
Seminars in Cell & Developmental Biology 23 (2012) 362–369

**Contents lists available at** SciVerse ScienceDirect

**Seminars in Cell & Developmental Biology**

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/semcdb

---

**Review**

**Metabolic reprogramming in cancer: Unraveling the role of glutamine in tumorigenesis**

Dania Daye<sup>a,b</sup>, Kathryn E. Wellen<sup>a,b,*</sup>

<sup>a</sup> Department of Cancer Biology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA  
<sup>b</sup> Abramson Family Cancer Research Institute, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA

---

**ARTICLE INFO**

Article history:  
Available online 11 February 2012  

Keywords:  
Glutamine  
Metabolism  
Cancer  
Glucose  
Myc  
Oxidative phosphorylation  

---

**ABSTRACT**

Increased glutaminolysis is now recognized as a key feature of the metabolic profile of cancer cells, along with increased aerobic glycolysis (the Warburg effect). In this review, we discuss the roles of glutamine in contributing to the core metabolism of proliferating cells by supporting energy production and biosynthesis. We address how oncogenes and tumor suppressors regulate glutamine metabolism and how cells coordinate glucose and glutamine as nutrient sources. Finally, we highlight the novel therapeutic and imaging applications that are emerging as a result of our improved understanding of the role of glutamine metabolism in cancer.

© 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

---

**Contents**

1. Introduction ................................................................................................................... 363
2. Glutamine metabolism supports cell proliferation .......................................................... 363
   2.1. Glutamine: a primary carbon source for energy production and biosynthesis ............. 363
   2.2. Glutamine: a nitrogen donor ................................................................................. 364
   2.3. Role of glutamine in cell signaling .......................................................................... 364
   2.4. Glutamine in regulation of redox homeostasis ....................................................... 364
3. Oncogenes regulate glutamine metabolism .................................................................... 364
   3.1. Myc: master regulator of glutamine metabolism ..................................................... 365
   3.2. Role of Rho GTPases in glutamine metabolism ...................................................... 365
   3.3. Ras transformation and glutamine ......................................................................... 365
   3.4. p53: a tumor suppressor’s role in glutamine metabolism ........................................ 365
4. Mutations in metabolic enzymes and glutamine metabolism ........................................ 365
   4.1. IDH mutations and glutamine metabolism ............................................................. 365
   4.2. SDH and FH mutations and glutamine metabolism .................................................. 366
5. Coordinating glutamine and glucose utilization in cancer ............................................ 366
   5.1. Metabolism of glucose and glutamine is coordinated .............................................. 366
   5.2. Carbon source flexibility in cancer cells .............................................................. 366
6. Glutamine metabolism: therapeutic and imaging implications ...................................... 367
   6.1. Therapeutic targeting of glutamine metabolism ..................................................... 367
   6.2. Glutamine imaging: new diagnostic potential ......................................................... 367
7. Conclusion ................................................................................................................... 368
Acknowledgment ............................................................................................................. 368
References ..................................................................................................................... 368

---

Abbreviations: Gls, glutaminase; GDH, glutamate dehydrogenase; PC, pyruvate carboxylase; GFAT, fructose-6-phosphate amido-transferase; GSH, glutathione; GlcNAc, N-acetyl-d-glucosamine; PRPP, 5-phospho-α-d-ribosyl 1-pyrophosphate; AOA, aminoxyacetate; EAA, essential amino acids; DON, 6-diazo-5-oxo-L-norleucine; IDH, isocitrate dehydrogenase; 2-HG, 2-hydroxyglutarate; SDH, succinate dehydrogenase; FH, fumarate hydratase; PHD, prolyl hydroxylase; HIF-1α, hypoxia inducible factor-1α; MRS, magnetic resonance spectroscopy; DNP, dynamic nuclear polarization; Got, glutamate: oxaloacetate transaminase; Gpt, glutamate: pyruvate transaminase.

* Corresponding author at: Department of Cancer Biology, 421 Curie Blvd, BRB II/III Room 607, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA. Tel.: +1 215 746 8599; fax: +1 215 573 6725.  
E-mail address: wellenk@exchange.upenn.edu (K.E. Wellen).

1084-9521/$ – see front matter © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.  
doi:10.1016/j.semcdb.2012.02.002

D. Daye, K.E. Wellen / Seminars in Cell & Developmental Biology 23 (2012) 362–369

### 1. Introduction

Glutamine has long been recognized to play a unique role in the metabolism of proliferating cells, as compared to other amino acids [1,2]. It is the most abundant amino acid in plasma, and most tumors consume and utilize glutamine at much higher rates than other amino acids [1]. Although glutamine is a non-essential amino acid in normal, non-dividing tissue, it is essential for the proliferation of most cells and the viability of some cancer cells that have become addicted to glutamine [3]. Glutamine metabolism contributes to the ability of cancer cells to continuously grow and proliferate by supporting ATP production and biosynthesis of proteins, lipids, and nucleic acids. Glutamine also modulates redox homeostasis and can impact the activity of signal transduction pathways [4,5].

Glutamine's involvement in oxidative mitochondrial metabolism in cancer cells was reported as early as the 1970s [6], and recent investigation has greatly expanded our understanding of the role and regulation of glutamine metabolism in cancer. In this article, we discuss the role of glutamine in supporting cellular proliferation and review current knowledge of how oncogenes and tumor suppressors regulate glutamine metabolism. We also discuss mechanisms through which metabolism of glutamine and glucose may be coordinated. Finally, we address the therapeutic and imaging applications that are emerging as a result of increasing recognition of the importance of glutamine metabolism in cancer.

### 2. Glutamine metabolism supports cell proliferation

Glutamine plays several important metabolic roles in the cell. It serves as a carbon source for energy production, contributes carbon and nitrogen to biosynthetic reactions, and regulates redox homeostasis (Fig. 1). Glutamine availability and metabolism can also modulate activity of signal transduction pathways. As we discuss below, each of these functions of glutamine contributes to its ability to support cell growth and proliferation.

#### 2.1. Glutamine: a primary carbon source for energy production and biosynthesis

Each of glutamine's fates in the cell serve important functions, although it is glutamine's role in supporting mitochondrial metabolism that is the primary reason that it is required in such large quantities. While non-proliferating cells can completely oxidize glucose-derived carbon in the TCA cycle to support their energy needs, proliferating cells use nutrients to support biosynthesis in addition to ATP production [7]. In proliferating cells, the TCA cycle metabolite citrate is exported out of the mitochondria to be used for generation of acetyl-CoA in the cytoplasm, which serves as a precursor for lipid biosynthesis. Because of the continual loss of citrate from the TCA cycle, replenishment of TCA intermediates (anaplerosis) is necessary, and glutamine serves as an important anaplerotic substrate in most proliferating cells. Citrate is generated from the condensation of acetyl-CoA and oxaloacetate, and 13C labeling of glucose and glutamine in proliferating glioblastoma cells demonstrated that in these cells glutamine is a major source of oxaloacetate, whereas glucose carbon is the predominant source of acetyl-CoA [8]. Glutamine's role as a carbon source supporting TCA cycle function is critical for glutamine-addicted cancer cells. Cells expressing oncogenic levels of c-Myc die upon glutamine withdrawal, and viability can be restored by supplementing cells

---

**Fig. 1.** Glutamine metabolism in cancer cells. Glutamine contributes to bioenergetics and biosynthesis through reactions that use its α-nitrogen (green), γ-nitrogen (yellow) or carbon skeleton (pink). The γ-nitrogen from glutamine’s amide group is a required nitrogen source for synthesis of nucleotides, hexosamines, and asparagine. During nucleotide synthesis, the γ nitrogen is contributed in three independent enzymatic steps in purine synthesis and two reactions in pyrimidine synthesis. The γ nitrogen can also be removed by glutaminase, which generates glutamate and ammonia. Ammonia has been previously shown to play a role in inducing autophagy. Glutamate carries most of glutamine’s α-nitrogen and is a major nitrogen source for nonessential amino acid production in cells. Alanine aminotransferase (also known as glutamate: pyruvate transaminase; Gpt) and aspartate aminotransferase (also known as glutamate: oxaloacetate transaminase; Got) catalyze the transfer of glutamate’s amino group directly into pyruvate and oxaloacetate to produce alanine and aspartate, respectively. Synthesis of other non-essential amino acids, including serine and the amino acids synthesized from serine, glycine and cysteine, requires contribution of the amino group from glutamate. Glutamate is also a precursor for synthesis of arginine and proline. In addition to its role in amino acid synthesis, glutamate is an important component of the synthesis of glutathione, an endogenous antioxidant that protects cells against various forms of oxidative stress. The final major fate of glutamine, following its conversion to glutamate and then glutamate’s conversion to α-ketoglutarate, is the oxidation of its carbon backbone in the mitochondria leading to energy production. Glutaminolysis contributes to production of mitochondrial NADH, which is used to support ATP production by oxidative phosphorylation. Glutamine metabolism also contributes to production of NADPH and lipid and amino acid biosynthesis. The TCA cycle metabolite citrate can also exit the mitochondria to be used for generation of cytoplasmic acetyl-CoA, a precursor for fatty acid biosynthesis. Similarly, malate produced in the TCA cycle can exit the mitochondria and contribute to pyruvate and lactate production. gln: glutamine; glu: glutamate; gls: glutaminase; GSH: glutathione; OAA: oxaloacetate; Asp: aspartate; Pyr: pyruvate; Ala: alanine; Gpt: glutamate: pyruvate transaminase; Got: glutamate: oxaloacetate transaminase; α-KG: α-ketoglutarate; glc: glucose.

with TCA cycle intermediates, such as pyruvate, oxaloacetate, or α-ketoglutarate [9–11].

By contributing to citrate production, glutamine also supports *de novo* lipogenesis [8,12]. While glutamine frequently plays a supporting role in lipogenesis by allowing transfer of glucose-derived acetyl-CoA from the mitochondria to the cytoplasm through citrate, glutamine carbon can also directly supply acetyl-CoA for lipogenesis. This can occur through two mechanisms. First, glutamine can contribute to lipogenesis through conversion of malate into pyruvate by malic enzyme, providing pyruvate that can then re-enter the TCA cycle as acetyl-CoA [13,14]. Second, glutamine, after conversion to α-ketoglutarate, can undergo reductive carboxylation to generate isocitrate, which is then converted into citrate [15–20]. The direct contribution of glutamine to *de novo* lipogenesis is particularly apparent under conditions of hypoxia or mitochondrial dysfunction, in which cells were shown to depend almost exclusively on the reductive metabolism of α-ketoglutarate to synthesize acetyl-CoA [16–18,20]. Remarkably, HIF-α expression is sufficient to drive reductive carboxylation of α-ketoglutarate, even under normoxic conditions, indicating that “reversal” of the TCA cycle can be actively programmed [16,17]. In lymphoma cells, on the other hand, Myc was shown to promote increased oxidation of glutamine, even under hypoxia [13]. Glutamine could in fact fully sustain the oxidative TCA cycle, even in the absence of glucose, in Myc-driven cells [13]. Recent estimates indicate that 10–25% of acetyl-CoA used for *de novo* lipogenesis comes from glutamine under normoxic conditions, and that up to 80% of acetyl-CoA for lipogenesis may come from glutamine in hypoxia [17]. Thus, the mechanism by which glutamine fuels lipid synthesis and proliferation is highly dependent on the oxygen and nutrient availability in the tumor environment, as well as oncogene expression, underlining the metabolic flexibility of cancer cells.

### 2.2. Glutamine: a nitrogen donor

In addition to the major function of glutamine in supplying carbon to mitochondria, glutamine serves as a nitrogen source. As depicted in Fig. 1, the amido and amino groups of glutamine contribute to multiple biosynthetic pathways, including synthesis of non-essential amino acids, nucleotides, and hexosamines. Glutamine deprivation causes growth arrest in most cell lines, and recent studies have highlighted glutamine’s role as a nitrogen donor during proliferation. Supplementation of glutamine-starved Myc-driven cells with TCA intermediates was shown to rescue viability but not proliferation, suggesting that during proliferation, glutamine serves critical functions in addition to supporting the TCA cycle [10]. Indeed, rescue of proliferation during glutamine deprivation in Hep3B cells was more potent when cells were supplemented with alternate nitrogen sources such as alanine or asparagine than with α-ketoglutarate. Supplementation of alanine and α-ketoglutarate together produced a synergistic rescue [21]. In particular, glutamine’s role in nucleotide biosynthesis, in which it is an obligate nitrogen donor for both purine and pyrimidine synthesis, has been implicated in ongoing support of proliferation. K-ras transformed fibroblasts cultured in glutamine-depleted media exhibit decreased cellular proliferation and abortive S phase entrance, which could be restored by addition of the four deoxyribonucleotides [22]. This result suggests that DNA synthesis may be particularly constrained by availability of glutamine and thus may inhibit proliferation when glutamine availability is limited. Interestingly, the expression of glutaminase (Gls1), an enzyme that catalyzes the conversion of glutamine to glutamate, is regulated during the cell cycle, with high expression during S phase that decreases as cells progress into G2/M. Glutamine consumption correlates with Gls1 expression, and following entry into S Phase, glutamine-deprived cells fail to progress

to G2/M phases [23]. Thus, glutamine’s function during DNA synthesis contributes to its role in supporting cell proliferation.

### 2.3. Role of glutamine in cell signaling

In addition to its direct metabolic roles, glutamine has also been implicated in modulating cell signaling pathways to promote growth. Slc1a5 (ASCT2), a high-affinity L-glutamine transporter, is upregulated in multiple types of cancer and has been implicated in mediating net glutamine uptake in cancer cells [24]. Entry of glutamine into the cell through Slc1a5 plays a role in regulating mammalian target of rapamycin complex 1 (mTORC1) activity [24–26]. The mechanism for this was recently elucidated; glutamine uptake and subsequent rapid efflux through Slc7a5 (LAT1) in exchange for essential amino acids (EAA) allows EAA-dependent mTORC1 activation [25].

In addition to its role in promoting mTORC1 activation to support cell growth, some evidence suggests a possible role for glutamine in regulation of other signaling pathways. As a substrate for oxidative mitochondrial metabolism, glutamine may also influence signaling through regulation of mitochondrial ROS production [27]. For example, in IL-3-dependent hematopoietic progenitors, inhibition of glutamine metabolism with 6-diazoo-5-oxo-L-norleucine (DON) blocks the sustained IL-3-dependent phosphorylation of Stat5 [14]. Stat5 phosphorylation in DON-treated cells could be rescued by α-ketoglutarate, suggesting that mitochondrial metabolism of glutamine could modulate Stat5 phosphorylation. Antioxidant treatment inhibited glutamine-dependent Stat5 phosphorylation in this context, consistent with previous studies showing that Stat5 phosphorylation can be promoted under conditions in which reactive oxygen species (ROS) levels are elevated [28,29]. In the context of oncogenic Kras, glutamine metabolism and mitochondrial ROS production was shown to contribute to cells’ capacity to proliferate by promoting ERK signaling [30]. Through modulation of physiological ROS production from the mitochondria, glutamine metabolism may participate in modulating multiple cell signaling pathways.

### 2.4. Glutamine in regulation of redox homeostasis

In addition to glutamine metabolism contributing to mitochondrial ROS production through its oxidation in the TCA cycle, much recent evidence indicates that glutamine metabolism plays a key role in the maintenance of cellular redox homeostasis [11,13,31,32]. This is due in large part to the role of glutamine in synthesis of glutathione, an endogenous antioxidant comprised of glutamate, cysteine, and glycine [33,34]. As described above, glutamate derives in large part from glutamine taken up by the cell. Furthermore, glutamate can contribute to the uptake of cystine through the countertransporter Slc7a11 [35]. In its antioxidant role, glutathione (GSH) donates electrons, becoming oxidized (GSSG). In order to restore glutathione to its reduced form, NADPH is required. Glutamine metabolism can also lead to increased production of NADPH, through its metabolism through malic enzyme [5]. Accordingly, stimulation of glutamine metabolism by p53 was shown to promote an increased GSH/GSSG ratio (discussed further in Section 3.4) [31,32].

### 3. Oncogenes regulate glutamine metabolism

As outlined above, glutamine plays an important role in supporting cancer cell proliferation. Perhaps not surprisingly, data has emerged in recent years demonstrating that glutamine metabolism is directly regulated by oncogenes and tumor suppressors. Increased glutaminase activity was reported to correlate with tumor growth rate as early as the 1960s [36,37], and Myc has
recently emerged as a critical regulator of glutamine metabolism and glutamine addiction in cancer cells [9–11]. A growing number of other tumor suppressors and oncogenes have also been implicated in regulating glutamine metabolism [31,32,38,39].

### 3.1. Myc: master regulator of glutamine metabolism

Myc, a proto-oncogene and major regulator of cell proliferation, stimulates expression of multiple metabolic genes and is well known to promote glycolytic metabolism [40]. More recently, it has become clear that Myc also stimulates glutamine uptake and metabolism [9,11]. Oncogenic levels of Myc cause glutamine addiction, and cells undergo apoptosis when deprived of glutamine [9,10]. Myc stimulates glutamine metabolism both directly and indirectly. As a transcription factor, Myc directly binds the promoters and stimulates expression of glutamine metabolism genes, such as the transporter Slc1a5 [9]. Myc also promotes glutaminase activity indirectly by repressing expression of miR-23a/b, which targets Glis1 [11].

What functions of glutamine are critical for mediating cell survival in the context of oncogenic Myc? Viability in the absence of glutamine was rescued by supplementation with TCA cycle substrates [9–11], indicating that glutamine’s anaplerotic role is critical for supporting cell survival in Myc-transformed cells. Furthermore, RNAi-mediated suppression of Glis1 also led to an increase in ROS levels and cell death, associated with diminished glutathione levels [11]. In Myc-driven cells, carbon derived from glutamine was shown to be preferentially used for glutathione synthesis, in contrast to carbon originating from glycolysis [13]. These results suggest that glutamine’s antioxidant roles are important for survival in Myc-driven cells.

### 3.2. Role of Rho GTPases in glutamine metabolism

Rho GTPases have also recently been reported to regulate glutamine metabolism [39]. Cancer cells dependent on Rho GTPase signaling display higher glutaminase activity, regulated in an NF-κB-dependent manner, and glutaminase activity is required for the transforming capability of at least three different Rho GTPases (Cdc42, Rac1 and RhoC) [39]. A small molecule inhibitor that impaired the growth and invasive potential of Rho GTPase-transformed fibroblasts and human cancer cells was found to target glutaminase, suggesting that glutamine metabolism could potentially be targeted in the context of Rho GTPase-driven tumorigenesis [39].

### 3.3. Ras transformation and glutamine

While Kras-mediated transformation has been reported to stimulate greater dependence on metabolism of glucose than glutamine, Kras-transformed cells nevertheless exhibit sensitivity to reduced glutamine conditions and fail to proliferate at levels of glutamine that can support growth of non-transformed cells [22]. Metabolic flux analysis provided evidence for both increased utilization of glutamine carbon to support the TCA cycle and contribution of glutamine’s nitrogen to biosynthetic processes in Kras transformed cells [41]. Interestingly, mitochondrial metabolism was shown to promote proliferation in the context of oncogenic Kras through generation of ROS intermediates by the Qo site of mitochondrial complex III. Glutamine-dependent ROS production promoted growth through regulation of ERK signaling, and disruption of mitochondrial respiration led to decreased tumor formation in an in vivo mouse model of Kras-driven lung cancer [38].

Depending on ROS levels and cellular state, ROS can either have pro-proliferative effects in stimulating signal transduction or can cause damage and death [27,42]. The role of glutamine in

the regulation of ROS levels appears to be different depending on context [11,13,31,32,38]. Moreover, the complementing effects of glutamine in increasing oxidative mitochondrial metabolism and hence ROS production versus promotion of antioxidant defenses may balance differently and regulate different cell fates depending on cell type and/or oncogenic context.

### 3.4. p53: a tumor suppressor’s role in glutamine metabolism

p53 is the first tumor suppressor to be shown to regulate glutamine metabolism. p53 induces the expression of Glis2, leading to increased mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation and energy production from glutaminolysis. Glis2 induction also increased glutathione levels and reduced ROS levels, conveying protection against oxidative stress-induced apoptosis. Induction of Glis2 was suggested to contribute to p53-dependent tumor suppression, since Glis2 expression was reduced in liver tumors and overexpression of Glis2 reduced tumor cell growth and colony formation [31,32].

It is noteworthy that Glis1 and Glis2 seem to have contrasting effects in tumorigenesis. Myc induces the expression of Glis1, while p53 induces the expression of Glis2. Glis1 downregulation inhibits oncogenic transformation and cancer cell proliferation [13,39,43,44] while overexpression of Glis2 is tumor suppressive [31,32]. The two isoenzymes of glutaminase are known to have different structural and kinetic properties, are subject to different regulatory mechanisms, and exhibit different tissue-specific expression [45]. Notably, both enzymes have been implicated in regulating glutathione production and redox homeostasis, which is important for mediating cell survival in Myc-driven cells, as well as for protecting against p53-dependent apoptosis [11,31,32]. Hence, cellular context may be important for determining whether these enzymes act to promote or suppress tumorigenesis. It is also possible that alternate activities of these enzymes could also play a role in their divergent effects; for example, Glis2 was reported to interact with other proteins and to alter gene expression patterns in glioma cells [46,47]. Further investigation is needed to understand the mechanisms underlying the different roles of Glis1 and Glis2 in tumorigenesis.

## 4. Mutations in metabolic enzymes and glutamine metabolism

As described above, a growing number of mutations in cancer have been reported to impact glutamine metabolism. Metabolic enzymes are also mutated in some cancers, including mutations in succinate dehydrogenase (SDHB, SDHC, SDHD, SDHAF2), fumarate hydratase (FH), and isocitrate dehydrogenase (IDH1/2). While the metabolic profiles of tumors bearing mutations in metabolic enzymes are unique based on the mutation, glutamine metabolism is also impacted in each of these circumstances.

### 4.1. IDH mutations and glutamine metabolism

Mutations within IDH1 and IDH2 have been reported in low-grade gliomas, acute myeloid leukemias, and a number of other malignancies [48–54]. While wild type IDH1 and 2 interconvert α-ketoglutarate and isocitrate, these mutations result in a neomorphic activity that catalyzes the conversion of α-ketoglutarate into 2-hydroxyglutarate (2-HG), a molecule described as an oncometabolite for its ability to independently induce metabolic changes similar to those associated with IDH mutations [55,56]. 2-HG is thought to act by inhibiting certain α-ketoglutarate-dependent enzymes, including Jumonji-C domain histone demethylases and TET proteins, which can convert
5-methylcytosine into 5-hydroxymethylcytosine and may participate in DNA demethylation [57–61].

Glutamine is the main source of α-ketoglutarate used by mutant IDH to produce 2-HG. Hence, the possibility that targeting glutamine metabolism could influence the activity of the mutant IDH enzyme was investigated [44]. Glutaminase inhibition indeed led to slowed proliferation of glioblastoma cells expressing mutant as compared to wild-type IDH1, and the growth suppression was rescued by α-ketoglutarate. However, despite reducing glutamate and α-ketoglutarate levels and suppressing growth in IDH1 mutant cells, 2-HG levels remained unaltered upon GLs inhibition [44]. The mechanism through which GLs inhibition selectively acts on cells expressing mutant IDH is not clear. Of note, metabolic profiling of IDH mutant cell lines indicates that broad metabolic changes occur in the presence of mutant IDH, including altered levels of TCA intermediates [62]; it is plausible that such alterations could play a role in sensitizing IDH mutant cells to suppression of glutaminase.

### 4.2. SDH and FH mutations and glutamine metabolism

Mutations in the genes encoding the TCA cycle enzymes succinate dehydrogenase (SDH) and FH cause familial and sporadic paraganglioma and phaeochromocytoma (SDH mutations) or hereditary leiomyomatosis and renal cell carcinoma (FH mutations) [63,64]. These mutations render the enzymes inactive, leading to the accumulation of succinate and fumarate in the mitochondria. High levels of these metabolites can inhibit members of the prolyl hydroxylase family (PHDs), which are α-ketoglutarate dependent [65,66]. This prevents the degradation of hypoxia inducible factor-1 (HIF-1α) and leads to a pseudohypoxic response and enhanced glycolysis. The pseudohypoxic response mediates the increased tumorigenicity induced by the loss of these mitochondrial tumor suppressors [65–67].

Two recent studies have investigated the metabolic changes that result from FH mutations that allow these cells to survive and proliferate. Metabolic modeling to assess pathways that allow cells to survive in the absence of FH identified the heme biosynthesis pathway as synthetically lethal with FH mutations [68]. Glutamine carbon is diverted into heme biosynthesis from succinyl-CoA. This mechanism simultaneously allows generation of NADH by α-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase in order to fuel some ATP production by oxidative phosphorylation, as well as providing an outlet for glutamine carbon, from the impasse in the TCA cycle created by FH deficiency [68]. To generate acetyl-CoA to synthesize lipids, FH-deficient cells were shown to rely on reductive carboxylation of glutamine-derived α-ketoglutarate to provide citrate [20].

### 5. Coordinating glutamine and glucose utilization in cancer

As we have discussed, glutamine metabolism supports proliferation at several levels and its metabolism is directly regulated in many cancers. Together, glucose and glutamine serve as the primary nutrients to fuel cancer cell proliferation. Recent data indicate that the metabolism of these two nutrients is linked and that proliferating cells actively coordinate their metabolism (Fig. 2). In cancer cells, oncogenic Myc puts into place gene expression programs to simultaneously increase the uptake and metabolism of both glucose and glutamine, as has been discussed in recent reviews [40,69,70]. Cells presumably must also be able to detect and adapt to changing nutrient availability. Two distinct mechanisms, described in Section 5.1, have recently been reported through which glucose or glutamine availability is sensed and used to regulate the metabolism of the other nutrient. Cells also have the capacity to alter metabolism in response to nutrient availability, and recent data, discussed in Section 5.2, indicates that some cancer cells can switch carbon source or compensate for reduced availability or metabolism of one nutrient by utilizing more of the other.

#### 5.1. Metabolism of glucose and glutamine is coordinated

Recent data suggest that cells actively employ mechanisms to regulate metabolism of glucose or glutamine, dependent on the availability of the other (Fig. 2). Glucose availability was recently shown in an IL-3-dependent hematopoietic cell line to modulate cellular uptake of glutamine through the hexosamine biosynthetic pathway [14], a branch of glucose metabolism that generates UDP-N-acetyl-d-glucosamine (UDP-GlcNAc), a donor substrate for glycosylation reactions [71,72]. Glucose deprivation inhibited growth-factor-stimulated glutamine uptake, as a result of suppression of IL-3Rα surface expression and downstream signaling. IL-3Rα is N-glycosylated and supplementing cells with the GlcNAc, a hexosamine pathway metabolite, at least partially rescued IL-3Rα surface expression and IL-3-dependent glutamine uptake. Hence, glucose flux into the hexosamine biosynthetic pathway to support surface receptor glycosylation may serve as a metabolic checkpoint, though which cells can regulate growth-factor-dependent uptake of glutamine, in a glucose-dependent manner [14].

Reciprocally, a mechanism has been described through which glutamine availability can modulate glucose uptake, through the transcription factor MondoA. MondoA is a member of the basic helix-loop-helix zipper (bHLHZip) transcription factor family. Similar to Myc, MondoA interacts with Mlx, a Max-like bHLHZip protein, and binds to E-box sites on target genes [69]. The MondoA:Mlx complex is a glucose sensor present in the cytoplasm [73]. Upon glucose uptake, the MondoA complex detects elevations in glucose-6-phosphate levels and transits into the nucleus [74]. There, it stimulates expression of thioredoxin interacting protein (TXNIP), which constrains glucose uptake [74]. A recent study showed that glutamine availability inhibited transcriptional activation of TXNIP expression by recruiting a histone deacetylase-dependent co-repressor to the N-terminus of MondoA [75]. Reduced TXNIP expression led to enhanced glucose uptake, as well as cell growth and proliferation. Supplementation of cells with α-ketoglutarate could also promote transcriptional repression of TXNIP and the induction of glucose uptake, suggesting that glutamine-dependent anaplerosis modulates glucose uptake and cell growth through regulation of MondoA transcriptional activity [75].

#### 5.2. Carbon source flexibility in cancer cells

Glucose and glutamine metabolism are regulated in a coordinated manner, and nutrient addiction can cause cancer cells to die in the absence of either glucose or glutamine. Cancer cells are notoriously resourceful, however, and two recent studies suggest that some cancer cells can switch carbon sources. Using SF188 glioblastoma cells, which overexpress Myc, the effects of impairments in glucose availability on glutamine uptake and metabolism were assessed [76]. Glucose deprivation caused a large increase in the activity of glutamate dehydrogenase (GDH), and GDH was shown to be required for cells to survive impairments in glycolysis [76]. Reciprocally, impairment of glutamine metabolism led cells to adapt to become fully reliant on glucose for mitochondrial metabolism [77]. Silencing of glutaminase suppressed growth, but cells were able to partially compensate by utilizing pyruvate carboxylase (PC) to allow use of glucose-derived carbon for anaplerosis [77]. Thus, glutamine and glucose metabolic pathways might be able to compensate for one another in some circumstances, a possibility that should be considered when developing cancer therapeutics targeting metabolism.

D. Daye, K.E. Wellen / Seminars in Cell & Developmental Biology 23 (2012) 362–369

Glucose → Glutl → Glucose → HK2 → G6P → F6P → F-1,6-BP → PFK → PEP → PKM2 → Pyruvate → LDHA → Lactate  
hexosamine pathway  

Myc  
Gene expression  

TXNIP  
MondoA  

miR23a/b  
Gls  

Glutamine → Slcla5 → Glutamine → glutamate → α-ketoglutarate  

GF  
receptor  

TCA  
cycle  

UDP-GlcNAC  

Fig. 2. Coordination of glutamine and glucose utilization during proliferation. Glucose and glutamine metabolism are linked and actively coordinated in cancer cells. Myc simultaneously increases the uptake and metabolism of both glucose and glutamine by regulating key transporters and enzymes involved in both pathways (shown in blue). Those targets highlighted in blue are transcriptionally activated by Myc, while those boxed in blue are regulated by Myc through other mechanisms. PKM2 expression is promoted by Myc through regulation of splicing factors and GlS1 is a target of miR23a/b, which is transcriptionally repressed by Myc. Two other mechanisms have been recently described that can contribute to cellular adaptation to nutrient availability. Glucose availability can control cellular uptake of glutamine through utilization of glucose in the hexosamine biosynthetic pathway (pathway shown in green). Glucose deprivation leads to a suppression of growth-factor-stimulated glutamine uptake, as a result of suppression of growth factor surface expression and downstream signaling in the absence of glucose. On the other hand, glutamine availability can be sensed by the cell to control uptake of glucose through the transcription factor MondoA (pathway shown in pink). The MondoA complex is a glucose sensor present in the cytoplasm. Upon increase in glucose levels, MondoA detects elevation in glucose-6-phosphate levels and is translocated into the nucleus. There, it interacts with a MondoA transcriptional target, TXNIP, that induces a potent feedback circuit that restricts glucose uptake and cell growth. Glutamine availability inhibits activation of TXNIP and induces an increase in glucose uptake. Glut1: glucose transporter 1; HK2: Hexokinase 2; G6P: glucose-6-phosphate; F6P: fructose-6-phosphate; F-1,6-BP: fructose-1,6-biphosphate; PEP: phosphoenolpyruvate; PKM2: pyruvate kinase isoform M2; LDHA: lactate dehydrogenase A; GF: growth factor; GlcNAc: N-acetyl-d-glucosamine; GlS: glutaminase; Slc1a5 (ASCT2): a high-affinity l-glutamine transporter.

## 6. Glutamine metabolism: therapeutic and imaging implications

### 6.1. Therapeutic targeting of glutamine metabolism

With the recognition that metabolic reprogramming is a key feature of transformed cells has come significant interest in targeting metabolism, including glutamine metabolism, as a cancer therapy. With glutamine participating in several key processes necessary for proliferation, as described in this article, there may be opportunities to interfere with glutamine metabolism at multiple points. GlS inhibition has shown promise in several models [13,39,43,44,78,79]. Given the adaptability of cancer cells, inhibition of glutamine metabolism may potentially work best when combined with other therapies. Specific strategies for targeting glutamine metabolism in cancer cells have been recently reviewed in detail, to which the reader is referred for more information [5,80,81].

### 6.2. Glutamine imaging: new diagnostic potential

Interest in imaging glutamine metabolism is also rising, in recognition of its potential to elucidate biologic characteristics of tumors exhibiting increased glutamine metabolism and to assess response to glutamine-targeted therapy [82]. Novel glutamine-based imaging techniques have emerged over the last few years, including positron emission tomography (PET) imaging and hyperpolarized magnetic resonance (MR).

Glutamine tracers have been synthesized for PET imaging, analogous to the commonly used fluorodeoxyglucose-(FDG)-PET used for imaging tumors that consume high levels of glucose. In particular, ¹⁸F-(2S,4R)4-fluoroglutamine was shown to be taken up both by glutamine-dependent cancer cell lines and by tumors in mice [83,84]. Very recently, another glutamine PET tracer, l-[5-¹¹C]-glutamine, was described and has shown promise for the imaging of glutaminolytic cells and tumors, both *in vitro* and *in vivo* [85].

Magnetic resonance imaging has long been used as a technique allowing direct assessment of glutaminolytic intermediates. ¹H magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS) allows the quantification of both glutamine and glutamate and can be used to measure the steady-state concentrations of both of these metabolites *in vitro* and *in vivo* [82,86,87]. However, metabolism is a dynamic process and increased information can be gained from examining metabolic fluxes. Probing metabolic fluxes has been typically achieved by administering isotopically labeled compounds (such as ¹³C-labeled metabolites) to cells or animals and following the incorporation of the labeled nuclei (e.g., carbon) into downstream metabolites [8,88,89]. Yet, the biggest challenge with ¹³C MRS has long been the low signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) due to the low gyromagnetic ratio of the NMR-active carbon. Advances in MR imaging recently led to the introduction of a novel method, hyperpolarized MR, for real-time monitoring of single enzyme-catalyzed reactions of glutamine and glutamate metabolism. In hyperpolarized MR, a molecule is labeled with an NMR-active nucleus (typically ¹³C) and that molecule is hyperpolarized using dynamic nuclear polarization (DNP). By dramatically increasing the fraction of targeted nuclei that are polarized (by as much of a factor of 10⁵), DNP allows a large increase in the SNR for detection of the labeled metabolite compared to ¹³C MR conducted at thermal equilibrium. This allows the user to observe the carbon transfer from substrate to product, as well as to compute the *in vivo* reaction rate of the conversion being observed. In the case of glutamine metabolism, this includes ability to monitor and quantify the progressive conversion of glutamine into glutamate and glutamate into α-ketoglutarate. To date, successful hyperpolarization has been reported for [5-¹³C]-glutamine, [1-¹³C]-glutamate, and [5-¹³C-4-²H₂]-glutamine [90–92]. While
these agents have been successfully used in cells, their implementation in animal models remains limited. The polarization tends to decay relatively rapidly following injection into living tissues minimizing the time frame during which the signal can be detected. For instance, the spin-lattice relaxation ($T_{1}$) of the labeled carbon in [5-$^{13}$C]-glutamine is in the order of 16 s [91]. Strategies allowing improvements in polarization levels and $T_{1}$ prolongation of these agents might pave the way for wider *in vivo* implementation.

Overall, these techniques show significant promise for the monitoring of glutamine metabolism *in vivo* allowing improved diagnosis and monitoring of glutamine-dependent tumors.

### 7. Conclusion

Glutamine is one of the most versatile nutrients, contributing to many aspects of metabolism in cancer and proliferating cells. It is required in large quantities to support mitochondrial metabolism during proliferation, and its roles as a nitrogen donor and a regulator of cellular redox status and signal transduction also contribute to proper cell function, growth, and proliferation.

The uptake and metabolism of the other major carbon source supporting proliferation, glucose, has been a major research focus in several fields for years, and new details continue to emerge. Glucose uptake is highly complex and is regulated both through transcriptional control of the expression of glycolytic enzymes and signaling-dependent control of the trafficking of the glucose transporters themselves. By comparison, the regulation of glutamine metabolism is relatively poorly understood, though intense research into this topic is rapidly increasing our understanding of the role of glutamine in cancer. It is likely that additional complexities and levels of regulation will continue to emerge with further investigation. Better understanding of the signal transduction pathways that regulate glutamine metabolism, both in response to normal growth factor cues and oncogene activation, will be important. Understanding how cells adapt to inhibition of metabolic pathways will also be critical as more therapeutics targeting cancer cell metabolism are developed. Future investigation should also focus on *in vivo* study of glutamine metabolism, particularly as better imaging technologies emerge, with the ultimate goal of identifying strategies to most effectively target glutamine metabolism in cancer, likely in combination with other therapies.

### Acknowledgment

We thank Drs. Lewis A. Chodosh, Morrie Birnbaum, Jim Delikatny, and Mitchell Schnall for comments on the manuscript and Carrie Kitzmiller for assistance with figure design. Dania Daye is a Howard Hughes Medical Institute Gilliam fellow.

### References

[1] Eagle H. The specific amino acid requirements of a human carcinoma cell (Stain HeLa) in tissue culture. J Exp Med 1955;102:37–48.

[2] Kvanme E, Svenneby G. Effect of anaerobiosis and addition of keto acids on glutamine utilization by Ehrlich ascites-tumor cells. Biochim Biophys Acta 1960;42:187–8.

[3] Fuchs BC, Bode BP. Stressing out over survival: glutamine as an apoptotic modulator. J Surg Res 2006;131:26–40.

[4] DeBerardinis RJ, Cheng T. Q’s next: the diverse functions of glutamine in metabolism, cell biology and cancer. Oncogene 2009;29:313–24.

[5] Wise DR, Thompson CB. Glutamine addiction: a new therapeutic target in cancer. Trends Biochem Sci 2010;35:427–33.

[6] Kovacevic Z, Morris HP. The role of glutamine in the oxidative metabolism of malignant cells. Cancer Res 1972;32:326–33.

[7] DeBerardinis RJ, Lum JJ, Hatzivassiliou G, Thompson CB. The biology of cancer: metabolic reprogramming fuels cell growth and proliferation. Cell Metab 2008;7:11–20.

[8] DeBerardinis RJ, Mancuso A, Daikhin E, Nissim I, Yudkoff M, Wehrli S, et al. Beyond aerobic glycolysis: transformed cells can engage in glutamine

metabolism that exceeds the requirement for protein and nucleotide synthesis. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2007;104:19345–50.

[9] Wise DR, DeBerardinis RJ, Mancuso A, Sayed N, Zhang XY, Pfeiffer HK, et al. Myc regulates a transcriptional program that stimulates mitochondrial glutaminolysis and leads to glutamine addiction. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2008;105:18782–7.

[10] Yuneva M, Zamboni N, Oefner P, Sachidanandam R, Lazebnik Y. Deficiency in glutamine but not glucose induces MYC-dependent apoptosis in human cells. J Cell Biol 2007;178:93–105.

[11] Gao P, Tchernyshyov I, Chang TC, Lee YS, Kita K, Ochi T, et al. c-Myc suppression of miR-23a/b enhances mitochondrial glutaminase expression and glutamine metabolism. Nature 2009;458:762–5.

[12] Sabine JR, Kopelovich L, Abraham S, Morris HP. Control of lipid metabolism in hepatomas: conversion of glutamate carbon to fatty acid carbon via citrate in several transplantable hepatomas. Biochim Biophys Acta 1973;296:493–8.

[13] Le A, Lane AN, Hamaker M, Bose S, Gouw A, Barbi J, et al. Glucose-independent glutamine metabolism *via* TCA cycling for proliferation and survival in B cells. Cell Metab 2012;15:110–21.

[14] Wellen KE, Lu C, Mancuso A, Lemons JM, Ryczko M, Dennis JW, et al. The hexosamine biosynthetic pathway couples growth factor-induced glutamine uptake to glucose metabolism. Genes Dev 2010;24, 2784–99.

[15] Yoo H, Antoniewicz MR, Stephanopoulos G, Kelleher JK. Quantifying reductive carboxylation flux of glutamine to lipid in a brown adipocyte cell line. J Biol Chem 2008;283:20621–7.

[16] Wise DR, Ward PS, Shay JE, Cross JR, Gruber JJ, Sachdeva UM, et al. Hypoxia promotes isocitrate dehydrogenase-dependent carboxylation of alpha-ketoglutarate to citrate to support cell growth and viability. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2011;108:19611–6.

[17] Metallo CM, Gameiro PA, Bell EL, Mattaini KR, Yang J, Hiller K, et al. Reductive glutamine metabolism by IDH1 mediates lipogenesis under hypoxia. Nature 2011.

[18] Scott DA, Richardson AD, Filipp FV, Knutzen CA, Chiang GG, Ronai ZA, et al. Comparative metabolic flux profiling of melanoma cell lines: beyond the Warburg effect. J Biol Chem 2011;286:42626–34.

[19] Holleran AL, Briscoe DA, Fiskum G, Kelleher JK. Glutamine metabolism in AS-30D hepatoma cells. Evidence for its conversion into lipids via reductive carboxylation. Mol Cell Biochem 1995;152:95–101.

[20] Mullen AR, Wheaton WW, Jin ES, Chen PH, Sullivan LB, Cheng T, Yang Y, Linehan WM, Chandel NS, DeBerardinis RJ. Reductive carboxylation supports growth in tumour cells with defective mitochondria. Nature 2011;481(7381):385–8.

[21] Meng M, Chen S, Lao T, Liang D, Sang N. Nitrogen anabolism underlies the importance of glutaminolysis in proliferating cells. Cell cycle (Georgetown, Tex; 9:39 21–32.

[22] Gaglio D, Soldati C, Vanoni M, Alberghina L, Chiaradonna F. Glutamine deprivation induces abortive s-phase rescued by deoxyribonucleotides in k-ras transformed fibroblasts. PLoS ONE 2009;4:e4715.

[23] Colombo SL, Palacios-Callender M, Frakich N, Carcamo S, Kovacs I, Tudzarova S, et al. Molecular basis for the differential use of glucose and glutamine in cell proliferation as revealed by synchronized HeLa cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2011;108:21069–74.

[24] Fuchs BC, Bode BP. Amino acid transporters ASCT2 and LAT1 in cancer: partners in crime. Semin Cancer Biol 2005;15:254–66.

[25] Nicklin P, Bergman P, Zhang B, Triantafellow E, Wang H, Nyfeler B, et al. Bidirectional transport of amino acids regulates mTOR and autophagy. Cell 2009;136:521–34.

[26] Fuchs BC, Finger RE, Onan MC, Bode BP. ASCT2 silencing regulates mammalian target-of-rapamycin growth and survival signaling in human hepatoma cells. Am J Physiol 2007;293:C55–63.

[27] Hamanaka RB, Chandel NS. Mitochondrial reactive oxygen species regulate cellular signaling and dictate biological outcomes. Trends Biochem Sci 2010;35:505–13.

[28] Sattler M, Winkler T, Verma S, Byrne CH, Shrikhande G, Salgia R, et al. Hematopoietic growth factors signal through the formation of reactive oxygen species. Blood 1999;93:2928–35.

[29] Iiyama M, Kakihana K, Kurosu T, Miura O. Reactive oxygen species generated by hematopoietic cytokines play roles in activation of receptor-mediated signaling and in cell cycle progression. Cell Signalling 2006;18:174–82.

[30] Weinberg F, Hamanaka R, Wheaton WW, Weinberg S, Joseph J, Lopez M, et al. Mitochondrial metabolism and ROS generation are essential for Kras-mediated tumorigenicity. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2010;107:8788–93.

[31] Hu W, Zhang C, Wu R, Sun Y, Levine A, Feng Z. Glutaminase 2, a novel p53 target gene regulating energy metabolism and antioxidant function. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2010;107:7455–60.

[32] Suzuki S, Tanaka T, Poyurovsky MV, Nagano H, Mayama T, Ohkubo S, et al. Phosphate-activated glutaminase (GLS2), a p53-inducible regulator of glutamine metabolism and reactive oxygen species. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2010;107:7461–6.

[33] Roth E, Oehler R, Manhart N, Exner R, Wessner B, Strasser E, et al. Regulatory potential of glutamine—relation to glutathione metabolism. Nutrition (Burbank, Los Angeles County, Calif) 2002;18:217–21.

[34] Wu G, Fang YZ, Yang S, Lupton JR, Turner ND. Glutathione metabolism and its implications for health. J Nutr 2004;134:489–92.

[35] Sato H, Tamba M, Ishii T, Bannai S. Cloning and expression of a plasma membrane cystine/glutamate exchange transporter composed of two distinct proteins. J Biol Chem 1999;274:11455–8.
[36] Knox WE, Horowitz ML, Friedell GH. The proportionality of glutaminase content to growth rate and morphology of rat neoplasms. Cancer Res 1969;29: 669–80.

[37] Linder-Horowitz M, Knox WE, Morris HP. Glutaminase activities and growth rates of rat hepatomas. Cancer Res 1969;29:1195–9.

[38] Weinberg F, Hamanaka R, Wheaton WW, Weinberg S, Joseph J, Lopez M, et al. Mitochondrial metabolism and ROS generation are essential for Kras-mediated tumorigenicity. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2011;107:8788–93.

[39] Wang JB, Erickson JW, Fuji R, Ramachandran S, Gao P, Dinavahi R, et al. Targeting mitochondrial glutaminase activity inhibits oncogenic transformation. Cancer cell;18:207–19.

[40] Dang CV. Rethinking the Warburg effect with Myc micromanaging glutamine metabolism. Cancer Res 2010;70:859–62.

[41] Gaglio D, Metallo CM, Gameiro PA, Hiller K, Danna LS, Balestrieri C, et al. Oncogenic K-Ras decouples glucose and glutamine metabolism to support cancer cell growth. Mol Syst Biol 2011;7:523.

[42] Wellen KE, Thompson CB. Cellular metabolic stress: considering how cells respond to nutrient excess. Molecular cell 2010;40:323–32.

[43] Lobo C, Ruiz-Bellido MA, Aledo JC, Marquez J, Nunez De Castro I, Alonso FJ. Inhibition of glutaminase expression by antisense mRNA decreases growth and tumourigenicity of tumour cells. Biochem J 2000;348(Pt 2): 257–61.

[44] Seltzer MJ, Bennett BD, Joshi AD, Gao P, Thomas AG, Ferraris DV, et al. Inhibition of glutaminase preferentially slows growth of glioma cells with mutant IDH1. Cancer Res 70:8981–7.

[45] Curthoys NP, Watford M. Regulation of glutaminase activity and glutamine metabolism. Annu Rev Nutr 1995;15:133–59.

[46] Olalla L, Gutierrez A, Jimenez AJ, Lopez-Tellez JF, Khan ZU, Perez J, et al. Expression of the scaffolding PDZ protein glutaminase-interacting protein in mammalian brain. J Neurosci Res 2008;86:281–92.

[47] Szeliga M, Obara-Michlewska M, Matyja E, Lazarczyk M, Lobo C, Hilgier W, et al. Transfection with liver-type glutaminase cDNA alters gene expression and reduces survival, migration and proliferation of T98G glioma cells. Glia 2009;57:1014–23.

[48] Amary MF, Bacsi K, Maggiani F, Damato S, Halai D, Berisha F, et al. IDH1 and IDH2 mutations are frequent events in central chondrosarcoma and central and periosteal chondromas but not in other mesenchymal tumours. J Pathol 2011;224:334–43.

[49] Parsons DW, Jones S, Zhang X, Lin JC, Leary RJ, Angenendt P, et al. An integrated genomic analysis of human glioblastoma multiforme. Science (New York, NY) 2008;321:1807–12.

[50] Yan H, Parsons DW, Jin G, McLendon R, Rasheed BA, Yuan W, et al. IDH1 and IDH2 mutations in gliomas. N Engl J Med 2009;360:765–73.

[51] Mardis ER, Ding L, Dooling DJ, Larson DE, McLellan MD, Chen K, et al. Recurring mutations found by sequencing an acute myeloid leukemia genome. N Engl J Med 2009;361:1058–66.

[52] Ward PS, Cross JR, Lu C, Weigert O, Abel-Wahab O, Levine RL, et al. Identification of additional IDH mutations associated with oncometabolite R(−)-2-hydroxyglutarate production. Oncogene 2011, doi:10.1038/onc.2011.416.

[53] Cairns RA, Iqbal J, Lemonnier F, Kucuk C, de Leval L, Jais JP, et al. IDH2 mutations are frequent in angioimmunoblastic T-cell lymphoma. Blood 2012.

[54] Pansuriya TC, van Eijk R, d’Adamo P, van Ruler MA, Kuijjer ML, Oosting J, et al. Somatic mosaic IDH1 and IDH2 mutations are associated with enchondroma and spindle cell hemangioma in Ollier disease and Maffucci syndrome. Nat Genet 2011;43:1256–61.

[55] Dang L, White DW, Gross S, Bennett BD, Bittinger MA, Driggers EM, et al. Cancer-associated IDH1 mutations produce 2-hydroxyglutarate. Nature 2009;462:739–44.

[56] Ward PS, Patel J, Wise DR, Abdel-Wahab O, Bennett BD, Coller HA, et al. The common feature of leukemia-associated IDH1 and IDH2 mutations is a neomorphic enzyme activity converting alpha-ketoglutarate to 2-hydroxyglutarate. Cancer cell 2010;17:225–34.

[57] Ito S, Shen L, Dai Q, Wu SC, Collins LB, Swenberg JA, et al. Tet proteins can convert 5-methylcytosine to 5-formylcytosine and 5-carboxylcytosine. Science (New York, NY) 2011;333:1300–3.

[58] Chowdhury R, Yeoh KK, Tian YM, Hillringhaus L, Bagg EA, Rose NR, et al. The oncometabolite 2-hydroxyglutarate inhibits histone lysine demethylases. EMBO Rep 2011;12:463–9.

[59] He YF, Li BZ, Li Z, Liu P, Wang Y, Tang Q, et al. Tet-mediated formation of 5-carboxylcytosine and its excision by TDG in mammalian DNA. Science (New York, NY) 2011;333:1303–7.

[60] Xu W, Yang H, Liu Y, Yang Y, Wang P, Kim SH, et al. Oncometabolite 2-hydroxyglutarate is a competitive inhibitor of alpha-ketoglutarate-dependent dioxygenases. Cancer Cell 2011;19:17–30.

[61] Figueroa ME, Abdel-Wahab O, Lu C, Ward PS, Patel J, Shih A, et al. Leukemic IDH1 and IDH2 mutations result in a hypermethylation phenotype, disrupt TET2 function, and impair hematopoietic differentiation. Cancer Cell 2010;18:553–67.

[62] Reitman ZJ, Jin G, Karoly ED, Spasojevic I, Yang J, Kinzler KW, et al. Profiling the effects of isocitrate dehydrogenase 1 and 2 mutations on the cellular metabolome. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2011;108:3270–5.

[63] Gottlieb E, Tomlinson IP. Mitochondrial tumour suppressors: a genetic and biochemical update. Nat Rev 2005;5:857–66.

[64] Eng C, Kiuru M, Fernandez MJ, Aaltonen LA. A role for mitochondrial enzymes in inherited neoplasia and beyond. Nat Rev 2003;3:193–202.

[65] Isaacs JS, Jung YJ, Mole DR, Lee S, Torres-Cabala C, Chung YL, et al. HIF overexpression correlates with biallelic loss of fumarate hydratase in renal cancer: novel role of fumarate in regulation of HIF stability. Cancer Cell 2005;8:143–53.

[66] Selak MA, Armour SM, MacKenzie ED, Boulahbel H, Watson DG, Mansfield KD, et al. Succinate links TCA cycle dysfunction to oncogenesis by inhibiting HIF-alpha prolyl hydroxylase. Cancer Cell 2005;7:77–85.

[67] MacKenzie ED, Selak MA, Tennant DA, Payne LJ, Crosby S, Frederiksen CM, et al. Cell-permeating alpha-ketoglutarate derivatives alleviate pseudohypoxia in succinate dehydrogenase-deficient cells. Mol Cell Biol 2007;27:3282–9.

[68] Frezza C, Zheng L, Folger O, Rajagopalan KN, MacKenzie ED, Jerby L, et al. Haem oxygenase is synthetically lethal with the tumour suppressor fumarate hydratase. Nature 2011;477:225–8.

[69] Kaadige MR, Elgort MG, Ayer DE. Coordination of glucose and glutamine utilization by an expanded Myc network. Transcription 2010;1:36–40.

[70] Sloan EJ, Ayer DE. Myc, mondo, and metabolism. Genes Cancer 2010;1:587–96.

[71] Love DC, Hanover JA. The hexosamine signaling pathway: deciphering the O-GlcNAc code. Sci STKE 2009;139(7):1229–41.

[72] Dennis JW, Nabi IR, Demetriou M. Metabolism, cell surface organization, and disease. Cell 2009;139:1229–41.

[73] Billin AN, Eilers AL, Coulter KL, Logan JS, MondoA. Ayer DE. a novel basic helix-loop-helix-leucine zipper transcriptional activator that constitutes a positive branch of a max-like network. Mol Cell Biol 2000;20:8845–54.

[74] Stoltzman CA, Peterson CW, Breen KT, Muoio DM, Billin AN, Ayer DE. Glucose sensing by MondoA:Mlx complexes: a role for hexokinases and direct regulation of thioredoxin-interacting protein expression. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2008;105:6912–7.

[75] Kaadige MR, Looper RE, Kamalanaadhan S, Ayer DE. Glutamine-dependent anapleurosis dictates glucose uptake and cell growth by regulating MondoA transcriptional activity. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2009;106:14878–83.

[76] Yang C, Sudderth J, Dang T, Bachoo RM, McDonald JG, DeBerardinis RJ. Glioblastoma cells require glutamate dehydrogenase to survive impairments of glucose metabolism or Akt signaling. Cancer Res 2009;69:7986–93.

[77] Cheng T, Sudderth J, Yang C, Mullen AR, Jin ES, Mates JM, et al. Pyruvate carboxylase is required for glutamine-independent growth of tumor cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2011;108:8674–9.

[78] Erickson JW, Cerione RA, Glutaminase A. Hot spot for regulation of cancer cell metabolism? Oncotarget 2010;1:734–40.

[79] Lora J, Alonso FJ, Segura JA, Lobo C, Marquez J, Mates JM. Antisense glutaminase inhibition decreases glutathione antioxidant capacity and increases apoptosis in Ehrlich ascitic tumour cells. Eur J Biochem/FEBS 2004;271:4298–306.

[80] Dang CV, Hamaker M, Sun P, Le A, Gao P. Therapeutic targeting of cancer cell metabolism. J Mol Med (Berl) 2011;89(3):205–12.

[81] Vander Heiden MG. Targeting cancer metabolism: a therapeutic window opens. Nat Rev Drug Discov 2011;10:671–84.

[82] Rajagopalan KN, Deberardinis RJ. Role of glutamine in cancer: therapeutic and imaging implications. J Nucl Med 2011;52:1005–8.

[83] Qu W, Zha Z, Ploessl K, Lieberman BP, Zhu L, Wise DR, et al. Synthesis of optically pure 4-fluoro-glutamines as potential metabolic imaging agents for tumors. J Am Chem Soc 2010;133:1122–33.

[84] Lieberman BP, Ploessl K, Wang L, Qu W, Zha Z, Wise DR, et al. PET imaging of glutaminolysis in tumors by 18F-(2S,4R)4-fluoroglutamine. J Nucl Med 2011;52:1947–55.

[85] Qu W, Oya S, Lieberman BP, Ploessl K, Wang L, Wise DR, et al. Preparation and characterization of L-[5-11C]-glutamine for metabolic imaging of tumors. J Nucl Med 2012;53:98–105.

[86] Ross BD. Biochemical considerations in 1H spectroscopy. Glutamate and glutamine; myo-inositol and related metabolites. NMR Biomed 1991;4:59–63.

[87] Rothman DL, Hanstock CC, Petroff OA, Novotny EJ, Prichard JW, Shulman RG. Localized 1H NMR spectra of glutamate in the human brain. Magn Reson Med 1992;25:94–106.

[88] Sibson NR, Dhankhar A, Mason GF, Behar KL, Rothman DL, Shulman RG. In vivo 13C NMR measurements of cerebral glutamine synthesis as evidence for glutamate–glutamine cycling. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1997;94:2699–704.

[89] Rothman DL, Novotny EJ, Shulman GI, Howseman AM, Petroff OA, Mason G, et al. 1H-[13C] NMR measurements of [4-13C]glutamate turnover in human brain. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1992;89:9603–6.

[90] Gallagher FA, Kettunen MI, Day SE, Hu DE, Karlsson M, Gisselsson A, et al. Detection of tumor glutamate metabolism in vivo using (13)C magnetic resonance spectroscopy and hyperpolarized [1-(13)C]glutamate. Magn Reson Med 2011;66:18–23.

[91] Gallagher FA, Kettunen MI, Day SE, Lerche M, Brindle KM. 13C MR spectroscopy measurements of glutaminase activity in human hepatocellular carcinoma cells using hyperpolarized 13C-labeled glutamine. Magn Reson Med 2008;60:253–7.

[92] Qu W, Zha Z, Lieberman BP, Mancuso A, Stetz M, Rizzi R, et al. Facile Synthesis [5-(13)C-4-(2)H(2)]-L-Glutamine for Hyperpolarized MRS Imaging of Cancer Cell Metabolism. Acad Radiol 2011;18:932–9.
