
the immune system)16) refocusing activation clusters to non-apical sites. Moreover, activation-dependent interfaces of DETCs with Langerhans cells may be driven by additional ligands and/or epithelial ligands picked up by scavenging Langerhans cells. Such interactions have been visualized in vivo in response to NKG2D activation8, but their molecular basis remains unresolved. Multiple ligands for a TCR should not be considered exceptional, as sequential thymic selection and peripheral activation of conventional αβTCRs demands it. Clearly, this highly provocative study3 adds renewed importance to the identification of the DETC TCR ligand(s) and likewise the TCR ligands for conserved intraepithelial T cell compartments, such as those in the gut. Such studies should show whether DETCs are beautiful but unique or attractive showcases for new and generally applicable aspects of lymphocyte regulation.

COMPETING FINANCIAL INTERESTS

The authors declare no competing financial interests.

1. Saito, H. et al. Nature 309, 757–762 (1984).
2. Asarnow, D.M. et al. Cell 55, 837–847 (1988).

3. Chodaczek, G. et al. Nat. Immunol. 13, 272–282 (2012).
4. Chorro, L. & Geissmann, F. Trends Immunol. 31, 438–445 (2010).
5. Boyden, L.M. et al. Nat. Genet. 40, 656–662 (2008).
6. Havran, W.L. & Jameson, J.M. J. Immunol. 184, 5423–5428 (2010).
7. Strid, J. et al. Science 334, 1293–1297 (2011).
8. Strid, J. et al. Nat. Immunol. 9, 146–154 (2008).
9. Hayday, A. Immunity 31, 184–196 (2009).
10. Havran, W.L. et al. Science 252, 1430–1432 (1991).
11. Witherden, D.A. et al. Science 329 1205–1210 (2010).
12. Uchida, Y. et al. J. Immunol. 186, 6945–6954 (2011).
13. Jensen, K.D. et al. Immunity 29, 90–100 (2008).
14. Brodin, P. et al. Trends Immunol. 30, 143–149 (2009).
15. Turchinovich, G. & Hayday, A. Immunity 35, 59–68 (2011).
16. Swamy, M. & Hayday, A. Nat. Immunol. 11, 656–665 (2010).


A new path to IL-1β production controlled by caspase-8

Jeremy Dupaul-Chicoine & Maya Saleh

Maturation of the proinflammatory cytokine IL-1β is achieved mainly by the canonical caspase-1 inflammasome. An alternative caspase-8-dependent inflammasome that is engaged after stimulation with dectin-1 during fungal and mycobacterial infection has now been described.

Delineating the mechanisms that lead to the production of bioactive interleukin 1β (IL-1β) has been the focus of intense research in the past few years. This pleotropic factor is critical in the pathophysiology of both acute and chronic inflammation. It exerts a wide range of inflammatory and antimicrobial activities, including the induction of fever and the acute-phase response, the elicitation of proinflammatory cytokine cascades, the activation of innate immunity effector mechanisms and the regulation of adaptive differentiation into IL-17-producing helper T cells1. The production of bioactive IL-1β is under tight regulation and requires a two-step process: the first step consists of synthesis of the inactive, 31-kilodalton precursor pro-IL-1β; the second controls the maturation of pro-IL-1β into the active 17-kilodalton mature form of IL-1β. This latter task was thought to be executed solely by the inflammatory cysteine protease caspase-1 (also known as ICE (IL-1β-converting enzyme)). Gringhuis et al. now describe an alternative means for the production of bioactive IL-1β in human dendritic cells infected with fungi or certain mycobacterial species2. They define a caspase-1-independent noncanonical inflammasome that forms downstream of engagement of dectin-1 and activation of the kinase Syk.

Roughly a decade ago, the discovery that mutations in the gene encoding the cytoplasmic receptor NLRP3 lead to excessive production of IL-1β in many sterile hereditary autoinflammatory syndromes spearheaded the characterization of the canonical caspase-1 inflammasome and led to considerable clinical success with the use of IL-1-blockade strategies3. Since then, many caspase-1 inflammasomes have been described as being scaffolded by distinct intracellular pattern-recognition receptors, including the cytosolic DNA receptor AIM2 and the viral RNA sensor RIG-I, as well as multiple members of the NLR family4. These activation platforms assemble in response to intracellular microbial or danger signals and recruit caspase-1, often in association with the adaptor ASC. Although human caspase-4 and caspase-5 and mouse caspase-11 are phylogenetically related to caspase-1, only the last is able to cleave IL-1β. Notably, caspase-11 has been shown to associate with select inflammasomes in response to bacterial infection; however, its function in these complexes is not to cleave IL-1β but instead is to stimulate the catalysis of caspase-1 and the induction of inflammasome-triggered pyroptotic cell death5.

Nonetheless, despite the important role of caspase-1 in the maturation of IL-1β, other enzymes, mainly the neutrophil-derived serine proteases cathepsin G, proteinase 3 and elastase, also process IL-1β6. Additionally, the proapoptotic enzyme caspase-8 has been previously linked to IL-1β maturation after stimulation of Toll-like receptors 3 and 4 (ref. 7). Gringhuis et al. now extend those findings and further link activation of caspase-8 to the production of IL-1β after fungal and mycobacterial recognition by dectin-1 (ref. 2).

Caspase-8 is known mainly for its function as an initiator of the death receptor-induced extrinsic pathway of apoptosis. In addition to serving that classical apoptotic role, caspase-8 has also been ascribed many nonapoptotic functions, including suppression of the programmed form of necrosis called ‘necroptosis’, embryonic development, monocyte differentiation, T cell and B cell proliferation, and activation of the transcription factor NF-κB pathway8. Mutation of sequence encoding the autoprocessing site of caspase-8 abrogates its proapoptotic function but retains its nonapoptotic functions. One of the first indications that caspase-8 exerts a nonapoptotic role was demonstrated with T lymphocytes. Triggering of the T cell antigen receptor leads to T cell activation and proliferation mainly through stimulation of the NF-κB pathway. The T cell antigen receptor signal is relayed to NF-κB via the CARMA1-Bcl-10-MALT1 complex in conjunction with caspase-8 (ref. 9). In this context, caspase-8 undergoes limited catalysis, which is dependent on its association with the paracaspase MALT1. This has been proposed to allow it to process a subset of its natural substrates without inducing cell death.

Fungal recognition by dectin-1 engages a complex related to CARMA1-Bcl-10-MALT1, consisting of CARD9, Bcl-10 and MALT1,

NEWS AND VIEWS

a
Dectin-1
Syk
CARD9
MALT1
Caspase-8
Bcl-10
MALT1

b
Fungi or mycobacteria
Group 1 pathogens
Noncanonical
inflammasome
Dectin-1
Syk
CARD9
Bcl-10
MALT1
Caspase-8
?
ASC
Other
proteins
Pro-IL-1β
NF-κB
IL-1β

c
Fungi or mycobacteria
Group 2 pathogens
Canonical and noncanonical
inflammasomes
Dectin-1
Syk
NLPR3
CARD9
Bcl-10
MALT1
Caspase-8
?
ASC
Other
proteins
Pro-IL-1β
NF-κB
IL-1β

Figure 1 Activation of the noncanonical inflammasome in dendritic cells. (a) In resting dendritic cells, caspase-8 is in complex with MALT1. A second pool of MALT1 interacts with Bcl-10. After stimulation of dectin-1 with fungi or mycobacteria, engagement of Syk triggers activation of NF-κB and transcription of the gene encoding pro-IL-1β via the CARD9–Bcl-10–MALT1 complex. (b,c) A subset of pathogens, such as *C. albicans* (species CBS8781 and CBS8758), *Candida tropicalis*, *Candida lusitaniae*, *Aspergillus fumigatus* and *Mycobacterium leprae*, stimulate the production of bioactive IL-1β mainly via a noncanonical inflammasome composed of CARD9, Bcl-10, MALT1, caspase-8 and ASC (b). Other pathogens, such as *Mycobacterium tuberculosis* or *Mycobacterium bovis* bacillus Calmette-Guérin, engage both the classical NLRP3 inflammasome as well as the noncanonical caspase-8 inflammasome, leading to the secretion of IL-1β (c).

which is crucial for antifungal immunity<sup>10</sup>. Indeed, human deficiency in either dectin-1 or CARD9 leads to greater susceptibility to mucocutaneous fungal infection<sup>11</sup>. Signaling through this complex is essential for NF-κB activation and induction of the expression of pro-IL-1β<sup>12</sup>. Now Gringhuis et al. demonstrate that caspase-8 is also recruited to the MALT1–Bcl-10–CARD9 complex to form a noncanonical inflammasome that is necessary for IL-1β maturation<sup>2</sup>. Thus, dectin-1, a pattern-recognition receptor present on the cell surface, is required for both the synthesis and the maturation of IL-1β (Fig. 1). IL-1β is essential for host resistance during disseminated candidiasis; however, the role of caspase-1 in this context has been controversial. Whereas caspase-1-deficient mice are reported to show normal resistance to infection with *Candida albicans*, ASC-deficient mice are hypersusceptible to such infection. This indicates that ASC might exert additional functions that are independent of the caspase-1 inflammasome<sup>13</sup>. Consistent with that, Gringhuis et al. now show that the IL-1β response triggered by fungal infection is largely independent of caspase-1 or NLRP3 but requires association of ASC with the noncanonical caspase-8 inflammasome<sup>2</sup>. Interestingly, IL-1β secretion after stimulation with dectin-1 does not require internalization of the pathogen.

Characterization of the noncanonical caspase-8 inflammasome raises many important questions. Although it is clear that

caspase-8 is engaged by certain pathogens in cell culture after stimulation with dectin-1, the relevant contribution of this pathway *in vivo* and the extent of its redundancy with other inflammasomes or IL-1β-processing proteases in fungal and mycobacterial infection remain to be addressed. This leads to the question of whether the noncanonical caspase-8 inflammasome is engaged solely in dendritic cells and after stimulation with dectin-1. Gringhuis et al. elegantly demonstrate the requirement for the enzymatic activity of caspase-8 in IL-1β production<sup>2</sup>. However, it remains plausible that caspase-8 does not cleave IL-1β directly but acts via proteolytic activation of a downstream effector. In this context, it will be important to determine the precise role of ASC in this complex, whether it interacts with caspase-8 directly and what the domain requirements for this binding are. Furthermore, analysis of whether additional components are recruited to this complex will lead to better understanding of the molecular mechanisms involved in controlling the limited catalysis of caspase-8 and regulating its substrate specificity. Whether other substrates are also cleaved by the noncanonical caspase-8 inflammasome and the physiological consequence of their processing on host resistance to fungal and mycobacterial infection are additional open-ended questions.

The study by Gringhuis et al. defines a previously unknown, noncanonical caspase-8 inflammasome<sup>2</sup> and begins to shed some light on the reported discrepancy between the response of *Il1b*<sup>-/-</sup> mice and that of *Casp1*<sup>-/-</sup> mice in models of fungal and mycobacterial infection. Their results indicate that several inflammasomes can form during infection *in vivo*. Investigation of the mechanisms and dynamics of assembly of each of these inflammasomes, their redundancy or synergy, their agonists and their substrate specificity are necessary for fuller understanding of the complexity of host-pathogen interactions and for the development of knowledge-based targeted therapies for infectious diseases.

COMPETING FINANCIAL INTERESTS

The authors declare no competing financial interests.

1. Dinarello, C.A. *Annu. Rev. Immunol.* **27**, 519–550 (2009).
2. Gringhuis, S.I. *et al.* *Nat. Immunol.* **13**, 246–254 (2012).
3. Hoffman, H.M. & Wanderer, A.A. *Curr. Allergy Asthma Rep.* **10**, 229–235 (2010).
4. Schroder, K. & Tschöpp, J. *Cell* **140**, 821–832 (2010).
5. Kayagaki, N. *et al.* *Nature* **479**, 117–121 (2011).
6. Netea, M.G. *et al.* *PLoS Pathog.* **6**, e1000661 (2010).
7. Maelfait, J. *et al.* *J. Exp. Med.* **205**, 1967–1973 (2008).
8. Oberst, A. & Green, D.R. *Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol.* **12**, 757–763 (2011).
9. Hailfinger, S., Rebeaud, F. & Thome, M. *Immunol. Rev.* **232**, 334–347 (2009).
10. Drummond, R.A., Saijo, S., Iwakura, Y. & Brown, G.D. *Eur. J. Immunol.* **41**, 276–281 (2011).
11. Ferwerda, B. *et al.* *N. Engl. J. Med.* **361**, 1760–1767 (2009).
12. Gringhuis, S.I. *et al.* *PLoS Pathog.* **7**, e1001259 (2011).
13. Joly, S. & Sutterwala, F.S. *Virulence* **1**, 276–280 (2010).
