
Original Paper

Neuroendocrinology 2012;96:68–80  
DOI: 10.1159/000335985  

Received: January 18, 2011  
Accepted after revision: December 20, 2011  
Published online: February 14, 2012  

---

**Kisspeptin Inhibits High-Voltage Activated Ca²⁺ Channels in GnRH Neurons via Multiple Ca²⁺ Influx and Release Pathways**

Xiao-Bing Zhang<sup>a</sup> Daniel J. Spergel<sup>a,b</sup>

<sup>a</sup>Section of Endocrinology, Department of Medicine, University of Chicago, Chicago, Ill., and <sup>b</sup>Department of Psychiatry, Yale University School of Medicine and the Ribicoff Research Facilities, Connecticut Mental Health Center, New Haven, Conn., USA

---

### Key Words
Ca²⁺ channels · Gonadotropin-releasing hormone neurons · G-protein-coupled receptor 54 · Kisspeptin · Puberty · Ryanodine receptors

---

### Abstract
Kisspeptin plays an important role in puberty and subsequent fertility by activating its receptor, G-protein-coupled receptor 54 (GPR54), and increasing cytoplasmic free Ca²⁺ concentration ([Ca²⁺]<sub>i</sub>) and gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) secretion in GnRH neurons. Yet the mechanism by which kisspeptin increases [Ca²⁺]<sub>i</sub> in GnRH neurons remains to be fully elucidated. In other neurons, voltage-gated Ca²⁺ channel (VGCC) activity has been shown to be inversely related to [Ca²⁺]<sub>i</sub>. We used whole-cell patch-clamp recording to examine the effects of kisspeptin-10 (KP-10) on VGCC activity evoked by step depolarizations in GnRH neurons in brain slices from pubertal male GnRH-green fluorescent protein transgenic mice. Prolonged (>30 s) KP-10 application inhibited Ca²⁺ currents. The GPR54 antagonist peptide 234, chelation of intracellular Ca²⁺ by 1,2-bis(2-aminophenoxy) ethane N,N,N′,N′-tetraacetic acid, substitution of Ba²⁺ for Ca²⁺, the calmodulin antagonists calmidazolium and trifluoperazine, the phospholipase C inhibitor edelfosine, the canonical transient receptor potential (TRPC) channel and inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor (IP₃R) antagonist 2-APB, the TRPC channel antagonist BTP2 and the endoplasmic reticulum Ca²⁺-ATPase blocker cyclopiazonic acid each prevented inhibition. The IP₃R antagonists caffeine (10 μM), heparin and intracellular 2-APB prevented inhibition to a lesser extent. The ryanodine receptor (RyR) antagonists ryanodine and dantrolene prevented inhibition, and the RyR agonist caffeine (30 mM) mimicked the effects of KP-10 on Ca²⁺ currents. Our results suggest that kisspeptin induces Ca²⁺ influx through TRPC channels and Ca²⁺ release via IP₃Rs and RyRs, and that this is followed by Ca²⁺/CaM-dependent inhibition of VGCCs.

Copyright © 2012 S. Karger AG, Basel

---

### Introduction
Reproduction is controlled via pulsatile secretion of gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) from hypothalamic GnRH neurons, which is modulated by various factors including the putative neurotransmitter kisspeptin [1–5]. Kisspeptin stimulates the reproductive axis by binding to its receptor, G-protein-coupled receptor 54 (GPR54) [6], and increasing GnRH release [7, 8]. Kisspeptin and GPR54 are important for puberty and subsequent fertility; mutations or targeted deletions in the

---

Daniel J. Spergel, Department of Psychiatry  
Yale University School of Medicine and the Ribicoff Research Facilities  
CMHC W-218, 34 Park Street  
New Haven, CT 06508 (USA)  
Tel. +1 203 988 7401, E-Mail daniel.spergel@gmail.com

KARGER  
Fax +41 61 306 12 34  
E-Mail karger@karger.ch  
www.karger.com  
© 2012 S. Karger AG, Basel  
0028–3835/12/0961–0068$38.00/0  
Accessible online at: www.karger.com/nen
genes encoding kisspeptin or GPR54 cause profound hypogonadotropic hypogonadism, failure to undergo puberty and infertility [9–12]. Kisspeptin released from presynaptic neurons acts on GnRH neurons directly, and indirectly (transsynaptically), to produce long-lasting (20–30 min) depolarization and increased action potential firing [13–21] along with increased cytoplasmic free Ca²⁺ concentration ([Ca²⁺]i) [17, 22, 23] required for the increased GnRH secretion. However, the mechanism by which kisspeptin increases [Ca²⁺]i in GnRH neurons has not been fully elucidated.

Kisspeptin activation of GPR54 initiates Gq/11-phospholipase C (PLC)-inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate (IP₃)/diacylglycerol (DAG) signaling that increases [Ca²⁺]i in GnRH neurons [17, 19, 22, 23]. Activated PLC hydrolyzes phosphatidylinositol bisphosphate (PIP₂) to yield IP₃ and DAG. IP₃ binds to IP₃ receptors (IP₃Rs), which would cause release of Ca²⁺ from the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), while DAG and/or a fall in PIP₂ may activate canonical transient receptor potential (TRPC) channels and inhibit inwardly rectifying K⁺ (Kir) channels, which would depolarize GnRH neurons [2].

If this is indeed the case, then kisspeptin would be expected to increase [Ca²⁺]i in GnRH neurons not only by mobilizing Ca²⁺ from IP₃-sensitive stores but also by activating and inducing Ca²⁺ influx through TRPC channels and voltage-gated Ca²⁺ channels (VGCCs) [22, 23], which may in turn cause Ca²⁺-induced Ca²⁺ release via ryanodine receptors (RyRs) and Ca²⁺- and calmodulin (CaM)-dependent VGCC inhibition.

In the present study, we examined these possibilities in GnRH neurons in brain slices of pubertal male GnRH-green fluorescent protein (GFP) transgenic mice by comparing high-voltage activated Ca²⁺ channel (i.e., L-, N-, P/Q- and R-type VGCC) activity, which has been shown to be inversely related to [Ca²⁺]i in other neurons [24–26], in response to kisspeptin-10 (KP-10, the 10-amino-acid fragment of kisspeptin) in the absence and presence of pharmacological agents that inhibit PLC, TRPC channels, ER Ca²⁺-ATPase, IP₃Rs, RyRs, or CaM.

---

**Materials and Methods**

**Use and Care of Mice**

Pubertal/young adult male (postnatal day 28–58; n = 77) homozygous GnRH-GFP transgenic mice, in which GFP is genetically targeted to GnRH neurons [27], were used for experiments. Mice were housed in a temperature (22°C)-and light (on 06:00–18:00 h)-controlled room with ad libitum access to food and water. All procedures were approved by the Animal Care and Use Committees of the University of Chicago and Yale University, and were conducted within the guidelines of the National Research Council's Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals.

**Brain Slice Preparation for Electrophysiology Experiments**

Mice were anesthetized with isoflurane (Abbott Laboratories, North Chicago, Ill., USA) and then decapitated. Brains were removed and dissected in ice-cold artificial cerebrospinal fluid (aCSF) containing (in mM) 125 NaCl, 25 NaHCO₃, 1.25 NaH₂PO₄, 2.5 KCl, 2 CaCl₂, 1 MgCl₂, 20 sucrose and 5 glucose (gassed with 95% O₂/5% CO₂; pH 7.4, 306 mosm). Brains were cut sagittally with a vibratome (Campden Instruments Integraslice 7550MM, Lafayette Instruments, Lafayette, Ind., USA) into 300-μm-thick slices containing the diagonal band of Broca and preoptic area. Slices were transferred using the back end of a Pasteur pipette to an incubation chamber with aCSF (gassed with 95% O₂/5% CO₂) for 20 min at 33°C and then stored at room temperature (22°C) in the same chamber until electrophysiological recording.

**Whole-Cell Patch-Clamp Recording of Ca²⁺ and Ba²⁺ Currents**

Ca²⁺ and Ba²⁺ currents were recorded from GFP-labeled GnRH neurons. Ca²⁺ currents were also recorded from neighboring nonfluorescent neurons. Neurons were visualized with a fluorescence microscope (Axioskop 2 FS, Zeiss Microimaging, Thornwood, N.Y., USA) and a near-infrared charge-coupled device camera (C7500-50; Hamamatsu Photonic Systems, Bridgewater, N.J., USA) as described previously [27, 28]. Neurons were superfused with bath solution (see below for composition) in a 3-ml temperature-controlled chamber (Luigs & Neumann, Ratingen, Germany), and the pharmacological agents were applied, at a flow rate of 3 ml/min that was monitored continuously using an inline flowsensor and flowmeter (ME1PXN and TS410; Transonic Systems, Ithaca, N.Y., USA). The experiments were performed at 35°C.

The bath solution for recording Ca²⁺ currents consisted of (in mM) 117.5 NaCl, 25 NaHCO₃, 1.25 NaH₂PO₄, 10 tetraethylammonium-chloride (TEA-Cl; to block K⁺ channels), 2 CaCl₂, 1 MgCl₂, 20 sucrose and 5 glucose, gassed with 95% O₂/5% CO₂ (pH 7.4, 309 mosm). The bath solution for recording Ba²⁺ currents consisted of (in mM) 101.5 NaCl, 25 NaHCO₃, 1.25 NaH₂PO₄, 10 TEA-Cl, 10 BaCl₂, 1 MgCl₂, 20 sucrose and 5 glucose, gassed with 95% O₂/5% CO₂ (pH 7.4, 288 mosm). The bath solutions for recording Ca²⁺ and Ba²⁺ currents were supplemented with 0.5 μM tetrodotoxin (TTX; Ascent Scientific, Princeton, N.J., USA) to block TTX-sensitive Na⁺ channels, 10 μM 6-cyano-7-nitroquinoxaline-2,3-dione (Ascent Scientific) or 6,7-dinitroquinoxaline-2,3-dione (Ascent Scientific) and 20 μMD-(−)-2-amino-5-phosphonopentanoic acid (Ascent Scientific) to block ionotropic glutamate receptors, and 50 or 100 μM picrotoxin to block A-type γ-aminobutyric acid receptors. We refer hereafter to the supplemented bath solutions for recording Ca²⁺ and Ba²⁺ currents as ICa aCSF and IBa aCSF, respectively.

The pipette solution for recording Ca²⁺ and Ba²⁺ currents contained (in mM) 102.5 CsCl, 30 TEA-Cl, 2.5 Na₂-phosphocreatine, 0.3 Na-GTP, 2.38 CaCl₂, 4 Mg-ATP, 5 Cs₂-1,2-bis(2-aminophenoxy)ethane N,N,N′,N′-tetraacetic acid (BAPTA; Invitrogen/Molecular Probes) and 10 HEPES (pH 7.29, 291 mosm). The free Ca²⁺ concentration in this solution was estimated to be 97 nM, assuming an absolute affinity constant for BAPTA of 9.35 × 10⁶ M⁻¹ [15, 29].

--- 

Neuroendocrinology 2012;96:68–80   69
Recording pipettes were made from thick-walled borosilicate glass capillary tubes (length 75 mm, outer diameter 2 mm, inner diameter 1 mm and wall thickness 0.5 mm; Hilgenberg, Malsfeld, Germany) using a P-97 Flaming/Brown micropipette puller (Sutter Instrument, Novato, Calif., USA) and had resistances ranging from 2 to 6 MΩ when filled with pipette solution. Pipettes were connected via an Ag-AgCl wire to the headstage of an EPC-10 patch-clamp amplifier (Heka Instruments, Bellmore, N.Y., USA). The reference electrode was an Ag-AgCl pellet (IVM, Healdsburg, Calif., USA) immersed in bath solution. The EPC-10 amplifier and PatchMaster 2.60 software (Heka) were used to acquire (10 kHz), filter (Bessel, 2.9 kHz) and analyze data, which were stored on a Power Macintosh G4 computer running Mac OS 10.5.8. The patch-clamp amplifier was also used to compensate pipette and cell capacitance. Cell capacitance in the present study was 9.75 ± 2.94 pF (mean ± SD) and ranged from 5.15 to 18.73 pF (n = 131 GnRH neurons). Series resistance was uncompensated but was usually less than 30 MΩ and varied less than 20% in recordings selected for analysis. Capacitative and leak currents were subtracted using a P/4 protocol. Traces were processed for presentation using Igor Pro 6.06 (Wavemetrics, Lake Oswego, Oreg., USA) and Canvas 10.5.8 (ACD Systems of America, Miami, Fla., USA) software.

**Drugs and Drug Application**

KP-10 (human), calmidazolium and dantrolene were obtained from Tocris Bioscience (Ellisville, Mo., USA). It should be noted that KP-10 has been shown to have the same biological activity as the full-length kisspeptin in the physiological and cellular assays employed thus far, and that although KP-10 differs from mouse KP-10 in its C-terminal amino acid residue, the difference has no influence on receptor binding [3, 6]. We used KP-10 concentrations of 1, 5, 10 and 100 nM, the same concentrations as those used by other labs performing electrophysiological [13, 15, 18, 19] and Ca²⁺ imaging [17, 22, 23] studies with KP-10 in GnRH neurons. Reported EC₅₀ values for KP-10-induced depolarization of GnRH neurons range from about 3 nM [19] to 10 nM [15]. Peptide 234 [30] was custom synthesized by, and purchased from, Anaspec (San Jose, Calif., USA). Two-aminoethyl diphenylborinate (2-APB), cyclopiazonic acid (CPA) and ryanodine were obtained from Ascent Scientific. Edelfosine, the 3,5-bis(trifluoromethyl)pyrazole derivative BTP2 and heparin (Na⁺ salt, low molecular weight) were obtained from EMD Chemicals/Calbiochem (Gibbstown, N.J., USA). Unless noted otherwise, all other reagents were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, Mo., USA). Neurons were exposed to bath-applied KP-10 for the indicated times. When pretreated with other drugs, which were applied extracellularly via bath superfusion or intracellularly by inclusion in the patch pipette solution, neurons were treated with those drugs for at least 10 min prior to, as well as during, KP-10 treatment. To avoid problems associated with desensitization, drugs were applied only once per slice.

**Statistics**

Data are expressed as mean ± SEM unless indicated otherwise. Statistical comparisons were performed with Prism 5 software (GraphPad Software, La Jolla, Calif., USA) using paired t tests, or two-way ANOVA with repeated measures followed by the Bonferroni post hoc test [31] where indicated. A p value <0.05 was used as our significance level for all tests.

---

Fig. 1. Time course of the reduction of Ca²⁺ current by KP-10 in GnRH neurons. **a** Ca²⁺ current in a GnRH neuron in response to a voltage pulse from –60 to 0 mV at 1.5 min before exposure to control solution (I_ca aCSF) without (upper traces) or with (lower traces) KP-10, and at 3.5 and 5.5 min after exposure. **b** Averaged results showing peak Ca²⁺ current (I_ca) at 1-min intervals before and after exposure to control solution without (filled circles) or with (empty circles) KP-10. Numbers of neurons are indicated in this and subsequent figures. For clarity, error bars in this and subsequent figures are shown as only minus or only plus for each condition.

**Results**

**KP-10 Reduces Ca²⁺ Current in a Time- and Concentration-Dependent Manner**

We first examined whether KP-10 alters VGCC activity evoked by 50-ms voltage pulses from a holding potential of –60 mV to a test potential of 0 mV at 1-min intervals for several minutes in GnRH neurons. We previously showed that the inward currents evoked by those voltage pulses were Ca²⁺ currents because the VGCC inhibitor Cd²⁺ blocked them, that they are largest at test potentials of –10 or 0 mV, and that there is a wide range of Ca²⁺ current amplitudes at each test potential in juvenile

Table 1. Effect of KP-10 on peak Ca²⁺ or Ba²⁺ current in GnRH neurons in the presence of various pharmacological agents

| Treatment                     | Control Iₐ (pA/pF) | Treatment Iₐ (pA/pF) | % Reduction | n   | p*    |
|-------------------------------|-------------------|---------------------|-------------|-----|-------|
| KP-10(1nM)                    | -34.8 ± 3.9       | -33.9 ± 3.8         | 2.2 ± 4.5   | 4   |       |
| KP-10(5nM)                    | -39.5 ± 5.0       | -38.6 ± 4.4         | 1.7 ± 2.7   | 6   |       |
| KP-10(10nM)                   | -36.1 ± 5.6       | -16.4 ± 2.3         | 52.0 ± 5.7  | 7   | <0.05 |
| KP-10(100nM)                  | -32.0 ± 1.6       | -10.9 ± 2.0         | 66.2 ± 3.1  | 5   | <0.05 |
| KP-10(10nM) + Peptide 234     | -34.5 ± 3.8       | -31.9 ± 2.7         | 1.6 ± 9.4   | 10  |       |
| BAPTA (+0Ca²⁺)                | -30.9 ± 2.2       | -31.5 ± 2.5         | -1.9 ± 3.5  | 7   |       |
| Ba²⁺(Iₐ)                      | -72.1 ± 10.6      | -79.8 ± 13.3        | -9.9 ± 11.4 | 7   |       |
| Calmidazolium                 | -31.1 ± 5.1       | -29.1 ± 5.0         | 1.9 ± 10.5  | 7   |       |
| Trifluoperazine               | -20.2 ± 7.2       | -23.1 ± 8.0         | -18.0 ± 9.8 | 3   |       |
| Edelfosine                    | -20.5 ± 4.4       | -14.6 ± 2.2         | 24.5 ± 8.2  | 4   |       |
| 2-APB                          | -26.6 ± 4.4       | -24.3 ± 5.4         | 7.3 ± 11.7  | 6   |       |
| BTP 2                         | -35.2 ± 3.4       | -32.9 ± 3.2         | 4.1 ± 4.5   | 13  |       |
| CPA                           | -17.9 ± 2.6       | -13.8 ± 1.9         | 21.6 ± 8.6  | 5   |       |
| Caffeine (10µM)               | -38.3 ± 5.2       | -23.6 ± 3.8         | 39.2 ± 4.3  | 9   | <0.05 |
| Heparin                       | -29.2 ± 2.7       | -19.3 ± 3.1         | 36.1 ± 7.5  | 8   | <0.05 |
| 2-APB                         | -20.6 ± 3.0       | -11.9 ± 1.5         | 40.6 ± 3.9  | 6   | <0.05 |
| Ryanodine                     | -29.1 ± 4.1       | -28.3 ± 4.2         | 2.9 ± 4.7   | 7   |       |
| Dantrolene                    | -32.0 ± 2.8       | -28.1 ± 2.3         | 11.2 ± 5.8  | 7   |       |
| CPA                           | -19.9 ± 2.2       | -16.3 ± 1.0         | 15.6 ± 8.2  | 4   |       |
| Caffeine (30mM)               | -35.4 ± 6.1       | -6.3 ± 1.1          | 81.3 ± 2.4  | 6   | <0.05 |

Ca²⁺ or Ba²⁺ current (Iₐ or Iₐ) was evoked by a 50-ms voltage pulse from a holding potential of -60 mV to a test potential of 0 mV. Control Iₐ or Iₐ was recorded in Iₐ aCSF, Iₐ aCSF, or Iₐ aCSF containing the indicated agent shortly after establishing the whole-cell patch-clamp configuration. Control Iₐ or Iₐ was then adjusted by subtracting the average amount of rundown recorded in separate experiments after 7 min in the absence of KP-10 or other agents, 7.2 ± 5.3% for Iₐ (n = 8) and 25.3 ± 4.7% for Iₐ (n = 6). Treatment Iₐ or Iₐ was recorded 7 min after the beginning of treatment with KP-10 alone or KP-10 plus the indicated agent. The effects of CPA and caffeine (30 mM) in the absence of KP-10 on Iₐ are shown for comparison. n = Number of neurons; *p < 0.05 (treatment vs. control), paired t test.

Fig. 2. Prevention by the kisspeptin/GPR54 antagonist peptide 234 of KP-10-induced Ca²⁺ current reduction. **a** Ca²⁺ currents in a GnRH neuron in control solution (IₐCSF) in response to 50-ms voltage pulses at 1 Hz from a holding potential of –60 to test potentials (Vₘ) of –80, –70, –60, –50, –40, –30, –20, –10, 0, +10, and +20 mV. Peak Ca²⁺ currents are indicated by a filled triangle. **b** Ca²⁺ currents in the GnRH neuron in **a** after an additional 7 min of treatment with control solution. **c** Averaged results showing the current-voltage (I–V) relationship for the peak Ca²⁺ currents expressed as current densities (Ca²⁺ currents divided by cell capacitance, to normalize any differences in cell size) in GnRH neurons in control solution and after an additional 7 min of treatment with control solution. **d** Ca²⁺ currents in a different GnRH neuron than in **a–c** in control solution. **e** Ca²⁺ currents in the GnRH neuron in **d** after 7 min of KP-10 treatment (control solution plus 10 nM KP-10). **f** Averaged results showing the I–V relationship for the peak Ca²⁺ currents recorded from GnRH neurons before and after KP-10 treatment. **g** Ca²⁺ currents in a different GnRH neuron than in **a** or **d** in the presence of the kisspeptin/GPR54 antagonist peptide 234. **h** Ca²⁺ currents in the same GnRH neuron as in **g** after 7 min of KP-10 treatment in the presence of peptide 234. **i** Averaged results showing the I–V relationship for the peak Ca²⁺ currents in GnRH neurons in the presence of peptide 234 before and after KP-10 treatment.

quent experiments because it was the lowest concentration of KP-10 that produced significant Ca²⁺ current inhibition.

The KP-10-Induced Decrease in Ca²⁺ Current Is Voltage Independent and Prevented by the Kisspeptin/GPR54 Antagonist Peptide 234

When we used a series of 50-ms voltage pulses at 1 Hz from a holding potential of –60 mV to test potentials of –80 to +20 mV in steps of 10 mV, we found that superfusion with control solution (IₐCSF) for 7 min had little or no effect on Ca²⁺ currents in GnRH neurons (fig. 2a–c). Peak Iₐ at 0 mV during superfusion with control solution decreased by 7.2 ± 5.3% (p > 0.05, control at 7 vs. control at 0 min; n = 8 GnRH neurons), which we took as the average amount of rundown at 7 min.

In contrast, superfusion with KP-10 (10 nM) for 7 min decreased peak Iₐ at 0 mV by 52.0 ± 5.7% (p < 0.05 vs.

Fig. 3. Lack of KP-10-induced reduction of VGCC activity in the presence of high intracellular BAPTA, or following substitution of Ba²⁺ for extracellular Ca²⁺, or in the presence of the CaM antagonists calmidazolium or trifluoperazine, or in the presence of the PLC inhibitor edelfosine.

a Ca²⁺ currents recorded with a pipette solution containing 20 mM BAPTA and zero added Ca²⁺. b Ca²⁺ currents in the GnRH neuron in a after 7 min of KP-10 treatment. c Averaged results showing similar peak Ca²⁺ currents recorded from GnRH neurons before and after KP-10 treatment with a pipette solution containing 20 mM BAPTA and zero added Ca²⁺. d Ba²⁺ currents (I_Ba) in a GnRH neuron recorded in control solution (I_Ba aCSF). e Ba²⁺ currents in the GnRH neuron in d after 7 min of KP-10 treatment. f Averaged results showing similar peak Ba²⁺ currents recorded from GnRH neurons before and after KP-10 treatment. g–i Averaged results showing similar peak Ca²⁺ currents recorded from GnRH neurons before and after KP-10 treatment in the presence of calmidazolium, trifluoperazine (added to the pipette solution), and edelfosine, respectively.

control at 0 min reduced by 7.2% to account for expected rundown at 7 min), and at all test potentials between –40 and +20 mV by 50–60%, in GnRH neurons (n = 7; fig. 2d–f and table 1), indicating that the KP-10-induced decrease in Ca²⁺ currents is voltage independent.

To determine whether KP-10 inhibition of Ca²⁺ currents involves KP-10 binding to its receptor, GPR54, we pretreated GnRH neurons with the kisspeptin/GPR54 antagonist peptide 234 [30]. Peptide 234 prevented KP-10 inhibition of Ca²⁺ currents (p > 0.05 vs. control; fig. 2g–i and table 1). These results indicated that KP-10-induced Ca²⁺ current inhibition is mediated by GPR54. Also, superfusion with KP-10 had little or no effect on Ca²⁺ currents in most (6 out of 7) neighboring non-GnRH (i.e., nonfluorescent) neurons examined (p > 0.05 vs. control; data not shown), consistent with a recent report suggesting that, unlike GnRH neurons, they do not express GPR54 [33].

The KP-10-Induced Decrease in Ca²⁺ Current Depends on Increased [Ca²⁺]_i and Ca²⁺ Binding to CaM

To ascertain whether KP-10 inhibition of Ca²⁺ currents depends on increased [Ca²⁺]_i, we measured the effect of KP-10 on Ca²⁺ currents in the presence of a low [Ca²⁺]_i produced by a high concentration of BAPTA in Ca²⁺-free pipette solution. In contrast to its inhibition of Ca²⁺ currents with a pipette solution containing 5 mM BAPTA plus 2.38 mM Ca²⁺, KP-10 failed to decrease Ca²⁺ currents with a pipette solution containing 20 mM BAPTA plus zero Ca²⁺ (p > 0.05 vs. control; fig. 3a–c and table 1), suggesting that the inhibition requires increased [Ca²⁺]_i. Further evidence for the dependence of reduced VGCC activity on increased [Ca²⁺]_i was that substitution of 10 mM Ba²⁺ for Ca²⁺ in the bath solution similarly prevented the reduction in channel activity (p > 0.05 vs. control; fig. 3d–f and table 1). To examine the dependence of the reduction on CaM, we compared Ca²⁺ currents in the presence of the CaM antagonists calmidazolium, added to the bath solution, and trifluoperazine, added to the pipette solution, before and after KP-10 treatment. KP-10 failed to significantly decrease Ca²⁺ currents in the presence of calmidazolium (p > 0.05 vs. control; fig. 3g and table 1) or trifluoperazine (p > 0.05 vs. control; fig. 3h and table 1). Taken together with the prevention of the KP- induced decrease in Ca²⁺ currents by Ba²⁺, which cannot bind to CaM, the prevention by calmidazolium and trifluoperazine suggests that the inhibition of VGCCs by KP-10 requires increased [Ca²⁺]_i and Ca²⁺ binding to CaM.

Fig. 4. Prevention by the TRPC channel antagonists extracellular 2-APB and BTP2, and by the ER Ca²⁺-ATPase blocker CPA, of KP-10-induced Ca²⁺ current reduction. **a, d, g** Ca²⁺ currents in GnRH neurons in the presence of 2-APB, BTP2, and CPA, respectively. **b, e, h** Ca²⁺ currents after 7 min of KP-10 treatment in the presence of 2-APB, BTP2 and CPA, respectively. **c, f, i** Averaged results showing peak Ca²⁺ currents in GnRH neurons in the presence of 2-APB, BTP2 and CPA, respectively, following KP-10 treatment.

fluoperazine suggests that the decrease involves Ca²⁺ binding to CaM.

### Blockers of PLC, TRPC Channels, ER Ca²⁺-ATPase, and RyRs Prevent the Reduction of Ca²⁺ Current by KP-10, whereas IP₃R Blockers Partially Prevent the Reduction

To determine the mechanism by which kisspeptin elevates [Ca²⁺]ᵢ, we pretreated GnRH neurons with the PLC inhibitor edelfosine [34] and the TRPC channel and IP₃R blocker 2-APB [35, 36] in separate experiments. Edelfosine prevented the reduction of Ca²⁺ currents by KP-10 (p > 0.05 vs. control; fig. 3i and table 1), suggesting that PLC hydrolysis of PIP₂ to IP₃ and DAG contributes to the KP-10 inhibition of Ca²⁺ currents. When we pretreated with 2-APB, which had been reported to prevent KP-10-induced depolarization and increased firing of GnRH neurons [17, 19, 22], it, too, prevented the reduction of Ca²⁺ currents by KP-10 (p > 0.05 vs. control; fig. 4a and table 1). Similarly, the TRPC channel blocker BTP2 [36,

[37] prevented the reduction (p > 0.05 vs. control; fig. 4b and table 1), providing further evidence for the involvement of TRPC channels in the KP-10 inhibition of Ca²⁺ currents.

To ascertain whether the KP-10 inhibition of Ca²⁺ currents also involves depletion of Ca²⁺ from intracellular Ca²⁺ stores, we used the ER Ca²⁺-ATPase inhibitor CPA [38, 39] and the IP₃R blockers caffeine [37, 38], heparin [39], and intracellular 2-APB [19]. CPA, by itself, had little effect on Ca²⁺ currents (table 1). However, CPA prevented the reduction of Ca²⁺ currents by KP-10 (p > 0.05 vs. control; fig. 4c and table 1). A low concentration (10 μM) of caffeine, when added to the bath solution, and heparin, when added to the pipette solution, partially prevented the reduction (p < 0.05 vs. control; fig. 5a–f and table 1). The reduction was also partially prevented when we added 2-APB to the pipette (intracellular) solution, expecting it to block IP₃Rs but not TRPC channels (p < 0.05 vs. control; fig. 5g–i and table 1).

Fig. 5. Partial prevention by the IP₃R antagonists low caffeine, intracellular heparin and intracellular 2-APB of KP-10-induced Ca²⁺ current reduction. a, d, g Ca²⁺ currents in GnRH neurons in the presence of a low concentration of caffeine, intracellular heparin and intracellular 2-APB, respectively. b, e, h Ca²⁺ currents after 7 min of KP-10 treatment in the presence of low caffeine, intracellular heparin and intracellular 2-APB, respectively. c, f, i Averaged results showing partially reduced peak Ca²⁺ currents in GnRH neurons in the presence of low caffeine, intracellular heparin and intracellular 2-APB, respectively, following KP-10 treatment.

Given the apparently small IP₃R-associated Ca²⁺ mobilization, as well as the tiny inward (likely Ca²⁺) current through TRPC channels in GnRH neurons in response to KP-10 in bath solution containing 5 mM Na⁺ reported previously [19], it seemed that another Ca²⁺ signaling pathway must contribute to the KP-10 reduction of Ca²⁺ currents. We tested the possibility that RyRs contribute and observed that the RyR antagonists ryanodine [38] and dantrolene [22] prevented the reduction (p > 0.05 vs. control; fig. 6a–f and table 1). Thus, pretreatment with TRPC channel and RyR blockers prevented KP-10 reduction of Ca²⁺ currents and pretreatment with IP₃R blockers partially prevented the reduction. These results suggested that TRPC channels mediate the KP-10-induced inhibition of Ca²⁺ currents by permitting Ca²⁺ influx that activates RyRs and induces Ca²⁺ release.

In addition, 7 min of treatment with a high concentration (30 mM) of caffeine, an activator of RyRs that increases [Ca²⁺]i in GnRH neurons [38], mimicked the effect of KP-10 on Ca²⁺ currents (p < 0.05 vs. control; fig. 6g–i and table 1). This indicated that ER Ca²⁺ stores remained intact in our experiments and was further evidence that Ca²⁺ release from RyR-sensitive ER Ca²⁺ stores can inhibit Ca²⁺ currents in GnRH neurons.

### Discussion

Although there is compelling evidence for the idea that kisspeptin activation of GnRH neurons is essential for puberty and subsequent fertility [10–12], the mechanism by which kisspeptin increases [Ca²⁺]i, and which is likely required for increased GnRH secretion at puberty, is unclear. Based on our results, which we discuss in detail below, along with those from other labs [15, 17–19, 22, 23], we propose a model for kisspeptin-induced Ca²⁺ signaling as depicted in figure 7. Kisspeptin binding to GPR54 in GnRH neurons couples GPR54 to the G-protein Gq/11 to activate PLC. PLC then hydrolyzes PIP₂ to yield IP₃ and DAG, which results in Ca²⁺ mobilization from IP₃-sensitive stores, TRPC channel activation and Ca²⁺ influx through TRPC channels. Our study is the

Fig. 6. Prevention by the RyR antagonists ryanodine and dantrolene, and mimicking by the RyR agonist high caffeine, of KP-10-induced Ca²⁺ current reduction.

a, d Ca²⁺ currents in GnRH neurons in the presence of ryanodine and dantrolene, respectively. b, e Ca²⁺ currents after 7 min of KP-10 treatment in the presence of ryanodine and dantrolene, respectively. c, f Averaged results showing similar peak Ca²⁺ currents in GnRH neurons in the presence of ryanodine and dantrolene, respectively, following KP-10 treatment. g Ca²⁺ currents in a GnRH neuron in control solution. h Ca²⁺ currents in the same GnRH neuron as in g after 7 min of treatment with high caffeine. i Averaged results showing decreased peak Ca²⁺ currents in GnRH neurons following treatment with high caffeine.

first to show that the kisspeptin-induced [Ca²⁺]i increase also involves Ca²⁺-induced Ca²⁺ release via RyRs.

We used Ca²⁺-dependent inhibition of high-voltage activated Ca²⁺ channels as a measure of [Ca²⁺]i to examine how [Ca²⁺]i in GnRH neurons is modulated by KP-10, one of the bioactive fragments of kisspeptin-54, the endogenous ligand of GPR54 [6]. KP-10 at concentrations ≥10 nM inhibited high-voltage activated Ca²⁺ channels by decreasing Ca²⁺ current. KP-10 failed to decrease Ca²⁺ currents in the presence of high intracellular BAPTA, to decrease Ba²⁺ currents and to decrease Ca²⁺ currents in the presence of the CaM antagonists calmidazolium and trifluoperazine. This suggests that the decrease requires increased [Ca²⁺]i followed by Ca²⁺ binding to CaM (fig. 7). Previous studies demonstrated that intracellular Ca²⁺ could inactivate L-, N-, P/Q- and R-type VGCCs, all of which are expressed in GnRH neurons [43, 44], directly, or indirectly via CaM [45–49]. The Ca²⁺-dependent VGCC inhibition we observed might involve a mechanism different from Ca²⁺-dependent VGCC inactivation since it affects the amplitude more than the rate of decay of the current. Similar inhibition was reported for cultured hypothalamic neurons following activation of ionotropic glutamate receptors [24], and for sympathetic neurons of the major pelvic ganglia and superior cervical ganglion following activation of muscarinic receptors that couple to Gq/11 G-proteins [25, 26]. The Ca²⁺-dependent VGCC inhibition we observed might also involve G-proteins, akin to that following muscarinic receptor activation [25, 26], but we did not test that possibility. Additionally, we cannot exclude VGCC internalization [50] as a possible mechanism for the reduction of VGCC current following the cascade of kisspeptin activation of GnRH neurons and [Ca²⁺]i rise.

It should be noted that BAPTA (20 mM) with 0 Ca²⁺ in the patch pipette, and Ba²⁺ (10 mM) substitution for Ca²⁺ (2 mM), as used in our study, may not only lower [Ca²⁺]i but may also inhibit PLC activity [51]. Inhibiting PLC activity would prevent the kisspeptin-induced decrease in Ca²⁺ current if, for example, the decrease were due to a decrease in PIP₂ [52] rather than to an increase in [Ca²⁺]i. However, our data indicating that calmidazolium, trifluoperazine, 2-APB, BTP2, ryanodine and dantrolene, which have not been reported to affect PLC activity, pre-

Fig. 7. Model of kisspeptin-induced Ca²⁺ signaling in GnRH neurons. The present study, along with previous studies by other groups [15, 17–19, 22, 23], suggests the following sequence of kisspeptin-induced Ca²⁺ signaling-associated events in GnRH neurons: kisspeptin binds to its receptor GPR54 and couples GPR54 to the G-protein Gq/11 to activate PLC. PLC hydrolyzes PIP₂ to yield IP₃ and DAG. IP₃ binds to IP₃Rs, which results in Ca²⁺ mobilization from IP₃-sensitive stores while DAG activates TRPC1 and TRPC3-7 channels, which may be expressed as homo- or heteromeric complexes. Na⁺ and Ca²⁺ flow in through TRPC channels, depolarizing the membrane and further increasing [Ca²⁺]i. Membrane depolarization due to TRPC channel activation, and closure of inward rectifier K⁺ channels due to the decrease in PIP₂ levels, increases action potential firing, which leads to further depolarization and opening of L-, N-, P/Q- and R-type VGCCs. Ca²⁺ influx through those VGCCs, along with the Ca²⁺ mobilization from IP₃-sensitive stores and influx through TRPC channels, activates RyRs and causes Ca²⁺-induced Ca²⁺ release from ryanodine-sensitive stores. The increased [Ca²⁺]i results in increased GnRH secretion and Ca²⁺/CaM-dependent VGCC inactivation.

vent the kisspeptin-induced decrease in Ca²⁺ current, suggest that the decrease is due to an increase in [Ca²⁺]i rather than to an increase in PLC activity per se.

We tested the effects of CPA on Ca²⁺ currents in the absence and presence of KP-10. CPA, like thapsigargin, depletes ER Ca²⁺ stores by inhibiting the ER Ca²⁺ ATPase, but, unlike thapsigargin, does not also directly inhibit L-type Ca²⁺ channels or stick to plasticware [38]. We found that CPA (30 μM [39]) by itself inhibited Ca²⁺ current in GnRH neurons by about 20% and that KP-10 (10 nM) induced a decrease in Ca²⁺ current of only about 22% in the presence of CPA versus about 52% in the absence of CPA (table 1). The effect of CPA by itself on Ca²⁺ current may be small compared to that of KP-10 or caffeine if CPA-induced depletion is slower or occurs farther from VGCCs, which would allow for sufficient Ca²⁺ extrusion by the plasma membrane Ca²⁺-ATPase and Na⁺/Ca²⁺ exchanger before [Ca²⁺]i increases to levels that would inhibit VGCCs. However, once CPA has depleted Ca²⁺ stores, the smaller reduction of Ca²⁺ current by KP-10 is consistent with the notion that KP-10 decreases Ca²⁺ current by releasing Ca²⁺ from ER Ca²⁺ stores.

The concentrations of drugs used in the present study were concentrations that had been effective in blocking Ca²⁺ signaling pathways in previous studies [17, 19, 22, 24, 34–42]. Except for the IP₃R blockers, all of the drugs prevented the KP-10-induced decrease in Ca²⁺ current, indicating that the concentrations of those drugs were adequate to reach a steady-state block. While none of the three IP₃R blockers prevented the decrease, the similar result obtained with all three, applied via superfusion (low caffeine) or internal dialysis (heparin and 2-APB) for at least 10 min prior to, as well as during, KP-10 treatment, suggests that the concentrations of the IP₃R blockers were also adequate.

While many of the traces of Ca²⁺ currents in the presence of the different drugs in our study exhibit poor voltage control, it is difficult to obtain adequate voltage control in whole-cell patch-clamp recordings from neurons such as GnRH neurons, which normally have long dendrites, unless only GnRH neurons with short dendrites are selected. Even then, there would still be substantial distortions of the currents [53]. However, since voltage control depends on the geometry of each neuron, which presumably remained constant during each recording,
the effects we observed were much more likely those of the drugs than of poor voltage control.

Since \([Ca^{2+}]_{i}\) in our study was buffered to \(97 \mathrm{nM}\) by BAPTA, \([Ca^{2+}]_{i}\) should have changed very little, so it may seem unclear how kisspeptin or caffeine could inhibit VGCCs in GnRH neurons through \(Ca^{2+}\) store release. However, the inhibition may be similar to the inhibition by caffeine of L-type VGCCs in thalamocortical relay neurons [54]. Rankovic et al. [54] suggested that, as in cardiac myocytes, the coupling between L-type VGCCs and RyRs in thalamocortical neurons occurs in a confined area where a cluster of RyRs is juxtaposed with a group of L-type VGCCs, forming a 'Ca²⁺ release unit'. They further suggested that the interaction between Ca²⁺ release units is enhanced by caffeine, which increases the sensitivity of RyRs for Ca²⁺ and evokes the spread of Ca²⁺-induced Ca²⁺ release across the ER (possibly filling up a shell of Ca²⁺ ions beneath the plasma membrane and allowing Ca²⁺ cooperativity), or by neurotransmitter-stimulated recruitment of L-type VGCCs and RyRs. Accordingly, the enhanced interaction, along with the ability of L-type VGCC-bound CaM to sense strong local or weaker global Ca²⁺ signals, would result in L-type VGCC inhibition.

We found that the kisspeptin/GPR 54 antagonist peptide 234 prevented the reduction of Ca²⁺ currents by KP-10, as did a TRPC channel and IP₃R antagonist (2-APB), a more selective TRPC channel antagonist (BTP 2), the IP₃R antagonists low caffeine, heparin and intracellular 2-APB, and the RyR antagonists ryanodine and dantrolene. Also, the RyR agonist high caffeine mimicked the effect of KP-10. Our results suggest that kisspeptin increases \([Ca^{2+}]_{i}\) in GnRH neurons from pubertal and young adult mice, as in GnRH neurons from mouse embryos [22] and young adult rats [23], by inducing Ca²⁺ influx through TRPC channels as well as Ca²⁺ release from IP₃-sensitive ER Ca²⁺ stores following GPR 54 activation and PLC hydrolysis of PIP₂ to IP₃ and DAG. Moreover, our results indicate that kisspeptin also induces RyR activation in GnRH neurons from pubertal and young adult mice, and that a significant proportion of the \([Ca^{2+}]_{i}\) increase in response to kisspeptin is due to Ca²⁺ release from RyR-sensitive ER Ca²⁺ stores (fig. 6).

Kisspeptin may also activate VGCCs, due to plasma membrane depolarization following DAG activation of TRPC channels, which are permeable to Na⁺ and Ca²⁺ [19, 55]. Indeed, the KP-10-induced \([Ca^{2+}]_{i}\) increase in GnRH neurons from mouse embryos was shown to be partially inhibited by the VGCC blockers Cd²⁺ and nifedipine [22], and the KP-10-induced \([Ca^{2+}]_{i}\) increase in GnRH neurons from young adult rats was partially inhibited by the Na⁺ channel blocker TTX [23]. Ca²⁺ entering through TRPC channels and VGCCs would activate RyRs, which would induce Ca²⁺ release from ER Ca²⁺ stores and result in a large increase in \([Ca^{2+}]_{i}\) as well as Ca²⁺/CaM-dependent VGCC inhibition (fig. 7). However, because we used the patch-clamp amplifier to hold the membrane potential at \(-60 \mathrm{mV}\), at which there is little if any VGCC activation, it was most likely Ca²⁺ influx through TRPC channels and subsequent Ca²⁺-induced Ca²⁺ release via RyRs, as well as Ca²⁺ release via IP₃Rs, rather than TRPC channel-mediated depolarization and VGCC activation, that was responsible in our experiments for the \([Ca^{2+}]_{i}\) increase resulting in the inhibition of VGCCs. GPR 54 is probably expressed in GnRH neuronal dendrites as well as in the soma, since there are close appositions between kisspeptin-immunoreactive fibers and GnRH neuronal dendrites as well as somata [56]. Thus, it is conceivable that, in addition to TRPC channels in the soma, KP-10 activated TRPC channels in dendrites over which the amplifier may have had little or no voltage control. If so, KP-10 may have caused depolarization, VGCC activation and Ca²⁺ influx in dendrites followed by Ca²⁺ movement from dendrites to soma and VGCC inhibition. Yet when we performed experiments in bath solution containing \(5 \mathrm{mM} \mathrm{Na}^{+}\)to reduce TRPC channel current, as had been done previously [19], KP-10 still inhibited Ca²⁺ currents (data not shown), suggesting that TRPC channel-mediated depolarization in dendrites did not contribute to the inhibition.

There may be functional coupling between TRPC channels and RyRs in GnRH neurons that regulates the gain of ER Ca²⁺ release in response to KP-10, which may be similar to the coupling between TRPC channels and RyRs proposed to regulate the gain of sarcoplasmic reticulum Ca²⁺ release during muscle cell differentiation [57]. Such coupling, and whether or not the TRPC channels, which have been shown in other cell types to undergo Ca²⁺/CaM-dependent inhibition [58], also become inhibited in GnRH neurons following KP-10 treatment remains to be investigated.

In addition to activating TRPC channels, kisspeptin may inhibit Kᵣ channels [15, 17–19], due to a rise in DAG and/or a fall in PIP₂ following PLC activation [2, 59], which would also result in depolarization and VGCC activation (fig. 7). However, in our experiments Kᵣ channels were blocked by extracellular TEA.

To begin to determine the physiological function of the KP-10-induced decrease in Ca²⁺ current in GnRH neurons, we recorded action potentials in response to KP-10 (100nM) but found that action potential shape and

78 Neuroendocrinology 2012; 96:68–80 Zhang/Spergelkinetics were unchanged following 7 min of treatment (data not shown). The lack of a change may reflect low expression or activity of large-conductance Ca²⁺-activated K⁺ channels that if expressed would promote repolarization, thereby decreasing action potential amplitude and duration [32]. It does not necessarily imply that the long-lasting Ca²⁺ current reduction has no physiological function. Additional studies are needed to determine the physiological function of the KP-10-induced inhibition of VGCCs, which may be to prevent excessive Ca²⁺ influx and limit GnRH secretion.

In summary, using Ca²⁺/CaM-dependent VGCC inhibition to monitor \[Ca²⁺\]i, the present study provides new information concerning the mechanism by which kisspeptin increases \[Ca²⁺\]i in the somata of pubertal/young adult GnRH neurons in the diagonal band of Broca and preoptic area. Namely, kisspeptin causes Ca²⁺ influx through TRPC channels as well as Ca²⁺ release from IP₃-sensitive Ca²⁺ stores, which, in turn, cause Ca²⁺-induced Ca²⁺ release from ryanodine-sensitive Ca²⁺ stores. This appears to be followed by Ca²⁺/CaM-dependent inhibition of VGCCs. The kisspeptin-induced increase in \[Ca²⁺\]i in GnRH neurons is likely to be important for the pubertal increase in GnRH secretion. Future studies involving Ca²⁺ imaging following kisspeptin (KP-10) application or release of endogenous kisspeptin with and without TRPC channel, IP₃R, RyR and VGCC inhibitors will be needed to confirm our findings and further assess the contributions of TRPC channels, IP₃Rs. RyRs and VGCCs to kisspeptin-induced increases in \[Ca²⁺\]i and GnRH secretion in pubertal and adult GnRH neurons.

## Acknowledgements

This work was supported by National Institutes of Health Grant HD053529 to D.J.S. from the Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health & Human Development. The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent the official views of the Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health & Human Development or the National Institutes of Health. We thank Crystal Gregory-Busch for excellent technical assistance.

## References

1. Popa SM, Clifton DK, Steiner RA: The role of kisspeptins and GPR54 in the neuroendocrine regulation of reproduction. Annu Rev Physiol 2008; 70: 213–238.
2. Colledge WH: Kisspeptins and GnRH neuronal signalling. Trends Endocrinol Metab 2009; 20: 115–121.
3. Mikkelsen JD, Simonneaux V: The neuroanatomy of the kisspeptin system in the mammalian brain. Peptides 2009; 30: 26–33.
4. Oakley AE, Clifton DK, Steiner RA: Kisspeptin signaling in the brain. Endocr Rev 2009; 30: 713–743.
5. Roseweir AK, Millar RP: The role of kisspeptin in the control of gonadotrophin secretion. Hum Reprod Update 2009; 15: 203–212.
6. Kotani M, Detheux M, Vandenberghe A, Communi D, Vanderwinden JM, Le Poul E, Brezillon S, Tyldesley R, Suarez-Huerta N, Vandeput F, Blanpain C, Schiffmann SN, Vassart F, Parmentier M: The metastasis suppressor gene KiSS-1 encodes kisspeptins, the natural ligands of the orphan G protein-coupled receptor GPR54. J Biol Chem 2001; 276: 34631–34636.
7. Gottsch ML, Cunningham MJ, Smith JT, Popa SM, Acohido BV, Crowley WF, Seminara S, Clifton DK, Steiner RA: A role for kisspeptins in the regulation of gonadotropin secretion in the mouse. Endocrinology 2004; 145: 4073–4077.
8. Messenger S, Chatzidaki EE, Ma D, Hendrick AG, Zahn D, Dixon J, Thresher RR, Malinge I, Lomet D, Carlton MB, Colledge WH, Caraty A, Aparicio SA: Kisspeptin directly stimulates gonadotropin-releasing hormone release via G protein-coupled receptor 54. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2005; 102: 1761–1766.
9. Funes S, Hedrick JA, Vassileva G, Markowitz L, Abbondanzo S, Golovko A, Yang S, Monsma FJ, Gustafson EL: The KiSS-1 receptor GPR54 is essential for the development of the murine reproductive system. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2003; 312: 1357–1363.
10. de Roux N, Genin E, Carel JC, Matsuda F, Chaussain JL, Milgrom E: Hypogonadotropic hypogonadism due to loss of function of the KiSS1-derived peptide receptor GPR54. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2003; 100: 10972–10976.
11. Seminara SB, Messenger S, Chatzidaki EE, Thresher RR, Acierno JS Jr, Shagoury JK, Bo-Abbas Y, Kuohung W, Schwinof KM, Hen-drick AG, Zahn D, Dixon J, Kaiser UB, Slau-genhaupt SA, Gusella JF, O’Rahilly S, Carl-ton MB, Crowley WF Jr, Aparicio SA, Colledge WH: The GPR54 gene as a regulator of puberty. N Engl J Med 2003; 349: 1614–1627.
12. d’Anglemont de Tassigny X, Fagg LA, Dixon JP, Day K, Leitch HG, Hendrick AG, Zahn D, Franceschini I, Caraty A, Carlton MB, Aparicio SA, Colledge WH: Hypogonadotropic hypogonadism in mice lacking a functional Kiss1 gene. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2007; 104: 10714–10719.
13. Han SK, Gottsch ML, Lee KJ, Popa SM, Smith JT, Jakawich SK, Clifton DK, Steiner RA, Herbison AE: Activation of gonadotropin-releasing hormone neurons by kisspeptin as a neuroendocrine switch for the onset of puberty. J Neurosci 2005; 25: 11349–11356.
14. Quaynor S, Hu L, Leung PK, Feng H, Mores N, Krsmanovic LZ, Catt KJ: Expression of a functional G protein-coupled receptor 54-kisspeptin autoregulatory system in hypothalamic gonadotropin-releasing hormone neurons. Mol Endocrinol 2007; 21: 3062–3070.
15. Dumalska I, Wu M, Morozova E, Liu R, van den Pol A, Alreja M: Excitatory effects of the puberty-initiating peptide kisspeptin and group I metabotropic glutamate receptor agonists differentiate two distinct subpopulations of gonadotropin-releasing hormone neurons. J Neurosci 2008; 28: 8003–8013.
16. Keen KL, Wegner FH, Bloom SR, Ghatei MA, Terasawa E: An increase in kisspeptin-54 release occurs with the pubertal increase in luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone-1 release in the stalk-median eminence of female rhesus monkeys in vivo. Endocrinology 2008; 149: 4151–4157.
17. Liu X, Lee K, Herbison AE: Kisspeptin excites gonadotropin-releasing hormone neurons through a phospholipase C/calcium-dependent pathway regulating multiple ion channels. Endocrinology 2008; 149: 4605–4614.
18 Pielecka-Fortuna J, Chu Z, Moenter SM: Kisspeptin acts directly and indirectly to increase GnRH neuron activity and its effects are modulated by estradiol. Endocrinology 2008;149:1979–1986.

19 Zhang C, Roepke TA, Kelly MJ, Ronnekleiv OK: Kisspeptin depolarizes gonadotropin-releasing hormone neurons through activation of TRPC-like cationic channels. J Neurosci 2008;28:4423–4434.

20 Bentsen AH, Ansel L, Simonneaux V, Tena-Sempere M, Juul A, Mikkelsen JD: Maturation of kisspeptinergic neurons coincides with puberty onset in male rats. Peptides 2010;31:275–283.

21 Pielecka-Fortuna J, Moenter SM: Kisspeptin increases γ-aminobutyric acidergic and glutamatergic transmission directly to gonadotropin-releasing hormone neurons in an estradiol-dependent manner. Endocrinology 2010;151:291–300.

22 Constantin S, Caligioni CS, Stojilkovic S, Wray S: Kisspeptin-10 facilitates a plasma membrane-driven calcium oscillator in gonadotropin-releasing hormone-1 neurons. Endocrinology 2009;150:1400–1412.

23 Kroll H, Bolsover S, Hsu J, Kim SH, Bouloux PM: Kisspeptin-evoked calcium signals in isolated primary rat gonadotropin-releasing hormone neurons. Neuroendocrinology 2011;93:114–120.

24 Zeilhofer HU, Mueller TH, Swandulla D: Inhibition of high voltage-activated calcium currents by L-glutamate receptor-mediated calcium influx. Neuron 1993;10:879–887.

25 Zhu Y, Yakel JL: Modulation of Ca²⁺ currents by various G protein-coupled receptors in sympathetic neurons of male rat pelvic ganglia. J Neurophysiol 1997;78:780–789.

26 Kammermeier PJ, Ruiz-Velasco V, Ikeda SR: A voltage-independent calcium current inhibitory pathway activated by muscarinic agonists in rat sympathetic neurons requires both Gαq/11 and Gβγ. J Neurosci 2000;20:5623–5629.

27 Spergel DJ, Krueth U, Hanley DF, Sprengel R, Seeburg PH: GABA-and glutamate-activated channels in green fluorescent protein-tagged gonadotropin-releasing hormone neurons in transgenic mice. J Neurosci 1999;19:2037–2050.

28 Spergel DJ: Calcium and small-conductance calcium-activated potassium channels in gonadotropin-releasing hormone neurons before, during, and after puberty. Endocrinology 2007;148:2383–2390.

29 Tsien RY: New calcium indicators and buffers with high selectivity against magnesium and protons: design, synthesis, and properties of prototype structures. Biochemistry 1980;19:2396–2404.

30 Roseweir AK, Kauffman AS, Smith JT, Guerrieri KA, Morgan K, Pielecka-Fortuna J, Pineda R, Gottsch ML, Tena-Sempere M, Moenter SM, Terasawa E, Clarke IJ, Steiner RA, Millar RP: Discovery of potent kisspeptin antagonists delineate physiological mechanisms of gonadotropin regulation. J Neurosci 2009;29:3920–3929.

31 Winer BJ: Statistical Principles in Experimental Design. New York, McGraw-Hill, 1971.

32 Hille B: Ion Channels of Excitable Membranes, ed 3. Sunderland, Sinauer, 2001.

33 Herbison AE, d'Anglemont de Tassigny X, Doran J, Colledge WH: Distribution and postnatal development of Gpr54 gene expression in mouse brain and gonadotropin-releasing hormone neurons. Endocrinology 2010;151:312–321.

34 Horowitz LF, Hirdes W, Suh BC, Hilgemann DW, Mackie K, Hille B: Phospholipase C in living cells: activation, inhibition, Ca²⁺ requirement, and regulation of M current. J Gen Physiol 2005;126:243–262.

35 van Rossum DB, Patterson RL, Ma HT, Gill DL: Ca²⁺ entry mediated by store depletion, S-nitrosylation, and TRP3 channels. Comparison of coupling and function. J Biol Chem 2000;275:28562–28568.

36 Clapham DE: SnapShot: mammalian TRP channels. Cell 2007;129:220.

37 He LP, Hewavitharana T, Soboloff J, Spassova MA, Gill DL: A functional link between store-operated and TRPC channels revealed by the 3,5-bis(trifluoromethyl)pyrazole derivative, BTP2. J Biol Chem 2005;280:10997–11006.

38 Nelson EJ, Li CC, Bangalore R, Benson B, Kass RS, Hinkle PM: Inhibition of L-type calcium-channel activity by thapsigargin and 2,5-t-butylhydroquinone, but not by cyclopiazonic acid. Biochem J 1994;302:147–154.

39 Duan W, Lee K, Herbison AE, Sneyd J: A mathematical model of adult GnRH neurons in mouse brain and its bifurcation analysis. J Theor Biol 2011;276:22–34.

40 Berridge MJ: Caffeine inhibits inositol-trisphosphate-induced membrane potential oscillations in Xenopus oocytes. Proc Biol Sci 1991;244:57–62.

41 Jasoni CL, Todman MG, Strumia MM, Herbison AE: Cell type-specific expression of a genetically encoded calcium indicator reveals intrinsic calcium oscillations in adult gonadotropin-releasing hormone neurons. J Neurosci 2007;27:860–867.

42 Cui G, Bernier BE, Harnett MT, Morikawa H: Differential regulation of action potential- and metabotropic glutamate receptor-induced Ca²⁺ signals by inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate in dopaminergic neurons. J Neurosci 2007;27:4776–4785.

43 Kato M, Ui-Tei K, Watanabe M, Sakuma Y: Characterization of voltage-gated calcium currents in gonadotropin-releasing hormone neurons tagged with green fluorescent protein in rats. Endocrinology 2003;144:5118–5125.

44 Nunemaker CS, DeFazio RA, Moenter SM: Calcium current subtypes in GnRH neurons. Biol Reprod 2003;69:1914–1922.

45 Zeilhofer HU, Blank NM, Neuhuber WL, Swandulla D: Calcium-dependent inactivation of neuronal calcium channel currents is independent of calcineurin. Neuroscience 2000;95:235–241.

46 Lee A, Wong ST, Gallagher D, Li B, Storm DR, Scheuer T, Catterall WA: Ca²⁺/calmodulin binds to and modulates P/Q-type calcium channels. Nature 1999;399:155–159.

47 Qin N, Olcese R, Bransby M, Lin T, Birnbaumer L: Ca²⁺-induced inhibition of the cardiac Ca²⁺ channel depends on calmodulin. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1999;96:2435–2438.

48 Zuhlke RD, Pitt GS, Deisseroth K, Tsien RW, Reuter H: Calmodulin supports both inactivation and facilitation of L-type calcium channels. Nature 1999;399:159–162.

49 Liang H, DeMaria CD, Erickson MG, Mori MX, Alseikhan BA, Yue DT: Unified mechanisms of Ca²⁺ regulation across the Ca²⁺ channel family. Neuron 2003;39:951–960.

50 Liu J, Rutledge A, Triggle DJ: Short-term regulation of neuronal calcium channels by depolarization. Ann NY Acad Sci 1995;765:119–133.

51 Hardie RC: Inhibition of phospholipase C activity in *Drosophila* photoreceptors by 1,2-bis(2-aminophenoxy)ethane-N,N,N′,N′-tetraacetic acid (BAPTA) and di-bromo BAPTA. Cell Calcium 2005;38:547–556.

52 Suh BC, Leal K, Hille, B: Modulation of high-voltage activated Ca²⁺ channels by membrane phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate. Neuron 2010;67:224–238.

53 Bar-Yehuda D, Korngreen A: Space-clamp problems when voltage clamping neurons expressing voltage-gated conductances. J Neurophysiol 2008;99:1127–1136.

54 Rankovic V, Ehling P, Coulon P, Landgraf P, Kreutz MR, Munsch T, Budde T: Intracellular Ca²⁺ release-dependent inactivation of Ca²⁺ currents in thalamocortical relay neurons. Eur J Neurosci 2010;31:439–449.

55 Clapham DE, Runnels LW, Struebing C: The TRP ion channel family. Nat Rev Neurosci 2001;2:387–396.

56 Clarkson J, Herbison AE: Postnatal development of kisspeptin neurons in mouse hypothalamus; sexual dimorphism and projections to gonadotropin-releasing hormone neurons. Endocrinology 2006;147:5817–5825.

57 Lee EH, Cherednichenko G, Pessah IN, Allen PD: Functional coupling between TRPC3 and RyR1 regulates the expressions of key triadic proteins. J Biol Chem 2006;281:10042–10048.

58 Gordon-Shaag A, Zagotta WN, Gordon SE: Mechanism of Ca²⁺-dependent desensitization in TRP channels. Channels 2008;2:125–129.

59 Huang CL, Feng S, Hilgemann DW: Direct activation of inward rectifier potassium channels by PIP₂ and its stabilization by Gβγ. Nature 1998;391:803–806.
