
ARTICLE

doi:10.1038/nature10955

The 2.8 Å crystal structure of the dynein motor domain

Takahide Kon${}^{1,2}$, Takuji Oyama${}^{1}$, Rieko Shimo-Kon${}^{1}$, Kenji Imamula${}^{3}$, Tomohiro Shima${}^{4}$, Kazuo Sutoh${}^{5}$ & Genji Kurisu${}^{1,2}$

Dyneins are microtubule-based AAA${}^{+}$ motor complexes that power ciliary beating, cell division, cell migration and intracellular transport. Here we report the most complete structure obtained so far, to our knowledge, of the 380-kDa motor domain of *Dictyostelium discoideum* cytoplasmic dynein at 2.8 Å resolution; the data are reliable enough to discuss the structure and mechanism at the level of individual amino acid residues. Features that can be clearly visualized at this resolution include the coordination of ADP in each of four distinct nucleotide-binding sites in the ring-shaped AAA${}^{+}$ ATPase unit, a newly identified interaction interface between the ring and mechanical linker, and junctional structures between the ring and microtubule-binding stalk, all of which should be critical for the mechanism of dynein motility. We also identify a long-range allosteric communication pathway between the primary ATPase and the microtubule-binding sites. Our work provides a framework for understanding the mechanism of dynein-based motility.

---

**Overall structure of dynein motor domain**

We crystallized the wild type and a truncation mutant ($\Delta$MTBD) of the 380-kDa motor domain (residues V1388–I4730 of the heavy chain) of *Dictyostelium discoideum* cytoplasmic dynein${}^{18,19}$ (Fig. 1a). $\Delta$MTBD lacks the small MTBD (residues A3372–K3495), but retains ATPase activity (111 ± 6 s${}^{-1}$) comparable to the maximal rate ($k_{\text{cat}}$) of microtubule-activated ATPase in the wild-type motor domain${}^{20}$. For $\Delta$MTBD, the structure was solved using three heavy-atom derivatives. The resulting electron-density maps were of sufficient quality (Supplementary Fig. 1a–f) to create a nearly complete atomic model (Fig. 1b), except for the 22 amino-terminal residues, disordered loops, and truncated MTBD (Supplementary Methods). The model was refined to 2.8 Å resolution ($R_{\text{work}}/R_{\text{free}}$ of 26.3/32.1%; Supplementary Table 1). For wild-type dynein motor domain, the structure was solved by molecular replacement using the $\Delta$MTBD structure as a search model, and the model including MTBD was refined to 3.8 Å resolution ($R_{\text{work}}/R_{\text{free}}$ of 22.1/29.4%; Fig. 1c and Supplementary Table 1). In both structures, the crystallographic asymmetric unit has two motor molecules ($\Delta$MTBD: $\Delta$MTBD-A and $\Delta$MTBD-B; wild type: WT-A and WT-B; Supplementary Fig. 1g, h). The four molecules are similar in overall structure, but have several distinct differences as described below, indicative of dynamic structural changes of the motor domain. Here we describe the monomeric motor domain structure by referring mainly to $\Delta$MTBD-A, because it provides the most complete model.

The motor domain comprises the AAA${}^{+}$ ring and three additional structural units: the linker, stalk/strut and C sequence (Fig. 1b, c and Supplementary Fig. 2). The central ATP-hydrolysing ring has six AAA${}^{+}$ modules arranged around the ring central pore, and is 130 Å in diameter, 65 Å in thickness and 35 Å in the pore diameter (Supplementary Fig. 3a). Each AAA${}^{+}$ module contains the N-terminal $\alpha/\beta$-submodule and the carboxy-terminal $\alpha$-submodule (Supplementary Fig. 4) that constitute the front and back faces of the ring, respectively (Supplementary Fig. 3a). The $\alpha/\beta$-submodule core exhibits a Rossmann-type fold (Supplementary Fig. 4a), which is commonly found in nucleotide-binding proteins${}^{21,22}$. AAA1–AAA4 have unique insertions in their $\alpha/\beta$-submodules: H2, pre-Walker B and pre-sensor

---

${}^{1}$Institute for Protein Research, Osaka University, 3-2 Yamadaoka, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan. ${}^{2}$Department of Macromolecular Science, Graduate School of Science, Osaka University, Osaka 560-0043, Japan. ${}^{3}$Department of Life Sciences, Graduate School of Arts and Sciences, University of Tokyo, Tokyo 153-8902, Japan. ${}^{4}$Department of Physics, Graduate School of Science, University of Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyou-ku, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan. ${}^{5}$Research Institute for Science and Engineering, Waseda University, Takada 1-17-22, Toshima-ku, Tokyo 171-0033, Japan.

RESEARCH ARTICLE

a
Heavy chain N—Tail Linker AAA1 AAA2 AAA3 AAA4 Stalk Strut AAA5 AAA6 C-sequence
Motor domain (WT) N—C
Motor domain (ΔMTBD) N—C
MTBD
AAA5 extension

b
Linker
90°
90°
AAA5 extension
C sequence

c
MTBD
Stalk
Strut
AAA4
AAA5
AAA6
AAA3
AAA2
AAA1

Figure 1 | Overall structure of the dynein motor domain. a, Sequence diagrams of dynein heavy chain and wild-type and ΔMTBD motor domains, showing tail, linker and six AAA⁺ modules constituting ring, stalk-strut and C-sequence. The colour code shown here is used for all figures, unless otherwise noted. b, c, Ribbon representation of ΔMTBD (b) and wild-type (c) motor domain structures.

I (PS-I) inserts (Supplementary Fig. 4b). AAA5 contains an additional globular structure (named here the AAA5 extension) that contains eight α-helices (H9–H16) and protrudes from the back face of the ring (Supplementary Fig. 3a).

Above the front face of the ring, the linker exists as a rod-like structure that comprises nineteen α-helices and eight β-strands and can be partitioned into five subdomains from 0 to 4 (Supplementary Fig. 3b). This structure extends from AAA1-α/β above the ring to the periphery of AAA4 (Fig. 1b, c). Between AAA4 and AAA5, two prominent coiled coils protrude and form a Y-shaped structure (Fig. 1b, c and Supplementary Fig. 3c). The longer coiled coil extending from AAA4 is the stalk and the shorter one extending from AAA5 is the strut (the buttress) that was identified in previous X-ray studies¹⁶,¹⁷. The WT-A stalk includes MTBD at the tip, whereas in the WT-B stalk, MTBD and its distal portion (K3359–K3512) are missing, probably due to structural flexibility of the stalk. On the ring’s back face, the C sequence exists as a complex structure comprising six α-helices and an incomplete six-stranded antiparallel β-barrel (Supplementary Fig. 3d). The shape of the C sequence is distinctively flat, spreading over the α-submodules of AAA1, AAA5 and AAA6 (Fig. 1b).

This overall structure is similar at the secondary structure level to the medium-resolution structures¹⁶,¹⁷ (see Supplementary Fig. 5 for comparison with our previous 4.5 Å model, which corrects errors in assignment in the previous study¹⁷). However, unlike previous models, our structure is reliable enough to discuss the dynein structure and mechanism at the level of individual amino acid residues, as judged from the reasonable refinement statistics at 2.8 Å resolution and resulting electron-density maps.

### The four nucleotide-binding sites

The motor domain has four ADP molecules bound to the first four AAA⁺ modules (Fig. 2a), in agreement with a previous biochemical study²³. Each nucleotide-binding site is formed at the interface between three submodules, α/β and α of one module and α/β of the adjacent module (Fig. 2b–e and Supplementary Fig. 6), with a structural organization very similar to that of other AAA⁺ ATPases⁹,²¹,²². At the AAA1 nucleotide-binding site (Fig. 2b), the phosphate moiety of ADP is surrounded by the Walker-A motif (G1977–T1981) in AAA1-α/β, whereas the ribose moiety is recognized by the sensor-II motif (R2150) and neighbouring residues (L2149 and K2153) in AAA1-α. The adenine base is accommodated by hydrophobic residues in AAA1-α (I2108) and the N loop (L1947 and V1948) connecting the linker with the AAA1 ATPase site (Fig. 2a, b and Supplementary Fig. 6a). Given that ATP is the only energy source for dynein motor function²⁴ although it can hydrolyse other nucleotides²⁵, the adenine base recognition by the N loop is probably involved in the coupling of the linker actions and ATPase. Residues in Walker-B (D2026 and E2027) and sensor-I (N2078) motifs of AAA1-α/β, which are generally required for ATP hydrolysis, occupy the nucleotide-binding site. In addition, an arginine finger (R2410) crucial for ATP hydrolysis stretches from the adjacent AAA2-α/β and points to the bound ADP.

Among the AAA1–AAA4 nucleotide-binding sites with similar structural frameworks, AAA2 shows several distinct characteristics (Fig. 2c). First, the crucial sensor-II motif is missing and L2531 occupies the position. Second, in the Walker-B motif, the conserved glutamic acid essential for ATP hydrolysis is replaced by glycine (G2357). Moreover, two arginine fingers (R2806 and R2809) from the adjacent AAA3 module interact extensively with the phosphates of bound ADP. The unique nucleotide-binding mode of AAA2 indicates that this site binds ADP and/or ATP but does not hydrolyse ATP. In contrast to AAA2, most functional motifs of AAA3 and AAA4 required for ATP binding and hydrolysis are oriented in a canonical manner (Fig. 2d, e), indicating that dynein has three ATP hydrolysis sites—AAA1, AAA3 and AAA4. This was further supported by pre-steady-state kinetic analysis of phosphate release from the motor domain carrying multiple mutations in the three nucleotide-binding sites (Supplementary Fig. 7

346 | NATURE | VOL 484 | 19 APRIL 2012
©2012 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved
two half-rings, and, as a result, apparent gaps are formed between them. This asymmetrical arrangement is different from that previously reported for the yeast motor domain in a no-nucleotide state, in which gaps exist between AAA1–AAA2 and between AAA5–AAA6 instead¹⁶.

The AAA1–AAA2 and AAA4–AAA5 gaps lie in the AAA1 and AAA4 nucleotide-binding sites, respectively, affecting the positioning of the trans-acting arginine finger critical to ATP hydrolysis in many ATPases²⁶. With these open gaps, the arginine fingers extending from AAA2 to AAA1 (R2410) and from AAA5 to AAA4 (R3780) are positioned far away from the bound ADP (Fig. 2b, e and Supplementary Fig. 8a) to allow ATP hydrolysis when bound to these nucleotide-binding sites. Given that ATP is hydrolysed at AAA1 and AAA4, the gaps are expected to close during their ATPase cycles so that arginine fingers can interact with the γ-phosphate of bound ATP. Indeed, the WT-A ring structure has a more closed conformation (lower, Supplementary Fig. 8a). This closure shortens the distance between the arginine finger and bound ADP (Supplementary Fig. 8a, b), which would allow R2410 and R3780 to participate in ATP hydrolysis. Although ΔMTBD and the wild-type dynein motor domain are in the same nucleotide-bound state, the structural differences suggest the existence of an ATPase-dependent open/closed transition of the ring, as observed for other AAA⁺ ATPases during their mechanochemical actions²⁷,²⁸.

## Linker and ring interactions

To understand the mechanism of dynein motility, it is critical to elucidate the structural details of interactions between the ATP-hydrolysing ring and the linker whose swing-like motions have been proposed to be the major contributor to dynein’s power stroke¹⁰,¹²,¹⁵. In the present structure, the linker position is close to that of the post-power-stroke state inferred from electron microscopy analysis¹². When viewed from the ring’s front face, the linker appears to bridge AAA1 and AAA4 by spanning the inner edge of AAA2, AAA3 and AAA4 (Fig. 1b, c). However, the linker interacts with the ring only through two major interfaces at AAA1–AAA6 and AAA2 (Fig. 3a). The first interaction interface is at the linker base connecting to AAA1-α/β (orange in Fig. 3a). Here, linker subdomains 3 and 4 are tightly sandwiched between AAA1-α/β, AAA1-α, and AAA6-α through four hydrogen bonds and hydrophobic interactions involving 64 residues. The resulting buried surfaces are sufficiently wide (2,478 Å²) for stable interactions between the linker base and ring. The second interface is at the middle region of the linker (cyan in Fig. 3a). Here, two finger-like structures—the H2 insert β-hairpin and PS-I insert loop—protruding from AAA2 interact with linker subdomains 2 and 3, respectively (Fig. 3b and Supplementary Fig. 9): the H2 insert tip forms hydrophobic interactions with β1, β2 and the H7 helix in linker subdomain 2, and the PS-I insert tip forms a hydrophobic interaction with the H13 helix in linker subdomain 3. Several hydrophobic interactions are formed between H2 and PS-I inserts, indicating that these two finger-like structures function together to support the linker structure.

To examine the functional significance of H2 and PS-I inserts, we performed functional analysis of a mutant (ΔH2I) in which the H2 insert β-hairpin (S2319–D2329) was replaced with a flexible linker (GG). With this mutation, all H2 insert residues interacting with the linker and PS-I insert were deleted or replaced (Fig. 3b). ΔH2I exhibited clear microtubule-activated ATPase activity and ATP-induced change in the affinity for microtubules, although at lower levels than those in wild type (Fig. 3c and Supplementary Fig. 10a). However, steady-state fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET)-based analysis¹⁵ did not detect ATPase-dependent linker motions in the mutant (Fig. 3d), indicating the critical involvement of H2/PS-I inserts in linker swing actions. The FRET signal reporting the linker position suggests that the linker may adopt an intermediate position between unprimed (post-power-stroke) and primed (pre-power-stroke) positions regardless of the nucleotide state.

## Open and closed ring conformations

The ring structure of ΔMTBD-A displays a unique arrangement of six AAA⁺ modules (upper, Supplementary Fig. 8a). The six α-submodules are almost equally arranged in pseudo-six-fold symmetry. In contrast, the six α/β-submodules exhibit an asymmetrical arrangement and can be grouped into AAA5–AAA6–AAA1, forming one loosely packed half-ring structure with buried inter-modular surfaces of approximately 200 Å², and AAA2–AAA3–AAA4, comprising the more tightly packed half-ring structure with buried inter-modular surfaces of 500–1,000 Å². There is no direct contact between the

Figure 2 | Structure of the four nucleotide-binding sites. **a**, Locations of bound ADP in the ring. ADP molecules are shown as space-filled models. The right panel shows the bottom view of the ring and linker. The N loop connects the AAA1 nucleotide-binding site and linker. **b**–**e**, Magnified views of ADP in the nucleotide-binding sites. ATPase motifs, that is, Walker-A, Walker-B, sensor-I, sensor-II and arginine-finger, are abbreviated as WA, WB, SI, SII and RF, respectively. Residues that are hydrogen-bonded to ADP are shown. In panel **b**, residues participating in ribose moiety (L2149) and adenine ring (I2108 and L1947) accommodation are included. In panel **c**, L2531 occupying the AAA2 sensor-II position is shown. Other residues forming hydrophobic interactions with ADP are omitted for clarity. Hydrogen bonds to ADP are drawn with grey dotted lines. Distances between the arginine finger Nη and ADP β-phosphate are indicated by black dashed lines.

and Supplementary Table 2). Similar kinetic experiments performed with microtubules showed that among the three ATPase sites, AAA1 alone drives microtubule-activated ATPase essential for dynein function (Supplementary Fig. 7 and Supplementary Table 2).

©2012 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved
Figure 3 | Linker-ring interactions. **a**, Open-book presentation of linker–ring interactions in ΔMTBD-A. First and second interaction interfaces are surrounded by dotted circles in orange and cyan, respectively. The secondary structure elements involved in the interactions are shown in cartoon representation. **b**, Side view of the motor domain showing linker-AAA2 interactions in ΔMTBD-A. Interacting residues between linker subdomain 2/3 and H2/PS-I inserts and between H2 and PS-I inserts are shown. D2329 and E2383 form a hydrogen bond network through R2337 (not shown). Truncation positions (S2319 and D2329) in ΔH2I are indicated. **c**, Microtubule-activated ATPase rates of the motor domain. Each symbol indicates mean ± s.d. (*n* = 3). **d**, FRET efficiency between BFP and GFP moieties in the motor domain in the presence of the indicated nucleotide. Vi, vanadate. The high and low FRET of wild type represent linker positions at primed and unprimed states, respectively<sup>15</sup>. Mean ± s.d. (*n* = 3) are shown.

The conventional linker swing model assumes that in the unprimed state, the N-terminal region of the linker docks on AAA4 or AAA5 with its C-terminal base connected to AAA1, and that ATPase-induced structural changes propagate from AAA1 to AAA4–AAA5 to release the docked linker end and induce the linker swing<sup>10,12,16</sup>. Here we propose an alternative model, on the basis of our findings that there is no direct contact between the linker and AAA3–AAA5 in our structure (Fig. 3b and Supplementary Fig. 9) and that H2 and PS-I inserts of AAA2 have a critical role in linker swing (Fig. 3d). Given that H2 and PS-I inserts in other AAA<sup>+</sup> proteins serve as interaction interfaces with target proteins or DNA to catch and remodel the targets<sup>22,29</sup>, dynein could also use this remodelling apparatus for the linker swing. During the mechanochemical cycle of dynein, H2 and PS-I inserts interacting with linker subdomains 2 and 3 could remodel the junction of the two subdomains so that the linker bends there and swings against the ring. In support of the model, the subdomain junction is the thinnest part of the linker (Fig. 3a, b) and therefore is the best candidate for the bending site among subdomain junctions along the linker. The open-closed transition of the AAA1–AAA2 interface during the primary AAA1 ATPase cycle (Supplementary

Figure 4 | Structure and function of stalk-strut and C sequence. **a**, Knobs-into-holes side-chain packing in stalk-strut coiled coils of ΔMTBD-A and ΔMTBD-B. Side chains of residues, assigned as knobs, are shown as red space-filled models. **b**, Open-book presentation of stalk-strut interactions in ΔMTBD-A. Residues involved in interactions are shown. Truncation positions (Q3824 and E3864) in ΔSD are indicated. **c**, Microtubule-activated ATPase rates. Each symbol indicates mean ± s.d. (*n* = 3). The grey dotted lines indicate wild-type rates. **d**, Microtubule-binding activity with or without ATP. The smooth curves are the best fits to hyperbolas; wild type (dotted lines) exhibited weak (*K*<sub>d</sub> >10 μM) and strong (*K*<sub>d</sub> ~0.4 μM) binding to microtubules in the presence and absence of ATP, respectively, whereas ΔSD and ΔC-seq showed weak MT binding (*K*<sub>d</sub> >10 μM) regardless of the presence of ATP. **e**, Back side view of the motor domain, showing the C-sequence H1 helix that interacts with the H6 helix of AAA5 connected to the strut.

Fig. 8) may directly affect the position and/or orientation of H2 and PS-I inserts protruding from AAA2 and thereby may drive the linker swing.

## The allosteric communication pathway

Another key question regarding the dynein mechanism is how the motor coordinates microtubule binding at MTBD with the primary ATPase at AAA1, which must be communicated over a long distance through several structural units including the stalk coiled coil. In the present structures, the stalk-strut exhibits the most significant structural variation between the four molecules. ΔMTBD-A has a straight stalk made of a canonical antiparallel coiled coil along its entire length and a strut without canonical coiled-coil packing (left, Fig. 4a and Supplementary Fig. 11). In contrast, ΔMTBD-B possesses a kinked stalk with a shorter coiled-coil region and a strut with canonical coiled-coil packing (right, Fig. 4a and Supplementary Fig. 11). In

WT-A, the distal portion of the inward helix of the stalk appears to melt just below the junction to MTBD, in contrast to the fully folded stalk in ΔMTBD (Supplementary Fig. 12). These structural differences suggest that the stalk-strut structure has a high degree of molecular plasticity that may be relevant to its function of relaying two-way allosteric communication between MTBD and the ring: the structural information could be propagated through the local melting and/or tilting of the stalk, in addition to the recently proposed ‘helix-sliding mechanism’^{30–32}.

The distal end of the strut (residues 3831–3862) interacts with the centre of the stalk (residues 3284–3302 and 3556–3574) to form a four-helix bundle that is stabilized by three hydrogen bonds and hydrophobic interactions involving 29 residues with a wide interaction interface of approximately 800 Å² (Fig. 4b). The extensive interactions suggest that the strut has a key role in the stalk-mediated allosteric communication. To examine this, we performed functional analysis of a strut mutant (ΔSD) generated by replacing its distal portion (Q3824–E3864) with a flexible linker (GGGG). With this mutation, the interaction interfaces of the strut with the stalk were completely removed (Fig. 4b). This mutant showed microtubule-independent, high ATPase activity that is relatively close to the \( k_{\text{cat}} \) value of wild-type microtubule-activated ATPase activity (~90 s⁻¹; Fig. 4c) and exhibited an ATP-insensitive, weak microtubule-binding affinity (dissociation constant (\( K_d \)) >10 μM; Fig. 4d). The results indicate that the communication between MTBD and the AAA1 ATPase site was disrupted by the mutation, and highlights the importance of stalk-strut interactions for allosteric communication.

We next examined how structural changes propagate from the stalk-strut to the primary AAA1 ATPase site. We previously proposed involvement of the C sequence^{17}. To test this and to identify the functionally crucial C-sequence segment, we designed a deletion mutant (ΔC-seq) lacking most of the C sequence (S4416–I4730) based on the present high-resolution structure (Fig. 4e and Supplementary Fig. 13). This mutant showed microtubule-independent, low ATPase activity close to the wild-type basal rate and ATP-insensitive, weak microtubule-binding affinity (Fig. 4c, d and Supplementary Fig. 10b), illustrating the importance of the C sequence for allosteric communication. Together with our previous finding that a C-terminal segment

of the C sequence (S4448–I4730) is dispensable for dynein’s motor activity^{33}, the results indicate that the remaining H1 helix (E4412–D4439) is crucial for communication (Fig. 4e and Supplementary Fig. 13). Indeed, the H1 helix forms a structural bridge between the AAA1-α/β–AAA6-α segment and the basal portion of the strut (Fig. 4e and Supplementary Fig. 13): this helix extends from AAA6-α adjacent to AAA1-α/β, forms a sandwiched structure with AAA5-α and AAA5 extension, and makes direct contacts with the H6 helix of AAA5 from which the strut extends towards the stalk. Collectively, our structure and functional analyses suggest that the stalk, strut and C sequence are involved in the allosteric communication pathway between MTBD and the AAA1 ATPase site.

### Concluding remarks

The dynein motor domain structure at 2.8 Å resolution reveals the unique composite architecture of the AAA⁺ ATPase ring and dynein-specific force-generating units (linker, stalk-strut and C-sequence). It also provides new insights into how dynein harnesses the unique architecture to generate force and movement along microtubules. We propose that dynein uses the two distinct molecular machineries embedded on the different ring faces to execute the two fundamental motor actions required for dynein motility: driving of the linker swing for the power stroke and allosteric regulation of MTBD for modulation of microtubule-binding affinity (Fig. 5). On the ring’s front face, the linker swing could be driven by similar mechanisms as those of remodelling actions in other AAA⁺ ATPases through the ATPase-induced open-closed transition of the interfaces between the adjacent AAA1–AAA2 modules and the critical participation of the remodelling apparatus, H2 and PS-I inserts of AAA2. On the ring’s back face, the long-range allosteric communication between AAA1 and MTBD required for coupling of the ATPase cycle with the switching of microtubule affinity could be relayed through dynein-specific structures, that is, stalk, strut and C sequence. The general AAA⁺ ATPase-type and dynein-specific actions coordinated by the primary ATPase cycle at AAA1 would drive dynein motility.

### METHODS SUMMARY

For crystallization, we used HF380 in which a His₆–Flag tag was attached to the 5′ terminus of the 380-kDa gene. To create ΔMTBD, the MTBD coding region (A3372–K3495) of HF380 was replaced by a linker sequence (encoding TG). To produce ΔH2I and ΔSD, H2I (S2319–D2329) and strut (Q3824–E3864) coding regions were replaced by a linker sequence (encoding GG and GGGG for ΔH2I and ΔSD, respectively). To construct ΔC-seq, the 3′-terminal region encoding S4416–I4730 was removed. Expression and purification of the motor domains were performed as described^{17,19}.

Crystallization of the motor domain was performed essentially as described^{17}. All X-ray diffraction data were collected at 100 K on the beamline BL44XU of SPring-8, Harima, Japan. Phase calculations proceeded successfully with the autoSHARP pipeline^{34}. An atomic model of ΔMTBD was built on the density-modified electron-density map and refined at 2.8 Å resolution. The wild-type structure was determined using the molecular replacement method with the model of ΔMTBD. MTBD of chain A was clearly seen in the electron-density map, and a homology model of MTBD was located in the density. The atomic coordinates of wild type were further refined by CNS^{35} at 3.8 Å resolution with the assistance of deformable elastic network (DEN) restraints^{36}.

ATPase rates^{20}, microtubule binding^{37} and FRET^{15} were measured as described. Phosphate release was measured using a PBP assay^{38} with an SX-18MV stopped-flow apparatus (Applied Photophysics).

Full Methods and any associated references are available in the online version of the paper at www.nature.com/nature.

Received 29 November 2011; accepted 17 February 2012.  
Published online 7 March 2012.

1. Höök, P. & Vallee, R. B. The dynein family at a glance. *J. Cell Sci.* **119**, 4369–4371 (2006).
2. Karki, S. & Holzbaur, E. L. Cytoplasmic dynein and dynactin in cell division and intracellular transport. *Curr. Opin. Cell Biol.* **11**, 45–53 (1999).

3. Valleé, R. B., Williams, J. C., Varma, D. & Barnhart, L. E. Dynein: An ancient motor protein involved in multiple modes of transport. *J. Neurobiol.* **58**, 189–200 (2004).
4. Scholey, J. M. Intraflagellar transport motors in cilia: moving along the cell’s antenna. *J. Cell Biol.* **180**, 23–29 (2008).
5. Gibbons, I. R. Cilia and flagella of eukaryotes. *J. Cell Biol.* **91**, 107–124 (1981).
6. DiBella, L. M. & King, S. M. Dynein motors of the Chlamydomonas flagellum. *Int. Rev. Cytol.* **210**, 227–268 (2001).
7. Neuwald, A. F., Aravind, L., Spouge, J. L. & Koonin, E. V. AAA⁺: A class of chaperone-like ATPases associated with the assembly, operation, and disassembly of protein complexes. *Genome Res.* **9**, 27–43 (1999).
8. Tucker, P. A. & Sallai, L. The AAA⁺ superfamily—a myriad of motions. *Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol.* **17**, 641–652 (2007).
9. Hanson, P. I. & Whiteheart, S. W. AAA⁺ proteins: have engine, will work. *Nature Rev. Mol. Cell Biol.* **6**, 519–529 (2005).
10. Burgess, S. A., Walker, M. L., Sakakibara, H., Knight, P. J. & Oiwa, K. Dynein structure and power stroke. *Nature* **421**, 715–718 (2003).
11. Samsó, M. & Koonce, M. P. 25 Angstrom resolution structure of a cytoplasmic dynein motor reveals a seven-member planar ring. *J. Mol. Biol.* **340**, 1059–1072 (2004).
12. Roberts, A. J. *et al.* AAA⁺ ring and linker swing mechanism in the dynein motor. *Cell* **136**, 485–495 (2009).
13. Gee, M. A., Heuser, J. E. & Valleé, R. B. An extended microtubule-binding structure within the dynein motor domain. *Nature* **390**, 636–639 (1997).
14. Koonce, M. P. Identification of a microtubule-binding domain in a cytoplasmic dynein heavy chain. *J. Biol. Chem.* **272**, 19714–19718 (1997).
15. Kon, T., Mogami, T., Ohkura, R., Nishiura, M. & Sutoh, K. ATP hydrolysis cycle-dependent tail motions in cytoplasmic dynein. *Nature Struct. Mol. Biol.* **12**, 513–519 (2005).
16. Carter, A. P., Cho, C., Jin, L. & Vale, R. D. Crystal structure of the dynein motor domain. *Science* **331**, 1159–1165 (2011).
17. Kon, T., Sutoh, K. & Kurisu, G. X-ray structure of a functional full-length dynein motor domain. *Nature Struct. Mol. Biol.* **18**, 638–642 (2011).
18. Koonce, M. P. & Samso, M. Overexpression of cytoplasmic dynein’s globular head causes a collapse of the interphase microtubule network in *Dictyostelium*. *Mol. Biol. Cell* **7**, 935–948 (1996).
19. Kon, T., Shima, T. & Sutoh, K. Protein engineering approaches to study the dynein mechanism using a dictyostelium expression system. *Methods Cell Biol.* **92**, 65–82 (2009).
20. Kon, T., Nishiura, M., Ohkura, R., Toyoshima, Y. Y. & Sutoh, K. Distinct functions of nucleotide-binding/hydrolysis sites in the four AAA modules of cytoplasmic dynein. *Biochemistry* **43**, 11266–11274 (2004).
21. Iyer, L. M., Leipe, D. D., Koonin, E. V. & Aravind, L. Evolutionary history and higher order classification of AAA⁺ ATPases. *J. Struct. Biol.* **146**, 11–31 (2004).
22. Erzberger, J. P. & Berger, J. M. Evolutionary relationships and structural mechanisms of AAA⁺ proteins. *Annu. Rev. Biophys. Biomol. Struct.* **35**, 93–114 (2006).
23. Mocz, G. & Gibbons, I. R. Phase partition analysis of nucleotide binding to axonemal dynein. *Biochemistry* **35**, 9204–9211 (1996).
24. Paschal, B. M. & Valleé, R. B. Retrograde transport by the microtubule-associated protein MAP 1C. *Nature* **330**, 181–183 (1987).
25. Shpetner, H. S., Paschal, B. M. & Valleé, R. B. Characterization of the microtubule-activated ATPase of brain cytoplasmic dynein (MAP 1C). *J. Cell Biol.* **107**, 1001–1009 (1988).
26. Ogura, T., Whiteheart, S. W. & Wilkinson, A. J. Conserved arginine residues implicated in ATP hydrolysis, nucleotide-sensing, and inter-subunit interactions in AAA and AAA⁺ ATPases. *J. Struct. Biol.* **146**, 106–112 (2004).
27. Gai, D., Zhao, R., Li, D., Finkielstein, C. V. & Chen, X. S. Mechanisms of conformational change for a replicative hexameric helicase of SV40 large tumor antigen. *Cell* **119**, 47–60 (2004).
28. Suno, R. *et al.* Structure of the whole cytosolic region of ATP-dependent protease FtsH. *Mol. Cell* **22**, 575–585 (2006).
29. Enemark, E. J. & Joshua-Tor, L. On helicases and other motor proteins. *Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol.* **18**, 243–257 (2008).
30. Gibbons, I. R. *et al.* The affinity of the dynein microtubule-binding domain is modulated by the conformation of its coiled-coil stalk. *J. Biol. Chem.* **280**, 23960–23965 (2005).
31. Carter, A. P. *et al.* Structure and functional role of dynein’s microtubule-binding domain. *Science* **322**, 1691–1695 (2008).
32. Kon, T. *et al.* Helix sliding in the stalk coiled coil of dynein couples ATPase and microtubule binding. *Nature Struct. Mol. Biol.* **16**, 325–333 (2009).
33. Numata, N., Shima, T., Ohkura, R., Kon, T. & Sutoh, K. C-sequence of the *Dictyostelium* cytoplasmic dynein participates in processivity modulation. *FEBS Lett.* **585**, 1185–1190 (2011).
34. Vonrhein, C., Blanc, E., Roversi, P. & Bricogne, G. Automated structure solution with autoSHARP. *Methods Mol. Biol.* **364**, 215–230 (2007).
35. Brünger, A. T. *et al.* Crystallography & NMR system: A new software suite for macromolecular structure determination. *Acta Crystallogr. D* **54**, 905–921 (1998).
36. Schröder, G. F., Levitt, M. & Brünger, A. T. Super-resolution biomolecular crystallography with low-resolution data. *Nature* **464**, 1218–1222 (2010).
37. Imamula, K., Kon, T., Ohkura, R. & Sutoh, K. The coordination of cyclic microtubule association/dissociation and tail swing of cytoplasmic dynein. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **104**, 16134–16139 (2007).
38. White, H. D., Belknap, B. & Webb, M. R. Kinetics of nucleoside triphosphate cleavage and phosphate release steps by associated rabbit skeletal actomyosin, measured using a novel fluorescent probe for phosphate. *Biochemistry* **36**, 11828–11836 (1997).

**Supplementary Information** is linked to the online version of the paper at www.nature.com/nature.

**Acknowledgements** We thank E. Yamashita, Y. Umena, M. Suzuki and A. Nakagawa of SPring-8 BL-44XU for their support during X-ray data collection; and T. Kikuchi and R. Ohkura for their technical support. We are grateful to C. Toyoshima for discussion of X-ray data collection; K. Kinosita Jr and T. Tsukihara for their support and encouragement. This work was supported by Grants-in-Aid for Scientific Research (17770126, 20687011 and 23370073 (T.K.), 16083205 and 17107003 (K.S.), 17053006, 18054008 and 20051006 (G.K.)) from the Ministry of Education, Culture Sports, Science, and Technology of Japan and a grant from the Human Frontier Science Program (T.K.).

**Author Contributions** T.K., K.S. and G.K. designed the study. T.K. purified, crystallized and collected X-ray data; T.O. and G.K. processed and refined X-ray data; T.K., R.S.-K, K.I. and T.S. performed functional analyses; T.K., K.S. and G.K. wrote the paper. All authors discussed the results and commented on the manuscript.

**Author Information** Coordinates and structure factors have been deposited in the Protein Data Bank under accession numbers 3VKG (ΔMTBD) and 3VKH (wild type). Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints. The authors declare no competing financial interests. Readers are welcome to comment on the online version of this article at www.nature.com/nature. Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to T.K. (takahide.kon@protein.osaka-u.ac.jp).

METHODS

Protein engineering, expression and purification. All constructs were generated using standard polymerase chain reaction (PCR)-based cloning methods. We used the 380-kDa motor domain (V1388–I4730; the numbering is based on DDB0185096 in dictyBase and is different from the numbering we used previously)¹⁸,¹⁹ of the cytoplasmic dynein heavy chain isolated from *D. discoideum* Ax2 strain. For crystallization, we used the HF380 construct in which a His₆-Flag tag (encoding MTRHHHHHHGGGDYKDDDDKGKGK) was attached to the 5′ terminus of the 380-kDa gene. We used the HFB380 construct³⁷ for phosphate release measurements and the HFG380B2 construct¹⁵ for ATPase, microtubule-binding and FRET measurements. To create the ΔMTBD mutant, the MTBD coding region (A3372–K3495) of HF380 was replaced by a linker sequence (encoding TG). To produce the ΔH2I and ΔSD mutants, the H2I coding region (S2319–D2329) and the strut coding region (Q3824–E3864) of HFG380B2 were replaced by a linker sequence (encoding GG and GGGG for ΔH2I and ΔSD, respectively). The previously used ΔC mutant¹² (V1388–I4324) has been found to have the C-terminal truncation beyond the boundary between AAA6 and the C-sequence; we therefore re-designed the ΔC-seq mutant (V1388–E4415) by removing the 3′-terminal region of the 380-kDa gene encoding S4416–I4730 from HFG380B2. Each of the constructs was subcloned into the MB38 plasmid³⁹. After verification of the nucleotide sequence of the PCR-amplified regions, each of the expression constructs was introduced into *D. discoideum* cells; subsequently, the transformed cells were selected, cultivated and collected as described¹⁹. For the production of the L-selenomethionine-containing motor domain, the *D. discoideum* cells were cultivated in HL5 medium (ForMedium) supplemented with 10 μg ml⁻¹ blasticidin S, 10 μg ml⁻¹ G418 and 12 μg ml⁻¹ tetracycline at 22 °C with shaking at 150 r.p.m. until the cell density reached ~1 × 10⁷ cells per ml; collected by centrifugation at 1,320g for 5 min; re-suspended in SIH medium without methionine (ForMedium) supplemented with 100 μg ml⁻¹ L-selenomethionine; and then cultivated further at 22 °C with shaking at 150 r.p.m. for ~24 h. The expressed motor domain was purified as described¹⁷,¹⁹. For crystallization, the protein was concentrated to 5.25 mg ml⁻¹ and supplemented with 3 mM ADP. 7-Diethylamino-3-((((2-maleimidyl)ethyl)amino)carbonyl)-coumarin-labelled phosphate-binding protein (MDCC-PBP) was prepared as described³⁸. Protein concentrations were determined by the Bradford method standardized with bovine serum albumin. The microtubule concentration is expressed as the tubulin dimer concentration.

Crystallization and structure determination. Crystallization of the motor domain was performed as described¹⁷. For cryo-protection, the crystals were transferred into a start solution (5 mM Bis-tris propane (pH 7.0), 7.5 mM Tris (pH 8.0), 2 mM MgCl₂, 8% PEG 8000, 1.5 mM ADP), and the concentration of PEG 400 was gradually increased from 0% to 30% in 5% increments using the soaking method. The crystals were then flash-frozen in a cold nitrogen gas stream at 100 K. For Ta₆Br₁₂ and PW₁₂O₄₀ derivatization, the crystals were cryo-protected and then soaked in the cryo-protection solution containing 0.4 mM Ta₆Br₁₂ and 0.03 mM PW₁₂O₄₀, respectively, for 3 days at 277 K before freezing. All X-ray diffraction data were collected at 100 K on the beamline BL44XU of SPring-8, Harima, Japan. Native data were measured at the wavelength of 0.9000 Å, and the Ta₆Br₁₂-, PW₁₂O₄₀- and L-selenomethionine-containing heavy atom derivative data were measured at the wavelength of 1.2547, 1.2142 and 0.9790 Å, respectively. X-ray diffraction images were processed using the HKL2000 program package⁴⁰. The structure was determined by the multiple isomorphous replacement method with anomalous scattering (MIRAS) using the three heavy atom derivative data. The refinement of heavy-atom positions was performed with SHARP⁴¹. Phase calculations proceeded successfully with the autoSHARP pipeline³⁴, with the reasonable figure of merit values before density modification (0.18 for centric and 0.26 for acentric reflections). An initial atomic model of ΔMTBD was built on the density-modified electron-density map using COOT⁴². An electron-density map was further improved by using non-crystallographic symmetry (NCS) averaging. The crystallographic refinement was performed by CNS³⁵ at 2.8 Å resolution, and then the manual model correction and refinement were iterated until convergence. The wild-type structure was determined using the molecular replacement method with the atomic model of ΔMTBD as a probe. Several rounds of rigid-body refinement gave a crystallographic $R_{\text{work}}$ and $R_{\text{free}}$ below 40%. At this stage, the MTBD of chain A was clearly seen in the electron-density map, and a homology model of the MTBD generated by SWISS-MODEL⁴³ was located in the density. All atomic coordinates were further refined by CNS at 3.8 Å resolution with the assistance of deformable elastic network (DEN) restraints³⁶. The models of ΔMTBD and wild type have no Ramachandran outlier. Intra-molecular interactions were analysed using PISA⁴⁴ and HBPLUS⁴⁵ with LigPlot+⁴⁶. The secondary structure elements were assigned using the program DSSP⁴⁷. We identified and analysed the coiled-coil interactions with SOCKET⁴⁸, and also checked them with TWISTER⁴⁹. All figures showing the atomic coordinates were made with PYMOL⁵⁰.

Steady-state biochemical assays. ATPase rates of HFG380B2 and its mutants (2–30 nM) were measured in a dynein assay buffer (10 mM K-PIPES, 50 mM potassium acetate, 4 mM MgSO₄, 1 mM EGTA, and 1 mM DTT, pH 7.0) supplemented with 10 μM paclitaxel and the indicated concentration of microtubules using a coupled enzymatic assay (EnzChek phosphate assay kit, Invitrogen) at 25 °C after mixing with 1 mM ATP, as described²⁰. Note that we used the monomeric motor domain constructs for the functional analyses, and thus the $K_{\text{m}}$ (microtubule) value for microtubule-activated ATPase (~30 μM for wild-type constructs²⁰) is higher than those reported for dimeric constructs³³. Microtubule binding was measured by co-sedimentation with microtubules in the absence or presence of 3.3 mM ATP in the assay buffer supplemented with 5 μM free paclitaxel and 250 μM GTP at 25 °C, as described³⁷. To determine FRET efficiencies, fluorescence intensities of the BFP and GFP moieties of HFG380B2 or its mutant (~120 nM) were measured in the assay buffer at 25 °C after mixing with 200 μM of the indicated nucleotide, and then FRET efficiencies were calculated from the sensitized emission of the acceptor (GFP) as described¹⁵.

Pre-steady-state phosphate release measurements. Pre-steady-state kinetic measurements were performed at 25 °C using a PBP assay³⁸ with an SX-18MV stopped-flow apparatus (Applied Photophysics). For the measurements, the motor domain (1 μM) in the assay buffer supplemented with 0.1 U ml⁻¹ purine nucleoside phosphorylase, 500 μM 7-methylguanosine, and 5 μM MDCC-PBP, was mixed with the same volume of a substrate solution (2 mM ATP and 40 μM microtubules) in the assay buffer supplemented with 0.1 U ml⁻¹ purine nucleoside phosphorylase, 500 μM 7-methylguanosine, 5 μM MDCC-PBP, and 10 μM free paclitaxel. Phosphate release from the motor domain was followed by exciting the reaction mixture at 425 nm and monitoring the MDCC-PBP fluorescence enhancement using a 455-nm cutoff filter.

39. Blaauw, M., Linskens, M.H. & van Haastert, P.J. Efficient control of gene expression by a tetracycline-dependent transactivator in single *Dictyostelium discoideum* cells. *Gene* **252**, 71–82 (2000).

40. Otwinowski, Z. & Minor, W. Processing of X-ray diffraction data collected in oscillation mode. *Methods Enzymol.* **276**, 307–326 (1997).

41. Bricogne, G., Vonrhein, C., Flensburg, C., Schiltz, M. & Paciorek, W. Generation, representation and flow of phase information in structure determination: recent developments in and around SHARP 2.0. *Acta Crystallogr. D* **59**, 2023–2030 (2003).

42. Emsley, P. & Cowtan, K. Coot: model-building tools for molecular graphics. *Acta Crystallogr. D* **60**, 2126–2132 (2004).

43. Arnold, K., Bordoli, L., Kopp, J. & Schwede, T. The SWISS-MODEL workspace: a web-based environment for protein structure homology modelling. *Bioinformatics* **22**, 195–201 (2006).

44. Krissinel, E. & Henrick, K. Inference of macromolecular assemblies from crystalline state. *J. Mol. Biol.* **372**, 774–797 (2007).

45. McDonald, I.K. & Thornton, J.M. Satisfying hydrogen bonding potential in proteins. *J. Mol. Biol.* **238**, 777–793 (1994).

46. Wallace, A.C., Laskowski, R.A. & Thornton, J.M. LIGPLOT: a program to generate schematic diagrams of protein-ligand interactions. *Protein Eng.* **8**, 127–134 (1995).

47. Kabsch, W. & Sander, C. Dictionary of protein secondary structure: pattern recognition of hydrogen-bonded and geometrical features. *Biopolymers* **22**, 2577–2637 (1983).

48. Walshaw, J. & Woolfson, D.N. Socket: a program for identifying and analysing coiled-coil motifs within protein structures. *J. Mol. Biol.* **307**, 1427–1450 (2001).

49. Strelkov, S.V. & Burkhard, P. Analysis of α-helical coiled coils with the program TWISTER reveals a structural mechanism for stutter compensation. *J. Struct. Biol.* **137**, 54–64 (2002).

50. Schrödinger, L.L.C., *The PyMOL Molecular Graphics System, Version 1.3r1* (2010).
