
nature publishing group

ARTICLES  
ADIPOCYTE BIOLOGY  

# Sphingolipid Content of Human Adipose Tissue: Relationship to Adiponectin and Insulin Resistance

**Agnieszka U. Blachnio-Zabielska**¹, **Christina Koutsari**¹, **Tamara Tchkonia**² and **Michael D. Jensen**¹

Ceramides (Cer) are implicated in obesity-associated skeletal muscle and perhaps adipocyte insulin resistance. We examined whether the sphingolipid content of human subcutaneous adipose tissue and plasma varies by obesity and sex as well as the relationship between ceramide content and metabolic indices. Abdominal subcutaneous adipose biopsies were performed on 12 lean adults (males = 6), 12 obese adults (males = 6) for measurement of sphingolipid content and activity of the main ceramide metabolism enzymes. Blood was sampled for glucose, insulin (to calculate homeostasis model assessment-estimated insulin resistance (HOMA~IR~)) adiponectin, and interleukin-6 (IL-6) concentrations. Compared to lean controls, total ceramide content (pg/adipocyte) was increased by 31% (*P* < 0.05) and 34% (*P* < 0.05) in obese females and males, respectively. In adipocytes from obese adults sphingosine, sphinganine, sphingosine-1-phosphate, C14-Cer, C16-Cer, and C24-Cer were all increased. C18:1-Cer was increased in obese males and C24:1-Cer in obese females. For women only, there was a negative correlation between C16-Cer ceramide and plasma adiponectin (*r* = −0.77, *P* = 0.003) and a positive correlation between total ceramide content and HOMA~IR~ (*r* = 0.74, *P* = 0.006). For men only there were significant (at least *P* < 0.05), positive correlations between adipocyte Cer-containing saturated fatty acid and plasma IL-6 concentration. We conclude that the sexual dimorphism in adipose tissue behavior in humans extends to adipose tissue sphingolipid content its association with adiponectin, IL-6 and insulin resistance.

*Obesity* (2012) **20**, 2341–2347. doi: [10.1038/oby.2012.126](http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/oby.2012.126)

## INTRODUCTION

Upper body/abdominal obesity is a risk factor for insulin resistance, type two diabetes and metabolic syndrome (1,2). The mechanism(s) by which abdominal obesity induces metabolic disorders is poorly understood. We know that white adipose tissue has both energy storage and important endocrine functions, secreting number of biologically active molecules, that affect glucose homeostasis, energy metabolism, food intake, body weight regulation and insulin sensitivity (3,4). Among these molecules are tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α), adiponectin, interleukin-6 (IL-6).

Ceramides (Cer), central molecules on the cross-roads of sphingolipid metabolism, act as second messengers by altering the activity of a variety of kinases, phosphatases and transcription factors (5,6). In turn, these transcription factors influence cellular functions ranging from proliferation and differentiation to growth arrest and apoptosis (7–10). The cellular content of Cer depends on the balance between their rates of generation and degradation. Cer may be produced from the hydrolysis of sphingomyelin by the action of neutral and acid sphingomyelinases (nSMase and aSMase), or they can be synthesized de novo. The first, rate-limiting step in this pathway is catalyzed by the enzyme serine palmitoyltransferase (SPT). The main way of ceramide degradation is its deacylation, catalyzed by ceramidase (CDase).

Most work in the field of sphingolipids, obesity and insulin resistance has focused on sphingolipid metabolism in skeletal muscle (11–15) because excess Cer have been implicated in skeletal muscle insulin resistance (16–18). Increased intracellular ceramide content can impair skeletal muscle insulin sensitivity at the level of Akt/PKB and Cer (C2) reduce GLUT4 translocation and glucose uptake in L6 myotubes (19).

Recent studies confirm the presence of Cer in adipose tissue (20–23). In 3T3-L1 adipocytes and in brown adipocytes, increased ceramide can impair insulin stimulated GLUT4 expression and glucose uptake (24). It has also been shown that ceramide mediates the effect of TNF-α on GLUT4 mRNA content in these cells (25,26). In brown adipocytes the effects of TNF-α on insulin action are mediated by de novo ceramide biosynthesis, whereas in 3T3-L1 adipocytes the source of Cer to

---

¹Department of Medicine, Endocrine Research Unit, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, USA; ²Department of Medicine, Robert and Arlene Kogod Center on Aging, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, USA. Correspondence: Michael D. Jensen ([jensen@mayo.edu](mailto:jensen@mayo.edu))

Received 13 September 2011; accepted 23 April 2012; advance online publication 7 June 2012. doi: [10.1038/oby.2012.126](http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/oby.2012.126)

**OBESITY | VOLUME 20 NUMBER 12 | DECEMBER 2012**   2341

ARTICLES

ADIPOCYTE BIOLOGY

inhibit GLUT4 expression is sphingomyelin hydrolysis (24). In ob/ob mice the hyperinsulinemia and elevated TNF-α associated with obesity may increase the expression of three major ceramide production enzymes: nSMase, aSMase, and SPT in adipose tissue. Despite greater mRNA of above mentioned enzymes, the ceramide and sphingomyelin content/g of adipose tissue protein in ob/ob mice is reduced compared to their lean counterparts (23). However, diet-induced obesity in mice is associated with increased adipose tissue ceramide content (27).

We found only two reports on the ceramide content of human subcutaneous adipose tissue. Ceramide concentrations were greater in adipose tissue of obese women with fatty liver than in BMI-matched obese individuals with no hepatic steatosis (22). However, another group found total adipose tissue ceramide content was less in adipose tissue from obese than lean adults despite greater mRNA levels of SMases, SPT, and CDases (28). The aim of the present study was to examine the effect of obesity and sex on sphingolipid content in human fat subcutaneous abdominal tissue and to understand whether relationships exist between adipokine concentrations, insulin sensitivity, and adipose tissue Cer.

METHODS AND PROCEDURES

Twenty-four adults participated in this study. The volunteers included six lean (BMI < 25) males, six lean females ($n = 6$), six obese (BMI > 30) males, and six obese females. All participants were healthy, nonsmokers, and were taking no medications, including oral contraceptives. All participants gave written, informed consent before entering the study.

Body composition

Total body and regional fat and lean body mass were assessed using dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry (Lunar Radiation, Madison, WI) combined with a single-slice abdominal computed tomography scan at the L2-L3 interspace (29).

Adipose tissue biopsies

Subcutaneous abdominal adipose tissue was obtained from just lateral to the umbilicus using a needle liposuction technique with sterile conditions and local anesthesia. Samples were rinsed with saline through Nitex Nylon Fiber 250/50 and frozen at –70°C before analysis. The volunteers were in the postabsorptive state after an overnight fast.

Blood samples

Arterialized venous blood was obtained using the heated hand vein technique within 30 min of the adipose tissue biopsies. We measured glucose, insulin, TNF-α, IL-6, adiponectin, free-fatty acid, triacylglycerols, total cholesterol and high-density lipoprotein-cholesterol. The plasma samples were stored at –80°C before analysis.

Adipose tissue and plasma sphingolipids

The content of sphingolipids was measured using a UPLC/MS/MS approach. Briefly, the adipose tissue samples (40 mg) were homogenized in a solution composed of 0.25 mol/l sucrose, 25 mmol/l KCl, 50 mmol/l Tris, and 0.5 mmol/l EDTA, pH 7.4. Immediately afterwards 10 μl of the internal standard solution (17C-sphingosine and 17C-S1P, and 17C16-Cer Avanti Polar Lipids) as well as 1.5 ml of an extraction mixture (isopropanol:water:ethyl acetate, 30:10:60; vol:vol:vol) were added to each homogenate. The mixture was vortexed, sonicated, and then centrifuged for 10 min at 4,000 rpm (Sorvall Legend RT). The supernatant was transferred to new tube and pellet was re-extracted. After centrifugation, supernatants were combined and evaporated under nitrogen. The dried sample was reconstituted in 100 μl of LC

Solvent A (2 mmol/l ammonium formate, 0.15% formic acid in methanol) for UPLC/MS/MS analysis. Plasma sphingolipids were measured using a similar approach requiring 100 μl of plasma.

Enzyme activity assays

The activities of nSMase and aSMase were determined according to Liu and Hannun (30) using [N-methyl-14C]-sphingomyelin (Perkin-Elmer Life Sciences, Waltham, MS) as the radiolabeled substrate. The product of reaction—14C-choline phosphate—was extracted with CHCl₃/methanol (2:1, vol/vol), transferred to scintillation vials and counted using a Packard TRI-CARB 1900 TR scintillation counter. The activity of neutral (nCDase), and acid (aCDase) ceramidase was measured by the method of Nikolova-Karakashian and Merrill (31) using radiolabeled [N-palmitoyl-1-14C]—sphingosine (Moravek Biochemicals, Brea, CA) as a substrate. Unreacted Cer and liberated 14C-palmitate were separated with basic Dole solution (isopropanol/heptane/1 mol/l NaOH, 40:10:1, vol/vol/vol). Radioactivity of the 14C-palmitate was measured by scintillation counting. SPT activity was measured as described by Merrill (32) using [³H]-L-serine (Moravek Biochemicals) as the labeled substrate. Briefly, microsomal fraction was obtained by ultracentrifugation at 150,000g for 40 min. Microsomes were incubated for 10 min at 37°C in the reaction buffer (100 mmol/l HEPES (pH 8.3), 5 mmol/l DTT (dithiothreitol), 2.5 mmol/l EDTA (pH 7.0), 50 mmol/l pyridoxal phosphate, 200 mmol/l palmitoyl-CoA, and 2 mmol/l L-serine, 44,000 dpm/nmol). The labeled lipid product 3-ketosphinganine was extracted with CHCl₃/methanol (1:2, vol/vol), and the radioactivity was measured by scintillation counting.

Adipocyte size

Adipocyte size (μg lipid/cell) was assessed using the approach of Di Girolamo et al. (33) which involves collagenase digestion of the adipose tissue sample, separation of adipocytes by centrifugation, methylene blue staining to identify nuclei, and measurement of cell diameter (33).

Adipose tissue total cell number

The total number of cells per gram of tissue was assessed using the DNA content of tissue, assuming that 1 ng of DNA corresponds to 150 cells. Frozen, powdered fat tissue was homogenized in 800 μl ice-cold radioimmunoprecipitation assay buffer composed of 25 mmol/l Tris–HCl, pH 7.6, 150 mmol/l NaCl, 1% NP-40, 1% sodium deoxycholate, 0.1% SDS. The homogenate was centrifuged for 5 min at 10,000 rpm/min and lipid layer was removed by aspiration. DNA concentration was measured in homogenate using Quant-it Pico-Green (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) according manufacturer’s instructions. DNA concentrations were calculated using a standard curve of fluorescence from known concentration of the bacteriophage lambda DNA.

Number of adipocyte and nonadipocyte cells

The number of adipocytes was calculated by dividing the fat content per gram adipose tissue by the mean adipocyte lipid content (μg/cell). The number of nonadipocytes was calculated by subtracting the number of adipocytes from the total cell number.

Plasma metabolites

Plasma glucose concentrations were measured using a glucose analyzer (Beckman Instruments, Fullerton, CA). Insulin concentrations were measured using a chemiluminescence method (Access Ultrasensitive Immunoenzymatic; Beckman, Chaska, MN). Total cholesterol, high-density lipoprotein cholesterol, and triglyceride concentrations were measured with enzymatic colorimetric methods (Roche Diagnostics, Indianapolis, IN). Plasma adiponectin concentrations were measured using the human adiponectin double antibody radioimmunoassay kit (Linco Research, St Louis, MO). Plasma IL-6 and TNF-α concentrations were measured using a quantitative two-site enzyme immunoassays from R&D Systems (Minneapolis, MN).

Statistical analysis
The statistics were performed with PASW Statistics 17.0 software (SPSS, Chicago, IL). All data are presented as means ± SD. Data were analyzed by one-way analysis of variance, followed by Tukey-Kramer post hoc test or Games-Howell post hoc test (in the case of uneven variances). P values < 0.05 were taken to indicate statistical significance.

RESULTS

Subject characteristics
The characteristics of the participants are provided in Table 1. As expected, percent body fat, regional fat masses, and fat cell size were greater in obese female and male groups compared to the corresponding lean groups. We also saw the well-known sex differences in body composition with respect to regional fat masses. In addition, abdominal adipocytes were significantly larger in lean women than lean men. Plasma insulin concentrations were significantly greater in obese than lean females and males. There were no sex differences in fasting plasma insulin concentrations and no statistically significant differences in plasma glucose or total plasma cholesterol concentrations between any of the groups. High-density lipoprotein-cholesterol and adiponectin concentration were reduced whereas plasma triglyceride and IL-6 concentrations were significantly greater in the obese compared to lean groups. Adiponectin was significantly less and plasma IL-6 was significantly greater in men than women (lean or obese). There were no significant differences in plasma TNF-α concentration among groups.

Lean men and women were more insulin sensitive than the corresponding obese groups as assessed by HOMA.

Adipose sphingolipids
Adipocyte sphinganine, sphingosine and sphingosine-1-phosphate (S1P) content was greater (P < 0.001) in obese than lean volunteers (Table 2). The C14-Cer and C16-Cer content was significantly greater in obese than lean males and females counterparts. The adipocyte C18:1-Cer content was greater in obese than lean males (P < 0.01), but it was lower in obese females than obese males (P < 0.001). The C18-Cer content of adipocytes did not differ significantly between obese and lean groups, however, it was significantly lower in obese females than obese males. Adipocyte C20-Cer content was not significantly different between any of the groups, whereas C24:1-Cer was greater (P < 0.01) in obese than lean females. C24:1-Cer was greater (P < 0.05) in lean females than lean males and greater (P < 0.001) in obese females than obese males. The content of C24-Cer increased in obese males (P < 0.05) and females (P < 0.01) compared to lean men and women. As expected from the analysis of individual Cer, the total ceramide content was greater in obese females (P < 0.05) and males (P < 0.05) than their lean counterparts.

Plasma sphingolipids
Plasma sphingosine-1-phosphate content was greater in obese males and females (both P < 0.01) compared to their lean

Table 1 Anthropometric and biochemical parameters in the studied groups

| Lean females | Lean males | Obese females | Obese males |
|--------------|------------|---------------|-------------|
| Number       | 6          | 6             | 6           | 6           |
| Age          | 37 ± 11    | 31 ± 9        | 41 ± 4      | 37 ± 7      |
| Body mass (kg) | 66.4 ± 8.5 | 77.7 ± 12.7   | 89.5 ± 12.2 | 111.2 ± 14.2 |
| BMI (kg/m²)  | 23 ± 1.7   | 24 ± 1.7      | 33 ± 3.7    | 34 ± 2.4    |
| Body fat%    | 32 ± 5     | 19 ± 6***     | 45 ± 6      | 33 ± 5d,*   |
| UBSQ fat (kg)| 11.3 ± 2.2 | 7.2 ± 3.3*    | 19.4 ± 3.8  | 19.8 ± 3.6  |
| Visc fat (kg)| 1.1 ± 1.0  | 1.7 ± 0.4**   | 4.3 ± 2.8   | 5.6 ± 2.0d,*|
| FFM (kg)     | 44.5 ± 6.6 | 62.5 ± 7.8*   | 48.3 ± 8.8  | 72.8 ± 9.2* |
| FCS (μg/cell)| 0.44 ± 0.23| 0.35 ± 0.16*  | 0.62 ± 0.26 | 0.69 ± 0.18 |
| Insulin (μU/ml) | 3.6 ± 1.8 | 3.6 ± 1.6     | 9.7 ± 3.5   | 10.5 ± 7.1  |
| Glucose (mg/dl) | 89 ± 5    | 87 ± 6        | 93 ± 7      | 100 ± 9     |
| Cholesterol (mg/dl) | 164 ± 15 | 163 ± 21     | 175 ± 42    | 172 ± 41    |
| HDL-cholesterol (mg/dl) | 70 ± 13 | 54 ± 6*     | 56 ± 18     | 43 ± 15a,*  |
| TG (mg/dl)   | 67 ± 12    | 59 ± 6        | 133 ± 70    | 139 ± 42    |
| FFA (μmol/l) | 414 ± 90   | 389 ± 151     | 495 ± 137   | 429 ± 134   |
| TNF-α (pg/ml) | 1.06 ± 0.50 | 0.82 ± 0.3    | 0.74 ± 0.08 | 0.85 ± 0.15 |
| ADIP (ng/ml) | 10,443 ± 5,078 | 8,319 ± 3,628** | 6,684 ± 2,736 | 3,297 ± 1,509d,** |
| IL-6 (pg/ml) | 1.17 ± 0.17 | 1.92 ± 1.25*** | 1.62 ± 0.28 | 2.2 ± 1.56a,** |
| HOMA<sub>R</sub> | 1.26 ± 0.72 | 0.81 ± 0.40   | 3.48 ± 2.32 | 2.96 ± 1.68 |

Values are expressed in pg per adipocyte (mean ± SD).
ADIP, adiponectin; FCS, fat cell size; FFA, free-fatty acid; FFM, fat-free mass; HOMA<sub>R</sub>, homeostasis model assessment-estimated insulin resistance; IL-6, interleukin-6; TG, plasma triglyceride concentrations; TNF-α, tumor necrosis factor-α; UBSQ, upper body subcutaneous fat mass.
<sup>a</sup>P < 0.05; <sup>b</sup>P < 0.02; <sup>c</sup>P < 0.01; <sup>d</sup>P < 0.001 vs. the same sex lean group; *P < 0.05; **P < 0.01; ***P < 0.001 vs. lean or obese group but opposite sex.

counterparts (**Table 3**). Total plasma ceramide content was greater in both obese males and females (all *P* < 0.001) groups compared to the lean groups. Specifically, the concentrations of C14-Cer (*P* < 0.001), C16-Cer, C18-Cer, C18:1-Cer (all *P* < 0.01), and C24:1-Cer (*P* < 0.001) in plasma were significantly greater in obese men and women (all *P* < 0.05) than in their lean counterparts.

### Ceramide metabolism enzyme activity

SPT activity (males *P* < 0.05, females *P* < 0.02) and nSMase activity (both sexes *P* < 0.05) were significantly greater in both obese groups as compared to the same sex lean group (**Table 4**). There were no significant differences in aSMase activity between lean and obese groups. The activity of nCDase increased in the obese females (*P* < 0.05) compared to lean females. There were no significant differences in aCDase activity between lean and obese groups.

In general, the activities of adipose tissue SPT, nSMase, nCDase, and aCDase were correlated (all *r* > 0.6, *P* < 0.005). We found a strong positive correlation between total ceramide content and both SPT (*r* = 0.72, *P* < 0.0002) and nSMase (*r* = 0.59, *P* < 0.004) activities. Surprisingly, similar positive relationships were observed between total adipose tissue ceramide and nCDase (*r* = 0.72, *P* < 0.0002) and aCDase (*r* = 0.56, *P* < 0.006) activities. When tested separately by sex, the correlations between total ceramide content and enzyme activities were stronger in females than males.

### Associations between sphingolipids and obesity markers

We found a negative correlation (*r* = −0.73, *P* = 0.007) between total adipocyte ceramide and plasma adiponectin concentration in females (**Figure 1a**). The strongest correlation was noticed with C16-Cer (*r* = −0.77, *P* = 0.004). There was also a negative correlation between adipocyte total ceramide content and fasting plasma insulin concentrations (*r* = 0.85, *P* = 0.0005) as well as ceramide and homeostasis model assessment-estimated insulin resistance (HOMA<sub>IR</sub>) (*r* = 0.74, *P* = 0.006) in females (**Figure 1b**). No such associations were detected adipocyte ceramide content in men. There were positive correlations between Cer containing saturated fatty acid (C16:0-Cer, C18:0-Cer and C20:0-Cer) and plasma IL-6 concentration (*r* = 0.57, *P* = 0.05; *r* = 0.65, *P* = 0.02 and *r* = 0.62, *P* = 0.03 respectively) in males, but not females.

There was a positive correlation between plasma total ceramide and IL-6 concentrations (*r* = 0.68, *P* = 0.02) and between total ceramide content in plasma and insulin concentration (*r* = 0.65, *P* = 0.03) in females. For men, there was a significant correlation between plasma total ceramide and TNFα concentrations (*r* = 0.59, *P* = 0.05) and total plasma ceramide concentration and HOMA<sub>IR</sub> (*r* = 0.61, *P* = 0.04).

### DISCUSSION

Our goal was to understand whether adipocyte ceramide content is altered in human obesity and, if so, whether there was any association between adipocyte Cer and adipokines or insulin resistance. We collected abdominal subcutaneous

Table 3 Plasma sphingolipids content in lean and obese males and females groups

| Sph | SPA | S1P | C14-Cer | C16-Cer | C18:1-Cer | C18-Cer | C20-Cer | C22-Cer | C24:1-Cer | C24-Cer | Total |
|-----|-----|-----|---------|---------|-----------|---------|---------|---------|-----------|---------|-------|
| LM   | 0.80±0.07 | 0.19±0.02 | 145±10 | 123±11 | 138±19 | 5.4±0.6 | 4.6±0.6 | 6.6±0.5 | 6.8±0.8 | 135±10 | 196±28 |
| LF   | 0.87±0.13 | 0.19±0.03 | 143±16 | 151±19 | 145±32 | 5.4±1.1 | 4.6±0.3 | 6.8±0.3 | 132±21 | 199±15 | 564±59 |
| OM   | 0.73±0.08 | 0.21±0.02 | 182±18° | 197±28° | 216±36° | 7.3±0.8° | 6.2±0.8° | 6.8±0.8° | 183±0.8° | 307±37° | 632±80 |
| OF   | 0.74±0.13 | 0.22±0.03 | 173±12° | 198±26° | 203±35° | 7.4±0.9° | 6.5±0.9° | 7.4±1.0 | 164±25 | 287±27° | 634±44 |

Values are expressed in ng per 100 μl of plasma (mean ± SD).

LF, lean females; LM, lean males; OF, obese female; OM, obese males.

°P < 0.05; °P < 0.02; °P < 0.01; °P < 0.001 vs. the same sex lean group.

ARTICLES

ADIPOCYTE BIOLOGY

Table 4 Activities of enzymes of ceramide metabolism in lean and obese males and females groups

| SPT                | nSMase               | aSMase               | nCDase               | aCDase               |
|--------------------|----------------------|----------------------|----------------------|----------------------|
| LM                 | 0.03 ± 0.006         | 0.0020 ± 0.00018     | 0.010 ± 0.0025       | 0.0007 ± 0.00017     | 0.0013 ± 0.00019     |
| OM                 | 0.04 ± 0.007<sup>a</sup> | 0.0025 ± 0.00020<sup>a</sup> | 0.008 ± 0.0016       | 0.0009 ± 0.00014     | 0.0015 ± 0.00012     |
| LF                 | 0.028 ± 0.004        | 0.0025 ± 0.00021     | 0.012 ± 0.0033       | 0.0009 ± 0.00025     | 0.0016 ± 0.00016     |
| OF                 | 0.060 ± 0.021<sup>b</sup> | 0.0038 ± 0.0011<sup>a</sup> | 0.013 ± 0.0036       | 0.0014 ± 0.00038<sup>a</sup> | 0.0023 ± 0.00083     |

Values are expressed as mean ± SD.

SPT, serine palmitoyltransferase activity (pmol serine × min<sup>-1</sup> × 1,000 cells<sup>-1</sup>; nSMase and aSMase (neutral and acidic sphingomyelinase, respectively) activity (nmol ceramides × h<sup>-1</sup> × 1,000 cells<sup>-1</sup>); nCDase and aCDase (neutral and acidic ceramidase, respectively) activity (nmol sphingosine × h<sup>-1</sup> × 1,000 cells<sup>-1</sup>).

LF, lean females; LM, lean males; OF, obese female; OM, obese males.

<sup>a</sup>P < 0.05; <sup>b</sup>P < 0.02; vs. the same sex lean group.

the greater C18:1-Cer concentrations offset potential downregulation of adiponectin by other species (obese men) or greater C24:1-Cer is uniquely disadvantageous (obese women). We could find no data regarding specificity of the various species of Cer with regards to regulation of adipocyte metabolism or the association between adipocyte Cer and adiponectin. However, the relationship between adipocyte Cer and IL-6 in men is consistent with the observation that 3T3-L1 adipocytes treated with Cer show significant induction of IL-6 expression (23). Our observations raise the possibility that the secretion of adipokines is regulated differently in men and women, and that these processes may be related to adipose tissue saturated fatty acid ceramide content.

Greater total ceramide content in plasma and adipose tissue of obese mice has been reported (27), although the predominant species that were increased were the long chain Cer. Similarly, we noticed the greatest elevation in C14-Cer, C16-Cer and C24-Cer in adipocytes and C14-Cer, C16-Cer, C18:1-Cer, C18-Cer, and C24:1-Cer in plasma.

Obesity is associated with a state of chronic low-level inflammation (37,38), which likely contributes to ceramide accumulation. Our findings that plasma Cer are elevated in obese adults (Table 3) is consistent with previous studies (23,39). There is some evidence for causal, not mere correlational links, between Cer and obesity-related disorders. The administration of myriocin (an inhibitor of de novo ceramide biosynthesis) decreased plasma Cer, body fat mass and improved metabolic and inflammatory parameters in obese mice (40).

In conclusion, this is the first report on ceramide metabolism in human subcutaneous adipose tissue of lean and obese males and females. We found elevated adipocyte content of particular ceramide species, sphinganine, sphingosine, and sphingosine-1-phosphate. In females, but not males, there was a strong negative correlation between total adipocyte ceramide content and plasma adiponectin concentrations and a positive correlation between total adipocyte ceramide content and HOMA<sub>IR</sub>. Taken together elevated adipose tissue sphingolipid content is associated with hypo-adiponectinemia and insulin resistance in women. However, it remains to be shown whether the increased ceramide content in adipocyte from obese adults are responsible for adipose tissue dysfunction. The ability to specifically modulate ceramide content, and especially those of various subspecies, would allow investigators to address this question.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by UL1RR024150 from the National Center for Research Resources (NCRR), by grants DK40484, DK45343, DK50456, and AG013925 from the US Public Health Service, 7-07-DCS-03 from the American Diabetes Association, and by the Mayo Foundation. A.U.B.-Z. was supported by an educational grant from Sanofi-Aventis.

DISCLOSURE
The authors declared no conflict of interest.
See the online ICMJE Conflict of Interest Forms for this article.

© 2012 The Obesity Society

REFERENCES
1. Després JP, Lemieux I. Abdominal obesity and metabolic syndrome. *Nature* 2006;444:881–887.
2. Lapidus L, Bengtsson C, Björntorp P. The quantitative relationship between “the metabolic syndrome” and abdominal obesity in women. *Obes Res* 1994;2:372–377.
3. Axelsson J, Heimbürger O, Lindholm B, Stenvinkel P. Adipose tissue and its relation to inflammation: the role of adipokines. *J Ren Nutr* 2005;15:131–136.
4. Hotamisligil GS. Molecular mechanisms of insulin resistance and the role of the adipocyte. *Int J Obes Relat Metab Disord* 2000; 24 Suppl 4:S23–S27.
5. Verheij M, Bose R, Lin XH et al. Requirement for ceramide-initiated SAPK/JNK signalling in stress-induced apoptosis. *Nature* 1996;380:75–79.
6. Wang YM, Seibenhener ML, Vandenplas ML, Wooten MW. Atypical PKC zeta is activated by ceramide, resulting in coactivation of NF-kappaB/JNK kinase and cell survival. *J Neurosci Res* 1999;55:293–302.
7. Kolesnick R, Fuks Z. Radiation and ceramide-induced apoptosis. *Oncogene* 2003;22:5897–5906.
8. MacRae VE, Burdon T, Ahmed SF, Farquharson C. Ceramide inhibition of chondrocyte proliferation and bone growth is IGF-I independent. *J Endocrinol* 2006;191:369–377.
9. Oh HL, Seok JY, Kwon CH, Kang SK, Kim YK. Role of MAPK in ceramide-induced cell death in primary cultured astrocytes from mouse embryonic brain. *Neurotoxicology* 2006;27:31–38.
10. Ohanian J, Ohanian V. Sphingolipids in mammalian cell signalling. *Cell Mol Life Sci* 2001;58:2053–2068.
11. Adams JM 2nd, Pratipanawatr T, Berria R et al. Ceramide content is increased in skeletal muscle from obese insulin-resistant humans. *Diabetes* 2004;53:25–31.
12. Gorski J, Dobrzyn A, Zendzian-Piotrowska M. The sphingomyelin-signaling pathway in skeletal muscles and its role in regulation of glucose uptake. *Ann N Y Acad Sci* 2002;967:236–248.
13. Straczkowski M, Kowalska I, Baranowski M et al. Increased skeletal muscle ceramide level in men at risk of developing type 2 diabetes. *Diabetologia* 2007;50:2366–2373.
14. Straczkowski M, Kowalska I, Nikolajuk A et al. Relationship between insulin sensitivity and sphingomyelin signaling pathway in human skeletal muscle. *Diabetes* 2004;53:1215–1221.
15. Turinsky J, O’Sullivan DM, Bayly BP. 1,2-Diacylglycerol and ceramide levels in insulin-resistant tissues of the rat in vivo. *J Biol Chem* 1990;265:16880–16885.
16. Chavez JA, Knotts TA, Wang LP et al. A role for ceramide, but not diacylglycerol, in the antagonism of insulin signal transduction by saturated fatty acids. *J Biol Chem* 2003;278:10297–10303.
17. Chavez JA, Summers SA. Characterizing the effects of saturated fatty acids on insulin signaling and ceramide and diacylglycerol accumulation in 3T3-L1 adipocytes and C2C12 myotubes. *Arch Biochem Biophys* 2003;419:101–109.
18. Hajduch E, Balendran A, Batty IH et al. Ceramide impairs the insulin-dependent membrane recruitment of protein kinase B leading to a loss in downstream signalling in L6 skeletal muscle cells. *Diabetologia* 2001;44:173–183.
19. JeBailey L, Wanono O, Niu W et al. Ceramide- and oxidant-induced insulin resistance involve loss of insulin-dependent Rac-activation and actin remodeling in muscle cells. *Diabetes* 2007;56:394–403.
20. Bonzón-Kulichenko E, Schwudke D, Gallardo N et al. Central leptin regulates total ceramide content and sterol regulatory element binding protein-1C proteolytic maturation in rat white adipose tissue. *Endocrinology* 2009;150:169–178.
21. Fernández-Veledo S, Hernandez R, Teruel T et al. Ceramide mediates TNF-alpha-induced insulin resistance on GLUT4 gene expression in brown adipocytes. *Arch Physiol Biochem* 2006;112:13–22.
22. Kolak M, Westerbacka J, Velagapudi VR et al. Adipose tissue inflammation and increased ceramide content characterize subjects with high liver fat content independent of obesity. *Diabetes* 2007;56:1960–1968.
23. Samad F, Hester KD, Yang G, Hannun YA, Bielawski J. Altered adipose and plasma sphingolipid metabolism in obesity: a potential mechanism for cardiovascular and metabolic risk. *Diabetes* 2006;55:2579–2587.
24. Long SD, Pekala PH. Lipid mediators of insulin resistance: ceramide signalling down-regulates GLUT4 gene transcription in 3T3-L1 adipocytes. *Biochem J* 1996;319 (Pt 1):179–184.
25. Stephens JM, Pekala PH. Transcriptional repression of the GLUT4 and C/EBP genes in 3T3-L1 adipocytes by tumor necrosis factor-alpha. *J Biol Chem* 1991;266:21839–21845.
26. Stephens JM, Pekala PH. Transcriptional repression of the C/EBP-alpha and GLUT4 genes in 3T3-L1 adipocytes by tumor necrosis factor-alpha. Regulations is coordinate and independent of protein synthesis. *J Biol Chem* 1992;267:13580–13584.
27. Shah C, Yang G, Lee I et al. Protection from high fat diet-induced increase in ceramide in mice lacking plasminogen activator inhibitor 1. *J Biol Chem* 2008;283:13538–13548.
28. Blachnio-Zabielska AU, Pulka M, Baranowski M et al. Ceramide metabolism is affected by obesity and diabetes in human adipose tissue. *J Cell Physiol* 2012;227:550–557.
29. Jensen MD, Kanaley JA, Reed JE, Sheedy PF. Measurement of abdominal and visceral fat with computed tomography and dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry. *Am J Clin Nutr* 1995;61:274–278.
30. Liu B, Hannun YA. Sphingomyelinase assay using radiolabeled substrate. *Meth Enzymol* 2000;311:164–167.
31. Nikolova-Karakashian M, Merrill AH Jr. Ceramidases. *Meth Enzymol* 2000;311:194–201.
32. Merrill AH Jr. Characterization of serine palmitoyltransferase activity in Chinese hamster ovary cells. *Biochim Biophys Acta* 1983;754:284–291.
33. Tchoukalova YD, Harteneck DA, Karwoski RA, Tarara J, Jensen MD. A quick, reliable, and automated method for fat cell sizing. *J Lipid Res* 2003;44:1795–1801.
34. Villa NY, Kupchak BR, Garitaonandia I et al. Sphingolipids function as downstream effectors of a fungal PAQR. *Mol Pharmacol* 2009;75:866–875.
35. Holland WL, Miller RA, Wang ZV et al. Receptor-mediated activation of ceramidase activity initiates the pleiotropic actions of adiponectin. *Nat Med* 2011;17:55–63.
36. Wu D, Ren Z, Pae M et al. Aging up-regulates expression of inflammatory mediators in mouse adipose tissue. *J Immunol* 2007;179:4829–4839.
37. Wellen KE, Hotamisligil GS. Inflammation, stress, and diabetes. *J Clin Invest* 2005;115:1111–1119.
38. Dandona P, Aljada A, Bandyopadhyay A. Inflammation: the link between insulin resistance, obesity and diabetes. *Trends Immunol* 2004;25:4–7.
39. Haus JM, Kashyap SR, Kasumov T et al. Plasma ceramides are elevated in obese subjects with type 2 diabetes and correlate with the severity of insulin resistance. *Diabetes* 2009;58:337–343.
40. Yang G, Badeanlou L, Bielawski J et al. Central role of ceramide biosynthesis in body weight regulation, energy metabolism, and the metabolic syndrome. *Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab* 2009;297:E211–E224.
