
Review

The photomorphogenic repressors COP1 and DET1: 20 years later

On Sun Lau${}^{1,2}$ and Xing Wang Deng${}^{1}$

${}^{1}$ Department of Molecular, Cellular and Developmental Biology, Yale University, New Haven, CT 06520-8104, USA  
${}^{2}$ Department of Biology, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305-5020, USA  

COP1 and DET1 are among the first repressors of photomorphogenesis to be identified, more than 20 years ago. Discovery of these repressors as conserved regulators of the ubiquitin-proteasome system has established protein degradation as a central theme in light signal transduction. COP1 is a RING E3 ubiquitin ligase that targets key regulators for degradation, and DET1 complexes with COP10 and DDB1, which is proposed to aid in COP1-mediated degradation. Recent studies have strengthened the role of COP1 as a major signaling center. DET1 is also emerging as a chromatin regulator in repressing gene expression. Here, we review current understanding on COP1 and DET1, with a focus on their role as part of two distinct, multimeric CUL4-based E3 ligases.

### COP/DET/FUS: from nine genetic loci to three protein complexes

COP1 and DET1 are founding members of a group of genes termed the CONSTITUTIVE PHOTOMORPHOGENIC/DE-ETIOLATED/FUSCA (COP/DET/FUS) [1,2]. These loci were identified through genetic screens in Arabidopsis (*Arabidopsis thaliana*) for seedling mutants that display light-grown phenotypes in darkness (COP/DET) or seeds that accumulate high levels of anthocyanin (FUS). Nine of the COP/DET/FUS loci were subsequently cloned, and they encode COP1, DET1, COP10 and COP9 signalsome (CSN) subunits 1 to 4, 7 and 8. These proteins were found to be important regulators in the ubiquitin (Ub)-proteasome system and are conserved in other eukaryotes including humans. Besides photomorphogenesis, the COP/DET/FUS proteins also play key roles in many other biological processes, as evident from the pleiotropic and lethal phenotypes displayed in their mutants in plants, and invertebrate and vertebrate animals [1–6].

Extensive biochemical and genetic studies have now defined the COP/DET/FUS proteins as constituents of three distinct protein complexes: the COP1-SUPPRESSOR OF PHYA-105 (SPA) complex, the CSN and the COP10-DET1-DDB1 (CDD) complex (Table 1). COP1, which is a part of a 700 kDa complex, is a RING E3 Ub ligase that mediates the ubiquitination of a myriad of substrates for degradation by the proteasome [5]. CSN, which consists of six of the COP/DET/FUS proteins, is a protease with eight distinct subunits that regulates all CULLIN-RING E3 ligases (CRL) through its NEDD8/RUB1 isopeptidase activity [3]. The CDD complex, which includes the remaining two members of the COP/DET/FUS protein group, consists of COP10, DET1 and DAMAGED DNA BINDING PROTEIN 1 (DDB1) [7,8].

It has been 20 years since the revelation of the molecular identity of the first gene from the COP/DET/FUS loci [9]. This study not only represented the beginning of the cloning and identification of a set of evolutionarily conserved regulators, but also led to a paradigm of light signal transduction – signaling through targeted protein degradation. Here, we review our current understanding of COP1 and DET1 in *Arabidopsis*, focusing on the two CUL4-based E3 complexes they constitute. We begin with an update on the central role played by COP1 in the light signaling pathway and how COP1 regulates flowering and the circadian rhythm. We then discuss the functional unit of COP1, the COP1-SPA complex, and the recent finding that it acts as a substrate receptor for CUL4 and forms the multimeric CUL4-DDB1${}^{\text{COP1-SPA}}$ E3 ligase. Finally, we review the unorthodox DET1 E3 complex, CUL4-CDD ligase, and present the latest discovery that DET1 plays a direct role in transcriptional repression. Owing to the scope of this article, readers interested in the CSN, which is expected to contribute to the function of COP1 and DET1 as a general CUL4 regulator, are encouraged to consult these specific reviews [2,3,10,11].

#### COP1: an E3 ubiquitin ligase at the heart of light signaling

COP1 was the first cloned COP/DET/FUS locus and has been one of the best characterized among them [5,9]. In plants, the function of COP1 is closely tied to the light signaling pathway. COP1 acts as a central repressor in the pathway, where it promotes the ubiquitination and degradation of the positive regulators and is itself regulated by multiple photoreceptors (Figure 1). Besides seedling photomorphogenesis [5], research in the past five years has strengthened and expanded the role of COP1 in other processes, most of which are light-regulated responses. These processes include flowering [12–14], circadian rhythm [14], UV-B signaling [15,16], stomatal opening and development [17,18], shade avoidance response [19], plant defense [20], crosstalk between light and brassinosteroid (BR) signaling [21], cold acclimation response [22] and light-induced root elongation [23] in *Arabidopsis*, and juvenile-adult phase change in rice (*Oryza sativa*) [24]. In many of these processes, the molecular involvement of COP1 is direct interaction and ubiquitination of the key

Corresponding author: Deng, X.W. (<xingwang.deng@yale.edu>).

Table 1. Components of the three COP/DET/FUS complexes and the core CUL4-DDB1 ubiquitin ligase in Arabidopsis

| Symbol | AGI code | Fullname | Phenotype of dark-grown mutant seedlings | Refs |
|--------|----------|----------|-----------------------------------------|------|
| COP 1-SPA complex<sup>a</sup> |  |  |  |  |
| COP 1 | AT2G32950 | CONSTITUTIVE PHOTOMORPHOGENIC 1 | cop phenotype (light-grown like)<sup>b</sup> | [9,93] |
| SPA 1 | AT2G46340 | SUPPRESSOR OF PHYA-105 1 | cop phenotype in the quadruple spa1spa2spa3spa4 mutant; milder cop phenotype in the triple and double mutants | [72] |
| SPA 2 | AT4G11110 | SPA 1-RELATED 2 |  |  |
| SPA 3 | AT3G15354 | SPA 1-RELATED 3 |  |  |
| SPA 4 | AT1G53090 | SPA 1-RELATED 4 |  |  |
| COP 10-DET 1-DDB 1 (CDD) complex |  |  |  |  |
| COP 10 | AT3G13550 | CONSTITUTIVE PHOTOMORPHOGENIC 10 | cop phenotype | [82,94] |
| DET 1 | AT4G10180 | DE-ETIOLATED 1 | cop phenotype | [81,95] |
| DDB1a | AT4G05420 | DAMAGED DNA BINDING PROTEIN1A | Wild-type phenotype, but enhances cop phenotype of det 1 | [8] |
| DDB1b | AT4G21100 | DAMAGED DNA BINDING PROTEIN1B | Embryonic lethal |  |
| COP 9 signalsome (CSN) |  |  |  |  |
| CSN 1 | AT3G61140 | COP 9 SIGNALOSOME SUBUNIT 1 | cop phenotype | [2] |
| CSN 2 | AT2G26990 | COP 9 SIGNALOSOME SUBUNIT 2 | cop phenotype |  |
| CSN 3 | AT5G14250 | COP 9 SIGNALOSOME SUBUNIT 3 | cop phenotype |  |
| CSN 4 | AT5G42970 | COP 9 SIGNALOSOME SUBUNIT 4 | cop phenotype |  |
| CSN 5a | AT1G22920 | COP 9 SIGNALOSOME SUBUNIT 5a | cop phenotype in the csn5acsn5b double mutant | [2,96] |
| CSN 5b | AT1G71230 | COP 9 SIGNALOSOME SUBUNIT 5b |  |  |
| CSN 6a | AT5G56280 | COP 9 SIGNALOSOME SUBUNIT 6a | cop phenotype in the csn6acsn6b double mutant | [2,96] |
| CSN 6b | AT4G26430 | COP 9 SIGNALOSOME SUBUNIT 6b |  |  |
| CSN 7 | AT1G02090 | COP 9 SIGNALOSOME SUBUNIT 1 | cop phenotype | [2] |
| CSN 8 | AT4G14110 | COP 9 SIGNALOSOME SUBUNIT 1 | cop phenotype |  |
| Core CUL 4-DDB 1 ligase<sup>c</sup> |  |  |  |  |
| CUL 4 | AT5G46210 | CULLIN 4 | cop phenotype in knockdown mutants | [79,85] |
| RBX 1a | AT5G20570 | RING-BOX1a | Not tested in loss of function mutant; weak de-etiolation in overexpression lines | [97] |
| RBX 1b | AT3G42830 | RING-BOX1b | Not tested |  |

<sup>a</sup>The COP 1-SPA complex is likely to be a tetramer of two COP1s and two SPA proteins.

<sup>b</sup>cop phenotype: mutants undergo constitutive photomorphogenesis (cop) in darkness, which includes the development of a short hypocotyl and open cotyledons.

<sup>c</sup>For its component DDB 1, please refer to the DDB1a/b entries under 'CDD complex'.

factors (Table 2). These studies have consolidated COP1 as a vital regulatory point in light signal transduction. In this section, we review the current state of COP1 in the light signaling pathway and how it specifically regulates flowering and the circadian clock.

Light signaling pathway

Light is an important environmental signal that controls many developmental processes in plants [25]. Central to these light-regulated processes is a light signaling pathway that connects light signals to gene expression. From the model of seedling photomorphogenesis, the COP/DET/FUS proteins were identified as negative regulators of light signaling. A major breakthrough in addressing how the COP/DET/FUS proteins control the developmental program was the discovery that COP1 is a UbE3 ligase that mediates the degradation of various photomorphogenesis-promoting transcription factors by the Ub-proteasome system, with the other COP/DET/FUS proteins likely to aid the process [26–28]. In darkness, COP1 targets these transcription factors, including ELONGATED HYPOCOTYL 5 (HY5), LONG AFTER FAR-RED LIGHT 1 (LAF1) and LONG HYPOCOTYL IN FAR RED (HFR1) for ubiquitination and degradation, leading to suppression of photomorphogenesis (Figures 1a and 2a) [26, 27, 29–32]. Recent studies also highlight the importance of several B-box Zinc Finger proteins (BBXs), including BBX4/COL3 and BBX22/LZS1/STH3, and a BR-regulated GATA transcriptional factor, GATA2,

in promoting photomorphogenesis, and they are also targeted by COP1 for degradation [21, 33–35].

In the presence of light, activated photoreceptors repress COP1 function and allow the accumulation of the photomorphogenesis-promoting transcription factors, resulting in photomorphogenic development (Figures 1a and 2b) [5]. Plants have an elaborate set of photoreceptors that allow perception of a broad spectrum of light, ranging from UV-B to far-red (280–800 nm) [25]. Among them, the far-red and red light-sensing phytochromes (phyA and phyB), the blue light-sensing cryptochromes (cry1 and cry2) and the recently identified UV-B receptor, UVR8, are the major photoreceptors that regulate photomorphogenesis in response to specific wavelengths of light [25, 36]. Remarkably, the signaling of all of these photoreceptors is mediated through COP1 (Figure 1). A well-known inhibitory mechanism of COP1 by visible light involves its export from the nucleus on light exposure, thus excluding its activity against nuclear-localized transcription factors (Figure 2b) [37]. However, the kinetics of the nuclear exclusion of COP1 is rather slow (approximately 24 h) and this strategy may represent only long-term suppression of COP1 under extended light conditions [5, 38]. A more rapid mechanism for downregulation of COP1 by phytochromes and cryptochromes is believed to exist because changes in the transcriptome initiated by far-red, red and blue light can be observed within an hour [39–41]. In addition, a large fraction of these early response genes are

Review

Trends in Plant Science October 2012, Vol. 17, No. 10

(a) Under visible light

Far-red light  
↓  
phyA  

Red light  
↓  
phyB  

Blue light  
↓  
cry1 cry2  

Photo-  
receptors:  

Signaling  
center:  

COP1  

Effectors:  
HY5, HYH,  
LAF1, etc.  

Transcription  
factors  

Light  
responses:  
Photomorphogenesis  

UV-B  
↓  
UVR8  

(b) Under UV-B  

COP1  

HY5  

UV-B  
tolerance  

TRENDS in Plant Science  

Figure 1. COP1 at the center of light signal transduction. COP1 represents a signaling center that integrates signals from various photoreceptors and also controls many downstream light-regulated responses. (a) Phytochromes (phyA and phyB) and cryptochromes (cry1 and cry2) are the major photoreceptors that perceive a wide spectrum of visible light. When activated, the photoreceptors act to suppress COP1. COP1 is a repressor in light signal transduction and functions as a ubiquitin E3 ligase that ubiquitates multiple light-response effectors for degradation. Thus, photoreceptor-mediated suppression of COP1 allows accumulation of the effectors, resulting in the specific light responses. (b) Under UV-B, however, COP1 acts as a positive regulator in the signaling pathway. Activated UVR8, the newly identified UV-B receptor, interacts directly with COP1 and together they promote the transcription of HY5 for UV-B tolerance. Note: solid lines between COP1 and other proteins denote that a demonstrated physical interaction is involved in regulation. See Table 2 for a complete list of COP1 substrates. CO, CONSTANS; COP1, CONSTITUTIVE PHOTOMORPHOGENIC 1; cry1 and cry2, cryptochrome 1 and 2; GI, GIGANTEA; HY5, ELONGATED HYPOCOTYL 5; HYH, HY5-HOMOLOG; LAF1, LONG AFTER FAR-RED LIGHT 1; phyA and phyB, phytochrome A and B; UV-B, ultraviolet-B radiation; UVR8, UV RESISTANCE LOCUS 8; Ub, ubiquitin.

direct targets of HY5, a COP1 substrate [42]. Correspondingly, HY5 protein accumulates rapidly (within an hour) on far-red light treatment [43]. How phyA and phyB might inhibit COP1 remains unknown, but recent studies have shown that signaling from cryptochromes and UVR8 involves direct interaction with COP1 and/or its binding partner SPA1.

The direct interaction between COP1 and cryptochromes was first reported a decade ago and is important for blue light-mediated photomorphogenic response [44,45]. However, because the interaction is not light dependent, it was unclear how light-activated cryptochromes can regulate COP1. Three recent studies have provided insights into this by showing that cry1 and cry2 interact with SPA1 in a blue light-dependent manner [46–48]. Although the detailed modes of action for cry1 and cry2 differ, both of the cryptochrome-SPA interactions are believed to perturb the function of the COP1-SPA E3 complex and suppress its activity (see below and [49,50]) (Figure 2b). Contrary to its role in the visible light spectrum, COP1 is a positive regulator in UV-B light signaling (Figure 1b) [51]. On UV-B irradiation, UVR8 monomerizes and interacts with COP1 [15,36]. Through an unknown mechanism, they promote the expression of HY5, which is responsible for the activation of a subset of UV-B induced genes [52]. In addition to acting as a signaling integrator,

COP1 is involved in the negative feedback regulation of photoreceptors in light, where it promotes the degradation of phyA, phyB and cry2 (Figure 1a) [53–55]. In the case of phyA and phyB, COP1 is the E3 ligase that promotes their ubiquitination.

Flowering

Mutations in COP1 have long been known to affect flowering time [56]. Two recent studies have identified the molecular link that explains how COP1 controls flowering in response to photoperiod [12,13]. In Arabidopsis, the transition from the vegetative to the flowering stage is controlled by day length. The transcriptional regulator CONSTANS (CO) promotes flowering under long days (LDs), but not short days (SDs) [57]. CO functions by activating the transcription of FLOWERING LOCUS T (FT), which is a potent inducer of flowering [58]. CO is regulated transcriptionally by the circadian clock and post-translationally by light, such that flowering is induced only when CO transcription at dusk coincides with the exposure to light (as in LD) when the CO protein is stabilized [59,60]. In darkness, CO is ubiquitinated and degraded through the Ub-proteasome system, thus preventing flowering under SDs even in the presence of CO transcripts [60]. Two studies reported that COP1 is the E3 Ub ligase responsible for the ubiquitination of CO during the night (Figure 1a)

Table 2. Targets of the COP1E3 ubiquitin ligase

| Substrate | AGI code | Protein identity | Processes involved | Interaction with COP1 | Refs |
|-----------|----------|------------------|---------------------|-----------------------|------|
| HY5       | AT5G11260 | bZIP transcription factor | Photomorphogenesis, light signaling | +     | [26,27] |
| HYH       | AT3G17609 | bZIP transcription factor | Photomorphogenesis, light signaling | +     | [28]    |
| LAF1      | AT4G25560 | MYB transcription factor | Photomorphogenesis, light signaling | +     | [29]    |
| HFR1      | AT1G02340 | bHLH transcription factor | Photomorphogenesis, light signaling | +     | [30-32] |
| BBX24/STO | AT1G06040 | B-box Zinc Finger protein | Photomorphogenesis, light signaling | +     | [69,98,99] |
| BBX4/COL3 | AT2G24790 | B-box Zinc Finger protein | Photomorphogenesis, light signaling | +     | [34]    |
| BBX22/LZF1/STH3 | AT1G78600 | B-box Zinc Finger protein | Photomorphogenesis, light signaling | Through HY5? | [33,100] |
| GATA2     | AT2G45050 | GATA transcription factor | Photomorphogenesis, light and brassinosteroid crosstalk | +     | [21]    |
| phyA      | AT1G09570 | Phytochrome | Light perception | +     | [53]    |
| phyB      | AT2G18790 | Phytochrome | Light perception | +     | [55]    |
| CO/BBX1   | AT5G15840 | B-box Zinc Finger protein | Flowering | +     | [101,102] |
| GI        | AT1G22770 | Unknown protein | Circadian rhythm and flowering | Through ELF3 | [14]    |
| SCAR1     | AT2G34150 | SCAR family member | Root growth | +     | [23]    |
| HRT       | AT5G43470 | R protein | Plant defense | +     | [20]    |

[12,13]. Mutants of *cop1* flower early under SDs and the phenotypes are largely suppressed in the *co* mutant background. COP1, through its WD40 repeats domain, interacts physically with CO (discussed below), ubiquitates CO *in vitro* and promotes CO degradation *in vivo*. In the presence of light, particularly blue and far-red, COP1 activity is inhibited, leading to accumulation of CO. Interestingly, SPA1, a component of the COP1-SPA complex, also interacts with CO and negatively affects CO stability [61]. Thus, COP1 plays a role in photoperiod perception by degrading CO at night, preventing flowering under SDs.

Circadian rhythm

The promotion of proteolysis of CO by COP1, however, is only part of its regulatory mechanism in the control of flowering. Another recent study has suggested that COP1 can also modulate CO transcriptionally by regulating the flowering-and circadian clock-associated protein GIGAN-TEA (GI) (Figures 1a and Fig. 3) [14]. Importantly, it establishes that COP1 can play a role in modulating the circadian clock. First, the study demonstrates that the SD-insensitive early flowering phenotype of *cop1* mutants can be partially rescued when the plants are entrained under a light-dark cycle with a reduced environmental time period (e.g. from 24h to 18h), possibly coinciding with the circadian period of the mutant. This indicates that a circadian defect in the *cop1* mutant contributes to its early flowering phenotype. Furthermore, COP1 has the ability to interact with EARLY FLOWERING 3 (ELF3), which allows COP1 to interact with GI *in vivo* and target GI for degradation (Figure 3a). GI is known to interact with the blue light-sensing F-box proteins FLA-VIN-BINDING, KELCH REPEAT, F-BOX1 (FKF1) and ZEITLUPE (ZTL) in a blue light-dependent manner [62,63]. FKF1 and ZTL are regulators of flowering time and circadian rhythms, respectively, and their interaction with GI is important for their function. The blue light-stabilized FKF1-GI interaction targets CYCLING DOF FACTOR 1 (CDF1), a transcriptional repressor of CO, for degradation (Figure 3b) [64]. The ZTL-GI interaction also mediates the degradation of TIMING OF CAB EXPRESSION 1 (TOC1), a central clock component that

has recently been shown to function as a transcriptional repressor of core circadian genes [65-67]. The ability of COP1 to regulate GI abundance enables it to function as a light-regulated switch for flowering and as a modulator of the circadian clock.

The COP1E3 machinery: a multimeric CUL4-DDB1<sup>COP1</sup>-SPA ligase

COP1 is a 76 kDa RING E3 ligase and contains three protein-protein interaction domains: an N-terminal RING-finger region, a coiled-coil domain and seven WD40 repeats at its C terminus [5]. The RING-finger motif mediates the interaction with Ub-conjugating enzymes (E2s), and the coiled-coil region of COP1 allows the formation of homodimers or heterodimers with members of the SPA protein family (discussed below) [5,68]. The WD40 repeats function as the substrate-interaction domain [5,69]. Although COP1 possesses the interaction domains of a functional E3 ligase and can ubiquitinate targets on its own *in vitro*, it forms a protein complex of greater than 700 kDa *in vivo*, indicating that COP1 function may require additional protein components [26,29].

In plants, the SPA family of proteins has been established as core components of the COP1 complex [26,68,70-72]. The SPA family consists of four members, SPA1 to SPA4, that each contain an N-terminal kinase-like domain, followed by a coiled-coil domain and, interestingly, a WD repeats domain that shares a high homology with COP1 (44% identity for SPA1) [72,73]. All four SPA family members interact with COP1 *in vitro* and *in vivo*, and the interaction is mediated through the respective coiled-coil regions [26,68,70]. Affinity purification of the SPA1 complex has demonstrated COP1 as its major constituent, further supporting the presence of the COP1-SPA complex [71]. The SPA family has overlapping but not entirely redundant functions in plants, and they exhibit distinct light- and organ-specific expression patterns, suggesting that spatiotemporal control of COP1-SPA complexes may be required for functional specificity [70,72,74]. Given their ability to homo- and heterodimerize and the approximate 440 kDa size of the core complex, the COP1-SPA complexes are proposed to be heterogeneous in nature, with a

Review

Trends in Plant Science October 2012, Vol. 17, No. 10

(a) In darkness

DDB1  
RBX1  
CUL4  

CUL4-DDB1  
E3 ligase core  

COP1  
SPA1  

The COP1-SPA1  
complex  

HY5  
Transcription  
factor  

Degradation  

Ub Ub  
COP1 HY5  
Ub  
SPA1  
DDB1  
RBX1  
CUL4  

CUL4-DDB1<sup>COP1-SPA1</sup>  
E3 ligase  

Photomorphogenesis  

HY5 targets  

Nucleus  

(b) Under light  

Blue light  

cry1  
Light  
Nuclear  
export  

COP1  
Cytoplasm  

Blue light  
receptor  

COP1  
SPA1  

The COP1-SPA1  
complex  

cry1  
SPA1  

HY5  
Transcription  
factor  

HY5  
Photomorphogenesis  

HY5 targets  

Nucleus  

TRENDS in Plant Science  

Figure 2. Mode of action of the CUL4-DDB1<sup>COP1-SPA1</sup> E3 ligase. (a) In darkness, COP1 is responsible for the proteasome-mediated degradation of transcription factors, such as HY5, that promote photomorphogenesis. COP1 forms a tetrameric complex with members of the SPA family (two COP1s and two SPAs) and interacts with the substrate HY5. The WDXR motifs on either COP1 or SPA further mediate the interaction with the CUL4-DDB1 core, and the multimeric CUL4-DDB1<sup>COP1-SPA1</sup> E3 ligase is assembled. Activated E2s are recruited to the E3, resulting in the poly-ubiquitination of HY5 and its degradation. Photomorphogenesis is repressed. (b) Under light, COP1 is inhibited by the activated photoreceptors. In blue light, cry1 interacts with SPA1 and sequesters it from COP1, thereby probably disrupting the COP1-SPA1 complex that is important for E3 function. COP1 also interacts with cry1 in a light-independent manner (not shown here). Visible light further promotes the nuclear export of COP1 for long-term suppression of COP1. As a result of reduced COP1 activity, HY5 accumulates, binds to its targets and promotes photomorphogenesis. cry1, cryptochrome 1; COP1, CONSTITUTIVE PHOTOMORPHOGENIC 1; CUL4, CULLIN 4; DDB1, DAMAGED DNA BINDING PROTEIN 1; HY5, ELONGATED HYPOCOTYL 5; RBX1, RING-BOX 1; SPA1, SUPPRESSOR OF PHYA-105 1; Ub, ubiquitin.

core tetramer of two COP1 proteins and combinations of two SPA proteins (Figure 2a) [70].

Genetic and biochemical evidence suggests that complex formation between COP1 and SPA proteins is important for COP1 function. COP1 and SPA1 interact genetically, and the quadruple spa mutant displays a striking constitutive photomorphogenic phenotype similar to strong cop1 mutants (Table 1) [26,72]. In spa mutants, at least three COP1 substrates—HY5, HFR1 and CO—have been shown to accumulate at higher levels [26,61,70,75]. In addition, in vitro ubiquitination assays have shown that SPA1 can modulate the activity of COP1, and at least in the case of LAF1, the coiled-coil region of SPA1 can enhance COP1 E3 activity at low COP1 concentration [26,29]. Finally, the identification of the blue-light dependent interaction between cryptochromes and SPAs, as discussed above, supports their importance in COP1 function [46–48]. Given that SPA proteins can also directly interact with HY5, HFR1 and CO through their WD repeat domains [26,61,75], SPA proteins may contribute to COP1 function through substrate recruitment and/or enhancement of COP1 activity. Furthermore, they may also play a structural role in the formation of a CUL4-DDB1<sup>COP1-SPA</sup> ligase (discussed below).

A recent study of the relationship between COP1 and CUL4 has led to a model of a multimeric COP1 E3 ligase in which the COP1-SPA complex acts as a substrate receptor of the CUL4-DDB1 E3 ligase (Figure 2a) [76]. The CUL4-DDB1 ligases belong to the multi-subunit CRL family, which consist of a CULLIN, a small RING finger protein named RBX1/ROC1 and a substrate receptor module [77]. CULLIN functions as a scaffold on which RBX1 and the substrate receptor module dock at its C and N terminus, respectively. RBX1 recruits E2s to the ligase, and the substrate receptor module mediates the interaction with substrates. For the CUL4-DDB1 ligases, the substrate receptor module consists of the core adaptor protein DDB1 and a group of interchangeable DWD/DCAF/CDW proteins as substrate receptors. DDB1 functions as a linker protein that connects the various DWD proteins to the CUL4 core (Figure 2a). The DWD (for DDB1-binding WD40) proteins are a subset of WD40 motif-containing proteins that associate with DDB1 through WDXR motifs. In plants, there are 85 and 78 putative DWDs in Arabidopsis and rice, respectively [78].

Interestingly, COP1 and the four SPAs are among the putative DWD proteins. Indeed, COP1 and the SPAs were shown to interact with the two Arabidopsis DDB1 isoforms, DDB1a and DDB1b, in vitro, and the interactions were dependent on their WDXR motifs [76]. The in vivo interaction between COP1 and SPA1/3/4 with DDB1b was also demonstrated. In addition, COP1 associates with CUL4 in vivo, and they interact genetically to repress photomorphogenesis [76,79]. These results suggest that the COP1-SPA complexes bind to DDB1 with their WDXR motifs and act as substrate receptors in the formation of multimeric CUL4-DDB1<sup>COP1-SPA</sup> ligases (Figure 2a). Given that COP1 is a functional E3 on its own in vitro, it is unclear why COP1 would function as a part of a multimeric ligase. One possible explanation is that the formation of the tetrameric COP1-SPA complex may mask the RING domain of COP1 and hinder its recruitment of E2s, thus requiring the activity of the CUL4-DDB1 ligase. Furthermore, the CUL4-DDB1 machinery

Review

Trends in Plant Science October 2012, Vol. 17, No. 10

(a) Night

(b) Day (afternoon)

COP1
ELF3
Ub Ub
?SPA
GI
Degradation
Blue-light sensing
FKF1
F-box protein
CDF1
Transcriptional
repressor
CO
Flowering control
ZTL
Blue-light sensing
F-box protein
TOC1
Transcriptional
repressor
Circadian genes
Clock control
cry1/2
COP1
ELF3
?SPA
Blue light
receptor
GL
Blue light
FKF1
ZTL
GL
CDF1
Degradation
TOC1
Degradation
CO
Flowering control
Circadian genes
Clock control
Flowering
progression

Figure 3. Model of COP1 regulation of GI for flowering time and circadian rhythm control. (a) At night, COP1, through binding with ELF3, interacts and targets GI for degradation. ELF3 is also degraded in the process. In the absence of GI, two blue light-sensing F-box proteins, FKF1 and ZTL, which are involved in the control of flowering and circadian rhythm, respectively, fail to promote degradation of their respective substrates, CDF1 and TOC1. The two transcriptional repressors then repress CO, an activator of flowering, and circadian genes, respectively. COP1 also interacts physically with CO protein and targets its degradation (not shown). The involvement of SPAs in this process has not been investigated. (b) In the afternoon, transcription of the circadian-regulated GI, ELF3, FKF1 and ZTL starts to peak. Because COP1 is inhibited by the activated cryptochromes, GI accumulates. Blue light also induces the formation of FKF1-GI and ZTL-GI complexes, and they mediate the degradation of CDF1 and TOC1, respectively, leading to transcription of CO and circadian genes. The FKF1-GI-CDF1 complex also associates with the promoter of CO (not shown). cry1/2, cryptochrome 1 or 2; CDF1, CYCLING DOF FACTOR 1; CO, CONSTANS; COP1, CONSTITUTIVE PHOTOMORPHOGENIC 1; ELF3, EARLY FLOWERING 3; FKF1, FLAVIN-BINDING, KELCH REPEAT, F-BOX 1; GI, GIGANTEA; SPA1, SUPPRESSOR OF PHYA-105 1; TOC1, TIMING OF CAB EXPRESSION 1; Ub, ubiquitin; ZTL, ZEITLUPE.

may be a more robust E3 ligase in general that COP1 has evolved to function within.

These recent studies on the COP1 E3 machinery in plants also demonstrated key differences between the composition of the E3 ligase in plants and animals. Like its counterpart, human COP1 can act as a substrate receptor for the CUL4-based ligase in the degradation of substrates, such as the proto-oncogenic transcription factor c-Jun [80]. However, in this CUL4A-DDB1<sup>hDET1-hCOP1</sup> ligase, the connection of hCOP1 to CUL4A-DDB1 is dependent on human DET1, which bridges hCOP1 to DDB1. In plants, DET1 is not required for the interaction between COP1 and DDB1; instead, COP1 and DET1 form distinct CUL4-DDB1 ligases [76]. It is interesting to note that hCOP1, as well as its homologs in mouse and chicken, has only one of the two conserved WDXR motifs found in plants. This might explain why hCOP1 cannot directly associate with DDB1.

DET1: a component of an unconventional CUL4-DDB1 ligase and a transcriptional regulator

Although the biochemical function of COP1 and CSN started to emerge in the past decade, understanding the molecular roles of DET1 and COP10, the two remaining COP/DET/FUS proteins, has been more challenging. DET1 has no recognizable domain besides two nuclear localization signals [81]. COP10 is a novel type of Ub-conjugating enzyme (E2) variant protein (UEV), which are E2-like proteins that lack E2 activity [82,83]. The discovery that DET1 and COP10 form a complex with DDB1 (the CDD complex), together with the recent establishment of DDB1 as a core adaptor of the CUL4-based E3 ligase, has now linked COP10 and DET1 to the CUL4 E3 machinery [7,8,77,80].

DET1 was first found to complex with DDB1 through affinity purification in tobacco (*Nicotiana tabacum*) cell lines [8]. Subsequently, the biochemical purification of COP10 in cauliflower (*Brassica oleracea*) and gel-filtration studies in *Arabidopsis* demonstrated that COP10 is another component of the CDD complex [7,76]. The CDD complex is also conserved in humans, where it exists as the hDET1-DDB1-DDA1 (DDD)-E2 complex [84]. The 'E2' denotes the canonical E2s of the human UBE2E family in the complex, of which COP10 is the closest homolog in plants. Although UBE2Es are functional E2s, only the uncharged form of UBE2Es (not conjugated to Ub) was found binding to the complex. This suggests that some structural or biochemical feature of UBE2Es and COP10 other than E2 activity is responsible for their recruitment to these complexes.

Through DDB1, COP10 and DET1 can connect to CUL4 and form a multimeric CUL4-CDD ligase (Figure 4) [79,85]. However, as mentioned above, the typical substrate receptors for CUL4-DDB1 ligases are DWD proteins containing WDXR motifs, through which they interact with

Review

Trends in Plant Science October 2012, Vol. 17, No. 10

(a) Important for E3 activity of  
CUL4-DDB1s?

Ub  
Ub Ub  
HY5  

COP1  
SPA1  
DDB1  

E2  
RBX1  

CUL4  

Enhance  
E3 activity?  

CUL4-DDB1<sup>COP1-SPA1</sup>  
E3 ligase  

Ub  
Ub Ub  
DDB2  

E2  
RBX1  

CUL4  

CUL4-DDB1<sup>DDB2</sup>  
E3 ligase  

(b) Transcriptional repression?  

?  
DDB1  

Transcriptional  
repression  

?  
COP10  
DET1  

?  
CUL4  

CCA1/LHY  
TOC1  

?  
RBX1  

Histone ubiquitination?  

Enhance activity of chromatin-  
regulating CUL4-DDB1(s)?  

Figure 4. Model of two possible roles of the CUL4-CDD E3 ligase. (a) CUL4-CDD E3 ligase or DET1 has been implicated to be important for the activity of two CUL4-DDB1 ligases: CUL4-DDB1<sup>COP1-SPA1</sup> and CUL4-DDB1<sup>DDB2</sup>. CUL4-CDD may act through enhancing the E3 activities of other CUL4-DDB1s (see text for details). (b) Because DET1 functions as a transcriptional corepressor, CUL4-CDD may also play a role in transcriptional repression. DET1 was found to interact physically with two closely related transcription factors, CCA1 and LHY, bind to their targets, such as TOC1, and suppress their transcription. Possible mechanisms for CUL4-CDD-mediated repression include histone ubiquitination and the enhancement of other CUL4-DDB1 ligases that interact with chromatin. CCA1, CIRCADIAN CLOCK ASSOCIATED 1; CDD, the COP10-DET1-DDB1 complex; COP1, CONSTITUTIVE PHOTOMORPHOGENIC 1; COP10, CONSTITUTIVE PHOTOMORPHOGENIC 10; CUL4, CULLIN 4; DDB1, DAMAGED DNA BINDING PROTEIN 1; DDB2, DAMAGED DNA BINDING PROTEIN 2; DET1, DE-ETIOLATED 1; HY5, ELONGATED HYPOCOTYL 5; LHY, LATE ELONGATED HYPOCOTYL 1; RBX1, RING-BOX 1; SPA1, SUPPRESSOR OF PHYA-105 1; TOC1, TIMING OF CAB EXPRESSION 1; Ub, ubiquitin.

DDB1. COP10 and DET1 are not DWDs and lack the WDXR motif; therefore it remains unclear whether the CDD can function as a substrate receptor. Another possibility is that the CDD complex may act as an adaptor for other substrate receptor proteins, similar to the role previously discussed for human DET1 [80]. A recent structural study has shown that a novel motif, the H-box motif, found in some viral hijacker proteins and DWDs, can mediate or aid in their interaction with DDB1 [86]. Interestingly, DET1 carries a H-box-like motif and may bind to DDB1 through this mechanism [87]. Thus, DET1 may have evolved to 'hijack' the CUL4-DDB1 machinery to target interacting proteins or modulate the activity of other CUL4-DDB1 ligases.

Some evidence has suggested a role of the CDD complex in the regulation of CUL4-based ligases activity. This stemmed from the findings that COP10 can enhance the E2 activity of a broad range of E2s and promote poly-Ub chain formation by UbcH1 and UbcH13/Uev1, two Ub-chain forming E2s, in vitro [7,88]. Importantly, purified CDD complex, likely through its COP10 subunit, enhanced the E3 activity of the CUL4-RBX1 core, as judged by increased auto-ubiquitination of RBX1 [79]. Thus, it has been proposed that the CDD complex plays a role in activating CUL4-DDB1 ligases, which may help to explain why it is required for the CUL4-DDB1<sup>COP1-SPA</sup>-mediated degradation of HY5 and other substrates (Figure 4a). A recent study

of UV-C induced DNA damage responses in Arabidopsis is also consistent with this proposal [89]. In this study, DET1 was shown to be important for the autodegradation of a DWD substrate receptor DDB2 by CUL4 during DNA repair (Figure 4a). It was further suggested that DET1 transiently associates with the CUL4-DDB1<sup>DDB2</sup> ligase and promotes DDB2 degradation. Nevertheless, the recombinant human DDD complex, without UBE2E, was shown to inhibit the activity of CUL4A-ROC1 in vitro [84], which may be a direct result of the absence of UBE2E. Clearly, additional experiments, particularly in vitro ubiquitination assays with all the requisite protein components, are needed to address whether the CDD complex can regulate other CUL4-DDB1 ligases.

Apart from our understanding of the CDD complex, DET1 has been implicated in chromatin regulation and has recently been shown to function as a transcriptional corepressor [90]. The first report on the involvement of DET1 in direct gene regulation came from a study in fruit flies [4]. The *Drosophila* DET1 homolog, ABO, localizes to the histone gene cluster on chromatin, specifically at the promoter regions of the histone genes. Because *abo* mutants have an elevated level of histone transcripts, *Drosophila* DET1 was proposed to act as a negative regulator of histone genes. In addition, both tomato (*Solanum lycopersicum*) and Arabidopsis DET1s were shown to interact with the non-acetylated tails of histone H2B in the

context of the nucleosome, further suggesting a role of DET1 in chromatin modeling [91]. However, because DET1 has no DNA-binding domain and no DNA-binding activity of DET1 was detected, it was not known how DET1 regulates specific genes [81]. Our recent study has addressed this gap by showing that DET1 can interact physically with two closely related MYB transcription factors, CCA1 and LHY, and is recruited to their target genes (Figure 4b) [90]. CCA1 and LHY are core ‘morning’ components of the plant circadian clock and function during the day to repress the ‘evening’ genes, such as TOC1 [92]. We found that DET1 associates with the promoter of TOC1 and other evening genes in a CCA1/LHY-dependent manner and mediates their repression. Transcriptional reporter assays in yeast and *in planta* also demonstrated that DET1 can repress transcription when tethered to promoters. These results not only reveal the role of DET1 in the circadian clock, but also define a novel function of DET1 as a transcriptional corepressor. Given the pleiotropic phenotypes beyond circadian defects in the *det1* mutants, DET1 may be recruited more broadly by other transcription factors in regulating diverse cellular processes. It has not been determined whether COP10 and CUL4-DDB1 participate in the transcriptional repression activity of DET1, but considering that DET1 generally exists *in vivo* with the CDD complex, it is likely that they play a role [7,8]. Connecting the CUL4-DDB1 ligase to the transcriptional repression activity of DET1 may reveal the mechanism behind this process (Figure 4b).

### Concluding remarks and outlook

The tremendous progress on the COP/DET/FUS proteins achieved in the past 20 years has shaped our understanding of how light controls gene expression and developmental programs. The pursuit of their molecular functions has also yielded general principles regarding these conserved proteins that regulate diverse processes. Building on these insights, recent studies have expanded and strengthened the role of COP1 in light signaling: the number of known COP1 substrates has increased significantly; the biological processes regulated by COP1 has expanded; and COP1 activity can be directly modulated by two types of photoreceptor. Studies have also identified the functional unit of COP1 and DET1 as two independent multimeric CUL4-DDB1 ligases—CUL4-DDB1<sup>COP1-SPA</sup> and CUL4-CDD. DET1 was also found to be a transcriptional corepressor, recruited by specific transcription factors to their target genes.

Many interesting questions on the structure, function and regulation of CUL4-DDB1<sup>COP1-SPA</sup> and CUL4-CDD remain to be addressed. First, why does COP1 require SPA proteins to function *in vivo* and how is the complex able to bind DDB1 as a multimer? Also, how do COP10 and DET1, two non-DWDs, mediate their interaction with DDB1? Structural and *in vitro* studies on these complexes will be valuable for addressing these questions. Second, as discussed above, the function of CUL4-CDD remains obscure. Further experiments will be needed to clarify its relationship with CUL4-DDB1<sup>COP1-SPA</sup> and its potential role in DET1-mediated gene repression (Figure 4). Finally, it remains unknown how phytochromes inhibit COP1 and

what mediates the nuclear export of COP1 (Figure 2b). Whether the CDD complex is regulated by light or other signals also remains to be explored. With all these challenging questions, the future of COP/DET/FUS research will require carefully designed experiments that integrate biochemical, structural and genetic approaches to uncover the remaining mysteries.

### Acknowledgments

We thank Graham Dow for critical reading of the manuscript. Relevant research in our laboratory is supported by a National Institutes of Health (NIH) grant (GM-47850) and a National Science Foundation (NSF) 2010 grant (MCB-0929100) to X.W.D. O.S.L. was supported by the Croucher Foundation and the funding sources listed above.

### References

1. Schwechheimer, C. and Deng, X.W. (2000) The COP/DET/FUS proteins-regulators of eukaryotic growth and development. *Semin. Cell Dev. Biol.* 11, 495–503
2. Serino, G. and Deng, X.W. (2003) The COP9 signalosome: regulating plant development through the control of proteolysis. *Annu. Rev. Plant Biol.* 54, 165–182
3. Wei, N. *et al.* (2008) The COP9 signalosome: more than a protease. *Trends Biochem. Sci.* 33, 592–600
4. Berloco, M. *et al.* (2001) The maternal effect gene, abnormal oocyte (abo), of *Drosophila melanogaster* encodes a specific negative regulator of histones. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.* 98, 12126–12131
5. Yi, C. and Deng, X.W. (2005) COP1—from plant photomorphogenesis to mammalian tumorigenesis. *Trends Cell Biol.* 15, 618–625
6. Migliorini, D. *et al.* (2011) Cop1 constitutively regulates c-Jun protein stability and functions as a tumor suppressor in mice. *J. Clin. Invest.* 121, 1329–1343
7. Yanagawa, Y. *et al.* (2004) Arabidopsis COP10 forms a complex with DDB1 and DET1 *in vivo* and enhances the activity of ubiquitin conjugating enzymes. *Genes Dev.* 18, 2172–2181
8. Schroeder, D.F. *et al.* (2002) De-etiolated 1 and damaged DNA binding protein 1 interact to regulate Arabidopsis photomorphogenesis. *Curr. Biol.* 12, 1462–1472
9. Deng, X.W. *et al.* (1992) COP1, an Arabidopsis regulatory gene, encodes a protein with both a zinc-binding motif and a G beta homologous domain. *Cell* 71, 791–801
10. Wei, N. and Deng, X.W. (2003) The COP9 signalosome. *Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol.* 19, 261–286
11. Chamovitz, D.A. (2009) Revisiting the COP9 signalosome as a transcriptional regulator. *EMBO Rep.* 10, 352–358
12. Liu, L-J. *et al.* (2008) COP1-mediated ubiquitination of CONSTANS is implicated in cryptochrome regulation of flowering in Arabidopsis. *Plant Cell* 20, 292–306
13. Jang, S. *et al.* (2008) Arabidopsis COP1 shapes the temporal pattern of CO accumulation conferring a photoperiodic flowering response. *EMBO J.* 27, 1277–1288
14. Yu, J.W. *et al.* (2008) COP1 and ELF3 control circadian function and photoperiodic flowering by regulating GI stability. *Mol. Cell* 32, 617–630
15. Favery, J.J. *et al.* (2009) Interaction of COP1 and UVR8 regulates UV-B-induced photomorphogenesis and stress acclimation in Arabidopsis. *EMBO J.* 28, 591–601
16. Oravecz, A. *et al.* (2006) CONSTITUTIVELY PHOTOMORPHOGENIC1 is required for the UV-B response in Arabidopsis. *Plant Cell* 18, 1975–1990
17. Mao, J. *et al.* (2005) A role for Arabidopsis cryptochromes and COP1 in the regulation of stomatal opening. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.* 102, 12270–12275
18. Kang, C.Y. *et al.* (2009) Cryptochromes, phytochromes, and COP1 regulate light-controlled stomatal development in Arabidopsis. *Plant Cell* 21, 2624–2641
19. Crocco, C.D. *et al.* (2010) AtBBX21 and COP1 genetically interact in the regulation of shade avoidance. *Plant J.* 64, 551–562
20. Jeong, R.D. *et al.* (2010) Cryptochrome 2 and phototropin 2 regulate resistance protein-mediated viral defense by negatively regulating an E3 ubiquitin ligase. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.* 107, 13538–13543

Review

Trends in Plant Science October 2012, Vol. 17, No. 10

21 Luo, X.M. *et al.* (2010) Integration of light- and brassinosteroid- signaling pathways by a GATA transcription factor in Arabidopsis. Dev. Cell 19, 872–883

22 Catala, R. *et al.* (2011) Integration of low temperature and light signaling during cold acclimation response in Arabidopsis. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 108, 16475–16480

23 Dyachok, J. *et al.* (2011) SCAR mediates light-induced root elongation in Arabidopsis through photoreceptors and proteasomes. Plant Cell 23, 3610–3626

24 Tanaka, N. *et al.* (2011) The COP1 ortholog PPS regulates the juvenile-adult and vegetative-reproductive phase changes in rice. Plant Cell 23, 2143–2154

25 Jiao, Y. *et al.* (2007) Light-regulated transcriptional networks in higher plants. Nat. Rev. Genet. 8, 217–230

26 Saijo, Y. *et al.* (2003) The COP1-SPA1 interaction defines a critical step in phytochrome A-mediated regulation of HY5 activity. Genes Dev. 17, 2642–2647

27 Osterlund, M.T. *et al.* (2000) Targeted destabilization of HY5 during light-regulated development of Arabidopsis. Nature 405, 462–466

28 Holm, M. *et al.* (2002) Two interacting bZIP proteins are direct targets of COP1-mediated control of light-dependent gene expression in Arabidopsis. Genes Dev. 16, 1247–1259

29 Seo, H.S. *et al.* (2003) LAF1 ubiquitination by COP1 controls photomorphogenesis and is stimulated by SPA1. Nature 423, 995–999

30 Yang, J. *et al.* (2005) Light regulates COP1-mediated degradation of HFR1, a transcription factor essential for light signaling in Arabidopsis. Plant Cell 17, 804–821

31 Jang, I.C. *et al.* (2005) HFR1 is targeted by COP1E3 ligase for post- translational proteolysis during phytochrome A signaling. Genes Dev. 19, 593–602

32 Duek, P.D. *et al.* (2004) The degradation of HFR1, a putative bHLH class transcription factor involved in light signaling, is regulated by phosphorylation and requires COP1. Curr. Biol. 14, 2296–2301

33 Datta, S. *et al.* (2008) LZF1/SALT TOLERANCE HOMOLOG 3, an Arabidopsis B-box protein involved in light-dependent development and gene expression, undergoes COP1-mediated ubiquitination. Plant Cell 20, 2324–2338

34 Datta, S. *et al.* (2006) Arabidopsis CONSTANS-LIKE 3 is a positive regulator of red-light signaling and root growth. Plant Cell 18, 70–84

35 Chang, C.S. *et al.* (2008) LZF1, a HY5-regulated transcriptional factor, functions in Arabidopsis de-etiolation. Plant J. 54, 205–219

36 Rizzini, L. *et al.* (2011) Perception of UV-B by the Arabidopsis UVR8 protein. Science 332, 103–106

37 von Arnim, A.G. and Deng, X.W. (1994) Light inactivation of Arabidopsis photomorphogenic repressor COP1 involves a cell- specific regulation of its nucleocytoplasmic partitioning. Cell 79, 1035–1045

38 von Arnim, A.G. *et al.* (1997) Genetic and developmental control of nuclear accumulation of COP1, a repressor of photomorphogenesis in Arabidopsis. Plant Physiol. 114, 779–788

39 Tepperman, J.M. *et al.* (2001) Multiple transcription-factor genes are early targets of phytochrome A signaling. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 98, 9437–9442

40 Tepperman, J.M. *et al.* (2004) Expression profiling of phyB mutant demonstrates substantial contribution of other phytochromes to red- light-regulated gene expression during seedling de-etiolation. Plant J. 38, 725–739

41 Jiao, Y. *et al.* (2003) A genome-wide analysis of blue-light regulation of Arabidopsis transcription factor gene expression during seedling development. Plant Physiol. 133, 1480–1493

42 Lee, J. *et al.* (2007) Analysis of transcription factor HY5 genomic binding sites revealed its hierarchical role in light regulation of development. Plant Cell 19, 731–749

43 Li, J. *et al.* (2010) Arabidopsis transcription factor ELONGATED HYPOCOTYL 5 plays a role in the feedback regulation of phytochrome A signaling. Plant Cell 22, 3634–3649

44 Wang, H. *et al.* (2001) Direct interaction of Arabidopsis cryptochromes with COP1 in light control development. Science 294, 154

45 Yang, H.Q. *et al.* (2001) The signaling mechanism of Arabidopsis CRY1 involves direct interaction with COP1. Plant Cell 13, 2573–2587

46 Zuo, Z. *et al.* (2011) Blue light-dependent interaction of CRY2 with SPA1 regulates COP1 activity and floral initiation in Arabidopsis. Curr. Biol. 21, 841–847

47 Liu, B. *et al.* (2011) Arabidopsis cryptochrome 1 interacts with SPA1 to suppress COP1 activity in response to blue light. Genes Dev. 25, 1029–1034

48 Lian, H.L. *et al.* (2011) Blue-light-dependent interaction of cryptochrome 1 with SPA1 defines a dynamic signaling mechanism. Genes Dev. 25, 1023–1028

49 Liu, H. *et al.* (2011) The action mechanisms of plant cryptochromes. Trends Plant Sci. 16, 684–691

50 Fankhauser, C. and Ulm, R. (2011) Light-regulated interactions with SPA proteins underlie cryptochrome-mediated gene expression. Genes Dev. 25, 1004–1009

51 Oravecz, A. *et al.* (2006) CONSTITUTIVELY PHOTOMORPHOGENIC 1 is required for the UV-B response in Arabidopsis. Plant Cell 18, 1975–1990

52 Heijde, M. and Ulm, R. (2012) UV-B photoreceptor-mediated signalling in plants. Trends Plant Sci. 17, 230–237

53 Seo, H.S. *et al.* (2004) Photoreceptor ubiquitination by COP1E3 ligase desensitizes phytochrome A signaling. Genes Dev. 18, 617–622

54 Shalitin, D. *et al.* (2002) Regulation of Arabidopsis cryptochrome 2 by blue-light-dependent phosphorylation. Nature 417, 763–767

55 Jang, I.C. *et al.* (2010) Arabidopsis PHYTOCHROME INTERACTING FACTOR proteins promote phytochrome B polyubiquitination by COP1E3 ligase in the nucleus. Plant Cell 22, 2370–2383

56 McNellis, T.W. *et al.* (1994) Genetic and molecular analysis of an allelic series of cop1 mutants suggests functional roles for the multiple protein domains. Plant Cell 6, 487–500

57 Imaizumi, T. and Kay, S.A. (2006) Photoperiodic control of flowering: not only by coincidence. Trends Plant Sci. 11, 550–558

58 Turck, F. *et al.* (2008) Regulation and identity of florigen: FLOWERING LOCUS T moves center stage. Annu. Rev. Plant Biol. 59, 573–594

59 Suarez-Lopez, P. *et al.* (2001) CONSTANS mediates between the circadian clock and the control of flowering in Arabidopsis. Nature 410, 1116–1120

60 Valverde, F. *et al.* (2004) Photoreceptor regulation of CONSTANS protein in photoperiodic flowering. Science 303, 1003–1006

61 Laubinger, S. *et al.* (2006) Arabidopsis SPA proteins regulate photoperiodic flowering and interact with the floral inducer CONSTANS to regulate its stability. Development 133, 3213–3222

62 Sawa, M. *et al.* (2007) FKF1 and GIGANTEA complex formation is required for day-length measurement in Arabidopsis. Science 318, 261

63 Kim, W-Y. *et al.* (2007) ZEITLUPE is a circadian photoreceptor stabilized by GIGANTEA in blue light. Nature 449, 356–360

64 Imaizumi, T. *et al.* (2005) FKF1 F-box protein mediates cyclic degradation of a repressor of CONSTANS in Arabidopsis. Science 309, 293

65 Mas, P. *et al.* (2003) Targeted degradation of TOC1 by ZTL modulates circadian function in Arabidopsis thaliana. Nature 426, 567–570

66 Gendron, J.M. *et al.* (2012) Arabidopsis circadian clock protein, TOC1, is a DNA-binding transcription factor. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 109, 3167–3172

67 Huang, W. *et al.* (2012) Mapping the core of the Arabidopsis circadian clock defines the network structure of the oscillator. Science 336, 75–79

68 Hoecker, U. and Quail, P.H. (2001) The phytochrome A-specific Signaling intermediate SPA1 interacts directly with COP1, a constitutive repressor of light signaling in Arabidopsis. J. Biol. Chem. 276, 38173–38178

69 Holm, M. *et al.* (2001) Identification of a structural motif that confers specific interaction with the WD40 repeat domain of Arabidopsis COP1. EMBO J. 20, 118–127

70 Zhu, D. *et al.* (2008) Biochemical characterization of Arabidopsis complexes containing constitutively photomorphogenic 1 and suppressor of PHYA proteins in light control of plant development. Plant Cell 20, 2307–2323

71 Saijo, Y. *et al.* (2008) Arabidopsis COP1/SPA1 complex and FYH1/FHY3 associate with distinct phosphorylated forms of phytochrome A in balancing light signaling. Mol. Cell 31, 607–613

72 Laubinger, S. *et al.* (2004) The SPA quartet: a family of WD-repeat proteins with a central role in suppression of photomorphogenesis in Arabidopsis. Plant Cell 16, 2293–2306

73 Hoecker, U. *et al.* (1999) SPA1, a WD-repeat protein specific to phytochrome A signal transduction. Science 284, 496–499

74 Fittinghoff, K. *et al.* (2006) Functional and expression analysis of Arabidopsis SPA genes during seedling photomorphogenesis and adult growth. *Plant J.* 47, 577–590

75 Yang, J. *et al.* (2005) Repression of light signaling by Arabidopsis SPA1 involves post-translational regulation of HFR1 protein accumulation. *Plant J.* 43, 131–141

76 Chen, H. *et al.* (2010) Arabidopsis CULLIN 4-damaged DNA binding protein 1 interacts with CONSTITUTIVELY PHOTOMORPHOGENIC 1-SUPPRESSOR OF PHYA complexes to regulate photomorphogenesis and flowering time. *Plant Cell* 22, 108–123

77 Jackson, S. and Xiong, Y. (2009) CRL4s: the CUL4-RING E3 ubiquitin ligases. *Trends Biochem. Sci.* 34, 562–570

78 Lee, J-H. *et al.* (2008) Characterization of Arabidopsis and rice DWD proteins and their roles as substrate receptors for CUL4-RING E3 ubiquitin ligases. *Plant Cell* 20, 152–167

79 Chen, H. *et al.* (2006) Arabidopsis CULLIN 4 forms an E3 ubiquitin ligase with RBX1 and the CDD complex in mediating light control of development. *Plant Cell* 18, 1991–2004

80 Wertz, I.E. *et al.* (2004) Human De-etiolated-1 regulates c-Jun by assembling a CUL4A ubiquitin ligase. *Science* 303, 1371–1374

81 Pepper, A. *et al.* (1994) DET1, a negative regulator of light-mediated development and gene expression in Arabidopsis, encodes a novel nuclear-localized protein. *Cell* 78, 109–116

82 Suzuki, G. *et al.* (2002) Arabidopsis COP10 is a ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme variant that acts together with COP1 and the COP9 signalosome in repressing photomorphogenesis. *Genes Dev.* 16, 554–559

83 Sancho, E. *et al.* (1998) Role of UEV-1, an inactive variant of the E2 ubiquitin-conjugating enzymes, in vitro differentiation and cell cycle behavior of HT-29-M6 intestinal mucosecretory cells. *Mol. Biol.* 18, 576–589

84 Pick, E. *et al.* (2007) Mammalian DET1 regulates Cul4A activity and forms stable complexes with E2 ubiquitin conjugating enzymes. *Mol. Biol.* 27, 4708–4719

85 Bernhardt, A. *et al.* (2006) CUL4 associates with DDB1 and DET1 and its downregulation affects diverse aspects of development in Arabidopsis thaliana. *Plant J.* 47, 591–603

86 Li, T. *et al.* (2010) A promiscuous alpha-helical motif anchors viral hijackers and substrate receptors to the CUL4-DDB1 ubiquitin ligase machinery. *Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol.* 17, 105–111

87 Biedermann, S. and Hellmann, H. (2011) WD40 and CUL4-based E3 ligases: lubricating all aspects of life. *Trends Plant Sci.* 16, 38–46

88 Lau, O.S. and Deng, X.W. (2009) Effect of Arabidopsis COP10 ubiquitin E2 enhancement activity across E2 families and functional conservation among its canonical homologues. *Biochem. J.* 418, 683–690

89 Castells, E. *et al.* (2011) The conserved factor DE-ETIOLATED 1 cooperates with CUL4-DDB1DDB2 to maintain genome integrity upon UV stress. *EMBO J.* 30, 1162–1172

90 Lau, O.S. *et al.* (2011) Interaction of Arabidopsis DET1 with CCA1 and LHY in mediating transcriptional repression in the plant circadian clock. *Mol. Cell* 43, 703–712

91 Benvenuto, G. *et al.* (2002) The photomorphogenesis regulator DET1 binds the amino-terminal tail of histone H2B in a nucleosome context. *Curr. Biol.* 12, 1529–1534

92 Pruneda-Paz, J.L. and Kay, S.A. (2010) An expanding universe of circadian networks in higher plants. *Trends Plant Sci.* 15, 259–265

93 Deng, X.W. *et al.* (1991) cop1: a regulatory locus involved in light-controlled development and gene expression in Arabidopsis. *Genes Dev.* 5, 1172–1182

94 Wei, N. *et al.* (1994) Arabidopsis COP8, COP10, and COP11 genes are involved in repression of photomorphogenic development in darkness. *Plant Cell* 6, 629–643

95 Chory, J. *et al.* (1989) Arabidopsis thaliana mutant that develops as a light-grown plant in the absence of light. *Cell* 58, 991–999

96 Gusmaroli, G. *et al.* (2007) Role of the MPN subunits in COP9 signalosome assembly and activity, and their regulatory interaction with Arabidopsis Cullin 3-based E3 ligases. *Plant Cell* 19, 564–581

97 Gray, W.M. *et al.* (2002) Role of the Arabidopsis RING-H2 protein RBX1 in RUB modification and SCF function. *Plant Cell* 14, 2137–2144

98 Yan, H. *et al.* (2011) Nuclear localization and interaction with COP1 are required for STO/BBX24 function during photomorphogenesis. *Plant Physiol.* 156, 1772–1782

99 Indorf, M. *et al.* (2007) Salt tolerance (STO), a stress-related protein, has a major role in light signalling. *Plant J.* 51, 563–574

100 Chang, C.S. *et al.* (2011) COP1-mediated degradation of BBX22/LZF1 optimizes seedling development in Arabidopsis. *Plant Physiol.* 156, 228–239

101 Liu, L.J. *et al.* (2008) COP1-mediated ubiquitination of CONSTANS is implicated in cryptochrome regulation of flowering in Arabidopsis. *Plant Cell* 20, 292–306

102 Jang, S. *et al.* (2008) Arabidopsis COP1 shapes the temporal pattern of CO accumulation conferring a photoperiodic flowering response. *EMBO J.* 27, 1277–1288
