
The role of AMP-activated protein kinase in the coordination of skeletal muscle turnover and energy homeostasis

Anthony M. J. Sanchez, Robin B. Candau, Alfredo Csibi, Allan F. Pagano, Audrey Raibon and Henri Bernardi

Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 303:C475-C485, 2012. First published 13 June 2012; doi: 10.1152/ajpcell.00125.2012

---

**You might find this additional info useful...**

This article cites 129 articles, 64 of which you can access for free at:
<http://ajpcell.physiology.org/content/303/5/C475.full#ref-list-1>

Updated information and services including high resolution figures, can be found at:
<http://ajpcell.physiology.org/content/303/5/C475.full>

Additional material and information about *American Journal of Physiology - Cell Physiology* can be found at:
<http://www.the-aps.org/publications/ajpcell>

---

This information is current as of October 14, 2012.

---

*American Journal of Physiology - Cell Physiology* is dedicated to innovative approaches to the study of cell and molecular physiology. It is published 24 times a year (twice monthly) by the American Physiological Society, 9650 Rockville Pike, Bethesda MD 20814-3991. Copyright © 2012 the American Physiological Society. ESSN: 1522-1563. Visit our website at <http://www.the-aps.org/>.

Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 303: C475–C485, 2012.
First published June 13, 2012; doi:10.1152/ajpcell.00125.2012.

The role of AMP-activated protein kinase in the coordination of skeletal muscle turnover and energy homeostasis

Anthony M. J. Sanchez,$^{1,2}$ Robin B. Candau,$^{1,2}$ Alfredo Csibi,$^{3}$ Allan F. Pagano,$^{1,2}$ Audrey Raibon,$^{1}$ and Henri Bernardi$^{1}$

$^{1}$Institut National de Recherche Agronomique (INRA), UMR866 Dynamique Musculaire et Métabolisme, Montpellier, France; $^{2}$Faculté des Sciences du Sport, Université Montpellier 1, Montpellier, France; and $^{3}$Department of Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts

Submitted 11 April 2012; accepted in final form 12 June 2012

Sanchez AM, Candau RB, Csibi A, Pagano AF, Raibon A, Bernardi H. The role of AMP-activated protein kinase in the coordination of skeletal muscle turnover and energy homeostasis. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 303: C475–C485, 2012. First published June 13, 2012; doi:10.1152/ajpcell.00125.2012.—The AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) is a serine/threonine protein kinase that acts as a sensor of cellular energy status switch regulating several systems including glucose and lipid metabolism. Recently, AMPK has been implicated in the control of skeletal muscle mass by decreasing mTORC1 activity and increasing protein degradation through regulation of ubiquitin-proteasome and autophagy pathways. In this review, we give an overview of the central role of AMPK in the control of skeletal muscle plasticity. We detail particularly its implication in the control of the hypertrophic and atrophic signaling pathways. In the light of these cumulative and attractive results, AMPK appears as a key player in regulating muscle homeostasis and the modulation of its activity may constitute a therapeutic potential in treating muscle wasting syndromes in humans.

AMPK; autophagy; Ulk1; metabolism; ubiquitin-proteasome; FoxO

---

### Structure and Regulation of AMPK

The AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) is a serine-threonine kinase highly conserved through evolution. AMPK is a heterotrimeric complex composed of a catalytic subunit (AMPK-α) and two regulatory subunits (AMPK-β and AMPK-γ) (Fig. 1). In humans, AMPK subunits are encoded by seven genes (α1, α2; β1, β2; γ1, γ2, γ3) that can form at least 12 αβγ heterotrimers, thus increasing the diversification of its functions (17, 109, 117). The most studied of these subunits is the catalytic subunit, which contains the threonine residue (Thr172) located in the activation loop of the kinase domain. Phosphorylation of Thr172 by upstream kinases leads to AMPK activation (47, 49). AMPK is considered as a key enzyme in conditions of cellular energy deficit and is able to inhibit metabolic pathways that consume energy and reciprocally to increase mechanisms that produce energy.

AMPK is activated by a large variety of cellular stresses that increase cellular AMP and decrease ATP levels such as electrical-stimulated muscle contraction (24, 120) and vigorous exercises (15, 20, 92, 125) and by hypoxia (79), ischemia (71), oxidative stress (18), metabolic poisoning (124), or nutrient deprivation (103). In response to energy depletion, AMPK activation promotes metabolic changes to maintain both bioenergetic state and cell survival. Moreover, by modulating multiple metabolic pathways and by regulating several transport proteins, AMPK potentially couples transport activity to cellular stress and energy levels. Pharmacological molecules such as 5-aminoimidazole-4-carboxamide-1-β-4-ribofuranoside (AICAR), metformin, clozapine, or 2-deoxy-D-glucose (2DG) also lead to AMPK activation (21, 35, 48, 98, 102, 129, 130).

AMPK activity is modulated in an allosteric way by AMP that promotes the phosphorylation on Thr172 by the AMPK kinases (AMPKK), and by ATP that inhibits phosphorylation on this site (110). AMP and ATP competitively bind to AMPK γ subunits on four sites formed by cystathionine β synthase (CBS) domains (17). Moreover, binding of AMP to AMPK inhibits dephosphorylation of Thr172 by phosphatases, an effect that is antagonized by high concentrations of ATP (22). Interestingly, Xiao and colleagues (127) have recently determined the crystal structure of an active AMPK complex and have explored how the kinase region interacts with the regulatory nucleotide-binding site that mediates protection against dephosphorylation. They found that the binding of AMP or ADP to the regulatory domain protects AMPK dephosphorylation, although ADP does not lead to allosteric activation (127). Finally, it was shown that AMPK is inhibited by glycogen in an allosteric manner, leading to inhibition of Thr172 phosphorylation by upstream kinases (80). Thus, these data reveal that AMPK constitutes a sensor of the status of cellular glycogen reserves.

The phosphorylation of AMPK at Thr172 residue is regulated by three AMPKK identified to date. The serine threonine kinase LKB1, a tumor suppressor, and the Ca²⁺/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase β (CaMKKβ) were the primary characterized upstream kinases of AMPK (51, 60, 113, 131,

Address for reprint requests and other correspondence: A. M. J. Sanchez, INRA, UMR866 Dynamique Musculaire Et Métabolisme, 2 Place Viala, 34060 Montpellier, France (e-mail: anthony.sanchez@univ-montpl1.fr; anthony.mj.sanchez@gmail.com).

Review

C476 ROLE OF AMPK IN THE CONTROL OF SKELETAL MUSCLE MASS

AMPK kinase

P

Fig. 1. Structure of AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK). AMPK is composed of a catalytic subunit (AMPK-α) and two regulatory subunits (AMPK-β and AMPK-γ). AMPK-α contains a catalytic domain in the NH₂-terminal that can be phosphorylated by the AMPKK enzymes on the residue Thr 172, an autoinhibition domain and a domain interacting with the subunits β and γ. The regulatory β subunits have interacting domains with glycogen and subunits α and γ. The regulatory γ subunits present four cystathionine β-synthase (CBS) domains interacting with AMP, ADP, and ATP.

Catalytic subunits α1 and α2
N
Thr 172
C
Catalytic Auto-inhibition βγ interacting
domain domain domain

Regulatory subunits β1 and β2
N
C
Glycogen interacting αγ interacting
domain domain

Regulatory subunits γ1, γ2 and γ3
N
C
CBS1 CBS2 CBS3 CBS4
AMP/ADP/ATP interacting domains

132). More recently, the transforming growth factor β-activated kinase 1 (TAK-1) was also found to phosphorylate AMPK (52).

Analysis of AMPK substrates suggests a consensus recognition sequence in which the phosphorylated serine residue is close to a hydrophobic residue on the NH₂-terminal side (i.e., at -1) and at least one arginine residue at -2, -3, or -4. Substrates for cyclic AMPK which lack the hydrophobic residue at -1 are not substrates for AMPK (13).

Glossary

2DG 2-deoxy-D-glucose
ACC acetyl-CoA carboxylase
AICAR 5-aminoimidazole-4-carboxamide-1-β-4-ribofuranoside
AMPK adenosine monophosphate-activated protein kinase
AMPKK AMPK kinases
Atg autophagy-specific gene
atrogin-1/MAFBx muscle atrophy F-box
CaMKK Ca²⁺/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase
CBS cystathionine β-synthase
ChREBP carbohydrate response element-binding protein
CPT-1 carnitine palmitoyltransferase 1
CREB cAMP response element-binding
CRT creatine transporter
eEF2 eukaryotic elongation factor-2
eIF4E eukaryotic translation initiation factor 4E
4E-BP1 eukaryotic translation initiation factor 4E-binding protein 1
FAT/CD36 fatty acid translocase/cluster of differentiation 36
FIP200 focal adhesion kinase family interacting protein of 200 kDa
FoxO Forkhead box O
GLUT-4 glucose transporter-4
GS glycogen synthase
HK-2 hexokinase-2

HMGR-CoA hydroxymethyl-glutaryl-coenzyme A reductase
HSL hormone-sensitive lipase
LC3 microtubule-associated protein light chain 3
LCFA CoA long-chain fatty acyl-CoA
LKB1 liver kinase B1
mLST8 mammalian target of rapamycin-associated protein LST8 homolog
mTOR mammalian target of rapamycin
mtTFA mitochondrial transcription factor A
mTORC1 mTOR complex 1
MuRF1 muscle RING finger 1
NRFs nuclear respiratory factors
PDK1 phosphoinositide-dependent kinase 1
PFK-2 6-phosphofructo-2-kinase
PGC-1 peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-γ coactivator 1
PPAR peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
PRAS 40 proline-rich Akt substrate of 40 kDa
raptor regulatory-associated protein of mTOR
Rheb Ras homolog enriched in brain
rpS6 ribosomal protein S6
S6K1 ribosomal protein S6 kinase 1
SIRT1 sirtuin 1
SREBP1c sterol regulatory element-binding protein 1c
TAK-1 transforming growth factor β-activated kinase 1
TSC 1/2 tuberous sclerosis complex 1/2
Ulk1 unc-51-like kinase 1

Role of AMPK in Metabolic Regulations: AMPK Regulates Anaerobic Metabolism, Fatty Acid Oxidation, and Cholesterol Synthesis

AMPK is a regulator of anaerobic metabolism allowing the insulin-independent transport of glucose and its subsequent metabolism in skeletal muscle and in the heart (4, 50, 99) (Fig. 2). Activation of AMPK induces the expression and the translocation of the glucose transporter-4 (GLUT-4) to the plasma membrane, resulting in an increase in glucose uptake and blood glucose oxidation (53). AMPK regulates glycolysis through

AJP-Cell Physiol·doi:10.1152/ajpcell.00125.2012·www.ajpcell.org

Exercise/Fasting/AICAR/Metformin/2DG

CaMKKβ
LKB1
TAK-1
Thr-172
AMPK
CRT
FAT/CD36
Ser-372
SREBP1c
Ser-568
ChREBP
Ser-79/221
ACC1
Ser-218
ACC2
Ser-862
HMGR-CoA
Ser-554
HSL
PGC1
Thr-177
Ser-133
CREB
Ser-8
GS
Glycogen
Glucose
HK-2
Glucose-6-phosphate
Ser-466
PFK-2
Fructose-6-phosphate
Fructose-1,6-bisphosphate
GLUT4
Glycolysis
NRFs
PPARs

Decrease in fatty acid and cholesterol
Mitochondrial biogenesis
β-oxidation

Fig. 2. AMPK regulates metabolic pathways in skeletal muscle. AMPK is directly activated by the enzymes LKB1, CaMKKβ, and TAK-1 upon high AMP levels, and indirectly by exercise, fasting, AICAR, metformin, or 2-deoxy-D-glucose (2DG) treatments. AMPK positively regulates glycolysis by phosphorylating 6-phosphofructo-2-kinase (PFK-2), by increasing hexokinase-2 (HK-2) transcription through cAMP response element-binding (CREB) phosphorylation, and by increasing the expression and translocation of the glucose transporters (GLUT4). AMPK inhibits the activities of the creatine transporter (CTR), glycogen synthase (GS), acetyl-CoA carboxylase (ACC), sterol regulatory element-binding protein 1c (SREBP1c), and carbohydrate response element-binding protein (ChREBP), and activates hormone-sensitive lipase (HSL) and hydroxymethyl-glutaryl-coenzyme A reductase (HMGR-CoA). AMPK increases fatty acid uptake through the translocation of fatty acid translocase (FAT)/CD36 to the plasma membrane. Activation of AMPK also leads to an increase of the transcriptional activity of the peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors and the nuclear respiratory factors (NRFs) via phosphorylation of PGC-1α.

phosphorylation of 6-phosphofructo-2-kinase (PFK-2), a key enzyme responsible for fructose 2,6-bisphosphate synthesis, a rate-limiting step in glycolysis (79). A dominant-negative form of AMPK could prevent both the activation and the phosphorylation of PFK-2 by oligomycin (79), which confirms the major role of AMPK in the regulation of PFK-2 activity. Moreover, AMPK increases hexokinase-2 (HK-2) transcription, an enzyme responsible for glucose-6-phosphate synthesis, by phosphorylating cAMP response element-binding (CREB) at Ser133 (111, 116). Furthermore, AMPK phosphorylates and inactivates glycogen synthase (GS), inhibiting glycogenesis (1, 13). This action seems to preferentially occur through the regulation of AMPK α2 isoform (62). In addition to the regulation of glycolysis and glycogenolysis, Li and colleagues (75) have recently shown that AMPK inhibits apical membrane creatine transporter (CRT) expression in kidney proximal tubule cells. CRT inhibition by AMPK is important because unnecessary creatine reabsorption and cellular energy expenditure are decreased under conditions of metabolic stress.

AMPK also modulates fatty acid and cholesterol metabolism in specialized tissues, such as adipose tissue, liver, and muscle (Fig. 2). AMPK increases fatty acid uptake due to translocation of the fatty acid translocase (FAT)/CD36 transporter to the cellular membrane (77). AMPK inhibits fatty acid and cholesterol synthesis through direct phosphorylation of the metabolic enzymes acetyl-CoA carboxylase 1 (ACC1), the hydroxymethyl-glutaryl-coenzyme A reductase (HMGR-CoA), and the hormone-sensitive lipase (HSL) (12, 14, 37). Furthermore, AMPK inhibits the expression and the activity of the transcription factors SREBP1c (sterol regulatory element-binding protein 1c) (33, 129) and ChREBP (carbohydrate response element-binding protein) (33, 68). The latter action represses the transcription of lipogenic genes and fatty acid synthesis (33). Furthermore, via phosphorylation and inhibition of ACC2, AMPK induces a drop in the production of malonyl-CoA, an allosteric inhibitor of carnitine palmitoyltransferase 1 (CPT-1) (83, 122, 123). CPT-1 controls the transfer of cytosolic long chain fatty acyl CoA (LCFA CoA) into mitochondria (81) and represents the rate-limiting step of fatty acid oxidation. Thus, AMPK activation involves a reduction in the cytosolic concentration of malonyl-CoA and facilitates the penetration and the oxidation of fatty acids in mitochondria.

The role of PPAR-γ coactivator 1α (PGC-1α) in adaptive responses after AMPK activation is now quite detailed (Fig. 2). PGC-1 is a master protein involved in the regulation of oxidative metabolism of brown fat and muscle that upregulates

C478 ROLE OF AMPK IN THE CONTROL OF SKELETAL MUSCLE MASS

mitochondrial respiration and biogenesis through an increase in the expression of enzymes implicated in the electron transport system and uncoupling proteins, and through regulation of the nuclear respiratory factors (NRFs) (94, 126). PGC-1 binds to and activates NRF-1 on the promoter of the mitochondrial transcription factor A (mtTFA), a direct regulator of mitochondrial DNA replication and transcription (126). In skeletal muscle, Canto and colleagues (11) have recently shown that inhibition of AMPK activity compromises the histone deacetylase sirtuin 1 (SIRT1)-dependent responses to exercise or fasting by decreasing cellular NAD⁺ levels. This results in impaired PGC-1α deacetylation and blunted induction of mitochondrial gene expression (11, 60). The effects of AMPK on gene expression of GLUT-4, mitochondrial genes, and PGC-1α itself are almost entirely dependent on the function of PGC-1α protein (60). PGC-1α gene expression is increased with exercise, AICAR, and metformin treatments (54, 112, 113). AMPK directly phosphorylates PGC-1α at Ser 538 and Thr 177 and these phosphorylation events are required for induction of the PGC-1α promoter (60).

**Role of AMPK in the Control of Skeletal Muscle Mass**

The maintenance of muscle mass is controlled by a fine balance between catabolic and anabolic processes, which determine the level of muscle proteins and the diameter of muscle fibers. Skeletal muscle hypertrophy can be defined as an overall augmentation in muscle mass, as a result of an increase in the size of preexisting skeletal muscle fibers accompanied by enhanced protein synthesis without an apparent increase in the number of myofibers (39). Muscle hypertrophy is associated with a strong rate of protein synthesis more than with a change in protein degradation. This physiological process stimulates muscle growth in response to mechanical loading or nutritional stimuli (39). On the contrary, skeletal muscle atrophy can be defined as a decrease in muscle fiber diameter, protein content, force production, and fatigue resistance (34, 59). This process results from a plethora of causes including immobilization, denervation, aging, and neuromuscular diseases. Moreover, muscle atrophy can be secondary to some devastating pathologies or health problems, such as spinal cord injury (16), cancer cachexia, sepsis, diabetes, or AIDS, and exacerbated by microgravity, glucocorticoid treatment, and starvation (31, 73, 84).

When the cellular energy level is low, AMPK promotes ATP production by switching on catabolic pathways and conserves ATP levels by switching off ATP-consuming processes, including most biosynthetic pathways. In muscle, this action occurs when AMPK is activated because of energy deprivation, and it results in the arrest of protein synthesis and cell growth, with the stimulation of muscle proteolysis. Thus, AMPK, as the main energy sensor in muscle cells, modulates muscle turnover and skeletal muscle mass.

**AMPK and inhibition of protein synthesis.** Several data suggest that AMPK acts as a negative regulator of protein synthesis by reducing both the initiation and the elongation of ribosomal peptide synthesis. Thus, it was shown that AMPK activation leads to the Thr56 phosphorylation of the eukaryotic elongation factor-2 (eEF2) (55). Upstream of this phosphorylation, activation of AMPK inhibits the mammalian target of rapamycin complex 1 (mTORC1), a multiprotein complex composed of mTOR (also known as FRAP, RAFT1, or RAPT),

the regulatory associated protein of mTOR (raptor), the proline-rich Akt substrate of 40 kDa (PRAS40), and the mTOR-associated protein LST8 homolog (mLST8) (69, 70, 119). This protein complex controls skeletal muscle hypertrophy (6, 97) through modulation of protein synthesis by phosphorylation toward its downstream effectors, the ribosomal protein S6 kinase 1 (S6K1) (2) and the eukaryotic translation initiation factor 4E-binding protein 1 (4E-BP1) (38). Its inhibition by AMPK results in decreased protein synthesis in both in vivo and in vitro models (7, 93). Phosphorylation of 4E-BP1 at Thr 37/46 by mTOR promotes its dissociation from eIF4E bound to the mRNA 7-methylguanosine cap structure, allowing the assembly of the preinitiation complex (128). S6K1 activation needs initial phosphorylation by mTORC1 at Thr 389 (101) and additional inputs on Thr 229 for full activation by the phosphoinositide-dependent kinase 1 (PDK1) (95). S6K1-mediated regulation of translation is thought to occur in part through phosphorylation of the 40S ribosomal protein S6 (rpS6) at Ser 235/236 (30). Several studies highlighted that AMPK activation by resistance exercise (27) or high-frequency electrical stimulation (114) leads to the inhibition of S6K1 and 4E-BP1. In vitro, pretreatment with AICAR completely inhibited the insulin-induced activation of mTORC1 and its downstream effectors (25). Two models have been proposed for the AMPK-mediated inhibition of mTORC1 activity (Fig. 3). The first involves the phosphorylation of the tuberous sclerosis complex 2 (TSC2) on residues Thr 1227 and Ser 1345, thus enhancing its GTPase activity towards the Ras homolog enriched in brain (Rheb), the direct activator of mTOR (58). The second model implicates the direct phosphorylation of raptor at Ser 722/792, leading to the cytoplasmic retention of raptor by 14-3-3 binding (45).

Lantier and colleagues (72) reported that AMPK⁻/⁻ mice exhibited a shift of muscular fiber size distribution toward higher values correlated with increased phosphorylation of S6K1 Thr 389 and rpS6 Ser 235/236 associated with a stimulation of protein synthesis. In this study, the size of AMPK-deficient myotubes was 1.5-fold higher than for controls and soleus mass was significantly higher by 42% in muscle AMPK-deficient mice compared with control mice. Another recent study performed by the same group demonstrates that AMPK-deficient mice exhibit enhanced hypertrophy after mechanical overloading, a phenomenon associated with increased activity of the mTORC1 signaling (87). Moreover, the overloading-induced hypertrophy was associated with a significant increase in AMPK α1 expression and activity after 7 and 21 days in non-transgenic muscle, probably to limit muscle mass growth (82). In the absence of AMPK α1, unphosphorylated eEF2 levels are higher in response to chronic overload with a parallel increase in mTORC1 signaling leading to greater muscle hypertrophy (87). Thus, these data show that AMPK α1 behaves as a negative effector required to limit mTORC1 activity and to inhibit overgrowth of skeletal muscle in response to hypertrophic stimuli.

In an aged rat model, Thomson and Gordon (115) showed that activation of AMPK is linked to the diminished overload-induced hypertrophy in fast-twitch skeletal muscle. An age-related increase in AMPK phosphorylation may partly contribute to the attenuated hypertrophic response observed in overloaded fast-twitch plantaris muscle. Furthermore, AMPK is upregulated with age in resting and overloaded fast-twitch skeletal

ROLE OF AMPK IN THE CONTROL OF SKELETAL MUSCLE MASS

Low Energy

Thr-1227, Ser-1345
TSC1/TSC2
GTP-ase
Rheb
mTOR
Ser-722/792
Raptor
Thr-37/46
4E-BP1
eIF4E
Protein Synthesis

Thr-172
AMPK
Ser-467
Ulk1
Autophagy
Lysosomal system
Protein Degradation

Ser-413/588
FoxO3a
MAFbx/MuRF1
Atgs
Ubiquitin-proteasome
system

Thr-389
S6K1
Thr-229
PDK1
Ser-235/236
rpS6

Fig. 3. AMPK regulates both anabolic and catabolic pathways in skeletal muscle. AMPK decreases protein synthesis by phosphorylating the tuberous sclerosis complex 1/2 (TSC1/2), an inhibitor of the mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) activator Ras homolog enriched in brain (Rheb), and by phosphorylating the regulatory associated protein of mTOR (raptor). mTOR modulates protein synthesis by phosphorylation toward its downstream effectors, the ribosomal protein S6 kinase 1 (S6K1) and the eukaryotic translation initiation factor 4E-binding protein 1 (4E-BP1). S6K1 activation needs initial phosphorylation by mTORC1 and additional inputs for full activation by the phosphoinositide-dependent kinase 1 (PDK1). S6K1-mediated regulation of translation occurs in part through phosphorylation of the 40S ribosomal protein S6 (rpS6). Phosphorylation of 4E-BP1 by mTOR promotes its dissociation from eukaryotic translation initiation factor 4E (eIF4E) and allows the assembly of the preinitiation complex. Activation of AMPK leads to an increase in Forkhead box O3a (FoxO3a) activity that induces the expression of the muscle atrophy F-box (MAFbx), the muscle RING finger 1 (MuRF1), and autophagy genes (Atgs). AMPK also interacts with, and phosphorylates, the unc-51-like kinase 1 (Ulk1) leading to autophagy induction.

muscle but not in slow-twitch muscle. Thus, the modulation of AMPK activity by pharmacological agents could constitute a relevant therapeutic tool to prevent sarcopenia.
Taken together, AMPK appears to be an essential contributor to the control of muscle cell size and adaptation to muscle hypertrophy. AMPK is involved in the cell size maintenance through the regulation of mTORC1 pathway and appears to play a major role in the metabolic program that controls muscle plasticity. The severe activation of AMPK in the overload model could contribute to restoring metabolic homeostasis that has been disturbed by the increased protein synthesis. Thus, AMPK seems to act as a homeostatic factor and to determine the extent to which protein translation is allowed under various energetic circumstances. Additionally, by limiting muscular hypertrophy, AMPK would act as negative feedback in the control of skeletal muscle mass.
AMPK and stimulation of protein degradation. In addition to the inhibitory effect of AMPK on protein synthesis, this enzyme has recently been associated with increased myofibrillar degradation in muscle cells. Nystrom and coworkers showed that AICAR and metformin treatments decreased protein synthesis and increased protein degradation in an AMPK-dependent manner in C2C12 myotubes (91).
AMPK regulates FoxO3a-dependent protein degradation. Nakashima and Yakabe (88) reported that AMPK activation stimulates myofibrillar protein degradation through increased expression of FoxO transcription factors. Protein degradation is mediated by two conserved pathways: the ATP-dependent ubiquitin-proteasome system and the autophagy-lysosomal pathway. The first one implicates a cascade of enzymatic reactions that labels substrate proteins with ubiquitin chains for degradation by the 26S proteasome. This system involves the activity of an E1 (ubiquitin-activating enzyme), an E2 (ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme), and an E3 ubiquitin ligase, which confers substrate specificity for ubiquitination. Two major E3 ligases have been described to be essential for muscle atrophy, atrogin-1/MAFbx (muscle atrophy F-box) and MuRF1 (muscle RING finger 1) (5, 32, 40). The second pathway implicates lysosomes and represents an important mechanism in the maintenance of protein turnover and cellular metabolism. This process requires Atg (autophagy-specific gene) proteins, which are necessary for the formation of autophagosomes (19).

AJP-Cell Physiol · doi:10.1152/ajpcell.00125.2012 · www.ajpcell.org

formation of these vesicles is required to drive substrates to lysosomes to achieve substrate degradation. mRNAs encoding Atg proteins are very abundant in skeletal muscle (86). This process is constitutively active in skeletal muscle and is enhanced in human myopathies caused by a genetic deficiency of lysosomal proteins, as evidenced by the accumulation of autophagosomes in Pompe's and Danon's diseases (89, 100, 121). Importantly, autophagy sequestration under starvation conditions requires the conjugation of LC3 (microtubule-associated protein light chain 3) with the phospholipids of the vacuolar membrane (65, 66).

Expression of a constitutively activated FoxO3a increases the transcription of many autophagy-related genes, including LC3B, Gabarapl1, Beclin1, PI3KIII, Ulk2, Atg4b, and Atg12l (78). FoxO proteins are an evolutionarily conserved subfamily of transcription factors involved in tumor suppression, regulation of protein degradation, and development in several tissues, and they are regulated by phosphorylation-dependent nuclear/cytoplasmic shuttling (9, 10). Besides its role in regulating the Atg, FoxO3, as FoxO1, positively controls the transcription of the E3 ligases MAFbx and MuRF1 (67, 107) and upregulation of MAFbx and MuRF1 expression leads to muscle atrophy. Akt phosphorylates FoxO1, FoxO3, and FoxO4 (Thr32, Ser253, and Ser315 in the FoxO3a sequence), leading to its inhibition by cytosolic retention via 14-3-3 (8).

The activation of FoxO3a by AMPK in skeletal muscle and its implication in regulating both autophagy and the ubiquitin-proteasome pathways are illustrated in Fig. 3. It was shown that AMPK activation by AICAR increases the mRNA and the protein content of MAFbx and MuRF1 in C2C12 and primary myotubes (88, 104). However, to the best of our knowledge, no supplementary data exist regarding the regulation of E1, E2, and proteasome subunits by AMPK in skeletal muscle.

Recently, we have described that activation of AMPK induces autophagy pathway in C2C12 cells and primary myotubes (104). The activation of FoxO3a by AMPK leads to an increase in the expression of Beclin, LC3-II and Gabarapl1, which are necessary for the promotion of autophagosome formation. AMPK phosphorylates FoxO3a at Ser413/588, residues known to lead to FoxO3a activation and protein degradation (41, 47). Nevertheless, no variations in nuclear content of FoxO3a were detected following AMPK activation after long treatments (i.e., 24 h), but an increase in the total protein level from 30 min was found. After a short time course (30 min–6 h) the activation of AMPK by AICAR induces accumulation of FoxO3a in the nucleus, consistent with the results of Tong and colleagues (118), who reported that AICAR treatment caused FoxO3a nuclear relocation correlated to a decrease in FoxO3a phosphorylation at Thr318/321. However, Greer and colleagues (41) have reported an increase of FoxO3a transcriptional activity without any change in the nuclear content of the factor after AMPK activation by 2-deoxyglucose in HEK293T cells. Nevertheless, these apparent divergent data strongly suggest that FoxO3a relocalization into the nucleus after AMPK activation is not necessarily required to increase its transcriptional activity. As demonstrated by Davila et al. in neurons, it can be suggested that AMPK activates FoxO3a directly into the nucleus (23) and may be implicated in the stability of the protein.

AMPK initiates autophagy by regulating Ulk1 complex. Another major signaling pathway has been identified in

AMPK-induced skeletal muscle autophagy. It concerns the regulation of Ulk1 complex by AMPK (Fig. 4). This complex is composed of AMPK, mTORC1, Ulk1, FIP200, and Atg13 and has been identified in muscle cells. Ulk1, the homologue of yeast Atg1, is a serine/threonine-protein kinase that plays a key role in the initial stages of autophagy induction, particularly the nucleation and formation of the pre-autophagosomal structures (36, 85, 90). Data obtained in skeletal muscle cells are consistent with the model described in HeLa, HEK293T, and mouse embryonic fibroblast cells and show that, under basal conditions, mTORC1 interacts with Ulk1 and prevents autophagy in opposition to energy stress conditions (56, 63, 64). Under nutrient-rich conditions, phosphorylation of Ulk1 by mTORC1 decreases Ulk1 kinase activity and its ability to interact with cofactors Atg13 and FIP200, a necessary interaction in coordinating the autophagic response (36, 46). It was reported in muscle cells that activation of AMPK by AICAR or inhibition of mTORC1 with either Torin1 or amino acid starvation leads to the dissociation of AMPK and mTOR/raptor from the Ulk1 complex (104). This process is thought to result in initiation of the Ulk1-dependent phosphorylation of Atg13 and FIP200 leading to the activation of autophagy (63).

A proteomic analysis of the autophagy system and a coimmunoprecipitation study performed in HEK293T cells have shown that AMPK interacts with Ulk1 and Ulk2 (3, 74). In muscle cells, Ulk1 was identified as a new interacting partner of AMPK that induces Ser467 phosphorylation (104). The phosphorylation of Ulk1 could lead to a conformational change and thereby disrupt the Ulk1-mTORC1 interaction, in line with the suppression of mTORC1 activity in the Ulk1 complex (56, 57, 64). Moreover, Ulk1 phosphorylation by AMPK may directly upregulate Ulk1 kinase activity. Indeed, it was shown in vitro that purified Ulk1 can phosphorylate itself and requires autophosphorylation for stability (26). In mammals, reconstitution of Ulk1-deficient cells with a mutant Ulk1 that cannot be phosphorylated by AMPK revealed that such phosphorylation is required for mitochondrial homeostasis and cell survival following starvation (28, 29). A lack of association between AMPK and Ulk1 resulted in an accumulation of abnormal mitochondria and cell death. Finally, AMPK controls Ulk1 activity by suppressing mTOR activity and by interacting and phosphorylating Ulk1.

Coimmunoprecipitation time course studies demonstrate that, following autophagy induction, AMPK dissociates from Ulk1 after 3 h of AICAR treatment (47). Shang and colleagues (108) reported that AMPK is associated with Ulk1 only under nutrient-rich conditions and dissociated from Ulk1 5 min after starvation in HeLa cells. Thus, altogether these data suggest that Ulk1 is associated with AMPK in normal conditions. However, upon AICAR-induced autophagy, the complex remains stable for 3 h and starts to dissociate later. It is conceivable, as suggested by Shang and colleagues (108), that Ulk1 dissociates from AMPK and thus becomes more active. Conversely, it is also possible that AMPK-Ulk1 dissociation is responsible for a negative regulatory feedback loop as described by Loffler and colleagues (76), who showed that Ulk1 could mediate phosphorylation of AMPK on its regulatory subunits. Additional experiments are necessary to define the molecular mechanisms for these events in skeletal muscle. We only conclude that AMPK takes part in the initiation of

ROLE OF AMPK IN THE CONTROL OF SKELETAL MUSCLE MASS

Nutrient  
↓  

mTOR  
Raptor  
Ser-757  

AMPK  
Ulk1  
Kinase domain  
Atg13  
FIP200  

AUTOPHAGY  

Low Energy  
↓  

mTOR  
Raptor  
Ser-722/792  

AMPK  
Ulk1  
Kinase domain  
Ser-317/467/555/637/777  
Atg13  
FIP200  

AUTOPHAGY  

AMPK  

Ulk1  
Kinase domain  
Ser-318  
Atg13  
FIP200  

AUTOPHAGY ?  

Fig. 4. Regulation of the unc-51-like kinase 1 (Ulk1) complex by AMPK in skeletal muscle. In basal condition, mTOR/raptor (mammalian target of rapamycin/regulatory associated protein of mTOR) interacts with, and phosphorylates, Ulk1 to inhibit its kinase activity and its ability to phosphorylate the autophagy protein 13 (Atg13) and the focal adhesion kinase family interacting protein of 200 kDa (FIP200). In this complex, AMPK also interacts with Ulk1. During cellular stress, AMPK phosphorylates raptor, leading to its dissociation from Ulk1, and phosphorylates Ulk1. Consequently, Ulk1 is activated and phosphorylates itself and its interacting partners Atg13 and FIP200. During autophagy process, AMPK dissociates from Ulk1 and two hypotheses can be formulated: Ulk1 dissociates from AMPK and thus may become more active, or, conversely, AMPK-Ulk1 dissociation may be responsible for a negative regulatory feedback loop. Further exploration will be necessary to better characterize these events. Note that Ulk1 phosphorylation at Ser 467 has been identified in myoblasts while the other sites of Ulk1 and Atg13 site have been identified in other cell lines.

autophagosome formation by interacting with, and phosphorylating, Ulk1.

**Physiological relevance.** The physiological relevance of these findings is emerging. Sandri's group has provided evidence of the existence of an amplifying loop of mitochondrial fission in atrophying muscles. Romanello and coworkers (96) have shown that mitochondrial-dependent muscle atrophy requires AMPK activation and inhibition of AMPK restores muscle size in myofibers with altered mitochondria in a FoxO3a-dependent manner. Interestingly, data related to the role of autophagy during exercise are accumulating; thus Grumati and colleagues (44) have shown that autophagy is stimulated during endurance exercise. These authors found that exercise induced mitochondria and myofibrillar degeneration in type VI collagen knockout mice. This deleterious effect was explained by autophagy failure in this model (42–44). He and coworkers have reported that autophagy is required for beneficial metabolic effects of exercise in skeletal and cardiac muscle of fed mice (51). Indeed, BCL2 AAA mice, which have mutations in BCL2 phosphorylation sites preventing stimulus-induced disruption of the BCL2-beclin-1 complex and autophagy activation, presented a decreasing endurance and altered glucose metabolism during acute exercise. The authors also showed chronic exercise-mediated protection against high-fat-diet-induced glucose intolerance. These studies support a new and essential role of muscular autophagy in the adaptation to exercise. However, excessive autophagy can also lead to atrophy and muscular diseases (105, 106). Lastly, in humans, Jamart and coworkers (61) have found that AMPK and FoxO3a regulate autophagy and ubiquitin proteasome-mediated proteolysis in a coordinated way during ultra-endurance exercise. Thus, AMPK promotes availability of internal energy sources and enhances cellular survival under conditions of energy stress.

**Summary and Conclusion**

In skeletal muscle, AMPK appears to be a master regulator of metabolism; it contributes to decreasing protein synthesis through inhibition of mTORC1 activity, and it plays a role in protein turnover through increased activity of the ubiquitin-proteasome and autophagy-lysosomal pathways. Accumulating data suggest that modulation of activity of AMPK substrates will constitute good candidates for muscle wasting therapy. In Pompe's disease, like in many myopathies, autophagy levels are modified and contractile proteins can be degraded. In this context, it appears important to understand the precise mechanisms that regulate autophagy to develop and improve therapeutic strategies against muscular dystrophies. Among the signaling pathways that control proteolysis and especially

autophagy, AMPK may play a key role that should be further addressed. In addition, attempts to evaluate the effects of physical exercise should be considered. AMPK has become a target for the development of new drugs for the treatment of type II diabetes, obesity, and even cancer, and we can assume that in the near future it will become a target for fighting myopathies.

### ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We thank Serge A. Leibovitch and Guillaume Py for critically reading the manuscript.

### GRANTS

This work was supported by INRA's PHASE division and by the Université de Montpellier 1, Faculté des Sciences du Sport. A. M. J. Sanchez held a graduate fellowship from the Ministère de la Recherche et de la Technologie (MRT).

### DISCLOSURES

No conflicts of interest, financial or otherwise, are declared by the author(s).

### AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS

A.M.J.S. and H.B. conception and design of the research; A.M.J.S. prepared the figures; A.M.J.S. and H.B. drafted the manuscript; A.M.J.S., R.B.C., A.C., A.F.P., A.R., and H.B. approved the final version of the manuscript; R.B.C., A.C., and A.R. edited and revised the manuscript.

### REFERENCES

1. Aschenbach WG, Hirshman MF, Fujii N, Sakamoto K, Howlett KF, Goodyear LJ. Effect of AICAR treatment on glycogen metabolism in skeletal muscle. *Diabetes* 51: 567–573, 2002.
2. Avruch J, Belham C, Weng Q, Hara K, Yonezawa K. The p70 S6 kinase integrates nutrient and growth signals to control translational capacity. *Prog Mol SubCell Biol* 26: 115–154, 2001.
3. Behrends C, Sowa ME, Gygi SP, Harper JW. Network organization of the human autophagy system. *Nature* 466: 68–76, 2010.
4. Bergeron R, Russell RR, 3rd Young LH, Ren JM, Marcucci M, Lee A, Shulman GI. Effect of AMPK activation on muscle glucose metabolism in conscious rats. *Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab* 276: E938–E944, 1999.
5. Bodine SC, Latres E, Baumhueter S, Lai VK, Nunez L, Clarke BA, Poueymirou WT, Panaro FJ, Na E, Dharmarajan K, Pan ZQ, Valenzuela DM, DeChiara TM, Stitt TN, Yancopoulos GD, Glass DJ. Identification of ubiquitin ligases required for skeletal muscle atrophy. *Science* 294: 1704–1708, 2001.
6. Bodine SC, Stitt TN, Gonzalez M, Kline WO, Stover GL, Bauerlein R, Zlotchenko E, Scrimgeour A, Lawrence JC, Glass DJ, Yancopoulos GD. Akt/mTOR pathway is a crucial regulator of skeletal muscle hypertrophy and can prevent muscle atrophy in vivo. *Nat Cell Biol* 3: 1014–1019, 2001.
7. Bolster DR, Crozier SJ, Kimball SR, Jefferson LS. AMP-activated protein kinase suppresses protein synthesis in rat skeletal muscle through down-regulated mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) signaling. *J Biol Chem* 277: 23977–23980, 2002.
8. Brunet A, Bonni A, Zigmond MJ, Lin MZ, Juo P, Hu LS, Anderson MJ, Arden KC, Blenis J, Greenberg ME. Akt promotes cell survival by phosphorylating and inhibiting a Forkhead transcription factor. *Cell* 96: 857–868, 1999.
9. Brunet A, Sweeney LB, Sturgill JF, Chua KF, Greer PL, Lin Y, Tran H, Ross SE, Mostoslavsky R, Cohen HY, Hu LS, Cheng HL, Jedrychowski MP, Gygi SP, Sinclair DA, Alt FW, Greenberg ME. Stress-dependent regulation of FOXO transcription factors by the SIRT1 deacetylase. *Science* 303: 2011–2015, 2004.
10. Calnan DR, Brunet A. The FoxO code. *Oncogene* 27: 2276–2288, 2008.
11. Canto C, Gerhart-Hines Z, Feige JN, Lagouge M, Noriega L, Milne JC, Elliott PJ, Puigserver P, Auwerx J. AMPK regulates energy expenditure by modulating NAD+ metabolism and SIRT1 activity. *Nature* 458: 1056–1060, 2009.
12. Carling D, Clarke PR, Zammit VA, Hardie DG. Purification and characterization of the AMP-activated protein kinase. Copurification of acetyl-CoA carboxylase kinase and 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA reductase kinase activities. *Eur J Biochem* 186: 129–136, 1989.
13. Carling D, Hardie DG. The substrate and sequence specificity of the AMP-activated protein kinase. Phosphorylation of glycogen synthase and phosphorylase kinase. *Biochim Biophys Acta* 1012: 81–86, 1989.
14. Carling D, Zammit VA, Hardie DG. A common bicyclic protein kinase cascade inactivates the regulatory enzymes of fatty acid and cholesterol biosynthesis. *FEBS Lett* 223: 217–222, 1987.
15. Carlson CL, Winder WW. Liver AMP-activated protein kinase and acetyl-CoA carboxylase during and after exercise. *J Appl Physiol* 86: 669–674, 1999.
16. Castro MJ, Apple DF Jr, Staron RS, Campos GE, Dudley GA. Influence of complete spinal cord injury on skeletal muscle within 6 mo of injury. *J Appl Physiol* 86: 350–358, 1999.
17. Cheung PC, Salt IP, Davies SP, Hardie DG, Carling D. Characterization of AMP-activated protein kinase gamma-subunit isoforms and their role in AMP binding. *Biochem J* 346: 659–669, 2000.
18. Choi SL, Kim SJ, Lee KT, Kim J, Mu J, Birnbaum MJ, Soo Kim S, Ha J. The regulation of AMP-activated protein kinase by H₂O₂. *Biochem Biophys Res Commun* 287: 92–97, 2001.
19. Codogno P. [ATG genes and macroautophagy]. *Med Sci (Paris)* 20: 734–736, 2004.
20. Coven DL, Hu X, Cong L, Bergeron R, Shulman GI, Hardie DG, Young LH. Physiological role of AMP-activated protein kinase in the heart: graded activation during exercise. *Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab* 285: E629–E636, 2003.
21. Dash PK, Orsi SA, Moore AN. Spatial memory formation and memory-enhancing effect of glucose involves activation of the tuberous sclerosis complex-mammalian target of rapamycin pathway. *J Neurosci* 26: 8048–8056, 2006.
22. Davies SP, Helps NR, Cohen PT, Hardie DG. 5′-AMP inhibits dephosphorylation, as well as promoting phosphorylation, of the AMP-activated protein kinase. Studies using bacterially expressed human protein phosphatase-2C alpha and native bovine protein phosphatase-2AC. *FEBS Lett* 377: 421–425, 1995.
23. Davila D, Connolly NM, Bonner H, Weisova P, Dussmann H, Con-cannon CG, Huber HJ, Prehn JH. Two-step activation of FOXO3 by AMPK generates a coherent feed-forward loop determining excitotoxic cell fate. *Cell Death Differ*. In press.
24. Derave W, Ai H, Ihlemann J, Witters LA, Kristiansen S, Richter EA, Ploug T. Dissociation of AMP-activated protein kinase activation and glucose transport in contracting slow-twitch muscle. *Diabetes* 49: 1281–1287, 2000.
25. Deshmukh AS, Treebak JT, Long YC, Viollet B, Wojtaszewski JF, Zierath JR. Role of adenosine 5′-monophosphate-activated protein kinase subunits in skeletal muscle mammalian target of rapamycin signaling. *Mol Endocrinol* 22: 1105–1112, 2008.
26. Dorsey FC, Rose KL, Coenen S, Prater SM, Cavett V, Cleveland JL, Caldwell-Busby J. Mapping the phosphorylation sites of Ulk1. *J Proteome Res* 8: 5253–5263, 2009.
27. Dreyer HC, Fujita S, Cadenas JG, Chinkes DL, Volpi E, Rasmussen BB. Resistance exercise increases AMPK activity and reduces 4E-BP1 phosphorylation and protein synthesis in human skeletal muscle. *J Physiol* 576: 613–624, 2006.
28. Egan D, Kim J, Shaw RJ, Guan KL. The autophagy initiating kinase ULK1 is regulated via opposing phosphorylation by AMPK and mTOR. *Autophagy* 7: 643–644, 2011.
29. Egan DF, Shackelford DB, Mihaylova MM, Gelino S, Kohnz RA, Mair W, Vasquez DS, Joshi A, Gwinn DM, Taylor R, Asara JM, Fitzpatrick J, Dillin A, Viollet B, Kundu M, Hansen M, Shaw RJ. Phosphorylation of ULK1 (hATG1) by AMP-activated protein kinase connects energy sensing to mitophagy. *Science* 331: 456–461, 2011.
30. Ferrari S, Bandi HR, Hofsteenge J, Bussian BM, Thomas G. Mitogen-activated 70KS6 kinase. Identification of in vitro 40S ribosomal S6 phosphorylation sites. *J Biol Chem* 266: 22770–22775, 1991.
31. Fitts RH, Riley DR, Widrick JJ. Functional and structural adaptations of skeletal muscle to microgravity. *J Exp Biol* 204: 3201–3208, 2001.
32. Foletta VC, White LJ, Larsen AE, Leger B, Russell AP. The role and regulation of MAFbx/atrogin-1 and MuRF1 in skeletal muscle atrophy. *Pflügers Arch* 461: 325–335, 2011.
33. Foretz M, Ancellin N, Andreelli F, Saintillan Y, Grondin P, Kahn A, Thorens B, Vaulont S, Viollet B. Short-term overexpression of a

constitutively active form of AMP-activated protein kinase in the liver leads to mild hypoglycemia and fatty liver. *Diabetes* 54: 1331–1339, 2005.

34. Franch HA, Price SR. Molecular signaling pathways regulating muscle proteolysis during atrophy. *Curr Opin Clin Nutr Metab Care* 8: 271–275, 2005.

35. Gaidhu MP, Fediuc S, Ceddia RB. 5-Aminoimidazole-4-carboxamide-1-beta-D-ribofuranoside-induced AMP-activated protein kinase phosphorylation inhibits basal and insulin-stimulated glucose uptake, lipid synthesis, and fatty acid oxidation in isolated rat adipocytes. *J Biol Chem* 281: 25956–25964, 2006.

36. Ganley IG, Lam du H, Wang J, Ding X, Chen S, Jiang X. ULK1.ATG13.FIP200 complex mediates mTOR signaling and is essential for autophagy. *J Biol Chem* 284: 12297–12305, 2009.

37. Garton AJ, Campbell DG, Carling D, Hardie DG, Colbran RJ, Yeaman SJ. Phosphorylation of bovine hormone-sensitive lipase by the AMP-activated protein kinase. A possible antilipolytic mechanism. *Eur J Biochem* 179: 249–254, 1989.

38. Gingras AC, Gygi SP, Raught B, Polakiewicz RD, Abraham RT, Hoekstra MF, Aebersold R, Sonenberg N. Regulation of 4E-BP1 phosphorylation: a novel two-step mechanism. *Genes Dev* 13: 1422–1437, 1999.

39. Goldberg AL, Etlinger JD, Goldspink DF, Jablecki C. Mechanism of work-induced hypertrophy of skeletal muscle. *Med Sci Sports* 7: 185–198, 1975.

40. Gomes MD, Lecker SH, Jagoe RT, Navon A, Goldberg AL. Atrogin-1, a muscle-specific F-box protein highly expressed during muscle atrophy. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA* 98: 14440–14445, 2001.

41. Greer EL, Oskoui PR, Banko MR, Maniar JM, Gygi MP, Gygi SP, Brunet A. The energy sensor AMP-activated protein kinase directly regulates the mammalian FOXO3 transcription factor. *J Biol Chem* 282: 30107–30119, 2007.

42. Grumati P, Coletto L, Sabatelli P, Cescon M, Angelin A, Bertaggia E, Blaauw B, Urciuolo A, Tiepolo T, Merlini L, Maraldi NM, Bernardi P, Sandri M, Bonaldo P. Autophagy is defective in collagen VI muscular dystrophies, and its reactivation rescues myofiber degeneration. *Nat Med* 16: 1313–1320, 2010.

43. Grumati P, Coletto L, Sandri M, Bonaldo P. Autophagy induction rescues muscular dystrophy. *Autophagy* 7: 426–428, 2011.

44. Grumati P, Coletto L, Schiavinato A, Castagnaro S, Bertaggia E, Sandri M, Bonaldo P. Physical exercise stimulates autophagy in normal skeletal muscles but is detrimental for collagen VI-deficient muscles. *Autophagy* 7: 1415–1423, 2011.

45. Gwinn DM, Shackelford DB, Egan DF, Mihaylova MM, Mery A, Vasquez DS, Turk BE, Shaw RJ. AMPK phosphorylation of raptor mediates a metabolic checkpoint. *Mol Cell* 30: 214–226, 2008.

46. Hara T, Mizushima N. Role of ULK-FIP200 complex in mammalian autophagy: FIP200, a counterpart of yeast Atg17? *Autophagy* 5: 85–87, 2009.

47. Hawley SA, Davison M, Woods A, Davies SP, Beri RK, Carling D, Hardie DG. Characterization of the AMP-activated protein kinase kinase from rat liver and identification of threonine 172 as the major site at which it phosphorylates AMP-activated protein kinase. *J Biol Chem* 271: 27879–27887, 1996.

48. Hawley SA, Gadalla AE, Olsen GS, Hardie DG. The antidiabetic drug metformin activates the AMP-activated protein kinase cascade via an adenine nucleotide-independent mechanism. *Diabetes* 51: 2420–2425, 2002.

49. Hawley SA, Pan DA, Mustard KJ, Ross L, Bain J, Edelman AM, Frenguelli BG, Hardie DG. Calmodulin-dependent protein kinase kinase-beta is an alternative upstream kinase for AMP-activated protein kinase. *Cell Metab* 2: 9–19, 2005.

50. Hayashi T, Hirshman MF, Kurth EJ, Winder WW, Goodyear LJ. Evidence for 5′ AMP-activated protein kinase mediation of the effect of muscle contraction on glucose transport. *Diabetes* 47: 1369–1373, 1998.

51. He C, Bassik MC, Moresi V, Sun K, Wei Y, Zou Z, An Z, Loh J, Fisher J, Sun Q, Korsmeyer S, Packer M, May HI, Hill JA, Virgin HW, Gilpin C, Xiao G, Bassel-Duby R, Scherer PE, Levine B. Exercise-induced BCL2-regulated autophagy is required for muscle glucose homeostasis. *Nature* 481: 511–515, 2012.

52. Herrero-Martin G, Hoyer-Hansen M, Garcia-Garcia C, Fumarola C, Farkas T, Lopez-Rivas A, Jaattela M. TAK1 activates AMPK-dependent cytoprotective autophagy in TRAIL-treated epithelial cells. *EMBO J* 28: 677–685, 2009.

53. Holmes BF, Kurth-Kraczek EJ, Winder WW. Chronic activation of 5′-AMP-activated protein kinase increases GLUT-4, hexokinase, and glycogen in muscle. *J Appl Physiol* 87: 1990–1995, 1999.

54. Hood DA, Irrcher I, Ljubicic V, Joseph AM. Coordination of metabolic plasticity in skeletal muscle. *J Exp Biol* 209: 2265–2275, 2006.

55. Horman S, Browne G, Krause U, Patel J, Vertommen D, Bertrand L, Lavoinne A, Hue L, Proud C, Rider M. Activation of AMP-activated protein kinase leads to the phosphorylation of elongation factor 2 and an inhibition of protein synthesis. *Curr Biol* 12: 1419–1423, 2002.

56. Hosokawa N, Hara T, Kaizuka T, Kishi C, Takamura A, Miura Y, Iemura S, Natsume T, Takehana K, Yamada N, Guan JL, Oshiro N, Mizushima N. Nutrient-dependent mTORC1 association with the ULK1-Atg13-FIP200 complex required for autophagy. *Mol Biol Cell* 20: 1981–1991, 2009.

57. Hosokawa N, Sasaki T, Iemura S, Natsume T, Hara T, Mizushima N. Atg101, a novel mammalian autophagy protein interacting with Atg13. *Autophagy* 5: 973–979, 2009.

58. Inoki K, Zhu T, Guan KL. TSC2 mediates cellular energy response to control cell growth and survival. *Cell* 115: 577–590, 2003.

59. Jackman RW, Kandarian SC. The molecular basis of skeletal muscle atrophy. *Am J Physiol Cell Physiol* 287: C834–C843, 2004.

60. Jager S, Handschin C, St-Pierre J, Spiegelman BM. AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) action in skeletal muscle via direct phosphorylation of PGC-1alpha. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA* 104: 12017–12022, 2007.

61. Jamart C, Francoux M, Millet GY, Deldicque L, Frère D, Féasson L. Modulation of autophagy and ubiquitin-proteasome pathways during ultra-endurance running. *J Appl Physiol* 112: 1529–1537, 2012.

62. Jorgensen SB, Violet B, Andreelli F, Frosig C, Birk JB, Schjerling P, Vaulont S, Richter EA, Wojtaszewski JF. Knockout of the alpha2 but not alpha1 5′-AMP-activated protein kinase isoform abolishes 5-aminoimidazole-4-carboxamide-1-beta-4-ribofuranosidebut not contraction-induced glucose uptake in skeletal muscle. *J Biol Chem* 279: 1070–1079, 2004.

63. Jung CH, Jun CB, Ro SH, Kim YM, Otto NM, Cao J, Kundu M, Kim DH. ULK-Atg13-FIP200 complexes mediate mTOR signaling to the autophagy machinery. *Mol Biol Cell* 20: 1992–2003, 2009.

64. Jung CH, Ro SH, Cao J, Otto NM, Kim DH. mTOR regulation of autophagy. *FEBS Lett* 584: 1287–1295, 2010.

65. Kabeya Y. LC3, GABARAP and GATE16 localize to autophagosomal membrane depending on form-II formation. *J Cell Sci* 117: 2805–2812, 2004.

66. Kabeya Y, Mizushima N, Ueno T, Yamamoto A, Kirisako T, Noda T, Kominami E, Ohsumi Y, Yoshimori T. LC3, a mammalian homologue of yeast Apg8p, is localized in autophagosome membranes after processing. *EMBO J* 19: 5720–5728, 2000.

67. Kamei Y, Miura S, Suzuki M, Kai Y, Mizukami J, Taniguchi T, Mochida K, Hata T, Matsuda J, Aburatani H, Nishino I, Ezaki O. Skeletal muscle FOXO1 (FKHR) transgenic mice have less skeletal muscle mass, down-regulated Type I (slow twitch/red muscle) fiber genes, and impaired glycemic control. *J Biol Chem* 279: 41114–41123, 2004.

68. Kawaguchi T, Osatomi K, Yamashita H, Kabashima T, Uyeda K. Mechanism for fatty acid “sparing” effect on glucose-induced transcription: regulation of carbohydrate-responsive element-binding protein by AMP-activated protein kinase. *J Biol Chem* 277: 3829–3835, 2002.

69. Kim DH, Sarbassov DD, Ali SM, King JE, Latek RR, Erdjument-Bromage H, Tempst P, Sabatini DM. mTOR interacts with raptor to form a nutrient-sensitive complex that signals to the cell growth machinery. *Cell* 110: 163–175, 2002.

70. Kim DH, Sarbassov DD, Ali SM, Latek RR, Guntur KV, Erdjument-Bromage H, Tempst P, Sabatini DM. GbetaL, a positive regulator of the rapamycin-sensitive pathway required for the nutrient-sensitive interaction between raptor and mTOR. *Mol Cell* 11: 895–904, 2003.

71. Kudo N, Barr AJ, Barr RL, Desai S, Lopaschuk GD. High rates of fatty acid oxidation during reperfusion of ischemic hearts are associated with a decrease in malonyl-CoA levels due to an increase in 5′-AMP-activated protein kinase inhibition of acetyl-CoA carboxylase. *J Biol Chem* 270: 17513–17520, 1995.

72. Lantier L, Mounier R, Leclerc J, Pende M, Foretz M, Viollet B. Coordinated maintenance of muscle cell size control by AMP-activated protein kinase. *FASEB J* 24: 3555–3561, 2010.

73. Lecker SH, Jagoe RT, Gilbert A, Gomes M, Baracos V, Bailey J, Price SR, Mitch WE, Goldberg AL. Multiple types of skeletal muscle

AJP-Cell Physiol · doi:10.1152/ajpcell.00125.2012 · www.ajpcell.org

atrophy involve a common program of changes in gene expression. FASEB J 18: 39–51, 2004.

74. Lee JW, Park S, Takahashi Y, Wang HG. The association of AMPK with ULK1 regulates autophagy. PLoS One 5: e15394, 2010.
75. Li H, Thali RF, Smolak C, Gong F, Alzamora R, Wallimann T, Scholz R, Pastor-Soler NM, Neumann D, Hallows KR. Regulation of the creatine transporter by AMP-activated protein kinase in kidney epithelial cells. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol 299: F167–F177, 2010.
76. Loffler AS, Alers S, Dieterle AM, Keppeler H, Franz-Wachtel M, Kundu M, Campbell DG, Wesselborg S, Alessi DR, Stork B. Ulk1-mediated phosphorylation of AMPK constitutes a negative regulatory feedback loop. Autophagy 7: 696–706, 2011.
77. Luiken JJ, Court SL, Willems J, Coumans WA, Bonen A, van der Vusse GJ, Glatz JF. Contraction-induced fatty acid translocase/CD36 translocation in rat cardiac myocytes is mediated through AMP-activated protein kinase signaling. Diabetes 52: 1627–1634, 2003.
78. Mammucari C, Milan G, Romanello V, Masiero E, Rudolf R, Del Piccolo P, Burden SJ, Di Lisi R, Sandri C, Zhao J, Goldberg AL, Schiaffino S, Sandri M. FoxO3 controls autophagy in skeletal muscle in vivo. Cell Metab 6: 458–471, 2007.
79. Marsin AS, Bertrand L, Rider MH, Deprez J, Beauloye C, Vincent MF, Van den Berghe G, Carling D, Hue L. Phosphorylation and activation of heart PFK-2 by AMPK has a role in the stimulation of glycolysis during ischaemia. Curr Biol 10: 1247–1255, 2000.
80. McBride A, Ghilagaber S, Nikolaev A, Hardie DG. The glycogen-binding domain on the AMPK beta subunit allows the kinase to act as a glycogen sensor. Cell Metab 9: 23–34, 2009.
81. McGarry JD, Brown NF. The mitochondrial carnitine palmitoyltransferase system. From concept to molecular analysis. Eur J Biochem 244: 1–14, 1997.
82. McGee SL, Mustard KJ, Hardie DG, Baar K. Normal hypertrophy accompanied by phosphorylation and activation of AMP-activated protein kinase alpha1 following overload in LKB1 knockout mice. J Physiol 586: 1731–1741, 2008.
83. Merrill GF, Kurth EJ, Hardie DG, Winder WW. AICA riboside increases AMP-activated protein kinase, fatty acid oxidation, and glucose uptake in rat muscle. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab 273: E1107–E1112, 1997.
84. Mitch WE, Goldberg AL. Mechanisms of muscle wasting. The role of the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway. N Engl J Med 335: 1897–1905, 1996.
85. Mizushima N. The role of the Atg1/ULK1 complex in autophagy regulation. Curr Opin Cell Biol 22: 132–139, 2010.
86. Mizushima N, Sugita H, Yoshimori T, Ohsumi Y. A new protein conjugation system in human. The counterpart of the yeast Apg12p conjugation system essential for autophagy. J Biol Chem 273: 33889–33892, 1998.
87. Mounier R, Lantier L, Leclerc J, Sotiropoulos A, Pende M, Daegelen D, Sakamoto K, Foretz M, Viollet B. Important role for AMPKalpha1 in limiting skeletal muscle cell hypertrophy. FASEB J 23: 2264–2273, 2009.
88. Nakashima K, Yakabe Y. AMPK activation stimulates myofibrillar protein degradation and expression of atrophy-related ubiquitin ligases by increasing FOXO transcription factors in C2C12 myotubes. Biosci Biotechnol Biochem 71: 1650–1656, 2007.
89. Nishino I, Fu J, Tanji K, Yamada T, Shimojo S, Koori T, Mora M, Riggs JE, Oh SJ, Koga Y, Sue CM, Yamamoto A, Murakami N, Shanske S, Byrne E, Bonilla E, Nonaka I, DiMauro S, Hirano M. Primary LAMP-2 deficiency causes X-linked vacuolar cardiomyopathy and myopathy (Danon disease). Nature 406: 906–910, 2000.
90. Noda T, Ohsumi Y. Tor, a phosphatidylinositol kinase homologue, controls autophagy in yeast. J Biol Chem 273: 3963–3966, 1998.
91. Nystrom GJ, Lang CH. Sepsis and AMPK activation by AICAR differentially regulate FoxO-1, -3 and -4 mRNA in striated muscle. Int J Clin Exp Med 1: 50–63, 2008.
92. Park H, Kaushik VK, Constant S, Prentki M, Przybytkowski E, Ruderman NB, Saha AK. Coordinate regulation of malonyl-CoA decarboxylase, sn-glycerol-3-phosphate acyltransferase, and acetyl-CoA carboxylase by AMP-activated protein kinase in rat tissues in response to exercise. J Biol Chem 277: 32571–32577, 2002.
93. Pruznak AM, Kazi AA, Frost RA, Vary TC, Lang CH. Activation of AMP-activated protein kinase by 5-aminoimidazole-4-carboxamide-1-beta-D-ribonucleoside prevents leucine-stimulated protein synthesis in rat skeletal muscle. J Nutr 138: 1887–1894, 2008.
94. Puigserver P, Wu Z, Park CW, Graves R, Wright M, Spiegelman BM. A cold-inducible coactivator of nuclear receptors linked to adaptive thermogenesis. Cell 92: 829–839, 1998.
95. Pullen N, Dennis PB, Andjelkovic M, Dufner A, Kozma SC, Hemmings BA, Thomas G. Phosphorylation and activation of p70s6k by PDK1. Science 279: 707–710, 1998.
96. Romanello V, Guadagnin E, Gomes L, Roder I, Sandri C, Petersen Y, Milan G, Masiero E, Del Piccolo P, Foretz M, Scorrano L, Rudolf R, Sandri M. Mitochondrial fission and remodelling contributes to muscle atrophy. EMBO J 29: 1774–1785, 2010.
97. Rommel C, Bodine SC, Clarke BA, Rossman R, Nunez L, Stitt TN, Yancopoulos GD, Glass DJ. Mediation of IGF-1-induced skeletal myotube hypertrophy by PI(3)K/Akt/mTOR and PI(3)K/Akt/GSK3 pathways. Nat Cell Biol 3: 1009–1013, 2001.
98. Rubin LJ, Magliola L, Feng X, Jones AW, Hale CC. Metabolic activation of AMP kinase in vascular smooth muscle. J Appl Physiol 98: 296–306, 2005.
99. Russell RR, 3rd Bergeron R, Shulman GI, Young LH. Translocation of myocardial GLUT-4 and increased glucose uptake through activation of AMPK by AICAR. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol 277: H643–H649, 1999.
100. Saftig P, Tanaka Y, Lullmann-Rauch R, von Figura K. Disease model: LAMP-2 enlightens Danon disease. Trends Mol Med 7: 37–39, 2001.
101. Saitoh M, Pullen N, Brennan P, Cantrell D, Dennis PB, Thomas G. Regulation of an activated S6 kinase 1 variant reveals a novel mammalian target of rapamycin phosphorylation site. J Biol Chem 277: 20104–20112, 2002.
102. Sakoda H, Ogihara T, Anai M, Fujishiro M, Ono H, Onishi Y, Katagiri H, Abe M, Fukushima Y, Shojima N, Inukai K, Kikuchi M, Oka Y, Asano T. Activation of AMPK is essential for AICAR-induced glucose uptake by skeletal muscle but not adipocytes. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab 282: E1239–E1244, 2002.
103. Salt IP, Johnson G, Ashcroft SJ, Hardie DG. AMP-activated protein kinase is activated by low glucose in cell lines derived from pancreatic beta cells, and may regulate insulin release. Biochem J 335: 533–539, 1998.
104. Sanchez AM, Csibi A, Raibon A, Cornille K, Gay S, Bernardi H, Candau R. AMPK promotes skeletal muscle autophagy through activation of forkhead FoxO3a and interaction with Ulk1. J Cell Biochem 113: 695–710, 2012.
105. Sandri M. Autophagy in health and disease. 3. Involvement of autophagy in muscle atrophy. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 298: C1291–C1297, 2010.
106. Sandri M. Autophagy in skeletal muscle. FEBS Lett 584: 1411–1416, 2010.
107. Sandri M, Sandri C, Gilbert A, Skurk C, Calabria E, Picard A, Walsh K, Schiaffino S, Lecker SH, Goldberg AL. Foxo transcription factors induce the atrophy-related ubiquitin ligase atrogin-1 and cause skeletal muscle atrophy. Cell 117: 399–412, 2004.
108. Shang L, Chen S, Du F, Li S, Zhao L, Wang X. Nutrient starvation elicits an acute autophagic response mediated by Ulk1 dephosphorylation and its subsequent dissociation from AMPK. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 108: 4788–4793, 2011.
109. Stapleton D, Mitchellhill KI, Gao G, Widmer J, Michell BJ, Teh T, House CM, Fernandez CS, Cox T, Witters LA, Kemp BE. Mammalian AMP-activated protein kinase subfamily. J Biol Chem 271: 611–614, 1996.
110. Stein SC, Woods A, Jones NA, Davison MD, Carling D. The regulation of AMP-activated protein kinase by phosphorylation. Biochem J 345: 437–443, 2000.
111. Stoppani J, Hildebrandt AL, Sakamoto K, Cameron-Smith D, Good-year LJ, Neufer PD. AMP-activated protein kinase activates transcription of the UCP3 and HKII genes in rat skeletal muscle. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab 283: E1239–E1248, 2002.
112. Terada S, Goto M, Kato M, Kawanaka K, Shimokawa T, Tabata I. Effects of low-intensity prolonged exercise on PGC-1 mRNA expression in rat epitrochlearis muscle. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 296: 350–354, 2002.
113. Terada S, Tabata I. Effects of acute bouts of running and swimming exercise on PGC-1alpha protein expression in rat epitrochlearis and soleus muscle. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab 286: E208–E216, 2004.
114. Thomson DM, Fick CA, Gordon SE. AMPK activation attenuates S6K1, 4E-BP1, and eEF2 signaling responses to high-frequency electri-

caly stimulated skeletal muscle contractions. *J Appl Physiol* 104: 625–632, 2008.

115. Thomson DM, Gordon SE. Diminished overload-induced hypertrophy in aged fast-twitch skeletal muscle is associated with AMPK hyperphosphorylation. *J Appl Physiol* 98: 557–564, 2005.

116. Thomson DM, Herway ST, Fillmore N, Kim H, Brown JD, Barrow JR, Winder WW. AMP-activated protein kinase phosphorylates transcription factors of the CREB family. *J Appl Physiol* 104: 429–438, 2008.

117. Thornton C, Snowden MA, Carling D. Identification of a novel AMP-activated protein kinase beta subunit isoform that is highly expressed in skeletal muscle. *J Biol Chem* 273: 12443–12450, 1998.

118. Tong JF, Yan X, Zhu MJ, Du M. AMP-activated protein kinase enhances the expression of muscle-specific ubiquitin ligases despite its activation of IGF-1/Akt signaling in C2C12 myotubes. *J Cell Biochem* 108: 458–468, 2009.

119. Vander Haar E, Lee SI, Bandhakavi S, Griffin TJ, Kim DH. Insulin signaling to mTOR mediated by the Akt/PKB substrate PRAS40. *Nat Cell Biol* 9: 316–323, 2007.

120. Vavvas D, Apazidis A, Saha AK, Gamble J, Patel A, Kemp BE, Witters LA, Ruderman NB. Contraction-induced changes in acetyl-CoA carboxylase and 5′-AMP-activated kinase in skeletal muscle. *J Biol Chem* 272: 13255–13261, 1997.

121. Walvoort HC, Dormans JA, van den Ingh TS. Comparative pathology of the canine model of glycogen storage disease type II (Pompe's disease). *J Inherit Metab Dis* 8: 38–46, 1985.

122. Winder WW, Hardie DG. Inactivation of acetyl-CoA carboxylase and activation of AMP-activated protein kinase in muscle during exercise. *Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab* 270: E299–E304, 1996.

123. Winder WW, Wilson HA, Hardie DG, Rasmussen BB, Huther CA, Call GB, Clayton RD, Conley LM, Yoon S, Zhou B. Phosphorylation

of rat muscle acetyl-CoA carboxylase by AMP-activated protein kinase and protein kinase A. *J Appl Physiol* 82: 219–225, 1997.

124. Witters LA, Nordlund AC, Marshall L. Regulation of intracellular acetyl-CoA carboxylase by ATP depletors mimics the action of the 5′-AMP-activated protein kinase. *Biochem Biophys Res Commun* 181: 1486–1492, 1991.

125. Wojtaszewski JF, Nielsen P, Hansen BF, Richter EA, Kiens B. Isoform-specific and exercise intensity-dependent activation of 5′-AMP-activated protein kinase in human skeletal muscle. *J Physiol* 528: 221–226, 2000.

126. Wu Z, Puigserver P, Andersson U, Zhang C, Adelmant G, Mootha V, Troy A, Cinti S, Lowell B, Scarpulla RC, Spiegelman BM. Mechanisms controlling mitochondrial biogenesis and respiration through the thermogenic coactivator PGC-1. *Cell* 98: 115–124, 1999.

127. Xiao B, Sanders MJ, Underwood E, Heath R, Mayer FV, Carmena D, Jing C, Walker PA, Eccleston JF, Haire LF, Sainu P, Howell SA, Aasland R, Martin SR, Carling D, Gamblin SJ. Structure of mammalian AMPK and its regulation by ADP. *Nature* 472: 230–233, 2011.

128. Youtani T, Tomoo K, Ishida T, Miyoshi H, Miura K. Regulation of human eIF4E by 4E-BP1: binding analysis using surface plasmon resonance. *IUBMB Life* 49: 27–31, 2000.

129. Zhou G, Myers R, Li Y, Chen Y, Shen X, Fenyk-Melody J, Wu M, Ventre J, Doebber T, Fujii N, Musi N, Hirshman MF, Goodyear LJ, Moller DE. Role of AMP-activated protein kinase in mechanism of metformin action. *J Clin Invest* 108: 1167–1174, 2001.

130. Zou MH, Kirkpatrick SS, Davis BJ, Nelson JS, Wiles WG 4th, Schlattnner U, Neumann D, Brownlee M, Freeman MB, Goldman MH. Activation of the AMP-activated protein kinase by the anti-diabetic drug metformin in vivo. Role of mitochondrial reactive nitrogen species. *J Biol Chem* 279: 43940–43951, 2004.
