
This article was downloaded by: [194.78.115.174]
On: 14 August 2015, At: 00:17
Publisher: Taylor&Francis
Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number: 1072954 Registered office: 5 Howick Place,
London, SW1P 1WG

---

**OncoImmunology**

Publication details, including instructions for authors and subscription information:
[http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/koni20](http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/koni20)

**Hypoxia-inducible factor 1**

Fan Pan<sup>a</sup>, Joseph Barbi<sup>a</sup>& Drew M. Pardoll<sup>a</sup>

<sup>a</sup> Immunology and Hematopoiesis Division; Department of Oncology and Medicine; Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center; Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine;
Baltimore, MD USA

Published online: 01 Jul 2012.

---

To cite this article: Fan Pan, Joseph Barbi & Drew M. Pardoll (2012) Hypoxia-inducible factor 1, OncoImmunology, 1:4, 510-515, DOI:10.4161/onci.19457

To link to this article: [http://dx.doi.org/10.4161/onci.19457](http://dx.doi.org/10.4161/onci.19457)

---

PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE

Taylor&Francis makes every effort to ensure the accuracy of all the information (the “Content”) contained in the publications on our platform. Taylor&Francis, our agents, and our licensors make no representations or warranties whatsoever as to the accuracy, completeness, or suitability for any purpose of the Content. Versions of published Taylor&Francis and Routledge Open articles and Taylor&Francis and Routledge Open Select articles posted to institutional or subject repositories or any other third-party website are without warranty from Taylor&Francis of any kind, either expressed or implied, including, but not limited to, warranties of merchantability, fitness for a particular purpose, or non-infringement. Any opinions and views expressed in this article are the opinions and views of the authors, and are not the views of or endorsed by Taylor&Francis. The accuracy of the Content should not be relied upon and should be independently verified with primary sources of information. Taylor&Francis shall not be liable for any losses, actions, claims, proceedings, demands, costs, expenses, damages, and other liabilities whatsoever or howsoever caused arising directly or indirectly in connection with, in relation to or arising out of the use of the Content.

This article may be used for research, teaching, and private study purposes. Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at [http://www.tandfonline.com/page/terms-and-conditions](http://www.tandfonline.com/page/terms-and-conditions)

It is essential that you check the license status of any given Open and Open Select article to confirm conditions of access and use.

Oncolimmunology 1:4, 510–515; July 2012; © 2012 Landes Bioscience

# Hypoxia-inducible factor 1

## A link between metabolism and T cell differentiation and a potential therapeutic target

### Fan Pan,* Joseph Barbi and Drew M. Pardoll

Immunology and Hematopoiesis Division; Department of Oncology and Medicine; Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center; Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine; Baltimore, MD USA

**Keywords:** hypoxia, HIF1, inflammation, cancer
this metabolically important regulator that expand upon its role in T-cell differentiation and disease.

**Hypoxia Inducible Factor (HIF)-1, a Major Oxygen Sensor and Metabolic Regulatory Transcription Factor, is Involved in the Regulation of the Balance between Treg and T_H17 Cell Differentiation**

HIF-1 is a heterodimeric transcription factor consisting of a highly regulated oxygen sensitive HIF-1α subunit and a constitutively present β subunit (termed HIF-1β or ARNT, which interestingly is also the non-ligand binding subunit of the AHR). H
How HIF-1 and hypoxia impact the immune system is no trivial matter as oxygen levels at sites of infection, inflammation or injury can approach or reach hypoxic levels.¹⁰ Tumors are notorious for their hypoxic or even anoxic regions. Given the likelihood of immune cells encountering low oxygen levels as they execute their various functions in the periphery, how hypoxia and elements of the hypoxic response (such as HIF-1) impact immune cell function is a highly relevant topic. As interest in understanding the complex metabolic regulation of immune responses grows, study of the role of hypoxia-sensing and the HIF
associated with the effectiveness of the response and overall disease outcome.¹⁸ Tregs are known to accumulate in tumor tissues and depleting them or inhibiting their suppressive function increases the effectiveness of certain cancer vaccines. For this reason, the sabotaging of Tregs has become an aim of many developing immunotherapy approaches.

The impact of T<sub>H</sub>17 cells in the tumor setting is less cut-and-dry. While they have been observed to accumulate in many cancer patients often alongside Tregs, their contributions to either tumor progression or tumor eradication is the subject of some debate. T<sub>H</sub>17
Tumor Microenvironment

Suppression of  
anti-tumor  
Effector  
response  

Proinflammatory  
cytokines,  
hypoxia  

CTL  

T  

Treg  

Tumor cell killing  

Tumor progression  

Angiogenesis  

Tumor cell adaptation  

Production of pro-  
angiogenic cytokines  

Figure 2. HIF-1 contributes to the production of IL-17 and in the tumor microenvironment may promote cancer progression through multiple mechanisms. In the tumor microenvironment, Tregs and TH17 cells accumulate. The former population suppresses the action of T effector cells capable of cancer cell eradication (
Acknowledgments

We thank the members of the Pan and Pardoll laboratories and our collaborators. We also apologize to any investigators whose relevant, original work is not discussed in this short review due to oversight or space limitations.

References

1. Zhou L, Chong MM, Littman DR. Plasticity of CD4+ T cell lineage differentiation. Immunity 2009; 30:646-55; PMID:19464987; http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.immuni.2009.05.001