
Circulation Journal  
Official Journal of the Japanese Circulation Society  
http://www.j-circ.or.jp  

REVIEW  

**Cyclic GMP-Dependent Signaling in Cardiac Myocytes**  
Eiki Takimoto, MD, PhD  

Cyclic GMP (cGMP) and its effector kinase PKG regulate diverse cellular functions. In cardiac myocytes, cGMP is produced by soluble and particulate guanylyl cyclases (GCs), the former stimulated by nitric oxide and the latter by natriuretic peptides, and is hydrolyzed to inactive 5′-GMP by cGMP-phosphodiesterases (PDEs). cGMP-PKG modulates cardiac contractility, hypertrophy and remodeling, and exerts cardioprotection. Although early research efforts have mostly focused on cGMP synthetic pathways, recent studies have revealed that cGMP degradation controlled by PDEs plays a critical role in the physiological action of cGMP. Among several cGMP-PDEs, cGMP-specific PDE5 has been intensively investigated. Studies in experimental animal models and humans consistently demonstrate benefits from PDE5 inhibitors in various cardiac pathologies. Several clinical trials are ongoing or planned to test the efficacy of PDE5 inhibitors in human heart disease, including a large multicenter clinical trial (RELAX) led by the NIH evaluating sildenafil efficacy in heart failure with preserved ejection fraction. This review underscores the current understanding of cGMP-PKG signal regulation and its pathophysiological role in the heart, focusing on cardiac myocytes. (Circ J 2012; 76: 1819–1825)

**Key Words:** Cyclic GMP (cGMP); cGMP-dependent protein kinase; Myocytes; Phosphodiesterases

---

Cyclic GMP (cGMP) is the intracellular second messenger that mediates the action of nitric oxide (NO) and natriuretic peptides (NPs).<sup>1,2</sup> It regulates a broad array of physiologic processes in the cardiovascular system, including cardiac contractility, vascular tone, platelet function, and cardiac and vascular remodeling.<sup>1</sup> NO activates soluble guanylyl cyclase (GC) and NP activates membrane-bound GC, to produce cGMP.<sup>2</sup> cGMP exerts its physiological action through cGMP-dependent protein kinase (PKG), cGMP-regulated phosphodiesterases (PDE2, PDE3) and cGMP-gated cation channels, among which PKG might be the primary mediator. Importantly, the cGMP signal is compartmentalized within a cell so that specific targeted proteins can be regulated by the same “generic” cGMP to exert differential physiological effects.<sup>3</sup> Key players in this regulation are the cyclic nucleotide degrading PDEs that are localized to specific subcellular space with confined activity.<sup>3</sup> This review highlights the cardiac regulation of cGMP signaling and its role in cardiac pathophysiology, focusing on cardiac myocytes (Figure).

### **cGMP Generation, Degradation, and Its Effector Kinase**

#### **Generation Via 2 Distinct Pathways**

##### **NO-sGC-cGMP Synthetic Pathway**
NO is a gaseous signaling molecule with a half-life of several seconds. Many key biological signals of NO are mediated by cGMP, while NO also directly modifies protein function via covalent attachment of NO to reduced thiol groups, known as S-nitrosylation.<sup>4</sup> NO is endogenously synthesized from L-arginine by the catalytic action of NO synthases (NOS), and it can be released from nitrovasodilators such as glyceryl trinitrate (nitroglycerin).<sup>5</sup> There are 3 isoforms of NO synthase, including neuronal NOS (nNOS or NOS1), inducible NOS (iNOS or NOS2) and endothelial NOS (eNOS or NOS3).<sup>6</sup> eNOS and nNOS are expressed constitutively and activated by Ca<sup>2+</sup>/calmodulin, whereas iNOS is induced by (inflammatory) stimuli and its activity is Ca<sup>2+</sup>-independent. eNOS is highly expressed in endothelial cells, whereas nNOS is abundant in neurons and skeletal muscle. However, many tissues express all 3 isoforms, including cardiac myocytes. NO activates soluble GC (sGC), a heterodimeric enzyme consisting of α- and β- subunits and a prosthetic heme group with a ferrous iron, and produces cGMP.<sup>7</sup> This enzyme activity is critically affected by redox status: oxidation of the heme moiety on the β-subunit renders the enzyme insensitive to NO. Oxidative stress could compromise this cGMP synthetic pathway by other mechanisms as well. NO forms a reactive oxidant peroxynitrite (ONOO−)<sup>8</sup> in the presence of superoxide (O<sup>2−</sup>), and NOS becomes dysfunctional (uncoupled) under oxidative stress to produce O<sup>2−</sup> rather than NO.<sup>9</sup>

##### **NPs-pGC-cGMP Synthetic Pathway**
The NPs are a family of structurally related polypeptide hormones, including atrial NP (ANP), B-type NP (BNP) and C-type NP (CNP).<sup>10</sup> ANP and BNP are derived primarily from the atria and ventricles of the heart, respectively, whereas CNP is secreted by endothelial cells. NPs bind to membrane-associated GC receptors (pGC or rGC) and produce cGMP. Among the 7 particulate GCs identified, GC-A (also called NP A receptor or NPR-A) and GC-B (also called NPR-B) are important in the cardiovascular system. GC-A is the dominant form, expressed in various tissues.

---

Received May 17, 2012; revised manuscript received June 7, 2012; accepted June 12, 2012; released online June 29, 2012  
Division of Cardiology, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA  
Mailing address: Eiki Takimoto, MD, PhD, FAHA, Division of Cardiology, Johns Hopkins University, 720 Rutland Avenue, Ross 850, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA. E-mail: etakimo1@jhmi.edu  
ISSN-1346-9843 doi:10.1253/circj.CJ-12-0664  
All rights are reserved to the Japanese Circulation Society. For permissions, please e-mail: cj@j-circ.or.jp  

**Circulation Journal Vol.76, August 2012**

NO                      β3AR                  LTCC                 TRPC                GqPCR
AngII, PE, ET1

ANP                     BNP

NOS3

sGC

PDE5                   cGMP

PKGI

Hypertrophy
Remodeling

Contractility

Survival

Figure. Cardiac myocyte cGMP-PKG pathways. cGMP is synthesized by 2 pathways, NO-sGC and NP-pGC pathways, and is under compartmentalized regulation by PDEs. cGMP-PKG regulates cardiac function, hypertrophy/remodeling and cell survival response (see text for details). cGMP, cyclic GMP; NO, nitric oxide; NP, natriuretic peptide; PDE, phosphodiesterase; PKG, cGMP-dependent protein kinase; LTCC, L-type Ca²⁺ channel; TRPC, transient receptor potential canonical; GqPCR, Gq protein coupled receptor; Ang II, angiotensin II; PE, phenylephrine; ET1, endothelin 1; β3AR, β3 adrenergic receptor; cTnl, cardiac troponin I; PLB, phospholamban; p, phosphorylation.

sues, including cardiac myocytes, and the principal receptor for ANP and BNP.¹¹ GC-B, a receptor for CNP, is mainly expressed in the brain and vascular tissues, but some studies have suggested its presence and role in cardiac myocytes.¹²,¹³ NPs-pGC-cGMP synthesis is compromised under disease conditions such as heart failure, because of the desensitization of GC-A.¹⁴

**Degradation by PDEs**

The PDEs are enzymes that hydrolyze cyclic nucleotides (cGMP, cAMP) to the inactive linear form (5′-GMP, 5′-AMP), thereby regulating both the duration and the amplitude of cyclic nucleotide signaling. PDEs comprise a 21-gene superfamily categorized into 11 families (PDE1–PDE11).¹⁵ PDEs 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 8 and 9 are expressed in the heart (Table) and the roles for PDEs 1, 2, 3 and 5 in cardiac cGMP regulation have been investigated. PDE2 and PDE5 harbor allosteric cGMP-binding sites, named GAF domains, located in the N-terminus portion. cGMP-binding affinity to the GAF domain is much higher than to PDE catalytic sites, and cGMP binds to the GAF domain before cyclic nucleotide catalytic action to induce the active state.¹⁵

**PDE1** PDE1 is a dual substrate PDE and is potently activated by Ca⁺/calmodulin.¹⁵ There are 3 isoforms (PDE1A, PDE1B and PDE1C), all expressed in cardiac myocytes.¹⁶,¹⁷ PDE1A and PDE1B hydrolyze cGMP with higher affinity than cAMP, whereas PDE1C, the dominant isoform in human cardiac myocytes, hydrolyzes both with similar affinity.¹⁷ Although PDE1 is a major esterase for both cAMP and cGMP in the myocardium or cardiac myocytes in humans,¹⁶,¹⁸ its physiological effect, particularly in vivo, has not been fully clarified.

**PDE2** PDE2 is a dual substrate esterase with similar affinity for cAMP and cGMP.¹⁵ PDE2 is expressed in cardiac myocytes in various species, including humans,¹⁶ and localized at the plasma membrane and Z-line of cardiac myocytes.¹⁹ Due to the cGMP-sensitive GAF domain, the enzyme functions mainly as a cGMP-stimulated cAMP esterase and thereby a cross-talk regulator between the 2 cyclic nucleotides.²⁰ Through a cAMP modulating function, PDE2 regulates the β-adrenergic cardiac response in a subcellular compartment-selective manner.

**PDE3** PDE3 is also a dual substrate enzyme, known as a cGMP-inhibited cAMP esterase.¹⁵ Although both subtypes, PDE3A and PDE3B, exist in cardiac myocytes, PDE3A is the main subtype and responsible for cardiac functional change caused by PDE3 inhibition.²¹ PDE3 has similar affinity for

cGMP-Dependent Signaling in Cardiac Myocytes

Table. PDEs in the Heart

| PDE isoenzyme | cAMP | cGMP | Heart expression |
|---------------|------|------|------------------|
| PDE1          | Ca²⁺/CaM regulated, Dual specificity | PDE1A: 73–120, PDE1B: 10–24, PDE1C: 0.3–1.2 | PDE1A: 2.6–5, PDE1B: 1.2–5.9, PDE1C: 0.6–2.2 | Yes |
| PDE2          | cGMP-stimulated, Dual specificity | 30–50 | 10–30 | Yes |
| PDE3          | cGMP-inhibited, Dual specificity | 0.02–0.15 | 0.18 | Yes |
| PDE4          | cAMP-specific | 2.9–10 | – | Yes |
| PDE5          | cGMP-specific | – | 1–6.2 | Yes |
| PDE8          | cAMP-specific | 0.15 | – | Yes |
| PDE9          | cGMP-specific | – | 0.17–0.39 | Yes |

PDEs, phosphodiesterases.

cAMP and cGMP, but because of the higher catalytic rate for cAMP than for cGMP, cGMP acts as a competitive inhibitor against its cAMP catalytic action.²

PDE5 PDE5A is a cGMP-specific esterase, abundantly expressed in vascular smooth muscle. Although PDE5A was not originally thought to be expressed in the heart, evidence has accumulated that PDE5A protein is expressed in cardiac myocytes.¹ The most recent study revealed that PDE5 represents ~20% of total cGMP-esterase activity in human cardiac myocytes,¹⁶ though there still remains some debate.¹⁸ PDE5 expression is upregulated in the diseased heart²²⁻²⁵ via an oxidant stress-dependent mechanism,²⁶ and is activated by cGMP binding to the GAF domain and by PKG phosphorylation at Ser 92.¹⁵ A PDE5 inhibitor such as sildenafil occupies its catalytic site as a false substrate to increase cGMP and activate PKG, leading to enhanced activity of the enzyme, and thus the inhibitor's efficacy.²,¹⁵ PDE5 is localized to the Z-band of cardiac myocytes under physiological conditions, but is diffusely distributed in disease conditions.²⁷,²⁸

### cGMP Effector Kinase

#### cGMP-Dependent Protein Kinase I (PKG I)
cGMP-dependent protein kinases (PKGs) are serine/threonine kinases that mediate many of the biological effects of cGMP. PKGI and PKGII are encoded by 2 genes,² and PKGI is the primary isotype in the cardiovascular system. PKGI is a homodimer of identical subunits. Each subunit has 3 functional domains: (1) an N-terminus domain containing a leucine/isoleucine zipper and auto-inhibitory/pseudosubstrate region, (2) a regulatory domain with 2 allosteric cGMP biding sites, and (3) a catalytic domain. The N-terminus of PKGI is encoded by 2 alternative exons that produce 2 splice-variants, PKGIα and PKGIβ. This N-terminal difference provides different cGMP sensitivity (PKGIα is more sensitive to cGMP than PKGIβ by 10-fold) and protein targeting. PKGIα has a unique cysteine (Cys 43), the oxidative modification of which leads to the enzyme activation independently of cGMP.²⁹ This activation mechanism operates basally to control resistance vessel tone, but its role in cardiac myocytes is unknown.³⁰

### cGMP Signal Regulation of Cardiac Myocytes

#### cGMP Regulation of Cardiac Contractility
cGMP negatively modulates contractility, accelerates relaxation and improves the stiffness of cardiac myocytes. These effects might be mediated by direct PKG phosphorylation of proteins, including cardiac troponin I, L-type Ca²⁺ channel, phosphol-
cGMP affects cAMP signaling via cross-talk regulation by cGMP-regulated PDEs (PDE2 or PDE3), and modulates cardiac function. Using a real-time cyclic nucleotide imaging technique, Mongillo et al reported that catecholamine stimulates cGMP via β3AR coupled to eNOS, and activates PDE2-cAMP hydrolysis, attenuating localized accumulation of cAMP.¹⁹ A more recent study has suggested that PDE2 activity is confined to the PKA RII isoforms residing compartment that is functionally coupled to phospholamban or troponin I phosphorylation.⁴² cGMP-cAMP cross-talk involving PDE3 was implicated in pathological right hearts. In a rat model of right ventricular hypertrophy, acute PDE5 inhibition increased myocardial cAMP (as well as cGMP) and cardiac contraction, associated with reduced PDE3 activity.²² A similar positive inotropic effect by PDE5 inhibition was observed in human failing right hearts.²⁴

### cGMP Regulation of Cardiac Hypertrophy and Remodeling

The heart develops hypertrophy in response to pathological stress.⁴³ Although cardiac hypertrophy provides the initial functional compensation response to stress, it evolves into maladaptive remodeling/dilation with functional de-compensation, and can result in overt failure. cGMP signaling plays a “brake”-like role (negative regulator) in the cardiac hypertrophy remodeling process. Gq-agonist-induced hypertrophy in cultured cardiac myocytes is suppressed by ANP, NO, cGMP or PKG.¹ Although an early study using conventional PKGI null animals with vascular re-introduction of PKGIβ failed to demonstrate a significant role for PKGI in cardiac hypertrophy or remodeling, this could be partly because their pressure-load protocol was not severe enough to induce the pathological signal activation that cGMP-PKG targets.⁴⁴ The 2 most recent studies clearly demonstrated the role of PKGI as a key negative regulator of cardiac hypertrophy and remodeling.⁴⁵,⁴⁶ Mice with reduced myocyte PKG activity by cardiac myocyte PDE5 overexpression develop exacerbated hypertrophy and remodeling in response to pressure overload, and normalizing PKG activity by turning off PDE5 overexpression ameliorates the once established remodeling.⁴⁵ Mice with cardiac-specific deletion of PKGI revealed worse remodeling to angiotensin II or pressure overload.⁴⁶ Studies of animals with a modified NP-cGMP pathway have shown consistent results.¹⁰,⁴⁷ Mice lacking NPRA throughout the body show arterial hypertension with a disproportionate degree of cardiac hypertrophy, and mice with cardiac-specific NPRA deletion develop exaggerated hypertrophy in response to pressure overload.¹⁰ Conversely, cardiac overexpression of constitutive active GC inhibits pressure-overload hypertrophy.⁴⁷

Most importantly, small molecule cGMP-PDE inhibitors ameliorate hypertrophy and remodeling. We first reported that the PDE5 inhibitor, sildenafil, activates myocardial PKG and ameliorates cardiac hypertrophy/remodeling in a mouse model of pressure overload.²⁵ Sildenafil efficacy in volume overload remodeling was recently demonstrated in a rat model of chronic mitral valve regurgitation.⁴⁸ Miller et al reported that a PDE1 inhibitor (IC86340) has antihypertrophic effects in cultured cardiac myocytes exposed to Gq-agonist and in chronic isoproterenol-induced hypertrophy in mice.⁴⁹ PDE1 and PDE5 inhibitors show additive antihypertrophic effects, suggesting that these enzymes do not hydrolyze identical intracellular cGMP pools.⁴⁹

Several mechanisms have been suggested for the antihypertrophic/remodeling effects of the cGMP signals. The cardiac hypertrophic response involves activation of various intracellular signaling cascades. Gq-coupled signaling, and in particular, calcineurin, plays a major role in this process.⁵⁰,⁵¹ Fiedler et al first demonstrated in cultured myocytes that PKG deactivates calcineurin via inhibition of the L-type Ca²⁺ channel, blunting the cellular hypertrophy response.⁵² Recently, studies have implicated a role for transient receptor potential canonical (TRPC) 6, a receptor-operated Ca²⁺ channel, in this regulation.⁵³ PKG phosphorylates TRPC6 at Thr 69, 70 and Ser 322, and suppresses its conductance, resulting in inhibition of calcineurin-NFAT signaling. However, calcineurin inhibition is not the sole mechanism, as mice lacking calcineurin Aβ can still develop moderate cardiac hypertrophy in response to pressure overload that is inhibited by PDE5 inhibitor.⁵⁴ Studies have demonstrated a central role for Regulator of G protein Signaling (RGS2 and RGS4) in the cGMP-mediated anti-hypertrophy/remodeling mechanism.⁵⁵,⁵⁶ RGS proteins deactivate G protein-coupled signaling via GTPase activating properties. PKGIα phosphorylates (activates) RGS2 and RGS4, and terminates the Gq signal, inhibiting hypertrophy. We reported that PKG activation by PDE5 inhibitor fails to de-activate multiple hypertrophy signaling cascades in hearts lacking RGS2, resulting in a lack of the antihypertrophic/remodeling effect,⁵⁵ and Tokudome et al reported that RGS4 overexpression ameliorates cardiac spontaneous hypertrophy in NPRA (GCA) null animals.⁵⁶ Recent study suggested that PKG-RGS2 is also involved in the ANP-GCA antihypertrophy.⁵⁷

Lastly, it is worthwhile mentioning the differential response between the right and left heart to PDE5 inhibitor in hypertrophy/remodeling. Interestingly, PDE5 inhibitor fails to exert a direct antihypertrophic effect on right heart hypertrophy induced by surgically induced pressure overload.⁵⁸ This difference might be attributable to fundamental anatomical, biological and physiological differences between the right and left sides of the heart.

### Cardiac Protection by cGMP Signaling: Ischemic Injury and Cardiomyopathy

The cGMP-PKG pathway has been implicated in cardiac protection against cell death-inducing stress, such as ischemic injury and doxorubicin toxicity.⁵⁹,⁶⁰ NO, BNP and 8Br-cGMP all ameliorate cell death in cultured cardiac myocytes exposed to ischemia-reoxygenation,⁶¹ and mice lacking PKGI develop a larger infarct than controls after ischemia-reperfusion.⁶² In vivo and ex vivo studies have revealed that NO donors limit infarct size and improve post-ischemic functional recovery. Such beneficial effects of NO, however, were not consistently observed, which might be attributable to impaired bioavailability of NO because of reactive oxygen species generated during early reperfusion.⁵⁹ Inhibition of NOS during ischemic preconditioning or postconditioning abolishes its cardiac protective effects, suggesting the essential role of NOS-cGMP-PKG in the cardiac protection conferred by preconditioning or post-conditioning.⁵⁹ On the other hand, NPs also limit the infarct size from ischemia-reperfusion injury in animal models and in humans. Kitakaze et al reported that patients with acute myocardial infarction who were given carperitide (recombinant human ANP)⁶³ as an adjunct to reperfusion therapy had smaller infarcts, fewer reperfusion injuries and better clinical outcomes than controls.⁶⁴ Recent studies have revealed potent cardioprotection by PDE5 inhibitors. The infarct-limiting effect of PDE5 inhibitor in myocardial ischemia-reperfusion injury has been reported in mouse, rat and rabbit hearts.⁶⁰

The underlying mechanisms are complex, involving mitochondrial K<sub>ATP</sub> channel (mitoK<sub>ATP</sub>) regulation and stress responsive (survival) signaling cascades.⁵⁹,⁶⁰ Ischemia-reperfusion induces mitochondrial permeability transition (MPT) pore
formation that induces a permeability change of mitochondria, leading to cell death. Ischemic preconditioning potentially inhibits this process, which is mediated by transient opening of mitoK<sub>ATP</sub>.<sup>65</sup> Opening the mitoK<sub>ATP</sub> partially compensates the membrane potential (∆Ψ<sub>m</sub>), which enables additional protons to be pumped out to form an H<sup>+</sup> gradient for both ATP synthesis and Ca<sup>2+</sup> transport.<sup>65</sup> Costa et al reported the mechanism that links PKG to mitoK<sub>ATP</sub> and MPT: PKG increases opening of mitoK<sub>ATP</sub> by PKCε via indirect activation.<sup>66</sup> Rapid influx of K<sup>+</sup> increases the matrix pH and increases H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub> production from complex I, to further activate PKCε coupled to MPT, resulting in MPT inhibition. In addition to direct PKG mitochondrial regulation, other mechanisms might be at play in cGMP-PKG mediated cardioprotection. Phosphorylation of ERK and glycogen synthase kinase 3β (GSK3β) and upregulation of anti-apoptotic bcl2 were reported in ischemia-reperfused hearts treated with PDE5 inhibitor.<sup>67</sup> Although ERK activation lies upstream of this regulation,<sup>68</sup> mitochondrial effects might be directly mediated by GSK3β inactivation (phosphorylation) and upregulated bcl2, the former inhibiting MPT pore formation<sup>69</sup> and the latter inhibiting mitochondrial apoptosis. Fiedler et al reported PKG inhibition of pro-apoptotic p38 MAPK.<sup>62</sup> Ischemia-reperfusion activates p38 via TAB1 (TAK1 binding protein), independently of upstream kinases MKK3 or 6, inducing apoptosis. PKGIα physically associates with p38 MAPK and prevents TAB1 interaction, resulting in reduced p38 activation and ischemia-reperfusion injury.<sup>62</sup> Another protective mechanism involves sarcolemmal Na<sup>+</sup>/K<sup>+</sup> ATPase regulation. Madhani et al reported that sildenafil or PKG phosphorylates phospholemman and activates Na<sup>+</sup>/K<sup>+</sup> ATPase, to limit Na<sup>+</sup> overload and thus Ca<sup>2+</sup> overload during reperfusion.<sup>70</sup>

The cardioprotective effects of cGMP signaling has been demonstrated in some types of cardiomyopathy. Doxorubicin (Dox), an anticancer drug, has cardiac toxicity that ultimately leads to cardiomyopathy. PDE5 inhibitor (sildenafil or tadalafil) improved cardiac function and survival in a rodent model of Dox-cardiomyopathy by attenuating oxidative stress and apoptosis, which might be attributable to upregulation of bcl2 and mitochondrial superoxide dismutase (MnSOD).<sup>60</sup> A genetic mouse model of Duchenne muscular dystrophy lacking dystrophin (mdx) develops cardiomyopathy as do human muscular dystrophy patients. Enhancing cGMP signal by cardiac overexpression of sGC or by PDE5 inhibitor, sildenafil, ameliorates the cardiac phenotype of mdx, including cardiac contractile performance, metabolic status and sarcolemmal integrity,<sup>71</sup> via mechanisms that might involve inhibition of MPT formation.<sup>72</sup> PDE5 inhibitor is effective also in diabetic cardiomyopathy.<sup>60</sup> Tadalafil improves cardiac function in leptin-deficient mice, an animal model for type II diabetes, which is associated with an altered proteomic profile of cytoskeletal rearrangement and redox regulation.

treatment improved cardiac function and exercise performance, associated with reverse remodeling of left atrial volume index and LV mass index, in heart failure patients (New York Heart Association class II–III).<sup>75</sup> Giannetta et al reported anti-remodeling effects and improved cardiac kinetics from 3 months sildenafil treatment in diabetic cardiomyopathy patients.<sup>76</sup> These results suggest that PDE5 inhibition is a promising new approach to treating various human heart diseases. A large placebo-controlled multicenter trial (RELAX, NCT00763867) led by NIH is ongoing to test sildenafil efficacy in heart failure patients with preserved ejection fraction. A single center study is currently testing sildenafil efficacy in cardiomyopathy with Duchenne and Becker muscular dystrophies (REVERS-DBMD, NCT01168908). These studies will soon provide more information on the clinical benefit of PDE5 inhibitor treatment in human heart disease. On the other hand, BNP (nesiritide) was introduced into clinical practice in 2001 for early relief of dyspnea in acute heart failure patients, because of its vasodilatory properties. However, recent evaluation in a large randomized trial showed minimal benefit and an increased risk of hypotension.<sup>77</sup> The efficacy of combined use of tadalafil and nesiritide is being tested in subclinical heart failure patients, in whom the expected benefit is renal function improvement rather than a direct cardiac effect (NCT01544998). Considering that the enzymes for cGMP synthesis, including NOS, sCG and GC-A, could be “uncoupled” from cGMP synthesis under chronic stress conditions, stimulation of sGC with a redox-insensitive activator and/or re-coupling of NOS with tetrahydrobiopterin (BH4) might have intriguing potential as a strategy to enhance cGMP signaling other than inhibiting cGMP degradation.

In summary, the cardiac cGMP system plays a key role in protection against various cardiac pathologies, including hypertrophy, heart failure, ischemic injury and cardiomyopathy. PDE5 inhibitors, in particular, are a promising therapeutic modality to enhance this signal, and efficacy has been demonstrated in human heart failure and diabetic cardiomyopathy. Ongoing and future large-scale clinical trials will determine whether the therapy will have long-term beneficial effects on cardiac remodeling and a reduction in major cardiac events. NP (nesiritide) failed to show benefit in acute decompensated heart failure, but its cardioprotective effect, particularly against ischemic injury, warrants further investigation.<sup>78</sup>

**Acknowledgments**

This work was supported by National Institute of Health (RO1 093432) and American Heart Association (11GRNT7700071).

**References**

1. Tsai EJ, Kass DA. Cyclic GMP signaling in cardiovascular pathophysiology and therapeutics. *Pharmacol Ther* 2009; **122**: 216–238.
2. Francis SH, Busch JL, Corbin JD, Sibley D. cGMP-dependent protein kinases and cGMP phosphodiesterases in nitric oxide and cGMP action. *Pharmacol Rev* 2010; **62**: 525–563.
3. Fischmeister R, Castro LR, bi-Gerges A, Rochais F, Jurevicius J, Leroy J, et al. Compartmentation of cyclic nucleotide signaling in the heart: The role of cyclic nucleotide phosphodiesterases. *Circ Res* 2006; **99**: 816–828.
4. Lima B, Forrester MT, Hess DT, Stamler JS. S-nitrosylation in cardiovascular signaling. *Circ Res* 2010; **106**: 633–646.
5. Nakahira A, Minamiyama Y, Takemura S, Hirai H, Sasaki Y, Okada S, et al. Coadministration of carvedilol attenuates nitrate tolerance by preventing cytochrome p450 depletion. *Circ J* 2010; **74**: 1711–1717.
6. Ziolo MT, Kohr MJ, Wang H. Nitric oxide signaling and the regulation of myocardial function. *J Mol Cell Cardiol* 2008; **45**: 625–632.
7. Friebe A, Koesling D. The function of NO-sensitive guanylyl cy-

clase: What we can learn from genetic mouse models. Nitric Oxide 2009; **21**: 149–156.

8. Heo KS, Fujiwara K, Abe J. Disturbed-flow-mediated vascular reactive oxygen species induce endothelial dysfunction. *Circ J* 2011; **75**: 2722–2730.

9. Takimoto E, Kass DA. Role of oxidative stress in cardiac hypertrophy and remodeling. *Hypertension* 2007; **49**: 241–248.

10. Kishimoto I, Tokudome T, Nakao K, Kangawa K. Natriuretic peptide system: An overview of studies using genetically engineered animal models. *FEBS J* 2011; **278**: 1830–1841.

11. Kuhn M. Structure, regulation, and function of mammalian membrane guanylyl cyclase receptors, with a focus on guanylyl cyclase-A. *Circ Res* 2003; **93**: 700–709.

12. Kalra PR, Clague JR, Bolger AP, Anker SD, Poole-Wilson PA, Struthers AD, et al. Myocardial production of C-type natriuretic peptide in chronic heart failure. *Circulation* 2003; **107**: 571–573.

13. Wollert KC, Yurukova S, Kilic A, Begrow F, Fiedler B, Gambaryan S, et al. Increased effects of C-type natriuretic peptide on contractility and calcium regulation in murine hearts overexpressing cyclic GMP-dependent protein kinase I. *Br J Pharmacol* 2003; **140**: 1227–1236.

14. Schlossmann J, Ammendola A, Ashman K, Zong X, Huber A, Neubauer G, et al. Regulation of intracellular calcium by a signalling complex of IRAG, IP3 receptor and cGMP kinase Ib eta. *Nature* 2000; **404**: 197–201.

15. Francis SH, Blount MA, Corbin JD. Mammalian cyclic nucleotide phosphodiesterases: Molecular mechanisms and physiological functions. *Physiol Rev* 2011; **91**: 651–690.

16. Johnson WB, Katugampola S, Able S, Napier C, Harding SE. Profiling of cAMP and cGMP phosphodiesterases in isolated ventricular cardiomyocytes from human hearts: Comparison with rat and guinea pig. *Life Sci* 2012; **90**: 328–336.

17. Vandeput F, Wolda SL, Krall J, Hambleton R, Uher L, McCaw KN, et al. Cyclic nucleotide phosphodiesterase PDE1C1 in human cardiac myocytes. *J Biol Chem* 2007; **282**: 32749–32757.

18. Vandeput F, Krall J, Ockaili R, Salloum FN, Florio V, Corbin JD, et al. cGMP-hydrolytic activity and its inhibition by sildenafil in normal and failing human and mouse myocardium. *J Pharmacol Exp Ther* 2009; **330**: 884–891.

19. Mongillo M, Tocchetti CG, Terrin A, Lissandron V, Cheung YF, Dostmann WR, et al. Compartmentalized phosphodiesterase-2 activity blunts beta-adrenergic cardiac inotropy via an NO/cGMP-dependent pathway. *Circ Res* 2006; **98**: 226–234.

20. Zaccolo M, Movsesian MA. cAMP and cGMP signaling cross-talk: Role of phosphodiesterases and implications for cardiac pathophysiology. *Circ Res* 2007; **100**: 1569–1578.

21. Sun B, Li H, Shakur Y, Hensley J, Hockman S, Kambayashi J, et al. Role of phosphodiesterase type 3A and 3B in regulating platelet and cardiac function using subtype-selective knockout mice. *Cell Signal* 2007; **19**: 1765–1771.

22. Nagendran J, Archer SL, Soliman D, Gurtu V, Moudgil R, Haromy A, et al. Phosphodiesterase type 5 is highly expressed in the hypertrophied human right ventricle, and acute inhibition of phosphodiesterase type 5 improves contractility. *Circulation* 2007; **116**: 238–248.

23. Pokreisz P, Vandenwijngaert S, Bito V, Van den BA, Lenaerts I, Busch C, et al. Ventricular phosphodiesterase-5 expression is increased in patients with advanced heart failure and contributes to adverse ventricular remodeling after myocardial infarction in mice. *Circulation* 2009; **119**: 408–416.

24. Shan X, Quaile MP, Monk JK, French B, Cappola TP, Margulies KB. Differential expression of PDE5 in failing and nonfailing human myocardium. *Circ Heart Fail* 2012; **5**: 79–86.

25. Takimoto E, Champion HC, Li M, Belardi D, Ren S, Rodriguez ER, et al. Chronic inhibition of cyclic GMP phosphodiesterase 5A prevents and reverses cardiac hypertrophy. *Nat Med* 2005; **11**: 214–222.

26. Lu Z, Xu X, Hu X, Lee S, Traverse JH, Zhu G, et al. Oxidative stress regulates left ventricular PDE5 expression in the failing heart. *Circulation* 2010; **121**: 1474–1483.

27. Senzaki H, Smith CJ, Juang GJ, Isoda T, Mayer SP, Ohler A, et al. Cardiac phosphodiesterase 5 (cGMP-specific) modulates beta-adrenergic signaling in vivo and is down-regulated in heart failure. *FASEB J* 2001; **15**: 1718–1726.

28. Takimoto E, Champion HC, Belardi D, Moslehi J, Mongillo M, Mergia E, et al. cGMP catabolism by phosphodiesterase 5A regulates cardiac adrenergic stimulation by NOS3-dependent mechanism. *Circ Res* 2005; **96**: 100–109.

29. Burgoyne JR, Madhani M, Cuello F, Charles RL, Brennan JP, Schroder E, et al. Cysteine redox sensor in PKGIa enables oxidant-induced activation. *Science* 2007; **317**: 1393–1397.

30. Prysyazhna O, Rudyk O, Eaton P. Single atom substitution in mouse

protein kinase G eliminates oxidant sensing to cause hypertension. *Nat Med* 2012; **18**: 286–290.

31. Wegener JW, Nawrath H, Wolfsgruber W, Kuhbandner S, Werner C, Hofmann F, et al. cGMP-dependent protein kinase I mediates the negative inotropic effect of cGMP in the murine myocardium. *Circ Res* 2002; **90**: 18–20.

32. Layland J, Li JM, Shah AM. Role of cyclic GMP-dependent protein kinase in the contractile response to exogenous nitric oxide in rat cardiac myocytes. *J Physiol* 2002; **540**: 457–467.

33. Wang H, Kohr MJ, Traynham CJ, Ziolo MT. Phosphodiesterase 5 restricts NOS3/Soluble guanylate cyclase signaling to L-type Ca²⁺ current in cardiac myocytes. *J Mol Cell Cardiol* 2009; **47**: 304–314.

34. Wang H, Viatchenko-Karpinski S, Sun J, Gyorke I, Benkusky NA, Kohr MJ, et al. Regulation of myocyte contraction via neuronal nitric oxide synthase: Role of ryanodine receptor S-nitrosylation. *J Physiol* 2010; **588**: 2905–2917.

35. Lee DI, Vahebi S, Tocchetti CG, Barouch LA, Solaro RJ, Takimoto E, et al. PDE5A suppression of acute beta-adrenergic activation requires modulation of myocyte beta-3 signaling coupled to PKG-mediated troponin I phosphorylation. *Basic Res Cardiol* 2010; **105**: 337–347.

36. Yang L, Liu G, Zakharov SI, Bellinger AM, Mongillo M, Marx SO. Protein kinase G phosphorylates Cav1.2 alpha1c and beta2 subunits. *Circ Res* 2007; **101**: 465–474.

37. Borlaug BA, Melenovsky V, Marhin T, Fitzgerald P, Kass DA. Sildenafil inhibits beta-adrenergic-stimulated cardiac contractility in humans. *Circulation* 2005; **112**: 2642–2649.

38. Takimoto E, Belardi D, Tocchetti CG, Vahebi S, Cormaci G, Ketner EA, et al. Compartmentalization of cardiac beta-adrenergic inotropy modulation by phosphodiesterase type 5. *Circulation* 2007; **115**: 2159–2167.

39. Lainchbury JG, Burnett JC Jr, Meyer D, Redfield MM. Effects of natriuretic peptides on load and myocardial function in normal and heart failure dogs. *Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol* 2000; **278**: H33–H40.

40. Bishu K, Hamdani N, Mohammed SF, Kruger M, Ohtani T, Ogut O, et al. Sildenafil and B-type natriuretic peptide acutely phosphorylate titin and improve diastolic distensibility in vivo. *Circulation* 2011; **124**: 2882–2891.

41. Kruger M, Kotter S, Grutzner A, Lang P, Andresen C, Redfield MM, et al. Protein kinase G modulates human myocardial passive stiffness by phosphorylation of the titin springs. *Circ Res* 2009; **104**: 87–94.

42. Stangherlin A, Gesellchen F, Zoccarato A, Terrin A, Fields LA, Berrera M, et al. cGMP signals modulate cAMP levels in a compartment-specific manner to regulate catecholamine-dependent signaling in cardiac myocytes. *Circ Res* 2011; **108**: 929–939.

43. Frey N, Olson EN. Cardiac hypertrophy: The good, the bad, and the ugly. *Annu Rev Physiol* 2003; **65**: 45–79.

44. Kass DA, Takimoto E. Regulation and role of myocyte cyclic GMP-dependent protein kinase-1. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA* 2010; **107**: E98; author reply E99.

45. Zhang M, Takimoto E, Hsu S, Lee DI, Nagayama T, Danner T, et al. Myocardial remodeling is controlled by myocyte-targeted gene regulation of phosphodiesterase type 5. *J Am Coll Cardiol* 2010; **56**: 2021–2030.

46. Frantz S, Klaiber M, Baba HA, Oberwinkler H, Volker K, Gabetaner B, et al. Stress-dependent dilated cardiomyopathy in mice with cardiomyocyte-restricted inactivation of cyclic GMP-dependent protein kinase I. *Eur Heart J* 2011 December 23 [Epub ahead of print].

47. Zahabi A, Picard S, Fortin N, Reudelhuber TL, Deschepper CF. Expression of constitutively active guanylate cyclase in cardiomyocytes inhibits the hypertrophic effects of isoproterenol and aortic constriction on mouse hearts. *J Biol Chem* 2003; **278**: 47694–47699.

48. Kim KH, Kim YJ, Ohn JH, Yang J, Lee SE, Lee SW, et al. Long-term effects of sildenafil in a rat model of chronic mitral regurgitation: Benefits of ventricular remodeling and exercise capacity. *Circulation* 2012; **125**: 1390–1401.

49. Miller CL, Oikawa M, Cai Y, Wojtovich AP, Nagel DJ, Xu X, et al. Role of Ca²⁺/calmodulin-stimulated cyclic nucleotide phosphodies- terase 1 in mediating cardiomyocyte hypertrophy. *Circ Res* 2009; **105**: 956–964.

50. Dorn GW 2nd, Force T. Protein kinase cascades in the regulation of cardiac hypertrophy. *J Clin Invest* 2005; **115**: 527–537.

51. Fiedler B, Wollert KC. Interference of antihypertrophic molecules and signaling pathways with the Ca²⁺-calcineurin-NFAT cascade in cardiac myocytes. *Cardiovasc Res* 2004; **63**: 450–457.

52. Fiedler B, Lohmann SM, Smolenski A, Linnemuller S, Pieske B, Schroder F, et al. Inhibition of calcineurin-NFAT hypertrophy signaling by cGMP-dependent protein kinase type I in cardiac myocytes. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA* 2002; **99**: 11363–11368.

53. Koitabashi N, Aiba T, Hesketh GG, Rowell J, Zhang M, Takimoto E,

et al. Cyclic GMP/PKG-dependent inhibition of TRPC6 channel activity and expression negatively regulates cardiomyocyte NFAT activation. Novel mechanism of cardiac stress modulation by PDE5 inhibition. *J Mol Cell Cardiol* 2010; **48**: 713–724.

Hsu S, Nagayama T, Koitabashi N, Zhang M, Zhou L, Bedja D, et al. Phosphodiesterase 5 inhibition blocks pressure overload-induced cardiac hypertrophy independent of the calcineurin pathway. *Cardiovasc Res* 2009; **81**: 301–309.

Takimoto E, Koitabashi N, Hsu S, Ketner EA, Zhang M, Nagayama T, et al. Regulator of G protein signaling 2 mediates cardiac compensation to pressure overload and antihypertrophic effects of PDE5 inhibition in mice. *J Clin Invest* 2009; **119**: 408–420.

Tokudome T, Kishimoto I, Horio T, Arai Y, Schwenke DO, Hino J, et al. Regulator of G-protein signaling subtype 4 mediates antihypertrophic effect of locally secreted natriuretic peptides in the heart. *Circulation* 2008; **117**: 2329–2339.

Klaiber M, Kruse M, Volker K, Schroter J, Feil R, Freichel M, et al. Novel insights into the mechanisms mediating the local antihypertrophic effects of cardiac atrial natriuretic peptide: Role of cGMP-dependent protein kinase and RGS2. *Basic Res Cardiol* 2010; **105**: 583–595.

Schafer S, Ellinghaus P, Janssen W, Kramer F, Lustig K, Milting H, et al. Chronic inhibition of phosphodiesterase 5 does not prevent pressure-overload-induced right-ventricular remodelling. *Cardiovasc Res* 2009; **82**: 30–39.

Burley DS, Ferdinandy P, Baxter GF. Cyclic GMP and protein kinase-G in myocardial ischaemia-reperfusion: Opportunities and obstacles for survival signaling. *Br J Pharmacol* 2007; **152**: 855–869.

Kukreja RC, Salloum FN, Das A, Koka S, Ockaili RA, Xi L. Emerging new uses of phosphodiesterase-5 inhibitors in cardiovascular diseases. *Exp Clin Cardiol* 2011; **16**: e30–e35.

Gorbe A, Giricz Z, Szunyog A, Csont T, Burley DS, Baxter GF, et al. Role of cGMP-PKG signaling in the protection of neonatal rat cardiac myocytes subjected to simulated ischemia/reoxygenation. *Basic Res Cardiol* 2010; **105**: 643–650.

Fiedler B, Feil R, Hofmann F, Willenbockel C, Drexler H, Smolenski A, et al. cGMP-dependent protein kinase type I inhibits TAB1-p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase apoptosis signaling in cardiac myocytes. *J Biol Chem* 2006; **281**: 32831–32840.

Takahashi R, Uchiyama A, Iguchi N, Mashimo T, Fujino Y. Effects of continuous venovenous hemofiltration on the pharmacology of carperitide, a recombinant human atrial natriuretic peptide. *Circ J* 2010; **74**: 1888–1894.

Kitakaze M, Asakura M, Kim J, Shintani Y, Asanuma H, Hamasaki T, et al. Human atrial natriuretic peptide and nicorandil as adjuncts to reperfusion treatment for acute myocardial infarction (J-WIND): Two randomized trials. *Lancet* 2007; **370**: 1483–1493.

Ardahali H, O’Rourke B. Mitochondrial K(ATP) channels in cell survival and death. *J Mol Cell Cardiol* 2005; **39**: 7–16.

Costa AD, Garlid KD, West IC, Lincoln TM, Downey JM, Cohen MV, et al. Protein kinase G transmits the cardioprotective signal from cytosol to mitochondria. *Circ Res* 2005; **97**: 329–336.

Das A, Xi L, Kukreja RC. Protein kinase G-dependent cardioprotective mechanism of phosphodiesterase-5 inhibition involves phosphorylation of ERK and GSK3beta. *J Biol Chem* 2008; **283**: 29572–29585.

Das A, Salloum FN, Xi L, Rao YJ, Kukreja RC. ERK phosphorylation mediates sildenafil-induced myocardial protection against ischemia-reperfusion injury in mice. *Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol* 2009; **296**: H1236–H1243.

Sanada S, Komuro I, Kitakaze M. Pathophysiology of myocardial reperfusion injury: Preconditioning, postconditioning, and translational aspects of protective measures. *Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol* 2011; **301**: H1723–H1741.

Madhani M, Hall AR, Cuello F, Charles RL, Burgoyne JR, Fuller W, et al. Phospholemman Ser69 phosphorylation contributes to sildenafil-induced cardioprotection against reperfusion injury. *Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol* 2010; **299**: H827–H836.

Khairallah M, Khairallah RJ, Young ME, Allen BG, Gillis MA, Danialou G, et al. Sildenafil and cardiomyocyte-specific cGMP signaling prevent cardiomyopathic changes associated with dystrophin deficiency. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA* 2008; **105**: 7028–7033.

Ascah A, Khairallah M, Daussin F, Bourcier-Lucas C, Godin R, Allen BG, et al. Stress-induced opening of the permeability transition pore in the dystrophin-deficient heart is attenuated by acute treatment with sildenafil. *Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol* 2011; **300**: H144–H153.

Lewis GD, Lachmann J, Camuso J, Lepore JJ, Shin J, Martinovic ME, et al. Sildenafil improves exercise hemodynamics and oxygen uptake in patients with systolic heart failure. *Circulation* 2007; **115**: 59–66.

Lindman BR, Zajarias A, Madrazo JA, Shah J, Gage BF, Novak E, et al. Effects of phosphodiesterase type 5 inhibition on systemic and pulmonary hemodynamics and ventricular function in patients with severe symptomatic aortic stenosis. *Circulation* 2012; **125**: 2353–2362.

Guazzi M, Vicenzi M, Arena R, Guazzi MD. PDE5 inhibition with sildenafil improves left ventricular diastolic function, cardiac geometry, and clinical status in patients with stable systolic heart failure: Results of a 1-year, prospective, randomized, placebo-controlled study. *Circ Heart Fail* 2011; **4**: 8–17.

Giannetta E, Isidori AM, Galea N, Carbone I, Mandosi E, Vizza CD, et al. Chronic inhibition of cyclic GMP phosphodiesterase 5a improves diabetic cardiomyopathy: A randomized, controlled clinical trial using magnetic resonance imaging with myocardial tagging. *Circulation* 2012; **125**: 2323–2333.

O’Connor CM, Starling RC, Hernandez AF, Armstrong PW, Dickstein K, Hasselblad V, et al. Effect of nesiritide in patients with acute decompensated heart failure. *N Engl J Med* 2011; **365**: 32–43.

Sezai A, Wakui S, Akiyama K, Hata M, Yoshitake I, Unosawa S, et al. Myocardial protective effect of human atrial natriuretic peptide in cardiac surgery: “hANP shot” in clinical safety trial. *Circ J* 2011; **75**: 2144–2150.
