
ARTICLE IN PRESS

Archives of Biochemistry and Biophysics xxx (2012) xxx–xxx

Contents lists available at SciVerse ScienceDirect  
Archives of Biochemistry and Biophysics  
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/yabbi  

Review

FoxOs in neural stem cell fate decision

Seung-Hyun Ro, Debra Liu, Hyeonju Yeo, Ji-hye Paik*

Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, NY 10065, USA

---

**A R T I C L E I N F O**

Article history:  
Available online xxxx  

Keywords:  
Neural stem cell  
FoxO  
Homeostasis  
Oxidative stress  
Aging  
Cell cycle  
Autophagy  
Apoptosis  
Differentiation  

---

**A B S T R A C T**

Neural stem cells (NSCs) persist over the lifespan of mammals to give rise to committed progenitors and their differentiated cells in order to maintain the brain homeostasis. To this end, NSCs must be able to self-renew and otherwise maintain their quiescence. Suppression of aberrant proliferation or undesired differentiation is crucial to preclude either malignant growth or precocious depletion of NSCs. The PI3K-Akt-FoxO signaling pathway plays a central role in the regulation of multiple stem cells including one in the mammalian brain. In particular, members of FoxO family transcription factors are highly expressed in these stem cells. As an important downstream effector of growth, differentiation, and stress stimuli, mammalian FoxO transcription factor family controls cellular proliferation, oxidative stress response, homeostasis, and eventual maintenance of long-term repopulating potential. The review will focus on the current understanding of FoxO function in NSCs as well as discuss their biological activities that contribute to determining neural stem cell fate.

© 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

---

Introduction

Neural stem cells (NSCs),¹ or multipotent neural progenitor cells, are a dynamic population of cells in the brain that respond not only to injury but also to various physiological stimuli of exercise, nutrients, and stress [1]. NSCs are organized in a specialized microenvironment, called neurogenic niche, that provides supportive cells such as endothelial and anchor cells [2,3]. The most well characterized niches are the subventricular zone of the lateral ventricles (SVZ/LV) [4] and the subgranular zone of the dentate gyrus (SGZ/DG) within the hippocampus [5]. The NSCs in neurogenic niches are readily identified by selective markers such as the intermediate filament Nestin [6], RNA binding protein- Musashi1 [7], or SRY (sex determining region Y) box (SOX) 2 [8]. NSCs from these neurogenic niches self-renew by symmetric division to maintain their population [9] and to give rise to neural progenitor cells such as neuroblasts and glioblasts, which can differentiate into neurons, astrocytes and oligodendrocytes by asymmetric division [10–12]. Neuroblasts originating from NSCs can migrate through the rostral migratory stream

* Corresponding author.  
E-mail address: jep2025@med.cornell.edu (J.-h. Paik).  
¹ Abbreviations used: NSC, neural stem cells; SVZ/LV, subventricular zone of the lateral ventricles; SGZ/DG, subgranular zone of the dentate gyrus; RMS, rostral migratory stream; RTK, receptor tyrosine kinase; JNK, c-Jun N-terminal kinase; AMPK, AMP-activated protein kinase; HSCs, hematopoietic stem cells; IGF, insulin/insulin-like growth factor; ASPM, abnormal spindle-like microcephaly-associated; Cdk, cyclin-dependent kinases; ROS, reactive oxygen species ; MnSOD, Manganese superoxide dismutase; Maml1, mastermind-like 1; Shh, Sonic hedgehog; SRY, sex determining region Y; MAPK, mitogen-activated protein kinase.

(RMS) to the olfactory bulb [13] or differentiate into neurons integrating into the granule cell layer of the DG of the hippocampus [14]. Spatial or fear learning and memory formation occurs in the hippocampus using newborn neurons from the NSCs in the DG [15–18]. In mammals, both the number and neurogenic capacity of NSCs decline with age in correlation with the loss of cognitive and sensory functions [19,20]. In this review, we discuss the role of evolutionarily conserved, pro-longevity FoxO transcription factor, in determination of neural stem cell fate.

Mammalian FoxO transcription factors

The FoxO family belongs to an evolutionarily conserved group of forkhead transcription factors. Mammals have four isoforms of the FoxO family: FoxO 1 [FKHR], 3a [FKHRL1], 4 [AFX], and the less related FoxO6. This family garnered considerable attention as a result of their association with lifespan extension in worms and fruit flies under caloric restriction, which offsets insulin/IGF signaling [21,22]. FoxOs (FoxO1, 3a, 4 isoforms, hereinafter referred as ‘FoxOs’) are well established downstream effectors of insulin/IGF and other growth factor-activated receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK)-phosphoinositide-3-kinase (PI3K) signaling pathway. Akt directly phosphorylates FoxOs on three conserved residues (T32, S253 and S315 based on human FOXO3A protein), promoting their export from the nucleus by binding to 14-3-3, resulting in the repression of FoxO-dependent transcription [23]. Besides Akt, a number of mitochondrial signaling kinases also phosphorylate FoxOs to negatively regulate their activity. Reportedly, SGK1, CK1, CDK2, ERK, and IKK inhibit transcriptional activity of FoxOs by phosphorylating on multiple residues [24–28]. In contrast, the stress-activated c-Jun

0003-9861/$ - see front matter © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.  
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.abb.2012.07.017

Please cite this article in press as: S.-H. Ro et al., Arch. Biochem. Biophys. (2012), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.abb.2012.07.017

ARTICLE IN PRESS

S.-H. Ro et al./Archives of Biochemistry and Biophysics xxx (2012) xxx–xxx

N-terminal kinase (JNK) and the energy sensing AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK), upon oxidative and nutrient stress stimuli phosphorylate and activate FoxOs [29,30]. Alternatively, (de)acetylation of FoxOs through interaction with transcriptional co-activator or co-repressor complexes contributes to their transcriptional activity [31–34]. Furthermore, FoxOs become ubiquitinated by Skp2 or Mdm2 and targeted for protein degradation [35,36]. Readers are referred to a recent review further detailing the regulation of FoxOs by posttranslational modifications [37]. How these regulatory pathways play a role in NSC homeostasis will be discussed later.

FoxO genes were initially identified at the chromosomal breakpoints in rhabdomyosarcomas and acute leukemia [38–41]. A number of subsequent studies reported genomic loss and diminished nuclear expression of FoxOs in human cancers, raising the possibility of their tumor suppressor role in humans [28,42,43]. Importantly, the relevance of FoxOs in cancer and their role in normal tissue homeostasis was demonstrated by a systematic evaluation of FoxO family function *in vivo* [44,45]. Broad somatic deletion of all three functionally redundant FoxOs in adult mice led to tissue-restricted tumor phenotypes with precocious loss of the tissue stem cell populations. Evidence on the essentiality of FoxO transcription factors in multiple tissue progenitor/stem cell homeostasis is rapidly growing. To date, NSCs, hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs), muscle progenitors, mesenchymal stem cells, and even embryonic stem cells are shown to be reliant on FoxOs for their proper function [46–51].

Physiological roles of FoxOs in the mammalian brain reported to date include regulation of food intake, brain mass through affecting neural progenitor proliferation during the brain development, lifelong neurogenesis, neuronal death under activity-deprivation, and neuronal polarity, among others [46,52–54]. In C elegans models of neurodegeneration, FoxO exhibited neuroprotective effect either as a downstream effector of Sir2 in protecting cells from mutant polyglutamines or by promoting cellular survival against toxic protein aggregation [55,56]. Initially, the critical function of FoxOs in regulation of cycling and maintenance of HSC raised question on their role in the brain, an organ which has a very slow turnover. In closely related studies, brain specific ablation of FoxO3a or combinatorial inactivation of three major FoxOs 1/3a/4 exploiting neural progenitor targeting Cre-recombinase expression, revealed phenotypic resemblance of enlarged brain with age-dependent depletion of NSC population. Furthermore, an ex vivo neurosphere formation assay demonstrated decreased self renewal capacity of FoxO knockout cells in an age-dependent fashion further highlighting cell autonomous defects [46,57]. The increase in brain size accompanies the up-regulation of ASPM (abnormal spindle-like microcephaly-associated), one of the human microcephaly genes. Decreased self-renewal and multipotency of FoxO-deficient NSCs are partially due to intracellular ROS accumulation, which leads to decreased NSC reserve and neurogenesis. In a single knockout of FoxO3a, a predominantly expressed isoform in NSCs, gene expression profile from NSCs showed sets of genes involved in cellular quiescence, differentiation, and oxygen metabolism. With p27<sup>KIP1</sup> and Ddit4 as direct targets, FoxO3a maintains NSC quiescence by regulating their entry into the cell cycle and proliferative potential under hypoxic conditions, preventing premature differentiation [46]. Both studies present only partially overlapping set of differentially expressed genes between wild type control and FoxO-deleted NSCs [58]. This could be due to compensatory activation of other FoxO isoforms in FoxO3a single knockout or different strategies to induce the deletion of FoxOs employed. Deciphering the regulatory pathways converging on FoxO regulation should help us to understand NSC fate determination under different contexts.

Factors regulating FoxOs in NSC biology

Nutrient and energy stress signaling pathways regulate FoxOs and are important for NSC maintenance [1,59]. An experimentally-induced obese animal model under a high fat diet with associated dementia exhibited lowered expression of FoxO3a and 6 in the brain. This suggests that reduced level of FoxOs in insulin/insulin-like growth factor (IGF) signaling may be a contributing factor for obesity associated cognitive decline [60,61]. Likewise, a systemic level of insulin/IGF is affected by calorie intake and influences NSC fate. In particular, IGF is a potent mitogenic stimuli that increases self-renewal and subsequent neurogenesis. It is highly expressed in the neurogenic niches of SVZ and DG and promotes self-renewal and proliferations of neural progenitors [62,63]. IGF acts through its cognate receptor IGF-R and IRS-mediated activation of PI3 K-PDK1-AKT signaling cascade (Fig. 1A). Akt further activates mTOR or inhibits FoxO branches, which then regulate stem cell growth and quiescence. Conditional inactivation of Pten in the brain, the epistatic upstream regulator of FoxOs, resulted in increased cell cycling and self-renewal of NSCs [64,65]. Disruption of the Pdk1 gene causes microcephaly and rescues hypertrophy of Pten deficient brain further confirming epistatic action of the pathway in the regulation of mammalian brain size [66].

The Tsc1/2-mTOR pathway is parallel to FoxO and both are directly regulated by Akt. Cross talk between mTOR and FoxO-mediated cellular responses has been described previously [67,68]. In an animal study targeting Tsc1, consequent hyperactivation of mTOR in embryonic telencephalic NSCs increased SVZ neural progenitors and their premature differentiation during both embryonic and postnatal development. Notably, increased differentiation of NSCs is due to the inhibition of Akt and concomitant activation of STAT3 by feedback regulation [69]. In another study, deletion of Tsc1 in Nestin-positive NSCs generated giant, vacuolated cells that ultimately led to epilepsy and premature death of animals. Interestingly, these cells presented markedly increased mitochondrial mass, aberrant lysosomes, and increased cellular stress, suggesting incompatibility of hyperactivated mTOR with long-term regenerative potential of NSCs [70]. Instead, mTOR is activated in insulin mediated neuronal differentiation, suggesting its role as a mediator of NSC fate decision [71].

AMPK phosphorylates FoxO on multiple residues [30] and thus poses as an important regulator of FoxO in dietary restriction-induced longevity and stem cell biology. AMPK is activated upon low ATP and high AMP conditions leading to an increase in fatty acid oxidation, glucose uptake and inhibition of the mTOR-mediated growth pathway [72–74]. Operation of the AMPK-mediated response is essential to maintain the NSC pool. AMPKβ1 null mice have abnormal brain development [75]. Defects in these animals are not limited to progenitors but are structural and functional in the whole brain. Nevertheless, reduction in brain size may be due to decreased progenitor proliferation due to hypo-phosphorylation of Rb. Furthermore, priming neural progenitors by 2-Deoxy-glucose (2-DG) treatment activates AMPK and protects cells from oxidative stress [76]. Together, these studies suggest that AMPK is particularly important for neural progenitors in managing energy homeostasis, proliferation control, and survival.

Regulation of FoxO by Sirt1 has diverse physiological implications. Sirt1 regulates FoxO-mediated transcriptional activity in response to oxidative stress [77–80]. An oxidative state induced neural progenitors specifically into differentiation of astrocytes lineages by Sirt1 activation whereas the reducing state promotes neuron lineages, implying that Sirt1 is the main regulator of cell fate determination in multipotent neural progenitors [81]. In another study, Sirt1 promotes neuronal differentiation through binding to a co-repressor NcoR. In the embryonic brain, impaired neuronal

Please cite this article in press as: S.-H. Ro et al., Arch. Biochem. Biophys. (2012), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.abb.2012.07.017

differentiation and migration of neural progenitors were observed upon inhibiting Sirt1 expression [82]. However, the significance of Sirt1 regulation of FoxO in NSCs and its contributions to the self-renewal and differentiation of NSC awaits further investigation.

Cyclin-dependent kinases (Cdk) phosphorylate and regulate FoxOs and clearly have important function in the regulation of cell cycles. In particular, Cdk2 is required for the self-renewal and proliferation of NSCs in the SVZ [83]. Cdk4 overexpression in the mouse cortex leads to the expansion of the progenitor pool of SVZ and inhibits the differentiation of neural progenitors by shortening G1 phase [84]. The NSCs from Cdk2/4 double knockout mice brain in the intermediate zone and cortical plate has an abnormal cell cycle and increased differentiation. Moreover, Cdk1 is sufficient to recover the self-renewal seen in Cdk2/4 double knockout NSCs [85].

Mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK), Erk and p38 also phosphorylate and inactivate FoxO1 [27]. Sprd1 (Sprouty-related protein with an EVH1 domain), a negative regulator of Ras/MAPK/ERK, is highly expressed in CNS germinal zones and inhibits the self-renewal and proliferation of NSCs, indicating that Ras/MAPK/ERK is critical in NSC maintenance [86]. Folate increases ERK1/2 phosphorylation and the proliferation of NSCs [87], but ERK1/2 inhibits the differentiation of NSCs [88]. ERK2 plays a significant role in NSC proliferation and memory function of the cortex [89]. ERK5 MAP kinase promotes proliferation and differentiation of mouse NSCs into GABAergic interneurons in the olfactory bulb [90]. JNK is one of the first MAPKs shown to activate FoxO by phosphorylation upon oxidative stress [91]. A recent study demonstrated that ablation of all three JNK in neurons necessitates FoxO-mediated Bnip3 expression and autophagy as a major survival mechanism [52]. How this survival response operates in NSCs is unknown and warrants investigation.

**Canonical function of FoxOs in NSCs**

FoxO transcription factors are at the interface of diverse physiological processes, coordinating gene expression that regulates proliferation, cell cycle, DNA repair, oxidative stress resistance as well as metabolism [92–96] (Fig. 1B). In the adult mouse brain, FoxOs show distinct and overlapping expression patterns. FoxO1 is most abundant in the striatum, DG and the ventral hippocampus while FoxO3a is highly expressed in the cortex, hippocampus and cerebellum. For FoxO6, it is expressed abundantly in the hippocampus, amygdala and cingulated cortex and nucleus accumbens shell [57,97]. This differential expression of FoxO proteins in the brain may suggest their specialized functions in progenitors, glia and different subtypes of neurons. Here, cellular processes regulated by FoxOs that are critical for NSC biology are discussed.

**Cell cycle regulation**

Cell cycle regulation is a major mechanism of stem cell self-renewal and differentiation. FoxOs inhibit cell cycle entry in G1 phase by upregulating the Cdk inhibitors: p27<sup>KIP1</sup>, p57<sup>Kip2</sup>, p15<sup>INK4b</sup>, p19<sup>INK4d</sup>, the Rb family member p130 [92,94,98,99], and by indirectly downregulating D type cyclins [100,101]. In addition, stress-activation of FoxO3a delays G2/M transition in part by upregulating cyclin G2 [102] and subsequently induces a DNA repair gene, GADD45a. This suggests that FoxO3a is involved in DNA damage-induced cell cycle arrest to maintain genomic stability [95].

The function of FoxOs in cell cycle regulation may play an important role in NSC self-renewal, quiescence, and differentiation. Cell cycle inhibitors in G1 phase such as p16<sup>Ink4a</sup> [103], p19<sup>Arf</sup> [104], p21<sup>Cip</sup> [105,106] have critical roles in neural stem cells self-renewal and quiescence. Expression of p16<sup>Ink4a</sup> increases during the course of aging, attenuating the frequency of multipotent progenitors and their self-renewal potential [107]. Repression of p16<sup>Ink4a</sup> is mediated by polycomb Bmi-1 which dictates neural stem cell self-renewal [103]. Interestingly, combined deletion of p16<sup>Ink4a</sup> and p19<sup>Arf</sup> only partially rescued NSC frequency and neurogenesis in Bmi-1 knockout mice, suggesting the presence of additional Bmi-1 targets playing a role in NSC self-renewal [104]. Notably, the effect of Bmi-1 on NSC self-renewal is most prominent in vitro while frequency of NSCs does not increase in Bmi-1 transgenic mice [108]. This further highlights the contribution of niche or extrinsic factors to limit excessive generation of neural progenitors in vivo.

Phenotypic resemblance between brain specific FoxO1/3a/4 combined knockout (hereinafter ‘FoxO KO’) and p21<sup>Cip</sup> null NSCs highlights the importance of stem cell quiescence for long-term maintenance of self-renewal capacity. In both models, loss of relative quiescence induces early expansion of progenitor population followed by progressive decline in NSC population both in vivo and in neurosphere cultures [46,57,106]. The in vivo consequence is precocious decline in neurogenesis in the olfactory bulb and the hippocampus during aging. Notably, p21<sup>Cip</sup> null NSCs do not show changes in cell fate decision nor loss of multipotentiality, suggesting that a deregulated cell cycle may not be the primary mechanism for altered NSC lineage choices.

The cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors p27<sup>Kip1</sup> and p57<sup>Kip2</sup> regulate cell cycle exit and differentiation of neural progenitors [109–114]. A number of transcription and growth factors such as Mnb/Dyrk1 [115], hypoxia-inducible factor-1 alpha (HIF1a) [116,117], Cux2 [118] and Phox2a [119] converge on p27<sup>Kip1</sup> and p57<sup>Kip2</sup> to regulate NSC proliferation and differentiation. Along the same line, tumor suppressor p53 negatively regulates NSC self-renewal by promoting the differentiation in both adult and embryonic neural progenitors [120,121]. p73, a paralog of p53, is essential for the maintenance of the NSC pool [122–124].

**Cellular defense to oxidative stress**

While a low level of reactive oxygen species (ROS) promotes cell proliferation, a high ROS level induces apoptosis in quiescent cells. Effective detoxification of ROS is an important defense mechanism for quiescent stem cells. The role of FoxOs in cellular oxidative defense has been evolutionarily conserved and long recognized. In *caenorhabditis elegans* DAF-16, an ortholog of FoxO is necessary for Mst1-mediated oxidative stress response and life span extension [125]. FoxOs are also involved in oxidative stress resistance via up-regulation of anti-oxidant enzymes Catalase and Manganese superoxide dismutase (MnSOD), to facilitate the removal of intracellular ROS [126,127]. Furthermore, FoxOs repress a large number of mitochondria genes by suppressing c-Myc stability. This ultimately decreases cellular respiration and decreases ROS production, an effect independent of decreased MnSOD expression [128,129]. Conversely, ROS can affect transcriptional activity of FoxO4 by inducing disulfide-dependent complexes of FoxO4 and the p300/CBP acetyltransferase, which modulates FoxO4 activity by p300/CBP-mediated acetylation [130]. Currently, it remains to be clarified whether accumulation of ROS is primarily due to failed upregulation of oxidative defense genes or whether FoxO-dependent cellular metabolism is necessary to prevent excessive ROS generation in NSCs.

Importantly, FoxO inactivation induced intracellular ROS accumulation and inhibited long-term proliferative capacity in both HSCs and NSCs, demonstrating its critical function in detoxification of physiological level of ROS [57,131]. In these studies, administering anti-oxidant N-acetyl-L-cysteine or enforcing expression of FoxO-responsive Sestrin3 anti-oxidant sulfhydryl enzyme rescued aberrant proliferation or loss of self-renewal capacity, emphasizing

Please cite this article in press as: S.-H. Ro et al., Arch. Biochem. Biophys. (2012), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.abb.2012.07.017

ARTICLE IN PRESS

S.-H. Ro et al./Archives of Biochemistry and Biophysics xxx (2012) xxx–xxx

A

Glucose
↓
Energy metabolism

Insulin/IGF
↓
PI3K
↓
PDK
↓
PTEN

NSC Niche
↓
EGF
↓
Ras
↓
MEK
↓
ER

ROS
AMPK
KT
TSC1/2
mTOR

MST1
JNK
CDK
FoxO
Inactive
HIF1

DNA damage
FoxO
Active

Nuclear translocation

Cytoplasm
Nucleus

B

Ac
p300/CBP
FoxO
Less active
SIRT1
Active
FoxO
Oxidative stress defense
Catalase
MnSOD
cell cycle regulation
P15/16
P19
P21
P27
P57
P130
Cyclin G2
Rb
Autophag
Apoptosis
Bim
Fas ligand
TRAIL
Genomic stability
Gadd45a
NSC fate determination

Fig. 1. (A) Possible regulation of FoxOs in NSC. Growth factors lead to activation of PI3K/PDK which promotes Akt and Erk activation and subsequent inhibition of FoxO by phosphorylation. In contrast, the stress activated-JNK, Mst1, and energy sensor AMPK phosphorylate and activate FoxOs. Inhibition of Cdk2 by Chk1/2-mediated DNA damage signaling activated FoxO as an apoptotic response [26]. FoxO3a is activated in response to hypoxia as a downstream of HIF1 [129]. The significance of these signaling cascades in the regulation of NSC self-renewal, proliferation and differentiation is not fully evaluated thus far. (B) FoxO-regulated cellular responses in NSC. In nuclei, FoxOs regulate target genes involved in cell cycle arrest, apoptosis, oxidative stress defense, and genome stability. Cell cycle inhibitors in G1 phase, p16<sup>Ink4a</sup>, p19<sup>Arf</sup>, and p21<sup>Cip</sup> have critical role in NSC self-renewal and quiescence. Cdk inhibitors p27<sup>Kip1</sup> and p57<sup>Kip2</sup> regulate cell cycle exit and differentiation. FoxO inactivation and ROS accumulation inhibits long-term proliferation potential. In contrast, ROS level increases in proliferating NSCs implying that the maintenance of physiological level of ROS regulated by Catalase and MnSOD is critical in NSC proliferation. FoxOs promote DNA repair, autophagy, or apoptosis. The mechanisms of how FoxO-dependent processes contributes NSC proliferation and differentiation remains to be further explored.

the major role of ROS in FoxO-deficient stem cell phenotypes. In addition, FoxOs is an important player in genomic stability and cellular survival under stress conditions. For example, FoxOs functionally interact with ATM, thus promoting the repair of damaged DNA by inducing histone H2AX nuclear foci formation and promoting targets (i.e., GADD45 and DDB1) necessary for DNA repair [95,132].

Interestingly, radiation induced reduction in neurogenesis is ameliorated in MnSOD deficient mice. These mice exhibit enhanced working memory compared to aged wild type control animals, suggesting that excessive production of H₂O₂ is beneficial in

aged mice [133]. In line with this study, ROS level increases in proliferating NSCs and enhances self-renewal and neurogenesis in primary neural progenitors, in contrast with previous findings [134]. A clear understanding of the redox-based regulatory mechanism of NSC fate decision may have significant implications for coaxing NSCs into functional neurons.

Autophagy

Autophagy is a lysosomal degradation pathway that allows cells to convert damaged organelles into energy and building blocks for

Please cite this article in press as: S.-H. Ro et al., Arch. Biochem. Biophys. (2012), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.abb.2012.07.017

ARTICLE IN PRESS

S.-H. Ro et al./Archives of Biochemistry and Biophysics xxx (2012) xxx–xxx

biosynthesis. Autophagy response represents a compensatory mechanism for cell death as a cellular stress-response pathway. Deficiencies in this pathway are associated with neurodegeneration, cardiovascular diseases, cancer, and aging [135–137]. Importantly, it plays a critical role in stem cell maintenance and differentiation. Accumulation of mitochondria, ROS, DNA damage, chromosomal instability, and aberrant proliferation, lead to dysfunctional HSCs as exemplified in Atg7 KO mice [138]. The roles of autophagy during stem cell differentiation continue to increase; some of which include: mitochondria clearance, protein degradation, structural remodeling, and ATP generation [139].

Autophagic flux and LC3 lipidation increase, along with increased expression of Atg7, Becn1, Ambra1 and LC3 during early neuronal differentiation of embryonic neural progenitors, are required for energy demand during the differentiation. Consistently, Atg5 and Ambra1 deficient NSCs display defective neuronal differentiation [140]. Growth factor withdrawal in NSCs induces autophagic cell death due to the increased levels of Beclin1 and LC3 II processing and inhibition of anti-apoptotic Bcl-2 [141–143]. In line with these findings, FoxOs promote autophagy as a cellular protection mechanism upon oxidative stress or starvation [144–146]. Stress-responsive Sirt1 and p38 MAPK induce autophagy through FoxO3a in cardiac myocytes and colorectal cancer cells, respectively [147,148]. As mentioned above, inactivation of JNK in neurons necessitates FoxO-dependent autophagy as a major survival mechanism [52]. Indeed, impaired autophagy leads to compensatory apoptosis of cells in Atg7 KO erythrocytes, reinforcing the connection between autophagy and apoptosis within a homeostasis network [149]. It remains to be determined whether a FoxO-dependent autophagy program contributes to NSC maintenance and differentiation.

### Apoptosis

Cell death by apoptosis is an important homeostasis mechanism. Regulation of proper cell number determines size as well as the cellular composition of the brain. In this regard, a recent study on FoxO function in *drosophila* neurogenesis adds complexity to its role in development vs. maintenance of NSCs. dFoxO in *drosophila* NSCs executes apoptosis at the termination of development, limiting adult neurogenesis. Deletion of FoxO along with reaper, an executor of apoptosis prolongs the lifespan of NSCs continuing for adult neurogenesis, which is otherwise absent in the fly. This study suggests that a primary function of dFoxO is to limit the number of NSCs and brain size. However, this system cannot address the role of FoxO in ‘adult’ NSC biology [150].

FoxOs promote apoptosis in a number of cell types by up-regulating target genes, such as proapoptotic Bim, Fas ligand, and TRAIL [151–153]. In neurons, activation of FoxO1 by Mst1 or Cdk1 induces cell death, suggesting cellular context-dependent FoxO activity [53,154]. In FoxO knockout mice, however, neither brains nor their derived NSCs, showed appreciable changes in apoptosis under physiological conditions [46,57]. Whether loss of FoxO sensitizes NSCs or renders resistance to stress challenges awaits further investigation. p53 activates apoptotic pathways in neural precursors [155] and may compensate for the absence of FoxOs in mammals. How these two cell death-invoking pathways interact in NSCs requires further research.

### Functional interaction with Notch

Developmental pathways regulating self-renewal interact with FoxOs to keep an ‘undifferentiated’ state as well as to determine cell fate. Along this line, a recent study reported that FoxO1 activates OCT4 and SOX2-dependent promoters by upregulating their expression in embryonic stem cells, thus acting as an essential regulator of pluripotency [51]. Another possibility though which FoxOs, in particular FoxO1, influence stem cell fate is via cross-talk with Notch pathway. Interaction between FoxO1 and Notch pathway is inferred by the phenotypic resemblance seen in various genetic studies; both FoxO1 or Notch1 mutant mice display similar defects during the embryogenesis, most explicitly in developing blood vessels [44,45,163]. Moreover, the expression of FoxO1 gain-of-function mutant phenocopies Notch1 activation in the differentiation of adipocyte and myogenesis, suggesting the presence of functional hierarchy between these two pathways [164–167]. In muscle cells active FoxO1 binds to Csl and collaborates with Notch1 to exchange the NcoR and SMRT co-repressors for the mastermind-like 1 (Maml1) co-activator to induce Hes1 expression, which in turn represses MyoD transcription and its dependent myogenic differentiation process [160]. In contrast, expression of FoxO3a is negatively regulated by Notch/Csl/Maml1, suggesting a divergence of FoxO isoforms in their interaction with Notch pathway [168]. In line with these findings, mice harboring tissue specific ablation of FoxOs exhibit various levels of change in cell type specification; defective myeloid and lymphoid differentiation during hematopoiesis and muscle fiber type switch, among others [160,169]. These observations further support the notion that FoxOs are important regulators of cell fate determination.

During mammalian brain development, Notch signaling supports neuronal progenitor renewal, by promoting asymmetric division and repressing neuronal commitment [170]. Continuously, Notch and related genes are expressed and highly active in adult neurogenic regions [171–173] and necessary for maintenance of a functional NSC reserve [174]. Along the same line, inactivation of RBPj, a common intracellular signal mediator of all Notch receptors, induces premature differentiation into transit-amplifying cells and early depletion of NSCs of adult SVZ [174]. A similar approach of deleting RBPj in NSCs of SGZ resulted in early neuronal differentiation and depletion of Sox2 positive NSC population, suggesting the same maintenance pathway is operative in both regions [175]. These studies provide strong evidence that Notch signaling plays a critical role in maintenance and differentiation of adult NSCs. Importantly, quiescence of adult ependymal cells from lateral ventricle requires canonical Notch signaling. While inhibition of this pathway spontaneously increases olfactory neurogenesis, forced activation inhibits the ependymal cell response to stroke [176]. The mechanism of Notch-dependent NSC maintenance and quiescence agrees well with intrinsic FoxO activity. Yet to be explored is the functional interaction between FoxO and Notch for cell fate determination in NSCs.

### NSC fate determination-functional interaction with FoxOs

FoxOs regulate the development and differentiation of tissues progenitors including blood, muscle, adipocyte, pancreas, vasculature, and bone in the mammals [156–159]. For example, FoxOs cooperatively regulate skeletal and cardiac muscle development and differentiation through Notch [160], mTOR pathway [161], and p27<sup>Kip1</sup> [162]. A role for FoxOs in NSC differentiation is highly plausible based on their pleiotropic activity discussed above. Nevertheless, brain specific knockout of FoxO1/3a/4 did not reveal major changes in cellular constituent, which negates their role in cell fate decision during brain development [55]. A closer examination of adult NSCs of SVZ and the hippocampus in a FoxO KO brain will reveal their role in stem cell fate decision under aging or pathophysiological conditions. Here, we discuss key developmental pathways that interact with FoxO signaling; pathways that may significantly influence NSC fate under stress or disease conditions demanding adult neurogenesis.

ARTICLE IN PRESS

S.-H. Ro et al./Archives of Biochemistry and Biophysics xxx (2012) xxx–xxx

Wnt connection

In developing brains, introducing stabilized beta-catenin expands neural precursor populations by keeping cells from cell cycle exit and differentiation, leading to enlarged brains [177–179]. In the adult hippocampus, Wnt3 supports neurogenesis by inducing proliferation and neuronal fate commitment of progenitors in the dentate gyrus [180]. In adult neurogenic SVZ, the nuclear receptor TLX regulates NSC proliferation and self-renewal through Wnt7a and beta-catenin [181]. Together, Wnt/beta-catenin activation instructively promotes proliferation and neurogenesis in neural progenitors from different developmental stages.

Functional interaction between PI3K-Akt-FoxO and canonical Wnt pathway is initially demonstrated in *c. elegans* where FoxO competes with TCF for interaction with beta-catenin, thereby inhibiting TCF-dependent transcription under oxidative stress conditions [182]. Furthermore, the antagonistic effect of FoxO activation on Wnt signaling in osteoblast precursors has been reported reinforcing the presence of their cross talk in mammals [183]. Although there has not been direct evidence of an antagonistic regulation between FoxO and Wnt in stem cells, it is possible that FoxO activation during the course of aging and stress might act against the tissue-specific stem cell self-renewal by dampening Wnt signaling pathway. Consequently, absence of FoxOs may be more deleterious to the longevity and homeostasis of NSCs. Therefore, it is conceivable that under physiological conditions, the balance between the two pathways would confer maximum self-renewal capacity and maintenance of the stem cell pool. Indeed, activation of Wnt signaling contributes to the initial burst of proliferation in FoxO-deficient NSC, which is short-lived and followed by a substantial decline in number of cycling cells [55].

Neurogenic niche

We envision that the aforementioned intrinsic factors regulated by or regulating FoxOs have important roles in the homeostasis of NSCs over the life-span. It is equally important to consider how FoxOs may contribute to NSC niche. Neurogenic niches are micro-environments where groups of NSCs are proliferating and differentiating. The niches are structured from embryogenesis to adulthood through development of the cerebral cortex and hippocampus [184,185]. Vascular niches and supporting ependymal cells are closely associated with NSCs [186,187]. Transplantation of niche astrocytes or injection of Sonic hedgehog (Shh) induces a neurogenic environment within the non-neurogenic cortex, suggesting an instructive role of a niche for NSC fate decision [188]. Furthermore, a hypoxic niche microenvironment of SGZ is critical for NSC proliferation and differentiation by regulating HIF1α-dependent beta-catenin stabilization [189,190]. The number of proliferating NSCs and the volume of the supporting structure such as the ependyma decreases with increasing age [191] along with the decline in olfactory neurogenesis of SVZ [192]. The sensitivity of the aged niche to growth factors and neurotrophic factors also significantly declines [193]. The loss of NSC mass and its sensitivity to internal and external signals in niches decreases neurogenesis and increases susceptibility to neurodegenerative conditions such as stroke, multiple sclerosis, Parkinson’s disease and CNS injuries [194,195]. It remains to be determined whether FoxOs maintain vasculature of neurogenic niche and/or support instructive micro-environment as part of their anti-aging function.

Conclusion

Convergence of multiple stimuli and inhibition of FoxOs in the brain may be associated with dysfunctional NSC pool and the pathologic conditions of brain aging, neurodegenerations, ischemia, and the neurocognitive disorders. As partially revealed from the rodent model system, newborn neurons may participate in brain repair in damaged neocortex [196] and grafted NSCs may improve motor function in neurodegenerative conditions including Huntington’s disease [197]. Therefore, understanding how FoxOs regulate NSCs in the mammalian brain bears significance for future therapeutic interventions.

Acknowledgments

We thank Mr. Jackson D. Harvey for critical reading of the manuscript. This work is supported by the Ellison Medical Foundation (AG-NS-0646-10 to J-H. P).

References

[1] P. Spéder, J. Liu, A.H. Brand, Nutrient control of neural stem cells, Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. 23 (2011) 724–729.

[2] J.C. Conover, R.Q. Notti, The neural stem cell niche, Cell Tissue Res. 331 (2008) 211–224.

[3] F. Doetsch, Niche for adult neural stem cells, Curr. Opin. Genet. Dev. 13 (2003) 543–550.

[4] C.M. Morshead, B.A. Reynolds, C.G. Craig, M.W. McBurney, W.A. Staines, D. Morassutti, S. Weiss, D. Van der Kooy, Neural stem cells in the adult mammalian forebrain: a relatively quiescent subpopulation of subependymal cells, Neuron 13 (1994) 1071–1082.

[5] T.D. Palmer, J. Takashi, F.H. Gage, The adult rat hippocampus contains primordial neural stem cells, Mol. Cell. Neurosci. 8 (1997) 389–404.

[6] U. Lendahl, L.B. Zimmerman, R.D. McKay, CNS stem cells express a new class of intermediate filament protein, Cell 60 (1990) 585–595.

[7] S. Sakakibara, T. Imai, J. Aruga, K. Nakajima, D. Yasutomi, T. Magata, Mouse-Musashi-1, a neural RNA-binding protein highly enriched in the mammalian CNS stem cell, Dev. Biol. 176 (1996) 230–242.

[8] V. Graham, J. Khudyakov, P. Ellis, L. Pevny, SOX2 functions to maintain neural progenitor identity, Neuron 39 (2003) 749–765.

[9] A. Gritti, E.A. Parati, L. Cova, P. Frolichsthal, R. Galli, E. Wanke, L. Faravelli, D.J. Morassutti, F. Roise, D.D. Nickel, A.L. Vescovi, Multipotent stem cells from the adult mouse brain proliferate and self-renew in response to basic fibroblast growth factor, J. Neurosci. 16 (1996) 1091–1100.

[10] H. Clevers, Stem cells, asymmetric division and cancer, Nat. Genet. 37 (2005) 1027–1028.

[11] A. Kriegstein, S. Noctor, V. Martinez-Cerdeno, Patterns of neural stem and progenitor cell division may underlie evolutionary cortical expansion, Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 7 (2006) 883–890.

[12] A.I. Ahmed, M. Zaben, M. Ahmed, W.P. Gray, Stem cells in the adult human brain, Br. J. Neurosurg. 25 (2011) 28–37.

[13] P.M. Lledo, F.T. Merkle, A. Alvarez-Buylla, Origin and function of olfactory bulb interneuron diversity, Trends Neurosci. 31 (2008) 392–400.

[14] H. Van Praag, A.F. Schinder, B.R. Christie, N. Toni, T.D. Palmer, F.H. Gage, Functional neurogenesis in the adult hippocampus, Nature 415 (2002) 1030–1034.

[15] C.D. Clelland, M. Choi, C. Romberg, G.D. Clemenson, A. Fragniere, P. Tyers, S. Jessberger, L.M. Saksida, R.A. Barker, F.H. Gage, T.J. Bussey, A functional role for adult hippocampal neurogenesis in apatial pattern separation, Science 325 (2009) 210–213.

[16] W. Deng, S.M., Gallina LS, Gage FH, Adult-born hippocampal dentate granule cells undergoing maturation modulate learning and memory in the brain, J Neurosci 29 (2009) 13532–13542.

[17] S. Farioli-Vecchioli, S.D., Costanzi M, Pacioni S, Cina I, Aceti M, Micheli L, Bacci A, Cestari V, Tirone F, The timing of differentiation of adult hippocampal neurons is crucial for spatial memory, PLoS Biol 6 (2008) e246.

[18] itamura T, S.Y., Takashima N, Murayama A, Niibori Y, Ageta H, Sekiguchi M, Sugiyama H, Inokuchi K, Adult neurogenesis modulates the hippocampus-dependent period of associative fear memory. Cell Tissue Res, 2009. 139: p. 814–827.

[19] L. Bondolfi et al., Impact of age and caloric restriction on neurogenesis in the dentate gyrus of C57BL/6 mice, Neurobiol Aging 25 (3) (2004) 333–340.

[20] G. Kempermann, H.G. Kuhn, F.H. Gage, Experience-induced neurogenesis in the senescent dentate gyrus, J Neurosci 18 (9) (1998) 3206–3212.

[21] C. Kenyon et al., A C. elegans mutant that lives twice as long as wild type, Nature 366 (6454) (1993) 461–464.

[22] D.S. Hwangbo, G.B., Tu MP, Palmer M., Tatar M., Drosophila dFOXO controls lifespan and regulates insulin signalling in brain and fat body, Nature 429 (2004) 562–566.

[23] A. Brunet et al., 14–3-3 transits to the nucleus and participates in dynamic nucleocytoplasmic transport, The Journal of cell biology 156 (5) (2002) 817–828.

[24] runet A, P.J., Tran H, Hu LS, Hemmings BA, Greenberg ME., Protein kinase SGK mediates survival signals by phosphorylating the forkhead transcription factor FKHRL1 (FOXO3a). Mol Cell Biol., 2001. 21: p. 952–965.

Please cite this article in press as: S.-H. Ro et al., Arch. Biochem. Biophys. (2012), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.abb.2012.07.017

[25] G. Rena, W.Y., Prescott AR, Peggie M, Unterman TG, Williams MR, Cohen P., Two novel phosphorylation sites on FKHR that are critical for its nuclear exclusion, EMBO J. 21 (2002) 2263–2271.

[26] Huang H, R.K., Lou Z, Chen J, Tindall DJ., CDK2-dependent phosphorylation of FOXO1 as an apoptotic response to DNA damage. Science, 2006. 314: p. 294–297.

[27] S. Asada, D.H., Matsuzaki H, Saito T, Sudo T, Mukai H, Iwashita S, Kako K, Kishi T, Kasuya Y, Fukamizu A., Mitogen-activated protein kinases, Erk and p38, phosphorylate and regulate Foxo1, Cell Signal. 19 (2007) 519–527.

[28] M.C. Hu et al., IkappaB kinase promotes tumorigenesis through inhibition of forkhead FOXO3a, Cell 117 (2) (2004) 225–237.

[29] M.C. Wang, D. Bohmann, H. Jasper, JNK extends life span and limits growth by antagonizing cellular and organism-wide responses to insulin signaling, Cell 121 (1) (2005) 115–125.

[30] E.L. Greer et al., The energy sensor AMP-activated protein kinase directly regulates the mammalian FOXO3 transcription factor, The Journal of biological chemistry 282 (41) (2007) 30107–30119.

[31] V. Perrot, R.M., The coactivator p300 directly acetylates the forkhead transcription factor Foxo1 and stimulates Foxo1-induced transcription, Mol Endocrinol. 19 (2005) 2283–2298.

[32] J. Sakamaki, D.H., Yoshimochi K, Miwa M, Fukamizu A., Regulation of FOXO1-mediated transcription and cell proliferation by PARP-1, Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 382 (2009) 497–502.

[33] K. Yoshimochi, D.H., Fukamizu A., PCAF represses transactivation function of FOXO1 in an acetyltransferase-independent manner, J Recept Signal Transduct Res. 30 (2010) 43–49.

[34] J. Nakae, C.Y., Hakuno F, Takemori H, Kawano Y, Sekioka R, Abe T, Kiyonari H, Tanaka T, Sakai J, Takahashi S, Itoh H., Novel repressor regulates insulin sensitivity through interaction with Foxo1, EMBO J. 31 (2012) 2275–2295.

[35] H. Huang, R.K., Wang F, Wang D, Smith DI, van Deursen JM, Tindall DJ., Skp2 inhibits FOXO1 in tumor suppression through ubiquitin-mediated degradation, Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A., 102 (2005) 1649–1654.

[36] W. Fu, M.Q., Chen L, Li P, Zhang M, Ramamoorthy S, Nawaz Z, Shimojima T, Wang H, Yang Y, Shen Z, Zhang Y, Zhang X, Nicosia SV, Zhang Y, Pledger JW, Chen J, Bai W., MDM2 acts downstream of p53 as an E3 ligase to promote FOXO ubiquitination and degradation, J Biol Chem. 284 (2009) 13987–14000.

[37] D.R. Calnan, A. Brunet, The FoxO code, Oncogene 27 (16) (2008) 2276–2288.

[38] N. Galili et al., Fusion of a fork head domain gene to PAX3 in the solid tumour alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma, Nature genetics 5 (3) (1993) 230–235.

[39] R.J. Davis et al., Fusion of PAX7 to FKHR by the variant t(1;13)(p36;q14) translocation in alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma, Cancer research 54 (11) (1994) 2869–2872.

[40] A. Borkhardt et al., Cloning and characterization of AFX, the gene that fuses to MLL in acute leukemias with a t(X;11)(q13;q23), Oncogene 14 (2) (1997) 195–202.

[41] J. Hillion et al., AF6q21, a novel partner of the MLL gene in t(6;11)(q21;q23), defines a forkhead transcriptional factor subfamily, Blood 90 (9) (1997) 3714–3719.

[42] X.Y. Dong et al., FOXO1A is a candidate for the 13q14 tumor suppressor gene inhibiting androgen receptor signaling in prostate cancer, Cancer research 66 (14) (2006) 6998–7006.

[43] S.S. Myatt et al., Definition of microRNAs that repress expression of the tumor suppressor gene FOXO1 in endometrial cancer, Cancer research 70 (1) (2010) 367–377.

[44] T. Hosaka et al., Disruption of forkhead transcription factor (FOXO) family members in mice reveals their functional diversification, Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 101 (9) (2004) 2975–2980.

[45] J.H. Paik et al., FoxOs are lineage-restricted redundant tumor suppressors and regulate endothelial cell homeostasis, Cell 128 (2) (2007) 309–323.

[46] V.M. Renault et al., FoxO3 regulates neural stem cell homeostasis, Cell stem cell 5 (5) (2009) 527–539.

[47] Z. Tothova, G.D., FoxO transcription factors and stem cell homeostasis: insights from the hematopoietic system, Cell Stem Cell 1 (2007) 140–152.

[48] P. Hu et al., Codependent activators direct myoblast-specific MyoD transcription, Developmental cell 15 (4) (2008) 534–546.

[49] M.T. Rached et al., FoxO1 is a positive regulator of bone formation by favoring protein synthesis and resistance to oxidative stress in osteoblasts, Cell metabolism 11 (2) (2010) 147–160.

[50] E. Ambrogini et al., FoxO-mediated defense against oxidative stress in osteoblasts is indispensable for skeletal homeostasis in mice, Cell metabolism 11 (2) (2010) 136–146.

[51] X. Zhang et al., FOXO1 is an essential regulator of pluripotency in human embryonic stem cells, Nat Cell Biol 13 (9) (2011) 1092–1099.

[52] P. Xu, D.M., Reilly J, Davis RJ., JNK regulates FoxO-dependent autophagy in neurons, Genes Dev. 25 (2011) 310–322.

[53] Z. Yuan et al., Activation of FOXO1 by Cdk1 in cycling cells and postmitotic neurons, Science 319 (5870) (2008) 1665–1668.

[54] L. de la Torre-Ubieta et al., A FOXO-Pak1 transcriptional pathway controls neuronal polarity, Genes Dev 24 (8) (2010) 799–813.

[55] J.A. Parker et al., Resveratrol rescues mutant polyglutamine cytotoxicity in nematode and mammalian neurons, Nat Genet 37 (4) (2005) 349–350.

[56] E. Cohen et al., Opposing activities protect against age-onset proteotoxicity, Science 313 (5793) (2006) 1604–1610.

[57] J.H. Paik et al., FoxOs cooperatively regulate diverse pathways governing neural stem cell homeostasis, Cell stem cell 5 (5) (2009) 540–553.

[58] C. Neri, Role and Therapeutic Potential of the Pro-Longevity Factor FOXO and Its Regulators in Neurodegenerative Disease, Front Pharmacol 3 (2012) 15.

[59] V.A. Rafalski, B.A., Energy metabolism in adult neural stem cell fate, Prog Neurobiol. 93 (2011) 182–203.

[60] Moll L, S.M., The Role of Insulin and Insulin-Like Growth Factor-1/FoxO-Mediated Transcription for the Pathogenesis of Obesity-Associated Dementia. Curr Gerontol Geriatr Res., 2012: p. in press.

[61] Zemva J, S.K., Stöhr O, Moll L, Franko A, Krone W, Wiesner RJ, Schubert M., Central FoxO3a and FoxO6 Expression is Down-regulated in Obesity Induced Diabetes but not in Aging. Exp Clin Endocrinol Diabetes., 2011: p. in press.

[62] A.N. Ziegler, S.J., Qin M, Tyler WA, Pintar JE, Fraidenraich D, Wood TL, Levison SW., Igf-ii promotes stemness of neural restricted precursors, Stem Cells 30 (2012) 1265–1276.

[63] O. Bracko, S.T., Aigner S, Knobloch M, Winner B, Ray J, Clemenson GD Jr, Suh H, Couillard-Despres S, Aigner L, Gage FH, Jessberger S., Gene expression profiling of neural stem cells and their neuronal progeny reveals IGF2 as a regulator of adult hippocampal neurogenesis, J Neurosci. 32 (2012) 3376–3387.

[64] Groszer M, E.R., Scripture-Adams DD, Lesche R, Trumpp A, Zack JA, Kornblum HI, Liu X, Wu H., Negative regulation of neural stem/progenitor cell proliferation by the Pten tumor suppressor gene in vivo. Science, 2001. 294(2186–2189).

[65] C. Gregorian, N.J., Le Belle J, Ohab J, Kim R, Liu A, Smith KB, Groszer M, Garcia AD, Sofroniew MV, Carmichael ST, Kornblum HI, Liu X, Wu H., Pten deletion in adult neural stem/progenitor cells enhances constitutive neurogenesis, J Neurosci. 29 (2009) 1874–1886.

[66] N. Chalhoub et al., Cell type specificity of PI3K signaling in Pdk1- and Pten-deficient brains, Genes Dev 23 (14) (2009) 1619–1624.

[67] C.C. Chen et al., FoxOs inhibit mTORC1 and activate Akt by inducing the expression of Sestrin3 and Rictor, Dev Cell 18 (4) (2010) 592–604.

[68] N., H., Interplay between FOXO, TOR, and Akt. Biochim Biophys Acta., 2011. 1813: p. 1965–1970.

[69] L. Magri, C.M., Cominelli M, Alfaro-Cervello C, Cursi M, Pala M, Bulfone A, García-Verdugo JM, Leocani L, Minicucci F, Poliani PL, Galli R., Sustained activation of mTOR pathway in embryonic neural stem cells leads to development of tuberous sclerosis complex-associated lesions, Cell Stem Cell 9 (2011) 447–462.

[70] J. Goto, T.D., Klein P, Qin W, Chekaluk YI, Anderl S, Malinowska IA, Di Nardo A, Bronson RT, Chan JA, Vinters HV, Kernie SG, Jensen FE, Sahin M, Kwiatkowski DJ., Regulable neural progenitor-specific Tsc1 loss yields giant cells with organellar dysfunction in a model of tuberous sclerosis complex, Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A., 108 (2011) E1070–E1079.

[71] J. Han, W.B., Xiao Z, Gao Y, Zhao Y, Zhang J, Chen B, Wang X, Dai J., Mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) is involved in the neuronal differentiation of neural progenitors induced by insulin, Mol Cell Neurosci. 39 (2008) 118–124.

[72] B.B. Kahn et al., AMP-activated protein kinase: ancient energy gauge provides clues to modern understanding of metabolism, Cell Metab 1 (1) (2005) 15–25.

[73] K. Inoki, T. Zhu, K.L. Guan, TSC2 mediates cellular energy response to control cell growth and survival, Cell 115 (5) (2003) 577–590.

[74] S.P. Davies et al., Diurnal rhythm of phosphorylation of rat liver acetyl-CoA carboxylase by the AMP-activated protein kinase, demonstrated using freeze-clamping. Effects of high fat diets, Eur J Biochem 203 (3) (1992) 615–623.

[75] B. Dasgupta, J. Milbrandt, AMP-activated protein kinase phosphorylates retinoblastoma protein to control mammalian brain development, Dev Cell 16 (2) (2009) 256–270.

[76] M. Park, S.K., Kim HK, Park YJ, Kim HS, Bae MI, Lee J., 2-Deoxy-d-glucose protects neural progenitor cells against oxidative stress through the activation of AMP-activated protein kinase, Neurosci Lett. 449 (2009) 201–206.

[77] Brunet A, S.L., Sturgill JF, Chua KF, Greer PL, Lin Y, Tran H, Ross SE, Mostoslavsky R, Cohen HY, Hu LS, Cheng HL, Jedrychowski MP, Gygi SP, Sinclair DA, Alt FW, Greenberg ME., Stress-dependent regulation of FOXO transcription factors by the SIRT1 deacetylase. Science, 2004. 303: p. 2011–2015.

[78] M.C. Motta, D.N., Lemieux M, Kamel C, Chen D, Gu W, Bultsma Y, McBurney M, Guarente L., Mammalian SIRT1 represses forkhead transcription factors, Cell 116 (2004) 551–563.

[79] A. van der Horst, T.L., de Vries-Smits LM, Frye RA, Medema RH, Burgering BM., FOXO4 is acetylated upon peroxide stress and deacetylated by the longevity protein hSir2(SIRT1), J Biol Chem. 279 (2004) 28873–28879.

[80] Y. Kobayashi, F.-H.Y., Chen C, Horio Y, Isobe K, Ikeda K, Motoyama N., SIRT1 is critical regulator of FOXO-mediated transcription in response to oxidative stress, Int J Mol Med. 16 (2005) 237–243.

[81] T. Prozorovski, S.-T.U., Glumm R, Baumgart J, Schröter F, Ninnemann O, Siegert E, Bendix I, Brüstle O, Nitsch R, Zipp F, Aktas O., Sirt1 contributes critically to the redox-dependent fate of neural progenitors, Nat Cell Biol. 10 (2008) 385–394.

[82] S. Hisahara, C.S., Matsumoto H, Tanno M, Yagi H, Shimohama S, Sato M, Horio Y., Histone deacetylase SIRT1 modulates neuronal differentiation by its nuclear translocation, Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A., 105 (2008) 15599–15604.

[83] B. Jablonska, A.A., Vandenberg R, Belachew S, Berthet C, Kaldis P, Gallo V., Cdk2 is critical for proliferation and self-renewal of neural progenitor cells in the adult subventricular zone, J Cell Biol. 179 (2007) 1231–1245.

[84] C. Lange, H.W., Calegari F., Cdk4/cyclinD1 overexpression in neural stem cells shortens G1, delays neurogenesis, and promotes the generation and expansion of basal progenitors, Cell Stem Cell. 5 (2009) 320–331.

[85] Lim S, K.P., Loss of Cdk2 and Cdk4 Induces a Switch from Proliferation to Differentiation in Neural Stem Cells. Stem Cells, 2012: p. 1114.

[86] T.N. Phoenix, T.S., Spred1, a negative regulator of Ras-MAPK-ERK, is enriched in CNS germinal zones, dampens NSC proliferation, and maintains ventricular zone structure, Genes Dev. 24 (2010) 45–56.

[87] X.M. Zhang, H.G., Tian ZH, Ren DL, Wilson JX., Folate stimulates ERK1/2 phosphorylation and cell proliferation in fetal neural stem cells, Nutr Neurosci. 12 (2009) 226–232.

[88] B. Wang, G.Y., Xiao Z, Chen B, Han J, Zhang J, Wang X, Dai J., Erk1/2 promotes proliferation and inhibits neuronal differentiation of neural stem cells, Neurosci Lett. 461 (2009) 252–257.

[89] I.S. Samuels, K.J., Faruzzi AN, Pickering K, Herrup K, Sweatt JD, Saitta SC, Landreth GE., Deletion of ERK2 mitogen-activated protein kinase identifies its key roles in cortical neurogenesis and cognitive function, J Neurosci. 28 (2008) 6983–6995.

[90] J. Zou, P.Y., Wang Z, Chang SY, Wang W, Wang X, Tournier C, Storm DR, Xia Z., Targeted deletion of ERK5 MAP kinase in the developing nervous system impairs development of GABAergic interneurons in the main olfactory bulb and behavioral discrimination between structurally similar odorants, J Neurosci. 32 (2012) 4118–4132.

[91] M.A. Essers, W.S., de Vries-Smits AM, Saarloos I, de Ruiter ND, Bos JL, Burgering BM., FOXO transcription factor activation by oxidative stress mediated by the small GTPase Ral and JNK, EMBO J. 23 (2004) 4802–4812.

[92] R.H. Medema et al., AFX-like Forkhead transcription factors mediate cell-cycle regulation by Ras and PKB through p27kip1, Nature 404 (6779) (2000) 782–787.

[93] J. Nakae et al., The forkhead transcription factor Foxo1 (Fkhr) confers insulin sensitivity onto glucose-6-phosphatase expression, The Journal of clinical investigation 108 (9) (2001) 1359–1367.

[94] G.J. Kops et al., Control of cell cycle exit and entry by protein kinase B-regulated forkhead transcription factors, Molecular and cellular biology 22 (7) (2002) 2025–2036.

[95] H. Tran et al., DNA repair pathway stimulated by the forkhead transcription factor FOXO3a through the Gadd45 protein, Science 296 (5567) (2002) 530–534.

[96] J. Gilley, P.J. Coffer, J. Ham, FOXO transcription factors directly activate bim gene expression and promote apoptosis in sympathetic neurons, The Journal of cell biology 162 (4) (2003) 613–622.

[97] M.F. Hoekman et al., Spatial and temporal expression of FoxO transcription factors in the developing and adult murine brain, Gene expression patterns : GEP 6 (2) (2006) 134–140.

[98] M. Schmidt et al., Cell cycle inhibition by FoxO forkhead transcription factors involves downregulation of cyclin D, Mol Cell Biol 22 (22) (2002) 7842–7852.

[99] K. Katayama et al., FOXO transcription factor-dependent p15(INK4b) and p19(INK4d) expression, Oncogene 27 (12) (2008) 1677–1686.

[100] Fernandez de Mattos, S., et al., FoxO3a and BCR-ABL regulate cyclin D2 transcription through a STAT5/BCL6-dependent mechanism, Molecular and cellular biology 24 (22) (2004) 10058–10071.

[101] S. Ramaswamy et al., A novel mechanism of gene regulation and tumor suppression by the transcription factor FKHR, Cancer Cell 2 (1) (2002) 81–91.

[102] L. Martinez-Gac et al., Control of cyclin G2 mRNA expression by forkhead transcription factors: novel mechanism for cell cycle control by phosphoinositide 3-kinase and forkhead, Molecular and cellular biology 24 (5) (2004) 2181–2189.

[103] A.V. Molofsky, P.R., Iwashita T, Park IK, Clarke MF, Morrison SJ., Bmi-1 dependence distinguishes neural stem cell self-renewal from progenitor proliferation, Nature 425 (2003) 962–967.

[104] A.V. Molofsky, H.S., Bydon M, Morrison SJ, Pardal R., Bmi-1 promotes neural stem cell self-renewal and neural development but not mouse growth and survival by repressing the p16Ink4a and p19Arf senescence pathways, Genes Dev. 19 (2005) 1432–1437.

[105] C.A. Fasano, D.J., Ivanova NB, Lowry N, Lemischka IR, Temple S., shRNA knockdown of Bmi-1 reveals a critical role for p21-Rb pathway in NSC self-renewal during development, Cell Stem Cell 1 (2007) 87–99.

[106] T.E. Kippin, D.J. Martens, D. van der Kooy, P21 loss compromises the relative quiescence of forebrain stem cell proliferation leading to exhaustion of their proliferation capacity, Genes Dev 19 (6) (2005) 756–767.

[107] A.V. Molofsky et al., Increasing p16INK4a expression decreases forebrain progenitors and neurogenesis during ageing, Nature 443 (7110) (2006) 448–452.

[108] S. He, I.T., Buchstaller J, Molofsky AV, Thomas D, Morrison SJ., Bmi-1 overexpression in neural stem/progenitor cells increases proliferation and neurogenesis in culture but has little effect on these functions in vivo, Dev Biol. 328 (2009) 257–272.

[109] F. Doetsch et al., Lack of the cell-cycle inhibitor p27Kip1 results in selective increase of transit-amplifying cells for adult neurogenesis, J Neurosci 22 (6) (2002) 2255–2264.

[110] R. Zhang, Z.Z., Tsang W, Wang L, Chopp M., Down-regulation of p27kip1 increases proliferation of progenitor cells in adult rats, Neuroreport. 15 (2004) 1797–1800.

[111] T. Goto, M.T., Takahashi T., Altered patterns of neuron production in the p27 knockout mouse, Dev Neurosci. 26 (2004) 208–217.

[112] J. Qiu, T.Y., Harada J, Topalkara K, Wang Y, Sims JR, Zheng G, Huang P, Ling Y, Scadden DT, Moskowitz MA, Cheng T., p27Kip1 constrains proliferation of neural progenitor cells in adult brain under homeostatic and ischemic conditions, Stem Cells 27 (2009) 920–927.

[113] Y.L. Zheng, L.B., Rudrabhatla P, Shukla V, Amin ND, Maric D, Kesavapany S, Kanungo J, Pareek TK, Takahashi S, Grant P, Kulkarni AB, Pant HC., Phosphorylation of p27Kip1 at Thr187 by cyclin-dependent kinase 5 modulates neural stem cell differentiation, Mol Biol Cell 21 (2010) 3601–3614.

[114] A. Tury, M.-C.G., DiCicco-Bloom E., The cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor p57Kip2 regulates cell cycle exit, differentiation, and migration of embryonic cerebral cortical precursors, Cereb Cortex 21 (2011) 1840–1856.

[115] B. Hämerle, U.E., Guimera J, Becker W, Guillemot F, Tejedor FJ., Transient expression of Mnb/Dyrk1a couples cell cycle exit and differentiation of neuronal precursors by inducing p27KIP1 expression and suppressing NOTCH signaling, Development 138 (2011) 2543–2554.

[116] H.C. Chen, S.H., Chang JL, Wang HW, Chen HK, Kang BH, Liu DW, Chen CH, Chao TT, Wang CH., Hypoxia enhances the stemness markers of cochlear stem/progenitor cells and expands sphere formation through activation of hypoxia-inducible factor-1 alpha, Hear Res. 275 (2011) 43–52.

[117] C.Y. Ko, T.M., Tseng WF, Cheng CH, Huang CR, Wu JS, Chung HY, Hsieh CS, Sun CK, Hwang SP, Yuh CH, Huang CJ, Pai TW, Tzou WS, Hu CH., Integration of CNS survival and differentiation by HIF2α, Cell Death Differ. 18 (2011) 1757–1770.

[118] A. Iulianella, S.M., Durnin M, Vanden Heuvel GB, Trainor PA., Cux2 (Cutl2) integrates neural progenitor development with cell-cycle progression during spinal cord neurogenesis, Development 135 (2008) 729–741.

[119] M. Paris, W.W., Shin MH, Franklin DS, Andrisani OM., Homeodomain transcription factor Phox2a, via cyclic AMP-mediated activation, induces p27Kip1 transcription, coordinating neural progenitor cell cycle exit and differentiation, Mol Cell Biol. 26 (2006) 8826–8839.

[120] A. Armesilla-Diaz, B.P., Del Valle I, Cuevas E, Lazaro I, Martin C, Cigudosa JC, Silva A., p53 regulates the self-renewal and differentiation of neural precursors, Neuroscience 158 (2009) 1378–1389.

[121] K. Meletis, W.V., Hede SM, Nistér M, Lundeberg J, Frisén J., p53 suppresses the self-renewal of adult neural stem cells, Development 133 (2006) 363–369.

[122] Gonzalez-Cano L, H.-V.M., Fernandez-Alonso R, Ayuso-Sacido A, Meyer G, Garcia-Verdugo JM, Silva A, Marques MM, Marin MC., p73 deficiency results in impaired self renewal and premature neuronal differentiation of mouse neural progenitors independently of p53. Cell Death Dis., 2010. 16: p. e109.

[123] M. Agostini, T.P., Chen H, Knight RA, Bano D, Nicotera P, McKeon F, Melino G., p73 regulates maintenance of neural stem cell, Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 403 (2010) 13–17.

[124] F. Talos, A.A., Vaseva AV, Holembowski L, Tsirka SE, Scheel A, Bode D, Dobbelstein M, Brück W, Moll UM., p73 is an essential regulator of neural stem cell maintenance in embryonal and adult CNS neurogenesis, Cell Death Differ. 17 (2010) 1816–1829.

[125] M.K. Lehtinen, Y.Z., Boag PR, Yang Y, Villén J, Becker EB, DiBacco S, de la Iglesia N, Gygi S, Blackwell TK, Bonni A., A conserved MST-FOXO signaling pathway mediates oxidative-stress responses and extends life span, Cell 125 (2006) 987–1001.

[126] G.J. Kops et al., Forkhead transcription factor FOXO3a protects quiescent cells from oxidative stress, Nature 419 (6904) (2002) 316–321.

[127] S. Nemoto, T. Finkel, Redox regulation of forkhead proteins through a p66shc-dependent signaling pathway, Science 295 (5564) (2002) 2450–2452.

[128] E.C. Ferber et al., FOXO3a regulates reactive oxygen metabolism by inhibiting mitochondrial gene expression, Cell Death Differ 19 (6) (2012) 968–979.

[129] K.S. Jensen et al., FoxO3A promotes metabolic adaptation to hypoxia by antagonizing Myc function, Embo J 30 (22) (2011) 4554–4570.

[130] [130. Dansen, T.B., et al., Redox-sensitive cysteines bridge p300/CBP-mediated acetylation and FoxO4 activity. Nat Chem Biol, 2009. 5(9): p. 664–72.

[131] Z. Tothova, D.G. Gilliland, FoxO transcription factors and stem cell homeostasis: insights from the hematopoietic system, Cell stem cell 1 (2) (2007) 140–152.

[132] W.B. Tsai et al., Functional interaction between FOXO3a and ATM regulates DNA damage response, Nature cell biology 10 (4) (2008) 460–467.

[133] A. Kamsler et al., Aged SOD overexpressing mice exhibit enhanced spatial memory while lacking hippocampal neurogenesis, Antioxid Redox Signal 9 (2) (2007) 181–189.

[134] J.E. Le Belle et al., Proliferative neural stem cells have high endogenous ROS levels that regulate self-renewal and neurogenesis in a PI3K/Akt-dependant manner, Cell Stem Cell 8 (1) (2011) 59–71.

[135] C. He, D.J. Klionsky, Regulation mechanisms and signaling pathways of autophagy, Annu Rev Genet 43 (2009) 67–93.

[136] B. Levine, K.G., Autophagy in the pathogenesis of disease, Cell 132 (2008) 27–42.

[137] N. Mizushima, L.B., Cuervo AM, Klionsky DJ., Autophagy fights disease through cellular self-digestion, Nature 451 (2008) 1069–1075.

[138] M. Mortensen et al., The autophagy protein Atg7 is essential for hematopoietic stem cell maintenance, The Journal of experimental medicine 208 (3) (2011) 455–467.

[139] A.T. Vessoni, A.R. Muotri, O.K. Okamoto, Autophagy in stem cell maintenance and differentiation, Stem Cells Dev 21 (4) (2012) 513–520.

[140] P. Vázquez, A.A., Cecconi F, de la Rosa EJ, Boya P, de Pablo F., Atg5 and Ambra1 differentially modulate neurogenesis in neural stem cells, Autophagy 8 (2012) 187–199.

[141] Cárdenas-Aguayo Mdel C, S.-O.J., Baizabal JM, Salgado LM, Covarrubias L., Growth factor deprivation induces an alternative non-apoptotic death

Please cite this article in press as: S.-H. Ro et al., Arch. Biochem. Biophys. (2012), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.abb.2012.07.017

mechanism that is inhibited by Bcl2 in cells derived from neural precursor
cells. J Hematother Stem Cell Res., 2003. 12: p. 735–748.
[142] S.H. Baek, K.E., Goudreau JL, Lookingland KJ, Kim SW, Yu SW., Insulin
withdrawal-induced cell death in adult hippocampal neural stem cells as a
model of autophagic cell death, Autophagy 5 (2009) 277–279.
[143] S.W. Yu, B.S., Brennan RT, Bradley CJ, Park SK, Lee YS, Jun EJ, Lookingland KJ,
Kim EK, Lee H, Goudreau JL, Kim SW., Autophagic death of adult hippocampal
neural stem cells following insulin withdrawal, Stem cells 26 (2008) 2602–
2610.
[144] J. Zhao, B.J., Schild A, Cao P, Sandri M, Schiaffino S, Lecker SH, Goldberg AL.,
FoxO3 coordinately activates protein degradation by the autophagic/
lysosomal and proteasomal pathways in atrophying muscle cells, Cell
Metab. 6 (2007) 472–483.
[145] A. Sengupta, M.J., Yutzey KE., FoxO transcription factors promote autophagy
in cardiomyocytes, J Biol Chem. 284 (2009) 28319–28331.
[146] A. Sengupta, M.J., Paik JH, DePinho RA, Yutzey KE., FoxO transcription factors
promote cardiomyocyte survival upon induction of oxidative stress, J Biol
Chem. 286 (2011) 7468–7478.
[147] N. Hariharan, M.Y., Nakae J, Paik J, Depinho RA, Sadoshima J., Deacetylation of
FoxO by Sirt1 Plays an Essential Role in Mediating Starvation-Induced
Autophagy in Cardiac Myocytes, Circ Res. 107 (2010) 1470–1482.
[148] F. Chiacchiera, M.A., Ferrari E, Ingravalle G, Lo Sasso G, Murzilli S, Petruzzelli
M, Salvatore L, Moschetta A, Simone C., p38alpha blockade inhibits colorectal
cancer growth in vivo by inducing a switch from HIF1alpha- to FoxO-
dependent transcription, Cell Death Differ. 16 (2009) 1203–1214.
[149] M. Mortensen et al., Loss of autophagy in erythroid cells leads to defective
removal of mitochondria and severe anemia in vivo, Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
107 (2) (2010) 832–837.
[150] S.E. Siegrist et al., Inactivation of both Foxo and reaper promotes long-term
adult neurogenesis in Drosophila, Current biology : CB 20 (7) (2010) 643–
648.
[151] P.F. Dijkers et al., Expression of the pro-apoptotic Bcl-2 family member Bim is
regulated by the forkhead transcription factor FKHR-L1, Curr Biol 10 (19)
(2000) 1201–1204.
[152] V. Modur et al., FOXO proteins regulate tumor necrosis factor-related
apoptosis inducing ligand expression. Implications for PTEN mutation in
prostate cancer, The Journal of biological chemistry 277 (49) (2002) 47928–
47937.
[153] A. Brunet et al., Akt promotes cell survival by phosphorylating and inhibiting
a Forkhead transcription factor, Cell 96 (6) (1999) 857–868.
[154] Z. Yuan, L.M., Merlo P, Villén J, Gygi S, Bonni A., Regulation of neuronal cell
death by MST1-FOXO1 signaling, J Biol Chem. 284 (2009) 11285–11292.
[155] R.S. Akhtar, G.Y., Klocke BJ, Roth KA., Neural precursor cells possess multiple
p53-dependent apoptotic pathways, Cell Death Differ. 13 (2006) 1727–1739.
[156] Q. Wen, W.H., Little PJ, Quirion R, Zheng W., Forkhead family transcription
factor FoxO and neural differentiation, Neurogenetics 13 (2012) 105–113.
[157] D. Accili, K.C. Arden, FoxOs at the crossroads of cellular metabolism,
differentiation, and transformation, Cell 117 (4) (2004) 421–426.
[158] Glass, Signaling pathways perturbing muscle mass. Curr Opin Clin Nutr
Metab Care, 2010. 13: p. 225–229.
[159] Kousteni, FoxO1: a molecule for all seasons. J Bone Miner Res., 2011. 26: p.
912–917.
[160] T. Kitamura, K.Y., Funahashi Y, Shawber CJ, Castrillon DH, Kollipara R,
DePinho RA, Kitajewski J, Accili D., A Foxo/Notch pathway controls myogenic
differentiation and fiber type specification, J Clin Invest. 117 (2007) 2477–
2485.
[161] A.L. Wu, K.J., Zhang C, Unterman TG, Chen J., Forkhead box protein O1
negatively regulates skeletal myocyte differentiation through degradation of
mammalian target of rapamycin pathway components, Endocrinology 149
(2008) 1407–1414.
[162] S.J. Lees, C.T., Booth FW., Age-dependent FOXO regulation of p27Kip1
expression via a conserved binding motif in rat muscle precursor cells, Am
J Physiol Cell Physiol. 295 (2008) C1238–C1246.
[163] L.T. Krebs et al., Notch signaling is essential for vascular morphogenesis in
mice, Genes Dev 14 (11) (2000) 1343–1352.
[164] M.L. Hribal et al., Regulation of insulin-like growth factor-dependent
myoblast differentiation by Foxo forkhead transcription factors, J Cell Biol
162 (4) (2003) 535–541.
[165] K. Kuroda et al., Delta-induced Notch signaling mediated by RBP-J inhibits
MyoD expression and myogenesis, J Biol Chem 274 (11) (1999) 7238–7244.
[166] D.A. Ross, P.K. Rao, T. Kadesch, Dual roles for the Notch target gene Hes-1 in
the differentiation of 3T3-L1 preadipocytes, Molecular and cellular biology 24
(8) (2004) 3505–3513.
[167] J. Nakae et al., The forkhead transcription factor Foxo1 regulates adipocyte
differentiation, Dev Cell 4 (1) (2003) 119–129.
[168] A. Mandinova et al., The FoxO3a gene is a key negative target of canonical
Notch signalling in the keratinocyte UVB response, Embo J 27 (8) (2008)
1243–1254.
[169] Z. Tothova et al., FoxOs are critical mediators of hematopoietic stem cell
resistance to physiologic oxidative stress, Cell 128 (2) (2007) 325–339.
[170] R. Kageyama et al., Dynamic Notch signaling in neural progenitor cells and a
revised view of lateral inhibition, Nat Neurosci 11 (11) (2008) 1247–1251.

[171] G. Stump et al., Notch1 and its ligands Delta-like and Jagged are expressed
and active in distinct cell populations in the postnatal mouse brain, Mech Dev
114 (1–2) (2002) 153–159.
[172] D.K. Irvin et al., Patterns of Jagged1, Jagged2, Delta-like 1 and Delta-like 3
expression during late embryonic and postnatal brain development suggest
multiple functional roles in progenitors and differentiated cells, J Neurosci
Res 75 (3) (2004) 330–343.
[173] S. Lugert, B.O., Knuckles P, Haussler U, Fabel K, Götz M, Haas CA, Kempermann G, Taylor V, Giachino C., Quiescent and Active Hippocampal
Neural Stem Cells with Distinct Morphologies Respond Selectively to
Physiological and Pathological Stimuli and Aging, Cell Stem Cell 6 (2010)
445–456.
[174] I. Imayoshi et al., Essential roles of Notch signaling in maintenance of neural
stem cells in developing and adult brains, J Neurosci 30 (9) (2010) 3489–
3498.
[175] O. Ehm et al., RBPJkappa-dependent signaling is essential for long-term
maintenance of neural stem cells in the adult hippocampus, J Neurosci 30
(41) (2010) 13794–13807.
[176] M. Carlen et al., Forebrain ependymal cells are Notch-dependent and
generate neuroblasts and astrocytes after stroke, Nat Neurosci 12 (3)
(2009) 259–267.
[177] Chenn A, W.C., Regulation of cerebral cortical size by control of cell cycle exit
in neural precursors. Science, 2002. 297: p. 365–369.
[178] A. Chenn, W.C., Increased neuronal production, enlarged forebrains and
cytoarchitectural distortions in beta-catenin overexpressing transgenic mice,
Cereb Cortex 13 (2003) 599–606.
[179] D. Zechner, F.Y., Hülsken J, Müller T, Walther I, Taketo MM, Crenshaw EB 3rd,
Birchmeier W, Birchmeier C., beta-Catenin signals regulate cell growth and
the balance between progenitor cell expansion and differentiation in the
nervous system, Dev Biol. 258 (2003) 406–418.
[180] D.C. Lie, C.S., Song HJ, Désiré L, Mira H, Consiglio A, Lein ES, Jessberger S,
Lansford H, Dearie AR, Gage FH., Wnt signalling regulates adult hippocampal
neurogenesis, Nature 437 (2005) 1370–1375.
[181] Q. Qu, S.G., Li W, Yang S, Ye P, Zhao C, Yu RT, Gage FH, Evans RM, Shi Y.,
Orphan nuclear receptor TLX activates Wnt/beta-catenin signalling to
stimulate neural stem cell proliferation and self-renewal, Nat Cell Biol. 12
(2010) 31–40.
[182] M.A. Essers et al., Functional interaction between beta-catenin and FOXO in
oxidative stress signaling, Science 308 (5725) (2005) 1181–1184.
[183] M. Almeida et al., Oxidative stress antagonizes Wnt signaling in osteoblast
precursors by diverting beta-catenin from T cell factor- to forkhead box O-
mediated transcription, J Biol Chem 282 (37) (2007) 27298–27305.
[184] P.A. Johansson, C.S., Götz M., Stem cells niches during development—lessons
from the cerebral cortex, Curr Opin Neurobiol. 20 (2010) 400–407.
[185] T.D. Palmer, W.A., Gage FH., Vascular niche for adult hippocampal
neurogenesis, J Comp Neurol. 425 (2000) 479–494.
[186] Q. Shen, W.Y., Kokovay E, Lin G, Chuang SM, Goderie SK, Roysam B, Temple S.,
Adult SVZ stem cells lie in a vascular niche: a quantitative analysis of niche
cell-cell interactions, Cell Stem Cell 11 (2008) 289–300.
[187] M. Tavazoie, V.d.V.L., Silva-Vargas V, Louissaint M, Colonna L, Zaidi B, Garcia-
Verdugo JM, Doetsch F., A specialized vascular niche for adult neural stem
cells, Cell Stem Cell 11 (2008) 279–288.
[188] J. Jiao, C.D., Induction of neurogenesis in nonconventional neurogenic regions
of the adult central nervous system by niche astrocyte-produced signals,
Stem Cells 26 (2008) 1221–1230.
[189] J. Mazumdar, O.B.W., Johnson RS, LaManna JC, Chavez JC, Klein PS, Simon MC.,
O2 regulates stem cells through Wnt/β-catenin signalling, Nat Cell Biol. 12
(2010) 1007–1013.
[190] L. De Filippis, D.D., Hypoxia in the regulation of neural stem cells, Cell Mol
Life Sci. 68 (2011) 2831–2844.
[191] M. Bouab, P.G., Aumont A, Forest-Bérard K, Fernandes KJ., Aging of the
subventricular zone neural stem cell niche: evidence for quiescence-
associated changes between early and mid-adulthood, Neuroscience. 173
(2011) 135–149.
[192] Sawamoto K, W.H., Gonzalez-Perez O, Cholfin JA, Yamada M, Spassky N,
Murcia NS, Garcia-Verdugo JM, Marin O, Rubenstein JL, Tessier-Lavigne M,
Okano H, Alvarez-Buylla A., New neurons follow the flow of cerebrospinal
fluid in the adult brain. Science, 2006. 311: p. 629–632.
[193] Conover JC, S.B., Aging of the subventricular zone neural stem cell niche.
Aging Dis., 2011. 2: p. 49–63.
[194] I. Decimo, B.F., Krampera M, Fumagalli G., Neural stem cell niches in health
and diseases, Curr Pharm Des. 18 (2012) 1755–1783.
[195] S. Rasmussen, I.J., Ayuso-Sacido A, Wang Y, Starossom SC, Kivisäkk P, Zhu B,
Meyer M, Bronson RT, Garcia-Verdugo JM, Khoury SJ., Reversible neural stem
cell niche dysfunction in a model of multiple sclerosis, Ann Neurol. 69 (2011)
878–891.
[196] S.S. Magavi, L.B., Macklis JD, Induction of neurogenesis in the neocortex of
adult mice, Nature 405 (2000) 951–955.
[197] E.M. Vazey, C.K., Hughes SM, Connor B, Transplanted adult neural progenitor
cells survive, differentiate and reduce motor function impairment in a rodent
model of Huntington’s disease, Exp Neurol 199 (2006) 384–396.


Please cite this article in press as: S.-H. Ro et al., Arch. Biochem. Biophys. (2012), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.abb.2012.07.017