
Review

Lessons from C. elegans: signaling pathways for longevity

Louis R. Lapierre and Malene Hansen

Sanford-Burnham Medical Research Institute, Del E. Webb Neuroscience, Aging and Stem Cell Research Center, Program of Development and Aging, La Jolla, CA, 92037, USA

Recent research using model organisms such as the nematode *Caenorhabditis elegans* has highlighted a crucial role for several conserved signaling pathways in longevity determination. Here, we review three major endocrine- and nutrient-sensing signaling pathways with influence on lifespan, the insulin/insulin-like growth factor (IGF), target of rapamycin (TOR), and germline signaling pathways. Although these pathways engage distinct sets of transcription factors, the three pathways appear to modulate aging in *C. elegans* through partially overlapping effector mechanisms, including lipid metabolism and autophagy. This review highlights the latest advances in our understanding of how the insulin/IGF-1, TOR, and germline signaling pathways utilize different transcription factors to modulate aging in *C. elegans* with special emphasis on the role of lipid metabolism and autophagy.

### Aging research in *C. elegans*

Studies in *C. elegans* have provided a wealth of information about the molecular mechanisms that modulate aging. *C. elegans* possesses several traits that make it an ideal model organism for aging research: a 2–3 week lifespan, conserved developmental programs, transparency, small size, genetic tractability, and a fully sequenced genome [1]. Moreover, gene inactivation by RNAi has been extremely useful in identifying many new longevity genes [2], and has promoted a rapidly growing body of work that highlight multiple evolutionary conserved longevity paradigms. These include the insulin/IGF-1, TOR, and germline signaling pathways, which control many biological processes, including development, reproduction, metabolism, somatic maintenance, and stress resistance. Here, we review the most recent literature describing the molecular mechanisms by which these three pathways modulate *C. elegans* aging.

### Insulin/IGF-1 signaling

#### The basics

Research on the genetics of aging in *C. elegans* began with the seminal findings that the lifespan of the organism was doubled by mutations in the *age-1* or *daf-2* genes, orthologs of the mammalian phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) and insulin/IGF-1 receptor (InR), respectively [3,4] (key *C. elegans* gene orthologs are listed in the Glossary). Both

---

**Corresponding author:** Hansen, M. (<mhansen@sanfordburnham.org>)

**Keywords:** insulin/IGF-1; TOR; germline; autophagy; lipid metabolism; aging.

1043-2760/$ – see front matter © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. <http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.tem.2012.07.007> Trends in Endocrinology and Metabolism, December 2012, Vol. 23, No. 12 637

---

**Glossary**

*C. elegans* gene orthologs

- **aak-2**: α subunit of AMP-activated kinase (AMPK).
- **age-1**: phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase.
- **akt-1,2**: serine/threonine kinase Akt/PKB.
- **CREB**: cAMP response element-binding protein.
- **CRTC-1**: CREB-regulated transcription coactivator-1.
- **daf-2**: insulin/IGF-1 receptor.
- **daf-9**: cytochrome P450 of the CYP27 subfamily.
- **daf-12**: nuclear receptor FXR.
- **daf-15**: TORC1-binding partner Raptor.
- **daf-16**: transcription factor FOXO3A.
- **daf-18**: phosphatidylinositol 3,4,5-triphosphate 3-phosphatase, PTEN.
- **daf-36**: catalytic subunit of Rieske-like oxygenase.
- **fat-5**: palmitoyl-CoA-Δ9-desaturase.
- **fat-6, -7**: stearoyl-CoA-Δ9-desaturase, SCD.
- **ftt-2**: 14-3-3 (FOXO-interacting) protein.
- **glp-1**: Notch receptor.
- **hcf-1**: host cell factor 1.
- **hsf-1**: heat shock factor 1.
- **ins-7**: one of 40 insulin-like peptides, encodes an insulin/IGF-1-like peptide.
- **jnk-1**: c-Jun N-terminal kinase.
- **kri-1**: ankyrin-repeat protein KRIT-1.
- **lip-4**: lipase with homology to human lysosomal acid lipase.
- **MAPK**: mitogen-activated protein kinase.
- **mir-71**: one of hundreds microRNA with a role in germline signaling.
- **nhr-80**: nuclear hormone receptor HNF-4.
- **pdk-1**: 3-phosphoinositide-dependent kinase 1.
- **pha-4**: transcription factor FOXA.
- **phi-62**: putative RNase-binding protein.
- **prmt-1**: protein arginine methyltransferase.
- **raga-1**: Ras-related GTPase RagA.
- **ragc-1**: Ras-related GTPase RagC.
- **rheb-1**: Rheb GTPase.
- **rict-1**: TORC2-binding partner Rictor (also referred to as *lpo-6*).
- **rle-1**: E3 ubiquitin ligase.
- **rsks-1**: p70 ribosomal S6 kinase.
- **skn-1**: transcription factor Nrf.
- **smk-1**: suppressor of MEK.
- **tcer-1**: transcription elongation regulator homolog 1.
- **TOR**: target of rapamycin (also referred to as *let-363*).
- **TORC1**: TOR complex 1.
- **TORC2**: TOR complex 2.
- **unc-51**: ULK-1 (Unc-51-like kinase).

Review

Trends in Endocrinology and Metabolism December 2012, Vol. 23, No. 12

kinases: AGE-1/PI3K, 3-phosphoinositide-dependent kinase 1 (PDK)-1, AKT-1/2, and serine/threonine-protein kinase (SGK)-1 (Figure 1a). Ultimately, AKT and SGK-1 phosphorylate and inactivate the FOXO transcription factor DAF-16 by preventing its translocation to the nucleus, thereby blocking transcription of target genes (reviewed in [11]).

As expected, reduced insulin/IGF-1 signaling (e.g., mutations in *daf-2/InR*) relieve this block and allow entry of DAF-16/FOXO into the nucleus, where it induces the expression of genes that increase lifespan and promote resistance to various stresses ([12], see below). Several additional mechanisms promote DAF-16/FOXO nuclear localization (Figure 1a). DAF-18/PTEN dephosphorylates and inhibits AGE-1/PI3K, thereby preventing DAF-16/FOXO phosphorylation by downstream kinases [13]. Nuclear translocation of DAF-16/FOXO can also be stimulated by alternate phosphorylation, for example via the kinase

JNK-1 [14]. Nuclear maintenance of DAF-16/FOXO is promoted by PRMT-1, an arginine methyltransferase [15]. The stability of DAF-16/FOXO is also regulated by RLE-1, an E3 ubiquitin ligase that catalyzes ubiquitination of DAF-16/FOXO and targets it for degradation [16]. Collectively, these factors modulate DAF-16/FOXO activity to ensure the appropriate transcriptional response to specific environmental and hormonal cues (Figure 1a).

DAF-16 transcriptional coregulators

Once in the nucleus, several proteins function together with DAF-16/FOXO to modulate its activity in response to reduced insulin/IGF-1 signaling. Coregulators such as suppressor of MEK (SMK-1/SMEK) and host cell factor-1 (HCF-1) are crucial for DAF-16/FOXO-mediated protection against microbial infection, DNA damage, and oxidative stress [17], whereas other transcription factors, such as

(a) Insulin/IGF-1 signaling  
(b) TOR signaling  

e.g., *daf-2(-)*  
mutants  

e.g., *tor(RNAi)*  
mutants  

Neurons and intestine  
(Intestine)  

Nutrients, e.g., amino acids  

Translation  

Autophagy  

Hormones,  
e.g., INS-7  

DAF-2/  
InR  

AGE-1/  
PI3K  

PDK-1  

AKT-1/2,  
SGK-1  

DAF-18/  
PTEN  

PMRT-1/  
methylase  

RLE-1/  
E3 ligase  

HCF-1  

SMK-1/  
SMEK1  

HSF-1  

SKN-1  
/Nrf  

DAF-16/  
FOXO  

Cell  

Nucleus  

Hormones  
Metabolism  

Detoxification  
Lipolysis  

Anti-inflammation  

Longevity  

RAGA/C-1/  
Rag  

RHEB-1/  
Rheb  

DAF-15/  
Raptor  

TORC1  

TORC2  

RICT-1/  
Rictor  

Cell  

Nucleus  

DAF-16/  
FOXO  

PHA-4/  
FOXA  

SKN-1/  
Nrf  

Lipolysis  
(*lip-1/-4*)  

Autophagy  
(*unc-51*)  

Detoxification  

Longevity  

TRENDS in Endocrinology & Metabolism  

Figure 1. Overview of insulin/IGF-1 and TOR signaling in *Caenorhabditis elegans* aging. (a) In *daf-2/InR* insulin-receptor mutants, insulin-like peptides (e.g., INS-7) secreted from neurons reach intestinal cells and trigger the canonical insulin-signaling pathway, which prevents DAF-16/FOXO from entering the nucleus. Other mechanisms of DAF-16/FOXO regulation include ubiquitination (RLE-1/E3 ligase) and arginine methylation (PRMT-1/methylase). Nuclear-localized DAF-16/FOXO activity is enhanced by the action of SMK-1/SMEK and HSF-1, and is inhibited by HCF-1. The transcription factor SKN-1/Nrf is also required for longevity in *daf-2/InR* mutants. Collectively, these factors transcriptionally regulate multiple output processes as noted. Autophagy is another cellular process required for *daf-2/InR* mutants to live long. It is not yet known whether autophagy is a transcriptionally regulated process in *daf-2/InR* mutants. (b) TOR responds to nutrients and functions in two different complexes, TORC1 and TORC2. By analogy with mammalian studies, TORC1 is thought to interact with DAF-15/Raptor as well as Rag GTPases such as RAGA-1, RAGC-1, and RHEB-1/Rheb. TORC1 and TORC2 specifically impair the activity of DAF-16/FOXO and SKN-1/Nrf, whereas it is not yet clear which of the two TOR complexes regulates PHA-4/FOXA (indicated by broken lines). By using these transcription factors, TOR inhibits the expression of at least particular lipolysis-, autophagy-, and detoxification-associated genes. Listed as a cytoplasmic process, TOR signaling probably also modulates aging through a general suppression of translation. Although the intestine has been linked to the longevity mediated by TORC1, the specific tissue requirements for TOR-dependent effects on aging have not yet been systematically investigated. Factors with longevity-promoting effects are in green and those with lifespan-limiting effects are in red. Transcription factors are in boxes. See text for details.

Review

Trends in Endocrinology and Metabolism December 2012, Vol. 23, No. 12

heat-shock factor-1 (HSF-1), guide DAF-16/FOXO activity, and cooperatively induce transcription of subsets of target genes, including heat-shock proteins involved in proteostasis [18]. The transcription factor Skinhead (SKN)-1/Nrf regulates resistance to oxidative stress and expression of detoxification genes in response to reduced insulin/IGF-1 signaling, but extends lifespan independently of DAF-16/FOXO [19]. In *daf-2/InR* animals, HSF-1, SMK-1/SMEK, and SKN-1/Nrf become nuclear localized independently of DAF-16/FOXO. Instead, HSF-1 activity is regulated via a repression complex [20], SMK-1/SMEK-1 is constitutively nuclear [17] and SKN-1/Nrf subcellular localization is controlled by phosphorylation via the p38 MAPK pathway [21,22]. In sum, multiple nuclear factors and parallel signaling pathways converge on DAF-16/FOXO to modulate longevity in long-lived insulin/IGF-1 pathway mutants (Figure 1a).

**DAF-16 target genes**

Gene expression profiling of *daf-2/InR* mutants has identified hundreds of DAF-16/FOXO-regulated genes involved in various cellular processes including metabolism, proteostasis, and stress responses such as oxidative stress, detoxification, and immunity [23–26]. Examples of genes with elevated expression in *daf-2/InR* mutants are members of the heat shock *hsp-16* protein family, cytochrome P450 enzymes, glutathione-S-transferases, catalases, and the superoxide dismutase *sod-3* (reviewed in [12]). By contrast, several genes show reduced expression in *daf-2/InR* mutants, and these include the insulin-like peptide *ins-7* and the vitellogenin yolk proteins [23]. However, although DAF-16/FOXO directly regulates the expression of many of these genes [27], RNAi-mediated inhibition of any single target only modestly reduces the long lifespan of *daf-2/InR* mutants, suggesting that DAF-16/FOXO-dependent longevity probably requires the expression of multiple target genes [23].

**Tissue specificity and endocrine signaling**

Insulin/IGF-1 signaling in specific tissues in the worm, primarily neuronal and intestinal cells, is crucial for the pathway to affect longevity systemically (reviewed in [11]) (Figure 1a). In brief, extensive genetic analysis has suggested that reduced DAF-2/InR activity in neurons leads to cell-autonomous DAF-16/FOXO activation and decreased production of hormones, including insulin-like peptide INS-7 [10]. In turn, reduced systemic levels of INS-7 signaling upregulates DAF-16/FOXO activity in the intestine, and this increases the production of additional hormones while inhibiting the production of insulin-like peptides. Consequently, somatic cells acquire germline stem cell-like, stress-resistant properties conducive to longevity [28].

In sum, hormonal signaling is likely to regulate several cellular processes in long-lived *daf-2/InR* mutants. Below, we will focus on two recently identified processes with emerging roles in *C. elegans* longevity, namely energy/lipid metabolism and autophagy.

**Cellular effector mechanisms**

Energy and lipid metabolism Insulin/IGF-1 signaling is a key regulator of metabolism that coordinates food intake and cellular energy homeostasis by stimulating glucose uptake and by driving anabolic processes. In *C. elegans*, glucose supplementation reduces lifespan by stimulating insulin signaling, and inhibiting DAF-16/FOXO-mediated transcription of longevity genes [29], whereas glucose restriction relieves this block and leads to lifespan extension [30]. Accordingly, impairing insulin signaling induces a survival response that alters feeding behavior [31] and promotes recycling of endogenous macromolecules. In support of this notion, *daf-2/InR* mutants show a DAF-16/FOXO-mediated increase in expression of the lipase LIPL-4 [32]. This lipase is not only partially required for *daf-2/InR* mutants to live for an extended time but also, when overexpressed, is sufficient to extend the lifespan of wild-type animals [32]. Taken together, these initial observations suggest that lipid breakdown is beneficial to *daf-2/InR* mutants. However, *daf-2/InR* mutants have increased lipid stores [33,34], indicating a complex role for lipid metabolism in these animals that remains to be investigated in more detail.

Energy metabolism also plays a central role in lifespan determination, as illustrated by the regulatory function of the energy-sensing enzyme AMP-activated kinase (AMPK). AMPK is activated by high intracellular AMP to ATP ratios, a condition that is observed in *daf-2/InR* mutants and in wild-type animals exposed to starvation or heat stress [35]. Consistent with this, a catalytic subunit of AMPK, AAK-2, is necessary for the long lifespan of *daf-2/InR* mutants [35], and AAK-2 overexpression is sufficient for lifespan extension of wild-type animals [35,36], an effect that is mediated at least partially through inhibition of the CREB-regulated transcriptional coactivator CRTC-1 [36].

**Autophagy**

Macroautophagy (hereafter referred to as autophagy) is a multistep process resulting in large-scale lysosomal degradation and recycling of vacuole-sequestered cytosolic cargos (reviewed in [37]), and is emerging as a key player in the modulation of longevity in *C. elegans*. Autophagy is increased in *daf-2/InR* mutants and is essential for their lifespan extension [38,39], implying that these mutants recycle cargos that otherwise would be limiting to long-term survival. Consistent with this idea, increased autophagy and lysosomal degradation protects against protein aggregation [40]. This mechanism probably delays the eventual collapse of proteostasis observed during aging [41,42], because toxic protein aggregates are more efficiently removed.

Autophagy is at least partially regulated by AMPK activity in *daf-2/InR* mutants [43]. In mammals, AMPK stimulates autophagy by directly phosphorylating the autophagy initiating kinase, UNC-51 (ATG-1/ULK-1) [43]. Consistent with this, *unc-51/ULK1*, similarly to *aak-2/AMPK*, is required for autophagy induction in *daf-2/InR* mutants [43]. Although recent work has suggested that autophagy can be transcriptionally regulated [44] (see section on Germline Signaling), DAF-16/FOXO appears to be unimportant for autophagy induction in *daf-2/InR* mutants [45]. Instead, DAF-16/FOXO could contribute to later stages of the autophagy process because DAF-16/FOXO induces the expression of a lysosomal protein necessary for thermotolerance [46]. Future studies should

investigate how autophagy is regulated to mediate the lifespan extension observed in *daf-2/InR* mutants.

### Summary

Research over the last two decades has made the insulin/IGF-1 signaling pathway the most-studied longevity paradigm and has identified DAF-16/FOXO as a prominent transcription factor that, along with additional transcription factors and coregulators, controls the expression of multiple longevity genes. It has also become clear that endocrine signaling between tissues, such as the nervous system and the intestine, have systemic effects on lipid metabolism, autophagy, and consequently longevity. Key issues for future research include understanding the insulin/IGF-1-dependent network of transcription factors and effector mechanisms, as well as the intracellular signaling events and feedback loops that coordinate insulin secretion and modulate aging.

### TOR signaling

#### The basics

The TOR (target of rapamycin) pathway controls growth and reproduction in response to the availability of amino acids and growth factors. As a nutrient sensor, TOR is a mediator of the metabolic response to dietary restriction, another conserved lifespan-extending paradigm with multiple links to the signaling pathways discussed here (reviewed in [47]). Consistent with this, inhibition of TOR activity extends lifespan in a variety of species (reviewed in [48]). TOR exists in two complexes, TORC1 and TORC2, which have different functions in mammalian cells; TORC1 integrates mitogen and nutrient signals to control cell proliferation and size, whereas TORC2 regulates cell shape (reviewed in [49]). TORC1 and TORC2 contain different coactivators, DAF-15/Raptor and RICT-1/Rictor, respectively (reviewed in [50]) (Figure 1b), and regulate development, lipid storage, mRNA translation, and autophagy in *C. elegans* [45,51–55]. TORC1 affects longevity in *C. elegans* at least in part via the GTPases RAGA-1/RAGC-1 [53,56], RHEB-1/Rheb [57], and DAF-15/Raptor [51]. RNAi inhibition of *raga-1* in the intestine is sufficient for lifespan extension [53], suggesting a role for this tissue in TOR-mediated longevity. Moreover, adult inhibition of *rict-1/Rictor* extends *C. elegans* lifespan [53]. The two transcription factors DAF-16/FOXO and SKN-1/Nrf are required for lifespan extension mediated by TORC1 inhibition, whereas SKN-1/Nrf is required for TORC2/*rict-1*-mediated lifespan extension [53]. TOR inhibition also requires the FOXA transcription factor PHA-4 to extend lifespan [58], but it has so far not been addressed whether this is primarily a TORC1 or TORC2 effect (Figure 1b).

#### Target genes

TOR regulates expression of the insulin-like peptide *ins-7* [57], raising the possibility that TOR may, as does DAF-2/InR, modulate aging through a systemic effect on hormones. Moreover, TORC1 regulates the expression of many *daf-16/FOXO-* and *skn-1/Nrf* target genes including detoxification genes [53]. Below, we discuss additional transcriptionally regulated targets that may contribute

to TOR-mediated longevity in *C. elegans* (Figure 1b). TOR may also affect longevity by non-transcriptional mechanisms, including TORC1-mediated phosphorylation of S6 kinase (S6K), a key regulator of mRNA translation. Accordingly, inhibition of S6K as well as other regulators of mRNA translation, such as *tor* inhibition, extends lifespan in multiple organisms [48]. Although it is unclear how reduced protein synthesis extends lifespan, S6K may modulate longevity in *C. elegans* via both transcriptional (e.g., via PHA-4/FOXA) as well as post-translational mechanisms (e.g., involving AMPK) [48].

#### Cellular effector mechanisms

##### Lipid metabolism

Similarly to *daf-2/InR* mutants, inhibition of TOR upregulates expression of the lipase LIPL-4 and increases lipolysis [44]. Moreover, *lipl-4* expression in animals with reduced TOR levels is at least partly mediated by DAF-16/FOXO [44]. Whereas the contribution of LIPL-4 and lipid metabolism to TOR-mediated longevity remains unclear, TOR, *daf-15/Raptor*, and *rict-1/Rictor* mutants all paradoxically accumulate more lipid droplets [51,54,55,59], as do *daf-2/InR* mutants.

##### Autophagy

As observed in other organisms, autophagy is induced by inhibition of TORC1 in *C. elegans* [45,53]. This is partly due to increased expression of *unc-51/ULK1*, an upstream activator of the multistep autophagy process, via PHA-4/FOXA [44]. Notably, *pha-4/FOXA* itself is subject to transcriptional regulation by TOR [44,57]. Along these lines, autophagy genes [45,60] and *pha-4/FOXA* [58] are required for TOR/TORC1 mutants to live long, suggesting that TOR/TORC1 inhibition extends lifespan through autophagy. Because lifespan extension induced by rapamycin, a chemical that inhibits TOR, in flies also depends on autophagy genes [61], this longevity mechanism may well be conserved.

#### Overlap with insulin/IGF-1 signaling

TOR inhibition and reduced insulin/IGF-1 signaling engage overlapping transcriptional targets and effector mechanisms, and consistent with this, TOR inhibition does not further extend the long lifespan of *daf-2/InR* mutants [59,62]. By contrast, DAF-16/FOXO negatively regulates the expression of the TORC1 coactivator *daf-15/Raptor* [51]. Moreover, as mentioned above, DAF-16/FOXO and SKN-1/Nrf are required for lifespan extension mediated by TORC1 inhibition [53]. It will be of interest to elucidate how signals from the insulin-signaling pathway (possibly via AKT as observed in mammals [50]) may modulate TOR in *C. elegans*, as well as to elucidate how DAF-16/FOXO and SKN-1/Nrf is regulated upon TOR inhibition.

### Summary

Studies in several species demonstrate that TOR signaling affects aging in a conserved manner. Although the molecular mechanisms by which TOR affects *C. elegans* lifespan are only starting to be elucidated, it is clear that insulin/IGF-1 and TOR signaling converge at the level of transcription factors (DAF-16/FOXO and SKN-1/Nrf), target genes (the lipase *lipl-4* and the insulin-like peptide *ins-7*), as well as potential effector mechanisms (autophagy and

possibly lipid metabolism). Future investigations should systematically address the tissue-specific functions of TOR in longevity.

### Germline signaling

#### The basics
In *C. elegans*, the germline integrates nutrient signaling and communicates with other tissues that modulate aging. Removal of germline cells by laser ablation of precursor cells extends the lifespan by 60%; however, this effect is nullified by concomitant removal of the somatic gonad, suggesting the existence of opposing signaling pathways originating from the germline and somatic gonad [63]. Germline-mediated regulation of lifespan has also been observed in flies, and signals from the reproductive system may affect lifespan in mice as well (reviewed in [64]).

As in *daf-2/InR* mutants, *daf-16/FOXO* is required for the long lifespan of germline-less animals but, in contrast to the insulin/IGF-1 pathway that affects *DAF-16/FOXO* in both neuronal and intestinal cells, germline ablation induces *DAF-16/FOXO* activation and translocation to the nucleus primarily in intestinal cells, a key site for the modulation of longevity through germline signaling [64]. Several factors with functions in insulin/IGF-1 signaling are required for germline-less animals to live long, including *DAF-18/PTEN* [65], the cofactor *SMK-1/SMEK-1* [17], and the transcription factor *HSF-1* [66]. Other factors are specific to germline signaling, including the transcription elongation factor *TCER-1/TCERG1* [67], and the ankyrin repeat-containing protein *KRI-1/KRIT-1* [65]. *KRI-1/KRIT-1* is required for nuclear localization of *DAF-16/FOXO* as well as for upregulation of *TCER-1/TCERG1* in the intestines of germline-less animals, but not in *daf-2/InR* animals. *TCER-1/TCERG1* may be involved in lifespan modulation in germline-less animals through its interactions with *PHI-62*, a predicted RNA-binding protein that binds *FTT-2/14-3-3*, a known *FOXO*-interacting protein [68]. Moreover, the microRNA *mir-71*, which is produced in

---

**Germline signaling**

e.g., laser ablation,  
*glp-1(-)* mutants  

Empty gonad  

| Tissue(s) unknown | Intestine | Neurons | Tissue(s) unknown |
|--------------------|-----------|---------|--------------------|
| **TOR signaling**  | **DAF-16 regulation** | **Steroid signaling** | **NHR-80** |
|                    |           |         |                    |
| TOR                | KRI-1/    | DAF-9/  | DAF-36/            |
|                    | KRIT-1    | CYP27   | oxygenase          |
|                    | FTT-2/    |         | DAF-12             |
|                    | 14-3-3    |         | ligands            |
|                    | PHI-62    |         |                    |
|                    | TCER-1/   | HSF-1   | Cell               |
|                    | TCERG1    | SMK-1/  | Nucleus            |
|                    | DAF-16/   | SMEK1   |                    |
| PHA-4/            | FOXO      | DAF-12/ | NHR-80/            |
| FOXA              |           | FXR     | HNF4               |
| Autophagy         | Lipolysis | (Various genes) | Fatty acid desaturation |

---

Longevity  

Figure 2. Overview of germline signaling in *Caenorhabditis elegans* aging. Lifespan extension via germline removal, for example by mutation of *glp-1/Notch*, depends on at least four signaling mechanisms: reduced TOR signaling (likely to regulate autophagy), *DAF-16/FOXO* regulation, increased steroid signaling via the *DAF-36/DAF-9/DAF-12* pathway (which regulates various genes), and increased *NHR-80/HNF-4* signaling (which enhances fatty-acid desaturation). Of these mechanisms, the most-studied mechanism is *DAF-16/FOXO* regulation. Germline-less animals require specific cofactors (not required in *daf-2/InR* mutants) for activation of *DAF-16/FOXO* in the nucleus of intestinal cells. *DAF-12/FXR*, *TCER-1/TCERG1*, *KRI-1/KRIT-1*, and *PHI-62* all function specifically in germline-less animals, whereas *DAF-18/PTEN*, *SMK-1/SMEK*, and *HSF-1* are common between the insulin/IGF-1 and germline signaling pathways. Cell-nonautonomous regulation of *DAF-16/FOXO* is also mediated through a microRNA, *mir-71*, which is produced in neurons. Factors with longevity-promoting effects are in green and those with lifespan-limiting effects are in red. TOR effects are listed in grey to indicate that these links are presently inferred. Transcription factors are in boxes. See text for details.

neurons, was recently found to regulate DAF-16/FOXO localization in the intestine [69], supporting a role for cell-nonautonomous regulation of lifespan in germline-less animals. These DAF-16/FOXO activators are all required for germline removal to extend lifespan (Figure 2).

A lipophilic-hormone/steroid signaling pathway also affects DAF-16/FOXO localization and is required for longevity in germline-less animals. This pathway includes three key components, DAF-9, DAF-36, and DAF-12. DAF-9 is an ortholog of the mammalian cytochrome P450 enzyme, CYP27 and is expressed in the hypodermis, the spermatheca, and two neuron-like cells. DAF-36 is a Rieske-like oxygenase primarily expressed in the intestine [11]. DAF-9/CYP27 and DAF-36/oxygenase are involved in the synthesis or modification of ligands for the nuclear hormone receptor DAF-12/FXR. Consistent with this idea, supplementation with the DAF-12/FXR ligand Δ4 dafachronic acid restores lifespan extension in germline-less animals deficient in *daf-9*/CYP27 or *daf-36*/oxygenase [70]. DAF-12/FXR is likely to interact in a complex manner with DAF-16 DAF-9/CYP27, and the two proteins may directly bind each other [71]. Thus, in response to germline removal, steroid signaling mediates specific changes in the intestine that stimulate DAF-16/FOXO activity to extend lifespan (Figure 2).

### Target genes

Conveniently, *C. elegans* lifespan extension induced by germline ablation can be mimicked genetically. For instance, animals carrying mutations in the Notch-1 receptor (*glp-1*/NotchR), a mediator of germline development, have extended lifespans [72]. These mutants were employed in a recent microarray analysis to identify DAF-16/FOXO and DAF-12/FXR target genes [68]. This detailed analysis revealed a significant overlap in DAF-16/FOXO-regulated genes in the *daf-2*/InR mutants and in germline-less animals, and a small but overlapping set of genes were regulated by both *daf-16*/FOXO and *daf-12*/FXR in germline-less animals. Of note, some of these genes are involved in lipid metabolism, as described below.

### Cellular effector mechanisms

#### Lipid metabolism

Germline-less animals display notable changes in lipid metabolism. These include increased lipolysis, resulting in large part from DAF-16/FOXO-mediated increases in the lipase *lip-4* expression [32], and concomitant increases in lipid stores [73], similar to *daf-2*/InR and *tor* mutants. Moreover, other lipid genes such as the lipase *lips-17* and the fatty acyl reductase *fard-17* are upregulated and required for the long lifespan of germline-less *glp-1*/NotchR mutants, further supporting a role for lipid remodeling in longevity [68]. In addition, a recent study showed that the nuclear hormone receptor NHR-80/HNF-4 regulates oleic acid synthesis via the fatty acid desaturases *fat-5*, -6, and -7, and mutation of *fat-6* and *fat-7* together shortens the lifespan of germline-less animals, an effect that can be reversed by adding oleic acid to the media [74]. Taken together, these results are consistent with a key role for fatty acid desaturation in germline signaling. It will be interesting to determine if products of these lipid-modifying genes could serve as signaling molecules to coordinate metabolism and longevity regulation of the entire organism.

#### Autophagy

As observed for both *daf-2*/InR and *tor* mutants, germline-less *glp-1*/NotchR animals display an increase in autophagy, which is required for their longevity [44]. Autophagy induction in *glp-1*/NotchR animals is at least partly mediated by a PHA-4/FOXA-dependent increase in expression of autophagy genes [44]. Autophagy is predominantly induced in hypodermal and intestinal cells, suggesting that these tissues are particularly important for longevity. In particular, overexpression of the lipase LIPL-4 in the intestine [32], or under its endogenous promoter [44], is sufficient to extend lifespan, and this occurs in part through PHA-4/FOXA-mediated induction of autophagy [44]. By contrast, autophagy is required for the increased lipase activity in germline-less animals, strengthening the hypothesis that there is a functional link between autophagy and lipid breakdown. Further investigation will be necessary to determine how autophagy functions as a possible regulator of lipid metabolism in germline-less animals.

#### Overlap with insulin/IGF-1 and TOR signaling

Germline-less animals and *daf-2*/InR mutants have several mechanistic similarities, including neuron-to-intestine communication for longevity, increased autophagy, nuclear-localized DAF-16/FOXO in the intestine, and overlap in DAF-16/FOXO-regulated targets [68]. However, there are also notable differences; for example, KRI-1/KRIT1 and TCER-1/TCERG1 regulate germline-dependent but not *daf-2*/InR-mediated longevity. Moreover, germline removal in *daf-2*/InR mutants leads to extreme longevity, suggesting that parallel pathways determine longevity in *daf-2*/InR and germline-less animals [75].

The lifespan of germline-less *glp-1*/NotchR animals is not further extended by TOR inhibition [44], suggesting that overlap exists between TOR and germline signaling. This is supported by the observation that TOR levels are reduced in *glp-1*/NotchR animals [44], and both pathways share common transcriptional targets (e.g., the lipase *lipl-4*) and regulators (e.g., DAF-16/FOXO). However, because inhibition of *raga-1* (i.e., TORC1) does extend the lifespan of germline-less animals [53], this overlap is likely to be complex and awaits further investigation.

### Summary

The effects of germline signaling on aging in *C. elegans* have received much attention in recent years, and this pathway is now known to share common effector mechanisms with insulin/IGF-1 and TOR signaling, most notably lipid metabolism and autophagy. Among the three longevity pathways discussed here, germline signaling is associated with the largest number of transcription factors known to modulate longevity, namely *daf-16*/FOXO, *daf-12*/FXR, *hsf-1*, *nhr-80*/HNF4, and *pha-4*/FOXA. Future experiments should evaluate how the function of these factors is coordinated, both intracellularly and at the intercellular level, to extend lifespan in germline-less animals.

Review

Trends in Endocrinology and Metabolism December 2012, Vol. 23, No. 12

### Concluding remarks

The involvement of the insulin/IGF-1, TOR, and germline signaling pathways in lifespan determination of *C. elegans* is the subject of intense investigation. Each pathway regulates downstream effector mechanisms, including lipid metabolism and autophagy, through overlapping sets of transcription factors. All three pathways converge on DAF-16/FOXO, whereas SKN-1/Nrf1, PHA-4/FOXA, and HSF-1 are employed in specific combinations. Notably, some transcriptional target genes are known to be regulated by both DAF-16/FOXO and HSF-1, whereas others are specifically controlled by one factor [18]. It will be crucial to identify the targets of each transcription factor, and to determine how they are coordinately regulated in the different longevity models.

At least two cellular processes are regulated in common by insulin/IGF-1, TOR, and germline signaling to affect longevity; namely, autophagy and lipolysis. The interplay between autophagy and lipolysis may be crucial for longevity as LIPL-4-mediated lipase activity and autophagy function interdependently [44]. Moreover, concomitant changes in fatty acid desaturation may be necessary for somatic maintenance [76]. As such, increased activity in lipid remodeling pathways, such as fatty acid desaturation observed in germline signaling, may stimulate membrane biogenesis and maintain functional autophagy (reviewed in [77]). The significance of lipid breakdown in aging appears to be conserved because, in humans, the capacity to maintain dynamic lipid turnover in adipocytes correlates with better health status [78]. Paradoxically, mutants of all three longevity pathways have excessive lipid stores (reviewed in [76]). Future biochemical experiments in *C. elegans* may reveal how aging is modulated by different metabolic routes governing energy and lipid homeostasis (Box 1).

As in the past decades, future research in *C. elegans* will probably help clarify how endocrine and metabolic signaling between different tissues modulate organismal aging. Such studies could uncover novel genetic factors with effects on survival, which may help develop therapeutic solutions against human age-related diseases and aging. The nematode is also emerging as a practical platform to test compounds and rapidly validate their bioactivity in different disease models [79,80]. In sum, research using the model organism *C. elegans* will continue to accelerate discoveries, and provide a better molecular and cellular understanding relevant to treatment of age-related disorders and metabolic diseases in humans.

---

### Box 1. Outstanding questions

- How are energy and lipid homeostasis changed to ensure survival?
- What is the cargo(s) degraded by autophagy that leads to longer lifespan?
- How do TOR complexes differ in their ability to mediate longevity?
- What are the mechanisms by which multiple transcription factors coordinate the transcription of distinct subset of genes in a longevity pathway?

---

### Acknowledgments

We would like to thank Drs H. Aguilaniu, A. Ghazi, and A. O'Rourke for feedback on the manuscript. We also thank Jamie Simon from the Salk Institute for Biological Studies for help with figures. L.R.L. is funded by a pilot grant from National Institutes of Health (NIH)/National Institute on Aging (NIA) (3 P50 AG005131-28), and M.H. is funded by two R01s from NIH/NIA (R01 AG038664 and R01 AG039756). M.H. is also an Ellison Medical Foundation New Scholar in Aging (AG-NS-0481-08).

### References

1. Panowski, S.H. and Dillin, A. (2009) Signals of youth: endocrine regulation of aging in *Caenorhabditis elegans*. Trends Endocrinol. Metab. 20, 259–264
2. Ni, Z. and Lee, S.S. (2010) RNAi screens to identify components of gene networks that modulate aging in *Caenorhabditis elegans*. Brief. Funct. Genomics 9, 53–64
3. Kenyon, C. *et al.* (1993) A *C. elegans* mutant that lives twice as long as wild type. Nature 366, 461–464
4. Friedman, D.B. and Johnson, T.E. (1988) A mutation in the *age-1* gene in *Caenorhabditis elegans* lengthens life and reduces hermaphrodite fertility. Genetics 118, 75–86
5. Kenyon, C.J. (2010) The genetics of ageing. Nature 464, 504–512
6. Kimura, K.D. *et al.* (1997) *daf-2*, an insulin receptor-like gene that regulates longevity and diapause in *Caenorhabditis elegans*. Science 277, 942–946
7. Pierce, S.B. *et al.* (2001) Regulation of DAF-2 receptor signaling by human insulin and ins-1, a member of the unusually large and diverse *C. elegans* insulin gene family. Genes Dev. 15, 672–686
8. Malone, E.A. *et al.* (1996) Genetic analysis of the roles of *daf-28* and *age-1* in regulating *Caenorhabditis elegans* dauer formation. Genetics 143, 1193–1205
9. Li, W. *et al.* (2003) *daf-28* encodes a *C. elegans* insulin superfamily member that is regulated by environmental cues and acts in the DAF-2 signaling pathway. Genes Dev. 17, 844–858
10. Murphy, C.T. *et al.* (2007) Tissue entrainment by feedback regulation of insulin gene expression in the endoderm of *Caenorhabditis elegans*. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 104, 19046–19050
11. Wolff, S. and Dillin, A. (2006) The trifecta of aging in *Caenorhabditis elegans*. Exp. Gerontol. 41, 894–903
12. Murphy, C.T. (2006) The search for DAF-16/FOXO transcriptional targets: approaches and discoveries. Exp. Gerontol. 41, 910–921
13. Ogg, S. and Ruvkun, G. (1998) The *C. elegans* PTEN homolog, DAF-18, acts in the insulin receptor-like metabolic signaling pathway. Mol. Cell 2, 887–893
14. Oh, S.W. *et al.* (2005) JNK regulates lifespan in *Caenorhabditis elegans* by modulating nuclear translocation of forkhead transcription factor/DAF-16. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 102, 4494–4499
15. Takahashi, Y. *et al.* (2011) Asymmetric arginine dimethylation determines lifespan in *C. elegans* by regulating forkhead transcription factor DAF-16. Cell Metab. 13, 505–516
16. Li, W. *et al.* (2007) RLE-1, an E3 ubiquitin ligase, regulates *C. elegans* aging by catalyzing DAF-16 polyubiquitination. Dev. Cell 12, 235–246
17. Wolff, S. *et al.* (2006) SMK-1, an essential regulator of DAF-16-mediated longevity. Cell 124, 1039–1053
18. Hsu, A.L. *et al.* (2003) Regulation of aging and age-related disease by DAF-16 and heat-shock factor. Science 300, 1142–1145
19. Tullet, J.M. *et al.* (2008) Direct inhibition of the longevity-promoting factor SKN-1 by insulin-like signaling in *C. elegans*. Cell 132, 1025–1038
20. Chiang, W.C. *et al.* (2012) HSF-1 Regulators DDL-1/2 link insulin-like signaling to heat-shock responses and modulation of longevity. Cell 148, 322–334
21. An, J.H. *et al.* (2005) Regulation of the *Caenorhabditis elegans* oxidative stress defense protein SKN-1 by glycogen synthase kinase-3. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 102, 16275–16280
22. Inoue, H. *et al.* (2005) The *C. elegans* p38 MAPK pathway regulates nuclear localization of the transcription factor SKN-1 in oxidative stress response. Genes Dev. 19, 2278–2283
23. Murphy, C.T. *et al.* (2003) Genes that act downstream of DAF-16 to influence the lifespan of *Caenorhabditis elegans*. Nature 424, 277–283
24. McElwee, J. *et al.* (2003) Transcriptional outputs of the *Caenorhabditis elegans* forkhead protein DAF-16. Aging Cell 2, 111–121

Review

Trends in Endocrinology and Metabolism December 2012, Vol. 23, No. 12

25 McElwee, J.J. *et al.* (2004) Shared transcriptional signature in *Caenorhabditis elegans* Dauer larvae and long-lived daf-2 mutants implicates detoxification system in longevity assurance. *J. Biol. Chem.* 279, 44533–44543

26 Halaschek-Wiener, J. *et al.* (2005) Analysis of long-lived *C. elegans* daf-2 mutants using serial analysis of gene expression. *Genome Res.* 15, 603–615

27 Lee, S.S. *et al.* (2003) DAF-16 target genes that control *C. elegans* lifespan and metabolism. *Science* 300, 644–647

28 Curran, S.P. *et al.* (2009) A soma-to-germline transformation in long-lived *Caenorhabditis elegans* mutants. *Nature* 459, 1079–1084

29 Lee, S.J. *et al.* (2009) Glucose shortens the lifespan of *C. elegans* by downregulating DAF-16/FOXO activity and aquaporin gene expression. *Cell Metab.* 10, 379–391

30 Schulz, T.J. *et al.* (2007) Glucose restriction extends *Caenorhabditis elegans* lifespan by inducing mitochondrial respiration and increasing oxidative stress. *Cell Metab.* 6, 280–293

31 You, Y.J. *et al.* (2008) Insulin, cGMP, and TGF-beta signals regulate food intake and quiescence in *C. elegans*: a model for satiety. *Cell Metab.* 7, 249–257

32 Wang, M.C. *et al.* (2008) Fat metabolism links germline stem cells and longevity in *C. elegans*. *Science* 322, 957–960

33 Ashrafi, K. *et al.* (2003) Genome-wide RNAi analysis of *Caenorhabditis elegans* fat regulatory genes. *Nature* 421, 268–272

34 Perez, C.L. *et al.* (2008) A 13C isotope labeling strategy reveals the influence of insulin signaling on lipogenesis in *C. elegans*. *Cell Metab.* 8, 266–274

35 Apfeld, J. *et al.* (2004) The AMP-activated protein kinase AAK-2 links energy levels and insulin-like signals to lifespan in *C. elegans*. *Genes Dev.* 18, 3004–3009

36 Mair, W. *et al.* (2011) Lifespan extension induced by AMPK and calcineurin is mediated by CRTC-1 and CREB. *Nature* 470, 404–408

37 Melendez, A. and Levine, B. (2009) Autophagy in *C. elegans*. *WormBook* 1–26 [http://dx.doi.org/10.1895/wormbook.1.147.1]

38 Melendez, A. *et al.* (2003) Autophagy genes are essential for dauer development and lifespan extension in *C. elegans*. *Science* 301, 1387–1391

39 Hars, E.S. *et al.* (2007) Autophagy regulates ageing in *C. elegans*. *Autophagy* 3, 93–95

40 Florez-McClure, M.L. *et al.* (2007) Decreased insulin-receptor signaling promotes the autophagic degradation of beta-amyloid peptide in *C. elegans*. *Autophagy* 3, 569–580

41 Ben-Zvi, A. *et al.* (2009) Collapse of proteostasis represents an early molecular event in *Caenorhabditis elegans* aging. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.* 106, 14914–14919

42 David, D.C. *et al.* (2010) Widespread protein aggregation as an inherent part of aging in *C. elegans*. *PLoS Biol.* 8, e1000450

43 Egan, D.F. *et al.* (2011) Phosphorylation of ULK1 (hATG1) by AMP-activated protein kinase connects energy sensing to mitophagy. *Science* 331, 456–461

44 Lapierre, L.R. *et al.* (2011) Autophagy and lipid metabolism coordinately modulate aging in germline-less *C. elegans*. *Curr. Biol.* 21, 1507–1514

45 Hansen, M. *et al.* (2008) A role for autophagy in the extension of lifespan by dietary restriction in *C. elegans*. *PLoS Genet.* 4, e24

46 McColl, G. *et al.* (2010) Insulin-like signaling determines survival during stress via posttranscriptional mechanisms in *C. elegans*. *Cell Metab.* 12, 260–272

47 Fontana, L. *et al.* (2010) Extending healthy lifespan—from yeast to humans. *Science* 328, 321–326

48 Kapahi, P. *et al.* (2010) With TOR, less is more: a key role for the conserved nutrient-sensing TOR pathway in aging. *Cell Metab.* 11, 453–465

49 Laplante, M. and Sabatini DM (2012) mTOR signaling in growth control and disease. *Cell* 149, 274–293

50 Zoncu, R. *et al.* (2011) mTOR: from growth signal integration to cancer, diabetes and ageing. *Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol.* 12, 21–35

51 Jia, K. *et al.* (2004) The TOR pathway interacts with the insulin signaling pathway to regulate *C. elegans* larval development, metabolism and lifespan. *Development* 131, 3897–3906

52 Long, X. *et al.* (2002) TOR deficiency in *C. elegans* causes developmental arrest and intestinal atrophy by inhibition of mRNA translation. *Curr. Biol.* 12, 1448–1461

53 Robida-Stubbs, S. *et al.* (2012) TOR signaling and rapamycin influence longevity by regulating SKN-1/Nrf and DAF-16/FoxO. *Cell Metab.* 15, 713–724

54 Soukas, A.A. *et al.* (2009) Rictor/TORC2 regulates fat metabolism, feeding, growth, and lifespan in *Caenorhabditis elegans*. *Genes Dev.* 23, 496–511

55 Jones, K.T. *et al.* (2009) Rictor/TORC2 regulates *Caenorhabditis elegans* fat storage, body size, and development through sgk-1. *PLoS Biol.* 7, e60

56 Schreiber, M.A. *et al.* (2010) Manipulation of behavioral decline in *Caenorhabditis elegans* with the Rag GTPase raga-1. *PLoS Genet.* 6, e1000972

57 Honjoh, S. *et al.* (2009) Signalling through RHEB-1 mediates intermittent fasting-induced longevity in *C. elegans*. *Nature* 457, 726–730

58 Sheaffer, K.L. *et al.* (2008) The Target of Rapamycin pathway antagonizes pha-4/FoxA to control development and aging. *Curr. Biol.* 18, 1355–1364

59 Vellai, T. *et al.* (2003) Genetics: influence of TOR kinase on lifespan in *C. elegans*. *Nature* 426, 620

60 Toth, M.L. *et al.* (2008) Longevity pathways converge on autophagy genes to regulate lifespan in *Caenorhabditis elegans*. *Autophagy* 4, 330–338

61 Bjedov, I. *et al.* (2010) Mechanisms of lifespan extension by rapamycin in the fruit fly *Drosophila melanogaster*. *Cell Metab.* 11, 35–46

62 Hansen, M. *et al.* (2007) Lifespan extension by conditions that inhibit translation in *Caenorhabditis elegans*. *Aging Cell* 6, 95–110

63 Hsin, H. and Kenyon, C. (1999) Signals from the reproductive system regulate the lifespan of *C. elegans*. *Nature* 399, 362–366

64 Kenyon, C. (2010) A pathway that links reproductive status to lifespan in *Caenorhabditis elegans*. *Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci.* 1204, 156–162

65 Berman, J.R. and Kenyon, C. (2006) Germ-cell loss extends *C. elegans* lifespan through regulation of DAF-16 by kri-1 and lipophilic-hormone signaling. *Cell* 124, 1055–1068

66 Hansen, M. *et al.* (2005) New genes tied to endocrine, metabolic, and dietary regulation of lifespan from a *Caenorhabditis elegans* genomic RNAi screen. *PLoS Genet.* 1, 119–128

67 Ghazi, A. *et al.* (2009) A transcription elongation factor that links signals from the reproductive system to lifespan extension in *Caenorhabditis elegans*. *PLoS Genet.* 5, e1000639

68 McCormick, M. *et al.* (2012) New genes that extend *Caenorhabditis elegans’* lifespan in response to reproductive signals. *Aging Cell* 11, 192–202

69 Boulias, K. and Horvitz, H.R. (2012) The *C. elegans* MicroRNA mir-71 acts in neurons to promote germline-mediated longevity through regulation of DAF-16/FOXO. *Cell Metab.* 15, 439–450

70 Gerisch, B. *et al.* (2007) A bile acid-like steroid modulates *Caenorhabditis elegans* lifespan through nuclear receptor signaling. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.* 104, 5014–5019

71 Dowell, P. *et al.* (2003) Convergence of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma and Foxo1 signaling pathways. *J. Biol. Chem.* 278, 45485–45491

72 Arantes-Oliveira, N. *et al.* (2002) Regulation of lifespan by germ-line stem cells in *Caenorhabditis elegans*. *Science* 295, 502–505

73 O’Rourke, E.J. *et al.* (2009) *C. elegans* major fats are stored in vesicles distinct from lysosome-related organelles. *Cell Metab.* 10, 430–435

74 Goudeau, J. *et al.* (2011) Fatty acid desaturation links germ cell loss to longevity through NHR-80/HNF4 in *C. elegans*. *PLoS Biol.* 9, e1000599

75 Arantes-Oliveira, N. *et al.* (2003) Healthy animals with extreme longevity. *Science* 302, 611

76 Ackerman, D. and Gems, D. (2012) The mystery of *C. elegans* aging: an emerging role for fat: distant parallels between *C. elegans* aging and metabolic syndrome? *Bioessays* 34, 466–471

77 Girardi, J.P. *et al.* (2011) De novo synthesis of phospholipids is coupled with autophagosome formation. *Med. Hypotheses* 77, 1083–1087

78 Arner, P. *et al.* (2011) Dynamics of human adipose lipid turnover in health and metabolic disease. *Nature* 478, 110–113

79 Petrascheck, M. *et al.* (2007) An antidepressant that extends lifespan in adult *Caenorhabditis elegans*. *Nature* 450, 553–556

80 Alavez, S. *et al.* (2011) Amyloid-binding compounds maintain protein homeostasis during ageing and extend lifespan. *Nature* 472, 226–229
