
# DAMP signaling in fungal infections and diseases

**Cristina Cunha**¹, **Agostinho Carvalho**²,³, **Antonella Esposito**⁴, **Francesco Bistoni**¹ and **Luigina Romani**¹*

1. Department of Experimental Medicine and Biochemical Sciences, University of Perugia, Perugia, Italy

best exemplified by the occurrence of severe fungal infections in patients with immune reconstitution syndrome, an entity characterized by localized and systemic inflammatory reactions, worsening disease in opportunistic and non-opportunistic infections, that are associated with immunological recovery (Gupta and Singh, 2011; Perfect, 2012). Additionally, a high incidence of fungal infections and sensitization to *Aspergillus
a double-edged sword and this may explain why PMNs, although essential in initiation and execution of the acute inflammatory response and subsequent resolution, may act as double-edged swords, as the excessive release of oxidants and proteases may be responsible for injury to organs and fungal sepsis (Romani and Puccetti, 2007).

### VIA A DUAL SENSOR SYSTEM

There is a growing suspicion(RAGE), a multiligand receptor of the immunoglobulin superfamily (Schmidt et al., 2001; Donato, 2007; Sparvero et al., 2009). Integral to the biology of RAGE and its ligands is their upregulation and increased accumulation in multiple biological and disease settings. The ability to activate expression programs that encode innate immune responsive genes confers to
CONCLUSION

It is now clear that several DAMPs are vital danger signals that alert the immune system to tissue damage upon fungal infections. However, PRR activation by DAMPs may initiate positive feedback loops where increasing tissue damage perpetuates pro-inflammatory responses leading to chronic inflammation. Indeed, DAMPs have been implicated in fungal diseases where excessive inflammation plays a key role in pathogenesis, including fungal pneumonia in transplanted patients and recurrent
D., Romani, L., Miller, B., Gut, I., Santos, M., Pierre, P., Bowyer, P., and Kapushesky, M. (2011). Systems biology of infectious diseases: a focus on fungal infections. *Immunobiology* 216, 1212–1227.

Schmidt, A. M., Yan,