
REVIEW

The role of microRNAs in cancers of the upper gastrointestinal tract

Shumei Song and Jaffer A. Ajani

Abstract Cancers of the oesophagus, gastro-oesophageal junction and stomach (upper gastrointestinal tract cancers; UGICs) pose a major health risk around the world. Collectively, the 5-year survival rate has remained <15%, and therapeutic improvements have been very slow and small. Novel molecules for early diagnosis, prognosis and therapy are, therefore, urgently needed. The role that microRNA (miRNA) molecules have in UGICs are worth pursuing to this end. miRNAs are small noncoding RNA molecules that regulate ~60% of coding genes in humans and, therefore, are pivotal in mediating and regulating many physiologic processes. miRNAs are deregulated in many disease states, particularly in cancer, making them important targets. Here, we review the growing body of evidence regarding the alterations of miRNAs in UGICs. By suppressing translation and/or promoting degradation of mRNAs, miRNAs can contribute to carcinogenesis and progression of UGICs. In-depth studies of miRNAs in UGICs might yield novel insights and potential novel therapeutic strategies.

Song, S. & Ajani, J. A. Nat. Rev. Gastroenterol. Hepatol. **10**, 109–118 (2013); published online 20 November 2012; doi:10.1038/nrgastro.2012.210

### Introduction

Cancers of the upper gastrointestinal tract (UGICs) include those originating in the oesophagus, gastro-oesophageal junction and stomach. The incidence of adenocarcinoma involving the lower third of the oesophagus, gastro-oesophageal junction and proximal stomach has risen considerably in the past 30 years.¹ It is estimated that 38,780 new cases and 25,610 deaths are likely to occur from UGICs in 2012 in the USA alone.² Gastric cancer is the fourth most common cancer and the second leading cause of cancer-related death in the world.³ *Helicobacter pylori* infection, gastrin levels, germline mutations, dietary factors and other chronic gastric conditions are all factors involved in the development of gastric cancer.

Our understanding of the molecular basis of carcinogenesis and progression of UGICs has lagged behind that of many other tumour types. This knowledge deficit is creating a barrier in the development of effective therapies, and progress in the treatment of UGICs has been unsatisfactory and slow. Consequently, outcomes for patients with UGICs have remained dismal, with 5-year survival rates <15%.² Improved understanding of the role of microRNAs (miRNAs) in UGICs could lead to novel prevention strategies, early detection and improved therapeutics.

### MicroRNAs

miRNAs are short (20–24 nucleotides) stable RNA molecules that are not translated into proteins but regulate 60% of coding genes by binding to mRNA molecules and so preventing their translation and/or promoting their degradation. More than 1,000 miRNAs have been identified, and they are involved in nearly all physiologic processes, as well as having an important role in diseases, such as cancer. Novel functions and mechanisms by which miRNAs regulate genes are constantly being discovered.⁴⁻⁶ Genes that encode miRNAs are located in intergenic regions but can also be in exonic or intronic regions of other genes.⁷ In addition, miRNA genes can be found in the introns of protein-coding or non-protein-coding genes.⁸ Each miRNA can target a large number of genes (mRNAs), and each mRNA can be targeted by several miRNAs.⁹ The many ways in which miRNAs engage mRNA have been described and new mechanisms are regularly being discovered.⁸ Most commonly, miRNAs either degrade an mRNA (when perfect complementarity is established) or inhibit its translation (when imperfect complementarity is established); the net outcome is a reduction in the amount of a particular protein inside the cell.¹¹⁰ In addition, some miRNAs can directly bind to the (open reading frame of the) DNA or modify the methylation status of a gene.¹¹ A mature miRNA can target mRNA binding proteins (functioning like a decoy).¹²

The genes that encode miRNAs are frequently located inside or close to fragile sites of chromosomes and are subject to considerable deregulation in cancer.¹⁰ Alterations in the expression of miRNAs in cancer are related to deletions, mutations, polymorphisms, promoter hypermethylation and/or histone acetylation of miRNA genes as well as alterations in the miRNA processing machinery. Amplifications, translocations and/or transcript activations can also lead to changes in expression of miRNAs.

---

Department of Gastrointestinal Medical Oncology (S. Song), Departments of Gastrointestinal Medical Oncology and Molecular Epidemiology (J. A. Ajani), The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, 1515 Holcombe Boulevard, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

---

Correspondence to:  
J. A. Ajani  
jajani@mdanderson.org

---

NATURE REVIEWS | GASTROENTEROLOGY & HEPATOLOGY  
VOLUME 10 | FEBRUARY 2013 | 109  

© 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved.

Key points

- Cancers of the oesophagus, gastro-oesophageal junction and stomach (UGICs) are common worldwide, and outcomes for patients with these cancers have remained dismal
- miRNAs are noncoding, single-stranded RNAs ~22 nucleotides in length; they comprise a novel class of gene regulators that negatively regulate their targets
- Many miRNA that act as oncogenes, tumour suppressors and important modulators in the process of invasion and metastasis of UGICs have been identified
- Increased activity of oncogenic miRNAs leads to inhibition of tumour suppressor genes, facilitating cell proliferation and tumour progression; decreased activity of tumour-suppressor miRNAs leads to increased oncogene translation, contributing to tumour progression
- Certain miRNAs are involved in the regulation of metastasis as well as in modulation of chemoresistance in UGICs
- Circulating miRNAs provide potential biomarkers for early diagnosis and prognosis in patients with UGICs; further research could lead to exploitation of miRNAs as therapeutic or diagnostic targets for these cancers

Table 1 | miRNAs and their targets in oesophageal adenocarcinoma

| miRNA       | Targets                     | References |
|-------------|-----------------------------|------------|
| **OncomiRs**|                             |            |
| miR-21*     | PDCD4                       | 26,27      |
| miR-196a†   | ANXA1, SPRR2C, S100         | 24,25      |
| miR-192†    | NR                          | 32         |
| miR-106b-25 | CDKN1A, BIM                 | 23         |
| miR-99b/199a| NR                          | 104        |
| miR-194     | NR                          | 27         |
| **TsmiRs**  |                             |            |
| miR-203*    | NR                          | 28,31–33   |
| miR-205†    | NR                          | 28,31,33   |
| Let-7a/b/c  | NR                          | 34         |
| miR-200a/b/c| ZEB1, ZEB2                  | 30         |
| miR-31/miR375| NR                         | 29         |
| miR-345/494/193a| NR                      | 34         |

*Reported consistently by more than four individual groups. †Reported by two groups. Abbreviation: NR, not reported.

Many miRNAs have been identified to act as oncogenes, tumour suppressors and important modulators in cellular pathways. The oncogenic or tumour suppressor function of an miRNA depends on the role of the target mRNA. Increased activity of oncogenic miRNAs (oncomiRs) leads to inhibition of tumour suppressor genes, facilitating cell proliferation and tumour progression. Decreased activity of tumour-suppressor miRNAs (tsmiRs) leads to increased oncogene translation, contributing to tumour formation.¹³ Certain miRNAs are involved in the regulation of metastasis (metastamiRs); these miRNAs can positively or negatively regulate cancer cell migration, invasion and metastasis.¹²,¹⁵

Some miRNAs are upregulated or downregulated in specific types of cancer, for example miR-122 in hepatocellular carcinoma.¹⁶,¹⁷ Further research might yield tissue-specific miRNAs; a level of specificity that would enable tumour-type-specific targeting. Some miRNAs are actively secreted in blood and other body fluids and could potentially be used for the early diagnosis of cancer and monitoring of therapy; some circulating miRNAs have been described in UGICs.¹⁸ Some miRNAs participate in genetic exchange among cells.¹⁹ miRNA profiling can make a distinction between normal and malignant tissue⁷ but, more importantly, since tumour-type-specific miRNA profiles (miRNomEs) have been discovered, such observations lend themselves to establishing miRNomics as a diagnostic tool for uncovering the origin of tumours.⁸ For example, as described above, miR-122 seems to be highly enriched in the liver, suggesting that the discovery of more organ-specific miRNAs could improve our ability to target these processes.²⁰ For greater understanding of the mechanisms of deregulated miRNA, we recommend a previous report.²¹

# miRNAs and oesophageal cancer

Microarray or real-time PCR and *in situ* hybridization have been used to determine and validate the expression of miRNAs in cell lines and tumour specimens. Many reports have described deregulated miRNAs and their targets and functions in the major oesophageal cancer histologic subtypes: oesophageal adenocarcinoma (Table 1) and oesophageal squamous cell carcinoma (Table 2).²²

## Oesophageal adenocarcinoma

### OncomiRs

miRNA profiling and functional studies have been used to understand the mechanisms of progression of Barrett oesophagus to oesophageal adenocarcinoma. Several reports discuss the alterations in miRNAs in Barrett oesophagus and oesophageal adenocarcinoma and have identified targets and characterized their functional roles in the carcinogenesis of oesophageal adenocarcinoma. For example, miR-106b-25 polycistron is progressively upregulated in high-risk Barrett oesophagus to oesophageal adenocarcinoma; this upregulation is associated with genomic amplification and overexpression of MCM7 locus at chromosome 7q22.1.²³ The upregulated polycistron targets and inhibits P21 and Bim proteins, which affect the cell cycle and apoptosis, thereby contributing to oesophageal adenocarcinoma carcinogenesis.²³ Two independent reports have described upregulation of miR-196a in a progressive manner from Barrett oesophagus to Barrett oesophagus with dysplasia and finally to oesophageal adenocarcinoma; miR-196a targets ANXA1 (annexin A1), SPRR2C (small proline-rich protein 2C) and S100A9.²⁴,²⁵ Expression of PDCD4 (programmed cell death receptor 4), a tumour suppressor gene, decreased progressively and substantially with progression of Barrett oesophagus to oesophageal adenocarcinoma, but miR-21 expression was upregulated in high-grade dysplasia with Barrett oesophagus and oesophageal adenocarcinoma, which is consistent with PDCD4 deregulation; functional studies have confirmed that miR-21 is a negative regulator of PDCD4 *in vivo* and has an oncogenic role in oesophageal adenocarcinoma.²⁶ Therefore, miR-21, miR-196a, and miR-192, which are upregulated in oesophageal adenocarcinoma but not in normal samples, have been termed as oncomiRs.²⁷,²⁸

Table 2 | Deregulated miRNAs, potential targets and functions in oesophageal squamous carcinoma

| miRNA          | Targets                     | Functions                          | References |
|-----------------|-----------------------------|------------------------------------|------------|
| **OncomiRs**   |                             |                                    |            |
| miR-21*        | PTEN, PDCD4                 | ↑ proliferation and invasion       | 35–37      |
| miR-25         | CDH1                        | ↑ metastasis                      | 38         |
| miR-1322       | SPINK7                      | ↑ proliferation                   | 22         |
| miR-223        | FBXW7                       | ↑ poor prognosis                  | 42         |
| miR-31         | EMP1, KSR2, RGS4            | ↑ progression                    | 43         |
| miR-92a        | CDH1                        | ↑ metastasis, poor prognosis      | 39         |
| miR-296        | Cyclin D1, BCL2             | ↑ progression                    | 44         |
| miR-10b        | KLF4                        | ↑ migration, invasion             | 40         |
| miR-373        | LATS2                       | ↑ proliferation                   | 41         |
| miR-196a       | ANXA1                       | ↑ proliferation                   | 24         |
| miR-129        | NR                          | NR                                | 45         |
| miR-17-92 cluster | TNF                        | ↑ proliferation                   | 46         |
| miR-200c/miR-21 | PPP2R1B                     | Cisplatin resistance              | 47         |
| miR-200b/c/miR-429 | TFAP2A                     | Cisplatin resistance              | 48         |
| **TsmiRs**     |                             |                                    |            |
| miR-375*       | PDK1, IGF1R                 | ↓ growth and metastasis           | 27,49–51   |
| miR-133a       | CD47                        | ↓ lymph-node metastasis           | 52,53      |
| Let-7          | HMGA2                       | ↓ proliferation                   | 58         |
| miR-29c        | Cyclin E                    | Cell cycle arrest                 | 59         |
| miR-34a        | NR                          | NR                                | 56,57      |
| miR-223        | ARTN                        | ↓ migration and invasion          | 61         |
| miR-205        | ZEB2, EMT                   | ↓ migration and invasion          | 54,55      |
| miR-141        | YAP1                        | ↓ chemoresistance                 | 119        |
| miR-203        | NP63                        | ↓ proliferation                   | 136        |
| miR-148a       | NR                          | ↑ chemosensitivity                | 121        |
| miR-210        | FGFRL1                      | Cell cycle arrest                 | 60         |
| miR-205†       | CDH1                        | ↓ inhibition of EMT               | 54         |
| miR-10a        | Homebox genes               | ↓ migration and invasion          | 55         |
| miR-143/145 cluster | FSCN1                     | ↓ lymph-node metastasis           | 62         |
| miR-34a/b/c/129-2 | NR                         | NR                                | 57         |

*Reported consistently by more than four individual groups. †Reported by two groups. Abbreviations: EMT, epithelial–mesenchymal transition; NR, not reported.

tsmiRs

Two miRNA alterations have been identified that might mediate progression to oesophageal adenocarcinoma: miR-31 showed frequent downregulation only in high-grade dysplasia and oesophageal adenocarcinoma cases, suggesting an association with transition from Barrett metaplasia to high-grade dysplasia, whereas miR-375 showed marked downregulation exclusively in oesophageal adenocarcinomas but not in Barrett metaplasia or lesions with high-grade dysplasia, suggesting an association with progression to invasive carcinoma.²⁹ Therefore, miR-31 and miR-375 have been proposed to be specifically associated with early and late-stage malignant progression, respectively.²⁹ However, documenting the functional significance of such discoveries is difficult in this setting because of the lack of mature genetically engineered mouse models. Some of the work

is, therefore, preliminary. For example, several studies have found alterations in miRNAs in Barrett oesophagus and oesophageal adenocarcinoma, but the target mRNAs have not been identified.

Smith *et al.*³⁰ found that miR-200 family members were downregulated in oesophageal adenocarcinoma when compared with Barrett oesophagus, and a significant inverse correlation was noted between miR-200 family expression and ZEB1 (zinc finger E-box binding homeobox 1) and ZEB2 expression in Barrett oesophagus and oesophageal adenocarcinoma. miR-203, miR-205, Let-7a/b/c, miR-345, miR-494, miR-193a and miR-375 are downregulated in oesophageal adenocarcinoma and could also be considered as tsmiRNAs.²⁸,³¹⁻³⁴ In-depth studies of these miRNAs will be important for their potential development as therapeutic targets.

REVIEWs

OncomiRs
miR-223 miR-106b-25 miR-373 miR-10b miR-21* miR-146a miR-196a*
tsmiRs
Similarly, many downregulated miRNAs and their targets have been identified in oesophageal squamous cell carcinoma. Among these, miR-375 is the most promising tsmiR that is consistently downregulated either in tumour tissues or plasma from patients with oesophageal squamous cell carcinoma compared with healthy controls. Hypermethylation of the miR-375 promoter is the reported mechanism of its downregulation. IGF1R (insulin-like growth factor 1 receptor) and PDK1 (phosphoinositide-dependent kinase 1) are important components of the IGF1 and phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) pathways, which are frequently overexpressed in many malignancies and have a crucial role in promoting cell proliferation, survival and metastasis; miR-375 might interact with the 3'-untranslated regions of IGF1R and PDK1 and down-regulate their expression. Therefore, IGF1R and PDK1 are two major targets of miR-375. Another report suggests that miR-133a inhibits tumorigenesis and growth in vivo and inhibits CD47; overexpression of CD47 correlates with poor prognosis. miR-133a in concert with miR-145 and miR-133b target FSCN1 (actin-binding oncogenic protein, Fascin homolog 1) and thereby inhibit cell proliferation and invasion in oesophageal squamous cell carcinoma cells. An in vitro study by Matsushima et al. demonstrated that the downregulation of miR-205 results in reduced cellular invasion and migration by targeting ZEB2; it also reduces EMT by decreasing E-cadherin expression. Let-7a and miR-34a, reportedly involved in cancer stem cell regulation, are down-regulated in oesophageal squamous cell carcinoma. Further tsmiRs include: miR-29c, which targets cyclin E without affecting cyclin dependent kinase (CDK)-2 and CDK6; miR-210, which targets FGFR1; and miR-223, which targets ARTN (Table 2).

Suppressors
FBXW7 CDKN1A/ BIM LATS2 KLF4 PTEN PDCD4 SMAD4 CDH1 ANXA1

Proliferation Apoptosis EMT/invasion/metastasis

Oncogenes
HMGA2 Cyclin-E IGF1R PDK1 ZEB1 ZEB2 CD47 FSCN1

TsmiRs
Let-7* miR-29c miR-375* miR-205* miR-133a miR-143 miR-145

Figure 1 | miRNAs, targets and functions in oesophageal cancers. *Common in both oesophageal adenocarcinoma and oesophageal squamous cell carcinoma. Abbreviations: EMT, epithelial–mesenchymal transition; miRNA, microRNA; oncomiRs, oncogenic miRNAs; tsmiRs, tumour suppressor miRNAs.

Oesophageal squamous cell carcinoma OncomiRs
A large number of miRNAs and their targets have been identified that are upregulated in oesophageal squamous cell carcinoma. These oncomiRs target important tumour suppressors. miR-21 has been reported by several independent groups to be an important oncomiR in oesophageal squamous cell carcinoma. miR-21 targets PTEN (phosphatase and tensin homolog) and PDCD4 and seems to promote progression of oesophageal squamous cell carcinoma; miR-21 should be explored as a therapeutic target for preclinical or clinical trials for subset of patients with high expression levels of this miRNA. Two reports note an upregulation of miR-25 and miR-92a in oesophageal squamous cell carcinoma, both of which target CDH1. This gene encodes E-cadherin, which is an important protein for maintaining a normal epithelial phenotype—its downregulation can lead to epithelial–mesenchymal transition (EMT) and metastasis. Both miRNAs promote migration and invasion through reduced expression of E-cadherin and are associated with poor prognosis. Upregulation of miR-10b has been reported in 95% of oesophageal squamous cell carcinomas, along with reduced expression of KLF4 (Krüppel-like factor 4), an important tumour suppressor in the gastrointestinal tract. LATS2 (large tumour suppressor homolog 2) is a member of the LATS tumour suppressor family and is involved in Hippo signalling, which controls organ size and has a crucial role in liver and gastrointestinal tract carcinogenesis. Frequent loss of heterozygosity of LATS has been reported in human oesophageal cancers, and miR-373 inhibits LATS2 in vitro and in vivo. Therefore, miR-373 might have an oncogenic role worthy of further research for potential therapeutic value. Many more potential oncogenic miRNAs have been reported in oesophageal squamous cell carcinoma (Figure 1, Table 2).

miRNAs and gastric cancer OncomiRs
Many overexpressed oncomiRs affect apoptosis and proliferation in gastric cancer. Overexpression of miR-181a in a gastric cancer cell line led to increased cell proliferation and inhibition of apoptosis by repression of tumour suppressor KLF6. Several investigators have reported upregulation of miR-21 in gastric cancer (its targets, as mentioned above, are PDCD4 and PTEN). miR-196a/196b are markedly overexpressed in tumour tissues and serum of patients with gastric cancer. miR-146a in gastric cancer directly targets SMAD4; and ectopic expression of miR-146a might increase proliferation and inhibit apoptosis of gastric cancer cells. Overexpression of miR-191 has been reported in the gastric cancer cell line MGC803 and in gastric cancer tissue; this miRNA regulates NDST1 (N-deacetylase/N-sulphotransferase 1). Overexpression of miR-370 in gastric cancer tissue has also been observed, leading to downregulation of TGFBR2 (TGFβ type II receptor). miR-126 overexpression leads to inhibition of SOX2, which seems to contribute to gastric cancer carcinogenesis. Thus it seems that many oncomiRs are worthy

off further research and might become therapeutic targets in the future. More oncomiRNAs in gastric cancer are shown in Figure 2 and Table 3. ${ }^{73-78}$

### tsmiRs

miR-181b and miR-182 are substantially down-regulated in human gastric adenocarcinoma tissue samples compared with the adjacent normal gastric tissues. ${ }^{79,80}$ Functionally, overexpression of miR-181b suppressed the proliferation and colony formation rate of gastric cancer cells and decreased the expression of CREB1 (cAMP responsive element binding protein 1) by binding to its 3' untranslated region. Thus, miR-181b and miR-182 might function as tumour suppressors in gastric adenocarcinoma cells through negative regulation of CREB1. ${ }^{79,80}$ Carvalho et al. ${ }^{81}$ found that miR-101 was downregulated in gastric cancer owing to microdeletions at miR-101 genomic loci that subsequently led to EZH2 overexpression and CDH1 dysfunction, especially in intestinal-type gastric cancer. miR-124 inhibits gastric cancer cell proliferation by inducing the cell cycle inhibitors P21 and P27 by targeting oncogenic SPHK1. ${ }^{82}$ The miR-409-3p cluster also inhibits proliferation by targeting the transcriptional regulator PHF10. ${ }^{83}$ MYC, an important modulator of cell growth and apoptosis, is downregulated by miR-429. ${ }^{84}$ miR-296 is progressively lost during tumour progression, leading to aberrant overexpression of SCRIB. ${ }^{85}$ miR-375 is downregulated in gastric cancer and its targets are the oncogenes JAK2, PDK1 and YWHAZ (14-3-3 zeta). ${ }^{86,87}$ miR-486, which has been reported by several investigators to be a tsmiR in gastric cancer, negatively regulates the antiapoptotic glycoprotein OLFM4. ${ }^{88}$ Let-7a has reduced expression in gastric cancer tissues and cell lines; ${ }^{89-91}$ its target is RAB40C. miR-137 is a negative regulator of CDC42 and is downregulated in gastric cancer as a result of hypermethylation. ${ }^{92}$ Quantitative PCR analyses have confirmed the loss of miR-449 in gastric cancer tissue compared with normal tissue; this miRNA facilitates translation of p53, p21 as well as the apoptosis markers CASP3 and PARP by suppressing the oncogenic targets MET, CCNE2, SIRT1 and CDK6. ${ }^{93}$ More details are shown in Figure 2 and Table 3. ${ }^{94-102}$

### miRNAs and metastasis of UGICs

#### MetastamiRs in oesophageal cancer

Invasion and metastasis are important for cancer progression. ${ }^{103}$ In oesophageal squamous cell carcinoma, several upregulated miRNAs (including miR-25, ${ }^{38}$ miR-92a ${ }^{39}$ and miR-205 ${ }^{54,55}$ ) target CDH1 to promote EMT. In addition to regulating EMT, many metastamiRs regulate targets that promote invasion and metastasis of tumour cells (Figure 1). In human oesophageal cancer lines, miR-10b promotes migration and invasion through the tumour suppressor KLF4, ${ }^{40}$ while miR-10a controls cell migration and invasion by targeting homeobox genes. ${ }^{55}$ miR21 is also involved in invasion and metastasis of oesophageal squamous cell carcinoma by targeting PDCD4 in vitro; furthermore, patients with oesophageal squamous cell carcinoma with lymph-node metastasis or

---

**Figure 2 |** miRNAs, targets and functions in gastric cancer. Abbreviations: EMT, epithelial-mesenchymal transition; miRNA, microRNA; oncomiRs, oncogenic miRNAs; tsmiRs, tumour suppressor miRNAs.

venous invasion showed higher expression of miR-21 in comparison with patients without metastasis or venous invasion. ${ }^{37}$ Anti-miRNA-21 transfected cells showed marked reductions in cellular proliferation and invasion. ${ }^{37}$ miR-133a targets CD47 to inhibit tumorigenesis and metastasis *in vivo*, ${ }^{52}$ and miR-375 inhibits invasion and metastasis by targeting IGFLR1 and PDK1. ${ }^{49,51}$ In addition, reduced expression of the miR-143/145 cluster (which regulates FSCN1) in oesophageal squamous cell carcinoma is associated with lymph-node metastases. ${ }^{62}$ miR-223 inhibits tumour migration and invasion by targeting ubiquitin ligase FBXW7 and ARTN in this cancer. ${ }^{42,61}$ A significant inverse correlation between miR-200 family expression and ZEB1 and ZEB2 expression in oesophageal adenocarcinoma has been reported. ${ }^{30}$ Feber et al. report the expression of three miRNAs associated with lymph-node metastasis: miR-99b, miR-199a-3p and miR-199a-5p. ${ }^{104}$

#### MetastamiRs in gastric cancer

miR-21 promotes invasion and lymph-node metastasis in gastric cancer. ${ }^{64,78}$ miR-196a promotes EMT; ${ }^{67}$ overexpression of mir-196b has been reported to induce migration and invasion by inducing EMT, increasing expression of VIM (vimentin) and MMP2, and reducing CDH1 expression. ${ }^{105}$ miR-10b is markedly increased in lymph-node metastasis positive gastric cancer tissues compared with lymph-node metastasis-free tumour tissues, and levels were correlated with downregulation of HOXD10 expression. miR-10 overexpression promotes invasion by stimulating RhoC and AKT by targeting HOXD10. ${ }^{106}$ Upregulation of miR-27 increased the expression of genes associated with EMT, including ZEB1, ZEB2, SLUG and VIM, while decreasing expression of CDH1. ${ }^{107}$

Table 3 | Deregulated miRNAs, targets and potential functions in gastric cancer

| miRNA           | Targets                          | Functions                                      | References |
|------------------|----------------------------------|------------------------------------------------|------------|
| **OncomiRs**    |                                  |                                                |            |
| miR-21*         | PTEN, PDCD4, DICER1             | ↑ proliferation and invasion                   | 64–66      |
| miR-181a        | R1, KLF6                        | ↑ proliferation, ↓ apoptosis                  | 63         |
| miR-196a†       | NR                               | ↑ migration, invasion and EMT                 | 67,68      |
| miR-93          | NR                               | Poor prognosis                                | 73         |
| miR-196b        | ETS2                             | ↑ EMT                                         | 105        |
| miR-222         | RECK                             | ↑ Proliferation                              | 74         |
| miR-10b         | HOXD10                           | ↑ invasion and metastasis                     | 106        |
| miR-663         | CDKN1A                           | NR                                            | 75         |
| miR-146a        | SMAD4                            | NR                                            | 69         |
| miR-200b/a      | CDH1                             | ↑ EMT                                         | 76         |
| miR-27          | NR                               | ↑ EMT and metastasis                          | 107        |
| miR-191         | NDST1                            | NR                                            | 70         |
| miR-370         | TGFBRI2                          | NR                                            | 71         |
| miR-223         | EPB41L3                          | ↑ invasion and metastasis                     | 137        |
| miR-126         | SOX2                             | NR                                            | 72         |
| miR-17-5P/20a   | NR                               | ↑ in plasma marker                           | 77         |
| miR-107/196a/21/9 | DICER1                         | ↑ lymph-node metastasis                       | 78         |
| **TsmiRs**      |                                  |                                                |            |
| miR-7†          | IGF1R                            | ↓ metastasis                                  | 108        |
| Let-7a†         | RAB40C                           | ↓ proliferation                              | 89–91      |
| Let-7f          | MYH9                             | ↓ invasion and metastasis                     | 113        |
| miR-181b        | CREB1                            | Prognostic marker                            | 79         |
| miR-101 (microdeletion) | EZH2                      | ↓ EMT                                        | 81         |
| miR-124         | SPHK1                            | ↓ proliferation                              | 82         |
| miR-145         | CDH2, MMP9                       | ↓ invasion and metastasis                     | 109        |
| miR-182         | CREB1                            | ↓ proliferation                              | 80         |
| miR-148a        | ROCK1                            | ↓ invasion and metastasis                     | 112        |
| miR-29a         | SAPCD2                           | NR                                            | 94         |
| miR-335         | BCLW, SP1                        | ↓ invasion and metastasis                     | 111        |
| miR-429         | MYC                              | ↓ metastasis                                 | 84         |
| miR-296         | SCRIB                            | NR                                            | 85         |
| miR-146a        | EGFR, IRAK1                      | Prognostic marker                            | 95         |
| miR-10b         | MAPRE1                           | NR                                            | 96         |
| miR-375         | JAK2, PDK1, YWHAQ                | NR                                            | 86,87      |
| miR-622         | ING1                             | ↓ invasion and migration                      | 97         |
| miR-107         | CDK6                             | ↓ proliferation and invasion                  | 98         |
| miR-497         | BCL2                             | ↑ drug sensitivity                           | 99         |
| miR-137 (methylation) | CDC42                        | ↓ proliferation                              | 92         |
| miR-449         | MET, SIRT1, CDK6                 | NR                                            | 93         |
| miR-486         | OLFM4                            | NR                                            | 88         |
| miR-495/551a    | PRL3                             | ↓ invasion and migration                      | 100        |
| miR-409-3P†     | PHF10, RDX                       | ↓ proliferation and metastasis                | 83,110     |
| miR-200b/c/429 let-7g/miR-34 | –                    | ↑ chemosensitivity                           | 101,102    |

*Reported consistently by more than four individual groups. †Reported by two groups. Abbreviation: EMT, epithelial–mesenchymal transition.
miR-7 has shown anti-metastatic properties by targeting *IGF1R* and *SNAI1* and increasing expression of *CDH1*; this pathway could, therefore, be a potential therapeutic target in gastric cancer.¹⁰⁸ miR-145 suppresses tumour metastasis by directly targeting *CDH2* (N-cadherin) and *MMP9* but not *MMP2*.¹⁰⁹ miR-409-3p reduces tumour cell migration and invasion *in vitro* and metastases *in vivo* and is frequently downregulated in gastric cancer.¹¹⁰ miR-409 targets the pro-metastatic gene *RDX* to suppress metastasis. miR-335 targets *BCLW* and *SP1* to suppress tumour cell invasion and metastasis and is downregulated in gastric cancer.¹¹¹ *ROCK1* promotes invasion and metastasis in many tumour types and miR-148a directly binds to the *ROCK1 3′* untranslated region and inhibits *ROCK1* expression, therefore suppressing metastasis.¹¹² miR-429 targets *MYC* to inhibit invasion.⁸⁴ Overexpression of let-7f can inhibit invasion and migration by targeting *MYH9* (a tumour metastasis associated gene).¹¹³

### Therapeutic implications of miRNAs in UGICs

#### miRNAs as therapeutic targets
Synthetic miRNA mimics that have been developed for other cancer types include small interfering RNA (siRNA)-like oligoribonucleotide duplexes¹¹⁴ and chemically modified oligoribonucleotides.¹¹⁵ miRNAs can be inhibited *in vitro* and *in vivo* by various modified antisense oligonucleotides called antagomiRs; these molecules might, therefore, have a role in cancer treatment.¹¹⁶ Intensive efforts have been made to develop miRNA-based therapeutics in preclinical models of breast cancer, pancreatic cancer and prostate cancer to modify oncogene or tumour suppressor functions.⁶,¹¹⁷,¹¹⁸ miRNA-based therapeutics are lagging behind for UGICs, but this is a promising area of research.

#### Modifying chemoresistance
In oesophageal squamous cell carcinoma, cisplatin induces expression of *TFAP2A*, which confers chemosensitivity by promoting apoptosis; *TFAP2A* is a target of the miR-200b/200c/miR-429 cluster, which negatively regulates *TFAP2A* to induce cisplatin resistance.⁴⁸ A similar study suggests that overexpression of miR-200c causes cisplatin resistance in oesophageal squamous cell carcinoma cells by upregulating the AKT pathway.⁴⁷ miR-141 sensitizes oesophageal squamous cell carcinoma cells to cisplatin by targeting the 3′-untranslated region of *YAP1*, which is known to have a crucial role in apoptosis induced by DNA-damaging agents.¹¹⁹ miR-148a upregulation in both oesophageal squamous cell carcinoma and oesophageal adenocarcinoma cells increases sensitivity to cisplatin and 5-fluorouracil.¹²⁰,¹²¹ More detailed studies are needed to elucidate these mechanisms.
Zhu *et al.*¹⁰¹ showed that the miR-200b/200c/miR-429 cluster sensitized gastric cancer cells (by increasing apoptosis) to vincristine and cisplatin by targeting *BCL2* and *XIAP*. Overexpression of miR-497 sensitized SGC7901/VCR and A549/CDDP gastric cancer cells to vincristine, 5-fluorouracil and cisplatin by targeting *BCL2 in vitro*.⁹⁹ *In vivo* experiments and subsequent clinical development is needed.

---

### miRNAs as biomarkers in UGICs

#### Diagnostic markers
miRNAs are stably expressed in serum, plasma, urine, saliva and other bodily fluids,¹⁸ and this property can be exploited. However, little work has been done in this regard in UGICs. In patients with oesophageal squamous cell carcinoma, miR-1322 levels are higher in serum and tumour tissues than in controls, so this miRNA could serve as a biomarker.²² OncomiRNAs (miR-21/miR-184/miR-221) and one tsmiR (miR-375) have been studied in the plasma of 50 patients with oesophageal squamous cell carcinoma and 20 healthy volunteers; the plasma level of miR-21 tended to be higher in patients with oesophageal squamous cell carcinoma (*P* = 0.0649), whereas that of miR-375 was significantly lower (*P* < 0.0001) and the miR-21:miR-375 ratio was significantly higher (*P* < 0.0001) in patients with oesophageal squamous cell carcinoma than in controls.⁵⁰

In gastric cancer, three serum miRNAs (miR-221, miR-744 and miR-376c) could distinguish patients with gastric cancer from healthy controls with 82.4% sensitivity and 58.8% specificity.¹²² Moreover, levels of miR-221 and miR-376c demonstrated positive correlation with poor differentiation of gastric cancer.¹²² In a validation experiment, plasma levels of miR-451 and miR-486 were higher in patients with gastric cancer compared with healthy controls, with high area under the curve (AUC) values (0.96 and 0.92).¹²³ A genome-wide miRNA profile identified high serum levels of miR-378 in patients with gastric cancer, and validation yielded a high receiver operating characteristic AUC (0.86).¹²⁴ A quantitative real-time PCR analysis identified five serum miRNAs (miR-1, miR-20a, miR-27a, miR-34 and miR-423-5p) as biomarkers for gastric cancer, and levels correlated with tumour stage.¹²⁵

#### Prognostic markers
Although prognostic biomarkers are of less value than predictive or early detection markers, here we describe the literature briefly. miR-21 seems to be a reliable poor prognosticator for oesophageal adenocarcinoma, oesophageal squamous cell carcinoma and gastric cancer.³¹,¹²⁶,¹²⁷ High levels of miR-92a, miR-99b and miR-199a in both oesophageal adenocarcinoma and oesophageal squamous cell carcinoma are also poor prognosticators.¹⁰⁴ Reduced expression of miR-375, miR-203 and miR-205 is associated with late stages of oesophageal adenocarcinoma and oesophageal squamous cell carcinoma.²⁹,³² High serum levels of miR-31 in patients with oesophageal squamous cell carcinoma portend poor prognosis.⁶³ The serum ratio of miR-21:miR-375 correlates with disease recurrence.⁵⁰

In gastric cancer, overexpression of miR-93 is associated with short survival.⁷³ Overexpression of miR-10b, miR-107/196a and miR-223 correlates with metastasis status.⁷⁸ High expression of circulating miR-17-5p/20a was an independent poor prognostic factor.⁷⁷ Low-level expression of Let-7a/let-7g/let-7f is associated with poor prognosis.⁸⁹,¹⁰² miR-181b and miR-182 are also novel poor prognosticators.⁷⁹ Low expression levels of
miR-125a-3p were found to be associated with enhanced malignant potential such as tumour size, lymph node and liver metastasis and poor prognosis, and this study suggests miR-125a-3p is a potent prognostic marker in gastric cancer.¹²⁸ miR-409-3p was found to be down-regulated frequently in patients with gastric cancer, and its expression was associated with distant metastasis.¹¹⁰ Collectively, many miRNAs demonstrate markedly different expression levels between patients with cancer and control groups, and might serve as prognostic markers for monitoring disease status. However, large case-control studies are needed to validate these individual miRNA markers as useful clinical tools.

**miRNAs and cancer stem cells**

Emerging evidence indicates that deregulation of miRNAs has an important role in regulating cancer stem cells of organs such as the breast,¹²⁹,¹³⁰ brain (glioma)¹³¹ and prostate.⁶ Research to establish the role miRNAs have in regulating cancer stem cells in UGICs is needed.

## Conclusions

miRNAs are ubiquitous and plentiful, and are crucial post-transcriptional regulators of human gene expression. Research over the past 10 years has identified numerous miRNAs that have diverse roles at multiple steps of tumour progression and metastasis. However, these discoveries have not been translated into the clinics to help patients with UGICs. Considerably more research is needed, including the demonstration of functional consequences in genetically engineered mouse models. The clinical potential is enormous as miRNAs might provide tools for diagnosis, early detection, prediction and monitoring of therapy, and as therapeutic targets. Overall, this area of research has huge potential and should be actively pursued. Furthermore, discoveries made through the ENCODE (Encyclopedia of DNA Elements) project seem extremely relevant to miRNA research.¹³²–¹³⁵ The interim results of the ENCODE project suggest that only up to 3% of the genome codes for proteins and 76% of the genome codes for RNA elements (including miRNAs), which probably regulate the protein coding genes. Many other discoveries, which are outside the scope of this Review, demonstrate that we must focus on the non-protein-coding genome with the same vigour as we have focussed on the protein-coding genome.

### Review criteria

A literature search was carried out in PubMed for papers published from 2002 to 2012. The search terms used were “miRNA”, “miRNA and cancer”, “miRNA and esophageal cancer”, “miRNA and EAC”, “miRNA and ESCC” and “miRNA and GC”. miRNA and cancer progression, apoptosis, metastasis, chemoresistance, target and biomarker were also used as search terms. The search was restricted to English language papers.

1. Brown, L. M., Devesa, S. S. & Chow, W. H. Incidence of adenocarcinoma of the esophagus among white Americans by sex, stage, and age. *J. Natl Cancer Inst* **100**, 1184–1187 (2008).
2. Siegel, R., Naishadham, D. & Jemal, A. Cancer statistics, 2012. *CA Cancer J. Clin.* **62**, 10–29 (2012).
3. Jemal, A. *et al.* Global cancer statistics. *CA Cancer J. Clin.* **61**, 69–90 (2011).
4. Croce, C. M. Causes and consequences of microRNA dysregulation in cancer. *Nat. Rev. Genet.* **10**, 704–714 (2009).
5. Wu, W. K. K. *et al.* MicroRNA dysregulation in gastric cancer: a new player enters the game. *Oncogene* **29**, 5761–5771 (2010).
6. Liu, C. *et al.* The microRNA miR-34a inhibits prostate cancer stem cells and metastasis by directly repressing CD44. *Nat. Med.* **17**, 211–215 (2011).
7. Iorio, M. V. & Croce, C. M. microRNA involvement in human cancer. *Carcinogenesis* **33**, 1126–1133 (2012).
8. Iorio, M. V. & Croce, C. M. MicroRNA dysregulation in cancer: diagnostics, monitoring and therapeutics. A comprehensive review. *EMBO Mol. Med.* **4**, 143–159 (2012)
9. Lewis, B. P., Burge, C. B. & Bartel, D. P. Conserved seed pairing, often flanked by adenosines, indicates that thousands of human genes are microRNA targets. *Cell* **120**, 15–20 (2005).
10. Calin, G. A. & Croce, C. M. MicroRNA signatures in human cancers. *Nat. Rev. Cancer* **6**, 857–866 (2006).
11. Moretti, F., Thermann, R. & Hentze, M. W. Mechanism of translational regulation by miR-2 from sites in the 5′ untranslated region or the open reading frame. *RNA* **16**, 2493–2502 (2010).
12. Eiring, A. M. *et al.* miR-328 functions as an RNA decoy to modulate hnRNP E2 regulation of mRNA translation in leukemic blasts. *Cell* **140**, 652–665 (2010).
13. Garzon, R., Marcucci, G. & Croce, C. M. Targeting microRNAs in cancer: rationale, strategies and challenges. *Nat. Rev. Drug Discov.* **9**, 775–789 (2010).
14. Lopez-Camarillo, C. *et al.* MetastamiRs: noncoding microRNAs driving cancer invasion and metastasis. *Int. J. Mol. Sci.* **13**, 1347–1379 (2012).
15. Hurst, D. R., Edmonds, M. D. & Welch, D. R. Metastamir: the field of metastasis-regulatory microRNA is spreading. *Cancer Res.* **69**, 7495–7498 (2009).
16. Kota, J. *et al.* Therapeutic microRNA delivery suppresses tumorigenesis in a murine liver cancer model. *Cell* **137**, 1005–1017 (2009).
17. Haussecker, D. & Kay, M. A. miR-122 continues to blaze the trail for microRNA therapeutics. *Mol. Ther.* **18**, 240–242 (2010).
18. Ichikawa, D., Komatsu, S., Konishi, H. & Otsuji, E. Circulating microRNA in digestive tract cancers. *Gastroenterology* **142**, 1074–1078 (2012).
19. Valadi, H. *et al.* Exosome-mediated transfer of mRNAs and microRNAs is a novel mechanism of genetic exchange between cells. *Nat. Cell Biol.* **9**, 654–659 (2007).
20. Nana-Sinkam, P. & Croce, C. M. MicroRNAs in diagnosis and prognosis in cancer: what does the future hold? *Pharmacogenomics* **11**, 667–669 (2010).
21. Song, J. H. & Meltzer, S. J. MicroRNAs in pathogenesis, diagnosis, and treatment of gastroesophageal cancers. *Gastroenterology* **143**, 35–47 (2012).
22. Zhang, T. *et al.* MicroRNA-1322 regulates ECRG2 allele specifically and acts as a potential biomarker in patients with esophageal squamous cell carcinoma. *Mol. Carcinog.* http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/mc.21880
23. Kan, T. *et al.* The miR-106b-25 polycistron, activated by genomic amplification, functions as an oncogene by suppressing p21 and Bim. *Gastroenterology* **136**, 1689–1700 (2009).
24. Luthra, R. *et al.* MicroRNA-196a targets annexin A1: a microRNA-mediated mechanism of annexin A1 downregulation in cancers. *Oncogene* **27**, 6667–6678 (2008).
25. Maru, D. M. *et al.* MicroRNA-196a is a potential marker of progression during Barrett’s metaplasia-dysplasia-invasive adenocarcinoma sequence in esophagus. *Am. J. Pathol.* **174**, 1940–1948 (2009).
26. Fassan, M. *et al.* PDCD4 nuclear loss inversely correlates with miR-21 levels in colon carcinogenesis. *Virchows Arch.* **458**, 413–419 (2011).
27. Mathe, E. A. *et al.* MicroRNA expression in squamous cell carcinoma and adenocarcinoma of the esophagus: associations with survival. *Clin. Cancer Res.* **15**, 6192–6200 (2009).
28. Fassan, M. *et al.* MicroRNA expression profiling in human Barrett’s carcinogenesis. *Int. J. Cancer* **129**, 1661–1670 (2011).
29. Leidner, R. S. *et al.* The microRNAs, MiR-31 and MiR-375, as candidate markers in Barrett’s esophageal carcinogenesis. *Genes Chromosomes Cancer* **51**, 473–479 (2012).
30. Smith, C. M. *et al.* miR-200 family expression is downregulated upon neoplastic progression of Barrett’s esophagus. *World J. Gastroenterol.* **17**, 1036–1044 (2011).

116 | FEBRUARY 2013 | VOLUME 10
www.nature.com/nrgastro

© 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved.

31. Feber, A. *et al.* MicroRNA expression profiles of esophageal cancer. *J. Thorac. Cardiovasc. Surg.* **135**, 255–260 (2008).

32. Luzna, P. *et al.* Changes of microRNAs-192, 196a and 203 correlate with Barrett’s esophagus diagnosis and its progression compared to normal healthy individuals. *Diagn. Pathol.* **6**, 114 (2011).

33. Wijnhoven, B. P. *et al.* MicroRNA profiling of Barrett’s oesophagus and oesophageal adenocarcinoma. *Br. J. Surg.* **97**, 853–861 (2010).

34. Yang, H. *et al.* MicroRNA expression signatures in Barrett’s esophagus and esophageal adenocarcinoma. *Clin. Cancer Res.* **15**, 5744–5752 (2009).

35. Akagi, I. *et al.* Relationship between altered expression levels of MIR21, MIR143, MIR145, and MIR205 and clinicopathologic features of esophageal squamous cell carcinoma. *Dis. Esophagus* **24**, 523–530 (2011).

36. Ma, W. J. *et al.* Role of microRNA-21 and effect on PTEN in Kazakh’s esophageal squamous cell carcinoma. *Mol. Biol. Rep.* **38**, 3253–3260 (2011).

37. Hiyoshi, Y. *et al.* MicroRNA-21 regulates the proliferation and invasion in esophageal squamous cell carcinoma. *Clin. Cancer Res.* **15**, 1915–1922 (2009).

38. Xu, X. *et al.* MicroRNA-25 promotes cell migration and invasion in esophageal squamous cell carcinoma. *Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun.* **421**, 640–645 (2012).

39. Chen, Z. L. *et al.* microRNA-92a promotes lymph node metastasis of human esophageal squamous cell carcinoma via E-cadherin. *J. Biol. Chem.* **286**, 10725–10734 (2011).

40. Tian, Y. *et al.* MicroRNA-10b promotes migration and invasion through KLF4 in human esophageal cancer cell lines. *J. Biol. Chem.* **285**, 7986–7994 (2010).

41. Lee, K. H. *et al.* MicroRNA-373 (miR-373) post-transcriptionally regulates large tumor suppressor, homolog 2 (LATS2) and stimulates proliferation in human esophageal cancer. *Exp. Cell Res.* **315**, 2529–2538 (2009).

42. Kurashige, J. *et al.* Overexpression of microRNA-223 regulates the ubiquitin ligase FBXW7 in oesophageal squamous cell carcinoma. *Br. J. Cancer* **106**, 182–188 (2012).

43. Zhang, T. *et al.* The oncogenic role of microRNA-31 as a potential biomarker in oesophageal squamous cell carcinoma. *Clin. Sci. (Lond.)* **121**, 437–447 (2011).

44. Hong, L. *et al.* The prognostic and chemotherapeutic value of miR-296 in esophageal squamous cell carcinoma. *Ann. Surg.* **251**, 1056–1063 (2010).

45. Ogawa, R. *et al.* Expression profiling of microRNAs in human esophageal squamous cell carcinoma using RT-PCR. *Med. Mol. Morphol.* **42**, 102–109 (2009).

46. Liu, M. *et al.* TNF-alpha is a novel target of miR-19a. *Int. J. Oncol.* **38**, 1013–1022 (2011).

47. Hamano, R. *et al.* Overexpression of miR-200c induces chemoresistance in esophageal cancers mediated through activation of the Akt signaling pathway. *Clin. Cancer Res.* **17**, 3029–3038 (2011).

48. Wu, Y. *et al.* A miR-200b/200c/429-binding site polymorphism in the 3’ untranslated region of the AP-2alpha gene is associated with cisplatin resistance. *PLoS ONE* **6**, e29043 (2011).

49. Kong, K. L. *et al.* MicroRNA-375 inhibits tumour growth and metastasis in oesophageal squamous cell carcinoma through repressing insulin-like growth factor 1 receptor. *Gut* **61**, 33–42 (2012).

50. Komatsu, S. *et al.* Circulating microRNAs in plasma of patients with oesophageal squamous cell carcinoma. *Br. J. Cancer* **105**, 104–111 (2011).

51. Li, X., Lin, R. & Li, J. Epigenetic silencing of microRNA-375 regulates PDK1 expression in esophageal cancer. *Dig. Dis. Sci.* **56**, 2849–2856 (2011).

52. Suzuki, S. *et al.* CD47 expression regulated by the miR-133a tumor suppressor is a novel prognostic marker in esophageal squamous cell carcinoma. *Oncol. Rep.* **28**, 465–472 (2012).

53. Kano, M. *et al.* miR-145, miR-133a and miR-133b: Tumor-suppressive miRNAs target FSCN1 in esophageal squamous cell carcinoma. *Int. J. Cancer* **127**, 2804–2814 (2010).

54. Matsushima, K. *et al.* MiRNA-205 modulates cellular invasion and migration via regulating zinc finger E-box binding homeobox 2 expression in esophageal squamous cell carcinoma cells. *J. Transl. Med.* **9**, 30 (2011).

55. Matsushima, K., Isomoto, H., Kohno, S. & Nakao, K. MicroRNAs and esophageal squamous cell carcinoma. *Digestion* **82**, 138–144 (2010).

56. Li, J. *et al.* Transcriptional activation of microRNA-34a by NF-kappa B in human esophageal cancer cells. *BMC Mol. Biol.* **13**, 4 (2012).

57. Chen, X. *et al.* CpG island methylation status of miRNAs in esophageal squamous cell carcinoma. *Int. J. Cancer* **130**, 1607–1613 (2012).

58. Liu, Q. *et al.* Role of microRNA let-7 and effect to HMGA2 in esophageal squamous cell carcinoma. *Mol. Biol. Rep.* **39**, 1239–1246 (2012).

59. Ding, D. P. *et al.* miR-29c induces cell cycle arrest in esophageal squamous cell carcinoma by modulating cyclin E expression. *Carcinogenesis* **32**, 1025–1032 (2011).

60. Tsuchiya, S. *et al.* MicroRNA-210 regulates cancer cell proliferation through targeting fibroblast growth factor receptor-like 1 (FGFRL1). *J. Biol. Chem.* **286**, 420–428 (2011).

61. Li, S. *et al.* miR-223 regulates migration and invasion by targeting Artemin in human esophageal carcinoma. *J. Biomed. Sci.* **18**, 24 (2011).

62. Liu, R. *et al.* The cluster of miR-143 and miR-145 affects the risk for esophageal squamous cell carcinoma through co-regulating fascin homolog 1. *PLoS ONE* **7**, e33987 (2012).

63. Zhang, X. *et al.* MicroRNA-181a promotes gastric cancer by negatively regulating tumor suppressor KLF6. *Tumour Biol.* **33**, 1589–1597 (2012).

64. Zhang, B. G. *et al.* microRNA-21 promotes tumor proliferation and invasion in gastric cancer by targeting PTEN. *Oncol. Rep.* **27**, 1019–1026 (2012).

65. Cao, Z., Yoon, J. H., Nam, S. W., Lee, J. Y. & Park, W. S. PDCD4 expression inversely correlated with miR-21 levels in gastric cancers. *J. Cancer Res. Clin. Oncol.* **138**, 611–619 (2012).

66. Yamanaka, S. *et al.* MicroRNA-21 inhibits Serpini1, a gene with novel tumour suppressive effects in gastric cancer. *Dig. Liver Dis.* **44**, 589–596 (2012).

67. Tsai, K. W. *et al.* Aberrant expression of miR-196a in gastric cancers and correlation with recurrence. *Genes Chromosomes Cancer* **51**, 394–401 (2012).

68. Tsai, K. W. *et al.* Epigenetic regulation of miR-196b expression in gastric cancer. *Genes Chromosomes Cancer* **49**, 969–980 (2010).

69. Xiao, B. *et al.* Increased miR-146a in gastric cancer directly targets SMAD4 and is involved in

70. Shi, X., Su, S., Long, J., Mei, B. & Chen, Y. MicroRNA-191 targets N-deacetylase/N-sulfotransferase 1 and promotes cell growth in human gastric carcinoma cell line MGC803. *Acta Biochim. Biophys. Sin. (Shanghai)* **43**, 849–856 (2011).

71. Lo, S. S. *et al.* Overexpression of miR-370 and downregulation of its novel target TGFbeta-RII contribute to the progression of gastric carcinoma. *Oncogene* **31**, 226–237 (2012).

72. Otsubo, T. *et al.* MicroRNA-126 inhibits SOX2 expression and contributes to gastric carcinogenesis. *PLoS ONE* **6**, e16617 (2011).

73. Chen, L., Jiang, M., Yuan, W. & Tang, H. Prognostic value of miR-93 overexpression in resectable gastric adenocarcinomas. *Acta Gastroenterol. Belg.* **75**, 22–27 (2012).

74. Li, N. *et al.* Increased miR-222 in H. pylori-associated gastric cancer correlated with tumor progression by promoting cancer cell proliferation and targeting RECK. *FEBS Lett.* **586**, 722–728 (2012).

75. Yi, C. *et al.* MiR-663, a microRNA targeting p21(WAF1/CIP1), promotes the proliferation and tumorigenesis of nasopharyngeal carcinoma. *Oncogene* **31**, 4421–4433 (2012).

76. Ahn, S. M. *et al.* Smad3 regulates E-cadherin via miRNA-200 pathway. *Oncogene* **31**, 3051–3059 (2012).

77. Wang, M. *et al.* Circulating miR-17-5p and miR-20a: molecular markers for gastric cancer. *Mol. Med. Rep.* **5**, 1514–1520 (2012).

78. Inoue, T., Inuma, H., Ogawa, E., Inaba, T. & Fukushima, R. Clinicopathological and prognostic significance of microRNA-107 and its relationship to DICER1 mRNA expression in gastric cancer. *Oncol. Rep.* **27**, 1759–1764 (2012).

79. Chen, L. *et al.* MicroRNA-181b targets cAMP responsive element binding protein 1 in gastric adenocarcinomas. *IUBMB Life* **64**, 628–635 (2012).

80. Kong, W. Q. *et al.* MicroRNA-182 targets cAMP-responsive element-binding protein 1 and suppresses cell growth in human gastric adenocarcinoma. *FEBS J.* **279**, 1252–1260 (2012).

81. Carvalho, J. *et al.* Lack of microRNA-101 causes E-cadherin functional deregulation through EZH2 up-regulation in intestinal gastric cancer. *J. Pathol.* **228**, 31–44 (2012).

82. Xia, J. *et al.* miR-124 inhibits cell proliferation in gastric cancer through down-regulation of SPHK1. *J. Pathol.* **227**, 470–480 (2012).

83. Li, C. *et al.* MicroRNA-409-3p regulates cell proliferation and apoptosis by targeting PHF10 in gastric cancer. *Cancer Lett.* **320**, 189–197 (2012).

84. Sun, T., Wang, C., Xing, J. & Wu, D. miR-429 modulates the expression of c-myc in human gastric carcinoma cells. *Eur. J. Cancer* **47**, 2552–2559 (2011).

85. Vaira, V. *et al.* miR-296 regulation of a cell polarity-cell plasticity module controls tumor progression. *Oncogene* **31**, 27–38 (2012).

86. Ding, L. *et al.* MiR-375 frequently downregulated in gastric cancer inhibits cell proliferation by targeting JAK2. *Cell Res.* **20**, 784–793 (2010).

87. Tsukamoto, Y. *et al.* MicroRNA-375 is downregulated in gastric carcinomas and regulates cell survival by targeting PDK1 and 14-3-3zeta. *Cancer Res.* **70**, 2339–2349 (2010).

88. Oh, H. K. *et al.* Genomic loss of miR-486 regulates tumor progression and the OLFM4 antiapoptotic factor in gastric cancer. *Clin. Cancer Res.* **17**, 2657–2667 (2011).

REVIEWS

89. Yang, Q. *et al.* Low-level expression of let-7a in gastric cancer and its involvement in tumorigenesis by targeting RAB40C. *Carcinogenesis* **32**, 713–722 (2011).

90. Golestaneh, A. F. *et al.* miRNAs expressed differently in cancer stem cells and cancer cells of human gastric cancer cell line MKN-45. *Cell Biochem. Funct.* **30**, 411–418 (2012).

91. Zhu, Y., Zhong, Z. & Liu, Z. Lentiviral vector-mediated upregulation of let-7a inhibits gastric carcinoma cell growth *in vitro* and *in vivo*. *Scand. J. Gastroenterol.* **46**, 53–59 (2011).

92. Chen, Q. *et al.* miR-137 is frequently down-regulated in gastric cancer and is a negative regulator of Cdc42. *Dig. Dis. Sci.* **56**, 2009–2016 (2011).

93. Bou Kheir, T. *et al.* miR-449 inhibits cell proliferation and is down-regulated in gastric cancer. *Mol. Cancer* **10**, 29 (2011).

94. Cui, Y. *et al.* MiR-29a inhibits cell proliferation and induces cell cycle arrest through the downregulation of p42.3 in human gastric cancer. *PLoS ONE* **6**, e25872 (2011).

95. Kogo, R., Mimori, K., Tanaka, F., Komune, S. & Mori, M. Clinical significance of miR-146a in gastric cancer cases. *Clin. Cancer Res.* **17**, 4277–4284 (2011).

96. Kim, K. *et al.* Epigenetic regulation of microRNA-10b and targeting of oncogenic MAPRE1 in gastric cancer. *Epigenetics* **6**, 740–751 (2011).

97. Guo, X. B. *et al.* Down-regulation of miR-622 in gastric cancer promotes cellular invasion and tumor metastasis by targeting ING1 gene. *World J. Gastroenterol.* **17**, 1895–1902 (2011).

98. Feng, L., Xie, Y., Zhang, H. & Wu, Y. miR-107 targets cyclin-dependent kinase 6 expression, induces cell cycle G1 arrest and inhibits invasion in gastric cancer cells. *Med. Oncol.* **29**, 856–863 (2012).

99. Zhu, W. *et al.* miR-497 modulates multidrug resistance of human cancer cell lines by targeting BCL2. *Med. Oncol.* **29**, 384–391 (2012).

100. Li, Z. *et al.* miR-495 and miR-551a inhibit the migration and invasion of human gastric cancer cells by directly interacting with PRL-3. *Cancer Lett.* **323**, 41–47 (2012).

101. Zhu, W. *et al.* miR-200bc/429 cluster modulates multidrug resistance of human cancer cell lines by targeting BCL2 and XIAP. *Cancer Chemother. Pharmacol.* **69**, 723–731 (2012).

102. Kim, C. H. *et al.* miRNA signature associated with outcome of gastric cancer patients following chemotherapy. *BMC Med. Genom.* **4**, 79 (2011).

103. Geiger, T. R. & Peeper, D. S. Metastasis mechanisms. *Biochim. Biophys. Acta* **1796**, 293–308 (2009).

104. Feber, A. *et al.* MicroRNA prognostic signature for nodal metastases and survival in esophageal adenocarcinoma. *Ann. Thorac. Surg.* **91**, 1523–1530 (2011).

105. Liao, Y. L. *et al.* Transcriptional regulation of miR-196b by ETS2 in gastric cancer cells.

106. Liu, Z., Zhu, J., Cao, H., Ren, H. & Fang, X. miR-10b promotes cell invasion through RhoC-AKT signaling pathway by targeting HOXD10 in

gastric cancer. *Int. J. Oncol.* **40**, 1553–1560 (2012).

107. Zhang, Z., Liu, S., Shi, R. & Zhao, G. miR-27 promotes human gastric cancer cell metastasis by inducing epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition. *Cancer Genet.* **204**, 486–491 (2011).

108. Zhao, X. *et al.* MicroRNA-7 functions as an anti-metastatic microRNA in gastric cancer by targeting insulin-like growth factor-1 receptor. *Oncogene* http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/onc.2012.156.

109. Gao, P. *et al.* The molecular mechanism of microRNA-145 to suppress invasion-metastasis cascade in gastric cancer. *Oncogene* http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/onc.2012.61

110. Zheng, B. *et al.* MicroRNA-409 suppresses tumour cell invasion and metastasis by directly targeting radixin in gastric cancers. *Oncogene* http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/onc.2011.581

111. Xu, Y. *et al.* MicroRNA-335 acts as a metastasis suppressor in gastric cancer by targeting Bcl-w and specificity protein 1. *Oncogene* **31**, 1398–1407 (2012).

112. Zheng, B. *et al.* MicroRNA-148a suppresses tumor cell invasion and metastasis by downregulating ROCK1 in gastric cancer. *Clin. Cancer Res.* **17**, 7574–7583 (2011).

113. Liang, S. *et al.* MicroRNA let-7f inhibits tumor invasion and metastasis by targeting MYH9 in human gastric cancer. *PLoS ONE* **6**, e18409 (2011).

114. Hutvagner, G. & Zamore, P. D. A microRNA in a multiple-turnover RNAi enzyme complex. *Science* **297**, 2056–2060 (2002).

115. Hossain, A., Kuo, M. T. & Saunders, G. F. Mir-17-5p regulates breast cancer cell proliferation by inhibiting translation of AIB1 mRNA. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* **26**, 8191–8201 (2006).

116. Krutzfeldt, J. *et al.* Silencing of microRNAs *in vivo* with ‘antagomirs’. *Nature* **438**, 685–689 (2005).

117. Pramanik, D. *et al.* Restitution of tumor suppressor microRNAs using a systemic nanovector inhibits pancreatic cancer growth in mice. *Mol. Cancer Ther.* **10**, 1470–1480 (2011).

118. Ma, L. *et al.* Therapeutic silencing of miR-10b inhibits metastasis in a mouse mammary tumor model. *Nat. Biotechnol.* **28**, 341–347 (2010).

119. Seki, N. A commentary on MicroRNA-141 confers resistance to cisplatin-induced apoptosis by targeting YAP1 in human esophageal squamous cell carcinoma. *J. Hum. Genet.* **56**, 339–340 (2011).

120. Hummel, R. *et al.* Chemotherapy-induced modification of microRNA expression in esophageal cancer. *Oncol. Rep.* **26**, 1011–1017 (2011).

121. Hummel, R. *et al.* Mir-148a improves response to chemotherapy in sensitive and resistant oesophageal adenocarcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma cells. *J. Gastrointest. Surg.* **15**, 429–438 (2011).

122. Song, M. Y. *et al.* Identification of serum microRNAs as novel non-invasive biomarkers for early detection of gastric cancer. *PLoS ONE* **7**, e33608 (2012).

123. Konishi, H. *et al.* Detection of gastric cancer-associated microRNAs on microRNA microarray

comparing pre- and post-operative plasma. *Br. J. Cancer* **106**, 740–747 (2012).

124. Liu, H. *et al.* Genome-wide microRNA profiles identify miR-378 as a serum biomarker for early detection of gastric cancer. *Cancer Lett.* **316**, 196–203 (2012).

125. Liu, R. *et al.* A five-microRNA signature identified from genome-wide serum microRNA expression profiling serves as a fingerprint for gastric cancer diagnosis. *Eur. J. Cancer* **47**, 784–791 (2011).

126. Mori, Y. *et al.* MicroRNA-21 induces cell proliferation and invasion in esophageal squamous cell carcinoma. *Mol. Med. Rep.* **2**, 235–239 (2009).

127. Zheng, Y. *et al.* MicroRNA-21 is a new marker of circulating tumor cells in gastric cancer patients. *Cancer Biomark.* **10**, 71–77 (2011).

128. Hashiguchi, Y. *et al.* Down-regulation of miR-125a-3p in human gastric cancer and its clinicopathological significance. *Int. J. Oncol.* **40**, 1477–1482 (2012).

129. Yu, F. *et al.* let-7 regulates self renewal and tumorigenicity of breast cancer cells. *Cell* **131**, 1109–1123 (2007).

130. Yu, F. *et al.* Mir-30 reduction maintains self-renewal and inhibits apoptosis in breast tumor-initiating cells. *Oncogene* **29**, 4194–4204 (2010).

131. Godlewski, J. *et al.* Targeting of the Bmi-1 oncogene/stem cell renewal factor by microRNA-128 inhibits glioma proliferation and self-renewal. *Cancer Res.* **68**, 9125–9130 (2008).

132. Ecker, J. R. *et al.* Genomics: ENCODE explained. *Nature* **489**, 52–55 (2012).

133. Birney, E. The making of ENCODE: Lessons for big-data projects. *Nature* **489**, 49–51 (2012).

134. Schadt, E. & Chang, R. Genetics. A GPS for navigating DNA. *Science* **337**, 1179–1180 (2012).

135. Pennisi, E. Genomics. ENCODE project writes eulogy for junk DNA. *Science* **337**, 1159–1161 (2012).

136. Yuan, Y. *et al.* MicroRNA-203 inhibits cell proliferation by repressing ΔNp63 expression in human esophageal squamous cell carcinoma. *BMC Cancer* **11**, 57 (2011).

137. Li, X. *et al.* miRNA-223 promotes gastric cancer invasion and metastasis by targeting tumor suppressor EPB41L3. *Mol. Cancer Res.* **9**, 824–833 (2011).

Acknowledgements  
This work was supported in part by the Dallas, Park, Smith, and Cantu family funds; the Kevin Fund; the Sultan Fund; the River Creek Foundation; and the Aaron and Martha Schecter Private Foundation. This work was also supported by the Multidisciplinary Research Program at The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center and by the National Institutes of Health through MD Anderson Cancer Center Support Grants CA016672 and CA138671 (J. Ajani).

Author contributions  
Both authors contributed equally to all aspects of this manuscript.
