
From bloodjournal.hematologylibrary.org at University of Arizona Health Sciences Library on January 19, 2013. For personal use only.

blood

Prepublished online January 16, 2013;  
doi:10.1182/blood-2012-09-378653

Essentials of Th17 cell commitment and plasticity

Pawel Muranski and Nicholas P. Restifo

---

Information about reproducing this article in parts or in its entirety may be found online at:  
http://bloodjournal.hematologylibrary.org/site/misc/rights.xhtml#repub_requests

Information about ordering reprints may be found online at:  
http://bloodjournal.hematologylibrary.org/site/misc/rights.xhtml#reprints

Information about subscriptions and ASH membership may be found online at:  
http://bloodjournal.hematologylibrary.org/site/subscriptions/index.xhtml

---

Advance online articles have been peer reviewed and accepted for publication but have not yet appeared in the paper journal (edited, typeset versions may be posted when available prior to final publication). Advance online articles are citable and establish publication priority; they are indexed by PubMed from initial publication. Citations to Advance online articles must include the digital object identifier (DOIs) and date of initial publication.

Blood (print ISSN 0006-4971, online ISSN 1528-0020), is published weekly by the American Society of Hematology, 2021 L St, NW, Suite 900, Washington DC 20036.  
Copyright 2011 by The American Society of Hematology; all rights reserved.

Blood First Edition Paper, prepublished online January 16, 2013; DOI 10.1182/blood-2012-09-378653
From [bloodjournal.hematologylibrary.org](http://bloodjournal.hematologylibrary.org) at University of Arizona Health Sciences Library on January 19, 2013. For personal use only.

# Essentials of Th17 cell Commitment and Plasticity

Pawel Muranski¹ and Nicholas P. Restifo²

Running title: Th17 cells

¹ Hematology Branch, National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute, NIH, Bethesda, MD  
² Surgery Branch, National Cancer Institute, NIH, Bethesda, MD  

## Corresponding author:

Pawel Muranski  
Hematology Branch, NHLBI/NIH  
10 Center Drive, 3E-5288  
Bethesda, MD 20892  
e-mail: [muranskp@mail.nih.gov](mailto:muranskp@mail.nih.gov)  
phone: 301-402-3297

Copyright © 2013 American Society of Hematology

From bloodjournal.hematologylibrary.org at University of Arizona Health Sciences Library on January 19, 2013. For personal use only.

Abstract:

CD4⁺ T helper (Th) cells exist in a variety of epigenetic states that determine their function, phenotype and capacity for persistence. These polarization states include Th1, Th2, Th17 and Foxp3⁺ T regulatory cells (Treg), as well as the more recently described T follicular helper (Tfh), Th9 and Th22 cells. Th17 cells express the master transcriptional regulator RORγt and produce canonical IL-17A and IL-17F cytokines. Th17 cells display a great degree of context-dependent plasticity, as they are capable of acquiring functional characteristics of Th1 cells. This late plasticity may contribute to the protection against microbes, plays a role in development of autoimmunity and is necessary for anti-tumor activity of Th17 cells in adoptive cell transfer therapy models. Moreover, plasticity of this subset is associated with higher *in vivo* survival and self-renewal capacity and less senescence than Th1 polarized cells, which have less plasticity and more phenotypic stability. New findings indicate that subset polarization of CD4⁺ T cells not only induces characteristic patterns of surface markers and cytokine production, but also has a maturation aspect that affects a cell's ability to survive, respond to secondary stimulation and form long-term immune memory.

From bloodjournal.hematologylibrary.org at University of Arizona Health Sciences Library on January 19, 2013. For personal use only.

# Introduction

CD4<sup>+</sup>T helper (Th) cells are central to the normal functioning of the entire immune system, coordinating the expansion and regulation of CD8<sup>+</sup>T cells, facilitating B cell responses and recruiting and modulating multiple components of innate immunity. The initial antigenic encounter of naive CD4<sup>+</sup>T cells varies depending on the anatomical site, pathogen type, and presence of assorted cytokines and costimulatory molecules, and these variations cause Th cell differentiation into antigen-experienced effectors with distinct functional characteristics termed polarization states.

In their early descriptions of the Th1/Th2 paradigm, Mossman and Coffman attempted to explain responses observed in many experimental models of infection, autoimmunity, and allergy. Th1 cells were considered essential for anti-viral immunity and providing help to CD8<sup>+</sup> cytotoxic T cells, and were viewed as main perpetrators of autoimmunity. Th1 cells are promoted by IL-12 (via Stat4) signaling and IFN-γ (via Stat1) that induce the expression of master transcription factor T-box 21 (Tbx21, T-bet) and secretion of the hallmark cytokine interferon (IFN)-γ. Th2 cells, induced by IL-4 via Stat6 signaling that up-regulates the transcription factor GATA3, were linked to humoral responses to extracellular organisms or parasites and development of atopy and allergic reactions, producing cytokines that include IL-4, IL-5, and IL-13. It seemed that Th1 and Th2 cells represented mutually exclusive binary epigenetic states because IL-12, IFN-γ, and the expression of T-bet inhibited Th2 differentiation, while IL-4 and Gata3 expression antagonized Th1 polarization. The discovery of Foxp3-expressing regulatory CD4<sup>+</sup>T cells (Treg) that restrained immune responses complemented these early views of Th differentiation. Yet, not all CD4<sup>+</sup>T cell activity could easily be classified as either type 1 or type 2. Finally, Th17 cells producing the canonical cytokine IL-17A emerged as the most prominent addition to the old paradigm of two-mode Th polarization.

# Generation of Th17 cells

Harrington, et al., and Park, et al., established that Th17 cells were a true distinct lineage whose in vitro generation was enhanced when IL-4 and IFN-γ were blocked and was independent of Th1 or Th2 related transcription factors (T-bet, Stat1, Stat4, and Stat6). Induction of the Th17 polarization program was initially attributed to the effect of IL-23 (a heterodimer of p40 shared with IL-12 and p19 subunit) signaling via its distinct IL-23 receptor (IL-23R) triggering Stat3 pathway, albeit this process produced cultures containing only small fractions of IL-17A-

From bloodjournal.hematologylibrary.org at University of Arizona Health Sciences Library on January 19, 2013. For personal use only.

secreting Th cells.³² Subsequently, Th17 cells were efficiently generated in the presence of TGF-β1 and IL-6, which signaled via Smads and Stat3 respectively (Figure 1).³³

Retinoic acid-related orphan receptor γ thymus (Roryt) encoded by gene *Rorc* was identified as the master transcription factor defining Th17 cells as a distinct lineage.³⁴ Retinoic acid-related orphan receptor α (Rora) was recognized as the additional transcription factor critical for Th17 differentiation.³⁵ The genetic deletion of Stat3 abrogates Th17 differentiation and genome-wide chromatin-immunoprecipitation sequencing (ChIP-seq) revealed a broad and pleiotropic function of Stat3 as a promoter of *Rorc*, *Il17*, *Il17f* and multiple other genes associated with Th17 polarization and survival.³⁶ The transcriptional network controlling type 17 differentiation also includes Batf/Irf4 complexes that mediate chromatin accessibility, cMaf, Runx1, and Hif1α amongst others.³⁷⁻⁴¹ IL-2 signaling via Stat5 attenuates Th17 polarization and Stat5 has a direct negative effect on IL-17A gene expression.⁴²,⁴³ IFN-γ and IL-27 (via Stat1) and IL-12 (via Stat4) clearly block Th17 differentiation, but the underlying mechanism remains unclear and possibly related to T-bet repressor activity.⁴⁴,⁴⁵ Perplexingly, Stat4-deficiency also impairs type 17 polarization, possibly due to lower IL-23 receptor (IL-23R) expression.⁴⁶

Naïve CD4⁺T cells express very low levels of IL-23R, but its expression is induced upon exposure to TGF-β1 and IL-6.⁴⁷ Naïve CD4⁺T cells cultured in only IL-6 and TGF-β and not in IL-23 secrete IL-17A, but also produce high levels of IL-10 and fail to induce experimental autoimmune encephalitis (EAE) upon adoptive cell transfer.⁴⁸ Furthermore, *in vivo* IL-23R-deficient CD4⁺Th17 cells fail to maintain their phenotype and demonstrate reduced persistence.⁴⁹ Thus, IL-23 is not required for the initial Th17 polarization, but instead stabilizes and expands pathogenic Th17-polarized cells.

Many additional cytokines and other molecules have been identified as factors regulating Th17 induction and expansion. Notably IL-21 (via Stat3 signaling) and Tgf-β are sufficient to induce Roryt and IL-23R expression and drive robust Th17 polarization in the absence of IL-6.⁵⁰ In the presence IL-6, stimulated CD4⁺T cells produce IL-21 themselves which further augments its secretion in an autocrine self-amplifying loop.⁵¹⁻⁵² IL-1β has emerged as another crucial factor driving Th17 polarization in a variety of inflammatory conditions.⁵³ IL-1 serves as a prototypic inflammasome-related cytokine produced by the cells of myeloid origin.⁵⁴ IL-1 signaling promotes proliferation and survival of antigenically-stimulated Th cells. This process involves activation of the Akt/mTOR pathway via induction of IKKi that inhibits glycogen synthetase kinase 3 (Gsk3) α.⁵⁵ IL-1 also induces Irf4, a regulator of the IL-21 autocrine signaling loop.⁵⁶⁻⁵⁸

From bloodjournal.hematologylibrary.org at University of Arizona Health Sciences Library on January 19, 2013. For personal use only.

Irf4-deficient animals have increased numbers of Foxp3⁺ Tregs and diminished ability to form Th17 responses despite intact Stat3 signaling.³⁹

The contribution of TGF-β1 to Th17 polarization remains a matter of debate, perhaps in part because it can be found in biologically-significant concentrations in culture media containing animal or human sera.⁵⁹⁶⁰ Animals deficient in TGF-β signaling have Th17 cells in their gut mucosa,⁵³ and Th17 cells generated using serum-free (thus TGF-β-free) media in presence of IL-1, IL-6 and IL-23 co-express RORγt and T-bet and cause aggressive EAE.⁵³ Tgf-β1 inhibits IL-2-mediated STAT5 signaling and diminishes the expression of Th1 and Th2-defining transcription factors T-bet and Gata3 respectively.⁶¹ Thus, at low concentrations, Tgf-β1 contributes indirectly to the initial development of Th17 responses, but is not critical to the inflammatory milieu that drives type 17 responses.⁶² At high concentrations, Tgf-β signaling inhibits IL-23R expression and converts naïve Th cells into induced FOXP3⁺ regulatory cells (iTregs) by antagonizing RORγt.⁶³ This interaction involves Runx1 transcription factor that binds either RORγt or Foxp3.⁴⁰ Thus, there is an active balance between the development of either iTregs or Th17 cells and even plasticity with Foxp3⁺ T cells capable of converting into Foxp3⁻ Th17 progeny.⁶⁴ All-trans retinoic acid (ATRA), a vitamin A metabolite produced in the gut mucosa, antagonizes the expression of *rorc* and promotes *in vitro foxp3* expression via its nuclear receptors (RARs).⁶⁵ Akin to the inhibitory function of TGF-β, ATRA also has been reported to negatively regulate Th1 and Th2 polarization. Both TGF-β and ATRA induce expression of Mir10a that might stabilize iTreg phenotype and limit Th17 differentiation.⁶⁶ The same report indicated that physiological concentrations of ATRA might promote, rather than impair Th17 polarization.⁶⁶ Indeed, *in vivo* ATRA has a pro-inflammatory effect and is required for the efficient Th17 responses against mucosal pathogens.⁶⁷

Aryl hydrocarbon receptors (AHRs) are the cytosolic receptors with transcription factor activity that have been reported to promote Th17 polarization.⁶⁸ AHRs sense a variety of small natural and man-made compounds including products of tryptophan metabolism and highly toxic dioxins, providing an intriguing link between the environment and autoimmunity.⁶⁹ Early Th17 polarization induces high expression of AHRs, and AHR-deficient animals are partly protected from the induction of EAE.⁶⁸

Gut-residing commensal microbiota can profoundly affect the Th17-mediated immunity and autoimmunity. Germ-free animals have fewer intraepithelial intestinal Th17 cells and an attenuated form of autoimmune arthritis, but develop severe arthritis after exposure to

segmented filamentous bacteria. ${ }^{70,71}$ On the other hand, infected nonobese diabetic mice (NOD) were protected from the progression of diabetes. ${ }^{72}$

**Th17 cells as mediators of host defense against infection**

Under physiological conditions, IL-17-producing CD4 ${ }^{+}$ T cells reside mainly in the lamina propria of the small intestine, but are readily induced at other mucosal sites upon infection or vaccination. ${ }^{34,71,73,74}$ Consequently, Th17 cells and type 17-associated cytokines contribute to the protection against a variety of predominantly extracellular bacterial and fungal pathogens in the gastro-intestinal tract, airway, lungs and skin. ${ }^{75,76}$

Th17 cells secrete IL-17 (IL-17A), IL-17F and IL-17A/F heterodimers, as well as IL-21, IL-22, GM-CSF and many other factors. ${ }^{77}$ The proinflammatory effects of IL-17 are mediated through the IL-17 receptor (IL-17R), composed of IL-17RA and IL-17RC subunits. ${ }^{78}$ IL-17R is widely expressed by immune system cells (T and B lymphocytes, neutrophils), and by many other tissues (epithelium, endothelium, fibroblasts, mesenchymal stromal cells and keratinocytes). ${ }^{78}$ Thus, IL-17 is highly pleiotropic, causing a variety of inflammatory effects that link adaptive and innate immunity. ${ }^{75}$ Other sources of IL-17 include γδ T cells and innate lymphocytes.

IL-17A promotes granulopoiesis by triggering the secretion of G-CSF in bone marrow stroma, ${ }^{79}$ and IL-17R-deficient mice show a deeply impaired ability to reconstitute following irradiation. ${ }^{80}$ In the gut, IL-17 maintains mucosal homeostasis and integrity. ${ }^{81}$ IL-17 induces GM-CSF, TNFα, IL-1β and IL-6 and multiple chemokines and chemokine receptors that act as powerful chemo-attractants for granulocytes. IL-17 also mediates formation of inducible secondary lymphoid tissues following the local infection. ${ }^{82}$ IL-17 and Th17 cells play an important role in immunity against *Klebsiella pneumoniae* ${ }^{73}$ and many other bacteria including *Staphylococcus aureus*, *Citrobacter rodentium*, *Salmonella* and *Shigella sp.*, *Bordetella pertussis*. ${ }^{76,83}$ Th17 cells also augment Th1 responses against some intracellular pathogens (*Mycobacteria* and *Francisella tularensis*). ${ }^{84,85}$ Th17 cells are also involved in protection against mucocutaneous candidiasis via the stimulation of pattern recognition elements (Dectin 1, Dectin 2) in macrophages and DCs. ${ }^{86}$ The role for Th17 cells and IL-17 in immunity against *Asperillus fumigatus* and some other fungi is more controversial and possibly detrimental. ${ }^{75,87}$

IL-22 and IL-17 synergistically trigger production of many anti-microbial peptides and proteins (β-defensins, S100 proteins and regenerating islet-derived protein 3γ, lipocalin 2). ${ }^{88}$ The IL-22

From bloodjournal.hematologylibrary.org at University of Arizona Health Sciences Library on January 19, 2013. For personal use only.

receptor (IL-22R) is predominantly expressed by cells of non-hematopoietic origin (keratinocytes, hepatocytes and enterocytes) and enables tissue-protective effects against invasion by *Toxoplasma gondii* and various Gram-negative bacteria. IL-21 regulates CD8-mediated responses and facilitates B cell responses and memory formation.

The importance of the Th17 subset in protecting humans is vividly demonstrated in patients with an autosomal-dominant form of hyper-IgE syndrome (HIES or Job's syndrome) that have an inactivating STAT3 mutation; thus they are incapable of generating Th17 cells. Patients with HIES suffer from recurrent staphylococcal soft tissue infections, pneumonias and bronchoalveolar infections, pneumatoceles, eczema and mucocutaneous candidiasis. They also show impaired immunity against varicella zoster (VZV), Epstein Barr (EBV), as well as defective proliferative responses and reduced central memory formation due to STAT3 dysfunction. Similar sequelae are seen in HIV infection that is associated with early preferential loss of Th17-mediated mucosal immunity in the gut. Th17 depletion in the GI tract leads to rapid disease progression in SIV-infected macaques, whereas sooty mangabeys that retain Th17 cells in the gastrointestinal mucosa are protected.

### Th17 cells as mediators of tissue damage

Early discoveries of IL-23 as an inducer of Th17 cells revealed their capacity to induce EAE, a disease initially attributed to Th1 cells and induced in the presence of IL-12 (a heterodimer of IL-12p40 and p35 subunits). However, animals deficient in the IL-12p35 subunit developed EAE despite diminished Th1 responses because they retained IL-23, which is a heterodimer of IL-12p40 and a distinct p19 subunit. These experimental data were complemented by studies linking genetic polymorphisms of IL-23R and its downstream signaling pathways with susceptibility to human autoimmune diseases including inflammatory bowel disease, psoriasis and aplastic anemia.

Tissue damage by Th17 cells might be caused by direct recognition of the antigen-specific target or it can result from the recruitment of neutrophils and macrophages into the microenvironment. In EAE, IL-17 induces reactive oxygen species (ROS) production in the endothelium leading to a disruption of the blood-brain barrier. IL-17 promotes inflammatory cytokines (IL-1, IL-6) and CCL20 (MIP3α), a potent chemotactic factor for myeloid cells and additional Th17 cells expressing high levels of its receptor CCR6. IL-9 produced by Th17 cells exacerbates EAE via its effect on T cells and IL-6-secreting macrophages.
From bloodjournal.hematologylibrary.org at University of Arizona Health Sciences Library on January 19, 2013. For personal use only.

produce GM-CSF, ${}^{103,104}$ which acts on myeloid cells by induction of IL-1, IL-6 and IL-23 and MHC class II expression. ${}^{103}$ Blockade of GM-CSF signaling effectively protected mice from autoimmunity. ${}^{104}$ Nevertheless, despite the latest emphasis on Th17 cells, both Th1 and Th17 cells can cause EAE and murine uveitis manifestations, albeit with distinct histopathological features. ${}^{105-107}$ Furthermore, both type 1 and type 17-related factors can be produced by pathogenic Th17 cells, but both subset-defining cytokines, IL-17A and IFN-$\gamma$, are dispensable whereas T-bet, thought of as the master transcription factor for Th1 cells, may be essential for pathogenicity of Th17 cells in EAE. ${}^{108}$ Recently TGF-$\beta$3 has been identified as a critical IL-23 and T-bet–dependent factor produced by the highly pathogenic Th17 population. ${}^{109}$ Moreover, presence of TGF-$\beta$3 during the initial Th17 polarization induced highly encephalitogenic T-bet-independent type 17 cells.

In patients with multiple sclerosis (MS), elevated frequencies of Th17 cells were found in peripheral blood and double producers of IL-17A and IFN-$\gamma$ have been reported in CNS lesions, mimicking the findings observed in mice with EAE. However, depletion of IL-23 in patients with MS caused only minimal improvement in disease control, possibly because of poor CNS penetration of anti-IL-23 antibody formulation used clinically or deficiencies in the mouse model. ${}^{110}$

Th17 responses are associated with psoriasis, where IL-23, IL-17 and IL-22 seem to contribute to the development of the human disease. ${}^{111,112}$ In mice, IL-22 is crucial in inducing psoriatic-like lesions with acanthocytosis in keratinocytes. ${}^{113}$ Targeting the p40 subunit of IL-12/IL-23 with monoclonal antibody ustekinumab appears to be highly effective in patients with psoriasis. ${}^{114,115}$ Recently a phase II clinical trial of the anti-IL-17 receptor monoclonal antibody brodalumab in patients with psoriasis demonstrated significant improvement in a majority of patients. ${}^{116}$

IL-23 directly drives pathogenic Th cells in a mouse model of colitis. ${}^{117}$ Whereas IFN-$\gamma$ is required for tissue damage, the role of IL-17 remains disputed. ${}^{118}$ IL-17 might protect the colon via inhibition of colitogenic Th1 differentiation. ${}^{119}$ Likewise, IL-22 from Th17 and NK cells might attenuate the development of intestinal pathology via Stat3-mediated effects on epithelial cells. ${}^{120,121}$ In contrast, IL-21 significantly potentiates pathogenic effects of Th17 cells in the gut. ${}^{122,123}$ Increased frequency of IL-17-secreting CD4${}^{+}$T cells can be found in the gut of patients with Crohn’s disease, ${}^{124}$ and these cells express CD161 in addition to the previously described CCR6 and CCR4 chemokine receptors. ${}^{101,125}$ In the clinical randomized proof of concept trial, the human anti-IL-17A monoclonal antibody failed to control the symptoms ofCrohn's disease and was associated with increased adverse events in comparison to the placebo, ${}^{126}$ whereas depletion of IL-23 with ustekinumab was more effective. ${}^{127}$ This might underscore the role of IL-23 not only in Th17 responses, but also as a driver of inflammation mediated by the innate lymphoid (LTi) cells that are abundant in the colonic mucosa. ${}^{128}$

Multiple other autoimmune diseases including rheumatoid arthritis, uveitis, atherosclerosis, emphysema and allergies have been associated with Th17 responses in murine models and in patients. ${}^{129,130}$ Currently various agents modulating the type 17 axis of inflammation are under development. Recently digoxin has been shown to inhibit Th17 development and novel small molecules that modulate Rora and Rort activity have been described. ${}^{131,132}$ Nevertheless, IL-23 rather than IL-17 plays a central role in Th17-related autoimmunity and pathogenic Th17 cells usually evolve and display Th1-like characteristics.

### Th17 cells in graft versus host disease (GVHD)

GVHD is a complex immune syndrome that develops in organ-specific sites under influences of a variety of inflammatory conditions. ${}^{133}$ The resemblance of GVHD to some autoimmune diseases has shed light on Th17 biology. ${}^{134}$ IL-23R polymorphism might be a prognostic factor in patients undergoing allogeneic stem cell transplantation, ${}^{135}$ and highly-polarized allogeneic Th17 cells can induce severe forms of GVHD in mice. ${}^{136}$ However, Th17 responses are frequently described as “sufficient but not necessary” for the development of GVHD, as evidenced by pathogenicity of IL-17A or Rort-deficient Th cells. ${}^{137,138}$ Concurrent elimination of T-bet and Rort was reported as protective against GVHD development in fully mismatched settings (C57/BL6 into BALB/c), while the graft vs. leukemia (GVL) effect was spared. ${}^{139}$ Perplexingly, a recent report demonstrated reduced numbers of Th17 cells within the lamina propria of animals with GVHD, but the development of GVHD colitis was attributed to the critical role of STAT3 signaling that promoted instability and plasticity of nTreg compartment and blockade of iTreg generation. ${}^{140}$ In a more clinically-relevant haploidentical transplant model rorc-deficient CD25-depleted CD4${}^{+}$T cells induced only a mild form of GVHD. ${}^{141}$ This protective effect correlated with diminished systemic levels of TNF-$\alpha$ and IL-17A, but colonic levels of IL-17A were preserved in mice treated with rorc-deficient CD4${}^{+}$T cells. In the same model $tbx21^{-/-}$ cells caused marked GVHD.

Undoubtedly, the functional plasticity of the Th17 subset that can produce Th1-like progeny is important for better understanding of their complex role in mediating GVHD. ${}^{134}$ Reminiscent of
From bloodjournal.hematologylibrary.org at University of Arizona Health Sciences Library on January 19, 2013. For personal use only.

some autoimmune conditions, the role of IL-17 in GVHD is unclear and IL-22 might be protective to colonic mucosa. IL-21, IL-6, IL-23, STAT3 and RA receptors have been reported as potentially useful targets for therapeutic intervention. ${}^{142-145}$

# Th17 cells and cancer

Carcinogenesis as a consequence of chronic inflammation has been described in the 19${}^{\text{th}}$ century by Rudolph Virchow. There is a strong correlation between cancer and autoimmunity (e.g. in inflammatory bowel disease) or prolonged inflammation cause by cigarette smoke or chronic infection, such as *H. pylori* or hepatitis. ${}^{146,147}$ Inflammation, especially involving Stat3 signaling pathways plays an important role in induction, progression and metastasis of tumors either directly or by modulation of the various components of tumor stroma, recruitment of myeloid cells and impairment of T cell responses. ${}^{148,149}$ IL-1, IL-6, IL-21 and IL-23 are frequently induced in the proinflammatory tumorigenic microenvironment and Th17 cells are commonly found in pre-cancerous and cancerous lesions. ${}^{150,151}$

The role of Th17 cells in protection or progression of tumors is controversial. ${}^{152,153}$ IL-17 promoted tumor neovascularization in nude mice, ${}^{154}$ supported neoplastic growth directly or via induction of IL-6 ${}^{155}$ and induced myeloid suppressor cells ${}^{156}$, but could be also protective in immunocompetent animals. ${}^{157,158}$ Th17 cells can suppress CD8-mediated immunosurveillance. ${}^{159}$ Genetic Rorty deficiency results in a slower growth of transplantable melanoma and elimination of IL-23 or IL-21 inhibits carcinogenesis in some models. ${}^{160-162}$ On the other hand, exogenous inflammatory cytokines can activate immune responses against tumor. ${}^{163,164}$ In humans, the presence of Th17 cells is a poor prognostic indicator in some studies and a favorable indicator in other reports. ${}^{153,165}$

The unknown antigenic specificity of the Th populations in question undermines many animal and clinical studies. Furthermore, Th17 cells are often viewed as static and incapable of plasticity. We investigated the relative anti-tumor activity of Th1 and Th17 cells in the setting of adoptive immunotherapy of murine B16.10 melanoma using TCR transgenic TRP-1CD4${}^{+}$T cells recognizing melanocyte differentiation antigen tyrosinase related protein 1 (Tyrp1). ${}^{166}$ Th17-polarized TRP-1 cells swiftly eradicated large (over 1 cm${}^{2}$) B16.10 melanoma upon transfer into tumor-bearing C57/B6 animals, whereas Th1-polarized TRP-1 cells were significantly less effective. TRP-1 Th17 cells recruited endogenous cytotoxic CD8${}^{+}$T cells into pulmonary metastases. ${}^{167}$ The potency of tumor-specific type 17 responses has also been

From bloodjournal.hematologylibrary.org at University of Arizona Health Sciences Library on January 19, 2013. For personal use only.

demonstrated using murine CD8⁺ T cells (Tc17) and genetically-engineered human CD4⁺ T cells.¹⁶⁸, ¹⁶⁹

# Fate of Th17 cells: plasticity with constraints

The Th1/Th2 paradigm implied that polarized lineages were mutually exclusive and stable, because of the self-enforcing nature of the signals involved in the acquisition of each lineage. This view of fixed phenotype and function was also initially applied to the newly defined Th17 subset. However, IL-17A and IFN-γ double-producing cells are found *in vivo*, suggesting that Th17 cells could at least in part function like Th1 cells.⁷⁷ In the setting of immunotherapy of melanoma with Th17-polarized TRP-1 cells, *in vivo* elimination of IFN-γ or T-bet abrogated the anti-tumor effect of adoptively transferred Th17 cells, suggesting evolution of a transferred population into Th1-like subset.¹⁶⁶, ¹⁷⁰ This late developmental plasticity of Th17 lineage was examined in detail using the IL-17F reporter system by Lee, *et al.*¹⁷¹ who demonstrated that type 17 cells could be maintained as such in presence of TGF-β and IL-23 but were readily converted into the IFN-γ-secreting population upon re-stimulation in the presence of IL-12 or IL-23 and in absence of TGF-β. An analogous switch occurs *in vivo* where transferred IL-17F-expressing CD4⁺ T cells give rise to IFN-γ-producing colitogenic effectors.¹⁷¹ In a model of diabetes mellitus (DM), Th17 cells converted into pathogenic IFN-γ-producing daughter cells in lymphopenic conditions, but in the intact (lymphoreplete) recipients, the same Th17 cells caused only benign insulitis and maintained a stable type 17 phenotype.¹⁷²

The observed stability or plasticity of Th subsets is governed by the epigenetic regulation of the key transcription factors and cytokines determining the polarization status.¹⁷³ Whether a particular gene is poised for expression or not is determined by the chromatin structure, as well as histone and DNA methylation states. Wei, *et al.* evaluated histone H3 methylation status over the entire genome in variety of CD4⁺ Th subsets.¹⁷⁴ Predictably, gene promoters for *tbx21* in Th1 cells and *rorc* in Th17 cells displayed a permissive methylation state (H3K4me3) associated with full expression of these master regulators in each lineage. However, gene promoters for *tbx21* in Th17 cells had a bivalent status characterized by H3K4me3/H3K27me3 dual positivity, thus substantiating the relative instability and propensity of these cells to acquire type 1 features in the presence of IL-12 (Figure 2).

Deeper insight into the evolution of Th17 responses *in vivo* was gained by Hirota, *et al.*¹⁷⁵ using a reporter system permanently labeling Th cells that express the *il17a* gene, thus allowing for
From bloodjournal.hematologylibrary.org at University of Arizona Health Sciences Library on January 19, 2013. For personal use only.

fate mapping of all “ex-Th17” cells *in vivo* by yellow fluorescent protein (yFP). In vaccination-induced EAE almost all myelin-specific CD4⁺ T cells infiltrating CNS were yFP⁺ and thus of Th17 origin, although they ceased secretion of IL-17A and switched to production of IFN-γ or other cytokines. This *in vivo* conversion was critically dependent on IL-23. In contrast, in acute cutaneous candidiasis, responding Th17 cells remained firmly committed to IL-17 production, possibly because of low local levels of IL-23. Thus, *in vivo* induced murine Th17 cells display context-dependent stability or flexibility, just like Th17 cells generated *in vitro*. If the same phenomenon is true in the case of human Th17 cells remains to be determined, however TCR clonotypes present in the Th17 cell compartment and Th1 compartment found in joint fluid recovered from patients with juvenile rheumatoid arthritis were remarkably similar, suggesting *in vivo* conversion.¹⁷⁶ In another report, Th17 cells specific for the cancer testis antigen MAGE-A3 isolated from a patient with lung cancer were readily converted into IFN-γ secreting Th1-like effectors.¹⁷⁷

Overall, the Th17 cells generated *in vitro* or *in vivo* can maintain pure type 17 phenotype or can acquire certain type 1 characteristics upon secondary stimulation. This plasticity, while significant, is clearly restrained by the epigenetic status of the genes encoding for the master transcriptional regulators and cytokines. As a result the observed plasticity is asymmetrical because committed Th1 cells cannot easily acquire Th17 features. Thus the plasticity of Th cell subsets is constrained and in this regard is similar to other self-renewing tissues with stem cell functionality as postulated by Hal Waddington almost 60 years ago; differentiation is strictly controlled in its directionality and once differentiated, cells rarely if ever revert to the plastic progenitor state, in a way analogous to biochemical or physical process of entropy.¹⁷⁸

### The maturation aspect of Th plasticity

Development of long-term memory is one of the key features of adaptive immunity and is crucial for the ability to mount effective protection upon the subsequent antigenic encounter. The formation of CD4⁺ T memory is complicated by the existence of multiple polarized Th subsets, which can evolve and experience plasticity. It is thought that CD4-mediated memory responses might be less robust in contrast to more stable persistence of CD8⁺ memory T cells.[184]

T cell memory has been extensively studied in the CD8⁺ compartment using phenotypic markers wherein naïve CD44⁺CD62L⁺CD8⁺ T cells differentiate upon stimulation into CD62L⁺CD44⁺ central memory (T~CM~) cells or CD62L⁻CD44⁺ effector memory (T~EM~) cells.Recently a novel, less-differentiated and very early memory cell subset termed memory stem cells ($T_{SCM}$) has been described in the setting of GVHD and adoptive immunotherapy. $T_{SCM}$ display stem cell like features such as longevity, a capacity for self-renewal and the ability to give rise to more differentiated ($T_{CM}$ and $T_{EM}$) memory subsets. ${}^{179,180}$ These cells display a naïve-like phenotype (CD62L${}^{hi}$, CCR7${}^{hi}$, CD44${}^{lo}$), but can be identified by the presence of some activation markers (Sca1 in mice and CD95 in humans). ${}^{180}$

$T_{SCM}$ also share certain molecular traits common to other self-renewing populations including the activity of the Wnt/$\beta$-catenin pathway that contributes to the maintenance of normal and transformed stem cells and the development of thymocytes. ${}^{181}$ Inhibition of glycogen synthtase kinase 3$\beta$ (GSK3$\beta$) during antigenic stimulation of naïve CD8${}^{+}$ T cells stabilizes $\beta$-catenin and enhances $T_{SCM}$ formation. ${}^{180}$ Stabilized $\beta$-catenin induces $Tcf7$ gene expression that encodes T cell factor 1 (Tcf1). Tcf1 participates in maintenance of memory T cells and Tregs *in vivo*. Its forced overexpression prevents secretion of type 1 and type 17 effector molecules (IFN-$\gamma$ and IL-17A respectively) and promotes Th2 differentiation. ${}^{182,183}$ CD8${}^{+}$ $T_{EM}$ cells are highly cytotoxic *in vitro*, but display very poor persistence and anti-tumor effect *in vivo*; thus they behave in a senescent manner. ${}^{184-186}$ $T_{CM}$ and even more dramatically $T_{SCM}$ cells that do not achieve full terminal differentiation *in vitro* are far more effective in eradicating the tumor *in vivo* and this is associated with superior persistence. ${}^{180,185}$ Therefore, therapeutic activity and self-renewal potential can be used as surrogate measurements of the maturational stage of the particular effector population. ${}^{184,185}$

When judged by some common phenotypic markers, Th17 cells appear to resemble terminally differentiated $T_{EM}$ cells with low expression of CD62L, CD45RA and CD27, a costimulatory molecule important for survival of T cells that is downregulated with advanced maturational stage. ${}^{170}$ In contrast, Th1 cells maintain a high expression of CD27 and upon *in vitro* polarization they retain a higher frequency of CD62L${}^{hi}$ cells. Because of the terminally-differentiated phenotype (CD27${}^{lo}$) Th17 cells were described as short-lived and unable to form long-term memory. ${}^{74}$ However, type 17 responses can be clearly protective against re-challenge in immunization models. ${}^{187}$ This assertion was also at odds with observations from adoptive cell transfer experiments, where even highly purified Th17 cells can survive, persist and retain functionality, as evidenced by protracted tissue damage in some models of autoimmunity or GVHD. ${}^{136,188}$ The persistence of Th17 cells is robustly observed in the TRP-1 model of cancer immunotherapy where Th17 cells are highly effective in eradicating the tumor, while Th1 cells are less efficient. ${}^{166,170}$ Furthermore, TRP-1 Th17 cells purified for the lowest expression ofFrom bloodjournal.hematologylibrary.org at University of Arizona Health Sciences Library on January 19, 2013. For personal use only.

CD27 showed the highest *in vivo* activity and survival. This finding is consistent with a recent report that CD27 signaling reduced the incidence and severity of disease in an EAE model.¹⁸⁹ Therefore, we hypothesized that despite certain phenotypic features of advanced maturation, considerable multipotency and plasticity demonstrated by Th17 cells indicated that these cells, at least when induced *in vitro*, are not terminally differentiated. Despite their phenotype, Th1 cells might represent a more differentiated subset with less capacity to expand, persist and eliminate tumor *in vivo* (Figure 3).

The developmental program associated with Th17 plasticity has been elucidated using global gene expression profiles of transferred Th1 and Th17 cells. Indeed, molecular signatures of persisting Th1 and Th17 cells underwent rapid convergence and Th17 cells readily downregulated expression of type 17-defining cytokines (IL-17A, IL-17F, IL-21, IL-22) and upregulated transcripts associated with type 1 polarization (*tbx21, Ifng*). Recent reports describe a role of T-bet expression gradient as a regulator of CD4⁺ T cell memory formation, with highly Th1-polarized T-bet⁺ cells displaying end-effector features and short lifespan while Th cells with lower expression of T-bet formed long-lived stable TCM population.¹⁹⁰,¹⁹¹ This to some degree mimicked our observations, as long-lived ex-Th17 cells acquired T-bet expression, albeit at the levels lower than their Th1 counterparts.

Multiple other transcripts remained differentially expressed. This difference between persisting Th1 and Th17-derived cells was analyzed by gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) that revealed the core molecular program of long-lived Th17 cells resembled that of CD8⁺ T cells at an early stage of differentiation, even after they converted to a Th1-like subset *in vivo*.¹⁹² Reciprocally, the Th1 population acquired a global signature of terminal differentiation and senescence with high expression of molecular and phenotypic markers of advanced maturational stage, including cytotoxic effector molecules (granzymes, perforin), *klrg1* and other killer-like lectin receptors, *prdm1* (a gene encoding a molecular marker of terminal Th1 differentiation, Blimp1).¹⁷⁰ Furthermore, Th17 cells overexpressed *tcf7*, and some other downstream molecules of Wnt/β-catenin signaling pathway. In CD8⁺ T cells, the level of *tcf7* expression closely correlates with the maturational status of T cells: it is highly expressed in naïve T cells and gradually lost following antigenic stimulation and acquisition of TCM phenotype.¹⁸⁰ TEM cells have the lowest *tcf7* expression. Thus, *tcf7* expression might be used as a possible surrogate marker of maturational state and self-renewal capacity. Strikingly, Th17 polarization *in vitro* induced *tcf7* expression higher than in naïve starting population. This was associated with a massive accumulation of stable β-catenin in Th17 cells, therefore mimicking a
From bloodjournal.hematologylibrary.org at University of Arizona Health Sciences Library on January 19, 2013. For personal use only.

molecular signature found in naïve and T<sub>SCM</sub> cells induced by activation of Wnt signaling or pharmacological inhibition of Gsk3β<sup>179</sup>, but in type 17 cells it most likely resulted from downstream effects of IL-6 or IL-1 mediated by PI3K/Akt activity. As indicated by Weaver and Lucky,<sup>193</sup> many questions in regards to the CD4<sup>+</sup> memory and self-renewal remain unanswered, but functionally Th17 cells displayed traits similar to T<sub>SCM</sub>, as they were long-lived, demonstrated plasticity and gave rise to more differentiated Th1-like progeny, but also retained the ability to self-renew as IL-17A-producers.

The findings from the murine model were substantiated by the description of stem cell-like behavior and self-renewal molecular program in human Th17 cells that express high levels of hypoxia inducible factor 1α (HIF1α) and anti-apoptotic molecule BCL2.<sup>194</sup> Intriguingly, Stat3 signaling pathway that induces Th17 differentiation is critical for survival of long-lived memory T cells, but also plays an important role in maintenance of normal and malignant self-renewing populations with attributes of stemness.

### Beyond Th17 – expanding spectrum of Th subsets

The discovery of Th17 cells has been followed by the realization that Th effectors can produce various other cytokines alone or in combination in patterns not fitting the preconceived definitions of Th1/Th2 or Th17 subsets. These findings have led to the description of additional Th cell lineages, including Th22, Th9 and most notably – follicular T helper cells (Tfh). The plasticity, stability and potential for memory formation by each of these subsets remain yet to be elucidated.

Tfh cells express CXCR5 and predominantly traffic to lymph nodes where they provide help to B cells and produce IL-21 (just like Th17 cells).<sup>195</sup> Tfh cell induction is governed by Stat3 and the expression of Bcl6, a molecule important for maintenance of CD8<sup>+</sup> memory. Bcl6 is a pro-survival transcriptional repressor that antagonizes Blimp1, a molecule that drives terminal differentiation of T cells, thus the balance between these two factors might have maturational implications.<sup>196</sup> Likewise Tfh cells have a high capacity to form long-term memory.<sup>197</sup> The relationship of Tfh with other Th cell subsets such as Th1, Th2 and Th17 cells remains unclear and cells have been investigated mostly in the context of infection *in vivo* and humoral immunity.<sup>197,198</sup> Observing the *in vivo* responses to infection it is difficult to ascertain the sequence of maturational events with long-lived cells emerging upon contraction of the massively expanded effectors induced by the presence of pathogen. Thus it is conceivable that

From bloodjournal.hematologylibrary.org at University of Arizona Health Sciences Library on January 19, 2013. For personal use only.

Tfh cells might represent a self-renewing, plastic and non-terminally differentiated “early” memory subset.

Th22 cells producing only IL-22 but neither IFN-γ nor IL-17A have been identified only in humans.¹⁹⁹ They are induced in the presence of TNF-α and IL-6 and require ligation of Ahr. Phenotypically they can be identified by expression of CCR10 and absence of typical markers of human Th17 cells (CCR4, CCR6 and CD161). Th22 cells via IL-22 influence the function of mesenchymal and epithelial cells and have been implicated in the dermatopathology of psoriasis and atopic dermatitis.²⁰⁰,²⁰¹

Th9 cells are induced in the presence of IL-4 and TGF-β1, but their master transcription factor has not been identified and the functional roles of Th9 cells and IL-9 are ill-defined. Recent findings demonstrate that IL-9 is expressed only transiently and predominantly produced *in vivo* not by Th9 cells but by a novel subset of innate lymphoid cells termed ILC2.²⁰² Wilhelm, et al. theorized that IL-9 might have a regulatory and pro-survival function for many lymphoid and myeloid cells.²⁰³ A latest report described the development of endogenous anti-tumor Th9 responses in Rorgt-deficient animals and proposed a protective role for IL-9 in tumor immunity.¹⁶²,²⁰⁴

## Conclusions

Recent years have brought a new level of appreciation of the complexities involved in the function of effector CD4⁺ T helper cells. The discovery of Th17 cells has filled the gaps and deficiencies existing in the previous simplistic Th1/Th2 paradigm and has revolutionized our understanding of immune responses against certain pathogens and pathophysiology associated with development and progression of some autoimmune diseases or genetic defects of host defense, progression of HIV and development of AIDS, solid organ transplantation rejection and GVHD. In addition, Th17 cells have been described as mediators of carcinogenesis as facilitators of early progression of solid and hematologic malignancy through the direct effects of inflammatory cytokines on some cancer cells, but more frequently by impairing immune surveillance or promoting neovascularization and supporting stroma.

Investigation of Th17 cells led to a new appreciation of flexibility and plasticity of Th cell-mediated immunity. In contrast to the previously postulated dichotomous Th1/Th2 division of labor it is now clear that naïve Th cells can achieve a multiplicity of polarization states and

From bloodjournal.hematologylibrary.org at University of Arizona Health Sciences Library on January 19, 2013. For personal use only.

experience remarkably different cell fates that are highly dependent on the context of their encounter with antigen. Th17 cells can provide an initial inflammatory response *via* their canonical type 17 cytokines and recruit various myeloid populations to the site of the immune response before transitioning into type 1-like cells that can also target the intracellular pathogens. This developmental plasticity has significant implications for the rational design of the new treatments of the type 17-linked autoimmune syndromes like multiple sclerosis or GVHD. It can also be harnessed for the design of novel adoptive cell transfer therapies, as evidenced by the anti-tumor efficacy of Th17-polarized tumor specific cells, where superior engraftment and persistence of highly-active transferred effectors is desired.

The initial differentiation towards the Th17 subset prevents the effector cells from a premature acquisition of terminal differentiation that is associated with highly polarized Th1 cells. Instead, these cells acquire a molecular program reminiscent of recently described T<sub>SCM</sub> subset that is functionally characterized by self-renewal, persistence and the ability to efficiently form memory and at the same time to generate more differentiated progeny critical for *in vivo* effector function. Thus, polarization of Th cells conveys not only characteristic phenotypic and cytokine profiles, but also has a maturation aspect in the spectrum from early, self-renewing subsets to those that are senescent.

## Acknowledgments

We received funding from the Center for Cancer Research, NCI-NIH Intramural Research Program, the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute Intramural Program, and the NIH-Center for Regenerative Medicine, all located in Bethesda, MD, USA.

## Authorship

P.M. and N.P.R. wrote the manuscript.

## Conflict of interest disclosure

Authors declare no competing financial interests.

References

1. Zhu J, Paul WE. CD4T cells: fates, functions, and faults. *Blood*. September 1, 2008;112(5):1557-1569.
2. Sun JC, Bevan MJ. Defective CD8 T cell memory following acute infection without CD4 T cell help. *Science (New York, N.Y.)* Apr 11 2003;300(5617):339-342.
3. Bevan MJ. Helping the CD8(+) T-cell response. *Nature reviews*. Aug 2004;4(8):595-602.
4. Swain SL, McKinstry KK, Strutt TM. Expanding roles for CD4+ T cells in immunity to viruses. *Nature reviews*. 2012;12(2):136-148.
5. Muranski P, Restifo NP. Adoptive immunotherapy of cancer using CD4(+) T cells. *Current opinion in immunology*. Mar 12 2009.
6. Mosmann TR, Cherwinski H, Bond MW, Giedlin MA, Coffman RL. Two types of murine helper T cell clone. I. Definition according to profiles of lymphokine activities and secreted proteins. *J Immunol*. Apr 1 1986;136(7):2348-2357.
7. Mosmann TR, Coffman RL. TH1 and TH2 cells: different patterns of lymphokine secretion lead to different functional properties. *Annual review of immunology*. 1989;7:145-173.
8. Heinzel FP, Sadick MD, Holaday BJ, Coffman RL, Locksley RM. RECIPROCAL EXPRESSION OF INTERFERON-GAMMA OR INTERLEUKIN-4 DURING THE RESOLUTION OR PROGRESSION OF MURINE LEISHMANIASIS - EVIDENCE FOR EXPANSION OF DISTINCT HELPER T-CELL SUBSETS. *J. Exp. Med.* Jan 1989;169(1):59-72.
9. Romagnani S. The Th1/Th2 paradigm. *Immunol. Today*. Jun 1997;18(6):263-266.
10. Parronchi P, Romagnani P, Annunziato F, et al. Type 1 T-helper cell predominance and interleukin-12 expression in the gut of patients with Crohn's disease. *Am. J. Pathol.* Mar 1997;150(3):823-832.
11. Leonard JP, Waldburger KE, Goldman SJ, Murray HW. Prevention of experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis by antibodies against interleukin 12. *J. Exp. Med.* 1995;181(1):381-386.
12. Afkarian M, Sedy JR, Yang J, et al. T-bet is a STAT1-induced regulator of IL-12R expression in naive CD4(+) T cells. *Nature immunology*. Jun 2002;3(6):549-557.
13. Szabo SJ, Kim ST, Costa GL, Zhang X, Fathman CG, Glimcher LH. A novel transcription factor, T-bet, directs Th1 lineage commitment. *Cell*. Mar 17 2000;100(6):655-669.
14. Oestreich KJ, Weinmann AS. Transcriptional mechanisms that regulate T helper 1 cell differentiation. *Current opinion in immunology*. 2012;24(2):191-195.
15. Kaplan MH, Schindler U, Smiley ST, Grusby MJ. Stat6 is required for mediating responses to IL-4 and for the development of Th2 cells. *Immunity*. Mar 1996;4(3):313-319.
16. Zheng WP, Flavell RA. The transcription factor GATA-3 is necessary and sufficient for Th2 cytokine gene expression in CD4 T cells. *Cell*. May 1997;89(4):587-596.
17. Shimoda K, van Deursen J, Sangster MY, et al. Lack of IL-4-induced Th2 response and IgE class switching in mice with disrupted Stat6 gene. *Nature*. Apr 1996;380(6575):630-633.
18. Robinson DS, Hamid Q, Ying S, et al. PREDOMINANT TH2-LIKE BRONCHOALVEOLAR LYMPHOCYTE-T POPULATION IN ATOPIC ASTHMA. *N. Engl. J. Med.* Jan 1992;326(5):298-304.
19. Lambrecht BN, De Veerman M, Coyle AJ, Gutierrez-Ramos JC, Theilemans K, Pauwels RA. Myeloid dendritic cells induce Th2 responses to inhaled antigen, leading to eosinophilic airway inflammation. *J. Clin. Invest.* Aug 2000;106(4):551-559.
20. Pearce EJ, Caspar P, Grzych JM, Lewis FA, Sher A. DOWN-REGULATION OF TH1 CYTOKINE PRODUCTION ACCOMPANIES INDUCTION OF TH2 RESPONSES BY A PARASITIC HELMINTH, SCHISTOSOMA-MANSONI. *J. Exp. Med.* Jan 1991;173(1):159-166.


From bloodjournal.hematologylibrary.org at University of Arizona Health Sciences Library on January 19, 2013. For personal use only.

21. Szabo SJ, Jacobson NG, Dighe AS, Gubler U, Murphy KM. DEVELOPMENTAL COMMITMENT TO THE TH2 LINEAGE BY EXTINCTION OF IL-12 SIGNALING. *Immunity*. Jun 1995; 2(6): 665-675.
22. Ouyang W, Ranganath SH, Weindel K, et al. Inhibition of Th1 development mediated by GATA-3 through an IL-4-independent mechanism. *Immunity*. Nov 1998; 9(5): 745-755.
23. Usui T, Preiss JC, Kanno Y, et al. T-bet regulates Th1 responses through essential effects on GATA-3 function rather than on IFNG gene acetylation and transcription. *The Journal of experimental medicine*. Mar 20 2006; 203(3): 755-766.
24. Hwang ES, Szabo SJ, Schwartzberg PL, Glimcher LH. T helper cell fate specified by kinase-mediated interaction of T-bet with GATA-3. *Science (New York, N.Y)*. Jan 21 2005; 307(5708): 430-433.
25. Oestreich KJ, Weinmann AS. T-bet employs diverse regulatory mechanisms to repress transcription. *Trends in immunology*. 2012; 33(2): 78-83.
26. Hori S, Nomura T, Sakaguchi S. Control of regulatory T cell development by the transcription factor Foxp3. *Science (New York, N.Y)*. Feb 2003; 299(5609): 1057-1061.
27. Cua DJ, Sherlock J, Chen Y, et al. Interleukin-23 rather than interleukin-12 is the critical cytokine for autoimmune inflammation of the brain. *Nature*. Feb 13 2003; 421(6924): 744-748.
28. Murphy CA, Langrish CL, Chen Y, et al. Divergent pro- and anti-inflammatory roles for IL-23 and IL-12 in joint autoimmune inflammation. *The Journal of experimental medicine*. Dec 15 2003; 198(12): 1951-1957.
29. Harrington LE, Hatton RD, Mangan PR, et al. Interleukin 17-producing CD4+ effector T cells develop via a lineage distinct from the T helper type 1 and 2 lineages. *Nature immunology*. Nov 2005; 6(11): 1123-1132.
30. Park H, Li ZX, Yang XO, et al. A distinct lineage of CD4 T cells regulates tissue inflammation by producing interleukin 17. *Nature immunology*. Nov 2005; 6(11): 1133-1141.
31. Oppmann B, Lesley R, Blom B, et al. Novel p19 protein engages IL-12p40 to form a cytokine, IL-23, with biological activities similar as well as distinct from IL-12. *Immunity*. 2000; 13(5): 715-725.
32. Langrish CL, Chen Y, Blumenschein WM, et al. IL-23 drives a pathogenic T cell population that induces autoimmune inflammation. *J. Exp. Med.* Jan 2005; 201(2): 233-240.
33. Hirahara K, Ghoreschi K, Laurence A, Yang XP, Kanno Y, O'Shea JJ. Signal transduction pathways and transcriptional regulation in Th17 cell differentiation. *Cytokine & growth factor reviews*. Dec 2010; 21(6): 425-434.
34. Ivanov, II, McKenzie BS, Zhou L, et al. The orphan nuclear receptor RORgammat directs the differentiation program of proinflammatory IL-17+ T helper cells. *Cell*. Sep 22 2006; 126(6): 1121-1133.
35. Yang XXO, Pappu BP, Nurieva R, et al. T helper 17 lineage differentiation is programmed by orphan nuclear receptors ROR alpha and ROR gamma. *Immunity*. Jan 2008; 28(1): 29-39.
36. Durant L, Watford WT, Ramos HL, et al. Diverse targets of the transcription factor STAT3 contribute to T cell pathogenicity and homeostasis. *Immunity*. May 28 2010; 32(5): 605-615.
37. Schraml BU, Hildner K, Ise W, et al. The AP-1 transcription factor Batf controls T(H) 17 differentiation. *Nature*. Jul 16 2009; 460(7253): 405-409.
38. Shi LZ, Wang R, Huang G, et al. HIF1α-dependent glycolytic pathway orchestrates a metabolic checkpoint for the differentiation of TH17 and Treg cells. *The Journal of experimental medicine*. July 4, 2011; 208(7): 1367-1376.
39. Brustle A, Heink S, Huber M, et al. The development of inflammatory T-H-17 cells requires interferon-regulatory factor 4. *Nature immunology*. Sep 2007; 8(9): 958-966.
40. Zhang F, Meng G, Strober W. Interactions among the transcription factors Runx1, RORgammat and Foxp3 regulate the differentiation of interleukin 17-producing T cells. *Nature immunology*. Nov 2008; 9(11): 1297-1306.

From bloodjournal.hematologylibrary.org at University of Arizona Health Sciences Library on January 19, 2013. For personal use only.

41. Ciofani M, Madar A, Galan C, et al. A Validated Regulatory Network for Th17 Cell Specification. *Cell*. 2012; 151(2): 289-303.
42. Yang XP, Ghoreschi K, Steward-Tharp SM, et al. Opposing regulation of the locus encoding IL-17 through direct, reciprocal actions of STAT3 and STAT5. *Nature immunology*. Mar 2011; 12(3): 247-254.
43. Laurence A, Tato CM, Davidson TS, et al. Interleukin-2 signaling via STAT5 constrains T helper 17 cell generation. *Immunity*. Mar 2007; 26(3): 371-381.
44. Lazarevic V, Chen X, Shim JH, et al. T-bet represses TH17 differentiation by preventing Runx1-mediated activation of the gene encoding RORγt. *Nature immunology*. 2011; 12(1): 96-104.
45. Diveu C, McGechy MJ, Boniface K, et al. IL-27 Blocks RORγt Expression to Inhibit Lineage Commitment of Th17 Cells. *The Journal of Immunology*. May 1, 2009 2009; 182(9): 5748-5756.
46. Mathur AN, Chang HC, Zisoulis DG, et al. Stat3 and Stat4 direct development of IL-17-secreting Th cells. *J Immunol*. Apr 15 2007; 178(8): 4901-4907.
47. Yang XXO, Panopoulos AD, Nurieva R, et al. STAT3 regulates cytokine-mediated generation of inflammatory helper T cells. *J. Biol. Chem*. Mar 2007; 282(13): 9358-9363.
48. McGechy MJ, Bak-Jensen KS, Chen Y, et al. TGF-beta and IL-6 drive the production of IL-17 and IL-10 by T cells and restrain TH-17 cell-mediated pathology. *Nature immunology*. Dec 2007; 8(12): 1390-1397.
49. McGechy MJ, Chen Y, Tato CM, et al. The interleukin 23 receptor is essential for the terminal differentiation of interleukin 17-producing effector T helper cells in vivo. *Nature immunology*. Mar 2009; 10(3): 314-324.
50. Chen Z, Laurence A, O'Shea JJ. Signal transduction pathways and transcriptional regulation in the control of Th17 differentiation. *Semin Immunol*. Dec 29 2007.
51. Zhou L, Ivanov, II, Spolski R, et al. IL-6 programs T(H)-17 cell differentiation by promoting sequential engagement of the IL-21 and IL-23 pathways. *Nature immunology*. Sep 2007; 8(9): 967-974.
52. Korn T, Bettelli E, Gao W, et al. IL-21 initiates an alternative pathway to induce proinflammatory T(H) 17 cells. *Nature*. Jun 20 2007.
53. Ghoreschi K, Laurence A, Yang XP, et al. Generation of pathogenic T(H) 17 cells in the absence of TGF-beta signalling. *Nature*. Oct 21 2010; 467(7318): 967-971.
54. Dinarello CA. Immunological and Inflammatory Functions of the Interleukin-1 Family. *Annu Rev Immunol*. Vol 27. Palo Alto: Annual Reviews; 2009: 519-550.
55. Gulen Muhammet F, Bulek K, Xiao H, et al. Inactivation of the Enzyme GSK3α by the Kinase IKKi Promotes AKT-mTOR Signaling Pathway that Mediates Interleukin-1-Induced Th17 Cell Maintenance. *Immunity*. 2012; 37(5): 800-812.
56. Gulen MF, Kang Z, Bulek K, et al. The Receptor SIGIRR Suppresses Th17 Cell Proliferation via Inhibition of the Interleukin-1 Receptor Pathway and mTOR Kinase Activation. *Immunity*. 2010; 32(1): 54-66.
57. Chung Y, Chang SH, Martinez GJ, et al. Critical Regulation of Early Th17 Cell Differentiation by Interleukin-1 Signaling. *Immunity*. 2009; 30(4): 576-587.
58. Chen Q, Yang W, Gupta S, et al. IRF-4-Binding Protein Inhibits Interleukin-17 and Interleukin-21 Production by Controlling the Activity of IRF-4 Transcription Factor. *Immunity*. 2008; 29(6): 899-911.
59. Oida T, Weiner HL. Depletion of TGF-β from fetal bovine serum. *Journal of Immunological Methods*. 2010; 362(1–2): 195-198.
60. Gutcher I, Donkor Moses K, Ma Q, Rudensky Alexander Y, Flavell Richard A, Li Ming O. Autocrine Transforming Growth Factor-β1 Promotes In Vivo Th17 Cell Differentiation. *Immunity*. 2011; 34(3): 396-408.

From bloodjournal.hematologylibrary.org at University of Arizona Health Sciences Library on January 19, 2013. For personal use only.

61. Qin H, Wang L, Feng T, et al. TGF-beta promotes Th17 cell development through inhibition of SOCS3. J Immunol. Jul 1 2009; 183(1): 97-105.
62. Veldhoen M, Hocking RJ, Atkins CJ, Locksley RM, Stockinger B. TGF beta in the context of an inflammatory cytokine milieu supports de novo differentiation of IL-17-producing T cells. Immunity. Feb 2006; 24(2): 179-189.
63. Zhou L, Lopes JE, Chong MM, et al. TGF-beta-induced Foxp3 inhibits T(H) 17 cell differentiation by antagonizing RORgammat function. Nature. May 8 2008; 453(7192): 236-240.
64. Valmori D, Raffin C, Raimbaud I, Ayyoub M. Human ROR gamma t(+) T(H) 17 cells preferentially differentiate from naive FOXP3(+)Treg in the presence of lineage-specific polarizing factors. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America. Nov 2010; 107(45): 19402-19407.
65. Mucida D, Park Y, Kim G, et al. Reciprocal T(H) 17 and regulatory T cell differentiation mediated by retinoic acid. Science (New York, N.Y. Jul 2007; 317(5835): 256-260.
66. Takahashi H, Kanno T, Nakayamada S, et al. TGF-beta and retinoic acid induce the microRNA miR-10a, which targets Bcl-6 and constrains the plasticity of helper T cells. Nature immunology. Jun 2012; 13(6): 587-+.
67. Hall Jason A, Cannons Jennifer L, Grainger John R, et al. Essential Role for Retinoic Acid in the Promotion of CD4+ T Cell Effector Responses via Retinoic Acid Receptor Alpha. Immunity. 2011; 34(3): 435-447.
68. Veldhoen M, Hirota K, Westendorf AM, et al. The aryl hydrocarbon receptor links T(H) 17-cell-mediated autoimmunity to environmental toxins. Nature. May 2008; 453(7191): 106-+.
69. Stockinger B, Hirota K, Duarte J, Veldhoen M. External influences on the immune system via activation of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor. Semin. Immunol. Apr 2011; 23(2): 99-105.
70. Wu H-J, Ivanov II, Darce J, et al. Gut-Residing Segmented Filamentous Bacteria Drive Autoimmune Arthritis via T Helper 17 Cells. Immunity. 2010; 32(6): 815-827.
71. Ivanov, II, Atarashi K, Manel N, et al. Induction of Intestinal Th17 Cells by Segmented Filamentous Bacteria. Cell. Oct 2009; 139(3): 485-498.
72. Kriegel MA, Sefik E, Hill JA, Wu H-J, Benoist C, Mathis D. Naturally transmitted segmented filamentous bacteria segregate with diabetes protection in nonobese diabetic mice. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. July 12, 2011 2011; 108(28): 11548-11553.
73. Chen K, McAleer JP, Lin Y, et al. Th17 Cells Mediate Clade-Specific, Serotype-Independent Mucosal Immunity. Immunity. Dec 2011; 35(6): 997-1009.
74. Pepper M, Linehan JL, Pagan AJ, et al. Different routes of bacterial infection induce long-lived TH1 memory cells and short-lived TH17 cells. Nature immunology. Jan 2010; 11(1): 83-89.
75. Ouyang WJ, Kolls JK, Zheng Y. The biological functions of T helper 17 cell effector cytokines in inflammation. Immunity. Apr 2008; 28(4): 454-467.
76. Khader SA, Gaffen SL, Kolls JK. Th17 cells at the crossroads of innate and adaptive immunity against infectious diseases at the mucosa. Mucosal Immunol. 2009; 2(5): 403-411.
77. Korn T, Bettelli E, Oukka M, Kuchroo VK. IL-17 and Th17 Cells. Annual review of immunology. 2009; 27(1): 485-517.
78. Gaffen SL. Structure and signalling in the IL-17 receptor family. Nat. Rev. Immunol. Aug 2009; 9(8): 556-567.
79. Fossiez F, Djossou O, Chomarat P, et al. T cell interleukin-17 induces stromal cells to produce proinflammatory and hematopoietic cytokines. The Journal of experimental medicine. June 1, 1996 1996; 183(6): 2593-2603.
80. Tan W, Huang W, Zhong Q, Schwarzenberger P. IL-17 receptor knockout mice have enhanced myelotoxicity and impaired hemopoietic recovery following gamma irradiation. J. Immunol. 2006; 176(10): 6186-6193.

From bloodjournal.hematologylibrary.org at University of Arizona Health Sciences Library on January 19, 2013. For personal use only.

81. Kinugasa T, Sakaguchi T, Gu XB, Reinecker HC. Claudins regulate the intestinal barrier in response to immune mediators. *Gastroenterology*. Jun 2000;118(6):1001-1011.
82. Rangel-Moreno J, Carragher DM, Garcia-Hernandez MD, et al. The development of inducible bronchus-associated lymphoid tissue depends on IL-17. *Nature immunology*. Jul 2011;12(7):639-U195.
83. Mangan PR, Harrington LE, O'Quinn DB, et al. Transforming growth factor-beta induces development of the T(H) 17 lineage. *Nature*. May 11 2006;441(7090):231-234.
84. Khader SA, Bell GK, Pearl JE, et al. IL-23 and IL-17 in the establishment of protective pulmonary CD4+ T cell responses after vaccination and during Mycobacterium tuberculosis challenge. *Nature immunology*. Apr 2007;8(4):369-377.
85. Lin YY, Ritchea S, Logar A, et al. Interleukin-17 Is Required for T Helper 1 Cell Immunity and Host Resistance to the Intracellular Pathogen Francisella tularensis. *Immunity*. Nov 2009;31(5):799-810.
86. LeibundGut-Landmann S, Grosz O, Robinson MJ, et al. Syk- and CARD9-dependent coupling of innate immunity to the induction of T helper cells that produce interleukin 17. *Nature immunology*. 2007;8(6):630-638.
87. Wuthrich M, Deepe GS, Klein B. Adaptive Immunity to Fungi. In: Paul WE, ed. *Annual Review of Immunology*, Vol 30. Vol 30. Palo Alto: Annual Reviews; 2012:115-148.
88. Liang SC, Tan X-Y, Luxenberg DP, et al. Interleukin (IL)-22 and IL-17 are coexpressed by Th17 cells and cooperatively enhance expression of antimicrobial peptides. *The Journal of experimental medicine*. October 2, 2006 2006;203(10):2271-2279.
89. Aujla SJ, Chan YR, Zheng MQ, et al. IL-22 mediates mucosal host defense against Gram-negative bacterial pneumonia. *Nature medicine*. Mar 2008;14(3):275-281.
90. Spolski R, Leonard WJ. Interleukin-21: Basic biology and implications for cancer and autoimmunity. *Annu Rev Immunol*. Vol 26. Palo Alto: Annual Reviews; 2008:57-79.
91. Milner JD, Brenchley JM, Laurence A, et al. Impaired T(H) 17 cell differentiation in subjects with autosomal dominant hyper-IgE syndrome. *Nature*. Apr 10 2008;452(7188):773-776.
92. Milner JD, Sandler NG, Douek DC. Th17 cells, Job's syndrome and HIV: opportunities for bacterial and fungal infections. *Curr Opin HIV AIDS*. Mar 2010;5(2):179-183.
93. Siegel Andrea M, Heimall J, Freeman Alexandra F, et al. A Critical Role for STAT3 Transcription Factor Signaling in the Development and Maintenance of Human T Cell Memory. *Immunity*. 2011;35(5):806-818.
94. Brenchley JM, Paiardini M, Knox KS, et al. Differential Th17 CD4 T-cell depletion in pathogenic and nonpathogenic lentiviral infections. *Blood*. Oct 1 2008;112(7):2826-2835.
95. Becher B, Durell BG, Noelle RJ. Experimental autoimmune encephalitis and inflammation in the absence of interleukin-12. *J. Clin. Invest*. 2002;110(4):493-497.
96. Cargill M, Schrodi SJ, Chang M, et al. A Large-Scale Genetic Association Study Confirms IL12B and Leads to the Identification of IL23R as Psoriasis-Risk Genes. *The American Journal of Human Genetics*. 2007;80(2):273-290.
97. Takaku T, Calado RT, Kajigaya S, Young NS. Interleukin-23 receptor (IL-23R) gene polymorphisms in acquired aplastic anemia. *Ann. Hematol*. Jul 2009;88(7):653-657.
98. Zwiers A, Kraal L, van de Pouw Kraan TCTM, Wurdinger T, Bouma G, Kraal G. Cutting Edge: A Variant of the IL-23R Gene Associated with Inflammatory Bowel Disease Induces Loss of MicroRNA Regulation and Enhanced Protein Production. *The Journal of Immunology*. February 15, 2012 2012;188(4):1573-1577.
99. Spolski R, Wang L, Wan CK, et al. IL-21 Promotes the Pathologic Immune Response to Pneumovirus Infection. *J. Immunol*. Feb 2012;188(4):1924-1932.

100. Huppert J, Closhen D, Croxford A, et al. Cellular mechanisms of IL-17-induced blood-brain barrier disruption. FASEB J. Apr 2010; 24(4): 1023-1034.
101. Acosta-Rodriguez EV, Rivino L, Geginat J, et al. Surface phenotype and antigenic specificity of human interleukin 17-producing T helper memory cells. Nature immunology. Jun 2007; 8(6): 639-646.
102. Nowak EC, Weaver CT, Turner H, et al. IL-9 as a mediator of Th17-driven inflammatory disease. The Journal of experimental medicine. Aug 3 2009; 206(8): 1653-1660.
103. El-Behi M, Ciric B, Dai H, et al. The encephalitogenicity of T(H) 17 cells is dependent on IL-1-and IL-23-induced production of the cytokine GM-CSF. Nature immunology. Jun 2011; 12(6): 568-U241.
104. Codarri L, Gyulveszi G, Tosevski V, et al. ROR[gamma]t drives production of the cytokine GM-CSF in helper T cells, which is essential for the effector phase of autoimmune neuroinflammation. Nature immunology. 2011; 12(6): 560-567.
105. Luger D, Silver PB, Tang J, et al. Either a Th17 or a Th1 effector response can drive autoimmunity: conditions of disease induction affect dominant effector category. J. Exp. Med. Apr 2008; 205(4): 799-810.
106. Kornienke MA, Carlson TJ, Andjelkovic AV, Segal BM. IL-12- and IL-23-modulated T cells induce distinct types of EAE based on histology, CNS chemokine profile, and response to cytokine inhibition. J. Exp. Med. Jul 2008; 205(7): 1535-1541.
107. Palmer MT, Weaver CT. Autoimmunity: increasing suspects in the CD4(+) T cell lineup. Nature immunology. Jan 2010; 11(1): 36-40.
108. Yang Y, Weiner J, Liu Y, et al. T-bet is essential for encephalitogenicity of both Th1 and Th17 cells. The Journal of experimental medicine. Jul 6 2009; 206(7): 1549-1564.
109. Lee Y, Awasthi A, Yosef N, et al. Induction and molecular signature of pathogenic T(H) 17 cells. Nature immunology. Oct 2012; 13(10): 991-999.
110. Segal BM, Constantinescu CS, Raychaudhuri A, et al. Repeated subcutaneous injections of IL12/23P40 neutralising antibody, ustekinumab, in patients with relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis: a phase II, double-blind, placebo-controlled, randomised, dose-ranging study. Lancet Neurol. Sep 2008; 7(9): 796-804.
111. Nograles KE, Zaba LC, Guttman-Yassky E, et al. Th17 cytokines interleukin (IL)-17 and IL-22 modulate distinct inflammatory and keratinocyte-response pathways. Br. J. Dermatol. Nov 2008; 159(5): 1092-1102.
112. Di Cesare A, Di Meglio P, Nestle FO. The IL-23/Th17 Axis in the Immunopathogenesis of Psoriasis. J. Invest. Dermatol. Jun 2009; 129(6): 1339-1350.
113. Ma HL, Liang S, Li J, et al. IL-22 is required for Th17 cell-mediated pathology in a mouse model of psoriasis-like skin inflammation. The Journal of clinical investigation. Jan 17 2008.
114. Leonardi CL, Kimball AB, Papp KA, et al. Efficacy and safety of ustekinumab, a human interleukin-12/23 monoclonal antibody, in patients with psoriasis: 76-week results from a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial (PHOENIX 1). Lancet. May 2008; 371(9625): 1665-1674.
115. Benson JM, Sachs CW, Treacy G, et al. Therapeutic targeting of the IL-12/23 pathways: generation and characterization of ustekinumab. Nat Biotech. 2011; 29(7): 615-624.
116. Papp KA, Leonardi C, Menter A, et al. Brodalumab, an Anti-Interleukin-17-Receptor Antibody for Psoriasis. N. Engl. J. Med. Mar 2012; 366(13): 1181-1189.
117. Ahern PP, Schiering C, Buonocore S, et al. Interleukin-23 Drives Intestinal Inflammation through Direct Activity on T Cells. Immunity. Aug 2010; 33(2): 279-288.
118. Monteleone I, Sarra M, Pallone F, Monteleone G. Th17-Related Cytokines in Inflammatory Bowel Diseases: Friends or Foes? Curr. Mol. Med. Jun 2012; 12(5): 592-597.

From bloodjournal.hematologylibrary.org at University of Arizona Health Sciences Library on January 19, 2013. For personal use only.

119. O'Connor W, Kamanaka M, Booth CJ, et al. A protective function for interleukin 17A in T cell-mediated intestinal inflammation. *Nature immunology*. Jun 2009;10(6):603-U665.
120. Sugimoto K, Ogawa A, Mizoguchi E, et al. IL-22 ameliorates intestinal inflammation in a mouse model of ulcerative colitis. *The Journal of clinical investigation*. Jan 2 2008.
121. Zenewicz LA, Yancopoulos GD, Valenzuela DM, Murphy AJ, Stevens S, Flavell RA. Innate and Adaptive Interleukin-22 Protects Mice from Inflammatory Bowel Disease. *Immunity*. Dec 2008;29(6):947-957.
122. Fantini MC, Rizzo A, Fina D, et al. IL-21 regulates experimental colitis by modulating the balance between T-reg and Th17 cells. *European journal of immunology*. Nov 2007;37(11):3155-3163.
123. Peluso I, Fantini MC, Fina D, et al. IL-21 counteracts the regulatory T cell-mediated suppression of human CD4(+) T lymphocytes. *J. Immunol.* Jan 2007;178(2):732-739.
124. Annunziato F, Cosmi L, Santarlasci V, et al. Phenotypic and functional features of human Th17 cells 2007:jem.20070663.
125. Cosmi L, De Palma R, Santarlasci V, et al. Human interleukin 17-producing cells originate from a CD161(+)CD4(+) T cell precursor. *J. Exp. Med.* Aug 2008;205(8):1903-1916.
126. Hueber W, Sands BE, Lewitzky S, et al. Secukinumab, a human anti-IL-17A monoclonal antibody, for moderate to severe Crohn's disease: unexpected results of a randomised, double-blind placebo-controlled trial. *Gut*. May 17, 2012 2012.
127. Sandborn WJ, Feagan BG, Fedorak RN, et al. A randomized trial of ustekinumab, a human interleukin-12/23 monoclonal antibody, in patients with moderate-to-severe Crohn's disease. *Gastroenterology*. Oct 2008;135(4):1130-1141.
128. Buonocore S, Ahern PP, Uhlig HH, et al. Innate lymphoid cells drive interleukin-23-dependent innate intestinal pathology. *Nature*. 2010;464(7293):1371-1375.
129. Tesmer LA, Lundy SK, Sarkar S, Fox DA. Th17 cells in human disease. *Immunological reviews*. Jun 2008;223:87-113.
130. Wilke CM, Bishop K, Fox D, Zou WP. Deciphering the role of Th17 cells in human disease. *Trends in immunology*. Dec 2011;32(12):603-611.
131. Solt LA, Kumar N, Nuhant P, et al. Suppression of TH17 differentiation and autoimmunity by a synthetic ROR ligand. *Nature*. 2011;472(7344):491-494.
132. Huh JR, Leung MWL, Huang P, et al. Digoxin and its derivatives suppress TH17 cell differentiation by antagonizing ROR[ggr]t activity. *Nature*. 2011;472(7344):486-490.
133. Blazar BR, Murphy WJ, Abedi M. Advances in graft-versus-host disease biology and therapy. *Nat. Rev. Immunol.* Jun 2012;12(6):443-458.
134. Serody JS, Hill GR. The IL-17 Differentiation Pathway and Its Role in Transplant Outcome. *Biol. Blood Marrow Transplant*. Jan 2012;18(1):S56-S61.
135. Carvalho A, Cunha C, Ianni M, et al. Prognostic significance of genetic variants in the IL-23/Th17 pathway for the outcome of T cell-depleted allogeneic stem cell transplantation. *Bone Marrow Transplant*. Nov 2010;45(11):1645-1652.
136. Carlson MJ, West ML, Coghill JM, Panoskaltsis-Mortari A, Blazar BR, Serody JS. In vitro-differentiated TH17 cells mediate lethal acute graft-versus-host disease with severe cutaneous and pulmonary pathologic manifestations. *Blood*. February 5, 2009 2009;113(6):1365-1374.
137. Kappel LW, Goldberg GL, King CG, et al. IL-17 contributes to CD4-mediated graft-versus-host disease. *Blood*. Jan 22 2009;113(4):945-952.
138. Iclozan C, Yu Y, Liu C, et al. T helper 17 Cells Are Sufficient But Not Necessary to Induce Acute Graft-Versus-Host Disease. *Biol. Blood Marrow Transplant*. Feb 2010;16(2):170-178.
139. Yu Y, Wang D, Liu C, et al. Prevention of GVHD while sparing GVL effect by targeting Th1 and Th17 transcription factor T-bet and RORyt in mice. *Blood*. November 3, 2011 2011;118(18):5011-5020.

From bloodjournal.hematologylibrary.org at University of Arizona Health Sciences Library on January 19, 2013. For personal use only.

140. Laurence A, Amarnath S, Mariotti J, et al. STAT3 Transcription Factor Promotes Instability of nTreg Cells and Limits Generation of iTreg Cells during Acute Murine Graft-versus-Host Disease. *Immunity*. 2012;37(2):209-222.
141. Fulton LM, Carlson MJ, Coghill JM, et al. Attenuation of Acute Graft-versus-Host Disease in the Absence of the Transcription Factor RORγt. *The Journal of Immunology*. August 15, 2012 2012;189(4):1765-1772.
142. Bucher C, Koch L, Vogtenhuber C, et al. IL-21 blockade reduces graft-versus-host disease mortality by supporting inducible T regulatory cell generation. *Blood*. Dec 2009;114(26):5375-5384.
143. Chen X, Das R, Komorowski R, et al. Blockade of interleukin-6 signaling augments regulatory T-cell reconstitution and attenuates the severity of graft-versus-host disease. *Blood*. Jul 2009;114(4):891-900.
144. Das R, Komorowski R, Hessner MJ, et al. Blockade of interleukin-23 signaling results in targeted protection of the colon and allows for separation of graft-versus-host and graft-versus-leukemia responses. *Blood*. Jun 2010;115(25):5249-5258.
145. Nishimori H, Maeda Y, Teshima T, et al. Synthetic retinoid Am80 ameliorates chronic graft-versus-host disease by down-regulating Th1 and Th17. *Blood*. Jan 2012;119(1):285-295.
146. Grivennikov SI, Greten FR, Karin M. Immunity, Inflammation, and Cancer. *Cell*. Mar 2010;140(6):883-899.
147. Li N, Grivennikov Sergei I, Karin M. The Unholy Trinity: Inflammation, Cytokines, and STAT3 Shape The Cancer Microenvironment. *Cancer Cell*. 2011;19(4):429-431.
148. Kujawski M, Kortylewski M, Lee H, Herrmann A, Kay H, Yu H. Stat3 mediates myeloid cell-dependent tumor angiogenesis in mice. *The Journal of clinical investigation*. Oct 2008;118(10):3367-3377.
149. Kortylewski M, Kujawski M, Wang T, et al. Inhibiting Stat3 signaling in the hematopoietic system elicits multicomponent antitumor immunity. *Nature medicine*. Dec 2005;11(12):1314-1321.
150. Kryczek I, Wei S, Zou L, et al. Cutting edge: Th17 and regulatory T cell dynamics and the regulation by IL-2 in the tumor microenvironment. *J Immunol*. Jun 1 2007;178(11):6730-6733.
151. Kryczek I, Banerjee M, Cheng P, et al. Phenotype, distribution, generation, and functional and clinical relevance of Th17 cells in the human tumor environments. *Blood*. August 6, 2009 2009;114(6):1141-1149.
152. Muranski P, Restifo NP. Does IL-17 promote tumor growth? *Blood*. Jul 9 2009;114(2):231-232.
153. Zou W, Restifo NP. T(H) 17 cells in tumour immunity and immunotherapy. *Nature reviews*. Apr 2010;10(4):248-256.
154. Tartour E, Fossiez F, Joyeux I, et al. Interleukin 17, a T-cell-derived cytokine, promotes tumorigenicity of human cervical tumors in nude mice. *Cancer research*. Aug 1 1999;59(15):3698-3704.
155. Wang L, Yi T, Kortylewski M, Pardoll DM, Zeng D, Yu H. IL-17 can promote tumor growth through an IL-6-Stat3 signaling pathway. *The Journal of experimental medicine*. Jul 6 2009;206(7):1457-1464.
156. He D, Li H, Yusuf N, et al. IL-17 promotes tumor development through the induction of tumor promoting microenvironments at tumor sites and myeloid-derived suppressor cells. *J Immunol*. Mar 1 2010;184(5):2281-2288.
157. Benchetrit F, Ciree A, Vives V, et al. Interleukin-17 inhibits tumor cell growth by means of a T-cell-dependent mechanism. *Blood*. Mar 15 2002;99(6):2114-2121.
158. Kryczek I, Wei S, Szeliga W, Vatan L, Zou W. Endogenous IL-17 contributes to reduced tumor growth and metastasis. *Blood*. Mar 16 2009.

From bloodjournal.hematologylibrary.org at University of Arizona Health Sciences Library on January 19, 2013. For personal use only.

159. Chalmin F, Mignot G, Bruchard M, et al. Stat3 and Gfi-1 Transcription Factors Control Th17 Cell Immunosuppressive Activity via the Regulation of Ectonucleotide Expression. *Immunity*. Mar 2012;36(3):362-373.
160. Langowski JL, Zhang X, Wu L, et al. IL-23 promotes tumour incidence and growth. *Nature*. 2006;442(7101):461-465.
161. Stolfi C, Rizzo A, Franze E, et al. Involvement of interleukin-21 in the regulation of colitis-associated colon cancer. *J. Exp. Med.* Oct 2011;208(11):2279-2290.
162. Purwar R, Schlapbach C, Xiao S, et al. Robust tumor immunity to melanoma mediated by interleukin-9-producing T cells. *Nature medicine*. 2012;18(8):1248-1253.
163. Overwijk WW, de Visser KE, Tirion FH, et al. Immunological and antitumor effects of IL-23 as a cancer vaccine adjuvant. *J Immunol.* May 1 2006;176(9):5213-5222.
164. Tong Z, Yang XO, Yan H, et al. A Protective Role by Interleukin-17F in Colon Tumorigenesis. *PloS one*. 2012;7(4):e34959.
165. Cho BS, Lim JY, Yahng SA, et al. Circulating IL-17 levels during the peri-transplant period as a predictor for early leukemia relapse after myeloablative allogeneic stem cell transplantation. *Ann. Hematol.* Mar 2012;91(3):439-448.
166. Muranski P, Boni A, Antony PA, et al. Tumor-specific Th17-polarized cells eradicate large established melanoma. *Blood*. Jul 15 2008;112(2):362-373.
167. Martin-Orozco N, Muranski P, Chung Y, et al. T helper 17 cells promote cytotoxic T cell activation in tumor immunity. *Immunity*. Nov 20 2009;31(5):787-798.
168. Paulos CM, Carpenito C, Plesa G, et al. The Inducible Costimulator (ICOS) Is Critical for the Development of Human TH17 Cells. *Science translational medicine*. Oct 27 2010;2(55):55ra78.
169. Hinrichs CS, Kaiser A, Paulos CM, et al. Type 17 CD8+ T cells display enhanced anti-tumor immunity. *Blood*. May 26 2009.
170. Muranski P, Borman ZA, Kerkar SP, et al. Th17 Cells Are Long Lived and Retain a Stem Cell-like Molecular Signature. *Immunity*. Dec 2011;35(6):972-985.
171. Lee YK, Turner H, Maynard CL, et al. Late developmental plasticity in the T helper 17 lineage. *Immunity*. Jan 2009;30(1):92-107.
172. Martin-Orozco N, Chung Y, Chang SH, Wang YH, Dong C. Th17 cells promote pancreatic inflammation but only induce diabetes efficiently in lymphopenic hosts after conversion into Th1 cells. *European journal of immunology*. Jan 2009;39(1):216-224.
173. O'Shea JJ, Lahesmaa R, Vahedi G, Laurence A, Kanno Y. Genomic views of STAT function in CD4+ T helper cell differentiation. *Nature reviews*. Apr 2011;11(4):239-250.
174. Wei G, Wei L, Zhu J, et al. Global mapping of H3K4me3 and H3K27me3 reveals specificity and plasticity in lineage fate determination of differentiating CD4+ T cells. *Immunity*. Jan 2009;30(1):155-167.
175. Hirota K, Duarte JH, Veldhoen M, et al. Fate mapping of IL-17-producing T cells in inflammatory responses. *Nature immunology*. Mar 2011;12(3):255-263.
176. Cosmi L, Cimaz R, Maggi L, et al. Evidence of the transient nature of the Th17 phenotype of CD4+CD161+ T cells in the synovial fluid of patients with juvenile idiopathic arthritis. *Arthritis & Rheumatism*. 2011;63(8):2504-2515.
177. Hamai A, Pignon P, Raimbaud I, et al. Human T(H) 17 Immune Cells Specific for the Tumor Antigen MAGE-A3 Convert to IFN-gamma-Secreting Cells as They Differentiate into Effector T Cells In Vivo. *Cancer research*. Mar 2012;72(5):1059-1063.
178. Waddington CH. *The Strategy of the Genes*. London: George Allen & Unwin.; 1957.
179. Gattinoni L, Lugli E, Ji Y, et al. A human memory T cell subset with stem cell-like properties. *Nature medicine*. Oct 2011;17(10):1290-U1325.

From bloodjournal.hematologylibrary.org at University of Arizona Health Sciences Library on January 19, 2013. For personal use only.

180. Gattinoni L, Zhong XS, Palmer DC, et al. Wnt signaling arrests effector T cell differentiation and generates CD8+ memory stem cells. Nature medicine. Jul 2009;15(7):808-813.
181. Gattinoni L, Ji Y, Restifo NP. Wnt/{beta}-Catenin Signaling in T-Cell Immunity and Cancer Immunotherapy. Clin Cancer Res. Sep 14 2010.
182. Yu Q, Sharma A, Ghosh A, Sen JM. T Cell Factor-1 Negatively Regulates Expression of IL-17 Family of Cytokines and Protects Mice from Experimental Autoimmune Encephalomyelitis. J. Immunol. Apr 2011;186(7):3946-3952.
183. Yu Q, Sharma A, Oh SY, et al. T cell factor 1 initiates the T helper type 2 fate by inducing the transcription factor GATA-3 and repressing interferon-gamma. Nature immunology. Sep 2009;10(9):992-999.
184. Klebanoff CA, Gattinoni L, Torabi-Parizi P, et al. Central memory self/tumor-reactive CD8+ T cells confer superior antitumor immunity compared with effector memory T cells. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America. Jul 5 2005;102(27):9571-9576.
185. Gattinoni L, Klebanoff CA, Palmer DC, et al. Acquisition of full effector function in vitro paradoxically impairs the in vivo antitumor efficacy of adoptively transferred CD8+ T cells. The Journal of clinical investigation. Jun 2005;115(6):1616-1626.
186. Klebanoff CA, Gattinoni L, Restifo NP. CD8+ T-cell memory in tumor immunology and immunotherapy. Immunological reviews. Jun 2006;211:214-224.
187. Chen K, McAleer J, Weaver C, Kolls J, Paterson D. Th17 cells mediate clade specific mucosal immunity. J. Immunol. May 2012;188.
188. Shi G, Ramaswamy M, Vistica BP, et al. Unlike Th1, Th17 cells mediate sustained autoimmune inflammation and are highly resistant to restimulation-induced cell death. J Immunol. Dec 1 2009;183(11):7547-7556.
189. Coquet Jonathan M, Middendorp S, van der Horst G, et al. The CD27 and CD70 Costimulatory Pathway Inhibits Effector Function of T Helper 17 Cells and Attenuates Associated Autoimmunity. Immunity. (0).
190. Pepper M, Pagan AJ, Igyarto BZ, Taylor JJ, Jenkins MK. Opposing Signals from the Bcl6 Transcription Factor and the Interleukin-2 Receptor Generate T Helper 1 Central and Effector Memory Cells. Immunity. Oct 2011;35(4):583-595.
191. Marshall HD, Chandele A, Jung YW, et al. Differential Expression of Ly6C and T-bet Distinguish Effector and Memory Th1 CD4(+) Cell Properties during Viral Infection. Immunity. Oct 2011;35(4):633-646.
192. Wirth TC, Xue HH, Rai D, et al. Repetitive Antigen Stimulation Induces Stepwise Transcriptome Diversification but Preserves a Core Signature of Memory CD8(+) T Cell Differentiation. Immunity. Jul 23 2010;33(1):128-140.
193. Luckey CJ, Weaver CT. Stem-Cell-like Qualities of Immune Memory; CD4(+) T Cells Join the Party. Cell Stem Cell. Feb 2012;10(2):107-108.
194. Kryczek I, Zhao ED, Liu Y, et al. Human T(H) 17 Cells Are Long-Lived Effector Memory Cells. Science translational medicine. Oct 2011;3(104).
195. Ma CS, Deenick EK, Batten M, Tangye SG. The origins, function, and regulation of T follicular helper cells. J. Exp. Med. Jul 2012;209(7):1241-1253.
196. Crotty S, Johnston RJ, Schoenberger SP. Effectors and memories: Bcl-6 and Blimp-1 in T and B lymphocyte differentiation. Nature immunology. Feb 2010;11(2):114-120.
197. Liu X, Yan X, Zhong B, et al. Bcl 6 expression specifies the T follicular helper cell program in vivo. The Journal of experimental medicine. September 24, 2012 2012;209(10):1841-1852.
198. Crotty S. Follicular Helper CD4 T Cells (T-FH). In: Paul WE, Littman DR, Yokoyama WM, eds. Annual Review of Immunology, Vol 29. Vol 29. Palo Alto: Annual Reviews; 2011:621-663.

199. Eyerich S, Eyerich K, Pennino D, et al. Th22 cells represent a distinct human T cell subset involved in epidermal immunity and remodeling. *J. Clin. Invest.* Dec 2009;119(12):3573-3585.
200. Trifari S, Spits H. IL-22-producing CD4(+) T cells: Middle-men between the immune system and its environment. *European journal of immunology.* Sep 2010;40(9):2369-2371.
201. Kagami S, Rizzo HL, Lee JJ, Koguchi Y, Blauvelt A. Circulating Th17, Th22, and Th1 Cells Are Increased in Psoriasis. *J. Invest. Dermatol.* May 2010;130(5):1373-1383.
202. Wilhelm C, Hirota K, Stieglitz B, et al. An IL-9 fate reporter demonstrates the induction of an innate IL-9 response in lung inflammation. *Nature immunology.* Nov 2011;12(11):1071-U1073.
203. Wilhelm C, Turner JE, Snick J, Stockinger B. The many lives of IL-9: a question of survival? *Nature immunology.* Jul 2012;13(7):637-641.
204. Zou W, Restifo NP. Nine lives for TH9s? *Nature medicine.* 2012;18(8):1177-1178.

From bloodjournal.hematologylibrary.org at University of Arizona Health Sciences Library on January 19, 2013. For personal use only.

Figure legends

Figure 1. Schematic representation of signaling and transcriptional regulation of Th17 polarization. Th17 cells are induced upon TCR activation in presence of cytokines that activate Stat3, including IL-6, IL-21 and IL-23. IL-12 and IFN-γ, which signal via Stat4 and Stat1 respectively, promote type 1 differentiation and inhibit Th17 polarization. However, IL-23 also activates Stat4 (not shown) and it remains perplexing that animals deficient in Stat4 have impaired functionality of Th17 cells. Similarly, IL-4 signaling via Stat6 inhibits Th17 polarization and promotes type 2 differentiation. Phosphorylated Stat3 (pStat3) binds to the promoter regions and activates transcription of genes encoding master regulators of Th17 polarization: rorc (encoding Rorgt) and rora (encoding Rora) transcription factors. Batf and Irf4 form a functional complex that plays a central role in Rorgt-mediated activation of type 17 molecular signature. Together with pStat3, Rorgt and Rora activate the expression of genes encoding canonical Th17-associated cytokines IL-17A and IL-17F, as well as IL-21, IL-22 and others. IL-6-induced activation of Stat3 also augments the expression of IL-23 receptor (IL-23R), thus increasing the sensitivity of early Th17 cells to the polarizing effects of IL-23. pStat3 also induces expression of Hif1α that inhibits Foxp3 and promotes Th17 differentiation. IL-21 secreted by early Th17 cells acts in a self-amplified autocrine loop via IL-21 receptor. IL-1 promotes Th17 polarization via activities of p38 mitogen-associated kinase (MAPK) and Akt/mTOR pathway. IL-1 also induces Irf4 that directly augments IL-21 secretion. Th17 polarization is also increased by activation of aryl hydrocarbon receptors (Ahr). TGF-β1 signals via Smads that most likely limit expression of genes encoding T-bet, Gata3 and other Th1 and Th2-associated factors, thus increasing the Th17 differentiation. TGF-β1 signaling in conjunction with retinoic acid (RA) and IL-2-induced pStat5 promotes Foxp3 expression and Treg differentiation. RA has been shown to either limit or (in lower concentrations) augment Th17 polarization. pStat5 directly inhibits pStat3 binding to IL-17 promoter (not shown). Both Foxp3 and Rorgt form complexes with Runx1 and reciprocally regulate each other.

Figure 2. Epigenetic mechanisms explain lineage relationship between Th17, Th1 and iTreg subsets. (A) Whether a particular gene is poised for expression or not is determined by the chromatin structure, as well as histone and DNA methylation states. Trimethylation of histone H3 on lysine 4 (H3K4me3) is considered permissive for gene expression, while trimethylation of lysine 27 on histone H3 (H3K27me3) is a marker of gene silencing. In some cases both states can be found in a gene locus, thus making it susceptible for either expression or negative regulation. (B) Plasticity of Th1, Th17 and iTreg cells is constrained by the

From bloodjournal.hematologylibrary.org at University of Arizona Health Sciences Library on January 19, 2013. For personal use only.

epigenetic status of genes encoding for the master transcriptional regulators of polarization and canonical cytokines. Th17 cells display permissive H3K4me3 histone modification over the *rorc* and *il17* genes and bivalent, poised status over loci encoding for *tbx21* and *foxp3*, thus substantiating the relative instability of this subset and its propensity to evolve into Th1 progeny. In contrast, Th1 cells display only repressive H3K27me3 methylation status over gene loci encoding for *rorc* and *il17*, rendering them much more stable. iTregs are another relatively unstable subset that can acquire Th1 or Th17 properties, based on the poised bivalent status of type 1 or type 17-associated genes.

Figure 3. Relationship between Th1 and Th17 polarization and maturation stage of Th memory cells. The initial polarization of naïve CD4⁺ T cells into Th1 or Th17 subsets not only induces the canonical set of transcription factors and cytokines but also affects CD4⁺ T cell plasticity and fate. Th17 cells are relatively more plastic and less terminally differentiated than their Th1 cell counterparts. This is reflected by the higher ability of Th17 cells to self-renew, generate a distinctive highly functional Th1-like Th17 progeny, and form long-term memory following the secondary antigen experience. Th1 cells rapidly acquire a senescent phenotype and molecular signature, are less functional, and display less ability for self-renewal and memory formation. The lower panel demonstrates a proposed relationship between polarized CD4⁺ Th cells and a model of linear CD8⁺ T cell memory formation. Upon antigen stimulation, CD8⁺ T cells progress from naïve via self-renewing early memory stem cells (Tscm) to central memory (Tcm) and (Tem) to the senescent terminally differentiated cells with no self-renewal potential. In vivo anti-tumor efficacy of adoptively transferred cells used for immunotherapy of cancer inversely correlates with the maturation stage of T cells.

Figure 1

PROMOTING

- TGFβ-1R
  - SMADs
    - IL-23R
    - HIF1α
      - RUNX1
        - FoxP3
          - pSTAT5
            - RARa
              - RA
                - IL-2R
                  - IL-27R
                    - IFNγR
                      - IFNγ
                        - IL-4R
                          - INHIBITORY
- IL-23R
  - STAT3
    - pSTAT3
      - NFAT
        - IRF4
          - pSTAT3
            - RORγt
              - BATF
                - RUNX1
                  - T-bet
                    - pSTAT1
                      - STAT1
                        - pSTAT4
                          - STAT4
                            - pSTAT6
                              - STAT6
                                - GATA3
                                  - IFNγ
                                    - IL-17A, IL-17F, IL-21, IL-22, TGFβ3
                                      - mTOR
                                        - p38
                                          - IRF4
                                            - IL-21
                                              - AHR ligand (FICZ)
                                                - Hsp90
                                                  - AHR
                                                    - TCR
                                                      - IL-1βR
                                                        - IL-6R
                                                          - IL-21R
                                                            - IL-23R
                                                              - IL-21

Figure 2

A
Gene expression OFF
- H3K27me3
- H3K27me3
- H3K27me3
- H3K27me3

Gene expression ON
- H3K4me3
- H3K4me3
- H3K4me3

B
- H3K4me3
- H3K27me3
- Bivalent (both)
- Neither

Naïve
- Tbx21
- Ifny
- Rorc
- IL17a
- Foxp3

T<sub>H1</sub>
- Tbx21
- Ifny
- Rorc
- IL17a
- Foxp3

T<sub>H17</sub>
- Tbx21
- Ifny
- Rorc
- IL17a
- Foxp3

T<sub>reg</sub>
- Tbx21
- Ifny
- Rorc
- IL17a
- Foxp3

Figure 3

CD4⁺ T cell differentiation

| Polarization |
| --- |
| Th17 |
| Th naïve |
| Th1 |

- **Th17**
  - Rorγt
- **Th17/Th1-like**
  - Rorγt, T-bet
- **Th1**
  - T-bet
- **Senescent cell**

---

CD8⁺ T cell differentiation

- **Naïve T cell**
- **Stem cell memory T cell**
- **Central memory T cell**
- **Effector memory T cell**
- **Senescent cell**

---

Differentiation stage (End-effector vs. naive)

- Anti-tumor efficacy
- Diminishing self-renewal
- Proliferative capacity

Increasing differentiation
