
Molecular BioSystems

RSCPublishing

PAPER

Cloning and sequencing of the kedarcidin biosynthetic gene cluster from *Streptoalloteichus* sp. ATCC 53650 revealing new insights into biosynthesis of the enediyne family of antitumor antibiotics†

Jeremy R. Lohman,$^{a}$ Sheng-Xiong Huang,$^{a}$ Geoffrey P. Horsman,$^{b}$ Paul E. Dilfer,$^{a}$ Tingting Huang,$^{a}$ Yihua Chen,$^{b}$ Evelyn Wendt-Pienkowski$^{b}$ and Ben Shen$^{\dagger\ast abcd}$

Enediyne natural product biosynthesis is characterized by a convergence of multiple pathways, generating unique peripheral moieties that are appended onto the distinctive enediyne core. Kedarcidin (KED) possesses two unique peripheral moieties, a (R)-2-aza-3-chloro-β-tyrosine and an iso-prooxy-bearing 2-naphthionate moiety, as well as two deoxysugars. The appendage pattern of these peripheral moieties to the enediyne core in KED differs from the other enediynes studied to date with respect to stereochemical configuration. To investigate the biosynthesis of these moieties and expand our understanding of enediyne core formation, the biosynthetic gene cluster for KED was cloned from *Streptoalloteichus* sp. ATCC 53650 and sequenced. Bioinformatics analysis of the ked cluster revealed the presence of the conserved genes encoding for enediyne core biosynthesis, type I and type II polyketide synthase loci likely responsible for 2-aza-L-tyrosine and 3,6,8-trihydroxy-2-naphthionate formation, and enzymes known for deoxysugar biosynthesis. Genes homologous to those responsible for the biosynthesis, activation, and coupling of the L-tyrosine-derived moieties from C-1027 and maduropeptin and of the naphthionate moiety from neocarzinostatin are present in the ked cluster, supporting 2-aza-L-tyrosine and 3,6,8-trihydroxy-2-naphthoic acid as precursors, respectively, for the (R)-2-aza-3-chloro-β-tyrosine and the 2-naphthionate moieties in KED biosynthesis.

---

**Introduction**

Kedarcidin (KED) was isolated from *Streptoalloteichus* sp. ATCC 53650 (originally strain L585-6) as a chromoprotein antitumor antibiotic in 1992.$^{1-5}$ The KED apoprotein primary sequence of 114 amino acids was determined by Edman degradation$^{2}$ (Fig. S1, ESI†), and the solution structure solved by NMR spectroscopy.$^{3}$ The structure of the KED chromophore was first established on the basis of an extensive spectroscopic analysis in 1992.$^{4,5}$ It has since been revised twice according to total syntheses$^{6,7}$ with the final revised structure shown in Fig. 1 (also see Fig. S2, ESI†). KED belongs to the enediyne family of antitumor antibiotics, which are of great interest as potent anticancer agents. They possess a reactive enediyne core that is able to abstract hydrogens from the deoxyribose backbone of DNA. Molecular oxygen can then react with the newly formed carbon-centered radicals, leading to site-specific single-stranded or double-stranded breaks, as well as interstrand crosslinks, and ultimately to cell death.$^{8-14}$ The potent anticancer activity of enediynes is offset in clinical applications by

Cite this: Mol. BioSyst., 2013, 9, 478

Received 16th November 2012, Accepted 20th January 2013

DOI: 10.1039/c3mb25523a

www.rsc.org/molecularbiosystems

$a$ Department of Chemistry, The Scripps Research Institute, Jupiter, Florida 33458, USA

$b$ Division of Pharmaceutical Sciences, School of Pharmacy, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin 53705, USA

$c$ Department of Molecular Therapeutics, The Scripps Research Institute, Jupiter, Florida 33458, USA

$d$ Natural Products Library Initiative at The Scripps Research Institute, The Scripps Research Institute, Jupiter, Florida 33458, USA

† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: The amino acid sequence of KedA in comparison with other known apoproteins (Fig. S1, ESI†), the original and revised structures of the KED chromophore (Fig. S2, ESI†), enediyne natural products whose structures have been determined (Fig. S3, ESI†), HPLC and MS analysis of the KED chromophore (Fig. S4, ESI†), SDS-PAGE analysis of the purified KedF (Fig. S5, ESI†), comparative analysis of the KED, C-1027, and MDP gene cluster supporting the proposed pathway for (R)-2-aza-3-chloro-β-tyrosine in KED biosynthesis (Fig. S6, ESI†), and comparative analysis of the KED, NCS, and MDP gene cluster supporting the proposed pathway for 3-hydroxy-7,8-dimethoxy-6-isopropoxy-2-naphthoic acid in KED biosynthesis. See DOI: 10.1039/c3mb25523a

‡ The Scripps Research Institute, 130 Scripps Way, #3A1, Jupiter, Florida 33458, USA. E-mail: shenb@scripps.edu; Fax: +1 561 228-2472; Tel: +1 561 228-2456.

their high cytotoxicity. Nevertheless, polymer and antibody conjugates of enediynes have been developed that display reduced general cytotoxicity, thereby allowing for their use in cancer chemotherapies. ${ }^{15-20}$

The enediynes represent a steadily growing family of natural products with remarkable molecular architectures. Since the structural elucidation of neocarzinostatin (NCS) ${ }^{21}$ and calicheamicin (CAL), ${ }^{22}$ the first two members of the family, in the 1980s, 14 enediynes have now been structurally confirmed, which include three probable enediynes isolated as aromatized products ${ }^{17,19,20,23}$ (Fig. S3, ESI†). Structurally, the enediynes are characterized by an unsaturated 9- or 10-membered carbacyclic ring featuring a diyne conjugated to a central double bond or an incipient double bond. The 9-membered enediyne chromophores are typically isolated noncovalently bound to an apoprotein (Fig. S1, ESI†), and the resulting complex is termed a chromoprotein; examples include C-1027, NCS, maduropeptin (MDP), and KED. There are exceptions where 9-membered enediynes lack an apoprotein, including N1999A2, the enediyne precursors of sporolides (SPO) and possibly the cyanosporasides ${ }^{19,20}$ (Fig. S3, ESI†). All 10-membered enediynes known to date are discrete small molecules that do not require sequestration by an apoprotein; examples include CAL, esperamicin (ESP), dynemicin (DYN), namenamicin, shishijimicin, and uncialamycin (Fig. S3, ESI†). Upon release from the apoprotein the 9-membered enediyne chromophore undergoes a Bergman or Myers-Saito rearrangement, yielding a benzenoid diradical that initiates oxidative DNA damage, thereby triggering cell death. The 10-membered enediynes typically need a base or reducing agent to initiate a similar rearrangement that subsequently damages DNA leading to cell death. ${ }^{8-10,15-17,19,20}$

While the enediyne core defines the enediyne family of natural products, they are always decorated with various peripheral moieties that modulate the biological activity and specificity of the individual enediyne natural products. The biosynthetic gene clusters for four 9-membered enediynes (C-1027, ${ }^{24}$ NCS, ${ }^{25}$ MDP, ${ }^{26}$ and SPO ${ }^{27}$ ) and three 10-membered enediynes (CAL, ${ }^{28}$ ESP, ${ }^{29,30}$ and DYN ${ }^{31}$ ) have been cloned and partially characterized. Comparative studies of these biosynthetic machineries have revealed: (i) enediyne core biosynthesis is initiated by the

enediyne polyketide synthase (PKS), but it is the enediyne PKS-associated enzymes that channel a nascent common polyene intermediate into 9- or 10-membered enediyne cores, ${ }^{32,33}$ (ii) biosynthesis of the peripheral moieties varies widely in the nature of precursors from primary metabolism, featuring much novel chemistry and enzymology, ${ }^{34-57}$ and (iii) a convergent biosynthetic strategy between the enediyne core and the varying peripheral moieties finally furnishes the myriad of functionalities found in the enediyne family of natural products. ${ }^{19,20}$

Inspired by the findings from comparative studies of the enediyne biosynthetic machineries, we decided to clone and characterize the KED biosynthetic machinery to shed new insights into biosynthesis of the enediyne family of antitumor antibiotics. We are particularly intrigued by the following observations: (i) amino acid sequencing revealed three variants of the KED apoproteins with varying N-termini (Fig. S1, ESI†), (ii) the $(R)$ -2-aza-3-chloro-$\beta$-tyrosine moiety that has not been seen in any other natural product, (iii) a deceptively simple isoprooxy group at the 2-naphthionate moiety, the biosynthesis of which has little literature precedence, and (iv) the peripheral moieties are appended to the enediyne core with an unusual stereochemistry that differs from the other enediynes characterized to date (Fig. 1) (also see Fig. S3, ESI† for comparison).

Here we present: (i) the cloning and annotation of the ked biosynthetic gene cluster from *Streptoalloteichus* sp. ATCC 53650, (ii) a convergent biosynthetic pathway for the KED chromophore on the basis of sequence analysis and comparisons to the other cloned 9- and 10-membered enediyne gene clusters, ${ }^{24-31}$ and (iii) *in vivo* characterization of kedE and kedE10 and *in vitro* characterization of KedF further supporting the proposed pathway for KED biosynthesis.

## Results

### Confirmation of KED chromoprotein production

The KED chromoprotein was purified to homogeneity guided by a bioassay against *Micrococcus luteus*. ${ }^{34}$ The KED chromophore was released from the purified KED chromoprotein by EtOAc extraction. The KED chromophore, purified under these conditions, was shown by HPLC analysis to be a mixture of the enediyne and

aromatized forms, and the enediyne form was completely converted into the aromatized form at room temperature overnight; the identities of both enediyne and aromatized forms of the KED chromophore were confirmed by high resolution mass spectrometry (Fig. S4, ESI†). For the enediyne form of the KED chromophore, high resolution electrospray ionization mass spectrometry (HRESIMS) yielded an \([M+H]^+\) ion at \(m/z\) 1030.37338 for the enediyne form of the KED chromophore, consistent with its predicted molecular formula of \(C_{53}H_{60}N_3O_{16}Cl\) (calculated \([M+H]^+\) ion at \(m/z\) 1030.37349).²⁵ For the aromatized form of the KED chromophore, HRESIMS revealed an \([M+H]^+\) ion at \(m/z\) 1032.39109, consistent with the molecular formula of \(C_{53}H_{62}N_3O_{16}Cl\) (calculated \([M+H]^+\) ion at \(m/z\) 1032.38914), differing from the enediyne form by the presence of two additional protons as would be predicted for the aromatized KED chromophore (Fig. 1 and Fig. S4, ESI†).⁵⁸,⁵⁹ These results re-confirm that *Streptoalloteichus* sp. ATCC 53650 in our possession harbors functional KED biosynthetic machinery.¹⁻⁵ Under the conditions described, the isolated yield of the KED chromoprotein complex is estimated to be \(50 \mathrm{mg} \mathrm{L}^{-1}\).²,⁵

**Cloning, sequencing, and annotation of the ked gene cluster**

The enediyne PKS gene is the hallmark of enediyne biosynthetic clusters,³²,³³ and as such, degenerate primers previously utilized to clone enediyne genes and clusters were used to localize the ked cluster.²⁹ A PCR-amplified internal fragment of kedE (probe-1) was first used as a probe to screen the *Streptoalloteichus* sp. ATCC 53650 cosmid library, resulting in the isolation of cosmid pBS16002. Iterations of chromosomal walking from pBS16002 using probe-2, -3, -4, and -5 afforded the four additional overlapping cosmids pBS16003, pBS16004, pBS16005, and pBS16006. Together, the five overlapping cosmids cover \(135 \mathrm{~kb}\) of contiguous DNA (Fig. 2A), complete DNA sequence of which led to the identification of 117 orfs (Fig. 2B). The overall GC content of the sequenced region is \(73.2\%\), characteristic for the Actinomycetes.⁶⁰

Functional assignments of genes within the ked cluster

Functional assignments of individual orfs were made by comparison of the deduced gene products with proteins of known or predicted functions in the database as summarized in Table 1. Sequence analysis by BLAST comparison and InterProScan of putative orfs suggested that the ked gene cluster minimally spans \(\sim 105 \mathrm{~kb}\). Starting from kedE11 and concluding at kedS1, the ked cluster contains 81 orfs in 21 operons that encode KED biosynthesis, regulation, and resistance (Fig. 2B and Table 1). The orfs flanking the ked cluster encode proteins of unknown

| 0.0 | 20.0 | 40.0 | 60.0 | 80.0 | 100.0 | 120.0 | 140.0-kb |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Probe-2 | Probe-1 | Probe-3 |  |  |  |  |  |
| pBS16002 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| A |  | pBS16003 |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  | Probe-4 |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  | pBS16004 |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  | Probe-5 |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  | pBS16005 |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  | pBS16006 |  |

| E11 | S | R2 | E5 | E2 | E10 | J | F | S2 | S8 | R1 | S6 |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| M | E9 | E7 | E4 | E | E6 | D2 | U3 | Y | N1 | N5 | U4 |
| U1 | E8 | U2 | E3 |  | L | N3 | X2 | S7 | S9 | S10 | N4 |

|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| B |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |

|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| U11-U28 | S5 | kedA | Y1 | Y5 | U31-U45 | R3 | S3 |
| (Type II PKS locus) | S4 | X | Y4 |  | (Type I PKS locus) | Y2 | S1 |
|  | N2 |  |  |  |  | Y3 |  |

| Enediyne core | Aza-β-tyrosine | Naphthionate | Sugars | Regulation | Resistance | Unknown |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |

**Fig. 2** The ked biosynthetic gene cluster from *Streptoalloteichus* sp. ATCC 53650. (A) The sequenced \(135 \mathrm{~kb}\) DNA region encompassed by five overlapping cosmids pBS16002, pBS16003, pBS16004, pBS16005, and pBS16006. Probe-1, -2, -3, -4, and -5 were used to isolate the overlapping cosmids from a *Streptoalloteichus* sp. ATCC 53650 genomic library. (B) Genetic organization of the ked biosynthetic gene cluster. Solid black indicates the region whose gene products are predicted to be involved in KED biosynthesis (\(\sim 105 \mathrm{~kb}\)). Proposed functions for individual orfs are pattern-coded and summarized in Table 1.

Table 1 Deduced functions of open reading frames in the ked biosynthetic gene cluster

| Gene                | Amino acids<sup>a</sup> | Protein homologs<sup>b</sup>                                                                 | Identity/similarity (%) | Deduced function                                      | Proposed roles in KED biosynthesis                          |
|---------------------|-----------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------|------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------|
| orf(-33) to orf(-1) |                       | ORFs predicted to be beyond the upstream boundary                                           |                         |                                                      |                                                         |
| kedE11              | 267                   | SgcE11 (AAL06691)                                                                           | 59/70                   | Unknown                                              | Enediyne core biosynthesis                                |
| kedM                | 335                   | SgcM (AAL06686)                                                                             | 46/55                   | Unknown                                              | Enediyne core biosynthesis                                |
| kedU1               | 221                   | Amir_4121 (ACU37976)                                                                        | 32/44                   | Hypothetical protein                                 | Unknown                                                   |
| kedS                | 182                   | SgcS (AAL06705)                                                                             | 60/72                   | Unknown                                              | Enediyne core biosynthesis                                |
| kedE9               | 546                   | SgcE9 (AAL06693)                                                                            | 76/86                   | Ketoreductase                                        | Enediyne core biosynthesis                                |
| kedE8               | 190                   | SgcE8 (AAL06694)                                                                            | 62/74                   | Unknown                                              | Enediyne core biosynthesis                                |
| kedR2               | 259                   | SgcR2 (AAL06696)                                                                            | 50/63                   | AraC-like transcriptional regulator                   | Regulation                                                |
| kedE7               | 447                   | SgcE7 (AAL06697)                                                                            | 63/74                   | P-450 monooxygenase                                  | Enediyne core biosynthesis                                |
| kedU2               | 123                   | None                                                                                       | —/—                     | Hypothetical protein                                 | Unknown                                                   |
| kedE5               | 351                   | SgcE5 (AAL06700)                                                                            | 61/70                   | Unknown                                              | Enediyne core biosynthesis                                |
| kedE4               | 649                   | SgcE4 (AAL06701)                                                                            | 58/73                   | Unknown                                              | Enediyne core biosynthesis                                |
| kedE3               | 328                   | SgcE3 (AAL06702)                                                                            | 54/62                   | Unknown                                              | Enediyne core biosynthesis                                |
| kedE2               | 342                   | SgcE2 (AAL06703)                                                                            | 59/70                   | Unknown                                              | Enediyne core biosynthesis                                |
| kedE1               | 320                   | SgcE1 (AAL06710)                                                                            | 41/65                   | Unknown                                              | Enediyne core biosynthesis                                |
| kedE                | 1919                  | SgcE (AAL06703)                                                                             | 55/66                   | Polyketide synthase                                  | Enediyne core biosynthesis                                |
| kedE10              | 148                   | SgcE10 (AAL06692)                                                                           | 65/77                   | Thioesterase                                         | Enediyne core biosynthesis                                |
| kedE6               | 164                   | SgcE6 (AAL06698)                                                                            | 51/64                   | Flavin reductase                                     | Enediyne core biosynthesis                                |
| kedL                | 391                   | SgcL (AAL06685)                                                                             | 62/75                   | Enoyl reductase                                      | Enediyne core biosynthesis                                |
| kedJ                | 141                   | SgcJ (AAL06676)                                                                             | 62/72                   | Unknown                                              | Enediyne core biosynthesis                                |
| kedD2               | 464                   | SgcD2 (AAL06669)                                                                            | 62/75                   | FAD dependent monooxygenase                          | Enediyne core biosynthesis                                |
| kedN3               | 409                   | NcsB3 (AAM77997)                                                                            | 49/64                   | P-450 monooxygenase                                  | Naphthoic acid biosynthesis                               |
| kedF                | 385                   | SgcF (AAL06662)                                                                             | 64/77                   | Epoxide hydrolase                                    | Enediyne core biosynthesis                                |
| kedU3               | 240                   | CalU12 (AAM94790)                                                                           | 30/40                   | Unknown (thioredoxin-like)                           | Unknown                                                   |
| kedX2               | 756                   | SgcB2 (AAL06654)                                                                            | 52/70                   | Efflux pump                                          | Resistance                                                 |
| kedS2               | 458                   | LanS (AAD13549)                                                                             | 65/77                   | NDP-hexose 2, 3-dehydratase                         | Sugar biosynthesis                                        |
| kedY                | 514                   | SgcC (AAL06674)                                                                             | 58/70                   | FAD-dependent monooxygenase                          | β-Azatyrosine biosynthesis                                |
| kedN1               | 334                   | SgcD4 (AAL06683)                                                                            | 56/75                   | O-Methyltransferase                                  | Naphthoic acid biosynthesis                               |
| kedS7               | 383                   | MdpA5 (ABY66023)                                                                            | 66/75                   | Aminotransferase                                     | Sugar biosynthesis                                        |
| kedS8               | 249                   | SgcA5 (AAL06660)                                                                            | 45/56                   | N-Methyltransferase                                  | Sugar biosynthesis                                        |
| kedS9               | 244                   | SgcA5 (AAL06660)                                                                            | 53/68                   | N-Methyltransferase                                  | Sugar biosynthesis                                        |
| kedS10              | 428                   | SgcA6 (AAL06670)                                                                            | 36/51                   | Glycosyltransferase                                  | Sugar moiety coupling                                     |
| kedR1               | 1088                  | Strop_2737 (ABP55181)                                                                       | 51/63                   | Transcriptional regulator                            | Regulation                                                |
| kedN5               | 627                   | Sare_2941 (ABV98767)                                                                        | 55/70                   | Radical SAM C-methyltransferase                      | Naphthoic acid biosynthesis                               |
| kedN4               | 425                   | SAV_4024 (Q82G74)                                                                           | 34/46                   | Acyl-CoA acyltransferase                             | Naphthionate moiety coupling                              |
| kedS6               | 417                   | SgcA6 (AAL06670)                                                                            | 34/50                   | Glycosyltransferase                                  | Sugar moiety coupling                                     |
| kedU4               | 73                    | RHA1_ro00868 (ABG92701)                                                                     | 52/72                   | Hypothetical protein                                 | Unknown                                                   |
| kedU11              | 367                   | Strop_2833 (ABP55274)                                                                       | 68/79                   | Monooxygenase                                        |                                                           |
| kedU12              | 328                   | Strop_2814 (ABP55255)                                                                       | 48/55                   | Enoyl reductase                                      |                                                           |
| kedU13              | 383                   | Strop_2813 (ABP55254)                                                                       | 61/73                   | Enoyl reductase                                      |                                                           |
| kedU14              | 397                   | Strop_2801 (ABP55242)                                                                       | 71/81                   | Acyltransferase                                      |                                                           |
| kedU15              | 407                   | Strop_2800 (ABP55241)                                                                       | 68/78                   | CoA transferase                                      |                                                           |
| kedU16              | 247                   | Strop_2799 (ABP55240)                                                                       | 71/81                   | Ketoreductase                                        |                                                           |
| kedU17              | 152                   | Strop_2798 (ABP55239)                                                                       | 43/53                   | Dehydratase                                          |                                                           |
| kedU18              | 164                   | Strop_2797 (ABP55238)                                                                       | 59/72                   | Dehydratase                                          |                                                           |
| kedU19              | 78                    | Strop_2796 (ABP55237)                                                                       | 76/93                   | ACP                                                  | Unknown type II PKS locus<sup>d</sup>                      |
| kedU20              | 402                   | Strop_2795 (ABP55236)                                                                       | 70/80                   | Ketosynthase                                         |                                                           |
| kedU21              | 353                   | Strop_2794 (ABP55235)                                                                       | 55/64                   | Ketosynthase<sup>c</sup>                             |                                                           |
| kedU22              | 375                   | Strop_2793 (ABP55234)                                                                       | 66/76                   | Ketosynthase                                         |                                                           |
| kedU23              | 290                   | Strop_2792 (ABP55233)                                                                       | 54/62                   | Ketosynthase<sup>c</sup>                             |                                                           |
| kedU24              | 268                   | Strop_2791 (ABP55232)                                                                       | 50/61                   | Unknown                                              |                                                           |
| kedU25              | 307                   | Strop_2780 (ABP55231)                                                                       | 64/75                   | Thioesterase                                         |                                                           |
| kedU26              | 252                   | Strop_2789 (ABP55230)                                                                       | 66/73                   | Isomerase                                            |                                                           |
| kedU27              | 246                   | Strop_2788 (ABP55229)                                                                       | 73/82                   | Aldolase                                             |                                                           |
| kedU28              | 1042                  | Strop_2787 (ABP55228)/Strop_2786 (ABP55227)                                                | 59/71 65/77             | Acyl-CoA synthetase/P-450 monooxygenase              |                                                           |
| kedS5               | 326                   | SgcA (AAL06671)                                                                             | 25/37                   | NDP-hexose oxidoreductase                            | Sugar biosynthesis                                        |
| kedS4               | 427                   | SgcA3 (AAL06661)                                                                            | 31/49                   | C-Methyltransferase                                  | Sugar biosynthesis                                        |
| kedN2               | 553                   | NcsB2 (AAM77987)                                                                            | 54/64                   | Acyl-CoA synthetase                                  | Naphthoic acid biosynthesis                               |
| kedA                | 146                   | CagA (AAL06658)                                                                             | 41/58                   | Apoprotein                                           | Resistance                                                 |
| kedX                | 561                   | SgcB (AAL06672)                                                                             | 49/68                   | Efflux pump                                          | Resistance                                                 |
| kedY4               | 539                   | SgcC4 (AAL06680)                                                                            | 66/82                   | Tyrosine aminomutase                                 | β-Azatyrosine biosynthesis                                |
| kedY1               | 1172                  | SgcC1 (AAL06681)                                                                            | 36/44                   | NRPS adenylation enzyme                              | β-Azatyrosine biosynthesis                                |
| kedY5               | 452                   | SgcC5 (AAL06678)                                                                            | 40/55                   | NRPS condensation enzyme                             | β-Azatyrosine moiety coupling                             |
| kedU31              | 497                   | SSHG_05343 (EFE84901)                                                                       | 32/44                   | Enoyl reductase                                      |                                                           |
| kedU32              | 389                   | M23134_01012 (EAY30688)                                                                     | 30/48                   | Enoyl reductase                                      |                                                           |
| kedU33              | 495                   | lcfB (O07610)                                                                               | 25/44                   | Acyl-CoA synthetase                                  |                                                           |
| kedU34              | 92                    | SSHG_05345 (EFE84903)                                                                       | 30/58                   | ACP                                                  |                                                           |

Molecular BioSystems

Table 1 (continued)

| Gene      | Amino acids<sup>a</sup> | Protein homologs<sup>b</sup>                          | Identity/similarity (%) | Deduced function                                      | Proposed roles in KED biosynthesis                     |
|-----------|------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------|-------------------------|------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------|
| kedU35    | 297                    | Celf_2318 (AEE46445)                                 | 26/35                  | Unknown                                               |                                                   |
| kedU36    | 247                    | DapB (Q97GI8)                                        | 29/47                  | Dihydrolipicolinate reductase                        |                                                   |
| kedU37    | 635                    | LcfB (O07610)                                        | 30/48                  | Acyl-ACP synthetase                                  |                                                   |
| kedU38    | 1803                   | Sros_2423 (ACZ85401)                                 | 44/56                  | Type I PKS (KS-AT-DH-KR-ACP)<sup>e</sup>            | Unknown type I PKS locus<sup>d</sup>                   |
| kedU39    | 291                    | Haur_3968 (ABX06600)                                 | 58/76                  | Enoyl reductase                                      |                                                   |
| kedU40    | 84                     | Haur_3969 (ABX06601)                                 | 49/74                  | ACP                                                  |                                                   |
| kedU41    | 398                    | Haur_3970 (ABX06602)                                 | 54/70                  | Enoyl reductase                                      |                                                   |
| kedU42    | 356                    | Hoch_2947 (ACY15461)                                 | 59/75                  | Unknown                                              |                                                   |
| kedU43    | 248                    | GrsT (P14686)                                        | 43/57                  | Thioesterase                                         |                                                   |
| kedU44    | 183                    | Sare_0361 (ABV96290)                                 | 37/47                  | Hypothetical protein                                 |                                                   |
| kedU45    | 409                    | CYP107B1 (P33271)                                    | 48/62                  | P-450 monooxygenase                                  |                                                   |
| kedR3     | 259                    | SgcR2 (AAL06696)                                     | 35/49                  | Transcriptional regulator                            | Regulation                                          |
| kedY2     | 90                     | SgcC2 (AAL06679)                                     | 59/67                  | NRPS PCP                                             | β-Azatyrosine biosynthesis                          |
| kedY3     | 492                    | SgcC3 (AAL06656)                                     | 69/81                  | FAD dependent halogenase                             | β-Azatyrosine biosynthesis                          |
| kedS3     | 333                    | KijD10 (ACB46498)                                    | 58/72                  | NDP-hexose oxidoreductase                           | Sugar biosynthesis                                  |
| kedS1     | 194                    | SgcS1 (AAL06668)                                     | 42/60                  | NDP-hexose epimerase                                | Sugar biosynthesis                                  |
| orf1 and orf2 |                      |                                                     |                         | ORFs predicted to be beyond the downstream boundary   |                                                   |

<sup>a</sup> Numbers are in amino acids. <sup>b</sup> Given in parentheses are NCBI accession numbers. Homologues from the C-1027 pathway were selected for comparison. If no homologue was found within the C-1027 cluster, homologues from NCS and MDP clusters were preferred over others in the GeneBank. <sup>c</sup> Nonfunctional on the basis of the mutated P-D-A (for KedU21) or A-D-G (KedU23) active site triad C-H-H of acyl-ACP ketosynthases. <sup>d</sup> While the overall organization of and the genes within the KED biosynthetic gene cluster show high homology to other known 9-membered enediyne biosynthetic gene clusters, including, C-1027,<sup>23</sup> NCS,<sup>24</sup> and MDP,<sup>25</sup> there are two loci, kedU11-kedU28, termed type II PKS locus, and kedU31-kedU45, termed type I PKS locus, within the KED cluster (in bold) whose roles in KED biosynthesis cannot be proposed on the basis of bioinformatics. <sup>e</sup> The KedU38 type I PKS consists of five domains (KS, ketosynthase; AT, acyltransferase; DH, dehydratase; KE, ketoreductase; ACP, acyl carrier protein).

functions or with similarities to enzymes involved in aromatic amino acid metabolism.

Among the orfs identified within the ked cluster include:

(i) one (kedE) encodes the enediyne PKS and 17 (kedE1 to kedE11, kedM, kedS, kedL, kedJ, kedD2, kedF) encodes accessory enzymes for enediyne core biosynthesis, (ii) six (kedY and kedY1 to kedY5) encode enzymes for tailoring the (R)-2-aza-3-chloro-β-tyrosine moiety and its coupling to the enediyne core, (iii) five (kedN1 to kedN5) encode enzymes for modifying the 2-naphthionate moiety and its coupling, via (R)-2-aza-3-chloro-β-tyrosine, to the enediyne core, (iv) ten (kedS1 to kedS10) encode enzymes for biosynthesis of the two sugar moieties and their couplings to the enediyne core, (v) three (kedR1, kedR2, kedR3) encode proteins for pathway regulation, (vi) three (kedA, kedX, and kedX2) encode elements for resistance, and (vii) four (kedU1 to kedU4) encode proteins of unknown function. In addition, there are two loci, termed type II PKS locus consisting of 18 genes (kedU11 to kedU28) and type I PKS locus consisting of 15 genes (kedU31 to kedU45), inserted within the ked cluster, that are unprecedented among all enediyne clusters known to date. They serve as candidates encoding biosynthesis of the nascent precursors for the (R)-2-aza-3-chloro-β-tyrosine and 2-naphthionate moieties (Fig. 3).

The KED apoprotein KedA

Bioinformatics analysis revealed a single gene, kedA, within the ked cluster, for which the deduced gene product matched the isolated KedA apoprotein.<sup>2,3</sup> The kedA gene is translated as a 145-amino acid protein, and SignalP analysis predicted a leader peptide that is cleaved between A31 and A32, resulting in a 114-amino acid protein with a predicted N-terminus of Ala-Ser-Ala-Ala-Val (Fig. S1, ESI†). This is consistent with the amino acid sequence of the isolated mature KedA apoprotein.<sup>2,3</sup>

The two additional known variants of KedA, with a Ser-Ala-Ala-Val and an Ala-Ala-Val terminus, respectively, could be accounted for by either the promiscuity of the leader peptide cleavage site or partial proteolysis of the N-terminus of the mature KedA during isolation. The kedA gene has also been independently cloned recently from Streptoalloteichus sp. ATCC 53650 and sequenced, overexpression of which in Streptoalloteichus sp. ATCC 53650 resulted in a 2-fold enhancement of KED titer.<sup>61</sup>

In vivo characterization of KedE-KedE10 as enediyne PKS-thioesterase for heptaene production

We have previously shown the production of heptaene as a hallmark for enediyne biosynthesis, which has been detected from all enediyne producers examined to date and can be produced upon co-expression of the enediyne pksE and associated thioesterase (TE) in either *E. coli* or *Streptomyces lividans*.<sup>32,33</sup> Co-expression of kedE-kedE10 in *E. coli*, with co-expressions of both sgcE-sgcE10 as a positive control<sup>33</sup> and sgcE(C211A)-sgcE10 as a negative control,<sup>33</sup> indeed resulted in the production of heptaene, the identity of which was confirmed by HPLC analysis in comparison with an authentic standard (Fig. 4).

In vitro characterization of KedF as an epoxide hydrolase

The kedF gene was predicted to encode an epoxide hydrolase, and epoxide hydrolases, such as SgcF<sup>48</sup> and NcsF2,<sup>49</sup> have been shown to play a critical role in enediyne biosynthesis, setting up the stereochemistry of the enediyne core for appending the peripheral moieties. KedF was overproduced in *E. coli*, purified to homogeneity (Fig. S5, ESI†), and directly assayed for epoxide

Paper

A  
D-Glucose-1-phosphate  

B  
2-Aza-L-phenylalanine  
(Free acid, X = OH)  
(Activated, X = carrier protein)  

C  
3,6,8-Trihydroxy-2-naphthoic acid  

D  

Fig. 3 Proposed biosynthetic pathway for the KED chromophore: (A) L-mycarose and kedarosamine from D-glucose-1-phosphate; (B) (R)-2-aza-3-chloro-β-tyrosine from 2-aza-L-phenylalanine, (C) 3-hydroxy-7,8-dimethoxy-6-isopropoxy-2-naphthoic acid from 3,6,8-trihydroxy-2-naphthoic acid; and (D) the enediyne core from acetate and a convergent assembly of the four components to yield the KED chromophore.

AU at 370 nm  

Time (min)  

Fig. 4 HPLC chromatograms with UV detection at 370 nm showing production of heptaene (●) upon co-expression of kedE-kedE10 in E. coli: (I) sgcE-sgcE10 as a positive control; (II) sgcE(C211A)-sgcE10 as a negative control; and (III) kedE-kedE10.

hydrolase activity using racemic styrene epoxide as a substrate mimic as described previously for SgcF^{48} and NcsF2.^{49} HPLC analysis of the reaction mixture showed a single product, the identity of which was confirmed to be the expected 1-phenyl-1,2-ethanediol upon comparison with an authentic standard. To investigate the substrate specificity, KedF was incubated with either (R)- or (S)-styrene oxide as a substrate. Chiral HPLC analysis of resultant products showed (S)-1-phenyl-1,2-ethanediol as a the major product, with 85% enantiomeric excess (ee), from (S)-styrene oxide and (R)-1-phenyl-1,2-ethanediol, with 54% ee, from (R)-styrene oxide (Fig. 5A).

To investigate the enantioselectivity of KedF, the steady state kinetic parameters of KedF towards (R)- and (S)-styrene oxides were determined by adopting the previously developed continuous spectrophotometric assay.^{48,49,62} A plot of initial velocity versus the concentration of (S)-styrene oxide displayed Michaelis-Menten kinetics, yielding a *k*_{cat} of 36.6 ± 1.1 min⁻¹, a *K*_{M} of 0.91 ± 0.10 mM, and a *k*_{cat}/K_{M} value of 40.2 ± 4.6 mM⁻¹ min⁻¹, while assays with (R)-styrene oxide afforded a *k*_{cat} of 35.1 ± 2.4 min⁻¹, a *K*_{M} of 3.50 ± 0.64 mM, and a *k*_{cat}/K_{M} value of 10.0 ± 1.9 mM⁻¹ min⁻¹ (Fig. 5B). Thus, KedF preferentially hydrolyzes (S)-styrene epoxide with a 4.0-fold greater specificity constant.

Molecular BioSystems

A

(S)-Styrene epoxide

(R)-Styrene epoxide

B

Fig. 5 *In vitro* characterization of KedF as an epoxide hydrolase using (R)- and (S)-styrene epoxide as substrate mimics, preferring (S)-styrene epoxide with a 4.0-fold greater specificity. (A) Regio- and stereoselectivity of KedF-catalyzed hydrolysis of (R)- and (S)-styrene epoxide and HPLC chromatograms with UV detection at 254 nm showing (R)- and (S)-1-phenyl-1,2-ethanediol, respectively, as the major product: (I) (S)-1-phenyl-1,2-ethanediol standard, (II) KedF with (S)-styrene epoxide, (III) (R)-1-phenyl-1,2-ethanediol standard, (IV) KedF with (R)-styrene epoxide, (V) (R)- and (S)-1-phenyl-1,2-ethanediol standards, (VI) KedF with racemic styrene epoxide; (R)- (♦) and (S)-1-phenyl-1,2-ethanediol (◊). (B) Steady-state kinetic analysis of KedF-catalyzed hydrolysis of (R)- and (S)-styrene epoxide showing single substrate kinetic plots for (R)-styrene epoxide and (S)-styrene epoxide.

The preference of KedF for the an (S)-epoxide is consistent with its proposed role in generating a 13-(S)-vicinal diol intermediate in KED biosynthesis (Fig. 3).

### Discussion

#### Cloning of the ked cluster from *Streptoalloteichus* sp. ATCC 53650

We set out to clone and sequence the ked gene cluster to further our understanding of enediyne core biosynthesis and to explore the novel chemistry governing the biosynthesis of the peripheral moieties, as exemplified by the (R)-2-aza-3-chloro-β-tyrosine and the iso-propoxy-bearing 2-naphthoic acid (Fig. 1). The general method we developed previously to access the enediyne PKS and associated genes by PCR³⁰ and the knowledge we have gained by characterizing the C-1027,²⁴ NCS,²⁵ and MDP²⁶ biosynthetic machinery greatly expedited the cloning and sequencing of the ked cluster from *Streptoalloteichus* sp. ATCC 53650. The ked cluster was localized to a 105 kb contiguous

484 | Mol. BioSyst., 2013, **9**, 478–491
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
DNA region, consisting of 81 orfs that encode KED biosynthesis, resistance, and regulation (Fig. 2 and Table 1). The cluster boundaries were assigned on the basis of bioinformatics analysis, pending future experimental confirmation. The difficulty in developing a genetic system for *Streptoalloteichus* sp. ATCC 53650, in spite of exhaustive effort, has also prevented us from verifying the *ked* cluster directly by *in vivo* experiments. Nevertheless, the identity of the cloned gene cluster to encode KED biosynthesis is supported by: (i) the finding of *kedA* within the cloned *ked* cluster that encodes the previously isolated KED apoprotein,²⁵ (ii) production of the signature heptaene product for enediyne biosynthesis upon co-expression of *kedE–kedE10* in *E. coli*³²,³³,³⁵ and (iii) *in vitro* characterization of KedF as an epoxide hydrolase using a substrate mimic that affords a vicinal diol product with the regio- and absolute stereochemistry as would be expected for the KED chromophore.⁶,⁷,⁴⁸,⁴⁹

### Biosynthesis of the two deoxysugars and their incorporation

Identification of the ten sugar biosynthesis genes within the *ked* cluster and their deduced functions supported a divergent pathway for biosynthesis of the two sugars from the common precursor D-glucose-1-phosphate (Fig. 2B and Table 1).³⁵,⁶³,⁶⁴ Thus, as depicted in Fig. 3A, D-glucose-1-phosphate is first converted into the common intermediate NDP-2,6-dideoxy-4-keto-D-glucose, and three of the five enzymes needed are encoded within the *ked* cluster (KedS1, KedS2, and KedS3). The enzymes responsible for the first two steps, a D-glucopyranosyl-1-nucleotidyltransferase and a NDP-glucose-4,6-dehydratase, are most likely provided by other biosynthetic pathways in *Streptoalloteichus* sp. ATCC 53650, and biosynthetic crosstalk between sugar biosynthetic pathways has been noted previously.⁶⁵ NDP-2,6-dideoxy-4-keto-D-glucose is then diverged by KedS4 and KedS5, affording NDP-L-mycarose, and by KedS7, KedS8, and kedS9, affording NDP-kedarosamine, respectively, both of which are finally coupled to the enediyne core by the two glycosyltransferases, KedS6 and KedS10.⁶³,⁶⁴

### Biosynthesis of the (R)-2-aza-3-chloro-β-tyrosine moiety and its incorporation

2-Aza-β-tyrosine is not known as a natural product, nor has it been found as a part in any other natural product. 2-Aza-L-tyrosine has been isolated from *Streptomyces chibaensis* SF-1346,⁶⁶ but nothing is known about its biosynthesis. Therefore, we did not know a priori what candidate genes to look for that would encode for (R)-2-aza-3-chloro-β-tyrosine biosynthesis within the *ked* cluster. Remarkably, comparative analysis of the *ked* cluster with the C-1027 and MDP clusters unveiled a subset of six genes, *kedY*, *kedY1* to *kedY5*, as well as *kedE6*, that are absolutely conserved among the three gene clusters (Fig. S6, ESI†).²⁴,²⁵,⁵⁶,⁵⁷ It is these findings that inspired us to propose a pathway for (R)-2-aza-3-chloro-β-tyrosine biosynthesis starting from 2-aza-L-tyrosine, in a mechanistic analogy to the biosynthesis, activation, and incorporation of the L-tyrosine-derived moieties in C-1027 and MDP (Fig. S6, ESI†). Thus, as depicted in Fig. 3B, 2-aza-L-tyrosine is first converted to (R)-2-aza-β-tyrosine, catalyzed by KedY4, a 4-methylideneimidazole-5-one (MIO) containing aminomutase.³⁶⁻⁴³,⁵⁶ Loading of (R)-2-aza-β-tyrosine to the free standing peptidyl carrier protein KedY2 by the discrete adenylation enzyme KedY1 activates (R)-2-aza-β-tyrosine as the (R)-2-aza-β-tyrosyl-S-KedY2 intermediate. The latter is chlorinated by KedY3, a FAD-dependent halogenase requiring the KedE6 flavin reductase, and finally coupled to the enediyne core *via* an ester linkage catalyzed by the discrete condensation enzyme KedY5.⁴⁵⁻⁴⁹,⁵⁴ The high sequence homology between KedY1 to KedY5, as well as KedE6, and their counterparts in the C-1027 and MDP biosynthetic machinery supports the proposed pathway for (R)-2-aza-3-chloro-β-tyrosine in KED biosynthesis.⁵⁶,⁵⁷ The distinct substrate specificity, as exemplified by KedY1 for 2-aza-L-tyrosine vs. SgcC1 for L-tyrosine, regiospecificity, as exemplified by KedY3 for C-6 chlorination of (R)-2-aza-β-tyrosyl-S-KedY2 vs. SgcC3 for C-3 chlorination of (S)-β-tyrosyl-S-SgcC2, and enantiospecificity, as exemplified by KedY4 affording (R)-2-aza-β-tyrosine vs. SgcC4 affording (S)-β-tyrosine, provide outstanding opportunities to investigate structure-and-activity relationship of this set of fascinating enzymes.

Bioinformatics analysis, however, failed to yield clues for the biosynthetic origin of 2-aza-L-tyrosine. In the absence of any other apparent candidates, we now propose, based more on necessity rather than on bioinformatics data, that the 18-gene type II PKS locus may play a role in 2-aza-L-tyrosine biosynthesis (Fig. 2B and Table 1). This locus has an identical genetic organization and shares high sequence homology with a locus from *Salinispora tropica* (Table 1), which resides near the SPO enediyne cluster but its functions are unknown.²⁷ There are two sets of ketosynthase α and β (KSα and KSβ) within this locus. The KSα of both sets lacks the canonical C–H–H/N active site motifs but retain the active site residue cysteines (C-E-A for KedU20 and C-E-S for KedU22), while the KSβ of both sets lacks the active site residue cysteine (P-D-A for KedU21 and, A-D-G for KedU23). KSs with noncanonical active site motifs are rare but known, and they represent an emerging family of enzymes catalyzing a broad range of chemistry.⁶⁷⁻⁶⁹ On the assumption that this locus does play a role in 2-aza-L-tyrosine biosynthesis, one could envisage 2-aza-L-phenylalanine, either free or tethered to a carrier protein, as a penultimate intermediate of the pathway. Hydroxylation of 2-aza-L-phenylalanine, catalyzed by KedY, a FAD-dependent monoxygenase requiring the KedE6 flavin reductase, finally affords 2-aza-L-tyrosine.⁴⁵,⁴⁷ Although our attempt to express this type II PKS locus, with or without *kedY*, in selected heterologous hosts failed to produce detectable amount of 2-aza-L-phenylalanine or 2-aza-L-tyrosine, this proposal now sets the stage to investigate 2-aza-L-tyrosine biosynthesis in *S*. *chibaensis* SF-1346.⁶⁶

### Biosynthesis of the iso-prooxy bearing 2-naphthionate moiety and its incorporation

The 2-naphthionate moiety is most likely of polyketide origin, but the exact nature of the nascent linear polyketide intermediate and its subsequent folding pattern to afford the 2-naphthionate backbone cannot be predicted in the absence of isotope labeling experiments. Similar aromatic polyketide moieties have been found in other enediyne natural products, as exemplified by the benzoic acid moiety in MDP and the 1-naphthoic acid moiety in NCS, and the biosynthesis of both moieties are catalyzed by the iterative type I PKSs, MdpB²⁶,⁵² and NcsB,²⁵,⁴⁹⁻⁵¹
respectively (Fig. S7, ESI†). Inspired by this biosynthetic precedence, we took a close examination of the orfs within the ked cluster and identified, in addition to kedE that encodes the enediyne PKS, kedU38 that resides in the middle of the 15-gene type I PKS locus, encodes a type I PKS with a similar domain organization as MdpB and NcsB (Fig. S7, ESI†).²⁵,²⁶ On the basis of these findings, we now propose that the type I PKS locus may play a role in the biosynthesis of the 2-naphthoate moiety. It could be imagined that KedU38 catalyzes the formation of a nascent intermediate, which is further modified by the other activities within the type I PKS locus to yield 3,6,8-trihydroxy-2-naphthoic acid as a key intermediate (Fig. S7, ESI†). However, all attempts to express the type I PKS locus in selected heterologous failed to produce detectable amount of the proposed 2-naphthoic acid intermediates, therefore this proposal awaits experimental verification.

Regardless the exact biosynthetic origin of the 2-naphthoate moiety, comparative analysis of ked cluster to the MDP and NCS clusters further unveiled a subset of five genes, KedN1 to KedN5, with high sequence homology to the tailoring enzymes for the 1-naphthoate moiety in NCS biosynthesis (Fig. S7, ESI†).²⁵,²⁶,⁴⁹⁻⁵¹ These findings lend additional support to the intermediacy of 3,6,8-trihydroxy-2-naphthoic acid in KED biosynthesis. Thus, as depicted in Fig. 3C, 3,6,8-trihydroxy-2-naphthoic acid could be C-7 hydroxylated by the KedN3 P-450 monooxygenase, triple O-methylated by the KedN1 O-methyltransferase, and tandem C-methylated to furnish the isopropoxy group by the KedN5 radical SAM methyltransferase. The fully modified 2-naphthoic acid is finally activated by KedN2 as a naphthonyl CoA and coupled to the enediyne core via an amide linkage to the

(R)-2-aza-3-chloro-β-tyrosine moiety by the KedN4 acyltransferase. The KedN5-catalyzed tandem C-methylation of an O–CH₃ group is unusual for isopropoxy group biosynthesis. A similar mechanism has been proposed for CndI, which was identified to C-methylate an O–CH₃ group to afford an ethoxy group for chondrochloren biosynthesis in *Chondromyces crocatus* Cmc5.⁷⁰ The fact that KedN5 shows significant sequence homology to CndI (24% identity/37% similarity) supports the proposed role of KedN5 in KED biosynthesis.

The enediyne core biosynthesis and convergent biosynthesis for the KED chromophore

By comparing and contrasting the seven enediyne gene clusters known to date [i.e., the four 9-membered enediynes of C-1027,²⁴ NCS,²⁵ MDP,²⁶ and SPO²⁷ and the three 10-membered endiynes of CAL,²⁸ DYN (partial),³¹ and ESP (partial)]²⁹,³⁰], we have previously shown that (i) both 9- and 10-membered enediyne clusters share an absolutely conserved five-gene cassette, known as the enediyne PKS cassette, consisting of E, E3, E4, E5 and E10, (ii) PKS chemistry (i.e., E–E10) does not direct biosynthetic divergence between 9- and 10-membered enediynes,³²,³³ (iii) it is the 9- or 10-membered pathway specific enediyne PKS accessory enzymes that most likely morph a common nascent polyketide intermediate into the distinct enediyne core structures,³²,³³,⁵³ and (iv) the final assembly of the enediyne chromophores features a convergent biosynthetic logic that employs varying coupling chemistry⁴⁴,⁴⁶,⁵³,⁵⁴ and often exploits epoxide-forming and epoxide-opening enzymes in activating the endiyne cores⁴⁸,⁴⁹ and setting up the stereochemistry for the attachment of the peripheral moieties (Fig. 6).

---

**Fig. 6** Genetic organization of the five 9- and three 10-membered enediyne biosynthetic gene clusters known to date highlighting the five-gene enediyne PKS cassettes (black) that are absolutely conserved among both 9- and 10-membered enediyne clusters and the varying number of conserved genes that encode the 9-membered enediyne pathway specific accessory enzymes (gray). 9-Membered enediynes including: C-1027; NCS, neocarzinostatin; MDP, maduropeptin; KED, kedarcidin; SPO, sporolide. 10-Membered enediynes including: CAL, calicheamicin; ESP, esperamicin; DYN, dynemicin.
The ked cluster now joins the growing list of enediyne biosynthetic machinery, supporting the emerging paradigm for enediyne core biosynthesis^{19,20,53,56,57} but also revealing new insights. Thus, the ked cluster also harbors the absolutely conserved five-gene enediyne PKS cassette (Fig. 6), whose PKS chemistry is demonstrated by the production of the hallmark heptaene product for enediyne biosynthesis upon co-expression of kedE-kedE10 in E. coli (Fig. 4).^{32,33} Flanking the ked enediyne PKS cassette are the highly conserved 13 genes, kedE1, kedE2, kedE6 to kedE9, kedE11, kedD2, kedF, kedJ, kedL, kedM, and kedS (Fig. 2B and Table 1), that are highly conserved among the five 9-membered enediyne gene clusters known to date (Fig. 6).^{33,53} They encode the 9-membered enediyne pathway specific PKS accessory enzymes for endiye core biosynthesis, including KedF whose epoxide hydrolase activity was demonstrated in vitro to afford a vicinal diol with the same regio- and absolute stereochemistry as would be for the KED enediyne core (Fig. 5). It should be noted that while the five genes consisting of the enediyne PKS cassette are typically clustered, the organization of genes encoding the accessory enzymes is less conserved, scattering on either side of the enediyne PKS cassette within the gene cluster (Fig. 6). They nonetheless show significant sequence homology, ensuring their identification upon careful bioinformatics analysis (Table 1). These observations should now be taken into consideration in future effort to identify and annotate new enediyne biosynthetic gene clusters. Finally, the fully modified and activated KED enediyne core intermediate is coupled with the two deoxysugars, the (R)-2-aza-3-chloro-β-tyrosine, and the 3-hydroxy-7,8-dimethoxy-6-isopropoxy-2-naphthoate moiety, and KedS6, KedS10, KedN4, and KedY5 are proposed to catalyze these coupling steps, respectively, the timing of which is pending future determination (Fig. 3D). It has long been speculated that the convergent molecular logic for enediyne biosynthesis presents outstanding opportunities to engineer new enediyne natural products by combinatorial strategies.^{12–14,19,20} The availability of the ked cluster and the novel chemistry associated with the KED biosynthetic machinery surely will enrich the enediyne genetic toolbox and facilitate such engineering effort.

### Conclusion

Kedarcidin, a member of the enediyne family of antitumor antibiotics, features a novel molecular architecture. The kedarcidin biosynthetic gene cluster is cloned from Streptoalloteichus sp. ATCC 53650 and sequenced and annotated. The identity of the cloned gene cluster to encode KED biosynthesis is supported by: (i) finding the kedA gene within the cloned ked cluster that encodes the previously isolated KED apoprotein, (ii) production of the signature heptaene product for enediyne biosynthesis upon co-expression of kedE-kedE10, encoding the enediyne PKS and the associated type II TE, in E. coli, and (iii) in vitro characterization of KedF as an epoxide hydrolase using a substrate mimic that affords a vicinal diol product with the regio- and absolute stereochemistry as would be expected for the KED chromophore. Comparative analysis between ked and the other cloned 9- and 10-membered enediyne gene clusters supports a convergent biosynthetic pathway for the KED chromophore, an emerging paradigm for the enediyne family of natural products, but the KED biosynthetic machinery is also predicted to feature much novel chemistry.

### Experimental

#### Bacterial strains, plasmids, and sequence analysis

Streptoalloteichus sp. ATCC 53650, the KED producer, and M. luteus ATCC 9431, the test organism for assay of the antibacterial activity of KED, were from American Type Culture Collection (Rockville, MD). SuperCos1, Gigapack III XL and E. coli XL1-Blue MR cells (Stratagene, La Jolla, CA), pGEM-T Easy and pSP72 (Promega, Madison, WI), and pETDuet-1, pRSFDuet-1, and E. coli BL21(DE3) cells (Novagen, Madison, WI) were from commercial sources. pANT841,^71 pBS1050,^32 pBS1051,^32 and pBS1065^32 were described previously. DIG-labeling kit and calf intestinal phosphatase (Roche, Indianapolis, IN), T4 DNA ligase (Promega), and restriction enzymes (New England Biolabs Ipswich, MA or Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) were from commercial sources. DNA sequencing was carried out at the University of Wisconsin-Madison Biotechnology Center (Madison, WI). Sequence analysis was carried out using BLASTN available from NCBI,

The C-10/C-11 cis-disubstitution provides a α-glycosidic and an ether linkage to the I-mycaroside and the (R)-2-aza-3-chloro-β-tyrosine moiety, respectively, in the KED chromophore (7). Intriguingly, similar glycosidic and ether/ester linkages to deoxysugar, tyrosine-derived moieties (C-1027 and MDP) and the 1-naphthoate moiety (NCS) are also present in other enediyne natural products, but the relative stereochemistry of these disubstitutions are in the trans-configuration, as exemplified by the C-1027, MDP, and NCS chromophores (Fig. S3, ESI†). Comparative studies of KED biosynthesis to those of C-1027, MDP, and NCS now provide opportunities to decipher the mechanism, thereby controlling and exploiting the regio- and stereochemistry in appending the peripheral moieties to each of the endiye cores for enediyne biosynthesis and structural diversity.^{12–14,19}

### KED biosynthesis and structural revisions

The structure of KED chromophore has been revised twice since it was first published^{4–7} (Fig. S2, ESI†). The original structure had the (R)-2-aza-3-chloro-α-tyrosine moiety with the 2-naphthamide linked at the α-amino position.^{4,5} This structure was subsequently revised to (R)-2-aza-3-chloro-β-tyrosine with the 2-naphthamide linked at the β-amino position.^6 Cloning and sequencing of the ked cluster in the current study supports this revision, as KedY4 is similar to SgcC4 and MdpC4, two MIO-containing aminomutases that have been characterized in vitro to catalyze the conversion of α-tyrosine to β-tyrosine^56 (Fig. S6, ESI†), supporting the intermediacy of (R)-2-aza-3-chloro-β-tyrosine in KED biosynthesis (Fig. 3).

The second revision was of the stereochemistry of the KED enediyne core, initially inverting the entire enediyne core into its enantiomer and subsequently revising the C-10/C-11 disubstitution pattern from trans- to cis-configuration (Fig. S2, ESI†).^4–7
and contiguous DNA was compiled using Lasergene (DNASTAR Inc., Madison, WI). Open reading frames (orfs) were predicted using ORFfinder from NCBI and Genemark, ${ }^{72}$ and protein sequences were analyzed using PSI-BLAST and InterProScan. ${ }^{73}$ All recombinant DNA manipulations were performed by following standard procedures ${ }^{60,74}$ or the manufacturers' instructions.

**Production, isolation, and analysis of KED**

KED production, isolation, and analysis were carried out essentially by following the literature procedures. ${ }^{2,5}$ Thus, *Streptoalloteichus* sp. ATCC 53650 was grown on TSB agar plate ${ }^{60}$ for single colonies. Seed inoculum was prepared by introducing the colony periphery of petri dish cultures into $250 \mathrm{~mL}$ flasks containing $50 \mathrm{~mL}$ of TSB medium, ${ }^{60}$ followed by shaking at $250 \mathrm{rpm}$ and $28^{\circ} \mathrm{C}$ for two days. Production fermentation was carried out by adding $3 \mathrm{~mL}$ of seed inoculum into each of the ten $250 \mathrm{~mL}$ flasks containing $50 \mathrm{~mL}$ of production medium (3% glycerol, 1% pharmamedia, 1.5% distiller's solubles extract, 1% fish meal, $0.05 \% \mathrm{KH}_{2} \mathrm{PO}_{4}$, and $0.6 \% \mathrm{CaCO}_{3}, \mathrm{pH} 7.0$ ), and shaking at $250 \mathrm{rpm}$ and $28^{\circ} \mathrm{C}$ for five days. The fermentation culture was centrifuged ($8000 \mathrm{rpm}, 4^{\circ} \mathrm{C}, 35 \mathrm{~min}$ ) and filtered to remove mycelia. The supernatant was slowly adjusted to $\mathrm{pH} 5.0$ with $2 \mathrm{NHCl}$ while stirring, followed by centrifugation ($12000 \mathrm{rpm}, 4^{\circ} \mathrm{C}, 35 \mathrm{~min}$ ) to remove precipitates. The resulting supernatant was mixed with DEAE-cellulose resin equilibrated in buffer ($0.05 \mathrm{M}$ Tris-HCl, pH 5.6). The resulting DEAE-cellulose resin was washed with the same buffer twice and eluted with the same buffer containing $1 \mathrm{MNaCl}$. The eluate was dialyzed against Milli-Q $\mathrm{H}_{2} \mathrm{O}$ at $4^{\circ} \mathrm{C}$ overnight using a $10 \mathrm{kDa}$ molecular weight cutoff membrane. The dialyzed solution was lyophilized, dissolved in $4 \mathrm{~mL}$ cold $\mathrm{H}_{2} \mathrm{O}$, and applied to a DEAE-cellulose column equilibrated in $0.05 \mathrm{M}$ Tris-HCl, pH 5.6. The column was washed with cold $\mathrm{H}_{2} \mathrm{O}$ and eluted stepwise with $0.1 \mathrm{M}, 0.2 \mathrm{M}$, and $0.3 \mathrm{MNaCl}$. Fractions were assayed against *M. luteus*, ${ }^{34}$ and the active fractions were combined and lyophilized to afford a yellow powder. Further purification was achieved using Sephadex G-75 chromatography eluting with cold $\mathrm{H}_{2} \mathrm{O}$ at $4^{\circ} \mathrm{C}$. Again, fractions were followed by assay against *M. luteus*, and active fractions were combined and lyophilized to give pure KED chromoprotein.

To dissociate the KED chromophore from the apoprotein, $5 \mathrm{mg}$ of purified KED chromoprotein was dissolved in $0.2 \mathrm{~mL}$ of $0.1 \mathrm{M}$ potassium phosphate buffer, $\mathrm{pH} 4.3$, and extracted twice with $0.3 \mathrm{~mL}$ of EtOAc each at $4^{\circ} \mathrm{C}$. The combined EtOAc extract was evaporated in vacuum, and the residue was subjected to HRESIMS analysis on an IonSpec HiResMALDI FT mass spectrometer with a 7 Tesla superconducting magnet. A portion of the EtOAc extract was also left at room temperature overnight and then similarly evaporated to dryness and analyzed by HRESIMS. The freshly prepared and the overnight EtOAc extracts were also subjected to HPLC analysis. HPLC was carried out on a Varian HPLC system equipped with Prostar 210 pumps, a photodiode array detector, and an Atima-C 18 column ($5 \mu \mathrm{m}, 4.6 \mathrm{~mm} \times 250 \mathrm{~mm}$, Grace Davison Discovery Sciences, Deerfield, IL). The column was developed at flow rate

of $1 \mathrm{~mL} \mathrm{~min}^{-1}$ with a linear gradient from $100 \%$ buffer A ($0.01 \mathrm{M}$ potassium phosphate, $\mathrm{pH} 6.8$ ) to $20 \%$ buffer A/80% buffer B ($80 \% \mathrm{CH}_{3} \mathrm{CN}$ in $0.01 \mathrm{M}$ potassium phosphate buffer, $\mathrm{pH} 6.8$ ) in $35 \mathrm{~min}$, monitored at $320 \mathrm{~nm}$.

Cosmid DNA library construction, screening, and sequencing

A SuperCos1 cosmid library was constructed using partially digested (Sau3AI) *Streptoalloteichus* sp. ATCC 53650 chromosomal DNA followed by dephosphorylation with calf intestinal phosphatase according to standard procedures. ${ }^{60,74}$ After an overnight ligation at $16^{\circ} \mathrm{C}$, the mixture was packaged using Gigapack III XL and used to transfect *E. coli* XL1 Blue MR cells following the manufacturer's instructions (Stratagene). A $3.5 \mathrm{kb}$ internal fragment of *kedE* was PCR amplified from total genomic DNA using Platinum Taq DNA polymerase (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) and the following pair of primers (forward $5^{\prime}-\mathrm{GGCGGCGGVTCACSGTSGACGGMGCCCTGC}-3^{\prime} /$ reverse, $5^{\prime}-\mathrm{CCC}$ ATSCCGACSCCGGACCASACSGACCAYTCCA-3', where M = A or C; S = C or G; V = A, C, or G; Y = C or T) as described previously. ${ }^{30}$ The PCR product was cloned into pGEM-T Easy to afford pBS16001, confirmed to encode an internal fragment of an enediyne PKS gene by sequencing, ${ }^{29,39}$ and used to prepare the DIG-labeled probe (probe-1). Probe-1 was then used to screen the cosmid library by colony hybridization, yielding three positive clones. One of the positive clones, pBS16002, was end-sequenced using the following pair of primers (forward $5^{\prime}-\mathrm{GGGAATAAGGGCGACACGGG}-3^{\prime} /$ reverse $5^{\prime}-\mathrm{GCTTATCGATGA}$ TAAGCGGTC-3') and confirmed to encode a part of the ked cluster. Four additional rounds of chromosomal walking from pBS16002 were subsequently carried out using probe-2, -3, -4, and -5, respectively to isolate overlapping cosmids that cover the entire *ked* cluster (Fig. 2A). Thus, probe-2 and probe-3 were prepared by PCR from pBS16002 using the following pairs of primers (probe-2, forward $5^{\prime}-\mathrm{GGTACTACCTGCTGTGCC}-3^{\prime} /$ reverse $5^{\prime}-\mathrm{GGTCTTGGTGAAAGCTGC}-3^{\prime}$ ) and (probe-3, forward $5^{\prime}-\mathrm{CGAT}$ CAAGTCGATCCTGACC-3'/reverse $5^{\prime}-\mathrm{GGTCGCTGGTGATGTCG}$ TCG-3'), respectively. Screening the cosmid library by colony hybridization with probe-2 and probe-3, respectively, resulted in the isolation of pBS16003 and pBS16004. Similarly, probe-4 was prepared by PCR from pBS16004 using the following pairs of primers (forward $5^{\prime}-\mathrm{GGAGGTCGAGGTGCGTGC}-3^{\prime} /$ reverse $5^{\prime}-\mathrm{GGTTCCACGTGATCAGC}-3^{\prime}$ ) and used to screen the cosmid library to isolate pBS16005. Probe-5 was prepared by PCR from pBS16005 using the following pairs of primers (forward $5^{\prime}-\mathrm{GCTGTGCCCTGGTGACCTGACC}-3^{\prime} /$ reverse $5^{\prime}-\mathrm{GCAGCAGGT}$ CGAGGTCG-3') and used to screen the cosmid library to isolate pBS16006. Finally, the five overlapping cosmids (*i.e.*, pBS16002, pBS16003, pBS16004, pBS16005, and pBS16006) were similarly end-sequenced to confirm their candidacy for complete sequencing (Fig. 2A).

The five overlapping cosmids were used to generate subclone libraries for complete DNA sequence determination. The resultant DNA sequences were compiled and assembled into contigs, and gaps were filled in by primer walking or by subcloning fragments covering the gaps and subsequently sequencing the cloned fragments (Fig. 2B and Table 1).

The kedE-kedE10 co-expression construct for E. coli expression

To construct the kedE-kedE10 co-expression plasmid, a 2400bp SstI-MluI fragment, containing the 1.8 kb of the 3′ region of kedE together with kedE10 was first cloned from pBS16002 and ligated into the same sites of pANT841 to afford pBS16007. A 4354bp XmnI-SstI fragment containing the 5′ region of kedE together with ~400bp of upstream sequence was next cloned from pBS16002 and ligated into the same sites of pSP72 to afford pBS16008. The 3′ region of kedE together with kedE10 was then recovered as an SstI-HindIII fragment from pBS16007 and cloned into the same sites of pBS16008 to yield pBS16009, which contain the complete kedE-kedE10 cassette. This cassette was moved as a BglII-HindIII fragment into the compatible BamHI-HindIII sites of pETDuet-1 to afford final construct pBS16010 for co-expressing kedE-kedE10 in E. coli.

Co-expression of kedE-kedE10 in E. coli for heptaene production

Co-expression of kedE-kedE10 in E. coli was carried out as described previously. Thus, pBS16010 was transformed into E. coli BL21(DE3) and cultured as described previously, with co-expressions of sgcE-sgcE10 (pBS1050-pBS1051) as a positive control and of sgcE(C211A)-sgcE10 (pBS1065-pBS1051) as a negative control. Briefly, E. coli recombinant strains carrying the varying co-expression cassettes were cultured in 50 mL LB medium supplemented with the appropriate antibiotics for selection. The cultures were first grown at 37°C to an optical density at 600 nm (OD600) of ~0.2 and then transferred to 18°C for continued incubation until they reached OD600 ~0.4; upon induction with 0.1 mM IPTG, incubation continued for an additional two days. The cultures were acidified to pH ~3 and harvested by centrifuging to pellet the cells. The cell pellet was extracted by vortexing with 20 mL of acetone. The acetone extract was centrifuged, and the supernatant was concentrated by rotary evaporation to ~1 mL, of which 100 μL was subjected to HPLC analysis. The same HPLC system and Atima-C18 column as described above were used. The column was developed at a flow rate of 1 mL min⁻¹ with a linear gradient from 40% buffer A (0.1% trifluoroacetic acid in H₂O)/60% buffer B (0.1% trifluoroacetic acid in CH₃OH) to 100% buffer B in 35 min with UV detection at 370 nm. The identity of heptaene was confirmed by comparison with an authentic standard.

Expression of kedF in E. coli and purification of KedF

The kedF gene was amplified by PCR from pBS16002 using Platinum Pfx polymerase (Invitrogen) and the following pair of primers (forward 5′-AAAACCTCTATTTCCAGTCGATGCCCGC TTCCGCATAGCCG-3′/reverse 5′-TACTTACTTAAATGTTATCAGG CCAGGGAGCGGGCGAACGC-3′). The resultant product was gel-purified and cloned into pBS160011, a variant of pRSFDuet-1 that contains both a TEV protease recognition site and ligation independent cloning site, to afford the expression construct pBS16012. Under this construct, KedF was overproduced as an N-terminal His₆-tagged fusion protein, whose His₆-tag can be removed upon TEV protease treatment. Introduction of pBS16012

into E. coli BL21 (DE3) for kedF expression and overproduction and purification of KedF by affinity chromatography using a 5 mL HisTrap HP column (GE Healthcare, Piscataway, NJ) were performed at 4°C following standard procedures. Immediately following the affinity chromatography, the KedF fraction was diluted to 50 mL with buffer A (50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0, 10 mM NaCl) and loaded on a MonoQ 10/100 column for anion exchange chromatography on an ÄKTA FPLC unit (GE Healthcare). The column was developed at a flow rate of 2 mL min⁻¹ with a linear gradient from 85% buffer A/15% buffer B (50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0, 1.0 M NaCl) to 40% buffer A/60% buffer B in 40 min. The eluted KedF protein was concentrated with a 30 K MWCO Vivaspin ultrafiltration device (Sartorius, Edgewood, NY) and stored at −80°C in 100 μL aliquots. The purified KedF was analyzed by SDS-PAGE on 12% gel. KedF concentration was determined from the absorbance at 280 nm using a molar absorptivity (ε 76.89 mM⁻¹ cm⁻¹) calculated according to the deduced KedF amino acid sequence.

In vitro characterization of KedF

In vitro characterization of KedF as an epoxide hydrolase was carried out as described previously, using styrene oxide as a substrate mimic. Thus, HPLC-based assays were carried out in 200 μL reaction mixtures containing 2 mM racemic styrene oxide in 50 mM phosphate buffer, pH 8.0. The reaction was initiated by the addition of 50 μM KedF, incubated at 25°C for 1 h, and terminated by extracting the assay mixture with 200 μL of EtOAc for three times. Negative controls were carried out under the identical conditions in the absence of KedF, while positive controls were carried out under the identical conditions with SgcF instead of KedF. The combined EtOAc extracts were concentrated in vacuum, and the resulting residue was dissolved in 50 μL of CH₃CN, 25 μL of which was subjected to HPLC analysis. HPLC was performed with an Alltech Apollo C18 column (5 μM, 4.6 × 250 mm, Grace Davison Discovery Sciences), developed at a flow rate of 1 mL min⁻¹ with a linear gradient from 0 to 60% CH₃CN in H₂O in 20 min with UV detection at 254 nm. The enantiomeric analysis of the vicinal diol products was performed on a Waters HPLC system equipped with 600 pumps, a 996 photodiode array detector, and a Chiralcel OD-H column (5 μM, 4.6 × 250 mm, Grace Davison Discovery Sciences). The column was eluted isocratically, at a flow rate of 0.7 mL min⁻¹, with 2.5% isopropanol in hexane.

Determination of the steady-state kinetic parameters of KedF-catalyzed hydrolysis of (R)- or (S)-styrene oxide followed the continuous spectrophotometric assay previously adopted for the SgcF and NcsF2 epoxide hydrolase. Thus, the reactions were carried out in 1 mL reaction mixture containing 10 μL of 300 mM sodium periodate in DMF, 20 μL of (R)- or (S)-styrene oxide in DMSO, with varying concentrations between 0.1 mM and 15 mM, in 50 mM phosphate buffer, pH 8.0. The reactions were initiated by the addition of 9.6 or 4.0 μM KedF, for (R)- or (S)-styrene oxide, respectively, and these reactions were carried out in triplicate. The absorbance at 290 nm was monitored in a 1 mL quartz cuvette, thermostated at 25°C, and the velocity was calculated based on the rate of change of

absorbance over 5 to 30 s Michaelis–Menten equation was fitted to plots of velocity of 1-phenyl-1,2-ethanediol formation versus substrate concentration to extract the \( K_m \) and \( k_{cat} \) values.

Nucleotide sequence accession number

The nucleotide sequence reported in this study is available in the GenBank database under accession number JX679499.

Acknowledgements

We thank the Analytical Instrumentation Center of the School of Pharmacy, University of Wisconsin-Madison for support in obtaining MS data. This work is supported in part by NIH grants CA78747 and CA113297. G.P.H. is the recipient of an NSERC (Canada) postdoctoral fellowship.

Notes and references

1. K. S. Lam, G. A. Hesler, D. R. Gustavson, A. R. Crosswell, J. M. Veitch, S. Forenza and K. Tomita, *J. Antibiot.*, 1991, 44, 472–478.
2. S. J. Hofstead, J. A. Matson, A. R. Malacko and H. Marquardt, *J. Antibiot.*, 1992, 45, 1250–1254.
3. K. L. Constantine, K. L. Colson, M. Wittekind, M. S. Friedrichs, N. Zein, J. Tuttle, D. R. Langley, J. E. Leet, D. R. Schroeder, K. S. Lam, B. T. Farmer II, W. J. Metzler, R. E. Bruccoler and L. Mueller, *Biochemistry*, 1994, 33, 11438–11452.
4. J. E. Leet, D. R. Schroeder, S. J. Hofstead, J. Golik, K. L. Colson, S. Huang, S. E. Klohr, T. W. Doyle and J. A. Matson, *J. Am. Chem. Soc.*, 1992, 114, 7946–7948.
5. J. E. Leet, D. R. Schroeder, D. R. Langley, K. L. Colson, S. Huang, S. E. Klohr, M. S. Lee, J. Golik, S. J. Hofstead, T. W. Doyle and J. A. Matson, *J. Am. Chem. Soc.*, 1993, 115, 8432–8443.
6. S. Kawata, S. Ashizawa and M. Hirama, *J. Am. Chem. Soc.*, 1997, 119, 12012–12013.
7. F. Ren, P. C. Hogan, A. J. Anderson and A. G. Myers, *J. Am. Chem. Soc.*, 2007, 129, 5381–5383.
8. K. C. Nicolaou and W.-M. Dai, *Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl.*, 1991, 30, 1387–1530.
9. Z. Xi and I. G. Goldberg, in *Comprehensive Natural Products Chemistry*, ed. D. Barton, K. Nakanish and O. Meth-Cohn, Elsevier, New York, 1999, vol. 7, pp. 553–592.
10. U. Galm, M. H. Hager, S. G. Van Lanen, J. S. Thorson and B. Shen, *Chem. Rev.*, 2005, 105, 739–758.
11. N. Zein, K. L. Colson, J. E. Leet, D. R. Schroeder, W. Solomon and T. W. Doyle, *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.*, 1993, 90, 2822–2826.
12. D. R. Kennedy, L. S. Gawron, J. Ju, W. Liu, B. Shen and T. A. Beerman, *Cancer Res.*, 2007, 67, 773–781.
13. D. R. Kennedy, J. Ju, B. Shen and T. A. Beerman, *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.*, 2007, 104, 17632–17637.
14. T. A. Beerman, L. S. Gawron, S. Shin, B. Shen and M. M. McHugh, *Cancer Res.*, 2009, 69, 593–598.
15. *Enediyne antibiotics as antitumor agents*, ed. T. W. Doyle and D. B. Borders, Marcel-Dekker, New York, 1995.
16. *Neocarzinostatin: the past, present, and future of an anticancer drug*, ed. H. Maeda, K. Edo and, N. Ishida, Springer-Verlag, New York, 1997.
17. J. S. Thorson, B. Shen, R. E. Whitwam, W. Liu and Y. Li, *Bioorg. Chem.*, 1999, 27, 172–188.
18. I. Brukner, *Curr. Opin. Oncol., Endocr. Metab. Invest. Drugs*, 2000, 2, 344–352.
19. S. G. Van Lanen and B. Shen, *Curr. Top. Med. Chem.*, 2008, 8, 448–459.
20. Z.-X. Liang, *Nat. Prod. Rep.*, 2010, 27, 499–528.
21. K. Edo, M. Mizugaki, Y. Koide, H. Seto, K. Furihata, N. Otake and N. Ishida, *Tetrahedron Lett.*, 1985, 26, 331–340.
22. M. D. Lee, T. S. Dunne, M. M. Siegel, C. C. Chang, G. O. Morton and D. B. Borders, *J. Am. Chem. Soc.*, 1987, 109, 3464–3466.
23. S.-J. Nam, S. P. Gaudencio, C. A. Kauffman, P. R. Jensen, T. P. Kondratyuk, L. E. Marler, J. M. Pezzuto and W. Fenical, *J. Nat. Prod.*, 2010, 73, 1080–1086.
24. W. Liu, S. D. Christenson, S. Standage and B. Shen, *Science*, 2002, 297, 1170–1173.
25. W. Liu, K. Nonaka, L. Nie, J. Zhang, S. D. Christenson, J. Bae, S. G. Van Lanen, E. Zazopoulos, C. M. Farnet, C. F. Yang and B. Shen, *Chem. Biol.*, 2005, 12, 293–302.
26. S. G. Van Lanen, T.-J. Oh, W. Liu, E. Wendt-Pienkowski and B. Shen, *J. Am. Chem. Soc.*, 2007, 129, 13082–13094.
27. R. P. McGlinchey, M. Nett and B. S. Moore, *J. Am. Chem. Soc.*, 2008, 130, 2406–2407.
28. J. Ahlert, E. Shepard, N. Lomovskaya, E. Zazopoulos, A. Staffa, B. O. Bachmann, K. Huang, L. Fonstein, A. Czisny, R. E. Whitwam, C. M. Farnet and T. S. Thorson, *Science*, 2002, 297, 1173–1176.
29. E. Zazopoulos, K. Huang, A. Staffa, W. Liu, B. O. Bachmann, K. Nonaka, J. Ahlert, J. S. Thorson, B. Shen and C. M. Farnet, *Nat. Biotechnol.*, 2003, 21, 187–190.
30. W. Liu, J. Ahlert, Q. Gao, E. Wendt-Pienkowski, B. Shen and J. S. Thorson, *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.*, 2003, 100, 11959–11963.
31. Q. Gao and J. S. Thorson, *FEMS Microbiol. Lett.*, 2008, 282, 105–114.
32. J. Zhang, S. G. Van Lanen, J. Ju, W. Liu, P. C. Dorrestein, W. Li, N. L. Kelleher and B. Shen, *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.*, 2008, 105, 1460–1465.
33. G. P. Horsman, Y. Chen, J. S. Thorson and B. Shen, *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.*, 2010, 107, 11331–11335.
34. W. Liu and B. Shen, *Antimicrob. Agents Chemother.*, 2000, 44, 382–392.
35. J. M. Murrell, W. Liu and B. Shen, *J. Nat. Prod.*, 2004, 67, 206–213.
36. S. D. Christenson, W. Liu, M. D. Toney and B. Shen, *J. Am. Chem. Soc.*, 2003, 125, 6062–6063.
37. S. D. Christenson, W. Wu, B. Shen and M. D. Toney, *Biochemistry*, 2003, 42, 12708–12718.
38. C. V. Christianson, T. J. Montavon, S. G. Van Lanen, B. Shen and S. D. Bruner, *Biochemistry*, 2007, 46, 7025–7214.
39. C. V. Christianson, T. J. Montavon, G. M. Festin, H. A. Cooke, B. Shen and S. D. Bruner, *J. Am. Chem. Soc.*, 2007, 129, 15744–15745.

40 T. J. Montavon, C. V. Christianson, G. M. Festin, B. Shen and S. D. Bruner, *Bioorg. Med. Chem. Lett.*, 2008, **18**, 3099–3102.

41 S. G. Van Lanen, P. C. Dorrestein, S. D. Christenson, W. Liu, J. Ju, N. L. Kelleher and B. Shen, *J. Am. Chem. Soc.*, 2005, **127**, 11594–11595.

42 S. G. Van Lanen, S. Lin, P. C. Dorrestein, N. L. Kelleher and B. Shen, *J. Biol. Chem.*, 2006, **281**, 29633–29640.

43 S. Lin, S. G. Van Lanen and B. Shen, *J. Am. Chem. Soc.*, 2007, **129**, 12432–12438.

44 S. G. Van Lanen, S. Lin and B. Shen, *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.*, 2008, **105**, 494–499.

45 S. Lin, S. G. Van Lanen and B. Shen, *J. Am. Chem. Soc.*, 2008, **130**, 6616–6623.

46 S. Lin, S. G. Van Lanen and B. Shen, *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.*, 2009, **106**, 4183–4188.

47 S. G. Van Lanen, S. Lin, G. P. Horsman and B. Shen, *FEMS Microbiol. Lett.*, 2009, **300**, 237–241.

48 S. Lin, G. P. Horsman and B. Shen, *J. Am. Chem. Soc.*, 2009, **131**, 16410–16417.

49 S. Lin, G. P. Horsman and B. Shen, *Org. Lett.*, 2010, **12**, 3816–3819.

50 H. A. Cooke, J. Zhang, M. A. Griffin, K. Nonaka, S. G. Van Lanen, B. Shen and S. D. Bruner, *J. Am. Chem. Soc.*, 2007, **129**, 7728–7729.

51 Y. Luo, S. Lin, J. Zhang, H. A. Cooke, S. D. Bruner and B. Shen, *J. Biol. Chem.*, 2008, **283**, 14694–14702.

52 H. A. Cooke, E. L. Guenther, Y. Luo, B. Shen and S. D. Bruner, *Biochemistry*, 2009, **48**, 9590–9598.

53 G. P. Horsman, S. G. Van Lanen and B. Shen, *Methods Enzymol.*, 2009, **459**, 97–112.

54 J. Ling, G. P. Horsman, S.-X. Huang, Y. Luo, S. Lin and B. Shen, *J. Am. Chem. Soc.*, 2010, **132**, 12534–12536.

55 S. Lin, T. Huang, G. P. Horsman, S.-X. Huang, X. Guo and B. Shen, *Org. Lett.*, 2012, **14**, 2300–2303.

56 J. R. Lohman and B. Shen, *Methods Enzymol.*, 2012, **516**, 299–319.

57 S. Lin, T. Huang and B. Shen, *Methods Enzymol.*, 2012, **516**, 321–343.

58 A. G. Myers, A. R. Hurd and P. C. Hogan, *J. Am. Chem. Soc.*, 2002, **124**, 4583–4585.

59 K. Ogawa, Y. Koyama, I. Ohashi, I. Sato and M. Hirama, *Angew. Chem., Int. Ed.*, 2009, **48**, 1110–1113.

60 T. Kieser, M. J. Bibb, M. M. Buttner, K. F. Chater and D. A. Hopwood, *Practical Streptomyces Genetics*, The John Innes Foundation, Norwich, UK, 2000.

61 V. T. T. Hang, T. S. Kim, T.-J. Oh and K. Sohng, *Biotechnol. Bioprocess Eng.*, 2011, **16**, 462–469.

62 C. Mateo, A. Archelas and R. Furstoss, *Anal. Biochem.*, 2003, **314**, 135–141.

63 C. J. Thibodeaux, C. E. Melancon III and H.-w. Liu, *Nature.*, 2007, **446**, 10081016.

64 C. J. Thibodeaux, C. E. Melancon III and H.-w. Liu, *Angew. Chem., Int. Ed.*, 2008, **47**, 9814–9858.

65 M. Tao, L. Wang, E. Wendt-Pienkowski, N. P. George, U. Galm, G. Zhang, J. M. Coughlin and B. Shen, *Mol. BioSyst.*, 2007, **3**, 60–74.

66 S. Inouye, T. Shomura, T. Tsuruoka, Y. Ogawa, H. Watanabe, J. Yoshida and T. Niida, *Chem. Pharm. Bull.*, 1975, **23**, 2669–2677.

67 H.-J. Kwon, W. C. Smith, A. J. Scharon, S. H. Hwang, M. J. Kurth and B. Shen, *Science*, 2002, **297**, 1327–1330.

68 B. Kusebauch, B. Busch, K. Scherlach, M. Roth and C. Hertweck, *Angew. Chem., Int. Ed.*, 2009, **48**, 5001–5004.

69 B. Shen, *Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol.*, 2003, **7**, 285–295.

70 S. Rachid, M. Scharfe, H. Bloecker, K. J. Weissman and R. Mueller, *Chem. Biol.*, 2009, **16**, 70–81.

71 V. B. Rajgarhia and W. R. Strohl, *J. Bacteriol.*, 1997, **179**, 2690–2696.

72 A. V. Lukashin and M. Borodovsky, *Nucleic Acids Res.*, 1998, **26**, 1107–1115.

73 S. Hunter, R. Apweiler, T. K. Attwood, A. Bairoch, A. Bateman, D. Binns, P. Bork, U. Das, L. Daugherty, L. Duquenne, R. D. Finn, J. Gough, D. Haft, N. Hulo, D. Kahn, E. Kelly, A. Laugraud, I. Letunic, D. Lonsdale, R. Lopez, M. Madera, J. Maslen, C. McAnulla, J. McDowall, J. Mistry, A. Mitchell, N. Mulder, D. Natale, C. Orengo, A. F. Quinn, J. D. Selengut, C. J. A. Sigrist, M. Thimma, P. D. Thomas, F. Valentin, D. Wilson, C. H. Wu and C. Yeats, *Nucleic Acids Res.*, 2009, **37**, D211–D215.

74 J. Sambrook, E. F. Fritsch and T. Maniatis, *Molecular Cloning: A Laboratory Manual*, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold Spring Harbor, NY, 3rd edn, 2000.
