
General and Comparative Endocrinology 188 (2013) 133–136

**Contents lists available at SciVerse ScienceDirect**

**General and Comparative Endocrinology**

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/ygcen

# Involvement of melanocortin receptor accessory proteins (MRAPs) in the function of melanocortin receptors

J.M. Cerdá-Reverter*, M.J. Agulleiro, R. Cortés, E. Sánchez, R. Guillot, E. Leal, B. Fernández-Durán, S. Puchol, M. Eley

Department of Fish Physiology and Biotechnology, Instituto de Acuicultura de Torre de la Sal, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas (IATS-CSIC), 12595 Torre de la Sal, Ribera de Cabanes, Castellón, Spain

## ARTICLE INFO

**Article history:**

Available online 11 February 2013

**Keywords:**

Melanocortin  
MRAP  
ACTH  
MSH  
Accessory protein  
HPA axis  

## ABSTRACT

The melanocortin system integrates different agonists, competitive or inverse agonists, and receptors. Recent investigations have also discovered a specific system of melanocortin receptor accessory proteins (MRAPs) that are involved in the regulation of the functional expression of these receptors. MRAP1 mutations are responsible for type 2 familial glucocorticoid deficiency (FGD2), a rare autosomal disorder characterized by high plasma adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) levels but severe cortisol deficiency. ACTH binds melanocortin 2 receptor (MC2R), a G protein-coupled receptor, in the adrenal gland to promote corticosteroid synthesis. In the absence of MRAP1, MC2R cannot translocate from the endoplasmic reticulum to the plasma membrane and ACTH-induced signaling is extinguished. A second MRAP protein, called MRAP2, also modulates MC2R activity. MRAPs also interact with the other melanocortin receptors, adjusting their pharmacological properties. In this paper, we briefly review the MRAP system and its interaction with melanocortin receptors.

© 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

## 1. Melanocortin system

Melanocortins are posttranscriptional products of a complex precursor named proopiomelanocortin (POMC). They are mainly comprised of an adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) and melanocyte-stimulating hormones (α-, β-γ- and δ-MSH). Tetrapod POMC precursor comprises three main domains: the N-terminal pro-γ-MSH, the central ACTH and the C-terminal β-lipotropin. Each domain contains one MSH peptide delineated by a core sequence HFRW: γ-MSH in pro-γ-MSH, β-MSH as N-terminal sequence of ACTH and β-MSH in β-lipotropin domain (Nakanishi et al., 1979).

Tetrapod POMC is mainly produced in the vertebrate pituitary and its posttranslational processing occurs in a tissue-specific manner. The proteolytic cleavage of POMC by prohormone convertase 1 (PC1) generates ACTH and β-lipotropin (β-LPH) in the corticotrophs of the anterior pituitary, whereas cleavage by PC1 and PC2 produces α-MSH and β-endorphin in the melanotrophs of the pars intermedia. POMC is also centrally produced and mainly processed to α-MSH and β-endorphin (Castro and Morrison, 1997). In rodents, two discrete groups of neurons in the hypothalamus (arcuate nucleus) and the medulla (nucleus of the tractus solitarius) also produce POMC (Bangol et al., 1999). POMC mRNA expression within the mediobasal hypothalamus has been conserved throughout vertebrate evolution, as POMC transcripts have been detected in hypothalamic neuronal systems of amphibians (Tuinhof et al., 1998), birds (Gerets et al., 2000) and fish (Cerdá-Reverter and Peter, 2003). However, no POMC expression within the vagal lobe, the teleostean nucleus of the tractus solitarius, has been reported in any teleost species.

Melanocortin exerts its physiological role by binding to a family of specific G protein-coupled receptors that positively couple to adenyllyl cyclase. Tetrapod species have five melanocortin receptors (MC1R–MC5R). The extracellular and cytoplasmic tails of all of the melanocortin receptors are unusually short. In fact, the MC2 receptor is the smallest of the hundreds of identified GPCRs. In mammalian systems, MC2R is specific for ACTH. By contrast, the MSHs bind to the other four MCRs, with MC1R and MC3R exhibiting the highest affinity for α-MSH and γ-MSH, respectively (Schiöth et al., 2007). Atypically, melanocortin signaling is not exclusively regulated by the binding of endogenous agonists, as naturally occurring antagonists, agouti-signaling protein (ASP) and agouti-related protein (AGRP) compete with melanocortin peptides by binding to MCRs. ASP is a potent melanocortin antagonist at melanocortin MC1R and MC4R receptors and relatively weak at MC3R. In contrast, AGRP is mainly produced within the hypothalamic arcuate nucleus and the adrenal gland, where it strongly inhibits melanocortin signaling at MC3R and MC4R, but it is not active at MC1R (Cone, 2006). Several studies have demonstrated that mammalian ASP and AGRP work as inverse agonists at

* Corresponding author. Fax: +34 964319509.
E-mail address: cerdarev@iats.csic.es (J.M. Cerdá-Reverter).

0016-6480/$ - see front matter © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ygcen.2013.01.017

MC4R, which is constitutively activated (Chai et al., 2003; Nijenhuis et al., 2001). Therefore, MC4R signals in the absence of agonist binding. AGRP or ASP reduces constitutive MC4R signaling in a dose-dependent manner. The presence of melanocortin endogenous antagonist including AGRP and ASP in fish was first demonstrated in goldfish (Cerdá-Reverter et al., 2005; Cerdá-Reverter and Peter, 2003) and later in several teleost species (Kurokawa et al., 2006; Murashita et al., 2009; Song et al., 2003).

### 2. Discovery of melanocortin receptor accessory protein (MRAP)

Of the five melanocortin receptors, only the activation MC2R fails when expressed in the conventional heterologous cell lines typically used to screen the activity of G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs). Suitable expression data were obtained only when MC2R was expressed in adrenocortical-derived cell lines (Y6 or OS3), in which endogenous MCR expression is absent (Schimmer et al., 1995). The experiments in a range of non-adrenal cells suggested that the receptor cannot reach the plasma membrane but is retained in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). It seems that transmembrane domains (TM) 3 and 4 of the MC2R comprise an ER retention signal that can be transferred to other MCRs (Fridmanis et al., 2010). Therefore, the presence of an accessory factor that works as an MC2R-specific transport system in the adrenocortical cells was assumed (Noon et al., 2002). The response to this hypothesis was provided by Clark’s group, who studied familial glucocorticoid deficiency (FGD) Metherell et al. (2005). FGD is a rare autosomal disorder characterized by high plasma ACTH levels but severe cortisol deficiency with normal mineralocorticoid levels. Untreated patients may die because of hypoglycemia or recurrent infections. Mutations of MC2R only explain around 25% of FGD cases, and FGD caused by receptor mutations has been termed as type 1. Linkage studies provided evidence of a second FGD locus (Chan et al., 2011; Cooray and Clark, 2011). Homozygosity mapping using single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) microarrays identified a third locus on chromosome 21 in some families where FGD exhibited no MC2R mutations. Data analysis provided a single candidate region at 21q22.1. About thirty known/predicted genes were localized within the region but none was a reasonable candidate for FGD given its function. However, after RT-PCR expression screening only one of these genes was exclusively expressed in the adrenal cortex. Actually, this gene had been characterized previously as an upregulated gene during the differentiation of mouse 3T3-L1 cells from fibroblasts into adipocytes, and named as fat tissue-specific low molecular weight protein (Xu et al., 2002) before being renamed melanocortin 2 receptor accessory protein (Metherell et al., 2005). MRAP seems to be responsible for about 20% of FGD, and FGD due to mutations in MRAP is now known as FGD type 2. Metherell and co-workers (Metherell et al., 2005) showed that human (h) MRAP is similar to another gene (C6orf117) encoding a small single transmembrane-domain protein that is more than 27% identical to hMRAP in the N-terminal and transmembrane domains but differs at the C-terminus. This gene encodes a 205 amino acid protein now known as MRAP2 (Chan et al., 2009; Sebag and Hinkle, 2009b). This introduces a degree of confusion into the nomenclature since most authors continue to call the first characterized protein MRAP rather than MRAP1. Subsequent studies identified MRAP orthologues in different species. We identified three different MRAPs in zebrafish, one MRAP grouped with tetrapod MRAP1s, and the two other MRAP sequences were classified as MRAP2a and MRAP2b. We also found MRAP1 and MRAP2 orthologues in most fish genomes screened but only zebrafish exhibited MRAP2 paralogues (Agulleiro et al., 2010; Cerdá-Reverter et al., 2011).

### 3. Structure of MRAPs and interaction with MC2R

Human MRAP1 is a small protein exhibiting a hydrophobic transmembrane domain (residues 38–60). MRAP1 is mainly expressed in the adrenal cortex but also in the testis, liver, brown and white fat, brain thyroid, breast and lymph nodes (Metherell et al., 2005; Xu et al., 2002). The hMRAP1 gene is alternatively spliced into two different proteins, i.e. hMRAPα and hMRAPβ, which contain 172 and 102 amino acids, respectively. Both proteins are identical in the first 69 amino acids that contain the N-terminal region (37 amino acids), the transmembrane domain (23 amino acids) and the first section of the C-terminal region (9 residues). The rest of the C-terminal region is fully divergent and seems to be involved in the fine tuning of MRAP intracellular localization and ACTH-induced cAMP production (Roy et al., 2007, 2012). It has also been suggested that the C-terminal region can play a role in the amount of the receptor that reaches the cell surface because deletion of the C terminus increases MC2R cell surface expression (Webb et al., 2009). hMRAP1 has no putative signal peptide, exhibits potential N-linked glycosylation sites (Asn-X-Ser/Thr) at position 3 and 6 and has a tyrosine-rich region within the N-terminal domain (residues 9–24).

The topology of the molecule suggests that MRAP1 is a type II integral membrane protein with an exoplasmic C-terminus. This means that the C-terminus faces the internal region of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and Golgi apparatus but turns towards the cell exterior when the protein reaches the plasma membrane. Metherell et al. (2005) corroborated this orientation by tagging the C-terminal domain of the hMRAP1 in CHO cells. Subsequent studies demonstrated that MRAP1 variants exhibit dual topology, meaning that both the N- and C-terminal regions can be found facing outward from the CHO (Sebag and Hinkle, 2007) or HEK293 cells (Roy et al., 2007). Dual topology was demonstrated at different expression levels and the two orientations, i.e. N<sub>exo</sub>–C<sub>cyt</sub> and N<sub>cyt</sub>–C<sub>exo</sub>, are present in roughly a 1:1 ratio (Sebag and Hinkle, 2007). On SDS–PAGE, hMRAP1 migrates with lower mobility than suggested by its molecular weight. Co-immunoprecipitation and mass spectroscopy studies in CHO and adrenal mouse Y1 cell lines suggest that MRAP exists as a homodimer (Cooray et al., 2008; Metherell et al., 2005). Sebag and Hinkle (Sebag and Hinkle, 2007) elegantly demonstrated that MRAP1 forms antiparallel homodimers and that both types of antiparallel complexes are able to interact with the MC2R in a similar way. Subsequently, Cooray et al. (2011) corroborated the formation of antiparallel homodimers by bioluminescence resonance energy transfer (BRET) but also demonstrated that MC2R forms homodimers in the ER. These MC2R homodimers form a complex with at least two antiparallel MRAP1 homodimers, making a hexameric complex that is probably stimulated by two ACTH molecules. Ligand binding induces a rapid conformational change and subsequent relaxation of the complex (Cooray et al., 2011). Sebag and Hinkle (Sebag and Hinkle, 2009b) also studied the structural requirements of MRAP1 to acquire the dual topology and to allow receptor trafficking and signaling. Deletion of the first 30 amino acids of the N-terminus or 64 of the 67 residues in the C-terminus did not affect the dual topology. However, residues localized just prior to the transmembrane domain (31–37, LKANKHS) are critical for the dual topology to be adopted. The deletion of these residues forced MRAP into a N<sub>exo</sub>–C<sub>cyt</sub> topology but also prevented dimer formation, suggesting that the dual topology is required for dimerization. These residues, together with the transmembrane domain, are also involved in the functional expression of the receptor. When the MC2R is co-expressed with a mutant MRAP1 lacking the transmembrane domain, the receptor is trapped in the ER. Therefore, a transmembrane domain is sufficient for interaction with the MC2R but is insufficient to pro-

J.M. Cerdá-Reverter et al./General and Comparative Endocrinology 188 (2013) 133–136

mote cell surface expression (Webb et al., 2009). The same occurred when the receptor was coexpressed with a single topology and monomeric MRAP1 mutant lacking residues 31–37. Interestingly, when MC2R is coexpressed with the mutant MRAP1 lacking residues 1 to 30, the receptor is unable to produce an ACTH-induced cAMP increase although easily reaches the plasma membrane (Sebag and Hinkle, 2009b). Smaller deletions demonstrated that the motif between amino acids 18 and 21 (LDYI) is a key region for ACTH-induced signaling. Therefore, when these amino acids were mutated to alanines the receptor reached the membrane but was unable to signal via cAMP after stimulation with ACTH. It seems that the inability to produce cAMP is a consequence of deficient ACTH binding, i.e. the binding of ACTH to MC2R co-expressing mutated MRAP1 (18-21A) is negligible. These results contrast with those reported by Webb et al. (2009), who showed that deletions of the fragment (9–24), that includes the tyrosine-rich region, precludes MC2R trafficking. This region is not needed for MRAP trafficking to the membrane but it could play a role in the stabilization of the MRAP1/MC2R complex or, alternatively, could interact with other proteins that regulate the surface expression of the complex (Webb et al., 2009). Within the latter domain, the motif EYY is fully conserved in all MRAP1 sequences characterized to date and could play a key role in the control of receptor trafficking (Agulleiro et al., 2010).

Using a mutagenesis approach involving the systematic construction of chimeric MC2R/MC4R, Fridmanis and collaborators (Fridmanis et al., 2010) hypothesized a model for the interaction of MRAP and MC2R. Data suggest that MRAP1 interacts with the TM4 and TM5 of the MC2R, which are important for the binding of the four basic amino acids in ACTH. However, data reported by Hinkle et al. (2011) did not support the model since the substitution of TM4 and TM5 of the MC2R with the MC4R did not impair MRAP dependence.

The structure of MRAP2 and interaction with the MCRs has not been studied in depth. The human MRAP2 gene consists of 4 exons that encode a 205 amino acid protein with a predicted molecular mass of 23.5 kD (Chan et al., 2009). Molecular modeling also predicts the presence of a transmembrane domain which is fully conserved among MRAP2 sequences (Agulleiro et al., 2010). Similar to MRAP1, the C-terminal domain is not conserved but it is noticeable that five amino acids within this region (IPNFV) are fully conserved in all MRAP2 sequences. MRAP2 is also a glycosylated protein and exhibits a tyrosine-rich domain in the N-terminal region. The residues localized immediately before the transmembrane domain of hMRAP1 (31-37, LKANKHS), which are critical for the dual topology to be adopted, only show one substitution compared with hMRAP1. However, the region containing the motif LDYI, responsible for ACTH binding and induced signaling, is not conserved (Agulleiro et al., 2010; Chan et al., 2009). In fact, orientation analysis in CHO cells demonstrates that both ends of the MRAP2 are detectable on the extracellular side of the membrane. MRAP2 facilitates MC2R trafficking to the membrane (Agulleiro et al., 2010; Chan et al., 2009; Sebag and Hinkle, 2009b) but data on functional activation by ACTH are controversial. Co-immunoprecipitation studies demonstrated that MRAP2 interacts with the MC2R and fully rescues the functional expression of the receptor. In addition, non-glycosylated MRAP2 assists MC2R to reach the plasma membrane but the receptor cannot respond to the ACTH stimulation. These data suggest that MRAP2 has two independent functions, (i) assisting the traffic of MC2R to the plasma membrane and (ii) enabling the receptor to respond to ACTH (Chan et al., 2009). However, Sebag and Hinkle (Sebag and Hinkle, 2009b) reported that MC2R reaches the cell membrane in the presence of MRAP2 but that the increase in ACTH-induced cAMP was much lower (8-fold) than that exhibited in cells expressing both MC2R and MRAP1. When the LDYI motif was introduced into the MRAP2 sequence,

the co-expressed MC2R was able to respond to ACTH to a similar extent to that observed in cells co-expressing MC2R/MRAP1. Subsequently, it was demonstrated that MRAP2 is an endogenous inhibitor of MC2R activation and competes with MRAP1 to bind to the receptor, thus decreasing the ability of ACTH to stimulate cAMP production. Also, ACTH binds to MC2R with high affinity when co-expressed with MRAP1, but not with MRAP2 (Sebag and Hinkle, 2010).

In our hands, zfMRAP2a was able to partially promote the presence of zfMC2R in the membrane but not ACTH-induced cAMP synthesis, while the co-expression of zfMRAP2a with zfMRAP1 enhanced the response of MC2R to ACTH stimulation (Agulleiro et al., 2010). Zebrafish genome also exhibits a paralogue gene of MRAP2 named MRAP2b. The protein is well conserved within the N-terminal domain but, again, it shows high divergence within the C-terminal region, also when compared with zfMRAP2a. Co-expression of MRAP2b with zfMC2R does not promote the functional expression of the receptor. Tagging experiments demonstrated that MRAP2b co-localized with the zfMC2R in a perinuclear region and in the cytoplasm, and was therefore unable to promote zfMC2R traffic to the membrane and an increase in ACTH-induced cAMP. When Doufexis and collaborators (Doufexis et al., 2007) investigated the interaction of the C-terminal tail of the MC2R with nucleoporin 50, they found that the stimulation of HEK cells expressing MC2R with ACTH promoted a gradual translocation of the MC2R-Nup50 complex from the membrane to the nucleus. It is thus possible that MRAP2b could traffic zfMC2R to the nuclear membrane or play a role in the nuclear translocation process (Agulleiro et al., 2010). Both zfMRAP2a and zfMRAP2b cooperate with MRAP1 to intensify the ACTH-induced cAMP increase mediated by zfMC2R (Agulleiro et al., 2010).

Recent research in cartilaginous fish have characterized the first MC2R that can be activated independently of MRAP in CHO cells. Therefore, trafficking to the membrane and functional activation do not require co-expression with exogenous MRAPs (Reinick et al., 2012b).

### 4. MRAP effects on the function of other MCRs

If the MRAP system assists MC2R functional expression, an obvious question arises as to whether this system is also involved in the function of the remaining melanocortin receptors. Immunoprecipitation studies demonstrated that both MRAP1 and MRAP2 interact physically with all five melanocortin receptors (Chan et al., 2009). Both MRAP1 and MRAP2 reduce the expression level of MC4R and MC5R but not of MC1R and MC3R in the plasma membrane. Accordingly, both MRAP1 and MRAP2 decrease NDP-MSH-stimulated cAMP production in cells expressing MC3R, MC4R and MC5R, but only MRAP2 was able to induce a similar effect on MC1R (Chan et al., 2009). In contrast to this, Sebag and Hinkle (Sebag and Hinkle, 2010) reported no effect of MRAP1 or MRAP1+MRAP2 on NDP-MSH-stimulated cAMP production mediated by MC4R expression in CHO cells. Studies on MC5R demonstrated that the receptor rapidly traffics to the membrane but it is trapped intracellularly when coexpressed with MRAP1. The MC5R homodimerizes in the absence of MRAP1, as does MC2R, but the coexpression of MRAP1 inhibits MC5R homodimerization, unlike MC2R (Sebag and Hinkle, 2009a). Therefore, MRAP1 has diametrically opposite effects on two different MCRs. The MRAP1 promotes MC2R traffic to the plasma membrane but prevents the functional expression of MC5R. Experiments in cartilaginous fish (Scualus acanthias) have shown that MRAP1 can also increase the sensitivity of the MC5R to ACTH. In this species, the MC5R is activated with higher potency by ACTH (1-25) than other MSH peptides (Reinick et al., 2012a).

5. Concluding remarks and future directions

The melanocortin system is probably one of the most complex endocrine systems as it exhibits a complex precursor encoding different agonists (MSHs and ACTH) and a non-agonist (β-endorphin), five different receptors, the constitutive activity of some receptors (MC4R), endogenous inverse agonists (AGRP and ASIP) and receptor accessory proteins (MRAPs) that promote the presence of the receptor in the plasma membrane. The discovery of these accessory proteins has allowed proper characterization of the MC2R and also of the other MCRs. The new challenge will be to study how these MRAPs can modulate the function of the melanocortin receptors by regulating their mRNA expression, functional expression, agonist binding and signaling. In fact, MRAPs are excellent candidates for regulating MC2R sensitivity by modulating the functional expression. This regulatory function might be physiologically relevant in the modulation of stress responses, especially stress accommodation processes. The MRAP system could limit the presence of MC2R in the membrane and therefore decrease the response to ACTH. The same might also be true for the functions regulated by the remaining MCRs.

Acknowledgments

Grants AGL2010-22247-C03-01 and CSD 2007-00002 from Spanish Science and Education Ministry (MEC) to JMC-R. Additional funding was obtained from the “Generalitat Valenciana” (research grant PROMETEO 2010/006). MJA and RC are recipient of a “Juan de la Cierva” research contract and FPI fellowship, respectively, from MINECO.

References

Agulleiro, M.J., Roy, S., Sánchez, E., Puchol, S., Gallo-Payet, N., Cerdá-Reverter, J.M., 2010. Role of accessory proteins in the function of zebrafish melanocortin receptor type 2. Mol. Cell. Endocrinol. 320, 145–152.

Bangol, D., Lu, X.-Y., Kaelin, C.D., Day, H.E.W., Ollmann, M., Gantz, I., Akil, H., Barsh, G.S., Watson, S.J.J., 1999. Anatomy of an endogenous antagonist: relationship between agouti-related protein and proopiomelanocortin in brain. J. Neurosci. 19, 1–7.

Castro, M.G., Morrison, E., 1997. Post-translational processing of proopiomelanocortin in the pituitary and the brain. Crit. Rev. Neurobiol. 11, 35–57.

Cerdá-Reverter, J.M., Peter, R.E., 2003. Endogenous melanocortin antagonist in fish: structure, brain mapping, and regulation by fasting of the goldfish agouti-related protein gene. Endocrinology 144, 4552–4561.

Cerdá-Reverter, J.M., Haitina, T., Schiöth, H.S., Peter, R.E., 2005. Gene structure of the goldfish agouti-signaling protein: a putative role in the dorsal-ventral pigment pattern of fish. Endocrinology 146, 1597–161026.

Cerdá-Reverter, J.M., Agulleiro, M.J., Sánchez, E., Guillot, R., 2011. Fish melanocortin system. Eur. J. Pharmacol. 660, 53–60.

Chai, B.X., Neubig, R.R., Millhauser, G.L., Thompson, D.A., Jackson, P.J., Barsh, G.S., Dickinson, C.J., Li, J.Y., Lai, Y.M., Gantz, I., 2003. Inverse agonist activity of agouti and agouti-related protein. Peptides 24, 603–609.

Chan, L.F., Webb, T.R., Chung, T.T., Meimaridou, E., Cooray, S.N., Guasti, L., Chapple, J.P., Egertová, M., Elphick, M.R., Cheetham, M.E., Metherell, L.A., Clark, A.J., 2009. MRAP and MRAP2 are bidirectional regulators of the melanocortin receptor family. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 106, 6146–6151.

Chan, L.F., Metherell, L.A., Clark, A.J., 2011. Effects of melanocortins on adrenal gland physiology. Eur. J. Pharmacol. 660, 171–180.

Cone, R.D., 2006. Studies on the physiological functions of the melanocortin system. Endocr. Rev. 27, 736–749.

Cooray, S.N., Clark, A.J., 2011. Melanocortin receptors and their accessory proteins. Mol. Cell. Endocrinol. 331, 215–221.

Cooray, S.N., Almiro Do Vale, I., Leung, K.Y., Webb, T.R., Chapple, J.P., Egertová, M., Cheetham, M.E., Elphick, M.R., Clark, A.J., 2008. The melanocortin 2 receptor accessory protein exists as a homodimer and is essential for the function of the melanocortin 2 receptor in the mouse y1 cell line. Endocrinology 149, 1935–1941.

Cooray, S.N., Chung, T.T., Mazhar, K., Szidonya, L., Clark, A.J., 2011. Bioluminescence resonance energy transfer reveals the adrenocorticotropic (ACTH)-induced conformational change of the activated ACTH receptor complex in living cells. Endocrinology 152, 495–502.5.

Doufexis, M., Storr, H.L., King, P.J., Clark, A.J., 2007. Interaction of the melanocortin 2 receptor with nucleoporin 50: evidence for a novel pathway between a G-protein-coupled receptor and the nucleus. FASEB J. 21, 4095–4100.

Fridmanis, D., Petrovska, R., Kalnina, I., Slaidina, M., Peculis, R., Schiöth, h.B., Klovins, J., 2010. Identification of domains responsible for specific membrane transport and ligand specificity of the ACTH receptor (MC2R). Mol. Cell. Endocrinol. 321, 175–183.

Gerets, H.H.J., Peeters, K., Arckens, L., Vandesande, R., Berghman, L.R., 2000. Sequence and distribution of proopiomelanocortin in the pituitary and brain of the chicken (Gallus gallus). J. Comp. Neurol. 417, 250–262.

Hinkle, P.M., Serasinghe, M.N., Jakabowski, A., Sebag, J.A., Wilson, K.R., Haskell-Luevano, C., 2011. Use of chimeric melanocortin-2 and -4 receptors to identify regions responsible for ligand specificity and dependence on melanocortin 2 receptor accessory protein. Eur. J. Pharmacol. 660, 94–102.

Kurokawa, T., Murashita, K., Uji, S., 2006. Characterization and tissue distribution of multiple agouti-family genes in pufferfish, Takifugu rubripes. Peptides 27, 3165–3175.

Metherell, L.A., Chapple, J.P., Cooray, S., David, A., Becker, C., Rüschendorf, F., Naville, D., Begeot, M., Khoo, B., Nürnberg, P., Huebner, A., Cheetham, M.E., Clark, A.J., 2005. Mutations in MRAP, encoding a new interacting partner of the ACTH receptor, cause familial glucocorticoid deficiency type 2. Nat. Genet. 37, 166–170.

Murashita, K., Kurokawa, T., Ebbesson, L.O., Stefansson, S.O., Rønnestad, I., 2009. Characterization, tissue distribution, and regulation of agouti-related protein (AgRP), cocaine- and amphetamine-regulated transcript (CART) and neuropeptide Y (NPY) in Atlantic salmon (Salmo salar). Gen. Comp. Endocrinol. 162, 160–171.

Nakanishi, S., Inoue, A., Kita, T., Nakamura, M., Chang, A.C.Y., Cohen, S.N., Numa, S., 1979. Nucleotide sequence of cloned cDNA for bovine corticotropin-β-lipotropin precursor. Nature 288, 610–613.

Nijenhuis, W.A., Oosterom, J., Adan, R.A., 2001. AgRP(83-132) acts as an inverse agonist on the human-melanocortin-4 receptor. Mol. Endocrinol. 15, 164–171.

Noon, L.A., Franklin, J.M., King, P.J., Goulding, N.J., Hunyady, L., Clark, A.J., 2002. Failed export of the adrenocorticotropic receptor from the endoplasmic reticulum in non-adrenal cells: evidence in support of a requirement for a specific adrenal accessory factor. J. Endocrinol. 174, 17–25.

Reinick, C.L., Liang, L., Angelson, J.K., Dores, R.M., 2012a. Functional expression of Squalus acanthias melanocortin-5 receptor in CHO cells: ligand selectivity and interaction with MRAP. Eur. J. Pharmacol. 680, 1–7.

Reinick, C.L., Liang, L., Angelson, J.K., Dores, R.M., 2012b. Identification of an MRAP-independent melanocortin 2 receptor: functional expression of the cartilaginous fish, Callorhinchus milii, melanocortin-2 receptor in CHO cells. Endocrinology 153, 4757–4765.

Roy, S., Rached, M., Gallo-Payet, N., 2007. Differential regulation of the human adrenocorticotropic receptor [melanocortin-2 receptor (MC2R)] by human MC2R accessory protein isoforms alpha and beta in isogenic human embryonic kidney 293 cells. Mol. Endocrinol. 21, 1656–1669.

Roy, S., Roy, S.J., Agulleiro, M.J., Cerdá-Reverter, J.M., Parent, J.L., Gallo-Payet, N., 2012. The C-terminal domain of melanocortin 2 receptor accessory proteins (MRAP) determines its localization and fine tunes ACTH-induced signaling. Gen. Comp. Endocrinol. 76, 265–274.

Schimmer, B.P., Kwan, W.K., Tsao, J., Qiu, R., 1995. Adrenocorticotropic-resistant mutants of the Y1 adrenal cell line fail to express the adrenocorticotropic receptor. J. Cell. Physiol. 163, 164–171.

Schiöth, H.B., Haitina, T., Ling, M.K., Ringholm, A., Fredriksson, R., Cerdá-Reverter, J.M., Klovins, J., 2007. Evolutionary conservation of the structural, pharmacological and genomic characteristics of the melanocortin receptors subtypes. Peptides 26, 1886–1900.

Sebag, J.A., Hinkle, P.M., 2007. Melanocortin-2 receptor accessory protein MRAP forms antiparallel homodimers. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 104, 20244–20249.

Sebag, J.A., Hinkle, P.M., 2009a. Opposite effects of the melanocortin-2 receptor accessory protein MRAP on MC2 and MC5 receptor dimerization and trafficking. J. Biol. Chem. 284, 22641–22648.

Sebag, J.A., Hinkle, P.M., 2009b. Regions of melanocortin 2 (MC2) receptor accessory protein necessary for dual topology and MC2 receptor trafficking and signaling. J. Biol. Chem. 284, 610–618.

Sebag, J.A., Hinkle, P.M., 2010. Regulation of G protein-coupled receptor signaling: specific dominant-negative effects of melanocortin 2 receptor accessory protein 2. Sci. Signal. 3, 116:ra28.

Song, Y., Golling, G., Thacker, T.L., Cone, R.D., 2003. Agouti-related protein (AGRP) is conserved and regulated by metabolic state in the zebrafish, Danio rerio. Endocrine 22, 257–265.

Tuinhof, R., Ubink, R., Tanaka, S., Atzori, C., van Strien, F.J.C., Roubos, E.W., 1998. Distribution of proopiomelanocortin and its peptide end products in the brain and hypophysis of the aquatic toad, Xenopus laevis. Cell Tissue Res. 292, 251–265.

Webb, T.R., Chan, L., Cooray, S.N., Cheetham, M.E., Chapple, J.P., Clark, A.J., 2009. Distinct melanocortin 2 receptor accessory protein domains are required for melanocortin 2 receptor interaction and promotion of receptor trafficking. Endocrinology 150, 720–726.

Xu, A., Choi, K.L., Wang, Y., Permana, P.A., Xu, L.Y., Bogardus, C., Cooper, G.J., 2002. Identification of novel putative membrane proteins selectively expressed during adipose conversion of 3T3-L1 cells. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 293, 1161–1167.
