
The Netherlands Journal of Medicine

REVIEW

# MiRNAs in oesophageal squamous cancer

Y. Chu, H. Zhu*, L. Lv, Y. Zhou, J. Huo

Department of Gastroenterology, The Second Xiangya Hospital of Central South University, Changsha, China, *Corresponding author: tel.: +86-731-85295035, fax: +86-731-85533525, e-mail: joanzhy@gmail.com

## ABSTRACT

Oesophageal cancer is a common cancer worldwide with a very poor prognosis. Oesophageal squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) is the major subtype of oesophageal cancer but also one of the least studied cancers worldwide. Although the molecular genetics of OSCC have been widely studied, the molecular mechanism of OSCC carcinogenesis is not completely understood. MicroRNA (miRNA) is now essential to understanding the molecular mechanism of cancer progression. Recent findings include the following: 1) recent findings regarding the functions of miRNA; 2) some of the latest findings on expression profile of miRNA involved in OSCC; 3) miRNAs and their target genes and molecular mechanisms in OSCC; and 4) the therapeutic-clinical potential of miRNAs in OSCC. We can make full use of this knowledge to guide us to evaluate and improve the patient's condition and choose the most fitting medical treatment or explore new approaches to improve the survival ratio of OSCC patients.

remains poor. Although preoperative chemotherapy and chemoradiation therapy are currently used for patients with advanced stage OSCC, their effectiveness is unsatisfactory. Consequently, it is important for targeted prevention and early detection in the control of this disease. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are a species of small noncoding single-stranded RNA of about 19 to 24 nucleotides that through partial sequence homology may interact with the 3'-untranslated region of target mRNA molecules. MiRNA inactivates multiple target genes by sequence-specific binding-mediated destabilisation of mRNA or inhibition of translation.

In this review, we highlight four issues of current relevance to this field and discuss 1) the recent findings regarding the functions of miRNA; 2) some of the latest findings on molecular mechanisms of miRNA involved in OSCC; 3) miRNAs and their target genes in OSCC; and 4) the therapeutic-clinical potential of miRNAs in OSCC.

## KEYWORDS

MicroRNA, oesophageal cancer, oesophageal squamous cell carcinoma

## INTRODUCTION

According to statistics, oesophageal cancer, which occurs worldwide with a variable geographic distribution, is the sixth leading cause of death from cancer and one of the least studied cancers worldwide. It has two main forms, each with distinct aetiological and pathological characteristics: oesophageal squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) and oesophageal adenocarcinoma (OAC). OSCC is the most frequent subtype of oesophageal cancer; it is often diagnosed at an advanced stage and its prognosis

PREVALENCE AND AETIOLOGY OF OESOPHAGEAL CANCER AND OESOPHAGEAL SQUAMOUS CANCER

According to statistics, oesophageal cancer is the sixth most common cancer worldwide and the third malignancy of the gastrointestinal tract with a very poor prognosis. Oesophageal cancer has two major histological types: adenocarcinoma (OAC) and squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC); OAC predominantly occurs in Western societies, but OSCC is the predominant histological type of oesophageal cancer worldwide. Incidence rates vary across the world by nearly 16-fold, with the highest rates found in Southern and Eastern Africa and Eastern Asia, and lowest rates observed in Western and Middle Africa and Central America in both males and females. OSCC is also one of the least studied cancers worldwide but one of

© Van Zuiden Communications B.V. All rights reserved.

MARCH 2013, VOL. 71, NO 2

the most lethal malignancies, with a five-year survival rate of less than 10%, and occurs at a relatively high frequency in certain areas of China.⁵⁶ Thus, OSCC is a very deadly disease in strong need of new, effective, therapeutic approaches.

Major risk factors for OSCC are not well understood, but are thought to include tobacco smoking, alcohol consumption, poor nutritional status and low intake of fruits and vegetables.⁷⁻¹¹ In some low-risk areas such as the United States and some Western countries, cigarette smoking and excessive alcohol consumption account for about 90% of the total cases of OSCC.¹² But the rates in these areas have been steadily declining because of long-term reductions in smoking and alcohol consumption.¹³ However, OSCC has been increasing in certain Asian countries, probably as a result of increases in tobacco use and alcohol consumption.¹⁴ The distinct risks exhibited by individuals exposed to similar known risk factors implied that genetic predisposition might play an important role in oesophageal cancer aetiology.⁷⁸ The exact causes and the mechanism of OSCC, which appear to be multifactorial, have not yet been fully appreciated. Thereby there is no effective strategy for treatment and prevention nowadays.

OSCC is often not diagnosed until a late stage when it is incurable and the prognosis of affected patients is unsatisfactory. Consequently, the dismal outcome of oesophageal cancer patients highlights the need for novel prognostic biomarkers to allow a tailored multimodality approach with increased efficacy, such as microRNAs (miRNA).

### MiRNAs AND THEIR FUNCTIONS

MicroRNAs are small noncoding RNAs of 19-24 nucleotides in length that are important in the regulation of several crucial biological processes, such as cell growth,¹⁵ apoptosis,¹⁶ development,¹⁷ differentiation,¹⁸ and endocrine homeostasis.¹⁹ The first miRNA was described in 1993, in which the C. elegans heterochronic gene lin-4 encoded small RNAs with antisense complementarity to lin-14.²⁰ MiRNAs play important roles in the aetiology of many human diseases by post-transcriptionally regulating the expression of approximately one third of all human genes.²¹,²² It has been investigated in a variety of diseases, including diabetes, heart diseases, Alzheimer’s disease, and viral infections.²³ The most active area and the starting point for the pathogenic role of miRNAs lies in cancer research.²⁴,²⁵ MicroRNAs are known as gene silencers and their expression profiles have been reported to be negatively correlated with those of their target genes.²⁶ The biological role of miRNA is to inactivate single or multiple target genes by sequence-specific binding-mediated destabilisation of mRNA or inhibition of translation mechanisms.²⁷ The degradation or inhibition of specific mRNA translation could decrease the expression of the resulting protein, and their role in disease development would presumably be through the regulation of their target protein gene.²⁸,²⁹ Recently, genome-wide expression of miRNAs, which could be examined by microarray and on a more limited miRNA set by microbead hybridisation or reverse transcription-PCR (RT-PCR), can provide increasing information in miRNA function studies of many diseases.

### MiRNAs AND CANCERS

Growing evidence has indicated important roles for different miRNA species in the development of different cancers, perhaps being involved in the pathophysiology of all human cancers.³⁰ MiRNA expression profiles have frequently been reported to be correlated with the aetiology, classification, progression, and prognosis of multiple human cancers.¹,²¹,²⁹,³¹⁻³³ Recent studies indicate that numerous miRNAs have been identified as tumour-related and can be categorised in two groups based on their functional relevance, tumour suppressors and oncogenes, and the miRNAs with roles in cancer are designated as oncogenic miRNAs (oncomiRs).³⁴ MiRNAs can act as oncogenes or tumour suppressors and modulate the expression of approximately one-third of all human genes.³⁵ In normal cells, tumour suppressor miRs are highly expressed and downregulate the expression of oncogenic proteins, whereas in tumour cells they are silenced leading to upregulation of oncogenic proteins. Conversely, oncomiRs are upregulated in tumour cells, downregulating the expression of tumour suppressive proteins. Both tumour suppressor miRs and oncomiRs are involved in biological and pathological processes including cell differentiation, proliferation, apoptosis and metabolism, and are emerging as highly tissue-specific biomarkers with potential clinical applicability for defining cancer types and origins.³⁶

### MiRNAs IN OSCC

In recent years, the study of miRNAs in OSCC has been expanded and is producing new knowledge on the molecular basis of this disease. MicroRNA expression profiles are important diagnostic and prognostic markers of OSCC. We summarised the miRNAs that have been reported in recent years¹,⁶,³²,³⁷⁻⁶⁶ (table 1) and discovered that more upregulated miRNAs species than downregulated species have been found. In other words, this means that we have found more oncomiRs than tumour suppressors

Chu, et al. MiRNAs in oesophageal squamous cancer.

Table 1. miRNAs in oesophageal squamous cell carcinoma that have been reported in the literature

| Upregulation | Downregulation |
|--------------|----------------|
| Tissue       | miR-9          | miR-10b        | miR-15b        | let-7          |
|              | miR-16         | miR-17-5p      | miR-20a        | miR-29c        | miR-30a-3p     |
|              | miR-20b        | miR-21         | miR-23a        | miR-100        | miR-106a       |
|              | miR-25         | miR-26a        | miR-27b        | miR-125b       | miR-133a       |
|              | miR-31         | miR-34b        | miR-34c        | miR-133b       | miR-139        |
|              | miR-92a        | miR-93         | miR-96         | miR-143        | miR-145        |
|              | miR-103        | miR-106a       | miR-107        | miR-148a       | miR-203        |
|              | miR-127        | miR-128b       | miR-129        | miR-205        | miR-210        |
|              | miR-130a       | miR-130b       | miR-132        |                | miR-375        |
|              | miR-134        | miR-137        | miR-138        |                |                |
|              | miR-142-3p     | miR-151        | miR-192        |                |                |
|              | miR-194        | miR-205        | MiR-223        |                |                |
|              | miR-296        | miR-373        | miR-1322       |                |                |
| Cell         | miR-16         | miR-21         | miR-10a        | miR-29c        |                |
|              | miR-30a-5p     | miR-141        | miR-99a        | miR-100        |                |
|              | miR-200c       | miR-205        | miR-125b       | miR-146b       |                |
|              | miR-429        | miR-153        | miR-376a       | miR-379        |                |
|              |                | miR-593        | miR-651        |                |                |

genes of specific miRNAs in OSCC to elucidate the exact mechanism of OSCC carcinogenesis. The target genes of these causal miRNAs may be tumour suppressor genes or other genes related to oncogenes, such as growth factors, growth factor receptors, signal transducers, transcription factors, programmed cell death regulators, genes that control cell division, or genes that repair DNA.

OncomiRs are presumed to function by downregulating tumour suppressor genes. Several reports in the literature have mentioned the target genes of several oncomiRs in OSCC (table 2). Many studies described that miR-21 targets phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN), tumour suppressor gene tropomyosin 1 (TPM1), programmed cell death 4 (PDCD4), Sprouty 2, B-cell CLL/lymphoma 2 (BCL2), programmed cell and Maspin, thereby demonstrating its involvement in tumour growth, invasion, and metastasis. Zhang et al. revealed that miR-31 promoted OSCC colony formation, migration and invasion that may regulate three tumour suppressor genes, namely epithelial membrane protein 1 (EMP1), kinase suppressor of ras 2 (KSR2) and regulator of G-protein signalling 4

correlated with OSCC. Furthermore, increasingly relevant research is being performed. For example, some studies have revealed that functional single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) rs2910164 in pre-miR-146a and rs11614913 in pre-miRNA-196a could contribute to OSCC susceptibility and clinical outcome in Chinese Han. Zhang et al. identified a profile of seven serum miRNAs (miR-10a, miR-22, miR-100, miR-148b, miR-223, miR-133a, and miR-127-3p) as OSCC biomarkers. And Chen et al. concluded that CpG island methylation of miR-34a, miR-34b/c and miR-129-2 occurs frequently and is an important mechanism, for their low expression in OSCC and the high methylation ratio of miR-129-2 indicated its potential as a methylation biomarker in the early diagnosis of OSCC.

MiRNAs AND THEIR TARGET GENES IN OSCC

Altered miRNA expression has been found to promote carcinogenesis, but little is known about the role of miRNAs in oesophageal cancer. Under these circumstances, accumulating research concerns the target

Table 2. miRNAs and their target genes in oesophageal squamous cell carcinoma

| miRNAs           | Target gene    | Effect of OSCC                                      |
|------------------|----------------|-----------------------------------------------------|
| OncomiRs         | miR-10b        | KLF4                                                | Promotes cell migration and invasion |
|                  | miR-19a        | TNF-α                                               | Promotes cell growth                   |
|                  | miR-21         | PTEN, TPM1, PDCD4, Sprouty 2, BCL2, maspin           | Promotes cell growth, invasion, and metastasis |
|                  | miR-31         | EMP1, KSR2, RGS4                                     | Promotes tumour colony formation, migration and invasion |
|                  | miR-34b        | P53                                                 | DNA damage and oncogenic stress        |
|                  | miR-92a        | CDH1                                                | Promotes cell migration and invasion   |
|                  | miR-205        | ZEB2                                                | Promotes cell invasion and migration   |
|                  | miR-373        | LATS2                                               | Affects cell cycle progression or apoptosis |
|                  | miR-296        | Cyclin D1, p27                                       | Affects tumour cell growth             |
| Tumour suppressor | let-7          | HMGA2                                               | Inhibits cell proliferation, lymph node metastasis |
|                  | miR-29c        | Cyclin-E                                            | Inhibits tumour cell growth            |
|                  | miR-133a/b     | FSCN1                                               | Inhibits cell proliferation and invasion |
|                  | miR-145        | FSCN1                                               | Inhibits cell proliferation and invasion |
|                  | miR-203        | ANP63                                               | Inhibits cell proliferation            |
|                  | miR-210        | FGFR1                                               | Inhibits cell proliferation            |
(RGS4). Hong *et al.*⁵⁵ found that miR-296 might cause the growth of OSCC *in vitro* and *in vivo* through regulation of cyclin D1 and p27. He *et al.*⁴⁰ demonstrated that miR-34b was the direct transcriptional target of protein 53 (p53) in human and mouse cells and that its induction by DNA damage and oncogenic stress was p53 dependent. Matsushima *et al.*⁵¹ showed that miR-205 was likely to control cell invasion and migration in OSCC cells through its repression of zinc finger E-box-binding homeobox 2 (ZEB2), a repressor of E-cadherin expression resulting in dysregulating cellular processes which may ultimately lead to tumourigenesis of OSCC. Tian *et al.*⁴² described that miR-10b overexpression promoted cell migration and invasion in human OSCC cell lines by regulating the Krüppel-like factor 4 (KLF4), a zinc finger protein of the Krüppel-like factor family that plays a role in cell cycle regulation, differentiation, and rises in response to DNA damage.[⁷⁷,⁷⁸] Lee *et al.*⁴⁹ described that the miR-373 expression was found to be inversely correlated with large tumour suppressor homolog 2 (LATS2) expression in the OSCC cell lines and OSCC patients. After detecting 109 consecutive OSCC samples, Kurashige *et al.*⁶⁶ found that high expression of miR-223 had a significant adverse impact on the survival of OSCC patients through repression of the function of FBXW7.

Conversely, it can be postulated that re-introduction of tumour suppressor miRs into tumour cells will result in upregulating tumour suppressor genes leading to the downregulation of target oncogenes and tumour suppression (*table* 2). Liu *et al.*⁵⁹ demonstrated that let-7, a tumour suppressor, was expressed lower in OSCC and might repress cell proliferation, and correlated with lymph node metastasis of OSCC patients by negatively regulating high mobility group AT-hook 2 (HMGA2) at the post-transcriptional level. Ding *et al.*⁶ reported that miR-29c, a potential tumour-suppressing miRNA in OSCC development, could influence the activity of cyclin E-CDK2 complexes by inhibiting the expression of cyclin E, one of the human G1 cyclins that binds to and activates its catalytic partner cyclin-dependent kinase 2 (CDK2) which phosphorylates a number of downstream substrates.⁷⁹⁻⁸² Yuan *et al.*⁸³ reported that miR-203 can significantly inhibit the proliferation of OSCC cells through the fJNp63-mediated signal pathway. fJNp63, an alternative splice variant of p63 gene lacking TA domain,⁸⁴ is the major isotype expressed in a variety of human squamous cell carcinomas including OSCC,⁸⁵ and the expression level of fJNp63 in tumour tissues was significantly higher than in the matched normal tissues.⁸⁵,⁸⁶ Chen *et al.*⁵⁶ revealed that miR-92a promotes OSCC cell migration and invasion at least partially via suppression of CDH1 expression, and patients with upregulated miR-92a are prone to lymph node metastasis and thus have a poor prognosis.

Kano *et al.*⁴⁷ found that miR-145 and miR-133a/b directly regulate FSCN1 and contribute to cellular proliferation and invasion in OSCC. Tsuchiya *et al.*⁵⁷ showed that miR-210 mediated mainly by the targeting of fibroblast growth factor receptor-like 1 (FGFRL1), inhibiting the proliferation of OSCC cells by inducing cell cycle arrest and apoptosis. Kong *et al.*⁸⁷ reported that downregulation of miR-375, which is mainly caused by promoter methylation, is one of the molecular mechanisms involved in the development and progression of OSCC through inhibiting the expression of IGF1R. Zhang *et al.*⁶⁵ found that miR-1322 can regulate oesophageal cancer-related gene 2 (ECRG2) in an allele-specific manner.

### MiRNAs AND THEIR TARGET GENES AFTER MEDICAL TREATMENT

Several studies have focused on the alteration and mechanism of miRNAs in the medical treatment of OSCC patients. It was shown that some miRNA alteration was closely related to some medical treatment. For example, Hummel *et al.*⁸⁸ revealed that 13 miRNAs (miR-199a-5p, miR-302f, miR-320a, miR-342-3p, miR-425, miR-455-3p, miR-486-3p, miR-519c-5p, miR-548d-5p, miR-617, miR-758, miR-766, miR-1286) were deregulated after 24- and/or 72-hours of treatment (Cisplatin or 5-fluorouracil) in OSCC cell lines. Additionally, many researchers appeared to notice the roles and possible mechanisms of miRNAs in the medical treatment of OSCC. For example, Hong *et al.*⁵⁵ described that downregulation of miR-296 could confer sensitivity of both P-glycoprotein-related and P-glycoprotein-nonrelated drugs on OSCC cells, and might promote ADR-induced apoptosis, accompanied by increased accumulation and decreased release of ADR. Imanaka *et al.*⁴⁵ showed that miR-141 negatively regulates the expression of YAP1 and conferred cisplatin resistance in OSCC. Hummel *et al.*⁴⁸ revealed that miR-148a upregulation sensitises chemotherapy-resistant variants of OSCC cell lines, to cisplatin and 5-FU *in vitro*, and further improves sensitivity in the corresponding chemotherapy-sensitive maternal cell lines. Mitogen and stress-activated protein kinase 1 (MSK1), *de novo* DNA methylation and pregnane X receptor (PXR) were potential mediators of these observations. Hamano *et al.*⁸⁹ demonstrated that overexpression of miR-200c induced chemoresistance in OSCC cell lines mediated through activation of the AKT signalling pathway. Hummel *et al.*⁶¹ also suggested that miR-21, miR-106a, and miR-148a correlate with tumour location, distant lymph node metastases and outcome in patients with locally advanced OSCC, and might inform the initial assessment of these patients and predict those at higher risk of postsurgical recurrence. Consequently, it can provide very valuable information to guide us to

Chu, et al. MiRNAs in oesophageal squamous cancer.

MARCH 2013, VOL. 71, NO 2

72
evaluate the patient's condition and choose the most fitting medical treatment methods in individual OSCC patients. Furthermore, it could mean that a specific miRNA could have a treatment effect in itself.

### CLINICAL APPLICATION OF MiRNAs

Improvement in the survival rate of patients with OSCC will most likely result from new therapeutics based on an increased understanding of the tumour biology and identification of biomarkers for earlier detection. The differential miRNA expression of OSCC may lead to identification of specific markers for progression, molecular classification of carcinoma lesions. Both oncomiRs and tumour suppressor miRs have the potential to serve as molecular therapeutic targets. The inhibition of oncomiRs and the promotion of tumour suppressor miRs should result in increased levels of tumour suppressor proteins or decreased oncogene-induced proteins. For example, the inhibition of miR-21 may possibly regulate PTEN, TPM1, PDCD4, Sprouty2, BCL2, programmed cell and maspin and their corresponding proteins and may inhibit tumour growth, invasion, and metastasis as a result. Upregulating the expression of miR-29c may inhibit the tumour growth through inhibition of cyclin-E. Additionally, we could choose the best medical treatment for individuals by detecting and evaluating specific miRNA. Furthermore, we can change the expression of specific miRNA to improve the treatment effect for some medical methods. For example, the OSCC patients of overexpression of miR-200c may lead the chemoresistance, and inhibition of miR-200c may possibly promote the chemotherapy-sensitivity and improve the effect of chemotherapy if there is no other method to choose. Consequently, a better understanding of changes in miRNA expression and their functions during OSCC carcinogenesis might lead to possible improvements in the diagnosis and treatment of OSCC. At present, there are no reports on the use of miRNA for anticancer therapy in the clinical field. However, miRNA therapy provides an attractive antitumour approach for integrated cancer therapy.

### CONCLUSION

To the best of our knowledge, miRNA expression and its role in OSCC have considerably advanced our understanding of the molecular mechanisms of OSCC. Emerging reports on miRNAs in OSCC have suggested that miRNAs are promising in stratifying the risk of susceptibility to developing and diagnosing OSCC, and developing future therapeutic targets in OSCC.

Furthermore, we can make full use of this knowledge to guide us to evaluate and improve the patient's condition and choose the most fitting medical treatment or explore new approaches to improve the survival rate of OSCC patients.

---

### REFERENCES

1. Guo Y, Chen Z, Zhang L, et al. Distinctive microRNA profiles relating to patient survival in esophageal squamous cell carcinoma. Cancer Res. 2008;68:26-33.
2. Enzinger PC, Mayer RJ. Esophageal cancer. N Engl J Med. 2003;349:2241-52.
3. Jemal A, Bray F, Center MM, et al. Global cancer statistics. CA Cancer J Clin. 2011;61:69-90.
4. Vizcaino AP, Moreno V, Lambert R, et al. Time trends incidence of both major histologic types of esophageal carcinomas in selected countries, 1973-1995. Int J Cancer. 2002;99:860-8.
5. He J, Gu D, Wu X, et al. Major causes of death among men and women in China. N Engl J Med. 2005;353:1124-34.
6. Ding DP, Chen ZL, Zhao XH, et al. miR-29c induces cell cycle arrest in esophageal squamous cell carcinoma by modulating cyclin E expression. Carcinogenesis. 2011;32:1025-32.
7. Hiyama T, Yoshihara M, Tanaka S, et al. Genetic polymorphisms and esophageal cancer risk. Int J Cancer. 2007;121:1643-58.
8. Kuwano H, Kato H, Miyazaki T, et al. Genetic alterations in esophageal cancer. Surg Today. 2005;35:7-18.
9. Islami F, Boffetta P, Ren JS, et al. High-temperature beverages and foods and esophageal cancer risk--a systematic review. Int J Cancer. 2009;125:491-524.
10. Islami F, Pourshams A, Nasrollahzadeh D, et al. Tea drinking habits and oesophageal cancer in a high risk area in northern Iran: population based case-control study. BMJ. 2009;338:b929.
11. Wu M, Liu AM, Kampman E, et al. Green tea drinking, high tea temperature and esophageal cancer in high-and low-risk areas of Jiangsu Province, China: a population-based case-control study. Int J Cancer. 2009;124:1907-13.
12. Engel LS, Chow WH, Vaughan TL, et al. Population attributable risks of esophageal and gastric cancers. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2003;95:1404-13.
13. Cook MB, Chow WH, and Devesa SS. Oesophageal cancer incidence in the United States by race, ex, and histologic type, 1977-2005. Br J Cancer. 2009;101:855-9.
14. Lu CL, Lang HC, Luo JC, et al. Increasing trend of the incidence of esophageal squamous cell carcinoma, but not adenocarcinoma, in Taiwan. Cancer Causes Control. 2010;21:269-74.
15. Cheng AM, Byrom MW, Shelton J, et al. Antisense inhibition of human miRNAs and indications for an involvement of miRNA in cell growth and apoptosis. Nucleic Acids Res. 2005;33:1290-7.
16. Xu P, Guo M, Hay BA, MicroRNAs and the regulation of cell death. Trends Genet. 2004;20:617-24.
17. Karp X and Ambros V. Developmental biology. Encountering microRNAs in cell fate signaling. Science. 2005;310:1288-9.
18. Chen CZ, Li L, Lodish HF, et al. MicroRNAs modulate hematopoietic lineage differentiation. Science. 2004;303:83-6.
19. Poy MN, Eliasson L, Krutzfeldt J, et al. A pancreatic islet-specific microRNA regulates insulin secretion. Nature. 2004;432:226-30.
20. Lee RC, Feinbaum RL, Ambros V. The C. elegans heterochronic gene lin-4 encodes small RNAs with antisense complementarity to lin-14. Cell. 1993;75:843-54.
21. Barbarotto E, Schmittgen TD, Calin GA. MicroRNAs and cancer: profile, profile, profile. Int J Cancer. 2008;122:969-77.

Chu, et al. MiRNAs in oesophageal squamous cancer.

MARCH 2013, VOL. 71, NO 2
73

22. Lewis BP, Burge CB, Bartel DP. Conserved seed pairing, often flanked by adenosines, indicates that thousands of human genes are microRNA targets. Cell. 2005;120:15-20.
23. Couzin J. MicroRNAs make big impression in disease after disease. Science. 2008;319:1782-4.
24. Calin GA, Dumitru CD, Shimizu M, et al. Frequent deletions and downregulation of micro-RNA genes miR-15 and miR-16 at 13q14 in chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2002;99:15524-9.
25. Garzon R, Fabbri M, Cimmino A, et al. MicroRNA expression and function in cancer. Trends Mol Med. 2006;12:580-7.
26. Lim LP, Lau NC, Garrett-Engele P, et al. Microarray analysis shows that some microRNAs downregulate large numbers of target mRNAs. Nature. 2005;433:769-73.
27. Kan T, Meltzer SJ. MicroRNAs in Barrett's esophagus and esophageal adenocarcinoma. Curr Opin Pharmacol. 2009;9:727-32.
28. Esquela-Kerscher A, Slack FJ. Oncomirs—microRNAs with a role in cancer. Nat Rev Cancer. 2006;6:259-69.
29. Calin GA, Croce CM. MicroRNA signatures in human cancers. Nat Rev Cancer. 2006;6:857-66.
30. Calin GA, Croce CM. MicroRNA-cancer connection: the beginning of a new tale. Cancer Res. 2006;66:7390-4.
31. Lu J, Getz G, Miska EA, et al. MicroRNA expression profiles classify human cancers. Nature. 2005;435:834-8.
32. Feber A, Xi L, Luketich JD, et al. MicroRNA expression profiles of esophageal cancer. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2008;135:255-60; discussion 260.
33. Ohta M, Mimori K, Fukuyoshi Y, et al. Clinical significance of the reduced expression of G protein gamma 7 (GNG7) in oesophageal cancer. Br J Cancer. 2008;98:410-7.
34. Cho WC. OncomiRs: the discovery and progress of microRNAs in cancers. Mol Cancer. 2007;6:60.
35. Ye Y, Wang KK, Gu J, et al. Genetic variations in microRNA-related genes are novel susceptibility loci for esophageal cancer risk. Cancer Prev Res (Phila). 2008;1:460-9.
36. Rosenfeld N, Aharonov R, Meiri E, et al. MicroRNAs accurately identify cancer tissue origin. Nat Biotechnol. 2008;26:462-9.
37. Zhang H, Li M, Han Y, et al. Downregulation of miR-27a might reverse multidrug resistance of esophageal squamous cell carcinoma. Dig Dis Sci. 2010;55:2545-51.
38. Liu M, Wang Z, Yang S, et al. TNF-alpha is a novel target of miR-19a. Int J Oncol. 2011;38:1013-22.
39. Ogawa R, Ishiguro H, Kuwabara Y, et al. Expression profiling of micro-RNAs in human esophageal squamous cell carcinoma using RT-PCR. Med Mol Morphol. 2009;42:102-9.
40. He L, He X, Lim LP, et al. A microRNA component of the p53 tumour suppressor network. Nature. 2007;447:1130-4.
41. Li X, Lin R, Li J. Epigenetic silencing of microRNA-375 regulates PDK1 expression in esophageal cancer. Dig Dis Sci. 2011;56:2849-56.
42. Tian Y, Luo A, Cai Y, et al. MicroRNA-10b promotes migration and invasion through KLF4 in human esophageal cancer cell lines. J Biol Chem. 2010;285:7986-94.
43. Hiyoshi Y, Kamohara H, Karashima R, et al. MicroRNA-21 regulates the proliferation and invasion in esophageal squamous cell carcinoma. Clin Cancer Res. 2009;15:1915-22.
44. Katada T, Ishiguro H, Kuwabara Y, et al. microRNA expression profile in undifferentiated gastric cancer. Int J Oncol. 2009;34:537-42.
45. Imanaka Y, Tsuchiya S, Sato F, et al. MicroRNA-141 confers resistance to cisplatin-induced apoptosis by targeting YAP1 in human esophageal squamous cell carcinoma. J Hum Genet. 2011;56:270-6.
46. Zhu L, Yan W, Rodriguez-Canales J, et al. MicroRNA analysis of microdissected normal squamous esophageal epithelium and tumor cells. Am J Cancer Res. 2011;1:574-84.

47. Kano M, Seki N, Kikkawa N, et al. miR-145, miR-133a and miR-133b: Tumor-suppressive miRNAs target FSCN1 in esophageal squamous cell carcinoma. Int J Cancer. 2010;127:2804-14.
48. Hummel R, Watson DI, Smith C, et al. Mir-148a improves response to chemotherapy in sensitive and resistant oesophageal adenocarcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma cells. J Gastrointest Surg. 2011;15:429-38.
49. Lee KH, Goan YG, Hsiao M, et al. MicroRNA-373 (miR-373) post-transcriptionally regulates large tumor suppressor, homolog 2 (LATS2) and stimulates proliferation in human esophageal cancer. Exp Cell Res. 2009;315:2529-38.
50. Mathe EA, Nguyen G.H, Bowman ED, et al. MicroRNA expression in squamous cell carcinoma and adenocarcinoma of the esophagus: associations with survival. Clin Cancer Res. 2009;15:6192-200.
51. Matsushima K, Isomoto H, Yamaguchi N, et al. MiRNA-205 modulates cellular invasion and migration via regulating zinc finger E-box binding homeobox 2 expression in esophageal squamous cell carcinoma cells. J Transl Med. 2011;9:30.
52. Kimura S, Naganuma S, Susuki D, et al. Expression of microRNAs in squamous cell carcinoma of human head and neck and the esophagus: miR-205 and miR-21 are specific markers for HNSCC and OSCC. Oncol Rep. 2010;23:1625-33.
53. Matsushima K, Isomoto H, Kohno S, et al. MicroRNAs and esophageal squamous cell carcinoma. Digestion. 2010;82:138-44.
54. Kano M, Seki N, Kikkawa N, et al. miR-145, miR-133a and miR-133b: Tumor suppressive miRNAs target FSCN1 in esophageal squamous cell carcinoma. Int J Cancer. 2010;127:2804-14.
55. Hong L, Han Y, Zhang H, et al. The prognostic and chemotherapeutic value of miR-296 in esophageal squamous cell carcinoma. Ann Surg. 2010;251:1056-63.
56. Chen ZL, Zhao XH, Wang JW, et al. microRNA-92a promotes lymph node metastasis of human esophageal squamous cell carcinoma via E-cadherin. J Biol Chem. 2011;286:10725-34.
57. Tsuchiya S, Fujiwara T, Sato F, et al. MicroRNA-210 regulates cancer cell proliferation through targeting fibroblast growth factor receptor-like 1 (FGFR1). J Biol Chem. 2011;286:420-8.
58. Zhang C, Wang C, Chen X, et al. Expression profile of microRNAs in serum: a fingerprint for esophageal squamous cell carcinoma. Clin Chem. 2010;56:1871-9.
59. Liu Q, Lv GD, Qin X, et al. Role of microRNA let-7 and effect to HMGA2 in esophageal squamous cell carcinoma. Mol Biol Rep. 2012;39:1239-46.
60. Zhou SL, Wang LD. Circulating microRNAs: novel biomarkers for esophageal cancer. World J Gastroenterol. 2010;16:2348-54.
61. Hummel R, Hussey DJ, Michael MZ, et al. MiRNAs and their association with locoregional staging and survival following surgery for esophageal carcinoma. Ann Surg Oncol. 2011;18:253-60.
62. Komatsu S, Ichikawa D, Takeshita H, et al. Circulating microRNAs in plasma of patients with esophageal squamous cell carcinoma. Br J Cancer. 2011;105:104-11.
63. Zhang T, Wang Q, Zhao D, et al. The oncogenic role of microRNA-31 as a potential biomarker in oesophageal squamous cell carcinoma. Clin Sci (Lond). 2011;121:437-47.
64. Lin RJ, Xiao DW, Liao LD, et al. MiR-142-3p as a potential prognostic biomarker for esophageal squamous cell carcinoma. J Surg Oncol. 2012;105:175-82.
65. Zhang T, Zhao D, Wang Q, et al. MicroRNA-1322 regulates ECRG2 allele specifically and acts as a potential biomarker in patients with esophageal squamous cell carcinoma. Mol Carcinog. 2012; Epub ahead of print.
66. Kurashige J, Watanabe M, Iwatsuki M, et al. Overexpression of microRNA-223 regulates the ubiquitin ligase FBXW7 in oesophageal squamous cell carcinoma. Br J Cancer. 2012;106:182-8.
67. Guo H, Wang K, Xiong G, et al. A functional variant in microRNA-146a is associated with risk of esophageal squamous cell carcinoma in Chinese Han. Fam Cancer. 2010;9:599-603.
68. Wang K, Guo H, Hu H, et al. A functional variation in pre-microRNA-196a is associated with susceptibility of esophageal squamous cell carcinoma risk in Chinese Han. Biomarkers. 2010;15:614-8.

Chu, et al. MiRNAs in oesophageal squamous cancer.

MARCH 2013, VOL. 71, NO 2

74

69. Chen X, Hu H, Guan X, et al. CpG island methylation status of miRNAs in esophageal squamous cell carcinoma. Int J Cancer. 2012;130:1607-13.
70. Meng F, Henson R, Wehbe-Janek H, et al. MicroRNA-21 regulates expression of the PTEN tumor suppressor gene in human hepatocellular cancer. Gastroenterology. 2007;133:647-58.
71. Zhu S, Si ML, Wu H, et al. MicroRNA-21 targets the tumor suppressor gene tropomyosin 1 (TPM1). J Biol Chem. 2007;282:14328-36.
72. Asangani IA, Rasheed SA, Nikolova DA, et al. MicroRNA-21 (miR-21) post-transcriptionally downregulates tumor suppressor Pdcd4 and stimulates invasion, intravasation and metastasis in colorectal cancer. Oncogene. 2008;27:2128-36.
73. Sayed D, Rane S, Lypowy J, et al. MicroRNA-21 targets Sprouty2 and promotes cellular outgrowths. Mol Biol Cell. 2008;19:3272-82.
74. Si ML, Zhu S, Wu H, et al. miR-21-mediated tumor growth. Oncogene. 2007;26:2799-803.
75. Meng F, Henson R, Lang M, et al. Involvement of human micro-RNA in growth and response to chemotherapy in human cholangiocarcinoma cell lines. Gastroenterology. 2006;130:2113-29.
76. Zhu S, Wu H, Wu F, et al. MicroRNA-21 targets tumor suppressor genes in invasion and metastasis. Cell Res. 2008;18:350-9.
77. Shields JM, Christy RJ, Yang VW, Identification and characterization of a gene encoding a gut-enriched Kruppel-like factor expressed during growth arrest. J Biol Chem. 1996;271:20009-17.
78. Zhang W, Geiman DE, Shields JM, et al. The gut-enriched Kruppel-like factor (Kruppel-like factor 4) mediates the transactivating effect of p53 on the p21WAF1/Cip1 promoter. J Biol Chem. 2000;275:18391-8.
79. Furstenthal L, Kaiser BK, Swanson C, et al. Cyclin E uses Cdc6 as a chromatin-associated receptor required for DNA replication. J Cell Biol. 2001;152:1267-78.
80. Zhao J, Dynlacht B, Imai T, et al. Expression of NPAT, a novel substrate of cyclin E-CDK2, promotes S-phase entry. Genes Dev. 1998;12:456-61.

81. Okuda M, Horn HF, Tarapore P, et al. Nucleophosmin/B23 is a target of CDK2/cyclin E in centrosome duplication. Cell. 2000;103:127-40.
82. Fisk HA, Winey M, The mouse Mps1p-like kinase regulates centrosome duplication. Cell. 2001;106:95-104.
83. Yuan Y, Zeng ZY, Liu XH, et al. MicroRNA-203 inhibits cell proliferation by repressing DeltaNp63 expression in human esophageal squamous cell carcinoma. BMC Cancer. 2011;11:57.
84. Moll UM and Slade N. p63 and p73: roles in development and tumor formation. Mol Cancer Res. 2004;2:371-86.
85. Rocco JW, Leong CO, Kuperwasser N, et al. p63 mediates survival in squamous cell carcinoma by suppression of p73-dependent apoptosis. Cancer Cell. 2006;9:45-56.
86. Hu H, Xia S.H, Li AD, et al. Elevated expression of p63 protein in human esophageal squamous cell carcinomas. Int J Cancer. 2002;102:580-3.
87. Kong KL, Kwong DL, Chan TH, et al. MicroRNA-375 inhibits tumour growth and metastasis in oesophageal squamous cell carcinoma through repressing insulin-like growth factor 1 receptor. Gut. 2012;61:33-42.
88. Hummel R, Wang T, Watson DI, et al. Chemotherapy-induced modification of microRNA expression in esophageal cancer. Oncol Rep. 2011;26:1011-7.
89. Hamano R, Miyata H, Yamasaki M, et al. Overexpression of miR-200c induces chemoresistance in esophageal cancers mediated through activation of the Akt signaling pathway. Clin Cancer Res. 2011;17:3029-38.
90. Kan T, Sato F, Ito T, et al. The miR-106b-25 polycistron, activated by genomic amplification, functions as an oncogene by suppressing p21 and Bim. Gastroenterology. 2009;136:1689-700.
91. Luthra R, Singh RR, Luthra MG, et al. MicroRNA-196a targets annexin A1: a microRNA-mediated mechanism of annexin A1 downregulation in cancers. Oncogene. 2008;27:6667-78.
