
REVIEW S

---

# Beyond TGFβ: roles of other TGFβ superfamily members in cancer

**Lalage M. Wakefield**${}^{1}$ **and Caroline S. Hill**${}^{2}$

**Abstract** | Much of the focus on the transforming growth factor-β (TGFβ) superfamily in cancer has revolved around the TGFβ ligands themselves. However, it is now becoming apparent that deregulated signalling by many of the other superfamily members also has crucial roles in both the development of tumours and metastasis. Furthermore, these signalling pathways are emerging as plausible therapeutic targets. Their roles in tumorigenesis frequently reflect their function in embryonic development or in adult tissue homeostasis, and their influence extends beyond the tumours themselves, to the tumour microenvironment and more widely to complications of cancer such as cachexia and bone loss.

The transforming growth factor-β (TGFβ) superfamily comprises the TGFβs, activins, NODAL, bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs), growth and differentiation factors (GDFs) and anti-Müllerian hormone (AMH). Over the past three decades much emphasis has been given to the role of the TGFβs themselves in cancer. In this Review, we focus on the other family members, in particular, the BMPs, activins, NODAL and GDFs (collectively referred to as BANGs). These ligands are well known for their functions in early vertebrate development and in adult tissue maintenance${}^{1-3}$, but it is now increasingly apparent that they also have crucial roles in both tumour development and dissemination. A recent surge of papers has revealed that many of their roles in cancer represent a redeployment of their roles in early development, or a perturbation of their roles in tissue homeostasis. In cancer, the role of some of the BANGs is to regulate the balance between the self-renewal and the differentiation of cancer stem cells (CSCs), and, in the case of NODAL, also to increase the plasticity of tumour cells. Moreover, the interplay between the BMPs and their antagonists, which is fundamental for the patterning of early embryos, determines the aggressiveness of primary tumours and the ability of disseminated tumour cells to exit from dormancy and establish metastases. After an introduction to the TGFβ superfamily and an outline of their mechanism of signalling, we briefly discuss the regulation of the BANGs and their functional roles in early vertebrate development. We then focus on recent work that demonstrates how tumour cells hijack the normally well-controlled functions of these ligands to enable the cells to grow at primary sites, and to disseminate and survive at distant sites. In the final section we discuss the therapeutic opportunities that arise from this emerging knowledge.

## Signalling by TGFβ superfamily members

There are more than 30 TGFβ superfamily ligands in the human genome, which can be divided into a number of subfamilies on the basis of sequence similarity and function (TABLE 1). They are found in all metazoans and arose with multicellularity, with the activin and BMP families being the most ancient${}^{4,5}$. In all cases, the ligands are synthesized as precursors, with a large pro-domain and a carboxy-terminal mature domain, and the mature ligands are cleaved from the precursor by pro-protein convertases${}^{6,7}$. The ligands form dimers, which can be homomeric or heteromeric and are held together by disulphide bonds.

The mechanism of signalling for all the ligands is fundamentally the same (FIG. 1a). Each ligand requires two types of serine/threonine kinase receptors to signal, a type I and a type II (see TABLE 1 for the known ligand–receptor interactions)${}^{8}$. For some ligands, additional co-receptors are required for optimal ligand binding to the type I–type II receptor complex (TABLE 1). In the activated receptor complex the constitutively active type II receptor phosphorylates the type I receptor on several serines and threonines in a highly conserved glycine- and serine-rich domain, close to the membrane-spanning region. This phosphorylation activates the type I receptor kinase and provides a binding site for the downstream substrates, the receptor-regulated SMADs (R-SMADs)${}^{9}$. Although the SMADs

---

**1** Laboratory of Cancer Biology and Genetics, National Cancer Institute, Building 37, Room 4032A, 37 Convent Drive, MSC 4255 Bethesda, Maryland 20892–4255, USA.  
**2** Developmental Signalling Laboratory, Cancer Research UK London Research Institute, 44 Lincoln’s Inn Fields, London WC2A 3LY, UK.  
e-mails: [lw34g@nih.gov](mailto:lw34g@nih.gov); [caroline.hill@cancer.org.uk](mailto:caroline.hill@cancer.org.uk)  
doi:10.1038/nrc3500

---

328 | MAY 2013 | VOLUME 13 | www.nature.com/reviews/cancer

© 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved.

At a glance

- The bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs), activins, NODAL, and growth and differentiation factors (GDFs) (collectively referred to as BANGs) have essential roles in early embryonic development and in regulating tissue homeostasis in adults, frequently acting in gradients shaped by the activity of ligand antagonists. Their roles in human cancer frequently constitute a redeployment of their activities in embryonic development or a perturbation of their roles in tissue homeostasis.
- Aberrant BMP signalling disrupts stem cell self-renewal and differentiation, and can contribute to tumour formation. This may occur, for example, at the level of genetic or epigenetic changes resulting in the overexpression of BMP antagonists, or the loss of BMP receptors, ligands or SMAD4.
- NODAL is not expressed in most normal adult tissues, but is expressed, along with the co-receptor Cripto, in many different tumours. It promotes phenotypic plasticity, which is important for tumour progression, and can positively regulate cancer stem cell self-renewal.
- High BMP signalling provides a natural barrier to tumour progression and metastasis. In the primary tumour, BMP signalling inhibits epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT), which can prevent tumour invasion. At metastatic sites, high BMP signalling prevents tumour cell colonization by enforcing a dormant state. This can be reversed by tumour-expressed BMP antagonists.
- BANGs sculpt the tumour microenvironment by promoting angiogenesis and suppressing immune responses.
- Increased expression of BANGs in tumours and as a result of chemotherapy can contribute to severe complications of cancer such as cachexia, anaemia and bone loss.
- Strategies are under development to target BANG signalling for therapeutic ends. These include inhibiting NODAL–Cripto signalling in the tumour cells, reducing tumour angiogenesis by inhibiting activin receptor-like kinase 1 (ALK1), and inhibiting activin receptors and myostatin to treat cachexia, anaemia and bone loss. Therapies that aim to increase BMP activity are also being developed.

are not the only molecules that can transduce TGFβ superfamily signals to the nucleus¹⁰, they are by far the best understood, particularly for the BANGs, and thus we focus on this signalling pathway. The traditional view of TGFβ superfamily signalling is that BMPs and GDFs signal through SMAD1, SMAD5 and SMAD8, and that TGFβs, activins and NODAL signal through SMAD2 and SMAD3 (FIG. 1a). However, this view has been revised following the finding that TGFβ induces phosphorylation of SMAD1 and SMAD5 in many cell types in addition to SMAD2 and SMAD3 (REFS 11–14).

Receptor-mediated phosphorylation allows the R-SMADs to form heteromeric complexes with another member of the SMAD family, SMAD4 (REF. 9). SMAD4 thus occupies a central position in the signalling pathways downstream of all of the ligands, being required for many, although not all, responses¹⁵,¹⁶. The R-SMADs also form homomeric complexes, and complexes with other activated R-SMADs¹²,¹⁷. The activated SMAD complexes accumulate in the nucleus, where they directly regulate transcription, both positively and negatively. The amino-terminal domains of SMAD4, and of all the R-SMADs except SMAD2, bind DNA directly, but have a fairly low affinity and low specificity. SMAD3 and SMAD4 recognize the sequence AGAC or its reverse complement, and SMAD1, SMAD5 and SMAD8 seem to preferentially bind GC-rich elements with the sequence GRCGNC. The SMAD complexes bind repeats of these sequences or bind in conjunction with other transcription factors¹⁸. The first identified SMAD-interacting transcription factor was FOXH1 (originally called FAST1), which recruits SMAD2–SMAD4 complexes to DNA¹⁹. SMAD complexes recruit further chromatin remodelling factors to regulate transcription¹⁸. In the nucleus, SMAD phosphatases dephosphorylate the R-SMADs, allowing their export to the cytoplasm. Although several candidates have been proposed, the identity of these phosphatases remains controversial²⁰.

The SMAD pathways were originally thought to be unidirectional and linear, but are actually dynamic networks, as the SMADs shuttle between the cytoplasm and nucleus, in both the absence and the presence of signal (FIG. 1a). In the presence of signal this allows the SMADs to continuously monitor levels of activated receptor, meaning that the level of activated SMADs in the nucleus continuously reflects the levels of activated receptors in the cytoplasm²¹. TGFβ superfamily ligands frequently function as morphogens, with different doses of ligand eliciting different responses (see below). The nucleocytoplasmic shuttling behaviour of the SMADs, as well as the lack of amplification steps, makes these pathways highly suitable for interpreting morphogen gradients²¹.

The TGFβ superfamily–SMAD pathways are subject to numerous levels of regulation²¹,²². One of the most important levels of regulation for the BANGs, which is pertinent to this Review, is the interaction of the ligands with extracellular antagonists that prevent, directly or indirectly, their binding to receptors (FIG. 1b). The output of the signalling pathways thus crucially depends not only on ligand levels, but also on the levels and activities of their antagonists. Ligand levels alone are thus rarely good predictors of signalling activity. In addition, TGFβ superfamily pathways are modulated by other signalling pathways. This modulation occurs at a number of different levels. For example, the R-SMADs themselves are phosphorylated by MAPKs, glycogen synthase kinase 3β (GSK3β) and cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs) at a number of sites in their middle linker region. Linker phosphorylation is thought to affect the stability of the SMADs, and hence the levels of activated nuclear SMADs. As a result, the activity of the SMADs is regulated by growth factors that signal through the MAPK pathways, by stimuli that regulate GSK3β activity and by the cell cycle²³. TGFβ superfamily signalling responses are also modulated by other signalling pathways at the level of promoters or enhancers of target genes; a recent example being the requirement of WNT and activin signalling for the activation of the mesodermal gene mix paired-like homeobox (MIXL1) in human embryonic stem cells (HESCs)²⁴ (see below).

Furthermore, the TGFβ superfamily pathways themselves are known to antagonize each other, and several mechanisms have been uncovered. This can occur at the level of the ligands themselves — for example, GDF3 directly inhibits BMP signalling²⁵ — but also at the level of the SMAD complexes. Antagonism of BMP signalling by TGFβ involves inhibitory complexes formed between phosphorylated SMAD3 and SMAD1 or SMAD5 in response to combined TGFβ and BMP signalling¹⁷.

REVIEW S

Table 1 | Ligand–receptor usage in TGFβ superfamily signalling*

| Ligand                | Type I receptor               | Type II receptor                     | Co-receptors           |
|-----------------------|-------------------------------|--------------------------------------|------------------------|
| Inhibin-α             | No type I receptor           | ACTRII                              | ND                    |
| Activin-βA            | ALK4                         | ACTRII and ACTRIIB                  | ND                    |
| Activin-βB            | ALK4 and ALK7                | ACTRII and ACTRIIB                  | ND                    |
| Activin-βE            | Unknown receptor             | Unknown receptor                    | ND                    |
| Activin-βC            | Unknown receptor             | Unknown receptor                    | ND                    |
| GDF1                  | ALK4 and ALK7                | ACTRII and ACTRIIB                  | CRIPTO and cryptic    |
| GDF3                  | ALK4 and ALK7                | ACTRII and ACTRIIB                  | CRIPTO and cryptic    |
| NODAL                 | ALK4 and ALK7                | ACTRII and ACTRIIB                  | CRIPTO and cryptic    |
| BMP3                  | No type I receptor           | ACTRIIB                             | ND                    |
| BMP3B (also known as GDF10) | ALK4                        | ACTRII                              | ND                    |
| GDF11                 | ALK4 and ALK5                | ACTRII and ACTRIIB                  | ND                    |
| Myostatin (also known as GDF8) | ALK4 and ALK5              | ACTRIIB                             | ND                    |
| GDF9                  | ALK4                         | BMPR2                               | ND                    |
| TGFβ1                 | ALK1† and ALK5               | TGFBR2                              | β-glycan and endoglin |
| TGFβ2                 | ALK1 and ALK5                | TGFBR2                              | β-glycan and endoglin |
| TGFβ3                 | ALK1 and ALK5                | TGFBR2                              | β-glycan and endoglin |
| GDF15                 | Unknown                      | TGFBR2                              | ND                    |
| BMP9                  | ALK1                         | ACTRII and BMPR2                   | ND                    |
| BMP10                 | ALK1                         | ACTRII and BMPR2                   | ND                    |
| BMP2                  | ALK3 and ALK6                | ACTRII, ACTRIIB and BMPR2          | ND                    |
| BMP4                  | ALK3 and ALK6                | ACTRII, ACTRIIB and BMPR2          | ND                    |
| GDF5 (also known as BMP14) | ALK3 and ALK6              | ACTRII, ACTRIIB and BMPR2          | ND                    |
| GDF6                  | ALK3 and ALK6                | ACTRII, ACTRIIB and BMPR2          | ND                    |
| GDF7                  | ALK3 and ALK6                | ACTRII, ACTRIIB and BMPR2          | ND                    |
| BMP5                  | ALK2, ALK3 and ALK6          | ACTRII, ACTRIIB and BMPR2          | ND                    |
| BMP6                  | ALK2, ALK3 and ALK6          | ACTRII, ACTRIIB and BMPR2          | ND                    |
| BMP7                  | ALK2, ALK3 and ALK6          | ACTRII, ACTRIIB and BMPR2          | ND                    |
| BMP8                  | ALK2, ALK3 and ALK6          | ACTRII, ACTRIIB and BMPR2          | ND                    |
| BMP15                 | ALK6                         | BMPR2                               | ND                    |
| AMH                   | ALK2 and ALK3                | AMHR2                               | ND                    |

ACTR, activin receptor; ALK, activin receptor-like kinase; AMH, anti-Müllerian hormone; AMHR, AMH receptor; BMP, bone morphogenetic protein; BMPR, BMP receptor; GDF, growth and differentiation factor; ND, not determined; TGFβ, transforming growth factor-β; TGFBR, TGFβ receptor. *The ligands are arranged according to receptor usage. Where multiple type I, type II and co-receptors are listed for a given ligand, multiple permutations are possible. †ALK1 is endothelial specific.

Mesoderm  
The middle germ layer of the developing embryo. Gives rise to the musculoskeletal, vascular and urogenital systems, and to connective tissue (including that of the dermis).

Endoderm  
The innermost of the three germ layers of the developing embryo. It differentiates to form the linings of two tubes in the body: the digestive tube, which extends the entire length of the body and the respiratory tube. Buds from the digestive tube form the liver, gall bladder and pancreas.

In other situations, limiting amounts of SMAD4 may account for the antagonism observed between activin or NODAL and BMP or GDF signalling in early Xenopus laevis embryos²⁶. Finally, the inhibitory SMADs, SMAD6 and SMAD7, which are upregulated in response to most TGFβ superfamily members, inhibit TGFβ superfamily signalling by recruiting E3 ubiquitin ligases to the activated type I receptors to induce their degradation²⁷. This mechanism may explain the antagonism between NODAL and BMP signalling in mouse embryonic stem cells²⁸.

to set the scene for a discussion of how these activities are redeployed and perturbed during tumorigenesis in adult animals.

The earliest role of NODAL in the mouse embryo is at the blastocyst stage, where it is responsible for maintaining the determinants of pluripotency, such as Oct4 (also known as Pou5f1) and Nanog²⁹. After implantation, a gradient of NODAL signalling defines the proximal–distal axis, which in turn establishes the anterior–posterior axis of the embryo³⁰. Graded NODAL signalling, in conjunction with WNT and BMP signalling, is subsequently essential for mesoderm and endoderm formation and patterning. At later stages, NODAL is required for left–right axis formation and patterning. In all these contexts, spatial NODAL activity

Roles of BANGs in development  
Studies predominantly in mice, fish and frogs have revealed that the BANGs have crucial roles in early vertebrate development. We discuss them briefly below

a

Type II receptors:
- ACTRII
- ACTRIIB

Type I receptors:
- ALK4
- ALK7

Activin A or activin B

CRIPTO or cryptic

NODAL, GDF1 and GDF3

BMPs and GDFs

Type I receptors:
- ALK1
- ALK3
- ALK2
- ALK6

Type II receptors:
- ACTRII
- BMPR2
- ACTRIIB

SMAD4
SMAD2 or SMAD3
SMAD1, SMAD5 or SMAD8

Nucleus

PPase

Gene regulation

Cofactors

Gene regulation

Cofactors

b

| NODAL |
| --- |
| - LEFTY 1 or LEFTY 2 |
| - Cerberus 1 |
| - COCO (also known as DAND5 and cerberus 2) |

| Activin A and B |
| --- |
| - Follistatin |
| - Follistatin-like 3 |
| - Inhibin |

| BMPs or GDFs |
| --- |
| - Cerberus 1 |
| - COCO |
| - DAN (also known as NBL1) |
| - Gremlin 1 |
| - PRDC |
| - BMP3 |

| Activin A and B |
| --- |
| - CRIPTO |
| - β-glycan |
| - BAMBI |

| BMP or GDFs |
| --- |
| - Sclerostin |
| - USAG1 |
| - Chordin |
| - Noggin |
| - Twisted gastrulation |

Soluble antagonists
Membrane-bound antagonists

Figure 1 | Signalling downstream of TGFβ superfamily ligands. a | The core signalling pathway through the SMADs is shown for the bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs), activins, NODAL, and growth and differentiation factors (GDFs) (BANGs). The pathways downstream of the transforming growth factor-βs (TGFβs) are not shown. Specific ligands bring together different combinations of type I and type II receptors, as indicated. In humans there are a total of seven type I receptors, known as activin receptor-like kinases (ALK1–7), and five type II receptors, with individual ligands binding different combinations (TABLE 1). Six type I receptors and three type II receptors mediate BANG signalling. The receptors all have a cysteine-rich extracellular domain, a single-pass transmembrane domain and an intracellular kinase domain. NODAL, GDF1 and GDF3 signalling also requires the co-receptors CRIPTO or cryptic, which are members of the EGF-CFC family (named after their epidermal growth factor (EGF)-like motif, and a novel cysteine-rich domain with the founding members CRIPTO, FRL1 and cryptic)<sup>21,32</sup>. The type I receptors dictate which receptor-regulated SMADs (R-SMADs) are phosphorylated (P) in response to which ligand. ALK1, ALK2, ALK3 and ALK6 phosphorylate SMAD1, SMAD5 and SMAD8, whereas ALK4, ALK5 and ALK7 phosphorylate SMAD2 and SMAD3 (REF. 9). The receptor-mediated phosphorylation of the R-SMADs occurs at their extreme carboxyl termini on two serines in an S-M-S or S-V-S motif. R-SMAD phosphorylation promotes complex formation with SMAD4 and subsequent accumulation in the nucleus. b | TGFβ superfamily ligand antagonists CRIPTO and β-glycan, which are co-receptors for NODAL, GDF1 and GDF3, and TGFβ, respectively (TABLE 1), act as inhibitors of activin signalling<sup>109</sup>. BAMBI, BMP and activin membrane-bound inhibitor; PPase, phosphatase; PRDC, protein related to DAN and cerberus (also known as gremlin 2); USAG1, uterine sensitization-associated gene 1 protein (also known as SOSTDC1).

Cell-sorting behaviour
The process by which a heterogeneous population of cells with different attractive and repellent properties migrate and sort themselves into homogeneous populations.

Epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT)
Conversion from an epithelial to a mesenchymal phenotype, which is a normal process in embryonic development. In carcinomas, this transformation results in altered cell morphology, the expression of mesenchymal proteins and increased invasiveness.

Mesendoderm
The term given to an embryonic tissue layer that can differentiate into mesoderm and endoderm.

is shaped and regulated by the activity of the antagonists LEFTY and cerberus-related proteins<sup>30,31</sup>. During these developmental processes, NODAL signalling is important not only for specifying cell fates, but also for governing cell-sorting behaviour, and inducing epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT)<sup>30</sup>. Roles for NODAL signalling in pluripotency and differentiation are also evident in HESCs, which express NODAL, GDF1 and GDF3 and the obligate receptors, including the co-receptor CRIPTO (also known as TDGF1)<sup>32</sup>. Low levels of NODAL are required for self-renewal, and higher levels promote differentiation to mesendoderm in vitro<sup>33,34</sup>, illustrating an important role for signal strength as a determinant of outcome. The mechanism underlying this has recently been illuminated by the finding that high levels of PI3K activity, which are induced by ligands such as heregulin and insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF1), are required for activin to induce pluripotency in HESCs, whereas low levels of PI3K are required for activin to induce mesendoderm differentiation<sup>24</sup>. This probably also applies to NODAL as it shares the same receptors and downstream signalling pathway. Crucial to this mechanism is the ability of PI3K to regulate ERK and WNT signalling. High levels of PI3K suppress these pathways, and, in the absence of PI3K activity, WNT and ERK signalling are

REVIEWs

Ectoderm
The outermost of the three germ layers of the developing embryo. It differentiates to form the nervous system, tooth enamel, the epidermis, hair, nails and the lining of mouth, anus, nostrils and sweat glands.

Hamartomatous polyps
Intestinal polyps in patients with juvenile polyposis syndrome. They are characterized by increased crypt formation and cell proliferation but otherwise normal epithelial cell maturation, and are associated with an abnormally expanded mesenchymal component with a pronounced inflammatory infiltrate. Unlike intestinal adenomas, they do not show epithelial dysplasia.

activated and activin- or NODAL-induced phosphorylated SMAD2 or SMAD3 cooperates with β-catenin–TCF transcription factor complexes to specifically induce mesendodermal genes, as well as genes required for EMT.

The BMPs also act in gradients in early embryos to establish the embryonic axes and pattern the tissues across them. Similar to NODAL, this spatial activity is moulded by the activity of secreted ligand antagonists<sup>22</sup>. A good example of this is the ventral-dorsal gradient of BMP activity that is formed before gastrulation in fish and frog embryos, which is dependent on the production of BMP antagonists such as chordin and noggin on the dorsal side<sup>22</sup>. This gradient is required to specify and pattern the mesoderm and ectoderm. At later stages of development, BMPs and the related GDF ligands are required for the formation of many different organs, such as for the regulation of limb, tooth, kidney, skin, muscle, haematopoietic and neuronal development, in conjunction with other signalling pathways such as WNT, receptor tyrosine kinases, Hedgehog and Notch<sup>35,36</sup>. Consistent with these developmental roles, BMPs and GDFs are essential in the adult for tissue homeostasis, regulating somatic stem cells and controlling differentiation, often in conjunction with the same signalling pathways with which they interact in development<sup>2</sup> (discussed below). By contrast, NODAL is predominantly expressed in the adult in pathological contexts<sup>37</sup>.

Roles of BANGs in the tumour parenchyma
Many tumours are phenotypically heterogeneous with only a subpopulation of cells, the CSCs, capable of initiating and sustaining tumorigenesis<sup>38</sup>. CSCs may originate from the adult somatic stem cell through the perturbation of normal stem cell self-renewal processes, or from more differentiated cells by the reacquisition of stem cell-like characteristics. During tumorigenesis, the normal hierarchical organization of the tissue breaks down owing to the failure of homeostatic processes and varying degrees of differentiation blockade. Furthermore, embryonic programmes specifying stem cell expansion, cellular migration and phenotypic plasticity are often inappropriately reactivated. The central role of BANGs in regulating these processes in embryogenesis and adult homeostasis makes BANG signalling a frequent target for disruption in cancer. The literature suggests particularly important roles for BMPs and NODAL in modulating the tumour parenchyma, whereas the most well-characterized effects of the activins and GDFs target the tumour microenvironment and host organs (discussed below).

Aberrant BMP signalling disrupts stem cell self-renewal and differentiation. In adult somatic tissues, BMPs have roles at two major levels in the cellular differentiation hierarchy (FIG. 2a). At the apex of this hierarchy, BMPs limit self-renewal of the somatic stem cells, frequently by opposing important regulators of stemness, such as the WNT pathway. Further down the hierarchy, they can specify cell fate and promote differentiation in proliferative progenitor cells. This organizational structure is well-characterized in the intestine (BOX 1), skin and brain<sup>1,2,39–42</sup>. The BMPs are often produced by specialized mesenchyme, and their activity in the stem cell niche is regulated by transient or highly localized expression of antagonists to permit controlled stem cell self-renewal for tissue maintenance and repair. This delicately balanced process can be disrupted in a number of ways in tumorigenesis (FIG. 2b).

In the colon, two familial polyposis syndromes have been genetically linked to aberrant BMP signalling and altered stem cell dynamics. Juvenile polyposis syndrome (JPS) is an inherited condition in which patients develop hamartomatous polyps in the intestine, which are associated with an increased risk of adenocarcinoma. Germline mutations in the type I receptor activin receptor-like kinase 3 (ALK3; also known as BMPR1A) are seen in 20–25% of JPS cases, with a further 15–20% of cases having mutations in SMAD4 (REF. 43). In the clinically-related hereditary mixed polyposis syndrome (HMPS), the causative mutation is a duplication of an upstream region of the GREM1 locus that drives ectopic overexpression of the BMP antagonist gremlin 1 throughout the intestinal epithelium and thus disrupts the tightly controlled ligand-antagonist balance<sup>44</sup>. Causality was confirmed in mouse models, in which the overexpression of another BMP antagonist, noggin, or the conditional inactivation of ALK3, drove the development of hamartomatous polyps in the intestine<sup>41,45</sup>. Polyposis was associated with stem cell expansion and crypt fission, reflecting a crucial homeostatic role for BMPs in limiting intestinal stem cell self-renewal. In a recurrent theme of BMP-WNT antagonism<sup>46</sup>, the underlying molecular mechanism involves BMP blockade of WNT signalling<sup>41</sup>.

In contrast to these familial syndromes, the evidence for BMP involvement in sporadic colorectal cancer (CRC) points to a role for the loss of BMP signalling in the late adenoma-to-carcinoma transition, rather than as an initiating event<sup>1</sup> (BOX 1). Use of nuclear phosphorylated SMAD1, SMAD5 or SMAD8 as a marker showed that BMP signalling is inactivated in ~70% of CRCs at the late adenoma stage or beyond, suggesting that BMPs pose a substantial barrier to tumour progression at this stage<sup>1</sup>. Somatic mutations in SMAD4 or BMPR2, or epigenetic silencing of BMP2, contribute to breaching this barrier<sup>1</sup>. As BMPs induce intestinal cell maturation<sup>47</sup> and can oppose inducers of EMT<sup>48</sup>, loss of BMP signalling in adenomas may permit the development of a migratory, invasive cell state through impaired lineage-specific differentiation and failure to maintain the epithelial phenotype.

The ability of BMPs to maintain a hierarchically organized tissue architecture also breaks down in brain cancer. In glioblastoma, this process can occur by reversion from an adult to an early embryonic pattern of BMP signalling. Early in development, BMP signalling through ALK3 promotes proliferative expansion of neural stem cells<sup>49</sup>. However, in the later maturation phase, upregulation of ALK6 (also known as BMPR1B) qualitatively alters cellular responses so that BMP signalling blocks the proliferation of neural precursors and
instead drives their differentiation⁴⁹. Similar to their role in late embryogenesis, BMPs are also active in the adult brain stem cell niche in the subventricular zone where they limit stem cell self-renewal and promote an astroglial fate⁵⁰. This control mechanism is retained in some glioblastomas⁵⁰, but CSCs from nearly 20% of human glioblastomas are rendered unresponsive to the anti-proliferative and differentiation-inducing effects of BMPs by epigenetic silencing of the ALK6 promoter⁵¹. In such cases, treatment with BMPs actually expanded the CSC population through the activation of ALK3,

suggesting that the glioblastoma cells had reacquired a BMP response pattern that was characteristic of early embryogenesis.

In the skin, endogenous BMP control mechanisms may be overridden by counteracting signals from the tumour-educated stroma. Gremlin 1 is highly expressed in stromal cells of basal cell carcinomas, but not in stromal cells of normal skin, and creates a permissive niche for CSC self-renewal by opposing BMP signalling⁵². Stromal expression of gremlin 1 was also seen in many breast, lung, colon, pancreatic and oesophageal tumours,

### Figure 2 | Roles for BMPs in normal tissue homeostasis and tumorigenesis.
**a** | Simplified schematic showing roles of bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) in normal adult homeostasis in organs such as the intestine, brain and skin.  
**b** | Schematic for aberrant BMP signalling in epithelial tumorigenesis. At the primary tumour site, impaired BMP signalling interacts with other oncogenic lesions to promote tumorigenesis. BMP antagonists are frequently overexpressed either by the tumour cells or by the tumour-educated stroma. The BMP ligands, receptors and downstream signalling components can be disabled through genetic or epigenetic targeting, or by aberrant regulation of expression in the dysfunctional tumour environment. As a result of compromised BMP signalling, stem cell self-renewal pathways are hyperactivated, and cellular maturation and differentiation are blocked or incomplete. Furthermore, some tumour cells may respond to oncogenic cues by undergoing an epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT), leading to increased cell motility, invasiveness and an increased probability of acquiring stem cell-like characteristics. When the activity of the BMP pathway is compromised, one of the natural barriers to EMT is eliminated. Tumour cells can then leave the primary tumour site and disseminate through the circulation to distant organs. Some commonly colonized sites such as the bone and lung express naturally high levels of endogenous BMPs. The local BMPs may promote a mesenchymal-to-epithelial transition (MET) in the newly arrived tumour cell. However, they also maintain the disseminated tumour cells in a dormant state, a barrier to successful metastasis that can be overcome in tumour cells expressing high levels of BMP antagonists. Dashed arrows represent normal functions of BMPs that are compromised in tumorigenesis.
suggesting broader relevance<sup>52</sup>. However, it is clear that normal tissue homeostasis is maintained by a very delicate balance of BANG ligands, antagonists and receptor subtypes, and that perturbation of this balance may have different outcomes depending on the situation. Thus, although the BMPs and related BANGs may inhibit CSC self-renewal in intestinal, brain, skin, liver and breast cancers<sup>41,51–55</sup>, overproduction of BMP2 and BMP4 in response to a naturally occurring oncogenic fusion gene, CBFA2T3-GLIS2, drives the expansion of haematopoietic progenitors in acute megakaryoblastic leukaemia<sup>56</sup>, and BMP2, BMP4 and BMP6 made by cancer-associated mesenchymal stem cells may cause the expansion of ovarian CSCs<sup>57</sup>. Qualitative aspects (for example, the identity of the type I receptor) and quantitative aspects of BMP signalling, as well as the molecular context for BMP signal interpretation, can have major effects on the biological outcome and may contribute to these differences.

Reactivated NODAL signalling promotes phenotypic plasticity and stemness in advanced cancers. NODAL is not normally expressed in adult tissues, with the exception of organs that undergo widespread remodelling, such as the placenta, endometrium and lactating mammary gland<sup>37,58</sup>. However, aggressive tumour cells, which share characteristics with embryonic progenitors in terms of self-renewal and plasticity, have been shown to both secrete and respond to NODAL. This phenomenon was first shown in melanoma cells using blastula stage zebrafish embryos as a biosensor for NODAL<sup>59</sup>. The amount of NODAL secreted by different melanoma cell lines correlated with tumour aggressiveness. These findings have subsequently been extended to prostate, breast and testicular tumours<sup>60–62</sup>. In embryonic development, NODAL requires the co-receptor CRIPTO to signal and, indeed, CRIPTO is also widely overexpressed in tumour cells from many

---

**Box 1 | BMP signalling in the colonic mucosa**

Homeostasis in the colon is regulated by opposing gradients of bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) and WNT pathway activation (see the figure; top part). As in embryogenesis, the BMP signalling gradient and localized BMP signalling domains in the colon are partly established by the balance between BMP ligands and their antagonists. BMP4 and other BMPs are expressed in mesenchymal cells of the intravillus and intercrypt regions, as well as in mesenchymal cells adjacent to the intestinal stem cell. BMP signalling is active in the intestinal stem cells in the crypt base and in the differentiating cells of the villus. There is no BMP signalling in the cells of the proliferative zone, which have very low expression of activin receptor-like kinase 3 (ALK3; also known as BMPR1A). Several BMP antagonists are expressed in subepithelial myofibroblasts at the crypt base, where they contribute to the stem cell niche and override BMP signalling in a regulated manner to permit WNT-driven stem cell self-renewal. BMP signalling in the differentiating zone of the villus is required for proper maturation of the secretory cells and apoptosis of mature colonic cells. There are also important interactions with the Notch and PI3K pathways that are not discussed here. Various lesions in the BMP pathway can contribute to colon cancer (see the figure; lower part). Germline mutations in BMP pathway components serve as initiating lesions that lead to increased stem cell expansion in hereditary polyposis syndromes that progress to carcinoma via a hamartomatous route. In sporadic colorectal cancer, the BMP pathway is typically compromised later in the disease process by somatic mutations or epigenetic silencing events, and the transition from in situ adenoma to invasive carcinoma is promoted.

BMPR, BMP receptor; GREM1, gremlin 1; IE cell, intestinal epithelial cell. Figure is modified, with permission, from REF. 42 © (2007) Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA.
different origins. In breast cancer, CRIPTO expression levels correlate with poor prognosis ${ }^{63}$, and in testicular tumours the amount of NODAL and CRIPTO produced was proportional to invasiveness and number of malignant cells ${ }^{62}$. The finding that CRIPTO is co-expressed with NODAL in melanoma cells, pancreatic tumour cells and breast carcinoma cells ${ }^{64,65}$, suggests that in tumour cells NODAL signals via its canonical pathway. Further parallels exist between NODAL secretion in development and in cancer as the same signalling pathway (Notch) that is required for NODAL production during the establishment of left–right asymmetry in vertebrate embryos also facilitates NODAL expression in melanoma ${ }^{66}$. In contrast to the situation during development, however, in which NODAL signalling is normally tempered by ligand antagonists such as LEFTY and cerberus-related proteins, NODAL signalling in breast carcinoma or

a Embryonic stem cells

HESC

- Low PI3K
- NODAL and activin

Differentiated cell
(mesendoderm)

WNT

Self-renewal
- High PI3K
- NODAL and activin

b Tumours

NODAL signalling:
high PI3K?

Self-
renewal

Increased
plasticity

Vascular
mimicry

EMT

Secretion of
PDGF and VEGF

Blood vessel

Angiogenesis

Stromal cell

Figure 3 | Role of NODAL signalling in HESCs and in cancer. a | Human embryonic stem cells (HESCs) express NODAL (and the related ligands growth and differentiation factor 1 (GDF1) and GDF3), in addition to the relevant type I and type II receptors and CRIPTO, and are thus competent to signal. They also express antagonists such as LEFTY. Activin and NODAL signalling induces self-renewal in HESCs in cooperation with high PI3K signalling, but induces differentiation to mesendoderm when PI3K signalling is low or absent, when it cooperates with WNT signalling. b | In many different types of cancer, NODAL is produced both by tumour cells and by stromal cells, such as pancreatic stellate cells. Tumour cells also express CRIPTO, but not LEFTY. NODAL signalling is important for self-renewal of cancer stem cells (CSCs) and this may be influenced by high PI3K signalling in tumours as a result of, for example, high epidermal growth factor (EGF) signalling, mutations in PTEN or mutations in PIK3CA (which encodes the PI3K p110α subunit) itself ${ }^{110}$. NODAL promotes plasticity of tumour cells — for example, inducing epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) — or development of a vascular network in the case of aggressive melanoma. NODAL also promotes the secretion of the pro-angiogenic factors platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF) and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), which act on endothelial cells to promote angiogenesis.

melanoma cells seems to be unopposed, as LEFTY is not expressed in these cells ${ }^{65}$ (FIG. 3). In melanoma this is explained by methylation of the LEFTY gene, which renders it transcriptionally inactive ${ }^{67}$.

The major tumour-promoting role of NODAL signalling in melanoma seems to be to drive cells to a less differentiated, more plastic phenotype ${ }^{59}$ (FIG. 3). Many aggressive melanomas simultaneously express markers of multiple lineages (mesenchymal, epithelial and endothelial), a feature that is dependent on NODAL signalling and favours functional adaptation of the tumour to hostile growth conditions. In a particularly striking example, NODAL promotes the formation of *de novo* vascular networks by melanoma cells, a process that is termed vascular mimicry, which *in vivo* may contribute to the perfusion of rapidly growing tumours ${ }^{66,68}$. Inhibition of NODAL signalling in melanoma cells reversed this phenotype and inhibited their ability to undergo anchorage-independent growth, to invade extracellular matrix and to form tumours in mice ${ }^{59}$. In breast cancer, NODAL also potentiates tumorigenesis by promoting tumour vascularization through facilitating endothelial cell migration and tube formation ${ }^{69}$. This is not a direct effect of NODAL on the endothelial cells, but is rather due to NODAL-induced upregulation of pro-angiogenic factors such as platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF) and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) in the tumour cells ${ }^{69}$.

A prominent role of NODAL signalling in the developing mouse embryo and in HESCs is to drive pluripotency and self-renewal (FIG. 3), and a similar role for NODAL has recently been demonstrated in pancreatic cancer, where NODAL is required to drive CSC self-renewal ${ }^{64}$. Pharmacological inhibition of NODAL signalling in the CSCs abolished their self-renewal capacity, and, in combination with a chemotherapeutic agent, gemcitabine, abolished tumorigenicity in a mouse model of pancreatic cancer. The source of NODAL in pancreatic tumours *in vivo* is not only the tumour cells themselves, but also the pancreatic stellate cells that form a niche for the CSCs, promoting their self-renewal and invasiveness ${ }^{70}$. These activities of NODAL and CRIPTO in cancer cells, coupled with the absence of NODAL and only low levels of CRIPTO in normal adult tissue, make the NODAL signalling pathway a very attractive target for tumour therapy (discussed below).

BMPs pose natural barriers to tumour progression and metastasis. The development of metastases requires the expression of new phenotypes in the tumour cell to facilitate escape from the primary site and to permit adaptation to hostile environments. Recent work suggests that many tumour cells of epithelial origin must acquire sufficient phenotypic plasticity so that they can cycle between a proliferative epithelial state and a motile, invasive but non-proliferative mesenchymal state ${ }^{71-73}$. The plasticity that is necessary for EMT can also enhance stem cell-like properties ${ }^{74}$. BMPs can oppose inducers of EMT, including TGFβ, in many cell types ${ }^{48,53,75}$, and may thus present a natural barrier against progression to an invasive state at the primary site (FIG. 2b). Consistent with this idea, BMP signalling
Mesenchymal-to epithelial transition (MET). The conversion of non-polarized and motile mesenchymal cells into polarized epithelial cells.

Ligand traps

Chimeric proteins that typically contain the ligand-binding domain of a receptor coupled to the Fc domain of an immunoglobulin. This generates an antibody-like ligand antagonist with the ligand specificity and high affinity of the parent receptor, coupled with the *in vivo* stability and distribution characteristics of the parent immunoglobulin.

in sporadic CRC is frequently inactivated at the late adenoma-to-carcinoma transition when invasion occurs¹, and SMAD4 loss promotes invasion and metastasis in prostate cancer⁷⁶. However, BMPs can stimulate invasion in some *in vitro* models⁷⁷.

Common sites for metastatic dissemination, such as lung and bone, are characterized by particularly high levels of BMP expression⁷⁸,⁷⁹, which can affect the newly arrived tumour cells in a variety of ways (FIG. 2b). As BMPs can induce mesenchymal-to-epithelial transition (MET)⁸⁰, it is possible that BMPs may promote reversion to the epithelial state that is a precondition for CSC self-renewal in carcinomas that do not have a constitutive mesenchymal phenotype⁷³. However, the high BMP levels then pose an important protective barrier to further steps in the metastatic colonization process. A screen for genes that promote the post-dissemination phase of breast cancer metastasis to the lung identified the BMP antagonist COCO (also known as DAND5 and cerberus 2) as a key player⁷⁸. In the absence of COCO, solitary tumour cells in the lung showed active BMP signalling and failed to establish clinically meaningful metastases, suggesting that locally high BMP levels enforce a state of dormancy. Overexpression of COCO allowed a few dormant tumour cells to overcome this BMP barrier, and to establish metastatic outgrowths. Mechanistically, COCO selectively induced a self-renewing stem cell-like phenotype by reversing the BMP-induced repression of core stem cell transcription factors⁷⁸.

As in the lung, BMPs in the bone can also prevent the colonization of disseminated tumour cells. BMP7 secreted by bone marrow stromal cells maintained the dormancy of prostate cancer cells in bone through the induction of a reversible senescent state in prostate CSCs⁷⁹. Although the mechanism for escape from BMP7 was not identified, bone-seeking metastatic breast cancer cells have been shown to overexpress the BMP antagonist noggin, which enhances their tumour-initiating and metastatic activity⁸¹. Interestingly, BMP7 treatment specifically inhibited the proliferation of prostate cancer cells in the bone, but not in the prostate itself, suggesting that local microenvironmental factors may generate divergent responses at the primary and metastatic sites⁷⁵. BMP7 also reduced the size of the CSC population and suppressed bone metastasis in a breast cancer model⁵³. However, other studies have shown a stimulatory effect of BMP2 on breast cancer metastasis to the bone⁸², and BMP4 was implicated in a vicious cycle of prostate cancer and bone stromal cell interaction, leading to enhanced osteoblastic metastases⁸³. Whether these discrepancies are due to differences in BMP ligands, influences of the microenvironment or genetic wiring patterns of the tumours remains to be clarified.

BANGs sculpt the tumour microenvironment

BANGs not only affect the tumour parenchyma, but they can also fuel an unhealthy dialogue between tumour cells and host cells that fosters the generation of a pro-tumorigenic microenvironment. Tumour cells can interact with mesenchymal cells in the stroma to generate detrimental BMP and antagonist expression patterns⁵²,⁵⁷,⁸³, and effects of BANGs on the vascular and immune components in the tumour bed are also emerging. The type I receptor ALK1 has a key role in regulating angiogenesis and vasculogenesis in early embryogenesis, mediating a complex interplay of signals from BMP9, BMP10 and the TGFβs⁸⁴. ALK1 expression is low in adult vasculature, but it increases in neo-angiogenic vessels in wounds and cancer, and may represent an Achilles heel in the angiogenic process⁸⁴. In preclinical models, ALK1-based ligand traps or antibodies significantly decreased the growth and angiogenesis of tumours⁸⁵,⁸⁶, confirming the involvement of ALK1 signalling. NODAL can also increase the tumour blood supply, both through pro-angiogenic effects on endothelial cells⁶⁹ and through the promotion of vascular mimicry⁸⁷ (FIG. 3).

Aberrantly activated immune cells are a prominent feature of the tumour ecosystem, resulting from subversive effects of the tumour on the immune response. TGFβs are well known as potent immunosuppressive factors, but activins are also emerging as players⁸⁸. Like TGFβ, activin A can drive macrophage differentiation towards a tumour-promoting M2 phenotype, as well as skewing T cell differentiation towards T helper 2 (T<sub>H</sub>2) or regulatory T cell (T<sub>Reg</sub>) fates and thereby suppressing antitumour immune responses⁸⁸. Activin A is overexpressed in human skin cancer, as well as other tumours, and transgenic expression of activin A in mouse skin enhanced tumorigenesis through effects specifically on the local immune response, by increasing the number of T<sub>Reg</sub> cells and suppressing cytotoxic γδT cells⁸⁹. Similarly, the divergent BANG GDF15 is overexpressed by many tumours and contributes to immune escape in gliomas by suppressing the cytotoxicity of T cells and natural killer cells⁹⁰. Thus, aberrant expression of BANGs that signal through SMAD2 and SMAD3 can powerfully modulate the immune response to promote tumour progression.

Roles for BANGs in complications of cancer

Many tumours show increased expression of BANGs⁹¹⁻⁹⁴, and chemotherapy can also increase BANG production⁹⁵,⁹⁶. It is becoming increasingly clear that this aberrant expression of BANGs can have clinical consequences beyond the tumour and its immediate microenvironment. BANGs are important regulators of normal homeostasis in muscle, bone and the haematopoietic system, and tumour- or treatment-induced increases in BANGs of the activin or GDF subfamilies can adversely affect all these tissues. *In vitro* experiments had generated conflicting views of the possible roles of individual BANGs, particularly in osteogenesis and erythropoiesis⁹⁵. However, use of ligand traps to probe the integrated effects of endogenous BANGs *in vivo* has clarified BANG involvement in these tissues in preclinical models, and has generated leads for therapeutic development (see below).

Cachexia is a wasting syndrome that affects the majority of patients with advanced cancers, and may account for up to one-third of cancer-related deaths⁹⁴. Furthermore, >75% of cancer patients develop anaemia

either as a direct result of their cancer, or in response  
to therapy⁹⁵. A role for activin in cachexia was first  
suggested by the phenotype of mice lacking the  
inhibin-α chain (Inha-knockout mice), which had  
increased circulating activin levels and which devel-  
oped gonadal tumours and cachexia⁹⁷. Subsequently,  
myostatin (also known as GDF8; originally named for  
its ability to regulate muscle mass) and GDF15 were also  
implicated in this process⁹⁸,⁹⁹. In an exciting recent  
advance, an activin receptor IIB (ACTRIIB)-based  
ligand trap that binds activin and myostatin, not only  
prevented on-going anorexia and muscular wasting  
in multiple preclinical models of cancer cachexia, but  
also fully reversed existing skeletal and heart mus-  
cle atrophy, leading to significantly prolonged sur-  
vival⁹⁴. Similarly, in the context of cancer anaemia, an  
ACTRIIA-based ligand trap reduced the anaemia that  
was induced by treatment with the chemotherapeutic  
paclitaxel in preclinical models⁹⁵, confirming an impor-  
tant role for an endogenous ACTRIIA ligand, probably  
activin A, in suppressing erythropoiesis *in vivo*.

Bone loss occurs with particularly high incidence in  
myeloma, lung, breast and prostate cancers, and causes  
severe pain and also increases the risk of death¹⁰⁰.  
Circulating activin levels are increased in patients  
with breast and prostate cancer who have bone metas-  
tases, as well as in patients with advanced multiple  
myeloma⁹⁵. ACTRIIA and ALK3 ligand traps increase  
bone formation and quality in normal mice, suggest-  
ing that endogenous BANG ligands of both the activin  
family and the BMP2 and BMP4 family negatively  
regulate bone formation by altering the balance of  
osteoblast and osteoclast activity¹⁰¹,¹⁰². Extending these  
observations to the cancer setting, an ACTRIIA ligand  
trap significantly reduced the osteolytic effect of mul-  
tiple myeloma in a xenograft model⁹³. Antagonism of  
activins released by tumour-conditioned bone marrow  
cells also blocks direct tumour-promoting effects⁹³; so,  
BANG antagonism in this context can be of dual benefit  
to the patient.

### Therapeutic implications and advances

From the discussions above, the reductionist view is  
that BANGs that signal through SMAD2 and SMAD3  
(activins, NODAL and myostatin) are frequently over-  
expressed and have deleterious effects in cancer develop-  
ment, whereas BANG signalling through SMAD1,  
SMAD5 and SMAD8 (by BMPs) is frequently inac-  
tivated, with consequent loss of tumour suppression.  
Strategies are under development to reverse both types  
of aberration (FIG. 4). The promiscuous interrelationship  
between the BANGs and their receptors creates both  
opportunities and problems for therapeutic targeting.  
The highest degree of specificity is achieved by targeting a  
given ligand with specific antibodies, whereas targeting  
the receptor kinases with small-molecule antagonists has  
the broadest effect owing to the high structural related-  
ness of the ALK kinases¹⁰³. Building on promising pre-  
clinical results, there are currently six BANG-targeted  
therapeutic agents in early phase clinical trials in cancer  
patients (TABLE 2).

Taking aim at the tumour cell itself, the NODAL-  
Cripto pathway makes a particularly attractive  
target. NODAL is absent in most normal adult tis-  
sues and Cripto is only expressed at low levels, but  
both are frequently reactivated in tumours, creating a  
viable therapeutic window¹⁰⁴. BIIB015 (Biogen-Idec),  
a Cripto-specific monoclonal antibody conjugated  
to a maytansine toxin, was well-tolerated in a Phase I  
trial, but further development was discontinued  
owing to company reprioritization. The kinase inhibi-  
tor LY2157299 (Eli Lilly) was originally developed and  
taken into the clinic as an inhibitor of TGFβ signal-  
ling¹⁰⁵. However, LY2157299 also inhibits the activity  
of ALK4 and ALK7 in addition to the TGFβ-specific  
ALK5. Thus, some of the observed efficacy may be  
attributable to inhibition of activin or NODAL sig-  
nalling. Indeed, given the many tumour-promoting  
effects of activins and NODAL, the combined inhi-  
bition of TGFβ, activin and NODAL pathways has  
appeal as a therapeutic strategy, providing the side  
effects are tolerable. Early clinical results are encour-  
aging, as the drug is well-tolerated with indications of  
efficacy in malignant glioma¹⁰⁵. Targeting the tumour  
stroma, an ALK1-specific antibody (PF-03446962;  
Pfizer) and an ALK1-based ligand trap (ACE-041  
(Dalantercept; Acceleron Pharma)) are now in early  
phase clinical trials as anti-angiogenics in a variety  
of human solid tumours⁹⁵. ALK1 was implicated as  
an escape mechanism in acquired resistance to anti-  
VEGF therapeutics, so combined antagonism of ALK1  
and VEGF may ultimately be desirable⁸⁶. Finally, on  
the basis of compelling preclinical data showing that  
activins and myostatin have deleterious effects on  
host tissues, an ACTRIIA-based ligand trap (ACE-011  
(Sotatercept; Celgene Corp/Acceleron Pharma)) and  
a myostatin-specific antibody (LY2495655; Eli Lilly)  
are in clinical trials to treat cancer-induced cachexia,  
anaemia and bone loss⁹⁵. Early results from Phase I  
trials show that both agents are well-tolerated, with  
evidence for improvement in haemoglobin levels  
and markers of bone formation-destruction bal-  
ance (ACE-011), and increases in muscle volume and  
function (LY2495655).

All the above strategies are based on antagonizing  
the deleterious effects of BANGs in cancer. However,  
in contrast to NODAL and activins, many of the  
actions of BMPs in the carcinogenic process are anti-  
tumorigenic, and therapeutic strategies are being  
sought that may restore or enhance these effects.  
Preclinical data suggest that treatment with BMPs, or  
strategies to boost the activity of endogenous BMPs,  
may be effective alone or as adjuncts to chemotherapy.  
CSCs are intrinsically resistant to therapy¹⁰⁶, but treat-  
ment of xenografted brain or colon tumours with  
BMP2 or BMP4 increased tumour cell differentiation,  
thereby restoring sensitivity to chemotherapeutics⁵⁰,¹⁰⁷.  
Moreover, reactivation of ALK6 by knockdown of  
enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) restored tumour  
suppressive effects of endogenous BMPs in glioblas-  
toma cells⁵¹, suggesting potential for drugs targeting  
histone methylation. However, context is crucial, as

Osteoblast  
A cell responsible for bone  
formation.

Osteoclast  
A cell that breaks down  
mineralized bone and that is  
responsible for bone  
resorption.

REVIEW

**Tumour parenchyma**

- Self-renewing CSCs and proliferating tumour cells
  - BIIB015
  - LY2157299
- Differentiation
- EMT
- Migratory invasive cell
- Dissemination
- Dormant metastatic cell
- Colonization
- Metastasis
  - BMPs
  - Epigenetic therapies
  - Lovastatin
  - Rapamycin and FK506

**BANGs**
- BMPs
- Activins
  - Activins
  - Myostatin
  - GDF15
- Immunosuppression

**Tumour stroma**
- ACE-041
- PF-03446962
- ALK1 or ALK2 ligands (BMP9 and BMP10)
- NODAL
- LY2157299
- Angiogenesis
- Vascular mimicry

**Host tissues**
- ACE-011
- sALK3-Fc
- Bone loss
- Anaemia
- Cachexia
- Anorexia
  - ACE-011
  - sACTRIIB-Fc
  - LY2495655
  - MIC-1 PAb

---

**Figure 4 | Therapeutic approaches to targeting the BANGs in cancer.** Dysregulation of bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs), activins, NODAL, and growth and differentiation factors (GDFs) (BANGs) can have deleterious effects on the tumour parenchyma, the tumour stroma and on host tissues that are not directly involved in the tumorigenic process. Broadly, most therapeutic strategies to date have been aimed at either enhancing BMP activity or antagonizing BANGs of the activin and NODAL superfamily. For more details of therapeutic agents under clinical development (shown in bold) see TABLE 2. The other therapeutic agents shown are still at the preclinical development stage. Of these, the BMP ligands (some of which are already US Food and Drug Administration (FDA)-approved for fracture healing and lumbar fusion) have been used to induce cancer stem cell (CSC) differentiation and to restore response to chemotherapeutics<sup>50,107</sup>. Genetic knockdown of enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2), a component of the Polycomb repressor complex that is highly expressed in many tumours, restored tumour suppressive BMP responses in glioma cells, suggesting promise for epigenetic therapies that can reverse gene silencing<sup>51</sup>. Interestingly, some drugs developed in other contexts can activate BMP signalling. Lovastatin, a cholesterol-lowering agent, restored response to 5-fluorouracil by reactivating epigenetically silenced BMP2 in colorectal and gastric cancers<sup>111</sup>, and the immunosuppressive agents FK506 and rapamycin can also activate BMP signalling<sup>112,113</sup>. Soluble activin receptor-like kinase 3-Fc (sALK3-Fc) and soluble activin receptor IIB-Fc (sACTRIIB-Fc) are ligand traps that have shown therapeutic promise as BANG antagonists in preclinical studies but that have not been taken into the clinic<sup>94,101</sup>. The grey arrows indicate interventions that may affect BANG signalling in cancer and cancer-associated processes. MIC-1 PAb, polyclonal antibody to GDF15.

high BMP4 expression was associated with the induction of EMT and resistance to cisplatin in gastric cancer<sup>108</sup>. Thus, depending on the tumour type, the specific BANG and the molecular context, it may be desirable to either enhance or block BANG activity to achieve maximum therapeutic benefit. Success in this area will depend on improved understanding of the underlying biology and the identification of good predictive biomarkers.

**Conclusions**

Having been overshadowed for many years by the focus on the TGFβs in human cancer, the BANGs are now emerging as key players in the tumorigenic process and as viable therapeutic targets. Deregulated BANG signalling can influence all stages of tumorigenesis from initiation, to seeding and growth of metastases. Moreover, because of their essential roles in maintaining normal tissue homeostasis, the consequences of perturbing BANG function are not restricted to the tumour cells themselves and the tumour microenvironment, but have more general effects in the body, as demonstrated by the effects of misregulated BANGs in cachexia, a common complication of cancer. General principles concerning the regulation and *in vivo* activity of many of the BANGs have emerged from studies in developmental systems. The discovery that the roles of the BANGs in cancer frequently represent the redeployment of their functions in embryonic development suggests that further insights may come via this route. Similarly, it is clear that BANG signals are propagated and interpreted in the context of a complex interactive network of signalling pathways, and network interactions first identified in embryogenesis are also frequently found to be at work in tumorigenesis.

Table 2 | BANG-targeted therapeutics under clinical development for cancer treatment

| Agent (Company) | Molecular target | Agent type | Biology targeted | Stage of development | Indication or patient population | Clinical trial identifier and status |
|------------------|-----------------|-------------|-------------------|----------------------|------------------------------------|-------------------------------------|
| BIIB015 (Biogen Idec) | CRIPTO | Antibody with 'toxic payload': humanized CRIPTO-specific monoclonal (IgG1) conjugated to maytansinoid derivative DM4 | Tumour targeting | Phase I | Relapsed or refractory solid tumours | NCT00674947 (completed; further development discontinued) |
| LY2157299 (Eli Lilly) | ALK4, ALK5 and ALK7 | Small-molecule kinase inhibitor | Tumour targeting | Phase I | Advanced or metastatic cancer | NCT01682187 (complete) |
|  |  |  | Tumour targeting | Phase IB/IIA | Malignant glioma in combination with radiochemotherapy | NCT01220271 (recruiting) |
|  |  |  | Tumour targeting | Phase IB/IIA | Metastatic cancer and advanced pancreatic cancer | NCT01373164 (recruiting) |
|  |  |  | Tumour targeting | Phase II | Hepatocellular carcinoma | NCT01246986 (recruiting) |
|  |  |  | Tumour targeting | Phase II | Recurrent glioblastoma | NCT01582269 (recruiting) |
| PF-03446962 (Pfizer) | ALK1 | Fully human ALK1-specific monoclonal antibody (IgG2) | Angiogenesis | Phase I | Advanced solid tumours | NCT00557856 (recruiting) |
|  |  |  | Angiogenesis | Phase II | Malignant pleural mesothelioma and previous cytotoxic chemotherapy | NCT01486368 (recruiting) |
| ACE-041 (Dalantercept; Acceleron Pharma) | ALK1 ligands (BMP9 and BMP10) | Ligand trap: human ALK1-Fc fusion (IgG1) | Angiogenesis | Phase I | Advanced solid tumours or refractory multiple myeloma | NCT00996957 (ongoing but not recruiting) |
|  |  |  | Angiogenesis | Phase II | Recurrent or persistent endometrial cancer | NCT01642082 (recruiting) |
|  |  |  | Angiogenesis | Phase II | Ovarian, fallopian tube or primary peritoneal cancer | NCT01720173 (planned) |
| ACE-011 (Sotatercept; Celgene Corp/Acceleron Pharma) | ACTRIIA ligands (activins, BMP10, myostatin and GDF11) | Ligand trap: human ACTRIIA-Fc (IgG1) | Bone loss | Phase IIA | Patients with multiple myeloma who have osteolytic lesions receiving concomitant MPT | NCT00747123 (completed) |
|  |  |  | Tumour targeting, anaemia and bone loss | Phase I | Relapsed or refractory multiple myeloma treated with dexamethasone and lenalidomide | NCT01562405 (temporarily suspended pending amendment) |
|  |  |  | Anaemia | Phase II | Anaemia in solid tumours | NCT01190644 (recruiting) |
|  |  |  | Myelofibrosis and anaemia | Phase II | Myelofibrosis and anaemia in myeloproliferative neoplasms | NCT01712308 (planned) |
| LY2495655 (Eli Lilly) | Myostatin | Fully humanized myostatin-specific antibody | Cancer-related cachexia | Phase I | Advanced cancer | NCT01524224 (ongoing but not recruiting) |
|  |  |  | Cancer-related cachexia | Phase II | Patients with locally advanced or inoperable metastatic pancreatic cancer receiving chemotherapy (gemcitabine) | NCT01505530 (recruiting) |

ACTRIIA, activin receptor IIA; ALK, activin receptor-like kinase; BANG, BMPs, activins, NODAL, and GDFs; BMP, bone morphogenetic protein; GDF, growth and differentiation factor; IgG, immunoglobulin G; MPT, melphalan, prednisolone and thalidomide.

Many questions are still outstanding. Our knowledge of the role of NODAL signalling in cancer is only rudimentary, and much more remains to be learnt regarding how it becomes expressed in tumours and exactly how it contributes to cancer progression. The BMP antagonists are also emerging as key players in tumorigenesis. Their crucial role in ‘reining in’ BMP activity in the context of normal tissue homeostasis is highlighted by the demonstration that increased expression of GREM1 underlies the hereditary syndrome HMPS. Clearly, as in embryogenesis, fairly small changes in flux through BANG signalling pathways can have a major effect on biological outcome. Our understanding of how these antagonists are

REVIEW S

normally so tightly regulated and what determines their specificity for different BANGs is far from complete. Moreover, some of the genetic lesions in pathway components responsible for certain tumours, such as the epigenetic silencing of ALK6 in glioblastoma, reveal our relative ignorance about how the BANGs signal. From *in vitro* analysis, the type I receptors ALK3 and ALK6 seem redundant, but signalling through these different receptors evidently has completely different consequences in the context of glioblastoma.

The work on BANGs is now at an exciting stage as we start to understand how these ligands contribute to cancer and await the results of clinical trials to discover whether their activity can be manipulated in patients for therapeutic benefit. Much progress is expected in the next few years.

1. Hardwick, J. C., Kodach, L. L., Offerhaus, G. J. & van den Brink, G. R. Bone morphogenetic protein signalling in colorectal cancer. *Nature Rev. Cancer* **8**, 806–812 (2008).
2. Oshimori, N. & Fuchs, E. The Harmonies played by TGF-β in stem cell biology. *Cell Stem Cell* **11**, 751–764 (2012).
3. Wu, M. Y. & Hill, C. S. TGF-β superfamily signaling in embryonic development and homeostasis. *Dev. Cell* **16**, 329–343 (2009).
4. Huminienecki, L. *et al.* Emergence, development and diversification of the TGF-β signalling pathway within the animal kingdom. *BMC Evol. Biol.* **9**, 28 (2009).
5. Pang, K., Ryan, J. F., Baxevanis, A. D. & Martindale, M. Q. Evolution of the TGF-β signaling pathway and its potential role in the ctenophore, Mnemiopsis leidyi. *PLoS ONE* **6**, e24152 (2011).
6. Constam, D. B. & Robertson, E. J. Regulation of bone morphogenetic protein activity by pro domains and proprotein convertases. *J. Cell Biol.* **144**, 139–149 (1999).
7. Constam, D. B. & Robertson, E. J. SPC4/PACE4 regulates a TGF-β signaling network during axis formation. *Genes Dev.* **14**, 1146–1155 (2000).
8. Mueller, T. D. & Nickel, J. Promiscuity and specificity in BMP receptor activation. *FEBS Lett.* **586**, 1846–1859 (2012).
9. Shi, Y. & Massague, J. Mechanisms of TGF-β signaling from cell membrane to the nucleus. *Cell* **113**, 685–700 (2003).
10. Kang, J. S., Liu, C. & Derynck, R. New regulatory mechanisms of TGF-β receptor function. *Trends Cell Biol.* **19**, 385–394 (2009).
11. Goumans, M. J. *et al.* Activin receptor-like kinase (ALK) 1 is an antagonistic mediator of lateral TGF-β/ALK5 signaling. *Mol. Cell* **12**, 817–828 (2003).
12. Daly, A. C., Randall, R. A. & Hill, C. S. Transforming growth factor β-induced Smad1/5 phosphorylation in epithelial cells is mediated by novel receptor complexes and is essential for anchorage-independent growth. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* **28**, 6889–6902 (2008).
13. Liu, I. M. *et al.* TGF-β-stimulated Smad1/5 phosphorylation requires the ALK5 L45 loop and mediates the pro-migratory TGF-β switch. *EMBO J.* **28**, 88–98 (2009).
14. Wrighton, K. H., Lin, X., Yu, P. B. & Feng, X. H. Transforming growth factor β can stimulate Smad1 phosphorylation independently of bone morphogenetic protein receptors. *J. Biol. Chem.* **284**, 9755–9763 (2009).
15. Chu, G. C., Dunn, N. R., Anderson, D. C., Oxburgh, L. & Robertson, E. J. Differential requirements for Smad4 in TGF-β-dependent patterning of the early mouse embryo. *Development* **131**, 3501–3512 (2004).
16. Levy, L. & Hill, C. S. Smad4 dependency defines two classes of transforming growth factor β (TGF-β) target genes and distinguishes TGF-β-induced epithelial-mesenchymal transition from its antiproliferative and migratory responses. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* **25**, 8108–8125 (2005).
17. Gronroos, E. *et al.* Transforming growth factor β inhibits bone morphogenetic protein-induced transcription through novel phosphorylated Smad1/5-Smad3 complexes. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* **32**, 2904–2916 (2012).
18. Ross, S. & Hill, C. S. How the Smads regulate transcription. *Int. J. Biochem. Cell Biol.* **40**, 383–408 (2008).
19. Chen, X., Rubock, M. J. & Whitman, M. A transcriptional partner for MAD proteins in TGF-β signalling. *Nature* **383**, 691–696 (1996).
20. Bruce, D. L. & Sapkota, G. P. Phosphatases in SMAD regulation. *FEBS Lett.* **586**, 1897–1905 (2012).

21. Schmierer, B. & Hill, C. S. TGF-β-SMAD signal transduction: molecular specificity and functional flexibility. *Nature Rev. Mol. Cell Biol.* **8**, 970–982 (2007).
22. Ramel, M. C. & Hill, C. S. Spatial regulation of BMP activity. *FEBS Lett.* **586**, 1929–1941 (2012).
23. Massague, J. TGF-β signalling in context. *Nature Rev. Mol. Cell Biol.* **13**, 616–630 (2012).
24. Singh, A. M. *et al.* Signaling network crosstalk in human pluripotent cells: a Smad2/3-regulated switch that controls the balance between self-renewal and differentiation. *Cell Stem Cell* **10**, 312–326 (2012). This paper explains the underlying mechanism that dictates whether activin signalling in HESCs induces pluripotency or differentiation.
25. Levine, A. J., Levine, Z. J. & Brivanlou, A. H. GDF3 is a BMP inhibitor that can activate Nodal signaling only at very high doses. *Dev. Biol.* **325**, 43–48 (2009).
26. Candia, A. F. *et al.* Cellular interpretation of multiple TGF-β signals: intracellular antagonism between activin/BVg1 and BMP-2/4 signaling mediated by Smads. *Development* **124**, 4467–4480 (1997).
27. Itoh, S. & ten Dijke, P. Negative regulation of TGF-β receptor/Smad signal transduction. *Curr. Opin. Cell Biol.* **19**, 176–184 (2007).
28. Galvin, K. E., Travis, E. D., Yee, D., Magnuson, T. & Vivian, J. L. Nodal signaling regulates the bone morphogenetic protein pluripotency pathway in mouse embryonic stem cells. *J. Biol. Chem.* **285**, 19747–19756 (2010).
29. Mesnard, D., Guzman-Ayala, M. & Constam, D. B. Nodal specifies embryonic visceral endoderm and sustains pluripotent cells in the epiblast before overt axial patterning. *Development* **133**, 2497–2505 (2006).
30. Arnold, S. J. & Robertson, E. J. Making a commitment: cell lineage allocation and axis patterning in the early mouse embryo. *Nature Rev. Mol. Cell Biol.* **10**, 91–103 (2009).
31. Schier, A. F. Nodal signaling in vertebrate development. *Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol.* **19**, 589–621 (2003).
32. Bianco, C. *et al.* Role of Cripto-1 in stem cell maintenance and malignant progression. *Am. J. Pathol.* **177**, 532–540 (2010).
33. Pera, M. F. & Tam, P. P. Extrinsic regulation of pluripotent stem cells. *Nature* **465**, 713–720 (2010).
34. Vallier, L. *et al.* Activin/Nodal signalling maintains pluripotency by controlling Nanog expression. *Development* **136**, 1339–1349 (2009).
35. Miyazono, K., Kamiya, Y. & Morikawa, M. Bone morphogenetic protein receptors and signal transduction. *J. Biochem.* **147**, 35–51 (2010).
36. Wagner, D. O. *et al.* BMPs: from bone to body morphogenetic proteins. *Sci. Signal.* **3**, mr1 (2010).
37. Strizzi, L., Hardy, K. M., Kirschmann, D. A., Ahrlund-Richter, L. & Hendrix, M. J. Nodal expression and detection in cancer: experience and challenges. *Cancer Res.* **72**, 1915–1920 (2012).
38. Magee, J. A., Piskounova, E. & Morrison, S. J. Cancer stem cells: impact, heterogeneity, and uncertainty. *Cancer Cell* **21**, 283–296 (2012).
39. Blanpain, C. & Fuchs, E. Epidermal homeostasis: a balancing act of stem cells in the skin. *Nature Rev. Mol. Cell Biol.* **10**, 207–217 (2009).
40. Bond, A. M., Bhalala, O. G. & Kessler, J. A. The dynamic role of bone morphogenetic proteins in neural stem cell fate and maturation. *Dev. Neurobiol.* **72**, 1068–1084 (2012).

41. He, X. C. *et al.* BMP signaling inhibits intestinal stem cell self-renewal through suppression of Wnt-β-catenin signaling. *Nature Genet.* **36**, 1117–1121 (2004). This paper demonstrates that conditional inactivation of ALK3 generates a mouse model of JPS and shows important antagonistic actions of BMP and WNT signalling on stem cell self-renewal.
42. Kosinski, C. *et al.* Gene expression patterns of human colon tops and basal crypts and BMP antagonists as intestinal stem cell niche factors. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **104**, 15418–15423 (2007).
43. Waite, K. A. & Eng, C. From developmental disorder to heritable cancer: it's all in the BMP/TGF-β family. *Nature Rev. Genet.* **4**, 763–773 (2003).
44. Jaeger, E. *et al.* Hereditary mixed polyposis syndrome is caused by a 40-kb upstream duplication that leads to increased and ectopic expression of the BMP antagonist GREM1. *Nature Genet.* **44**, 699–703 (2012). This paper demonstrates that a genetic lesion leading to overexpression of the BMP antagonist gremlin 1 underlies hereditary mixed polyposis syndrome.
45. Haramis, A. P. *et al.* De novo crypt formation and juvenile polyposis on BMP inhibition in mouse intestine. *Science* **303**, 1684–1686 (2004).
46. Itasaki, N. & Hoppler, S. Crosstalk between Wnt and bone morphogenetic protein signaling: a turbulent relationship. *Dev. Dyn.* **239**, 16–33 (2010).
47. Auclair, B. A., Benoit, Y. D., Rivard, N., Mishina, Y. & Perreault, N. Bone morphogenetic protein signaling is essential for terminal differentiation of the intestinal secretory cell lineage. *Gastroenterology* **133**, 887–896 (2007).
48. Scheel, C. *et al.* Paracrine and autocrine signals induce and maintain mesenchymal and stem cell states in the breast. *Cell* **145**, 926–940 (2011).
49. Panchision, D. M. & McKay, R. D. The control of neural stem cells by morphogenic signals. *Curr. Opin. Genet. Dev.* **12**, 478–487 (2002).
50. Piccirillo, S. G. *et al.* Bone morphogenetic proteins inhibit the tumorigenic potential of human brain tumour-initiating cells. *Nature* **444**, 761–765 (2006).
51. Lee, J. *et al.* Epigenetic-mediated dysfunction of the bone morphogenetic protein pathway inhibits differentiation of glioblastoma-initiating cells. *Cancer Cell* **13**, 69–80 (2008). This paper shows that ALK6 is epigenetically silenced in some human glioblastomas, causing reversion to an early embryonic BMP signalling pattern and the loss of inhibitory effects on the CSC population.
52. Sneddon, J. B. *et al.* Bone morphogenetic protein antagonist gremlin 1 is widely expressed by cancer-associated stromal cells and can promote tumor cell proliferation. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **103**, 14842–14847 (2006).
53. Buijs, J. T. *et al.* The BMP2/7 heterodimer inhibits the human breast cancer stem cell subpopulation and bone metastases formation. *Oncogene* **31**, 2164–2174 (2012).
54. Upadhayay, G. *et al.* Stem cell antigen-1 enhances tumorigenicity by disruption of growth differentiation factor-10 (GDF10)-dependent TGF-β signaling. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **108**, 7820–7825 (2011).
55. Zhang, L. *et al.* BMP4 administration induces differentiation of CD133+ hepatic cancer stem cells, blocking their contributions to hepatocellular carcinoma. *Cancer Res.* **72**, 4276–4285 (2012).

56. Gruber, T. A. *et al.* An Inv(16)(p13.3q24.3)-encoded CBFA2T3-GLIS2 fusion protein defines an aggressive subtype of pediatric acute megakaryoblastic leukemia. *Cancer Cell* **22**, 683–697 (2012).

57. McLean, K. *et al.* Human ovarian carcinoma-associated mesenchymal stem cells regulate cancer stem cells and tumorigenesis via altered BMP production. *J. Clin. Invest.* **121**, 3206–3219 (2011).

58. Quail, D. F., Siegers, G. M., Jewer, M. & Postovit, L. M. Nodal signalling in embryogenesis and tumourigenesis. *Int. J. Biochem. Cell Biol.* **45**, 885–898 (2013).

59. Topczewska, J. M. *et al.* Embryonic and tumorigenic pathways converge via Nodal signaling: role in melanoma aggressiveness. *Nature Med.* **12**, 925–932 (2006). This was the first demonstration that NODAL is secreted by tumour cells, with the level of NODAL correlating with tumour aggressiveness.

60. Lawrence, M. G. *et al.* Reactivation of embryonic nodal signaling is associated with tumor progression and promotes the growth of prostate cancer cells. *Prostate* **71**, 1198–1209 (2011).

61. Strizzi, L. *et al.* Potential for the embryonic morphogen Nodal as a prognostic and predictive biomarker in breast cancer. *Breast Cancer Res.* **14**, R75 (2011).

62. Spiller, C. M. *et al.* Endogenous Nodal signaling regulates germ cell potency during mammalian testis development. *Development* **139**, 4123–4132 (2012).

63. Bianco, C. & Salomon, D. S. Targeting the embryonic gene Cripto-1 in cancer and beyond. *Expert Opin. Ther. Pat.* **20**, 1739–1749 (2010).

64. Lonardo, E. *et al.* Nodal/Activin signaling drives self-renewal and tumorigenicity of pancreatic cancer stem cells and provides a target for combined drug therapy. *Cell Stem Cell* **9**, 433–446 (2011). This was the first demonstration that NODAL and activin signalling promotes self-renewal of CSCs.

65. Postovit, L. M. *et al.* Human embryonic stem cell microenvironment suppresses the tumorigenic phenotype of aggressive cancer cells. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **105**, 4329–4334 (2008).

66. Hardy, K. M. *et al.* Regulation of the embryonic morphogen Nodal by Notch4 facilitates manifestation of the aggressive melanoma phenotype. *Cancer Res.* **70**, 10340–10350 (2010).

67. Costa, F. F. *et al.* Epigenetically reprogramming metastatic tumor cells with an embryonic microenvironment. *Epigenomics* **1**, 387–398 (2009).

68. Seftor, R. E. *et al.* Tumor cell vasculogenic mimicry: from controversy to therapeutic promise. *Am. J. Pathol.* **181**, 1115–1125 (2012).

69. Quail, D. F. *et al.* Embryonic protein nodal promotes breast cancer vascularization. *Cancer Res.* **72**, 3851–3863 (2012).

70. Lonardo, E., Frias-Aldeguer, J., Hermann, P. C. & Heeschen, C. Pancreatic stellate cells form a niche for cancer stem cells and promote their self-renewal and invasiveness. *Cell Cycle* **11**, 1282–1290 (2012).

71. Ocana, O. H. *et al.* Metastatic colonization requires the repression of the epithelial-mesenchymal transition inducer prrx1. *Cancer Cell* **22**, 709–724 (2012).

72. Tsai, J. H., Donaher, J. L., Murphy, D. A., Chau, S. & Yang, J. Spatiotemporal regulation of epithelial-mesenchymal transition is essential for squamous cell carcinoma metastasis. *Cancer Cell* **22**, 725–736 (2012).

73. Brabletz, T. To differentiate or not--routes towards metastasis. *Nature Rev. Cancer* **12**, 425–436 (2012).

74. Polyak, K. & Weinberg, R. A. Transitions between epithelial and mesenchymal states: acquisition of malignant and stem cell traits. *Nature Rev. Cancer* **9**, 265–273 (2009).

75. Buijs, J. T. *et al.* BMP7, a putative regulator of epithelial homeostasis in the human prostate, is a potent inhibitor of prostate cancer bone metastasis *in vivo*. *Am. J. Pathol.* **171**, 1047–1057 (2007).

76. Ding, Z. *et al.* SMAD4-dependent barrier constrains prostate cancer growth and metastatic progression. *Nature* **470**, 269–273 (2011).

77. Bailey, J. M., Singh, P. K. & Hollingsworth, M. A. Cancer metastasis facilitated by developmental pathways: Sonic hedgehog, Notch, and bone morphogenetic proteins. *J. Cell Biochem.* **102**, 829–839 (2007).

78. Gao, H. *et al.* The BMP inhibitor Coco reactivates breast cancer cells at lung metastatic sites. *Cell* **150**, 764–779 (2012). This paper shows that tumour cells can upregulate BANG antagonists to overcome organ-specific BMP barriers to metastatic colonization.

79. Kobayashi, A. *et al.* Bone morphogenetic protein 7 in dormancy and metastasis of prostate cancer stem-like cells in bone. *J. Exp. Med.* **208**, 2641–2655 (2011).

80. Samavarchi-Tehrani, P. *et al.* Functional genomics reveals a BMP-driven mesenchymal-to-epithelial transition in the initiation of somatic cell reprogramming. *Cell Stem Cell* **7**, 64–77 (2010).

81. Tarragona, M. *et al.* Identification of NOG as a specific breast cancer bone metastasis-supporting gene. *J. Biol. Chem.* **287**, 21346–21355 (2012).

82. Katsuno, Y. *et al.* Bone morphogenetic protein signaling enhances invasion and bone metastasis of breast cancer cells through Smad pathway. *Oncogene* **27**, 6322–6333 (2008).

83. Nishimori, H., Ehata, S., Suzuki, H. I., Katsuno, Y. & Miyazono, K. Prostate cancer cells and bone stromal cells mutually interact with each other through bone morphogenetic protein-mediated signals. *J. Biol. Chem.* **287**, 20037–20046 (2012).

84. Cunha, S. I. & Pietras, K. ALK1 as an emerging target for antiangiogenic therapy of cancer. *Blood* **117**, 6999–7006 (2011).

85. Cunha, S. I. *et al.* Genetic and pharmacological targeting of activin receptor-like kinase 1 impairs tumor growth and angiogenesis. *J. Exp. Med.* **207**, 85–100 (2010). This study implicated ALK1 ligands as key players in tumour angiogenesis.

86. Hu-Lowe, D. D. *et al.* Targeting activin receptor-like kinase 1 inhibits angiogenesis and tumorigenesis through a mechanism of action complementary to anti-VEGF therapies. *Cancer Res.* **71**, 1362–1373 (2011).

87. Strizzi, L. *et al.* Nodal as a biomarker for melanoma progression and a new therapeutic target for clinical intervention. *Expert Rev. Dermatol.* **4**, 67–78 (2009).

88. Hedger, M. P., Winnall, W. R., Phillips, D. J. & de Kretser, D. M. The regulation and functions of activin and follistatin in inflammation and immunity. *Vitam. Horm.* **85**, 255–297 (2011).

89. Antsiferova, M. *et al.* Activin enhances skin tumourigenesis and malignant progression by inducing a pro-tumourigenic immune cell response. *Nature Commun.* **2**, 576 (2011).

90. Roth, P. *et al.* GDF-15 contributes to proliferation and immune escape of malignant gliomas. *Clin. Cancer Res.* **16**, 3851–3859 (2010).

91. Corre, J. *et al.* Bioactivity and prognostic significance of growth differentiation factor GDF15 secreted by bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells in multiple myeloma. *Cancer Res.* **72**, 1395–1406 (2012).

92. Harada, K. *et al.* Serum immunoreactive activin A levels in normal subjects and patients with various diseases. *J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab.* **81**, 2125–2130 (1996).

93. Vallet, S. *et al.* Activin A promotes multiple myeloma-induced osteolysis and is a promising target for myeloma bone disease. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **107**, 5124–5129 (2010).

94. Zhou, X. *et al.* Reversal of cancer cachexia and muscle wasting by ActRIIB antagonism leads to prolonged survival. *Cell* **142**, 531–543 (2010). This important preclinical study showed that neutralization of ACTRIIB ligands leads to dramatically prolonged survival in cancer-bearing mice by reversing adverse effects of BANGs on host tissues.

95. Fields, S. Z. *et al.* Activin receptor antagonists for cancer-related anemia and bone disease. *Expert Opin. Investig. Drugs* **22**, 87–101 (2013).

96. Pellagatti, A. *et al.* Lenalidomide inhibits the malignant clone and up-regulates the SPARC gene mapping to the commonly deleted region in 5q-syndrome patients. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **104**, 11406–11411 (2007).

97. Matzuk, M. M. *et al.* Development of cancer cachexia-like syndrome and adrenal tumors in inhibin-deficient mice. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **91**, 8817–8821 (1994).

98. Johnen, H. *et al.* Tumor-induced anorexia and weight loss are mediated by the TGF-β superfamily cytokine MIC-1. *Nature Med.* **13**, 1333–1340 (2007).

99. Zimmers, T. A. *et al.* Induction of cachexia in mice by systemically administered myostatin. *Science* **296**, 1486–1488 (2002).

100. Saad, F. *et al.* Pathologic fractures correlate with reduced survival in patients with malignant bone disease. *Cancer* **110**, 1860–1867 (2007).

101. Baud’huin, M. *et al.* A soluble bone morphogenetic protein type IA receptor increases bone mass and bone strength. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **109**, 12207–12212 (2012).

102. Pearsall, R. S. *et al.* A soluble activin type IIA receptor induces bone formation and improves skeletal integrity. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **105**, 7082–7087 (2008).

103. Vogt, J., Traynor, R. & Sapkota, G. P. The specificities of small molecule inhibitors of the TGFβ and BMP pathways. *Cell. Signal.* **23**, 1831–1842 (2011).

104. Rangel, M. C. *et al.* Role of Cripto-1 during epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition in development and cancer. *Am. J. Pathol.* **180**, 2188–2200 (2012).

105. Akhurst, R. J. & Hata, A. Targeting the TGFβ signalling pathway in disease. *Nature Rev. Drug Discov.* **11**, 790–811 (2012).

106. Alison, M. R., Lin, W. R., Lim, S. M. & Nicholson, L. J. Cancer stem cells: in the line of fire. *Cancer Treat. Rev.* **38**, 589–598 (2012).

107. Lombardo, Y. *et al.* Bone morphogenetic protein 4 induces differentiation of colorectal cancer stem cells and increases their response to chemotherapy in mice. *Gastroenterology* **140**, 297–309 (2011).

108. Ivanova, T. *et al.* Integrated epigenomics identifies BMP4 as a modulator of cisplatin sensitivity in gastric cancer. *Gut* **62**, 22–33 (2013).

109. Antsiferova, M. & Werner, S. The bright and the dark sides of activin in wound healing and cancer. *J. Cell Sci.* **125**, 3929–3937 (2012).

110. Weigelt, B. & Downward, J. Genomic determinants of PI3K pathway inhibitor response in *Cancer. Front. Oncol.* **2**, 109 (2012).

111. Kodach, L. L. *et al.* Statins augment the chemosensitivity of colorectal cancer cells inducing epigenetic reprogramming and reducing colorectal cancer cell ‘stemness’ via the bone morphogenetic protein pathway. *Gut* **60**, 1544–1553 (2011).

112. Kugimiya, F. *et al.* Mechanism of osteogenic induction by FK506 via BMP/Smad pathways. *Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun.* **338**, 872–879 (2005).

113. van der Poel, H. G., Hanrahan, C., Zhong, H. & Simons, J. W. Rapamycin induces Smad activity in prostate cancer cell lines. *Urol. Res.* **30**, 380–386 (2003).

**Acknowledgements**

The authors thank members of the Hill and Wakefield laboratories, K. Hunter, E. Sahai, M. Sporn, S. Yuspa and Y. Zhang for useful comments on the manuscript. C.S.H. acknowledges Cancer Research UK and the European Commission Network of Excellence EpiGeneSys (HEALTH-F4-2010-257082) for funding. L.M.W. acknowledges the Intramural Research Program of the US National Institutes of Health, National Cancer Institute, Center for Cancer Research for funding.

**Competing interests statement**

The authors declare no competing financial interests.

**DATABASES**

ClinicalTrials.gov: [http://www.clinicaltrials.gov](http://www.clinicaltrials.gov)

[NCT00557856](NCT00557856) | [NCT00674947](NCT00674947) | [NCT00747123](NCT00747123) | [NCT00996957](NCT00996957) |

[NCT01190644](NCT01190644) | [NCT01220271](NCT01220271) | [NCT01246986](NCT01246986) | [NCT01373164](NCT01373164) |

[NCT01486368](NCT01486368) | [NCT01505530](NCT01505530) | [NCT01524224](NCT01524224) | [NCT01562405](NCT01562405) |

[NCT01582269](NCT01582269) | [NCT01642089](NCT01642089) | [NCT01682187](NCT01682187) | [NCT01712308](NCT01712308) |

[NCT01720173](NCT01720173)

**FURTHER INFORMATION**

Lalage M. Wakefield’s homepage: [http://ccr.cancer.gov/staff/staff.asp?profileid=13665](http://ccr.cancer.gov/staff/staff.asp?profileid=13665)

Caroline S. Hill’s homepage: [http://www.london-research-institute.org.uk/research/caroline-hill](http://www.london-research-institute.org.uk/research/caroline-hill)

ALL LINKS ARE ACTIVE IN THE ONLINE PDF
