
Accepted Manuscript

Title: Angiotensin III: A Physiological Relevant Peptide of the Renin Angiotensin System

Author: Vudhya G. Yugandhar Michelle A. Clark

PII: S0196-9781(13)00172-1  
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/doi:10.101
# Angiotensin III: A Physiological Relevant Peptide of the Renin Angiotensin System

**Vudhya G. Yugandhar and Michelle A. Clark**

Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences  
College of Pharmacy  
Nova Southeastern University  
3200 South University Drive  
Fort Lauderdale, FL 33328  

---

Key words: Angiotensin, Aminopeptidase A, Blood pressure, Cardiovascular, Renin angiotensin system, Sodium appetite, Vasopressin.

---

## Address for Correspondence:

Michelle A. Clark, Ph.D.  
College of Pharmacy  
Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences  
Nova Southeastern University  
3200 South University Drive  
Fort Lauderdale, FL 33328  
Phone: (954) 262-1384  
Fax: (954) 262-2278  
miclark@nova.edu

ABSTRACT

The renin angiotensin system (RAS) is a peptide hormone system that plays an important role in the pathophysiology of various diseases, including congestive heart failure, hypertension, myocardial infarction, and diabetic nephropathy. This has led researchers to focus extensively on this system, leading to the discovery of various peptides, peptidases, receptors and signal transduction mechanisms intrinsic to the RAS. Angiotensinogen (AGT), angiotensin (Ang) II, Ang III, Ang IV, and Ang-(1-7) are the main biologically active peptides of RAS. However, most of the available studies have focused on Ang II as the likely key peptide from the RAS that directly and indirectly regulates physiological functions leading to pathological conditions. However, data from recent studies suggest that Ang III may produce physiologically-relevant effects that are similar to those produced by Ang II. Hence, this review focuses on Ang III and the myriad of physiological effects that it produces in the body.

1. INTRODUCTION

The renin angiotensin system (RAS) is a peptide hormone system that is composed of various enzymes, as well as inactive and active peptides that play pivotal roles in the regulation of fluid homeostasis, blood pressure, and cardiovascular function. As shown in Figure 1, angiotensinogen (AGT), which is primarily produced in the liver, is the precursor molecule that is catabolized to various peptides through the actions of a series of peptidase enzymes. The aspartyl protease renin, which is primarily secreted from the juxtaglomerular cells of the kidney, is the initial enzyme that cleaves AGT producing the decapeptide angiotensin (Ang) I, [Ang-(1-10)]. Ang I acts as a substrate for the next enzyme, angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE), leading to the production of the first physiologically active peptide Ang II, [Ang-(1-8)] [71]. The octapeptide Ang II is further metabolized to the heptapeptide Ang III, [Ang-(2-8)], by aminopeptidase A (APA) [47]. Ang III can be further processed to Ang IV [Ang-(3-8)] by aminopeptidase N. There are several pathways by which the active peptide Ang-(1-7) can be produced. Ang I can be processed by ACE2 to Ang-(1-9) which is further cleaved by ACE to Ang-(1-7). Alternatively, Ang I can be cleaved by an endopeptidase to form Ang-(1-7). Ang II can also be cleaved by ACE2 or by prolylcarboxypeptidase to produce Ang-(1-7) [27].

Despite the discovery of components of the RAS dating back more than 100 years ago [77] [37] [14] [57] [70] [55] [15], elucidating the components of this system and its active physiological peptides are still considered to be one of the central dogma in understanding the pathophysiology of various diseases. For a long time the RAS was considered to be an endocrine system with circulating Ang II as it’s only functional effector hormone. Thus, the effects of Ang II in regulating physiological and pathological processes are well studied and documented. This peptide affects a wide gamut of processes ranging from regulation of the cardiovascular system to control of inflammatory pathways [54]. Ang II interacts with the G-protein coupled AT₁ and AT₂ receptors to mediate its effects. Gene targeting experiments and studies using selective AT₁ and AT₂ receptor antagonists suggest that most of the functions of Ang II are mediated by AT₁ receptors [78] [76]. Ang II interaction with the AT₂ receptor leads to anti-proliferative and pro-apoptotic changes, primarily by antagonizing AT₁ receptors [54]. AT₂ receptors are also important in fetal development, and can be induced later in adult life under pathological

conditions [68]. In recent decades, the increase in the availability of a variety of molecular techniques, and the advent of new inhibitors against the peptidases, has changed our view of this system to include the role that other Ang peptides may play in physiological as well as pathological processes. In the present review, the physiological effects of Ang III is discussed with a focus on its possible role in pathophysiological processes.

2. The Ang III Hypothesis

Ang III actions are derived from interactions at the AT₁ and AT₂ receptors, thus fueling the debate as to the physiologically relevant peptides of the RAS. Several studies actually suggested that Ang III may be the true effector of the RAS in the control of blood pressure [7] [93], and vasopressin (AVP) release [99]. This has led to the controversial “Ang III Hypothesis” which was primarily derived through observations of Ang II and Ang III actions in the central nervous system. The premise of this theory is that the physiologically relevant peptide that binds to and activates Ang II receptors is Ang III, not Ang II. This putative “Ang III Hypothesis” suggests that Ang II is converted to Ang III in order to activate Ang receptors [24] [40] [63] [96] [39] [41]. Studies have shown that centrally produced Ang II is rapidly degraded by several enzymes (primarily APA), leading to the accumulation of Ang III [72]. It is the degradation of Ang II to Ang III by APA that is the most documented breakdown pathway for Ang II and is the focus of most studies. Since the metabolism of Ang II is relatively rapid, this has helped to substantiate the Ang III Hypothesis.

There are a few studies that support the putative Ang III hypothesis. Most of these studies have focused on using APA inhibitors such as amastatin to block Ang II conversion to Ang III, then measuring effects of the initial Ang II treatment on blood pressures of normotensive and hypertensive animals [1] [99] [61] [94]. A few studies have also focused on the Ang receptor(s) that Ang III interacts with to cause effects on blood pressure. For example, study findings such as the one conducted by Harding and Felix [41] has helped to sustain the debate. They showed that Ang III was more potent than Ang II at eliciting responses from AT₁ receptors located on paraventricular nucleus (PVN) neuronal cells isolated from both normal rats and spontaneously hypertensive rats (SHR). The Ang II response was blocked by the addition of

amastatin, the selective APA inhibitor, and the inhibitor was ineffective in preventing the Ang III response [39].

However, there are a number of studies that refute the theory that Ang II conversion to Ang III is necessary for receptor binding. Kokje et al. [46] showed that intracerebroventricularly (ICV)-administered aminopeptidase-resistant Ang II analogs pressor and dipsogenic activities were similar or greater than Ang II. In addition, there were no differences in Ang II, its aminopeptidase-resistant analogs, and Ang III initial peak pressor responses, findings that do not support a requisite formation of Ang III to elicit a response. It has also been established that ${}^{125}$I-Ang II can bind to brain AT${}_{1}$ receptors, an effect that does not require conversion to ${}^{125}$I-Ang III [45]. In addition, we have shown that blocking Ang II conversion to Ang III with the use of APA inhibitors does not affect Ang II's ability to stimulate mitogen activated protein (MAP) kinase pathways [21].

Interestingly, a number of studies have suggested that Ang III and Ang II are equipotent at eliciting cardiovascular and fluid changes [29]. Moreover, it is notable that in most instances, Ang III agonistic effects are similar to those of Ang II. Both peptides have been shown to induce similar central-mediated increases in blood pressure or mean arterial pressure [8] [81], and equivalent central effects on thirst and sodium appetite [87]. Centrally-administered Ang III was as potent as Ang II in causing pressor and renal effects in rats fed normal or high sodium diets [20]. Ang II and Ang III induced the central expression of the transcription factors c-fos, c-jun, and krox-24 with the same efficacy as well [11]. Peripherally, Ang III was equipotent to Ang II with respect to blood pressure increases, aldosterone secretion, and renal functions [36]. More recently, we have shown that both Ang II and Ang III similarly caused phosphorylation of the ERK1/2 MAP kinases [23], and the stress activated protein kinase/Jun-terminal (SAPK/JNK) MAP kinases [22]. On the other hand, we have shown that the ability of Ang III to cause proliferation of astrocytes was different from Ang II. At low doses Ang III exhibited a similar effect as Ang II, however; at the higher doses of the peptides, astrocytes were more responsive to Ang II [23]. Thus, our studies and others have shown that Ang II and Ang III may have equivalent effects on several physiological processes, but differential effects on others.

There are a number of studies suggesting that Ang III has agonistic and mitogenic properties of its own. Most importantly, these studies support a role for Ang III as an active

RAS peptide with similar if not equivalent effects as Ang II. Ang III agonistic properties were observed a number of years ago [8]; however, the relevance of this peptide as a key player in the RAS is not yet appreciated, although there are a number of biological effects that are known to be mediated by Ang III.

### 3.1 Pressor and Cardiovascular Effects of Ang III

It is well established that the RAS system plays a significant role in the regulation of pressor and cardiovascular effects [25] [31] [94]. These effects are thought to be primarily mediated by Ang II. The efficacy of Ang III as a pressor peptide is controversial in terms of its potency to elicit increases in blood pressure. Initial studies showed increased pressor and dipsogenic responses by Ang III compared to Ang II when administered ICV [52] [79]. On the other hand, the dipsogenic potency of centrally applied Ang III is 50% or less the potency of Ang II, depending upon the infusion site (reviewed in [32]) [89] [90]). Comparative studies showed that when injected ICV, Ang II showed the greatest pressor activity [80] [91] [92], followed by that of Ang I and Ang III. Thus, it is clear that Ang III can cause pressor and dipsogenic effects but, the potency of the peptide as compared to Ang II to cause this effect is debatable.

To address the controversy as to the nature of the pressor response of Ang III, degradation resistant analogs of Ang II, Ang III and Ang IV were designed to investigate the effects of the active Ang peptides with respect to the central control of cardiovascular functions. These analogs were prepared by replacing an amide bond with hydroxyethylamine (HEA) at the N-terminus of the Ang peptides to give HEA-Ang II, HEA-Ang III, and HEA-Ang IV. By creating these degradation-resistant analogs, it is possible to measure the direct effects of the peptides and not the degradation products. It was shown that when ICV infused, all three analogs were equivalent with respect to maximum elevation in pressor responses; each analog also showed significantly extended durations of effects compared with their respective native Angs [88]. Of the three analogs, HEA-Ang II had a significantly longer effect as compared with HEA-Ang III and HEA-Ang IV; whereas the latter two had equivalent effects. Pre-treatment with the AT₁ receptor blocker, Losartan, resulted in decreased pressor response to each of the different Angs, suggesting that responses are mediated by the AT₁ receptor subtype [88].
Tseng et al. [81] compared the pressor responses of Ang II and Ang III in normotensive and 2-kidney, 1-clip renovascular hypertensive rats. In this study, the peptides were injected ICV into the nucleus tractus solitarii (NTS) and the area postrema (AP) of the rats. Both Ang II and Ang III had similar dose-dependent pressor responses in the normotensive and hypertensive rats. Fink et al. [29] also examined the influence of chronic administration of Ang III on arterial blood pressure regulation and fluid/electrolyte homeostasis in rats. In this experiment, Ang II and Ang III were injected either into the blood, or into the brain via the cerebral ventricles. Results from this study suggested that Ang III is a less potent direct vasoconstrictor than Ang II but it had virtually equivalent pressor activity upon cerebroventricular administration. Another study conducted by Wright et al. [94] also observed that ICV injections of Ang II and Ang III yielded equivalent pressor and drinking responses. However, the pressor and drinking effects of both peptides were significantly reduced when the specific Ang receptor antagonist \[[Sar^1, Ile^8]\] Ang II was ICV administered prior to the peptides. In rat coronary vascular beds, Ang II, Ang III and Ang IV constricted coronary arteries, an effect mediated by the Ang AT₁ receptor [82]. Of the three peptides, Ang II was the most potent and Ang IV the least potent. In the presence of the AT₂ receptor blocker, PD123319, the vasoconstriction effect of Ang III was significantly enhanced suggesting that Ang III actions on AT₂ receptors in this system lead to vasodilation [82]. Most importantly, these findings suggest that Ang III rather than Ang II is the preferred endogenous agonist of these receptors.

Overall, these studies suggest that when directly injected or ICV-administered into certain regions of the brain, Ang III produces a cardiovascular response almost identical to those produced by Ang II [89] [99]. However, Ang III injected centrally may be less effective than Ang II in promoting dipsogenic responses [30]. Both Ang peptides are equally released in the hypothalamic PVN after hyperosmotic stimulation in conscious rats [59]. Thus, it is plausible that both peptides are produced in cardiovascular centers of the brain and that they both have “pressor” tendencies.

### 3.2 Aldosterone and Renal Effects of Ang III

Aldosterone produced by the adrenal glands plays a major role in retaining sodium and water leading to an increase in blood volume and a corresponding increase in blood pressure.
Ang III was shown earlier on to specifically stimulate secretion of aldosterone in rats [16]. Moreover, Ang III is nearly equipotent with Ang II as a stimulus for the adrenal production of aldosterone in sheep and rats [10] [9] [17]. Ang III also directly influenced kidney functions by increasing glomerular filtration rate and it reduces tubular reabsorption [20]. ICV administration of Ang III in adult male Sprague-dawley rats that were maintained on a normal diet and a high sodium intake diet showed that Ang III enhanced renal functions as well [20]. In Wistar Kyoto normotensive rats, infusion of Ang III elicited natriuresis and renal proximal tubule cell AT₂ receptor translocation [56]. Identical treatment of SHR did not result in natriuresis or AT₂ receptor translocation. These findings suggest that a defect in AT₂ receptor-mediated natriuresis and trafficking may be important in the development of hypertension in SHRs [56]. Thus, these studies suggest a relevant role for Ang III in adrenal secretion and kidney functions.

### 3.3 Sodium Appetite and Thirst Effects of Ang III

There is considerable evidence to support the role of Ang III in the regulation of thirst (reviewed in [90]). But, little evidence exists concerning Ang III's potential involvement in sodium appetite, and what data is available is conflicting. For example, comparative studies were conducted to understand the effects of Ang II and Ang III towards salt appetite. Peripheral administration of Ang III has been shown to be ineffective in eliciting salt appetite in Fischer 344 and Sprague-dawley rats [18]. In contrast to this, Ang II was capable of increasing sodium appetite [18]. In male albino rats, acute Ang III infusion into the preoptic area of the brain failed to increase sodium appetite in rats, whereas Ang II stimulated sodium appetite [4].

On the other hand, in baboons, ICV infused Ang III was equipotent to Ang II in stimulating sodium consumption [8]. In dogs Ang III elicits immediate sodium retention as well as aldosterone secretion [84]. Wilson and colleagues [87] particularly focused on the role of centrally administered Ang II and Ang III on thirst and salt appetite using aminopeptidase resistant analogs of Ang II and Ang III in male Sprague-dawley rats. Prior to ICV infusions, the formation of endogenous Ang was blocked in the rats with furosemide (a diuretic and natriuretic drug) and captopril (ACE inhibitor). Results from this study showed that both Ang II and Ang III are equally capable of producing water and salt intake. Besides these results, a number of other

studies suggested a central role for Ang III in osmoregulatory behavior, an effect mediated by AT₁ receptors [8][34][40][39][41][42][62][61][96][99].

### 3.4 Vasopressin Release by Ang III

The role of the PVN in the integration and transduction of effects, such as AVP release, induced by peripheral or central Ang is increasingly recognized [74][73][3][83]. It was demonstrated that both Ang II and Ang III were released within the PVN in response to local hyperosmotic stimulation and dehydration [59][42]. Therefore in conscious Wistar rats, Qadri et al. [60] compared the effects of Ang peptides and their C-and N-terminal Ang fragments on AVP release and drinking when these peptides were microinjected into the hypothalamic PVN. The main finding was that besides Ang II, only the C-terminal Ang fragment, Ang III was capable of stimulating AVP release and inducing drinking behavior via AT₁ receptors and not via AT₂ receptors. Ang III was equally as potent as Ang II to induce this response [63]. Aminopeptidase inhibitors have also been employed to study the effects of Ang peptides on AVP release. ICV injection of Ang II caused a dose-dependent doubling of plasma AVP levels [99]. The addition of EC33, the APA inhibitor, prevented Ang II-induced AVP release, a finding that suggests that Ang II must be converted to Ang III to elicit AVP release [99]. On the other hand, injection of APN inhibitors, (prevents Ang III breakdown), increased AVP release. This effect was prevented by the co-administration of Ang receptor blockers [61]. These findings suggest that the effector peptide that caused AVP release was Ang III and this effect occurred via interaction with Ang receptors.

### 3.5 Atrial Natriuretic Peptide (ANP) Release by Ang III

ANP is a cardiac hormone that, in addition to causing vasodilation of blood vessels, is also involved in the homeostatic control of body fluids, sodium, and potassium. Recently it has been shown that Ang III stimulated stretch-induced ANP secretion [58]. Interestingly, this effect was mediated by the AT₂ Ang receptor and was opposite to the effect observed with Ang II. The Ang III effect was thought to be mediated by Phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K), Akt, and protein kinase G. This is one of the few instances where an effect of Ang III has been observed that is

not the same as that of Ang II. Additionally, this is one of the few examples of an Ang III effect that occurs via interaction with the AT₂ receptor. Most importantly, the ability of Ang III to cause ANP release opposes some of the effects, (example, sodium and water retention), which have been observed by others and is a result of its action on the Ang AT₂ receptor.

### 3.6 Molecular Effects of Ang III

As discussed, most studies delineating the effects of Ang III have focused on the binding affinity of the peptide to AT₁ receptors or measured the effects of the peptide to modulate blood pressure [1][99][62]. The intracellular mechanisms mediating Ang III effects are not well studied. As mentioned earlier, Blume et al. [11] demonstrated in conscious rats that Ang II and Ang III induced the expression of the transcription factors c-fos, c-jun and krox-24 with the same efficacy in rat brains. The Ang peptides-induced expression of these transcription factors were mediated by the AT₁ receptor. Ang II-induced transcription factors expression was partly mediated by Ang III since pretreatment with amastatin reduced the transcription factors expression [11]. In rat mesangial and mononuclear cells, Ang III was shown to have proinflammatory actions, inducing transcription factors nuclear factor kappa-light-chain-enhancer of activated B cells (NF-kβ) and activator protein 1 (AP-1), and increasing the expression of related genes, such as monocyte chemotactic protein-1 [MCP-1] [66]. These findings suggest that these inducible transcription factors mediate the effects of Ang III. Most importantly these factors have also been shown to mediate Ang II effects.

The earlier signaling pathways governing the effects of Ang III have been the recent focus of our laboratory. In cultured rat astrocytes, we showed that Ang III stimulated the Ang AT₁ receptor to induce the phosphorylation of ERK1/2 and SAPK/JNK MAP kinase pathways with an equal potency as Ang II [23][22]. These pathways were also shown to mediate Ang III-induced astrocyte proliferation suggesting, at least in astrocytes, that these MAP kinase pathways mediate Ang III effects. In neonatal cardiac fibroblasts Ang III induced protein synthesis, DNA synthesis and collagen synthesis/secretion in a concentration-dependent manner [85]. Although there is some headway in unraveling Ang III intracellular signaling pathways, more studies, similar to what has been done for Ang II, are needed.

4. CONCLUSIONS

Over the last two decades, the RAS has become much more complex with the identification of novel peptides that exhibit biological activity. These peptides actively participate in the normal physiology of blood pressure, cardiovascular functions and fluid balance homeostasis in the human body. Dysregulation of these functions leads to a myriad of diseases including hypertension, congestive heart failure, myocardial infarction, diabetic nephropathy, and others (reviewed in [3]). Research studies suggest that there is an intact RAS in many major organs. Activation of these systems leads to the production of the active peptides with numerous effects in the body. Here, we show the relevance of Ang III as a physiologically important peptide produced by the RAS in the periphery as well as in the brain.

Even though some controversy still exists in terms of the effects of Ang III compared to Ang II, it is clear that the peptide is physiologically important particularly in the control of blood pressure, fluid homeostasis, and AVP release. Most studies suggest the involvement of both Ang II and Ang III with only a few attributing unique effects to Ang III. The most distinct and well-studied Ang III effects that have been observed are probably its ability to cause release of certain peptides. As discussed previously, it has been shown that Ang III behaves as the main RAS effector peptide in the control of AVP release (see [53] for review). Also, ANP has been shown to be released by Ang III, an effect that was opposite to that produced by Ang II [58].

There are probably many reasons why few distinct effects are attributable to this peptide. One of these reasons is that the receptors by which Ang III elicits its effects are the same as those of Ang II. Further, no studies have been done that demonstrate that the interaction of these two peptides with Ang receptors is different. The putative “Ang III hypothesis” alludes to certain central effects of Ang II as being attributable to Ang III. In particular, this theory considers the physiologically relevant peptide in the brain RAS that regulates blood pressure and AVP release to be Ang III rather than Ang II [24][40][63][96][39][41]. However, evidence supporting this theory is inconclusive [21] [45] [46]. Thus, our investigation leads us to believe that Ang III in most instances behaves in a similar manner as Ang II suggesting that, as with many other systems and effects in the body, there is some redundancy.

ACEIs and Ang receptor blockers (ARBs) are currently indicated for the treatment of hypertension, diabetic nephropathy, post-myocardial infarction, left ventricular dysfunction, and

chronic heart failure [33][44][51]. Use of these agents is correlated with improved patient survival and significant cardiovascular and renal benefits. These remarkable benefits have been obtained even though modulating the synthesis and actions of only Ang II with currently available agents may not be optimal in controlling deleterious actions elicited by RAS activation. The available therapeutic agents do not consider that the physiology of the RAS is by far more complex and multilayered than previously thought. With the advent of additional active components/peptides of the RAS, it is highly possible that we have not seen the whole picture as of yet.

The possibility exists that therapeutic modalities for blocking the synthesis and actions of Ang III might help to further slow progression of cardiovascular and renal diseases. Hence, research geared towards further defining the physiological relevance of Ang III, the interplay between Ang II and Ang III, and the molecular signals that are important in Ang III's effects are necessary. A likely therapeutic target for the development of antihypertensives is the enzyme APA that metabolizes Ang II to Ang III [62][64][5]. APA is an attractive target since unilateral lesions of the nigrostriatal system of the brain, aminopeptidase activities, and blood pressure control appear to be related [6]. Bodineau et al. [12] have designed an APA inhibitor, RB150, which crosses the blood-brain barrier leading to inhibition of brain APA. Importantly, treatment with RB150 led to a decrease in plasma AVP and a decrease in blood pressure in the DOCA-salt sensitive rat model of hypertension. Findings such as these point to an important role of Ang III in neurogenic blood pressure control, and suggest that central APA may be an interesting and viable target for the treatment of hypertension.

A number of issues still remain with regards to the utility of APA inhibitors as therapeutic agents. Resolving these issues will require: 1) delineating the roles of Ang III and APA in various cardioregulatory brain regions, including blood pressure control; 2) determining whether a global inhibition of APA is necessary to achieve maximal effect on blood pressure and AVP release; and 3) defining the influence of other peptidases upon the formation of Ang ligands. The challenging complexity and the central position of the RAS in the pathophysiology of numerous cardiovascular diseases will continue to inspire research and drug trials with the aim of creating optimal pharmacological tools for RAS modulation or blockade; creation of APA inhibitors is one of these options.

Acknowledgments

Some of the findings presented was supported by a President's Faculty Research & Development Grant (Grant# 335465) from Nova Southeastern University.

References

[1] Abhold RH, Sullivan MJ, Wright JW, Harding JW. Binding, degradation and pressor activity of angiotensins II and III after aminopeptidase inhibition with amastatin and bestatin. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 1987;242:957-62.

[2] Albiston AL, Peck GR, Yeatman HR, Fernando R, Ye S, Chai SY. Therapeutic targeting of insulin-regulated aminopeptidase: heads and tails? Pharmacol Ther. 2007;116:417-27.

[3] Atlas SA. The renin-angiotensin aldosterone system: pathophysiological role and pharmacologic inhibition. J Manag Care Pharm. 2007;13:9-20.

[4] Avrith DB, Fitzsimons JT. Increased sodium appetite in the rat induced by intracranial administration of components of the renin-angiotensin system. J Physiol. 1980;301:349-64.

[5] Banegas I, Prieto I, Vives F, Alba F, de Gasparo M, Segarra AB, et al. Brain aminopeptidases and hypertension. J Renin Angiotensin Aldosterone Syst. 2006;7:129-34.

[6] Banegas I, Prieto I, Vives F, Alba F, Duran R, Segarra AB, et al. Plasma aminopeptidase activities in rats after left and right intrastriatal administration of 6-hydroxydopamine. Neuroendocrinology. 2004;80:219-24.

[7] Batt CM, Klein EW, Harding JW, Wright JW. Pressor responses to amastatin, bestatin and Plummer's inhibitors are suppressed by pretreatment with the angiotensin receptor antagonist sarthran. Brain Res Bull. 1988;21:731-5.

[8] Blair-West JR, Carey KD, Denton DA, Madden LJ, Weisinger RS, Shade RE. Possible contribution of brain angiotensin III to ingestive behaviors in baboons. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol. 2001;281:R1633-6.

[9] Blair-West JR, Coghlan JP, Denton DA, Fei DT, Hardy KJ, Scoggins BA, et al. A dose-response comparison of the actions of angiotensin II and angiotensin III in sheep. J Endocrinol. 1980;87:409-17.

[10] Blair-West JR, Coghlan JP, Denton DA, Funder JW, Scoggins BA, Wright RD. The effect of the heptapeptide (2-8) and hexapeptide (3-8) fragments of angiotensin II on aldosterone secretion. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 1971;32:575-8.

[11] Blume A, Undeutsch C, Zhao Y, Kaschina E, Culman J, Unger T. ANG III induces expression of inducible transcription factors of AP-1 and Krox families in rat brain. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol. 2005;289:R845-50.

[12] Bodineau L, Frugiere A, Marc Y, Inguimbert N, Fassot C, Balavoine F, et al. Orally active aminopeptidase A inhibitors reduce blood pressure: a new strategy for treating hypertension. Hypertension. 2008;51:1318-25.

[13] Brazzko JJ, Wielgat P, Walesiuk A. Effect of D(3) dopamine receptors blockade on the cognitive effects of angiotensin IV in rats. Neuropeptides. 2008;42:301-9.

[14] Braun-Menendez E, J.C. Fasciolo, et al. The substance causing renal hypertension. Journal of Physiology. 1940;98:283-98.

[15] Bumpus FM, Schwarz H, Page IH. Synthesis and pharmacology of the octapeptide angiotonin. Science. 1957;125:886-7.

[16] Campbell WB, Brooks SN, Pettinger WA. Angiotensin II- and angiotensin 3-induced aldosterone release vivo in the rat. Science. 1974;184:994-6.

[17] Campbell WB, Pettinger WA. Organ specificity of angiotensin II and Des-aspartyl angiotensin II in the conscious rat. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 1976;198:450-6.

[18] Caputo FA, Rowland NE, Fregly MJ. Angiotensin-related intakes of water and NaCl in Fischer 344 and Sprague-Dawley rats. Am J Physiol. 1992;262:R382-8.

[19] Chai SY, Fernando R, Peck G, Ye SY, Mendelsohn FA, Jenkins TA, et al. The angiotensin IV/AT4 receptor. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2004;61:2728-37.

[20] Chen CY, Huang WC. Pressor and renal effects of intracerebroventricularly administered angiotensins II and III in rats. Kidney Blood Press Res. 2000;23:95-105.

[21] Clark MA, C. Nguyen et al. Distinct molecular effects of Angiotensin II and Angiotensin III in rat astrocytes. International journal of Hypertension. 2013;2013:1-8.

[22] Clark MA, Nguyen C, Tran H. Angiotensin III induces c-Jun N-terminal kinase leading to proliferation of rat astrocytes. Neurochem Res. 2012;37:1475-81.

[23] Clark MA, Tran H, Nguyen C. Angiotensin III stimulates ERK1/2 mitogen-activated protein kinases and astrocyte growth in cultured rat astrocytes. Neuropeptides. 2011;45:329-35.

[24] Devynck MA, Pernollet MG, Matthews PG, Khosla MC, Bumpus FM, Meyer P. Specific receptors for des-Asp1-angiotensin II ("angiotensin III") in rat adrenals. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 1977;74:4029-32.

[25] Dzau VJ. Vascular wall renin-angiotensin pathway in control of the circulation. A hypothesis. Am J Med. 1984;77:31-6.

[26] Ebermann L, Spillmann F, Sidiropoulos M, Escher F, Heringer-Walther S, Schultheiss HP, et al. The angiotensin-(1-7) receptor agonist AVE0991 is cardioprotective in diabetic rats. Eur J Pharmacol. 2008;590:276-80.

[27] Ferrario CM, Chappell MC, Tallant EA, Brosnihan KB, Diz DI. Counterregulatory actions of angiotensin-(1-7). Hypertension. 1997;30:535-41.

[28] Ferreira AJ, Santos RA, Almeida AP. Angiotensin-(1-7): cardioprotective effect in myocardial ischemia/reperfusion. Hypertension. 2001;38:665-8.

[29] Fink GD, Bruner CA. Hypertension during chronic peripheral and central infusion of angiotensin III. Am J Physiol. 1985;249:E201-8.

[30] Fitzsimons JT. The effect on drinking of peptide precursors and of shorter chain peptide fragments of angiotensin II injected into the rat's diencephalon. J Physiol. 1971;214:295-303.

[31] Fitzsimons JT. Angiotensin stimulation of the central nervous system. Rev Physiol Biochem Pharmacol. 1980;87:117-67.

[32] Fitzsimons JT. Angiotensin, thirst, and sodium appetite. Physiol Rev. 1998;78:583-686.

[33] Flather MD, Yusuf S, Kober L, Pfeffer M, Hall A, Murray G, et al. Long-term ACE-inhibitor therapy in patients with heart failure or left-ventricular dysfunction: a systematic overview of data from individual patients. ACE-Inhibitor Myocardial Infarction Collaborative Group. Lancet. 2000;355:1575-81.

[34] Fournie-Zaluski MC, Coric P, Turcaud S, Bruetschy L, Lucas E, Noble F, et al. Potent and systemically active aminopeptidase N inhibitors designed from active-site investigation. J Med Chem. 1992;35:1259-66.

[35] Fraga-Silva RA, Pinheiro SV, Goncalves AC, Alenina N, Bader M, Santos RA. The antithrombotic effect of angiotensin-(1-7) involves mas-mediated NO release from platelets. Mol Med. 2008;14:28-35.

[36] Gammelgaard I, Wamberg S, Bie P. Systemic effects of angiotensin III in conscious dogs during acute double blockade of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone-system. Acta Physiol (Oxf). 2006;188:129-38.

[37] Goldblatt H, Lynch J, Hanzal RF, Summerville WW. Studies on Experimental Hypertension: I. The Production of Persistent Elevation of Systolic Blood Pressure by Means of Renal Ischemia. J Exp Med. 1934;59:347-79.

[38] Greco AJ, Master RG, Fokin A, Jr., Baber SR, Kadowitz PJ. Angiotensin-(1-7) potentiates responses to bradykinin but does not change responses to angiotensin I. Can J Physiol Pharmacol. 2006;84:1163-75.

[39] Harding JW, Felix D. Angiotensin-sensitive neurons in the rat paraventricular nucleus: relative potencies of angiotensin II and angiotensin III. Brain Res. 1987;410:130-4.

[40] Harding JW, Felix D. The effects of the aminopeptidase inhibitors amastatin and bestatin on angiotensin-evoked neuronal activity in rat brain. Brain Res. 1987;424:299-304.

[41] Harding JW, Felix D, Sullivan MJ, Camara CA, Erickson JB, Regulja I, et al. The pivotal role at angiotensin III in the brain angiotensin system. Proc West Pharmacol Soc. 1987;30:11-5.

[42] Harding JW, Jensen LL, Hanesworth JM, Roberts KA, Page TA, Wright JW. Release of angiotensins in paraventricular nucleus of rat in response to physiological and chemical stimuli. Am J Physiol. 1992;262:F17-23.

[43] Heitsch H, Brovkovych S, Malinski T, Wiemer G. Angiotensin-(1-7)-Stimulated Nitric Oxide and Superoxide Release From Endothelial Cells. Hypertension. 2001;37:72-6.

[44] Hunt SA. ACC/AHA 2005 guideline update for the diagnosis and management of chronic heart failure in the adult: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines (Writing Committee to Update the 2001 Guidelines for the Evaluation and Management of Heart Failure). J Am Coll Cardiol. 2005;46:e1-82.

[45] Karamyan VT, Gadepalli R, Rimoldi JM, Speth RC. Brain AT1 angiotensin receptor subtype binding: importance of peptidase inhibition for identification of angiotensin II as its endogenous ligand. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2009;331:170-7.

[46] Kokje RJ, Wilson WL, Brown TE, Karamyan VT, Wright JW, Speth RC. Central pressor actions of aminopeptidase-resistant angiotensin II analogs: challenging the angiotensin III hypothesis. Hypertension. 2007;49:1328-35.

[47] Krishnan B, Smith TL, Dubey P, Zapadka ME, Torti FM, Willingham MC, et al. Angiotensin-(1-7) attenuates metastatic prostate cancer and reduces osteoclastogenesis. Prostate. 2013;73:71-82.

[48] Krishnan B, Torti FM, Gallagher PE, Tallant EA. Angiotensin-(1-7) reduces proliferation and angiogenesis of human prostate cancer xenografts with a decrease in angiogenic factors and an increase in sFlt-1. Prostate. 2013;73:60-70.

[49] Kucharewicz I, Chabielska E, Pawlak D, Matys T, Rolkowski R, Buczko W. The antithrombotic effect of angiotensin-(1-7) closely resembles that of losartan. J Renin Angiotensin Aldosterone Syst. 2000;1:268-72.

[50] Liu GC, Oudit GY, Fang F, Zhou J, Scholey JW. Angiotensin-(1-7)-induced activation of ERK1/2 is cAMP/protein kinase A-dependent in glomerular mesangial cells. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. 2012;302:F784-90.

[51] Ma TK, Kam KK, Yan BP, Lam YY. Renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system blockade for cardiovascular diseases: current status. Br J Pharmacol. 2010;160:1273-92.

[52] Mann JF, Johnson AK, Ganten D. Plasma angiotensin II: dipsogenic levels and angiotensin-generating capacity of renin. Am J Physiol. 1980;238:R372-7.

[53] Marc Y, Llorens-Cortes C. The role of the brain renin-angiotensin system in hypertension: implications for new treatment. Prog Neurobiol. 2011; 95:89-103.

[54] Mehta PK, Griendling KK. Angiotensin II cell signaling: physiological and pathological effects in the cardiovascular system. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2007;292:C82-97.

[55] Ng KK, Vane JR. Conversion of angiotensin I to angiotensin II. Nature. 1967;216:762-6.

[56] Padia SH, Kemp BA, Howell NL, Gildea JJ, Keller SR, Carey RM. Intrarenal angiotensin III infusion induces natriuresis and angiotensin type 2 receptor translocation in Wistar-kyoto but not in spontaneously hypertensive rats. Hypertension. 2009; 53:338-43.

[57] Page IH, Helmer OM. A Crystalline Pressor Substance (Angiotonin) Resulting from the Reaction between Renin and Renin-Activator. J Exp Med. 1940;71:29-42.

[58] Park BM, Oh YB, Gao S, Cha SA, Kang KP, Kim SH. Angiotensin III stimulates high stretch-induced ANP secretion via angiotensin type 2 receptor. Peptides. 2013; 42: 131-7.

[59] Qadri F, Edling O, Wolf A, Gohlke P, Culman J, Unger T. Release of angiotensin in the paraventricular nucleus in response to hyperosmotic stimulation in conscious rats: a microdialysis study. Brain Res. 1994;637:45-9.

[60] Qadri F, Wolf A, Waldmann T, Rascher W, Unger T. Sensitivity of hypothalamic paraventricular nucleus to C- and N-terminal angiotensin fragments: vasopressin release and drinking. J Neuroendocrinol. 1998;10:275-81.

[61] Reaux A, de Mota N, Zini S, Cadel S, Fournie-Zaluski MC, Roques BP, et al. PC18, a specific aminopeptidase N inhibitor, induces vasopressin release by increasing the half-life of brain angiotensin III. Neuroendocrinology. 1999;69:370-6.

[62] Reaux A, Fournie-Zaluski MC, David C, Zini S, Roques BP, Corvol P, et al. Aminopeptidase A inhibitors as potential central antihypertensive agents. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1999;96:13415-20.

[63] Reaux A, Fournie-Zaluski MC, Llorens-Cortes C. Angiotensin III: a central regulator of vasopressin release and blood pressure. Trends Endocrinol Metab. 2001;12:157-62.

[64] Reaux-Le Goazigo A, Iturrioz X, Fassot C, Claperon C, Roques BP, Llorens-Cortes C. Role of angiotensin III in hypertension. Curr Hypertens Rep. 2005;7:128-34.

[65] Ruiz-Ortega M, Esteban V, Egido J. The regulation of the inflammatory response through nuclear factor-kappab pathway by angiotensin IV extends the role of the renin angiotensin system in cardiovascular diseases. Trends Cardiovasc Med. 2007;17:19-25.

[66] Ruiz-Ortega M, Lorenzo O, Egido J. Angiotensin III increases MCP-1 and activates NF-kappaB and AP-1 in cultured mesangial and mononuclear cells. Kidney Int. 2000;57:2285-98.

[67] Santos RA, Ferreira AJ, Simoes ESAC. Recent advances in the angiotensin-converting enzyme 2-angiotensin(1-7)-Mas axis. Exp Physiol. 2008;93:519-27.

[68] Shanmugam S, Corvol P, Gasc JM. Angiotensin II type 2 receptor mRNA expression in the developing cardiopulmonary system of the rat. Hypertension. 1996;28:91-7.

[69] Silva DM, Gomes-Filho A, Olivon VC, Santos TM, Becker LK, Santos RA, et al. Swimming training improves the vasodilator effect of angiotensin-(1-7) in the aorta of spontaneously hypertensive rat. J Appl Physiol. 2011;111:1272-7.

[70] Skeggs LT, Jr., Lentz KE, Kahn JR, Shumway NP, Woods KR. The amino acid sequence of hypertensin. II. J Exp Med. 1956;104:193-7.

[71] Soubrier F, Cambien F. Renin-angiotensin system genes as candidate genes in cardiovascular diseases. Trends Cardiovasc Med. 1993;3:250-8.

[72] Speth RC, Karamyan VT. The significance of brain aminopeptidases in the regulation of the actions of angiotensin peptides in the brain. Heart Fail Rev. 2008;13:299-309.

[73] Stadler T, Veltmar A, Qadri F, Unger T. Angiotensin II evokes noradrenaline release from the paraventricular nucleus in conscious rats. Brain Res. 1992;569:117-22.

[74] Swanson LW, Sawchenko PE. Hypothalamic integration: organization of the paraventricular and supraoptic nuclei. Annu Rev Neurosci. 1983;6:269-324.

[75] Tallant EA, Diz DI, Ferrario CM. State-of-the-Art lecture. Antiproliferative actions of angiotensin-(1-7) in vascular smooth muscle. Hypertension. 1999;34:950-7.

[76] Tharaux PL, Coffman TM. Transgenic mice as a tool to study the renin-angiotensin system. Contributions to nephrology. 2001:72-91.

[77] Tigerstedt RaPGB. "Niere and Kreislauf". Scandinavian Archives of Physiology. 1898;8:223-71.

[78] Timmermans PB, Wong PC, Chiu AT, Herblin WF, Benfield P, Carini DJ, et al. Angiotensin II receptors and angiotensin II receptor antagonists. Pharmacological reviews. 1993;45:205-51.

[79] Tonnaer JA, Engels GM, Voshart K, Wiegant VM, de Jong W. Binding of angiotensins to rat brain tissue: structure activity relationship. Brain Res Bull. 1983;10:295-300.

[80] Tonnaer JA, Wiegant VM, de Jong W, De Wied D. Central effects of angiotensins on drinking and blood pressure: structure-activity relationships. Brain Res. 1982;236:417-28.

[81] Tseng CJ, Chou LL, Ger LP, Tung CS. Cardiovascular effects of angiotensin III in brainstem nuclei of normotensive and hypertensive rats. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 1994;268:558-64.

[82] van Esch JH, Oosterveer CR, Batenburg WW, van Veghle R, Jan Dnaser AH. Eur J Pharmacol. 2008;588:286-93.

[83] Veltmar A, Culman J, Qadri F, Rascher W, Unger T. Involvement of adrenergic and angiotensinergic receptors in the paraventricular nucleus in the angiotensin II-induced vasopressin release. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 1992;263:1253-60.

[84] Wamberg C, Plovsing RR, Sandgaard NC, Bie P. Effects of different angiotensins during acute, double blockade of the renin system in conscious dogs. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol. 2003;285:R971-80.

[85] Wang HX, Zhang QF, Zeng XJ, Wang W, Tang CS, Zhang LK. Effects of angiotensin III on protein, DNA, and collagen synthesis of neonatal cardiomyocytes and cardiac fibroblasts in vitro. J Cardiovasc Pharmacol Ther. 2010;15:393-402.

[86] Wang K, Hu X, Du C, Tu S, Zhang F, Xie X. Angiotensin-(1-7) suppresses the number and function of the circulating fibrocytes by upregulating endothelial nitric oxide synthase expression. Mol Cell Biochem. 2012;365:19-27.

[87] Wilson WL, Roques BP, Llorens-Cortes C, Speth RC, Harding JW, Wright JW. Roles of brain angiotensins II and III in thirst and sodium appetite. Brain Res. 2005;1060:108-17.

[88] Wright JW, Bechtholt AJ, Chambers SL, Harding JW. Angiotensin III and IV activation of the brain AT1 receptor subtype in cardiovascular function. Peptides. 1996;17:1365-71.

[89] Wright JW, Harding JW. Regulatory role of brain angiotensins in the control of physiological and behavioral responses. Brain Res Brain Res Rev. 1992;17:227-62.

[90] Wright JW, Harding JW. Important role for angiotensin III and IV in the brain renin-angiotensin system. Brain Res Brain Res Rev. 1997;25:96-124.

[91] Wright JW, Jensen LL, Cushing LL, Harding JW. Heightened blood pressure responsiveness to intracarotid infusion of angiotensins in the spontaneously hypertensive rat. Pharmacol Biochem Behav. 1988;30:343-6.

[92] Wright JW, Jensen LL, Roberts KA, Sardinia MF, Harding JW. Structure-function analyses of brain angiotensin control of pressor action in rats. Am J Physiol. 1989;257:R1551-7.

[93] Wright JW, Mizutani S, Murray CE, Amir HZ, Harding JW. Aminopeptidase-induced elevations and reductions in blood pressure in the spontaneously hypertensive rat. J Hypertens. 1990;8:969-74.

[94] Wright JW, Morseth SL, Abhold RH, Harding JW. Pressor action and dipsogenicity induced by angiotensin II and III in rats. Am J Physiol. 1985;249:R514-21.

[95] Wright JW, Stubley L, Pederson ES, Kramar EA, Hanesworth JM, Harding JW. Contributions of the brain angiotensin IV-AT4 receptor subtype system to spatial learning. J Neurosci. 1999;19:3952-61.

[96] Wright JW, Tamura-Myers E, Wilson WL, Roques BP, Llorens-Cortes C, Speth RC, et al. Conversion of brain angiotensin II to angiotensin III is critical for pressor response in rats. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol. 2003;284:R725-33.

[97] Xue H, Zhou L, Yuan P, Wang Z, Ni J, Yao T, et al. Counteraction between angiotensin II and angiotensin-(1-7) via activating angiotensin type I and Mas receptor on rat renal mesangial cells. Regul Pept. 2012;177:12-20.

[98] Zhang F, Hu Y, Xu Q, Ye S. Different effects of angiotensin II and angiotensin-(1-7) on vascular smooth muscle cell proliferation and migration. PLoS One. 2010;5:e12323.

[99] Zini S, Fournie-Zaluski MC, Chauvel E, Roques BP, Corvol P, Llorens-Cortes C. Identification of metabolic pathways of brain angiotensin II and III using specific aminopeptidase inhibitors: predominant role of angiotensin III in the control of vasopressin release. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1996;93:11968-73.

## Figure Legends

### Figure 1: Schematic Representation of Renin Angiotensin System

The heavy arrows show the classic pathway. The light arrows indicate the alternative pathways. Red curved arrows show the cleavage of small peptides from the inactive precursors or Pro-enzymes to form the active precursor (Angiotensinogen, AGT) and the active enzyme (renin). Biologically active peptides are shown in bold red color. The enzymes that catalyze the formation of the peptides are represented with different shapes and colors. For example, ACE = dark blue diamond shape; ACE2 = the black diamond shape; APA = Yellow oval shape; AP = Red flag shape; APN = Grey triangle shape; Endopeptidase = dark green spear; PCP = green diamond shape; Renin = green oval shape; AT₁, AT₂, AT₄ and Mas receptors = Red; deep blue, violet and brick red colored boxes, respectively. Dotted arrows show the biological active peptides and their corresponding receptors in which blue dotted lines show the actions of both Ang II and Ang III towards AT₂ receptor, and deep blue colored dotted lines show the actions of Ang II and Ang III towards AT₁ receptor.

***= Even though these organs (Liver, Kidney and Lungs) produces, these components are also produced local in other organs such as brain.

**Figure Abbreviation:**  
ACE = Angiotensin converting enzyme; ACE-2 = Angiotensin converting enzyme-2; Ang = Angiotensin; AP = Aspartyl Aminopeptidase; APA = Aminopeptidase-A; APN = Aminopeptidase-N; E = Endopeptidase; PCP = Prolylcarboxypeptidase; AT1R = Angiotensin receptor-1; AT2R = Angiotensin receptor-2; AT4R = Angiotensin receptor-4; IRAP = Insulin-regulated amino peptidase; Mas = Receptor for Ang (1-7).

Figure 2: Biological Effects of Ang III

Most of the effects of Ang III are mediated by the Ang AT1 receptor. However, ANP release is mediated by the AT₂ receptor.

Figure Abbreviations: AP-1 = activator protein 1; ANP = Atrial natriuretic peptide; ERK = extracellular signal-regulated kinases; GFR = Glomerular filtration rate; MCP-1 = monocyte chemotactic protein-1; NFκβ = nuclear factor kappa-light-chain-enhancer of activated B cells; PKG = Protein kinase G; SAPK/JNK = stress activated protein kinase/Jun-terminal.

Highlights

- This review focusses on angiotensin III, a physiologically relevant renin angiotensin system peptide.
- Similar to Angiotensin II, the peptide causes an increase in blood pressure, aldosterone release, vasopressin release and other effects.
- Angiotensin III appears to be the main peptide involved in vasopressin release and atrial natriuretic peptide release.
- We believe angiotensin III is a physiologically relevant peptide and its effects and molecular pathways should be further investigated.

FIGURE 1

Pre-Angiotensinogen (485 a.a.)
↓
Angiotensinogen (AGT) – (452 a. a.)
Liver
(and local)***
↓
Renin
↓
Ang I (1-10)
ACE2 → Ang-(1-9)
↓
AP
↓
Ang I
[des-Asp]
(2-10)
↓
ACE
↓
Ang II (1-8)
PCP
↓
APA
↓
ACE
↓
Ang III (2-8)
APN
↓
Ang IV (3-8)

Lungs
(and local) ***

Figure 2

Increased Cellular  
Proliferation (Increased  
ERK1/2 & Increased  
SAPK/JNK)

Proinflammatory  
(Increased NFκ-β,  
AP-1 & MCP-1)

Increased Kidney  
function  
(Increased Glomerular  
filtration rate (GFR)  
& Decreased tubular  
reabsorption)

Ang III

Increased ANP  
release  
(AT₂ receptor, PI3K,  
Akt, PKG-mediated)

Increased  
Aldosterone  
(Increased Sodium &  
Water retention)

Vasoconstrictor

Increased  
Vasopressin release  
(Increased  
drinking behavior)

Increased Thirst and  
Sodium appetite  
(Increased in blood  
volume)
