
This article was downloaded by: [University of North Texas]
On: 28 November 2014, At: 05:22
Publisher: Taylor&Francis
Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number: 1072954 Registered office: Mortimer House,
37-41 Mortimer Street, London W1T 3JH, UK

---

**Communicative & Integrative Biology**

Publication details, including instructions for authors and subscription information:
http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/kcib20

In planta fitness-cost of the Atu 4232-regulon encoding for a selective GABA-binding sensor in Agrobacterium

Sara Planamente${}^{ab}$, Solange Morera${}^{b}$ & Denis Faure${}^{a}$

${}^{a}$ Institut des Sciences du Végétal (ISV); CNRS; Gif-sur-Yvette, France  
${}^{b}$ Laboratoire d'Enzymologie et Biochimie Structurales (LEBS); CNRS; Gif-sur-Yvette, France  

Published online: 01 May 2013.

---

To cite this article: Sara Planamente, Solange Morera & Denis Faure (2013) In planta fitness-cost of the Atu 4232-regulon encoding for a selective GABA-binding sensor in Agrobacterium, Communicative & Integrative Biology, 6:3, e23692, DOI: 10.4161/cib.23692

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.4161/cib.23692

---

PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE

Taylor&Francis makes every effort to ensure the accuracy of all the information (the “Content”) contained in the publications on our platform. Taylor&Francis, our agents, and our licensors make no representations or warranties whatsoever as to the accuracy, completeness, or suitability for any purpose of the Content. Versions of published Taylor&Francis and Routledge Open articles and Taylor&Francis and Routledge Open Select articles posted to institutional or subject repositories or any other third-party website are without warranty from Taylor&Francis of any kind, either expressed or implied, including, but not limited to, warranties of merchantability, fitness for a particular purpose, or non-infringement. Any opinions and views expressed in this article are the opinions and views of the authors, and are not the views of or endorsed by Taylor&Francis. The accuracy of the Content should not be relied upon and should be independently verified with primary sources of information. Taylor&Francis shall not be liable for any losses, actions, claims, proceedings, demands, costs, expenses, damages, and other liabilities whatsoever or howsoever caused arising directly or indirectly in connection with, in relation to or arising out of the use of the Content.

This article may be used for research, teaching, and private study purposes. Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://www.tandfonline.com/page/terms-and-conditions

It is essential that you check the license status of any given Open and Open Select article to confirm conditions of access and use.

Communicative & Integrative Biology 6:3, e23692; May/June 2013; © 2013 Landes Bioscience

# In planta fitness-cost of the Atu4232-regulon encoding for a selective GABA-binding sensor in Agrobacterium

**Sara Planamente**,${}^{1,2}$ **Solange Moréra**,${}^{2,*}$ and **Denis Faure**${}^{1,*}$

${}^{1}$Institut des Sciences du Végétal (ISV); CNRS; Gif-sur-Yvette, France; ${}^{2}$Laboratoire d'Enzymologie et Biochimie Structurales (LEBS); CNRS; Gif-sur-Yvette, France

Keywords: GABA, TACA, periplasmic binding protein, ABC transporter, GABAc, Agrobacterium, plant tumour, fitness, quorum-sensing

GABA (gamma-aminobutyric acid) mediates cell-to-cell communication in eukaryotes and interspecies communication in host-microbe interactions. *Agrobacterium tumefaciens* induces the development of plant tumor in which GABA accumulates. Two periplasmic binding proteins Atu2422 and Atu4243 and their appropriate ABC-transporter are involved in the binding and importation of GABA. The structure of the selective GABA-binding Atu4243 reveals a GABA conformation similar to a proposed model of GABA bound to the mammalian GABAC receptor. The *A. tumefaciens atu4243* mutant is affected for GABA uptake, aggressiveness on plant host and GABA-induced degradation of the quorum-sensing signal, hence for horizontal transfer of the tumor-inducing plasmid. Here, we report that a de-repression of *atu4243* and its co-regulated neighbor genes affect the fitness of *A. tumefaciens* during tumor colonization. Atu4243-orthologs are present in several species of the *Agrobacterium* genus. This addendum highlights the recent data on the GABA transport in the *A. tumefaciens* plant-pathogen.

The plant pathogen *Agrobacterium tumefaciens* is able to transfer a DNA fragment (T-DNA) from its tumor-inducing (Ti) plasmid to the nuclear genome of the plant host. ${}^{1}$ In the transformed plant cells, T-DNA encodes for synthesis of plant hormones, auxin and cytokinins, resulting in cell proliferation and development of a plant tumor. In addition, T-DNA redirects plant metabolism for the production of tumor-specific compounds, called opines, among which some stimulate the synthesis of a quorum-sensing (QS) signal, 3-oxo-octanoylhomoserine lactone (OC8HSL), in *A. tumefaciens*. Accumulation of OC8HSL promotes horizontal transfer of the Ti plasmid by conjugation, hence dissemination and maintenance of the virulence genes among the *A. tumefaciens* population which colonizes the plant tumor. Moreover, the OC8HSL accumulation amplifies aggressiveness of *A. tumefaciens*. ${}^{2}$

In addition to opines, the *Agrobacterium*-induced plant tumors accumulate a wide variety of sugars and amino-acids, including GABA, ${}^{3}$ which may be also used as nutrients or signals to trigger gene expression in *A. tumefaciens*. GABA plays two roles in the *A. tumefaciens*-host interaction: first, GABA moderates gravity of the symptoms provoked by *A. tumefaciens*; ${}^{4}$ second, GABA induces the expression of an OC8HSL-cleaving lactonase BlcC (also named AttM), therefore may slightly delay the quorum-sensing signal accumulation and the conjugation

of the Ti plasmid. ${}^{5,6}$ Uptake of GABA into the *Agrobacterium* cells is required for enhancing the expression of the lactonase BlcC. ${}^{4,7,8}$ The transport of GABA involves two periplasmic binding proteins (PBPs) Atu2422 and Atu4243, which bring GABA to their cognate ABC-transporters and then to the cytoplasm (Fig. 1). This addendum summarizes recent data ${}^{8,9}$ on these two PBPs and their role in the GABA-uptake and GABA-mediated gene regulation in *A. tumefaciens*.

These two PBPs display a similar affinity for GABA ($\mu$M range of the $K_{d}$ values), however, their sequence, binding site composition and selectivity, as well as the conformation of the liganded GABA strongly differ. ${}^{8,9}$ Atu2422 can bind a large spectrum of amino acids with a short lateral chain, such as Alanine, Valine, Proline, which are competitive inhibitors of the transport of GABA, hence antagonists of the GABA-induced degradation of the quorum-sensing signal OC8HSL. In contrast, the Atu4243-mediated transport of GABA is only altered by a synthetic analog trans-4-aminocrotonic acid (TACA), in which a double bond confers rigidity and mimics GABA in a planar conformation. GABA is a flexible molecule which can adopt various conformations in aqueous solution. ${}^{10}$ GABA bound to Atu4243 exhibits so far a unique planar and extended conformation (PDB code 4EUO), while the Atu2422-interacting GABA adopts a non-planar and curved

*Correspondence to: Solange Moréra and Denis Faure; Email: morera@lebs.cnrs-gif.fr and faure@isv.cnrs-gif.fr  
Submitted: 12/14/12; Revised: 01/21/13; Accepted: 01/21/13  
http://dx.doi.org/10.4161/cib.23692  
Citation: Planamente S, Moréra S, Faure D. In planta fitness-cost of the Atu4232-regulon encoding for a selective GABA-binding sensor in Agrobacterium. Commun Integr Biol 2013; 6: e23692

Plant cell

Proline GABA

Atu2422 Atu4243

SSA GABA-T
BicR BicC TraR Tra-Trb
pAt OC8HS pTi
AbcR atu2422 Atu4232 atu4243
Cir.Ch. Lin.Ch.
A. tumefaciens C58

Figure 1. Working model of GABA-uptake and GABA-signaling in A. tumefaciens. The PBP Atu4243 is selective for GABA, while the Atu2422-mediated transport of GABA may be competed by free Proline. In A. tumefaciens cells, GABA is converted into semialdehyde succinic (SSA) by a still uncharacterized GABA-transaminase (GABA-T), and then SSA interacts with the transcriptional repressor BlcR which controls the expression of the blcABC operon encoded by the plasmid At(pAt). The lactonase BlcC converts the QS-signal OC8HSL into the inactive product (OC8HS), hence affects the level of the accumulated OC8HSL. In complex with the transcriptional regulator TraR, OC8HSL acts as a positive signal for the expression of the tra and trb operons which promote the horizontal transfer of the virulence plasmid Ti(pTi). The atu2422 gene harbored by the circular chromosome (Cir.Ch.) is constitutively expressed, but is susceptible to the activity of the non-coding RNA AbcR1. The atu4243 gene belongs to a large cluster on the linear chromosome (Lin.Ch.) of which expression is controlled by the transcriptional repressor Atu4232. Additional details are described in the text.

recA marker
Atu2422 Atu4243
A. rhizogenes K84 + +
A. vitis S4 + +
A. tumefaciens G2CIP 497-74 + -
A. tumefaciens G9 Hayward 0363 + -
A. tumefaciens G5F2 + -
A. tumefaciens G5CIP 107444 + -
A. tumefaciens G1TT 111 + +
A. tumefaciens G1H13-3 + +
A. tumefaciens G1CFBP 5771 + +
A. tumefaciens G1S56 + +
A. tumefaciens G3CIP 107443 + +
A. tumefaciens G13CFBP 6927 + -
A. tumefaciens G7NCPPB 1641 + +
A. tumefaciens G7Zutra 3/1 + +
A. tumefaciens G7RV3 + +
A. tumefaciens G6NCPPB 925 + +
A. tumefaciens G8J0-7 + +
A. tumefaciens G8C58 + +
A. tumefaciens G8ATCC 31749 + +
A. tumefaciens G4Kerr 14 + -
A. tumefaciens G4B6 + -
A. tumefaciens G4CFBP 5621 + -

Figure 2. Occurrence of Atu4243 and Atu2422 in Agrobacterial genomes. Among the available Agrobacterium genomes (Agrobacterium-Scope project at www.genoscope.cns.fr), the presence (+) and absence (-) of PBPs Atu2422 and Atu4243 were indicated. Phylogenetic tree of Agrobacterium strains was constructed using recA gene.

Phylogenetic analysis revealed that Atu2422 and Atu4243 PBPs belong to different protein clusters. Their occurrence differs among Proteobacteria, the atu2422-orthologs were more frequently encountered than the atu4243-orthologs. Their co-occurrence was observed in some strains belonging to the α-proteobacteria Agrobacterium, Azospirillum, Mesorhizobium, Rhizobium and Sinorhizobium, and γ-proteobacteria Pseudomonas and Marinomonas. In the Agrobacterium genus (Fig. 2), the atu2422 gene is present in all available genomes, while the atu4243 gene was identified in strains of the A. rhizogenes and A. vitis species, as well as A. tumefaciens genomic species G1, G7, G6 and G8, but not in strains of the A. tumefaciens genomic species G2, G4, G5 and G13. The Agrobacterium genome encompasses more than a hundred of PBPs, of which some of them were already described as key-loci for species identification. Hence, the gene encoding the selective GABA-binding PBP Atu4243 would also be used for discriminating the A. tumefaciens genomic species.

In A. tumefaciens C58, Atu4243 and Atu2422 also differ by the regulation of their expression (Fig. 1). The atu2422 gene is constitutively transcribed and post-transcriptionally controlled by small RNA AbcR1. In contrast, the Atu4243-system is strongly controlled by the transcriptional repressor Atu4232 belonging to the GntR family. The environmental conditions

conformation (PDB code 3IP9), as observed in few liganded GABA-protein structures in the Protein Data Bank (PDB codes 2OKK, 2OKJ, 6JDW). No structures of the mammalian GABA-receptors are available. The ionotropic GABA-receptors GABAA and GABAC belong to the Cys-loop receptor family in which the ionic channel exhibits a ligand-binding domain. The metabotropic receptor belongs to the class C G-Protein Coupled Receptor (GPCR) family, in which the extracellular ligand-binding domain exhibits similarities with the general fold of bacterial PBPs. Modeling the GABAB PBP-like domain using Atu2422 or Atu4243 as a matrix was unsuccessful. In contrast, our work highlights four characteristics of the GABA binding mode that Atu4243 and the GABAC-receptor model proposed by Harrison and coworkers would share: the planar and extended conformation of GABA, the sensitivity to TACA, the stacking of GABA between aromatic residues and the interaction between its carboxylate and an Arg residue. Our data suggest that the global fold of the GABA binding proteins would be less informative than the conformation of GABA to predict its molecular interactions with the protein residues of the binding site.
or compounds which could release the repressing activity of Atu 4232 are still unknown. To evaluate whether a tight control of the Atu 4232 regulon would confer a selective advantage in the course of the plant-tumor colonization, we performed competition experiments associating different *A. tumefaciens* C58 derivatives: ^8^the Gm^R^-strain C58-107 which harbors the *atu2422* and *atu4232* wild-type alleles, in which expression of *Atu4232* is efficiently repressed (WT *Atu2422* and WT *Atu4243*); the constructed *atu2422::acc1Gm^R*-mutant which is defective for *Atu2422* only (KO-*Atu2422* and WT *Atu4243*); and the *gaba+* mutant, which is an *atu2422::acc1* derivative harboring a punctual mutation in the repressor *Atu4232*, hence constitutively expresses the *Atu4232*-regulon including *Atu4243* and adjacent genes (KO-*Atu2422* and *Atu4243^C^*). Each of the strain was able to colonize the plant tumor at a similar level. By contrast, competition assays associating *gaba^+* (KO-*Atu2422* and *Atu4243^C^*) and the C58-107 (WT *Atu2422* and WT *Atu4243*) or KO-*atu2422* (KO-*Atu2422* and WT *Atu4243*) derivatives revealed fitness lost of the constitutive expression of the *Atu4232*-regulon in the course of plant-tumor colonization whatever the expression of the *atu2422* gene (Fig. 3). Fitness lost probably results from toxicity effects. Indeed, the GABA imported via the selective *Atu4243*-mediated system is converted to the toxic succinic semialdehyde^4,17^ by a still unidentified GABA-transaminase in *A. tumefaciens* cells.^6^ However, we could not exclude other causes as the *Atu4232*-regulon encompasses 12 additional genes of which the function is still unknown.^8^ These competition assays highlight the importance of a tight regulation of *atu4232*-regulon in the course of the *A. tumefaciens*-plant host interaction. However, when the *Atu4232* regulon is repressed, the unique pathway for GABA-uptake involves the PBP *Atu2422* which is not selective for GABA, hence *Atu2422*-mediated GABA-uptake is moderated by natural competitors, which are abundant in the plant tumor, such as the free amino-acids Proline, Alanine, Valine.^7^

In conclusion, *A. tumefaciens* seems to mobilize two different systems for the transport of GABA that are the PBPs *Atu2422* and *Atu4243* and their cognate ABC-transporters. In the both systems, GABA uptake is tightly controlled at transcriptional, post-transcriptional, and/or PBP-ligand interaction levels.

**Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest**

No potential conflicts of interest were disclosed.

**Acknowledgments**

The authors thank X. Nesme (INRA, University of Lyon) for an access to the unpublished genomes of the Agrobacterscope project (www.genoscope.cns.fr). This work was supported by the Agence Nationale de la Recherche (ANR-12-BSV8-0003-01, SENSOR).

---

**Figure 3. Competition assays in host plant.** Stems of 5-week-old tomato plants (*Solanum lycopersicum* L. cv Dona) were infected by approximately 10^5^ CFU of monoclonal (C58-107, *gaba^+1* and *atu2422*) and mixed (1:1 ratio) populations (C58-107/*gaba^+1* and *atu2422/gaba^+1*) of the *A. tumefaciens* derivatives. At infection time (*t = 0*), and 3 and 6 weeks later, populations were numerated (CFU/g of tumor fresh weight) and identified using appropriate primers targeting the mutated loci. All the strains harbor the same *acc1* gene encoding for gentamycin resistance. Graphs at the top of the panels (A and B) indicate level of the monoclonal and mixed populations in the plant tumor, while lower bars represent the relative abundance (%) of individuals in mixed populations only. The experiment was done in two independent replicates (each with 10 plants). Statistical differences using the Kruskal-Wallis one-way ANOVA (*p < 0.01*) are noted by different letters.
References

1. Escobar MA, Dandekar AM. *Agrobacterium tumefaciens* as an agent of disease. Trends Plant Sci 2003; 8:380-6; PMID:12927971; http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S1360-1385(03)00162-6.

2. Haudecoeur E, Faure D. A fine control of quorum-sensing communication in *Agrobacterium tumefaciens*. Commun Integr Biol 2010; 3:84-8; PMID:20585496; http://dx.doi.org/10.4161/cib.3.2.10429.

3. Deeken R, Engelmann JC, Efetova M, Czirjak T, Müller T, Kaiser WM, et al. An integrated view of gene expression and solute profiles of *Arabidopsis* tumors: a genome-wide approach. Plant Cell 2006; 18:3617-34; PMID:17172353; http://dx.doi.org/10.1105/tpc.106.044743.

4. Chevrot R, Rosen R, Haudecoeur E, Cirou A, Shelp BJ, Ron E, et al. GABA controls the level of quorum-sensing signal in *Agrobacterium tumefaciens*. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2006; 103:7460-4; PMID:16645034; http://dx.doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0600313103.

5. Haudecoeur E, Tannières M, Cirou A, Raffoux A, Dessaux Y, Faure D. Different regulation and roles of lactonases AiiB and AttM in *Agrobacterium tumefaciens* C 58. Mol Plant Microbe Interact 2009; 22:529-37; PMID:19348571; http://dx.doi.org/10.1094/MPMI-22-5-0529.

6. Khan SR, Farrand SK. The BlcC (AttM) lactonase of *Agrobacterium tumefaciens* does not quench the quorum-sensing system that regulates Ti plasmid conjugative transfer. J Bacteriol 2009; 191:1320-9; PMID:19011037; http://dx.doi.org/10.1128/JB.01304-08.

7. Haudecoeur E, Planamente S, Cirou A, Tannières M, Shelp BJ, Moréra S, et al. Proline antagonizes GABA-induced quenching of quorum-sensing in *Agrobacterium tumefaciens*. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2009; 106:14587-92; PMID:19706545; http://dx.doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0808005106.

8. Planamente S, Mondy S, Hommais F, Vigouroux A, Moréra S, Faure D. Structural basis for selective GABA binding in bacterial pathogens. Mol Microbiol 2012; 86:1085-99; PMID:23043322; http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/mmi.12043.

9. Planamente S, Vigouroux A, Mondy S, Nicaise M, Faure D, Moréra S. A conserved mechanism of GABA binding and antagonism is revealed by structure-function analysis of the periplasmic binding protein Atu2422 in *Agrobacterium tumefaciens*. J Biol Chem 2010; 285:30294-303; PMID:20630861; http://dx.doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M110.140715.

10. Crittenden DL, Chebib M, Jordan MJ. Stabilization of zwitterions in solution: GABA analogues. J Phys Chem A 2005; 109:4195-201; PMID:16833745; http://dx.doi.org/10.1021/jp050320a.

11. Tsetlin V, Kuzmin D, Kasheverov I. Assembly of nicotinic and other Cys-loop receptors. J Neurochem 2011; 116:734-41; PMID:21214570; http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1471-4159.2010.07060.x.

12. Wellendorph P, Bräuner-Osborne H. Molecular basis for amino acid sensing by family C G-protein-coupled receptors. Br J Pharmacol 2009; 156:869-84; PMID:19298394; http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1476-5381.2008.00078.x.

13. Harrison NJ, Lummis SC. Molecular modeling of the GABA(C) receptor ligand-binding domain. J Mol Model 2006; 12:317-24; PMID:16249935; http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00894-005-0034-6.

14. Lassalle F, Campillo T, Vial L, Baude J, Costechareyre D, Chapulliot D, et al. Genomic species are ecological species as revealed by comparative genomics in *Agrobacterium tumefaciens*. Genome Biol Evol 2011; 3:762-81; PMID:21795751; http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/gbe/evr070.

15. Yuan ZC, Haudecoeur E, Faure D, Kerr KF, Nester EW. Comparative transcriptome analysis of *Agrobacterium tumefaciens* in response to plant signal salicylic acid, indole-3-acetic acid and gamma-amino butyric acid reveals signalling cross-talk and *Agrobacterium*-plant co-evolution. Cell Microbiol 2008; 10:2339-54; PMID:18671824; http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1462-5822.2008.01215.x.

16. Wilms I, Voss B, Hess WR, Leichert LI, Narberhaus F. Small RNA-mediated control of the *Agrobacterium tumefaciens* GABA binding protein. Mol Microbiol 2011; 80:492-506; PMID:21320185; http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2958.2011.07589.x.

17. Chai Y, Tsai CS, Cho H, Winans SC. Reconstitution of the biochemical activities of the AttJ repressor and the AttK, AttL, and AttM catabolic enzymes of *Agrobacterium tumefaciens*. J Bacteriol 2007; 189:3674-9; PMID:17307843; http://dx.doi.org/10.1128/JB.01274-06.
