
Accepted Manuscript

Title: AMP-activated Protein Kinase: a target for old drugs against diabetes and cancer

Author: Gian Luigi Russo Maria Russo Paola Ungaro

PII: S0006-2952(13)00349-3  
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/doi:10.1016/j.bcp.201
AMP-activated Protein Kinase: a target for old drugs against diabetes and cancer

Gian Luigi RUSSO${}^{1\#}$, Maria RUSSO${}^{1}$, Paola UNGARO${}^{2}$

${}^{1}$Institute of Food Sciences, National Research Council, 83100, Avellino, Italy; ${}^{2}$Institute of Experimental Endocrinology and Oncology, National Research Council, 80131, Naples, Italy

$\#$To whom correspondence should be addressed:

Gian Luigi Russo  
Istituto Scienze dell'Alimentazione  
Via Roma, 64  
83100 Avellino, Italy  
Phone: +39 0825 299331 - Fax: +39 0825 781585 - e-mail: glrusso@isa.cnr.it  

Running title: Targeting AMPK in diabetes and cancer

Key words

AMP-activated protein kinase; Adenylate Energy Charge; Energy Metabolic Stress; Diabetes; Cancer; Biguanides, Natural compounds.

Abstract

The AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) is considered a key checkpoint to ensure energy balance in both cells and organisms. AMPK is an αβγ heterotrimer controlled by allosteric regulation by AMP, ADP and ATP, auto-inhibitory features and phosphorylation, with the threonine-172 phosphorylation on the catalytic α-subunit by LKB1, CaMKKβ or Tak1 being essential for its fully activation. AMPK acts as a protective response to energy stress in numerous systems, but it is also a key player in diabetes and related metabolic diseases and cancer.

Pharmacological activation of AMPK by metformin or other compounds holds a considerable potential to reverse the metabolic abnormalities associated with type 2 diabetes. In cancer, correction of the dysregulated metabolic pathway LKB1/AMPK/mTORC1 can lower the Warburg effect, suggesting AMPK as a potential target for cancer prevention and/or treatment.

In this commentary, we review recent findings that support the role and function of AMPK in normal and pathological conditions. We also discuss how the activation of AMPK by naturally occurring compounds could help to prevent the development of numerous chronic diseases contributing in such a way to the well-being of aging population.

# 1. Introduction

AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) is a historical protein kinase since its activity was firstly identified in 1973 as a negative regulator of acetyl-CoA carboxylase (ACC) and 3-hydroxy-3-methyl-glutaryl (HMG)-CoA reductase in the biosynthesis of fatty acids and cholesterol, respectively [1, 2]. However, only in 1989 the name AMPK was adopted to indicate its positive regulation by AMP nucleotide [3]. Its key role in regulating cellular energy metabolism is demonstrated by the presence of phylogenetically conserved homologs in unicellular organisms, such as yeast *Saccharomyces cerevisiae* (protein kinase Snf1) [4].

In 1968, Atkinson formulated the theory of “adenylate energy charge” (AEC), a concept where the ratio of ATP to ADP to AMP represents an index of the organism's physiological state of health [5]. Since then, it was expected that regulatory enzymes in energy-producing catabolic pathways had to show greater activity at low energy charge (high AMP, low ATP), and drop down sharply as AEC approaches 1.0 (high ATP). The early demonstration that AMP is a potent activator of AMPK opened the way for the current role of the kinase in metabolic control, as a perfect example of AEC in action. Under conditions of low energy, e.g., in the presence of stresses that increase the cellular concentration of AMP, due to either decreased production of ATP (hypoxia) or increased energy expenditure (muscle contraction), AMPK is activated favouring catabolism (e.g., fatty acid oxidation and glycolysis) and inhibiting anabolic reactions (e.g., fatty acid, triglyceride, cholesterol, and protein syntheses). When the physiological concentrations of ATP are restored, AMPK returns in the inactivated form [6, 7]. The later demonstrations that AMPK promotes food intake [8] and can be activated by Ca²⁺ via calmodulin-dependent kinase kinase (CaMKK) independent of AMP level [9], induced several

authors to suggest the name of “energy kinase” to better define the broad role of the kinase in regulating physiological functions [7, 10].

More than 70 reviews can be retrieved from PubMed on AMPK in the last five years, to indicate the interest for this kinase initially focused on its role in controlling cellular energy balance. More recently, the importance of AMPK in common chronic diseases, such as diabetes and cancer, strongly emerged intensifying the studies of its regulation in cellular and animal models applied to these pathologies. Currently, the identification of new drugs able to specifically target AMPK-dependent pathways represents a field of intense and competitive studies. Excellent and omni comprehensive reviews have been published in recent years, several of them largely cited in the present work, covering all aspects of AMPK regulation in health and disease; thus, we apologize in advance for the many omissions. Entire areas, as the role of AMPK in regulating food intake and appetite, or its protective effect in cardiovascular disease have been voluntary omitted for lack of space. We focused our critical revision on selected and recent structural and functional novelties that, to our opinion, may help to predict the future developments in the field of pharmacological activators of AMPK.

2. Biochemistry of AMPK and regulation

2.1 Subunit composition and structure

AMPK is normally present in cells as a heterotrimeric complex formed by α-, β- and γ-subunits, being the former the catalytic subunit, while β and γ are responsible for the regulation of the kinase activity, enzyme stability and localization (Figure 1). As reported in Table 1, human

AMPK includes two isoforms of the α- and β-subunit each (α1, α2 and β1, β2) and three isoforms of the γ-subunits (γ1, γ2 and γ3), all encoded by different genes, for a total number of at least 12 possible heterotrimer combinations which may differ in tissue-specific expression and activation. However, the picture is further complicated by the existence of alternate splicing and differential transcription initiation which generates common and still uncharacterized transcripts (reviewed in [7] and [11]). Tissue distribution of different human AMPK subunits is summarized in Table 1 and retrieved primarily from UniProt and Human Protein Reference Database<sup>1</sup>.

Original works reviewed in [7] indicated the tendency of a tissue-specificity for γ-subunits which correlates with different enzyme regulation. As an example, γ3 isoform is expressed primarily in white skeletal muscle, strongly suggesting that γ3 plays a key role in this tissue [12]. However, wide gene expression analysis suggests an ubiquitous expression in normal tissues for β1, β2, γ1, γ2 and γ3 and a preferential expression in skeletal muscle for α1 and α2 (Table 1).

The N-terminal half of the α catalytic subunit is highly conserved among species and contains a conventional serine/threonine kinase domain followed by an auto-inhibitory sequence (AIS), a C-terminus containing the subunit interacting domains required for binding to β subunit (β-SID) [13] and a conserved leptomycin-sensitive nuclear export sequence (NES) recently identified [14]. The β subunits contain two characteristic elements. A middle domain identified as glycogen-binding domain (GBD; also named CBM, carbohydrate-binding module) whose functional significance remains uncertain and partially contradictory, although it may serve to co-localize AMPK with downstream targets located in the glycogen particle, such as glycogen synthase [15]. In fact, while GBD/CBM is required for the interaction with the regulatory domain of the catalytic α-subunit of yeast and plant homologs, it appears not essential to stabilize the

<sup>1</sup> www.uniprot.org; www.hprd.org
mammalian heterotrimeric complex [11]. The second element of β-subunit occupies the C-terminal half and is called ASC from association with Snf1 (the S. cerevisiae homolog) complex, or SBS for subunit binding sequence (Figure 1). It interacts with both the α- and γ-subunits of mammalian AMPK [16].

The γ-subunit includes the four domains of allosteric regulation by AMP/ATP (Figure 1). It is formed by two pairs of motifs in tandem called CBS since they are related to cystathionine-β-synthase sequences. They are also known as Bateman domains after their recognition by Alex Bateman [17]. Exciting studies performed in the last quinquennium largely clarified the mode of nucleotide binding to CBS. The crystal structure of a core αβγ adenylate-binding domain of fission yeast AMPK [18] and mammalian γ-subunit has been solved [19]. These studies clearly indicate that AMP and ATP act as allosteric activator and inhibitor, respectively, of mammalian AMPK by binding at exchangeable sites CBS1 and CBS3. Doubts remain on why CBS4 binds permanently and non-exchangeable to AMP and whether any adenylate nucleotide binds to CBS2 motif [19, 20]. New insights on AMPK γ-subunit structure came from a recent work on mammalian AMPK where biochemical and structural data indicate that ADP, which was originally excluded as a possible AMPK activator, binds to just one of the two exchangeable nucleotide binding sites (CBS3) and protects the enzyme from inactivating dephosphorylation, although it does not interfere with the allosteric activation [21]. This finding generated a new model on how the energy status of a cell regulates AMPK activity (see below).

## 2.2 Regulation of AMPK activity

Page 6 of 46
AMPK activity is differently modulated at post-translational by adenine nucleotides (allosteric regulation), phosphorylation, myristoylation, binding of different effectors (Figure 1). In physiological conditions, the first event in the activation of mammalian AMPK is represented by changes in the AMP/ADP/ATP binding on the CBS domains of γ-subunits. Accordingly to the most recent views, in resting conditions with high AEC (e.g., optimal ATP level), adenylate kinase maintains AMP concentration low and ATP can bind and inactivate AMPK allowing the interaction between the myristoyl group of β-subunit to a putative myristoyl binding site within the α-subunit, which makes inaccessible the residues Thr172 (residue position is referred to human α2) in the catalytic domain, essential for kinase activity [22]. Upon energetic imbalance, adenylate kinase shifts the reaction 2ADP → ATP + AMP towards the formation of ATP and AMP. However, the relative changes in AMP are much greater than those occurring to ATP, because it has been estimated that a 10% variation of ATP levels results in a more than 8-fold change in AMP concentrations [23]. Therefore, in these conditions, decreasing AEC allows AMP to replace ATP in the γ-subunit (CBS1 motif). This allosteric change triggers a myristoyl switch, freeing Thr172 which becomes available for phosphorylation by upstream kinases (see below).

An emerging and important role has been recently attributed to ADP in maintaining AMPK active, preserving dephosphorylation of Thr172 and inactivation of AMPK. In fact, since free concentration of ADP is between 10 to 400-fold higher than AMP (50-200 versus 0.5-5 μM), ADP can behave as a more successful nucleotide at competing with ATP [21]. Shortly, this model foresees the binding of ADP to the weaker of the two exchangeable sites in the γ-subunit, i.e. CBS3 (Figure 1), blocking α-Thr172 dephosphorylation. The conformational changes allowing this mechanism involves the so-called α-hook structure (a region involving residues α373-α382 largely conserved between α1 and α2 in vertebrates). The α-hook interacts with the

γ-subunit making a lid over the CBS3 nucleotide binding site occupied by ADP/AMP. This interaction reduces the flexibility of the α-linker region (residues 300 to 370), promoting contacts of the kinase domain phosphorylated in Thr172 with the C-terminal regulatory fragments of α- and β-subunits (the β-SID and the αγ-SBS domains, respectively, mentioned above). These interactions create a task where Thr172 can be protected against dephosphorylation. Exchange of ADP/AMP by ATP leads to the release of the α-hook, an increase in the flexibility of the linker that promotes the dissociation of the kinase domain. In this form, the activation loop is no longer protected by packing against the regulatory domain and is accessible to attach by phosphatases [21]. In conclusion, the fact that ADP protects AMPK from dephosphorylation is likely to represent an important physiological mechanism for regulating the activity of the enzyme.

In addition to allosteric activation, AMPK is regulated by reversible phosphorylation (Table 1). AMPK belongs to the CAMK branches of the kinome, together with MLCK, CaMK1 and CaMK2, and, like many protein kinases, it has an obligate requirement for phosphorylation in the activation loop of the catalytic subunit, corresponding to the conventionally referred residue Thr172 (from the position in the original rat sequence) [7, 15]. Allosteric regulation and phosphorylation on Thr172 causes a >1000-fold increase in kinase activity (compared to up-to 5-fold for allosteric activation alone), allowing high sensitivity in responses to small changes in cellular energy status [24]. Currently, three AMPK upstream kinases have been identified in mammals. The first to be described was LKB1 (liver kinase B1) which was originally identified genetically as a tumour suppressor (see below) and it is present in a complex including STRADα (STE20-related adaptor protein α) and MO25 (scaffolding mouse 25 protein) [25, 26]. At the light of the allosteric regulation discussed above, it has been proposed that, in the basal state, LKB1-STRAD-MO25 complex provides a continuous basal level of phosphorylation at Thr172
in equilibrium with dephosphorylation of the same site, generating a “futile cycle”. Binding of AMP/ADP to the AMPK γ-subunit promotes phosphorylation and inhibits dephosphorylation.

Although this may seem energetically wasteful, the energy cost of this cycling is quantitatively negligible and it allows for greater and more rapid changes in the phosphorylation status and activity of AMPK in response to various stimuli [6, 15, 27]. This view was recently challenged with recent studies showing that the activation of LKB1 is retained in the nucleus in an inactive state. Its translocation to the cytoplasm, which is induced upon formation of a heterotrimer with STRADα and MO25. The former prevents nuclear re-localization of LKB1, while MO25 stabilizes the LKB1-STRADα complex [28, 29]. In addition, to induce its nucleus-cytoplasm translocation, LKB1-STRADα interaction also results in LKB1 auto-phosphorylation at various residues.

Two other kinases have also been identified as a separate AMPK phosphorylating kinases. Ca2+/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase kinase β (CaMKKβ) [9, 30, 31] phosphorylates and activates AMPK in response to elevated intracellular Ca²⁺ concentrations, independent of any change in cellular AMP/ATP ratio. Finally, TGF-β-activated kinase 1 (Tak1) has also been shown to regulate AMPK activity by phosphorylating Thr172. In fact, genetic studies in yeast suggest that Tak1 may directly phosphorylate AMPK. In addition, mice carrying a cardiac specific dominant negative mutation for Tak1 show signs of the Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome similarly to those associated to mutations in human AMPKα2. Despite these evidence, the physiological conditions during which Tak1 regulates AMPK remain elusive [7, 27].

The phosphorylation of AMPKα is reversed by the phosphatases PP2A and PP2C whereas PP1 is much less effective [32, 33], although the exact mechanisms that modulate their action remain poorly understood. Both phosphatases were shown to dephosphorylate AMPK *in vitro* and their
activity is inhibited by AMP binding to the γ subunit. These results are enforced by the observation that PP2A is involved in regulating the interaction between AMPK α2 and γ1 [34]. More recently, it has been proposed that calcium controls the regulatory B′ subunit (PR72), which influences enzyme activity, substrate specificity and subcellular localization) of heterotrimeric PP2A, and that the PR72-containing form of PP2A is necessary for the ability of chronic high calcium to inhibit AMPK activity in skeletal muscle [35].

Other important regulatory regions are the auto-inhibitory sequence located between residue 312 and 392 on the α-subunit of mammalian enzyme, the pseudosubstrate sequence within the γ- subunit CBS2 motif and additional regulatory sites on the β-subunit. Truncation of the autoinhibitory sequence, which overlaps with the ubiquitin-associated domain (UBA), generated a fully active α1-subunit in the absence of β and γ subunits [13]. Its regulatory role is still uncertain, although autoregulatory sequences beyond the COOH terminus of the catalytic domain have been found in all CAMK kinases to block catalytic activity [36]. In analogy with other kinases, e.g., MARK2, possessing a homologous UBA domain, this region plays an important role in regulating conformation and LBK1-mediated phosphorylation and activation of AMPK [7, 37].

The general consensus motif for AMPK includes hydrophobic residues in the P+4 and P-5 position relative to the Ser/Thr phosphorylation site at P-0 and basic residues at -4 and -3, or both. The simple consensus motif can be written ΦX(B, X)XX(Ser/Thr)XXXΦ, where Φ is a hydrophobic residue, B is basic, and X is any residue (reviewed in [7]). A typical pseudosubstrate sequence has been identified in human γ1: LFDAVSSLIRNKIH<sup>151</sup>R<sup>152</sup>LP(V<sup>155</sup>)IDPE<sup>159</sup>, where V<sup>155</sup> is embedded in a canonical consensus site for AMPK phosphorylation and occupies the site corresponding to the phosphorylatable Ser<sup>79</sup> in ACC1 [7]. It has been postulated that this

sequence interacts with the active-site groove of the α-subunit to prevent phosphorylation and activation by upstream kinases. Binding of AMP to the γ-subunit would then result in a conformational change in the AMPK complex that disrupts its interaction with the α-subunit and relieves the inhibition.

As mentioned above, the β1 and β2-subunit of AMPK are myristoylated on Gly2 embedded in a canonical consensus site for myristoylation (MGNXXS/T). Mutation Gly2Ala results in a 4-fold increase in kinase activity and a more homogenous redistribution of the β subunits in the cell, according with the role of myristoylation of proteins in facilitating membrane binding [38]. The same region contains two serine residues, Ser24 and Ser25 which are autophosphorylated suggesting that this event contributes to sustain AMPK activation [39] (Table 1). However, it is not clear whether AMPK could undergo a “myristoyl switch” between membrane and soluble forms in response to phosphorylation or ligand binding signals [7]. It is only confirmed that the effects of AMP/ADP on kinase activation N-terminal myristylation of the β-subunit [40].

Original studies indicated that high glycogen levels correlated with reduced activation of AMPK in response to exercise. It seemed an intuitive consequence of the need to switch off AMPK activity when energy stores, such as glycogen, become replete. However, conflicting data indicate that this cannot be the case. In fact, AMPK activity was not found to be directly correlated with muscle glycogen content [41] and, paradoxically, AMPK can inactivate glycogen synthase (GS) by phosphorylation on Ser7 [42]. A suggestive hypothesis assumes that glycogen with high branching content (α1→6 branch) is a potent allosteric inhibitor of AMPK and also inhibits its phosphorylation and activation by upstream kinases [43]. In skeletal muscle, when AMPK is bound to fully synthesized glycogen particle is probably in an active state due to inaccessibility of internal branch points, allowing the kinase to phosphorylate and inhibit GS,

providing further extension of glycogen particles. However, when glycogen is depleted, AMPK becomes inhibited after binding to exposed α1–6 branch points. This allows dephosphorylation of GS and rapid resynthesis of glycogen. This model implies that AMPK acts as a cellular glycogen sensor through its CBM/GBD-containing β subunit [43] and different pools of AMPK (glycogen-bound versus glycogen-free) can phosphorylate some targets while not others [27, 42, 43].

In addition to the essential phosphorylation on Thr172 of α-subunit, AMPK is phosphorylated on multiple sites on α and β-subunits (Table 1). The identification of the upstream kinases responsible for these phosphorylation events and their functional meaning remain largely understood. In several cases, the site identified are equivocal and, more important, it is not proven if the phosphorylation events occur in vivo [7]. Apart from Thr172, new evidence suggests that in primary mouse adipocytes, PKA associates with and phosphorylates AMPKα1 at Ser173 to impede Thr172 phosphorylation and activation of AMPK by LKB1 in response to lipolytic signals [44]. These results suggest a new mechanism of negative regulation of AMPK activity by PKA. Stimulation of adipocyte lipolysis, via PKA activation, triggers a negative feedback mechanism involving AMPK to restrain the energy depletion and oxidative stress caused by lipolysis [27, 45].

## 3. Effect of AMPK on cellular energetic metabolism

### 3.1 Regulation of glucose uptake and metabolism

AMPK is known as a potent modulator of catabolism by enhancing glucose uptake, an event which occurs during muscle contraction, to generate ATP, but, paradoxically, is also promoted by

insulin in resting muscle to synthesize glycogen, an anabolic process. In both cases, enhanced  
glucose uptake implies translocation of glucose transporter type 4 (GLUT 4) from intracellular  
storage vesicles to the plasma membrane. As we will discuss in the next paragraphs, exercise  
and/or skeletal muscle contraction increase glucose uptake is independent from insulin signaling,  
making the rationale for the therapeutic use of AICAR (5-aminoimidazole-4-carboxamide  
riboside) to stimulated glucose uptake via a phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI₃K)-independent  
pathway to bypass insulin resistance [7].  

How AMPK stimulates GLUT 4 translocation is extremely interesting from a biochemical and  
genetic point of view. Translocation and fusion of GLUT 4 vesicles to plasma membrane are  
under the control of the Rab family of G proteins in their active and GTP-bound state. Under  
basal conditions, Rabs are inactivated (GDP-bound state) by members of Rab GTPase, such as  
TBC1D1 and TBC1D4 (also known as AS160, i.e. Akt substrate of 160 kDa) (Figure 2) which  
are associated with the GLUT 4 storage vesicles (reviewed in [7]). Following stimulating  
conditions, two pathways converge on AS160 and TBC1D1 under the control of AMPK. In  
muscle cells and adipocytes, the insulin-activated phosphorylation of AS160 by Akt results in 14-  
3-3 binding and increases GTP-bound Rab and GLUT 4 exocytosis to the plasma membrane.  
AMPK contributed to AS160 binding to 14-3-3, but direct phosphorylation has not been  
identified [46]. In contrast, while AS160/TBC1D4 is phosphorylated by both AMPK and Akt, in  
contracting muscle, AMPK is the only kinase that phosphorylates and inactivates TBC1D1 on  
Ser237, increasing its binding to 14-3-3, suggesting that it is the predominant RabGAP regulating  
AMPK-stimulated GLUT 4 exocytosis (Figure 2). Upon activation, AMPK can improve glucose  
uptake following other pathways. In skeletal muscle, the activating phosphorylation of AMPK on  
Ser789 of IRS-1 (insulin receptor substrate 1) stimulates PI₃K/Akt activity enhancing AS160  
binding to 14-3-3. This mechanism can explain the well documented improve of insulin  


**Page 13 of 46**
sensitivity in patients with type 2 diabetes (T2D) after a single bout of exercise. Finally, AMPK is a positive regulator of GLUT4 gene acting on both the transcription factors myocyte enhancer factor (MEF) 2A and MEF2D [47]. The activity of these two transcription factors is under the control of the activating AMPK phosphorylation of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma coactivator-1 alpha (PGC-1α) [48]. In addition, AMPK phosphorylates and inhibits histone deacetylase (HDAC) 5 causing its bond to 14-3-3 and translocation out of the nucleus (Figure 2). As a consequence, GLUT4 promoter activity and mitochondrial biogenesis enhance [49]. These results have been questioned by data in transgenic mice. The generation of regulatory (β1−/− and β2−/−) and catalytic (α1−/− and α2−/−) subunits knockout animals has emphasized the distinct and critical role for AMPK in the control of energy metabolism. Interestingly, AMPKα2−/−, but not AMPKα1−/− mice, were resistant to hypoglycemic AICAR effects, although the effects of contraction were normal [50], suggesting that AMPKα2-containing complexes are the main contributors of AMPK activation during AICAR stimulation at the whole-body level [51]. Indeed, if deletion of AMPKα1 has no detectable metabolic phenotype, whole-body AMPKα2 deletion resulted in mild insulin-resistance, although AMPKα2−/− mice do not display typical alterations of T2D at a molecular level [50]. By contrast, in knockout mice for the activating kinase LKB1, the effects of both AICAR and contraction on glucose uptake are lost [52]. In addition, in double knockout mice for muscle-specific AMPKβ1/AMPKβ2 (no AMPK activity detectable), exercise was dramatically impaired, glucose uptake and contraction-stimulated glucose uptake were markedly diminished [53], supporting the idea that AMPK activation is crucial during muscle contraction.

3.2 Regulation of mitochondrial biogenesis
It is interesting that the AMPKβ1/AMPKβ2 double knockout mice present a reduced muscle mitochondrial content [53] and PGC-1α, mentioned above as an AMPK substrate, enhances the activity of several transcription factors acting on nuclear-encoded mitochondrial genes, suggesting a role for AMPK in regulating mitochondrial biogenesis. AMPK can phosphorylate and activate PGC-1α which promotes its own transcription [54], or can contribute to mitochondrial biogenesis by targeting sirtuin (SIRT1)-dependent deacetylation of PGC-1α culminating in the transcriptional modulation of mitochondrial and lipid utilization genes [55] (Figure 2).

The ideal cellular ATP-generating capacity is ensured by generation of healthy mitochondria and elimination of damaged ones, a process called mitophagy, a specific type of autophagy. Recent studies demonstrated that AMPK binds and phosphorylates UNC-51 like kinase 1 (ULK1), the mammalian orthologue of the yeast Atg1, a key kinase in initiating the autophagy cascade, thus triggering mitophagy [56]. This phosphorylation leads to the direct activation of ULK1 by AMPK bypassing mTOR-inhibition. ULK1/2 in turn phosphorylates all three subunits of AMPK (Table 1) and thereby negatively regulates its activity. Thus, ULK1 is not only involved in the induction of autophagy, but also in terminating signaling events that trigger autophagy. In this model, phosphorylation of AMPK by ULK1 represents a negative feedback circuit [57].

Although the protein kinase activity of ULK1 is required for autophagic function, its proteic substrate(s) responsible for autophagy activation has not been identified (reviewed in [58]). This supports the idea that phosphorylation of ULK1 by AMPK is required for the clearance of dysfunctional mitochondria [15].
3.2 Regulation of lipid metabolism

During fasting the synchronized regulation of lipid and carbohydrate metabolism is finely controlled by AMPK at transcriptional and post-translational levels. In metabolically active tissues and in response to different physiological stimuli, this coordination allows release of free fatty acids (FA) from adipose tissue combined with the ability to activate carbohydrate metabolism. AMPK acts at different levels (Figure 2 and references [7] and [59]). Recent findings indicate that AMPK regulates FAT/CD36 plasma membrane recruitment in cardiomyocytes via AS160 [60]. AMPK may also be important in the regulation of FAT/CD36 transcription increasing protein expression levels and, in AMPK γ3 null mice [61], fasting-induced increase in FAT/CD36 is suppressed. Once FA crossed the plasma membrane, they can be either directed towards oxidation or storage. AMPK phosphorylates (Ser79) and inactivates ACC1 and HMG-CoA reductase, leading to inhibition of *de novo* synthesis of FA and cholesterol, respectively. Phosphorylation of ACC2 by AMPK on Ser221 causes increases of FA oxidation [62] (Figure 2). ACC regulates the cellular levels of malonyl-CoA which is the key substrate for FA biosynthesis and a potent inhibitor of FA oxidation. AMPK can also increase the activity of malonyl-CoA decarboxylase (MCD). Reduction of malonyl-CoA also relieves CPT1 (carnitine-acetyl carnitine translocase 1) inhibition, increasing lipid oxidation. In addition, AMPK reduces FA synthesis either by inhibiting the transcription factor SREBP1c, which controls the entire synthetic pathway, or by directly inhibiting the activity of FAS [7, 63]. The futile cycle between triacylglycerol (TG) synthesis and hydrolysis is also blocked by AMPK which inactivates mitochondrial sn-glycerol-3-phosphate acyltransferase (mGPAT) (Figure 2), and hormone-sensitive lipase (HSL), respectively [64, 65].

4. Correcting AMPK dysregulation in diseases

4.1. Pharmacological intervention on AMPK in diabetes

Obesity and the metabolic syndrome represent a major health and economic problem in both Western and developing societies. The diseases, arising as a consequence of obesity, such as T2D, cardiovascular disease and certain cancers, are increasingly important causes of morbidity and mortality. Interestingly, all three diseases juxtapose dysregulated intracellular signaling with altered metabolic state. Considering the role of AMPK described above in regulating energy balance at both the cellular and whole-body levels, this kinase occupies a central position in studies regarding obesity, diabetes and the metabolic syndrome [59].

T2D is a metabolic disorder characterized by hyperglycaemia and altered lipid metabolism caused by islet beta cells being unable to secrete adequate insulin to varying degrees of over- nutrition, inactivity, consequential overweight or obesity, and insulin resistance [66]. It is well established that regular exercise is an effective method of treating insulin resistance and T2D, as well as preventing their onset in susceptible individuals, and it seems likely that the beneficial effects of exercise are at least partly mediated by AMPK activation [67]. As a proof of concept, studies with AMPK activators in animal models of T2D provided promising results. It has been demonstrated that AICAR was able to increase glucose uptake in perfused rat muscle [68].

AICAR is taken up by the cell and is phosphorylated to mono-phosphorylated derivative ZMP (5- aminoimidazole-4-carboxamide ribonucleoside). ZMP mimics activating effects of AMP on AMPK, without affecting the adenosine nucleotide or phosphocreatine status of the cell [59]. The main limit of a pharmacological activation of AMPK is that it concerns all AMPK complexes;

thus, it is difficult to assign specific functions for each AMPK heterotrimeric complexes. These limits have been overcome by the generation of mouse transgenic and knockout models. The use of catalytic subunit knockout animals (AMPKα1⁻/⁻ and AMPKα2⁻/⁻) [50, 69] brought to the demonstration that only the knockout for AMPKα2 isoform, but not AMPKα1, was resistant to hypoglycemic AICAR effects [50, 69]. Moreover, whole-body deletion of AMPKα1 has no detectable metabolic phenotype, whereas whole-body AMPKα2 deletion showed some features typically of T2D, such as insulin-resistance and impaired glucose tolerance associated with insulin secretory defect [50, 69], although insulin release by isolated pancreatic islets and insulin-stimulated glucose uptake by isolated muscles were both normal [69] raising doubts on the consistency of AMPKα2⁻/⁻ mice as a new model to study T2D.

Although studies with AMPK activators in animal models of T2D are consistent with the notion that AMPK activation may prevent disease onset, data obtained in human subjects with obesity and insulin resistance, with or without diabetes, failed to find abnormalities in AMPK activity in skeletal muscle of these patients [70]. These data suggest that impaired insulin action on glycogen synthesis and lipid oxidation in skeletal muscle of these patients is unlikely to involve changes in AMPK expression and activity. On the other hand, it has been reported that the ability of exercise to activate AMPK is impaired in muscle of obese individuals with or without diabetes suggesting that AMPK activation above basal levels might be effective in the treatment of T2D and the metabolic syndrome and perhaps even obesity [7, 71].

The identification of AMPK as an indirect target of established anti-diabetic drugs, such as metformin [72], generated increasing interest in the development of novel and more specific AMPK activators. For fifty years, one of the few classes of therapeutics effective in reducing glucose production has been the biguanides, which include phenformin and metformin, the latter
the most frequently prescribed drug for T2D [59]. In intact cells, metformin increases AMPK activity, resulting in increased fatty acid oxidation, down-regulation of lipogenic genes, decreased hepatic glucose production and stimulation of glucose uptake [73]. The mechanism by which metformin activates AMPK is not fully understood. It has been hypothesized that metformin activates AMPK by weakly inhibiting complex I of the respiratory chain, resulting in a fall in cellular ATP concentration and an increase in the AMP:ATP ratio ([74] and reviewed in [75]) (Figure 2). The increase in the AMP:ATP ratio inhibits dephosphorylation of AMPK, thereby potentiating the phosphorylation of AMPK by the upstream kinase LKB1. Therefore, AMPK is considered the major mediator of the glucose-lowering effects of metformin. However, recently, Foretz at al. reported studies utilizing genetic ablation of both AMPK catalytic subunits and the upstream activating kinase LKB1 in liver and primary hepatocytes to show clearly that neither AMPK, nor LKB1 are essential for metformin inhibition of hepatic glucose production [76]. This suggests that metformin-induced reductions in hepatic glucose production is essentially linked to perturbation of intracellular ATP-levels rather than direct inhibition of gluconeogenic gene expression. Moreover, it has recently been proposed a novel mechanism by which metformin blocks glucagon-dependent glucose output from hepatocytes by inhibiting adenylyl cyclase that might represent a novel target for the development of therapeutics for the treatment of insulin resistance and T2D [77].

Because of its global favorable effects on energy metabolism pathways, it is tempting to consider AMPK as a potential therapeutic target in the prevention and the treatment of T2D and insulin resistance. However, doing so to its widespread cellular functions, some of the effects of AMPK activation in other organs or tissues should be carefully evaluated, since simultaneous advantageous and deleterious consequences being possible. Therefore, care should be taken that other metabolic effects due to AMPK activation could be detrimental for diabetic patients.
4.2. Targeting AMPK in cancer

The chronic and uncontrolled proliferation of cancer cells is supported by a corresponding adjustment of the energy metabolism, such as supplying the rhythms of abnormal cell growth and division. Peculiar metabolic alteration in cancer was first recognized in the middle fifties by Otto Warburg [78]. However, his observations were substantially ignored or not fully understood until recent years. Today, altered metabolism of tumour cells is widely recognized as an emerging hallmark and a potential drug target in cancer cells [79].

Differently from healthy cells which, under normal aerobic conditions, produce ATP from glycolysis in cytoplasm and throughout oxidative phosphorylation in mitochondria, cancer cells essentially use glycolysis as energy source, a condition defined "aerobic glycolysis" [80]. Only after the discovery of oncogenes and tumour suppressors in cancer biology, it became known that the metabolic switch to aerobic glycolysis is genetically supported by oncogenes, such as myc, nuclear factor κB (NF-κB), Akt, and several tyrosine kinase receptors (epidermal growth factor, EGF; insulin-like growth factor 1, IGF-1; Her-2; etc.), which, in turn, activate proliferating pathways [81]. All together, these pathways (e.g., Ras/RAF/MAP kinase; PI₃K; mammalian target of rapamycin, mTOR; hypoxia induced factor, HIF) can stimulate the transcription of genes involved in glycolysis (GLUT transporters, hexokinase 2, etc.), enhancing glucose uptake and its retention in the cell, both events essential to support Warburg effect in cancer [81]. On the opposite, classical tumour suppressors, like p53, regulate cell metabolism sustaining normal growth, survival and autophagy or apoptosis depending from the cellular context [81, 82].

Epidemiological and pharmacological data support a causal link between cancer and metabolic dysfunction. In fact, insulin resistance, obesity and T2D in both humans and animal models are associated to an increased risk of cancer, resulting in increased mortality and poor prognosis.

Analyses of retrospective data from a cohort of patients with T2D indicated that use of metformin, as a first-line anti-diabetic drug, was associated with a 30% lower cancer incidence [83]. Since then, an enormous amount of data have been published (reviewed in [84]), not without doubts [85].

AMPK is at a crossroad between upstream (p53, LKB1) and downstream (TSC2, tuberous sclerosis complex 2) tumour suppressors. In addition to the functions described above, AMPK inhibits the anabolic processes including mTORC1 (mTOR complex 1) dependent protein biosynthesis and at the same time, cell proliferation through p53 activation (Figure 2). Shortly, AMPK activates the TSC1/TSC2 complex by phosphorylating TSC2 on Thr<sup>1227</sup> and Ser<sup>1345</sup> under condition of metabolic stress. The activated TSC1/TSC2 complex regulates the activity of mTORC1, consisting of mTOR, raptor and mLST8, which controls cell growth mainly through the regulation of protein translation. When TSC1/TSC2 is active, expresses GTPase activating protein activity towards Rheb inducing conversion of active GTP-bound Rheb to inactive GDP-bound Rheb. Switching off GTP-Rheb results in inhibition of mTORC1 and all downstream events depending by mTORC1 and leading to cell growth, such as activation of protein translation, inhibition of autophagy, induction of angiogenesis through induction of hypoxia-inducible factor 1α (HIF1α)-dependent expression of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) [29]. AMPK can also contribute to inhibit mTORC1 and to induce cell-cycle arrest depending by energy stress via phosphorylation of raptor and favoring its binding to 14-3-3 [86] (reviewed in [29] and Figure 2).
From these data, AMPK deserved the title of “metabolic tumour suppressor”. Despite these circumstantial evidence linking AMPK to tumor suppression functions, its exact role in tumorigenesis and tumor metabolism has been recently clarified in an elegant paper from Jones’s group who demonstrated that AMPK negatively regulates aerobic glycolysis (the Warburg effect) in cancer cells and suppresses tumor growth *in vivo* [87]. The authors, using the transgenic mouse model Eμ-Myc, harbouring also a mutation in the gene that encodes AMPKα1, the only isoforms expressed in B-cells, demonstrated that loss of AMPKα1 in these mice accelerated Myc-driven lymphoma genesis, displaying characteristics of pre-B cell tumours. The AMPK deficient B-cells displayed a normal viability under normal growth conditions but, interestingly, an increased cell death in the presence of 2-deoxyglucose (2-DG). A metabolomic analysis revealed that loss of AMPKα1 in these cells decreased glucose content and increased lactate production, a signature of the “Warburg effect” [87]. These data suggest that, *in vivo*, AMPK loss promotes a metabolic shift with results in a growth advantage for lymphoma cells. In human cancer, however, genetic mutation in AMPK genes are rare and the selective pressure during tumorigenesis pushing towards AMPK loss of function could often derives from mutation of its upstream activators, or its downstream targets. The major AMPK upstream controller, LKB1, is considered a “classical” tumour suppressor, since this kinase is mutated in a rare human syndrome called Peutz-Jeghers, a disease characterized by increased risk of benign and malignant tumours in different tissues and mucocutaneous pigmentation. LKB1 is also a target for somatic mutations frequently observed in sporadic lung adenocarcinoma in humans [29]. In melanoma cells with the B-Raf V<sup>600</sup>E mutation, LKB1-AMPK axis is inactivated following LKB1 phosphorylation by Erk and Rsk, two kinases downstream of B-Raf, resulting in AMPK inactivation and strengthening the proliferative Raf-MEK-Erk pathway in melanoma [88]. Recent work shed light on LKB1
mechanism of activation. Zequiraj et al. demonstrated that LKB1 activity is regulated by the pseudo-kinase STRADα and the scaffold protein MO25 through an allosteric mechanism phosphorylation-independent (see above). In a recent study, an interesting link emerged between the orphan nuclear receptor Nur77 and LKB1. Nur77 binds and sequesters LKB1 in the nucleus, thereby attenuating AMPK activation [89]. This function is antagonized by TMPA (2-[2,3,4-trimethoxy-6-(1-octanoyl)phenyl]acetate), which, interacting with Nur77 with high affinity and at specific sites, releases and shuttles of LKB1 to the cytoplasm where it is free to phosphorylate and activate AMPK [89].

These studies, even if in different cellular models and pathological situation demonstrate that AMPK activity can be restored acting on LKB1 using drugs directed to the upstream kinase (for example by inhibiting oncogenic B-Raf) or binding to a specific nuclear receptor, such as Nur77.

Two recent studies have clarified many aspects regarding the therapeutic efficacy of old drugs, such as anti-diabetes (metformin/phenformin) and anti-inflammatory molecules (aspirin/salicilate) in cancer cells where the LKB1-AMPK axis is compromised.

The exact mechanism by which metformin and other biguanide drugs (e.g., phenformin) might protect against cancer T2D patients has been largely debated. LKB1 tumor suppressor is mutationally inactivated in approximately 20% of non-small cell lung cancers (NSCLC).

Phenformin selectively induced apoptosis in LKB1-deficient NSCLC cells, but not when p53 was mutated. Similarly, in K-Ras-dependent mouse models of NSCLC, tumors with K-Ras and LKB1 mutations, but not those with K-Ras and p53 mutations showed a selective response to phenformin as a single agent, resulting in prolonged survival [90]. This study paradoxically demonstrates that biguanide drugs are more effective in tumors lacking a functional LKB1-AMPK pathway, since only mice lacking LKB1 and treated with phenformin had enhanced

overall survival and a lower “Warburg effect” respect to the other genotypes. The authors suggest three alternative mechanisms to explain the different effects of biguanide drugs depending on cellular context: i. in normal cells of T2D patients, metformin lower plasma glucose, increases insulin secretion and finally reverse the favorable environment for cell growth; ii. in pre-cancerous cells expressing a normal LKB1-AMPK pathway, biguanide drugs may act on this signaling pathway to counteract the Warburg effect, suggesting a potential use of these drugs in chemoprevention; iii. in tumor cells lacking a functional LKB1/AMPK pathway, phenformin reduces ATP levels and induces selectively tumor death since these cells are unable to respond to energy stress [90]. In summary, biguanide drugs can find applications as chemopreventive molecules in diabetic and pre-cancerous patients, or as a selective chemotherapy eventually associated to other anticancer drugs.

The concept that an old drug targeting AMPK can be used in cancer chemoprevention has been also confirmed by a different study where salicylate, the metabolic derivative of aspirin, selectively activated AMPK and inhibited dephosphorylation of Thr172, binding AMPK at the same site as the synthetic activator A-769662 [91] (Figure 2). This mechanism may also explain why aspirin inhibits mTOR towards AMPK activation, leading to increased autophagy in colorectal cancer [92].

5. Activation of AMPK by natural compounds

Among the molecules potentially responsible for the “indirect” activation of AMPK, a plethora of naturally occurring compounds have been described, including many plant-derived xenobiotics or nutraceuticals that were claimed to have health benefits in diabetes or cancer, such as quercetin,

resveratrol, epigallocatechin gallate (EGCG), α-lipoic acid, berberine, a component of traditional Chinese medicine known from the ancient times for its beneficial effect against T2D [59, 93, 94].

The rationale to explain how so many compounds possessing different structures and functions can all activate AMPK, resides in the hypothesis that many of them activate AMPK indirectly by inhibiting mitochondrial ATP production, a condition verified in intact cells, but not in cell-free assays [95]. In fact, the complexity of the mitochondrial respiratory chain and ATP synthase play in favor of the pleiotropic activity of many different xenobiotic compounds (synthetic or natural), especially if they are hydrophobic molecules. An elegant demonstration of this hypothesis has been provided by the generation of an isogenic human embryonic kidney cell line (HEK 293) stably expressing either the wild-type γ2 subunit of AMPK, or the γ2 mutant, R531G, insensitive to AMPK activation by AMP. Several natural compounds, including galegine, resveratrol and berberine, as well as positive controls, such as metformin, phenformin and classical mitochondrial poisons (oligomycin and dinitrophenol), were able to activate wild-type AMPK, but failed to activate the R531G mutant, indicating that they act by inhibiting ATP synthesis and thus elevating AMP [95] (Figure 2). To confirm this observation, AICAR did not activate R531G mutant, while the direct activator A-769662 and the Ca²⁺ ionophore A 23187, which acts in an AMP-independent manner by increasing cellular Ca²⁺ and thus triggering phosphorylation of Thr172 by CaMKKβ, maintained the capacity to activate AMPK [95].

A special mention deserves resveratrol as potential activator of AMPK, since its different mode of action depending on the concentration applied. Among the different functions attributed to resveratrol in health and disease, its role in mitochondrial biogenesis and improving metabolic function recently emerged, although no without criticisms. Resveratrol was first identified as a direct target of NAD⁺-depend deacetylase SIRT1 suggesting its capacity to maintain human
health status with age. Using animal models, a recent study reported that stimulation of AMPK activity and increase in NAD⁺ levels, mitochondrial biogenesis, and mitochondrial function in skeletal muscle by a moderate dose (25 μM) of resveratrol are entirely dependent upon SIRT1, specifically via the deacetylation of LKB1 [96]. Interestingly, when resveratrol was used at higher doses (>50 μM), it activated AMPK in a SIRT1-independent manner. Resveratrol increased mitochondrial biogenesis by inhibiting phosphodiesterase PDE4, resulting in increased cAMP and stimulation of Ca²⁺-dependent pathway involving phosphorylation of AMPK by CamKKβ [96, 97].

---

6. Conclusions and perspectives

Although the number of papers on AMPK increased of more than 10-fold in the last ten years compared to the previous decade, the hunger for knowledge surrounding this kinase has not been satisfied. AMPK passed through different phases of intense studies: it was first investigated as key kinase in regulating cellular metabolism; subsequently, its role in maintaining energy balance at the whole-body emerged; finally, AMPK involvement in countering metabolic and degenerative diseases emerged. It is difficult to predict where the most promising studies on AMPK will be directed. The only certainty is that the range of scientific investigations involving AMPK is so large and branched that important discoveries will follow in the next years regarding its role in both normal cells/organisms and diseases.

From the data commented here, it clearly appears that AMPK has been an ideal target for biochemical studies that shed light on how it is activated by upstream kinases or Ca²⁺ increaseand how these events work in concert with allosteric activation by AMP/ATP or ADP/ATP.

However, areas of shadow still remain regarding AMPK regulation. As an example, how dephosphorylation of Thr172 is regulated is still elusive; the mechanism of both negative (AIS domain on α-subunit) and positive (Ser24/25 on β-subunit) auto-regulation (Figure 1) requires further studies. Similarly, mechanism(s) of LKB1 activation by metabolic stimuli needs new inputs. In addition, an urgent requirement exists to confirm the exact function of AMPK holoenzyme in genetic models. In fact, the possibility to assemble at least 12 possible heterotrimer combinations generates a redundancy that may explain the contradictory results obtained comparing genetic versus biochemical approaches. As extensively reviewed [7, 51], it is not surprising that in transgenic AMPK dominant negative mice and AMPKα2 null animals glucose uptake is substantially normal, or mice with liver specific double knockout of α1 and α2 subunits and LKB1 are viable and dispensable for metformin-induced decreases in hepatic glucose output [59, 76]. The continuous generation of new models of transgenic or knockout mice remains an essential approach to discriminate among the 12 differently activated tissue-specific AMPK complexes. The development of specific regulators of AMPK able to target each single complex represents an alternative to identify specific functions in normal and pathological models.

In this context, the challenges to design AMPK activator for therapeutic applications represent a field of great interest, as demonstrated by the number of patented chemical modulators of AMPK [98]. Targeting of AMPK, although attractive from a pharmacological point of view, includes some risks. In fact, uncontrolled activation of AMPK can be associated to some detrimental effects, such as tumour-promoting and heart diseases, or body weight gain [98]. According to a recent review, between 2006 and 2010, nine patents have been registered on targeting AMPK in

Page 27 of 46
metabolic syndrome and three in cancer; 16 novel pharmaceutical compounds for prevention

and/or treatment of metabolic syndrome targeting AMPK have been synthesized and

characterized [98]. From these data, AMPK appears a ‘druggable’ target; however, the efficacy

of old and new compounds in ameliorating AMPK-related diseases need to be tested in clinical

trials. Unfortunately, the current situation shows a deficiency of adequate studies that hopefully

will be filled in the next years. Searching PubMed, the limited number of clinical studies

published analysed the link between AMPK-dependent signalling and physical exercise in

normal subjects and, more recently, in subjects affected by T2D. Table 2 reports examples

retrieved from clinical trials databases², where the activity and regulation of AMPK in cancer,

after treatment with metformin, or therapeutic cocktails which include metformin, represent

primary or secondary endpoints. These studies are still in the recruiting phase, or results have not

been available yet. Further researches on the possible use of AMPK modulators in adjuvant

cancer therapy are extremely warranted.

To this respect, the interest in natural compounds acting on AMPK activation represents a field in

growing expansion in the next future. However, major concerns in this area regard uptake and

metabolism of these molecules, and their metabolites, which rarely reach micromolar

concentration in the blood after supplementation compatible with any chemopreventive and/or

protective effect. As an example, the effects of low and high doses of resveratrol commented

above regarding the AMPK-dependent of SIRT-1 are largely far from those attainable *in vivo*

with a resveratrol enriched diet or supplementation. Perhaps, these molecules, due to their

pleiotropic effect, may find clinical applications as adjuvants. Also in this case, the feasibility of

this approach can be achieved only planning future clinical trials to ascertain their real capacity to

positively modulate AMPK activity *in vivo*.


Footnote:

² http://clinicaltrials.gov/

A part from their potential therapeutic use, there are new aspects of plant-derived xenobiotics and nutraceuticals which deserves careful attention and consideration. Their claims to improve health, delay aging and protect against chronic diseases, such as cancer, metabolic and cardiovascular disorders, may pass through AMPK. As discussed above, these compounds are “indirect” activators of AMPK activity probably inhibiting mitochondrial function, which would increase the cellular AMP:ATP ratio. An interesting hypothesis formulated by Hardie’s group suggests that compounds that inhibit mitochondrial function would activate AMPK in the wild-type cells but not in mutant cells. This was the case for metformin, resveratrol, quercetin and others. On the opposite, agents that act via AMP-independent mechanisms are able to activate both the wild- type and mutant cells [93, 99]. This concept opens the road to studies aimed to target AMPK as “the well-being kinase”. It may be possible that nutritional doses (few milligrams diluted in the diet or taken as supplements) of single compounds or cocktail of few of them taken regularly can contribute to maintain a level of AMPK activity slightly above the threshold ensuring an adequate control of energy metabolic homeostasis, enhancing stress resistance, improving and extending lifespan via an integrated signaling network [100]. Circumstantial evidence that this strategy is feasible comes from the observation that daily doses of AMPK activator AICAR improves exercise endurance in rats (this effect brought the World Anti-Doping Agency to ban the use of AICAR in competitions) and quercetin, a nutraceutical acting in part via AMPK, provides a statistically significant benefit in human endurance exercise capacity.

AMPK field is now mature for new and exciting novelties regarding its application in preventive and clinical medicine. With the possibility to genetically or pharmacologically target the different isoforms of this complex enzyme, time remains the only limit for the achievement of this goal.

Acknowledgements

This work was partially supported by a grant from the Italian Ministry of Economy and Finance to the National Research Council for the project "Innovazione e Sviluppo del Mezzogiorno - Conoscenze Integrate per Sostenibilità ed Innovazione del Made in Italy Agroalimentare - Legge n. 10 191/2009 and by project MERIT (n. RBNE08ZZN7; decree 11/Ric, 10/01/2011) from Italian Ministry of Education, University and Scientific Research.

Figure Legends

Figure 1. Domain organization of the α, β and γ subunits of human AMPK. Considering the differences in sequence and structure of different AMPK subunits, the scheme and the residue positions are referred to α2, β1 and γ2 subunits, as reported on the right. Phosphorylated residues uncertain or determined by similarity or probability are not reported (see Table 1 and text for details). AIS, auto-inhibitory sequence; β-SID, subunit interacting domains required for binding to β subunit; NES, nuclear export sequence; CBM, carbohydrate-binding module; GBD, glycogen-binding domain; SBS, subunit binding sequence; ASC, association with Snf1 (the S. cerevisiae homolog) complex; CBS, cystathionine-β-synthase sequence (see text for details).

Figure 2. AMPK signalling pathway. AMPK is activated directly or indirectly by drugs such as AICAR (5-aminoimidazole-4-carboxamide riboside), salicylate, biguanides and plant products (berberine, resveratrol, quercetin, EGCG). Terms in bold (LBK1/CaMKKb, PP2A, AICAR, resveratrol) indicate the more effective molecules or pathways. Some of the major AMPK targets and their effects on energy metabolism are also shown, although not all of them are directly phosphorylated by AMPK. In general, AMPK switches off anabolic pathways that consume ATP (protein synthesis, glycogen synthesis, etc.) and upregulates those processes that increase ATP (glucose uptake, glycolysis, mitochondrial biogenesis). Plus and minus symbols on the bottom of the cartoon indicate activation or inhibition, respectively, as result of AMPK activity on the reported metabolic processes. TSC1/TSC2, tuberous sclerosis complex 1 and 2; mTOR, mammalian target of rapamycin; mtGPAT, mitochondrial sn-glycerol-3-phosphate acyltransferase; ACC1, acetyl-CoA carboxylase-1; FA, fatty acids; ACC2, acetyl-CoA

carboxylase-2; TBC1D1, (Tre-2/USP6, BUB2, Cdc16) Domain Family, Member 1; AS160,

AKT substrate of 160 kDa; PGC-1α, peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma

coactivator-1 α; HDAC. histone deacetylase; SIRT1, sirtuin.

References

[1] Beg ZH, Allmann DW, Gibson DM. Modulation of 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl coenzyme A reductase activity with cAMP and wth protein fractions of rat liver cytosol. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 1973;54:1362-9.

[2] Carlson CA, Kim KH. Regulation of hepatic acetyl coenzyme A carboxylase by phosphorylation and dephosphorylation. J Biol Chem 1973;248:378-80.

[3] Carling D, Clarke PR, Zammit VA, Hardie DG. Purification and characterization of the AMP-activated protein kinase. Copurification of acetyl-CoA carboxylase kinase and 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA reductase kinase activities. Eur J Biochem 1989;186:129-36.

[4] Celenza JL, Carlson M. A yeast gene that is essential for release from glucose repression encodes a protein kinase. Science 1986;233:1175-80.

[5] Atkinson DE. Regulation of enzyme function. Annu Rev Microbiol 1969;23:47-68.

[6] Richter EA, Ruderman NB. AMPK and the biochemistry of exercise: implications for human health and disease. Biochem J 2009;418:261-75.

[7] Steinberg GR, Kemp BE. AMPK in Health and Disease. Physiol Rev 2009;89:1025-78.

[8] Lim CT, Kola B, Korbonits M. AMPK as a mediator of hormonal signalling. J Mol Endocrinol 2010;44:87-97.

[9] Woods A, Dickerson K, Heath R, Hong SP, Momcilovic M, Johnstone SR, et al. Ca2+/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase kinase-beta acts upstream of AMP-activated protein kinase in mammalian cells. Cell Metab 2005;2:21-33.

[10] Witters LA, Kemp BE, Means AR. Chutes and Ladders: the search for protein kinases that act on AMPK. Trends Biochem Sci 2006;31:13-6.

[11] Ghillebert R, Swinnen E, Wen J, Vandesteene L, Ramon M, Norga K, et al. The AMPK/SNF1/SnRK1 fuel gauge and energy regulator: structure, function and regulation. FEBS J 2011;278:3978-90.

[12] Mahlapuu M, Johansson C, Lindgren K, Hjalm G, Barnes BR, Krook A, et al. Expression profiling of the gamma-subunit isoforms of AMP-activated protein kinase suggests a major role for gamma3 in white skeletal muscle. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab 2004;286:E194-200.

[13] Crute BE, Seefeld K, Gamble J, Kemp BE, Witters LA. Functional domains of the alpha catalytic subunit of the AMP-activated protein kinase. J Biol Chem 1998;273:35347-54.

[14] Kazgan N, Williams T, Forsberg LJ, Brenman JE. Identification of a nuclear export signal in the catalytic subunit of AMP-activated protein kinase. Mol Biol Cell 2010;21:3433-42.

[15] Hardie DG, Ross FA, Hawley SA. AMPK: a nutrient and energy sensor that maintains energy homeostasis. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2012;13:251-62.

[16] Iseli TJ, Walter M, van Denderen BJ, Katsis F, Witters LA, Kemp BE, et al. AMP-activated protein kinase beta subunit tethers alpha and gamma subunits via its C-terminal sequence (186-270). J Biol Chem 2005;280:13395-400.

[17] Bateman A. The structure of a domain common to archaebacteria and the homocystinuria disease protein. Trends Biochem Sci 1997;22:12-3.

[18] Townley R, Shapiro L. Crystal structures of the adenylate sensor from fission yeast AMP-activated protein kinase. Science 2007;315:1726-9.

[19] Xiao B, Heath R, Saiu P, Leiper FC, Leone P, Jing C, et al. Structural basis for AMP binding to mammalian AMP-activated protein kinase. Nature 2007;449:496-500.

[20] Kemp BE, Oakhill JS, Scott JW. AMPK structure and regulation from three angles. Structure 2007;15:1161-3.

[21] Xiao B, Sanders MJ, Underwood E, Heath R, Mayer FV, Carmena D, et al. Structure of mammalian AMPK and its regulation by ADP. Nature 2011;472:230-3.

[22] Oakhill JS, Chen ZP, Scott JW, Steel R, Castelli LA, Ling N, et al. beta-Subunit myristoylation is the gatekeeper for initiating metabolic stress sensing by AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK). Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2010;107:19237-41.

[23] Cardaci S, Filomeni G, Ciriolo MR. Redox implications of AMPK-mediated signal transduction beyond energetic clues. J Cell Sci 2012;125:2115-25.

[24] Suter M, Riek U, Tuerk R, Schlattnow U, Wallimann T, Neumann D. Dissecting the role of 5'-AMP for allosteric stimulation, activation, and deactivation of AMP-activated protein kinase. J Biol Chem 2006;281:32207-16.

[25] Hawley SA, Boudeau J, Reid JL, Mustard KJ, Udd L, Makela TP, et al. Complexes between the LKB1 tumor suppressor, STRAD alpha/beta and MO25 alpha/beta are upstream kinases in the AMP-activated protein kinase cascade. J Biol 2003;2:28.

[26] Shaw RJ, Kosmatka M, Bardeesy N, Hurley RL, Witters LA, DePinho RA, et al. The tumor suppressor LKB1 kinase directly activates AMP-activated kinase and regulates apoptosis in response to energy stress. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2004;101:3329-35.

[27] Viollet B, Horman S, Leclerc J, Lantier L, Foretz M, Billaud M, et al. AMPK inhibition in health and disease. Crit Rev Biochem Mol Biol 2010;45:276-95.

[28] Boudeau J, Baas AF, Deak M, Morrice NA, Kieloch A, Schutkowski M, et al. MO25alpha/beta interact with STRADAlpha/beta enhancing their ability to bind, activate and localize LKB1 in the cytoplasm. EMBO J 2003;22:5102-14.

[29] van Veelen W, Korsse SE, van de Laar L, Peppelenbosch MP. The long and winding road to rational treatment of cancer associated with LKB1/AMPK/TSC/mTORC1 signaling. Oncogene 2011;30:2289-303.

[30] Hawley SA, Pan DA, Mustard KJ, Ross L, Bain J, Edelman AM, et al. Calmodulin-dependent protein kinase kinase-beta is an alternative upstream kinase for AMP-activated protein kinase. Cell Metab 2005;2:9-19.

[31] Hurley RL, Anderson KA, Franzone JM, Kemp BE, Means AR, Witters LA. The Ca2+/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase kinases are AMP-activated protein kinase kinases. J Biol Chem 2005;280:29060-6.

[32] Moore F, Weekes J, Hardie DG. Evidence that AMP triggers phosphorylation as well as direct allosteric activation of rat liver AMP-activated protein kinase. A sensitive mechanism to protect the cell against ATP depletion. Eur J Biochem 1991;199:691-7.

[33] Ingebritsen TS, Stewart AA, Cohen P. The protein phosphatases involved in cellular regulation. 6. Measurement of type-1 and type-2 protein phosphatases in extracts of mammalian tissues; an assessment of their physiological roles. Eur J Biochem 1983;132:297-307.

[34] Gimeno-Alcaniz JV, Sanz P. Glucose and type 2A protein phosphatase regulate the interaction between catalytic and regulatory subunits of AMP-activated protein kinase. J Mol Biol 2003;333:201-9.

[35] Park S, Scheffler TL, Rosie SS, Gerrard DE. AMPK activity is regulated by calcium-mediated protein phosphatase 2A activity. Cell Calcium 2013;53:217-23.

[36] Kobe B, Kemp BE. Active site-directed protein regulation. Nature 1999;402:373-6.

[37] Jaleel M, Villa F, Deak M, Toth R, Prescott AR, Van Aalten DM, et al. The ubiquitin-associated domain of AMPK-related kinases regulates conformation and LKB1-mediated phosphorylation and activation. Biochem J 2006;394:545-55.

[38] Warden SM, Richardson C, O'Donnell J, Jr., Stapleton D, Kemp BE, Witters LA. Post-translational modifications of the beta-1 subunit of AMP-activated protein kinase affect enzyme activity and cellular localization. Biochem J 2001;354:275-83.

[39] Mitchelhill KI, Michell BJ, House CM, Stapleton D, Dyck J, Gamble J, et al. Posttranslational modifications of the 5'-AMP-activated protein kinase beta1 subunit. J Biol Chem 1997;272:24475-9.

[40] Oakhill JS, Steel R, Chen ZP, Scott JW, Ling N, Tam S, et al. AMPK is a direct adenylate charge-regulated protein kinase. Science 2011;332:1433-5.

[41] McConnell GK, Manimmanakorn A, Lee-Young RS, Kemp BE, Linden KC, Wadley GD. Differential attenuation of AMPK activation during acute exercise following exercise training or AICAR treatment. J Appl Physiol 2008;105:1422-7.

[42] Jorgensen SB, Nielsen JN, Birk JB, Olsen GS, Viollet B, Andreelli F, et al. The alpha 2-5'AMP-activated protein kinase is a site 2 glycogen synthase kinase in skeletal muscle and is responsive to glucose loading. Diabetes 2004;53:3074-81.

[43] McBride A, Ghilagaber S, Nikolaev A, Hardie DG. The glycogen-binding domain on the AMPK beta subunit allows the kinase to act as a glycogen sensor. Cell Metab 2009;9:23-34.

[44] Djouder N, Tuerk RD, Suter M, Salvioni P, Thali RF, Scholz R, et al. PKA phosphorylates and inactivates AMPKalpha to promote efficient lipolysis. EMBO J 2010;29:469-81.

[45] Gauthier MS, Miyoshi H, Souza SC, Cacicedo JM, Saha AK, Greenberg AS, et al. AMP-activated protein kinase is activated as a consequence of lipolysis in the adipocyte: potential mechanism and physiological relevance. J Biol Chem 2008;283:16514-24.

[46] Chen S, Wasserman DH, MacKintosh C, Sakamoto K. Mice with AS160/TBC1D4-Thr649Ala knockin mutation are glucose intolerant with reduced insulin sensitivity and altered GLUT4 trafficking. Cell Metab 2011;13:68-79.

[47] Holmes BF, Sparling DP, Olson AL, Winder WW, Dohm GL. Regulation of muscle GLUT4 enhancer factor and myocyte enhancer factor 2 by AMP-activated protein kinase. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab 2005;289:E1071-6.

[48] Horman S, Vertommen D, Heath R, Neumann D, Mouton V, Woods A, et al. Insulin antagonizes ischemia-induced Thr172 phosphorylation of AMP-activated protein kinase alpha-subunits in heart via hierarchical phosphorylation of Ser485/491. J Biol Chem 2006;281:5335-40.

[49] McGee SL, van Denderen BJ, Howlett KF, Mollica J, Schertzer JD, Kemp BE, et al. AMP-activated protein kinase regulates GLUT4 transcription by phosphorylating histone deacetylase 5. Diabetes 2008;57:860-7.

[50] Jorgensen SB, Viollet B, Andreelli F, Frosig C, Birk JB, Schjerling P, et al. Knockout of the alpha 2 but not alpha1 5'-AMP-activated protein kinase isoform abolishes 5-aminoimidazole-4-carboxamide-1-beta-4-ribofuranosidebut not contraction-induced glucose uptake in skeletal muscle. J Biol Chem 2004;279:1070-9.

[51] Viollet B, Athea Y, Mounier R, Guigas B, Zarrinpashneh E, Horman S, et al. AMPK: Lessons from transgenic and knockout animals. Front Biosci 2009;14:19-44.

[52] Sakamoto K, McCarthy A, Smith D, Green KA, Grahame Hardie D, Ashworth A, et al. Deficiency of LKB1 in skeletal muscle prevents AMPK activation and glucose uptake during contraction. EMBO J 2005; 24: 1810-20.

[53] O'Neill HM, Maarbjerg SJ, Crane JD, Jeppesen J, Jorgensen SB, Schertzer JD, et al. AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) beta1beta2 muscle null mice reveal an essential role for AMPK in maintaining mitochondrial content and glucose uptake during exercise. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2011; 108: 16092-7.

[54] Jager S, Handschin C, St-Pierre J, Spiegelman BM. AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) action in skeletal muscle via direct phosphorylation of PGC-1alpha. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2007; 104: 12017-22.

[55] Canto C, Jiang LQ, Deshmukh AS, Mataki C, Coste A, Lagouge M, et al. Interdependence of AMPK and SIRT1 for metabolic adaptation to fasting and exercise in skeletal muscle. Cell Metab 2010; 11: 213-9.

[56] Egan DF, Shackelford DB, Mihaylova MM, Gelino S, Kohnz RA, Mair W, et al. Phosphorylation of ULK1 (hATG1) by AMP-activated protein kinase connects energy sensing to mitophagy. Science 2011; 331: 456-61.

[57] Löffler AS, Alers S, Dieterle AM, Keppeler H, Franz-Wachtel M, Kundu M, et al. Ulk1-mediated phosphorylation of AMPK constitutes a negative regulatory feedback loop. Autophagy 2011; 7: 696-706.

[58] Wong PM, Puente C, Ganley IG, Jiang X. The ULK1 complex: sensing nutrient signals for autophagy activation. Autophagy 2013; 9: 124-37.

[59] Zhang BB, Zhou G, Li C. AMPK: an emerging drug target for diabetes and the metabolic syndrome. Cell Metab 2009; 9: 407-16.

[60] Samovski D, Su X, Xu Y, Abumrad NA, Stahl PD. Insulin and AMPK regulate FA translocase/CD36 plasma membrane recruitment in cardiomyocytes via Rab GAP AS160 and Rab8a Rab GTPase. J Lipid Res 2012; 53: 709-17.

[61] Long YC, Barnes BR, Mahlapuu M, Steiler TL, Martinsson S, Leng Y, et al. Role of AMP-activated protein kinase in the coordinated expression of genes controlling glucose and lipid metabolism in mouse white skeletal muscle. Diabetologia 2005; 48: 2354-64.

[62] Viollet B, Guigas B, Leclerc J, Hebrard S, Lantier L, Mounier R, et al. AMP-activated protein kinase in the regulation of hepatic energy metabolism: from physiology to therapeutic perspectives. Acta Physiol (Oxf) 2009; 196: 81-98.

[63] Foretz M, Ancellin N, Andreelli F, Saintillan Y, Grondin P, Kahn A, et al. Short-term overexpression of a constitutively active form of AMP-activated protein kinase in the liver leads to mild hypoglycemia and fatty liver. Diabetes 2005; 54: 1331-9.

[64] Muoio DM, Seefeld K, Witters LA, Coleman RA. AMP-activated kinase reciprocally regulates triacylglycerol synthesis and fatty acid oxidation in liver and muscle: evidence that sn-glycerol-3-phosphate acyltransferase is a novel target. Biochem J 1999; 338 (Pt 3): 783-91.

[65] Smith AJ, Thompson BR, Sanders MA, Bernlohr DA. Interaction of the adipocyte fatty acid-binding protein with the hormone-sensitive lipase: regulation by fatty acids and phosphorylation. J Biol Chem 2007; 282: 32424-32.

[66] Saltiel AR, Kahn CR. Insulin signalling and the regulation of glucose and lipid metabolism. Nature 2001; 414: 799-806.

[67] Fujii N, Ho RC, Manabe Y, Jessen N, Toyoda T, Holland WL, et al. Ablation of AMP-activated protein kinase alpha 2 activity exacerbates insulin resistance induced by high-fat feeding of mice. Diabetes 2008; 57: 2958-66.

[68] Merrill GF, Kurth EJ, Hardie DG, Winder WW. AICA riboside increases AMP-activated protein kinase, fatty acid oxidation, and glucose uptake in rat muscle. Am J Physiol 1997;273:E1107-12.

[69] Viollet B, Andreelli F, Jorgensen SB, Perrin C, Geloen A, Flamez D, et al. The AMP-activated protein kinase alpha 2 catalytic subunit controls whole-body insulin sensitivity. J Clin Invest 2003;111:91-8.

[70] Hojlund K, Mustard KJ, Staehr P, Hardie DG, Beck-Nielsen H, Richter EA, et al. AMPK activity and isoform protein expression are similar in muscle of obese subjects with and without type 2 diabetes. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab 2004;286:E239-44.

[71] Steinberg GR, Smith AC, Van Denderen BJ, Chen Z, Murthy S, Campbell DJ, et al. AMP-activated protein kinase is not down-regulated in human skeletal muscle of obese females. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2004;89:4575-80.

[72] Shaw RJ, Lamia KA, Vasquez D, Koo SH, Bardeesy N, Depinho RA, et al. The kinase LKB1 mediates glucose homeostasis in liver and therapeutic effects of metformin. Science 2005;310:1642-6.

[73] Zhou G, Myers R, Li Y, Chen Y, Shen X, Fenyk-Melody J, et al. Role of AMP-activated protein kinase in mechanism of metformin action. J Clin Invest 2001;108:1167-74.

[74] El-Mir MY, Nogueira V, Fontaine E, Averet N, Rigoulet M, Leverve X. Dimethylbiguanide inhibits cell respiration via an indirect effect targeted on the respiratory chain complex I. J Biol Chem 2000;275:223-8.

[75] Viollet B, Guigas B, Sanz Garcia N, Leclerc J, Foretz M, Andreelli F. Cellular and molecular mechanisms of metformin: an overview. Clin Sci (Lond) 2012;122:253-70.

[76] Foretz M, Hebrard S, Leclerc J, Zarrinpashneh E, Soty M, Mithieux G, et al. Metformin inhibits hepatic gluconeogenesis in mice independently of the LKB1/AMPK pathway via a decrease in hepatic energy state. J Clin Invest 2010;120:2355-69.

[77] Miller RA, Chu Q, Xie J, Foretz M, Viollet B, Birnbaum MJ. Biguanides suppress hepatic glucagon signalling by decreasing production of cyclic AMP. Nature 2013;494:256-60.

[78] Warburg O. On respiratory impairment in cancer cells. Science 1956;124:269-70.

[79] Hanahan D, Weinberg RA. Hallmarks of cancer: the next generation. Cell 2011;144:646-74.

[80] Lunt SY, Vander Heiden MG. Aerobic glycolysis: meeting the metabolic requirements of cell proliferation. Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 2011;27:441-64.

[81] Levine AJ, Puzio-Kuter AM. The control of the metabolic switch in cancers by oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes. Science 2010;330:1340-4.

[82] Mihaylova MM, Shaw RJ. The AMPK signalling pathway coordinates cell growth, autophagy and metabolism. Nat Cell Biol 2011;13:1016-23.

[83] Evans JM, Donnelly LA, Emslie-Smith AM, Alessi DR, Morris AD. Metformin and reduced risk of cancer in diabetic patients. BMJ 2005;330:1304-5.

[84] Pollak MN. Investigating metformin for cancer prevention and treatment: the end of the beginning. Cancer Discov 2012;2:778-90.

[85] Stevens RJ, Ali R, Bankhead CR, Bethel MA, Cairns BJ, Camisasca RP, et al. Cancer outcomes and all-cause mortality in adults allocated to metformin: systematic review and collaborative meta-analysis of randomised clinical trials. Diabetologia 2012;55:2593-603.

[86] Gwinn DM, Shackelford DB, Egan DF, Mihaylova MM, Mery A, Vasquez DS, et al. AMPK phosphorylation of raptor mediates a metabolic checkpoint. Mol Cell 2008;30:214-26.

[87] Faubert B, Boily G, Izreig S, Griss T, Samborska B, Dong Z, et al. AMPK is a negative regulator of the Warburg effect and suppresses tumor growth in vivo. Cell Metab 2013;17:113-24.

[88] Zheng B, Jeong JH, Asara JM, Yuan YY, Granter SR, Chin L, et al. Oncogenic B-RAF negatively regulates the tumor suppressor LKB1 to promote melanoma cell proliferation. Mol Cell 2009;33:237-47.

[89] Zhan YY, Chen Y, Zhang Q, Zhuang JJ, Tian M, Chen HZ, et al. The orphan nuclear receptor Nur77 regulates LKB1 localization and activates AMPK. Nat Chem Biol 2012;8:897-904.

[90] Shackelford DB, Abt E, Gerken L, Vasquez DS, Seki A, Leblanc M, et al. LKB1 Inactivation Dictates Therapeutic Response of Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer to the Metabolism Drug Phenformin. Cancer Cell 2013;23:143-58.

[91] Hawley SA, Fullerton MD, Ross FA, Schertzer JD, Chevtzoff C, Walker KJ, et al. The ancient drug salicylate directly activates AMP-activated protein kinase. Science 2012;336:918-22.

[92] Din FV, Valanciute A, Houde VP, Zibrova D, Green KA, Sakamoto K, et al. Aspirin inhibits mTOR signaling, activates AMP-activated protein kinase, and induces autophagy in colorectal cancer cells. Gastroenterology 2012;142:1504-15e3.

[93] Hardie DG. Sensing of energy and nutrients by AMP-activated protein kinase. Am J Clin Nutr 2011;93:891S-6.

[94] Hwang JT, Kwon DY, Yoon SH. AMP-activated protein kinase: a potential target for the diseases prevention by natural occurring polyphenols. N Biotechnol 2009;26:17-22.

[95] Fogarty S, Hardie DG. Development of protein kinase activators: AMPK as a target in metabolic disorders and cancer. Biochim Biophys Acta 2010;1804:581-91.

[96] Price NL, Gomes AP, Ling AJ, Duarte FV, Martin-Montalvo A, North BJ, et al. SIRT1 is required for AMPK activation and the beneficial effects of resveratrol on mitochondrial function. Cell Metab 2012;15:675-90.

[97] Park SJ, Ahmad F, Philp A, Baar K, Williams T, Luo H, et al. Resveratrol ameliorates aging-related metabolic phenotypes by inhibiting cAMP phosphodiesterases. Cell 2012;148:421-33.

[98] Yun H, Ha J. AMP-activated protein kinase modulators: a patent review (2006-2010). Expert Opin Ther Pat 2011;21:983-1005.

[99] Hawley SA, Ross FA, Chevtzoff C, Green KA, Evans A, Fogarty S, et al. Use of cells expressing gamma subunit variants to identify diverse mechanisms of AMPK activation. Cell Metab 2010;11:554-65.

[100] Salminen A, Kaarniranta K. AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) controls the aging process via an integrated signaling network. Ageing Res Rev 2012;11:230-41.

Table 1—Summary of human AMPK biochemical features and post-translational modifications

| AMPK subunit | Gene name | MW (Da) | Primary expression² | Subcellular Location² | Phospho residues | Phosphorylating kinases | Method³ | Other post-translational modifications |
|--------------|-----------|---------|---------------------|------------------------|-------------------|--------------------------|---------|---------------------------------------|
| α1           | PRKAA1    | 64009   | SM, others          | C, N                   | T183              | Phosphorylation by LKB1 and CaMKK2 | By similarity |                                     |
|              |           |         |                     |                        | S360;T368         | Phosphorylation by ULK1  | By similarity |                                     |
|              |           |         |                     |                        | S397;T488         | Phosphorylation by ULK1  | Probable | -Ubiquitinated (by similarity).       |
|              |           |         |                     |                        | S184;T269         |                          | By similarity | -Dephosphorylated by PP2AandPP2C.     |
|              |           |         |                     |                        | S508              |                          |           |                                       |
|              |           |         |                     |                        | T32;S356          |                          |           |                                       |
|              |           |         |                     |                        | T382;S467         | Phospho-proteomic analysis |           | -Phosphorylated by ULK1/ULK2          |
|              |           |         |                     |                        | S486;T490         |                          |           | -Acetylated (K40, K80)                |
|              |           |         |                     |                        | S496              |                          |           |                                       |
|              |           |         |                     |                        | T379;T481         | MS/MS tryptic peptide [7] |           |                                       |
|              |           |         |                     |                        | S485;S499         |                          |           |                                       |
|              |           |         |                     |                        | S173              | PKA                      | [44]     |                                       |
|              |           |         |                     |                        | S485              | PKA/Akt                  | [7]      |                                       |
| α2           | PRKAA2    | 62320   | SM, T, others       | C, N                   | T172              | Phosphorylation by LKB1 and CaMKK2 | By similarity | -Ubiquitinated (by similarity)        |
|              |           |         |                     |                        | S173;T258         |                          | By similarity | -Dephosphorylated by PP2AandPP2C       |
|              |           |         |                     |                        | S491;S500         |                          |           | -Phosphorylated by ULK1               |
|              |           |         |                     |                        | S377              | Phospho-proteomic analysis |           |                                       |

|  |  |  |  |  |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| β1 | PRKAB1 | 30382 | Ubiquitous | C | S491 PKA/Akt [7] |
|  |  |  |  |  | S24;S25 autocatalysis By similarity -N-myristoylation (G2) |
|  |  |  |  |  | S182 By similarity -Phosphorylated when associated with the catalytic subunit |
|  |  |  |  |  | T4;S5;S6 Phospho- (PRKAA1orPRKAA2) |
|  |  |  |  |  | T19;S40 proteomic -Phosphorylated by ULK1 |
|  |  |  |  |  | S96;S108 analysis |
|  |  |  |  |  | T148 |
| β2 | PRKAB2 | 30302 | Ubiquitous | C | S39;T40 Phosphorylation Probable -Phosphorylated when by ULK1 |
|  |  |  |  |  | S69 Phosphorylation By similarity associated with the catalytic subunit by ULK1 |
|  |  |  |  |  | S174 By similarity (PRKAA1orPRKAA2) |
|  |  |  |  |  | S108;S184 Phospho- and ULK2 proteomic analysis |
| γ1 | PRKAG1 | 37579 | Ubiquitous | C | S261;T263 Phosphorylation By similarity -Phosphorylated by ULK1 and ULK2 by ULK1 |
|  |  |  |  |  | S270 -Acetylated (K264) |
| γ2 | PRKAG2 | 63066 | Ubiquitous | C | S65;S71; |
|  |  |  |  |  | S73 |
|  |  |  |  |  | S90;S138 By similarity -Phosphorylated by ULK1 |
|  |  |  |  |  | S161;S162 -Acetylated (K9) |
|  |  |  |  |  | S196 |
| γ3 | PRKAG3 | 54258 | SM[7], others | nr | nr -Phosphorylated by ULK1 |

If not otherwise specified, data were retrieved from OMIM in PubMed (www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/gene; //omim.org/); UniProt (www.uniprot.org); Human Protein Reference Database (www.hprd.org)

C = cytoplasm; N = nucleus; T = tears; SM = skeletal muscle; nr = not reported

3 According to UniProt, the term ‘Potential’ indicates that there is some logical or conclusive evidence that the given annotation could apply (e.g., non-experimental data to present results from protein sequence analysis software tools). The term ‘Probable’ indicates stronger evidence than the qualifier ‘Potential’ (e.g., some experimental evidence). ‘By similarity’ qualifier indicates that a biological information, experimentally obtained for a given protein (or part of it), can be transferred to other protein family members within a certain taxonomic range, dependent on the biological event or characteristic.

Table 2—Ongoing clinical trials evaluating AMPK regulations for the treatment of different types of cancer

| Cohort | Drug/Dose | Endpoints | Stage clinical trial |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Patients with early stage breast cancer receiving neo adjuvant chemotherapy | Metformin (1500mg/day for 2-3 weeks) | - Phosphorylation of S6K, 4E-BP-1 and AMPK<br>- Gene array analysis on upstream and downstream members of AMPK pathway<br>- Rate of patients free from disease progression at 3 months from randomization | Recruiting patients |
| Female patients with HER2-negative, ER and/or PgR positive breast cancer in progression after first-line hormonal therapy | Lapatinib (1250mg/day)<br>Metformin (1500mg/day<br>Lapatinib + Metformin (1250+<br>1500mg/day) | - Overall response rate<br>- Duration of response<br>- 3-years overall survival rate<br>- Tolerability of each proposed treatment | Recruiting patients |
| No diabetic patients with histologically confirmed prostate cancer | Metformin (500mg/day 4-12 weeks prior to radical prostatectomy) | - Difference in Ki 67 staining and other immunohistochemical markers (IR, IGF-1R, p70S6K, AMPK, MVD, cleaved caspase 3, PTEN, c-Myc)<br>- Change in activated S6Ser235<br>- Levels of colorectal mucosa proliferation by: Ki-67 staining, pAMPK, pAktSer473; phosphorylated mTOR; phosphorylated insulin receptor (pIR), and phosphorylated IGF-1 (pIGF-1) receptor | Completed. No results published |
| Phase II A study in patients with a history of colorectal adenomas and elevated BMI | Metformin (12 week) | - Time to treatment failure (defined as: absolute lymphocyte count >5000; increased of Rai stage by one stage; increased in any lymph node by >50%) | Recruiting participants. |
| Phase II study in patients with relapsed CLL (Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia) and untreated CLL Patients | Metformin (500mg/die for 1 week; 1g/day for 1 week; 2g/day for 1 week) |  | Recruiting participants. |

Source: www.clinicaltrials.gov

H₂N- Kinase domain AIS β-SID α2
P
T172
β-binding

Autophosphorylation
P P
S24 S25
α-binding
H₂N- CBM/GBD αγ-SBS/ASC β1
Myristoylation site γ-binding
Pseudo
substrate
Divergent N-terminal domain
H₂N- CBS1 CBS2 CBS3 CBS4 γ2
β-binding
ATP ? ATP AMP
AMP ADP
Bateman domains

Figure 1
Page 44 of 46

Figure

LKB1/CaMKKβ/Tak1
PP2A/PP2C

P
T<sup>172</sup>

α
β
γ

ATP ↓
AMP ↑

ATP ↓
ATP ↑
ATP-consuming
ATP-producing
(anabolism)
(catabolism)

SIRT1

Resveratrol

Metformin
Phenformin
Quercetin
Berberine
EGCG
(other nutraceuticals)

Salicylate
AICAR

TSC1
TSC2

mTOR
mtGPAT
ACC1
ACC2
AS160
TBC1D1
HDAC
PGC1α

Protein
synthesis
TG
FA synthesis
FA
oxidation
GLUT4
GLUT4
expression
Mitochondrial
biogenesis

Lipid
Metabolism
Glucose uptake
Glucose
Metabolism

Figure 2

Page 45 of 46

LKB1/CaMKKβ/Tak1
PP2A/PP2C

P
T<sup>172</sup>

α
β
γ

ATP ↓
ATP ↑
ATP-consuming
(anabolism)
ATP-producing
(catabolism)

SIRT1

TSC1
TSC2

mTOR
mtGPAT
ACC1
ACC2
AS160
TBC1D1
HDAC
PGC1α

Protein
synthesis
TG
FA synthesis
FA
oxidation
GLUT4
expression
Mitochondrial
biogenesis

Lipid
Metabolism
Glucose uptake
Glucose
Metabolism

Salicylate
AICAR
Metformin
Phenformin
Quercetin
Berberine
EGCG
(other nutraceuticals)
Resveratrol

Graphic abstract
