
REVIEW ARTICLE

# Structural diversity in Salmonella O antigens and its genetic basis

Bin Liu${}^{1,2}$, Yuriy A. Knirel${}^{3}$, Lu Feng${}^{1,2,4}$, Andrei V. Perepelov${}^{3}$, Sof’ya N. Senchenkova${}^{3}$, Peter R. Reeves${}^{5}$ & Lei Wang${}^{1,2,4,6}$

${}^{1}$TEDA School of Biological Sciences and Biotechnology, Nankai University, TEDA, Tianjin, China; ${}^{2}$The Key Laboratory of Molecular Microbiology and Technology, Ministry of Education, Tianjin, China; ${}^{3}$N.D. Zelinsky Institute of Organic Chemistry, Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow, Russian Federation; ${}^{4}$Tianjin Key Laboratory of Microbial Functional Genomics, Tianjin, China; ${}^{5}$School of Molecular and Microbial Bioscience (G08), University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia; and ${}^{6}$Tianjin Research Center for Functional Genomics and Biochip, Tianjin, China

---

**Correspondence:** Lei Wang, TEDA School of Biological Sciences and Biotechnology, Nankai University, 23 Hongda Street, TEDA, Tianjin 300457, China. Tel.: 86 22 66229588; fax: 86 22 66229596; e-mail: wanglei@nankai.edu.cn

Received 30 November 2012; revised 15 May 2013; accepted 5 July 2013. Final version published online 2 August 2013.

DOI: 10.1111/1574-6976.12034

Editor: Wilbert Bitter

Keywords: polysaccharide; pathogen; polymorphism; serotyping; evolution; glycosyltransferase.

---

## Abstract

This review covers the structures and genetics of the 46 O antigens of *Salmonella*, a major pathogen of humans and domestic animals. The variation in structures underpins the serological specificity of the 46 recognized serogroups. The O antigen is important for the full function and virulence of many bacteria, and the considerable diversity of O antigens can confer selective advantage. *Salmonella* O antigens can be divided into two major groups: those which have N-acetylglucosamine (GlcNAc) or N-acetylgalactosamine (GalNAc) as the first sugar in the O unit. In recent years, we have determined 21 chemical structures and sequenced 28 gene clusters for GlcNAc-/GalNAc-initiated O antigens, thus completing the structure and DNA sequence data for the 46 *Salmonella* O antigens. The structures and gene clusters of the GlcNAc-/GalNAc-initiated O antigens were found to be highly diverse, and 24 of them were found to be identical or closely related to *Escherichia coli* O antigens. Sequence comparisons indicate that all or most of the shared gene clusters were probably present in the common ancestor, although alternative explanations are also possible. In contrast, the better-known eight Gal-initiated O antigens are closely related both in structures and gene cluster sequences.

---

## Introduction

O antigen (O polysaccharide) is a part of the lipopolysaccharide (LPS) component of the outer membrane of Gram-negative bacteria and is one of the most variable cell constituents. It consists of oligosaccharide repeats (O units), normally containing two to eight sugar residues. The variation is mostly in the types of sugars present, their order in the structure, and the linkages between them. The O antigen is subject to intense selection by the host immune system, bacteriophages, and other environmental factors (Reeves & Wang, 2002), which may account for the maintenance of diverse O-antigen forms within a species. O-antigen diversity is a common basis for bacterial serotyping and also important for the bacteria, as it allows each of the various clones to present a surface that offers selective advantage in its specific niche.

(Reeves, 1992). The presence of O antigen is also essential for survival of bacteria in their natural environment and plays a role in bacterial virulence. There is direct evidence that the loss of O antigen makes many pathogens, such as *Escherichia coli*, *Shigella flexneri*, *Francisella tularensis*, and *Yersinia enterocolitica*, serum sensitive or otherwise seriously impaired in virulence (Pluschke et al., 1983; Bengoechea et al., 2004; West et al., 2005; Plainvert et al., 2007; Raynaud et al., 2007).

*Salmonella* is recognized as a major pathogen of both animals and humans and is the cause of typhoid fever, paratyphoid fever, and the foodborne illness salmonellosis. *Salmonella* infections arise from contamination of poultry, eggs, beef, and other foods, sometimes including unwashed fruits and vegetables. In many countries, *Salmonella* is the leading cause of foodborne outbreaks and infections. It is estimated that there are 1.3 million cases

© 2013 Federation of European Microbiological Societies.
Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd. All rights reserved

of salmonellosis, 15 000 hospitalizations, and 400 deaths annually in the United States (Hardnett et al., 2004). The genus *Salmonella* includes two species, *S. enterica* and *S. bongori*. *S. enterica* is divided into the following six subspecies: *S. enterica enterica*, *S. enterica salamae*, *S. enterica arizonae*, *S. enterica diarizonae*, *S. enterica houtenae*, and *S. enterica indica* or subspecies I, II, IIIa, IIIb, IV, and VI, respectively. *S. bongori* was originally designated *S. enterica* subspecies V, but it has since been determined to be a separate species. This classification has been confirmed by multilocus enzyme electrophoresis and sequence analysis of housekeeping genes (Nelson et al., 1991; Nelson & Selander, 1992; Boyd et al., 1994; McQuiston et al., 2008).

Serotyping is highly useful for identifying strains that vary in host range and disease spectrum, including pathogens such as *Salmonella*, and is invaluable for epidemiological investigations. The Kauffmann–White–Le Minor serotyping scheme for designation of *Salmonella* serotypes, maintained by the WHO Collaborating Centre for Reference and Research on *Salmonella*, is used by most laboratories for the characterization of *Salmonella* isolates. A serotype of *Salmonella* is determined on the basis of O and flagellar (H) antigens. The O antigen determines the serogroup, while the H antigen completes the definition of the serovar or serotype of a *Salmonella* isolate.

There are 46 O serogroups described in the Kauffmann–White–Le Minor scheme. These were originally designated by letters of the alphabet, but later, it was necessary to continue with numbers 51–67. The genes specific for O-antigen synthesis are normally present as a gene cluster in the chromosome, which maps between *galF* and *gnd* in *Salmonella*, *E. coli*, and *Shigella*, but sometimes, one or more such genes map outside the gene cluster. There are 114 H antigens in *Salmonella* (McQuiston et al., 2004), and 2557 serovars in total have been recognized (Grimont & Weill, 2007). Approximately 60% of the serovars belong to subspecies I, while subspecies VI and *S. bongori* are rare. O-antigen gene clusters appear to have been transferred among subspecies, as the majority of *Salmonella* O antigens are found in at least two subspecies with a mean of 3.5 subspecies per O antigen (Reeves, 1995; Popoff & Le Minor, 1997).

Genetic variation in the O-antigen gene cluster is the major determinant of differences among the diverse O-antigen forms. O-antigen synthesis genes fall into three main classes: (1) nucleotide sugar precursor synthesis genes for sugars specific to the O antigen. Note that the common sugars in the O antigen that are also found in other polysaccharide structures or are involved in metabolism, such as glucose (Glc), galactose (Gal), and N-acetylglucosamine (GlcNAc), are usually synthesized by genes outside the O-antigen gene cluster. (2) sugar transferase

genes associated with the O-unit assembly that are specific for the donor and acceptor sugars and generate a specific linkage between them; and (3) genes for O-unit processing and the conversion of the O unit to O antigen (*wzx* and *wzy* in the Wzx/Wzy pathway and *wzm* and *wzt* in the ABC transporter pathway). However, genes on bacteriophages or other chromosomally encoded genes, which are not located in the O-antigen gene cluster, are often involved in modification of the structure and particularly in the addition of side-chain residues to the O units.

The synthesis and translocation of the O antigen can occur through three distinct pathways: the Wzx/Wzy pathway, the ATP-binding cassette (ABC) transporter pathway, and the synthase pathway (Bronner et al., 1994; Keenleyside & Whitefield, 1996; Daniels et al., 1998; Linton & Higgins, 1998; Samuel & Reeves, 2003). In the Wzx/Wzy pathway, the O unit is synthesized by sequential transfer of a sugar phosphate and one or more sugars from the respective nucleotide sugars to the carrier lipid, namely undecaprenyl phosphate (UndP). O units are flipped across the cytoplasmic membrane and then polymerized to form polysaccharide chains, which are transferred to the independently synthesized core-lipid A component to form LPS (Mulford & Osborn, 1983; McGrath & Osborn, 1991; Reeves & Wang, 2002). In the ABC transporter pathway, the glycosyltransferases mediate the sequential addition of sugar residues to the nonreducing end of the growing polymer to form the complete O-antigen polymer that is attached to UndPP. The polysaccharide is then translocated across the cytoplasmic membrane by an ABC transporter and ligated to the core-lipid A to form the complete LPS (Bronner et al., 1994; Linton & Higgins, 1998). In the synthase pathway used for synthesis of the *Salmonella* O54 antigen, a synthase catalyzes the extension of the polysaccharide chain with simultaneous extrusion of the nascent polymer across the cytoplasmic membrane (Keenleyside & Whitefield, 1996).

Most *Salmonella* O antigens (39 in total including *Salmonella* O54 and O67 and taking into account that *Salmonella* O28 is divided into O28ab and O28ac) have either GlcNAc or N-acetylgalactosamine (GalNAc) as the first sugar of the O unit. As in most *E. coli* and *Shigella* strains WecA, which is encoded by a gene in the enterobacterial common antigen (ECA) gene cluster, is responsible for initiating the synthesis of GlcNAc- and GalNAc-initiated O antigens by transferring GlcNAc-1-phosphate to the UndP carrier. When GalNAc is the initiating sugar, UndPP–GlcNAc is then converted to UndPP–GalNAc by an epimerase, which is encoded by a gene that has been called *gne* (Rush et al., 2010). However, we suggest that this gene be renamed *gnu*, as its product is specific for
UndPP–GlcNAc, whereas epimerases encoded by *gne* are specific for UDP–GlcNAc (Cunneen et al., 2013).

Salmonella O67 occurs rarely and has been suggested to be a variant of serogroup O4 (B) O antigen (Li & Reeves, 2000). However, in this study, we found that the O-antigen structure of Salmonella O67 is similar to that of D-galactan I O antigen in Klebsiella pneumonia and that its gene cluster is not located between *galF* and *gnd*.

Salmonella O54 has a disaccharide O unit composed of two ManNAc residues. The O54 antigen gene cluster is on a plasmid, and the O antigen expressed from the main O-antigen gene cluster is present together with the O54 antigen (Keenleyside & Whitefield, 1996). The O54 serogroup is currently retained, but if the plasmid is lost, factor O54 is no longer expressed.

The Salmonella O antigens belonging to serogroups O2 (A), O4 (B), O8 (C2–C3), O9 (D1), O9,46 (D2), O9,46,27 (D3), O3,10 (E1–E3), and O1,3,19 (E4) form a distinct set that is characterized by having a Gal residue as the first sugar of the O unit and a *wbaP* gene in the O-antigen gene cluster, which encodes the glycosyltransferase that catalyzes the addition of the Gal-1-phosphate residue to UndP to initiate O-unit synthesis. These serogroups have related O-antigen structures and gene clusters (Reeves et al., 2013). Details of their relationships show that they have a complex evolutionary history that will be reviewed separately (Reeves et al., 2013).

Although GlcNAc-/GalNAc-initiated O antigens outnumber Gal-initiated O antigens in Salmonella (39 vs. 8), the latter were found to be more prevalent in Salmonella isolates. Among Salmonella isolates from human sources reported between 1999 and 2009 by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in the United States, 84.23% isolates belonged to serogroups with a Gal-initiated O antigen, and only 5.35% isolates belonged to serogroups with a GlcNAc-/GalNAc-initiated O antigen (other isolates could not be serotyped) (CDC, 2009).

Systematically analyzing the chemical structures and gene clusters of different O-antigen forms in a genus or species will improve our understanding of the generation of the O-antigen diversity. It will also open the way for experimental studies on the relationship between this diversity and pathogenicity. Many laboratories in the world have worked on the structure, genetics, and function of O antigens. However, most of these studies have focused on relatively few O-antigen forms.

In a previous review, we summarized the structures and gene clusters of all Shigella O antigens (Liu et al., 2008) and found many genetic anomalies in the gene clusters. It was suggested that the Shigella set of O antigens has been assembled relatively recently or undergone adaptive modifications in a newly occupied niche. Salmonella, Shigella, and *E. coli* are known to be evolutionarily related (Ochman & Wilson, 1987), and we also presented evidence in support of the close relationship between Shigella and *E. coli*, as 21 of 34 Shigella O antigens are either identical or closely related to an *E. coli* O antigen. Homologous recombination was shown to be an essential mechanism in the diversification of Shigella O antigens.

Shigella is a pathogenic form that was estimated to have developed within *E. coli* several times over the last 35 000–270 000 years (Pupo et al., 2000), but these events were probably more recent as mutation rates in bacterial clones observed in recent studies are much higher than earlier estimates, and this affects the date estimates (Feng et al., 2008; Ho et al., 2011; Morelli et al., 2011; Reeves et al., 2011). In contrast, Salmonella is a distinct genus with a much longer history (Ochman & Wilson, 1987; Doolittle et al., 1996); it is thought that *E. coli* and Salmonella diverged from a common ancestor about 140 million years ago. The evolutionary mechanisms for generation of the O-antigen diversity in Salmonella are expected to be different from those in Shigella. When we started a systematic study of Salmonella and *E. coli* O antigens, there were only four cases in which the O-antigen structure had been shown to be identical in the two species (Rundlöf et al., 1998; Samuel et al., 2004), although more serological cross-reactions had been observed (Orskov et al., 1977). It was suggested that there had been extensive replacement of O antigens, presumably by lateral gene transfer, since divergence of the two species.

In the past 5 years, we have sequenced 28 Salmonella O-antigen gene clusters, 14 of which are reported here for the first time, and determined 21 Salmonella O-antigen chemical structures, five of which are reported here for the first time. We have also revised the chemical structures of another three Salmonella O antigens. In this study, we present a compilation of the published and new chemical structures and DNA sequence data for the 46 known Salmonella O antigens. Together with the summary of Shigella O antigens, it gives an improved insight into the evolution of O-antigen diversity in bacteria. The structures and gene clusters of GlcNAc-/GalNAc-initiated O antigens were found to be highly diverse. However, the proportion of genetic anomalies in these gene clusters is clearly lower than that in Shigella, indicating that these O antigens are more stable. We also sequenced 18 *E. coli* O-antigen gene clusters and determined 9 and revised 2 *E. coli* O-antigen chemical structures to obtain sufficient data for a comparison of all O antigens shared by Salmonella and *E. coli* (the others were retrieved from databases). We found that 24 Salmonella O-antigen forms are either identical or closely related to *E. coli* O antigens, as indicated by both genetic and structural data. Therefore, the relationship between *E. coli* and Salmonella O antigens is much closer than previously thought. The genetic data imply that almost all O antigens shared by Salmonella

© 2013 Federation of European Microbiological Societies.  
Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd. All rights reserved   FEMS Microbiol Rev **38** (2014) 56–89and *E. coli* originated from an O antigen in their common ancestor, although alternative explanations (such as a recent lateral transfer of a gene cluster from one species to the other) are also possible. In contrast to Salmonella GlcNAc-/GalNAc-initiated O antigens, Salmonella Gal-initiated O antigens exhibit a high level of relatedness in structure and genetic aspects, implying a distinct evolutionary history.

# Chemical composition and structures for Salmonella GlcNAc-/GalNAc-initiated O antigens

The structures of all GlcNAc-/GalNAc-initiated Salmonella O antigens are now known (Table 1). Some structures elucidated by us only recently have not been reported earlier and are presented here for the first time. They were established using one- and two-dimensional ${}^{1}\mathrm{H}$- and ${}^{13}\mathrm{C}$-NMR spectroscopy essentially as described (Duus *et al.*, 2000). Three new *Salmonella* structures, those of O42, O52, and O65 antigens, are identical to the known structures of *E. coli* O1B (Gupta *et al.*, 1992), O153 (Ratnayake *et al.*, 1994), and O78 (Jansson *et al.*, 1987), respectively.

The O-antigen structure of *Salmonella* O67 was found to be highly similar to that of D-galactan I $(\rightarrow 3)$-D-Galf-$(\beta 1 \rightarrow 3)-\alpha$-D-Galp-$(\alpha 1 \rightarrow)$ in *K. pneumoniae* (Whitfield *et al.*, 1991). The only difference between the two O antigens is the presence of an O-acetyl group in *Salmonella* O67. Its position was determined by a comparison of the NMR spectra of the initial and O-deacetylated polysaccharides, which revealed characteristic displacements of ${}^{1}\mathrm{H}$- and ${}^{13}\mathrm{C}$ NMR signals caused by a deshielding effect of the O-acetyl group.

Using ${}^{13}\mathrm{C}$-NMR spectroscopy and the ‘fingerprint’ method, it was found that the O antigen of *Salmonella* O21 has the same structure as that reported erroneously for *S. enterica arizonae* O64 and *Citrobacter freundii* O32 (Kochanova *et al.*, 1988). Formerly, a wrong structure has been assigned to the *S. enterica arizonae* O21 O antigen (Vinogradov *et al.*, 1994), which, in fact, may belong to *Citrobacter braakii* O37 (A. Gamian, pers. commun.).

In addition, structures of two *Salmonella* O antigens were revised in this work. Using known regularities in the ${}^{13}\mathrm{C}$-NMR chemical shifts of the Quip3NAc-$(\alpha 1 \rightarrow 3)$-D-Manp disaccharide (Shashkov *et al.*, 1988), the absolute configuration of Qui3NAc in the O39 antigen was revised from L (Gajdus *et al.*, 2009) to D. In the O62 antigen, D-GalNAcA is present in the amide form (D-GalNAcAN) rather than as the free acid (Vinogradov *et al.*, 1992). This was demonstrated by the ${}^{1}\mathrm{H}$-NMR spectrum of a polysaccharide sample measured in a 9:1 H${}_{2}$O/D${}_{2}$O mixture, which showed two signals for NH${}_{2}$ protons at 7.40 and 7.65 ppm [compare published data (Rundlof *et al.*, 1998)]. We have also revised the N-acyl group on L-FucN in the O48 antigen from N-acetyl to N-acetimidoyl (Feng *et al.*, 2005b).

Except for the O54 and O67 antigens, all *Salmonella* GlcNAc-/GalNAc-initiated O antigens are heteropolysaccharides. Some are linear and have tri- to pentasaccharide O units. Others are branched with tetra- to hexasaccharide O units usually including one or two monosaccharide side chains or, less often, a disaccharide side chain. Most of the sugars are in the pyranose form, whereas D-Gal occurs in the furanose form in two O antigens, and D-Rib exists in the furanose form in all cases.

In addition to D-GlcNAc and D-GalNAc, hexoses D-Glc, D-Man, D-Gal, L-Rha, and L-Fuc occur in six or more O antigens each (Supporting Information, Table S1). When D-Glc is present as a side chain, its content is often less than stoichiometric, and there is no putative glycosyltransferase for its transfer in the gene clusters, both indicating that this sugar is incorporated into the O antigen after assembling and processing of the O unit. Exceptionally, a side-chain Glc was proposed to be transferred by a glycosyltransferase encoded in the *Salmonella* O66 gene cluster (Liu *et al.*, 2010a).

Other monosaccharides are components in 1–4 O antigens each. These include neutral sugars (D-Rib, Col) and various uncommon amino sugars (D-ManN, L-QuiN, L-FucN, D-Qui3N, D-Fuc3N, D-Qui4N, D-Rha4N). In most cases, the amino sugars are N-acetylated, but in some O antigens, they carry rarely occurring N-acyl groups, such as N-acetimidoyl on L-FucN, N-formyl on D-Fuc3N, (R)-3-hydroxybutanoyl on 8-epilegionaminic acid (8eLeg), and N-acetyl-L-seryl or N-$[(S)-3$-hydroxybutanoyl]-D-alanyl on Qui4N (Table S1). O-Acetylation is not uncommon in *Salmonella* O antigens, and one or two O-acetyl groups are present in nonstoichiometric quantities in the O units of 7 O serogroups (Table 1).

In contrast to the O antigens of *Shigella* (Liu *et al.*, 2008), the O antigens of *Salmonella* are typically neutral polysaccharides. Only a few of them contain acidic components, such as hexuronic acids (D-GlcA and D-GalNAcA in the O45 and O62 antigens, respectively), nonulosonic acids (derivatives of Neu and 8eLeg in the O48 and O61 antigens, respectively), and ribitol phosphate (in the O47 antigen). However, GalNAcA exists in the neutral amide form, and the negative charge of both nonulosonic acids and phosphate group is neutralized by a basic N-acetimidoyl group on a L-FucN residue.

8eLeg5RHb7Ac (7-acetamido-3,5,7,9-tetradeoxy-5-$[(R)-3$-hydroxybutanoylamino]-L-glycero-D-galacto-non-2-ulosonic acid, a derivative of 8-epilegionaminic acid) is a higher sugar rarely occurring in nature and is similar to isomeric nonulosonic acids found in some other bacterial carbohydrates, di-N-acyl derivatives of Pse (5,7-diamino-3,5,7,
Table 1. Structures of Salmonella GlcNAc-/GalNAc-initiated O antigens, including O54 and O67, and related Escherichia coli O antigens

| Bacterium*, serogroup, Salmonella serovar or subspecies | O-antigen structure† | References |
| --- | --- | --- |
| SO6,7 (C₁) Thompson | →2)-D-Manp-(β1→2)-D-Manp-(α1→2)-D-Manp-(α1→2)-D-Manp-(β1→3)-D-GlcpNAc-(β1→ | Lindberg et al. (1988) |
|  | D-Glcp |  |
|  | α1 |  |
|  | ↓ |  |
|  | 3 |  |
| SO6,7 (C1) Thompson, Livingstone | →2)-D-Manp-(β1→2)-D-Manp-(α1→2)-D-Manp-(α1→2)-D-Manp-(β1→3)-D-GlcpNAc-(β1→ | Lindberg et al. (1988) |
|  | Di Fabio et al. (1989b) |  |
|  | D-Glcp |  |
|  | α1 |  |
| SO6,7 (C1) Ohio | ↓ | Di Fabio et al. (1989c) |
|  | 3 |  |
|  | →2)-D-Manp-(β1→2)-D-Manp-(α1→2)-D-Manp-(α1→2)-D-Manp-(β1→3)-D-GlcpNAc-(β1→ |  |
|  | D-Glcp |  |
|  | α1 |  |
| SO6,7 (C4) Livingstone var. 14⁺ | ↓ | Di Fabio et al. (1988b) |
|  | 3 |  |
|  | →2)-D-Manp-(β1→2)-D-Manp-(α1→2)-D-Manp-(α1→2)-D-Manp-(β1→3)-D-GlcpNAc-(β1→ |  |
|  | D-Manp |  |
|  | β1 |  |
| SO11 (F) Aberdeen EO75 | ↓ | Szafranek et al. (2003) |
|  | 4 | Erbing et al. (1978) |
|  | →3)-D-Galp-(α1→4)-L-Rhap-(α1→3)-D-GlcpNAc-(β1→ |  |
| SO13 (G) | →2)-L-Fucp-(α1→2)-D-Galp-(β1→3)-D-GalpNAc-(α1→3)-D-GlcpNAc-(α1→ | Perepelov et al. (2010e) |
|  | Ac (~70%) |  |
|  | ↓ |  |
|  | 3 |  |
| EO127 | →2)-L-Fucp-(α1→2)-D-Galp-(β1→3)-D-GalpNAc-(α1→3)-D-GalpNAc-(α1→ | Widmalm & Leontein (1993) |
|  | 4 | Perepelov et al. (2010e) |
|  | ↓ |  |
|  | Ac (~40%) |  |
| SO6,14 (H) Boecker, Carrau, Madelia EO77 | →6)-D-Manp-(α1→2)-D-Manp-(α1→2)-D-Manp-(β1→3)-D-GlcpNAc-(α1→ | Brisson & Perry (1988) |
|  | Di Fabio et al. (1988a) |  |
|  | Di Fabio et al. (1989a) |  |
|  | Yildirim et al. (2001) |  |
|  | D-Glcp |  |
|  | α1 |  |
| SO6,14 (H) Carrau, Madelia EO44 | ↓ | Di Fabio et al. (1988a) |
|  | 3 | Di Fabio et al. (1989a) |
|  | Staaf et al. (1995) |  |
|  | →6)-D-Manp-(α1→2)-D-Manp-(α1→2)-D-Manp-(β1→3)-D-GlcpNAc-(α1→ |  |
|  | D-Glcp |  |
|  | α1 |  |
| SO6,14 (H) Madelia | ↓ | Di Fabio et al. (1989a) |
|  | 4 |  |
|  | →6)-D-Manp-(α1→2)-D-Manp-(α1→2)-D-Manp-(β1→3)-D-GlcpNAc-(α1→ |  |

Salmonella O-antigen diversity

Table 1. Continued

| Bacterium*, serogroup, Salmonella serovar or subspecies | O-antigen structure† | References |
| --- | --- | --- |
| EO17 | D-Glcp<br>α1<br>↓<br>6<br>→6)-D-Manp-(α1→2)-D-Manp-(α1→2)-D-Manp-(β1→3)-D-GlcpNAc-(α1→ | Masoud & Perry (1996) |
| EO73 | D-Glcp<br>α1<br>↓<br>4<br>D-Glcp<br>α1<br>↓<br>3<br>→6)-D-Manp-(α1→2)-D-Manp-(α1→2)-D-Manp-(β1→3)-D-GlcpNAc-(α1→ | Wang et al. (2007) |
| SO16 (I) | L-Fucp<br>α1<br>↓<br>3<br>Ac (~20/40/20%)<br>|<br>2/3/4<br>D-Glcp (~50%)<br>β1<br>↓<br>4<br>→4)-D-GalpNAc-(α1→6)-D-Manp-(α1→3)-L-Fucp-(α1→3)-D-GalpNAc-(β1→ | Li et al. (2010b) |
| EO11 | L-Fucp<br>α1<br>↓<br>3<br>→4)-D-GalpNAc-(α1→6)-D-Manp-(α1→3)-L-Fucp-(α1→3)-D-GalpNAc-(β1→ | Li et al. (2010b) |
| SO17 (J) | D-Galf<br>α1<br>↓<br>4<br>Ac (~80%)<br>|<br>2<br>→2)-D-Galp-(α1→3)-D-ManpNAc-(β1→6)-D-Galf-(β1→3)-D-GlcpNAc-(β1→ | Perepelov et al. (2011d) |
| EO85 | D-Galf<br>α1<br>↓<br>4<br>→2)-D-Galp-(α1→3)-D-ManpNAc-(β1→6)-D-Galf-(β1→3)-D-GlcpNAc-(β1→ | Perepelov et al. (2011d) |
| SO18 (K)<br>Cerro | →4)-D-Manp-(α1→2)-D-Manp-(α1→2)-D-Manp-(β1→3)-D-GalpNAc-(α1→ | Vinogradov et al. (2004) |
| E. coli 73-1 | D-Glcp<br>α1<br>↓<br>3<br>→4)-D-Manp-(α1→2)-D-Manp-(α1→2)-D-Manp-(β1→3)-D-GalpNAc-(α1→ | Weintraub et al. (1993) |
| SO21 (L)‡ | D-GlcpNAc<br>α1<br>↓<br>3<br>→4)-D-GalpNAc-(β1→3)-D-Galp-(α1→4)-D-Galp-(β1→3)-D-GalpNAc-(β1→ | This review |
| SO28ab (M)<br>Telaviv | D-Galp-(α1→3)-D-Galp<br>α1<br>↓<br>3<br>D-Glcp (~55%)<br>α1<br>↓<br>4<br>→4)-D-Quip3NAc-(β1→3)-D-Ribf-(β1→4)-D-Galp-(β1→3)-D-GalpNAc-(α1→ | Kumirská et al. (2011) |

Table 1. Continued

| Bacterium*, serogroup, Salmonella serovar or subspecies | O-antigen structure† | References |
| --- | --- | --- |
| EO5ab | →4)-D-Quip3NAc-(β1→3)-D-Ribf-(β1→4)-D-Galp-(β1→3)-D-GalpNAc-(α1→ D-Glcp β1 | MacLean & Perry (1997) |
| SO28ac (M) Dakar | ↓ 4 →4)-D-Quip3NAc-(α1→3)-L-Rhap-(α1→4)-D-Galp-(β1→3)-D-GalpNAc-(α1→ Ac (~10%) Ac (~30%) | Kumirská et al. (2007) |
| EO71 | ↓ 4 →4)-D-Quip3NAc-(α1→3)-L-Rhap-(α1→4)-D-Galp-(β1→3)-D-GalpNAc-(α1→ 3 Ac (~55%) Ac (~50%) | Hu et al. (2010) |
| SO30 (N) Landau | ↓ 6 →2)-D-Rhap4NAc-(α1→3)-L-Fucp-(α1→4)-D-Glcp-(β1→3)-D-GalpNAc-(α1→ D-Glcp β1 | Bundle et al. (1986) |
| SO30 (N) Urbana, Godesberg | ↓ 4 →2)-D-Rhap4NAc-(α1→3)-L-Fucp-(α1→4)-D-Glcp-(β1→3)-D-GalpNAc-(α1→ | Perry et al. (1986b) |
| EO157 | ↓ 3 Colp α1 →2)-D-Rhap4NAc-(α1→3)-L-Fucp-(α1→4)-D-Glcp-(β1→3)-D-GalpNAc-(α1→ | Perry et al. (1986a) |
| SO35 (O) Adelaide EO111 | ↑ 6 α1 Colp →4)-D-Glcp-(α1→4)-D-Galp-(α1→3)-D-GlcpNAc-(β1→ D-Galp D-GlcpNAc β1 β1 | Kenne et al. (1983) |
| SO38 (P) EO21 | ↓ ↓ 4 2 →3)-D-Galp-(β1→4)-D-Glcp-(β1→3)-D-GalpNAc-(β1→ | Li et al. (2010b) Staaf et al. (1999) |
| SO39 (Q) Mara | D-GlcpNAc β1 →2)-D-Quip3NAc-(α1→3)-D-Manp-(α1→3)-L-Fucp-(α1→3)-D-GalpNAc-(α1→ | Gajdus et al. (2009) this review |
| SO40 (R) Riogrande | ↓ 2 →4)-D-GalpNAc-(α1→3)-D-Manp-(β1→4)-D-Glcp-(β1→3)-D-GalpNAc-(α1→ | Perry & MacLean (1992b) |
| SO41 (S) | →2)-D-Manp-(β1→4)-D-Glcp-(α1→3)-L-QuipNAc-(α1→3)-D-GlcpNAc-(α1→ | Perepelov et al. (2010b) |

Salmonella O-antigen diversity

Table 1. Continued

| Bacterium*, serogroup, Salmonella serovar or subspecies | O-antigen structure† | References |
| --- | --- | --- |
| SO42 (T) EO1B | D-ManpNAc<br>β1<br>↓<br>2<br>→3)-L-Rhap-(α1→2)-L-Rhap-(α1→2)-D-Galp-(α1→3)-D-GlcpNAc-(β1→<br>D-Galp<br>α1 | This review<br>Gupta et al. (1992) |
| SO43 (U) Milwaukee | ↓<br>3<br>→4)-L-Fucp-(α1→2)-D-Galp-(β1→3)-D-GalpNAc-(α1→3)-D-GlcpNAc-(β1→<br>D-Galp<br>α1 | Perry & MacLean<br>(1992b) |
| EO86:K2:H2 | ↓<br>3<br>→4)-L-Fucp-(α1→2)-D-Galp-(β1→3)-D-GalpNAc-(α1→3)-D-GalpNAc-(β1→<br>D-GlcpNAc<br>β1 | Andersson et al.<br>(1989) |
| SO44 (V) | ↓<br>3<br>→2)-D-Glcp-(α1→6)-D-Glcp-(α1→4)-D-Galp-(α1→3)-D-GlcpNAc-(β1→<br>L-Fucp<br>α1 | Perepelov et al.<br>(2010d) |
| SO45 (W) ssp. arizonae | Ac (~80%)<br>|<br>3<br>→4)-D-GlcpA-(β1→4)-L-Fucp-(α1→3)-D-Ribf-(β1→4)-D-Galp-(β1→3)-D-GlcpNAc-(β1→<br>Ac (~10%)<br>|<br>4 | Shashkov et al.<br>(1993) |
| SO47 (X) | →2)-D-Rib-ol-5-P-(O→6)-D-Galp-(α1→3)-L-FucpNAm-(α1→3)-D-GlcpNAc-(α1→ | Perepelov et al.<br>(2009) |
| EO118 | →3)-D-Rib-ol-5-P-(O→6)-D-Galp-(α1→3)-L-FucpNAm-(α1→3)-D-GlcpNAc-(β1→<br>D-GlcpNAc<br>β1 | Liu et al. (2010b) |
| EO151 | ↓<br>4<br>→2)-D-Rib-ol-5-P-(O→6)-D-Galp-(α1→3)-L-FucpNAm-(α1→3)-D-GlcpNAc-(β1→<br>→4)-Neup5Ac-(α2→3)-L-FucpNAm-(α1→3)-D-GlcpNAc-(β1→ | Liu et al. (2010b) |
| SO48 (Y) Toucra | 7,9<br>|<br>Ac (~30%, ~70%) | Gamian et al. (2000)<br>Feng et al. (2005b) |
| EO145 | →4)-Neup5Ac-(α2→3)-L-FucpNAm-(α1→3)-D-GlcpNAc-(β1→ | Feng et al. (2005b) |

Table 1. Continued

| Bacterium*, serogroup, Salmonella serovar or subspecies | O-antigen structure† | References |
| --- | --- | --- |
| SO50 (Z) Greenside EO55 | Colp-(α1→2)-D-Galp<br>β1<br>↓<br>3<br>→6)-D-GlcpNAc-(β1→3)-D-Galp-(α1→3)-D-GalpNAc-(β1→<br>Colp-(α1→2)-D-Galp<br>β1 | Kenne et al. (1983)<br>Lindberg et al. (1981) |
| SO50 ssp. arizonae | ↓<br>3<br>→6)-D-GlcpNAc-(β1→3)-D-Galp-(α1→3)-D-GlcpNAc-(β1→<br>D-GlcpNAc<br>β1 | Senchenkova et al. (1997) |
| SO51 | ↓<br>3<br>→6)-D-Glcp-(α1→4)-D-Galp-(β1→3)-D-GalpNAc-(α1→3)-D-GlcpNAc-(β1→<br>D-GlcpNAc<br>β1 | Perepelov et al. (2011c) |
| EO23 | D-Glcp<br>α1<br>↓<br>6<br>→6)-D-Glcp-(α1→4)-D-Galp-(β1→3)-D-GalpNAc-(α1→3)-D-GlcpNAc-(β1→ | Bartelt et al. (1993) |
| SO52 EO153 | →2)-D-Ribf-(β1→4)-D-Galp-(β1→4)-D-GlcpNAc-(α1→4)-D-Galp-(β1→3)-D-GlcpNAc-(α1→<br>Ac (~60%, ~25%) | This review<br>Ratnayake et al. (1994) |
| SO53 | ↓<br>2,3<br>→2)-Galf-(α1→4)-D-GalpNAc-(β1→4)-L-Rhap-(α1→3)-D-GlcpNAc-(β1→ | Perepelov et al. (2011a) |
| SO54 Borreze | →4)-D-ManpNAc-(β1→3)-D-ManpNAc-(β1→ | Keenleyside et al. (1994) |
| SO55 | →2)-D-Glcp-(β1→2)-D-Fucp3NAc-(β1→6)-D-Glcp-(α1→4)-D-GalpNAc-(α1→3)-D-GlcpNAc-(β1→ | Liu et al. (2010c) |
| EO103 | →2)-D-Glcp-(β1→2)-D-Fucp3NRHb-(β1→6)-D-GlcpNAc-(α1→4)-D-GalpNAc-(α1→3)-D-GlcpNAc-(β1→ | Liu et al. (2010c) |
| SO56 | →3)-D-Quip4N(L-SerAc)-(β1→3)-D-Ribf-(β1→4)-D-GalpNAc-(α1→3)-D-GlcpNAc-(α1→<br>D-GlcpNAc<br>β1 | Perepelov et al. (2010g) |
| SO57 EO51 | ↓<br>2<br>→3)-L-Rhap-(α1→2)-L-Rhap-(α1→4)-D-Glcp-(α1→3)-D-GalpNAc-(β1→ | Perepelov et al. (2011e)<br>Perepelov et al. (2011e) |
| SO58 | →3)-D-Quip4N(D-Ala-SHb)-(β1→6)-D-GlcpNAc-(α1→3)-L-QuipNAc-(α1→3)-D-GlcpNAc-(α1→<br>Ac (~30%) | Perepelov et al. (2010f) |
| EO123 | ↓<br>6<br>→3)-D-Quip4N(D-Ala-SHb)-(β1→6)-D-GlcpNAc-(α1→3)-L-QuipNAc-(α1→3)-D-GlcpNAc-(α1→ | Clark et al. (2009)<br>Perepelov et al. (2010f) |

Salmonella O-antigen diversity

Table 1. Continued

| Bacterium*, serogroup, Salmonella serovar or subspecies | O-antigen structure† | References |
| --- | --- | --- |
| SO59§ | →2)-D-Galp-(β1→3)-D-GlcpNAc-(α1→4)-L-Rhap-(α1→3)-D-GlcpNAc-(β1→ D-Fucp3NFo α1 | Perepelov et al. (2011b) |
| SO60 | ↓ 3 →2)-D-Manp-(β1→3)-D-Glcp-(β1→3)-D-GlcpNAc-(β1→ | Perepelov et al. (2010a) |
| SO61 ssp. arizonae | →8)-8eLegp5RHb7Ac-(α2→3)-L-FucpNAmP-(α1→3)-D-GlcpNAc-(α1→ D-GalpNAcAN α1 | Vinogradov et al. (1992) |
| SO62 ssp. arizonae EO35 | ↓ 2 →3)-L-Rhap-(α1→2)-L-Rhap-(α1→3)-L-Rhap-(α1→2)-L-Rhap-(α1→3)-D-GlcpNAc-(β1→ D-Fucp3NAc α1 | Vinogradov et al. (1994) this review Rundlof et al. (1998) |
| SO63 ssp. arizonae | ↓ 4 →3)-D-Galp-(β1→4)-D-Glcp-(α1→4)-D-GalpNAc-(α1→3)-D-GalpNAc-(β1→ | Vinogradov et al. (1987a) |
| SO65 EO78 | →4)-D-Manp-(β1→4)-D-Manp-(α1→3)-D-GlcpNAc-(β1→4)-D-GlcpNAc-(β1→ | This review Jansson et al. (1987) |
| SO66 | D-Glcp β1 ↓ 3 Ac (~90%) →2)-D-Galp-(α1→6)-D-Galp-(α1→4)-D-GalpNAc-(α1→3)-D-GalpNAc-(β1→ D-Glcp β1 | Liu et al. (2010a) |
| EO166 | ↓ 3 →3)-D-Galp-(α1→6)-D-Galp-(α1→4)-D-GalpNAc-(α1→3)-D-GalpNAc-(β1→ Ac (~30%) | Ali et al. (2007) |
| SO67 | ↓ 2 →3)-D-Galf-(β1→3)-D-Galp-(α1→ | This review |

*S, Salmonella; E, E. coli.

†For abbreviations of sugar residues and nonsugar groups, see Table S1.

‡Earlier, this structure has been reported erroneously as that of S. enterica arizonae O64 and Citrobacter freundii O32 (Kocharova et al., 1988), whereas another structure has been reported for S. enterica arizonae O21 (Vinogradov et al., 1994), which, in fact, may belong to Citrobacter braakii O37 (A. Gamian, pers. commun.).

§Earlier, another structure has been reported for S. enterica arizonae O59 (Vinogradov et al., 1987b), which, in fact, belongs to Citrobacter braakii O35 (Kocharova et al., 1996) and E. coli O15 (Perepelov et al., 2011b).

9-tetradeoxy-L-glycero-L-manno-non-2-ulosonic or pseud-aminic acid), and Leg (5,7-diamino-3,5,7,9-tetradeoxy-D-glycero-D-galacto-non-2-ulosonic or legionaminic acid) (Knirel et al., 2003, 2012).

There are only two pairs of Salmonella O serogroups with closely related GlcNAc-/GalNAc-initiated O antigens. The O13 and O43 antigens differ only in (1) the configuration (α vs. β) and the position (1→2 vs. 1→4) of the polymerization linkage between the O units; and (2) the presence of a Gal side chain in the O43 antigen. The O6, 14 and O18 antigens, which share O factors 6 and 14, differ only in (1) the initiating amino sugar (GlcNAc vs. GalNAc); and (2) the polymerization linkage (1→6 vs. 1→4). Within serogroups, nonglucosylated

Table 2. Summary of Salmonella and Escherichia coli sharing the identical or closely related O-antigen structures and gene clusters*

| Salmonella O antigen | E. coli O antigen | Structure relationship | Reference for sequences (Salmonella/E. coli) |
|----------------------|------------------|------------------------|--------------------------------------------|
| SO11(F)              | EO75             | =                      | This review/Li et al. (2010a)              |
| SO13(G)              | EO127            | Cr                     | Fitzgerald et al. (2007)/Iguchi et al. (2009) |
| SO6,14(H)            | EO77/O73//O17/O44 | Cr                     | Fitzgerald et al. (2003)/Wang et al. (2007) |
| SO16(I)              | EO11             | Cr                     | Li et al. (2010a, b)/Li et al. (2010b)      |
| SO17(J)              | EO85             | Cr                     | Fitzgerald et al. (2006)/Perepelov et al. (2011d) |
| SO18(K)              | 73-1†            | Cr                     | Fitzgerald et al. (2006)                   |
| SO28ac(M)            | EO71             | Cr                     | Hu et al. (2010)/Hu et al. (2010)           |
| SO28ab(M)            | EO5              | Cr                     | Clark et al. (2010)/this review             |
| SO30(N)              | EO157            | Cr                     | Samuel et al. (2004)/Wang & Reeves (1998)   |
| SO35(O)              | EO111            | =                      | Wang & Reeves (2000)/Wang & Reeves (2000)   |
| SO38(P)              | EO21             | =                      | Li et al. (2010b)/Ren et al. (2008)         |
| SO42(T)              | EO1B             | =                      | This review/Li et al. (2010a)               |
| SO43(U)              | EO86             | Cr                     | This review/Feng et al. (2005a)             |
| SO47(X)              | EcO118/O151      | Cr                     | Liu et al. (2010b)/Liu et al. (2010b)       |
| SO48(Y)              | EO145            | Cr                     | This review/Feng et al. (2005b)             |
| SO50(Z)              | EO55             | =                      | Samuel et al. (2004)/Wang et al. (2002b)     |
| SO51                 | EO23             | Cr                     | Perepelov et al. (2011c)/Perepelov et al. (2011c) |
| SO52‡                | EO153            | =                      | This review/this review                    |
| SO55                 | EO103            | Cr                     | Liu et al. (2010c)/Fratamico et al. (2005)   |
| SO57                 | EO51             | =                      | Perepelov et al. (2011e)/Perepelov et al. (2011e) |
| SO58                 | EO123            | Cr                     | Clark et al. (2009)/Beutin et al. (2007)     |
| SO62                 | EO35             | =                      | This review/Liu et al. (2009)               |
| SO65                 | EO78             | =                      | This review/Liu et al. (2009)               |
| SO66                 | EO166            | Cr                     | Liu et al. (2010a)/Liu et al. (2010a)       |

*S: Salmonella; E: E. coli; =: identical; Cr: closely related.*

†The backbone of Salmonella O18 antigen is found to be identical to that of strain E. coli 73-1 (Weintraub et al., 1993). However, the O-serogroup and O-antigen gene cluster of E. coli 73-1 are unknown.

‡Salmonella O52 shares the same O-antigen structure with E. coli O153 (Ratnayake et al., 1994). However, their gene clusters are unrelated.

Salmonella O-antigen diversity

C1  
wzy wbaB wbaC wbaD manC manB wzx  

O11(F)  
rmlB rmlD rmlA rmlC wdaA wzy wdaB wdaC manC manB wzx  

O13(G)  
gne wfbG gmd fcl gmm manC manB wzy wcmC wfbI  

O6,14(H)  
wbaC wbaD manC manB wzy wzx  

O16(I)  
wzx wdaD wzy wdaE gne wdaF gmd fcl gmm manC wdaG manB  

O17(J)  
mnaA wzy wfbQ wzx wfbR wfbS glf wfbU  

O18(K)  
wfbV wbaC manC manB wzy wzx wfbX  

O21(L)  
wzx wdaH wzy wdaI wdaJ wdaK gne wdaL  

O28ac(M)  
rmlB rmlD rmlA wdaK rmlC qdtA qdtB wzx wdaM wzy wdaN qdtC  

O28ab(M)  
rmlB rmlA qdtA qdtC qdtB wzx wzy wbuM wbuN wbuO wbeD  

O30(N)  
wbhN wzy wbhO wzx per wbhP gmd fcl gmm manC manB  

O35(O)  
wbhH gmd gmm manC manB colA colB wzx wzy wbhL wbhM  

O38(P)  
wzx wclN wbhN wclP wzy wclQ  

O39(Q)  
rmlB rmlA qdtA qdtC qdtB wzx wzy wdaO wdaF gmd fcl gmm manC wdaG manB  

O40(R)  
gne wzx wzy wdaQ wdaR wdaS wbhN manC manB  

O41(S)  
wbyJ manC manB wzx wzy wbhH fnlA qnlA qnlB wbhH wbhC  

O42(T)  
rmlB rmlD rmlA rmlC wzx mnaA wekM wzy wekN wbhH  

O43(U)  
gne wfbG gmd fcl gmm manC manB wzx wcmB wzy wcmC wcmD  

O44(V)  
wzx wdaX wzy wdaY wdaZ wbhH  

O61  
elb1 elb2 elb4 elb6 elb3 elb5 wdck elb7 wdcl wzx wzy wdcm wbuX wbuY wbuZ fnlA fnlB fnlC wbuB wbuC  

O unit processing gene  
glycosyltransferase gene  
GDP-sugar pathway gene  
UDP-sugar pathway gene  
dTDP-sugar pathway gene  
Neu5Ac synthesis gene  
acetyltransferase gene  
CDP-ribitol synthesis gene  
function unknown gene  
CDP-sugar pathway gene  
gene remnant  
gnd  
IS remnant  

Fig. 1. The O-antigen gene clusters of Salmonella GlcNAc-/GalNAc-initiated O antigens. Open arrows represent the location and orientation of putative genes. The O-antigen gene clusters that are first reported in this review have been deposited in GenBank under accession numbers from JX975328 to JX975348.

structure with a central set of variable serogroup-specific genes flanked by highly homologous sugar pathway genes or other shared genes. A similar situation has been found in several groups of Streptococcus pneumoniae gene clusters for capsules with related structures (Bentley *et al.*, 2006; Mavroidi *et al.*, 2007) and in Yersinia pseudotuberculosis O-antigen gene clusters (Cunneen *et al.*, 2009; De Castro *et al.*, 2009, 2010). In contrast, the gene clusters for Salmonella GlcNAc-/GalNAc-initiated O antigens are highly diverse and possess no cassette structure. There are only three sets of related O-antigen gene clusters.

(1) Salmonella O11 and C1. The last three genes (*manC*, *manB*, and *wzx*) at the 3′ end of their gene clusters are in the same order and share obvious DNA identity (63% for *manC*, 93% for *manB*, and 97% for *wzx*; Fig. 2a). The O-antigen structures of Salmonella O11 and C1 are not related except for having mannose as a constituent sugar, and the other genes of their gene clusters are quite different. It is likely that a recombination event has occurred between the O-antigen gene clusters of Salmonella O11 and C1. The DNA identity level of *manC* is much lower than that of the *manB* and *wzx* genes, and we propose that one of the recombination sites is located in the *manB* gene. It is surprising that an almost identical Wzx protein is responsible for translocation of O antigens with such different structures.

(2) Salmonella O13 and O43. The first seven genes and last two genes of the Salmonella O13 and O43 antigen

(a)
C1
wzy wdaB wdaC wbaD manC manB wzx
DNA identity%
Protein identity%

O11
rmlB rmlD rmlA rmlC wdaA wzy wdaB wdaC manC manB wzx

(b)
O43
gne wfbG gmd fcl gmm manC manB wzx wcmB wzy wcmCwcmD
DNA identity%
Protein identity%

O13
gne wfbG gmd fcl gmm manC manB wzx wzy wcmC wfl

(c)
O47
rib wzx wdbI wzy wdbJ wbuXwbuYwbuZ fnlA fnlB fnlC wbuB wbuC
DNA identity%
Protein identity%

O48
mnaD mnaB mnaC mnaA wzx wzy wbuW wbuXwbuYwbuZ fnlA fnlB fnlC wbuB wbuC
DNA identity%
Protein identity%

O61
elb1 elb2 elb4 elb6 elb3 elb5 wdcK elb7 wdcL wzx wzy wdcM wbuX wbuYwbuZ fnlA fnlB fnlC wbuB wbuC

Fig. 2. Comparisons of related Salmonella O-antigen gene clusters. For color coding key, see Fig. 1. The proposed functions of glycosyltransferases are shown.

gene clusters have the same order and significant DNA identity, and the structures are also related (Fig. 2b). Both structures are also found in E. coli, and the relationships between the four structures and gene clusters are discussed below.
(3) Salmonella O47, O48, and O61. The last eight genes in the O-antigen gene clusters of the three O serogroups have the same order and share 63–100% DNA identity (Fig. 2c). All three structures contain the L-FucpNAm-(α1→3)-D-GlcpNAc disaccharide fragment. Four of the eight genes, fnlA, fnlB, fnlC, and wbuX, are involved in the synthesis of L-FucpNAm, and wbuB is proposed to be the L-FucNAm transferase gene. The role of the other three genes is not clear as there are no other shared structural elements.
Although the O-antigen structures of Salmonella O6,14 and O18 are identical apart from the Wzy polymerization linkage (Table 1), the genes in their gene clusters share no similarity, except for manC (59% identity) and wzy (49% identity). It is interesting that the wzy genes are among those with higher levels of identity given the different polymerization linkage.
The sugar synthesis genes in O-antigen gene clusters, such as those for L-Rha and D-Man, are often highly conserved and easily identified.
Among the Salmonella GlcNAc-/GalNAc-initiated O antigens discussed in this section, L-Rha is present in 7

© 2013 Federation of European Microbiological Societies.
Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd. All rights reserved

Salmonella O-antigen diversity

first two genes, as in the O-antigen gene clusters of Salmonella O28ab, O39, O55, O58, and O60. Only in Salmonella O56 and O63 are *rmlB* and *rmlA* found elsewhere in the gene cluster (Fig. 1).

D-Man is present in 10 GlcNAc-/GalNAc-initiated Salmonella O antigens. GDP-D-Man is synthesized from fructose-6-phosphate by ManA, ManB, and ManC, but only the *manB* and *manC* genes are generally present in the gene cluster as ManA is also involved in use of exogenous mannose as a carbon source, and the gene is not associated with the O-antigen gene clusters (Neidhardt *et al.*, 1987). ManB and ManC are also involved in the synthesis of GDP-Col, GDP-L-Fuc, GDP-D-Rha4NAc (GDP-PerNAc), so a total of 16 gene clusters for GlcNAc-/GalNAc-initiated Salmonella O antigens contain *manB* and *manC* genes. Colanic acid (CA), which is widely present in Salmonella, contains L-Fuc, and the *manB* and *manC* genes required for production of GDP-Fuc are located within the CA gene cluster (Aoyama *et al.*, 1994). The CA gene cluster is unusual in having generally a high GC content, and remarkably, most *manB* genes for GlcNAc-/GalNAc-initiated Salmonella O antigens (including those in O60 and O65 that are reported in this review) share high level identity (93–99%) to the CA *manB* gene (Jensen & Reeves, 2001). The only exceptions are *manB* genes of O6,14 and O35. Furthermore, those CA-like *manB* genes display obvious subspecies specificity, and the CA *manB* genes and the CA-like *manB* genes in each strain appear to be evolving in concert via gene conversion events (Jensen & Reeves, 2001). These events appear to be unidirectional, as no *manB* gene with low GC content has been found in a CA gene cluster. It should be noted that the *manB* genes from the O-antigen gene clusters of the 8 Gal-initiated serogroups are closely related and not CA-like (Jensen & Reeves, 2001). In contrast to *manB*, with the exception of O11 and O41, the Salmonella *manC* genes are not CA-like even in gene clusters with the whole of the L-Fuc pathway.

To assess the diversity of Wzx, Wzy, and the glycosyltransferases involved in the synthesis of the 37 Wzx/Wzy pathway GlcNAc-/GalNAc-initiated O antigens, we used the TribeMCL program (Enright *et al.*, 2002) with a cutoff of 1e⁻⁵⁰ to assemble each group of proteins into homology groups (HG). 36 Wzy proteins (the Salmonella O66 gene cluster contains no *wzy* gene) and 37 Wzx proteins were assembled into 35 and 23 HG, respectively. There is enormous diversity as the average amino acid identity levels between the Wzy or Wzx HG are under 15%.

In contrast, Wzy and Wzx proteins for the 8 Gal-initiated Salmonella O antigens were assembled into 4 and 3 HG, respectively, with mostly similar low levels of identity between HG as found for Salmonella GlcNAc-/GalNAc-initiated O antigens. However, the higher proportion of

gene clusters with a shared HG for Wzx or Wzy reflects a higher level of relatedness among gene clusters for Gal-initiated O antigens. The data also further demonstrate the different patterns of diversity in the gene clusters for Salmonella GlcNAc-/GalNAc- and Gal-initiated O-antigen gene clusters.

The 127 glycosyltransferases from the 37 Wzx/Wzy pathway O antigens were assembled into 91 HG (Table S3), of which 20 contain 2–6 members. The functions of 64 of these glycosyltransferases can be predicted based on correlations between the presence of a glycosyltransferase with a specific protein sequence and a shared or similar structural element in the corresponding O antigens (Fig. S1).

In some cases, glycosyltransferases belonging to the same HG were proposed to have the same function. For instance, the 6 glycosyltransferases in HG-GT-1 share 41–99% identity in pairwise comparisons. Among these, WfbG in Salmonella O43 was proposed to be responsible for the synthesis of a D-GalNAc-(α1→3)-D-GlcNAc linkage. When structural data were taken into consideration, 5 of the 6 HG-GT-1 glycosyltransferases were proposed to have the same function and named WfbG accordingly. The only exception is WbdH in Salmonella O35, which is proposed to be responsible for the formation of a D-Gal-(α1→3)-D-GlcNAc linkage.

### Low proportion of anomalies in gene clusters for Salmonella GlcNAc-/GalNAc-initiated O antigens

Anomalies in the O-antigen gene clusters usually indicate a recent genetic event that may have been involved in the formation of the O-antigen form, perhaps related to adaptive modifications of bacteria in newly occupied niches (Liu *et al.*, 2008). Twelve such anomalies belonging to five categories (mobile elements, noncoding region, gene(s) in the reverse orientation or unusual location, and gene remnant) are found in the 37 Salmonella GlcNAc-/GalNAc-initiated O-antigen gene clusters. Previous studies found 17 such anomalies in the 33 Shigella O-antigen gene clusters, and 49 anomalies present in 148 *E. coli* O-antigen gene clusters. The proportion of anomalies in Salmonella O-antigen gene clusters is very similar to that in *E. coli* O-antigen gene clusters and much lower than that in Shigella. This suggests that it is Shigella that is atypical, which is consistent with it having diverged relatively recently and adopting a new niche.

### Mobile elements

Several insertion sequences and H-repeat elements were found in Shigella strains and were often associated with inferred gene cluster rearrangements. However, for the

gene clusters of Salmonella GlcNAc-/GalNAc-initiated O antigens, only one mobile element is found, an H-repeat insertion that is 78% identical to the RhsB H-repeat of E. coli K12 (Zhao et al., 1993), and is located between gne and gnd in the O-antigen gene cluster of Salmonella O51. This is the only major difference between the O-antigen gene clusters of Salmonella O51 and E. coli O23 that encode the same O antigen (Perepelov et al., 2011c), indicating that this H-repeat unit inserted into the O-antigen gene cluster of Salmonella O51 after the divergence of Salmonella and E. coli. Because the H-repeat unit in Salmonella O51 is intact, it is likely that the insertion occurred recently.

### Noncoding regions

The gaps between genes in O-antigen gene clusters are often very short, suggesting that translational coupling is occurring, but larger gaps can arise during restructuring of a gene cluster (for instance, the incorporation or deletion of genes). In Salmonella serogroups A, B, and D1, for example, the functional wzy genes responsible for the polymerization of O units are found outside the O-antigen gene cluster (Naide et al., 1965; Curd et al., 1998), and a remnant wzy gene is present in the large gap upstream of the wbaO gene where the wzy gene is found in groups E and D2. Noncoding regions also are found in gene clusters for four of the Salmonella GlcNAc-/GalNAc-initiated O antigens.

(1) In the O-antigen gene cluster of Salmonella O66, there is no wzy gene (Fig. 1), and there is also a 874-bp noncoding region between weiA and weiB in the gene cluster (Liu et al., 2010a). However, no remnant of a wzy gene can be found in this region by sequence homology search. A wzy remnant can be difficult to find by BLAST search because of the high divergence levels in wzy genes and the degradation of remnant sequences by deletions, which can fragment an open reading frame and/or change the reading frame. In Salmonella serogroups A, B, and D1 discussed above, the wzy remnants were not found until the ancestral wzy gene of group D3 was sequenced, which provided a closely related homologue. The Salmonella wzy genes are highly divergent, and if none are in the same HG as the lost O66 wzy gene, then a remnant may well not be detectable by BLAST but have to await sequencing of a near relative. Because the Salmonella O66 type strain can produce normal LPS, it is highly likely that it also has a functional wzy gene for its β 1→2 linkage outside the O-antigen gene cluster.

(2) In the O-antigen gene cluster of Salmonella O40, there is a remnant gnu gene between gne and wzx (Fig. 1). Gnu is responsible for the formation of UndPP–GalNAc from UndPP–GlcNAc for GalNAc-initiated O antigens (Rush et al., 2010), and the remnant suggests that the ancestral gene cluster coded for a GalNAc-initiated O antigen, although in E. coli and Salmonella, there is often a gnu gene upstream of galF rather than in the gene cluster. There is a 671-bp noncoding region between the gnu remnant and wzx, with no good hits in a BLAST search. Salmonella O40 has two GalNAc residues and no main-chain GlcNAc residue, indicating that both gne and gnu are required for the O-antigen synthesis. We suggest that there is a gnu gene upstream of galF in Salmonella O40, which is responsible for the synthesis of UndPP–GalNAc and replaces the function of the now degraded gnu gene in the gene cluster.

(3) A 570-bp noncoding region with no good hits in a BLAST search is located between wekM and wzy in the Salmonella O42 antigen gene cluster. Salmonella O42 has the same O-antigen structure as E. coli O1 (Table 1), and their gene clusters also have the same organization. However, the 570-bp noncoding region is not found in the O-antigen gene cluster of E. coli O1. This noncoding region marks a boundary between different levels of DNA identity between the two gene clusters (Fig. 3a), being 55–81% for the seven upstream genes (rmlB-wekA), but only about 40% identity for the three downstream genes (wzy, wekN, wbdH) to the corresponding genes in E. coli O1, with no obvious protein identity for the gene products. The first seven genes in the two gene clusters presumably have a common ancestor, while the other three may have different origins. It is likely that the presence of the 570-bp noncoding region is related to the incorporation of wzy, wekN, and wbdH in Salmonella O42, suggesting that the ancestral gene cluster was like that in E. coli.

(4) Two noncoding regions are found in the O-antigen gene cluster of Salmonella O53. One is located upstream (positions 9867–10961) of gne, and the other (positions 11991–13054), downstream of gne (upstream of gnd). It is likely that these two noncoding regions are related to the incorporation of the gne gene into the O-antigen gene cluster, implying an ancestor without the GalNAc residue currently present.

### Genes in the reverse orientation

All but two of the genes in the Salmonella O-antigen gene clusters are transcribed from galF to gnd, the exceptions being qdtC in Salmonella O28ac and gne in Salmonella O21, which are transcribed in the opposite direction.

(1) qdtC is located at the 3′ end of the Salmonella O28ac antigen gene cluster. QdtC is involved in the biosynthesis of dTDP-Qui3NAc, together with RmlA, RmlB, QdtA, and QdtB (Pfostl et al., 2008). QdtC is an acetyltransferase for the final step in synthesis of dTDP-Qui3NAc, and it is likely that qdtC was added to the O28ac gene cluster

Salmonella O-antigen diversity

(a)
SO42
DNA identity%
80 74 81 72 55 63 57 41 40 41
Protein identity%
90 84 95 81 46 60 48

EO1
rmLB rmlD rmlArmlC wzx mnaA wekM wzy wekN wbdH

D-ManpNAc
β1
WekM
↓
2
WekN WbdH
→3)-L-Rhap-(α1→2)-L-Rhap-(α1→2)-D-Galp-(α1→3)-D-GlcpNAc-(β1→

D-ManpNAc
β1
WekM
↓
2
WekN WbdH
→3)-L-Rhap-(α1→2)-L-Rhap-(α1→2)-D-Galp-(α1→3)-D-GlcpNAc-(β1→

(b)
SO55
DNA identity%
74 76 69 67 69 53 59 58 60 63 66
Protein identity%
85 88 75 67 70 47 52 42 47 62 66

EO103
rmlB rmlD fdtA fdtB wdbT wdbU wzy wdbV wfbG gne

WfbG
→2)-D-Glcp-(β1→2)-D-Fucp3NAc-(β1→6)-D-Glcp-(α1→4)-D-GalpNAc-(α1→3)-D-GlcpNAc-(β1→

WfbG
→2)-D-Glcp-(β1→2)-D-Fucp3NR3Hb-(β1→6)-D-GlcpNAc-(α1→4)-D-GalpNAc-(α1→3)-D-GlcpNAc-(β1→

(c)
SO66
DNA identity%
66 66 65 70 64 66
Protein identity%
61 62 59 68 60 66

EO166
wzx weiA wzy weiB weiC weiD gne

D-Glcp
β1
WeiD
↓
3
Ac (~90%)
→2)-D-Galp-(α1→6)-D-Galp-(α1→4)-D-GalpNAc-(α1→3)-D-GalpNAc-(β1→

D-Glcp
β1
WeiD
↓
3
→2)-D-Galp-(α1→6)-D-Galp-(α1→4)-D-GalpNAc-(α1→3)-D-GalpNAc-(β1→

(d)
SO43
DNA identity%
63 83 84 75 74 77 64 73 63 68 66
Protein identity%
60 93 90 77 79 86 54 72 59 67 54

EO86
gne wfbG gmd fcl gmm manC manB wcmB wzy wcmC wcmD

WcmD WcmB WcmC WfbG
→4)-L-Fucp-(α1→2)-D-Galp-(β1→3)-D-GalpNAc-(α1→3)-D-GlcpNAc-(β1→

D-Galp
α1
WcmD WcmB WcmC WcmA
↓
3
→4)-L-Fucp-(α1→2)-D-Galp-(β1→3)-D-GalpNAc-(α1→3)-D-GalpNAc-(β1→

(e)
SO13
DNA identity%
62 83 84 75 74 78 37 68 73 66
Protein identity%
60 92 87 78 79 86 35 62 71 63

EO127
gne wfbG gmd fcl gmm manC manB wcmA wzy wcmC wfbI

WfbI WcmC WfbG
→2)-L-Fucp-(α1→2)-D-Galp-(β1→3)-D-GalpNAc-(α1→3)-D-GlcpNAc-(α1→

Ac (~70%)
|
3
WfbI WcmC WcmA
→2)-L-Fucp-(α1→2)-D-Galp-(β1→3)-D-GalpNAc-(α1→3)-D-GalpNAc-(α1→
4
|
Ac (~40%)

(f)
EO127
DNA identity%
99 99 98 96 98 99 94 50 47 54 67 63
Protein identity%
99 100 100 99 98 99 99 15 13 16 59 50

EO86
gne wcmA gmd fcl gmm manC manB wcmB wzy wcmC wcmD

Ac (~70%)
|
3
WfbI WcmC WcmA
→2)-L-Fucp-(α1→2)-D-Galp-(β1→3)-D-GalpNAc-(α1→3)-D-GalpNAc-(α1→
4
|
Ac (~40%)

D-Galp
α1
WcmD WcmB WcmC WcmA
↓
3
→4)-L-Fucp-(α1→2)-D-Galp-(β1→3)-D-GalpNAc-(α1→3)-D-GalpNAc-(β1→
Ac (~50%)
|
6
WbdN

(g)
SO30
DNA identity%
66 69 70 77 70 74 67 64 76 79
Protein identity%
60 65 70 83 66 90 77 61 81 89

EO157
wbdN wzy wbdO wzx perA wbdP gmd fcl gmm manC manB

→2)-D-Rhap4NAc-(α1→3)-L-Fucp-(α1→4)-D-Glcp-(β1→3)-D-GalpNAc-(α1→

WbdN
→2)-D-Rhap4NAc-(α1→3)-L-Fucp-(α1→4)-D-Glcp-(β1→3)-D-GalpNAc-(α1→

Fig. 3. Examples of O antigens with gene clusters and structures that are the same or are related in Salmonella and Escherichia coli. For color coding key, see Fig. 1. S, Salmonella. E, E. coli. The proposed functions of glycosyltransferases are shown.

relatively recently and that the ancestor had Qui3N in place of Qui3NAc. The *E. coli* O71 antigen gene cluster has the same organization as that of *Salmonella* O28ac, including the orientation of the *qdtC* gene, and the main chains of the two polysaccharides are the same (Hu *et al.*, 2010). Thus, unlike other anomalies discussed in this section, it is likely that the *qdtC* gene in *Salmonella* O28ac and *E. coli* O71 was present in the common ancestor and is not an indication of recent change in our definition.

(2) The *gne* gene in the O-antigen gene cluster of *Salmonella* O21 is located between *wdaK* and *wdaL* and transcribed in the opposite direction. This is an unusual location for a gene with this orientation as all previously described genes transcribed in the opposite direction in the O-antigen gene clusters of *Salmonella* and *Shigella* are located after the 3′ end of the normally transcribed genes. The O21 *gne* gene is needed to synthesize the GalNAc residue, which is the last sugar in the structure, and would perhaps be replaced by a GlcNAc residue in its absence. The orientation of this *gne* gene creates a need for two additional promoters (one for *wcaL*), but there is no evidence to indicate that the *gne* gene is a recent addition, especially because a promoter upstream of *gne* could not be identified based on an in silico search.

### rml genes in unusual location

As discussed above, the *rmlB*, *rmlD*, *rmlA*, and *rmlC* genes for the four-step synthesis of dTDP-L-Rha are usually located at the 5′ end of the *E. coli* and *Salmonella* O-antigen gene clusters, with the conserved gene order as above. In some cases, the *rmlC* gene is separated from other *rml* genes. Seven *Salmonella* GlcNAc-/GalNAc-initiated O antigens contain L-Rha, and two of the *rmlC* genes are found in unusual locations.

(1) and (2) In *Salmonella* O28ac and O53, *rmlC* was located 1 gene and 5 genes, respectively, downstream of the *rmlBDA* genes.

(3) In *Salmonella* O56, the *rmlA* and *rmlB* genes are involved in the synthesis of dTDP-Qui4N, and as there is no L-Rha moiety, the *rmlC* and *rmlD* genes are not required. However, while the O56 *rmlB* gene is at the 5′ end of the gene cluster, the *rmlA* gene is located at the other end of the gene cluster, 10 genes downstream of *rmlB*.

(4) In the O-antigen gene cluster of *Salmonella* O63, the *rmlB* and *rmlA* genes, which are involved in the synthesis of dTDP-D-Fuc3NAc, are not located at the 5′ end of the O-antigen gene cluster, but downstream of *weiD*.

#### Remnant genes

The O antigen of *Salmonella* O50 contains D-Gal, D-GalNAc, D-GlcNAc, and Col. The synthesis of GDP-Col requires the products of 5 nonhousekeeping sugar synthesis genes: *manB*, *manC*, *gmd*, *colA*, and *colB* (Fig. 4). The *manB*, *manC*, and *gmd* genes are in the O-antigen gene cluster, while *colA* and *colB* are downstream of *gnd*, suggesting that they are a recent addition not fully incorporated into the gene cluster. There is a remnant of an *fcl* gene between *gmd* and *gmm* in the *Salmonella* O50 gene cluster, indicating that before the acquisition of *colA* and *colB*, the ancestral gene cluster coded for synthesis of GDP-L-Fuc. The *colA* and *colB* genes in *E. coli* O55, which has the same O antigen as *Salmonella* O50, are also located downstream of *gnd*. However, there is no *fcl* gene remnant in the O-antigen gene cluster of *E. coli* O55, presumably due to more extensive deletions than in *Salmonella* O50, which have occurred since the acquisition of the *colA* and *colB* genes. The presence of the *colA* and *colB* genes downstream of *gnd* and a remnant *fcl* gene in the gene cluster could suggest that *colA* and *colB* are a recent addition not fully incorporated into the gene cluster. However, the presence of the genes in the same location in *E. coli* suggests that in this case, it has survived for a long time and that consolidation of genes into the gene cluster can be a very slow process.

### Biosynthetic pathways of monosaccharides

Twenty-one different sugars were found in the *Salmonella* GlcNAc-/GalNAc-initiated O antigens (Table S1). Fourteen of them are also present in *Shigella* O antigens, and their proposed or characterized biosynthetic pathways have been reviewed (Liu *et al.*, 2008). The pathways for the other 7 sugars (Col, L-FucNAm, D-Qui3NAc, D-Fuc3NAc/D-FucNFO, D-Rha4NAc (D-PerNAc), Neu5Ac, and 8eLeg5RHb7Ac) and ribitol are shown in Fig. 4.

The biosynthetic pathway for 8eLeg5RHb7Ac, a component of the *Salmonella* O61 O antigen, is first proposed in this review (Fig. 4) and requires biochemical confirmation. A similar derivative of 8-epilegionaminic acid, 8eLeg5Ac7Ac, has been found in the O antigens of *E. coli* O61 and O108, and a biosynthetic pathway, including 7 enzymes (Elg1–Elg7), also was proposed (Perepelov *et al.*, 2010c). Orf1–Orf6 and Orf8 in the *Salmonella* O61 antigen gene cluster share 51–84% identity to Elg1-Elg7, respectively, and may have the corresponding functions. Therefore, it is likely that the pathway for 8eLeg5RHb7Ac is similar to that proposed for 8eLeg5Ac7Ac, and *orf1–orf6* and *orf8* are responsible for the synthesis of 8eLeg5RHb7Ac in *Salmonella* O61 (Fig. 4). Based on the structural difference, we propose that the substrates of each gene in the two pathways have the different acyl groups at N5. The biosynthesis of 8eLeg5Ac7Ac is initiated from UDP-GlcNAc, and we propose that 8eLeg5RHb7Ac is initiated from

Salmonella O-antigen diversity

Fru-6-P $\xrightarrow{\text{ManA}^{a}}$ D-Man-6-P $\xrightarrow{\text{ManB}}$ D-Man-1-P $\xrightarrow{\text{ManC}}$ GDP-D-Man $\xrightarrow{\text{Gmd}}$ GDP-6-deoxy-$\alpha$-D-$l$-xylo-hexos-4-ulose

$\downarrow$

ribulose 5-phosphate $\xrightarrow{\text{Rib}}$ CDP-ribitol

$\downarrow$

Glc-1-P $\xrightarrow{\text{RmlA}}$ dTDP-D-Glc $\xrightarrow{\text{RmlB}}$ dTDP-6-deoxy-$\alpha$-D-xylo-hexos-4-ulose

$\downarrow$

DdhA $\rightarrow$ CDP-D-Glc $\xrightarrow{\text{DdhB}}$ CDP-6-deoxy-$\alpha$-D-xylo-hexos-4-ulose $\xrightarrow{\text{DdhC}}$ [I] $\xrightarrow{\text{DdhD}}$ CDP-3,6-dideoxy-$\alpha$-D-erythro-hexos-4-ulose

$\downarrow$

UDP-GlcNAc $\xrightarrow{\text{NnaA}}$ UDP-ManNAc $\xrightarrow{\text{NnaB}}$ NeuNAc $\xrightarrow{\text{NnaC}}$ CMP-NeuNAc

$\downarrow$

UDP-2-acetamido-2,6-dideoxy-$\beta$-L-arabino-hexos-4-ulose $\xrightarrow{\text{FnI B}}$ UDP-2-acetamido-2,6-dideoxy-$\beta$-L-talose $\xrightarrow{\text{FnI C}}$ UDP-L-FucNAc $\xrightarrow{\text{WbuX}}$ UDP-L-FucNAm

$\downarrow$

UDP-2,6-dideoxy-2-[(R)-3-hydroxybutanoyl- amino]-$\beta$-L-arabino-hexos-4-ulose

$\downarrow$

Elb1 $\longrightarrow$ Elb2 $\longrightarrow$ Elb3 $\longrightarrow$ Elb4

$\downarrow$

CMP-8eLeg5RHb7Ac $\longleftarrow$ Elb7 $\longleftarrow$ 8eLeg5RHb7Ac $\longleftarrow$ Elb6 $\longleftarrow$ Elb5

$\downarrow$

4-acetamido-2,4,6-trideoxy-2-[(R)-3- hydroxybutanoylamino]-$\beta$-L-gulose

$\downarrow$

UDP-4-acetamido-2,4,6-trideoxy-2-[(R)- 3-hydroxybutanoylamino]-$\beta$-L-idose

$\downarrow$

PerA $\rightarrow$ GDP-d-Rha4N $\xrightarrow{\text{PerB}}$ GDP-d-Rha4NAc

$\downarrow$

ColA $\rightarrow$ GDP-3,6-dideoxy-$\alpha$-D-threo-hexos-4-ulose

$\downarrow$

ColB $\downarrow$ GDP-L-colitose

$\downarrow$

FdtA $\rightarrow$ dTDP-6-deoxy-$\alpha$-D-xylo-hexos-3-ulose $\xrightarrow{\text{FdtB}}$ dTDP-D-Fuc3N $\xrightarrow{\text{FdtC}}$ dTDP-D-Fuc3NAc

$\downarrow$

QdtA $\rightarrow$ dTDP-6-deoxy-$\alpha$-D-ribo-hexos-3-ulose $\xrightarrow{\text{QdtB}}$ dTDP-D-Qui3N $\xrightarrow{\text{QdtC}}$ dTDP-D-Qui3NAc

$\downarrow$

Abe $\rightarrow$ CDP-Abe

$\downarrow$

Prt $\rightarrow$ CDP-Par $\xrightarrow{\text{Tyv}}$ CDP-Tyv

Fig. 4. Biosynthetic pathways for the sugars in Salmonella O antigens. The pathways for the sugars that are also present in Shigella O antigens (Liu et al., 2008) are not included. Putative pathways are denoted by a broken line. In the CDP-3,6-dideoxyhexose pathway, [I] indicates a 4-pyridoxamine 6-deoxy-$\Delta^{3,4}$-glucoseen intermediate (Johnson & Liu, 1998). ManA, phosphomannose isomerase; ManB, phosphomannomutase; ManC, mannose-1-phosphate guanylyltransferase (Samuel & Reeves, 2003); Gmd, GDP-mannose 4,6-dehydratase (Somoza et al., 2000; Kneidinger et al., 2001); ColA, GDP-4-keto-6-deoxy-D-mannose 3-dehydrase (Alam et al., 2004); ColB, GDP-colitose synthase (Alam et al., 2004); PerA, GDP-perosamine synthetase (Zhao et al., 2007; Albermann & Beuttler, 2008); PerB, GDP-perosamine N-acetyltransferase (Albermann & Beuttler, 2008); Rib, ribulose 5-phosphate reductase/CDP-ribitol pyrophosphorylase (Follens et al., 1999); RmlA, glucose-1-phosphate thymidylyltransferase (Zuccotti et al., 2001); RmlB, dTDP-D-glucose 4,6-dehydratase (Allard et al., 2001); FdtA, dTDP-6-deoxy-hex-4-ulose isomerase; FdtB, dTDP-6-deoxy-D-xylo-hex-3-ulose aminase; FdtC, dTDP-D-Fuc3N acetylase (Pfoestl et al., 2003); QdtA, dTDP-4-oxo-6-deoxy-D- glucose 3,4-oxoisomerase; QdtB, dTDP-3-oxo-6-deoxy-D-glucose aminase; QdtC, dTDP-D-Qui3N acetylase (Pfoestl et al., 2008); DdhA, glucose-1- phosphate cytidylyltransferase; DdhB, CDP-glucose 4,6-dehydratase; DdhC, CDP-4-keto-6-deoxy-D-glucose 3-dehydrase; DdhD, CDP-6-deoxy-$\Delta^{3,4}$- glucoseen reductase (Johnson & Liu, 1998; Samuel & Reeves, 2003); Abe, CDP-abequose synthase (Hallis et al., 1998); Prt, CDP-paratose synthase (Hallis et al., 1998); Tyv, CDP-Par 2-epimerase (Koropatkin et al., 2003); FnI A, 4,6-dehydratase/5-epimerase; FnI B, 3-epimerase/ reductase; FnI C, C2 epimerase (Mulrooney et al., 2005); WbuX, aminotransferase (King et al., 2008); NnaA, GlcNAc-2-epimerase; NnaB, Neu5Ac condensing enzyme; NnaC, CMP-Neu5Ac synthetase (Annunziato et al., 1995); Esb1, C6 dehydratase/C5 epimerase; Esb2, aminotransferase; Esb3, acetyltransferase; Esb4, nucleotidase; Esb5, condensase; Esb6, cytidylyltransferase. ${ }^{a}$The enzyme is encoded by the gene, which is not located in the O-antigen gene cluster.

UDP-GlcNRHb, which is probably synthesized from UDP- GlcNAc. However, the expected genes for UDP-GlcNRHb are not found in the O-antigen gene cluster of Salmonella O61 and may be located elsewhere in the genome. orf1-orf6 and orf8 in Salmonella O61 were named elb1-elb7, respectively.

### A close relationship between the O antigens of Salmonella and E. coli

Until recently, there were only four confirmed cases in which the O antigens are identical in the two species: Salmonella O35 and E. coli O111, Salmonella O50 and E. coli

O55, Salmonella O30 and E. coli O157, and Salmonella O62 and E. coli O35 (Rundlof et al., 1998; Samuel et al., 2004) (Table 1). We now find that there are 24 O antigens present in both Salmonella and E. coli being either identical or near identical between the two species, which is a much higher number than previously thought. All of the shared O antigens are GlcNAc-/GalNAc-initiated. The data are summarized in Table 2, and some interesting examples are described in detail below.

It is worth noting that in addition to Salmonella O30, O35, O50, and O62, there are 11 Salmonella O antigens that cross-react serologically with one or more E. coli O antigens (Orskov et al., 1977), and 7 of them (Salmonella

FEMS Microbiol Rev **38** (2014) 56–89

© 2013 Federation of European Microbiological Societies. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd. All rights reserved
O6,14, O11, O17, O38, O42, O43, and O51) were shown in this study to have structures and gene clusters that are identical or closely related to an *E. coli* O antigen. However, the remaining four *Salmonella* O antigens are not obviously related structurally or genetically to the respective *E. coli* O antigen.

*Salmonella* O52 was found to have the same O-antigen structure as that of *E. coli* O153 (Ratnayake *et al.*, 1994). However, there are no genes shared by the two gene clusters, which is obviously different from other pairs of *Salmonella* and *E. coli* O antigens that are identical or closely related. The sources for the sequences of the 15 *Salmonella* GlcNAc-/GalNAc-initiated O antigens that are not related to *E. coli* O antigens are summarized in Table S4.

### Salmonella O6,14 and E. coli O77 group

It is well known that most *S. flexneri* serotypes share a common O-antigen backbone and differ only in the distribution of four possible Glc side-branch residues and an O-acetyl moiety, which are all attached by enzymes encoded by prophage genes (Allison & Verma, 2000), or differ in the presence of a plasmid-encoded phosphoethanolamine modification (Sun *et al.*, 2012; Knirel *et al.*, 2013). There is a similar group of O-antigen structures in *E. coli*, comprising *E. coli* O77, O17, O44, O73, and O106, which have been given serogroup status, and *Salmonella* O6,14 is a single representative in *Salmonella* with a related structure (Wang *et al.*, 2007). These strains also share a common four-sugar backbone O-unit structure and differ by the addition of one or two Glc side branches at various positions of the backbone (the only exception is the *E. coli* O77 O antigen that does not have any side-chain modification). Their O-antigen gene clusters contain the same genes in the same order and express proteins required for the biosynthesis of the common four-sugar backbone. The O-antigen gene clusters of the *E. coli* O77 group share > 99% identity to each other and 70–76% identity to that of *Salmonella* O6,14, suggesting that this O-antigen backbone was in the common ancestor. In *S. flexneri*, the side-branch Glc residues are added from UDP-Glc in a three-step process involving GtrA and GtrB common to all such residues and a side-branch-specific transferase. The three genes are always present as a set of three genes, which are on a prophage genome in the chromosome, and most probably the *E. coli* O77-related strains and *Salmonella* O6,14 gained their specific side-branch modifications by acquiring similar prophages carrying different *gtr* gene sets.

### Salmonella O66 and E. coli O166

The O-antigen structures of *Salmonella* O66 and *E. coli* O166 differ only in the linkage between O units and the presence of an O-acetyl moiety in the former. The O-antigen gene clusters of *Salmonella* O66 and *E. coli* O166 have nearly identical organizations, the only exception being that the *wzy* gene in *E. coli* O166 is replaced by a noncoding region in *Salmonella* O66 (Fig. 3c) (Liu *et al.*, 2010a). It is proposed that a functional *wzy* gene outside the O-antigen gene cluster is involved in the synthesis of the O antigen of *Salmonella* O66, similar to what is found in *Salmonella* serogroups A, B, and D1 (Naide *et al.*, 1965; Curd *et al.*, 1998). The ancestral gene cluster of *Salmonella* O66 presumably had the *wzy* gene found in *E. coli* O166 between *weiA* and *weiB*, which would be no longer required after the bacteria gained the new *wzy* gene. The noncoding region in *Salmonella* O66 could be a remnant of a gene, but we found no region of similarity with the *E. coli* O166 *wzy* gene, probably owing to the substantial degradation observed between *weiA* and *weiB*.

### Salmonella O43-E. coli O86 and Salmonella O13-E. coli O127

The four O antigens have similar four-sugar main chains varying mainly in the first sugar, which is GlcNAc in *Salmonella* and GalNAc in *E. coli*. Also, *Salmonella* O43 and *E. coli* O86 have a side-branch Gal that is lacking in the others. So for our purposes, there is a pair of related *Salmonella* O antigens, and both *Salmonella* O antigens have a related *E. coli* O antigen, all of which are treated together here.

Four of the genes (*gmd-manC*) of the *Salmonella* O13 and O43 antigen gene clusters have the same order and

### Salmonella O55 and E. coli O103

The O antigens of *Salmonella* O55 and *E. coli* O103 have similar pentasaccharide O units that differ in only one sugar (Glc vs. GlcNAc) and in the acyl group on Fuc3N (Ac group vs. Hb group; Table 1).

The DNA sequence identity in corresponding genes ranges from 53% to 76% (Fig. 3b), the only exception being the two acyltransferase genes (*fdtC* encoding an acetyltransferase in *Salmonella* O55 and *fdhC* encoding a 3-hydroxybutanoyltransferase in *E. coli* O103), which share no similarity and are responsible for the structural difference between dTDP-*d*-Fuc3NHb and dTDP-*d*-Fuc3-NAc. We suggest that one of the two gene clusters acquired a new gene (acyltransferase or 3-hydroxybutanoyltransferase gene) after species divergence (Liu *et al.*, 2010c), but there is no indication as to which was the original gene in the ancestor. There must also be a difference in the specificity of the second glycosyltransferase to ensure the difference in the third sugar as precursors for Glc and GlcNAc are generally available.
Salmonella O-antigen diversity

are 93–99% identical, as are the same genes in *E. coli* O127 and O86 (Figs 2b and 3d–f). In comparisons between the species, these genes are 74–84% identical. This is as expected for genes that were present in the common ancestor and diverged as the species diverged, with the genes in the two gene clusters undergoing frequent recombination within each species so that they evolved in concert (Samuel *et al.*, 2004). The *manB* gene immediately downstream of *manC* is similar, but has rather more divergence than the *gmd-manC* genes due to having a CA gene cluster form of *manB* in the Salmonella and *E. coli* strains.

The other genes show quite complex patterns including high levels of divergence as discussed below.

The choice of first sugar is determined when the second sugar, a GalNAc residue, is added to either UndPP-GalNAc or UndPP-GlcNAc by glycosyltransferases WcmA or WfbG, respectively (Yi *et al.*, 2005). The *wcmA* and *wfbG* genes are second genes in the gene cluster, after the *gne* gene that is required for synthesis of the UDP-GalNAc substrate. The *E. coli* strains will also need a *gnu* gene for synthesis of the UndPP-GalNAc. The two genes in Salmonella are again highly similar (98–99% identity) as are the two in *E. coli* (99–100% identity). However, the *gne* genes are only 60–63% identical in comparisons between the species, and the two glycosyltransferase genes, *wcmA* and *wfbG*, are not related at all (no more than 30% identity). It appears that this end of the gene cluster was replaced in one of the species causing the first sugar to be replaced.

At the 3′ end are genes related to the addition of the side-branch Gal in Salmonella O43 and *E. coli* O86, and the corresponding glycosyltransferase *wcmB* gene is found only in those strains, where it is located between the *wzx* and *wzy* genes. The *wdbR* gene in the same location in *E. coli* O127 only is proposed to be an acetyltransferase gene based on sequence homology and may be responsible for addition of one of the O-acetyl groups to the Fuc residue in *E. coli* O127. The genes for addition of the main-chain Gal residue and addition of the Fuc residue to it are very different in the 2 structural forms. The main-chain Gal residue carries the Gal side branch in Salmonella O43 and *E. coli* O86, so this may account for the difference between *wfbI* and *wcmD*, as if the side-branch Gal is added first, it would affect the target sugar for the Fuc transferases. However, the explanation for the difference between *wfbI* and *wcmD* genes is not so simple, as they are responsible for the same linkage, although the first sugars of the molecule at this stage are different. All these genes, including *wzx* and *wzy*, are highly divergent, and only for *wcmB* does it seem likely that the various forms have diverged from the gene cluster in the common ancestor of the two species. Perhaps there have been

gene replacements since species divergence, or perhaps the situation in the common ancestor was more complex than just having the two forms seen today and included the sequence diversity now observed.

### Salmonella O30 and *E. coli* O157

Salmonella O30 and *E. coli* O157 have the same O-antigen structure that contains one residue each of D-Rha4NAc (N-acetyl-D-perosamine, D-PerNAc), D-Glc, L-Fuc, and D-GalNAc. The O-antigen gene cluster of Salmonella O30 is nearly identical to that of *E. coli* O157, the only difference being that Salmonella O30 lacks the acetyltransferase gene *perB*, which is located at the 3′ end of the *E. coli* O157 antigen gene cluster and is involved in the synthesis of D-Rha4NAc (Albermann & Beuttlер, 2008) (Fig. 3g). An H-repeat remnant is located upstream of the *perB* gene in *E. coli* O157. It is likely that the acquisition of the *E. coli* O157 *perB* gene was mediated by the H-repeat element and occurred more recently. An acetyltransferase gene that converts GDP-D-Rha4N to GDP-D-Rha4NAc may be located elsewhere in Salmonella O30 genome.

### Two special Salmonella GlcNAc-/GalNAc-initiated O-antigen forms (O54 and O67)

The O antigen of Salmonella O54 is different from all other reported bacterial O antigens in being synthesized by the synthase pathway. Salmonella O54 has a disaccharide O unit: →4)-D-ManpNAc-(β1→3)-D-ManpNAc-(β1) and is thus a homopolymer. The gene cluster responsible for the synthesis of the Salmonella O54 O antigen resides on a small mobilizable plasmid (Keenleyside & Whitefield, 1996), and mobilization of this plasmid into strains with a functional chromosomal O-antigen gene cluster can lead to the simultaneous expression of two distinct O antigens. However, in the Salmonella O54 type strain, this is not the case due to inactivation of the chromosomal O-antigen locus, but the strains for O54 serovars include some with group B, C1, C2, E, or 21(L) epitopes (Fitzgerald *et al.*, 2007), suggesting that the plasmid is quite mobile in nature. The Salmonella O54 antigen gene cluster contains *mnaA*, *wbbE*, and *wbbF*. MnaA is a C2 epimerase that converts UDP-GlcNAc to UDP-ManNAc (Campbell *et al.*, 2000). WbbE transfers the first UDP-ManNAc to UndPP-GlcNAc that is also synthesized by WecA, to complete an adapter. WbbF, an integral membrane protein, is responsible for both sequential addition of ManNAc and the concurrent extrusion of the nascent polymer across the cytoplasmic membrane (Keenleyside & Whitefield, 1996).

Salmonella O67 has previously been suggested to be a variant of serogroup B (O4) (Li & Reeves, 2000). Indeed,
a molecular typing study based on O-antigen gene cluster probes found that the serogroup O4 antigen-specific gene does not distinguish strains of serogroups O4 and O67 (Fitzgerald *et al.*, 2007). In this study, we sequenced the region between *galF* and *gnd* in *Salmonella* O67 and found it to be the same as for the serogroup O4 antigen gene cluster (with identity ranging from 99% to 100% for corresponding genes). However, the structural analysis revealed that the O67 antigen structure is similar to that of D-galactan I O antigen of *K. pneumoniae* (Table 1), the only difference being the presence of an O-acetyl group in *Salmonella* O67, which is consistent with the fact that there is no cross-reaction between serogroup O4 and O67 antigens and their respective antisera. The data show that the O67 gene cluster is not located between *galF* and *gnd*, but elsewhere in the genome.

The gene cluster responsible for the synthesis of D-galactan I in *K. pneumoniae* O1 has been identified downstream of *gnd* and consists of six genes, comprising *wzm*, *wzt*, *wbbM*, *glf*, *wbbN*, and *wbbO* (Clarke & Whitfield, 1992). *wzm* and *wzt* encode components of an ABC transporter for export of the O polysaccharide, and *glf* encodes a UDP-galactopyranose mutase, for conversion of UDP-Galp to UDP-Galf. In the ABC transporter pathway, O-antigen synthesis begins with the formation in the cytoplasm of a chain of O units on an acceptor UndPP–GlcNAc, which is synthesized by WecA. Galactan I synthesis has been studied by the Whitfield group and summarized in a recent review (Greenfield & Whitfield, 2012). *WbbO* was shown to be a bifunctional glycosyltransferase adding the first two-sugar repeat unit (Galp and Galf) to the UndPP–GlcNAc acceptor, forming the adaptor region of the O polysaccharide. Further extension of galactan I requires *WbbM*, which encodes a Galp transferase (Guan *et al.*, 2001). *WbbN* is thought to be the Galf transferase for galactan I extension, although *WbbO* can replace *WbbN* as the Galf transferase *in vitro*. However, no genes with the potential for the synthesis of D-galactan I can be found downstream of *gnd* in *Salmonella* O67.

To identify the O-antigen gene cluster, we obtained a draft genome of the *Salmonella* O67 type strain using Solexa sequencing. A contig was found containing eight genes related to the synthesis of the O67 antigen. *orf1-orf6* of that contig are identified as *wzm*, *wzt*, *wbbM*, *glf*, *wbbN*, and *wbbO* by homology with the genes of *K. pneumoniae* O1 (92%, 95%, 76%, 85%, 64%, and 79% identity, respectively) and account for the synthesis of D-galactan I. *orf7* and *orf8* were named *wejU* and *wejV*, respectively. *wejU* appears to be a glycosyltransferase gene, but its exact function is unclear. *WejV* shares similarity to many acyltransferase, and we propose that it is responsible for transfer of the O-acetyl group to the *Salmonella* O67 antigen.

We found that *K.* oxytoca 10–5246 has the same gene cluster (downstream of *gnd*) as that of *Salmonella* O67 including *wejU* and *wejV*. Some of the *Klebsiella* strains also have galactan O antigens, and we suggest that the O67 gene cluster was derived from a *Klebsiella* strain with this gene cluster. Currently, the genomic locus of *Salmonella* O67 antigen gene cluster is unclear. It should be noted that the *wzm-wejU* set of genes is also present in the genome of *E. coli* SMS-3-5, with many insertion elements present upstream and downstream of that region.

It is likely that the *Salmonella* O67 strain under study arose from a serogroup B strain by gaining a new gene cluster for D-galactan I that originally came from *Klebsiella* and has been incorporated into the chromosome at an unidentified locus and that this was followed by repression of the function of its original O-antigen gene cluster by means also not identified. It remains to be seen whether all O67 isolates have similar genetics, but serogroup O67 has only one serovar, named ‘Cresswell’, and isolates are extremely rare.

## Structure and genetics of Salmonella Gal-initiated O antigens with close relatedness

There is a set of O antigens in *Salmonella* that have Gal as first sugar of the O unit, comprising serogroups O2 (A), O4 (B), O8 (C2-C3), O9 (D1), O9,46 (D2), O9,46,27 (D3), O3,10 (E1-E3), and O1,3,19 (E4). These O antigens also have many other similarities (Table 3). Except for serogroup C2-C3, they possess a main chain having a D-Manp-(1→4)-L-Rhap-(α1→3)-D-Galp trisaccharide repeat unit and may differ in (1) the configuration (α vs. β) and the position of the polymerization linkage (α 1→2 vs. α 1→6); and (2) the configuration (α vs. β) of the D-Manp-(1→4)-L-Rhap linkage. In serogroup C2-C3, the main chain is built up of L-Rhap-(β1→2)-D-Manp-(α1→2)-D-Manp-(α1→3)-D-Galp tetrasaccharide repeats. The major differences between serogroups are defined by the presence or absence and the identity (Abe, Tyv, or Par) of the side-branch 3,6-dideoxyhexose residue, and additional structural diversity is achieved by lateral glucosylation and/or O-acetylation, which in most cases are nonstoichiometric.

The other defining feature of Gal-initiated *Salmonella* O antigens is that they have the *wbaP* gene in the gene cluster for the initial transferase that transfers Gal-P from UDP–Gal to UndP to generate UndPP–Gal.

It is near universal in the Enterobacteriaceae for the first sugar to be GlcNAc or GalNAc with WecA as the initial transferase. The Gal-initiated O antigens are major exception, and it seems that the use of Gal as initial sugar arose in *Salmonella* since its divergence from *E. coli*. However, although there are only 8 Gal-initiated O antigens and
Salmonella O-antigen diversity

Table 3. Structures of Salmonella Gal-initiated O antigens [adopted from the recent review (Knirel, 2011)]

| Salmonella (S) serogroup, serovar | O-antigen structure* |
| --- | --- |
| SO2 (A) Paratyphi | $\begin{aligned} & \text { Parp } \\ & \alpha 1 \\ & \downarrow \\ & 3 \\ & \rightarrow 2)-\mathrm{D}-\operatorname{Manp}-(\alpha 1 \rightarrow 4)-\mathrm{L}-\operatorname{Rhap}-(\alpha 1 \rightarrow 3)-\mathrm{D}-\operatorname{Galp}-(\alpha 1 \rightarrow \\ & \text { Ac } \\ & | \\ & 2 \\ & \text { Abep-(2—Ac } \\ & \alpha 1 \\ & \downarrow \\ & 3 \\ & \text { D-Glcp } \\ & \alpha 1 \\ & \downarrow \\ & 4 \end{aligned}$ |
| SO4 (B) Typhimurium, Agona,† Abortus equi* | $\begin{aligned} & \text { Abep-(2—Ac } \\ & \alpha 1 \\ & \downarrow \\ & 3 \\ & \rightarrow 2)-\mathrm{D}-\operatorname{Manp}-(\alpha 1 \rightarrow 4)-\mathrm{L}-\operatorname{Rhap}-(\alpha 1 \rightarrow 3)-\mathrm{D}-\operatorname{Galp}-(\alpha 1 \rightarrow \\ & \text { D-Glcp } \\ & \alpha 1 \\ & \downarrow \\ & 4 \end{aligned}$ |
| SO4 (B) Bredeney, Typhimurium SL3622† | $\begin{aligned} & \text { Abep } \\ & \alpha 1 \\ & \downarrow \\ & 3 \\ & \rightarrow 2)-\mathrm{D}-\operatorname{Manp}-(\alpha 1 \rightarrow 4)-\mathrm{L}-\operatorname{Rhap}-(\alpha 1 \rightarrow 3)-\mathrm{D}-\operatorname{Galp}-(\alpha 1 \rightarrow \\ & \text { D-Glcp-(2—Ac } \\ & \alpha 1 \\ & \downarrow \\ & 3 \end{aligned}$ |
| SO8 (C2) Newport | $\begin{aligned} & \text { Abep } \\ & \alpha 1 \\ & \downarrow \\ & 2 \\ & \mid \\ & \text { Ac } \\ & \rightarrow 4)-\mathrm{L}-\operatorname{Rhap}-(\beta 1 \rightarrow 2)-\mathrm{D}-\operatorname{Manp}-(\alpha 1 \rightarrow 2)-\mathrm{D}-\operatorname{Manp}-(\alpha 1 \rightarrow 3)-\mathrm{D}-\operatorname{Galp}-(\beta 1 \rightarrow \\ & \text { D-Glcp-(2—Ac } \\ & \alpha 1 \\ & \downarrow \\ & 4 \end{aligned}$ |
| SO8 (C3) Kentucky I.S. 98 | $\begin{aligned} & \text { Abep } \\ & \alpha 1 \\ & \downarrow \\ & 3 \\ & \rightarrow 4)-\mathrm{L}-\operatorname{Rhap}-(\beta 1 \rightarrow 2)-\mathrm{D}-\operatorname{Manp}-(\alpha 1 \rightarrow 2)-\mathrm{D}-\operatorname{Manp}-(\alpha 1 \rightarrow 3)-\mathrm{D}-\operatorname{Galp}-(\beta 1 \rightarrow \\ & \text { D-Glcp } \\ & \alpha 1 \\ & \downarrow \\ & 2 \end{aligned}$ |
| SO8 (C3) Kentucky 98/39 | $\begin{aligned} & \text { Tyvp } \\ & \alpha 1 \\ & \downarrow \\ & 3 \\ & \rightarrow 2)-\mathrm{D}-\operatorname{Manp}-(\alpha 1 \rightarrow 4)-\mathrm{L}-\operatorname{Rhap}-(\alpha 1 \rightarrow 3)-\mathrm{D}-\operatorname{Galp}-(\alpha 1 \rightarrow \\ & \text { D-Glcp-(2—Ac } \\ & \alpha 1 \\ & \downarrow \\ & 4 \end{aligned}$ |
| SO9 (D1) Typhi, Enteritidis SE6,† Gallinarum bv. Pullorum 77† | $\begin{aligned} & \text { Tyvp } \\ & \alpha 1 \\ & \downarrow \\ & 3 \\ & \rightarrow 2)-\mathrm{D}-\operatorname{Manp}-(\alpha 1 \rightarrow 4)-\mathrm{L}-\operatorname{Rhap}-(\alpha 1 \rightarrow 3)-\mathrm{D}-\operatorname{Galp}-(\alpha 1 \rightarrow \\ & \text { D-Glcp } \\ & \alpha 1 \\ & \downarrow \\ & 4 \end{aligned}$ |
| SO9 (D1) Enteritidis I.S. 64, Gallinarum bv. Pullorum 11 | $\begin{aligned} & \text { Tyvp } \\ & \alpha 1 \\ & \downarrow \\ & 3 \\ & \rightarrow 6)-\mathrm{D}-\operatorname{Manp}-(\beta 1 \rightarrow 4)-\mathrm{L}-\operatorname{Rhap}-(\alpha 1 \rightarrow 3)-\mathrm{D}-\operatorname{Galp}-(\alpha 1 \rightarrow \\ & \text { D-Glcp } \\ & \alpha 1 \\ & \downarrow \\ & 4 \end{aligned}$ |
| SO9,46 (D2) Strasbourg | $\begin{aligned} & \text { Tyvp } \\ & \alpha 1 \\ & \downarrow \\ & 3 \\ & \rightarrow 6)-\mathrm{D}-\operatorname{Manp}-(\beta 1 \rightarrow 4)-\mathrm{L}-\operatorname{Rhap}-(\alpha 1 \rightarrow 3)-\mathrm{D}-\operatorname{Galp}-(\alpha 1 \rightarrow \\ & \text { D-Glcp } \\ & \alpha 1 \\ & \downarrow \\ & 4 \end{aligned}$ |

FEMS Microbiol Rev 38 (2014) 56–89
© 2013 Federation of European Microbiological Societies.
Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd. All rights reserved

Table 3. Continued

| Salmonella (S) serogroup, serovar | O-antigen structure* |
| --- | --- |
| SO9,46 (D2) II | $\begin{aligned} & \text { Tyvp } \\ & \alpha 1 \\ & \downarrow \\ & 3 \\ & \rightarrow 6)-\mathrm{D}-\operatorname{Manp}-(\beta 1 \rightarrow 4)-\mathrm{L}-\operatorname{Rhap}-(\alpha 1 \rightarrow 3)-\mathrm{D}-\operatorname{Galp}-(\alpha 1 \rightarrow \end{aligned}$ |
| SO9,46,27 (D3) II | $\begin{aligned} & \text { Tyvp } \\ & \alpha 1 \\ & \downarrow \\ & 3 \\ & \rightarrow 6)-\mathrm{D}-\operatorname{Manp}-(\alpha / \beta 1 \rightarrow 4)-\mathrm{L}-\operatorname{Rhap}-(\alpha 1 \rightarrow 3)-\mathrm{D}-\operatorname{Galp}-(\alpha 1 \rightarrow \\ & \text { D-Glcp } \\ & \alpha 1 \\ & \downarrow \\ & 6 \\ & \text { Ac } \\ & 6 \end{aligned}$ |
| SO3,10 (E1) Anatum | $\begin{aligned} & \rightarrow 6)-\mathrm{D}-\operatorname{Manp}-(\beta 1 \rightarrow 4)-\mathrm{L}-\operatorname{Rhap}-(\alpha 1 \rightarrow 3)-\mathrm{D}-\operatorname{Galp}-(\alpha 1 \rightarrow \\ & \text { D-Glcp } \\ & \alpha 1 \\ & \downarrow \\ & 4 \end{aligned}$ |
| SO3,10 (E1) Muenster | $\begin{aligned} & \rightarrow 6)-\mathrm{D}-\operatorname{Manp}-(\beta 1 \rightarrow 4)-\mathrm{L}-\operatorname{Rhap}-(\alpha 1 \rightarrow 3)-\mathrm{D}-\operatorname{Galp}-(\alpha 1 \rightarrow \\ & \text { D-Glcp } \\ & \alpha 1 \\ & \downarrow \\ & 4 \end{aligned}$ |
| SO3,10 (E2) Anatum var. 15+ | $\begin{aligned} & \rightarrow 6)-\mathrm{D}-\operatorname{Manp}-(\beta 1 \rightarrow 4)-\mathrm{L}-\operatorname{Rhap}-(\alpha 1 \rightarrow 3)-\mathrm{D}-\operatorname{Galp}-(\beta 1 \rightarrow \\ & \text { D-Glcp } \\ & \alpha 1 \\ & \downarrow \\ & 4 \end{aligned}$ |
| SO3,10 (E3) Lexington var. 15+,34+ | $\begin{aligned} & \rightarrow 6)-\mathrm{D}-\operatorname{Manp}-(\beta 1 \rightarrow 4)-\mathrm{L}-\operatorname{Rhap}-(\alpha 1 \rightarrow 3)-\mathrm{D}-\operatorname{Galp}-(\beta 1 \rightarrow \\ & \text { D-Glcp } \\ & \alpha 1 \\ & \downarrow \\ & 6 \end{aligned}$ |
| SO1,3,19 (E4) Senftenberg | $\begin{aligned} & \rightarrow 6)-\mathrm{D}-\operatorname{Manp}-(\beta 1 \rightarrow 4)-\mathrm{L}-\operatorname{Rhap}-(\alpha 1 \rightarrow 3)-\mathrm{D}-\operatorname{Galp}-(\alpha 1 \rightarrow \end{aligned}$ |

* Abe, abequose (3,6-dideoxy-D-xylo-hexose); Par, paratose (3,6-dideoxy-D-ribo-hexose); Tyv, tyvelose (3,6-dideoxy-D-arabino-hexose). Nonstoichiometric substituents are italicized.

† The O antigen lacks O-acetylation.

Salmonella O-antigen diversity

B $rmlB$ $rmlD$ $rmlA$ $rmlC$ $ddhD$ $ddhA$ $ddhB$ $ddhC$ $abe$ $wzx$ $wbaV$ $wbaU$ $wbaN$ $manC$ $manB$ $wbaP$

A $rmlB$ $rmlD$ $rmlA$ $rmlC$ $ddhD$ $ddhA$ $ddhB$ $ddhC$ $prt$ $tyv^{*}$ $wzx$ $wbaV$ $wbaU$ $wbaN$ $manC$ $manB$ $wbaP$

D1 $rmlB$ $rmlD$ $rmlA$ $rmlC$ $ddhD$ $ddhA$ $ddhB$ $ddhC$ $prt$ $tyv$ $wzx$ $wbaV$ $wbaU$ $wbaN$ $manC$ $manB$ $wbaP$

D3 $rmlB$ $rmlD$ $rmlA$ $rmlC$ $ddhD$ $ddhA$ $ddhB$ $ddhC$ $prt$ $tyv$ $wzx$ $wbaV$ $wzy$ $wbaO$ $wbaN$ $manC$ $manB$ $wbaP$

D2 $rmlB$ $rmlD$ $rmlA$ $rmlC$ $ddhD$ $ddhA$ $ddhB$ $ddhC$ $prt$ $tyv$ $wzx$ $wbaV$ $wzy$ $wbaO$ $wbaN$ $manC$ $manB$ $wbaP$

E $rmlB$ $rmlD$ $rmlA$ $rmlC$ $wzx$ $wzy$ $wbaO$ $wbaN$ $manC$ $manB$ $wbaP$ $orf17.4$

C2 $rmlB$ $rmlD$ $rmlA$ $rmlC$ $ddhD$ $ddhA$ $ddhB$ $ddhC$ $abe$ $wzx$ $wbaR$ $wbaL$ $wbaQ$ $wzy$ $wbaW$ $wbaZ$ $manC$ $manB$ $wbaP$

---

1 kb

Fig. 5. The O-antigen gene clusters of Salmonella Gal-initiated O antigens. For color coding key, see Fig. 1. Group B was the first O-antigen gene cluster to be described (Nikaido et al., 1967; Jiang et al., 1991). The O-antigen gene cluster of group A was extracted from the published genome CP00026. Other gene clusters were studied by restriction enzyme mapping to locate regions shared with the O-antigen gene cluster of group B, and only unique region was sequenced (Verma & Reeves, 1989; Liu et al., 1991; Brown et al., 1992; Wang et al., 1992; Xiang et al., 1994; Curd et al., 1998). * the $tyv$ gene in the O-antigen gene cluster of group A is nonfunctional due to a frameshift mutation.

function was found downstream of $wbaP$ in some group E strains.

Group B was the first O-antigen gene cluster to be described (Nikaido et al., 1967; Jiang et al., 1991) as it is present in the strain LT2 that was used in many early studies in bacterial genetics. It has Abe as its dideoxyhexose and the four $ddh$ genes plus the $abe$ gene. The difference between the O-antigen structures of the D1 and B O antigens is the presence of a Tyv side-branch sugar in D1 in place of Abe. The D1 gene cluster has $prt$ and $tyv$ genes in place of $abe$, which accounts for the structural difference. The only difference between the O-antigen structures of serogroups A and D1 is the presence of a Par or Tyv side branch, respectively, and the gene clusters are near identical, with $prt$ and $tyv$ genes both present. However, the $tyv$ gene is not functional in group A, and in serovar Paratyphi A at least, this has been shown to be due to a frameshift mutation near the start of the gene, which would prevent conversion of CDP-Par to CDP-Tyv (Verma et al., 1988). As mentioned above, the $wzy$ genes of groups A, B, and D1 are not located within the O-antigen gene cluster, but at a locus named $rfc$. However, there are $wzy$ remnants in their gene clusters.

The group D2 structure differs from the group D1 structure in the polymerization linkage and the configuration ($\alpha$ vs. $\beta$) of the D-Manp-(1→4)-L-Rhap linkage. It has been suggested that the O-antigen gene cluster of serogroup D2 has arisen by reassortment of the serogroup D1 and E gene clusters by recombination mediated by an H-repeat element (Xiang et al., 1994).

For serogroup D3, there are two forms of the O unit that differ only in the configuration of the linkage between Man and Rha ($\alpha$-1→4 and $\beta$-1→4). $wbaU$ is responsible for the formation of the D-Man-($\alpha$1→4)-L-Rha linkage (Curd et al., 1998), but there is no glycosyltransferase gene in the O-antigen gene cluster for the D-Man-($\beta$1→4)-L-Rha linkage, which may be located elsewhere in the genome. The O-antigen gene cluster of serogroup D1 also is thought to have arisen from that of D3 by the loss of original $wzy$ gene (Curd et al., 1998).

Group E was initially subdivided into groups E1, E2, E3, and E4, based on serology. Serogroups E1, E2, and E3 have been amalgamated as serogroup E1 (the 2007 Weill summary) on the basis that they have almost the same O-antigen gene clusters between $galF$ and $gnd$. Recently, we found that serogroup E4 also has the same O-antigen gene cluster as E1 and so is not really a separate serogroup. The variation in the Glc side chain among serogroup E O antigens is presumably due to the presence of different bacteriophages with side-chain modification genes (Table 3).

Serogroup C2-C3 has a different order for the sugars and one more Man residue in the O unit. All of the genes in the central region of the gene cluster are unique to serogroup C2-C3. The C3 form was originally put in a separate serogroup C3, but differs only in having a Glc side branch that is due to a bacteriophage-encoded set of genes as is common in Salmonella.

# Conclusions

This review covers the chemical structure and DNA sequence data for all Salmonella O antigens, including more recent work on the GlcNAc-/GalNAc-initiated Salmonella O antigens that are more directly comparable with those of *E. coli* and *Shigella*. Together with the previously published survey of *Shigella* O antigens, it provides insights into the evolution of O-antigen diversity in bacteria. It also documents the relationships between the O antigens of Salmonella and *E. coli*, which were underestimated before.

In our previous review (Liu et al., 2008), we had observed that *Shigella* has a higher than usual proportion of anomalies in its O-antigen gene clusters (17 anomalies in 33 O-antigen gene clusters), many of which are thought to be indicators of events that mediated the formation of new O-antigen forms, such as remnants of genes no longer required or elements that mediated gain of new genes. However, only 12 anomalies are found in the 37 gene clusters of the Salmonella GlcNAc-/GalNAc-initiated O antigens with the Wzx/Wzy pathway (excluding Salmonella O54 and O67), much lower than that in *Shigella*. The smaller number of anomalies indicates that for this major group of Salmonella O antigens, the structure of the gene clusters has generally been stable, indicating that the set of O antigens is well adapted to the Salmonella niche.

In the previous review (Liu et al., 2008), we also found that 21 of 34 *Shigella* O antigens are either identical or closely related to an O antigen in *E. coli* which is easily explained as all *Shigella* serotypes except for S. boydii type 13 are in fact part of the species *E. coli*. Homologous recombination occurs readily and was shown to be an essential mechanism in the diversification of *Shigella* O antigens.

Previous structural analysis of Salmonella and *E. coli* O antigens had revealed only a few shared structures, although early serological data had shown extensive cross-reactions (Orskov et al., 1977). However, in our recent studies, we found many more cases to give a total of 24 O antigens that are identical or closely related in Salmonella and *E. coli*. The most likely explanation for the observed similarities in the two species is that the each pair of gene clusters originated from a gene cluster that was present in the most recent common ancestor. In that case, the two gene clusters would have a similar organization. *E. coli* and Salmonella diverged about 140 million years ago, and 93% of *E. coli* and Salmonella housekeeping genes have levels of identity between 76.3% and 100% (Sharp, 1991). For 23 of the 24 O-antigen gene clusters that encode identical or closely related O antigens in *E. coli* and Salmonella, the average identity for corresponding genes is 73.5%, and the average identity for corresponding proteins is 73.7%. This is close to the lower end of the range for housekeeping genes, but the pattern is generally similar for all of the gene clusters. However, genes in these O-antigen gene clusters do diverge at a higher rate than housekeeping genes, suggesting that the O-antigen genes are under consistent selection pressure from the environments or hosts for better adaptation. This is not unexpected as they have an atypical GC content, suggesting an origin in another species, and they may still be adjusting to the new intracellular environment.

In these pairs of O-antigen gene clusters in Salmonella and *E. coli*, the identity levels for sugar synthesis genes, glycosyltransferase genes, and O-unit processing genes are different. The average level of identity is 77.1%, 70.3%, and 69.4%, respectively, for the three classes of genes and 81.4%, 67.1%, and 65.6%, respectively, for the proteins encoded by these genes. The divergence levels for glycosyltransferase genes and O-unit processing genes are consistently higher than those for sugar synthesis genes, being observed in almost all pairs of gene clusters. It appears that each pair has indeed diverged from a gene cluster that was in the common ancestor, but that the three classes of genes were subject to different selection pressures, although there is no experimental evidence for that.

Alternative explanations for the shared gene clusters are the following: (1) The gene clusters were recently transferred from one species to the other after species divergence. In this case, the two gene clusters should have a higher level of sequence identity, not related to the level for housekeeping genes. (2) They have a common origin but were acquired independently. In this case, we expect similar gene order, as is observed, but can make no predictions on level of divergence as it will depend on the time since the divergence of the donor species, which could be earlier or later than divergence of the *E. coli* and Salmonella species. (3) The two gene clusters were assembled independently either after species divergence or before being acquired by the *E. coli* and Salmonella lineages. In this case, the gene organization of the individual gene clusters should be different, so is not supported at all for the 23 pairs being discussed.

None of these alternative explanations fit the data as a sole explanation, but options (1) and (2) are also

Salmonella O-antigen diversity

possible, although if at all common one would expect some pairs with a much higher or lower level of divergence. This conclusion is in agreement with one proposed earlier with data for just three structures (Samuel *et al.*, 2004), but now has much stronger support. It is of course possible that some of the 23 gene clusters did arrive independently but happen to be close to the others in divergence, but if so, we suggest that this was a minority of them.

The exception is the case of Salmonella O52 and *E. coli* O153, in which gene clusters that are not related generate the same O-antigen structure. Each gene cluster has the expected number of glycosyltransferase genes and a *wzx* and *wzy* gene, but the order is different, and none have significant levels of identity. This is presumably a case of two gene clusters for a given structure that were assembled independently.

Some of the gene clusters shared by Salmonella and *E. coli* did evolve to generate new O-antigen forms by acquisition of new genes after species divergence as described above. The Salmonella O66 gene cluster is thought to have obtained a new *wzy* gene outside the O-antigen gene cluster that is responsible for the β-1→2 linkage between the O units. The original *wzy* gene for the β-1→3 linkage in the O-antigen gene cluster must have degraded over time as proposed for Salmonella serogroup B (Wang *et al.*, 2002a) as it was no longer required in O-antigen synthesis. For the Salmonella O55-*E. coli* O103 pair, one of the two gene clusters must have acquired a new gene (an acetyltransferase gene or a 3-hydroxybutanoyltransferase gene) after species divergence to synthesize a different sugar derivative. For the related Salmonella O43–*E. coli* O86 and Salmonella O13–*E. coli* O127 pairs, there were significant evolutionary changes, but it is not yet possible to unravel what happened. The Salmonella O6,14 and the *E. coli* O77 groups are interesting as, like the group of related *S.* flexneri serogroups, diversity arises by acquisition (or loss) of different prophage genes for side-chain modification: only one form has been observed in Salmonella, but 5 in *E. coli*.

It should be noted that within some serogroups, there are also variant strains with O-antigen structures and gene clusters different from those of the type strains. For example, the O-antigen structure of one Salmonella O50 strain was reported to differ from that of the type strain in having a GlcNAc in place of a GalNAc residue (Senchenkova *et al.*, 1997). Also Fitzgerald *et al.* found that the O-antigen-based molecular typing method they devised for Salmonella O13 cannot detect O13 strains belonging to subspecies IIIb or *S.* bongori (Fitzgerald *et al.*, 2007). The genetic basis for this difference remains to be determined. In addition, there is more than one O-antigen structure for some other Salmonella O

serogroups, usually obtained to determine the basis of serological variation, and most variations are in the side branches, as in serogroups O6,7, O6,14, and O30 (Table 1). These variations are probably due to the presence in the chromosome of different bacteriophage genomes that include O-antigen side-branch modification genes.

As a genus with a long evolutionary history, the mechanism for the generation and maintenance of O-antigen diversity in Salmonella is obviously different from that in Shigella (Liu *et al.*, 2008), which is essentially a relatively small group of strains in another species (*E. coli*) that are distinguished by a capacity for host cell invasion that may have only recently been adopted in the species (Maurelli *et al.*, 1998; Pallen & Wren, 2007). One of the major characteristics of Salmonella is that the O antigens can be divided into two different classes (Gal-initiated class and GlcNAc-/GlcNAc-initiated class). The GlcNAc-/GlcNAc-initiated Salmonella O antigens that we have just been discussing are similar to those in other members of Enterobacteriaceae in using the WecA initial sugar transferase encoded in the ECA gene cluster that is widely distributed in the family. Over half of the GlcNAc-/GlcNAc-initiated O antigens are also found in the closest relative *E. coli* and all but one of these are thought to have been present in their common ancestor.

The Gal-initiated O antigens have a quite different evolutionary history and are thought to have entered the species quite recently, but although only 8 in number are now dominant. We do not know the reasons for this enormous difference between *E. coli* and Salmonella, with Gal-initiated O antigens greatly outnumbering the GlcNAc-/GlcNAc-initiated O antigens in Salmonella, but to our knowledge not reported in *E. coli*.

Most Salmonella strains that cause serious infection in humans and animals have Gal-initiated O antigens. However, it is worth noting that the *E. coli* members of several Salmonella–*E. coli* serogroup pairs with identical or related O antigens, including *E. coli* O157, O55, O111, O145, O103, O118, and O78, are associated with important pathogenic *E. coli* strains. The long history of these O antigens in *E. coli* and Salmonella indicates that they are possibly adaptive in both species, but most Salmonella members are not recognized to be particularly pathogenic.

O-antigen diversity has been thought to be important in offering the various clones selective advantages in their specific niches. It has been estimated that a selective advantage of only 0.1% for one O antigen over another in a given niche is sufficient to maintain different alleles in different clones (Reeves, 1992), although it is difficult to demonstrate this in a laboratory assay. The O antigen is a target of the host innate immune system. It is recognized by the Toll-like receptor 4 (Royle *et al.*, 2003), and
it has been suggested that the pressures from the immune system may contribute to O-antigen diversity. Novel O antigens, especially those containing rare sugars, would not be recognized by the immune system. An example of the effect of a change in O antigen is given by *Vibrio cholerae* O139, a variant of the 7th pandemic O1 clone with a new O unit containing 2 Col residues and a QuiN-Ac residue (Knirel, 2011). It was first identified in 1992 Southern India and quickly spread in India and Bengal and some other Asian countries, totally displacing the O1 serogroup (Ramamurthy *et al.*, 2003). It had the capacity to infect persons previously immune to the ancestral *V.* *cholerae* O1 form of the pandemic strain (Blokesch & Schoolnik, 2007), and this was thought to be the cause of its success (Ramamurthy *et al.*, 2003). After few years, the O139 form virtually disappeared, but there has been periodic switching between *V.* *cholerae* O1 and O139 strains as agents of cholera in some areas (Faruque *et al.*, 2003; Chatterjee *et al.*, 2007). The strains also diversified other factors, which affect the balance of the two antigenic forms; however, the original rise of O139 form showed how powerful the selective pressure of O-antigen variation can be.

It should be noted that a relationship between O-antigen form and host has been observed in several bacteria, including *Salmonella* for which a host is commonly most easily infected by strains bearing a specific O antigen (Makela *et al.*, 1973; Rabsch *et al.*, 2002; Butela & Lawrence, 2010). In addition, most bacteria cannot evade an immune response by switching their O antigens in the timescale of an infection, as for H antigen phase variation. These data raise the possibility that the different O antigens expressed by different strains may confer advantages in different ecological niches, such as different host intestinal environments, which may be a major selection pressure for the generation and maintenance of O-antigen diversity (Butela & Lawrence, 2010). It has for instance been shown that diversifying selection mediated by predation from intestinal amoebae can contribute to O-antigen variation in *Salmonella* (Wildschutte *et al.*, 2004; Wildschutte & Lawrence, 2007). Intestinal amoebae recognize antigenically diverse *Salmonella* strains with different efficiency, giving the various serotypes different ability to escape predators in particular environments. O-antigen variation is also helpful for bacteria in avoiding bacteriophage predation (Blokesch & Schoolnik, 2007). In addition, O-antigen diversity may provide selective advantage in other aspects; for example, they may mediate more effective adhesion to different intestinal mucins.

Serotyping has been very important for our understanding of diversity in *Salmonella* and is used to define the serovars that are referred to in most discussions of the genus. However, in recent years, several aspects of traditional serotyping methods have limited the utility of serotyping, especially in large-scale epidemiology studies. The techniques can be laborious and time-consuming, and the full range of sera needed is kept only in major typing centers. In addition, based on the O-antigen structure data obtained in this study, considerable serological cross-reaction is expected between *E.* *coli* and *Salmonella*. There has often been discussion of developing a molecular typing system for *Salmonella* based on the current serology scheme, and the relevant concepts have also been discussed and applied in other bacteria (Raymond *et al.*, 2002; Li *et al.*, 2009). The completion of the sequencing of the *Salmonella* O-antigen gene clusters provides the data for a comprehensive typing scheme for *Salmonella* using sequence diversity, but based on the serotyping scheme, to give in effect molecular serotyping. To facilitate this, we have included data on the specific genes that could be useful for this and also a comprehensive set of primers that we have developed for a microarray targeting the O-antigen-specific genes that can differentiate most *Salmonella* serogroups (Table S5) (Guo *et al.*, 2013). The only exceptions are groups A and D1 that need to be further distinguished from each other using conventional serotyping methods, due to having near-identical O-antigen gene clusters. The mutations in the *tyv* gene of group A strains are not enough to easily distinguish groups A and D1, but the specific frameshift in serovar Paratyphi A could probably be developed into a specific test for this serovar.

For most serogroups, the O-unit processing genes (*wzx* and *wzy*) were selected as target genes, the exceptions being serogroups A/D1, O54, and O67, for which the sugar synthesis gene *prt*, the glycosyltransferase gene *wbbE*, and acetyltransferase gene *wejV*, respectively, were selected. For most serogroups, only primer pairs based on their own specific genes can generate the specific PCR products. However, due to the close relationship among the Gal-initiated *Salmonella* O-antigen gene clusters, combinations of primer pairs targeting more than one gene were necessary for detecting some of these serogroups (Table S5). For instance, as the *prt* genes of groups A, D1, D2, and D3 are highly similar, but not found in other O-antigen gene clusters, *prt* was used in the identification of all these groups, with D2 and D3, for example, further distinguished by their specific *wzy* genes. Our molecular typing system can also accurately differentiate *Salmonella* and *E.* *coli* strains with related O-antigen structures.

# Acknowledgements

This work was supported by the National Key Programs for Infectious Diseases of China (2013ZX10004-216-001); the National 973 Program of China Grant (2012CB721001,
2009CB522603); the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC) Key Program Grant 31030002; the NSFC General Program Grant (81171524, 31270003); and the Russian Foundation for Basic Research (projects 11-04-91173_NNSF-a and 11-04-01020-a). The authors have no conflict of interest to declare.

# References

Alam J, Beyer N & Liu HW (2004) Biosynthesis of colitose: expression, purification, and mechanistic characterization of GDP-4-keto-6-deoxy-D-mannose-3-dehydrase (ColD) and GDP-L-colitose synthase (ColC). *Biochemistry* 43: 16450–16460.

Albermann C & Beuttler H (2008) Identification of the GDP-N-acetyl-D-perosamine producing enzymes from *Escherichia coli* O157:H7. *FEBS Lett* 582: 479–484.

Ali T, Weintraub A & Widmalm G (2007) Structural determination of the O-antigenic polysaccharide from *Escherichia coli* O166. *Carbohydr Res* 342: 274–278.

Allard ST, Giraud MF, Whitfield C *et al.* (2001) The crystal structure of dTDP-D-glucose 4,6-dehydratase (RmlB) from *Salmonella enterica* serovar Typhimurium, the second enzyme in the dTDP-l-rhamnose pathway. *J Mol Biol* 307: 283–295.

Allison GE & Verma NK (2000) Serotype-converting bacteriophages and O-antigen modification in *Shigella flexneri*. *Trends Microbiol* 8: 17–23.

Andersson M, Carlin N, Leontein K *et al.* (1989) Structural studies of the O-antigenic polysaccharide of *Escherichia coli* O86, which possesses blood-group B activity. *Carbohydr Res* 185: 211–223.

Annunziato PW, Wright LF, Vann WF *et al.* (1995) Nucleotide sequence and genetic analysis of the *neuD* and *neuB* genes in region 2 of the polysialic acid gene cluster of *Escherichia coli* K1. *J Bacteriol* 177: 312–319.

Aoyama KM, Haase AM & Reeves PR (1994) Evidence for effect of random genetic drift on G+C content after Lateral transfer of fucose pathway genes to *Escherichia coli* K-12. *Mol Biol Evol* 11: 829–838.

Bartelt M, Shashkov AS, Kochanowski H *et al.* (1993) Structure of the O-specific polysaccharide of the O23 antigen (LPS) from *Escherichia coli* O23:K?:H16. *Carbohydr Res* 248: 233–240.

Bengoechea JA, Najdenski H & Skurnik M (2004) Lipopolysaccharide O antigen status of *Yersinia enterocolitica* O:8 is essential for virulence and absence of O antigen affects the expression of other *Yersinia* virulence factors. *Mol Microbiol* 52: 451–469.

Bentley SD, Aanensen DM, Mavroidi A *et al.* (2006) Genetic analysis of the capsular biosynthetic locus from all 90 pneumococcal serotypes. *PLoS Genet* 2: e31.

Beutin L, Wang Q, Naumann D *et al.* (2007) Relationship between O-antigen subtypes, bacterial surface structures and O-antigen gene clusters in *Escherichia coli* O123 strains

carrying genes for Shiga toxins and intimin. *J Med Microbiol* 56: 177–184.

Blokesch M & Schoolnik GK (2007) Serogroup conversion of *Vibrio cholerae* in aquatic reservoirs. *PLoS Pathog* 3: e81.

Boyd EF, Nelson K, Wang F-S *et al.* (1994) Molecular genetic basis of allelic polymorphism in malate dehydrogenase (*mdh*) in natural populations of *Escherichia coli* and *Salmonella enterica*. *P Natl Acad Sci USA* 91: 1280–1284.

Brisson JR & Perry MB (1988) The structures of the two lipopolysaccharide O-chains produced by *Salmonella boecker*. *Biochem Cell Biol* 66: 1066–1077.

Bronner D, Clarke BR & Whitfield C (1994) Identification of an ATP-binding cassette transport system required for translocation of lipopolysaccharide O-antigen side-chains across the cytoplasmic membrane of *Klebsiella pneumoniae* serotype O1. *Mol Microbiol* 14: 505–519.

Brown PK, Romana LK & Reeves PR (1992) Molecular analysis of the *rfb* gene cluster of *Salmonella* serovar Muenchen (strain M67): genetic basis of the polymorphism between groups C2 and B. *Mol Microbiol* 6: 1385–1394.

Bundle D, Gerken M & Perry M (1986) Two-dimensional nuclear magnetic resonance at 500 MHz: the structural elucidation of a *Salmonella* serogroup N polysaccharide antigen. *Can J Chem* 64: 255–264.

Butela K & Lawrence J (2010) Population genetics of *Salmonella*: selection for antigenic diversity. *Bacterial Population Genetics in Infectious Disease* Vol. (Ashley Robinson D, Falush D & Feil EJ, eds), A John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, NJ.

Campbell RE, Mosimann SC, Tanner ME *et al.* (2000) The structure of UDP-N-acetylglucosamine 2-epimerase reveals homology to phosphoglycosyl transferases. *Biochemistry* 39: 14993–15001.

CDC (2009) *Salmonella* Surveillance: Annual Summary, 2009. US Department of Health and Human Services, Atlanta, GA.

Chatterjee S, Ghosh K, Raychoudhuri A *et al.* (2007) Phenotypic and genotypic traits and epidemiological implication of *Vibrio cholerae* O1 and O139 strains in India during 2003. *J Med Microbiol* 56: 824–832.

Clark CG, Kropinski AM, Parolis H *et al.* (2009) *Escherichia coli* O123 O-antigen genes and polysaccharide structure are conserved in some *Salmonella enterica* serogroups. *J Med Microbiol* 58: 884–894.

Clark CG, Grant CC, Trout-Yakel KM *et al.* (2010) The O28 antigen gene clusters of *Salmonella enterica* subsp. *enterica* serovar Dakar and serovar Pomona are different. *Int J Microbiol* 2010: 209291.

Clarke BR & Whitfield C (1992) Molecular cloning of the *rfb* region of *Klebsiella pneumoniae* serotype O1:K20: the *rfb* gene cluster is responsible for synthesis of the D-galactan I O polysaccharide. *J Bacteriol* 174: 4614–4621.

Cunneen MM, De Castro C, Kenyon J *et al.* (2009) The O-specific polysaccharide structure and biosynthetic gene cluster of *Yersinia pseudotuberculosis* serotype O:11. *Carbohydr Res* 344: 1533–1540.

Cunneen MM, Liu B, Wang L & Reeves PR (2013) Biosynthesis of UDP-GlcNAc, UndPP-GlcNAc and UDP-GlcNAcA involves three easily distinguished 4-epimerase enzymes, Gne, Gnu and GnaB. *PLoS One* **8**: e67646.

Curd H, Liu D & Reeves PR (1998) Relationships among the O-antigen gene clusters of *Salmonella enterica* groups B, D1, D2, and D3. *J Bacteriol* **180**: 1002–1007.

Daniels C, Vindurampulle C & Morona R (1998) Overexpression and topology of the *Shigella flexneri* O-antigen polymerase (Rfc/Wzy). *Mol Microbiol* **28**: 1211–1222.

De Castro C, Skurnik M, Molinaro A *et al.* (2009) Characterization of the specific O-polysaccharide structure and biosynthetic gene cluster of *Yersinia pseudotuberculosis* serotype O:15. *Innate Immun* **15**: 351–359.

De Castro C, Kenyon JJ, Cunneen MM *et al.* (2010) Genetic characterisation and structural analysis of the O-specific polysaccharide of *Yersinia pseudotuberculosis* serotype O:1c. *Innate Immun* **17**: 183–190.

Di Fabio JL, Brisson JR & Perry MB (1988a) Structure of the major lipopolysaccharide antigenic O-chain produced by *Salmonella carrau* (O:6, 14, 24). *Carbohydr Res* **179**: 233–244.

Di Fabio JL, Perry MB & Brisson JR (1988b) Structure of the antigenic O-polysaccharide of the lipopolysaccharide produced by *Salmonella eimsbutel*. *Biochem Cell Biol* **66**: 107–115.

Di Fabio JL, Brisson JR & Perry MB (1989a) Structural analysis of the three lipopolysaccharides produced by *Salmonella madelia* (1,6,14,25). *Biochem Cell Biol* **67**: 78–85.

Di Fabio JL, Brisson JR & Perry MB (1989b) Structure of the lipopolysaccharide antigenic O-chain produced by *Salmonella livingstone* (O:6,7). *Biochem Cell Biol* **67**: 278–280.

Di Fabio JL, Brisson JR & Perry MB (1989c) Structure of the lipopolysaccharide antigenic O-chain produced by *Salmonella ohio* (O:6,7). *Carbohydr Res* **189**: 161–168.

Doolittle RF, Feng DF, Tsang S *et al.* (1996) Determining divergence times of the major kingdoms of living organisms with a protein clock. *Science* **271**: 470–477.

Duus J, Gotfredsen CH & Bock K (2000) Carbohydrate structural determination by NMR spectroscopy: modern methods and limitations. *Chem Rev* **100**: 4589–4614.

Enright AJ, Van Dongen S & Ouzounis CA (2002) An efficient algorithm for large-scale detection of protein families. *Nucleic Acids Res* **30**: 1575–1584.

Erbing C, Kenne L, Lindberg B *et al.* (1978) Structure of the O-specific side-chains of the *Escherichia coli* O 75 lipopolysaccharide: a revision. *Carbohydr Res* **60**: 259–265.

Faruque SM, Chowdhury N, Kamruzzaman M *et al.* (2003) Reemergence of epidemic *Vibrio cholerae* O139, Bangladesh. *Emerg Infect Dis* **9**: 1116–1122.

Feng L, Han W, Wang Q *et al.* (2005a) Characterization of *Escherichia coli* O86 O-antigen gene cluster and identification of O86-specific genes. *Vet Microbiol* **106**: 241–248.

Feng L, Senchenkova SN, Tao J *et al.* (2005b) Structural and genetic characterization of enterohemorrhagic *Escherichia*

coli O145 O antigen and development of an O145 serogroup-specific PCR assay. *J Bacteriol* **187**: 758–764.

Feng L, Reeves PR, Lan R *et al.* (2008) A recalibrated molecular clock and independent origins for the cholera pandemic clones. *PLoS ONE* **3**: e4053.

Fitzgerald C, Sherwood R, Gheesling LL *et al.* (2003) Molecular analysis of the *rfb* O-antigen gene cluster of *Salmonella enterica* serogroup O:6,14 and development of a serogroup-specific PCR assay. *Appl Environ Microbiol* **69**: 6099–6105.

Fitzgerald C, Gheesling L, Collins M *et al.* (2006) Sequence analysis of the *rfb* loci, encoding proteins involved in the biosynthesis of the *Salmonella enterica* O17 and O18 antigens: serogroup-specific identification by PCR. *Appl Environ Microbiol* **72**: 7949–7953.

Fitzgerald C, Collins M, van Duyne S *et al.* (2007) Multiplex, bead-based suspension array for molecular determination of common *Salmonella* serogroups. *J Clin Microbiol* **45**: 3323–3334.

Follens A, Veiga-da-Cunha M, Merckx R *et al.* (1999) *acs1* of *Haemophilus influenzae* type a capsulation locus region II encodes a bifunctional ribulose 5-phosphate reductase-CDP-ribitol pyrophosphorylase. *J Bacteriol* **181**: 2001–2007.

Fratamico PM, DebRoy C, Strobaugh TP Jr *et al.* (2005) DNA sequence of the *Escherichia coli* O103 O-antigen gene cluster and detection of enterohemorrhagic *E. coli* O103 by PCR amplification of the *wzx* and *wzy* genes. *Can J Microbiol* **51**: 515–522.

Gajdus J, Kaczynski Z, Smietana J *et al.* (2009) Structural determination of the O-antigenic polysaccharide from *Salmonella Mara* (O:39). *Carbohydr Res* **344**: 1054–1057.

Gamian A, Jones C, Lipinski T *et al.* (2000) Structure of the sialic acid-containing O-specific polysaccharide from *Salmonella enterica* serovar Toucra O48 lipopolysaccharide. *Eur J Biochem* **267**: 3160–3166.

Greenfield LK & Whitfield C (2012) Synthesis of lipopolysaccharide O-antigens by ABC transporter-dependent pathways. *Carbohydr Res* **356**: 12–24.

Grimont PAD & Weill FX (2007) *Antigenic Formulae of the Salmonella Serovars*, 9th edn. WHO Collaborating Centre for Reference and Research on *Salmonella*. Institut Pasteur, Paris, France.

Guan S, Clarke AJ & Whitfield C (2001) Functional analysis of the galactosyltransferases required for biosynthesis of D-galactan I, a component of the lipopolysaccharide O1 antigen of *Klebsiella pneumoniae*. *J Bacteriol* **183**: 3318–3327.

Guo D, Liu B, Liu F *et al.* (2013) Development of a DNA microarray for molecular identification of all 46 *Salmonella* O serogroups. *Appl Environ Microbiol* **79**: 3392–3399.

Gupta DS, Shashkov AS, Jann B *et al.* (1992) Structures of the O1B and O1C lipopolysaccharide antigens of *Escherichia coli*. *J Bacteriol* **174**: 7963–7970.

Hallis TM, Lei Y, Que NL *et al.* (1998) Mechanistic studies of the biosynthesis of paratose: purification and characterization of CDP-paratose synthase. *Biochemistry* **37**: 4935–4945.

Salmonella O-antigen diversity

Hardnett FP, Hoekstra RM, Kennedy M *et al.* (2004) Epidemiologic issues in study design and data analysis related to FoodNet activities. *Clin Infect Dis* 38(suppl 3): S121–S126.

Ho SY, Lanfear R, Bromham L *et al.* (2011) Time-dependent rates of molecular evolution. *Mol Ecol* 20: 3087–3101.

Hu B, Perepelov AV, Liu B *et al.* (2010) Structural and genetic evidence for the close relationship between Escherichia coli O71 and Salmonella enterica O28 O-antigens. *FEMS Immunol Med Microbiol* 59: 161–169.

Iguchi A, Thomson NR, Ogura Y *et al.* (2009) Complete genome sequence and comparative genome analysis of enteropathogenic Escherichia coli O127:H6 strain E2348/69. *J Bacteriol* 191: 347–354.

Jansson PE, Lindberg B, Widmalm G *et al.* (1987) Structural studies of the Escherichia coli O78 O-antigen polysaccharide. *Carbohydr Res* 165: 87–92.

Jensen SO & Reeves PR (2001) Molecular evolution of the GDP-mannose pathway genes (*manB* and *manC*) in Salmonella enterica. *Microbiology* 147: 599–610.

Jiang XM, Neal B, Santiago F *et al.* (1991) Structure and sequence of the *rfb* (O antigen) gene cluster of Salmonella serovar typhimurium (strain LT2). *Mol Microbiol* 5: 695–713.

Johnson DA & Liu H (1998) Mechanisms and pathways from recent deoxysugar biosynthesis research. *Curr Opin Chem Biol* 2: 642–649.

Keenleyside WJ & Whitefield C (1996) A novel pathway for O-polysaccharide biosynthesis in Salmonella enterica serovar Borreze. *J Biol Chem* 271: 28581–28592.

Keenleyside WJ, Perry M, Maclean L *et al.* (1994) A plasmid-encoded *rfbO*:54 gene cluster is required for biosynthesis of the O:54 antigen in Salmonella enterica serovar Borreze. *Mol Microbiol* 11: 437–448.

Kenne L, Lindberg B, Soderholm E *et al.* (1983) Structural studies of the O-antigens from Salmonella greenside and Salmonella adelaide. *Carbohydr Res* 111: 289–296.

King JD, Mulrooney EF, Vinogradov E *et al.* (2008) *lfnA* from Pseudomonas aeruginosa O12 and *wbuX* from Escherichia coli O145 encode membrane-associated proteins and are required for expression of 2,6-dideoxy-2-acetamidino-*L*-galactose in lipopolysaccharide O antigen. *J Bacteriol* 190: 1671–1679.

Kneidinger B, Graninger M, Adam G *et al.* (2001) Identification of two GDP-6-deoxy-*D*-lyxo-4-hexulose reductases synthesizing GDP-*D*-rhamnose in Aneurinibacillus thermoaerophilus L420-91T. *J Biol Chem* 276: 5577–5583.

Knirel YA (2011) Structure of O-antigens. *Bacterial Lipopolysaccharides: Structure, Chemical Synthesis, Biogenesis and Interaction with Host Cells*. (Knirel YA & Valvano MA, eds), Springer Wien, New York, NY.

Knirel YA, Shashkov AS, Tsvetkov YE *et al.* (2003) 5,7-Diamino-3,5,7,9-tetradeoxynon-2-ulosonic acids in bacterial glycopolymers: chemistry and biochemistry. *Adv Carbohydr Chem Biochem* 58: 371–417.


Knirel YA, Shevelev SD & Perepelov AV (2012) Higher aldulosonic acids: components of bacterial glycans. *Mendeleev Commun* 21: 173–182.

Knirel YA, Lan R, Senchenkova SN *et al.* (2013) O-antigen structure of Shigella flexneri serotype Yv and effect of the *lpt-O* gene variation on phosphoethanolamine modification of *S.* flexneri O-antigens. *Glycobiology* 23: 475–485.

Kocharova NA, Vinogradov EV, Knirel’ IuA *et al.* (1988) The structure of O-specific polysaccharide chains of lipopolysaccharides from Citrobacter 032 and Salmonella arizonae 064 (Arizona 29). *Bioorg Khim* 14: 697–700.

Kocharova NA, Knirel YA, Stanislavsky ES *et al.* (1996) Structural and serological studies of lipopolysaccharides of Citrobacter O35 and O38 antigenically related to Salmonella. *FEMS Immunol Med Microbiol* 13: 1–8.

Koropatkin NM, Liu HW & Holden HM (2003) High resolution x-ray structure of tyvelose epimerase from Salmonella typhi. *J Biol Chem* 278: 20874–20881.

Kumirska J, Szafranek J, Czerwicka M *et al.* (2007) The structure of the O-polysaccharide isolated from the lipopolysaccharide of Salmonella Dakar (serogroup O:28). *Carbohydr Res* 342: 2138–2143.

Kumirska J, Dziadziuszko H, Czerwicka M *et al.* (2011) Heterogeneous structure of O-Antigenic part of lipopolysaccharide of Salmonella Telaviv (serogroup O:28) containing 3-Acetamido-3,6-dideoxy-*D*-glucopyranose. *Biochemistry (Mosc)* 76: 780–790.

Li Q & Reeves PR (2000) Genetic variation of dTDP-*L*-rhamnose pathway genes in Salmonella enterica. *Microbiology* 146: 2291–2307.

Li Y, Cao B, Liu B *et al.* (2009) Molecular detection of all 34 distinct O-antigen forms of Shigella. *J Med Microbiol* 58: 69–81.

Li D, Liu B, Chen M *et al.* (2010a) A multiplex PCR method to detect 14 Escherichia coli serogroups associated with urinary tract infections. *J Microbiol Methods* 82: 71–77.

Li Y, Perepelov AV, Guo D *et al.* (2010b) Structural and genetic relationships of two pairs of closely related O-antigens of Escherichia coli and Salmonella enterica: *E.* coli O11/*S.* enterica O16 and *E.* coli O21/*S.* enterica O38. *FEMS Immunol Med Microbiol* 61: 258–268.

Lindberg B, Lindh F, Longren J *et al.* (1981) Structural studies of the O-specific side-chain of the lipopolysaccharide from Escherichia coli O55. *Carbohydr Res* 97: 105–112.

Lindberg B, Leontein K, Lindquist U *et al.* (1988) Structural studies of the O-antigen polysaccharide of Salmonella thompson, serogroup Cl (6,7). *Carbohydr Res* 174: 313–322.

Linton KJ & Higgins CF (1998) The Escherichia coli ATP-binding cassette (ABC) proteins. *Mol Microbiol* 28: 5–13.

Liu D, Verma NK, Romana LK & Reeves PR (1991) Relationships among the *rfb* regions of Salmonella serovars A, B, and D. *J Bacteriol* 173: 4814–4819.

Liu B, Knirel YA, Feng L *et al.* (2008) Structure and genetics of Shigella O antigens. *FEMS Microbiol Rev* 32: 627–653.

Liu B, Wu F, Li D *et al.* (2009) Development of a serogroup-specific DNA microarray for identification of Escherichia coli strains associated with bovine septicemia and diarrhea. Vet Microbiol 142: 373–378.

Liu B, Perepelov AV, Li D *et al.* (2010a) Structure of the O-antigen of Salmonella O66 and the genetic basis for similarity and differences between the closely related O-antigens of Escherichia coli O166 and Salmonella O66. Microbiology 156: 1642–1649.

Liu B, Perepelov AV, Guo D *et al.* (2010b) Structural and genetic relationships between the O-antigens of Escherichia coli O118 and O151. FEMS Immunol Med Microbiol 60: 199–207.

Liu B, Perepelov AV, Svensson MV *et al.* (2010c) Genetic and structural relationships of Salmonella O55 and Escherichia coli O103 O-antigens and identification of a 3-hydroxybutanoyltransferase gene involved in the synthesis of a Fuc3N derivative. Glycobiology 20: 679–688.

MacLean LL & Perry MB (1997) Structural characterization of the serotype O:5 O-polysaccharide antigen of the lipopolysaccharide of Escherichia coli O:5. Biochem Cell Biol 75: 199–205.

Makela PH, Valtonen VV & Valtonen M (1973) Role of O-antigen (lipopolysaccharide) factors in the virulence of Salmonella. J Infect Dis 128 (Suppl): 81–85.

Masoud H & Perry MB (1996) Structural characterization of the O-antigenic polysaccharide of Escherichia coli serotype 017 lipopolysaccharide. Biochem Cell Biol 74: 241–248.

Maurelli AT, Fernandez RE, Bloch CA *et al.* (1998) “Black holes” and bacterial pathogenicity: a large genomic deletion that enhances the virulence of Shigella spp. and enteroinvasive Escherichia coli. P Natl Acad Sci USA 95: 3943–3948.

Mavroidi A, Aanensen DM, Godoy D *et al.* (2007) Genetic relatedness of the Streptococcus pneumoniae capsular biosynthetic loci. J Bacteriol 189: 7841–7855.

McGrath BC & Osborn MJ (1991) Localisation of the terminal steps of O-antigen synthesis in Salmonella typhimurium. J Bacteriol 173: 649–654.

McQuiston JR, Parrenas R, Ortiz-Rivera M *et al.* (2004) Sequencing and comparative analysis of flagellin genes fliC, fljB, and flpA from Salmonella. J Clin Microbiol 42: 1923–1932.

McQuiston JR, Herrera-Leon S, Wertheim BC *et al.* (2008) Molecular phylogeny of the salmonellae: relationships among Salmonella species and subspecies determined from four housekeeping genes and evidence of lateral gene transfer events. J Bacteriol 190: 7060–7067.

Morelli G, Song Y, Mazzoni CJ *et al.* (2011) Yersinia pestis genome sequencing identifies patterns of global phylogenetic diversity. Nat Genet 42: 1140–1143.

Mulford CA & Osborn MJ (1983) A intermediate step in translocation of lipopolysaccharide to outer membrane of Salmonella typhimurium. P Natl Acad Sci USA 80: 1159–1163.

Mulrooney EF, Poon KK, McNally DJ *et al.* (2005) Biosynthesis of UDP-N-acetyl-L-fucosamine, a precursor to the biosynthesis of lipopolysaccharide in Pseudomonas aeruginosa serotype O11. J Biol Chem 280: 19535–19542.

Naide Y, Nikaido H, Mäkelä PH *et al.* (1965) Semirough strains of Salmonella. P Natl Acad Sci USA 53: 147–153.

Neidhardt FC, Ingraham JL, Magasanik B *et al.* (1987) Escherichia and Salmonella typhimurium: Cellular and Molecular Biology. American Society for Microbiology, Washington, DC.

Nelson K & Selander RK (1992) Evolutionary genetics of the proline permease gene (*putP*) and the control region of the proline utilization operon in populations of Salmonella and Escherichia coli. J Bacteriol 174: 6886–6895.

Nelson K, Whittam TS & Selander RK (1991) Nucleotide polymorphism and evolution in the glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase gene (*gapA*) in natural populations of Salmonella and Escherichia coli. P Natl Acad Sci USA 88: 6667–6671.

Nikaido H, Levinthal M, Nikaido K *et al.* (1967) Extended deletions in the histidine-rough-B region of the Salmonella chromosome. P Natl Acad Sci USA 57: 1825–1832.

Ochman H & Wilson AC (1987) Evolution in bacteria: evidence for a universal substitution rate in cellular genomes. J Mol Evol 26: 74–86.

Orskov I, Orskov F, Jann B *et al.* (1977) Serology, chemistry, and genetics of O and K antigens of Escherichia coli. Bacteriol Rev 41: 667–710.

Pallen MJ & Wren BW (2007) Bacterial pathogenomics. Nature 449: 835–842.

Perepelov AV, Liu B, Senchenkova SN *et al.* (2009) Structure of O-antigen and functional characterization of O-antigen gene cluster of Salmonella enterica O47 containing ribitol phosphate and 2-acetimidoylamino-2,6-dideoxy-L-galactose. Biochemistry (Mosc) 74: 416–420.

Perepelov AV, Liu B, Senchenkova SN *et al.* (2010a) Structure and gene cluster of the O-antigen of Salmonella enterica O60 containing 3-formamido-3,6-dideoxy-D-galactose. Carbohydr Res 345: 1632–1634.

Perepelov AV, Liu B, Senchenkova SN *et al.* (2010b) Structure of the O-polysaccharide of Salmonella enterica O41. Carbohydr Res 345: 971–973.

Perepelov AV, Liu B, Senchenkova SN *et al.* (2010c) Structure of the O-antigen and characterization of the O-antigen gene cluster of Escherichia coli O108 containing 5,7-diacetamido-3,5,7,9-tetradeoxy-L-glycero-D-galacto-non-2-ulosonic (8-epilegionaminic) acid. Biochemistry (Mosc) 75: 19–24.

Perepelov AV, Liu B, Senchenkova SN *et al.* (2010d) Structure and gene cluster of the O-antigen of Salmonella enterica O44. Carbohydr Res 345: 2099–2101.

Perepelov AV, Liu B, Senchenkova SN *et al.* (2010e) The O-antigen of Salmonella enterica O13 and its relation to the O-antigen of Escherichia coli O127. Carbohydr Res 345: 1808–1811.

Salmonella O-antigen diversity

Perepelov AV, Liu B, Shevelev SD *et al.* (2010f) Relatedness of the O-polysaccharide structures of Escherichia coli O123 and Salmonella enterica O58, both containing 4,6-dideoxy-4-{N-[(S)-3-hydroxybutanoyl]-D-alanyl} amino-D-glucose; revision of the E. coli O123 O-polysaccharide structure. Carbohydr Res 345: 825–829.

Perepelov AV, Liu B, Shevelev SD *et al.* (2010g) Structural and genetic characterization of the O-antigen of Salmonella enterica O56 containing a novel derivative of 4-amino-4,6-dideoxy-D-glucose. Carbohydr Res 345: 1891–1895.

Perepelov AV, Liu B, Senchenkova SN *et al.* (2011a) Structure of the O-polysaccharide and characterization of the O-antigen gene cluster of Salmonella enterica O53. Carbohydr Res 346: 373–376.

Perepelov AV, Liu B, Senchenkova SN *et al.* (2011b) Structures of the O-polysaccharides of Salmonella enterica O59 and Escherichia coli O15. Carbohydr Res 346: 381–383.

Perepelov AV, Liu B, Guo D *et al.* (2011c) Structure elucidation of the O-antigen of Salmonella enterica O51 and its structural and genetic relation to the O-antigen of Escherichia coli O23. Biochemistry (Mosc) 76: 774–779.

Perepelov AV, Li D, Liu B *et al.* (2011d) Structural and genetic characterization of the closely related O-antigens of Escherichia coli O85 and Salmonella enterica O17. Innate Immun 17: 164–173.

Perepelov AV, Liu B, Senchenkova SN *et al.* (2011e) O-antigen structure and gene clusters of Escherichia coli O51 and Salmonella enterica O57; another instance of identical O-antigens in the two species. Carbohydr Res 346: 828–832.

Perry MB & MacLean LL (1992a) Structure of the polysaccharide O-antigen of Salmonella riogrande O:40 (group R) related to blood group A activity. Carbohydr Res 232: 143–150.

Perry MB & MacLean LL (1992b) Structural characterization of the O-polysaccharide of the lipopolysaccharide produced by Salmonella milwaukee O:43 (group U) which possesses human blood group B activity. Biochem Cell Biol 70: 49–55.

Perry MB, MacLean L & Griffith DW (1986a) Structure of the O-chain polysaccharide of the phenol-phase soluble lipopolysaccharide of Escherichia coli 0157:H7. Biochem Cell Biol 64: 21–28.

Perry MB, Bundle DR, MacLean L *et al.* (1986b) The structure of the antigenic lipopolysaccharide O-chains produced by Salmonella urbana and Salmonella godesberg. Carbohydr Res 156: 107–122.

Pfoestl A, Hofinger A, Kosma P *et al.* (2003) Biosynthesis of dTDP-3-acetamido-3,6-dideoxy-α-D-galactose in Aneurinibacillus thermoaerophilus L420-91T. J Biol Chem 278: 26410–26417.

Pfoestl A, Zayni S, Hofinger A *et al.* (2008) Biosynthesis of dTDP-3-acetamido-3,6-dideoxy-α-D-glucose. Biochem J 410: 187–194.

Plainvert C, Bidet P, Peigne C *et al.* (2007) A new O-antigen gene cluster has a key role in the virulence of the Escherichia coli meningitis clone O45:K1:H7. J Bacteriol 189: 8528–8536.


Pluschke G, Mayden J, Achtmann M *et al.* (1983) Role of the capsule and the O-antigen in resistance of O18:K1 Escherichia coli to complement-mediated killing. J Bacteriol 42: 907–913.

Popoff MY & Le Minor L (1997) Antigenic Formulas of the Salmonella Serovars, 7th Revision. WHO Collaborating Centre for Reference and Research on Salmonella. Institut Pasteur, Paris, France.

Pupo GM, Lan R & Reeves PR (2000) Multiple independent origins of Shigella clones of Escherichia coli and convergent evolution of many of their characteristics. P Natl Acad Sci USA 97: 10567–10572.

Rabsch W, Andrews HL, Kingsley RA *et al.* (2002) Salmonella enterica serotype Typhimurium and its host-adapted variants. Infect Immun 70: 2249–2255.

Ramamurthy T, Yamasaki S, Takeda Y *et al.* (2003) Vibrio cholerae O139 Bengal: odyssey of a fortuitous variant. Microbes Infect 5: 329–344.

Ratnayake S, Weintraub A & Widmalm G (1994) Structural studies of the enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli (ETEC) O153 O-antigenic polysaccharide. Carbohydr Res 265: 113–120.

Raymond CK, Sims EH, Kas A *et al.* (2002) Genetic variation at the O-antigen biosynthetic locus in Pseudomonas aeruginosa. J Bacteriol 184: 3614–3622.

Raynaud C, Meibom KL, Lety MA *et al.* (2007) Role of the wbt locus of Francisella tularensis in lipopolysaccharide O-antigen biogenesis and pathogenicity. Infect Immun 75: 536–541.

Reeves PR (1992) Variation in O antigens, niche specific selection and bacterial populations. FEMS Microbiol Lett 100: 509–516.

Reeves PR (1995) Role of O-antigen variation in the immune response. Trends Microbiol 3: 381–386.

Reeves PR & Wang L (2002) Genomic organization of LPS-specific loci. Curr Top Microbiol Immunol 264: 109–135.

Reeves PR, Liu B, Zhou Z *et al.* (2011) Rates of mutation and host transmission for an Escherichia coli clone over 3 years. PLoS ONE 6: e26907.

Reeves PR, Cunneen MM, Liu B & Wang L (2013) Genetics and evolution of the Salmonella galactose-initiated set of O antigens. PLoS One 8: e69306.

Ren Y, Liu B, Cheng J *et al.* (2008) Characterization of Escherichia coli O3 and O21 O-antigen gene clusters and development of serogroup-specific PCR assays. J Microbiol Methods 75: 329–334.

Royle MC, Totemeyer S, Alldridge LC *et al.* (2003) Stimulation of Toll-like receptor 4 by lipopolysaccharide during cellular invasion by live Salmonella typhimurium is a critical but not exclusive event leading to macrophage responses. J Immunol 170: 5445–5454.

Rundlof T, Weintraub A & Widmalm G (1998) Structural determination of the O-antigenic polysaccharide from Escherichia coli O35 and cross-reactivity to Salmonella arizonae O62. Eur J Biochem 258: 139–143.

Rush JS, Alaimo C, Robbiani R *et al.* (2010) A novel epimerase that converts GlcNAc-P-P-undecaprenol to


FEMS Microbiol Rev 38 (2014) 56–89

© 2013 Federation of European Microbiological Societies. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd. All rights reserved

GalNAc-P-P-undecaprenol in Escherichia coli O157. *J Biol Chem* 285: 1671–1680.

Samuel G & Reeves P (2003) Biosynthesis of O-antigens: genes and pathways involved in nucleotide sugar precursor synthesis and O-antigen assembly. *Carbohydr Res* 338: 2503–2519.

Samuel G, Hogbin JP, Wang L *et al.* (2004) Relationships of the Escherichia coli O157, O111, and O55 O-antigen gene clusters with those of Salmonella enterica and Citrobacter freundii, which express identical O antigens. *J Bacteriol* 186: 6536–6543.

Senchenkova SN, Shashkov AS, Knirel YA *et al.* (1997) Structure of the O-specific polysaccharide of Salmonella enterica ssp. arizonae O50 (Arizona 9a, 9b). *Carbohydr Res* 301: 61–67.

Sharp PM (1991) Determinants of DNA sequence divergence between Escherichia coli and Salmonella typhimurium: codon usage, map position, and concerted evolution. *J Mol Evol* 33: 23–33.

Shashkov AS, Lipkind GM, Knirel NK *et al.* (1988) Stereochemical factors determining the effects of glycosylation on the <sup>13</sup>C chemical shifts in carbohydrates. *Magn Reson Chem* 26: 735–747.

Shashkov AS, Vinogradov EV, Knirel YA *et al.* (1993) Structure of the O-specific polysaccharide of Salmonella arizonae O45. *Carbohydr Res* 241: 177–188.

Somoza JR, Menon S, Schmidt H *et al.* (2000) Structural and kinetic analysis of Escherichia coli GDP-mannose 4,6 dehydratase provides insights into the enzyme’s catalytic mechanism and regulation by GDP-fucose. *Structure* 8: 123–135.

Staaf M, Widmalm G, Weintraub A *et al.* (1995) Structural elucidation of the O-antigenic polysaccharide from Escherichia coli O44:H18. *Eur J Biochem* 233: 473–477.

Staaf M, Urbina F, Weintraub A *et al.* (1999) Structural elucidation of the O-antigenic polysaccharides from Escherichia coli O21 and the enteroaggregative Escherichia coli strain 105. *Eur J Biochem* 266: 241–245.

Sun Q, Knirel YA, Lan R *et al.* (2012) A novel plasmid-encoded serotype conversion mechanism through addition of phosphoethanolamine to the O-antigen of Shigella flexneri. *PLoS ONE* 7: e46095.

Szafranek J, Kaczynska M, Kaczynski Z *et al.* (2003) Structure of the polysaccharide O-antigen of Salmonella Aberdeen (O:11). *Pol J Chem* 77: 1135–1140.

Verma V & Reeves PR (1989) Identification and sequence of rfbS and rfbE, which determine antigenic specificity of group A and group D Salmonella. *J Bacteriol* 171: 5694–5701.

Verma NK, Quigley NB & Reeves PR (1988) O-antigen variation in Salmonella spp.: *rfb* gene clusters of three strains. *J Bacteriol* 170: 103–107.

Vinogradov EV, Knirel’ IuA, Lipkind GM *et al.* (1987a) [Antigenic bacterial polysaccharides. 24. The structure of the O-specific polysaccharide chain of Salmonella arizonae 063 (Arizona 08) lipopolysaccharide]. *Bioorg Khim* 13: 1399–1404.

Vinogradov EV, Knirel YA, Lipkind GM *et al.* (1987b) Antigenic polysaccharides of bacteria. 23. The structure of

the O-specific polysaccharide chain of the lipopolysaccharide of Salmonella arizonae O59. *Bioorg Khim* 13: 1275–1281.

Vinogradov EV, Shashkov AS, Knirel YA *et al.* (1992) The structure of the O-specific polysaccharide chain of the lipopolysaccharide of Salmonella arizonae O61. *Carbohydr Res* 231: 1–11.

Vinogradov EV, Knirel YA, Kochetkov NK *et al.* (1994) The structure of the O-specific polysaccharide of Salmonella arizonae O62. *Carbohydr Res* 253: 101–110.

Vinogradov E, Nossova L & Radziejewska-Lebrecht J (2004) The structure of the O-specific polysaccharide from Salmonella cerro (serogroup K, O:6,14,18). *Carbohydr Res* 339: 2441–2443.

Wang L & Reeves PR (1998) Organization of Escherichia coli O157 O-antigen gene cluster and identification of its specific genes. *Infect Immun* 66: 3545–3551.

Wang L & Reeves PR (2000) The Escherichia coli O111 and Salmonella enterica O35 gene clusters: gene clusters encoding the same colitose-containing O antigen are highly conserved. *J Bacteriol* 182: 5256–5261.

Wang L, Romana LK & Reeves PR (1992) Molecular analysis of a Salmonella enterica group El *rfb* gene cluster: O antigen and the genetic basis of the major polymorphism. *Genetics* 130: 429–443.

Wang L, Andrianopoulos K, Liu D *et al.* (2002a) Extensive variation in the O-antigen gene cluster within one Salmonella enterica serogroup reveals an unexpected complex history. *J Bacteriol* 184: 1669–1677.

Wang L, Huskic S, Cisterne A *et al.* (2002b) The O-antigen gene cluster of Escherichia coli O55:H7 and identification of a new UDP-GlcNAc C4 epimerase gene. *J Bacteriol* 184: 2620–2625.

Wang W, Perepelov AV, Feng L *et al.* (2007) A group of Escherichia coli and Salmonella enterica O antigens sharing a common backbone structure. *Microbiology* 153: 2159–2167.

Weintraub A, Leontein K, Widmalm G *et al.* (1993) Structural studies of the O-antigenic polysaccharide of an enteroaggregative Escherichia coli strain. *Eur J Biochem* 213: 859–864.

West NP, Sansonetti P, Mounier J *et al.* (2005) Optimization of virulence functions through glucosylation of Shigella LPS. *Science* 307: 1313–1317.

Whitfield C, Richards JC, Perry MB *et al.* (1991) Expression of two structurally distinct D-galactan O antigens in the lipopolysaccharide of Klebsiella pneumoniae serotype O1. *J Bacteriol* 173: 1420–1431.

Widmalm G & Leontein K (1993) Structural studies of the Escherichia coli O127 O-antigen polysaccharide. *Carbohydr Res* 247: 255–262.

Wildschutte H & Lawrence JG (2007) Differential Salmonella survival against communities of intestinal amoebae. *Microbiology* 153: 1781–1789.

Wildschutte H, Wolfe DM, Tamewitz A *et al.* (2004) Protozoan predation, diversifying selection, and the

Salmonella O-antigen diversity

evolution of antigenic diversity in Salmonella. P Natl Acad Sci USA 101: 10644–10649.

Xiang SH, Hobbs M & Reeves PR (1994) Molecular analysis of the *rfb* gene cluster of a group D2 *Salmonella enterica* strain: evidence for its origin from an insertion sequence-mediated recombination event between group E and D1 strains. J Bacteriol 176: 4357–4365.

Yi W, Shao J, Zhu L *et al.* (2005) *Escherichia coli* O86 O-antigen biosynthetic gene cluster and stepwise enzymatic synthesis of human blood group B antigen tetrasaccharide. J Am Chem Soc 127: 2040–2041.

Yildirim H, Weintraub A & Widmalm G (2001) Structural studies of the O-polysaccharide from the *Escherichia coli* O77 lipopolysaccharide. Carbohydr Res 333: 179–183.

Zhao S, Sandt CH, Feulner G *et al.* (1993) *Rhs* elements of *Escherichia coli* K-12: complex composites of shared and unique components that have different evolutionary histories. J Bacteriol 175: 2799–2808.

Zhao G, Liu J, Liu X *et al.* (2007) Cloning and characterization of GDP-perosamine synthetase (Per) from *Escherichia coli* O157:H7 and synthesis of GDP-perosamine *in vitro*. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 363: 525–530.

Zuccotti S, Zanardi D, Rosano C *et al.* (2001) Kinetic and crystallographic analyses support a sequential-ordered bi bi

catalytic mechanism for *Escherichia coli* glucose-1-phosphate thymidylyltransferase. J Mol Biol 313: 831–843.

# Supporting Information

Additional Supporting Information may be found in the online version of this article:

Fig. S1. The proposed functions of glycosyltransferases involved in the synthesis of *Salmonella* GlcNAc/GalNAc-initiated O antigens with the Wzx/Wzy pathway.

Table S1. Composition of *Salmonella* GlcNAc/GalNAc-initiated O antigens.

Table S2. Characteristics of the ORFs in *Salmonella* O-antigen gene clusters which are firstly reported in this review.

Table S3. Homology groups of glycosyltransferases in *Salmonella* GlcNAc/GalNAc-initiated O-antigen gene clusters with *wzx/wzy*.

Table S4. Summary of unique *Salmonella* GlcNAc/GalNAc-initiated O antigens.

Table S5. Primers used for *Salmonella* molecular typing.
