
Review in Advance first posted online  
on July 10, 2013. (Changes may  
still occur before final publication  
online and in print.)

# Cytoskeletal Dynamics in  
Caenorhabditis elegans Axon  
Regeneration

**Andrew D. Chisholm**

Division of Biological Sciences, Section of Neurobiology, University of California, San Diego,  
La Jolla, California 92093; email: chisholm@ucsd.edu

---

### Keywords

microtubule, dynamic instability, neurofilament, DLK pathway, growth cone, axotomy

### Abstract

Axon regeneration after damage is widespread in the animal kingdom, and the nematode *Caenorhabditis elegans* has recently emerged as a tractable model in which to study the genetics and cell biology of axon regrowth in vivo. A key early step in axon regrowth is the conversion of part of a mature axon shaft into a growth cone–like structure, involving coordinated alterations in the microtubule, actin, and neurofilament systems. Recent attention has focused on microtubule dynamics as a determinant of axon-regrowth ability in several organisms. Live imaging studies have begun to reveal how the microtubule cytoskeleton is remodeled after axon injury, as well as the regulatory pathways involved. The dual leucine zipper kinase family of mixed-lineage kinases has emerged as a critical sensor of axon damage and plays a key role in regulating microtubule dynamics in the damaged axon.

# Contents

INTRODUCTION ..... 10.2
- The Axon Cytoskeleton in Regeneration ..... 10.3
- *Caenorhabditis elegans* as a Model for Axon Regeneration ..... 10.3
- Axonogenesis and Axotomy in *Caenorhabditis elegans* ..... 10.3
THE AXONAL CYTOSKELETON IN GROWTH AND REGENERATION ..... 10.6
- The Microtubule Cytoskeleton ..... 10.6
- Microtubule Nucleation: Centrosomal or Noncentrosomal? ..... 10.6
- Microtubule-Binding Proteins and Posttranslational Modifications ..... 10.9
- Other Cytoskeletal Elements: The Actin and Neurofilament Networks ..... 10.11
- The Microtubule Cytoskeleton of *Caenorhabditis elegans* Neurons ..... 10.12
- Microtubule Dynamics in Injured and Regrowing Axons: Lessons from *Aplysia*, *Drosophila*, and *Caenorhabditis elegans* ..... 10.12
GENES AND PATHWAYS INVOLVED IN AXON REGENERATION ..... 10.14
- Early Signals of Damage: Ca²⁺ and Cyclic AMP ..... 10.14
- The DLK-1 MAPK Cascade in Regeneration and Microtubule Dynamics ..... 10.15
- Conservation of DLK Functions in Axon Regeneration and Microtubule Dynamics ..... 10.17
- Other Signaling Pathways Potentially Affecting Microtubule Dynamics in Regeneration ..... 10.18
- Microtubule Dynamics Regulators I: Tubulins, MAPs, +TIPs, and EFA-6 ..... 10.18
- Microtubule Dynamics Regulators II: Kinesin-13 ..... 10.19
- Microtubule Dynamics Regulators III: Posttranslational Modifications ..... 10.19

# INTRODUCTION

Successful axon regeneration after damage or axotomy often involves the conversion of a mature and stable axonal process into a highly dynamic and motile regenerating growth cone. Understanding the cell-biological basis of this transition requires knowledge of the cytoskeleton in the mature axon and the nature of the damage signals and responses that generate the cytoskeleton of the regrowing process. It is equally important to understand why some axons fail to regrow after damage, especially those in the mature mammalian central nervous system. Ramón y Cajal (1991) was the first to recognize that failure of axon regeneration often manifests as the formation of dystrophic end bulbs or retraction bulbs by axon stumps, instead of motile growth cones. Failure to remodel and reestablish a functional microtubule (MT) network at the axon stump has been implicated as a primary cause of retraction-bulb formation (Erturk et al. 2007).

Significant progress has been made in all these areas in recent years, and most attention has focused on the MT cytoskeleton and its regulators. Striking recent results from several laboratories suggest that pharmacological stabilization of the MT cytoskeleton is sufficient to enhance axon regeneration in permissive and nonpermissive environments (Hellal et al. 2011, Sengottuvel et al. 2011). Other genetic manipulations targeting the cytoskeleton also significantly enhance regenerative regrowth (Hur et al. 2011b), suggesting the cytoskeleton is an important determinant of axon regrowth.

Studies of axon regeneration use a wide variety of vertebrate and invertebrate models (recently reviewed in Chen & Chisholm 2011, Chen et al. 2007, Fang & Bonini 2012, Liu et al. 2011,

Chisholm

Changes may still occur before final publication online and in print

Tuszynski & Steward 2012, Wang & Jin 2011, and Zheng et al. 2006). Although axon regeneration has been observed in all animals examined, organism-specific differences exist. Invertebrates lack myelin, and nonmammalian vertebrates lack most components of myelin that inhibit regrowth in the adult mammalian central nervous system (Filbin 2003). However, at the level of the cytoskeleton, all animal axons are built on a conserved scaffold of consistently polarized MTs and cortical actin, which makes it plausible that cell-intrinsic mechanisms of cytoskeletal rearrangement may be conserved among the various axon regeneration models.

### The Axon Cytoskeleton in Regeneration

The axonal cytoskeleton has long been of interest in the regeneration field. Classic early studies characterized the effects of axotomy on axonal transport (Hoffman & Lasek 1980). The cloning of cytoskeletal proteins in the 1980s allowed molecular analysis of the cytoskeleton in regeneration and led to the general conclusion that axotomy tends to acutely upregulate expression of tubulins and downregulate expression of neurofilaments (NFs) (Hoffman & Cleveland 1988, Hoffman et al. 1993, Oblinger & Lasek 1988). Several regeneration-associated genes (GAP43, CAP23, MARCKS) whose expression is strongly upregulated by axon injury are regulators of the actin cytoskeleton (Frey et al. 2000). However, alterations in gene expression seem insufficient to account for the drastic changes in cytoskeleton architecture during regeneration. A fuller appreciation of how the cytoskeleton is remodeled after injury and during regeneration has come from live imaging of cytoskeletal dynamics in vitro and in vivo using models such as *Aplysia*, *Drosophila*, and *Caenorhabditis elegans*.

### Caenorhabditis elegans as a Model for Axon Regeneration

The nematode *C. elegans* was chosen as a model organism in the 1960s for the simplicity of its development and its tractability for genetic analysis of neuronal function and behavior. The normal development of the nervous system in *C. elegans* is highly invariant, down to the number and positions of synaptic connections (White et al. 1986). In the past decade, a hitherto unappreciated aspect of the *C. elegans* nervous system has been revealed: its ability to regrow axonal processes after injury (Yanik et al. 2004). This discovery showed that it would be feasible to use genetic approaches to investigate the mechanisms underlying an axon’s response to injury and how this response leads to formation of a new regrowing axon. Further, the small size and transparent nature of the *C. elegans* body allow in vivo live imaging of the dynamic reorganization of the cytoskeleton and other structures during the regrowth of single axons.

This review covers recent progress on axonal cytoskeletal dynamics during regenerative axon growth, focusing on *C. elegans* and other organisms in which in vivo imaging of the axonal cytoskeleton is possible after single-axon injury. (For recent reviews of growth cone formation in regeneration, see Bradke et al. 2012, Hur et al. 2011a.) El Bejjani & Hammarlund (2012) recently reviewed the genetic insights into regeneration gained from *C. elegans*.

### Axonogenesis and Axotomy in Caenorhabditis elegans

*C. elegans* axons develop in a highly stereotyped manner. Most axons grow out during mid to late embryogenesis, either as single pioneer processes or fasciculated with other processes into bundles. *C. elegans* grows through four postembryonic larval stages, L1–L4; axons that initially grew out in the embryo undergo proportional growth (scaling) as the animal grows. Neurons born in larval stages extend axons via growth cones (Knobel et al. 1999). Axon outgrowth is essentially
complete in late larval development, with the sexually dimorphic HSNs likely being the last neurons to extend axons in hermaphrodites (Adler et al. 2006). In adults, axons continue to grow proportionally as the adult enlarges, but no new growth cones or neurons have been observed.

Single-neuron axotomy in *C. elegans* was made possible by the intersection of two technologies: GFP-expressing transgenes that can label single neurons and femtosecond lasers that permit precise axotomy of single axons without extensive tissue damage. Less precise UV lasers have also been successfully used to sever axons; overall, the patterns of regrowth appear to be similar, irrespective of the kind of laser damage used (Wu et al. 2007). However, laser axotomy differs from crush or contusion injuries used in other organisms in that axons are fully and abruptly severed. Axotomy can be performed close to the soma (complete axotomy) or at some distance from the soma (partial axotomy); the responses to axon injury may share mechanistic overlap with dendritic responses to injury (Figure 1). Axon regeneration in *C. elegans* was first observed after femtosecond laser axotomy of motor neurons, which are readily severed at the most lateral point of their circumferential commissures and which regrow in a dorsally directed but error-prone manner toward the dorsal midline (Yanik et al. 2004). Axotomy of several motor neurons led to locomotor deficits that recovered after 24 h, concomitant with axon regrowth. These observations indicate that, at least in the motor circuit, regenerated axons can function.

Axon regrowth has also been documented intensively in mechanosensory (touch) neurons, whose anatomy, development, and physiology are well studied. The posterior and anterior touch neurons PLM and ALM are especially tractable because they have long, large-caliber axons that display robust regenerative regrowth (Wu et al. 2007). Two other touch neurons, AVM and PVM, have short, ventrally directed commissures whose outgrowth and guidance have been well studied. Other neurons, such as the sensory neurons ASH and AWC, do not regrow after injury (Gabel et al. 2008), for reasons that remain to be explored.

In both the motor and ALM/PLM touch neuron models of axon regrowth, axons are severed partially (Figure 1a), tens of micrometers from the soma, and the cut ends typically retract from the cut site (Wu et al. 2007). Regrowth begins at the proximal stump and rarely occurs via collateral sprouting or new neurites from the soma. In contrast, AVM axotomy is complete (Figure 1b) and often results in formation of a new neurite rather than regrowth from the axon stump (Gabel et al. 2008). This complete axotomy model may be analogous to the *Drosophila* sensory neurons that undergo dendrite-to-axon conversion in response to complete axotomy.

In the *C. elegans* partial-axotomy models, the proximal axon stump forms a growth cone–like structure, which can be motile for 24–48 h after damage and navigates in an error-prone manner toward its original target. Regrowing axons often extend multiple branches, some of which retract later in regrowth. The distal fragment degenerates, although, in the case of mechanosensory neurons, this fragment can occasionally reconnect with the proximal stump or regrowing process (Ghosh-Roy et al. 2010, Neumann et al. 2011). *C. elegans* neurons rarely undergo cell death in response to partial axotomy but can do so more frequently after complete axotomy. The ability of axons to regrow after damage is highest during larval and early adult stages and declines thereafter (Hammarlund et al. 2009, Wu et al. 2007). Most *C. elegans* axon-regeneration studies use late–larval

---

**Figure 1**

Types of axotomy and regenerative responses. (*a*) Partial axotomy can result in regrowth from a new growth cone formed by the axon stump, collateral sprouting, or abortive regrowth (end bulb formation). (*b*) Complete axotomy can trigger new neurite sprouting from the cell soma or conversion of a dendrite into an axon. (*c*) Dendritotomy (dendrite severing) can likewise trigger new growth from the severed dendrite or compensatory sprouting from nearby dendrites.

Chisholm

Changes may still occur before final publication online and in print
a Partial axotomy

Axon
Soma

End bulb formation
(abortive regrowth)

Regrowth from
axon stump

Collateral sprouting

b Complete axotomy

New neurite outgrowth
from cell body

Conversion of
dendrite to axon

c Dendritotomy

Dendrite regrowth
from stump

Compensatory sprouting
of other dendrites

www.annualreviews.org • C. elegans Axon Regeneration
10.5

Changes may still occur before final publication online and in print

stage or early-adult animals. Regenerative axon growth is generally slower than developmental outgrowth, and regenerating growth cones are smaller and less protrusive than developmental growth cones (Hammarlund et al. 2009). This change in growth cone morphology may reflect intrinsic changes in axon growth potential, as it can be slowed by neuronal expression of dual leucine zipper kinase (DLK)-1 kinase (Hammarlund et al. 2009). It is unclear whether the age-dependent decline in regrowth reflects a decline in DLK-1 expression or in other factors.

# THE AXONAL CYTOSKELETON IN GROWTH AND REGENERATION

## The Microtubule Cytoskeleton

The cytoskeleton of the mature axon has been reviewed recently (Conde & Cáceres 2009, Hoogenraad & Bradke 2009, Kapitein & Hoogenraad 2011) and is summarized briefly before we turn to aspects specific to *C. elegans* axons. The MT cytoskeleton of a neuron is now recognized as being a central determinant of neuronal polarity and the distinction between axon and dendrite. MTs are polarized polymers of α-tubulin and β-tubulin heterodimers assembled in protofilament chains that associate laterally to form the walls of the mature MT. Most MTs have 13 protofilaments (13 pf), although MTs with between 11 and 16 pf have been observed. Most *C. elegans* neurons contain 11-pf MTs (Chalfie & Thomson 1982), with the exception of the 15-pf-containing touch receptor neurons (Bounoutas et al. 2009, Topalidou et al. 2012). Essentially all axons examined, including those in *C. elegans* neurons, display highly uniform plus end-out MT polarity, whereas dendrites may have plus end-out, minus end-out, or mixed MT polarity, depending on the organism, cell type, and location in the dendritic array (Figures 2a and 3).

MTs are intrinsically polarized, with plus and minus ends defined by a variety of criteria. MT minus ends are relatively stable, whereas plus ends are the major site of polymerization and depolymerization. Numerous proteins, known as the plus end-tracking proteins (+TIPs), specifically interact with growing MT plus ends (Akhmanova & Steinmetz 2008) (see sidebar, Microtubule Dynamics and the End-Binding Protein Assay). MT polarity and neuronal polarity are intimately linked. Axons and dendrites can be distinguished by the organization of their MT arrays: In axons, MTs are almost exclusively plus end out, whereas dendrites contain MT arrays that are either minus end out (Stone et al. 2008) or plus end out or have mixed polarity (Baas et al. 1988).

The development of neuronal morphology, in particular axon specification and growth, is strongly influenced by the MT cytoskeleton and its dynamic instability properties. Shi et al. (2004) showed that, in developing neurons, local stabilization of MTs in a single neurite by the GSK3 effector APC is a determinant of axon initiation. Polleux & Snider (2010) recently reviewed other polarity factors and signals involved in axon specification via MT stabilization. Axons regenerating from a stump do not have to generate polarity de novo, so early polarizing cues may be dispensable in regrowth. MTs also play important roles in developmental axon outgrowth, guidance, and maintenance (Dent et al. 2011). MT dynamics can play an instructive role in guidance, because focal application of the MT-stabilizing drug taxol induces growth cone turning toward the source (Buck & Zheng 2002). MT polymerization itself provides important protrusive forces for growth cone movement (Suter & Miller 2011). Many of these roles may be reprised in regenerating axons.

## Microtubule Nucleation: Centrosomal or Noncentrosomal?

In many cells and in developing neurons, new MTs are nucleated at the centrosome, the major MT-organizing center. The centrosome contains γ-tubulin and other centrosomal proteins that together form the pericentriolar material that promotes MT–minus end nucleation (Kuijpers &

a Vertebrate neurons

Hippocampal neurons

b Drosophila sensory neurons

ddaC neurons

c C. elegans neurons

PLM touch neurons

Presynaptic

DB motor

DA motor

Amphid sensory

Figure 2

Schematic diagrams of microtubule (MT) polarity in vertebrate, *Drosophila*, and *Caenorhabditis elegans* neurons used in axon regeneration. (*a*) Typical vertebrate neuronal MT polarity, based on studies of rodent interneurons (Baas et al. 1988, Stepanova et al. 2003). Axonal MTs are almost exclusively plus end out (plus end-out MTs are shown as blue arrows). Proximal dendrites have mixed polarity; more distal dendrites have plus end-out polarity. (*b*) In *Drosophila* sensory neurons, dendritic arborization class I, ddaC axonal MTs are >95% plus end out. Proximal dendritic MTs are predominantly minus end out (minus end-out MTs shown as red arrows); more distal dendrites have mixed MT polarity (Stone et al. 2008). (*c*) MT arrangement in selected *C. elegans* neurons. PLM mechanosensory neurons have plus ends out in the main anterior axonal process (Ghosh-Roy et al. 2012). In DB motor neurons, dorsal presynaptic processes have plus end-out orientation, based on EBP-GFP imaging (Goodwin et al. 2012). In DA neurons, dorsal presynaptic processes also have plus end-out MTs; ventral postsynaptic processes have mixed polarity with more minus ends out distally (Ou et al. 2010). Amphid sensory neurons have minus end-out MTs in their sensory processes and plus end-out MTs in their axons (Maniar et al. 2012).

Hoogenraad 2011). However, neurons face unique challenges in that MTs form along the entire axon shaft, potentially hundreds of cell soma diameters from the centrosome. In a long-standing model for neuronal MT nucleation, new MTs are nucleated at the centrosome and severed by MT-severing enzymes, such as katanin, and the resulting fragments are transported along preexisting MTs into growing neurites (Yu et al. 1993, 1994). Evidence supporting this model of centrosomal MT nucleation has come from studies of developing neurons that are extending primary neurites (Ahmad et al. 1994). However, the mature or regenerating axon faces a distinct task in that the axonal cytoskeleton must be either maintained or refashioned into a growth cone after injury distant from the centrosome.

www.annualreviews.org • C. elegans Axon Regeneration 10.7

Changes may still occur before final publication online and in print

a Aplysia neurons

| Axon | Soma |
| --- | --- |
| Steady state: many dynamic MTs |

| 0–5 min: depolymerization at injury site |  |

| 5–15 min: local reversal of polarity | Vesicle trap |

b Drosophila sensory neurons

| Axon | Dendrite |
| --- | --- |
| Steady state |  |

| Complete axotomy: 0–24 h, upregulation of MTs in soma, reversal of dendrite MT polarity |  |

| Partial axotomy: 24 h, partial reversal of axonal MT polarity |  |

c C. elegans neurons

| Axon |  |
| --- | --- |
| Steady state: most MTs nondynamic |  |

| 3 h: local upregulation of growing MTs |  |

| 6 h: more persistent MT growth |  |

Changes may still occur before final publication online and in print

Recent evidence suggests that in mature or regenerating neurons, MTs may be nucleated independent of the centrosome. In many differentiated cells, MT nucleation sites become redistributed to a variety of cellular locations, sometimes reflecting a movement of pericentriolar material from the centrosome (Feldman & Priess 2012). Notably, laser ablation of the centrosome fails to prevent axon extension in regenerating hippocampal neurons (Stiess et al. 2010). Genetic disruption of the centrosome or laser ablation also failed to affect MT organization in mature *Drosophila* neurons (Nguyen et al. 2011). Although acentrosomal MT growth could be from remnant MT fragments originally nucleated at centrosomes (Baas & Falnikar 2012), these results suggest the existence of acentrosomal nucleation sites in axons or dendrites. In dendrites of *Drosophila* sensory neurons, Golgi outposts support acentrosomal MT nucleation (Ori-McKenney et al. 2012). However, the mechanism of axonal, acentrosomal MT nucleation remains unclear.

## Microtubule-Binding Proteins and Posttranslational Modifications

As well as exhibiting uniform polarity, the MT cytoskeleton of the mature axon exhibits other distinctive features. Axonal MTs are often arrayed in bundles with a consistent side-to-side spacing, the result of axonal MT-bundling pathways (Burnette et al. 2008, Feltrin et al. 2012). Further, axonal MTs are highly stabilized compared with those of most cells. MTs are capable of rapid switches between polymerization and depolymerization at the plus end, a property termed dynamic instability (see sidebar, Microtubule Dynamics and the End-Binding Protein Assay). However, most MTs in mature axons do not actively grow or shrink. In developing neurons, selective MT stabilization is a key step in the formation of a single axon among multiple neurites (Witte et al. 2008). In mature axons, the stability of the MT array is likely essential for maintenance of an axonal process throughout life, consistent with the association of MT regulatory factors with neurodegenerative processes (Falnikar & Baas 2009).

MT-binding proteins can affect MT levels in several ways. MTs are sensitive to depolymerization by catastrophe factors, such as kinesin-13/KIF2A (Homma et al. 2003). In addition, MTs can be severed by proteins such as katanin or spastin (Roll-Mecak & McNally 2010); the resulting MT fragments may be critical in nucleating new MT growth (Roll-Mecak & Vale 2006). In non-neuronal cells, stable MTs are protected from depolymerization by MT-binding proteins such as Patronin/Nezha, which blocks depolymerization at minus ends (Goodwin & Vale 2010, Meng et al. 2008); it remains to be determined if this mechanism also applies to neurons. Tau, an axon-specific protein that binds the surface of the MT lattice, likely protects against katanin-mediated severing. Other MT-binding proteins, such as the MAP1 family members, play neuron-specific MT-stabilizing roles. *C. elegans* expresses a single Tau-like protein, PTL-1 (Goedert et al. 1996), but lacks the MAP1 family (Halpain & Dehmelt 2006).

---

**Figure 3**

Types of microtubule (MT) rearrangements after axotomy. Growing plus end-out MTs are blue, growing minus end-out MTs are red, and stable MTs are black. (*a*) Cultured *Aplysia* neurons display numerous growing MTs prior to axotomy. Axotomy triggers local depolymerization, followed by establishment of mixed MT polarity near the tip and a vesicle trap (Erez et al. 2007). (*b*) In *Drosophila* dendritic arborization sensory neurons, complete axotomy triggers global upregulation of growing MTs and reversal of dendritic MT polarity (Stone et al. 2010). Partial axotomy triggers similar upregulation and can lead to mixed MT polarity in the regrowing axon (Song et al. 2012). (*c*) In *Caenorhabditis elegans* PLM neurons, partial axotomy triggers local upregulation of growing MTs close to the axotomy site, followed by persistent growth (Ghosh-Roy et al. 2012).

MICROTUBULE DYNAMICS AND THE END-BINDING PROTEIN ASSAY

Individual MTs can switch rapidly between polymerization and depolymerization at their plus ends, exhibiting a fundamental property of MTs known as dynamic instability (Mitchison & Kirschner 1984). Transitions to depolymerization are known as catastrophe events, and transitions to polymerization are rescue events (Gardner et al. 2013). In vitro, dynamic instability parameters are a function of tubulin concentration; in vivo, dynamic instability is modulated by the cellular composition of MAPs and MT-modifying enzymes. MT minus ends are capable of dynamic instability but are generally either capped or anchored in vivo.

MT dynamics have been defined using four basic parameters: growth rate (polymerization), shrinkage rate (depolymerization), catastrophe frequency, and rescue frequency (Cassimeris et al. 1987, 1988; Walker et al. 1988). Pause duration and frequency can sometimes be inferred from kymograph plots (Stepanova et al. 2010). Live imaging of MTs in which tubulin is constitutively labeled allows a complete assessment of the dynamics parameters. In contrast, +TIP-based assays, such as EBP-GFP, label growing MTs and therefore directly capture only growth rate and catastrophe frequency, although other parameters can be inferred from quantitative analysis (Applegate et al. 2011). MTs are often described simply as being stable or dynamic. Nevertheless, individual MAPs, modifications, or drugs may overall promote stability or instability in different ways. For example, some neuronal MAPs primarily suppress catastrophe and promote rescue but only mildly affect polymerization rate (Conde & Cáceres 2009). Dynamic instability parameters of individual MTs do not fully capture the behavior of MT cytoskeletons, such as those of the axon, where most MTs are in a nondynamic state. For this reason, it is also important to consider the fraction of the axonal MT pool displaying growth or dynamic instability.

The discovery of proteins that specifically associate with polymerizing MT plus ends, the +TIPs (Diamantopoulos et al. 1999, Perez et al. 1999), opened up new approaches to visualizing MT dynamics in vivo. Among the +TIPs, the end-binding proteins (EB1, EB2, and EB3 in vertebrates, generically known as EB) are particularly tractable owing to their small size and their tolerance for GFP tags. EB proteins interact directly with growing (but not shrinking) plus ends and recruit other +TIPs to plus ends. EB-GFP gradually dissociates from the MT lattice behind the plus end, forming a comet in live imaging; the decay of fluorescence along the comet tail reflects turnover of EB-binding sites on the growing MT (Bieling et al. 2007, Stepanova et al. 2010). Under optimal conditions, MT dynamics parameters obtained from EB-GFP assays resemble those obtained using labeled tubulin. Stepanova et al. (2003) first used the EB-GFP assay in mammalian neurons, and it has since been used in multiple organisms and types of neuron (Rolls et al. 2007). As most MT growth in an axon or dendrite effectively occurs in a single dimension, kymograph analysis is a rapid and simple way to quantitate axonal MT dynamics.

*C. elegans* encodes three EB family members, EBP-1, EBP-2, and EBP-3 (Motegi et al. 2006, Srayko et al. 2003), although the three worm genes are not orthologs of the vertebrate EB1, EB2, or EB3 proteins. Mutants lacking single EBPs are viable, probably reflecting redundancy. In the EBP-GFP assay, EBP-1 and EBP-2 give very similar results when compared side by side (Ghosh-Roy et al. 2012). Use of the EBP-GFP assay in *C. elegans* neurons allows in-depth analysis of MT dynamics before and after injury and during early stages of axon regrowth. The lateral touch neurons PLM and ALM are favorable for live imaging because their axons are large and confined to a single focal plane. Parameters of MT dynamics obtained using the EBP-GFP assay are fairly consistent among neurons from different organisms. For example the average growth rate of EB-GFP comets is 0.21–0.22 μm s⁻¹ in mammalian axons (Stepanova et al. 2003) and ~0.17–0.22 μm s⁻¹ in *C. elegans* PLM axons (Ghosh-Roy et al. 2012).

In addition to these MT-stabilizing MT-associated proteins (MAPs), axonal MTs are subject to extensive posttranslational modifications of their tubulin subunits that have major effects on MT stability. Knowledge of the mechanisms and functions of MT posttranslational modifications (PTMs) is rapidly expanding, and excellent reviews have been published in this area (Janke & Bulinski 2011, Janke & Kneussel 2010). Many α-tubulins contain a conserved C-terminal motif,

Changes may still occur before final publication online and in print
-EEY (-Glu-Glu-Tyr-COOH); this motif or closely related motifs are substrates for deyrosination and deglutamylation reactions. Classic biochemical studies of tubulin beginning in the 1970s revealed that the C-terminal Y could be removed enzymatically (deyrosination) and replaced (tyrosination) in a cycle known as the tubulin tyrosine cycle. Tyrosinated MTs turn over rapidly, whereas deyrosinated MTs are more stable (Webster et al. 1987). Deyrosinated tubulin is also susceptible to further irreversible cleavage of the subterminal glutamate by cytosolic carboxypeptidases (CCPs), yielding Δ2-tubulin, which is extremely stable and abundant in axons (Paturle-Lafanechère et al. 1991, 1994). The stability of Δ2-tubulin in part reflects resistance to kinesin-13 depolymerization (Peris et al. 2009). Both deyrosinated and Δ2-tubulin can be glutamylated at subterminal residues. Polyglutamylation is also prevalent in axonal MTs and has more complex effects on MT interactions with motors, MAPs, and MT-severing proteins (Garnham & Roll-Mecak 2012, Lacroix et al. 2010).

Of the many types of MT-PTM, glutamylation and acetylation have been demonstrated in *C. elegans* (Cueva et al. 2012, Kimura et al. 2010, O'Hagan et al. 2011). MT glycylation appears to be absent. An important, unresolved question in *C. elegans* MT posttranslational modification is the existence of the tyrosination-detyrosination cycle described in mammalian MTs. All nine *C. elegans* α-tubulins contain a C-terminal Tyr or Phe residue, and several have the canonical C-terminal motif -EEY. Immunostaining against the δ2 epitope has been detected in the wild type (Ghosh-Roy et al. 2012). These observations imply a detyrosination step, yet the identity of the tubulin detyrosinase remains unknown in any organism. Conversely, although *C. elegans* encodes multiple tubulin tyrosine ligase–like (TTLL) proteins, none appear to be orthologous to the canonical TTL enzyme that retyrosinates tubulin.

### Other Cytoskeletal Elements: The Actin and Neurofilament Networks

The second major component of the neuronal cytoskeleton is the actin filament network. Actin filaments, like MTs, are intrinsically polar and tend to grow either by polymerization at the barbed (plus) end or by Arp2/3-dependent branching from the side of the actin filament. The organization of actin in axonal shafts remains relatively poorly understood. Most filaments may be relatively short (1 μm), with barbed ends directed toward the cell surface (Kapitein & Hoogenraad 2011). New findings using superresolution microscopy suggest a new picture of the axon cortex defined by a periodically repeating actin/spectrin network (Xu et al. 2013). The actin cytoskeleton of *C. elegans* axons remains little characterized but is critical for maintenance of axonal structure, as loss of function in *unc-70/β*-spectrin leads to drastic axon-fragility defects (Hammarlund et al. 2007). *unc-70* mutants display spontaneous axon breakage owing to mechanical stretching as the animal moves; the broken axons frequently regenerate and can undergo additional rounds of breakage and regrowth. This natural axotomy model allows analysis of axon regrowth without laser surgery (Hammarlund et al. 2009).

The third major component of the axonal cytoskeleton is the system of neuronal intermediate filaments, or NFs (Yuan et al. 2012), a key determinant of axonal caliber in vertebrates (Hoffman et al. 1987). NF expression is suppressed transiently after injury but is subsequently elevated in the subset of neurons undergoing successful regeneration (Hoffman & Cleveland 1988, Szaro & Strong 2010). NFs and MTs are intimately related in neurons and often have antagonistic roles (Bocquet et al. 2009); thus, the transient downregulation of NFs after injury may be important to allow maximal reformation of a dynamic MT cytoskeleton in the reforming growth cone. Subsequently, expression of NFs may be upregulated during axon extension to promote stabilization of the newly regrown axon shaft. *Drosophila* lacks NFs, but *C. elegans* encodes a large family of

www.annualreviews.org • C. elegans Axon Regeneration

Changes may still occur before final publication online and in print
intermediate filament proteins, some of which are expressed in neurons (Karabinos et al. 2001, 2004); their role in axon development or regeneration has not yet been explored.

**EBP:** end-binding protein

## The Microtubule Cytoskeleton of *Caenorhabditis elegans* Neurons

The MT cytoskeleton in *C. elegans* neurons was first examined in electron microscopy studies of the MT-rich touch neurons. MT polarity could be inferred in some cell types, especially in ciliated sensory neurons, by using live imaging of MT-based transport (Scholey 2008). More recently, the end-binding protein (EBP) assay (see sidebar, Microtubule Dynamics and the End-Binding Protein Assay) has allowed visualization of MT-plus end growth dynamics in live intact animals.

The cytoskeleton of *C. elegans* touch neuron axons has been characterized extensively since early ultrastructural studies in the 1970s (Chalfie & Thomson 1979, 1982). Touch neurons were first identified as prominent, MT-rich neurons filled with specialized 15-pf MTs, instead of the 11-pf MTs found in other *C. elegans* cells. Touch neurons express specialized tubulins (MEC-7/α-tubulin, MEC-12/β-tubulin) required for this protofilament organization (Savage et al. 1989). The major lateral touch neurons ALM(L/R) and PLM(L/R) contain 20–50 MTs at any one point. Even before the formal definition of MT plus and minus ends, it was known from ultrastructural data that touch neuron MTs have a consistent polarity, with approximately 80% of MTs having diffuse (i.e., plus) ends away from the cell body and filled (i.e., minus) ends toward the cell body (Chalfie & Thomson 1979). Although classical techniques, such as hook decoration, have not been performed in *C. elegans*, the accumulation of plus end– and minus end–binding proteins in touch neurons is consistent with plus end–out polarity (Figure 2c) (Arimoto et al. 2011), as is the analysis of EBP-GFP dynamics (Ghosh-Roy et al. 2012).

The cytoskeleton of *C. elegans* motor neurons is less well characterized. Motor neuron processes are thinner than touch neuron processes and contain only a few MTs in EM cross-sections. The motor neurons most used in axon regeneration studies are the GABAergic DD and VD neurons (Nix et al. 2011) or the cholinergic VA and DA neurons (Figure 2c) (Gabel et al. 2008). DD and VD neurons have opposite polarity: The dorsal process is presynaptic in DD neurons but postsynaptic in VD neurons. It is unclear whether DD and VD commissures have the same MT polarity as the dorsal process, in which case VD commissure injury might resemble dendrite rather than axon regeneration. To date, no significant difference has been found between the axon-regrowth responses of VD and DD commissures. MT growth polarity has not yet been reported for D-type neurons but has been analyzed in DB motor neurons (Goodwin et al. 2012), which have a simple bipolar morphology (Figure 2c). MT polarity is plus end out (axonal) in the dorsal process and almost wholly minus end out in the ventral process. MT polarity in DAs likely resembles that of DBs, based on their patterns of accumulation of plus end– and minus end–directed motors (Ou & Shen 2011, Ou et al. 2010). Other *C. elegans* neurons, such as the bipolar amphid sensory neurons, exhibit plus end–out polarity in their axons and minus end–out polarity in their sensory endings (Maniar et al. 2012).

## Microtubule Dynamics in Injured and Regrowing Axons: Lessons from *Aplysia*, *Drosophila*, and *Caenorhabditis elegans*

Spira and colleagues first characterized the remodeling of the axonal cytoskeleton after injury in classic studies on *Aplysia* neurons using a combination of electron microscopy, live imaging (Sahly et al. 2006), and the EBP-GFP assay (Erez et al. 2007). An inevitable result of axon severing is major local disruption of the axonal MT array. After axotomy, MTs at the proximal axon stump are locally severed or depolymerized, then within minutes they reestablish a mixed polarity

Changes may still occur before final publication online and in print

50–150 μm proximal to the tip (Figure 3a) (Erez et al. 2007). This generates a vesicle trap that accumulates plus end-directed vesicles, whose contents are involved in growth cone formation. MT reversal and vesicle trapping are reminiscent of the MT-polarity reversal observed in *Drosophila* (Stone et al. 2010) but have not been reported in *C. elegans*. In *Aplysia*, disruption of either the MT or actin cytoskeletons by drugs blocks remodeling of the axon into a growth cone, for different reasons, which indicates that coordinated reformation of the MT and actin networks is required for a new growth cone to take shape. Taken together, these findings show a key role for MT remodeling in initiating axon regrowth.

The pattern of MT dynamics after axon injury in vivo has been characterized extensively in *Drosophila* sensory neurons, which are capable of several kinds of regenerative growth. In experiments where the axon was severed adjacent to the cell soma (complete axotomy), regeneration proceeded via conversion of a dendrite into a new axon rather than by extension of a new neurite (Stone et al. 2010). In other studies, where the axon was severed 20–50 μm from the cell body, the axon could regrow from the axon stump (Song et al. 2012, Stone et al. 2012). Dendrites can also regenerate after injury (dendritotomy), with new branches forming from the severed dendrite stump (Song et al. 2012). Both complete and partial axotomies trigger major rearrangements in the MT cytoskeleton (Figure 3b). Complete axotomy causes a tenfold increase in the number of MT plus ends in the cell soma by 24 h after axotomy (Stone et al. 2010), as well as a global rearrangement of dendritic MTs from predominantly minus end out to mixed or plus end out. These rearrangements take several days and eventually lead to a single dendrite converting into an axon-like process that regrows. Partial axotomy also triggers a reversal of MT polarity in dendrites (Song et al. 2012). Axonal MTs also display partial reversal of MT polarity in response to partial axotomy (Figure 3b); although it is unclear whether this is relevant to regrowth (Nawabi et al. 2012), it is reminiscent of the local MT reversal reported in *Aplysia* axons.

In *Drosophila* dendritic arborization (da) neurons, dendrite injury does not appear to trigger global MT upregulation (Stone et al. 2010) but does trigger reversal of MT polarity in the dendrite that eventually regrows (Song et al. 2012). The global upregulation of growing MTs after axotomy also tends to prevent dendrite degeneration after damage and can be triggered by other stresses, such as overexpression of polyglutamine proteins (Chen et al. 2012). These observations indicate that upregulation of growing MTs occurs in response to a variety of cellular stresses and that manipulations, such as laser axotomy, hyperactivate this stress pathway. The increase in numbers of growing MTs depends on γ-tubulin (Chen et al. 2012), which suggests that injury or stress could promote MT nucleation.

Analysis of MT dynamics in *C. elegans* axon regeneration has so far been performed in the touch neurons PLM and ALM (Ghosh-Roy et al. 2012). As discussed above, PLM and ALM are unusually rich in specialized MTs. EBP-GFP imaging revealed that few of these MTs are actively growing in the steady-state mature axon. Prior to axotomy, EBP-GFP comets are largely confined to the cell soma. Axon injury triggers a series of changes in MT dynamics that represent two major stages (Figure 3c). In the first stage, up to 2–3 h post axotomy, the number of growing MTs, as defined by EBP-GFP comets, increases locally at the cut site. The average MT-growth persistence, a function of catastrophe frequency, remains similar to that of the rare growing MTs in the steady state. In the second phase, the number of growing MTs does not change, but there is a twofold decrease in catastrophe frequency, leading to doubling in growth length. The second phase occurs 3–6 h post axotomy, coincident with the formation of a morphologically visible growth cone, which suggests that a decrease in MT catastrophe (i.e., partial stabilization) is critical for growth cone formation.

The local upregulation of axonal MT dynamics after PLM partial axotomy contrasts with the global upregulation in complete axotomy experiments in *Drosophila*. It is not yet known if

www.annualreviews.org • C. elegans Axon Regeneration

Changes may still occur before final publication online and in print

complete axotomy in *C. elegans* has global effects on MT dynamics. Also in contrast to *Aplysia* or *Drosophila*, reversal of MT polarity is only rarely observed after PLM partial axotomy. As the touch neuron MT cytoskeleton is atypical, it will be important to address whether the picture of MT dynamics derived from touch neurons is generalizable. At least some MT regulators required in touch neurons are also required for regrowth in other neuron types, which suggests that their roles in touch neurons are representative (Ghosh-Roy et al. 2012).

Although MT dynamics have been analyzed extensively in developing cultured vertebrate neurons (Stiess et al. 2010, Tanaka & Kirschner 1991) and in growth cones (Kabir et al. 2001), there has been little direct analysis of the effects of axotomy on the axonal MT array. Recent advances in imaging (Laskowski & Bradke 2012) may soon make it possible to examine MT dynamics in regrowing mammalian axons in vivo.

## GENES AND PATHWAYS INVOLVED IN AXON REGENERATION

A central justification for studying axon regeneration in *C. elegans* is the ease with which genes and pathways can be manipulated by genetics (Chen et al. 2011), transgenics, or RNAi. *C. elegans* axon regeneration is also tractable for chemical genetic screening (Samara et al. 2010). Several laboratories have performed large-scale genetic screens, the results of which have led to an initial understanding of the signals involved in converting a mature axon to a regrowing process. The various pathways influencing *C. elegans* axon regrowth have been reviewed recently (El Bejjani & Hammarlund 2012) and are summarized here, focusing on those relevant to cytoskeletal dynamics.

### Early Signals of Damage: Ca²⁺ and Cyclic AMP

One of the earliest responses to such cellular damage in many cell types is a large increase in intracellular calcium, the calcium transient (Ziv & Spira 1993). In *C. elegans*, live imaging using genetically encoded Ca²⁺ sensors has shown that the Ca²⁺ transient originates at the site of damage and propagates away from the injury site into the proximal and distal fragments (Ghosh-Roy et al. 2010, Pinan-Lucarre et al. 2012). The Ca²⁺ transient arises from a combination of flux across the damaged membrane, opening of membrane Ca²⁺ channels, and Ca²⁺-induced Ca²⁺ release from internal stores.

In cultured *Aplysia* neurons, localized Ca²⁺ transients are sufficient to cause a section of the axon shaft to dedifferentiate into a growth cone (Ziv & Spira 1997). Local Ca²⁺ transients trigger severing of MTs and NFs comparable to that observed after axotomy, which suggests that local Ca²⁺ transients promote cytoskeletal disassembly. In addition to physical disruption by axotomy, axonal MTs are enzymatically severed by calpains or other Ca²⁺-dependent proteases (Gitler & Spira 1998, Spira et al. 2003) or by MT-severing proteins activated by injury. In *Drosophila*, axon and dendrite regrowth are highly sensitive to the dosage of the MT-severing protein spastin and also depend on the severing protein katanin (Table 1) (Stone et al. 2012). It is not yet known whether severing proteins are activated by injury; they are likely required for MT fragmentation that allows growth of new MTs.

In contrast, loss of function in individual MT-severing proteins does not affect PLM regrowth in *C. elegans* (Ghosh-Roy et al. 2012). It is unclear whether this reflects functional redundancy among MT-severing proteins or whether MT severing depends on other pathways. Of note, the apoptotic executioner proteins CED-3/caspase and CED-4/Apaf-1 are required for *C. elegans* ALM axon regrowth and act downstream of Ca²⁺ (Pinan-Lucarre et al. 2012). CED-3 is required early in regrowth; because caspases are known to target cytoskeletal proteins in apoptosis, CED-3 might promote growth cone formation by locally disrupting the axon cytoskeleton,

Changes may still occur before final publication online and in print

Table 1 Genetic analysis of microtubule regulators in axon regeneration

| Gene | Function | Neuron/assay | Axon regeneration |
|------|----------|-------------|-------------------|
| **Caenorhabditis elegans** |  |  |  |
| ebp-1 | Plus end binding | PLM axon regrowth | Strongly reduced |
| klp-7 | Microtubule depolymerizing | PLM, motor | Increased |
| ccpp-1, ccpp-6 | Cytosolic carboxypeptidases | PLM | Reduced |
| ttl-5 | Tubulin tyrosine ligase-like | PLM | Increased |
| **Drosophila** |  |  |  |
| Spastin | Microtubule severing | ddaE dendrite-to-axon regrowth<br>ddaC axon regrowth | Reduced |
| Katanin | Microtubule severing | ddaE dendrite-to-axon regrowth | Reduced |

a Results from Chen et al. (2011) and Ghosh-Roy et al. (2012).  
b Results from Stone et al. (2012).

releasing cytoskeletal polymers for rapid remodeling. It will be interesting to learn whether axonal MT dynamics are altered in *ced-3* or *ced-4* mutants.

Ca²⁺ levels are highly dynamic in the absence of injury, and it is currently unclear if the specificity of the Ca²⁺ injury signal resides in subtle aspects of its dynamics or amplitude or in its conjunction with additional damage-triggered primary signals. In any event, the Ca²⁺ transient is so far the earliest known response to axon injury in *C. elegans*, and it appears to trigger multiple responses and signaling pathways that lead to the events initiating regrowth. In *C. elegans*, Ca²⁺ acts upstream of the cAMP second-messenger cascade, a conserved pathway in axon regeneration, and also appears to activate the DLK-1 MAPK cascade.

## The DLK-1 MAPK Cascade in Regeneration and Microtubule Dynamics

One of the first signaling pathways to be identified in *C. elegans* as critical for axon regrowth was the DLK-1 MAPK cascade (Figure 4) (Hammarlund et al. 2009, Yan et al. 2009). By itself, loss of function in the DLK-1 pathway has little effect on developmental axon growth (Nakata et al. 2005) but strongly blocks regenerative axon growth, which suggests that DLK-1 plays a specific role in initiating early stages of regeneration, discussed in more detail below. Recent findings suggest that DLK-1 can be activated at the time and place of axon injury in a Ca²⁺-dependent manner (Yan & Jin 2012). Moreover, a mammalian DLK homolog, leucine zipper kinase (LZK)/mixed-lineage kinase (MLK), can substitute for *C. elegans dlk-1* in axon regeneration in vivo.

Several downstream outputs of the DLK-1 pathway have been identified. DLK-1 activation leads to local translation of CEBP-1, a bZip protein whose mRNA is axonally localized via its 3′ untranslated region (Yan et al. 2009) and is required for axon regrowth. It is noteworthy that a mammalian ortholog of CEBP-1, C/EBPβ, is required for injury-induced upregulation of α1-tubulin transcription (Nadeau et al. 2005). Thus, the DLK/CEBP signaling axis may have a conserved role in regulating neuronal cytoskeleton composition at the transcriptional level.

DLK-1 activity also regulates MT dynamics, independently of CEBP-1 (Ghosh-Roy et al. 2012). Analysis of EBP-GFP dynamics in *dlk-1* loss-of-function mutants after axotomy revealed a

www.annualreviews.org • C. elegans Axon Regeneration

Changes may still occur before final publication online and in print

CB29CH10-Chisholm ARI 28 June 2013 19:2

**a** C. elegans  
**b** Drosophila  
**c** Vertebrates  

Axon damage  
Ca²⁺  
MT fragmentation/ depolymerization?  
RPM-1  
DLK-1  
MAPKKK  
MLK-1  
MKK4  
MAPKK  
MEK-1  
pmk-3  
p38  
MAPK  
JNK  
CEBP-1  
MT dynamics, kinesin-13, CCPPs, TTLLs  
kgb-1  

HIW  
Wnd  
MKK7  
JNK  
Jun/Fos  
Kinesin-1 cargo linkage  

MTs  
PHR  
DLK  
LZK  
MAP3K  
MKK7  
MKK4  
JNK  
p38α  
Jun/Fos  
Stathmins, MAP1B, altered MT dynamics?  

Figure 4  

Dual leucine zipper kinase (DLK)-related signaling cascades and microtubule (MT) regulation. Not all of these regulatory linkages have been demonstrated in regeneration. (a) *Caenorhabditis elegans* DLK-1 and MLK-1 (mixed-lineage kinase-1) cascades. (b) *Drosophila* Wnd pathway. (c) Vertebrate DLK and LZK pathways. Other MLK pathways (not shown) can crossactivate MKK4 and p38α. Abbreviations: CCPP, cytosolic carboxypeptidase; Hiw, Highwire; TTLL, tubulin tyrosine ligase-like.

slight reduction in initial upregulation of dynamic MT numbers and a complete failure to transition to more persistent MT growth. Conversely, DLK-1 overexpression resulted in a striking increase in the number of growing axonal MTs in the absence of injury. DLK activity therefore can be considered partly stabilizing, in that it is required for the transition to persistent MT growth after axotomy, but also partly destabilizing, in that it converts nondynamic MTs into growing MTs.

Although *dlk-1(lf)* mutants display major effects on the MT cytoskeleton after injury, the MT cytoskeleton appears largely normal prior to injury. Electron microscopy of touch neuron MTs in *dlk-1*-null mutants (Ghosh-Roy et al. 2012) or in *pmk-3/p38* mutants (Bounoutas et al. 2011) has not revealed any major alterations in steady-state MT numbers: MT numbers are slightly but not significantly decreased in *dlk-1* PLM axons and slightly (but not significantly) increased in *pmk-3* ALM axons. These observations are consistent with evidence that DLK-pathway activity levels are low in mature steady-state axons.

MT depolymerization itself may activate the DLK-1 cascade in *C. elegans* touch neurons (Bounoutas et al. 2011). MT depolymerization with colchicine leads to a downregulation in transcription of multiple touch neuron genes, including the transcription factor MEC-3 and its target tubulins; this response depends on the DLK-1/CEBP-1 pathway, although it is not yet clear if any of these genes are direct CEBP-1 targets (Bounoutas et al. 2011). How might depolymerized MTs be sensed by DLK-1? Speculatively, inactive DLK-1 (or a regulator of the DLK-1 pathway) might be associated with MTs, and MT disruption might release active DLK-1. Given the evidence that DLK-1 promotes persistent MT growth, activation of DLK-1 by MT depolymerization could operate as a homeostatic negative-feedback loop that restores the MT cytoskeleton. Nevertheless, this hypothesis fails to explain why tubulin transcription should be downregulated in response to MT depolymerization or DLK-1 pathway activation.

Chisholm  

Changes may still occur before final publication online and in print

DLK-1 is under negative control by RPM-1, a member of the conserved PHR family or E3 ligases, which targets activated DLK-1 for degradation (Abrams et al. 2008, Nakata et al. 2005). Loss of *rpm-1* function might be expected to potentiate the activity of DLK-1 and promote regrowth. *rpm-1(lf)* mutants show modest improvements in motor neuron regrowth (Hammarlund et al. 2009) but show normal PLM regrowth (Yan et al. 2009), and they do not potentiate the effects of DLK-1 overexpression (Nix et al. 2011). In *Drosophila*, the RPM-1 ortholog Highwire is downregulated after injury by unknown mechanisms, potentially allowing increased DLK/Wnd activation (Xiong et al. 2010). Together, these studies suggest that strong activation of DLK-1 by axon injury reflects the synergistic effects of elevated Ca²⁺, local MT disruption, and possibly downregulation or otherwise reduced interaction with the negative regulator RPM-1.

### Conservation of DLK Functions in Axon Regeneration and Microtubule Dynamics

The DLK family has a conserved role in axonal injury signaling and regeneration, and in several cases this involves regulation of axonal MT dynamics. The details vary depending on the organism, cell type, type of injury, and degree of cross talk or redundancy with other MAPK cascades. In mammals, DLK is required for axon regrowth, as axons of *DLK* mutant neurons show reduced regrowth after axotomy in vitro (Itoh et al. 2009). In the mammalian central nervous system, DLK is required for the enhanced regrowth of PTEN-deficient retinal ganglion cell (RGC) axons after optic nerve crush injury (Watkins et al. 2013). In the peripheral nervous system, DLK is not required for initial growth cone formation after axon injury (Shin et al. 2012). Instead, DLK appears to be specifically involved in the second phase of axon regeneration dependent on retrograde injury signals. In dorsal root ganglion (DRG) neurons, DLK is required for retrograde injury signaling and enhanced peripheral axon regrowth after a conditioning lesion (Shin et al. 2012). Although these results might argue against a conserved role for DLK in early regrowth, this role may have been taken over in vertebrates by other MLKs, such as MAP3K13/LZK, which is closer to *C. elegans* DLK-1 in sequence and activation mechanism (Yan & Jin 2012).

Unlike *C. elegans* DLK-1, mammalian DLK is thought to signal predominantly via MKK7 and JNK (Figure 4c). DLK and JNK collectively promote axogenesis in developing mammalian neurons in culture (Hirai et al. 2011). The axon formation defects of *dlk* RNAi or JNK1-inhibited neurons can be rescued with low doses of taxol, consistent with DLK/JNK signaling partly stabilizing MTs. JNK signaling promotes MT stabilization in neurite outgrowth (Tararuk et al. 2006) and in response to osmotic stress in nonneuronal cells (Ng et al. 2010), in both cases by inhibiting MT-destabilizing proteins of the stathmin family. Moreover, the MAPKK target of DLK, MKK7, is locally translated and activated in axons, where it can promote MT bundling via JNK-dependent MAP1B phosphorylation as part of a neurite-localized network of MAPK cascades that collectively regulate MT dynamics (Feltrin et al. 2012).

Important evidence linking DLK signaling to MT dynamics in vertebrates came from analysis of animals lacking PHR, the negative regulator of DLK. PHR-deficient mice (*magellan* mutants) display aberrant, looped axonal MTs in the absence of injury (Lewcock et al. 2007), as do *phr/esrom*-mutant zebrafish (Hendricks & Jesuthasan 2009). In the zebrafish *phr* mutants, axonal MTs grow faster and therefore can assemble longer MTs that lead to looping. The interpretation of these loops has been unclear, as taxol treatment suppresses looping in mice but recapitulates it in wild-type zebrafish. In mice, the *phr*-looping phenotype reflects increased activity of the DLK/p38 cascade (Lewcock et al. 2007), whereas in zebrafish, the *phr*-looping phenotype is unaffected by inhibition of p38 or JNK (Hendricks & Jesuthasan 2009). Other PHR substrates or interactors may be responsible for the altered MT dynamics in *phr* fish mutants, independent of DLK signaling.

Alternatively, redundancy among the MAP3Ks or their downstream targets could account for the failure of inhibition of individual pathways to alter MTs. It will be interesting to know the phenotypes of the zebrafish DLK and LZK mutants.

*Drosophila* encodes a single DLK ortholog, Wallenda (Wnd) (Figure 4b). In larval motor neurons, Wnd is upregulated in the axon by crush injury and is required for axon regrowth (Xiong et al. 2010). The roles of *Drosophila* Wnd in regrowth are mediated in part via JNK/Jun/Fos transcriptional responses. Wnd/JNK signaling can also regulate MT-based transport directly (Horiuchi et al. 2007); it is not yet known whether Wnd affects MT dynamics or the MT upregulation observed in sensory neurons.

# Other Signaling Pathways Potentially Affecting Microtubule Dynamics in Regeneration

Axonal injury triggers a complex network of responses both locally and at the transcriptional level (Tedeschi 2011). Although the DLK pathway has a central role in sensing damage and relaying signals to the cytoskeleton, it clearly acts in concert with other cascades. In *C. elegans*, the MLK cascade (MLK-1/MEK-1/KGB-1 JNK) is also required for regrowth of motor neurons (Nix et al. 2011). The DLK-1 and MLK-1 pathways crossactivate at multiple levels (Figure 4a), such that DLK-1 can activate either PMK-3/p38, KGB-1/JNK, or both. MLK-1, but not DLK-1, is activated nonautonomously by the SVH-1/SVH-2 growth-factor cascade (Li et al. 2012), also required for regeneration. The ability of DLK family kinases to signal via p38 or JNK may depend on the cellular or signaling context.

Other pathways potentially linking axon damage to the neuronal cytoskeleton include AKT/FOXO signaling and STAT3. *Drosophila foxo* mutants display stabilized axonal MTs, which indicates that FOXO indirectly destabilizes MTs (Nechipurenko & Broihier 2012). Genetic or pharmacological MT disruption activates Akt, independent of DLK/Wnd signaling, which leads to downregulation of neuronal FOXO and MT stabilization. It will be interesting to learn if this homeostatic response occurs after axon injury. In vertebrates, JAK/STAT3 signaling is important for axon regeneration (Bareyre et al. 2011, Qiu et al. 2005); as well as acting as a transcription factor, STAT3 regulates axonal MT dynamics in an axon-degeneration model via the catastrophe factor stathmin (Selvaraj et al. 2012). It will be interesting to learn if this role of STAT3 is important in regeneration.

# Microtubule Dynamics Regulators I: Tubulins, MAPs, +TIPs, and EFA-6

The importance of the MT cytoskeleton in *C. elegans* axon regeneration is evident from genetic screens in which several known MT regulators or components were found to be required for normal regrowth (Table 1) (Chen et al. 2011, Ghosh-Roy et al. 2012). A subset of these MT regulators also affect developmental axon outgrowth. For example, loss of function in the end-binding protein *ebp-1* has little effect on touch neuron development but dramatically reduces regrowth (Chen et al. 2011). The *ebp-1* regrowth phenotype is rescued by expression of EBP-2::GFP as used in MT dynamics analysis, establishing the functionality of the transgene and the likely partial redundancy of different EBPs in regrowth. Loss of function in individual tubulins has little effect on axon regrowth, which likely reflects functional redundancy. A dominant mutation in the *mec-7β*-tubulin gene impairs touch neuron regeneration (Kirszenblat et al. 2013). These *mec-7(gf)* mutants form ectopic neurites in development, a phenotype also observed after treatment with taxol and in animals lacking the depolymerizing kinesin-13 family member KLP-7. These findings suggest that the *mec-7(gf)* mutation somehow hyperstabilizes MTs and that this can interfere with axon regrowth.

Of more than 650 genes tested for roles in axon regrowth, less than 2% displayed increased axon regrowth in loss-of-function-mutant backgrounds. One of these, *efa-6*, encodes a member of the EFA-6/PSD family of Arf6 guanine nucleotide exchange factors (GEFs) (Franco et al. 1999). However, careful analysis revealed that EFA-6 functions in the early embryo (O’Rourke et al. 2010) and in axon regrowth (Chen et al. 2011) are largely independent of GEF activity and instead occur via regulation of MT dynamics. *efa-6(lf)* mutants are viable and display mild overgrowth of axons in development and strongly increased axon regrowth after injury. These phenotypes can be rescued with mutant versions of EFA-6 predicted to lack GEF activity.

Conversely, overexpression of EFA-6 or EFA-6ΔGEF inhibits axon regrowth. The overexpression assay allowed structure-function dissection of EFA-6 domains and revealed that the EFA-6 N terminus was necessary and sufficient for axon regrowth inhibition. Analysis of MT dynamics in the embryo and in axon regeneration is consistent with the EFA-6 N-terminal domain promoting MT catastrophe. Consistent with this notion, effects of EFA-6 overexpression on axon regrowth can be rescued by treatment with paclitaxel (Chen et al. 2011).

EFA-6 lacks known MT-binding domains or the EB-interacting motif SxIP, and it remains to be determined how EFA-6 influences MT stability. In early embryonic cells, EFA-6 localizes to the cell cortex, and this localization is important for control of plus end dynamics of MTs growing perpendicular to the cortex (O’Rourke et al. 2010). However, axonal MTs grow parallel to the cortex, and cortical localization of EFA-6 does not seem to be critical for its neuronal role. Thus, although the effects of EFA-6 on MT dynamics appear to be similar in neurons and early embryonic cells, its subcellular localization may differ.

Loss of function in *efa-6* is among the few genetic alterations that can partially suppress the requirement for DLK-1 in regeneration. This antagonism is broadly consistent with DLK-1 signaling promoting persistent MT growth and EFA-6 promoting catastrophe. The partial suppression of *dlk-1* does not resolve whether EFA-6 acts downstream of or in parallel to the DLK-1-MT signaling axis.

## Microtubule Dynamics Regulators II: Kinesin-13

*C. elegans* lacks homologs of known axonal MT catastrophe factors such as Op18/stathmin. Instead, the kinesin-13 family member KLP-7 has a major role in promoting MT catastrophe both in axons and in other cells. Loss of function in *klp-7* results in ectopic neurite outgrowth in development, presumably the result of excessive MT stabilization. In mature touch neurons, the overall number of MTs is slightly reduced (Ghosh-Roy et al. 2012), and remaining MTs are highly stabilized: Growing MTs are rare in *klp-7*-mutant axons prior to axotomy. After axotomy, the number of growing MTs dramatically increases close to the injury site in *klp-7(lf)*. Conversely KLP-7 overexpression partially blocks the injury-dependent upregulation of MTs and inhibits the transition to persistent MT growth. Loss of function in *klp-7* accelerates the onset of axon regrowth, whereas KLP-7 overexpression inhibits axon regeneration. The KLP-7 overexpression phenotype allowed structure-function dissection of KLP-7 domains and revealed that the regrowth inhibition requires the KLP-7 motor and its N terminus, a region containing a potential EB-interacting motif (Ghosh-Roy et al. 2012). KLP-7 is locally downregulated at the injured axon tip, either directly or indirectly by the DLK-1 pathway. Consistent with this, loss of function in *dlk-1* or its downstream kinases can be partly suppressed by *klp-7(lf)*.

## Microtubule Dynamics Regulators III: Posttranslational Modifications

As discussed earlier, MTs in mature steady-state axons are typically highly modified. In *C. elegans*, modifications such as Δ2, polyglutamylation, and acetylation are readily detected in axons by using

Changes may still occur before final publication online and in print

antibodies against these conserved epitopes (Ghosh-Roy et al. 2012, Kimura et al. 2010, O'Hagan et al. 2011, Topalidou et al. 2012). Animals lacking the relevant enzymes (CCPs, TTLs, and acetylases) are viable and display specific defects in neuronal MT architecture or MT-dependent transport. Loss of function in the carboxypeptidases CCPP-1 or CCPP-6 impairs axon regrowth and reduces axonal Δ2-tubulin, which suggests that Δ2-tubulin or polyglutamylated tubulin promotes axon regrowth. Conversely, loss of function in TTLL enzymes tends to enhance regrowth (Ghosh-Roy et al. 2012). Although the specificity of these modifying enzymes remains to be fully explored in *C. elegans*, these results imply that the modification state of axonal MTs can affect regrowth.

Early evidence that MT modifications might be regulated by injury came from the identification of the carboxypeptidase Nna1 as an axon-injury-upregulated transcript in the mouse spinal cord (Harris et al. 2000). The mechanism of Nna1 upregulation by injury remains to be fully explored. In *C. elegans*, DLK-1 pathway activity promotes CCPP expression and inhibits expression of TTLL genes expression (Ghosh-Roy et al. 2012). Regulation of these genes by DLK-1 suggests that injury could promote a transient downregulation in MT modification, allowing more dynamic, newly grown MTs to drive formation of a new growth cone. Roles of the mammalian enzymes in regeneration have not yet been examined. However, MT acetylation has been implicated as a negative regulator of axon regeneration in mammals, because injury induces local deacetylation via the deacetylase HDAC5, acting downstream of Ca²⁺ signals and protein kinase C (Cho & Cavalli 2012). Local deacetylation may create a pool of less-stable growing MTs at the new growth cone without preventing the more stable MTs of the axon shaft from supporting axon extension. Further analysis of the regulation of MT PTM enzymes in axon growth and regeneration should prove highly informative.

---

### SUMMARY POINTS

1. Regeneration of an axon from an axotomized stump involves a coordinated local disassembly of the stabilized axonal cytoskeleton and its remodeling into a dynamic, growth cone-like structure.
2. The microtubule cytoskeleton plays a central role in regrowth. Microtubules are locally severed or depolymerized at sites of injury in response to initial damage signals, such as Ca²⁺.
3. Partial stabilization of MT growth is sufficient to enhance axon regrowth relative to the wild type.
4. Injury triggers damage-sensing pathways, such as the DLK cascade. One output of the DLK cascade is to remodel the axonal MT cytoskeleton.
5. Signaling cascades, such as the DLK pathway, may act both locally and transcriptionally to affect the cytoskeleton. In several cases, the output of the DLK pathway appears to be increased persistence of MT growth (i.e., partial stabilization). Local outputs of the DLK cascade may include downregulation of depolymerizing kinesin and coordinate regulation of multiple PTM enzymes.

---

### FUTURE ISSUES

1. How are MT dynamics regulators and PTM enzymes regulated by axon injury?
2. How and where are axonal MTs nucleated during regeneration?

Chisholm

Changes may still occur before final publication online and in print

3. How is DLK-1 activated by MT disruption, and is this mechanism conserved? Is the role of DLK in initiating axon regrowth or MT remodeling performed by DLK or a related mixed-lineage kinase in vertebrates?

4. What are the roles of neurofilaments in axon regrowth, and how do they interact with the axonal MT cytoskeleton?

5. What is the nature of MT-PTMs in *C. elegans*, and how are they regulated by injury or the DLK cascade?

**DISCLOSURE STATEMENT**

The author is not aware of any affiliations, memberships, funding, or financial holdings that might be perceived as affecting the objectivity of this review.

**ACKNOWLEDGMENTS**

I thank Yishi Jin and members of the Chisholm and Jin laboratories for their contributions to the results and ideas presented here and Marian Chuang for comments on the manuscript. Our work on *Caenorhabditis elegans* axon regeneration has been supported by the National Institutes of Health (R01 NS057317).

**LITERATURE CITED**

Abrams B, Grill B, Huang X, Jin Y. 2008. Cellular and molecular determinants targeting the *Caenorhabditis elegans* PHR protein RPM-1 to perisynaptic regions. *Dev. Dyn.* 237:630–39

Adler CE, Fetter RD, Bargmann CI. 2006. UNC-6/Netrin induces neuronal asymmetry and defines the site of axon formation. *Nat. Neurosci.* 9:511–18

Ahmad FJ, Joshi HC, Centonze VE, Baas PW. 1994. Inhibition of microtubule nucleation at the neuronal centrosome compromises axon growth. *Neuron* 12:271–80

Akhmanova A, Steinmetz MO. 2008. Tracking the ends: a dynamic protein network controls the fate of microtubule tips. *Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol.* 9:309–22

Applegate KT, Besson S, Matov A, Bagonis MH, Jaqaman K, Danuser G. 2011. plusTipTracker: quantitative image analysis software for the measurement of microtubule dynamics. *J. Struct. Biol.* 176:168–84

Arimoto M, Koushika SP, Choudhary BC, Li C, Matsumoto K, Hisamoto N. 2011. The *Caenorhabditis elegans* JIP3 protein UNC-16 functions as an adaptor to link kinesin-1 with cytoplasmic dynein. *J. Neurosci.* 31:2216–24

Baas PW, Deitch JS, Black MM, Banker GA. 1988. Polarity orientation of microtubules in hippocampal neurons: uniformity in the axon and nonuniformity in the dendrite. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 85:8335–39

Baas PW, Falnikar A. 2012. Re-evaluation of the neuronal centrosome as a generator of microtubules for axons and dendrites. In *The Centrosome*, ed. H Schatten, pp. 309–26. New York: Humana

Bareyre FM, Garzorz N, Lang C, Misgeld T, Büning H, Kerschensteiner M. 2011. In vivo imaging reveals a phase-specific role of STAT3 during central and peripheral nervous system axon regeneration. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 108:6282–87

Bieling P, Laan L, Schek H, Munteanu EL, Sandblad L, et al. 2007. Reconstitution of a microtubule plus-end tracking system *in vitro*. *Nature* 450:1100–5

Bocquet A, Berges R, Frank R, Robert P, Peterson AC, Eyer J. 2009. Neurofilaments bind tubulin and modulate its polymerization. *J. Neurosci.* 29:11043–54

Bounoutas A, Kratz J, Emtage L, Ma C, Nguyen KC, Chalfie M. 2011. Microtubule depolymerization in *Caenorhabditis elegans* touch receptor neurons reduces gene expression through a p38 MAPK pathway. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 108:3982–87

Bounoutas A, O'Hagan R, Chalfie M. 2009. The multipurpose 15-protofilament microtubules in *C. elegans* have specific roles in mechanosensation. *Curr. Biol.* 19:1362–67

Bradke F, Fawcett JW, Spira ME. 2012. Assembly of a new growth cone after axotomy: the precursor to axon regeneration. *Nat. Rev. Neurosci.* 13:183–93

Buck KB, Zheng JQ. 2002. Growth cone turning induced by direct local modification of microtubule dynamics. *J. Neurosci.* 22:9358–67

Burnette DT, Ji L, Schaefer AW, Medeiros NA, Danuser G, Forscher P. 2008. Myosin II activity facilitates microtubule bundling in the neuronal growth cone neck. *Dev. Cell* 15:163–69

Cassimeris L, Pryer NK, Salmon ED. 1988. Real-time observations of microtubule dynamic instability in living cells. *J. Cell Biol.* 107:2223–31

Cassimeris LU, Walker RA, Pryer NK, Salmon ED. 1987. Dynamic instability of microtubules. *BioEssays* 7:149–54

Chalfie M, Thomson JN. 1979. Organization of neuronal microtubules in the nematode *Caenorhabditis elegans*. *J. Cell Biol.* 82:278–89

Chalfie M, Thomson JN. 1982. Structural and functional diversity in the neuronal microtubules of *Caenorhabditis elegans*. *J. Cell Biol.* 93:15–23

Chen L, Chisholm AD. 2011. Axon regeneration mechanisms: insights from *C. elegans*. *Trends Cell Biol.* 21:577–84

Chen L, Stone MC, Tao J, Rolls MM. 2012. Axon injury and stress trigger a microtubule-based neuroprotective pathway. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 109:11842–47

Chen L, Wang Z, Ghosh-Roy A, Hubert T, Yan D, et al. 2011. Axon regeneration pathways identified by systematic genetic screening in *C. elegans*. *Neuron* 71:1043–57

Chen ZL, Yu WM, Strickland S. 2007. Peripheral regeneration. *Annu. Rev. Neurosci.* 30:209–33

Cho Y, Cavalli V. 2012. HDAC5 is a novel injury-regulated tubulin deacetylase controlling axon regeneration. *EMBO J.* 31:3063–78

Conde C, Cáceres A. 2009. Microtubule assembly, organization and dynamics in axons and dendrites. *Nat. Rev. Neurosci.* 10:319–32

Cueva JG, Hsin J, Huang KC, Goodman MB. 2012. Posttranslational acetylation of α-tubulin constrains protofilament number in native microtubules. *Curr. Biol.* 22:1066–74

Dent EW, Gupton SL, Gertler FB. 2011. The growth cone cytoskeleton in axon outgrowth and guidance. *Cold Spring Harb. Perspect. Biol.* In press

Diamantopoulos GS, Perez F, Goodson HV, Batelier G, Melki R, et al. 1999. Dynamic localization of CLIP-170 to microtubule plus ends is coupled to microtubule assembly. *J. Cell Biol.* 144:99–112

El Bejjani R, Hammarlund M. 2012. Neural regeneration in *Caenorhabditis elegans*. *Annu. Rev. Genet.* 46:499–513

Erez H, Malkinson G, Prager-Khoutorsky M, De Zeeuw CI, Hoogenraad CC, Spira ME. 2007. Formation of microtubule-based traps controls the sorting and concentration of vesicles to restricted sites of regenerating neurons after axotomy. *J. Cell Biol.* 176:497–507

Erturk A, Hellal F, Enes J, Bradke F. 2007. Disorganized microtubules underlie the formation of retraction bulbs and the failure of axonal regeneration. *J. Neurosci.* 27:9169–80

Falnikar A, Baas PW. 2009. Critical roles for microtubules in axonal development and disease. *Cell Biol. Axon* 48:47–64

Fang Y, Bonini NM. 2012. Axon degeneration and regeneration: insights from *Drosophila* models of nerve injury. *Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol.* 28:575–97

Feldman JL, Priess JR. 2012. A role for the centrosome and PAR-3 in the hand-off of MTOC function during epithelial polarization. *Curr. Biol.* 22:575–82

Feltrin D, Fusco L, Witte H, Moretti F, Martin K, et al. 2012. Growth cone MKK7 mRNA targeting regulates MAP1b-dependent microtubule bundling to control neurite elongation. *PLoS Biol.* 10:e1001439

Filbin MT. 2003. Myelin-associated inhibitors of axonal regeneration in the adult mammalian CNS. *Nat. Rev. Neurosci.* 4:703–13

Franco M, Peters PJ, Boretto J, van Donselaar E, Neri A, et al. 1999. EFA6, a sec7 domain-containing exchange factor for ARF6, coordinates membrane recycling and actin cytoskeleton organization. *EMBO J.* 18:1480–91

Chisholm

Changes may still occur before final publication online and in print

Frey D, Laux T, Xu L, Schneider C, Caroni P. 2000. Shared and unique roles of CAP23 and GAP43 in actin regulation, neurite outgrowth, and anatomical plasticity. *J. Cell Biol.* 149:1443–54

Gabel CV, Antoine F, Chuang CF, Samuel AD, Chang C. 2008. Distinct cellular and molecular mechanisms mediate initial axon development and adult-stage axon regeneration in *C. elegans*. *Development* 135:1129–36

Gardner MK, Zanic M, Howard J. 2013. Microtubule catastrophe and rescue. *Curr. Opin. Cell Biol.* 25:14–22

Garnham CP, Roll-Mecak A. 2012. The chemical complexity of cellular microtubules: tubulin post-translational modification enzymes and their roles in tuning microtubule functions. *Cytoskeleton* 69:442–63

Ghosh-Roy A, Goncharov A, Jin Y, Chisholm AD. 2012. Kinesin-13 and tubulin posttranslational modifications regulate microtubule growth in axon regeneration. *Dev. Cell* 23:716–28

Ghosh-Roy A, Wu Z, Goncharov A, Jin Y, Chisholm AD. 2010. Calcium and cyclic AMP promote axonal regeneration in *Caenorhabditis elegans* and require DLK-1 kinase. *J. Neurosci.* 30:3175–83

Gitler D, Spira ME. 1998. Real time imaging of calcium-induced localized proteolytic activity after axotomy and its relation to growth cone formation. *Neuron* 20:1123–35

Goedert M, Baur CP, Ahringer J, Jakes R, Hasegawa M, et al. 1996. PTL-1, a microtubule-associated protein with tau-like repeats from the nematode *Caenorhabditis elegans*. *J. Cell Sci.* 109:2661–72

Goodwin PR, Sasaki JM, Juo P. 2012. Cyclin-dependent kinase 5 regulates the polarized trafficking of neuropeptide-containing dense-core vesicles in *Caenorhabditis elegans* motor neurons. *J. Neurosci.* 32:8158–72

Goodwin SS, Vale RD. 2010. Patronin regulates the microtubule network by protecting microtubule minus ends. *Cell* 143:263–74

Halpain S, Dehmelt L. 2006. The MAP1 family of microtubule-associated proteins. *Genome Biol.* 7:224

Hammarlund M, Jorgensen EM, Bastiani MJ. 2007. Axons break in animals lacking β-spectrin. *J. Cell Biol.* 176:269–75

Hammarlund M, Nix P, Hauth L, Jorgensen EM, Bastiani M. 2009. Axon regeneration requires a conserved MAP kinase pathway. *Science* 323:802–6

Harris A, Morgan JI, Pecot M, Soumare A, Osborne A, Soares HD. 2000. Regenerating motor neurons express Nna1, a novel ATP/GTP-binding protein related to zinc carboxypeptidases. *Mol. Cell. Neurosci.* 16:578–96

Hellal F, Hurtado A, Ruschel J, Flynn KC, Laskowski CJ, et al. 2011. Microtubule stabilization reduces scarring and causes axon regeneration after spinal cord injury. *Science* 331:928–31

Hendricks M, Jesuthasan S. 2009. PHR regulates growth cone pausing at intermediate targets through microtubule disassembly. *J. Neurosci.* 29:6593–98

Hirai S, Banba Y, Satake T, Ohno S. 2011. Axon formation in neocortical neurons depends on stage-specific regulation of microtubule stability by the dual leucine zipper kinase-c-Jun N-terminal kinase pathway. *J. Neurosci.* 31:6468–80

Hoffman PN, Cleveland DW. 1988. Neurofilament and tubulin expression recapitulates the developmental program during axonal regeneration: induction of a specific β-tubulin isotype. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 85:4530–33

Hoffman PN, Cleveland DW, Griffin JW, Landes PW, Cowan NJ, Price DL. 1987. Neurofilament gene expression: a major determinant of axonal caliber. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 84:3472–76

Hoffman PN, Lasek RJ. 1980. Axonal transport of the cytoskeleton in regenerating motor neurons: constancy and change. *Brain Res.* 202:317–33

Hoffman PN, Pollock SC, Striph GG. 1993. Altered gene expression after optic nerve transection: reduced neurofilament expression as a general response to axonal injury. *Exp. Neurol.* 119:32–36

Homma N, Takei Y, Tanaka Y, Nakata T, Terada S, et al. 2003. Kinesin superfamily protein 2A (KIF2A) functions in suppression of collateral branch extension. *Cell* 114:229–39

Hoogenraad CC, Bradke F. 2009. Control of neuronal polarity and plasticity—a renaissance for microtubules? *Trends Cell Biol.* 19:669–76

Horiuchi D, Collins CA, Bhat P, Barkus RV, Diantonio A, Saxton WM. 2007. Control of a kinesin-cargo linkage mechanism by JNK pathway kinases. *Curr. Biol.* 17:1313–17

Hur E-M, Saijilafu, Zhou FQ. 2011a. Growing the growth cone: remodeling the cytoskeleton to promote axon regeneration. *Trends Neurosci.* 35:164–74

Hur E-M, Yang IH, Kim D-H, Byun J, Sajjilafu, et al. 2011b. Engineering neuronal growth cones to promote axon regeneration over inhibitory molecules. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 108:5057–62

Itoh A, Horiuchi M, Bannerman P, Pleasure D, Itoh T. 2009. Impaired regenerative response of primary sensory neurons in ZPK/DLK gene-trap mice. *Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun.* 383:258–62

Janke C, Bulinski JC. 2011. Post-translational regulation of the microtubule cytoskeleton: mechanisms and functions. *Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol.* 12:773–86

Janke C, Kneussel M. 2010. Tubulin post-translational modifications: encoding functions on the neuronal microtubule cytoskeleton. *Trends Neurosci.* 33:362–72

Kabir N, Schaefer AW, Nakhost A, Sossin WS, Forscher P. 2001. Protein kinase C activation promotes microtubule advance in neuronal growth cones by increasing average microtubule growth lifetimes. *J. Cell Biol.* 152:1033–44

Kapitein LC, Hoogenraad CC. 2011. Which way to go? Cytoskeletal organization and polarized transport in neurons. *Mol. Cell Neurosci.* 46:9–20

Karabinos A, Schmidt H, Harborth J, Schnabel R, Weber K. 2001. Essential roles for four cytoplasmic intermediate filament proteins in *Caenorhabditis elegans* development. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 98:7863–68

Karabinos A, Schunemann J, Weber K. 2004. Most genes encoding cytoplasmic intermediate filament (IF) proteins of the nematode *Caenorhabditis elegans* are required in late embryogenesis. *Eur. J. Cell Biol.* 83:457–68

Kimura Y, Kurabe N, Ikegami K, Tsutsumi K, Konishi Y, et al. 2010. Identification of tubulin deglutamylase among *Caenorhabditis elegans* and mammalian cytosolic carboxypeptidases (CCPs). *J. Biol. Chem.* 285:22936–41

Kirszenblat L, Neumann B, Coakley S, Hilliard MA. 2013. A dominant mutation in *mec-7/β-tubulin* affects axon development and regeneration in *Caenorhabditis elegans* neurons. *Mol. Biol. Cell* 24:285–96

Knobel KM, Jorgensen EM, Bastiani MJ. 1999. Growth cones stall and collapse during axon outgrowth in *Caenorhabditis elegans*. *Development* 126:4489–98

Kuijpers M, Hoogenraad CC. 2011. Centrosomes, microtubules and neuronal development. *Mol. Cell Neurosci.* 48:349–58

Lacroix B, van Dijk J, Gold ND, Guizetti J, Aldrian-Herrada G, et al. 2010. Tubulin polyglutamylation stimulates spastin-mediated microtubule severing. *J. Cell Biol.* 189:945–54

Laskowski CJ, Bradke F. 2012. *In vivo* imaging: a dynamic imaging approach to study spinal cord regeneration. *Exp. Neurol.* 242:11–17

Lewcock JW, Genoud N, Lettieri K, Pfaff SL. 2007. The ubiquitin ligase Phr1 regulates axon outgrowth through modulation of microtubule dynamics. *Neuron* 56:604–20

Li C, Hisamoto N, Nix P, Kanao S, Mizuno T, et al. 2012. The growth factor SVH-1 regulates axon regeneration in *C. elegans* via the JNK MAPK cascade. *Nat. Neurosci.* 15:551–57

Liu K, Tedeschi A, Park KK, He Z. 2011. Neuronal intrinsic mechanisms of axon regeneration. *Annu. Rev. Neurosci.* 34:131–52

Maniar TA, Kaplan M, Wang GJ, Shen K, Wei L, et al. 2012. UNC-33 (CRMP) and ankyrin organize microtubules and localize kinesin to polarize axon-dendrite sorting. *Nat. Neurosci.* 15:48–56

Meng W, Mushika Y, Ichii T, Takeichi M. 2008. Anchorage of microtubule minus ends to adherens junctions regulates epithelial cell-cell contacts. *Cell* 135:948–59

Mitchison T, Kirschner M. 1984. Dynamic instability of microtubule growth. *Nature* 312:237–42

Motegi F, Velarde NV, Piano F, Sugimoto A. 2006. Two phases of astral microtubule activity during cytokinesis in *C. elegans* embryos. *Dev. Cell* 10:509–20

Nadeau S, Hein P, Fernandes KJL, Peterson AC, Miller FD. 2005. A transcriptional role for C/EBP β in the neuronal response to axonal injury. *Mol. Cell. Neurosci.* 29:525–35

Nakata K, Abrams B, Grill B, Goncharov A, Huang X, et al. 2005. Regulation of a DLK-1 and p38 MAP kinase pathway by the ubiquitin ligase RPM-1 is required for presynaptic development. *Cell* 120:407–20

Nawabi H, Zukor K, He Z. 2012. No simpler than mammals: axon and dendrite regeneration in *Drosophila*. *Genes Dev.* 26:1509–14

Nechipurenko IV, Broihier HT. 2012. FoxO limits microtubule stability and is itself negatively regulated by microtubule disruption. *J. Cell Biol.* 196:345–62

Chisholm

Changes may still occur before final publication online and in print

Neumann B, Nguyen KC, Hall DH, Ben-Yakar A, Hilliard MA. 2011. Axonal regeneration proceeds through specific axonal fusion in transected *C. elegans* neurons. *Dev. Dyn.* 240:1365–72

Ng DC, Zhao TT, Yeap YY, Ngoei KR, Bogoyevitch MA. 2010. c-Jun N-terminal kinase phosphorylation of stathmin confers protection against cellular stress. *J. Biol. Chem.* 285:29001–13

Nguyen MM, Stone MC, Rolls MM. 2011. Microtubules are organized independently of the centrosome in *Drosophila* neurons. *Neural Dev.* 6:38

Nix P, Hisamoto N, Matsumoto K, Bastiani M. 2011. Axon regeneration requires coordinate activation of p38 and JNK MAPK pathways. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 108:10738–43

O’Hagan R, Piasecki BP, Silva M, Phirke P, Nguyen KCQ, et al. 2011. The tubulin deglutamylase CCP-1 regulates the function and stability of sensory cilia in *C. elegans*. *Curr. Biol.* 21:1685–94

O’Rourke SM, Christensen SN, Bowerman B. 2010. *Caenorhabditis elegans* EFA-6 limits microtubule growth at the cell cortex. *Nat. Cell Biol.* 12:1235–41

Oblinger MM, Lasek RJ. 1988. Axotomy-induced alterations in the synthesis and transport of neurofilaments and microtubules in dorsal root ganglion cells. *J. Neurosci.* 8:1747–58

Ori-McKenney KM, Jan LY, Jan YN. 2012. Golgi outposts shape dendrite morphology by functioning as sites of acentrosomal microtubule nucleation in neurons. *Neuron* 76:921–30

Ou CY, Poon VY, Maeder CI, Watanabe S, Lehrman EK, et al. 2010. Two cyclin-dependent kinase pathways are essential for polarized trafficking of presynaptic components. *Cell* 141:846–58

Ou CY, Shen K. 2011. Neuronal polarity in *C. elegans*. *Dev. Neurobiol.* 71:554–66

Paturle-Lafanechère L, Eddé B, Denoulet P, Van Dorsselaer A, Mazarguil H, et al. 1991. Characterization of a major brain tubulin variant which cannot be tyrosinated. *Biochemistry* 30:10523–28

Paturle-Lafanechère L, Manier M, Trigault N, Pirollet F, Mazarguil H, Job D. 1994. Accumulation of delta 2-tubulin, a major tubulin variant that cannot be tyrosinated, in neuronal tissues and in stable microtubule assemblies. *J. Cell Sci.* 107:1529–43

Perez F, Diamantopoulos GS, Stalder R, Kreis TE. 1999. CLIP-170 highlights growing microtubule ends in vivo. *Cell* 96:517–27

Peris L, Wagenbach M, Lafanechère L, Brocard J, Moore AT, et al. 2009. Motor-dependent microtubule disassembly driven by tubulin tyrosination. *J. Cell Biol.* 185:1159–66

Pinan-Lucarre B, Gabel CV, Reina CP, Hulme SE, Shevkoplyas SS, et al. 2012. The core apoptotic executioner proteins CED-3 and CED-4 promote initiation of neuronal regeneration in *Caenorhabditis elegans*. *PLoS Biol.* 10:e1001331

Polleux F, Snider W. 2010. Initiating and growing an axon. *Cold Spring Harb. Perspect. Biol.* 2:a001925

Qiu J, Cafferty WB, McMahon SB, Thompson SW. 2005. Conditioning injury-induced spinal axon regeneration requires signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 activation. *J. Neurosci.* 25:1645–53

Ramón y Cajal S, DeFelipe J (ed.), Jones EG (ed.). 1991. *Cajal’s Degeneration and Regeneration of the Nervous System*. Transl. R.M. May. New York: Oxford Univ. Press

Roll-Mecak A, McNally FJ. 2010. Microtubule-severing enzymes. *Curr. Opin. Cell Biol.* 22:96–103

Roll-Mecak A, Vale RD. 2006. Making more microtubules by severing: A common theme of noncentrosomal microtubule arrays? *J. Cell Biol.* 175:849–51

Rolls MM, Satoh D, Clyne PJ, Henner AL, Uemura T, Doe CQ. 2007. Polarity and intracellular compartmentalization of *Drosophila* neurons. *Neural Dev.* 2:7

Sahly I, Khoutorsky A, Erez H, Prager-Khoutorsky M, Spira ME. 2006. On-line confocal imaging of the events leading to structural dedifferentiation of an axonal segment into a growth cone after axotomy. *J. Comp. Neurol.* 494:705–20

Samara C, Rohde CB, Gilleland CL, Norton S, Haggarty SJ, Yanik MF. 2010. Large-scale in vivo femtosecond laser neurosurgery screen reveals small-molecule enhancer of regeneration. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 107:18342–47

Savage C, Hamelin M, Culotti JG, Coulson A, Albertson DG, Chalfie M. 1989. *mec-7* is a β-tubulin gene required for the production of 15-protofilament microtubules in *Caenorhabditis elegans*. *Genes Dev.* 3:870–81

Scholey JM. 2008. Intraflagellar transport motors in cilia: moving along the cell’s antenna. *J. Cell Biol.* 180:23–29

www.annualreviews.org • *C. elegans* Axon Regeneration

Changes may still occur before final publication online and in print

Selvaraj BT, Frank N, Bender FLP, Asan E, Sendtner M. 2012. Local axonal function of STAT3 rescues axon degeneration in the *pmm* model of motoneuron disease. *J. Cell Biol.* 199:437–51

Sengottuvel V, Leibinger M, Pfreimer M, Andreadaki A, Fischer D. 2011. Taxol facilitates axon regeneration in the mature CNS. *J. Neurosci.* 31:2688–99

Shi S-H, Cheng T, Jan LY, Jan YN. 2004. APC and GSK-3β are involved in mPar3 targeting to the nascent axon and establishment of neuronal polarity. *Curr. Biol.* 14:2025–32

Shin JE, Cho Y, Beirowski B, Milbrandt J, Cavalli V, DiAntonio A. 2012. Dual leucine zipper kinase is required for retrograde injury signaling and axonal regeneration. *Neuron* 74:1015–22

Song Y, Ori-McKenney KM, Zheng Y, Han C, Jan LY, Jan YN. 2012. Regeneration of *Drosophila* sensory neuron axons and dendrites is regulated by the Akt pathway involving *Pten* and microRNA *bantam*. *Genes Dev.* 26:1612–25

Spira ME, Oren R, Dormann A, Gitler D. 2003. Critical calpain-dependent ultrastructural alterations underlie the transformation of an axonal segment into a growth cone after axotomy of cultured *Aplysia* neurons. *J. Comp. Neurol.* 457:293–312

Srayko M, Quintin S, Schwager A, Hyman AA. 2003. *Caenorhabditis elegans* TAC-1 and ZYG-9 form a complex that is essential for long astral and spindle microtubules. *Curr. Biol.* 13:1506–11

Stepanova T, Slemmer J, Hoogenraad CC, Lansbergen G, Dortland B, et al. 2003. Visualization of microtubule growth in cultured neurons via the use of EB3-GFP (end-binding protein 3-green fluorescent protein). *J. Neurosci.* 23:2655–64

Stepanova T, Smal I, van Haren J, Akinci U, Liu Z, et al. 2010. History-dependent catastrophes regulate axonal microtubule behavior. *Curr. Biol.* 20:1023–28

Stiess M, Maghelli N, Kapitein LC, Gomis-Ruth S, Wilsch-Brauninger M, et al. 2010. Axon extension occurs independently of centrosomal microtubule nucleation. *Science* 327:704–7

Stone MC, Nguyen MM, Tao J, Allender DL, Rolls MM. 2010. Global up-regulation of microtubule dynamics and polarity reversal during regeneration of an axon from a dendrite. *Mol. Biol. Cell* 21:767–77

Stone MC, Rao K, Gheres KW, Kim S, Tao J, et al. 2012. Normal *spastin* gene dosage is specifically required for axon regeneration. *Cell Rep.* 2:1340–50

Stone MC, Roegiers F, Rolls MM. 2008. Microtubules have opposite orientation in axons and dendrites of *Drosophila* neurons. *Mol. Biol. Cell* 19:4122–29

Suter DM, Miller KE. 2011. The emerging role of forces in axonal elongation. *Prog. Neurobiol.* 94:91–101

Szaro BG, Strong MJ. 2010. Post-transcriptional control of neurofilaments: new roles in development, regeneration and neurodegenerative disease. *Trends Neurosci.* 33:27–37

Tanaka EM, Kirschner MW. 1991. Microtubule behavior in the growth cones of living neurons during axon elongation. *J. Cell Biol.* 115:345–63

Tararuk T, Östman N, Li W, Björkblom B, Padzik A, et al. 2006. JNK1 phosphorylation of SCG10 determines microtubule dynamics and axodendritic length. *J. Cell Biol.* 173:265–77

Tedeschi A. 2011. Tuning the orchestra: transcriptional pathways controlling axon regeneration. *Front. Mol. Neurosci.* 4:60

Topalidou I, Keller C, Kalebic N, Nguyen KCQ, Somhegyi H, et al. 2012. Genetically separable functions of the MEC-17 tubulin acetyltransferase affect microtubule organization. *Curr. Biol.* 22:1057–65

Tuszynski MH, Steward O. 2012. Concepts and methods for the study of axonal regeneration in the CNS. *Neuron* 74:777–91

Walker RA, O’Brien ET, Pryer NK, Soboeiro MF, Voter WA, et al. 1988. Dynamic instability of individual microtubules analyzed by video light microscopy: rate constants and transition frequencies. *J. Cell Biol.* 107:1437–48

Wang Z, Jin Y. 2011. Genetic dissection of axon regeneration. *Curr. Opin. Neurobiol.* 21:189–96

Watkins TA, Wang B, Huntwork-Rodriguez S, Yang J, Jiang Z, et al. 2013. DLK initiates a transcriptional program that couples apoptotic and regenerative responses to axonal injury. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 110:4039–44

Webster DR, Gundersen GG, Bulinski JC, Borisy GG. 1987. Differential turnover of tyrosinated and detyrosinated microtubules. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 84:9040–44

White JG, Southgate E, Thomson JN, Brenner S. 1986. The structure of the nervous system of the nematode *Caenorhabditis elegans*. *Philos. Trans. R. Soc. B Biol. Sci.* 314:1–340

Witte H, Neukirchen D, Bradke F. 2008. Microtubule stabilization specifies initial neuronal polarization. *J. Cell Biol.* 180:619–32

Wu Z, Ghosh-Roy A, Yanik MF, Zhang JZ, Jin Y, Chisholm AD. 2007. *Caenorhabditis elegans* neuronal regeneration is influenced by life stage, ephrin signaling, and synaptic branching. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 104:15132–37

Xiong X, Wang X, Ewanek R, Bhat P, DiAntonio A, Collins CA. 2010. Protein turnover of the Wallenda/DLK kinase regulates a retrograde response to axonal injury. *J. Cell Biol.* 191:211–23

Xu K, Zhong G, Zhuang X. 2013. Actin, spectrin, and associated proteins form a periodic cytoskeletal structure in axons. *Science* 339:452–56

Yan D, Jin Y. 2012. Regulation of DLK-1 kinase activity by calcium-mediated dissociation from an inhibitory isoform. *Neuron* 76:534–48

Yan D, Wu Z, Chisholm AD, Jin Y. 2009. The DLK-1 kinase promotes mRNA stability and local translation in *C. elegans* synapses and axon regeneration. *Cell* 138:1005–18

Yanik MF, Cinar H, Cinar HN, Chisholm AD, Jin Y, Ben-Yakar A. 2004. Neurosurgery: functional regeneration after laser axotomy. *Nature* 432:822

Yu W, Ahmad FJ, Baas PW. 1994. Microtubule fragmentation and partitioning in the axon during collateral branch formation. *J. Neurosci.* 14:5872–84

Yu W, Centonze VE, Ahmad FJ, Baas PW. 1993. Microtubule nucleation and release from the neuronal centrosome. *J. Cell Biol.* 122:349–59

Yuan A, Rao MV, Veeranna, Nixon RA. 2012. Neurofilaments at a glance. *J. Cell Sci.* 125:3257–63

Zheng B, Lee JK, Xie F. 2006. Genetic mouse models for studying inhibitors of spinal axon regeneration. *Trends Neurosci.* 29:640–46

Ziv NE, Spira ME. 1993. Spatiotemporal distribution of Ca²⁺ following axotomy and throughout the recovery process of cultured Aplysia neurons. *Eur. J. Neurosci.* 5:657–68

Ziv NE, Spira ME. 1997. Localized and transient elevations of intracellular Ca²⁺ induce the dedifferentiation of axonal segments into growth cones. *J. Neurosci.* 17:3568–79
