
Fink, J., Carpi, N., Betz, T., Bétard, A., Chebah, M., Azioune, A., Bornens, M., Sykes, C., Fetler, L., Cuvelier, D., and Piel, M. (2011). Nat. Cell Biol. 13, 771–778.

Gönczy, P. (2008). Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 9, 355–366.

Green, R.A., Paluch, E., and Oegema, K. (2012). Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. 28, 29–58.

Kiyomitsu, T., and Cheeseman, I.M. (2012). Nat. Cell Biol. 14, 311–317.

Kiyomitsu, T., and Cheeseman, I.M. (2013). Cell 154, this issue, 391–402.

Kotak, S., Busso, C., and Gönczy, P. (2012). J. Cell Biol. 199, 97–110.

Neumüller, R.A., and Knoblich, J.A. (2009). Genes Dev. 23, 2675–2699.

Sedzinski, J., Biro, M., Oswald, A., Tinevez, J.Y., Salbreux, G., and Paluch, E. (2011). Nature 476, 462–466.

Woodard, G.E., Huang, N.N., Cho, H., Miki, T., Tall, G.G., and Kehrl, J.H. (2010). Mol. Cell. Biol. 30, 3519–3530.


---

# Aging: Seeking Mitonuclear Balance

**Jason Karpac**${}^{1}$ **and Heinrich Jasper**${}^{1,*}$

${}^{1}$Buck Institute for Research on Aging, Novato, CA 94945, USA

*Correspondence: hjasper@buckinstitute.org  
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2013.06.046*

Metabolic imbalances accompany the aging process in many organisms, and signaling mechanisms that allay or prevent these imbalances can extend lifespan. Two recent studies by Auwerx and colleagues, including one in this issue, identify a conserved signaling network centered on mitochondrial stress responses that promotes longevity in response to changes in mitochondrial translation and NAD${}^{+}$ metabolism.

Aging is characterized by a progressive decline in metabolic homeostasis. A comprehensive insight into cellular processes that respond to metabolic imbalances will be useful in identifying new avenues for therapeutic intervention against age-related diseases.

Mitochondria play a central role in such processes, as they are the hubs of metabolic activity in eukaryotic cells and significantly influence the intracellular energy balance and redox milieu. The function of mitochondria as sensors of metabolic imbalances and as mediators of specific cellular stress responses that can impact longevity has recently garnered increased attention. Mitochondrial dysfunction has long been implicated in aging, primarily as a source of metabolic stress and of reactive oxygen species (ROS; Balaban et al., 2005). However, recent work in *C. elegans* has shown that specific stress responses initiated by mitochondria that experience functional impairments can extend lifespan. These stress responses include both the mitochondrial unfolded protein response (UPR${}^{\mathrm{mt}}$; Durieux et al., 2011) and mitochondrial ROS-induced defense pathways (mitohormesis

response; Lee et al., 2010; Schulz et al., 2007).

In a recent genetic tour-de-force, Auwerx and colleagues have identified mutations in mitochondrial ribosomal proteins (MRPs) as evolutionarily conserved regulators of lifespan (Houtkooper et al., 2013). Genetic variants of MRPS5 expression in mice significantly correlate with increased longevity, whereas MRP knockdown in *C. elegans* can extend lifespan. These phenotypes are associated with “mitonuclear imbalance,” an imbalance between the expression of nuclear- and mitochondrially encoded mitochondrial proteins. Mitonuclear imbalance activates the UPR${}^{\mathrm{mt}}$, extending lifespan in *C. elegans*. Interestingly, longevity-promoting compounds such as rapamycin and resveratrol also induce mitonuclear imbalance, and the UPR${}^{\mathrm{mt}}$ is required for rapamycin-mediated lifespan extension in worms (Houtkooper et al., 2013). The authors further identify specific antibiotics that induce mitonuclear imbalance, activate the UPR${}^{\mathrm{mt}}$, and extend lifespan.

Now, in this issue of *Cell*, the Auwerx group extends this work and identifies how a central metabolic intermediate, nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD${}^{+}$), influences mitochondrial stress responses (Mouchiroud et al., 2013). NAD${}^{+}$ governs cellular energy homeostasis through its central role in mitochondrial ATP production, and the maintenance of an optimal NAD${}^{+}$/NADH ratio is critical for mitochondrial function. Beyond ATP production, the biosynthesis and catabolism of NAD${}^{+}$, which can be modulated by nutritional and environmental stimuli, also influences the function of NAD${}^{+}$-dependent enzymes, such as sirtuins and poly-ADP-ribose polymerase (PARP). Sirtuins, which regulate many cellular metabolic processes, influence lifespan in various organisms, and significantly affect age-related metabolic diseases in mice (Chalkiadaki and Guarente, 2012). PARPs, in turn, are NAD${}^{+}$ consuming enzymes classically described as DNA repair proteins (Amé et al., 2004).

NAD${}^{+}$ metabolism thus engages key effectors of longevity, and interventions aimed at modulating NAD${}^{+}$ levels may have significant effects on longevity and age-related diseases. Supporting this notion, elevated NAD${}^{+}$ levels have been

duces the UPR<sup>mt</sup> but increases mitochondrial fusion, nuclear localization of DAF-16/Foxo, and expression of the antioxidant target gene of DAF-16/Foxo, sod-3. It is likely that this delayed activation of DAF-16/Foxo is part of an adaptive “mitohormesis” response to the earlier spike in mitochondrial ROS production.

Finally, the authors show that NAD<sup>+</sup> supplementation and SirT1 activation induces stress responses in mammalian hepatocytes that are reminiscent of the UPR<sup>mt</sup> and the DAF-16-mediated stress response in worms.

Taken together, Mouchiroud et al. present an evolutionarily conserved NAD<sup>+</sup>/Sir2/UPR<sup>mt</sup>/Foxo-signaling axis that can extend lifespan in *C. elegans*. It is of particular interest that NAD<sup>+</sup> metabolism can coordinate the activity of known mediators of longevity, such as Sir2 and Foxo, supporting a model in which NAD<sup>+</sup> levels are a key determinant of aging via the integration of metabolic, dietary, and mitochondrial inputs (Figure 1). The conserved nature of these interactions should invite future work to explore whether pharmacologically targeting NAD<sup>+</sup> metabolism (potentially using PARP inhibitors) can prevent age-associated diseases.

Importantly, this and previous studies also highlight the central role of the UPR<sup>mt</sup> in monitoring fluctuations in cellular metabolism and promoting protective responses that increase lifespan. Future studies dissecting the signaling mechanisms involved in these responses thus have the potential to significantly advance our understanding of aging and age-related diseases.

**ACKNOWLEDGMENTS**

The authors are supported by the National Institute on Aging (NIH RO1 AG028127), the National Institute on General Medical Sciences (NIH RO1 GM100196), and the Ellison Medical Foundation (AG-SS-2224-08), and by an AFAR/Ellison postdoctoral fellowship to J.K.

**REFERENCES**

Amé, J.C., Spenlehauer, C., and de Murcia, G. (2004). Bioessays 26, 882–893.

Balaban, R.S., Nemoto, S., and Finkel, T. (2005). Cell 120, 483–495.

Barbosa, M.T., Soares, S.M., Novak, C.M., Sinclair, D., Levine, J.A., Aksoy, P., and Chini, E.N. (2007). FASEB J. 21, 3629–3639.

Belenky, P., Bogan, K.L., and Brenner, C. (2007). Trends Biochem. Sci. 32, 12–19.

Chalkiadaki, A., and Guarente, L. (2012). Nat. Rev. Endocrinol. 8, 287–296.

Durieux, J., Wolff, S., and Dillin, A. (2011). Cell 144, 79–91.

Houtkooper, R.H., Mouchiroud, L., Ryu, D., Moulian, N., Katsyuba, E., Knott, G., Williams, R.W., and Auwerx, J. (2013). Nature 497, 451–457.

Lee, S.J., Hwang, A.B., and Kenyon, C. (2010). Curr. Biol. 20, 2131–2136.

Mouchiroud, L., Houtkooper, R.H., Moullan, N., Katsyuba, E., Ryu, D., Cantó, C., Mottis, A., Jo, Y.-S., Viswanathan, M., Schoonjans, K., et al. (2013). Cell 154, this issue, 430–441.

Schulz, T.J., Zarse, K., Voigt, A., Urban, N., Birringer, M., and Ristow, M. (2007). Cell Metab. 6, 280–293.
