
ARTHITIS & RHEUMATISM  
Vol. 65, No. 11, November 2013, pp 2791–2802  
DOI 10.1002/art.38094  
© 2013, American College of Rheumatology  

# Methotrexate Normalizes Up-Regulated Folate Pathway Genes in Rheumatoid Arthritis

Marjolein Blits,$^{1}$ Gerrit Jansen,$^{1}$ Yehuda G. Assaraf,$^{2}$ Mark A. van de Wiel,$^{1}$ Willem F. Lems,$^{1}$ Mike T. Nurmohamed,$^{3}$ Dirkjan van Schaardenburg,$^{3}$ Alexandre E. Voskuyl,$^{1}$ Gert-Jan Wolbink,$^{4}$ Saskia Vosslamber,$^{1}$ and Cornelis L. Verweij$^{1}$

**Objective.** The folate antagonist methotrexate (MTX) is an anchor drug in the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis (RA), but its mechanism of action with regard to the impact on folate metabolism remains elusive. The aim of the present study was to investigate the cellular pharmacologic impact of MTX on peripheral blood cells, by comparing MTX-treated RA patients to MTX-naive RA patients and healthy controls.

**Methods.** Gene expression microarray data were used to investigate the expression of 17 folate pathway genes by peripheral blood cells from a cohort of 25 RA patients treated with MTX, 10 MTX-naive RA patients starting treatment with MTX, and 15 healthy controls (test cohort). Multiplex real-time polymerase chain reaction was used to validate the results in an independent cohort, consisting of 151 RA patients treated with MTX, 28 MTX-naive RA patients starting treatment with MTX, and 24 healthy controls (validation cohort).

**Results.** Multiple folate metabolism-related genes were consistently and significantly altered between the 3 groups in both cohorts. Concurrent with evidence of an immune-activation gene signature in MTX-naive RA patients, significant up-regulation of the folate-metabolizing enzymes γ-glutamyl hydrolase and dihydrofolate reductase, as well as the MTX/folate efflux transporters ABCC2 and ABCC5, was observed in the MTX-naive RA group compared to healthy controls. Strikingly, MTX treatment of RA patients normalized these differential gene expression levels to the levels observed in healthy controls.

**Conclusion.** These results suggest that under inflammatory conditions, basal folate metabolism in the peripheral blood cells of RA patients is markedly up-regulated, and treatment with MTX restores folate metabolism to normal levels. Identification of this novel gene signature provides insight into the mechanism of action of MTX, thus paving the way for development of novel folate metabolism-targeted therapies.

Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a systemic autoimmune disease that is characterized by chronic inflammation of the joints. RA is heterogeneous in terms of its clinical presentation, pathologic processes, and response to therapy (1,2). The folic acid antagonist methotrexate (MTX) is by far the most widely used disease-modifying antirheumatic drug (DMARD) in the treatment of RA, either as a single agent or in combination with other DMARDs. Failure to respond to DMARD-based therapy may prompt the use of biologic agents, such as anti-tumor necrosis factor α monoclonal antibodies, in combination with MTX (3,4).

---

Supported in part by the TRACER consortium of the Center for Translational and Molecular Medicine, the Dutch Arthritis Foundation (grant 9-1-407), the Centre for Medical Systems Biology (a center of excellence from the Netherlands Genomics Initiative), and the European Union (project AutoCure). Dr. Assaraf was recipient of a visiting professor fellowship provided by the Dutch Arthritis Foundation as well as awards from the Dutch Organization for Scientific Research, the Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences, and the VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam.

$^{1}$Marjolein Blits, MSc, Gerrit Jansen, PhD, Mark A. van de Wiel, PhD, Willem F. Lems, MD, PhD, Alexandre E. Voskuyl, MD, PhD, Saskia Vosslamber, MSc, Cornelis L. Verweij, PhD: VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands; $^{2}$Yehuda G. Assaraf, PhD: Technion-Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel; $^{3}$Mike T. Nurmohamed, MD, PhD, Dirkjan van Schaardenburg, MD: VU University Medical Center, and Jan van Breemen Research Institute|Reade, Amsterdam, The Netherlands; $^{4}$Gert-Jan Wolbink, MD, PhD: Jan van Breemen Research Institute|Reade, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Address correspondence to Cornelis L. Verweij, PhD, VU University Medical Center, Departments of Pathology and Rheumatology, Inflammatory Disease Profiling, CCA2.28, PO Box 7057, 1007MB Amsterdam, The Netherlands. E-mail: c.verweij@vumc.nl.

Submitted for publication December 14, 2012; accepted in revised form July 11, 2013.

Figure 1. Key components of methotrexate (MTX)/folate metabolism, involved in the uptake and extrusion, metabolism, and targeting of MTX/folate. The influx transporters comprise reduced folate carrier (RFC), proton-coupled folate transporter (PCFT), and folate receptor α and β (FRα/β) isoforms. The metabolizing enzymes comprise folylpolyglutamate synthetase (FPGS) and γ-glutamyl hydrolase (GGH) (compartmentalized in lysosomes). The folate-dependent enzymes involved in folate cycling include dihydrofolate reductase (DHFR), thymidylate synthase (TYMS), 5-aminimidazole-4-carboxamide ribonucleotide formyltransferase (AICARTF/ATIC), glycine ribonucleotide transformylase (GART), methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR), and methionine synthase (MS). The MTX efflux transporters, members of the ATP-binding cassette (ABC) transporters, include ABCC1–5 and ABCG2. Inhibition of folate-dependent enzymes by MTX is depicted with the long broken lines. Proteins and enzymes are shown in boldface. PG = polyglutamate; OP⁻ = organic phosphate; H⁺ = hydrogen; Pi = phosphates; DHF = dihydrofolate; THF = tetrahydrofolate; CH₃-THF = 5-methyl-tetrahydrofolate; CH₂-THF = 5,10-methylene-tetrahydrofolate; CHO-THF = 10-formyl-tetrahydrofolate. Adapted, with permission, from refs. 5 and 13.

Beyond its application in the treatment of RA, MTX is also commonly prescribed in the treatment of malignant diseases (5,6). The antiinflammatory effects elicited by low-dose MTX treatment of RA may involve mechanisms that are distinct from those observed with high-dose MTX treatment of various cancers. However, with respect to the cellular pharmacologic effects of MTX, there are overlapping mechanisms of action in RA and cancer. MTX suppresses proliferation of malignant cells by blocking the de novo biosynthesis of purines and pyrimidines (5). Moreover, MTX inhibits the homocysteine and methionine cycle involved in methylation of DNA, RNA, and proteins. MTX-induced inhibition of 5-aminimidazole-4-carboxamide ribonucleotide formyltransferase (AICARTF/ATIC) promotes release of the endogenous antiinflammatory mediator adenosine (5,7,8). MTX has also been reported to achieve additional pharmacologic effects, e.g.,

generation of reactive oxygen species through JNK activation (9,10), induction of T cell apoptosis (11), and inhibition of NF-κB (12), for which the contribution of its therapeutic efficacy is not fully defined.

As shown in Figure 1, treatment with MTX primarily interferes with folate homeostasis, a process that is tightly controlled at multiple levels, including the following: 1) routes of cellular uptake and efflux of MTX/folate; 2) intracellular metabolism and retention of MTX/folate; and 3) expression of key regulatory folate-dependent enzymes (for review, see refs. 5 and 13). Oral MTX is taken up in the upper small intestine via the proton-coupled folate transporter (PCFT/SLC46A1), which functions optimally at the acidic pH of the duodenum and jejunum, both of which show predominant expression of PCFT (5,14). Cellular uptake of MTX by immune cells proceeds via the reduced folate carrier (RFC/SLC19A1), although a third transport

route, involving a receptor-mediated process via folate
receptor β (FRβ), which is expressed predominantly in
macrophages, can be operative in activated macro-
phages in inflamed synovial tissue (15,16). Upon entry
into the cell, MTX is metabolically activated by the
enzyme folylpolyglutamate synthetase (FPGS) to a poly-
anionic polyglutamate form that is highly retained within
cells (17). For deactivation, polyglutamylation can be
reversed by γ-glutamyl hydrolase (GGH), which cleaves
off the polyglutamyl chain attached to folates and poly-
glutamatable antifolates such as MTX (18).

MTX blocks the key enzyme dihydrofolate reduc-
tase (DHFR), whereas MTX polyglutamates (MTXGlu)
potently inhibit thymidylate synthase (TYMS), both of
which are enzymes that are crucial for the de novo bio-
synthesis of purines and pyrimidines required for DNA
replication and cellular proliferation. MTXGlu and di-
hydrofolate polyglutamates that accumulate after
DHFR inhibition can also exert an inhibitory effect
on other folate-dependent enzymes downstream of
DHFR, such as glycineamide ribonucleotide formyltrans-
ferase (GART) and methylenetetrahydrofolate reduc-
tase (MTHFR) (19,20), which also function in de novo
purine biosynthesis and methylation of DNA, RNA,
and proteins, respectively. Finally, folate/MTX can be
extruded from cells, mainly as the nonpolyglutamated
form, via ATP-binding cassette (ABC) transporters,
including ABCC1 and ABCG2 (5,21).

Despite the key role of MTX in current RA
therapies, its mechanism of action remains elusive, and a
recurrent theme is the lack of a clinical response and the
risk of toxicity in a considerable fraction of patients.
Many studies have investigated genetic variants of folate
pathway genes and the levels of MTXGlu in red blood
cells (RBCs) as predictive markers for therapy response
or toxicity, and these markers could be used to decipher
the molecular basis underlying the loss of MTX efficacy
in RA (22–26).

Although these studies offer promising avenues
toward the discovery of markers that could predict and
explain the mechanisms underlying loss of MTX func-
tion, the mode of action of MTX in RA remains unclear.
As a step toward this end and in order to better
understand the impact of MTX treatment on RA, we
compared expression levels of multiple MTX/folate
pathway genes in RA patients prior to and during
treatment with MTX. Furthermore, expression profiling
in these 2 RA groups was compared with that in healthy
controls.

---

PATIENTS AND METHODS

Patients and controls. This study consisted of 2 inde-
pendently collected cohorts, a test cohort and a validation
cohort. The test cohort included 25 RA patients who were
receiving treatment with MTX, 10 RA patients who had not
been treated with MTX or other DMARDs and were about to
start MTX treatment (MTX-naive), and 15 healthy controls, as
previously reported (27). The validation cohort consisted of
151 RA patients who were receiving treatment with MTX,
28 MTX-naive RA patients who were about to start MTX
treatment, and 24 healthy controls. The characteristics of the
patients and controls in both cohorts are summarized in
Table 1. All patients were diagnosed as having RA according
to the American College of Rheumatology 1987 revised cri-
teria for RA (28), and each subject was randomly selected for
the study. All RA patients and healthy individuals gave their
informed consent to participate, and the study protocol was
approved by medical ethics committees of the Academic
Medical Center, the VU University Medical Center, and the
Jan van Breemen Research Institute|Reade (Amsterdam, The
Netherlands).

Blood sampling for RNA isolation. Samples of peri-
pheral blood (2.5 ml) for RNA isolation were obtained from
all patients and healthy controls and directly collected in
PAXgene Blood RNA isolation tubes (PreAnalytiX) to avoid
manipulation and activation of the cells (29). Incubation at
room temperature for 2 hours on a roller bank ensured
complete cell lysis and RNA stabilization, after which tubes
were stored at –20°C. Total RNA was isolated using a
PAXgene RNA isolation kit according to the manufacturer’s
instructions, including a DNase treatment (Qiagen) to re-
move genomic DNA. The quantity and quality of the RNA
were determined using a NanoDrop Technologies spectro-
photometer.

Gene expression microarray data. For gene expression
analysis (27) of peripheral blood samples from the test cohort,
data were retrieved from the Stanford Microarray Database
(30) (http://smd.stanford.edu/cgi-bin/search/basicSearch.pl),
and expression levels of specific genes were extracted and
analyzed. A subanalysis in the test cohort involved microarray
expression analysis of genes in the MTX/folate pathway (13),
in particular those involved in cellular uptake of MTX/folate
(FR, PCFT, and RFC) and efflux of MTX/folate (ABCC1–
ABCC5 and ABCG2), the metabolism of MTX/folate (FPGS
and GGH), and intracellular targeting of MTX (DHFR, TYMS,
MTHFR, ATIC, and GART).

Complementary DNA (cDNA) synthesis and real-time
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) analysis. RNA (0.25 μg) was
reverse-transcribed into cDNA with a RevertAid H Minus
First Strand cDNA Synthesis Kit (MBI Fermentas) according
to the manufacturer’s instructions. The BioMark 96.96 dy-
namic array (Fluidigm) used for gene expression analysis was
also used for real-time PCR analysis of 17 folate/MTX pathway
genes, performed by an outsourcing company (ServiceXS).
Before using the BioMark array, Specific Target Amplification
of the cDNA (14 cycles) was performed. The reaction was
diluted 5-fold before being loaded onto the BioMark array.
PCR and imaging were performed on a BioMark instrument,
after which C<sub>t</sub> values were extracted using BioMark Real-Time

Table 1. Characteristics of the patients and healthy control subjects in the test cohort and validation cohort*

|  | Test cohort | Validation cohort |
| --- | --- | --- |
|  | Healthy controls (n = 15) | MTX-naive RA patients (n = 10) | RA patients receiving MTX treatment (n = 25) | Healthy controls (n = 24) | MTX-naive RA patients (n = 28) | RA patients receiving MTX treatment (n = 151) |
| Age, years | 43 (27–63) | 49 (25–67) | 49 (23–63) | 35 (23–63) | 52 (21–83) | 55 (29–79) |
| Sex, % female | 60 | 80 | 68 | 50 | 61 | 75 |
| Disease characteristic |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| CRP, mg/liter | ND | ND | 19 (3–76) | ND | 18 (1–57) | 17 (0–131) |
| ESR, mm/hour | ND | 41 (13–70) | 27 (2–82) | ND | 28 (5–82) | 24 (2–82) |
| Positive for RF, no. (%) | ND | 5 (50) | 10 (43)† | ND | 13 (48)‡ | 107 (71) |
| Positive for ACPAs, no. (%) | ND | 9 (90) | 20 (86)† | ND | 17 (63)§ | 82 (73)§ |
| Disease duration, months | NA | 7 (1–12) | 113 (8–417) | NA | 6 (1–18) | 118 (0–516) |
| Erosions, no. (%) | NA | 1 (10) | 24 (96) | NA | 5 (18) | 108 (72) |
| DAS28 | NA | 5.1 (3.1–7.4) | 5.5 (3.4–7.2) | NA | 5.3 (3.4–7.6) | 5.1 (1.8–8.3) |
| Medication |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| Dose of MTX, mg/week | NA | 0 | 21 (7.5–30) | NA | 0 | 21 (5–30) |
| Prednisone at <20 mg/day, no. (%) | NA | 0 | 6 (24) | NA | 0 | 42 (28) |

* Except where indicated otherwise, values are the mean (range). RA = rheumatoid arthritis; CRP = C-reactive protein; ND = not determined; ESR = erythrocyte sedimentation rate; RF = rheumatoid factor; ACPAs = anti-citrullinated protein antibodies; NA = not applicable; DAS28 = Disease Activity Score in 28 joints.

† Missing in 2 patients receiving methotrexate (MTX) treatment.

‡ Missing in 1 patient without MTX treatment.

§ Missing in 39 patients receiving MTX treatment.

IMPACT OF MTX ON FOLATE PATHWAY GENES IN RA

Table 2. PANTHER analysis of significantly differentially expressed genes in pathways in the methotrexate (MTX)-treated group compared to the MTX-naive group of rheumatoid arthritis patients*

| Pathway | $P$ |
| --- | --- |
| Up-regulated genes in MTX-treated vs. MTX-naive |  |
| Ras pathway | $6.99 \times 10^{-5}$ |
| Unclassified | $9.62 \times 10^{-4}$ |
| FGF signaling pathway | $4.16 \times 10^{-3}$ |
| Parkinson's disease | $5.69 \times 10^{-3}$ |
| Ornithine degradation | $8.03 \times 10^{-3}$ |
| Apoptosis signaling pathway | $9.80 \times 10^{-3}$ |
| Angiogenesis | $1.25 \times 10^{-2}$ |
| PI3K pathway | $1.49 \times 10^{-2}$ |
| Alzheimer's disease–amyloid secretase pathway | $1.49 \times 10^{-2}$ |
| EGF receptor signaling pathway | $1.88 \times 10^{-2}$ |
| Insulin/IGF pathway–MAP kinase kinase/ MAP kinase cascade | $2.07 \times 10^{-2}$ |
| Toll receptor signaling pathway | $2.17 \times 10^{-2}$ |
| PDGF signaling pathway | $2.70 \times 10^{-2}$ |
| Xanthine and guanine salvage pathway | $2.94 \times 10^{-2}$ |
| p53 pathway | $3.10 \times 10^{-2}$ |
| B cell activation | $3.13 \times 10^{-2}$ |
| Huntington's disease | $3.75 \times 10^{-2}$ |
| TCA cycle | $4.05 \times 10^{-2}$ |
| Cysteine biosynthesis | $4.32 \times 10^{-2}$ |
| Alzheimer's disease–presenilin pathway | $4.75 \times 10^{-2}$ |
| Down-regulated genes in MTX-treated vs. MTX-naive |  |
| Unclassified | $7.03 \times 10^{-4}$ |
| Inflammation mediated by chemokine and cytokine signaling pathway | $1.42 \times 10^{-3}$ |
| p53 pathway by glucose deprivation | $1.51 \times 10^{-3}$ |
| Integrin signaling pathway | $5.14 \times 10^{-3}$ |
| Folate biosynthesis | $7.56 \times 10^{-3}$ |
| Acetate utilization | $1.70 \times 10^{-2}$ |
| VEGF signaling pathway | $2.86 \times 10^{-2}$ |
| Formyltetrahydrofolate biosynthesis | $3.67 \times 10^{-2}$ |

*FGF = fibroblast growth factor; PI3K = phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase; EGF = epidermal growth factor; IGF = insulin-like growth factor; PDGF = platelet-derived growth factor; TCA = tricarboxylic acid; VEGF = vascular endothelial growth factor.

Gene expression profiling of folate pathway-related genes in MTX-naive and MTX-treated RA patients in the test and validation cohorts. The results obtained from the PANTHER analysis encouraged us to pursue further in-depth analysis of the genes that regulate cellular folate metabolism (Figures 1–3). As an initial evaluation in the test cohort, data on expression levels of individual folate pathway-related genes were selected from the microarray data set, and these genes were divided into 4 groups based on their known function: folate influx systems ($FR\alpha$ and $FR\beta$), folate-metabolizing enzymes ($FPGS$ and $GGH$), folate-dependent enzymes ($DHFR$, $GART$, and $TYMS$), and folate efflux transporters ($ABCC1-5$ and $ABCG2$) (Figure 1). The effect of MTX treatment on folate metabolism (comparing MTX-treated RA patients with MTX-naive RA patients) was studied both in the test cohort and in an independent validation cohort. Detailed analysis showed that expression levels of these folate pathway genes were, overall, lower in the MTX-treated group compared to the MTX-naive group (Figures 2A–D), as had been anticipated from the pathway analysis.

Thereafter, we studied these genes individually, supplemented with genes encoding the influx transporters $RFC1$ and $PCFT$ and genes encoding the folate-dependent enzymes $MTHFR$ and $ATIC$ (not represented on the microarray), in an independent validation cohort using multiplex real-time PCR. These results revealed a pattern similar to that in the test cohort, even after stringent Bonferroni-Holm correction for multiple testing. This analysis in the validation cohort confirmed that levels of the multidrug efflux transporter genes $ABCC1$, $ABCC3$, and $ABCC4$ were significantly decreased in the MTX-treated group compared to the MTX-naive group ($P = 0.0369$, $P = 0.0022$, and $P = 0.0004$, respectively) (Figure 3D). In addition, the expression of $GGH$, which catalyzes the hydrolysis of folate/MTXGlu tails, was significantly lower in the MTX-treated group compared to that in the MTX-naive group ($P = 0.0004$) (Figure 3B). A similar profile was observed for the folate-dependent enzymes $DHFR$, $TYMS$, and $ATIC$ ($P = 0.0024$, $P < 0.0001$, and $P = 0.0040$, respectively) (Figure 3C). Furthermore, gene expression levels of the folate influx receptor $FR\beta$ were significantly lower in the MTX-treated group compared to the MTX-naive group ($P = 0.0124$), but significance was lost after Bonferroni-Holm correction (Figure 3A).

No significant differences were observed in the expression levels of various folate influx systems ($RFC1$ and $PCFT$), the metabolizing enzyme $FPGS$, the folate-dependent enzyme $MTHFR$, and the efflux transporter $ABCG2$ between the 2 groups of RA patients (Figures 3A–D). One notable difference was observed in the expression levels of $GART$, which were significantly increased in the MTX-treated group compared to the MTX-naive group in the test cohort ($P < 0.0001$) (Figure 2C), but were significantly decreased in the MTX-treated group compared to the MTX-naive group in the validation cohort ($P < 0.0001$) (Figure 3C). This apparent discrepancy was explained by the fact that only one $GART$ isoform was detected on the microarray, whereas both isoforms were captured by multiplex real-time PCR. Overall, the differential expression of folate-related genes showed that MTX is capable of suppressing the expression of these genes.

Figure 2. Gene expression analysis of the test cohort. Gene expression of folate/MTX influx transporters (A), metabolizing enzymes (B), folate-dependent enzymes (C), and efflux transporters (D) was assessed in the MTX-naive group (MTX−) (n = 10) and MTX-treated group (MTX+) (n = 25) of rheumatoid arthritis patients compared to healthy controls (HCs) (n = 15). The original microarray template did not include probes for $RFC$, $PCFT$, $MTHFR$, and $ATIC$, and therefore these genes are not presented. Results are the $\log_{2}$-transformed relative expression data (RQ), relative to the values for $GAPDH$. Data are presented in box plots, where the boxes represent the 25th to 75th percentiles, the lines within the boxes represent the median, and the lines outside the boxes represent the 10th and 90th percentiles. * = $P < 0.05$; ** = $P < 0.01$; *** = $P < 0.001$. See Figure 1 for other definitions.

Folate/MTX pathway gene expression profiling in MTX-naive RA patients and healthy controls in the test and validation cohorts. Next, folate/MTX pathway gene expression profiling studies were extended to the MTX-naive RA patients and healthy controls. First, SAM analysis performed on microarray data from the test cohort revealed 3,150 genes that were differentially expressed between the MTX-naive group and healthy controls, of which 1,553 were up-regulated and 1,597 were down-regulated. PANTHER analysis of these differentially expressed genes revealed that several biologic processes involved in immune responses were significantly up-regulated in the MTX-naive group compared to healthy controls; these included processes such as the immune system response, response to stimuli, cellular process, (primary) metabolic process, protein metabolic process, angiogenesis, signal transduction, and cell surface receptor–linked signal transduction (Table 3). This profile, together with the immune responses that were previously observed by our group (27), point toward the possibility that an immune-activation gene signature is acquired in MTX-naive RA patients.

Moreover, in the test cohort, the overall picture emerged that folate pathway–related gene expression levels within the MTX-naive group were elevated compared to those in the healthy controls (Figures 2A–D). A similar pattern was observed in the validation cohort, even after stringent Bonferroni-Holm correction for multiple testing (Figures 3A–D).

These analyses showed that gene expression levels of the folate-metabolizing enzyme $GGH$ ($P < 0.0001$), folate-dependent enzymes $DHFR$ ($P < 0.0001$)

IMPACT OF MTX ON FOLATE PATHWAY GENES IN RA

A
Influx Transporters
RFC1
PCFT
FRβ
B
Metabolizing Enzymes
FPGS
GGH
C
Dependent Enzymes
DHFR
GART
TYMS
MTHFR
ATIC
D
Efflux Transporters
ABCC1
ABCC2
ABCC3
ABCC4
ABCC5
ABCG2

Figure 3. Gene expression analysis of the validation cohort. Gene expression of the folate/MTX influx transporters (A), metabolizing enzymes (B), folate-dependent enzymes (C), and efflux transporters (D) was assessed in the MTX-naive group (MTX−) (n = 28) and the MTX-treated group (MTX+) (n = 151) of rheumatoid arthritis patients compared to healthy controls (HCs) (n = 24). Results are the log₂-transformed relative expression data (RQ), relative to the values for GAPDH. Data are presented in box plots, where the boxes represent the 25th to 75th percentiles, the lines within the boxes represent the median, and the lines outside the boxes represent the 10th and 90th percentiles. * = P < 0.05; ** = P < 0.01; *** = P < 0.001, after Bonferroni-Holm correction for multiple testing. See Figure 1 for other definitions.

and GART (P = 0.006), and efflux transporters ABCC2 and ABCC5 (both P < 0.0001) were consistently and significantly higher in the MTX-naive group compared to healthy controls (Figures 3B–D). Gene expression levels of the folate-dependent enzyme ATIC and efflux transporters ABCC3 and ABCC4 were also significantly

higher in the MTX-naive group compared to healthy controls (P = 0.0204, P = 0.0179, and P = 0.0176, respectively), but not after Bonferroni-Holm correction (Figures 3C and D). Gene expression analysis of the influx transporters (RFC, PCFT, and FRβ) and metabolizing enzyme FPGS revealed no significant differences

Table 3. PANTHER analysis of significantly differentially expressed genes in biologic processes in methotrexate (MTX)-naive rheumatoid arthritis patients compared to healthy controls

| Biologic process | $P$ |
| --- | --- |
| Up-regulated genes in MTX-naive vs. healthy controls |  |
| Unclassified | $2.48 \times 10^{-11}$ |
| Immune system process | $6.73 \times 10^{-6}$ |
| Response to stimulus | $1.00 \times 10^{-5}$ |
| Metabolic process | $8.41 \times 10^{-5}$ |
| Cellular process | $4.89 \times 10^{-4}$ |
| Mesoderm development | $6.21 \times 10^{-4}$ |
| Primary metabolic process | $9.55 \times 10^{-4}$ |
| Immune response | $1.33 \times 10^{-3}$ |
| Developmental process | $2.85 \times 10^{-3}$ |
| Protein metabolic process | $4.09 \times 10^{-3}$ |
| Skeletal system development | $2.29 \times 10^{-2}$ |
| Angiogenesis | $3.03 \times 10^{-2}$ |
| Signal transduction | $3.33 \times 10^{-2}$ |
| Cell surface receptor-linked signal transduction | $3.75 \times 10^{-2}$ |
| Down-regulated genes in MTX-naive vs. healthy controls |  |
| Metabolic process | $3.57 \times 10^{-8}$ |
| Primary metabolic process | $5.64 \times 10^{-8}$ |
| Protein metabolic process | $2.94 \times 10^{-6}$ |
| Translation | $2.09 \times 10^{-3}$ |
| Unclassified | $1.69 \times 10^{-2}$ |

higher in the MTX-treated group compared to healthy controls; however, these elevated levels did not exceed the expression levels in the MTX-naive group.

Finally, both cohorts were tested for possible confounding factors that could have influenced the results. No significant differences in positivity for anti-citrullinated protein antibodies, C-reactive protein levels, and the erythrocyte sedimentation rate were found between the groups, and therefore these could be excluded as confounding factors. We also analyzed age, sex, rheumatoid factor (RF) titer, prednisone use, disease duration, and presence of erosions; only disease duration and presence of bone erosions were potential confounding factors. In the validation cohort, a clear difference in disease duration was observed between the groups, in that the disease duration was <19 months in the MTX-naive patients compared to a maximum of 516 months in the MTX-treated patients. We therefore compared patients with a disease duration of <19 months in both groups. With regard to erosions, we compared patients without erosions in both groups.

Reanalyses including these 2 factors did not change the results, thus establishing that the gene expression patterns in the validation cohort (depicted in Figure 3) were independent of these possible confounding factors. Confounding by indication was largely overcome, because patients in the MTX-naive group were facing the start of treatment and were at the same stage of disease as that in patients in the MTX-treated group at the start of treatment. Moreover, a comparison between patients undergoing short-term treatment with MTX and those who had been treated with MTX over the long term revealed no differences.

Finally, we examined whether alterations in abundance of specific immune cell subsets (CD14+ monocytes, CD20+ B cells, and CD3+ T cells) (32) could account for the alterations in the gene expression profiles between the MTX-naive group of RA patients and healthy controls. Monocyte, T cell, and B cell counts were, on average, increased 1.37-fold, 0.83-fold, and 0.9-fold, respectively, in the MTX-naive group compared to healthy controls, but the percentage of monocytes as a fraction of total leukocytes was only marginally higher in the MTX-naive group (mean ± SD 6.9 ± 1.4% versus 6.1 ± 1.6% in healthy controls) (see Supplementary Table 2, available on the Arthritis & Rheumatism web site at http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/art.38094/abstract), whereas the fold change differences in expression of folate-related genes ranged up to 3.6-fold.

We also analyzed the correlation of expression

levels of immune cell subset-specific genes and expression of the most significantly differentially expressed folate-related genes (i.e., GGH, DHFR, and ABCC3) between the MTX-naive and MTX-treated groups of RA patients and healthy controls. Consistently, no correlation between the groups was found in the levels of monocyte gene expression and the differentially expressed folate-related genes. With regard to expression of other immune cell subset-specific transcript markers (CD3 and CD20), a random distribution of some correlations between the groups was observed (results shown in Supplementary Table 2, available on the *Arthritis & Rheumatism* web site at http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/art.38094/abstract). Taken together, these results underscore the notion that changes in immune cell subsets are not associated with the expression profiles of folate-related genes.

Collectively, in these 2 independent cohorts, a consistent profile of increased expression of folate/MTX pathway genes was observed in MTX-naive RA patients, and these levels exceeded those in healthy controls. MTX treatment led to stabilization and suppression of the gene expression levels in RA patients, when compared to the levels in RA patients who had not received treatment with MTX.

## DISCUSSION

Microarray techniques have been successfully applied to identify gene expression signatures and relevant pathways involved in the pathophysiology of RA (27,33). In the current study, we quantified expression levels of folate/MTX pathway-related genes in the peripheral blood of RA patients (prior to and during MTX treatment) and healthy control subjects in order to address 2 questions: 1) is the expression of these genes altered during chronic inflammation?; and 2) what impact does MTX treatment have on the expression of these genes? Since these expression profiles included the majority of folate pathway-related genes, it could generate an integrated picture of dynamic alterations in folate metabolism as a function of chronic inflammation and/or MTX treatment.

An important finding of the current study was that in blood cells of MTX-naive RA patients, expression levels of multiple folate/MTX pathway-related genes were significantly increased, whereas in MTX-treated patients, these expression levels were either retained or largely suppressed to the levels observed in healthy controls. These findings were unrelated to the many possible confounding factors tested, including age, sex, co-medication, confounding by indication, RF seropositivity, disease duration, presence of bone erosions, and alterations in immune cell-type abundance, although an influence of residual confounding factors cannot be ruled out.

The finding of up-regulated expression of folate/MTX pathway-related genes under inflammatory conditions is compatible with evidence of an immune-activation program that did emerge from PANTHER pathway analysis of the microarray data. In this context, immune activation, with accompanying proliferation and lymphopoiesis, requires (folate-dependent) purine and pyrimidine de novo biosynthesis for increased nucleotide generation, occurring concomitant with up-regulated expression of the folate-dependent enzymes DHFR, GART, and ATIC. MTX could harbor the capacity to offset the imbalance in homeostasis caused by the immune activation in this chronic inflammatory disease. Consistently, part of the therapeutic effects of MTX may stem from suppression of proliferation and induction of apoptosis in activated immune cells (11).

In accordance with the mode of action of MTX, pathway analysis revealed down-regulation of folate biosynthesis and up-regulation of cysteine biosynthesis in the MTX-treated patients compared to the MTX-naive patients. The latter may be explained by the observation that MTX diminishes the intracellular folate pool, which gives rise to accumulation of potentially toxic levels of homocysteine. By converting homocysteine to cysteine, the cell has an escape route to prevent induction of cell death (34).

Although pathway analysis involves multiple levels of complexity, and the results should be interpreted with care, we and other investigators have successfully applied pathway analysis tools, such as PANTHER analysis, to reveal biologically relevant processes, characterized by differentially expressed gene signatures (27,35). Herein, we applied PANTHER analysis to select folate metabolism as a regulated process, which was further validated and extended by quantitative PCR analysis of the originally identified genes and additional biologically related genes in an independent cohort.

Evaluation of alterations in expression of functionally related genes may provide additional information about the dynamic features of folate metabolism and homeostasis. When we examined the group of folate/MTX influx transporters, we found that expression of RFC and PCFT was largely unchanged, and therefore the functional capacity of these transporters may not be a limiting factor in MTX uptake. FRβ is expressed particularly on activated macrophages, and
although $FR\beta$ has a relatively low affinity for MTX (15,16), its reduced expression in MTX-treated patients compared to MTX-naive patients may be a reflection of the MTX-induced suppression of macrophage activation.

Initially, one may have anticipated that expression of $FPGS$, which has been implicated in the activation of MTX to polyglutamate forms, could have played a critical role in folate/MTX homeostasis in the blood cells of RA patients. However, no significant differences in expression were found between the groups. Nevertheless, it should be mentioned that $FPGS$ messenger RNA (mRNA) expression levels may not necessarily be indicative of $FPGS$ catalytic activity, as $FPGS$ pre-mRNA is subject to aberrant splicing, particularly under conditions of antifolate pressure (17). Remarkably, a prominent alteration observed was the increased $GGH$ expression in MTX-naive RA patients as compared to that in healthy controls. In response to MTX treatment, $GGH$ expression was suppressed to levels that were in the intermediate range between those in MTX-naive patients and those in healthy controls. Conceivably, $GGH$ may serve as a potential marker of the onset of inflammatory processes and could be used to demonstrate a successful antiinflammatory response upon MTX treatment. In this context, $GGH$ may regulate the increased need for folates by regulating cleavage of intracellularly stored folylpolyglutamate pools (5,18,36). MTX may suppress this need and facilitate restoration of cellular folate homeostasis. Given the notion that $GGH$ is compartmentalized in the lysosome, and folylpolyglutamates reside in the cytoplasm and mitochondria (36), this implies that intercompartmental cross-talk may take place in folate homeostasis and the response to MTX.

ABC drug-efflux transporters have dual functions. From a pharmacologic perspective, they may extrude a variety of cytotoxic drugs, including MTX, and thereby confer drug resistance (5,13,37), whereas physiologically, one important function is to secrete inflammatory mediators, e.g., leukotrienes (38). As such, increased expression of ABC transporters in MTX-naive RA patients as compared to that in healthy controls may be compatible with an inflammatory response. In this respect, it is of interest to note that upon MTX treatment, expression levels of ABC transporters do not further increase, which would suggest that they have no role in resistance development, but rather, the levels decrease, which is a possible indication of a genuine antiinflammatory effect.

Given its cross-sectional approach, the present study was not designed to directly assess MTX-response predictions. Moreover, on a cautionary note, it is advised

that (clinical) MTX-response parameters should not be overinterpreted in cross-sectional studies when compared to longitudinal studies (39). However, over the past decade, multiple efforts have been made to build MTX-response prediction models based on genetic variants (single-nucleotide polymorphisms [SNPs]) of folate/MTX-related genes (22,24,40) or MTXGlu in RBCs (26,41,42). Although these studies showed promising results, genetic associations were not always consistent (23) or could not be replicated in various international cohorts (43). For most SNPs, their impact on the functional activity of gene products is still unknown, and it remains to be determined whether they contribute individually to sustaining folate homeostasis. Regarding MTXGlu formation, measurements in RBCs provide valuable information and are well accepted. However, RBCs do not represent the most ideal cell type, since they do not have a nucleus and intracellular organelles (and therefore lack lysosomal $GGH$ activity) to control folate homeostasis, as white blood cells do. Therefore, a longitudinal cohort study combining analysis of gene expression profiles, SNPs, and RBC MTXGlu would be most revealing in identifying relevant parameters for MTX-response prediction studies.

Understanding the MTX response is relevant not only in a monotherapy or DMARD-combination setting. It is also a crucial factor in a treatment setting of combination therapy with biologic agents such as infliximab, adalimumab, or etanercept (44,45), to achieve less radiologic progression of damage in the joints (46). Based on our observations of a stabilization/decrease in folate/MTX pathway–related gene expression levels in the MTX-treated group compared to the MTX-naive group, the results of the present study suggest that RA patients may have a sustained response to MTX therapy, even though they may be clinically classified as poor responders eligible for biologic treatment. This would imply that clinical nonresponsiveness to MTX may be associated with mechanisms downstream of the folate/MTX pathway (9,13). Moreover, one cannot exclude the possibility that for a small fraction of RA patients with a poor response to MTX, classic mechanisms of acquired resistance to MTX may still apply (5,13).

Finally, identification of differential expression profiles of folate-related genes in RA patients may open new avenues for therapeutic interventions beyond drugs such as MTX. In fact, from a clinical oncology perspective, many MTX analogs were designed to overcome MTX resistance (5). These next-generation antifolate drugs have emerged from clinical application with known efficacy and safety/toxicity profiles. For ex-
ample, these novel antifolate agents harbor properties of
more efficient cellular uptake (via RFC, FR, or PCFT),
polyglutamylation by FPGS, impaired efflux via ABC
transporters, and targeting of key enzymes in folate
metabolism (5,47,48). Expanding our knowledge of the
differential expression levels of folate transporters in
various blood-cell types may also contribute to their
selective targeting. For example, FRβ expression on
synovial macrophages has been exploited for selective
delivery of antifolate drugs for which FRβ has a high
affinity (16,49). Given the response profile for MTX,
the present study results (as shown in Figure 3) could
suggest that the folate-dependent enzyme GART (in-
volved in de novo purine biosynthesis) may be an
attractive drug target. Currently, several inhibitors of
this enzyme are being evaluated in a (pre)clinical oncol-
ogy setting (5,50). Whether these novel GART inhibitors
could elicit potential antiinflammatory responses re-
mains to be established.

In conclusion, the current study identified re-
markable differences in expression profiles of folate/
MTX pathway–related genes in the peripheral blood
cells of MTX-treated RA patients compared to MTX–
naive RA patients and healthy controls. The increased
immune-activation status known to be present in pa-
tients with RA paralleled the elevated expression levels
of these genes in MTX-naive RA patients compared to
healthy controls. The impact of MTX treatment on RA
was manifested in the stabilization and suppression of
the folate/MTX pathway–related gene expression levels.
This novel gene signature could provide additional in-
sights into the mechanism of action of MTX, and thus
pave the way to facilitate further exploration of MTX
with the aim of continually improving its pharmacologic
properties and efficacy.

### ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We extend our gratitude to the rheumatologists who
allowed inclusion of their patients in the present study. We also
thank Michiel Pegtel for his support.

### AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS

All authors were involved in drafting the article or revising it
critically for important intellectual content, and all authors approved
the final version to be published. Dr. Verweij had full access to all of
the data in the study and takes responsibility for the integrity of the
data and the accuracy of the data analysis.
Study conception and design. Blits, Jansen, Assaraf, Lems,
Nurmohamed, van Schaardenburg, Verweij.
Acquisition of data. Blits, Jansen, Nurmohamed, Voskuyl, Wolbink.
Analysis and interpretation of data. Blits, Jansen, Assaraf,
van de Wiel, Nurmohamed, Wolbink, Vosslamber, Verweij.


#### REFERENCES

1. Scott DL, Wolfe F, Huizinga TW. Rheumatoid arthritis. Lancet 2010;376:1094–108.
2. McInnes IB, Schett G. The pathogenesis of rheumatoid arthritis. N Engl J Med 2011;365:2205–19.
3. Kremer JM. Toward a better understanding of methotrexate. Arthritis Rheum 2004;50:1370–82.
4. Smolen JS, Aletaha D, Koeller M, Weisman MH, Emery P. New therapies for treatment of rheumatoid arthritis. Lancet 2007;370: 1861–74.
5. Gonen N, Assaraf YG. Antifolates in cancer therapy: structure, activity and mechanisms of drug resistance. Drug Resist Updat 2012;15:183–210.
6. Bertino JR. Karnofsky memorial lecture: ode to methotrexate. J Clin Oncol 1993;11:5–14.
7. Cronstein BN. Low-dose methotrexate: a mainstay in the treat- ment of rheumatoid arthritis. Pharmacol Rev 2005;57:163–72.
8. Cutolo M, Sulli A, Pizzorni C, Seriolo B, Straub RH. Anti- inflammatory mechanisms of methotrexate in rheumatoid arthri- tis. Ann Rheum Dis 2001;60:729–35.
9. Spurlock CF III, Tossberg JT, Fuchs HA, Olsen NJ, Aune TM. Methotrexate increases expression of cell cycle checkpoint genes via JNK activation. Arthritis Rheum 2012;64:1780–9.
10. Phillips DC, Woollard KJ, Griffiths HR. The anti-inflammatory actions of methotrexate are critically dependent upon the produc- tion of reactive oxygen species. Br J Pharmacol 2003;138:501–11.
11. Genestier L, Paillot R, Fournel S, Ferraro C, Miossec P, Revillard JP. Immunosuppressive properties of methotrexate: apoptosis and clonal deletion of activated peripheral T cells. J Clin Invest 1998;102:322–8.
12. Majumdar S, Aggarwal BB. Methotrexate suppresses NF-κB acti- vation through inhibition of IkBα phosphorylation and degrada- tion. J Immunol 2001;167:2911–20.
13. Van der Heijden JW, Dijkmans BA, Scheper RJ, Jansen G. Drug insight: resistance to methotrexate and other disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs—from bench to bedside. Nat Clin Pract Rheumatol 2007;3:26–34.
14. Qiu A, Jansen M, Sakaris A, Min SH, Chattopadhyay S, Tsai E, et al. Identification of an intestinal folate transporter and the molecular basis for hereditary folate malabsorption. Cell 2006;127: 917–28.
15. Nakashima-Matsushita N, Homma T, Yu S, Matsuda T, Sunahara N, Nakamura T, et al. Selective expression of folate receptor β and its possible role in methotrexate transport in synovial macrophages from patients with rheumatoid arthritis. Arthritis Rheum 1999;42: 1609–16.
16. Van der Heijden JW, Oerlemans R, Dijkmans BA, Qi H, van der Laken CJ, Lems WF, et al. Folate receptor β as a potential delivery route for novel folate antagonists to macrophages in the synovial tissue of rheumatoid arthritis patients. Arthritis Rheum 2009;60:12–21.
17. Stark M, Wichman C, Avivi I, Assaraf YG. Aberrant splicing of folylpolyglutamate synthetase as a novel mechanism of antifolate resistance in leukemia. Blood 2009;113:4362–9.
18. Rots MG, Pieters R, Peters GJ, Noordhuis P, van Zantwijk CH, Kaspers GJ, et al. Role of folylpolyglutamate synthetase and folylpolyglutamate hydrolase in methotrexate accumulation and polyglutamylation in childhood leukemia. Blood 1999;93:1677–83.
19. Baggott JE, Morgan SL, Vaughn WH. Differences in methotrex- ate and 7-hydroxymethotrexate inhibition of folate-dependent enzymes of purine nucleotide biosynthesis. Biochem J 1994;300: 627–9.
20. Allegra CJ, Drake JC, Jolivet J, Chabner BA. Inhibition of phos- phoribosylaminoimidazolecarboxamide transformylase by metho- trexate and dihydrofolic acid polyglutamates. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1985;82:4881–5.

21. Hooijberg JH, Broxterman HJ, Kool M, Assaraf YG, Peters GJ, Noordhuis P, et al. Antifolate resistance mediated by the multidrug resistance proteins MRP1 and MRP2. Cancer Res 1999;59: 2532–5.
22. Wessels JA, van der Kooij SM, le Cessie S, Kievit W, Barerra P, Allaart CF, et al. A clinical pharmacogenetic model to predict the efficacy of methotrexate monotherapy in recent-onset rheumatoid arthritis. Arthritis Rheum 2007;56:1765–75.
23. Stamp LK, Roberts RL. Effect of genetic polymorphisms in the folate pathway on methotrexate therapy in rheumatic diseases. Pharmacogenomics 2011;12:1449–63.
24. Fransen J, Kooloos WM, Wessels JA, Huizinga TW, Guchelaar HJ, van Riel PL, et al. Clinical pharmacogenetic model to predict response of MTX monotherapy in patients with established rheumatoid arthritis after DMARD failure. Pharmacogenomics 2012; 13:1087–94.
25. Dervieux T, Zablocki R, Kremer J. Red blood cell methotrexate polyglutamates emerge as a function of dosage intensity and route of administration during pulse methotrexate therapy in rheumatoid arthritis. Rheumatology (Oxford) 2010;49:2337–45.
26. Stamp LK, O'Donnell JL, Chapman PT, Zhang M, James J, Frampton C, et al. Methotrexate polyglutamate concentrations are not associated with disease control in rheumatoid arthritis patients receiving long-term methotrexate therapy. Arthritis Rheum 2010; 62:359–68.
27. Van der Pouw Kraan TC, Wijbrandts CA, van Baarsen LG, Voskuyl AE, Rustenburg F, Baggen JM, et al. Rheumatoid arthritis subtypes identified by genomic profiling of peripheral blood cells: assignment of a type I interferon signature in a subpopulation of patients. Ann Rheum Dis 2007;66:1008–14.
28. Arnett FC, Edworthy SM, Bloch DA, McShane DJ, Fries JF, Cooper NS, et al. The American Rheumatism Association 1987 revised criteria for the classification of rheumatoid arthritis. Arthritis Rheum 1988;31:315–24.
29. Chaussabel D, Pascual V, Banchereau J. Assessing the human immune system through blood transcriptomics. BMC Biol 2010; 8:84.
30. Ball CA, Awad IA, Demeter J, Gollub J, Hebert JM, Hernandez-Boussard T, et al. The Stanford Microarray Database accommodates additional microarray platforms and data formats. Nucleic Acids Res 2005;33:D580–2.
31. Tusher VG, Tibshirani R, Chu G. Significance analysis of microarrays applied to the ionizing radiation response. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2001;98:5116–21.
32. Batliwalla FM, Baechler EC, Xiao X, Li W, Balasubramanian S, Khalili H, et al. Peripheral blood gene expression profiling in rheumatoid arthritis. Genes Immun 2005;6:388–97.
33. Van Baarsen LG, Wijbrandts CA, Gerlag DM, Rustenburg F, van der Pouw Kraan TC, Dijkmans BA, et al. Pharmacogenomics of infliximab treatment using peripheral blood cells of patients with rheumatoid arthritis. Genes Immun 2010;11:622–9.
34. Mattson MP, Shea TB. Folate and homocysteine metabolism in neural plasticity and neurodegenerative disorders. Trends Neurosci 2003;26:137–46.
35. Viswanathan GA, Seto J, Patil S, Nudelman G, Sealfon SC. Getting started in biological pathway construction and analysis. PLoS Comput Biol 2008;4:e16.
36. Tibbetts AS, Appling DR. Compartmentalization of mammalian folate-mediated one-carbon metabolism. Annu Rev Nutr 2010;30: 57–81.
37. Van der Heijden JW, Oerlemans R, Tak PP, Assaraf YG, Kraan

MC, Scheffer GL, et al. Involvement of breast cancer resistance protein expression on rheumatoid arthritis synovial tissue macrophages in resistance to methotrexate and leflunomide. Arthritis Rheum 2009;60:669–77.
38. Van de Ven R, Oerlemans R, van der Heijden JW, Scheffer GL, de Gruijl TD, Jansen G, et al. ABC drug transporters and immunity: novel therapeutic targets in autoimmunity and cancer. J Leukoc Biol 2009;86:1075–87.
39. De Rotte MC, Luime JJ, Bulatovic M, Hazes JM, Wulffraat NM, de Jonge R. Do snapshot statistics fool us in MTX pharmacogenetic studies in arthritis research? Rheumatology (Oxford) 2010;49:1200–1.
40. Owen SA, Hider SL, Martin P, Bruce IN, Barton A, Thomson W. Genetic polymorphisms in key methotrexate pathway genes are associated with response to treatment in rheumatoid arthritis patients. Pharmacogenomics J 2013;13:227–34.
41. Dalrymple JM, Stamp LK, O'Donnell JL, Chapman PT, Zhang M, Barclay ML. Pharmacokinetics of oral methotrexate in patients with rheumatoid arthritis. Arthritis Rheum 2008;58:3299–308.
42. Dervieux T, Furst D, Lein DO, Capps R, Smith K, Walsh M, et al. Polyglutamation of methotrexate with common polymorphisms in reduced folate carrier, aminoimidazole carboxamide ribonucleotide transformylase, and thymidylate synthase are associated with methotrexate effects in rheumatoid arthritis. Arthritis Rheum 2004;50:2766–74.
43. Dervieux T, Wessels JA, Kremer JM, Padyukov L, Seddighzadeh M, Saevarsdottir S, et al. Patterns of interaction between genetic and nongenetic attributes and methotrexate efficacy in rheumatoid arthritis. Pharmacogenet Genomics 2012;22:1–9.
44. Burmester GR, Mariette X, Montecucco C, Monteagudo-Saez I, Malaise M, Tzioufas AG, et al. Adalimumab alone and in combination with disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs for the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis in clinical practice: the Research in Active Rheumatoid Arthritis (ReAct) trial. Ann Rheum Dis 2007;66:732–9.
45. Klareskog L, van der Heijde D, de Jager JP, Gough A, Kalden J, Malaise M, et al. Therapeutic effect of the combination of etanercept and methotrexate compared with each treatment alone in patients with rheumatoid arthritis: double-blind randomised controlled trial. Lancet 2004;363:675–81.
46. Emery P, Genovese MC, van Vollenhoven R, Sharp JT, Patra K, Sasso EH. Less radiographic progression with adalimumab plus methotrexate versus methotrexate monotherapy across the spectrum of clinical response in early rheumatoid arthritis. J Rheumatol 2009;36:1429–41.
47. Walling J. From methotrexate to pemetrexed and beyond: a review of the pharmacodynamic and clinical properties of antifolates. Invest New Drugs 2006;24:37–77.
48. Westerhof GR, Schornagel JH, Kathmann I, Jackman AL, Rosokowsky A, Forsch RA, et al. Carrier- and receptor-mediated transport of folate antagonists targeting folate-dependent enzymes: correlates of molecular-structure and biological activity. Mol Pharmacol 1995;48:459–71.
49. Nagayoshi R, Nakamura M, Ijiri K, Yoshida H, Komiya S, Matsuyama T. LY309887, antifolate via the folate receptor suppresses murine type II collagen-induced arthritis. Clin Exp Rheumatol 2003;21:719–25.
50. Jansen G, Mauritz R, Kathmann I, Boritzki TJ, Peters GJ. Membrane transport properties and biological activity of stereoisomers of glycinaldehyde ribonucleotide formyltransferase (GARTF) inhibitors AG2032 and AG2034. Pteridines 2010;20:109–14.
