
Published OnlineFirst July 29, 2013; DOI: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-12-3629

Clinical Cancer Research

Molecular Pathways: Targeting MYC-induced Metabolic Reprogramming and Oncogenic Stress in Cancer

Bo Li and M. Celeste Simon

Clin Cancer Res 2013;19:5835-5841. Published OnlineFirst July 29, 2013.

| Updated version | Access the most recent version of this article at: doi:10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-12-3629 |
| --- | --- |

| Cited Articles | This article cites by 62 articles, 19 of which you can access for free at: http://clincancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/19/21/5835.full.html#ref-list-1 |
| --- | --- |

| E-mail alerts | Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal. |
| Reprints and Subscriptions | To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications Department at pubs@aacr.org. |
| Permissions | To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications Department at permissions@aacr.org. |
| --- | --- |

Downloaded from clincancerres.aacrjournals.org on November 1, 2013. © 2013 American Association for Cancer Research.

Molecular Pathways

---

**Molecular Pathways: Targeting MYC-induced Metabolic Reprogramming and Oncogenic Stress in Cancer**

Bo Li${}^{1}$ and M. Celeste Simon${}^{1,2}$

---

### Abstract

MYC is a multifunctional transcription factor that is deregulated in many human cancers. MYC impacts a collaborative genetic program that orchestrates cell proliferation, metabolism, and stress responses. Although the progression of MYC-amplified tumors shows robust dependence on MYC activity, directly targeting MYC as a therapeutic method has proven to be technically difficult. Therefore, alternative approaches are currently under development with a focus on interference with MYC-mediated downstream effects. To fuel rapid cell growth, MYC reprograms cancer cell metabolism in a way that is substantially different from normal cells. The MYC-induced metabolic signature is characterized by enhanced glucose and glutamine uptake, increased lactate production, and altered amino acid metabolism. Targeting MYC-reprogrammed cancer cell metabolism is considered to be promising based on multiple preclinical studies. In addition, the increased biosynthetic demand of MYC-driven tumors coupled with limited nutrient access within tumor microenvironments create multiple levels of oncogenic stress, which can also be used as tumor-specific targets for pharmacologic intervention. Presumably, the best therapeutic strategy for treating MYC-amplified tumors is combined targeting of multiple MYC-mediated pathways, especially those involved in regulating cell proliferation, metabolism, and oncogenic stress. *Clin Cancer Res; 19(21): 5835–41.* ©2013 AACR.

---

### Background

MYC is a pleiotropic transcription factor that participates in many cellular processes, including cell proliferation, apoptosis, differentiation, metabolism, and genome stability (1). Upon activation, MYC recognizes CACGTG sequences termed "E Boxes," as a heterodimer paired with its binding partner MAX. MYC cofactors such as TRRAP and GCN5 are then recruited to E Boxes within chromatin and contribute to MYC-driven transcriptional events (2). Depending on the specific cellular and signaling contexts, MYC is able to induce or suppress the expression of up to 15% of all known genes, partly because of the prevalence of MYC cognate sites within the genome (1). Interestingly, it was recently revealed that MYC is particularly enriched in the promoter regions of active genes, therefore functioning to amplify existing transcriptional signals (3, 4). This breakthrough finding revolutionizes our understanding of MYC, expanding the horizon beyond traditional MYC target genes to virtually all actively transcribed genes. The MYC gene family comprises 3 major members: c-MYC, MYCN, and MYCL. c-MYC is the only isoform expressed ubiquitously in a broad range of tissues and organs, especially during early embryogenesis. In contrast, MYCN and MYCL are expressed in a more tissue-restricted manner, such as in the central nervous system and lung epithelium (2). Nevertheless, it is generally believed that MYC family members can be functionally interchangeable, which is partially supported by the fact that knockin expression of MYCN into the c-MYC locus does not interfere with normal mouse development and reproduction (5).

Given the pleiotropic role of MYC in multiple cellular functions, MYC expression and activity need to be tightly regulated. MYC protein is frequently induced in proliferating cells to orchestrate the signaling and metabolic events that drive cell-cycle progression and is quickly targeted for proteasomal degradation after proliferation signals regress (1, 6). In normal differentiated tissues, MYC expression levels remain low except in those bearing a high turnover rate. Meanwhile, deregulated MYC resulting from genomic amplification or translocation contributes to neoplastic transformation and tumor progression (1, 7). Not surprisingly, high levels of MYC expression were found to be hallmark of many cancer types, including Burkitt lymphoma, neuroblastoma, medulloblastoma, breast cancer, and multiple myeloma (2, 8). Early studies using transgenic mice suggested that tumors with elevated MYC expression are frequently addicted to MYC, as tumor progression was severely impaired if MYC was silenced (1). Moreover, a systematic investigation of possible side effects of inhibiting global MYC expression was recently conducted in the

---

**Authors' Affiliations:** ${}^{1}$Abramson Family Cancer Research Institute, Perelman School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania; and ${}^{2}$Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania

**Corresponding Author:** M. Celeste Simon, University of Pennsylvania, Abramson Family Cancer Research Institute, 456 BRB II/III, 421 Curie Boulevard, Philadelphia, PA 19104. Phone: 215-746-5532; Fax: 215-746-5511; E-mail: celeste2@mail.med.upenn.edu

**doi:** 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-12-3629

©2013 American Association for Cancer Research.

KRAS<sup>G12D</sup> lung cancer model, where a dominant negative form of MYC (OmoMYC) was ubiquitously expressed under the CMV promoter in these mice (9). While KRAS-driven tumor progression was significantly inhibited by the presence of OmoMYC, there were no obvious physiologic changes observed in most organs and tissues except for a reversible growth retardation found in skin, testis, and intestinal epithelium (9). These observations provide solid basis for targeting MYC as an efficient and tolerable therapy for treating cancers harboring-amplified MYC.

For the past 2 decades, numerous attempts have been made to develop strategies to directly target MYC activity or expression. However, little success has been achieved along this route. For instance, inhibiting MYC activity using small molecules to disrupt the specific MYC-MAX interaction has proven to be quite difficult, largely because of the "flat" interface between the MYC-MAX dimer (10, 11). The best IC<sub>50</sub> value of currently identified MYC inhibitors is at the micromolar level, which is not potent enough to be considered for clinical evaluation (12). Lately, another promising strategy emerged following the discovery of G-quadruplex motif, which is a transcription module located in the MYC promoter region that suppresses MYC gene expression (13). Some leading compounds stabilizing the G-quadruplex motif, such as TMPyP4, showed promising effects in inhibiting lymphoma cell proliferation (14). However, the intrinsic complexity of these structures restrains the possibility of targeting a specific gene like MYC using this method. Recently, a small-molecule bromodomain inhibitor JQ1 was found to efficiently affect MYC transcription and block MYC-driven tumorigenesis (15–17). Although, a JQ1 derivative compound GSK525762 has entered clinical trials (NCT01587703), the specificity of this molecule merits close attention due to the prevalent interaction between bromodomain proteins and acetylated histones. In fact, JQ1 treatment has already been reported to cause infertility in male mice (18).

Continuous difficulties lying in directly targeting MYC led to the thoughts of developing alternative methods to circumvent this problem. It is well established that activated-MYC reshapes cancer cell metabolism in a way that is coordinated with a sustained proliferative signal (ref. 6; Fig. 1). MYC-induced glucose and glutamine consumption accompanied by enhanced lactate production provide necessary energy and intermediates for the rapid construction of new daughter cells (7). MYC also stimulates ribosomal and mitochondrial biogenesis to sufficiently cover an increased metabolic demand (19). In most cases, MYC reprograms cell metabolism by promoting the expression of essential enzymes that control metabolic flux, such as lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), glutaminase (GLS), and phosphoglycerate dehydrogenase (PHGDH; ref. 20–22). Targeting these key metabolic enzymes genetically or pharmacologically has proved to be an effective approach to delay tumor progression in many preclinical studies (21–24). Moreover, the selective inhibition of MYC-driven transformation can also be achieved by aggravating the oncogenic stress accumulated in fast-growing cancer cells (25). In

this article, we will focus on several MYC-induced oncogenic and metabolic changes that could be vulnerable for molecular targeting, with an emphasis on current translational efforts aiming to develop better therapeutic strategies to treat MYC-induced malignancies.

### Clinical-Translational Advances

#### Targeting a MYC-induced Warburg effect

Cancer cells preferentially generate energy through aerobic glycolysis rather than oxidative phosphorylation, a well-established phenomenon described as the Warburg effect (26). Although glycolysis is an inefficient way of using glucose, it provides essential intermediates for the biosynthesis of macromolecules, including proteins, lipids, and nucleotides (26). Glycolysis also produces minimal oxidative stress, a survival obstacle that is often encountered by rapidly growing cancer cells (27). Activated MYC drives the expression of almost all glycolytic enzymes, particularly LDH, hexokinase 2, and enolase 1, as well as glucose transporter (GLUT1; ref. 7; Fig. 1). Unfortunately, inhibiting the early steps of glycolysis often introduces nontolerable toxicity, as evidenced by the failed clinical trials of the hexokinase inhibitors 2-deoxy-D-glucose (NCT00633087) and lonidamine (NCT00435448). However, targeting lactate metabolism via a small molecule FX11 that inhibits LDHA, an LDH isoform that is specifically induced in tumor tissues, blocks MYC-driven lymphoma progression without introducing any observable side effects in mice (21). It would be of great interest to follow the effect of FX11 or its optimized derivatives in future clinical trials.

In addition to suppressing LDHA activity, an alternative approach to interfere with lactate metabolism is to block the excretion of lactate from cancer cells through inhibiting monocarboxylate transporter (MCT) activity, given that high levels of intracellular lactate lower cytosolic pH and cause severe cytotoxicity (28). Currently, a MCT1-specific inhibitor AZD3965 is being tested for treating prostate cancer, gastric cancer, and large B-cell lymphoma (NCT01791595).

Another attractive target within the glycolytic pathway is pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase (PDK). PDK inhibits pyruvate dehydrogenase through direct phosphorylation, which prevents central carbon metabolites from entering the tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle, thus ensuring consistent glycolytic flux and the Warburg effect (29). PDK expression can be robustly increased by the cooperation between MYC and hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF), a transcription factor frequently induced in solid tumors with poor vascularity (ref. 30; Fig. 1). Interestingly, MYC opposes HIF activity in the normal physiologic condition, whereas in transformed tissues it often collaborates with HIF to promote glucose-lactate conversion partially through PDK1 coactivation (30–33). Several clinical trials on brain tumors, head and neck carcinoma, and other recurrent/metastatic solid malignancies are ongoing, using a PDK1-inhibiting compound dichloroacetate as a single agent or in combination with other therapeutics (NCT00566410, NCT01386632, and NCT01111097).

Targeting MYC-induced Metabolic Changes and Oncogenic Stress

Glucose
Glucose transporter (GLUT1)
Glutamine
Glutamine transporter
(ASCT2, SN2, etc.)

Extracellular
Intracellular

Glucose
JQ1,
TMPyP4
GSK2656157
PERK
UPR
ATF4
FRT
Apoptosis
Everolimus
mTOR
MYC
3-PG
Serine
SHMT
Glycine
FX11
LDH
Lactate
(HIF)
Pyruvate
PDH
PDK
Acetyl-CoA
Oxalacetate
TCA cycle
α-ketoglutarate
PYCR1
Proline
GSA/
P5C
POX
EGCG
P5CS
GDH
Transaminases
AOA
Glutamate
GLS
Glutamine

© 2013 American Association for Cancer Research

CCR Molecular Pathways

Figure 1. The pleiotropic-transcription factor MYC reprograms cancer cell metabolism to fuel rapid cell growth. MYC increases glycolytic flux by inducing the expression of GLUT1 and glycolytic enzyme LDH. MYC in cooperation with HIF increases PDK expression to inhibit PDH and prevents central carbon metabolites from entering the TCA cycle (the Warburg effect). Glutaminolysis is stimulated upon activation of several glutamine transporters (ASCT2, SN2, etc.) and GLS in MYC-amplified cells. MYC is also capable of enhancing serine, glycine, and proline metabolism by modulating several related enzymes, including PHGDH, SHMT, POX, P5CS, and PYCR1. In addition to MYC's role in metabolic regulation, MYC activation results in multiple cellular responses mediating oncogenic stress that is often present in rapidly growing cancer cells, such as the UPR and apoptosis. The MYC-regulated downstream targets/effects that facilitate cancer progression are highlighted in red, whereas those antagonizing MYC-induced tumorigenesis are highlighted in green. A number of compounds that directly target MYC or downstream pathways emanating from MYC are also highlighted in green. GLUT1; 3-PG, 3-phosphoglycerate; LDH; PDK; PDH, pyruvate dehydrogenase; ASCT2, also known as solute carrier family 1, member 5 (SLC1A5); SN2, also known as solute carrier family 38, member 5 (SLC38A5); GLS; GDH; PHGDH; SHMT; POX, also known as proline dehydrogenase (PRODH); P5C, pyrroline-5-carboxylate; GSA, glutamic gamma-semialdehyde; P5CS; P5C synthase; PYCR1; P5C reductase 1; HIF; UPR; FRT, fenretinide, also known as 4-hydroxyphenyl retinamide (4-HPR); EGCG; AOA; DON; and DCA, dichloroacetate.

Targeting MYC-induced glutamine metabolism

MYC-induced aerobic glycolysis directs central carbon metabolites away from the mitochondria, resulting in a significant depletion of TCA cycle intermediates (6). To compensate for substrate loss that hinders rapid cell growth, alternative bioenergetic resources need to be supplemented. Glutamine, the most abundant nonessential amino acid in the human body, represents a critical replenishment for mitochondrial respiration. In addition to its role in protein synthesis, glutamine can also be catabolized to α-ketoglutarate and feed into the TCA cycle, a process termed "anaplerosis" (34). This is accomplished by a two-step glutaminolytic reaction: first, glutamine is converted to glutamate via GLS-mediated deamination; then glutamate dehydrogenase (GDH) or glutamate-dependent transaminases remove the amino group from glutamate to generate α-ketoglutarate (6, 34). Cancer cells harboring amplified MYC exhibit MYC-dependent glutamine addiction, as glutamine depletion or glutaminolysis inhibition triggers dramatic apoptotic responses in MYC-overexpressing fibroblasts, lymphoma cells, and neuroblastoma cells, but not in MYC-nonexpressing counterparts (35–39). The glutamine dependence induced by MYC amplification is partially mediated by MYC's ability to upregulate a few glutamine transporters (ASCT2, SN2, etc.) and GLSs (Fig. 1), which opens a therapeutic window for drug targeting (6, 39).

Indeed, several glutaminolysis inhibitors have been developed and tested preclinically. 6-diazo-5-oxo-L-norleucine (DON) is a nonspecific GLS inhibitor that showed antitumor activities in both cell culture and animal experiments (40, 41). However, its severe side effects such as neuronal toxicity prevented its bedside application (42). BPTES is a specific inhibitor of GLS1, the kidney isoform of GLS that is frequently activated by c-MYC (43). The *in vitro* and *in vivo* proliferation of P493 lymphoma cells overexpressing c-MYC are significantly inhibited by BPTES treatment, a phenotype that is even more dramatic in hypoxic conditions (37). It’s worth noting that the amplified MYCN associated with neuroblastoma predominantly induces the expression of GLS2, the liver isoform of GLS that cannot be inhibited by BPTES (36, 43). Therefore, caution is needed when treating cancers driven by different MYC isoforms. Compound 968 is another GLS1 inhibitor identified by screening for molecules that block Rho-GTPase-induced transformation (44). 968 selectively targets a short-splicing isoform of GLS1 named GAC which is presumably accounting for the elevated basal GLS activity detected in transformed cells. Consistent with this finding, 968 administration significantly decreases the growth rate of human breast cancer and lymphoma cells without affecting normal cell growth (44). Although these preclinical results are encouraging, neither BPTES nor 968 have been transferred to clinical examination, also special attention needs to be paid to the neuronal side effects that might be caused by these GLS inhibitors. Meanwhile, glutaminolysis can also be disrupted by inhibition of GDH or transaminases, 2 groups of enzymes catalyzing the second step of glutaminolysis (ref. 34; Fig. 1). It has been reported that even short-term treatment with aminoxyacetate (AOA), a pan-transaminase inhibitor, was sufficient to delay autochthonous neuroblastoma growth in the TH-MYCN+/+ mouse model (31). Unfortunately, the intolerable side effects of AOA prevent it from being approved to treat human patients (45). More specific and potent transaminase inhibitors are necessary. Moreover, MYC-amplified neuroblastoma and glioblastoma cells are also sensitive to GDH inhibition, especially in glucose-depleted conditions (36, 46). Administration of a nonspecific GDH inhibitor epigallocatechin gallate (EGCG), which is a green tea extract, triggers dramatic apoptosis in these cells and inhibits neuroblastoma xenograft tumor growth (36). EGCG is currently in phase II trials on colorectal cancer (NCT01360320) and multiple myeloma (NCT00942422).

### Targeting MYC-induced serine, glycine, and proline metabolism

Recent studies focusing on cancer cell metabolism highlight the importance of several amino acids to cancer progression. The serine/glycine metabolic pathway has drawn significant attention because it not only contributes to the biosynthesis of 2 important amino acids, but also provides the essential one-carbon unit for making nucleotides and other biomolecules (47). PHGDH is the first enzyme catalyzing serine biosynthesis and has been established as an important player in maintaining the oncogenic potential of breast cancer and melanoma cells (23, 24). In MYC-induced hepatocellular carcinoma tissues, PHGDH expression is dramatically increased (Fig. 1) and correlates with advanced stages of tumor progression (20). Serine hydroxymethyltransferase (SHMT) is another key enzyme in this metabolic pathway, which functions by breaking down serine into glycine and a one-carbon moiety (47). SHMT is also a MYC target gene (Fig. 1) and able to partially rescue the growth defect of MYC-deficient cells (48). It would be particularly interesting to determine whether MYC-amplified cancer cells are more sensitive to the blockade of serine/glycine metabolism, particularly through PHGDH and SHMT inhibition. Proline is another amino acid that is closely regulated by the MYC signaling cascade. Proline oxidase (POX) is the first enzyme functioning in proline catabolism whose activity inhibits MYC-mediated cancer cell proliferation and survival (ref. 49; Fig. 1). POX knockdown partially rescues the growth defect of lymphoma and prostate cancer cells where MYC has been inhibited, largely due to a decrease in ROS production, which is associated with proline catabolism. MYC also markedly increases the biosynthesis of proline from glutamine through upregulation of pyrroline-5-carboxylate synthase (P5CS) and pyrroline-5-carboxylate reductase 1 (PYCR1; ref. 49; Fig. 1). The increased glutamine-proline flux presumably contributes to the glutamine dependence of MYC-amplified cells, which leads to the possibility of targeting proline metabolism as an alternative approach to treat MYC-driven malignancies.

### Targeting MYC-induced oncogenic stress and apoptosis

Upon its oncogenic activation, MYC elicits a massive transcriptional program that supports cancer cell proliferation and tumor progression. The rapid cell growth and biomass synthesis creates an unfavorable cellular environment, a situation termed "oncogenic stress" and multiple stress defensive responses are activated to overcome this issue (25). In MYC-induced lymphoma tissues, elevated protein synthesis leads to the accumulation of unfolded proteins in the ER, which initiates the unfolded protein response (UPR) through activation of the PERK/eIF2α pathway (ref. 50; Fig. 1). Loss of UPR signaling resulting from PERK deletion triggers a caspase-dependent apoptosis in MYC-overexpressing cells, which raises interest in using PERK inhibitors to treat MYC-amplified tumors. Recently, a small-molecule GSK2656157 was developed as a specific PERK inhibitor, which successfully inhibited pancreatic cancer and multiple myeloma xenograft tumor growth, although a drug-induced pancreatic damage was also observed (51). To reduce the amount of unfolded proteins in the ER, PERK/eIF2α activation blocks global protein synthesis while simultaneously increasing the expression of selective genes, such as ATF4 (50). Upon activation by PERK, ATF4 protects cells from UPR-induced apoptosis partially through its connection to autophagy (50, 52). However, amino acid deprivation, a metabolic stress that

frequently occurs in poorly vascularized tumors, also activates ATF4 via a PERK-independent kinase GCN2. In this case, ATF4 functions as a proapoptotic factor that mediates stress-induced cell death (ref. 36; Fig. 1). It has been reported that in MYC-amplified lymphoma and neuroblastoma cells, glutamine starvation triggers apoptosis via the activation of ATF4-PUMA/NOXA/TRB3 pathway and MYC-induced xenograft tumor growth is significantly inhibited by injection of a nonspecific ATF4 agonist 4-hydroxyphenyl retinamide (4-HPR, also known as fenretinide; ref. 36). Fenretinide is currently in clinical trials to treat neuroblastoma (NCT00646230), B-cell lymphoma (NCT00288067), and ovarian cancer (NCT01535157). Given that MYC-induced oncogenic stress sensitizes cancer cells to apoptosis, antiapoptotic factors would be another group of intriguing targets to consider. Increased glutamine flux elicited by high levels of MYC can activate mTOR (53) and transgenic activation of the mTOR downstream effector eIF4E antagonizes MYC-dependent apoptosis *in vivo* (ref. 54; Fig. 1). Consistent with these findings, MYC-driven lymphoma progression in mice is significantly delayed by administration of a specific mTORC1 inhibitor everolimus (55), a promising anticancer compound that is undergoing numerous clinical trials (56). Interestingly, an uncontrolled, hyperactivated mTOR signaling event is also detrimental to MYC-induced transformation. A Kinome siRNA screen revealed that AMPK-related kinase 5 (ARK5), an upstream inhibitory regulator of mTORC1, contributes to MYC-induced hepatocellular carcinoma progression (57). ARK5-restrained mTOR activity is necessary to maintain MYC-driven glutaminolysis, suggesting that ARK5 may be a potential drug target for tumors with deregulated MYC.

### Conclusions and Future Perspective

Cancer cell metabolism is an "antique" research field that has recently been revisited and gained increasing momentum over the past decade. Newly developed biotechnologies and better understanding of signaling networks will elucidate the mechanisms whereby metabolic changes are induced in cancer cells. MYC is a "master regulator" oncogene that orchestrates multiple levels of cancer cell activities, including proliferation, apoptosis, stress responses, and metabolism. The multifaceted function of MYC opens up exciting possibilities for combined targeting strategies that may achieve better therapeutic responses. Consistent with this idea, coadministration of the apoptosis-inducing fenretinide and glutaminolysis inhibitor EGCG in a preclinical neuroblastoma model resulted in better outcomes than individual application (36). Fenretinide and EGCG are both clinically approved drugs and can be quickly translated into trials for testing their cooperative effect in human patients. In addition to MYC-primed apoptosis and metabolism, MYC-induced cell-cycle progression can be a third option to consider for combined therapeutic targeting. A list of proliferation-related effectors have been reported to be essential for MYC-driven tumorigenesis, including cyclin-dependent kinases 1/2, polyamine synthetic enzyme ornithine decarboxylase 1, and SUMOylation-activating enzyme 1/2 (58–62). Several compounds that selectively inhibit these enzymes have entered clinical trials, such as eflornithine (NCT01586260, NCT01059071, NCT00983580), AT7519M (NCT01183949, NCT01652144, NCT01627054), and seliciclib (NCT00999401). We believe that the evolving knowledge about MYC will keep providing intriguing targets for treating MYC-amplified malignancies.

#### Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest

No potential conflicts of interest were disclosed.

#### Authors' Contributions

- **Conception and design:** B. Li, M.C. Simon
- **Development of methodology:** B. Li
- **Analysis and interpretation of data (e.g., statistical analysis, biostatistics, computational analysis):** B. Li
- **Writing, review, and/or revision of the manuscript:** B. Li, M.C. Simon
- **Administrative, technical, or material support (i.e., reporting or organizing data, constructing databases):** B. Li

#### Grant Support

The authors' laboratory is supported by the Howard Hughes Medical Institute and by NIH Grant CA104838 (to M.C. Simon).

Received June 4, 2013; accepted July 3, 2013; published OnlineFirst July 29, 2013.

---

### References

1. Meyer N, Penn LZ. Reflecting on 25 years with MYC. Nat Rev Cancer 2008;8:976–90.
2. Albihn A, Johnsen JI, Henriksson MA. MYC in oncogenesis and as a target for cancer therapies. Adv Cancer Res 2010;107:163–224.
3. Nie Z, Hu G, Wei G, Cui K, Yamane A, Resch W, et al. c-Myc is a universal amplifier of expressed genes in lymphocytes and embryonic stem cells. Cell 2012;151:68–79.
4. Lin CY, Loven J, Rahl PB, Paranal RM, Burge CB, Bradner JE, et al. Transcriptional amplification in tumor cells with elevated c-Myc. Cell 2012;151:56–67.
5. Malynn BA, de Alboran IM, O'Hagan RC, Bronson R, Davidson L, DePinho RA, et al. N-myc can functionally replace c-myc in murine development, cellular growth, and differentiation. Genes Dev 2000;14:1390–9.
6. Dang CV. Therapeutic targeting of Myc-reprogrammed cancer cell metabolism. Cold Spring Harb Symp Quant Biol 2011;76:369–74.
7. Miller DM, Thomas SD, Islam A, Muench D, Sedoris K. c-Myc and cancer metabolism. Clin Cancer Res 2012;18:5546–53.
8. Podar K, Anderson KC. A therapeutic role for targeting c-Myc/Hif-1-dependent signaling pathways. Cell Cycle 2010;9:1722–8.
9. Soucek L, Whitfield J, Martins CP, Finch AJ, Murphy DJ, Sodir NM, et al. Modelling Myc inhibition as a cancer therapy. Nature 2008;455:679–83.
10. Kiessling A, Wiesinger R, Sperl B, Berg T. Selective inhibition of c-Myc/Max dimerization by a pyrazolo[1,5-a]pyrimidine. ChemMedChem 2007;2:627–30.
11. Kiessling A, Sperl B, Hollis A, Eick D, Berg T. Selective inhibition of c-Myc/Max dimerization and DNA binding by small molecules. Chem Biol 2006;13:745–51.
12. Prochownik EV, Vogt PK. Therapeutic targeting of Myc. Genes Cancer 2010;1:650–9.

13. Brooks TA, Hurley LH. The role of supercoiling in transcriptional control of MYC and its importance in molecular therapeutics. Nat Rev Cancer 2009;9:849–61.
14. Brooks TA, Hurley LH. Targeting MYC expression through G-quadruplexes. Genes Cancer 2010;1:641–9.
15. Puissant A, Frumm SM, Alexe G, Basil CF, Qi J, Chanthery YH, et al. Targeting MYCN in neuroblastoma by BET bromodomain inhibition. Cancer Discov 2013;3:308–23.
16. Loven J, Hoke HA, Lin CY, Lau A, Orlando DA, Vakoc CR, et al. Selective inhibition of tumor oncogenes by disruption of super-enhancers. Cell 2013;153:320–34.
17. Delmore JE, Issa GC, Lemieux ME, Rahl PB, Shi J, Jacobs HM, et al. BET bromodomain inhibition as a therapeutic strategy to target c-Myc. Cell 2011;146:904–17.
18. Matzuk MM, McKeown MR, Filippakopoulos P, Li Q, Ma L, Agno JE, et al. Small-molecule inhibition of BRDT for male contraception. Cell 2012;150:673–84.
19. van Riggelen J, Yetil A, Felsher DW. MYC as a regulator of ribosome biogenesis and protein synthesis. Nat Rev Cancer 2010;10:301–9.
20. Vazquez A, Markert EK, Oltvai ZN. Serine biosynthesis with one-carbon catabolism and the glycine cleavage system represents a novel pathway for ATP generation. PLoS ONE 2011;6:e25881.
21. Le A, Cooper CR, Gouw AM, Dinavahi R, Maitra A, Deck LM, et al. Inhibition of lactate dehydrogenase A induces oxidative stress and inhibits tumor progression. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2010;107:2037–42.
22. Gao P, Chernyshyov I, Chang TC, Lee YS, Kita K, Ochi T, et al. c-Myc suppression of miR-23a/b enhances mitochondrial glutaminase expression and glutamine metabolism. Nature 2009;458:762–5.
23. Possemato R, Marks KM, Shaul YD, Pacold ME, Kim D, Birsoy K, et al. Functional genomics reveal that the serine synthesis pathway is essential in breast cancer. Nature 2011;476:346–50.
24. Locasale JW, Grassian AR, Melman T, Lyssiotis CA, Mattaini KR, Bass AJ, et al. Phosphoglycerate dehydrogenase diverts glycolytic flux and contributes to oncogenesis. Nat Genet 2011;43:869–74.
25. Meyer N, Kim SS, Penn LZ. The Oscar-worthy role of Myc in apoptosis. Semin Cancer Biol 2006;16:275–87.
26. Vander Heiden MG, Cantley LC, Thompson CB. Understanding the Warburg effect: the metabolic requirements of cell proliferation. Science 2009;324:1029–33.
27. Wellen KE, Thompson CB. Cellular metabolic stress: considering how cells respond to nutrient excess. Mol Cell 2010;40:323–32.
28. Pinheiro C, Longatto-Filho A, Azevedo-Silva J, Casal M, Schmitt FC, Baltazar F. Role of monocarboxylate transporters in human cancers: state of the art. J Bioenerg Biomembr 2012;44:127–39.
29. Kim JW, Chernyshyov I, Semenza GL, Dang CV. HIF-1-mediated expression of pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase: a metabolic switch required for cellular adaptation to hypoxia. Cell Metab 2006;3:177–85.
30. Dang CV, Kim JW, Gao P, Yustein J. The interplay between MYC and HIF in cancer. Nat Rev Cancer 2008;8:51–6.
31. Qing G, Skuli N, Mayes PA, Pawel B, Martinez D, Maris JM, et al. Combinatorial regulation of neuroblastoma tumor progression by N-Myc and hypoxia inducible factor HIF-1alpha. Cancer Res 2010;70:10351–61.
32. Kim JW, Gao P, Liu YC, Semenza GL, Dang CV. Hypoxia-inducible factor 1 and dysregulated c-Myc cooperatively induce vascular endothelial growth factor and metabolic switches hexokinase 2 and pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase 1. Mol Cell Biol 2007;27:7381–93.
33. Gordan JD, Bertout JA, Hu CJ, Diehl JA, Simon MC. HIF-2alpha promotes hypoxic cell proliferation by enhancing c-myc transcriptional activity. Cancer Cell 2007;11:335–47.
34. Deberardinis RJ, Sayed N, Ditsworth D, Thompson CB. Brick by brick: metabolism and tumor cell growth. Curr Opin Genet Dev 2008;18:54–61.
35. Yuneva MO, Fan TW, Allen TD, Higashi RM, Ferraris DV, Tsukamoto T, et al. The metabolic profile of tumors depends on both the responsible genetic lesion and tissue type. Cell Metab 2012;15:157–70.
36. Qing G, Li B, Vu A, Skuli N, Walton ZE, Liu X, et al. ATF4 regulates MYC-mediated neuroblastoma cell death upon glutamine deprivation. Cancer Cell 2012;22:631–44.
37. Le A, Lane AN, Hamaker M, Bose S, Gouw A, Barbi J, et al. Glucose-independent glutamine metabolism via TCA cycling for proliferation and survival in B cells. Cell Metab 2012;15:110–21.
38. Yuneva M, Zamboni N, Oefner P, Sachidanandam R, Lazebnik Y. Deficiency in glutamine but not glucose induces MYC-dependent apoptosis in human cells. J Cell Biol 2007;178:93–105.
39. Wise DR, DeBerardinis RJ, Mancuso A, Sayed N, Zhang XY, Pfeiffer HK, et al. Myc regulates a transcriptional program that stimulates mitochondrial glutaminolysis and leads to glutamine addiction. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2008;105:18782–7.
40. Ahluwalia GS, Grem JL, Hao Z, Cooney DA. Metabolism and action of amino acid analog anti-cancer agents. Pharmacol Ther 1990;46:243–71.
41. Ovejera AA, Houchens DP, Catane R, Sheridan MA, Muggia FM. Efficacy of 6-diazo-5-oxo-L-norleucine and N-[N-gamma-glutamyl-6-diazo-5-oxo-norleucinyl]-6-diazo-5-oxo-norleucine against experimental tumors in conventional and nude mice. Cancer Res 1979;39:3220–4.
42. Dang CV, Le A, Gao P. MYC-induced cancer cell energy metabolism and therapeutic opportunities. Clin Cancer Res 2009;15:6479–83.
43. Robinson MM, McBryant SJ, Tsukamoto T, Rojas C, Ferraris DV, Hamilton SK, et al. Novel mechanism of inhibition of rat kidney-type glutaminase by bis-2-(5-phenylacetamido-1,2,4-thiadiazol-2-yl)ethyl sulfide (BPTES). Biochem J 2007;406:407–14.
44. Wang JB, Erickson JW, Fuji R, Ramachandran S, Gao P, Dinavahi R, et al. Targeting mitochondrial glutaminase activity inhibits oncogenic transformation. Cancer Cell 2010;18:207–19.
45. Guth PS, Risey J, Briner W, Blair P, Reed HT, Bryant G, et al. Evaluation of amino-oxyacetic acid as a palliative in tinnitus. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol 1990;99:74–9.
46. Yang C, Sudderth J, Dang T, Bachoo RM, McDonald JG, DeBerardinis RJ. Glioblastoma cells require glutamate dehydrogenase to survive impairments of glucose metabolism or Akt signaling. Cancer Res 2009;69:7986–93.
47. Agrawal S, Kumar A, Srivastava V, Mishra BN. Cloning, expression, activity and folding studies of serine hydroxymethyltransferase: a target enzyme for cancer chemotherapy. J Mol Microbiol Biotechnol 2003;6:67–75.
48. Nikiforov MA, Chandriani S, O'Connell B, Petrenko O, Kotenko I, Beavis A, et al. A functional screen for Myc-responsive genes reveals serine hydroxymethyltransferase, a major source of the one-carbon unit for cell metabolism. Mol Cell Biol 2002;22:5793–800.
49. Liu W, Le A, Hancock C, Lane AN, Dang CV, Fan TW, et al. Reprogramming of proline and glutamine metabolism contributes to the proliferative and metabolic responses regulated by oncogenic transcription factor c-MYC. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2012;109:8983–8.
50. Hart LS, Cunningham JT, Datta T, Dey S, Tameire F, Lehman SL, et al. ER stress-mediated autophagy promotes Myc-dependent transformation and tumor growth. J Clin Invest 2012;122:4621–34.
51. Atkins C, Liu Q, Minthorn E, Zhang SY, Figueroa DJ, Moss K, et al. Characterization of a novel PERK kinase inhibitor with antitumor and antiangiogenic activity. Cancer Res 2013;73:1993–2002.
52. Rouschop KM, van den Beucken T, Dubois L, Niessen H, Bussink J, Savelkouls K, et al. The unfolded protein response protects human tumor cells during hypoxia through regulation of the autophagy genes MAP1LC3B and ATG5. J Clin Invest 2010;120:127–41.
53. Duran RV, Oppliger W, Robitaille AM, Heiserich L, Skendaj R, Gottlieb E, et al. Glutaminolysis activates Rag-mTORC1 signaling. Mol Cell 2012;47:349–58.
54. Ruggero D, Montanaro L, Ma L, Xu W, Londei P, Cordon-Cardo C, et al. The translation factor eIF-4E promotes tumor formation and cooperates with c-Myc in lymphomagenesis. Nat Med 2004;10:484–6.
55. Wall M, Poortinga G, Stanley KL, Lindemann RK, Bots M, Chan CJ, et al. The mTORC1 inhibitor everolimus prevents and treats Emu-Myc

lymphoma by restoring oncogene-induced senescence. Cancer Dis-
cov 2013;3:82–95.
56. Wander SA, Hennessy BT, Slingerland JM. Next-generation mTOR
inhibitors in clinical oncology: how pathway complexity informs ther-
apeutic strategy. J Clin Invest 2011;121:1231–41.
57. Liu L, Ulbrich J, Muller J, Wustefeld T, Aeberhard L, Kress TR, et al.
Deregulated MYC expression induces dependence upon AMPK-relat-
ed kinase 5. Nature 2012;483:608–12.
58. Kessler JD, Kahle KT, Sun T, Meerbrey KL, Schlabach MR,
Schmitt EM, et al. A Sumoylation-dependent transcriptional sub-
program is required for Myc-driven tumorigenesis. Science 2012;
335:348–53.

59. Campaner S, Doni M, Hydbring P, Verrecchia A, Bianchi L, Sardella D,
et al. Cdk2 suppresses cellular senescence induced by the c-myc
oncogene. Nat Cell Biol 2010;12:54–9.
60. Hogarty MD, Norris MD, Davis K, Liu X, Evageliou NF, Hayes CS, et al.
ODC1 is a critical determinant of MYCN oncogenesis and a therapeutic
target in neuroblastoma. Cancer Res 2008;68:9735–45.
61. Goga A, Yang D, Tward AD, Morgan DO, Bishop JM. Inhibition of CDK1
as a potential therapy for tumors overexpressing MYC. Nat Med
2007;13:820–7.
62. Nilsson JA, Keller UB, Baudino TA, Yang C, Norton S, Old JA, et al.
Targeting ornithine decarboxylase in Myc-induced lymphomagenesis
prevents tumor formation. Cancer Cell 2005;7:433–44.
