
Intimate host attachment: enteropathogenic and enterohaemorrhagic

Escherichia coli

Running title: Intimate EPEC and EHEC adhesion

YuShuan Lai${}^{1}$, Ilan Rosenshine${}^{2}$, John Leong${}^{1,3}$ and Gad Frankel${}^{4*}$

${}^{1}$Department of Microbiology and Physiological Systems, University of  
Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester MA, USA; ${}^{2}$Department of Microbiology  
and Molecular Genetics, IMRIC, Faculty of Medicine, The Hebrew University of  
Jerusalem, Israel; ${}^{3}$Molecular Biology and Microbiology Department, Tufts  
University, Boston MA, USA; ${}^{4}$MRC Centre for Molecular Bacteriology and  
Infection, Imperial College London, London, UK

*For correspondence: MRC Centre for Molecular Bacteriology and Infection, Flowers  
Building, Imperial College London, London WS7 2AZ, UK  

Tel: 44 20 7594 5253  

Electronic mail: g.frankel@imperial.ac.uk

---

This article has been accepted for publication and undergone full peer review but has not been through  
the copyediting, typesetting, pagination and proofreading process, which may lead to differences  
between this version and the Version of Record. Please cite this article as doi:10.1111/cmi.12179

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

Abstract

Enteropathogenic and enterohaemorrhagic *Escherichia coli* use a novel infection strategy to colonize the gut epithelium, involving translocation of their own receptor, Tir, via a type III secretion system and subsequent formation of attaching and effacing (A/E) lesions. Following integration into the host cell plasma membrane of cultured cells, and clustering by the outer membrane adhesin intimin, Tir triggers multiple actin polymerization pathways involving host and bacterial adaptor proteins that converge on the host Arp2/3 actin nucleator. Although initially thought to be involved in A/E lesion formation, recent data have shown that the known Tir-induced actin polymerization pathways are dispensable for this activity, but can play other major roles in colonization efficiency, *in vivo* fitness and systemic disease. In this review we summarize the roadmap leading from the discovery of Tir, through the different actin polymerization pathways it triggers, to our current understanding of their physiological functions.

Introduction

Commensal *Escherichia coli*, which was discovered in 1885, is the predominant facultative anaerobe of the human gut microbiota. It colonizes the gastrointestinal tract within hours after birth and establishes a mutual beneficial relationship with the host throughout life. However, through acquisition of pathogenicity islands (PAI), prophages, and plasmids, several highly adapted *E. coli* clones have evolved the ability to efficiently colonize specific anatomical sites and cause disease. Pathogenic *E. coli* can cause a variety of diarrheal diseases (Clement, *et al.*, 2012), and some (i.e., extraintestinal *E. coli* - ExPEC) are capable of infecting extra-intestinal sites such as the urinary tract (uropathogenic *E. coli* – UPEC) or the bloodstream and/or the central nervous system, particularly in the neonate (Manges and Johnson, 2012).

Traditionally, diarrheogenic *E. coli* have been divided into six pathotypes (Clements *et al.*, 2012): (i) enterotoxigenic *E. coli* (ETEC), which expresses the heat stable (ST) and/or heat labile (LT) enterotoxins; (ii) enteroinvasive *E. coli* (EIEC), which harbors a 220 kb virulence plasmid encoding the *ipa* operon that mediates invasion of gut epithelial cells; (iii) diffuse adherent *E. coli* (DAEC), a heterogeneous group of *E. coli* with variable virulence characteristics; (iv) enteroaggregative *E. coli* (EAEC), which encodes the enteroaggregative heat-stable toxin (EAST1), as well as the aggregative adherence fimbriae (AAF) that promote the formation of bacterial aggregates on the mucosal surface; (v) Shiga toxin- (Stx-) producing *E. coli* (STEC; aka verocytotoxigenic *E. coli* or VTEC), a group of pathogens that includes the enterohaemorrhagic *E. coli* (EHEC), an STEC subset that encodes the locus of a *enterocyte effacement* (LEE) pathogenicity island (PAI) (Nataro and Kaper, 1998); and (vi) enteropathogenic *E. coli* (EPEC), which
carry the LEE but does not produce Stx and are subdivided into typical or atypical EPEC based on the presence or absence, respectively, of the EPEC Adherence Factor (EAF) (Girón et al., 1991) plasmid that encodes the bundle forming pili required for localized adherence on epithelial cells (Trabulsi et al., 2002). New pathotypes are also emerging, such as the *E. coli* O104:H4 strain, an Stx-producing EAEC strain that caused a lethal outbreak in Germany in 2011 (Frank et al., 2011; Rohde et al., 2011).

Of the *E. coli* pathotypes, EPEC and EHEC are unique in colonizing the intestinal mucosa via ‘attaching and effacing’ (A/E) lesions, characterized by effacement of the intestinal brush border, intimate bacterial attachment to the plasma membrane of enterocytes, and accumulation of electron dense material, consisting of mostly actin filaments, under the adherent bacteria (Clements et al., 2012; Wong et al., 2011). This hallmark of EHEC and EPEC has been the subject of considerable study for the last two and a half decades.

Although these related pathogens utilize highly homologous virulence factors to promote A/E lesions, which are morphologically indistinguishable, EPEC and EHEC utilize distinct signaling pathways to generate filamentous actin. Thus, these studies have provided fascinating examples of how microbial pathogens can hijack related mammalian actin assembly signaling cascades in multiple ways. The diversity and redundancy of signaling suggest that A/E lesion formation plays an important role in the pathogenesis of these infectious agents, a supposition that has recently been tested in animal models.
Key milestones for intimate attachment: The LEE PAI, effector proteins, and intimin

While *E. coli* was first linked with severe diarrheal illnesses in the early 1900's (Robins-Browne, 1987), the first EPEC strain was isolated in 1945 during an investigation of an infantile diarrheal outbreak in Hillingdon Hospital in Middlesex, England (Bray, 1945). EHEC O157:H7 was first identified as a new diarrheagenic pathogen in 1982 during an investigation of an outbreak of gastrointestinal illness, which was traced to consumption of contaminated hamburgers (Riley *et al.*, 1983).

In 1987, the visualization of electron-dense structures, termed “pedestals”, beneath bacteria attached to host cells offered the first clue towards understanding the EPEC virulence mechanism. Later, it was realized that this dense matter consisted of filamentous actin, formed following attachment of EPEC to cultured epithelial cells (Knutton *et al.*, 1989). This unusual phenotype had not been observed previously for other human pathogens and prompted genetic screens that led to the identification of the first essential virulence factor for intimate EPEC attachment to cultured cells: an outer membrane adhesin, intimin, encoded by the *eae* gene (Jerse and Kaper, 1991; Donnenberg *et al.*, 1993a). Intimin consists of a conserved 700 aa N-terminal region that contains a beta barrel autotransporter domain that anchors it to the outer membrane and an allelic variable 280 aa C-terminal region that is exposed on the bacterial outer surface (Frankel, *et al.*, 1995). This latter domain is comprised of two Ig-like and one C-type lectin-like domains and is homologous to the *Yersinia pseudotuberculosis* invasin protein that binds tightly to beta-1 integrins, to promote bacterial entry into mammalian cells (Isberg and Falkow, 1985; Isberg and Leong, 1990; Hamburger *et al.*, 1999). EPEC

intimin is critical for binding to cultured mammalian cells, establishing colonization in animal models and causing disease in human volunteers (Donnenberg *et al.*, 1993b; Donnenberg *et al.*, 1993a). In 1992, an EHEC O157:H7 *eae* gene was identified, which shared 83% sequence homology with EPEC *eae* (Yu and Kaper, 1992).

A second observed phenotype that led to key discoveries of EPEC and EHEC virulence factors was the invasion of cultured cells by typical EPEC. Although EPEC is not known as an invasive pathogen during human infection, this *in vitro* phenotype provided an important readout in an additional genetic screen to identify a battery of mutants incapable of cellular entry. Many of these mutants were also deficient in formation of actin pedestals and intimate attachment (Donnenberg, 1990). Today we know that these mutants are deficient in the biogenesis of a LEE-encoded type III secretion system (T3SS) that is capable of translocating bacterial effectors into host cells (Jarvis *et al.*, 1995; Goosney *et al.*, 2000; Clements, *et al.*, 2012).

Since its discovery in 1995, LEE-encoded genes not devoted to the biogenesis of the T3SS were better defined and found to include *eae*, gene regulators, chaperones, and T3SS translocated effector proteins (McDaniel *et al.*, 1995; Goosney *et al.*, 2000). EPEC and EHEC also share a large number of effectors (known as non-LEE encoded effectors or Nle's) that are encoded by genetic elements other than the LEE (Tobe *et al.*, 2006; Iguchi *et al.*, 2009). The total number of T3SS effectors expressed by individual EPEC and EHEC isolates is not fixed and ranges from 22 to 50 (Tobe *et al.*, 2006; Iguchi *et al.*, 2009).

The next breakthrough in our understanding of the virulence associated with the A/E phenotype was the observation that some of the EPEC LEE PAI genes were required to

promote tyrosine phosphorylation of a protein, termed Hp90 (Human protein 90kD), that  
localized at the tips of actin pedestals beneath sites of bacterial attachment (Rosenshine,  
et al., 1992). Post-translational modification of Hp90 was linked to both invasiveness and  
formation of actin pedestals. Moreover, it was demonstrated that Hp90 bound to the  
bacteria in an intimin-dependent manner (Rosenshine, et al., 1992; Rosenshine et al.,  
1996). Hp90 was believed to be a host trans-membrane receptor for intimin, analogous to  
the integrin receptors of invasin (Isberg and Leong, 1990). However, in 1997, Kenny and  
coworkers discovered that Hp90 was actually a T3SS effector that localizes in the host  
plasma membrane and binds to intimin, and thus renamed Hp90 the translocated intimin  
receptor, or Tir (Kenny et al., 1997). This discovery was independently confirmed by  
Deibel and colleagues, who renamed Hp90 EspE (Deibel et al., 1998), although the name  
Tir is more widely used. The delivery of a self-receptor into the host cell by a bacterium  
to effect tight pathogen-host binding was a surprising and previously unknown  
pathogenic strategy.

Our current molecular understanding of actin pedestal formation  

**Tir, a unique paradigm for host cell attachment and signaling by a microbial pathogen**

Upon translocation into host cells, Tir inserts into the apical membrane such that the N-  
and C-terminal portions of Tir are cytosolic, with helical transmembrane domains  
traversing the host apical membrane. The central (~100-residue) portion, known as the  
Intimin Binding Domain (IBD), forms two helices separated by a hairpin loop on the  
external surface of the host cell (Kenny, 1999; Luo et al., 2000). This loop binds the C-  
terminus of intimin with high affinity (K<sub>d</sub> of ~10 nM for EPEC and less than 1 nM for  

EHEC) thus facilitating extremely tight attachment of these pathogenic *E. coli* to the host  
cell (DeVinney *et al.*, 1999; Ross and Miller, 2007). Based on sequence and antigenic  
variation within the 280 aa variable C-terminal region, a classification scheme for intimin  
was developed, becoming an important epidemiological marker alongside the O:H  
serotypes. The most common intimin types are α, expressed by EPEC belonging to the  
EPEC1 evolutionary branch; β, expressed by EPEC2 and some non-O157 EHEC (e.g.  
O26) and γ, which is mainly found in EPEC O55:H7 and EHEC O157:H7 (McGraw *et al.*,  
1999). Although intimin types are strain-specific, they are interchangeable between the  
strains and can interact with any Tir IBD (DeVinney *et al.*, 1999).  

In addition to its function as a bacterial receptor, Tir serves as a signaling effector that  
elegantly initiates the recruitment of host adaptors and actin nucleators from inside the  
host cytosol, a strategy commonly used by intracellular pathogens to exert  
pathophysiologic effects. Although EPEC and EHEC Tirs are homologous in structure  
and share ~60% identity (Kenny, 1999) they use divergent mechanisms of signaling that  
then converge on the activation of common actin nucleators to produce pedestals that are  
indistinguishable when examined by electron microscopy or fluorescence imaging of  
actin (Fig. 1),  

Both intimin and Tir appear to be adapted for multimerization. The beta barrel region of  
intimin, which anchors intimin to the bacterial outer membrane, and the IBD of Tir each  
encode dimerization domains, giving rise to a model in which the two proteins might  
efficiently form higher order ‘lattices’ essential for downstream signaling (Luo *et al.*,  
2000; Touzé *et al.*, 2003).  

Within an infected host cell, Tir interacts with a number of host proteins through its  

N- and C-terminal cytosolic domains. The N-terminal tail is functionally interchangeable between EHEC and EPEC Tirs and binds various focal adhesion proteins, thereby potentially linking Tir to the cytoskeleton (Goosney et al., 2000; Kenny, 2001). However, such activity is insufficient for actin pedestal formation (Kenny, 2001). Both EPEC and EHEC require the C-terminal tail, the portion of Tir that is most divergent between these two highly related pathogens (DeVinney et al., 1999). Notably, intimin binding enhances post-translocation modification of the C-terminus of Tir inside the host cell. These modifications, when fully characterized, were pivotal in revealing the mechanism of actin pedestal formation (Kenny et al., 1997; Campellone et al., 2004a; Campellone and Leong, 2005).

### EPEC pedestal formation pathways

Host modification of the C-terminus of EPEC Tir is critical for its activity. This domain contains multiple tyrosine, threonine, and serine residues that are available for potential host phosphorylation. Serine/threonine phosphorylation, which changes the apparent molecular weight of Tir on SDS-PAGE where it appears as a 90 kDa protein (similar to the MW of Hp90), has been suggested to play a role in Tir insertion into the apical membrane, but otherwise does not contribute to actin pedestal formation. Tyrosine phosphorylation of EPEC Tir, on the other hand, is absolutely required for efficient actin polymerization (Kenny et al., 1997). Multiple protein kinases, including members of the Abl and Src kinase families, have been localized to EPEC pedestal tips and thus implicated in pedestal formation; broad inhibition of both these classes of kinases by non-specific pharmacologic inhibitors can inhibit EPEC pedestals (Swimm et al., 2004; Hayward et al., 2009). However, EPEC can still induce pedestal formation on a variety of

158 cultured cells lacking individual kinases from the Abl or Src families, suggesting that  
159 EPEC Tir is capable of utilizing multiple, redundant, tyrosine kinases for Tir  
160 phosphorylation in vitro (Swimm, et al., 2004).  

161 Of the Tir C-terminal tyrosine residues, phosphorylation of residue Y₄₇₄ (in EPEC1 strain  
162 E2348/69) is the most critical for focal actin assembly and triggers the major pathway by  
163 which EPEC1 strains initiate pedestal formation in vitro (Fig. 2, pathway 1) (Kenny et al.,  
164 1997; DeVinney et al., 2001). In clinical isolates, this critical tyrosine residue may be in  
165 other close positions due to small insertions or deletions. This pedestal formation  
166 pathway utilizes the host adaptor Nck, which contains an SH2 domain capable of binding  
167 a 12-residue region of EPEC Tir that includes the critical phosphorylated Y₄₇₄ (Gruenheid  
168 et al., 2001; Campellone et al., 2002). Nck, found at the tips of EPEC-induced actin  
169 pedestals, also contains three SH3 domains that may directly or indirectly recruit the host  
170 actin nucleation promoting factor N-WASP (Gruenheid et al., 2001; Buday et al., 2002).  
171 N-WASP, in turn, recruits and activates the actin nucleating Arp2/3 complex (Snapper  
172 and Rosen, 1999; Miki and Takenawa, 2003).  

173 Due to similarities in the use of Nck and N-WASP by vaccinia virus for “actin comet  
174 tail” formation, a similar mechanism of actin assembly has been proposed for EPEC  
175 (Campellone and Leong, 2005). Vaccinia produces A36R, a Nck-binding protein, that,  
176 like EPEC Tir, is tyrosine phosphorylated by the host. An eight-residue sequence in the  
177 A36R Nck-binding region is nearly homologous to the Y474 region of EPEC Tir  
178 (Campellone and Leong, 2005). Recruitment of Nck by A36R leads to indirect activation  
179 of N-WASP through the intermediary adaptor, WASP Interacting Protein (WIP) (Moreau  
180 et al., 2000). WIP contains N-terminal proline rich domains that are capable of binding
Nck's SH3 domains; its C-terminal WASP binding domain (WBD) activates N-WASP by  
binding to the N-WASP N-terminal WH1 domain (Moreau *et al.*, 2000). Ectopic  
overexpression of the WBD decreases vaccinia actin comet tail formation, presumably by  
a dominant negative effect, and various mutations in the WH1 domain of N-WASP can  
abrogate its recruitment and actin comet tail formation by vaccinia (Moreau *et al.*, 2000).  

A role for WIP in pathogen-mediated actin assembly appears to depend on the  
experimental system. Garber and colleagues showed that both EPEC and vaccinia are still  
able to induce actin assembly in a cell line lacking WIP (Garber *et al.*, 2012). N-WASP  
also contains a proline-rich domain that is capable of binding Nck directly, and thereby  
leading to its activation (Antón *et al.*, 1998). As is the case for the kinases(s) responsible  
for EPEC Tir phosphorylation, seemingly disparate observations concerning the  
mechanism of N-WASP activation by Nck and the role of WIP may indicate a degree of  
redundancy in the N-WASP activation pathway.  

Although the major pathway for EPEC pedestal formation requires Nck, Nck-  
independent mechanisms of actin pedestal formation have also been uncovered, reflecting  
redundant pedestal formation pathways (Fig. 2, pathways a and b). EPEC infection of  
Nck-deficient murine embryonic fibroblasts still generate roughly one-fifth the number of  
the actin pedestals generated upon infection of wild type fibroblasts. Most of this activity,  
also requires Y474, reaffirming its role as a key residue for triggering actin assembly by  
EPEC Tir. However, even in the absence of Y474, about 2-5% of bound EPEC can  
generate actin pedestals, a rate more than ten-fold higher than for a Tir-deficient EPEC  
strain. An additional tyrosine residue at position 454 of EPEC Tir is critical for this minor  
Nck-independent actin assembly activity (Campellone and Leong, 2005). Initially  
considered of marginal importance, this pathway was later shown to be highly related to

the major pathway of actin pedestal formation by EHEC.

### EHEC pedestal formation pathways

A critical first indication that EHEC and EPEC utilized distinct pedestal formation

pathways came from studies showing that tyrosine phosphorylated proteins were absent

from EHEC actin pedestals (DeVinney *et al.*, 2001). In fact, EHEC Tir lacks the

equivalent of EPEC Tir Y₄₇₄, and EHEC does not require Nck for actin pedestal

formation (Kenny, 1999; Devinney *et al.*, 2001). Consistent with distinct pathways of

actin assembly, EHEC *tir* cannot complement EPEC *tir* mutants for actin pedestal

formation unless modified to encode the critical Y₄₇₄-containing region of EPEC Tir

(Kenny, 2001; Campellone *et al.*, 2002). Co-infection of cultured *tir* and *eae* (encoding

intimin) deletion mutants of EPEC and EHEC revealed that latter requires an additional

EHEC-specific effector for pedestal formation (Kenny, 2001; Devinney *et al.*, 2001).

These observations pointed to different mechanisms of actin pedestal formation for EPEC

and EHEC (Fig. 2).

Experiments using chimeric Tir proteins suggested that the key to differences in EPEC

and EHEC Tir lie in the C-terminus. While the N-terminus and IBD of EHEC and EPEC

Tir are highly similar and functionally interchangeable, their cytosolic C-terminal

domains are only ~41% identical (Devinney *et al.*, 1999). Further studies of this region

revealed that an NPY sequence at residues 456 to 458 of EHEC Tir is critical for actin

pedestal formation (Brady *et al.*, 2007). EHEC Tir residue Y₄₅₈ corresponds to EPEC Tir

Y₄₅₄, the residue previously shown to be essential for triggering one of the minor Nck-

independent actin assembly pathways in EPEC pedestal formation, described above.
Instead of utilizing tyrosine phosphorylation and Nck recruitment, the EHEC Tir NPY-mediated pathway acts through a different category of host adaptors (Fig. 1, pathway 2).

The NPY<sub>458</sub> sequence of EHEC Tir, and likely the equivalent sequence of EPEC Tir as well, binds to IRTKS and IRSp53, members of the I-Bar subfamily of membrane deforming and remodeling proteins. These proteins link to Tir via their N-terminal IMD domains, which also form “zeppelin”-shaped homodimers associated with convex membrane protrusions (Vingadassalom *et al.*, 2009; Weiss *et al.*, 2009; de Groot *et al.*, 2011; Zhao *et al.*, 2011). The C-terminal regions of IRTKS and IRSp53 contain additional motifs, such as an SH3 domain, that link their membrane deforming activity to signaling proteins and actin regulators (Weiss *et al.*, 2009; Vingadassalom *et al.*, 2009).

A paradox in this Tir NPY-mediated pedestal pathway is that it promotes pedestal formation with low efficiency for EPEC, yet with high efficiency for EHEC (Campellone and Leong, 2005; Campellone *et al.*, 2006). This riddle was solved by the identification of an additional non LEE-encoded bacterial effector, termed EspF<sub>U</sub> (a homolog of the effector EspF encoded on prophage U) or TccP (Tir cytoskeleton coupling protein) (Campellone *et al.*, 2004b; Garmendia *et al.*, 2004). Found in EHEC O157:H7, EspF<sub>U</sub>/TccP also greatly enhances NPY<sub>458</sub> mediated pedestal formation if expressed in EPEC1 (Campellone *et al.*, 2006).

Discovered before the Tir NPY<sub>458</sub> residues and IRTKS/IRSp53, EspF<sub>U</sub>/TccP provided structural insights that helped elucidate both the identity of its linker to EHEC Tir and the mechanism of N-WASP activation. EspF<sub>U</sub>/TccP consists of an N-terminal secretion signal, followed by (in nearly all isolates) between three and eight repeating elements (Garmendia *et al.*, 2005, 2006). Each functional repeating unit contains two structurally

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
and functionally distinct domains, an N-terminal helical section that binds and activates

N-WASP, and a C-terminal proline-rich domain with multiple canonical SH3 binding

PxxP motifs that are recognized by the SH3 domain in the C-terminus of IRTKS and

IRS p53 (Garmendia *et al.*, 2006; Cheng *et al.*, 2008; Aitio *et al.*, 2010).

EspF<sub>U</sub>/TccP acts through structural mimicry and, remarkably, has evolved to outcompete

some endogenous host ligands, making it a most efficient hijacker of mammalian

signaling pathways. SH3 domains are an abundant and common motif for affecting

cellular interactions. The proline-rich domains of EspF<sub>U</sub>/TccP recognize the SH3 domain

of IRTKS with high affinity (Aitio *et al.*, 2010), potentially allowing it to outcompete

Eps8, a host actin modulator that appears to be a major binding partner of IRS p53

(Funato *et al.*, 2004; Disanza *et al.*, 2006). Like EspF<sub>U</sub>/TccP, Eps8 and has been shown to

bind the SH3 domains of IRTKS and IRS p53 via multiple PxxP motifs (Aitio *et al.*,

2010). Although the IRTKS/IRS p53-binding sequences of Eps8 and EspF<sub>U</sub>/TccP are

nearly identical, the latter binds to the IRTKS SH3 domain with higher affinity due to the

presence of a tryptophan, rather than an alanine, between tandem PxxP motifs. Thus,

EspF<sub>U</sub>/TccP’s tryptophan ‘switch’ may allow EHEC to usurp control of IRTKS/IRS p53

from natural host ligands (Aitio *et al.*, 2012).

Similarly, the N-WASP-activating helical domain of EspF<sub>U</sub>/TccP acts by high affinity

mimetic displacement. N-WASP’s C-terminal VCA domain, which functions to activate

Arp2/3, is normally maintained in an autoinhibited state, due to an intramolecular

interaction between an amphipathic helix in this domain and a hydrophobic groove

located the GBD domain in the central portion of N-WASP (Snapper and Rosen, 1999;

Miki and Takenawa, 2003; Cheng *et al.*, 2008). Endogenous N-WASP activators such as

Cdc42 disrupt this autoinhibition by binding to the GBD and indirectly disrupting this
interaction by altering the GBD structure (Snapper and Rosen, 1999; Miki and Takenawa,
2003). In contrast, EspF<sub>U</sub>/TccP's helical domain is structurally similar to the helix in the
N-WASP VCA domain and can directly displace it from the GBD, thereby activating N-
WASP (Cheng et al., 2008).

A notable finding is that more than 99% of EspF<sub>U</sub>/TccP alleles possess at least three
repeats of the functional (i.e. helical- and proline-rich-containing) domains, suggesting
that multiple repeats confer a selective advantage to EHEC (Garmendia et al., 2005).
Multiple EspF<sub>U</sub>/TccP repeats synergistically enhance activation of Arp2/3 *in vitro*
(Campellone et al., 2008; Sallee et al., 2008). In addition, we speculated above that the
dimerization domains of intimin and Tir might promote a higher order structure
conducive to efficient actin signaling. In fact, the presence of dimerization activity in
IRTKS/IRSp53 indicates that three of the four components in this signaling cascade, i.e.,
intimin, Tir, IRTKS/IRSp53 each have the capacity to multimerize and the fourth,
TccP/EspF<sub>U</sub>, encodes multiple repeat elements. A compelling hypothesis is that EHEC
utilizes a series of both bacterial and mammalian components to promote the formation of
a large multimeric complex at the host cell membrane, one that efficiently generates
filamentous actin and enhances EHEC's ability to attach to colonic epithelium.

Finally, just as EPEC encodes multiple actin assembly pathways, EHEC triggers yet
another alternative pathway for pedestal formation in a cell culture model (Fig. 2,
pathway c). Low levels of actin assembly can be observed when embryonic fibroblasts
from N-WASP knockout mice are infected with an intimin-expressing *E. coli* strain that
delivers EHEC Tir and EspF<sub>U</sub>/TccP. This N-WASP-independent pathway depends on

multiple repeats of EspF<sub>U</sub>/TccP, again suggesting a functional role for multiple repeats (Vingadassalom et al., 2010) but the critical elements of this pathway are yet unidentified.

### TccP2/EspF<sub>M</sub>-induced actin polymerization in EPEC2 and non-O157 EHEC

Typical EHEC O157:H7 also possesses a pseudogene of EspF<sub>U</sub>/TccP encoded on prophage CP-933 M/Sp4, and thus called TccP2/EspF<sub>M</sub>, which lacks an intact type III secretion signal (Ogura et al., 2007). Beta-glucuronidase-positive and sorbitol-fermenting EHEC O157 strains harbor an intact *tccP2/espF<sub>M</sub>* gene as well as an *espF<sub>U</sub>/tccP* gene (Ogura et al., 2007). Although they carry divergent N-terminal secretion signals, EspF<sub>U</sub>/TccP and TccP2/EspF<sub>M</sub> share the same repeat structure, and EspF<sub>U</sub>/TccP and TccP2/EspF<sub>M</sub> are functionally interchangeable in EHEC O157 strains (Ooka et al., 2007).

Unexpectedly, EspF<sub>U</sub>/TccP was also found in EPEC strains of the serotype O119:H6, which express Tir that contains both NPY<sub>458</sub> and Y<sub>474</sub> equivalents (Ooka et al., 2007). Infections of cultured cells have shown that EPEC O119:H6 can simultaneously utilize the Tir:Nck and Tir:IRTKS/IRS p53:EspF<sub>U</sub>/TccP pathways (Fig. 3) (Whale et al., 2007). Later, this infection strategy was found to be common among EPEC strains belonging to the EPEC2 evolutionary lineage and non-O157:H7 strains, as they encode both a functional TccP2/EspF<sub>M</sub> and a Tir protein that can be tyrosine phosphorylated (Whale et al., 2006; Ogura et al., 2007). These results show the existence of yet another level of redundancy and suggest that Tir-induced actin polymerization is under strong selective pressure.

Map and EspH impact on Tir-induced actin polymerization

Map and EspH have both been implicated in filopodia formation and modulation of Tir-induced actin polymerization in undifferentiated epithelial cells. While Map is a Cdc42 guanine nucleotide exchange factor (GEF) (Huang et al., 2009), EspH is a RhoGEF inhibitor that acts by competitively binding to the tandem Dbl-homology and pleckstrin-homology (DH-PH) domains of Dbl-family mammalian RhoGEFs (Dong et al., 2010). Ectopic expression of EspH leads to cell detachment, while infections with strains either missing or over-expressing EspH result in short or elongated pedestals, respectively. The cytotoxicity of EspH could be offset by expression of the bacterial Rho GEFs EspM2 and EspT (Wong et al., 2012a). EPEC infection leads to accumulation of WIP at the tip of the Tir-induced actin pedestals (Garber et al., 2012; Wong et al., 2012b) in a process involving EspH, which itself tags actin polymerization in a Tir-dependent mechanism (Wong et al., 2012b).

Activation of Cdc42 by Map leads to transient filopodia formation during early stages of infection; interaction of Map with NHERF1 via its PDZ-biding motif is needed for filopodia stabilization (Berger et al., 2009). Recovery from the filopodial signals requires phosphorylation of Tir tyrosine Y474 and activation of the actin polymerization pathway as either infection of Nck-proficient cells with EPEC expressing TirY474 or infection of Nck-deficient cells with wild-type EPEC results in persistence of filopodia (Berger et al., 2009). The relevance of these pathways in EPEC-induced microvilli effacement was recently reported following infection of polarized Caco-2 cells (Dean et al., 2013). Taken together, these data show the existence of an elaborated cross talk between Tir and other effectors that subvert actin dynamics.

In vivo and ex vivo infection models

Rabbit

In 1983 and 1985 Moon *et al.* and Tzipori *et al.* used rabbit ligated ileal loops and gnotobiotic piglets to describe the A/E lesion (Moon *et al.*, 1983; Tzipori *et al.*, 1985). Subsequently, Robins-Browne *et al.* showed that rabbit EPEC (REPEC) strains were unable to colonize the intestinal tract of guinea pigs and were detected in distal intestine of conventional mice but without evidence of A/E lesions (Robins-Browne *et al.*, 1994).

Using the rabbit model Marches *et al.* have shown that intimin and Tir are essential for A/E lesion formation *in vivo* (Marchès *et al.*, 2000). In infant rabbits infected with EHEC O157:H7, colonization efficiency of the *espF<sub>U</sub>/tccP* mutant was similar to the parental wild type strain in the ileum but was reduced in the large bowel at 7 days post infection (Ritchie *et al.*, 2008). Infection of rabbits with EHEC Δmap mutant resulted in reduced colonization specifically in the small intestine, while infection with EHEC ΔespH resulted in reduced colonization throughout the intestine. However, neither Map nor EspH were needed for A/E lesion formation in the rabbit model (Ritchie and Waldor, 2005).

Bovine and porcine

As EHEC can colonize large farm animals, they could potentially be employed as infection models, although for obvious reasons they cannot be used for routine investigation. EHEC and EPEC strains have been shown to cause A/E lesions on the bovine gut mucosa using experimental bovine and porcine challenges (Girard *et al.*, 2005; Naylor *et al.*, 2005) and intestinal *in vitro* organ cultures (IVOC) (Girard *et al.*, 

2005, 2009), as well as following inoculation of bovine ligated intestinal loops (Vlisidou et al., 2006). The bovine ileal loop and IVOC, as well as the gnotobiotic piglet (Ritchie et al., 2008), models confirmed a role for intimin and Tir, but revealed that EspF<sub>U</sub>/TccP is not required for A/E lesion formation on these mucosal surfaces, although expression of TccP/ EspF<sub>U</sub> was associated with larger aggregates of mucosally adherent bacteria in the latter model (Ritchie et al., 2008). Moreover, neither Tir Y<sub>474</sub> nor TccP2/EspF<sub>M</sub> were needed for A/E lesion formation following infection of bovine IVOC with EPEC strains E2348/69 (EPEC1) and B171 (EPEC2) (Girard et al., 2009).

### Human intestinal organ cultures (hIVOC) and xerographs

Knutton et al. have utilized human IVOC (hIVOC) to show that EPEC can efficiently form A/E lesions on the human gut mucosa (Knutton et al., 1987). Later, Philips et al. found that EHEC specifically causes A/E lesions on human Peyer's patches (PP) (Phillips et al., 2000). Moreover, the human IVOC model revealed that infection with EPEC E2348/69, but not EHEC O157, resulted in the accumulation of tyrosine phosphorylated proteins and Nck under attached bacteria, while infection with either strains resulted in the localization of N-WASP. Recruitment of N-WASP and A/E lesion formation following EPEC infection were independent of Tir residue Y<sub>474</sub>. In contrast, while EspF<sub>U</sub>/TccP was not needed for A/E lesion formation, recruitment of N-WASP was not detected following infection with the EHEC *tccP/espF<sub>U</sub>* mutant. Infection of human IVOC with a clinical atypical EPEC O125:H6 isolate, which naturally lacks both EspF<sub>U</sub>/TccP and the equivalent of Y<sub>474</sub>, also resulted in the formation of typical A/E lesions (Bai et al., 2008). These results suggest that EPEC can recruit N-WASP to

infection sites by a Tir Y474-independent mechanism, but the relationship, if any, of this

pathway to the minor pathways described above is not yet known.

Infection of hIVOC with EPEC Δmap and ΔespH mutants revealed that while both

induced brush border remodeling and produced typical A/E lesions, there were some

differences from the wild-type strain; elongation of non-effaced microvilli, particularly in

the espH mutant, appeared to be attenuated and some bacteria that had clearly formed

pedestals had come away, leaving a “pedestal footprint” (Shaw et al., 2005). The fact

that this kind of pedestal footprints were not seen following infection with parental wild

type strain suggests that Map and EspH might modulate Tir interaction with the

cytoskeleton, which in turn impacts Tir-intimin interaction.

Human intestinal xenografts in severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID) mice allow

for experimentation with the live human tissue with minimal ethical conflicts. Recent

work has shown that the model faithfully recapitulates the tissue tropism of EHEC to the

colon, where it forms A/E lesions in a T3SS dependent manner (Golan et al., 2011). This

model has also been used to show that flagellin of EHEC O157:H7 is sufficient to

eliciting colonic inflammation (Miyamoto et al., 2006). In contrast to the IVOC model,

the use of xenografts allows for the analysis of innate immune responses to infection.

However, the use of SCID animals precludes employing this model to study the adaptive

response. An additional major difference from the natural infection setting is the lack of

micobiota in the xenograftes, which are for the most part sterile.

Mouse

Infections of mice with EPEC and EHEC isolates, with or without pre-treatment with

antibiotics to deplete the endogenous gut flora, have been reported, but in the absence of

A/E lesions and close association of the bacteria with the mucosa, the usefulness of this model is somewhat questionable. For this reason, *Citrobacter rodentium*, which shares a characteristic mechanism of colonization (i.e., A/E lesion formation) and T3SS effectors with EPEC and EHEC, is arguably one of the best murine models of bacterial infection available, as it reflects a natural and physiological host-pathogen interaction in immunocompetent animals (reviewed in Mundy *et al.*, 2005). Importantly, not only are virulence factors generally interchangeable between *C. rodentium* and the human pathogens (Frankel *et al.*, 1995), but from the available volunteer and intestinal explant studies, it is clear that *C. rodentium* has predictive value in assessing the role of *E. coli* virulence factors in humans.

Deng *et al.* was the first to report that the Tir Y474 pathway was not needed for A/E lesion formation following infection of mice with *C. rodentium*, which carries the equivalent Y474 residue at position Y471 (Deng *et al.*, 2003). Later, Girard *et al.* reported that expression of EspF/TccP in *C. rodentium* (which is naturally *espF/tccP* negative) did not enhance virulence (Girard *et al.*, 2009). In 2010 Crepin *et al.* reported that both the Tir-dependent Nck and IRTKS/IRSp53 pathways are dispensable for colonization and A/E lesion formation (Crepin *et al.*, 2010). Similar to EPEC on human IVOC, recruitment of Nck, but not N-WASP, in infected mice was Y471-dependent. In mixed infections, the wild-type *C. rodentium* out-competed the *tir* tyrosine mutants. These results show that although not needed for A/E lesion formation, the ability to stimulate Tir-induced actin polymerization pathways provide a competitive colonization advantage.

*C. rodentium* does not produce Stx, the phage-encoded toxin required for the most serious manifestations of EHEC disease in humans, such as haemorrhagic colitis or

haemolytic uremic syndrome, the triad of anemia, thrombocytopenia and renal failure.

To generate a murine infection model that permits the analysis of Stx-mediated disease in the context of infection of conventional mice, *C. rodentium* was lysogenized with λstx2dact, a naturally occurring Stx-encoding lambdoid phage. Infection with *C. rodentium* (λstx2dact) mimics several key features of EHEC disease, including the induction of proinflammatory cytokines and intestinal inflammation (Mallick et al., 2012). More importantly, Stx induced renal inflammation and dysfunction, similar to HUS in human EHEC disease. A/E lesions were apparent in this model, and not dependent on Stx. Furthermore, *C. rodentium* (λstx2dact) expressing the Tir mutant Y471F, which promotes cell attachment but is incapable of stimulating Nck-dependent actin assembly, colonized colonic epithelia less efficiently than wild type, a defect that was associated with an absence of intestinal or renal inflammation. Notably, expression of the Tir Y471F mutant was specifically associated with a sixteen-fold lower risk of lethality. These findings suggest that this model recapitulates both the unique mode of epithelial colonization and Stx-mediated pathology.

What are the physiological roles of Tir-induced pedestal formation?

While Tir and intimin are essential virulence factors needed for colonization and disease, the physiological role of Tir-mediated actin polymerization is not well defined. However, a number of infection models have shown that while the Tir:Nck and Tir:IRSTKS/IRSp53:TccP/EspFU pathways are not needed for A/E lesion formation, they promote efficient colonization and *in vivo* fitness of the pathogen. Firstly, EPEC and EHEC have been observed to undergo two-dimensional actin-based motility on the cell

surface, a process that could promote the spread of daughter cells and the formation on

the epithelium surface of large aggregates, which have been associated with pedestal

formation in infected piglets. Secondly, in conjunction with other effectors, Tir impacts

the integrity of tight junctions and focal adhesions, thus affecting cell exfoliation. Thirdly,

Tir-induced disruption of tight junctions might contribute to diarrhea and/or translocation

of Stx across the gut epithelium, consistent with the association of pedestal formation

with toxin-mediated renal disease in the *C. rodentium* (Stx2dact) model. Finally, although

EPEC is considered an extracellular pathogen, a minority of EPEC strains express EspT,

which activates Rac1 and promotes bacterial entry into epithelial cells via the ‘trigger’

mechanism (Bulgin *et al.*, 2009). Following invasion, these strains reside within *E. coli*

containing vacuoles (ECV); localization of Tir to the ECV membrane was shown to

induce actin polymerization around it that was needed for intracellular bacterial

replication. Therefore Tir-induced actin polymerization is essential for infection by the

small clade of invasive EPEC.

An additional possible function of the actin pedestal is the formation of a localized

signaling hub that coordinates bacterial modulation of host cell functions. Indeed,

multiple host proteins (e.g. cortactin, talin ezrin, annexin) as well as T3SS effectors (e.g.

Map, EspH, EspF) are recruited to the pedestal structure and it is possible that within the

pedestals these components are organized in a specific architecture that allows a special

and temporal control of effector functions (Munera *et al.*, 2013).

Taken together, the emerging data on Tir-induced actin polymerization suggest that while

actin pedestal formation may not be required for generating A/E lesions, these pathways

have major roles in virulence and pathogenesis, which likely is responsible for their

475 widespread preservation among diverse strains and the existence of redundant
476 mechanisms in clinical isolates.
477 
478 Acknowledgments
479 JML and YL were supported by NIH Grant R01AI046454; IR by a grant from the Israel
480 Science Foundation and GF by grants from the MRC, BBSRC and the Wellcome Trust.

References

Aitio, O., Hellman, M., Kazlauskas, A., Vingadassalom, D.F., Leong, J.M., Saksela, K., and Permi, P. (2010) Recognition of tandem PxxP motifs as a unique Src homology 3-binding mode triggers pathogen-driven actin assembly. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA* 107: 21743–21748.

Aitio, O., Hellman, M., Skehan, B., Kesti, T., Leong, J.M., Saksela, K., and Permi, P. (2012) Enterohaemorrhagic *Escherichia coli* exploits a tryptophan switch to hijack host f-actin assembly. *Structure* 20:1692–1703.

Antón, I.M., Lu, W., Mayer, B.J., Ramesh, N., and Geha, R.S. (1998) The Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome protein-interacting protein (WIP) binds to the adaptor protein Nck. *J Biol Chem* 273: 20992–20995.

Bai, L., Schüller, S., Whale, A., Mousnier, A., Marches, O., Wang, L., et al. (2008) Enteropathogenic *Escherichia coli* O125:H6 triggers attaching and effacing lesions on human intestinal biopsy specimens independently of Nck and TccP/TccP2. *Infect Immun* 76: 361–368.

Berger, C.N., Crepin, V.F., Jepson, M. A., Arbeloa, A., and Frankel, G. (2009) The mechanisms used by enteropathogenic *Escherichia coli* to control filopodia dynamics. *Cell Microbiol* 11: 309–322.

Brady, M.J., Campellone, K.G., Ghildiyal, M., and Leong, J.M. (2007) Enterohaemorrhagic and enteropathogenic *Escherichia coli* Tir proteins trigger a common Nck-independent actin assembly pathway. *Cell Microbiol* 9: 2242–2253.

Bray, J. (1945) Isolation of antigenically homogeneous strains of *Bact. coli neopolitanum* from summer diarrhoea of infants. *J Pathol Bacteriol* 57: 239–247.

Buday, L., Wunderlich, L., and Tamás, P. (2002) The Nck family of adapter proteins: regulators of actin cytoskeleton. *Cell Signal* 14: 723–731.

Bulgin, R.R., Arbeloa, A., Chung, J.C.S., and Frankel, G. (2009) EspT triggers formation of lamellipodia and membrane ruffles through activation of Rac-1 and Cdc42. *Cell Microbiol* 11: 217–229.

Campellone, K.G., Giese, A., Tipper, D.J., and Leong, J.M. (2002) A tyrosine-phosphorylated 12-amino-acid sequence of enteropathogenic *Escherichia coli* Tir binds the host adaptor protein Nck and is required for Nck localization to actin pedestals. *Mol Microbiol* 43: 1227–1241.

Campellone, K.G., Rankin, S., Pawson, T., Kirschner, M.W., Tipper, D.J., and Leong, J.M. (2004a) Clustering of Nck by a 12-residue Tir phosphopeptide is sufficient to trigger localized actin assembly. *J Cell Biol* 164: 407–416.

Campellone, K.G., Robbins, D., and Leong, J.M. (2004b) EspF<sub>U</sub> is a translocated EHEC effector that interacts with Tir and N-WASP and promotes Nck-independent actin assembly. *Dev Cell* 7: 217–228.

Campellone, K.G. and Leong, J.M. (2005) Nck-independent actin assembly is mediated by two phosphorylated tyrosines within enteropathogenic *Escherichia coli* Tir. *Mol Microbiol* 56: 416–432.

Campellone, K.G., Brady, M.J., Alamares, J.G., Rowe, D.C., Skehan, B.M., Tipper, D.J., and Leong, J.M. (2006) Enterohaemorrhagic *Escherichia coli* Tir requires a C-terminal

12-residue peptide to initiate EspF-mediated actin assembly and harbours N-terminal
sequences that influence pedestal length. Cell Microbiol 8: 1488–1503.

Campellone, K.G., Cheng, H.-C., Robbins, D., Siripala, A.D., McGhie, E.J., Hayward,
R.D., *et al.* (2008) Repetitive N-WASP-binding elements of the enterohemorrhagic
Escherichia coli effector EspF(U) synergistically activate actin assembly. PLoS Pathog 4:
e1000191.

Cheng, H.-C., Skehan, B.M., Campellone, K.G., Leong, J.M., and Rosen, M.K. (2008)
Structural mechanism of WASP activation by the enterohaemorrhagic *E. coli* effector
EspF(U). Nature 454: 1009–1013.

Clements, A., Young, J., Constantinou, K., and Frankel, G. (2012) Infection strategies of
enteric pathogenic Escherichia coli. Gut Microbes 3: 71–87.

Crepin, V.F., Girard, F., Schüller, S., Phillips, A.D., Mousnier, A., and Frankel, G. (2010)
Dissecting the role of the Tir:Nck and Tir:IRTKS/IRSp53 signalling pathways in vivo.
Mol Microbiol 75: 308–323.

Dean, P., Young, L., Quitard, S., and Kenny, B. (2013) Insights into the pathogenesis of
enteropathogenic *E. coli* using an improved intestinal enterocyte model. PloS One 8:
e55284.

Deibel, C., Krämer, S., Chakraborty, T., and Ebel, F. (1998) EspE, a novel secreted
protein of attaching and effacing bacteria, is directly translocated into infected host cells,
where is appears as a phosphorylated 90 kDa protein. Mol Microbiol 28: 463-474.

Deng, W., Vallance, B.A., Li, Y., Puente, J.L., and Finlay, B.B. (2003) Citrobacter
rodentium translocated intimin receptor (Tir) is an essential virulence factor needed for

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

546 actin condensation, intestinal colonization and colonic hyperplasia in mice. Mol
547 Microbiol 48: 95–115.
548 Devinney, R., Stein, M., Reinscheid, D., Abe, A., Ruschkowski, S., and Finlay, B.B.
549 (1999) Enterohemorrhagic *Escherichia coli* O157:H7 produces Tir, which is
550 translocated to the host cell membrane but is not tyrosine phosphorylated. Infect Immun
551 67: 2389–2398.
552 Devinney, R., Puente, J.L., Gauthier, A., Goosney, D., and Finlay, B.B. (2001)
553 Enterohaemorrhagic and enteropathogenic *Escherichia coli* use a different Tir-based
554 mechanism for pedestal formation. Mol Microbiol 41: 1445–1458.
555 Disanza, A., Mantoani, S., Hertzog, M., Gerboth, S., Frittoli, E., Steffen, A., et al. (2006)
556 Regulation of cell shape by Cdc42 is mediated by the synergic actin-bundling activity of
557 the Eps8-IRSp53 complex. Nat Cell Biol 8: 1337–1347.
558 Dong, N., Liu, L., and Shao, F. (2010) A bacterial effector targets host DH-PH domain
559 RhoGEFs and antagonizes macrophage phagocytosis. EMBO J 29: 1363–1376.
560 Donnenberg, M., Calderwood, S.B., Donohue-Rolfe, A., Keusch, G.T., and Kaper, J.B.
561 (1990) Construction and analysis of TnphoA mutants of enteropathogenic *Escherichia*
562 *coli* unable to invade HEp-2 Cells. Infect Immun 58: 1565–1571.
563 Donnenberg, M.S., Tzipori, S., McKee, M.L., O’Brien, A.D., Alroy, J., and Kaper, J.B.
564 (1993a) The role of the *eae* gene of enterohemorrhagic *Escherichia coli* in intimate
565 attachment in vitro and in a porcine model. J Clin Invest 92: 1418–1424.

Donnenberg, M., Tacket, C., James, S., Genevieve, L., Nataro, J.P., Wasserman, S., *et al.* (1993b) Role of the *eaeA* gene in experimental enteropathogenic *Escherichia coli* infection. *J Clin Invest* 92: 1412–1417.

Frank, C., Werber, D., Cramer, J., Asker, M., Faber, M., an der Heiden, M., *et al.* (2011) Epidemic profile of shiga-toxin-producing *Escherichia coli* O104:H4 Outbreak in Germany. *N Engl J Med* 365: 1771–1780.

Frankel, G., Candy, D.C., Fabiani, E., Abu-Bobie, J., Gil, S., Novokava, M., *et al.* (1995) Molecular characterization of a carboxy-terminal eukaryotic-cell-binding domain of intimin from enteropathogenic *Escherichia coli*. *Infect Immun* 63: 4323–4328.

Funato, Y., Terabayashi, T., Suenaga, N., Seiki, M., Takenawa, T., and Miki, H. (2004) IRSp53/Eps8 complex is important for positive regulation of Rac and cancer cell motility/invasiveness. *Cancer Res* 64: 5237–5244.

Garber, J.J., Takeshima, F., Antón, I.M., Oyoshi, M.K., Lyubimova, A., Kapoor, A., *et al.* (2012) Enteropathogenic *Escherichia coli* and vaccinia virus do not require the family of WASP-interacting proteins for pathogen-induced actin assembly. *Infect Immun* 80: 4071–4077.

Garmendia, J., Phillips, A.D., Carlier, M.-F., Chong, Y., Schüller, S., Marches, O., *et al.* (2004) TccP is an enterohaemorrhagic *Escherichia coli* O157:H7 type III effector protein that couples Tir to the actin-cytoskeleton. *Cell Microbiol* 6: 1167–1183.

Garmendia, J., Ren, Z., Tennant, S., Viera, M.A., Chong, Y., Whale, A., *et al.* (2005) Distribution of tccP in clinical enterohemorrhagic and enteropathogenic *Escherichia coli* Isolates. *J Clin Invest* 43: 5715–5720.

Garmendia, J., Carlier, M.-F., Egile, C., Didry, D., and Frankel, G. (2006) Characterization of TccP-mediated N-WASP activation during enterohaemorrhagic Escherichia coli infection. Cell Microbiol 8: 1444–1455.

Girard, F., Batisson, I., Frankel, G., Harel, J., and Fairbrother, J.M. (2005) Interaction of enteropathogenic and shiga toxin-producing Escherichia coli and porcine intestinal mucosa: role of intimin and Tir in adherence. Infect Immun 73: 6005–6016.

Girard, F., Dziva, F., Stevens, M.P., and Frankel, G. (2009) Interactions of typical and atypical enteropathogenic Escherichia coli strains with the calf intestinal mucosa ex vivo. App Environ Microbiol 75: 5991–5995.

Girón, J.A., Ho, A.S.Y., and Schoolnik, G.K. (1991) An inducible bundle-forming pilus of enteropathogenic Escherichia coli. Science 254: 710-713.

Golan, L., Gonen, E., Yagel, S., Rosenshine, I., and Shpigler, N.Y. (2011) Enterohemorrhagic Escherichia coli induce attaching and effacing lesions and hemorrhagic colitis in human and bovine intestinal xenograft models. Disease Model Mech 4: 86–94.

Goosney, D.L., Gruenheid, S., and Finlay, B.B. (2000) Gut feelings: enteropathogenic E. coli (EPEC) interactions with the host. Ann Rev Cell Dev Biol 16: 173–189.

de Groot, J.C., Schlüter, K., Carius, Y., Quedenau, C., Vingadassalom, D., Faix, J., et al. (2011) Structural basis for complex formation between human IRSp53 and the translocated intimin receptor Tir of enterohemorrhagic E. coli. Structure 19: 1294–1306.

Gruenheid, S., DeVinney, R., Bladt, F., Goosney, D., Gelkop, S., Gish, G.D., *et al.* (2001) Enteropathogenic *E. coli* Tir binds Nck to initiate actin pedestal formation in host cells. *Nat Cell Biol* 3: 856–859.

Hamburger, Z.A., Brown, M.S., Isberg, R.R., and Bjorkman, P.J. (1999) Crystal structure of invasin: a bacterial integrin-binding protein. *Science* 286: 291–295.

Hayward, R.D., Hume, P.J., Humphreys, D., Phillips, N., Smith, K., and Koronakis, V. (2009) Clustering transfers the translocated *Escherichia coli* receptor into lipid rafts to stimulate reversible activation of c-Fyn. *Cell Microbiol* 11: 433–441.

Huang, Z., Sutton, S.E., Wallenfang, A.J., Orchard, R.C., Wu, X., Feng, Y., Chai, J., and Alto, N.M. (2009) Structural insights into host GTPase isoform selection by a family of bacterial GEF mimics. *Nat Struct Mol Biol* 16: 853-860.

Iguchi, A., Thomson, N.R., Ogura, Y., Saunders, D., Ooka, T., Henderson, I.R., *et al.* (2009) Complete genome sequence and comparative genome analysis of enteropathogenic *Escherichia coli* O127:H6 strain E2348/69. *J Bacteriol* 191: 347–354.

Isberg, R.R. and Falkow, S. (1985) A single genetic locus encoded by *Yersinia pseudotuberculosis* permits invasion of cultured animal cells by *Escherichia coli* K-12. *Nature* 317: 262–264.

Isberg, R.R. and Leong, J.M. (1990) Multiple beta 1 chain integrins are receptors for invasin, a protein that promotes bacterial penetration into mammalian cells. *Cell* 60: 861–871.

Jarvis, K.G., Girón, J.A., Jerse, A.E., McDaniel, T.K., Donnenberg, M.S., and Kaper, J.B. (1995) Enteropathogenic *Escherichia coli* contains a putative type III secretion system

necessary for the export of proteins involved in attaching and effacing lesion formation.

Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 92: 7996–8000.

Jerse, A.E. and Kaper, J.B. (1991) The *eae* gene of enteropathogenic *Escherichia coli*

encodes a 94-kilodalton membrane protein, the expression of which is influenced by the

EAF plasmid. *Infect Immun* 59: 4302–4309.

Kenny, B., DeVinney, R., Stein, M., Reinscheid, D.J., Frey, E.A., and Finlay, B.B. (1997)

Enteropathogenic *E. coli* (EPEC) transfers its receptor for intimate adherence into

mammalian cells. *Cell* 91: 511–520.

Kenny, B. (1999) Phosphorylation of tyrosine 474 of the enteropathogenic *Escherichia*

coli (EPEC) Tir receptor molecule is essential for actin nucleating activity and is

preceded by additional host modifications. *Mol Microbiol* 31: 1229–1241.

Kenny, B. (2001) The enterohaemorrhagic *Escherichia coli* (serotype O157:H7) Tir

molecule is not functionally interchangeable for its enteropathogenic *E. coli* (serotype

O127:H6) homologue. *Cell Microbiol* 3: 499–510.

Knutton, S., Lloyd, D., and McNeish, A. (1987) Adhesion of enteropathogenic

*Escherichia coli* to human intestinal enterocytes and cultured human intestinal mucosa.

*Infect Immun* 55: 69–77.

Knutton, S., Baldwin, T., Williams, P.H., and McNeish, A.S. (1989) Actin accumulation

at sites of bacterial adhesion to tissue culture cells: basis of a new diagnostic test for

enteropathogenic and enterohemorrhagic *Escherichia coli*. *Infect Immun* 57: 1290-1298.

Luo, Y., Frey, E.A., Pfuetzner, R.A., Creagh, A.L., Knoechel, D.G., Haynes, C.A., *et al.* (2000) Crystal structure of enteropathogenic *Escherichia coli* intimin-receptor complex. Nature 405: 1073–1077.

Mallick, E., McBee, M., Vanguri, V.K., Melton-Celsa, A.R., Schlieper, K., Karalius, B.J., *et al.* (2012) A novel murine infection model for Shiga toxin – producing *Escherichia coli*. J Clin Invest 122: 51–53.

Manges, A.R. and Johnson, J.R. (2012) Food-borne origins of *Escherichia coli* causing extraintestinal infections. Clinical infectious diseases: an official publication of the Infect Dis Soc Am 55: 712–719.

Marchès, O., Nougayrède, J., Mainil, J., Charlier, G., Raymond, I., Pohl, P., *et al.* (2000) Role of Tir and intimin in the virulence of rabbit enteropathogenic *Escherichia coli* serotype O103:H2. Infect Immun 68: 2171–2182.

McDaniel, T.K., Jarvis, K.G., Donnenberg, M.S., and Kaper, J.B. (1995) A genetic locus of enterocyte effacement conserved among diverse enterobacterial pathogens. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 92: 1664–1668.

McGraw, E.A., Li, J., Selander, R.K., and Whittam, T.S. (1999) Molecular evolution and mosaic structure of alpha, beta, and gamma intimins of pathogenic *Escherichia coli*. Mol Biol Evolution 16: 12–22.

Miki, H. and Takenawa, T. (2003) Regulation of actin dynamics by WASP family proteins. J Biochem 134: 309–313.

Miyamoto, Y., Iimura, M., Kaper, J.B., Torres, A.G., and Kagnoff, M.F. (2006) Role of Shiga toxin versus H7 flagellin in enterohaemorrhagic *Escherichia coli* signalling of human colon epithelium *in vivo*. Cell Microbiol 8: 869–879.

Moon, H.W., Whipp, S.C., Argenzio, R.A., and Giannella, R.A. (1983) Attaching and effacing activities of rabbit and human enteropathogenic *Escherichia coli* in pig and rabbit intestines. Infect Immun 41: 1340–1351.

Moreau, V., Frischknecht, F., Reckmann, I., Vincentelli, R., Rabut, G., Stewart, D., and Way, M. (2000) A complex of N-WASP and WIP integrates signalling cascades that lead to actin polymerization. Nat Cell Biol 2: 441–448.

Mundy, R., MacDonald, T.T., Dougan, G., Frankel, G., and Wiles, S. (2005) *Citrobacter rodentium* of mice and man. Cell Microbiol 7: 1697-1706.

Munera, D., Martinez, E., Mahajan, A., Ayala-Sanmartin, J., Frankel, G. (2012) Recruitment and membrane interactions of host cell proteins during attachment of enteropathogenic and enterohemorrhagic *Escherichia coli*. Biochem J 445: 383-392.

Nataro, J.P. and Kaper, J.B. (1998) Diarrheagenic *Escherichia coli*. Clin Microbiol Rev 11: 142-201.

Naylor, S.W., Roe, A.J., Nart, P., Spears, K., Smith, D.G.E., Low, J.C., and Gally, D.L. (2005) *Escherichia coli* O157:H7 forms attaching and effacing lesions at the terminal rectum of cattle and colonization requires the LEE4 operon. Microbiology 151: 2773–2781.

Ogura, Y., Ooka, T., Whale, A., Gar mendia, J., Beutin, L., Tennant, S., et al. (2007) TccP2 of O157:H7 and non-O157 enterohemorrhagic *Escherichia coli* (EHEC):

692 challenging the dogma of EHEC-induced actin polymerization. Infect Immun 75: 604–
693 612.
694 Ooka, T., Vieira, M.A.M., Ogura, Y., Beutin, L., La Ragione, R., Van Diemen, P.M., et
695 al. (2007) Characterization of tccP2 carried by atypical enteropathogenic Escherichia coli.
696 FEMS Microbiol Lett 271: 126–135.
697 Phillips, A., Navabpour, S., Hicks, S., Dougan, G., Wallis, T., and Frankel, G. (2000)
698 Enterohaemorrhagic Escherichia coli O157:H7 target Peyer's patches in humans and
699 cause attaching/effacing lesions in both human and bovine intestine. Gut 47: 377–381.
700 Riley, L.W., Remis, R.S., Helgerson, S.D., McGee, H.B., Wells, J.G., Davis, B.R., et al.
701 (1983) Hemorrhagic colitis associated with a rare Escherichia serotype. N Engl J Med
702 308: 681–685.
703 Ritchie, J. and Waldor, M. (2005) The locus of enterocyte effacement-encoded effector
704 proteins all promote enterohemorrhagic Escherichia coli pathogenicity in infant rabbits.
705 Infect Immun 73: 1466–1474.
706 Ritchie, J.M., Brady, M.J., Riley, K.N., Ho, T.D., Campellone, K.G., Herman, I.M., et al.
707 (2008) EspF<sub>U</sub>, a type III-translocated effector of actin assembly, fosters epithelial
708 association and late-stage intestinal colonization by E. coli O157:H7. Cell Microbiol 10:
709 836–847.
710 Robins-Browne, R. (1987) Traditional enteropathogenic Escherichia coli of infantile
711 diarrhea. Rev Infect Dis 9: 28-53.

Robins-Brown, R., Tokhi, A., Adams, L.M., and Bennett-Wood, V. (1994) Host specificity of enteropathogenic *Escherichia coli* from rabbits: lack of correlation between adherence in vitro and pathogenicity for laboratory animals. *Infect Immun* 62: 3329–3336.

Rohde, H., Qin, J., Cui, Y., Li, D., Lomen, N.J., Hentschke, M., Chen, W., et al. (2011) Open-source genomic analysis of shiga-toxin-producing *E. coli* O104:H4. *N Engl J Med* 365: 718–724.

Rosenshine, I., Donnenberg, M., Kaper, J.B., and Finlay, B.B. (1992) Signal transduction between enteropathogenic *Escherichia coli* (EPEC) and epithelial cells: EPEC induces tyrosine phosphorylation of host cell proteins to initiate cytoskeletal rearrangement and bacterial uptake. *EMBO J* 11: 3551–3560.

Rosenshine, I., Ruschkowski, S., Stein, M., Reinscheid, D.J., Mills, S.D., and Finlay, B.B. (1996) A pathogenic bacterium triggers epithelial signals to form a functional bacterial receptor that mediates actin pseudopod formation. *EMBO J* 15: 2613–2624.

Ross, N. and Miller, B. (2007) Characterization of the binding surface of the translocated intimin receptor, an essential protein for EPEC and EHEC cell adhesion. *Prot Science* 16: 2677–2683.

Sallee, N.A., Rivera, G.M., Dueber, J.E., Vasilescu, D., Mullins, R.D., Mayer, B.J., and Lim, W. (2008) The pathogen protein EspF(U) hijacks actin polymerization using mimicry and multivalency. *Nature* 454: 1005–1008.

Shaw, R., Cleary, J., Murphy, M.S., Frankel, G., and Knutton, S. (2005) Interaction of enteropathogenic *Escherichia coli* with human intestinal mucosa: role of effector proteins

in brush border remodeling and formation of attaching and effacing lesions. *Infect Immun* 73: 1243–1251.

Snapper, S.B. and Rosen, F.S. (1999) The Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome protein (WASP): roles in signaling and cytoskeletal organization. *Ann Rev Imm* 17: 905–929.

Swimm, A., Bommarius, B., Reeves, P., Sherman, M., and Kalman, D. (2004) Complex kinase requirements for EPEC pedestal formation. *Nat Cell Biol* 6: 795–796.

Tobe, T., Beatson, S.A., Taniguchi, H., Abe, H., Bailey, C.M., Fivian, A., *et al.* (2006) An extensive repertoire of type III secretion effectors in *Escherichia coli* O157 and the role of lambdoid phages in their dissemination. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA* 103: 14941–14946.

Touzé, T., Hayward, R.D., Eswaran, J., Leong, J.M., and Koronakis, V. (2003) Self-association of EPEC intimin mediated by the β-barrel-containing anchor domain: a role in clustering of the Tir receptor. *Mol Microbiol* 51: 73–87.

Trabulsi, L.R., Keller, R., and Gomes, T.A.T. (2002) Typical and atypical enteropathogenic *Escherichia coli*. *Em Infect Dis* 8: 508–513.

Tzipori, S., Robins-Browne, R.M., Gonis, G., Hayes, J., Withers, M., and McCartney, E. (1985) Enteropathogenic *Escherichia coli* enteritis: evaluation of the gnotobiotic piglet as a model of human infection. *Gut* 26: 570–578.

Vingadassalom, D., Kazlauskas, A., Skehan, B., Cheng, H.-C., Magoun, L., Robbins, D., *et al.* (2009) Insulin receptor tyrosine kinase substrate links the E. coli O157:H7 actin assembly effectors Tir and EspF(U) during pedestal formation. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA* 106: 6754–6759.

Vingadassalom, D., Campellone, K.G., Brady, M.J., Skehan, B., Battle, S.E., Robbins, D., et al. (2010) Enterohemorrhagic *E. coli* requires N-WASP for efficient type III translocation but not for EspF<sub>U</sub>-mediated actin pedestal formation. *PLoS Pathog* 6: e1001056.

Vlisidou, I., Dziva, F., Ragione, R.L., Best, A., Gar mendia, J., Hawes, P., et al. (2006) Role of intimin-Tir interactions and the Tir-cytoskeleton coupling protein in the colonization of calves and lambs by *Escherichia coli* O157:H7. *Infect and Immun* 74: 758–764.

Weiss, S.M., Ladwein, M., Schmidt, D., Ehinger, J., Lommel, S., Städing, K., et al. (2009) IRSp53 links the enterohemorrhagic *E. coli* effectors Tir and EspF<sub>U</sub> for actin pedestal formation. *Cell Host Microbe* 5: 244–528.

Whale, A.D., Gar mendia, J., Gomes, T.A., and Frankel, G. (2006) A novel category of enteropathogenic *Escherichia coli* simultaneously utilizes the Nck and TccP pathways to induce actin remodelling. *Cell Microbiol* 8: 999–1008.

Whale, A.D., Hernandez, R.T., Ooka, T., Beutin, L., Schüller, S., Gar mendia, J., et al. (2007) TccP2-mediated subversion of actin dynamics by EPEC 2 - a distinct evolutionary lineage of enteropathogenic *Escherichia coli*. *Microbiology* 153: 1743–1755.

Wong, A.R.C., Clements, A., Raymond, B., Crepin, V.F., and Frankel, G. (2012a) The interplay between the *Escherichia coli* Rho guanine nucleotide exchange factor effectors and the mammalian RhoGEF inhibitor. *mBio* 3: e00250–11.

Wong, A.R.C., Pearson, J.S., Bright, M.D., Munera, D., Robinson, K.S., Lee, S.F., Frankel, G., and Hartland, E.L. (2011) Enteropathogenic and enterohaemorrhagic Escherichia coli: even more subversive elements. Mol Microbiol 80: 219-230.

Wong, A.R.C., Raymond, B., Collins, J.W., Crepin, V.F., and Frankel, G. (2012b) The enteropathogenic *E. coli* effector EspH promotes actin pedestal formation and elongation via WASP-interacting protein (WIP). Cell Microbiol 14: 1051–1070.

Yu, J. and Kaper, J.B. (1992) Cloning and characterization of the *eae* gene of enterohaemorrhagic Escherichia coli O157:H7. Mol Microbiol 6: 411–417.

Zhao, H., Pykäläinen, A., and Lappalainen, P. (2011) I-BAR domain proteins: linking actin and plasma membrane dynamics. Curr Opin Cell Biol 23: 14–21.

Figure legends

Figure 1.
Actin pedestals as visualized by transmission electron microscopy appear as electron dense protrusions beneath intimately attached bacteria (A). By immunofluorescence microscopy, actin pedestals can be visualized with phalloidin-conjugated fluorophores. EHEC (blue; DAPI stained) induces actin pedestals on infected HeLa cells (B) and HCT8 intestinal cells (C) stained with Alexa-488 conjugated phalloidin (green). White arrowheads point to typical actin pedestals for these cell types. Tir stained with Alexa-568 (red) colocalizes with actin at the tips of actin pedestals, forming yellow foci beneath intimately adhered bacteria.

Figure 2.
EPEC1 and EHEC use different mechanisms of Tir-activated signaling cascades that converge on common host actin nucleation factors, N-WASP and Arp2/3 to form actin pedestals. The major EPEC1 actin pedestal pathway requires phosphorylation of the critical Tir residue Y474, which recruits Nck (pathway 1). Nck can activate N-WASP directly or through WIP. The major EHEC actin pedestal pathway requires Tir residues NPY458 and the EHEC effector EspFᵤ/TccP (pathway 2). EspFᵤ/TccP is linked to Tir via host adaptors IRTKS and IRSp53 and activates N-WASP. Minor EPEC actin assembly pathways utilize Tir residues Y474 or Y454 to initiate Nck-independent activation of N-WASP (pathways a and b). A minor actin assembly pathway for EHEC utilizes EspFᵤ but does not require N-WASP for Arp2/3 activation (pathway c).

Figure 3

EPEC2 and non-O157 EHEC can use the major pathways of both typical EPEC1 and EHEC O157 to generate actin pedestals. Tir in these strains contain both an Y474 equivalent, which initiates actin assembly through Nck (pathway 1), and an NPY458 equivalent, which initiates actin assembly through IRTKS/IRSp53 and an EspF<sub>U</sub>/TccP homologue, TccP2/EspF<sub>M</sub> (pathway 2).

cmi_12179_fl.tif

EPEC1
EHEC O157:H7
Intimin
Tir
Y474
Y474
NPY458
Nck
SH3 SH3 SH3 SH2
WIP
Pro WBD
WH1 GBD PRD
VCA
Inactive
N-WASP
a
b
SH3 IMD SH3
IRTKS/IRS p53
H P H P
EspFᵤ/TccP
Inactive
N-WASP
WH1 GBD PRD
VCA
Active N-WASP
WH1 GBD PRD
VCA
Arp2/3
Complex
Polymerized
Actin
Host
cmi_12179_f2.pdf

EPEC2  
& non-O157 EHEC  

Intimin  

Tir  

Y  
474  

NPY  
454  

Nck  

SH3/SH3/SH3/SH2  

WIP  

Pro WBD  

WH1 GBD PRD  

VCA  

Inactive  
N-WASP  

Active N-WASP  

WH1 GBD PRD  

VCA  

Arp2/3  

Complex  

Polymerized  
Actin  

IRTKS/IRS p53  

H P H P  
TccP2/EspF_M  

Inactive  
N-WASP  

WH1 GBD PRD  

VCA  

cmi_12179_f3.pdf
