
Beiträge zum Themenschwerpunkt

Z Gerontol Geriat 2013 · 46:613–622  
DOI 10.1007/s00391-013-0543-3  
Received: 6 June 2013  
Accepted: 14 July 2013  
Published online: 24 August 2013  
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2013  

B. Bartling  
Klinik und Poliklinik für Herz- und Thoraxchirurgie, Universitätsklinikum Halle (Saale) AöR  

# Cellular senescence in normal and premature lung aging  

Aging is a natural process characterized by a progressive functional impairment and reduced capacity of organs and tissues to respond adaptively to environmental factors. Cellular senescence, apoptotic cell death, oxidative/carbonyl stress, protein modifications, and altered gene/protein expressions have been suggested to contribute to aging and age-associated diseases. Here, I review the identification of senescent cells in lung and their potential importance in normal lung aging as well as premature lung aging as observed in chronic respiratory diseases.

## Aging and respiratory diseases

In addition to age-related changes of the thoracic cage and immune system, aging of lung tissue essentially contributes to the post-maturation decline in the respiratory function [1]. Lung tissue of old individuals is characterized by an enlargement of the alveoli and an increased diameter of alveolar ducts/sacs and higher-order respiratory bronchioles (i.e., distal duct ectasia). The alveolar walls are thicker, which might result from the cumulative deposition of basement membrane material due to the lifelong cell turnover. Qualitative changes of elastin and collagen cause reduced elasticity of bronchial and alveolar walls. Moreover, the density of lung capillaries per alveolus is reduced. These structural changes of lung parenchyma and small airways are the reason for numerous physiological changes with higher age, such as increased residual and closing volume, impaired pulmonary gas exchange, and reduced lung elastic recoil. Air flow and vital capacity of the lung are usually determined in pulmonary function tests to assess respiratory capacity, which decreases progressively after maturation. This progressive decline starts already at about 20 years of age for women and 25 years for men, and it is accelerated by chronic exposure to cigarette smoke [2]. Despite the relevance of other noxious environmental substances to pulmonary dysfunction, such as pollutants emitted from incineration plants and particulate matters, cigarette smoke is the major risk factor for the development of respiratory diseases and lung cancer [3, 4]. In Germany, more than 110,000 persons die annually from respiratory diseases, lung cancer, and diseases of the pulmonary circulation [5]. The age-dependent analysis of causes of death demonstrates that among all causes of death the death rate due to lung cancer reaches its maximum when the persons are between 60 and 70 years old, whereas the relative mortality due to pulmonary heart diseases is less affected by age (Fig. 1a). In contrast, the death rate due to respiratory diseases steadily increases with higher age (Fig. 1a) but a subgroup analysis shows that, similar to lung cancer, the death rate due to chronic respiratory diseases also reaches its maximum when the persons are around 65 years old (Fig. 1a). This analogy is well explainable by the high prevalence of lung cancer in patients suffering from chronic respiratory diseases [6]. Although the statistical data indicate that people who reach old age are less susceptible to chronic respiratory diseases, mortality due to pneumonia induced either by pathogens or fluid/solid substances increases steadily (Fig. 1b). In particular, a decline in the immune function might be a major factor for this age-dependent increase in pneumonia and, thus, pneumonia-mediated death [7]. Waning immunity with increasing age is highly associated with the senescence of immune cells, which are characterized by the shortening length of the telomeres of linear chromosomes, called telomeres [8]. Smoking cigarettes significantly enhances age-related shortening of telomeres in immune cells [9, 10].

## Markers of cellular senescence

Telomere length is an appropriate indicator for the senescence of immune cells because immune cells replicate more often than most other cell types throughout life. Since telomerase, which normally maintains the telomeres, is less active in somatic cells, telomere shortening results finally in the uncapping of telomeres and, consequently, irreversible growth arrest [11]. In addition to telomere shortening/uncapping as a specific form of DNA damage, other forms of DNA damage are characteristic for a senescent cell phenotype. This includes DNA damage following sublethal exposure to various types of radiation, oxidants/free radicals or highly reactive chemical compounds (genotoxic stress), and DNA damage following per-

Beiträge zum Themenschwerpunkt

cell cycle arrest also triggers cell death by apoptosis, cellular senescence and apoptosis occur simultaneously (Fig. 2). The increase in both cellular senescence and apoptosis is suggested to play an essential role in lung aging and the development of age-related respiratory diseases, whereas the age-related increase in lung cancer also results from the replication of damaged cells which were incorrectly repaired (Fig. 2). However, this is not specific for the lung but rather common for all aging organs and tissues. Especially the epithelial cells in organs and tissues are more often subjected to DNA damage and subsequent DDR activation than other cell types because of their relatively high exposure to environmental factors that can cause DNA damage. This fact also explains the high prevalence of epithelial types of cancer (carcinomas) with increasing age [5].

The detection of DDR compounds is commonly used to identify senescent cells in organs and tissues because some other senescence-associated (SA) cell characteristics, such as irreversible growth arrest and SA cell morphology, are hardly detectable in situ. As presented in Fig. 3, DDR activation triggers both cell cycle arrest and induction of the DNA repair mechanism depending on the cell cycle phase in which the damage occurred [16, 17]. Both processes are mediated by activation of the ataxia telangiectasia-mutated (ATM) kinase, ATM- and Rad-3-related (ATR) kinase and DNA-dependent protein kinase (DNA-PK). Cellular senescence is mainly associated with an irreversible arrest in the G1 cell cycle phase, in which down-stream activation of ATM/ATR kinase substrates plays a central role. Among these substrates are the checkpoint kinases (Chk) 1 and 2, and the transcription factor p53. Activation of p53 stimulates the gene expression of several targets, including the cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK) inhibitor p21<sup>Cip1</sup> and other factors blocking CDKs (e.g., GADD45, 14-3-3), but also apoptosis-inducing factors. p21<sup>Cip1</sup> inhibits CDK4/6 and CDK2 which causes an accumulation of the retinoblastoma protein (pRb), a regulator of the transcription factor E2F, in its unphosphorylated form in which pRb activates E2F. Finally, the expression of E2F

manent growth stimulation (oncogenic stress) [12]. Genotoxic stress often damages both strands of the DNA, but it can also cause telomere shortening due to the higher susceptibility of the GC-rich telomere sequence to oxidative damage [13].

Cellular senescence by a critical number of cell replications (replicative senescence), or by genotoxic or oncogenic stress (stress-induced premature senescence-like phenotype [SIPS]) is mediated

by a cellular process called the DNA damage response (DDR) pathway [14, 15, 16]. Although this cellular pathway does not necessarily trigger irreversible cell cycle arrest but the reversible arrest allowing DNA repair, cellular senescence results from DDR activation when DNA damage cannot be repaired (Fig. 2). That means cellular senescence is a permanently maintained DDR state, mainly in the G1 cell cycle phase. Because the irreversible

Fig. 1 ▲ Age-dependent death for selected lung diseases **a** relative to all death causes and **b** relative to death due to all respiratory diseases (1998–2011 according to ICD-10). (Adapted from [5])

Zeitschrift für Gerontologie und Geriatrie 7 · 2013

Hier steht eine Anzeige.

♞ Springer

target genes mediates the cell cycle arrest. Cell cycle arrest via p53/p21<sup>Cip1</sup> can be stabilized by another pathway via p16<sup>Ink4a</sup>, which is often induced in response to oncogenic stress [18]. Moreover, Chkl/2 activation by ATM/ATR kinases can stabilize cell cycle arrest. Among all these factors involved in DDR, the activation of ATM/ATR kinases and Chkl/2 as well as the increased expression level of p53, p21<sup>Cip1</sup>, p16<sup>Ink4a</sup> and pRb were frequently used to identify senescent cells in lung tissue (□ Tab. 1 and □ Tab. 2). Moreover, senescent lung cells are characterized by activation (phosphorylation) of the p53-binding protein 1 (53BP1), which occurs upstream of Chkl/2 activation [19, 20]. Besides the activation of compounds of the DDR pathways, compounds of other signalling pathways have been detected in senescent lung cells. This includes the activation of mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) p38 [21, 22], Src kinase [23], or nuclear factor-κB(NF-κB) [24].

Permanent DDR activation in senescent cells causes the stable formation of heterochromatin foci, which are commonly called senescence-associated heterochromatin foci (SAHF; or senescence-associated damage foci [SDF]). Classical SAHF are well detectable with DNA fluorescent dyes in senescent cells in vitro, but its precise detection in situ is rather difficult [25]. Therefore, SAHF in lung tissues or isolated lung cells are identified by detection of distinct proteins enriched in SAHF [22, 24, 25, 26, 27]. Among these marker proteins are the histone variant H2A.X phosphorylated at serine-139 (γH2AX) and the histone variant macro H2A (mH2A). The presence of active DDR compounds in SAHF (e.g., 53BP1 and Chkl/2) emphasizes the interplay of DDR activation in SAHF formation [28].

Besides telomere uncapping and SAHF formation as important SA nuclear changes, senescence of lung cells in situ or in vitro has been characterized by acid β-galactosidase activity (□ Tab. 1 and □ Tab. 2) and other cytoplasmic changes, such as lipofuscin accumulation [29], higher lysosomal content [21, 30, 31, 32], and increased proteosomal degradation of proteins [33, 34, 35]. Moreover, senescent lung cells release more inflammatory cytokines, among which are the interleu-

### Abstract · Zusammenfassung

Z Gerontol Geriat 2013 · 46:613–622 DOI 10.1007/s00391-013-0543-3 © Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2013

#### B. Bartling

##### Cellular senescence in normal and premature lung aging

**Abstract**

The incidence of chronic respiratory diseases (e.g., chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, COPD) and interstitial lung diseases (e.g., pneumonia and lung fibrosis) increases with age. In addition to immune senescence, the accumulation of senescent cells directly in lung tissue might play a critical role in the increased prevalence of these pulmonary diseases. In the last couple of years, detailed studies have identified the presence of senescent cells in the aging lung and in diseased lungs of patients with COPD and lung fibrosis. Cellular senescence has been shown for epithelial cells of bronchi and alveoli as well as mesenchymal and vascular cells.

**Keywords**

Cellular senescence · Lung · Aging · Pulmonary disease · Smoking

---

##### Zelluläre Seneszenz bei normaler und verfrühter Lungenalterung

**Zusammenfassung**

Chronische Atemwegserkrankungen, insbesondere die chronisch obstruktive Lungenerkrankung (COPD), sowie interstitielle Lungenerkrankungen wie die Pneumonie und die Lungenfibrose nehmen mit dem Alter deutlich zu. Dabei könnte neben der Immunseneszenz auch das vermehrte Auftreten von seneszenten Zellen direkt in der Lunge eine wichtige Rolle spielen. In den letzten Jahren wiesen detaillierte Studien seneszente Zellen in der alten Lunge und in der erkrankten Lunge von Patienten mit COPD oder Lungenfibrose nach. Neben den epithelialen Zellen von Bronchien und Alveolen waren von der Seneszenz auch Bindegewebszellen und Gefäßzellen betroffen. Mithilfe experimenteller Studien wurden bekannte Risikofaktoren von Atemwegserkrankungen (Zigarettenrauch, Luftverschmutzung, bakterielle Infektionen etc.) als mögliche Auslöser der zellulären Seneszenz identifiziert. Die Erkenntnisse weisen auf die Bedeutung der zellulären Seneszenz bei der normalen Lungenalterung hin, aber auch bei der verfrühten Alterung der Lunge bei Patienten mit COPD, Lungenfibrose oder möglicherweise anderen Atemwegserkrankungen.

**Schlüsselwörter**

Zelluläre Seneszenz · Lunge · Altern · Lungenerkrankungen · Rauchen

---

for idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis [41, 42]. These findings emphasize the importance of the aging immune system in the development of respiratory diseases. However, they do not indicate the potential importance of the senescence of resident lung cells in the structural changes of lung parenchyma and small airways associated with normal aging and age-related lung diseases.

##### Senescence in aging lung and age-related respiratory diseases

Population studies investigating telomere length in peripheral leukocytes indicated a direct relationship between immune senescence and the extent of pulmonary dysfunction in patients with chronic respiratory disease [10, 38, 39, 40] or the risk

Oncogenic stress | Telomere shortening | dsDNA breaks
--- | --- | ---
DNA DAMAGES IN LUNG

ACTIVATION OF CELL CYCLE CHECKPOINTS
↓
CELL CYCLE ARREST
↓
SENESCENCE | APOPTOSIS
↓
LUNG AGING
RESPIRATORY DISEASES

dsDNA REPAIR
↓
NHEJ | HR
↓
INCORRECT | CORRECT
↓
MUTATIONS & CHROMOSOMAL ABERRATIONS | CELL CYCLE PROGRESSION
↓
LUNG CANCER

Fig. 2 ▲ Simplified presentation of the fate of lung epithelial cells after DNA damage and its contribution to aging and cancer of the lung but also other organs rich in epithelial cells

hTERT ← c-Myc
↓
Oncogenic stress | Telomere shortening | dsDNA breaks
↓ ROS
DNA DAMAGES (recognition by sensor proteins)

G1/S phase | S/G2 phase
HR REPAIR | NHEJ REPAIR | HR REPAIR
↑ ↑ ↑ ↑ ↑ ↑
ATM P | ATR P | DNA-PK P | ATM P | ATR P
↓ ↓ ↓ ↓ ↓ ↓
Chk2 P | Chk1 P | Chk2 P
↓ ↓ ↓ ↓ ↓ ↓
Ets-1 P | p53 P | p19ARF | MDM2 P | Cdc25A C P
↓ ↓ ↓ ↓ ↓ ↓
p16Ink4a | p21Cip1 | GADD45 | 14-3-3 | CDK1 | Cyclin B1
↓ ↓ ↓ ↓ ↓ ↓
CDK4/6 | CDK2 | Cyclin E
↓ ↓ ↓ ↓ ↓ ↓
Cyclin D | pRb P | pRb | pRb
↓ ↓ ↓ ↓ ↓ ↓
E2F | E2F | E2F
↓ ↓ ↓ ↓ ↓ ↓
G1 phase | G1/S phase | intra S phase | G2/M phase
↓ ↓ ↓ ↓ ↓ ↓
SENESCENCE

Fig. 3 ▼ DNA damage triggers the activation of cell cycle checkpoints by transducer proteins (ATM, ATR, DNA-PK) and effector proteins (e.g., Chk2, p53), which leads to an arrest of the cell cycle at the G1/S, intra-S, or G2/M phase. DNA damage can be repaired by non-homologues end-joining (NHEJ) or homologue recombination (HR) during cell cycle arrest. Telomere shortening can be repaired by telomerase with its catalytic subunit hTERT. Cellular senescence is mainly associated with an irreversible arrest in the G1 cell cycle phase. Therefore, selected proteins of the DNA damage response are used for detecting cellular senescence (e.g., ATM, p21Cip1, pRb)

Beiträge zum Themenschwerpunkt

### Abbreviations

| 53BP1 | p53-binding protein-1 |
| --- | --- |
| ATM | ataxia telangiectasia-mutated |
| ATR | ATM-and Rad-3-related kinase |
| CDC | cell division cycle |
| CDK | cyclin-dependent kinase |
| Chk | checkpoint kinase |
| COPD | chronic obstructive pulmonary disease |
| CKI | cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor |
| DDR | DNA damage response |
| DNA-PK | DNA-dependent protein kinase |
| ds | double stand |
| GADD45 | growth arrest and DNA damage 45 |
| HR | homologue recombination |
| hTERT | telomerase catalytic subunit |
| IPF | idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis |
| ICD-10 | international statistical classification of diseases and related health problems, version 10 |
| IL | interleukin |
| MAPK | mitogen-activated protein kinase |
| MCP-1 | monocyte chemotactic protein-1 |
| mTOR | mammalian target of rapamycin |
| NAD | nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide |
| NHEJ | non-homologue end-joining |
| NF-kB | nuclear factor k-light-chain-enhancer of activated B-cells |
| P | phosphorylated |
| p16Ink4a | protein 16 (CKI2A) |
| p19Arf | protein 19 (CKI2A) |
| p21Cip1/Waf1 | protein 21 (cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor protein 1A) |
| p53 | protein 53 |
| pRb | retinoblastoma susceptibility protein |
| SA | senescence-associated |
| SAHF | senescence-associated heterochromatin foci |
| SAM | senescence accelerated mouse |
| SIRT | sirtuin (silent mating type information regulation) |
| Src | Swiss raid commando |

deficient mice, which showed more pronounced damage of the lung in response to cigarette smoke than normal mice [20, 48]. Moreover, in vitro studies identified a senescence-inducing effect of bacterial toxins (Tab. 2). These findings also proposed the importance of cellular senescence in pneumonia, but in situ studies investigating cellular senescence in the pneumonic lung are still lacking.

The accumulation of senescent cells is accompanied by an increase in apoptotic cell death (Fig. 2). Therefore, it is well conceivable that both cell fates together cause the irreversible damage and, finally, loss of the alveolar walls in the emphysematous lung of COPD patients. Moreover, senescence of vascular cells in COPD could contribute to the pulmonary hypertension frequently observed in COPD patients (Tab. 1). In most studies, cellular senescence was identified by detection of DDR compounds indicating substantial DNA damage as the primary cause of the cellular senescence (Tab. 1 and Tab. 2). The contribution of DNA damage to the senescence of lung cells was also shown experimentally using mutagenic bromodeoxyuridine in vitro and in vivo (Tab. 2). Moreover, oxidative damage of DNA and other cell structures by chronic hyperoxia caused cellular senescence (Tab. 2). The fact that hyperoxia finally leads to alveolar hypoplasia [49] again emphasizes the relationship between cellular senescence and structural changes of the lung. In addition to compounds of the DDR pathway, several other characteristics of cellular senescence were detected in response to genotoxic/oxidative stress, in particular acid β-galactosidase activity (Tab. 2).

Fibroblasts play an important role in the maintenance of the alveolar structure in the lung because of their essential contribution to the matrix generation. Thus, senescence of fibroblasts might play a role in the pathogenesis of COPD [33, 43, 50]. However, a senescent phenotype has also been detected in IPF [51, 52], which is characterized by an excess of alveolar matrix generation by fibroblasts. The cause of lung fibrosis is not clear in IPF, but viral infections and other injuries to the lung are believed to cause fibrosis [53]. Epithelial cell injury and apoptosis are recognized

spiratory diseases [46]. Moreover, idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) is associated with an increased accumulation of senescent cells in the lung as shown for fibroblasts and bronchial epithelial cells (Tab. 1). This observation also suggests accelerated aging of the lung in IPF [47].

### Cause of cellular senescence in lung

Long-term exposure of the lung to environmental substances causing moderate genotoxic stress (e.g., oxidants and highly reactive chemical compounds/carbonyls in cigarette smoke and air pollutants) contributes to development and progression of COPD. Experimental studies showed that these substances can also mediate cellular senescence in vitro and in vivo (Tab. 2), again indicating the involvement of cellular senescence in the development of COPD. The impaired autophagy of damaged cellular components due to their chemical reaction with oxidants/carbonyls seems to play a critical role in the senescence induction [35]. The senescence-mediated effect of cigarette smoke or air pollutants might be enhanced by higher age and bacterial infections, which often occur in COPD patients due to the increased susceptibility of the lung to infections and the waning immune system. This assumption was confirmed by means of the senescence-accelerated mouse (SAM) model and telomerase-

Tab. 1 Detection of senescent cells in lung

| Model (species) | SA phenotype detection | Location | DDR<sup>a</sup> | SAHF<sup>b</sup> | β-Gal<sup>c</sup> | Others<sup>d</sup> | Ref. |
|-----------------|-----------------------|----------|---------------|----------------|----------------|----------------|------|
| Human          | Aging                | Lung tissue homogenate | X               | X              | X              |      | [27] |
| Mouse          | Aging                | Lung tissue homogenate | X               | X              |                |      | [27] |
| Mouse          | Aging                | Alveolar tissue in situ |                 | X              |                |      | [25] |
| Mouse          | Aging                | Alveolar tissue in situ |                 | X              |                |      | [26] |
| Human          | Allografts           | Small airway epithelial cells in situ |             | X              |                |      | [44] |
| Human          | COPD                 | Isolated alveolar epithelial cells in vitro |            |                | X              |      | [34] |
| Human          | COPD                 | Pulmonary vascular endothelial cells in situ | X           | X              | X              |      | [36] |
|                |                      | Isolated pulmonary vascular endothelial cells in vitro |         |                |                |      |      |
| Human          | COPD                 | Alveolar epithelial cells in situ | X           | X              | X              |      | [24] |
|                |                      | Alveolar endothelial cells in situ |            |                |                |      |      |
| Human          | COPD                 | Isolated pulmonary vascular smooth muscle cells in vitro | X       | X              |                |      | [63] |
| Human          | Emphysema            | Isolated lung fibroblasts in vitro |            | X              | X              |      | [43, 50] |
| Human          | Emphysema            | Isolated lung fibroblasts in vitro |            |                | X              |      | [33] |
| Human          | Emphysema            | Alveolar epithelial cells type II in situ | X        |                | X              |      | [64, 65] |
|                |                      | Alveolar endothelial cells in situ |            |                |                |      |      |
| Human          | IPF                  | Alveolar epithelial cells type II in situ | X        |                |                |      | [41] |
| Human          | IPF                  | Lung fibroblasts in situ |                |                | X              |      | [51] |
| Human          | IPF                  | Bronchial epithelial cells in situ | X         | X              | X              |      | [37] |
| Human          | IPF                  | Lung tissue in situ | X               |                |                |      | [52] |

Detection of <sup>a</sup> compounds of the DNA damage response (DDR); <sup>b</sup> senescence-associated heterochromatin foci (SAHF); <sup>c</sup> acid β-galactosidase activity (β-Gal); or <sup>d</sup> other SA phenotypes.

Beiträge zum Themenschwerpunkt

Tab. 2 Experimental models indicating cellular senescence of lung cells

| Mechanism               | SA phenotype detection                                                                 | Location                                                                                          | Ref. |
|-------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------|
|                         | DDR<sup>a</sup>                                                                        | SAHF<sup>b</sup>                                                                                    | β-Gal<sup>c</sup> | Others<sup>d</sup> |
| Accelerated aging       |                                                                                       |                                                                                                   |      |              |
| SAM model               | Mouse lung tissue homogenate                                                          | X                                                                                                 |      | [66]          |
| Telomerase deficiency   | Mouse lung tissue in situ                                                             | X                                                                                                 | X    | [20]          |
| Bacterial toxins        |                                                                                       |                                                                                                   |      |              |
| Lipopolysaccharide      | Human alveolar epithelial cell line (A549) in vitro                                     | X                                                                                                 | X    | [30]          |
| Pseudomonas aeruginosa- | Human alveolar epithelial cell line (A549) in vitro                                     | X                                                                                                 | X    | [21, 31]      |
| pyocyanin               | Human lung fibroblasts in vitro                                                       |                                                                                                   |      |              |
| Genotoxic stress        |                                                                                       |                                                                                                   |      |              |
| Air pollutants          | Rat alveolar type II-like cells (RLE-6TN) in vitro                                      | X                                                                                                 | X    | [23]          |
|                         | Human alveolar type II-like cells (A549) in vitro                                      | X                                                                                                 | X    | [19]          |
| Bleomycin               | Human alveolar type II-like cells (A549) in vitro                                      | X                                                                                                 | X    | [32]          |
|                         | Primary rat alveolar type II-like cells in vitro                                       |                                                                                                   |      |              |
|                         | Human alveolar type II-like cells (A549) in vitro                                      | X                                                                                                 | X    | [27]          |
|                         | Human alveolar type II-like cells (A549) in vitro                                      | X                                                                                                 | X    | [54]          |
|                         | Mouse alveolar tissue in situ                                                         | X                                                                                                 |      | [32]          |
|                         | Mouse alveolar type II-like cells (MLE-15) in vitro                                    | X                                                                                                 | X    | [57]          |
|                         | Isolated alveolar epithelial cells from treated mice                                   |                                                                                                   |      |              |
|                         | Mouse lung tissue in situ                                                             | X                                                                                                 |      | [56]          |
| Bromodeoxyuridine       | Mouse Clara cells in situ                                                             | X                                                                                                 | X    | X             | [22]          |
|                         | Human Clara-like cells (NCI-H441) in vitro                                             |                                                                                                   |      |              |
| Cigarette smoke extracts/condensates | Human bronchial epithelial cells in vitro                                  | X                                                                                                 | X    | [34, 35]      |
|                         | Human alveolar type II-like cells (A549) in vitro                                      | X                                                                                                 | X    | [67, 68, 69]  |
|                         | Human bronchial epithelial cells in vitro                                             |                                                                                                   |      |              |
|                         | Human tracheobronchial epithelial cells in vitro                                       | X                                                                                                 |      | [33]          |
|                         | Human lung fibroblasts in vitro                                                       |                                                                                                   |      |              |
| Smoking                 | Mouse alveolar epithelial cells in situ                                               | X                                                                                                 | X    | X             | [29]          |
|                         | Mouse lung tissue in situ                                                            | X                                                                                                 | X    | [20]          |
| Others                  |                                                                                       |                                                                                                   |      |              |
| Hyperoxia               | Human fibroblasts from adult lung in vitro                                            | X                                                                                                 | X    | [70]          |
|                         | Mouse lung tissue homogenate                                                         | X                                                                                                 |      | [49]          |
| TGF-β1                  | Human bronchial epithelial cells in vitro                                              | X                                                                                                 | X    | X             | [37]          |

Detection of <sup>a</sup> compounds of the DNA damage response (DDR); <sup>b</sup> senescence-associated heterochromatin foci (SAHF); <sup>c</sup> acid β-galactosidase activity (β-Gal); or <sup>d</sup> other SA phenotypes.

activity could delay the aging process in COPD [62]. However, blocking cellular senescence also increases the probability of damaged and misdirected cells to survive and proliferate again, thereby increasing the risk for lung cancer and probably lung fibrosis. Therefore, future research should be directed towards the development of agents that notably affect the course of COPD without increasing the risk for cancer.

Practical conclusion

- Senescence of lung cells occurs in aging lung of human and mouse.
- Senescence of lung cells also occurs in age-related respiratory diseases, particularly COPD and lung fibrosis,

Corresponding address

PD Dr. B. Bartling  
Klinik und Poliklinik für Herz- und Thoraxchirurgie, Universitätsklinikum Halle (Saale) AöR Ernst-Grube-Str. 40,  
06120 Halle (Saale)  
Germany  
babett.bartling@uk-halle.de  

Compliance with ethical guidelines

Conflict of interest. B. Bartling states that there are no conflicts of interests.

The accompanying manuscript does not include studies on humans or animals.

References

1. Taylor NAS (2011) Pulmonary function in aging humans. In: Masoro EJ, Austad, SN (eds) Handbook of the biology of aging. Elsevier, Academic Press, pp 421–446
2. Kerstjens HA, Rijcken B, Schouten JP et al (1997) Decline of FEV₁ by age and smoking status: facts, figures, and fallacies. Thorax 52:820–827
3. Sint T, Donohue JF, Ghio AJ (2008) Ambient air pollution particles and the acute exacerbation of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Inhal Toxicol 20:25–29
4. Milara J, Cortijo J (2012) Tobacco, inflammation, and respiratory tract cancer. Curr Pharm Des 18:3901–3938
5. Statistisches Bundesamt, Zweigstelle Bonn (eds) (2011) Sterbefälle ab 1998. Gesundheitsberichterstattung des Bundes. http://www.gbe-bund.de. Accessed: 12 August 2013
6. Decramer M, Janssens W, Miravitlles M (2012) Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Lancet 379:1341–1351
7. Meyer KC (2010) The role of immunity and inflammation in lung senescence and susceptibility to infection in the elderly. Semin Respir Crit Care Med 31:561–574
8. Aubert G, Lansdorp PM (2008) Telomeres and aging. Physiol Rev 88:557–579
9. Morla M, Busquets X, Pons J et al (2006) Telomere shortening in smokers with and without COPD. Eur Respir J 27:525–528
10. Lee J, Sandford AJ, Connett JE et al (2012) The relationship between telomere length and mortality in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). PLoS One 7:e35567
11. Baur JA, Zou Y, Shay JW et al (2001) Telomere position effect in human cells. Science 292:2075–2077
12. Mallette FA, Ferbeyre G (2007) The DNA damage signaling pathway connects oncogenic stress to cellular senescence. Cell Cycle 6:1831–1836
13. Toussaint O, Remacle J, Dierick JF et al (2002) From the Hayflick mosaic to the mosaics of ageing. Role of stress-induced premature senescence in human ageing. Int J Biochem Cell Biol 34:1415–1429
14. Gorbunova V, Seluanov A (2005) Making ends meet in old age: DSB repair and aging. Mech Aging Dev 126:621–628
15. Zglinicki Tvon, Saretzki G, Ladhoff J et al (2005) Human cell senescence as a DNA damage response. Mech Ageing Dev 126:111–117
16. Yang J, Yu Y, Hamrick HE et al (2003) ATM, ATR and DNA-PK: initiators of the cellular genotoxic stress responses. Carcinogenesis 24:1571–1580
17. Houtgraaf JH, Versmissen J, Giessen WJ van der (2006) A concise review of DNA damage checkpoints and repair in mammalian cells. Cardiovasc Revasc Med 7:165–172
18. Lin AW, Barradas M, Stone JC et al (1998) Premature senescence involving p53 and p16 is activated in response to constitutive MEK/MAPK mitogenic signaling. Genes Dev 12:3008–3019
19. Sanchez-Perez Y, Chirino YI, Osornio-Vargas AR et al (2009) DNA damage response of A549 cells treated with particulate matter (PM10) of urban air pollutants. Cancer Lett 278:192–200
20. Alder JK, Guo N, Kembou F et al (2011) Telomere length is a determinant of emphysema susceptibility. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 184:904–912
21. Muller M, Li Z, Maitz PK (2009) Pseudomonas pyocyanin inhibits wound repair by inducing premature cellular senescence: role for p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase. Burns 35:500–508
22. Zhou F, Onizawa S, Nagai A et al (2011) Epithelial cell senescence impairs repair process and exacerbates inflammation after airway injury. Respir Res 12:78
23. Buchner N, Ale-Agha N, Jakob Set al (2013) Unhealthy diet and ultrafine carbon black particles induce senescence and disease associated phenotypic changes. Exp Gerontol 48:8–16
24. Aoshiba K, Zhou F, Tsuji T et al (2012) DNA damage as a molecular link in the pathogenesis of COPD in smokers. Eur Respir J 39:1368–1376
25. Kreiling JA, Tamamori-Adachi M, Sexton AN et al (2011) Age-associated increase in heterochromatic marks in murine and primate tissues. Aging Cell 10:292–304
26. Wang C, Jurk D, Maddick Met al (2009) DNA damage response and cellular senescence in tissues of aging mice. Aging Cell 8:311–323
27. Shivshankar P, Boyd AR, Le Saux CJ et al (2011) Cellular senescence increases expression of bacterial ligands in the lungs and is positively correlated with increased susceptibility to pneumococcal pneumonia. Aging Cell 10:798–806
28. d'Addadi Fagagna F, Reaper PM, Clay-Farrace Let al (2003) A DNA damage checkpoint response in telomere-initiated senescence. Nature 426:194–198

Beiträge zum Themenschwerpunkt

29. Tsuji T, Aoshiba K, Nagai A (2004) Cigarette smoke induces senescence in alveolar epithelial cells. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol 31:643–649  
30. Kim CO, Huh AJ, Han SH et al (2012) Analysis of cellular senescence induced by lipopolysaccharide in pulmonary alveolar epithelial cells. Arch Gerontol Geriatr 54:e35–e41  
31. Muller M (2006) Premature cellular senescence induced by pyocyanin, a redox-active Pseudomonas aeruginosa toxin. Free Radic Biol Med 41:1670–1677  
32. Aoshiba K, Tsuji T, Nagai A (2003) Bleomycin induces cellular senescence in alveolar epithelial cells. Eur Respir J 22:436–443  
33. Nyunoya T, Monick MM, Klingelhutz AL et al (2009) Cigarette smoke induces cellular senescence via Werner's syndrome protein down-regulation. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 179:279–287  
34. Hara H, Araya J, Takasaka N et al (2012) Involvement of creatine kinase B in cigarette smoke-induced bronchial epithelial cell senescence. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol 46:306–312  
35. Fujii S, Hara H, Araya J et al (2012) Insufficient autophagy promotes bronchial epithelial cell senescence in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Oncoimmunology 1:630–641  
36. Amsellem V, Gary-Bobo G, Marcos E et al (2011) Telomere dysfunction causes sustained inflammation in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 184:1358–1366  
37. Minagawa S, Araya J, Numata T et al (2011) Accelerated epithelial cell senescence in IPF and the inhibitory role of SIRT6 in TGF-beta-induced senescence of human bronchial epithelial cells. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 300:L391–L401  
38. Savale L, Chaouat A, Bastuji-Garin S et al (2009) Shortened telomeres in circulating leukocytes of patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 179:566–571  
39. Houben JM, Mercken EM, Ketelslegers HB et al (2009) Telomere shortening in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Respir Med 103:230–236  
40. Mui TS, Man JM, McElhaney JE et al (2009) Telomere length and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: evidence of accelerated aging. J Am Geriatr Soc 57:2372–2374  
41. Alder JK, Chen JJ, Lancaster L et al (2008) Short telomeres are a risk factor for idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 105:13051–13056  
42. Cronkhite JT, Xing C, Raghu G et al (2008) Telomere shortening in familial and sporadic pulmonary fibrosis. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 178:729–737  
43. Holz O, Zuhlke I, Jaksztat E et al (2004) Lung fibroblasts from patients with emphysema show a reduced proliferation rate in culture. Eur Respir J 24:575–579  
44. Parker SM, Goriwec MR, Borthwick LA et al (2008) Airway epithelial cell senescence in the lung allograft. Am J Transplant 8:1544–1549  
45. Fukuchi Y (2009) The aging lung and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: similarity and difference. Proc Am Thorac Soc 6:570–572  
46. Ito K, Barnes PJ (2009) COPD as a disease of accelerated lung aging. Chest 135:173–180  
47. Faner R, Rojas M, Macnee W et al (2012) Abnormal lung aging in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 186:306–313  
48. Kasagi S, Seyama K, Mori H et al (2006) Tomato juice prevents senescence-accelerated mouse P1 strain from developing emphysema induced by chronic exposure to tobacco smoke. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 290:L396–L404  

49. Londhe VA, Sundar IK, Lopez B et al (2011) Hypoxia impairs alveolar formation and induces senescence through decreased histone deacetylase activity and up-regulation of p21 in neonatal mouse lung. Pediatr Res 69:371–377  
50. Müller KC, Welker L, Paasch K et al (2006) Lung fibroblasts from patients with emphysema show markers of senescence in vitro. Respir Res 7:32  
51. Waisberg DR, Parra ER, Barbas-Filho JV et al (2012) Increased fibroblast telomerase expression precedes myofibroblast alpha-smooth muscle actin expression in idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. Clinics (Sao Paulo) 67:1039–1046  
52. Diaz de Leon A, Cronkhite JT, Katzenstein AL et al (2010) Telomere lengths, pulmonary fibrosis and telomerase (TERT) mutations. PLoS One 5:e10680  
53. Naik PK, Moore BB (2011) Viral infection and aging as cofactors for the development of pulmonary fibrosis. Expert Rev Respir Med 4:759–771  
54. Linge A, Weinhold K, Blasche R et al (2007) Down-regulation of caveolin-1 affects bleomycin-induced growth arrest and cellular senescence in A549 cells. Int J Biochem Cell Biol 39:1964–1974  
55. Volonte D, Zhang K, Lisanti MP et al (2002) Expression of caveolin-1 induces premature cellular senescence in primary cultures of murine fibroblasts. Mol Biol Cell 13:2502–2517  
56. Shivshankar P, Brampton C, Miyasato S et al (2012) Caveolin-1 deficiency protects from pulmonary fibrosis by modulating epithelial cell senescence in mice. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol 47:28–34  
57. Fridlender ZG, Cohen PY, Golan O et al (2007) Telomerase activity in bleomycin-induced epithelial cell apoptosis and lung fibrosis. Eur Respir J 30:205–213  
58. Liu T, Chung MJ, Ullenbruch M et al (2007) Telomerase activity is required for bleomycin-induced pulmonary fibrosis in mice. J Clin Invest 117:3800–3809  
59. Collado M, Blasco MA, Serrano M (2007) Cellular senescence in cancer and aging. Cell 130:223–233  
60. Bartling B, Desole M, Silber RE et al (2007) Dicarboxyl-mediated protein modifications affect matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) activity. Z Gerontol Geriatr 40:357–361  
61. Bartling B, Rehbein G, Silber RE et al (2006) Senescent fibroblasts induce moderate stress in lung epithelial cells in vitro. Exp Gerontol 41:532–539  
62. Ito K, Colley T, Mercado N (2012) Geroprotectors as a novel therapeutic strategy for COPD, an accelerating aging disease. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis 7:641–652  
63. Noureddine H, Gary-Bobo G, Alifano M et al (2011) Pulmonary artery smooth muscle cell senescence is a pathogenic mechanism for pulmonary hypertension in chronic lung disease. Circ Res 109:543–553  
64. Tsuji T, Aoshiba K, Nagai A (2006) Alveolar cell senescence in patients with pulmonary emphysema. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 174:886–893  
65. Tsuji T, Aoshiba K, Nagai A (2010) Alveolar cell senescence exacerbates pulmonary inflammation in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Respiration 80:59–70  
66. Hosokawa M, Fujisawa H, Ax S et al (2000) Age-associated DNA damage is accelerated in the senescence-accelerated mice. Mech Ageing Dev 118:61–70  
67. Albino AP, Huang X, Jorgensen E et al (2004) Induction of H2AX phosphorylation in pulmonary cells by tobacco smoke: a new assay for carcinogens. Cell Cycle 3:1062–1068  

68. Tanaka T, Huang X, Jorgensen E et al (2007) ATM activation accompanies histone H2AX phosphorylation in A549 cells upon exposure to tobacco smoke. BMC Cell Biol 8:26  
69. Rammah M, Dandachi F, Salman R et al (2012) In vitro cytotoxicity and mutagenicity of mainstream waterpipe smoke and its functional consequences on alveolar type II derived cells. Toxicol Lett 211:220–231  
70. Klimova TA, Bell EL, Shroff EH et al (2009) Hyperoxia-induced premature senescence requires p53 and pRb, but not mitochondrial matrix ROS. FASEB J 23:783–794  

Kommentieren Sie diesen Beitrag auf springermedizin.de  
Geben Sie hierzu den Beitragstitel in die Suche ein und nutzen Sie anschließend die Kommentarfunktion am Beitragsende.
