
NEWS AND VIEWS

# IL-1 signaling in atherosclerosis: sibling rivalry

**Frederick J Sheedy & Kathryn J Moore**

Signaling via the interleukin 1 (IL-1) family, particularly by IL-1β, has long been linked to the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis. Findings that atherogenic fatty acids induce IL-1α to promote vascular inflammation identify a key role for this less-well-studied cytokine.

Atherosclerosis (the formation of macrophage- and lipid-rich plaques in the artery wall) results from a maladaptive immune response triggered by the accumulation of lipids, most notably cholesterol and its derivatives, in the subendothelial space of the artery¹. Studies of atherosclerotic plaques have identified myriad proinflammatory cytokines and chemokines that orchestrate atherosclerotic inflammation. Among those, cytokines of the interleukin 1 (IL-1) family have received particular emphasis because of their early identification in human atherosclerotic plaques and studies of mouse models of atherosclerosis suggesting causal roles for IL-1 signaling. Much focus has been placed on IL-1β, and a large clinical trial evaluating the effect of IL-1β inhibition on coronary artery disease is ongoing. However, in this issue of *Nature Immunology*, Freigang *et al.* identify unsaturated fatty acids as potent inducers of IL-1 signaling in atherosclerosis, which tips the balance in favor of IL-1α and brings this less-well-studied family member to center stage².

Deficiency in or delivery of an antagonist of the receptor for IL-1 (IL-1R) in mice unequivocally result in reductions in atherosclerosis³, yet the exact contributions of IL-1α and IL-1β, which both signal via IL-1R, remain unclear. IL-1α and IL-1β lack signal peptide and are first synthesized as precursor proteins whose release is regulated by noncanonical secretion mechanisms. The maturation of pro-IL-1β is regulated by inflammasomes (cytosolic macromolecular complexes triggered by both microbial ligands and sterile ligands, such as alum and uric acid crystals), which activate caspase-1 that in turn cleaves pro-IL-1β. The NLRP3 inflammasome has emerged as a key driver of the secretion of IL-1β from macrophages in many sterile inflammatory diseases, including Muckle-Wells syndrome, and atherosclerosis. Modified cholesterol species that accumulate in plaques, in particular oxidized low-density lipoprotein (LDL) and cholesterol crystals, have been identified as endogenous triggers of the NLRP3 inflammasome and secretion of IL-1β by plaque macrophages⁴⁻⁷. Hematopoietic compartment-specific deletion of NLRP3 or its adaptor ASC in mice deficient in the receptor for LDL (*Ldlr*⁻/⁻ mice), which have high concentrations of circulating LDL cholesterol and are susceptible to atherosclerosis, results in a 70% decrease in the formation of atherosclerotic plaques, with hematopoietic deficiency in both IL-1α and IL-1β giving similar results⁸. Interestingly, studies of whole-body deletion of IL-1β in another atherosclerotic model, the apolipoprotein E-deficient (*ApoE*⁻/⁻) mouse, have reported only a 30% decrease in atherosclerosis⁹⁻¹⁰. Although the reasons for the more deleterious phenotype observed after deletion of NLRP3 are not known, they may relate to the findings that IL-1α secretion can also be regulated by the NLRP3 inflammasome under certain conditions¹⁰ and that cholesterol crystals induce both IL-1α and IL-1β⁵.

Although IL-1α has often been overlooked, its role in atherosclerosis should not be discounted; deletion of IL-1α confers greater protection (60%) from atherosclerosis in *ApoE*⁻/⁻ mice than does deletion of IL-1β (30%)⁸. The study by Freigang *et al.* provides the mechanism for how IL-1α is induced in plaques and shows that this cytokine is a potent inducer of vascular inflammation². By screening the fatty acids present in mouse atherosclerotic plaques, the authors identify oleic acid as an abundant unsaturated fatty acid that accumulates with disease progression. Of note, *ApoE*⁻/⁻ mice fed a diet enriched in oleic acid are phenotypically similar to those fed a diet containing high concentration of cholesterol, in that they both have increased accumulation of lipids in macrophages, vascular inflammation and plaque formation; these results identify this fatty acid species as a potent atherogenic mediator. *In vitro*, oleic acid stimulates the production of IL-1α by macrophages primed with lipopolysaccharide (signal 1) but not by unprimed macrophages, which indicates a specific role for oleic acid in stimulating IL-1α secretion (signal 2) (Fig. 1). However, unlike cholesterol crystals, which elicit the secretion of both IL-1α and IL-1β from lipopolysaccharide-primed macrophages, oleic acid selectively stimulates the secretion of IL-1α. Consistent with other inducers of IL-1α secretion, oleic acid acts via a mechanism that requires both the oxidative stress-responsive transcription factor Nrf2 (ref. 5) and the calcium-sensitive cysteine protease calpain¹⁰; however, it does not require the inflammasome components NLRP3 or caspase-1 (ref. 2). Instead, oleic acid-induced secretion of IL-1α is linked to mitochondrial uncoupling, which results in a substantial calcium (Ca²⁺) flux in macrophages. These findings add to a growing body of literature suggesting key roles for intracellular Ca²⁺ fluxes and mitochondrial dysfunction in triggering signaling pathways of the innate immune system, including NLRP3.

In an intriguing twist, although both promote the secretion of IL-1α, oleic acid and the mitochondrial uncoupling agent FCCP (carbonyl cyanide-4-(trifluoromethoxy) phenylhydrazone) also potently repress the secretion

---

Frederick J. Sheedy is with the Institute of Molecular Medicine, Trinity College, St. James’ Hospital, Dublin, Ireland. Kathryn J. Moore is with the Marc and Ruti Bell Vascular Biology and Disease Program, Leon H. Charney Division of Cardiology, Department of Medicine, New York University School of Medicine, New York, New York, USA.  
e-mail: kathryn.moore@nyumc.org

NEWS AND VIEWS

in IL-1β reduce atherosclerosis in Apoe⁻/⁻ mice⁸,¹¹. Nevertheless, the data in aggregate strongly indicate a role for dietary unsaturated fatty acids, and oleic acid in particular, in stimulating the secretion of IL-1α from macrophages and promoting atherosclerosis.

Despite the new light that these data shed on the mechanism of IL-1α secretion in atherosclerosis, the results leave a few questions unanswered. One key gap is the identity of the stimulus or stimuli that provide(s) signal 1 for *Il1a* transcription in atherosclerosis. Freigang *et al.* prime macrophages with lipopolysaccharide², which is not a relevant stimulus in atherosclerosis. Indeed, the situation *in vivo* is probably complex, as macrophages in plaques may receive numerous signals simultaneously. A possibility not explored is that priming by endogenous cholesterol or other fatty acid species may ‘reprogram’ the macrophage and favor signal 2 for IL-1α or IL-1β by modulating Ca²⁺ fluxes, mitochondrial function or *Nlrp3* expression itself. One likely candidate for the endogenous signal 1 that can prime both *Il1a* and *Il1b* mRNA is oxidized LDL, which signals via the pattern-recognition receptor CD36 together with Toll-like receptor (TLR4) and TLR6. In support of that, targeted deletion of CD36, TLR4 or TLR6 in Apoe⁻/⁻ mice leads to decreased *Il1a* mRNA in plaques and a lower concentration of IL-1α in the serum⁷. Other potential regulators of signal 1 include saturated fatty acids, such as palmitic acid, which can activate the transcription factor NF-κB via TLR2 or TLR4. In addition to the identity of signal 1, how oleic acid engages intracellular pathways and is presented to intracellular organelles, such as the mitochondria, remains undetermined.

The individual contributions of IL-1α and IL-1β to atherogenesis may ultimately prove difficult to delineate. Studies have suggested roles for IL-1β in the secretion of IL-1α, and as shown by Freigang *et al.*, this has been recapitulated in certain lines of IL-1β-deficient mice but not in others². Determining the relationship between the secretion of IL-1β and that of IL-1α will require further experimentation; however, it is unlikely that IL-1β-mediated secretion of IL-1α can account for the finding that IL-1β is proatherosclerotic, as at least one study of Apoe⁻/⁻ mice has used an IL-1β-deficient mouse strain⁸ with intact IL-1α secretion *in vivo*¹². As can be inferred from that example, caution should be used to avoid overinterpreting the results of any single mouse atherosclerosis study. Differences in the mouse strains and diets used can vastly influence the outcome of atherosclerosis studies, and different phenotypes may be observed depending on the stage of the plaque (early or advanced) and the

Figure 1 Regulation of members of the IL-1 family in macrophages during atherosclerosis. The transcription and production of both pro-IL-1β and pro-IL-1α (priming; signal 1) is induced by NF-κB-activating stimuli such as oxidized forms of LDL (which signal through CD36-TLR4-TLR6) and saturated fatty acids (which can signal through TLR4). Signal 2, which activates the NLRP3 inflammasome for processing of mature IL-1β, is induced by cholesterol crystals taken up from the extracellular space or formed intracellularly through CD36-mediated uptake of oxidized LDL, and by the saturated fatty acid palmitate. Crystals trigger phagolysosomal damage, efflux of Ca²⁺ from the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and release of mitochondrial reactive oxygen species (ROS), three linked processes that result in the activation of NLRP3 and formation of caspase-1-activating inflammasomes through recruitment of the adaptor ASC. Signal 2 for the secretion of IL-1α is triggered by unsaturated fatty acids such as oleic acid, which uncouple mitochondrial respiration and trigger the release of Ca²⁺; that in turn activates calpain to cleave and secrete mature IL-1α. At the same time, fatty acid-induced mitochondrial uncoupling interferes with the NLRP3-activating signal 2 and limits the production of IL-1β.

of IL-1β from macrophages, which suggests that complete uncoupling of mitochondrial respiration inhibits the processing of IL-1β by the NLRP3 inflammasome². Thus, as oleic acid begins to accumulate in plaques, this may shift the balance of IL-1 secretion by macrophages from IL-1β to IL-1α. Freigang *et al.* speculate that IL-1α thus has a more dominant role in atherosclerosis². Indeed, a side-by-side comparison of *Ldlr⁻/⁻* mice made deficient in *Il1a* or *Il1b* in the hematopoietic compartment and fed a diet containing 0.5% cholesterol for 16 weeks shows a 50% smaller plaque size in the absence of IL-1α and a nonsignificant 25% smaller plaque size in the absence of IL-1β relative to that in wild-type mice². On the basis of those findings, the authors argue that IL-1α is the predominant IL-1 isoform that exacerbates atherosclerosis through signaling via IL-1R. However, that conclusion may be overstated, as the decrease in atherosclerosis in IL-1β-null chimeric *Ldlr⁻/⁻* mice is similar in magnitude to what has been reported for *Il1b⁻/⁻Apoe⁻/⁻* mice (33%), but this result may not have reached statistical significance because of the relatively small number of mice (*n* = 8) used in this study² (such studies typically require 10–15 mice). Moreover, that conclusion discounts other studies that support the proposal that IL-1β is involved in atherogenesis, including the demonstration that IL-1β-targeting monoclonal antibodies and bone marrow deficiency

NATURE IMMUNOLOGY VOLUME 14 NUMBER 10 OCTOBER 2013

NEWS AND VIEWS

arterial site. Indeed, this has been the case for several studies examining components of the IL-1 signaling cascade. For example, studies of *ApoE*⁻/⁻ mice deficient in NLRP3 or IL-1β fed a Western diet containing 1.25% cholesterol (a human diet contains ~0.05% cholesterol) have failed to recapitulate protective effects of those gene deficiencies observed in mice fed diets containing moderate amounts of cholesterol (0.15–0.3%)¹³,¹⁴. Additionally, although signaling via IL-1R accelerates early stages of atherosclerosis, studies have indicate that it has a protective role in advanced plaques¹⁵. Ultimately, the hope is that such studies of mice may inform the development of therapeutics for human atherosclerosis. Inhibition of IL-1R has shown efficacy in the treatment of several inflammatory disorders, and clinical trials of a monoclonal antibody to IL-1β (canakinumab) and of a recombinant antagonist of IL-1R (anakinra) that blocks both IL-1α and IL-1β are ongoing³. Given the results of the study by Freigang *et al.*, which so elegantly highlights how dietary metabolic stimuli can ‘hijack’ the inflammatory output of macrophages toward increased IL-1α and decreased IL-1β², total inhibition of IL-1 may prove most effective. In essence, this study adds to the growing body of literature that proves that in the inflammatory response to pathogens and endogenous danger molecules, ‘you really are what you eat.’

COMPETING FINANCIAL INTERESTS  
The authors declare no competing financial interests.

1. Hansson, G.K. & Hermansson, A. *Nat. Immunol.* **12**, 204–212 (2011).
2. Freigang, S. *et al.* *Nat. Immunol.* **14**, 1045–1053 (2013).
3. Qamar, A. & Rader, D.J. *Curr. Opin. Lipidol.* **23**, 548–553 (2012).
4. Duewell, P. *et al.* *Nature* **464**, 1357–1361 (2010).
5. Freigang, S. *et al.* *Eur. J. Immunol.* **41**, 2040–2051 (2011).
6. Rajamäki, K. *et al.* *PLoS ONE* **5**, e11765 (2010).
7. Sheedy, F.J. *et al.* *Nat. Immunol.* **14**, 812–820 (2013).
8. Kamari, Y. *et al.* *Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun.* **405**, 197–203 (2011).
9. Kirii, H. *et al.* *Arterioscler. Thromb. Vasc. Biol.* **23**, 656–660 (2003).
10. Yazdi, A.S. & Drexl, S.K. *Ann. Rheum. Dis.* **72** (suppl. 2), ii96–ii99 (2013).
11. Bhaskar, V. *et al.* *Atherosclerosis* **216**, 313–320 (2011).
12. Fantuzzi, G. *et al.* *J. Immunol.* **157**, 291–296 (1996).
13. Kamari, Y. *et al.* *Atherosclerosis* **195**, 31–38 (2007).
14. Menu, P. *et al.* *Cell Death Dis.* **2**, e137 (2011).
15. Alexander, M.R. *et al.* *J. Clin. Invest.* **122**, 70–79 (2012).

---

# GATA-3 controls self-renewal in stressed HSCs

Toshimi Yoshida & Katia Georgopoulos

The transcription factor GATA-3 is expressed in quiescent hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) with long-term repopulating ability. Stress-mediated activation of HSCs promotes localization of GATA-3 to the nucleus in a manner dependent on the mitogen-activated protein kinase p38α and restricts self-renewal.

P rimitive hematopoietic progenitor cells with self-renewing potential are responsible for the life-long regeneration of short-lived blood cells and cells of the immune system. During homeostasis, self-renewing hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) are mostly quiescent and enter the cell cycle once every 50–150 days (ref. 1). However, under stress conditions such as infection, acute trauma or accumulation of reactive oxygen species, a large fraction of HSCs rapidly enter the cell cycle and increase the production of various blood cells and/or cells of the immune system². Once the insult is over, HSCs quickly revert to the quiescent state. Repeated stress-induced proliferation has been shown to limit the lifespan of HSCs and deplete their long-term lineage-repopulating capacity³. HSCs have served as a paradigm for many somatic stem cell systems; however, the mechanisms that control the population expansion and differentiation of HSCs while maintaining their self-renewal under steady-state conditions versus stress-mediated conditions remain ill defined. In this issue of *Nature Immunology*, Frelin *et al.* provide new insight into this process by showing that the nuclear factor GATA-3 has a specific role in regulating self-renewal under conditions that promote the acute proliferative expansion of long-term HSCs (LT-HSCs)⁴.

First, the authors establish that GATA-3 is expressed exclusively in LT-HSCs, defined here by a lineage-repopulating capacity of more than 4 months (ref. 4). Both GATA-3 mRNA and GATA-3 protein are shown to be present at considerable abundance in a population enriched for LT-HSCs. Notably, the combination of a GATA-3-based fluorescent reporter (knocked into the *Gata3* locus) and the stem cell markers CD150 (SLAMF1)⁵ and CD49b (integrin α₂)⁶ can be used to purify LT-HSCs to functional homogeneity, which establishes GATA-3 expression as a valuable marker for LT-HSCs⁴. The exclusive expression of GATA-3 in LT-HSCs and not in intermediate-term HSCs (defined by a repopulating activity of 2–4 months) provides the first functional correlation between GATA-3 function and long-term self-renewal.

Although GATA-3 is expressed in LT-HSCs, the protein is present in the cytoplasm and therefore is probably functionally inactive (Fig. 1a). This indicates that the function of GATA-3 in the LT-HSC population must be activated in non-steady-state conditions. Indeed, induction of LT-HSC proliferation either *in vitro* (by cytokine stimulation) or *in vivo* (by induction with interferon) results in relocation of GATA-3 from the cytoplasm into the nucleus⁴. In both cases, the nuclear location of GATA-3 correlates with activation of the stress signaling pathway of the mitogen-activated protein kinase p38α⁴ (*Fig. 1a*). p38α has been linked to the limited self-renewal of HSCs activated by reactive oxygen species⁷. Notably, interference with p38α signaling through the use of specific inhibitors prevents the entry of GATA-3 into the nucleus, which confirms the functional connection of p38α and GATA-3 and provides a means with which to manipulate GATA-3 function in LT-HSCs⁴.

The authors describe an important negative correlation between the localization of GATA-3 to the nucleus and HSC self-renewal⁴. *In vivo*, expanding HSC populations with nuclear GATA-3 are capable of only short-term multilineage reconstitution. After the expansion-inducing signal is removed, GATA-3 localization reverts to the cytoplasm of HSCs and long-term lineage reconstitution is restored. This effect does not correlate with the cycling status of HSCs, as even quiescent HSCs with nuclear GATA-3 display limited lineage-repopulating ability.

Toshimi Yoshida and Katia Georgopoulos are in the Cutaneous Biology Research Center, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Charlestown, Massachusetts, USA.  
e-mail: katia.georgopoulos@cbrc2.mgh.harvard.edu
