
This article was downloaded by: [Michigan State University]
On: 08 February 2015, At: 13:53
Publisher: Taylor&Francis
Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number: 1072954 Registered office: Mortimer House,
37-41 Mortimer Street, London W1T 3JH, UK

JAK-STAT

Publication details, including instructions for authors and subscription information:
http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/kjks20

Regulation of proliferation, cell competition, and cellular growth by the Drosophila JAK-STAT pathway

Tamara Zoranovic<sup>a</sup>, Lydia Grmai<sup>a</sup>&Erika A Bach<sup>a</sup>

<sup>a</sup> Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Pharmacology; New York University School of Medicine; New York, NY USA

Published online: 17 Jun 2013.

To cite this article: Tamara Zoranovic, Lydia Grmai&Erika A Bach (2013) Regulation of proliferation, cell competition, and cellular growth by the Drosophila JAK-STAT pathway, JAK-STAT, 2:3, e25408, DOI: 10.4161/jkst.25408

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.4161/jkst.25408

PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE

Taylor&Francis makes every effort to ensure the accuracy of all the information (the “Content”) contained in the publications on our platform. Taylor&Francis, our agents, and our licensors make no representations or warranties whatsoever as to the accuracy, completeness, or suitability for any purpose of the Content. Versions of published Taylor&Francis and Routledge Open articles and Taylor&Francis and Routledge Open Select articles posted to institutional or subject repositories or any other third-party website are without warranty from Taylor&Francis of any kind, either expressed or implied, including, but not limited to, warranties of merchantability, fitness for a particular purpose, or non-infringement. Any opinions and views expressed in this article are the opinions and views of the authors, and are not the views of or endorsed by Taylor&Francis. The accuracy of the Content should not be relied upon and should be independently verified with primary sources of information. Taylor&Francis shall not be liable for any losses, actions, claims, proceedings, demands, costs, expenses, damages, and other liabilities whatsoever or howsoever caused arising directly or indirectly in connection with, in relation to or arising out of the use of the Content.

This article may be used for research, teaching, and private study purposes. Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://www.tandfonline.com/page/terms-and-conditions

It is essential that you check the license status of any given Open and Open Select article to confirm conditions of access and use.

JAK-STAT 2:3, e25408; July/August/September 2013; © 2013 Landes Bioscience

**Regulation of proliferation, cell competition, and cellular growth by the Drosophila JAK-STAT pathway**

Tamara Zoranovic, Lydia Grmai, and Erika A Bach*

Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Pharmacology; New York University School of Medicine; New York, NY USA

Keywords: *Drosophila*, JAK-STAT, Notch, PRC, JNK, Myc, Wingless, Hippo, proliferation

---

The JAK-STAT pathway is a key regulator of tissue size in *Drosophila melanogaster*. Here we provide an overview of its roles in processes that regulate the size of *Drosophila* imaginal discs, epithelia of diploid cells that proliferate and acquire specific fates in the larvae and that become functional in the adult. *Drosophila* has a single JAK and a single STAT gene, which has facilitated genetic dissection of this pathway. Moreover, the sophisticated genetic tools available in flies for clonal growth assays have made *Drosophila* an ideal organism in which to dissect the multiple roles of the JAK-STAT pathway in growth control. Studies in flies have revealed JAK-STAT pathway activity as a central node for diverse signals that control proliferation and mass accumulation. In addition, recent work has established a new role for the pathway in cell competition, a process thought to be akin to the early stages of transformation in which more robust cells kill and take the place of less robust ones.

---

**Background**

With only one JAK and one STAT, the Janus kinase/signal transducer and activator of transcription (JAK-STAT) pathway has lower complexity in the fruit fly *Drosophila melanogaster* than in mammals.¹ There are 3 interleukin-6 (IL-6)-like cytokines—Unpaired (Upd), also called Outstretched, Upd2, and Upd3. These ligands bind to the receptor Domeless (Dome), which is homologous to gp130, the common chain for the IL-6 receptor family (Fig. 1).²⁻⁵ There is a second transmembrane receptor, *eye transformer*, also called *latran*, which forms heterodimers with Dome and antagonizes JAK-STAT signaling.⁶,⁷ The sole *Drosophila* JAK, called Hopscotch (Hop), is most similar to JAK2, and the sole STAT, called STAT92E, is most homologous to STATs 3 and 5.⁸⁻¹⁰ Activated STAT92E dimers modulate expression of target genes, the best characterized of which is *Socs36E*, which encodes a negative regulator.¹¹ The reduced

---

genetic complexity of the pathway in *Drosophila* and the observation that numerous human disease genes are conserved in flies,¹² make *Drosophila* an excellent model for studying this pathway.

It is well established that dominant-active mutations in JAK2 result in human leukemia and myeloproliferative disorders.¹³,¹⁴ In addition, sustained STAT3 signaling is linked to tumorigenesis in mouse models and a dozen types of human cancer, including all classes of carcinoma.¹⁵⁻¹⁷ Cytokine signaling is also important for normal organ size during development as mice deficient for SOCS2, a negative regulator of growth hormone signaling, exhibit gigantism.¹⁸ Roles of the JAK-STAT pathway in growth control have been well described in *Drosophila*. With the advantages of powerful genetic approaches and in vivo clonal growth assays, studies in *Drosophila* have advanced our knowledge of the importance of this pathway during development, homeostasis and transformation. In this review, we discuss the current understanding of the functions of the JAK-STAT pathway in the growth of imaginal discs.

---

**Growth Control during Development**

Imaginal discs are comprised of epithelial cells that give rise to the cuticular structures of the adult, such as compound eyes and wings. Each imaginal disc is formed from a small number of cells (e.g., 50 cells in the case of the wing disc) that are specified in the embryonic ectoderm.¹⁹ Once the embryo hatches into the larva, which promptly begins to feed, the discs start to grow rapidly. Larval development lasts ~4 d at 25 °C and consists of three distinct periods called instars, each separated by a molt. Imaginal disc cells proliferate exponentially during larval development to give rise to thousands of cells (e.g., 50,000 cells in the case of the wing disc) at the end of third instar.²⁰,²¹ Most of the cells in the larva are polyploid, undergoing endoreplication (S phase but not cytokinesis) and increasing their volume substantially. In contrast, imaginal cells are diploid and undergo both S and M phase.

Growth in wild-type eye discs is mediated by an “organizer” which forms during second instar at the dorsal–ventral (D–V) midline through the actions of *Iroquois-Complex (Iro-C)* genes, which repress the O-glycosyltransferase Fringe (Fng) to the ventral domain (Fig. 2). This juxtaposition of ventral *fng⁺* cells and dorsal *fng⁻* cells leads to activation of Notch signaling.²²⁻²⁴ Notch signaling at the D–V midline is required for appropriate disc

---

*Correspondence to: Erika A Bach; Email: erika.bach@nyu.edu  
Submitted: 04/29/13; Revised: 06/06/13; Accepted: 06/14/13  
Citation: Zoranovic T, Grmai L, Bach EA. Regulation of proliferation, cell competition, and cellular growth by the *Drosophila* JAK-STAT pathway. JAK-STAT 2013; 2:e25408; http://dx.doi.org/10.4161/jkst.25408*

One important function of JAK-STAT signaling is in formation of the eye field; it promotes proliferation and growth of cells in the eye field while cell-autonomously repressing wingless (wg), which specifies head cuticle fate (see below). Interestingly, JAK-STAT signaling has been shown to act downstream of Notch signaling. Specifically, activated STAT92E represses expression of Serrate (Ser), which encodes a Notch ligand homologous to mammalian Jagged and which is normally restricted to the ventral eye (Fig. 2). The loss of Stat92E in clones in the dorsal eye results in ectopic expression of Ser there and over-growth of this compartment. Finally, the expression of upd prior to the reported formation of the D-V organizer (described above) suggests that either the organizer is actually active in first instar or that upd can be induced independently of Notch signaling. In fact, one study did report an early role of upd in formation of the organizer, implying that JAK-STAT activity can also function upstream of Notch in the eye disc.

Studies from several labs have since shown that STAT92E is a central regulator of eye size. The functional effects of sustained activation of the JAK-STAT pathway in imaginal discs was forecasted fortuitously by transposon insertion in the Om(1E) gene, a paralog of upd, in the related species D. ananassae, resulting in increased Om(1E) expression and outgrowths in the adult eye. Subsequently, the role of sustained JAK-STAT pathway activation in tissue growth was confirmed by targeted mis-expression of upd in the developing eye disc of D. melanogaster; GMR-upd transgenic animals have enlarged eye imaginal discs, resulting in a dramatically enlarged compound adult eye. A characterization of GMR-upd and similar transgenic animals revealed that Upd acts as a mitogen for undifferentiated eye cells. The increased production of Upd ligand in GMR-upd animals expands the number of eye progenitor cells without affecting their patterning, leading to a distinctly larger eye that is otherwise patterned normally. The GMR-upd enlarged eye phenotype can be largely suppressed by halving the genetic dose of Stat92E, suggesting that activation of STAT92E downstream of Upd is primarily responsible for the overgrowth. Shortly after the publication of the GMR-upd animal, another study reported a similar enlarged-eye phenotype resulting from inactivation of C-terminal src kinase (Csk) function in the eye disc. STAT92E is autonomously activated in Csk−/− clones, suggesting that JAK-STAT signaling plays an important role in the Csk−/− over-grown eye. Indeed, this phenotype is largely suppressed by reducing Stat92E expression levels. The activation of STAT92E in Csk−/− clones is likely due to upregulation of Src kinases in the absence of negative regulation by Csk (as opposed to Csk-dependent activation of Dome or Hop), but this has not been formally shown. Of note, mutations in endosomal sorting complex required for transport (ESCRT) components tsg101 and vps25, which trap the Notch receptor in an activated state, also result in cell-autonomous increases in upd expression and dramatic eye over-growth, a phenotype that depends on STAT92E activation. In fact, a recent study of Notch-dependent hyperplastic wing imaginal disc tissue has revealed that all three upd ligands are direct targets of Notch signaling and their loci interact directly with the Notch transcriptional effector Suppressor of Hairless. As mentioned

Figure 1. The Drosophila JAK-STAT pathway. Three Unpaired (Upd) ligands here collectively referred to as Upd (orange) activate a dimeric receptor Domeless (Dome) (magenta). This results in activation of the JAK Hopscotch (Hop) (green), leading to tyrosine phosphorylation of Dome. The phosphorylated receptor/JAK complex phosphorylates STAT92E dimer (blue) on Y711, generating an active STAT92E dimer. A consensus TTCNNNGAA site is bound by the activated STAT92E dimer, leading altered gene expression. One of the best-characterized STAT92E target genes is Socs36E, encoding a negative regulator of JAK/receptor activity (pink). A second receptor Eye Transformer (ET) (also called Latran [Lat]), referred to as ET/Lat (red), forms heterodimers with Dome and inhibits JAK-STAT signaling. Brown circles represent phosphotyrosine residues.
above, although Notch is activated along the entire midline, *upd* is induced only at the posterior margin at the midline, i.e., only in a small region of active Notch signaling, indicating that other factors must repress its expression elsewhere in the disc. Interestingly *upd* genes, particular *upd3*, are repressed by polycomb-group repressive complex 1 (PRC1) and are ectopically expressed in mutations in any PRC1 component, leading to eye-overgrowth that is suppressed by lowering the dose of *Stat92E*. Finally, in the *RasV12/scribble (scrib)*-metastatic tumor model, Upd is upregulated by Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) signaling, which leads to STAT92E activation in both the tumor and adjacent cells and is required for metastasis of the tumor from the eye disc to the ventral nerve cord. Thus, restricting induction of Upd to the posterior midline by balancing Notch activation with PRC1 repression during development and JNK activation during tumorigenesis is important to prevent over-growth (Fig. 2).

### JAK-STAT Signaling and Proliferation

Given the significant role of the JAK-STAT pathway in specification of eye size, a key issue is how this pathway controls proliferation. FACS analysis of cells from eye and wing discs with sustained JAK-STAT signaling revealed that these cells appear to progress through G1/S and G2/M cell cycle checkpoints faster than control disc cells. These results raise the possibility that JAK-STAT signaling controls the expression or activation of factors required for cell cycle progression. In fact, one study reported that cyclin-dependent kinase 4 (Cdk4) functions between Hop and STAT92E in the embryo. However, in *Drosophila* Cdk4 is primarily a regulator of cellular growth (see below) and is dispensable for proliferation. Cyclin B (CycB), which is required for G2/M progression in the embryo, was elevated in a cell-autonomous manner in clones with increased JAK-STAT signaling. It is not known if CycB is a target of JAK-STAT signaling or if increased CycB in JAK-STAT pathway gain-of-function clones simply reflects increased proliferation rates. In fact, two independent genetic screens failed to reveal a cell cycle gene that strongly modified the GMR-*upd* phenotype. While this could be due to the possibility that cell cycle genes are largely dosage-insensitive in the GMR-*upd* background, expression profiling of GMR-*upd* eye discs also did not reveal any potential candidates. In addition, three independent whole-genome RNAi screens did not identify a connection between JAK-STAT signaling and genes known to regulate proliferation.

An anti-proliferative role has also been reported for STAT92E. One study reported that *Stat92E*- clones induced late in larval wing development grew to larger sizes than their sibling (+/+) clones. The observation that *hop*- clones did not display the same overgrowth phenotype led to the model that in late larval wing discs, STAT92E acts non-canonically (i.e., independently of Upd or Hop) to constrain proliferation. This study postulates that *Drosophila* STAT92E contains both the pro-proliferative function of STAT3 and the anti-proliferative function of STAT1 and that evolutionary forces subsequently assigned these roles to distinct mammalian STAT proteins. This paper raises important questions that need to be addressed. First, are there

---

**Figure 2.** The role of the *Drosophila* JAK-STAT pathway in eye development. During the second larval instar, *Iro-C* genes are induced by Wg signaling in the dorsal domain of the eye disc. *Iro-C* proteins repress *Fng* expression such that only ventral cells express *Fng*. This creates a border of *Fng*-expressing and non-*Fng*-expressing cells at the midline of the disc, leading to Notch signaling there. Notch induces expression of *upd* at the posterior midline of the eye disc. JNK signaling can also induce *upd* during invasive tumor formation. *upd* is presumed to be repressed by PRC1 in cells outside of the posterior midline. *Upd* leads to activation of STAT92E (*STATP*), which represses the Notch ligand *Ser* to the ventral domain and *Wg* to the anterior margin. *Csk* negatively regulates *STATP*, either through *Src* or through *Dome/Hop*. Delta (*DI*), another Notch ligand in *Drosophila*, is expressed only in the dorsal domain.

distinct regions of STAT92E that mediate these opposite effects on proliferation? Second, what factors are the pro-proliferative and anti-proliferative targets of STAT92E? Finally, the proposed switch from pro-proliferative to anti-proliferative occurs within a 24-h window. What changes occur in STAT92E or the chromatin of late larval wing imaginal disc cells to facilitate this switch? Our current understanding of JAK-STAT regulation of proliferation is limited, and more studies will be required at the molecular level to sufficiently answer these questions.

### JAK-STAT Signaling and Cell Competition

Local interactions between cells influence their growth and their ability to contribute to the adult. Some of these interactions have been revealed by studying “cell competition”, a process that has been best studied in the *Drosophila* wing disc but that also exists in mammals. In the last 10 years, the field of cell competition has exploded (reviewed in refs. 57 and 58), but a consensus on definitions for each type of competitive interaction has not yet been achieved. In this review, we will use the term “cell competition” to mean the context-specific behavior of cells of a
particular genotype: they are killed (out-competed) when surrounded by wild-type cells but viable when placed in the context of slower-growing cells. The first example of cell competition was observed with *Minutes* (*M*), dominant mutations in ribosomal protein (*Rp*) genes that are lethal when homozygous (*M/M*) but produce viable, slow-developing animals when heterozygous (*M/+*).<sup>52-54</sup> *M/+* cells exhibit distinct outcomes depending on the local environment; *M/+* clones are viable when residing in a homotypic environment (i.e., when they are surrounded by *M/+* cells) but die when grown in the presence of wild-type (+/+) cells. These studies also revealed that death of *M/+* cells is associated with proliferation of wild-type cells. The wild-type cells (termed “winners”) subsequently occupy the space of the *M/+* cells (termed “losers”), which are eliminated by the winners through cell death to ensure maintenance of normal tissue size. It has been subsequently shown that differences in levels of other growth-regulatory genes such as dMyc, a transcription factor that regulates expression of genes controlling proliferation, cellular growth, and ribosome biogenesis, elicit similar types of competitive interactions; clones with lower levels of dMyc become losers, which are killed by winners that have normal levels of dMyc.<sup>59-61</sup>

Knowing the dependence of proper cell growth and tissue development on STAT92E activity, clonal growth assays were employed to assess whether modulating the levels of JAK-STAT signaling could induce competitive interactions. *Stat92E⁻/* clones and their wild-type (+/+) sibling clones were induced by FLP/FRT-mediated mitotic recombination<sup>62</sup> early in embryonic development and clone size was measured in wing and eye discs after a defined period. Since disc cells are epithelial and remain associated after mitosis, differences in clone size reflect differential growth rates.<sup>63</sup> If *Stat92E* were not required for clonal growth, *Stat92E⁻/* clone areas should comprise ~50% of the total clone area. In one study, control *FRT⁸²B* wild-type clones and their sibling clones grew to equal sizes and were each ~50% of the total clone area.<sup>29</sup> By contrast, *Stat92E⁻/* clones comprised only ~5% of the total clone area in the disc. (In another study, *Stat92E⁻/* clones induced during early larval development were larger [40% of the total clone area].<sup>33</sup>) The discrepancy in *Stat92E⁻/* clone size is presumably due to the use of weaker *Stat92E* alleles in the latter study.<sup>31,33</sup> By contrast, *Stat92E⁻/* clones in a mosaic background underwent caspase-dependent but JNK-independent cell death and were extruded from the epithelium.<sup>29</sup> However, when programmed cell death was blocked in the *Stat92E⁻/* cells, they grew to the same size as sibling clones.<sup>29</sup> By contrast, clones lacking *dmyc* or ribosomal genes like *Rpl135* cannot grow even when death is inhibited.<sup>64,65</sup> This may represent an important distinction between the function of activated STAT92E and dMyc in losers. The context-specific behavior of cells with reduced JAK-STAT signaling was revealed when *Stat92E⁻/* clones were given a growth advantage. When induced in a *Minute* background, *Stat92E⁻/* clones grew to large sizes.<sup>29</sup> This result reveals that *Stat92E⁻/* cells die in a wild-type background because they have become losers and are out-competed by the more robust wild-type winner cells. Similar results—that loss of *Stat92E* reduces cellular fitness and

renders cells losers—have been observed in a *scrib⁻/* tumor suppressor model in *Drosophila*.<sup>66</sup>

Cells with increased dMyc or increased Wingless (Wg) signaling become “supercompetitors”, which we define as a clone of cells overexpressing a particular factor that causes neighboring wild-type cells to experience a growth disadvantage.<sup>59,61,67-70</sup> Of note, clones with increased dMyc expression kill losers up to 10 cells away.<sup>59</sup> Clonal growth assays, such as the two-clone assay,<sup>59,71</sup> which serve as a direct measurement of supercompetitor behavior, revealed that clones with sustained JAK-STAT pathway activation become winners, acquire supercompetitor characteristics, and can kill losers located several cell diameters away through non-autonomous induction of apoptosis.<sup>29</sup> This study also demonstrated that, like with dMyc, cells with activated STAT92E require the pro-apoptotic gene *head involution defective (hid)* to kill surrounding neighbors and achieve supercompetitor status. These results suggest a link between STAT92E and dMyc or between STAT92E and the Wg pathway. Surprisingly, however, no link was found between JAK-STAT signaling and either *dmyc* mRNA, dMyc protein, or targets of the Hippo pathway,<sup>29</sup> which regulate dMyc levels.<sup>68,69</sup> In addition, clonal mis-expression of dMyc did not activate STAT, nor did clonal mis-expression of Crumbs,<sup>72,73</sup> which is a target of JAK-STAT signaling in the embryo<sup>74</sup> and an upstream regulator of Hippo pathway signaling. Finally, hyperactivation of JAK-STAT signaling had no effect on Wg signaling and, reciprocally, Wg did not modulate STAT92E activity.<sup>29</sup> These results strongly suggest that at least in the wing imaginal disc JAK-STAT pathway activity functions in parallel to dMyc and Wg in growth and cell competition (Fig. 3).

# JAK-STAT Signaling and Cellular Growth

Tissue growth occurs as a result of both cellular growth (also called mass accumulation) and subsequent proliferation. Studies from *Drosophila* imaginal discs have shown that cell division and cellular growth are regulated independently.<sup>63,75</sup> It follows that in order to get overgrown imaginal tissue, both proliferation and cellular growth must be accelerated concomitantly. Numerous factors affect cell size, including dMyc, CycD/Cdk4, and Hippo.<sup>76</sup> Since JAK-STAT signaling in the eye imaginal disc is causal for tissue overgrowth, it is of great interest to unravel how this pathway regulates cellular growth. We define cellular growth as the net production of new proteins, which can occur by a variety of means, including but not limited to increased de novo synthesis of ribosomes (i.e., ribosome biogenesis) or accelerated translation on existing ribosomes. Increased cell size can result from increased cellular growth and can be measured by the forward scatter parameter on a flow cytometer.<sup>64</sup> FACS analysis of cells with sustained JAK-STAT signaling revealed no change in cell size.<sup>29,30</sup> Consistent with this, there was no change in cell density in clones with activated JAK-STAT signaling.<sup>33</sup> The unaltered cell size in cells with sustained JAK-STAT signaling is likely due to the fact that cell division rates are also increased when this pathway is hyper-activated.<sup>29,30,32,33</sup> Furthermore, JAK-STAT signaling does not induce genes such as *nop5*, *Nop60B*, and *Tif-1A* (which, incidentally, are targets of dMyc) that regulate de novo

ribosome biosynthesis.²⁹ As mentioned above, the JAK-STAT pathway also does not interact with dMyc, which upregulates ribosome biogenesis, ⁶⁵ or regulators of dMyc.⁶⁸,⁶⁹ These data suggest that JAK-STAT signaling does not regulate cellular growth by means of increasing ribosome biogenesis. As mentioned above, one study reported that CycD/Cdk4 functions to promote proliferation and acts between Hop and STAT92E in JAK-STAT signaling. However, there are lines of evidence that suggest that this conclusion needs to be re-examined, particularly with respect to JAK-STAT signaling in imaginal discs. First, several groups have reported that CycD/Cdk4 is not required for proliferation but instead promotes growth through mitochondrial biogenesis.⁴⁶,⁴⁷,⁷⁷ Second, we have not found a link between mitochondrial functions and JAK-STAT signaling (Rodrigues and Bach, unpublished data). Taken together, how JAK-STAT signaling controls cellular growth at the molecular level remains a critical area of investigation for the field.

**Concluding Remarks**

In summary, these studies have revealed that the JAK-STAT pathway is a central regulator of tissue size in *Drosophila* imaginal discs. In the eye disc, *upd* is subject to positive and negative regulation, but only Notch-mediated induction of *upd* has been delineated at the genetic level. Future work should reveal how JNK activates and how PRC1 represses the *upd* locus. Furthermore, the inhibitory effects of Csk on activated STAT92E also need to be further explored. Despite the central role that JAK-STAT signaling plays in proliferation and cellular growth, the targets of STAT92E required for these processes are yet unknown and need to be determined in future studies. Finally, the recent work showing that cells with sustained JAK-STAT activity become super-competitors raises several outstanding questions, including: (1) Do STAT92E winners secrete a Notum-like molecule, which inhibits neighboring cells from transducing Upd signals? (2) What are non-autonomous signals downstream of STAT92E that cause death in losers? (3) Are these signals regulated by other factors involved in cell competition such as dMyc and Wg signaling? Using *Drosophila* as a model to study how JAK-STAT signaling regulates proliferation, cellular growth, and cell competition is poised to shed light on mechanisms of tumorigenesis in mammals.

**Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest**

No potential conflicts of interest were disclosed.

**References**

1. Arbouzova NI, Zeidler MP. JAK/STAT signalling in *Drosophila*: insights into conserved regulatory and cellular functions. Development 2006; 133:2605-16; PMID:16794031; http://dx.doi.org/10.1242/dev.02411
2. Harrison DA, McCoon PE, Binari R, Gilman M, Perrimon N. *Drosophila* unpaired encodes a secreted protein that activates the JAK signaling pathway. Genes Dev 1998; 12:3252-63; PMID:9784499; http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/gad.12.20.3252
3. Hombría JC, Brown S, Häder S, Zeidler MP. Characterisation of Upd2, a *Drosophila* JAK/STAT pathway ligand. Dev Biol 2005; 288:420-33; PMID:16277982; http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ydbio.2005.09.040
4. Agaisse H, Perrimon N. The roles of JAK/STAT signaling in *Drosophila* immune responses. Immunol Rev 2004; 198:72-82; PMID:15199955; http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.0105-2896.2004.0133.x
5. Brown S, Hu N, Hombría JC. Identification of the first invertebrate interleukin JAK/STAT receptor, the *Drosophila* gene domeless. Curr Biol 2001; 11:1700-5; PMID:11696329; http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0960-9822(01)00524-3

6. Makki R, Meister M, Pennetier D, Ubeda JM, Braun A, Daburon V, et al. A short receptor downregulates JAK/STAT signalling to control the *Drosophila* cellular immune response. PLoS Biol 2010; 8: e1000441; PMID:20689801; http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.1000441
7. Kallio J, Myllymäki H, Grönholm J, Armstrong M, Vanha-aho LM, Mäkinen L, et al. Eye transformer is a negative regulator of *Drosophila* JAK/STAT signaling. FASEB J 2010; 24:4467-79; PMID:20624926; http://dx.doi.org/10.1096/fj.10-162784
8. Binari R, Perrimon N. Stripe-specific regulation of pair-rule genes by hopscotch, a putative Jak family tyrosine kinase in *Drosophila*. Genes Dev 1994; 8:300-12; PMID:8314084; http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/gad.8.3.300
9. Hou XS, Melnick MB, Perrimon N. Marelle acts downstream of the *Drosophila* HOP/JAK kinase and encodes a protein similar to the mammalian STATs. Cell 1996; 84:411-9; PMID:8608595; http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0092-8674(00)81286-6
10. Yan R, Small S, Desplan C, Dearolf CR, Darnell JE Jr. Identification of a Stat gene that functions in *Drosophila* development. Cell 1996; 84:421-30; PMID:8608596; http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0092-8674(00)81287-8

11. Callus BA, Mathey-Prevot B. SOCS36E, a novel *Drosophila* SOCS protein, suppresses JAK/STAT and EGF-R signalling in the imaginal wing disc. Oncogene 2002; 21:4812-21; PMID:12101419; http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/sj.onc.1205618
12. Bier E. *Drosophila*, the golden bug, emerges as a tool for human genetics. Nat Rev Genet 2005; 6:9-23; PMID:15630418; http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nrg1503
13. Lacronique V, Boureux A, Valle VD, Poirel H, Quang CT, Mauchauffé M, et al. A TEL-JAK2 fusion protein with constitutive kinase activity in human leukemia. Science 1997; 278:1309-12; PMID:9360930; http://dx.doi.org/10.1126/science.278.5341.1309
14. Levine RL. Janus kinase mutations. Semin Oncol 2009; 36(Suppl 1): S6-11; PMID:19393837; http://dx.doi.org/10.1053/j.seminoncol.2009.02.005
15. Bromberg JF, Wrzeszczynska MH, Devgan G, Zhao Y, Pestell RG, Albanese C, et al. Stat3 as an oncogene. Cell 1999; 98:295-303; PMID:10458605; http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0092-8674(00)81959-5
16. Darnell JE. Validating Stat3 in cancer therapy. Nat Med 2005; 11:595-6; PMID:15937466; http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nm0605-595

www.landesbioscience.com
JAK-STAT
e25408-5

17. Migone TS, Lin JX, Cereseto A, Mulloy JC, O'Shea JJ, Franchini G, et al. Constitutively activated Jak-STAT pathway in T cells transformed with HTLV-I. Science 1995; 269:79-81; PMID: 7604283; http://dx.doi.org/10.1126/science.7604283

18. Metcalf D, Greenhalgh CJ, Viney E, Willson TA, Starr R, Nicola NA, et al. Gigantism in mice lacking suppressor of cytokine signalling-2. Nature 2000; 405:1069-73; PMID: 10890450; http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/35016611

19. Cohen SM. Imaginal disc development. Cold Spring Harbor, NY: Cold Spring Harbor Press, 1993.

20. Bryant PJ, Simpson P. Intrinsic and extrinsic control of growth in developing organs. Q Rev Biol 1984; 59:387-415; PMID: 6393189; http://dx.doi.org/10.1086/414040

21. Madhavan M, Schneiderman HA. Histological analysis of the dynamics of growth of imaginal discs and histoblast nests during the larval development of *Drosophila melanogaster*. Wilhelm Roux's Arch 1977; 183:269-305; http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/BF00848459

22. Papayannopoulos V, Tomlinson A, Panin VM, Rauskolb C, Irvine KD. Dorsal-ventral signaling in the *Drosophila* eye. Science 1998; 281:2031-4; PMID: 9748163; http://dx.doi.org/10.1126/science.281.5385.2031

23. Cho KO, Choi KW. Fringe is essential for mirror symmetry and morphogenesis in the *Drosophila* eye. Nature 1998; 396:272-6; PMID: 9834034; http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/24394

24. Domínguez M, de Celis JF. A dorsal/ventral boundary established by Notch controls growth and polarity in the *Drosophila* eye. Nature 1998; 396:276-8; PMID: 9834035; http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/24402

25. Chao JL, Tsai YC, Chiu SJ, Sun YH. Localized Notch signal acts through eyg and upd to promote global growth in *Drosophila* eye. Development 2004; 131:3839-47; PMID: 15253935; http://dx.doi.org/10.1242/dev.01258

26. Reynolds-Kenneally J, Mlodzik M. Notch signaling controls proliferation through cell-autonomous and non-autonomous mechanisms in the *Drosophila* eye. Dev Biol 2005; 285:38-48; PMID: 16039641; http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ydbio.2005.05.038

27. Ekas LA, Baeg GH, Flaherty MS, Ayala-Camargo A, Bach EA. JAK/STAT signaling promotes regional specification by negatively regulating wingless expression in *Drosophila*. Development 2006; 133:4721-9; PMID: 17079268; http://dx.doi.org/10.1242/dev.02675

28. Bach EA, Ekas LA, Ayala-Camargo A, Flaherty MS, Lee H, Perrimon N, et al. GFP reporters detect the activation of the *Drosophila* JAK/STAT pathway in vivo. Gene Expr Patterns 2007; 7:323-31; PMID: 17008134; http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.modgep.2006.08.003

29. Rodrigues AB, Zoranovic T, Ayala-Camargo A, Grewal S, Reyes-Robles T, Krasny M, et al. Activated STAT regulates growth and induces competitive interactions independently of Myc, Yorkie, Wingless and ribosome biogenesis. Development 2012; 139:4051-61; PMID: 22992954; http://dx.doi.org/10.1242/dev.076760

30. Bach EA, Vincent S, Zeidler MP, Perrimon N. A sensitized genetic screen to identify novel regulators and components of the *Drosophila* janus kinase/signal transducer and activator of transcription pathway. Genetics 2003; 165:1149-66; PMID: 14668372

31. Ekas LA, Cardozo TJ, Flaherty MS, McMullan EA, Gonsalves FC, Bach EA. Characterization of a dominant-active STAT that promotes tumorigenesis in *Drosophila*. Dev Biol 2010; 344:621-36; PMID: 20501334; http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ydbio.2010.05.497

32. Tsai YC, Sun YH. Long-range effect of upd, a ligand for Jak/STAT pathway, on cell cycle in *Drosophila* eye development. Genesis 2004; 39:141-53; PMID: 15170700; http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/gene.20035

33. Mukherjee T, Hombría JC, Zeidler MP. Opposing roles for *Drosophila* JAK/STAT signaling during cellular proliferation. Oncogene 2005; 24:2503-11; PMID: 15735706; http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/sj.onc.1208487

34. Flaherty MS, Zavadil J, Ekas LA, Bach EA. Genome-wide expression profiling in the *Drosophila* eye reveals unexpected repression of notch signaling by the JAK/STAT pathway. Dev Dyn 2009; 238:2235-53; PMID: 19504457; http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/dvdy.21989

35. Gutierrez-Aviño FJ, Ferres-Marco D, Dominguez M. The position and function of the Notch-mediated eye growth organizer: the roles of JAK/STAT and four-jointed. EMBO Rep 2009; 10:1051-8; PMID: 19662079; http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/embor.2009.140

36. Juni N, Awasaki T, Yoshida K, Hori SH. The Om (1E) mutation in *Drosophila ananassae* causes compound eye overgrowth due to tom retrotransposon-driven overexpression of a novel gene. Genetics 1996; 143:1257-70; PMID: 8807298

37. Read RD, Bach EA, Cagan RL. *Drosophila* C-terminal Src kinase negatively regulates organ growth and cell proliferation through inhibition of the Src, Jun N-terminal kinase, and STAT pathways. Mol Cell Biol 2004; 24:6676-89; PMID: 15254235; http://dx.doi.org/10.1128/MCB.24.15.6676-6689.2004

38. Moberg KH, Schelble S, Burdick SK, Hariharan IK. Mutations in erupted, the *Drosophila* ortholog of mammalian tumor susceptibility gene 101, elicit non-cell-autonomous overgrowth. Dev Cell 2005; 9:699-710; PMID: 16256744; http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.devcel.2005.09.018

39. Vaccari T, Bilder D. The *Drosophila* tumor suppressor vps 25 prevents nonautonomous overproliferation by regulating notch trafficking. Dev Cell 2005; 9:687-98; PMID: 16256743; http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.devcel.2005.09.019

40. Herz HM, Chen Z, Scherr H, Lackey M, Bolduc C, Bergmann A. vps 25 mosaics display non-autonomous cell survival and overgrowth, and autonomous apoptosis. Development 2006; 133:1871-80; PMID: 16611691; http://dx.doi.org/10.1242/dev.02356

41. Djiane A, Krejci A, Bernard F, Fexova S, Millen K, Bray SJ. Dissecting the mechanisms of Notch induced hyperplasia. EMBO J 2013; 32:60-71; PMID: 23232763; http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/emboj.2012.326

42. Classen AK, Bunker BD, Harvey KF, Vaccari T, Bilder D. A tumor suppressor activity of *Drosophila* Polycomb genes mediated by JAK-STAT signaling. Nat Genet 2009; 41:1150-5; PMID: 19749759; http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/ng.445

43. González I, Simon R, Busturia A. The Polyhomeotic protein induces hyperplastic tissue overgrowth through the activation of the JAK/STAT pathway. Cell Cycle 2009; 8:4103-11; PMID: 19923887; http://dx.doi.org/10.4161/cc.8.24.10212

44. Wu M, Pastor-Pareja JC, Xu T. Interaction between Ras(V12) and scribbled clones induces tumour growth and invasion. Nature 2010; 463:545-8; PMID: 20072127; http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nature08702

45. Chen X, Oh SW, Zheng Z, Chen HW, Shin HH, Hou SX. Cyclin D-Cdk4 and cyclin E-Cdk2 regulate the Jak/STAT signal transduction pathway in *Drosophila*. Dev Cell 2003; 4:179-90; PMID: 12586062; http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S1534-5807(03)00024-8

46. Meyer CA, Jacobs HW, Datara SA, Du W, Edgar BA, Lehner CF. *Drosophila* Cdk4 is required for normal growth and is dispensable for cell cycle progression. EMBO J 2000; 19:4533-42; PMID: 10970847; http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/emboj/19.17.4533

47. Datara SA, Jacobs HW, de la Cruz AF, Lehner CF, Edgar BA. The *Drosophila* cyclin D-Cdk4 complex promotes cellular growth. EMBO J 2000; 19:4543-54; PMID: 10970848; http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/emboj/19.17.4543

48. Knoblich JA, Lehner CF. Synergistic action of *Drosophila* cyclins A and B during the G2-M transition. EMBO J 1993; 12:65-74; PMID: 8428595

49. Müller P, Kuttenkeuler D, Gesellchen V, Zeidler MP, Boutros M. Identification of JAK/STAT signaling components by genome-wide RNA interference. Nature 2005; 436:871-5; PMID: 16094372; http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nature03869

50. Baeg GH, Zhou R, Perrimon N. Genome-wide RNAi analysis of JAK/STAT signaling components in *Drosophila*. Genes Dev 2005; 19:1861-70; PMID: 16055650; http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/gad.1320705

51. Bina S, Wright VM, Fisher KH, Milo M, Zeidler MP. Transcriptional targets of *Drosophila* JAK/STAT pathway signaling as effectors of haematopoietic tumour formation. EMBO Rep 2010; 11:201-7; PMID: 20168330; http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/embor.2010.1

52. Simpson P. Parameters of cell competition in the compartments of the wing disc of *Drosophila*. Dev Biol 1979; 69:182-93; PMID: 446891; http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/0012-1606(79)90284-7

53. Simpson P, Morata G. Differential mitotic rates and patterns of growth in compartments in the *Drosophila* wing. Dev Biol 1981; 85:299-308; PMID: 7262460; http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/0012-1606(81)90261-X

54. Morata G, Ripoll P. Minutes: mutants of *drosophila* autonomously affecting cell division rate. Dev Biol 1975; 42:211-21; PMID: 1116643; http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/0012-1606(75)90330-9

55. Oertel M, Menthen A, Dabeva MD, Shaffritz DA. Cell competition leads to a high level of normal liver reconstitution by transplanted fetal liver stem/progenitor cells. Gastroenterology 2006; 130:507-20, quiz 590; PMID: 16472603; http://dx.doi.org/10.1053/j.gastro.2005.10.049

56. Bondar T, Medzhitov R. p53-mediated hematopoietic stem and progenitor cell competition. Cell Stem Cell 2010; 6:309-22; PMID: 20362536; http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.stem.2010.03.002

57. de Beco S, Ziosi M, Johnston LA. New frontiers in cell competition. Dev Dyn 2012; 241:831-41; PMID: 22438309; http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/dvdy.23783

58. Levayer R, Moreno E. Mechanisms of cell competition: themes and variations. J Cell Biol 2013; 200:689-98; PMID: 23509066; http://dx.doi.org/10.1083/jcb.201301051

59. de la Cova C, Abril M, Bellosta P, Gallant P, Johnston LA. *Drosophila myc* regulates organ size by inducing cell competition. Cell 2004; 117:107-16; PMID: 15066286; http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0092-8674(04)00214-4

60. Li W, Baker NE. Engulfment is required for cell competition. Cell 2007; 129:1215-25; PMID: 17574031; http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2007.03.054

61. Moreno E, Basler K. dMyc transforms cells into supercompetitors. Cell 2004; 117:117-29; PMID: 15066287; http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0092-8674(04)00262-4

62. Xu T, Rubin GM. Analysis of genetic mosaics in developing and adult *Drosophila* tissues. Development 1993; 117:1223-37; PMID: 8404527

63. Neufeld TP, de la Cruz AF, Johnston LA, Edgar BA. Coordination of growth and cell division in the *Drosophila* wing. Cell 1998; 93:1183-93; PMID: 9657151; http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0092-8674(00)81462-2

64. Johnston LA, Prober DA, Edgar BA, Eisenman RN, Gallant P. *Drosophila myc* regulates cellular growth during development. Cell 1999; 98:779-90; PMID: 10499795; http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0092-8674(00)81512-3

65. Grewal SS, Li L, Orian A, Eisenman RN, Edgar BA. Myc-dependent regulation of ribosomal RNA synthesis during *Drosophila* development. Nat Cell Biol 2005; 7:295-302; PMID: 15723055; http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/ncb1223

66. Schroeder MC, Chen CL, Gajewski K, Halder G. A non-cell-autonomous tumor suppressor role for Stat in eliminating oncogenic scribble cells. Oncogene 2012; PMID:23108407; http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/onc.2012.476
67. Vincent JP, Kolahgar G, Gagliardi M, Piddini E. Steep differences in wingless signaling trigger Myc-independent competitive cell interactions. Dev Cell 2011; 21:366-74; PMID:21839923; http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.devcel.2011.06.021
68. Ziosi M, Baena-López LA, Grifoni D, Froldi F, Pession A, Garoia F, et al. dMyc functions downstream of Yorkie to promote the supercompetitive behavior of hippo pathway mutant cells. PLoS Genet 2010; 6:e1001140; PMID:20885789; http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgen.1001140
69. Neto-Silva RM, de Beco S, Johnston LA. Evidence for a growth-stabilizing regulatory feedback mechanism between Myc and Yorkie, the Drosophila homolog of Yap. Dev Cell 2010; 19:507-20; PMID:20951343; http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.devcel.2010.09.009
70. Tyler DM, Li W, Zhuo N, Pellock B, Baker NE. Genes affecting cell competition in Drosophila. Genetics 2007; 175:643-57; PMID:17110495; http://dx.doi.org/10.1534/genetics.106.061929
71. Wu DC, Johnston LA. Control of wing size and proportions by Drosophila myc. Genetics 2010; 184:199-211; PMID:19897747; http://dx.doi.org/10.1534/genetics.109.110379

72. Badouel C, Garg A, McNeill H. Herding Hippos: regulating growth in flies and man. Curr Opin Cell Biol 2009; 21:837-43; PMID:19846288; http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ceb.2009.09.010
73. Reddy BV, Irvine KD. The Fat and Warts signaling pathways: new insights into their regulation, mechanism and conservation. Development 2008; 135:2827-38; PMID:18697904; http://dx.doi.org/10.1242/dev.020974
74. Lovegrove B, Simões S, Rivas ML, Sotillos S, Johnson K, Knust E, et al. Coordinated control of cell adhesion, polarity, and cytoskeleton underlies Hox-induced organogenesis in Drosophila. Curr Biol 2006; 16:2206-16; PMID:17113384; http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2006.09.029
75. Weigmann K, Cohen SM, Lehner CF. Cell cycle progression, growth and patterning in imaginal discs despite inhibition of cell division after inactivation of Drosophila Cdc2 kinase. Development 1997; 124:3555-63; PMID:9342048
76. Neto-Silva RM, Wells BS, Johnston LA. Mechanisms of growth and homeostasis in the Drosophila wing. Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 2009; 25:197-220; PMID:19575645; http://dx.doi.org/10.1146/annurev.cellbio.24.110707.175242
77. Icreverzi A, de la Cruz AF, Van Voorhies WA, Edgar BA. Drosophila cyclin D/Cdk4 regulates mitochondrial biogenesis and aging and sensitizes animals to hypoxic stress. Cell Cycle 2012; 11:554-68; PMID:22293404; http://dx.doi.org/10.4161/cc.11.3.19062
