
REVIEW

Gastric cancer—molecular and clinical dimensions

Roopma Wadhwa, Shumei Song, Ju-Seog Lee, Yixin Yao, Qingyi Wei and Jaffer A. Ajani

Abstract | Gastric cancer imposes a considerable health burden around the globe despite its declining incidence. The disease is often diagnosed in advanced stages and is associated with a poor prognosis for patients. An in-depth understanding of the molecular underpinnings of gastric cancer has lagged behind many other cancers of similar incidence and morbidity, owing to our limited knowledge of germline susceptibility traits for risk and somatic drivers of progression (to identify novel therapeutic targets). A few germline (*PLCE1*) and somatic (*ERBB2*, *ERBB3*, *PTEN*, *PI3K/AKT/mTOR*, *FGF*, *TP53*, *CDH1* and *MET*) alterations are emerging and some are being pursued clinically. Novel somatic gene targets (*ARID1A*, *FAT4*, *MLL* and *KMT2C*) have also been identified and are of interest. Variations in the therapeutic approaches dependent on geographical region are evident for localized gastric cancer—differences that are driven by preferences for the adjuvant strategies and the extent of surgery coupled with philosophical divides. However, greater uniformity in approach has been noted in the metastatic cancer setting, an incurable condition. Having realized only modest successes, momentum is building for carrying out more phase III comparative trials, with some using biomarker-based patient selection strategies. Overall, rapid progress in biotechnology is improving our molecular understanding and can help with new drug discovery. The future prospects are excellent for defining biomarker-based subsets of patients and application of specific therapeutics. However, many challenges remain to be tackled. Here, we review representative molecular and clinical dimensions of gastric cancer.

Wadhwa, R. *et al.* Nat. Rev. Clin. Oncol. advance online publication 24 September 2013; doi:10.1038/nrclinonc.2013.170

Introduction
Globally, the incidence of gastric cancer ranks as the fourth most frequent cancer in men and fifth in women, but its death rate is comparable to lung cancer—the most common cancer worldwide.¹ Histologically, gastric cancer can be mostly diffuse or intestinal type. Diffuse gastric cancer (DGC) represents poorly differentiated cancer cells interspersed with stromal cells. By contrast, intestinal gastric cancer (IGC) comprises cancer cells that form gland-like tubular structures with limited stromal components.²

In 2008, approximately 989,600 (8% of all cancers) new cases of gastric cancer worldwide and 738,000 (10% of all cancer deaths) gastric-cancer-specific deaths were reported. Of these, 70% of deaths occurred in developing nations—with China reporting approximately 40%—owing to the high incidence of gastric cancer in these regions,¹ with Asia, Eastern Europe and South America being most affected. Despite these seemingly worrying numbers, the incidence of gastric cancer globally has been declining since World War II;³ several factors that have contributed to the decline include improved living standards³⁻⁶ and early detection strategies, which have reduced the death rate in Japan.⁷ *Helicobacter pylori* infection as a risk factor is of importance for preventive strategies by developing strategic elimination of the bacteria in high-risk areas.⁸ Furthermore, major molecular biology advances have identified small subsets of gastric cancers defined by biomarkers. Of these, the overexpression of HER2 protein and amplification of its gene *ERBB2* have led to new treatment approaches in gastric cancer, such as trastuzumab. At present, additional biomarkers (for example, c-MET, PI3K/Akt/mTOR and HER3) are currently being explored. Greater understanding of the molecular biology and immune biology of gastric cancer is still lacking, but likely to be highly rewarding.

This Review focuses on the aspects of the emerging molecular biology of gastric cancer that might lead to improved therapeutics. We discuss the complexity of genomic alterations that drive the disease and show how these present potential opportunities for exploitation. The details of molecular signalling are largely not covered if their translational value is unclear. We discuss the role of tumour-initiating cells and the role of many oncogenes in conferring secondary resistance to therapy. In addition, we emphasize the progress—or lack thereof—made in the clinical arena by outlining recent phase III trial results. We aim to highlight advances in molecular and clinical research that reflect the current understanding of gastric cancer, rather than provide an encyclopaedic reference. Details of preventive strategies, impact of new classifications and nuances of surgery and radiotherapy are beyond the scope of this Review.

Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.

Department of Gastrointestinal Medical Oncology (R. Wadhwa, S. Song, Y. Yao, J. A. Ajani), Department of Systems Biology (J.-S. Lee), Department of Epidemiology (Q. Wei), University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, 1515 Holcombe Boulevard (FC10.3022), Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Correspondence to:
J. A. Ajani
jajani@mdanderson.org

NATURE REVIEWS | CLINICAL ONCOLOGY
ADVANCE ONLINE PUBLICATION | 1
© 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

REVIEW

Key points
- Globally, gastric cancer is the fourth most common cancer in men and fifth most common cancer in women
- Helicobacter pylori is the most intriguing and best studied risk factor for sporadic gastric cancers
- Signalling pathways and cancer stem cells have key roles in carcinogenesis and progression
- Localized gastric cancer can be cured by primary surgery, but adjunctive therapies increase the cure rate
- New somatic genes altered in gastric cancer (such as ARID1A, FAT4, MLL and KMT2C) have been identified, but thorough interrogation of gastric cancer is as yet incomplete
- Therapeutic approaches that exploit the capabilities of the host immune mechanisms hold immense promise

H. pylori infection increases the risk of gastric cancer threefold to sixfold,^{10} and is associated with distal gastric cancer and IGC.^{11} Chronic active gastritis is an integral part of bacteria-related gastric cancer:^{11,12} the organism attaches to gastric epithelial cells, leading to inflammation and an increase in the reactive oxygen and nitrogen species, which causes tissue damage.^{13,14} Furthermore, H. pylori also induces the expression of Toll-like receptors (TLRs), which leads to proliferation of the gastric epithelium.^{15} The oncogene CagA (now known as S100A8) is produced by carcinogenic H. pylori strains;^{12,16,17} the gene is included in the cag pathogenicity island and is translocated by the bacterium into the host epithelial cytosol.^{16,18} Once in the host cell, CagA is phosphorylated by Src and c-Abl kinases^{19,20} to its active form to exert a range of effects, such as forming a complex with the SRC homology 2-domain (SH2)-containing tyrosine phosphatase SHP-2 (encoded by PTPN11), resulting in cytoskeletal reorganization that can induce malignant transformation.^{21} CagA activates the ERK/MAP kinase cascade, resulting in ETS domain-containing protein Elk-1 (Elk-1) phosphorylation and increased proto-oncogene c-Fos (c-Fos) transcription.^{22} In addition, CagA promotes invasion through activation of the hepatocyte growth factor receptor c-MET, which leads to an oncogenic response.^{23} CagA also induces E-cadherin-mediated impairment of cell adhesion junctions leading to cytoplasmic and nuclear accumulation of β-catenin.^{24} The protein CagA can bind Crk adaptor (p38) proteins (Crk-II, Crk-I and Crk-L)^{25} and kinase PAR1,^{26} eliciting loss of cell polarity, which is an oncogenic event. Furthermore, CagA stimulates the inflammatory pathway by inducing the secretion of cytokines IL-8, IL-1 and TNF-α^{27–29} through NF-κB in the epithelium.^{30} Proinflammatory IL-1 gene cluster polymorphisms (in IL1B, encoding IL-1β, and in the loci for IL1RN and its receptor antagonist) increase the risk of noncardia gastric cancer (that is, cancer that affects the lower stomach).^{31,32} CagA also upregulates cyclooxygenase 2 (COX-2),^{27,33} which in turn induces the expression of oncogenic prostaglandins.^{34,35}

Aside from its CagA-mediated effects, H. pylori reduces the expression of the proapoptotic FAS-associated factor 1 (encoded by FAF1).^{36} The bacterium also mediates increases in another oncoprotein, aquaporin-3 (encoded by AQP3),^{37} alters DNA methylation of E-cadherin (encoded by CDH1), which is an oncogenic event,^{38,39} and promotes methylation of the tumour suppressor TFF2^{40} and RUNX3,^{41} as well as likely promoting the methylation of six other tumour suppressors (FLNC, HAND1, THBD, ARPC1B, HRASLS and LOX).^{42} Finally, H. pylori can lead to aberrant expression of the nucleic acid editing enzyme activation-induced cytidine deaminase (AID), which can promote carcinogenesis through gene editing.^{43} These elucidated pathways and mechanisms show that H. pylori is carcinogenic, albeit in susceptible individuals. These improved and detailed understandings of H. pylori-induced host events will lead to plausible targets for drug development to reduce the risk of gastric cancer.

**Helicobacter pylori as a risk factor**

The risk factors for gastric cancer include old age, smoking, alcohol consumption, above normal body weight, high salt and fat consumption, low vegetable and fruit consumption, low economic status, pernicious anaemia, other chronic gastric diseases and H. pylori infection.^{6,9} Of these risk factors, H. pylori is the most fascinating (Figure 1) and best studied. The bacterium is associated with a range of effects, from chronic inflammation to epigenetic modulations that can promote transformation, invasion and metastasis of host cells.

The genomic profile of gastric cancer

The regions that have a high prevalence of *H. pylori*—for example, South America, Asia, Africa and Eastern Europe—have few cases of gastric cancer, which implies that genetic susceptibility might be a critical factor to consider.⁴⁴ Indeed, several studies of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have revealed some plausible genes implicated in gastric cancer.

Rare germline mutations (<0.001% of the general population) in *CDH1* have been implicated in familial cases of gastric cancer.⁴⁵,⁴⁶ Intuitively, SNPs can facilitate gastric cancer such that one adverse allele contributes weakly, but multiple adverse alleles can considerably increase the risk.⁴⁷ Prior investigations of SNPs have focused on genes involved in mucosal protection against *H. pylori* infection (for example, *IL1B*, *IL1RN* and *TNFA*), carcinogen metabolism (for example, *CYP2E1* and *GSTM1*), deoxynucleotide synthesis (for example, *MTHFR* and *TYMS*), DNA repair (for example, *MTHFR* and *XRCC1*) and tumour suppressors (for example, *TP53* and *CDH1*). However, these studies have had limited yield and none can be used clinically because SNP studies require customized approaches (with *a priori* assumptions that alterations in certain functional SNPs would increase susceptibility to gastric cancer). In spite of the correlations between certain SNPs and gastric cancer, prospective validation requiring large, population-based studies have been lacking as they are labour-intensive and resource-intensive.

GWAS have been used to scan the whole genome to identify SNPs that are implicated in the disease (Table 1). Such studies have identified genes not previously known to be involved in gastric cancer—for example, *PLCE1* (encoding pancreas-enriched phospholipase C) has an oncogenic role in skin and intestinal cancers,⁴⁸ but is now thought to have a role in gastric cancer. A Japanese research group documented that SNPs in *PSCA* (encoding prostate stem-cell antigen) was associated with diffuse gastric cancer.⁴⁹,⁵⁰ The researchers genotyped 188 cases and 752 controls for 85,576 SNPs and then valid data were obtained from 749 cases and 750 controls for 2,753 SNPs. Although the intronic rs2976392 SNP in *PSCA* was identified as the risk allele and the SNP was in disequilibrium with rs2294008 (located in exon 1), the function of *PSCA* in gastric tissue is unclear, although its possible tumour-suppressing function in the gastric epithelium has been suggested.⁵¹ A second study included 1,077 oesophageal cancer (which bears many similarities to gastric cardia cancer in terms of environmental risk factors) cases and 1,733 controls and identified 18 ‘hits’ that were validated in 2,766 cases of gastric cardia cancer; *PLCE1* rs2274223 and *C20orf54* rs1304295 SNPs were shown to be associated with gastric cancer risk.⁴⁸ Another study of 2,240 gastric cancer cases and 3,302 controls identified the *PLCE1* rs2274223 SNP as a risk allele for gastric cardia cancer.⁵² Indeed, *PLCE1* SNPs have been shown to be associated with risk of gastric cancer⁵³,⁵⁴ and poor prognosis in Chinese patients,⁵⁵ but not white patients.⁵⁶ The fourth GWAS included

---

**Table 1 | Representative GWAS studies in gastric cancer**

| Gene (locus)                     | Identified SNPs          | Reference | Validated? |
|-----------------------------------|--------------------------|-----------|------------|
| **Noncardia gastric cancer**      |                          |           |            |
| PSCA (8q24.3)                    | rs2976392A>G<br>rs2294008 | 49        | Yes⁴⁸,⁵⁵,¹⁸⁹–¹⁹² |
| PTGER4 or PRKAA1 (5p13.1)         | rs13361707T>C           | 57        | Yes¹⁹⁸     |
| ZBTB20 (3q13.31)                 | rs9841504C>G            | 57        | No         |
| **Diffuse gastric cancer**       |                          |           |            |
| PSCA (8q24.3)                    | rs2294008               | 49        | Yes⁴⁸,⁵⁵,¹⁸⁹–¹⁹² |
| MUC1 (1q22)                      | rs2070803G>A            | 49        | Yes⁵⁶,¹⁹⁹   |
| **Cardia and noncardia gastric cancers** |                          |           |            |
| PLCE1 (10q23)                    | rs2274223A>G            | 48, 52    | Yes⁵⁰,⁵³,²⁰⁰ |
| C20orf54 (20p13)                 | rs1304295               | 48        | No⁵⁶       |

1,006 cases and 2,273 controls in China and validated the genomic data in 3,288 cases and 3,069 controls; SNP rs13361707 (located between *PTGER4* and *PRKAA1*) and the *ZBTB20* rs9841504 SNP were associated with increased risk of gastric cancer.⁵⁷

## Cancer stem cells and aberrant pathways

Gastric carcinogenesis is complex and not fully characterized.⁵⁸ Although IGC develops after systematic progression from the preneoplastic stages, DGC is thought to arise *de novo* as the result of downregulation (mutation or promoter methylation) of *CDH1*,⁵⁹,⁶⁰ thereby permitting tumorigenesis and progression. Nevertheless, accumulated genetic alterations—mutations, amplifications, insertions, deletions and recombinations—contribute to gastric cancer,⁶¹,⁶² with more alterations accumulating as the cancer progresses (Table 2). Furthermore, increasing evidence points to the existence of gastric cancer stem cells (CSCs) that initiate malignancy by self-renewal and differentiation. Although the origin of human gastric CSCs is still unclear, the mesenchymal stem cells in the bone marrow have been suggested to have a role.⁶³,⁶⁴ Despite the efforts to genotype IGC and DGC (and identify novel subtypes),⁶⁵⁻⁷⁶ clinically relevant and robust molecular subtypes have yet to emerge; in one study, IGC and DGC were found not to be genotypically distinct, but did respond differently on the basis of their histopathological characteristics.⁷³ However, these are preliminary results. Further detailed analyses of the implicated cells and pathways might point to viable targets that can be exploited in gastric cancer; indeed, some of these strategies have been studied in other cancer types.

CSCs are known to undergo epithelial–mesenchymal transition (EMT), activate oncogenic pathways⁷⁷ and activate embryogenic signalling pathways,⁷⁸ which are essential for the self-renewal and maintenance of tumours. EMT leads to the CSC-like phenotypes.⁷⁹ CSCs are generally resistant to stress caused by reactive oxygen species, which in turn makes them relatively resistant to radiotherapy and chemotherapy. Additionally, CSCs have self-renewal capacities. These cells depend on the Wnt, Notch and Hedgehog pathways for maintenance.⁸⁰ Four pleiotropic transcriptional factors (Snail, Slug, Twist and

REVIEWs

Table 2 | Comparison of molecular characteristics of the gastric cancer subtypes*

| Biomarker       | Intestinal gastric cancer                                                                 | Diffuse gastric cancer                                                                 |
|-----------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| HER2 (ERBB2)    | Amplified or overexpressed<sup>99</sup>                                                 | NR                                                                                    |
| EGFR            | Amplified or overexpressed<sup>109</sup><br>Activating mutation<sup>201</sup>         | NR                                                                                    |
| VEGFA           | Amplified or overexpressed<sup>95</sup>                                                | NR                                                                                    |
| NOTCH1          | Amplified or overexpressed<sup>202</sup>                                               | NR                                                                                    |
| p-mTOR          | Amplified or overexpressed<br>(47–60%)                                                 | Amplified or overexpressed<br>(58–64%)<sup>203,204</sup>                             |
| MMP1, MMP7     | Amplified or overexpressed<br>(32–70%)                                                  | Amplified or overexpressed<br>(62–90%)<sup>205,206</sup>                             |
| MET             | Limited data<sup>115,116</sup>                                                         | Amplified or overexpressed<sup>196</sup><br>Activating mutation<sup>120</sup>        |
| TGFB1           | NR                                                                                     | Amplified or overexpressed<sup>92</sup>                                              |
| SHH/PTCH1/SMO   | NR                                                                                     | Amplified or overexpressed<sup>207</sup>                                              |
| HER3 (ERBB3)    | NR                                                                                     | Amplified or overexpressed<sup>92</sup>                                              |
| FGFR2           | NR                                                                                     | Amplified or overexpressed<sup>127,208</sup>                                          |
| PIK3CA          | NR                                                                                     | Amplified or overexpressed<sup>59</sup><br>Activating mutation<sup>59</sup>          |
| CDH1            | Loss of expression (69%)                                                               | Loss of function mutation<sup>209</sup><br>Loss of expression (89%)<sup>205</sup>   |
| TP53            | Loss of function mutation<br>(40% overall)<sup>†</sup><br>Loss of expression<sup>†</sup>| Loss of function mutation<br>(40% overall)<sup>†,203,204</sup><br>Loss of expression<sup>†210</sup> |
| PTEN            | Loss of function mutation<sup>†</sup><br>Loss of expression<sup>†</sup>               | Loss of function mutation<sup>‡211</sup><br>Loss of expression<sup>‡122</sup>        |

*Other molecular alterations implicated in gastric cancer not yet assigned to a subtype include *IGF1R*<sup>212</sup> and *KRAS*.<sup>213</sup> †No statistical correlation with pathological features. Abbreviations: NR, not reported; p-mTOR, phosphorylated mammalian target of rapamycin.

PI3K/Akt.<sup>94</sup> Given the considerable interest in the inhibition of angiogenesis, VEGF and VEGFR overexpression, which is common in IGC through activation of NF-kB by *H. pylori*, is a potential target.<sup>95,96</sup>

Gastric CSCs express CD133, CD44, aldehyde dehydrogenase 1 (*ALDH1*) and ATP-binding cassette sub-family G member 2 (*ABCG2*); CD44 and ALDH1 are associated with therapy resistance and might be valid therapeutic targets.<sup>97</sup> CD44 imparts stem-cell-like properties by promoting synthesis of intracellular reduced glutathione.<sup>98</sup> Among the other plausible targets in gastric cancer, HER family members have been of interest.<sup>99</sup> The oncogenic properties of HER are conferred through the RAS/MEK/MAPK and PI3K/Akt/mTOR pathways.<sup>100,101</sup> Overexpression of HER2 caused by *ERBB2* amplification is more prevalent in IGC than DGC.<sup>102,103</sup> Thus, confirming the HER2 status in patients with IGC is more important than in patients with DGC; in DGC HER overexpression is rare and might not be driving the cancer. HER2 interacts with EGFR (also known as HER1), HER3<sup>104</sup> and insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1R),<sup>105</sup> which are amplified, overexpressed<sup>106,107</sup> or acquire activating mutations in cancer.<sup>108–110</sup> *ERBB3* mutations have been reported in 10% of gastric cancers.<sup>111</sup>

Constitutive activation of c-MET can trigger proliferation and antiapoptotic signals.<sup>112</sup> Amplification or overexpression of c-MET, rather than mutation of its gene, can activate receptor tyrosine kinase function.<sup>113,114</sup> c-MET overexpression or amplification is common in DGC as well as IGC.<sup>115–117</sup> Amplified c-MET crosstalk can activate EGFR, HER2 and HER3 to establish a signalling network leading to constitutive PI3K/Akt signalling.<sup>118–120</sup> This information enables the understanding of the mechanisms of primary and secondary resistance when the c-MET pathway is inhibited and can lead to rational therapeutic strategies in the future, including dual pathway inhibition. Gastric cancers with c-MET overexpression coexpress EGFR, HER3 or both,<sup>121</sup> which is clinically relevant for strategies looking to inhibit both targets concurrently.<sup>117,120,121</sup> Indeed, the PI3K/Akt/mTOR pathway is frequently altered as a result of amplification or overexpression (*PIK3CA, AKT1*), activating mutations (*PIK3CA*)<sup>59,122</sup> or loss of *PTEN*.<sup>123</sup> Overexpression of phosphorylated mTOR can occur in DGC;<sup>59</sup> HER3 and *FGFR* amplification in DGC is another mechanism for PI3K/Akt activation.<sup>124,125</sup>

Although HER, c-MET, PI3K/Akt/mTOR, VEGFR and VEGF have been targeted in gastric and other cancer types, TGF-β and E-cadherin are not targetable because loss of function of a gene is difficult to restore in patients (although it can be achieved in cell lines). Several novel targets worth mentioning include chromatin modifiers, such as *ARID1A, MLL3, MLL* and *FAT4* (cell adhesion), which are of increasing interest and importance.<sup>75,126</sup> Frequent mutations in the genes mentioned above have been observed in 47% of gastric cancers and can potentially be therapeutic targets. As we uncover the complexity of RNA regulation of intracellular processes, more targets are likely to emerge, for example, targeting the mutations in the spliceosome machinery.

MicroRNAs

miRNAs have a role in tumorigenesis, tumour progression and metastasis, and will—in all likelihood—continue to gain importance in diagnostics, monitoring during therapy and as therapeutic targets (Figure 2).<sup>127</sup> Oncogenic microRNAs (oncomiRs) are overexpressed and inhibit tumour suppressors, leading to cell proliferation, invasion and reduced apoptosis. For example, overexpression of miR-296-5p in gastric cancer cells increased cell proliferation and inhibition of apoptosis via the repression of tumour suppressor CDX1.<sup>128</sup> Furthermore, overexpression of miR-301a directly targets tumour suppressor RUNX3,<sup>129</sup> whereas miR-17-5p/20a targets tumour protein p53-inducible nuclear protein 1 (TP53INP1).<sup>130</sup> miR-18a levels were correlated with those of survivin (also known as baculoviral inhibitor of apoptosis repeat-containing 5; BIRC5), Bcl-xL (B-cell lymphoma-extra large) and c-Myc, all three being downstream transcriptional targets of STAT3. STAT3-induced transcription can be negatively regulated by PIAS3. Thus, miR-18a acts as an oncomiR by negatively regulating PIAS3.<sup>131</sup> miRNA-372 is oncogenic as it targets TNFAIP1 and modulates NF-kB signalling in gastric cancer cells.<sup>132</sup> IRX1, a newly identified tumour suppressor gene, is inactivated by miR-544.<sup>133</sup> miR-10b is highly expressed in IGC and is associated with the depth of invasion, lymph-node involvement and metastatic progression.<sup>134</sup>

Tumour suppressor microRNAs (tsmiRs), by contrast, are downregulated miRNAs that facilitate the activity of target oncogenes. miR-195 and miR-378 have been shown to be downregulated in gastric cancer (*in vivo* and *in vitro*); their target oncogenes are CDK6 and VEGF.<sup>135</sup> The oncogene target of miR-133b is FGFR1, which is often amplified in DGC.<sup>136</sup> The target of miR-29c is Mcl-1; activation of this miRNA by celecoxib represses Mcl-1 and promotes apoptosis of gastric cancer cells.<sup>137</sup> miR-34a is downregulated in gastric cancer cells; its oncogene target is BIRC5.<sup>138</sup> miR-145 suppresses protein C-ets-1 (ETS1), also known as p54, by binding to its three-prime untranslated region (3'-UTR) and reducing the oncogenic processes.<sup>139</sup> Let-7i is frequently downregulated in most tumours and is prognostic of lymphatic invasion, nodal metastasis and poor pathological tumour response in patients with gastric cancer.<sup>140</sup> Furthermore, ZFX has a role the maintenance of CSCs and is the target of miR-144 in gastric cancer.<sup>141</sup> miR-101 targets the 3'-UTR of PTGS2 (also known as COX2) mRNA and its downregulation in gastric cancer correlates with overexpression of COX-2 and cell proliferation.<sup>142</sup> Finally, miRNA-146a inhibits NF-kB by targeting CARD10 and COPS8 in gastric cancer.<sup>143</sup>

All miRNAs are stable in serum, plasma, gastric juice and other bodily fluids, which makes them ideal biomarkers for the disease.<sup>144</sup> Indeed, miR-21 and miR-106a were shown to be overexpressed in the gastric juice of patients compared with normal controls.<sup>145</sup> Additionally, levels of miR-421 in the gastric juice of patients was higher than in controls (*P* < 0.001) and it resulted in the earlier diagnosis of gastric cancer than by serum carcinoembryonic antigen.<sup>146</sup> Similarly, plasma miR-106b,

---

**Figure 2 |** microRNA targets and functions in gastric cancer. Some oncomiRs are overexpressed in tumours and inhibit tumour suppressors, leading to cell proliferation, invasion and reduced apoptosis. By contrast, tsmiRs normally target oncogenes that are downregulated in tumours and facilitate the activity of their target oncogenes. Abbreviations: EMT, epithelial–mesenchymal transition; miR, microRNA; oncomiRs, oncogenic microRNAs; tsmiRs, tumour-suppressor microRNAs.

miR-20a and miR-221 levels were elevated in patients compared with healthy controls (*P* < 0.05).<sup>147</sup> In another study, plasma levels of miRNA-199a-3p were associated with tumour invasion, lymph-node involvement and metastases.<sup>148</sup> Circulating miR-17-5p and miR-20a (miR-17-5p/20a) have also been detected in patients with gastric cancer and both of these miRNAs correlated with overall survival and relapse-free survival.<sup>149</sup> Finally, the miR-200c expression level in the blood in patients with gastric cancer were significantly higher than in the blood of normal controls (*P* = 0.018).<sup>150</sup> Clearly, research on several miRNAs holds promise and needs to be fully developed.

## Mechanisms of resistance

Treatment resistance is inevitable; the major reasons for treatment failure in patients are the occurrence of primary and secondary resistance. For example, HER2 is the only validated biomarker in gastric cancer, and HER2-overexpressing tumours regularly become resistant to targeted agents, such as trastuzumab. Accordingly, understanding the underlying mechanisms of resistance is important. In HER2-overexpressing tumours, the predominant mechanism of resistance is compensatory signalling by other cell surface receptors.<sup>151</sup> HER2-overexpressing cells—when inhibited—reprogramme other oncogenes, including IGF1R, MET, GDF15 (encoding growth differentiation factor 15) and other members of the ERBB family.<sup>152</sup> The IGF1R-mediated resistance to HER2 targeting involves the PI3K pathway, leading to enhanced degradation of p27<sup>Kip1</sup><sub>105,153,154</sub> whereas activated

REVIEW

Extracellular

Bevacizumab VEGF 40%
Cetuximab Matuzumab
Ramucirumab Panitumumab
Trastuzumab Nimotuzumab
HGF Rilotumumab Pertuzumab Onartuzumab
Crizotinib Figitumumab
LDE 225*
BMS833923
GDC-0449

FGFR2 PDGFR+ VEGFR EGFR/HER1 HER2 c-MET IGFR+
9% 36% 27–44% 7–34% 10–15%

Dovitinib Sunitinib Erlotinib Lapatinib GSK089 ARQ197

Ras PI3K
2–20% 4–36%

Raf1 PDK-1+
0–3%

Sorafenib Mek+ Akt
29–86%

Regorafenib Erk+ mTOR Everolimus
60–88%

Chromatin-remodelling gene (EZH2, ARID, KMT2C, KMT2A) inhibitors**

Nucleus

Proliferation Survival/apoptosis Metastasis Angiogenesis

Cytoplasm

Figure 3 | Targeted therapy in gastric cancer. Percentages signify the overall molecular characteristics in the disease: FGFR2 amplification (9%), VEGF/VEGFR overexpression (36–40%), EGFR amplification and overexpression (27–44%), HER-2 amplification and overexpression (7–34%), c-MET amplification (10–15%), kRAS mutation (2–20%), Raf mutation (0–3%), PI3K mutation (4–36%), phospho-Akt expression (29–86%), phospho-mTOR expression (60–88%), PTCH1 overexpression (16%), SMO overexpression (12%) and HER3 mutations (10%, not shown). *No clinical trials of these agents have yet been reported in gastric cancer. **No known numbers or percentages for these genes and pathways. Abbreviations: EGFR, epidermal growth factor receptor; FGFR, fibroblast growth factor receptor; GLI, glioma-associated oncogene family zinc finger 1; HDAC, histone deacetylase; HER, human epidermal growth factor receptor; HGF, hepatocyte growth factor; Hh, Hedgehog; IGFR, insulin-like growth factor receptor; MMP, matrix metalloproteinase; mTOR, mammalian target of rapamycin; PDGFR, platelet-derived growth factor receptor; Ptch-1, protein patched homolog 1; Smo, smoothened; VEGF, vascular endothelial growth factor; VEGFR, vascular endothelial growth factor receptor.

c-MET mediates resistance in gastric cancer cells¹⁵⁵,¹⁵⁶ by restoring shared downstream signalling in the MAPK and Akt pathways.¹⁵⁵ Increased levels of EGFR and HER3 ligands can overcome HER2 inhibition.⁸⁸,¹²⁴,¹⁵²

Constitutively activated p95HER2, a truncated HER2 receptor, is the most intriguing mechanism of resistance in response to the blockade of the extracellular domain of HER2.¹⁵⁷ This method of conferring resistance to trastuzumab is mediated by the regulatory DNA that engages a specific protease gene to truncate the receptor. Thus, resistance is not caused by acquiring a mutation in the ERBB2 gene itself, rather another gene modifies the receptor and renders the truncated receptor constitutively active. Membrane mucins, such as mucin-4, interact with HER2 in HER2-overexpressing breast cancer cells, resulting in epitope masking that blocks trastuzumab binding.¹⁵⁸ Other factors that confer resistance to trastuzumab include focal adhesion kinase (FAK), Src and alterations in cell-cycle regulators.¹⁵⁹ Constitutive activation of PI3K caused by activating PIK3CA mutations,⁶¹ reduced PTEN expression¹⁶⁰ or deregulated signalling can induce

resistance to HER2 inhibition.⁶¹,¹⁶¹,¹⁶² Finally, STAT3 activation can mediate resistance as a result of production of IL-6.¹⁶³ These data suggest that cancer cells have many redundant mechanisms to overcome resistance to therapy. Accordingly, we have considerable work ahead of us, including exploring antibody-drug conjugates and immune modulation therapies.

### Clinical considerations

Much clinical development is underway in the setting of gastric cancer, which includes many of the targets discussed herein. Many of the recently completed phase III trials should have an impact on patient care and future research directions (Figure 3). Notably, any discussion regarding clinical developments and the future of gastric cancer care must be made with consideration of the regional differences, both in terms of epidemiology and standard practice. The epidemiology and predominant location of primary gastric cancer varies geographically¹⁶⁴ because of variations in genetic susceptibility, predominance of certain histological phenotypes (for example,
IGC is frequent in the endemic areas) and carcinogenic determinants, including *H. pylori*.<sup>165</sup> Gastric cardia cancer is more common in the West, whereas noncardia gastric cancer is more common in the endemic regions. Besides these differences, the surgical approach is more comprehensive in Asia—where a D2 dissection (lymph node dissection that includes regional nodes outside the perigastric area) is routine<sup>166</sup>—than in the West, where D0 (without formal node dissection) or D1 (dissection limited to perigastric nodes) approaches are preferred. Other regional differences are reflected in the adjuvant strategy for localized gastric cancer (LGC). In the West, postoperative chemoradiotherapy or preoperative chemotherapy has been embraced as the adjunctive strategy for patients with localized gastric cancer.<sup>167</sup> By contrast, in Southeast Asia, two prospective trials (ACTS-GC<sup>168</sup> and CLASSIC)<sup>169</sup> established the benefit of postoperative adjuvant chemotherapy. Many of these factors might account for differences in survival of patients in different regions.<sup>166</sup>

### Localized gastric cancer

LGC can be staged as clinical T1 (cT1) or higher with or without regional nodes. Once a patient is diagnosed with LGC, a multidisciplinary evaluation (by medical oncologists, surgical oncologists, surgeons, gastroenterologists, pathologists, radiation oncologists, geneticists [if appropriate] and nutritionists) is highly recommended prior to initiating any therapy.<sup>170</sup> Endoscopic resection for a T1 lesion, when feasible, is recommended. For tumours not amenable to effective endoscopic therapy, surgery should be considered. However, adjunctive therapies (preoperative and postoperative) have contributed to the higher cure rates than those obtained by surgery.<sup>167,171–173</sup> Indeed, in North America and Europe, results from the INT-0116<sup>167</sup> and Medical Research Council Adjuvant Gastric Infusional Chemotherapy (MAGIC)<sup>174</sup> trials have established specific adjunctive strategies. In Asia, postoperative adjuvant chemotherapy has been established as the standard of care.<sup>168,169</sup>

#### Postoperative adjuvant chemoradiotherapy

Despite safety concerns, such as haematological effects (leukopenia) and treatment-related deaths (cardiac events, pulmonary fibrosis and sepsis as a complication of myelosuppression) during the INT-0116 phase III trial (conducted in the USA) of observation after surgery versus adjuvant chemoradiotherapy (5-fluorouracil, leucovorin and radiotherapy) after surgery, chemoradiotherapy improved the 5-year cure rate by ~10%.<sup>167</sup> This advantage prevailed with longer follow-up durations.<sup>175</sup> However, a subsequent US-based trial coordinated by Cancer and Leukemia Group B produced negative results when investigating the adjuvant chemotherapy strategy (epirubicin, cisplatin and 5-fluorouracil).<sup>176</sup> Similarly, the ARTIST trial used the INT-0116 strategy, but differed in two aspects: the control group was treated with chemotherapy and all patients had undergone a D2 gastrectomy.<sup>177</sup> The trial failed to demonstrate a benefit for those receiving chemoradiotherapy,<sup>178</sup> raising more questions than it answered.

---

### Postoperative chemotherapy

The benefits of adjuvant chemotherapy after D2 gastrectomy were first established in Japan using S-1 (an oral fluoropyrimidine) as the adjuvant.<sup>168</sup> The Adjuvant Chemotherapy Trial of TS-1 for Gastric Cancer (ACTS-GC)<sup>168</sup> randomly assigned 1,059 patients to 1 year of S-1 or observation. The primary analysis demonstrated a 33% improvement in overall survival for the S-1 group, results that prevailed after a longer follow-up duration (5 years).<sup>178</sup> A second Asian study, the Capecitabine and Oxaliplatin Adjuvant Study in Stomach Cancer (CLASSIC trial) randomly assigned 1,035 patients who had undergone D2 gastrectomy to capecitabine plus oxaliplatin for 6 months or observation,<sup>169</sup> documenting benefit for chemotherapy for the end point of disease-free survival (at 3 years; hazard ratio \[HR\] = 0.56, 95% CI, 0.44–0.72; *P* < 0.0001). A meta-analysis based on data from 3,710 patients showed a 7% improvement in overall survival for fluorouracil-based postoperative chemotherapy when compared with surgery alone,<sup>173</sup> but this evidence is not robust; the analysis combined many studies from different time periods with differing eligibility criteria and therapeutic approaches, making it difficult to make a firm conclusion.

#### Perioperative or preoperative chemotherapy

The MAGIC trial, which randomly assigned 504 patients (74% of whom had gastric cancer), established the evidence for perioperative chemotherapy (epirubicin, cisplatin and 5-fluorouracil) for gastroesophageal cancer in the West.<sup>174</sup> A second, French trial (in which 25% of the patients had gastric cancer) terminated early because of the lack of interest, but demonstrated benefit for preoperative chemotherapy (5-fluorouracil and cisplatin).<sup>172</sup> Several trials using a variety of adjuvant strategies are currently ongoing (Table 3).<sup>179</sup>

### Advanced gastric cancer

Most targeted therapies investigated in unenriched (that is, patients are not selected based on a biomarker) patient populations have produced disappointing results (Table 3). Despite these results, the infrastructure for conducting regional or global phase III trials has ripened and timely patient accrual is less of a problem. However, many questions regarding the lack of progress for patients with advanced gastric cancer remain. Glaring unanswered questions include: would further understanding of molecular biology of gastric cancer lead to selection of appropriate patient subsets and, therefore, more effective therapy? Are regional differences in gastric cancers (and patient genetics) so substantial that global trials in unenriched populations will not be fruitful? Do second-line and third-line therapies produce substantial survival advantages as to jeopardize the primary end point of overall survival required by most regulatory agencies for first-line phase III trials? Certainly, many other unknown factors are likely to contribute to the disappointing results observed thus far in advanced gastric cancer. We stress that use of a single biological agent (such as trastuzumab) in enriched populations (HER2-overexpressing tumours) provides only marginal advantage because of the presence of primary resistance
Table 3 | Major phase III trials for gastric cancer

| Trial | $n$ | Treatment arms | HR for overall survival ($P$) | Survival comparison |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| **Localized gastric cancer** |  |  |  |  |
| INT-116 (2001)<sup>167</sup> | 556 | Surgery and chemoradiotherapy* versus surgery | 1.32 (0.004) | Overall survival: 36 months versus 27 months |
| MAGIC (2006)<sup>174</sup> | 503 | ECF, surgery, ECF versus surgery | 0.75 (0.009) | 5-year overall survival: 36.3% versus 23% |
| CALGB-80101 (2011)<sup>214</sup> | 546 | 5-FU, chemoradiotherapy, 5-FU versus ECF, chemoradiotherapy, ECF | 1.03 (0.80) | Overall survival: 37 months versus 38 months |
| ARTIST (2012)<sup>177</sup> | 458 | Surgery and XP versus surgery, XP, XRT, XP | 0.6865 (0.0862) | 3-year DFS: 74.2% versus 78.2% |
| ACTS-GC (2007)<sup>168</sup> | 1,059 | Surgery versus surgery and S-1 | 0.68 (0.003) | 3-year overall survival: 70.1% versus 80.1%<br>3-year RFS: 65.4% versus 53.1% |
| CLASSIC (2012)<sup>169</sup> | 1,035 | XELOX and surgery versus surgery | 0.56 (<0.0001) | 3-year DFS: 74% versus 59% |
| FNLCC (2011)<sup>172</sup> | 224 | Perioperative chemotherapy versus surgery | 0.69 (0.003) | 5-year overall survival: 38% versus 24% |
| SAMIT (2011)<sup>*215</sup> | 1,495 | Surgery and UFT versus surgery and S-1 versus surgery, paclitaxel and UFT versus surgery, paclitaxel and S-1 | NR | NR |
| ARTIST-II<sup>*</sup> | 1,000 | Surgery and XP versus surgery, XP, XRT and XP | NR | NR |
| MAGIC-B (2013)<sup>*218</sup> | 1,100 | ECX and bevacizumab versus ECX | NR | NR |
| TOPGEAR (2012)<sup>*216</sup> | 752 | Preoperative chemotherapy versus preoperative chemoradiotherapy | NR | NR |
| CRITICS (2011)<sup>*179</sup> | 788 | ECX, surgery and ECX versus ECX, surgery, chemotherapy and chemoradiotherapy | NR | NR |
| **Advanced gastric cancer—first-line** |  |  |  |  |
| ToGA (2010)<sup>$182</sup> | 584 | CX, CF and trastuzumab versus CX and CF | 0.74 (0.0046) | Overall survival: 13.8 months versus 11.1 months |
| AVAGAST (2011)<sup>186</sup> | 774 | Cisplatin and 5-FU versus cisplatin, 5-FU and bevacizumab | 0.87 (0.1002) | Overall survival: 10.1 months versus 12.2 months<br>PFS: 5.3 months versus 6.7 months |
| EXPAND (2012)<sup>217</sup> | 904 | CX versus CX and cetuximab | 1.004 (0.9547) | Overall survival: 10.7 months versus 9.4 months |
| REAL-3 (2012)<sup>219</sup> | 574 | EOC versus mEOC–P | 1.37 (0.013) | Overall survival: 11.3 months versus 8.8 months |
| V325 (2006)<sup>180</sup> | 457 | DCF versus CF | 1.47 (<0.001) | Time to progression: 5.6 months versus 3.7 months |
| SPIRITS (2008)<sup>181</sup> | 305 | S-1 and cisplatin versus S-1 | 0.77 (0.04) | Overall survival: 13.0 months versus 11.0 months |
| FLAGS (2010)<sup>188</sup> | 1,053 | Cisplatin and S-1 versus cisplatin and 5-FU | 0.92 (0.20) | Overall survival: 8.6 months versus 7.9 months |
| LOGIC<sup>*220</sup> | 545 | CapeOx and lapatinib versus CapeOx and placebo | NR | NR |
| **Advanced gastric cancer—second-line** |  |  |  |  |
| GRANITE-1 (2009)<sup>190</sup> | 648 | BSC and placebo versus BSC and everolimus | 0.90 (0.1244) | Overall survival: 4.3 months versus 5.4 months |
| REGARD (2012)<sup>192,193</sup> | 355 | BSC and ramicirumab versus BSC | 0.776 (0.0473) | Overall survival: 5.2 months versus 3.8 months |
| TYTAN (2012)<sup>195</sup> | 261 | Lapatinib and paclitaxel versus paclitaxel | 0.85 (0.2441) | Overall survival: 11.0 months versus 8.9 months |
| Kang et al.<sup>221</sup> (2012) | 202 | BSC versus docetaxel or irinotecan | 0.657 (0.007) | Overall survival: 3.8 months versus 5.3 months |
| AIO (2011)<sup>189</sup> | 40 | Irinotecan and BSC versus BSC | 0.48 (0.012) | Overall survival: 4.0 months versus 2.4 months |
| COUGAR-02 (2012)<sup>194,222</sup> | 168 | Docetaxel and ASC versus ASC | 0.67 (0.01) | Overall survival: 5.2 months versus 3.6 months |

* *45 Gy radiotherapy plus 5-FU.* † *Ongoing trial.* § *HR reduced to 0.8 on follow-up analysis.* <sup>183</sup> Abbreviations: 5-FU, 5-fluorouracil; ASC, active symptom control; BSC, best supportive care; CapeOx, capecitabine and oxaliplatin; CF, cisplatin and 5-FU; CX, cisplatin and capecitabine; DCF, docetaxel, cisplatin and 5-fluorouracil; DFS, disease-free survival; ECF, epirubicin, cisplatin and 5-FU; ECX, epirubicin, cisplatin and capecitabine; EOC, epirubicin, oxaliplatin and capecitabine; HR, hazard ratio; mEOC–P, EOC plus panitumumab; NR, not reported; PFS, progression-free survival; RFS, relapse-free survival; UFT, tegafur and uracil; XELOX, capecitabine and oxaliplatin; XP, capecitabine and cisplatin; XRT, XP and radiotherapy.
(administered capecitabine and cisplatin, with (experimental) or without (control) cetuximab. Median progression-free survival was 4.4 months in the experimental group compared with 5.6 months in the control group. In the REAL-3 trial,^{185} panitumumab was added to epirubicin, oxaliplatin and capecitabine. The experimental (four-agent) group had shorter overall survival (8.8 months) compared with the control (three-agent) group (11.3 months; HR 1.37). In both trials, the results demonstrated that the addition of anti-EGFR antibodies (cetuximab or panitumumab) to chemotherapy did not confer a benefit. Except for the ToGA trial,^{182} all studies investigating a biological agent were conducted in an unenriched population.

Amongst the failed trials in advanced gastric cancer, was the AVAGAST trial, which was conducted in 774 patients who were randomly assigned to chemotherapy with or without bevacizumab (which targets VEGF-A). This trial did not meet its primary end point of overall survival.^{186} Retrospective biomarker evaluation of plasma VEGF-A and neuropilin-1 levels seemed to be associated with bevacizumab efficacy; high plasma VEGF-A and low tumour neuropilin-1 levels seemed to correlate with improved overall survival, but neither of these biomarkers is validated.^{187} Another noteworthy trial is the First line Advanced Gastric Cancer Study (FLAGS), conducted in >1,000 patients who were randomly assigned to receive S-1 plus cisplatin versus 5-fluorouracil plus cisplatin, which also did not meet its primary end point of an overall survival advantage.^{188}

### Second-line therapy

A small phase III Arbeitsgemeinschaft Internistische Onkologie (AIO) trial of 40 patients randomly assigned to irinotecan with best supportive care (BSC) or BSC alone showed that overall survival could be extended using irinotecan plus BSC.^{189} The randomized GRANITE-1 study (NCT00879333)^{190} included >600 patients and compared everolimus with placebo in the second-line or third-line settings, but did not achieve its primary end point of improved overall survival.^{191} However, the REGARD trial (NCT00917384)^{192} that compared BSC with or without ramucirumab (which targets VEGFR2) in 345 patients demonstrated a marginal improvement in overall survival for ramucirumab (*P* = 0.047),^{193} suggesting that ramucirumab has only a borderline effect. More impressively, the randomized Cougar-02 trial of approximately 186 patients assigned to BSC or docetaxel plus BSC demonstrated a significant prolongation of overall survival in the combination arm. The patients who received docetaxel survived 44% longer than those who did not receive docetaxel; overall survival was 5.2 months versus 3.6 months, respectively (*P* = 0.01, HR 0.67).^{194} Lapatinib—a dual inhibitor of HER2 and EGFR—was investigated in a phase III study (TYTAN) in >300 patients assigned to either lapatinib or placebo, but the primary end point of prolonged overall survival was not achieved.^{195}

Targeting the c-MET pathway in these patients is also of interest. In a small study with crizotinib, two out of four patients with five or more *MET* copy number gains had a longer response duration than those with fewer than five copies of the gene.^{196} Furthermore, rilotumumab

(AMG 102), a fully human monoclonal antibody, demonstrated longer overall survival for patients whose tumours had high total c-MET expression.^{197}

### Conclusions

Despite considerable advances in biotechnology that have improved our understanding of cancer, immense complexities confront us. Although gastric cancer lags behind many other tumour types in terms of genetic sequencing and specially designed therapies, more progress is anticipated. Greater understanding of the pathogenesis of IGC by *H. pylori* is poised to help with increasingly sophisticated preventive strategies. Germline susceptibility investigations have uncovered novel genes, but clinical implementation has proven problematic and more work is needed. Clinically, progress has been slow, but adjuvant strategies are now frequently employed in patients with LGC around the world, which should be considered an important advancement. Future progress will be propelled by further improvements in biotechnologies to produce better biomarkers and drugs.

Given our current knowledge, patients who are ≤45 years old should be recommended genetic counselling followed by genetic testing, if needed. Patients with advanced gastric cancer could benefit from HER2/neu testing.^{151} The value of assessing other somatic alterations in gastric cancer is currently ongoing, but results from ongoing large-scale genomic sequencing projects will yield insights into the landscape of genomic alterations. Banking of research blood (and other bodily fluids) as well as tumour tissue from all patients for studies should enable detailed examination of this heterogeneous cancer, and is highly desirable but challenging. Interrogation of blood for specific alterations in circulating DNA, RNA, peptides, proteins and tumour cells holds particular promise for the early detection of gastric cancer and its monitoring during therapy and surveillance.

All patients with LGC must undergo multidisciplinary evaluation and discussion by experts representing each major discipline. LGC is a complex disease and patients should be treated only by experienced high-volume physicians and at centres with excellent infrastructure. Patients with clinical T1aN0 gastric cancer should be evaluated for endoscopic therapy. Patients with clinical >T1bN0 gastric cancer should be offered adjunctive therapy (preoperative, postoperative or both). Suitable patients with advanced disease should be offered second-line systemic therapy. Investigations of therapeutic agents that take advantage of the host immune system and mechanisms (including antibody–drug conjugates) hold immense promise.

#### Review criteria

The MEDLINE and PubMed databases were searched for original articles published between 1992 and 2013 using the search terms “gastric cancer”, “targeted therapy gastric cancer”, “localized and advanced gastric cancer”, “genes gastric cancer”. All papers identified were English-language full-text papers. The reference lists of identified articles were also interrogated for additional papers. This Review is representative of the topics discussed and, therefore, has not cited all reports.
1.  Jamal, A. *et al.* Global cancer statistics. CA Cancer J. Clin. **61**, 69–90 (2011).
2.  National Cancer Institute at the National Institutes of Health. Cellular Classification of Gastric Cancer [online], http://www.cancer.gov/cancertopics/pdq/treatment/gastric/HealthProfessional/page2 (2013).
3.  Bertuccio, P. *et al.* Recent patterns in gastric cancer: a global overview. Int. J. Cancer **125**, 666–673 (2009).
4.  Chen, J., Bu, X. L., Wang, Q. Y., Hu, P. J. & Chen, M. H. Decreasing seroprevalence of Helicobacter pylori infection during 1993–2003 in Guangzhou, southern China. Helicobacter **12**, 164–169 (2007).
5.  Kawakami, E., Machado, R. S., Ogata, S. K. & Langner, M. Decrease in prevalence of Helicobacter pylori infection during a 10-year period in Brazilian children. Arq. Gastroenterol. **45**, 147–151 (2008).
6.  Tkachenko, M. A. *et al.* Dramatic changes in the prevalence of Helicobacter pylori infection during childhood: a 10-year follow-up study in Russia. J. Pediatr. Gastroenterol. Nutr. **45**, 428–432 (2007).
7.  Lee, K. J. *et al.* Gastric cancer screening and subsequent risk of gastric cancer: a large-scale population-based cohort study, with a 13-year follow-up in Japan. Int. J. Cancer **118**, 2315–2321 (2006).
8.  Parkin, D. M. The global health burden of infection-associated cancers in the year 2002. Int. J. Cancer **118**, 3030–3044 (2006).
9.  Axon, A. Review article: gastric cancer and Helicobacter pylori. Aliment. Pharmacol. Ther. **16** (Suppl. 4), 83–88 (2002).
10. Kim, S. S., Ruiz, V. E., Carroll, J. D. & Moss, S. F. Helicobacter pylori in the pathogenesis of gastric cancer and gastric lymphoma. Cancer Lett. **305**, 228–238 (2011).
11. Conteduca, V. *et al.* H. pylori infection and gastric cancer: state of the art (review). Int. J. Oncol. **42**, 5–18 (2013).
12. Rizzato, C. *et al.* Risk of advanced gastric precancerous lesions in Helicobacter pylori infected subjects is influenced by ABO blood group and cagA status. Int. J. Cancer **133**, 315–322 (2013).
13. Correa, P. & Houghton, J. Carcinogenesis of Helicobacter pylori. Gastroenterology **133**, 659–672 (2007).
14. Tsugawa, H. *et al.* Reactive oxygen species-induced autophagic degradation of Helicobacter pylori CagA is specifically suppressed in cancer stem-like cells. Cell Host Microbe **12**, 764–777 (2012).
15. Pimentel-Nunes, P. *et al.* Helicobacter pylori induces increased expression of Toll-like receptors and decreased toll-interacting protein in gastric mucosa that persists throughout gastric carcinogenesis. Helicobacter **18**, 22–32 (2013).
16. Peek, R. M. Jr *et al.* Helicobacter pylori cagA+ strains and dissociation of gastric epithelial cell proliferation from apoptosis. J. Natl Cancer Inst. **89**, 863–868 (1997).
17. Graham, D. Y. & Yamaoka, Y. H. pylori and cagA: relationships with gastric cancer, duodenal ulcer, and reflux esophagitis and its complications. Helicobacter **3**, 145–151 (1998).
18. Hatakeyama, M. Helicobacter pylori cagA—a potential bacterial oncoprotein that functionally mimics the mammalian Gab family of adaptor proteins. Microbes Infect. **5**, 143–150 (2003).
19. Mueller, D. *et al.* c-Src and c-Abl kinases control hierarchic phosphorylation and function of the CagA effector protein in Western and East Asian Helicobacter pylori strains. J. Clin. Invest. **122**, 1553–1566 (2012).
20. Müller, A. Multistep activation of the Helicobacter pylori effector CagA. J. Clin. Invest. **122**, 1192–1195 (2012).
21. Higashi, H. *et al.* SHP-2 tyrosine phosphatase as an intracellular target of Helicobacter pylori CagA protein. Science **295**, 683–686 (2002).
22. Meyer-ter-Vehn, T., Covacci, A., Kist, M. & Pahl, H. L. Helicobacter pylori activates mitogen-activated protein kinase cascades and induces expression of the proto-oncogenes c-fos and c-jun. J. Biol. Chem. **275**, 16064–16072 (2000).
23. Schirrmacher, W. *et al.* Ectodomain shedding of E-cadherin and c-Met is induced by Helicobacter pylori infection. Exp. Cell Res. **315**, 3500–3508 (2009).
24. Murata-Kamiya, N. *et al.* Helicobacter pylori cagA interacts with E-cadherin and deregulates the β-catenin signal that promotes intestinal transdifferentiation in gastric epithelial cells. Oncogene **26**, 4617–4626 (2007).
25. Suzuki, M. *et al.* Interaction of CagA with Crk plays an important role in Helicobacter pylori-induced loss of gastric epithelial cell adhesion. J. Exp. Med. **202**, 1235–1247 (2005).
26. Hatakeyama, M. Linking epithelial polarity and carcinogenesis by multitasking Helicobacter pylori virulence factor cagA. Oncogene **27**, 7047–7054 (2008).
27. Bartchewsky, W. Jr *et al.* Effect of Helicobacter pylori infection on IL-8, IL-1β and COX-2 expression in patients with chronic gastritis and gastric cancer. Scand. J. Gastroenterol. **44**, 153–161 (2009).
28. Li, C. Q., Pignatelli, B. & Ohshima, H. Coexpression of interleukin-8 and inducible nitric oxide synthase in gastric mucosa infected with cagA+ Helicobacter pylori. Dig. Dis. Sci. **45**, 55–62 (2000).
29. Suganuma, M. *et al.* TNF-α-inducing protein, a carcinogenic factor secreted from H. pylori, enters gastric cancer cells. Int. J. Cancer **123**, 117–122 (2008).
30. Brandt, S., Kwok, T., Hartig, R., König, W. & Backert, S. NF-κB activation and potentiation of proinflammatory responses by the Helicobacter pylori cagA protein. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA **102**, 9300–9305 (2005).
31. Rad, R. *et al.* Synergistic effect of Helicobacter pylori virulence factors and interleukin-1 polymorphisms for the development of severe histological changes in the gastric mucosa. J. Infect. Dis. **188**, 272–281 (2003).
32. Zambon, C. F. *et al.* Pro- and anti-inflammatory cytokines gene polymorphisms and Helicobacter pylori infection: interactions influence outcome. Cytokine **29**, 141–152 (2005).
33. Chang, Y. J. *et al.* Induction of cyclooxygenase-2 overexpression in human gastric epithelial cells by Helicobacter pylori involves TLR2/TLR9 and c-Src-dependent nuclear factor-κB activation. Mol. Pharmacol. **66**, 1465–1477 (2004).
34. Walduck, A. K. *et al.* Identification of novel cyclooxygenase-2-dependent genes in Helicobacter pylori infection in vivo. Mol. Cancer **8**, 22 (2009).
35. Seo, J. H., Kim, H. & Kim, K. H. Cyclooxygenase-2 expression by transcription factors in Helicobacter pylori-infected gastric epithelial cells: comparison between HP 99 and NCTC 11637. Ann. NY Acad. Sci. **973**, 477–480 (2002).
36. Liu, A. Q., Ge, L. Y., Ye, X. Q., Luo, X. L. & Luo, Y. Reduced FAF1 expression and Helicobacter infection: correlations with clinicopathological features in gastric cancer. Gastroenterol. Res. Pract. **2012**, 153219 (2012).
37. Wang, G. *et al.* Involvement of aquaporin 3 in Helicobacter pylori-related gastric diseases. PLoS ONE **7**, e49104 (2012).
38. Tamura, G. *et al.* E-cadherin gene promoter hypermethylation in primary human gastric carcinomas. J. Natl Cancer Inst. **92**, 569–573 (2000).
39. Becker, K. F. & Höfler, H. Frequent somatic allelic inactivation of the E-cadherin gene in gastric carcinomas. J. Natl Cancer Inst. **87**, 1082–1084 (1995).
40. Peterson, A. J. *et al.* Helicobacter pylori infection promotes methylation and silencing of trefoil factor 2, leading to gastric tumor development in mice and humans. Gastroenterology **139**, 2005–2017 (2010).
41. Katayama, Y., Takahashi, M. & Kuwayama, H. Helicobacter pylori causes RUNX3 gene methylation and its loss of expression in gastric epithelial cells, which is mediated by nitric oxide produced by macrophages. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. **388**, 496–500 (2009).
42. Yoshida, T. *et al.* Altered mucosal DNA methylation in parallel with highly active Helicobacter pylori-related gastritis. Gastric Cancer http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10120-012-0230-x.
43. Matsumoto, Y. *et al.* Helicobacter pylori infection triggers aberrant expression of activation-induced cytidine deaminase in gastric epithelium. Nat. Med. **13**, 470–476 (2007).
44. Holcombe, C. Helicobacter pylori: the African enigma. Gut **33**, 429–431 (1992).
45. Guilford, P. *et al.* E-cadherin germline mutations in familial gastric cancer. Nature **392**, 402–405 (1998).
46. Huntsman, D. G. *et al.* Early gastric cancer in young, asymptomatic carriers of germ-line E-cadherin mutations. N. Engl. J. Med. **344**, 1904–1909 (2001).
47. Hu, Z., Ajani, J. A. & Wei, Q. Molecular epidemiology of gastric cancer: current status and future prospects. Gastrointest. Cancer Res. **1**, 12–19 (2007).
48. Wang, L. D. *et al.* Genome-wide association study of esophageal squamous cell carcinoma in Chinese subjects identifies susceptibility loci at PLCE1 and C20orf54. Nat. Genet. **42**, 759–763 (2010).
49. Study Group of Millennium Genome Project for Cancer. Genetic variation in PSCA is associated with susceptibility to diffuse-type gastric cancer. Nat. Genet. **40**, 730–740 (2008).
50. Wang, T., Zhang, L., Li, H., Wang, B. & Chen, K. Prostate stem cell antigen polymorphisms and susceptibility to gastric cancer: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Cancer Epidemiol. Biomarkers Prev. **21**, 843–850 (2012).
51. Saeki, N., Gu, J., Yoshida, T. & Wu, X. Prostate stem cell antigen: a Jekyll and Hyde molecule? Clin. Cancer Res. **16**, 3533–3538 (2010).
52. Abnet, C. C. *et al.* A shared susceptibility locus in PLCE1 at 10q23 for gastric adenocarcinoma and esophageal squamous cell carcinoma. Nat. Genet. **42**, 764–767 (2010).
53. Zhang, H. *et al.* Genetic variants at 1q22 and 10q23 reproducibly associated with gastric cancer susceptibility in a Chinese population. Carcinogenesis **32**, 848–852 (2011).
54. Wang, M. *et al.* Potentially functional variants of PLCE1 identified by GWASs contribute to gastric adenocarcinoma susceptibility in an eastern Chinese population. PLoS ONE **7**, e31932 (2012).
55. Luo, D. *et al.* Genetic variation in PLCE1 is associated with gastric cancer survival in a Chinese population. J. Gastroenterol. **46**, 1260–1266 (2011).
56. Palmer, A. J. *et al.* Genetic variation in C20orf54, PLCE1 and MUC1 and the risk of upper gastrointestinal cancers in Caucasian populations. Eur. J. Cancer Prev. **21**, 541–544 (2012).

57. Shi, Y. *et al.* A genome-wide association study identifies new susceptibility loci for non-cardia gastric cancer at 3q13.31 and 5p13.1. *Nat. Genet.* **43**, 1215–1218 (2011).

58. Wu, K. C. *et al.* Molecular basis of therapeutic approaches to gastric cancer. *J. Gastroenterol. Hepatol.* **24**, 37–41 (2009).

59. Wong, H. & Yau, T. Targeted therapy in the management of advanced gastric cancer: are we making progress in the era of personalized medicine? *Oncologist* **17**, 346–358 (2012).

60. Schneider, B. G. *et al.* Promoter DNA hypermethylation in gastric biopsies from subjects at high and low risk for gastric cancer. *Int. J. Cancer* **127**, 2588–2597 (2010).

61. Markman, B., Dienstmann, R. & Tabernero, J. Targeting the PI3K/Akt/mTOR pathway—beyond rapalogs. *Oncotarget* **1**, 530–543 (2010).

62. Chalhoub, N. & Baker, S. J. PTEN and the PI3-kinase pathway in cancer. *Annu. Rev. Pathol.* **4**, 127–150 (2009).

63. Bergfeld, S. A. & DeClerck, Y. A. Bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells and the tumor microenvironment. *Cancer Metastasis Rev.* **29**, 249–261 (2010).

64. Takaishi, S., Okumura, T. & Wang, T. C. Gastric cancer stem cells. *J. Clin. Oncol.* **26**, 2876–2882 (2008).

65. Chen, C. N. *et al.* Gene expression profile predicts patient survival of gastric cancer after surgical resection. *J. Clin. Oncol.* **23**, 7286–7295 (2005).

66. Cho, J. Y. *et al.* Gene expression signature-based prognostic risk score in gastric cancer. *Clin. Cancer Res.* **17**, 1850–1857 (2011).

67. Deng, N. *et al.* A comprehensive survey of genomic alterations in gastric cancer reveals systematic patterns of molecular exclusivity and co-occurrence among distinct therapeutic targets. *Gut* **61**, 673–684 (2012).

68. Ivanova, T. *et al.* Integrated epigenomics identifies BMP4 as a modulator of cisplatin sensitivity in gastric cancer. *Gut* **62**, 22–33 (2013).

69. Kim, H. K. *et al.* A gene expression signature of acquired chemoresistance to cisplatin and fluorouracil combination chemotherapy in gastric cancer patients. *PLoS ONE* **6**, e16694 (2011).

70. Kim, H. K. *et al.* Three-gene predictor of clinical outcome for gastric cancer patients treated with chemotherapy. *Pharmacogenomics J.* **12**, 119–127 (2012).

71. Ooi, C. H. *et al.* Oncogenic pathway combinations predict clinical prognosis in gastric cancer. *PLoS Genet.* **5**, e1000676 (2009).

72. Takeno, A. *et al.* Gene expression profile prospectively predicts peritoneal relapse after curative surgery of gastric cancer. *Ann. Surg. Oncol.* **17**, 1033–1042 (2010).

73. Tan, I. B. *et al.* Intrinsic subtypes of gastric cancer, based on gene expression pattern, predict survival and respond differently to chemotherapy. *Gastroenterology* **141**, 476–485 (2011).

74. Wu, Y. *et al.* Comprehensive genomic meta-analysis identifies intra-tumoural stroma as a predictor of survival in patients with gastric cancer. *Gut* **26**, 1100–1111 (2013).

75. Zang, Z. J. *et al.* Exome sequencing of gastric adenocarcinoma identifies recurrent somatic mutations in cell adhesion and chromatin remodeling genes. *Nat. Genet.* **44**, 570–574 (2012).

76. Zouridis, H. *et al.* Methylation subtypes and large-scale epigenetic alterations in gastric cancer. *Sci. Transl. Med.* **4**, 156ra140 (2012).

77. Tan, D. S., Gerlinger, M., Teh, B. T. & Swanton, C. Anti-cancer drug resistance: understanding the mechanisms through the use of integrative genomics and functional RNA interference. *Eur. J. Cancer* **46**, 2166–2177 (2010).

78. Subramaniam, D., Ramalingam, S., Houchen, C. W. & Anant, S. Cancer stem cells: a novel paradigm for cancer prevention and treatment. *Mini Rev. Med. Chem.* **10**, 359–371 (2010).

79. Mani, S. A. *et al.* The epithelial–mesenchymal transition generates cells with properties of stem cells. *Cell* **133**, 704–715 (2008).

80. Peacock, C. D. & Watkins, D. N. Cancer stem cells and the ontogeny of lung cancer. *J. Clin. Oncol.* **26**, 2883–2889 (2008).

81. Peinado, H., Olmeda, D. & Cano, A. Snail, Zeb and bHLH factors in tumour progression: an alliance against the epithelial phenotype? *Nat. Rev. Cancer* **7**, 415–428 (2007).

82. Voutsadakis, I. A. The ubiquitin-proteasome system and signal transduction pathways regulating epithelial mesenchymal transition of cancer. *J. Biomed. Sci.* **19**, 67 (2012).

83. Li, Y. Q. *et al.* c-Met signaling induces a reprogramming network and supports the glioblastoma stem-like phenotype. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **108**, 9951–9956 (2011).

84. Roberts, A. B. & Wakefield, L. M. The two faces of transforming growth factor β in carcinogenesis. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **100**, 8621–8623 (2003).

85. Bierie, B. & Moses, H. L. TGFβ: the molecular Jekyll and Hyde of cancer. *Nat. Rev. Cancer* **6**, 506–520 (2006).

86. Watabe, T. & Miyazono, K. Roles of TGF-β family signaling in stem cell renewal and differentiation. *Cell Res.* **19**, 103–115 (2009).

87. Singh, A. & Settleman, J. EMT, cancer stem cells and drug resistance: an emerging axis of evil in the war on cancer. *Oncogene* **29**, 4741–4751 (2010).

88. Zhou, J. B. *et al.* Activation of the PTEN/mTOR/STAT3 pathway in breast cancer stem-like cells is required for viability and maintenance. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **104**, 16158–16163 (2007).

89. Hirsch, H. A., Iliopoulos, D., Tsichlis, P. N. & Struhl, K. Metformin selectively targets cancer stem cells, and acts together with chemotherapy to block tumor growth and prolong remission. *Cancer Res.* **69**, 7507–7511 (2009).

90. Singh, B. N., Fu, J., Srivastava, R. K. & Shankar, S. Hedgehog signaling antagonist GDC-0449 (vismodegib) inhibits pancreatic cancer stem cell characteristics: molecular mechanisms. *PLoS ONE* **6**, e27306 (2011).

91. Heindl, S. *et al.* Relevance of MET activation and genetic alterations of KRAS and E-cadherin for cetuximab sensitivity of gastric cancer cell lines. *J. Cancer Res. Clin. Oncol.* **138**, 843–858 (2012).

92. Komuro, A. *et al.* Diffuse-type gastric carcinoma: progression, angiogenesis, and transforming growth factor β signaling. *J. Natl Cancer Inst.* **101**, 592–604 (2009).

93. Ebi, M., Kataoka, H., Higashiyama, S. & Joh, T. TGFβ induces EGFR transactivation and HB-EGF C-terminal fragment nuclear translocation through ADAM17 activation in gastric cancer cells. *Gastroenterology* **140** (Suppl. 1), S629 (2011).

94. Kang, M. H. *et al.* Inhibition of PI3 kinase/Akt pathway is required for BMP2-induced EMT and invasion. *Oncol. Rep.* **22**, 525–534 (2009).

95. Takahashi, Y. *et al.* Significance of vessel count and vascular endothelial growth factor and its receptor (KDR) in intestinal-type gastric cancer. *Clin. Cancer Res.* **2**, 1679–1684 (1996).

96. Sharma, V. K., Vasudeva, R. & Howden, C. W. Changing demographics of gastric cancer: 15 year experience. *Gastroenterology* **114** (Suppl. 1), A40 (1998).

97. Takaishi, S. *et al.* Identification of gastric cancer stem cells using the cell surface marker CD44. *Stem Cells* **27**, 1006–1020 (2009).

98. Ishimoto, T. *et al.* CD44 variant regulates redox status in cancer cells by stabilizing the xCT subunit of system xc(-) and thereby promotes tumor growth. *Cancer Cell* **19**, 387–400 (2011).

99. Fornaro, L. *et al.* Anti-HER agents in gastric cancer: from bench to bedside. *Nat. Rev. Gastroenterol. Hepatol.* **8**, 369–383 (2011).

100. Schlessinger, J. Common and distinct elements in cellular signaling via EGF and FGF receptors. *Science* **306**, 1506–1507 (2004).

101. Dhanasekaran, D. N. & Johnson, G. L. MAPKs: function, regulation, role in cancer and therapeutic targeting. *Oncogene* **26**, 3097–3099 (2007).

102. Lordick, F. *et al.* HER2 status of advanced gastric cancer is similar in Europe and Asia [abstract 253]. *Ann. Oncol.* **18** (Suppl. 7), vii95–vii96 (2007).

103. Zhang, X. L. *et al.* Comparative study on overexpression of HER2/neu and HER3 in gastric cancer. *World J. Surg.* **33**, 2112–2118 (2009).

104. Terashima, M. *et al.* Impact of expression of human epidermal growth factor receptors EGFR and ERBB2 on survival in stage II/III gastric cancer. *Clin. Cancer Res.* **18**, 5992–6000 (2012).

105. Browne, B. C. *et al.* Inhibition of IGF1R activity enhances response to trastuzumab in HER-2-positive breast cancer cells. *Ann. Oncol.* **22**, 68–73 (2011).

106. Wilkinson, N. W. *et al.* Epidermal growth factor receptor expression correlates with histologic grade in resected esophageal adenocarcinoma. *J. Gastrointest. Surg.* **8**, 448–453 (2004).

107. Isinger-Ekstrand, A. *et al.* Genetic profiles of gastroesophageal cancer: combined analysis using expression array and tiling array-comparative genomic hybridization. *Cancer Genet. Cytogenet.* **200**, 120–126 (2010).

108. Moutinho, C. *et al.* Epidermal growth factor receptor structural alterations in gastric cancer. *BMC Cancer* **8**, 10 (2008).

109. Liu, Z. M. *et al.* Epidermal growth factor receptor mutation in gastric cancer. *Pathology* **43**, 234–238 (2011).

110. Pinto, C. *et al.* Phase II study of cetuximab in combination with cisplatin and docetaxel in patients with untreated advanced gastric or gastro-oesophageal junction adenocarcinoma (DOCETUX study). *Br. J. Cancer* **101**, 1261–1268 (2009).

111. Jaiswal, B. S. *et al.* Oncogenic ERBB3 mutations in human cancers. *Cancer Cell* **23**, 603–617 (2013).

112. Migliore, C. & Giordano, S. Molecular cancer therapy: can our expectation be MET? *Eur. J. Cancer* **44**, 641–651 (2008).

113. El-Rifai, W. & Powell, S. M. Molecular biology of gastric cancer. *Semin. Radiat. Oncol.* **12**, 128–140 (2002).

114. Smolen, G. A. *et al.* Amplification of MET may identify a subset of cancers with extreme sensitivity to the selective tyrosine kinase inhibitor PHA-665752. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **103**, 2316–2321 (2006).

115. Janjigian, Y. Y. *et al.* MET expression and amplification in patients with localized gastric cancer. *Cancer Epidemiol. Biomarkers Prev.* **20**, 1021–1027 (2011).

116. Lee, J. *et al.* Impact of MET amplification on gastric cancer: possible roles as a novel prognostic marker and a potential therapeutic target. *Oncol. Rep.* **25**, 1517–1524 (2011).

117. Guo, A. *et al.* Signaling networks assembled by oncogenic EGFR and c-Met. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **105**, 692–697 (2008).

118. Arteaga, C. L. HER3 and mutant EGFR meet MET. *Nat. Med.* **13**, 675–677 (2007).

119. Corso, S., Comoglio, P. M. & Giordano, S. Cancer therapy: can the challenge be MET? *Trends Mol. Med.* **11**, 284–292 (2005).

REVIEWS

120. Corso, S. *et al.* Activation of HER family members in gastric carcinoma cells mediates resistance to MET inhibition. *Mol. Cancer* **9**, 121 (2010).

121. Bachleitner-Hofmann, T. *et al.* HER kinase activation confers resistance to MET tyrosine kinase inhibition in MET oncogene-addicted gastric cancer cells. *Mol. Cancer Ther.* **7**, 3499–3508 (2008).

122. Byun, D. S. *et al.* Frequent monoallelic deletion of PTEN and its reciprocal association with PIK3CA amplification in gastric carcinoma. *Int. J. Cancer* **104**, 318–327 (2003).

123. Oki, E. *et al.* Impact of PTEN/AKT/PI3K signal pathway on the chemotherapy for gastric cancer [abstract 4034]. *J. Clin. Oncol.* **24** (Suppl. 18), 187s (2006).

124. Garrett, J. T. *et al.* Transcriptional and posttranslational up-regulation of HER3 (ErbB3) compensates for inhibition of the HER2 tyrosine kinase. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **108**, 5021–5026 (2011).

125. Shin, E. Y. *et al.* Up-regulation and co-expression of fibroblast growth factor receptors in human gastric cancer. *J. Cancer Res. Clin. Oncol.* **126**, 519–528 (2000).

126. Wang, K. *et al.* Exome sequencing identifies frequent mutation of ARID1A in molecular subtypes of gastric cancer. *Nat. Genet.* **43**, 1219–1223 (2011).

127. Song, S. & Ajani, J. A. The role of microRNAs in cancers of the upper gastrointestinal tract. *Nat. Rev. Gastroenterol. Hepatol.* **10**, 109–118 (2013).

128. Li, T. *et al.* MicroRNA-296-5p increases proliferation in gastric cancer through repression of Caudal-related homeobox 1. *Oncogene* http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/onc.2012.637.

129. Wang, M. *et al.* Overexpressed miR-301a promotes cell proliferation and invasion by targeting RUNX3 in gastric cancer. *J. Gastroenterol.* http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00535-012-0733-6.

130. Wang, M. *et al.* miR-17-5p/20a are important markers for gastric cancer and murine double minute 2 participates in their functional regulation. *Eur. J. Cancer* **49**, 2010–2021 (2013).

131. Wu, X. *et al.* MicroRNA expression signatures during malignant progression from Barrett’s esophagus to esophageal adenocarcinoma. *Cancer Prev. Res. (Phila.)* **6**, 196–205 (2013).

132. Zhou, C. *et al.* microRNA-372 maintains oncogene characteristics by targeting TNFAIP1 and affects NFκB signaling in human gastric carcinoma cells. *Int. J. Oncol.* **42**, 635–642 (2013).

133. Zhi, Q. *et al.* Oncogenic miR-544 is an important molecular target in gastric cancer. *Anticancer Agents Med. Chem.* **13**, 270–275 (2013).

134. Wang, Y. Y. *et al.* Clinicopathologic significance of miR-10b expression in gastric carcinoma. *Hum. Pathol.* **44**, 1278–1285 (2013).

135. Deng, H. *et al.* MicroRNA-195 and microRNA-378 mediate tumor growth suppression by epigenetical regulation in gastric cancer. *Gene* **518**, 351–359 (2013).

136. Wen, D. *et al.* miR-133b acts as a tumor suppressor and negatively regulates FGFR1 in gastric cancer. *Tumour Biol.* **34**, 793–803 (2013).

137. Saito, Y. *et al.* The tumor suppressor microRNA-29c is downregulated and restored by celecoxib in human gastric cancer cells. *Int. J. Cancer* **132**, 1751–1760 (2012).

138. Cao, W. *et al.* Expression and regulatory function of miRNA-34a in targeting survivin in gastric cancer cells. *Tumour Biol.* **34**, 963–971 (2012).

139. Zheng, L. *et al.* miRNA-145 targets v-ets erythroblastosis virus E26 oncogene homolog 1 to suppress the invasion, metastasis, and angiogenesis of gastric cancer cells. *Mol. Cancer Res.* **11**, 182–193 (2013).

140. Liu, K. *et al.* Decreased expression of microRNA let-7i and its association with chemotherapeutic response in human gastric cancer. *World J. Surg. Oncol.* **10**, 225 (2012).

141. Akiyoshi, S. *et al.* Clinical significance of miR-144-ZFX axis in disseminated tumour cells in bone marrow in gastric cancer cases. *Br. J. Cancer* **107**, 1345–1353 (2012).

142. He, X. P. *et al.* Downregulation of miR-101 in gastric cancer correlates with cyclooxygenase-2 overexpression and tumor growth. *FEBS J.* **279**, 4201–4212 (2012).

143. Crone, S. G. *et al.* microRNA-146a inhibits G-protein-coupled receptor-mediated activation of NF-κB by targeting CARD10 and COPPS8 in gastric cancer. *Mol. Cancer* **11**, 71 (2012).

144. Ichikawa, D., Komatsu, S., Konishi, H. & Otsuji, E. Circulating microRNA in digestive tract cancers. *Gastroenterology* **142**, 1074–1078.e1 (2012).

145. Cui, L. *et al.* Gastric juice microRNAs as potential biomarkers for the screening of gastric cancer. *Cancer* **119**, 1618–1626 (2013).

146. Zhang, X. *et al.* Gastric juice microRNA-421 is a new biomarker for screening gastric cancer. *Tumour Biol.* **33**, 2349–2355 (2012).

147. Cai, H. *et al.* Plasma microRNAs serve as novel potential biomarkers for early detection of gastric cancer. *Med. Oncol.* **30**, 452 (2013).

148. Li, C. *et al.* MiRNA-199a-3p in plasma as a potential diagnostic biomarker for gastric cancer. *Ann. Surg. Oncol.* http://dx.doi.org/10.1245/s10434-012-2600-3.

149. Wang, M. *et al.* Circulating miR-17-5p and miR-20a: molecular markers for gastric cancer. *Mol. Med. Report* **5**, 1514–1520 (2012).

150. Valladares-Ayerbes, M. *et al.* Circulating miR-200c as a diagnostic and prognostic biomarker for gastric cancer. *J. Transl. Med.* **10**, 186 (2012).

151. Stern, H. M. Improving treatment of HER2-positive cancers: opportunities and challenges. *Sci. Transl. Med.* **4**, 127rv2 (2012).

152. Nahta, R. Molecular mechanisms of trastuzumab-based treatment in HER2-overexpressing breast cancer. *ISRN Oncol.* **2012**, 428062 (2012).

153. Kim, J. W. *et al.* The growth inhibitory effect of lapatinib, a dual inhibitor of EGFR and HER2 tyrosine kinase, in gastric cancer cell lines. *Cancer Lett.* **272**, 296–306 (2008).

154. Lu, Y., Zi, X. & Pollak, M. Molecular mechanisms underlying IGF-I-induced attenuation of the growth-inhibitory activity of trastuzumab (Herceptin) on SKBR3 breast cancer cells. *Int. J. Cancer* **108**, 334–341 (2004).

155. Chen, C. T. *et al.* MET activation mediates resistance to lapatinib inhibition of HER2-amplified gastric cancer cells. *Mol. Cancer Ther.* **11**, 660–669 (2012).

156. Shattuck, D. L., Miller, J. K., Carraway, K. L. & Sweeney, C. Met receptor contributes to trastuzumab resistance of HER2-overexpressing breast cancer cells. *Cancer Res.* **68**, 1471–1477 (2008).

157. Molina, M. A. *et al.* Trastuzumab (herceptin), a humanized anti-HER2 receptor monoclonal antibody, inhibits basal and activated HER2 ectodomain cleavage in breast cancer cells. *Cancer Res.* **61**, 4744–4749 (2001).

158. Nagy, P. *et al.* Decreased accessibility and lack of activation of ErbB2 in JIMT-1, a herceptin-resistant, MUC4-Expressing breast cancer cell line. *Cancer Res.* **65**, 473–482 (2005).

159. Gong, S. J., Jin, C. J., Rha, S. Y. & Chung, H. C. Growth inhibitory effects of trastuzumab and chemotherapeutic drugs in gastric cancer cell lines. *Cancer Lett.* **214**, 215–224 (2004).

160. Arcaro, A. & Guerreiro, A. S. The phosphoinositide 3-kinase pathway in human cancer: genetic alterations and therapeutic implications. *Curr. Genomics* **8**, 271–306 (2007).

161. Engelman, J. A. *et al.* Effective use of PI3K and MEK inhibitors to treat mutant Kras G12D and PIK3CA H1047R murine lung cancers. *Nat. Med.* **14**, 1351–1356 (2008).

162. Eichhorn, P. J. *et al.* Phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase hyperactivation results in lapatinib resistance that is reversed by the mTOR/phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase inhibitor NVP-BEZ235. *Cancer Res.* **68**, 9221–9230 (2008).

163. Korkaya, H. *et al.* Activation of an IL6 inflammatory loop mediates trastuzumab resistance in HER2+ breast cancer by expanding the cancer stem cell population. *Mol. Cell* **47**, 570–584 (2012).

164. Shah, M. A. & Ajani, J. A. Gastric cancer—an enigmatic and heterogeneous disease. *JAMA* **303**, 1753–1754 (2010).

165. Bickenbach, K. & Strong, V. E. Comparisons of gastric cancer treatments: East vs West. *J. Gastric Cancer* **12**, 55–62 (2012).

166. Tamura, S., Takeo, A. & Miki, H. Lymph node dissection in curative gastrectomy for advanced gastric cancer. *Int. J. Surg. Oncol.* **2011**, 748745 (2011).

167. Macdonald, J. S. *et al.* Chemoradiotherapy after surgery compared with surgery alone for adenocarcinoma of the stomach or gastroesophageal junction. *N. Engl. J. Med.* **345**, 725–730 (2001).

168. Sakuramoto, S. *et al.* Adjuvant chemotherapy for gastric cancer with S-1, an oral fluoropyrimidine. *N. Engl. J. Med.* **357**, 1810–1820 (2007).

169. Bang, Y. J. *et al.* Adjuvant capecitabine and oxaliplatin for gastric cancer after D2 gastrectomy (CLASSIC): a phase 3 open-label, randomised controlled trial. *Lancet* **379**, 315–321 (2012).

170. Ajani, J. A. *et al.* Gastric cancer. *J. Natl Compr. Canc. Netw.* **8**, 378–409 (2010).

171. Lim, L., Michael, M., Mann, G. B. & Leong, T. Adjuvant therapy in gastric cancer. *J. Clin. Oncol.* **23**, 6220–6232 (2005).

172. Ychou, M. *et al.* Perioperative chemotherapy compared with surgery alone for resectable gastroesophageal adenocarcinoma: an FNCLCC and FFCD multicenter phase III trial. *J. Clin. Oncol.* **29**, 1715–1721 (2011).

173. Paoletti, X. *et al.* Benefit of adjuvant chemotherapy for resectable gastric cancer: a meta-analysis. *JAMA* **303**, 1729–1737 (2010).

174. Cunningham, D. *et al.* Perioperative chemotherapy versus surgery alone for resectable gastroesophageal cancer. *N. Engl. J. Med.* **355**, 11–20 (2006).

175. Smalley, S. R. *et al.* Updated analysis of SWOG-directed intergroup study 0116: a phase III trial of adjuvant radiochemotherapy versus observation after curative gastric cancer resection. *J. Clin. Oncol.* **30**, 2327–2333 (2012).

176. Fuchs, C. S. *et al.* Postoperative adjuvant chemoradiation for gastric or gastroesophageal junction (GEJ) adenocarcinoma using epirubicin, cisplatin, and infusional (CI) 5-FU (ECF) before and after CI 5-FU/LV and radiotherapy (CRT) compared with bolus 5-FU/LV before and after CRT: Intergroup trial CALGB 80101 [abstract 4003]. *J. Clin. Oncol.* **29** (Suppl.), 4003 (2011).

177. Lee, J. *et al.* Phase III trial comparing capecitabine plus cisplatin versus capecitabine plus cisplatin with concurrent capecitabine radiotherapy in completely resected gastric cancer with D2 lymph node dissection: the ARTIST trial. *J. Clin. Oncol.* **30**, 268–273 (2012).

178. Sasako, M. *et al.* Five-year outcomes of a randomized phase III trial comparing adjuvant chemotherapy with S-1 versus surgery alone in stage II or III gastric cancer. *J. Clin. Oncol.* **29**, 4387–4393 (2011).

179. Dikken, J. L. et al. Neo-adjuvant chemotherapy followed by surgery and chemotherapy or by surgery and chemoradiotherapy for patients with resectable gastric cancer (CRITICS). BMC Cancer 11, 329 (2011).

180. Van Cutsem, E. et al. Phase III study of docetaxel and cisplatin plus fluorouracil compared with cisplatin and fluorouracil as first-line therapy for advanced gastric cancer: a report of the V325 Study Group. J. Clin. Oncol. 24, 4991–4997 (2006).

181. Koizumi, W. et al. S-1 plus cisplatin versus S-1 alone for first-line treatment of advanced gastric cancer (SPIRITS trial): a phase III trial. Lancet Oncol. 9, 215–221 (2008).

182. Bang, Y. J. et al. Trastuzumab in combination with chemotherapy versus chemotherapy alone for treatment of HER2-positive advanced gastric or gastro-oesophageal junction cancer (ToGA): a phase 3, open-label, randomised controlled trial. Lancet 376, 687–697 (2010).

183. FDA. Trastuzumab. Office of Medical Products and Tobacco [online], http://www.fda.gov/AboutFDA/CentersOffices/OfficeofMedicalProductsandTobacco/CDER/ucm230418.htm (2010).

184. Lordick, F. et al. Capecitabine and cisplatin with or without cetuximab for patients with previously untreated advanced gastric cancer (EXPAND): a randomised, open-label phase 3 trial. Lancet Oncol. 14, 490–499 (2013).

185. Waddell, T. et al. Epirubicin, oxaliplatin, and capecitabine with or without panitumumab for patients with previously untreated advanced oesophagogastric cancer (REAL3): a randomised, open-label phase 3 trial. Lancet Oncol. 14, 481–489 (2013).

186. Ohtsu, A. et al. Bevacizumab in combination with chemotherapy as first-line therapy in advanced gastric cancer: a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled phase III study. J. Clin. Oncol. 29, 3968–3976 (2011).

187. Van Cutsem, E. et al. Bevacizumab in combination with chemotherapy as first-line therapy in advanced gastric cancer: a biomarker evaluation from the AVAGAST randomized phase III trial. J. Clin. Oncol. 30, 2119–2127 (2012).

188. Ajani, J. A. et al. Multicenter phase III comparison of cisplatin/S-1 with cisplatin/infusional fluorouracil in advanced gastric or gastroesophageal adenocarcinoma study: the FLAGS trial. J. Clin. Oncol. 28, 1547–1553 (2010).

189. Thuss-Patience, P. C. et al. Survival advantage for irinotecan versus best supportive care as second-line chemotherapy in gastric cancer—a randomised phase III study of the Arbeitsgemeinschaft Internistische Onkologie (AIO). Eur. J. Cancer 47, 2306–2314 (2011).

190. US National Library of Medicine. ClinicalTrials.gov [online], http://clinicaltrials.gov/show/NCT00879333 (2013).

191. Everolimus for advanced gastric cancer: results of the randomized, double-blind, phase III GRANITE-1 study. J. Clin. Oncol. (in press).

192. US National Library of Medicine. ClinicalTrials.gov [online], http://clinicaltrials.gov/show/NCT00917384/ (2013).

193. Fuchs, C. S. et al. REGARD: a phase III, randomized, double-blind trial of ramucirumab and best supportive care (BSC) versus placebo and BSC in the treatment of metastatic gastric or gastroesophageal junction (GEJ) adenocarcinoma following disease progression on first-line platinum-and/or fluoropyrimidine-containing combination therapy [abstract LBA5]. J. Clin. Oncol. 30 (Suppl. 34), LBA5 (2012).

194. Ford, H. et al. Cougar-02: a randomized phase III study of docetaxel versus active symptom control

in advanced esophagogastric adenocarcinoma [abstract LBA4]. J. Clin. Oncol. 30 (Suppl. 34), LBA4 (2012).

195. Bang, Y.-J. et al. A randomized, open-label, phase III study of lapatinib in combination with weekly paclitaxel versus weekly paclitaxel alone in the second-line treatment of HER2 amplified advanced gastric cancer (AGC) in Asian population: Tytan study [abstract 11]. J. Clin. Oncol. 30 (Suppl. 34), 11 (2012).

196. Lennerz, J. K. et al. MET amplification identifies a small and aggressive subgroup of esophagogastric adenocarcinoma with evidence of responsiveness to crizotinib. J. Clin. Oncol. 29, 4803–4810 (2011).

197. Oliner, K. S. et al. Evaluation of MET pathway biomarkers in a phase II study of rilotumumab (R, AMG 102) or placebo (P) in combination with epirubicin, cisplatin, and capecitabine (ECX) in patients (pts) with locally advanced or metastatic gastric (G) or esophagogastric junction (EGJ) cancer [abstract 4005]. J. Clin. Oncol. 30 (Suppl.), 4005 (2012).

198. Hwang, J. Y. et al. Recapitulation of previous genome-wide association studies with two distinct pathophysiological entities of gastric cancer in the Korean population. J. Hum. Genet. 58, 233–235 (2013).

199. Saeki, N. et al. A functional single nucleotide polymorphism in mucin 1, at chromosome 1q22, determines susceptibility to diffuse-type gastric cancer. Gastroenterology 140, 892–902 (2011).

200. Gu, H. et al. Replication study of PLCE1 and C20orf54 polymorphism and risk of esophageal cancer in a Chinese population. Mol. Biol. Rep. 39, 9105–9111 (2012).

201. Mammano, E. et al. Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR): mutational and protein expression analysis in gastric cancer. Anticancer Res. 26, 3547–3550 (2006).

202. Hong, S. P. et al. Overexpression of Notch 1 signaling associates with the tumorigenesis of gastric adenoma and intestinal type of gastric cancer. Gastroenterology 132, A617 (2007).

203. Yu, G. Z. et al. Overexpression of phosphorylated mammalian target of rapamycin predicts lymph node metastasis and prognosis of Chinese patients with gastric cancer. Clin. Cancer Res. 15, 1821–1829 (2009).

204. Lang, S. A. et al. Mammalian target of rapamycin is activated in human gastric cancer and serves as a target for therapy in an experimental model. Int. J. Cancer 120, 1803–1810 (2007).

205. Zhou, Y. N. et al. Clinicopathological significance of E-cadherin, VEGF, and MMPs in gastric cancer. Tumor Biol. 31, 549–558 (2010).

206. Kitoh, T. et al. Increased expression of matrix metalloproteinase-7 in invasive early gastric cancer. J. Gastroenterol. 39, 434–440 (2004).

207. Fukaya, M. et al. Hedgehog signal activation in gastric pit cell and in diffuse-type gastric cancer. Gastroenterology 131, 14–29 (2006).

208. Hattori, Y. et al. Immunohistochemical detection of K-sam protein in stomach cancer. Clin. Cancer Res. 2, 1373–1381 (1996).

209. Pereira, P. S. et al. E-cadherin missense mutations, associated with hereditary diffuse gastric cancer (HDGC) syndrome, display distinct invasive behaviors and genetic interactions with the Wnt and Notch pathways in Drosophila epithelia. Hum. Mol. Genet. 15, 1704–1712 (2006).

210. Kobayashi, M., Kawashima, A., Mai, M. & Ooi, A. Analysis of chromosome 17p13 (p53 locus) alterations in gastric carcinoma cells by dual-color fluorescence *in situ* hybridization. Am. J. Pathol. 149, 1575–1584 (1996).

211. Guo, C. Y., Xu, X. F., Wu, L. Y. & Liu, S. F. PCR-SSCP-DNA sequencing method in detecting PTEN gene mutation and its significance in human gastric cancer. World J. Gastroenterol. 14, 3804–3811 (2008).

212. Li, H. et al. Insulin-like growth factor-I receptor blockade reduces tumor angiogenesis and enhances the effects of bevacizumab for a human gastric cancer cell line, MKN45. Cancer 117, 3135–3147 (2011).

213. Cepero, V. et al. MET and KRAS gene amplification mediates acquired resistance to MET tyrosine kinase inhibitors. Cancer Res. 70, 7580–7590 (2010).

214. Fuchs, C. et al. Postoperative adjuvant chemoradiation for gastric or gastroesophageal adenocarcinoma using epirubicin, cisplatin, and infusional (CI) 5-FU (ECF) before and after CI 5-FU and radiotherapy (RT): Interim toxicity results from Intergroup trial CALGB 80101 [abstract 4003]. J. Clin. Oncol. 29 (Suppl.), 4003 (2011).

215. Tsuburaya, A. et al. SAMIT: Preliminary safety data from a 2 × 2 factorial randomized phase III trial to investigate weekly paclitaxel (PTX) followed by oral fluoropyrimidines (FPs) versus FPs alone as adjuvant chemotherapy in patients (pts) with gastric cancer [abstract 4017]. J. Clin. Oncol. 29 (Suppl.), 4017 (2011).

216. Leong, T. L. et al. TOPGEAR: An international randomized phase III trial of preoperative chemoradiotherapy versus preoperative chemotherapy for resectable gastric cancer (AGITG/TROG/EORTC/NCIC CTG) [abstract TPS4141]. J. Clin. Oncol. 30 (Suppl.), TPS4141 (2012).

217. Lordick, F. et al. Capecitabine and cisplatin with or without cetuximab for patients with previously untreated advanced gastric cancer (EXPAND): a randomised, open-label phase 3 trial. Lancet Oncol. 14, 490–499 (2013).

218. US National Library of Medicine. ClinicalTrials.gov [online], http://clinicaltrials.gov/show/NCT00450203 (2013).

219. Waddell, T. S. et al. A randomized, multicenter trial of epirubicin, oxaliplatin, and capecitabine (EOC) plus panitumumab in advanced esophagogastric cancer (REAL3) [abstract LBA4000]. J. Clin. Oncol. 30 (Suppl.), LBA4000 (2012).

220. US National Library of Medicine. ClinicalTrials.gov [online], http://clinicaltrials.gov/show/NCT00680901 (2013).

221. Kang, J. H. et al. Salvage chemotherapy for pretreated gastric cancer: a randomized phase III trial comparing chemotherapy plus best supportive care with best supportive care alone. J. Clin. Oncol. 30, 1513–1518 (2012).

222. US National Library of Medicine. ClinicalTrials.gov [online], http://clinicaltrials.gov/show/NCT00978549 (2009).


Acknowledgements
The authors are supported by grants from the Caporella, Cantu, Smith, Park, Fairman, Frazier, Sultan, Oaks, Vansteklenberg and Milrod families, by the Kevin Fund, Schecter Private Fund and the Rivercreek Foundation and a Multidisciplinary Research Grant from University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center. J. A. Ajani is also supported by grants RO1CA138671 and ROaCA172741 awarded by the National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, MD, USA. The authors also thank the editorial staff of Nature Reviews Clinical Oncology for their editorial assistance in considerably improving the clarity and organization of the manuscript.

Author contributions
All authors researched the data, discussed the article’s content, wrote the manuscript and edited it before submission.
