
Research Article

Role of Myc in hepatocellular proliferation and hepatocarcinogenesis

Aijuan Qu${}^{1}$, Changtao Jiang${}^{1}$, Yan Cai${}^{1}$, Jung-Hwan Kim${}^{1}$, Naoki Tanaka${}^{1}$, Jerrold M. Ward${}^{2}$, Yatrik M. Shah${}^{1,3}$, Frank J. Gonzalez${}^{1,*}$

${}^{1}$Laboratory of Metabolism, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, United States; ${}^{2}$Global VetPathology, Montgomery Village, MD 20866, United States; ${}^{3}$Department of Molecular and Integrative Physiology and Internal Medicine, Division of Gastroenterology, University of Michigan School of Medicine, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, United States

---

### Background & Aims: Myc is involved in cell growth, proliferation, apoptosis, energy metabolism, and differentiation. Whether it is essential for hepatocellular proliferation and carcinogenesis is unclear due to a lack of an efficient hepatocyte-specific Myc disruption model. This study used a novel genetic model to investigate the involvement of Myc in hepatocellular proliferation and hepatocarcinogenesis in mice.

### Methods: Temporal hepatocyte-specific Myc disruption was achieved by use of the tamoxifen-inducible Cre-ER${}^{T2}$ recombinase system under control of the serum albumin promoter. Hepatocyte proliferation was assessed by administering peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor $\alpha$ (PPAR$\alpha$) agonist Wy-14,643. A diethylnitrosamine-induced liver cancer model was used to evaluate the role of Myc in hepatocarcinogenesis.

### Results: Tamoxifen administration induced recombination of Myc specifically in hepatocytes of $Myc^{fl/fl,ERT2-Cre}$ mice. When treated with a known hepatocellular proliferative stimulus Wy-14,643, $Myc^{fl/fl,ERT2-Cre}$ mice showed a lower liver/body weight ratio and suppressed hepatocyte proliferation as compared to $Myc^{fl/fl}$ mice. Hepatic expression of cell cycle control genes, DNA repair genes, and Myc target gene miRNAs were upregulated in Wy-14,643-treated $Myc^{fl/fl}$ mouse livers, but not in Wy-14,643-treated $Myc^{fl/fl,ERT2-Cre}$ livers. However, no differences were observed in the lipid-lowering effect of Wy-14,643 between $Myc^{fl/fl,ERT2-Cre}$ and $Myc^{fl/fl}$ mice, consistent with no differences in the expression of several PPAR$\alpha$ target genes involved in fatty acid $\beta$-oxidation. Moreover, when subjected to the diethylnitrosamine liver cancer bioassay, $Myc^{fl/fl,ERT2-Cre}$ mice exhibited a markedly lower incidence of tumor formation compared with $Myc^{fl/fl}$ mice.

---

### Conclusions: Myc plays an essential role in hepatocellular proliferation and liver tumorigenesis.

Published by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of the European Association for the Study of the Liver.

---

### Introduction

c-Myc, encoded by proto-oncogene *Myc*, is a pleiotropic transcription factor that belongs to the basic helix-loop-helix leucine zipper (bHLH) family of transcription factors [1,2]. Myc binds to a 6-nucleotide DNA consensus sequence CACGTG (E-box) by forming a heterodimer with MAX, another bHLH protein to participate in the control of a wide variety of genes that are involved in the regulation of cell growth, cell proliferation, apoptosis, and differentiation by stimulating metabolism and protein synthesis [2].

Myc expression promotes the transition from G0/G1 to S phase of the cell cycle in multiple cell types by regulating cyclin/cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK) complexes [3,4]. Rapid Myc induction is observed in hepatocytes of proliferating livers induced by peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor $\alpha$ (PPAR$\alpha$) activation [5,6], which is tightly correlated with G0/G1 to S-phase transition. Dysregulation of *Myc* is commonly found in several cancers [7–9]. In the liver, forced overexpression of Myc leads to spontaneous hepatocellular carcinomas [10]. In transgenic mice with inducible Myc, withdrawal of ectopic Myc expression in liver results in regression of tumors [11,12]. However, a direct role for Myc in hepatocellular proliferation and carcinogenesis has not been established. Although most studies demonstrate that overexpression of *Myc* induces hepatocellular proliferation and tumorigenesis, direct evidence for an essential role of endogenous Myc in hepatocellular proliferation and tumorigenesis is lacking.

In this study, hepatocyte-specific temporal disruption of Myc was accomplished by using the albumin promoter (SA)-expressing Cre-ER${}^{T2}$ system that yields hepatocyte-specific expression and activation of Cre recombinase in the presence of tamoxifen [13]. Disruption of Myc suppressed hepatocellular proliferation induced by the PPAR$\alpha$ agonist Wy-14,643. Microarrays revealed that Myc regulates a large array of genes important for cellular proliferation and cell cycle progression that is not found in Wy-14,643-treated

---

Keywords: Myc; Cell proliferation; Tumorigenesis; BrdU; Cell cycle control.

Received 15 July 2013; received in revised form 14 September 2013; accepted 23 September 2013; available online 2 October 2013

* Corresponding author. Fax: +1 301 496 8419.

E-mail address: gonzalef@mail.nih.gov (F.J. Gonzalez).

Abbreviations: $Myc^{fl/fl}$, floxed Myc allele; Cre-ER${}^{T2}$, cre recombinase, tamoxifen-inducible estrogen receptor ligand-binding domain fusion protein; $Myc^{fl/fl,ERT2-Cre}$, inducible liver-specific Myc knockout mouse; bHLH, basic helix-loop-helix leucine zipper; CDK, cyclin-dependent kinase; PPAR$\alpha$, peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor $\alpha$; DEN, diethylnitrosamine; SA, serum albumin promoter; BrdU, bromodeoxyuridine; Acox1, acyl-CoA oxidase; Cyp4a10 and Cyp4a14, cytochromes P450 4a10 and 4a14; Chek1, checkpoint kinase 1 homologue; Rad51, RAD51 homolog (*S. cerevisiae*); Mcm, minichromosome maintenance; $Myc^{fl/fl}$Mx-Cre, $\alpha/\beta$ interferon-inducible Mx-promoter driving Cre recombinase.

Research Article

mice with hepatic Myc disruption. Disruption of Myc expression resulted in a lower incidence of diethylnitrosamine (DEN)-induced liver tumors. These data demonstrate that Myc is required for hepatocellular proliferation and liver tumorigenesis.

### Materials and methods

#### Animals and diets

$Myc^{fl/fl}$ mice were provided by John M. Sedivy (Brown University) and described previously [14]. For temporal hepatocyte-specific disruption, $Myc^{fl/fl}$ mice were crossed with mice harboring the Cre-ER$^{T2}$ recombinase driven by the SA, designated SA-Cre-ER$^{T2}$ [15], obtained from Pierre Chambon and Daniel Metzger (University of Strasbourg), to yield the $Myc^{fl/fl,ERT2-Cre}$ mouse line. $Myc^{fl/fl}$ and $Myc^{fl/fl}$ mice were maintained as littermates. For activation of the SA-Cre-ER$^{T2}$ driven Cre recombinase, 6- to 8-week-old male mice were injected intraperitoneally with 2 mg tamoxifen and then fed a tamoxifen diet (1 mg/kg, Dyets Inc., Bethlehem, PA). For Wy-14,643 treatment, mice were fed for 3 days with tamoxifen diet before exposure to pelleted chow containing 0.1% Wy-14,643 (Bioserv, Frenchtown, NJ) and receiving 2 mg of tamoxifen injection every other day for the indicated time. All mice were housed in light and temperature-controlled rooms with free access to water and pelleted chow *ad libitum*. All animal experiments were performed in accordance with the AAALAC international guidelines and approved by the National Cancer Institute Animal Care and Use Committee.

#### DEN-induced hepatocarcinogenesis

$Myc^{fl/fl}$ and $Myc^{fl/fl,ERT2-Cre}$ mice were injected intraperitoneally with 50 μg/g of tamoxifen at 10 days old and with 25 μg/g of DEN (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO) at 15 days old as described [16]. After weaning at 21 days old, mice were fed the tamoxifen diet for 5 days followed by a single dose of tamoxifen injection (2 mg/mice) every other week until killing and necropsy at 9 months. The livers were then separated into individual lobes, analyzed for the presence of tumors, and subjected to histological analysis.

#### Triglyceride and cholesterol analysis

Serum triglycerides and cholesterol levels were measured using Serum Triglyceride Determination Kit and Serum Cholesterol Determination Kit according to manufacturer's recommendation (Wako, Richmond, VA).

#### Quantitative real-time PCR

Total RNA extraction and quantitative real-time PCR (qPCR) were performed as previously described [15]. Primers were designed using qPrimerDepot and sequences are listed in Supplementary Table 1. Values were quantified using the comparative CT method, and normalized to $\beta$-actin mRNA. To determine the expression levels of microRNAs, Taqman microRNA assays (Invitrogen) directed to mmu-mir-17-5p, mmu-mir17-3p, mmu-mir-18a-5p, mmu-mir-19a, mmu-mir-290-5p, mmu-mir-291-3p, mmu-mir-293, mmu-mir-295, mmu-mir-100, mmu-let-7a-2 and an endogenous reference snoRNA55, were used following the manufacturer's protocol (Applied Biosystems).

#### cDNA microarray analysis

Dye-coupled cDNAs were purified with MiniElute PCR purification kit (Qiagen) and hybridized to an Agilent 44K mouse 60-mer oligo microarray (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA). The data were processed and analyzed by Genespring GX software package (Agilent Technologies).

#### Western blot analysis

Liver whole-cell extracts were subjected to Western blot using primary monoclonal anti-Myc antibody (Santa Cruz Biotechnology Inc, Santa Cruz, CA) as previously described [15], and the signals obtained normalized to GAPDH (Santa Cruz Biotechnology Inc).

---

Fig. 1. Conditional and temporal disruption of Myc in hepatocytes. (A) PCR diagnostic for activated ER$^{T2}$-Cre-mediated recombination of Myc allele in genomic DNA isolated from kidney and liver of $Myc^{fl/fl}$ or $Myc^{fl/fl,ERT2-Cre}$ mice treated with vehicle (VEH) or tamoxifen (TM) for 24 h. (B) qPCR Analysis measuring Myc mRNA level in liver, lung, heart, kidney, and skeletal muscle from $Myc^{fl/fl}$ or $Myc^{fl/fl,ERT2-Cre}$ mice treated with tamoxifen and killed 24 h post-treatment n = 6–8. ***p < 0.001 vs. $Myc^{fl/fl}$ group. (C) Western blot of Myc for whole liver extracts from $Myc^{fl/fl}$ and $Myc^{fl/fl,ERT2-Cre}$ mice treated with TM and killed 24 h post treatment.

#### Histological analysis

Hematoxylin and Eosin (H&E) staining were performed on formalin fixed paraffin embedded sections. Immunohistochemistry staining for BrdU was performed as previously described using antibodies against BrdU (AbDSerotec, Raleigh, NC) [17].

#### Data analysis

Data are expressed as means ± standard deviations (SD). p values were calculated by independent t test between two groups or one-way ANOVA analysis with Tukey correction between multiple groups using Prism 5. A p value <0.05 was considered significant.

---

### Results

#### Generation of a mouse model with temporal hepatocyte-specific disruption of Myc

$Myc^{fl/fl}$ mice were crossed with SA-Cre-ER$^{T2}$ transgenic mice to generate a temporal and conditional disruption of Myc ($Myc^{fl/fl,ERT2-Cre}$). To confirm hepatocyte-specific disruption of Myc, $Myc^{fl/fl}$, and $Myc^{fl/fl,ERT2-Cre}$ mice were treated with one dose of vehicle or tamoxifen, and livers and extrahepatic tissues were analyzed at 24 h post-treatment. Myc recombination was only observed in livers from tamoxifen-treated $Myc^{fl/fl,ERT2-Cre}$ mice but not from $Myc^{fl/fl}$ or vehicle-treated $Myc^{fl/fl}$ and $Myc^{fl/fl,ERT2-Cre}$

332 Journal of Hepatology 2014 vol. 60 | 331–338

mice (Fig. 1A). A decrease in Myc mRNA level was also achieved in livers only from tamoxifen-treated $Myc^{fl/fl,ERT2-Cre}$ mice and not from $Myc^{fl/fl}$ mice; Myc mRNA was not changed in extrahepatic tissues of tamoxifen-treated $Myc^{fl/fl,ERT2-Cre}$ mice (Fig. 1B). Western blot analysis of liver extracts revealed diminished Myc protein levels in tamoxifen-treated $Myc^{fl/fl,ERT2-Cre}$ mice (Fig. 1C). These data indicate that an efficient inducible liver-specific disruption of Myc was achieved using the SA-Cre-ER$^T2$ system.

**Myc disruption represses hepatocellular proliferation and hepatomegaly but not β-oxidation induced by the PPARα agonist Wy-14,643**

Administration of PPARα agonists results in hepatocyte proliferation and hepatomegaly in mice and rats [18]. Previous studies demonstrated that PPARα agonists induce Myc mRNA in rats and mice and that increased Myc protein levels correlated with hepatocellular proliferation [6]. When treated with Wy-14,643 for two weeks, $Myc^{fl/fl,ERT2-Cre}$ mice showed a lower number of BrdU-positive hepatocytes compared to $Myc^{fl/fl}$ mice (Fig. 2A). The labeling index was 21 ± 4.7% for hepatocytes in Wy-14,643-treated $Myc^{fl/fl,ERT2-Cre}$ mice compared to 67 ± 7.1% for hepatocytes in Wy-14,643-treated $Myc^{fl/fl}$ mice (Fig. 2B), demonstrating that Myc disruption markedly suppresses Wy-14,643-induced hepatocyte proliferation. It was also noteworthy that the BrdU labeling index of non-parenchymal cells was comparable between Wy-14,643-treated $Myc^{fl/fl}$ and $Myc^{fl/fl,ERT2-Cre}$ mice (Fig. 2B), indicating that proliferation of non-parenchymal cells is not affected by disruption of Myc in hepatocytes. The decrease in hepatocellular proliferation was further revealed by a lower liver/body weight ratio in the $Myc^{fl/fl,ERT2-Cre}$ mice as compared to the $Myc^{fl/fl}$ mice (Fig. 2C). However, the serum triglyceride-lowering extent was similar in the mouse lines (Fig. 2D), and the induction of well-characterized PPARα target genes, acyl-CoA oxidase ($Acox1$), cytochromes P450 4a10 and 4a14 ($Cyp4a10$ and $Cyp4a14$) did not differ between $Myc^{fl/fl}$ and $Myc^{fl/fl,ERT2-Cre}$ mice (Fig. 2E), indicating that Myc is not required for PPARα-dependent fatty acid β-oxidation.

**Myc controls cellular growth and proliferation networks in hepatocytes**

To further explore the expression profile of genes controlled by Myc, microarray analysis was conducted on liver RNA from $Myc^{fl/fl}$ and $Myc^{fl/fl,ERT2-Cre}$ mice on chow diet or Wy-14,643-containing diet. The data revealed that 1247 genes were significantly decreased and 825 genes increased in $Myc^{fl/fl,ERT2-Cre}$ mice compared with $Myc^{fl/fl}$ mice (Supplementary Fig. 1, microarray data in http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/, GEO # GSE43842). Thirty-three of the decreased genes are known to be involved in cell cycle control and 13 are involved in DNA replication, recombination and repair (Table 1). Pathway analysis revealed that the top down-regulated network was associated with cellular growth and proliferation (Table 2). These data reinforce a role for Myc in driving hepatocellular growth and proliferation by controlling the cell cycle, and DNA replication, recombination and repair.

To confirm these pathways, qPCR analysis of mRNAs encoded by cell cycle control genes was performed in $Myc^{fl/fl}$ and $Myc^{fl/fl,ERT2-Cre}$ mice treated with Wy-14,643 for 48 h. Ablation of Myc expression significantly down-regulated a series of cyclins, including cyclin mRNAs, $Ccnb1$, $Ccne1$, and $Ccne2$, and cyclin-

Research Article

Table 1. Top biological functions regulated in liver by Myc in hepatocytes.

| Name | p value | # Molecules |
|------|---------|-------------|
| Downregulated |  |  |
| Cell cycle | 5.57E-05-3.83E-02 | 27 |
| DNA replication, recombination, and repair | 5.57E-05-4.53E-02 | 13 |
| Protein trafficking | 5.26E-04-3.83E-02 | 6 |
| Cell death | 6.84E-04-3.83E-02 | 18 |
| Cell-to-cell signaling and interaction | 1.40E-03-4.99E-02 | 33 |
| Upregulated |  |  |
| Carbohydrate metabolism | 7.81E-04-4.25E-02 | 11 |
| Cell morphology | 7.81E-04-4.97E-02 | 21 |
| Cell-to-cell signaling and interaction | 7.81E-04-4.95E-02 | 19 |
| Lipid metabolism | 7.81E-04-4.28E-02 | 16 |
| Molecular transport | 7.81E-04-4.97E-02 | 19 |

Table 2. Associated networks regulated in liver by Myc in hepatocytes.

| Down-regulated | ID | Associated network functions | Score |
|----------------|----|-------------------------------|-------|
|                | 1  | Cellular development, cell death, cellular growth and proliferation | 31    |
|                | 2  | Cellular growth and proliferation, hematological system development and function, cell-to cell signaling and interaction | 29    |
|                | 3  | Tissue development, embryonic development, organ development | 18    |
|                | 4  | Cellular growth and proliferation, cell death, post-translational modification | 15    |
|                | 5  | Lipid metabolism, small molecule biochemistry, vitamin and mineral metabolism | 15    |

| Up-regulated | ID | Associated network functions | Score |
|--------------|----|-------------------------------|-------|
|              | 1  | Cellular movement, cell-to-cell signaling and interaction, nervous system development and function | 36    |
|              | 2  | Cell death, cell-mediated immune response, cellular development | 30    |
|              | 3  | Inflammatory response, amino acid metabolism, molecular transport | 15    |
|              | 4  | Cell cycle, DNA replication, recombination, and repair, cell death | 15    |
|              | 5  | Tissue development, cellular development, reproductive system disease | 13    |

The score was calculated by Ingenuity Pathway Analysis software. Details are given in the Supplementary Data file.

minichromosome maintenance (Mcm) genes required for the initiation and elongation of DNA replication, were dramatically reduced by liver-specific Myc disruption (Fig. 3B). These data demonstrate that disruption of Myc suppresses Wy-14,643-induced hepatocellular proliferation via inhibition of genes responsible for G1/S cell cycle, checkpoint and DNA damage repair.

Myc regulates miR 17-92 cluster in hepatocytes

PPARα activation in mice leads to an increase in mir-17-92 polycistronic cluster [6]. A critical mechanism by which Myc induces proliferation and tumorigenesis is direct regulation of the mir 17-92 miRNA cluster [19]. To test whether PPARα-dependent induction of mir-17-92 cluster is Myc dependent, qPCR analysis was performed. Mir-17-5p was rapidly induced by over 5-fold after two days of Wy-14,643 exposure in Mycfl/fl mice, but not in Mycfl/fl,ERT2-Cre mice (Fig. 3C). Disruption of hepatic Myc could also inhibit the induction of other mir-17-92 cluster family members such as mir-17-3p, mir-18a-5p, and mir-19a. However, no significant changes were observed in expression of the mir-290-295 cluster (homolog of human miR-371-3 cluster in mouse) or

mir-100/let-7a2 (Fig. 3C). This is consistent with previous studies that Myc activates this miRNA cistron [6].

Mycfl/fl,ERT2-Cre mice are resistant to DEN-induced hepatocarcinogenesis

To investigate the direct role of Myc in liver tumorigenesis, the susceptibility of Mycfl/fl and Mycfl/fl,ERT2-Cre mice to DEN-induced liver cancer was determined. Injection of 25 μg/g DEN resulted in 100% incidence of visible tumors in Mycfl/fl mice whereas only 33% incidence in Mycfl/fl,ERT2-Cre mice occurred (Fig. 4A); the number and size of tumors were also decreased in Mycfl/fl,ERT2-Cre mice (Fig. 4B and C). Histological analysis demonstrated that Mycfl/fl,ERT2-Cre mice had a 55% incidence of preneoplastic foci and 33% adenomas but no carcinomas, whereas 100% of Mycfl/fl mice had both preneoplastic foci and adenomas, with 67% of them developing carcinomas (Fig. 4D and E). Ki67 immunostaining showed a significant increase of hepatocyte proliferation in DEN-treated Mycfl/fl that was markedly reduced in Mycfl/fl,ERT2-Cre livers (Fig. 4F). qPCR analysis further demonstrated a significant increase of mir-290-295 RNA in DEN-induced liver tumors from the DEN-treated Mycfl/fl mice as compared to DEN-treated

334 Journal of Hepatology 2014 vol. 60 | 331-338

JOURNAL OF HEPATOLOGY

**Fig. 3. Altered expression of cell cycle control, DNA repair genes and miRNAs in mice lacking hepatic expression of Myc.** (A) qPCR Analysis of cell cycle control mRNAs. (B) qPCR Analysis for mRNAs encoding proteins involved in DNA damage repair and checkpoints n = 6–8. *p <0.05 and **p <0.01. (C) qPCR Analysis of the mir-17-92 cluster, mir-290-295 cluster and mir-100/let-7a-2 cluster in livers from vehicle or Wy-14,643-treated $Myc^{fl/fl}$ and $Myc^{fl/fl,ERT2-Cre}$ mice. Expression was normalized to endogenous reference snoRNA55 n = 6–8. **p <0.01 and ***p <0.001 compared to all the other three groups.

$Myc^{fl/fl,ERT2-Cre}$ mice; normal liver tissues from saline-treated $Myc^{fl/fl}$ and $Myc^{fl/fl,ERT2-Cre}$ mice were used as controls (Fig. 4G), which is consistent with a previous study showing that miR-371-3 (homolog of mir-290-295 in humans) could be a direct target of Myc in HCC [20]. To investigate whether the 55% incidence of preneoplastic foci and 33% adenomas developed in $Myc^{fl/fl,ERT2-Cre}$ mice was due to the residual Myc-floxed allele, Myc recombination was assessed in a few tumors. PCR analysis showed a slight band for the Myc-floxed allele that was detected in adenomas from $Myc^{fl/fl,ERT2-Cre}$ mice, suggesting that a small amount of Myc could be produced in these tumors, but likely less than in tumors from $Myc^{fl/fl}$ mice (Supplementary Fig. 2). This indicates that DEN-induced tumor hepatocytes from $Myc^{fl/fl,ERT2-Cre}$ mice could escape Myc disruption through the transformation of residual hepatocytes or stem cells that did not undergo recombination of the Myc-floxed allele.

### Discussion

Myc, a transcription factor encoded by proto-oncogene c-Myc, is thought to contribute to hepatocyte proliferation, liver regeneration and tumorigenesis in response to hepatic injury and carcinogens exposure. Given the potential key role of Myc, it would be of value to determine whether Myc is essential for these processes using a genetic model in vivo. In the current study, mice with a temporal hepatocyte-specific Myc disruption were developed using the SA-Cre-ER${}^{\mathrm{T2}}$ system [13]. Continuous treatment with tamoxifen led to maintenance of Myc disruption in hepatocytes. Disruption of Myc in hepatocytes represses hepatocellular proliferation induced by PPAR$\alpha$ agonist Wy-14,643. Mice with hepatocyte-specific Myc disruption were also largely resistant to DEN-induced hepatocarcinogenesis, thus demonstrating that Myc is essential in hepatocellular proliferation and tumorigenesis.

Since embryonic Myc knockout mice are lethal [21], liver-specific Myc-deficient mice were used to investigate the role of Myc in liver physiology and pathology. Previously, other groups targeted Myc disruption in liver [22,23]. Myc alleles were disrupted by injecting newborn $Myc^{fl/fl}$ homozygous mice with plpC to activate the $\alpha/\beta$ interferon-inducible Mx-promoter driving Cre recombinase ($Myc^{fl/fl}$ Mx-Cre), thereby revealing that lower Myc in newborn mice had decreased hepatocyte size and polyploidization as the liver develops [23]. A model of hepatocyte-specific Myc disruption was also generated by crossing $Myc^{fl/fl}$ mice to SA-Cre-harboring mice [22,24]. However, the efficiency of Myc disruption was low, with Myc mRNA expression remaining higher than 30% in 10-week-old mice [22]. A similar result was obtained when the $Myc^{fl/fl}$ mouse was crossed with the SA-Cre line [25], where efficient disruption of Myc could not be achieved (unpublished data). This lack of efficient Myc loss in the Alb-Cre mice is likely due to the rapid proliferation of Myc-expressing hepatocytes during liver growth and the regenerative capacity of the liver with non-recombined Myc alleles. In the present model, recombination of the Myc-floxed alleles was achieved by the hepatocyte-specific Cre-ER${}^{\mathrm{T2}}$ system, which temporally activates the Cre recombinase expression under the control of serum albumin promoter in the presence of tamoxifen [13,15]. This mouse line achieved stable and efficient disruption of Myc protein specifically in hepatocytes, yielding a more suitable model for assessing its physiological and pathological roles in hepatocytes compared with the previous mouse models.

Research Article

Fig. 4. *Myc*<sup>f/f,ERT2-Cre</sup> mice are resistant to DEN-induced liver tumorigenesis. (A) Incidence of visible tumors from in *Myc*<sup>f/f</sup> and *Myc*<sup>f/f,ERT2-Cre</sup> mice treated with 25 μg/g of DEN at age of 15 days and killed 9 months later. (B) The number of tumors counted from the surface of liver lobes n = 6–9 per group. (C) Tumor size measured on the surface of liver lobes n = 9 per group. (D) Incidence of preneoplastic foci, hepatocellular adenoma, and hepatocellular carcinoma in DEN-treated *Myc*<sup>f/f</sup> and *Myc*<sup>f/f,ERT2-Cre</sup> mice. Data are expressed as percentage of total number of mice (n = 9). (E) Representative images of H&E staining from DEN-treated *Myc*<sup>f/f</sup> and *Myc*<sup>f/f,ERT2-Cre</sup> mice. “T” denotes tumor area. (F) Representative images of Ki67 staining from DEN-induced tumors in *Myc*<sup>f/f</sup> and *Myc*<sup>f/f,ERT2-Cre</sup> mice. (G) qPCR analysis of mir-290-295 cluster and mir-100/let-7a-2 cluster in saline-treated livers and DEN-induced tumors in *Myc*<sup>f/f</sup> and *Myc*<sup>f/f,ERT2-Cre</sup> mice. Expression was normalized to endogenous reference snoRNA55. n = 6 for saline treatment, n = 9 for *Myc*<sup>f/f</sup> + DEN and n = 3 for *Myc*<sup>f/f,ERT2-Cre</sup> + DEN. *p* < 0.05 and **p** < 0.01, ***p*** < 0.001.

Fibrate drugs used to lower plasma triglycerides [26], are agonist for PPARα, a ligand-activated nuclear receptor that controls genes involved in fatty acid transport and catabolism, primarily in liver, but also in kidney, heart and skeletal muscle [27,28]. In rodents, short-term administration of PPARα agonists, such as fibrate drugs and the experimental compound Wy-14,643, initiates a pleiotropic response of hepatomegaly, peroxisome proliferation, and increased fatty acid transport and oxidation in liver, whereas long-term exposure leads to tumorigenesis in a PPARα-dependent manner [5,29]. Clues to the molecular link between PPARα and hepatocellular proliferation was recently uncovered. Given the importance of Myc in regulating cellular growth, proliferation and metabolism, Myc might serve as a critical link between PPARα and hepatocellular proliferation. Indeed, Myc mRNA and Myc protein levels were robustly induced as early as 24 h upon Wy-14,643 treatment in mice as a result of suppression of expression of the let-7C miRNA-encoding gene [6]. Let-7C destabilizes Myc mRNA and the lower let-7C expression leads to increased Myc mRNA and Myc protein and the resultant hepatocellular proliferation. Wy-14,643 treatment for two weeks caused a significant increase of liver weight in *Myc*<sup>f/f</sup> mice, which was mainly due to hepatocellular proliferation, as revealed by the BrdU labeling index, consistent with earlier studies [30]. However, this response was markedly blunted by Myc disruption in hepatocytes of *Myc*<sup>f/f,ERT2-Cre</sup> mice, as the BrdU labeling index dropped from about 68% to 21% in hepatocytes. The difference of liver/body weight ratio between *Myc*<sup>f/f</sup> and *Myc*<sup>f/f,ERT2-Cre</sup> mice occurred as early as two days post Wy-14,643 treatment. Mechanistically, several critical Myc target genes involved in cell cycle control, including Ccna2, Ccnb1, Ccne1, Ccne2, and Cdk1, were suppressed in *Myc*<sup>f/f,ERT2-Cre</sup> mice upon Wy-14,643 treatment. In addition to cell cycle control genes, minichromosome maintenance (Mcm) 2-7 genes, identified as direct Myc target genes in neuroblastoma [31], were down-regulated by Myc disruption. MCM2-7, a family of six related proteins required for the initiation and elongation of DNA replication, form heterohexameric MCM

complexes and act as a replicative helicase at the DNA replication fork, a key component of the pre-replication complex [32–34]. The decreased MCM2-7 indicates that Myc disruption reduces DNA replication in hepatocytes upon Wy-14,643 challenge. Moreover, two checkpoint genes, Chek1 and Rad51, were repressed by Myc inactivation. CHEK1 kinase acts downstream of ATM/ATR kinase and plays an important role in DNA damage checkpoint control, embryonic development and tumor suppression [35,36]. RAD51 was also reported to be involved in DNA damage signaling, recombination repair, and tumorigenesis [37]. Many of the above genes were previously found regulated and critical for PPARα-induced hepatocellular proliferation in PPARα ligand-independent constitutively-active mice [17]. This further confirms that Myc drives the proliferative response to PPARα activation in mice.

A mechanism by which PPARα regulates gene expression and hepatocellular proliferation was revealed, in which Myc is the central player [6]. As noted above, activated PPARα indirectly induced Myc mRNA and protein expression via suppression of let-7C. In addition, a series of miRNAs were upregulated upon PPARα activation, including the mir-17-92 polycistron cluster, and ChIP assays demonstrated that Myc could bind to the promoter of the gene encoding mir-17-5p. The mir-17-92 cluster is directly regulated by Myc leading to enhanced cell cycle progression and a blockade of tumor cell apoptosis [38,39]. Consistent with this data, hepatic disruption of Myc in the current study inhibited Wy-14,643-induced expression of mir-17-5p, mir-17-3p, mir-18a-5p, and mir-19a, indicating that the mir-17-92 cluster is a direct Myc target and might be partially responsible for PPARα activation-induced hepatocellular proliferation and tumorigenesis.

Numerous studies suggest that Myc plays a role in glucose metabolism and ribosomal biogenesis, [40] and that overexpression of Myc improved glucose homeostasis in diabetic mice [41]. However, the present data suggest that Myc disruption in *Myc*<sup>f/f</sup>*ERT2-Cre* mice did not alter the expression of genes involved in glucose metabolism, nor the genes responsible for glutamine metabolism under normal conditions (data not shown). In addition, Myc inactivation does not alter the induction of fatty acid-catabolizing genes induced by PPARα activation, such as Cyp4a10, Cyp4a14, and Acox1. These data indicate that Myc may not be essential for glucose, fatty acid and glutamine metabolism under these conditions. Myc disruption may increase the β-oxidation-independent carbohydrate and lipid metabolism via an indirect regulatory pathway. Whether Myc is crucial for glucose and glutamine metabolism during tumorigenesis and other hepatic pathological processes needs to be elucidated by additional experimentation.

To investigate the role of Myc in liver carcinogenesis, the DEN-induced hepatocarcinogenesis model was used. *Myc*<sup>f/f,ERT2-Cre</sup> mice were found to be resistant to development of liver adenomas and carcinomas as compared to the *Myc*<sup>f/f</sup> mice. The mechanism leading to a decrease in hepatocellular cancer is likely due to a lower proliferative capacity of hepatocytes during development, resulting in less DEN-induced DNA damage being fixed as gene mutations. Dysregulation of Myc is a hallmark of many human malignancies, including liver cancers. In liver, constitutive overexpression of Myc induces tumorigenesis, whereas inhibition of Myc expression resulted in regression of established tumors in vivo [11,12], indicating that targeting Myc is a potential approach for therapeutics of liver tumors. Further studies are required to determine how Myc contributes to multiple carcinogenic steps, such as initiation and promotion.


JOURNAL OF HEPATOLOGY

Financial support

This work was supported by the National Cancer Institute Intramural Research Program, and National Institutes of Health Grant CA148828 (to Y.M.S.).

Conflict of interest

The authors who have taken part in this study declared that they do not have anything to disclose regarding funding or conflict of interest with respect to this manuscript. The underlying research reported in the study was funded by the NIH Institutes of Health.

Acknowledgments

We thank John M. Sedivy for providing the *Myc*<sup>f/f</sup> mice, and Pierre Chambon and Daniel Metzger for providing the SA-Cre-ER<sup>T2</sup> mice.

Supplementary data

Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jhep.2013.09.024.

References

[1] Kelly K, Cochran BH, Stiles CD, Leder P. Cell-specific regulation of the c-myc gene by lymphocyte mitogens and platelet-derived growth factor. Cell 1983;35:603–610.

[2] Grandori C, Cowley SM, James LP, Eisenman RN. The Myc/Max/Mad network and the transcriptional control of cell behavior. Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 2000;16:653–699.

[3] Yaswen P, Goyette M, Shank PR, Fausto N. Expression of c-Ki-ras, c-Ha-ras, and c-myc in specific cell types during hepatocarcinogenesis. Mol cell Biol 1985;5:780–786.

[4] Obaya AJ, Mateyak MK, Sedivy JM. Mysterious liaisons: the relationship between c-Myc and the cell cycle. Oncogene 1999;18:2934–2941.

[5] Peters JM, Cattley RC, Gonzalez FJ. Role of PPAR alpha in the mechanism of action of the nongenotoxic carcinogen and peroxisome proliferator Wy-14,643. Carcinogenesis 1997;18:2029–2033.

[6] Shah YM, Morimura K, Yang Q, Tanabe T, Takagi M, Gonzalez FJ. Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor alpha regulates a microRNA-mediated signaling cascade responsible for hepatocellular proliferation. Mol Cell Biol 2007;27:4238–4247.

[7] Eilers M, Eisenman RN. Myc's broad reach. Genes Dev 2008;22:2755–2766.

[8] Meyer N, Penn LZ. Reflecting on 25 years with Myc. Nat Rev Cancer 2008;8:976–990.

[9] Dang CV, Le A, Gao P. Myc-induced cancer cell energy metabolism and therapeutic opportunities. Clin Cancer Res 2009;15:6479–6483.

[10] Murakami H, Sanderson ND, Nagy P, Marino PA, Merlino G, Thorgeirsson SS. Transgenic mouse model for synergistic effects of nuclear oncogenes and growth factors in tumorigenesis: interaction of c-myc and transforming growth factor alpha in hepatic oncogenesis. Cancer Res 1993;53:1719–1723.

[11] Shachaf CM, Kopelman AM, Arvanitis C, Karlsson A, Beer S, Mandl S, et al. Myc inactivation uncovers pluripotent differentiation and tumour dormancy in hepatocellular cancer. Nature 2004;431:1112–1117.

[12] Hu S, Balakrishnan A, Bok RA, Anderton B, Larson PE, Nelson SJ, et al. 13C-pyruvate imaging reveals alterations in glycolysis that precede c-Myc-induced tumor formation and regression. Cell Metab 2011;14:131–142.

[13] Schuler M, Dierich A, Chambon P, Metzger D. Efficient temporally controlled targeted somatic mutagenesis in hepatocytes of the mouse. Genesis 2004;39:167–172.

Research Article

[14] de Alboran IM, O'Hagan RC, Gartner F, Malynn B, Davidson L, Rickert R, et al. Analysis of C-Myc function in normal cells via conditional gene-targeted mutation. Immunity 2001;14:45–55.

[15] Qu A, Taylor M, Xue X, Matsubara T, Metzger D, Chambon P, et al. Hypoxia-inducible transcription factor 2alpha promotes steatohepatitis through augmenting lipid accumulation, inflammation, and fibrosis. Hepatology 2011;54:472–483.

[16] Vesselinovitch SD, Mihailovich N. Kinetics of diethylnitrosamine hepatocarcinogenesis in the infant mouse. Cancer Res 1983;43:4253–4259.

[17] Qu A, Shah YM, Matsubara T, Yang Q, Gonzalez FJ. PPARAlpha-dependent activation of cell cycle control and DNA repair genes in hepatic nonparenchymal cells. Toxicol Sci 2010;118:404–410.

[18] Gonzalez FJ, Shah YM. PPARAlpha: mechanism of species differences and peroxisome proliferators. Toxicology 2008;246:2–8.

[19] Chang TC, Yu D, Lee YS, Wentzel EA, Arking DE, West KM, et al. Widespread microRNA repression by Myc contributes to tumorigenesis. Nat Genet 2008;40:43–50.

[20] Cairo S, Wang Y, de Reynies A, Duroure K, Dahan J, Redon MJ, et al. Stem cell-like micro-RNA signature driven by Myc in aggressive liver cancer. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2010;107:20471–20476.

[21] Davis AC, Wims M, Spotts GD, Hann SR, Bradley A. A null c-myc mutation causes lethality before 10.5 days of gestation in homozygotes and reduced fertility in heterozygous female mice. Genes Dev 1993;7:671–682.

[22] Sanders JA, Schorl C, Patel A, Sedivy JM, Gruppuso PA. Postnatal liver growth and regeneration are independent of c-myc in a mouse model of conditional hepatic c-myc deletion. BMC Physiol 2012;12:1.

[23] Baena E, Gandarillas A, Vallespinos M, Zanet J, Bachs O, Redondo C, et al. C-Myc regulates cell size and ploidy but is not essential for postnatal proliferation in liver. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2005;102:7286–7291.

[24] Postic C, Shiota M, Niswender KD, Jetton TL, Chen Y, Moates JM, et al. Dual roles for glucokinase in glucose homeostasis as determined by liver and pancreatic beta cell-specific gene knock-outs using Cre recombinase. J Biol Chem 1999;274:305–315.

[25] Yakar S, Liu JL, Stannard B, Butler A, Accili D, Sauer B, et al. Normal growth and development in the absence of hepatic insulin-like growth factor I. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1999;96:7324–7329.

[26] Berkowitz D. Drug treatment of hyperlipidemia. Mod Treat 1969;6:1341–1351.

[27] Issemann I, Green S. Activation of a member of the steroid hormone receptor superfamily by peroxisome proliferators. Nature 1990;347:645–650.

[28] Staels B, Fruchart JC. Therapeutic roles of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor agonists. Diabetes 2005;54:2460–2470.

[29] Lee SS, Pineau T, Drago J, Lee EJ, Owens JW, Kroetz DL, et al. Targeted disruption of the alpha isoform of the peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gene in mice results in abolition of the pleiotropic effects of peroxisome proliferators. Mol Cell Biol 1995;15:3012–3022.

[30] Reddy JK, Warren JR, Reddy MK, Lalwani ND. Hepatic and renal effects of peroxisome proliferators: biological implications. Ann N Y Acad Sci 1982;386:81–110.

[31] Koppen A, Ait-Aissa R, Koster J, van Sluis PG, Ora I, Caron HN, et al. Direct regulation of the minichromosome maintenance complex by MycN in neuroblastoma. Eur J Cancer 2007;43:2413–2422.

[32] Lygerou Z, Nurse P. Cell cycle. License withheld-geminin blocks DNA replication. Science 2000;290:2271–2273.

[33] Labib K, Tercero JA, Diffley JF. Uninterrupted MCM2-7 function required for DNA replication fork progression. Science 2000;288:1643–1647.

[34] Lin DI, Aggarwal P, Diehl JA. Phosphorylation of MCM3 on Ser-112 regulates its incorporation into the MCM2-7 complex. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2008;105:8079–8084.

[35] Liu Q, Guntuku S, Cui XS, Matsuoka S, Cortez D, Tamai K, et al. Chk1 is an essential kinase that is regulated by Atr and required for the G(2)/M DNA damage checkpoint. Genes Dev 2000;14:1448–1459.

[36] Hoglund A, Nilsson LM, Muralidharan SV, Hasvold IA, Merta P, Rudelius M, et al. Therapeutic implications for the induced levels of Chk1 in Myc-expressing cancer cells. Clin Cancer Res 2011;17:7067–7079.

[37] Suwaki N, Klare K, Tarsounas M. RAD51 paralogs: roles in DNA damage signalling, recombinational repair and tumorigenesis. Semin Cell Dev Biol 2011;22:898–905.

[38] Hayashita Y, Osada H, Tatematsu Y, Yamada H, Yanagisawa K, Tomida S, et al. A polycistronic microRNA cluster, miR-17-92, is overexpressed in human lung cancers and enhances cell proliferation. Cancer Res 2005;65:9628–9632.

[39] O'Donnell KA, Wentzel EA, Zeller KI, Dang CV, Mendell JT. C-Myc-regulated microRNAs modulate E2F1 expression. Nature 2005;435:839–843.

[40] Oskarsson T, Trumpp A. The Myc trilogy: lord of RNA polymerases. Nat Cell Biol 2005;7:215–217.

[41] Riu E, Ferre T, Mas A, Hidalgo A, Franckhauser S, Bosch F. Overexpression of c-myc in diabetic mice restores altered expression of the transcription factor genes that regulate liver metabolism. Biochem J 2002;368:931–937.
