
Appl Microbiol Biotechnol
DOI 10.1007/s00253-013-5265-3

MINI-REVIEW

**Current knowledge on mycolic acids in *Corynebacterium glutamicum* and their relevance for biotechnological processes**

Marie-Antoinette Lanéelle · Maryelle Tropis · Mamadou Daffé

Received: 15 July 2013 / Revised: 12 September 2013 / Accepted: 14 September 2013
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2013

Abstract *Corynebacterium glutamicum* is the world’s largest producer of glutamate and lysine. Industrial glutamate overproduction is induced by empirical processes, such as biotin limitation, supplementation with specific surfactants or addition of sublethal concentration of certain antibiotics to the culture media. Although Gram-positive bacteria, *C. glutamicum* and related bacterial species and genera contain, in addition to the plasma membrane, an outer permeability membrane similar to that of Gram-negative microorganisms. As the amino acids have to cross both membranes, their integrity, composition and fluidity influence the export process. While the precise mechanism of the export of the amino acids by *C. glutamicum* is not fully understood, the excretion of amino acids through the inner membrane involved at least a major export system mechanosensitive channel MscS family (MscCG) encoded by NCgl1221. As the various industrial treatments have been shown to affect the lipid content of the bacterial cell, it is strongly believed that defects in the hallmark of the outer membrane, 2-alkyl, 3-hydroxylated long-chain fatty acids (mycolic acids), could be key factors in the glutamate overproduction. This review aims at giving an overview of the current knowledge on mycolic acids structure, biosynthesis and transfer in *C. glutamicum* and their relevance for amino acid biotechnological production.

Keywords *Corynebacterium* · Glutamate · Excretion · Mycolic acid · Outer membrane

Introduction

*Corynebacterium glutamicum* is a member of the Corynebacteriales order of actinomycetes, a group that includes corynebacteria, mycobacteria, nocardia, rhodococci and other related microorganisms (Liebl 2005). The hallmark of these bacteria is the presence of α-branched and β-hydroxylated long-chain fatty acids, called “mycolic acids” (MA). The chain lengths of MA typify the genus, ranging from the shortest chain lengths of MAs in *Corynebacterium* (C₁₆ to C₃₆) to the very-long MA of the Segniliparus genus (up to C₁₀₀), through a continuum of chain lengths. The most complex *Mycobacterium* MAs (C₆₀–C₈₉) bear specific functions such as cyclopropanes, double bonds and oxygenated groups (Barry et al. 1998; Hong et al. 2012; Lanéelle et al. 2013; Marrakchi et al. 2008).

MAs are structurally important components of the envelope of members of the Corynebacteriales order (Fig. 1). This coat is composed of a typical plasma membrane (PM) surrounded by a cell wall core covered by an outer layer (OL) composed of carbohydrate and protein. The cell wall core consists of peptidoglycan (PG) covalently linked to arabinogalactan (AG), which in turn is covalently bound to MAs. Unlike other Gram-positive bacteria, members of the Corynebacteriales order possess an outer permeability layer (Daffé and Draper 1998; Jarlier and Nikaido 1994). The attached MAs form with other free lipids an outer membrane (mycomembrane). It is thus expected that MAs would play a critical role in the structural organisation of the cell envelope, notably by participating to the outer permeability barrier to solutes and antibacterial drugs. The occurrence of a cell wall fracture plane has been correlated to the presence of MAs

M.-A. Lanéelle · M. Tropis · M. Daffé  
Team « Mycobacterial Cell Envelopes: Structure, Biosynthesis and Roles », Département “Mécanismes Moléculaires des Infections Mycobactériennes”, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique (CNRS), Institut de Pharmacologie et Biologie Structurale (IPBS), UMR 5089, BP 64182, 205, Route de Narbonne, 31077 Toulouse Cedex 04, France

M.-A. Lanéelle · M. Tropis · M. Daffé (✉)  
Université de Toulouse (Toulouse III), IPBS, 118 Route de Narbonne, 31062 Toulouse Cedex 04, France  
e-mail: mamadou.daffe@ipbs.fr

Published online: 11 October 2013

Fig. 1 Schematic representation of the cell envelope of *Corynebacterium glutamicum*. From the cytosolic site to the external side of the bacterium, the cell envelope is composed of a plasma membrane (PM), a typical bilayer of proteins and phospholipids. A periplasm (*P*) separates the PM from the cell wall core, which consists of a thick peptidoglycan (*PG*) covalently linked to the heteropolysaccharide arabinogalactan (*AG*) with some arabinosyl termini esterified by mycolic acids (*MA*). These, together with other non-covalently linked lipids, form the symmetric bilayer, called mycomembrane (*MM*), which also contains small proteins with pore-forming ability (porins). Different non-covalently linked lipids and proteins are also present in an outermost layer (*OL*) consisting in a polysaccharide matrix

(Daffé 2005; Daffé and Draper 1998), consistent with its absence in *Corynebacterium amycolatum*, a species devoid of MAs (Puech et al. 2001). This provides the demonstration that mycolic acids linked to arabinogalactan are essential for the formation of the outer membrane, “the mycomembrane”. More recently, it has been shown by cryo-electron microscopy of vitreous sections (CEMOVIS) that a typical outer membrane, similar to what is found in Gram-negative bacteria, and containing at least MAs occur in the cell envelope of *Corynebacteriales* (Hoffman et al. 2008; Zuber et al. 2008).

Structure of corynomycolic acids

The simplest MA acid (Fig. 2) contains only the “mycolic unit”, i.e. the α-branch and β-hydroxyl, and has been largely used as a model for biochemical studies (Portevin et al. 2004, 2005). The stereochemistry of the two asymmetric centres present in the molecule has been defined for the MA of *Corynebacterium diphtheriae* as 2R-tetradecyl, 3R-hydroxy octadecanoic acid (Asselineau and Asselineau 1966), which is conserved in the MAs examined to date (Asselineau et al. 1970). The peculiarity of the “mycolic unit” structure confers to MAs the property to be cleaved at high temperature into an aldehyde and an acid (the so-called α-branch) in a reaction similar to a reverse Claisen-type condensation (Fig. 2). This property has been extensively used for structural studies by gas chromatography/mass spectrometry (MS). More informative was the derivation of the hydroxyl group by silylation, which impedes the splitting of the molecule and allowed an easy characterization of the overall chain lengths, as well as the nature of the two parts of the molecule, i.e. the ester and the aldehyde that result from the cleavage, with the indication of the presence or absence of double bonds.

Fig. 2 Structure of the C₃₂ corynomycolic acid (2R-tetradecyl-3R-hydroxy-octadecanoic acid) and scheme of the pyrolytical cleavage of the “mycolic unit” leading to C₁₆ aldehyde and C₁₆ acid. $R_1$ represents the C₁₅H₃₁ alkyl chain; $R_2$ is the C₁₄H₂₉ alkyl chain, also called “α-branch”. $R$ indicates the absolute configuration of the asymmetric carbon

C. glutamicum contains C<sub>32:0</sub>, C<sub>34:1</sub>, C<sub>36:2</sub> MAs as main components, accompanied by shorter homologues, C<sub>16:0</sub> to C<sub>30:0</sub>, the abundance of which depends on both the strain analyzed and the growth conditions (Yang et al. 2012). The main representative of the short chain series is the C<sub>24:0</sub> homologue, which upon pyrolysis liberates C<sub>8</sub> (α-branch) and C<sub>16</sub> aldehyde (Huchenq et al. 1984). The presence of small amounts of C<sub>16</sub> homologues in other corynebacteria (Nishiuchi et al. 2000) results from the condensation of C<sub>8</sub> acid for their synthesis and indicates the large specificity of the condensing enzyme for its substrates in terms of chain lengths. Based on the definition of MAs as short-chain mycolic acids (C<sub>16</sub> to C<sub>36</sub>), the classification of many coryneform strains, e.g. Bacterionema, Brevibacterium and Caseobacter, has been revisited, and many strains have been reclassified (Minnikin et al. 1978; Collins et al. 1982; Yano and Saito 1972; Alshamoany et al. 1977; Attalye et al. 1984).

Changes in the MA profile have been observed with the composition of growth media. Growth in the presence of serum resulted in the production of polyunsaturated MAs with expected chain lengths but bearing up to four double bonds (Gailly et al. 1982). Similarly, growth in the presence of Tween-80 for enhancing the bacterial growth rate led to the production of high levels of MA with 36 carbon atoms, due to the utilization of the C<sub>18</sub> fatty acid constitutive of the detergent (Chevalier et al. 1988). Comparative analysis of different strains of *C. glutamicum* by electrospray MS followed by MS/MS fragmentation has demonstrated that the composition of MAs is also influenced by the temperature, both in terms of chain lengths and unsaturation degrees: at 30 °C, the predominant homologue is C<sub>36:2</sub> while at 34 °C, the major MA is C<sub>32:0</sub>; at higher temperature, the bacterial cells synthesize more MAs containing unsaturated and shorter carbon chains, improving the fluidity of the cell wall (Yang et al. 2012). In that connexion, we have identified NCgl2775, a gene transcriptionally induced under heat-stress conditions (Meniche et al. 2009). The expression of the protein in stress conditions triggers an increase in MA biosynthesis concomitant with a decrease in phospholipid content.

C. glutamicum possesses only FAS-I involved in the synthesis of de novo fatty acid, in contrast to mycobacteria whose C<sub>60</sub>–C<sub>90</sub> MAs result from the elongation of the FAS-I product by the FAS-II system (Marrakchi et al. 2008). Nevertheless, some peculiarities are observed in *C. glutamicum* fatty acid syntheses: (1) two FAS-I proteins are present, compared to *C. diphtheriae*, differing in their ability to synthesize C<sub>18:1</sub> and in their chain length specificities. Indeed, it has been shown that FAS-IA synthesizes mainly the C<sub>18:1</sub> (oleate) and C<sub>18:0</sub> (stearate), with only traces of the C<sub>16:0</sub> (palmitate), while FAS-IB product is the C<sub>16:0</sub>. Both syntheses are needed for the production of the characteristic lipid profile of *C. glutamicum* (Stuible et al. 1997; Radmacher et al. 2005). This illustrates the specificity of the FAS-I enzymes and the difference between the fatty acid content of *C. diphtheriae*, which lacks FAS-IA, and *C. glutamicum*. Interestingly, the *fas-IA*-deleted mutants enable glutamate excretion, probably by changing the phospholipid composition (Radmacher et al. 2005).

That the synthesis of mycolic acid is realized by the condensation of FAS-I products in corynebacteria has been proved by 1-<sup>14</sup>C-palmitate-labelling using cell-free extracts of both *C. diphtheriae* and “*Corynebacterium matruchotii*” (formerly *Bacterionema matruchotii*. However, some differences have been noticed between the two species. While the mature MA, i.e. trehalose 6-corynomycoloyl, has been characterized in *C. matruchotii* cell-free extracts (Shimakata et al. 1984, 1985, 1986; Shimakata and Minatogawa 2000), the unreduced MA precursor, i.e. 2-tetradecyl-3-keto-octadecanoyl-6-α,α′-D-trehalose, has been identified in that of *C. diphtheriae* in the first minutes of the reaction (Gastambide-Odier and Lederer 1960; Walker et al. 1973; Promé et al. 1974; Ahibo-Coffy et al. 1978). The absence of a carboxylation step in *C. matruchotii* has been confirmed by cell-free experiments involving <sup>2</sup>H-palmitate incorporation (Lee et al. 1997). Therefore, the two species differ both in terms of condensation product and activated form.

The description of the genome of some corynebacteria (Kalinowski et al. 2003; Cerdeno-Tarrega et al. 2003; Nishio et al. 2003; Ikeda and Nakagawa 2003) has facilitated the in silico analysis with the aim of searching of the genes that would encode the different proteins involved in the condensation, carboxylation, activation and reduction reactions to yield MA. The disruption of the putative genes, followed by the analyses of the resulting mutants, has led to the demonstration that corynebacteria contain only one ORF that encodes a protein catalyzing a condensation reaction, namely a polyketide synthase. This gene, NCgl2773 (named *pks13* in mycobacteria), is present in the genome of all MA-containing strains sequenced so far (Fig. 3). Its involvement in MA synthesis has been established in *C. glutamicum* (Portevin et al. 2004; Gande et al. 2004). The Pks13/NCgl2773 protein contains the four catalytic domains required for the condensation reaction, namely, an acyl transferase (AT), a keto

altered cell envelope modifications (Portevin et al. 2004, 2005). The accumulation of tetradecyl malonic acid in the ΔNCgl2774/fadD32::km and its absence from the ΔNcgl2772/CgAccD3::km establish that the activation of one fatty acid molecule by NCgl2774/CgFadD32 and the carboxylation of the other substrate by Ncgl2772/CgAccD3 are required for the condensation reaction (Portevin et al. 2005), as previously suggested by the effect of avidine in the cell-free experiments of *C. diphtheriae* (Walker et al. 1973).

The gene that catalyzes the reduction of the keto-ester that is required for the production of the mature MA has been identified by deleting NCgl2385, called *cmrA* (Lea-Smith et al. 2007). The resulting mutant produced slow-growing cells that contain elevated levels of trehalose lipid containing the β-keto intermediates, as expected, and a marked deficiency in the acylation of the cell wall arabinogalactan by MA. CmrA converts the keto function into a hydroxyl group. A cytosolic location of the protein has been proposed (Lea-Smith et al. 2007). In that connexion, a phospholipid containing 3-oxo-2-tetradecylmalonate has been identified in *C. diphtheriae* but, due to the instability of the lipid, the characterization could not be pursued (Datta and Takayama 1993). Interestingly, the product of condensation, characterized in cell-free experiments, was always trehalose derivatives. However, while the non-reduced trehalose keto acyl derivative (2-tetradecyl-3-keto-octadecanoyl-6-α,α′-D-trehalose) was identified in *C. diphtheriae* (Walker et al. 1973), the mature corynomycolyl-6-α,α′-D-trehalose was isolated in *C. matruchotii* (Shimakata et al. 1984, 1985, 1986; Shimakata and Minatogawa 2000). Comparison of the Ncgl2772-Ncgl2773-Ncgl2774 cluster from *C. glutamicum* ATCC13032 and *C. matruchotii* ATCC14266, with reference to the orthologous fadD32-pks13-accD4 genes of *M. tuberculosis* (Fig. 3), showed two additional genes (CORMA0001_2753 and 2754) between (CORMA0001_2752) and CORMA0001_2755 in *C. matruchotii*. The presence of these two genes may explain the difference observed between the products characterized from cell-free experiments of *C. glutamicum* and *C. diphtheriae* on one hand and *C. matruchotii* on the other hand.

The crucial role of trehalose in the physiology of the corynebacterial cell has been demonstrated by the construction of viable mutants that are defective in the synthesis of trehalose (Wolf et al. 2003). In contrast to mycobacteria where trehalose was shown to be essential (De Smet et al. 2000), trehalose-less corynebacterial cells were shown to be devoid of MA and also the characteristic cell fracture plane when grown on sucrose as carbon source (Tropis et al. 2005). Interestingly, the mutants were able to synthesize MA when grown on maltose or maltotriose, i.e. saccharide containing α-D-glucose residues. The newly synthesized glycolipids consisted of one molecule of MA located on carbon 6 of the non-reducing glucopyranosyl unit (Tropis et al. 2005). The MA residues synthesized by the mutant grown on α-D-

glucopyranosyl or oligosaccharides were transferred both onto the cell wall arabinogalactan and the free sugar acceptors. Based on results showing that trehalose is necessary for the condensation reaction (Tropis et al. 2005) and the isolation of β-keto ester of trehalose, both in whole cells and cell-free experiments (Ahibo-Coffy et al. 1978; Promé et al. 1974; Puzo et al. 1979; Walker et al. 1973), it was deduced that the reduction of the keto group was not necessary for the subsequent pathways involving mycolyl transferases.

### Mycolyl transferases: acylation of trehalose, arabinogalactan and porins

Up to recently, MAs were found in corynebacteria linked only to polyols, namely glycerol, as glycerol monocorynomycolate (Ioneda and Silva 1979; Yagüe et al. 2000), trehalose in the ubiquitous glycolipids, i.e. trehalose di- and mono-mycolate and less often, the MA keto-derivatives (Daffé 2005; Puzo et al. 1979) and the cell wall arabinogalactan (Puech et al. 2001). Thus, mycolyl transferases (Myts) play an essential role in the biogenesis of the cell envelope of members of the Corynebacteriales order as they transfer the newly synthesized MAs or their keto intermediates onto their acceptors. In contrast to mycobacteria, however, the majority of the mature MAs are found linked to trehalose, instead of the cell wall arabinogalactan, both forms being involved in the formation of the outer permeability barrier (Puech et al. 2001). Three functional *myt* genes have been demonstrated in mycobacteria (Puech et al. 2002; Belisle et al. 1997), known as *fbp* (fibronectin-binding proteins). Surprisingly, six *cmyts* have been identified in corynebacteria (Brand et al. 2003; De Sousa-D’Auria et al. 2003). In silico analysis showed that each of the putative cMyt contains the esterase domain including the three key amino acids necessary for the catalysis (Ser, His, Glu) that have been shown to be critical for the Myt activity (Belisle et al. 1997). The consequences of the mutation of the different *cmyt* genes on the viability, the transfer of MAs onto arabinogalactan and trehalose and on the ultrastructure of the corynebacterial envelope have been examined (Brand et al. 2003; De Souza D’Auria et al. 2003; Kacem et al. 2004). Quantitative analyses of the MA content of the simple mutants demonstrated that all the defective strains, except cMytC and cMytE, accumulated trehalose mycolates and exhibited lower MA-bound contents, compared to the parent strain, showing some redundancy (De Sousa-D’Auria et al. 2003). Profound alterations on the cell wall of the double mutant Δ*cmytA*Δ*cmytB* were observed by freeze-fracture electron microscopy (Kacem et al. 2004). These modifications were associated to a cell wall-bound MA content corresponding to 60 % less cell wall-bound corynomycolates (Kacem et al. 2004).

Mycolate transport through the plasma membrane has been shown to involve two proteins, NCgl0228 and NCgl2769. A complete loss of trehalose-associated and cell wall-bound mycolates was observed only in the double mutant, but not in individual single mutants, pointing to a redundancy in the role of the two orthologous proteins of “mycobacterial membrane protein large” (mmpL) in *C. glutamicum* (Varela et al. 2012). The transfer of mycolyl residues onto trehalose was shown to occur outside the plasma membrane, in the cell walls on corynebacteria (Tropis et al. 2005).

*C. glutamicum* contains pore-forming activities, the major cell wall channel being formed by small polypeptides, namely PorA and PorH (Barth et al. 2010). The two polypeptides and an unknown small protein have been shown to be *O*-mycolylated (Huc et al. 2010), an unprecedented *O*-acylation in the bacterial world. The post-translational mycolylation of PorA occurs at Ser15 and that of PorH at Ser 56 (Rath et al. 2013). The post-translational modification of PorA is necessary for the pore-forming activity (Huc et al. 2010; Rath et al. 2011). The Myt responsible for porin mycolylation has been very recently identified as cMytC (Huc et al. 2013).

#### Glutamate excretion and the mycolate content

*C. glutamicum* is the world’s largest producer of glutamate and lysine. More than 2.10<sup>6</sup> tons of amino acids are produced annually using *C. glutamicum* (Sano 2009; Hermann 2003). When grown on carbohydrates and ammonia, cells release L-glutamic acid from 2-oxoglutarate by reductive ammonia fixation that uses the enzyme glutamate dehydrogenase (Kimura 2005). L-glutamic acid is an essential metabolite that normally does not leak from the cells. However, it is what occurs in the industrial process of glutamic acid production by *C. glutamicum*. The massive excretion is obtained during the active growth of the culture by various conditions such as growth under biotin limitation (Shiiio et al. 1962a, b), the addition of either cerulenin (Hoischen and Kramer 1990), surfactant (Takinami et al. 1965), antibiotics as ethambutol (Radmacher et al. 2005) or penicillin (Nunheimer et al. 1970) or by a temperature upshift (Delaunay et al. 1999). The mechanism of L-glutamate secretion is complex and certainly required several factors.

It is known that the lipid content of *C. glutamicum* severely impacts the excretion properties and industrial processes for L-glutamate production due to the expected alterations of both the plasma membrane and the outer membrane by the various treatments used, which include, in addition to the biotin limitation, the variation of the growth temperature and addition of surfactants (Tween-40 or –60, basic amine surfactants). Therefore, as the amino acids have to cross two membranes (inner and outer membranes), the integrity, composition and fluidity of both membranes influence the export of amino acids.

As far as the export of amino-acids through the plasma membrane is concerned, a direct evidence of glutamic acid
excretion through a major export system (MscCG) related to *Escherichia coli* mechanosensitive channel MscS family has been established in *C. glutamicum*. The channel is formed by subunits of the 2-oxoglutarate dehydrogenase (OdhA) complex encoded by NCgl1221. Disruption of *odhA* essentially abolishes L-glutamic acid secretion, causing an accumulation of intracellular glutamate under biotin-limiting conditions. Expectedly, amplification of the wild-type NCgl1221 gene increases L-glutamate secretion in response to induction (Nakamura et al. 2007). Electrophysiological studies have provided direct evidence of glutamate excretion through this channel by passive diffusion (Hashimoto et al. 2012). Interestingly, the major difference between NCgl1221 and homologous corynebacterial MscCG protein and most other MscS-type proteins is the presence of an additional 247 amino-acid long C-terminal domain that carries a transmembrane segment. Selected truncations of this domain have shown that it has a significant impact for function and/or regulation of MscCG (Becker et al. 2013). Three-dimensional homology modelling has suggested that the N-terminal domain of NCgl1221 has an extra-loop structure of 221–232 amino acids that is found in most MscS proteins (Yamashita et al. 2013). Furthermore, the mutant deleted for this loop structure lost the ability to secrete L-glutamate. As the NCgl1221 mutant lacking the C-terminal extracytoplasmic domain (420–533 amino acids) produced glutamate without any inducing treatment, it was suggested that the N-terminal domain is necessary and sufficient for the L-glutamate excretion in response to inducing treatment and that the C-terminal extracytoplasmic domain has a negative regulatory role in the glutamate production (Yamashita et al. 2013).

All the glutamate-producing bacteria possess a MA-rich outer membrane (mycomembrane; Fig. 1). That the mycolate content is important to switch off the stimulus for L-glutamate and L-lysine excretion came from the work of Gebhardt and coworkers who compared the content of the amino acid of the medium of the wild-type and mycolate-less strains of *C. glutamicum* (Gebhardt et al. 2007). Depending on the carbon source, the trehalose and mycolate deficiency of the mutant could be modulated. The loss of MA biosynthesis led to the accumulation of L-glutamate in the medium, a phenomenon that was reversed by the induction of synthesis of an amount of MAs equivalent to that of the parental strain (by adding trehalose to the culture medium).

The structures of MAs produced by *C. glutamicum* under biotin limitation, Tween-40 supplementation, penicillin addition or cerulenin supplementation have been compared to that of the control. While the main MA homologue is C~32:0~ (72 %) in the control, this proportion decreases to 52 % with cerulenin, with the occurrence of saturated shorter-chain lengths (C~24~–C~30~) mycolic acids (Hashimoto et al. 2006). This suggests that by changing the composition of the envelope, the industrial processes cause also a defect in the outer membrane (mycomembrane).

It is likely that modifications of the mycomembrane induce the aperture of an efflux channel in the plasma membrane (Marquet et al. 1986). The mycomembrane itself is a permeability barrier for amino acids efflux, and it is unlikely that amino acids like Glu and Lys passively diffuse across this bilayer (Eggeling 2005). Accordingly, the implication of pore-forming proteins (e.g. PorA/PorH) is likely. How industrial treatments affect the passage through this membrane remains a major challenge for future work in order to discover how this takes place in detail and then apply these findings for a further strain improvement (Eggeling and Sahm 2001).

Acknowledgements We are indebted to all of our colleagues for stimulating discussions, notably Pr Gilbert Lanéelle, Drs Nathalie Eynard and A. Quémard, and Mr. Wladimir Malaga, all from IPBS-CNRS and University of Toulouse.

References

Ahibo-Coffy A, Aurelle H, Lacave C, Promé JC, Puzo G, Savagnac A (1978) Isolation, structural studies and chemical synthesis of a “palmitone lipid” from *Corynebacterium diphtheriae*. Chem Phys Lipids 22:185–195

Alshamoany L, Goodfellow M, Minnikin DE, Bowden GH, Hardie JM (1977) Fatty and mycolic acids of *Bacterionema matruchotii* and related organisms. J Gen Microbiol 98:205–213

Asselineau J, Asselineau C (1966) Stéréochimie de l’acide corynomycolique. Bull Soc Chim France 1192–1996

Asselineau C, Tocanne G, Tocanne, JF (1970) Stéréochimie des acides mycoliques. Bull Soc Chim France 1455–1459

Attalye M, Noble WC, Mallet AI, Minnikin DE (1984) Gas-chromatography-mass spectrometry of mycolic acids as tool in the identification of medically important coryneform bacteria. J Gen Microbiol 130:513–519

Barry CE III, Lee RE, Mdluli K, Sampson AE, Schroeder BG, Slayden RA, Yuan Y (1998) Mycolic acids: structure, biosynthesis and physiological functions. Prog Lipid Res 37:143–179

Barth E, Barcelo MA, Klackta C, Benz R (2010) Reconstitution experiments and gene deletions reveal the existence of two-component major cell wall channels in the genus *Corynebacterium*. J Bacteriol 192:786–800

Becker M, Börgen K, Nomura T, Battle AR, Marin K, Martinac B, Krämer R (2013) Glutamate efflux mediated by *Corynebacterium glutamicum* MscCG, *Escherichia coli* MscS, and their derivatives. Biochim Biophys Acta 1828:1230–1240

Belisle JT, Vissa VD, Sievert T, Takayama K, Brennan PJ, Besra GS (1997) Role of the major antigen of *Mycobacterium tuberculosis* in cell wall biogenesis. Science 276:1420–1422

Brand S, Niehaus K, Pühler A, Kalinowski J (2003) Identification and functional analysis of six mycolyltransferase genes of *Corynebacterium glutamicum* ATCC 13032: the genes *cop1*, *cmt1*, and *cmt2* can replace each other in the synthesis of trehalose dicorynomycolate, a component of the mycolic acid layer of the cell envelope. Arch Microbiol 180:33–44

Cerdeño-Tárraga AM, Efstratiou A, Dover LG, Holden MT, Pallen M, Bentley SD, Besra GS, Churcher C, James KD, De Zoysa A, Chillingworth T, Cronin A, Dowd L, Feltwell T, Hamlin N, Holroyd S, Jagels K, Moule S, Quail MA, Rabbinowitsch E, Rutherford KM, Thomson NR, Unwin L, Whitehead S, Barrell BG, Parkhill J (2003)

Springer
The complete genome sequence and analysis of Corynebacterium diphtheriae NCTC13129. Nucleic Acids Res 31:6516–6523

Chevalier J, Pommier MT, Crémieux A, Michel G (1988) Influence of Tween 80 on the mycolic acid composition of three cutaneous corynebacteria. J Gen Microbiol 134:2457–2461

Collins MD, Goodfellow M, Minnikin DE (1982) A survey of the structures of mycolic acids in *Corynebacterium* and related taxa. J. Gen Microbiol 128:129–149

Daffé M (2005) The cell envelope of corynebacteria. In: Eggeling L, Bott M (eds) Handbook of *Corynebacterium glutamicum*. CRC Press, Boca Raton, pp 121–148

Daffé M, Draper P (1998) The envelope layers of mycobacteria with reference to their pathogenicity. Adv Microbiol Physiol 39:132–203

Datta AK, Takayama K (1993) Biosynthesis of a novel 3-oxo-tetradecyloctadecanoate-containing phospholipid by a cell-free extract of *Corynebacterium diphtheriae*. Biochim Biophys Acta 1169:135–145

De Smet KAL, Weston A, Brown IN, Young DB, Robertson BD (2000) Three pathways for trehalose biosynthesis in mycobacteria. Microbiology 146:199–208

De Sousa-D’auria C, Kacem R, Puech V, Tropis M, Leblon G, Houssin C, Daffé M (2003) New insights into the biogenesis of the cell envelope of corynebacteria: identification and functional characterization of five new mycolyltransferase genes in *Corynebacterium glutamicum*. FEMS Microbiol Lett 224:35–44

Del aunay S, Gourdon P, Lapujade P, Mailly E, Oriol E, Engasser JM, Lindley ND, Goergen JL (1999) An improved temperature-triggered process for glutamate production with *Corynebacterium glutamicum*. Enzym Microb Technol 25:762–768

Eggeling L (2005) Export of aminoacids and other solutes. In: Eggeling L, Bott M (eds) Handbook of *Corynebacterium glutamicum*. CRC Press, Boca Raton, pp 187–211

Eggeling L, Sahm H (2001) The cell barrier of *Corynebacterium glutamicum* and amino acid efflux. J Biosci Bioeng 92:201–213

Gailly C, Sandra P, Verzele M, Cocito C (1982) Analysis of mycolic acids from a group of corynebacteria by capillary gas chromatography and mass spectrometry. Eur J Biochem 125:83–94

Gande R, Gibson KJ, Brown AK, Krumbach K, Dover LG, Sahm H, Shi oyama S, Oikawa T, Besra GS, Eggeling L (2004) Acyl-CoA carboxylases (accd2 and accd3), together with a unique polyketide synthase (Cg-pks) are key to mycolic acid biosynthesis in *Corynebacterineae* such as *Corynebacterium glutamicum* and *Mycobacterium tuberculosis*. J Biol Chem 279:44847–44857

Gastambide-Odier M, Lederer E (1960) Biosynthèse de l’acide corynomycolique à partir de deux molécules d’acide palmitique. Biochem Z 333:285–295

Gebhart H, Méniche X, Tropis M, Krämer R, Daffé M, Morbach S (2007) The key role of the mycolic acid content in the functionality of the cell wall permeability barrier in *Corynebacterineae*. Microbiology 153:1424–1434

Hashimoto K, Kawasaki H, Akazawa K, Nakamura J, Asakura Y, Kudo T, Sakuradani E, Shimizu S, Nakamatsu T (2006) Changes in composition and content of mycolic acids in glutamate-overproducing *Corynebacterium glutamicum*. Biosci Biotechnol Biochem 70:22–30

Hashimoto K, Murata J, Konishi T, Yabe I, Nakamatsu T, Kawasaki H (2012) Glutamate is excreted through the NCgl1221 channel of *Corynebacterium glutamicum* by passive diffusion. Biosci Biotechnol Biochem 76:1422–1424

Hermann T (2003) Industrial production of aminoacids by coryneform bacteria. J Biotechnol 104:155–172

Hoffman C, Leis A, Niederweis M, Plitzko JM, Engelhardt H (2008) Disclosure of the mycobacterial outer membrane: cryo-electron tomography and vitreous sections reveal the lipid layer structure. PNAS 105:3963–3967

Hoischen H, Krämer R (1990) Membrane alteration is necessary but not sufficient for effective glutamate secretion in *Corynebacterium glutamicum*. J Bacteriol 172:3409–3416

Hong S, Cheng TY, Layre E, Sweet L, Young DC, Posey JE, Butler WR, Moody DB (2012) Ultralong C100 Mycolic acids support the assignment of *Segniliparus* as a new bacteria genus. PLoS ONE 7: e39017

Huc E, Meniche X, Benz R, Bayan N, Ghazi A, Tropis M, Daffé M (2010) *O*-mycoloylated proteins from *Corynebacterium*: an unprecedented post-translational modification in bacteria. J Biol Chem 285:21908–21912

Huc E, De Souza-D’auria C, Li de la Sierra-Gallay I, Salmeron C, van Tilburg H, Bayan N, Daffé M, Tropis M (2013) Identification of a mycoloyl transferase selectively involved in *O*-acylation of poly-peptides in *Corynebacteriales*. J Bacteriol 195:4121–4128

Huchenq H, Marquet M, Welby M, Montrozier H, Goma G, Lanéelle G (1984) Glutamate excretion triggering mechanism: a reinvestigation of the surfactant-induced modification of cell lipids. Ann Microbiol (Paris) 135:53–67

Ikeda M, Nakagawa S (2003) The *Corynebacterium glutamicum* genome: features and impacts on biotechnological processes. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 62:99–109

Ioneda T, Silva CL (1979) Purification of 1-monoacylglycerols containing α-branched β-hydroxylated fatty acids from lipids of *Corynebacterium pseudotuberculosis*. Chem Phys Lipids 25:85–91

Jarlier V, Nikaido H (1994) Mycobacterial cell wall: structure and role in natural resistance to antibiotics. FEMS Microbiol Lett 123:1–8

Kacem R, De Souza-D’Auria C, Tropis M, Chami M, Gounon P, Leblon G, Houssin C, Daffé M (2004) Importance of mycoloyl transferases on the physiology of *Corynebacterium glutamicum*. Microbiology 150:73–84

Kalinowski J, Bathe B, Bartels D, Bischoff N, Bott M, Burkovski A, Dusch N, Eggeling L, Eikmanns BJ, Gaigalat L, Goesmann A, Hartmann M, Huthmacher K, Kramer R, Linke B, McHardy AC, Meyer F, Mockel B, Pfefferle W, Puhler A, Rey DA, Ruckert C, Rupp O, Sahm H, Wendisch VF, Wiegrabe I, Tauch A (2003) The complete *Corynebacterium glutamicum* ATCC 13032 genome sequence and its impact on the production of L-aspartate-derived amino acids and vitamins. J Biotechnol 104:5–25

Kimura E (2005) L-glutamate production. In: Eggeling L, Bott M (eds) Handbook of *Corynebacterium glutamicum*. CRC Press, Boca Raton, pp 439–463

Lanéelle MA, Eynard N, Spina L, Lemassu A, Laval F, Huc E, Etienne G, Marrakchi H, Daffé M (2013) Structural elucidation and genomic scrutiny of the C<sub>60</sub>–C<sub>100</sub> mycolic acids of *Segniliparus rotundus*. Microbiology 159:191–203

Lea-Smith DE, Pyke JS, Tull D, McConville MJ, Coppel RL, Crellin PK (2007) The reductase that catalyzes mycolic motif synthesis is required for efficient attachment of mycolic acids to arabinogalactan. J Biol Chem 282:11000–11008

Lee RE, Armour JW, Takayama K, Brennan PJ, Besra GS (1997) Mycolic acid biosynthesis: definition and targeting of the Claisen condensation step. Biochim Biophys Acta 1346:275–284

Liebl W (2005) *Corynebacterium* taxonomy. In: Eggeling L, Bott M (eds) Handbook of *Corynebacterium glutamicum*. CRC Press, Boca Raton, pp 9–34

Marquet M, Uribelarrea JL, Huchenq A, Lanéelle G, Goma G (1986) Glutamate expression by *Corynebacterium glutamicum*: a study of glutamate accumulation during a fermentation course. Applied Microbiol Biotechnol 25:220–223

Marrakchi H, Bardou F, Lanéelle MA, Daffé M (2008) A comprehensive overview of mycolic acid structure and biosynthesis. In: Daffé M, Reyrat JM (eds) The mycobacterial cell envelope. ASM Press, Washington, DC

Meniche X, Labarre C, De Souza-D’Auria C, Huc E, Laval F, Tropis M, Bayan N, Portevin D, Guilhot C, Houssin C (2009) Identification of a stress-induced factor of *Corynebacterineae* that is involved in the regulation of the outer membrane lipid composition. J Bacteriol 191: 7323–7332

Minnikin DE, Goodfellow M, Collins MD (1978) Lipid composition in the classification of coryneform and related taxa. In: Bousfield IJ, Galleli AG (eds) Coryneform bacteria. Academic Press, New York, pp 85–160

Nakamura J, Hirano S, Ito H, Wachi M (2007) Mutations of the *Corynebacterium glutamicum* NCgl1221 gene, encoding a mechanosensitive channel homolog, induce L-glutamic acid production. Appl Environ Microbiol 73:4491–4498

Nishio Y, Nakamura Y, Kawarabayasi Y, Usuda Y, Kimura E, Sugimoto S, Matsui K, Yamagishi A, Kikuchi K, Ikeo K, Gojobori T (2003) Comparative complete genome sequence analysis of the amino acid replacements responsible for the thermostability of *Corynebacterium efficiens*. Genome Res 13:1572–1579

Nishiuchi Y, Baba T, Yano I (2000) Mycolic acids from *Rhodococcus*, *Gordonia*, and *Dietzia*. J Microbiol Methods 40:1–9

Nunheimer TD, Birnbaum J, Ihnen ED, Demain AL (1970) Product inhibition of the fermentative formation of glutamic acid. Appl Microbiol 20:215–217

Portevin D, De Souza-D’Auria C, Houssin C, Grimaldi C, Chami M, Daffé M, Guilhot C (2004) A polyketide synthase catalyses the last condensation step of mycolic acid biosynthesis in mycobacteria and related organisms. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 101:314–319

Portevin D, De Souza-D’Auria C, Bardou F, Montrozier H, Houssin C, Stella A, Lanéelle MA, Bardou F, Guilhot C, Daffé M (2005) The acyl-AMP ligase FadD32 and AccD4-containing acyl-CoA carboxylase are required for the synthesis of mycolic acids and essential for mycobacterial growth. Identification of the carboxylation product and determination of the acyl-CoA carboxylase components. J Biol Chem 280:8862–8874

Promé JC, Walker RW, Lacave C (1974) Condensation de deux molécules d’acide palmitique chez *Corynebacterium diphtheriae*: formation d’un β-céto-ester de tréhalose. C R Acad Sci Paris 278:1065–1068

Puech V, Chami M, Lemassu A, Lanéelle MA, Schiffler B, Gounon P, Bayan N, Benz R, Daffé M (2001) Structure of the cell envelope of corynebacteria: importance of the non-covalently bound lipids in the formation of the cell wall permeability barrier and fracture plane. Microbiology 147:1365–1382

Puech V, Guilhot C, Perez E, Tropis M, Armitige LY, Gicquel B, Daffé M (2002) Evidence for a partial redundancy of the fibronectin-binding proteins for the transfer of mycoloyl residues onto the cell wall arabinogalactan termini of *Mycobacterium tuberculosis*. Mol Microbiol 44:1109–1122

Puzo G, Tissié G, Aurelle H, Lacave C, Promé JC (1979) Occurrence of 3-oxo-acyl groups in the 6,6′-diesters of α-D-trehalose. New glycolipids related to Cord Factor from *Corynebacterium diphtheriae*. Eur J Biochem 98:99–105

Radmacher E, Stancen KC, Besra GS, Alderwick LJ, Maugham WN, Hollweg G, Sahm H, Wendish VE, Eggeling L (2005) Ethambutol, a cell wall inhibitor of *Mycobacterium tuberculosis*, elicits L-glutamate efflux of *Corynebacterium glutamicum*. Microbiology 151:1359–1368

Rath P, Demange P, Saurel O, Tropis M, Daffé M, Dötsch V, Ghazi A, Bernhard F, Milon A (2011) Functional expression of the PorAH channel from *Corynebacterium glutamicum* in cell-free expression systems. Implications for the role of the naturally occurring mycolic acid modification. J Biol Chem 286:32525–32532

Rath P, Saurel O, Tropis M, Daffé M, Demange P, Milon A (2013) NMR localisation of the O-mycoloylation on PorH, a channel forming peptide from *Corynebacterium glutamicum*. FEBS Lett in press

Sano C (2009) History of glutamate production. Am J Clin Nutr 90:728S–732S

Shiiio I, Otsuka SI, Katsuya N (1962a) Effect of biotin on the bacterial formation of glutamic acid. I. Glutamate formation and cellular permeability of amino acids. J Biochem 51:56–62

Shiiio I, Otsuka SI, Katsuya N (1962b) Effect of biotin on the bacterial formation of glutamic acid. II. Metabolism of glucose. J Biochem 52:108–116

Shimakata T, Minatogawa Y (2000) Essential role of trehalose in the synthesis and subsequent metabolism of corynomycolic acid in *Corynebacterium matruchotii*. Archiv Biochem Biophys 380:331–338

Shimakata T, Ikawi M, Kusaka T (1984) *In vitro* synthesis of mycolic acids by the fluffy layer fraction of *Bacterionema matruchotii*. Arch Biochem Biophys 229:329–339

Shimakata T, Tsubokura K, Kusaka T, Shizukuishi KI (1985) Mass spectrometry identification of trehalose 6-monomycolate synthesized by the cell-free system of *Bacterionema matruchotii*. Arch Biochem Biophys 238:497–508

Shimakata T, Tsubokura K, Kusaka T (1986) Requirement of glucose for mycolic acid biosynthetic activity localized in the cell wall. Arch Biochem Biophys 247:302–311

Stuble HP, Meurer G, Schweizer E (1997) Heterologous expression and biochemical characterization of two functionally different type I fatty acid synthases from *Brevibacterium ammoniagenes*. Eur J Biochem 247:268–273

Takinami K, Yoshi H, Tsuri H, Okada H (1965) Biochemical effects of fatty acid and its derivatives on L-glutamic acid fermentation. III. Biotin-Tween 60 relationship in accumulation of L-glutamic acid and the growth of *Brevibacterium lactofermentum*. Agric Biol Chem 29:351–359

Tropis M, Meniche X, Wolf A, Gebhardt H, Strelkov S, Chami M, Schomburg D, Kramer R, Morbach S, Daffe M (2005) The crucial role of trehalose and structurally related oligosaccharides in the biosynthesis and transfer of mycolic acids in Corynebacterineae. J Biol Chem 280:26573–26585

Varela C, Rittmann D, Singh A, Krumbach K, Bhatt K, Eggeling L, Besra GS, Bhatt A (2012) MmpL genes are associated with mycolic acid metabolism in *Mycobacteria* and *Corynebacteria*. Chem Biol 19:498–506

Walker RW, Promé JC, Lacave C (1973) Biosynthesis of mycolic acids. Formation of a C32-β-ketoester from palmitic acid in a cell-free system of *Corynebacterium diphtheriae*. Biochim Biophys Acta 326:52–62

Wolf A, Krämer R, Morbach S (2003) Three pathways for trehalose metabolism in *Corynebacterium glutamicum* ATCC13032 and their significance in response to osmotic stress. Mol Microbiol 49:1119–1134

Yagüe G, Segovia M, Valero-Guillen PL (2000) Detection of mycoloylglycerol by thin-layer chromatography as a tool for the rapid inclusion of corynebacteria of clinical origin in the genus *Corynebacterium*. J Chromatog B Biomed Sci Appl 28:181–185

Yamashita C, Hashimoto K, Kumagai K, Maeda T, Takada A, Yabe I, Kawasaki H, Wachi M (2013) L-glutamate secretion by the N-terminal domain of the *Corynebacterium glutamicum* NCgl1221 mechanosensitive channel. Biosci Biotechnol Biochem 77:1008–1013

Yang Y, Shi F, Tao G, Wang X (2012) Purification and structural analysis of mycolic acids in *Corynebacterium glutamicum*. J Microbiol 50:235–240

Yano I, Saito K (1972) Gas chromatographic and mass spectrometric analysis of molecular species of corynomycolic acids from *Corynebacterium ulcerans*. FEBS Lett 23:352–356

Zuber B, Chami M, Houssin C, Dubochet J, Griffiths G, Daffé M (2008) Direct visualization of the outer membrane of mycobacteria and corynebacteria in their native state. J Bacteriol 190:5672–5680
