
Planta (1986) 167:196–205

**Tissue-distribution of secondary phenolic biosynthesis in developing primary leaves of *Avena sativa* L.**

W. Knogge* and G. Weissenböck  
Botanisches Institut der Universität zu Köln, Gyrhofstraße 15, D-5000 Köln 41, Federal Republic of Germany

---

**Abstract.** Primary leaves of oats (*Avena sativa* L.) have been used to study the integration of secondary phenolic metabolism into organ differentiation and development. In particular, the tissue-specific distribution of products and enzymes involved in their biosynthesis has been investigated. C-Glucosylflavones along with minor amounts of hydroxycinnamic-acid esters constitute the soluble phenolic compounds in these leaves. In addition, considerable amounts of insoluble products such as lignin and wall-bound ferulic-acid esters are formed. The tissue-specific activities of seven enzymes were determined in different stages of leaf growth. The rate-limiting enzyme of flavonoid biosynthesis in this system, chalcone synthase, together with chalcone isomerase (EC 5.5.1.6) and the terminal enzymes of the vitexin and isovitexin branches of the pathway (a flavonoid O-methyltransferase and an isovitexin arabinosyltransferase) are located in the leaf mesophyll. Since the flavonoids accumulate predominantly (up to 70%) in both epidermal layers, an intercellular transport of products is postulated. In contrast to the flavonoid enzymes, L-phenylalanine ammonia-lyase (EC 4.3.1.5), 4-coumarate:CoA ligase (EC 6.2.1.12), and S-adenosyl-L-methionine:caffeate 3-O-methyltransferase (EC 2.1.1.-), all involved in general phenylpropanoid metabolism, showed highest activities in the basal leaf region as well as in the epidermis and the vascular bundles. We suggest that these latter enzymes participate mainly in the biosynthesis of non-flavonoid phenolic products, such as lignin in the xylem tissue and wall-bound hydroxycinnamic acid-esters in epidermal, phloem, and sclerenchyma tissues.

**Key words:** Avena – C-Glucosylflavone – Flavonoid biosynthesis – Phenylpropanoid metabolism.

---

**Introduction**

In definite ontogenetic stages, higher plants are capable of synthesizing an array of secondary products, which are usually restricted to certain organs, tissues, or even single cells (Wiernmann 1981). Primary leaves of grass seedlings such as oats and rye provide suitable experimental systems to study secondary phenolic metabolism and its integration into organ differentiation and development (Weissenböck and Effertz 1974; Strack et al. 1982). Being essentially equifacial, these leaves are composed of three major types of tissue: the autotrophic mesophyll and the heterotrophic epidermal layers and vascular bundles.

Flavonoids represent the main soluble phenolic compounds in oat primary leaves (Weissenböck and Effertz 1974). In addition, extracellular insoluble materials, lignin and wall-bound esters¹ of hydroxycinnamic acids, are formed (Harris and Hartley 1976). Flavonoid biosynthesis results in the accumulation of three major C-glucosylflavones: an isovitexin arabinoside (F₂) and two structurally related compounds.

---

* Present address: Max-Planck-Institut für Züchtungsforschung, D-5000 Köln 30, Federal Republic of Germany

Abbreviations: CHI = chalcone isomerase; CHS = chalcone synthase; 4CL = 4-coumarate:CoA ligase; CMT = S-adenosyl-L-methionine:caffeate 3-O-methyltransferase; FMT = S-adenosyl-L-methionine:vitexin 2′-O-rhamnoside 7-O-methyltransferase; HPLC = high-performance liquid chromatography; IAT = uridine 5′-diphosphate L-arabinose:isovitexin 2′-O-arabinosyltransferase; PAL = L-phenylalanine ammonia-lyase;

---

¹ The term wall-bound comprises phenolic acids bound to the carbohydrate moiety of cell walls (Hartley et al. 1976; Fry 1983) as well as to cutin in the leaf cuticle and to suberin described to be present in the walls of grass bundle-sheath cells (Kolattukudy 1980, 1981). In the present paper it was not attempted to discriminate between these fractions.
lated vitexin rhamnosides (F₁, F₃; Fig. 5) (Chopin et al. 1977). Depending on leaf age and the type of tissue, flavonoid patterns show distinct quantitative and qualitative differences (Effertz and Weissenböck 1980). The two epidermal layers always contain 60–70% of total leaf flavonoids. All compounds are metabolic end products which are not degraded (Effertz and Weissenböck 1978; Proksch et al. 1981).

Two models can explain the formation of stage- and tissue-dependence of flavone patterns in the leaf. First, each tissue is biosynthetically autonomous; thus, product accumulation reflects the distribution of the respective biosynthetic enzymes. Alternatively, biosynthesis occurs in one type of tissue; consequently, products are translocated to other tissues.

Our previous investigations on the tissue localization of the initial enzymes of flavonoid biosynthesis, chalcone synthase (CHS) and chalcone isomerase (CHI), had been restricted to that growth stage of plants showing the most rapid flavone accumulation (Fuisting and Weissenböck 1980; Weissenböck and Sachs 1977). In the present paper we report on the localization of seven enzymes of phenolic metabolism in leaf tissues during organogenesis. The enzymes analyzed were L-phenylalanine ammonia-lyase (PAL), 4-coumarate: CoA ligase (4CL) (Knogge et al. 1981), and caffeate O-methyltransferase (CMT), all involved in general phenylpropanoid metabolism, as well as CHS and CHI and the final enzymes of the vitexin and isovitexin branches of the pathway. These final enzymes included a flavonoid O-methyltransferase (FMT) which specifically catalyzes the transfer of a methyl group to the 7-hydroxyl group of vitexin rhamnoside F₃ (Knogge and Weissenböck 1984) and an isovitexin O-arabinosyltransferase (IAT) showing high specificity for the flavonoid substrate (Fuisting 1981). Additional results are presented concerning the accumulation of non-flavonoid phenolic products in oat primary leaf tissues.

### Material and methods

#### Plant material
Oat plants (*Avena sativa* L. cv. Flämingskrone; F. von Lochow-Petkus GmbH, Bergen, FRG) were grown under standard conditions in a phytotron under a regime of 7500 lx for 13 h per day (Weissenböck and Effertz 1974). For studying tissue-specific enzyme activities as a function of seedling development, 4- to 8-d-old primary leaves were harvested at the end of the dark phase.

#### Chemicals
Polyclar AT, DOWEX AG 1X2 (200–400 mesh), and dithiothreitol (DTT) were obtained from Serva (Heidelberg, FRG); all biochemicals from Boehringer (Mannheim, FRG); all laboratory chemicals (analytical grade) from Merck (Darmstadt, FRG). Cinnamic acids were purchased from Roth (Karlsruhe, FRG). Flavonoids were extracted and purified according to standard methods of this laboratory using polyamide and Sephadex LH-20 column chromatography (Popovici et al. 1977) as well as high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC). 1-O-4-Coumaroylglucose and 1-O-feruloylglucose from *Antirrhinum* petals (Harborne and Corner 1961) were kind gifts of Dr. D. Strack (Botanical Institute, University of Cologne). Cellulysin (*Trichoderma viride*, 10000 units g⁻¹) was purchased from Calbiochem-Behring (La Jolla, Cal., USA). [2-¹⁴C] Malonyl CoA (1.56–1.77 GBq mmol⁻¹), uridine 5′-diphosphate-L-[U-¹⁴C]arabinose (6.76 GBq mmol⁻¹), and S-adenosyl-L-(methyl-¹⁴C)methionine (1.94 GBq mmol⁻¹) were obtained from New England Nuclear (Dreieichenhain, FRG), [3-¹⁴C]cinnamic acid (1.66–2.03 GBq mmol⁻¹) from CEA (Gif-sur-Yvette), France. 4-Coumaroyl CoA and 2′,4′,6′-tetrahydroxychalcone were synthesized according to Stöckigt and Zenk (1975) and Moustafa and Wong (1967), respectively.

#### Preparation of tissue fractions
Preparation of epidermal peels and mesophyll protoplasts has been described previously (Weissenböck and Sachs 1977; Haas et al. 1979). The vascular strands resistant to cellulolytic digestion were collected and washed twice with protoplast isolation medium. This method did not allow tissue separation in the basal region of the leaves. This part was defined by the break point of the epidermal peels and comprised one (4-d-old leaves) to 2 cm (8-d-old leaves). It was analyzed, therefore, as a whole. For routine tests of enzyme distribution the leaves were separated into epidermal peels and the corresponding leaf complements (compare Weissenböck and Sachs 1977).

#### Extraction of enzymes
Tissue fractions from 40 leaves were ground in a mortar at 0–4°C in the presence of sufficient quartz sand, DOWEX, Polyclar AT and buffer (see below). The homogenates were squeezed through Miracloth (Chicopee Mills, Milltown, N.J., USA) and centrifuged for 10 min at 48000 g. The clear supernatants served as enzyme sources. Extraction procedures were optimized for the individual enzymes, and different extraction buffers were, therefore, used: PAL, 0.1 M 2-amino-2-(hydroxymethyl)-1,3-propanediol (Tris)-HCl or 0.1 M glycine-NaOH pH 8.5 [5 mM 2-mercaptoethanol (2-ME)]; 4CL, 0.1 M K-phosphate pH 7.3 (40 mM dithiothreitol); CMT and FMT, 0.1 M K-phosphate pH 7.5 (5 mM ethylenediaminetetraacetate, 10 mM 2-ME); CHS and CHI, 0.1 M K-phosphate pH 8.0 (4.3 mM 2-ME); IAT, 0.1 M K-phosphate pH 7.5 (8 mM 2-ME; Fuisting 1981). In the case of CHS, before centrifugation the filtrate was again treated with DOWEX in a batch procedure followed by filtration through Miracloth.

#### Enzyme assays
All enzyme assays were carried out at 30°C; PAL, 4CL, and CHI were measured photometrically; for all other enzymes, radioactive assays were used. Assay conditions have been optimized starting from published methods as indicated. Assay mixtures were as follows PAL, 0.1 M Tris-HCl pH 8.5, 5 mM 2-ME, 5 mM L-phenylalanine and 50–100 μl of enzyme extract in a total volume of 1 ml (Weissenböck 1975); 4CL: 50 mM K-phosphate pH 7.3, 2 mM dithiothreitol, 1 mM ATP, 10 mM MgCl₂, 0.2 mM CoA, 2 mM 4-coumaric acid and 10–50 μl of enzyme extract in a total volume of 0.5 ml (Gross and Zenk 1974); CHI, 0.1 M K-phosphate pH 8.0, 75 μM 2′,4′,6′-tetrahydroxychalcone, 50 mM KCN and 10–20 μl of enzyme extract in a total volume of 0.5 ml (Boland and Wong 1975); CMT, 0.1 M K-phosphate pH 7.5, 1 mM caffeic acid, 1.5 mM MgCl₂, 20 mM Na-ascorbate, 0.17 mM S-adenosyl-L-(methyl-¹⁴C)methionine (37 MBq mmol⁻¹), and 10–50 μl of enzyme extract in a total volume of 0.2 ml (Poulton and Butt
198 W. Knogge and G. Weissenböck: Localization of secondary phenolic metabolism in oat leaf tissues

IAT, 0.1 M K-phosphate pH 7.5, 8 mM 2-ME, 0.3 mM isovitexin, 9 μM uridine 5′-diphosphate-L-[U-¹⁴C]arabinose (6.76 GBq mmol⁻¹), and 10 μl of enzyme extract in a total volume of 30 μl (Fuisting 1981). Chalcone synthase was measured according to Schröder et al. (1979). The FMT assay is described elsewhere (Knogge and Weissenböck 1984). Labelled reaction products were isolated by thin-layer chromatography (TLC) in the solvent systems I (CMT), II (CHS), and IV (IAT), respectively.

**Extraction of flavonoids.** Flavonoids were extracted from leaves or tissue fractions by homogenization in 80% methanol. Tissue debris was removed by centrifugation (10 min, 5000 g). The supernatants were subjected to HPLC analysis.

**Analysis of non-flavonoid phenolic compounds**

**Microscopy.** Lignification of cell walls was demonstrated in free-hand cross sections through different regions of the developing leaf by staining with the phloroglucinol-HCl reagent after bleaching the tissues with chloral hydrate. For UV-fluorescence microscopy, small leaf pieces were fixed in 4% glutaraldehyde in 0.1 M cacodylate buffer pH 7.0, dehydrated and embedded in an epoxy resin (Spurr 1969). Semi-thin sections were prepared using a microtome. Treatment of the sections with 0.1 M NH₄OH resulted in a general intensification of the fluorescence and a shift of the blue fluorescence of wall-bound hydroxycinnamic acid esters to green (Harris and Hartley 1976).

**Extraction.** Analysis of soluble phenolic esters was carried out after extraction of tissue fractions with 80% methanol and alkaline hydrolysis (1 N NaOH, 30°C, 1–3 h). The insoluble material remaining after extraction was washed with methanol and chloroform and then also hydrolyzed. Hydrolysates were acidified and extracted with ethyl acetate. The resulting solutions of aglyca, mainly hydroxycinnamic acids, were analyzed by HPLC. In this paper, it was not attempted to extract and quantify lignin.

**Feeding experiments.** Ten leaves were cut close to the caryopsis and placed in 20 μM [3-¹⁴C]cinnamic acid dissolved in 2% ethanol. In pulse-chase experiments, five leaves were extracted with 80% methanol after 1 h of incubation. The remaining five leaves were transferred to a 20-μM solution of unlabelled cinnamic acid and extracted after a further 2 h of incubation. The insoluble residues were submitted to alkaline hydrolysis (see above). The methanolic extracts were fractionated by chromatography on a polyamide column with water, methanol and 0.01% NH₄OH in methanol (Knogge et al. 1981). The flavonoids were eluted with methanol. Both other fractions mainly contained different hydroxycinnamic-acid esters. Fractions were cochromatographed with authentic 1-O-feruloyl- and 1-O-4-coumaroylglucose as well as with the oat flavones F₁₋₃ in solvent system III. The hydrolysates were acidified and extracted with ethyl acetate. Cochromatography with ferulic and 4-coumaric acid was performed in solvent system I.

**Determination of chlorophyll and protoplast yield.** Chlorophyll was determined according to Bruinsma (1961). Chlorophyll recovery in isolated protoplasts was used to calculate protoplast yield.

**Thin-layer chromatography** was performed on microcrystalline cellulose with the following solvent systems: I, toluene/acetic acid 2:1 (v/v), saturated with water; II, benzene/acetic acid/water 115:72:3 (by vol.); III, chloroform/acetic acid 3:2 (v/v), saturated with water; IV, n-butanol/n-propanol/water 600:262:63 (by vol.), mixed 1:1 with *n*-propionic acid/water 427:496 (v/v) (Feige et al. 1969).

**High-performance liquid chromatography.** The quaternary HPLC system of DuPont Instruments (Bad Nauheim, FRG) was used in combination with the Spectroflow 773 absorbance detector (Kratos Analytical Instruments, Trappenkamp, FRG) and the SP4270 integrator (Spectra-Physics, Santa Clara, Cal., USA). Separation of flavonoids was achieved on a Zorbax C-8 column (DuPont) by an isocratic solvent system using a mixture of 78% water (1% H₃PO₄, 9% methanol, 7% acetonitrile and 6% tetrahydrofuran (by vol.). The separated compounds were quantified by external standardization. Separation of cinnamic acids was achieved either by a gradient system on an RP-8 column (Merck, Darmstadt, FRG) (Proksch et al. 1981) or by an isocratic system on a Zorbax C-8 column using a mixture of 67% water (1% H₃PO₄), 21% methanol and 12% tetrahydrafuran (by vol.).

**Determination of radioactivity.** Labelled products were localized on TLC plates using a TLC-scanner with linear analyzer (Berthold, Wildbad, FRG), respectively. After scraping off the spots, radioactivity was determined in a liquid scintillation spectrometer (Packard Instruments, Frankfurt, FRG) using a toluene cocktail containing 0.5% (w/v) of 2,5-diphenyloxazole and 0.03% (w/v) of 1,4-bis(5-phenyloxazoyl)benzene.

**Results**

**Separation of leaf tissues.** Enzymatic digestion of leaf cell walls after removal of one epidermal layer enabled the separation of mesophyll protoplasts and vascular bundles, the latter being resistant to cellulolytic digestion. Approximately 90% of the leaf mesophyll could be isolated as intact protoplasts. Contamination of vascular strands with adhering mesophyll cells was negligible. Preparations of mesophyll protoplasts were not contaminated with epidermal protoplasts since the latter remained in the supernatant during the sedimentation steps. Efforts to prepare epidermal protoplasts by repeated floating resulted in suspensions still containing significant amounts of mesophyll protoplasts (10–30%). Routine analyses of enzyme activities, therefore, were carried out with epidermal peels which never showed more than 10% contamination with mesophyll cells.

**Flavonoid biosynthesis.** Figure 1 demonstrates activities of four specific enzymes along with flavonoid accumulation as a function of plant age. After the initial rapid increase, the enzymes, with the exception of CHS, continue to exhibit high activities even in leaf stages with already diminished flavonoid biosynthesis. Studies on the distribution of enzymes throughout the leaf revealed highest activities in the upper parts in which the flavonoid products predominantly accumulate (results not shown; compare Weissenböck and Sachs 1977; Effertz and

W. Knogge and G. Weissenböck: Localization of secondary phenolic metabolism in oat leaf tissues

Table 1. C-Glucosylflavones and hydroxycinnamic acid derivatives of unknown chemical nature in 80% methanol extracts from tissue fractions of 5-d-old oat primary leaves (nmol/leaf). Quantification was performed after HPLC-assisted separation (detection limit: 0.01 nmol/leaf). Concentration of the non-flavonoid compounds was calculated with ferulic acid as standard.

| Tissue fraction         | C-Glucosyl-     | Hydroxy-          |
|-------------------------|------------------|-------------------|
|                         | flavones         | cinnamic          |
|                         | F₁               | F₂               | derivatives      |
| Lower epidermal layer   | 7.80             | 7.19             | 4.61             | 1.45             |
| Mesophyll protoplasts   | 4.73             | 5.22             | 14.08            | 4.18             |
| Vascular strands        | –                | –                | –                | –                |
| Basal region            | 1.82             | 0.88             | 0.91             | 1.97             |

Flavonoids are present in all tissues of oat primary leaves except the vascular bundles (Table 1; compare Effertz and Weissenböck 1980). However, 80 to 90% of whole-leaf activity of the enzymes CHS, CHI, IAT (Fuisting 1981) and FMT could be measured in the mesophyll at all developmental stages investigated. None of the four enzymes was detected in extracts from vascular strands. The remaining activity (about 10%) was found in epidermal preparations (peels and protoplasts) coinciding with contamination by mesophyll. Mixing experiments with extracts from active and inactive tissues demonstrated the absence of effectors of CHS activity. Addition of crude epidermal extracts to purified CHS (data not shown) also showed the absence of endogenous inhibitors. Furthermore, incubation of epidermal protoplast preparations with \[^{14}C\]cinnamic acid showed a clear dependence of incorporation into flavonoids on the number of mesophyll protoplasts present as contaminants (Fig. 2) but not on the number of epidermal protoplasts. From basal leaf sections only about 10% of the activities of whole leaves could be extracted except for those from 4-d-old plants (20–30%; Fuisting and Weissenböck 1980). This is in contrast to the enzymes involved in general phenylpropanoid metabolism which were always found to be located to an appreciably higher proportion in the basal leaf region (Fig. 3; Weissenböck and Sachs 1977; Knogge et al. 1981).

General phenylpropanoid metabolism. Figure 3 shows the activity profiles of PAL, 4CL, and CMT in the leaf tissues as a function of plant age. Though being characteristically different, the curves for the single tissue fractions as well as for the whole leaf reveal several common features and similarities for the three enzymes. Throughout the experimental period, highest activities were measured.

W. Knogge and G. Weissenböck: Localization of secondary phenolic metabolism in oat leaf tissues

Fig. 2. Incorporation of \[^{14}C\]cinnamic acid into C-glucosylflavones \(F_{1-3}\) in four independent experiments. Suspensions (1 ml) containing similar numbers of epidermal protoplasts (○) but increasing numbers of mesophyll protoplasts (●) as contaminants were incubated for 2 h at \(30^\circ\)C with 15 nmol (28.6 kBq) of \[3-\^{14}C\]cinnamic acid. The bars mark SDs of protoplast numbers as counted in a hemacytometer. The coincidence of number of mesophyll protoplasts present and radioactivity incorporated into flavonoids was calculated by linear regression. The insert shows the mean values (with SDs) of radioactivity incorporated into the single flavonoids in the four experiments. Note the high labelling of \(F_1\) and \(F_3\) both accumulating predominantly in the epidermal layers of the leaf.

measured in the basal section of the leaf, all enzymes showing maximum activities in 5-d-old plants. A second activity maximum of all three enzymes is manifested in the vascular strands of 7-d-old leaves. In addition, only PAL and CMT activities exhibit a maximum in the epidermis of 6-d-old leaves (Fig. 3a, c). Leaf mesophyll, however, is characterized by a relatively broad activity maximum in 5- to 6-d-old plants. Activities of 4CL and CMT again increase in the leaf bases after reaching their first maximum, their time course coinciding with the enzyme activity curves in the vascular bundles.

Non-flavonoid phenolic compounds. The enzymes involved in general phenylpropanoid metabolism are thought to participate mainly in non-flavonoid biosynthetic pathways, particularly in the epidermal and vascular tissues. Several experimental approaches were used to obtain information about the products in question. Histochemical analysis of cross sections through different leaf regions demonstrated that lignin is deposited in the cell

Fig. 3a–c. Activity profiles of enzymes involved in general phenylpropanoid metabolism in leaf tissues as a function of plant age: epidermis (Δ), mesophyll (○), vascular strands (▲), basal leaf section (□), sum for total leaf (*). 100% activity corresponds to PAL 27.3 pkat/leaf (a); 4CL 9.5 pkat/leaf (b); CMT 5.4 pkat/leaf (c). Values represent the mean of at least four independent experiments.

W. Knogge and G. Weissenböck: Localization of secondary phenolic metabolism in oat leaf tissues

Fig. 4a–d. UV fluorescence micrographs of transverse sections from an oat primary leaf after treatment with NH₄OH. a General view demonstrating the fluorescing walls of vascular bundles, sclerenchyma bands (arrowhead), guard cells (double arrowhead), and epidermal cells (×420); b vascular bundle (×1100); c upper epidermis with guard cells arrowhead (×2400); d leaf edge with sclerenchyma bands (×1100). Bars = 10 µm

walls of the xylem part of the vascular bundles (results not shown). In addition, microscopical investigations corroborated the presence of blue-green fluorescing hydroxycinnamic-acid esters in the periclinal and anticlinal epidermal walls, in the reinforced walls of the guard cells, in the sclerenchyma bands at the leaf edges and above and below the larger vascular bundles, as well as in the phloem part of the bundles and in the periclinal and anticlinal walls of the bundle-sheath cells (Fig. 4; Harris and Hartley 1976). Accordingly, the presence of considerable amounts of ferulic acid besides low amounts of 4-coumaric acid also could be demonstrated after alkaline hydrolysis especially of insoluble epidermal and vascular residues using HPLC (Table 2).

In addition to flavonoids, different amounts of soluble hydroxycinnamic-acid esters were found in methanolic extracts of the leaf fractions. Only the vascular tissues were shown to be free of soluble phenolics (Table 1). The 1-O-glucose esters of ferulic and 4-coumaric acid could be demonstrated to be present in mesophyll protoplasts and in the

Table 2. Hydroxycinnamic acids and other phenolic compounds of unknown chemical nature in alkaline hydrolysates from 80% methanol extracts (M) and insoluble extraction residues (R) from tissue fractions of 5-d-old oat primary leaves (nmol/leaf). For quantification see Table 1

| Tissue fraction          | 4-Coumaric acid | Ferulic acid | Phenolic derivatives |
|--------------------------|-----------------|--------------|----------------------|
|                          | M               | R            | M                    | R                |
| Lower epidermal layer    | 0.34            | 0.57         | 0.62                 | 3.75             | 0.86              | 1.40              |
| Mesophyll protoplasts    | 0.16            | –            | 0.80                 | –                | 0.34              | –                 |
| Vascular strands         | –               | 0.11         | –                    | 1.21             | –                 | 0.69              |
| Basal region             | –               | –            | –                    | 0.95             | 0.33              | 0.33              |

Table 3. Incorporation of [3-¹⁴C]cinnamic acid into hydroxycinnamic-acid derivatives using excised leaves

| Labelled products        | 1-h pulse (Bq) | 2-h chase (Bq) |
|--------------------------|----------------|----------------|
| 1-O-Feruloyl glucose     | 862            | 193            |
| Wall-bound ferulic acid  | 587            | 1009           |
| 1-O-4-Coumaroyl glucose  | 881            | 931            |

W. Knogge and G. Weissenböck: Localization of secondary phenolic metabolism in oat leaf tissues

GENERAL PHENYLPROPANOID METABOLISM

HYDROXYCINNAMIC ACID ESTERS  
(wall-bound and 'soluble')

LIGNIN

3 malonyl CoA +  
4-Coumaroyl CoA  

CHS  

OH  
HO—C6H4—CH2—C6H5—OH  
HO—C6H4—CHO  

2',4',6'-tetrahydroxychalcone  

CHI  

OH  
HO—C6H4—O—C6H5—OH  
HO—C6H4—O  

naringenin  
(4,5,7-trihydroxyflavanone)  

OH  
HO—C6H4—O—C6H5—OH  
HO—C6H4—O  

8-C-glucosyl naringenin  

glc  

OH  
HO—C6H4—O—C6H5—OH  
HO—C6H4—O  

vitexin  

glc  

OH  
HO—C6H4—O—C6H5—OH  
HO—C6H4—O  

isovitexin  

ara-O-glc  

OH  
HO—C6H4—O—C6H5—OH  
HO—C6H4—O  

isovitexin 2"-O-arabinoside  

rha-O-glc  

OH  
HO—C6H4—O—C6H5—OH  
HO—C6H4—O  

vitexin 2"-O-rhamnoside  

FMT  

rha-O-glc  

CH3O  
HO—C6H4—O—C6H5—OH  
HO—C6H4—O  

7-O-methylvitexin 2"-O-rhamnoside  

Fig. 5. Postulated reaction scheme for flavonoid biosynthesis in oat primary leaves. C-Glucosylation (1), oxidation of flavanone (2), vitexin-isovitexin isomerization (3), and rhamnosyl transfer (4) remain to be demonstrated

leaf bases. Pulse-labelling experiments using [3-  
¹⁴C]cinnamic acid resulted in an equal incorporation  
into both glucose esters. A subsequent chase  
with unlabelled cinnamic acid led to a decrease  
of [¹⁴C]ferulic acid in 1-O-feruloylglucose and a  
corresponding increase in the insoluble fraction  
(Table 3). Furthermore, feeding experiments  
showed the presence of the basal region of the leaf  
to be essential for an effective incorporation of  
cinnamic acid. After removal of the basal 2-cm  
section, only 10%, as compared with the incorporation  
of the whole leaf, could be extracted as labelled derivatives. In whole leaves, 90% of the incorporated radioactivity was found in the 1-cm basal section. While the remaining 10% in the upper part of the leaf mainly represented the flavonoids, these products were rarely labelled in the basal section (5%). In the latter leaf region, however, 80–90% of incorporated radioactivity was found in ferulic and 4-coumaric acid (approx. 30% in the respective glucose esters; see Table 3).

Discussion

Flavonoid biosynthesis. A reaction scheme for flavonoid biosynthesis, though not fully established for oat primary leaves, is proposed in Fig. 5. The still-hypothetical pathway leading from naringenin to the C-glucosylated flavones vitexin and isovitexin is suggested from results obtained by feeding experiments with representatives of the Lemnaceae family (Wallace et al. 1969; Wallace and Mabry 1970; Wallace and Grisebach 1973).

Our investigations on the localization of flavonoid biosynthesis in developing oat primary leaves are based on the analysis of the key enzyme, CHS, and of CHI as well as of the terminal enzymes of both branches of the pathway, IAT and FMT (Fig. 5). From the present data on the activity of these enzymes, as measured in extracts from separated tissues, together with the incorporation experiments using isolated protoplasts (Fig. 2; compare Proksch et al. 1981), we conclude that the

entire pathway is located in the leaf mesophyll. Furthermore, mathematical correlation of CHS activity and product formation (compare Hahlbrock and Grisebach 1979) resulted in the coincidence of the experimentally derived data with the calculated curve for flavonoid accumulation. Activity of CHS measured in vitro thereby accounted for approx. 65% of flavonoid accumulation in the leaf. This relationship which did not hold true for any other enzyme of oat phenolic metabolism, investigated so far (Fig. 1), indicates that under the plant growth conditions applied, CHS is the rate-limiting enzyme of the pathway.

The localization of the biosynthetic enzymes in the leaf mesophyll together with the rate-limiting character of the key enzyme, CHS, when compared with the major accumulation (60–70%) of the products in both epidermal layers, can only be interpreted by postulating the involvement of intercellular transport processes. The flavonoid products may be translocated with different efficiency leading to a predominant occurrence of the vitexin derivatives (F₁, F₃) in the epidermis and of the isovitexin derivative (F₂) in the mesophyll (Effertz and Weissenböck 1980). Alternatively, mesophyll cells may differ in their biosynthetic potential. Thus, epidermal-product pattern may reflect flavonoid biosynthesis in the subepidermal mesophyll cells (Fig. 2). In a previous paper (Proksch et al. 1981) it was shown that [¹⁴C]cinnamic acid applied to leaf pieces devoid of the lower epidermis is incorporated into flavonoids of mesophyll protoplasts and the remaining epidermis in the respective tissue-specific patterns. The direct incubation of isolated protoplasts with the labelled precursor resulted in the characteristic mesophyll pattern when mesophyll protoplasts were used (Proksch et al. 1981) but resulted in the typical epidermal pattern when suspensions enriched in epidermal protoplasts were used (Fig. 2). The latter is surprising because both CHS activity and incorporation into flavonoids correlated with the number of contaminating mesophyll protoplasts. Further investigations are necessary to explain this discrepancy which may be due to cooperative effects of both types of protoplasts.

The suggested transport of end products of flavonoid biosynthesis could take place either apoplastically across the cell walls or symplastically through the plasmodesmata of neighbouring cells. Translocation via membrane carriers or through channel proteins should not be completely prevented in isolated protoplasts. The observed absence of labelled flavonoids from protoplast incubation and washing solutions (data not shown),

therefore, may be interpreted in support of a symplastic transport. Using water-soluble fluorescent dyes the molecular size limit for movement in the symplast has been demonstrated to be about 800 Da, thus exceeding the size of oat flavonoids (<600 Da Goodwin 1983). In addition, the presumed localization of the biosynthetic enzymes at or near cytoplasmic membranes (Grisebach 1979; Forkmann et al. 1980; Britsch et al. 1981; Stotz and Forkmann 1981, 1982) may point to a role of the endoplasmic reticulum which continues through the plasmodesmata, thus forming a compartment common to neighbouring cells (Hepler 1982; Overall et al. 1982).

### Biosynthesis of non-flavonoid phenolic compounds

A considerable part of secondary phenolic metabolism in oat primary leaves leads to the formation of extracellular insoluble material, lignin and wall-bound hydroxycinnamic-acid esters (Table 2; Fig. 4; see also Harris and Hartley 1980). In addition, minor amounts of soluble phenolic compounds are present besides the flavonoids (Table 1). Coinciding tissue-specific activity profiles for the enzymes involved in general phenylpropanoid metabolism (Fig. 3) are interpreted as reflecting their participation in a common pathway. Phenylalanineammonia-lyase, 4CL, and CMT, exhibiting maximum activities in vascular bundles late in leaf development (7 d), are supposed to be involved in the biosynthesis of lignin which is present only in the xylem tissue.

In comparison, the formation of wall-bound esters of ferulic acid (and low amounts of other phenolic acids) appears to take place earlier in tissue development. While the enzymes involved in flavonoid biosynthesis showed highest activities (80–90%) in the middle part of the leaf with steadily differentiating cells (Weissenböck and Sachs 1977; Fuisting and Weissenböck 1980), phenylpropanoid enzymes are mainly present in the basal region of young tissues. Accordingly, the typical blue-green fluorescence of esterified ferulic acid can be seen in the respective cell walls (epidermis, phloem, sclerenchyma) when cross sections through the basal region of the leaf are visualized (Fig. 4). A further corroboration results from feeding experiments with [¹⁴C]cinnamic acid. Most radioactivity was found in hydroxycinnamic-acid esters, in particular 1-O-glucose esters. The results from pulse-chase experiments point to an involvement of these esters, especially in the case of ferulic acid, in the formation of wall-bound esters (Tables 2, 3). The potential character of 1-O-acyl glu-

cose esters of phenolic acids as precursors in trans-
esterification reactions has recently been demon-
strated (Michalczuk and Bandurski 1980; Tkotz
and Strack 1980; Strack et al. 1983; 1984; Gross
1983; Dahlbender and Strack 1984). In addition,
these compounds could serve as transport vehicles
of the respective hydroxycinnamic acids for possi-
ble reesterification with cell-wall components
(Strack et al. 1984).

In future studies, our hypotheses, presented
here for the first time, have to be verified. We are
currently undertaking immunohistochemical inves-
tigations on tissue localization of CHS. Further-
more, the enzymes catalyzing the proposed reac-
tions in the biosynthesis of oat C-glucosylflavones
(Fig. 5) remain to be demonstrated. In addition
to the analysis of tissue-specific accumulation of
hydroxycinnamic-acid derivatives during leaf de-
velopment, enzymes specifically involved in the dif-
ferent pathways leading to the non-flavonoid prod-
ucts have to be demonstrated. Thus, the activity
profiles of cinnamyl alcohol dehydrogenase (lignin
biosynthesis) and the presumed glucosyl transfer-
ase (ester biosynthesis) might point to the metab-
olic routes in which PAL, 4CL, and CMT are in-
volved in the different tissues.

### Concluding remarks

From the results obtained with oat primary leaves,
two major criteria can be deduced which must be
fulfilled for any enzymatic work on tissue distribu-
tion of secondary phenolic metabolism. i) The en-
zymes involved in flavonoid biosynthesis, in gener-
al turned out to exhibit high substrate specificities
(Hösel 1981; Poulton 1981; Fuisting 1981; Knogge
and Weissenböck 1984). Therefore, the relevance
of results obtained by measuring enzyme activities
for which substrate specificity has not been demon-
strated or which catalyze reactions leading to prod-
ucts not accumulating in the respective plant tis-
sues is questionable (e.g. Hrazdina et al. 1982).
Furthermore, data should be interpreted with care
if measured enzyme activities fall short of explain-
ing the amount of accumulating products by sever-
al orders of magnitude (e.g. Hrazdina and Wagner
1985). ii) Secondary phenolic metabolism is a dy-
namic process which is integrated into organogene-
sis (see also Strack et al. 1982; Wiermann 1981).
Data obtained by determining the distribution of
enzymes in plant tissues for which the developmen-
tal dependence of enzyme activities had not been
demonstrated (Hrazdina et al. 1982) may, there-
fore, result in misleading interpretation (compare
differences in enzyme distribution in 5- and 7-d-old
leaves; Fig. 3).

The financial support of the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft
is gratefully acknowledged. We wish to thank Mrs. M. Schulz
for performing the feeding experiments, Mrs. B. Dahlbender
and Mrs. F. Furkert for drawing the figures, and Mrs. M.
Kalda and Mr. D. Bock for preparing the photographs.

### References

Boland, M.J., Wong, E. (1975) Purification and kinetic proper-
ties of chalcone-flavanone isomerase from soya bean. Eur.
J. Biochem. **50**, 383–389

Britsch, L., Heller, W., Grisebach, H. (1981) Conversion of
flavanone to flavone, dihydroflavonol and flavonol with an
enzyme system from cell cultures of parsley. Z. Naturforsch.
Teil C **36**, 742–750

Bruinsma, J. (1961) A comment on the spectrophotometric de-
termination of chlorophyll. Biochim. Biophys. Acta **52**, 576–578

Chopin, J., Dellamonica, G., Bouillant, M.L., Besset, A., Popo-
vici, G., Weissenböck, G. (1977) C-Glycosylflavones from
*Avena sativa*. Phytochemistry **16**, 2041–2043

Dahlbender, B., Strack, D. (1984) Enzymatic synthesis of
1,2-di-sinapoylglucose from 1-sinapoylglucose by a protein
preparation from cotyledons of *Raphanus sativus* grown in
the dark. Z. Pflanzenphysiol. **116**, 375–379

Effertz, B., Weissenböck, G. (1978) ¹⁴C-Phenylalanine incorpo-
ration in C-glycosylflavones of developing primary oat
leaves. Z. Pflanzenphysiol. **92**, 319–326

Effertz, B., Weissenböck, G. (1980) Tissue specific variation
of C-glycosylflavone patterns in oat leaves as influenced
by the environment. Phytochemistry **19**, 1669–1672

Feige, G.B., Gimmler, H., Jeschke, W.D., Simonis, H. (1969)
Eine Methode zur dünnsschichtchromatographischen Auf-
trennung von ¹⁴C- und ³²P-markierten Stoffwechselproduk-
ten. J. Chromatogr. **41**, 80–90

Forkmann, G., Heller, W., Grisebach, H. (1980) Anthocyanin
biosynthesis in flowers of *Matthiola incana*. Flavanone 3-
and flavonoid 3′-hydroxylases. Z. Naturforsch. Teil C
**35**, 691–695

Fry, S.C. (1983) Feruloylated pectins from the primary cell
wall: their structure and possible functions. Planta
**157**, 111–123

Fuisting, K. (1981) Lokalisation der Chalkon-Flavanon-Syn-
these und der UDP-Arabinose:Isovitexin-2″-O-Arabinosyl-
transferase in den Primärblättern von *Avena sativa* L. Ph.D.
Thesis, Univ. Köln

Fuisting, K., Weissenböck, G. (1980) “Flavanone synthase”
in oat primary leaves. Time course and tissue distribution
at the tissue and subcellular level. Z. Naturforsch. Teil C
**35**, 973–977

Goodwin, P.B. (1983) Molecular size limit for movement in
the symplast of *Elodea canadensis* leaf. Planta **157**, 124–130

Grisebach, H. (1979) Selected topics in flavonoid biosynthesis.
In: Biochemistry of plant phenolics, pp. 221–248, Swain,
T., Harborne, J.B., Van Sumere, C.F., eds. Plenum Press,
New York London

Grisebach, H. (1981) Lignins. In: The biochemistry of plants,
vol. 7: Secondary plant products, pp. 457–478, Stumpf,
P.K., Conn, E.E., eds. Academic Press, New York London

Gross, G.G. (1983) Synthesis of mono-, di- and trigalloyl-β-D-
glucose by β-glucogallin-dependent galloyltransferases from
oak leaves. Z. Naturforsch. Teil C **38**, 519–523

Gross, G.G., Zenk, M.H. (1974) Isolation and properties of
hydroxycinnamate:CoA ligase from lignifying tissue of For-
sythia. Eur. J. Biochem. **42**, 453–459

Haas, R., Heinz, E., Popovici, G., Weissenböck, G. (1979) Pro-
toplasts from oat primary leaves as tools for experiments

on the compartmentation in lipid and flavonoid metabolism. Z. Naturforsch. Teil C 34, 854–864

Hahlbrock, K., Grisebach, H. (1979) Enzymic controls in the biosynthesis of lignin and flavonoids. Annu. Rev. Plant Physiol. 30, 105–130

Harborne, J.B., Corner, J.J. (1961) Plant polyphenols. 4. Hydroxycinnamic acid-sugar derivatives. Biochem. J. 81, 242–250

Harris, P.J., Hartley, R.D. (1976) Detection of bound ferulic acid in cell walls of the Gramineae by ultraviolet fluorescence microscopy. Nature 259, 508–510

Harris, P.J., Hartley, R.D. (1980) Phenolic constituents of the cell wall of monocotyledons. Biochem. System. Ecol. 8, 153–160

Hartley, R.D., Jones, E.C., Wood, T.M. (1976) Carbohydrates and carbohydrate esters of ferulic acid released from cell walls of *Lolium multiflorum* by treatment with cellulolytic enzymes. Phytochemistry 15, 305–307

Hepler, P.K. (1982) Endoplasmic reticulum in the formation of the cell plate and plasmodesmata. Protoplasma 111, 121–133

Hösel, W. (1981) Glycosylation and glycosidases. In: The biochemistry of plants, vol. 7: Secondary plant products, pp. 725–753, Stumpf, P.K., Conn, E.E., eds. Academic Press, New York London

Hrazdina, G., Marx, G.A., Hoch, H.C. (1982) Distribution of secondary plant metabolites and their biosynthetic enzymes in pea (*Pisum sativum* L.) leaves. Plant Physiol. 70, 745–748

Hrazdina, G., Wagner, G.J. (1985) Metabolic pathways as enzyme complexes: evidence for the synthesis of phenylpropanoids and flavonoids on membrane associated enzyme complexes. Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 237, 88–100

Knogge, W., Beulen, C., Weissenböck, G. (1981) Distribution of phenylalanine ammonia-lyase and 4-coumarate:CoA ligase in oat primary leaf tissues. Z. Naturforsch. Teil C 36, 389–395

Knogge, W., Weissenböck, G. (1984) Purification characterization, and kinetic mechanism of S-adenosyl-L-methionine:vitexin 2′-O-rhamnoside 7-O-methyltransferase of *Avena sativa* L. Eur. J. Biochem. 140, 113–118

Knogge, W., Weissenböck, G., Strack, D. (1981) Application of liquid chromatography to a study on 4-coumarate:coenzyme A ligase activity. Z. Naturforsch. Teil C 36, 197–199

Kolattukudy, P.E. (1980) Cutin, suberin, and waxes. In: The biochemistry of plants, vol. 4: Lipids: structure and function, pp. 571–645, Stumpf, P.K., Conn, E.E., eds. Academic Press, New York London

Kolattukudy, P.E. (1981) Structure, biosynthesis, and biodegradation of cutin and suberin. Annu. Rev. Plant Physiol. 32, 539–567

Michalczuk, L., Bandurski, R.S. (1980) UDP-glucose:indolactic acid glucosyl transferase and indolacetyl-glucose:myoinositol indolacetyl transferase. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 93, 588–592

Moustafa, E., Wong, E. (1967) Purification and properties of chalcone-flavanone isomerase from soya bean seed. Phytochemistry 6, 625–632

Overall, R.L., Wolfe, L., Gunning, B.E.S. (1982) Intercellular communication in *Azolla* roots. I. Ultrastructure of plasmodesmata. Protoplasma 111, 134–150

Popovici, G., Weissenböck, G., Bouillant, M.L., Dellamonica, G., Chopin, J. (1977) Isolation and characterization of flavonoids from *Avena sativa* L. Z. Pflanzenphysiol. 85, 103–115

Poulton, J.E. (1981) Transmethylation and demethylation reactions in the metabolism of secondary plant products. In: The biochemistry of plants, vol. 7: Secondary plant products, pp. 667–723, Stumpf, P.K., Conn, E.E., eds. Academic Press, New York London

Poulton, J.E., Butt, V.S. (1975) Purification and properties of S-adenosyl-L-methionine:caffeic acid O-methyltransferase from leaves of spinach beet (*Beta vulgaris* L.). Biochim. Biophys. Acta 403, 301–314

Proksch, M., Strack, D., Weissenböck, G. (1981) Incorporation of \[^{14}C\]phenylalanine and \[^{14}C\]cinnamic acid into leaf pieces and mesophyll protoplasts from oat primary leaves for studies on flavonoid metabolism at the tissue and cell level. Z. Naturforsch. Teil C 36, 222–233

Schröder, J., Heller, W., Hahlbrock, K. (1979) Flavanone synthase: simple and rapid assay for the key enzyme of flavonoid biosynthesis. Plant Sci. Lett. 14, 281–286

Spurr, A.R. (1969) A low-viscosity epoxy resin embedding medium for electron microscopy. J. Ultrastruct. Res. 26, 31–42

Stöckigt, J., Zenk, M.H. (1975) Chemical synthesis and properties of hydroxycinnamoyl-coenzyme A derivatives. Z. Naturforsch. Teil C 30, 352–358

Stotz, G., Forkmann, G. (1981) Oxidation of flavanones to flavones with flower extracts of *Antirrhinum majus* (Snapdragon). Z. Naturforsch. Teil C 36, 737–741

Stotz, G., Forkmann, G. (1982) Hydroxylation of the B-ring of flavonoids in the 3′-and 5′-position with enzyme extracts from flowers of *Verbena hybrida*. Z. Naturforsch. Teil C 37, 19–23

Strack, D., Meurer, B., Weissenböck, G. (1982) Tissue-specific kinetics of flavonoid accumulation in primary leaves of rye (*Secale cereale* L.). Z. Pflanzenphysiol. 108, 131–141

Strack, D., Knogge, W., Dahlbender, B. (1983) Enzymatic synthesis of sinapine from 1-O-sinapoyl-β-d-glucose and choline by a cell-free system from developing seeds of red radish (*Raphanus sativus* L. var. *sativus*). Z. Naturforsch. Teil C 38, 21–27

Strack, D., Bokern, M., Berlin, J., Sieg, S. (1984) Metabolic activity of hydroxycinnamic acid glucose esters in cell suspension cultures of *Chenopodium rubrum*. Z. Naturforsch. Teil C 39, 902–907

Tkotz, N., Strack, D. (1980) Enzymatic synthesis of sinapoyl-l-malate from 1-sinapoylglucose and l-malate by a protein preparation from *Raphanus sativus* cotyledons. Z. Naturforsch. Teil C 35, 835–837

Wallace, J.W., Grisebach, H. (1973) The in vivo incorporation of a flavanone into C-glycosylflavones. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 304, 837–841

Wallace, J.W., Mabry, T.J. (1970) The conversion of the 8-C-glycosylflavone vitexin to the 6-isomer, isovitexin, in *Lemma minor*. Phytochemistry 9, 2133–2135

Wallace, J.W., Mabry, T.J., Alston, R.E. (1969) On the biogenesis of flavone O-glycosides and C-glycosides in the Lemnaceae. Phytochemistry 8, 93–99

Weissenböck, G. (1975) Aktivitätsverlauf der Phenylalanin-, Tyrosin-Ammonium-Lyase (PAL, TAL) und Chalkon-Flavanon-Isomerase im Vergleich zur C-Glycosylflavon-Akkumulation im wachsenden Hafersproß (*Avena sativa* L.) bei Belichtung und Dunkelheit. Z. Pflanzenphysiol. 74, 226–254

Weissenböck, G., Effertz, B. (1974) Entwicklungs- und lichtabhängige Akkumulation von C-Glykosylflavonen im Haferkeimling (*Avena sativa* L.). Z. Pflanzenphysiol. 74, 298–326

Weissenböck, G., Sachs, G. (1977) On the localization of enzymes related to flavonoid metabolism in sections and tissues of oat primary leaves. Planta 137, 49–52

Wiermann, R. (1981) Secondary plant products and cell and tissue differentiation. In: The biochemistry of plants, vol. 7: Secondary plant products, pp. 85–116, Stumpf, P.K., Conn, E.E., eds. Academic Press, New York London

Received 15 May; accepted 16 September 1985
