
frontiers in
CELLULAR NEUROSCIENCE

REVIEW ARTICLE
published: 18 December 2013
doi: 10.3389/fncel.2013.00264

---

**A taste for ATP: neurotransmission in taste buds**

**Sue C. Kinnamon¹ and Thomas E. Finger²***

*¹ Department of
taste receptor (TR) family of G-protein coupled taste receptors and the related phospholipase C (PLC)-mediated downstream cascade (Yarmolinsky et al., 2009; Roper, 2013). The points of contact between the type II cells and nerve fibers often exhibit a non-conventional specialization involving subsurface cisternae and atypical mitochondria (
However, knockout (KO) of either 5-HT3 (Finger et al., 2005) or GLP-1R (Shin et al., 2008) fails to block taste behaviors, suggesting that while these transmitters may play a role in activating nerve fibers, they are not required.

Glutamate also has been suggested to serve as a taste transmitter (Vandenbe
we cannot rule out other possibilities for reduced taste function in NTPDase KO animals, such as inhibition of the ATP release channel by high levels of extracellular ATP (Qiu and Dahl, 2009). Nonetheless, these NTPDase2 knockout data provide further support for the requirement of ATP for all taste qualities, although the cellular source of the ATP for sour and salty stimuli remains enigmatic.

The
receptors and GLP-1 receptors (Shin et al., 2008), become activated maximally?

A second major unanswered question relating to purinergic signaling in taste buds, is how and if ATP is released by sour and salt-responsive type III taste cells which possess conventional synapses. Type III cells do release serotonin and GABA using a vesicular release mechanism (Vandenbeuch et al.,
chorda tympani but not the trigeminal nerve in rats and mice. *J. Comp. Neurol.* 514, 131–144. doi: 10.1002/cne.22000

Iwatsuki, K., Ichikawa, R., Hiasa, M., Moriyama, Y., Torii
Kinnamon and Finger

Purinergic neurotransmission in taste buds

Conflict of Interest Statement: The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

Received: 14 October 2013; accepted: 03 December 2013; published online: 18 December 2013