
REVIEWS

Metformin—mode of action and clinical implications for diabetes and cancer

Ida Pernicova and Márta Korbonits

Abstract | Metformin has been the mainstay of therapy for diabetes mellitus for many years; however, the mechanistic aspects of metformin action remained ill-defined. Recent advances revealed that this drug, in addition to its glucose-lowering action, might be promising for specifically targeting metabolic differences between normal and abnormal metabolic signalling. The knowledge gained from dissecting the principal mechanisms by which metformin works can help us to develop novel treatments. The centre of metformin’s mechanism of action is the alteration of the energy metabolism of the cell. Metformin exerts its prevailing, glucose-lowering effect by inhibiting hepatic gluconeogenesis and opposing the action of glucagon. The inhibition of mitochondrial complex I results in defective cAMP and protein kinase A signalling in response to glucagon. Stimulation of 5'-AMP-activated protein kinase, although dispensable for the glucose-lowering effect of metformin, confers insulin sensitivity, mainly by modulating lipid metabolism. Metformin might influence tumourigenesis, both indirectly, through the systemic reduction of insulin levels, and directly, via the induction of energetic stress; however, these effects require further investigation. Here, we discuss the updated understanding of the antiguconeogenic action of metformin in the liver and the implications of the discoveries of metformin targets for the treatment of diabetes mellitus and cancer.

Pernicova, I. & Korbonits, M. Nat. Rev. Endocrinol. **10**, 143–156 (2014); published online 7 January 2014; doi:10.1038/nrendo.2013.256

Introduction

The biguanide metformin has been used for its glucose-lowering effect since 1957 in Europe and since 1995 in the USA. Yet despite being the most frequently prescribed antidiabetic treatment worldwide, its mechanism of action remains largely elusive. Metformin and the related phenformin are derivatives of guanidine (Table 1). Discovered in the 1920s in extracts of the plant *Galega officinalis* (French lilac), isoamylene guanidine, also called galegine, had been used for centuries for the treatment of diabetes mellitus.¹ Phenformin has been withdrawn for use in humans as a result of safety concerns in most parts of the world, whereas the clinical indications for metformin therapy have expanded from type 2 diabetes mellitus (where it offers undisputable benefits) to gestational diabetes mellitus, polycystic ovary syndrome, the metabolic syndrome and diabetes prevention.²

Metformin lowers glucose levels and improves insulin sensitivity.³ In addition, metformin has gained attention for its pleiotropic effects. It has been shown to decrease food intake (Box 1)⁴ and body weight³ in some studies. Moreover, this drug can positively influence multiple cardiovascular risk markers (Box 2), including lipid profile³,⁵ and fatty liver,⁶ modulate inflammatory markers⁷,⁸ (Box 2) and possibly reduce cancer risk.⁹ However, many promising results are not without dispute. For example, whether metformin treatment can improve cardiovascular morbidity and mortality remains controversial. Although the UK Prospective Diabetes Study and several systematic reviews found an overall reduced cardiovascular mortality and morbidity risk with metformin treatment,¹⁰ two meta-analyses have failed to determine any benefit of metformin therapy on all-cause or cardiovascular-related mortality or on diabetes-related macrovascular complications, pointing to methodological weaknesses of previous studies and insufficient data.¹¹,¹²

Here, we discuss the updated understanding of the molecular mechanisms through which metformin acts on metabolism, mainly focussing on liver gluconeogenesis, and on tumourigenesis. In addition, we will review the potential implications of new discoveries about metformin molecular targets for the development of antidiabetic and anticancer therapies.

Metformin and diabetes mellitus

Antidiabetic actions of metformin

The antihyperglycaemic action of biguanides is mainly a consequence of reduced glucose output owing to inhibition of liver gluconeogenesis¹³ and, possibly to a lesser extent, increased insulin-mediated glucose uptake in the skeletal muscle.¹⁴ Metformin has little effect on glucose absorption through the gastrointestinal tract but slightly delays the absorption process.¹⁵,¹⁶ The pharmacokinetics and response to metformin reveal a wide interindividual variability. The polarity of metformin makes it dependent on membrane transporters for cellular uptake and secretion. The main metformin transporters are solute

Department of  
Endocrinology, William  
Harvey Research  
Institute, Barts and  
The London School of  
Medicine and Dentistry,  
Queen Mary University  
of London,  
Charterhouse Square,  
London EC1A 6BQ, UK  
(I. Pernicova,  
M. Korbonits).

Correspondence to:  
M. Korbonits  
m.korbonits@  
qmul.ac.uk  

Competing interests  
The authors declare an association with the following company: Merck. See the article online for full details of the relationships.

Key points
- The glucose-lowering, insulin-sensitizing agent metformin works mainly by reducing gluconeogenesis and opposing glucagon-mediated signalling in the liver and, to a lesser extent, by increasing glucose uptake in skeletal muscle
- The primary site of metformin action is the mitochondrion
- The antihyperglycaemic effect of metformin is probably owing to defective protein kinase A signalling
- Metformin affects lipid metabolism primarily via 5'-AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) activation
- Antitumourigenic effects of metformin, which require further study, might be partially due to systemic metabolic alterations, including the reduced availability of insulin
- In cancer cells, metformin acts as an inducer of energetic stress; AMPK-driven inhibition of mTOR seems to be required for much of its antimitotic activity

is mediated through an increase in the tyrosine kinase activity of the insulin receptor<sup>19</sup> and through enhanced activity and translocation of glucose transporters, such as GLUT-4 (also known as SLC2A4), to the plasma membrane.<sup>28</sup> Increased insulin receptor expression<sup>19,29</sup> and an enhanced ability to restore enzymatic pathways involved in insulin signalling<sup>30</sup> have also been attributed to metformin.

Altered endocrine function in the pancreas
The antidiabetic action of metformin is not the result of increased insulin levels<sup>31,32</sup> but rather has been associated with reduced insulin concentrations in the circulation.<sup>33,34</sup> Consequently, metformin monotherapy is associated with only a minimal risk of hypoglycaemia.<sup>16</sup> Glucose clamp studies in nondiabetic individuals treated with metformin suggest that a reduction in glucose levels lowers insulin secretion and increases glucagon secretion.<sup>35</sup> However, this mechanism might be less effective in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus, which might account for rare cases of hypoglycaemia among patients with diabetes mellitus receiving metformin monotherapy.<sup>25,35</sup>

Importantly, metformin seems to interact with the incretin axis, as an enhancer and sensitizer for the actions of glucagon-like peptide 1 (GLP-1).<sup>36</sup> GLP-1 increases secretion of insulin and reduces secretion of glucagon in response to glucose and has widespread tissue-specific metabolic effects.<sup>37</sup> Metformin stimulates expression of GLP-1 receptor in the pancreas and increases plasma GLP-1 levels.<sup>37,38</sup> Moreover, circulating levels of dipeptidyl peptidase 4 (DDP-4), which is known to degrade incretins, were reported to be lower in patients treated with metformin than in untreated individuals.<sup>39</sup> However, metformin did not directly inhibit DDP-4 activity *in vitro*.<sup>38,40</sup> Combining DDP-4 inhibitors with metformin improved glycaemic control in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus.<sup>41</sup> The full clinical relevance of the effect of metformin on GLP-1 is yet to be established. Metformin did not preserve β-cell function in outcome studies.<sup>42</sup>

To summarize, the ability of metformin to reduce circulating glucose levels in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus can be explained by multiple mechanisms, such as increased glucose uptake in liver and muscle, reduced gluconeogenesis, improved GLP-1 and reduced glucagon functions. Nevertheless, the molecular principles of metformin action remain debated.

Molecular targets of antidiabetic effects
Mitochondria—the primary site of action
The primary target of metformin within the cell is the mitochondrion, where metformin transiently inhibits complex I of the mitochondrial electron transport chain, which induces a drop in energy charge,<sup>43–46</sup> a measure of the energetic state of the cell (defined as [ATP] + 0.5[ADP])/([ATP] + [ADP] + [AMP]).<sup>46</sup> This inhibition has been demonstrated more markedly *in vitro* than *in vivo*.<sup>45</sup> The resulting decrease in ATP production and increase in AMP levels probably drive two major pathways: inhibition of glucagon-induced cAMP synthesis, as demonstrated in the liver,<sup>21</sup> and the activation

Increased glucose uptake in skeletal muscle
Metformin improves insulin sensitivity and insulin-mediated glucose uptake in skeletal muscle. This effect

Table 1 | Comparison of phenformin and metformin

| Characteristic | Phenformin | Metformin |
| --- | --- | --- |
| Chemical structure | Biguanide<br>Two guanidine groups linked together with the loss of an ammonia group<br>Contains a phenyl-ethyl ring on a guanidine side-chain (Phenethylbiguanide) | Biguanide<br>Two methyl groups on a guanidine side-chain (Dimethylbiguanide) |
| Physical properties and cellular transport | Less polar and more lipid soluble than metformin<sup>127</sup><br>Phenformin exhibits higher affinity and transport activity with marked differences in uptake kinetics compared with metformin<sup>128*</sup><br>High affinity for mitochondrial membranes<sup>60</sup> | Polar and unusually hydrophilic<br>More reliant on active transcellular transport<sup>129*</sup><br>Lower affinity for mitochondrial membranes than phenformin |
| Effect on mitochondrial respiratory chain | Powerful inhibitory effect on functioning of the mitochondrial respiratory chain<br>Inhibits lactate oxidation/increases lactate concentration in plasma<sup>25</sup><br>Increased release of lactate from muscle<sup>130</sup> | Less powerful inhibitor of the mitochondrial respiratory chain (probably the main reason for decreased risk of lactic acidosis)<sup>45</sup><br>Metformin increases lactate oxidation<sup>25</sup><br>Not altering the release of lactate from muscle<sup>25</sup> |
| Drug metabolism | Metabolized by CYP2D6 in the liver<sup>131</sup><br>Phenformin metabolism can differ depending on CYP2D6 polymorphisms | Not metabolized<sup>131</sup> |
| Half-life | Half-life of 7–15 h<sup>132,133</sup><br>Elimination through the kidneys | Half-life of 1.5–6.5 h<sup>20,132–134</sup><br>Food decreases and slightly delays absorption of metformin; metformin is excreted by kidneys<br>Renal clearance is reduced by other factors, such as concomitant use of cimetidine |
| Clinical use | Withdrawn from the markets in most parts of the world in the 1970s for safety reasons<sup>135</sup> | Widespread use and excellent safety profile<br>Many nephrologists propose that metformin is under-prescribed in chronic kidney disease and guidelines should be revisited<sup>136</sup> (metformin is deemed safe unless eGFR levels fall < 30 ml/min/1.73 m²) |

### Adverse effects

| Risk of lactic acidosis | Increased risk of lactic acidosis, with a mortality rate of 30–50%<br>0.4–0.64 cases per 1,000 patient-years<sup>131</sup> | Incidence of lactic acidosis is 0.03 cases per 1,000 patient-years (10–20 times lower than with phenformin).<sup>131</sup> The reported incidence of lactic acidosis in diabetic patients on metformin is similar to the one in diabetic patients not taking metformin<sup>137</sup><br>Metformin has a wider therapeutic window and requires higher blood levels than phenformin to cause lactic acidosis;<sup>132</sup> metformin is generally believed not to cause accumulation of lactate unless metabolism of lactate is impaired for another reason |
| Cardiovascular risk | Increased cardiovascular risk<sup>11</sup> | Reported cardiovascular benefits<sup>138</sup> |
| Gastrointestinal disturbances | Gastrointestinal disturbance<br>Reduced gastrointestinal glucose absorption<sup>15,16</sup> | Gastrointestinal disturbance (especially at initiation of therapy), reported in ~30% of patients,<sup>139</sup> may be one of the reasons for compliance issues (reported in up to one third of patients<sup>140</sup>). The mechanisms of gastrointestinal side-effects are unknown but an increased mucosal serotonin production<sup>139</sup> and possibly rise in GLP-1 may be partially responsible.<br>Little effect on intestinal glucose absorption<sup>15,16</sup><br>B12 malabsorption and increased, homocysteine levels with long-term use |
| Other clinical effects | In cancer, *in vitro* and *in vivo* animal models show greater antineoplastic activity with phenformin than metformin<sup>129,141</sup> and phenformin was linked to an improved immunologic status in breast cancer patients.<sup>142</sup> However, the anti-tumour effect of phenformin has not been formally investigated in clinical trials | Following promising results of *in vitro* and *in vivo* animal models, the anti-tumour effects of metformin are being intensively investigated in clinical trials. To date most available data is in colon and breast cancer, reporting surrogate markers<sup>143</sup> |

*Active transport is predominant in both phenformin and metformin.<sup>128</sup> Abbreviations: CYP2D6, cytochrome P450 2D6; eGFR, estimated glomerular filtration rate; GLP-1, glucagon-like peptide 1.

of 5'-AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK).<sup>47</sup> AMPK is an energy sensor and a master coordinator of an integrated signalling network that comprises metabolic and growth pathways acting in synchrony to restore cellular energy balance. When activated, AMPK switches on catabolic pathways that generate ATP and switches off anabolic, ATP-consuming pathways.

The specific molecular mechanisms involved in the inhibition of mitochondrial complex I remain unclear. An interaction between biguanides and mitochondrial copper ions has been observed and reported to be crucial

for the metabolic effects of metformin.<sup>48</sup> At normal pH, metformin is positively charged; therefore, its intracellular transport depends on cationic transporters (Table 2). The mitochondrial membrane potential might drive accumulation of the positively charged metformin in the mitochondrial matrix.

The inhibition of complex I by metformin reduces NADH oxidation, lowering the proton gradient across the inner mitochondrial membrane and the proton-driven synthesis of ATP. As a result, the ATP:ADP:AMP equilibrium is shifted towards increased AMP synthesis

REVIEWS

Box 1 | The role of metformin on feeding behaviour

- In some studies, metformin suppresses food intake,^{4} probably by increasing the levels of glucagon-like peptide 1 (GLP-1)^{37} and by interacting with signalling upstream or downstream of other hormones or cytokines (such as ghrelin, leptin and insulin)
- Metformin has been detected in the cerebrospinal fluid after oral administration^{158}
- Metformin has been shown to reduce appetite by counteracting ghrelin-induced 5'-AMP-activated kinase (AMPK) signalling and inhibition of mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) in the hypothalamus;^{159} metformin has also been reported to inhibit dexamethasone-induced hypothalamic AMPK activity *in vitro*^{157}
- AMPK has been proposed to mediate feeding behaviour in response to different signalling pathways (including ghrelin, leptin and cannabinoid signalling)^{160–163}
- In the hypothalamus, metformin inhibits hypoglycaemia-induced AMPK activity and the expression of the orexigenic neuropeptide Y,^{164} although the inhibition of neuropeptide Y and agouti-related peptide in other scenarios was mediated by signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3) signalling rather than AMPK activity^{158,165}

and glucagon signalling, and the antidiabetic effect of metformin.^{21}

Interestingly, although mitochondria seem to be the primary targets of metformin action, metformin can also influence erythrocytes, which lack mitochondria, possibly by affecting membrane fluidity.^{50} Further exploration of this mechanism is awaited.

Glucagon signalling and metformin

Glucagon concentrations are abnormally elevated in the circulation of individuals with diabetes mellitus, as hyperglycaemia blunts suppression of the glucagon-secreting pancreatic α cells. Glucagon promotes gluconeogenesis, glycogenolysis and ketogenesis, and reduces glycogenesis and glycolysis (Figure 1). These actions lead to increased hepatic glucose production during fasting and an attenuated decline in hepatic glucose synthesis postprandially.^{51}

Glucagon performs its main effect via activation of adenylate cyclase. The adenylate-cyclase-derived cAMP activates protein kinase A (PKA), which then phosphorylates downstream targets, such as the bifunctional enzyme 6-phosphofructo-2-kinase/fructose-2,6-bisphosphatase (one of the isoforms being PFK/FBPase 1, encoded by *PFKFB1*). PFK/FBPase 1 phosphorylation inhibits PFK activity and stimulates FBPase 1 activity, thereby lowering the intracellular levels of fructose-2,6-bisphosphate (Figure 2). This compound is an allosteric inhibitor of glycolysis and activator of gluconeogenesis, as it alters the activity of several enzymes in these pathways (Figures 1 and 2). Activation of PKA also leads to changes in gene expression, but this effect is somewhat slower than the one on enzymatic activity. For example, phosphorylation of the cAMP-responsive element-binding protein (CREB-1) induces binding of this protein to cAMP response element sites within the promoter of gluconeogenic genes such as *PEPCK* and *G6PC* (Figure 3).^{52,53} During fasting, PKA also phosphorylates inositol 1,4,5-triphosphate receptors (I3PRs), thereby inducing an increase in intracellular Ca²⁺ levels.^{54} This increase, in turn, activates CREB-regulated transcription coactivator 2 (CRTC2), enabling interaction between CRTC2 and CREB-1 to activate gluconeogenic gene expression (Figure 3).^{55} This process is reduced during feeding owing to an increase in insulin signalling induced by the inactivation of I3PR via AKT (also known as PKB).^{55}

Following on from earlier reports,^{22} Miller *et al.* showed in a series of *in vitro* and *in vivo* experiments that biguanides exert their glucose-lowering effect mainly by opposing glucagon signalling (Figure 3).^{21} Biguanides were shown to rapidly inhibit the glucagon-stimulatory effect on cAMP levels in hepatocytes, leading to disrupted PKA activity and repressed phosphorylation of PFK/FBPase 1, I3PR and CREB-1.^{21} So, it was proposed that, at therapeutic concentrations, metformin leads to inhibition of glucagon signalling, possibly by increasing AMP levels through inhibition of mitochondrial complex I (Figure 3). AMP then binds to the regulatory intracellular inhibitory ‘P-site’ (a purine moiety site)

by adenylate kinase,^{45} thereby reducing the energy charge of the cell. Direct inhibition of AMP deaminase, an enzyme that degrades AMP, by metformin might also increase AMP levels.^{49} Raised AMP levels inhibit adenylate cyclase (see below), a membrane-bound enzyme that catalyses the conversion of ATP to cAMP. Hence, metformin action ultimately reduces cAMP levels. A link has been made between reduced cAMP synthesis

Box 2 | Metabolic* and anti-inflammatory benefits associated with metformin

- Moderate reduction of BMI or weight-neutral effects (as opposed to the effects of many other antidiabetic treatments)^{3}
- Weight loss preferentially involving adipose tissue^{25}
- Reduction in blood pressure that is independent of weight change;^{33} however, no change in blood pressure could be detected in other studies^{166,167}
- Beneficial effect on lipid levels in some studies,^{3,5} but not others^{166,167}
- Reduced resistin levels^{168} and increased adiponectin levels^{169}
- Reduced fatty liver in rodents^{6}
- Reduced fibrinogen^{170} and upregulated fibrinolytic system^{171}
- Reduced levels of PAI-1^{172}
- Inhibition of platelet aggregation^{171}
- Improved endothelium-dependent vasodilatation^{173}
- Reduced progression of carotid intima thickening was identified in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus^{174} treated with metformin; however, no difference in carotid intima progression was noted in nondiabetic patients with proven coronary artery disease^{175}
- Reduced levels of C-reactive protein^{167}
- Reduced levels of proinflammatory cytokines;^{7,8} for example, metformin inhibited production of TNF by human monocytes *in vitro*^{176} and lowered TNF levels in patients with diabetes mellitus^{7}
- Reduced expression of the adhesion molecules ICAM1 and VCAM1;^{177} for example, metformin exerted an antiatherogenic effect in vascular endothelial cells through inhibition of TNF–NF-κB-driven expression of proinflammatory and cell adhesion molecules, in an AMPK-dependent manner^{178} and through blockade of the PI3K–AKT pathway^{179}
- Metformin has been reported to enhance CD8⁺ T-cell memory by altering fatty acid metabolism,^{180} thereby linking metabolism and immunomodulation
- Metformin has been shown to reduce endotoxin-induced hepatic injury in mice^{181}
- Metformin inhibited osteoclasts and bone resorption through immune mechanisms^{182}
- Metformin favourably modulated immune responses in animal models of multiple sclerosis,^{8} uveitis,^{183} autoimmune arthritis,^{184} and chronic asthma^{185}

*The metabolic benefits of metformin administration listed here are not consistent in all studies. Abbreviations: AMPK, 5'-AMP-activated kinase; NF-κB, nuclear factor κB; PI3K, phosphoinositide 3-kinase; PAI-1, plasminogen activator inhibitor 1; TNF, tumor necrosis factor.

Table 2 | Membrane transporters involved in metformin pharmacokinetics

| Metformin transporter | Encoded by | Function |
|-----------------------|------------|----------|
| SLC22A1 (also known as OCT1) | SLC22A1 | Main transporter accountable for metformin uptake<sup>18</sup><br>Expressed in liver and kidney<br>Some SNPs shown to associate with reduced metformin uptake, increased metformin elimination as a result of reduced renal tubular reabsorption and lower therapeutic response owing to diminished action of metformin in the liver<sup>144</sup><br>Wide disparity in frequency distribution of SNPs among ethnic groups<sup>18</sup> |
| SLC22A2 (also known as OCT2) | SLC22A2 | Mediates metformin secretion (kidney)<br>Accountable for 80% of the total metformin clearance<sup>85</sup> |
| SLC22A3 (also known as OCT3) | SLC22A3 | Expressed in multiple tissues (including liver, kidney, heart, skeletal muscle, brain, placenta)<br>May be important in the uptake of metformin in muscle<sup>145</sup> |
| SLC22A4 (also known as OCTN1) | SLC22A4 | Involved in the gastrointestinal absorption of metformin<sup>146</sup><br>Role in the mitochondrial uptake of phenformin<sup>17</sup> |
| MATE1 | SLC47A1 | Mediates metformin secretion (kidney; liver–excretion into bile)<br>Rs2289669 polymorphism was associated with an amplified glucose-lowering effect of metformin in diabetic patients<sup>147</sup> |
| MATE2 | SLC47A2 | Mediates metformin secretion (kidney) |
| hENT4 (also known as PMAT) | SLC29A4 | Mediates renal and intestinal metformin uptake<sup>148</sup> |

Abbreviations: hENT4, equilibrative nucleotide transporter 4; MATE1, multidrug and toxin extrusion transporter 1; PMAT, plasma membrane monoamine transporter; SLC22A1, solute carrier family 22 member 1; SNP, single nucleotide polymorphism.

of adenylate cyclase,<sup>56</sup> thereby inhibiting glucagon-mediated activation of adenylate cyclase and reducing endogenous synthesis of cAMP and PKA activity. This action culminates in a glucose-lowering effect (Figure 3). It was also demonstrated that AMPK—although activated by metformin—is dispensable for the above action and that AKT phosphorylation is unaltered shortly after metformin administration,<sup>21</sup> which suggests that metformin does not affect insulin responsiveness acutely. However, how metformin works at higher concentrations remains unclear, as—in addition to inhibiting glucagon signalling—it reduces glucose output in response to a membrane-permeable analogue of cAMP, bypassing adenylate cyclase.<sup>21</sup> Furthermore, whereas glucagon receptor knockout mice show hypoglycaemia,<sup>57</sup> this outcome is unusual in patients receiving metformin monotherapy, which suggests that either metformin inhibits glucagon signalling incompletely in humans or that other compensatory mechanisms are present.

The role of AMPK in hepatic gluconeogenesis

Biguanides are recognized as indirect activators of AMPK.<sup>47</sup> For about a decade, AMPK was the assumed prime mediator of metformin action. As mentioned above, metformin can activate AMPK by promoting AMP accumulation. Moreover, the drug has been shown to activate AMPK without inducing any detectable changes in AMP, ADP and ATP,<sup>58,59</sup> whereas phenformin has been more consistent in modifying adenine nucleotide ratio.<sup>60</sup>

The link between metformin and AMPK activation was supported by experiments showing that the effects of metformin on reduced glucose output and lipogenesis were mitigated by treatment with the AMPK inhibitor compound C<sup>47</sup> (although it was later deemed nonselective), or under adenoviral-mediated expression of dominant negative AMPK.<sup>61</sup> Moreover,

gluconeogenesis was shown to be inhibited by the AMPK activator AICAR,<sup>62</sup> and was also reduced in a mutant rodent model expressing a constitutively active form of AMPK.<sup>63</sup> In the liver, deletion of liver kinase B1 (LKB1; an upstream kinase that phosphorylates the catalytic α domain of AMPK) prevented activation of AMPK and negated the antidiabetic effect of metformin in mice fed a high-fat diet.<sup>13</sup> Multiple studies reported involvement of AMPK in the deactivation of CRTC2,<sup>13,64–66</sup> one of the key regulators of gluconeogenic gene expression.

However, reservations regarding the hypothesis of AMPK being the main driving force behind reduced hepatic gluconeogenesis have been accumulating over years, primarily owing to a lack of correlation between gluconeogenic gene expression and hepatic glucose output.<sup>67,68</sup> The AMPK model was seriously challenged when metformin lowered glucose production in the liver of transgenic mice that lacked AMPK or its upstream activator LKB1.<sup>69</sup> The investigators of this breakthrough study<sup>69</sup> hypothesized that the discordance between their findings and the previous model, which suggested that the antidiabetic action of metformin requires LKB1,<sup>13</sup> reflected possible benefits of the LKB1–AMPK axis for lipotoxicity in animals fed a high-fat diet rather than a direct effect on gluconeogenesis.<sup>69</sup> Unlike PKA, AMPK does not control PFK activity in the liver.<sup>70</sup> Foretz *et al.* demonstrated that the ability of metformin to lower glucose output was preserved under a forced overexpression of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-γ coactivator-1α (PGC-1α) and an increase in protein levels of gluconeogenic enzymes, such as phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase (PEPCK) and glucose-6-phosphatase (G6Pase), concluding that metformin disrupts the activity of the gluconeogenic enzymes rather than the expression of the genes encoding them (PEPCK and G6PC, respectively).<sup>69</sup> The proposed role of metformin in glucagon signalling

β-oxidation<sup>71</sup> (by regulating the activity of acetyl coenzyme A carboxylase<sup>47</sup> and the expression of multiple enzymes involved in lipogenesis<sup>47,63</sup> and β-oxidation<sup>23</sup>). This mechanism is consistent with the observations of altered fatty acid metabolism and improved hepatic steatosis in mice receiving metformin.<sup>6</sup> Free fatty acids can reduce glucose transport by hampering insulin signalling<sup>72</sup> and have been implicated as the main culprit of impaired insulin secretion by pancreatic β cells.<sup>73</sup> In addition to free fatty acids, acetyl coenzyme A and citrate—byproducts of β-oxidation—inhibit key enzymes of the glycolytic pathway (Figure 1).<sup>70</sup> Therefore, metformin might improve insulin secretion and sensitivity by lowering the levels of glucose and free fatty acids, and by preventing lipid deposition in insulin-sensitive tissues.

### Direct modulation through energy charge

The data presented by Miller et al. suggest a good correlation between metformin-induced elevation of AMP and the drop in cAMP and glucose levels in mice.<sup>21</sup> In addition to fructose-2,6-bisphosphate, which regulates phosphofructokinase-1 (also called 6-phosphofructokinase, liver type; PFKL) and fructose-1,6-bisphosphatase 1 (FBP1) with the greatest affinity, various other factors modulate gluconeogenic and glycolytic enzymes independently of glucagon and AMPK signalling, including metabolites (such as citrate), the AMP:ATP ratio<sup>46,70,74</sup> and the NADH:NAD⁺ status<sup>46</sup> (Figure 1). These findings suggest that metformin-induced changes in energy charge have contributory effects on gluconeogenesis, independent of cAMP and AMPK signalling.

The molecular targets of metformin include the mitochondrial complex I and other enzymes modulated by the altered energy charge, notably adenylate cyclase (inhibited by increased AMP levels), affecting glucagon signalling, and AMPK (stimulated by the increased AMP:ATP ratio).

### Metformin and cancer

In 2005, a report associated metformin use with a reduced incidence of cancer,<sup>75</sup> putting the drug into the cancer research spotlight. As of October 2013, 173 clinical trials on metformin and cancer have been registered.<sup>76</sup> Diabetes mellitus has been associated with a 1.2–2.0-fold increase in cancer incidence.<sup>9</sup> A report in 2010 suggested that metformin reduces this risk by approximately 40% compared with any other antidiabetic treatment.<sup>9</sup> Several studies have claimed a notable reduction in the risk of all-cause and cancer-specific mortality, and with attenuated cancer progression.<sup>77,78</sup> However, a population-based analysis has failed to show an association between improved survival and metformin use in diabetic patients with breast cancer aged >65 years,<sup>79</sup> and these findings were in line with results of several other studies.<sup>80,81</sup>

Little is known about the cancer-related effect of metformin in nondiabetic patients. A human study showed that short-term treatment with metformin suppressed formation of colorectal aberrant crypt foci;<sup>82</sup> a trial of longer duration is currently underway. Metformin treatment also reduced the cellular marker of proliferation,

(increased AMP reduces cAMP levels)<sup>21</sup> has supported the AMPK-independent antihyperglycaemic action of metformin.

Nevertheless, a number of metformin effects are still attributed to AMPK. AMPK phosphorylates and increases the activity of insulin receptor and IRS-2 and enhances translocation of glucose transporters (Figure 3).<sup>19</sup> AMPK is also responsible for the effect of metformin on fatty acid metabolism (Figure 3).<sup>47</sup> Activated AMPK inhibits fatty acid synthesis and enhances

a
Glucagon
↑cAMP
↑PKA
Phosphorylation promotes FBPass 1 activity and inactivates PFK
PFK/FBPass 1
FBPass 1
↓F2,6BP
Allosteric inhibition by F2,6BP
↑FBP1
↑Gluconeogenesis
PFK
Allosteric activation by F2,6BP
↓PFKL
↓Glycolysis

b
Biguanides
↓cAMP
↓PKA
Lack of phosphorylation prevents FBPass 1 activity and promotes PFK activity
PFK/FBPass 1
FBPass 1
↑F2,6BP
Allosteric inhibition by F2,6BP
↓FBP1
↓Gluconeogenesis
PFK
Allosteric activation by F2,6BP
↑PFKL
↑Glycolysis

Figure 2 | The effect of glucagon and biguanide signalling on fructose-2,6-bisphosphate. a | Glucagon binds to glucagon receptor coupled to Gₛ-protein (not shown). Gₛα activates adenylate cyclase which generates cAMP from ATP (not shown). cAMP stimulates protein kinase A (PKA) that phosphorylates 6-phosphofructo-2-kinase/fructose-2,6-bisphosphatase 1 (PFK/FBPass 1). PFK/FBPass 1 is a bifunctional enzyme that regulates the levels of fructose-2,6-bisphosphate (F2,6BP) by catalysing both synthesis and hydrolysis of F2,6BP to and from fructose-6-phosphate (F6P), respectively. F2,6BP is an allosteric activator of phosphofructokinase-1 (PFKL), therefore it controls the rate of conversion of fructose-6-phosphate to fructose-1,6-bisphosphate in the glycolytic pathway. At the same time, F2,6BP is also an allosteric inhibitor of fructose-1,6-bisphosphatase 1 (FBP1), thereby regulating the rate of gluconeogenesis. PFK/FBPass 1 phosphorylation leads to conformational changes that favour FBPass 1 activity, therefore lowering F2,6BP levels. A drop in F2,6BP levels promotes gluconeogenesis and inhibits glycolysis. b | Biguanides abrogate glucagon signalling. cAMP production is inhibited resulting in decreased PKA activity, increased PFK activity leading to increased F2,6BP levels. A rise in F2,6BP levels suppresses gluconeogenesis and stimulates glycolysis. Abbreviation: F2,6BP, fructose-2,6-bisphosphate.

Ki67, in biopsy samples obtained from nondiabetic women with breast cancer treated with metformin. Mechanisms by which metformin attenuates tumourigenesis and has chemoprotective properties are not well-defined. An important limitation of many experimental studies is that metformin inhibits cell proliferation *in vitro* at supraphysiological concentrations, which are generally thought to be unachievable in patients. Moreover, many factors influence availability and response to metformin in tissue. For example, the tissue expression of transporters that mediate metformin uptake varies between normal and tumour cells, and can be influenced by various drugs such as antibiotics and proton pump inhibitors. Poor uptake into target cells might limit the therapeutic potential of metformin in cancer; on the other hand, this fact could play a crucial part in the drug’s excellent safety profile. Overall, the interplay between the patient’s metabolic make-up and the molecular characteristics of the tumour adds to the complexity of the effects of metformin on tumourigenesis, which are probably both systemic (indirect) and local (direct) (Figure 4).

Systemic metformin effects on tumourigenesis Hyperinsulinaemia has been associated with adverse prognosis in several cancers (including breast, colon and prostate cancer). In states of insulin resistance, metformin action in the liver lowers systemic glucose levels and improves secondary hyperinsulinaemia, preventing the latter’s effects on tumour growth and progression. This action means that metformin can affect insulin-sensitive neoplastic tissues indirectly, without the need to accumulate in cancer cells. Our understanding of this principle remains limited. Although exogenous insulin used in the treatment of diabetes mellitus does not promote cancer, there is some controversy regarding the risk for patients treated with the long-acting insulin analogue glargine.

Moreover, it is possible that other hormones, cytokines and metabolic intermediates that influence tumourigenesis are also affected by metformin. A systemic effect related to reduced glucagon signalling in glucagon-responsive cells warrants exploration. More studies are needed to clarify this principle in patients with normoglycaemia.

Direct effects of metformin in cancer The antitumourigenic effects of metformin can be independent of insulinaemia. Several findings support the notion of a direct action of metformin in cancer cells. In this context, AMPK-dependent and AMPK-independent mechanisms have been described, which are likely to coexist and interact.

AMPK-dependent metfomin effects in cancer LKB1-dependent and AMPK-dependent suppression of the mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) pathway is possibly the most potent antineoplastic effect of metformin (Figure 4). mTOR inhibition disturbs protein synthesis and, thereby, tumour cell proliferation. Loss of LKB1 is frequent in cancer, and a germline mutation in *LKB1* is responsible for Peutz–Jeghers syndrome, a cancer-predisposing condition.

mTOR is a catalytic subunit of two multiprotein complexes, mTORC1 and mTORC2. These complexes are central in the regulation of cellular growth and integrate

to a complex tumour syndrome, which suggests that induction of DICER1 expression by metformin could be an additional antineoplastic mechanism (Figure 4).<sup>98</sup> Metformin also inhibits the proto-oncogene c-MYC and hypoxia-inducible factor 1α (HIF-1α) via AMPK (Figure 4).<sup>98</sup> Importantly, AMPK and HIF-1α have a key role in metabolic transformation in cancer.

Rapidly dividing cells, such as tumour or inflammatory cells, show altered metabolism that favours glycolysis to oxidative phosphorylation as energy source, even under aerobic conditions, a process called the Warburg effect.<sup>99,100</sup> This metabolic transformation promotes fatty acid synthesis and ensures availability of intermediates as building blocks for proliferating cells. Probably one of the key mediators of this reprogramming is the mTORC1-activated HIF-1α,<sup>101</sup> a transcription factor promoting expression of glycolytic enzymes, GLUT-1 and monocarboxylate transporter 4 (MCT4), involved in lactic acid transport.

A defect in the LKB1–AMPK pathway potentiates the risk of metabolic transformation of pre-neoplastic cells; hence, many tumours have inactive LKB1.<sup>102</sup> AMPK has been shown to negatively regulate the Warburg effect and tumour growth *in vivo*.<sup>103</sup> Metformin decreased HIF-1α mRNA and protein levels in a breast cancer model,<sup>98</sup> exhibiting an antiproliferative, anti-Warburg potential, probably via AMPK. Metformin also acted antimitotically by inhibiting expression of fatty acid synthase<sup>104</sup> and favouring fatty acid oxidation in cancer cells of the colon.<sup>105</sup>

The effect of metformin on cell metabolism and tumour growth is controversial. In pre-neoplastic cells with an intact AMPK axis, metformin can counteract the Warburg effect (that is, inhibit oxidative glycolysis).<sup>106</sup> However, in established tumours, as opposed to pre-neoplastic cells, the presence of LKB1 and AMPK might confer a survival advantage to tumour cells by protecting them against energetic stress.<sup>107</sup> It can even cause increased glycolytic flux under certain micro-environments, such as acidic pH;<sup>108</sup> therefore, AMPK activators could potentially be harmful. Conversely, absence of LKB1 or AMPK in established tumours makes the cancer cells selectively more vulnerable to depleted ATP incurred by metformin, as their ability to restore energy balance is impaired.<sup>109</sup>

### AMPK-independent metformin effects in cancer

Whilst growth factors regulate mTORC1 through the PI3K–AKT–TSC1–TSC2 axis, amino acids can activate mTORC1 signalling through the RAG family of GTPases (also called the Ras-related GTPases), independently of AMPK.<sup>110,111</sup> Following its activation by the Ragulator complex, the RAG GTPases recruit mTORC1 to the lysosomal surface, where it is activated by RHEB. Metformin can inhibit mTORC1 signalling by inactivating the Ragulator complex, thereby mimicking the effect of amino-acid withdrawal.<sup>89</sup> This mechanism of action, which is responsive to perturbations in energy status, may prove important in certain types of cancer<sup>110</sup> and, parallel to dietary energy restriction, in cancer prevention.<sup>112</sup>

Indirect effects
Metformin
↓ Body weight
↓ Inflammation
↓ Insulin resistance
↓ Glucose levels
↓ Insulin levels

Direct effects
Metformin
Insulin
↓ IGF-1 and insulin receptors
IRS-1
PI3K
AKT
Other upstream kinases
LKB1
CaMKK2
AMPK
Fatty acid synthesis
cMYC
DICER
p53
NF-κB
IL-6
ROS
ATM
Ragulator
RAG GTPases
RHEB
mTORC1
HIF-1α
Protein synthesis
Cell growth
Cell viability

Figure 4 | Proposed actions of metformin in cancer. The antitumour effect of metformin is probably a combination of indirect (systemic) and direct effects. Systemic influence is secondary to the effects of metformin on metabolism in insulin-sensitive target tissues. Metformin lowers systemic glucose and insulin levels, which decreases insulin-mediated tumour growth and progression. Possible anti-inflammatory effects may also reduce cancer risk. Metformin might inhibit mTORC1 through regulation at multiple levels. Low energy charge in metformin-treated cancer cells activates AMPK, which can restrain cell growth and proliferation. AMPK activates the tumour suppressor gene TSC2, resulting in inhibition of the mTORC1 activator RHEB. AMPK can directly phosphorylate and inhibit RAPTOR, a member of the mTORC1 complex. Metformin might also decrease signalling downstream of IGF-1–insulin receptors by lowering insulin levels and through AMPK-dependent phosphorylation of IRS-1. This action inhibits AKT and mTORC1 signalling. Moreover, AMPK has been suggested to hinder cancer cell growth through numerous other mechanisms, including activation of HIF-1α, p53, cMYC and DICER1, and suppression of fatty acid synthesis. AMPK may also be a mediator of an attenuated inflammatory feedback loop (NF-κB/IL-6 pathway), restraining malignant transformation. Metformin can inhibit mTORC1 also in an AMPK-independent manner via direct inactivation of the Ragulator complex, which results in inhibition of RAG GTPases and dissociation of mTORC1 from its activator RHEB. Other AMPK-independent effects include inhibition of the serine-protein kinase ATM and reduction of ROS levels, which are produced by mitochondrial complex I and confer mutagenesis risk. Abbreviations: AMPK, 5'-AMP-activated protein kinase; CaMKK2, Calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase 2; IGF-1, insulin-like growth factor 1; IRS-1, insulin receptor substrate 1; IL-6, interleukin 6; LKB1, liver kinase B1; mTORC1, mammalian target of rapamycin complex 1; NF-κB, nuclear factor κB; PI3K, phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase; ROS, reactive oxidative species; TSC2, tuberous sclerosis complex 2.

Through inhibition of mitochondrial complex I, metformin reduces production of reactive oxygen species, oxidative stress and DNA damage, therefore reducing the risk of mutagenesis. Variation in the glycaemic response to metformin in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus has been associated with the presence of common genetic variants near the ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM) gene locus. This observation suggests that metformin-dependent signalling involves ATM activation. ATM encodes a tumour-suppressor protein, a crucial component of the DNA-damage response network system that is required for DNA repair and cell-cycle control. ATM is mutated in ataxia telangiectasia, a neurodegenerative condition associated with a predisposition to cancer, insulin resistance and type 2 diabetes mellitus. Both AMPK-dependent and AMPK-independent mechanisms are probably involved in the ATM-mediated reparatory effect. Metformin, as a cellular stressor, activates reparatory processes, even in the absence of DNA damage, which might be protective against premalignant to malignant transformation.

Metformin combined with cytotoxic therapy
Multiple studies have looked into the antineoplastic potential of metformin when used in combination with cytotoxic therapies. Metformin has been reported to improve cancer responses to radiation therapy, probably via downregulation of the hyperactive PI3K–AKT–mTOR pathway. Moreover, metformin enhanced apoptosis induced by paclitaxel and cisplatin in endometrial cancer by repressing glyoxalase I expression through an undefined mechanism. However, metformin antagonized cisplatin-induced cytotoxicity in glioma, neuroblastoma, fibrosarcoma and leukaemia cell lines through an AMPK-independent activation of AKT. Thus, use of metformin in combination with chemotherapy drugs in cancer warrants a degree of caution.
Tyrosine kinase inhibitors reduce insulin–IGF-1 receptor signalling, therefore metformin is frequently used in combination with these agents to counter iatrogenic hyperglycaemia. The contribution of metformin to the antineoplastic success of this combination remains unclear.
In mouse xenograft cancer models, metformin selectively kills cancer stem cells, even at low concentrations, and prolongs tumour remission when combined with chemotherapy agents, probably through the regulation of inflammatory pathways (Box 2). Metformin is thought to inhibit cancerous transformation by attenuating the inflammatory feedback loop, a signalling cascade

Table 3 | Potential therapeutic targets—lessons learned from metformin-related metabolic studies

| Theoretical targets or compounds under investigation                                                                                                      | Insulin resistance and/or diabetes mellitus | Oncology |
|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------|----------|
| Potential renaissance of phenformin use (better absorbed and a probably more potent mitochondrial inhibitor than metformin; its adverse effect profile is better than that of most cytotoxic drugs<sup>129</sup>) | –                                          | ✓        |
| Short courses of high-dose metformin<sup>84</sup> (mechanism of action of high doses of metformin is unknown)                                              | –                                          | ✓        |
| Novel biguanides<br>New molecules that are better tolerated and have less adverse effects than current biguanides<br>Molecules less dependent on active transport than metformin and with more suitable pharmacokinetics (better absorbed in the gut, better absorbed in the target cells) | ✓                                          | ✓        |
| Molecules affecting mitochondrial respiratory chain<br>Tissue-selective (e.g. liver)<br>Different degree of energy stress<br>Different inhibitory effect on reactive oxygen species production          | ✓                                          | ✓        |
| Molecules targeting copper ion transport                                                                                                              | ✓                                          | ✓        |
| Metabolic inhibitors and targeted therapies based on tumour metabolic profiles (for example, DICER, c-MYC,<sup>98</sup> HIF-1α, MCT4, and MCT1,<sup>149</sup> GLUT-1, HKII, phosphoglycerate dehydrogenase, LDHA,<sup>150</sup> 6-phosphofructo-2-kinase (PFKFB3 isoform),<sup>151</sup> fatty acid synthase,<sup>152</sup> CPT1C<sup>153</sup>) | –                                          | ✓        |
| ‘P-site’ of adenylate cyclase<sup>21</sup>                                                                                                            | ✓                                          | –        |
| Other targets specific to glucagon signalling (e.g. glucagon receptor, α cells)<sup>154</sup>                                                          | ✓                                          | –        |
| New GLP-1 receptor agonists and DPP-4 inhibitors (to reduce plasma glucagon levels)                                                                     | ✓                                          | –        |
| Targeting abnormal metabolism linked to different G-protein coupled receptors (e.g. hybrid peptides acting through GIP, glucagon and GLP-1 receptors at the same time,<sup>155</sup> G-protein–coupled receptor 40 agonist<sup>156</sup>) | ✓                                          | –        |
| Other targets of insulin signalling (e.g. anti-IGF-1R antibodies or small molecule IGF-1R compounds<sup>96</sup>)                                        | ✓                                          | ✓        |
| Other AMPK activators and tissue specific AMPK activators                                                                                             | ✓                                          | ✓        |
| AMPK inhibitors (for cases where AMPK potentiates tumour metabolism)                                                                                  | –                                          | ✓        |
| Other mTOR inhibitors                                                                                                                                | –                                          | ✓        |
| Agents targeting appetite and obesity                                                                                                                 | ✓                                          | ✓        |
| Anti-inflammatory molecules                                                                                                                         | ✓                                          | ✓        |
| New chronotherapeutics (that is, modulators of insulin release to mimic cyclicity; targets against dysregulated circadian rhythms which may underlie insulin resistance, obesity and can have association with cancer; for example, CLOCK, BMAL1, PER, CRY) | ✓                                          | ✓        |
| Targeting complications of other treatments (e.g. steroids<sup>157</sup>)                                                                             | ✓                                          | ✓        |
| Combination therapies (for example, chemotherapeutic agents, other antidiabetics)                                                                      | ✓                                          | ✓        |

mediated by the transcription factor NF-κB and its downstream cytokine interleukin 6 (IL-6).<sup>122</sup> Interestingly, the inhibitory effect is more pronounced in cancer stem cells than noncancer stem cells, as the sensitivity of transformed cell lines to metformin is determined by the degree of immune-cell-mediated tumour inflammation, which is reflected by IL-6 levels.<sup>122</sup> How metformin inhibits NF-κB is unclear, but AMPK activation in the presence of a metabolic difference between cancer stem cells and noncancer stem cells may play a part.<sup>123</sup> The main systemic effect of metformin on cancer is via its beneficial effect on glucose metabolism, whereas the main direct effect is via LKB1 and AMPK. More research is needed to dissect the intersection between dysregulated metabolism and cancer and whether there is a benefit of using metformin as a single agent or in combination.

Future therapeutic directions

The AMP-binding P-site on adenylate cyclase has been proposed as a new therapeutic target in insulin resistance and type 2 diabetes mellitus.<sup>21</sup> Molecules that abrogate cAMP and PKA signalling would bypass the mitochondrial action of metformin and thus confer a pro-glycolytic effect without changes in energy charge and the resulting AMPK activation. The efficacy and safety of such molecules would need to be established. What about the risk of hypoglycaemia or pancreatic α-cell hyperplasia, as seen in glucagon knockout mice?<sup>57</sup> Could there be a risk of an undesirable pro-Warburg effect? Could such molecules affect different enzymatic isoforms of adenylate cyclase or be tissue-specific? How will specificity be established? Glucagon receptor is expressed in various tissues, and the cAMP–PKA pathway is involved in a plethora of signalling pathways, highlighting the need for a specific targeting strategy. Investigating this newly proposed pathway beyond hepatocytes is of interest, given that an upregulated, rather than down-regulated, cAMP–PKA pathway, as mediated by GLP-1, is deemed protective of myocardial infarct size.<sup>124</sup> Metformin-induced activation of AMPK also confers

cardioprotection;¹²⁴ however, other frequently prescribed drugs such as statins can activate PKA¹²⁵ and AMPK¹²⁶ in the heart. Interaction of various pathways and drugs and their contribution to the pleiotropic effects attributed to metformin will probably remain a topic of debate in the future. The knowledge gained from the molecular mechanisms of metformin action could lead to the development of novel therapies across multiple fields in medicine with more suitable pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic properties (Table 3).

### Conclusions

Metformin acts as a metabolic inhibitor and alters both whole-body and cellular energy metabolism. It is primarily used in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus, and its main mechanism of action in this disease setting is inhibition of hepatic gluconeogenesis. Metformin interacts with complex I in the mitochondrial electron transport chain, thereby lowering cellular ATP levels and causing AMP accumulation. AMP binds to the P-site of adenylate cyclase and inhibits its action in response to glucagon, thereby disrupting downstream cAMP–PKA signalling. As a result, the activity of enzymes of the gluconeogenic pathway is inhibited in favour of glycolysis. This mechanism is probably the main mode through which metformin lowers hepatic glucose output.

In addition, the reduction in energy charge leads to AMPK activation and downregulation of gluconeogenic gene expression. Although AMPK activation is dispensable for the glucose-lowering effect of metformin, it probably triggers important insulin-sensitizing and lipid-modulating mechanisms. Much of the regulatory components of this model of metformin action, as well as parameters that determine its kinetics (such as the rate of dissociation of AMP from the P-site of adenylate cyclase) and specificity remain undefined.

Laboratory evidence of the antimitotic action of metformin is promising, although results from epidemiological studies remain controversial.⁸⁰ The combination of tumour genetics, patient metabolic profile and the cellular microenvironment determine the antitumour effect of metformin treatment. Focussed use of metformin to specifically target metabolic differences between normal and abnormal signalling offers a vast, though challenging, therapeutic potential. The metabolic similarities between activated proinflammatory cells and cancer cells suggest that metabolic inhibitors may modulate immune cells. The immune system could thus be a mediator of some of the pleiotropic benefits of metformin. Many details of metformin action remain to be discovered, and the risk of harm must be considered when designing new metformin-based therapies. Hopefully, the knowledge gained from dissecting the pathways that metformin acts on will propel the development of multiple novel therapies.

#### Review criteria

A PubMed database search was performed using the following terms: “metformin”, “gluconeogenesis”, “glycogenolysis”, “glucagon”, “inflammation”, “cancer”, “AMPK”, “cAMP”, “mitochondrion”, “GLP-1”, “liver”, “phenformin”, and “hypoglycaemia”. No restriction was placed on the year the paper was published. However, due to the sheer volume of publications relating to this topic, spreading over decades, more weight was given to original articles, meta-analysis and reviews published in the last 5 years. The references given in selected papers were scrutinised. Manuscripts written in English, French, Spanish and Czech were considered.

1. Bailey, C. J. & Day, C. Traditional plant medicines as treatments for diabetes. *Diabetes Care* **12**, 553–564 (1989).
2. Cicero, A. F., Tartagni, E. & Ertek, S. Metformin and its clinical use: new insights for an old drug in clinical practice. *Arch. Med. Sci.* **8**, 907–917 (2012).
3. Salpeter, S. R., Buckley, N. S., Kahn, J. A. & Salpeter, E. E. Meta-analysis: metformin treatment in persons at risk for diabetes mellitus. *Am. J. Med.* **121**, 149–157 (2008).
4. Glueck, C. J. *et al.* Metformin reduces weight, centripetal obesity, insulin, leptin, and low-density lipoprotein cholesterol in nondiabetic, morbidly obese subjects with body mass index greater than 30. *Metabolism* **50**, 856–861 (2001).
5. Gokcel, A. *et al.* Evaluation of the safety and efficacy of sibutramine, orlistat and metformin in the treatment of obesity. *Diabetes Obes. Metab.* **4**, 49–55 (2002).
6. Kita, Y. *et al.* Metformin prevents and reverses inflammation in a non-diabetic mouse model of nonalcoholic steatohepatitis. *PLoS ONE* **7**, e43056 (2012).
7. Andrews, M., Soto, N. & Arredondo, M. Effect of metformin on the expression of tumor necrosis factor-α, Toll like receptors 2/4 and C reactive protein in obese type-2 diabetic patients [Spanish]. *Rev. Med. Chil.* **140**, 1377–1382 (2012).
8. Nath, N. *et al.* Metformin attenuated the autoimmune disease of the central nervous system in animal models of multiple sclerosis. *J. Immunol.* **182**, 8005–8014 (2009).
9. Giovannucci, E. *et al.* Diabetes and cancer: a consensus report. *Diabetes Care* **33**, 1674–1685 (2010).
10. Selvin, E. *et al.* Cardiovascular outcomes in trials of oral diabetes medications: a systematic review. *Arch. Intern. Med.* **168**, 2070–2080 (2008).
11. Boussageon, R. *et al.* Reappraisal of metformin efficacy in the treatment of type 2 diabetes: a meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials. *PLoS Med.* **9**, e1001204 (2012).
12. Hemmingsen, B. *et al.* Comparison of metformin and insulin versus insulin alone for type 2 diabetes: systematic review of randomised clinical trials with meta-analyses and trial sequential analyses. *Br. Med. J.* **344**, e1771 (2012).
13. Shaw, R. J. *et al.* The kinase LKB1 mediates glucose homeostasis in liver and therapeutic effects of metformin. *Science* **310**, 1642–1646 (2005).
14. McIntyre, H. D. *et al.* Metformin increases insulin sensitivity and basal glucose clearance in type 2 (non-insulin dependent) diabetes mellitus. *Aust. NZ J. Med.* **21**, 714–719 (1991).
15. Czyzyk, A., Tawecki, J., Sadowski, J., Ponikowska, I. & Szczepanik, Z. Effect of biguanides on intestinal absorption of glucose. *Diabetes* **17**, 492–498 (1968).
16. Hermann, L. S. Metformin: a review of its pharmacological properties and therapeutic use. *Diabetes Metab.* **5**, 233–245 (1979).
17. Shitara, Y. *et al.* Role of organic cation/carnitine transporter 1 in uptake of phenformin and inhibitory effect on complex I respiration in mitochondria. *Toxicol. Sci.* **132**, 32–42 (2013).
18. Nies, A. T., Koepsell, H., Damme, K. & Schwab, M. Organic cation transporters (OCTs, MATEs), *in vitro* and *in vivo* evidence for the importance in drug therapy. *Handb. Exp. Pharmacol.* **201**, 105–167 (2011).
19. Gunton, J. E., Delhanty, P. J., Takahashi, S. & Baxter, R. C. Metformin rapidly increases insulin receptor activation in human liver and signals preferentially through insulin-receptor substrate-2. *J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab.* **88**, 1323–1332 (2003).
20. Bailey, C. J. & Turner, R. C. Metformin. *N. Engl. J. Med.* **334**, 574–579 (1996).
21. Miller, R. A. *et al.* Biguanides suppress hepatic glucagon signalling by decreasing production of cyclic AMP. *Nature* **494**, 256–260 (2013).
22. Alengrin, F., Grossi, G., Canivet, B. & Dolais-Kitabgi, J. Inhibitory effects of metformin on insulin and glucagon action in rat hepatocytes involve post-receptor alterations. *Diabetes Metab.* **13**, 591–597 (1987).
23. Fulgencio, J. P., Kohl, C., Girard, J. & Pegorier, J. P. Effect of metformin on fatty acid and glucose metabolism in freshly isolated hepatocytes and on specific gene expression in

cultured hepatocytes. *Biochem. Pharmacol.* 62, 439–446 (2001).

24. Consoli, A. & Nurjhan, N. Contribution of gluconeogenesis to overall glucose output in diabetic and nondiabetic men. *Ann. Med.* 22, 191–195 (1990).

25. Stumvoll, M., Nurjhan, N., Perriello, G., Dailey, G. & Gerich, J. E. Metabolic effects of metformin in non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus. *N. Engl. J. Med.* 333, 550–554 (1995).

26. Lutz, T. A., Estermann, A., Haag, S. & Scharrer, E. Depolarization of the liver cell membrane by metformin. *Biochim. Biophys. Acta* 1513, 176–184 (2001).

27. Otto, M., Breinholt, J. & Westergaard, N. Metformin inhibits glycogen synthesis and gluconeogenesis in cultured rat hepatocytes. *Diabetes Obes. Metab.* 5, 189–194 (2003).

28. Fischer, Y., Thomas, J., Rosen, P. & Kammermeier, H. Action of metformin on glucose transport and glucose transporter GLUT1 and GLUT4 in heart muscle cells from healthy and diabetic rats. *Endocrinology* 136, 412–420 (1995).

29. Fantus, I. G. & Brosseau, R. Mechanism of action of metformin: insulin receptor and postreceptor effects *in vitro* and *in vivo*. *J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab.* 63, 898–905 (1986).

30. Stith, B. J. *et al.* The antidiabetic drug metformin elevates receptor tyrosine kinase activity and inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate mass in Xenopus oocytes. *Endocrinology* 137, 2990–2999 (1996).

31. Prager, R. & Schernthaner, G. Insulin receptor binding to monocytes, insulin secretion, and glucose tolerance following metformin treatment. Results of a double-blind cross-over study in type II diabetics. *Diabetes* 32, 1083–1086 (1983).

32. Jackson, R. A. *et al.* Mechanism of metformin action in non-insulin-dependent diabetes. *Diabetes* 36, 632–640 (1987).

33. Giugliano, D. *et al.* Metformin improves glucose, lipid metabolism, and reduces blood pressure in hypertensive, obese women. *Diabetes Care* 16, 1387–1390 (1993).

34. United Kingdom Prospective Diabetes Study (UKPDS). 13: Relative efficacy of randomly allocated diet, sulphonylurea, insulin, or metformin in patients with newly diagnosed non-insulin dependent diabetes followed for three years. *Br. Med. J.* 310, 83–88 (1995).

35. Fruehwald-Schultes, B. *et al.* Metformin does not adversely affect hormonal and symptomatic responses to recurrent hypoglycemia. *J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab.* 86, 4187–4192 (2001).

36. Cho, Y. M. & Kieffer, T. J. New aspects of an old drug: metformin as a glucagon-like peptide 1 (GLP-1) enhancer and sensitiser. *Diabetologia* 54, 219–222 (2011).

37. Maida, A., Lamont, B. J., Cao, X. & Drucker, D. J. Metformin regulates the incretin receptor axis via a pathway dependent on peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-α in mice. *Diabetologia* 54, 339–349 (2011).

38. Lenhard, J. M., Croom, D. K. & Minnick, D. T. Reduced serum dipeptidyl peptidase-IV after metformin and pioglitazone treatments. *Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun.* 324, 92–97 (2004).

39. Lindsay, J. R. *et al.* Inhibition of dipeptidyl peptidase IV activity by oral metformin in type 2 diabetes. *Diabet. Med.* 22, 654–657 (2005).

40. Yasuda, N. *et al.* Enhanced secretion of glucagon-like peptide 1 by biguanide compounds. *Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun.* 298, 779–784 (2002).

41. Goldstein, B. J., Feinglos, M. N., Lunceford, J. K., Johnson, J. & Williams-Herman, D. E. Effect of initial combination therapy with sitagliptin, a

dipeptidyl peptidase-4 inhibitor, and metformin on glycemic control in patients with type 2 diabetes. *Diabetes Care* 30, 1979–1987 (2007).

42. Defronzo, R. A. & Abdul-Ghani, M. A. Preservation of β-cell function: the key to diabetes prevention. *J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab.* 96, 2354–2366 (2011).

43. Detaille, D., Guigas, B., Leverve, X., Wiernsperger, N. & Devos, P. Obligatory role of membrane events in the regulatory effect of metformin on the respiratory chain function. *Biochem. Pharmacol.* 63, 1259–1272 (2002).

44. El-Mir, M. Y. *et al.* Dimethylbiguanide inhibits cell respiration via an indirect effect targeted on the respiratory chain complex I. *J. Biol. Chem.* 275, 223–228 (2000).

45. Owen, M. R., Doran, E. & Halestrap, A. P. Evidence that metformin exerts its anti-diabetic effects through inhibition of complex 1 of the mitochondrial respiratory chain. *Biochem. J.* 348 (Pt 3), 607–614 (2000).

46. Miller, R. A. & Birnbaum, M. J. An energetic tale of AMPK-independent effects of metformin. *J. Clin. Invest.* 120, 2267–2270 (2010).

47. Zhou, G. *et al.* Role of AMP-activated protein kinase in mechanism of metformin action. *J. Clin. Invest.* 108, 1167–1174 (2001).

48. Logie, L. *et al.* Cellular responses to the metal-binding properties of metformin. *Diabetes* 61, 1423–1433 (2012).

49. Ouyang, J., Parakhia, R. A. & Ochs, R. S. Metformin activates AMP kinase through inhibition of AMP deaminase. *J. Biol. Chem.* 286, 1–11 (2011).

50. Muller, S. *et al.* Action of metformin on erythrocyte membrane fluidity *in vitro* and *in vivo*. *Eur. J. Pharmacol.* 337, 103–110 (1997).

51. Quesada, I., Tudori, E., Ripoll, C. & Nadal, A. Physiology of the pancreatic α-cell and glucagon secretion: role in glucose homeostasis and diabetes. *J. Endocrinol.* 199, 5–19 (2008).

52. Herzig, S. *et al.* CREB regulates hepatic gluconeogenesis through the coactivator PGC-1. *Nature* 413, 179–183 (2001).

53. Yoon, J. C. *et al.* Control of hepatic gluconeogenesis through the transcriptional coactivator PGC-1. *Nature* 413, 131–138 (2001).

54. Altarejos, J. Y. & Montminy, M. CREB and the CRTC co-activators: sensors for hormonal and metabolic signals. *Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol.* 12, 141–151 (2011).

55. Wang, Y. *et al.* Inositol-1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor regulates hepatic gluconeogenesis in fasting and diabetes. *Nature* 485, 128–132 (2012).

56. Johnson, R. A., Yeung, S. M., Stubner, D., Bushfield, M. & Shoshani, I. Cation and structural requirements for P site-mediated inhibition of adenylate cyclase. *Mol. Pharmacol.* 35, 681–688 (1989).

57. Gelling, R. W. *et al.* Lower blood glucose, hyperglucagonemia, and pancreatic α cell hyperplasia in glucagon receptor knockout mice. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* 100, 1438–1443 (2003).

58. Hawley, S. A., Gadalla, A. E., Olsen, G. S. & Hardie, D. G. The antidiabetic drug metformin activates the AMP-activated protein kinase cascade via an adenine nucleotide-independent mechanism. *Diabetes* 51, 2420–2425 (2002).

59. Fryer, L. G., Parbu-Patel, A. & Carling, D. The antidiabetic drugs rosiglitazone and metformin stimulate AMP-activated protein kinase through distinct signaling pathways. *J. Biol. Chem.* 277, 25226–25232 (2002).

60. Hawley, S. A. *et al.* Calmodulin-dependent protein kinase kinase-β is an alternative upstream kinase for AMP-activated protein kinase. *Cell Metab.* 2, 9–19 (2005).

61. Zang, M. *et al.* AMP-activated protein kinase is required for the lipid-lowering effect of metformin in insulin-resistant human HepG2 cells. *J. Biol. Chem.* 279, 47898–47905 (2004).

62. Lochhead, P. A., Salt, I. P., Walker, K. S., Hardie, D. G. & Sutherland, C. 5-aminoimidazole-4-carboxamide riboside mimics the effects of insulin on the expression of the 2 key gluconeogenic genes PEPCK and glucose-6-phosphatase. *Diabetes* 49, 896–903 (2000).

63. Foretz, M. *et al.* Short-term overexpression of a constitutively active form of AMP-activated protein kinase in the liver leads to mild hypoglycemia and fatty liver. *Diabetes* 54, 1331–1339 (2005).

64. He, L. *et al.* Metformin and insulin suppress hepatic gluconeogenesis through phosphorylation of CREB binding protein. *Cell* 137, 635–646 (2009).

65. Lee, J. M. *et al.* AMPK-dependent repression of hepatic gluconeogenesis via disruption of CREB-CRTC2 complex by orphan nuclear receptor small heterodimer partner. *J. Biol. Chem.* 285, 32182–32191 (2010).

66. Caton, P. W. *et al.* Metformin suppresses hepatic gluconeogenesis through induction of SIRT1 and GCN5. *J. Endocrinol.* 205, 97–106 (2010).

67. Samuel, V. T. *et al.* Fasting hyperglycemia is not associated with increased expression of PEPCK or G6Pc in patients with Type 2 diabetes. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA.* 106, 12121–12126 (2009).

68. Burgess, S. C. *et al.* Cytosolic phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase does not solely control the rate of hepatic gluconeogenesis in the intact mouse liver. *Cell Metab.* 5, 313–320 (2007).

69. Foretz, M. *et al.* Metformin inhibits hepatic gluconeogenesis in mice independently of the LKB1/AMPK pathway via a decrease in hepatic energy state. *J. Clin. Invest.* 120, 2355–2369 (2010).

70. Ros, S. & Schulze, A. Balancing glycolytic flux: the role of 6-phosphofructo-2-kinase/fructose 2,6-bisphosphatases in cancer metabolism. *Cancer Metab.* 1, 8 (2013).

71. Collier, C. A., Bruce, C. R., Smith, A. C., Lopaschuk, G. & Dyck, D. J. Metformin counters the insulin-induced suppression of fatty acid oxidation and stimulation of triacylglycerol storage in rodent skeletal muscle. *Am. J. Physiol. Endocrinol. Metab.* 291, E182–E189 (2006).

72. Dresner, A. *et al.* Effects of free fatty acids on glucose transport and IRS-1-associated phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase activity. *J. Clin. Invest.* 103, 253–259 (1999).

73. Patane, G. *et al.* Metformin restores insulin secretion altered by chronic exposure to free fatty acids or high glucose: a direct metformin effect on pancreatic β-cells. *Diabetes* 49, 735–740 (2000).

74. Vincent, M. F., Marangos, P. J., Gruber, H. E. & Van den Berghe, G. Inhibition by AICA riboside of gluconeogenesis in isolated rat hepatocytes. *Diabetes* 40, 1259–1266 (1991).

75. Evans, J. M., Donnelly, L. A., Emslie-Smith, A. M., Alessi, D. R. & Morris, A. D. Metformin and reduced risk of cancer in diabetic patients. *Br. Med. J.* 330, 1304–1305 (2005).

76. U.S. National Library of Medicine. *ClinicalTrials.gov* [online] (2013).

77. Lee, J. H. *et al.* The effects of metformin on the survival of colorectal cancer patients with diabetes mellitus. *Int. J. Cancer* 131, 752–759 (2012).

78. He, X. *et al.* Metformin and thiazolidinediones are associated with improved breast cancer-specific

survival of diabetic women with HER2+ breast cancer. Ann. Oncol. 23, 1771–1780 (2012).

79. Lega, I. C. et al. Association Between Metformin Therapy and Mortality After Breast Cancer: A Population-Based Study. Diabetes Care 36, 3018–3026 (2013).

80. Suissa, S. & Azoulay, L. Metformin and the risk of cancer: time-related biases in observational studies. Diabetes Care 35, 2665–2673 (2012).

81. Niraula, S. et al. Influence of concurrent medications on outcomes of men with prostate cancer included in the TAX 327 study. Can. Urol. Assoc. J. 7, E74–E81 (2013).

82. Hosono, K. et al. Metformin suppresses colorectal aberrant crypt foci in a short-term clinical trial. Cancer Prev. Res. (Phila.) 3, 1077–1083 (2010).

83. Hadad, S. et al. Evidence for biological effects of metformin in operable breast cancer: a pre-operative, window-of-opportunity, randomized trial. Breast Cancer Res. Treat. 128, 783–794 (2011).

84. Pollak, M. N. Investigating metformin for cancer prevention and treatment: the end of the beginning. Cancer Discov. 2, 778–790 (2012).

85. Emami, R. A., Fisel, P., Nies, A. T., Schaeffeler, E. & Schwab, M. Metformin and cancer: from the old medicine cabinet to pharmacological pitfalls and prospects. Trends Pharmacol. Sci. 34, 126–135 (2013).

86. Nies, A. T., Damme, K., Schaeffeler, E. & Schwab, M. Multidrug and toxin extrusion proteins as transporters of antimicrobial drugs. Expert Opin. Drug Metab. Toxicol. 8, 1565–1577 (2012).

87. Gale, E. A. Insulin glargine and cancer: another side to the story? Lancet 374, 521 (2009).

88. Tomimoto, A. et al. Metformin suppresses intestinal polyp growth in ApcMin/+ mice. Cancer Sci. 99, 2136–2141 (2008).

89. Pierotti, M. A. et al. Targeting metabolism for cancer treatment and prevention: metformin, an old drug with multi-faceted effects. Oncogene 32, 1475–1487 (2013).

90. Bar-Peled, L., Schweitzer, L. D., Zoncu, R. & Sabatini, D. M. Ragulator is a GEF for the rag GTPases that signal amino acid levels to mTORC1. Cell 150, 1196–1208 (2012).

91. Ece, H. et al. Use of oral antidiabetic drugs (metformin and pioglitazone) in diabetic patients with breast cancer: how does it effect serum Hif-1 α and 80hdg levels? Asian Pac. J. Cancer Prev. 13, 5143–5148 (2012).

92. Wang, Y. et al. Effects of antidiabetic drug metformin on human breast carcinoma cells with different estrogen receptor expressing in vitro. Xi. Bao. Yu Fen. Zi. Mian. Yi. Xue. Za Zhi. 27, 253–256 (2011).

93. Inoki, K., Li, Y., Zhu, T., Wu, J. & Guan, K. L. TSC2 is phosphorylated and inhibited by Akt and suppresses mTOR signalling. Nat. Cell Biol. 4, 648–657 (2002).

94. Gwinn, D. M. et al. AMPK phosphorylation of raptor mediates a metabolic checkpoint. Mol. Cell 30, 214–226 (2008).

95. Ning, J. & Clemmons, D. R. AMP-activated protein kinase inhibits IGFI signaling and protein synthesis in vascular smooth muscle cells via stimulation of insulin receptor substrate 1 S794 and tuberous sclerosis 2 S1345 phosphorylation. Mol. Endocrinol. 24, 1218–1229 (2010).

96. Vazquez-Martin, A., Oliveras-Ferraros, C., Del, B. S., Martin-Castillo, B. & Menendez, J. A. If mammalian target of metformin indirectly is mammalian target of rapamycin, then the insulin-like growth factor-1 receptor axis will audit the efficacy of metformin in cancer clinical trials. J. Clin. Oncol. 27, e207–e209 (2009).

97. Liang, J. et al. The energy sensing LKB1-AMPK pathway regulates p27(kip1) phosphorylation mediating the decision to enter autophagy or apoptosis. Nat. Cell Biol. 9, 218–224 (2007).

98. Blandino, G. et al. Metformin elicits anticancer effects through the sequential modulation of DICER and c-MYC. Nat. Commun. 3, 865 (2012).

99. Dandapani, M. & Hardie, D. G. AMPK: opposing the metabolic changes in both tumour cells and inflammatory cells? Biochem. Soc. Trans. 41, 687–693 (2013).

100. Warburg, O. Metabolism of tumours. Biochem. Z. 142, 317–333 (1923).

101. Thomas, G. V. et al. Hypoxia-inducible factor determines sensitivity to inhibitors of mTOR in kidney cancer. Nat. Med. 12, 122–127 (2006).

102. Hardie, D. G. & Alessi, D. R. LKB1 and AMPK and the cancer-metabolism link—ten years after. BMC. Biol. 11, 36 (2013).

103. Faubert, B. et al. AMPK is a negative regulator of the Warburg effect and suppresses tumor growth in vivo. Cell Metab. 17, 113–124 (2013).

104. Algire, C., Amrein, L., Zakikhani, M., Panasci, L. & Pollak, M. Metformin blocks the stimulative effect of a high-energy diet on colon carcinoma growth in vivo and is associated with reduced expression of fatty acid synthase. Endocr. Relat. Cancer 17, 351–360 (2010).

105. Buzzai, M. et al. Systemic treatment with the antidiabetic drug metformin selectively impairs p53-deficient tumor cell growth. Cancer Res. 67, 6745–6752 (2007).

106. Huang, X. et al. Important role of the LKB1-AMPK pathway in suppressing tumorigenesis in PTEN-deficient mice. Biochem. J. 412, 211–221 (2008).

107. Jeon, S. M., Chandel, N. S. & Hay, N. AMPK regulates NADPH homeostasis to promote tumour cell survival during energy stress. Nature 485, 661–665 (2012).

108. Mendoza, E. E. et al. Control of glycolytic flux by AMP-activated protein kinase in tumor cells adapted to low pH. Transl. Oncol. 5, 208–216 (2012).

109. Algire, C. et al. Diet and tumor LKB1 expression interact to determine sensitivity to anti-neoplastic effects of metformin in vivo. Oncogene 30, 1174–1182 (2011).

110. Kalender, A. et al. Metformin, independent of AMPK, inhibits mTORC1 in a rag GTPase-dependent manner. Cell Metab. 11, 390–401 (2010).

111. Efeyan, A. et al. Regulation of mTORC1 by the Rag GTPases is necessary for neonatal autophagy and survival. Nature 493, 679–683 (2013).

112. Zhu, Z., Jiang, W., Thompson, M. D., McGinley, J. N. & Thompson, H. J. Metformin as an energy restriction mimetic agent for breast cancer prevention. J. Carcinog. 10, 17 (2011).

113. Algire, C. et al. Metformin reduces endogenous reactive oxygen species and associated DNA damage. Cancer Prev. Res. (Phila.) 5, 536–543 (2012).

114. Zhou, K. et al. Common variants near ATM are associated with glycemic response to metformin in type 2 diabetes. Nat. Genet. 43, 117–120 (2011).

115. Vazquez-Martin, A., Oliveras-Ferraros, C., Cufi, S., Martin-Castillo, B. & Menendez, J. A. Metformin activates an ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM)/Chk2-regulated DNA damage-like response. Cell Cycle 10, 1499–1501 (2011).

116. Chen, G., Xu, S., Renko, K. & Derwahl, M. Metformin inhibits growth of thyroid carcinoma cells, suppresses self-renewal of derived cancer stem cells, and potentiates the effect of

117. Song, C. W. et al. Metformin kills and radiosensitizes cancer cells and preferentially kills cancer stem cells. Sci. Rep. 2, 362 (2012).

118. Dong, L. et al. Metformin sensitizes endometrial cancer cells to chemotherapy by repressing glyoxalase I expression. J. Obstet. Gynaecol. Res. 38, 1077–1085 (2012).

119. Janjetovic, K. et al. Metformin reduces cisplatin-mediated apoptotic death of cancer cells through AMPK-independent activation of Akt. Eur. J. Pharmacol. 651, 41–50 (2011).

120. Iliopoulos, D., Hirsch, H. A. & Struhl, K. Metformin decreases the dose of chemotherapy for prolonging tumor remission in mouse xenografts involving multiple cancer cell types. Cancer Res. 71, 3196–3201 (2011).

121. Hirsch, H. A., Iliopoulos, D., Tsichlis, P. N. & Struhl, K. Metformin selectively targets cancer stem cells, and acts together with chemotherapy to block tumor growth and prolong remission. Cancer Res. 69, 7507–7511 (2009).

122. Hirsch, H. A., Iliopoulos, D. & Struhl, K. Metformin inhibits the inflammatory response associated with cellular transformation and cancer stem cell growth. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 110, 972–977 (2013).

123. Anastasiou, D. Metformin: a case of divide and conquer. Breast Cancer Res. 15, 306 (2013).

124. Ye, Y., Perez-Polo, J. R., Aguilar, D. & Birnbaum, Y. The potential effects of anti-diabetic medications on myocardial ischemia-reperfusion injury. Basic Res. Cardiol. 106, 925–952 (2011).

125. Manickavasagam, S. et al. The cardioprotective effect of a statin and cilostazol combination: relationship to Akt and endothelial nitric oxide synthase activation. Cardiovasc. Drugs Ther. 21, 321–330 (2007).

126. Hermida, N. et al. HMGCoA reductase inhibition reverses myocardial fibrosis and diastolic dysfunction through AMP-activated protein kinase activation in a mouse model of metabolic syndrome. Cardiovasc. Res. 99, 44–54 (2013).

127. Goodarzi, M. O. & Bryer-Ash, M. Metformin revisited: re-evaluation of its properties and role in the pharmacopoeia of modern antidiabetic agents. Diabetes Obes. Metab. 7, 654–665 (2005).

128. Sogame, Y., Kitamura, A., Yabuki, M. & Komuro, S. A comparison of uptake of metformin and phenformin mediated by hOCT1 in human hepatocytes. Biopharm. Drug Dispos. 30, 476–484 (2009).

129. Segal, E. D. et al. Relevance of the OCT1 transporter to the antineoplastic effect of biguanides. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 414, 694–699 (2011).

130. Fasshauer, M., Paschke, R. & Stumvoll, M. Adiponectin, obesity, and cardiovascular disease. Biochimie 86, 779–784 (2004).

131. Sogame, Y., Kitamura, A., Yabuki, M., Komuro, S. & Takano, M. Transport of biguanides by human organic cation transporter OCT2. Biomed. Pharmacother. 67, 425–430 (2013).

132. Gan, S. C., Barr, J., Arieff, A. I. & Pearl, R. G. Biguanide-associated lactic acidosis. Case report and review of the literature. Arch. Intern. Med. 152, 2333–2336 (1992).

133. Lemke, T. L. & Williams, D. A. Foye’s Principles of Medicinal Chemistry. 5th edn (Lippincott, Williams and Wilkins, 1995).

134. electronic Medicines Compendium (eMC). SPC Glucophage 500mg and 850mg film coated tablets [online], http://www.medicines.org.uk/emc/medicine/1043 (2010).

135. Luft, D., Schmulling, R. M. & Eggstein, M. Lactic acidosis in biguanide-treated diabetics:

REVIEWS

136. Kajbaf, F., Arnouts, P., de Broe, M. & Lalau, J. D. Metformin therapy and kidney disease: a review of guidelines and proposals for metformin withdrawal around the world. *Pharmacoepidemiol. Drug Saf.* **22**, 1027–1035 (2013).

137. Brown, J. B., Pedula, K., Barzilay, J., Herson, M. K. & Latare, P. Lactic acidosis rates in type 2 diabetes. *Diabetes Care* **21**, 1659–1663 (1998).

138. UKPDS. Effect of intensive blood-glucose control with metformin on complications in overweight patients with type 2 diabetes (UKPDS 34). UK Prospective Diabetes Study (UKPDS) Group. *Lancet* **352**, 854–865 (1998).

139. Cubeddu, L. X. *et al.* Effects of metformin on intestinal 5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT) release and on 5-HT3 receptors. *Naunyn Schmiedeburgs Arch. Pharmacol.* **361**, 85–91 (2000).

140. Donnelly, L. A., Morris, A. D. & Pearson, E. R. Adherence in patients transferred from immediate release metformin to a sustained release formulation: a population-based study. *Diabetes Obes. Metab.* **11**, 338–342 (2009).

141. Appleyard, M. V. *et al.* Phenformin as prophylaxis and therapy in breast cancer xenografts. *Br. J. Cancer* **106**, 1117–1122 (2012).

142. Dilman, V. M. *et al.* Metabolic immunodepression and metabolic immunotherapy: an attempt of improvement in immunologic response in breast cancer patients by correction of metabolic disturbances. *Oncology* **39**, 13–19 (1982).

143. Pollak, M. Potential applications for biguanides in oncology. *J. Clin. Invest.* **123**, 3693–3700 (2013).

144. Tzvetkov, M. V. *et al.* The effects of genetic polymorphisms in the organic cation transporters OCT1, OCT2, and OCT3 on the renal clearance of metformin. *Clin. Pharmacol. Ther.* **86**, 299–306 (2009).

145. Chen, L. *et al.* Role of organic cation transporter 3 (SLC22A3) and its missense variants in the pharmacologic action of metformin. *Pharmacogenet. Genomics* **20**, 687–699 (2010).

146. Nakamichi, N. *et al.* Involvement of carnitine/organic cation transporter OCTN1/SLC22A4 in gastrointestinal absorption of metformin. *J. Pharmacol. Sci.* **102**, 3407–3417 (2013).

147. Becker, M. L. *et al.* Genetic variation in the multidrug and toxin extrusion 1 transporter protein influences the glucose-lowering effect of metformin in patients with diabetes: a preliminary study. *Diabetes* **58**, 745–749 (2009).

148. Zhou, M., Xia, L. & Wang, J. Metformin transport by a newly cloned proton-stimulated organic cation transporter (plasma membrane monoamine transporter) expressed in human intestine. *Drug Metab. Dispos.* **35**, 1956–1962 (2007).

149. Morris, J. C. *et al.* Targeting hypoxic tumor cell viability with carbohydrate-based carbonic anhydrase IX and XII inhibitors. *J. Med. Chem.* **54**, 6905–6918 (2011).

150. Hamanaka, R. B. & Chandel, N. S. Targeting glucose metabolism for cancer therapy. *J. Exp. Med.* **209**, 211–215 (2012).

151. Clem, B. F. *et al.* Targeting 6-Phosphofructo-2-Kinase (PFKFB3) as a Therapeutic Strategy against Cancer. *Mol. Cancer Ther.* **12**, 1461–1470 (2013).

152. Zhou, W. *et al.* Fatty acid synthase inhibition triggers apoptosis during S phase in human cancer cells. *Cancer Res.* **63**, 7330–7337 (2003).

153. Zaugg, K. *et al.* Carnitine palmitoyltransferase 1C promotes cell survival and tumor growth under conditions of metabolic stress. *Genes Dev.* **25**, 1041–1051 (2011).

154. D’Alessio, D. The role of dysregulated glucagon secretion in type 2 diabetes. *Diabetes Obes. Metab.* **13** (Suppl. 1), 126–132 (2011).

155. Bhat, V. K., Kerr, B. D., Flatt, P. R. & Gault, V. A. A novel GLP-oxyntomodulin hybrid peptide acting through GLP, glucagon and GLP-1 receptors exhibits weight reducing and anti-diabetic properties. *Biochem. Pharmacol.* **85**, 1655–1662 (2013).

156. Ou, H. Y. *et al.* Multiple mechanisms of GW-9508, a selective G protein-coupled receptor 40 agonist, in the regulation of glucose homeostasis and insulin sensitivity. *Am. J. Physiol. Endocrinol. Metab.* **304**, E668–E676 (2013).

157. Christ-Crain, M. *et al.* AMP-activated protein kinase mediates glucocorticoid-induced metabolic changes: a novel mechanism in Cushing’s syndrome. *FASEB J.* **22**, 1672–1683 (2008).

158. Lv, W. S. *et al.* The effect of metformin on food intake and its potential role in hypothalamic regulation in obese diabetic rats. *Brain Res.* **1444**, 11–19 (2012).

159. Stevanovic, D. *et al.* Intracerebroventricular administration of metformin inhibits ghrelin-induced Hypothalamic AMP-kinase signalling and food intake. *Neuroendocrinol.* **96**, 24–31 (2012).

160. Yang, Y., Atasoy, D., Su, H. H. & Sternson, S. M. Hunger states switch a flip-flop memory circuit via a synaptic AMPK-dependent positive feedback loop. *Cell* **146**, 992–1003 (2011).

161. Seo, S., Ju, S., Chung, H., Lee, D. & Park, S. Acute effects of glucagon-like peptide-1 on hypothalamic neuropeptide and AMP activated kinase expression in fasted rats. *Endocr. J.* **55**, 867–874 (2008).

162. Andrews, Z. B. *et al.* UCP2 mediates ghrelin’s action on NPY/AgRP neurons by lowering free radicals. *Nature* **454**, 846–851 (2008).

163. Kola, B. *et al.* Cannabinoids and ghrelin have both central and peripheral metabolic and cardiac effects via AMP-activated protein kinase. *J. Biol. Chem.* **280**, 25196–25201 (2005).

164. Chau-Van, C., Gamba, M., Salvi, R., Gaillard, R. C. & Pralong, F. P. Metformin inhibits adenosine 5'-monophosphate-activated kinase activation and prevents increases in neuropeptide Y expression in cultured hypothalamic neurons. *Endocrinology* **148**, 507–511 (2007).

165. Lee, C. K. *et al.* Intracerebroventricular injection of metformin induces anorexia in rats. *Diabetes Metab. J.* **36**, 293–299 (2012).

166. Hermann, L. S. *et al.* Therapeutic comparison of metformin and sulfonylurea, alone and in various combinations. A double-blind controlled study. *Diabetes Care* **17**, 1100–1109 (1994).

167. Chu, N. V. *et al.* Differential effects of metformin and troglitazone on cardiovascular risk factors in patients with type 2 diabetes. *Diabetes Care* **25**, 542–549 (2002).

168. Gomez-Diaz, R. A. *et al.* Metformin decreases plasma resistin concentrations in pediatric patients with impaired glucose tolerance: a placebo-controlled randomized clinical trial. *Metabolism* **61**, 1247–1255 (2012).

169. Singh, S., Akhtar, N. & Ahmad, J. Plasma adiponectin levels in women with polycystic ovary syndrome: impact of metformin treatment in a case-control study. *Diabetes Metab. Syndr.* **6**, 207–211 (2012).

170. Fanghanel, G. *et al.* Effects of metformin on fibrinogen levels in obese patients with type 2 diabetes. *Rev. Invest. Clin.* **50**, 389–394 (1998).

171. Chakrabarti, R., Hocking, E. D. & Fearnley, G. R. Fibrinolytic effect of metformin in coronary-artery disease. *Lancet* **2**, 256–259 (1965).

172. Nagi, D. K. & Yudkin, J. S. Effects of metformin on insulin resistance, risk factors for cardiovascular disease, and plasminogen activator inhibitor in NIDDM subjects. A study of two ethnic groups. *Diabetes Care* **16**, 621–629 (1993).

173. Mather, K. J., Verma, S. & Anderson, T. J. Improved endothelial function with metformin in type 2 diabetes mellitus. *J. Am. Coll. Cardiol.* **37**, 1344–1350 (2001).

174. Matsumoto, K. *et al.* Metformin attenuates progression of carotid arterial wall thickness in patients with type 2 diabetes. *Diabetes Res. Clin. Pract.* **64**, 225–228 (2004).

175. Preiss, D. *et al.* Metformin for non-diabetic patients with coronary heart disease (the CAMERA study): a randomised controlled trial. *Lancet Diabet. Endocrinol.* http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S2213-8587(13)70152-9.

176. Arai, M. *et al.* Metformin, an antidiabetic agent, suppresses the production of tumor necrosis factor and tissue factor by inhibiting early growth response factor-1 expression in human monocytes in vitro. *J. Pharmacol. Exp. Ther.* **334**, 206–213 (2010).

177. de Jager, J. *et al.* Effects of short-term treatment with metformin on markers of endothelial function and inflammatory activity in type 2 diabetes mellitus: a randomized, placebo-controlled trial. *J. Intern. Med.* **257**, 100–109 (2005).

178. Hattori, Y., Suzuki, K., Hattori, S. & Kasai, K. Metformin inhibits cytokine-induced nuclear factor κB activation via AMP-activated protein kinase activation in vascular endothelial cells. *Hypertension* **47**, 1183–1188 (2006).

179. Isoda, K. *et al.* Metformin inhibits proinflammatory responses and nuclear factor-κB in human vascular wall cells. *Arterioscler. Thromb. Vasc. Biol.* **26**, 611–617 (2006).

180. Pearce, E. L. *et al.* Enhancing CD8 T-cell memory by modulating fatty acid metabolism. *Nature* **460**, 103–107 (2009).

181. Yuan, H. *et al.* Antidiabetic drug metformin alleviates endotoxin-induced fulminant liver injury in mice. *Int. Immunopharmacol.* **12**, 682–688 (2012).

182. Liu, L., Zhang, C., Hu, Y. & Peng, B. Protective effect of metformin on periapical lesions in rats by decreasing the ratio of receptor activator of nuclear factor κB ligand/osteoprotegerin. *J. Endod.* **38**, 943–947 (2012).

183. Kalariya, N. M., Shoeb, M., Ansari, N. H., Srivastava, S. K. & Ramana, K. V. Antidiabetic drug metformin suppresses endotoxin-induced uveitis in rats. *Invest. Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci.* **53**, 3431–3440 (2012).

184. Kang, K. Y. *et al.* Metformin downregulates Th17 cells differentiation and attenuates murine autoimmune arthritis. *Int. Immunopharmacol.* **16**, 85–92 (2013).

185. Park, C. S. *et al.* Metformin reduces airway inflammation and remodeling via activation of AMP-activated protein kinase. *Biochem. Pharmacol.* **84**, 1660–1670 (2012).

Acknowledgements  
We would like to thank Professor A. B. Grossman, Oxford Centre for Diabetes, Endocrinology and Metabolism, for his expert review of this manuscript. I. Pernicova is supported by a Project Grant from the Barts Charity.

Author contributions  
The authors contributed equally to all aspects of the manuscript.
