
BETWEEN BEDSIDE AND BENCH

# The many faces of sirtuins

Metabolic regulators that permit adaptation to changes in caloric intake have been shown to be needed to protect from age-related disorders. Sirtuins play a crucial part in this program, impinging on not only aging but also other diseases. New findings are uncovering the multifaceted activity of sirtuins in living organisms and their effects on healthspan. In ‘Bedside to Bench’, Leonard Guarente discusses how different sirtuins are hindering cancer metabolism through suppression of the Warburg effect. The apparent antitumor effects of several sirtuins through their regulation of different metabolic pathways suggest therapeutic approaches to induce sirtuin function or that of downstream targets may block cancer growth. In ‘Bench to Bedside’, Eric Verdin peruses a few studies in different animal models showing that increased amounts of nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD), a cofactor of sirtuins, may have a positive effect in longevity and span of healthy life, or healthspan, by increasing sirtuin enzymatic activity. Whether harnessing NAD therapeutically is a potential way to extend lifespan and ameliorate diseases is still open to debate.

---

## BEDSIDE TO BENCH

### Sirtuins and the Warburg effect

#### Leonard Guarente

Cancer cells display dysregulated growth compared to normal cells. In the early twentieth century, Otto Warburg showed that cancer cells also feature an extremely high level of glucose uptake and metabolism by glycolysis, even in the presence of oxygen¹. More recently, it has been recognized that the so-called ‘Warburg effect’ encompasses a similarly increased utilization of glutamine², an amino acid that is ultimately converted to α-ketoglutarate in the mitochondria to enter the tricarboxylic acid cycle (TCA) cycle. Both glucose and glutamine hypercatabolism may foster the rapid growth of tumor cells by providing fuel for nucleotides via the pentose phosphate shunt (glucose), as well as lipids and proteins via TCA cycle intermediates (glutamine) (Fig. 1).

New insight into the regulation of the Warburg effect has recently implicated three of the seven mammalian homologs of the yeast protein SIR2, termed sirtuins, in the regulation of cancer metabolism. Sirtuins are NAD⁺-dependent deacetylases that drive metabolic adaptation to calorie restriction and suppress both aging and associated diseases³. Progression from normal cells to cancer typically features two mutational hits, one that disrupts cell cycle control (such as loss of TP53), and a second one that activates oncogenes (such as a RAS gain of function). A study by Sebastian *et al.*⁴ showed that loss of SIRT6, a nuclear sirtuin tightly bound to chromatin,

Leonard Guarente is at the Department of Biology, Glenn Laboratory for the Science of Aging and Koch Institute for Integrative Cancer Research, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA.

e-mail: leng@mit.edu

completely functioned as a driver of tumorigenesis in the absence of activation of oncogenic signaling. The tumors caused upon SIRT6 loss seemed to be fueled by the Warburg effect, as glycolysis suppression through inhibition of the glycolytic enzyme pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase 1 (PDK1) greatly reduced their growth. Numerous controls also showed that the known genome instability in cells lacking SIRT6 was not itself driving tumor progression.

A high level of glycolysis in cells lacking SIRT6 had previously been shown and had been ascribed to the upregulation of the transcription factor hypoxia-inducible factor-1α (HIF-1α) (ref. 5) (Fig. 1). SIRT6 functions as a HIF-1α co-repressor at promoters of the glycolytic target genes of this transcription factor through deacetylation of Lys9 of histone H3. Sebastian *et al.*⁴ found that SIRT6 is also a cMYC co-repressor and that SIRT6 loss resulted in derepressed expression of the cMYC target gene product glutaminase (GLS1), which converts glutamine to glutamate, thereby fostering glutamine utilization (Fig. 1). Other cMYC targets involved in ribosome biogenesis were also derepressed upon SIRT6 loss, furthering the potential for rapid cell growth. Analysis of human cancer data revealed SIRT6 loss in roughly 20% of all tumors, with a higher loss rate in pancreatic and colon cancers and a positive correlation between SIRT6 expression with time to relapse in node-positive colorectal cancer patients. In *Apc*<sup>Min/+</sup> mice, a model for human colon cancer, gut-specific *Sirt6* deletion greatly increased the number and invasiveness of tumors; remarkably, treatment with a small-molecule inhibitor of PDK1, dichloroacetate, suppressed tumor formation, implying the Warburg effect helps drive their growth. Thus, as in the case of oncogene activation, this study shows that unleashing the Warburg effect upon loss of SIRT6 can be crucial in driving tumorigenesis.

Studies of the mitochondrial sirtuins SIRT3 and SIRT4 have furthered the connection between these proteins and the Warburg effect. SIRT4 catalyzes an alternative reaction involving transfer of ADP-ribose from NAD⁺ to substrates, causing inhibition of glutamate dehydrogenase (GDH)⁶, an enzyme that converts glutamate into α-ketoglutarate and that along with GLS1 drives glutamine catabolism to replenish the TCA cycle (Fig. 1). Remarkably, a study found that DNA damage induced a massive increase in SIRT4 expression, which triggered a shutdown of glutamine metabolism sufficient to arrest advance through the cell cycle⁷. Similarly, the nutrient sensor mammalian target of rapamycin, which drives cell growth and cancer, was recently shown to repress SIRT4 and thereby increase glutamine metabolism⁸. Notably, loss of SIRT4 compromised the maintenance of genome fidelity after DNA damage⁷. This new glutamine checkpoint may give cells time to repair damage and escape a cancer fate, by coupling a metabolic pathway to cell cycle control via a mitochondrial sirtuin.

SIRT4 displays features of a tumor suppressor in culture or in mice, as mice lacking *Sirt4* had a large elevation in the rate of lung cancer compared to wild-type mice⁷. Even normal lung tissue from these mice showed constitutively high GDH levels that were not further induced by DNA damage. As with SIRT6, SIRT4 expression is reduced in a substantial number of human cancers⁷,⁸, indicating SIRT4 may be mainly exerting its tumor suppressor function by both repressing glutamine use and promoting genome stability.

BETWEEN BEDSIDE AND BENCH

deacetylase activities of SIRT3 and SIRT6 may become possible once we further understand how these enzymes are regulated. A recent study found that the deacetylase activity of SIRT6 could be induced up to 35-fold *in vitro* by long-chain fatty acids<sup>14</sup>. Because the fatty acids bound directly to a site in the catalytic domain of SIRT6 to increase its affinity for acetylated protein substrates, these findings suggest that small molecules might be identified that can activate SIRT6 and potentially antagonize the Warburg effect.

The field of cancer metabolism has grown by leaps and bounds<sup>2</sup>. Recent studies showing that the sirtuins SIRT3, SIRT4 and SIRT6 can all suppress the Warburg effect expand on components of the centrally important phosphatidylinositol-3 kinase pathway<sup>15</sup> as orchestrators of cancer metabolism. Sirtuins may therefore subvert the metabolic intentions of cancer cells and provide additional drug targets to shut down cancer metabolism.

COMPETING FINANCIAL INTERESTS

The author declares competing financial interests: details are available in the online version of the paper (doi:10.1038/nm.3438).

1. Warburg, O., Wind, F. & Negelein, E. *J. Gen. Physiol.* **8**, 519–530 (1927).
2. Ward, P.S. & Thompson, C.B. *Cold Spring Harb. Perspect. Biol.* **4**, a006783 (2012).
3. Guarente, L. *Genes Dev.* **27**, 2072–2085 (2013).
4. Sebastián, C. *et al.* *Cell* **151**, 1185–1199 (2012).
5. Zhong, L. *et al.* *Cell* **140**, 280–293 (2010).
6. Haigis, M.C. *et al.* *Cell* **126**, 941–954 (2006).
7. Jeong, S.M. *et al.* *Cancer Cell* **23**, 450–463 (2013).
8. Csibi, A. *et al.* *Cell* **153**, 840–854 (2013).
9. Kim, H.S. *et al.* *Cancer Cell* **17**, 41–52 (2010).
10. Verdin, E., Hirschey, M.D., Finley, L.W. & Haigis, M.C. *Trends Biochem. Sci.* **35**, 669–675 (2010).
11. Bell, E.L., Emerling, B.M., Ricoult, S.J. & Guarente, L. *Oncogene* **30**, 2986–2996 (2011).
12. Finley, L.W. *et al.* *Cancer Cell* **19**, 416–428 (2011).
13. Hubbard, B.P. *et al.* *Science* **339**, 1216–1219 (2013).
14. Feldman, J.L., Baeza, J. & Denu, J.M. *J. Biol. Chem.* **288**, 31350–31356 (2013).
15. Wong, K.K., Engelman, J.A. & Cantley, L.C. *Curr. Opin. Genet. Dev.* **20**, 87–90 (2010).

---

### Figure 1 Regulation of the Warburg effect by sirtuins. SIRT3 and SIRT6 downregulate HIF-1α expression, and thus glycolysis, by repressing expression of glycolytic enzymes. SIRT6 also co-represses cMYC and its targets, such as GLS1, to downregulate glutamine catabolism. SIRT4 expression is induced by DNA damage in the nucleus, which triggers a glutamine checkpoint in cancer surveillance. Because SIRT4 inhibits GDH activity, it also impairs glutamine use. α-KG, α-ketoglutarate; ROS, reactive oxygen species.

SIRT3 has also been shown to function as a tumor suppressor, and mice lacking this sirtuin are cancer prone<sup>9</sup>. Because this sirtuin is the major mitochondrial protein deacetylase, it regulates metabolism, respiration and stress control in that organelle<sup>10</sup>. The absence of SIRT3 led to overproduction of reactive oxygen species, which caused stabilization of HIF-1α in the nucleus and upregulation of its glycolytic targets, indicating a potential regulation of the Warburg effect<sup>11,12</sup> (Fig. 1). Again, loss of SIRT3 has been amply demonstrated in many human tumors<sup>9,12</sup>.

What are the prospects for drugs that treat cancer by blunting the Warburg effect? Research efforts searching for sirtuin-based drugs have identified small molecules that activate the SIR2 ortholog SIRT1 by binding to an allosteric site in the enzyme<sup>13</sup>; however, this site is not conserved in SIRT3, SIRT4 or SIRT6, so developing agonists for these sirtuins may prove more challenging. One ray of hope comes from the observation that SIRT4 gene expression is highly inducible by DNA damage; the details of this mechanism, when revealed, may suggest a strategy to activate SIRT4 expression pharmacologically. Likewise, pharmacological activation of the

---

### BENCH TO BEDSIDE

#### Coupling of NAD metabolism, sirtuins and lifespan

##### Eric Verdin

Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD), a coenzyme found in all living cells, was discovered by Sir Arthur Harden as a molecular fraction that greatly accelerated alcoholic fermentation in yeast extract<sup>1</sup>. Subsequent work by Hans von Euler-Chelpin identified it as a nucleotide sugar phosphate, and he shared the 1929 Nobel Prize in Chemistry with Harden. Other biochemists have contributed to what we know today about NAD: it serves as an essential cofactor of many biochemical reactions, for example in glucose and fat oxidation reactions in its oxidized form (NAD⁺) or as a substrate for the electron transport chain in its reduced (NADH) form. In addition, NAD has a crucial role as a cofactor for other enzymes, including the protein deacetylases sirtuins, the poly-ADP-ribose polymerase (PARP) and the cyclic ADP-ribose hydrolase CD38.

The fundamental biochemistry work on NAD has had profound implications for

Eric Verdin is at the Gladstone Institutes, University of California–San Francisco, San Francisco, California, USA.
e-mail: everdin@gladstone.ucsf.edu

NATURE MEDICINE VOLUME 20 | NUMBER 1 | JANUARY 2014
