
CHEM BIO CHEM
FULL PAPERS

DOI: 10.1002/cbic.201300319

# Identification and Characterization of the Carbapenem MM 4550 and its Gene Cluster in Streptomyces argenteolus ATCC 11009

Rongfeng Li,[a] Evan P. Lloyd,[a] Kristos A. Moshos,[b] and Craig A. Townsend*[a]

Nearly 50 naturally occurring carbapenem β-lactam antibiotics, most produced by Streptomyces, have been identified. The structural diversity of these compounds is limited to variance of the C-2 and C-6 side chains as well as the stereochemistry at C-5/C-6. These structural motifs are of interest both for their antibiotic effects and their biosynthesis. Although the thienamycin gene cluster is the only active gene cluster publicly available in this group, more comparative information is needed to understand the genetic basis of these structural differences. We report here the identification of MM 4550, a member of the olivanic acids, as the major carbapenem produced by Streptomyces argenteolus ATCC 11009. Its gene cluster was also identified by degenerate PCR and targeted gene inactivation. Sequence analysis revealed that the genes encoding the biosynthesis of the bicyclic core and the C-6 and C-2 side chains are well conserved in the MM 4550 and thienamycin clusters. Three new genes, cmmSu, cmm17 and cmmPah were found in the new cluster, and their putative functions in the sulfonation and epimerization of MM 4550 are proposed. Gene inactivation showed that, in addition to cmmI, two new genes, cmm22 and -23, encode a two-component response system thought to regulate the production of MM 4550. Overexpression of cmmI, cmm22 and cmm23 promoted MM 4550 production in an engineered strain. Finally, the involvement and putative roles of all genes in the MM 4550 cluster are proposed based on the results of bioinformatics analysis, gene inactivation, and analysis of disruption mutants. Overall, the differences between the thienamycin and MM 4550 gene clusters are reflected in characteristic structural elements and provide new insights into the biosynthesis of the complex carbapenems.

## Introduction

It has been reported that 50–60% of the more than two million nosocomial infections in the USA each year are caused by antimicrobial-resistant bacteria.[1] β-Lactam antibiotics are critically important as pharmaceutical agents to combat these bacterial pathogens. Carbapenems are the most potent subclass of these antibacterials due to their rapid penetration across bacterial cell membranes, high affinity to penicillin-binding proteins and resistance to a broad range of β-lactamases. With the rapid spread of multidrug resistance and abandoned anti-infective research and development programs in pharmaceutical companies, there are few antibiotics available for treatment and even fewer drugs in the antibiotic pipeline.

All currently used carbapenems, such as Imipenem and Meropenem, are manufactured by total synthesis, in part because fermentation efforts have failed, and knowledge of their biosynthesis is far from complete. Therefore the treatment of severe infections with carbapenems is very costly. An important role could be played by the development of semisynthetic approaches to provide large quantities of carbapenems at reduced cost.

The complex carbapenems are composed of a (5R)-carbapenem-3-carboxylic acid core that is commonly diversified by a sulfur-linked side chain at C-2 and an alkyl substituent at C-6. The nature of these substituents, often highly oxidized, gives rise to approximately 50 known natural carbapenem products; the simplest and best understood of which is (5R)-carbapenem-3-carboxylic acid (Scheme 1). The biosynthesis of (5R)-carbapenem-3-carboxylic acid is shown below:

**Scheme 1. Representative carbapenems.**

- **MM 4550**
  
     O3SO
      |
      H
      |
    C-C(=O)-N-C(=O)-C-S-CH2-NHAc
         |       |
         H       H
  

- **Carbapen-2-em-3-carboxylic acid**
  
     H
     |
   C-C(=O)-N-C(=O)-C-H
        |       |
        H       H
  

- **Thienamycin**
  
     HO
      |
      H
      |
    C-C(=O)-N-C(=O)-C-S-CH2-NH2
         |       |
         H       H
  

- **Asparenomycin A**
  
     HO
      |
      H
      |
    C-C(=O)-N-C(=O)-C-S-CH2-NHAc
         |       |
         H       H
  

[a] Dr. R. Li, E. P. Lloyd, Prof. C. A. Townsend  
Department of Chemistry, The Johns Hopkins University  
3400 North Charles Street, Baltimore, MD 21218 (USA)  
E-mail: ctownsend@jhu.edu  

[b] Dr. K. A. Moshos  
Current address: Cubist Pharmaceuticals  
65 Hayden Avenue, Lexington, MA 02421 (USA)

Supporting information for this article is available on the WWW under http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/cbic.201300319.

Wiley Online Library © 2014 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim  
ChemBioChem 2014, 15, 320–331 320

CHEMBIOCHEM
FULL PAPERS
www.chembiochem.org

bapenem-3-carboxylic acid in *Pectobacterium carotorovum* has been discovered to be exquisitely efficient, requiring only three enzymes, CarA, CarB and CarC. CarB is a member of the crotonase superfamily and catalyzes the formation of (2S,5S)-carboxymethylproline (CMP), the first committed intermediate in the pathway, from malonyl-CoA and L-pyrroline-5-carboxylate (L-P5C).<sup>[2]</sup> CarA, carbapenam synthetase, cyclizes CMP to yield the (2S,5S)-carbapenam nucleus.<sup>[3]</sup> Finally, CarC, a non-heme iron α-ketoglutarate (α-KG)-dependent oxygenase, catalyzes both epimerization at the C-5 bridgehead and C-2/C-3 desaturation of the carbapenam to produce the final simple carbapenem.<sup>[4]</sup>

The discovery of the gene cluster for thienamycin (Scheme 1) in *Streptomyces cattleya* led to the assignment of 22 genes (*thnA–V*), 20 of which are not present in the simple carbapenem gene cluster.<sup>[5]</sup> Biochemical analysis has shown that the activities of ThnE and ThnM mirror those of CarB and CarA, respectively, and are capable of producing the common bicyclic core. Additionally, ThnQ is involved in the hydroxylation of the C-6 side chain of PS-5 to produce N-acetyl-thienamycin.<sup>[6]</sup> Efforts to reveal the biosynthesis of the C-2 assembly have shown that ThnH, ThnR and ThnT incrementally cleave CoA to pantetheine, 4-phosphopantetheine and cysteamine, respectively. ThnF acts as an acetyltransferase to convert thienamycin to N-acetyl thienamycin.<sup>[6b,7]</sup> In addition, ThnG is responsible for further modification of the C-2 side chain as a desaturase and an oxygenase.<sup>[6b]</sup> Gene inactivation has indicated that *thnL*, *thnN*, *thnO*, and *thnP* are absolutely necessary for the biosynthesis of thienamycin. However, reported mutational analyses give seemingly contradictory results, as thienamycin production was still observed in *thnG-*, *thnR-* and *thnT*-disruption mutants, thus suggesting that these genes are not required for thienamycin biosynthesis.<sup>[8]</sup> Finally, two pathway-regulatory proteins, Thnl and CepU, positively regulate the expression of ten genes in the thienamycin cluster and the biosynthesis of cephamycin in *S. cattleya*, respectively.<sup>[9]</sup>

These recent advances notwithstanding, many questions remain about the biosynthesis of complex carbapenems including how, and in what order, epimerization of the carbapenam bridgehead, introduction of the double bond at carbons C-2/C-3, incorporation of CoASH at C-2, and alkylation at C-6 occur. Enzymatic analysis has demonstrated that the differences in the level of oxidation of the C-6 and C-2 side chains and C-6 stereochemistry give rise to many structural combinations.<sup>[10]</sup> It remains unknown how these differences are genetically encoded to produce potent antibiotics distinct from thienamycin. Genetic differences across different species would explain these structural alterations. Apart from the silent gene cluster discovered in the *Streptomyces flavogriseus* genomic sequencing project,<sup>[15]</sup> the thienamycin cluster in *S. cattleya* remains the only openly available gene cluster functionally associated with a specific complex carbapenem. Thus, exploration of the comparative genomics of the structurally advanced carbapenems would not only give greater insight into the biosynthesis of these metabolites, but also provide an opportunity to apply combinatorial biosynthesis to generate new carbapenems with potentially improved properties.

In the early 1980s, *Streptomyces argenteolus* ATCC 31589 was reported to be a producer of asparenomycins, another group of potent carbapenems.<sup>[11]</sup> In this article, we establish that MM 4550 rather than asparenomycins is the major carbapenem produced in the related strain *S. argenteolus* ATCC 11009. In addition, we provide detailed information on the identification, bioinformatic analysis, and mutational analysis of the gene cluster responsible for the biosynthesis of MM 4550.

### Results

#### Identification of the carbapenems produced in *S. argenteolus* ATCC 11009

Asparenomycins A, B and C (Scheme 1) were isolated from two *Streptomyces* strains, *S. tokunonensis* ATCC 31569 and *S. argenteolus* ATCC 31589.<sup>[11b]</sup> However, a search of the ATCC and NRRL catalogues did not yield *S. argenteolus* ATCC 31589, but a different strain of *S. argenteolus*, ATCC 11009. *S. argenteolus* ATCC 11009 was also reported to produce carbapenems and carbapenams, such as an olivanic acid complex and 17927D;<sup>[10c,12]</sup> however, identifications have not been published.<sup>[12b]</sup> As the first step in our investigation, we conducted small-scale fermentation of *S. argenteolus* ATCC 11009 in OMYM and ISP4<sup>+</sup> media, which showed antibiotic activity against the β-lactam-supersensitive *Escherichia coli* ESS and inhibition of the β-lactamase in *Klebsiella pneumoniae* subsp. *pneumoniae* ATCC 29665 (data not shown). Bioassay of the fractions collected from HPLC by direct injection of supernatant broth indicated that the active product(s) resided in only one narrow region of the chromatogram (data not shown).

Initial efforts to identify the β-lactam product failed owing to the low titer from the wild-type *S. argenteolus* ATCC 11009. To improve production, a genetic-engineering approach was applied by overexpressing three positive regulatory genes, *cmml*, *cmml22* and *cmml23* (see below). The expression of each gene was individually controlled by an *ermE*p constitutive promoter, and the final expression construct containing all three genes, pMS82/cmml-22-23 (Figure S1), was integrated into the φBT1 site of the genome. Bioassay against *E. coli* ESS showed an enlarged zone of inhibition from the engineered strain, and HPLC analysis revealed that this altered strain still produced the same product as the wild-type strain (Figure 3), but in a nearly fourfold improved yield based on comparison of peak areas for the active fraction. In addition, the maximum production in the engineered strain was at 48 and 56 h in 0.05 and 1.3 L scale fermentations, respectively, compared to the wild-type strain at 72 and 80 h (Figure S2).

*S. argenteolus* cmml-22-23 was used to characterize the carbapenem produced. A large-scale fed-batch fermentation procedure was developed by using a modified minimal medium (ISP4<sup>++</sup>) to give maximum production that also minimized impurities during product purification. To make large-scale growth applicable to laboratory purification techniques, a long-chain quaternary ammonium salt was used as a phase-transfer catalyst to extract negatively charged carboxylates into a small volume of organic solvent. Back-extraction of the

CHEMBIOCHEM
FULL PAPERS

www.chembiochem.org

A)
AsnB1 318 YVKVILSGEGA 329 - 100aa - 429 EFAQGCASSTVLE 441
AsnB2 318 YVKVILTGEGA 329 - 100aa - 429 QFDEGSGTVDLLV 441
AsnB3 318 YVKVVLSGEGA 329 - 100aa - 429 EFAQGCASSGVLE 441
AsnB4 353 GPLRILTGYGA 363 - 96aa - 459 GIHEGSGTTSAWT 471

B)
Motif M1
BLS3 330 SGRRLITGYGA 340 - 96 aa - 436 GVHEGSGVTAAFT 448
BLS 339 PERRILTGYGA 349 - 96 aa - 445 GVHEGSGTTSSFS 457
CarA 336 QVSCMLTGYGS 346 - 99 aa - 445 GIHEGSSVNQAF 457
CpmA 333 KVNSLITGYGS 343 - 99 aa - 442 GIHEGSSVNKSF 454
ThnM 295 ARQVMLSGYGA 305 - 96 aa - 401 GIHEGTAMSRMFA 413
PluM 313 DRQVLLSGYGA 323 - 96 aa - 419 GIHEGTAMSRMFA 430
:::***:
*:****::: *:

Motif M2

Primers:
thnM-DEG-5: 5'-GCGCCAGTGCAATGCTGwsnggntaygg-3'
thnM-DEG-3: 5'-CATGGCGGTGCCCTcrtgdatncc-3'

Figure 1. The two conserved motifs in the β-lactam ring-closing enzymes. The names and access numbers are as follows: AsnB1: Nodularia spumigena CCY 9414 (YP_003135129.1), AsnB2: Cyanothec sp. CCY 0110 (ZP_01729766.1), AsnB3: Leptolyngbya sp. PCC 7375 (ZP_18904938.1); AsnB4: S. clavuligerus (ZP_08220805.1); BLS3: S. antibioticus (AFH74298.1), BLS: S. clavuligerus ATCC 27064 (ZP_05002824.1), CarA: P. carotovorum subsp. brasiliensis PBR1692 (ZP_03825848.1), CpmA: P. luminescens subsp. laumondii TTO1 (NP_927548.1), ThnM: S. cattleya NRRL 8057 (YP_004920124.1), PluM: Streptomyces sulfonofaciens NRRL B-16438 (unpublished). The beginning and ending numbers indicate the position of amino acids in the proteins, and the numbers between the motifs indicate the separation in amino acid residues. (:), similar residues, (*), identical residues. Primers designed for the M1 and M2 motifs according to the CODEHOP program. n: A/T/G/C, d: A/G/T, y: C/T, r: A/G, w: A/T, s: C/G.

on E. coli ESS plates, with a retention time of 16.3 min (Figure 3). Coinjection with a synthetic asparenomycin A standard showed a different retention time and UV spectrum, thus strongly indicating that the asparenomycins originally reported from S. argenteolus ATCC 31589 are not produced in S. argenteolus ATCC 11009.[10b,11b] Treatment with hydroxylamine resulted in the loss of that peak; this is consistent with the presence of a β-lactam in the active product. Additional bioactive material was collected by HPLC for further characterization.

The UV spectrum showed the product had not only a typical carbapenem absorbance signature at 288 nm but also an absorbance band at 245 nm. A search of available UV data across all natural carbapenems resulted in only one potential compound that matched the spectrum of the isolated antibiotic. ¹H NMR spectroscopy identified the compound as MM 4550, as both chemical shifts and coupling constants were consistent with the published characterization of this compound (Figure S3A). Furthermore, two-dimensional ¹H, ¹H COSY, ROESY, and TOCSY experiments confirmed the assignments of all protons made in the original publication (Figure S3B-E).[13] Electrospray ionization mass spectrometry provided accurate mass of 407.0226 (±0.5 ppm; calcd: 407.0224) for the anion of MM 4550.

resulting organic mixture with aqueous potassium iodide allowed the antibiotic to be recovered into a volume 100 times more concentrated than the original fermentation filtrate. We found that a 5% solution of Aliquat 336 in dichloromethane was highly effective in extracting the antibiotic as only two 300 mL washes were required to extract almost all of the antibiotic from 13 L of fermentation filtrate, as monitored by E. coli ESS bioassay. The concentrated KI solution was then lyophilized, and the crude salt obtained was further purified by anion-exchange chromatography over Dowex resin. We found that anion-exchange chromatography was critical at this stage to remove the majority of impurities, salts, and residual phase-transfer catalyst. Most importantly, this procedure resulted in highly concentrated fractions for further purification and analysis by HPLC.

Reversed-phase (C18) HPLC analysis of the active fractions resolved only one bioactive peak, as determined by bioassay

Cloning of the MM 4550 biosynthetic gene cluster

Sequence analysis suggested and biochemical studies confirmed that ThnE and ThnM in the thienamycin biosynthetic pathway mirror the chemistry of CarB and CarA in the simple carbapenem pathway.[6a,c] Alignment of CarA (Pectobacterium carotovorum), β-LS (Streptomyces clavuligerus), β-LS3 (Streptomyces antibioticus), CpmA (Photorhabdus luminescens), ThnM (S. cattleya), and several AsnB (asparagine synthetase) revealed two motifs (M1 and M2) that are highly conserved in the β-lactam-forming enzymes but either absent or present at distinctly lower homology in asparagine synthetases (AsnB). By using the CODEHOP program (http://blocks.fhcrc.org/codehop.html)[14] two degenerate primers, thnM-DEG-5 and thnM-DEG-3, were designed for amplifying regions between M1 and M2 (Figure 1). A specific PCR product with the expected size of ~350 bp was obtained from S. argenteolus gDNA. This product showed an incomplete open reading frame encoding a truncated protein of 108 amino acids with 74% identity to ThnM of

MM 4550 gene cluster
thienamycin gene cluster

bicyclic core genes C-6 side chain genes C-2 side chain genes regulatory genes resistance/transport genes unknown genes boundary genes

Figure 2. Gene organization of the MM 4550 and thienamycin gene clusters in S. argenteolus ATCC 11009 (top) and S. cattleya NRRL 8057 (below), respectively. The direction of transcription and the proposed functions of individual ORFs are indicated.
© 2014 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim
ChemBioChem 2014, 15, 320–331 322

CHEMBIOCHEM
FULL PAPERS
www.chembiochem.org

S. cattleya, and 32% identity to CarA of *P. carotovorum*. A BLASTP alignment also showed that the two highly conserved motifs, M1 and M2, were present in the partial protein. These results strongly suggested that a partial *thnM* orthologous gene had been cloned from *S. argenteolus*.

A cosmid gDNA library of *S. argenteolus* ATCC 11009 was constructed and screened by using the ~350 bp gene fragment as a probe. Fourteen positive clones were obtained from a 2000-clone library. Sequence analysis revealed that the T₃- and T₇-ends of the insert in cosmids 5D1 and 12B9 encoded a MarR-family transcription regulator and an AsnC-family transcription regulator, respectively. These proteins are not encoded by genes in the thienamycin gene cluster, thus indicating that cosmids 5D1 and 12B9 likely contained a whole carbapenem gene cluster. Cosmid 5D1 was chosen for further investigation.

Cosmid 5D1 was sequenced in its entirety. Five gaps between five contigs were bridged by PCR amplification and Sanger sequencing to give the full, circular cosmid. Overall, we ascertained that 5D1 contained the putative MM 4550 biosynthetic genes, which spanned almost 43.8 kb of the *S. argenteolus* genome. Computer-assisted analysis of the sequence revealed 31 complete ORFs (Figure 2).

---

**Figure 3.** A) HPLC analysis of *S. argenteolus* extracts. 1) Wild-type *S. argenteolus* ATCC 11009; 2) *S. argenteolus* cmml-22-23; 3) Wild-type *S. argenteolus* ATCC 11009 spiked with isolated peak from *S. argenteolus* cmml-22-23; 4) argE8 disruption mutant. Peaks corresponding to MM4550 are indicated by a heavy dot (●). B) Bioassay of the 16.3 min HPLC fractions of *S. argenteolus* cmml-22-23 (left) and argE8 (right).

In order to confirm that the cloned gene cluster was responsible for the biosynthesis of MM 4550, *cmmE*, whose gene product showed 76 and 40% identity to ThnE and CarB, respectively, was inactivated by a PCR targeting strategy with an *oriT-aac(3)IV* cassette to generate a gene-replacing mutant argE8. The intended disruption of *cmmE* was confirmed by Southern hybridization with *cmmE* and *oriT-aac(3)IV* probes. As expected, when PmlI-digested gDNA was tested with the *cmmE* probe, a 1.65-kb positive fragment was observed in the wild-type but not the argE8 mutant gDNAs. Correspondingly, this fragment was replaced with a 2.2-kb band in the argE8 mutant when hybridized with the *oriT-aac(3)IV* probe, but this band was missing in the wild-type gDNA (Figure 4). Bioassay on *E. coli* ESS plates showed that the argE8 mutant failed to produce antibacterial products when fermented in ISP4+ medium (Table 2 (below), Figure 3B). HPLC analysis of the extract from the argE8 fermentation medium further showed that the peak corresponding to MM 4550 in the wild-type *S. argenteolus* was absent (Figure 3A). These results strongly suggested that the gene cluster cloned in cosmid 5D1 is responsible for the biosynthesis of MM 4550 in *S. argenteolus*.

The DNA sequences of the MM 4550 gene cluster have been deposited in the NCBI nucleotide sequence database with accession number KF042303.

---

**Sequence analysis of the MM 4550 biosynthetic gene cluster**

The putative functions of the deduced gene products are summarized in Table 1. The overall architecture and some gene products of the MM 4550 gene cluster are highly similar to a cryptic cluster in *S. flavogriseus* ATCC 33331 identified by gene scanning.[15] However, because no product is known from this cluster and none of the enzymes encoded by it has been characterized, analysis of the MM 4550 gene cluster focused principally on comparison with the thienamycin gene cluster.

As shown in Figure 2, among the 31 complete ORFs present in the insert of 5D1, 17 clear homologues are also present in the thienamycin gene cluster.[5] Genes *cmmE–Q* show the same organization as *thnE—Q* in the thienamycin gene cluster. Notable genes *cmmR, cmmS,* and *cmmT* are also shared between the two clusters. However, in the MM 4550 gene cluster, they

---

**Figure 4.** A) The organization of *cmmSu, cmmE,* and *cmmF* in cosmid 5D1 and the construction of the argE8 disruption mutant. The restriction maps of the wild-type *cmmE* gene and its disrupted copy in the mutant are shown. B) Southern analysis of the wild-type and the argE8 (*ΔcmmE*) mutant showing the positive hybridizing bands to the *cmmE* and the *oriT-aac(3)IV* probes, respectively.

Table 1. Deduced functions of proteins encoded by the MM4550 biosynthetic gene cluster.

| Protein | Amino acids | Proposed function | Sequence similarity (identity/positive) | Identity/positive to ATCC 33331 [%] |
|---------|-------------|------------------|---------------------------------------|--------------------------------------|
| Orf1    | 238         | unknown          | no similar sequences                  | -/-[a]                              |
| Orf2    | 475         | arabinofuranosidase | SMCF_639, Streptomyces coelicoflavus ZG 0656 (89/92) | -/-                                 |
| CmmSu   | 353         | sulfotransferase | Sfla_0165, S.flavogriseus ATCC 33331 (87/92) | 87/92                               |
| CmmE    | 263         | carboxymethylproline synthase | ThnE, S.cattleya NRRL 8057 (69/80) | 93/96                               |
| CmmF    | 338         | N-acetyltransferase | ThnF, S.cattleya NRRL 8057 (58/66) | 86/89                               |
| CmmG    | 263         | oxidoreductase | ThnG, S.cattleya NRRL 8057 (70/80) | 87/92                               |
| CmmH    | 229         | HAD-superfamily hydrolase | ThnH, S.cattleya NRRL 8057 (57/69) | 82/87                               |
| CmmI    | 466         | LysR family transcriptional regulator | Thnl, S.cattleya NRRL 8057 (51/64) | 83/87                               |
| CmmJ    | 487         | transporter protein | ThnJ, S.cattleya NRRL 8057 (56/68) | 89/93                               |
| CmmK    | 680         | radical SAM methyltransferase | ThnK, S.cattleya NRRL 8057 (79/86) | 95/96                               |
| CmmL    | 394         | radical SAM methyltransferase | ThnL, S.cattleya NRRL 8057 (67/72) | 82/86                               |
| CmmM    | 459         | carbapenam synthetase | ThnM, S.cattleya NRRL 8057 (64/76) | 86/91                               |
| CmmN    | 369         | AFD class I superfamily protein, acyl-CoA synthase | ThnN, S.cattleya NRRL 8057 (86/91) | 95/97                               |
| CmmO    | 467         | aldehyde dehydrogenase | ThnO, S.cattleya NRRL 8057 (75/82) | 90/94                               |
| CmmP    | 482         | radical SAM methyltransferase | ThnP, S.cattleya NRRL 8057 (83/91) | 97/98                               |
| CmmQ    | 259         | putative oxygenase | ThnQ, S.cattleya NRRL 8057 (72/81) | 93/94                               |
| Cmm17   | 292         | enoyl-CoA hydratase | Kyg_13766, Acidovorax sp.NO-1 (34/46) | 89/93                               |
| CmmR    | 228         | nudix hydrolase | ThnR, S.cattleya NRRL 8057 (55/66) | 75/82                               |
| CmmT    | 388         | hydrolase | ThnT, S.cattleya NRRL 8057 (69/75) | 87/90                               |
| CmmS    | 334         | β-lactamase | Orf11, S.clavuligerus ATCC 27064 (63/71) | 80/87                               |
| CmmPah  | 298         | proclavaminate amidino hydrolase | PAH, S.clavuligerus ATCC 27064 (52/65) | 86/90                               |
| Cmm22   | 227         | two-component system response regulator | SPW_1836, Streptomyces sp.W 007 (84/90) | -/-                                 |
| Cmm23   | 506         | two-component system sensor kinase | Sacte_5700, Streptomyces sp.SirexAA-E (89/93) | -/-                                 |
| Cmm24   | 217         | unknown | Sacte_5699, Streptomyces sp.SirexAA-E (74/79) | -/-                                 |
| Orf25   | 1094        | putative peptidase | Sacte_5698, Streptomyces sp.SirexAA-E (81/88) | -/-                                 |
| Orf26   | 1029        | putative glycosyl hydrolase | Szn_17732, Streptomyces zinciresistens K 42 (78/88) | -/-                                 |
| Orf27   | 294         | putative RNA polymerase sigma factor | Sfla_6134, S.flavogriseus ATCC 33331 (88/93) | -/-                                 |
| Orf28   | 441         | putative serine/threonine phosphatase | Sfla_6135, S.flavogriseus ATCC 33331 (85/91) | -/-                                 |
| Orf29   | 164         | putative MarR family transcriptional regulator | Sfla_6136, S.flavogriseus ATCC 33331 (93/95) | -/-                                 |

[a] -/-: not in the cluster.

CHEMBIOCHEM
FULL PAPERS

www.chembiochem.org

ThnT.[7] Furthermore, the acetyltransferase ThnF, is responsible for the N-acetylation of the cysteaminyl side chain from acetyl-CoA.[7] Finally, CmmG shares 70% identity with ThnG in the thienamycin biosynthetic pathway. In vitro characterization of ThnG has shown that it catalyzes the desaturation and sulfoxidation of the *N*-acetyl-2-cysteaminyl side chain of *N*-acetyl-thienamycin to form the sulfoxide of PS-7.[6b] Consistent with its structure, the C-2 side chain of MM 4550 is likely to be processed by these five enzymes in the order CmmR, CmmH, CmmT, CmmF and CmmG.

cmmI encodes a putative LysR-family positive regulator, which shares 50 and 26% identities to ThnI and ClaR in the biosynthetic pathways of thienamycin and clavulanic acid, respectively.[9,19] Two new genes, cmm22 and cmm23, located at the right end of the gene cluster encode proteins homologous to the two-component regulatory systems in a wide range of microorganisms. The amino acid sequence of Cmm22 (227 aa) shows end-to-end similarity to response regulators, including an aspartate residue (Asp52) typically phosphorylated inside the N-terminal phosphorylation domain, a C-terminal DNA binding domain, and several other key characteristic residues (Asp9, Asp10, Thr80 and His101).[20] As observed in most two-component regulatory systems, cmm23 encodes a protein (506 aa) with full-length homology to sensory histidine kinases and is located immediately downstream of cmm22. Cmm23 contains three conserved domains including the H-box (269HELRTPL275; His269 is a putative phosphorylation site), the N-box (376NLVGNA381), and the G-box (405VRDSGPGI412).[20c] Structural prediction with TopPred 0.01 (http://mobyle.pasteur.fr/cgi-bin/portal.py?#forms::toppred)[21] identified three possible transmembrane domains in Cmm23: I (residues 14–34, score 1.96), II (147–167, score 1.26) and III (181–201, score 1.26). The sensor domain is located at the N terminus in most histidine kinases; therefore, domain I is likely the sensor domain of Cmm23. The organization and likely properties of Cmm22 and Cmm23 suggested that they belong to the OmpR family of two-component response regulators.[20b]

Two genes, cmm17 and cmmPah, absent in the thienamycin gene cluster, were also identified. cmm17 is located directly downstream of and in the same orientation as cmmQ in the gene cluster and encodes a 292-residue protein. BLASTP analysis showed that Cmm17 has appreciably high similarity (35–38% identity and 50–55% similarity) to enoyl-CoA hydratases from a number of microorganisms. Cmm17 possesses most of the residues important for substrate binding and catalysis, including Glu128. However, a His residue is present at position 148 instead of the Glu residue that is typically conserved in most enoyl-CoA hydratases (Figure S8).[16,22] cmmPah is located between cmm22 and cmmS and is transcribed in the opposite direction to cmmS. Its gene product comprises 298 amino acids and belongs to the arginase-like/histone-like hydrolase superfamily.[23] A BLASTP search showed that CmmPah has significant similarity to agmatinases, a subgroup of the arginase superfamily and a key enzyme in an alternative metabolic pathway of arginine in microorganisms and plants.[24] The highest homology (46–52% identity and 60–67% similarity) is to proclavaminic acid amidino hydrolase (PAH), an enzyme in the

clavulanic acid and (5S)-clavam biosynthetic pathways from *S. clavuligerus* and *S. antibioticus.*[25] However, alignment of CmmPah with three PAH enzymes from *S. clavuligerus* and *S. antibioticus* and two arginases from *Anoxybacillus flavithermus* and *Saccharomonospora viridis* showed that only one of the six Mn²⁺-binding residues (Asp222) is conserved in CmmPah. Only one of the three guanidino binding residues (Thr232) and one of the four α-amino acid binding residues (Gly147) conserved in arginases and PAHs is present in CmmPah.[26] The GGDHS motif conserved in all arginases is changed to 116GGGRS120 in CmmPah (Figure S9). Finally, secondary structure prediction (http://bioinf.cs.ucl.ac.uk/psipred/) showed that the N-terminal secondary structure of CmmPah is similar to that of the PAHs and arginases, but the C-terminal region is different.[26]

Mutational analysis of genes in the MM 4550 gene cluster

To better understand the role of each individual gene in the biosynthesis of MM 4550, we generated gene-replacing mutants for 20 genes in the proposed biosynthetic gene cluster by using λ-RED-mediated PCR mutagenesis.[27] Each targeted gene was replaced with a FRT-oriT-aac(3)/IV-FRT cassette in its resultant mutant. Mutants derived from double-crossover events with the targeted genes, and their disrupted copies on 5D1 were selected according to their apramycin-resistant/kana-mycin-sensitive (Am<sup>R</sup>/Km<sup>S</sup>) phenotype. To confirm the genotype of the mutants, gDNA was digested with restriction enzymes and hybridized with a oriT-acc(3)/IV probe. As expected, the gDNA of wild-type *S. argenteolus* did not hybridize to the probe, but positive hybridization was observed from all tested mutants, and the size of each resultant band was as predicted by restriction analysis (Figure S6). The digested gDNA of each mutant was also hybridized against the gene-specific probe. No hybridization was observed from any potential mutant (data not shown), thus confirming that targeted gene replacement had occurred in each case. One mutant in each disruption of a specific gene was chosen for further characterization.

All disruption mutants were characterized by fermentation in ISP4<sup>+</sup> medium and analyzed for antibacterial activity on *E. coli* ESS or β-lactamase induction on *Bacillus licheniformis* with Nitrocefin as indicator.[28] We observed that, in addition to antibiotic activity against *E. coli* ESS, MM 4550 exhibits moderate β-lactamase-inducing and antibacterial activities in *B. licheniformis* (Figure S4 B). We further analyzed bioactive intermediates in disruption mutants by UPLC-MS (Figure S5).

As summarized in Table 2 and explicitly shown in Figure S4A, bioassay on *E. coli* ESS showed that disruption of cmmE and cmmM completely eliminated the production of MM 4550 during seven-day fermentation. Nitrocefin assays showed that β-lactamase induction was only at background levels compared with the wild-type; this is consistent with no carbapenems being produced in these mutants (Figure S4 B). Moreover, HPLC analysis confirmed that the peak corresponding to MM 4550 was completely absent in the argE8 mutant (Figure 3). Similar results were also obtained from argK11, argL2 and argP4 mutants, thus suggesting that these enzymes

© 2014 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim

ChemBioChem 2014, 15, 320–331 325

CHEMBIOCHEM
FULL PAPERS

Table 2. Analysis of the disruption mutants of S. argenteolus.

| Disruption mutants | E.coli ESS | B. licheniformis | Nitrocefin |
|--------------------|------------|------------------|------------|
| argSu13            | +          | -                | +          |
| argE8              | -          | -                | -          |
| argF7              | -          | -                | -          |
| argG5              | +          | +                | +          |
| argH8              | +          | +                | +          |
| argJ4              | -          | -                | -          |
| argK11             | -          | -                | -          |
| argL2              | -          | -                | -          |
| argM7              | -          | -                | -          |
| argN7              | -          | -                | -          |
| argO2              | -          | -                | -          |
| argP4              | -          | -                | -          |
| argQ4              | +          | -                | +          |
| arg17-4            | -          | +                | -          |
| argR8              | -          | -                | -          |
| argT3              | -          | -                | -          |
| argS6              | +          | +                | +          |
| argPah9            | -          | -                | -          |
| arg22-6            | -          | -                | -          |
| arg24-3            | +          | +                | +          |
| WT                 | +          | +                | +          |

were unable to produce MM 4550 at anytime during the fermentation, whereas the cmmH and cmmG mutants, argH8 and argG5, still produced bioactive products, as indicated by bioassay on E.coli ESS (Table 2, Figure S4A). The Nitrocefin assay showed that both the argG5 and argH8 mutants had similar antibacterial and β-lactamase-induction activities as the wild type (Figure S4B). UPLC-MS analysis showed that the active intermediate in argG5 has the same mass as MM 17880 (Table 3, Figure S5). These results indicate that cmmH, cmmG, cmmR, cmmT, and cmmF are essential for the production of MM 4550.

Gene cmm22 was disrupted to investigate whether the two-component response regulators are involved in the MM 4550 biosynthesis. Both antibacterial and β-lactamase-induction activities from the disruption mutant, arg22-6, were negative; this suggests that the two-component regulators encoded by cmm22/23 are essential for the biosynthesis of MM 4550 (Table 2, Figure S4). Thus, the biosynthesis of MM 4550 is regulated by at least two regulatory mechanisms: LysR-type transcription activation and the two-component response system, in S. argenteolus.[5, 9]

The involvement of two new genes, cmm17 and cmmPah, in the biosynthesis of MM 4550 was also studied through gene inactivation. Disruption of cmm17 generated a mutant (arg17-4) that was unable to produce any metabolites that were active against E.coli ESS and B. licheniformis. However, the fermentation supernatant showed strong β-lactamase-induction activity as shown by the Nitrocefin assay, thus indicating a β-lactam-ring-containing intermediate accumulated in the mutant. On the other hand, bioassays and β-lactamase-induction assay showed that the cmmPah disruption mutant (argPah9) failed to produce metabolites that were positive against E.coli ESS and B. licheniformis, or to induce β-lactamase expression. Although the role of CmmPah in the biosynthesis is unknown, extensive mass spectroscopy analyses were unable to detect intermediates in the mutants. Notwithstanding,

are also necessary for biosynthesis (Table 2, Figure S4A). Bioassay against E.coli ESS showed that the disruption mutant of cmmQ, argQ4, consistently produced a bioactive product during its fermentation, but in reduced amount or potency in comparison to the wild-type. The Nitrocefin assay showed that argQ4 still maintains β-lactamase-induction activity, but loses detectable antibacterial activity against B. licheniformis (Table 2, Figure S4A and B). The active fraction of extracted fermentation broth shared both the same retention time and mass with synthetic PS-5, thus confirming that PS-5 is accumulated in argQ4 (Table 3, Figure S5B).[6b] BLASTP analysis suggested that CmmSu is the most likely candidate in the gene cluster to catalyze C-6 sulfonation to MM 4550.

Interestingly, the disruption mutant of cmmSu, argSu13, still produced antibacterial products. However, unlike the wild-type S. argenteolus, the supernatant of the argSu3 only showed β-lactamase-induction activity rather than antibacterial activity on B. licheniformis (Figure S4B); this indicated that the product is not likely to be MM 4550. UPLC-MS analysis of the bioactive material in argSu13 revealed a mass for the nonsulfonated derivative of MM 4550 (Table 3, Figure S5).

Mixed results were obtained from genes potentially involved in the biosynthesis of the C-2 side chain. Mutants argR8, argT3 and argF7, disrupted at cmmR, cmmT, and cmmF, respectively,

Table 3. UPLC-MS analysis of carbapenems from S. argenteolus.

| Strain     | Found [m/z] | m/z (calc'd) | Molecular formula | Proposed structure |
|------------|--------------|--------------|-------------------|--------------------|
| WT         | 407.0215     | 407.0224     | C₁₃H₁₅N₂O₉S₂      | MM 4550            |
| argSu13    | 313.0848     | 313.0858     | C₁₃H₁₇N₂O₅S⁻      |                    |
| argQ4      | 297.0909     | 297.0909     | C₁₃H₁₇N₂O₄S⁻      |                    |
| argG5      | 393.0404     | 393.0426     | C₁₃H₁₇N₂O₈S₂⁻     |                    |
| argE8      | n.a.         | n.a.         | n.a.              | no carbapenem masses found |

© 2014 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim
ChemBioChem 2014, 15, 320–331 326

ing, the results demonstrated that these two new genes are essential for the biosynthesis of MM 4550 (Table 2, Figure S4). Finally, analysis of cell-free extracts of mutants arg17-4 and argPah9 showed that they displayed similar antibacterial and β-lactamase-induction activities as their fermentation supernatants (data not shown).

Disruption of *cmm24* resulted in a mutant with the same phenotype of antibacterial and β-lactamase-induction activities as the wild-type *S. argenteolus*. Given the BLASTP analysis (Table 1), *cmm24* might not be involved in the biosynthesis of MM 4550 and is likely to be on the 3′-boundary of the gene cluster. ORF analysis also showed that the intergenic region upstream of *cmmSu* is nearly 1 kb, and the gene (*orf4*) upstream of *cmmSu* encodes a protein similar to sugar metabolism that is clearly unrelated to carbapenem biosynthesis (Table 1). Thus, we propose that the MM 4550 gene cluster harbors 21 genes involved in its biosynthesis, resistance and regulation (Figure 2).

### Discussion

Olivanic acids, including MM 4550, MM 13902 and MM 17880, were originally identified from *Streptomyces olivaceus* ATCC 31126 and *S. olivaceus* ATCC 21379.[10c,13,29] Although it has been mentioned that olivanic acids are also produced by other *Streptomyces* strains, including *S. argenteolus* ATCC 11009, no further information has been reported.[10c] By combining genetic-engineering approaches with modified extraction protocols and structural analysis, we have demonstrated that MM 4550 is the major carbapenem produced by *S. argenteolus* ATCC 11009. This contrasts with the two *S. olivaceus* strains in which three compounds of the olivanic acid complex are produced in similar titers.[13] NMR and UV spectroscopy, and mass spectrometry support the structure of the final product in *S. argenteolus* being MM 4550.

The MM 4550 gene cluster is only the second gene cluster determined to be involved in the biosynthesis of a complex carbapenem that has been characterized. MM 4550 is more highly functionalized than thienamycin, with a sulfate at the C-8 position as well as an oxidatively modified C-2 side chain. The syn relationship across the C-5–C-6 bond is another feature that differs, and many carbapenems with this stereochemistry have been discovered. This structural feature suggests a potential fundamental difference in their biosynthetic pathways, despite the similarity of the gene clusters for thienamycin and MM 4550.

Although the genes presumed to be involved in the biosynthesis of the bicyclic core and the C-6 and C-2 side chains are conserved between the two gene clusters, there are differences that stand out. First, the genes *thnA–D*, *cepU* and *thnV* in the thienamycin gene cluster are all missing in the MM 4550 cluster. It is known that *cepU* is a regulatory gene for cephamycin biosynthesis, but the functions of the other genes in this group are yet to be determined in *S. cattleya*. Second, we found that the biosynthesis of MM 4550 is regulated by two mechanisms with proteins encoded by *cmmI* and *cmm22/23*. A helix-turn-helix (HTH) DNA binding domain and the rare TTA codon are shared by ThnI and CmmI, thus indicating similar regulatory roles in their biosynthetic pathways.[9] Two-component regulatory systems are generally global regulators in the biosynthesis of secondary metabolites.[30] Disruption of *cmm22* clearly showed that *cmm22/23* is involved in MM 4550 biosynthesis, presumably through phosphorylation of the regulator (Cmm22) by the membrane-bound phosphokinase (Cmm23). In addition, overexpression of *cmmI* and *cmm22/23* improved the production of MM 4550, thus confirming their positive regulatory roles. Lastly, three putative biosynthetic genes that are unique in the MM 4550 gene cluster were identified.

The first, *cmmSu*, encodes a putative sulfotransferase as predicted by sequence analysis. Sulfotransferases are a superfamily of enzymes catalyzing sulfonation of a variety of endogenous and exogenous substrates. In contrast to those in humans and other mammals, little is known about bacterial sulfotransferases.[18a] BLASTP analysis suggested that CmmSu is PAPS-dependent owing to the presence of a putative PBS loop and the 3′-phosphate binding sites. Disruption of *cmmSu* resulted in a mutant with an antibacterial spectrum that was different from that of MM 4550. Analysis by mass spectroscopy showed the accumulation of a nonsulfonated derivative of MM 4550 in the *argSu13* mutant, as expected. An earlier analysis of the OA-6129 group of carbapenems identified in a series of random mutants of *Streptomyces fulvoviridis* processing at C-6 and C-8 that was thought to be ordered as C-8 hydroxylation, C-6 isomerization and C-8 sulfonation. The substrate of the sulfonation enzyme, OA-6129B1, was demonstrated to be bioactive.[31] MM 4550 possesses the same C-6 side chain as OA-6129C, and this suggests that the C-6 side chain of MM 4550 is processed through a similar biosynthetic sequence as the OA-6129 carbapenem group.

Structurally, the major difference that distinguishes MM 4550 from thienamycin is the syn-relationship across C-5 and C-6. The remaining enzymes that could be involved in establishing this alternate stereochemistry are Cmm17 and CmmPah, as they are present in *S. argenteolus* but not in *S. cattleya*. Cmm17 shows high sequence homology with enoyl-CoA hydratases. It is known that the acid/base chemistry for this type of enzymes can hydrate α,β-unsaturated double bonds or perform the reverse reaction.[22] Interestingly, disruption of *cmm17* resulted in the loss of antibacterial activities against *E. coli* ESS and *B. licheniformis* but stronger β-lactamase-induction activity compared to the wild-type and other disruption mutants, thus indicating that a β-lactam-containing intermediate was accumulated in the mutant. We propose that Cmm17 could be involved in the epimerization of the C-6 side chain and, therefore, produce a different ultimate stereochemical outcome in MM 4550 biosynthesis (Scheme 2). Although CmmPah displays high sequence similarity to arginases and PAHs, almost all the amino acid residues involved in substrate binding and cofactor binding in the comparison enzymes are absent from CmmPah (Figure S8), this strongly suggests that CmmPah catalyzes a different reaction(s) in the biosynthesis of MM 4550 from the arginases and PAHs.

It is important to note that the disruption mutants for *cmmG* and *cmmQ* resulted in intermediates with masses for

Importantly, disruption of *cmmR* and *cmmT* led to MM 4550 nonproducers in *S. argenteolus*. This finding contradicts reports in *S. cattleya* in which inactivation of orthologous genes *thnR* and *thnT* retained thienamycin production in the mutants.[8] Biochemical studies have shown that both ThnR and ThnT are involved in the incremental truncation of the C-2 side chain in thienamycin.[7] Our gene-inactivation results support the in vitro analysis and confirm that *cmmR* and *cmmT* are essential for the biosynthesis of MM 4550. ThnR and ThnT are similar to Nudix hydrolases and peptidases, respectively. Searching the recently sequenced genome of *S. cattleya* showed five putative Nudix hydrolases and 46 putative peptidases. Thus, the continued production of thienamycin in *thnR* and *thnT* disruption mutants could result from *in trans* complementation.

The questions that remain in the biosynthesis of complex carbapenems include the mechanism and timing of inversion of the C-5 carbapenam bridgehead, the desaturation of the C-2/C-3 bond, and the attachment of the C-2 and C-6 side chains. As in the thienamycin cluster, there are no obvious candidates to catalyze these steps in the MM 4550 gene cluster. As both thienamycin and MM 4550 require these transformations, it is probable that the enzymes conducting these steps are among those encoded in common by both gene clusters. Our gene-disruption results ruled out the involvement of *cmmQ* and *cmmG* in the epimerization/desaturation as had been hypothesized[6c] because the disruption mutants retain the ability to produce bioactive intermediates.

Based on previous reports and the results of our earlier experiments, we propose the biosynthetic pathway to MM 4550 shown in Scheme 2. Many of the early steps are almost certainly shared with thienamycin biosynthesis, but the syntheses diverge to achieve stereochemical inversion of the C-6 and C-8 stereocenters and formation of a sulfate, likely through the action of Cmm17 and CmmSu. The OA-6129 group of carbapenems identified from mutagenesis studies in *S. fulvoviridis* includes the C-2 side chain prior to pantethine cleavage by a ThnT orthologue.[32] These accumulated products, presumed intermediates, provide possible insight into the sequence of CmmQ hydroxylation, dehydration/rehydration of the C-6 side chain and O-sulfonation. The OA-6129 carbapenems are shown as possible intermediates in Scheme 2. Additionally, the occurrence of the asparenomycin group of carbapenems in *Streptomyces* suggests the possibility of an ene-carbapenem intermediate during the proposed C-6 and C-8 epimerization.[10b] The origin of the structural diversity of many isolated carbapenems across the entire family can, in part, be rationalized by this scheme.

It has been shown that the stereochemical relationship across C-5 and C-6 influences both antibacterial activity and stability toward β-lactamases; the presence of a sulfate at C-8 also appears to enhance stability toward β-lactamases.[33] Fully understanding the biosynthesis of MM 4550 in *S. argenteolus* will surely provide information for the rational development of novel carbapenems in the future.

CHEMBIOCHEM
FULL PAPERS
www.chembiochem.org

Conclusions

Isolation and characterization of the carbapenem MM 4550 from *S. argenteolus* ATCC 11009 coupled with data resulting from DNA sequence and individual gene disruptions provide insights into the biosynthesis of the structurally complex carbapenem antibiotics. The consistencies and inconsistencies apparent in comparisons with the thienamycin gene cluster point to specific gene products to account for the structural differences between thienamycin and MM 4550. The absence of genes homologous to *thnA-D* and *thnV* suggest that their corresponding proteins are not involved in the assembly of the carbapenem, but the additional genes *cmmSu*, *cmm17* and *cmmPah* might well be responsible for the differing stereochemical features of the C-6 side chain. The knowledge provided by the sequencing of multiple carbapenem-producing gene clusters can offer insights into their genetic diversity and how that diversity translates into variation in antibiotic structure. Exploration of this diversity could provide cost-effective fermentation methods to produce antibiotics or semisynthetic strategies for the synthesis of new antibiotics to combat the ever-developing resistance of bacterial pathogens.

Experimental Section

Cloning of the *thnM/carA* homologous gene in *S. argenteolus*: Degenerate PCR primers *thnM*-DEG-5 and *thnM*-DEG-3 were designed by using the CODEHOP program [14] (Figure 1). The PCR reaction was performed with a “touchdown” program that consisted of 1) denaturation at 98 °C for 5 min; 2) seven cycles of 40 s at 98 °C, 40 s at 63–56 °C (decreasing 1 °C every cycle), and 1 min at 72 °C; 3) 30 cycles of 40 s at 98 °C, 40 s at 56 °C, and 1 min at 72 °C; and 4) 10 min at 72 °C. The 300-bp PCR product was cloned into pBlue-script SK(+), and the resulting recombinant was subjected to DNA sequence analysis.

Disruption of *S. argenteolus* genes by λ-RED-mediated PCR targeting mutagenesis: A λ-RED-mediated PCR mutagenesis system developed by Gust et al. was employed for the inactivation of genes in the targeted gene cluster in *S. argenteolus*. [27] The extended *FRT-oriT-aac(3)IV-FRT* cassette amplified by PCR was used to target each individual gene on cosmid 5D1 in *E. coli*. For the overlapped ORFs in the gene cluster, primers were designed from outside the overlapped regions, but the translation remained in-frame. The PCR products were used to replace the corresponding genes in the cluster in *E. coli* BW25113 (pIJ790) by homologous recombination. The mutated cosmid was introduced into *E. coli* ET12567 (pUZ8002) for conjugation into wild-type *S. argenteolus*. [27] Disruption mutants generated by double-crossover events were confirmed by a Kms/Amr phenotype and eventually by Southern hybridization using the gene-specific and *oriT-aac(3)IV* probes.

Construction of *S. argenteolus* cmml-22-23: cmml, cmm22, and cmm23 were cloned by PCR from cosmid 5D1 (see the Supporting Information) and cloned into pBluescript SK(+) to give recombinants pBS/cmml, pBS/cmm22, and pBS/cmm23, respectively. cmml was excised from pBS/cmml with Ndel-HindIII and inserted into pUWL201PW digested with the same enzymes to generate plasmid pUWL201/cmml. cmm23 was also inserted into pUWL201PW at Ndel-EcoRI sites to yield plasmid pUWL201/cmm23. pUWL201/cmm23 was digested with KpnI and blunt-ended with Klenow DNA polymerase followed by digestion with EcoRI. The blunt EcoRI ermE*p-cmm23* was cloned downstream of cmml in pUWL201/cmml at HindIII/Klenow-EcoRI sites to give recombinant pUWL201/cmml-cmm23. cmm22 was excised as a Ndel-HindIII fragment from pBS/cmm22 and inserted into pET28(b) to yield plasmid pET28(b)/cmm22. The RBS-cmm22 obtained by digesting pET28(b)/cmm22 with Xbal-HindIII was inserted into pIJ4070 to give plasmid pIJ4070/cmm22. The ermE*p-RBS-cmm22* was excised as a blunt-end fragment by digestion of pIJ4070/cmm22 with EcoRI-PstI, followed by treatment with Klenow DNA polymerase. The ermE*p-RBS-cmm22* was inserted into the blunt-ended HindIII site in pMS82 to give plasmid pMS82/cmm22. Finally, ermE*p-cmml-ermE*p-cmm23* was excised as a Xhol-EcoRI fragment, blunt-ended with Klenow DNA polymerase, and inserted into pMS82/cmm22 at the blunt-ended EcoRI site to give the final integrative expression vector pMS82/cmml-22-23.

*S. argenteolus* cmml-22-23 was constructed by conjugating the wild-type *S. argenteolus* with *E. coli* ET12567 (pUZ8002, pMS82/cmml-22-23).

Fermentation and detection of the wild-type, genetically engineered, and disruption mutants of *S. argenteolus*: The wild-type *S. argenteolus* and its derived strains were grown at 30 °C on S/P medium (1% glycerol, 1% yeast extract, 2% agar, pH 7.0) for solid cultivation, and on tomato paste-oatmeal agar for sporulation. [34] For liquid cultivation, mycelia or spores were inoculated in S/P liquid medium and grown for 72 h at 30 °C. Antibiotics were added in cultures if necessary at the following final concentrations: apramycin (50 μg mL⁻¹), nalidixic acid (20 μg mL⁻¹), and hygromycin (50 μg mL⁻¹). For the general antibacterial activity test, seed culture (2.5 mL) was transferred to fermentation medium (50 mL) of either modified ISP4 (ISP: International Streptomyces Project) medium (ISP4⁺: ISP4 plus 6 mg L⁻¹ CoCl₂·6H₂O and pH 7.7) or OMYM (oatmeal-yeast extract-malt extract) medium. [12b] For isolation, purification, and characterization of intermediates or final products, the fermentation was carried out on a 1.3 L×10 scale as follows: S/P medium (100 mL, containing antibiotics if necessary) was inoculated with spores (100 μL, ~10⁶–⁹ mL) and grown at 30 °C for 48–56 h. Seed culture (10 mL) was transferred into ISP4⁺⁺ medium (1.3 L, ISP4 plus 6 mg L⁻¹ CoCl₂·6H₂O and 1 mg L⁻¹ methylcobalamin, pH 7.7). The fermentation was carried out for 52–56 h at 30 °C and 250 rpm rotation.

A sample (2 mL) was taken every 24 h from each culture, and supernatant (250 μL) was added to a microcylinder on top of nutrient agar seeded with β-lactam-supersensitive *E. coli* ESS. [35] The carbapenem MM 4550 and its bioactive intermediates could be visualized as inhibition zones after incubation at 37 °C for 15 h. The production of carbapenems was also detected with induction of β-lactamases in *B. licheniformis* ATCC 14580 in a colorimetric assay with Nitrocefin. [28]

Isolation and identification of MM 4550 in *S. argenteolus*: Isolation and purification steps were performed at 4 °C, with the exception of preparatory HPLC, which was performed at room temperature. K₂HPO₄ buffer (20 mM, pH 7.0) containing ethylenediamenetraacetate (EDTA, 0.5 mM) was used to make all aqueous solutions in order to maintain the pH and provide a neutral environment to avoid degradation of carbapenem products.

To extract antibiotics from media, the filtrate from of fermentation broth (13 L) was first washed with CH₂Cl₂ (600 mL). The resultant washed medium was then extracted with Aliquat 336 (5%, 300 mL) in CH₂Cl₂. The medium was tested for bioactivity by *E. coli* ESS bioassay before and after extraction, which confirmed efficient

extraction. The organic phase was then back-extracted with aqueous KI (4×25 mL, each of 1, 3, 5 and 10%). The 3 and 5 % KI fractions contained the greatest quantity of antibiotic, as shown by bioassay on *E. coli* ESS, and were collected and lyophilized.

The crude powder was dissolved in phosphate buffer and loaded onto a column of anion-exchange resin (Dowex 1×2, 200×20 mm, 100 mesh). The antibiotic was eluted with NaCl (1 M), and the bioactive fractions were lyophilized and dissolved in a minimum amount of phosphate buffer for purification by reversed-phase HPLC. HPLC was carried out on an Agilent 1100 series G1311A pump with an Agilent model 7725i injector fitted with a 1 mL injection loop. The chromatogram was monitored by an Agilent 1100 series G1315B DAD detector at 210, 240, 270, 300, and 330 nm.

**HPLC conditions:** Phenomenex Prodigy C18 (2) 250×10.00 mm 5 μ micron semipreparatory column, 2 mL min⁻¹; buffer A=20 mM K₂HPO₄, 0.5 mM EDTA, pH 7.4 with HCl, buffer B=CH₃CN. Method 1, t=0 min 1.5% B, t=15 min 1.5% B, t=30 min 30% B, t=35 min 30% B, t=40 min 1.5% B, t=55 min 1.5% B.

For the hydroxamate assay, a stock solution (100 μL) of hydroxylamine hydrochloride (50 mM) in phosphate buffer (pH 7.4) was added to the crude antibiotic-containing solution (900 μL), and the mixture was incubated for 1 h at room temperature before it was injected for HPLC analysis according to the method described above. The fractions containing a peak in the control that was absent when treated with hydroxylamine were collected and used for bioassay on *E. coli* ESS.

To prepare samples for NMR analysis, the crude antibiotic-containing solution (50 mL) was HPLC purified according to the method described above, and the peak that reacted with hydroxylamine was collected for all runs. The biologically active peak was collected and lyophilized. In order to remove excess salts from the resulting powder for NMR experimentation, the entire mixture was purified by one run of HPLC. The peak was collected in 1 mL fractions and lyophilized. Samples taken for NMR spectroscopy were dissolved in D₂O (333 μL, 100%) and placed in a 5 mm D₂O Shigemi tube.

¹H NMR (600 MHz, D₂O using Shigemi advanced NMR microtubes, Bruker Avance II 600 spectrometer at 298 K, processed with the ACD labs software from Advanced Chemistry Development, Inc.): 7.60 (d, J=13.7 Hz, 1 H), 6.41 (d, J=14.7 Hz, 1 H), 4.94 (qd, J=5.9, 14.7 Hz, 1 H), 4.49 (dt, J=3.9, 5.9 Hz, 1 H), 3.98 (dd, J=5.9, 8.8 Hz, 1 H), 3.52 (dd, J=8.8, 17.6 Hz, 1 H), 3.12 (dd, J=10.8, 17.6 Hz, 1 H), 2.14 (s, 3 H), 1.54 ppm (d, J=6.8 Hz, 3 H).

ESI mass spectrometric analysis was run on a PerkinElmer Axlon TOF in the negative mode.

For mass-spectrometry analysis of carbapenem intermediates in mutants, cultures grown in ISP4⁺⁺ were directly injected onto the UPLC-MS. UPLC-MS was carried out on a Waters Acquity H-Class UPLC system with a multi-wavelength UV/Vis diode array detector in tandem with HRMS analysis by a Waters Xevo-G2 Q-ToF ESI mass spectrometer.

**UPLC conditions:** Waters Acquity BEH UPLC column packed with ethylene-bridged hybrid C-18 2.1 mm×50 mm, 1.7 μm, 0.3 mL min⁻¹; solvent A=H₂O, solvent B=acetonitrile. Method: t=0 min 0% B, t=1 min 0% B, t=7.5 min 80% B, t=8.4 min 80% B, t=10 min 0% B. Samples were run in the negative mode with a 1 min solvent purge after injection.

---

### Acknowledgements

We thank Dr. Ananya Majumdar and Dr. Cathy Moore for assistance with the NMR spectroscopic analyses and Joshua Wilhide at the University of Maryland for the MS data. We are grateful to Prof. Susan E. Jensen (University of Alberta) and Dr. Margaret C. M. Smith for providing the *E. coli* ESS and plasmid pMS82. We also thank Dr. Michael M. Freeman for informed discussion, Tegan Feehery for assistance with the early PCR experiments, Daniel Marous for the provision of PS-5, and the National Institutes of Health (AI 014937) for financial support.

---

**Keywords:** antibiotics · biosynthesis · carbapenems · beta-lactams · MM 4550 · *Streptomyces argenteolus*

---

[1] C. Suárez, K. Lolans, M. Villegas, J. Quinn, *Expert Rev. Anti-Infect. Ther.* **2005**, 3, 915–922.

[2] M. Sleeman, C. Schofield, *J. Biol. Chem.* **2004**, 279, 6730–6736.

[3] M. Miller, B. Gerratana, A. Stapon, C. Townsend, A. Rosenzweig, *J. Biol. Chem.* **2003**, 278, 40996–41002.

[4] a) R. Li, A. Stapon, J. Blanchfield, C. Townsend, *J. Am. Chem. Soc.* **2000**, 122, 9296–9297; b) A. Stapon, R. Li, C. Townsend, *J. Am. Chem. Soc.* **2003**, 125, 8486–8493; c) I. Clifton, L. Doan, M. Sleeman, M. Topf, H. Suzuki, R. Wilmouth, C. Schofield, *J. Biol. Chem.* **2003**, 278, 20843–20850.

[5] L. Núñez, C. Méndez, A. Braña, G. Blanco, J. Salas, *Chem. Biol.* **2003**, 10, 301–311.

[6] a) M. Bodner, R. Li, R. Phelan, M. Freeman, K. Moshos, C. Townsend, *ChemBioChem* **2011**, 12, 2159–2165; b) M. Bodner, R. Phelan, M. Freeman, R. Li, C. Townsend, *J. Am. Chem. Soc.* **2010**, 132, 12–13; c) R. Hamed, E. Batchelar, J. Mecinović, T. Claridge, C. Schofield, *ChemBioChem* **2009**, 10, 246–250.

[7] M. Freeman, K. Moshos, M. Bodner, R. Li, C. Townsend, *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* **2008**, 105, 11128–11133.

[8] M. Rodríguez, L. Núñez, A. Braña, C. Méndez, J. Salas, G. Blanco, *Antimicrob. Agents Chemother.* **2011**, 55, 1638–1649.

[9] M. Rodríguez, L. Núñez, A. Braña, C. Méndez, J. Salas, G. Blanco, *Mol. Microbiol.* **2008**, 69, 633–645.

[10] a) K. Okamura, S. Hirata, A. Koki, K. Hori, N. Shibamoto, Y. Okumura, M. Okabe, R. Okamoto, K. Kouno, Y. Fukagawa, Y. Shimauchi, T. Ishikura, J. Lein, *J. Antibiot.* **1979**, 32, 262–271; b) J. Shoji, H. Hindo, R. Sakazaki, N. Tsuji, K. Nagashima, K. Matsumoto, Y. Takahashi, S. Kosuki, T. Hattori, E. Kondo, K. Tanaka, *J. Antibiot.* **1982**, 35, 15–23; c) D. Butterworth, M. Cole, G. Hanscomb, G. Rolinson, *J. Antibiot.* **1979**, 32, 287–294; d) E. Stapley, P. Cassidy, J. Tunac, R. Monaghan, M. Jackson, S. Hernandez, S. Zimmerman, J. Mata, S. Currie, *J. Antibiot.* **1981**, 34, 628–636; e) N. Tsuji, M. Kobayashi, Y. Terui, K. Matsumoto, Y. Takahashi, E. Kondo, *J. Antibiot.* **1985**, 38, 270–274; f) M. Nakayama, S. Kimura, S. Tanabe, T. Mizoguchi, I. Watanabe, T. Mori, *J. Antibiot.* **1981**, 34, 818–823.

[11] a) K. Tanaka, J. Shoji, Y. Terui, N. Tsuji, E. Kondo, M. Mayama, Y. Kawamura, T. Hattori, K. Matsumoto, T. Yoshida, *J. Antibiot.* **1981**, 34, 909–911; b) Y. Kawamura, Y. Yasuda, M. Mayama, K. Tanaka, *J. Antibiot.* **1982**, 35, 10–14.

[12] a) T. Haneishi, M. Nakajima, N. Serizawa, M. Inukai, Y. Takiguchi, M. Arai, S. Satoh, H. Kuwano, C. Tamura, *J. Antibiot.* **1983**, 36, 1581–1584; b) Y. Nakamura, E. Ono, T. Kohda, H. Shibai, *J. Antibiot.* **1989**, 42, 73–83.

[13] J. Hood, S. Box, M. Verrall, *J. Antibiot.* **1979**, 32, 295–304.

[14] T. Rose, E. Schultz, J. Henikoff, S. Pietrokovski, C. McCallum, S. Henikoff, *Nucleic Acids Res.* **1998**, 26, 1628–1635.

[15] G. Blanco, *Arch. Microbiol.* **2012**, 194, 549–555.

[16] R. Hamed, E. Batchelar, I. Clifton, C. Schofield, *Cell. Mol. Life Sci.* **2008**, 65, 2507–2527.

[17] Y. Yan, L. Zhang, T. Ito, X. Qu, Y. Asakawa, T. Awakawa, I. Abe, W. Liu, *Org. Lett.* **2012**, 14, 4142–4145.

[18] a) M. Negishi, L. Pedersen, E. Petrotchenko, S. Shevtsov, A. Gorokhov, Y. Kakuta, L. Pedersen, *Arch. Biochem. Biophys.* **2001**, 390, 149–157; b) R.

CHEMBIOCHEM
FULL PAPERS
www.chembiochem.org

Shi, S. Lamb, S. Bhat, T. Sulea, G. Wright, A. Matte, M. Cygler, *J. Biol. Chem.* 2007, 282, 13073–13086; c) Y. Kakuta, L. Pedersen, L. Pedersen, M. Niegishi, *Trends Biochem. Sci.* 1998, 23, 129–130.

[19] a) A. Paradkar, K. Aidoo, S. Jensen, *Mol. Microbiol.* 1998, 27, 831–843; b) R. Pérez-Redondo, A. Rodríguez-García, J. Martín, P. Liras, *Gene* 1998, 211, 311–321.

[20] a) J. Stock, A. Ninfa, A. Stock, *Microbiol. Rev.* 1989, 53, 450–490; b) M. Hutchings, P. Hoskisson, G. Chandra, M. Buttner, *Microbiology* 2004, 150, 2795–2806; c) Y. Hwang, J. Lee, E. Kim, C. Choi, *Biotechnol. Lett.* 2001, 23, 457–462.

[21] M. Claros, G. von Heijne, *CABIOS Comput. Appl. Biosci.* 1994, 10, 685–686.

[22] G. Agnihotri, H. Liu, *Bioorg. Med. Chem.* 2003, 11, 9–20.

[23] D. Christianson, *Acc. Chem. Res.* 2005, 38, 191–201.

[24] C. Tabor, H. Tabor, *Annu. Rev. Biochem.* 1984, 53, 749–790.

[25] a) S. Goomeshi Nobary, S. Jensen, *Can. J. Microbiol.* 2012, 58, 413–425; b) T. Wu, R. Busby, T. Houston, D. McIlwaine, L. Egan, C. Townsend, *J. Bacteriol.* 1995, 177, 3714–3720.

[26] J. Elkins, I. Clifton, H. Hernández, L. Doan, C. Robinson, C. Schofield, K. Hewitson, *Biochem. J.* 2002, 366, 423–434.

[27] B. Gust, G. Challis, K. Fowler, T. Kieser, K. Chater, *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 2003, 100, 1541–1546.

[28] R. Sykes, J. Wells, *J. Antibiot.* 1985, 38, 119–121.

[29] a) A. Brown, D. Corbett, A. Eglington, T. Howarth, *J. Chem. Soc. Chem. Commun.* 1977, 523–525; b) D. Corbett, A. Eglington, T. Howarth, *J. Chem. Soc. Chem. Commun.* 1977, 953–954.

[30] a) H. Ishizuka, S. Horinouchi, H. Kieser, D. Hopwood, T. Beppu, *J. Bacteriol.* 1992, 174, 7585–7594; b) Y. Lu, W. Wang, D. Shu, W. Zhang, L. Chen, Z. Qin, S. Yang, W. Jiang, *Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol.* 2007, 77, 625–635.

[31] I. Kojima, Y. Fukagawa, M. Okabe, T. Ishikura, N. Shibamoto, *J. Antibiot.* 1988, 41, 899–907.

[32] M. Okabe, S. Azuma, I. Kojima, K. Kouno, R. Okamoto, Y. Fukagawa, T. Ishikura, *J. Antibiot.* 1982, 35, 1255–1263.

[33] R. Wise, *Antimicrob. Agents Chemother.* 1986, 30, 343–349.

[34] S. Williams, C. Booth in *Actinomycetes, Vol. 4*, Academic Press, London, 1971.

[35] H. Aoki, H. Sakai, M. Kohsaka, T. Konomi, J. Hosoda, *J. Antibiot.* 1976, 29, 492–500.

Received: May 22, 2013  
Revised: October 25, 2013  
Published online on January 13, 2014

© 2014 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim

ChemBioChem 2014, 15, 320–331 331
