
Author Manuscript Published OnlineFirst on February 3, 2014; DOI: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-13-2233  
Author manuscripts have been peer reviewed and accepted for publication but have not yet been edited.

Clinical Cancer Research

The impact of EGFR T790M mutations and BIM mRNA expression on outcome in patients with EGFR-mutant NSCLC treated with erlotinib or chemotherapy in the randomized phase III EURTAC trial

Carlota Costa, Miguel Angel Molina-Vila, Ana Drozdowskyj, et al.  
Clin Cancer Res Published Online First February 3, 2014.

---

**Updated version**  
Access the most recent version of this article at:  
doi:10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-13-2233  

**Supplementary Material**  
Access the most recent supplemental material at:  
http://clincancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/suppl/2014/02/04/1078-0432.CCR-13-2233.DC1.html  

**Author Manuscript**  
Author manuscripts have been peer reviewed and accepted for publication but have not yet been edited.

---

**E-mail alerts**  
Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.

**Reprints and Subscriptions**  
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications Department at pubs@aacr.org.

**Permissions**  
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications Department at permissions@aacr.org.

---

Downloaded from clincancerres.aacrjournals.org on February 5, 2014. © 2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

Author Manuscript Published OnlineFirst on February 3, 2014; DOI: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-13-2233
Author manuscripts have been peer reviewed and accepted for publication but have not yet been edited.

The impact of EGFR T790M mutations and BIM mRNA expression on outcome in patients with EGFR-mutant NSCLC treated with erlotinib or chemotherapy in the randomized phase III EURTAC trial

Carlota Costa¹, Miguel Angel Molina¹, Ana Drozdowskyj², Ana Giménez-Capitán¹, Jordi Bertran-Alamillo¹, Niki Karachaliou¹, Radj Gervais³, Bartomeu Massuti⁴, Jia Wei¹,⁵, Teresa Moran⁶, Margarita Majem⁷, Enriqueta Felip⁸, Enric Carcereny⁶, Rosario Garcia-Campelo⁹, Santiago Viteri¹, Miquel Taron¹,⁶, Mayumi Ono¹⁰, Petros Giannikopoulos¹¹, Trever Bivona¹¹,¹², Rafael Rosell¹³

¹Pangaea Biotech, Barcelona, Spain; ²Pivotal, Madrid, Spain; ³Centre François Baclesse, Caen, France; ⁴Hospital General de Alicante, Alicante, Spain; ⁵Drum Tower Hospital, Nanjing, China; ⁶Catalan Institute of Oncology, Badalona, Spain; ⁷Hospital Sant Pau, Barcelona, Spain; ⁸Hospital Vall d’Hebron, Barcelona, Spain; ⁹Complejo Hospitalario Universitario, La Coruña, Spain; ¹⁰Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan; ¹¹Cancer Therapeutics Innovation Group, New York, NY, USA; ¹²Helen Diller Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of California, San Francisco, CA, USA; ¹³Molecular Oncology Research (MOR) Foundation, Barcelona, Spain

Running title: BIM mRNA expression and survival in NSCLC

Keywords: BIM mRNA expression, EGFR mutations, T790M, chemotherapy, erlotinib

Financial support: Work in Dr Rafael Rosell’s laboratory is partially supported by a grant from La Caixa Foundation and by a grant from Red Tematica de Investigacion Cooperativa en Cancer (RTICC; grant RD12/0036/0072). Neither of these funding agencies was involved in the study design or conduct, data management or analysis, manuscript preparation or review, or the decision to submit for publication.

Correspondence to: Rafael Rosell
Catalan Institute of Oncology
Head, Medical Oncology Service
Hospital Germans Trias i Pujol
Ctra Canyet, s/n
08916 Badalona (Barcelona)
Spain
Tel: +34 93 497 89 25
Fax: +34 93 497 89 50
Email: rrosell@iconcologia.net

Potential conflicts of interest: The authors report no conflicts of interest.

Word count: 3350

Total number of figures and tables: 5

Downloaded from clincancerres.aacrjournals.org on February 5, 2014. © 2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

Author Manuscript Published OnlineFirst on February 3, 2014; DOI: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-13-2233
Author manuscripts have been peer reviewed and accepted for publication but have not yet been edited.

# Statement of translational relevance

Despite the recent paradigm shift in the treatment of non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients, with a move toward biomarker-directed therapy, preclinical data has seldom been incorporated into clinical practice, since the existence of multiple resistance mechanisms complicates the selection of optimal biomarkers. Here we report possible causes of resistance to EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors in EGFR-mutant NSCLC patients: the high co-existence of the pretreatment somatic T790M mutation, with a clear impact on progression-free survival, and the role of BIM mRNA expression as an independent prognostic marker. Our findings show that the T790M mutation is present at clinically meaningful levels prior to treatment and provide the basis for the use of EGFR T790M mutations and BIM mRNA levels to prospectively identify patients most likely to benefit from rational polytherapies designed to overcome innate and acquired resistance to EGFR TKI monotherapy.

Abstract

Purpose: Concomitant genetic alterations could account for transient clinical responses to tyrosine kinase inhibitors of the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) in patients harboring activating EGFR mutations.

Experimental Design: We have evaluated the impact of pretreatment somatic EGFR T790M mutations, TP53 mutations and BIM mRNA expression in 95 patients with EGFR-mutant NSCLC included in the EURTAC trial (trial registration: NCT00446225).

Results: T790M mutations were detected in 65.26% of patients using our highly sensitive method based on laser microdissection and PNA-clamping PCR, which can detect the mutation at an allelic dilution of 1 in 5000. Progression-free survival (PFS) to erlotinib was 9.7 months for those with T790M mutations and 15.8 months for those without, while among patients receiving chemotherapy, it was 6 and 5.1 months, respectively (P<0.0001). PFS to erlotinib was 12.9 months for those with high and 7.2 months for those with low/intermediate BIM expression levels, while among chemotherapy-treated patients, it was 5.8 and 5.5 months, respectively (P=0.0003). Overall survival was 28.6 months for patients with high BIM expression and 22.1 months for those with low/intermediate BIM expression (P=0.0364). Multivariate analyses showed that erlotinib was a marker of longer PFS (hazard ratio [HR] = 0.35; P=0.0003), while high BIM expression was a marker of longer PFS (HR=0.49; P=0.0122) and overall survival (HR=0.53; P=0.0323).

Conclusions: Low-level pretreatment T790M mutations can frequently be detected and can be used for customizing treatment with T790M-specific inhibitors. BIM mRNA expression is a biomarker of survival in EGFR-mutant NSCLC and can potentially be used for synthetic lethality therapies.

Author Manuscript Published OnlineFirst on February 3, 2014; DOI: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-13-2233
Author manuscripts have been peer reviewed and accepted for publication but have not yet been edited.

# Introduction

A recent meta-analysis of patients with non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) with activating mutations in the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) showed that EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs), mainly gefitinib and erlotinib, significantly delayed disease progression but had no effect on overall survival, although this may have been due to the confounding effect of crossover between randomization arms at the time of progression (1). In a large prospective study of EGFR-mutant patients treated with erlotinib, we observed similar overall survival in the first- and second-line settings (2).

In the randomized phase III EURTAC trial comparing erlotinib vs chemotherapy in advanced EGFR-mutant patients with NSCLC, the interim analysis confirmed that EGFR mutations were a predictive biomarker of longer progression-free survival to erlotinib (hazard ratio [HR] = 0.37; P < 0.001) (3). However, response was limited to 58% of the patients in the erlotinib group and no impact on overall survival was observed.

Preclinical and limited clinical studies have identified genetic events that could regulate response to EGFR TKIs in NSCLC, including a primary drug resistance mutation in EGFR (T790M) (4-8), dysregulation of Bcl-2 interacting mediator of cell death (BIM) (9-12) and mutations in TP53 (13). The EGFR T790M mutation promotes the assembly of an active kinase conformation with high affinity for ATP binding (14). The EGFR T790M mutation has been found in pretreatment fresh-frozen or paraffin-embedded tissue from EGFR-mutant, EGFR TKI-naïve patients with NSCLC at frequencies ranging from 2.7% to 79% (4, 5, 7, 15-18). This variation seems to be due to the use of different detection methods. For example, the recent study by Su et al compared mass spectrometry with standard direct sequencing and found the T790M mutation in

31.5% and 2.7%, respectively (15). The presence of the T790M mutation has been

related to shorter progression-free survival to EGFR TKIs (4, 5, 15). In NSCLC cell lines

harboring EGFR activating mutations, EGFR mutations led to impaired BIM expression,

mediated by the activation of the extracellular regulated kinase (ERK) pathway (9-11,

19). In a study of EGFR-mutant patients treated with EGFR TKIs, nine patients with low

BIM mRNA levels had a significantly shorter progression-free survival than 15 with high

levels (4.7 vs 13.7 months; P = 0.007) (12). TP53 mutations have not been examined in

patients with EGFR mutations; however, preclinical data indicate that p53 could be

associated with acquired resistance to EGFR TKIs (20).

Here we present the updated efficacy results of the EURTAC trial (3) (data cut-off,

January 24, 2013). We have also examined somatic T790M and TP53 mutations and

BIM mRNA expression in pretreatment tumor samples from 95 patients included in the

trial in order to assess their potential role as predictive biomarkers of progression-free

and overall survival.

Author Manuscript Published OnlineFirst on February 3, 2014; DOI: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-13-2233
Author manuscripts have been peer reviewed and accepted for publication but have not yet been edited.

# Methods

## Patients

The EURTAC study enrolled 173 patients with EGFR mutations who were randomized to receive erlotinib or standard intravenous chemotherapy with cisplatin or carboplatin plus docetaxel or gemcitabine (3). Pretreatment tumor specimens were available from 95 of these patients for further genetic analyses. The EURTAC was approved by the institutional review board of each participating center, and written informed consent was obtained from all patients.

## Molecular analyses

All analyses were carried out centrally at the Pangaea Biotech Laboratory of Oncology, an ISO 15189-certified laboratory, located in the Quirón Dexeus University Hospital (Barcelona, Spain). See the Supplementary Material for complete details of all methodologies.

## T790M mutations

For the assessment of the pretreatment somatic EGFR T790M mutation, cancer cells were microdissected directly into 15 μL of PCR buffer (Ecogen, Barcelona, Spain) plus proteinase K (40 μg/mL) and incubated overnight at 60°C. Proteinase was inactivated at 95°C for 10 minutes, and the amount of DNA present in the cell extract was quantified in a Nanodrop and diluted to 5 ng of DNA/μL. Two extracts were obtained from every tumor, each from one or more separate tumor areas (5). Cell extracts were directly analyzed by TaqMan in the presence of a peptide-nucleic acid (PNA) designed to inhibit the amplification of the wild-type (wt) allele, as previously described (5).

Primers, probes and PNA were as follows: forward primer, 5′-AGGCAGCCGAAGGGCA-3′, reverse primer 5′-CCTCACCTCCACC GTGCA-3′; probes 5′-VIC

CTCATCACGCAGCTCATG-MGB-3'; and 5'-FAM-CTCATCATGCAGCTCATG-MGB'3; and

PNA: N(5')-TCATCACGCAGCTC-C(3'). Amplification was performed in 12.5-μl volumes using 1 μl of extract, 6.25 μl of TaqMan 2x PCR Master Mix (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA), 7.5 pmol of each primer, 2.5 pmol of probes and 6.25 pmol of PNA.

Samples were submitted to 50 cycles of 15 seconds at 94°C and 1 minute at 60°C in a 7900 HT Fast Real-Time PCR System (Applied Biosystems). All cell extracts were run in quadruplicate, so every tumor sample was run in octuplicate. In addition, all cell extracts were also assayed in the absence of PNA to confirm the presence of DNA. DNA from the DLD1 cell line at 5 ng/μL was used as a negative control and DNA from the H1975 cell line at 50 pg/μL as a mutated, positive control. The H1975 cell line is derived from an EGFR TKI-naive patient and harbors both the T790M and L858R mutation (6). Extraction and not-template controls were also run. Upon completion of the TaqMan assay, in order to confirm that the amount of DNA in the samples was not higher than 5 ng/μL, we compared the Ct of the wt allele in the absence of PNA with the corresponding Ct of the DLD-1 cell line. Subsequently, a tumor was considered positive if at least 1 of the 8 octuplicates showed amplification of the T790M allele in the presence of PNA.

We had previously evaluated the sensitivity of our T790M assay using serially diluted genomic DNA from the cell line H1975. Five pg of DNA per μL were successfully amplified and the T790M mutation detected. In contrast, results from cell lines not harboring the T790M were consistently negative in our assay, at concentrations up to 5 ng/μL (a thousand times higher than the concentration of H1975 needed to detect the T790M). The specificity of our assay was determined by diluting DNA from H1975 (10 pg/mL final) into increasing concentrations (1:10 to 1:20000) of DNA from the DLD-

Author Manuscript Published OnlineFirst on February 3, 2014; DOI: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-13-2233

Author manuscripts have been peer reviewed and accepted for publication but have not yet been edited.

1 cell line (wt for the T790M mutation). Our assay consistently detected the T790M allele at an allelic distribution of 1 in 5000. For additional details on the validation of our technique, see Supplementary Methods, Supplementary Tables S1-S3, and Supplementary Fig. 1.

Since the T790M mutation is present in an extremely low percentage of cells, many standard, commercially available techniques detect it only in a relatively small percentage of tumors, since they can detect the mutation at an allelic distribution of 1 in only 10 to 100. One of these assays, the T790M TaqMan Mutation Detection Assay (TMDA) (Applied Biosystems), is based upon cast-PCR, where an allele-specific primer detects the mutant allele and an MGB oligonucleotide blocker suppresses the amplification of the wt allele. We have also examined the T790M mutation with the TMDA in our series of 95 patients.

**TP53 mutations**

We used High Resolution Melting (HRM) to screen for mutations in exons 5, 6, 7 and 8 of TP53. The HRM products of all samples that appeared mutated or unclear in the dissociation curve analyses were subsequently sequenced. All mutated samples were re-confirmed by standard PCR followed by agarose gel electrophoresis and sequencing (Supplementary Tables S4-6).

**BIM mRNA expression**

Gene expression analysis of BIM was performed on RNA isolated from the tumor tissue specimens. RNA extraction, retrotranscription analysis and real-time PCR were performed as previously described (5), and gene expression was examined by QPCR using β-actin as housekeeping gene.

**Statistical analyses**

Author Manuscript Published OnlineFirst on February 3, 2014; DOI: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-13-2233

Author manuscripts have been peer reviewed and accepted for publication but have not yet been edited.

On 24 January 2013, 135 progression-free survival events had occurred, and the results reported here are based on data analyses from that cut-off date. For the overall survival analysis, patients were not censored at crossover, while all patients were censored at crossover for the analysis of progression-free survival. Progression-free and overall survival were estimated by means of the Kaplan-Meier method and compared with a non-parametric log-rank test. A multivariate Cox proportional hazard model was applied with treatment and potential risk factors as covariates, obtaining hazard ratios and their 95% confidence intervals (CIs). Response rates were compared with the χ² test, or Fisher exact test, as required. The U Mann-Whitney test and the Kruskal-Wallis test were used to test associations between genotypes and clinical characteristics. Each analysis was performed with the use of a two-sided 5% significance level and a 95% CI. The statistical analyses were performed using SAS version 9.2, SPSS version 17.0, or S-PLUS version 6.1. The EURTAC study is registered with ClinicalTrials.gov, number NCT00446225.

Author Manuscript Published OnlineFirst on February 3, 2014; DOI: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-13-2233
Author manuscripts have been peer reviewed and accepted for publication but have not yet been edited.

Results

Table 1 shows patient characteristics of the patients included in the sub-analysis of 95 patients from the EURTAC trial (3). Characteristics of the 95 patients were consistent with those of all 173 patients included in the trial. The pretreatment somatic EGFR T790M mutation was detected in 62 (65.26%) patients using our assay with laser microdissection and PNA-clamping PCR. The analysis of non-tumor tissue ruled out the presence of germline mutations. In contrast, the TMDA assay detected the T790M allele in only 23 of 95 samples (24.2%) (Supplementary Table S7).

TP53 mutations were successfully assessed in 82 and detected in 23 (28.05%). Among the 83 patients in whom BIM mRNA was successfully examined, BIM expression was low (<1.83) or intermediate (1.83–2.96) in 53 (63.96%) and high (≥2.96) in 30 (36.14%).

There was no statistically significant association between T790M mutation status and BIM expression levels. No differences in baseline characteristics were observed according to T790M or TP53 mutations or BIM expression levels (Table 1).

Progression-free survival

At January 24, 2013, median progression-free survival for all 173 patients in the EURTAC study was 10.4 months for patients treated with erlotinib and 5.1 months for those treated with chemotherapy (HR = 0.33; 95% CI, 0.23–0.49; *P* < 0.0001).

Differences in progression-free survival times for the 95 patients included in this sub-analysis, based on treatment and T790M mutation status as determined by our method, were highly significant (*P* < 0.0001) (Fig. 1A). Among patients treated with erlotinib, progression-free survival was 15.8 months (95% CI, 8.8–NR) for those without the concomitant T790M mutation, compared to 9.7 months (95% CI, 6.9–12.9) for those with the T790M mutation (*P* = 0.0185), while among those treated with

chemotherapy, progression-free survival was 5.1 months (95% CI, 1.1-6.7) for those

without the T790M mutation and 6 months (95% CI, 4.1-7.7) for those with the T790M

mutation (*P* = 0.2427) (Supplementary Fig. S2A-B). When tumor samples were

classified as having low or high levels of T790M, using the median (0.0073) as the

cutoff, progression-free survival to erlotinib was 10.4 months in patients with low

levels and 8.7 months in those with high levels (*P* = 0.058). When T790M mutation

status was determined by the TMDA, PFS was similar in patients in whom the T790M

mutation was detected (10.8 months) and in those in whom the mutation was not

detected (10.4 months) (Supplementary Fig. S3).

Progression-free survival to erlotinib was 7.2 months (95% CI, 2.6-12.3) for those with

low/intermediate BIM levels, compared to 12.9 months (95% CI, 9.7-23.9) for those

with high BIM levels, while among patients treated with chemotherapy, progression-

free survival was 5.5 months (95% CI, 3.9-6.7) for those with low/intermediate BIM

levels and 5.8 months (95% CI, 1.3-9.0) for those with high levels (*P* = 0.0003) (Fig. 1B).

Progression-free survival to erlotinib was 9.7 months (95% CI, 0.5-15.9) for those with

TP53 mutations and 11 months (95% CI, 8.7-13.7) for those without TP53 mutations,

while among patients treated with chemotherapy, progression-free survival was 5.3

months (95% CI, 1.3-7.7) for those with mutations and 6 months (95% CI, 3.9-8.3) for

those without (*P* = 0.0001).

In the univariate analysis, only erlotinib (HR = 0.32; 95% CI, 0.19-0.53; *P* < 0.0001) and

high BIM expression (HR = 0.54, 95% CI, 0.31-0.93; *P* = 0.0261) were associated with

longer progression-free survival (Table 2). In the multivariate analysis, treatment with

erlotinib (HR = 0.35; 95% CI, 0.20-0.62; *P* = 0.0003) and high BIM expression (HR = 0.49;

95% CI, 0.28-0.86; *P* = 0.0122) were again markers of longer progression-free survival.

Author Manuscript Published OnlineFirst on February 3, 2014; DOI: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-13-2233
Author manuscripts have been peer reviewed and accepted for publication but have not yet been edited.

### Survival

Overall survival for all 173 patients included in the EURTAC study did not differ between treatment groups. At January 24, 2013, with a median follow-up of 40.7 months for the erlotinib group and 35.4 months for the chemotherapy group, median survival was 22.9 months in the erlotinib group and 22.1 months in the chemotherapy group (Supplementary Fig. S4).

Survival times were similar (25.8 vs 23.9 months, respectively) for the 95 patients included in the present study. Importantly, however, the majority of patients had crossed over at the time of progression (Supplementary Table S8). Survival to erlotinib was 20.8 months (95% CI, 8.9-32.5) for those with low/intermediate BIM levels, compared to 24.5 months (95% CI, 14-NR) for those with high BIM levels, while among patients treated with chemotherapy, survival was 20.8 months (95% CI, 15-30.7) for those with low/intermediate BIM levels and 35.8 months (95% CI, 18.1-NR) for those with high levels (*P* = 0.2037) (Supplementary Fig. S5).

Table 2 shows the univariate analysis for survival. Among the 83 patients in whom BIM mRNA expression was analyzed, overall survival was 28.6 months (95% CI, 19.8-NR) for those with high BIM expression and 22.1 months (95% CI, 14.7-30.0) for those with low/intermediate BIM expression (*P* = 0.0364) (Fig. 2). In the multivariate analysis, only high BIM expression (HR = 0.53; 95% CI, 0.30-0.95; *P* = 0.0323) was associated with longer survival.

### Response

At April 11, 2012, the overall response rates in the EURTAC study were 65.1% in the erlotinib group and 16.1% in the chemotherapy group (*P* < 0.0001). Among the 95 patients included in the present study, response rates were 56% and 11.11%,

respectively $(P < 0.0001)$. For the 83 patients with data on BIM mRNA expression,

erlotinib-treated patients with low/intermediate BIM levels attained an overall

response of 34.6%, compared to 87.5% for those with high BIM levels. For patients

receiving chemotherapy, overall response was 11.1% and 14.3%, respectively $(P <

0.0001)$. Response according to T790M mutation status is shown in Supplementary

Table S9.

In the subgroup of 29 patients with the T790M mutation, the overall response to

erlotinib was 80% when BIM levels were high and 31.58% when BIM levels were low $(P

= 0.041)$. A similar but non-significant difference in response rates was observed in the

13 patients without the T790M mutation (100% vs 42.86%; $P = 0.07$).

Author Manuscript Published OnlineFirst on February 3, 2014; DOI: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-13-2233
Author manuscripts have been peer reviewed and accepted for publication but have not yet been edited.

Discussion

Through the analysis of a large prospective clinical cohort, our data establish novel clinical biomarkers and therapeutic targets that could be used to optimize the survival of patients with EGFR-mutant NSCLC. Although overall fewer than 60% of patients responded to erlotinib in the present study, the response rate was an unprecedented 100% in those with high BIM mRNA expression and 75% in those without the T790M mutation. Moreover, in patients without the T790M mutation, progression-free survival to erlotinib was 15.8 months, compared to 10.4 months for those with low levels of T790M and 8.7 months for those with high levels. In addition, the multivariate analyses showed that high BIM expression was a marker of longer progression-free and overall survival, confirming preliminary data that total BIM mRNA expression influences outcome of patients with EGFR mutations (12).

In H1650 cells (with an EGFR exon 19 deletion and low BIM mRNA expression), the combination of gefitinib with the BH3 mimetic ABT-737 increased apoptosis (10). In addition, experiments with pharmacological inhibitors indicated that blockade of ERK1/2 signaling—but not of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K)—was crucial for BIM activation (10). In EGFR-mutant cells (9, 11), BIM expression is mainly regulated by the ERK pathway, and crosstalk between the ERK and the cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) pathway may be a key factor in innate resistance to EGFR TKIs.

Phosphodiesterases 4 (PDE4) isoforms A and D inhibit protein kinase A (PKA), a main cAMP effector, and activate ERK (21) (Fig. 3). The H1975 cell line, which overexpresses PDE4, was highly sensitive to the PDE4 inhibitor rolipram (21), suggesting that the use of PDE4 inhibitors in conjunction with EGFR TKIs could represent a novel synthetic lethality approach (19).

Although the expression and degradation of BIM are regulated mainly by the ERK

pathway (9, 10, 19), a variety of other mechanisms can also regulate BIM function,

ranging from transcriptional and post-transcriptional regulation to post-translational

modification and epigenetic silencing (19, 22). For example, an inverse relationship has

been reported between miR-494 and BIM expression (23) (Fig. 3).

The T790M mutation was detected in 68-83% of rebiopsies of EGFR-mutant patients

progressing to EGFR TKIs (15, 24) and is recognized as an acquired-resistance mutation

in EGFR-mutant lung cancer (6, 25). However, the co-existence of the T790M mutation

before treatment has been under-appreciated in spite of several reports (4, 5, 15, 16).

Several techniques have been used to detect the T790M mutation in pretreatment

EGFR-mutant lung cancer samples with varying results. The mutation was detected in

2-3% of samples by Sanger sequencing (7, 26), in 4% by a mutant-enriched PCR assay

(7); in 9% by targeted deep sequencing (27); in 31.5% by matrix-assisted laser

desorption/ionization (MALDI) time-of-flight (TOF) mass spectrometry (15), and in 79%

by colony hybridization (18) (Supplementary Table S7). We found the pretreatment

T790M mutation at low dosage in 65% of our EGFR-mutant patients, which may be

explained by three specific aspects of our method. Firstly, we microdissect our samples

to ensure the presence of at least 80% of tumor cells. Secondly, since the mutation is

known to be heterogeneously distributed within the tumor tissue, we analyze at least

two separate tumor areas. Finally, we use a PNA clamp specifically designed to inhibit

the amplification of the wild-type allele. To the best of our knowledge, only one other

study has used the PNA-clamping PCR method for detection of low-level EGFR T790M

mutations (28).

Author Manuscript Published OnlineFirst on February 3, 2014; DOI: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-13-2233
Author manuscripts have been peer reviewed and accepted for publication but have not yet been edited.

In the present study, the presence of the T790M mutation was related to shorter progression-free survival. Since the combination of erlotinib with the VEGF inhibitor bevacizumab inhibited the growth of mouse xenograft H1975 tumors (29), the ongoing European phase II BELIEF trial (NCT01562028) is examining the efficacy of erlotinib plus bevacizumab in patients with EGFR-mutant NSCLC stratified according to the presence of the T790M mutation as detected by our method. T790M mutant-specific inhibitors are currently used at the time of acquired resistance, when other mechanisms of resistance can also be involved, including epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (30), which can be induced by overexpression of AXL (31). However, these inhibitors warrant testing as first-line treatment when the pretreatment EGFR T790M mutation is detected.

The role of TP53 mutations was not conclusive in the present study. Although our data indicate that these mutations are not predictive of outcome in patients with EGFR-mutant NSCLC, findings in trials of drugs that restore the transcriptional activity of mutant p53 (32) suggest that the impact of TP53 mutations cannot be ruled out.

In conclusion, in this analysis of pretreatment tumor specimens from a large cohort of patients with EGFR-mutant NSCLC, the somatic EGFR T790M mutation was frequently detected prior to therapy, impacting progression-free survival to erlotinib. Importantly, our findings reveal for the first time that BIM mRNA expression is a unique biomarker of both progression-free and overall survival. The identification of the signaling pathways leading to abrogation of BIM can be crucial in the design of combinatorial approaches for synthetic lethality and lead to novel therapeutic approaches to prevent innate and acquired resistance to EGFR TKI monotherapy.

References

1. Lee CK, Brown C, Gralla RJ, Hirsh V, Thongprasert S, Tsai CM, et al. Impact of EGFR Inhibitor in Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer on Progression-Free and Overall Survival: A Meta-Analysis. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2013;105:595-605.

2. Rosell R, Moran T, Queralt C, Porta R, Cardenal F, Camps C, et al. Screening for epidermal growth factor receptor mutations in lung cancer. N Engl J Med. 2009;361:958-67.

3. Rosell R, Carcereny E, Gervais R, Vergnenegre A, Massuti B, Felip E, et al. Erlotinib versus standard chemotherapy as first-line treatment for European patients with advanced EGFR mutation-positive non-small-cell lung cancer (EURTAC): a multicentre, open-label, randomised phase 3 trial. Lancet Oncol. 2012;13:239-46.

4. Maheswaran S, Sequist LV, Nagrath S, Ulkus L, Brannigan B, Collura CV, et al. Detection of mutations in EGFR in circulating lung-cancer cells. N Engl J Med. 2008;359:366-77.

5. Rosell R, Molina MA, Costa C, Simonetti S, Gimenez-Capitan A, Bertran-Alamillo J, et al. Pretreatment EGFR T790M Mutation and BRCA1 mRNA Expression in Erlotinib-Treated Advanced Non-Small-Cell Lung Cancer Patients with EGFR Mutations. Clin Cancer Res. 2011;17:1160-8.

6. Pao W, Miller VA, Politi KA, Riely GJ, Somwar R, Zakowski MF, et al. Acquired resistance of lung adenocarcinomas to gefitinib or erlotinib is associated with a second mutation in the EGFR kinase domain. PLoS Med. 2005;2:e73.

7. Inukai M, Toyooka S, Ito S, Asano H, Ichihara S, Soh J, et al. Presence of epidermal growth factor receptor gene T790M mutation as a minor clone in non-small cell lung cancer. Cancer Res. 2006;66:7854-8.

Author Manuscript Published OnlineFirst on February 3, 2014; DOI: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-13-2233
Author manuscripts have been peer reviewed and accepted for publication but have not yet been edited.

8. Shih JY, Gow CH, Yang PC. EGFR mutation conferring primary resistance to gefitinib in non-small-cell lung cancer. N Engl J Med. 2005;353:207-8.
9. Costa DB, Halmos B, Kumar A, Schumer ST, Huberman MS, Boggon TJ, et al. BIM mediates EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitor-induced apoptosis in lung cancers with oncogenic EGFR mutations. PLoS Med. 2007;4:1669-79; discussion 80.
10. Cragg MS, Kuroda J, Puthalakath H, Huang DC, Strasser A. Gefitinib-induced killing of NSCLC cell lines expressing mutant EGFR requires BIM and can be enhanced by BH3 mimetics. PLoS Med. 2007;4:1681-89; discussion 90.
11. Gong Y, Somwar R, Politi K, Balak M, Chmielecki J, Jiang X, et al. Induction of BIM Is Essential for Apoptosis Triggered by EGFR Kinase Inhibitors in Mutant EGFR-Dependent Lung Adenocarcinomas. PLoS Med. 2007;4:e294.
12. Faber AC, Corcoran R, B., Hiromichi E, Sequist L, Waltman BA, Chung E, et al. BIM Expression in Treatment-Naive Cancers Predicts Responsiveness to Kinase Inhibitors. Cancer Discovery. 2011;1:352-65.
13. Forbes SA, Bindal N, Bamford S, Cole C, Kok CY, Beare D, et al. COSMIC: mining complete cancer genomes in the Catalogue of Somatic Mutations in Cancer. Nucleic Acids Res. 2011;39:D945-50.
14. Nussinov R, Tsai CJ. Allostery in disease and in drug discovery. Cell. 2013;153:293-305.
15. Su KY, Chen HY, Li KC, Kuo ML, Yang JC, Chan WK, et al. Pretreatment epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) T790M mutation predicts shorter EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitor response duration in patients with non-small-cell lung cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2012;30:433-40.

Author Manuscript Published OnlineFirst on February 3, 2014; DOI: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-13-2233
Author manuscripts have been peer reviewed and accepted for publication but have not yet been edited.

16. Querings S, Altmuller J, Ansen S, Zander T, Seidel D, Gabler F, et al. Benchmarking of mutation diagnostics in clinical lung cancer specimens. PLoS One. 2011;6:e19601.
17. Fukuoka M, Wu YL, Thongprasert S, Sunpaweravong P, Leong SS, Sriuranpong V, et al. Biomarker analyses and final overall survival results from a phase III, randomized, open-label, first-line study of gefitinib versus carboplatin/paclitaxel in clinically selected patients with advanced non-small-cell lung cancer in Asia (IPASS). J Clin Oncol. 2011;29:2866-74.
18. Fujita Y, Suda K, Kimura H, Matsumoto K, Arao T, Nagai T, et al. Highly Sensitive Detection of EGFR T790M Mutation Using Colony Hybridization Predicts Favorable Prognosis of Patients with Lung Cancer Harboring Activating EGFR Mutation. J Thorac Oncol. 2012;7:1640-4.
19. Rosell R, Bivona TG, Karachaliou N. Genetics and biomarkers in personalisation of lung cancer treatment. Lancet. 2013;382:720-31.
20. Huang S, Benavente S, Armstrong EA, Li C, Wheeler DL, Harari PM. p53 modulates acquired resistance to EGFR inhibitors and radiation. Cancer Res. 2011;71:7071-9.
21. Pullamsetti SS, Banat GA, Schmall A, Szibor M, Pomagruk D, Hanze J, et al. Phosphodiesterase-4 promotes proliferation and angiogenesis of lung cancer by crosstalk with HIF. Oncogene. 2013;32:1121-34.
22. Nakagawa T, Takeuchi S, Yamada T, Ebi H, Sano T, Nanjo S, et al. EGFR-TKI resistance due to BIM polymorphism can be circumvented in combination with HDAC inhibition. Cancer Res. 2013;73:2428-34.

Downloaded from clincancerres.aacrjournals.org on February 5, 2014. © 2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

Author Manuscript Published OnlineFirst on February 3, 2014; DOI: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-13-2233
Author manuscripts have been peer reviewed and accepted for publication but have not yet been edited.

23. Romano G, Acunzo M, Garofalo M, Di Leva G, Cascione L, Zanca C, et al. MiR-
    494 is regulated by ERK1/2 and modulates TRAIL-induced apoptosis in non-small-cell
    lung cancer through BIM down-regulation. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2012;109:16570-5.
24. Arcila ME, Oxnard GR, Nafa K, Riely GJ, Solomon SB, Zakowski MF, et al.
    Rebiopsy of lung cancer patients with acquired resistance to EGFR inhibitors and
    enhanced detection of the T790M mutation using a locked nucleic acid-based assay.
    Clin Cancer Res. 2011;17:1169-80.
25. Kobayashi S, Boggon TJ, Dayaram T, Janne PA, Kocher O, Meyerson M, et al.
    EGFR mutation and resistance of non-small-cell lung cancer to gefitinib. N Engl J Med.
    2005;352:786-92.
26. Ye X, Zhu ZZ, Zhong L, Lu Y, Sun Y, Yin X, et al. High T790M detection rate in TKI-
    naive NSCLC with EGFR sensitive mutation: truth or artifact? J Thorac Oncol.
    2013;8:1118-20.
27. Lee JK, Shin JY, Kim S, Lee S, Park C, Kim JY, et al. Primary resistance to
    epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) in patients
    with non-small-cell lung cancer harboring TKI-sensitive EGFR mutations: an exploratory
    study. Ann Oncol. 2013;24:2080-7.
28. Oh JE, An CH, Yoo NJ, Lee SH. Detection of low-level EGFR T790M mutation in
    lung cancer tissues. APMIS. 2011;119:403-11.
29. Naumov GN, Nilsson MB, Cascone T, Briggs A, Straume O, Akslen LA, et al.
    Combined vascular endothelial growth factor receptor and epidermal growth factor
    receptor (EGFR) blockade inhibits tumor growth in xenograft models of EGFR inhibitor
    resistance. Clin Cancer Res. 2009;15:3484-94.

Author Manuscript Published OnlineFirst on February 3, 2014; DOI: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-13-2233
Author manuscripts have been peer reviewed and accepted for publication but have not yet been edited.

30. Chong CR, Janne PA. The quest to overcome resistance to EGFR-targeted therapies in cancer. Nat Med. 2013;19:1389-400.
31. Zhang Z, Lee JC, Lin L, Olivas V, Au V, Laframboise T, et al. Activation of the AXL kinase causes resistance to EGFR-targeted therapy in lung cancer. Nat Genet. 2012.
32. Lehmann S, Bykov VJ, Ali D, Andren O, Cherif H, Tidefelt U, et al. Targeting p53 in vivo: a first-in-human study with p53-targeting compound APR-246 in refractory hematologic malignancies and prostate cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2012;30:3633-9.

|  | Total (N=95) N(%) | Erlotinib (N=50) N(%) | Chemotherapy (N=45) N(%) | P |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Gender |  |  |  | 0.1112<sup>a</sup> |
| Female | 71(74.74) | 34(68.00) | 37(82.22) |  |
| Male | 24(25.26) | 16(32.00) | 8(17.78) |  |
| Age |  |  |  | 0.9481<sup>a</sup> |
| < 65 years | 44(46.32) | 23(46.00) | 21(46.67) |  |
| >= 65 years | 51(53.68) | 27(54.00) | 24(53.33) |  |
| Smoking history |  |  |  | 0.3120<sup>b</sup> |
| Never smoked | 64(67.37) | 32(64.00) | 32(71.11) |  |
| Former smoker | 23(24.21) | 15(30.00) | 8(17.78) |  |
| Current smoker | 8(8.42) | 3(6.00) | 5(11.11) |  |
| ECOG performance status |  |  |  | 0.7263<sup>a</sup> |
| 0 | 31(32.63) | 15(30.00) | 16(35.56) |  |
| 1 | 51(53.68) | 27(54.00) | 24(53.33) |  |
| 2 | 13(13.68) | 8(16.00) | 5(11.11) |  |
| Histology |  |  |  | 0.0193<sup>b</sup> |
| Adenocarcinoma | 87(91.58) | 47(94.00) | 40(88.89) |  |
| Bronchioalveolar adenocarcinoma | 1(1.05) | 0(0.00) | 1(2.22) |  |
| Large-cell carcinoma | 2(2.11) | 2(4.00) | 0(0.00) |  |
| Squamous cell carcinoma | 1(1.05) | 1(2.00) | 0(0.00) |  |
| Other | 4(4.21) | 0(0.00) | 4(8.89) |  |
| Tumor stage |  |  |  | 0.4381<sup>b</sup> |
| IIIB (malignant effusion) | 7(7.37) | 5(10.00) | 2(4.44) |  |
| IV | 87(91.58) | 44(88.00) | 43(95.56) |  |
| unknown<sup>d</sup> | 1(1.05) | 1(2.00) | 0(0.00) |  |
| Lung or pleura metastasis |  |  |  | 0.6017<sup>b</sup> |
| Yes | 92(96.84) | 49(98.00) | 43(95.56) |  |
| No | 3(3.16) | 1(2.00) | 2(4.44) |  |
| Bone metastasis |  |  |  | 0.3139<sup>a</sup> |
| Yes | 27(28.42) | 12(24.00) | 15(33.33) |  |
| No | 68(71.58) | 38(76.00) | 30(66.67) |  |
| Brain metastasis |  |  |  | 0.2505<sup>a</sup> |
| Yes | 11(11.58) | 4(8.00) | 7(15.56) |  |
| No | 84(88.42) | 46(92.00) | 38(84.44) |  |
| Type of EGFR mutation |  |  |  | 0.7643<sup>a</sup> |

| del 19 | 64(67.37) | 33(66.00) | 31(68.89) |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| L858R | 31(32.63) | 17(34.00) | 14(31.11) |  |
| T790M mutation |  |  |  | 0.5548<sup>a</sup> |
| Detected | 62(65.26) | 34(68.00) | 28(62.22) |  |
| Not detected | 33(34.74) | 16(32.00) | 17(37.78) |  |
| TP 53 mutations |  |  |  | 0.5950<sup>a</sup> |
| Detected | 23(24.21) | 10(20.00) | 13(28.89) |  |
| Not detected | 59(62.11) | 33(66.00) | 26(57.78) |  |
| No data<sup>e</sup> | 13(13.68) | 7(14.00) | 6(13.33) |  |
| BIM expression |  |  |  | 0.5418<sup>a</sup> |
| Low/intermediate | 53(55.79) | 26(52.00) | 27(60.00) |  |
| High | 30(31.58) | 16(32.00) | 14(31.11) |  |
| No data<sup>e</sup> | 12(12.63) | 8(16.00) | 4(8.89) |  |
| Response |  |  |  | <0.0001<sup>b</sup> |
| Complete response | 1(1.05) | 1(2.00) | 0(0.00) |  |
| Partial response | 32(33.68) | 27(54.00) | 5(11.11) |  |
| Stable disease | 34(35.79) | 12(24.00) | 22(48.89) |  |
| Progressive disease | 14(14.74) | 6(12.00) | 8(17.78) |  |
| Unknown<sup>d</sup> | 14(14.74) | 4(8.00) | 10(22.22) |  |

<sup>a</sup>Chi-square; <sup>b</sup>Fisher; <sup>c</sup>ECOG, Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group; <sup>d</sup>information not recorded (percentages are based on all 95 patients); <sup>e</sup>insufficient tumor tissue for analysis (percentages are based on all 95 patients)

| Variable                     | Progression-Free Survival | P       | Overall Survival | P       |
|------------------------------|--------------------------|---------|------------------|---------|
| Gender                       |                          |         |                  |         |
| Female                       | 1.00                     |         | 1.00             |         |
| Male                         | 1.05(0.63-1.76)          | 0.8487  | 0.955(0.54-1.69) | 0.8742  |
| Treatment                    |                          |         |                  |         |
| Chemotherapy                 | 1.00                     |         | 1.00             |         |
| Erlotinib                    | 0.32(0.19-0.53)          | <0.0001 | 0.96(0.59-1.57)  | 0.8651  |
| Smoking history              |                          |         |                  |         |
| Current smoker               | 1.00                     |         | 1.00             |         |
| Never smoked                 | 0.68(0.29-1.60)          | 0.3774  | 0.55(0.23-1.29)  | 0.1688  |
| Former smoker                | 0.75(0.30-1.90)          | 0.5424  | 0.56(0.22-1.46)  | 0.2392  |
| ECOG performance status      |                          |         |                  |         |
| 1,2                          | 1.00                     |         | 1.00             |         |
| 0                            | 0.71(0.43-1.18)          | 0.1834  | 0.70(0.41-1.20)  | 0.1939  |
| Bone metastasis               |                          |         |                  |         |
| No                           | 1.00                     |         | 1.00             |         |
| Yes                          | 1.45(0.86-2.42)          | 0.1615  | 0.89(0.51-1.57)  | 0.6915  |
| Brain metastasis              |                          |         |                  |         |
| No                           | 1.00                     |         | 1.00             |         |
| Yes                          | 2.02(0.80-5.10)          | 0.1347  | 1.11(0.48-2.58)  | 0.8102  |
| Type of EGFR mutation        |                          |         |                  |         |
| del 19                       | 1.00                     |         | 1.00             |         |
| L858R                        | 1.05(0.65-1.71)          | 0.8330  | 1.41(0.85-2.34)  | 0.1805  |
| T790M mutation               |                          |         |                  |         |
| Not detected                 | 1.00                     |         | 1.00             |         |
| Detected                     | 1.36(0.82-2.26)          | 0.2279  | 0.998(0.59-1.69) | 0.9941  |
| TP 53 mutations (n=82)       |                          |         |                  |         |
| Not detected                 | 1.00                     |         | 1.00             |         |
| Detected                     | 1.67(0.94-2.97)          | 0.0794  | 1.41(0.78-2.53)  | 0.2546  |
| BIM expression (n=83)        |                          |         |                  |         |
| Low/intermediate             | 1.00                     |         | 1.00             |         |
| High                         | 0.54(0.31-0.93)          | 0.0261  | 0.55(0.31-0.97)  | 0.0395  |

Author Manuscript Published OnlineFirst on February 3, 2014; DOI: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-13-2233
Author manuscripts have been peer reviewed and accepted for publication but have not yet been edited.

Table and Figure Legends

Table 1. Patient characteristics of the 95 patients from the EURTAC trial included in the present study.

Table 2. Univariate analyses of progression-free and overall survival in 95 patients from the EURTAC trial included in the present study.

Figure 1. Progression-free survival according to (A) treatment group and T790M mutation status; (B) treatment group and BIM mRNA expression levels (low/intermediate vs high).

Figure 2. Overall survival in 88 patients according to BIM mRNA expression (low/intermediate vs high).

Figure 3. A simplified hypothetical model of crosstalk circuits between signaling pathways that may downregulate BIM. EGFR downstream signaling pathways, including the MAPK and the PI3K pathway, are activated when the ligand binds to the receptor. ERK and AKT phosphorylate and directly downregulate FOXO3a. FOXO3a is responsible for the transcriptional upregulation of BIM, while ERK phosphorylates BIM and promotes BIM degradation post-transcriptionally. The ERK axis induces VEGF-A production. The overexpression of miR-494 through the MAPK pathway can increase resistance to EGFR TKI-induced apoptosis through BIM downregulation. Inhibition of the GPCR-cAMP-PKA pathway by PDE4A/D promotes Raf-1 kinase activity, downregulates BIM and suppresses induction of VEGF-A.

Abbreviations: AC, adenylate cyclase; BIM, Bcl-2 interacting mediator of cell death; BRAF, v-Raf murine sarcoma viral oncogene homolog B1; cAMP, cyclic adenoside monophosphate; del19, deletion 19; EGF, epidermal growth factor; EGFR, epidermal growth factor receptor; ELK-1, ETS-domain transcription factor 1; ERK 1/2, extracellular signal-regulated kinase-1/2; FOXO3a, forkhead box O3a; GPCR, G protein-coupled receptors; Gs, G proteins; L858R, substitution of lysine for arginine

Downloaded from clincancerres.aacrjournals.org on February 5, 2014. © 2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

Author Manuscript Published OnlineFirst on February 3, 2014; DOI: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-13-2233

Author manuscripts have been peer reviewed and accepted for publication but have not yet been edited.

mutation at amino acid position 858; MED23, mediator complex subunit 23; MEK, mitogen-activated protein kinase; PKA, cAMP-dependent kinase protein kinase A; PDE4A/D, phosphodiesterases 4A and 4D; Raf-1, v-raf-1 murine leukemia viral oncogene homolog 1; RAS, rat sarcoma viral oncogene; T790M, substitution of threonine for methionine mutation at amino acid position 790; VEGF-A, vascular enthothelial growth factor A

Downloaded from clincancerres.aacrjournals.org on February 5, 2014. © 2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

Author Manuscript Published OnlineFirst on February 3, 2014; DOI: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-13-2233
Author manuscripts have been peer reviewed and accepted for publication but have not yet been edited.

Figure 1A

Log-Rank P < 0.0001

G1: Erlotinib and T790M present (n=34)

G2: Erlotinib and T790M absent (n=16)

G3: Chemotherapy and T790M present (n=28)

G4: Chemotherapy and T790M absent (n=17)

| PFS probability |
|------------------|
| 1.0              |
| 0.
Author Manuscript Published OnlineFirst on February 3, 2014; DOI: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-13-2233
Author manuscripts have been peer reviewed and accepted for publication but have not yet been edited.

Figure 1B

Log-Rank P= 0.0003

G1: Erlotinib and BIM Low/intermediate (n=26)

G2: Erlotinib and BIM High (n=16)

G3: Chemotherapy and BIM Low/Intermediate (n=27)

G4:Chemotherapy and BIM High (n=14)

Author Manuscript Published OnlineFirst on February 3, 2014; DOI: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-13-2233
Author manuscripts have been peer reviewed and accepted for publication but have not yet been edited.

Figure 2

Log-Rank P = 0.0364

| Survival probability |
| --- |
| 1.0 |
| 0.8 |
| 0.6 |
| 0.4 |
| 0.2 |
| 0.0 |

| Patients at risk | Time(months) |
| --- | --- |
| BIM Low/Intermediate 53 | 0 | 6 | 12 | 18 | 24 | 30 | 36 | 42
Author Manuscript Published OnlineFirst on February 3, 2014; DOI: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-13-2233
Author manuscripts have been peer reviewed and accepted for publication but have not yet been edited.

Figure 3

Cell Exterior
EGF
Ligands
EGFR
GPCR
AC
Gs
ATP
cAMP
del19, L858R/T790M
PTEN
PI3K
RAS
BRAF
Raf-1
PKA
AKT
MEK
ERK1/2
miR
494
BIM
FOXO3a
ELK-1/MED23
VEGFA
Nucleus
Prolifer