
ARTICLE IN PRESS

Human Immunology xxx (2014) xxx–xxx

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/humimm

Review

Can Toll-Like Receptor (TLR) 2 be considered as a new target for immunotherapy against hepatitis B infection?

Vahid Bagheri ${ }^{a}$, Azam Askari ${ }^{a}$, Mohammad Kazemi Arababadi ${ }^{a,*}$, Derek Kennedy ${ }^{b}$

${ }^{a}$Immunology of Infectious Diseases Research Center, Rafsanjan University of Medical Sciences, Rafsanjan, Iran  
${ }^{b}$School of Biomolecular and Physical Science, Eskitis Institute for Drug Discovery, Griffith University Nathan, Queensland, Australia

---

**A R T I C L E I N F O**

Article history:  
Received 18 October 2013  
Accepted 4 February 2014  
Available online xxxx  

---

**A B S T R A C T**

The current literature describes pivotal mechanisms in which hepatitis B virus (HBV) induces liver diseases including inflammation, cirrhosis and hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). It appears that differences in genetic and immunological parameters between patients and controls may be responsible for inducing the prolonged forms of the infection. Previous studies demonstrated that Toll-Like Receptors (TLRs) play key roles in viral recognition and inducing appropriate immune responses. Therefore, TLRs can be considered as key sensors for HBV recognition and subsequent induction of immune responses against this virus. It has also been shown that the TLR2 detects several microbial PAMPs either in its homodimer form or in a heterodimer with TLR1 or TLR6 and subsequently activates NF-κB in a MYD88 dependent manner. Therefore, defective TLR2 expression may result in impaired immune responses against HBV which is reported in long-term forms of hepatitis B. This review presents the recent data regarding the status and important roles played by TLR2 in HBV recognition and induction or suppression of immune responses against HBV as well as its roles in the pathogenesis of cirrhosis and HCC in prolonged hepatitis B forms.

© 2014 American Society for Histocompatibility and Immunogenetics. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

---

**Contents**

1. Introduction ..... 00
2. Introducing the Toll-Like Receptor 2 ..... 00
3. TLR2 ligands ..... 00
4. TLR2 signaling ..... 00
5. TLR2 and hepatitis B ..... 00
6. TLR2 and hepatitis B liver complications ..... 00
7. Conclusion ..... 00
   - Acknowledgment ..... 00
   - References ..... 00

---

**Abbreviations:** TLR, Toll-Like Receptor; PAMP, pathogen associated molecular patterns; HBV, hepatitis B virus; MYD88, myeloid differentiation primary response; IRAK1, interleukin-1 receptor associated kinase-1; TRAF6, TNF receptor associated factor; NF-κB, nuclear factor kappa-light-chain-enhancer of activated B cells; DNMT-1, DNA methyltransferase 1; TAK1, transforming growth factor b-activated kinase 1; MAPK, mitogen-activated protein kinase; AP-1, activator protein 1; PBMC, peripheral blood mononuclear cell; NADPH, nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate.

* Corresponding author. Fax: +98 3915225209.  
E-mail address: dr.kazemi@rums.ac.ir (M.K. Arababadi).

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.humimm.2014.02.018  
0198-8859/© 2014 American Society for Histocompatibility and Immunogenetics. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

---

**1. Introduction**

Hepatitis B is the most prevalent liver disorder and is induced by hepatitis B virus (HBV) [1–3]. Chronic, asymptomatic and occult HBV infected patients are unable to clear HBV from neither hepatocytes nor sera, hence, are considered as prolonged term HBV infected patients [4,5]. Additionally, it has been documented that prolonged forms of HBV infections are the main causes of severe liver disorders including cirrhosis and hepatocarcinoma [6,7]. The

Please cite this article in press as: Bagheri V et al. Can Toll-Like Receptor (TLR) 2 be considered as a new target for immunotherapy against hepatitis B infection? Hum Immunol (2014), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.humimm.2014.02.018

main mechanisms responsible for the progression of the prolonged term forms of HBV infections are yet to be clarified. However, it has been hypothesized that differences in the patient’s genetic and immunological make up, when compared with subjects who successfully clear HBV infections (clearance group), may be considered as the main reasons for inducing the long-term infection forms of the disease [1,5,8]. TLRs are the main intra/extra-cellular immune cell receptors and play important roles in DAMPs and PAMPs recognition which result in induction of immune responses against viruses, including hepatitis B, infections [9,10].

TLRs/PAMPs interactions result in induction of various immune responses including migration [11], phagocytosis [12], activation of NADPH oxidase [13] and inflammatory cytokine production [14]. Accordingly, TLR2/ligand interaction leads to expression of selectins, integrins and inflammatory cytokines in a MYD88 dependent pathway [15]. Additionally, there is some evidence regarding the suppressing roles of TLR2/ligands interactions on the immune responses [16]. Therefore, altered expression of TLR2 and its intracellular molecular signaling may result in modulation of immune responses against viruses, including HBV, infections. The observation that patients suffering from prolonged HBV infection are unable to completely clear HBV from hepatocytes [17–19], leads to the suggestion that parameters within their immune systems are not functioning to optimal capacity. Due to the key roles played by TLR2 in the viral recognition and modulation of immune responses, it may be hypothesized that altered signaling or expression in the TLR2 pathway may result in persistent HBV infection in long-term HBV infected patients. Therefore, the aim of this review article was to collate the recent published data regarding the status of TLR2 expression, its roles in modulation of immune responses against HBV and the probable mechanisms that could lead to alteration in expression of TLR2 and its signaling molecules in prolonged HBV infected patients. Furthermore, the current data regarding the roles of TLR2 in the pathology of cirrhosis of the liver and hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) are also presented in this article. It has been documented that seven drugs are available for the treatment of hepatitis B [20] which are categorized as interferons and nucleos(t)ide analogues (NAs) [21]. NAs are Lamivudine, Adefovir dipivoxil, Entecavir, Telbivudine and Tenofovir disoproxil fumarate, while interferons are used as standard and pegylated forms [20]. Previous studies demonstrated that, although these drugs are also associated with advantages, they have also several limitations including 1. Long-term NAs therapies in chronic HBV infected patients which lead to genetic drug resistance in HBV [22], 2. Adverse events and effects on patient’s quality of life which is associated with interferons therapy, 3. The high cost of drugs, 4. The drugs are unable to clear HBV covalently closed circular DNA (cccDNA) from the infected cells [20]. Thus, it seems that a novel therapeutic strategy is strongly needed. Accordingly, another aim of this review article is to present recent data regarding usage of TLR2 as a target for immunotherapy against hepatitis B.

intracellular signaling molecules and transcription factors which are described further in the next sections. Interestingly, this molecule also plays key roles in regulation of immune cell functions via different signaling molecules (See next Sections). Therefore, it appears that TLR2 plays dual roles in activation and regulation of immune responses. It has been demonstrated that monocytes and macrophages, polymorphonuclear cells, dendritic cells, endothelial cells, epithelial cell lines, hepatocytes and murine T cells express TLR2 [25,26]. Furthermore, human naive T, B and NK cells do not express cell surface or intracellular TLR2, while activated B cells in germinal centers also expressed TLR2 in tonsils, lymph nodes, and appendices [26]. Several studies on TLR2 knockout (TLR2−/−) mouse model revealed that the role of TLR2 in the induction of immune responses against infectious agents is controversial. For instance, Kohanawa et al. showed that TLR2−/− mice produced higher levels of TNF-α and IL-6 in response to Staphylococcus aureus infection when compared to wild-type mice. The results suggested that TLR2 plays a role in suppression of immune responses against infectious agents [27]. Moreover, depletion of TLR2 (TLR2−/− animal model) is associated with higher replication of murine cytomegalovirus (MCMV) in the spleen and liver in comparison to C57BL/6 mice [28]. HCV core and NS3 proteins also induced inflammatory pathways through TLR2 and failed to activate TLR2-deficient mice macrophages [29]. The controversial roles of TLR2 in immune responses against hepatitis B are discussed in the next Sections.

## 3. TLR2 ligands

Previous studies reported that bacterial peptidoglycan, lipoprotein, lipoteichoic acid, porins, viral hemagglutinin and glycoproteins [30] are recognized by TLR2 in its homodimer form, while bacterial triacylated lipopeptides are the target of the TLR2/1 heterodimer and bacterial diacylated lipopeptides and lipoteichoic acid are detected by the TLR2/6 heterodimer. It appears that the HBcAg, which is a glycoprotein, is the main HBV PAMP which is detected by TLR2 [31]. Accordingly, a synthetic triacylated lipopeptide, Pam3CSK4, is used for stimulation of the TLR2/1 receptor in experimental models [32]. Interestingly, like TLR4, pathogen recognition by TLR2 is strongly increased by CD14, which suggests that lipopolysaccharide (LPS) is another ligand for TLR2. Additionally, TLR2 recognize some endogenous ligands including human glycosaminoglycan hyaluronan [33], high mobility group box 1 protein, β-defensin-3 and heat shock proteins, which are upregulated following microbial infections [16]. It appears that the variety of TLR2 ligands is greater than other TLRs and this is due to its potential to form various heterodimerized complexes.

## 4. TLR2 signaling

TLR2/ligand interactions induce activation of intracellular signaling which leads to either initiation or suppression of innate pro-inflammatory responses. Previous investigations revealed that following TLR2/ligand interactions some pro-inflammatory intracellular signaling pathways, including MAPKs and MYD88 dependent multimolecular signaling pathway, will be activated which lead to the initiation of innate pro-inflammatory responses [34,35]. Interestingly, the MYD88 dependent signaling pathway may induce the PI3K/AKT pathway which is responsible for expression of IL-10 which is the main cytokine used for suppression of the immune system [36]. It appears that activation of the PI3K/AKT pathway happens following recruitment of MAL, also known as TIRAP, which is a MYD88-like adaptor protein [37]. In addition to the PI3K/AKT pathway, TLR2/ligands interaction can activate SOCS proteins which suppress cytokine signaling pathways including

## 2. Introducing the Toll-Like Receptor 2

TLR2, which is also known as TIL4 and CD282, is a receptor for bacterial, fungal, viral and parasitological PAMPs (which are discussed further in the next section). TLR2 was identified and characterized in 1998 [23]. The gene of this protein is located on chromosome 4 and location 4p32 and is highly conserved. Like other TLRs, the TLR2 molecule is a type I transmembrane protein, containing extracellular leucine-rich repeats (LRRs) domains followed by a hydrophobic transmembrane domain and a cytoplasmic Toll/interleukin-1 receptor (TIR) domain (Fig. 1). TLR2 recognizes microbial PAMPs in its homodimeric form or alternatively as a heterodimer with TLR1 or 6 forms [24] and activates various

ARTICLE IN PRESS

V. Bagheri et al./Human Immunology xxx (2014) xxx–xxx

Fig. 1. The TLR2 intracellular signaling and the suppressive effects of HBV on these molecules in plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pDCs). The Figure shows how HBsAg and HBeAg lead to the suppression of TLR2 signaling molecules. HBsAg indirectly suppresses TLR2 signaling via induction of monocytes to produce IL-10 and subsequently results in JAK/STAT3 pathway activation in immune cells. The JAK/STAT3 pathway inactivates TLR2 signaling molecules. HBsAg also directly suppresses MAPK and JNK pathways. HBeAg inhibits TIR/TIR interaction and NF-κB activation.

MAPKs and JAK–STAT pathways (Fig. 1) [38]. Moreover, it has also been documented that TLR2 signaling leads to depletion of IRAK1 and consequently inhibits induction of type I IFNs by other TLRs such as TLR7 and 9 [39]. The study revealed that IRAK1 was depleted rapidly following treatment with TLR2 agonist [39]. Due to the fact that IRAK1 is essential for TLRs-induced type I IFN production [39], it appears that TLR2/ligands interaction down-regulates production of type I IFNs via depletion of IRAK1. Dolganiuc et al. reported that HCV core protein could inhibit IFN-α production by plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pDCs) [40]. Interestingly, researchers revealed that anti-TLR2 blocking Ab could prevent the inhibitory effects of HCV core on IFN-α production [40]. Thus, it may be hypothesized that several viral pathogens, including HBV, express ligands for TLR2 to inhibit immune responses. The mechanisms responsible for the induction of TLR2 activation or suppression pathways are unclear but it appears that the concentration of TLR2 ligands may be a determining factor for the outcome of TLR2/ligand interactions.

5. TLR2 and hepatitis B

As described above, viral lipoproteins and glycoproteins are the main ligands for TLR2, hence, HBV glycoproteins can be considered as candidates for recognition by TLR2 leading to the activation/suppression of immune cells. It has been documented that the HBcAg glycoprotein is one of the main HBV PAMPs which is recognized by TLR2 [31]. Several investigations identified that TLR2/HBV interactions may be an important mechanism for the activation of immune cells. For instance, Cooper and colleagues demonstrated

Please cite this article in press as: Bagheri V et al. Can Toll-Like Receptor (TLR) 2 be considered as a new target for immunotherapy against hepatitis B infection? Hum Immunol (2014), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.humimm.2014.02.018
that HBcAg can induce pro-inflammatory cytokine production by human THP-1 macrophages in a TLR2 dependent manner [31]. Thompson and colleagues reported that TLR2/ligand interactions inhibit HBV replication in hepatoma cell lines [41]. Another study identified that TLR2 are also expressed by hepatocytes [25], hence, can contribute in induction of the hepatocyte innate immune responses against HBV. Zhang et al. also reported that TLR2 is an important pattern recognition receptor (PRR) which induces innate immunity against hepadna-viruses in an animal model [42] and these results were confirmed by additional studies on patients who were suffering from the prolonged infection form of hepatitis B. It has been documented that chronic HBV infected (CHB) patients are unable to elicit an appropriate immune response against HBV [3,43], hence, it appears that some parameters of immune system are disrupted in these patients. Chen et al. reported that mRNA and protein levels of TLR2 were significantly decreased in PBMCs of CHB patients using quantitative Real-Time PCR and flow cytometry techniques [44]. Our previous study using quantitative Real-Time PCR technique also demonstrated that mRNA levels of IRAK4, an intracellular molecules (see previous Section), were also decreased in PBMCs of CHB patients [10]. Therefore, it appears that TLR2 may play an important role in the induction of immune responses against HBV. In contrast with the Chen et al. study, several studies demonstrated that expression levels of TLR2 were increased in CHB patients. For instance, by using flow cytometry technique, Wei et al. revealed that patients with chronic hepatitis B and chronic severe hepatitis B had higher levels of TLR2 on their PBMCs [45]. By using immunohistochemistry technique, another study revealed that the expression of TLR2 in liver tissues of CHB patients were significantly increased when compared to healthy controls [46]. Therefore, it appears that there is a controversy regarding the expression levels of TLR2 in patients with the prolonged form of hepatitis B. Interestingly, increased expression levels of TLR2 were reported by some of investigators to potentially activate the suppressive effects of TLR2 signaling in the prolonged HBV infected patients. For instance, one study demonstrated that stimulation with TLR2 ligands resulted in significantly lower IFN-$\alpha$ production in CHB patients when compared to healthy controls [47]. Additionally, it may be hypothesized that, although increased expression of TLR2 was reported by the investigators, its molecular signaling may be downregulated or inactivated by HBV. For example, Wang et al. demonstrated that HBsAg suppresses TLR2/ligand-induced IL-12 production in monocytes/macrophages by blocking the JNK-MAPK pathway [48]. Lang et al. reported that HBeAg inhibited TIR-mediated activation of two inflammatory molecules, NF-$\kappa$B and IFN-$\beta$ [49]. The study also revealed that HBeAg disrupted homotypic TIR/TIR interactions which play an important role in TLR-mediated signaling [49]. Another study which confirmed this hypothesis reported that expression of TLR2 on peripheral monocytes, hepatocytes and Kupffer cells were decreased in HBeAg positive CHB patients when compared to HBeAg negative CHB patients and controls [50]. Interestingly, the study also demonstrated that TLR2 expression was significantly increased in HBeAg negative CHB patients in comparison to healthy controls [50]. Wilson et al. showed that HBeAg inhibited IL-1$\beta$ mediated NF-$\kappa$B activation in hepatocytes [51]. Thus, it appears that increased expression of TLR2 in HBV infected patients is a normal immune response against HBV but the virus reduces TLR2 expression or suppresses its signaling pathways to escape from immune responses. In addition, it seems that HBV not only directly targets TLR2 and its signaling molecules but also indirectly reduces the activity of this pathway. For example, Shi et al. revealed that HBsAg induces monocytes to release IL-10 (Fig. 1) [52]. Previous investigations reported that IL-10 downregulates several inflammatory molecules via the JAK1/STAT3 signaling pathway [53], thus, this mechanism may be responsible for either downregulation or

inactivation of TLR2 and its signaling molecules in prolonged HBV infected patients (Fig. 1). Vincent et al. revealed that HBV can block the MyD88-IRAK4 axis [54], hence, it is able to inhibit TLR2 signaling. Interestingly, Isogawa et al. also showed that specific ligands for TLR2 were unable to inhibit HBV replication under in vitro condition [55]. The mechanisms used by HBV to suppress TLR2 signaling pathway in pDCs are shown in Fig. 1. Furthermore, it has been documented that immune tolerance to HBV antigens is plausible in prolonged forms of HBV infection, and it is possible that immune tolerance to HBV antigens is assisted by alterations in the TLR2 signaling pathway. It appears that TLR2 is a main PRR which is involved in HBV recognition and normally elicits appropriate immune responses. However, it is also the main target of HBV to escape from immune responses. The use of TLR2 ligands as an adjuvant for immunotherapy against HBV is controversial because it may also result in decreased immune responses against HBV as discussed above. Additional in vivo investigations using TLR2 ligands as adjuvants can improve our knowledge regarding the roles of TLR2 in immune responses against HBV and its important roles in determining HBV infection outcome.

# 6. TLR2 and hepatitis B liver complications

It is widely accepted that the risk of liver complications, including hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) and cirrhosis of the liver, is higher in patients with the prolonged form of hepatitis B infection [56]. Previous investigations also confirmed that TLR2 can be considered as a candidate for hepatitis B pathogenesis [57], hence, a hypothesis may be proposed in which the TLR2 pathway may be associated with liver complications in prolonged HBV infected patients. Interestingly, previous investigations demonstrated that TLR2 was associated with HCC and cirrhosis of the liver. For instance, Guo et al. reported that the intensity of TLR2 expression was significantly increased in association with a high grade of necroinflammatory activity [46]. Wang et al. demonstrated that expression of TLR2 was increased in CHB related liver failure, but not in the active stage of CHB [58]. Another study revealed that TLR2 expression was increased in the liver of patients suffering from cirrhosis, but not HCC [59]. Yunwei et al. reported that expression levels of TLR2 were increased in CHB patients when compared to healthy controls [60]. Their results also identified that TLR2 expression was increased in moderate and severe grades of chronic hepatitis B in comparison to mild disease [60]. The main mechanisms responsible for cirrhosis and HCC that function via the TLR2 pathway are not completely clear but the authors of this review propose direct and indirect probable mechanisms as follows: (1) The direct mechanism: Previous studies demonstrated that intracellular signaling via MYD88, which results in NF-$\kappa$B and JNK activation, is the main reason for induction of HCC [34,35]. Due to the fact that TLR2 activates immune cells via the MYD88 pathway, it may be concluded that TLR2 stimulates tumorigenesis pathways in the HBV infected liver as an off-target effect of activating these pathways. (2) The indirect mechanisms: (a) Previous investigations revealed that cholesterol and its metabolic pathway is strongly associated with cirrhosis of the liver [61]. Li et al. demonstrated that HBV induces expression of cholesterol metabolism related genes in HepG2 cells through the TLR2 pathway [62], hence, it appears that TLR2 may induce cirrhosis by modulation of cholesterol metabolism related genes. (b) It has been documented that inflammation is a main reason for induction of cirrhosis and HCC [63,64]. TLR2 is the main PAMP and DAMP receptor which induces inflammation in the infected tissues, hence, it seems that induction of inflammation by TLR2 may be another mechanism leading to the induction of cirrhosis and HCC. In contrast to the mentioned studies, Lian et al. showed that

Please cite this article in press as: Bagheri V et al. Can Toll-Like Receptor (TLR) 2 be considered as a new target for immunotherapy against hepatitis B infection? Hum Immunol (2014), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.humimm.2014.02.018
expression levels of TLR2 did not differ in patients with liver cir-
rhosis when compared to CHB patients [65]. Therefore, it may also
be hypothesized that cirrhosis and HCC are complex disorders and
under the effects or control of several intracellular pathways
through which TLR2 may elicit the described pathogenesis.

## 7. Conclusion

Based on the information reported here, it may be hypothesized
that TLR2 plays key roles in initiation of innate immune responses
against HBV in acute form of hepatitis B, hence, HBV targets this
molecule and its signaling molecules to induce immune tolerance
in prolonged HBV infected patients. Additionally, TLR2 participates
in suppression of immune responses in chronic form of hepatitis B,
Therefore, it seems that TLR2 plays dual roles during hepatitis B
infection and dependent on the status of the disease. Therefore,
it appears that future therapies could focus on treatments which
can induce the inflammatory pathways of TLR2 that results in
appropriate immune responses instead of immune tolerance to
HBV antigens in acute form of hepatitis B. Furthermore, the data
suggests that TLR2 and its signaling molecules can be considered
as important molecules in the pathogenesis of HBV infection,
including cirrhosis of the liver and HCC which are associated with
chronic form of hepatitis B. Therefore, these molecules may be con-
sidered as novel targets for molecular cancer therapy as well as
chronic HBV infection.

## Acknowledgment

This project was funded through the Rafsanjan University of
Medical Sciences.

## References

1. Assar S, Arababadi MK, Ahmadabadi BN, Salehi M, Kennedy D. Occult hepatitis
   B virus (HBV) infection: a global challenge for medicine. Clin Lab 2012;58:1225.
2. Ayoobi F, Hassanshahi G, Zainodini N, Khorramdelazad H, Arababadi MK,
   Kennedy D. Reduced expression of TRIF in chronic HBV infected Iranian
   patients. Clin Res Hepatol Gastroenterol 2013;37:491.
3. Khorramdelazad H, Hassanshahi G, Nasiri Ahmadabadi B, Kazemi Arababadi M.
   High serum levels of TGF-beta in Iranians with chronic HBV infection. Hepat
   Mon 2012;12:e7581.
4. Chan HL, Jia J. Chronic hepatitis B in Asia-new insights from the past decade. J
   Gastroenterol Hepatol 2011;26(Suppl. 1):131.
5. Arababadi MK, Pourfathollah AA, Jafarzadeh A, Hassanshahi G, Rezvani ME.
   Association of exon 9 but not intron 8 VDR polymorphisms with occult HBV
   infection in south-eastern Iranian patients. J Gastroenterol Hepatol
   2009;25:90.
6. Mendy ME, Welzel T, Lesi OA, Hainaut P, Hall AJ, Kuniholm MH, et al. Hepatitis
   B viral load and risk for liver cirrhosis and hepatocellular carcinoma in The
   Gambia. West Africa. J Viral Hepat 2009;27:27.
7. Michielsen P, Ho E. Viral hepatitis B and hepatocellular carcinoma. Acta
   Gastroenterol Belg 2011;74:4.
8. Ahmadabadi BN, Hassanshahi G, Arababadi MK, Leanza C, Kennedy D. The IL-
   10 promoter polymorphism at position-592 is correlated with susceptibility to
   occult HBV infection. Inflammation 2012;35:818.
9. Khvalevsky E, Rivkin L, Rachmilewitz J, Galun E, Giladi H. TLR3 signaling in a
   hepatoma cell line is skewed towards apoptosis. J Cell Biochem
   2007;100:1301.
10. Momeni M, Zainodini N, Bidaki R, Hassanshahi G, Daneshvar H, Khaleghinia M,
    et al. Decreased expression of toll like receptor signaling molecules in chronic
    HBV infected patients. Hum Immunol 2014;75:15.
11. Nguyen-Pham TN, Lim MS, Nguyen TA, Lee YK, Jin CJ, Lee HJ, et al. Type I and II
    interferons enhance dendritic cell maturation and migration capacity by
    regulating CD38 and CD74 that have synergistic effects with TLR agonists. Cell
    Mol Immunol 2011;8:341.
12. Hirayama T, Tamaki Y, Takakubo Y, Iwazaki K, Sasaki K, Ogino T, et al. Toll-like
    receptors and their adaptors are regulated in macrophages after phagocytosis
    of lipopolysaccharide-coated titanium particles. J Orthop Res 2011;29:984.
13. Bae YS, Lee JH, Choi SH, Kim S, Almazan F, Witztum JL, et al. Macrophages
    generate reactive oxygen species in response to minimally oxidized low-
    density lipoprotein: toll-like receptor 4- and spleen tyrosine kinase-dependent
    activation of NADPH oxidase 2. Circ Res 2009;104:210.

[14] Imani Fooladi AA, Mousavi SF, Seghatoleslami S, Yazdani S, Nourani MR. Toll-
like receptors: role of inflammation and commensal bacteria. Inflamm Allergy
Drug Targets 2011;10:198.
[15] Rusz A, Pilatz A, Wagenlehner F, Linn T, Diemer T, Schuppe H, et al. Influence of
urogenital infections and inflammation on semen quality and male fertility.
World J Urol 2012;30:23.
[16] Oliveira-Nascimento L, Massari P, Wetzler LM. The Role of TLR2 in Infection
and Immunity. Front Immunol 2012;3:79.
[17] Arababadi MK, Ahmadabadi BN, Kennedy D. Current information on the
immunological status of occult hepatitis B infection. Transfusion
2012;52:1819.
[18] Khorramdelazad H, Hassanshahi G, Ahmadabadi BN, Arababadi MK. High
serum levels of TGF-β in Iranians with chronic HBV infection. Hepat mon
2012;12:e7581.
[19] Hassanshahi G, Arababadi MK, Khoramdelazad H, Yaghini N, Zarandi ER.
Assessment of CXCL12 (SDF-1alpha) polymorphisms and its serum level in
posttransfusion occult HBV-infected patients in Southeastern Iran. Arch Med
Res 2010;41:338.
[20] Tujuis SR, Lee WM. Update in the management of chronic hepatitis B. Curr
Opin Gastroenterol 2013;29:250.
[21] Scaglione SJ, Lok AS. Effectiveness of hepatitis B treatment in clinical practice.
Gastroenterology 2012;142:1360.
[22] Papatheodoridis GV. Why do I treat HBeAg-negative chronic hepatitis B
patients with nucleos(t)ide analogues? Liver Int 2013;33(Suppl. 1):151.
[23] Rock FL, Hardiman G, Timans JC, Kastelein RA, Bazan JF. A family of human
receptors structurally related to Drosophila Toll. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
1998;95:588.
[24] Yu H, Pardoll D, Jove R. STATs in cancer inflammation and immunity: a leading
role for STAT3. Nat Rev Cancer 2009;9:798.
[25] Preiss S, Thompson A, Chen X, Rodgers S, Markovska V, Desmond P, et al.
Characterization of the innate immune signalling pathways in hepatocyte cell
lines. J Viral Hepat 2008;15:888.
[26] Flo TH, Halaas O, Torp S, Ryan L, Lien E, Dybdahl B, et al. Differential expression
of Toll-like receptor 2 in human cells. J Leukoc Biol 2001;69:474.
[27] Kohanawa M, Zhao S, Ozaki M, Haga S, Nan G, Kuge Y, et al. Contribution of
toll-like receptor 2 to the innate response against staphylococcus aureus
infection in mice. PLoS One 2013;8:e74287.
[28] Szomolanyi-Tsuda E, Liang X, Welsh RM, Kurt-Jones EA, Finberg RW. Role for
TLR2 in NK cell-mediated control of murine cytomegalovirus in vivo. J Virol
2006;80:4286.
[29] Dolganiuc A, Oak S, Kodys K, Golenbock DT, Finberg RW, Kurt-Jones E, et al.
Hepatitis C core and nonstructural 3 proteins trigger toll-like receptor 2-
mediated pathways and inflammatory activation. Gastroenterology
2004;127:1513.
[30] Leoni V, Gianni T, Salvioli S, Campadelli-Fiume G. Herpes simplex virus
glycoproteins gH/gL and gB bind Toll-like receptor 2, and soluble gH/gL is
sufficient to activate NF-kappaB. J Virol 2012;86:6555.
[31] Cooper A, Tal G, Lider O, Shaul Y. Cytokine induction by the hepatitis B virus
capsid in macrophages is facilitated by membrane heparan sulfate and
involves TLR2. J Immunol 2005;175:3165.
[32] Tsolmongyn B, Koide N, Jambalganiin U, Odkhuu E, Naiki Y, Komatsu T, et al. A
toll-like receptor 2 ligand, Pam3CSK4, augments interferon-gamma-induced
nitric oxide production via a physical association between MyD88 and IFN-
gamma receptor in vascular endothelial cells. Immunology 2013;140:352.
[33] Abe T, Fukuhara T, Wen X, Ninomiya A, Moriishi K, Maehara Y, et al. CD44
participates in IP-10 induction in cells in which hepatitis C virus RNA is
replicating, through an interaction with Toll-like receptor 2 and hyaluronan. J
Virol 2012;86:6159.
[34] Liang B, Chen R, Wang T, Cao L, Liu Y, Yin F, et al. Myeloid differentiation factor
88 promotes growth and metastasis of human hepatocellular carcinoma. Clin
Cancer Res 2013;19:2905.
[35] Maeda S. NF-kB, JNK, and TLR signaling pathways in hepatocarcinogenesis.
Gastroenterol Res Pract 2010;2010:367694.
[36] Gerber PA, Buhren BA, Steinhoff M, Homey B. Rosacea: the cytokine and
chemokine network. J Investig Dermatol Symp Proc 2011;15:40.
[37] Fuertes E, Brauer M, MacIntyre E, Bauer M, Bellander T, von Berg A, et al.
Childhood allergic rhinitis, traffic-related air pollution, and variability in the
GSTP1, TNF, TLR2, and TLR4 genes: results from the TAG Study. J Allergy Clin
Immunol 2013;132:342.
[38] Ryu JH, Yoo JY, Kim MJ, Hwang SG, Ahn KC, Ryu JC, et al. Distinct TLR-mediated
pathways regulate house dust mite-induced allergic disease in the upper and
lower airways. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2013;131:549.
[39] Liu YC, Simmons DP, Li X, Abbott DW, Boom WH, Harding CV. TLR2 signaling
depletes IRAK1 and inhibits induction of type I IFN by TLR7/9. J Immunol
2012;188:1019.
[40] Dolganiuc A, Chang S, Kodys K, Mandrekar P, Bakis G, Cormier M, et al.
Hepatitis C virus (HCV) core protein-induced, monocyte-mediated
mechanisms of reduced IFN-alpha and plasmacytoid dendritic cell loss in
chronic HCV infection. J Immunol 2006;177:6758.
[41] Thompson AJ, Colledge D, Rodgers S, Wilson R, Revill P, Desmond P, et al.
Stimulation of the interleukin-1 receptor and Toll-like receptor 2 inhibits
hepatitis B virus replication in hepatoma cell lines in vitro. Antivir Ther
2009;14:797.
[42] Zhang X, Ma Z, Liu H, Liu J, Meng Z, Broering R, et al. Role of Toll-like receptor 2
in the immune response against hepadnaviral infection. J Hepatol
2012;57:522.


Please cite this article in press as: Bagheri V et al. Can Toll-Like Receptor (TLR) 2 be considered as a new target for immunotherapy against hepatitis B infection? Hum Immunol (2014), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.humimm.2014.02.018

ARTICLE IN PRESS

V. Bagheri et al./Human Immunology xxx (2014) xxx–xxx

[43] Khorramdelazad H, Hakimizadeh E, Hassanshahi G, Rezayati M, Sendi H, Arababadi MK. CCR5 Δ 32 mutation is not prevalent in Iranians with chronic HBV infection. J Med Virol 2013;85:964.

[44] Chen Z, Cheng Y, Xu Y, Liao J, Zhang X, Hu Y, et al. Expression profiles and function of Toll-like receptors 2 and 4 in peripheral blood mononuclear cells of chronic hepatitis B patients. Clin Immunol 2008;128:400.

[45] Wei XQ, Wen ZF, Zheng FP, Yao JL. Changes of Toll-like receptor (TLR) 2 and TLR4 on the peripheral blood mononuclear cells in patients with chronic hepatitis B and chronic severe hepatitis B. Zhonghua Gan Zang Bing Za Zhi 2007;15:354.

[46] Guo YW, Wei XQ, Yang SJ. A close relationship between viral hepatitis B and Toll-like receptor 2. Zhonghua Gan Zang Bing Za Zhi 2007;15:485.

[47] Heiberg IL, Winther TN, Paludan SR, Hogh B. Pattern recognition receptor responses in children with chronic hepatitis B virus infection. J Clin Virol 2012;54:229.

[48] Wang S, Chen Z, Hu C, Qian F, Cheng Y, Wu M, et al. Hepatitis B virus surface antigen selectively inhibits TLR2 ligand-induced IL-12 production in monocytes/macrophages by interfering with JNK activation. J Immunol 2013;190:5142.

[49] Lang T, Lo C, Skinner N, Locarnini S, Visvanathan K, Mansell A. The hepatitis B e antigen (HBeAg) targets and suppresses activation of the toll-like receptor signaling pathway. J Hepatol 2011;55:762.

[50] Visvanathan K, Skinner NA, Thompson AJ, Riordan SM, Sozzi V, Edwards R, et al. Regulation of Toll-like receptor-2 expression in chronic hepatitis B by the precore protein. Hepatology 2007;45:102.

[51] Wilson R, Warner N, Ryan K, Selleck L, Colledge D, Rodgers S, et al. The hepatitis B e antigen suppresses IL-1beta-mediated NF-kappaB activation in hepatocytes. J Viral Hepat 2011;18:e499.

[52] Shi B, Ren G, Hu Y, Wang S, Zhang Z, Yuan Z. HBsAg inhibits IFN-alpha production in plasmacytoid dendritic cells through TNF-alpha and IL-10 induction in monocytes. PLoS One 2012;7:e44900.

[53] Liu WH, Liu JJ, Wu J, Zhang LL, Liu F, Yin L, et al. Novel mechanism of inhibition of dendritic cells maturation by mesenchymal stem cells via interleukin-10 and the JAK1/STAT3 signaling pathway. PLoS One 2013;8:e55487.

[54] Vincent IE, Zannetti C, Lucifora J, Norder H, Protzer U, Hainaut P, et al. Hepatitis B virus impairs TLR9 expression and function in plasmacytoid dendritic cells. PLoS One 2011;6:e26315.

[55] Isogawa M, Robek MD, Furuichi Y, Chisari FV. Toll-like receptor signaling inhibits hepatitis B virus replication in vivo. J Virol 2005;79:7269.

[56] Lagowska-Lenard M, Stelmasiak Z, Bartosik-Psuiek H. Influence of vitamin C on markers of oxidative stress in the earliest period of ischemic stroke. Pharmacol Rep 2010;62:751.

[57] Chatziathanasiou GN, Nikas DN, Katsouras CS, Kazakos ND, Bouba V, Vougiouklakis T, et al. Combined intravenous treatment with ascorbic acid and desferrioxamine to reduce myocardial reperfusion injury in an experimental model resembling the clinical setting of primary PCI. Hellenic J Cardiol 2012;53:195.

[58] Wang K, Liu H, He Y, Chen T, Yang Y, Niu Y, et al. Correlation of TLR1-10 expression in peripheral blood mononuclear cells with chronic hepatitis B and chronic hepatitis B-related liver failure. Hum Immunol 2010;71:950.

[59] Soares J-B, Pimentel-Nunes P, Afonso L, Rolanda C, Lopes P, Roncon-Albuquerque R, et al. Increased hepatic expression of TLR2 and TLR4 in the hepatic inflammation-fibrosis-carcinoma sequence. Innate Immun 2012;18:700.

[60] Yunwei G, Xiuqing W, Yongwei L. Expression and clinical significance of Toll-like receptor 2 (TLR2) in patient with chronic hepatitis B – a report of 63 cases. New Med 2007;2:004.

[61] Janicko M, Veselíny E, Leško D, Jarcuška P. Serum cholesterol is a significant and independent mortality predictor in liver cirrhosis patients. Ann Hepatol 2013;12:581.

[62] Li YJ, Zhu P, Liang Y, Yin WG, Xiao JH. Hepatitis B virus induces expression of cholesterol metabolism-related genes via TLR2 in HepG2 cells. World J Gastroenterol 2013;19:2262.

[63] Matsuzaki K, Murata M, Yoshida K, Sekimoto G, Uemura Y, Sakaida N, et al. Chronic inflammation associated with hepatitis C virus infection perturbs hepatic transforming growth factor β signaling, promoting cirrhosis and hepatocellular carcinoma. Hepatology 2007;46:48.

[64] Tarao K, Ohkawa S, Miyagi Y, Morinaga S, Ohshige K, Yamamoto N, et al. Inflammation in background cirrhosis evokes malignant progression in HCC development from HCV-associated liver cirrhosis. Scand J Gastroenterol 2013;48:729.

[65] Lian J-Q, Wang X-Q, Zhang Y, Huang C-X, Bai X-F. Correlation of circulating TLR2/4 expression with CD3+/4+/8+ T cells and Treg cells in HBV-related liver cirrhosis. Viral Immunol 2009;22:301.


Please cite this article in press as: Bagheri V et al. Can Toll-Like Receptor (TLR) 2 be considered as a new target for immunotherapy against hepatitis B infection? Hum Immunol (2014), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.humimm.2014.02.018
