
Review

Programmed necrosis in microbial pathogenesis

Haripriya Sridharan and Jason W. Upton

Department of Molecular Biosciences, Institute for Cellular and Molecular Biology, University of Texas at Austin, 2506 Speedway, Stop A5000, Austin, TX 78712-1191, USA

Programmed cell death is an important facet of host–pathogen interactions. Although apoptosis has long been implicated as the major form of programmed cell death in host defense, the past decade has seen the emergence of other forms of regulated death, including programmed necrosis. While the molecular mechanisms of programmed necrosis continue to be unveiled, an increasing number of viral and bacterial pathogens induce this form of death in host cells, with important consequences for infection, control, and pathogenesis. Moreover, pathogen strategies to manipulate or utilize this pathway are now being discovered. In this review, we focus on a variety of viral and bacterial pathogens where a role for programmed necrosis is starting to be appreciated. In particular, we focus on the mechanistic details of how the host or the pathogen might appropriate this pathway for its own benefit.

Controlled cell death pathways

Programmed cell death (PCD) plays a significant role in the development, immune homeostasis, and host defense of multicellular organisms. For nearly 30 years, PCD has been synonymous with apoptosis, and apoptosis remains the most well studied of the PCD pathways. This controlled form of ‘suicide’ is an important arm of innate host defense that serves to limit pathogens, and allows the immune system to quickly and effectively dispose of dead and dying cells.

In addition to apoptosis, it is becoming clear that other modes of cell death are carefully controlled by eukaryotic cells [1–3] (Box 1). Necrosis has been traditionally regarded as accidental and uncontrolled cell death. However, in the past several years, this view has been challenged by clear evidence that some forms of necrotic death are genetically programmed. Similar to apoptosis, necrosis can also be initiated in response to various extrinsic and intrinsic signals and carried out through specific signaling cascades resulting in death. Such necrotic cell death is commonly referred to as programmed necrosis, regulated necrosis, or ‘necroptosis’.

Programmed necrosis can be initiated by death ligands, Toll-like receptor (TLR; see Glossary) ligands, or microbial

Glossary

Adapter proteins involved in signal transduction

Apoptosis-associated speck-like protein containing a caspase recruitment domain (ASC): adapter protein that functions to bridge procaspase-1 and other proteins within the inflammasomes, leading to procaspase-1 cleavage and activation.

TIR domain-containing adapter-inducing interferon-β (TRIF): adapter protein that functions downstream of TLRs 3 and 4 to mediate downstream signals resulting in immune responses.

Interferon (IFN) response

Interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF3): member of the interferon regulatory factor (IRF) family of transcription factors. Activated in response to viral nucleic acids by phosphorylation. Important for the transcription of IFNαβ and IFNβ, as well as other genes important in antiviral responses.

Janus kinase (JAK): family of intracellular, nonreceptor tyrosine kinases that mediate signal transduction initiated from IFNs. Activated by autophosphorylation and subsequently phosphorylates and activates specific STAT proteins.

Mitochondrial antiviral signaling protein (MAVS): adapter protein that transmits signals from the cytosolic RNA sensor, RIG-1, resulting in activation of IRF3 and transcription of IFNα and IFNβ genes.

Signal transducers and activation of transcription (STAT): family of transcription factors that are activated by JAKs. Upon activation, homo- or heterodimerize and translocate to the nucleus to transcriptionally activate many IFN-stimulated genes.

Stimulator of interferon genes (STING): adapter protein involved in host response to cytosolic pathogen-derived or self-DNA. Acts by activating transcription factors IRF3 and STAT6.

Molecules involved in cell death pathways

Cellular FLICE-like inhibitory protein (cFLIP): potent negative regulator of caspase-8 present as long (cFLIP_L) and short (cFLIP_S) isoforms. cFLIP_L inhibits both apoptosis and programmed necrosis, whereas cFLIP_S inhibits apoptosis but sensitizes cells towards programmed necrosis.

Cellular inhibitor of apoptosis protein (cIAP): family of ubiquitin E3 ligases important for regulation of apoptosis and programmed necrosis. Loss of cIAPs sensitizes cells towards programmed necrosis by facilitating the spontaneous assembly of an RIP1RIP3 containing signaling complex, termed the ‘ripoptosome’. Fas-associated death domain (FADD): adapter protein that functions downstream of some death receptors (e.g., Fas and TNF) to mediate downstream signals through the formation of a death-associated signaling complex (DISC). Loss of FADD potentiates RIP1-RIP3 programmed necrosis.

Mixed lineage kinase domain-like (MLKL): direct target of RIP3 kinase activity and important for mediating programmed necrosis downstream of RIP3.

Phosphoglycerate mutase family member 5 (PGAM5): a mitochondria-associated phosphatase that is activated by MLKL in certain conditions of programmed necrosis. Dephosphorylates Drp1 that leads to mitochondrial fission.

Reactive oxygen species (ROS): oxygen containing byproducts of metabolism, including oxygen anions and peroxides. Important second messengers and play roles in signal transduction leading to inflammation and cell death.

Pattern recognition receptors (PRRs)

Nucleotide oligomerization domain (Nod)-like receptor (NLR): intracellular PRRs that initiate immune response to injury, toxins, or microbial infection. Activation of some NLRs can result in the assembly of ‘inflammasomes’ that activate caspase-1.

Toll-like receptor (TLR): membrane-associated PRRs that are involved in recognizing a variety of pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs) and initiating downstream signal cascades resulting in host responses during infection.

Corresponding author: Upton, J.W. (upton@austin.utexas.edu).

Keywords: necrosis; necroptosis; RIP1; RIP3; MCMV; vaccinia; reovirus; *Mycobacterium*; *Salmonella*; *Yersinia*; Coxsackie B virus; cell death; innate immunity; host defense; TNF; *Listeria*; Human adenovirus; influenza; EPEC; PKR; IRF3.

0966-842X/$ – see front matter

© 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.tim.2014.01.005

CrossMark

Trends in Microbiology, April 2014, Vol. 22, No. 4 199

Review

Box 1. Forms of programmed cell death

Apoptosis: characterized by cell shrinkage, nuclear condensation, chromosomal fragmentation, membrane blebbing, and eventual breakdown into apoptotic bodies that are detected and disposed of by phagocytes. Requires the activation and activity of cysteine proteases known as caspases. Induced by external stimuli, such as death receptor ligation or pattern recognition receptor (PRR) activation, or by internal stimuli that influence mitochondrial integrity. Caspases exist as latent zymogens in the cell. 'Initiator' caspases, such as caspases-8 and -9, are activated in response to signals, which then activate 'executioner' caspases, caspases-7 and -3, that target cellular substrates leading to apoptotic death.

Programmed necrosis: characterized by organelle damage, cell swelling, and rupture of the plasma membrane, leading to the release of cytoplasmic contents. Associated with inflammation. Some forms of programmed necrosis are mediated by the RIP3 kinase. See text for details.

Pyroptosis: caspase-1-dependent, nonapoptotic cell death. Characterized by loss of plasma membrane integrity, release of cytoplasmic contents, and tightly associated with the maturation and secretion of inflammatory cytokines, including interleukin (IL)-1β and IL-18. Caspase-1 is activated by the assembly of the 'inflammasome', comprising activated cytosolic pathogen-sensing NLRs [nucleotide oligomerization domain (Nod)-like receptors] that recruit caspase-1 directly or through the adaptor ASC (apoptosis-associated speck-like protein containing a caspase recruitment domain) [86,87].

---

Figure 1. Central role of RHIM domains in programmed necrotic signaling. Extrinsic signals from death receptors, TLRs, or viruses require RHIM-containing adapters to activate programmed necrosis. RIP3 associates with either RIP1 (TNFR1), TRIF (TLR3) or DAI (MCMV) through homotypic interactions of the RHIM domain. This subsequently activates MLKL that then conveys the signal downstream. vIRA protein of MCMV inhibits RIP3-DAI-mediated signaling during infection through its RHIM domain by binding and sequestering RIP3 to prevent complex formation. Abbreviations: RHIM, RIP homotypic interaction motif; TLR, Toll-like receptor; RIP, receptor-interacting protein; TNFR1, tumor necrosis factor receptor 1; TRIF, TIR domain-containing adapter-inducing interferon-β; MCMV, murine cytomegalovirus; MLKL, mixed lineage kinase domain-like; vIRA, viral inhibitor of RIP activation.

infection. The most well-studied signaling pathway that is induced by death ligands is tumor necrosis factor (TNF). Paradoxically, it has been known for over 15 years that TNF can induce apoptosis in some instances and necrosis in others [4]. Unlike apoptosis, programmed necrosis is independent of caspase activity, and inhibition or lack of caspase-8 can sensitize cells to programmed necrosis [5]. Indeed, many additional proteins involved in regulation of apoptosis, including Fas-associated death domain (FADD), cellular inhibitor of apoptosis proteins (cIAPs), and cellular FLICE-like inhibitory proteins (cFLIPs), are implicated in regulation of programmed necrosis [2]. Signaling from TNF receptors activates the receptor-interacting protein (RIP) kinases 1 and 3, which then play central roles in mediating downstream signals. Several ‘extrinsic’ necrotic signals from TNF, TLR3 activation, and certain virus infections converge on RIP3 [6] (Figure 1). Several recent reviews have focused on the signaling cascade from TNF resulting in activation of the RIP1–RIP3 complex termed the ‘necrosome’ [2,7]. Activation of RIP1 and RIP3 involve auto- or cross-phosphorylation and dimerization through a motif called a RIP homotypic interaction motif (RHIM). Recently, it has been demonstrated that RIP1 is dispensable for some extrinsic signals (Figure 1); however, RIP3 plays an essential role in all, thus forming the crucial convergence point for execution of necrosis. Activated RIP3 then phosphorylates and activates downstream targets, ultimately leading to programmed necrosis. One common downstream substrate that is activated in all cases of RIP3-dependent necrosis is the pseudokinase mixed lineage kinase domain-like (MLKL) [8–10]. MLKL therefore probably comprises an essential step in necrosis progression, although events downstream of MLKL are just beginning to be elucidated. Recent studies suggest activation results in oligomerization and plasma membrane association of MLKL, which promotes calcium and/or sodium influx, and ultimately leads to membrane lysis [11,12]. However, in some cell types, MLKL activates PGAM5, resulting in mitochondrial fission, reactive oxygen species (ROS), and necrosis [13]. It has been demonstrated that RIP3-dependent programmed necrosis does not require mitochondria or ROS production in mouse fibroblast and endothelial cell lines [14], suggesting that, similar to RIP1, the requirement for mitochondria and ROS in programmed necrosis might be specific to certain agonists, cell types, or conditions. Thus, the minimal requirement for execution of RIP3-dependent programmed necrosis remains an important unanswered question.

Pyroptosis is another important form of nonapoptotic programmed cell death (Box 1). Initially described as the caspase-1-dependent apoptosis of macrophages during Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium (S. Typhimurium) infection [15], further investigations revealed significant morphological and biochemical differences between apoptosis and pyroptosis [1,16]. Although dependent upon the activity of caspases, pyroptosis results in loss of plasma membrane integrity and is associated with release of inflammatory cytokines. Owing to these features, pyroptosis has multiple potent proinflammatory effects that influence infection and immunity.

---

Necrosis and infection

Cellular suicide initiated by infected cells constitutes an effective mechanism to contain pathogen replication and spread. At the same time it facilitates the uptake and clearance of infected cells by phagocytes of the immune

Review

Trends in Microbiology April 2014, Vol. 22, No. 4

system. The importance of apoptosis as a host defense is underscored by the plethora of inhibitors encoded by different pathogens to suppress apoptosis [17,18]. Viruses and bacteria also usurp the apoptotic pathway to aid their replication as well as to avoid detection and clearance by immune cells. In some cases, apoptosis positively correlates with disease progression and pathology. One example is HIV-1, which induces bystander apoptosis in CD4<sup>+</sup>T cells [19]. This depletes the cellular reservoir that mounts an immune response against the virus, ultimately leading to increased viral titers and AIDS. Similarly, the bacterium *Mycobacterium avium* induces apoptosis in infected macrophages, and although this may lead to effective clearance of the bacterium [20], other studies suggest apoptosis can promote *M. avium* spread [21], highlighting the intricate dance between life and death. Regardless, apoptosis is clearly an important facet of the host-pathogen interaction that is used by both sides.

Recently, we have begun to appreciate an analogous role for necrosis in the host-pathogen interplay. In some cases, programmed necrosis is clearly a host defense mechanism against infection. In others, it is coopted by intracellular bacteria and viruses to aid in dissemination and spread. In all these cases, necrosis clearly influences the virulence and pathogenesis of the infectious disease. Here, we will discuss a number of viral and bacterial pathogens and the influence programmed necrosis has on their infection.

### Vaccinia virus

Accumulating evidence clearly indicates that programmed necrosis, at least in some cases, is a critical antiviral host defense mechanism. One such case is infection by vaccinia virus (VV). This large, double-stranded DNA virus encodes a plethora of immune and cell modulatory genes to facilitate infection, among them B13R, an ortholog of the well-characterized cowpox serpin, CrmA. Similar to CrmA, B13R can bind and inhibit caspases, including caspase-8 [22,23]. B13R is necessary for VV pathogenesis in mice [24], presumably to prevent apoptosis of infected cells. However, VV infection of mouse fibroblasts results in the sensitization of these cells to TNF-induced, caspase-independent necrotic cell death requiring B13R [25]. This apparent paradox was afforded mechanistic explanation when it was shown that RIP1 participates in death receptor-induced necrosis [26] as well as death of VV-infected cells [27]. Thus, inhibition of apoptosis, at least in some cases, promotes TNF-dependent programmed necrosis. The RIP1-RIP3 necrosome was clearly implicated as an important mediator of host defense in VV-infected mice, because genetic ablation of RIP3 and TNF receptor 2 (TNFR2) ameliorated extensive necrotic damage and inflammation [27,28]. RIP3<sup>-/-</sup> mice showed reduced pathology, but suffered significantly higher viral titers, and succumbed to infection. Conversely, wild-type mice controlled VV infection, but were afflicted with more severe tissue pathology [28]. Taken together, these data indicate that VV is controlled by the host through TNF-induced, RIP1-RIP3-dependent programmed necrosis. Although this antiviral strategy results in enhanced pathology associated with VV infection, it limits replication of the virus to protect from infection.

### Murine cytomegalovirus

Another virus demonstrating an antiviral role for necrosis is murine cytomegalovirus (MCMV). MCMV is a herpesvirus and establishes a life-long infection of its host. As such, the fate of infected cells is a critical issue that MCMV must manipulate to facilitate replication and persistence. Similar to other herpesviruses, MCMV encodes a number of inhibitors of apoptosis [29], including a viral inhibitor of caspase activation (vICA) that directly targets caspase-8 [30]. Although MCMV and VV inhibit caspase-8 during infection, the outcomes of infection by these viruses are very different. Unlike VV, wild-type MCMV infection does not sensitize cells to TNF-induced cell death [31]. This is due in large part to the MCMV M45 gene product, which encodes the viral inhibitor of RIP activation (vIRA). vIRA is a RHIM-containing protein that specifically binds and inhibits RIP3 (Figure 1) [32,33]. A recombinant MCMV encoding vIRA with a mutated RHIM (MCMVmutRHIM) was severely attenuated in both immune-compromised and normal hosts, but was completely rescued in RIP3<sup>-/-</sup> mice [33]. These results unequivocally demonstrated that inhibition of RIP3 RHIM-dependent programmed necrosis by vIRA is critical for MCMV infection.

Unlike VV, death receptors and RIP1 were not involved in MCMVmutRHIM-induced programmed necrosis. Instead, it requires the DNA-dependent activator of interferon regulatory factors (DAI/ZBP1) (Figure 2), a RHIM-containing pathogen recognition receptor involved in the innate immune response to DNA virus infection [34–36]. Expression of DAI sensitizes cells to MCMVmutRHIM-induced necrosis, and a RIP3-DAI interaction is detectable in MCMVmutRHIM virus-infected cells. Similar to loss of RIP3, RNAi-mediated knockdown or genetic ablation of DAI significantly reduces necrosis and rescues MCMVmutRHIM virus pathogenesis *in vitro* and *in vivo*. Together, these genetic and biochemical data indicate that programmed necrosis is a potent antiviral strategy employed by the host to combat viral infections, such as VV and MCMV infection, and some viruses have developed elegant strategies to circumvent this defense mechanism.

### Reovirus

Mammalian reovirus is a nonenveloped double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) virus long known to induce cell death during infection both *in vitro* and *in vivo* (reviewed in [37,38]). Reovirus-induced cell death is mediated by death receptor signaling, particularly via the death cytokine TNF-related apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL) [39]. Although reovirus-induced programmed cell death appears to play little role during infections *in vitro*, infection of target tissues *in vivo*, including the heart and central nervous system, results in extensive reovirus strain-specific tissue injury due to PCD. In some cases, reovirus induction of cell death is necessary for maximal virus growth *in vitro* and *in vivo*, suggesting that reovirus has coopted this host defense mechanism to facilitate its own pathogenesis [37]. Moreover, cell death is also strain-dependent, with the Type 3 (T3) strains inducing more death than other laboratory strains, such as Type I (T1) [40]. T3 strains of reovirus cause fatal encephalitis in neonatal mice that is dependent upon the activity of proapoptotic Bid, highlighting the important contribution of apoptosis to the pathology of

Review

Trends in Microbiology April 2014, Vol. 22, No. 4

- Coxsackie B virus
- Pore-forming toxins

Ca²⁺
perturbation

Calpains

DR
- Vaccinia
- Reovirus
- IAV
- Mycobacteria
- EPEC

RIP1
- Salmonella
- Yersinia
- C. perfringens toxin

RIP3

DAI
- MCMV

Programmed necrosis

IRF3
- Adenovirus
- Listeria

TRENDS in Microbiology

Figure 2. Multiple routes to programmed necrosis during infection. Viral and bacterial pathogens, including vaccinia, reovirus, IAV, *Mycobacterium*, and EPEC, activate the RIP3-dependent necrotic pathway via death receptors (DRs), whereas *Salmonella*, *Yersinia*, and the *Clostridium perfringens* toxin induce necrosis dependent on RIP1 kinase activity. MCMV elicits and inhibits an analogous DAI-dependent pathway leading to RIP3. Other pathogens induce programmed necrosis through IRF3 or by changes in intracellular calcium via mechanisms that are not currently understood. '?' indicates an unknown connection. Abbreviations: IAV, influenza A virus; EPEC, enteropathogenic *Escherichia coli*; RIP, receptor-interacting protein; MCMV, murine cytomegalovirus.

disease [41]. Correspondingly, the T3 strains also induce more effector caspase and nuclear factor-κB (NF-κB) activation. Surprisingly, neither was required for cell death in murine L929 cells, and T3-induced death was reduced by the RIP1 inhibitor, necrostatin-1 (nec-1). This suggests that the predominant form of death in L929 cells is RIP-dependent programmed necrosis rather than apoptosis (Figure 2) [42]. The initiating events for necrosis during reovirus infection may be different than those inducing apoptosis, because necrosis requires viral RNA and protein synthesis, unlike apoptosis where viral penetration is sufficient [43–45]. It is conceivable that both these forms of cell death contribute to reovirus infection, but may differentially mediate damage in specific tissues or cell types. Although reovirus-induced apoptosis has a positive effect on viral replication, it remains to be determined whether necrosis plays a significant role in virus growth and spread. In either case, it will be important to determine the contribution of programmed necrosis in the context of in vivo infection and assess its role in pathogenesis alongside apoptosis.

Influenza A virus

Programmed cell death plays an important role in influenza A virus (IAV) infections. IAV inhibits apoptosis early during infection, through the action of its nonstructural protein 1, but actively induces apoptosis at later stages of infection [46]. A recent study has identified cIAP2 as a critical inhibitor of programmed necrosis necessary to maintain tissue homeostasis during IAV infections [47]. Unlike wild type mice, which eventually recovered from infection, cIAP2-deficient mice succumbed to infection due to massive necrosis and hemorrhaging of the airway passage epithelia. Programmed necrosis was mediated by the death cytokine FasL and required RIP1 and RIP3.

Chemical inhibition of RIP1 or genetic depletion of RIP3 rescued infected cIAP2⁻/⁻ mice from tissue damage and improved animal survival. Interestingly, programmed necrosis triggered by IAV infection in cIAP2 knockout mice did not affect viral titers, immune cell activation, or the inflammatory cytokine response [47]. This suggests that programmed necrosis in the case of IAV infection does not act as a host defense or even as a viral strategy employed by IAV to complete its life cycle. Instead, it is clear evidence that necrosis contributes to the pathology and severity of IAV-induced disease, thereby having important consequences for patient outcome, especially in patients where cIAP2 function may be compromised.

*Mycobacterium*

The past few years have seen an increasing number of studies identifying programmed necrosis as a consequence of bacterial infections. *Mycobacterium tuberculosis* (MTB) infection proceeds in several distinct but inter-related stages (reviewed in [48,49]). The bacteria invade alveolar macrophages in the lung, leading to robust localized inflammation, with the release of inflammatory cytokines, such as TNF, which promote granuloma formation (reviewed in [49]). However, the relationship among MTB, TNF, and programmed necrosis is complex. Although TNF plays an important role in control of MTB, excess can cause tissue damage and organ dysfunction. Emphasizing this delicate balance, a series of recent studies elegantly demonstrated that both excess and insufficient TNF exacerbate outcomes of TB infection through programmed necrosis [50–52]. Excess TNF during infection causes an RIP1/RIP3-dependent increase in ROS that initially aids in intracellular control of the bacteria in macrophages. However, it ultimately leads to TNF-mediated, RIP1-RIP3-dependent programmed necrosis.

and release of MTB [50]. Thus, initial protection afforded the host in control of intracellular bacteria by ROS is negated by host cell necrosis and release of the bacteria into the extracellular compartment. Chemical or RNAi-mediated inhibition of programmed necrosis by targeting RIP1, RIP3, MLKL, or PGAM5 prevented both the initial bactericidal activity as well as subsequent necrosis of macrophages, resulting in enhanced extracellular bacterial loads, which has an adverse outcome for the host. However, targeting the pathway downstream of ROS production, but upstream of cell lysis, through blockade of cyclophilin D or acid sphingomyelinase rendered the host hyper-resistant to infection. By maintaining a low intracellular bacterial burden, but also preventing macrophage necrosis and extracellular dissemination, the infection is efficiently controlled. Although these studies were performed in a zebrafish model system, they highlight the tight balance between infection, death-promoting cytokines, and programmed necrosis, as well as how targeting the necrotic pathway at precise points could potentially improve patient outcome in tuberculosis therapy.

### Salmonella

S. Typhimurium is a highly virulent intracellular bacterial pathogen. S. Typhimurium infection of normal mice results in rapid mortality coincident with excessive necrotic death of infected macrophages. This is dependent upon type I interferons (IFNs) and mediated by the interferon receptor 1 (IFNAR1) [53]. Macrophages from IFNAR$^{-/-}$ mice displayed better survival and were therefore better able to contain bacterial burdens earlier during infection, as compared with those from wild type mice. Interestingly, macrophages treated with nec-1, or those derived from RIP3$^{-/-}$ mice, were protected from death, confirming a role for RIP1-RIP3 programmed necrosis during S. Typhimurium infection. However, it remains unclear how programmed necrosis contributes to the pathogenesis of S. Typhimurium, because RIP3$^{-/-}$ mice showed only modest improvements in survival compared with wild type animals [53]. Inhibition of caspase-1 activity also modestly reduced the lethality in infected macrophages, suggesting that multiple pathways contribute to lethality of the host during S. Typhimurium infection. Nevertheless, RIP1-RIP3-dependent death influences survival of infected macrophages during S. Typhimurium infection *in vitro* and *in vivo* (Figure 2). RIP1 was shown to associate with IFNAR1 [53], but the actual mechanism of necrosome activation in this scenario is not understood. This warrants additional work to understand the physiological role of programmed necrosis during infection of this important bacterial pathogen.

### Yersinia

Yersinia outer membrane proteins (YOPs) are secreted from different Yersinia strains, contributing to virulence and pathogenesis of the bacteria by counteracting host innate and adaptive immunity [54]. In macrophages, the Yersinia enterocolitica YopP (YopJ in Yersinia pestis) induces caspase-8 activation and apoptotic death. However, in dendritic cells (DCs), YopP induces death simultaneously through both apoptosis and necrosis [55]. Treatment of Yersinia-infected DCs with caspase inhibitors partially protected cells from death, suggesting that both caspase-dependent and -independent pathways of death operate in DCs. Injection of YopP into DCs induces formation of a caspase-8-FADD-RIP1 complex independent of death receptor activation [56]. This is reminiscent of the complex termed the 'ripoptosome,' which is induced by the depletion of cIAPs or DNA damaging agents [57,58]. YopP is a cysteine protease whose activity is essential for cleavage of caspase-8 and RIP1 [56]. Cleaved RIP1 amplifies the apoptotic response [59,60]; how it acts as a pronecrotic mediator remains to be determined. Chemical depletion of RIP1 in this system by geldanamycin implicates RIP1 as a necessary mediator of YopP death. By contrast, YopJ-induced necrosis in infected macrophages was unaffected by RIP1 kinase inhibition with nec-1 [61]. These apparently conflicting results could be reconciled by the finding that geldanamycin also depletes RIP3 levels [28]. Thus, the necrosis induced by both YopP in DCs and YopJ in macrophages may be RIP3-dependent, but RIP1-independent (Figure 2). However, a definitive role for RIP3 in Yop-mediated necrosis, as well as how YopP/J-induced cell death influences Yersinia pathogenesis remain open questions.

#### Enteropathogenic Escherichia coli (EPEC)

Many bacterial gene products, such as the Yops discussed above or pore-forming toxins discussed later, induce eukaryotic cell death. However, recently the type III effector protein of pathogenic *E. coli*, NleB, was identified as an inhibitor of cell death signaling [62]. NleB has a novel N-glucosamineacyl (NGlnAc) transferase activity that targets a conserved arginine in the death domains of TRADD, FADD, TNFR1, and RIP1, effectively inhibiting the association of the death domains to abolish downstream signaling in response to death cytokines. Moreover, the NGlnAc activity also suppressed TNF-induced programmed necrosis in RIP3 overexpressing HeLa or HT29 cells. In mice infected with NleB-deleted strains, the bacteria were unable to effectively colonize the host, showing reduced colony forming units in stool and colon, as compared with mice infected with wild type strains [62], highlighting the importance of these pathways as protective to the host and helping to clear infection. Further investigations into the mechanisms of host cell death during *in vivo* infection will probably yield important insights into the interplay between *E. coli* and its host.

#### Interferon-dependent, noncanonical pathways for necrosis

The intracellular bacterium *Listeria monocytogenes* and human adenovirus (hAdv) both induce a form of programmed necrosis with rapid kinetics in infected macrophages [63]. Intriguingly, this cell death was mediated by the transcription factor, IRF3 (Figure 2). RIP3 appeared to play no role in this form of programmed necrosis, at least during hAdv infection. Although insight into the mechanism of IRF3-induced necrosis is lacking, no difference in cytokine profiles between wild type and IRF3$^{-/-}$ mice were detected, indicating that transcriptional activity of IRF3 is probably not involved. Neither *Listeria*, nor HAdv mutants unable to escape from the endosome into the cytosol induced IRF3-dependent necrosis. Surprisingly,

death was independent of upstream sensors such as STING, MAVS, and DAI [63]. The bacterial burden in *Listeria*-infected wild type mice was doubled in comparison to IRF3⁻/⁻ mice, suggesting that *Listeria* uses programmed necrosis to aid bacterial dissemination. However, this trend was inversed for hAdv because viral burdens were higher in the livers of IRF3⁻/⁻ infected mice as compared with wild type. This serves as yet another example of a necrotic pathway used as both a host defense and pathogen survival strategy.

Recently, another study established the role of the protein kinase R (PKR) in programmed necrosis mediated by IFNs [64]. PKR has been previously implicated in apoptosis caused by various stimuli, including dsRNA, lipopolysaccharide (LPS), and TNF [65, 66]. IFN-mediated necrosis required JAK/STAT signaling, PKR, RIP1, and RIP3, and although primarily demonstrated with IFNγ, was similar for both type I and type II IFNs [64]. Interestingly, the kinase activity of RIP1 was dispensable; instead, IFN induced PKR associated with RIP1 to form the necrosome and initiate programmed necrosis. Moreover, the elucidation of this IFN-dependent pathway calls into question whether type II IFN and PKR could also be involved in *S.* Typhimurium-induced programmed necrosis [53].

Viruses have been shown to inhibit nearly every step of IFN production and signaling, including activation of IRF3, JAK/STAT signaling, and PKR [67]. In addition to inhibiting the antiviral functions of IRFs and IFNs, these viral proteins could potentially play an unappreciated role in inhibiting host cell death. This could explain why IFN-mediated programmed necrosis is not a more commonly observed phenomenon with virus infections. Future investigations into the effect of these pathways on programmed necrosis will probably be illuminating.

### Cell death induced by pore-forming toxins

Many bacteria encode pore-forming toxins that are crucial to pathogenesis, contributing to sepsis and tissue damage in the host. In some cases, the same toxin can initiate different host cell death pathways in a dose-dependent manner [68]. β-Toxin from *Clostridium perfringens* [69], α-toxin from *Clostridium septicum* [70, 71], and *Helicobacter pylori* VacA [72] all cause a primarily necrotic death. In the case of *C. perfringens*, necrosis is inhibited by nec-1, suggesting a role for RIP1 kinase activity (Figure 2). However, in most other systems, it remains to be determined whether RIP1 and/or RIP3 play any role in executing toxin-induced death. The ‘inflammasome’ is activated by many pore-forming toxins [73, 74]. Recent evidence indicates that RIP3 can directly activate the NLRP3 inflammasome independent of its necrotic signaling [75, 76], suggesting the possibility that both pyroptosis and programmed necrosis actively contribute to death by soluble toxins. Inflammation has generally been considered a secondary effect of necrosis due to release of danger-associated molecular patterns (DAMPs) from the necrotic cell. However, inhibition of cIAPs, important regulators of programmed necrosis, resulted in increased RIP3-dependent activation of the inflammasome [75]. Other components recruited to the ‘necrosome’, including MLKL and PGAM5, have also been implicated [76], suggesting a complex interplay among cell

death modalities, inflammatory signaling, and bacterial toxins.

### Calcium, calpains, and necrosis

Many bacterial toxins and some viruses, such as Coxsackie B virus (CVB), induce necrotic cell death by activating calpains (Figure 2), a family of calcium-dependent proteases known to promote cell death. CVB is an enterovirus that depends on cell lysis for virus release at the end of its life cycle. Many studies conducted on nonpolarized cells identified activation of caspases and a role for apoptosis in CVB release [77–79]. However, in polarized cells, CVB-induced cell death was inhibited by a calpain inhibitor or knock-down of calpain-2, but not caspase inhibitors [80]. Importantly, knock-down of calpain-2 by RNAi significantly inhibited CVB release from cells, pointing to an important role for calpain-mediated necrosis in the life cycle of CVB. The role of the RIP kinases in CVB-induced necrosis is not understood. Many forms of necrosis exhibit altered intracellular calcium levels, calpain activation, and lysosomal degradation [7, 81]. However, the connection between RIP3 activation and increases in calcium-dependent signaling is not entirely clear. It has been suggested that signals from calcium perturbations do not require RIP1, RIP3, or MLKL to induce programmed necrosis, but is dependent on PGAM5 [13]. This could be context-specific depending on the cell type and/or necrotic stimuli. A more detailed look into possible connections between RIP3 activation and effects of calcium is needed to better understand this regulation.

### Other potential inhibitors of necrosis

So far, only two proteins from pathogens, namely vIRA from MCMV and NleB from *E. coli*, have been shown to directly interact with and inhibit programmed necrosis to influence an infection in a host. Viruses of the poxvirus and herpesvirus families encode homologs of cFLIP, which are strong apoptosis inhibitors [2]. Intriguingly, a subset of these vFLIP molecules can also inhibit programmed necrosis [27], although they have not been tested in a natural infection model. However, as the role of necrosis in viral and bacterial infection continues to expand, it is probable that other inhibitors of necrosis will be identified. Viruses that encode caspase-8 inhibitors [2] could also encode for as yet undiscovered inhibitors of programmed necrosis. The ribonucleotide reductase large subunits of herpes simplex virus (HSV)-1 and HSV-2, orthologs of MCMV vIRA, protect from cell death in isolation [82], although further investigation is necessary to assess any potential role in suppressing programmed necrosis. It is tempting to speculate that inhibition of necrosis may be a common strategy employed by many more pathogens to evade the host immune system.

### Concluding remarks

Data from studies of several pathogens have indicated an important role for programmed necrosis in mediating virulence and pathogenesis of infectious disease. As it becomes appreciated that necrosis is not an accidental death modality, the studies discussed in this review highlight the emerging concept of how infections by a variety of

Review

Trends in Microbiology April 2014, Vol. 22, No. 4

Table 1. Summary of microbial induction and inhibition of programmed necrosis

| Pathogen               | Mechanism of programmed necrosis          | Pathogen influence on programmed necrosis | Pathogen-associated programmed necrosis inhibitor^b or inducer^c | Consequence of programmed necrosis during infection         | Refs     |
|------------------------|-------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------|----------|
| Vaccinia virus         | TNF-RIP1-RIP3                            | Promotes                                | ND                                                              | Host defense                                               | [22-24]   |
| MCMV                   | DAI-RIP3                                 | Inhibits                                | vIRA(M45)^b                                                     | Host defense                                               | [29,30,33]|
| Reovirus               | DR-RIP1                                  | Promotes                                | ND                                                              | ND                                                           | [39]      |
| Influenza A virus      | FasL (TRAIL)-RIP1-RIP3                   | Promotes                                | ND                                                              | Enhanced pathology                                         | [44]      |
| Mycobacterium          | TNF-RIP1-RIP3                            | Promotes                                | ND                                                              | Benefit to both host and pathogen^d                         | [47]      |
| Salmonella             | IFN-RIP1-RIP3                            | Promotes                                | ND                                                              | Limits host defense                                         | [50]      |
| Yersinia               | RIP1-RIP3                                | Promotes                                | YopJ^c                                                          | ND                                                           | [52,53,58]|
| Enteropathogenic Escherichia coli | DR-RIP1-RIP3                          | Inhibits                                | NleB^b                                                          | Host defense                                               | [59]      |
| Listeria monocytogenes | IRF3                                     | Promotes                                | ND                                                              | Promote dissemination                                       | [60]      |
| Human adenovirus       | IRF3                                     | Promotes                                | ND                                                              | Host defense                                               | [60]      |
| Clostridium perfringens | RIP1, Calpains                           | Promotes                                | B toxin^c                                                       | ND                                                           | [66]      |
| Clostridium septicum   | Calpains                                 | Promotes                                | A toxin^c                                                       | ND                                                           | [67,68]   |
| Helicobacter pylori    | ND^a                                     | Promotes                                | VacA^c                                                          | ND                                                           | [69]      |
| Coxsackie B virus      | Calpain-2                                | Promotes                                | ND                                                              | Promote dissemination                                       | [77]      |

^aND, not determined.

^bPathogen-associated programmed necrosis inhibitor.

^cPathogen-associated programmed necrosis inducer.

^dTNF-mediated signaling and ROS facilitates early control of intracellular bacteria, but also promotes cell lysis and bacterial dissemination. See text for details.

pathogens actively engage signal transduction pathways leading to necrosis of the host cell. In some cases, programmed necrosis functions as an antiviral/antibacterial response against infection; in others, it is utilized by the pathogen to aid its dissemination (Table 1). More importantly, necrosis can contribute to inflammation, tissue destruction, and, therefore, disease severity and should be considered as a component of treatment options. A common theme that emerges from most of the above studies is that the type of death induced by an infection is contextual, dependent upon a multiplicity of factors, ranging from pathogen genetics to host immune responses, and deciphering these contexts in terms of pathogen infection should remain a top priority.

Many interesting questions remain to be answered regarding programmed necrosis and infections (Box 2). In addition to caspase-8 and FADD [5,83], there has been some evidence that caspase-9 has a role in inhibition of necrosis during MTB infection [84]. Interestingly, a genome-wide screen for genes involved in programmed necrosis identified the Bcl-2 family member Bmf [85]. It remains to be seen whether additional apoptotic 'checkpoints' serve to regulate programmed necrosis. Another important question is how metabolic and chemical conditions in the host cell determine regulation of programmed necrosis. Currently, we lack clear understanding of how 'intrinsic' signals such as calcium flux or ROS are related to RIP kinase signaling and the initiation of programmed necrosis, and

Box 2. Outstanding questions

- What points in the apoptotic pathway in addition to caspase-8 and FADD serve as 'checkpoints' for programmed necrosis?
- How are changes in ROS or calcium flux related to RIP3 activity?
- What are the mechanisms by which pathogens other than MCMV and EPEC modulate programmed necrosis?

Acknowledgments

We sincerely apologize to the many colleagues whose work could not be discussed or referenced owing to space limitations. We would like to thank Jamie Waggoner for graphic design and members of the Upton laboratory for helpful discussions and critically reading the manuscript. Work in the Upton laboratory is supported by the Cancer Prevention and Research Institute of Texas (CPRIT) Scholar award R1202 (J.W.U.).

References

1 Kepp, O. *et al.* (2010) Pyroptosis—a cell death modality of its kind? *Eur. J. Immunol.* 40, 627–630

2 Mocarski, E.S. *et al.* (2012) Viral infection and the evolution of caspase 8-regulated apoptotic and necrotic death pathways. *Nat. Rev. Immunol.* 12, 79–88

3 Vandenabeele, P. *et al.* (2010) Molecular mechanisms of necroptosis: an ordered cellular explosion. *Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol.* 11, 700–714

4 Laster, S.M. *et al.* (1988) Tumor necrosis factor can induce both apoptic and necrotic forms of cell lysis. *J. Immunol.* 141, 2629–2634

5 Kaiser, W.J. *et al.* (2011) RIP3 mediates the embryonic lethality of caspase-8-deficient mice. *Nature* 471, 368–372

Review

Trends in Microbiology April 2014, Vol. 22, No. 4

6 Kaiser, W.J. *et al.* (2013) Viral modulation of programmed necrosis. Curr. Opin. Virol. 3, 296–306

7 Galluzzi, L. *et al.* (2011) Programmed necrosis from molecules to health and disease. Int. Rev. Cell Mol. Biol. 289, 1–35

8 Kaiser, W.J. *et al.* (2013) Toll-like receptor 3-mediated necrosis via TRIF, RIP3, and MLKL. J. Biol. Chem. 288, 31268–31279

9 Sun, L. *et al.* (2012) Mixed lineage kinase domain-like protein mediates necrosis signaling downstream of RIP3 kinase. Cell 148, 213–227

10 Zhao, J. *et al.* (2012) Mixed lineage kinase domain-like is a key receptor interacting protein 3 downstream component of TNF-induced necrosis. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 109, 5322–5327

11 Cai, Z. *et al.* (2014) Plasma membrane translocation of trimerized MLKL protein is required for TNF-induced necroptosis. Nat. Cell Biol. 16, 55–65

12 Chen, X. *et al.* (2014) Translocation of mixed lineage kinase domain-like protein to plasma membrane leads to necrotic cell death. Cell Res. 24, 105–121

13 Wang, Z. *et al.* (2012) The mitochondrial phosphatase PGAM5 functions at the convergence point of multiple necrotic death pathways. Cell 148, 228–243

14 Tait, S.W. *et al.* (2013) Widespread mitochondrial depletion via mitophagy does not compromise necroptosis. Cell Rep. 5, 878–885

15 Monack, D.M. *et al.* (1996) Salmonella typhimurium invasion induces apoptosis in infected macrophages. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 93, 9833–9838

16 Miao, E.A. *et al.* (2011) Caspase-1-induced pyroptotic cell death. Immunol. Rev. 243, 206–214

17 Best, S.M. (2008) Viral subversion of apoptotic enzymes: escape from death row. Annu. Rev. Microbiol. 62, 171–192

18 Lamkanfi, M. and Dixit, V.M. (2010) Manipulation of host cell death pathways during microbial infections. Cell Host Microbe 8, 44–54

19 Ross, T.M. (2001) Using death to one’s advantage: HIV modulation of apoptosis. Leukemia 15, 332–341

20 Fratazzi, C. *et al.* (1997) Programmed cell death of Mycobacterium avium serovar 4-infected human macrophages prevents the mycobacteria from spreading and induces mycobacterial growth inhibition by freshly added, uninfected macrophages. J. Immunol. 158, 4320–4327

21 Early, J. *et al.* (2011) Mycobacterium avium uses apoptotic macrophages as tools for spreading. Microb. Pathog. 50, 132–139

22 Dobbelstein, M. and Shenk, T. (1996) Protection against apoptosis by the vaccinia virus SPI-2 (B13R) gene product. J. Virol. 70, 6479–6485

23 Kettle, S. *et al.* (1997) Vaccinia virus serpin B13R (SPI-2) inhibits interleukin-1β-converting enzyme and protects virus-infected cells from TNF- and Fas-mediated apoptosis, but does not prevent IL-1β-induced fever. J. Gen. Virol. 78, 677–685

24 Legrand, F.A. *et al.* (2004) Induction of potent humoral and cell-mediated immune responses by attenuated vaccinia virus vectors with deleted serpin genes. J. Virol. 78, 2770–2779

25 Li, M. and Beg, A.A. (2000) Induction of necrotic-like cell death by tumor necrosis factor α and caspase inhibitors: novel mechanism for killing virus-infected cells. J. Virol. 74, 7470–7477

26 Holler, N. *et al.* (2000) Fas triggers an alternative, caspase-8-independent cell death pathway using the kinase RIP as effector molecule. Nat. Immunol. 1, 489–495

27 Chan, F.K. *et al.* (2003) A role for tumor necrosis factor receptor-2 and receptor-interacting protein in programmed necrosis and antiviral responses. J. Biol. Chem. 278, 51613–51621

28 Cho, Y.S. *et al.* (2009) Phosphorylation-driven assembly of the RIP1-RIP3 complex regulates programmed necrosis and virus-induced inflammation. Cell 137, 1112–1123

29 Fliss, P.M. and Brune, W. (2012) Prevention of cellular suicide by cytomegaloviruses. Viruses 4, 1928–1949

30 Skaletskaya, A. *et al.* (2001) A cytomegalovirus-encoded inhibitor of apoptosis that suppresses caspase-8 activation. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 98, 7829–7834

31 Mack, C. *et al.* (2008) Inhibition of proinflammatory and innate immune signaling pathways by a cytomegalovirus RIP1-interacting protein. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 105, 3094–3099

32 Upton, J.W. *et al.* (2008) Cytomegalovirus M45 cell death suppression requires receptor-interacting protein (RIP) homotypic interaction motif (RHIM)-dependent interaction with RIP1. J. Biol. Chem. 283, 16966–16970

33 Upton, J.W. *et al.* (2010) Virus inhibition of RIP3-dependent necrosis. Cell Host Microbe 7, 302–313

34 Kaiser, W.J. *et al.* (2008) Receptor-interacting protein homotypic interaction motif-dependent control of NF-κB activation via the DNA-dependent activator of IFN regulatory factors. J. Immunol. 181, 6427–6434

35 Takaoka, A. *et al.* (2007) DAI (DLM-1/ZBP1) is a cytosolic DNA sensor and an activator of innate immune response. Nature 448, 501–505

36 Upton, J.W. *et al.* (2012) DAI/ZBP1/DLM-1 complexes with RIP3 to mediate virus-induced programmed necrosis that is targeted by murine cytomegalovirus vIRA. Cell Host Microbe 11, 290–297

37 Clarke, P. *et al.* (2005) Mechanisms of apoptosis during reovirus infection. Curr. Top. Microbiol. Immunol. 289, 1–24

38 Danthi, P. *et al.* (2013) Reovirus receptors, cell entry, and proapoptotic signaling. Adv. Exp. Med. Biol. 790, 42–71

39 Clarke, P. *et al.* (2000) Reovirus-induced apoptosis is mediated by TRAIL. J. Virol. 74, 8135–8139

40 Tyler, K.L. *et al.* (1995) Differences in the capacity of reovirus strains to induce apoptosis are determined by the viral attachment protein sigma 1. J. Virol. 69, 6972–6979

41 Danthi, P. *et al.* (2010) Bid regulates the pathogenesis of neurotropic reovirus. PLoS Pathog. 6, e1000980

42 Berger, A.K. and Danthi, P. (2013) Reovirus activates a caspase-independent cell death pathway. MBio 4, e00178–e213

43 Danthi, P. *et al.* (2008) Reovirus apoptosis and virulence are regulated by host cell membrane penetration efficiency. J. Virol. 82, 161–172

44 Danthi, P. *et al.* (2008) Independent regulation of reovirus membrane penetration and apoptosis by the mu1 phi domain. PLoS Pathog. 4, e1000248

45 Connolly, J.L. and Dermody, T.S. (2002) Virion disassembly is required for apoptosis induced by reovirus. J. Virol. 76, 1632–1641

46 Yatim, N. and Albert, M.L. (2011) Dying to replicate: the orchestration of the viral life cycle, cell death pathways, and immunity. Immunity 35, 478–490

47 Rodrigue-Gervais, I.G. *et al.* (2014) Cellular inhibitor of apoptosis protein cIAP2 protects against pulmonary tissue necrosis during influenza virus infection to promote host survival. Cell Host Microbe 15, 23–35

48 Schluger, N.W. and Rom, W.N. (1998) The host immune response to tuberculosis. Am. J. Respir. Crit. Care Med. 157, 679–691

49 Sasindran, S.J. and Torrelles, J.B. (2011) Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection and inflammation: what is beneficial for the host and for the bacterium? Front. Microbiol. 2, 2

50 Roca, F.J. and Ramakrishnan, L. (2013) TNF dually mediates resistance and susceptibility to mycobacteria via mitochondrial reactive oxygen species. Cell 153, 521–534

51 Tobin, D.M. *et al.* (2010) The lta4h locus modulates susceptibility to mycobacterial infection in zebrafish and humans. Cell 140, 717–730

52 Tobin, D.M. *et al.* (2012) Host genotype-specific therapies can optimize the inflammatory response to mycobacterial infections. Cell 148, 434–446

53 Robinson, N. *et al.* (2012) Type I interferon induces necroptosis in macrophages during infection with Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium. Nat. Immunol. 13, 954–962

54 Viboud, G.I. and Bliska, J.B. (2005) Yersinia outer proteins: role in modulation of host cell signaling responses and pathogenesis. Annu. Rev. Microbiol. 59, 69–89

55 Grobner, S. *et al.* (2006) Yersinia YopP-induced apoptotic cell death in murine dendritic cells is partially independent from action of caspases and exhibits necrosis-like features. Apoptosis 11, 1959–1968

56 Grobner, S. *et al.* (2007) Catalytically active Yersinia outer protein P induces cleavage of RIP and caspase-8 at the level of the DISC independently of death receptors in dendritic cells. Apoptosis 12, 1813–1825

57 Feoktistova, M. *et al.* (2011) cIAPs block ripoptosome formation, a RIP1/caspase-8 containing intracellular cell death complex differentially regulated by cFLIP isoforms. Mol. Cell 43, 449–463

58 Tenev, T. *et al.* (2011) The ripoptosome, a signaling platform that assembles in response to genotoxic stress and loss of IAPs. Mol. Cell 43, 432–448

59 Martinon, F. *et al.* (2000) Activation of a pro-apoptotic amplification loop through inhibition of NF-κB-dependent survival signals by caspase-mediated inactivation of RIP. FEBS Lett. 468, 134–136

60 Lin, Y. *et al.* (1999) Cleavage of the death domain kinase RIP by caspase-8 prompts TNF-induced apoptosis. *Genes Dev.* 13, 2514–2526

61 Ying Zheng, S.L. *et al.* (2012) YopJ-induced caspase-1 activation in Yersinia-infected macrophages: independent of apoptosis, linked to necrosis, dispensable for innate host defense. *PLoS ONE* 7, 15

62 Li, S. *et al.* (2013) Pathogen blocks host death receptor signalling by arginine GlcNAcylation of death domains. *Nature* 501, 242–246

63 Di Paolo, N.C. *et al.* (2013) The transcription factor IRF3 triggers 'defensive suicide' necrosis in response to viral and bacterial pathogens. *Cell Rep.* 3, 1840–1846

64 Thapa, R.J. *et al.* (2013) Interferon-induced RIP1/RIP3-mediated necrosis requires PKR and is licensed by FADD and caspases. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.* 110, E3109–E3118

65 Balachandran, S. *et al.* (1998) Activation of the dsRNA-dependent protein kinase, PKR, induces apoptosis through FADD-mediated death signaling. *EMBO J.* 17, 6888–6902

66 Gil, J. and Esteban, M. (2000) The interferon-induced protein kinase (PKR), triggers apoptosis through FADD-mediated activation of caspase 8 in a manner independent of Fas and TNF-α receptors. *Oncogene* 19, 3665–3674

67 Versteeg, G.A. and Garcia-Sastre, A. (2010) Viral tricks to grid-lock the type I interferon system. *Curr. Opin. Microbiol.* 13, 508–516

68 Bischofberger, M. *et al.* (2012) Pathogenic pore-forming proteins: function and host response. *Cell Host Microbe* 12, 266–275

69 Autheman, D. *et al.* (2013) *Clostridium perfringens* β-toxin induces necrostatin-inhibitable, calpain-dependent necrosis in primary porcine endothelial cells. *PLoS ONE* 8, e64644

70 Kennedy, C.L. *et al.* (2009) Programmed cellular necrosis mediated by the pore-forming α-toxin from *Clostridium septicum*. *PLoS Pathog.* 5, e1000516

71 Knapp, O. *et al.* (2010) *Clostridium septicum* α-toxin forms pores and induces rapid cell necrosis. *Toxicon* 55, 61–72

72 Radin, J.N. *et al.* (2011) *Helicobacter pylori* VacA induces programmed necrosis in gastric epithelial cells. *Infect. Immun.* 79, 2535–2543

73 Craven, R.R. *et al.* (2009) *Staphylococcus aureus* α-hemolysin activates the NLRP3-inflammasome in human and mouse monocytic cells. *PLoS ONE* 4, e7446

74 Boyden, E.D. and Dietrich, W.F. (2006) Nalp1b controls mouse macrophage susceptibility to anthrax lethal toxin. *Nat. Genet.* 38, 240–244

75 Vince, J.E. *et al.* (2012) Inhibitor of apoptosis proteins limit RIP3 kinase-dependent interleukin-1 activation. *Immunity* 36, 215–227

76 Kang, T.B. *et al.* (2013) Caspase-8 blocks kinase RIPK3-mediated activation of the NLRP3 inflammasome. *Immunity* 38, 27–40

77 Carthy, C.M. *et al.* (1998) Caspase activation and specific cleavage of substrates after coxsackievirus B3-induced cytopathic effect in HeLa cells. *J. Virol.* 72, 7669–7675

78 Carthy, C.M. *et al.* (2003) Bcl-2 and Bcl-xL overexpression inhibits cytochrome c release, activation of multiple caspases, and virus release following coxsackievirus B3 infection. *Virology* 313, 147–157

79 Yuan, J.P. *et al.* (2003) Coxsackievirus B3-induced apoptosis and caspase-3. *Cell Res.* 13, 203–209

80 Bozym, R.A. *et al.* (2011) Calcium signals and calpain-dependent necrosis are essential for release of coxsackievirus B from polarized intestinal epithelial cells. *Mol. Biol. Cell* 22, 3010–3021

81 Vanlangenakker, N. *et al.* (2012) Many stimuli pull the necrotic trigger, an overview. *Cell Death Differ.* 19, 75–86

82 Dufour, F. *et al.* (2011) The ribonucleotide reductase R1 subunits of herpes simplex virus 1 and 2 protect cells against poly(I.C)-induced apoptosis. *J. Virol.* 85, 8689–8701

83 Zhang, H. *et al.* (2011) Functional complementation between FADD and RIP1 in embryos and lymphocytes. *Nature* 471, 373–376

84 Uchiyama, R. *et al.* (2007) Involvement of caspase-9 in the inhibition of necrosis of RAW 264 cells infected with *Mycobacterium tuberculosis*. *Infect. Immun.* 75, 2894–2902

85 Hitomi, J. *et al.* (2008) Identification of a molecular signaling network that regulates a cellular necrotic cell death pathway. *Cell* 135, 1311–1323

86 Fernandes-Alnemri, T. *et al.* (2007) The pyroptosome: a supramolecular assembly of ASC dimers mediating inflammatory cell death via caspase-1 activation. *Cell Death Differ.* 14, 1590–1604

87 Franchi, L. *et al.* (2009) The inflammasome: a caspase-1-activation platform that regulates immune responses and disease pathogenesis. *Nat. Immunol.* 10, 241–247
