
Journal of Steroid Biochemistry & Molecular Biology 143 (2014) 160–173

**Contents lists available at** ScienceDirect

**Journal of Steroid Biochemistry and Molecular Biology**

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jsbmb

---

**Review**

**Estrogen signaling crosstalk: Implications for endocrine resistance in ovarian cancer**

Jennifer R. Ribeiro<sup>a</sup>, Richard N. Freiman<sup>a,b,*</sup>

<sup>a</sup> Brown University, Pathobiology Graduate Program, 70 Ship St., Providence, RI 02903, USA  
<sup>b</sup> Brown University, Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology and Biochemistry, 70 Ship St., Providence, RI 02903, USA

---

**ARTICLE INFO**

Article history:  
Received 2 January 2014  
Received in revised form 4 February 2014  
Accepted 13 February 2014  
Available online 22 February 2014  

Keywords:  
Estrogen signaling  
Estrogen receptor  
Estradiol  
Endocrine resistance  
Ovarian cancer

---

**ABSTRACT**

Resistance to anti-estrogen therapies is a prominent challenge in the treatment of ovarian cancer. Tumors develop endocrine resistance by acquiring adaptations that help them rely on alternative oncogenic signaling cascades, which crosstalk with estrogen signaling pathways. An understanding of estrogen signaling crosstalk with these growth promoting cascades is essential in order to maximize efficacy of anti-estrogen treatments in ovarian cancer. Herein, we provide an overview of estrogen signaling in ovarian cancer and discuss the major challenges associated with anti-estrogen therapies. We also review what is currently known about how genomic and non-genomic estrogen signaling pathways crosstalk with several major oncogenic signaling cascades. The insights provided here illustrate existing strategies for targeting endocrine resistant ovarian tumors and may help identify new strategies to improve the treatment of this disease.

© 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

---

**Contents**

1. Introduction ..... 160
   1.1. Estrogen signaling ..... 161
   1.2. Clinical response to anti-estrogens ..... 161
2. Estrogen signaling crosstalk ..... 162
   2.1. HER/ErbB family growth factor receptors ..... 162
   2.2. Insulin-like growth factor receptor ..... 165
   2.3. MAPK signaling pathway ..... 166
   2.4. c-SRC ..... 166
   2.5. The PI3K signaling pathway ..... 166
   2.6. NFκB ..... 167
   2.7. NOTCH signaling ..... 167
3. Conclusions ..... 169
Acknowledgments ..... 169
References ..... 169

---

1. **Introduction**

Ovarian cancer is the most deadly gynecological cancer [1], which frequently presents at an advanced stage [2] and has a high rate of recurrence after chemotherapy [3]. Efforts have been made to exploit the estrogen production and dependence of the ovary to treat malignant ovarian tumors of both epithelial and granulosa cell origin, although we will focus primarily on epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) in this review. In contrast to breast cancer, anti-estrogen therapies have only proven effective in a small subset of patients and have largely failed to produce increases in overall survival (OS) of ovarian cancer patients [4–14]. There are a number of cellular scenarios that may render ovarian tumors resistant to endocrine therapy. Similarly to chemoresistance, which develops as tumors

* Corresponding author at: Brown University, MCB, 70 Ship St., Rm 408 02903, Providence, RI, USA. Tel.: +1 4018639633.
E-mail addresses: Jennifer_Wardell@Brown.edu (J.R. Ribeiro), Richard_Freiman@brown.edu (R.N. Freiman).

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jsbmb.2014.02.010  
0960-0760/© 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

J.R. Ribeiro, R.N. Freiman / Journal of Steroid Biochemistry & Molecular Biology 143 (2014) 160–173

acquire adaptive mechanisms to evade apoptosis, tumors also acquire adaptations that help them rely on growth promoting pathways other than estrogen signaling. The complexity of estrogen signaling crosstalk with alternative oncogenic signaling pathways provides ample opportunities for ovarian tumors to develop productive adaptive mechanisms. Although many of these pathways are well studied in the context of breast cancer, their contribution to the development of endocrine resistance in ovarian cancer is less thoroughly explored. In this review, we will begin with an overview of estrogen signaling and a discussion of clinical benefits and challenges of anti-estrogen therapy; we will then discuss how genomic and non-genomic estrogen signaling pathways interact with a variety of oncogenic signaling cascades in ovarian cancer. Relevant studies from other estrogen-responsive cancers, primarily breast cancer, will be included where research in ovarian cancer is lacking. These studies have profound implications for understanding the development of endocrine resistance in ovarian cancer and highlight the need for combinatorial strategies to increase the therapeutic efficacy of anti-estrogenic therapies.

### 1.1. Estrogen signaling

The paradigm of how we approach ovarian cancer research is changing as we gain a greater understanding of the cell types of origin and molecular signatures associated with various subtypes of ovarian tumors. For example, high-grade and low-grade serous epithelial ovarian cancer (HGSC, LGSC), and the rarer epithelial subtypes including mucinous, clear cell and endometrioid tumors have unique cell types of origin and may be more effectively treated if approached as discrete diseases [16–18]. However, one common denominator in all of these subtypes is that they preferentially arise or grow in the ovarian milieu. Many HGSC are now known to originate from the fimbrial epithelium of the fallopian tube [19], in addition to the ovarian surface epithelium [20]. By focusing on commonalities between subtypes and between HGSC of differing origins, we may be able to gain insight into why the ovary is an optimal site for tumor growth.

One long-standing hypothesis is that normal endocrine signaling within the pre-menopausal ovary contributes to establishment of a unique and pro-tumorigenic microenvironment. Perturbation of the delicate balance of hormonal signaling factors may thus increase the risk of ovarian tumorigenesis later in life [21]. Moreover, epidemiological studies, which reveal that long-term use of estrogen-only hormone replacement therapy increases a woman’s risk of ovarian cancer, support the hypothesis that estrogen-signaling contributes to the etiology of the disease [22–25]. In addition, experimental studies demonstrate the growth promoting effects of estrogen on ovarian tumors in mice [26–28] and in human ovarian cancer cell lines [29–31]. Thus, while anti-estrogen therapies alone may be ineffective, they should not be ruled out as part of future combinatorial therapeutic approaches to better treat ovarian cancer.

We are only beginning to appreciate the complexity of estrogen signaling pathways, which can occur by way of genomic, non-genomic or converging mechanisms. Classical genomic estrogen signaling occurs via the classical estrogen receptors (ERs), ERα and ERβ. Homodimerization or heterodimerization of these receptors occurs in response to binding of a ligand, such as 17β-estradiol (estradiol), prompting transport to the nucleus, where the dimer binds to canonical estrogen response elements (EREs) in target gene promoters [32,33]. Non-classical, or tethered, genomic signaling occurs when ligand-bound ERs interact with AP-1 or SP1 transcription factors, which are bound to their own DNA recognition sites [33]. An intermediary mechanism has been described whereby ERs bind to one or two ERE-half sites, and this interaction is stabilized by transcription factor binding at a downstream AP-1 or SP1 site [34,35]. Likewise, ERs bound at EREs can stabilize interactions of other transcription factors to imperfect response elements, as occurs with nuclear factor kappa B (NFκB) at a latent NFκB response element upstream of an ERE [36]. Thus, activation of ERs and direct modulation of downstream transcriptional programs is a well-characterized function of estrogen.

Non-genomic estrogen signaling pathways are typically mediated by activation of a membrane bound ER, which transactivates protein kinase cascades, leading to rapid cell signaling and transcriptional activation of downstream targets of these kinase cascades [37–39]. The G protein-coupled receptor GPR30, also named G protein-coupled estrogen receptor 1 (GPER1), has been extensively studied as a membrane ER that activates non-genomic estrogen signaling pathways in various tissues [40]. Filardo et al. show that GPER1 transactivates epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) signaling in breast cancer cells, which in turn activates the mitogen activated protein kinase/extracellular signal-regulated kinase (MAPK/ERK) signaling cascade [41]. However, controversy still exists as to the role it plays in mediating reproductive responses, since GPER1-deficient mice have normal reproductive functions and mammary development [42].

Ligand-independent events represent an alternate mechanism for estrogenic action as well, whereby classical ERs are phosphorylated by activated MAPK/ERK [43,44] or phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase/protein kinase B (PI3K/AKT) [45,46]. Alternative isoforms of ERα have recently been shown to act at the cell membrane and participate in non-genomic estrogen signaling pathways as well [38,47,48]. Many of these pathways act in tandem; therefore, inhibition of one mechanism of estrogen signaling may not completely abolish estrogenic or ER regulatory actions in a cell.

Adding another layer of complexity to estrogen signaling, ERs are differentially regulated in tissue- and cell type-specific manners. Although some target genes may overlap between tissues, many genes may only be regulated in a particular cell type or in a specific context, as their regulation is dependent upon specific combinations of transcriptional cofactors and the ratio of various ERs present [32,49]. In this manner, the relative levels of ER corepressors and coactivators can also affect tumor progression and response to hormone therapy [32,49]. The differential functions of the various ERs play an important role in ovarian cancer as well; ERα [29,50,51,53] and GPER1 [52,55,56] are primarily thought to be pro-tumorigenic, whereas studies report ERβ to be primarily anti-proliferative [57–60].

These differing ER roles can affect tumor phenotypes depending upon the relative ratios of each ER; this point is illustrated in a study that found varying levels of ERα, ERβ and GPER1 in three different human ovarian cancer cell lines, and also observed varying effects of estrogen on each of these cell lines [61]. The variability in expression of ERs is reflected in a clinical setting as well, where approximately 67% of ovarian cancer patients are ER-positive [62], and ovarian tumors display an increased ERα:ERβ mRNA ratio compared to normal ovarian tissue or benign cysts [63]. Moreover, levels of ERα and ERβ have not been found to correlate with levels of GPER1 [64]. These results make individualized approaches toward therapeutic strategies all the more important, including definitive identification of specific ER status in ovarian tumors.

### 1.2. Clinical response to anti-estrogens

While clinical benefit of anti-estrogens ranging from 13–51% is reported in EOC (marked by complete response [CR], partial response [PR], or stable disease [SD]), anti-estrogen therapy has elicited no improvement in OS [4–14]. These studies largely suggest that inhibition of estrogen signaling alone is not adequate to cause significant tumor regression once tumorigenesis has already been initiated. However, there are several considerations of these studies
to take into account. First, only one study selected for patients with ER-positivity [9], which has been correlated with increased clinical benefit to anti-estrogens in ovarian cancer patients [5,11,65]. In addition to ERα, Argenta et al. also significantly correlate expression of the estrogen response genes TFF1 and vimentin with clinical benefit and/or PFS in response to the anti-estrogen fulvestrant [65]. Smyth et al. confirm higher TFF1 expression and lower vimentin expression as predictors of endocrine sensitivity [9], supporting the idea that further research is merited to identify subsets of patients who might benefit most from anti-estrogen treatments. Perhaps by measuring a panel of endocrine-related factors, including multiple ER isoforms, TFF1 and other downstream ER target genes, a subset of EOC patients that may respond to anti-estrogen therapies can be identified.

Another consideration of clinical studies that involve anti-estrogen therapy is that they typically involve recurrent ovarian cancer cases, which are resistant to platinum chemotherapy. The use of anti-estrogens in chemo-naive patients, alone or in combination with standard chemotherapeutics or novel small molecule inhibitors has not been thoroughly investigated. The need for these types of studies is apparent when examining the retrospective study performed by Gershenson et al., which shows a clinical benefit of various anti-estrogen regimens in 82.7% of patients with platinum-sensitive, recurrent LGSC versus a clinical benefit in 54.1% of platinum-resistant cases [13]. Moreover, although the Gershenson et al. study focused only on LGSC, most trials have failed to distinguish ovarian cancer subtypes, potentially further diluting the significance of their results. However, a major challenge to performing studies on rare subtypes lies in obtaining adequate numbers of patients.

The type of anti-estrogen therapy needs to be considered in designing a productive clinical trial as well. Forms of anti-estrogen therapy include: selective estrogen receptor modulators (SERMs), such as raloxifene; aromatase inhibitors (AIs), which block the conversion of androgens to estrogens by aromatase, including letrozole and anastrazole; and selective estrogen receptor degraders (SERDs), such as fulvestrant (also known as ICI 182,780) [66,67].

The anti-estrogen tamoxifen has frequently been studied in ovarian cancer, however, it exhibits ERα agonist activity at AP-1 sites [33], which may be increased in tamoxifen resistant breast cancer [68]. Moreover, Hachisuga et al. report an anti-estrogenic effect of tamoxifen on normal endometrium in competition with endogenous estradiol, but an agonist effect in the absence of endogenous estradiol [69]. These results emphasize the limitations in our understanding of how this compound functions in the normal ovary and in the treatment of ovarian cancer.

A study by Badia et al. highlights some differences between tamoxifen and fulvestrant. The authors show that long-term treatment of ovarian cancer cells with fulvestrant durably inhibits ovarian cancer cells from transactivating a synthetic FRE and results in slower proliferation. Conversely, after long-term treatment with tamoxifen, the cells remain estrogen-responsive and actually grow faster than control cells [70]. For this reason, more studies utilizing fulvestrant as opposed to tamoxifen may be merited. Finally, since AIs function by blocking the synthesis of estrogen [67], they should theoretically reduce both genomic and non-genomic estrogen signaling; however, they do not address ligand-independent ER signaling events, which could play a greater role than is currently appreciated.

The study by Badia et al. raises the issue of duration of treatment as well. It is possible that longer courses of anti-estrogens may be more effective in ovarian cancer, as suggested in a review by Simpkins et al. The authors point out a study that used tamoxifen as an adjuvant therapy for 36 weeks [71], which is shorter than the recommended timeframe for tamoxifen treatment in breast

cancer [72]. A meta-analysis of 20 studies of ER-positive breast cancer patients reports reduced recurrence rates through the first 10 years and a one third reduction in mortality through the first 15 years with 5 years of adjuvant tamoxifen therapy [73]. Although current 5-year survival rates of ovarian cancer patients may limit the use of such long-term hormone therapy for some patients with advanced disease, the duration of anti-estrogen treatment after cytoreductive surgery and chemotherapy is one parameter that may merit additional consideration.

Future alternative approaches in clinical study design involving anti-estrogen therapy may be required to best capitalize on endocrine therapy for the treatment of ovarian cancer. Both early and late stage disease may benefit from novel combinatorial treatments, which could potentially include SERMs or SERDs in appropriate patients. However, attention must also be given to factors that contribute to the development of endocrine resistance, which may vary considerably amongst and within tumor subtypes. Further preclinical investigation into the mechanisms of estrogen signaling and the development of endocrine resistance in ovarian cancer is needed to support and define these future experimental studies and clinical trials.

2. Estrogen signaling crosstalk

The complexity of estrogen signaling and opportunities for crosstalk with other oncogenic pathways may be key in elucidating why many patients treated with anti-estrogen therapy exhibit de novo or acquired resistance to anti-estrogen therapies, which is illustrated in clinical trials [4–14]. Given the wide variety of alterations observed in ovarian cancer, including genomic copy number changes frequently seen in HGSC and mutations frequently occurring in LGSC and other epithelial subtypes [16], it is not surprising that a number of other well-known oncogenic signal transduction pathways may be activated in addition to the estrogen signaling pathway. Accordingly, the potential benefit of a given anti-estrogen therapy alone may be masked by the dominant nature of these other oncogenic pathways. Here, we present the potential crosstalk between estrogen signaling and specific oncogenic pathways that serve to highlight both the challenges of and the opportunities for devising future combinatorial treatments to better manage ovarian cancer. Throughout this review, we will discuss studies performed in breast and endometrial cancer as well. These studies and their implications for endocrine resistance are summarized in Table 1. Although anti-estrogen therapy is more effective in breast cancer than ovarian cancer, endocrine resistance presents itself as a significant problem in both diseases [74]; therefore, where sparse research has been performed in ovarian cancer models, we may be able to extrapolate some results from breast cancer studies to ovarian cancer.

2.1. HER/ErbB family growth factor receptors

The HER (or ErbB) family of growth factor receptors includes HER1 (commonly known as the epidermal growth factor receptor [EGFR]), HER2, HER3 and HER4. Ligand induced dimerization of these receptors by growth factors such as epidermal growth factor (EGF), transforming growth factor-alpha (TGFα), or heparin-bound EGF (HB-EGF) leads to receptor autophosphorylation and activation of downstream signal transduction pathways, including the MAPK/ERK and PI3K/AKT cascades [75]. EGFR and HER2 are both implicated as important players in ovarian tumorigenesis and progression. EGFR expression is reported in 33–75% of EOC [76], and there is a correlation between EGFR-positivity and poor response to platinum-based chemotherapy, shorter PFS and OS [77,78]. A meta-analysis of studies comparing patient survival
Table 1  
Estrogen signaling crosstalk in other estrogen-dependent cancers.

| Crosstalk                                                                 | Implications for endocrine resistance                                                                 |
|--------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| EGFR                                                                     | Functional overlap of ligand-free or non-genomic ER signaling and EGFR signaling                     |
| - ERα is required for EGFR activation [80]                                | - Constitutive activation of EGFR → reduced reliance on non-genomic ER growth promoting effects      |
| - Estradiol transactivates EGFR via ERα and/or GPER1 via activation of MMPs and liberation of HB-EGF in MCF7 cells [41,86] | TAM may increase non-genomic ER signaling crosstalk with EGFR                                         |
| - TAM stimulates GPER1 activation of FAK downstream of MAPK and PI3K pathways in endometrial cancer cells [92] | Negative feedback mechanism that downregulates ERα upon constitutive activation of HER2                 |
| HER2                                                                     | Compensatory increase in HER2 in the absence of active E2 signaling                                 |
| - Inverse correlation between ERα and HER2 levels in endometrial and breast cancer [94,95] | Inverse relationship could be exploited by inhibiting HER2, which may restore ERα signaling, combined with inhibition of ERα to increase the efficacy of HER2 inhibition |
| - MCF7 xenografts that express high levels of ERα upregulate EGFR, HER2 and p-p38 in response to several months of TAM treatment [97] | Compensatory upregulation of the IGF-IR pathway upon TAM inhibition of classical E2 signaling          |
| IGF-IR                                                                   | Inhibition of genomic ER mechanisms may allow dominance of non-genomic ER mechanisms that crosstalk with IGF-IR |
| - IGF-I increases E2-dependent transcription [117]                        |                                                                                               |
| - IGF-IR activation stimulates MAPK and PI3K pathways [101], which activate ERα in ligand-independent manners [44,46] |                                                                                               |
| - Estradiol activates Shc to facilitate association of ERα/Shc complex with IGF-IR [120] |                                                                                               |
| - Estradiol increases expression of IGF signaling effectors and decreases IGF inhibitors [reviewed in [118]] |                                                                                               |
| - IGF-IR pathway is activated in TAM resistant MCF7 xenografts, despite continued suppression of IGF-IR gene expression by TAM [121] |                                                                                               |
| MAPK/ERK                                                                 | Constitutive activation of MAPK → reduced reliance on ERα signaling                                  |
| - Inhibition of MAPK/ERK increases expression of ERα and restores TAM sensitivity in breast cancer cells [125] | MEK inhibition can be used to restore E2 signaling, combined with an anti-E2 to increase the efficacy of the MEK inhibitor |
| c-SRC                                                                    | Requirement of c-SRC inhibition for fulvestrant-induced degradation of ERα → interaction of c-SRC with ERα protects it from degradation? |
| - Ligand-bound ERα activates c-SRC, and c-SRC phosphorylates ERα to promote E2-dependent transcription and ERα proteolysis [129] | Certain non-genomic mechanisms involving c-SRC and tyrosine kinase cascades might not be inhibited by fulvestrant? |
| - c-SRC is involved in mediating non-genomic E2 signaling crosstalk with growth factor signaling cascades [84,130] | Inhibition of c-SRC in combination with E2 signaling → more complete blockade of genomic and non-genomic E2 signaling pathways |
| - Improved efficacy of dual c-SRC and E2 signaling inhibition in breast cancer models [131,132] |                                                                                               |
| - CSK tyrosine kinase, a negative regulator of c-SRC, is required for fulvestrant-induced degradation of ERα, leading to increased cell death in breast cancer cell lines [133] |                                                                                               |
| PI3K/AKT                                                                | PI3K functionally overlaps with non-genomic E2 signaling pathways                                    |
| - GPER1 activates PI3K in endometrial cancer cells [142]                  | Constitutive activation of PI3K → reduced reliance on ERα                                           |
| - Activated AKT phosphorylates ERα and increases ERα-dependent transcription [46] | Inhibition of E2 signaling → increased dependency on PI3K signaling                                   |
| - Activation of PI3K in breast cancer cells is associated with reduced ERα levels and endocrine resistance [reviewed in [145]] | PI3K inhibition may lead to restoration of E2 signaling, which can be suppressed by anti-E2s           |
| - E2-signaling deprivation causes dependence on PI3K pathway activation [reviewed in [144]] |                                                                                               |
| - Combinatorial PI3K inhibition with anti-E2 is more effective than either treatment alone [reviewed in [145]] |                                                                                               |
| NFκB                                                                    | NFκB and ERs frequently transrepress each other                                                   |
| - ERα suppresses NFκB signaling in a variety of tissues [reviewed in [154]] | Constitutive activation of NFκB → suppression of E2 signaling/anti-E2 resistance                       |
| - Inverse correlation between NFκB signaling and E2 signaling in breast cancer cells [155,156] |                                                                                               |
| - Suppression of NFκB signaling restores anti-E2 sensitivity [157,159,160] |                                                                                               |
| NOTCH                                                                   | Both negative and positive relationships reported between NOTCH signaling and E2 signaling           |
| - Inverse relationship frequently reported between activated NOTCH signaling and E2 signaling [169,170] | Activated NOTCH may be associated with silencing of ERα transcription, or increase expression of endocrine resistance genes |
| - Activated NOTCH signaling is associated with endocrine resistance in breast cancer cells [167,168,170] | Combinatorial treatment → silence both oncogenic NOTCH signaling and restore endocrine sensitivity     |
| - Positive relationship reported between NOTCH and ligand-independent ERα transcription in MCF7 cells [171] |                                                                                               |
| - Combinatorial treatment of anti-E2 resistant breast cancer cells with a GSI plus TAM synergistically inhibited xenograft growth [168,169] |                                                                                               |
| - NOTCH3 regulates expression of endocrine resistance genes in breast cancer cells [170] |                                                                                               |

Summary of results showing estrogen signaling crosstalk with oncogenic cascades in other estrogen-dependent cancers and their suggested implications. E2 = estradiol; TAM = tamoxifen.

J.R. Ribeiro, R.N. Freiman / Journal of Steroid Biochemistry & Molecular Biology 143 (2014) 160–173

Fig. 1. Estrogen receptors (ERs; depicted in red) crosstalk with oncogenic signaling cascades. Cascades are simplified for clarity and to draw attention to examples of their interactions with ERs. TAM = tamoxifen; E2 = estradiol; γ-sec = γ-secretase; NICD = NOTCH intracellular domain. (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

signaling events, since the effect is not inhibited with fulvestrant [81].

A requirement for ERα in EGF-stimulated EGFR activation and DNA-synthesis is also demonstrated in MCF7 breast cancer cells [80]. Moreover, EGF- and IGF-I-stimulated uterine proliferation does not occur in ERα knockout mice [82,83]. These results establish the interdependence of ERα and EGFR signaling, which may be mediated by cytosolic and ligand-independent ERα. ERα is targeted to the cell membrane by palmitoylation of the ligand binding domain (LBD) and/or interactions with scaffolding proteins. This localization at the membrane likely contributes to direct crosstalk between ERα and membrane growth factor receptors, including EGFR [84,85]. The presence of alternative forms of ERα, including ERα36 and ERα46, which preferentially localize to the membrane, may further increase opportunities for crosstalk [85]. Furthermore, estradiol, in an ERα-dependent manner, transactivates EGFR in MCF7 breast cancer cells by SRC-dependent activation of matrix metalloproteinases, thereby liberating HB-EGF to activate EGFR [86]. This mechanism, illustrated in Fig. 1 for GPER1, represents another potential opportunity for non-genomic estrogen signaling crosstalk with EGFR, and suggests functional overlap of these pathways. However, these interactions have not been well studied in ovarian cancer models, and could represent an underappreciated mechanism of EGFR crosstalk with ERα in this context.

Transactivation of EGFR by estradiol is also shown to occur via membrane-bound GPER1 in multiple tissues [87]. Estradiol increases phospho-ERK1/2 in ERα-negative/GPER1-positive SKBR3 breast cancer cells, but not in ERα-negative/GPER1-negative MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells. Transfection of GPER1 into MDA-MD-231 cells confers estrogen-responsiveness [41]. Furthermore, this response requires SRC and phosphorylated SHC-adaptor protein (Shc), and is dependent upon transactivation of EGFR via release of HB-EGF [41], similar to the mechanism observed for ERα-induced EGFR transactivation in MCF7 breast cancer cells by Razandi et al. [86]. These data demonstrate that estrogen signaling may work in synchrony with EGFR activation to promote breast cancer progression. Likewise,

these signaling mechanisms may also be active in ovarian tumors.

Albanito et al. report that in BG-1 cells, both GPER1 and ERα are required for transactivation of EGFR and subsequent phosphorylation of ERK1/2, and suggest that the requirements for ERα and GPER1 may be cell type specific [52]. The cell line BG-1 is frequently used and reported to be an ERα-positive ovarian cancer cell line; however, it is important to note that DNA profiling supports that BG-1 cells may actually be MCF-7 cells [88]. Therefore, while studies using BG-1 cells may improve our understanding of estrogen signaling crosstalk, further research is required in diverse cell lines of definitive ovarian cancer origin. At least in some cases, it appears that ERα and GPER1 may function together to activate EGFR, since a physical interaction between ERα, GPER1 and EGFR is reported in endometrial and tamoxifen-resistant breast cancer cells [87]. Since tamoxifen is a mixed agonist/antagonist, it is tempting to speculate that tamoxifen may actually promote formation of this non-genomic ER complex.

The role of matrix metalloproteinases in the transactivation of EGFR by GPER1 hasn’t been described in ovarian cancer, but seems plausible since GPER1 expression correlates with MMP-9 expression in ovarian tumors [56]. These results point to a role for GPER1 in regulating cancer cell migration and invasion, which is demonstrated in OVCAR5 cells [55]. Studies also show higher GPER1 expression in malignant ovarian tumors than in normal, benign, or “low-malignancy potential” tissue [56,89], and report the association of GPER1 with reduced 5-year survival [89]. However, an independent study reports no correlation between GPER1 expression and survival [90], and Ignatov et al. find GPER1 expression to be positively associated with disease-free survival in ovarian cancer [91]. Further studies will be required to determine if these seemingly discrepant outcomes are due to differences in study methodology, immunohistochemical technique, or histological subtype.

GPER1 may also regulate migration and proliferation by activating focal adhesion kinase (FAK) downstream of ERK1/2 and PI3K activation, which occurs in a SRC-dependent, ERα-independent manner in endometrial cancer cells [92]. Interestingly, tamoxifen
also elicits this effect in these cells, suggesting another mechanism for tamoxifen resistance where tamoxifen stimulates pro-tumorigenic pathways by exerting estrogen agonist effects on non-genomic signaling. Taken together, it is clear that more studies are required to address the potential overlap of estrogen and growth factor signaling via EGFR, and the effect of various anti-estrogens on non-genomic estrogen signaling.

Multiple reports show an inverse correlation between ERα levels and HER2 mRNA, protein, or copy number in endometrial, breast and ovarian tumors [93–96]. This inverse correlation between HER2 and ERα supports the notion that hyperactivation of HER2 receptors may play a role in the development of endocrine resistance. In support of this idea, MCF7 breast cancer cell xenografts upregulate growth factor signaling, including HER2, after long-term tamoxifen treatment [97], suggesting a compensatory mechanism which could again be exploited by combinatorial therapy. Concordantly, low levels of HER2 are seen in serous, endometrioid and mixed histology ovarian tumors with improved response to letrozole [9]. Clear cell carcinomas present with lower ERα and increased ERβ and HER2-positivity compared to other types of EOC [93], suggesting an association between HER2 and the clear cell phenotype. In corroboration of these results, another study reported that mice with xenografts derived from a mixed clear cell/endometrioid ovarian tumor, HOX424, responded more strongly to anti-HER2 antibodies than mice with xenografts derived from serous tumors [98].

In estrogen-resistant SKOV3 ovarian cancer xenografts, areas with clear cell morphology are reduced upon treatment with anti-HER2 antibodies, along with a concomitant increase in ERα expression. Importantly, combination therapy with letrozole and an anti-HER2 antibody, trastuzumab, results in greater SKOV3 xenograft tumor regression than with trastuzumab treatment alone, implicating the suppression of HER2 in restoration of anti-estrogen sensitivity [98]. In ERα-positive PEO4 ovarian cancer cells, estradiol-stimulated growth is accompanied by an immediate increase in phosphorylated forms of HER2, ERK, AKT and ERα [99]. It is possible that the eventual downregulation of ERα seen with HER2 constitutive activation could occur by way of a negative feedback mechanism, and thus contribute to anti-estrogen insensitivity. Alternatively, as suggested above, tumor cells could upregulate HER2 as a compensatory mechanism in the absence of productive ERα signaling. It will be important to determine the precise mechanisms underlying the inverse expression of HER2 and ERα in ovarian cancer.

### 2.2. Insulin-like growth factor receptor

Insulin-like growth factor-I receptor (IGF-IR) functions as a transmembrane receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) for insulin-like growth factor-I and -II (IGF-I, IGF-II). Multiple IGF binding proteins (IGFBPs) potentiate or inhibit the actions of IGF-I or IGF-II. IGF-IR ligand binding causes phosphorylation of insulin receptor substrate-1 and -2 (IRS1, IRS2), which promote growth by transmitting signals to MAPK/ERK, PI3K/AKT and JAK/STAT in cell type specific manners [100,101]. In the normal ovary, the IGF-IR pathway is implicated in folliculogenesis, atresia, steroidogenesis, and oocyte maturation in synergy with gonadotropins [102], demonstrating that IGF signaling is important in the intraovarian milieu and could contribute to priming this site for future tumorigenesis. In ovarian tumors and cancer cell lines, IGF signaling regulates proliferation, invasion and metastasis [102]. Elevated serum levels of IGF signaling components detected by western blot or radioimmunoassay and intra-tumoral mRNA and protein levels detected by qPCR or enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay are associated with ovarian cancer progression and poor prognosis, particularly in pre-and perimenopausal women [103–110]; however, some conflicting

reports exist [111,112]. Additionally, Karasik et al. report a positive correlation between estradiol and IGF-I levels in invasive malignant cyst fluid from postmenopausal women [110]. Another study reports that IGF-IR signaling proteins correlate with response to the aromatase inhibitor, letrozole [108]. Crosstalk between IGF-IR and ERα is well-studied in breast cancer models, and is implicated as a mechanism of anti-estrogen resistance [101]. These studies could prove useful to inform future directions in ovarian cancer models.

A few studies report crosstalk between IGF signaling and estrogen signaling in BG-1 cells, including the effect of estradiol on IGF signaling components. One group shows that the phytoestrogens resveratrol and genistein inhibit estrogen-induced proliferation of ERα-positive BG-1 cancer cells by suppressing ERα and IGF-IR gene expression and ERα, phospho-IRS1, phospho-AKT and Cyclin D1 protein expression [29,30]. The authors speculate that resveratrol acts by inhibiting ligand binding of ERα and by preventing ligand bound ERα from interacting with phospho-IRS1 [30]. They additionally show that genistein blocks estrogen-induced BG-1 xenograft progression by way of inhibition of ERα and IGF-IR crosstalk [29]. Another study investigated the effects of estradiol and the xenoestrogen bisphenol A (BPA) on BG-1 cells, revealing that the IGF-I activator IGFBP4 is significantly increased by treatment of either compound [113].

Furthermore, estradiol also increases the number of IGF-I receptors per cell by approximately 50% in cultures from HGSC mesenteric metastases [114]. A study that first reported IGFBP3 mRNA in human ovarian cancer samples shows that estradiol reduces levels of the IGF-I inhibitor, IGFBP3, in ERα-positive PEO4 cells [115]. In support of these studies, Walker et al. show that estradiol reduces IGFBP3 and IGFBP5 levels and increases IGFBP4 levels via ERα in PEO4 ovarian cancer cells, which is reversed by tamoxifen treatment. They further link this signature to sensitivity to the aromatase inhibitor letrozole, suggesting that blockade of estrogen production is effective in these tumors partially due to its inhibition of IGF signaling [108]. In parallel, reduced expression of the IGF-I inhibitor, IGFBP5, is a predictor of letrozole response in ovarian cancer patients [9]. Collectively, these studies demonstrate the stimulatory effect of estrogen on IGF signaling in ovarian cancer, and suggest that in cells with intact estrogen signaling, there may be activation of IGF-IR via transcriptional pathways. Conversely, in endocrine resistant cells, IGF-IR signaling may be constitutively active despite downregulation of ERα transcriptional programs.

Crosstalk between the IGF pathway and ERα is also demonstrated in breast cancer cells. IGF-I increases estrogen-dependent transcription [117], increases expression of IGF-IR, IRS1, and IGF-II, and decreases levels of IGFBP3 and the scavenger receptor IGF-IIR [118]. The activation of ERα by IGF (and EGF, as previously discussed) is dependent upon the activator function-1 (AF-1) domain of ERα. IGF-IR activation stimulates ERK1/2 and AKT, which in turn phosphorylate ERα at serine-118 or serine-167, respectively, in the AF-1 domain [43–46]. The physical association between ERα and IGF-IR is also demonstrated by co-immunoprecipitation of these proteins in the membrane [119]. Another study shows that estradiol rapidly activates the adaptor molecule Shc to facilitate its association with ERα, allowing this complex to associate with IGF-IR and activate MAPK/ERK [120]. Non-genomic crosstalk occurring at the membrane could contribute to endocrine resistance, as demonstrated in MCF7 breast cancer cell xenografts where phospho-IGF-IR is elevated in tamoxifen resistant tumors, despite continued suppression of IGF-IR gene expression by tamoxifen [121]. These mechanisms haven’t been sufficiently explored in ovarian cancer, but could potentially contribute to the development of endocrine resistance upon constitutive activation of IGF signaling and reduced reliance on estrogen signaling to stimulate similar effects.
J.R. Ribeiro, R.N. Freiman / Journal of Steroid Biochemistry & Molecular Biology 143 (2014) 160–173

## 2.3. MAPK signaling pathway

Closely intertwined with ERα crosstalk with EGFR, HER2 and IGF-IR is the MAPK signaling pathway, which is an important downstream effector of RTK activation. The cascade relies on RAS and RAF to transmit signals that activate MEK1/2, which in turn phosphorylate extracellular signal-regulated kinases ERK1/2. The activated ERK dimer can regulate cytosolic targets or phosphorylate transcription factors in the nucleus [122]. Several lines of evidence illustrate potential crosstalk between MAPK/ERK and ER signaling, including the previously discussed interactions between growth factor receptors and estrogen signaling, since these receptors activate the MAPK/ERK pathway. Also previously discussed, MAPK can phosphorylate ERα at serine-118 in the AF-1 domain, resulting in activation of ERα [43,44]. Very little research has been completed on specific molecular interactions between ERs and MAPK/ERK pathway proteins in ovarian cancer; however, as discussed below, MAPK/ERK inhibition is associated with re-activation of signaling via ERα and improved response to anti-estrogens, in parallel to the inverse relationship seen between HER2 and ERα.

In SKOV3 ovarian cancer cells, Hou et al. report that MEK inhibition causes ERα overexpression, phosphorylation at serine-118 and an increase in expression of ERα-regulated genes, including TFF1, previously noted for its correlation with improved response to anti-estrogens. Subsequently, combinatorial treatment with fulvestrant and a MEK inhibitor reduces ERα expression and suppresses feedback activation of EGFR and HER2 by the MEK inhibitor. The combinatorial treatment also synergistically reduces proliferation in vitro and in SKOV3 xenografts [123]. It should be noted that SKOV3 cells are reported to contain a 32 base pair deletion in the gene for ERα, resulting in a truncated protein and rendering these cells ERα-positive yet estrogen insensitive [124]. However, Hou et al. report estrogen dependency of their SKOV3 cells [123]. It is possible that variations in SKOV3 lines could exist as a result of genetic instability and clonal outgrowth of the cells. While their findings in SKOV3 cells may require further corroboration, these results are in agreement with a study done in breast cancer cells, where inhibition of MAPK/ERK results in increased expression of ERα and restoration of tamoxifen-sensitivity [125].

Again, this inverse relationship between ERα and constitutive MAPK activation could exist due to a negative feedback mechanism, explaining why inhibition of the dominant pathway may restore estrogen signaling and thus endocrine sensitivity. The results presented here reiterate the point that constitutive activation of oncogenic signaling pathways reduces tumor cell reliance on estrogen signaling, since these pathways overlap functionally, rendering the tumors resistant to anti-estrogen therapy. Targeting these pathways appropriately may allow for increased anti-estrogen sensitivity in the treatment of ovarian cancer.

## 2.4. c-SRC

C-SRC encodes for a non-receptor tyrosine kinase that regulates proliferation, apoptosis, adhesion, migration and differentiation downstream of activated RTKs [126]. C-SRC is reported to be activated in a majority of serous ovarian tumors [127,128]. As previously discussed, c-SRC appears to play an important role in estrogen-induced transactivation of EGFR [39,41]. Studies in breast cancer cells demonstrate that ligand-bound ERα activates c-SRC, which in turn phosphorylates ERα and stimulates ERα-dependent transcription [129]. Moreover, the scaffold protein modulator of non-genomic action of estrogen receptor (MNAR), is required for ERα-SRC interaction in MCF7 breast cancer cells. Activation of c-SRC by estradiol leads to MNAR phosphorylation, promoting its interaction with the PI3K regulatory subunit p85, and subsequent activation of the PI3K/AKT pathway [84]. In addition,

MNAR facilitates ERα/SRC interaction, which activates ERK and promotes ERα-dependent transcription [130]. Studies in breast cancer demonstrate improved efficacy of dual c-SRC and estrogen inhibition [131,132]. Yeh et al. also report that a negative regulator of c-SRC, CSK tyrosine kinase, is required for fulvestrant-induced degradation of ERα and increased cell death in MCF7 and T47D breast cancer cell lines [133], further implicating c-SRC in regulating anti-estrogen response.

The role of c-SRC in anti-estrogen response in ovarian cancer has also been recently investigated. Simpkins et al. report c-SRC activation by estrogen in an anti-estrogen resistant ovarian cancer ascites-derived cell line, PEO1R. Inhibition of c-SRC with the ABL/SRC family member inhibitor saracatinib reverses fulvestrant resistance in these cells, and saracatinib in combination with fulvestrant synergistically promotes cell cycle arrest and induction of autophagy. Importantly, this synergistic effect is also striking in PEO1R xenografts, where the authors note little effect with saracatinib treatment alone and only slower growth with fulvestrant, while combination therapy causes tumor regression [128]. It is important to note, however, that saracatinib inhibits all SRC/ABL family members. It appears that this pan-inhibition is essential for maximal fulvestrant re-sensitization, since limited results are observed when shRNA against c-SRC is used, due to a compensatory increase in other SRC family members [128]. These results suggest that the interactions between multiple SRC family members and ER signaling are apparently intertwined in a complex and often-times redundant weave of signaling downstream of RTKs such as EGFR and IGF-IR, and provide further evidence of ERα crosstalk with these pathways.

### 2.5. The PI3K signaling pathway

The PI3K pathway is also activated downstream of RTKs, and relies on phosphorylation of AKT, which in turn can phosphorylate many targets, including NFκB, GSK3β, MDM2 and mTOR. The mTOR kinase complex, the best described target of AKT signaling [134,135], is considered to be a master regulator of cellular metabolism/ribosomal biosynthesis, apoptosis, autophagy and cell cycle control [136]. Array comparative genomic hybridization reveals frequent activation of the PI3K/AKT pathway in 93 ovarian tumors; and overexpression of phospho-AKT or a catalytic sub-unit of PI3K, PIK3CA, correlates with reduced survival in a panel of 522 serous ovarian tumors [137]. Furthermore, mTOR is aberrantly expressed or activated in serous and clear cell carcinomas [138–140], and correlates with phospho-AKT in an ovarian cancer tissue array [138]. Phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN), a negative regulator of mTOR, is frequently mutated in endometrioid ovarian tumors [141].

Again, much of what we know about PI3K/AKT and estrogen signaling crosstalk comes from studies in breast cancer. As previously mentioned, activated AKT can phosphorylate ERα at serine-167 in the AF-1 domain and increase ERα-dependent transcription [46]. Likewise, non-genomic estrogen signaling via membrane-bound ERs has the potential to activate multiple downstream signaling cascades, including PI3K/AKT. In HEC-1A endometrial cancer cells, GPER1 activates PI3K to promote cell proliferation [142]. Activation of the PI3K pathway in breast tumors is associated with reduced ERα levels and endocrine resistance [144]. Several studies demonstrate the dependence of estrogen-deprived breast cancer cells on PI3K pathway activation [144], and experimental and clinical studies show that combining PI3K inhibition with an anti-estrogen is more effective than either treatment alone [145]. These results are in agreement with other studies in breast cancer models showing that constitutive activation of growth factor receptor signaling cascades leads to reduced ERα levels and endocrine resistance [145], while inhibition of these pathways

can re-sensitize cells to anti-estrogens [125]. Furthermore, these studies illustrate that estrogen deprivation or ER inhibition can produce acquired endocrine resistance by encouraging reliance on other oncogenic cascades. Studies on crosstalk between estrogen signaling and the PI3K pathway in ovarian cancer are limited, but demonstrate that estrogens can activate the PI3K/AKT pathway in ovarian cancer cells [146, 147]. However, further research is needed to determine if downregulation of estrogen signaling occurs with constitutive activation of PI3K, and if this effect can be reversed by inhibition of the PI3K pathway.

As with c-SRC inhibition, consideration of other compensatory mechanisms must be taken into account when selecting appropriate PI3K targeting drugs for study. Positive feedback loop signaling via the alternate mTOR complex, mTORC2, causes a compensatory activation of the PI3K pathway when mTORC1 is inhibited, indicating that inhibition of one component of the PI3K pathway may not be sufficient to produce a significant clinical benefit [144, 148]. A greater understanding of the complexities of estrogen signaling crosstalk with the PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway in ovarian cancer is required in order to understand how it might be possible to improve patient and inhibitor selection to test combinatorial treatments that target multiple pathways.

### 2.6. NFkB

Nuclear factor kappa B (NFkB) is activated by signals from cytokines such as TNFα, and mediates inflammation, survival and proliferation via transcriptional regulation by NFkB dimers [149, 150]. Normally, NFkB signaling is transient, due to the fact that it upregulates expression of its own negative regulators; however, in a chronically inflamed tumor environment, this signaling pathway can become constitutively active [150], as suggested by increased NFkB activity in a syngenic mouse model of serous ovarian cancer at late stages of tumor progression [151]. Although it is not as well studied in relationship to ovarian cancer as some other signaling pathways, there are several lines of evidence connecting NFkB to ovarian cancer. Barlin et al. show that the NFkB network is over-represented in HGSC [152]. Another study finds that protein expression of a positive regulator of NFkB, IKKB, correlates with poor OS, and that IKKB mediates adhesion and invasion of ovarian cancer cells [153].

The relationship between estrogen signaling and NFkB signaling is complex. Several studies show that ERs and NFkB can transrepress each other. ERα suppresses NFkB in a variety of tissues by reducing NFkB DNA binding, regulating levels of NFkB signaling proteins, and modulating NFkB co-activator functions [154]. An inverse correlation between estrogen signaling and NFkB signaling is seen in breast cancer cells [155, 156]. In support of these results, re-expression of ERα in an ERα-negative breast cancer cell line, and in an ERα-positive, estrogen-independent breast cancer cell line, reduces NFkB DNA binding and expression of NFkB regulatory proteins, and ultimately causes a decrease in cell viability. Additionally, this study reports that the NFkB subunit p50 associates with ERα on EREs, and that inhibition of NFkB increases expression of estrogen responsive genes [157]. These data demonstrate that constitutive activation of NFkB in cancer is one potential mechanism of endocrine resistance, and likely occurs due to direct transrepression of ERα, as opposed to a putative negative feedback mechanism seen with growth factor signaling.

On the other hand, Frasor et al. report a mixed relationship between estrogen signaling and NFkB. They treated ERα-positive MCF7 breast cancer cells with estradiol, TNFα, or both, and measured gene expression profiles in these samples. In agreement with other studies, they find that estrogen represses approximately 41% of TNFα regulated genes, although this number may be underestimated due to the rapid actions of NFKB. However, TNFα enhances estrogen regulation of 30% of estrogen-regulated genes, and an inhibitor of IKK blocks the enhancement provided by TNFα, demonstrating the likelihood that it is dependent upon NFkB. They identify a cluster of genes that exhibit synergy between estrogen and TNFα, and this set includes genes involved in transcriptional regulation, metabolism and apoptosis [158]. In another study, this same group further explores one of these genes, ABCG2, a drug transporter that may contribute to chemotherapy resistance, and find that TNFα enhances ERα occupancy at its ERE, which is dependent upon NFkB binding to a latent NFkB response element upstream of the ERE [36]. These studies illustrate the complexity of the crosstalk between ERα and NFkB, which could be explored in ovarian cancer as well.

The crosstalk between estrogen signaling and NFkB signaling provides opportunities for the development of endocrine resistance. Elevated expression of NFB family members is reported in anti-estrogen resistant breast cancer cell lines, and inhibition of NFkB sensitizes these cells to anti-estrogens, suggesting that repression of estrogen signaling by NFkB contributes to anti-estrogen resistance [159]. Another study reports that interferon-gamma (IFNγ) restored anti-estrogen sensitivity via IFN regulatory factor 1 (IRF1) suppression of NFkB signaling [160]. Thus, suppression of NFkB signaling could potentially be an additional treatment option to explore in the context of anti-estrogen resistance.

To our knowledge, the only study investigating NFkB and estrogen signaling crosstalk in ovarian cancer shows that human KGN and COV434 granulosa cancer cells are endocrine resistant due to constitutive activation of NFkB [161]. However, further research is needed to investigate the role of NFkB in EOC, either in the context of rendering cells resistant to anti-estrogenic silencing of ERα, or silencing potentially anti-proliferative functions of ERβ. These studies would be useful to determine if constitutive activation of this pathway could be responsible for the development of anti-estrogen resistance in certain patients, particularly ER-positive patients with activated NFkB.

### 2.7. NOTCH signaling

NOTCH receptors (NOTCH1, 2, 3 and 4) are transmembrane proteins that interact with multiple ligands, resulting in cleavage of the intracellular domain of the receptor by γ-secretase. This intracellular domain (ICD) translocates to the nucleus and subsequently acts as a transcription factor with various cofactors to regulate differentiation, proliferation and apoptosis [162]. The Cancer Genome Atlas tumor database reveals a 22% incidence of NOTCH pathway alterations in 316 HGSC samples [163, 164], and NOTCH signaling is identified as a significantly altered subnetwork in an unbiased bioinformatic analysis [165].

Recent studies identify crosstalk between NOTCH signaling and ERα in breast and endometrial carcinoma, and implicate it in the development of endocrine resistance. In endometrial cancer cells, Wei et al. show that estrogen promotes NOTCH1 expression in an ERα-positive cell line only, and overexpression of ERα in an ERα-negative line allows these cells to upregulate NOTCH1 in response to estrogen. The estrogen-induced NOTCH1 expression and proliferation is inhibited by the anti-estrogen fulvestrant [166]. Additionally, NOTCH4 correlates with expression of protein kinase C-α (PKCα), which is shown to cause tamoxifen resistance in breast cancer cells [167, 168]. Furthermore, transcriptional analysis of ERα-positive T47D/NOTCH4-ICD overexpressing cells shows clustering with PKCα overexpressing cells, and combinatorial treatment with a γ-secretase inhibitor (GSI) plus tamoxifen synergistically inhibits xenograft tumor growth of these cells [168]. Rizzo et al. report similar results—NOTCH1 and NOTCH4 correlate with poor prognosis in breast cancer, and there is significantly more T47D xenograft tumor regression with GSI and tamoxifen

Table 2  
Estrogen signaling crosstalk in ovarian cancer.

| Crosstalk | Implications for endocrine resistance |
|-----------|---------------------------------------|
| EGFR      | - Ligand-free ERα enhances signaling via EGFR [81]                                      |
|           | - GPER1 and ERα participate in transactivation of EGFR and MAPK pathway activation [52] |
|           | - Functional overlap of ligand-free or non-genomic ER signaling and EGFR signaling     |
|           | - Constitutive activation of EGFR → reduced reliance on non-genomic ER growth promoting effects TAM may increase non-genomic ER signaling crosstalk with EGFR |
| HER2      | - Estradiol activates HER2 [99]                                                          |
|           | - Inverse correlation between ERα and HER2 levels in ovarian cancer [93,96]            |
|           | - Low levels of HER2 associated with improved response to letrozole [9]                |
|           | - Inhibition of HER2 in xenografts increases levels of ERα [98]                        |
|           | - Negative feedback mechanism that downregulates ERα upon constitutive activation of HER2? |
|           | - Compensatory increase in HER2 in the absence of active E2 signaling                  |
|           | - Inverse relationship can be exploited by inhibiting HER2 to restore ERα signaling, followed by inhibition of ERα to increase the efficacy of HER2 inhibition |
| IGF-IR    | - Estradiol has a stimulatory effect on IGF-IR signaling by increasing levels of positive regulators of the pathway and decreasing expression of negative regulators. This gene expression signature is predicative of improved response to aromatase inhibitors [9,108,113–115] |
|           | - Phytoestrogens inhibit E2-induced proliferation of ovarian cancer cells and xenografts by suppressing ERα and IGF-IR crosstalk [74:30] |
|           | - Functional overlap of non-genomic E2 signaling and IGF-IR                            |
|           | - Constitutive activation of IGF-IR → reduced reliance on non-genomic E2 signaling TAM may enhance signaling through non-genomic pathways that cross-talk with IGF-IR |
| MAPK/ERK | - MEK inhibition causes ERα overexpression and activation, and increases transcription of ERα-regulated genes [123] |
|           | - Inhibition of MEK and ERs in combination reduces ERα expression, suppresses feedback activation of EGFR and HER2, and synergistically reduces proliferation of xenografts [123] |
|           | - Constitutive activation of MAPK → reduced reliance on ERα signaling                   |
|           | - MEK inhibition can be used to restore E2 signaling, combined with an anti-E2 to increase the efficacy of the MEK inhibitor |
| c-SRC     | - E2 activates c-SRC in an anti-E2 resistant ovarian cancer cell line [128]             |
|           | - Inhibition of SRC/ABL family members with saracatinib in combination with fulvestrant synergistically promotes cell cycle arrest and autophagy in xenografts [128] |
|           | - E2 promotes non-genomic pathways involving s-SRC via mechanisms that are resistant to anti-E2s Inhibition of these pathways may be necessary to restore anti-E2 sensitivity in certain patients |
| PI3K/AKT | - E2s activate the PI3K pathway [146,147]                                               |
|           | - Activation of the PI3K pathway by E2s mimics that seen with several other oncogenic pathways Mechanisms regulating endocrine resistance may be applied to PI3K signaling as well |
| NFκB      | - NFκB transrepresses ERβ activity in human granulosa cancer cell lines [161]          |
|           | - NFB inhibition may re-activate anti-proliferative ERβ-mediated E2 signaling in some tumors |
|           | - NFκB inhibition may also re-activate ERα-dependent signaling, which could then be targeted by ERα-specific antagonists |
| NOTCH     | No studies reported                                                                 |
|           | N/A                                                                                   |

Summary of results showing estrogen signaling crosstalk with oncogenic cascades in ovarian cancer and their suggested implications. E2 = estradiol; TAM = tamoxifen.

breast cancer studies may not always be extrapolated to ovarian cancer.

### 3. Conclusions

To conclude, several oncogenic pathways are activated in ovarian cancer that crosstalk with estrogen signaling, which could potentially lead to anti-estrogen resistance. These studies and their implications are summarized in Table 2, which illustrates the similarities in crosstalk and endocrine resistance mechanisms between ovarian and other estrogen-responsive cancers that were outlined in Table 1. Fig. 1 graphically illustrates interactions between estrogen signaling and oncogenic cascades that have been discussed herein. These do not represent all potential actions of ERs, but rather illustrate the complexity of estrogen signaling that should be considered when employing anti-estrogen therapy in ovarian cancer.

Overall, a trend seems apparent where constitutive activation of oncogenic pathways eventually leads to downregulation of ERα levels/suppression of ERα-dependent signaling, or to occur following inhibition of classical estrogen signaling, thereby producing endocrine resistance. Transrepression of ERs by NFκB can produce the same effect if NFκB is chronically activated in the inflammatory tumor microenvironment. The transcriptional regulation of genes involved in endocrine resistance, which could occur by way of hyperactive NOTCH signaling, could also be a contributing factor. Moreover, an increase in tamoxifen agonist activity at AP-1 promoters or via crosstalk with non-genomic signaling pathways, despite continued suppression of classical genomic ER signaling, is another potential mechanism for anti-estrogen resistance. The activation of ligand-independent ER actions, which play an important role in the oncogenic pathways discussed, may also be an underappreciated mechanism for anti-estrogen resistance in ovarian cancer. The non-classical and non-genomic mediated transcriptional actions of ERα are likely involved in the development of anti-estrogen resistance, and gaining a better understanding of the transcriptional profiles mediated by these pathways will be important for our understanding of this process. Although many of these mechanisms have been more thoroughly investigated in breast cancer, their relevance to ovarian cancer is less well established.

Although this review focused on selective pathways frequently discussed in breast and ovarian cancer, other pathways should also be considered. Wnt/β-catenin signaling, which potentially plays a role in endometrioid EOC [179] and in granulosa cell tumors [180], could also crosstalk with estrogen signaling, and may need to be explored. The role of other membrane receptors (fibroblast growth factor receptor [FGFR], platelet-derived growth factor receptor [PDGF-R], GPCRs and cytokine receptors) could be important, since these also activate tyrosine kinase cascades, as could stress-induced MAPK signaling via JNK or p38-MAPK be explored. Leptin signaling, which is implicated in ovarian cancer [181], can also crosstalk with estrogen signaling in ovarian cancer models via the JAK/STAT pathway [51,147]. In order to effectively use information from these studies, careful patient selection may be required to identify tumors that might respond to hormonal inhibition or combinatorial treatment with small molecule inhibitors. However, the analysis of estrogen signaling crosstalk is complicated by the crosstalk that occurs within these other oncogenic pathways themselves. Furthermore, drawbacks to targeted therapeutic approaches need to be considered going forward. Ovarian tumors present with a great deal of heterogeneity due to clonal outgrowth [182] and infiltration of stromal cells and tumor-associated fibroblasts, adipocytes and immune cells [183–186], making successful targets more difficult to identify. Xenograft models can better account for this tumor microenvironment and heterogeneity than cell cultures. Toward this end, Baratta et al. have developed an in vivo screen using serous ovarian cancer cell xenografts “barcoded” for shRNAs against kinases and potential oncogenes [187]. However, limitations to this approach still exist in that results cannot be generalized to all cell lines and the cells are still passaged in vitro prior to xenografting.

It is also important to continue working to understand targets and mechanisms of estrogen signaling in the ovary, which contribute to establishment of the ovarian milieu that is supportive of tumor growth. We have previously identified the gene for the TFIID subunit TAF4B as an ovarian-specific estrogen response gene, which is normally regulated by ERβ in granulosa cells, but can also be regulated by ERα in the absence of ERβ [188]. We found Taf4b expression to be upregulated in epithelial-derived, estrogen-supplemented mouse ovarian tumors [188]. Moreover, the TFIID complex was identified as a significantly altered subnetwork in HGSC [165]. Learning more about the normal functions of estrogen signaling in the ovary could also give us clues as to how this environment supports tumorigenesis. However, it may be important to stratify the mechanisms by which estrogen signaling contributes to ovarian tumor initiation versus progression. If indeed there is an activation of non-classical, non-genomic or ligand-independent ER-mediated pathways that follows anti-estrogen treatment, despite continued repression of classical signaling, there may be elements of classically-mediated ER signaling that are supportive of tumor initiation yet do not play a role in tumor progression.

Much remains to be answered in regards to the importance of estrogen signaling in ovarian cancer. The limited clinical benefit achieved with anti-estrogen therapies is without a doubt a concern, but the possibility remains that if we can improve patient selection for therapy, employ appropriate combinatorial therapy, or identify improved markers for earlier detection, estrogen signaling may still prove to be an effective target in a subset of ovarian tumors.

#### Acknowledgments

We thank Barbara C. Vanderhyden (University of Ottawa) for productive collaborations that provided the inspiration for this manuscript, for her continued support and guidance, and for helpful insight in the preparation of this manuscript.

#### References

[1] US Cancer Statistics Working Group, in: United States Cancer Statistics: 1999–2009 Incidence and Mortality Web-based Report, Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, and National Cancer Institute, Atlanta, GA, 2013.

[2] R.L. Coleman, B.J. Monk, A.K. Sood, T.J. Herzog, Latest research and treatment of advanced-stage epithelial ovarian cancer, Nat. Rev. Clin. Oncol. 10 (2013) 211–224.

[3] O.W. Foley, J.A. Rauh-Hain, M.G. del Carmen, Recurrent epithelial ovarian cancer: an update on treatment, Oncology (Williston Park) 27 (2013) 288–294, 298.

[4] J. Hasan, N. Ton, S. Mullamitha, A. Clamp, A. McNeilly, E. Marshall, G.C. Jayson, Phase II trial of tamoxifen and goserelin in recurrent epithelial ovarian cancer, Br. J. Cancer 93 (2005) 647–651.

[5] P.A. Argenta, S.G. Thomas, P.L. Judson, L.S. Downs Jr., M.A. Geller, L.F. Carson, A.L. Jonson, R. Ghebre, A phase II study of fulvestrant in the treatment of multiply-recurrent epithelial ovarian cancer, Gynecol. Oncol. 113 (2009) 205–209.

[6] M.G. del Carmen, A.F. Fuller, U. Matulonis, N.K. Horick, A. Goodman, L.R. Duska, R. Penson, S. Campos, M. Roche, M.V. Seiden, Phase II trial of anastrozole in women with asymptomatic mullerian cancer, Gynecol. Oncol. 91 (2003) 596–602.

[7] P.T. Ramirez, K.M. Schmeler, M.R. Milam, B.M. Slomovitz, J.A. Smith, J.J. Kavanagh, M. Deavers, C. Levenback, R.L. Coleman, D.M. Gershenson, Efficacy of letrozole in the treatment of recurrent platinum- and taxane-resistant high-grade cancer of the ovary or peritoneum, Gynecol. Oncol. 110 (2008) 56–59.

[8] A. Bowman, H. Gabra, S.P. Langdon, A. Lessells, M. Stewart, A. Young, J.F. Smyth, CA125 response is associated with estrogen receptor expression in a phase

II trial of letrozole in ovarian cancer: identification of an endocrine-sensitive subgroup, Clin. Cancer Res. 8 (2002) 2233–2239.

[9] J.F. Smyth, C. Gourley, G. Walker, M.J. MacKean, A. Stevenson, A.R. Williams, A.A. Nafussi, T. Rye, R. Rye, M. Stewart, J. McCurdy, M. Mano, et al., Antiestrogen therapy is active in selected ovarian cancer cases: the use of letrozole in estrogen receptor-positive patients, Clin. Cancer Res. 13 (2007) 3617–3622.

[10] J.D. Ahlgren, N.M. Ellison, R.J. Gottlieb, F. Laluna, J.J. Lokich, P.R. Sinclair, W. Ueno, G.L. Wampler, K.Y. Yeung, D. Alt, et al., Hormonal palliation of chemoresistant ovarian cancer: three consecutive phase II trials of the Mid-Atlantic Oncology Program, J. Clin. Oncol. 11 (1993) 1957–1968.

[11] K.D. Hatch, J.B. Beecham, J.A. Blessing, W.T. Creasman, Responsiveness of patients with advanced ovarian carcinoma to tamoxifen. A Gynecologic Oncology Group study of second-line therapy in 105 patients, Cancer 68 (1991) 269–271.

[12] M. Markman, K.A. Iseminger, K.D. Hatch, W.T. Creasman, W. Barnes, B. Dubeshter, Tamoxifen in platinum-refractory ovarian cancer: a Gynecologic Oncology Group Ancillary Report, Gynecol. Oncol. 62 (1996) 4–6.

[13] D.M. Gershenson, C.C. Sun, R.B. Iyer, A.L. Malpica, J.J. Kavanagh, D.C. Bodurka, K. Schmeler, M. Deavers, Hormonal therapy for recurrent low-grade serous carcinoma of the ovary or peritoneum, Gynecol. Oncol. 125 (2012) 661–666.

[14] C.A. Papadimitriou, S. Markaki, J. Siapkaras, G. Vlachos, E. Efstathiou, I. Grimani, G. Hamilos, M. Zorzou, M.A. Dimopoulos, Hormonal therapy with letrozole for relapsed epithelial ovarian cancer. Long-term results of a phase II study, Oncology 66 (2004) 112–117.

[16] R. Vang, M. Shih Ie, R.J. Kurman, Ovarian low-grade and high-grade serous carcinoma: pathogenesis, clinicopathologic and molecular biologic features, and diagnostic problems, Adv. Anat. Pathol. 16 (2009) 267–282.

[17] M.S. Anglesio, M.S. Carey, M. Kobel, H. Mackay, D.G. Huntsman, Clear cell carcinoma of the ovary: a report from the first ovarian clear cell symposium, June 24th, 2010, Gynecol. Oncol. 121 (2011) 407–415.

[18] A. Gurung, T. Hung, J. Morin, C.B. Gilks, Molecular abnormalities in ovarian carcinoma: clinical, morphological and therapeutic correlates, Histopathology 62 (2013) 59–70.

[19] R.J. Kurman, Origin and molecular pathogenesis of ovarian high-grade serous carcinoma, Ann. Oncol. 24 (Suppl 10) (2013) x16–x21.

[20] N. Auersperg, Ovarian surface epithelium as a source of ovarian cancers: unwarranted speculation or evidence-based hypothesis? Gynecol. Oncol. 130 (2013) 246–251.

[21] F. Salehi, L. Dunfield, K.P. Phillips, D. Krewski, B.C. Vanderhyden, Risk factors for ovarian cancer: an overview with emphasis on hormonal factors, J. Toxicol. Environ. Health B 11 (2008) 301–321.

[22] T. Riman, P.W. Dickman, S. Nilsson, N. Correia, H. Nordlinder, C.M. Magnusson, I.R. Persson, Risk factors for invasive epithelial ovarian cancer: results from a Swedish case-control study, Am. J. Epidemiol. 156 (2002) 363–373.

[23] P.P. Garg, K. Kerlikowske, L. Subak, D. Grady, Hormone replacement therapy and the risk of epithelial ovarian carcinoma: a meta-analysis, Obstet. Gynecol. 92 (1998) 472–479.

[24] J.V. Lacey Jr., P.J. Mink, J.H. Lubin, M.E. Sherman, R. Troisi, P. Hartge, A. Schatzkin, C. Schairer, Menopausal hormone replacement therapy and risk of ovarian cancer, JAMA 288 (2002) 334–341.

[25] A.R. Folsom, J.P. Anderson, J.A. Ross, Estrogen replacement therapy and ovarian cancer, Epidemiology 15 (2004) 100–104.

[26] M.A. Spillman, N.G. Manning, W.W. Dye, C.A. Sartorius, M.D. Post, J.C. Harrell, B.M. Jacobsen, K.B. Horwitz, Tissue-specific pathways for estrogen regulation of ovarian cancer growth and metastasis, Cancer Res. 70 (2010) 8927–8936.

[27] L.A. Laviolette, K. Garson, E.A. Macdonald, M.K. Senterman, K. Courville, C.A. Crane, B.C. Vanderhyden, 17beta-estradiol accelerates tumor onset and decreases survival in a transgenic mouse model of ovarian cancer, Endocrinology 151 (2010) 929–938.

[28] G.N. Armaiz-Pena, L.S. Mangala, W.A. Spannuth, Y.G. Lin, N.B. Jennings, A.M. Nick, R.R. Langley, R. Schmandt, S.K. Lutgendorf, S.W. Cole, A.K. Sood, Estrous cycle modulates ovarian carcinoma growth, Clin. Cancer Res. 15 (2009) 2971–2978.

[29] K.A. Hwang, M.A. Park, N.H. Kang, B.R. Yi, S.H. Hyun, E.B. Jeung, K.C. Choi, Anticancer effect of genistein on BG-1 ovarian cancer growth induced by 17 beta-estradiol or bisphenol A via the suppression of the crosstalk between estrogen receptor alpha and insulin-like growth factor-1 receptor signaling pathways, Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 272 (2013) 637–646.

[30] N.H. Kang, K.A. Hwang, H.R. Lee, D.W. Choi, K.C. Choi, Resveratrol regulates the cell viability promoted by 17beta-estradiol or bisphenol A via down-regulation of the cross-talk between estrogen receptor alpha and insulin growth factor-1 receptor in BG-1 ovarian cancer cells, Food Chem. Toxicol. 59 (2013) 373–379.

[31] H.H. Li, Y.J. Zhao, Y. Li, C.F. Dai, S.O. Jobe, X.S. Yang, X.F. Li, M.S. Patankar, R.R. Magness, J. Zheng, Estradiol 17beta and its metabolites stimulate cell proliferation and antagonize ascorbic acid-suppressed cell proliferation in human ovarian cancer cells, Reprod. Sci. 21 (January (1)) (2014) 102–111.

[32] N. Heldring, A. Pike, S. Andersson, J. Matthews, G. Cheng, J. Hartman, M. Tujague, A. Strom, E. Treuter, M. Warner, J.A. Gustafsson, Estrogen receptors: how do they signal and what are their targets, Physiol. Rev. 87 (2007) 905–931.

[33] L. Björnström, M. Sjoberg, Mechanisms of estrogen receptor signaling: convergence of genomic and nongenomic actions on target genes, Mol. Endocrinol. 19 (4) (2005) 833–842.

[34] C. Wang, J.A. Mayer, A. Mazumdar, K. Fertuck, H. Kim, M. Brown, P.H. Brown, Estrogen induces c-myc gene expression via an upstream enhancer activated

by the estrogen receptor and the AP-1 transcription factor, Mol. Endocrinol. 25 (2011) 1527–1530.

[35] L.N. Petz, A.M. Nardulli, Sp1 binding sites and an estrogen response element half-site are involved in regulation of the human progesterone receptor A promoter, Mol. Endocrinol. 14 (2000) 972–985.

[36] M. Pradhan, L.A. Bembister, S.C. Baumgarten, J. Frasor, Proinflammatory cytokines enhance estrogen-dependent expression of the multidrug transporter gene ABCG2 through estrogen receptor and NF{kappa}B cooperativity at adjacent response elements, J. Biol. Chem. 285 (2010) 31100–31106.

[37] M. Maggiolini, D. Picard, The unfolding stories of GPR30, a new membrane-bound estrogen receptor, J. Endocrinol. 204 (2010) 105–114.

[38] Z. Wang, X. Zhang, P. Shen, B.W. Loggie, Y. Chang, T.F. Deuel, A variant of estrogen receptor-{alpha}, hER-{alpha}36: transduction of estrogen- and antiestrogen-dependent membrane-initiated mitogenic signaling, PNAS 103 (2006) 9063–9068.

[39] R.X. Song, R.A. McPherson, L. Adam, Y. Bao, M. Shupnik, R. Kumar, R.J. Santen, Linkage of rapid estrogen action to MAPK activation by ERAlpha-Shc association and Shc pathway activation, Mol. Endocrinol. 16 (2002) 116–127.

[40] E.J. Filardo, P. Thomas, Minireview: G protein-coupled estrogen receptor-1, GPER-1: its mechanism of action and role in female reproductive cancer, renal and vascular physiology, Endocrinology 153 (2012) 2953–2962.

[41] E.J. Filardo, J.A. Quinn, K.I. Bland, A.R. Frackelton Jr., Estrogen-induced activation of Erk-1 and Erk-2 requires the G protein-coupled receptor homolog, GPR30, and occurs via trans-activation of the epidermal growth factor receptor through release of HB-EGF, Mol. Endocrinol. 14 (2000) 1649–1660.

[42] C. Otto, I. Fuchs, G. Kauselmann, H. Kern, B. Zevnik, P. Andreasen, G. Schwarz, H. Altmann, M. Klewer, M. Schoor, R. Vonk, K.H. Fritzemeier, GPR30 does not mediate estrogenic responses in reproductive organs in mice, Biol. Reprod. 80 (2009) 34–41.

[43] G. Bunone, P.A. Briand, R.J. Miksicek, D. Picard, Activation of the unliganded estrogen receptor by EGF involves the MAP kinase pathway and direct phosphorylation, EMBO J. 15 (1996) 2174–2183.

[44] S. Kato, H. Endoh, Y. Masuhiro, T. Kitamoto, S. Uchiyama, H. Sasaki, S. Masushige, Y. Gotoh, E. Nishida, H. Kawashima, D. Metzger, P. Chambon, Activation of the estrogen receptor through phosphorylation by mitogen-activated protein kinase, Science 270 (1995) 1491–1494.

[45] T. Simoncini, A. Hafezi-Moghadam, D.P. Brazil, K. Ley, W.W. Chin, J.K. Liao, Interaction of oestrogen receptor with the regulatory subunit of phosphatidylinositol-3-OH kinase, Nature 407 (2000) 538–541.

[46] R.A. Campbell, P. Bhat-Nakshatri, N.M. Patel, D. Constantinidou, S. Ali, H. Nakshatri, Phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase/AKT-mediated activation of estrogen receptor alpha: a new model for anti-estrogen resistance, J. Biol. Chem. 276 (2001) 9817–9824.

[47] L. Li, M.P. Haynes, J.R. Bender, Plasma membrane localization and function of the estrogen receptor alpha variant (ER46) in human endothelial cells, PNAS 100 (2003) 4807–4812.

[48] S.L. Lin, L.Y. Yan, X.T. Zhang, J. Yuan, M. Li, J. Qiao, Z.Y. Wang, Q.Y. Sun, ER-alpha36, a variant of ER-alpha, promotes tamoxifen agonist action in endometrial cancer cells via the MAPK/ERK and PI3K/Akt pathways, PLoS One 5 (2010) e9013.

[49] C.J. Barnes, R.K. Vadlamudi, R. Kumar, Novel estrogen receptor coregulators and signaling molecules in human diseases, Cell. Mol. Life Sci. 61 (2004) 281–291.

[50] M.A. Park, K.A. Hwang, H.R. Lee, B.R. Yi, E.B. Jeung, K.C. Choi, Benzophenone-1 stimulated the growth of BG-1 ovarian cancer cells by cell cycle regulation via an estrogen receptor alpha-mediated signaling pathway in cellular and xenograft mouse models, Toxicology 305 (2013) 41–48.

[51] J.H. Choi, K.T. Lee, P.C. Leung, Estrogen receptor alpha pathway is involved in leptin-induced ovarian cancer cell growth, Carcinogenesis 32 (2011) 589–596.

[52] L. Albanito, A. Madeo, R. Lappano, A. Vivacqua, V. Rago, A. Carpino, T.I. Oprea, E.R. Prossnitz, A.M. Musti, S. Ando, M. Maggiolini, G protein-coupled receptor 30 (GPR30) mediates gene expression changes and growth response to 17beta-estradiol and selective GPR30 ligand G-1 in ovarian cancer cells, Cancer Res. 67 (2007) 1859–1866.

[53] S.H. Park, L.W. Cheung, A.S. Wong, P.C. Leung, Estrogen regulates Snail and Slug in the down-regulation of E-cadherin and induces metastatic potential of ovarian cancer cells through estrogen receptor alpha, Mol. Endocrinol. 22 (2008) 2085–2098.

[55] Y. Yan, H. Liu, H. Wen, X. Jiang, X. Cao, G. Zhang, G. Liu, The novel estrogen receptor GPER regulates the migration and invasion of ovarian cancer cells, Mol. Cell. Biochem. 378 (2013) 1–7.

[56] L. Long, Y. Cao, L.D. Tang, Transmembrane estrogen receptor GPR30 is more frequently expressed in malignant than benign ovarian endometriotic cysts and correlates with MMP-9 expression, Int. J. Gynecol. Cancer 22 (2012) 539–545.

[57] J. Haring, S. Schuler, C. Lattrich, O. Ortmann, O. Treeck, Role of estrogen receptor beta in gynecological cancer, Gynecol. Oncol. 127 (2012) 673–676.

[58] O. Treeck, G. Pfeiler, D. Mitter, C. Lattrich, G. Piendl, O. Ortmann, Estrogen receptor {beta}1 exerts antitumoral effects on SK-OV-3 ovarian cancer cells, J. Endocrinol. 193 (2007) 421–433.

[59] A. Docquier, A. Garcia, J. Savatier, A. Boulahrouf, S. Bonnet, V. Bellet, M. Busson, E. Margeat, S. Jalaguier, C. Royer, P. Balaguer, V. Cavailles, Negative regulation of estrogen signaling by ERbeta and RIP 140 in ovarian cancer cells, Mol. Endocrinol 27 (2013) 1429–1441.

[60] C. Bossard, M. Busson, D. Vindrieux, F. Gaudin, V. Machelon, M. Brigitte, C. Jacquard, A. Pillon, P. Balaguer, K. Balabanian, G. Lazennec, Potential role of estrogen receptor beta as a tumor suppressor of epithelial ovarian cancer, PLoS One 7 (2012) e44787.

[61] L.P. Parker, D.D. Taylor, S. Kesterson, C. Gercel-Taylor, Gene expression profiling in response to estradiol and genistein in ovarian cancer cells, Cancer Genomics Proteomics 6 (2009) 189–194.

[62] B.J. Slotman, B.R. Rao, Ovarian cancer (review). Etiology, diagnosis, prognosis, surgery, radiotherapy, chemotherapy and endocrine therapy, Anticancer Res. 8 (1988) 417–434.

[63] P. Pujol, J.M. Rey, P. Nirde, P. Roger, M. Gastaldi, F. Laffargue, H. Rochefort, T. Maudelonde, Differential expression of estrogen receptor-alpha and -beta messenger RNAs as a potential marker of ovarian carcinogenesis, Cancer Res. 58 (1998) 5367–5373.

[64] S. Fujiwara, Y. Terai, H. Kawaguchi, M. Takai, S. Yoo, Y. Tanaka, T. Tanaka, S. Tsunetoh, H. Sasaki, M. Kanemura, A. Tanabe, Y. Yamashita, et al., GPR30 regulates the EGFR-Akt cascade and predicts lower survival in patients with ovarian cancer, J. Ovarian Res. 5 (2012) 35.

[65] P.A. Argenta, I. Um, C. Kay, D. Harrison, D. Faratian, T. Sueblinvong, M.A. Geller, S.P. Langdon, Predicting response to the anti-estrogen fulvestrant in recurrent ovarian cancer, Gynecol. Oncol. 131 (2013) 368–373.

[66] D.P. McDonnell, S.E. Wardell, The molecular mechanisms underlying the pharmacological actions of ER modulators: implications for new drug discovery in breast cancer, Curr. Opin. Pharmacol. 10 (2010) 620–628.

[67] C.J. Fabian, The what, why and how of aromatase inhibitors: hormonal agents for treatment and prevention of breast cancer, Int. J. Clin. Pract. 61 (2007) 2051–2063.

[68] S.R. Johnston, B. Lu, G.K. Scott, P.J. Kushner, I.E. Smith, M. Dowsett, C.C. Benz, Increased activator protein-1 DNA binding and c-Jun NH2-terminal kinase activity in human breast tumors with acquired tamoxifen resistance, Clin. Cancer Res. 5 (1999) 251–256.

[69] T. Hachisuga, T. Hideshima, T. Kawarabayashi, F. Eguchi, M. Emoto, T. Shirakusa, Expression of steroid receptors, Ki-67, and epidermal growth factor receptor in tamoxifen-treated endometrium, Int. J. Gynecol. Pathol. 18 (1999) 297–303.

[70] E. Badia, A. Docquier, M. Busson, M. Lapierre, P. Pujol, P. Balaguer, V. Cavailles, Long-term treatment with the pure anti-estrogen fulvestrant durably remodels estrogen signaling in BG-1 ovarian cancer cells, J. Steroid Biochem. Mol. Biol. 132 (2012) 176–185.

[71] P.E. Schwartz, J.T. Chambers, E.I. Kohorn, S.K. Chambers, H. Weitzman, I.M. Voynick, N. MacLusky, F. Naftolin, Tamoxifen in combination with cytotoxic chemotherapy in advanced epithelial ovarian cancer. A prospective randomized trial, Cancer 63 (1989) 1074–1078.

[72] F. Simpkins, A. Garcia-Soto, J. Slingerland, New insights on the role of hormonal therapy in ovarian cancer, Steroids 78 (2013) 530–537.

[73] C. Davies, J. Godwin, R. Gray, M. Clarke, D. Cutter, S. Darby, P. McGale, H.C. Pan, C. Taylor, Y.C. Wang, M. Dowsett, J. Ingle, et al., Relevance of breast cancer hormone receptors and other factors to the efficacy of adjuvant tamoxifen: patient-level meta-analysis of randomised trials, Lancet 378 (2011) 771–784.

[74] K.I. Pritchard, Endocrine therapy: is the first generation of targeted drugs the last? J. Intern. Med. 274 (2013) 144–152.

[75] B. Linggi, G. Carpenter, ErbB receptors: new insights on mechanisms and biology, Trends Cell Biol. 16 (2006) 649–656.

[76] A. Berchuck, G.C. Rodriguez, A. Kamel, R.K. Dodge, J.T. Soper, D.L. Clarke-Pearson, R.C. Bast Jr., Epidermal growth factor receptor expression in normal ovarian epithelium and ovarian cancer. I. Correlation of receptor expression with prognostic factors in patients with ovarian cancer, Am. J. Obstet. Gynecol. 164 (1991) 669–674.

[77] J. Fischer-Colbrie, A. Witt, H. Heinzl, P. Speiser, K. Czerwenka, P. Sevelda, R. Zeillinger, EGFR and steroid receptors in ovarian carcinoma: comparison with prognostic parameters and outcome of patients, Anticancer Res. 17 (1997) 613–619.

[78] G. Scambia, P. Benedetti-Panici, G. Ferrandina, M. Distefano, G. Salerno, M.E. Romanini, A. Fagotti, S. Mancuso, Epidermal growth factor, oestrogen and progesterone receptor expression in primary ovarian cancer: correlation with clinical outcome and response to chemotherapy, Br. J. Cancer 72 (1995) 361–366.

[79] D. Zhao, F. Zhang, W. Zhang, J. He, Y. Zhao, J. Sun, Prognostic role of hormone receptors in ovarian cancer: a systematic review and meta-analysis, Int. J. Gynecol. Cancer 23 (2013) 25–33.

[80] A. Migliaccio, M. Di Domenico, G. Castoria, M. Nanayakkara, M. Lombardi, A. de Falco, A. Bilancia, L. Varricchio, A. Ciociola, F. Auricchio, Steroid receptor regulation of epidermal growth factor signaling through Src in breast and prostate cancer cells: steroid antagonist action, Cancer Res. 65 (2005) 10585–10593.

[81] K.R. Kalli, S.V. Bradley, S. Fuchshuber, C.A. Conover, Estrogen receptor-positive human epithelial ovarian carcinoma cells respond to the antitumor drug suramin with increased proliferation: possible insight into ER and epidermal growth factor signaling interactions in ovarian cancer, Gynecol. Oncol. 94 (2004) 705–712.

[82] S.W. Curtis, T. Washburn, C. Sewall, R. DiAugustine, J. Lindzey, J.F. Couse, K.S. Korach, Physiological coupling of growth factor and steroid receptor signaling pathways: estrogen receptor knockout mice lack estrogen-like response to epidermal growth factor, PNAS 93 (1996) 12626–12630.

[83] D.M. Klotz, S.C. Hewitt, P. Ciana, M. Raviscioni, J.K. Lindzey, J. Foley, A. Maggi, R.P. DiAugustine, K.S. Korach, Requirement of estrogen receptor-alpha in insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1)-induced uterine responses and in vivo

[84] B.J. Cheskis, J. Greger, N. Cooch, C. McNally, S. McLarney, H.S. Lam, S. Rutledge, B. Mekonnen, D. Hauze, S. Nagpal, L.P. Freedman, MNAR plays an important role in ERa activation of Src/MAPK and PI3K/Akt signaling pathways, Steroids 73 (2008) 901–905.

[85] V. Boonyaratankornkit, Scaffolding proteins mediating membrane-initiated extra-nuclear actions of estrogen receptor, Steroids 76 (2011) 877–884.

[86] M. Razandi, A. Pedram, S.T. Park, E.R. Levin, Proximal events in signaling by plasma membrane estrogen receptors, J. Biol. Chem. 278 (2003) 2701–2712.

[87] E.J. Filardo, Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) transactivation by estrogen via the G-protein-coupled receptor, GPR30: a novel signaling pathway with potential significance for breast cancer, J. Steroid Biochem. Mol. Biol. 80 (2002) 231–238.

[88] A. Vivacqua, R. Lappano, P. De Marco, D. Sisci, S. Aquila, F. De Amicis, S.A. Fuqua, S. Ando, M. Maggiolini, G protein-coupled receptor 30 expression is up-regulated by EGF and TGFalpha in estrogen receptor alpha-positive cancer cells, Mol. Endocrinol. 23 (2009) 1815–1826.

[89] H.O. Smith, H. Arias-Pulido, D.Y. Kuo, T. Howard, C.R. Qualls, S.J. Lee, C.F. Verschraegen, H.J. Hathaway, N.E. Joste, E.R. Prossnitz, GPR30 predicts poor survival for ovarian cancer, Gynecol. Oncol. 114 (2009) 465–471.

[90] Z. Kolkova, V. Casslen, E. Henic, S. Ahmadi, A. Ehinger, K. Jirstrom, B. Casslen, The G protein-coupled estrogen receptor 1 (GPER/GPR30) does not predict survival in patients with ovarian cancer, J. Ovarian Res. 5 (2012) 9.

[91] T. Ignatov, S. Modl, M. Thulig, C. Weissenborn, O. Ortmann, A. Zenclussen, S.D. Costa, T. Kalinski, A. Ignatov, GPER-1 acts as a tumor suppressor in ovarian cancer, J. Ovarian Res. 6 (2013) 51.

[92] C.L. Tsai, H.M. Wu, C.Y. Lin, Y.J. Lin, A. Chao, T.H. Wang, S. Hsueh, C.H. Lai, H.S. Wang, Estradiol and tamoxifen induce cell migration through GPR30 and activation of focal adhesion kinase (FAK) in endometrial cancers with low or without nuclear estrogen receptor alpha (ERAlpha), PLoS One 8 (2013) e72999.

[93] G.F. Zannoni, F. Morassi, M.G. Prisco, I. De Stefano, V.G. Vellone, V. Arena, G. Scambia, D. Gallo, Clinicopathologic and immunohistochemical features of ovarian clear cell carcinomas in comparison with type I and type II tumors, Int. J. Gynecol. Pathol. 31 (2012) 507–516.

[94] C. Lattrich, I. Juhasz-Boess, O. Ortmann, O. Treeck, Detection of an elevated HER2 expression in MCF-7 breast cancer cells overexpressing estrogen receptor beta1, Oncol. Rep. 19 (2008) 811–817.

[95] D. Wang, I. Konishi, M. Koshiyama, M. Mandai, Y. Nanbu, Y. Ishikawa, T. Mori, S. Fujii, Expression of c-erbB-2 protein and epidermal growth receptor in endometrial carcinomas. Correlation with clinicopathologic and sex steroid receptor status, Cancer 72 (1993) 2628–2637.

[96] C.K. Lin, W.L. Lin, F.L. Chen, M.Y. Lee, J.F. Kuo, A. Ruan, Y.S. Tyan, H. Chiang, M.C. Chou, C.P. Han, Assessing the impact of polysomy-17 on HER2 status and the correlations of HER2 status with prognostic variables (ER, PR, p53, Ki-67) in epithelial ovarian cancer: a tissue microarray study using immunohistochemistry and fluorescent in situ hybridization, Int. J. Gynecol. Pathol. 30 (2011) 372–379.

[97] M.C. Gutierrez, S. Detre, S. Johnston, S.K. Mohsin, J. Shou, D.C. Allred, R. Schiff, C.K. Osborne, M. Dowsett, Molecular changes in tamoxifen-resistant breast cancer: relationship between estrogen receptor, HER-2, and p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase, J. Clin. Oncol. 23 (2005) 2469–2476.

[98] D. Faratian, A.J. Zweemer, Y. Nagumo, A.H. Sims, M. Muir, M. Dodds, P. Mullen, I. Um, C. Kay, M. Hasmann, D.J. Harrison, S.P. Langdon, Trastuzumab and pertuzumab produce changes in morphology and estrogen receptor signaling in ovarian cancer xenografts revealing new treatment strategies, Clin. Cancer Res. 17 (2011) 4451–4461.

[99] P. Mullen, D.A. Cameron, M. Hasmann, J.F. Smyth, S.P. Langdon, Sensitivity to pertuzumab (2C4) in ovarian cancer models: cross-talk with estrogen receptor signaling, Mol. Cancer Ther. 6 (2007) 93–100.

[100] E. Himpe, R. Kooijman, Insulin-like growth factor-I receptor signal transduction and the Janus kinase/signal transducer and activator of transcription (JAK-STAT) pathway, Biofactors 35 (2009) 76–81.

[101] V. Bartella, P. De Marco, R. Malaguarnera, A. Belfiore, M. Maggionlini, New advances on the functional cross-talk between insulin-like growth factor-I and estrogen signaling in cancer, Cell Signal. 24 (2012) 1515–1521.

[102] M.C. Beauchamp, A. Yasmeen, A. Knafo, W.H. Gotlieb, Targeting insulin and insulin-like growth factor pathways in epithelial ovarian cancer, J. Oncol. (2010), 2010: 257058.

[103] A. Flyvbjerg, O. Mogensen, B. Mogensen, O.S. Nielsen, Elevated serum insulin-like growth factor-binding protein 2 (IGFBP-2) and decreased IGFBP-3 in epithelial ovarian cancer: correlation with cancer antigen 125 and tumor-associated trypsin inhibitor, J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab. 82 (1997) 2308–2313.

[104] R.A. Sayer, J.M. Lancaster, J. Pittman, J. Gray, R. Whitaker, J.R. Marks, A. Berchuck, High insulin-like growth factor-2 (IGF-2) gene expression is an independent predictor of poor survival for patients with advanced stage serous epithelial ovarian cancer, Gynecol. Oncol. 96 (2005) 355–361.

[105] D. Spentzos, S.A. Cannistra, F. Grall, D.A. Levine, K. Pillay, T.A. Libermann, C.S. Mantzoros, IGF axis gene expression patterns are prognostic of survival in epithelial ovarian cancer, Endocr. Relat. Cancer 14 (2007) 781–790.

[106] J. Brokaw, D. Katsaros, A. Wiley, L. Lu, D. Su, O. Sochirca, I.A. de la Longrais, S. Mayne, H. Risch, H. Yu, IGF-I in epithelial ovarian cancer and its role in disease progression, Growth Factors 25 (2007) 346–354.

[107] Y. An, L. Cai, Y. Wang, D. Zhu, Y. Guan, J. Zheng, Local expression of insulin-like growth factor-I, insulin-like growth factor-I receptor, and estrogen receptor alpha in ovarian cancer, Onkologie 32 (2009) 638–644.

[108] G. Walker, K. MacLeod, A.R. Williams, D.A. Cameron, J.F. Smyth, S.P. Langdon, Insulin-like growth factor binding proteins IGFBP3, IGFBP4, and IGFBP5 predict endocrine responsiveness in patients with ovarian cancer, Clin. Cancer Res. 13 (2007) 1438–1444.

[109] L. Lu, D. Katsaros, A. Wiley, I.A. Rigault de la Longrais, H.A. Risch, M. Puopolo, H. Yu, The relationship of insulin-like growth factor-II, insulin-like growth factor binding protein-3, and estrogen receptor-alpha expression to disease progression in epithelial ovarian cancer, Clin. Cancer Res. 12 (2006) 1208–1214.

[110] A. Karasik, J. Menczer, C. Pariente, H. Kanety, Insulin-like growth factor-I (IGF-I) and IGF-binding protein-2 are increased in cyst fluids of epithelial ovarian cancer, J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab. 78 (1994) 271–276.

[111] N.G. Shah, J.M. Bhatavdekar, S.S. Doctor, T.P. Suthar, D.B. Balar, R.S. Dave, Circulating epidermal growth factor (EGF) and insulin-like growth factor-I (IGF-I) in patients with epithelial ovarian carcinoma, Neoplasma 41 (1994) 241–243.

[112] B. Waksmanski, J. Dudkiewicz, T. Kowalski, Changes in insulin-like growth factor I, 17-b-estradiol, and progesterone in postmenopausal women with benign and malignant ovarian tumours, Med. Sci. Monit. 7 (2001) 919–923.

[113] K.A. Hwang, S.H. Park, B.R. Yi, K.C. Choi, Gene alterations of ovarian cancer cells expressing estrogen receptors by estrogen and bisphenol a using microarray analysis, Lab. Anim. Res. 27 (2011) 99–107.

[114] J. Wimalasena, D. Meehan, R. Dostal, J.S. Foster, M. Cameron, M. Smith, Growth factors interact with estradiol and gonadotropins in the regulation of ovarian cancer cell growth and growth factor receptors, Oncol. Res. 5 (1993) 325–337.

[115] R.F. Krywicki, J.A. Figueroa, J.G. Jackson, T.W. Kozelsky, S. Shimasaki, D.D. Von Hoff, D. Yee, Regulation of insulin-like growth factor binding proteins in ovarian cancer cells by oestrogen, Eur. J. Cancer 29A (1993) 2015–2019.

[117] A.V. Lee, C.N. Weng, J.G. Jackson, D. Yee, Activation of estrogen receptor-mediated gene transcription by IGF-I in human breast cancer cells, J. Endocrinol. 152 (1997) 39–47.

[118] D.H. Fagan, D. Yee, Crosstalk between IGF1R and estrogen receptor signaling in breast cancer, J. Mammary Gland Biol. Neoplasia 13 (2008) 423–429.

[119] S. Kahler, S. Nuedling, M. van Eckels, H. Vetter, R. Meyer, C. Grohe, Estrogen receptor alpha rapidly activates the IGF-1 receptor pathway, J. Biol. Chem. 275 (2000) 18447–18453.

[120] R.X. Song, C.J. Barnes, Z. Zhang, Y. Bao, R. Kumar, R.J. Santen, The role of Shc and insulin-like growth factor 1 receptor in mediating the translocation of estrogen receptor alpha to the plasma membrane, PNAS 101 (2004) 2076–2081.

[121] S. Massarweh, C.K. Osborne, C.J. Creighton, L. Qin, A. Tsimelzon, S. Huang, H. Weiss, M. Rimawi, R. Schiff, Tamoxifen resistance in breast tumors is driven by growth factor receptor signaling with repression of classic estrogen receptor genomic function, Cancer Res. 68 (2008) 826–833.

[122] P.P. Roux, J. Blenis, ERK and p38 MAPK-activated protein kinases: a family of protein kinases with diverse biological functions, Microbiol. Mol. Biol. Rev. 68 (2004) 320–344.

[123] J.Y. Hou, A. Rodriguez-Gabin, L. Samaweera, R. Hazan, G.L. Goldberg, S.B. Horowitz, H.M. McDaid, Exploiting MEK inhibitor-mediated activation of ERalpha for therapeutic intervention in ER-positive ovarian carcinoma, PLoS One 8 (2013) e54103.

[124] K.M. Lau, S.C. Mok, S.M. Ho, Expression of human estrogen receptor-alpha and -beta, progesterone receptor, and androgen receptor mRNA in normal and malignant ovarian epithelial cells, PNAS 96 (1999) 5722–5727.

[125] J. Bayliss, A. Hilger, P. Vishnu, K. Diehl, D. El-Ashry, Reversal of the estrogen receptor negative phenotype in breast cancer and restoration of antiestrogen response, Clin. Cancer Res. 13 (2007) 7029–7036.

[126] S.M. Thomas, J.S. Brugge, Cellular functions regulated by Src family kinases, Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. 13 (1997) 513–609.

[127] J.R. Wiener, T.C. Windham, V.C. Estrella, N.U. Parikh, P.F. Thall, M.T. Deavers, R.C. Bast, G.B. Mills, G.E. Gallick, Activated SRC protein tyrosine kinase is overexpressed in late-stage human ovarian cancers, Gynecol. Oncol. 88 (2003) 73–79.

[128] F. Simpkins, P. Hevia-Paez, J. Sun, W. Ullmer, C.A. Gilbert, T. da Silva, A. Pedram, E.R. Levin, I.M. Reis, B. Rabinovich, D. Azzam, X.X. Xu, et al., Src Inhibition with saracatinib reverses fulvestrant resistance in ER-positive ovarian cancer models in vitro and in vivo, Clin. Cancer Res. 18 (2012) 5911–5923.

[129] J. Sun, W. Zhou, K. Kaliappan, Z. Nawaz, J.M. Slingerland, ERAlpha phosphorylation at Y537 by Src triggers E6-AP-ERAlpha binding, ERAlpha ubiquitylation, promoter occupancy, and target gene expression, Mol. Endocrinol. 26 (2012) 1567–1577.

[130] C.W. Wong, C. McNally, E. Nickbarg, B.S. Komm, B.J. Cheskis, Estrogen receptor-interacting protein that modulates its nongenomic activity crosstalk with Src/Erk phosphorylation cascade, PNAS 99 (2002) 14783–14788.

[131] Y. Chen, E.A. Alvarez, D. Azzam, S.A. Wander, N. Guggisberg, M. Jorda, Z. Ju, B.T. Hennessy, J.M. Slingerland, Combined Src and ER blockade impairs human breast cancer proliferation in vitro and in vivo, Breast Cancer Res. Treat. 128 (2011) 69–78.

[132] M.H. Herynk, A.R. Beyer, Y. Cui, H. Weiss, E. Anderson, T.P. Green, S.A. Fuqua, Cooperative action of tamoxifen and c-Src inhibition in preventing the growth of estrogen receptor-positive human breast cancer cells, Mol. Cancer Ther. 5 (2006) 3023–3031.

[133] W.L. Yeh, K. Shioda, K.R. Coser, D. Rivizzigno, K.R. McSweeney, T. Shioda, Fulvestrant-induced cell death and proteasomal degradation of estrogen receptor alpha protein in MCF-7 cells require the CSK c-Src tyrosine kinase, PLoS One 8 (2013) e60889.

[134] H.A. Burris 3rd., Overcoming acquired resistance to anticancer therapy: focus on the PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway, Cancer Chemother. Pharmacol. 71 (2013) 829–842.

[135] A. Leary, E. Auclin, P. Pautier, C. Lhomme, Ovarian cancer—a clinical and translational update, in: I. Diaz-Padilla (Ed.), The PI3K/Akt/mTOR Pathway in Ovarian Cancer: Biological Rationale and Therapeutic Opportunities, 2013.

[136] M. Laplante, D.M. Sabatini, mTOR signaling at a glance, J. Cell Sci. 122 (2009) 3589–3594.

[137] J. Huang, L. Zhang, J. Greshock, T.A. Colligon, Y. Wang, R. Ward, D. Katsaros, H. Lassus, R. Butzow, A.K. Godwin, J.R. Testa, K.L. Nathanson, et al., Frequent genetic abnormalities of the PI3K/AKT pathway in primary ovarian cancer predict patient outcome, Genes Chromosomes Cancer 50 (2011) 606–618.

[138] D.A. Altomare, H.Q. Wang, K.L. Skele, A. De Rienzo, A.J. Klein-Szanto, A.K. Godwin, J.R. Testa, AKT and mTOR phosphorylation is frequently detected in ovarian cancer and can be targeted to disrupt ovarian tumor cell growth, Oncogene 23 (2004) 5853–5857.

[139] M. Kato, S. Yamamoto, M. Takano, O. Matsubara, K. Furuya, Aberrant expression of the mammalian target of rapamycin, hypoxia-inducible factor-1alpha, and glucose transporter 1 in the development of ovarian clear-cell adenocarcinoma, Int. J. Gynecol. Pathol. 31 (2012) 254–263.

[140] S. Mabuchi, C. Kawase, D.A. Altomare, K. Morishige, K. Sawada, M. Hayashi, M. Tsujimoto, M. Yamoto, A.J. Klein-Szanto, R.J. Schilder, M. Ohmichi, J.R. Testa, et al., mTOR is a promising therapeutic target both in cisplatin-sensitive and cisplatin-resistant clear cell carcinoma of the ovary, Clin. Cancer Res. 15 (2009) 5404–5413.

[141] M. Shih Ie, R.J. Kurman, Ovarian tumorigenesis: a proposed model based on morphological and molecular genetic analysis, Am. J. Pathol. 164 (2004) 1511–1518.

[142] X. Ge, R. Guo, Y. Qiao, Y. Zhang, J. Lei, X. Wang, L. Li, D. Hu, The G protein-coupled receptor GPR30 mediates the nontranscriptional effect of estrogen on the activation of PI3K/Akt pathway in endometrial cancer cells, Int. J. Gynecol. Cancer 23 (2013) 52–59.

[144] E.M. Fox, C.L. Arteaga, T.W. Miller, Abrogating endocrine resistance by targeting ERAlpha and PI3K in breast cancer, Front. Oncol. 2 (2012) 145.

[145] X. Fu, C.K. Osborne, R. Schiff, Biology and therapeutic potential of PI3K signaling in ER+/HER2-negative breast cancer, Breast 22 (Suppl 2) (2013) S12–S18.

[146] K. Hua, W. Feng, Q. Cao, X. Zhou, X. Lu, Y. Feng, Estrogen and progestin regulate metastasis through the PI3K/AKT pathway in human ovarian cancer, Int. J. Oncol. 33 (2008) 959–967.

[147] A. Ptak, E.L. Gregoraszczuk, Bisphenol A induces leptin receptor expression, creating more binding sites for leptin, and activates the JAK/Stat, MAPK/ERK and PI3K/Akt signalling pathways in human ovarian cancer cell, Toxicol. Lett. 210 (2012) 332–337.

[148] M. Breuleux, M. Klopfenstein, C. Stephan, C.A. Doughty, L. Barys, S.M. Maira, D. Kwiatkowski, H.A. Lane, Increased AKT S473 phosphorylation after mTORC1 inhibition is rictor dependent and does not predict tumor cell response to PI3K/mTOR inhibition, Mol. Cancer Ther. 8 (2009) 742–753.

[149] A.E. Drummond, P.J. Fuller, Activin and inhibin, estrogens and NFkappaB, play roles in ovarian tumourigenesis is there crosstalk? Mol. Cell. Endocrinol. 359 (2012) 85–91.

[150] G. Diamant, R. Dikstein, Transcriptional control by NF-kappaB: elongation in focus, Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1829 (2013) 937–945.

[151] A.J. Wilson, W. Barham, J. Saskowski, O. Tikhomirov, L. Chen, H.J. Lee, F. Yull, D. Khabele, Tracking NF-kappaB activity in tumor cells during ovarian cancer progression in a syngeneic mouse model, J. Ovarian Res. 6 (2013) 63.

[152] J.N. Barlin, P. Jelinic, N. Olvera, F. Bogomolniy, M. Bisogna, F. Dao, R.R. Barakat, D.S. Chi, D.A. Levine, Validated gene targets associated with curatively treated advanced serous ovarian carcinoma, Gynecol. Oncol. 128 (2013) 512–517.

[153] L. Hernandez, S.C. Hsu, B. Davidson, M.J. Birrer, E.C. Kohn, C.M. Annunziata, Activation of NF-kappaB signaling by inhibitor of NF-kappaB kinase beta increases aggressiveness of ovarian cancer, Cancer Res. 70 (2010) 4005–4014.

[154] D. Kalaitzidis, T.D. Gilmore, Transcription factor cross-talk: the estrogen receptor and NF-kappaB, Trends Endocrinol. Metab. 16 (2005) 46–52.

[155] H. Nakshatri, P. Bhat-Nakshatri, D.A. Martin, R.J. Goulet Jr., G.W. Sledge Jr., Constitutive activation of NF-kappaB during progression of breast cancer to hormone-independent growth, Mol. Cell. Biol. 17 (1997) 3629–3639.

[156] M.A. Pratt, T.E. Bishop, D. White, G. Yasvinski, M. Menard, M.Y. Niu, R. Clarke, Estrogen withdrawal-induced NF-kappaB activity and bcl-3 expression in breast cancer cells: roles in growth and hormone independence, Mol. Cell. Biol. 23 (2003) 6887–6900.

[157] N. Gionet, D. Jansson, S. Mader, M.A. Pratt, NF-kappaB and estrogen receptor alpha interactions: differential function in estrogen receptor-negative and -positive hormone-independent breast cancer cells, J. Cell. Biochem. 107 (2009) 448–459.

[158] J. Frasor, A. Weaver, M. Pradhan, Y. Dai, L.D. Miller, C.Y. Lin, A. Stanculescu, Positive cross-talk between estrogen receptor and NF-kappaB in breast cancer, Cancer Res. 69 (2009) 8918–8925.

[159] C.W. Yde, K.B. Emdal, B. Guerra, A.E. Lykkesfeldt, NFkappaB signaling is important for growth of antiestrogen resistant breast cancer cells, Breast Cancer Res. Treat. 135 (2012) 67–78.

[160] Y. Ning, R.B. Riggins, J.E. Mulla, H. Chung, A. Zwart, R. Clarke, IFNgamma restores breast cancer sensitivity to fulvestrant by regulating STAT1, IFN regulatory factor 1, NF-kappaB, BCL2 family members, and signaling to caspase-dependent apoptosis, Mol. Cancer Ther. 9 (2010) 1274–1285.

[161] S. Chu, Y. Nishi, T. Yanase, H. Nawata, P.J. Fuller, Transrepression of estrogen receptor beta signaling by nuclear factor-kappaB in ovarian granulosa cells, Mol. Endocrinol. 18 (2004) 1919–1928.

[162] I. Espinoza, R. Pochampally, F. Xing, K. Watabe, L. Miele, Notch signaling: targeting cancer stem cells and epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition, Oncotargets Ther. 6 (2013) 1249–1259.

[163] E. Cerami, J. Gao, U. Dogrusoz, B.E. Gross, S.O. Sumer, B.A. Aksoy, A. Jacobsen, C.J. Byrne, M.L. Heuer, E. Larsson, Y. Antipin, B. Reva, et al., The cBio cancer genomics portal: an open platform for exploring multidimensional cancer genomics data, Cancer Discovery 2 (2012) 401–404.

[164] J. Gao, B.A. Aksoy, U. Dogrusoz, G. Dresdner, B. Gross, S.O. Sumer, Y. Sun, A. Jacobsen, R. Sinha, E. Larsson, E. Cerami, C. Sander, et al., Integrative analysis of complex cancer genomics and clinical profiles using the cBioPortal, Sci. Signal. 6 (2013) pl1.

[165] Cancer Genome Atlas Research Network, Integrated genomic analyses of ovarian carcinoma, Nature 474 (2011) 609–615.

[166] Y. Wei, Z. Zhang, H. Liao, L. Wu, X. Wu, D. Zhou, X. Xi, Y. Zhu, Y. Feng, Nuclear estrogen receptor-mediated Notch signaling and GPR30-mediated PI3K/AKT signaling in the regulation of endometrial cancer cell proliferation, Oncol. Rep. 27 (2012) 504–510.

[167] D.A. Tonetti, M.J. Chisamore, W. Grdina, H. Schurz, V.C. Jordan, Stable transfection of protein kinase C alpha cDNA in hormone-dependent breast cancer cell lines, Br. J. Cancer 83 (2000) 782–791.

[168] J. Yun, A. Pannuti, I. Espinoza, H. Zhu, C. Hicks, X. Zhu, M. Caskey, P. Rizzo, G. D’Souza, K. Backus, M.F. Denning, J. Coon, et al., Crosstalk between PKAlpha and Notch-4 in endocrine-resistant breast cancer cells, Oncogenesis 2 (2013) e60.

[169] P. Rizzo, H. Miao, G. D’Souza, C. Osipo, L.L. Song, J. Yun, H. Zhao, J. Mascarenhas, D. Wyatt, G. Antico, L. Hao, K. Yao, et al., Cross-talk between notch and the estrogen receptor in breast cancer suggests novel therapeutic approaches, Cancer Res. 68 (2008) 5226–5235.

[170] L. Magnani, A. Stoeck, X. Zhang, A. Lanczky, A.C. Mirabella, T.L. Wang, B. Gyorffy, M. Lupien, Genome-wide reprogramming of the chromatin landscape underlies endocrine therapy resistance in breast cancer, PNAS 110 (2013) E1490–E1499.

[171] L. Hao, P. Rizzo, C. Osipo, A. Pannuti, D. Wyatt, L.W. Cheung, G. Sonenshein, B.A. Osborne, L. Miele, Notch-1 activates estrogen receptor-alpha-dependent transcription via IKKalpha in breast cancer cells, Oncogene 29 (2010) 201–213.

[172] M.M. Shah, M. Zerlin, B.Y. Li, T.J. Herzog, J.K. Kitajewski, J.D. Wright, The role of Notch and gamma-secretase inhibition in an ovarian cancer model, Anticancer Res. 33 (2013) 801–808.

[173] N. Gupta, Z. Xu, A. El-Sehemy, H. Steed, Y. Fu, Notch3 induces epithelial-mesenchymal transition and attenuates carboplatin-induced apoptosis in ovarian cancer cells, Gynecol. Oncol. 130 (2013) 200–206.

[174] S.M. McAuliffe, S.L. Morgan, G.A. Wyant, L.T. Tran, K.W. Muto, Y.S. Chen, K.T. Chin, J.C. Partridge, B.B. Poole, K.H. Cheng, J. Daggett Jr., K. Cullen, et al., Targeting Notch, a key pathway for ovarian cancer stem cells, sensitizes tumors to platinum therapy, PNAS 109 (2012) E2939–E2948.

[175] M.T. Rahman, K. Nakayama, M. Rahman, H. Katagiri, T. Ishibashi, M. Ishikawa, K. Iida, S. Nakayama, Y. Otsuki, K. Miyazaki, Notch3 overexpression as potential therapeutic target in advanced stage chemoresistant ovarian cancer, Am. J. Clin. Pathol. 138 (2012) 535–544.

[176] X. Chen, M.M. Thiaville, L. Chen, A. Stoeck, J. Xuan, M. Gao, M. Shih Ie, T.L. Wang, Defining NOTCH3 target genes in ovarian cancer, Cancer Res. 72 (2012) 2294–2303.

[177] A.D. Steg, A.A. Katre, B. Goodman, H.D. Han, A.M. Nick, R.L. Stone, R.L. Coleman, R.D. Alvarez, G. Lopez-Berestein, A.K. Sood, C.N. Landen, Targeting the notch ligand JAGGED1 in both tumor cells and stroma in ovarian cancer, Clin. Cancer Res. 17 (2011) 5674–5685.

[178] L.Y. Jiang, X.L. Zhang, P. Du, J.H. Zheng, Gamma-secretase inhibitor, DAPT inhibits self-renewal and stemness maintenance of ovarian cancer stem-like cells in vitro, Chin. J. Cancer Res. 23 (2011) 140–146.

[179] W. Kildal, B. Risberg, V.M. Abeler, G.B. Kristensen, J. Sudbo, J.M. Nesland, H.E. Danielsen, Beta-catenin expression, DNA ploidy and clinicopathological features in ovarian cancer: a study in 253 patients, Eur. J. Cancer 41 (2005) 1127–1134.

[180] D. Boerboom, M. Paquet, M. Hsieh, J. Liu, S.P. Jamin, R.R. Behringer, J. Sirois, M.M. Taketo, J.S. Richards, Misregulated Wnt/beta-catenin signaling leads to ovarian granulosa cell tumor development, Cancer Res. 65 (2005) 9206–9215.

[181] S. Uddin, R. Bu, M. Ahmed, J. Abubaker, F. Al-Dayel, P. Bavi, K.S. Al-Kuraya, Overexpression of leptin receptor predicts an unfavorable outcome in Middle Eastern ovarian cancer, Mol. Cancer 8 (2009) 74.

[182] S. Abelson, Y. Shamai, L. Berger, R. Shouval, K. Skorecki, M. Tzukerman, Intratumoral heterogeneity in the self-renewal and tumorigenic differentiation of ovarian cancer, Stem Cells 30 (2012) 415–424.

[183] A.K. Mitra, M. Zillhardt, Y. Hua, P. Tiwari, A.E. Murmann, M.E. Peter, E. Lengyel, MicroRNAs reprogram normal fibroblasts into cancer-associated fibroblasts in ovarian cancer, Cancer Discovery 2 (2012) 1100–1108.

[184] S.Y. Ko, N. Barengo, A. Ladanyi, J.S. Lee, F. Marini, E. Lengyel, H. Naora, HOXA9 promotes ovarian cancer growth by stimulating cancer-associated fibroblasts, J. Clin. Invest. 122 (2012) 3603–3617.

[185] K.M. Nieman, I.L. Romero, B. Van Houten, E. Lengyel, Adipose tissue and adipocytes support tumorigenesis and metastasis, Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1831 (2013) 1533–1541.

[186] Z. Guo, D. Cheng, Z. Xia, M. Luan, L. Wu, G. Wang, S. Zhang, Combined TIM-3 blockade and CD137 activation affords the long-term protection in a murine model of ovarian cancer, J. Transl. Med. 11 (2013) 215.

[187] M.G. Baratta, J. Liu, Y. Zwang, A. Schinzel, R. Drapkin, W. Hahn, D.M. Livingston, In tumor screening for novel targets in papillary serous ovarian cancer, in: Advances in Ovarian Cancer Research: From Concept to Clinic, American Association for Cancer Research, Miami, FL, 2013.

[188] J.R. Wardell, K.M. Hodgkinson, A.K. Binder, K.A. Seymour, K.S. Korach, B.C. Vanderhyden, R.N. Freiman, Estrogen-responsiveness of the TFIID subunit TAF4B in the normal mouse ovary and in ovarian tumors, Biol. Reprod. 89 (2013) 116.
