
bjh review

# Time now to TORC the TORC? New developments in mTOR pathway inhibition in lymphoid malignancies

Toby A. Eyre,$^{1}$ Graham P. Collins,$^{1}$ Anthony H. Goldstone$^{2}$ and Kate Cwynarski$^{3}$

$^{1}$Department of Haematology, Oxford University Hospitals NHS Trust, Oxford, $^{2}$Department of Haematology, University College Hospital, London, and $^{3}$Department of Haematology, Royal Free Hospital, London, UK

---

## Summary

Since the discovery of rapamycin in Easter Island soil in 1975, more has been learnt about the relevance and importance of the mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) pathway in cell signalling, proliferation and ultimately tumourigenesis. Rapamycin targets the mTORC1 complex alone. Despite initial excitement, rapamycin and its analogues, everolimus and temsirolimus, have displayed limited efficacy in the treatment of lymphoid malignancies. This review highlights the important and well-described aspects of the critical phosphatidylinositol-4,5-bisphosphate 3-kinase (PI3K)/AKT/mTOR pathway and discusses the mechanisms of action of rapamycin, its clinical efficacy in lymphoid malignancies, and the mechanisms of resistance. Renewed interest in targeting the pathway has evolved through the discovery of mTORC2, a protein complex associated with a key mechanism of resistance to first generation mTOR inhibitors. As such, novel dual inhibitors of mTORC1 and mTORC2 have been developed, along with other dual inhibitors of the mTOR pathway. The evolution in the development of dual inhibitors is described herein, along with the burgeoning *in vitro*, pre-clinical data and the early phase clinical data available. Although historically mTOR inhibitors have been used extensively in haematopoietic and solid organ transplant prophylaxis, this review will focus on developments of their use in lymphoid malignancies.

Keywords: mTOR, AZD2014, AZD8055, mTORC1/2, rapamycin.

Major advances in the understanding of the biology of haematological malignancies have resulted in novel therapies in recent years. Specific genetic mutations associated with haematological disorders have become targets for therapy with encouraging clinical responses. The incidence of non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL) is increasing and it is the fifth most common type of cancer in the UK and United States. Despite the advent of new immunotherapeutics, lymphoid disease still results in over 27 000 annual deaths in the US (Jemal *et al.*, 2010). Novel, well-tolerated and effective anti-tumour agents are needed. Dysregulation of signalling pathways involved in cell proliferation, cell-cycle, DNA damage responses and protein synthesis are increasingly identified in haematological malignancies and have become biological targets. The challenge for the haemato-oncologist is identifying the optimal treatment with the intent of cure or prolongation of survival with minimal toxicity.

Rapamycin and its analogues (rapalogs) have traditionally been used as immunosuppression post-solid organ transplant (SOT; Webster *et al.*, 2006) and as graft-versus-host-disease (GVHD) prophylaxis post-haematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT; Alyea *et al.*, 2008; Nasu *et al.*, 2014). First generation mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) inhibitors have had limited success in treating haematological cancer. An improved recent understanding of the mTOR complex 2 (mTORC2) has provided the opportunity to develop highly selective, small molecule inhibitors with the potential to overcome the resistance seen with rapamycin. This review will not concentrate on HSCT, GVHD or SOT, but on developments in understanding of the mTOR pathway and its role in targeted therapy for lymphoid malignancies.

## What is mTOR?

Mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) is a ubiquitously expressed serine-threonine protein kinase that belongs to the phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K)-related kinase family (Schmelze & Hall, 2000; Hay & Sonenberg, 2004). The phosphatidylinositol-4,5-bisphosphate 3-kinase (PI3K)/AKT/mTOR pathway is a ‘critical switch’, constituting the core of a highly conserved evolutionarily pathway that adjusts protein synthesis to regulate cell growth and proliferation by integrating signals arising from growth factors, hormones, nutrients and energy metabolism (Fingar & Blenis, 2004). ATP levels influence mTOR activity, consistent with protein translation being a major consumer of cellular energy. mTOR plays a pivotal role in the dysregulation of cell survival and proliferation underlying many malignancies. Malignant

---

Correspondence: Kate Cwynarski, Department of Haematology, Royal Free Hospital, London NW3 2QG, UK.  
E-mail: kate.cwynarski@nhs.net

First published online 19 May 2014  
doi: 10.1111/bjh.12945

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd  
British Journal of Haematology, 2014, **166**, 336–351

transformation is associated with increased mTORC1 signaling, a process required to support increased cell cycling and metabolic demands (Mohi *et al.*, 2004).

### mTOR activation

The exact mechanisms underlying mTOR activation in haematopoietic cells continue to be elucidated. At least two distinct activating signals have been identified in epithelial cells. The first is provided by cell membrane receptors for growth factors such as insulin, insulin-like growth factor (IGF) and platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF) and the second is generated by nutrients. IGF and other tyrosine kinase-growth factor receptors activate PI3K/AKT (Scheid & Woodgett, 2001; Cantley, 2002) and the mitogen-induced extracellular kinase MEK/ERK (Shahbazian *et al.*, 2006) pathways. PI3K, a lipid kinase, is recruited to the cell membrane upon growth factor receptor activation and subsequently converts phosphoinositides to 3′-phosphorylated phosphoinositide. This recruits and activates AKT at the cell membrane. mTORC1 activation by AKT occurs, phosphorylating and inhibiting the activity of the tuberous sclerosis complex negative regulatory proteins; TSC1 and TSC2. The TSC1/TSC2 complex inhibits mTORC1 through inactivating the G-protein RHEB; a positive mTOR activator. Thus PI3K and AKT activation leads TSC1/TSC2 complex deactivation, an increase in RHEB-GTP, and consequent mTOR activation.

### mTORC1

In mammals, the mTOR tertiary structure provides the binding sites for multiple proteins that transiently or constitutively interact, thus regulating its activity and subcellular localization. The combination of protein partners define the two independent multi-protein complexes (mTORC1 and mTORC2), with different regulatory activities (Bracho-Valdés *et al.*, 2011). In particular, mTOR associates with one of two proteins called raptor and rictor to form the biochemically distinct mTORC1 and mTORC2 complexes respectively (Kim *et al.*, 2002; Sarbassov *et al.*, 2004).

A key function of mTORC1 is in the phosphorylation of the downstream effectors p70S6 kinase (p70S6K) and eukaryotic initiation factor 4E (eIF4E) binding protein 1 (4E-BP1) in response to nutrient availability and growth factors. Phosphorylation and activation of p70S6K increases translation and regulation of many aspects of cell growth by inhibiting autophagy and facilitating lipid and mitochondrial biogenesis (Loewith *et al.*, 2002; Sparks & Guertin, 2010). p70S6K phosphorylates and activates S6 protein of the 40S ribosomal subunit (S6RP) at several sites including serines 235/236 and 240/244, (Holz *et al.*, 2005; Shahbazian *et al.*, 2006) resulting in ribosome biosynthesis (see Fig 1).

mTORC1 phosphorylation of 4E-BP1 releases its inhibitory effect on eIF4E, promoting cap-dependent mRNA translation (Fingar & Blenis, 2004; Richardson *et al.*, 2004). eIF4E drives the translation of 5′cap mRNAs of several oncogenic proteins such as MYC, VEGFA and cyclin D1 (CCND1; Rosenwald *et al.*, 1995; Thomas, 2006). Other members (4E-BP2 and 4E-BP3) of the 4E-BP family are similarly targets of mTOR kinase activity.

mTORC1 is functionally inactivated by the immunosuppressive macrolide rapamycin. This inhibits 4E-BP phosphorylation, increases the interaction between eIF4E and 4E-BP, and consequently inhibits cap-dependent translation (Gingras *et al.*, 1999; Grolleau *et al.*, 2002). Over the last decade rapalogs have shown some activity in lymphoid malignancies (Witzig & Gupta, 2010).

### mTORC2

The recent discovery of mTORC2 unravelled its key role in driving rapamycin resistance. mTORC2 is generally considered to be unaffected by rapamycin and produces resistance at least partly via its direct phosphorylation of AKT on Ser473, a critical regulatory site that stimulates maximal activity of this important survival kinase (Sarbassov *et al.*, 2005; O’Reilly *et al.*, 2006). As the main downstream effector of the insulin/PIK3 pathway, AKT modulates downstream substrates involved in cell proliferation, migration, angiogenesis, metabolism and glucose uptake (Manning & Cantley, 2007).

mTORC2 is essential for transformation of cancer cells but appears less important in normal cells (Sparks & Guertin, 2010). Defining downstream regulatory pathways of mTORC2 has proven more challenging given its insensitivity to rapamycin *in vitro*. mTORC2 function is not fully elucidated, although when activated by PI3K (Sarbassov *et al.*, 2004, 2005), it phosphorylates the AGC kinases, AKT, downstream SGK and protein kinase C (PKC), culminating in the control of cell survival and metabolic regulation. mTORC2 promotes cell migration via interaction with P-Rex1, a Rac-specific guanine nucleotide exchange factor, and cell survival via Rho GTPases activation (Jacinto *et al.*, 2004).

Although there is some *in vivo* data to suggest that prolonged rapamycin disrupts mTORC2 assembly (Sarbassov *et al.*, 2006) and reduces mTORC2 levels, recent data describes its key role in inducing rapamycin resistance. Some data suggests S6K1 and TSC1/2 negatively and positively regulate mTORC2, respectively, indicating that considerable feedback loops and cross-interactions between mTORC1 and mTORC2 occur. This may have important therapeutic implications (Huang *et al.*, 2008, 2009).

Inhibition of mTORC1 alone has little effect on apoptosis in many cells, in contrast to marked apoptosis described with PI3K/AKT inhibition (Peponi *et al.*, 2006; Dal Col *et al.*, 2008; Marzec *et al.*, 2008). Simultaneous inhibition of mTORC1 and either PI3K, MEK/ERK or mTORC2 significantly enhances apoptosis (Marzec *et al.*, 2011; Gupta *et al.*, 2012).

Review

Nutrient availability
- Amino acids
- Energy

Stress, hypoxia, DNA damage

Rituximab

IGF/PDGF

mTOR and PI3K dual-specificity inhibitors

Growth factor receptor

CD20

GRB2

IRS

PIP2

PI3K

SOS

Ras

RKIP

NF1

PTEN

PIP3

PDK1

Rho GTPase

SGK1

Cell survival

FAK

PKCa

Rho

Cytoskeleton organisation

mLST8
mTOR
RICTOR
SIN1
mTORC2

Gene transcription

Selective mTORC1/2 inhibitors
mTOR and PI3K dual-specificity inhibitors
Rapalogs (Rapamycin and its analogues)

ERK

MEK

Akt

β-catenin

CREB

TSC2
TSC1

REDD1

AMPK

Rheb

p90RSK

Grb10

4E-BP1

S6K1

Cell proliferation and differentiation

MNK1/2

eIF4E

mRNA translation

MYC

CCND1

VEGFA

KEY:
- → Activates
- — Inhibits
- → P Activates through phosphorylation
- — P Inhibits through phosphorylation

Fig 1. mTOR pathway and the sites of novel inhibitors.

Other regulatory pathways

DEPTOR, a protein whose expression is negatively regulated by mTORC1 and mTORC2, has been shown to interact with mTOR (Peterson et al., 2009). DEPTOR overexpression suppresses S6K1 but, by relieving feedback inhibition from mTORC1 to PI3K signalling, activates AKT. Activation of mTORC1 and mTORC2, and associated low DEPTOR expression is observed in many cancers. In contrast, paradoxical DEPTOR overexpression in a subset of myeloma patients has been reported recently. It is thought that DEPTOR inhibits the negative feedback via S6K1 resulting in its overactivity (Peterson et al., 2009).

A well-described negative feedback mechanism occurs via S6K1 and may contribute to rapamycin resistance. When activated by loss of DEPTOR, S6K1 directly phosphorylates insulin receptor substrate 1 (IRS-1) resulting in its degradation (Aguirre et al., 2002). Blocking mTORC1 may increase DEPTOR expression, suppress S6K1 and lead to a continued growth signal via IRS-1. PDGF-receptor and ERK/MAPK pathways are also important targets of S6K1-mediated negative feedback and provide other resistance pathways (Zhang et al., 2007; Carracedo et al., 2008; Efeyan & Sabatini, 2010).

mTOR Activation in haematopoietic cells and haematological malignancies

Both PI3K/AKT and MEK/ERK pathways drive mTORC1 activation in haematopoietic cells but their relative contribution

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
British Journal of Haematology, 2014, **166**, 336–351

differs depending on the primary stimulus or cell type (Marzec *et al.*, 2008). mTOR activation can also be mediated by mechanisms independent of the PI3K/AKT signalling pathway in transformed B-cells (Wlodarski *et al.*, 2005). The Syk kinase pathway has been implicated in mTOR activation in follicular lymphoma (Leseux *et al.*, 2006). Other implicated mTORC1 stimuli in lymphoid cells include CD40 ligand (Sakata *et al.*, 1999), ALK (Marzec *et al.*, 2007) and NOTCH (Chan *et al.*, 2007). mTOR activation in cutaneous T-cell lymphoma (CTCL) cell lines is nutrient-dependent and growth factor and cytokine-independent (Marzec *et al.*, 2008). Constitutional PI3K/AKT activation is well described in haematological malignancies (McCubrey *et al.*, 2008) through activation of tyrosine kinases, an acquired deficiency in phosphoinositide phosphatase, PTEN, or its inactivating phosphorylation (Dal Col *et al.*, 2008).

### Physiological and pharmacological mTOR inhibition

Physiological stresses, such as DNA damage, nutrient withdrawal and depletion of cellular energy and hypoxia impair mTOR signalling. The effect of nutrient depletion on mTOR activity is independent of PI3K/AKT in transformed B-cells (Wlodarski *et al.*, 2005).

Rapamycin is a specific mTORC1 inhibitor. Originally discovered as ‘streptomycete’ isolated from Easter Island soil in 1975, it was initially found to inhibit Candida albicans growth (Vézina *et al.*, 1975). It exerts its biological effect by binding to the cytoplasmic immunophilin FK506-binding protein-12 (FKBP-12). Rapamycin-FKBP12 is not an enzymatic kinase/ATP-binding domain inhibitor, but allosterically inhibits mTOR. The complex subsequently binds to mTORC1, selectively disrupting mTORC1 assembly (Easton & Houghton, 2006; Chiang & Abraham, 2007). This limits its kinase activity and abrogates subsequent downstream signalling to S6K and 4E-BP. Water-soluble rapalogs were developed to improve pharmacokinetics and oral bioavailability. All are highly specific mTORC1 inhibitors. Although mTORC1 inhibition was expected to cause substantial cell death, the inhibition of negative feedback loops and lack of mTORC2 inhibition have proven to be key limitations (Sengupta *et al.*, 2010; Hsu *et al.*, 2011).

### Clinical experience using mTORC1 inhibitors in lymphoid malignancy

#### Mantle cell lymphoma

This aggressive lymphoma accounts for 5–10% of B-cell NHLs and remains incurable with standard chemotherapy. Although rituximab maintenance in older patients (Kluin-Nelemans *et al.*, 2012) and cytarabine-based induction (Romaguera *et al.*, 2005; Geisler *et al.*, 2008) followed by autologous stem cell transplantation (ASCT) in first complete remission improve initial disease control, there remains an unmet need for novel treatments.

Mantle cell lymphoma (MCL) is characterized by *t*(11;14) (*q*13;*q*32) which juxtaposes *CCND1* with the immunoglobulin heavy chain (*IGHV*) gene. This places *CCND1* under the transcriptional control of *IGHV* enhancers with a resultant *CCND1* overexpression (Lukas *et al.*, 1994). *CCND1* is a member of the G<sub>1</sub> cyclin family, facilitating progression thought the G<sub>1</sub> checkpoint and a premature transition into the S-phase. Nuclear retention of *CCND1* is oncogenic *in vivo* (Gladden *et al.*, 2006).

Given the critical role of *CCND1* in MCL pathogenesis, interest developed in targeting upstream drivers of *CCND1* expression (Hipp *et al.*, 2005). *In vitro* studies using well-characterized MCL cell lines and tumours from untreated patients suggest that the PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway is constitutively activated and may contribute to cell-cycle progression, inhibition of apoptosis and tumour cell survival (Wang *et al.*, 1999; Peponi *et al.*, 2006; Rudelius *et al.*, 2006; Dal Col *et al.*, 2008). eIF4E regulates *CCND1* expression at transcriptional and post-transcriptional levels and is overexpressed in MCL. Inhibition of eIF4E expression *in vitro* significantly reduces MCL cell viability and cell-cycle S-phase, decreases *CCND1* levels and increases apoptosis (Peponi *et al.*, 2006). The effects of mTOR on MCL cell-cycle progression and apoptosis inhibition are, at least in part, mediated by eIF4E. Additionally the TP53 pathway, an inhibitor of mTOR activity involving the TSC1/TSC2 complex, is deregulated in a subset of MCL (Feng *et al.*, 2005).

Rapamycin and its analogues have a dose-dependent *in vitro* anti-proliferative activity, by inhibiting mTOR and inducing G<sub>0</sub>/G<sub>1</sub> cell-cycle arrest, in MCL cell lines (Hipp *et al.*, 2005; Haritunians *et al.*, 2007; Yazbeck *et al.*, 2008). Although apoptosis is generally unaffected, autophagy can be induced, but the effects are cytostatic rather than cytotoxic (Yazbeck *et al.*, 2008). However combination drug studies have revealed synergistic cytotoxicity with rapalogs and agents such as doxorubicin, vincristine, vorinostat and paclitaxel (Hipp *et al.*, 2005; Haritunians *et al.*, 2007; Yazbeck *et al.*, 2008).

Although the cytotoxic effects of rapalogs are not well described in short-term culture (≤96 h) *in vitro*, it is possible that cell death can be achieved *in vivo* through more prolonged drug exposure via sustained autophagy. Rapalogs may indirectly kill tumour cells *in vivo* by inhibiting angiogenesis (Klos *et al.*, 2006).

Based on this *in vitro* data and the hypothesis that rapalogs inhibit *CCND1* mRNA transcription, two phase II studies investigated temsirolimus in heavily pre-treated relapsed, refractory MCL. Overall response rates (ORR) of 38% and 41% were noted using 250 mg and 25 mg weekly regimens, respectively (Witzig *et al.*, 2005; Ansell *et al.*, 2008). Response durations were limited. The 250 mg weekly regimen led to a median response duration of 6·9 months and a median progression-free survival (PFS) of 6·5 months. The 25 mg weekly regimen led to a median PFS of 5·5 months.

Review

250 mg weekly regimen caused greater myelosuppression, with equivalent responses.

A subsequent multicentre phase III study (Hess *et al.*, 2009) led to US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approval of temsirolimus in relapsed, refractory MCL. This study enrolled 162 patients with relapsed or refractory MCL (2–7 prior therapies). Temsirolimus was continued until progression, death, or unacceptable toxicity. Patients were randomized to: (1) temsirolimus 175 mg 3-weekly followed by 75 mg weekly; (2) temsirolimus 175 mg 3-weekly followed by 25 mg weekly; or (3) single agent investigator's choice. At least 70% of the intended doses were administered. Thrombocytopenia was the most common adverse event (AE) causing discontinuation, dose delays or dose reductions. Grade 3–4 anaemia, neutropenia and asthenia were also observed with temsirolimus. A highly disappointing 22% ORR (predominantly partial responses [PR]) was observed in the 175 mg/75 mg cohort, although it was significantly higher than observed (2%) with ‘investigator’s choice’ (*P* = 0·0019). The median PFS was 4·8 months, 3·4 months and 1·9 months. The 175/75 mg group had a significantly longer PFS than those treated with investigator’s choice (*P* = 0·0009). All responses were short-lived. The median overall survival (OS) was 13·6 months compared to 9·7 months with ‘investigator’s choice’. The authors believed these inferior responses in comparison with the phase II data were due to selection of a more heavily pre-treated cohort, although a more recent prospective phase II study investigating everolimus in relapsed, refractory MCL found a disappointing ORR of 20% (95% confidence interval [CI]: 8–37) with a short PFS of 5·5 months (Renner *et al.*, 2012).

These results suggest limited efficacy of rapalogs in MCL, albeit in the relapsed, refractory setting. These results have led to further pre-clinical and clinical studies to investigate whether novel dual inhibition of the PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway can improve responses. Whether outcomes can be improved by safely combining rapalogs with other agents is the subject of ongoing clinical trials. A summary of clinical trials that have investigated TORC1 inhibitors in MCL and other lymphoid malignancies is provided in Table I.

### Rituximab and mTOR Inhibition in MCL

The mechanism of action of rituximab is perhaps more complex than first assumed. In addition to the induction of apoptosis (Shan *et al.*, 2000), complement-dependent (Golay *et al.*, 2000) and antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity (Würfllein *et al.*, 1998), rituximab inhibits the phosphorylation of Raf-1, ERK1/2 and MEK1/2 via the upregulation of Raf-1 kinase inhibitory protein (RKIP; Jazirehi *et al.*, 2004). This pre-clinical data, together with clinical evidence of efficacy (Ghielmini *et al.*, 2000), provide a good rationale for its use in combination with mTOR inhibitors in MCL and other B-cell NHL (Barnes *et al.*, 2013; Xu *et al.*, 2013).

A recent phase II study (Ansell *et al.*, 2011) of 71 relapsed MCL patients enrolled previously rituximab-sensitive and rituximab-refractory patients. Temsirolimus 25 mg/week was combined with rituximab 375 mg/m² (weekly for 4 weeks and then 4-weekly). Those responding after six cycles continued to 12 cycles. The ORR was 59% (19% complete response [CR], 41% PR). The ORR was 63% for previously rituximab-sensitive patients, and encouragingly, 52% in rituximab-refractory patients. This data suggests combination therapy targeting the mTOR pathway can overcome previous resistant disease. Interestingly, p4EBP1 expression in pretreatment biopsies correlated with time to progression.

Little clinical work has examined markers of mTOR activation prior to treatment in large cohorts of lymphoma patients. More needs to be done to define which lymphoma subtypes express markers of mTOR activation, and which specific expression predicts response. Such biomarkers (O’Reilly & McSheehy, 2010) are important to investigate in future trials to identify those most likely to benefit from combination therapy.

#### mTOR Inhibition in Aggressive NHL, Including Diffuse Large B-Cell Lymphoma

There is persuasive pre-clinical and clinical evidence that the mTOR pathway is important in the tumour biology of aggressive NHL. eIF4E overexpression in NHL tissues appears to have some correlation with biological aggressiveness (Wang *et al.*, 1999). Pre-clinical models show that mTOR inhibition results in reduced phosphorylation of p70S6K and 4E-BP1 in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) cells cultured in the presence of everolimus. This resulted in inhibited proliferation and induced G₁ arrest in Epstein-Barr virus-negative DLBCL cell lines *in vitro* (Wanner *et al.*, 2006).

Clinical evidence that the mTOR pathway is important in DLBCL pathogenesis includes two recent phase II trials. In the first trial, 77 ‘aggressive’ NHLs received everolimus in the relapsed, refractory setting (Witzig *et al.*, 2011). ORR was similar in MCL, follicular lymphoma (FL) and DLBCL patients (32%, 38% and 30% respectively), demonstrating some activity. The University of Chicago group (Smith *et al.*, 2010), reported an ORR of 28·1% (CR 12·5%) in a relapsed, refractory DLBCL subpopulation, with median PFS of 2·6 months and OS of 7·2 months. Everolimus attenuated S6RP phosphorylation in a dose-dependent manner in MCL and DLBCL cell lines. Everolimus decreased p4E-BP1 in a dose-dependent manner in MCL lines but not DLBCL cells. Cell proliferation was inhibited, but minimal apoptosis was observed.

This data provides a proof of principle, although responses were modest and resistant was frequent. The same group investigated mTOR inhibitor resistance pathways in DLBCL, and demonstrated that when DLBCL cells are treated with rapamycin, cells activate AKT through mTORC2 signalling;

| Lymphoid disease | Agent used | Trial design | Clinical response | Toxicities | References |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Relapsed, refractory MCL | Temsirolimus iv 250 mg weekly | Prospective phase II | ORR 38% (13 of 34 patients; 90% CI, 24–54%), median PFS 6.5 months | Greater myelosuppression (71% grade 3 and 11%) | Witzig et al (2005) |
| Temsirolimus iv 25 mg weekly | Prospective phase II | ORR 41% (11 of 27 patients; 90% CI, 22–61%), median PFS 6 months | grade 4) vs. 25 mg dose | Ansell et al (2008) |
| Everolimus 10 mg po daily | Phase II: subgroup | ORR 32% (6 of 19 patients; 95% CI: 13–57) in subgroup |  | Witzig et al (2011) |
| Everolimus 10 mg po daily | Prospective phase II | ORR 20% (7 of 35 patients; 95% CI: 8–37), median PFS 5.5 months |  | Renner et al (2012) |
| Temsirolimus 175 mg | 162 patients | multicentre phase III study | Median PFS 4–8 months vs. 3.4 months with 'investigator's choice' (P = 0.0019). |  | Hess et al (2009) |
| iv 3 weekly followed by 75 mg |  |  | vs. 1.9 months (P = 0.0009). Median OS 9.7 months (investigator's choice) |  |  |
| iv weekly; vs. temsirolimus 175 mg |  |  |  |  |  |
| iv weekly; vs. single agent |  |  |  |  |  |
| investigator's choice |  |  |  |  |  |
| Temsirolimus 25 mg iv weekly | Phase II multicentre, prospective study | Phase II: subgroup | ORR 59% (41 of 69 patients; 19% CR, 41% PR), ORR 63% (30 of 48) for median OS 7.2 months in subgroup previously rituximab-sensitive; ORR 52% in rituximab-refractory | 4 cases of possible drug-induced pneumonia across all subgroups | Ansell et al (2011) |
| combined with rituximab iv 375 mg/m² (weekly for 4 weeks, then 4 weekly) |  |  |  |  | Witzig et al (2011) |
| Everolimus 10 mg po daily | Everolimus 25 mg iv weekly | Phase II: subgroup | ORR 30% (14 of 47 patients; 95% CI 17–45) in subgroup |  |  |
| Relapsed, refractory DLBCL | Everolimus 10 mg/d with rituximab 375 mg/m² iv weekly (4 weeks); then every 4 weeks | Prospective phase II | ORR 28.1%, median PFS 2.6 months and ORR 38% (9 of 24 patients; 90% CI: 21–56%), PFS 2.9 months (90% CI 1.8–3.8), OS 37% at 12 months ORR 70% (included 28% 'minimal responses'); other 42% PR. Estimated PFS at 12 months 62%; median PFS not reached | 75% rituximab-refractory at enrolment. Pulmonary toxicity 10% (6% grade 3) | Barnes et al (2013) Smith et al (2010) Ghorial et al (2010) |
| Relapsed, refractory WM | Everolimus 10 mg po daily | Prospective phase II study | ORR 18% (4 of 22 patients; 95% CI 5–40), median PFS 5.1 months |  | Zent et al (2010) |
| Relapsed, refractory HL | Everolimus 10 mg po daily | Phase II study, 19 patients | ORR 47% (9 of 19 patients; 95% CI 24–71), median PFS 7.2 months | Grade 3–4 pulmonary toxicity in 4 of 19 patients | Johnston et al (2010) |

Review

providing an escape mechanism (Gupta *et al.*, 2009). A variety of methods to attempt to overcome rapamycin resistance have been investigated, with some promising results.

### Rituximab and mTOR inhibition in DLBCL

Wanner *et al.* (2006) demonstrated that everolimus induced G1-phase arrest in DLBCL cell lines and augmented cytotoxicity induced by rituximab. Moreover, a recent study showed that in DLBCL patients with PI3K/AKT/mTOR activation, outcomes were considerably inferior if rituximab was not added to CHOP (cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, prednisone; Xu *et al.*, 2013). The group found that, when rituximab was combined with rapamycin in DLBCL cell lines from these patients, there was synergistic *in vitro* down-regulation of PI3K/AKT/mTOR signalling by Western blot analysis. Rituximab was able to down-regulate PI3K/AKT/mTOR activation that had otherwise correlated with a more aggressive clinical course with poor treatment response.

A recent phase II study of everolimus combined with rituximab examined the efficacy and tolerability in relapsed/refractory DLBCL ineligible for or relapsing after ASCT. 75% were considered rituximab-refractory at enrolment. Everolimus 10 mg/d was given with rituximab 375 mg/m² weekly for 4 weeks and then every 4 weeks. 26 patients (24 evaluable) were enrolled and an ORR of 38% [90% CI (21–56%)] with three CRs and six PRs. OS was 37% at 12 months and the regimen was well tolerated. There is an ongoing phase I/II trial in relapsed DLBCL where everolimus will be added to R-DHAP (rituximab, dexamethasone, cytarabine, cisplatin). The ‘STORM’ trial will attempt to assess safety and assess if this combination improves ORR pre-ASCT (Witzens-Harig *et al.*, 2013).

### Direct AKT inhibition in DLBCL

Mechanisms of rapamycin resistance using gene expression profiling (GEP) have recently been investigated. DLBCL cell lines were treated with rapamycin and then, using pathway analysis and connectivity mapping, a GEP was found that correlated clearly with rapamycin response. AKT expression was key to resistance to rapamycin. Two novel AKT inhibitors (Nelfinavir and MK-2206) combined with rapamycin showed synergistic inhibition of DLBCL cell line viability (Petrich *et al.*, 2012).

### Histone deacetylase inhibition and mTOR inhibition in DLBCL

The Mayo group demonstrated that rapamycin inhibited mTORC1 but showed minimal cytotoxicity *in vitro* and resistance was driven via overexpression of mTORC2 with consequent AKT activation via phosphorylation at Ser 473 (Gupta *et al.*, 2009). Cell lines exposed to rapamycin exhibited a dose and time-dependent increase in AKT phosphorylation. In addition, phosphorylation of eIF4E was unexpectedly increased. The mechanism is unclear, but it has been postulated that MEK/ERK and p38 MAPK signalling pathways activate eIF4E through MNK1-mediated phosphorylation of eIF4E (Mahalingam & Cooper, 2001). The group showed that mTORC2 knockdown inhibited AKT phosphorylation. DLBCL cell lines were then treated with an histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor, LBH589 (LBH), which resulted in dephosphorylation of AKT via gene-specific histone acetylation and subsequent upregulation of protein phosphatase PP1. This was importantly not mediated through regulators upstream of AKT (PI3K). LBH589 also prevented eIF4E activation *in vitro*. Downstream cell-cycle regulatory protein expression was reduced with this combination. These findings led to synergistic *in vitro* DLBCL cell death when rapamycin and LBH589 were combined, with only nanomolar doses required for potent synergistic DLBCL cytotoxicity.

This hypothesis has been further strengthened by results combining rapamycin and an HDAC inhibitor in Burkitt lymphoma cell lines (Dong *et al.*, 2013). Valproic acid, an HDAC1 inhibitor, displayed synergy with temsirolimus. The combination inhibited mTOR signalling and blocked rapamycin-induced AKT activation.

### mTOR inhibition in T cell lymphomas

The mTOR pathway is activated in ALK-positive anaplastic large cell lymphoma (ALCL) cell lines and tumours (Vega *et al.*, 2006; Marzec *et al.*, 2007). mTOR activation is triggered directly by nucleophosmin (NPM1)/ALK tyrosine kinase and the MEK/ERK pathway is activated relatively more than the PI3K/AKT pathway (Marzec *et al.*, 2007). Rapamycin induces cell-cycle arrest and apoptosis in ALK-positive ALCL cells *in vitro* (Jundt *et al.*, 2005; Vega *et al.*, 2006). Decreased phosphorylation of p70S6K, 4E-BP1, rbS6K and total eIF4E have been observed, consistent with inhibition of mTOR and its feedback loops.

mTORC1 activation has been detected in malignant CD4⁺ T cells derived from patients with cutaneous T-cell lymphoma (CTCL; Marzec *et al.*, 2008) with the highest percentage of positive cells present in cases with large cell transformation. mTORC1 activation was nutrient-dependent and transduced preferentially through the PI3K/AKT pathway. *In vitro* mTORC1 inhibition by rapamycin in CTCL induced cytostatic rather than cytotoxic effects, suggesting that its use as a single agent *in vivo* may be limited.

MNK1 (MAPK-interacting Ser/Thr Kinase, also termed MKNK1) and MNK2 (MKNK2) kinases phosphorylate and augment eIF4E activity (Marzec *et al.*, 2011). Simultaneous, combined inhibition of eIF4E with rapamycin and a direct MNK inhibitor provided synergistic and marked suppression of CTCL proliferation. Other than case reports of rapamycin use in CTCL (Chumsri *et al.*, 2008), there is no robust clinical efficacy data to date.
$mTOR$ inhibition in Hodgkin lymphoma

The PI3K/AKT/mTOR/4EBP1 pathway is constitutively activated in Hodgkin cells (Dutton *et al.*, 2005; Márk *et al.*, 2013). Pre-clinical data suggested that everolimus down-regulates the isoform of CCAAT transcription factor enhancer binding protein B, which, in turn, inhibits nuclear factor (NF)-κB survival signalling (Jundt *et al.*, 2005). Temsirolimus induces cell-cycle arrest and autophagy in Hodgkin lymphoma (HL) cell lines, suggesting some activity (Georgakis *et al.*, 2006).

A phase II study (Johnston *et al.*, 2010) treated 19 patients with everolimus 10 mg/d with response assessment after two and six cycles. 84% of patients had relapsed post-ASCT. The ORR was 47% with a median time to progression of 7·2 months. Grade 3 or 4 pulmonary toxicity was noted in 4 of 19 patients, an AE associated with everolimus (Ellard *et al.*, 2009) and temsirolimus (Hess *et al.*, 2009). There are no other published studies in HL using rapalogs or combination PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway inhibitors.

$mTOR$ inhibition in Chronic lymphocytic lymphoma

Attempts to target the AKT/mTOR element of the pathway have been unsuccessful in comparison to the PI3K inhibitor idelalisib (Furman *et al.*, 2014). Rapamycin induces apoptosis in chronic lymphocytic lymphoma (CLL) cells *in vitro* (Alskog *et al.*, 2008), although the required concentration was higher than possible *in vivo*. Subsequent clinical responses using everolimus 5 mg/d were disappointing. A pilot study was halted early after safety concerns. Four patients developed infectious complications, although a definitive causal relationship was difficult to prove in this extensively pre-treated cohort. Only a single PR was seen (Decker *et al.*, 2009). A subsequent phase II study (Zent *et al.*, 2010) treated 22 relapsed, refractory CLL patients with single-agent everolimus 10 mg/d. Only 18% achieved a PR and the median PFS was only 5·1 months. Malignant cells were noted to mobilize into the peripheral blood in 36%, a phenomenon now well described with idelalisib. Given the success of other novel small molecules targeting B-cell receptor signalling (Byrd *et al.*, 2013; Furman *et al.*, 2014) it seems unlikely that mTOR inhibition will develop a niche in CLL. No early phase trials utilizing combination mTOR pathway inhibition have been published.

$mTOR$ inhibition in Waldenström’s macroglobulinaemia

The AKT pathway plays an important role in cell proliferation and survival in Waldenström’s macroglobulinaemia (WM; Leleu *et al.*, 2007). WM cell lines from the bone marrow of a small number of patients displayed an enhanced PI3K/AKT signalling cascade and, by inhibiting AKT by triciribine and by AKT knockdown, WM cell apoptosis occurs. The novel AKT inhibitor perifosine can inhibit WM cell growth and signalling *in vitro* and *in vivo* in murine models (Leleu *et al*., 2007). Perifosine also blocked WM cell adhesion and migration *in vitro* and *in vivo* in the bone marrow microenvironment. Interestingly, the inhibition of AKT by perifosine resulted in ERK/MAPK pathway activation, although this could be further blocked by adding the ERK inhibitor U0126.

The same group investigated everolimus in a phase II ‘CONSORT’ study of 50 patients with relapsed, refractory WM (Ghobrial *et al.*, 2010). Encouragingly, the ORR was 70%, although this included 28% ‘minimal responses’, with the other 42% being PRs. Tumour responses were relatively durable. The estimated PFS at 12 months was 62% as the median PFS had not been reached. This single agent activity was encouraging although, again, pulmonary toxicity was noted in 10% (6% grade 3).

The group subsequently investigated dual inhibition of the PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway *in vitro* using the novel dual PI3K and mTOR inhibitor NVP-BEZ235 (Roccaro *et al.*, 2010). NVP-BEZ235 inhibited mTORC1/2 and blocked AKT phosphorylation. This resulted in inhibition of downstream phosphorylation of p70S6 and 4E-BP1 in a more potent manner than either LY-294002, a specific PI3K inhibitor, rapamycin, or indeed those two combined. Interestingly, the Raf-MEK-MAPK pathway was activated when NVP-BEZ235 was used, and further synergic inhibition of cell growth was seen when a specific MEK inhibitor was added to NVP-BEZ235. Early phase clinical trials are awaited using these novel agents.

### Resistance mechanisms

Overall, the clinical data discussed with single agent mTORC1 inhibitors is disappointing. The addition of rituximab improves responses although most are short-lived. Patients had relapsed, refractory disease and are likely to have evolved multiple resistance mechanisms. None of the single-agent clinical studies discussed measured any of these potential mechanisms. Multiple complex resistance mechanisms to mTORC1 inhibitors have been described in both solid tumours and haematological malignancy. For example; relative under-expression of mTOR proteins can alter sensitivity to rapamycin (Mallya *et al.*, 2014), PIM kinase overexpression leads to inhibition of apoptosis and produces resistance to rapamycin (Swords *et al.*, 2011), MNK mediates phosphorylation of IF4E (Ser209) that can bypass mTORC1/2 inhibition via ERK/MEK/MNK activation (Wang *et al.*, 2007), and mTORC2 directly phosphorylates and activates AKT (Ser473; O’Reilly *et al.*, 2006).

### Activation of the $mTOR$ pathway and biomarkers of response

Despite the large collaborative studies described, only two studies have evaluated the clinical use of biomarkers to gain some understanding of mechanism of potential sensitive and/or resistance in mTOR pathway inhibition *in vivo*. Many

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
British Journal of Haematology, 2014, **166**, 336–351
Review

studies have utilized *in vitro* data and applied this to clinical trials without biomarker studies. Ansell *et al* (2011) undertook immunohistochemical analysis on pre-treatment biopsies to measure mTOR signalling protein expression (raptor, rictor, phospho-4EBP1, phospho-AKT, and p70S6K). Their exploratory analysis found that higher p-4EBP1 expression may be more resistant to TORC1 inhibition. Low phospho-4EBP1 expression had a median time to progression of 10 months versus 5·2 months if expression was high (*P* = 0·02). Barnes *et al* (2013) investigated whether DLBCL subtype (germinal centre B-cell [GCB] versus non-GCB) or p-70S6 kinase (immunohistochemistry on formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissue), as a biomarker of mTOR activity, influences response to everolimus combined with rituximab. This limited biomarker analysis showed no clear response correlation with B-cell origin in the 20 cases available, and no correlation between response and p-70S6k activity in 13 patients. It is critical that future clinical trials are designed such that protein expression of the PI3K/AKT/mTORC1/2 pathway is assessed to discover the relative expression in different lymphoid (and non-lymphoid) diseases and whether markers predict treatment sensitivity or resistance.

### Side effects of Rapamycin and analogues

Clinical trials and experience outside of the malignant setting have provided good data on the AE profile of rapalogs, which produce a number of class-specific side effects. Hypertension, oedema and hyperlipidaemia are recognized along with dose-dependent cytopenias. Perhaps most concerningly, there is a relatively high rate of pulmonary toxicity. Grade 3–4 pulmonary toxicity was noted in 4 of 19 patients in the HL phase II study (Johnston *et al*, 2010), in the CONSORT study (Ghobrial *et al*, 2010), with everolimus in a phase II breast cancer trial (Ellard *et al*, 2009), and in 8% with everolimus in the phase III trial in metastatic renal cell carcinoma (Motzer *et al*, 2008). Monitoring for these potential AEs will be essential when novel dual inhibitors are used in clinical practice.

### Second Generation mTOR inhibitors: mTORC1 and mTORC2 inhibition

The discovery that mTORC2 directly phosphorylates AKT has added important new insight into the role of mTORC2 in lymphoid malignancies and solid tumours when mTORC1 alone is targeted with rapamycin. An evolving collection of pre-clinical data has shown that dual inhibition of mTORC1/2 may overcome rapamycin resistance. Various novel inhibitors target mTORC1, mTORC2 and other important elements of the PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway in combination. A number of such small molecule inhibitors are being tested *in vitro*. Three of the well-studied inhibitors are OSI-027, AZD8055 and AZD2014 and are discussed further below.

Other examples are summarized in Table II, although this table is not completely exhaustive.

#### OSI-027

OSI-027 is a novel, selective, dual mTORC1/2 inhibitor that inhibits the phosphorylation of mTORC1 and mTORC2 and induces apoptosis and autophagy in chronic myeloid leukaemia cells (Carayol *et al*, 2010). OSI–027 exhibited high selectivity for mTORC1/2 when compared to PI3K subsets and DNA–PK (>100–fold; Bhagwat *et al*, 2011). Dual inhibition of mTORC1/2 is more effective than rapamycin at inhibiting B-cell acute lymphoblastic leukaemia, MCL, marginal zone lymphoma and Sézary syndrome cell line proliferation, inducing *in vitro* apoptosis. OSI-027 also has tumour activity in lymphoma xenograft models (Gupta *et al*, 2012). OSI-027 inhibited both mTORC2-induced phosphorylation of AKT and 4EBP1 phosphorylation on Thr37 and Thr46. AKT inhibition was also shown not to act through bystander inhibition of PI3K, as PDK1-mediated phosphorylation of AKT on Thr308 was retained. It was also shown that BCL2 overexpression, alongside low expression of BCL2 neutralizing proteins BBC3 (PUMA) and BCL2L11 (BIM) within lymphoid cells has the potential to act as a resistance mechanism, and it is postulated that this might explain why FL and CLL cells have been relatively less sensitive to mTOR inhibition.

OSI-027 has potent inhibitory activity in acute myeloid leukaemia (AML) cell lines by blocking mTORC1/2; eliciting more potent anti-leukaemic responses than rapamycin (Altman *et al*, 2011). Pre-clinical data from solid tumours is also encouraging (Li *et al*, 2012; Becker *et al*, 2013). Recently, a phase I trial investigated three schedules of OSI–027 in patients with solid tumours and lymphoma (Tan & Dumez, 2010). OSI–027 was well tolerated in the schedules tested.

#### AZD8055

AZD8055 is a novel, potent, specific ATP-competitive mTORC1/2 dual inhibitor. AZD8055 inhibits phosphorylation of p70S6K, 4E-BP1, AKT and downstream proteins (Chresta *et al*, 2010). AZD8055 has no significant activity against 260 kinases up to 10 μmol/l and has a 50% inhibitory concentration (*IC*~50~) of 0·8 nmol/l *in vivo*. AZD8055 induces autophagy and cell death in cancer cell lines (Sini *et al*, 2010), including impressive *in vivo* and murine model data in AML (Willems *et al*, 2012). AZD8055 showed potent inhibitory activity in multiple xenograft tumour models. This led to two phase I dose-escalation studies in metastatic solid tumours and lymphoma (Asahina *et al*, 2012; Naing *et al*, 2012). 66 patients received AZD8055. The maximum tolerated dose (MTD) was 90 mg bd in both populations. The most frequent AEs were increases in alanine transaminase/aspartate transaminase levels in 20% of cases. Toxicity was reasonable, although no clinical responses were seen.

| Compound         | Pre-clinical data                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      | References                          | Published clinical data |
|-------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------|-------------------------|
| Dual mTORC1/2 inhibitors | MLN0128/JNK128<br>TORC1/2 knock-down led to significant inhibition of myeloma cell line. Dual TORC1/2 inhibition causes significantly more active p-4EBP1 and p-AKT inhibition than rapamycin in MM cell lines<br>MLN0128 suppressed proliferation of B-ALL cell lines and had a cytostatic effect in murine models. | Maiso et al (2011)<br>Janes et al (2013) | Nil to date          |
| WYE-132          | MLN0128 enhanced the efficacy of dasatinib (DA) in Ph+B-ALL cell lines<br>WYE-132 is a specific and potent ATP-competitive mTORC1/2 inhibitor. WYE-132 targets p-AKT/AKT function.<br>WYE-132 results in substantially more potent inhibition of cancer cell growth, protein synthesis and metabolism when compared with rapamycin | Yu et al (2010)                      | Nil to date          |
| PP242            | Greater attenuation of mTORC1 and mTORC2 when compared with rapamycin. PP242 also suppressed chemokine receptor CXCR4 inhibited phosphorylated AKT, S6K, and 4EBP1. PP242 also suppressed chemokine receptor CXCR4 expression in leukaemic and stromal cells | Zeng et al (2012)                    | Nil to date          |
| OSI-027          | PP242 induced ERK activation in MM cell lines, a potential source of resistance<br>OSI-027 Inhibits the phosphorylation of mTORC1 and mTORC2 and induces apoptosis and autophagy in CML cells. More effective than rapamycin at inhibiting B-ALL, MCL, MZL and Sezary syndrome cell line proliferation, inducing in vitro apoptosis | Hoang et al (2012)<br>Carayol et al (2010) | Phase I trial investigated 3 schedules in solid tumours and lymphoma. Well tolerated (Tan & Dumez, 2010). |
| AZD8055          | Tumour activity in lymphoma xenograft models. OSI-027 inhibited mTORC2<br>Potent inhibitory activity in AML cell lines by blocking mTORC1/2. More potent anti-leukaemic responses than rapamycin | Gupta et al (2012)<br>Altman et al (2011) | 2 phase I trials in with metastatic solid tumours and lymphoma. MTD 90 mg bd. Toxicity reasonable. No responses seen (Asahina et al, 2012; Naing et al, 2012). |
| AZD2014          | AZD8055 inhibits phosphorylation of p70S6K, 4E-BP1, AKT and downstream proteins with very specific mTORC1/2 activity<br>AZD8055 induces autophagy and cell death in cancer cell lines including impressive in vivo and murine model data in AML<br>AZD8055 has potent inhibitory activity in a range of xenograft tumour type models<br>AZD8055 exhibits high turnover in human hepatocytes and inconsistent rodent pharmacokinetics, therefore discontinued<br>AZD2014 displayed dose-dependent tumour growth inhibition in mouse MCF7 xenograft model and has consistent rodent pharmacokinetics and low turnover in human hepatocytes | Chresta et al (2010)<br>Willems et al (2012)<br>Sini et al (2010)<br>Pike et al (2013)<br>Guichard et al (2012) | Phase 1 trial in solid tumours. Reduced p-p70S6K and p-4EBP1 in paired biopsies. PAKT not upregulated post-treatment. MTD 50 mg bd. Well tolerated. (Banerji et al, 2012) |

Despite the optimism generated from some preclinical models, AZD 8055 exhibits high turnover in human hepatocytes and very inconsistent rodent pharmacokinetics. These factors combined were felt to constitute a significant risk when predicting clinical exposure. AZD 8055 was therefore discontinued and compound optimization was continued (Pike et al, 2013).

### AZD 2014

AZD 2014 is the most recent dual mTORC1/2 inhibitor to enter pre-clinical and clinical studies. It is a potent mTORC1/2 inhibitor, (IC₅₀: 0·0028 μmol/l) and is inactive against >200 kinases at 10 μmol/l (Pike et al, 2013). AZD 2014 displayed dose-dependent tumour growth inhibition in the mouse MCF7 xenograft model and has consistent rodent pharmacokinetics and low turnover in human hepatocytes. In vitro, the potency of AZD 2014 is approximately five times less than AZD 8055. However, AZD 2014 has far superior pharmacokinetics (Guichard et al, 2012). The safety and tolerability profile of AZD 2014 was studied in a phase 1 dose-escalation and expansion study in 50 patients with solid tumours (Banerji et al, 2012). Reduced phosphorylation p70S6K and 4E-BP1 was seen in paired biopsies. pAKT was not upregulated in any post-treatment biopsies. The MTD was 50 mg bd. AZD 2014 was rapidly absorbed and well tolerated (Banerji et al, 2012).

### Future developments

Targeting B-cell receptor signalling with agents such as ibrutinib (a BTK inhibitor) and idelalisib (a PI3K inhibitor) has shown impressive responses in relapsed CLL (Byrd et al, 2013; Furman et al, 2014) and low grade NHL (Flinn et al, 2014; Gopal et al, 2014). Relapses occur following these agents however and there will be a need for non-cross-reactive therapeutics, such as mTOR inhibitors, for these patients. Responses to ibrutinib in relapsed DLBCL have been less impressive, with particularly poor responses in the GCB-subtype (Wilson et al, 2012). It is possible that dual mTORC1/2 inhibitors in combination with rituximab may improve responses in relapsed, refractory DLBCL, an area of unmet need. It remains to be seen how these exciting novel agents are to be taken forward in clinical trials. Carefully designed trials are required using dual mTORC1/2 inhibition and/or alternative combinations to maximize blockade of the mTOR pathway, whilst minimizing toxicity.

### Conclusions

The PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway plays a pivotal role in the growth and proliferation of lymphoid malignancies. Although much still needs unravelling within the pathway, it is clear that two distinct multi-protein complexes, mTORC1 and mTORC2 play crucial roles in signal transduction and cell proliferation. Rapalogs have proven disappointing in

lymphoid malignancies. Only mTORC1 is consistently inhibited by rapamycin, which typically results in multiple resistance pathways being activated, including mTORC2-induced AKT phosphorylation. Exciting opportunities to use novel combinations for more profound inhibition of the PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway are developing. Dual-specific PI3K-mTOR inhibitors, MNK inhibitors and specific mTORC1/2 inhibitors have been successful in pre-clinical studies, and overcome some limitations of rapamycin. Combination inhibitors are particularly active in cells lines with activating PI3K/AKT/mTOR mutations. The challenge is now to produce carefully designed, collaborative clinical trials to test the efficacy and toxicity of these new agents, whilst establishing both predictive biomarkers in the pathway and further understanding resistance mechanisms.

### Search strategy and selection criteria

Data for this Review were identified by searches of MEDLINE, Current Contents, PubMed, and references from relevant articles using the search terms ‘mTOR inhibition’ ‘mTORC1’ ‘mTORC2’ and ‘haematological malignancy’, or ‘lymphoma’. Abstracts and reports from meetings were included only when they related to previously published work. Only papers published in English before March 2014 were included.

#### Authorship contributions

TE and KC wrote the manuscript. AG and GC reviewed and revised the manuscript.

#### Acknowledgement

Many thanks to Dr Caroline Watson who provided expert assistance in the production of Fig 1.

#### Role of funding source

None.

#### Ethical approval

Not required.

#### Conflicts of Interest

None.

---

### References

- Aguirre, V., Werner, E.D., Giraud, J., Lee, Y.H., Shoelson, S.E. & White, M.F. (2002) Phosphorylation of Ser307 in insulin receptor substrate-1 blocks interactions with the insulin receptor and inhibits insulin action. *The Journal of Biological Chemistry*, **277**, 1531–1537.
- Aleskog, A., Norberg, M., Nygren, P., Rickardson, L., Kanduri, M., Tobin, G., Aberg, M., Gustafsson, M.G., Rosenquist, R. & Lindhagen, E. (2008) Rapamycin shows anticancer activity in primary chronic lymphocytic leukemia cells in vitro, as single agent and in drug combination. *Leukemia & Lymphoma*, **49**, 2333–2343.
- Altman, J.K., Sassano, A., Kaur, S., Glaser, H., Kroczyńska, B., Redig, A.J., Russo, S., Barr, S. & Platanias, L.C. (2011) Dual mTORC2/mTORC1 targeting results in potent suppressive effects on acute myeloid leukemia (AML) progenitors. *Clinical Cancer Research: An Official Journal of the American Association for Cancer Research*, **17**, 4378–4388.
- Alyea, E.P., Li, S., Kim, H.T., Cutler, C., Ho, V., Soiffer, R.J. & Antin, J.H. (2008) Sirolimus, tacrolimus, and low-dose methotrexate as graft-versus-host disease prophylaxis in related and unrelated donor reduced-intensity conditioning allogeneic peripheral blood stem cell transplantation. *Biology of Blood and Marrow Transplantation: Journal of the American Society for Blood and Marrow Transplantation*, **14**, 920–926.
- Ansell, S.M., Inwards, D.J., Rowland, K.M., Flynn, P.J., Morton, R.F., Moore, D.F., Kaufmann, S.H., Ghobrial, I., Kurtin, P.J., Maurer, M., All-
- mer, C. & Witzig, T.E. (2008) Low-dose, single-agent temsirolimus for relapsed mantle cell lymphoma: a phase 2 trial in the North Central Cancer Treatment Group. *Cancer*, **3**, 508–514.
- Ansell, S.M., Tang, H., Kurtin, P.J., Koenig, P.A., Inwards, D.J., Shah, K., Ziesmer, S.C., Feldman, A.L., Rao, R., Gupta, M., Erlichman, C. & Witzig, T.E. (2011) Temsirolimus and rituximab in patients with relapsed or refractory mantle cell lymphoma: a phase 2 study. *Lancet Oncology*, **4**, 361–368.
- Asahina, H., Nokihara, H., Yamamoto, N., Yamada, Y., Tamura, Y., Honda, K., Seki, Y., Tanabe, Y., Shimada, H., Shi, X. & Tamura, T. (2012) Safety and tolerability of AZD8055 in Japanese patients with advanced solid tumors; a dose-finding phase I study. *Investigational New Drugs*, **3**, 677–684.
- Banerji, U., Dean, E. & Gonzalez, M. (2012) First-in-human phase I trial of the dual mTORC1 and mTORC2 inhibitor AZD2014 in solid tumors. *Journal of Clinical Oncology*, **30** (suppl 3004).
- Barnes, J.A., Jacobsen, E., Feng, Y., Freedman, A., Hochberg, E.P., Lacasce, A.S., Armand, P., Joyce, R., Sohani, A.R., Rodig, S.J., Neuberg, D., Fisher, D.C. & Abramson, J.S. (2013) Everolimus in combination with rituximab induces complete responses in heavily pretreated diffuse large B-cell lymphoma. *Haematologica*, **98**, 615–619.
- Baumann, P., Mandl-Weber, S., Oduncu, F. & Schmidmaier, R. (2009) The novel orally bioavailable inhibitor of phosphoinositol-3-kinase and mammalian target of rapamycin, NVP-BEZ235, inhibits growth and proliferation in
- multiple myeloma. *Experimental Cell Research*, **315**, 485–497.
- Baumann, P., Schneider, L., Mandl-Weber, S., Oduncu, F. & Schmidmaier, R. (2012) Simultaneous targeting of PI3K and mTOR with NVP-BGT226 is highly effective in multiple myeloma. *Anti-Cancer Drugs*, **23**, 131–138.
- Becker, M.N., Wu, K.J., Marlow, L.A., Kreinest, P.A., Vonroemeling, C.A., Copland, J.A. & Williams, C.R. (2013) The combination of an mTORc1/TORc2 inhibitor with lapatinib is synergistic in bladder cancer in vitro. *Urologic Oncology*, **3**, 317–326.
- Bhagwat, S.V., Gokhale, P.C., Crew, A.P., Cooke, A., Yao, Y., Mantis, C., Kahler, J., Workman, J., Bittner, M., Dudkin, L., Epstein, D.M., Gibson, N.W., Wild, R., Arnold, L.D., Houghton, P.J. & Pachter, J.A. (2011) Preclinical characterization of OSI-027, a Potent and Selective Inhibitor of mTORC1 and mTORC2: distinct from rapamycin. *Molecular Cancer Therapeutics*, **10**, 1394–1406.
- Bracho-Valdés, I., Moreno-Alvarez, P., Valencia-Martínez, I., Robles-Molina, E., Chávez-Vargas, L. & Vázquez-Prado, J. (2011) mTORC1- and mTORC2-interacting proteins keep their multifunctional partners focused. *IUBMB Life*, **63**, 896–914.
- Byrd, J.C., Furman, R.R., Coutre, S.E., Flinn, I.W., Burger, J.A., Blum, K.A., Grant, B., Sharman, J.P., Coleman, M., Wierda, W.G., Jones, J.A., Zhao, W., Heerema, N.A., Johnson, A.J., Sukbuntherng, J., Chang, B.Y., Clow, F., Hedrick, E., Buggy, J.J., James, D.F. & O'Brien, S. (2013) Targeting BTK with ibrutinib in relapsed

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd  
*British Journal of Haematology*, 2014, **166**, 336–351

Review

chronic lymphocytic leukemia. *The New England Journal of Medicine*, 369, 32–42.

Cantley, L.C. (2002) The phosphoinositide 3-kinase pathway. *Science (New York, N.Y.)*, 296, 1655–1657.

Carayol, N., Vakana, E., Sassano, A., Kaur, S., Goussetis, D.J., Glaser, H., Druker, B.J., Donato, N.J., Altman, J.K., Barr, S. & Platanias, L.C. (2010) Critical roles for mTORC2- and rapamycin-insensitive mTORC1-complexes in growth and survival of BCR-ABL-expressing leukemic cells. *Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America*, 107, 12469–12474.

Carracedo, A., Ma, L., Teruya-Feldstein, J., Rojo, F., Salmena, L., Alimonti, A., Egia, A., Sasaki, A.T., Thomas, G., Kozma, S.C., Papa, A., Nardella, C., Cantley, L.C., Baselga, J. & Pandolfi, P.P. (2008) Inhibition of mTORC1 leads to MAPK pathway activation through a PI3K-dependent feedback loop in human cancer. *The Journal of Clinical Investigation*, 118, 3065–3074.

Chan, S.M., Weng, A.P., Tibshirani, R., Aster, J.C. & Utz, P.J. (2007) Notch signals positively regulate activity of the mTOR pathway in T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia. *Blood*, 110, 278–286.

Chiang, G.G. & Abraham, R.T. (2007) Targeting the mTOR signaling network in cancer. *Trends in Molecular Medicine*, 13, 433–442.

Chresta, C.M., Davies, B.R., Hickson, I., Harding, T., Cosulich, S., Critchlow, S.E., Vincent, J.P., Ellston, R., Jones, D., Sini, P., James, D., Howard, Z., Dudley, P., Hughes, G., Smith, L., Maguire, S., Hummersone, M., Malagu, K., Me near, K., Jenkins, R., Jacobsen, M., Smith, G.C., Guichard, S. & Pass, M. (2010) AZD8055 is a potent, selective, and orally bioavailable ATP-competitive mammalian target of rapamycin kinase inhibitor with in vitro and in vivo antitumor activity. *Cancer Research*, 70, 288–298.

Chumsri, S., Zhao, M., Garofalo, M., Burger, A., Hamburger, A., Zhao, F. & Rapoport, A. (2008) Inhibition of the mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) in a case of refractory primary cutaneous anaplastic large cell lymphoma. *Leukemia & Lymphoma*, 49, 359–361.

Civallero, M., Cosenza, M., Marcheselli, L., Pozzi, S. & Sacchi, S. (2012) NVP-BEZ235 alone and in combination in mantle cell lymphoma: an effective therapeutic strategy. *Expert Opinion on Investigational Drugs*, 21, 1597–1606.

Dal Col, J., Zancai, P., Terrin, L., Guidoboni, M., Ponzoni, M., Pavan, A., Spina, M., Bergamin, S., Rizzo, S., Tirelli, U., De Rossi, A., Doglioni, C. & Dolcetti, R. (2008) Distinct functional significance of Akt and mTOR constitutive activation in mantle cell lymphoma. *Blood*, 111, 5142–5151.

Decker, T., Sandherr, M., Goetze, K., Oelsner, M., Ringshausen, I. & Peschel, C. (2009) A pilot trial of the mTOR (mammalian target of rapamycin) inhibitor RAD001 in patients with advanced B-CLL. *Annals of Hematology*, 3, 221–227.

Dong, L.H., Cheng, S., Zheng, Z., Wang, L., Shen, Y., Shen, Z.X., Chen, S.J. & Zhao, W.L. (2013) Histone deacetylase inhibitor potentiated the ability of MTOR inhibitor to induce autophagic cell death in Burkitt leukemia/lymphoma. *Journal of Hematology & Oncology*, 6, 53.

Dutton, A., Reynolds, G.M., Dawson, C.W., Young, L.S. & Murray, P.G. (2005) Constitutive activation of phosphatidylinositol 3 kinase contributes to the survival of Hodgkin’s lymphoma cells through a mechanism involving Akt kinase and mTOR. *The Journal of Pathology*, 205, 498–506.

Easton, J.B. & Houghton, P.J. (2006) mTOR and cancer therapy. *Oncogene*, 25, 6436–6446.

Efeyan, A. & Sabatini, D.M. (2010) mTOR and cancer: many loops in one pathway. *Current Opinion in Cell Biology*, 22, 169–176.

Ellard, S.L., Clemons, M., Gelmon, K.A., Norris, B., Kennecke, H., Chia, S., Pritchard, K., Eisen, A., Vandenberg, T., Taylor, M., Sauerbrei, E., Mishaeli, M., Huntsman, D., Walsh, W., Olivo, M., McIntosh, L. & Seymour, L. (2009) Randomized phase II study comparing two schedules of everolimus in patients with recurrent/metastatic breast cancer: NCIC Clinical Trials Group IND.163. *Journal of Clinical Oncology*, 27, 4536–4544.

Feng, Z., Zhang, H., Levine, A.J. & Jin, S. (2005) The coordinate regulation of the p53 and mTOR pathways in cells. *Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America*, 102, 8204–8209.

Fingar, D.C. & Blenis, J. (2004) Target of rapamycin (TOR): an integrator of nutrient and growth factor signals and coordinator of cell growth and cell cycle progression. *Oncogene*, 23, 3151–3171.

Flinn, I.W., Kahl, B.S., Leonard, J.P., Furman, R.R., Brown, J.R., Byrd, J.C., Wagner-Johnston, N.D., Coutre, S.E., Benson, D.M., Peterman, S., Cho, Y., Webb, H.K., Johnson, D.M., Yu, A.S., Ulrich, R.G., Godfrey, W.R., Miller, L.L. & Spurgeon, S.E. (2014) Idelalisib, a selective inhibitor of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase-δ, as therapy for previously treated indolent non-Hodgkin lymphoma. *Blood*, doi: 10.1182/blood-2013-11-538546.

Furman, R.R., Sharman, J.P., Coutre, S.E., Cheson, B.D., Pagel, J.M., Hillmen, P., Barrientos, J.C., Zelenetz, A.D., Kipps, T.J., Flinn, I., Ghia, P., Eradat, H., Ervin, T., Lamanna, N., Coiffier, B., Pettitt, A.R., Ma, S., Stilgenbauer, S., Cramer, P., Aiello, M., Johnson, D.M., Miller, L.L., Li, D., Jahn, T.M., Dansey, R.D., Hallek, M. & O’Brien, S.M. (2014) Idelalisib and rituximab in relapsed chronic lymphocytic leukemia. *New England Journal of Medicine*, 370, 997–1007.

Geisler, C.H., Kolstad, A., Laurell, A., Andersen, N.S., Pedersen, L.B., Jerkeman, M., Eriksson, M., Nordström, M., Kimby, E., Boesen, A.M., Kuittinen, O., Lauritzsen, G.F., Nilsson-Ehle, H., Ralfkiaer, E., Akerman, M., Ehinger, M., Sundström, C., Langholm, R., Delabie, J., Karjalainen-Lindsberg, M.-L., Brown, P. & Elonen, E;

Nordic Lymphoma Group. (2008) Long-term progression-free survival of mantle cell lymphoma after intensive front-line immunotherapy with in vivo-purged stem cell rescue: a nonrandomized phase 2 multicenter study by the Nordic Lymphoma Group. *Blood*, 7, 2687–2693.

Georgakis, G., Yazbeck, V., Li, Y. & Younes, A. (2006) Preclinical rationale for therapeutic targeting of mTOR by CC-I779 and rapamycin in Hodgkin lymphoma. *Journal of Clinical Oncology*, 24, 10070.

Ghielmini, M., Schmitz, S.F., Bürki, K., Pichert, G., Betticher, D.C., Stupp, R., Wernli, M., Lohri, A., Schmitter, D., Bertoni, F. & Cerny, T. (2000) The effect of Rituximab on patients with follicular and mantle-cell lymphoma. Swiss Group for Clinical Cancer Research (SAKK). *Annals of Oncology*, 11, 123–126.

Ghobrial, I.M., Gertz, M., Laplant, B., Camoriano, J., Hayman, S., Lacy, M., Chuma, S., Harris, B., Leduc, R., Rourke, M., Ansell, S.M., Deangelo, D., Dispenzieri, A., Bergsagel, L., Reeder, C., Anderson, K.C., Richardson, P.G., Treon, S.P. & Witzig, T.E. (2010) Phase II trial of the oral mammalian target of rapamycin inhibitor everolimus in relapsed or refractory Waldenstrom macroglobulinemia. *Journal of Clinical Oncology*, 8, 1408–1414.

Gingras, A.C., Gygi, S.P., Raught, B., Polakiewicz, R.D., Abraham, R.T., Hoekstra, M.F., Aebersold, R. & Sonenberg, N. (1999) Regulation of 4E-BP1 phosphorylation: a novel two-step mechanism. *Genes & Development*, 13, 1422–1437.

Gladden, A.B., Woolery, R., Aggarwal, P., Wasik, M.A. & Diehl, J.A. (2006) Expression of constitutively nuclear cyclin D1 in murine lymphocytes induces B-cell lymphoma. *Oncogene*, 25, 998–1007.

Golay, J., Zaffaroni, L., Vaccari, T., Lazzari, M., Borleri, G.M., Bernasconi, S., Tedesco, F., Ram baldi, A. & Introna, M. (2000) Biologic response of B lymphoma cells to anti-CD20 monoclonal antibody rituximab in vitro: CD55 and CD59 regulate complement-mediated cell lysis. *Blood*, 95, 3900–3908.

Gopal, A.K., Kahl, B.S., de Vos, S., Wagner-Johnston, N.D., Schuster, S.J., Jurczak, W.J., Flinn, I.W., Flowers, C.R., Martin, P., Viardot, A., Blum, K. A, Goy, A.H., Davies, A.J., Zinzani, P.L., Dreyling, M., Johnson, D., Miller, L.L., Holes, L., Li, D., Dansey, R.D., Godfrey, W.R. & Salles, G.A. (2014) PI3Kδ Inhibition by Idelalisib in Patients with Relapsed Indolent Lymphoma. *The New England Journal of Medicine*, 11, 1008–1018.

Grolleau, A., Bowman, J., Pradet-Balade, B., Pu ravs, E., Hanash, S., Garcia-Sanz, J.A. & Beretta, L. (2002) Global and specific translational control by rapamycin in T cells uncovered by microarrays and proteomics. *The Journal of Biological Chemistry*, 277, 22175–22184.

Guichard, S., Howard, Z. & Heathcote, D. (2012) AZD2014, a dual mTORC1 and mTORC2 inhibitor is differentiated from allosteric inhibi-

tors of mTORC1 in ER+ breast cancer. *Cancer Research*, **72**(Suppl. 1).

Gupta, M., Ansell, S.M., Novak, A.J., Kumar, S., Kaufmann, S.H. & Witzig, T.E. (2009) Inhibition of histone deacetylase overcomes rapamycin-mediated resistance in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma by inhibiting Akt signaling through mTORC2. *Blood*, **114**, 2926–2935.

Gupta, M., Hendrickson, A.E.W., Yun, S.S., Han, J.J., Schneider, P.A., Koh, B.D., Stenson, M.J., Wellik, L.E., Shing, J.C., Peterson, K.L., Flatten, K.S., Hess, A.D., Smith, B.D., Karp, J.E., Barr, S., Witzig, T.E. & Kaufmann, S.H. (2012) Dual mTORC1/mTORC2 inhibition diminishes Akt activation and induces Puma-dependent apoptosis in lymphoid malignancies. *Blood*, **119**, 476–487.

Haritunians, T., Mori, A., O’Kelly, J., Luong, Q.T., Giles, F.J. & Koeffler, H.P. (2007) Antiproliferative activity of RAD001 (everolimus) as a single agent and combined with other agents in mantle cell lymphoma. *Leukemia: Official Journal of the Leukemia Society of America, Leukemia Research Fund, U.K.*, **21**, 333–339.

Hay, N. & Sonenberg, N. (2004) Upstream and downstream of mTOR. *Genes & Development*, **18**, 1926–1945.

Hess, G., Herbrecht, R., Romaguera, J., Verhoef, G., Crump, M., Gisselbrecht, C., Laurell, A., Offner, F., Strahs, A., Berkenblit, A., Hanushevsky, O., Clancy, J., Hewes, B., Moore, L. & Coiffier, B. (2009) Phase III study to evaluate temsirolimus compared with investigator’s choice therapy for the treatment of relapsed or refractory mantle cell lymphoma. *Journal of Clinical Oncology*, **23**, 3822–3829.

Hipp, S., Ringshausen, I., Oelsner, M., Bogner, C., Peschel, C. & Decker, T. (2005) Inhibition of the mammalian target of rapamycin and the induction of cell cycle arrest in mantle cell lymphoma cells. *Haematologica*, **90**, 1433–1434.

Hoang, B., Benavides, A., Shi, Y., Yang, Y., Frost, P., Gera, J. & Lichtenstein, A. (2012) The PP242 mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) inhibitor activates extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) in multiple myeloma cells via a target of rapamycin complex 1 (TORC1)/eukaryotic translation initiation factor 4E (eIF-4E)/RAF pathway and activ. *The Journal of Biological Chemistry*, **287**, 21796–21805.

Holz, M.K., Ballif, B.A., Gygi, S.P. & Blenis, J. (2005) mTOR and S6K1 mediate assembly of the translation preinitiation complex through dynamic protein interchange and ordered phosphorylation events. *Cell*, **123**, 569–580.

Hsu, P.P., Kang, S.A., Rameseder, J., Zhang, Y., Ottina, K.A., Lim, D., Peterson, T.R., Choi, Y., Gray, N.S., Yaffe, M.B., Marto, J.A. & Sabatini, D.M. (2011) The mTOR-regulated phosphoproteome reveals a mechanism of mTORC1-mediated inhibition of growth factor signaling. *Science (New York, N.Y.)*, **332**, 1317–1322.

Huang, J., Dibble, C.C., Matsuzaki, M. & Manning, B.D. (2008) The TSC1-TSC2 complex is required for proper activation of mTOR com-

plex 2. *Molecular and Cellular Biology*, **28**, 4104–4115.

Huang, J., Wu, S., Wu, C.-L. & Manning, B.D. (2009) Signaling events downstream of mammalian target of rapamycin complex 2 are attenuated in cells and tumors deficient for the tuberous sclerosis complex tumor suppressors. *Cancer Research*, **69**, 6107–6114.

Jacinto, E., Loewith, R., Schmidt, A., Lin, S., Rüegg, M.A., Hall, A. & Hall, M.N. (2004) Mammalian TOR complex 2 controls the actin cytoskeleton and is rapamycin insensitive. *Nature Cell Biology*, **6**, 1122–1128.

Janes, M.R., Vu, C., Mallya, S., Shieh, M.P., Limon, J.J., Li, L.-S., Jessen, K.A., Martin, M.B., Ren, P., Lilly, M.B., Sender, L.S., Liu, Y., Rommel, C. & Fruman, D.A. (2013) Efficacy of the investigational mTOR kinase inhibitor MLN0128/INK128 in models of B-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia. *Leukemia*, **27**, 586–594.

Jazirehi, A.R., Vega, M.I., Chatterjee, D., Goodglick, L. & Bonavida, B. (2004) Inhibition of the Raf-MEK1/2-ERK1/2 signaling pathway, Bcl-xL down-regulation, and chemosensitization of non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma B cells by Rituximab. *Cancer Research*, **64**, 7117–7126.

Jemal, A., Siegel, R., Xu, J. & Ward, E. (2010) Cancer statistics. *CA: A Cancer Journal for Clinicians*, **60**, 277–300.

Johnston, P.B., Inwards, D.J., Colgan, J.P., Laplant, B.R., Kabat, B.F., Habermann, T.M., Micallef, I.N., Porrata, L.F., Ansell, S.M., Reeder, C.B., Roy, V. & Witzig, T.E. (2010) A Phase II trial of the oral mTOR inhibitor everolimus in relapsed Hodgkin lymphoma. *American Journal of Hematology*, **5**, 320–324.

Jundt, F., Raetzel, N., Müller, C., Calkhoven, C.F., Kley, K., Mathas, S., Lietz, A., Leutz, A. & Dörken, B. (2005) A rapamycin derivative (everolimus) controls proliferation through downregulation of truncated CCAAT enhancer binding protein beta and NF-kB activity in Hodgkin and anaplastic large cell lymphomas. *Blood*, **106**, 1801–1807.

Kampa-Schittenhelm, K.M., Heinrich, M.C., Akmut, F., Rasp, K.H., Illing, B., Döhner, H., Döhner, K. & Schittenhelm, M.M. (2013) Cell cycle-dependent activity of the novel dual PI3K-mTORC1/2 inhibitor NVP-BGT226 in acute leukemia. *Molecular Cancer*, **12**, 46.

Kim, D.-H., Sarbassov, D.D., Ali, S.M., King, J.E., Latek, R.R., Erdjument-Bromage, H., Tempst, P. & Sabatini, D.M. (2002) mTOR interacts with raptor to form a nutrient-sensitive complex that signals to the cell growth machinery. *Cell*, **110**, 163–175.

Kim, A., Park, S., Lee, J.-E., Jang, W.-S., Lee, S.-J., Kang, H.J. & Lee, S.-S. (2012) The dual PI3K and mTOR inhibitor NVP-BEZ235 exhibits anti-proliferative activity and overcomes bortezomib resistance in mantle cell lymphoma cells. *Leukemia Research*, **36**, 912–920.

Klos, K.S., Wyszomierski, S.L., Sun, M., Tan, M., Zhou, X., Li, P., Yang, W., Yin, G., Hittelman, W.N. & Yu, D. (2006) ErbB2 increases vascular

endothelial growth factor protein synthesis via activation of mammalian target of rapamycin/p70S6K leading to increased angiogenesis and spontaneous metastasis of human breast cancer cells. *Cancer Research*, **66**, 2028–2037.

Kluin-Nelemans, H.C., Hoster, E., Hermine, O., Walewski, J., Trneny, M., Geisler, C.H., Stilgenbauer, S., Thieblemont, C., Vehling-Kaiser, U., Doorduijn, J.K., Coiffier, B., Forstpointner, R., Tilly, H., Kanz, L., Feugier, P., Szymczyk, M., Hallek, M., Kremer, S., Lepeu, G., Sanhes, L., Zijlstra, J.M., Bouabdallah, R., Lugtenburg, P.J., Macro, M., Pfreundschuh, M., Procházka, V., Di Raimondo, F., Ribrag, V., Upenkamp, M., André, M., Klapper, W., Hidemann, W., Unterhalt, M. & Dreyling, M.H. (2012) Treatment of older patients with mantle cell lymphoma. *New England Journal of Medicine*, **367**, 520–531.

Leleu, X., Jia, X., Runnels, J., Ngo, H.T., Moreau, A.-S., Farag, M., Spencer, J.A., Pitsillides, C.M., Hatjiharissi, E., Roccaro, A., O’Sullivan, G., McMillin, D.W., Moreno, D., Kiziltepe, T., Carrasco, R., Treon, S.P., Hideshima, T., Anderson, K.C., Lin, C.P. & Ghobrial, I.M. (2007) The Akt pathway regulates survival and homing in Waldenstrom macroglobulinemia. *Blood*, **110**, 4417–4426.

Leseux, L., Hamdi, S.M., Al Saati, T., Capilla, F., Recher, C., Laurent, G. & Bezombes, C. (2006) Syk-dependent mTOR activation in follicular lymphoma cells. *Blood*, **108**, 4156–4162.

Li, H., Lin, J., Wang, X., Yao, G., Wang, L., Zheng, H., Yang, C., Jia, C., Liu, A. & Bai, X. (2012) Targeting of mTORC2 prevents cell migration and promotes apoptosis in breast cancer. *Breast Cancer Research and Treatment*, **134**, 1057–1066.

Loewith, R., Jacinto, E., Wullschleger, S., Lorberg, A., Crespo, J.L., Bonenfant, D., Oppliger, W., Jeノー, P. & Hall, M.N. (2002) Two TOR complexes, only one of which is rapamycin sensitive, have distinct roles in cell growth control. *Molecular Cell*, **10**, 457–468.

Lukas, J., Jadayel, D., Bartkova, J., Nacheva, E., Dyer, M.J., Strauss, M. & Bartek, J. (1994) BCL-1/cyclin D1 oncoprotein oscillates and subverts the G1 phase control in B-cell neoplasms carrying the t(11;14) translocation. *Oncogene*, **9**, 2159–2167.

Mahalingam, M. & Cooper, J.A. (2001) Phosphorylation of mammalian eIF4E by Mnkl and Mnk2: tantalizing prospects for a role in translation. *Progress in Molecular and Subcellular Biology*, **27**, 132–142.

Maiso, P., Liu, Y., Morgan, B., Azab, A.K., Ren, P., Martin, M.B., Zhang, Y., Liu, Y., Sacco, A., Ngo, H., Azab, F., Quang, P., Rodig, S.J., Lin, C.P., Roccaro, A.M., Rommel, C. & Ghobrial, I.M. (2011) Defining the role of TORC1/2 in multiple myeloma. *Blood*, **118**, 6860–6870.

Mallya, S., Fitch, B.A., Lee, J.S., So, L., Janes, M.R. & Fruman, D.A. (2014) Resistance to mTOR kinase inhibitors in lymphoma cells lacking 4EBP1. *PLoS One*, **9**, e88865.

Manning, B.D. & Cantley, L.C. (2007) AKT/PKB signaling: navigating downstream. *Cell*, 129, 1261–1274.

Márk, A., Hajdu, M., Váradi, Z., Sticz, T.B., Nagy, N., Csomor, J., Berczi, L., Varga, V., Csóka, M., Kopper, L. & Sebestyén, A. (2013) Characteristic mTOR activity in Hodgkin-lymphomas offers a potential therapeutic target in high risk disease - a combined tissue microarray, in vitro and in vivo study. *BMC Cancer*, 13, 250.

Markman, B., Tabernero, J., Krop, I., Shapiro, G.I., Siu, L., Chen, L.C., Mita, M., Melendez Cuero, M., Stutvoet, S., Birle, D., Anak, O., Hackl, W. & Baselga, J. (2012) Phase I safety, pharmacokinetic, and pharmacodynamic study of the oral phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase and mTOR inhibitor BGT226 in patients with advanced solid tumors. *Annals of Oncology: Official Journal of the European Society for Medical Oncology/ESMO*, 23, 2399–2408.

Marzec, M., Kasprzycka, M., Liu, X., El-Salem, M., Halasa, K., Raghunath, P.N., Bucki, R., Wlodarski, P. & Wasik, M.A. (2007) Oncogenic tyrosine kinase NPM/ALK induces activation of the rapamycin-sensitive mTOR signaling pathway. *Oncogene*, 26, 5606–5614.

Marzec, M., Liu, X., Kasprzycka, M., Witkiewicz, A., Raghunath, P.N., El-Salem, M., Robertson, E., Odum, N. & Wasik, M.A. (2008) IL-2- and IL-15-induced activation of the rapamycin-sensitive mTORC1 pathway in malignant CD4+ T lymphocytes. *Blood*, 111, 2181–2189.

Marzec, M., Liu, X., Wysocka, M., Rook, A.H., Odum, N. & Wasik, M.A. (2011) Simultaneous inhibition of mTOR-containing complex 1 (mTORC1) and MNK induces apoptosis of cutaneous T-cell lymphoma (CTCL) cells. *PLoS One*, 6, e24849.

McCubrey, J.A., Steelman, L.S., Abrams, S.L., Bertrand, F.E., Ludwig, D.E., Bäsecke, J., Libra, M., Stivala, F., Milella, M., Tafuri, A., Lunghi, P., Bonati, A. & Martelli, A.M. (2008) Targeting survival cascades induced by activation of Ras/Raf/MEK/ERK, PI3K/PTEN/Akt/mTOR and Jak/STAT pathways for effective leukemia therapy. *Leukemia: Official Journal of the Leukemia Society of America, Leukemia Research Fund, U.K.*, 22, 708–722.

Mohi, M.G., Boulton, C., Gu, T.-L., Sternberg, D.W., Neuberg, D., Griffin, J.D., Gilliland, D.G. & Neel, B.G. (2004) Combination of rapamycin and protein tyrosine kinase (PTK) inhibitors for the treatment of leukemias caused by oncogenic PTKs. *Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America*, 101, 3130–3135.

Motzer, R.J., Escudier, B., Oudard, S., Hutson, T.E., Porta, C., Bracarda, S., Grünwald, V., Thompson, J.A., Figlin, R.A., Hollaender, N., Urbanowitz, G., Berg, W.J., Kay, A., Lebwohl, D. & Ravaud, A. (2008) Efficacy of everolimus in advanced renal cell carcinoma: a double-blind, randomised, placebo-controlled phase III trial. *Lancet*, 9637, 449–456.

Müller, A., Zang, C., Chumduri, C., Dörken, B., Daniel, P.T. & Scholz, C.W. (2013) Concurrent

inhibition of PI3K and mTORC1/mTORC2 overcomes resistance to rapamycin induced apoptosis by down-regulation of Mcl-1 in mantle cell lymphoma. *International Journal of Cancer*. *Journal International du Cancer*, 133, 1813–1824.

Naing, A., Aghajanian, C., Raymond, E., Olmos, D., Schwartz, G., Oelmann, E., Grinsted, L., Burke, W., Taylor, R., Kaye, S., Kurzrock, R. & Banerji, U. (2012) Safety, tolerability, pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of AZD8055 in advanced solid tumours and lymphoma. *British Journal of Cancer*, 107, 1093–1099.

Nasu, R., Nannya, Y., Shinohara, A., Ichikawa, M. & Kurokawa, M. (2014) Favorable outcomes of tacrolimus compared with cyclosporine A for GVHD prophylaxis in HSCT for standard-risk hematological diseases. *Annals of Hematology*, doi: 10.1007/s00277-014-2027-y.

O'Reilly, T. & McSheehy, P.M. (2010) Biomarker development for the clinical activity of the mTOR inhibitor everolimus (RAD001): processes, limitations, and further proposals. *Translational Oncology*, 3, 65–79.

O'Reilly, K.E., Rojo, F., She, Q.-B., Solit, D., Mills, G.B., Smith, D., Lane, H., Hofmann, F., Hicklin, D.J., Ludwig, D.L., Baselga, J. & Rosen, N. (2006) mTOR inhibition induces upstream receptor tyrosine kinase signaling and activates Akt. *Cancer Research*, 66, 1500–1508.

Peponi, E., Drakos, E., Reyes, G., Leventaki, V., Rassidakis, G.Z. & Medeiros, L.J. (2006) Activation of mammalian target of rapamycin signaling promotes cell cycle progression and protects cells from apoptosis in mantle cell lymphoma. *The American Journal of Pathology*, 169, 2171–2180.

Peterson, T.R., Laplante, M., Thoreen, C.C., Sancak, Y., Kang, S.A., Kuehl, W.M., Gray, N.S. & Sabatini, D.M. (2009) DEPTOR is an mTOR inhibitor frequently overexpressed in multiple myeloma cells and required for their survival. *Cell*, 137, 873–886.

Petrich, A.M., Leshchenko, V., Kuo, P.-Y., Xia, B., Thirukonda, V.K., Ulahannan, N., Gordon, S., Fazzari, M.J., Ye, B.H., Sparano, J.A. & Parekh, S. (2012) Akt inhibitors MK-2206 and nelfinavir overcome mTOR inhibitor resistance in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma. *Clinical Cancer Research*, 18, 2534–2544.

Pike, K.G., Malagu, K., Hummersone, M.G., Me near, K. & a, Duggan, H.M.E., Gomez, S., Martin, N.M.B., Ruston, L., Pass, S.L. & Pass, M., (2013) Optimization of potent and selective dual mTORC1 and mTORC2 inhibitors: the discovery of AZD8055 and AZD2014. *Bioorganic & Medicinal Chemistry Letters*, 23, 1212–1216.

Renner, C., Zinzani, P.L., Gressin, R., Klingbiel, D., Dietrich, P.-Y., Hitz, F., Bargetzi, M., Mingrone, W., Martinelli, G., Trojan, A., Bouabdallah, K., Lohri, A., Gyan, E., Biaggi, C., Cogliatti, S., Bertoni, F., Ghielmini, M., Brauchli, P. & Ketterer, N. (2012) A multicenter phase II trial (SAKK 36/06) of single-agent everolimus (RAD001) in patients with relapsed or refractory

mantle cell lymphoma. *Haematologica*, 97, 1085–1091.

Richardson, C.J., Schalm, S.S. & Blenis, J. (2004) PI3-kinase and TOR: PIKTORing cell growth. *Seminars in Cell & Developmental Biology*, 15, 147–159.

Roccaro, A.M., Sacco, A., Husu, E.N., Pitsillides, C., Vesole, S., Azab, A.K., Azab, F., Melhem, M., Ngo, H.T., Quang, P., Maiso, P., Runnels, J., Liang, M.-C., Wong, K.-K., Lin, C. & Ghobrial, I.M. (2010) Dual targeting of the PI3K/Akt/mTOR pathway as an antitumor strategy in Waldenstrom macroglobulinemia. *Blood*, 115, 559–569.

Romaguera, J.E., Fayad, L., Rodriguez, M.A., Broglio, K.R., Hagemeister, F.B., Pro, B., McLaughlin, P., Younes, A., Samaniego, F., Goy, A., Sarris, A.H., Dang, N.H., Wang, M., Beasley, V., Medeiros, L.J., Katz, R.L., Gagneja, H., Samuels, B.I., Smith, T.L. & Cabanillas, F.F. (2005) High rate of durable remissions after treatment of newly diagnosed aggressive mantle-cell lymphoma with rituximab plus hyper-CVAD alternating with rituximab plus high-dose methotrexate and cytarabine. *Journal of Clinical Oncology*, 28, 7013–7023.

Rosenwald, I.B., Kaspar, R., Rousseau, D., Gehrke, L., Leboulch, P., Chen, J.J., Schmidt, E.V., Sonenberg, N. & London, I.M. (1995) Eukaryotic translation initiation factor 4E regulates expression of cyclin D1 at transcriptional and post-transcriptional levels. *The Journal of Biological Chemistry*, 270, 21176–21180.

Rudelius, M., Pittaluga, S., Nishizuka, S., Pham, T.H.-T., Fend, F., Jaffe, E.S., Quintanilla-Martinez, L. & Raffeld, M. (2006) Constitutive activation of Akt contributes to the pathogenesis and survival of mantle cell lymphoma. *Blood*, 108, 1668–1676.

Sakata, A., Kuwahara, K., Ohmura, T., Inui, S. & Sakaguchi, N. (1999) Involvement of a rapamycin-sensitive pathway in CD40-mediated activation of murine B cells in vitro. *Immunology Letters*, 68, 301–309.

Sarbassov, D.D., Ali, S.M., Kim, D.-H., Guertin, D.A., Latek, R.R., Erdjument-Bromage, H., Tempst, P. & Sabatini, D.M. (2004) Rictor, a novel binding partner of mTOR, defines a rapamycin-insensitive and raptor-independent pathway that regulates the cytoskeleton. *Current Biology: CB*, 14, 1296–1302.

Sarbassov, D.D., Guertin, D.A., Ali, S.M. & Sabatini, D.M. (2005) Phosphorylation and regulation of Akt/PKB by the rictor-mTOR complex. *Science (New York, N.Y.)*, 307, 1098–1101.

Sarbassov, D.D., Ali, S.M., Sengupta, S., Sheen, J.-H., Hsu, P.P., Bagley, A.F., Markhard, A.L. & Sabatini, D.M. (2006) Prolonged rapamycin treatment inhibits mTORC2 assembly and Akt/PKB. *Molecular Cell*, 22, 159–168.

Scheid, M.P. & Woodgett, J.R. (2001) PKB/AKT: functional insights from genetic models. *Nature Reviews. Molecular Cell Biology*, 2, 760–768.

Schmelzle, T. & Hall, M.N. (2000) TOR, a central controller of cell growth. *Cell*, 103, 253–262.

Sengupta, S., Peterson, T.R. & Sabatini, D.M. (2010) Regulation of the mTOR complex 1 pathway by nutrients, growth factors, and stress. *Molecular Cell*, **40**, 310–322.

Shahbazian, D., Roux, P.P., Mieulet, V., Cohen, M.S., Raught, B., Taunton, J., Hershey, J.W.B., Blenis, J., Pende, M. & Sonenberg, N. (2006) The mTOR/PI3K and MAPK pathways converge on eIF4B to control its phosphorylation and activity. *The EMBO Journal*, **25**, 2781–2791.

Shan, D., Ledbetter, J.A. & Press, O.W. (2000) Signaling events involved in anti-CD20-induced apoptosis of malignant human B cells. *Cancer Immunology, Immunotherapy: CII*, **48**, 673–683.

Sini, P., James, D., Chresta, C. & Guichard, S. (2010) Simultaneous inhibition of mTORC1 and mTORC2 by mTOR kinase inhibitor AZD8055 induces autophagy and cell death in cancer cells. *Autophagy*, **6**, 553–554.

Smith, S.M., van Besien, K., Karrison, T., Dancey, J., McLaughlin, P., Younes, A., Smith, S., Stiff, P., Lester, E., Modi, S., Doyle, L.A., Vokes, E.E. & Pro, B. (2010) Temsirolimus has activity in non-mantle cell non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma subtypes: The University of Chicago phase II consortium. *Journal of Clinical Oncology*, **31**, 4740–4746.

Sparks, C.A. & Guertin, D.A. (2010) Targeting mTOR: prospects for mTOR complex 2 inhibitors in cancer therapy. *Oncogene*, **29**, 3733–3744.

Swords, R., Kelly, K., Carew, J., Nawrocki, S., Mahalingam, D., Sarantopoulos, J., Bearss, D. & Giles, F. (2011) The Pim kinases: new targets for drug development. *Current Drug Targets*, **12**, 2059–2066.

Tan, D. & Dumez, H. (2010) In-human phase I study exploring three schedules of OSI-027, a novel small molecule TORC1/TORC2 inhibitor, in patients with advanced solid tumors and lymphoma. *Journal of Clinical Oncology* (ASCO Meeting Abstracts), **28**, 3006.

Thomas, G.V. (2006) mTOR and cancer: reason for dancing at the crossroads? *Current Opinion in Genetics & Development*, **16**, 78–84.

Vega, F., Medeiros, L.J., Leventaki, V., Atwell, C., Cho-Vega, J.H., Tian, L., Claret, F.-X. & Rassidakis, G.Z. (2006) Activation of mammalian target of rapamycin signaling pathway contributes to tumor cell survival in anaplastic lymphoma kinase-positive anaplastic large cell lymphoma. *Cancer Research*, **66**, 6589–6597.

Vézina, C., Kudelski, A. & Sehgal, S.N. (1975) Rapamycin (AY-22,989), a new antifungal antibiotic. I. Taxonomy of the producing streptomycete and isolation of the active principle. *The Journal of Antibiotics*, **28**, 721–726.

Wang, S., Rosenwald, I.B., Hutzler, M.J., Pihan, G.A., Savas, L., Chen, J.J. & Woda, B.A. (1999) Expression of the eukaryotic translation initiation factors 4E and 2alpha in non-Hodgkin’s lymphomas. *The American Journal of Pathology*, **155**, 247–255.

Wang, X., Yue, P., Chan, C.-B., Ye, K., Ueda, T., Watanabe-Fukunaga, R., Fukunaga, R., Fu, H., Khuri, F.R. & Sun, S.-Y. (2007) Inhibition of mammalian target of rapamycin induces phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase-dependent and Mnk-mediated eukaryotic translation initiation factor 4E phosphorylation. *Molecular and Cellular Biology*, **27**, 7405–7413.

Wanner, K., Hipp, S., Oelsner, M., Ringshausen, I., Bogner, C., Peschel, C. & Decker, T. (2006) Mammalian target of rapamycin inhibition induces cell cycle arrest in diffuse large B cell lymphoma (DLBCL) cells and sensitises DLBCL cells to rituximab. *British Journal of Haematology*, **134**, 475–484.

Webster, A.C., Lee, V.W., Chapman, J.R. & Craig, J.C. (2006) Target of rapamycin inhibitors (TOR-I; sirolimus and everolimus) for primary immunosuppression in kidney transplant recipients. *Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews (Online)*, CD004290.

Willems, L., Chapuis, N., Puissant, A., Maciel, T.T., Green, A.S., Jacque, N., Vignon, C., Park, S., Guichard, S., Herault, O., Fricot, A., Hermine, O., Moura, I.C., Auberge, P., Ifrah, N., Dreyfus, F., Bonnet, D., Lacombe, C., Mayeux, P., Bouscary, D. & Tamburini, J. (2012) The dual mTORC1 and mTORC2 inhibitor AZD8055 has anti-tumor activity in acute myeloid leukemia. *Leukemia*, **26**, 1195–1202.

Wilson, W., Gerecitano, J. & Goy, A. (2012) The Bruton’s tyrosine kinase (BTK) inhibitor, ibrutinib (PCI-32765), has preferential activity in the ABC subtype of relapsed/refractory de novo diffuse large. *Blood*, **120**, abstract 686.

Witzens-Harig, M., Memmer, M.L., Dreyling, M. & Hess, G. (2013) A phase I/II trial to evaluate the safety, feasibility and activity of salvage therapy consisting of the mTOR inhibitor Temsirolimus added to standard therapy of Rituximab and DHAP for the treatment of patients with relapsed or refractory diffuse ce. *BMC Cancer*, **13**, 308.

Witzig, T.E. & Gupta, M. (2010) Signal transduction inhibitor therapy for lymphoma. *Hematology/the Education Program of the American Society of Hematology. American Society of Hematology. Education Program*, **2010**, 265–270.

Witzig, T.E., Geyer, S.M., Ghobrial, I., Inwards, D.J., Fonseca, R., Kurtin, P., Ansell, S.M., Luyun, R., Flynn, P.J., Morton, R.F., Dakhil, S.R., Gross, H. & Kaufmann, S.H. (2005) Phase II trial of single-agent temsirolimus (CCI-779) for relapsed mantle cell lymphoma. *Journal of Clinical Oncology: Official Journal of the American Society of Clinical Oncology*, **23**, 5347–5356.

Witzig, T.E., Reeder, C.B., LaPlant, B.R., Gupta, M., Johnston, P.B., Micallef, I.N., Porrata, L.F., Ansell, S.M., Colgan, J.P., Jacobsen, E.D., Ghobrial, I.M. & Habermann, T.M. (2011) A phase II trial of the oral mTOR inhibitor everolimus in relapsed aggressive lymphoma. *Leukemia*, **2**, 341–347.

Wlodarski, P., Kasprzycka, M., Liu, X., Marzec, M., Robertson, E.S., Slupianek, A. & Wasik, M.A. (2005) Activation of mammalian target of rapamycin in transformed B lymphocytes is nutrient dependent but independent of Akt, mitogen-activated protein kinase/extracellular signal-regulated kinase kinase, insulin growth factor-I, and serum. *Cancer Research*, **65**, 7800–7808.

Würfllein, D., Dechant, M., Stockmeyer, B., Tutt, A.L., Hu, P., Repp, R., Kalden, J.R., van de Winkel, J.G., Epstein, A.L., Valerius, T., Glennie, M. & Gramatzki, M. (1998) Evaluating antibodies for their capacity to induce cell-mediated lysis of malignant B cells. *Cancer Research*, **58**, 3051–3058.

Xu, Z.-Z., Xia, Z.-G., Wang, A.-H., Wang, W.-F., Liu, Z.-Y., Chen, L.-Y. & Li, J.-M. (2013) Activation of the PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway in diffuse large B cell lymphoma: clinical significance and inhibitory effect of rituximab. *Annals of Hematology*, **92**, 1351–1358.

Yazbeck, V.Y., Buglio, D., Georgakis, G.V., Li, Y., Iwado, E., Romaguera, J.E., Kondo, S. & Younges, A. (2008) Temsirolimus downregulates p21 without altering cyclin D1 expression and induces autophagy and synergizes with vorinostat in mantle cell lymphoma. *Experimental Hematology*, **36**, 443–450.

Yu, K., Shi, C., Toral-Barza, L., Lucas, J., Shor, B., Kim, J.E., Zhang, W.-G., Mahoney, R., Gaydos, C., Tardio, L., Kim, S.K., Conant, R., Curran, K., Kaplan, J., Verheijen, J., Ayral-Kaloustian, S., Mansour, T.S., Abraham, R.T., Zask, A. & Gibbons, J.J. (2010) Beyond rapalog therapy: preclinical pharmacology and antitumor activity of WYE-125132, an ATP-competitive and specific inhibitor of mTORC1 and mTORC2. *Cancer Research*, **70**, 621–631.

Zang, C., Eucker, J., Liu, H., Müller, A., Possinger, K. & Scholz, C.W. (2013) Concurrent inhibition of PI3-kinase and mTOR induces cell death in diffuse large B cell lymphomas, a mechanism involving down regulation of Mcl-1. *Cancer Letters*, **339**, 288–297.

Zeng, Z., Shi, Y.X., Tsao, T., Qiu, Y., Kornblau, S.M., Baggerly, K.A., Liu, W., Jessen, K., Liu, Y., Kantarjian, H., Rommel, C., Fruman, D.A., Andreeff, M. & Konopleva, M. (2012) Targeting of mTORC1/2 by the mTOR kinase inhibitor PP242 induces apoptosis in AML cells under conditions mimicking the bone marrow micro-environment. *Blood*, **120**, 2679–2689.

Zent, C.S., LaPlant, B.R., Johnston, P.B., Call, T.G., Habermann, T.M., Micallef, I.N. & Witzig, T.E. (2010) The treatment of recurrent/refractory chronic lymphocytic leukemia/small lymphocytic lymphoma (CLL) with everolimus results in clinical responses and mobilization of CLL cells into the circulation. *Cancer*, **9**, 2201–2207.

Zhang, H., Bajraszewski, N., Wu, E., Wang, H., Moseman, A.P., Dabora, S.L., Griffin, J.D. & Kwiatkowski, D.J. (2007) PDGFRs are critical for PI3K/Akt activation and negatively regulated by mTOR. *The Journal of Clinical Investigation*, **117**, 730–738.
