
Free Radical Research

ISSN: 1071-5762 (Print) 1029-2470 (Online) Journal homepage: http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/ifra20

# LOX-1 and ROS, inseparable factors in the process of endothelial damage

V. Lubrano & S. Balzan

To cite this article: V. Lubrano & S. Balzan (2014) LOX-1 and ROS, inseparable factors in the process of endothelial damage, Free Radical Research, 48:8, 841-848, DOI: 10.3109/10715762.2014.929122

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.3109/10715762.2014.929122

Accepted author version posted online: 02 Jun 2014.
Published online: 23 Jun 2014.

Submit your article to this journal

Article views: 284

View related articles

View Crossmark data

Citing articles: 1 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=ifra20

Download by: [University of California, San Diego] Date: 09 December 2016, At: 00:16

Free Radical Research, August 2014; 48(8): 841–848

© 2014 Informa UK, Ltd.

ISSN 1071-5762 print/ISSN 1029-2470 online

DOI: 10.3109/10715762.2014.929122

REVIEW ARTICLE

LOX-1 and ROS, inseparable factors in the process of endothelial damage

V. Lubrano¹ & S. Balzan²

¹Fondazione CNR/Regione Toscana G. Monasterio, Pisa, Italy, and ²Institute of Clinical Physiology, CNR, Pisa, Italy

Abstract

Lectin-like oxidized low-density lipoprotein (LOX-1) has been identified in endothelial cells as the main receptor of oxidized low-density lipoprotein (OxLDL). LOX-1 is upregulated in the presence of pathological conditions including atherosclerosis, hypertension, and diabetes because it acts as a mediator of “endothelial dysfunction”. It promotes the generation of superoxide anion ($\mathrm{O}_{2}^{-}$), the inhibition of nitric oxide (NO) production and the increment of endothelial adhesiveness to monocytes. Recently, it was reported that OxLDL, binding to LOX-1, determined a significant increase in the generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS), suggesting the involvement of signaling pathways such as mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs).

It is now generally accepted that ROS act indirectly on the modulation of LOX-1 expression because ROS oxidize native LDL. Moreover, LOX-1 activation *per se* may stimulate ROS generation. Accordingly, our findings showed that high levels of ROS can directly increase LOX-1 production in microvascular endothelial cells (HMEC-1).

It has been reported that OxLDL, usually >20 μg protein/ml, induced apoptosis in a variety of cell types. At low concentrations (<5 μg protein/ml) OxLDL appears to be associated with cell proliferation and low levels of ROS-induced capillary tube formation in endothelial cells.

Our data and those of the literature indicate the existence of a direct control of LOX-1 by ROS.

Although ROS in large amounts clearly have detrimental effects on cell biology, small amounts of ROS could have a beneficial effect, suggesting its therapeutic potential for reducing ischemic tissue.

Keywords: Ox-LDL receptors, free radicals, oxidative stress, endothelial function, angiogenesis

Introduction

For a long time elevated levels of low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol were considered to be a risk factor for a number of diseases, until studies showed that the effect of oxidative modification of LDL was a well-established contributor to the pathogenesis of several morbid and sometimes fatal illnesses, including cardiovascular disease [1]. A scavenger receptor called lectin-like oxidized low-density lipoprotein receptor (LOX)-1 was first cloned as a major receptor for oxidatively modified LDL by Sawamura and colleagues [2]. Recently it has been reported that this receptor accepts oxidized-LDL (OxLDL) as a ligand, and binds and internalizes it by receptor-mediated endocytosis [3]. It has a type II membrane protein structure with a short N-terminal cytosolic domain and a long C-terminal extracellular domain, which is distinct from the type I and 2 scavenger receptors, CD36 and CD68 [2]. It has been suggested that OxLDL uptake through the LOX-1 receptor, abundantly present on the surface of vascular endothelium, might be involved in the endothelial activation or dysfunction in atherogenesis [4]. Moreover, Sawamura et al. suggested that OxLDL, binding to LOX-1, can upregulate it at the transcriptional level in a time- and concentration-dependent fashion [2]. Other factors such as cytokines, shear stress, and advanced glycation end-products can upregulate LOX-1

[5,6,7]. Generally LOX-1 expression is upregulated in pathological conditions such as hypertension, diabetes, and hypercholesterolemia [8] and is present in large amounts in cells derived from human and animal atheroma [9].

LOX-1 acts as a mediator of “endothelial dysfunction” because it promotes the generation of superoxide anion ($\mathrm{O}_{2}^{-}$), the inhibition of nitric oxide (NO) production, and the increment of endothelial adhesiveness to monocytes [10]. In this context, it was recently reported that OxLDL binding to LOX-1, determined a significant increase in the generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) [11], which seems to be due to the activation of several pathways involved in crucial cellular functions such as phagocytosis, apoptosis, activation of nuclear factor-kB (NF-kB) pathway, and production of cytokines [10].

So far, ROS production has always been observed after the activation of LOX-1. In this review we will discuss the data from the literature regarding the relationship between LOX-1 and ROS.

Inductors of LOX-1

In endothelial cells LOX-1 exhibits binding activity for multiple ligands and the expression of LOX-1 is upregulated in the presence of pathological conditions including

Correspondence: Dr. Valter Lubrano, Fondazione CNR/Regione Toscana G. Monasterio, Via Moruzzi n° 1, 56100 - Pisa, Italy.

Tel: +390503152199. Fax: +39-050-3153454. E-mail: walterl@ifc.cnr.it

(Received date: 10 January 2014; Accepted date: 26 May 2014; Published online: 20 June 2014)

atherosclerosis, hypertension, and diabetes [12]. In basal cellular conditions, LOX-1 expression is very low, but several proinflammatory and proatherogenic stimuli can induce it [8, 12]; pro-inflammatory cytokines include tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNFα), interleukin-1 (IL-1), interferon gamma (IFNγ), angiotensin II (Ang II), endothelin-1 (ET-1), free radicals, and fluid shear stress. In particular, LOX-1 recognizes the protein moiety and lipid constituents of OxLDL [13]. Studies *in vitro* suggested that LOX-1 expression can be also upregulated in endothelial cells by 15-lipoxygenase-modified LDL. Moreover LOX-1 over-expression increases the association of 15-lipoxygenase-modified LDL in endothelial cells, supporting the hypothesis that minimally oxidized LDL may contribute to LOX-1 induction and to endothelial cell activation [14].

OxLDL is rapidly internalized into cells following the interaction with LOX-1; this internalization process is inhibited by LOX-1-blocking antibody which acts by preventing the binding of OxLDL with the receptor [15]. After endocytosis of the complex OxLDL-LOX-1, the receptor is uncoupled from OxLDL, and both are located in separate compartments within the cytosol [3].

Chen et al. (2006) [15] studied the transcriptional mechanism for OxLDL-induced human LOX-1 gene expression by “promoter bashing” and showed that the promoter region between nt-1494 and -1599 was required for OxLDL-induced LOX-1 promoter activation in human coronary artery endothelial cells (HCAECs). These authors also examined the mechanism underlying Ang II-induced human LOX-1 gene upregulation [16]. Interestingly, they found that the promoter activation region between nt-2131 and -2247 which includes an active NF-κB binding site is required for Ang II-induced human LOX-1 promoter transactivation [16]. Among the transcription factors possibly involved in the transcriptional regulation of LOX-1, several studies have emphasized the important role of NF-κB in a variety of disease states, including atherosclerosis, myocardial ischemia, hypertension, and tumorigenesis [17, 18]. We are aware that the self-amplifying positive feedback loop between ROS and LOX-1 involves NF-κB expression. This interaction may be associated with cell survival, motility, and cell activation as well as cell death [19–21]. H₂O₂ is an activator of NF-κB in endothelial cells [19, 20], and over-expression of catalase blocks NF-κB activation induced by TNFα; oxidative radical stress has stimulatory effects on NF-κB through the activation of KB Kinase inhibitor (IKK), which is mediated by the phosphorylation of serine residues in the activation loops [22]. In addition nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADPH) oxidase 2 (Nox2) transcription is dependent on NF-κB; two potential cis-acting elements in the murine Nox2 promoter control NF-κB-dependent regulation [23].

It is now generally accepted that ROS also indirectly act on the modulation of LOX-1 expression; in fact they oxidize native LDL, resulting in the formation of OxLDL fractions. It is now amply evident that OxLDL is more important than native LDL in atherogenesis [8].

Cominacini et al. (2000) [19] showed that ROS can induce the expression of LOX-1. In other studies, [24] they showed that LOX-1 activation *per se* can stimulate ROS generation, suggesting a positive feedback loop between ROS and LOX-1 (Figure 1). Transcriptional upregulation of LOX-1 by OxLDL in isolated endothelial cells and in other cell types also results in the generation of large amounts of ROS [25]. Therefore, LOX-1 enhances ROS and ROS enhances LOX-1.

Preliminary unpublished data from our laboratory showed that high levels of ROS can directly increase LOX-1 production in human microvascular endothelial cells (HMEC-1), a cell line that has retained morphological, phenotypic, and functional characteristics of normal human microvascular endothelial cells [26] (Figure 2). HMEC-1 were provided by the Center for Disease Control (Atlanta, USA) and were obtained by transfection of primary cells with PBR-322-based plasmid containing the coding region for the simian virus 40 large T [26].

The fact that increasing evidence supports a direct role of microcirculatory dysfunction in the genesis of target-organ damage in metabolic disorder [27–29] and that the endothelial cell in microcirculation is the most representative of the vascular system, prompted us to consider HMEC-1 a suitable model for investigating the effect of oxygen free radicals on cells of human microcirculation. Soluble (s)LOX-1 levels were measured in the medium of HMEC-1 by an ELISA assay [30] in response to incubation with H₂O₂ (100 μM) in presence or absence of Vitamin E (20 mM), a well-known antioxidant compound. The concentrations for H₂O₂ and Vitamin E used in these experiments had been previously selected in our laboratory because they represented the maximal dose without cytotoxicity. The incubation with H₂O₂ induced a significant increment in sLOX-1 medium concentration compared to the basal condition (*p* < 0.01), while this effect was abolished when the cells were in presence of Vitamin E (*p* < 0.01) (Figure 2). Vitamin E alone did not influence sLOX-1 levels. Measurement of other important markers of endothelial function such as IL-6, ET-1, and ICAM-1, showed similar increments by H₂O₂ treatment and a decrease in presence of Vitamin E (data not shown).

Our findings suggest that ROS may act alone, not requiring the presence of native LDL for the up-regulation of LOX-1.

### LOX-1-induced increase of ROS

LOX-1 has been shown to be activated by shear stress, ET-1, Ang II, and oxidative stress. The binding of OxLDL to LOX-1 activates a membrane multi-subunit enzyme NADPH oxidase on the endothelial cell, which results in a rapid increase in intracellular ROS. ROS generated include O₂⁻, H₂O₂, peroxynitrite (ONOO⁻), NO, and hydroxyl (OH⁻) radicals. In particular, O₂⁻ is responsible for inactivating NO in a chemical reaction during which the cytotoxic radical peroxynitrite is formed [31, 32].

(A) Metabolic Disorder
Hypertension
Smoking

Angiotensin II
Cytokines
Endothelin
Shear Stress

Oxidized-LDL
Free Radicals
Glycoxidized LDL

High levels of ROS

ROS

LOX-1

NADPH
oxidase

O₂⁻

ROS

H₂O₂

NF-κB

eNOS

PI3 Kinase
Bcl-2
Bcl-xl

PKB/Akt
Cytochrome-c
Caspase-9
Caspase-3

Endothelial Dysfunction

Apoptosis

(B)

Mild values of oxidative stress

Low levels of ROS

ROS

LOX-1

NADPH
oxidase

H₂O₂
O₂⁻

NF-kB

VEGF

Tube formation

Atherosclerotic plaque rupture

Cell proliferation

Cell Growth

Angiogenesis

Figure 1. Pathways engaging ROS and LOX-1 in apoptosis or angiogenesis. Panel (A) many inducers lead to very high oxidative stress that upregulates LOX-1, with subsequent increased level of ROS by means of NADPH oxidase. The followed translocation of NF-kB causes apoptosis. The upregulation of LOX-1 also induces endothelial apoptosis by the activation of caspases 3 and 9. Over-expression of LOX-1 induces endothelial dysfunction by the down-regulation of eNOS. Panel (B) low levels of ROS induces LOX-1 expression, With resultant activation of NADPH oxidase followed by translocation of NF-kB. This subsequently induces VEGF gene transcription which contributes to tube formation.

Increased O₂⁻ not only reacts with intracellular NO, but also up-regulates LOX-1 expression, thereby contributing to further ROS generation [33,19]. Several studies indicate that ROS derived from NADPH oxidase act as a potent causal factor that initiates and accelerates the development of atherosclerosis [34]. The activation of NADPH oxidase induces a redox signal that involves p38MAPK and NF-kB, the latter of which controls the expression of a number of pro-inflammatory and adhesion molecules [35]. The activation of NF-kB appears to be induced by ROS through the cleavage of IkB from the p50–65 heterodimer. The increased cellular production of ROS was prevented by pre-incubating endothelial cells with different antioxidants known to work as radical scavengers, supporting that the incubation of OxLDL with endothelial cells is associated with an increased intracellular production of ROS [19].

ROS and LOX-1 in apoptosis and angiogenesis

Atherosclerosis is a chronic inflammatory vascular disease having as ultimate outcome atheromatous plaque, a focal lesion located within the intima of large and medium-sized arteries [36,37]. Endothelial dysfunction is a very early stage in the atherogenic process and OxLDL, through LOX-1, contributes to the induction of apoptosis [14]. Moreover, apoptosis also seems to play an important role in the destabilization of atherosclerotic plaques. Besides

are detrimental to cell biology, and attempts have been made to scavenge ROS both in atherosclerosis and cancer. At the same time, recent studies [21] indicate that small amounts of ROS and consequently of OxLDL, which are present during physiological state or dyslipidemia, may have a non-patho-physiologic effect on endothelial cells. In particular, the generation of small amounts of ROS, like those induced by low concentrations of OxLDL (<5 μg/mL), appears to stimulate angiogenesis through upregulation of LOX-1, and LOX-1-mediated activation of NADPH oxidase/mitogen-activated protein kinases/ NF-kB pathway. These authors also showed that OxLDL at these small concentrations induced vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), which is the main element of capillary tube formation in endothelial cells. This effect was inhibited by anti-LOX-1 antibody, which also decreases ROS generation, NF-kB activation, and upregulation of VEGF (Figure 1B). According to Dandapat et al. (2007) [21] the pathways leading to OxLDL apoptosis are the same that lead to angiogenesis by small OxLDL concentrations, but the only difference is in the large amount of ROS generated by the high concentration of OxLDL. The proposed pathway in OxLDL-mediated capillary tube formation derives from the use of specific inhibitors of NADPH oxidase, p38 MAPK, and p44/42 MAPK, as well as the use of gp91phox NADPH oxidase knockdown experiment. The NADPH oxidase inhibitor apocynin and siRNA gp91phox blocked the downstream signaling as well as VEGF expression and capillary tube formation. The p38 MAPK inhibitor SB203580 and the p44/42 MAPK inhibitor U0126 both blocked NF-kB expression as well as VEGF expression and capillary tube formation [21].

Khaidakov M et al. (2012) [49] indicate that OxLDL enhances expression of multiple receptors involved in transmission of pro-angiogenic signaling from growth factors, cytokines, chemokines, and components of the extracellular matrix; microarray analysis revealed upregulation of components of VEGF pathway that are implicated in its mitogenic action including PLCG-1 (Phospholipase C, gamma 1), and SRC (tyrosine kinase proto-oncogene). While angiogenesis may be an important tool for re-oxygenation of ischemic tissues, in an atherosclerotic lesion it may cause expansion vulnerability and rupture of plaque by hemorrhage in the microvasculature [50]. In the early stages of atherosclerosis, angiogenesis sustains growth of the plaque [51]. In vitro studies have shown that stimulation of human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVEC) with OxLDL activates LOX-1 expression upregulates adhesion molecules, inflammatory proteins, tissue factors, and remodeling proteins like MMP-2 and MMP-9, many of which are also stimulators of angiogenesis [52].

NADPH oxidase appears to be the sole source for OxLDL/LOX-1 generated ROS both in apoptosis and angiogenesis; in fact the decrease in O₂⁻ production was observed only by inhibition of NADPH oxidase. Moreover, in both cases, the activation and translocation of NF-kB to the nucleus is an early consequence (within minutes) of OxLDL–LOX-1 interaction [19] (Figure 1A and B).

ROS, LOX-1, and ischemia-reperfusion

Another source of ROS derives from events of ischemia-reperfusion, with anoxia or hypoxia. In the arterioles and capillaries, endothelial cells, macrophages, and other cells of the immune system generate large amounts of free radicals. ROS cause the release of pro-inflammatory cytokines, and react with NO to produce reactive nitrogen species such as ONOO⁻ that are highly reactive and destructive radicals. The radicals upregulate NADPH oxidases, followed by stimulation of redox-sensitive transcription factors such as NF-κB as previously mentioned. This effect induces the expression of cell-surface adhesion molecules such as leukocyte adhesion molecule CD18, endothelial ICAM-1, and P-selectin, and a release of cytokines to further promote the recruitment of neutrophils to the heart after ischemia-reperfusion [53].

Inhibition of ROS has been shown to reduce the phenomenon of reperfusion injury [54] and improve cardiac dysfunction in several animal models [55]. In fact, a number of studies have shown that administration of ROS scavengers before reperfusion can limit the so-called reperfusion injury [56]. Li et al. (2003) [57] showed that the expression of LOX-1 was markedly increased in the endocardial and the sub-endocardial regions of rats subjected to ischemia-reperfusion, whereas ischemia alone was not enough to increase the expression of LOX-1. Administration of a specific binding antibody to LOX-1 also reduced ischemia-reperfusion-mediated apoptosis and lipid peroxidation and attenuated the upregulation of LOX-1 [57].

---

ROS, LOX-1, and hypertension

Although LOX-1 expression is minimal in aorta from normal rats, Nagase et al. (2000) [58] reported that its expression was markedly upregulated in spontaneously hypertensive rats, suggesting a correlation between LOX-1 and hypertension. This concept is supported by the in vitro observations that Ang II upregulates LOX-1 gene expression and OxLDL upregulates angiotensin II type 1 receptors (AT1R) expression in cultured HCAECs [59]. Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors and AT1R blockers decrease LOX-1 expression [60]. Previous studies have shown that AT1R activation stimulates the expression of LOX-1 [59], and LOX-1 activation, in turn, upregulates AT1R expression. Activation of both AT1R and LOX-1 induces a state of oxidative stress [8].

LOX-1 deletion resulted in a selective attenuation of blood pressure in response to Ang II [61]. ACE inhibitors, AT1R blocker, and aldosterone blockers are efficacious in the treatment of hypertension. In fact, their beneficial effects, including prevention of cardiovascular, renal disease, and mortality, have been established in large clinical trials [62]. Kobayashi et al. (2006) [63] suggested that these effects may be due not only to decreased synthesis of Ang II, but also to the ability of these drugs to prevent the breakdown of the potent vasodilator bradykinin-eNOS and oxidative stress-LOX-1 pathway. All these findings

---

Effect of ROS on LOX-1 in endothelial function

suggest that LOX-1 contributes to the pathogenesis of hypertension, which is induced by the activation of the renin-angiotensin system.

---

Effects of diet and smoking on LOX-1 and ROS

We reported that OxLDL induces endothelial apoptosis or endothelial damage. It has been proposed that antioxidants such as Vitamin C inhibit oxidant production and prevent apoptosis [64, 65]. Epidemiologic studies show that a high consumption of polyphenolic flavonoids is inversely related to the risk of cardiovascular disease [66] and this phenomenon may be associated with their antioxidant ability to scavenge various types of radicals in aqueous and organic environments [67]. Resveratrol attenuated OxLDL-provoked apoptotic features, generation of ROS, and accumulation of intracellular calcium, indicating that red wine intake may protect against oxidized LDL-induced endothelial dysfunction [68]. Other substances may act by blocking other signaling pathways such as N-acetylcysteine that suppress the activity of redox-sensitive activating protein-1 and NF-kB regulating expression of apoptotic genes [69].

Our recent findings showed that in HMEC-1 Lisosan G reduced the effect of OxLDL on ICAM-1 and LOX-1 production [70]. This effect suggests an important role of this natural compound in preventing the early events of atherosclerosis or microcirculatory dysfunction. On the contrary, in high-fat diets LOX-1 is over-expressed. LOX-1 expression in the adipose tissue of obese mice was closely correlated with the expression of Monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 (MCP-1) and other proinflammatory cytokines such as IL-6, and Macrophage inflammatory protein-1 (αMIP-1α) was suppressed by knocking out LOX-1 [71].

In addition, another important source of oxidative stress is cigarette smoking, which induces the inflammation of vessel walls and increases cardiovascular risk for myocardial and cerebral infarction [72]. Cigarette smoking is a determinant of LOX-1 ligand activity in healthy men and thus is thought to be a crucial risk factor for initiation and progression of atherosclerosis through OxLDL production [73]. A cohort study indicated the prevalence of smoking to be higher among people with higher sLOX-1 levels [74]. The serum sLOX-1 level was found to increase in close association with both the smoking-related variables and the inflammatory marker, the high sensitive C reactive protein (hsCRP) [71].

---

Conclusion

In conclusion, our findings as well as those of other studies indicate the existence of the direct control of LOX-1 by ROS, and this could be important for the control of angiogenesis. Generation of ROS has been generally thought to be a toxic phenomenon in human biology and attempts have been made to scavenge ROS by a variety of approaches in a number of disease states, including

atherosclerosis and cancer. Several antioxidant and anti-
inflammatory compounds are being investigated for the
prevention and treatment of several types of cardiovascu-
lar disease. Another way to prevent the damage caused by
ROS is to control endocytosis induced by the binding of
oxLDL to LOX-1. Further understanding of the proteins
that facilitate OxLDL transfer across the endothelium may
allow the development of pharmaceutical agents that
inhibit its endocytosis.

Although ROS in large amounts clearly have detrimental
effects on cell biology, being responsible for LOX-1
activation, endothelial dysfunction, cell damage, and
apoptosis, small amounts of ROS appear to be beneficial
for the growth of new vessels.

However, while angiogenesis is important in the treat-
ment of ischemic tissue, in primary atherosclerotic lesions
it can induce expansion and rupture of plaque, with dra-
matic consequences.

Further studies are needed to understand how to use
ROS-induced angiogenesis for therapeutic purposes with-
out aggravating atherosclerotic plaques in the arteries
already affected.

In conclusion, small amounts of LOX-1 and ROS seem
to have therapeutic potential for reducing the development
of atherosclerotic disease.

Acknowledgements

The authors are grateful to Lucrecia Mota Garcia for her
English editing support and to Alison Frank for the final
English revision.

Declaration of interest

The authors report no declarations of interest. The authors
alone are responsible for the content and writing of the
paper.

References

[1] Suzuki T, Kohno H, Hasegawa A, Toshima S, Amaki T,
Kurabayashi M, et al. Diagnostic implications of circulating
oxidized low density lipoprotein levels as a biochemical risk
marker of coronary artery disease. Clin Biochem 2002;35:
347–353.
[2] Sawamura T, Kume N, Aoyama T, Moriwaki H, Hoshikawa H,
Aiba Y, et al. An endothelial receptor for oxidized low-density
lipoprotein. Nature 1997;386:73–77.
[3] Twigg MW, Freestone K, Homer-Vanniasinkam S,
Ponnambalam S. The LOX-1 scavenger receptor and its impli-
cations in the treatment of vascular disease. Cardiol Res Pract
2012;2012:632408.
[4] Goyal T, Mitra S, Khaidakov M, Wang X, Singla S, Ding Z,
et al. Current concepts of the role of oxidized LDL receptors
in atherosclerosis. Curr Atheroscler Rep 2012;14:150–159.
[5] Murase T, Kume N, Korenaga R, Ando J, Sawamura T,
Masaki T, Kita T. Fluid shear stress transcriptionally induces
lectin-like oxidized LDL receptor-1 in vascular endothelial
cells. Circ Res 1998;83:328–333.
[6] Lubrano V and Balzan S. LOX-1, a new marker of risk and
prognosis in coronary artery disease? Mol Cell Biochem
2013;383:223–230.
[7] Jono T, Miyazaki A, Nagai R, Sawamura T, Kitamura T,
Horiuchi S. Lectin-like oxidized low density lipoprotein
receptor-1 (LOX-1) serves as an endothelial receptor for
advanced glycation end products (AGE). FEBS Lett
2002;511:170–174.
[8] Mehta JL, Chen J, Hermonat PL, Romeo F, Novelli G. Lectin-
like, oxidized low-density lipoprotein receptor-1 (LOX-1): a
critical player in the development of atherosclerosis and
related disorders. Cardiovasc Res 2006;69:36–45.
[9] Kataoka H, Kume N, Miyamoto S, Minami M, Moriwaki H,
Murase T, et al. Expression of lectin-like oxidized low density
lipoprotein receptor-1 in human atherosclerotic lesions. Circu-
lation 1999;99:3110–3117.
[10] Kita T, Kume N, Minami M, Hayashida K, Murayama T, Sano
H, et al. Role of oxidized LDL in atherosclerosis. Ann N Y
Acad Sci. 2001;947:199–205.
[11] Cominacini L, Fratta Pasini A, Garbin U, Pastorino A,
Rigoni A, Nava C, et al. The platelet-endothelium interaction
mediated by lectin-like oxidized low-density lipoprotein
receptor-1 reduces the intracellular concentration of nitric
oxide in endothelial cells. J Am Coll Cardiol 2003;41:
499–507.
[12] Xu S, Ogura S, Chen J, Little PJ, Moss J and Liu P. LOX-1 in
atherosclerosis: biological functions and pharmacological
modifiers. Cell Mol Life Sci 2013;70:2859–2872.
[13] Moriwaki H, Kume N, Sawamura T, Aoyama T, Hoshikawa
H, Ochi H, et al. Ligand specificity of LOX-1, a novel endothe-
lial receptor for oxidized low density lipoprotein. Arterioscler
Thromb Vasc Biol 1998;18:1541–1547.
[14] Pirillo A, Norata GD, Catapano AL. LOX-1, OxLDL, and
atherosclerosis. Mediators Inflamm 2013;2013:1–12.
doi:10.1155/2013/152786.
[15] Chen J, Liu Y, Liu H, Hermonat PL, Mehta JL. Lectin-like
oxidized low-density lipoprotein receptor-1 (LOX-1)
transcriptional regulation by Oct-1 in human endothelial cells:
implications for atherosclerosis. Biochem J 2006;393:
255–265.
[16] Chen J, Liu Y, Liu H, Hermonat PL, Mehta JL. Molecular
dissection of angiotensin II-activated human LOX-1 promoter.
Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol 2006;26:1163–1168.
[17] Coles AH, Gannon H, Cerny A, Kurt-Jones E, Jones SN.
Inhibitor of growth-4 promotes IkappaB promoter activation
to suppress NF-kappaB signaling and innate immunity. Proc
Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010;107:11423–11428.
[18] Kashiwase K, Higuchi Y, Hirotani S, Yamaguchi O, Hikoso S,
Takeda T, et al. CaMKII activates ASK1 and NF-kappaB to
induce cardiomyocyte hypertrophy. Biochem Biophys Res
Commun 2005;327:136–142.
[19] Cominacini L, Pasini AF, Garbin U, Davoli A, Tosetti ML,
Campagnola M, et al. Oxidized low density lipoprotein
(ox-LDL) binding to ox-LDL receptor-1 in endothelial cells
induces the activation of NF-kappaB through an increased
production of intracellular reactive oxygen species. J Biol
Chem 2000;275:12633–12638.
[20] Groeger G, Quiney C, Cotter TG. Hydrogen peroxide as a
cell-survival signaling molecule. Antioxid Redox Signal
2009;11:2655–2671.
[21] Dandapat A, Hu C, Sun L, Mehta JL. Small concentrations of
ox-LDL induce capillary tube formation from endothelial cells
via LOX-1-dependent redox-sensitive pathway. Arterioscler
Thromb Vasc Biol 2007;27:2435–2442.
[22] Kamata H, Manabe T, Oka S, Kamata K, Hirata H. Hydrogen
peroxide activate IkappaB kinases through phosphorylation of
serine residues in the activation loops. FEBS Lett 2002;519:
231–237.
[23] Anilkumar N, Weber R, Zhang M, Brewer A, Shah AM.
NOX4 and NOX2 NADPH oxidases mediate distinct cellular

redox signaling response to agonist stimulation. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol 2007;27:2435–2442.

[24] Cominacini L, Rigoni A, Pasini AF, Garbin U, Davoli A, Campagnola M, Pastorino AM, et al. The binding of oxidized low density lipoprotein (ox-LDL) to ox-LDL receptor-1 reduces the intracellular concentration of nitric oxide in endothelial cells through an increased production of superoxide. J Biol Chem 2001;276:13750–13755.

[25] Mehta JL, Li DY. Identification and autoregulation of receptor for ox-LDL in cultured human coronary artery endothelial cells. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 1998;248:511–514.

[26] Ades EW, Candal FJ, Swerlick RA, George VG, Summers S, Bosse DC, et al. HMEC-1: establishment of an immortalized human microvascular endothelial cell line. J Invest Dermatol 1992;99:683–690.

[27] Abarquez RF. Microvascular disease relevance in the hypertensive syndrome. Clin Hemorheol Microcirc 2003;29:295–300.

[28] He Z, King GL. Microvascular complications of diabetes. Endocrinol Metab Clin North Am 2004;33:215–238.

[29] Stokes K, Cooper D, Tailor A, Granger DN. Hypercholesterolemia promotes inflammation and microvascular dysfunction: role of nitric oxide and superoxide. Free Radic Biol Med 2002;33:1026–1036.

[30] Lubrano V, Del Turco S, Nicolini G, Di Cecco P, Basta G. Circulating levels of lectin-like oxidized low-density lipoprotein receptor-1 are associated with inflammatory markers. Lipids 2008;43:945–950.

[31] Ignarro LJ. Biosynthesis and metabolism of endothelium-derived nitric oxide. Ann Rev Pharmacol Toxicol 1990;30:535–560.

[32] Huie RE, Padmaja S. The reaction of no with superoxide. Free Radic Res Commun 1993;18:195–199.

[33] Chen XP, Xun KL, Wu Q, Zhang TT, Shi JS, Du GH. Oxidized low density lipoprotein receptor-1 mediates oxidized low density lipoprotein induced apoptosis in human umbilical vein endothelial cells: role of reactive oxygen species. Vasc Pharmacol 2007;47:1–9.

[34] Li JM, Shah AM. Endothelial cell superoxide generation: regulation and relevance for cardiovascular pathophysiology. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol 2004;287:R1014–R1030.

[35] Mehta JL, Chen J, Yu F, Li DY. Aspirin inhibits ox-LDL-mediated LOX-1 expression and metalloproteinase-1 in human coronary endothelial cells. Cardiovasc Res 2004;64:243–249.

[36] Libby P. Inflammation in atherosclerosis. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol 2012;32:2045–2051.

[37] Hansson GK, Robertson AK, Soderberg-Naucler C. Inflammation and atherosclerosis. Ann Rev Pathol 2006;1:297–329.

[38] Lu J, Mitra S, Wang X, Khaidakov M, Mehta JL. Oxidative stress and lectin-like ox-LDL-receptor LOX-1 in atherosclerosis and tumorigenesis. Antioxid Redox Signal 2011;15:2301–2333.

[39] Holvoet P, Harris TB, Tracy RP, Verhamme P, Newman AB, Rubin SM, et al. Association of high coronary heart disease risk status with circulating oxidized LDL in the well-functioning elderly: findings from the Health, Aging, and Body Composition study. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol 2003;23:1444–1448.

[40] Holvoet P, Kritchevsky SB, Tracy RP, Mertens A, Rubin SM, Butler J, et al. The metabolic syndrome, circulating oxidized LDL, and risk of myocardial infarction in well-functioning elderly people in the health, aging, and body composition cohort. Diabetes 2004;53:1068–1073.

[41] Segev A, Strauss BH, Witztum JL, Lau HK, Tsimikas S. Relationship of a comprehensive panel of plasma oxidized low-density lipoprotein markers to angiographic restenosis in patients undergoing percutaneous coronary intervention for stable angina. Am Heart J 2005;150:1007–1014.


Effect of ROS on LOX-1 in endothelial function 847

[42] Li R, Mittelstein D, Fang K, Beebe T, Quigley K, Berliner J, Hsiai TK. Angiopoietin-2 modulates Survivin expression in OxLDL-induced endothelial cell apoptosis. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2011;417:619–622.

[43] Mattaliano MD, Huard C, Cao W, Hill AA, Zhong W, Martinez RV, et al. LOX-1-dependent transcriptional regulation in response to oxidized LDL treatment of human aortic endothelial cells. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 2011;96:C1329–C1337.

[44] Salvayre R, Auge N, Benoist H, Negre-Salvayre A. Oxidized low-density lipoprotein-induced apoptosis. Biochem Biophys Acta 2002;30:213–221.

[45] Kataoka H, Kume N, Miyamoto S, Minami M, Morimoto M, Hayashida K, et al. Oxidized LDL Modulates Bax/Bcl-2 Through the Lectinlike Ox-LDL Receptor-1 in Vascular Smooth Muscle Cells. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol 2001;21:955–960.

[46] Wu CY, Tang ZH, Jiang L, Li XF, Jiang ZS, Liu LS. PCSK9 siRNA inhibits HUVEC apoptosis induced by ox-LDL via Bcl/Bax-caspase9-caspase3 pathway. Mol Cell Biochem 2012;359:347–358.

[47] Rueckschloss U, Villmow M, Klöckner U. NADPH oxidasederived superoxide impairs calcium transients and contraction in aged murine ventricular myocytes. Exp Gerontol 2010;45:788–796.

[48] Ou HC, Song TY, Yeh YC, Huang CY, Yang SF, Chiu TH, et al. EGCG protects against oxidized LDL-induced endothelial dysfunction by inhibiting LOX-1-mediated signaling. J Appl Physiol (1985). 2010;108:1745–1756.

[49] Khaidakov M, Mitra S, Wang X, Ding Z, Bora N, Lyzogubov V, et al. Large impact of low concentration oxidized LDL on angiogenic potential of human endothelial cells: a microarray study. PLoS One 2012;7:e47421.

[50] Wu FT, Stefanini MO, Mac Gabhann F, Kontos CD, Annex BH, Popel AS. A systems biology perspective on sVEGFR1: its biological function, pathogenic role and therapeutic use. J Cell Mol Med. 2010;14:528–552.

[51] Moulton KS. Angiogenesis in atherosclerosis: gathering evidence beyond speculation. Curr Opin Lipidol. 2006;17:548–555.

[52] Li D, Mehta JL. Upregulation of endothelial receptor for oxidized LDL (LOX-1) by oxidized LDL and implications in apoptosis of human coronary artery endothelial cells: evidence from use of antisense LOX-1 mRNA and chemical inhibitors. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol 2000;20:1116–1122.

[53] Hsieh HJ, Cheng CC, Wu ST, Chiu JJ, Wung BS, Wang DL. Increase of reactive oxygen species (ROS) in endothelial cells by shear flow and involvement of ROS in shear-induced c-fos expression. J Cell Physiol 1998;175:156–162.

[54] Bolli R, Zughaiib M, Li XY, Tang XL, Sun JZ, Triana JF, McCay PB. Recurrent ischemia in the canine heart causes recurrent bursts of free radical production that have a cumulative effect on contractile function. A pathophysiological basis for chronic myocardial “Stunning”. J Clin Invest 1995;96:1066–1084.

[55] Li D, Liu L, Chen H, Sawamura T, Mehta JL. LOX-1, an oxidized LDL endothelial receptor, induces CD40/CD40L signaling in human coronary artery endothelial cells. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol 2003;23:816–821.

[56] Koga K, Kenessey A, Powell S, Sison CP, Miller EJ, Ojamaa K. Macrophage migration inhibitory factor provides cardioprotection during ischemia/reperfusion by reducing oxidative stress. Antioxid Redox Signal 2011;14:1191–1202.

[57] Li D, Williams V, Liu L, Chen H, Sawamura T, Romeo F, Mehta JL. Expression of lectin-like oxidized low-density lipoprotein receptors during ischemia-reperfusion and its role in determination of apoptosis and left ventricular dysfunction. J Am Coll Cardiol 2003;41:1048–1055.

[58] Nagase M, Kaname S, Nagase T, Wang G, Ando K, Sawamura T, Fujita T. Expression of LOX-1, an oxidized low-density lipoprotein receptor, in experimental hypertensive glomerulo-sclerosis. J Am Soc Nephrol 2000;11:1826–1836.

[59] Li D, Saldeen T, Romeo F, Mehta JL. Oxidized LDL upregulates angiotensin II type 1 receptor expression in cultured human coronary artery endothelial cells: the potential role of transcription factor NF-kappaB. Circulation 2000;102:1970–1976.

[60] Morawietz H, Rueckschloss U, Niemann B, Duerrschmidt N, Galle J, Hakim K, et al. Angiotensin II induces LOX-1, the human endothelial receptor for oxidized low-density lipoprotein. Circulation 1999;100:899–902.

[61] Hu C, Dandapat A, Sun L, Marwali MR, Inoue N, Sugawara F, et al. Modulation of angiotensin II-mediated hypertension and cardiac remodeling by lectin-like oxidized low-density lipoprotein receptor-1 deletion. Hypertension 2008;52:556–562.

[62] The Acute Infarction Ramipril Efficacy (AIRE) Study Investigators. Effect of ramipril on mortality and morbidity of survivors of acute myocardial infarction with clinical evidence of heart failure. Lancet 1993;342:821–828.

[63] Kobayashi N, Honda T, Yoshida K, Nakano S, Ohno T, Tsubokou Y, Matsuoka H. Critical role of bradykinin-eNOS and oxidative stress-LOX-1 pathway in cardiovascular remodeling under chronic angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibition. Atherosclerosis 2006;187:92–100.

[64] Aoki M, Nata T, Morishita R, Matsushita H, Nakagami H, Yamamoto K, et al. Endothelial apoptosis induced by oxidative stress through activation of NFkB: antiapoptotic effect of antioxidant agents on endothelial cells. Hypertension. 2001;38:48–55.

[65] Rossig L, Hoffmann J, Hugel B, Mallat Z, Haase A, Freyssinet JM, et al. Vitamin C inhibits endothelial cell apoptosis in congestive heart failure. Circulation. 2001;104:2182–2187.

[66] Kris-Etherton PM, Keen CL. Evidence that the antioxidant flavonoids in tea and cocoa are beneficial for cardiovascular health. Curr Opin Lipidol. 2002;13:41–49.

[67] Dugas AJ, Castaneda-Acosta J, Bonin GC, Price KL, Fischer NH, Winston GW. Evaluation of the total peroxyl radical-scavenging capacity of flavonoids: structure-activity relationships. J Nat Prod. 2000;63:327–331.

[68] Ou HC, Chou FP, Sheen HM, Lin TM, Yang CH, Huey-Herng Sheu W. Resveratrol, a polyphenolic compound in red wine, protects against oxidized LDL-induced cytotoxicity in endothelial cells. Clin Chem Acta. 2006;364:196–204.

[69] Zafarullah M, Li WQ, Sylvester J, Ahmad M. Molecular mechanisms of N-acetylcysteine actions. Cell Mol Life Sci 2003;60:6–20.

[70] Lubrano V, Baldi S, Napoli D, Longo V. Beneficial effect of Lisosan G on cultured human microvascular endothelial cells exposed to oxidised low density lipoprotein. Indian J Med Res 2012;136:82–88.

[71] Takanabe-Mori R, Ono K, Sowa N, Wada H, Takaya T, Horie T, et al. Lectin-like oxidized low-density lipoprotein receptor-1 is required for the adipose tissue expression of proinflammatory cytokines in high-fat diet-induced obese mice. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2010;398:576–80.

[72] Ambrose JA, Barua RS. The pathophysiology of cigarette smoking and cardiovascular disease: an update. J Am Coll Cardiol 2004;43:1731–1737.

[73] Uchida K, Suehiro A, Nakanishi M, Sawamura T, Wakabayashi I. Associations of atherosclerotic risk factors with oxidized low-density lipoprotein evaluated by LOX-1 ligand activity in healthy men. Clin Chem Acta. 2011;412: 1643–1647.

[74] Brinkley TE, Kume N, Mitsuoka H, Phares DA, Hagberg JM. Elevated soluble lectin-like oxidized LDL receptor-1 (sLOX-1) levels in obese postmenopausal women. Obesity 2008;16: 1454–1456.
