
G Model
YSCDB 16081-9

ARTICLE IN PRESS

Seminars in Cell & Developmental Biology xxx (2014) xxx–xxx

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Seminars in Cell & Developmental Biology

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/semcdb

Review

Roles of TGF-β family signals in the fate determination of pluripotent stem cells

Fumiko Itoh ${}^{a,*}$, Tetsuro Watabe ${}^{b,c}$, Kohei Miyazono ${}^{d}$

${}^{a}$ Laboratory of Cardiovascular Medicine, School of Life Sciences, Tokyo University of Pharmacy and Life Sciences, Hachioji, Tokyo 192-0392, Japan  
${}^{b}$ Laboratory of Oncology, School of Life Sciences, Tokyo University of Pharmacy and Life Sciences, Hachioji, Tokyo 192-0392, Japan  
${}^{c}$ PRESTO, Japan Science Technology Agency, Kawaguchi, Saitama 332-0012, Japan  
${}^{d}$ Department of Molecular Pathology, Graduate School of Medicine, The University of Tokyo, Bunkyo, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan

ARTICLE INFO

Article history:
Available online xxx

Keywords:
TGF-β
BMP
ES cells
iPS cells
Pluripotency
Differentiation
Reprogramming

ABSTRACT

Members of the transforming growth factor-β (TGF-β) family have been implicated in embryogenesis as well as in the determination of the cell fates of mouse and human embryonic stem (ES) cells, which are characterized by their self-renewal and pluripotency. The cellular responses to TGF-β family signals are divergent depending on the cellular context and local environment. TGF-β family signals play critical roles both in the maintenance of the pluripotent state of ES cells by inducing the expression of Nanog, Oct4, and Sox2, and in their differentiation into various cell types by regulating the expression of master regulatory genes. Moreover, multiple lines of evidence have suggested the importance of TGF-β family signals in establishing induced pluripotent stem (iPS) cells. Since ES and iPS cells have great potential for applications in regenerative medicine, it is critical to figure out the mechanisms underlying their self-renewal, pluripotency, and differentiation. Here, we discuss the roles of TGF-β family ligands and their downstream signaling molecules, Smad proteins, in the maintenance of the pluripotency and lineage specification of mouse and human ES and iPS cells.

© 2014 Published by Elsevier Ltd.

Contents

1. Introduction ..... 00
2. TGF-β family signaling ..... 00
3. Pluripotent stem cells ..... 00
4. Role of TGF-β family signals in maintaining pluripotency ..... 00
   4.1. Mouse ES cells ..... 00
   4.2. Human ES cells ..... 00
   4.3. Genetic and pharmacological approaches to study the roles of TGF-β signals in stem cells ..... 00
5. Differentiation of ES cells ..... 00
   5.1. Germ layer specification ..... 00
   5.2. Endoderm lineages ..... 00
   5.3. Mesoderm lineages ..... 00
   5.4. Ectoderm lineages ..... 00

Abbreviations: ALK, activin receptor-like kinase; BMPs, bone morphogenetic proteins; Bra, Brachyury; Co-Smads, common-mediator Smads; Dusp9, dual specificity phosphatase 9; EBs, embryonic bodies; EMT, epithelial to mesenchymal transition; ES, embryonic stem; FGF, fibroblast growth factor; Flk+, fetal liver kinase positive; GDFs, growth differentiation factors; hES, human embryonic stem; ICM, inner cell mass; Id, inhibition of differentiation; IGF, insulin-like growth factor; iPSC, induced pluripotent stem; I-Smads, inhibitory Smads; ITD-1, inducer of Type II receptor degradation-1; LIF, leukemia inhibitory factor; MAPK, mitogen activated protein kinase; MEFs, mouse embryonic fibroblasts; mEpiSCs, mouse epiblast stem cells; mES, mouseembryonic stem; MET, mesenchymal to epithelial transition; Mvh, mouse vasa homolog; PGCs, primordial germ cells; PI3K, phosphatidylinositol-3 kinase; PS, primitive streak; R-Smads, receptor-regulated Smads; SBE, Smad binding element; TβR, TGF-β receptor; Tet1, Ten-eleven translocation 1; TGF-β, transforming growth factor-β; VEGF, vascular endothelial growth factor; Zeb2, zinc finger E-box binding homeobox 2.

* Corresponding author. Tel.: +81 42 676 5185; fax: +81 42 676 5185.  
E-mail address: mame.fumiko@gmail.com (F. Itoh).

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.semcdb.2014.05.017

1084-9521/© 2014 Published by Elsevier Ltd.

Please cite this article in press as: Itoh F, et al. Roles of TGF-β family signals in the fate determination of pluripotent stem cells. Semin Cell Dev Biol (2014), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.semcdb.2014.05.017

G Model
YSCDB 16081-9

ARTICLE IN PRESS

F. Itoh et al./Seminars in Cell & Developmental Biology xxx (2014) xxx–xxx

|  |  |  |
| --- | --- | --- |
| 2 |  |  |
| 39 | 5.5. Germ cell differentiation | 00 |
| 40 | 6. Reprogramming to iPS cells | 00 |
| 41 | 7. Conclusion and future perspectives | 00 |
| 42 | Acknowledgement | 00 |
| 43 | References | 00 |

---

### 1. Introduction

The complex architecture of our body originates from one fertilized egg, which proliferates and differentiates to give rise to various types of cells in multiple organs. In adults, the homeostasis of most organs is maintained by a continuous supply of newly generated, functionally differentiated cells. Stem cells have been implicated in the development and maintenance of our bodies. These cells are unspecialized and have remarkable potential to develop into many different cell types during life. A noteworthy character is their ability to self-renew. Unlike somatic cells, such as blood or muscle cells, stem cells can divide symmetrically to replicate themselves many times or proliferate asymmetrically to generate differentiated cell types for long periods. There are various types of stem cells in mammals including embryonic stem (ES) cells and adult (somatic) stem cells. The proliferation and differentiation of stem cells are regulated by multiple types of signaling cascades, including those mediated by the members of the transforming growth factor (TGF)-β family. The roles of TGF-β family signals in somatic stem cells have been described [1]; therefore, in this review, we focus on their roles in the maintenance of pluripotency of ES cells and their differentiation into multiple lineages.

### 2. TGF-β family signaling

The TGF-β family has over 30 members, including TGF-βs, activins, Nodal, bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs), and growth differentiation factors (GDFs) [2]. They are multifunctional cytokines, and are involved in the morphogenesis of many organs and homeostasis of adult tissues [3,4]. When TGF-β family signaling is disrupted, developmental defects or diseases are observed [5]. In addition, TGF-β family members sustain the pluripotent state of human embryonic stem (ES) cells, and contribute to the germ layer commitment of stem cells to mature organs [6].

TGF-β family members transduce their signals to the nucleus by the formation of heteromeric receptor complexes of specific type I and type II serine/threonine kinase receptors known as TGF-β type I (TβRI) and type II receptors (TβRII), respectively (Fig. 1). TβRI, also termed activin receptor-like kinase (ALK) 5, acts downstream of TβRII and phosphorylates receptor-regulated Smads (R-Smads), which are gateways for canonical TGF-β signaling.

Smad proteins are classified into three subfamilies depending on their function and structure: R-Smads, common-mediator Smads (Co-Smads), and inhibitory Smads (I-Smads) (Fig. 1). Each R-Smad has an SXS motif at their extreme C-terminus, and both serine residues are direct targets of type I receptor kinases. Among R-Smads, Smad2 and Smad3 are phosphorylated by ALK4, TβRI (ALK5), and ALK7 and transduce canonical TGF-β and activin/Nodal signals, whereas ALK1, ALK2, ALK3, and ALK6 activate Smad1, Smad5, and Smad8 and transduce BMP signals. After ligand stimulation, R-Smads are phosphorylated and make a ternary complex with the Co-Smad, Smad4. Then the complex accumulates into the nucleus, where it regulates the expression of various TGF-β family target genes. The expression of I-Smads, *i.e.* Smad6 and Smad7, is induced by TGF-β family members. I-Smads prevent R-Smads from being phosphorylation by type I receptor kinases, thereby terminating TGF-β family signals. Smad7 has multiple inhibitory effects on both TGF-β and BMP signals, whereas Smad6 preferentially blocks BMP signaling.

### The N-terminal domains of Co-Smad and R-Smad are able to bind to a DNA sequence termed 5′-AGAC-3′, known as the Smad binding element (SBE). Since Smads alone generally have a weak affinity to bind to DNA, other transcription factors are needed. Due to the differential expression of various binding partners in multiple cell types, Smads are able to regulate the transcription of many groups of target genes in different ways. In addition to transcriptional factors, Smads can associate with chromatin modifiers and other chromatin remodelers [7].

### 3. Pluripotent stem cells

ES cells are derived from the inner cell mass (ICM) of blastocysts at an early embryonic stage. ES cells are able to proliferate without differentiation since they are established. When the inner cells are isolated and cultured on feeder cells, the cells can grow while retaining their potency to form all three layers: the endoderm, mesoderm, and ectoderm [8]. Therefore, ES cells have been used in an *in vitro* model of early embryogenesis to investigate the detailed molecular mechanisms for developmental processes. When ES cells can be conventionally used, we can easily establish genetically modified or knockout mice using these cells, which will be useful tools for regenerative medicine. Meanwhile, adult stem cells exist in almost all tissues of the body after embryonic development. They are ready for emergencies such as disease or tissue injury as well as maintenance of tissue homeostasis.

ES cells can be generated from various species at different embryonic stages. Several groups have obtained ES cells from the mouse morula stage and these cells are already committed to blastomers at the later stage of blastocysts [9]. Recently, an additional type of ES cells was established from the epiblast of mouse embryos, termed epiblast stem cells (mEpiSCs) [10,11]. The mEpiSCs are molecularly and epigenetically distinct from mES cells. Their characteristics are very similar to human ES (hES) cells, showing similar gene expression profiles and signaling responses, which can be observed in the mouse epiblast.

### 4. Role of TGF-β family signals in maintaining pluripotency

The maintenance of pluripotency in mES cells relies on a complex network of transcription factors [12], with Oct4, Nanog, and Sox2 playing a central role [13,14]. Oct4, a POU domain protein, is expressed in early mouse embryogenesis and germ cells [15]. Reduced expression of Oct4 leads ES cells to differentiate into trophoblasts, whereas overexpression of Oct4 triggers differentiation into endodermal and mesodermal cells. Therefore, adequate levels of Oct4 expression are needed for maintenance of the pluripotency of ES cells. Nanog, a homeobox-containing protein, is expressed specifically in early embryos and pluripotent stem cells, including mES and hES cells. Forced expression of Nanog can elicit self-renewal of ES cells without cytokine-induced activation of STAT3 [16], although impaired Nanog expression causes ES cell differentiation. Thus, Nanog is thought to stabilize inhibition of differentiation [13]. In contrast, Sox2, a SRY-related HMG box protein, is expressed in various phases of embryonic development. Sox2 cooperates with Oct4 to activate Oct-Sox-target genes. In addition, Oct4, Nanog, and Sox2 cooperatively regulate the expression of many genes which are responsible for self-renewal and pluripotency [17]. Due to their essential roles in early embryonic

---

Please cite this article in press as: Itoh F, et al. Roles of TGF-β family signals in the fate determination of pluripotent stem cells. Semin Cell Dev Biol (2014), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.semcdb.2014.05.017

G Model
YSCDB 16081-9

ARTICLE IN PRESS

F. Itoh et al./Seminars in Cell & Developmental Biology xxx (2014) xxx–xxx

| Ligand | TGF-$\beta$ | Activin | BMP |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Receptors | ALK5 | ALK4 | ALK1, ALK3, |
|  | ALK7 |  | ALK2, ALK6 |
| R-Smad | Smad2/3 | Smad1/5/8 | Cytoplasm |
| Co-Smad | P | Smad4 | P |
| I-Smad | Smad7 | Smad6 |  |
| Co-Activator |  | Co-Activator | Nucleus |
| TF | Transcription | TF | Transcription |

Fig. 1. Schematic of the canonical TGF-$\beta$ family signaling. TGF-$\beta$ family which includes TGF-$\beta$, Activin, Nodal, BMP, and GDF, signals through intrinsic type I and type II serine/threonine kinase receptors. After ligand stimulation, R-Smads are phosphorylated, and accumulated into nucleus with Co-Smad. I-Smads are induced by the signaling and terminate the signaling.

development, Oct4, Nanog, and Sox2 are commonly used as markers of pluripotency in ES cells [18].

A common trait of both mouse and human ES cells is the ability for self-renewal and pluripotency. These cells express Oct4, Nanog, and Sox2 to maintain their pluripotency [18,19]. However, many studies have highlighted differences between mouse and human ES cells, including how they react to extrinsic signals and the expression of various markers. Since mEpiSCs are more similar to hES cells than mES cells, it was suggested that mES and hES cells may represent different stages of development [20]. Human ES cells, but not mES cells, require cell-cell contact for propagation [21]. Mouse ES cells express SSEA1, but not SSEA3 or SSEA4, which are surface markers of hES cells [8]. Thus, we need to be careful when results obtained from mES cells are extrapolated for studies using hES cells. In this section, we separately discuss the roles of TGF-$\beta$ family signals in the maintenance of pluripotency of mES and hES cells.

### 4.1. Mouse ES cells

In 1981, the first mES cells were isolated from mouse embryos [22]. This was the first time that cells were cultured in an undifferentiated state for a long period of time. To retain this undifferentiated state in culture, mES cells were cultured on a layer of feeder cells such as mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs), which produce important factors such as leukemia inhibitory factor (LIF). These feeder cells can be replaced by LIF [23,24], which transduces its signaling through dimerization of the cytokine receptors LIF-R and gp130 and predominantly activates the transcription factor STAT3 [25,26]. Importantly, LIF alone is insufficient to inhibit neural differentiation and sustain self-renewal in the mES cells, while LIF in serum or in combination with BMP4 is sufficient to maintain the mES cells in a pluripotent state [27].

BMP4 has a crucial role in the maintenance of mES cell identity and inhibits differentiation of mES cells into the neuronal lineage by inducing the expression of helix-loop-helix (HLH) inhibition of differentiation (Id) genes. Overexpression of Id1 protein was sufficient form ES cell self-renewal in cooperation with LIF [27]. In addition, Id1-null ES cells showed reduced Nanog expression and were, thereby, unable to maintain a self-renewing state [28]. Over-expression of Nanog sustained high levels of Id3 protein in mES

### 4.2. Human ES cells

Several hES cell lines have been established and share similar pluripotent markers as those expressed in mES cells: Oct4, Nanog, and Sox2. They have the characteristic of undifferentiated stem cells when kept in appropriate culture conditions, but have the ability to form teratomas [20]. Several differences have been reported between mES and hES cells, not only in culture conditions to maintain pluripotency, but in their shape, expression patterns of stem cell antigens, markers for differentiation, and cell death-regulating genes [33].

Human ES cells are maintained on feeder layers of mouse or human cells, or in feeder-free systems on matrigel- or laminin-coated plates with MEF-conditioned medium. However, feeder-free culture conditions provide less support for the unlimited, undifferentiated state of hES cells. In contrast to mES cells, LIF and BMP are unable to maintain the self-renewal and pluripotency of hES cells, but rather promote their differentiation. Wei and colleagues reported that transcriptome analyses of hES cells cultured on feeder cells identified the signals mediated by fibroblast growth factor2 (FGF2, also known as basic FGF), activin, TGF-$\beta$, insulin, and insulin-like growth factor (IGF) to be required for the maintenance of their undifferentiated state, whose notion was further supported by other groups [20,34–38]. FGF2 maintains hES cells by activating the mitogen activated protein kinase (MAPK) while the signals mediated by activin/Nodal and IGF maintain them via activation of the Ras and phosphatidylinositol-3 kinase (PI3K)

Please cite this article in press as: Itoh F, et al. Roles of TGF-$\beta$ family signals in the fate determination of pluripotent stem cells. Semin Cell Dev Biol (2014), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.semcdb.2014.05.017

G Model
YSCDB 16081-9

ARTICLE IN PRESS

F. Itoh et al./Seminars in Cell & Developmental Biology xxx (2014) xxx–xxx

Mouse ES Cells
Human ES Cells/mEpiSCs

LIF
BMP
Activin
Nodal

JAK
PI3K
Smad1/5/8
Smad2/3

pSTAT3
Dusp9
Ids

pERK
Nanog
Self-renewal
Oct4
Sox2

BMP
Activin
IGF
Nodal
Insulin
FGF2

PI3K
RAS
Smad1/5/8
Smad2/3

Raf
MEK
MAPK
Nanog
Self-renewal
Sox2
Oct4

Differentiation

Fig. 2. Signaling cascades regulating self-renewal and differentiation of mouse and human ES cells. BMP and Nodal/Activin signaling pathways control ES cell self-renewal in combination with LIF, IGF/Insulin and FGF signaling via Nanog, Oct4, and Sox2 transcription factors.

pathways. While activation of the Wnt pathway with the GSK3β inhibitor can replace MEF-conditioned medium in maintaining the undifferentiated state of hES cells, it requires activation of Smad2/3 signals as a downstream event [36].

TGF-β/activin signaling maintains the pluripotency of hES cells while their differentiation is prompted by BMP. TGF-β and FGF2 signaling cooperate to inhibit BMP signaling and sustain the expression of undifferentiated markers by activating Smad3 binding to the Nanog promoter. The proximal Nanog promoter contains the TGF-β/activin responsive element, and is inhibited by BMP [39]. The level of BMP activity in hES cells is increased when they are cultured without feeder cells or in MEF conditioned medium, resulting in their differentiation. A high amount of FGF2 or lower amount of FGF2 with Noggin, a BMP antagonist, maintains pluripotency and long term, undifferentiated proliferation of hES cells by reducing BMP activity [39].

4.3. Genetic and pharmacological approaches to study the roles of TGF-β signals in stem cells

While we have introduced the *in vitro* evidence showing that TGF-β family members play crucial roles in the maintenance of ES cell properties, this notion is also supported by various genetic studies in mice. The null mutation of the Smad4 gene results in defective epiblast proliferation and delayed outgrowth of the ICM [40]. Nodal-deficient embryos arrest shortly before gastrulation with failure to establish a primitive streak (PS) [41]. Smad3-null mice are healthy and fertile; however, deletion of Smad2 or activin receptor IIB results in a malformation of the PS [42,43]. TGF-β family signaling plays important roles in patterning the dorsoventral axis and the subsequent patterning of tissues during embryogenesis. It is essentially important that signaling gradients provide positional information to govern the patterning of multicellular organisms.

It has been implicated that Nodal/activin signaling via Smad2/3 phosphorylation supports the proliferation of mES [44] and hES cells in the undifferentiated state [45]. These findings can be explained by the observation that primed state of mES cells (mEpiSCs) is positively regulated by activin signals. Activation

Please cite this article in press as: Itoh F, et al. Roles of TGF-β family signals in the fate determination of pluripotent stem cells. Semin Cell Dev Biol (2014), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.semcdb.2014.05.017

G Model
YSCDB 16081-9

ARTICLE IN PRESS

F. Itoh et al. / Seminars in Cell & Developmental Biology xxx (2014) xxx–xxx

E3.5
Blastocyst
ICM
+LIF
+BMP

E6.0
Extraembryonic ectoderm
Epiblast
+FGF2
+Activin

mES cell
iPS cell
BMP
mEpiSC
Mesendoderm cell
+Fibroblast
+Klf4, c-Myc
+Oct4, Sox2
MET
miR-200
miR-205
Snail
Zeb2
BMP
TGF-β

Fig. 3. Stem cells derived from blastocyst stage of mouse embryos. TGF-β family signaling regulates isolation and differentiation of mouse ES and iPS cells.

[52]. Ying et al. reported that BMP4 sustains self-renewal of mES
cells in concert with LIF, and that the critical
contribution of
BMP4 is to induce the expression of Id genes [27]. They tested the
effects of BMP4in N2B27 medium which has neural differentiation
inducing effects, and showed that mES cells tend to differentiate
into neural precursors and exhibit decreased proliferation, even
in the presence of LIF [50]. Although BMPs are strong inhibitors
of neural differentiation in vertebrate embryos [53], their growth-
stimulatory effects may be due to their inhibitory effects on the
neural differentiation of mES cells (Fig. 2). Thus, TGF-β family
signals play important roles in the maintenance of self-renewal
and pluripotency of both human and mouse ES cells, while their
mechanisms of action seem to diverge between these two species.

5. Differentiation of ES cells

To maintain the pluripotency of ES cells, strict culture condi-
tions are necessary. If the factors that maintain the undifferentiated
state are removed, ES cells start to differentiate into the three
germ layers, i.e. the ectoderm, mesoderm, and endoderm, under
appropriate conditions. Various genetic studies have shown that
the BMP signaling pathways regulate dorsoventral body axis pat-
terning, neural inhibition, and mesoderm formation during mouse
early embryogenesis. In contrast with the findings obtained from
in vivo studies, BMP signaling has great potential to determine ES
cell fate in vitro. Moreover, in vitro culture systems can facilitate
studies of the biological activities of various growth factors and
extracellular matrix proteins during early differentiation, as can
genetic strategies, such as gain-of-function and loss-of-function
approaches.
In mES cells, TGF-β/activin/Nodal signaling pathways are
important regulators of stem cell differentiation in the mesendo-
derm, which differentiates to the endoderm and mesoderm (Fig. 3).
In serum-free conditions, treatment of ES cells with activin A

induces the expression of mesendoderm markers in both adherent
and suspension cultures [54,55]. Interestingly, this effect relies on
cooperation with Wnt signaling. Both activin and Wnt3a can induce
the expression of mesendoderm marker genes, and inhibition of
either activin or Wnt signaling can abolish the induced differenti-
ation process, indicating the interdependence of the two signaling
pathways in promoting mesendoderm differentiation [55]. Fur-
thermore, activin A has been shown to induce Wnt3 expression,
while Wnt upregulates the expression of Nodal protein. A genome-
wide approach determined that Smad2 binds to promoters of
a large number of development-related genes across the whole
genome [56]. Nodal/activin signaling targets Tbx3 and TAPBP to
mediate mesendoderm differentiation [56,57]. Activin signaling
has been implicated in definitive endoderm differentiation from
the mesendoderm [54,55]. Wnt and BMP signaling cooperate with
activin to induce efficient differentiation of cardiac progenitor cells.
In hES cells, self-renewal is maintained by TGF-β/activin/Nodal
signaling, whose level decreases when the cells differentiate. As
a result, Smad2/3 phosphorylation is reduced, leading to decreased
expression of their target genes including Nodal, which contributes
to the maintenance of self-renewal [39,58]. SB431542 causes acti-
vation of BMP signaling, which induces hES cell differentiation into
the mesoderm [36,39]. Recently, Valdimarsdottir et al. showed that
BMP4 induces the expression of Slug and Msx2, which are epithe-
lial to mesenchymal transition (EMT)-related transcription factors
[59].

5.1. Germ layer specification

During the early stages of embryogenesis, the three germ
layers (endoderm, mesoderm, and ectoderm) are generated during
gastrulation. Gastrulation begins with the formation of the PS
in the presumptive posterior end of the embryos. Activin/Nodal
and Wnt, but not BMP, signaling pathways are required for the

Please cite this article in press as: Itoh F, et al. Roles of TGF-β family signals in the fate determination of pluripotent stem cells. Semin Cell Dev Biol (2014), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.semcdb.2014.05.017

formation of the PS, which gives rise to the mesendoderm under
the influence of these pathways in vivo [60]. Mesendoderm
cells leave either as definitive endoderm or mesoderm, while the
ectoderm is originated from the anterior region of the epiblast that
does not enter the PS.
    In vitro cultured ES cells recapitulate these in vivo events of
germ layer specification as ES cells, upon the removal of the fac-
tors that maintain their pluripotency, begin to differentiate into
the derivatives of all three germ layers under appropriate culture
conditions. In serum-free conditions, BMP4 can induce PS-like cells
with high expression of the mesodermal marker Brachyury (Bra)
and posterior PS markers Msdp1 and Hoxb1 [61]. It should be noted
that BMP significantly enhances the expression of Nodal and Wnt3.
The effects of BMP are dependent on both TGF-β/activin/Nodal
signaling and canonical Wnt signaling as the addition of SB431542
or DKK1 (Wnt inhibitor) can abolish the expression of these PS
marker genes [62]. In contrast, activin A and low concentrations of
Wnt3a induce anterior PS-like cells, which highly express Bra and
Foxa2, and the addition of BMP signaling results in the induction
of the anterior PS marker gene and the reduction of the poste-
rior marker genes. These findings indicate that the effect of BMP
signaling is dominant over posterior PS fate commitment.

Together, these results suggest that the roles of TGF-β family
signals in germ layer specification are consistent in both in vivo sit-
uations and in vitro ES cell differentiation systems. A combination of
TGF-β family signals regulates the differentiation of the three germ
layers from ES cells. Differentiation of the PS is induced by BMP and
activin/Nodal, while the ectoderm is differentiated from ES cells in
the absence of TGF-β family signals. A high level of activin/Nodal
signals in the absence of serum induces differentiation of the endo-
derm from ES cells. The mesoderm is differentiated from the PS
region in the presence of a medium level of activin/Nodal signals
and BMP. Further differentiation from each germ layer is discussed
below.

### 5.2. Endoderm lineages

ES cells may have an important therapeutic potential since
endoderm derivatives are generated from ES cells, particularly
pancreatic and hepatic cells, they are clinically important for the
treatment of type I diabetes and liver diseases. Kubo and colleagues
reported a method to obtain definitive endodermal cells by treating
ES cells with activin in the absence of serum [63]. Then, an effi-
cient protocol was established to generate endoderm progenitor
cells by culturing differentiating ES cells in the presence of activin
in serum-free conditions, using BMP4, activin, and FGF to obtain a
population of hepatic cells expressing albumins [64]. Expression of
Pdx1 transcription factor marks the development of all pancreatic
lineages during embryogenesis. Using activin and BMP4 at vari-
ous steps during in vitro ES cell differentiation, Pdx1-positive cells
were generated at a high efficacy (30%) [65]. These findings suggest
that it is now possible to efficiently generate endoderm populations
from ES cells. Recently, Yi et al. identified betatrophin as a regulator
of proliferation of pancreatic β-cells [66], which may help gener-
ate insulin-producing cells more efficiently from pluripotent stem
cells.

### 5.3. Mesoderm lineages

BMP signaling is indispensable for commitment to the fetal
liver kinase positive (Flk+) mesoderm, in cooperation with TGF-
β/activin/Nodal and Wnt signaling [61]. BMP, Wnt, and Notch
signaling induce the Ets-type transcription factor Er71, which
directly potentiates Flk expression in embryonic body (EB)
differentiation. The Flk1+ mesodermal precursor has potential
to differentiate into endothelial cells, blood, muscle, and the
mesenchymal lineage. The specification of the Flk+ mesoderm to
the hematopoietic lineage requires vascular endothelial growth
factor (VEGF) and Wnt signaling, but not BMP or activin/Nodal
signaling in mES cells [61]; however, it appears to be expendable
for adult hematopoiesis [67]. Trompouki et al. [68] showed that
BMP and Wnt pathways are critical for hematopoiesis and dif-
ferentiation into the erythroid or myeloid lineage. TGF-β family
members play crucial roles in cardiomyocyte differentiation. The
addition of BMP2 to EBs induces cardiomyocyte development
[69] by inducing the expression of a cardiac-specific gene, Nkx2-5
[70]. The cardiogenic effect of BMP was observed only if TGF-β
or BMP2 was added to ES cells prior to differentiation. Thus, the
time window of stimulation of TGF-β signaling is important to
obtain a specific cell lineage decision. Cripto, a co-receptor for
Nodal, is also essential for cardiogenesis in EBs and there is precise
regulation of Cripto expression. It is expressed in ES cells but not
in ES cell-derived cardiomyocytes. Interestingly, a small molecule,
a 1,4-dihydropyridine inducer of type II receptor degradation-1
(ITD-1) promotes cardiomyocyte differentiation from uncommit-
ted mesodermal progenitors derived from mouse and human ES
cells [71]. These data indicate that there is a biphasic role of TGF-β
signaling during cardiogenesis.

#### 5.4. Ectoderm lineages

Consistent with its inhibitory effects in neural lineage differen-
tiation in early embryonic development, BMP signaling inhibits the
differentiation of mES cells into neuroectoderm lineages. In mono-
layer differentiation condition, mES cells efficiently differentiate
into Sox+ neural precursor cells. BMP signaling can dramatically
inhibit this process via the expression of Id family proteins, which
repress the expression of neurogenic basic HLH transcription fac-
tors [49,50]. Furthermore, BMP induces Dusp9 to suppress ERK1/2
activity [32] and other downstream target genes such as Dpysl2 and
Jmjd3 [56]. Co-culture of mES cells with PA6 cells induces neural
differentiation, which is suppressed by treatment with BMP4 in the
early phase [72]. Interestingly, when BMP4 is added at an appropri-
ate dose in later phases, it causes differentiation to neural crest cells
and the dorsal most CNS cells, showing a stage-dependent effect
[72]. Consistent with this notion, in the EB-derived neural differen-
tiation system, the early addition of BMP2 inhibits differentiation
to the neuroectoderm, while later exposure supports further differ-
entiation to neural crest cells [73]. BMP signaling represses neural
differentiation by direct inhibition of ZFP521, which is essential and
sufficient to drive the intrinsic neural differentiation [74]. Thus,
BMP signaling inhibits early neural commitment of mES cells via
regulation of neural differentiation genes, which are downstream
targets of BMP.

BMP signals also play key roles in the neural differentiation of
hES cells. Similar to mES cells, BMP4 represses neural differentia-
tion induced in the PA6 co-culture system [72] or serum-free cul-
ture conditions [75]. On the contrary, inhibition of BMP signaling by
Noggin [76] or by the small molecule BMP receptor kinase inhibitor
dorsomorphin [77] facilitates neural commitment. Interestingly,
dual inhibition of both BMP and TGF-β/activin/Nodal signaling
by Noggin/SB431542 [78] or dorsomorphin/SB431542 [79] further
enhanced the efficiency of neural differentiation. Indeed, inhibi-
tion of TGF-β/activin/Nodal signaling impairs self-renewal of hES
cells and rapidly drives the transition from self-renewal to differ-
entiation. During the differentiation process, inhibition of BMP and
TGF-β/activin/Nodal signaling drives efficient differentiation of hES
cells to the neural lineage [78]. In hES cells, FGF/ERK signaling can
drive efficient neural commitment [80], whereas BMP signaling
inhibits neural differentiation and further downregulates the self-
renewal effect by TGF-β/activin/Nodal signaling.

G Model
YSCDB 16081-9

ARTICLE IN PRESS

F. Itoh et al. / Seminars in Cell & Developmental Biology xxx (2014) xxx–xxx

5.5. Germ cell differentiation

The primordial germ cells (PGCs) are derived from epiblast cells that give rise to the extraembryonic mesoderm that develops into the allantois, blood islands, yolk sac mesoderm, and so on. It has been well documented that the BMP signaling pathway plays a key role in PGC formation during mouse embryonic development, with BMP2, BMP4 [81,82], and BMP8b [83] regulating the formation of PGCs. The addition of BMPs to distal mouse epiblast cultures increases the expression of Tnap, a marker for early germ cells [84].

Consistent with these *in vivo* functions of BMPs on germ cells [85], BMP signaling induces differentiation of ES cells into germ cells in EBs, which consist of early embryonic tissue lineages. Toyooka et al. [86] generated mouse vasa homolog (Mvh; a germ cell marker) knock-in ES cells, and found a dramatic increase of Mvh+ ES cells after BMP4 stimulation. These Mvh+ cells contributed to formation of testicular tubules and even mature sperm *in vivo*. BMP elicited similar effects on the expression of another germ cell marker, Stella, during germ cell differentiation of ES cells [87]. Furthermore, hES [88] and iPS [89] cells had similar potentials to differentiate into PGCs upon BMP stimulation. The addition of BMP4 to differentiating human EBs induced germ-cell specific marker gene expression, and BMP7 and BMP8b showed additive effects when used in combination with BMP4, resulting in dramatically enhanced VASA+ germ cells. These data indicate that BMP signaling enhances germ cell differentiation in both mouse and human ES/iPS cells.

6. Reprogramming to iPSCells

In 2006, the first direct reprogramming was established from mouse embryonic fibroblasts to a mES-like cell line by forced expression of only four transcription factors, Oct4, Sox2, Klf4, and c-Myc [90]. Mouse iPSCells have characteristics of pluripotent ES cells, *i.e.* expression of stem cell markers, formation of teratomas, differentiating capacity to all three germ layers, and generation of chimeric mice when iPSCells are injected into blastocytes. This novel technology was successfully applied to human somatic cells to generate human iPSCells [91]. Since we can avoid ethical concerns when the iPSCells are used instead of hES cells, they have potential for use in regenerative medicine. However, the reprogramming process is long and the generation of iPSCells occurs at a low frequency [92]. In addition, iPSCells are reported to keep an epigenetic memory of their somatic cell of origin [93]. Thus, we need to improve the strategy to establish iPSCells.

Recent studies showed that inhibition of TGF-β signaling using TβRI kinase inhibitors such as SB431542 [39,94] and RepSox [95] can accelerate or improve the generation of iPSCells. The first step during the reprogramming of somatic cells is the morphological change from disperse fibroblasts to uniform and tightly packed ES-like cells. This morphological process is termed mesenchymal to epithelial transition (MET), which is the opposite process of EMT. It is known that RepSox takes over the function of Sox2 during reprogramming [95]. Early EMT induced by TGF-β stimulation enhances programming, which suggests that a sequential EMT-MET mechanism is the first step of reprogramming [96]. Since TGF-β potentiates EMT, it is not surprising that inhibition of TGF-β signaling accelerates somatic cell reprogramming. TGF-β directly activates the expression of Snail and zinc finger E-box binding homeobox 2 (Zeb2), both of which are involved in EMT (Fig. 3). Thus, suppression of Zeb2 expression helps to generate iPSCells via enhancement of the MET process. It is known that the miR-200 family, which is activated by Oct4 and Sox2, supports somatic cell reprogramming. Furthermore, BMP can induce miR-205 and the

miR-200 family to influence MET and encourage somatic cells to reprogram [97].

7. Conclusion and future perspectives

TGF-β family signals regulate the specification of multiple lineages. TGF-β family members regulate gene expression in a context-dependent manner in many types of cells because Smads have low affinity for DNA binding and TGF-β family signals regulate gene expression via crosstalk with other signaling pathways, such as Wnt, FGF, and Notch. Similar to their *in vivo* functions in embryogenesis, the TGF-β family members regulate the cell fate determination of both hES and mES cells *in vitro*. Recent studies have revealed that TGF-β family signals are capable of maintaining the pluripotency of ES/iPS cells, and of inhibiting reprogramming of iPS cells. Since these pluripotent stem cells are expected to be useful sources for therapeutic regenerative medicine, it is necessary to understand how TGF-β family signaling networks cooperate with other signaling pathways to maintain their pluripotency and differentiation.

Acknowledgement

This work was supported by Grant-in-Aid for Young Scientists (A) and for Scientific Research on Innovative Areas.

References

[1] Sakaki-Yumoto M, Katsuno Y, Derynck R. TGF-β family signaling in stem cells. Biochim Biophys Acta 2013;1830:2280–96.

[2] Derynck R, Miyazono M. In: Derynck R, Miyazono M, editors. The TGF-β family. NY: Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press; 2008.

[3] Flavell RA, Sanjabi S, Wrzesinski SH, Licona-Limon P. The polarization of immune cells in the tumour environment by TGFβ. Nat Rev Immunol 2010;10:554–67.

[4] Heldin CH, Landstrom M, Moustakas A. Mechanism of TGF-β signaling to growth arrest, apoptosis, and epithelial-mesenchymal transition. Curr Opin Cell Biol 2009;21:166–76.

[5] Moustakas M, Miyazawa K. In: Moustakas M, Miyazawa K, editors. TGF-β in human disease. Springer; 2013.

[6] Oshimori N, Fuchs E. Paracrine TGF-β signaling counterbalances BMP-mediated repression in hair follicle stem cell activation. Cell Stem Cell 2012;10:63–75.

[7] Massagué J, Xi Q. TGF-β control of stem cell differentiation genes. FEBS Lett 2012;586:1953–8.

[8] Thomson JA, Itskovitz-Eldor J, Shapiro SS, Waknitz MA, Swiergiel JJ, Marshal VS, et al. Embryonic stem cell line derived from human blastocysts. Science 1998;282:1145–7.

[9] Stojkovic M, Lako M, Stojkovic P, Stewart R, Przyborski S, Armstrong L, et al. Derivation of human embryonic stem cells from day-8 blastocysts recovered after three-step in vitro culture. Stem Cells 2004;22:790–7.

[10] Tesar PJ, Chenoweth JG, Brook FA, Davies TJ, Evans EP, Mack DL, et al. New cell lines from mouse epiblast share defining features with human embryonic stem cells. Nature 2007;448:196–9.

[11] Brons IG, Smithers LE, Trotter MW, Rugg-Gunn P, Sun B, Chuva de Sousa Lopes SM, et al. Derivation of pluripotent epiblast stem cells from mammalian embryos. Nature 2007;448:191–5.

[12] Loh KM, Lim B. A precarious balance: pluripotency factors as lineage specifiers. Cell Stem Cell 2011;8:363–9.

[13] Silva J, Smith A. Capturing pluripotency. Cell 2008;132:532–6.

[14] Young RA. Control of the embryonic stem cell state. Cell 2011;144:940–54.

[15] Nichols J, Zevnik B, Anastassiadis K, Niwa H, Klewe-Nebenius D, Chambers I, et al. Formation of pluripotent stem cells in the mammalian embryo depends on the POU transcription factor Oct4. Cell 1998;95:379–91.

[16] Chambers I, Colby D, Robertson M, Nichols J, Lee S, Tweedie S, et al. Functional expression cloning of Nanog, a pluripotency sustaining factor in embryonic stem cells. Cell 2003;113:643–55.

[17] Ivanova N, Dobrin R, Lu R, Kotenko I, Levesse J, DeCoste C, et al. Dissecting self-renewal in stem cells with RNA interference. Nature 2006;44:533–8.

[18] Boyer LA, Lee TI, Cole MF, Johnstone SE, Levine SS, Zucker JP, et al. Core transcriptional regulatory circuitry in human embryonic stem cells. Cell 2005;122:947–56.

[19] Loh YH, Wu Q, Chew JL, Vega VB, Zhang W, Chen X, et al. Oct4 and Nanog transcription network regulates pluripotency in mouse embryonic stem cells. Nat Genet 2006;38:431–40.

[20] Wei CL, Miura T, Robson P, Lim SK, Xu XQ, Lee MY, et al. Transcriptome profiling of human and murine ESCs identifies divergent paths required to maintain the stem cell state. Stem Cells 2005;23:166–85.

Please cite this article in press as: Itoh F, et al. Roles of TGF-β family signals in the fate determination of pluripotent stem cells. Semin Cell Dev Biol (2014), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.semcdb.2014.05.017

G Model
YSCDB 16081-9

ARTICLE IN PRESS

F. Itoh et al. / Seminars in Cell & Developmental Biology xxx (2014) xxx–xxx

[21] Oh SK, Kim HS, Park YB, Seol HW, Kim YY, Cho MS, et al. Methods for expansion of human embryonic stem cells. Stem Cells 2005; 23: 605–9.

[22] Evans M, Kaufman M. Establishment in culture of pluripotent cells from mouse embryos. Nature 1981; 292: 154–6.

[23] Smith AG, Heath JK, Donaldson DD, Wong GG, Moreau J, Stahl M, et al. Inhibition of pluripotential embryonic stem cell differentiation by purified polypeptides. Nature 1988; 336: 688–90.

[24] Williams RL, Hilton DJ, Pease S, Willson TA, Stewart CL, Gearing DP, et al. Myeloid leukaemia inhibitory factor maintains the developmental potential of embryonic stem cells. Nature 1988; 336: 684–7.

[25] Niwa H, Ogawa K, Shimosato D, Adachi K. A parallel circuit of LIF signaling pathways maintains pluripotency of mouse ES cells. Nature 2009; 460: 118–22.

[26] Ernst M, Novak U, Nicholson SE, Layton JE, Dunn AR. The carboxyl-terminal domains of gp130-related cytokine receptors are necessary for suppressing embryonic stem cell differentiation. Involvement of STAT3. J Biol Chem 1999; 274: 9729–37.

[27] Ying QL, Nichols J, Chambers I, Smith A. BMP induction of Id proteins suppresses differentiation and sustains embryonic stem cell self-renewal in collaboration with STAT3. Cell 2003; 115: 281–92.

[28] Romero-Lanman EE, Pavlovic S, Amlani B, Chin Y, Benezra R. Id1 maintains embryonic stem cell self-renewal by up-regulation of Nanog and repression of Brachyury expression. Stem Cells Dev 2012; 21: 384–93.

[29] Costa Y, Ding J, Theunissen TW, Faiola F, Hore TA, Shliaha PV, et al. NANOG-dependent function of TET1 and TET2 in establishment of pluripotency. Nature 2013; 495: 370–4.

[30] Liu N, Lu M, Tian X, Han Z. Molecular mechanisms involved in self-renewal and pluripotency of embryonic stem cells. J Cell Physiol 2007; 211: 279–86.

[31] Kunath T, Saba-El-Leil MK, Almousailleakh M, Wray J, Meloche S, Smith A. FGF stimulation of the Erk1/2 signalling cascade triggers transition of pluripotent embryonic stem cells from self-renewal to lineage commitment. Development 2007; 134: 2895–902.

[32] Li Z, Fei T, Zhang J, Zhu G, Wang L, Lu D, et al. BMP4 signaling acts via dual-specificity phosphatase 9 to control ERK activity in mouse embryonic stem cells. Cell Stem Cell 2012; 10: 171–82.

[33] Ginis I, Luo Y, Miura T, Thies S, Brandenberger R, Gerecht-Nir S, et al. Differences between human and mouse embryonic stem cells. Dev Biol 2004; 269: 360–80.

[34] Xu RH, Peck RM, Li DS, Feng X, Ludwig T, Thomson JA. Basic FGF and suppression of BMP signaling sustain undifferentiated proliferation of human ES cells. Nat Methods 2005; 2: 185–90.

[35] Beattie GM, Lopez AD, Bucay N, Hinton A, Firpo MT, King CC, et al. Activin A maintains pluripotency of human embryonic stem cells in the absence of feeder layers. Stem Cells 2005; 23: 489–95.

[36] James D, Levine AJ, Besser D, Hemmati-Brivanlou A. TGFβ/activin/nodal signaling is necessary for the maintenance of pluripotency in human embryonic stem cells. Development 2005; 132: 1273–82.

[37] Besser D. Expression of nodal, lefty-a, and lefty-B in undifferentiated human embryonic stem cells requires activation of Smad2/3. J Biol Chem 2004; 279: 45076–84.

[38] Vallier L, Alexander M, Pedersen RA. Activin/Nodal and FGF pathways cooperate to maintain pluripotency of human embryonic stem cells. J Cell Sci 2005; 118: 4495–509.

[39] Xu RH, Sampsell-Barron TL, Gu F, Root S, Peck RM, Pan G, et al. NANOG is a direct target of TGFbeta/activin-mediated SMAD signaling in human ESCs. Cell Stem Cell 2008; 3: 196–206.

[40] Sirard C, de la Pompa JL, Elia A, Itie A, Mirtsos C, Cheung A, et al. The tumor suppressor gene Smad4/Dpc4 is required for gastrulation and later for anterior development of the mouse embryo. Genes Dev 1998; 12: 107–19.

[41] Conlon FL, Lyons KM, Takaesu N, Barth KS, Kispert A, Herrmann B, et al. A primary requirement for nodal in the formation and maintenance of the primitive streak in the mouse. Development 1994; 120: 1919–28.

[42] Nomura M, Li E. Smad2 role in mesoderm formation, left-right patterning and craniofacial development. Nature 1998; 393: 786–90.

[43] Song J, Oh SP, Schrewe H, Nomura M, Lei H, Okano M, et al. The type II activin receptors are essential for egg cylinder growth, gastrulation, and rostral head development in mice. Dev Biol 1999; 213: 157–69.

[44] Ogawa K, Saito A, Matsui H, Suzuki H, Ohtsuka S, Shimosato D, et al. Activin-Nodal signaling is involved in propagation of mouse embryonic stem cells. J Cell Sci 2007; 120: 55–65.

[45] Vallier L, Reynolds D, Pedersen RA. Nodal inhibits differentiation of human embryonic stem cells along the neuroectodermal default pathway. Dev Biol 2004; 275: 403–21.

[46] Sakaki-Yumoto M, Liu J, Ramalho-Santos M, Yoshida N, Derynck R. Smad2 is essential for maintenance of the human and mouse primed pluripotent stem cell state. J Biol Chem 2013; 288: 18546–60.

[47] Brandenberger R, Wei H, Zhang S, Lei S, Murage J, Fisk GJ, et al. Transcriptome characterization elucidates signaling networks that control human ES cell growth and differentiation. Nat Biotechnol 2004; 22: 707–16.

[48] Inman GJ, Nicolás FJ, Callahan JF, Harling JD, Gaster LM, Reith AD, et al. SB-431542 is a potent and specific inhibitor of transforming growth factor-beta superfamily type I activin receptor-like kinase (ALK) receptors ALK4, ALK5, and ALK7. Mol Pharmacol 2002; 62: 65–74.

[49] Ying QL, Smith AG. Defined conditions for neural commitment and differentiation. Methods Enzymol 2003; 365: 327–41.

[50] Ying QL, Stavridis M, Griffiths D, Li M, Smith A. Conversion of embryonic stem cells into neuroectodermal precursors in adherent monoculture. Nat Biotechnol 2003; 21: 183–6.

[51] Paling NR, Wheadon H, Bone HK, Welham MJ. Regulation of embryonic stem cell self-renewal by phosphoinositide 3-kinase-dependent signaling. J Biol Chem 2004; 279: 48063–70.

[52] Qi X, Li TG, Hao J, Hu J, Wang J, Simmons H, et al. BMP4 supports self-renewal of embryonic stem cells by inhibiting mitogen-activated protein kinase pathways. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2004; 101: 6027–32.

[53] Wilson PA, Hemmati-Brivanlou A. Induction of epidermis and inhibition of neural fate by Bmp-4. Nature 1995; 376: 331–3.

[54] Yasunaga M, Tada S, Torikai-Nishikawa S, Nakano Y, Okada M, Jakt LM, et al. Induction and monitoring of definitive and visceral endoderm differentiation of mouse ES cells. Nat Biotechnol 2005; 23: 1542–50.

[55] Gadue P, Huber TL, Paddison PJ, Keller GM. Wnt and TGF-beta signaling are required for the induction of an in vitro model of primitive streak formation using embryonic stem cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2006; 103: 16806–11.

[56] Fei T, Xia K, Li Z, Zhou B, Zhu S, Chen H, et al. Genome-wide mapping of SMAD target genes reveals the role of BMP signaling in embryonic stem cell fate determination. Genome Res 2010; 20: 36–44.

[57] Weidgang CE, Russell R, Tata PR, Kühl SJ, Illing A, Müller M, et al. TBX3 directs cell-fate decision toward mesendoderm. Stem Cell Report 2013; 1: 248–65.

[58] Xiao L, Yuan X, Sharkis SJ. Activin A maintains self-renewal and regulates fibroblast growth factor, Wnt, and bone morphogenic protein pathways in human embryonic stem cells. Stem Cells 2006; 24: 1476–86.

[59] Richer A, Valdimarsdittur L, Hrafnkelsdotiir HE, Runarsson JF, Omarsdottir AR, Oostward DW, et al. BMP4 promotes EMT and mesodermal commitment in human embryonic stem cells via SLUG and MSX1. Stem Cells 2014; 32: 636–48.

[60] Tam PP, Behringer RR. Mouse gastrulation: the formation of a mammalian body plan. Mech Dev 1997; 68: 3–25.

[61] Nostro MC, Cheng X, Keller GM, Gadue P. Wnt, activin, and BMP signaling regulate distinct stages in the developmental pathway from embryonic stem cells to blood. Cell Stem Cell 2008; 2: 60–71.

[62] Kimura-Yoshida C, Nakano H, Okamura D, Nakao K, Yonemura S, Belo JA, et al. Canonical Wnt signaling and its antagonist regulate anterior-posterior axis polarization by guiding cell migration in mouse visceral endoderm. Dev Cell 2005; 9: 639–50.

[63] Kubo A, Shinozaki K, Shannon JM, Kouskoff V, Kennedy M, Woo S, et al. Development of definitive endoderm from embryonic stem cells in culture. Development 2004; 131: 1651–62.

[64] Gouon-Evans V, Boussemet L, Gadue P, Nierhoff D, Koehler CI, Kubo A, et al. BMP-4 is required for hepatic specification of mouse embryonic stem cell-derived definitive endoderm. Nat Biotechnol 2006; 24: 1402–11.

[65] Shiraki N, Yoshida T, Araki K, Umezawa A, Higuchi Y, Goto H, et al. Guided differentiation of embryonic stem cells into Pdx1-expressing regional-specific definitive endoderm. Stem Cells 2008; 26: 874–85.

[66] Yi P, Park JS, Melton DA. Betatrophin: a hormone that controls pancreatic β cell proliferation. Cell 2013; 153: 747–58.

[67] Singbrant S, Karlsson G, Ehinger M, Olsson K, Jaako P, Miharada K, et al. Canonical BMP signaling is dispensable for hematopoietic stem cell function in both adult and fetal liver hematopoiesis, but essential to preserve colon architecture. Blood 2010; 115: 4689–98.

[68] Trompouki E, Bowman TV, Lawton LN, Fan ZP, Wu DC, DiBiase A, et al. Lineage regulators direct BMP and Wnt pathways to cell-specific programs during differentiation and regeneration. Cell 2011; 147: 577–89.

[69] Behfar A, Zingman LV, Hodgson DM, Rauzier JM, Kane GC, Terzic A, et al. Stem cell differentiation requires a paracrine pathway in the heart. FASEB J 2002; 16: 1558–66.

[70] Chi X, Chatterjee PK, Wilson III W, Zhang SX, Demayo FJ, Schwartz RJ. Complex cardiac Nkx2-5 gene expression activated by noggin-sensitive enhancers followed by chamber-specific modules. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2005; 102: 13490–5.

[71] Willems E, Cabral-Teixeira J, Schade D, Cai W, Reeves P, Bushway PJ, et al. Small molecule-mediated TGFβ Type II receptor degradation promotes cardiomyogenesis in embryonic stem cells. Cell Stem Cells 2012; 11: 242–52.

[72] Mizuseki K, Sakamoto T, Watanabe K, Muguruma K, Ikeya M, Nishiyama A, et al. Generation of neural crest-derived peripheral neurons and floor plate cells from mouse and primate embryonic stem cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2003; 13: 5828–33.

[73] Kamiya D, Banno S, Sasai N, Ohgushi M, Inomata H, Watanabe K, et al. Intrinsic transition of embryonic stem-cell differentiation into neural progenitors. Nature 2011; 470: 503–9.

[74] Gossrau G, Thiele J, Konang R, Schmandt T, Brüstle O. Bone morphogenetic protein-mediated modulation of lineage diversification during neural differentiation of embryonic stem cells. Stem Cells 2007; 25: 939–49.

[75] Schulz TC, Noggle SA, Palmarini GM, Weiler DA, Lyons IG, Pensa KA, et al. Differentiation of human embryonic stem cells to dopaminergic neurons in serum-free suspension culture. Stem Cells 2004; 22: 1218–38.

[76] Pera MF, Andrade J, Houssami S, Reubinoff B, Trounson A, Stanley EG, et al. Regulation of human embryonic stem cell differentiation by BMP-2 and its antagonist noggin. J Cell Sci 2004; 117: 1269–80.

[77] Zhou J, Su P, Li D, Tsang S, Duan E, Wang F. High-efficiency induction of neural conversion in human ESCs and human induced pluripotent stem cells with a single chemical inhibitor of transforming growth factor beta superfamily receptors. Stem Cells 2010; 28: 1741–50.

[78] Chambers SM, Fasano CA, Papapetrou EP, Tomishima M, Sadelain M, Studer L. Highly efficient neural conversion of human ES and iPS cells by dual inhibition of SMAD signaling. Nat Biotechnol 2009; 27: 275–80.

Please cite this article in press as: Itoh F, et al. Roles of TGF-β family signals in the fate determination of pluripotent stem cells. Seminars in Cell Dev Biol (2014), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.semcdb.2014.05.017

[79] Morizane A, Doi D, Kikuchi T, Nishimura K, Takahashi J. Small-molecule inhibitors of bone morphogenic protein and activin/nodal signals promote highly efficient neural induction from human pluripotent stem cells. J Neurosci Res 2011;89:117-26.

[80] Greber B, Coulon P, Zhang M, Moritz S, Frank S, Müller-Molina AJ, et al. FGF signaling inhibits neural induction in human embryonic stem cells. EMBO J 2011;30:4874-84.

[81] Ying Y, Zhao GQ. Cooperation of endoderm-derived BMP 2 and extraembryonic ectoderm-derived BMP 4 in primordial germ cell generation in the mouse. Dev Biol 2001;232:484-92.

[82] Fujiwara T, Dunn NR, Hogan BLM. Bone morphogenetic protein 4 in the extraembryonic mesoderm is required for allantois development and the localization and survival of primordial germ cells in the mouse. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2001;24:13739-44.

[83] Ying Y, Liu XM, Marble A, Lawson KA, Zhao GQ. Requirement of Bmp8b for the generation of primordial germ cells in the mouse. Mol Endocrinol 2000;14:1053-63.

[84] Saitou M, Barton SC, Surani MA. A molecular programme for the specification of germ cell fate in mice. Nature 2002;418:293-300.

[85] Aramaki S, Hayashi K, Kurimoto K, Ohta H, Yabuta Y, Iwanari H, et al. A mesodermal factor, T, specifies mouse germ cell fate by directly activating germline determinants. Dev Cell 2013;27:516-29.

[86] Toyooka Y, Tsunekawa N, Akasu R, Noce T. Embryonic stem cells can form germ cells in vitro. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2003;100:11457-62.

[87] Wei W, Qing T, Ye X, Liu H, Zhang D, Yang W, et al. Primordial germ cell specification from embryonic stem cells. PLoS One 2008;3:e4013.

[88] Kee K, Gonsalves JM, Clark AT, Pera RA. Bone morphogenetic proteins induce germ cell differentiation from human embryonic stem cells. Stem Cells Dev 2006;15:831-7.

[89] Panula S, Medrano JV, Kee K, Bergström R, Nguyen HN, Byers B, et al. Human germ cell differentiation from fetal- and adult-derived induced pluripotent stem cells. Hum Mol Genet 2011;20:752-62.

[90] Takahashi K, Yamanaka S. Induction of pluripotent stem cells from mouse embryonic and adult fibroblast cultures by defined factors. Cell 2006;126:663-76.

[91] Takahashi K, Tanabe K, Ohnuki M, Narita M, Ichisaka T, Tomoda K, et al. Induction of pluripotent stem cells from adult human fibroblasts by defined factors. Cell 2007;131:861-72.

[92] Yamanaka S. Elite and stochastic models for induced pluripotent stem cell generation. Nature 2009;460:49-52.

[93] Bauman K. Stem cells: holding onto the memories. Nat Rev Genet 2010;11:593.

[94] Lin T, Ambasudhan R, Yuan X, Li W, Hilcove S, Abujarour R, et al. A chemical platform for improved induction of human iPSCs. Nat Methods 2009;6:805-8.

[95] Ichida JK, Blanchard J, Lam K, Son EY, Chung JE, Egli D, et al. A small-molecule inhibitor of Tgf-β signaling replaces sox2 in reprogramming by inducing Nanog. Cell Stem Cell 2009;5:491-503.

[96] Liu X, Sun H, Qi J, Wang L, He S, Liu J, et al. Sequential introduction of reprogramming factors reveals a time-sensitive requirement for individual factors and a sequential EMT-MET mechanism for optimal reprogramming. Nat Cell Biol 2013;15:829-38.

[97] Samavarchi-Tehrani P, Golipour A, David L, Sung HK, Beyer TA, Datti A, et al. Functional genomics reveals a BMP-driven mesenchymal-to-epithelial transition in the initiation of somatic cell reprogramming. Cell Stem Cell 2010;7:64-77.


Please cite this article in press as: Itoh F, et al. Roles of TGF-β family signals in the fate determination of pluripotent stem cells. Semin Cell Dev Biol (2014), [http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.semcdb.2014.05.017](http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.semcdb.2014.05.017)