
Mol Biol Rep (2014) 41:6691–6703  
DOI 10.1007/s11033-014-3552-4  

---

**Apelin/APJ system: a promising therapy target for hypertension**

Di Wu · Lu He · Linxi Chen

Received: 20 January 2014 / Accepted: 20 June 2014 / Published online: 3 July 2014  
© Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht 2014  

---

**Abstract** Apelin is a recently described endogenous peptide and its receptor APJ, is a member of the G protein-coupled receptors family. Apelin and APJ are widely distributed in central and peripheral tissues exert important biological effects on cardiovascular system. Recent studies have suggested that apelin/APJ system involves in decreasing the blood pressure and have a close relationship with hypertension, presumably, pathophysiology of hypertension as well. Such as, apelin/APJ system may be concerned in hyperfunction of the sympathetic nervous system, renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system, endothelial injury, excessive endothelin, sodium retention, vascular remodeling, insulin resistance elicit hypertension, as well as in hypertension-induced organ damaged. Meanwhile, on the ground of the variation of apelin level in hypertension therapeutic process and combining with the recently researches on APJ agonist and antagonist, we could infer that apelin/APJ system would be a promising therapeutic target for hypertension and other cardiovascular disease in the future. However, the role of apelin on these pathogenic conditions was not consistent, consequently, the contradictory role of apelin on these pathogenesis of hypertension would be discussed in this article.

**Keywords** Apelin · APJ · Hypertension · Sympathetic nervous system · Vascular smooth muscle cell · Endothelial cell

---

**Introduction**

In 1993, O’Dowd et al. [1] named a gene as APJ, since no found its endogenous ligand, APJ has been known as G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) for many years, until 1998, Tatemoto et al. [2] from bovine stomach secretion extracted and purified APJ natural ligand, apelin. Following study found that apelin and its receptor APJ extensively expressed in vivo tissues, particularly high concentration in cardiovascular tissues [3], mediated potent vasodilator and positive inotropic action [4, 5]. In Pan et al. [6] review demonstrated that the apelin/APJ system also possesses the functions of diuresis, regulating the balance of humoral, immune system, insulin sensitivity, promoting cell proliferation, migration and angiogenesis and so on. However, the blood pressure (BP) regulation effect of apelin/APJ system in central and peripheral tissues were inconsistent, also conformity in different pathological conditions. Therefore, we explored the distinct role of apelin/APJ system in hyperfunction sympathetic nervous system (SNS) and renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system (RAAS), endothelial injury, excessive endothelin, sodium retention, vascular remodeling, insulin resistance induced hypertension (Fig. 1), reviewed the possible role of apelin/APJ system on relevant target organ damaged induced by hypertension, such as heart, kidney, brain damage, and analysed the variation of apelin level after administrated hypertension drugs, as well as summarized recently researches harvest and prospect of apelin receptor agonists and antagonists. Accordingly, we major discussed the existence contradictory role of apelin/APJ system in those pathogenesis of hypertension in this review, which may be an important implication for if apelin and its receptor could have a clinical value in the prevention and treatment of hypertension in the future research.

---

D. Wu · L. He · L. Chen (✉)  
Institute of Pharmacy and Pharmacology, University of South China, Hengyang 421001, China  
e-mail: lxchen6@126.com

Fig. 1 Apelin/APJ system involved in the pathogenesis of hypertension

Characteristic of apelin/APJ system

APJ receptor is a protein of 377 amino acids, containing seven transmembrane domains; this gene is located on the long arm of chromosome 11 [1]. APJ has been known for "orphan" receptor for a long time as it is unable to activate by Angiotensin II (Ang-II), despite its gene sequence homologous with angiotensin receptor (AT1) in hydrophobic transmembrane region of 40–50%, until 1998 when its ligand apelin was isolated from bovine stomach extracts [2]. Apelin gene encoded a containing 77 amino acids residues pre-proprotein, could be hydrolyzed into unequal length activity polypeptide: Apelin-36, Apelin-17, Apelin-13, Apelin-12 and so on. Yet, the C terminus amino acid of these activity polypeptide could be cleaved into inactive state by angiotensin converting enzyme-II (ACE2) and proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin 3 (PCSK3) [7–9]. Different length of the peptide distribution in different tissues, and the affinity with APJ and biological activity are also distinguished, usually quantity applied apelin-13 for experimental study. O'Carroll et al. [10] for the first time detected that apelin mRNA is widely expressed in lung, heart, skeletal muscle, kidney, brain and liver in rats experiment. Besides, apelin has a distinct and unique distribution in the central nervous system [hypothalamic paraventricular nucleus (PVN) and supraoptic nucleus (SON)], which could mediate neuroendocrine responses. In later human researches found that apelin and its receptor

APJ are expressed in several tissues as well, in vascular endothelial cells (VECs), vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs) and myocardial cells also have a prominent expression, indicating that apelin interact with its receptor APJ may have functions in a wide variety of cells [11]. Recently, researches have shown that apelin/APJ system may be involved in many physiological and pathological processes, particularly, in cardiovascular, central nervous system, fluid balance, insulin sensitivity, feeding and drinking control, angiogenesis and so on [12]. As numerous studies have suggested that apelin/APJ system have an effect on human cardiovascular system, including reducing the BP and reinforcing cardiac contractility, indicating that apelin/APJ system would be a new therapeutic target for cardiovascular diseases.

Regulation of apelin/APJ system on blood pressure

Dilation of blood vessels, reduce blood pressure

Numerous experiments have demonstrated that apelin/APJ system is closely associated with lowering the BP. By collecting data, including systolic BP (SBP), diastolic BP (DBP), and mean arterial BP (MABP) from 1,031 subjects in the coastal areas of China, Zhu et al. [13] found that there was a negative correlation between plasma apelin levels and BP. Besides, the plasma apelin level in essential
hypertension patients is significantly lower than in normal person [14]. And Tatamoto et al. [15] already indicated that in apelin injection rats the MABP was reduced, and caused a transient elevation of the plasma nitrite/nitrate concentration, however, this effect was blocked by a nitric oxide synthase (NOS) inhibitor. All these results indicated that the effect of apelin reduced BP may be via a nitric oxide (NO)-dependent mechanism. Later study further illustrated the mechanism of apelin-induced vasodilation by directly activating the L-arginine (L-Arg)/NOS/NO pathway in vascular endothelium, then increasing intracellular cyclic guanosine monophosphate (cGMP) level, which induced VSMCs relaxation, lowering the BP [16]. In APJ-deficient mice, apelin-induced phosphorylation of endothelial NOS disappeared and the antihypertensive effect deprived, further proved the NO-dependent mechanism mediate apelin/ APJ system induced vessel dilation. Meanwhile, these defect mice presented a strongly increased vasopressor response to the most potent vasoconstrictor Ang-II, indicating that apelin/APJ system exerts the hypotensive effect in vivo may be against the pressor action of Ang-II [7]. Recent study also support the opposite role of apelin on Ang-II, showed apelin is a positive regulator of ACE2 to promote Ang-II degradation [17]. Collectively, these studies indicated that apelin/APJ system reduced BP may be achieved by promoting the vasodilative effect of NO and blocking the vasoconstrictive effect of Ang-II.

Contraction of blood vessels, increased blood pressure

Antihypertensive effect caused by apelin has been demonstrated in numerous documents. However, recent research conducted by Nagano et al. [18] found that the BP was transiently elevated in response to apelin stimulation in NG-nitro-L-arginine methyl ester (LNAME)-induced peripheral vascular damaged hypertension mice, indicated that unlike the normal circumstance, apelin may function as a vasopressor peptide under vascular damaged condition. Asymmetric dimethylarginine (ADMA) is also a risk factor for endothelial dysfunction, Han et al. [19] in their study demonstrated that apelin-13 directly combined with its receptor APJ on VSMCs to promotes vasoconstriction and exacerbates hypertension by increasing myosin light chain (MLC) phosphorylation in ADMA treated rats. In our lab, we also validated that apelin exhibits a strong vasodilation depend on endothelium-dependent manner, yet in ex vivo vascular rings of spontaneous hypertensive rat (SHR), the effect of apelin on vasodilation was attenuated, and moreover, present contraction the vascular rings as the NO pathway disordered [20]. The ionic mechanism of apelin on vasoconstriction have been studied by Modgil et al. [21], they stated that apelin-13 via a phosphorylation phosphoinositide 3 kinase (PI3K)-dependent signaling

pathway to inhibit large-conductance Ca^(2+)-activated K^(+) (BKCa) channel in VSMCs. Additionally, the central apelin also plays a special role in regulating BP, the rostral ventrolateral medulla (RVLM) apelin expression is remarkably increased on stress-induced hypertension rat (SIHR). In addition, direct microinjection of exogenous apelin-13 (200 pmol in 50 nL) into the RVLM caused a 20 mmHg elevation in BP [22], suggesting that central apelin plays a totally opposite effect on BP compared with periphery tissue via a neuromodulation effect.

According to these experiments, a conflicting viewpoint about the role of apelin in regulating vascular tone were yielded, and demonstrated that vivo endothelial integrity or not, the action site (central or peripheral) all these factors would affect the regulation role of apelin on BP. Yet, it is difficult to fully unraveling the exact role of apelin in the modulation of vascular tone, the peptide size and type and location of the vascular bed upon which it is acting on, also may be the influencing factors.

Apelin/APJ system on the pathogenesis of hypertension

Central apelin activates sympathetic nervous system (SNS)

Hypertension is a commonly neurogenic disease, mainly caused by SNS overactivity, which has been proved in many researches. Davern et al. [23] observed that the schlager hypertensive (BPH/2J) mice exhibited hypotension as treatment with sympathetic blockade pentolinium, demonstrated that CNS disorder and sympathetic over activation could contribute to hypertension.The potential mechanism may be by activating the sympathetic nervous to increased catecholamine hormones release, then contract the VSMCs, usually the sympathetic marker norepinephrine (NE) displayed an increase in hypertensive state. Besides, catheter-based renal denervation (RDN) is a novel technique specifically targeting renal sympathetic nerves has reported on recently clinical studies, also the BP was significantly reduced in RDN resistant hypertension patients [24]. Activation of renal sympathetic nerve also exert an effect on the development of hypertension via stimulating renal renin release to increase Ang-II activity, decrease renal blood flow, and enhance tubular sodium retention [25].

The peripheral apelin/APJ system plays a significant role in cardiovascular homeostasis and pathophysiology of cardiovascular diseases. However, the central effect of this neurohormonal system in neural control of cardiovascular function was poorly understood. The RVLM is the major source of exciting sympathetic nervous, acts as an important center for regulating cardiovascular function [26].Seyedabadi et al. [27] found that the RVLM and nucleus tractus solitarius (NTS) mediate the effect of apelin-13 on arterial pressure. Later Zhang et al. [22] presented that microinjection of exogenous apelin-13 (200 pmol in 50 nL) into the RVLM caused a BP elevation and a 24% increase in sympathetic nerve activity as well. Apelin microinjected into the RVLM of control rats or SIHR, the BP was significantly increased, furthermore, effects induced by apelin-13 in SIHR were significantly intenser than those of control rats [28].

The central apelin involved in the regulation of hypertension by over-activating the SNS to exert a totally contrary role to peripheral have been clarified, yet how about the specific mechanism? Under the pathological conditions, high concentration of central apelin could further increased the BP, which may be caused by a injury of brain tissue.

Apelin/APJ system antagonists renin–angiotensinaldosterone system (RAAS)

RAAS exists both in the circulatory system and the blood vessels walls, as well as different kinds of tissues to regulate vascular tone, promote the development and maintenance of hypertension. Ang-II is the most important component of RAAS, exhibits a powerful vasoconstrictive effect, meanwhile, increases aldosterone secretion to induce sodium retention accompany with peripheral resistance [29, 30]. The inherent renin–angiotensin system in brain plays an important role in raising BP as well, Ang-II unbalanced the NO bioavailability and reactive oxygen species (ROS) generation, and increased SNS activity to induce hypertension [31, 32]. In addition, Ang-II not only has itself effect on blood vessels contraction, also activates oxidation and inflammation factors to induce endothelial dysfunction and inflammation, which is a major risk factor for cardiovascular diseases [33]. Hartono et al. [34] found that Ang-II could promote chronic renal damage by inducing oxidative stress, inflammation, and fibrosis in hypertension murine, demonstrating that activation of the local RAAS also plays a critical role in the development of hypertension and related organ damage.

ACE2 is a negative regulator for Ang-II-induced vasoconstriction and diastolic dysfunction by hydrolyzing Ang-II to Ang-(1-7). In addition, as ACE2 is a multifunctional enzyme also degrade apelin, recently study has shown that apelin stimulates its receptor APJ to increase ACE2 promoter activity then promote Ang-II hydrolysis in vitro, therefore, this two peptides may be jointly involved in BP regulation [17, 35]. However, this specific complicate correlation and mechanism haven't been detailed. Present study showed that apelin/APJ system blocks Ang-II action by increasing NO production and inhibiting Ang-II signaling in vascular disease [36]. According to the hypothesis

that apelin/APJ system oppose to the renin–angiotensin system in pathophysiology functions, Fukushima et al. [37] found apelin and APJ expression and phosphorylation of Akt and eNOS in Dahl salt-sensitive hypertensive (DS) rats were significantly increased by an Ang-II receptor blocker olmesartan. Besides, administration of LNAME completely abrogated the olmesartan-mediated hypertensive improvement, apelin/APJ expression and Akt/eNOS phosphorylation. Based on these results the apelin/APJ system antagonism to Ang-II is achieved by blocking Ang-II-reduced NO production. All-trans-RA (atRA) plays a beneficial effect in hypertension by decreasing Ang-II synthesis and its receptor expression. Zhong et al. [38] examined that chronic atRA treatment SHR induced gene and protein expression of apelin and reduced BP, indicating that atRA possesses a potential clinical value in the prevention and treatment hypertension by regulating the balance between apelin/APJ system and Ang-II-AT1 signaling.

Here, we could infer that in vivo the effect of RAAS on hypertension may be in part dependent on a dynamic interaction with apelin/APJ system. In pathological conditions, apelin/APJ also inhibits Ang-II-induced intense vasoconstriction and decreased NO-dependent vasodilation.

Apelin/APJ system inhibits sodium retention

Reduced glomerular filtration rate (GFR), prolonged activation the SNS and RAAS axis, increased arginine-vasopressin (AVP) release and all these factors would contribute to sodium retention [39, 40]. Yet, long-term renal sodium retention increased the blood volume, led to excretion barrier then partake in the pathogenesis of hypertension, many researches already demonstrated that sodium-rich diets become a hypertension promoting risk. Herein, Jaitovich et al. [41] discussed the possible mechanism of sodium retention-induced hypertension, rich sodium content increased intracellular Na⁺ and Ca²⁺ concentrations in VSMCs by modulating Na⁺, K⁺-ATPase activity, subsequently result in increasing the vascular tone and with a corresponding increasing in BP. Akcilar et al. [42] conduct a study for the first time discovered that apelin chronic application could reduce BP in deoxycorticosterone acetate-salt-induced hypertension rats (DOCA-salt). Increased AVP secretion, an antidiuretic hormone, is a key physiological response to hyperosmotic stress and may be part mechanism of high-salt diets induce or exacerbate hypertension. Apelin, a neuropeptide, co-localizes with AVP in magnocellular neurons and is involved in regulating body fluid homeostasis [43]. Llorens-Cortes and Kordon [44] central injected apelin decreased the phasic electrical activity of vasopressinergicneurones and the systemic secretion of AVP, finally induced water diuresis in lactating rats, demonstrated that stimulate specific central apelin expression would be a new therapeutic tools for improving sodium retention induced hypertension. However, there is a conflicting report about the effect of apelin on AVP secretion that adequate intra- venous injection apelin increased AVP release from hypothalamus explants [45]. In addition, Bech et al. [46] illustrated that NOS-inhibitor induced an increasing in systemic BP, significantly reducing in renal plasma flow, GFR and fractional excretions of sodium on essential hypertension patients and normal persons, indicating that blocked NO production would enhance sodium retention. Combined with previous discussion, we can confer that apelin/APJ system inhibits sodium retention by the regulation of AVP release, RAS activation and NO production to improve hypertension. However, the above discussion result have presented that central apelin could increase SNS activity [21], which would further enhance sodium retention, and the ambiguity role of apelin on AVP release also need a uniform interpretation. In generally, the exactly effect of apelin/APJ system on sodium retention caused hypertension may be according to the main contributor of sodium retention.

Apelin/APJ system constriction vessel by promoting endothelial damage

Vascular endothelial possess plenty of important functions, such as maintain the balance of vessel contraction and relaxation, regulate vascular smooth muscle proliferation, participate in inflammatory response and signaling transduction etc. Under normal circumstance, VECs generate a large number of potent vasoactive substances to maintain its function. However, blockade the balance between vasoconstrictor and vasodilator substances would cause endothelial dysfunction. Most of animal hypertension models showed VECs dysfunction, such as spontaneously hypertensive rats, Dahl salt-sensitive (Dahl-S) salt-induced hypertension rats etc. [47, 48]. In human studies hypertension is also associated with the functional and morphological alteration of the endothelium and accompanied with the vasodilators [NO, prostacyclin (PGI₂)] and vasoconstrictors [endothelin, thromboxane (TXA₂)] substances variation [49]. In addition, Chen et al. [50] proved that VECs function disorder increased ET synthesis, decreased NO release, then disordered the adjustment of vascular tone, eventually promoted hypertension.

In cardiovascular system apelin and its receptor APJ are widely present on the endothelium of vascular wall and smooth muscle cells. Study have illustrated apelin lowering BP through endothelium-dependent vasodilation as endothelial structure and function integrally. However, apelin

could exert an totally opposite effect on vascular tone as endothelial dysfunction as well. Han et al. [19] evaluated the ability of apelin on BP regulation in ADMA-induced endothelial damaged hypertension rats, which were divided into ADMA-treated and control group. They measured the SBP before and after injection of apelin-13, finally found that SBP declined in the control group but elevated in the ADMA-treated group. Especially, apelin-13 could promote VSMCs MLC phosphorylation in the ADMA group. These results indicated that under endothelium dysfunction state apelin-13 directly acts on VSMCs to increase MLC phosphorylation, thus causing vasoconstriction and exacerbating hypertension. Similarly, Nagano et al. [18] established L-NAME induced vascular damaged mice, found apelin functions as a vasopressor peptide in these mice. Moreover, the apelin–APJ system is involved in the expression of adhesion molecules and chemokines variation in endothelial cells, which could promote endothelial injury. Our laboratory for the first time revealed that apelin via PI3K/14-3-3 pathway increased the expression of intercellular adhesion molecule-1 (ICAM-1), vascular cell adhesion molecule-1 (VCAM-1) and monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 (MCP-1) in human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) [51]. Subsequently another lab also demonstrated that administration of apelin induced significant expression of above proteins via a nuclear factor kappa-B (NF-κB) and c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) pathways [52, 53].

Consequently, apelin can not exert an endothelium-dependent vasodilation effect under endothelial damaged state but via directly acts on VSMCs to further exacerbate hypertension. Moreover, under normal condition excessive apelin may activate adhesion molecules to promote endothelial injury.

Undefined effect of apelin/APJ system on excessive endothelin (ET)

Endothelin (ET) is a strong and lasting vasoconstrictor peptide which is implicated in the pathogenesis of hypertension. In vivo, ET gene encodes three kinds of isomeric peptides: ET-1, ET-2, ET-3. ET-1 is the strongest vasoconstrictor substance, its effects are mediated by ET receptors (ETA, ETB, ETC). In Januszewicz et al. [54] study found that the level of plasma ET-1 was elevated in essential hypertension patients compared with normal person, suggesting that ET-1 may be associated with the development and maintenance of elevated BP. Gendron et al. [55] compared the effect of BQ-123 (a selective ETA-receptor antagonist) on SHR and normotensive rats BP. After BQ-123 infusion, the BP was significantly decreased in SHRs, but not in normotensive rats, suggesting that the endogenous ET-1 contributes to the excessive higher BP inSHRs. Clinical trials also have demonstrated that the ETA-receptor antagonist darusentan is able to decrease the BP of patients with refractory hypertension.

Thus, the possible mechanism of ET increases BP was described on following literatures. We known that excessive ET itself would exert a strong vasoconstriction effect, yet ET could activate some pathways that are associated with the regulation of BP as well. Yamamoto et al. [56] found that ET-1 administered into the cerebral third ventricle increased the MABP, plasma AVP release in a dose-related manner in conscious rats. Besides, pretreatment with AVP-antagonist attenuated the BP response to ET-1. These results suggest that centrally over-expressed ET-1 may increase the activity of SNS and vasopressinergic neurons, resulting in an increase in BP. However, the effects of AVP and ET on regulating renal collecting duct (CD) sodium and water reabsorption was antagonistic, and lack of ET could inhibit sodium (Na) and water transport through binding its receptors [57]. In this sense local ET system in the CD contributing to the antihypertensive and renal sodium excretion, yet the case of CD excessive ET have not discussed. The relationship between Ang-II and ET-1 is known to be complex, and both peptides can initiate and potentiate each other’s gene expression. Uemasu et al. [58] presented that the BP and plasma ET-1 significantly decreased in hypertension patients after treatment with captopril, an ACE inhibitor, suggesting that inhibition of Ang-II could improve essential hypertension may be at least in part, mediated by depressing ET-1 production on vascular endothelium. Study have showed the expression of Ang-II was upregulated in hypertensive patients, then promoted the ET release, which in turn, ET could increase the synthesis of Ang-II in VSMCs, result in aggravating hypertension [59].

However, the exactly effect of apelin/APJ system on ET induced hypertension has not clearly reports, according to above researches which we have discussed, apelin may be object to the ET effect by inhibiting the function of AVP and Ang-II. In another angle that ET is closely related to vascular damage and increased SNS activity, may be along with the apelin/APJ system contribute to endothelium-dependent vasodilation impaired and aggravated hypertension. Thus, the exact effect of apelin on ET induced hypertension need a further discussion.

Apelin/APJ signaling transduction pathways mediates vascular remodeling

In 1989, Baumbach and Heistad [60] by examining whether a reduction in external diameter could contribute to encroachment on the vascular lumen in SHR, then firstly proposed the concept vascular remodeling (VR). VR occurs after endothelial injury, caused by VSMCs proliferation and vascular fibrosis. VR is the pathological and structure foundation to maintain hypertension and its complications, usually associated with following changes such as lumen diameter reduced and media-to-lumen ratio (M/L) increased, mainly displayed VSMCs proliferation, which would increase the peripheral vessels resistance, eventually elevated the BP.

Following, we discussed the apelin plays on vascular remodeling-induced hypertension. Kidoya and Takakura [61] have already reported that apelin/APJ system is involved in the regulation of blood formation and mature, as apelin-deficient mice showed narrow blood vessels in intersomitic vessels during embryogenesis. We know that VSMCs proliferation plays a critical role in the pathogenesis of hypertension, our laboratory longevity committed to investigate the effect of apelin/APJ system on VSMCs proliferation. Apelin and its receptor APJ both have a prominent expression on VSMCs, and Li et al. [62] found apelin-13 significantly stimulated VSMCs proliferation and increased cell cycle progression for the first time, with an increasing in the expression of extracellular regulated protein kinases1/2 (p-ERK1/2) and CyclinD1, then demonstrating that the VSMCs proliferation mediated by apelin-APJ-ERK1/2-CyclinD1 signal cascades. Next, we conducted a further study found that apelin-13 promotes the expression of PI3K and Akt in dose- and time-dependent manner, and these proteins inhibitor significantly decrease the VSMCs proliferation, also showed PI3K/Akt-ERK1/2 mediated apelin/APJ system promotes VSMCs proliferation, complement the previous signaling pathway [63]. Subsequently, we stated that the NOX4-derived ROS and 14-3-3/Raf-1 compound could activate ERK1/2 and its downstream to drive apelin-13-induced VSMCs proliferation as well [64]. In our recently work have already suggested the Jagged-1/Notch3 signaling also involved in apelin-13-induced VSMC proliferation by promoting the expression of Cyclin D1 [65]. Another lab study favour that apelin plays an important role in the migration and proliferation of VSMCs, found apelin-13 induced ERK phosphorylation to promote osteopontin (OPN) and Egr-1 expression, which is a critical initiating factor of the processes of VSMC proliferation and migration [66]. On the whole, our laboratory findings combined with other research showing that apelin/APJ system via multiply signaling transduction pathways to promote VSMCs proliferation (Fig. 2), which play a catalytic role in promoting vascular remodeling, then induced and exacerbated hypertension.
may induce the renal sodium reabsorption then lead to vascular resistance and BP increased [71].

Apelin has been proposed as a novel beneficial adipokine and its expression was increased in obese state, thus the apelin/APJ system is tightly association with insulin resistance as well. Yue et al. [72] discovered that APKO (apelin knockout) mice diminished insulin sensitivity, insulin-induced Akt phosphorylation, and presented hyperinsulinemic. However, administration of apelin to APKO mice improved insulin sensitivity, glucose uptake and Akt phosphorylation, demonstrated that apelin has the function to oppose IR. Zhu et al. [73] investigated the molecular mechanism of apelin on glucose metabolism and insulin resistance in 3T3-L1 adipocytes, found that apelin increased adipocytes' insulin-stimulated glucose uptake through the PI3K/Akt pathway, modulated inflammatory responses, thereby improving insulin resistance. Recently, Duparc et al. [74] illustrated that hypothalamus apelin/ROS signaling controls hepatic glucose production via activates SNS to induce peripheral hyperglycemia and induced IR, the central apelin may exert an effect on IR distinct to periphery.

These studies illustrate the apelin/APJ system is involved in obesity related hypertension, via acting on SNS, Ang-II, endothelial dysfunction and sodium transport, however its particular mechanism, and its action with those multiple factors would generate a contradictory effect on IR-induced hypertension. Such as, apelin indeed stimulates glucose uptake, yet how about the endothelial dysfunction circumstances? which role does apelin play in IR induced hypertension?

**Apelin and APJ genic polymorphism is a trigger factor for hypertension**

Hypertension is a complex, multifactorial disease. Genetically hypertensive rats, such as in SHR showed that hypertension germination is close to genetic factor. Many studies have revealed hypertension significant contact with certain genetic polymorphisms. The present researches considered that hypertension pathogenic genes may be associated with RAAS, vasopressin receptor gene, ET-1 and eNOS, etc. [75–77]. Recently, apelin and AGTRL1 genetic polymorphisms might contribute to essential hypertension or its related phenotypes has been raised. Li et al. [78] recruited 1,015 Han Chinese from 248 families with essential hypertension, used the family-based association test (FBAT) and the haplotype-based association test (HBAT) to analyze those collected data. Two SNPs (rs3761581 and T-1860C) within apelin, and three SNPs (rs7119375, rs10501367 and rs9943582) within AGTRL1 were found to be associated with hypertension, suggesting that genetic variation with apelin and AGTRL1 are likely

Fig. 2 The signal transduction of apelin/APJ system promotes VSMCs proliferation

Apelin/APJ system partakes in multiple pathways activated insulin resistance (IR)

IR usually accompany with hyperinsulinemia to compensate insulin-deficient action by excessive insulin secretion, and is a precursor of numerous cardiovascular disease has been reported. Xun et al. [67] conducted a meta-analysis suggesting that IR is closely associated with an increased risk of hypertension. IR is complex, resulting from multiple factors interplay, thus the mechanism of IR on hypertension involved in many vivo pathophysiologic processes: (1) The mechanism of IR-induced hypertension could be rooted in an increased density and function of SNS stated by Takatori et al. [68]. (2) IR broke the balance between NO and ET-1 by impairing PI3K-dependent signaling to induce endothelial dysfunction, present serum NO decreased, ET levels over-expressed, also thickened the vessel wall and narrowed arteriolar lumen, demonstrated that IR could impaired NO dependent vasodilation and enhanced the effect of ET on vascular contraction [69]. (3) IR-induced hypertension may be associated with Ang-II as well, upregulates AT1 receptor to aggravate the adverse effect of Ang-II on the cardiovascular system, also increases the production of oxygen free and radical inflammatory cytokines in endothelial cells, which may be involved in activation of the nuclear factor kappa B (NF kappa B) inflammatory pathway, ultimately causing hypertension and endothelial dysfunction [70]. (4) Insulin acts on almost all nephron segments' sodium transport and it is a strong enhancer of sodium reabsorption, yet hyperinsulinemia
contribute to essential hypertension. Following, Jin et al. [79] studied those candidate genes and demonstrated a contributive role of low-penetrance haplotype in apelin gene on coronary artery disease (CAD) in males, and more importantly, interactive effects of genetic defect in apelin/ APJ pathway might confer a potential risk in Chinese hypertensive patients. However, recently Huang et al. [80] explored the association of genetic variants in the apelin/ APJ system genes (APLN, APLNR and ACE2) and BP response to cold pressor test (CPT), found that there were no significant associations of polymorphisms in APLN and APLNR genes with BP responses to CPT. Thus, these findings suggesting that a further research is badly needed to confirm the genetic variation of apelin and AGTRLI induced hypertension, maybe in some cases, the polymorphism of these genes could be a trigger factor for hypertension.

A beneficial role of apelin/APJ system on relevant target organ damage

Numerous experiments have stated that hypertension is accompanied with renal, cardiac and cerebral damaged. Hypertension and renal have a closely and complex relationship and mutually enhanced, which could create a vicious cycle. Hypertension has a significant association with serum uric acid level, and declines renal function in Sedaghat et al. [81] meta-analysis study. Kidney damage represents a frequent event in the course of hypertension, and its contributory molecular mechanisms may be include activating RAAS, oxidative stress, endothelial dysfunction, vascular remodeling and so on. Early blockade of the RAAS is successful in delaying the development of hypertension in SHR and ameliorating renal damage by inhibiting inflammatory response. Seifi et al. [82] stated that in DOCA-salt treatment rats renal antioxidant was decreased, proteinuria and histological damage were increased. These researches indicating multitude pathogenesis of hypertension was involved in the kidney damage.

Drukteinis et al. [83] analyzed left ventricular structure and function in 1940 participants, found that hypertensive participants had higher left ventricular wall thickness and mass, the relative wall thickness was approximately threefold-higher than normotensive. Left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH) is an independent predictor of poor prognosis in patients with hypertension. Hypertension patients the left ventricular diastolic and systolic function were impaired, which might be aggravated by inflammation or neurohumoral activation. In Ang-II-induced hypertension, via increased oxidative stress and inflammation, contributes to the development of cardiac and renal injury [34].

Hypertension also caused an alteration in cerebral artery structure and function that impaired blood flow. Muller et al. [84] proved that untreated hypertension, poorly controlled hypertension, and high BP levels are associated with a decline in parenchymal cerebral blood flow, increased ischemic damage.

Endogenous apelin levels are decreased in some renal, cardiac and cerebral patients, and recently studies have reported that exogenous treatment apelin could protect against renal ischemia/reperfusion (I/R) [85], improve cardiac dysfunction [86], alleviate diabetic cardiomyopathy [87], ischemic brain injury [88] etc. In addition, apelin/APJ system have a regulation effect on cell autophagy [89], in our lab previous reviews discussed that autophagy have an important role in vascular function and myocardial diseases and the latest study have indicated that apelin promotes proliferation of bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells (BMSCs), which is critical to treatment of ischemic injury [90–93], combining with the physiologic function of apelin dilate vessels, improve blood circulation, positive inotropic, antagonize Ang-II action, indicating apelin/APJ system also have a beneficial role on hypertension relevant target organ damage by regulating different pathological events.

Apelin/APJ system would be a therapeutic target in hypertension

According to the pathogenesis of hypertension, antihypertensive drugs commonly divided to diuretics, SNS inhibitors, renin-angiotensin inhibitors, calcium channel blockers, vasodilators. Besides, recently researches focused that some hypertension drugs are accompanied with the variation of apelin levels, which further illustrate that apelin/APJ system is participate in the development of hypertension.

Jin et al. [94] examined the expression of apelin and its receptor APJ in normal control group (C), 2K1C model group (M) and puerarin treatment group (P), and indicated that plasma apelin and APJ levels at M group rats were higher than those of C group, whereas their expressions on P group were lower than those of M model group, as in the compensation period of the 2K1C rats, the increasing apelin could lower BP to protect the organism, after treatment puerarin downregulated apelin expression exert a protective effect on renal hypertension. Huang et al. [95] also found puerarin decreases the expression of apelin and APJ in ischemic and non-ischemic kidneys, suggesting that puerarin regulate BP and protect target organs may be in part via apelin/APJ pathway. Another study tested apelin and APJ levels changes in SHR underwent swimming training for 9 weeks and without training. Compared with
without training group, swimming-trained SHR showed decreased SBP and elevated apelin and APJ mRNA expression in plasma and cardiovascular tissue, demonstrated that long-term swimming training relieved hypertension may be via up-regulating the cardiovascular apelin and its receptor expression and function [96]. Besides periphery, the RVLM level of apelin and its receptor APJ also changed in hypertension central therapy rats. Zhang et al. [28] investigated whether acupuncture therapy effect on hypertension involve the apelinergic system in the RVLM, result shown that repetitive electroacupuncture (EA) stimulation at the Zusuanli (ST-36) acupoint attenuated hypertension and the RVLM apelin expression in SIHR, also decreased the pressor effect elicited by exogenous apelin-13 RVLM microinjection in SIHR, indicated that this treatment methods could resist the neurergic effect of apelin on BP increased.

The levels of apelin alteration were different on these treatment drugs, which may be result from the different hypertension status, as well as the action site of apelin. Nevertheless, it is indisputable that apelin/APJ system is a potential therapy target in treatment of hypertension, and our laboratory's reviews have put forward some meaningful perspective for apelin/APJ system as a therapeutic target in cardiovascular disease [97–99]. Accordingly, APJ antagonist and agonist would be a useful tool to validate the importance role of apelin/APJ system in organism. Recently study have found the apelin receptor APJ agonist E339-3D6 [100], APJ antagonist CRPRLC [101], and ML221, which have been firstly synthesized by Maloney et al. [102], this compound antagonized apelin-13-mediated activation of APJ in a concentration-dependent manner, also presented the initial vitro pharmacologic characterization. However, ML221 displayed limited cross reactivity against a range of GPCRs. As the role apelin and APJ in normal physiology and pathology remains to be further illuminated, current efforts is to optimize scaffold then synthesized these agonists and antagonists, in order to explore the effects of apelin/APJ system in vivo, which would promote a new therapeutic medicine to treatment cardiovascular disease.

### Discussion

Apelin as an endogenous active peptide, plays a beneficial role on regulation of BP, blood vessel formation, and its role in the cardiovascular system has been extensively studied in previous studies. In this review we discussed the potential physiology mechanism of hypertension disease that apelin/APJ system may be involved in, such as, interacts with SNS, RAAS, and participates in the process of endothelial injury, sodium retention, organism ET over-expression, vascular remodeling, insulin resistance to regulate the BP. However, the impact of apelin/APJ on hypertension is still have some controversies, we summary that the effect of apelin on vascular tone depends on the integrity of the endothelial cells and its action site (central or peripheral), which would exert totally opposite effect. On the one side, apelin improves hypertension by reversing the effect of Ang-II, alleviating sodium retention, resisting IR. On the other side, apelin aggravate hyperfunction SNS, endothelial injury or vascular remodeling induced hypertension by increasing the SNS activity, producing some adhesion factors or promoting VSMCs proliferation. As the definite mechanism of apelin on ET was unclear research, we speculate apelin may exert a vasoconstrictive action on the ET over-expression induced endothelial injury. Study have suggested that apelin genetic polymorphisms may be contribute to hypertension as well, yet in a CPT study found a contrary result, then whether the apelin/APJ system is associated with hypertension and its complications at the gene level need more evidence.

Moreover, the interaction and regulation between these pathogenic factors of hypertension are complicated. Thus, we must explore the exact effect of apelin on pathogenesis to favor it as a target in treatment hypertension, and make a explicit answer to direct we should attract or repel apelin/APJ system in different pathogenesis states. Recently studies have mimicked APJ antagonists and agonists, which is particular benefit to identify their biological function and potential role on diseases. Yet, it is difficult to synthesize, and its specificity and activity needs a further enhanced via the structure optimization. Anyhow, there is no doubt that apelin/APJ system would be a promising therapeutic target for hypertension and other related diseases.

#### Acknowledgement
This work was supported by the grants from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (81270420, 30901577), the Hengyang Joint Funds of Hunan Provincial Natural Science Foundation of China (12JJ8013), Hunan Provincial Natural Science Foundation of China (14JJ3102), and the Construct Program of the Key Discipline in Hunan Province. We special appreciate Bingbing Wang (Assistant Professor, Perinatal Biology Laboratory, Division of Maternal-Fetal Medicine, Rutgers University-Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, USA) for the English language improvement.

### References

1. O'Dowd BF, Heiber M, Chan A, Heng HH, Tsui LC, Kennedy JL, Shi X, Petronis A, George SR, Nguyen T (1993) A human gene that shows identity with the gene encoding the angiotensin receptor is located on chromosome 11. Gene 136(1–2): 355–360
2. Tatemo K, Hosoya M, Habata Y, Fujii R, Kakegawa T, Zou MX, Kawamata Y, Fukusumi S, Hinuma S, Kitada C, Kurokawa T, Onda H, Fujino M (1998) Isolation and characterization of a

novel endogenous peptide ligand for the human APJ receptor.
Biochem Biophys Res Commun 251(2):471–476

3. Kawamata Y, Habata Y, Fukusumi S, Hosoya M, Fujii R, Hina-
numa S, Nishizawa N, Kitada C, Onda H, Nishimura O, Fujino
M (2001) Molecular properties of apelin: tissue distribution and
receptor binding. Biochim Biophys Acta 1538(2–3):162–171

4. Hosoya M, Kawamata Y, Fukusumi S, Fujii R, Habata Y, Hina-
numa S, Kitada C, Honda S, Kurokawa T, Onda H, Nishimura
O, Fujino M (2000) Molecular and functional characteristics of
APJ. Tissue distribution of mRNA and interaction with the
endogenous ligand apelin. J Biol Chem 275(28):21061–21067

5. Sonmez A, Celebi G, Erdem G, Tapan S, Genc H, Tasci I, Ercin
CN, Dogru T, Kilic S, Uckaya G, Yilmaz MI, Erbil MK, Kutlu
M (2010) Plasma apelin and ADMA Levels in patients with
essential hypertension. Clin Exp Hypertens 32(3):179–183

6. Pan CS, Qi YF, Tang CS (2005) Apelin and its biological
effects. Sheng Li Ke Xue Jin Zhan [Prog Physiol]
36(3):223–226

7. Ishida J, Hashimoto T, Hashimoto Y, Nishiwaki S, Iguchi T,
Harada S, Sugaya T, Matsuzaki H, Yamamoto R, Shiota N,
Okunishi H, Kihara M, Umemura S, Sugiyama F, Yagami K,
Kasuya Y, Mochizuki N, Fukamizu A (2004) Regulatory roles
for APJ, a seven-transmembrane receptor related to angiotensin-
type 1 receptor in blood pressure in vivo. J Biol Chem
279(25):26274–26279

8. De Falco M, De Luca L, Onori N, Cavallotti I, Artigiano F,
Esposito V, De Luca B, Laforgia V, Groeger AM, De Luca A
(2002) Apelin expression in normal human tissues. Vivo
16(5):333–336

9. Shin K, Pandey A, Liu XQ, Anini Y, Rainey JK (2013) Preferential apelin-13 production by the proprotein convertase
PCSK3 is implicated in obesity. FEBS Open Bio 3:328–333.
doi:10.1016/j.fob.2013.08.001

10. O'Carroll AM, Selby TL, Palkovits M, Lolait SJ (2000) Distribution of mRNA encoding B78/apj, the rat homologue of the
human APJ receptor, and its endogenous ligand apelin in brain
and peripheral tissues. Biochim Biophys Acta 1492(1):72–80

11. Kleinz MJ, Davenport AP (2004) Immunocytochemical localization of the endogenous vasoactive peptide apelin to human
vascular and endocardial endothelial cells. Regul Pept
118(3):119–125

12. Yang L, Chen LX (2011) Regulatory function of apelin/
APJ system on multiple systems. Int J Pathol Clin Med
31(1):42–48

13. Zhu P, Huang F, Lin F, Yuan Y, Chen F, Li Q (2013) Plasma
apelin levels, blood pressure and cardiovascular risk factors in a
coastal Chinese population. Ann Med 45(7):494–498

14. Papadopoulos DP, Mourouzis I, Faselis C, Perrea D, Makris T,
Tsioufis C, Papademetriou V (2013) Masked hypertension and
atherogenesis: the impact of apelin and relaxin plasma levels.
J Clin Hypertens (Greenwich) 15(5):333–336

15. Tatemoto K, Takayama K, Zou MX, Kumaki I, Zhang W, Ku-
mano K, Fujimiya M (2001) The novel peptide apelin lowers
blood pressure via a nitric oxide-dependent mechanism. Regul
Pept 99(2–3):87–92

16. Jia YX, Lu ZF, Zhang J, Pan CS, Yang JH, Zhao J, Yu F, Duan
XH, Tang CS, Qi YF (2007) Apelin activates L-arginine/nitric
oxide synthase/nitric oxide pathway in rat aortas. Peptides
28(10):2023–2029

17. Sato T, Suzuki T, Watanabe H, Kadowaki A, Fukamizu A, Liu
PP, Kimura A, Ito H, Penninger JM, Imai Y, Kuba K (2013)
Apelin is a positive regulator of ACE2 in failing hearts. J Clin
Investig 123(12):5203–5211

18. Nagano K, Ishida J, Unno M, Matsukura T, Fukamizu A (2013)
Apelin elevates blood pressure in ICR mice with LNAMEin-
duced endothelial dysfunction. Mol Med Rep 7(5):1371–1375


19. Han X, Zhang DL, Yin DX, Zhang QD, Liu WH (2013) Apelin-
13 deteriorates hypertension in rats after damage of the vascular
endothelium by ADMA. Can J Physiol Pharmacol
91(9):708–714. doi:10.1139/cjpp-2013-0046

20. Liu CH, Li X, Chen F, Pan WN, Feng F, Qin XP, Li LF, Su T,
Chen LX (2009) ERK1/2 mediated the vasodilatation of apelin-
13 on vascular rings of spontaneously hypertensive rat in vitro.
Prog Biochem Biophys 36(12):1578–1588

21. Modgil A, Guo L, O'Rourke ST, Sun C (2013) Apelin-13
inhibits large-conductance Ca(2+)-activated K(+) channels in
cerebral artery smooth muscle cells via a PI3-kinase dependent
mechanism. PLoS One 8(12):e83051

22. Zhang Q, Yao F, Raizada MK, O'Rourke ST, Sun C (2009)
Apelin gene transfer into the rostral ventrolateral medulla
induces chronic blood pressure elevation in normotensive rats.
Circ Res 104(12):1421–1428

23. Davern PJ, Chowdhury S, Jackson KL, Nguyen-Huu TP, Head
GA (2013) GABAA receptor dysfunction contributes to high
blood pressure and exaggerated response to stress in Schlager
genetically hypertensive mice. J Hypertens 32(2):352–362.
doi:10.1097/HJH.0000000000000015

24. Urban D, Ewen S, Ukena C, Linz D, Bohm M, Mahfoud F
(2013) Treating resistant hypertension: role of renal denervation.
Integr Blood Press Control 6:119–128

25. Hendel MD, Collister JP (2006) Renal denervation attenuates
long-term hypertensive effects of Angiotensin ii in the rat. Clin
Exp Pharmacol Physiol 33:1225–1230. doi:10.1111/j.1440-
1681.2006.04514.x

26. Colombari E, Sato MA, Cravo SL, Bergamaschi CT, Campos
RR Jr, Lopes OU (2001) Role of the medulla oblongata in
hypertension. Hypertension 38:549–554

27. Seyedabadi M, Goodchild AK, Pilowsky PM (2002) Site-specific effects of apelin-13 in the rat medulla oblongata on arterial
pressure and respiration. Auton Neurosci 101(1–2):32–38

28. Zhang CR, Xia CM, Jiang MY, Zhu MX, Zhu JM, Du DS, Liu
M, Wang J, Zhu DN (2013) Repeated electroacupuncture
attenuating of apelin expression and function in the rostral
ventrolateral medulla in stress-induced hypertensive rats. Brain
Res Bull 97:53–62

29. Gomes RA, Teodoro L, Lopes IC, Bersanetti PA, Carmona AK,
Hial V (2008) Angiotensin-converting enzyme in pericardial
fluid: comparative study with serum activity. Arq Bras Cardiol
91(3):156–161, 172–178

30. Orlov SN, Mongin AA (2007) Salt-sensing mechanisms in blood
pressure regulation and hypertension. Am J Physiol Heart Circ
Physiol 293(4):H2039–H2053

31. Carlson SH, Wyss JM (2008) Neurohormonal regulation of the
sympathetic nervous system: new insights into central mechanisms of action. Curr Hypertens Rep 10:233–240

32. Hirooka Y, Kishi T, Sakai K, Takeshita A, Sunagawa K (2011)
Imbalance of central nitric oxide and reactive oxygen species in
the regulation of sympathetic activity and neural mechanisms of
hypertension. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol
300:R818–R826. doi:10.1152/ajpregu.00426.2010

33. Liao TD, Yang XP, Liu YH, Shesely EG, Cavasin MA,
Kuziel WA, Pagano PJ, Carretero OA (2008) Role of
inflammation in the development of renal damage and dysfunction in angiotensin II-induced hypertension. Hypertension
52(2):256–263

34. Hartono SP, Knudsen BE, Zubair AS, Nath KA, Textor SJ,
Lerman LO, Grande JP (2013) Redox signaling is an early event
in the pathogenesis of renovascular hypertension. Int J Mol Sci
14(9):18640–18656

35. Wang W, Bodiga S, Das SK, Lo J, Patel V, Oudit GY (2012)
Role of ACE2 in diastolic and systolic heart failure. Heart Fail
Rev 17(4–5):683–691

36. Chun HJ, Ali ZA, Kojima Y, Kundu RK, Sheikh AY, Agrawal R, Zheng L, Leeper NJ, Pearl NE, Patterson AJ, Anderson JP, Tsao PS, Lenardo MJ, Ashley EA, Quertermous T (2008) Apelin signaling antagonizes Ang II effects in mouse models of atherosclerosis. J Clin Investig 118(10): 3343–3354

37. Fukushima H, Kobayashi N, Takeshima H, Koguchi W, Ishimitsu T (2010) Effects of olmesartan on apelin/APJ and Akt/endothelial nitric oxide synthase pathway in Dahl rats with end-stage heart failure. J Cardiovasc Pharmacol 55(1): 83–88

38. Zhong JC, Huang DY, Liu GF, Jin HY, Yang YM, Li YF, Song XH, Du K (2005) Effects of all-trans retinoic acid on orphan receptor APJ signaling in spontaneously hypertensive rats. Cardiovasc Res 65(3): 743–750

39. Chaney E, Shaw A (2010) Pathophysiology of fluid retention in heart failure. Contrib Nephrol 164: 46–53

40. Niebylski A, Boccolini A, Bensi N, Binotti S, Hansen C, Yaciuk R, Gauna H (2012) Neuroendocrine changes and natriuresis in response to social stress in rats. Stress Health 28(3): 179–185

41. Jaitovich A, Bertorello AM (2010) Salt, Na+, K+-ATPase and hypertension. Life Sci 86(3–4): 73–78

42. Akcilar R, Turgut S, Caner V, Akcilar A, Ayada C, Elmas L, Ozcan TO (2013) Apelin effects on blood pressure and RAS in DOCA-salt-induced hypertensive rats. Clin Exp Hypertens 35(7): 550–557

43. Azizi M, Iturrioz X, Blanchard A, Peyrard S, De Mota N, Chartrel N, Vaudry H, Corvol P, Llorens-Cortes C (2008) Reciprocal regulation of plasma apelin and vasopressin by osmotic stimuli. J Am Soc Nephrol (JASN) 19(5): 1015–1024

44. Llorens-Cortes C, Kordon C (2008) Jacques Benoit lecture: the neuroendocrine view of the angiotensin and apelin systems. J Neuroendocrinol 20(3): 279–289

45. Taheri S, Murphy K, Cohen M, Sujkovic E, Kennedy A, Dhillon W, Dakin C, Sajedi A, Ghatei M, Bloom S (2002) The effects of centrally administered apelin-13 on food intake, water intake and pituitary hormone release in rats. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 291: 1208–1212. doi: [10.1006/bbrc.2002.6575](https://doi.org/10.1006/bbrc.2002.6575)

46. Bech JN, Nielsen EH, Pedersen RS, Svendsen KB, Pedersen EB (2007) Enhanced sodium retention after acute nitric oxide blockade in mildly sodium loaded patients with essential hypertension. Am J Hypertens 20(3): 287–295

47. Johnson FK, Johnson RA, Peyton KJ, Durante W (2005) Arginase inhibition restores arteriolar endothelial function in Dahl rats with salt-induced hypertension. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol 288(4): R1057–R1062

48. Sasaki Y, Noguchi T, Yamamoto E, Giddings JC, Ikeda K, Yamamoto J, Yamori Y (2004) Effects of voluntary exercise on cerebral thrombosis and endothelial function in spontaneously hypertensive rats (SHRSP/Izm). Clin Exp Pharmacol Physiol 31(Suppl 2): S47–S48

49. Sainani GS, Maru VG (2004) Role of endothelial cell dysfunction in essential hypertension. J Assoc Physicians India 52: 966–969

50. Chen X, Lin YN, Fang DH, Zhang HQ, Huang WJ (2013) Effect of crucumin on vascular endothelial function in atherosclerotic rabbits. China J Chin Mater Medica 38(19): 3343–3347

51. Li X, Zhang X, Li F, Chen L, Li L, Qin X, Gao J, Su T, Zeng Y, Liao D (2010) 14-3-3 mediates apelin-13-induced enhancement of adhesion of monocytes to human umbilical vein endothelial cells. Acta Biochim Biophys Sin 42(6): 403–409

52. Lu Y, Zhu X, Liang GX, Cui RR, Liu Y, Wu SS, Liang QH, Liu GY, Jiang Y, Liao XB, Xie H, Zhou HD, Wu XP, Yuan LQ, Liao EY (2012) Apelin-APJ induces ICAM-1, VCAM-1 and MCP-1 expression via NF-kappaB/JNK signal pathway in human umbilical vein endothelial cells. Amino Acids 43(5): 2125–2136. doi: [10.1007/s00726-012-1298-7](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00726-012-1298-7)

53. Malyszko J, Malyszko JS, Pawlak K, Mysliwiec M (2008) Visfatin and apelin, new adipokines, and their relation to endothelial function in patients with chronic renal failure. Adv Med Sci 53(1): 32–36

54. Januszewicz A, Lapinski M, Symonides B, Dabrowska E, Kuch-Wocial A, Trzepla E, Ignatowska-Switalska H, Wocial B, Chodakowska J, Januszewicz W (1994) Elevated endothelin-1 plasma concentration in patients with essential hypertension. J Cardiovasc Risk 1(1): 81–85

55. Gendron G, Gobeil F Jr, Morin J, D'Orleans-Juste P, Regoli D (2004) Contractile responses of aortae from WKY and SHR to vasoconstrictors. Clin Exp Hypertens 26(6): 511–523

56. Yamamoto T, Kimura T, Ota K, Shoji M, Inoue M, Sato K, Ohta M, Yoshinaga K (1991) Central effects of endothelin-1 on vasopressin and atrial natriuretic peptide release and cardiovascular and renal function in conscious rats. J Cardiovasc Pharmacol 17 (Suppl 7): S316–318

57. Strait KA, Stricklett PK, Kohan DE (2007) Altered collecting duct adenyllyl cyclase content in collecting duct endothelin-1 knockout mice. BMC Nephrol 8: 8. doi: [10.1186/1471-2369-8-817Suppl7:S316-318](https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-2369-8-817Suppl7:S316-318)

58. Uemasu J, Munemura C, Fujihara M, Kawasaki H (1994) Inhibition of plasma endothelin-1 concentration by captopril in patients with essential hypertension. Clin Nephrol 41(3): 150–152

59. Vanourkova Z, Kramer HJ, Huskova Z, Cervenka L, Vanekova I (2010) Despite similar reduction of blood pressure and renal ANG II and ET-1 levels aliskiren but not losartan normalizes albuminuria in hypertensive Ren-2 rats. Physiol Res 59(3): 339–345

60. Baumbach GL, Heistad DD (1989) Remodeling of cerebral arterioles in chronic hypertension. Hypertension 13(6 Pt 2): 968–972

61. Kidoya H, Takakura N (2012) Biology of the apelin-APJ axis in vascular formation. J Biochem 152(2): 125–131

62. Li F, Li L, Qin X, Pan W, Feng F, Chen F, Zhu B, Liao D, Tanowitz H, Albanese C, Chen L (2008) Apelin-induced vascular smooth muscle cell proliferation: the regulation of cyclin D1. Front Biosci J Virtual Libr 13: 3786–3792

63. Liu C, Su T, Li F, Li L, Qin X, Pan W, Feng F, Chen F, Liao D, Chen L (2010) PI3K/Akt signaling transduction pathway is involved in rat vascular smooth muscle cell proliferation induced by apelin-13. Acta Biochim Biophys Sin 42(6): 396–402

64. Pan WN, Li F, Mao XH, Qin XP, Deng SX, Feng F, Chen F, Li LF, Liao DF, Chen LX (2011) 14-3-3 protein is involved in ERK1/2 signaling trasduction pathway of rat VSMCs proliferation induced by apelin. Prog Biochem Biophys 38(12): 1153–1161. doi: [10.3724/SP.J.1206.2011.00334](https://doi.org/10.3724/SP.J.1206.2011.00334)

65. Li L, Li L, Xie F, Zhang Z, Guo Y, Tang G, Lv D, Lu Q, Chen L, Li J (2013) Jagged-1/Notch3 signaling transduction pathway is involved in apelin-13-induced vascular smooth muscle cells proliferation. Acta Biochim Biophys Sin 45(10): 875–881. doi: [10.1093/abbs/gmt085](https://doi.org/10.1093/abbs/gmt085)

66. Liu QF, Yu HW, You L, Liu MX, Li KY, Tao GZ (2013) Apelin-13-induced proliferation and migration induced of rat vascular smooth muscle cells is mediated by the upregulation of Egr-1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 439(2): 235–240. doi: [10.1016/j.bbrc.2013.08.051](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbrc.2013.08.051)

67. Xun P, Wu Y, He Q, He K (2013) Fasting insulin concentrations and incidence of hypertension, stroke, and coronary heart disease: a meta-analysis of prospective cohort studies. Am J Clin Nutr 98(6): 1543–1554. doi: [10.3945/ajcn.113.065565](https://doi.org/10.3945/ajcn.113.065565)

68. Takatori S, Zamami Y, Hashikawa-Hobara N, Kawasaki H (2013) Insulin resistance-induced hypertension and a role of perivascular CGRPergic nerves. Curr Protein Pept Sci 14(4): 275–281

69. Muniyappa R, Sowers JR (2013) Role of insulin resistance in endothelial dysfunction. Rev Endocr Metab Disord 14(1): 5–12. doi:10.1007/s11154-012-9229-1

70. Togashi N, Maeda T, Yoshida H, Koyama M, Tanaka M, Furuhashi M, Shimamoto K, Miura T (2012) Angiotensin II receptor activation in youth triggers persistent insulin resistance and hypertension—a legacy effect? Hypertens Res 35(3): 334–340. doi:10.1038/hr.2011.206

71. Horita S, Seki G, Yamada H, Suzuki M, Koike K, Fujita T (2011) Insulin resistance, obesity, hypertension, and renal sodium transport. Int J Hypertens 2011: 391762

72. Yue P, Jin H, Aillaud M, Deng AC, Azuma J, Asagami T, Kundu RK, Reaven GM, Quertermous T, Tsao PS (2010) Apelin is necessary for the maintenance of insulin sensitivity. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab 298(1): E59–E67. doi:10.1152/ajpendo.00385.2009

73. Zhu S, Sun F, Li W, Cao Y, Wang C, Wang Y, Liang D, Zhang R, Zhang S, Wang H, Cao F (2011) Apelin stimulates glucose uptake through the PI3K/Akt pathway and improves insulin resistance in 3T3-L1 adipocytes. Mol Cell Biochem 353(1–2): 305–313. doi:10.1007/s11010-011-0799-0

74. Duparc T, Colom A, Cani PD, Massaly N, Rastrelli S, Drougard A, Le Gonidec S, Mouledous L, Frances B, Leclercq I, Llorens-Cortes C, Pospisilik JA, Delzenne NM, Valet P, Castan-Laurell I, Knauf C (2011) Central apelin controls glucose homeostasis via a nitric oxide-dependent pathway in mice. Antioxid Redox Signal 15(6): 1477–1496

75. Wang L, Hou L, Li H, Chen J, Kelly TN, Jaquish CE, Rao DC, Hixson JE, Hu D, Chen CS, Gu C, Chen S, Lu X, Whelton PK, He J, Lu F, Huang J, Liu DP, Gu D (2010) Genetic variants in the renin-angiotensin system and blood pressure reactions to the cold pressor test. J Hypertens 28(12): 2422–2428. doi:10.1097/HJH.0b013e32833ea74e

76. Yang B, Liu X, Li M, Yang Y, Na X, Wang Y (2013) Genetic association of rs1800780 (A→G) polymorphism of the eNOS gene with susceptibility to essential hypertension in a Chinese Han population. Biochem Genet. doi:10.1007/s10528-013-9628-3

77. Burrell LM, Risvanis J, Dean RG, Patel SK, Velkoska E, Johnston CI (2013) Age-dependent regulation of renal vasopressin V(1A) and V(2) receptors in rats with genetic hypertension: implications for the treatment of hypertension. J Am Soc Hypertens (JASH) 7(1): 3–13. doi:10.1016/j.jash.2012.11.004

78. Li WW, Niu WQ, Zhang Y, Wu S, Gao PJ, Zhu DL (2009) Family-based analysis of apelin and AGTRL1 gene polymorphisms with hypertension in Han Chinese. J Hypertens 27(6): 1194–1201

79. Jin W, Su X, Xu M, Liu Y, Shi J, Lu L, Niu W (2012) Interactive association of five candidate polymorphisms in Apelin/APJ pathway with coronary artery disease among Chinese hypertensive patients. PLoS One 7(12): e51123

80. Huang J, Chen S, Lu X, Zhao Q, Rao DC, Jaquish CE, Hixson JE, Chen J, Wang L, Cao J, Li J, Li H, He J, Liu DP, Gu D (2012) Polymorphisms of ACE2 are associated with blood pressure response to cold pressor test: the GenSalt study. Am J Hypertens 25(8): 937–942

81. Sedaghat S, Hoorn EJ, van Rooij FJ, Hofman A, Franco OH, Witteman JC, Dehghan A (2013) Serum uric acid and chronic kidney disease: the role of hypertension. PLoS One 8(11): e76827. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0076827

82. Seifi B, Kadkhodaee M, Karimian SM, Zahmatkesh M, Xu J, Soleimani M (2010) Evaluation of renal oxidative stress in the development of DOCA-salt induced hypertension and its renal damage. Clin Exp Hypertens 32(2): 90–97. doi:10.3109/10641960902993111

83. Drukteinis JS, Roman MJ, Fabsitz RR, Lee ET, Best LG, Russell M, Devereux RB (2007) Cardiac and systemic hemodynamic characteristics of hypertension and prehypertension in adolescents and young adults: the Strong Heart Study. Circulation 115(2): 221–227. doi:10.1161/circulationaha.106.668921

84. Muller M, van der Graaf Y, Visseren FL, Mali WP, Geerlings MI (2012) Hypertension and longitudinal changes in cerebral blood flow: the SMART-MR study. Ann Neurol 71(6): 825–833. doi:10.1002/ana.23554

85. Sagiroglu T, Torun N, Yagci M, Yalta T, Sagiroglu G, Oguz S (2012) Effects of apelin and leptin on renal functions following renal ischemia/reperfusion: an experimental study. Exp Ther Med 3: 908–914. doi:10.3892/etm.2012.499

86. Ceylan-Isik AF, Kandadi MR, Xu X, Hua Y, Chicco AJ, Ren J, Nair S (2013) Apelin administration ameliorates high fat diet-induced cardiac hypertrophy and contractile dysfunction. J Mol Cell Cardiol 63: 4–13. doi:10.1016/j.yjmcc.2013.07.002

87. Zeng H, He X, Hou X, Li L, Chen JX (2014) Apelin gene therapy increases myocardial vascular density and ameliorates diabetic cardiomyopathy via upregulation of sirtuin 3. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol 306: H585–H597. doi:10.1152/ajpheart.00821.2013

88. Gu Q, Zhai L, Feng X, Chen J, Miao Z, Ren L, Qian X, Yu J, Li Y, Xu X, Liu CF (2013) Apelin-36, a potent peptide, protects against ischemic brain injury by activating the PI3K/Akt pathway. Neurochem Int 63(6): 535–540. doi:10.1016/j.neuint.2013.09.017

89. Yang L, Su T, Lv D, Xie F, Liu W, Cao J, Sheikh IA, Qin X, Li L, Chen L (2014) ERK1/2 mediates lung adenocarcinoma cell proliferation and autophagy induced by apelin-13. Acta Biochim Biophys Sin. doi:10.1093/abbs/gmt140

90. Xie F, Li L, Chen L (2013) Autophagy, a new target for disease treatment. Sci China Life Sci 56(9): 856–860. doi:10.1007/s11427-013-4530-0

91. Xie F, Liu W, Chen LX (2012) The progress of autophagy involved in heart disease. Prog Biochem Biophys 39(03): 224–233. doi:10.3724/SP.J.1206.2012.00088

92. Li LF, Li LF, He L, Zhang ZD, Xie F, Guo Y, Xiao JH, Chen LX, Li J (2014) Effects of apelin-13 on rat bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cell proliferation through the AKT/GSK3β/cyclin D1 pathway. Int J Pept Res Ther. doi:10.1007/s10989-014-9404-1

93. Xiao L, Li LF, Chen LX (2013) Progress on the autophagy in vessel function and related diseases. Prog Biochem Biophys 40(01): 1171–1185. doi:10.3724/SP.J.1206.2012.00623

94. Jin G, Yang P, Gong Y, Fan X, Tang J, Lin J (2009) Effects of puerarin on expression of apelin and its receptor of 2K1C renal hypertension rats. Chin J Chin Mater Med 34(24): 3263–3267

95. Huang ZG, Bai S, Chen L, Wang JT, Ding BP (2013) Effect of puerarin combined with felodipine on mRNA and protein expression of apelin and APJ in renovascular hypertensive rat. China J Chin Mater Med 38(3): 381–385

96. Zhang J, Ren CX, Qi YF, Lou LX, Chen L, Zhang LK, Wang X, Tang C (2006) Exercise training promotes expression of apelin and APJ of cardiovascular tissues in spontaneously hypertensive rats. Life Sci 79(12): 1153–1159

97. Lv D, Li H, Chen L (2013) Apelin and APJ, a novel critical factor and therapeutic target for atherosclerosis. Acta Biochim Biophys Sin 45(7): 527–533. doi:10.1093/abbs/gmt040

98. Xie F, Li LF, Chen LX (2013) Apelin/APJ receptor as myocardial cell baroreceptor induced myocardial hypertrophy formation. Prog Biochem Biophys 40(01): 33–36. doi:10.3724/SP.J.1206.2012.00416

99. Lv D, Lu Q, Cao J, Chen L (2013) Unanticipated role of apelin: regulation of miRNA generation. Acta Biochim Biophys Sin 45(10): 896–898. doi:10.1093/abbs/gmt090

100. Iturrioz X, Alvear-Perez R, De Mota N, Franchet C, Guillier F, Leroux V, Dabire H, Le Jouan M, Chabane H, Gerbier R, Bonnet D, Berdeaux A, Maigret B, Galzi JL, Hibert M, Llorens-Cortes C (2010) Identification and pharmacological properties of E339-3D6, the first nonpeptidic apelin receptor agonist. FASEB J 24(5):1506–1517. doi:[10.1096/fj.09-140715](https://doi.org/10.1096/fj.09-140715)

101. Macaluso NJ, Pitkin SL, Maguire JJ, Davenport AP, Glen RC (2011) Discovery of a competitive apelin receptor (APJ) antagonist. ChemMedChem 6(6):1017–1023. doi:[10.1002/cmdc.201100069](https://doi.org/10.1002/cmdc.201100069)

102. Maloney PR, Khan P, Hedrick M, Gosalía P, Milewski M, Li L, Roth GP, Sergienko E, Suyama E, Sugarman E, Nguyen K, Mehta A, Vasile S, Su Y, Stonich D, Nguyen H, Zeng FY, Novo AM, Vicchiarelli M, Diwan J, Chung TD, Smith LH, Pinkerton AB (2012) Discovery of 4-oxo-6-((pyrimidin-2-ylthio)methyl)-4H-pyran-3-yl 4-nitrobenzoate (ML221) as a functional antagonist of the apelin (APJ) receptor. Bioorg Med Chem Lett 22(21):6656–6660. doi:[10.1016/j.bmcl.2012.08.105](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bmcl.2012.08.105)
