
Molecular Pathways Regulating the Formation of Brown-like Adipocytes in White Adipose Tissue

Jianfei Fu,$^{1,\dagger}$ Zhen Li,$^{2,\dagger}$ Huiqin Zhang,$^{1}$ Yushan Mao,$^{3}$ Anshi Wang,$^{1}$ Xin Wang,$^{1}$ Zuquan Zou,$^{1}$ and Xiaohong Zhang$^{1,*}$

$^{1}$ Institute of Preventative Medicine and Zhejiang Provincial Key Laboratory of Pathological and Physiological Technology, School of Medicine, Ningbo University, Ningbo, 315211 Zhejiang, China. E-mail: fujianfei686@163.com; 357791287@qq.com; 442096556@qq.com; wangxin@nbu.edu.cn; zouzuquan@nbu.edu.cn.; zhangxiaohong1@nbu.edu.cn.

$^{2}$ School of Public Health, Wuhan University, Wuhan, 430071 Hubei, China. E-mail: zhenli20071204@126.com.

$^{3}$ The Affiliated Hospital of School of Medicine of Ningbo University, Ningbo University, Ningbo, 315211 Zhejiang, China. E-mail: zhys007@tom.com

$^*$ Correspondence to: Xiaohong Zhang, Institute of Preventative Medicine and Zhejiang Provincial Key Laboratory of Pathological and Physiological Technology, School of Medicine, Ningbo University, Ningbo, 315211 Zhejiang, China. E-mail: zhangxiaohong1@nbu.edu.cn.

Tel: +86 0574 87609591, Fax: +86 0574 87608638.

$\dagger$ Jianfei Fu and Zhen Li contributed equally to this work.

Running title: Pathways for the recruitment of brown-like adipocytes in WAT

This article has been accepted for publication and undergone full peer review but has not been through the copyediting, typesetting, pagination and proofreading process, which may lead to differences between this version and the Version of Record. Please cite this article as doi: 10.1002/dmrr.2600

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

Abstract

Adipose tissue is functionally composed of brown adipose tissue (BAT) and white adipose tissue (WAT). The unique thermogenic capacity of BAT results from expression of uncoupling protein 1 (UCP1) in the mitochondrial inner membrane. Based on recent findings that adult humans have functionally active BAT, BAT is now recognized as playing a much more important role in human metabolism than was previously thought. More importantly, brown-like adipocytes can be recruited in WAT upon environmental stimulation and pharmacologic treatment, and this change is associated with increased energy expenditure, contributing to a lean and healthy phenotype. Thus, the promotion of brown-like adipocyte development in WAT offers novel possibilities for the development of therapeutic strategies to combat obesity and related metabolic diseases. In this review, we summarize recent advances in understanding the molecular mechanisms involved in the recruitment of brown-like adipocyte in WAT.

Keywords: brown-like; adipocyte; uncoupling protein 1; white adipose tissue; thermogenesis

1. Introduction

Adipose tissues play crucial roles in the development of obesity. Mammals contain two types of adipose tissue, white adipose tissue (WAT) and brown adipose tissue (BAT). Morphologically, brown adipocytes contain multilocular lipid droplets and numerous mitochondria whereas white adipocytes contain unilocular lipid droplets and fewer mitochondria. WAT accumulates surplus energy, whereas BAT has a unique thermogenic capacity resulting from the expression of uncoupling protein 1 (UCP1) in the mitochondrial inner membrane. Until quite recently, BAT was thought to be of metabolic importance only in small mammals and infant humans. However, recent studies in adult humans revealed that BAT has increased activities in response to low temperature, and this response is negatively correlated with body mass index (BMI) [1-4]. These findings have revived interest in the therapeutic potential of augmenting BAT to combat metabolic diseases. However, compared with WAT depots, BAT depots in adult humans are much smaller and present within small defined locations throughout the body [1]. Given that WAT is able to develop a BAT-like phenotype under special conditions, including cold exposure or after administration of β-adrenergic agonist to WAT depots [5, 6], the development of therapeutics to enhance the brown phenotype in WAT depots might represent a potential strategy to combat obesity-associated disorders. Nevertheless, development of such therapeutics requires significant understanding of the molecular mechanisms controlling the formation of brown-like fat cells. This review will focus on recent findings regarding the development of brown-like cells in WAT, and seeks to identify the key components regulating this “browning” effect.

2. BAT in Adult Humans

BAT is present in most mammals and is responsible for cold-induced non-shivering thermogenesis. Loss of BAT function in animals is linked to obesity and metabolic disease [7], whereas experimental increases in BAT are associated with a lean and healthy phenotype [8, 9]. In humans, the volume of BAT gradually decreases with increasing age [10, 11], and BAT was previously considered to be of metabolic importance only in infants for protection against a cold environment [12, 13]. Overactivity of BAT in adults was only observed in

patients who suffer from pheochromocytoma and hibernoma [14, 15]. However, many recent studies have reported non-pathologic uptake of ${}^{18}$F-fluorodeoxyglucose (${}^{18}$F-FDG) in the supraclavicular, paravertebral, and mediastinum regions of adult humans using positron-emission tomography scanning [1-4]. These glucose uptake sites were identified as BAT with high metabolic activity after exclusion of muscle tissue uptake [2, 4, 16-19]. The reported incidences of FDG uptake are different [2, 16-19], which could be attributed to various experimental conditions (including exposure temperature and time) and diagnostic protocol. BAT in adult humans has been generally accepted to be closely associated with obesity based on findings that elevated ${}^{18}$F-FDG uptake is associated with a decreased BMI [2, 16, 17, 20, 21]. Therefore, BAT may play a much more important role in human metabolism than was previously thought.

Interestingly, as for the nature of adult human BAT from the supraclavicular region., there is some evidence to argue for the co-existence of classical brown adipocytes and brown-like adipocytes [22] instead of only brown-like or classical brown adipocytes [23-25].

## 3. Origin of Brown Adipocytes, Brown-like Adipocytes and White adipocytes

Accumulating evidence has prompted the classification of adipocytes into three subtypes: the classic interscapular brown adipocyte, brown adipocytes recruitable in WAT, and the white adipocyte [26, 27]. It was reported that mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) derived from the mesoderm can differentiate into various lineages such as white adipoblasts, brown adipoblasts, and myoblast lineages. Early adipoblasts are probably an intermediate between MSCs and mature adipocytes. In addition, endothelial cells can give rise to preadipocytes of brown and white adipocytes [28], and embryonic cells expressing Pax7 potentially differentiate into brown adipocytes and myocytes [29]. It is known that brown adipocytes and myocytes also originate from precursors expressing Myf5 [30]. Brown fat progenitors fail to differentiate into brown adipocytes and differentiate toward muscle lineage when there is a deficiency in the expression of PRD1-BF1-RIZ1 homologous domain containing 16 (PRDM16). However, ectopic expression of PRDM16 in myocytes causes differentiation to brown adipocytes. Human skeletal muscle expressing CD34 surface antigen differentiates to brown adipocytes in vitro [31].
The thermogenic protein UCP1 is a hallmark of classic brown adipocytes and is normally expressed only in BAT. It has been suggested that exposure to a cold environment or certain pharmacological agents can lead to recruitment of UCP1-positive adipocytes in traditional WAT, including retroperitoneal, inguinal, or perigenital fat depots [5, 26, 32-42]. The brown adipocytes inducible in white fat are considered to be an intermediate type between white and brown adipocytes and are called brown-like adipocytes, or “beige” or “brown-in-white (brite)” fat cells [26, 27, 33, 43-46]. The brown-like adipocytes are smaller than white adipocytes and exhibit a multilocular phenotype with numerous lipid droplets; in addition, these cells contain fewer mitochondria than classic brown adipocytes but more than white adipocytes [32]. Further, classic interscapular BAT and the brown adipocytes interspersed within the WAT depots appear to originate from distinct lineages [47]. Interscapular brown fat cells arise from Myf5-expressing progenitors [30], whereas the brown fat cells emerging in white fat are not labeled by Myf5 promoter-driven fluorescent protein and express molecular characteristics distinct from those of interscapular brown fat cells [26]. A recent study even pointed out that the Myf5+ lineage can also give rise to white adipocytes [48].

Currently, the cellular origin of the brown-like adipocytes that are inducible in WAT is a matter of dispute. Two possibilities have been proposed (Figure 1). It has been pointed out that exposure to cold or the β3-adrenoreceptor (β3-AR) agonist CL316243 (CL) induces the recruitment of brown-like adipocytes through activation of β3-ARs [32, 34]. A quantitative analysis showed that the number of cold-induced brown-like adipocytes is approximately equal to the decrease in the number of mature white adipocytes, and the total number of adipocytes barely changes [5]. Moreover, a decrease in adipocyte size rather than reduction in adipocyte number were observed in WAT of CL-treated mice [44]. These data suggest a direct conversion from mature white adipocytes to brown-like adipocytes upon β3-AR activation. Very recently, it has been reported that cold-induced brown-like adipocytes can be converted into white-typical adipocytes after adaptation whereas these white-typical adipocytes can be reversed upon additional cold exposure, thereby implying a bi-directional transdifferentiation of brown-like and white adipocytes [49].

Alternatively, several evidences supported that brown-like adipocytes arise from WAT progenitors [27, 50-53]. In vitro experiments have shown that white progenitors expressing

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
Sca-1⁺/CD45⁻/Mac1⁻ can differentiate to brown-like adipocytes when treated with bone morphogenetic protein 7 (BMP7) or CL [51]. Additionally, PDGFRα⁺/CD34⁺/Sca-1⁺ cells isolated from abdominal WAT have the capacity to differentiate into beige adipocytes under treatment with β3-adrenergic agonists or to develop into white adipocytes on a high fat diet (HFD) [52].

## 4. Signaling Pathways for the Emergence of Brown-like Adipocytes in WAT

### 4.1. Transcriptional Machinery

#### 4.1.1. PGC-1α/PPARγ Complex

Several studies have suggested a key role of combinatorial transcription factor mechanisms in the recruitment of brown adipocytes in WAT (Figure 2). Nuclear receptor peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor γ (PPARγ), which acts as a key transcription factor for UCP1 expression, is required for non-shivering thermogenesis of BAT [54]. The PPARγ agonist rosiglitazone, a member of a family of insulin-sensitizing drugs commonly used to treat type 2 diabetes mellitus, was found to significantly induce brown-like adipocytes and mitochondrial biogenesis in WAT [35-40]. Pioglitazone, a high-affinity ligand of PPARγ, was also found to strongly enhance the expression of genes involved in mitochondrial biogenesis and fatty acid oxidation, including PPARγ coactivator 1α (PGC-1α) and UCP1, in subcutaneous fat from patients with type 2 diabetes [55]. There are two possible explanations for the origin of brown adipocytes induced by PPARγ activation. Based on co-culture of brown adipocytes and white adipocytes, it was proposed that rosiglitazone-induced brown-like adipocytes are derived from white adipocytes rather than brown preadipocytes. A recent study described mouse brown-like adipocytes, which were obtained upon chronic PPARγ activation of primary cultures of white adipocyte precursors [27]. It was also reported that human multipotent adipose-derived stem (hMADS) cells are able to differentiate into brown-like adipocytes upon UCP1 induction and dependent on PPARγ activation [37, 56, 57].

PGC-1α is expressed in a number of tissues, including adipose tissue, muscle, liver, and brain [58]. It is well established that PGC-1α functions as a potent transcriptional coactivator, playing a key role in linking nuclear receptors to the transcriptional program of adaptive thermogenesis by greatly increasing the transcriptional activity of PPARγ and the thyroid

hormone receptor on the UCP1 promoter [59]. Consistent with this notion, ectopic expression of PGC-1α activates expression of UCP1 and key enzymes of the mitochondrial respiratory chain as well as increases the mitochondrial DNA content in white adipose cells [60]. Overexpression of PGC-1α in human subcutaneous white adipocytes induces UCP1 mRNA expression and directs PPARγ toward a transcriptional program linked to energy dissipation [35]. It is known that PGC-1α is the master regulator of mitochondrial biogenesis, playing a role in the stimulation of oxidative capacity via its interaction with nuclear respiratory factor 1 and 2 (NRF1 and -2) [58, 61]. Interestingly, it was recently reported that PGC-1α mediates expression of rosiglitazone-induced brown genes, such as UCP1, cell death-inducing DFFA-like effector A (CIDEA), cytochrome C oxidase subunit VIIIb-8b, and carnitine palmitoyl-transferase 1b (CPT1b), but it has no effect on mitochondriogenesis [38]. Moreover, the optimal transcriptional effect of PGC-1α is seen when PPARγ ligand is added, although the binding of PGC-1α and PPARγ is not ligand-dependent [60].

### 4.1.2. RARs or RXRs and PGC-1α Complex

Nuclear retinoid receptors such as the retinoic acid receptors (RARs) and the retinoid X receptors (RXRs) have also been shown to mediate UCP1 activation. These receptors are ligand-dependent transcription factors of different types (α, β, or γ) that preferentially activate specific responsive promoters. The UCP1 gene promoter was found to contain a complex retinoic acid response element that can be activated by RAR and RXR (Figure 2) [62, 63]. Remodeling of WAT depots toward the acquisition of brown fat features by retinoids, including Rald and retinoic acid, is associated with RARs or RXRs. Specifically, Rald recruits PGC-1α to RARα already present on the UCP1 promoter, inducing UCP1 transcription, whereas all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA) and 9 cis-RA potently recruit PGC-1α to RXRα [64]. In addition, ATRA stimulates p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase (p38MAPK), which catalyzes activating phosphorylation of PPARγ and PGC-1α as well as inactivating phosphorylation of the retinoblastoma protein (pRB), and activates ERK, which subsequently enhances CREB phosphorylation, resulting in elevated PGC-1α expression.

4.1.3. PPARγ/PRDM16 Interaction

PRDM16, a determinant of the development of classic brown fat [30], is required for the induction of brown gene profiles in WAT in response to the PPARγ ligand rosiglitazone [40]. Rosiglitazone induces a brown fat gene program in subcutaneous WAT through the activation of the PRDM16 pathway. Surprisingly, such effects are due in large measure to the stabilization and accumulation of the PRDM16 protein, independent of PRDM16 mRNA levels [40]. In addition, gain of function of the NAD⁺-dependent deacetylase SIRT1 promotes BAT-like remodeling of white adipocytes *in vivo* and *in vitro* by deacetylating PPARγ on Lys293 and Lys268 in a ligand-dependent manner [65]. Likewise, SIRT1 overexpression is able to rescue the PPARγ/PRDM16 interaction through the recruitment of the brown fat cofactor PRDM16 and clearance of the corepressor NcoR from the PPARγ complex. Mechanistically, deacetylation of Lys293 is critical for the recruitment of PRDM16 to PPARγ, whereas acetylation of Lys268 and Lys293 is required for the interaction of PPARγ with the transcriptional corepressor NcoR [65]. Notably, the binding of PRDM16 to PPARγ is dependent on rosiglitazone. The acetyltransferase cAMP-response element-binding protein (CBP), which is an important component of the PPARγ complex, prevents PRDM16 binding by acetylating PPARγ, but rosiglitazone partially relieves the inhibition to an extent commensurate with PPARγ deacetylation (Figure 2).

4.1.4. C/EBP Family

It has been demonstrated that the induction of PGC-1α by cyclic AMP (cAMP) depends primarily on a single conserved cAMP-response element (CRE) found within 200 bp of the transcription start site. CRE sites are regulatory elements that can bind to a wide range of transcription factors, typically those belonging to the basic leucine zipper (bZIP) family. CRE binding protein (CREB) was the first protein characterized as a target of cAMP action through CRE sites [66]. Subsequently, ATF-2, c-JUN, CREB, and the C/EBPs have been identified as CRE-binding proteins that link cellular stimulation with the transcription of CRE-containing genes. The CCAAT/enhancer binding protein (C/EBP) family of b-ZIP transcription factors includes C/EBPα, -β, -γ, -δ, and -ε, and the endoplasmic reticulum stress protein C/EBP homology protein (CHOP), which must heterodimerize with other members of
this family, most notably C/EBPβ, in order to function. C/EBPβ in particular is an important b-ZIP transcription factor essential for adipose physiology. Several studies have proposed that C/EBPβ plays a key role in reprogramming white adipocytes toward brown adipocyte differentiation. In 3T3-L1 cells C/EBPβ, CREB, ATF-2 (activating transcription factor 2), and CHOP10 are bound to the PGC-1α CRE in the presence of forskolin, and binding of C/EBPβ to the CRE on the PGC-1α promoter contributes to the induction of cAMP-responsive expression of PGC-1α and UCP1 (Figure 2) [67]. CHOP10, which has been reported to act as a dominant negative transcription factor of C/EBPs, down-regulates the stimulatory effect of C/EBPβ overexpression on PGC-1α transcriptional activation. The formation of a heterodimer of CHOP10 with ATF-2 is necessary for CHOP10 inhibitory action, and removing the leucine zipper domain of CHOP10 decreases its down-regulatory activity [68]. When C/EBPβ overexpression and forskolin treatment are combined, C/EBPβ and CREB binding is increased but ATF-2 and CHOP10 binding to the PGC-1α proximal CRE decreases. It was proposed that the binding of C/EBPβ and CREB may recruit CBP to CREB and thus create an active CREB·C/EBPβ/CBP transcriptional complex [68]. A positive relationship between the expression of C/EBPβ and PGC-1α was also observed in animal studies. β/β transgenic mice, in which C/EBPβ replaces C/EBPα at the C/EBPα locus resulting in maintained C/EBPβ expression during differentiation, have higher energy expenditure than control mice and fail to accumulate lipids in WAT, which is enriched in mitochondria and has increased UCP1 mRNA and cAMP levels [69]. C/EBPβ⁻ mice have a decrease in UCP1 expression and lipid accumulation in BAT compared with wild type, and when both C/EBPβ and C/EBPδ are deleted UCP1 expression is hardly detectable and fat droplets do not accumulate in BAT, signifying the importance of C/EBPβ and C/EBPδ in UCP1 gene regulation [70]. Interestingly, sustained C/EBPβ expression and increased cAMP sensitivity result in increased PGC-1α and UCP1 expression, whereas transient expression of C/EBPβ during early stages of adipogenic conversion leads to a WAT phenotype [68].

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
4.1.5. RIP140

Receptor-interacting protein 140 (RIP140) is also known as nuclear receptor-interacting protein 1 (NRIP1). As a transcriptional coregulator, RIP140 is highly expressed in metabolic tissues, such as adipose tissue and muscle. RIP140 is most highly expressed in WAT and plays a central role in regulating metabolic gene expression. Compared with wild-type mice, RIP140-deficient mice are extremely lean with a 70% reduction of WAT depots and a 20% reduction in body weight when fed a high-fat diet [71]. This lean phenotype has been demonstrated to be related to the high expression levels of genes regulating fatty acid oxidation in WAT, including fatty acid transporter CPT-1β and the lipid droplet protein CIDEC. It is particularly noteworthy that WAT in RIP140-deficient mice acquires a characteristic of BAT, that is, a marked increase in UCP1 expression [71]. Similarly, UCP1 expression is also elevated in RIP140-deficient adipocytes [23, 49]. These data suggest that RIP140 inhibits UCP1 expression, and it has been demonstrated that the binding of RIP140 to the UCP1 upstream enhancer element is required for transcriptional repression of UCP1 expression [49].

Orphan nuclear receptor estrogen-related receptor α (ERRα) regulates fatty acid oxidation and plays an important role in the control of energy balance [24, 72]. PGC-1α promotes the activity of ERRs [73], however, most of the genes activated by ERRα or PGC-1α, such as brown fat genes CIDEC, PPARα, and UCP1, are inhibited by RIP140 [23, 74]. It has been reported that full activation of UCP1 transcription is dependent on ERRα/PGC-1α recruitment to the UCP1 enhancer element, which is also a target for repression by RIP140 [23]. An increase in RIP140 expression causes UCP1 repression, whereas a decrease in RIP140 expression causes UCP1 transcriptional activation by ERRα/PGC-1α [22]. It has also been found that RIP140 interacts with PGC-1α and directly suppresses its activity [22, 73] (Figure 2). RIP140 also binds to and represses PPARα and PPARγ [75]. Therefore, a reduction in RIP140 expression or its recruitment to the UCP1 enhancer element may be a mechanism to induce browning of white adipose cells.

4.1.6. TGF-β Subfamily

The transforming growth factor β (TGF-β) superfamily includes several large families of growth and differentiation factors. The TGF-β–Smad3 pathway plays a critical role in regulating energy homeostasis and affects the development of related metabolic disorders [76]. TGF-β1 transmits its signals via dual serine/threonine kinase receptors and transcription factors called Smads, with Smad3 serving as the principal facilitator of TGF-β signals [77]. In humans, plasma TGF-β1 concentration shows a positive correlation with BMI [67, 68]. Elevated TGF-β1 levels are observed in $Lep^{ob/ob}$ mice and DIO mice, in association with increased body weight [78]. Treatment with the anti-TGF-β neutralizing antibody 1D11 induces weight loss and increases glucose tolerance and insulin sensitivity in ob/ob mice and DIO mice [79, 80]. Furthermore, WAT from mice treated with 1D11 exhibits highly significant increases in transcripts related to BAT, mitochondrial function, and skeletal muscle biology. Consistent with the data on 1D11-treated mice, loss of Smad3 induces a WAT to BAT phenotypic transition with increased expression of markers of brown adipogenesis, such as PGC-$1\alpha$, UCP1, and PRDM16, in WAT. More importantly, ablation of the TGF-β/Smad3 signal induces a BAT/skeletal muscle signature in WAT. It was postulated that a small pool of brown adipocyte precursors or a shared WAT/BAT/skeletal muscle progenitor may reside in the white fat environment, and the TGF-β effect could be exerted at the level of the common progenitor for white, brown, and muscle cells. Some of the mechanistic details have been uncovered. It is known that TGF-β target genes are regulated by binding of Smad3 to Smad-binding elements (SBEs) on gene promoters [77]. It was demonstrated that TGF-β represses the PGC-$1\alpha$ promoter in a Smad3-dependent manner based on findings that Smad3 binds to SBEs in the PGC-$1\alpha$ promoter in adipocytes (Figure 2) and that TGF-β cannot repress the promoter upon Smad3 ablation. Moreover, knockdown of Smad3 and PRDM16 in combination causes an intermediate phenotype in which the repressing effects of Smad3 and the promoting effects of PRDM16 on BAT-specific gene expression are effectively neutralized. Together, these observations support the notion that the ability of TGF-β/Smad3 to regulate the overall lean phenotype is mediated by regulation of the PGC-$1\alpha$–PRDM16 axis by Smad [78].
The bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) family is part of the TGF-β superfamily, and emerging evidence suggests that different members of the BMP family play a significant role in adipocyte development and energy metabolism in addition to regulating bone and cartilage development. BMP7 drives brown fat cell fate in both mesenchymal progenitor cells and committed brown preadipocytes [81]. BMP7 triggers commitment of multipotent mesenchymal cells to the brown adipocyte lineage in vitro, and BMP7-treated cells develop into a fat pad containing mostly brown adipocytes in an ex vivo setting [81]. BMP7 knockout embryos show a marked paucity of brown fat. Moreover, adipogenic progenitors (Sca-1⁺/CD45⁻/Mac1⁻) from subcutaneous white fat of mice are highly inducible to differentiate into brown-like adipocytes upon stimulation with BMP7, and human preadipocytes isolated from subcutaneous white fat also exhibit a great inducible capacity to become brown adipocytes [51]. Robust activation of p38MAPK and its downstream effector ATF-2 is observed in brown preadipocytes treated with BMP7. Specific p38MAPK inhibitors effectively block BMP7-induced UCP1 protein expression without an effect on lipid accumulation. p38MAPK is known to regulate thermogenesis through the nuclear coactivator PGC-1α, which is transactivated by ATF-2 [82]. A marked decrease in BMP7-induced UCP1 expression is found in *PGC-1* null brown preadipocytes. These data indicate an important role of p38MAPK and PGC-1 coactivator in BMP7-induced thermogenesis. BMP2 and BMP4 were proposed to be adipogenic factors for white fat that act through the Smad pathway [83]. Recent studies showed that BMP4 can regulate WAT remodeling, leading to increases in whole-body metabolic rate and insulin sensitivity [84]. BMP4 expression is increased in WAT of lean human subjects. Adipose-targeted BMP4 overexpression induces a brown adipocyte-like cell structure and function and protects mice from metabolic disorders induced by a high-fat diet. It was further demonstrated that BMP4 action markedly increases p38MAPK/ATF-2 activation in WAT in addition to increasing expression of PGC-1α. Conversely, ATF-2 knockdown causes the transformed brown-like adipocytes of BMP4-transgenic mice to revert to the normal white adipocyte phenotype. Together, these findings reveal that induction of the brown-like adipocyte phenotype by BMP4 occurs primarily through activation of the p38MAPK/ATF-2/PGC-1α pathway, as shown for BMP7 [84].

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
4.2. Post-transcriptional Regulation

4.2.1. MicroRNA-196a

microRNAs (miRNAs) are small, non-coding RNAs that base pair with specific mRNAs and suppress gene expression post-transcriptionally [85]. miR-196a has been demonstrated to mediate inducible brown adipogenesis through metabolic activity in WAT. The expression level of miR-196a is positively correlated to the conversion of WAT to BAT in mice exposed to cold or β3-adrenergic stimulation, although it is not involved in classical brown adipogenesis in interscapular BAT. miR-196a promotes brown adipocyte differentiation of the WAT-progenitor cells. Furthermore, fat-specific forced expression of miR-196a in mice enhances energy expenditure and BAT content, thereby rendering the mice resistant to obesity. Mechanistically, the target gene of miR-196a is the Hoxc8 gene, which is more highly expressed in WAT than in BAT and functions as an important determinant of white fat lineage [51, 86]. Hoxc8 negatively regulates the induction of brown adipogenesis in WAT-progenitor cells by directly repressing expression of C/EBPβ, a master switch of brown adipogenesis, through a 3' regulatory sequence in an histone deacetylase (HDAC)3-dependent manner [53]. These data imply that the miR-196a–Hoxc8–C/EBPβ signaling pathway underlies brown adipogenesis in WAT (Figure 2) and could be a therapeutic target for obesity and its associated diseases.

4.2.2. MicroRNA-133

Satellite cells, adult skeletal muscle stem cells, are multipotent and can differentiate into myocytes or brown adipocytes. miR-133 is highly expressed in myogenic cells, several lines of evidence support that miR-133–PRDM16 axis is a central regulator of brown adipose development in skeletal muscle satellite cells as well as in browning of WAT. Muscle satellite cells from miR-133 knockdown mice expressed high levels of PRDM16 and further developed into brown adipocytes expressing UCP1 protein [87]. Furthermore, it was found that miR-133 regulated PRDM16 expression at the post-transcriptional level by directly targeting the 3'UTR of the PRDM16 mRNA (Figure 2), thereby repressing PRDM16 expression [87]. In addition, miR-133 overexpression caused brown preadipocytes to generate less thermogenic adipocytes. Multilocular UCP1-positive beige adipocytes have
been found to intersperse in the subcutaneous WAT in miR-133 knockdown mice [88]. These results support a key role of miR-133 in the browning of white adipocytes.

### 4.2.3. MicroRNA-155

miR-155 positively regulates the proliferation and negatively regulates the differentiation of brown preadipocytes. Recently, it was reported that miR-155 also involves in the browning of WAT [89]. BAT mass and thermogenesis were significantly reduced in miR-155 overexpressed mice; whereas, the inhibition of miR-155 induced the thermogenic program in white adipocytes and dramatically enhanced UCP1 expression in WAT. A bistable negative feedback loop between miR-155 and adipogenic transcript C/EBP β may be the underlying mechanism [89]. Specifically, TGF β1 signaling induced expression of miR-155 (Figure 2), which binds to the 5'UTR of C/EBP β and represses its translation. In turn, C/EBP β functions to inhibit the transcription of miR-155.

### 4.3. Control of Browning by the Central Neural System

#### 4.3.1. Neuropeptide Y

Neuropeptide Y (NPY), a 36-amino acid peptide, is widely distributed in both the peripheral and central nervous systems with high expression in the hypothalamus. It was shown that repression of hypothalamic NPY results in decreased food intake and weight loss in rats [90]. Overexpression of NPY in the dorsomedial hypothalamus (DMH) of lean rats increases food intake and exacerbates high-fat diet-induced obesity, whereas knockdown of NPY expression in the DMH ameliorates the hyperphagia and obesity [91, 92]. These findings indicate that NPY is a potent hypothalamic orexigenic peptide that plays key roles in the control of energy balance. However, the importance of NPY in the browning of WAT remains unclear. Interestingly, the inguinal adipose tissue in DMH NPY knockdown rats is dark brown and expresses UCP1 [92]. In addition, upregulation of CPT1a expression and a decrease in fatty acid synthase (FAS) expression in adipose tissue is observed. Consistent with the gene expression profile, energy expenditure increases and the thermogenic response to a cold environment is enhanced in DMH NPY knockdown rats [92]. It is suggested that brown adipocyte formation in inguinal fat contributes to lipid mobilization and reduced fat accumulation in DMH NPY knockdown rats. Furthermore, sympathetic denervation induced

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
by injection of the neurotoxin 6-hydroxydopamine (6-OHDA) prevents brown adipocyte formation in inguinal adipose tissue and significantly increases the release of norepinephrine (NE) in DMH NPY knockdown rats. Therefore, it was suggested that knockdown of NPY in the DMH induces the development of brown adipocytes in WAT through activation of the sympathetic nervous system (SNS) (Figure 3).

### 4.3.2. Brain-derived Neurotrophic Factor

Brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF), a member of the neurotrophin family of growth factors, is richly expressed throughout the developing and mature central nervous system (CNS) and in several peripheral tissues, especially muscle, liver, and fat. Mature BDNF has a high affinity for tropomyosin-related kinase B (TrkB) [93, 94]. In recent years, BDNF has attracted great attention for its role in energy homeostasis [95]. It was noted that chronic intraventricular administration of BDNF prevents weight gain [96]. Recent studies showed that mice living in an enriched environment (EE) consisting of physically and socially complex housing show resistance to diet-induced obesity, and that this resistance is related to browning of WAT [97]. The molecular features of browning WAT are upregulation of the brown fat gene program including CIDEA, Elovl3, UCP1, PGC-1α, and PRDM 16. Animals living in an EE exhibit elevated BDNF levels in multiple brain regions. Moreover, selective overexpression of BDNF in the hypothalamus reproduces the enrichment-associated activation of the brown fat gene program, specifically upregulation of β-ARs and BAT markers in WAT and a lean phenotype. In contrast, inhibition of TrkB signaling reverses the effects of EE on adiposity and the generation of brown-like adipocyte in WAT depots (Figure 3). β3-AR blockade attenuates the induction of WAT browning by EE or hypothalamic BDNF overexpression, suggesting that the SNS plays a critical role in this transformation [97].

### 4.3.3. Leptin/Leptin Receptor Pathway

Leptin is a 16-kDa peptide hormone that is primarily produced by adipocytes in proportion to the size of fat stores. It is transported from adipose tissue into the hypothalamus across the blood-brain barrier and engages the leptin receptor (LEPR) to modulate energy expenditure and food intake. In 1996, it was reported that adenovirus-mediated hyperleptinemia in normal
rats causes the rapid disappearance of all visible body fat within 7 days without increasing free fatty acids (FFA) and ketogenesis [98]. It was suggested that fat-storing adipocytes are oxidizing the fat, but the mechanism was unclear. In 2003, a study [99] analyzing the ultrastructural changes of adipocytes accompanying this functional transformation by electron microscopy showed that after 14 days of hyperleptinemia, normal-appearing, fat-filled adipocytes are replaced by shrunken, fat-depleted adipocytes, crowded with mitochondria that are much smaller than those of brown adipocytes, in which the cristae traverse the entire organelle. Immunoblotting showed the presence of thermogenic protein UCP1 in the lipid-depleted white adipocytes, but at the levels were well below those normally present in BAT. The molecular markers of mature white adipocytes, such as adipocyte fatty acid-binding protein 2, had disappeared, but some brown adipocyte hallmarks, such as CIDEA, were present. These fatless white adipocytes were designated postadipocytes.

Furthermore, phosphorylation of AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) and acetyl-CoA carboxylase (ACC) (α plus β) in the fat pad is increased in leptinized rats. Phosphorylation inactivates ACC and activates AMPK. AMPK acts to catalyze ACC phosphorylation, which blocks the production of malonyl CoA, the substrate for lipogenesis and an inhibitor of fatty acid oxidation. It is likely that inactivation of ACC through the increase in p-AMPK plays a role in the lipid depletion in adipocytes. The adipogenic transcription factors SREBP-1c, ChREBP, and FOXO1 are significantly suppressed during the first week of hyperleptinemia. Levels of the lipogenic enzymes FAS, stearoyl CoA desaturase 1, and glycerol-3-phosphate acyltransferase are also significantly reduced after leptin treatment, whereas there is an increase in expression of the mitochondrial proteins cytochrome C oxidase IV and UCP1 and 2. Consistent with the increased mitochondrial abundance, the level of *PGC-1α* mRNA, which upregulates mitochondrial biogenesis and is normally very low in white fat, is strikingly elevated. Forced expression of PGC-1α in human fat cells enhances their oxidation of fatty acids [35]. These profound changes in the gene expression profile in adipose tissue of overleptinized animals support the idea that adipocytes are transformed into mitochondria-rich fat-burning cells by hyperleptinemia. In general, the action of leptin is mainly mediated through Janus kinases (JAKs) and the signal transducers and activators of transcription (STAT) pathway. However, the leptin receptor also engages activation of the

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
Pi3-kinase (PI3K) pathway via Jak2-mediated tyrosine phosphorylation of insulin receptor substrate (IRS) proteins. PI3K is a relevant point of crosstalk between the insulin and leptin signaling pathways. Leptin has been shown to stimulate the IRS2-mediated hypothalamic PI3K activity, whereas pharmacologic blockade of PI3K abrogates the leptin-induced hyperpolarization of NPY/AgRP (agouti-related peptide) neurons, thus blocking the anorectic effect of leptin [100]. Conversely, intracerebroventricular (icv) injection of PI3K inhibitors blunts the acute anorectic action of icv-administered leptin [101]. These experiments indicate that PI3K activation is also involved in mediating the anorectic action of leptin. Phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN) negatively regulates the PI3K pathway by catalyzing the conversion of phosphatidylinositol-(3,4,5)-triphosphate [PI(3,4,5)P3] to phosphatidylinositol-4,5-trisphosphate [PI(4,5)P2]. Leptin can act through a central mechanism or directly on the adipocytes. ObRb-specific PTEN knockout ($PTEN^{ΔObRb}$) mice have been developed by deletion of the PIP3 phosphatase PTEN in leptin-responsive hypothalamic neurons as a mouse model that mimics overactivation of the PI3K pathway [102]. It is clearly established that PI3K activation in primary leptin-responsive neurons of the CNS (as characterized by ObRb expression) regulates sympathetic nervous activity of WAT and pararenal fat tissue and leads to BAT-like remodeling of WAT with increased mitochondrial content and UCP1 expression, resulting in increased energy expenditure and leanness [102]. Moreover, icv leptin treatment results in more pronounced weight reduction and WAT remodeling in $ob/ob$-$PTEN^{ΔObRb}$ mice compared with $ob/ob$ mice [102]. These findings clearly define a pathway in which sensitization of leptin-stimulated PI3K activity in hypothalamic neurons accounts for browning of WAT (Figure 3).

### 4.3.4. β3-AR/cAMP/PKA/PGC-1α Pathway

Brown-like adipocytes can appear in distinct white fat depots under cold conditions and various genetic backgrounds (Table 1) [5, 26, 32-34, 41, 42]. It has been reported that cold exposure primarily activates the central nervous system [103], and the browning phenomenon is likely to be secondary. The increase in brown adipocytes induced by cold acclimation is accompanied by an increased density of noradrenergic parenchymal nerve fibers, with a significant correlation between the density of these fibers and the number of brown adipocytes. The density of noradrenergic nerve fibers is greatest in adipose depots exhibiting
a significant increase in UCP1-positive multilocular adipocytes [5]. Noradrenergic fibers secrete noradrenaline, an important molecular factor that acts on β3-AR. Browning of the adipose organ after cold exposure is blunted in β3-AR knockout C57BL/6J and Sv129 mice [32, 33]. Several lines of evidence suggest that SNS β3-AR activation is essential for cold-induced generation of brown-like adipocytes and UCP1 expression in WAT (Figure 2), but not in interscapular BAT [32, 33, 104].

β3-ARs are G protein-coupled receptors that are selectively expressed in rodent mature adipocytes. Chronic activation of these receptors upregulates fatty acid catabolism and exerts potent anti-diabetic and anti-obesity effects in rodent models [105]. It was demonstrated that remodeling of white fat occurs after sustained activation of β3-AR by CL [106]. The central features of this remodeling include a dramatic elevation in metabolic rate, mitochondrial biogenesis, and the induction of genes involved in oxidation of fatty acids [79]. The metabolic remodeling of WAT induced by β3-AR is mediated by activation of adenylyl cyclase (AC), which increases cAMP levels and activates protein kinase A (PKA). β-AR/PKA signaling promotes the transcription of genes involved in lipid oxidation, including PGC-1α and UCP1, through PKA phosphorylation of specific transcription factors [107]. It was demonstrated that acute activation of cAMP signaling induces rapid PGC-1α deacetylation and its cotranscriptional activity, whereas cAMP/PKA-dependent PGC-1α activation is mediated partially by an increase in SIRT1 activity [108]. SIRT1 is a NAD⁺-dependent deacetylase that plays an important role in metabolic function and longevity in mammals. SIRT1 overexpression significantly potentiates adrenergic-mediated elevation of fatty acid oxidation and energy expenditure. PKA activation results in phosphorylation of SIRT1 on the Ser434 residue in the catalytic domain and an increase in SIRT1 activity in the absence of changes in NAD⁺ levels. This heightened sirtuin enzymatic capacity leads to PGC-1α deacetylation and subsequent activation [108]. In contrast to PKA, PKC suppresses expression of β-ARs at the transcriptional level. PKC⁻/⁻ mice exhibit a substantial increase in energy expenditure and adipose atrophy that is related to increased synthesis or stability of UCP1 protein in WAT [109]. In addition, histologic and gene profile data indicate that during the first 3 days of CL treatment, a rapid but transient induction of inflammatory cytokines including CCL2, IL-6, and PAI-1 occurs that is followed by

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
mitogenesis among stromal cells and multilocular adipocytes. Subsequent work demonstrated that PKA directly activates hormone-sensitive lipase (HSL) by phosphorylation, and that inflammatory cytokine expression is regulated by HSL-dependent fatty acid production and the activation of p38MAPK [110]. Inhibition of p38MAPK suppresses the inflammatory expression response, but the induction of PKA-targeted genes by β3-AR is unaffected. However, some in vitro studies support a role of p38MAPK in β3-AR activation. It was also reported that the β-adrenergic agonist isoproterenol rapidly increases the activity of the stress-activated kinase p38MAPK in freshly isolated rat epididymal fat cells [111]. It has also been shown that stimulation of β3-AR activates p38MAPK by PKA phosphorylation through the β-AR/cAMP/PKA signaling pathway in adipocytes. p38MAPK targets the -2530/-2310 enhancer region of the UCP1 promoter and its activity is required for the β-AR-dependent increase in UCP1 expression [111]. Intracellular fatty acids negatively feed back on AC at the level of β-AR occupancy and limit the induction of PKA target genes [107]. Limiting lipolysis during β3-AR activation could suppress inflammation and augment the expression of genes regulated by PKA [107]. Previously, it was found that PPARα is required for the expansion of oxidative capacity in WAT during CL treatment. FFAs are known to be potent activating ligands for PPARα [112], inducing its expression [113]. In HSL-KO mice, the induction of mitochondrial biogenesis and expression of fatty acid oxidation genes by CL are significantly delayed [114]. On the basis of these results, it was proposed that FFAs contribute to the adaptive upregulation of mitochondrial oxidative capacity during sustained CL stimulation [114]. Interestingly, in the late phase of CL stimulation the increase in oxidative capacity in WAT provides a sink for mobilized fatty acids and the inflammatory response wanes. A second major feature of CL-induced remodeling is cellular proliferation. Mitogenesis lags behind the inflammatory response, peaking around the third day of treatment and dropping off by the sixth day. Histologically, except for stromal cells, the cellular proliferation mainly involves multilocular adipocytes containing well-defined lipid droplets. These multilocular cells are derived from mature adipocytes and continuous CL treatment fragments the central lipid droplets and induces mitochondrial biogenesis of mature adipocytes. Consistent with this, several reports have demonstrated the proliferative potential of lipid-laden adipocytes in vitro [115, 116]. Interestingly, the ability of fat cells to divide in

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
vitro appears to require fragmentation of the central lipid droplet, and this process is accelerated by catabolic stimulation.

Cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) is a rate-limiting enzyme in prostaglandin (PG) synthesis. PGE2 and PGI2 are major WAT-derived PGs [117], and COX-2 expression is more important for PGE2 production than for other PGs [118]. Studies on murine models suggested that COX-2 is a downstream effector of β-adrenergic signaling in WAT and is required for BAT development in white fat (Figure 2). Chronic CL treatment increases COX-2 expression and PG levels within WAT, accompanied by acquisition of a BAT-like phenotype [119]. The stable PGE2 analogue 16, 16-dimethyl-PGE2 induces UCP1 expression in inguinal WAT [118]. COX-2 overexpression mimics the CL-induced recruitment of BAT-like cells in WAT [120] with the absence of systemic inflammation, whereas the effect of CL is substantially blunted in animals on a celecoxib (selective COX-2 inhibitor) diet [121] or with COX-2 deficiency [122]. Accordingly, COX-2 knockout or inhibition markedly diminishes CL-stimulated induction of thermogenic genes including *UCP1* [86], *PGC-1α*, and *PPARα* [123]. Correlating with the loss of COX-2 action and the decrease in plasma PG to the normal level, BAT-like cells are absent in the WAT. Interestingly, CL-mediated thermogenic mRNA expression in the classic interscapular BAT depot is not affected by celecoxib [86]. Consistent with this, cold-induced UCP1 expression is fully blocked in inguinal WAT, but not in interscapular BAT, in mice treated with a general COX inhibitor. Therefore, it was postulated that cold or β3-adrenergic agonists increase COX-2 expression in WAT thus increasing the production of PG, which then acts locally and triggers brown fat-specific gene expression in WAT. Furthermore, treatment with a PGI2 analogue induces a distinct increase in BAT marker gene expression and triggers differentiation towards brown adipocytes in WAT-derived primary multipotent mesenchymal progenitors from the stromal-vascular cell fraction (SVF) of WAT and in a murine C3H10T1/2 multipotential mesenchymal cell line. Moreover, the brown adipocytes emerging in WAT depots do not express the hallmarks of classic BAT progenitors, Myf5 and LHX8, in CL-treated or COX-2 overexpressing mice. These data suggest that, in contrast to classic BAT cells, cells that arise from COX-2 induced de novo BAT recruitment in WAT do not arise from common BAT/myogenic progenitors, but from unique mesenchymal progenitors in the SVF of WAT [118]. Although both COX-1

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.and COX-2 appear to be necessary to full UCP1 induction within WAT, the activity of COX-2 is of greater importance. Furthermore, the BAT recruitment induced by the PGI2 analogue and CL can be impaired by loss-of-function of cellular PGI2 receptors (Ptgir or PPARY) [119], whereas the effect of the PGE2 analogue can be blocked by an antagonist of EP4, a major PGE2 receptor [118]. Cells from the SVF of BAT and WAT differentiate into mature adipocytes. When these cells are treated with the β-adrenergic agonist isoproterenol with or without the general COX inhibitor indomethacin, the COX inhibitor blunts isoproterenol-induced UCP1 expression in mature cells derived from inguinal WAT but not in cells derived from interscapular BAT, indicating that β-adrenergic stimulation can also induce direct transformation of WAT into BAT, and that this involves COX activity [118]. Given that β3-adrenergic agonists have not been successful when applied in the clinic for weight loss [124], whereas mice overexpressing COX-2 display elevated systemic energy expenditure as well as decreased adiposity, the COX-2/PG signaling pathway may lead to new therapies for obesity.

Further studies showing that mice deficient in PGC-1α are cold sensitive [125, 126] and have increased body fat [126] suggest that PGC-1α is important in eliciting the effects of β-AR by augmenting cAMP-mediated transactivation of effector genes such as UCP1 [60]. Furthermore, the adrenergic signaling that couples cAMP production to PKA-dependent phosphorylation of p38MAPK is implicated in ATF-2 activation by phosphorylation, with subsequent negative regulation of both PGC-1α and UCP1 transcription [82].

### 4.3.5. Endocannabinoid System

Endocannabinoids (ECs) are arachidonic acid derivatives that function as endogenous ligands for cannabinoid receptors type 1 (CB1r) and type 2 (CB2r). The endocannabinoid system comprises ECs, their receptors, and the enzymes responsible for their synthesis and degradation [127-130]. CB1r receptors are expressed in the CNS-like lateral area of the hypothalamus, the nucleus of the solitary tract, and several peripheral organs such as WAT [131], BAT [132], liver [133], and skeletal muscle [134]. ECs function as synaptic neuromodulators by diffusing and acting on CB1r receptors located in the presynaptic membrane. In addition, ECs are implicated in the regulation of energy metabolism. Obesity

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.was found to be related to EC overactivation, and the effects of global or peripheral CB1r antagonists on weight loss are related to anorexia mediated by their inhibitory action on CB1r in the CNS [135] or gut respectively. It was quickly recognized that weight loss via CB1r blockade is mediated by metabolic actions on peripheral organs. Blockage of CB1r receptors might stimulate mitochondrial biogenesis and BAT activity in a SNS-dependent manner [132]. On the other hand, CB1r blockade could enhance BAT function by inducing transdifferentiation of white adipocytes to brown adipocytes [136]. Thus, blocking CB1r action could induce a brown fat phenotype in white adipocytes. Chronic treatment with the CB1r antagonist rimonabant either significantly increases expression of UCP1 and PGC-1α in white mature adipocytes, or enhances AMPK phosphorylation and PGC-1α expression in white adipocytes during differentiation [136]. It is known that AMPK performs multiple functions including the upregulation of PGC-1α expression and mitochondrial biogenesis, increasing fatty acid oxidation, and inhibiting adipocyte lipolysis [137]. In addition, in view of the adverse psychiatric side effects of global CB1r antagonists, peripheral CB1r antagonists that do not cross the blood-brain barrier provide a promising pharmacological approach to fighting obesity and its metabolic complications.

It is noteworthy that phytocannabinoids, synthetic CB1r and CB2r ligands, and endocannabinoids can interact with some types of transient receptor potential (TRP) channels including TRPV1, TRPV2, and TRPV4 [129]. Endocannabinoid-like anandamide and 2-arachidonoylglycerol (2-AG) are reported to activate TRPV4 [138]. However, the role of the interaction between ECs and TRP channels in the browning of white adipocytes remains unclear.

### 4.4. Control of Browning by the Periphery

#### 4.4.1. Crosstalk between Muscle and White Adipose Tissue

Myostatin (Mstn), a member of the TGF-β superfamily, is predominantly secreted by skeletal muscle to negatively affect muscle growth [139]. Myostatin expression is low in adipose tissue compared with skeletal muscle and liver [139, 140], and multiple lines of evidence indicate that myostatin plays important roles in regulating fat deposition [141, 142]. Myostatin appears to inhibit the maturation of WAT preadipocytes [141] and the differentiation of brown adipocytes in vitro through the activin receptor IIB

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.(ActRIIB)–Smad3 pathway [143]. Recently, murine studies have revealed that myostatin-null ($Mstn^{-/-}$) mice have significantly less body fat [144] and increased total energy expenditure [145, 146] despite normal food intake, and treatment with myostatin antagonist alleviates DIO in mice [147]. The beneficial effect of myostatin correlates with acquisition of BAT characteristics by WAT [147], because WAT of $Mstn^{-/-}$ mice exhibits a multilocular adipocyte morphology and dramatically increased expression of UCP1, PGC-1α, and several other crucial factors for controlling fatty acid oxidation and thermogenesis. However, conditional deletion of myostatin specifically in adipose tissue does not have a dramatic impact on adipose tissue fat accumulation and metabolic homeostasis [148]. A recent study showed that $Mstn^{-/-}$ muscle tissue extract robustly induces browning of wild-type WAT stromal-vascular fraction cells and that this browning effect can be abolished by a neutralizing antibody against the myokine irisin. This indicated that the observed browning phenotype in WAT of $Mstn^{-/-}$ mice is not a direct effect of Mstn deletion in WAT, but an indirect effect of irisin. Irisin is released into the blood by skeletal muscles after proteolysis of membrane protein fibronectin type III domain-containing protein 5 (FNDC5), which is upregulated by PGC-1α in muscle. Irisin has been described as a health-promoting hormone that browns white fat and appears to induce UCP1 gene expression at least in part via PPAR-α [149]. Further studies showed that $Mstn^{-/-}$ mice exhibit elevated expression and phosphorylation of AMPK in muscle, which subsequently activates PGC-1α and upregulates the expression and release of irisin [150]. Therefore, the AMPK–PGC-1α–FNDC5 pathway in muscle is responsible for the browning of WAT induced by Mstn deficiency. In addition, strong induction of COX-2 and enhanced release of prostaglandin were observed in $Mstn^{-/-}$ mice WAT explants, suggesting that the browning of WAT induced by Mstn ablation also involves the COX-2–PG system [150].

### 4.4.2. Crosstalk between Liver and Adipose Tissue

Fibroblast growth factor (FGF) 21, a novel member of the FGF subfamily, has been identified as an important endocrine hormone with beneficial metabolic actions [151]. It is abundantly expressed in liver, epididymal WAT, and the pancreas [152] and signals through cell-surface complexes composed of FGF receptors and the transmembrane protein β-klotho [153, 154].FGF21 treatment potently increases glucose uptake in 3T3-L1 adipocytes and human adipocytes [153]. Systemic administration and transgenic overexpression of FGF21 lead to weight loss in obese mice through increased energy expenditure without alterations in food intake [153, 155, 156]. Both BAT and WAT express high levels of the critical co-receptor β-klotho and are sensitive to exogenous FGF21 stimulation. Pharmacologic doses of FGF21 can induce expression of thermogenic genes, including UCP1 and CIDEA (Figure 2), in BAT and primary classical brown adipocytes. Interestingly, FGF21 has far more profound effects in thermogenically competent WAT depots (inguinal subcutaneous and perirenal fat), causing a large increase in multilocular, brown-like adipocytes in the inguinal fat pads of FGF21-treated mice. Even more interestingly, this process is associated with a large induction of PGC-1α protein in adipose tissue [157]. Data from in vitro and in vivo studies indicate that FGF21 enhances mitochondrial function in white adipocytes in an AMPK- and SIRT1-dependent manner [158]. Furthermore, the phosphorylation of AMPK triggered by FGF21 is mediated through interaction between ERK 1/2 and liver kinase B1 (LKB1). FGF21 signaling through β-klotho and the FGF receptors results in activation of ERK 1/2, which regulates LKB1 activity [159]. LKB1, a serine threonine kinase, directly phosphorylates Thr172 of AMPK and activates its kinase activity [160], which indirectly activates SIRT1 by increasing the cellular NAD⁺/NADH ratio, resulting in deacetylation of its downstream target, PGC-1α [158]. FGF21 is the only known cold-induced secreted protein, and is required for physiological adaptation to cold exposure. However, cold exposure induces the appearance of brown-like adipocytes in WAT depots without alterations in the level of circulating FGF21. Therefore, it was suggested that adipose-derived FGF21 regulates chronic adaptive thermogenesis in an autocrine/paracrine manner by “browning” white fat [157]. More importantly, FGF21 induces similar effects on mitochondrial function in rodents and humans, indicating the potential of FGF21 as a therapeutic agent for obesity and type 2 diabetes [157]. A recent study characterizing the crosstalk between vertebrate transcription factor NFE2-related factor 2 (Nrf2) and FGF21 identified Nrf2 as a master regulator of the cellular redox status and detoxification responses [161]. Nrf2-KO mice are partially resistant to HFD-induced obesity and insulin resistance without alteration of food consumption. Increased FGF21 mRNA expression in liver and WAT and elevated plasma

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
levels of FGF21 in Nrf2-KO mice are accompanied by increased PGC-1α expression in both liver and WAT. In contrast, Nrf2 overexpression reduces *FGF21* mRNA expression levels and suppresses *FGF21* promoter activity [162]. Thus, Nrf2 was identified as a novel regulator of FGF21.

### 4.4.3. Adipose Tissue Auto-modulation

#### 4.4.3.1. Lipolysis-Associated Proteins

WAT stores triacylglycerol (TAG) during times of energy excess and hydrolyzes TAG to release fatty acids (FAs) during periods of energy need. Adipocyte lipolysis is catalyzed by adipose tissue lipases in sequential steps (Figure 4). Adipose triglyceride lipase (ATGL), which is located on lipid droplets in both basal and hormone-stimulated states of the cell [163], specifically removes the first FA from the TAG molecule generating diacylglycerol (DAG) [163]. Subsequently, HSL hydrolyzes DAG to generate a second FA and monoacylglycerol (MAG), which is hydrolyzed by MAG lipase to yield the final FA and glycerol. Within adipocytes, TAG is predominantly stored within lipid droplets that are surrounded by a phospholipid monolayer containing various lipid droplet proteins. There is growing evidence that lipolysis involves specific protein-protein interactions at the surface of lipid droplets [164]. Perilipin A (Plin) is the most abundant lipid droplet scaffold protein and plays a pivotal role in orchestrating interactions among lipolytic effector proteins [165]. The interaction of Plin and its co-activator, α/β-fold domain-containing protein 5 (Abhd5), regulates basal and stimulated lipolysis. In the basal state, Plin sequesters Abhd5, resulting in incomplete or absent activation of ATGL. Catecholamines are the most important stimulators of lipolysis, causing PKA activation in a cAMP-dependent manner [166] through Gas-coupled β-adrenergic receptors. Activated PKA phosphorylates cytosolic HSL and the lipid droplet-associated Plin protein. Upon Plin phosphorylation, Abhd5 is released and becomes available for ATGL, and the subsequent activation of ATGL results in increased TG hydrolysis. In addition, phosphorylated HSL translocates to the lipid droplet and docks at the site provided by phosphorylated Plin, giving HSL access to substrates at the surface of the lipid droplets [167-170]. It was further demonstrated that Plin contains six consensus PKA sites, and phosphorylation of either Ser492 or Ser517 of Plin is sufficient to release Abhd5.
[171]. In contrast to Plin, fat-specific protein 27 (FSP27 or CIDEC) was also found to localize on the surface of lipid droplets but functions to promote the formation of unilocular lipid droplets in white adipocytes [172].

Plin overexpression protects against DIO by increasing energy expenditure and reducing lipid synthesis in vivo [173, 174]. The basis for these effects is considered to be induction of a BAT-like phenotype in WAT due to a decrease in FSP27 expression in response to overexpression of Plin (Figure 4). This interaction is thought to be related to the preferential location of Plin and FSP27 on lipid droplets [173]. In addition, attenuation of FSP27 is the trigger for the downregulation of RIP140 and upregulation of PGC-1α, which causes progenitor adipocytes to differentiate into brown adipocytes rather than white adipocytes [173].

Many studies have established that different lipases may regulate distinct metabolic pathways. AMPK is a serine/threonine kinase that is activated during a low-energy state [175] through remodeling of adipocyte metabolism with upregulation of pathways that favor energy dissipation versus lipid storage in WAT [176]. Chronic AMPK activation (2 weeks) in vivo causes the appearance of brown adipocytes within WAT depots, with increased UCP1 protein levels in WAT [177]. This process may be related to increased ATGL content and FA oxidation in white adipocytes (Figure 4), together with inhibition of basal and epinephrine-stimulated HSL activity, in response to AMPK activation [176]. Mice that overexpress ATGL in adipose tissue (aP2-ATGL mice) show a reduced adipocyte TAG content and attenuation of DIO through increased lipolysis. Interestingly, increasing lipolysis in the adipose tissue of aP2-ATGL mice does not necessarily increase serum FA levels, which was attributed to the enhancement of FA oxidation caused by increased expression of UCP1 and other oxidative genes including CPT-1β and PGC-1α in white adipocytes [178]. In contrast, adipose-specific ablation of ATGL in mice results in impaired thermogenesis and decreased expression of UCP1 [179]. These findings establish ATGL-catalyzed lipolysis as a major determinant of thermogenesis that is required for the maintenance of a BAT phenotype.

Data from cultured adipocytes and mice provide evidence that AMPK phosphorylates Ser406 of ATGL to increase its activity and promote lipolysis, resulting in FA oxidation and UCP1

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.induction for thermogenesis [179]. There is a large body of evidence supporting the role of lipolysis-related proteins in the browning of WAT. HSL-knockout animals are lean and resistant to DIO [180-182], and their WAT acquires BAT characteristics with high expression levels of UCP1 [182, 183]. Notably, mRNA expression of pRB and RIP140 was significantly decreased in isolated white adipocytes without increased PGC-$1\alpha$ expression. Previously, it was established that PGC-$1\alpha$ activates, and RIP140 represses, genes involved in mitochondrial biogenesis and respiration, including ERR$\alpha$ and NRF-1 [58, 184]. As key factors promoting differentiation into the white over the brown adipocyte lineage, both pRB and RIP140 proteins are positively regulated by retinoic acid (RA), whereas HSL was demonstrated to be a retinyl ester hydrolase of adipose tissue. Therefore, it is speculated that a deficiency in HSL mediates the browning of adipocytes by blocking retinoic acid that activates pRB and RIP140.

### 4.4.3.2. Transient Receptor Potential Vanilloid 4

The transient receptor potential vanilloid 4 (TRPV4) is a calcium-permeable ion channel that belongs to the transient receptor potential (TRP) superfamily. Adipose tissue was shown to have among the highest levels of TRPV4 mRNA expression [185]. Recently, TRPV4 expression was reported to be higher in WAT than in BAT [186]. TRPV4 knockdown increases expression of PGC-$1\alpha$, UCP1, and other mitochondrial genes in white adipocytes, whereas chemical activation of TRPV4 has the opposite effect. Moreover, these changes are dependent on the induction of PGC-$1\alpha$. Thus, it was suggested that TRPV4 functions as a negative regulator of PGC-$1\alpha$ and oxidative metabolism. Furthermore, U0126, a specific inhibitor of MEK1/2, effectively reverses the repression of PGC-$1\alpha$ by TRPV4 agonist, indicating that much of the repressive effect of TRPV4 on PGC-$1\alpha$ expression is mediated by ERK1/2 protein kinases. The fact that PGC-$1\alpha$ mRNA is more strongly induced in TRPV4 shRNA-treated 3T3-F442A adipocytes than in TRPV1 shRNA-treated adipocytes supports the notion that TRPV4 is the dominant TPRV family member in the negative regulation of PGC-$1\alpha$ expression. In light of the “browning” effect of TRPV4 on white adipocytes, the effect of TRPV4 ablation on the thermogenic gene program in white adipose tissues has been examined. TRPV4 null mutant mice show elevated thermogenesis and reduced inflammation

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
in adipose tissues and are protected against DIO and insulin resistance. More importantly, TRPV4 modulates adipose energy metabolism and inflammation in white adipocytes in vivo in a cell-autonomous manner, making TRPV4 a novel target for obesity and type 2 diabetes.

### 4.4.4. Crosstalk between Heart and Adipose Tissue

Recently, the heart was found to function as a central regulator of adipose tissue biology through secretion of the natriuretic peptides (NPs), atrial NP (ANP), and ventricular companion (BNP). The actions of NPs are mainly mediated by binding to NP receptor A (NPRA), whose intracellular domain has guanylyl cyclase (GC) activity to generate cGMP [187] and NP clearance receptor (NPRC), which binds ANP and BNP to remove them from circulation [188]. It is known that NPs stimulate lipolysis in human adipocytes with potency similar to that of catecholamines [189]. Interestingly, NPs also function in a parallel manner to catecholamines to trigger a functional “brown-like” adipocyte phenotype. Results *in vitro* and *in vivo* demonstrate that ANP turns on machinery typical of brown fat thermogenesis via the cGMP-dependent protein kinase G (PKG)–p38MAPK pathway (Figure 2). Moreover, ANP induces the entire machinery for adaptive thermogenesis as effectively as catecholamines through cAMP and PKA. Mechanistically, the cGMP produced by NPRA triggers a kinase cascade from PKG to p38MAPK, which phosphorylates the transcriptional regulators PGC-1α and ATF-2 (Figure 2). Once phosphorylated and activated, the PGC-1α–PPARγ complex and ATF-2 are recruited to the peroxisome proliferator receptor response element (PPRE) and the cAMP-response element (CRE2), respectively, thereby increasing *UCP1* transcription. ATF-2 also binds CRE2 in the *PGC-1α* promoter to increase its transcription [190]. PKG is expressed as two different isoforms (PKG I and PKG II) in mammalian cells. PKG I has recently been demonstrated to mediate cGMP-induced mitochondrial biogenesis and browning in WAT [191]. High levels of NPs are a characteristic feature of heart failure, and are used as diagnostic markers of severe heart disease [192]. Therefore, the clinical relevance of NP-induced browning in WAT should be investigated.

5. Outlook

BAT converts chemical energy into heat, thus playing a critical role in regulating energy metabolism. Although the potential of BAT as a therapeutic target for combating obesity and related metabolic disorders has recently been highlighted, the limited amount of BAT in human adults reduces its physiological relevance. Considering the significant mass of WAT and observations that brown adipocyte-like cells can be recruited in WAT, inducing the browning of white adipocytes is a reasonable strategy for the treatment of obesity.

WAT browning has been studied extensively in recent years. The results currently available imply that browning of adipose tissue is regulated by a complex network involving the central and peripheral neural systems, as well as peripheral organs such as liver, muscle, and heart. The influences of cold exposure and β3-AR stimulation have been studied in most detail to date. It should be noted that β3-ARs are weakly expressed in human adipose tissue, thereby limiting their therapeutic potential in human obesity and diabetes [193, 194]. NPs, heart-derived factors that trigger a functional “brown-like” adipocyte phenotype, are generally associated with severe heart disease. Thus, understanding the crosstalk between peripheral organs and WAT must be considered in the development of plausible therapeutics.

The induction of specific transcripts such as PGC-1α, BMP7, and C/EBPs is involved in the browning of WAT to regulate BAT mass and activity. Moreover, PGC-1α appears to play a key role in the interplay of these transcripts. However, current understanding of their role largely depends on a number of experimental animal or cell culture studies. Further investigation is also needed in human brown adipocytes models so as to elucidate the clinical relevance of these molecular events for human physiology.

Given the large amount of evidence suggesting that targeting molecular events is a feasible approach to the development of therapies for obesity and related disorders, the search for signaling pathways that induce BAT-like changes in WAT continues.

# Acknowledgements

We thank Jing Yang and Ruth Rebecca Magaye for critical reading of the manuscript. This study was partly sponsored by the K.C.Wong Magna Fund in Ningbo University and supported by the National Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 81172660), Zhejiang Provincial Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. LY12H26001 and LY14H260001), Ningbo Civil Outstanding Talent and Leadership Fund, Ningbo University Discipline Fund (Grant No.xkl1347).

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

References

1. Yeung H W, R K Grewal, M Gonen, H Schoder, and S M Larson. Patterns of (18)F-FDG uptake in adipose tissue and muscle: a potential source of false-positives for PET. *J Nucl Med* 2003; 44(11): 1789-1796.

2. Saito M, Y Okamatsu-Ogura, M Matsushita, K Watanabe, T Yoneshiro, J Nio-Kobayashi, T Iwanaga, M Miyagawa, T Kameya, K Nakada, Y Kawai, and M Tsujisaki. High incidence of metabolically active brown adipose tissue in healthy adult humans: effects of cold exposure and adiposity. *Diabetes* 2009; 58(7): 1526-1531.

3. Truong M T, J J Erasmus, R F Munden, E M Marom, B S Sabloff, G W Gladish, D A Podoloff, and H A Macapinlac. Focal FDG uptake in mediastinal brown fat mimicking malignancy: a potential pitfall resolved on PET/CT. *AJR Am J Roentgenol* 2004; 183(4): 1127-1132.

4. Cohade C, K A Mourtzikos, and R L Wahl. "USA-Fat": prevalence is related to ambient outdoor temperature-evaluation with 18F-FDG PET/CT. *J Nucl Med* 2003; 44(8): 1267-1270.

5. Vitali A, I Murano, M C Zingaretti, A Frontini, D Ricquier, and S Cinti. The adipose organ of obesity-prone C57BL/6J mice is composed of mixed white and brown adipocytes. *J Lipid Res* 2012; 53(4): 619-629.

6. Granneman J G, P Li, Z Zhu, and Y Lu. Metabolic and cellular plasticity in white adipose tissue I: effects of beta3-adrenergic receptor activation. *Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab* 2005; 289(4): E608-616.

7. Hansen J B and K Kristiansen. Regulatory circuits controlling white versus brown adipocyte differentiation. *Biochem J* 2006; 398(2): 153-168.

8. Feldmann H M, V Golozoubova, B Cannon, and J Nedergaard. UCP1 ablation induces obesity and abolishes diet-induced thermogenesis in mice exempt from thermal stress by living at thermoneutrality. *Cell Metab* 2009; 9(2): 203-209.

9. Guerra C, R A Koza, H Yamashita, K Walsh, and L P Kozak. Emergence of brown adipocytes in white fat in mice is under genetic control. Effects on body weight and adiposity. *J Clin Invest* 1998; 102(2): 412-420.

10. Heaton J M. The distribution of brown adipose tissue in the human. *J Anat* 1972; 112(Pt 1): 35-39.

11. Tanuma Y, M Tamamoto, T Ito, and C Yokochi. The occurrence of brown adipose tissue in perirenal fat in Japanese. *Arch Histol Jpn* 1975; 38(1): 43-70.

12. Aherne W and D Hull. Brown adipose tissue and heat production in the newborn infant. *J Pathol Bacteriol* 1966; 91(1): 223-234.

13. Aherne W and D Hull. The site of heat production in the newborn Infant. *Proc R Soc Med* 1964; 57: 1172-1173.

14. Ricquier D, M Nechad, and G Mory. Ultrastructural and biochemical characterization of human brown adipose tissue in pheochromocytoma. *J Clin Endocrinol Metab* 1982; 54(4): 803-807.

15. Chatterton B E, D Mensforth, B J Coventry, and P Cohen. Hibernoma: intense uptake seen on Tc-99m tetrofosmin and FDG positron emission tomographic scanning. *Clin Nucl Med* 2002; 27(5): 369-370.

16. Cypess A M, S Lehman, G Williams, I Tal, D Rodman, A B Goldfine, F C Kuo, E L Palmer, Y H Tseng, A Doria, G M Kolodny, and C R Kahn. Identification and importance of brown adipose tissue in adult humans. *N Engl J Med* 2009; 360(15): 1509-1517.

17. van Marken Lichtenbelt W D, J W Vanhommerig, N M Smulders, J M Drossaerts, G J Kemerink, N D Bouvy, P Schrauwen, and G J Teule. Cold-activated brown adipose tissue in healthy men. *N Engl J Med* 2009; 360(15): 1500-1508.

18. Virtanen K A, M E Lidell, J Orava, M Heglind, R Westergren, T Niemi, M Taittonen, J Laine, N J Savisto, S Enerback, and P Nuutila. Functional brown adipose tissue in healthy adults. *N Engl J Med* 2009; 360(15): 1518-1525.

19. Yoneshiro T, S Aita, M Matsushita, T Kameya, K Nakada, Y Kawai, and M Saito. Brown adipose tissue, whole-body energy expenditure, and thermogenesis in healthy adult men. *Obesity (Silver Spring)* 2011; 19(1): 13-16.

20. Chiba S, I Katsuragi, T Shimada, I Adachi, Y Satoh, H Noguchi, K Gotoh, T Tsubone, K Fujiwara, T Masaki, T Kakuma, M Kang, K Tanaka, K Hamaguchi, and C a Y Wada, H. Evaluation of human brown adipose tissue using positron emission tomography, computerised tomography and histochemical studies in association with body mass index, visceral fat accumulation and insulin resistance. *Obes Rev* 2006; 7(Supplement s2): 87.

21. Ouellet V, A Routhier-Labadié, W Bellemare, L Lakhal-Chaieb, E Turcotte, A C Carpentier, and D Richard. Outdoor temperature, age, sex, body mass index, and diabetic status determine the prevalence, mass, and glucose-uptake activity of 18F-FDG-detected BAT in humans. *J Clin Endocrinol Metab* 2011; 96(1): 192-199.

22. Debevec D, M Christian, D Morganstein, A Seth, B Herzog, M Parker, and R White. Receptor interacting protein 140 regulates expression of uncoupling protein 1 in adipocytes through specific peroxisome proliferator activated receptor isoforms and estrogen-related receptor alpha. *Mol Endocrinol* 2007; 21(7): 1581-1592.

23. Christian M, E Kiskinis, D Debevec, G Leonardsson, R White, and M G Parker. RIP140-targeted repression of gene expression in adipocytes. *Mol Cell Biol* 2005; 25(21): 9383-9391.

24. Schreiber S N, R Emter, M B Hock, D Knutti, J Cardenas, M Podvinec, E J Oakeley, and A Kralli. The estrogen-related receptor alpha (ERRalpha) functions in PPARgamma coactivator 1alpha (PGC-1alpha)-induced mitochondrial biogenesis. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA* 2004; 101(17): 6472-6477.

25. Wu J, P Bostrom, L M Sparks, L Ye, J H Choi, A H Giang, M Khandekar, K A Virtanen, P Nuutila, G Schaart, K Huang, H Tu, W D van Marken Lichtenbelt, J Hoeks, S Enerback, P Schrauwen, and B M Spiegelman. Beige adipocytes are a distinct type of thermogenic fat cell in mouse and human. *Cell* 2012; 150(2): 366-376.

26. Young P, J R Arch, and M Ashwell. Brown adipose tissue in the parametrial fat pad of the mouse. *FEBS Lett* 1984; 167(1): 10-14.

27. Petrovic N, T B Walden, I G Shabalina, J A Timmons, B Cannon, and J Nedergaard. Chronic peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma (PPARgamma) activation of epididymally derived white adipocyte cultures reveals a population of thermogenically competent, UCP1-containing adipocytes molecularly distinct from classic brown adipocytes. *J Biol Chem* 2010; 285(10): 7153-7164.

28. Tran K V, O Gealekman, A Frontini, M C Zingaretti, M Morrone, A Giordano, A Smorlesi, J Perugini, R De Matteis, A Sbarbati, S Corvera, and S Cinti. The vascular endothelium of the adipose tissue gives rise to both white and brown fat cells. *Cell Metab* 2012; 15(2): 222-229.

29. Lepper C and C M Fan. Inducible lineage tracing of Pax7-descendant cells reveals embryonic origin of adult satellite cells. *Genesis* 2010; 48(7): 424-436.

30. Seale P, B Bjork, W Yang, S Kajimura, S Chin, S Kuang, A Scime, S Devarakonda, H M Conroe, H Erdjument-Bromage, P Tempst, M A Rudnicki, D R Beier, and B M Spiegelman. PRDM16 controls a brown fat/skeletal muscle switch. *Nature* 2008; 454(7207): 961-967.

31. Crisan M, L Casteilla, L Lehr, M Carmona, A Paoloni-Giacobino, S Yap, B Sun, B Leger, A Logar, L Penicaud, P Schrauwen, D Cameron-Smith, A P Russell, B Peault, and J P Giacobino. A reservoir of

brown adipocyte progenitors in human skeletal muscle. Stem Cells 2008; 26(9): 2425-2433.

32. Barbatelli G, I Murano, L Madsen, Q Hao, M Jimenez, K Kristiansen, J P Giacobino, R De Matteis, and S Cinti. The emergence of cold-induced brown adipocytes in mouse white fat depots is determined predominantly by white to brown adipocyte transdifferentiation. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab 2010; 298(6): E1244-1253.

33. Jimenez M, G Barbatelli, R Allevi, S Cinti, J Seydoux, J P Giacobino, P Muzzin, and F Preitner. Beta 3-adrenoceptor knockout in C57BL/6J mice depresses the occurrence of brown adipocytes in white fat. Eur J Biochem 2003; 270(4): 699-705.

34. Cousin B, N Bascands-Viguerie, N Kassis, M Nibbelink, L Ambid, L Casteilla, and L Penicaud. Cellular changes during cold acclimation in adipose tissues. J Cell Physiol 1996; 167(2): 285-289.

35. Tiraby C, G Tavernier, C Lefort, D Larrouy, F Bouillaud, D Ricquier, and D Langin. Acquisition of brown fat cell features by human white adipocytes. J Biol Chem 2003; 278(35): 33370-33376.

36. Wilson-Fritch L, S Nicoloro, M Chouinard, M A Lazar, P C Chui, J Leszyk, J Straubhaar, M P Czech, and S Corvera. Mitochondrial remodeling in adipose tissue associated with obesity and treatment with rosiglitazone. J Clin Invest 2004; 114(9): 1281-1289.

37. Elabd C, C Chiellini, M Carmona, J Galitzky, O Cochet, R Petersen, L Penicaud, K Kristiansen, A Bouloumie, L Casteilla, C Dani, G Ailhaud, and E Z Amri. Human multipotent adipose-derived stem cells differentiate into functional brown adipocytes. Stem Cells 2009; 27(11): 2753-2760.

38. Pardo R, N Enguix, J Lasheras, J E Feliu, A Kralli, and J A Villena. Rosiglitazone-induced mitochondrial biogenesis in white adipose tissue Is independent of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor γ coactivator-1α. PLoS One 2011; 6(11): e26989.

39. Distel E, G Penot, T Cadoudal, I Balguy, S Durant, and C Benelli. Early induction of a brown-like phenotype by rosiglitazone in the epicardial adipose tissue of fatty Zucker rats. Biochimie 2012; 94(8): 1660-1667.

40. Ohno H, K Shinoda, B M Spiegelman, and S Kajimura. PPARγ agonists induce a white-to-brown fat conversion through stabilization of PRDM16 protein. Cell Metab 2012; 15(3): 395-404.

41. Loncar D. Convertible adipose tissue in mice. Cell Tissue Res 1991; 266(1): 149-161.

42. Coulter A A, C M Bearden, X Liu, R A Koza, and L P Kozak. Dietary fat interacts with QTLs controlling induction of Pgc-1 alpha and Ucp1 during conversion of white to brown fat. Physiol Genomics 2003; 14(2): 139-147.

43. Cousin B, S Cinti, M Morrone, S Raimbault, D Ricquier, L Penicaud, and L Casteilla. Occurrence of brown adipocytes in rat white adipose tissue: molecular and morphological characterization. J Cell Sci 1992; 103 (Pt 4): 931-942.

44. Ghorbani M, T H Claus, and J Himms-Hagen. Hypertrophy of brown adipocytes in brown and white adipose tissues and reversal of diet-induced obesity in rats treated with a beta3-adrenoceptor agonist. Biochem Pharmacol 1997; 54(1): 121-131.

45. Veyrat-Durebex C, A L Poher, A Caillon, X Montet, and F Rohner-Jeanrenaud. Alterations in lipid metabolism and thermogenesis with emergence of brown adipocytes in white adipose tissue in diet-induced obesity-resistant Lou/C rats. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab 2011; 300(6): E1146-1157.

46. Ishibashi J and P Seale. Beige Can Be Slimming. Science 2010; 328(5982): 1113-1114.

47. Xue B, J S Rim, J C Hogan, A A Coulter, R A Koza, and L P Kozak. Genetic variability affects the development of brown adipocytes in white fat but not in interscapular brown fat. J Lipid Res 2007; 48(1): 41-51.

48. Sanchez-Gurmaches J, C M Hung, C A Sparks, Y Tang, H Li, and D A Guertin. PTEN loss in the

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

Myf5 lineage redistributes body fat and reveals subsets of white adipocytes that arise from Myf5 precursors. *Cell Metab* 2012; 16(3): 348-362.

49. Christian M, R White, and M G Parker. Metabolic regulation by the nuclear receptor corepressor RIP140. *Trends Endocrinol Metab* 2006; 17(6): 243-250.

50. Cristancho A G and M A Lazar. Forming functional fat: a growing understanding of adipocyte differentiation. *Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol* 2011; 12(11): 722-734.

51. Schulz T J, T L Huang, T T Tran, H Zhang, K L Townsend, J L Shadrach, M Cerletti, L E McDougall, N Giorgadze, T Tchkonia, D Schrier, D Falb, J L Kirkland, A J Wagers, and Y H Tseng. Identification of inducible brown adipocyte progenitors residing in skeletal muscle and white fat. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA* 2011; 108(1): 143-148.

52. Lee Y H, A P Petkova, E P Mottillo, and J G Granneman. In vivo identification of bipotential adipocyte progenitors recruited by beta3-adrenoceptor activation and high-fat feeding. *Cell Metab* 2012; 15(4): 480-491.

53. Mori M, H Nakagami, G Rodriguez-Araujo, K Nimura, and Y Kaneda. Essential role for miR-196a in brown adipogenesis of white fat progenitor cells. *PLoS Biol* 2012; 10(4): e1001314.

54. Sears I B, M A MacGinnitie, L G Kovacs, and R A Graves. Differentiation-dependent expression of the brown adipocyte uncoupling protein gene: regulation by peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma. *Mol Cell Biol* 1996; 16(7): 3410-3419.

55. Bogacka I, H Xie, G A Bray, and S R Smith. Pioglitazone induces mitochondrial biogenesis in human subcutaneous adipose tissue in vivo. *Diabetes* 2005; 54(5): 1392-1399.

56. Rodriguez A M, C Elabd, F Delteil, J Astier, C Vernochet, P Saint-Marc, J Guesnet, A Guezennec, E Z Amri, C Dani, and G Ailhaud. Adipocyte differentiation of multipotent cells established from human adipose tissue. *Biochem Biophys Res Commun* 2004; 315(2): 255-263.

57. Pisani D F, M Djedaini, G E Beranger, C Elabd, M Scheideler, G Ailhaud, and E Z Amri. Differentiation of human adipose-derived stem cells into "brite" (brown-in-white) adipocytes. *Front Endocrinol (Lausanne)* 2011; 2: 87.

58. Puigserver P and B M Spiegelman. Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-γ coactivator 1α (PGC-1α): transcriptional coactivator and metabolic regulator. *Endocr Rev* 2003; 24(1): 78-90.

59. Spiegelman B M. Transcriptional control of mitochondrial energy metabolism through the PGC1 coactivators. *Novartis Found Symp* 2007; 287: 60-63; discussion 63-69.

60. Puigserver P, Z Wu, C W Park, R Graves, M Wright, and B M Spiegelman. A cold-inducible coactivator of nuclear receptors linked to adaptive thermogenesis. *Cell* 1998; 92(6): 829-839.

61. Lin J, H Wu, P T Tarr, C-Y Zhang, Z Wu, O Boss, L F Michael, P Puigserver, E Isotani, E N Olson, B B Lowell, R Bassel-Duby, and B M Spiegelman. Transcriptional co-activator PGC-1[alpha] drives the formation of slow-twitch muscle fibres. *Nature* 2002; 418(6899): 797-801.

62. Alvarez R, J de Andres, P Yubero, O Vinas, T Mampel, R Iglesias, M Giralt, and F Villarroya. A novel regulatory pathway of brown fat thermogenesis. Retinoic acid is a transcriptional activator of the mitochondrial uncoupling protein gene. *J Biol Chem* 1995; 270(10): 5666-5673.

63. Bonet M L, P Puigserver, F Serra, J Ribot, F Vázquez, C Picó, and A Palou. Retinoic acid modulates retinoid X receptor α and retinoic acid receptor α levels of cultured brown adipocytes. *FEBS Lett* 1997; 406(1–2): 196-200.

64. Kiefer F W, C Vernochet, P O'Brien, S Spoerl, J D Brown, S Nallamshetty, M Zeyda, T M Stulnig, D E Cohen, C R Kahn, and J Plutzky. Retinaldehyde dehydrogenase 1 regulates a thermogenic program in white adipose tissue. *Nat Med* 2012; 18(6): 918-925.

65. Qiang L, L Wang, N Kon, W Zhao, S Lee, Y Zhang, M Rosenbaum, Y Zhao, W Gu, S R Farmer, and D Accili. Brown remodeling of white adipose tissue by SirT1-dependent deacetylation of Ppargamma. *Cell* 2012; 150(3): 620-632.

66. Montminy M R and L M Bilezikjian. Binding of a nuclear protein to the cyclic-AMP response element of the somatostatin gene. *Nature* 1987; 328(6126): 175-178.

67. Karamanlidis G, A Karamitri, K Docherty, D G Hazlerigg, and M A Lomax. C/EBPbeta reprograms white 3T3-L1 preadipocytes to a brown adipocyte pattern of gene expression. *J Biol Chem* 2007; 282(34): 24660-24669.

68. Karamitri A, A M Shore, K Docherty, J R Speakman, and M A Lomax. Combinatorial transcription factor regulation of the cyclic AMP-response element on the Pgc-1alpha promoter in white 3T3-L1 and brown HIB-1B preadipocytes. *J Biol Chem* 2009; 284(31): 20738-20752.

69. Chiu C-H, W-D Lin, S-Y Huang, and Y-H Lee. Effect of a C/EBP gene replacement on mitochondrial biogenesis in fat cells. *Genes & Development* 2004; 18(16): 1970-1975.

70. Tanaka T, N Yoshida, T Kishimoto, and S Akira. Defective adipocyte differentiation in mice lacking the C/EBPbeta and/or C/EBPdelta gene. *EMBO J* 1997; 16(24): 7432-7443.

71. Leonardsson G, J H Steel, M Christian, V Pocock, S Milligan, J Bell, P W So, G Medina-Gomez, A Vidal-Puig, R White, and M G Parker. Nuclear receptor corepressor RIP140 regulates fat accumulation. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA* 2004; 101(22): 8437-8442.

72. Mootha V K, C Handschin, D Arlow, X Xie, J St Pierre, S Sihag, W Yang, D Altshuler, P Puigserver, N Patterson, P J Willy, I G Schulman, R A Heyman, E S Lander, and B M Spiegelman. Erralpha and Gabpa/b specify PGC-1alpha-dependent oxidative phosphorylation gene expression that is altered in diabetic muscle. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA* 2004; 101(17): 6570-6575.

73. Hallberg M, D L Morganstein, E Kiskinis, K Shah, A Kralli, S M Dilworth, R White, M G Parker, and M Christian. A functional interaction between RIP140 and PGC-1α regulates the expression of the lipid droplet protein CIDEA. *Mol Cell Biol* 2008; 28(22): 6785-6795.

74. Herzog B, M Hallberg, A Seth, A Woods, R White, and M G Parker. The nuclear receptor cofactor, receptor-interacting protein 140, is required for the regulation of hepatic lipid and glucose metabolism by liver X receptor. *Mol Endocrinol* 2007; 21(11): 2687-2697.

75. Treuter E, T Albrektsen, L Johansson, J Leers, and J A Gustafsson. A regulatory role for RIP140 in nuclear receptor activation. *Mol Endocrinol* 1998; 12(6): 864-881.

76. Tan C, H Chong, E Tan, and N Tan. Getting ‘Smad’ about obesity and diabetes. *Nutrition & Diabetes* 2012; 2(3): e29.

77. Feng X H and R Derynck. Specificity and versatility in tgf-beta signaling through Smads. *Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol* 2005; 21: 659-693.

78. Yadav H, C Quijano, A K Kamaraju, O Gavrilova, R Malek, W Chen, P Zerfas, D Zhigang, E C Wright, C Stuelten, P Sun, S Lonning, M Skarulis, A E Sumner, T Finkel, and S G Rane. Protection from obesity and diabetes by blockade of TGF-beta/Smad3 signaling. *Cell Metab* 2011; 14(1): 67-79.

79. Alessi M C, D Bastelica, P Morange, B Berthet, I Leduc, M Verdier, O Geel, and I Juhan-Vague. Plasminogen activator inhibitor 1, transforming growth factor-beta1, and BMI are closely associated in human adipose tissue during morbid obesity. *Diabetes* 2000; 49(8): 1374-1380.

80. Yadav H and S G Rane. TGF-beta/Smad3 signaling regulates brown adipocyte induction in white adipose tissue. *Front Endocrinol (Lausanne)* 2012; 3: 35.

81. Tseng Y-H, E Kokkotou, T J Schulz, T L Huang, J N Winnay, C M Taniguchi, T T Tran, R Suzuki, D O Espinoza, Y Yamamoto, M J Ahrens, A T Dudley, A W Norris, R N Kulkarni, and C R Kahn. New

role of bone morphogenetic protein 7 in brown adipogenesis and energy expenditure. Nature 2008; 454(7207): 1000-1004.

82. Cao W, K W Daniel, J Robidoux, P Puigserver, A V Medvedev, X Bai, L M Floering, B M Spiegelman, and S Collins. p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase is the central regulator of cyclic AMP-dependent transcription of the brown fat uncoupling protein 1 gene. Mol Cell Biol 2004; 24(7): 3057-3067.

83. Tang Q Q, T C Otto, and M D Lane. Commitment of C3H10T1/2 pluripotent stem cells to the adipocyte lineage. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2004; 101(26): 9607-9611.

84. Qian S W, Y Tang, X Li, Y Liu, Y Y Zhang, H Y Huang, R D Xue, H Y Yu, L Guo, H D Gao, Y Liu, X Sun, Y M Li, W P Jia, and Q Q Tang. BMP4-mediated brown fat-like changes in white adipose tissue alter glucose and energy homeostasis. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2013; 110(9): E798-807.

85. Bartel D P. MicroRNAs: genomics, biogenesis, mechanism, and function. Cell 2004; 116(2): 281-297.

86. Gesta S, Y H Tseng, and C R Kahn. Developmental origin of fat: tracking obesity to its source. Cell 2007; 131(2): 242-256.

87. Yin H, A Pasut, V D Soleimani, C F Bentzinger, G Antoun, S Thorn, P Seale, P Fernando, W van Ijcken, F Grosfeld, R A Dekemp, R Boushel, M E Harper, and M A Rudnicki. MicroRNA-133 controls brown adipose determination in skeletal muscle satellite cells by targeting Prdm16. Cell Metab 2013; 17(2): 210-224.

88. Liu W, P Bi, T Shan, X Yang, H Yin, Y X Wang, N Liu, M A Rudnicki, and S Kuang. miR-133a regulates adipocyte browning in vivo. PLoS Genet 2013; 9(7): e1003626.

89. Chen Y, F Siegel, S Kipschull, B Haas, H Frohlich, G Meister, and A Pfeifer. miR-155 regulates differentiation of brown and beige adipocytes via a bistable circuit. Nat Commun 2013; 4: 1769.

90. Gardiner J V, W M Kong, H Ward, K G Murphy, W S Dhillo, and S R Bloom. AAV mediated expression of anti-sense neuropeptide Y cRNA in the arcuate nucleus of rats results in decreased weight gain and food intake. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2005; 327(4): 1088-1093.

91. Williams G, C Bing, X J Cai, J A Harold, P J King, and X H Liu. The hypothalamus and the control of energy homeostasis: different circuits, different purposes. Physiol Behav 2001; 74(4-5): 683-701.

92. Chao P T, L Yang, S Aja, T H Moran, and S Bi. Knockdown of NPY expression in the dorsomedial hypothalamus promotes development of brown adipocytes and prevents diet-induced obesity. Cell Metab 2011; 13(5): 573-583.

93. Leibrock J, F Lottspeich, A Hohn, M Hofer, B Hengerer, P Masiakowski, H Thoenen, and Y A Barde. Molecular cloning and expression of brain-derived neurotrophic factor. Nature 1989; 341(6238): 149-152.

94. Klein R, V Nanduri, S A Jing, F Lamballe, P Tapley, S Bryant, C Cordon-Cardo, K R Jones, L F Reichardt, and M Barbacid. The trkB tyrosine protein kinase is a receptor for brain-derived neurotrophic factor and neurotrophin-3. Cell 1991; 66(2): 395-403.

95. Noble E E, C J Billington, C M Kotz, and C Wang. The lighter side of BDNF. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol 2011; 300(5): R1053-1069.

96. Lapchak P A and F Hefti. BDNF and NGF treatment in lesioned rats: effects on cholinergic function and weight gain. Neuroreport 1992; 3(5): 405-408.

97. Cao L, E Y Choi, X Liu, A Martin, C Wang, X Xu, and M J During. White to brown fat phenotypic switch induced by genetic and environmental activation of a hypothalamic-adipocyte axis. Cell Metab 2011; 14(3): 324-338.

98. Chen G, K Koyama, X Yuan, Y Lee, Y T Zhou, R O'Doherty, C B Newgard, and R H Unger. Disappearance of body fat in normal rats induced by adenovirus-mediated leptin gene therapy. Proc

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

Natl Acad Sci U S A 1996; 93(25): 14795-14799.

99. Orci L, W S Cook, M Ravazzola, M Y Wang, B H Park, R Montesano, and R H Unger. Rapid transformation of white adipocytes into fat-oxidizing machines. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2004; 101(7): 2058-2063.

100. Myers M G. Leptin receptor signaling and the regulation of mammalian physiology. Recent Prog Horm Res 2004; 59(1): 287-304.

101. Niswender K D, G J Morton, W H Stearns, C J Rhodes, M G Myers, Jr., and M W Schwartz. Intracellular signalling. Key enzyme in leptin-induced anorexia. Nature 2001; 413(6858): 794-795.

102. Plum L, E Rother, H Munzberg, F T Wunderlich, D A Morgan, B Hampel, M Shanabrough, R Janoschek, A C Konner, J Alber, A Suzuki, W Krone, T L Horvath, K Rahmouni, and J C Brüning. Enhanced leptin-stimulated Pi3k activation in the CNS promotes white adipose tissue transdifferentiation. Cell Metab 2007; 6(6): 431-445.

103. Nautiyal K M, M Dailey, N Brito, M N Brito, R B Harris, T J Bartness, and H J Grill. Energetic responses to cold temperatures in rats lacking forebrain-caudal brain stem connections. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol 2008; 295(3): R789-798.

104. Mulligan J D, A A Gonzalez, A M Stewart, H V Carey, and K W Saue. Upregulation of AMPK during cold exposure occurs via distinct mechanisms in brown and white adipose tissue of the mouse. J Physiol 2007; 580(Pt. 2): 677-684.

105. Grujic D, V S Susulic, M E Harper, J Himms-Hagen, B A Cunningham, B E Corkey, and B B Lowell. Beta3-adrenergic receptors on white and brown adipocytes mediate beta3-selective agonist-induced effects on energy expenditure, insulin secretion, and food intake. A study using transgenic and gene knockout mice. J Biol Chem 1997; 272(28): 17686-17693.

106. Himms-Hagen J, A Melnyk, M C Zingaretti, E Ceresi, G Barbatelli, and S Cinti. Multilocular fat cells in WAT of CL-316243-treated rats derive directly from white adipocytes. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 2000; 279(3): C670-681.

107. Mottillo E P and J G Granneman. Intracellular fatty acids suppress β-adrenergic induction of PKA-targeted gene expression in white adipocytes. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab 2011; 301(1): E122-E131.

108. Gerhart-Hines Z, J E Dominy, Jr., S M Blattler, M P Jedrychowski, A S Banks, J H Lim, H Chim, S P Gygi, and P Puigserver. The cAMP/PKA pathway rapidly activates SIRT1 to promote fatty acid oxidation independently of changes in NAD(+). Mol Cell 2011; 44(6): 851-863.

109. Huang W, R R Bansode, N C Bal, M Mehta, and K D Mehta. Protein kinase Cβ deficiency attenuates obesity syndrome of ob/ob mice by promoting white adipose tissue remodeling. J Lipid Res 2012; 53(3): 368-378.

110. Mottillo E P, X J Shen, and J G Granneman. beta3-adrenergic receptor induction of adipocyte inflammation requires lipolytic activation of stress kinases p38 and JNK. Biochim Biophys Acta 2010; 1801(9): 1048-1055.

111. Moule S K and R M Denton. The activation of p38 MAPK by the beta-adrenergic agonist isoproterenol in rat epididymal fat cells. FEBS Lett 1998; 439(3): 287-290.

112. Kersten S, J Seydoux, J M Peters, F J Gonzalez, B Desvergne, and W Wahli. Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor alpha mediates the adaptive response to fasting. J Clin Invest 1999; 103(11): 1489-1498.

113. Steineger H H, H N Sorensen, J D Tugwood, S Skrede, O Spydevold, and K M Gautvik. Dexamethasone and insulin demonstrate marked and opposite regulation of the steady-state mRNA

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

level of the peroxisomal proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR) in hepatic cells. Hormonal modulation of fatty-acid-induced transcription. *Eur J Biochem* 1994; **225(3)**: 967-974.

114. Mottillo E P, X J Shen, and J G Granneman. Role of hormone-sensitive lipase in β-adrenergic remodeling of white adipose tissue. *Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab* 2007; **293(5)**: E1188-E1197.

115. Sugihara H, N Yonemitsu, S Miyabara, and S Toda. Proliferation of unilocular fat cells in the primary culture. *J Lipid Res* 1987; **28(9)**: 1038-1045.

116. Sugihara H, N Yonemitsu, S Toda, S Miyabara, S Funatsumaru, and T Matsumoto. Unilocular fat cells in three-dimensional collagen gel matrix culture. *J Lipid Res* 1988; **29(5)**: 691-697.

117. Richelsen B. Factors regulating the production of prostaglandin E2 and prostacyclin (prostaglandin I2) in rat and human adipocytes. *Biochem J* 1987; **247(2)**: 389-394.

118. Madsen L, L M Pedersen, H H Lillefosse, E Fjære, I Bronstad, Q Hao, R K Petersen, P Hallenborg, T Ma, R De Matteis, P Araujo, J Mercader, M L Bonet, J B Hansen, B Cannon, J Nedergaard, J Wang, S Cinti, P Voshol, S O Døskeland, and K Kristiansen. UCP1 Induction during recruitment of brown adipocytes in white adipose tissue is dependent on cyclooxygenase activity. *PLoS One* 2010; **5(6)**: e11391.

119. Vegiopoulos A, K Muller-Decker, D Strzoda, I Schmitt, E Chichelnitskiy, A Ostertag, M Berriel Diaz, J Rozman, M Hrabe de Angelis, R M Nusing, C W Meyer, W Wahli, M Klingenspor, and S Herzig. Cyclooxygenase-2 controls energy homeostasis in mice by de novo recruitment of brown adipocytes. *Science* 2010; **328(5982)**: 1158-1161.

120. Neufang G, G Furstenberger, M Heidt, F Marks, and K Muller-Decker. Abnormal differentiation of epidermis in transgenic mice constitutively expressing cyclooxygenase-2 in skin. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA* 2001; **98(13)**: 7629-7634.

121. Penning T D, J J Talley, S R Bertenshaw, J S Carter, P W Collins, S Docter, M J Graneto, L F Lee, J W Malecha, J M Miyashiro, R S Rogers, D J Rogier, S S Yu, AndersonGd, E G Burton, J N Cogburn, S A Gregory, C M Koboldt, W E Perkins, K Seibert, A W Veenhuizen, Y Y Zhang, and P C Isakson. Synthesis and biological evaluation of the 1,5-diarylpyrazole class of cyclooxygenase-2 inhibitors: identification of 4-[5-(4-methylphenyl)-3-(trifluoromethyl)-1H-pyrazol-1-yl]benzenesulfonamide (SC-58635, celecoxib). *J Med Chem* 1997; **40(9)**: 1347-1365.

122. Akunda J K, K S Chun, A R Sessoms, H C Lao, S M Fischer, and R Langenbach. Cyclooxygenase-2 deficiency increases epidermal apoptosis and impairs recovery following acute UVB exposure. *Mol Carcinog* 2007; **46(5)**: 354-362.

123. Seale P, S Kajimura, W Yang, S Chin, L M Rohas, M Uldry, G Tavernier, D Langin, and B M Spiegelman. Transcriptional control of brown fat determination by PRDM16. *Cell Metab* 2007; **6(1)**: 38-54.

124. Arch J R. beta(3)-Adrenoceptor agonists: potential, pitfalls and progress. *Eur J Pharmacol* 2002; **440(2-3)**: 99-107.

125. Leone T C, J J Lehman, B N Finck, P J Schaeffer, A R Wende, S Boudina, M Courtois, D F Wozniak, N Sambandam, C Bernal-Mizrachi, Z Chen, J O Holloszy, D M Medeiros, R E Schmidt, J E Saffitz, E D Abel, C F Semenkovich, and D P Kelly. PGC-1alpha deficiency causes multi-system energy metabolic derangements: muscle dysfunction, abnormal weight control and hepatic steatosis. *PLoS Biol* 2005; **3(4)**: e101.

126. Lin J, P H Wu, P T Tarr, K S Lindenberg, J St-Pierre, C Y Zhang, V K Mootha, S Jager, C R Vianna, R M Reznick, L Cui, M Manieri, M X Donovan, Z Wu, M P Cooper, M C Fan, L M Rohas, A M Zavacki, S Cinti, G I Shulman, B B Lowell, D Krainc, and B M Spiegelman. Defects in adaptive energy

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

metabolism with CNS-linked hyperactivity in PGC-1alpha null mice. Cell 2004; 119(1): 121-135.

127. Devane W A, L Hanus, A Breuer, R G Pertwee, L A Stevenson, G Griffin, D Gibson, A Mandelbaum, A Etinger, and R Mechoulam. Isolation and structure of a brain constituent that binds to the cannabinoid receptor. Science (New York, N.Y.) 1992; 258(5090): 1946-1949.

128. Sugiura T, S Kondo, A Sukagawa, S Nakane, A Shinoda, K Itoh, A Yamashita, and K Waku. 2-Arachidonoylglycerol: a possible endogenous cannabinoid receptor ligand in brain. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 1995; 215(1): 89-97.

129. Pertwee R G, A C Howlett, M E Abood, S P Alexander, V Di Marzo, M R Elphick, P J Greasley, H S Hansen, G Kunos, K Mackie, R Mechoulam, and R A Ross. International Union of Basic and Clinical Pharmacology. LXXIX. Cannabinoid receptors and their ligands: beyond CB(1) and CB(2). Pharmacol Rev 2010; 62(4): 588-631.

130. Stella N, P Schweitzer, and D Piomelli. A second endogenous cannabinoid that modulates long-term potentiation. Nature 1997; 388(6644): 773-778.

131. Matias I, M P Gonthier, P Orlando, V Martiadis, L De Petrocellis, C Cervino, S Petrosino, L Hoareau, F Festy, R Pasquali, R Roche, M Maj, U Pagotto, P Monteleone, and V Di Marzo. Regulation, function, and dysregulation of endocannabinoids in models of adipose and beta-pancreatic cells and in obesity and hyperglycemia. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2006; 91(8): 3171-3180.

132. Quarta C, L Bellocchio, G Mancini, R Mazza, C Cervino, L J Brailke, C Fekete, R Latorre, C Nanni, M Bucci, L E Clemens, G Heldmaier, M Watanabe, T Leste-Lassere, M Maitre, L Tedesco, F Fanelli, S Reuss, S Klaus, R K Srivastava, K Monory, A Valerio, A Grandis, R De Giorgio, R Pasquali, E Nisoli, D Cota, B Lutz, G Marsicano, and U Pagotto. CB(1) signaling in forebrain and sympathetic neurons is a key determinant of endocannabinoid actions on energy balance. Cell Metab 2010; 11(4): 273-285.

133. Osei-Hyiaman D, M DePetrillo, P Pacher, J Liu, S Radaeva, S Batkai, J Harvey-White, K Mackie, L Offertaler, L Wang, and G Kunos. Endocannabinoid activation at hepatic CB1 receptors stimulates fatty acid synthesis and contributes to diet-induced obesity. J Clin Invest 2005; 115(5): 1298-1305.

134. Matias I, S Petrosino, A Racioppi, R Capasso, A A Izzo, and V Di Marzo. Dysregulation of peripheral endocannabinoid levels in hyperglycemia and obesity: Effect of high fat diets. Mol Cell Endocrinol 2008; 286(1–2, Supplement 1): S66-S78.

135. Di Marzo V, S K Goparaju, L Wang, J Liu, S Batkai, Z Jarai, F Fezza, G I Miura, R D Palmiter, T Sugiura, and G Kunos. Leptin-regulated endocannabinoids are involved in maintaining food intake. Nature 2001; 410(6830): 822-825.

136. Perwitz N, J Wenzel, I Wagner, J Buning, M Drenckhan, K Zarse, M Ristow, W Lilienthal, H Lehnert, and J Klein. Cannabinoid type 1 receptor blockade induces transdifferentiation towards a brown fat phenotype in white adipocytes. Diabetes Obes Metab 2010; 12(2): 158-166.

137. Towler M C and D G Hardie. AMP-activated protein kinase in metabolic control and insulin signaling. Circ Res 2007; 100(3): 328-341.

138. Watanabe H, J Vriens, J Prenen, G Droogmans, T Voets, and B Nilius. Anandamide and arachidonic acid use epoxyeicosatrienoic acids to activate TRPV4 channels. Nature 2003; 424(6947): 434-438.

139. McPherron A C, A M Lawler, and S J Lee. Regulation of skeletal muscle mass in mice by a new TGF-beta superfamily member. Nature 1997; 387(6628): 83-90.

140. Li Z B, H D Kollias, and K R Wagner. Myostatin directly regulates skeletal muscle fibrosis. J Biol Chem 2008; 283(28): 19371-19378.

141. Feldman B J, R S Streep, R V Farese, Jr., and K R Yamamoto. Myostatin modulates adipogenesis to

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

generate adipocytes with favorable metabolic effects. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2006; 103(42): 15675-15680.

142. Tsurutani Y, M Fujimoto, and K Yokote. Myostatin (MSTN) inhibits adipogenesis and high-fat induced obesity via smad3: a possibility of crosstalk between muscle and adipose tissue. in Diabetes. 2009. AMER DIABETES ASSOC 1701 N BEAUREGARD ST, ALEXANDRIA, VA 22311-1717 USA.

143. Fournier B, B Murray, S Gutzwiller, S Marcaletti, D Marcellin, S Bergling, S Brachat, E Persohn, E Pierrel, F Bombard, S Hatakeyama, A-U Trendelenburg, F Morvan, B Richardson, D J Glass, E Lach-Trifilieff, and J N Feige. Blockade of the activin receptor IIB activates functional brown adipogenesis and thermogenesis by inducing mitochondrial oxidative metabolism. Mol Cell Biol 2012; 32(14): 2871-2879.

144. McPherron A C and S-J Lee. Suppression of body fat accumulation in myostatin-deficient mice. J Clin Invest 2002; 109(5): 595-601.

145. Bernardo B L, T S Wachtman, P G Cosgrove, M Kuhn, A C Opsahl, K M Judkins, T B Freeman, J R Hadcock, and N K LeBrasseur. Postnatal PPARδ activation and myostatin inhibition exert distinct yet complimentary effects on the metabolic profile of obese insulin-resistant mice. PLoS One 2010; 5(6): e11307.

146. Choi S J, Z Yablonka-Reuveni, K J Kaiyala, K Ogimoto, M W Schwartz, and B E Wisse. Increased energy expenditure and leptin sensitivity account for low fat mass in myostatin-deficient mice. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab 2011; 300(6): E1031-1037.

147. Zhang C, C McFarlane, S Lokireddy, S Masuda, X Ge, P D Gluckman, M Sharma, and R Kambadur. Inhibition of myostatin protects against diet-induced obesity by enhancing fatty acid oxidation and promoting a brown adipose phenotype in mice. Diabetologia 2012; 55(1): 183-193.

148. Guo T, W Jou, T Chanturiya, J Portas, O Gavrilova, and A C McPherron. Myostatin inhibition in muscle, but not adipose tissue, decreases fat mass and improves insulin sensitivity. PLoS One 2009; 4(3): e4937.

149. Bostrom P, J Wu, M P Jedrychowski, A Korde, L Ye, J C Lo, K A Rasbach, E A Bostrom, J H Choi, J Z Long, S Kajimura, M C Zingaretti, B F Vind, H Tu, S Cinti, K Hojlund, S P Gygi, and B M Spiegelman. A PGC1-alpha-dependent myokine that drives brown-fat-like development of white fat and thermogenesis. Nature 2012; 481(7382): 463-468.

150. Shan T, X Liang, P Bi, and S Kuang. Myostatin knockout drives browning of white adipose tissue through activating the AMPK-PGC1α-Fndc5 pathway in muscle. FASEB J 2013; 27(5): 1981-1989.

151. Inagaki T, P Dutchak, G Zhao, X Ding, L Gautron, V Parameswara, Y Li, R Goetz, M Mohammadi, V Esser, J K Elmquist, R D Gerard, S C Burgess, R E Hammer, D J Mangelsdorf, and S A Kliewer. Endocrine regulation of the fasting response by PPARalpha-mediated induction of fibroblast growth factor 21. Cell Metab 2007; 5(6): 415-425.

152. Johnson C L, J Y Weston, S A Chadi, E N Fazio, M W Huff, A Kharitonenkov, A Koester, and C L Pin. Fibroblast growth factor 21 reduces the severity of cerulein-induced pancreatitis in mice. Gastroenterology 2009; 137(5): 1795-1804.

153. Kharitonenkov A, T L Shiyanova, A Koester, A M Ford, R Micanovic, E J Galbreath, G E Sandusky, L J Hammond, J S Moyers, and R A Owens. FGF-21 as a novel metabolic regulator. J Clin Invest 2005; 115(6): 1627-1635.

154. Adams A C, C Yang, T Coskun, C C Cheng, R E Gimeno, Y Luo, and A Kharitonenkov. The breadth of FGF21's metabolic actions are governed by FGFR1 in adipose tissue. Mol Metab 2013; 2(1): 31-37.

155. Coskun T, H A Bina, M A Schneider, J D Dunbar, C C Hu, Y Chen, D E Moller, and A Kharitonenkov.

156. Xu J, D J Lloyd, C Hale, S Stanislaus, M Chen, G Sivits, S Vonderfecht, R Hecht, Y S Li, and R A Lindberg. Fibroblast growth factor 21 reverses hepatic steatosis, increases energy expenditure, and improves insulin sensitivity in diet-induced obese mice. *Diabetes* 2009; **58(1)**: 250-259.

157. Fisher F M, S Kleiner, N Douris, E C Fox, R J Mepani, F Verdeguer, J Wu, A Kharitonenkov, J S Flier, E Maratos-Flier, and B M Spiegelman. FGF21 regulates PGC-1alpha and browning of white adipose tissues in adaptive thermogenesis. *Genes Dev* 2012; **26(3)**: 271-281.

158. Chau M D, J Gao, Q Yang, Z Wu, and J Gromada. Fibroblast growth factor 21 regulates energy metabolism by activating the AMPK-SIRT1-PGC-1alpha pathway. *Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A* 2010; **107(28)**: 12553-12558.

159. Sapkota G P, A Kieloch, J M Lizcano, S Lain, J S Arthur, M R Williams, N Morrice, M Deak, and D R Alessi. Phosphorylation of the protein kinase mutated in Peutz-Jeghers cancer syndrome, LKB1/STK11, at Ser431 by p90(RSK) and cAMP-dependent protein kinase, but not its farnesylation at Cys(433), is essential for LKB1 to suppress cell vrowth. *J Biol Chem* 2001; **276(22)**: 19469-19482.

160. Shaw R J, M Kosmatka, N Bardeesy, R L Hurley, L A Witters, R A DePinho, and L C Cantley. The tumor suppressor LKB1 kinase directly activates AMP-activated kinase and regulates apoptosis in response to energy stress. *Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A* 2004; **101(10)**: 3329-3335.

161. Calkins M J, D A Johnson, J A Townsend, M R Vargas, J A Dowell, T P Williamson, A D Kraft, J M Lee, J Li, and J A Johnson. The Nrf2/ARE pathway as a potential therapeutic target in neurodegenerative disease. *Antioxid Redox Signal* 2009; **11(3)**: 497-508.

162. Chartoumpekis D V, P G Ziros, A I Psyrogiannis, A G Papavassiliou, V E Kyriazopoulou, G P Sykiotis, and I G Habeos. Nrf2 represses FGF21 during long-term high-fat diet-induced obesity in mice. *Diabetes* 2011; **60(10)**: 2465-2473.

163. Zimmermann R, J G Strauss, G Haemmerle, G Schoiswohl, R Birner-Gruenberger, M Riederer, A Lass, G Neuberger, F Eisenhaber, A Hermetter, and R Zechner. Fat mobilization in adipose tissue is promoted by adipose triglyceride lipase. *Science* 2004; **306(5700)**: 1383-1386.

164. Londos C, D L Brasaemle, C J Schultz, D C Adler-Wailes, D M Levin, A R Kimmel, and C M Rondinone. On the control of lipolysis in adipocytes. *Ann N Y Acad Sci* 1999; **892**: 155-168.

165. Brasaemle D L. Thematic review series: adipocyte biology. The perilipin family of structural lipid droplet proteins: stabilization of lipid droplets and control of lipolysis. *J Lipid Res* 2007; **48(12)**: 2547-2559.

166. Holm C. Molecular mechanisms regulating hormone-sensitive lipase and lipolysis. *Biochem Soc Trans* 2003; **31(Pt 6)**: 1120-1124.

167. Granneman J G, H P Moore, R L Granneman, A S Greenberg, M S Obin, and Z Zhu. Analysis of lipolytic protein trafficking and interactions in adipocytes. *J Biol Chem* 2007; **282(8)**: 5726-5735.

168. Clifford G M, C Londos, F B Kraemer, R G Vernon, and S J Yeaman. Translocation of hormone-sensitive lipase and perilipin upon lipolytic stimulation of rat adipocytes. *J Biol Chem* 2000; **275(7)**: 5011-5015.

169. Miyoshi H, S C Souza, H H Zhang, K J Strissel, M A Christoffolete, J Kovsan, A Rudich, F B Kraemer, A C Bianco, M S Obin, and A S Greenberg. Perilipin promotes hormone-sensitive lipase-mediated adipocyte lipolysis via phosphorylation-dependent and -independent mechanisms. *J Biol Chem* 2006; **281(23)**: 15837-15844.

170. Sztalryd C, G Xu, H Dorward, J T Tansey, J A Contreras, A R Kimmel, and C Londos. Perilipin A is essential for the translocation of hormone-sensitive lipase during lipolytic activation. *J Cell Biol* 2003;

171. Granneman J G, H P H Moore, R Krishnamoorthy, and M Rathod. Perilipin controls lipolysis by regulating the interactions of AB-hydrolase containing 5 (Abhd5) and adipose triglyceride lipase (Atgl). J Biol Chem 2009; 284(50): 34538.
172. Nishino N, Y Tamori, S Tateya, T Kawaguchi, T Shibakusa, W Mizunoya, K Inoue, R Kitazawa, S Kitazawa, and Y Matsuki. FSP27 contributes to efficient energy storage in murine white adipocytes by promoting the formation of unilocular lipid droplets. J Clin Invest 2008; 118(8): 2808.
173. Sawada T, H Miyoshi, K Shimada, A Suzuki, Y Okamatsu-Ogura, J W Perfield, T Kondo, S Nagai, C Shimizu, and N Yoshioka. Perilipin overexpression in white adipose tissue induces a brown fat-like phenotype. PLoS One 2010; 5(11): e14006.
174. Miyoshi H, S C Souza, M Endo, T Sawada, J W Perfield II, C Shimizu, Z Stancheva, S Nagai, K J Strissel, and N Yoshioka. Perilipin overexpression in mice protects against diet-induced obesity. J Lipid Res 2010; 51(5): 975-982.
175. Lage R, C Diéguez, A Vidal-Puig, and M López. AMPK: a metabolic gauge regulating whole-body energy homeostasis. Trends Mol Med 2008; 14(12): 539-549.
176. Gaidhu M P, S Fediuc, N M Anthony, M So, M Mirpourian, R L Perry, and R B Ceddia. Prolonged AICAR-induced AMP-kinase activation promotes energy dissipation in white adipocytes: novel mechanisms integrating HSL and ATGL. J Lipid Res 2009; 50(4): 704-715.
177. Vila-Bedmar R, M Lorenzo, and S Fernandez-Veledo. Adenosine 5'-monophosphate-activated protein kinase-mammalian target of rapamycin cross talk regulates brown adipocyte differentiation. Endocrinology 2010; 151(3): 980-992.
178. Ahmadian M, R E Duncan, K A Varady, D Frasson, M K Hellerstein, A L Birkenfeld, V T Samuel, G I Shulman, Y Wang, C Kang, and H S Sul. Adipose overexpression of desnutrin promotes fatty acid use and attenuates diet-induced obesity. Diabetes 2009; 58(4): 855-866.
179. Ahmadian M, Marcia J Abbott, T Tang, Carolyn S S Hudak, Y Kim, M Bruss, Marc K Hellerstein, H-Y Lee, Varman T Samuel, Gerald I Shulman, Y Wang, Robin E Duncan, C Kang, and Hei S Sul. Desnutrin/ATGL is regulated by AMPK and is required for a brown adipose phenotype. Cell Metab 2011; 13(6): 739-748.
180. Harada K, W J Shen, S Patel, V Natu, J Wang, J Osuga, S Ishibashi, and F B Kraemer. Resistance to high-fat diet-induced obesity and altered expression of adipose-specific genes in HSL-deficient mice. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab 2003; 285(6): E1182-E1195.
181. Sekiya M, J Osuga, H Okazaki, N Yahagi, K Harada, W J Shen, Y Tamura, S Tomita, Y Iizuka, and K Ohashi. Absence of hormone-sensitive lipase inhibits obesity and adipogenesis in Lepob/ob mice. J Biol Chem 2004; 279(15): 15084-15090.
182. Strom K, O Hansson, S Lucas, P Nevsten, C Fernandez, C Klint, S Moverare-Skrtic, F Sundler, C Ohlsson, and C Holm. Attainment of brown adipocyte features in white adipocytes of hormone-sensitive lipase null mice. PLoS One 2008; 3(3): e1793.
183. Ström K, T E Gundersen, O Hansson, S Lucas, C Fernandez, R Blomhoff, and C Holm. Hormone-sensitive lipase (HSL) is also a retinyl ester hydrolase: evidence from mice lacking HSL. FASEB J 2009; 23(7): 2307-2316.
184. Powelka A M, A Seth, J V Virbasius, E Kiskinis, S M Nicoloro, A Guilherme, X Tang, J Straubhaar, A D Cherniack, M G Parker, and M P Czech. Suppression of oxidative metabolism and mitochondrial biogenesis by the transcriptional corepressor RIP140 in mouse adipocytes. J Clin Invest 2006; 116(1): 125-136.

185. Liedtke W, Y Choe, M A Martí-Renom, A M Bell, C S Denis, AndrejŠali, A J Hudspeth, J M Friedman, and S Heller. Vanilloid receptor–related osmotically activated channel (VR-OAC), a candidate vertebrate osmoreceptor. *Cell* 2000; 103(3): 525-535.

186. Ye L, S Kleiner, J Wu, R Sah, R K Gupta, A S Banks, P Cohen, M J Khandekar, P Bostrom, R J Mepani, D Laznik, T M Kamenecka, X Song, W Liedtke, V K Mootha, P Puigserver, P R Griffin, D E Clapham, and B M Spiegelman. TRPV4 is a regulator of adipose oxidative metabolism, inflammation, and energy homeostasis. *Cell* 2012; 151(1): 96-110.

187. Chinkers M, D L Garbers, M-S Chang, D G Lowe, H Chin, D V Goeddel, and S Schulz. A membrane form of guanylate cyclase is an atrial natriuretic peptide receptor. *Nature* 1989; 338(6210): 78-83.

188. Maack T, M Suzuki, F Almeida, D Nussenzveig, R Scarborough, G McEnroe, and J Lewicki. Physiological role of silent receptors of atrial natriuretic factor. *Science* 1987; 238(4827): 675-678.

189. Sengenes C, M Berlan, I De Glisezinski, M Lafontan, and J Galitzky. Natriuretic peptides: a new lipolytic pathway in human adipocytes. *FASEB J* 2000; 14(10): 1345-1351.

190. Bordicchia M, D Liu, E Z Amri, G Ailhaud, P Dessi-Fulgheri, C Zhang, N Takahashi, R Sarzani, and S Collins. Cardiac natriuretic peptides act via p38 MAPK to induce the brown fat thermogenic program in mouse and human adipocytes. *J Clin Invest* 2012; 122(3): 1022-1036.

191. Mitschke M M, L S Hoffmann, T Gnad, D Scholz, K Kruithoff, P Mayer, B Haas, A Sassmann, A Pfeifer, and A Kilic. Increased cGMP promotes healthy expansion and browning of white adipose tissue. *FASEB J* 2013; 27(4): 1621-1630.

192. Noveanu M, M Potocki, and C Mueller. Natriuretic peptides and their evolving clinical applications. *Future Cardiol* 2008; 4(6): 593-598.

193. Ursino M G, V Vasina, E Raschi, F Crema, and F De Ponti. The [beta] 3-adrenoceptor as a therapeutic target: Current perspectives. *Pharmacol Res* 2009; 59(4): 221-234.

194. Krief S, F Lonngqvist, S Raimbault, B Baude, A Van Spronsen, P Arner, A D Strosberg, D Ricquier, and L J Emorine. Tissue distribution of beta 3-adrenergic receptor mRNA in man. *J Clin Invest* 1993; 91(1): 344-349.

Figure 1 Developmental origin of white adipocytes, brown-like adipocytes and brown adipocytes Mesenchymal stem cell derived from bone marrow and embryonic cells expressing Pax7 can differentiate into adipocyte precursors and myocyte precursors, among them precursors expressing Myf5 can transform into brown precursors and myocyte lineage even white precursors. Interestingly, there is transdifferentiation between brown precursors and myocyte lineage. Ablation of PRDM16 drives brown precursors to differentiate to myocytes while forced expression of PRDM16 triggers myoblasts to develop toward brown adipocytes. In addition, myocyte expressed CD34 can transdifferentiate into brown adipocyte. As for brown-like adipocyte, it has been shown as an intermediate type between white and brown adipocytes, may come from white precursor or mature white adipocyte. PDGFRα+CD34+Sca-1+ and Sca-1+CD45-Mac- white precursors can differentiate toward brown-like adipocyte when exposed to various stimulus.

NP  
NPR-A  

cold  

GCGC  
cGMP GMP  
PKG  

β3-AR  
AC  
cAMP ATP  
PKA  

COX-2  

PGI₂  
Ptgir  
cAMP P  
ATP  
PKA  

Smad3  

PGE₂  
EP4  
G  

Myostatin  

BMP7  

HOXC8  
miR-196a  

FGF21  
AMPK  
NADH NAD⁺  

p38  

ATF2  
CHOP10  
ATF2 ATF2  

pRB  

PPARY  

SIRT1  

UCP1 promoter  

PGC-1α promoter  

PGC-1α  
HDAC3  

C/EBPβ  
CREB  

PGC-1α  
RXRα  
PPARY  

PRDM16 PPARY  

RARα  
PPARY  

PRDM16 PPARY  

Ac  

PPARY NCoR  

Nucleus  

UCP1 promoter  

Cytoplasm  

UCP1  

Lipid droplet  

Mitochondrial  

Rosiglitazone  

Direct positive regulation/ Activation  
Indirect negative regulation/ Inhibition  

Indirect positive regulation/ Activation  

Direct negative regulation/ Inhibition  

Figure 2 Candidate transcriptional machinery for recruitment of brown-like adipocyte in WAT.

To express UCP1 is a pivotal characteristic of brown-like adipocytes. Many transcripts have been demonstrated to be involved in mediating the UCP1 expression. Moreover, these transcriptional factors do not work alone and generally function in a combinatorial manner. The recruitment of PGC-1α/PPARγ complex, RARs or RXR/PGC-1α complex, PPARγ/PRDM16 complex, C/EBP family, as well as BMPs at the promoter of PGC-1α1 or UCP1 have been shown to be capable to induce the expression of UCP1.

Mouse brain

Negative regulation
Positive regulation

SNS

White adipocyte
Brown-like adipocyte

Figure 3 Interaction of neural system with white adipose tissue.

Brain-derived key factors NPY and BDNF, and fat-derived hormone-leptin, are involved in the emergence of brown-like adipocyte through activation of sympathetic nervous system. Among them, leptin can bind to the leptin receptor, which activates PI3K pathway via JAK2-mediated tyrosine phosphorylation of IRS proteins. PI3K activation in leptin-responsive neurons in CNS enhances sympathetic nervous activity of WAT, leading to browning of WAT.

Positive regulation/ Activation  Negative regulation/ Inhibition

Figure 4 Role of lipolysis-related proteins in the UCP1 expression and mitochondrial biogenesis.

The hydrolysis of TAG into DAG is catalyzed by ATGL. The binding of Abhd5 and ATGL is necessary for the activation of ATGL. In basic condition, Plin sequesters Abhd5, inhibiting lipolysis. Upon PKA is activated, which can phosphorylate Plin, thereby Abhd5 is released from Plin and available for ATGL. Activated PKA can also phosphorylate HSL and trigger it translocate to the surface of lipid droplet to convert DAG further into MAG. The hydrolysis of TAG releases FAs, which is beneficial to UCP1 expression. AMPK phosphorylates Ser402 of ATGL which acts to enhance the UCP1 and PGC-1α expression. Another lipid droplet-associated protein FSP27 functions to inhibit PGC-1α expression. HSL promotes the formation of RA, which upregulates pRB and RIP140, both of them inhibits the mitochondrial biogenesis and decrease the PGC-1α expression.

Tables 1 Cold Condition and Genetic Background of Rodents in Studies Reporting Brown-like Adipocytes Appearance in WAT

| Reference No. | Exposure temperature (°C) | Exposure duration (week/day) | Species | WAT depot with brown-like adipocytes | Year of publication |
|---------------|--------------------------|-------------------------------|---------|---------------------------------------|---------------------|
| [26]          | 4°C                      | 4 weeks                       | BALB/c mice | Genital WAT*                          | 1984                |
|               |                          |                               |           | (parametrial fat)                     |                     |
| [41]          | 4°C                      | 1 week                        | NMRI mice | Inguinal WAT                          | 1991                |
| [34, 43]      | 4°C                      | 10 days                       | Wistar and Zucker rats | Genital WAT                           | 1992, 1996         |
|               |                          |                               |           | (periovarian fat)                     |                     |
| [9, 42]       | 5°C                      | 7 days                        | A/J and C57BL/6J mice | Retroperitoneal WAT                  | 1998, 2003         |
| [33]          | 6°C                      | 10 days                       | C57BL/6J mice | Genital WAT                           | 2003                |
| [32]          | 6°C                      | 10 days                       | 129Sv mice | Subcutaneous WAT                      | 2010                |
| [5]           | 6°C                      | 10 days                       | C57BL/6J mice | Subcutaneous WAT                      | 2012                |

*WAT, white adipose tissue
