
A long-awaited merger of the pathways mediating host defence and programmed cell death

J. Magarian Blander

Abstract | Historically, cell death and inflammation have been closely linked, but the necessary divergence of the fields in the past few decades has enriched our molecular understanding of the signalling pathways that mediate various programmes of cell death and multiple types of inflammatory responses. The fields have now come together again demonstrating a surprising level of integration. Intimate interconnections at multiple levels are revealed between the cell death and inflammatory signal transduction pathways that are mobilized in response to the engagement of pattern recognition receptors during microbial infection. Molecules such as receptor-interacting protein kinase 1 (RIPK1), RIPK3, FAS-associated death domain protein (FADD), FLICE-like inhibitory protein (FLIP) and caspase 8 — which are associated with different forms of cell death — are incorporated into compatible and exceedingly dynamic Toll-like receptor, NOD-like receptor and RIG-I-like receptor signalling modules. These signalling modules have a high capacity to switch from inflammation to cell death, or a programmed execution of both, all in an orchestrated battle for host defence and survival.

Cell death and inflammation have been studied together for over a hundred years, leading to important discoveries concerning the mediators of inflammation and their contribution to tissue injury¹ (BOX 1). The definition of apoptosis in the 1970s and later characterization of its molecular mechanisms necessarily separated the field of cell death from that of inflammation. The early 1990s witnessed the proposal of two prominent theories regarding how inflammation is initiated — the ‘Pattern Recognition Theory’ by Charles Janeway² and the ‘Danger Model’ by Polly Matzinger³, which posited that inflammation follows the detection of either infectious microorganisms or tissue damage, respectively. The discovery of the first signalling pattern recognition receptor (PRR), Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4), in 1997 served as a prototype for the identification of more TLRs that detect various microbial structures, and led to the characterization of the pathways mediating innate immunity and inflammation⁴. Later in the mid-2000s, NOD-like receptors (NLRs) and RIG-I-like receptors (RLRs) were discovered, and their activation in response to microbial and tissue-derived components began to be characterized⁵. Only in the past five years have the fields of cell death and inflammation, now molecularly defined, come together again in a union that has revealed how intricately they are interconnected.

In host defence, programmed cell death is a form of ‘cellular altruism’, whereby the death of infected cells curtails microbial infections, spares uninfected neighbouring cells, and warns the host through alert signals and inflammatory mediators. It is perhaps not surprising that many PRR signalling pathways can trigger cell death. This Review delineates not only how host defence pathways are wired to the executioners of cell death, but also how the integration of cell death mediators into these pathways modulates inflammatory outcomes. The focus is on pyroptosis, apoptosis and necroptosis in the context of infection (BOX 1). The emerging picture reveals intimate interconnections between cell death and inflammation, and the dynamic protein modules that execute the most appropriate attack against the infectious threat.

Caspases in pyroptosis and inflammation

Two members of the cysteine-dependent aspartate-directed protease (caspase) family, caspase 1 (which is encoded by *Casp1*) and mouse caspase 11 (which is also known as caspase 4, and is orthologous to human caspase 4 and caspase 5), have important roles in the execution of pyroptosis, which is an inflammatory form of cell death (BOX 1). Caspase 1 is activated by a cytosolic

Immunology Institute and  
Tisch Cancer Institute,  
Department of Medicine,  
Icahn School of Medicine at  
Mount Sinai, New York,  
New York 10029, USA.  
doi:10.1038/nri3720

REVIEWS

Box 1 | Various forms of programmed cell death

Cell death was first observed by Karl Vogt in the mid-1800s when he was studying cell ‘resorption’ during notochord degeneration at peak metamorphosis in tadpoles<sup>125</sup>. Weissman, Flemming and Metchnikoff also reported cell death under other circumstances of normal organismal physiology<sup>125</sup>. Rudolph Virchow made a distinction between ‘necrosis’ — which he defined as cell death in the context of tissue damage and inflammation — and ‘necrobiosis’, which was defined as a spontaneous breakdown of natural tissue that was more akin to the process that Vogt and others had studied. Necrosis and necrobiosis could be regarded as the ancestor forms of currently known cell death pathways.

Multiple forms of cell death have been described and these include (but are not limited to) apoptosis, pyroptosis and necroptosis. For a complete list of the classification and types of cell death, see REF. 126.

Apoptosis occurs as part of the normal physiology of healthy tissues and can be triggered in response to two pathways. The extrinsic pathway is mobilized upon binding of extracellular ligands to transmembrane receptors — such as FAS (also known as CD95 and TNFRSF6), tumour necrosis factor receptor 1 (TNFR1), TNF-related apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL) receptor 1 (also known as TNFRSF10A) and TRAIL receptor 2 (also known as TNFRSF10B) — and leads to the activation of caspase 8 (REF. 126). Depending on the cell type, caspase 8 can then either cleave caspase 3 directly, or cleave the BH3-interacting domain death agonist (BID) into its truncated form, which activates BCL-2 homologous antagonist/killer (BAK; also known as BAK1) and apoptosis regulator BAX, leading to mitochondrial outer membrane permeabilization<sup>127</sup>. The intrinsic pathway is mobilized in response to various signals such as DNA damage, microbial infection or developmental cues, and culminates in mitochondrial outer membrane permeabilization, the release of cytochrome c into the cytoplasm, and the consequent assembly of a multimolecular complex called the ‘apoptosome’, which is comprised of cytochrome c, apoptotic protease activating factor 1 (APAF1) and procaspase 9 (REF. 128).

Pyroptosis was first described in the context of *Salmonella* infections<sup>129</sup>. It is initiated in response to the mobilization of the canonical and/or non-canonical pathways of inflammasome activation<sup>130</sup>. Its hallmark caspases are caspase 11 (caspase 4 and caspase 5 in humans) and caspase 1. Pyroptosis can but does not always follow the caspase 1-dependent secretion of interleukin-1β (IL-1β) and IL-18. The dependence of pyroptosis on caspase 1 and caspase 11 sets it apart from apoptosis, along with other characteristics such as the lack of involvement of apoptotic caspases (such as caspase 3, caspase 6 and caspase 8); no loss of mitochondrial integrity; no cleavage of chromosomal DNA; and the inability to package cellular contents into apoptotic bodies<sup>9</sup>. Instead, the plasma membrane ruptures during pyroptosis releasing cellular contents, characterizing pyroptosis as an inflammatory form of cell death, which is in stark contrast to non-inflammatory apoptosis<sup>9</sup>.

Necroptosis can be triggered by death receptor or Toll-like receptor signalling when caspases are inhibited<sup>131,132</sup>. It is initiated upon receptor-interacting protein kinase 1 (RIPK1) phosphorylation by RIPK3. The kinase activity of RIPK1 in turn phosphorylates RIPK3 to facilitate the formation a RIPK1–RIPK3 complex called the ‘necrosome’. RIP homotypic interaction motif (RHIM)-dependent interaction of RIPK3 with RIPK1 has been described to form β-amyloids<sup>133</sup>. Known downstream effectors include the pseudokinase mixed lineage kinase domain-like protein (MLKL), which is phosphorylated by RIPK3 (REFS 103,105), and the mitochondrial serine/threonine-protein phosphatase PGAM5 (REF. 104), although contradictory evidence regarding the involvement of PGAM5 in necroptosis has been presented<sup>106–108</sup>. Upon phosphorylation, MLKL oligomerizes and thus gains the ability to bind phosphatidylinositol phosphates and cardiolipin, thereby translocating to the plasma membrane where it may function directly as a pore<sup>110,111</sup> or indirectly as an ion channel regulator<sup>109,112</sup>. Unlike apoptosis, necroptosis can proceed independently of mitochondria<sup>108</sup>.

The classic view is that programmed cell death is either tolerogenic or immunogenic depending on the type of cell death<sup>134</sup>. Necroptosis and pyroptosis are inflammatory in nature owing to the rupture of the plasma membrane, and the release of cellular contents and pro-inflammatory molecules such as ATP, high mobility group protein B1 (HMGB1), pro-IL-1α and IL-33 (REF. 135). Indeed, the levels of IL-33 correlate with RIPK3–MLKL-dependent necroptosis and inflammation in RIPK1-deficient mice<sup>65,135</sup>. By contrast, apoptosis is a mechanism of cellular disintegration through a process in which intracellular material is contained within small membrane-bound apoptotic bodies that are efficiently phagocytosed<sup>136</sup>. Because of its predominance during embryonic development and adult tissue homeostasis, apoptosis is by necessity immunologically silent or tolerogenic<sup>134</sup>. However, apoptosis can be triggered by certain microbial pathogens, which target the host cell mitochondrion<sup>137,138</sup>. In these cases, immune recognition of infected apoptotic cells leads to the production of a mixture of inflammatory and anti-inflammatory cytokines, which favour the development of a T helper 17 cell-mediated adaptive immune response<sup>139</sup>.

---

inflammasome complex and mediates secretion of the inflammatory cytokines interleukin-1β (IL-1β) and IL-18 (see Supplementary information S1 (box)). The type of cell death induced by caspase 1 during infection with pathogenic bacteria such as *Shigella flexneri* and *Salmonella enterica* serovar Typhimurium was originally reported as apoptosis<sup>6</sup>, however the finding that *Casp1<sup>−/−</sup>* mice showed no defects in apoptosis<sup>7,8</sup> prompted further careful examination. Caspase 1-triggered cell death did not involve the activation of apoptotic caspases, and thus was termed pyroptosis<sup>9</sup>. Notably, in contrast to caspase 1-mediated cleavage of pro-IL-1β and pro-IL-18, pyroptosis can be executed without caspase 1 expression or proteolysis<sup>10,11</sup>.

The cloning and characterization of ICH3 — now known as caspase 11 — showed that its overexpression also induced cell death (reported as apoptosis)<sup>12–15</sup>. Two crucial components of caspase 11 biology additionally linked it to inflammation<sup>15–17</sup>: first, its upregulation by lipopolysaccharide (LPS) or tissue injury (a feature not shared by other caspases); and second, its ability to serve as an upstream regulator of caspase 1 by interacting with procaspase 1 and promoting both pyroptosis (BOX 1) and pro-IL-1β processing (see Supplementary information S1 (box)). The characterization of *‘Casp11<sup>−/−</sup>’* mice corroborated these findings. These mice were resistant to LPS-induced septic shock, a model in which cell death contributes to systemic organ failure<sup>16,17</sup>.

Notably, ‘Casp1<sup>−/−</sup>’ and ‘Casp11<sup>−/−</sup>’ mice were generated in these earlier studies using embryonic stem (ES) cells from the mouse 129 strain<sup>7,8,16</sup>, which is frequently used to derive genetically modified mice<sup>18</sup>. Recently, 129 mice were found to have a germline 5 bp deletion encompassing the Casp11 exon 7 splice acceptor junction that creates a frameshift mutation and a premature stop codon<sup>11</sup>. The mutation deletes the small catalytic subunit-encoding sequences of caspase 11 and destabilizes Casp11 transcripts<sup>11</sup>. Thus, the previously generated ‘Casp11<sup>−/−</sup>’ mice were derived from ES cells that already contained a Casp11 mutation (hereafter referred to as Casp11<sup>129mt/129mt</sup>)<sup>16</sup>. ‘Casp1<sup>−/−</sup>’ mice<sup>7,8</sup> are Casp1<sup>−/−</sup>Casp11<sup>129mt/129mt</sup> or double deficient for Casp1 and Casp11 even when extensively backcrossed to C57BL/6, as the Casp11 mutation in 129 mice was too close to Casp1 for segregation by genetic recombination<sup>11</sup>.

Earlier observations using supposed ‘Casp1<sup>−/−</sup>’ and ‘Casp11<sup>−/−</sup>’ mice were thus revisited<sup>11</sup>. The resistance of Casp1<sup>−/−</sup>Casp11<sup>129mt/129mt</sup> mice to septic shock<sup>7,8</sup> — a phenotype that implicated caspase 1 as the culprit — was later clarified to be mainly owing to their concomitant lack of caspase 11 (REF. 11). Rescue of caspase 11 expression in Casp1<sup>−/−</sup>Casp11<sup>129mt/129mt</sup> mice confirmed the non-redundant role of caspase 1 in IL-1β secretion, but also highlighted caspase 11-independent ‘canonical’ and caspase 11-dependent ‘non-canonical’ pathways of caspase 1 activation<sup>11</sup>. Caspase 11 activation and processing occurred independently of canonical pathways of inflammasome activation (that is, pathways involving NOD-, LRR- and pyrin domain-containing 3 (NLRP3; also known as NALP3), absent in melanoma 2 (AIM2), NOD-, LRR- and CARD-containing 4 (NLRC4) and the adaptor protein ASC; see Supplementary information S1 (box)), suggesting that a distinct pathway upstream of caspase 11 existed that was responsible for its activation.

### New links between inflammation and pyroptosis

#### Caspase 11-mediated pyroptosis can occur independently of microbial virulence.
Pyroptosis was long considered to be a consequence of caspase 1 activation in response to the activity of virulence factors produced by pathogenic bacteria<sup>9</sup>. Following the realization that the supposed ‘Casp1<sup>−/−</sup>’ mice also lacked caspase 11 expression<sup>11</sup>, the individual contributions of Casp1 and Casp11 to pyroptosis were reassessed. S. Typhimurium expresses type III secretion systems (T3SSs) that are encoded by Salmonella pathogenicity island 1 (SPI-1) and SPI-2. SPI-2 mediates the injection of flagellin from S. Typhimurium-containing phagosomes into the cell cytosol and this can activate both the neuronal apoptosis inhibitory protein 5 (NAIP5)–NLRC4 and the NLRP3 inflammasomes<sup>19,20</sup> (see Supplementary information S1 (box)). Infection with SPI-2-deficient S. Typhimurium or flagellin-deficient S. Typhimurium that have diminished SPI-1 expression reduced the availability of ligands for NAIP5–NLRC4, and revealed a role for NLRP3 in IL-1β and IL-18 secretion<sup>21</sup>. This study also found a distinct process of caspase 11-dependent pyroptosis that was independent of NLRC4 and caspase 1, and caspase 11 was proposed to act upstream

of NLRP3 (REF. 21). These results showed that similar to other enteric bacteria (such as Citrobacter rodentium, Vibrio cholerae and Escherichia coli<sup>11,22,23</sup>), intracellular S. Typhimurium triggers a non-canonical inflammasome that induces pyroptosis<sup>11</sup>.

Seemingly unrelated to these observations was the earlier report that live, but not dead, avirulent *E. coli* (strain K12) and various attenuated Gram-negative pathogenic bacteria induce pyroptosis and activate caspase 1 with subsequent IL-1β secretion independently of microbial virulence factors<sup>24</sup> (FIG. 1). These responses were contingent on activation of the NLRP3 inflammasome by bacterial mRNA that was released from live bacteria after phagocytosis, and translocated from phagosomes into the cytosol<sup>24</sup>. Signalling by TIR domain-containing adaptor protein inducing IFNβ (TRIF; also known as TICAM1), which functions downstream of TLR3 and TLR4 (REF. 25), was essential for NLRP3 inflammasome activation<sup>24</sup>. Similar observations were made in response to enterohemorrhagic *E. coli* (EHEC), *C. rodentium*, T3SS-mutant *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* and S. Typhimurium<sup>22,23</sup>. These studies also added an important piece to the puzzle of how TRIF connected to the NLRP3 inflammasome, by showing that engagement of the type I interferon (IFN) receptor (IFNAR) by TRIF-induced IFNβ led to the induction of procaspase 11 expression and also its autoprocessing<sup>22,23</sup> (FIG. 1).

In the absence of TRIF and IFNAR, procaspase 11 expression was still induced in response to infection with SPI-2-deficient or flagellin-deficient S. Typhimurium, albeit with delayed kinetics<sup>21</sup>. However, consistent with observations using live avirulent Gram-negative bacteria<sup>22–24</sup>, caspase 1 and caspase 11 activation — and the subsequent induction of pyroptosis and IL-1β secretion — were abrogated<sup>21</sup>. Thus, procaspase 11 expression is induced upon infection with Gram-negative bacteria and an unknown TRIF-dependent, IFNβ-responsive factor is required for caspase 11 activation (FIG. 1).

#### Caspase 11-mediated pyroptosis in response to cytosolic Gram-negative pathogenic bacteria.
The non-canonical pathway of inflammasome activation described above was revealed upon attenuation of virulence factor activity in bacteria. This suggests that caspase 11 activation serves as a ‘backup’ response when virulent bacteria evade canonical pathways of inflammasome activation (see Supplementary information S1 (box)). Indeed, similar to the responses seen to *E. coli* or to SPI-1-reduced, SPI-2-deficient or flagellin-deficient S. Typhimurium<sup>11,22–24</sup>, pyroptosis in response to flagellin-deficient *Legionella pneumophila* was delayed and was dependent on IFNAR signalling and caspase 11 expression<sup>26,27</sup>. However, in addition to being NLRC4 independent, pyroptosis in these settings was also independent of NLRP3, TRIF and myeloid differentiation primary response protein 88 (MYD88) (REFS 26,27), whereas IL-1β and IL-18 secretion remained NLRP3 dependent<sup>26</sup>. Interestingly, pyroptosis also required the *L. pneumophila* type IV secretion system (T4SS) Dot/Icm genes<sup>26,27</sup>, which encode proteins that traverse phagosomal membranes (FIG. 1). Similarly, the T3SS of

Live avirulent  
Gram-negative  
bacteria (E. coli)  

- Live C. rodentium  
- Live EHEC  

Live severely attenuated  
Gram-negative pathogen  
- ΔSPI-2 S. Typhimurium  
- Stationary phase ↓ SPI-1  

O111:B4 LPS  

Lipid A  

Electroporation  
or transfection  

GM1  

Retrograde transport to ER  
→ cytosol?  

Vacuolar  
lysis  

GBP  

Phagosomal  
channel  

Bacterial mRNA  

NLRP3 inflammasome  

ASC  
CARD-PYD  

NLRP3  
PYD-NBD-LRR  

Caspase 1  
p10-p20-CARD  

ASC polymer  

Caspase 1  
polymer  

Cleavage  

Pro-IL-1β or  
pro-IL-18  

IL-1β or  
IL-18  

Unknown  
caspase 11  
activator?  

Type I  
IFN  

P-IRF3  

Live pathogenic  
Gram-negative bacteria  
- ΔflaAΔSdhA L. pneumophila  
- ΔflgBSifA S. Typhimurium  
- B. pseudomallei  
- B. thailandensis  

Phagosome  

Burkholderia spp.  

Phagosomal  
rupture?  

LPS  

T3SS  

T4SS Dot/lcm  

Phagosome  

L. pneumophila  

TRIF  

Direct binding  

ISGF3  

STAT1  
P  

STAT2  
P  

IRF9  

Procaspase 11  

Oligomerization  
and activation  

Caspase 11  

Pyroptosis  

IL-1α,  
HMGB1  
and IL-33  

Unknown caspase 11  
activator?  

ISRE  

Procaspace 11  

Nucleus  

Type I  
IFN  

www.nature.com/reviews/immunol
Burkholderia spp., which facilitates access to the cytosol, was necessary for pyroptosis independently of canonical inflammasomes²⁸ (FIG. 1). By contrast, IL-1β secretion in response to these bacteria required NLRP3, NLRC4 and ASC. When mutant strains of S. Typhimurium and L. pneumophila were used that lacked both flagellin and the ability to prevent phagosome rupture, caspase 11-dependent pyroptosis ensued even in the absence of canonical NLRC4 or AIM2 inflammasomes²⁸.

These studies collectively show the existence of distinct mechanisms of caspase 11 activation in response to bacteria, or components thereof, in the cytosol. Access to the cytosol could occur via the activity of virulence factors or alternatively through select TLR-inducible transporters — such as SLC15A3 and SLC15A4 — which are reported to mediate phagosomal egress of the NOD2 (nucleotide-binding oligomerization domain-containing protein 2) ligand muramyldipeptide²⁹. Caspase 11 activation also relies on guanylate-binding proteins, which are small IFN-inducible GTPases that mediate phagosomal lysis³⁰. The search for the non-canonical inflammasome upstream of caspase 11 was thus underway.

Figure 1 | Two parallel pathways of caspase 1 and caspase 11 activation in response to Gram-negative bacteria. TIR domain-containing adaptor protein inducing IFNβ (TRIF) is central to the first pathway and involves the activation of NOD-, LRR- and pyrin domain-containing 3 (NLRP3) by bacterial mRNA that is released upon phagosomal degradation of live bacteria, and translocated to the cytosol through an undefined mechanism²⁴. This pathway was first described in response to live avirulent Escherichia coli strain K12, and severely attenuated strains of Shigella spp. and Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium²⁴, and later in response to Citrobacter rodentium, enterohemorrhagic E. coli (EHEC) and S. Typhimurium that is deficient for flagellin and Salmonella pathogenicity island 2 (SPI-2), and also has suppressed SPI-1 expression²¹⁻²³. TRIF signalling downstream of Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4), and perhaps TLR3, induces interferon (IFN)-regulatory factor 3 (IRF3)-dependent IFNβ transcription, production and binding to the type I IFN receptor (IFNAR), signalling through which initiates transcription of the gene encoding procaspase 11 (REFS 21–23). Pyrin domain (PYD)-mediated interactions between NLRP3 and the adaptor protein ASC triggers prion-like ASC nucleation, leading to procaspase 1 recruitment and polymerization via caspase activation and recruitment domain (CARD)–CARD interactions. Proximity-induced caspase 1 dimerization drives autocatalytic cleavage into its p20 and p10 subunits, subsequently mediating the cleavage of pro-interleukin-1β (pro-IL-1β) and pro-IL-18 into mature active cytokines. The activation of caspase 11 here is critical for caspase 1 activation and its consequences¹¹,²¹⁻²³,¹¹⁹. Caspase 11 activation is not well understood and seems to be controlled by an undefined TRIF-dependent, IFNβ-responsive factor²¹⁻²³. Caspase 11 is also activated upon direct binding to intracellular lipopolysaccharide (LPS) via the CARD, leading to caspase 11 oligomerization³¹,³²,¹⁶⁷. Intracellular LPS delivery can be achieved by binding O111:B4 LPS to the cholera toxin B subunit (CTB) followed by internalization via the GM1 ganglioside, or by electroporation or transfection³¹,³². Caspase 11 activation has also been described in response to avirulent E. coli, EHEC, C. rodentium, Burkholderia pseudomallei, B. thailandensis, ΔflgBΔSifA S. Typhimurium (which lacks flagellin and the virulence factor SifA) and ΔflaAΔSdhA Legionella pneumophila (which lacks flagellin and the virulence factor SdhA), whereby LPS release into the cytosol could occur via phagosomal rupture, activity of the type III or type IV Dot/lcm secretion system (T3SS or T4SS), or perhaps via phagosomal channels¹¹,²¹⁻²³,²⁶⁻²⁸,³²,¹¹⁹. Caspase 11 activation also leads to pyroptosis and release of IL-1α and high mobility group protein B1 (HMGB1) in a caspase 1-independent manner¹¹,²¹⁻²³,²⁶⁻²⁸,³²,¹¹⁹. The dashed arrow indicates the possibility that unknown caspase 11 substrates execute pyroptosis. ER, endoplasmic reticulum; GBP, guanylate-binding protein; GlcN, glucosamine; ISGF3, IFN-stimulated gene factor 3 complex; ISRE, IFN-stimulated response element; JAK1, Janus kinase 1; NBD, nucleotide-binding domain; RHIM, RIP homotypic interaction motif; STAT, signal transducer and activator of transcription; TIR, Toll/IL-1R; TRAM, TRIF-related adaptor molecule; TYK2, tyrosine kinase 2.

Caspase 11-dependent pyroptosis points to a new LPS sensor. The findings above led to the hypothesis that a cytosolic ligand released from bacteria is responsible for activating the non-canonical inflammasome. The evidence pointed to LPS³¹,³². Transfection of LPS into macrophages could induce NLRP3-independent pyroptosis, as well as the NLRP3-dependent secretion of IL-1β in a caspase 11-dependent manner³¹,³² (FIG. 1). Surprisingly, TLR4 was dispensable providing that cells were primed with a ligand that activates other TLRs, such as TLR2 or TLR3, in order to induce procaspase 11 expression. Further experiments with LPS lipid A acylation mutant bacteria demonstrated that both hexa-acylated and penta-acylated LPS, as well as the synthetic monophosphoryl lipid A, induced caspase 11-dependent pyroptosis and IL-1β secretion, whereas the tetra-acylated LPS did not³¹,³².

These results collectively indicated the presence of a presumably cytoplasmic sensor of LPS that acts independently of TLR4, and suggested that bacteria such as Francisella novicida, Yersinia pestis and Helicobacter pylori could avoid activation of the non-canonical inflammasome pathway by expressing a tetra-acylated lipid A. Results from in vitro studies were verified using a prime-challenge regimen, which revealed that a sublethal dose of LPS could become lethal if mice were previously primed with a TLR ligand to induce procaspase 11 expression³¹,³². Surprisingly, Tlr4⁻/⁻ mice were as susceptible to LPS as wild-type mice when priming was performed with poly(I:C)³¹,³², whereas C57BL/6 Casp11⁻/⁻ mice were always resistant. Therefore, a putative cytoplasmic LPS sensor may act collaboratively with TLR4 during infection with Gram-negative bacteria, such that TLR4 primes procaspase 11 expression and the cytoplasmic sensor mediates caspase 11 activation³¹,³².

Caspases are the receptors for cytoplasmic LPS. The infection of human monocyte cell lines with strains of L. pneumophila or S. Typhimurium that are unable to prevent phagosome rupture, or the electroporation of human monocyte, keratinocyte or epithelial cell lines with LPS led to pyroptosis in a caspase 4-dependent, but ASC-independent manner¹⁶⁷. Caspase 4 and caspase 11 functioned interchangeably in mouse macrophages or human cells, respectively¹⁶⁷. Recombinant caspase 4 and caspase 11 oligomerized only when purified from *E. coli* and not from insect cells, an observation that led to the discovery that these caspases, as well as caspase 5, bind specifically to LPS with high affinity independently of catalytic activity¹⁶⁷. Endogenous caspase 11 associated with electroporated LPS in pyroptotic macrophages. Notably, only hexa-acylated and not penta-acylated LPS induced the oligomerization of caspase 4 and caspase 11 (REF. 167), unlike the ability of mutant penta-acylated LPS-expressing *F. novicida* to trigger caspase 11 activation in mouse macrophages³¹. Specific residues within the first 64 amino acids of the caspase 11 CARD were necessary for LPS binding and oligomerization, which was required for catalytic activation and pyroptosis¹⁶⁷.
REVIEWS

Implications for the treatment of septic shock. Although many host- or microorganism-derived mediators implicated in the lethality of murine endotoxaemia have been targeted in various Phase II and Phase III clinical trials of sepsis and septic shock, none have resulted in successful new treatments for use in humans³³. The central role for caspase 11 in mediating LPS-induced lethality in mice³¹,³², as well as the discovery that caspase 11 and human

Box 2 | Caspase 8, FADD and FLIP

Caspase 8 (previously known as FLICE) was discovered as the initiator of apoptotic cell death downstream of FAS (also known as CD95 and TNFRSF6) and tumour necrosis factor receptor 1 (TNFR1) when evidence accumulated that a caspase other than the CED-3-like proteases that were known at the time (caspase 1–caspase 3, caspase 4 (corresponding to caspase 11 in mice), caspase 6, caspase 7 and caspase 9) must have a role in linking surface death receptors to cytosolic apoptotic proteases¹⁴⁰. Two death effector domains (DEDs) in the amino terminus of caspase 8 were shown to mediate its recruitment to the death receptor FAS via interacting with a homologous DED in the adaptor protein FAS-associated death domain protein (FADD), which is recruited to FAS upon its activation¹⁴⁰. The oligomerization of FADD upon engagement of TNFR superfamily proteins such as FAS, TNFR1 and TNF-related apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL) leads to the oligomerization of caspase 8 and its subsequent activation, in turn leading to the activation of downstream ‘executioner’ caspases — caspase 3, caspase 6 and caspase 7 (REF. 141) (also see BOX 3).

Another protein that resembles caspase 8 is FLIP<sub>L</sub>, the long splice form of FLICE-like inhibitory protein (FLIP) that lacks the catalytic cysteine in the caspase domain. FLIP<sub>L</sub> heterodimerizes with caspase 8 and has been reported to either enhance or inhibit its activity in a concentration- and context-dependent manner⁸⁶. The association of FLIP<sub>L</sub> with caspase 8 can promote the enzymatic activity of caspase 8, leading to partial autoprocessing to generate the p43 fragment of caspase 8 (lacking the p10 fragment), but inhibiting further cleavage to generate fully active caspase 8. In turn, FLIP<sub>L</sub> itself is processed by caspase 8 into p43 fragment of FLIP (also lacking the p10 fragment), which recruits TNFR-associated factor 2 (TRAF2) and receptor-interacting protein kinase 1 (RIPK1), leading to nuclear factor-κB (NF-κB) activation⁸⁵. Procaspace 8–FLIP<sub>L</sub> heterodimers are also effective at destabilizing RIPK1–RIPK3 complexes, and thus effectively inhibit necroptosis³⁸,¹²⁴. FLIP<sub>S</sub> is the short splice form that contains only two DEDs, similar to the pro-domains of caspase 8 and caspase 10, and inhibits caspase 8 signalling⁸⁶.

Genetic ablation of caspase 8 (REFS 142,143) or FADD¹⁴⁴,¹⁴⁵ leads to embryonic lethality that can be rescued by concurrent ablation of RIPK3, implicating a coordinated role for FADD and caspase 8 in controlling RIPK3 during embryogenesis³⁸,⁴³. Similar lethality in FLIP-deficient mice¹⁴⁶ is rescued by ablation of both FADD and RIPK3 (REF. 147). During mammalian development, caspase 8 is protective through its enzymatic activity in complex with FLIP<sub>L</sub> (REF. 38). Indeed, transgenic expression of a mutant D387A caspase 8 — which is inactive as a homodimer but retains enzymatic activity upon heterodimerization with FLIP<sub>L</sub> (REF. 38) — rescues Casp8<sup>-/-</sup> mice from embryonic lethality¹⁴⁸. Thus, FLIP<sub>L</sub> is required for effective caspase 8-mediated suppression of RIPK3-mediated necroptosis, although the mechanism involved is not known.

Because RIPK1 activates RIPK3 during an association that is important for necroptosis (BOX 1), a conundrum emerged when Ripk1<sup>-/-</sup>Fadd<sup>-/-</sup> and Ripk1<sup>-/-</sup>Casp8<sup>-/-</sup> mice still died, albeit perinatally⁶³⁻⁶⁵,¹⁴⁹, unlike the Ripk3<sup>-/-</sup>Fadd<sup>-/-</sup> or Ripk3<sup>-/-</sup>Casp8<sup>-/-</sup> mice which survived to adulthood³⁸,⁴³,¹⁴⁷. Also, the long-known perinatal lethality of Ripk1<sup>-/-</sup> mice⁶⁵,¹⁵⁰ was not rescued by ablation of Ripk3 (REFS 63,65). Altogether, these observations hinted at a crucial postnatal role for RIPK1. The concomitant ablation of Ripk3 allowed Ripk1<sup>-/-</sup>Fadd<sup>-/-</sup> and Ripk1<sup>-/-</sup>Casp8<sup>-/-</sup> mice to survive past weaning⁶³⁻⁶⁵. Concordantly, ablation of Tnfr1, which initiates both apoptosis and necroptosis (BOX 3), rescued the perinatal lethality of Ripk1<sup>-/-</sup>Ripk3<sup>-/-</sup> but not Ripk1<sup>-/-</sup> mice⁶³,⁶⁵. Notably, ablation of Trif (which encodes TIR domain-containing adaptor protein inducing IFNβ) or Ifnar (which encodes the type I interferon receptor) in Tnfr1<sup>-/-</sup>Ripk1<sup>-/-</sup> mice could significantly delay lethality⁶³. Thus, postnatal TNFR1-independent signals via TRIF and IFNAR can engage RIPK3 to promote lethality in the absence of RIPK1. Consistent with these studies, although the kinase activity of RIPK1 potentiated RIP homotypic interaction motif (RHIM)-dependent RIPK3 oligomerization and necroptosis, the absence of RIPK1 also promoted this, demonstrating intrinsic RIPK1-mediated suppression of RIPK3 (REF. 151).

caspase 4 and caspase 5 serve as the receptors for intracellular LPS¹⁶⁷, identify these human caspases as potentially important new targets for sepsis therapy. However, there are key differences between humans and rodents in the transcriptional response to endotoxaemia³⁴. Unlike the expression of caspase 11 and caspase 5, which is induced by LPS, caspase 4 is expressed constitutively¹⁵,³⁵. Although transgenic expression of human caspase 4 in mice confirmed that it has a crucial role in endotoxin sensitivity, it also demonstrated that caspase 4 links TLR signals to caspase 1 activation in the absence of a secondary activation signal³⁶. This finding partly explains the heightened sensitivity of humans to endotoxin, but further studies are required to fully understand the regulation of the human orthologues of mouse caspase 11.

Cell death, inflammation and caspase 8

Caspase 8 (previously known as FLICE) and FAS-associated death domain protein (FADD) are molecules that are involved in executing the extrinsic pathway of apoptosis (BOXES 1,2). In mice, ubiquitous transgenic expression of a mutant D387A caspase 8 alongside the endogenous caspase 8 alleles led to the development of systemic inflammation³⁷. D387A caspase 8 is inactive as a homodimer but retains enzymatic activity upon heterodimerization with the long isoform of FLICE-like inhibitory protein (FLIP<sub>L</sub>; FLIP is also known as CFLAR)³⁸ (BOX 2). Specific deletion of caspase 8 in intestinal epithelial cells resulted in ileitis, primarily owing to tumour necrosis factor (TNF)-induced necroptosis of Paneth cells and goblet cells; this is consistent with a role for caspase 8 in protecting cells against necroptosis³⁹. Deficiency of caspase 8 specifically in hepatocytes or keratinocytes resulted in chronic liver and skin inflammation, respectively⁴⁰⁻⁴². These studies linked caspase 8 to the suppression of inflammatory responses *in vivo*³⁷. Also supporting this possibility was the finding that TANK-binding kinase 1 (TBK1) and IFN-regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) were spontaneously activated in Casp8<sup>-/-</sup> keratinocytes, perhaps in response to an endogenous ligand⁴². In Casp8<sup>-/-</sup> keratinocytes, many genes involved in inflammatory, IFN and wound-healing responses were upregulated. The expression of alarmins, IL-33 and S100A9 was prominent in the suprabasal layers of the epithelium, where cornification and cell disintegration occurs. DNA released from these cells, perhaps following receptor-interacting protein kinase 3 (RIPK3)-dependent necroptosis³⁷, may be the ligand responsible for activating TBK1 and IRF3. In support of this, enhanced inflammatory cytokine production is seen in cultures of DNA-transfected Casp8<sup>-/-</sup> keratinocytes⁴².

New studies that are discussed in the following section have shown that there is extensive integration of caspase 8 into various inflammatory signalling pathways where it can either mediate or attenuate inflammation. Rescue of the embryonic lethality of Casp8<sup>-/-</sup> mice by concomitant deficiency of RIPK3 (REFS 38,43) (BOX 2), as well as the generation of mice in which caspase 8 is deleted in defined immune cell subsets, now make it possible to study the full impact of caspase 8 on inflammation in different contexts for the first time.

Box 3 | Distinct signalling complexes assemble around tumour necrosis factor receptor 1

The most extensive information on apoptosis and necroptosis comes from studies on tumour necrosis factor (TNF)-induced signalling through the TNF receptor 1 (TNFR1). TNFR1 signalling involves the formation of a membrane-associated complex I and a cytosolic complex II (also known as the death-inducing signalling complex (DISC))<sup>152,153</sup>. Binding of TNF to TNFR1 induces receptor trimerization and the formation of complex I, which is comprised of TNFR1, TNFR-associated factor 2 (TRAF2), TRAF5, cellular inhibitor of apoptosis protein 1 (cIAP1), cIAP2, TNFR1-associated death domain (TRADD) and receptor-interacting protein kinase 1 (RIPK1). The subsequent recruitment of the linear ubiquitin chain assembly complex (LUBAC) facilitates the additional recruitment of transforming growth factor-β-associated kinase 1 (TAK1; also known as NR2C2) and TAK1-binding protein 2 (TAB2) or TAB3, as well as the inhibitor of nuclear factor-κB (NF-κB) kinase (IKK) complex (which comprises IKKα, IKKβ and NF-κB essential modulator (NEMO)) leading to NF-κB activation<sup>154,155</sup>. Complex II (also called the ‘TRADDosome’ (REF. 81)) forms upon deubiquitylation of RIPK1 by cylindromatosis (CYLD) or A20. TRADD and RIPK1 now associate with FAS-associated death domain protein (FADD) and caspase 8, leading to caspase 8 activation and apoptosis<sup>152,156</sup>. The activation of NF-κB via complex I negatively regulates complex II through the incorporation of caspase 8-inhibitory long isoform of FLICE-like inhibitory protein (FLIP<sub>L</sub>) into complex II<sup>152</sup>. Therefore, although complex II can trigger apoptosis, the incorporation of FLIP<sub>L</sub> into this complex prevents apoptosis and propagates NF-κB activation. A third outcome of TNFR1 signalling becomes evident upon depletion of cIAPs and caspase inhibition, as the binding of TNF to TNFR1 in this context triggers necroptosis. Inhibition of cIAPs without concomitant inhibition of caspases leads to RIPK1-dependent apoptosis and not necroptosis<sup>110</sup>. A critical determinant of necroptosis is the incorporation of RIPK3 into complex II to form complex IIb, which is also known as the necrosome and is comprised of TNFR1, FADD, caspase 8, RIPK1 and RIPK3 (REF. 153). The balance between apoptosis and necroptosis is determined by caspase 8 and RIPK3. FADD and caspase 8 promote apoptosis by activating downstream executioner caspases, while at the same time keeping necroptosis in check via caspase 8-dependent cleavage of RIPK1, RIPK3 and CYLD<sup>45,46,157</sup>.

---

### Initiation of cell death by TLRs

#### Central role of the signalling adaptor TRIF. RIPK3 is an important executor of necroptosis when complexed with RIPK1, provided that caspase 8 — which is known to cleave RIPK1 and RIPK3 (REFS 44–46) — is inactivated<sup>47–49</sup> (BOXES 1, 2). At its carboxyl terminus, TRIF contains a RIP homotypic interaction motif (RHIM) — a motif that is also present in RIPK1 and RIPK3 — which enables its interactions with RIPK1 and RIPK3 via a conserved four amino acid motif (VQLG)<sup>50–52</sup>. The amino terminus of TRIF is important for both nuclear factor-κB (NF-κB) and IRF3 activation<sup>53</sup>, but the RHIM-dependent recruitment of RIPK1 to TRIF mediates NF-κB but not IRF3 activation<sup>50,54</sup>. Upon TLR3 engagement, TNFR1-associated death domain protein (TRADD) is also recruited to RIPK1 via death domain interactions, leading to RIPK1 ubiquitylation and NF-κB activation<sup>55</sup>. By contrast, RIPK3 inhibits NF-κB activation by competing with TRIF to bind to RIPK1 (REF. 50). Thus, TRIF acts as an adaptor linking TLR3 to RIPK1 and RIPK3. Further studies revealed that of the five human TIR (Toll/IL-1R) domain-containing proteins, only TRIF could induce apoptosis; this was independent of the mitochondrial pathway of cell death (BOX 1) and the ability of TRIF to activate IRF3 and NF-κB<sup>51,52</sup>. The RHIM domain of TRIF was essential for apoptosis, and FADD and caspase 8 were also important<sup>51,52</sup>.

The activation of RIPK3 is crucial for necroptosis induced by TNF<sup>47–49</sup> (BOX 1). Similar to TNFR1 (BOX 3), TLR3 and TLR4 also induce necroptosis in the presence of the pan-caspase inhibitor zVAD<sup>49,56–59</sup>. TRIF is also important, as macrophages from *Trif*<sup>*Lps2/Lps2*</sup> mice — which have a frameshift mutation in *Trif* that disrupts the RHIM-containing C terminus — were protected from necroptosis, and this was independent of TNFR1 and TNFR2 signalling<sup>56,57</sup>. Endogenous TRIF could be immunoprecipitated with RIPK3 but not with a mutant RIPK3 lacking the

RHIM, and this was only possible after treatment with TLR3 and TLR4 agonists, regardless of caspase inhibition<sup>56</sup>. The suppression of RIPK1 expression enhanced necroptosis induced by these agonists<sup>56</sup>, whereas the inhibition of RIPK1 kinase activity by necrostatin 1 blocked necroptosis<sup>57</sup>. TRIF- and RIPK3-dependent necroptosis was mediated by reactive oxygen species (ROS), which accumulated downstream of TLR3 engagement, although it is unclear exactly how this occurs<sup>56</sup>.

#### RIPK1 links TLR3 and TRIF to cell death. RIPK1 has a central role in the assembly of a large 2 MDa complex comprised of RIPK1, FADD, caspase 8, caspase 10 and FLIP isoforms<sup>60,61</sup>. Aptly named the ‘ripoptosome’, this complex assembles spontaneously upon depletion of the inhibitors of apoptosis (IAPs) X-linked IAP (XIAP), cellular IAP1 (cIAP1; also known as BIRC2) and cIAP2 (also known as BIRC3) (REFS 60, 61) (BOX 4). cIAP1 and cIAP2 mediate both K48- and K63-linked ubiquitylation of RIPK1 in response to TNF<sup>62</sup>. The deubiquitylation of RIPK1 upon IAP depletion was necessary for binding to FADD and caspase 8, and led to the assembly of the ripoptosome<sup>60,61</sup>.

Upon stimulation of TLR3 with poly(I:C), cIAP depletion sensitized cells to TLR3- and TRIF-mediated cell death<sup>60</sup>. TLR3-induced cell death could only be rescued by the combination of zVAD and necrostatin 1. A series of overexpression and knockdown experiments demonstrated important roles for both RIPK1 and RIPK3 (REF. 60). RIPK1 kinase activity is critical for ripoptosome assembly and for promoting either apoptosis via FADD–caspase 8, or necroptosis via RIPK3 when caspase 8 activity is blocked. It is noteworthy that necrostatins, which block RIPK1 kinase activity, cannot be used to distinguish between apoptosis and necroptosis<sup>60,61</sup>.

REVIEWS

Box 4 | Inhibitors of apoptosis and SMAC mimetics

Inhibitor of apoptosis (IAP) proteins block cell death by inhibiting the activity of the caspases that execute programmed cell death. IAPs comprise a family of several members that are characterized by the presence of one, two or three baculovirus IAP repeat (BIR) domains that are crucial for anti-apoptotic activity<sup>158</sup>. Most IAPs have a carboxy-terminal RING domain, which functions as a ubiquitin ligase. Cellular IAP protein 1 (cIAP1) and cIAP2 also contain a caspase activation and recruitment domain (CARD). During apoptosis, second mitochondria-derived activator of caspase (SMAC; also known as DIABLO) is released from the mitochondrion and promotes caspase activation within the apoptosome complex (which contains cytochrome c, caspase 9 and apoptotic protease activating factor 1 (APAF1)) by counteracting IAPs via a highly conserved four-residue IAP-binding motif (AVPI) at its amino terminus. The mechanism by which IAPs inhibit caspase activity varies depending on the IAP involved. X-linked IAP (XIAP) inhibits caspase 3, caspase 7 and caspase 9, and is the only IAP that inhibits caspases by direct binding. The BIR2 and BIR3 domains of XIAP mediate binding to the catalytic pockets and IAP-binding motifs of caspase 3 and caspase 7, and inhibit their activities. Once procaspase 9 is activated, both XIAP (via its BIR3 domain) and SMAC can bind to the newly exposed four residues at the N terminus of the small p12 subunit of processed caspase 9, in a mutually exclusive manner that determines whether the inhibition or execution of apoptosis occurs.

SMAC mimetics (SMs) are small molecules that were originally designed to antagonize XIAP, but were found to work most effectively with cIAP1 and cIAP2 (REF. 159). They promote cell death in response to the engagement of death receptors, but also chemotherapeutic agents. SMs induce auto-ubiquitylation and proteasomal degradation of cIAPs. ‘SM-sensitive’ cells die upon treatment with SMs because cIAP depletion results in enhanced sensitivity to tumour necrosis factor (TNF). ‘SM-resistant’ cells survive because they do not produce TNF.

IAPs also modulate signalling. cIAP1 and cIAP2 positively regulate TNF receptor-mediated nuclear factor-κB (NF-κB) activation by mediating the ubiquitylation of receptor-interacting protein kinase 1 (RIPK1) through the addition of K63-linked polyubiquitin chains, leading to recruitment and activation of the inhibitor of NF-κB kinase (IKK) complex<sup>158</sup>. By contrast, cIAP1 and cIAP2 negatively regulate the alternative NF-κB pathway mediated by TNF-related weak inducer of apoptosis (TWEAK; also known as TNFSF12) and CD40L (also known as TNFRSF5) by inducing K48-linked ubiquitylation and degradation of NF-κB-inducing kinase (NIK; also known as MAP3K14), a step that is reversed by ligand binding<sup>158</sup>. cIAP1 and cIAP2 can also be part of the myeloid differentiation primary response protein 88 (MYD88) signalling complex (but not the TLR domain-containing adaptor protein inducing IFNβ (TRIF) signalling complex) downstream of Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4) engagement, where they mediate degradative K48-linked ubiquitylation of TNFR-associated factor 3 (TRAF3) upon undergoing K63-ubiquitylation themselves by TLR4-activated TRAF<sup>160</sup>. The degradation of TRAF3 in this manner precludes its activation downstream of MYD88, and allows cytosolic translocation of the MYD88-associated signalling complex, leading to activation of the transforming growth factor-β-associated kinase-1 (TAK1; also known as NR2C2) and mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathways. Curiously, endocytosis of TLR4 — which is important for TRIF signalling — was also important for K63-linked auto-ubiquitylation of TRAF3, a modification that was required for interferon (IFN)-regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) activation and the induction of the IFN response<sup>160</sup>. Accordingly, inhibition of cIAP1 and cIAP2 with SMs leads to highly specific inhibition of pro-inflammatory gene transcription downstream of TLR4 without affecting IFN responses<sup>160</sup>.

not automatically follow ripoptosome assembly, and depends on cell type and the expression of FLIP isoforms, FLIP<sub>L</sub> and the short isoform FLIP<sub>S</sub>(BOX 2), which control caspase activity in the ripoptosome and determine whether cell death occurs by RIPK3-dependent necroptosis or caspase-dependent apoptosis<sup>60,61</sup> (FIG. 2). Whereas FLIP<sub>L</sub> prevents ripoptosome assembly in the absence of cIAPs, FLIP<sub>S</sub> promotes it<sup>60</sup>.

Of note, a new role for RIPK1 has been revealed in postnatal protection against the activities of TNFR1, FADD and caspase 8 in some instances, and TRIF, IFN and RIPK3 in other settings<sup>63–65</sup> (BOX 2). These activities may be related to cell death<sup>63</sup>, inflammation<sup>65</sup>, or both. RIPK1 kinase activity is probably dispensable for postnatal repression of these pathways because mice with a kinase-dead mutant version of RIPK1 develop normally<sup>66–68</sup>.

Implications for infections and pathological states. The T3SS of pathogenic *Yersinia* spp. encodes multiple effectors that inhibit NF-κB and mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) signalling, and that mediate apoptosis, necroptosis or pyroptosis<sup>69</sup>. Although ripoptosomes have not been isolated from macrophages responding to infection, two studies support a model whereby TLR4–TRIF signalling during *Yersinia* infection — perhaps upon RIPK1 deubiquitylation by the *Yersinia* effector YopJ — trigger either caspase 8- or RIPK3-dependent cell death<sup>70,71</sup>. Interestingly, cell death switched from apoptosis to RIPK3-dependent necroptosis upon deletion or inhibition of caspase 8, and RIPK1 was upstream of both caspase 8- and RIPK3-mediated cell death<sup>70,71</sup>.

Various experimental animal models for neurological, ophthalmological, cardiac, renal and gastrointestinal disorders, have shown improvement upon treatment with necrostatins or in the presence of RIPK3 deficiency<sup>72</sup>. RIPK1–caspase 8-dependent apoptosis or RIPK1–RIPK3-mediated necroptosis may thus contribute to pathological processes. Although many stimuli can lead to necroptosis<sup>72</sup>, as discussed above, there is evidence that TLR3 could be activated by free and necrotic cell-associated host mRNA during acute inflammation<sup>73,74</sup>. Notably, *Tlr3<sup>-/-</sup>* mice survived the sustained inflammation during polymicrobial septic peritonitis and ischaemic bowel injury, and this was attributed to a marked reduction in necrosis limiting the immune response to necrotic cell byproducts<sup>73,74</sup>. TLR3 engagement by endogenous ligands released under stress and tissue injury might favour ripoptosome assembly.

Caspase 8 immunoprecipitates showed increased interaction of RIPK1 with caspase 8 upon cIAP depletion and following stimulation with poly(I:C)<sup>60</sup>. Immunoprecipitates also contained FADD, FLIP cleavage fragment p43, caspase 10 and also, notably, TRIF. The ripoptosome contained TRIF specifically upon TLR3 activation, indicating the potential to be recruited to TLR3 presumably via RHIM interactions between RIPK1 and TRIF (FIG. 2). RIPK3 was not detected in the ripoptosome, leaving open the possibility that an additional step activates necroptosis<sup>60,61</sup>. Cell death does

Cell death and inflammatory RLR signalling

MAVS induces apoptosis. Viral RNAs are sensed in the cytosol by RLRs, such as retinoic acid-inducible gene I (RIG-I), leading to activation of the mitochondrial antiviral signalling protein (MAVS), and subsequent type I IFN and inflammatory cytokine production<sup>75</sup> (see Supplementary information S2 (box)). The overexpression of MAVS, or infection with Sendai virus or Dengue virus, induces MAVS and caspase-dependent apoptosis independent of type I IFN, IRF3 and NF-κB

Cytosol

RIPK1

Kinase
DD

Stress signal

DD
Kinase
RHIM

Ub Ub Ub

FADD
DED DD
Ripoptosome
Deubiquitylation
SMs
IAPs
FADD
DED DD
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED
DED

signalling or other secreted soluble factors<sup>76,77</sup>. Similarly to type I IFN signalling, apoptosis is dependent on the mitochondrial localization of MAVS. MAVS encodes a bicistronic mRNA that produces full-length MAVS and a truncated MAVS (the latter restricts IFN production), and although both proteins can mediate cell death, competition between them may determine whether either IFN production or apoptosis is induced<sup>78</sup>.

Assembly of a TRADDosome around mitochondrial MAVS. The involvement of FADD and RIPK1 in RLR signalling was suspected because cells lacking FADD or RIPK1 were defective in antiviral responses to infection with vesicular stomatitis virus or transfection with poly(I:C)<sup>79</sup>. The first evidence came with the demonstration that MAVS interacted with FADD and RIPK1 via its C terminus — which does not contain a caspase activation and recruitment domain (CARD) — to selectively mediate NF-κB rather than IRF3 activation<sup>80</sup>. Specifically upon RIG-I activation, FADD and RIPK1 are recruited to MAVS via TRADD into a trimolecular complex termed the ‘TRADDosome’ and in this way, TRADD participates in NF-κB and IRF3 activation leading to inhibition of viral replication<sup>81</sup> (FIG. 3). Although the TRADDosome assembles downstream of TNFR1 (BOX 3), its function in IRF3 activation is unique to RIG-I perhaps as a consequence of its localization to mitochondrial membranes, which may in turn harbour necessary proteins<sup>81</sup>.

Caspase 8 and caspase 10 cleavage were reported during double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) stimulation and these molecules were critical for antiviral NF-κB responses<sup>82</sup>, although they have also been implicated in IRF3 activation in response to antiviral RLR signalling<sup>81</sup>. In fact, caspase 8 is recruited to the mitochondria-associated RIG-I TRADDosome upon infection with Sendai virus<sup>83</sup> (FIG. 3) (also see Supplementary information S2 (box)), where it terminates antiviral signalling rather than mediating cell death. RIPK1 co-immunoprecipitated with caspase 8 from Sendai virus infected cells, and was necessary for long-lived associations among complex components, which included MAVS, TRAF family member-associated NF-κB activator (TANK), TBK1, IRF3 and NF-κB essential modulator (NEMO)<sup>83</sup>. The absence of caspase 8 led to enhanced IRF3 phosphorylation and IFNβ responses to Sendai virus and poly(I:C) transfection<sup>83</sup>. Overexpression assays revealed an interaction of caspase 8 with the CARD of RIG-I and with MAVS, which led to proteasomal degradation of RIG-I but not MAVS. At the same time, caspase 8 mediated RIPK1 cleavage within the complex yielding a fragment that compromised TRADDosome assembly, and specifically impaired virus-induced activation of IRF3 but not NF-κB<sup>83</sup> (FIG. 3). Notably, Sendai virus infection induced K63-linked ubiquitylation of RIPK1, which — although necessary for maximal IRF3 activation — rendered the molecule susceptible to caspase 8 cleavage.

Caspase 8 activity also mediates the cleavage of IRF3 resulting in subsequent proteasomal degradation after RIG-I stimulation with Sendai virus and adenovirus, and to a lesser extent, TLR3 stimulation

with poly(I:C)<sup>84</sup>. Mutation of a putative caspase recognition motif located at the N terminus of IRF3 impaired its cleavage by active caspase 8 and protected it from proteasomal degradation<sup>84</sup>. Mutated IRF3 was not ubiquitylated suggesting that caspase 8-mediated cleavage was a prerequisite for IRF3 ubiquitylation and subsequent degradation. These results may also explain the accumulation of IRF3 in the skin that is observed upon conditional deletion of the gene encoding caspase 8 in keratinocytes (see above)<sup>42</sup>. Interestingly, IRF3 degradation by caspase 8 terminated some, but not all, dsRNA-induced IRF3-dependent genes<sup>84</sup>.

The assembly of a TRADDosome around MAVS appears to predominantly be important for RIPK1–FADD-dependent enhancement of IRF3 activation, but it is also important for caspase 8-dependent termination of signal transduction (FIG. 3). Although caspase 8-mediated cell death was not observed, this is probably a reflection of the presence of FLIP in the complex. Indeed, the complexity of TRADDosome signalling is determined at the level of incorporation of FLIP isoforms, such that caspase 8 activity could be diverted away from the induction of apoptosis<sup>85,86</sup> (BOX 2). The incorporation of caspase 8 into signalling complexes downstream of RIG-I or other PRRs where its activity is regulated by FLIP, may serve to promptly switch inflammatory signalling to cell death. Therefore, those cells that engage PRR signalling could be ‘marked’ to die after their roles in host defence have been carried out and, in doing so, further extinguish the source of and potential niche for microbial pathogens.

### Cell death and cytosolic DNA sensors

Microbial DNA in the cytosol is detected by several receptors that trigger multiple responses<sup>87–89</sup> (see Supplementary information S2 (box)). The cytosolic DNA sensor cyclic GMP–AMP synthase (cGAS) and the DNA-dependent activator of IRFs (DAI; also known as ZBP1) induce transcription of IRF3- and NF-κB-dependent genes, distinguishing them from AIM2 which activates the inflammasome. New evidence links some of these DNA sensors to the induction of cell death.

### Apoptosis downstream of the AIM2 inflammasome

The *Francisella* pathogenicity island (FPI) mediates the escape of phagocytosed *Francisella tularensis* from the phagosome to the cytosol where AIM2 can sense released bacterial DNA<sup>90,91</sup>. Pyroptosis occurs soon after in an AIM2–ASC–caspase 1-dependent manner<sup>92,93</sup> and surprisingly, is accompanied by the cleavage of the apoptotic caspases — namely, caspase 3, caspase 7, caspase 8 and caspase 9 (REFS 92,93). Inhibiting the expression or activity of caspase 8 in *Casp1<sup>-/-</sup>Casp11<sup>129mt/129mt</sup>* macrophages impaired the cleavage of caspase 3 and caspase 9, and rescued the cells from ASC-mediated cell death, which implicates caspase 8 as the key caspase involved in this pathway<sup>92,93</sup>. Biochemical characterization suggested that the caspase 8 death effector domain interacts with the ASC pyrin domain<sup>92,93</sup>. Collectively, these studies show that in the absence of caspase 1, oligomerized ASC within an active inflammasome can recruit and activate caspase 8 leading to apoptosis.

Plasma membrane

Cytosol

Virus

Endosome

5′-ppp dsRNA

RIG-I

ATP hydrolysis

Heterotetrameric RIG-I complex

K63 polyubiquitin

MAVS

Three-stranded MAVS filament

Prion-like MAVS aggregation

Mitochondrion

Mitochondrial membrane

REVIEWs

MAVS

TRADD

FADD

DED

DD

TRAF2, TRAF3 or TRAF6

TANK

RIPK1

Kinase

K63 ubiquitylation

Caspase 8

RIPK1 cleavage

MiniMAVS

NEMO

IKKα

IKKβ

IκB

p50 p65

NF-κB

NEMO

NAP1

TBK1

IKKε

IRF

IRF

IRF3 or IRF7 homodimers

Figure 3 | A TRADDosome-like complex on mitochondrial membranes links RIG-I and MAVS to antiviral inflammation. Infection of cells with viruses introduces viral RNA into the cytosol where it is detected by RIG-I-like receptors (RLRs), such as retinoic acid-inducible gene I (RIG-I) and melanoma differentiation-associated protein 5 (MDA5)⁷⁵. RIG-I adopts an inactive state in which the caspase activation and recruitment domains (CARDs) are sequestered and only becoming exposed upon binding of the carboxy-terminal domain (CTD) of RIG-I to RNA molecules with a terminal double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) structure and exposed 5′-triphosphate moieties. Binding to dsRNA causes dimerization of RIG-I and activation of its ATPase activity leading to ATP hydrolysis, which propels RIG-I translocation along the viral RNA, exposing the amino-terminal CARDs and making them available to bind to K63-polyubiquitin chains, as well as leading to formation of a large complex consisting of four RIG-I and four polyubiquitin chains¹⁶¹,¹⁶². This heterotetrameric complex triggers the formation of prion-like mitochondrial antiviral signalling protein (MAVS) aggregates on the mitochondrial membrane that are essential for interferon (IFN)-regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) signalling and the induction of type I IFN responses¹⁶³. These aggregates are composed of filaments that contain three intertwined helical strands (shown in red, blue and green) formed by four-sided CARD-mediated intra-filament and inter-filament interactions of MAVS with neighbouring MAVS¹⁶⁴. MAVS aggregates form a platform for the assembly of an elaborate signalling complex¹⁶³, whereby the E3 ligase tumour necrosis factor receptor (TNFR)-associated factor TRAF3 (and also, reportedly, TRAF2 or TRAF6) interacts with the TRAF-interacting motif in the proline-rich region of MAVS¹⁶⁵. TNFR1-associated death domain protein (TRADD) interaction with MAVS recruits the E3 ubiquitin ligase TRAF3 — which could perhaps mediate receptor-interacting protein kinase 1 (RIPK1) ubiquitylation — and the adaptor protein TRAF family member-associated NF-κB activator (TANK), which interacts with TANK-binding kinase 1 (TBK1) to mediate IRF3 activation⁸¹ (not shown in the figure). In an alternative pathway, TRADD interacts with FAS-associated death domain protein (FADD), RIPK1, and caspase 8. Signalling from this large complex activates the inhibitor of nuclear factor-κB (NF-κB) kinase (IKK) complex (composed of NF-κB essential modulator (NEMO), IKKα and IKKβ), in order to initiate NF-κB signalling, as well as activating NEMO, which functions with NAK-associated protein 1 (NAP1; also known as AZI2), TBK1 and IKKε to induce the activation of IRF3 or IRF7 (REF. 165). Although K63-linked polyubiquitylation of RIG-I facilitates assembly of the complex around MAVS and enhances phosphorylation of IRF3, it also subsequently targets RIPK1 for cleavage by caspase 8 to generate a RIPK1 fragment that inhibits IRF3 and terminates the antiviral type I IFN response⁸³. MiniMAVS — a product of the bicistronic MAVS transcript — can also inhibit IFN production that is induced by full-length MAVS⁷⁸. Both MAVS and miniMAVS can induce cell death through an undefined pathway⁷⁶–⁷⁸.

DD, death domain; DED, death effector domain; IκB, inhibitor of NF-κB; PRD, proline-rich domain.

REVIEWS

**Virus-induced necrosis downstream of DAI.** DAI was the first receptor for cytosolic DNA to be identified<sup>94</sup>. Notably, it contains a RHIM that interacts with the RHIM of RIPK1 or RIPK3 (REFS 95,96) (see Supplementary information S2 (box)). DAI–RIPK3-dependent virus-induced necrosis that is independent of RIPK1 and TRIF was first revealed in fibroblasts infected with murine cytomegalovirus (MCMV), which encodes a viral inhibitor of caspase 8 activation (vICA) and a viral inhibitor of RIP activation (vIRA)<sup>97</sup>. vIRA, which is encoded by the M45 gene, also contains a RHIM that interacts with the RHIM of RIPK1 or RIPK3 to inhibit necroptosis<sup>97</sup>. Infection with a mutant MCMV that encodes vIRA with a tetra-alanine substitution in the RHIM (M45mutRHIM), led to RIPK3-dependent necrosis, which was aided by the vICA-mediated inhibition of caspase 8 (REF. 98). These results provided compelling evidence for vIRA-mediated suppression of virus-induced DAI–RIPK3-dependent necrosis as a critical component of viral pathogenesis. Concordantly, expression of a RHIM-mutant DAI prevented necrosis, and RIPK3 co-immunoprecipitated with DAI in cells infected with M45mutRHIM MCMV<sup>98</sup>. These findings were consistent with a role for the RHIM-dependent interaction between DAI and RIPK3, which is necessary for the execution of virus-induced necrosis. Infection of DAI-deficient mice with M45mutRHIM MCMV permitted virus growth and dissemination<sup>98</sup>, similar to that observed in *Ripk3*<sup>−/−</sup> mice<sup>97</sup>.

---

**Cell death and the inflammasome**

Increasing evidence points to the presence of intricate connections among the pathways of cell death and those of the inflammasome that extend beyond the roles of caspase 1 and caspase 11. Members of the anti-apoptotic B cell CLL/lymphoma 2 (BCL-2) family — BCL-2 or BCL-X<sub>L</sub> (also known as BCL-2L1) — interact with NLRP1 in its inactive conformation and restrain the assembly of the NLRP1 inflammasome<sup>99</sup>. BCL-2 can negatively regulate NLRP3 inflammasome activation by protecting against mitochondrial dysfunction induced by activators such as ATP<sup>100</sup>. BCL-2 presumably prevents the cytosolic release of mitochondrial DNA during apoptosis, which was shown to be important for activation of NLRP3 (REF. 100). These studies provide examples of how components of the anti-apoptotic machinery suppress the inflammasome pathways of host defence. The RIPK1–FADD–caspase 8 and RIPK1–RIPK3 modules have also been reported to regulate the inflammasome under specific circumstances, and these are detailed below.

---

**RIPK3-mediated activation of the NLRP3 inflammasome.** A surprising role for the ripoptosome in pro-IL-1β processing was first revealed when macrophages were treated with compound A, which is a mimetic of second mitochondria-derived activator of caspase (SMAC; also known as DIABLO) that antagonizes XIAP and promotes

Figure 4 | **A centre stage for caspase 8 in canonical and non-canonical pathways of inflammasome activation.** Caspase 8 and FAS-associated death domain protein (FADD) act upstream of both the NOD-, LRR- and CARD-containing 4 (NLRC4) and NOD-, LRR- and pyrin domain-containing 3 (NLRP3) inflammasomes. *Salmonella* infection (depicted by red arrows) induces the recruitment of caspase 8 to the NLRC4 inflammasome, which is triggered when *Salmonella* flagellin is translocated from phagosomes into the cytosol via activity of *Salmonella* pathogenicity island 2 (SPI-2)<sup>120</sup>. Cytosolic flagellin is recognized by neuronal apoptosis inhibitory protein 5 (NAIP5) or NAIP6 (in mouse macrophages) and triggers the assembly of the NLRC4 inflammasome, whereby NLRC4 serves as an adaptor mediating the recruitment of caspase 1 via caspase activation and recruitment domain (CARD)–CARD interactions, activation of caspase 1 and proteolytic cleavage of pro-interleukin-1β (pro-IL-1β)<sup>166</sup>. Upon engagement of dectin 1 (also known as CLEC7A) by curdlan or other β-glucans on fungi and *Mycobacteria* spp. (depicted by dark blue arrows), spleen tyrosine kinase (SYK)-dependent signalling induces the recruitment of a complex containing CARD9, B cell lymphoma–leukaemia 10 (BCL-10), MALT lymphoma translocation protein 1 (MALT1), caspase 8 and ASC that mediates processing of pro-IL-1β independently of caspase 1 (the depicted presence of FADD in the complex is hypothetical; ASC is not depicted)<sup>117</sup>. The internalization of some strains of *Candida albicans* by dectin 1 is a prerequisite for caspase 1-mediated processing of pro-IL-1β in a manner that is dependent on the presence of an undefined ligand recognized by NLRP3 (REF. 117). The engagement of Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4) by lipopolysaccharide (LPS; depicted by light blue arrows) concurrently with FAS (also known as CD95 and TNFRSF6)<sup>116</sup> or shortly after treatment with endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress-inducing drugs<sup>115</sup> leads to caspase 8-dependent processing of IL-1β (depicted by light blue arrows) without the participation of ASC. In an alternative pathway, FADD and caspase 8 act upstream of the canonical caspase 11-independent (induced by LPS and ATP; not shown) and the non-canonical caspase 11-dependent (induced by *Escherichia coli*, *Citrobacter rodentium* and enterohemorrhagic *E. coli* (EHEC)) activation of the NLRP3 inflammasome<sup>119</sup> (depicted by green arrows; see also FIG. 1 and Supplementary information S1 (box)). Note that the exit of LPS from phagosomes containing *E. coli*, *C. rodentium* and EHEC has not yet been shown. Procaspace 8 is recruited to FAS via FADD<sup>140</sup> (also see BOX 3), and may hypothetically be recruited to TLR4–TRIF (TIR domain-containing adaptor protein inducing IFNβ) via FADD and receptor-interacting protein kinase 1 (RIPK1), similar to the recruitment of the ripoptosome to TLR3 (see FIG. 2; RIPK1 is not shown here). Thus, a FADD–caspase 8 complex can contribute to NLRP3 inflammasome activation, depending on the specific cellular and inflammatory context. The model depicted here predicts that heterodimers of procaspase 8 with the long isoform of FLIP (FLIP<sub>L</sub>) may dominate the association with FADD upstream of the NLRP3 inflammasome<sup>123</sup>. The FADD–procaspase 8 complex is shown as separate from the NLRP3 inflammasome complex, although it may interact with the NLRP3 inflammasome<sup>102,119</sup>. The FADD–procaspase 8 complex may also be part of the NLRC4 inflammasome complex (red arrows; shown from TLR4 to FADD–caspase 8 to NLRC4 inflammasome<sup>120</sup>). BIR, baculovirus IAP repeat; PYD, pyrin domain; CARD, caspase activation and recruitment domain; DD, death domain; DED, death effector domain; FASL, FAS ligand (also known as CD95L and TNFSF6); GlcN, glucosamine; *M. leprae*, *Mycobacterium leprae*; NBD, nucleotide-binding domain; RHIM, RIP homotypic interaction motif; *S. Typhimurium*, *Salmonella enterica* serovar Typhimurium; TIR, Toll/IL-1R; TRAM, TRIF-related adaptor molecule.

- Curdlan
- Extracellular C. albicans
- Aspergillus spp.
- M. leprae

S. Typhimurium

Dectin 1
Dectin 1
C. albicans

FASL
TLR4 dimer
S. Typhimurium
E. coli
C. rodentium
EHEC

SPI-2
Flagellin
CARD9
BCL-10
MALT1
FADD
NLRC4 inflammasome
NAIP5 or
NAIP6
Flagellin
NBD
NBD
NBD
NBD
BIR
CARD
CARD
CARD
CARD
BIR
BIR
p20
p20
p20
p20
p10
p10
p10
p10
Caspase 1

FAS
DD
TIR
TIR
+ ER stress
ER
Unknown ligand
FADD
DED
DD
DED
DD
DED
Caspase 8
p18
p10
FLIP<sub>L</sub>
NLRP3 inflammasome
ASC
CARD
PYD
PYD
NLRP3
PYD
NBD
LRR
p10
p20
CARD
Caspase 1
ASC polymer
Caspase 1
polymer
Cleavage
Pro-IL-1β
IL-1β

LPS
GlcN
GlcN
?
Direct
binding
CARD
p20
p10
Oligomerization
and activation
CARD
p20
p10
Caspase 11
Bacterial
mRNA
RHIM
TRAM
TRIF

the rapid degradation of CIAP1 and CIAP2 (REF. 101)  
(BOX 4). Consistent with studies describing the ripoptosome  
(see above)⁶⁰,⁶¹, compound A increased the association of  
RIPK1 with caspase 8 particularly when macrophages  
were previously primed with LPS¹⁰¹. The combination  
of LPS and compound A was sufficient for IL-1β secretion, which  
required both the NLRP3–ASC-caspase 1  
inflammasome and caspase 8 in a caspase 1-independent  
manner¹⁰¹. Because IAP depletion can promote the formation  
of RIPK1–RIPK3 complexes downstream of ripoptosome assembly⁶⁰,⁶¹, testing the involvement of RIPK3  
identified an important role for this kinase in ROS generation, and subsequent activation of caspase 8 and the  
NLRP3 inflammasome¹⁰¹. RIPK1 kinase activity was surprisingly dispensable, which is a finding attributed to either  
protection of ‘pre-activated’ pools of RIPK1 from subsequent necrostatin 1 treatment, or RIPK3 activity occurring  
independently of RIPK1. Collectively, these results hinted  
at the existence of a negative regulatory function for IAPs  
in IL-1β secretion that is mediated via the ripoptosome.

The generation of mice lacking caspase 8 expression  
specifically in dendritic cells (DCs) also revealed an involvement of RIPK3 in activation of the NLRP3  
inflammasome¹⁰². These mice — termed C8⁻ mice —  
showed increased susceptibility to LPS-induced septic  
shock, which was preceded by an increase in serum  
levels of IL-1β. Treatment with necrostatin 1 or genetic  
ablation of *Ripk3* prolonged the survival of C8⁻ mice.  
Notably, IL-1β production by C8⁻ DCs in response to  
LPS required ASC and NLRP3, but not a second activating  
signal like ATP¹⁰² (see Supplementary information S1  
(box)). Stimulation of wild-type DCs with LPS showed  
that FADD and caspase 8 were associated with NLRP3.  
These observations raised the possibility that caspase 8  
may associate with NLRP3 under certain circumstances  
and prevent inflammasome activation¹⁰¹.

The absence of caspase 8 led to robust association  
of RIPK1 and RIPK3 with FADD, forming the core  
‘necrosome’. Both RIPK1 and RIPK3 were important for  
IL-1β production, and so were the pseudokinase mixed  
lineage kinase domain-like protein (MLKL) and the mitochondrial serine/threonine-protein phosphatase PGAM5,  
which are reported to be sequentially activated during  
necroptosis¹⁰³–¹⁰⁵ (BOX 1). How PGAM5 and MLKL are  
related to inflammasome activation remains enigmatic,  
especially in light of new evidence that PGAM5 is not necessary for necroptosis¹⁰⁶–¹⁰⁸, and that MLKL phosphorylated by RIPK3 oligomerizes and translocates to  
the plasma membrane during necroptosis to compromise  
plasma membrane integrity¹⁰⁹–¹¹². However, despite the  
involvement of necrosome components, necroptosis was  
not observed but rather the NLRP3 inflammasome  
was activated.

A role for RIPK3 in NLRP3 inflammasome activation  
is unexpected, especially since *Ripk3⁻/⁻* mice were reported  
to produce normal amounts of IL-1β after injection with  
LPS¹¹³. The physiological relevance of RIPK3 in inflammasome activation under these particular conditions —  
when IAPs are inhibited or caspase 8 is absent — remains  
to be elucidated. Targeting of caspase 8 by pathogens in  
an effort to subvert the extrinsic pathway of apoptosis

could instead conceivably trigger NLRP3 inflammasome  
activation to defend the host. Perhaps secondary signals  
facilitate caspase 8 cleavage to permit inflammasome  
activation. The presence of FLIPL in these complexes  
could prevent further involvement of the necrosome.

**A non-canonical caspase 8 pathway for IL-1β processing.** A priming signal is required to upregulate NLRP3  
and pro-IL-1β followed by a second signal that activates  
the inflammasome¹¹⁴ (see Supplementary information S1  
(box)). Several studies have revealed that this second signal  
can be provided by receptors such as TLR4 (REFS 70,71,115),  
FAS (also known as CD95 and TNFRSF6)¹¹⁶ or dectin 1  
(also known as CLEC7A)¹¹⁷ independently of the canonical  
inflammasome. In this pathway, caspase 8 instead  
of caspase 1 mediates IL-1β processing, placing it at the  
crossroads of apoptotic and pro-inflammatory signaling. This was first reported to occur in macrophages  
in a TRIF-dependent manner in response to TLR3 or  
TLR4 engagement¹¹⁸. Recombinant caspase 8 was shown  
to cleave pro-IL-1β *in vitro* at the same site as caspase 1.  
TLR3 or TLR4 ligands eventually led to delayed apoptosis¹¹⁸, which is reminiscent of the previously reported  
TLR3- and TLR4-induced caspase 8-dependent apoptosis  
that is mediated by the TRIF–RIPK1–FADD–caspase 8  
pathway⁵¹,⁵². Together, these observations led to speculation that perhaps a similar TRIF–RIPK1–FADD–caspase  
8 pathway was responsible for pro-IL-1β processing.

In the context of inflammatory signalling, caspase 8 is  
recruited to surface PRRs, such as dectin 1 and TLR4, in a  
manner that is similar to its delivery to surface death receptors (BOX 2). In fact, the engagement of FAS (the expression of which is induced on macrophages and DCs by  
TLR signalling) stimulates the FADD-dependent recruitment of caspase 8 and its activation, leading to increased  
levels of pro-IL-1β as well as its cleavage and secretion  
independently of NLRP3, ASC, caspase 1 or caspase 11  
(REF. 116) (FIG. 4). This may benefit the host during inflammation when FAS is engaged by FAS ligand (FASL; also  
known as CD95L and TNFSF6) on adaptive immune cells.  
RIPK3 had no apparent role¹¹⁶. Concordantly, although  
IL-1β cleavage was impaired in *Casp8⁻/⁻Ripk3⁻/⁻* and  
*Fadd⁻/⁻Ripk3⁻/⁻* macrophages (BOX 2), it proceeded normally in *Ripk3⁻/⁻* macrophages contrasting with the  
RIPK3-dependent cleavage of IL-1β observed after treatment with LPS and compound A (see above)¹⁰¹. Similarly,  
engagement of dectin 1 with different strains of *Candida albicans* and the β-glucan curdlan in human DCs, revealed the presence of caspase 8 in immunoprecipitates containing the NF-κB-activating CARD9–BCL-10–MALT1 (MALT lymphoma translocation protein 1) scaffold assembled upon dectin 1 – SYK (spleen tyrosine kinase) signalling. This scaffold controlled caspase 8 activity and triggered the assembly of a MALT1–caspase 8–ASC inflammasome that was responsible for pro-IL-1β processing¹¹⁷ (FIG. 4).

Using *Casp8⁻/⁻Ripk3⁻/⁻* macrophages, an underlying role for the non-canonical caspase 8 pathway of inflammasome activation was also revealed in response to *Yersinia* infection⁷⁰,⁷¹; inflammation accompanying endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress; canonical and non-canonical triggers of the NLRP3 inflammasome¹¹⁹;
and also the Salmonella-induced NLRC4 inflammasome$^{120}$ (FIG. 4). TLR4 expression was deemed to be important in all of these cases. Casp8$^{-/-}$Ripk3$^{-/-}$ macrophages, and in some studies those that were Fadd$^{-/-}$Ripk3$^{-/-}$ (REFSs 70,119), failed to cleave caspase 1 and produce IL-1β in response to these triggers$^{70,71,115,119,120}$. Again, RIPK3 was dispensable. Caspase 8 cleavage, presumably in a larger complex with RIPK1 and FADD, was induced in response to Yersinia infection in a manner dependent on TLR4–TRIF and the Yersinia virulence factor YopJ$^{70,71}$. In this setting, caspase 8 — along with RIPK1 and FADD — mediated caspase 1 activation, and subsequent IL-1β and IL-18 secretion independently of canonical inflammasomes$^{70,71}$. Compared to other TLR ligands, only stimulation of wild-type macrophages with LPS and ER stress-inducing agents led to the induction of pro-IL-1β, and its cleavage — which had previously been reported$^{121}$ — proceeded independently of effectors of the unfolded protein response, including PRKR-like ER kinase (PERK; also known as EIF2AK3), inositol-requiring enzyme 1α (IRE1α; also known as ERN1) and activating transcription factor 6α (ATF6α; also known as ATF6)$^{115}$. Although NLRP3 and ASC were non-essential — contradicting with the previously reported activation of the NLRP3 inflammasome in response to ER stress$^{121}$ — the response was impaired in *Tlr4*${}^{-/-}$, *Trif*${}^{-/-}$ and *Casp1*${}^{-/-}$*Casp11*${}^{129mt/129mt}$ mice$^{115}$. Endogenous TLR4 agonists — such as high mobility group protein B1 (HMGB1) — that are present during chronic inflammatory conditions$^{122}$ may contribute to inflammation through this pathway in cells undergoing ER stress$^{115}$.

Interestingly, canonical triggers of the NLRP3 inflammasome, as well as Salmonella infection, led to caspase 8 cleavage in an NLRP3–ASC- or NLRC4–ASC-dependent mechanism, respectively, but NLRP3 and ASC were dispensable for caspase 8 cleavage in response to non-canonical triggers such as *E. coli* or *C. rodentium*$^{119,120}$. FADD and caspase 8 had an accessory role in transcriptional upregulation of NLRP3 and pro-IL-1β, and interacted with core components of the NLRP3 inflammasome to promote procaspase 1 activation$^{119,120}$. Casp8$^{-/-}$Ripk3$^{-/-}$ and Fadd$^{-/-}$Ripk3$^{-/-}$ mice had significantly reduced levels of serum IL-1β and IL-1α after challenge with a lethal dose of LPS, and these mice higher numbers of *C. rodentium* in the stools after Citrobacter infection, a setting in which NLRP3 has an important role$^{119}$.

Notably, studies using Casp8$^{-/-}$Ripk3$^{-/-}$ macrophages did not report the spontaneous necrosome-dependent IL-1β secretion observed in caspase 8-deficient DCs (see above)$^{101}$. The most obvious difference is the expression of RIPK3, the association of which with RIPK1 and FADD in caspase 8-deficient DCs was found to be important for IL-1β secretion$^{101}$. These findings suggest yet more complexity in the activation of the NLRP3 inflammasome. A clue comes from a recent study showing that FLIP$_L$ interacts with NLRP3 and caspase 1, and that hemizygotic deletion of the gene encoding FLIP impaired canonical NLRP3 inflammasome activation$^{123}$. Together, these data suggest a model whereby FLIP$_L$–caspase 8 heterodimers promote NLRP3 inflammasome activation, while simultaneously preventing RIPK3-mediated activation of the inflammasome, similar to their proposed role in opposing RIPK3-mediated necroptosis$^{124}$. Perhaps when caspase 8 is compromised, as in caspase 8-deficient DCs, the unopposed interaction between RIPK3 and RIPK1 mediates LPS-induced activation of the NLRP3 inflammasome.

### Conclusion and perspectives

The very same pathways that mediate pathogen recognition and inflammation can also trigger cell death, emphasizing the importance of cell death in host defence. Elucidating the extent to which these pathways are integrated, and how decisions between cell death and inflammation are made will be important. There is a need to characterize the individual components of the signalling complexes that assemble around PRRs and their adaptors, and how their nature changes over time and in response to different physiological triggers. This will identify the molecular checkpoints in these pathways that determine whether or not — and if so, when — cell death is executed. It will be important to identify regulators of the executioners of cell death and investigate the conditions under which they become incorporated into or excluded from inflammatory signalling complexes. Finally, a better appreciation of the cross-regulatory relationships between different forms of cell death and how these pathways are controlled will be important for understanding their roles in the setting of human disease.

1. Wallach, D., Kang, T. B. & Kovalenko, A. Concepts of tissue injury and cell death in inflammation: a historical perspective. *Nature Rev. Immunol.* **14**, 51–59 (2014).
2. Janeway, C. A. Jr. Pillars article: approaching the asymptote? Evolution and revolution in immunology. *Cold Spring Harb Symp Quant Biol.* 1989. 54: 1–13. *J. Immunol.* **191**, 4475–4487 (2013).
3. Matzinger, P. Tolerance, danger, and the extended family. *Annu. Rev. Immunol.* **12**, 991–1045 (1994).
4. Medzhitov, R. Approaching the asymptote: 20 years later. *Immunity* **30**, 766–775 (2009).
5. Martinon, F., Mayor, A. & Tschopp, J. The inflammasomes: guardians of the body. *Annu. Rev. Immunol.* **27**, 229–265 (2009).
6. Zychlinsky, A., Prevost, M. C. & Sansonetti, P. J. Shigella flexneri induces apoptosis in infected macrophages. *Nature* **358**, 167–169 (1992).
7. Li, P. *et al.* Mice deficient in IL-1β-converting enzyme are defective in production of mature IL-1β and resistant to endotoxic shock. *Cell* **80**, 401–411 (1995).
8. Kuida, K. *et al.* Altered cytokine export and apoptosis in mice deficient in interleukin-1β converting enzyme. *Science* **267**, 2000–2003 (1995).
References 7 and 8 report gene targeting of *Casp1* in mice using 129 strain-derived ES cells. Because of the recently identified *Casp11* passenger mutation in 129 mice (see reference 11), these mice should now be referred to as *Casp1*${}^{-/-}$*Casp11*${}^{129mt/129mt}$.
9. Bergsbaken, T., Fink, S. L. & Cookson, B. T. Pyroptosis: host cell death and inflammation. *Nature Rev. Microbiol.* **7**, 99–109 (2009).
10. Broz, P., von Moltke, J., Jones, J. W., Vance, R. E. & Monack, D. M. Differential requirement for caspase-1 autoproteolysis in pathogen-induced cell death and cytokine processing. *Cell Host Microbe* **8**, 471–483 (2010).
11. Kayagaki, N. *et al.* Non-canonical inflammasome activation targets caspase-11. *Nature* **479**, 117–121 (2011).  
This study shows that the *Casp11* locus in 129 mice is mutated, which attenuates caspase 11 expression. The generation of C57BL/6 *Casp11*-targeted mice reveals the caspase 11 is engaged by a non-canonical inflammasome. Rescue of caspase 11 expression in *Casp1*${}^{-/-}$*Casp11*${}^{129mt/129mt}$ mice confirms the essential role of caspase 1 in IL-1β production and shows that caspase 11, rather than caspase 1, is required for non-canonical inflammasome-triggered macrophage cell death and LPS-induced endotoxaemia.
12. Faucheu, C. *et al.* A novel human protease similar to the interleukin-1 beta converting enzyme induces apoptosis in transfected cells. *EMBO J.* **14**, 1914–1922 (1995).
REVIEW S

13. Kamens, J. *et al.* Identification and characterization of ICH-2, a novel member of the interleukin-1β-converting enzyme family of cysteine proteases. *J. Biol. Chem.* **270**, 15250–15256 (1995).

14. Munday, N. A. *et al.* Molecular cloning and pro-apoptotic activity of ICE<sub>relII</sub> and ICE<sub>relIII</sub>, members of the ICE/CED-3 family of cysteine proteases. *J. Biol. Chem.* **270**, 15870–15876 (1995).

15. Wang, S. *et al.* Identification and characterization of Ich-3, a member of the interleukin-1β converting enzyme (ICE)/Ced-3 family and an upstream regulator of ICE. *J. Biol. Chem.* **271**, 20580–20587 (1996).

16. Wang, S. *et al.* Murine caspase-11, an ICE-interacting protease, is essential for the activation of ICE. *Cell* **92**, 501–509 (1998). This paper originally reported the targeted disruption of *Casp11* using 129 ES cells and showed that, similar to the 129 strain-derived supposed ‘*Casp1−/−*’ mice (references 7 and 8), 129 strain-derived *Casp11−/−* mice are resistant to LPS-induced endotoxaemia.

17. Kang, S. J. *et al.* Dual role of caspase-11 in mediating activation of caspase-1 and caspase-3 under pathological conditions. *J. Cell Biol.* **149**, 613–622 (2000).

18. Simpson, E. M. *et al.* Genetic variation among 129 substrains and its importance for targeted mutagenesis in mice. *Nature Genet.* **16**, 19–27 (1997).

19. Mariathasan, S. *et al.* Differential activation of the inflammasome by caspase-1 adaptors ASC and Ipaf. *Nature* **430**, 213–218 (2004).

20. Broz, P. *et al.* Redundant roles for inflammasome receptors NLRP3 and NLRC4 in host defense against Salmonella. *J. Exp. Med.* **207**, 1745–1755 (2010).

21. Broz, P. *et al.* Caspase-11 increases susceptibility to Salmonella infection in the absence of caspase-1. *Nature* **490**, 288–291 (2012).

22. Gurung, P. *et al.* Toll or interleukin-1 receptor (TIR) domain-containing adaptor inducing interferon-β (TRIF)-mediated caspase-11 protease production integrates Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4) protein- and Nlrp3 inflammasome-mediated host defense against enteropathogens. *J. Biol. Chem.* **287**, 34474–34483 (2012).

23. Rathinam, V. A. *et al.* TRIF licenses caspase-11-dependent NLRP3 inflammasome activation by gram-negative bacteria. *Cell* **150**, 606–619 (2012). References 22 and 23 follow up on the observations in reference 24 and demonstrate the TLR4–TRIF–IFNAR-dependent induction and activation of caspase 11. Caspase 11 subsequently synergizes with the assembled NLRP3 inflammasome to cleave caspase 1 and to mediate caspase 1-independent cell death.

24. Sander, L. E. *et al.* Detection of prokaryotic mRNA signifies microbial viability and promotes immunity. *Nature* **474**, 385–389 (2011). This paper reveals TRIF-dependent NLRP3 inflammasome activation upon phagocytosis of live but not dead Gram-negative bacteria in the absence of virulence factors, and in a manner dependent on prokaryotic mRNA, which is a viability-associated pathogen-associated molecular pattern. The role of TRIF is shown to be independent of *Nlrp3* transcription or inflammasome ‘priming’.

25. Takeuchi, O. & Akira, S. Pattern recognition receptors and inflammation. *Cell* **140**, 805–820 (2010).

26. Case, C. L. *et al.* Caspase-11 stimulates rapid flagellin-independent pyroptosis in response to *Legionella pneumophila*. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **110**, 1851–1856 (2013).

27. Casson, C. N. *et al.* Caspase-11 activation in response to bacterial secretion systems that access the host cytosol. *PLoS Pathog.* **9**, e1003400 (2013).

28. Aachoui, Y. *et al.* Caspase-11 protects against bacteria that escape the vacuole. *Science* **339**, 975–978 (2013). This study highlights the non-canonical caspase 11 inflammasome as an important line of defence against cytosolic bacteria that acts independently of NLRP3, NLRC4 and ASC, which constitute canonical inflammasomes.

29. Nakamura, N. *et al.* Endosomes are specialized platforms for bacterial sensing and NOD2 signalling. *Nature* **509**, 240–244 (2014). Two endolysosomal transporters, SLC15A3 and SLC15A4, are shown to mediate the generation of endosomal membrane tubules and the endosomal egress of bacterial components to activate the cytosolic PRR NOD2.

30. Meunier, E. *et al.* Caspase-11 activation requires lysis of pathogen-containing vacuoles by IFN-induced GTPases. *Nature* **509**, 366–370 (2014). This study shows that guanylate-binding proteins mediate the lysis of bacteria-containing phagosomes and subsequent activation of the non-canonical caspase 11 inflammasome. This same process also recruits galectin 8 to contain bacteria in autophagosomes and limit caspase 11 activation.

31. Hagar, J. A., Powell, D. A., Aachoui, Y., Ernst, R. K. & Miao, E. A. Cytoplasmic LPS activates caspase-11: implications in TLR4-independent endotoxic shock. *Science* **341**, 1250–1253 (2013).

32. Kayagaki, N. *et al.* Noncanonical inflammasome activation by intracellular LPS independent of TLR4. *Science* **341**, 1246–1249 (2013). References 31 and 32 reveal the existence of a cytoplasmic LPS sensor. Although unidentified in these papers, the sensor is distinct from the prototypical LPS sensor, TLR4.

33. Marshall, J. C. Why have clinical trials in sepsis failed? *Trends Mol. Med.* **20**, 195–203 (2014).

34. Seok, J. *et al.* Genomic responses in mouse models poorly mimic human inflammatory diseases. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **110**, 3507–3512 (2013).

35. Lin, X. Y., Choi, M. S. & Porter, A. G. Expression analysis of the human caspase-1 subfamily reveals specific regulation of the CASP5 gene by lipopolysaccharide and interferon-γ. *J. Biol. Chem.* **275**, 39920–39926 (2000). 36. Kajiwara, Y. *et al.* A critical role for human caspase-4 in endotoxin sensitivity. *J. Immunol.* **193**, 335–343 (2014).

37. Wallach, D., Kang, T. B., Yang, S. H. & Kovalenko, A. The *in vivo* significance of necrosis: Lessons from exploration of caspase-8 function. *Cytokine Growth Factor Rev.* **25**, 157–165 (2013).

38. Oberst, A. *et al.* Catalytic activity of the caspase-8–FLIP<sub>L</sub> complex inhibits RIPK3-dependent necrosis. *Nature* **471**, 363–367 (2011).

39. Gunther, C. *et al.* Caspase-8 regulates TNF-α-induced epithelial necrosis and terminal ileitis. *Nature* **477**, 335–339 (2011). This study shows that the specific deletion of caspase 8 in the intestinal epithelium of mice leads to the spontaneous development of colitis, which occurs as a result of increased intestinal epithelial cell death that is triggered by TNF-mediated, RIPK3-dependent necrosis. Increased RIPK3 expression and necrosis is also found in the terminal ileum of patients with Crohn’s disease.

40. Ben Moshe, T. *et al.* Role of caspase-8 in hepatocyte response to infection and injury in mice. *Hepatology* **45**, 1014–1024 (2007).

41. Ben Moshe, T. *et al.* Cell-autonomous and non-cell-autonomous functions of caspase-8. *Cytokine Growth Factor Rev.* **19**, 209–217 (2008).

42. Kovalenko, A. *et al.* Caspase-8 deficiency in epidermal keratinocytes triggers an inflammatory skin disease. *J. Exp. Med.* **206**, 2161–2177 (2009). This study shows that the specific deletion of the gene encoding caspase 8 in mouse keratinocytes, or the expression of an enzymatically inactive caspase 8 that is unable to mediate apoptosis, results in chronic skin inflammation.

43. Kaiser, W. J. *et al.* RIP3 mediates the embryonic lethality of caspase-8-deficient mice. *Nature* **471**, 368–372 (2011). References 38 and 43 show that RIPK3 deficiency rescues the embryonic lethality that occurs in caspase 8-deficient mice.

44. Chan, F. K. *et al.* A role for tumor necrosis factor receptor-2 and receptor-interacting protein in programmed necrosis and antiviral responses. *J. Biol. Chem.* **278**, 51613–51621 (2003).

45. Feng, S. *et al.* Cleavage of RIP3 inactivates its caspase-independent apoptosis pathway by removal of kinase domain. *Cell Signal* **19**, 2056–2067 (2007).

46. Lin, Y., Devin, A., Rodriguez, Y. & Liu, Z. G. Cleavage of the death domain kinase RIP by caspase-8 prompts TNF-induced apoptosis. *Genes Dev.* **13**, 2514–2526 (1999).

47. Cho, Y. S. *et al.* Phosphorylation-driven assembly of the RIP1–RIP3 complex regulates programmed necrosis and virus-induced inflammation. *Cell* **137**, 1112–1123 (2009).

48. He, S. *et al.* Receptor interacting protein kinase-3 determines cellular necrotic response to TNF-α.

49. Zhang, D. W. *et al.* RIP3, an energy metabolism regulator that switches TNF-induced cell death from apoptosis to necrosis. *Science* **325**, 332–336 (2009).

50. Meylan, E. *et al.* RIP1 is an essential mediator of Toll-like receptor 3-induced NF-κB activation. *Nature Immunol.* **5**, 503–507 (2004). References 47–50 identify RIPK3 as the central orchestrator of necroptosis.

51. Kaiser, W. J. & Offermann, M. K. Apoptosis induced by the toll-like receptor adaptor TRIF is dependent on its receptor interacting protein homotypic interaction motif. *J. Immunol.* **174**, 4942–4952 (2005).

52. Han, K. J. *et al.* Mechanisms of the TRIF-induced interferon-stimulated response element and NF-κB activation and apoptosis pathways. *J. Biol. Chem.* **279**, 15652–15661 (2004).

53. Sato, S. *et al.* Toll/IL-1 receptor domain-containing adaptor inducing IFN-β (TRIF) associates with TNF receptor-associated factor 6 and TANK-binding kinase 1, and activates two distinct transcription factors, NF-κB and IFN-regulatory factor-3, in the Toll-like receptor signaling. *J. Immunol.* **171**, 4304–4310 (2003).

54. Cusson-Hermance, N., Khurana, S., Lee, T. H., Fitzgerald, K. A. & Kelliher, M. A. Rip1 mediates the Trif-dependent toll-like receptor 3- and 4-induced NF-κB activation but does not contribute to interferon regulatory factor 3 activation. *J. Biol. Chem.* **280**, 36560–36566 (2005).

55. Ermolaeva, M. A. *et al.* Function of TRADD in tumor necrosis factor receptor 1 signaling and in TRIF-dependent inflammatory responses. *Nature Immunol.* **9**, 1037–1046 (2008).

56. He, S., Liang, Y., Shao, F. & Wang, X. Toll-like receptors activate programmed necrosis in macrophages through a receptor-interacting kinase-3-mediated pathway. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **108**, 20054–20059 (2011).

57. Kaiser, W. J. *et al.* Toll-like receptor 3-mediated necrosis via TRIF, RIP3, and MLKL. *J. Biol. Chem.* **288**, 31268–31279 (2013). References 56 and 57 show that TRIF mediates TLR3- and TLR4-induced necrosis in a RIPK3-dependent manner. In this paper, necrosis is additionally shown to be independent of RIPK1 expression or kinase activity.

58. Kalai, M. *et al.* Tipping the balance between necrosis and apoptosis in human and murine cells treated with interferon and dsRNA. *Cell Death Differ.* **9**, 981–994 (2002).

59. Ma, Y., Temkin, V., Liu, H. & Pope, R. M. NF-κB protects macrophages from lipopolysaccharide-induced cell death: the role of caspase 8 and receptor-interacting protein. *J. Biol. Chem.* **280**, 41827–41834 (2005).

60. Feoktistova, M. *et al.* cIAPs block Ripoptosome formation, a RIP1/caspase-8 containing intracellular cell death complex differentially regulated by cFLIP isoforms. *Mol. Cell* **43**, 449–463 (2011).

61. Tenev, T. *et al.* The Ripoptosome, a signaling platform that assembles in response to genotoxic stress and loss of IAPs. *Mol. Cell* **43**, 432–448 (2011). References 60 and 61 show that CIAP inhibition leads to the spontaneous assembly of a RIPK1-centred ripoptosome that mediates cell death. In reference 59, the ripoptosome is shown to contain TRIF, which recruits the complex to TLR3 upon stimulation with the TLR3 ligand poly(I:C).

62. Bertrand, M. J. *et al.* cIAP1 and cIAP2 facilitate cancer cell survival by functioning as E3 ligases that promote RIP1 ubiquitination. *Mol. Cell* **30**, 689–700 (2008).

63. Dillon, C. P. *et al.* RIPK1 blocks early postnatal lethality mediated by caspase-8 and RIPK3. *Cell* **157**, 1189–1202 (2014).

64. Kaiser, W. J. *et al.* RIP1 suppresses innate immune necrotic as well as apoptotic cell death during mammalian parturition. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **111**, 7753–7758 (2014).

65. Rickard, J. A. *et al.* RIPK1 regulates RIPK3-MLKL-driven systemic inflammation and emergency hematopoiesis. *Cell* **157**, 1175–1188 (2014). References 63–65 reveal a novel suppressive function of RIPK1 in postnatally protecting mice against inflammation and cell death.

66. Newton, K. *et al.* Activity of protein kinase RIPK3 determines whether cells die by necroptosis or apoptosis. *Science* **343**, 1357–1360 (2014). This study uses mice expressing catalytically inactive RIPK3 to reveal the necessity of RIPK3 kinase activity for necroptosis and associated pathology, and also for protection against FADD- or caspase 8-mediated apoptosis and embryonic lethality. Unlike RIPK1-deficient mice, mice with a catalytically inactive RIPK1 are viable.

67. Berger, S. B. *et al.* Cutting Edge: RIP1 kinase activity is dispensable for normal development but is a key regulator of inflammation in SHARPIN-deficient mice. *J. Immunol.* **192**, 5476–5480 (2014).

68. Polykratis, A. *et al.* Cutting Edge: RIPK1 kinase inactive mice are viable and protected from TNF-induced necroptosis *in vivo*. *J. Immunol.* http://dx.doi.org/10.4049/jimmunol.1400590 (2014).

References 66–68 show that kinase activity is dispensable for the postnatal repressive functions of RIPK1.

69. Philip, N. H. & Brodsky, I. E. Cell death programs in Yersinia immunity and pathogenesis. *Front. Cell. Infect. Microbiol.* **2**, 149 (2012).

70. Philip, N. H. *et al.* Caspase-8 mediates caspase-1 processing and innate immune defense in response to bacterial blockade of NF-κB and MAPK signaling. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* http://dx.doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1403252111 (2014).

71. Weng, D. *et al.* Caspase-8 and RIP kinases regulate bacteria-induced innate immune responses and cell death. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* http://dx.doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1403477111 (2014).

References 70 and 71 show that TLR4–TRIF-initiated, RIPK1–FADD–caspase 8-mediated cell death and caspase 1 activation are crucial host responses against the activity of the virulence factor YopJ, which is expressed by *Yersinia* species.

72. Linkermann, A. & Green, D. R. Necroptosis. *N. Engl. J. Med.* **370**, 455–465 (2014).

73. Kariko, K., Ni, H., Capodici, J., Lamphier, M. & Weissman, D. mRNA is an endogenous ligand for Toll-like receptor 3. *J. Biol. Chem.* **279**, 12542–12550 (2004).

74. Cavassani, K. A. *et al.* TLR3 is an endogenous sensor of tissue necrosis during acute inflammatory events. *J. Exp. Med.* **205**, 2609–2621 (2008).

75. Goubau, D., Deddouche, S. & Reis e Sousa, C. Cytosolic sensing of viruses. *Immunity* **38**, 855–869 (2013).

76. Lei, Y. *et al.* MAVS-mediated apoptosis and its inhibition by viral proteins. *PLoS ONE* **4**, e5466 (2009).

77. Yu, C. Y., Chiang, R. L., Chang, T. H., Liao, C. L. & Lin, Y. L. The interferon stimulator mitochondrial antiviral signaling protein facilitates cell death by disrupting the mitochondrial membrane potential and by activating caspases. *J. Virol.* **84**, 2421–2431 (2010).

References 76 and 77 show that MAVS, which is better known for its roles in initiating an antiviral type I IFN response, can also initiate antiviral apoptosis.

78. Brubaker, S. W., Gauthier, A. E., Mills, E. W., Ingolia, N. T. & Kagan, J. C. A bicistronic MAVS transcript highlights a class of truncated variants in antiviral immunity. *Cell* **156**, 800–811 (2014).

79. Balachandran, S., Thomas, E. & Barber, G. N. A FADD-dependent innate immune mechanism in mammalian cells. *Nature* **432**, 401–405 (2004). This paper provides the first evidence that FADD is important for protective antiviral cellular responses, including the production of type I IFNs.

80. Kawai, T. *et al.* IPS-1, an adaptor triggering RIG-I- and Mda5-mediated type I interferon induction. *Nature Immunol.* **6**, 981–988 (2005).

81. Michallet, M. C. *et al.* TRADD protein is an essential component of the RIG-like helicase antiviral pathway. *Immunity* **28**, 651–661 (2008).

82. Takahashi, K. *et al.* Roles of caspase-8 and caspase-10 in innate immune responses to double-stranded RNA. *J. Immunol.* **176**, 4520–4524 (2006).

83. Rajput, A. *et al.* RIG-I RNA helicase activation of IRF3 transcription factor is negatively regulated by caspase-8-mediated cleavage of the RIP1 protein. *Immunity* **34**, 340–351 (2011). This study shows that after viral infection, caspase 8 is recruited to the mitochondrial RIG-I complex where it mediates RIPK1 cleavage and the generation of an inhibitory RIPK1 fragment that attenuates RIG-I signalling.

84. Sears, N., Sen, G. C., Stark, G. R. & Chattopadhyay, S. Caspase-8-mediated cleavage inhibits IRF-3 protein by facilitating its proteasome-mediated degradation. *J. Biol. Chem.* **286**, 33037–33044 (2011). This paper shows that caspase 8 is activated by RIG-I signalling and mediates IRF3 cleavage thus inhibiting the expression of select antiviral genes.

85. Budd, R. C., Yeh, W. C. & Tschopp, J. cFLIP regulation of lymphocyte activation and development. *Nature Rev. Immunol.* **6**, 196–204 (2006).

86. Peter, M. E. The flip side of FLIP. *Biochem. J.* **382**, e1–e3 (2004).

87. Cai, X., Chiu, Y. H. & Chen, Z. J. The cGAS-cGAMP-STING pathway of cytosolic DNA sensing and signaling. *Mol. Cell* **54**, 289–296 (2014).

88. Paludan, S. R. & Bowie, A. G. Immune sensing of DNA. *Immunity* **38**, 870–880 (2013).

89. Unterholzner, L. The interferon response to intracellular DNA: why so many receptors? *Immunobiology* **218**, 1312–1321 (2013).

90. Fernandes-Alnemri, T. *et al.* The AIM2 inflammasome is critical for innate immunity to *Francisella tularensis*. *Nature Immunol.* **11**, 385–393 (2010).

91. Jones, J. W. *et al.* Absent in melanoma 2 is required for innate immune recognition of *Francisella tularensis*. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **107**, 9771–9776 (2010).

92. Pierini, R. *et al.* AIM2/ASC triggers caspase-8-dependent apoptosis in *Francisella*-infected caspase-1-deficient macrophages. *Cell Death Differ.* **19**, 1709–1721 (2012).

93. Sagulenko, V. *et al.* AIM2 and NLRP3 inflammasomes activate both apoptotic and pyroptotic death pathways via ASC. *Cell Death Differ.* **20**, 1149–1160 (2013).

References 92 and 93 report that AIM2- and NLRP3-dependent apoptosis occurs in the absence of both caspase 1 and caspase 11, and correlates with caspase 8 activation upon binding to ASC-inflammasome ‘specks’.

94. Takaoka, A. *et al.* DAI (DLM-1/ZBP1) is a cytosolic DNA sensor and an activator of innate immune response. *Nature* **448**, 501–505 (2007).

95. Kaiser, W. J., Upton, J. W. & Mocarski, E. S. Receptor-interacting protein homotypic interaction motif-dependent control of NF-κB activation via the DNA-dependent activator of IFN regulatory factors. *J. Immunol.* **181**, 6427–6434 (2008).

96. Rebsamen, M. *et al.* DAI/ZBP1 recruits RIP1 and RIP3 through RIP homotypic interaction motifs to activate NF-κB. *EMBO Rep.* **10**, 916–922 (2009).

97. Upton, J. W., Kaiser, W. J. & Mocarski, E. S. Virus inhibition of RIP3-dependent necrosis. *Cell Host Microbe* **7**, 302–313 (2010).

98. Upton, J. W., Kaiser, W. J. & Mocarski, E. S. DAI/ZBP1/DLM-1 complexes with RIP3 to mediate virus-induced programmed necrosis that is targeted by murine cytomegalovirus vIRA. *Cell Host Microbe* **11**, 290–297 (2012). This paper shows that DAI can partner with RIPK3 through RHIM domain interactions to mediate virus-induced necroptosis independently of TRIF or RIPK1 kinase activity.

99. Bruey, J. M. *et al.* Bcl-2 and Bcl-XL regulate proinflammatory caspase-1 activation by interaction with NALP1. *Cell* **129**, 45–56 (2007). This paper identifies an interaction of NLRP1 with anti-apoptotic BCL-2 and BCL-XL that is lost upon NLRP1 ligand stimulation. BCL-2 and BCL-XL are shown to modulate muramyldipeptide-induced IL-1β secretion, and these findings are confirmed in *Bcl2−/−* and *Bcl2*-transgenic mice.

100. Shimada, K. *et al.* Oxidized mitochondrial DNA activates the NLRP3 inflammasome during apoptosis. *Immunity* **36**, 401–414 (2012). This study shows that BCL-2 negatively regulates the NLRP3 inflammasome by preserving mitochondrial function and thereby indirectly preventing the release of oxidized mitochondrial DNA during apoptosis, which is shown to bind to and activate NLRP3.

101. Vince, J. E. *et al.* Inhibitor of apoptosis proteins limit RIP3 kinase-dependent interleukin-1 activation. *Immunity* **36**, 215–227 (2012). This paper shows that the cell death-inducing ripoptosome and RIPK3 can lead to NLRP3 inflammasome activation and IL-1β production when IAPs are inhibited by SMAC mimetics.

102. Kang, T. B., Yang, S. H., Toth, B., Kovalenko, A. & Wallach, D. Caspase-8 blocks kinase RIPK3-mediated activation of the NLRP3 inflammasome. *Immunity* **38**, 27–40 (2013). This paper uses mice in which caspase 8 is specifically deleted in DCs to demonstrate a role for RIPK1 and RIPK3, as well as MLKL and PGAM5, in LPS-induced activation of the NLRP3 inflammasome.

103. Sun, L. *et al.* Mixed lineage kinase domain-like protein mediates necrosis signaling downstream of RIP3 kinase. *Cell* **148**, 213–227 (2012).

104. Wang, Z., Jiang, H., Chen, S., Du, F. & Wang, X. The mitochondrial phosphatase PGAM5 functions at the convergence point of multiple necrotic death pathways. *Cell* **148**, 228–243 (2012).

105. Zhao, J. *et al.* Mixed lineage kinase domain-like is a key receptor interacting protein 3 downstream component of TNF-induced necrosis. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **109**, 5322–5327 (2012). References 103–105 identify MLKL and PGAM5 as downstream effectors of the RIPK1–RIPK3 necrosome.

106. Murphy, J. M. *et al.* The pseudokinase MLKL mediates necroptosis via a molecular switch mechanism. *Immunity* **39**, 443–453 (2013). This study uses MLKL-deficient mice and crystal structure-guided mutations in MLKL to confirm its crucial role in RIPK3-mediated necroptosis. PGAM5 is found to be dispensable, in line with the findings of references 107 and 108.

107. RemijSEN, O. *et al.* Depletion of RIPK3 or MLKL blocks TNF-driven necroptosis and switches towards a delayed RIPK1 kinase-dependent apoptosis. *Cell Death Dis.* **5**, e1004 (2014).

108. Tait, S. W. *et al.* Widespread mitochondrial depletion via mitophagy does not compromise necroptosis. *Cell Rep.* **5**, 878–885 (2013). By removing mitochondria via mitophagy, this study shows that TNF-induced necroptosis proceeds normally, despite the loss of mitochondrial PGAM5 expression and necroptosis-associated ROS production.

109. Chen, X. *et al.* Translocation of mixed lineage kinase domain-like protein to plasma membrane leads to necrotic cell death. *Cell Res.* **24**, 105–121 (2014).

110. Dondelinger, Y. *et al.* RIPK3 contributes to TNFR1-mediated RIPK1 kinase-dependent apoptosis in conditions of cIAP1/2 depletion or TAK1 kinase inhibition. *Cell Death Differ.* **20**, 1381–1392 (2013).

111. Wang, H. *et al.* Mixed lineage kinase domain-like protein MLKL causes necrotic membrane disruption upon phosphorylation by RIP3. *Mol. Cell* **54**, 133–146 (2014).

112. Cai, Z. *et al.* Plasma membrane translocation of trimerized MLKL protein is required for TNF-induced necroptosis. *Nature Cell Biol.* **16**, 55–65 (2014). References 109–112 show that necroptosis follows the plasma membrane translocation of RIPK3-phosphorylated MLKL and that oligomerized MLKL disrupts plasma membrane integrity.

113. Newton, K., Sun, X. & Dixit, V. M. Kinase RIP3 is dispensable for normal NF-κBs, signaling by the B-cell and T-cell receptors, tumor necrosis factor receptor 1, and Toll-like receptors 2 and 4. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* **24**, 1464–1469 (2004).

114. Bauernfeind, F. G. *et al.* Cutting edge: NF-κB activating pattern recognition and cytokine receptors license NLRP3 inflammasome activation by regulating NLRP3 expression. *J. Immunol.* **183**, 787–791 (2009).

115. Shenderov, K. *et al.* Cutting Edge: Endoplasmic reticulum stress licenses macrophages to produce mature IL-1β in response to TLR4 stimulation through a caspase-8- and TRIF-dependent pathway. *J. Immunol.* **192**, 2029–2033 (2014).

116. Bossaller, L. *et al.* Cutting edge: FAS (CD95) mediates noncanonical IL-1β and IL-18 maturation via caspase-8 in an RIP3-independent manner. *J. Immunol.* **189**, 5508–5512 (2012). Thus study shows that caspase 8 activation upon FAS ligation can mediate pro-IL-1β expression and processing.

117. Gringhuis, S. I. *et al.* Dectin-1 is an extracellular pathogen sensor for the induction and processing of IL-1β via a noncanonical caspase-8 inflammasome. *Nature Immunol.* **13**, 246–254 (2012). This paper shows that caspase 8 associated with a CARD9–BCL-10–MALT1 scaffold (assembled following dectin 1–SYK signalling) can mediate pro-IL-1β processing.

118. Maelfait, J. *et al.* Stimulation of Toll-like receptor 3 and 4 induces interleukin-1β maturation by caspase-8. *J. Exp. Med.* **205**, 1967–1973 (2008).

119. Gurung, P. *et al.* FADD and caspase-8 mediate priming and activation of the canonical and noncanonical Nlrp3 inflammasomes. *J. Immunol.* **192**, 1835–1846 (2014).

120. Man, S. M. *et al.* Salmonella infection induces recruitment of caspase-8 to the inflammasome to modulate IL-1β production. *J. Immunol.* **191**, 5239–5246 (2013). References 115, 118, 119 and 120 show that FADD and caspase 8 act downstream of TLR4 to mediate pro-IL-1β expression and processing in response to canonical and non-canonical inflammasome triggers.

REVIEWS

121. Menu, P. *et al.* ER stress activates the NLRP3 inflammasome via an UPR-independent pathway. *Cell Death Dis.* **3**, e261 (2012).

122. Andersson, U. & Tracey, K. J. HMGB1 is a therapeutic target for sterile inflammation and infection. *Annu. Rev. Immunol.* **29**, 139–162 (2011).

123. Wu, Y. H. *et al.* Participation of c-FLIP in NLRP3 and AIM2 inflammasome activation. *Cell Death Differ.* **21**, 451–461 (2014).

124. Oberst, A. & Green, D. R. It cuts both ways: reconciling the dual roles of caspase 8 in cell death and survival. *Nature Rev. Mol. Cell Biol.* **12**, 757–763 (2011).

125. Clarke, P. G. & Clarke, S. Nineteenth century research on cell death. *Exp. Oncol.* **34**, 139–145 (2012).

126. Galluzzi, L. *et al.* Molecular definitions of cell death subroutines: recommendations of the Nomenclature Committee on Cell Death 2012. *Cell Death Differ.* **19**, 107–120 (2012).

127. Tait, S. W. & Green, D. R. Mitochondria and cell death: outer membrane permeabilization and beyond. *Nature Rev. Mol. Cell Biol.* **11**, 621–632 (2010).

128. Tait, S. W. & Green, D. R. Mitochondrial regulation of cell death. *Cold Spring Harb. Perspect. Biol.* **5**, a00870 (2013).

129. Brennan, M. A. & Cookson, B. T. *Salmonella* induces macrophage death by caspase-1-dependent necrosis. *Mol. Microbiol.* **38**, 31–40 (2000).

130. Aachoui, Y., Sagulenko, V., Miao, E. A. & Stacey, K. J. Inflammasome-mediated pyroptotic and apoptotic cell death, and defense against infection. *Curr. Opin. Microbiol.* **16**, 319–326 (2013).

131. Vandenabeele, P., Galluzzi, L., Vanden Berghe, T. & Kroemer, G. Molecular mechanisms of necroptosis: an ordered cellular explosion. *Nature Rev. Mol. Cell Biol.* **11**, 700–714 (2010).

132. Zhou, W. & Yuan, J. SnapShot: Necroptosis. *Cell* **158**, 464–464.e1 (2014).

133. Li, J. *et al.* The RIP1/RIP3 necrosome forms a functional amyloid signaling complex required for programmed necrosis. *Cell* **150**, 339–350 (2012).

134. Green, D. R., Ferguson, T., Zitvogel, L. & Kroemer, G. Immunogenic and tolerogenic cell death. *Nature Rev. Immunol.* **9**, 353–363 (2009).

135. Kaczmarek, A., Vandenabeele, P. & Krysko, D. V. Necroptosis: the release of damage-associated molecular patterns and its physiological relevance. *Immunity* **38**, 209–223 (2013).

136. Poon, I. K., Lucas, C. D., Rossi, A. G. & Ravichandran, K. S. Apoptotic cell clearance: basic biology and therapeutic potential. *Nature Rev. Immunol.* **14**, 166–180 (2014).

137. Brereton, C. F. & Blander, J. M. The unexpected link between infection-induced apoptosis and a T~H~17 immune response. *J. Leukoc. Biol.* **89**, 565–576 (2011).

138. Campisi, L., Cummings, R. J. & Blander, J. M. Death-defining immune responses after apoptosis. *Am. J. Transplant* **14**, 1488–1498 (2014).

139. Torchinsky, M. B., Garaude, J., Martin, A. P. & Blander, J. M. Innate immune recognition of infected apoptotic cells directs T~H~17 cell differentiation. *Nature* **458**, 78–82 (2009).

140. Muzio, M. *et al.* FLICE, a novel FADD-homologous ICE/CED-3-like protease, is recruited to the CD95 (Fas/APO-1) death-inducing signaling complex. *Cell* **85**, 817–827 (1996).

141. Salvesen, G. S. & Riedl, S. J. Caspase mechanisms. *Adv. Exp. Med. Biol.* **615**, 13–23 (2008).

142. Sakamaki, K. *et al.* Ex vivo whole-embryo culture of caspase-8-deficient embryos normalize their aberrant phenotypes in the developing neural tube and heart. *Cell Death Differ.* **9**, 1196–1206 (2002).

143. Varfolomeev, E. E. *et al.* Targeted disruption of the mouse Caspase 8 gene ablates cell death induction by the TNF receptors, Fas/Apo1, and DR3 and is lethal prenatally. *Immunity* **9**, 267–276 (1998).

144. Yeh, W. C. *et al.* FADD: essential for embryo development and signaling from some, but not all, inducers of apoptosis. *Science* **279**, 1954–1958 (1998).

145. Zhang, J., Cado, D., Chen, A., Kabra, N. H. & Winoto, A. Fas-mediated apoptosis and activation-induced T-cell proliferation are defective in mice lacking FADD/Mort1. *Nature* **392**, 296–300 (1998).

146. Yeh, W. C. *et al.* Requirement for Casper (c-FLIP) in regulation of death receptor-induced apoptosis and embryonic development. *Immunity* **12**, 633–642 (2000).

147. Dillon, C. P. *et al.* Survival function of the FADD-CASPASE-8-c-FLIP~L~ complex. *Cell Rep.* **1**, 401–407 (2012).

148. Kang, T. B. *et al.* Mutation of a self-processing site in caspase-8 compromises its apoptotic but not its nonapoptotic functions in bacterial artificial chromosome-transgenic mice. *J. Immunol.* **181**, 2522–2532 (2008).

149. Zhang, H. *et al.* Functional complementation between FADD and RIP1 in embryos and lymphocytes. *Nature* **471**, 373–376 (2011).

150. Kelliher, M. A. *et al.* The death domain kinase RIP mediates the TNF-induced NF-κB signal. *Immunity* **8**, 297–303 (1998).

151. Orozco, S. *et al.* RIPK1 both positively and negatively regulates RIPK3 oligomerization and necroptosis. *Cell Death Differ.* http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/cdd.2014.76 (2014).

152. Micheau, O. & Tschopp, J. Induction of TNF receptor I-mediated apoptosis via two sequential signaling complexes. *Cell* **114**, 181–190 (2003).

153. Vandenabeele, P., Declercq, W., Van Herreweghe, F. & Vanden Berghe, T. The role of the kinases RIP1 and RIP3 in TNF-induced necrosis. *Sci. Signal.* **3**, re4 (2010).

154. Gerlach, B. *et al.* Linear ubiquitination prevents inflammation and regulates immune signalling. *Nature* **471**, 591–596 (2011).

155. O'Donnell, M. A., Hase, H., Legarda, D. & Ting, A. T. NEMO inhibits programmed necrosis in an NFκB-independent manner by restraining RIP1. *PLoS ONE* **7**, e41238 (2012).

156. Wang, L., Du, F. & Wang, X. TNF-α induces two distinct caspase-8 activation pathways. *Cell* **133**, 693–703 (2008).

157. O'Donnell, M. A. *et al.* Caspase 8 inhibits programmed necrosis by processing CYLD. *Nature Cell Biol.* **13**, 1437–1442 (2011).

158. Beug, S. T., Cheung, H. H., LaCasse, E. C. & Korneluk, R. G. Modulation of immune signalling by inhibitors of apoptosis. *Trends Immunol.* **33**, 535–545 (2012).

159. Li, L. *et al.* A small molecule Smac mimic potentiates TRAIL- and TNFα-mediated cell death. *Science* **305**, 1471–1474 (2004).

160. Tseng, P. H. *et al.* Different modes of ubiquitination of the adaptor TRAF3 selectively activate the expression of type I interferons and proinflammatory cytokines. *Nature Immunol.* **11**, 70–75 (2010).

161. Jiang, X. *et al.* Ubiquitin-induced oligomerization of the RNA sensors RIG-I and MDA5 activates antiviral innate immune response. *Immunity* **36**, 959–973 (2012).

162. Zeng, W. *et al.* Reconstitution of the RIG-I pathway reveals a signaling role of unanchored polyubiquitin chains in innate immunity. *Cell* **141**, 315–330 (2010).

163. Hou, F. *et al.* MAVS forms functional prion-like aggregates to activate and propagate antiviral innate immune response. *Cell* **146**, 448–461 (2011).

164. Xu, H. *et al.* Structural basis for the prion-like MAVS filaments in antiviral innate immunity. *Elife* **3**, e01489 (2014).

165. Yoneyama, M. & Fujita, T. RNA recognition and signal transduction by RIG-I-like receptors. *Immunol. Rev.* **227**, 54–65 (2009).

166. von Moltke, J., Ayres, J. S., Kofoed, E. M., Chavarria-Smith, J. & Vance, R. E. Recognition of bacteria by inflammasomes. *Annu. Rev. Immunol.* **31**, 73–106 (2013).

167. Shi, J. *et al.* Inflammatory caspases are innate immune receptors for intracellular LPS. *Nature* http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nature13683 (2014). This is the first report identifying the inflammatory caspases — mouse caspase 11 and human caspases 4 and 5 — as intracellular receptors for cytoplasmic LPS.

Acknowledgements  
J.M.B. is supported by the US National Institutes of Health (grants AI095245 and DK072201), the Burroughs Wellcome Trust Fund, the American Cancer Society, the Leukemia and Lymphoma Society, and the Irma-Hirschl and Monique Weill-Caulier Charitable Trust Funds.

Competing interests statement  
The author declares no competing interests.

SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION  
See online article: [S1](box) | [S2](box)  
ALL LINKS ARE ACTIVE IN THE ONLINE PDF
