
Signal Transduction:
The CpxR/CpxA Two-Component
Regulatory System Upregulates the
Multidrug Resistance Cascade to Facilitate
Escherichia coli Resistance to A Model
Antimicrobial Peptide

Natasha Weatherspoon-Griffin, Dezhi Yang,
Wei Kong, Zichun Hua and Yixin Shi
J. Biol. Chem. published online October 6, 2014 originally published online October 6, 2014

---

Access the most updated version of this article at doi: [10.1074/jbc.M114.565762](http://dx.doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M114.565762)

Find articles, minireviews, Reflections and Classics on similar topics on the JBC Affinity Sites.

Alerts:
- When this article is cited
- When a correction for this article is posted

Click here to choose from all of JBC's e-mail alerts

This article cites 0 references, 0 of which can be accessed free at
[http://www.jbc.org/content/early/2014/10/22/jbc.M114.565762.full.html#ref-list-1](http://www.jbc.org/content/early/2014/10/22/jbc.M114.565762.full.html#ref-list-1)

JBC Papers in Press. Published on October 22, 2014 as Manuscript M114.565762  
The latest version is at http://www.jbc.org/cgi/doi/10.1074/jbc.M114.565762  

The CpxR/CpxA Two-Component Regulatory System Upregulates the Multidrug Resistance Cascade to Facilitate Escherichia coli Resistance to A Model Antimicrobial Peptide  

Natasha Weatherspoon-Griffin¹,⁵, Dezhi Yang¹,²,³, Wei Kong², Zichun Hua⁴, and Yixin Shi¹,²  

From ¹The School of Life Sciences, ²The Center for Infectious Diseases and Vaccinology at the Biodesign Institute, Arizona State University, Tempe, Arizona, 85287-4501, USA, ³College of Life Sciences, Inner Mongolia University, Hohhot, Inner Mongolia, 010021, China, ⁴The State Key Laboratory of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, Nanjing University, Nanjing, Jiangsu, 210093, China  

⁵Present address: School of Life Sciences, University of Nevada Las Vegas. The author credits in the original version of this manuscript that was published on October 6, 2014 as a Paper in Press were incorrect. Natasha Weatherspoon-Griffin is the sole first author.  

Running title: A CpxR/CpxA-upregulated marRAB transcription  
Address correspondence to: Yixin Shi, PhD, School of Life Sciences, Arizona State University, PO Box 874501, Tempe, Arizona, 85287-4501. Fax: (480) 965-6899, E-mail: yixin.shi@asu.edu  

Keywords: The CpxR/CpxA system, mar operon, transcription regulation, tolC, indole  

**Background:** The CpxR/CpxA system facilitates *E. coli* resistance to antimicrobial peptides. However, many CpxR-dependent mechanisms remain elusive.  

**Result:** The CpxR/CpxA system activates mar transcription, subsequently facilitating *E. coli* resistance to protamine via tripartite multidrug transporters.  

**Conclusion:** A CpxR/CpxA-dependent regulatory cascade controls MarRA for CAMP resistance in response to aromatic metabolites.  

**Significance:** This is novel regulatory mechanism controlling bacterial resistance to CAMPS and antibiotics.  

A genome-wide susceptibility assay was used to identify specific CpxR-dependent genes that facilitate *Escherichia coli* resistance to a model cationic antimicrobial peptide (CAMP), protamine. A total of 115 strains from the Keio Collection, each of which contained a deletion at a demonstrated or predicted CpxR/CpxA-dependent locus, were tested for protamine susceptibility. One strain that exhibited high susceptibility carried a deletion of *tolC*, a gene that encodes the outer membrane component of multiple tripartite multidrug transporters. Concomitantly, two of these efflux systems, AcrAB/TolC and EmrAB/TolC,  

play major roles in protamine resistance. Activation of the CpxR/CpxA system stimulates *mar* transcription, suggesting a new regulatory circuit that enhances the multidrug resistance cascade. Tripartite multidrug efflux systems contribute to bacterial resistance to protamine differently from the Tat system. DNase I footprinting analysis demonstrated that the CpxR protein binds to a sequence located in the -35 and -10 regions of *mar* promoter. This sequence resembles the consensus CpxR binding site, however, on the opposite strand. *aroK*, a CpxR-dependent gene that encodes a shikimate kinase in the tryptophan biosynthesis pathway, was also found to facilitate protamine resistance. Specific aromatic metabolites from this pathway, such as indole, can stimulate expression of well-studied CpxR-dependent genes *degP* and *cpxP*, which are not components of the tripartite multidrug transporters. Thus, we propose a novel mechanism for *E. coli* to modulate resistance to protamine and likely other CAMPS, in which the CpxR/CpxA system upregulates *mar* transcription in response to specific aromatic metabolites, subsequently stimulating the multidrug resistance cascade.

In enteric bacteria, the CpxR/CpxA two-component system regulates a vast number of genetic loci in response to periplasmic stress, including misfolded proteins, inner membrane disruptions, alkaline pH, starvation, and high osmolarity. The Escherichia coli CpxR/CpxA system responds to general periplasmic stress, and has been used as a model two-component system for transcription regulation in bacteria (For a review see Ref. 1). This system has a global effect in a variety of signal transduction pathways and bacterial resistance since the vastness of its circuits becomes evident as it continues to be implicated in virulence (1), biofilm formation (2), chemotaxis (3) and recently, resistance to antimicrobials (4-7). To date, there are over 150 demonstrated or putative members of the CpxR/CpxA regulon. In a previous study, we have shown that the CpxR/CpxA system facilitates Salmonella and E. coli resistance to cationic antimicrobial peptides (i.e., CAMPs) including a model peptide protamine and α-helical CAMPs by activating transcription of two genetic loci, i.e., amiA and amiC, which encode two peptidoglycan amidases (4). On the other hand, activation of the CpxR/CpxA system in a ΔtatC mutant or ΔamiA ΔamiC double mutant could still facilitate resistance to protamine, suggesting that additional gene(s), other than amiA and amiC, are also required for the CpxR-dependent resistance.

The multidrug-resistant operon, marRAB, encodes a repressor, MarR, an activator, MarA, and an unknown function protein, MarB, which coordinately regulate the mar transcription to maintain intrinsic resistance to antimicrobial substances (8, 9). The natural signal for the marRAB operon has not been identified as it remains unknown whether plant-derived napthoquinones are natural inducers (10). It has been shown that the operon is activated by compounds such as salicylate, chloramphenicol and tetracycline, acetaminophen, sodium benzoate, 2, 4-dinitrophenol, cinnamate, carbonyl cyanide m-chlorophenylhydrazone, menadione and plumbagin (11, 12). In the presence of specific antibiotics (such as tetracycline and

chloramphenicol, see Refs. 11, 13), bile salts and reactive oxygen species, MarA, in concert with global regulators Rob and SoxS, binds to the mar box sequence to activate transcription of the mar operon (14-17). In contrast, transcriptional repressor MarR, which binds at the operator region (marO), is only released once a compound, such as salicylate, binds, allowing for transcription (8, 9, 18). Interestingly, the marRAB operon can also be activated by sublethal concentrations of CAMPs via Rob (which is required for polymyxin B-induced upregulation of micF) and facilitate resistance, at least in part, by overexpressing the AcrAB/TolC efflux pump (19, 20).

While deletion of marA had no apparent phenotypic effect regarding susceptibility to CAMPs, constitutive expression of marA by either a point mutation in marR or a plasmid harboring a wild-type copy of marA raised bacterial resistance to multiple CAMPs, which represent various classes including α-helical and β-sheet CAMPs (such as LL-37 and HBD-1, respectively), as well as cyclic lipopeptide polymyxin B (19). However, mutation of acrAB or tolC eliminates this resistance in this constitutive marA strain (19). In addition, deletion of tolC in a marA constitutive expression strain causes a higher susceptibility to AMPs than deletion of acrAB (19), suggesting that additional TolC-dependent tripartite efflux system(s) other than AcrAB/TolC should contribute to this resistance. AcrAB and other RND efflux pumps probably use these export systems to mediate efflux of CAMPs because a loss of PMF in the presence of an uncoupler, i.e., carbonyl cyanide m-chlorophenyl hydrazone, causes an increased level of LL-37 susceptibility (19).

Here, we investigated the role of those known CpxR-dependent loci in E. coli resistance to protamine. Our study revealed a new regulatory mechanism for bacterial resistance to this model CAMP. The CpxR/CpxA system can activate transcription of marRAB operon, thus facilitating multidrug-resistant regulator to enhance expression of TolC-dependent tripartite multidrug transporters. This E. coli resistance to protamine via tripartite

multidrug efflux systems should represent a
novel CpxR-mediated mechanism that is
independent from the Tat system. Our
results also suggest that the aroK gene is
involved in the resistance by mediating
synthesis of aromatic metabolites, which
probably act as signal molecules to
stimulate the CpxR/CpxA system and Mar
regulators.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Bacterial strains and growth conditions—All
bacterial strains used in this study are
provided in Table 1. Escherichia coli strains
were obtained or derived from mutant
strains in the Keio Collection (21) or derived
from the wild-type strain BW 25113 using
the one-step gene deletion method (22).
Bacteria were grown at 37°C in Luria-
Bertani broth (LB). When necessary,
antibiotics were added at final
concentrations of 50 μg/ml for ampicillin,
20 μg/ml for chloramphenicol, or 50 μg/ml
for kanamycin. E. coli DH5α was used as
host for the preparation of plasmid DNA. E.
coli BL 21-Gold (Stratagene, Inc.) was used
for protein expression. P1(vir) transduction
was carried out for construction of E. coli
multiple mutants from the Keio Collection.

Construction of strains with chromosomal
deletions and lac fusions—Simultaneous
deletion of the marR and marA genes was
carried out using primer pairs 1746 (5′-TGC
AAC TAA CTT GCC AGG GCA ACT
AAT CAT ATG AAT ATC CTC CTT AG-3′)
& 1747 (5′-ATT GCC TCA GTG ACG TTG
TCA CGT TTT CAA GTG TAG GCT GGA
GCT GCT TC-3′) to amplify the kanamycin
resistance cassette (Km<sup>R</sup>) from plasmid
pKD4 and integrate the resulting PCR
product into the chromosome of wild-type
harboring pKD46. The kanamycin-resistant
cassette was removed using plasmid pCP20
and the lac transcriptional fusion plasmid
pKG136 was integrated into the FLP
recombination target sequence in the
deleted locus (22, 23). P1 transduction was
carried out to construct double and triple
mutants.

Plasmid construction—All plasmids used in
this study are described in Table 1. pYS1755
(pUHE-tolC) was constructed using PCR
fragments containing full-length tolC coding
region generated with primers 2126 (5′-
CGG GAT CCA CAA GGA ATG CAA
ATG-3′) and 2127 (5′-CCC AAG CTT GTC
GTC ATC AGT TAC GG-3′) and wild-type
BW 25113 chromosomal template, that were
digested with BamH I and HindIII and then
ligated between BamH I and HindIII sites of
pUHE 21-2lacI<sup>q</sup>
(24). pYS1736
was
constructed by cloning 120 bp of the marR
promoter region, amplified using primers
1731 (5′-CCG CTC GTT CAT TGA ACA
GAT CGC TGG TAC TTT TCA C-3′) and
1736 (5′-GCG TCG ACC TTT AGC TAG
CCT TGC ATC GCA TTG AAC AA-3′) and
wild-type BW 25113 chromosomal template,
into the SalI and XhoI sites of pYS1000 with
a lacZ reporter
(25). pYS2211
was
constructed to produce the E. coli CpxR
protein fused to a His<sub>6</sub> tag at its N terminus
by PCR amplification with the primers 1512
(5′-GTT TCA TAT GAA TAA AAT CCT G-
3′) and 1714 (5′-ACG CGT CGA CTC ATG
AAG CAG AAA CCA T-3′) and wild-type
BW 25113 chromosomal template. The PCR
product was digested with NdeI and SalI
and then ligated between the NdeI and SalI
sites of pET28a.

Protamine susceptibility assay to test CpxR-
dependent genes—Specific strains from the
Keio collection (21) were picked out to test
their susceptibility to protamine
(26).
Bacterial cells were cultured overnight, re-
inoculated (1:100) in LB broth, and grown
for 4 h at 37°C. Cultures were diluted and
approximately 1 × 10<sup>3</sup> cells were dropped
onto LB agar plates containing varying
concentrations
(0.5-1.5 mg/ml)
of
protamine sulfate (MP Biomedicals) and
incubated overnight at 37°C to determine
the colony-forming units (CFU). The
percentage survival of each strain was
calculated by comparing CFU from plates
supplemented with and without protamine.

β-galactosidase assay—β-galactosidase assays
(27) were carried out in triplicate and the
activity (Miller Unit) was determined using
a VERSAmax plate reader (Molecular


This Markdown output directly reflects the OCR content from the provided image without any additional formatting or interpretation.
Device). Data correspond to three independent assays conducted in duplicate, and all values are mean ± standard deviation.

Purification of CpxR-His₆ Protein—The E. coli CpxR-His₆ protein was purified from E. coli BL21-Gold with His-Select nickel affinity gel (Sigma) according to the manufacturer's instructions. After purification, the fractions containing CpxR-His₆ protein were desalted and concentrated using an Amicon Ultra centrifugal filter (Millipore).

DNase I footprinting assay—DNase I footprinting assays were carried out using a DNA fragment whose non-coding strand was radioactively labeled. Primer 2051 (5′-CAG ATC GCT GGT ACT TTT CAC-3′) was labeled with [γ-³²P] ATP (Perkin Elmer) and T4 polynucleotide kinase (New England Biolabs). A 332-bp DNA fragment was amplified by PCR using BW25113 chromosomal DNA as template and primers ³²P-labeled 2051 and 2050 (5′-TTG CCT GCC AGG CCA-3′). Approximately 25 pmol of labeled DNA and increasing amounts of CpxR-His₆ protein were mixed in a 100 μl reaction containing 2 mM HEPES pH 8.0, 10 mM KCl, 20 μM EDTA, 0.5 mg/mL BSA, 20 μg/ml-1 poly(dI-dC), 2% glycerol (28). The reaction mixture was incubated at room temperature for 20 min. Then, a DNase I solution (10 mM CaCl₂, 10 mM MgCl₂, and 0.01 units of DNase I (Fermentas)) was added and the mixture was incubated at room temperature for 3 min. The DNase I digestion was stopped by phenol treatment and the DNA was precipitated. Samples were analyzed by 6% polyacrylamide DNA sequencing electrophoresis supplemented with 8 M urea by comparison with a DNA sequence ladder generated with the same primers using a Maxam and Gilbert A+G reaction. The bands were detected by autoradiography.

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

CpxR-regulated tolC gene contributes to E. coli resistance to protamine—Our previous study has implied that the CpxR/CpxA system may control a Tat-independent mechanism that facilitates bacterial resistance to a model CAMP, protamine (4). To study this new mechanism, we carried out a susceptibility assay to compare protamine resistance of an E. coli wild-type (BW25113) with particular isogenic strains from the Keio Collection, i.e., a mutant library carrying in-frame single-gene deletion (21). Protamine could kill this E. coli wild-type strain in a concentration-dependent manner because the percentage survival of BW25113 dropped when protamine concentration was gradually elevated (Fig. 1A). To genome-wide characterize the CpxR-dependent loci that contribute to E. coli resistance to this CAMP, a total of 115 single mutants, each harboring a deletion at one demonstrated or predicted CpxR-regulated locus (29-31), were tested in our susceptibility assays. Bacterial cells were challenged by protamine at 1.0 mg/ml, which allowed approximately 40% of wild-type cells to survive (Fig. 1A). Thus, a susceptible mutant should exhibit a survival rate significantly lower than the wild-type strain in the presence of this protamine. Individual strains were cultured in LB broth to log phase (4 h), and diluted with fresh medium. Bacterial cells (~10³) were inoculated onto LB agar plates with and without protamine and incubated at 37°C overnight to develop colonies. Previous studies have suggested that the CpxR/CpxA system enhances the resistance of E. coli and Salmonella to protamine through activation of the Tat-dependent amiA and amiC loci, as well as the yqjA gene which is also regulated by the PhoP/PhoQ system (4, 32, 33). Consistently, the ΔamiA, ΔamiC and ΔyqjA single mutants from the Keio Collection displayed increased susceptibility to protamine (Table 2, and data not shown).

A susceptible mutant characterized from our susceptibility assay carried deletion at the tolC locus. The tolC gene encodes the surface component of tripartite multidrug efflux systems (34). The ΔtolC mutant cells exhibited hypersusceptibility to protamine, and were killed completely (i.e., 0% survival) in the presence of 1 mg/ml protamine. Actually, only 4.4% of
these mutant cells survived when challenged by protamine at a low concentration (0.5 mg/ml), which could not kill wild-type cells (Fig. 1A). The phenotype of the ΔtolC mutant was solely the result of a lack of the TolC protein because the survival rate under varied protamine concentrations was reversed to a level similar to wild-type by pYS1755, a plasmid containing an IPTG-inducible wild-type copy of the tolC gene (ptolC, Fig. 1A).

Multiple tripartite drug efflux transporters play major roles in E. coli TolC-dependent resistance to protamine—TolC makes up tripartite multidrug efflux systems by pairing with AcrAB, AcrAD, AcrEF, MdtEF, MacAB, EmrAB, and EmrKY (35, 36). Susceptibility to protamine caused by tolC deletion suggests a role of drug efflux systems in bacterial resistance to protamine. Thus, we determined the protamine susceptibility of the Keio strains carrying a single deletion in these loci. In the presence of 1.0 mg/ml protamine, the percentage survival of the ΔacrB and ΔemrB mutants was 11% and 20%, respectively (Fig. 1B), suggesting that deletion of these genes rendered bacteria more susceptible to protamine when compared to the isogenic wild-type strain (~42%), but not as susceptible as the ΔtolC mutant cells which were actually killed completely (Fig. 1B). On the other hand, the survival rate of the ΔacrD, ΔacrE, ΔacrF, ΔmdtE, ΔmdtF, ΔmacA, ΔmacB, ΔemrK and ΔemrY single mutants was similar to wild-type under the same condition (Fig. 1B). Therefore, two tripartite drug efflux transporters, AcrAB-TolC and EmrAB-TolC, should play major roles in the protamine resistance. An ΔacrB ΔemrB double mutant was indeed more susceptible than either ΔacrB or ΔemrB single mutant, and thus killed completely by 1.0 mg/ml protamine (Fig. 1C). However, this double mutant was still more resistant than the ΔtolC mutant because 19.3% of the ΔacrB ΔemrB mutant cells survived when challenged by a lower concentration (0.8 mg/ml) of protamine (Fig. 1C), while the ΔtolC mutant cells were killed completely (Fig. 1A). This observation suggested that additional TolC-dependent efflux pump(s) contribute to the resistance.

We introduced the acrE, emrY, and macB mutations into the ΔacrB ΔemrB mutant, respectively, and found that all of these triple mutants became more susceptible than the ΔacrB ΔemrB mutant to protamine (Fig. 1C), regardless of a wild-type level resistance exhibited in their single mutants (Fig. 1B). Thus, multiple tripartite multidrug efflux systems, particularly AcrAB-TolC and EmrAB-TolC, should contribute to TolC-dependent protamine resistance. Taken together, we conclude that a CpxR/CpxA-dependent mechanism that controls E. coli resistance to protamine is to facilitate production, assembly, and action of multiple TolC-dependent tripartite drug efflux transporters.

Multiple mechanisms facilitate CpxR-dependent resistance to protamine in E. coli—We constructed a ΔtolC ΔtatC double mutant to investigate whether the tripartite multidrug efflux systems were components of the Tat-mediated mechanism or functioned independently to confer resistance to protamine. In the presence of a low concentration of protamine (0.5 mg/ml), 4.4% and 7.5% of ΔtolC and ΔtatC single mutants survived, respectively, whereas all of the ΔtolC ΔtatC mutant cells were killed (Fig. 1A and Fig. 2A). Since this double mutant displayed an additive effect, we postulate that the tripartite multidrug efflux complexes function independently from the Tat system.

Two more CpxR-regulated genes required for protamine resistance were degP and dsbA (Table 2). When challenged by 1.0 mg/ml protamine, percentage survival of the ΔdegP and ΔdsbA single mutants was 14% and 16%, respectively (Fig. 2B). The degP and dsbA genes encode a heat shock response chaperone/protease and thiol disulfide oxidoreductase, respectively. They play important roles in the release of envelope stress and the maintenance of the outer membrane integrity by assisting in protein folding and assembly (37). Thus, the outer membrane of the ΔdegP and ΔdsbA mutants can be vulnerable and more susceptible to the membrane-acting antimicrobial peptides. DsbA is required for formation of one disulfide bond in the DegP

5protein, whose nascent form is unstable and  
thus becomes absent in a dsbA null mutant  
(38). Thus, the susceptibility of the ΔdsbA  
mutant to protamine could result from a  
lack of functional DegP proteins. Indeed, a  
ΔdegP ΔdsbA double mutant was as  
susceptible as individual single mutants  
(percentage survival, 14.8%, Fig. 2B). We  
constructed the ΔtolC ΔdegP ΔdsbA and  
ΔtatC ΔdegP ΔdsbA triple mutants, and  
found that their susceptibility was similar to  
the ΔtolC and ΔtatC single mutants,  
respectively (Fig. 2C). Thus, we conclude  
that the Tat system and tripartite multidrug  
efflux complexes may require contain  
components related to DegP and DsbA for  
E. coli resistance to protamine.

The CpxR/CpxA system upregulates  
transcription of the mar operon—We  
postulated that the CpxR/CpxA system  
indirectly regulated the tolC gene because  
the consensus CpxR-binding site (i.e., CpxR  
box, GTAAA-N5-GTAAA, see Ref. 3) was  
not present in its promoter region. It is  
known that the marA gene encodes MarA, a  
regulator that activates transcription of both  
tolC as well as the pump component genes,  
including acrAB (19). Therefore, we  
investigated whether the CpxR/CpxA  
system could activate transcription of the  
marRAB operon (marked as mar,  
hereinafter). We constructed a reporter  
plasmid, pYS1736, in which lacZ was fused  
with a DNA fragment covering 112 bp  
upstream of the mar transcription start site  
including both marbox and MarR-binding  
site characterized previously (18), and  
introduced it into E. coli strains. β-  
galactosidase activity from a mutant  
harboring a deletion of the repressor gene  
marR was 4.1-fold higher than that from  
wild-type (Fig. 3A). This transcription  
activation caused by the marR mutation was  
eliminated when the activator gene marA  
was also deleted, and β-galactosidase  
activity in a ΔmarR ΔmarA double mutant  
was reversed to a level comparable to a  
basal level in wild-type (Fig. 3A). We  
postulate that MarA functions as an  
activator required for mar transcription, but  
not as an antirepressor to antagonize MarR.  
These results demonstrated that the mar  

promoter region present in pYS1736 is  
sufficient for the MarR and MarA-  
dependent transcription regulation. Without supplementing inducer molecules,  
the mar operon remained at a basal-level of  
expression in the wild-type strain when  
grown in LB. Furthermore, the level of mar  
transcription in a Δrob mutant or ΔsoxS  
mutant grown in LB was similar to that in a  
wild-type strain (Fig. 3A), implying that its  
expression is also activated by a factor(s)  
other than these known regulators.  
To study transcriptional regulation of  
mar controlled by the CpxR/CpxA system,  
we constructed a set of strains carrying  
pYS1736 and a compatible plasmid,  
pYS2132, which carried a wild-type copy of  
a IPTG-inducible nlpE gene (4).  
Overexpression of nlpE induced by IPTG  
will stimulate the regulatory activity of the  
CpxR/CpxA system (47). β-galactosidase  
activity in wild-type strain was 3.1-fold  
higher when IPTG (0.1 mM) was  
supplemented (Fig. 3B). On the contrary, β-  
galactosidase activity from a cpxR deletion  
mutant remained at similar levels when  
grown in the medium with or without IPTG  
as that in the wild-type strain without IPTG  
induction (Fig. 3B). These results  
demonstrate that the CpxR/CpxA system is  
a regulator that activates mar transcription  
through the mar promoter fragment in  
pYS1736. To investigate whether the  
CpxR/CpxA system could regulate the mar  
transcription indirectly through a known  
mar regulator (14-17), we determined  
pYS1736-directed lacZ expression in the  
strains harboring a deletion at one of these  
regulator genes. Overexpression of nlpE  
could still activate mar transcription in the  
absence of these regulators because in the  
presence of IPTG, β-galactosidase activity in  
ΔmarR, ΔmarRA, Δrob and ΔsoxS mutants  
was raised by 3.1-, 3.7-, 2.8- and 3.9-fold,  
respectively (Fig. 3B). We conclude that the  
CpxR/CpxA system can activate mar  
expression by bypassing or overcoming  
these regulators. Concomitantly, percent  
survival of these mutants was similar to the  
wild-type strain when challenged by 1.0  
mg/ml protamine (data not shown).  
We also examined the effect of  
CpxR/CpxA system on the transcription of  
tolC gene. Supplementing IPTG raised β-galactosidase activity by ~6.8-fold in a strain with a chromosomal tolC-lac fusion carrying pYS2132 (Fig. 3C). On the contrary, when the cpxR gene was deleted, β-galactosidase activity became unchanged regardless of IPTG (Fig. 3C). Taken together, we propose a transcriptional regulatory cascade that controls E. coli TolC-dependent resistance to protamine, in which the CpxR/CpxA system upregulates transcription of mar operon to facilitate expression of MarA-dependent loci, such as tolC.

The CpxR protein binds to the mar promoter—An electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA) suggests that the CpxR binding site is present in the mar promoter because a CpxR-His6 fusion protein binds to the mar promoter (Data not shown). To reveal the nucleotide sequence recognized by CpxR, we carried out a DNase I footprinting assay using a [32P]-labeled 332-bp DNA fragment containing the mar promoter region present in pYS1736. We found that CpxR was able to protect DNA from DNase I cleavage in a region covering the nucleotides from -48 to -20 upstream of the +1 site (i.e., the transcription start site) (Fig. 4A, and illustrated in Fig. 4B). We observed that this CpxR-protected region possessed a sequence, 5′-TTGACttataCTTGC-3′, which is located in -37 and -23 upstream of +1, whose sequence on the opposite strand, 5′-GCAAGtataaGTCAA-3′ resembled a consensus CpxR-binding site (the CpxR box, 5′-GTAAA-N5-ATAAA-3′, see Ref. 29). Similar to a reverse CpxR box characterized from the amiC promoter (4), the CpxR binding site is located between -35 and -10 regions (illustrated in Fig. 4B), which bind σ70 to initiate mar transcription. On the other hand, the marbox is located far upstream, approximately two helical turns apart from this CpxR box, providing a region for MarA/Rob/SoxS to interact with α subunits of RNA polymerase. Because of this, CpxR can act on the mar promoter in a manner independent from other regulators. Thus, we conclude that CpxR regulates mar transcription by directly binding to its promoter.

Activation of the CpxR/CpxA system through aromatic metabolites—We wanted to know how the CpxR/CpxA system could activate mar transcription in wild-type (Fig. 3B) when MarR was present and presumably bound to the promoter. We postulate that the CpxR/CpxA system actually facilitates production of a signal molecule(s) to destabilize MarR binding to the mar promoter, thus allowing an RNA polymerase to pass the MarR-binding site. In fact, salicylate and 2,3-dihydroxybenzoate activate the mar promoter by directly binding to MarR with a similar affinity (40). We screened the aroK locus as a protamine resistant gene because the ΔaroK mutant displayed increased susceptibility when challenged by 1.0 mg/ml protamine (23% survived, Fig. 5A). The aroK gene has been demonstrated as a CpxR-dependent gene (29), which encodes a kinase that generates shikimate 3-phosphate in chorismate biosynthesis in E. coli. As illustrated in Fig. 5D, chorismate is a precursor for biosynthesis of aromatic amino acids including phenylalanine, tyrosine, and tryptophan, and also for the synthesis of specific aromatic metabolites—indole and salicylate, as well as salicylate-like compounds including 2,3-dihydroxybenzoate and anthranilate. Therefore, CpxR-activated aroK expression should enhance production of aromatic metabolites to derepress transcription of mar, resulting in activation of the tolC gene.

Investigation of indole as a signal molecule to activate the CpxR-dependent genes—Indole is able to induce the BaeR/BaeS two-component system to activate multidrug exporters including acrD and mdtABC (41). We found that indole (2 mM) induced a higher level of resistance to protamine in wild-type (~3.8-fold) than that in ΔcpxR mutant (~1.6-fold) (Fig. 5B). Meanwhile, this indole could also facilitate mar transcription in wild-type harboring pYS1736 to a higher level (~4.8-fold) than the ΔcpxR mutant (~2.5-fold) (Fig. 5C). To determine if indole could directly act on the CpxR/CpxA system, we constructed strains harboring a chromosomal lacZ fusion at

degP and cpxP genes, which have been demonstrated previously as CpxR-activated loci (4, 42, 43). Indole was shown to activate transcription of these Mar-independent genes because β-galactosidase activity in degP-lacZ and cpxP-lacZ strains was ~3- and 2.9-fold higher, respectively, when 2 mM indole was supplemented to the culture. As a negative control, transcription of a PhoP-dependent gene, mgrB (44), could not be activated by indole (Fig. 5C). Taken together, we propose that indole may be one of the physiological signals for the CpxR/CpxA system, thus facilitating resistance to protamine.

transporters. This is probably a reason why loss of the TolC-dependent efflux can activate the BaeRS and CpxRA systems (39). Some cytoplasmic components, such as indole, could be facilitated to release out of the cytoplasm from a damaged bacterial envelope. We postulate that this extracytoplasmic indole can interact with the periplasmic domain of the CpxA sensor and subsequently activate this two-component system. Therefore, our findings provide new insights into a mechanism of action of the CpxR/CpxA system.

Antimicrobial peptides, rather than conventional antibiotics, are a natural component in the host environments. Thus, it is more likely that expression of the tripartite multidrug efflux systems actually is to facilitate bacterial resistance to antimicrobial peptides when bacteria are located in certain host niches. As illustrated in Fig. 6, we propose a model that outlines the new mechanism we uncovered in this study. The CpxR/CpxA system activates transcription of mar operon, thus facilitating generation of tripartite multidrug efflux transporters; meanwhile, it also activates transcription of the aroK gene, thus enhancing production of aromatic metabolites including indole, salicylate and 2,3-dihydroxybenzoate, etc. Salicylate and 2,3-dihydroxybenzoate can act directly on MarR to release it from the marO site. Indole released into the extracytoplasm stimulates the CpxA sensor to phosphorylate CpxR, which subsequently activates the mar transcription.

CONCLUDING REMARKS

The results present in this study extend our understandings of molecular mechanisms for the CpxR-dependent resistance to CAMPS. Many CAMPS are not only membrane active, thus causing damages of bacterial membranes; but also membrane permeable, thus entering the cytoplasm to target specific cytoplasmic components (reviews see Ref. 45, 46). A damaged bacterial envelope would be changed in membrane permeability, or become leaky, resulting in uncontrollable transmembrane exchange of varied harmful substances. On the other hand, bacteria can probably release this stress by removing malicious substances from the cytoplasm through varied tripartite multidrug transporters. CAMPS that entered into the cytoplasm might be recognized as such noxious substances, subsequently exported by these

REFERENCES

1. Raivio, T. L. (2005) Envelope stress responses and Gram-negative bacterial pathogenesis. Molecular microbiology 56, 1119-1128
2. Ma, Q., and Wood, T. K. (2009) OmpA influences Escherichia coli biofilm formation by repressing cellulose production through the CpxRA two-component system. Environmental microbiology 11, 2735-2746
3. De Wulf, P., Kwon, O., and Lin, E. C. (1999) The CpxRA signal transduction system of Escherichia coli: growth-related autoactivation and control of unanticipated target operons. Journal of bacteriology 181, 6772-6778
4. Weatherspoon-Griffin, N., Zhao, G., Kong, W., Kong, Y., Morigen, Andrews-Polymenis, H., McClelland, M., and Shi, Y. (2011) The CpxR/CpxA two-component system up-regulates two Tat-dependent peptidoglycan amidases to confer bacterial resistance to antimicrobial peptide. The Journal of biological chemistry 286, 5529-5539

5. Hirakawa, H., Nishino, K., Hirata, T., and Yamaguchi, A. (2003) Comprehensive studies of drug resistance mediated by overexpression of response regulators of two-component signal transduction systems in *Escherichia coli*. *Journal of bacteriology* 185, 1851-1856

6. Nishino, K., Yamasaki, S., Hayashi-Nishino, M., and Yamaguchi, A. (2010) Effect of NlpE overproduction on multidrug resistance in *Escherichia coli*. *Antimicrobial agents and chemotherapy* 54, 2239-2243

7. Mahoney, T. F., and Silhavy, T. J. (2013) The Cpx stress response confers resistance to some, but not all, bactericidal antibiotics. *Journal of bacteriology* 195, 1869-1874

8. Alekshun, M. N., and Levy, S. B. (1999) The *mar* regulon: multiple resistance to antibiotics and other toxic chemicals. *Trends in microbiology* 7, 410-413

9. Seoane, A. S., and Levy, S. B. (1995) Characterization of MarR, the repressor of the multiple antibiotic resistance (*mar*) operon in *Escherichia coli*. *Journal of bacteriology* 177, 3414-3419

10. Roldan, M. D., Perez-Reinado, E., Castillo, F., and Moreno-Vivian, C. (2008) Reduction of polynitroaromatic compounds: the bacterial nitroreductases. *FEMS microbiology reviews* 32, 474-500

11. Sulavik, M. C., Gambino, L. F., and Miller, P. F. (1995) The MarR repressor of the multiple antibiotic resistance (*mar*) operon in *Escherichia coli*: prototypic member of a family of bacterial regulatory proteins involved in sensing phenolic compounds. *Mol Med* 1, 436-446

12. Randall, L. P., and Woodward, M. J. (2002) The multiple antibiotic resistance (*mar*) locus and its significance. *Research in veterinary science* 72, 87-93

13. Hachler, H., Cohen, S. P., and Levy, S. B. (1991) *marA*, a regulated locus which controls expression of chromosomal multiple antibiotic resistance in *Escherichia coli*. *Journal of bacteriology* 173, 5532-5538

14. Martin, R. G., Gillette, W. K., Rhee, S., and Rosner, J. L. (1999) Structural requirements for marbox function in transcriptional activation of *mar/sox/rob* regulon promoters in *Escherichia coli*: sequence, orientation and spatial relationship to the core promoter. *Molecular microbiology* 34, 431-441

15. Rosenberg, E. Y., Bertenthal, D., Nilles, M. L., Bertrand, K. P., and Nikaido, H. (2003) Bile salts and fatty acids induce the expression of *Escherichia coli* AcrAB multidrug efflux pump through their interaction with Rob regulatory protein. *Molecular microbiology* 48, 1609-1619

16. Martin, R. G., Jair, K. W., Wolf, R. E., Jr., and Rosner, J. L. (1996) Autoactivation of the *marRAB* multiple antibiotic resistance operon by the MarA transcriptional activator in *Escherichia coli*. *Journal of bacteriology* 178, 2216-2223

17. Miller, P. F., Gambino, L. F., Sulavik, M. C., and Gracheck, S. J. (1994) Genetic relationship between *soxRS* and *mar* loci in promoting multiple antibiotic resistance in *Escherichia coli*. *Antimicrobial agents and chemotherapy* 38, 1773-1779

18. Martin, R. G., and Rosner, J. L. (1995) Binding of purified multiple antibiotic-resistance repressor protein (MarR) to *mar* operator sequences. *Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America* 92, 5456-5460

19. Warner, D. M., and Levy, S. B. (2010) Different effects of transcriptional regulators MarA, SoxS and Rob on susceptibility of *Escherichia coli* to cationic antimicrobial peptides (CAMPs): Rob-dependent CAMP induction of the *marRAB* operon. *Microbiology* 156, 570-578

20. Oh, J. T., Cajal, Y., Skowronska, E. M., Belkin, S., Chen, J., Van Dyk, T. K., Sasser, M., and Jain, M. K. (2000) Cationic peptide antimicrobials induce selective transcription of *micF* and *osmY* in *Escherichia coli*. *Biochimica et biophysica acta* 1463, 43-54

21. Baba, T., Ara, T., Hasegawa, M., Takai, Y., Okumura, Y., Baba, M., Datsenko, K. A., Tomita, M., Wanner, B. L., and Mori, H. (2006) Construction of *Escherichia coli* K-12 in-frame, single-gene knockout mutants: the Keio collection. *Molecular systems biology* 2, 2006 0008

22. Datsenko, K. A., and Wanner, B. L. (2000) One-step inactivation of chromosomal genes in Escherichia coli K-12 using PCR products. *Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America* 97, 6640-6645

23. Ellermeier, C. D., Janakiraman, A., and Slach, J. M. (2002) Construction of targeted single copy lac fusions using lambda Red and FLP-mediated site-specific recombination in bacteria. *Gene* 290, 153-161

24. Soncini, F. C., Vescovi, E. G., and Groisman, E. A. (1995) Transcriptional autoregulation of the Salmonella typhimurium phoPQ operon. *Journal of bacteriology* 177, 4364-4371

25. Cromie, M. J., Shi, Y., Latifi, T., and Groisman, E. A. (2006) An RNA sensor for intracellular Mg(2+). *Cell* 125, 71-84

26. Ando, T., Yamasaki, M., and Suzuki, K. (1973) Protamines. Isolation, characterization, structure and function. *Molecular biology, biochemistry, and biophysics* 12, 1-114

27. Miller, J. H. (1972) Experiments in molecular genetics, pp. 352–355, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold Spring Harbor, N.Y.

28. Kato, A., Latifi, T., and Groisman, E. A. (2003) Closing the loop: the PmrA/PmrB two-component system negatively controls expression of its posttranscriptional activator PmrD. *Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America* 100, 4706-4711

29. De Wulf, P., McGuire, A. M., Liu, X., and Lin, E. C. (2002) Genome-wide profiling of promoter recognition by the two-component response regulator CpxR-P in Escherichia coli. *The Journal of biological chemistry* 277, 26652-26661

30. Bury-Mone, S., Nomane, Y., Reymond, N., Barbet, R., Jacquet, E., Imbeaud, S., Jacq, A., and Bouloc, P. (2009) Global analysis of extracytoplasmic stress signaling in Escherichia coli. *PLoS genetics* 5, e1000651

31. Price, N. L., and Raivio, T. L. (2009) Characterization of the Cpx regulon in Escherichia coli strain MC4100. *Journal of bacteriology* 191, 1798-1815

32. Sikdar, R., Simmons, A. R., and Doerrler, W. T. (2013) Multiple envelope stress response pathways are activated in an Escherichia coli strain with mutations in two members of the DedA membrane protein family. *Journal of bacteriology* 195, 12-24

33. Shi, Y., Cromie, M. J., Hsu, F. F., Turk, J., and Groisman, E. A. (2004) PhoP-regulated Salmonella resistance to the antimicrobial peptides magainin 2 and polymyxin B. *Molecular microbiology* 53, 229-241

34. Gerken, H., and Misra, R. (2004) Genetic evidence for functional interactions between TolC and AcrA proteins of a major antibiotic efflux pump of Escherichia coli. *Molecular microbiology* 54, 620-631

35. Koronakis, V., Eswaran, J., and Hughes, C. (2004) Structure and function of TolC: the bacterial exit duct for proteins and drugs. *Annual review of biochemistry* 73, 467-489

36. Yamanaka, H., Kobayashi, H., Takahashi, E., and Okamoto, K. (2008) MacAB is involved in the secretion of Escherichia coli heat-stable enterotoxin II. *Journal of bacteriology* 190, 7693-7698

37. Gerken, H., Leiser, O. P., Bennion, D., and Misra, R. (2010) Involvement and necessity of the Cpx regulon in the event of aberrant beta-barrel outer membrane protein assembly. *Molecular microbiology* 75, 1033-1046

38. Hiniker, A., and Bardwell, J. (2004) In Vivo Substrate Specificity of Periplasmic Disulfide Oxidoreductases. *The Journal of biological chemistry* 279, 12967–12973

39. Rosner, J. L., and Martin, R. G. (2013) Reduction of cellular stress by TolC-dependent efflux pumps in Escherichia coli indicated by BaeSR and CpxARP activation of spy in efflux mutants. *Journal of bacteriology* 195, 1042-1050

40. Chubiz, L. M., and Rao, C. V. (2010) Aromatic acid metabolites of Escherichia coli K-12 can induce the marRAB operon. *Journal of bacteriology* 192, 4786-4789

41. Hirakawa, H., Inazumi, Y., Masaki, T., Hirata, T., and Yamaguchi, A. (2005) Indole induces the expression of multidrug exporter genes in Escherichia coli. *Molecular microbiology* 55, 1113-1126

42. Danese, P. N., Snyder, W. B., Cosma, C. L., Davis, L. J., and Silhavy, T. J. (1995) The Cpx two-component signal transduction pathway of *Escherichia coli* regulates transcription of the gene specifying the stress-inducible periplasmic protease, DegP. *Genes & development* 9, 387-398

43. Danese, P. N., and Silhavy, T. J. (1998) CpxP, a stress-combative member of the Cpx regulon. *Journal of bacteriology* 180, 831-839

44. Kato, A., Tanabe, H., and Utsumi, R. (1999) Molecular characterization of the PhoP-PhoQ two-component system in *Escherichia coli* K-12: identification of extracellular Mg²⁺-responsive promoters. *Journal of bacteriology* 181, 5516-5520

45. Yeaman, M. R., and Yount, N. Y. (2003) Mechanisms of antimicrobial peptide action and resistance. *Pharmacological reviews* 55, 27-55

46. Brogden, K. A. (2005) Antimicrobial peptides: pore formers or metabolic inhibitors in bacteria? *Nature reviews. Microbiology* 3, 238-250

47. Snyder, W. B., Davis, L. J., Danese, P. N., Cosma, C. L., and Silhavy, T. J. (1995) Overproduction of NlpE, a new outer membrane lipoprotein, suppresses the toxicity of periplasmic LacZ by activation of the Cpx signal transduction pathway. *J. Bacteriol.* 177, 4216–4223

ABBREVIATIONS

CAMP, cationic antimicrobial peptide; *mar*, the *marRAB* operon; PCR, polymerase chain reaction.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

We thank Dr. Morigen for strain construction, technical support and thoughtful discussion. We thank Dr. Thomas Silhavy for strains PND 2000 and SP1, and Dr. Akinori Kato for the strain MG1301. We also thank Cori Leonetti for technical aid, and Melissa Ellingboe, Jacob Hrkal, Analissa Sarno, Kirk Schmitz, Kayla Wright, and Connie Zuo for editing. This study was in part supported by Basic Research Grant of Major Open Topics from Science and Technology Department of Inner Mongolia Autonomous Region, China, No20110905 (To Y. S.).

FIGURE LEGENDS

FIGURE 1. TolC-dependent multidrug transporters are required for *E. coli* resistance to protamine. (A) Protamine susceptibility assay for *E. coli ΔtolC* mutant and complementation. Plasmid harboring a wild-type copy of *tolC* restores resistance to protamine. Shown is percentage survival and colony-forming unit (CFU) in log₁₀ (inlet) of wild type (BW25113) carrying plasmid pUHE21 (vector) and Δ*tolC* mutant (from the Keio Collection) carrying plasmid vector or pYS1755 (pUHE-*tolC*, or p*tolC*) after incubation with protamine (0, 0.5, 0.8, 1.0, 1.2 or 1.5 mg/ml). (B) Protamine susceptibility assay for wild-type (BW25113) and selected single TolC-dependent multidrug transporter mutants (the Keio Collection) on LB plates containing protamine (0 or 1.0 mg/ml). Shown is percentage survival and CFU in log₁₀ (inlet) of wild type, Δ*acrB* and Δ*emrB*, Δ*acrD*, Δ*acrF*, Δ*mdtF*, Δ*macB* and Δ*emrY* single mutants (the Keio Collection), after incubation with protamine (0 or 1.0 mg/ml). (C) Percentage survival and CFU in log₁₀ (inlet) of wild-type, Δ*emrB*Δ*acrB* double mutant (YS Collection 7a), as well as Δ*emrB*Δ*acrB*Δ*acrE* (YS Collection 7b), Δ*emrB*Δ*acrB*Δ*emrY* (YS Collection 7c), and Δ*emrB*Δ*acrB*Δ*macB* (YS Collection 7d) triple mutants after incubation with protamine (0, 0.8 or 1.0 mg/ml). Data in these experiments correspond to mean values from at least two independent experiments performed in duplicate. Error bars, S.D. Percentage survival of the strains tested was calculated by comparing CFU from plates with protamine to that from input (*i.e.*, the plate without

supplementing protamine, and shown as the column with light horizontal lines in A, or column in black in B and C).

FIGURE 2. Protamine resistance controlled by the CpxR/CpxA system in TolC-dependent and Tat-dependent manners. (A) Protamine susceptibility assay for wild-type, ΔtatC single mutant (YS13007), and ΔtolCΔtatC double mutant (YS15910) on LB plates containing protamine (0, 0.5, or 0.8 mg/ml). Shown is percentage survival and CFU in log₁₀ (inlet). (B) Percentage survival and CFU in log₁₀ (inlet) of wild-type, ΔdegP and ΔdsbA single mutants (the Keio Collection), and ΔdegPΔdsbA double mutant (YS15924) after incubation with protamine (0 or 1.0 mg/ml). (C) Percentage survival and CFU in log₁₀ (inlet) of wild-type, ΔtolCΔdegPΔdsbA (YS15925) and ΔtatCΔdegPΔdsbA (YS15926) triple mutants after incubation with protamine (0, or 0.5 mg/ml). Column in black is input cell number counted from the culture without protamine. Data in these experiments correspond to mean values from at least two independent experiments performed in duplicate. Error bars, S.D. Percentage survival of the strains tested was calculated by comparing CFU from plates with protamine to that from input (shown as the column in black in A, B and C).

FIGURE 3. Activation of the CpxR/CpxA system by nlpE overexpression upregulates mar transcription. (A) A cloned mar promoter region including 112 bp DNA upstream of transcription start site is sufficient for the MarR and MarA-dependent regulation. β-galactosidase activity of wild-type and ΔmarR (Keio), ΔmarRA (YS14530) mutants harboring pYS1736 (Pₘₐᵣ-lacZ), grown in LB for 4 h. (B) The CpxR/CpxA system activates mar transcription in different genetic backgrounds. Fold change in β-galactosidase activity of wild-type, and ΔcpxR (the Keio Collection), ΔmarR (the Keio Collection), ΔmarRA (YS14530) mutants harboring pYS1736 and either pUHE21 (vector) or pYS2132 (pnlpE) grown in LB supplemented with IPTG (0.1 mM) for 4 h. Fold change was calculated: the β-galactosidase activity of a strain grown with IPTG divided by that without. (C) The CpxR/CpxA system activates tolC transcription. β-galactosidase activity of wild-type and cpxR harboring chromosomal tolC-lac fusion (YS15537 and YS15538, respectively) and either pUHE21 or pYS2132, grown in LB supplemented with IPTG (0.1 mM) for 4 h. All assays were conducted in triplicate. Error bars, S.D.

FIGURE 4. The CpxR protein binds to the mar promoter. (A) DNase I footprinting analysis of the wild-type mar promoter with [³²P]-labeled probe for the noncoding strand and increasing amounts of CpxR-His₆ protein (100 and 200 pmol). Products were subjected to polyacrylamide DNA sequencing electrophoresis, and the bands were detected by autoradiography. Right brace corresponds to the CpxR binding site, and sequence represents the DNA region protected by CpxR-His₆ protein. Red boxes are the CpxR box sequence. (B) DNA sequence of the mar promoter region. The underlines correspond to the CpxR protected region. Sequences in red resembling a reverse consensus CpxR box. Double arrows indicate the putative -35 and -10 sequences, respectively. The nucleotide A in purple with arrow is the transcription start site (+1). Sequences in blue and green are the marbox and MarR-binding site, respectively. Numbering in A and B is from the +1.

FIGURE 5. A possible signal transduction required for resistance to protamine. (A) Percentage survival and CFU in log₁₀ (inlet) of wild-type and ΔaroK mutant (Keio) after incubation with protamine (0 or 1.0 mg/ml). Percentage survival was calculated by comparing CFU from plates with protamine to that from input (the column in black). (B) Fold change of percentage survival of wild-type and ΔcpxR mutant (Keio) after incubation in the presence of protamine (1.0 mg/ml) supplemented with indole (2 mM) or without. Fold change was calculated as follows: percentage survival of the strains with indole divided by that without. (C) Fold change in β-galactosidase activity of wild-type harboring pYS1736, and strains carrying chromosomal lacZ fusions at degP (PND2000), cpxP (SP1), and mgrB (MG1301), grown in LB for 4 h supplemented with or without 2 mM indole or solvent dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO). Fold change was

calculated as follows: β-galactosidase activity of strains with indole or DMSO divided by that without. (D) AroK is a kinase that mediates biosynthesis of chorismate, a precursor for the synthesis of aromatic metabolites including anthranilate, salicylate, 2,3-dihydroxybenzoate, as well as indole (the structure in red).

FIGURE 6. A proposed role for CpxR-dependent regulation in E. coli resistance to CAMP. The CpxR/CpxA response induces the expression of a variety of genes encoding MarA, MarR, AroK, and other envelope folding factors DsbA, DegP, etc. CpxR-induced MarA activates the genes encoding TolC and other components of tripartite multidrug transporters. DegP and DsbA affect assembly of these transporters, which mediate efflux of the CAMPS into the cytoplasm. AroK mediates production of indole, which is exported and stimulates the CpxR/CpxA system, resulting in activation of *mar* transcription. In the meantime, AroK also mediates production of salicylate and 2,3-dihydroxybenzoate, which bind to MarR to derepress *mar* transcription.

Table 1 | Bacterial strains and plasmids used in this study

| Strain or plasmid | Description | Reference or source |
|-------------------|-------------|---------------------|
| E.coli            |             |                     |
| Keio Collection   | F, DE(araD-araB) 567lacZ 4787(del) | (21) |
| (Parent strain,  | ::rrnB-3LAMrph-1DE(rhaD-rhaB)      |       |
| BW25113)         | 568hsdR 514                        |       |
| YS Collection 7a  | ΔemrBΔacrB::Km<sup>R</sup>        | This work |
| YS Collection 7b  | ΔemrBΔacrBΔacrE::Km<sup>R</sup>   | This work |
| YS Collection 7c  | ΔemrBΔacrBΔemrY::Km<sup>R</sup>   | This work |
| YS Collection 7d  | ΔemrBΔacrBΔmacB::Km<sup>R</sup>  | This work |
| YS14530           | ΔmarRA::Cm<sup>R</sup>            | This work |
| YS13007           | ΔtatC                              | (4)     |
| YS15910           | ΔtolCΔtatC                         | This work |
| YS15924           | ΔdegPΔdsbA                         | This work |
| YS15925           | ΔtolC::Km<sup>R</sup>ΔdegPΔdsbA    | This work |
| YS15926           | ΔtatC::Km<sup>R</sup>ΔdegPΔdsbA::Km<sup>R</sup> | This work |
| YS15537           | tolC-lac::Km<sup>R</sup>          | This work |
| YS15538           | tolC-lac::Km<sup>R</sup>cpxR      | This work |
| PND 2000          | MC 4100, kRS 88[degP-lacZ]         | (42)    |
| SP1               | MC4100ara<sup>+</sup>λplacMu 53    | (43)    |
|                   | [cpxP-lacZ]                       |         |
| MG1301            | MC4100mgrB::λplacMu 55            | (44)    |
| DH5α              | F supE44ΔlacU 169(φ80lacZ        | (New England Biolabs) |
|                   | ΔM15) hsdR17recA1endA1             |         |
|                   | gyrA96thi-1relA1                  |         |
| BL 21-Gold(DE 3)  | E.coli BF'ompT hsdSB(rB-mB-)       | (Agilent Technologies) |
|                   | dcm<sup>+</sup>Tet<sup>r</sup>gal λ(DE 3) endA Hte |         |
| Plasmids          |                                     |         |
| pKD4              | rep<sub>R6K</sub>γAp<sup>R</sup>FRT Km<sup>R</sup>FRT | (22) |
| pKD46             | rep<sub>pSC101</sub><sup>ts</sup>Ap<sup>R</sup>P<sub>araBAD</sub>γβexo | (22) |
| pCP20             | rep<sub>pSC101</sub><sup>ts</sup>Ap<sup>R</sup>Cm<sup>R</sup>cl857λP<sub>R</sub> | (22) |
| pKG136            | rep<sub>R6K</sub>γKm<sup>R</sup>FRT lacZY<sub>this</sub> | (23) |
| pACYC 184         | rep<sub>p15A</sub>Cm<sup>R</sup>Tc<sup>R</sup> | (New England Biolabs) |
| pUHE 21-2lac<sup>q</sup> | rep<sub>pMB1</sub>Ap<sup>R</sup>lacI<sup>q</sup> | (24) |
| pYS2132           | rep<sub>pMB1</sub>Ap<sup>R</sup>lacI<sup>q</sup>nlpE | (4) |
| pYS1755           | rep<sub>pMB1</sub>Ap<sup>R</sup>lacI<sup>q</sup>tolC | This work |
| pYS1000           | rep<sub>p15A</sub>Cm<sup>R</sup>P<sub>lac1-6</sub>lacZ<sub>this</sub> | (25) |
| pYS1736           | rep<sub>p15A</sub>Cm<sup>R</sup>P<sub>lac1-6</sub>P<sub>mar</sub> | This work |
| pET28a            | rep<sub>ColE1</sub>Km<sup>R</sup>lacI<sub>T7</sub> | EMD Biosciences |
| pYS2211           | rep<sub>ColE1</sub>Km<sup>R</sup>lacI<sub>T7</sub>(Eco) cpxR-His<sub>6</sub> | This work |

Table 2. Susceptibility of E. coli mutants to protamine

| Mutant | Susceptibility to protamine | Mutant | Susceptibility to protamine | Mutant | Susceptibility to protamine |
|--------|-----------------------------|--------|-----------------------------|--------|-----------------------------|
| acpP   | no                          | gltK   | no                          | tig    | no                          |
| acrD   | no                          | hlpA/ompH | no                          | tolC   | yes                         |
| adhE   | no                          | hslTS  | no                          | tsr    | no                          |
| aer    | no                          | htpX   | no                          | udk    | no                          |
| amiA   | yes                         | intB   | no                          | ung    | no                          |
| amiC   | yes                         | leuS   | no                          | uxuR   | no                          |
| argA   | no                          | ligB(yicF) | no                          | yabC(mraW) | no                          |
| aroG   | no                          | mdtABDC | no                          | ybaQ   | no                          |
| aroK   | yes                         | mobAB  | no                          | ybaR   | no                          |
| b2503  | no                          | motAB/cheAW | no                          | ybaS   | no                          |
| b2504  | no                          | mviM   | no                          | ybcU(borD) | no                          |
| chaA   | no                          | ompF   | no                          | ycbZ   | no                          |
| chaB   | no                          | pap    | no                          | yccA   | no                          |
| cobUST | no                          | pheM   | no                          | ycfS   | no                          |
| cpxP   | no                          | ppc    | no                          | ycgZ   | no                          |
| cpxRA  | no                          | ppiA   | no                          | yciF   | no                          |
| csgBAC | no                          | ppiD   | no                          | ydeH   | no                          |
| csgDEFG | no                          | psd    | no                          | ydjF   | no                          |
| degP   | yes                         | ptsI   | no                          | yefJ   | no                          |
| deoC   | no                          | purR   | no                          | yfiD   | no                          |
| dnaK   | yes                         | puuC(aldH) | no                          | ygjT   | no                          |
| dppC   | no                          | qseB   | no                          | yhdG   | no                          |
| dppD   | no                          | rcsA   | no                          | yhdJ   | no                          |
| eda    | no                          | rdoA-dsbA | yes                         | yhfC   | no                          |
| efeU   | no                          | rpoE/rseABC | yes                         | yhjE   | no                          |
| endA   | no                          | rpoH   | no                          | yhjV   | no                          |
| fliY   | no                          | rpsT   | no                          | yjfP   | no                          |
| flu    | no                          | secA   | no                          | yjiY   | no                          |
| fryA(ypdD) | no                          | slt    | no                          | ymgA   | no                          |
| ftmB   | no                          | smpA   | no                          | yojN   | no                          |
| fsJ-hflB | no                          | spy    | no                          | ypdF   | no                          |
| fucU   | no                          | sspA   | no                          | yqjA   | yes                         |
| galP   | no                          | tap    | no                          | yzgL   | no                          |
| gcvTHP | no                          |        |                             |        |                             |

NOTES:  
a. Gene list was summarized from Refs. 8, 29-31  
b. All strains tested were derived from the Keio Collection

A

| Survival % |
| --- |
| 120 |
| 100 |
| 80 |
| 60 |
| 40 |
| 20 |
| 0 |

Strain:  
WT  
Plasmid:  
vector  

| CFU (log₁₀) |
| --- |
| 3 |
| 2 |
| 1 |
| 0 |

[Protamine]:  
■ 0.5 mg/ml  
□ 0.8 mg/ml  
□ 1.0 mg/ml  
□ 1.2 mg/ml  
□ 1.5 mg/ml  

ΔtolC  
vector  

ΔtolC  
ptolC  

B

| Survival % |
| --- |
| 100 |
| 80 |
| 60 |
| 40 |
| 20
A

| Survival % | 100 |
| --- | --- |
|  | 80 |
|  | 60 |
|  | 40 |
|  | 20 |
|  | 0 |
| WT |  |
| ΔtatC |  |
| ΔtolC |  |
| ΔtatC |  |

[Protamine]:
- 0.5 mg/ml
- 0.8 mg/ml

B

| Survival % | 100 |
| --- | --- |
|  | 80 |
|  | 60 |
|  | 40 |
|  | 20 |
|  | 0 |
| WT |  |
| ΔdegP |  |
| ΔdsbA |  |
| ΔdegP |  |
| ΔdsbA |
A

$\beta$-galactosidase activity  
(Miller Unit)

| 2500 | $P_{mar}$-$lacZ$ (pYS1736) |
| --- | --- |
| 2000 |  |
| 1500 |  |
| 1000 |  |
| 500 |  |
| 0 |  |

WT $\Delta marR$ $\Delta marRA$ $\Delta rob$ $\Delta soxS$

B

Fold change of $\beta$-  
galactosidase activity

| 6 | $P_{mar}$-$lacZ$ (pYS1736) |
| --- | --- |
| 4 |  |
| 2 |  |
| 0 |  |

WT $\Delta cpxR$ $\
A

M - CpxR

-48  
a  
t  
t  
c  
a  
t  
t  
c  
a  
t  

-37  
t  
g  
a  
c  

-23  
t  
a  
c  
t  
g  
c  

-20  
c  
t  
g  

CpxR-binding site

B

-113 ctttagctagccttgcatcgcat tgaacaaaacttgaacc gatttagc

-65 aaaacgtggcat cggtcaattcat TTGAC ttata cttgc ctggg

-17 caatattatcccctgc Aact aat tacttgtccagggaactaat GTG

Fig. 4

A

| Survival % |
| --- |
| 100 |
| 80 |
| 60 |
| 40 |
| 20 |
| 0 |

| WT | Δarok |
| --- | --- |
| [Protamine]: |
| 1.0 mg/ml |

B

| Fold change of survival induced by indole |
| --- |
| 5- |
| 4- |
| 3- |
| 2- |
| 1- |
| 0- |

| WT | ΔcpxR |

C

| Fold change of β-galactosidase activity |
| --- |
| 6 |
| 5 |
| 4 |
| 3 |
| 2 |
| 1 |
| 0 |

| +/- DMSO |
| +/- 2 mM Indole |

|
OM
IM

TolC
CAMPs
tolC
(+)
(+)
MarA
mar operon
(-)
MarR
(+)
DsbA
DegP
CpxA
Pi
CpxR
(+)
indole
indole
AroK
aroK
Salicylate and
2,3-dihydroxybenzoate
acrAB
