
REVIEWS

# Genetic mutations in sporadic pituitary adenomas—what to screen for?

**Anne-Lise Lecoq, Peter Kamenický, Anne Guiochon-Mantel and Philippe Chanson**

---

### Abstract
Pituitary adenomas are benign intracranial neoplasms that can result in morbidity owing to local invasion and/or excessive or deficient hormone production. The prevalence of symptomatic pituitary adenomas is approximately 1:1,000 in the general population. The vast majority of these tumours occur sporadically and are not part of syndromic disorders. However, germline mutations in genes known to predispose individuals to familial pituitary adenomas are found in a few patients with sporadic pituitary adenomas. Mutations in *AIP* (encoding aryl-hydrocarbon receptor-interacting protein) are the most frequently observed germline mutations. The prevalence of these mutations in patients with sporadic pituitary adenomas is ~4%, but can increase to 8–20% in young adults with macroadenomas or gigantism, and also in children. Germline mutations in *MEN1* (encoding menin) result in multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 and are found in very young patients with isolated sporadic pituitary adenomas, which highlights the importance of the chromosome 11q13 locus in pituitary tumorigenesis. In this Review, we describe the clinical features of patients with sporadic pituitary adenomas that are associated with *AIP* or *MEN1* mutations, and discuss the molecular mechanisms that might be involved in pituitary adenoma tumorigenesis. We also discuss genetic screening of patients with sporadic pituitary adenomas and investigations of relatives of these patients who also have the same genetic mutations.

Lecoq, A.-L. et al. Nat. Rev. Endocrinol. advance online publication 28 October 2014; doi:10.1038/nrendo.2014.181

---

### Introduction
Pituitary adenomas (for definitions of the different types of pituitary adenomas used in this Review see Box 1) represent ~8% of central nervous system tumours.¹ The prevalence of these tumours has been estimated to be 14–22% by autopsy and radiological studies,² but clinically significant adenomas occur less frequently, with a prevalence of 68–94 per 100,000 in the general population.³⁻⁶ These tumours can lead to clinical complications via hormone overproduction or deficiency and also by effects resulting from the mass of the tumour. Prolactinomas (also known as prolactin-secreting pituitary adenomas) are the most frequent subtype, representing 44–66% of all pituitary adenomas.³⁻⁶ After nonfunctional pituitary adenomas (NFPAs), growth-hormone (GH)-secreting adenomas⁷ are the third most frequent subtype, with a prevalence of 8.6 per 100,000 in the general population⁵ and an incidence of 3–4 cases per million in the general population per year.⁶

The mechanisms underlying pituitary tumorigenesis are unknown. Pituitary adenomas seem to be of monoclonal origin, which suggests that somatic mutations precede clonal expansion.⁸ Very few pituitary adenomas occur as a component of hereditary syndromes and these are mostly in multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 (*MEN1*) and in familial isolated pituitary adenomas (FIPAs). Carney complex and MEN4 are rarer causes of inherited forms of pituitary adenomas. Germline mutations in *MEN1* (encoding menin), *AIP* (encoding aryl-hydrocarbon receptor-interacting protein), *PRKAR1A* (encoding cAMP-dependent protein kinase type Ia regulatory subunit) and *CDKN1B* (encoding cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor 1B; also known as p27<sup>Kip1</sup>) have been identified in familial forms of pituitary adenomas. Furthermore, a GH-secreting pituitary adenoma has been reported to be associated with a germline mutation in *SDHD* (encoding the mitochondrial isoform of succinate dehydrogenase [ubiquinone] cytochrome b small subunit) in a family with paragangliomas;⁹ a case of Cushing disease has also been described in a patient with MEN2A and a mutation in *RET* (encoding proto-oncogene tyrosine-protein kinase receptor Ret; also known as rearranged during transfection).¹⁰ These observations need further confirmation before mutations in *SDHD* and *RET* can be claimed to be responsible for pituitary adenomas.

Nevertheless, the vast majority of pituitary adenomas are sporadic and can be divided into two subgroups: sporadic pituitary adenomas with a germline mutation in a predisposing gene but no known familial history of the disease; and sporadic tumours with no known germline mutations, which are the most frequent type. A number of somatic mutations and other genetic and/or epigenetic abnormalities have been described in the latter group of sporadic pituitary tumours.¹¹

This Review discusses germline mutations found in patients with sporadic pituitary adenomas with a particular focus on *AIP* and *MEN1* mutations, which, although

---

### Service d'Endocrinologie et des Maladies de la Reproduction (A.-L.L., P.K., P.C.), Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire, Pharmacogénétique et Hormonologie (A.G.-M.), AP-HP, Hôpitaux Universitaires Paris-Sud (site Bicêtre), 78 Rue du Général Leclerc, 94270 Le Kremlin-Bicêtre, France.

---

### Correspondence to: P.C.
philippe.chanson@bct.aphp.fr

---

### Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.

---

### NATURE REVIEWS | ENDOCRINOLOGY
© 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

Key points

- More than 95% of pituitary adenomas are sporadic
- AIP mutations are the most frequent germline mutations found in patients with sporadic isolated pituitary adenomas, and are particularly frequent in children and young adults with macroadenomas or gigantism
- AIP mutations are almost always inherited from one parent; the penetrance of these mutations requires further evaluation, but seems to be very low
- The presence of germline MEN1 mutations should be considered a possibility in very young patients with isolated sporadic pituitary adenomas when AIP mutation screening is negative
- Both AIP and MEN1 are considered to be tumour suppressor genes and might act via regulators of the cell cycle and/or the cAMP pathway

Box 1 | Classification of pituitary adenomas

**Syndromic pituitary adenomas**

Pituitary adenomas that are associated with other endocrine or nonendocrine disorders; the whole presentation is recognized as a syndrome or a complex. These syndromes are often hereditary but can also be sporadic, without any affected relatives. A germline mutation in a predisposing gene might be present.

**Isolated pituitary adenomas**

Pituitary adenomas are the only manifestation of the disease.

**Familial pituitary adenomas**

At least one relative of the simplex case has a pituitary adenoma.

**Sporadic pituitary adenomas**

The simplex case has no family history of pituitary adenoma. A germline mutation in a predisposing gene (AIP or MEN1) might be present; these cases are referred as germline-mutation-positive sporadic pituitary adenomas. Most often, no germline mutation can be identified; these cases are referred to as germline-mutation-negative sporadic pituitary adenomas.

very rare, are the most frequent type. We also discuss the proposed molecular mechanisms involved in their tumorigenesis and, if relevant, specific clinical features of affected patients, together with genetic screening of patients with sporadic pituitary adenomas and investigations of their relatives who have the same genetic mutations.

**Sporadic pituitary adenomas**

**Germline mutations**

**AIP**

Germline AIP mutations were first described in 2006, initially in FIPA kindreds who were defined by the existence of at least two family members with a pituitary adenoma but who lacked clinical evidence of MEN1 syndrome or Carney complex. AIP mutations have since been identified in 20.4% of FIPA kindreds. The predisposition to pituitary adenoma induced by AIP mutations seems to have an autosomal dominant mode of inheritance. The observed incomplete penetrance has led us and others to search for mutations in sporadic pituitary adenomas, although the first studies in small cohorts of patients did not detect any mutations. We first began to look for mutations in sporadic pituitary adenomas in 2007, and we described the first mutations and the clinical features of patients with them in 2012. In our prospective single-centre cohort of 443 patients from the Bicêtre Hospital, France, the overall prevalence of AIP mutations in sporadic pituitary adenomas was 3.6%, in accord with the prevalence of ~3% found by other groups studying the same type of population. Unlike FIPAs, use of the multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) technique failed to detect large genomic deletions in samples from the Bicêtre Hospital cohort, as had been reported in other cohort studies.

Patients with sporadic pituitary adenomas and AIP mutations share certain characteristics with patients with FIPA who have mutations in AIP. These patients are significantly younger at the time of diagnosis than patients without mutations in AIP and mainly have GH-secreting adenomas and prolactinomas, although NFPA and adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH)-secreting adenomas have also been reported, as have the clinical characteristics of the Bicêtre Hospital cohort of patients with sporadic pituitary adenomas, with and without AIP mutations (Table 1 and Figure 1). Sporadic pituitary adenomas with AIP mutations have been found predominantly in male patients, a finding confirmed in mutation-carrying patients with acromegaly (all male patients) but not in the overall population (Table 1). Similar to patients with FIPA who have AIP mutations, the maximum tumour diameter was larger in patients with sporadic pituitary adenomas who have AIP mutations than in patients without mutations.

Patients from the Bicêtre Hospital cohort mainly had macroadenomas and, as observed by other groups, showed an increased prevalence of AIP mutations in younger patients (Figure 2). Indeed, these mutations were present in 9.2% and 23.3% of patients aged <30 years and <18 years, respectively, similar to that reported by another group (11.7% and 20.5%, respectively). AIP mutations are also closely linked with gigantism in patients with sporadic pituitary adenomas (Table 1), and paediatric somatotropinomas. The group of patients with acromegaly and mutations in AIP contained significantly higher numbers of patients with gigantism (32.0%) than the group of patients with acromegaly who had wild-type AIP (6.5%). Furthermore, sporadic pituitary adenomas that contain AIP mutations are more invasive and more aggressive than those with wild-type AIP, and are potentially resistant to medical treatment with somatostatin analogues and dopamine agonists. These patients might thus need several surgical operations and/or sessions of radiotherapy in addition to standard medical treatment with somatostatin analogues. Indeed, somatostatin analogue therapy was associated with a significantly poorer reduction in both hormone levels (GH and insulin-like growth factor 1 [IGF-1]) and tumour diameter in patients with acromegaly and mutations in AIP than in control patients with wild-type AIP, necessitating a considerably increased rate of reoperation in this group. Moreover, the prevalence of AIP mutations in somatotropinomas that are resistant to somatostatin analogues (8%) is higher than in the overall population of sporadic pituitary adenomas. A possible

Table 1 | Clinical characteristics of 443 patients with sporadic pituitary adenomas*

| Sporadic pituitary adenoma (type) | Patients with an $AIP$ mutation† | Patients without an $AIP$ mutation§ |
| --- | --- | --- |
| GH-secretting |  |  |
| $n$ | 6 | 142 |
| Age at diagnosis (years) | 23.5±4.2 | 40.9±1.2 |
| Sex (female, male) | 0, 6 | 58, 84 |
| Size of adenoma (MI; MA; G) | 0, 4, 2 | 24, 98, 20 |
| Gigantism (%) | 83 | 9 |
| GH-secretting + prolactin-secrettingǁ |  |  |
| $n$ | 3 | 25 |
| Age at diagnosis (years) | 25.0±13.5 | 34.1±12.4 |
| Sex (female, male) | 0, 3 | 9, 16 |
| Size of adenoma (MI, MA, G) | 0, 3, 0 | 0, 20, 5 |
| Prolactin-secretting |  |  |
| $n$ | 6 | 126 |
| Age at diagnosis (years) | 21.2±2.5 | 30.9±1.6 |
| Sex (female, male) | 5, 1 | 79, 47 |
| Size of adenoma (MI, MA, G) | 2, 3, 1 | 38, 70, 18 |
| NFPA |  |  |
| $n$ | 1 | 112 |
| Age at diagnosis (years) | 32.0 | 56.7±14.9 |
| Sex (female, male) | 1, 0 | 49, 63 |
| Size of adenoma (MI; MA; G) | 0, 1, 0 | 1, 72, 39 |
| ACTH-secretting |  |  |
| $n$ | 3 | 41 |
| Age at diagnosis (years) | 26.0±12.5 | 41.3±15.0 |
| Sex (female, male) | 2, 1 | 28, 13 |
| Size of adenoma (MI, MA, G) | 2, 1, 0 | 27, 12, 2 |
| TSH-secretting |  |  |
| $n$ | 0 | 6 |
| Age at diagnosis (years) | NA | 42.7±17.2 |
| Sex (female, male) | NA | 3, 3 |
| Size of adenoma (MI, MA, G) | NA | 1, 5, 0 |

*Data is derived from Table 1 and Table 2 of Cazabat, L. et al. *J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab.* **97**, E663–E670 (2012).†Average age at diagnosis 26.2±2.0; age range 14–40 years. §Average age at diagnosis 43.6±0.8; age range 4–87 years. ǁIncluded in number of GH-secretting pituitary adenomas. Diagnosis of GH-secretting + prolactin-secretting pituitary adenomas was confirmed by prolactin immunostaining and/or by very high blood levels of prolactin (>200 μg/l)—effectively eliminating hyperprolactinaemia secondary to stalk effect as the cause. Age at diagnosis corresponds to mean ± SD. Abbreviations: ACTH, adrenocorticotropic hormone; G, giant (≥40 mm); GH, growth hormone; MA, macroadenoma (>10 mm); MI, microadenoma (<10 mm); NA, not applicable; NFPA, nonfunctional pituitary adenoma.

REVIEWs

cohort, 30 relatives from 13 families of patients with an AIP mutation were genetically screened for mutations (P. Chanson, unpublished data). Whenever possible, screening was extended to first-degree relatives (other than the parents) and to second-degree relatives, which resulted in the identification of 15 relatives carrying the AIP mutation, although no *de novo* mutations were identified. Hormonal and MRI evaluations performed in 13 relatives resulted in the identification of only one nonfunctioning microadenoma (in the father of a simplex case carrying the 896C>T, Ala299Val mutation). However, the true significance of these imaging results in relatives carrying the mutation is questionable; indeed, the prevalence of so-called pituitary microincidentalomas in the general population is also quite high.²

MEN1

MEN1 is an autosomal-dominant-inherited syndrome that links primary hyperparathyroidism with gastropancreatic neuroendocrine tumours and pituitary adenomas.⁴⁸ Other manifestations are possible, such as adrenocortical tumours, thymic and/or bronchial carcinoids, lipomas, collagenomas and facial angiofibromas.⁴⁹ Mutations in the *MEN1* gene were first identified in 1997.⁵⁰

Pituitary adenomas are found in ~40% of patients with MEN1, with a mean age at disease onset of 38 years and a predominance of female individuals affected. These tumours are the first manifestation of MEN1 in <20% of cases,⁵¹ although hyperparathyroidism is often already present but underdiagnosed owing to the absence of symptoms. Prolactinomas are the most frequent type of pituitary adenoma, followed by NFPA and GH-secreting adenomas, all of which are typically macroadenomas.⁵¹ After treatment, normalization of hormone secretion in these tumours seems to be difficult to achieve, partly because of the more aggressive nature of the tumours.⁵¹,⁵² Sporadic cases of MEN1 are not rare (found in 8–14% of all patients with mutations in *MEN1*),⁴⁹ and the prevalence of pituitary adenomas is higher in patients with sporadic MEN1 than in those with familial forms.⁵¹

Germline *MEN1* mutations are rare in sporadic isolated pituitary adenomas (Supplementary Table 2). The prevalence of *MEN1* mutations has been reported to be 0.6–2.6% on the basis of histopathological analysis of a series of sporadic adenomas;⁵² the occurrence of germline *MEN1* mutations in patients with sporadic prolactinomas is 1%.⁴⁸ A *MEN1* mutation was identified in an 11-year-old boy during the screening of six children with isolated GH-secreting adenomas or prolactinomas for *MEN1* mutations.⁴⁵ In patients <30 years of age, the prevalence of *MEN1* mutations is only slightly higher (3.4%) than that found in unselected populations (0.6–2.6%).⁴⁷ This low frequency contrasts with observations made about patients with mutations in *AIP* who have sporadic pituitary adenomas. However, as with *AIP* mutations, the frequency of *MEN1* mutations is increased in the paediatric population (to 6.5%).⁴⁷ The age at the time of diagnosis of sporadic pituitary adenoma was the same in patients with and without *MEN1* mutations.⁴⁷ Similar to cases of familial MEN1, prolactinomas are the dominant form;

an isolated prolactinoma.⁴⁵ Consequently, the discovery of an *AIP* mutation in a patient with a sporadic pituitary adenoma almost always implies that one of his or her parents is also a carrier, thus defining a new family with *AIP* mutations. However, in our experience, even after meticulous interview of the patient and his or her relatives, the search for a family history of pituitary adenomas is generally unsuccessful, again highlighting the very low penetrance of the disease.

Very few studies have objectively assessed the penetrance of sporadic pituitary adenomas that contain *AIP* mutations; only two nonfunctioning microadenomas (9.5%) were identified among 21 mutation-carrying relatives of six patients with mutations,²⁵ and none were identified in three other studies.²⁶,⁴⁶,⁴⁷ In the Bicêtre Hospital

Figure 1 | Characteristics of patients with sporadic pituitary adenomas. Correlation between *AIP*-mutation status and age at the time of diagnosis in 443 patients with sporadic pituitary adenomas.¹⁸ Mean age at the time of diagnosis is indicated by coloured lines. The distributions of ages at the time of diagnosis are shown relative to the mean values.

Figure 2 | Prevalence of *AIP* mutations in patients with sporadic pituitary adenomas. Correlation between age at the time of diagnosis of sporadic pituitary adenoma and the prevalence of *AIP* mutations. Data were compiled from published cohorts of patients with sporadic pituitary adenomas.¹²,¹⁵,¹⁶,¹⁸–²¹,²⁵,³⁴,³⁶,⁴¹,⁴⁵–⁴⁷,¹⁰⁵
one mutation has been found in a patient with somatotropinoma and another mutation in a patient with NFPA.⁴⁷ Although the number of patients with a mutation in *MEN1* who have sporadic pituitary adenomas is too small to demonstrate a genotype–phenotype correlation, such a correlation seems unlikely, as it is not present in familial MEN1.

Very few long-term follow-up studies of these patients have been published. In a series of patients <30 years of age, only one patient developed primary hyperparathyroidism, 10 years after the first manifestation of symptoms of a pituitary adenoma.⁴⁷ Thus, it seems that patients with a mutations in *MEN1* who have sporadic pituitary adenomas rarely develop other MEN1 manifestations (if they occur, the manifestations develop many years after the diagnosis of the adenoma). This feature could be specific to these patients, but it could also result from the *MEN1* variants in these patients being nonpathogenic. No deleterious effect has been demonstrated for one of the missense mutations reported.⁴⁷ However, a molecular effect has been found for the c.655 –6C>T and c.655 –7C>A intronic mutations at the mRNA and protein level.⁵³,⁵⁴ More studies are needed to determine the transmission pattern, as *de novo* *MEN1* mutations have been described in ~10% of patients.⁴⁹,⁵⁵–⁵⁷ In the only family analysed in one study,⁴⁷ the mutation was inherited from the father who had previously been diagnosed with primary hyperparathyroidism.

### CDKN1B

The first evidence linking *CDKN1B* with pituitary adenomas came from murine models. *Cdkn1b⁻/⁻* mice develop adenomas in the intermediate lobe⁵⁸ and the phenotype of rats with MENX (a recessive multiple endocrine neoplasia-like syndrome; mice are homozygous for a tandem duplication of eight nucleotides in exon 2 of *Cdkn1b*) resembles that of MEN1 and MEN2 syndromes.⁵⁹ Germline heterozygous mutations in *CDKN1B* have been implicated in MEN1-like syndromes without *MEN1* mutations. The first patient with a *CDKN1B* mutation to be identified had a GH-secreting adenoma diagnosed 16 years before the onset of hyperparathyroidism, although there was a context of familial disease as her father had acromegaly.⁵⁹

To date, few pathogenic mutations in *CDKN1B* have been described in sporadic cases of MEN4. The c.59–77dup mutation was found in a 47-year-old woman with a small-cell neuroendocrine cervical carcinoma, an ACTH-secreting pituitary adenoma and primary hyperparathyroidism;⁶⁰ none of her first-degree relatives were affected. The missense mutation 678C>T (resulting in a Pro69Leu mutation) was identified in a 79-year-old woman with a nonfunctioning microadenoma, a bronchial carcinoid tumour, hyperparathyroidism and a papillary thyroid carcinoma,⁶¹ and a 4 bp deletion (c. –456 –453delCCTT) was identified in a 62-year-old woman with acromegaly and a pancreatic neuroendocrine tumour.⁶² The latter mutation is particularly interesting owing to its mechanism of action; the deletion alters the small open reading frame in the 5'-untranslated region of the *CDKN1B* gene, which in turn decreases the translation of the protein. A synonymous change (c.426G>A, resulting in a silent Thr142Thr mutation) was found in a young patient with sporadic acromegaly, but it was considered nonpathogenic as it was located outside of the protein functional domains and had no predicted effect on splicing.⁶⁰ The same variant was detected in a 55-year-old patient with a sporadic GH-secretory adenoma, a thyroid papillary carcinoma, and adrenal and colon adenomas;²⁰ in three unrelated prolactinomas in three different FIPA families; and in a control population.⁶³ In the search for mutations, analysis of 50 sporadic isolated pituitary adenomas,⁶⁰ 37 patients with acromegaly,²⁰ 16 sporadic parathyroid and pituitary tumours⁶⁴ and 80 paediatric isolated pituitary adenomas⁴⁵ failed to identify any mutations. Germline *CDKN1B* mutations are thus very rare in sporadic pituitary adenomas and are, so far, always accompanied by other endocrine disorders.

No mutations in the *CDKN2B*, *CDKN2C* and *CDKN1A* genes, encoding p15<sup>Ink4b</sup>, p18<sup>Ink4c</sup> and p21, respectively, have been reported in sporadic pituitary adenomas.⁶⁵ In addition, no mutations in the *CDKN2C* gene were found in 74 paediatric tumours.⁴⁵

### PRKAR1A, PRKACA and PRKACB

Up to one-third of cases of Carney complex might be sporadic and acromegaly can be the first manifestation of the disease.⁶⁶ Nevertheless, GH-secretory adenomas occur in only 10% of patients who have Carney complex and these tumours always seem to be associated with other disease manifestations at the time of diagnosis, such as primary pigmented nodular adrenocortical disease, cardiac myxomas, lentiginosis, gonadal tumours and thyroid tumours.⁶⁷ *PRKAR1A* status has also been evaluated in series of patients with sporadic pituitary adenomas,⁶⁸–⁷⁰ but no germline or somatic mutations were found. Thus, germline *PRKAR1A* mutations do not seem to have a role in the pathogenesis of isolated sporadic pituitary adenomas.

A triplication of the chromosomal region that includes *PRKACB*, which encodes cAMP-dependent protein kinase catalytic subunit β, was identified in a patient with Carney complex who presented with acromegaly but without any adrenal disorder.⁷¹ Sequencing of this gene in isolated sporadic pituitary adenomas is required to determine whether or not mutations in *PRKACB* have a role in the occurrence of the tumour.

In addition to *PRKAR1A* mutations, inactivating mutations in *PDE11A* and *PDE8B* have been identified in patients with primary pigmented nodular adrenocortical disease or nonpigmented hyperplasia.⁷²,⁷³ Mutations that activate PKA Ca (encoded by *PRKACA*) have also been identified in cortisol-producing adrenal tumours,⁷⁴–⁷⁶ but none of these mutations are associated with pituitary adenomas.

### Genetic mosaicism

Pituitary adenomas can also be found in the context of McCune–Albright syndrome. Acromegaly is diagnosed in 20–30% of patients with McCune–Albright syndrome,⁷⁷
predominantly in children and young adults. McCune–Albright syndrome is sometimes associated with gigantism and is frequently associated with polyostotic fibrous dysplasia, precocious puberty, pigmented skin lesions (so-called ‘café au lait’ spots) and hyperthyroidism. Excessive levels of GH are generally associated with macroadenomas, but MRI sometimes fails to identify a tumour. Histological studies can reveal diffuse hyperplasia and neoplastic changes; somatotroph hyperplasia has been suggested to be the first stage in pituitary disease. The underlying genetic abnormality in McCune–Albright syndrome is a postzygotic activating mutation in GNAS (encoding the guanine nucleotide-binding protein subunit α isoform short, or Ga), which leads to somatic mosaicism and activation of the cAMP pathway.

Thus, young patients with acromegaly should be investigated for the presence of McCune–Albright syndrome. The clinical diagnosis is generally easy as the other disease manifestations (listed above) are usually present. The genetic diagnosis of McCune–Albright syndrome is therefore not necessary, especially as it could require invasive procedures to identify the GNAS mutation (which is not always found in circulating blood cells).

## Sporadic pituitary tumorigenesis

AIP mutations (followed by MEN1 mutations) are the most frequent germline mutations found in sporadic pituitary adenomas. Interestingly, both genes are located at the chromosome 11q13 locus, separated by 2.7 Mb. We now focus on these two genes and the downstream signalling pathways that might be shared by CDKN1B, PRKAR1A and GNAS. Many other genetic modifications have been described in sporadic pituitary adenomas, (some of these modifications are presented in Supplementary Table 3).

The AIP gene consists of 6 exons and encodes a 330 amino-acid cytoplasmic protein that is ubiquitously expressed. AIP is mainly known as a co-chaperone of aryl-hydrocarbon receptor (AhR), a ligand-activated transcription factor that mediates adaptive and toxic responses to environmental pollutants such as dioxin. Depending on the cell or tissue studied, AhR can exert a proliferative effect (mediated by Rb and E2F-1) or an antiproliferative effect (mediated by p27). AIP interacts with AhR via its C-terminal region, particularly the last five amino acids, and, in vitro, stabilizes AhR in the cytoplasm (Figure 3a). Depending on the cell type and the presence or absence of a ligand, AIP can stimulate or repress AhR transcriptional activity. AIP also interacts with the phosphodiesterases PDE4A5 and PDE2A via its C-terminal tetratricopeptide domains. In vitro, AIP inhibits the activity of PDE4A5 and could thus increase local cAMP levels (Figure 3b). The effect of AIP on PDE2A is neutral, but it might participate in the retention of AhR in the cytoplasm. Wild-type AIP inhibits cAMP signalling in murine pituitary cells; however, this effect is not mediated by phosphodiesterases, but possibly results from defective Ga and Ga proteins. Among many other molecular partners, AIP is also capable of binding the Ga protein, a process that leads to loss of the interaction between AIP and AhR

**Figure 3 |** Signalling pathways involved in sporadic pituitary adenomas. Genes encoding proteins in bright orange oval shapes have been found to contain germline and/or somatic mutations in patients diagnosed with sporadic pituitary adenomas. **a** | Crosstalk between menin, AIP and p27. Menin regulates the expression of the genes encoding p18 and p27 via modifications of promoter DNA methylation status. AIP might regulate the expression of p27 via interaction with AhR. Menin, AIP and p27 are negative regulators of the cell cycle. Genes encoding p15, p16 and Rb are also epigenetically modified in pituitary adenomas. **b** | Crosstalk between αs, αi/o, PKA and AIP. Ga and PKA are both positive regulators of the cAMP pathway, which promotes growth in somatotroph cells. αi/o and AIP both decrease the subcellular concentration of cAMP, which might participate in the tumour suppressor effects of AIP via inhibition of the cAMP pathway and/or inhibition of the nuclear translocation of AhR. AIP mutations might lead to increased concentrations of cAMP via alteration of Ga function. Dashed line indicates that the interaction between AIP and αi/o is uncertain. Abbreviations: αi/o, inhibitory G protein α-subunit; αs, stimulatory G protein α-subunit; AC, adenylate cyclase; AhR; aryl-hydrocarbon receptor; AIP, aryl-hydrocarbon receptor-interacting protein; ARNT, aryl-hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator; C, catalytic subunit; CDK, cyclin-dependent kinase; CREB, cAMP response element binding protein; E2F-1, transcription factor E2F1; HMT, histone methyltransferase complex; P, phosphorylation; p15, cyclin-dependent kinase 4 inhibitor B; p16, cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor 2A, isoform 1/2/3; p18, cyclin-dependent kinase 4 inhibitor C; p21, cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor 1; p27, cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor 1B; PDE, phosphodiesterase; PKA, protein kinase A; R, regulatory subunit; Rb, retinoblastoma-associated protein.
and to inhibition of AhR transcriptional activation. ${ }^{95}$ Interestingly, the AhR and cAMP signalling pathways, in which AIP participates, are interlinked as cAMP is able to induce AhR nuclear translocation. ${ }^{96}$

$M E N 1$ consists of 10 exons and encodes a 610 amino-acid protein with ubiquitous and predominantly nuclear expression. Menin interacts with many proteins involved in transcriptional regulation, genome stability, cell division and proliferation. ${ }^{97}$ Menin represses the JunD and NF-$\kappa B$-mediated transcriptional activation, ${ }^{98,99}$ and interacts with members of the Smad family involved in transforming growth factor $\beta$ and bone morphogenetic protein 2 signalling pathways. ${ }^{100,101}$ Menin is also part of a histone methyltransferase complex that includes other histone-modifying proteins of the Trithorax group (MLL, MLL2 and Ash2), and regulates the expression of several genes, including $C D K N 1 B$ and $C D K N 2 C .{ }^{102-104}$

Several arguments suggest that $A I P$ and $M E N 1$ act as tumour suppressor genes. First of all, the observed mutations are inactivating, which results in a loss of function of the protein. Most of the pathogenic $A I P$ mutations are located in the C-terminal part of the protein, which is involved in interactions with other proteins, such as phosphodiesterases and AhR. These mutations could theoretically result in a truncated protein or alter the conformation and/or stability of the intact protein. In vitro studies have indeed shown that some mutations hinder the interaction with PDE4A5. ${ }^{43}$ The effects of $A I P$ mutations on the interaction between $A I P$ and AhR and its downstream signalling are unknown. Most $M E N 1$ mutations are frameshift and nonsense mutations, which result in truncated proteins without nuclear localization signals, or disrupt production of the protein through a nonsense-mediated mRNA decay mechanism mediated by a nonsense mutation. Missense mutations can affect interactions with other proteins (JunD and histone methyltransferase component proteins) and with DNA, or the stability of the protein itself. ${ }^{97}$

The observation of LOH at the chromosome 11q13 locus in pituitary adenomas containing $A I P$ and $M E N 1$ mutations provides another argument for the role of these genetic mutations in pituitary tumorigenesis, but the supporting evidence is undermined by technical variability and possible contamination with normal pituitary tissue. LOH has been investigated in pituitary tumours of patients with mutations in $A I P{ }^{12,15,18,21,22,26,36,39,41,46,105-108}$ and was found in 35 of 45 cases. However, various techniques were used (polymorphism screening, direct sequencing and MLPA), the results were sometimes questionable or incomplete, and it was not always specified whether the lost allele was wild type or mutated). With the exception of LOH, no somatic $A I P$ mutations have been described and methylation studies have not yet been performed.

Although LOH at chromosome 11q13 is found in >90% of MEN1 tumours (parathyroid adenomas, ${ }^{109}$ insulinomas, ${ }^{110}$ lung carcinoids and lipomas ${ }^{111}$ ), very few studies have assessed LOH specifically in MEN1 pituitary adenomas and, when reported, it concerned the wild-type allele. ${ }^{111-114}$ The second event according to the Knudson's model of tumorigenesis ${ }^{115}$ might also be a point mutation.

$M E N 1$ somatic mutations have been found in parathyroid adenomas, insulinomas and lipomas of patients who have germline $M E N 1$ mutations, ${ }^{116}$ and are rare in patients with sporadic pituitary adenomas that do not have germline mutations. ${ }^{114,117-123}$ Unfortunately, $M E N 1$ somatic mutations have not been assessed in pituitary adenomas with germline mutations in $M E N 1$. An epigenetic event such as $M E N 1$ promoter hypermethylation or a downregulation of menin by microRNA (miR-24-1) ${ }^{124}$ could also mimic and substitute for the LOH. Interestingly, $\leq 20 \%$ of sporadic pituitary adenomas exhibit LOH at chromosome 11q13. ${ }^{125}$ However, this LOH can be isolated, with no germline or somatic mutations in $A I P$ or $M E N 1$, which suggests that another gene located at this locus might be involved in tumorigenesis.

Another argument for the tumour suppressor role of $A I P$ and $M E N 1$ comes from murine models and in vitro studies. Pituitary adenomas occur in $A i p^{+/+}$ mice, with complete penetrance at 15 months, ${ }^{126}$ and in 20–40% of $M e n 1^{+/+}$ mice, ${ }^{127-129}$ with chromosome 11q13 LOH evident in the tumours. Pituitary cell proliferation was decreased by overexpression of wild-type $A I P{ }^{41}$ and increased by $A I P$ knock down, ${ }^{130}$ whereas re-expression of menin in pituitary tumours of $M e n 1^{+/+}$ mice reduced tumour cell proliferation. ${ }^{131}$ These antiproliferative effects of $A I P$ and menin in the pituitary adenomas support a role for both $A I P$ and $M E N 1$ as tumour suppressor genes.

The precise roles of $A I P$ and menin in the normal pituitary are unknown. Both proteins seem to have a role in the control of cell growth and their action might be mediated by the same cell-cycle factors, particularly p27 ${ }^{\mathrm{Kip} 1}$, p18 ${ }^{\text {Ink } 4 \mathrm{c}}$ and Rb (Figure 3a). Although the molecular mechanism underlying the endocrine-specific tumour phenotype in MEN1 is unknown, the higher prevalence of $A I P$ mutations in GH-secreting adenomas could be explained by the fact that $A I P$ is possibly involved in regulating cAMP signalling. Indeed, activating somatic mutations in $G N A S$ (which have been described in $\leq 40 \%$ of patients with sporadic GH-secreting adenomas ${ }^{132}$ ) and inactivating $P R K A R 1 A$ mutations in patients with the Carney complex ${ }^{133-135}$ both lead to increased cAMP signalling, which represents a mitogenic signal for the somatotroph cell. $A I P$ deficiency is now known to elevate intracellular cAMP concentrations, notably in pituitary cell lines. ${ }^{93,94}$ This effect is apparently not mediated by phosphodiesterases, ${ }^{93}$ as $A I P$ mutations, which disrupt the interaction with PDE4A5 would lead to a loss of inhibition of this enzyme and a decrease in cAMP concentrations, an event that is contrary to the observed effects. The effect of $A I P$ mutations on cAMP levels is more probably a consequence of defective $G_{\alpha_{s}}$ signalling. ${ }^{94}$ However, the growth-promoting action of cAMP seems to be specific to somatotroph adenomas, whereas $A I P$ mutations are also found in prolactinomas, NFPA s and corticotropinomas.

$A I P$ is also involved in AhR signalling. Immunohistochemistry studies have shown decreased AhR immunostaining in human pituitary adenomas compared with normal pituitary glands, which significantly correlates with $A I P$ immunostaining. ${ }^{106}$ A complete loss of nuclear AhR immunostaining was observed in pituitary

REVIEWS

Box 2 | Proposed diagnostic procedure for AIP-affected relatives*

**Screening of relatives**

For children, screening should be offered at the earliest opportunity as AIP-mutation-positive adenomas have been reported in children aged <6 years†

**Relatives without an AIP mutation**

Follow-up is not necessary as the risk of developing a pituitary adenoma is the same as in the general population

**Relatives with an AIP mutation**

- At diagnosis, perform: clinical examination; biochemical evaluation, including measurement of levels of IGF-1 and prolactin; morphological evaluation (by use of pituitary MRI)
- In the absence of a pituitary adenoma, perform: yearly clinical examination with particular attention paid to growth in children; pituitary MRI every 5 years. Yearly biochemical evaluation in children; in adolescents and young adults, measure prolactin and IGF-1 (cautious interpretation in adolescents); in individuals >20 years, measure IGF-1 and prolactin every 2 years until 30 years of age, then every 5 years.
- In the presence of a macroadenoma, perform biochemical evaluation and treat in agreement with current guidelines according to the type of adenoma
- In the presence of a microadenoma: if secreting adenoma, treat in agreement with current guidelines for the type of adenoma. If nonsecreting adenoma, perform MRI after 6–12 months to check tumour growth with particular attention paid to the potential presence of a pituitary incidentaloma

*Information derived and adapted from Beckers, A. et al. *Endocr. Rev.* **34**, 239–277 (2013)¹⁴ and Williams, F. et al. *J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab.* **99**, 1122–1131 (2014).⁴⁴ †The age at initial MRI needs to be discussed according to the need for general anaesthesia in young children. Some investigators have proposed that MRI is first performed at age 10 years.⁴⁴ Abbreviation: IGF-1, insulin-like growth factor 1.

can have an isolated presentation without an associated pituitary adenoma.

## Screening procedures

As germline mutations are rare in sporadic pituitary adenomas, *PRKAR1A* sequencing should be reserved for patients with other manifestations of the Carney complex. The same reservation applies to *CDKN1B* mutations, which are not recognized as a cause of FIPA⁶³ and also occur infrequently in sporadic pituitary adenomas. By contrast, it is worthwhile searching for *AIP* mutations in young patients with macroadenomas or gigantism and in children with sporadic pituitary adenomas owing to the high prevalence of mutations in these age groups. The age cut-off is not fixed and in our experience it is worthwhile performing *AIP* sequencing in all patients <40 years of age with sporadic pituitary adenomas (Figure 2). In the Bicêtre Hospital cohort, *AIP* mutations were identified in 12 of 130 patients <30 years of age and in 4 of 91 patients aged 30–40 years.¹⁸ In other studies that assessed *AIP* mutation status in patients with sporadic pituitary adenomas, of the 42 patients with an *AIP* mutation, 10 patients were aged 30–40 years and three patients were >40 years of age.¹⁸⁻²¹,³⁶,¹⁰⁵ Apart from the age at diagnosis, there is currently no other criteria formally accepted that can be used to define the population to be screened, although resistance to medical treatment with somatostatin analogues and dopamine agonists could also be a criterion.

Considering the variety of mutations found in sporadic pituitary adenomas and the very few mutational hotspots, *AIP* sequencing should include the entire coding sequence and the intron–exon junctions. When sequencing of *AIP* fails to detect any mutations, despite the presence of clinical features suggestive of an *AIP* mutation, MLPA should be used to search for large DNA rearrangements. The pathogenicity of the variants identified in the simplex case must be evaluated before screening of the relatives commences. This evaluation must include at least *in silico* analysis, which can be performed with software programmes such as Alamut Visual (®Interactive Biosoftware, Rouen, France),¹³⁷ SIFT dbSNP (© J. Craig Venter™ Institute, Rockville, MD, USA),¹³⁸ PolyPhen-2¹³⁹ and Align GVD.¹⁴⁰,¹⁴¹ The existence of single nucleotide polymorphisms must be ruled out by use of the single nucleotide polymorphism database (dbSNP)¹⁴² and the exome variant server.¹⁴³ In research laboratories, functional characterization of *AIP* variation can also be performed by use of techniques such as minigene constructs and luciferase assays.

Genetic counselling is recommended for relatives of affected patients as the identification of carriers might facilitate earlier diagnosis and treatment, which can limit the morbidity associated with pituitary adenomas. As the youngest age at which a patient with a mutation has been diagnosed with a pituitary adenoma is 6 years (sporadic¹³³ or FIPA³¹), it seems reasonable to propose genetic screening from this age onwards.

Giving unaffected carriers information about their risk of developing a tumour is difficult, owing to the very low penetrance of the disease and the existence of variants of

8 | ADVANCE ONLINE PUBLICATION

© 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved
www.nature.com/nrendo

Box 3 | Proposed diagnostic procedure for MEN1-affected relatives*

### Screening of relatives
For children, screening should be offered at the earliest opportunity as MEN1-mutation-positive adenomas have been reported in children <5 years of age

### Relatives without a MEN1 mutation
Follow-up is not necessary as the risk of developing an endocrine tumour is the same as in the general population

### Relatives with a MEN1 mutation
- At diagnosis, perform: clinical examination; biochemical evaluation, including measurement of plasma levels of calcium and parathyroid hormone, fasting glucose levels, levels of gastric and pancreatic hormones (chromogranin A, insulin, gastrin, glucagon, pancreatic polypeptide and vasointestinal polypeptide) and levels of IGF-1 and prolactin; morphological evaluation that includes abdominal and chest CT or MRI and pituitary MRI
- In the absence of any MEN1-related symptoms, perform: clinical examination once a year; biochemical evaluation that includes yearly measurement of plasma levels of calcium and parathyroid hormone, fasting glucose levels, levels of gastric and pancreatic hormones (chromogranin A, insulin, gastrin, glucagon, pancreatic polypeptide and vasointestinal polypeptide) and levels of IGF-1 and prolactin; morphological evaluation that includes yearly abdominal CT or MRI, pituitary MRI every 3–5 years and chest CT or MRI every 1–2 years
- In the presence of a pituitary adenoma: if a tumour is found, treat in agreement with current guidelines for the type of tumour

*Information derived and adapted from Thakker, R. V. et al. J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab. 97, 2990–3011 (2012).<sup>48</sup> Abbreviations: IGF-1, insulin-like growth factor 1; MEN1, multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1.

more patients with mutations have been followed-up for extended durations.

Consensus is lacking regarding MEN1 screening for isolated sporadic pituitary adenomas, but screening can be considered in children and young adults (<30 years) with macroadenomas, in the absence of AIP mutations. Screening needs to begin with a systematic measurement of levels of calcium and parathyroid hormone. However, genetic analysis can be proposed even in the absence of hypercalcaemia for two reasons: firstly, pituitary tumours might precede the onset of hyperparathyroidism and, secondly, patients presenting with a first tumour in the pituitary tend to be younger at the time of diagnosis than those with an endocrine enteropancreatic tumour as an initial manifestation of MEN1.<sup>51</sup> When a mutation is identified, the patient should be screened for other manifestations (particularly hyperparathyroidism) and screening should be repeated over time because the penetrance of these mutations is high and increases with age. The probability that a relative will develop a MEN1 manifestation when the index case has an isolated pituitary adenoma needs to be further evaluated.

## Conclusion
Although much progress has been made in the understanding of the pathophysiology of pituitary adenomas, many factors remain to be identified. In contrast to familial cases, germline mutations are not frequently found in sporadic pituitary adenomas, with the exception of the subgroup of patients that includes children and young adults with macroadenomas or gigantism. In this population, AIP should be sequenced first, as the prevalence of AIP mutations is ~8–18%. MEN1 screening should be considered if no AIP mutations are found. The search for CDKN1B and PRKAR1A mutations should be reserved for patients with other endocrine manifestations or tumours. More studies are needed to determine the penetrance of AIP mutations in relatives of affected patients and consequently to improve genetic counselling.

### Review criteria
The PubMed database was searched for English-language articles published between 1937 and 2014, using the following search terms: “pituitary tumorigenesis”, “aryl-hydrocarbon receptor interacting protein”, “multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1”, “menin”, “multiple endocrine neoplasia type 4”, “CDKN1B”, “Carney complex” and “PRKAR1A”. The reference lists of selected articles were also searched for additional relevant articles.

1. Surawicz, T. S. et al. Descriptive epidemiology of primary brain and CNS tumors: results from the Central Brain Tumor Registry of the United States, 1990–1994. *Neuro. Oncol.* **1**, 14–25 (1999).
2. Ezzat, S. et al. The prevalence of pituitary adenomas: a systematic review. *Cancer* **101**, 613–619 (2004).
3. Daly, A. F. et al. High prevalence of pituitary adenomas: a cross-sectional study in the province of Liege, Belgium. *J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab.* **91**, 4769–4775 (2006).
4. Fontana, E. & Gaillard, R. Epidemiology of pituitary adenoma: results of the first Swiss study [French]. *Rev. Med. Suisse* **5**, 2172–2174 (2009).
5. Fernandez, A., Karavitaki, N. & Wass, J. A. Prevalence of pituitary adenomas: a community-based, cross-sectional study in Banbury
6. Raappana, A., Koivukangas, J., Ebeling, T. & Pirilä, T. Incidence of pituitary adenomas in Northern Finland in 1992–2007. *J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab.* **95**, 4268–4275 (2010).
7. Holdaway, I. M. & Rajasoorya, C. Epidemiology of acromegaly. *Pituitary* **2**, 29–41 (1999).

NATURE REVIEWS | ENDOCRINOLOGY
© 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved
ADVANCE ONLINE PUBLICATION | 9

REVIEWS

8. Herman, V., Fagin, J., Gonsky, R., Kovacs, K. & Melmed, S. Clonal origin of pituitary adenomas. *J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab.* **71**, 1427–1433 (1990).

9. Xekouki, P., Azevedo, M. & Stratakis, C. A. Anterior pituitary adenomas: inherited syndromes, novel genes and molecular pathways. *Expert Rev. Endocrinol. Metab.* **5**, 697–709 (2010).

10. Naziat, A. *et al.* Confusing genes: a patient with MEN2A and Cushing’s disease. *Clin. Endocrinol. (Oxf.)* **78**, 966–968 (2013).

11. Melmed, S. Pathogenesis of pituitary tumors. *Nat. Rev. Endocrinol.* **7**, 257–266 (2011).

12. Vierimaa, O. *et al.* Pituitary adenoma predisposition caused by germline mutations in the *AIP* gene. *Science* **312**, 1228–1230 (2006).

13. Daly, A. F. *et al.* Clinical characterization of familial isolated pituitary adenomas. *J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab.* **91**, 3316–3323 (2006).

14. Beckers, A., Altonen, L. A., Daly, A. F. & Karhu, A. Familial isolated pituitary adenomas (FIPA) and the pituitary adenoma predisposition due to mutations in the aryl hydrocarbon receptor interacting protein (*AIP*) gene. *Endocr. Rev.* **34**, 239–277 (2013).

15. Iwata, T. *et al.* The aryl hydrocarbon receptor-interacting protein gene is rarely mutated in sporadic GH-secreting adenomas. *Clin. Endocrinol. (Oxf.)* **66**, 499–502 (2007).

16. Yu, R., Bonert, V., Saporta, I., Raffel, L. J. & Melmed, S. Aryl hydrocarbon receptor interacting protein variants in sporadic pituitary adenomas. *J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab.* **91**, 5126–5129 (2006).

17. Cazabat, L., Bouligand, J. & Chanson, P. *AIP* mutation in pituitary adenomas. *N. Engl. J. Med.* **364**, 1973–1974 (2011).

18. Cazabat, L. *et al.* Germline *AIP* mutations in apparently sporadic pituitary adenomas: prevalence in a prospective single-center cohort of 443 patients. *J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab.* **97**, E663–E670 (2012).

19. Cazabat, L. *et al.* Germline inactivating mutations of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor-interacting protein gene in a large cohort of sporadic acromegaly: mutations are found in a subset of young patients with macroadenomas. *Eur. J. Endocrinol.* **157**, 1–8 (2007).

20. Occhi, G. *et al.* Prevalence of *AIP* mutations in a large series of sporadic Italian acromegalic patients and evaluation of *CDKN1B* status in acromegalic patients with multiple endocrine neoplasia. *Eur. J. Endocrinol.* **163**, 369–376 (2010).

21. Cai, F. *et al.* Screening for *AIP* gene mutations in a Han Chinese pituitary adenoma cohort followed by LOH analysis. *Eur. J. Endocrinol.* **169**, 867–884 (2013).

22. Barlier, A. *et al.* Mutations in the aryl hydrocarbon receptor interacting protein gene are not highly prevalent among subjects with sporadic pituitary adenomas. *J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab.* **92**, 1952–1955 (2007).

23. Georgitsi, M. *et al.* Large genomic deletions in *AIP* in pituitary adenoma predisposition. *J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab.* **93**, 4146–4151 (2008).

24. Daly, A. F. *et al.* Clinical characteristics and therapeutic responses in patients with germ-line *AIP* mutations and pituitary adenomas: an international collaborative study. *J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab.* **95**, E373–E383 (2010).

25. Tichomirowa, M. A. *et al.* High prevalence of *AIP* gene mutations following focused screening in young patients with sporadic pituitary macroadenomas. *Eur. J. Endocrinol.* **165**, 509–515 (2011).

26. Personnier, C. *et al.* Clinical features and treatment of pediatric somatotropinoma: case study of an aggressive tumor due to a new *AIP* mutation and extensive literature review. *Horm. Res. Pædiatr.* **75**, 392–402 (2011).

27. Oriola, J. *et al.* Germline mutations of *AIP* gene in somatotropinomas resistant to somatostatin analogues. *Eur. J. Endocrinol.* **168**, 9–13 (2013).

28. Chahal, H. S. *et al.* Somatostatin analogs modulate *AIP* in somatotroph adenomas: the role of the ZAC1 pathway. *J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab.* **97**, E1411–E1420 (2012).

29. Martucci, F., Trivellin, G. & Korbonits, M. Familial isolated pituitary adenomas: an emerging clinical entity. *J. Endocrinol. Invest.* **35**, 1003–1014 (2012).

30. Occhi, G. *et al.* The R304X mutation of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor interacting protein gene in familial isolated pituitary adenomas: mutational hot-spot or founder effect? *J. Endocrinol. Invest.* **33**, 800–805 (2010).

31. Chahal, H. S. *et al.* *AIP* mutation in pituitary adenomas in the 18<sup>th</sup> century and today. *N. Engl. J. Med.* **364**, 43–50 (2011).

32. Salvatori, R. *et al.* Founder effect in recurring *AIP* mutation causing familial isolated pituitary adenoma syndrome [abstract]. Presented at the Endocrine Society’s 96<sup>th</sup> Annual Meeting, http://press.endocrine.org/doi/abs/10.1210/endo-meetings.2014.NP26.SUN-0698 (2014).

33. Daly, A. F. *et al.* Aryl hydrocarbon receptor-interacting protein gene mutations in familial isolated pituitary adenomas: analysis in 73 families. *J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab.* **92**, 1891–1896 (2007).

34. Buchbinder, S. *et al.* Aryl hydrocarbon receptor interacting protein gene (*AIP*) mutations are rare in patients with hormone secreting or non-secreting pituitary adenomas. *Exp. Clin. Endocrinol. Diabetes* **116**, 625–628 (2008).

35. Guaraldi, F. & Salvatori, R. Familial isolated pituitary adenomas: from genetics to therapy. *Clin. Transl. Sci.* **4**, 55–62 (2011).

36. Georgitsi, M. *et al.* Molecular diagnosis of pituitary adenoma predisposition caused by aryl hydrocarbon receptor-interacting protein gene mutations. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **104**, 4101–4105 (2007).

37. Georgitsi, M. *et al.* Mutation analysis of aryl hydrocarbon receptor interacting protein (*AIP*) gene in colorectal, breast, and prostate cancers. *Br. J. Cancer* **96**, 352–356 (2007).

38. Zatelli, M. C. *et al.* Should *AIP* gene screening be recommended in family members of FIPA patients with R16H variant? *Pituitary* **16**, 238–244 (2012).

39. Naves, L. A. *et al.* Variable pathological and clinical features of a large Brazilian family harboring a mutation in the aryl hydrocarbon receptor-interacting protein gene. *Eur. J. Endocrinol.* **157**, 383–391 (2007).

40. Beckers, A. & Daly, A. F. The clinical, pathological, and genetic features of familial isolated pituitary adenomas. *Eur. J. Endocrinol.* **157**, 371–382 (2007).

41. Leontiou, C. A. *et al.* The role of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor-interacting protein gene in familial and sporadic pituitary adenomas. *J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab.* **93**, 2390–2401 (2008).

42. Jennings, J. E. *et al.* Aggressive pituitary adenomas occurring in young patients in a large Polynesian kindred with a germline R271W mutation in the *AIP* gene. *Eur. J. Endocrinol.* **161**, 799–804 (2009).

43. Igreja, S. *et al.* Characterization of aryl hydrocarbon receptor interacting protein (*AIP*) mutations in familial isolated pituitary adenoma families. *Hum. Mutat.* **31**, 950–960 (2010).

44. Williams, F. *et al.* Clinical experience in the screening and management of a large kindred with familial isolated pituitary adenoma due to an aryl hydrocarbon receptor interacting protein (*AIP*) mutation. *J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab.* **99**, 1122–1131 (2014).

45. Stratakis, C. A. *et al.* The role of germline, *AIP*, *MEN1*, *PRKAR1A*, *CDKN1B* and *CDKN2C* mutations in causing pituitary adenomas in a large cohort of children, adolescents, and patients with genetic syndromes. *Clin. Genet.* **78**, 457–463 (2010).

46. Georgitsi, M. *et al.* Aryl hydrocarbon receptor interacting protein (*AIP*) gene mutation analysis in children and adolescents with sporadic pituitary adenomas. *Clin. Endocrinol. (Oxf.)* **69**, 621–627 (2008).

47. Cuny, T. *et al.* Genetic analysis in young patients with sporadic pituitary macroadenomas: besides *AIP* don’t forget *MEN1* genetic analysis. *Eur. J. Endocrinol.* **168**, 533–541 (2013).

48. Thakker, R. V. *et al.* Clinical practice guidelines for multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 (*MEN1*). *J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab.* **97**, 2990–3011 (2012).

49. Thakker, R. V. Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 (*MEN1*). *Best Pract. Res. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab.* **24**, 355–370 (2010).

50. Chandrasekharappa, S. C. *et al.* Positional cloning of the gene for multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1. *Science* **276**, 404–407 (1997).

51. Vergès, B. *et al.* Pituitary disease in *MEN* type 1 (*MEN1*): data from the France–Belgium *MEN1* multicenter study. *J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab.* **87**, 457–465 (2002).

52. Trouillas, J. *et al.* Pituitary tumors and hyperplasia in multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 syndrome (*MEN1*): a case–control study in a series of 77 patients versus 2,509 non-*MEN1* patients. *Am. J. Surg. Pathol.* **32**, 534–543 (2008).

53. Roijers, J. F. *et al.* Criteria for mutation analysis in *MEN* 1-suspected patients: *MEN* 1 case-finding. *Eur. J. Clin. Invest.* **30**, 487–492 (2000).

54. Drori-Herishanu, L. *et al.* An Intronic mutation is associated with prolactinoma in a young boy, decreased penetrance in his large family, and variable effects on *MEN1* mRNA and protein. *Horm. Metab. Res.* **41**, 630–634 (2009).

55. Agarwal, S. K. *et al.* Germline mutations of the *MEN1* gene in familial multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 and related states. *Hum. Mol. Genet.* **6**, 1169–1175 (1997).

56. Bassett, J. H. *et al.* Characterization of mutations in patients with multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1. *Am. J. Hum. Genet.* **62**, 232–244 (1998).

57. Teh, B. T. *et al.* Mutation analysis of the *MEN1* gene in multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1, familial acromegaly and familial isolated hyperparathyroidism. *J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab.* **83**, 2621–2626 (1998).

58. Nakayama, K. *et al.* Mice lacking p27<sup>Kip1</sup> display increased body size, multiple organ hyperplasia, retinal dysplasia, and pituitary tumors. *Cell* **85**, 707–720 (1996).

59. Pellegata, N. S. *et al.* Germ-line mutations in p27<sup>Kip1</sup> cause a multiple endocrine neoplasia syndrome in rats and humans. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **103**, 15558–15563 (2006).

60. Georgitsi, M. *et al.* Germline *CDKN1B/p27<sup>Kip1</sup>* mutation in multiple endocrine neoplasia. *J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab.* **92**, 3321–3325 (2007).

61. Molatore, S. *et al.* A novel germline *CDKN1B* mutation causing multiple endocrine tumors: clinical, genetic and functional characterization. *Hum. Mutat.* **31**, E1825–E1835 (2010).

62. Occhi, G. et al. A novel mutation in the upstream open reading frame of the CDKN1B gene causes a MEN4 phenotype. PLoS Genet. 9, e1003350 (2013).

63. Tichomirowa, M. A. et al. Cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor 1B (CDKN1B) gene variants in AIP mutation-negative familial isolated pituitary adenoma kindreds. Endocr. Relat. Cancer 19, 233–241 (2012).

64. Ozawa, A. et al. The parathyroid/pituitary variant of multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 usually has causes other than p27<sup>Kip1</sup> mutations. J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab. 92, 1948–1951 (2007).

65. Agarwal, S. K., Mateo, C. M. & Marx, S. J. Rare germline mutations in cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor genes in multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 and related states. J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab. 94, 1826–1834 (2009).

66. Stergiopoulos, S. G., Abu-Asab, M. S., Tsokos, M. & Stratakis, C. A. Pituitary pathology in Carney complex patients. Pituitary 7, 73–82 (2004).

67. Bertherat, J. et al. Mutations in regulatory subunit type 1A of cyclic adenosine 5'-monophosphate-dependent protein kinase (PRKAR1A): phenotype analysis in 353 patients and 80 different genotypes. J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab. 94, 2085–2091 (2009).

68. Sandrini, F. et al. PRKAR1A, one of the Carney complex genes, and its locus (17q22–24) are rarely altered in pituitary tumours outside the Carney complex. J. Med. Genet. 39, e78 (2002).

69. Kaltsas, G. A. et al. Sequence analysis of the PRKAR1A gene in sporadic somatotroph and other pituitary tumours. Clin. Endocrinol. (Oxf.) 57, 443–448 (2002).

70. Yamasaki, H. et al. GH-secreting pituitary adenomas infrequently contain inactivating mutations of PRKAR1A and LOH of 17q23–24. Clin. Endocrinol. (Oxf.) 58, 464–470 (2003).

71. Forlino, A. et al. PRKACB and Carney complex. N. Engl. J. Med. 370, 1065–1067 (2014).

72. Horvath, A. et al. A genome-wide scan identifies mutations in the gene encoding phosphodiesterase 11A4 (PDE11A) in individuals with adrenocortical hyperplasia. Nat. Genet. 38, 794–800 (2006).

73. Horvath, A., Mericq, V. & Stratakis, C. A. Mutation in PDE8B, a cyclic AMP-specific phosphodiesterase in adrenal hyperplasia. N. Engl. J. Med. 358, 750–752 (2008).

74. Beuschlein, F. et al. Constitutive activation of PKA catalytic subunit in adrenal Cushing's syndrome. N. Engl. J. Med. 370, 1019–1028 (2014).

75. Cao, Y. et al. Activating hotspot L205R mutation in PRKACA and adrenal Cushing's syndrome. Science 344, 913–917 (2014).

76. Goh, G. et al. Recurrent activating mutation in PRKACA in cortisol-producing adrenal tumors. Nat. Genet. 46, 613–617 (2014).

77. Salenave, S., Boyce, A. M., Collins, M. T. & Chanson, P. Acromegaly and McCune–Albright syndrome. J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab. 99, 1955–1969 (2014).

78. Dumitrescu, C. E. & Collins, M. T. McCune–Albright syndrome. Orphanet J. Rare Dis. 3, 12 (2008).

79. Chanson, P., Salenave, S. & Orcel, P. McCune–Albright syndrome in adulthood. Pediatr. Endocr. Rev. 4 (Suppl. 4), 453–463 (2007).

80. Vortmeyer, A. O. et al. Somatic GNAS mutation causes widespread and diffuse pituitary disease in acromegalic patients with McCune–Albright syndrome. J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab. 97, 2404–2413 (2012).

81. Weinstein, L. S. et al. Activating mutations of the stimulatory G protein in the McCune–Albright syndrome. N. Engl. J. Med. 325, 1688–1695 (1991).

82. Zhou, Y., Zhang, X. & Klibanski, A. Genetic and epigenetic mutations of tumor suppressive genes in sporadic pituitary adenoma. Mol. Cell. Endocrinol. 386, 16–33 (2014).

83. Ma, Q. & Whitlock, J. P. Jr. A novel cytoplasmic protein that interacts with the Ah receptor, contains tetratricopeptide repeat motifs, and augments the transcriptional response to 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin. J. Biol. Chem. 272, 8878–8884 (1997).

84. Carver, L. A., LaPres, J. J., Jain, S., Dunham, E. E. & Bradfield, C. A. Characterization of the Ah receptor-associated protein, ARA9. J. Biol. Chem. 273, 33580–33587 (1998).

85. Puga, A., Ma, C. & Marlowe, J. L. The aryl hydrocarbon receptor cross-talks with multiple signal transduction pathways. Biochem. Pharmacol. 77, 713–722 (2009).

86. Bell, D. R. & Poland, A. Binding of aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) to AhR-interacting protein. The role of hsp90. J. Biol. Chem. 275, 36407–36414 (2000).

87. LaPres, J. J., Glover, E., Dunham, E. E., Burger, M. K. & Bradfield, C. A. ARA9 modifies agonist signaling through an increase in cytosolic aryl hydrocarbon receptor. J. Biol. Chem. 275, 6153–6159 (2000).

88. Kazlauskas, A., Poellinger, L. & Pongratz, I. The immunophilin-like protein XAP2 regulates ubiquitination and subcellular localization of the dioxin receptor. J. Biol. Chem. 275, 41317–41324 (2000).

89. Lees, M. J., Peet, D. J. & Whitelaw, M. L. Defining the role for XAP2 in stabilization of the dioxin receptor. J. Biol. Chem. 278, 35878–35888 (2003).

90. Hollingshead, B. D., Petrulis, J. R. & Perdew, G. H. The aryl hydrocarbon (Ah) receptor transcriptional regulator hepatitis B virus X-associated protein 2 antagonizes p23 binding to Ah receptor-Hsp90 complexes and is dispensable for receptor function. J. Biol. Chem. 279, 45652–45661 (2004).

91. Bolger, G. B. et al. Attenuation of the activity of the cAMP-specific phosphodiesterase PDE4A5 by interaction with the immunophilin XAP2. J. Biol. Chem. 278, 33351–33363 (2003).

92. De Oliveira, S. K. et al. Phosphodiesterase 2A forms a complex with the co-chaperone XAP2 and regulates nuclear translocation of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor. J. Biol. Chem. 282, 13656–13663 (2007).

93. Formosa, R., Xuereb-Anastasi, A. & Vassallo, J. AIP regulates cAMP signalling and GH secretion in GH3 cells. Endocr. Relat. Cancer 20, 495–505 (2013).

94. Tuominen, I. et al. AIP inactivation leads to pituitary tumorigenesis through defective Ga<sub>i</sub>-cAMP signaling. Oncogene http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/onc.2014.50.

95. Nakata, A. et al. G-protein signalling negatively regulates the stability of aryl hydrocarbon receptor. EMBO Rep. 10, 622–628 (2009).

96. Oesch-Bartlomowicz, B. et al. Aryl hydrocarbon receptor activation by cAMP vs. dioxin: divergent signaling pathways. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 102, 9218–9223 (2005).

97. Lemos, M. C. & Thakker, R. V. Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 (MEN1): analysis of 1,336 mutations reported in the first decade following identification of the gene. Hum. Mutat. 29, 22–32 (2008).

98. Agarwal, S. K. et al. Menin interacts with the AP1 transcription factor JunD and represses JunD-activated transcription. Cell 96, 143–152 (1999).

99. Heppner, C. et al. The tumor suppressor protein menin interacts with NF-κB proteins and inhibits

100. Kaji, H., Canaff, L., Lebrun, J. J., Goltzman, D. & Hendy, G. N. Inactivation of menin, a Smad3-interacting protein, blocks transforming growth factor type β signaling. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 98, 3837–3842 (2001).

101. Sowa, H. et al. Menin is required for bone morphogenetic protein 2- and transforming growth factor β-regulated osteoblastic differentiation through interaction with Smads and Runx2. J. Biol. Chem. 279, 40267–40275 (2004).

102. Karnik, S. K. et al. Menin regulates pancreatic islet growth by promoting histone methylation and expression of genes encoding p27<sup>Kip1</sup> and p18<sup>INK4c</sup>. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 102, 14659–14664 (2005).

103. Milne, T. A. et al. Menin and MLL cooperatively regulate expression of cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 102, 749–754 (2005).

104. Scacheri, P. C. et al. Genome-wide analysis of menin binding provides insights into MEN1 tumorigenesis. PLoS Genet. 2, e51 (2006).

105. Raitila, A. et al. No evidence of somatic aryl hydrocarbon receptor interacting protein mutations in sporadic endocrine neoplasia. Endocr. Relat. Cancer 14, 901–906 (2007).

106. Jaffrain-Rea, M.-L. et al. Expression of aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) and AHR-interacting protein in pituitary adenomas: pathological and clinical implications. Endocr. Relat. Cancer 16, 1029–1043 (2009).

107. Villa, C. et al. Hyperplasia-adenoma sequence in pituitary tumorigenesis related to aryl hydrocarbon receptor interacting protein gene mutation. Endocr. Relat. Cancer 18, 347–356 (2011).

108. García-Arnés, J. A. et al. Familial isolated pituitary adenoma caused by a Aip gene mutation not described before in a family context. Endocr. Pathol. 24, 234–238 (2013).

109. Thakker, R. V. et al. Association of parathyroid tumors in multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 with loss of alleles on chromosome 11. N. Engl. J. Med. 321, 218–224 (1989).

110. Larsson, C., Skogseid, B., Oberg, K., Nakamura, Y. & Nordenskjöld, M. Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 gene maps to chromosome 11 and is lost in insulinoma. Nature 332, 85–87 (1988).

111. Dong, Q. et al. Loss of heterozygosity at 11q13: analysis of pituitary tumors, lung carcinoids, lipomas, and other uncommon tumors in subjects with familial multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1. J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab. 82, 1416–1420 (1997).

112. Emmert-Buck, M. R. et al. Localization of the multiple endocrine neoplasia type I (MEN1) gene based on tumor loss of heterozygosity analysis. Cancer Res. 57, 1855–1858 (1997).

113. Stratakis, C. A. et al. Pituitary macroadenoma in a 5-year-old: an early expression of multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1. J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab. 85, 4776–4780 (2000).

114. Zhuang, Z. et al. Mutations of the MEN1 tumor suppressor gene in pituitary tumors. Cancer Res. 57, 5446–5451 (1997).

115. Knudson, A. G. Jr. Mutation and cancer: statistical study of retinoblastoma. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 68, 820–823 (1971).

116. Pannett, A. A. & Thakker, R. V. Somatic mutations in MEN type 1 tumors, consistent with the Knudson ‘two-hit’ hypothesis. J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab. 86, 4371–4374 (2001).

117. Tanaka, C. et al. Analysis of loss of heterozygosity on chromosome 11 and

infrequent inactivation of the MEN1 gene in
sporadic pituitary adenomas. J. Clin. Endocrinol.
Metab. 83, 2631–2634 (1998).
118. Prezant, T. R., Levine, J. & Melmed, S. Molecular
characterization of the Men1 tumor suppressor
gene in sporadic pituitary tumors. J. Clin.
Endocrinol. Metab. 83, 1388–1391 (1998).
119. Schmidt, M. C. et al. Analysis of the MEN1 gene
in sporadic pituitary adenomas. J. Pathol. 188,
168–173 (1999).
120. Poncin, J., Stevenaert, A. & Beckers, A. Somatic
MEN1 gene mutation does not contribute
significantly to sporadic pituitary tumorigenesis.
Eur. J. Endocrinol. 140, 573–576 (1999).
121. Farrell, W. E. et al. Sequence analysis and
transcript expression of the MEN1 gene in
sporadic pituitary tumours. Br. J. Cancer 80,
44–50 (1999).
122. Evans, C. O., Brown, M. R., Parks, J. S. &
Oyesiku, N. M. Screening for MEN1 tumor
suppressor gene mutations in sporadic pituitary
tumors. J. Endocrinol. Invest. 23, 304–309
(2000).
123. Asteria, C., Anagni, M., Persani, L. & 
Beck-Peccoz, P. Loss of heterozygosity of the
MEN1 gene in a large series of TSH-secreting
pituitary adenomas. J. Endocrinol. Invest. 24,
796–801 (2001).
124. Luzi, E. et al. The negative feedback-loop between
the oncomir Mir-24-1 and menin modulates the
Men1 tumorigenesis by mimicking the ‘Knudson’s
second hit’. PLoS ONE 7, e39767 (2012).
125. Boggild, M. D. et al. Molecular genetic studies
of sporadic pituitary tumors. J. Clin. Endocrinol.
Metab. 78, 387–392 (1994).
126. Raitila, A. et al. Mice with inactivation of aryl
hydrocarbon receptor-interacting protein (Aip)
display complete penetrance of pituitary
adenomas with aberrant ARNT expression.
Am. J. Pathol. 177, 1969–1976 (2010).
127. Harding, B. et al. Multiple endocrine neoplasia
type 1 knockout mice develop parathyroid,
pancreatic, pituitary and adrenal tumours with
hypercortico**steronaemia. Endocr. Relat. Cancer
16, 1313–1327 (2009).
128. Crabtree, J. S. et al. A mouse model of multiple
endocrine neoplasia, type 1, develops multiple
endocrine tumors. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 98,
1118–1123 (2001).
129. Bertolino, P., Tong, W.-M., Galendo, D.,
Wang, Z.-Q. & Zhang, C.-X. Heterozygous Men1
mutant mice develop a range of endocrine
tumors mimicking multiple endocrine neoplasia
type 1. Mol. Endocrinol. 17, 1880–1892 (2003).
130. Heliövaara, E. et al. The expression of AIP-related
molecules in elucidation of cellular pathways
in pituitary adenomas. Am. J. Pathol. 175,
2501–2507 (2009).
131. Walls, G. V. et al. MEN1 gene replacement
therapy reduces proliferation rates in a mouse
model of pituitary adenomas. Cancer Res. 72,
5060–5068 (2012).
132. Vallar, L., Spada, A. & Giannattasio, G. Altered
G<sub>s</sub> and adenylate cyclase activity in human
GH-secreting pituitary adenomas. Nature 330,
566–568 (1987).
133. Kirschner, L. S. et al. Mutations of the gene
encoding the protein kinase A type I-α regulatory
subunit in patients with the Carney complex.
Nat. Genet. 26, 89–92 (2000).
134. Robinson-White, A. et al. Protein kinase-A
activity in PRKAR1A-mutant cells, and regulation
of mitogen-activated protein kinases ERK1/2.
Hum. Mol. Genet. 12, 1475–1484 (2003).
135. Groussin, L. et al. Molecular analysis of the
cyclic AMP-dependent protein kinase A (PKA)
regulatory subunit 1A (PRKAR1A) gene in
patients with Carney complex and primary
pigmented nodular adrenocortical disease
(PPNAD) reveals novel mutations and clues for
pathophysiology: augmented PKA signaling is
associated with adrenal tumorigenesis in
PPNAD. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 71, 1433–1442
(2002).
136. Farrell, W. E. et al. Unique gene expression
profile associated with an early-onset multiple
endocrine neoplasia (MEN1)-associated

pituitary adenoma. J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab.
96, E1905–E1914 (2011).
137. Alamut Visual version 2.4 (®Interactive
Biosoftware, Rouen, France).
138. J. Craig Venter™ Institute. SIFT dbSNP [online],
http://sift.jcvi.org/www/SIFT_dbSNP.html
(2009).
139. Adzhubei, I. A. et al. A method and server for
predicting damaging missense mutations.
Nat. Methods 7, 248–249 (2010).
140. Tavtigian, S. V. et al. Comprehensive statistical
study of 452 BRCA1 missense substitutions
with classification of eight recurrent
substitutions as neutral. J. Med. Genet. 43,
295–305 (2006).
141. Mathe, E. et al. Computational approaches for
predicting the biological effect of p53 missense
mutations: a comparison of three sequence
analysis based methods. Nucleic Acids Res. 34,
1317–1325 (2006).
142. Sherry, S. T. et al. dbSNP: the NCBI database
of genetic variation. Nucleic Acids Res. 29,
308–311 (2001).
143. NHLBI Exome Sequencing Project (ESP).
Exome variant server [online], http://evs.gs.
washington.edu/EVS (2014).

Acknowledgements
We are grateful to J. Bouligand and J. Young for their
continuous support in gene analysis and always very
pertinent advice. We also thank L. Cazabat who
actively participated in the collection of samples and
phenotype–genotype analysis of some of our patients
of the Bicêtre Hospital cohort.

Author contributions
A.-L.L., P.K. and P.C. researched data for the article,
provided substantial contributions to discussion of
content and reviewed and edited the manuscript before
submission. A.-L.L. wrote the article. A.G.-M. reviewed
and edited the manuscript before submission.

Supplementary information is linked to the online
version of the paper at www.nature.com/nrendo.
