
Review

Neurodegener Dis 2014;14:161–175  
DOI: 10.1159/000367694  

Received: April 10, 2014  
Accepted after revision: August 19, 2014  
Published online: November 20, 2014  

# Failure of Ubiquitin Proteasome System: Risk for Neurodegenerative Diseases

**Chen Zheng**${}^{a}$ **Thangiah Geetha**${}^{b}$ **Jeganathan Ramesh Babu**${}^{a}$

${}^{a}$Department of Nutrition, Dietetics, and Hospitality Management, Auburn University, Auburn, Ala., and  
${}^{b}$Department of Chemistry, Auburn University at Montgomery, Montgomery, Ala., USA  

---

### Key Words
Ubiquitin proteasome system · Nervous system · Neuronal function · Neurodegenerative diseases

---

### Abstract
The ubiquitin proteasome system (UPS) is the primary proteolytic quality control system in cells and has an essential function in the nervous system. UPS dysfunction has been linked to neurodegenerative conditions, including Alzheimer’s, Parkinson’s and Huntington’s diseases. The pathology of neurodegenerative diseases is characterized by the abnormal accumulation of insoluble protein aggregates or inclusion bodies within neurons. The failure or dysregulation of the UPS prevents the degradation of misfolded/aberrant proteins, leading to deficient synaptic function that eventually affects the nervous system. In this review, we discuss the UPS and its physiological roles in the nervous system, its influence on neuronal function, and how UPS dysfunction contributes to the development of neurodegenerative diseases.

© 2014 S. Karger AG, Basel

---

### Introduction
The ubiquitin proteasome system (UPS) is one of the major pathways involved in the clearance of proteins in mammalian cells and plays an essential role in protein homeostasis. Proteolysis is executed through sequential steps catalyzed by activating (E1), conjugating (E2) and ligating (E3) enzymes [1, 2]. The initial step is that ubiquitin, a small protein of 76 amino acids, is activated by E1 to form an ubiquitin-E1 thiol ester bond. Next, E2 replaces E1 to conjugate the activated ubiquitin, and associates with a specific E3 ubiquitin ligase. The E3 is the key in this process because it ligates ubiquitin to a lysine residue in a given specific protein substrate. More ubiquitin molecules attach to the first ubiquitin to form polyubiquitin, which marks the protein for degradation.

Ubiquitin binds to other ubiquitin molecules through any of its seven lysine residues (Lys-6, Lys-11, Lys-27, Lys-29, Lys-33, Lys-48, and Lys-63). Additional molecules of ubiquitin bind to Lys-11 or Lys-48 of the first ubiquitin to mark the substrate. Polyubiquitination is recognized by the 26S proteasome, which leads to degradation of the substrate [1]. Lys-63 polyubiquitin chains mediate internalization of signaling receptors such as TrkA [3] or have a role in intracellular signaling via NF-kB [4]. It remains unclear whether polyubiquitin chains with Lys-6, Lys-27, Lys-29, and Lys-33 linkages have biological functions [5, 6].

The proteasome is a multisubunit, barrel-shaped complex. It exists as different oligomeric assemblies such as 20S and 26S complexes. The primary difference between them is that the 26S assembly degrades polyubiquitinated proteins in an ATP-dependent manner. The 20S assembly degrades nonubiquitinated proteins and peptides without the expenditure of ATP [1, 7]. The 26S proteasome comprises the 20S catalytic core assembly and two 19S regulatory assemblies [8].

Roles of the UPS in Neurodegenerative Diseases

The UPS is responsible for the degradation of regulatory proteins, including transcription factors or cell cycle regulators, to maintain homeostasis. It is also an important quality control system to protect cells from damage caused by misfolded or aberrant proteins and depends on ubiquitin as a signaling element.

Compelling evidence has shown impaired UPS function in neurodegenerative disorders that manifest protein misfolding. UPS components are somehow connected to neurodegenerative disorders, including Alzheimer's (AD), Parkinson's (PD) and Huntington's (HD) diseases. There is evidence that gene mutations or otherwise aberrant components interfere with UPS function. Failure to clear damaged proteins causes protein aggregation and leads to cell death [9]. Recent studies link the UPS to the maintenance of synaptic plasticity [10, 11]. Synaptic dysfunction is believed to be an early effect of dysfunctional ubiquitin-mediated proteolysis in neurodegenerative diseases [12]. The connection between impaired synaptic plasticity and UPS is better understood in AD than in PD or HD [13].

Alzheimer's Disease

AD is the most common neurodegenerative disorder and cause of dementia [14]. Clinical manifestations of AD begin with short-term memory loss and visual-spatial confusion. Memory loss becomes more severe over time and eventually causes reduced intellectual capacity and cognitive dysfunction. Eventually, people with AD become unable to maintain their personal independence [15–17].

AD pathology is characterized by an accumulation of misfolded proteins, inflammatory changes and oxidative damage that leads to loss of neurons and synapses [18]. Two hallmarks detected in AD brains are extracellular senile plaques caused by the accumulation of amyloid-β (Aβ) and intracellular neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs) caused by the accumulation of hyperphosphorylated tau.

The cause of most AD cases is still unknown except for only around 0.1% of cases resulting from familial forms of autosomal dominant inheritance [19]. Mutations in the genes encoding amyloid precursor protein (APP), presenilin 1 (PS1) and 2, are associated with familial AD [20]. APP is a transmembrane protein that influences β-catenin regulation. β-Catenin anchors proteins to the actin cytoskeleton and plays an essential role in cell-to-cell adhesion and in Wnt signaling [21]. APP is cleaved via γ-secretase-mediated processes and PS1 and 2, producing neurotoxic effects. Sporadic AD accounts for about 95% of all instances of AD with a late onset (≥65 years) [22]. In sporadic AD, apolipoprotein E, which can modify the γ-secretase activity, is commonly abnormal. The products of other genes such as insulin-degrading enzyme (IDE) and ubiquilin-1 (UBQLN1) may be involved in Aβ degradation and intracellular trafficking of APP, respectively [22].

Impaired UPS Function Is Associated with AD

Molecular chaperones (hsp70 and hsp40) are the first line of defense against protein misfolding and aggregation. Chaperones are involved in protein folding and cooperate with the UPS; however, this is disturbed in AD [23, 24]. The UPS is the second line of defense. Several studies have shown that the UPS is impaired in AD [25]. Dysfunction of the UPS can lead to the accumulation and aggregation of ubiquitinated proteins [26]. A recent study using an AD mouse model suggests that UPS can be impaired or functionally insufficient in specific brain regions while animals are young, long before the formation of senile plaques and the onset of memory loss [27]. Moreover, a brain site-specific proteomic study revealed that ubiquitin C, identified by Ingenuity Pathway Analysis, interacts with diverse AD-associated factors and implicates reduced UPS as one of the causative factors of AD [28]. In addition, evidence from studies of protein-interacting networks shows that UCH-L5 in the proteasome-associated module interacts with the histone acetyltransferase-associated module. Downregulation of UCH-L5 has been observed in AD, suggesting the collapse of the relationship between epigenetic transcriptional regulation and UPS [29].

The Ca²⁺/calmodulin (CaM) signaling pathway was altered in AD lymphoblasts [30]. Esteras et al. [30] showed that increased levels of CaM synergize with serum to overactivate PI3K/AKT in AD cells by direct binding of CaM to the regulatory α-subunit (p85) of PI3K. Because CaM degradation is primarily by way of the UPS [31], the impaired UPS impedes CaM degradation and eventually the Ca²⁺/CaM-dependent signaling pathways, which may be important in the etiopathogenesis of AD [30].

Several proteins related to the UPS and AD may be aberrant, including E1, E2-25K, CHIP, ubiquitin carboxyl-terminal esterase L1 (UCH-L1), and tau. These and a mutant form of ubiquitin can induce inhibition of the UPS in AD [32] and cause dysfunction of the proteasomal system.

UPS and Amyloid-β

Aβ is a peptide of 36–43 amino acids cleaved from the APP by two proteases, β- and γ-secretase [33]. First, β-secretase (β-site APP-cleaving enzyme, also called BACE) cleaves the ectodomain of APP, resulting in the shedding of APPsβ. Subsequently, γ-secretase cleaves the transmembrane domain of the APP carboxy-terminal fragments (β-CTF), releasing the Aβ peptide into the extracellular environment [34].

Aβ is a multifunctional peptide with significant non-pathological activity [35]. Aβ is the primary component of amyloid plaques associated with AD, and the primary component of senile plaque protein deposits found in the brains of patients with AD [36]. The accumulation of Aβ aggregates is believed to be fundamental to the development of neurodegenerative pathology and to contribute to the progression of AD.

The overexpression of APP elevates UPS activity in the frontal cortex in a transgenic mouse model of AD [37]. Qing et al. [38] demonstrated that BACE1 is ubiquitinated and that its degradation is mediated by the UPS. Site-directed mutagenesis at BACE1 Lys-203 and Lys-382 abrogates its proteasomal degradation, APP processing at the β-site and Aβ production, which suggests that Lys-203 and Lys-382 are essential for the proteasomal degradation of BACE1 [39]. It has also been demonstrated that UCH-L1 accelerates BACE1 degradation and affects APP processing and Aβ production, which suggests that UCH-L1 may reduce the levels of BACE1 and Aβ in the brain [40].

There is much evidence to suggest that Aβ accumulation impairs the UPS activity. Gregori et al. [41] found that Aβ binds the 20S proteasome to form a proteasome-Aβ complex which inhibits proteasomal activity [42]. Almeida et al. [43] reported that Aβ accumulation in neurons reduces the activities of the proteasome and deubiquitinating enzymes. In Tg2576 transgenic mice, Aβ accumulation localizes in the late endosome/multivesicular body and impairs the multivesicular sorting pathway via the UPS, which further impairs the degradation of EGFR. In APP mutant neurons, EGFR showed delayed dephosphorylation/deactivation after EGF treatment. This effect can be rescued by decreasing Aβ production through γ-secretase inhibitor treatment. A further study confirmed that Aβ oligomers rather than monomers inhibit the proteasome in vitro [44].

Oddo et al. [45] found that Aβ deposits are cleared from the brain first and subsequently reemerge before the tau pathology, indicating that Aβ clearance leads to a significant reduction in early but not late tau pathology. The evidence implies that Aβ accumulation may impair proteasome function and subsequently facilitate tau accumulation [44]. However, tau aggregation cannot be cleared by the proteasome even if Aβ is removed. In addition, recent evidence shows that either wild-type or mutant APP affects downstream protease inhibition in neural cells. APP also causes enhanced activity of cathepsin B, a normal lysosomal proteinase [46].

UPS and Tau

Tau is a highly soluble microtubule-associated protein found in neurons. The function of tau is to stabilize the microtubule network through its C-terminal 3 or 4 microtubule-binding domains [47]. In nerve cells, tau is concentrated in axons [48]. Six tau isoforms are expressed in the adult human brain. These are generated by alternative splicing of the microtubule-associated protein tau gene [48]. Although the mechanism of initiation of tau fibrillization in pathological conditions remains unclear, hexapeptide motifs of tau can function as a core to form β-sheet structures and induce paired helical filament (PHF) formation [49].

Tau undergoes various posttranslational modifications, including hyperphosphorylation, glycosylation, ubiquitination, glycation, polyamination, nitration, and proteolysis [50, 51]. One of the hexapeptide motifs includes the ubiquitination site (Lys-311) of tau, suggesting a possible link between tau aggregation and tau degradation through ubiquitination. In addition to hexapeptide motifs of tau, other components of NFTs are ubiquitin and apolipoprotein E proteins. Tau also undergoes a stepwise fragmentation to generate cleaved tau molecules that have proaggregation properties and can induce neurodegeneration [52]. Dolan and Johnson [53] found that these truncated forms of tau can be cleared by the autophagy system rather than the UPS, which is usually responsible for the degradation of full-length tau. However, Grune et al. [54] found that degradation of tau protein can be catalyzed by the ATP/ubiquitin-independent 20S proteasome.

In addition to protein ubiquitination, protein phosphorylation is also associated with AD. In the diseases in which tau filaments are observed, tau protein is hyperphosphorylated and unable to interact with microtubules [55]. Some kinases may be involved in this hyperphosphorylation, including glycogen synthase kinase 3β (GSK3β), cyclin-dependent kinase 5 (CDK5), protein ki-
nase A (PKA), and extracellular signal-regulated kinase 2  
(ERK2). Reductions in both the expression and activity of  
PP2A have also been reported in the brains of patients  
with AD [56], which may be involved in the dephosphorylation of tau. In neurodegenerative diseases, tau might  
first misfold, and the resulting conformational change  
could lead to a better substrate for kinases but a conformation that inhibits the phosphatases. Accumulated hyperphosphorylated tau leads to intraneuronal filamentous inclusions termed PHFs that are the main component of NFTs.

The UPS is involved in tau turnover. Keck et al. [57]  
showed that the 20S proteasome coprecipitated with tau  
aggregates, and that this is accompanied by a decrease in  
proteasome activity. Additional evidence confirms that  
tau can be degraded by the proteasome. Proteasome inhibition in cell culture abrogates tau degradation [44, 58].  
Moreover, tau was degraded after incubation with the 20S  
proteasome in vitro [59]. Evidence suggests a relationship  
between proteasome activity and tau accumulation in  
AD. The inhibition of the proteasome may explain the  
overall increase in ubiquitinated proteins in AD. First,  
ubiquitin binds tau at Lys-254, Lys-311 and Lys-353 as an  
early event in the development of AD [60]. Next, additional ubiquitin molecules bind to those at Lys-6, Lys-11  
and Lys-48. Molecules binding at Lys-11 and Lys-48 are  
known to target the protein to the UPS, although Lys-6  
inhibits ubiquitin-dependent protein degradation and favors the formation of PHF over tau clearance [60].

Tau affects the UPS activity. In AD brains, the endogenous proteasome activity is reduced [61, 62]. However,  
this reduction is neither associated with the diminished  
proteasome proteins nor the amount of hyperphosphorylated tau. The inhibitory binding of PHF-tau to proteasomes contributes to this reduction [57]. In AD synapses,  
the accumulation of hyperphosphorylated tau oligomers  
is negatively correlated to valosin-containing protein,  
which is a chaperone that delivers substrates to proteasomes. However, this correlation does not exist with Aβ  
accumulation, suggesting that tau hyperphosphorylation  
and the UPS dysfunction may progress together [63].  
Studies have shown that CDK5 and GSK3 phosphorylate tau, which in turn causes tau to interact with the carboxy-terminus of heat shock protein 70-interacting protein (CHIP), an E3 ubiquitin ligase [64, 65]. In CHIP knockout mice, soluble phosphorylated tau was found to be accumulated in the brain [66]. In addition, a cellular kinase (AKT) and microtubule affinity-regulating kinase (PAR1/MARK2) interact directly and together with hsp90 to regulate tau degradation [67]. Although hsp70  

degrades tau regardless of its phosphorylation state, it  
does not affect the spatial memory of rats [64]. BAG-1 is  
a binding partner of hsp70 that, when overexpressed, inhibits the degradation of tau and results in the accumulation of tau in neurons, thus contributing to the formation of NFTs [44].

### UBB<sup>+</sup>

UBB<sup>+</sup> is frameshift mutant of ubiquitin that arises  
from the ubiquitin B gene [68] and leads to the addition  
of 20 extra amino acid residues at its C-terminus. UBB<sup>+</sup>  
is the direct link between the ubiquitin system and the  
pathogenesis of AD. The mutation causes a dose-dependent inhibition of proteasome activity and has been detected in neurodegenerative diseases such as AD [58, 68].  
UBB<sup>+</sup> is an efficient substrate for polyubiquitination  
[32], but the polyubiquitin chain formed cannot be disassembled, which impairs proteasome function [69]. E2-25K/Hip-2, a mediator of Aβ toxicity, colocalizes with UBB<sup>+</sup> and is upregulated in AD [70]. UBB<sup>+</sup> has also been shown to inhibit polyubiquitination of TRAFs and subsequent phosphorylation of TAK1 [71]. Treatment with TNF-α and IL-1β induces the expression of CCL2 and CXCL8 in human astrocytes. However, ectopic expression of UBB<sup>+</sup> abrogated the proinflammatory cytokine-induced expression of chemokines, leading to the suppression of TNF-α, IL-1β induction of NF-kB and the JNK signaling pathway [71].

### UCH-L1

The gene UCH-L1 (PARK5) encodes PGP 9.5, a protein-deubiquitinating enzyme. It is one of the most abundant brain proteins, accounting for 1–2% of soluble neuronal protein, and is exclusively localized in neurons [72]. This enzyme has multiple functions: it removes ubiquitin from small or unfolded proteins, disassembles polyubiquitin chains for ubiquitin recycling and exhibits ubiquitin-ligase activity [73, 74]. UCH-L1 plays an important role in the clearance of abnormal proteins because it stabilizes monoubiquitinated proteins [74]. While it is active on polyubiquitin chains, other UCH-L1 substrates are unknown. Animal studies show that UCH-L1 is also required for normal synaptic and cognitive function, but its activity is downregulated in APP/PS1 mice [75]. Transduction of UCH-L1 protein restores normal enzymatic activity and synaptic function in Aβ-treated hippocampal  
slices and in slices from APP/PS1 mice [75]. Downregulation of UCH-L1 occurs in PD and AD.

The concentration of UCH-L1 is inversely proportional to the number of NFTs. Evidence shows a direct link between oxidative damage to the neuronal UPS and sporadic AD and PD [76]. A substitution of serine by tyrosine at codon 18 within exon 3 of the UCH-L1 gene was associated with Chinese Han population AD patients, with genotypes more resistant among the female population [77]. An in-frame deletion at exons 7 and 8 of the UCH-L1 gene results in gracile axonal dystrophy (gad) in mice [78] that causes a truncated protein with 42 amino acids missing, including a histidine that is normally located at the purported active site of the enzyme [78]. This illustrates the first mammalian model of a hereditary neurodegenerative disorder that resulted from a mutation in a component of the UPS. The gad mice show a retrograde accumulation of Aβ protein and ubiquitin conjugates in neurons [78]. UCH-L1 rescues Aβ-induced decreases in synaptic function, as shown in transgenic mice that overexpress APP and presenilin. An inhibition of UCH-L1 influences memory functions [79]. Recently, a study by Poon et al. [80] indicated that UCH-L1 is important for regulating neurotrophin receptor sorting to signaling endosomes and supporting retrograde transport. These results suggest that Aβ can downregulate UCH-L1 in the AD brain, which in turn impairs BDNF/TrkB-mediated retrograde signaling and compromises synaptic plasticity and neuronal survival.


with NFTs in AD and with Lewy bodies (LB) in the PD brain, which implies that it can affect the pathogenesis of neurodegenerative diseases other than AD [86]. Full-length ubiquilin-1 TV1 and TV3 can cause PS1 accumulation and the formation of aggresomes that may impact AD susceptibility or pathogenesis [87].

### Sequestosome 1 (p62)

p62, a UPS-related protein, was found in most NFTs [88]. It contains an ubiquitin-like domain at its N-terminus, an ubiquitin-associated domain at the C-terminus and a TRAF6 binding domain. p62 has affinity for multi-Ub chains and may serve as a receptor to bind ubiquitinated proteins [89] and to shuttle the proteins to proteasome for degradation [90]. p62 shuttles polyubiquitinated tau to proteasome for degradation [91]. Interestingly, p62 has been found in neuronal inclusion bodies with ubiquitinated protein aggregates in AD, PD, Pick's disease, frontotemporal lobar degeneration and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) [91–94].

Loss of p62 induced an AD-like phenotype in mice [95]. Overexpression of p62/TRAF6 restored p75 neurotrophin receptor (p75NTR) polyubiquitination upon Aβ/NGF treatment [96], and p62 functions as a scaffolding protein. Polyubiquitination of p75NTR by p62/TRAF6 directs neuronal cell survival [97]. The impairment of the association of p62/TRAF6 and p75NTR leads to cell death.

### SUMO

Posttranslational modification by small ubiquitin-like modifier (SUMO) exists in a wide variety of proteins in neurons. Aβ and tau have been linked to the SUMO [98, 99]. In mammalian cell line cultures, overexpressed tau was subjected to be SUMOylated at Lys 340 majorly by SUMO-1 rather than SUMO-2 or SUMO-3 [98]. The treatment with proteasome inhibitor MG132 decreased tau SUMOylation and increased ubiquitinated tau. Another study demonstrated that SUMO-1 immunoreactivity colocalizes within phospho-tau in Tg 2576 transgenic mice, which overexpress APP, but not in JNPL3 mutant tau transgenic mice, which overexpress human 4-repeat tau with P301L mutation [99]. This conflict might result from the differences in mechanisms of amyloid and tau pathology. Since the phosphorylated tau in the AD brain is ubiquitinated within C-terminal microtubule domains, which contain a SUMOylation site [100], the crosstalk be-

Failure of UPS: Risk for Neurodegenerative Diseases

Neurodegener Dis 2014;14:161-175 DOI: 10.1159/000367694

between ubiquitination and SUMOylation should be considered.

Several conflicting results have revealed the effect of SUMO on APP processing and Aβ levels. APP was identified as a SUMO-1 substrate [101]. Furthermore, APP SUMOylation decreased the levels of Aβ aggregates [102]. Li et al. [103] reported that overexpression of SUMO-2 greatly reduced Aβ production in HEK 293 cells. However, another study suggested that SUMO-3 overexpression significantly increased the secretion of Aβ₄₀ and Aβ₄₂ peptides as well as APP levels in HEK 293 cell [104].

### Others

E2-25K/Hip-2 is an E2 ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme essential in mediating Aβ (1–42) neurotoxicity by inhibiting the proteasome activity [105]. E2-25K-deficient cortical neurons are resistant to Aβ toxicity [106]. Calsenilin (also known as DREAM/KChIP3) is a neuronal calcium-binding protein that interacts with PS1 and PS2. Calsenilin has been shown to have multiple functions in the cell such as repressing gene transcription and binding to A-type voltage-gated potassium channels. Increased expression of calsenilin has been observed in the brains of AD patients [107] and in the transgenic mouse AD model Tg2576 [108]. Inhibition of the UPS, but not the lysosomal pathway, increased the expression of calsenilin [109], indicating that impairment of the UPS may contribute to the accumulation of calsenilin in disease-associated neurodegeneration.

### Huntington's Disease

HD is an autosomal-dominant genetic neurological disorder characterized by motor dysfunction, cognitive decline and psychological dysfunction [110, 111].

It is caused by the abnormal expansion of a stretch of CAG repeats in the coding region of Huntingtin (HTT) gene that is subsequently translated into polyQ expansion within the amino terminus of the HTT protein [112]. When the polyQ repeat exceeds a length of 36 glutamines the expansion becomes disease causing [113]. The length of the polyQ expansion is negatively correlated with the age of onset of HD [114] but positively correlated with severe symptoms [110].

Although the exact disease mechanisms of HD are still unclear, most evidence indicates that the hallmark of HD is protein aggregates composed of mutant htt (mHTT) N-terminal polyQ stretch [115].

#### Mutant HTT May Impair the UPS

The HTT protein is a wildly expressed protein which may be involved in chemical signaling, transporting materials and protein interaction [116]. Increasing evidence suggests that the N-terminal mHTT fragments are highly prone to aggregate in the cell and lead to toxic activity [117].

The UPS is involved in HTT protein turnover in HD. Several studies have shown that ubiquitin and mhtt colocalize in the brain tissue of HD patients [118] and mouse models [119] and in cellular models of HD [120]. mhtt can be polyubiquitinated in the cell model [121] and mouse model [122], but this occurs in competition with modification by SUMO-1, which shunts proteins away from the UPS [123]. Furthermore, after the inhibition of proteasomes, the accumulation of mhtt can be observed [124].

However, some reports suggest that polyQ proteins are not degraded efficiently by eukaryotic proteasomes [125, 126]. In HD, the length of polyQ stretch exceeds normal proteasome products (2–25 residues); therefore, eukaryotic 26S and 20S proteasomes are unable to cleave the flanking sequence in peptides [126]. The polyQ peptides can be released from the proteasome for further degradation by cytosolic aminopeptidases [127]. This leads to the hypothesis that polyQ may impair proteasome activity and explain why longer polyQ stretches develop early disease onset.

Another hypothesis suggests that the proteasome could be trapped by long polyQ repeats. The undigested polyQ repeats are too long to diffuse out of the narrow α-pore of the proteasome and are therefore retained in the core. This finally leads to the depletion of ubiquitin and proteasome and thereby impairs the UPS activity. This hypothesis is supported by fluorescence live-cell imaging, which demonstrates that proteasome is sequestered irreversibly within aggregates of overexpressed N-terminal mHTT fragments or simple polyQ expansion proteins. A fluorescence resonance energy transfer experiment also showed a close and stable interaction between the proteasome and aggregated polyQ proteins [125].

However, there are some controversial reports suggesting that polyQ can be digested by proteasome [128, 129]. The ornithine decarboxylase (a destabilizing enzyme)-tagged mHTT was efficiently degraded and did not aggregate, indicating that the mhtt aggregation is not a consequence of a proteolytic failure of the 20S proteasome [128]. Furthermore, proteins that carried either 103
or 25 glutamines could be degraded efficiently and completely by the proteasome if they carried a degradation signal [129].

Interestingly, Bennett et al. [130] reported that although UPS colocalizes with htt inclusion bodies, most proteasome subunits are not recruited to these structures in cell culture models, and the UPS impairment with mhtt occurs without the formation of inclusion bodies. As mhtt causes UPS substrates to accumulate, mhtt levels increase and impair UPS. In response, the cell may deliver substrates to the autophagic pathway of intracellular protein degradation through mediators such as HDAC6 [131] to reestablish cellular homeostasis [132].

### Parkinson's Disease

PD is a common neurodegenerative movement disease characterized by severe motor symptoms resulting from the death of dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra. The disease pathology is characterized by ubiquitinated α-synuclein-containing LB in surviving substantia nigra neurons [133].

Evidence is emerging that apart from the decreased functioning of the UPS [134], impaired mitochondrial metabolism and concomitant oxidative stress contribute to PD pathogenesis [135]. At least 10 mutations of different genes are associated with PD and some of these are linked to the UPS, including α-synuclein, UCH-L1, PARK7 (DJ-1), PINK1 (PTEN-induced putative kinase), and PARK2 (parkin). Evidence shows that mutations in parkin, PINK1 [136] and DJ-1 are individually linked to autosomal recessive early-onset familial forms of PD [137].

#### α-Synuclein

α-Synuclein is the primary component of LB, the intracellular inclusions observed in the brains of PD patients. LB contain high amounts of ubiquitinated proteins, including ubiquitinated α-synuclein. The protofibrils of LB inhibit UPS function [138] and have an inhibitory effect on 26S proteasome-mediated protein degradation. α-Synuclein transgenic mice also exhibit defective proteasome activity [139].

In vitro, normal α-synuclein can be degraded by the 20S proteasome in an ubiquitin-independent manner [140]. However, treatment with proteasome inhibitor lactacystin leads to an increase in aggregated α-synuclein

even without ubiquitination, suggesting that ubiquitination is not absolutely essential for proteasome-mediated α-synuclein degradation. Further studies confirm that the expression of either A30P [141] or A53T [142] mutant α-synuclein impairs the proteasome function in the PC12 cell line, but this impairment is not related with the ubiquitination of LB [143]. Another study demonstrated that aggregated α-synuclein strongly inhibited the function of the 26S proteasome but not 20S [144]. The aggregated α-synuclein selectively interacts with the 19S cap with a high binding efficiency. However, Lindersson et al. [145] showed that 20S proteasome particles rather than 19S regulatory complex bind efficiently to aggregated α-synuclein filaments and are markedly inhibited by α-synuclein filaments [145]. More evidence is needed to clarify which subunit is of primary significance.

#### UCH-L1

UCH-L1 is a susceptibility gene for the development of PD [146]. It is one of the immediate early genes essential for long-term memory storage [147]. As one of the most abundant proteins in neurons [148], UCH-L1 is thought to play an important role in ubiquitin homeostasis in PD. There are 2 well-known mutations in UCH-L1, I93M and S18Y, which are associated with PD. I93M was originally identified in 2 German siblings with PD [146], and that family was shown to have a missense mutation in UCH-L1 that reduced its protease activity [146]. This autosomal-dominant mutation reduces the hydrolytic activity of UCH-L1 in vitro [73].

A meta-analysis revealed an inverse association between the S18Y variant of the UCH-L1 gene and the risk of PD in Asian and Caucasian populations [149]. This protection may result from the reduced ligase activity caused by the mutation [73], but the mechanism is unclear. Another explanation may be that the S18Y variant functions as an antioxidant to protect neurons from oxidative damage [150]. This might imply that UCH-L1 could be used therapeutically to prevent neurodegeneration.

#### DJ-1

DJ-1, also known as PARK7, was originally identified as an oncogene [151]. Overexpression of DJ-1 is associated with several types of cancers [152]. The DJ-1 pro-tein is predominantly expressed in the cytosol, but it is also found in the nucleus and is associated with mitochondria. In mice, DJ-1 is expressed by most neurons in the central nervous system [153]. Kotaria et al. [154] showed that the DJ-1 protein was expressed by astrocytes in the mouse brain. In the normal human brain, DJ-1 is predominantly expressed by astrocytes [155, 156]. In the PD brain, DJ-1 is absent from α-synuclein-positive LB and Lewy neurites and DJ-1 protein levels are reduced in the substantia nigra of sporadic PD patients [157, 158].

Animal studies have implicated a protective function for DJ-1 protein. Brain tissue from DJ-1 KO mice does not show signs of neurodegeneration [159, 160], suggesting the protective effect of DJ-1. Moreover, mutations in the DJ-1 gene have been associated with autosomal recessive early-onset parkinsonism [161]. In 2009, Xiong et al. [162] suggested that a functional ubiquitin E3 ligase complex consists of parkin, PINK1 and DJ-1 (PPD complex). Data indicate that DJ-1 is essential for the PINK1/parkin pathway and that the PPD complex promotes ubiquitination and degradation of parkin substrates. A deficit of DJ-1 leads to reduced ubiquitination of parkin and enhanced accumulation of misfolded parkin substrates. However, recent data suggest that DJ-1 works in parallel with the PINK1/parkin pathway to maintain mitochondrial function [163], indicating the need for future studies to confirm the role of the DJ-1 link to PINK1/parkin. In addition, DJ-1 is a substrate for the conjugation to SUMO-1, a protein related to ubiquitin. SUMOylation of DJ-1 appears to be essential for its function [164].

### PINK1

PINK1 is a highly conserved serine-threonine kinase [165]. PINK1 is expressed throughout the human brain with the highest expression in the hippocampus, substantia nigra and cerebellar Purkinje cells [166]. Expression of PINK1 enhanced parkin-mediated degradation of heat shock-induced misfolded proteins. By contrast, PD parkin and PINK1 mutations showed reduced ability to promote the degradation of parkin substrates, suggesting that PINK1 plays an important role in the clearance of aberrant proteins by proteasomal degradation [167].

Similar to parkin, the PINK1 mutation is responsible for some cases of sporadic PD and autosomal recessive PD. PINK1 is colocalized with LB in human and animal models [166]. In vivo, PINK1 knock-out mice showed symptoms similar to those observed in PD patients such as reduced dopamine overflow from nigrostriatal terminals, impaired corticostriatal synaptic plasticity and mitochondrial dysfunction in dopaminergic neurons [168, 169]. In 2009, Liu et al. [170] showed that PINK1 deficiency impairs proteasome function and results in α-synuclein aggregation, which suggests a link between UPS and PINK1 in PD.

#### Parkin

Other evidence of direct associations between PD and UPS includes the genetic mutation in the *parkin* gene and familial parkinsonism [171]. Parkin has been shown to be an ubiquitin ligase. Its amino acid sequence contains an ubiquitin-like domain at its N-terminus and a RING box at its C-terminus, which has E3 ubiquitin-ligase activity [172]. The first evidence of a link between parkin and autosomal recessive familial PD was the discovery of the T240R mutation, a threonine to arginine substitution, in the *parkin* gene [173]. Evidence shows that parkin is present in the affected PD brain [174] and that it coexists with LB [175]. Parkin has a neuroprotective function in PD that might result from its E3 ubiquitin-ligase activity, and the most important target for ubiquitin degradation is wild-type α-synuclein [176]. Studies investigating possible connections of parkin to neurodegeneration have found that parkin is a key regulator of the aggresome-autophagy pathway [177]. Parkin targets several misfolded proteins to the aggresome-autophagy pathway through Lys-63-linked polyubiquitination. Moreover, parkin suppresses cytotoxicity induced by a mutated form of α-synuclein-parkin-associated endothelin-like receptor (Pael-R) [178, 179]. Parkin also promotes ubiquitination and degradation of a polyglutamine-expanded ataxin-3 and reduces its cellular toxicity [180]. Ataxin-3 is a deubiquitinating enzyme that preferentially cleaves Lys-63 linkages [181]. The deubiquitinating enzyme activity of ataxin-3 is enhanced by its ubiquitination [182]. Both parkin and ataxin-3 participate in aggresome formation to remove misfolded proteins via autophagy [183]. Although it is hypothesized that mutations in the *parkin* gene result in aberrant accumulation of toxic substrates by way of dysfunction of the UPS, parkin might also be involved in PD pathogenesis because of its role in mitochondrial functioning. PD patients with parkin mutations possessed impaired mitochondrial function in pe-
Peripheral tissues [184], and various mitochondrial processes in which parkin is involved are impaired in PD patients.

## Others

Additional information regarding the linkage between proteasome dysfunction and neurodegeneration in PD has been provided by a mouse model using targeted conditional depletion of the 26S proteasome through inactivation of a 19S proteasome subunit PSMC1 (also called Rpt2/S4). In these mice, 26S proteasome depletion led to neurodegeneration and LB-like inclusions. Intraneuronal inclusions contained ubiquitin and α-synuclein, and displayed striking similarities to LB in the brains of human PD patients [185]. A genetic connection between the proteasome and PD was also provided by a study of German PD patients, which found more frequent variations in intron 5 of a gene encoding the proteasome subunit S6 ATPase in early-onset PD patients than in late-onset PD patients [186].

## Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (ALS)

ALS is characterized by progressive motor neuron degeneration in the brain and spinal cord and consequential muscle weakness. Most cases of ALS are sporadic except for 5–10% of familial ALS. To date, the causes of the majority of ALS are unknown but several gene mutations have been identified to be related with familial ALS cases such as superoxide dismutase 1 (SOD1) [187], TAR DNA-binding protein (TARDBP, also called TDP43) [188], fused in sarcoma (FUS, also called translocated in liposarcoma (TLS)) [189, 190], and ubiquilin 2 (UBQLN2) [191].

Some studies have linked the UPS to a turnover of SOD1 but the exact mechanisms are still unclear. It has been reported that mutant SOD1 proteins are degraded more rapidly than wild-type SOD1 by the UPS [192]. The inhibition of proteasome enhances the stability of mutant SOD1 [193]. Moreover, mutant SOD1 can be ubiquitinated and degraded enhancely by Dorfin [194].

Recent studies have shown that mutations in UBQLN2 can cause its accumulation which is colocalized with the skein-like inclusions found in ALS [191, 195]. Since The UBQLN2 protein belongs to the ubiquilin family, which regulates the degradation of ubiquitinated proteins, the defects of UBQLN2 may underlie the pathogenesis of ALS and possibly other neurodegenerative disorders.

## Prion Diseases

Prion diseases are a group of fatal neurodegenerative disorders characterized by the accumulation of abnormally folded prion protein (PrPSc). The mechanism of pathology is unknown but few studies indicate the impairments of the UPS in the presence of oligomeric PrPSc [196, 197]. The 26S proteasome is inhibited by PrPSc only but not by normal prion protein (PrPC) and this inhibition could be abrogated by preincubation with PrPSc antibodies [196]. A very recent study shows that p62 is increasingly expressed and is localized with PrPSc in prion-infected cells. Since p62 plays a role in the degradation of misfolded proteins, it is likely that p62 activation is important for the efficient clearance of PrPSc [198]. Moreover, it has been reported that PrPSc can be degraded via the autophagic pathway [199, 200], suggesting that the UPS and autophagy may regulate the PrPSc together.

## Summary

As described in this review, the UPS is a very important defense mechanism. Protein degradation by the UPS is essential for normal cellular function and survival. In neurodegenerative diseases, malfunction of the UPS probably plays a primary role in the pathology of neurodegenerative disorders. On the other hand, aggregated, misfolded proteins show the ability to inhibit the UPS many times, which leads to further neuronal damage. The inhibition of the UPS and the accumulation of disease proteins feed each other. Furthermore, it appears that the activation of the UPS is beneficial in order to attenuate pathogenesis in those diseases, although it is hard to activate. Therefore, it is probable that the impairment of the UPS can be a new biomarker for early diagnosis and may be a bright road to successful treatment.

## Acknowledgments

This work was supported by the Auburn University Intramural Grants Program (AU-IGP), the Alabama Agricultural Experimental Station, the Hatch/Multistate Funding Program and the Diabetes Action Research and Education Foundation (to J.R.B.) and by a Malone-Zallen Fellowship (to C.Z.).

## Disclosure Statement

The authors have no conflicts of interest to disclose.

References

1. Glickman MH, Ciechanover A: The ubiquitin-proteasome proteolytic pathway: destruction for the sake of construction. Physiol Rev 2002;82:373–428.
2. Pickart CM: Back to the future with ubiquitin. Cell 2004;116:181–190.
3. Geetha T, Jiang J, Wooten MW: Lysine 63 polyubiquitination of the nerve growth factor receptor TrkA directs internalization and signaling. Mol cell 2005;20:301–312.
4. Deng L, Wang C, Spencer E, Yang L, Braun A, You J, Slaughter C, Pickart C, Chen ZJ: Activation of the IkB kinase complex by TRAF6 requires a dimeric ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme complex and a unique polyubiquitin chain. Cell 2000;103:351–361.
5. Komander D: The emerging complexity of protein ubiquitination. Biochem Soc Trans 2009;37:937–953.
6. Ye Y, Rape M: Building ubiquitin chains: E2 enzymes at work. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2009;10:755–764.
7. Nandi D, Tahiliani P, Kumar A, Chandu D: The ubiquitin-proteasome system. J Biosci 2006;31:137–155.
8. Chondrogianni N, Gonos ES: Structure and function of the ubiquitin-proteasome system: modulation of components. Prog Mol Biol Transl Sci 2012;109:41–74.
9. Layfield R, Cavey JR, Lowe J: Role of ubiquitin-mediated proteolysis in the pathogenesis of neurodegenerative disorders. Ageing Res Rev 2003;2:343–356.
10. Bingol B, Schuman EM: Synaptic protein degradation by the ubiquitin proteasome system. Curr Opin Neurobiol 2005;15:536–541.
11. Patrick GN: Synapse formation and plasticity: recent insights from the perspective of the ubiquitin proteasome system. Curr Opin Neurobiol 2006;16:90–94.
12. Selkoe DJ: Alzheimer's disease is a synaptic failure. Science 2002;298:789–791.
13. Hegde AN, Upadhyay SC: Role of ubiquitin-proteasome-mediated proteolysis in nervous system disease. Biochim Biophys Acta 2011;1809:128–140.
14. Selkoe DJ: The molecular pathology of Alzheimer's disease. Neuron 1991;6:487–498.
15. Lambon Ralph MA, Patterson K, Graham N, Dawson K, Hodges JR: Homogeneity and heterogeneity in mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer's disease: a cross-sectional and longitudinal study of 55 cases. Brain 2003;126:2350–2362.
16. Artero S, Tierney MC, Touchon J, Ritchie K: Prediction of transition from cognitive impairment to senile dementia: a prospective, longitudinal study. Acta Psychiatr Scand 2003;107:390–393.
17. Mattson MP: Pathways towards and away from Alzheimer's disease. Nature 2004;430:631–639.
18. Querfurth HW, LaFerla FM: Alzheimer's disease. New Engl J Med 2010;362:329–344.
19. Blennow K, de Leon MJ, Zetterberg H: Alzheimer's disease. Lancet 2006;368:387–403.
20. Waring SC, Rosenberg RN: Genome-wide association studies in Alzheimer disease. Arch Neurol 2008;65:329–334.
21. Chen Y, Bodles AM: Amyloid precursor protein modulates β-catenin degradation. J Neuroinflammation 2007;4:29.
22. Minati L, Edginton T, Bruzzone MG, Giaccone G: Current concepts in Alzheimer's disease: a multidisciplinary review. Am J Alzheimer's Dis Other Demen 2009;24:95–121.
23. Grillari J, Katinger H, Voglauer R: Aging and the ubiquitinome: traditional and non-traditional functions of ubiquitin in aging cells and tissues. Exp Gerontol 2006;41:1067–1079.
24. Oddo S: The ubiquitin-proteasome system in Alzheimer's disease. J Cell Mol Med 2008;12:363–373.
25. Aso E, Lomoio S, Lopez-Gonzalez I, Joda I, Carmona M, Fernandez-Yague N, Moreno J, Juves S, Pujol A, Pamplona R, Portero-Otin M, Martin V, Diaz M, Ferrer I: Amyloid generation and dysfunctional immunoproteasome activation with disease progression in animal model of familial Alzheimer's disease. Brain Pathol 2012;22:636–653.
26. Gao X, Hu H: Quality control of the proteins associated with neurodegenerative diseases. Acta Biochim Biophys Sin (Shanghai) 2008;40:612–618.
27. Liu Y, Hettinger CL, Zhang D, Rezvani K, Wang X, Wang H: The proteasome function reporter GFPu accumulates in young brains of the APPswe/PS1dE9 Alzheimer's disease mouse model. Cell Mol Neurobiol 2014;34:315–322.
28. Manavalan A, Mishra M, Feng L, Sze SK, Akatsu H, Heese K: Brain site-specific proteome changes in aging-related dementia. Exp Mol Med 2013;45:e39.
29. Kikuchi M, Ogishima S, Miyamoto T, Miyashita A, Kuwano R, Nakaya J, Tanaka H: Identification of unstable network modules reveals disease modules associated with the progression of Alzheimer's disease. PLoS One 2013;8:e76162.
30. Esteras N, Munoz U, Alquezar C, Bartolome F, Bermejo-Pareja F, Martin-Requero A: Altered calmodulin degradation and signaling in non-neuronal cells from Alzheimer's disease patients. Curr Alzheimer Res 2012;9:267–277.
31. Benaroudj N, Tarcsa E, Cascio P, Goldberg AL: The unfolding of substrates and ubiquitin-independent protein degradation by proteasomes. Biochimie 2001;83:311–318.
32. Lam YA, Pickart CM, Alban A, Landon M, Jamieson C, Ramage R, Mayer RJ, Layfield R: Inhibition of the ubiquitin-proteasome system in Alzheimer's disease. Proc Nat Acad Sci USA 2000;97:9902–9906.
33. Selkoe DJ: Alzheimer's disease: genotypes, phenotypes, and treatments. Science 1997;275:630–631.
34. Sisodia SS, St. George-Hyslop PH: γ-Secretase, notch, Aβ and Alzheimer's disease: where do the presenilins fit in? Nat Rev Neurosci 2002;3:281–290.
35. Lahiri DK, Maloney B: Beyond the signaling effect role of amyloid-β42 on the processing of APP, and its clinical implications. Exp Neurol 2010;225:51–54.
36. Selkoe DJ: Cell biology of protein misfolding: the examples of Alzheimer's and Parkinson's diseases. Nat Cell Biol 2004;6:1054–1061.
37. Seo H, Isacson O: The hAPP-YAC transgenic model has elevated UPS activity in the frontal cortex similar to Alzheimer's disease and Down's syndrome. J Neurochem 2010;114:1819–1826.
38. Qing H, Zhou W, Christensen MA, Sun X, Tong Y, Song W: Degradation of BACE by the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway. FASEB J 2004;18:1571–1573.
39. Wang R, Ying Z, Zhao J, Zhang Y, Wang R, Lu H, Deng Y, Song W, Qing H: Lys(203) and Lys(382) are essential for the proteasomal degradation of BACE1. Curr Alzheimer Res 2012;9:606–615.
40. Zhang M, Deng Y, Luo Y, Zhang S, Zou H, Cai F, Wada K, Song W: Control of BACE1 degradation and APP processing by ubiquitin carboxyl-terminal hydrolase L1. J Neurochem 2012;120:1129–1138.
41. Gregori L, Hainfeld JF, Simon MN, Goldgaber D: Binding of amyloid-β protein to the 20S proteasome. J Biol Chem 1997;272:58–62.
42. Gregori L, Fuchs C, Figueiredo-Pereira ME, Van Nostrand WE, Goldgaber D: Amyloid β-protein inhibits ubiquitin-dependent protein degradation in vitro. J Biol Chem 1995;270:19702–19708.
43. Almeida CG, Takahashi RH, Gouras GK: β-Amyloid accumulation impairs multivesicular body sorting by inhibiting the ubiquitin-proteasome system. J Neurosci 2006;26:4277–4288.
44. Tseng BP, Green KN, Chan JL, Blurton-Jones M, LaFerla FM: Aβ inhibits the proteasome and enhances amyloid and tau accumulation. Neurobiol Aging 2008;29:1607–1618.
45. Oddo S, Billings L, Kesslak JP, Cribbs DH, LaFerla FM: Aβ immunotherapy leads to clearance of early, but not late, hyperphosphorylated tau aggregates via the proteasome. Neuron 2004;43:321–332.
46. Cecarini V, Bonfili L, Cuccioloni M, Mozzi-cafreddo M, Rossi G, Keller JN, Angeletti M, Eleuteri AM: Wild-type and mutant amyloid precursor proteins influence downstream effects of proteasome and autophagy inhibition. Biochim Biophys Acta 2013;1842:127–134.
47. Lee MJ, Lee JH, Rubinsztein DC: Tau degradation: the ubiquitin-proteasome system versus the autophagy-lysosome system. Prog Neurobiol 2013;105:49–59.

48 Goedert M, Spillantini MG, Jakes R, Rutherford D, Crowther RA: Multiple isoforms of human microtubule-associated protein tau: sequences and localization in neurofibrillary tangles of Alzheimer's disease. Neuron 1989; 3:519–526.

49 von Bergen M, Friedhoff P, Biernat J, Heberle J, Mandelkow EM, Mandelkow E: Assembly of τ protein into Alzheimer paired helical filaments depends on a local sequence motif (306vqivyk311) forming β structure. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2000;97:5129–5134.

50 Martin L, Latypova X, Terro F: Post-translational modifications of tau protein: implications for Alzheimer’s disease. Neurochem Int 2011;58:458–471.

51 Hernandez F, Avila J: Tauopathies. Cell Mol Life Sci 2007;64:2219–2233.

52 Wang Y, Garg S, Mandelkow EM, Mandelkow E: Proteolytic processing of tau. Biochem Soc Trans 2010;38:955–961.

53 Dolan PJ, Johnson GV: A caspase cleaved form of tau is preferentially degraded through the autophagy pathway. J Biol Chem 2010; 285:21978–21987.

54 Grune T, Botzen D, Engels M, Voss P, Kaiser B, Jung T, Grimm S, Ermak G, Davies KJ: Tau protein degradation is catalyzed by the ATP/ ubiquitin-independent 20S proteasome under normal cell conditions. Arch Biochem Biophys 2010;500:181–188.

55 Yoshida H, Ihara Y: Tau in paired helical filaments is functionally distinct from fetal tau: assembly incompetence of paired helical filament-tau. J Neurochem 1993;61:1183–1186.

56 Vogelsberg-Ragaglia V, Schuck T, Trojanowski JQ, Lee VM: Pp2a mRNA expression is quantitatively decreased in Alzheimer’s disease hippocampus. Exp Neurol 2001; 168:402–412.

57 Keck S, Nitsch R, Grune T, Ullrich O: Proteasome inhibition by paired helical filament-tau in brains of patients with Alzheimer’s disease. J Neurochem 2003;85:115–122.

58 David DC, Layfield R, Serpell L, Narain Y, Goedert M, Spillantini MG: Proteasomal degradation of tau protein. J Neurochem 2002;83: 176–185.

59 Cardozo C, Michaud C: Proteasome-mediated degradation of tau proteins occurs independently of the chymotrypsin-like activity by a nonprocessive pathway. Arch Biochem Biophys 2002;408:103–110.

60 Cripps D, Thomas SN, Jeng Y, Yang F, Davies P, Yang AJ: Alzheimer disease-specific conformation of hyperphosphorylated paired helical filament-tau is polyubiquitinated through Lys-48, Lys-11, and Lys-6 ubiquitin conjugation. J Biol Chem 2006;281:10825– 10838.

61 Keller JN, Hanni KB, Markesbery WR: Impaired proteasome function in Alzheimer’s disease. J Neurochem 2000;75:436–439.

62 Lopez Salon M, Morelli L, Castano EM, Soto EF, Pasquini JM: Defective ubiquitination of cerebral proteins in Alzheimer’s disease. J Neurosci Res 2000;62:302–310.

63 Tai HC, Serrano-Pozo A, Hashimoto T, Frosch MP, Spires-Jones TL, Hyman BT: The synaptic accumulation of hyperphosphorylated tau oligomers in Alzheimer disease is associated with dysfunction of the ubiquitin-proteasome system. Am J Pathol 2012;181:1426–1435.

64 Petrucelli L, Dickson D, Kehoe K, Taylor J, Snyder H, Grover A, De Lucia M, McGowan E, Lewis J, Prihar G, Kim J, Dillmann WH, Browne SE, Hall A, Voellmy R, Tsuboi Y, Dawson TM, Wolozin B, Hardy J, Hutton M: CHIP and Hsp70 regulate tau ubiquitination, degradation and aggregation. Hum Mol Genet 2004;13:703–714.

65 Shimura H, Schwartz D, Gygi SP, Kosik KS: CHIP-Hsc70 complex ubiquitates phosphorylated tau and enhances cell survival. J Biol Chem 2004;279:4869–4876.

66 Dickey CA, Yue M, Lin WL, Dickson DW, Dunmore JH, Lee WC, Zehr C, West G, Cao S, Clark AM, Caldwell GA, Caldwell KA, Eckman C, Patterson C, Hutton M, Petrucelli L: Deletion of the ubiquitin ligase chip leads to the accumulation, but not the aggregation, of both endogenous phospho- and caspase-3-cleaved tau species. J Neurosci 2006;26: 6985–6996.

67 Layfield R, Alban A, Mayer RJ, Lowe J: The ubiquitin protein catabolic disorders. Neurobiol Appl Neurobiol 2001;27:171–179.

68 van Leeuwen FW, de Kleijn DP, van den Hurk HH, Neubauer A, Sonnemans MA, Sluijs JA, Koycu S, Ramdjielal RD, Salehi A, Martens GJ, Grosveld FG, Peter J, Burbach H, Hol EM: Frameshift mutants of beta amyloid precursor protein and ubiquitin-B in Alzheimer’s and Down patients. Science 1998;279:242–247.

69 van Tijn P, de Vrij FM, Schuurman KG, Danuma NP, Fischer DF, van Leeuwen FW, Hol EM: Dose-dependent inhibition of proteasome activity by a mutant ubiquitin associated with neurodegenerative disease. J Cell Sci 2007;120:1615–1623.

70 Hama E, Shirotani K, Masumoto H, Sekine-Aizawa Y, Aizawa H, Saido TC: Clearance of extracellular and cell-associated amyloid-β peptide through viral expression of neprilysin in primary neurons. J Biochem 2001;130:721– 726.

71 Choi K, Park J, Lee J, Han EC, Choi C: Mutant ubiquitin attenuates interleukin-1beta- and tumor necrosis factor-alpha-induced pro-inflammatory signaling in human astrocytic cells. PLoS One 2013;8:e67891.

72 Oddo S, Caccamo A, Smith IF, Green KN, LaFerla FM: A dynamic relationship between intracellular and extracellular pools of Aβ. Am J Pathol 2006;168:184–194.

73 Liu Y, Fallon L, Lashuel HA, Liu Z, Lansbury PT Jr: The UCH-L1 gene encodes two opposing enzymatic activities that affect alpha-synuclein degradation and Parkinson’s disease susceptibility. Cell 2002;111: 209–218.

74 Setsui R, Wada K: The functions of UCH-L1 and its relation to neurodegenerative diseases. J Neurochem Int 2007;51:105–111.

75 Gong B, Cao Z, Zheng P, Vitolo OV, Liu S, Staniszewski A, Moolman D, Zhang H, Shelanski M, Arancio O: Ubiquitin hydrolase UCH-L1 rescues β-amyloid-induced decreases in synaptic function and contextual memory. Cell 2006;126:775–788.

76 Oddo S, Caccamo A, Tran L, Lambert MP, Glabe CG, Klein WL, LaFerla FM: Temporal profile of amyloid-beta (Aβ) oligomerization in an in vivo model of Alzheimer disease. A link between Aβ and tau pathology. J Biol Chem 2006;281:1599–1604.

77 Xue S, Jia J: Genetic association between ubiquitin carboxy-terminal hydrolase-L1 gene S18Y polymorphism and sporadic Alzheimer’s disease in a Chinese Han population. Brain Res 2006;1087:28–32.

78 Saigoh K, Wang YL, Suh JG, Yamanishi T, Sakai Y, Kiyosawa H, Harada T, Ichihara N, Wakana S, Kikuchi T, Wada K: Intragenic deletion in the gene encoding ubiquitin carboxy-terminal hydrolase in gad mice. Nat Genet 1999;23:47–51.

79 Shirotani K, Tsubuki S, Iwata N, Takaki Y, Harigaya W, Maruyama K, Kiryu-Seo S, Ki-yama H, Iwata H, Tomita T, Iwatubo T, Saido TC: Neprilysin degrades both amyloid-β peptides 1–40 and 1–42 most rapidly and efficiently among thiorphan- and phosphoramidon-sensitive endopeptidases. J Biol Chem 2001;276:21895–21901.

80 Poon WW, Carlos AJ, Aguilar BL, Berchtold NC, Kawano CK, Zograbyan V, Yaopruke T, Shelanski M, Cotman CW: β-amyloid (Aβ) oligomers impair brain-derived neurotrophic factor retrograde trafficking by down-regulating ubiquitin C-terminal hydrolase, UCH-L1. J Biol Chem 2013;288:16937– 16948.

81 Bertram L, Hiltunen M, Parkinson M, Ingelson M, Lange C, Ramasamy K, Mullin K, Menon R, Sampson AJ, Hsiao MY, Elliott KJ, Velicelebi G, Moscarillo T, Hyman BT, Wagner SL, Becker KD, Blacker D, Tanzi RE: Family-based association between Alzheimer’s disease and variants in UBQLN1. New Engl J Med 2005;352:884–894.

82 Kamboh MI, Minster RL, Feingold E, DeKosky ST: Genetic association of ubiquilin with Alzheimer’s disease and related quantitative measures. Mol Psychiatry 2006;11:273– 279.

83 Slifer MA, Martin ER, Haines JL, Pericak-Vance MA: The ubiquilin 1 gene and Alzheimer’s disease. New Engl J Med 2005;352: 2752–2753, author reply 2752–2753.

84 Golan MP, Melquist S, Safranow K, Styczynska M, Slowik A, Kobrys M, Zekanowski C, Barcikowska M: Analysis of UBQLN1 variants in a Polish Alzheimer’s disease patient control series. Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord 2008;25:366–371.

85 Stieren ES, El Ayadi A, Xiao Y, Siller E, Landsverk ML, Oberhauser AF, Barral JM, Boehning D: Ubiquilin-1 is a molecular chaperone for the amyloid precursor protein. J Biol Chem 2011;286:35689–35698.

86 Mah AL, Perry G, Smith MA, Monteiro MJ: Identification of ubiquilin, a novel presenilin interactor that increases presenilin protein accumulation. J Cell Biol 2000;151:847–862.

87 Viswanathan J, Haapasalo A, Bottcher C, Miettinen R, Kurkinen KM, Lu A, Thomas A, Maynard CJ, Romano D, Hyman BT, Berzovska O, Bertram L, Soininen H, Dantuma NP, Tanzi RE, Hiltunen M: Alzheimer's disease-associated ubiquilin-1 regulates presenilin-1 accumulation and aggresome formation. Traffic 2011;12:330–348.

88 Kuusisto E, Salminen A, Alafuzoff I: Early accumulation of p62 in neurofibrillary tangles in Alzheimer's disease: possible role in tangle formation. Neuropathol Appl Neurobiol 2002;28:228–237.

89 Shin J: P62 and the sequestosome, a novel mechanism for protein metabolism. Arch Pharm Res 1998;21:629–633.

90 Seibenhener ML, Babu JR, Geetha T, Wong HC, Krishna NR, Wooten MW: Sequestosome 1/p62 is a polyubiquitin chain binding protein involved in ubiquitin proteasome degradation. Mol Cell Biol 2004;24:8055–8068.

91 Babu JR, Geetha T, Wooten MW: Sequestosome 1/p62 shuttles polyubiquitinated tau for proteasomal degradation. J Neurochem 2005;94:192–203.

92 Nakano T, Nakaso K, Nakashima K, Ohama E: Expression of ubiquitin-binding protein p62 in ubiquitin-immunoreactive intranuclear inclusions in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis with dementia: analysis of five autopsy cases with broad clinicopathological spectrum. Acta Neuropathol 2004;107:359–364.

93 Nakaso K, Yoshimoto Y, Nakano T, Takeshima T, Fukuhara Y, Yasui K, Araga S, Yanagawa T, Ishii T, Nakashima K: Transcriptional activation of p62/A170/ZIP during the formation of the aggregates: possible mechanisms and the role in Lewy body formation in Parkinson's disease. Brain Res 2004;1012:42–51.

94 Tanji K, Zhang HX, Mori F, Kakita A, Takahashi H, Wakabayashi K: P62/sequestosome 1 binds to TDP-43 in brains with frontotemporal lobar degeneration with TDP-43 inclusions. J Neurosci Res 2012;90:2034–2042.

95 Ramesh Babu J, Lamar Seibenhener M, Peng J, Strom AL, Kemppainen R, Cox N, Zhu H, Wooten MC, Diaz-Meco MT, Moscat J, Wooten MW: Genetic inactivation of p62 leads to accumulation of hyperphosphorylated tau and neurodegeneration. J Neurochem 2008;106:107–120.

96 Geetha T, Zheng C, McGregor WC, Douglas White B, Diaz-Meco MT, Moscat J, Babu JR: TRAF6 and p62 inhibit amyloid β-induced neuronal death through p75 neurotrophin receptor. Neurochem Int 2012;61:1289–1293.

97 Geetha T, Zheng C, Unroe B, Sycheva M, Klues H, Babu JR: Polyubiquitination of the neurotrophin receptor p75 directs neuronal cell survival. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2012;421:286–290.

98 Dorval V, Fraser PE: Small ubiquitin-like modifier (SUMO) modification of natively unfolded proteins tau and alpha-synuclein. J Biol Chem 2006;281:9919–9924.

99 Takahashi K, Ishida M, Komano H, Takahashi H: SUMO-1 immunoreactivity colocalizes with phospho-tau in APP transgenic mice but not in mutant tau transgenic mice. Neurosci Lett 2008;441:90–93.

100 Morishima-Kawashima M, Hasegawa M, Takio K, Suzuki M, Titani K, Ihara Y: Ubiquitin is conjugated with amino-terminally processed tau in paired helical filaments. Neuron 1993;10:1151–1160.

101 Gocke CB, Yu H, Kang J: Systematic identification and analysis of mammalian small ubiquitin-like modifier substrates. J Biol Chem 2005;280:5004–5012.

102 Zhang YQ, Sarge KD: Sumoylation of amyloid precursor protein negatively regulates Aβ aggregate levels. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2008;374:673–678.

103 Li Y, Wang H, Wang S, Quon D, Liu YW, Cordell B: Positive and negative regulation of APP amyloidogenesis by sumoylation. Proc Nat Acad Sci USA 2003;100:259–264.

104 Dorval V, Mazzella MJ, Mathews PM, Hay RT, Fraser PE: Modulation of Aβ generation by small ubiquitin-like modifiers does not require conjugation to target proteins. Biochem J 2007;404:309–316.

105 Song S, Kim SY, Hong YM, Jo DG, Lee JY, Shim SM, Chung CW, Seo SJ, Yoo YJ, Koh JY, Lee MC, Yates AJ, Ichijo H, Jung YK: Essential role of E2-25K/Hip-2 in mediating amyloid-β neurotoxicity. Mol Cell 2003;12:553–563.

106 Song S, Lee H, Kam TI, Tai ML, Lee JY, Noh JY, Shim SM, Seo SJ, Kong YY, Nakagawa T, Chung CW, Choi DY, Oubrahim H, Jung YK: E2-25K/Hip-2 regulates caspase-12 in ER stress-mediated Aβ neurotoxicity. J Cell Biol 2008;182:675–684.

107 Jin JK, Choi JK, Wasco W, Buxbaum JD, Kołowski PB, Carp RI, Kim YS, Choi EK: Expression of calsenilin in neurons and astrocytes in the Alzheimer's disease brain. Neuroreport 2005;16:451–455.

108 Jo DG, Lee JY, Hong YM, Song S, Mook-Jung I, Koh JY, Jung YK: Induction of proapoptotic calsenilin/DREAM/KChIP3 in Alzheimer's disease and cultured neurons after amyloid-β exposure. J Neurochem 2004;88:604–611.

109 Jang C, Choi JK, Kim E, Park ES, Wasco W, Buxbaum JD, Kim YS, Choi EK: Calsenilin is degraded by the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2011;405:180–185.

110 Walker FO: Huntington's disease. Lancet 2007;369:218–228.

111 Myers RH: Huntington's disease genetics. NeuroRx 2004;1:255–262.

112 Huntington's Disease Collaborative Research Group: A novel gene containing a trinucleotide repeat that is expanded and unstable on Huntington's disease chromosomes. Cell 1993;72:971–983.

113 Duyao M, Ambrose C, Myers R, Novelletto A, Persichetti F, Frontali M, Folstein S, Ross C, Franz M, Abbott M, et al: Trinucleotide repeat length instability and age of onset in Huntington's disease. Nat Genet 1993;4:387–392.

114 Andrew SE, Goldberg YP, Kremer B, Teleńius H, Theilmann J, Adam S, Starr E, Squiteri F, Lin B, Kalchman MA, et al: The relationship between trinucleotide (CAG) repeat length and clinical features of Huntington's disease. Nat Genet 1993;4:398–403.

115 DiFiglia M, Sapp E, Chase KO, Davies SW, Bates GP, Vonsattel JP, Aronin N: Aggregation of huntingtin in neuronal intranuclear inclusions and dystrophic neurites in brain. Science 1997;277:1990–1993.

116 Borrell-Pages M, Zala D, Humbert S, Saudou F: Huntington's disease: from huntingtin function and dysfunction to therapeutic strategies. Cell Mol Life Sci 2006;63:2642–2660.

117 Sanchez I, Mahlke C, Yuan J: Pivotal role of oligomerization in expanded polyglutamine neurodegenerative disorders. Nature 2003;421:373–379.

118 Sieradzan KA, Mechan AO, Jones L, Wanker EE, Nukina N, Mann DM: Huntington's disease intranuclear inclusions contain truncated, ubiquitinated huntingtin protein. Exp Neurol 1999;156:92–99.

119 Davies SW, Turmaine M, Cozens BA, DiFiglia M, Sharp AH, Ross CA, Scherzinger E, Wanker EE, Mangiarini L, Bates GP: Formation of neuronal intranuclear inclusions underlies the neurological dysfunction in mice transgenic for the HD mutation. Cell 1997;90:537–548.

120 Jana NR, Zemskov EA, Wang G, Nukina N: Altered proteasomal function due to the expression of polyglutamine-expanded truncated N-terminal huntingtin induces apoptosis by caspase activation through mitochondrial cytochrome C release. Hum Mol Genet 2001;10:1049–1059.

121 Kalchman MA, Graham RK, Xia G, Koide HB, Hodgson JG, Graham KC, Goldberg YP, Gietz RD, Pickart CM, Hayden MR: Huntingtin is ubiquitinated and interacts with a specific ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme. J Biol Chem 1996;271:19385–19394.

122 Thompson LM, Aiken CT, Kaltenbach LS, Agrawal N, Illes K, Khoshnan A, Martinez-Vincente M, Arrasate M, O'Rourke JG, Khashwji H, Lukacsovich T, Zhu YZ, Lau AL, Massey A, Hayden MR, Zeitlin SO, Finkbeiner S, Green KN, LaFerla FM, Bates G, Huang L, Patterson PH, Lo DC, Cuervo AM, Marsh JL, Steffan JS: IKK phosphorylates huntingtin and targets it for degradation by the proteasome and lysosome. J Cell Biol 2009;187:1083–1099.

123 Steffan JS, Agrawal N, Pallos J, Rockabrand E, Trotman LC, Slepko N, Illes K, Lukacsovich T, Zhu YZ, Cattaneo E, Pandolfi PP, Thompson LM, Marsh JL: SUMO modification of huntingtin and Huntington's disease pathology. Science 2004;304:100–104.

124 Lunkes A, Lindenberg KS, Ben-Haiem L, Weber C, Devys D, Landwehrmeyer GB, Mandel JL, Trottier Y: Proteases acting on mutant huntingtin generate cleaved products that differentially build up cytoplasmic and nuclear inclusions. Mol Cell 2002; 10: 259–269.

125 Holmberg CI, Staniszewski KE, Mensah KN, Matouschek A, Morimoto RI: Inefficient degradation of truncated polyglutamine proteins by the proteasome. EMBO J 2004; 23:4307–4318.

126 Venkatraman P, Wetzel R, Tanaka M, Nukina N, Goldberg AL: Eukaryotic proteasomes cannot digest polyglutamine sequences and release them during degradation of polyglutamine-containing proteins. Mol Cell 2004; 14:95–104.

127 Bhutani N, Venkatraman P, Goldberg AL: Puromycin-sensitive aminopeptidase is the major peptidase responsible for digesting polyglutamine sequences released by proteasomes during protein degradation. EMBO J 2007;26:1385–1396.

128 Rousseau E, Kojima R, Hoffner G, Djian P, Bertolotti A: Misfolding of proteins with a polyglutamine expansion is facilitated by proteasomal chaperones. J Biol Chem 2009; 284:1917–1929.

129 Michalik A, Van Broeckhoven C: Proteasome degrades soluble expanded polyglutamine completely and efficiently. Neurobiol Dis 2004; 16:202–211.

130 Bennett EJ, Bence NF, Jayakumar R, Kopito RR: Global impairment of the ubiquitin-proteasome system by nuclear or cytoplasmic protein aggregates precedes inclusion body formation. Mol Cell 2005; 17:351–365.

131 Pandey UB, Nie Z, Batlevi Y, McCray BA, Ritson GP, Nedelsky NB, Schwartz SL, DiProspero NA, Knight MA, Schuldiner O, Padmanabhan R, Hild M, Berry DL, Garza D, Hubbert CC, Yao TP, Baehrecke EH, Taylor JP: HDAC6 rescues neurodegeneration and provides an essential link between autophagy and the UPS. Nature 2007; 447:859–863.

132 Martinez-Vicente M, Cuervo AM: Autophagy and neurodegeneration: when the cleaning crew goes on strike. Lancet Neurol 2007; 6:352–361.

133 Wichmann T, DeLong MR: Functional neuroanatomy of the basal ganglia in Parkinson's disease. Adv Neurol 2003; 91:9–18.

134 Branco DM, Arduino DM, Esteves AR, Silva DF, Cardoso SM, Oliveira CR: Cross-talk between mitochondria and proteasome in Parkinson's disease pathogenesis. Front Aging Neurosci 2010; 2:17.

135 Winklhofer KF, Haass C: Mitochondrial dysfunction in Parkinson's disease. Biochim Biophys Acta 2010; 1802:29–44.

136 Valente EM, Abou-Sleiman PM, Caputo V, Muqit MM, Harvey K, Gispert S, Ali Z, Del Turco D, Bentivoglio AR, Healy DG, Albanese A, Nussbaum R, Gonzalez-Maldonado R, Deller T, Salvi S, Cortelli P, Gilks WP,

137 Cookson MR: The biochemistry of Parkinson's disease. Ann Rev Biochem 2005; 74: 29–52.

138 Zhang NY, Tang Z, Liu CW: α-Synuclein protofibrils inhibit 26S proteasome-mediated protein degradation: understanding the cytotoxicity of protein protofibrils in neurodegenerative disease pathogenesis. J Biol Chem 2008; 283:20288–20298.

139 Chen L, Thiruchelvam MJ, Madura K, Richfield EK: Proteasome dysfunction in aged human α-synuclein transgenic mice. Neurobiol Dis 2006; 23:120–126.

140 Tofaris GK, Layfield R, Spillantini MG: α-Synuclein metabolism and aggregation is linked to ubiquitin-independent degradation by the proteasome. FEBS Lett 2001; 509: 22–26.

141 Tanaka Y, Engelender S, Igarashi S, Rao RK, Wanner T, Tanzi RE, Sawa A, L Dawson V, Dawson TM, Ross CA: Inducible expression of mutant α-synuclein decreases proteasome activity and increases sensitivity to mitochondria-dependent apoptosis. Hum Mol Genet 2001; 10:919–926.

142 Stefanis L, Larsen KE, Rideout HJ, Sulzer D, Greene LA: Expression of A53T mutant but not wild-type α-synuclein in PC12 cells induces alterations of the ubiquitin-dependent degradation system, loss of dopamine release, and autophagic cell death. J Neurosci 2001; 21:9549–9560.

143 Tofaris GK, Razzaq A, Ghetti B, Lilley KS, Spillantini MG: Ubiquitination of α-synuclein in Lewy bodies is a pathological event not associated with impairment of proteasome function. J Biol Chem 2003; 278: 44405–44411.

144 Snyder H, Mensah K, Theisler C, Lee J, Ma touschek A, Wolozin B: Aggregated and monomeric α-synuclein bind to the S6' proteasomal protein and inhibit proteasomal function. J Biol Chem 2003; 278:11753–11759.

145 Lindersson E, Beedholm R, Hojrup P, Moos T, Gai W, Hendil KB, Jensen PH: Proteasomal inhibition by α-synuclein filaments and oligomers. J Biol Chem 2004; 279: 12924–12934.

146 Leroy E, Boyer R, Auburger G, Leube B, Ulm G, Mezey E, Harta G, Brownstein MJ, Jon nalagada S, Chernova T, Dehejia A, Lavedan C, Gasser T, Steinbach PJ, Wilkinson KD, Polymeropoulos MH: The ubiquitin pathway in Parkinson's disease. Nature 1998; 395:451–452.

147 Hegde AN, Inokuchi K, Pei W, Casadio A, Ghirardi M, Chain DG, Martin KC, Kandel ER, Schwartz JH: Ubiquitin C-terminal hydrolase is an immediate-early gene essential for long-term facilitation in aplysia. Cell 1997; 89:115–126.

148 Wilkinson KD: Regulation of ubiquitin-dependent processes by deubiquitinating enzymes. FASEB J 1997; 11:1245–1256.

149 Ragland M, Hutter C, Zabetian C, Edwards K: Association between the ubiquitin carboxyl-terminal esterase L1 gene (UCHL1) S18Y variant and Parkinson's disease: a huge review and meta-analysis. Am J Epidemiol 2009; 170:1344–1357.

150 Kyratzi E, Pavlaki M, Stefanis L: The S18Y polymorphic variant of UCH-L1 confers an antioxidant function to neuronal cells. Hum Mol Genet 2008; 17:2160–2171.

151 Bekris LM, Mata IF, Zabetian CP: The genetics of Parkinson disease. J Geriatr Psychiatry Neurol 2010; 23:228–242.

152 Nagakubo D, Taira T, Kitaura H, Ikeda M, Tamai K, Iguchi-Ariga SM, Ariga H: DJ-1, a novel oncogene which transforms mouse NIH3T3 cells in cooperation with Ras. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 1997; 231:509–513.

153 Shang H, Lang D, Jean-Marc B, Kaelin-Lang A: Localization of DJ-1 mRNA in the mouse brain. Neurosci Lett 2004; 367:273–277.

154 Kotaria N, Hinz U, Zechel S, von Bohlen Und Halbach O: Localization of DJ-1 protein in the murine brain. Cell Tissue Res 2005; 322:503–507.

155 Bandopadhyay R, Kingsbury AE, Cookson MR, Reid AR, Evans IM, Hope AD, Pittman AM, Lashley T, Canet-Aviles R, Miller DW, McLendon C, Strand C, Leonard AJ, Abou-Sleiman PM, Healy DG, Ariga H, Wood NW, de Silva R, Revesz T, Hardy JA, Lees AJ: The expression of DJ-1 (PARK7) in normal human CNS and idiopathic Parkinson's disease. Brain 2004; 127:420–430.

156 van Horssen J, Drexhage JA, Flor T, Gerritsen W, van der Valk P, de Vries HE: NRF2 and DJ1 are consistently upregulated in inflammatory multiple sclerosis lesions. Free Radic Biol Med 2010; 49:1283–1289.

157 Nural H, He P, Beach T, Sue L, Xia W, Shen Y: Dissembled DJ-1 high molecular weight complex in cortex mitochondria from Parkinson's disease patients. Mol Neurodegener 2009; 4:23.

158 Cookson MR, Bandmann O: Parkinson's disease: insights from pathways. Hum Mol Genet 2010; 19:R21–R27.

159 Andres-Mateos E, Perier C, Zhang L, Blanchard-Fillion B, Greco TM, Thomas B, Ko HS, Sasaki M, Ischiropoulos H, Przedborski S, Dawson TM, Dawson VL: DJ-1 gene deletion reveals that DJ-1 is an atypical peroxiredoxin-like peroxidase. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2007; 104:14807–14812.

160 Kim RH, Smith PD, Aleyasin H, Hayley S, Mount MP, Pownall S, Wakeham A, You-Ten AJ, Kalia SK, Horne P, Westaway D, Lozano AM, Anisman H, Park DS, Mak TW: Hypersensitivity of DJ-1-deficient mice to 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydro-pyridine (MPTP) and oxidative stress. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2005; 102:5215–5220.

161 Bonifati V, Rizzu P, van Baren MJ, Schaap O, Breedveld GJ, Krieger E, Dekker MC, Squitieri F, Ibanez P, Joosse M, van Dongen JW, Vanacore N, van Swieten JC, Brice A, Meco G, van Duijn CM, Oostra BA, Heutink P: Mutations in the DJ-1 gene associated with autosomal recessive early-onset parkinsonism. Science 2003;299:256–259.

162 Xiong H, Wang D, Chen L, Choo YS, Ma H, Tang C, Xia K, Jiang W, Ronai Z, Zhuang X, Zhang Z: Parkin, PINK1, and DJ-1 form a ubiquitin E3 ligase complex promoting unfolded protein degradation. J Clin Invest 2009;119:650–660.

163 Thomas KJ, McCoy MK, Blackinton J, Beilina A, van der Brug M, Sandebring A, Miller D, Maric D, Cedazo-Minguez A, Cookson MR: DJ-1 acts in parallel to the PINK1/parkin pathway to control mitochondrial function and autophagy. Hum Mol Genet 2011; 20:40–50.

164 Shinbo Y, Niki T, Taira T, Ooe H, Takahashi-Niki K, Maita C, Seino C, Iguchi-Ariga SM, Ariga H: Proper SUMO-1 conjugation is essential to DJ-1 to exert its full activities. Cell Death Differ 2006;13:96–108.

165 Heeman B, Van den Haute C, Aelvoet SA, Valsecchi F, Rodenburg RJ, Reumers V, Debyser Z, Callewaert G, Koopman WJ, Willems PH, Baekelandt V: Depletion of PINK1 affects mitochondrial metabolism, calcium homeostasis and energy maintenance. J Cell Sci 2011;124:1115–1125.

166 Blackinton JG, Anvret A, Beilina A, Olson L, Cookson MR, Galter D: Expression of PINK1 mRNA in human and rodent brain and in Parkinson’s disease. Brain Res 2007; 1184:10–16.

167 Clements CM, McNally RS, Conti BJ, Mak TW, Ting JP: DJ-1, a cancer- and Parkinson’s disease-associated protein, stabilizes the antioxidant transcriptional master regulator NRF2. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2006; 103:15091–15096.

168 Kitada T, Pisani A, Porter DR, Yamaguchi H, Tscherter A, Martella G, Bonsi P, Zhang C, Pothos EN, Shen J: Impaired dopamine release and synaptic plasticity in the striatum of PINK1-deficient mice. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2007;104:11441–11446.

169 Kitada T, Tong Y, Gautier CA, Shen J: Absence of nigral degeneration in aged parkin/DJ-1/PINK1 triple knockout mice. J Neurochem 2009;111:696–702.

170 Liu W, Vives-Bauza C, Acin-Perez R, Yamamoto A, Tan Y, Li Y, Magrane J, Stavarache MA, Shaffer S, Chang S, Kaplitt MG, Huang XY, Beal MF, Manfredi G, Li C: PINK1 defect causes mitochondrial dysfunction, proteasomal deficit and α-synuclein aggregation in cell culture models of Parkinson’s disease. PLoS One 2009;4:e4597.

171 Kitada T, Asakawa S, Hattori N, Matsumine H, Yamamura Y, Minoshima S, Yokochi M, Mizuno Y, Shimizu N: Mutations in the parkin gene cause autosomal recessive juvenile parkinsonism. Nature 1998;392:605–608.

172 Shimura H, Hattori N, Kubo S, Mizuno Y, Asakawa S, Minoshima S, Shimizu N, Iwai K, Chiba T, Tanaka K, Suzuki T: Familial Parkinson disease gene product, parkin, is an ubiquitin-protein ligase. Nat Genet 2000; 25:302–305.

173 Hattori N, Matsumine H, Asakawa S, Kitada T, Yoshino H, Elibol B, Brookes AJ, Yamamura Y, Kobayashi T, Wang M, Yoritaka A, Minoshima S, Shimizu N, Mizuno Y: Point mutations (Thr240Arg and Gln311Stop) [correction of Thr240Arg and Ala311Stop] in the parkin gene. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 1998;249:754–758.

174 Song YJ, Halliday GM, Holton JL, Lashley T, O’Sullivan SS, McCann H, Lees AJ, Ozawa T, Williams DR, Lockhart PJ, Revesz TR: Degeneration in different parkinsonian syndromes relates to astrocyte type and astrocyte protein expression. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 2009;68:1073–1083.

175 Shimura H, Hattori N, Kubo S, Yoshikawa M, Kitada T, Matsumine H, Asakawa S, Minoshima S, Yamamura Y, Shimizu N, Mizuno Y: Immunohistochemical and subcellular localization of parkin protein: absence of protein in autosomal recessive juvenile parkinsonism patients. Ann Neurol 1999;45:668–672.

176 Shimura H, Schlossmacher MG, Hattori N, Frosch MP, Trockenbacher A, Schneider R, Mizuno Y, Kosik KS, Selkoe DJ: Ubiquitination of a new form of α-synuclein by parkin from human brain: implications for Parkinson’s disease. Science 2001;293:263–269.

177 Lim KL, Dawson VL, Dawson TM: Parkin-mediated lysine 63-linked polyubiquitination: a link to protein inclusions formation in Parkinson’s and other conformational diseases? Neurobiol Aging 2006;27:524–529.

178 Imai Y, Soda M, Takahashi R: Parkin suppresses unfolded protein stress-induced cell death through its E3 ubiquitin-protein ligase activity. J Biol Chem 2000;275:35661–35664.

179 Imai Y, Soda M, Inoue H, Hattori N, Mizuno Y, Takahashi R: An unfolded putative transmembrane polypeptide, which can lead to endoplasmic reticulum stress, is a substrate of parkin. Cell 2001;105:891–902.

180 Tsai YC, Fishman PS, Thakor NV, Oyler GA: Parkin facilitates the elimination of expanded polyglutamine proteins and leads to preservation of proteasome function. J Biol Chem 2003;278:22044–22055.

181 Winborn BJ, Travis SM, Todi SV, Scaglione KM, Xu P, Williams AJ, Cohen RE, Peng J, Paulson HL: The deubiquitinating enzyme ataxin-3, a polyglutamine disease protein, edits Lys63 linkages in mixed linkage ubiquitin chains. J Biol Chem 2008;283:26436–26443.

182 Todi SV, Winborn BJ, Scaglione KM, Blount JR, Travis SM, Paulson HL: Ubiquitination directly enhances activity of the deubiquitinating enzyme ataxin-3. EMBO J 2009;28: 372–382.

183 Olzmann JA, Li L, Chin LS: Aggresome formation and neurodegenerative diseases: therapeutic implications. Curr Med Chem 2008;15:47–60.

184 Muftuoglu M, Elibol B, Dalmizrak O, Ercan A, Kulaksiz G, Ogus H, Dalkara T, Ozer N: Mitochondrial complex I and IV activities in leukocytes from patients with parkin mutations. Mov Disord 2004;19:544–548.

185 Bedford L, Hay D, Devoy A, Paine S, Power DG, Seth R, Gray T, Topham I, Fone K, Rezvani N, Mee M, Soane T, Layfield R, Shepherd PW, Ebendal T, Usoskin D, Lowe J, Mayer RJ: Depletion of 26S proteasomes in mouse brain neurons causes neurodegeneration and Lewy-like inclusions resembling human pale bodies. J Neurosci 2008;28: 8189–8198.

186 Wahl C, Kautzmann S, Krebiehl G, Strauss K, Woitalla D, Muller T, Bauer P, Riess O, Kruger R: A comprehensive genetic study of the proteasomal subunit S6 ATPase in German Parkinson’s disease patients. J Neural Transm 2008;115:1141–1148.

187 Deng HX, Hentati A, Tainer JA, Iqbal Z, Cayabyab A, Hung WY, Getzoff ED, Hu P, Herzfeldt B, Roos RP, et al.: Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and structural defects in Cu,Zn superoxide dismutase. Science 1993;261: 1047–1051.

188 Kabashi E, Valdmanis PN, Dion P, Spiegelman D, McConkey BJ, Vande Velde C, Bouchard JP, Lacomblez L, Pochigaeva K, Salachas F, Pradat PF, Camu W, Meiningerv, Dupre N, Rouleau GA: TARDBP mutations in individuals with sporadic and familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Nat Genet 2008;40:572–574.

189 Kwiatkowski TJ Jr, Bosco DA, Leclerc AL, Tamrazian E, Vanderburg CR, Russ C, Davis A, Gilchrist J, Kasarskis EJ, Munsat T, Valdmanis P, Rouleau GA, Hosler BA, Cortelli P, de Jong PJ, Yoshinaga Y, Haines JL, Pericak-Vance MA, Yan J, Ticozzi N, Siddique T, McKenna-Yasek D, Sapp PC, Horvitz HR, Landers JE, Brown RH Jr: Mutations in the FUS/TLS gene on chromosome 16 cause familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Science 2009;323:1205–1208.

190 Vance C, Rogelj B, Hortobagyi T, De Vos KJ, Nishimura AL, Sreedharan J, Hu X, Smith B, Ruddy D, Wright P, Ganesalingam J, Williams KL, Tripathi V, Al-Saraj S, Al-Chalabi A, Leigh PN, Blair IP, Nicholson G, de Belloche J, Gallo JM, Miller CC, Shaw CE: Mutations in FUS, an RNA processing protein, cause familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis type 6. Science 2009;323:1208–1211.

191 Deng HX, Chen W, Hong ST, Boycott KM, Gorrie GH, Siddique N, Yang Y, Fecto F, Shi Y, Zhai H, Jiang H, Hirano M, Rampersaud E, Jansen GH, Donkervoort S, Bigio EH, Brooks BR, Ajroud K, Sufit RL, Haines JL, Mugnaini E, Pericak-Vance MA, Siddique T: Mutations in UBQLN2 cause dominant X-linked juvenile and adult-onset ALS and ALS/dementia. Nature 2011;477:211–215.

192 Johnston JA, Dalton MJ, Gurney ME, Ko-
pito RR: Formation of high molecular
weight complexes of mutant Cu,Zn-su-
peroxide dismutase in a mouse model for
familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2000;97:12571–
12576.

193 Hoffman EK, Wilcox HM, Scott RW, Siman
R: Proteasome inhibition enhances the sta-
bility of mouse Cu/Zn superoxide dismutase
with mutations linked to familial amy-
trophic lateral sclerosis. J Neurol Sci 1996;
139:15–20.

194 Niwa J, Ishigaki S, Hishikawa N, Yamamoto
M, Doyu M, Murata S, Tanaka K, Taniguchi
N, Sobue G: Dorfin ubiquitylates mutant
SOD1 and prevents mutant SOD1-mediated
neurotoxicity. J Biol Chem 2002;277:36793–
36798.

195 Matsumoto S, Goto S, Kusaka H, Imai T,
Murakami N, Hashizume Y, Okazaki H, Hi-
rano A: Ubiquitin-positive inclusion in an-
terior horn cells in subgroups of motor neu-
ron diseases: a comparative study of adult-
onset amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, juvenile
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and Werdnig-
Hoffmann disease. J Neurol Sci 1993;115:
208–213.

196 Kristiansen M, Deriziotis P, Dimcheff DE,
Jackson GS, Ovaa H, Naumann H, Clarke
AR, van Leeuwen FW, Menendez-Benito V,
Dantuma NP, Portis JL, Collinge J, Tabrizi
SJ: Disease-associated prion protein oligo-
mers inhibit the 26S proteasome. Mol Cell
2007;26:175–188.

197 Ma J, Lindquist S: Wild-type PRP and a mu-
tant associated with prion disease are subject
to retrograde transport and proteasome deg-
radation. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2001;98:
14955–14960.

198 Homma T, Ishibashi D, Nakagaki T, Satoh
K, Sano K, Atarashi R, Nishida N: Increased
expression of p62/SQSTM1 in prion disea-
ses and its association with pathogenic prion
protein. Sci Rep 2014;4:4504.

199 Heiseke A, Aguib Y, Riemer C, Baier M,
Schatzl HM: Lithium induces clearance of
protease-resistant prion protein in prion-
infected cells by induction of autophagy. J
Neurochem 2009;109:25–34.

200 Aguib Y, Heiseke A, Gilch S, Riemer C, Bai-
er M, Schatzl HM, Ertmer A: Autophagy in-
duction by trehalose counteracts cellular
prion infection. Autophagy 2009;5:361–369.
