
Send Orders for Reprints to reprints@benthamscience.ae

Current Molecular Medicine 2015, 15, 27-37

**Intracellular Signaling of the Aging Suppressor Protein Klotho**

M. Sopjani${}^{*,1}$, M. Rinnerthaler${}^{3}$, J. Kruja${}^{4}$ and M. Dërmaku-Sopjani${}^{*,2}$

${}^{1}$Faculty of Medicine, University of Prishtina, Prishtinë, Kosova  
${}^{2}$Department of Chemistry, University of Prishtina, Prishtinë, Kosova  
${}^{3}$Department of Cell Biology, Division of Genetics, University of Salzburg, Salzburg, Austria  
${}^{4}$Neurology Service, University of Medicine, Tirana, Albania  

**Abstract:** The Klotho protein deficiency is known to participate in premature aging. As an aging suppressor, Klotho is an important molecule in aging processes and its overexpression results in longevity. Due to many reasons, the insulin/insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1) has been considered as a key pathway in aging research. The Klotho gene is closely related to this pathway. The Klotho gene encodes a transmembrane protein that after cleavage is also found as a secreted protein. Importantly, its overexpression suppresses insulin/IGF-1 signaling and thus extends the lifespan. In addition, Klotho participates in the regulation of several other intracellular signaling pathways, including regulation of FGF23 signaling, cAMP, PKC, transforming growth factor-$\beta$ (TGF-$\beta$), p53/p21, and Wnt signaling. The aim of this review is to summarize current literature that shows the involvement of Klotho in the regulation of several intracellular pathways. The results of our review clearly indicate that Klotho participates in several intracellular signaling pathways, and by regulating them, Klotho is involved in aging and longevity.

**Keywords:** cAMP, fibroblast growth factor (FGF), insulin/IGF-1, Klotho, PKC, PTH, vitamin D, p53/p21, Wnt signaling pathway.

---

**INTRODUCTION**

Aging is a biological phenomenon driven by the complex interplay between multiple genetic and environmental factors [1,2]. Age-related process that manifests on the gene expression level, intracellular signaling pathways, and as a complex relationship between age-related genes remains poorly understood. However, it is well known that aging is associated with increased incidence of several diseases, including hypertension [3,4], diabetes [5], and chronic kidney disease (CKD) with impairment of endothelial function [6,7], neurological disorders [8], and increased risk of cardiovascular morbidity and mortality [9]. Accordingly, prospective medications targeting Klotho genes responsible for slowing down ageing and postponing the onset of age-related diseases may be an important potential target for therapeutic intervention of high clinical relevance.

Klotho is a novel aging suppressor gene encoding a single-pass transmembrane protein with multiple pleiotropic effects [10]. The Klotho family of proteins has three members: $\alpha$Klotho (that is mainly known as Klotho) and the two proteins that show a sequence similarity, $\beta$Klotho and $\gamma$Klotho [11]. The Klotho gene is predominantly expressed in the distal convoluted tubule (DCT) cells of the kidney, to a lesser extent in the renal proximal convoluted tubule (PCT) cells [10-13] as well as in the choroid plexus epithelial cells of the brain [14,15]. Small amounts of $\alpha$Klotho can also be found in the pituitary gland, placenta, skeletal muscle, urinary bladder, aorta, ovary, colon, thyroid gland, pancreas, and testis [10,16,17]. A mouse deficient for Klotho gene shows phenotypes that resemble human premature or accelerated aging (reviewed elsewhere [11]), whereas over-expression of the gene in mice extends lifespan [18].

Klotho is also implicated in the cellular transport and cell volume regulation [11,13,19-21] along with some other proteins, such as AMP-activated protein kinase [22-26] and Janus kinase 2 [27,28].

The mouse klotho ($mKL$) gene encodes a protein that consists of 1014 amino acids, whereas human $\alpha$Klotho gene ($hKL$) encodes a single-pass transmembrane protein consisting of 1012 amino acids [11,29,30] as pictured in Fig. (1A).

The Klotho protein exists in two forms: a membrane and a secreted form. The latter arises either by proteolytic cleavage of extracellular domain of the full length $\alpha$Klotho just above the plasma membrane [10,31,32], or by alternative mRNA Klotho gene splicing (isoform 70 kDa) [33]. Both of them show different

*Address correspondence to these authors at the (M. Sopjani) Faculty of Medicine of the University of Prishtina, Str. Bulevardi i Deshmorëve, p.n., 10 000, Prishtina, Kosova; Tel: +377 44 604 944; Fax: +381 38 512 223; E-mail: msopjani@yahoo.com and (M. Dërmaku-Sopjani) Department of Chemistry, Faculty of Natural Sciences and Mathematics, University of Prishtina, Str. Mother Teresa, p.n. 10 000, Prishtina, Kosova; Tel: +377 44 620 551; Fax: +381 38 226 104; E-mail: miribanedermaku@yahoo.com

© 2015 Bentham Science Publishers

biological activities, however, most of the Klotho effects are attributed to its secreted form [11, 34, 35] which functions as a humoral factor [20, 36, 37]. The shortened Klotho variant acts most probably through an unknown cell membrane Klotho receptor [38], and is also an enzyme involved in the regulation of various cell membrane glycoproteins [3, 39]. The circulating Klotho protein by regulating several cell surface receptor activities may influence particular intracellular signaling pathways [36, 40]. Nonetheless, recent studies have revealed much broader biological functions for the membrane as well as secreted Klotho protein, these being of high relevance in multiple physiological and pathological processes.

KLOTHO-SENSITIVE INTRACELLULAR SIGNALING PATHWAYS

Multiple Klotho biological functions have been determined, but the underlying molecular mechanisms are not fully understood and are yet to be clarified. However, many studies have demonstrated the involvement of Klotho in various intracellular signaling pathways, including regulation of fibroblast growth factor (FGF) 23 signaling [41], insulin/insulin-like growth factor-1 (insulin/IGF-1) [31], cAMP [7], PKC [42], p53/p21 [43], and Wnt [44] signaling pathways. These signaling pathways involving Klotho are discussed below in more detail.

Klotho in the Regulation of FGF23 Signaling

The FGF23, a member of the FGF19 subfamily, is a protein composed of 251-amino acids in length (approx. 32 kDa) with an N-terminal fragment binding domain for the FGF receptor (FGFR) and a novel C-terminal binding domain for Klotho [45-47].

FGF23 requires a binary complex of Klotho as an obligate co-receptor protein and FGFR for FGFR activation [47], therefore membrane expression of both FGFR and Klotho proteins defines the target organs for FGF23. In humans and mice, four distinct genes encode FGFRs (FGFR1-4) [48]. αKlotho has different FGFRs binding abilities, including lower affinity for FGFR2 than for the other FGFRs. The COOH-terminal domain of FGF23 forms a tertiary complex with αKlotho and the “c” isoforms of FGFR1, 3, and 4, reaching its maximum cellular signaling when FGF23-FGFR1c-αKlotho cis complex is formed [45, 47, 49, 50]. By this trimeric complex, FGF23 initiates downstream signaling effects through a variety of intracellular signal transduction proteins, including PLC, Gab1, ERK1/2-SGK1, FRS2, Shc, or STAT1, leading to a potential mechanism for differential gene expression [40, 45, 50-52].

FGF23 is mainly expressed by osteocytes and osteoblasts in the bone [46], which are the main sources of FGF23 in the body. Synthesis and secretion of FGF23 by osteocytes in the bone are stimulated by the parathyroid hormone (PTH), vitamin D (1,25(OH)(2)D) as well as dietary and serum phosphate levels [53]. PGF23 is also reported to be

inhibited, through still unclear mechanisms, by the dentin matrix protein 1 (DMP1) as well as by a phosphate-regulating gene with homologies to endopeptidases on the X chromosome (PHEX) [54]. However, studies using PHEX-deficient mice have shown that PHEX deficiency is necessary, albeit insufficient, to induce FGF23 gene transcription in osteocytes [53, 55].

The Klotho/FGFR complex is necessary for eliciting the FGF23-dependent signaling events [41]. Many FGF23-mediated biological functions are reported in which membrane Klotho is an important factor. Experiments using rodents confirmed that FGF23 over-expression or its parenteral administration inhibits both biosynthesis of vitamin D and the phosphate reabsorption in the renal proximal tubules [49, 56], whereas FGF23-/- mice or homozygous missense mutation in human FGF23 have shown significantly higher levels of serum vitamin D. This causes severe hyperphosphatemia, resulting in soft-tissue calcification [1, 47, 53, 57]. Further, FGF23 is reported to be causally implicated in developing numerous hypophosphatemic diseases, including X-linked dominant hypophosphatemic rickets/osteomalacia (XLH), autosomal dominant hypophosphatemic rickets/osteomalacia (ADHR) and tumor-induced rickets/osteomalacia (TIO) [55, 56, 58]. FGF23 acts as a counter regulatory phosphaturic hormone for vitamin D; hence its excess leads to a reduction in circulating vitamin D levels by regulating expression levels of vitamin D-synthesis/degradation renal enzymes, i.e., inhibiting the renal enzyme 25-hydroxyvitamin D 1-α-hydroxylase (Cyp27b1) participating in the synthesis of vitamin D, and stimulating 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D 24-hydroxylase (Cyp24a1) catalyzing the catabolism of vitamin D into inactive calcitroic acid in the renal tubules [59]. Noteworthy, hypophosphatemia resulting from the FGF23 excess is mediated by inhibiting the expression of sodium coupled phosphate co-transporters, NaPi2a and NaPi2c, in the renal proximal tubules [60], consequently increasing phosphate excretion in the urine (Fig. 1B).

Klotho plays a key role in calcium homeostasis. Homozygous Klotho mutant (kl-/-) mice also exhibit a calcium abnormality [42], which is thought to be due to the increased gene expression of the 25-hydroxyvitamin D3 1-α-hydroxylase in the kidney. Furthermore, one key factor for platelets activation is an increased cytosolic calcium concentration ([Ca²⁺]) following store-operated calcium entry (SOCE) accomplished by calcium-release-activated calcium (CRAC) channel moiety Orai1 located in the plasma membrane and its regulator Stim1 localized to the endoplasmic reticulum. Recently, it has been reported that Klotho deficiency impedes platelet Ca²⁺ signaling and platelet activation in mice, which effect is at least partially accounted to vitamin D-mediated inhibition of nuclear NF-κB activity and Stim/Orai1 expression in megakaryocytes [61]. Cytosolic Ca²⁺ concentration is also important for the function of dendritic cells (DCs). Increased [Ca²⁺]i is realized by SOCE, while the

Klotho and Intracellular Signaling

Current Molecular Medicine, 2015, Vol. 15, No. 1 29

A.

N-SS---KL1---L---KL2---TM---CD-C


Human Klotho protein

B.

FGF23
Membrane Klotho
NaPi2a/2c
P
Lysosome
NaPi2a/2c
Tubular Cell
24-hydroxylase
1-α-hydroxylase
Nucleus
Kidney
Soluble Klotho
Klotho
Blood
Urine
CSF
Active
Inactive
25(OH)D → 1,25(OH)₂D₃ → Calcitriolic acid

Fig. (1). Schematic diagram showing the domain structure, location and main functions of membrane and secreted Klotho protein [11,16,39]. (A) The human Klotho protein, composed of 1012 amino acids in length, possesses a putative signal sequence (SS) at its N-terminus, two internal repeats (KL1 and KL2) of the extracellular domain that shares sequence homology to the β-glucosidase, a linker (L), and a putative transmembrane domain (TM) with a short cytoplasmic domain (CD) at the C-terminus (not drawn to scale). (B) Membrane Klotho forms a complex with the FGFR to create a de novo high-affinity co-receptor binding site for FGF23, and has an important role in the regulation of phosphate and vitamin D metabolism. The latter plays a crucial role in controlling the minerals levels in the body. The ectodomain shedding of membrane Klotho by α- and β-secretases results in releasing the secreted Klotho that can be detected in cerebrospinal fluid, blood, and urine. The FGF23/Klotho signaling in turn reduces circulating vitamin D levels, either by inhibiting the expression levels of enzyme 1-α-hydroxylase that participates in vitamin D active form synthesis or by inducing of another enzyme 24-hydroxylase which catalyzes the catabolism of vitamin D into inactive calcitriolic acid. This FGF23/Klotho complex also down-regulates the renal sodium coupled phosphate transporters. See text for further details.

decrease by K⁺-independent (NCX) and K⁺-dependent (NCKX) Na⁺/Ca²⁺ exchangers. The latter, is stimulated by vitamin D, which is on the other side inhibited by Klotho. Thus, the deficiency of the antiaging protein Klotho stimulates cell membrane abundance of NCKX1 and Na⁺/Ca²⁺-exchange activity. These effects are in large part due to excessive vitamin D formation [62].

FGF 23 and Klotho signaling prevents tissue atrophy by stimulating the cell proliferation and preventing vitamin D-induced cell death by apoptosis. This signaling exerts dual role in the inhibition of apoptotic effects of vitamin D through both down-regulation of 1-α-hydroxylase gene expression and phosphoinositide-3 kinase-mediated suppression of caspase activity [63]. This indicates the potential use of FGF23-Klotho axis as an anti-aging therapy. However, it should be noted that normal levels of vitamin D are also important for many body functions, and its normal levels deregulation may be a risk for developing diseases associated with vitamin D deficiency.

The aging suppressor protein of Klotho plays an important role in renal function. Klotho has been reported to decrease apoptosis in acute experimental ischemic renal failure [64], and its synthesis is strongly reduced in human chronic kidney failure [65]. Further, the deletion of the Klotho gene causes kidney damage [66], suggesting that this protein is crucial for maintaining normal structure and function of the kidney.

Klotho Participates in the Insulin/IGF-1 and RIG-1 Signaling Pathways

The aging suppressor Klotho protein was reported to have a principal function as a hormone that inhibits the intracellular IGF-1 signaling cascade, an important mechanism for extending lifespan [67]. To fulfill its function a large extracellular domain of Klotho is cleaved off and secreted into the blood, thereby acting as a hormonal factor that binds to a high affinity but not yet identified cell membrane Klotho receptor. This binding leads to an inhibition of the tyrosine kinase activity of the insulin/IGF-1 receptor [40] and a subsequent inhibition of insulin receptor substrates (IRS) as well as association of IRS with phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K), and serine phosphorylation of PKB [10, 18, 47]. It has to be determined, however, whether the inhibitory effect of the Klotho protein is dependent on the direct inhibition of IRS, PI3K, and PKB/Akt or is completely or partially dependent on its ability to inhibit the insulin/IGF-1 receptor. Noteworthy, PI3K pathway stimulates PKB/Akt and SGK isoforms, which in turn suppress the glycogen synthase kinase GSK3. The latter kinase plays an essential role in the regulation of cytosolic Ca²⁺ concentration as reported in experiments using dendritic cells [68]. Klotho hormone furthermore increases the resistance to oxidative stress both *in vitro* and *in vivo* [31, 69], which may also contribute to the anti-aging effects of Klotho. Klotho activates the FoxO forkhead transcription factors that are down-regulated by insulin/IGF-1 signaling [70] (Fig. 2), thereby inducing the expression of the mitochondrial manganese superoxide dismutase (MnSOD), which in turn participates in the removal of ROS and gives resistance to oxidative stress at the cellular as well as organismic level in mammals. The involvement of Klotho in oxidative stress protection is also observed in the retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) cells which are highly specialized and very important central nervous system (CNS) cells that contribute to retinal homeostasis. Klotho, by regulating the expression of stress-related genes in RPE, decreases the formation of ROS, and thus protects RPE from oxidative stress [71]. Except its neuroprotective role from oxidative damage [72], it has been demonstrated that Klotho increases oligodendrocyte maturation and developmental myelination of the CNS [73], therefore, Klotho role in neuroprotection and neurodevelopment. Moreover, through inhibiting IGF-1 signaling and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) receptor 2 phosphorylation, the Klotho protein up-regulates the l-3,4-dihydroxyphenylalanine synthesis and inhibits VEGF secretion from basal membranes [71]. Clearly, bone marrow cells (BMCs) from young mice have higher expression levels of Klotho and a reduced phosphorylation levels of the IGF-1 receptor β compared to old mice BMCs. Injection of young BMCs in old mice mitigate their renal aging [74], indicating that Klotho is a possible key factor in this process. As recently reported for an Alzheimer's disease (AD) mouse model, the Klotho protein, potentially by modulating insulin/IGF-1 signaling, contributes to the neuroprotective effects of ligustilide [75], thus, suggesting that Klotho is a novel therapeutic target for age-related AD-like neuropathologies. Therefore, an over-expression of Klotho might be contributing to the neuroprotection against AD.

Noteworthy, Klotho has been reported to function as a tumor suppressor in several tumors. It is demonstrated that restoration of Klotho gene expression inhibited tumor cell proliferation by inducing apoptosis and autophagy in gastric cancer (GC) cells [76] and in hepatocellular carcinoma cells (HCC) [77] as well as inhibits growth and promotes apoptosis in human lung cancer [78] and suppresses pancreatic cancer development [79]. The GC suppressive effect of klotho is indicated [76] to be initiated by inhibiting the IGF-1 receptor phosphorylation with subsequent down-regulation of IRS-1, PI3K, Akt/PKB, and mTOR phosphorylation. This demonstrates a key role for Klotho in tumor suppression and suggesting that the gene of Klotho may be an important target for developing the appropriate agents for cancer therapy. Tumor suppressor function of Klotho in HCC [76] goes through the regulation of IGF-1R phosphorylation with subsequent activation of downstream Akt-p70S6K and ERK signaling that leads to the down-regulation of HCC tumor cell proliferation and invasion. Klotho can inhibit proliferation of the human lung cancer [78] at least partly due to the inhibition of IGF-1/insulin pathways and including regulation of the expression of the apoptosis-related genes bax/bcl-2. The tumor suppressor function of Klotho in pancreatic cancer [79], is mediated through modulating the IGF-I and the FGF

Klotho and Intracellular Signaling

pathways. Thus, klotho may serve as a potential tumor suppressor protein by inhibiting the IGF-1-mediated signaling in various tumor types. This clearly suggests the use of Klotho molecule as a potential strategy target for developing a novel therapeutic intervention for numerous cancer treatments.

In addition, it was reported that the intracellular, but not the secreted, form of Klotho inhibits the retinoic-acid-inducible gene-I (RIG-I) which leads to a subsequent down-regulation of RIG-I-induced expression of two essential mediators of inflammation: IL-6 (interleukin-6) and IL-8, both *in vitro* and *in vivo* [80]. Therefore, by inhibiting RIG-I-mediated inflammation Klotho may suppress aging.

### Klotho Influences the Transforming Growth Factor-β1 (TGF-β1) Signaling

A first indication about the involvement of TGF-β1 in sympathetic over-activity, a hallmark of chronic renal failure, was reported in a study where rats with chronic renal failure [81] were treated with the sympatholytic drug moxonidine (MOX). After this treatment a modulation of the gene expression of several genes, including klotho, TGF-beta1, type I TGF-beta receptor was observed. These genes are the candidates to participate in the disease progression of chronic renal failure.

A hallmark of aging for leukocytes is a clear reduction of telomere length. But a report from the year 2007 found no correlation between telomere length and genetic variants of the age-related genes, Klotho and TGF-β1, in a female Caucasian dizygotic twin human population [82]. The authors suggested that these genes are modulating the aging process through other mechanisms than increasing the telomere length.

The connection with aging could be explained by another observation. The secreted Klotho variant can directly bind to type-II TGF-β receptors (TGFβR2) on the cell membrane surface, in this way inhibiting the binding of TGF-β1 to its receptor. The blocking of TGFβR2 through Klotho would lead to an inhibition of TGF-β1 dependent signaling (Fig. 2). Klotho also has the ability to down-regulate TGF-β1-induced epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT), a process that is taking place in the initiation of metastasis for cancer progression. Therefore, Klotho may act as an endogenous anti-EMT regulator as well as an inhibitor of cancer metastasis in mice [36]. In addition, Klotho has been reported to suppress Wnt [4,83] and IGF-1 [36,84] signaling that may also promote EMT. Thus, Klotho-dependent TGF-β1 signaling inhibition may have a therapeutic role in treating renal fibrosis and may inhibit cancer metastasis with a unique mechanism of action. Importantly, Klotho therapy would be safe, because over-expression of Klotho in mice results in extending lifespan.

Another recent study reported that decreased renal Klotho gene expression increases the activity of the fibrosis marker TGF-β(1) and this down-regulation of Klotho is a cause of renal fibrosis, a typical final

---

Current Molecular Medicine, 2015, Vol. 15, No. 1 31

pathology of CKD. Furthermore, TGF-β(1) was shown to suppress the gene expression of Klotho in cultured epithelial cells of the kidney in mice and this result suggests that the decreased renal Klotho expression may be a contributor to renal fibrosis [85]. Even though the molecular mechanisms underlying the relation between aging and CKD are not fully understood, several models of nephropathy demonstrated a significantly reduced expression rate of the Klotho gene. In a recent paper, it was reported that the suppression of Klotho expression by TGF-β1 leads to activated β-catenin. In contrast to this, over-expression of Klotho abolishes the TGF-β1 related fibrogenic effects in mice [86]. Therefore, CKD is clearly a result of the interplay between TGF-β1 and β-catenin, and the loss of Klotho is also related with enhanced β-catenin and thus Wnt signaling in renal diseases which will discussed later.

#### Klotho Effects Through the p53/p21 Signaling Pathway

The protein p53 lies at the center of a complex signaling network involved in the regulation of cell cycle arrest, apoptosis, senescence and survival [87]. The tumor suppressor p53 effectuate transient or irreversible cell cycle arrest in the G1 to S phase transition mediated by the transcriptional activation of the cyclin dependent kinase (CDK) inhibitors such as p16 and p21. Increased p53 activity activates CDK and triggers the growth arrest and senescence, eventually leading to apoptosis [88] (Fig. 2). In response to DNA damage, Klotho reduces cellular senescence in MRC-5 primary human lung fibroblast cells and human umbilical vascular endothelial cells (HUVECs) through the p53/p21-dependent pathway. Loss of klotho activity in MRC-5 primary human fibroblast cells results in an accelerated premature senescence phenotype which is dependent on protein p53 which stimulates the downstream p53-dependent CDK factor p21. This result is indicating a Klotho involvement in the inhibition of senescence through the p53/p21-sensitive pathway [84]. Similarly, through the p53/p21 pathway, Klotho reduces cellular senescence in HUVECs [43], thereof potentiating the importance of this intracellular signal pathway in controlling senescence. The gene expression of p53 and p21 molecules is reduced in Klotho-treated cells; therefore, Klotho role in inhibiting of apoptosis and senescence in vascular cells. In addition, it was demonstrated *in vitro* that activation of Akt/PKB reduces the lifespan of HUVECs via the p53/p21-dependent pathway [89]. In this regard, klotho-sensitive inhibition of cellular senescence through the p53/p21-dependent pathway may be direct or indirect through inactivation of Akt/PKB. These hypotheses, however, will need to be validated.

#### Klotho and the cAMP/PKA Signaling Pathway

Cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) is a nucleotide synthesized from ATP through the action of the enzyme called adenylate cyclase (AC). The intracellular concentration of cAMP is regulated by a

variety of factors, like hormones, and its fluctuations affect a wide variety of cellular processes. Protein kinase A (PKA) is a serine/threonine protein kinase dependent on cAMP. PKA during normal cell-cycle is in a catalytically-inactive state, but under conditions of increased levels of cAMP, this second messenger binds to and releases an active form of PKA, which, in turn, phosphorylates and thus regulates (stimulates or inhibits) a number of other target proteins, including many enzymes, important for various cellular functions [90]. *In vitro* experiments performed in endothelial cells revealed that the membrane-form of the Klotho protein functions as a humoral factor that increases angiotensin I-converting enzyme (ACE) activity via stimulation of cAMP-PKA signaling pathway in HUVECs [91]. It was also reported that in HUVEC cells treated with the recombinant Klotho protein the activity of Mn-SOD and NO production is up-regulated by the same signaling pathways [7, 91], leading to a protective effect against angiotensin II (AngII)-induced ROS formation. AngII is known to induce superoxide production and this ROS play an important role in endothelial dysfunction. An over-expression of Klotho gene led to a suppression of Nox2 NADPH oxidase protein expression, in this way attenuating AngII-induced intracellular superoxide production, oxidative damage, and apoptosis in rat aorta smooth muscle (RASM) cells via the cAMP-PKA-dependent pathway [30] (Fig. 2). This potentiating a new function of over-expressed Klotho in protecting the smooth muscle cells. The most recent research has reported that Klotho is a potent regulator that activates PKA-cAMP responsive element-binding protein (CREB) signaling pathway in (-)-Epigallocatechin-3-O-gallate (EGCG) mediated human keratinocyte differentiation [92]. Thus, demonstrating the Klotho regulation influences the aging process in skin. Klotho has a key role in the physiology of mouse retinal health *in vivo* and human RPE *in vitro*. The aging suppressor Klotho protein regulates pigment synthesis by inducing the expression of two pivotal genes in melanogenesis: microphthalmia transcription factor (MITF) and tyrosinase (TYR). In addition, Klotho stimulates phagocytosis in cultured RPE, important in retinal homeostasis, by inducing gene expression of MERTK/AXL/TYRO3. These effects of Klotho are reported to be mediated by cAMP-PKA-sensitive phosphorylation of the transcription factor CREB [71]. Therefore it can be stated that Klotho is an essential regulator of RPE homeostasis, and that alterations in its gene expression could participate in the RPE degeneration and retinal pathology.

Klotho in the Regulation of the PKC Signaling Pathway

The human genome encodes over 450 protein kinases [93], which may phosphorylate either one to very few protein substrates or a large number of substrates and are therefore participating in the regulation of various cellular responses. The Protein kinase C (PKC) isoenzymes form a family of highly related serine/threonine kinases that regulate a large number of target proteins [94]. Many studies report that PKC has a crucial role in various human diseases, such as diabetes, cancers, several autoimmune diseases, Parkinson's disease, Alzheimer's disease, bipolar disease, psoriasis, ischemic heart disease, heart failure and a number of other important human diseases [5]. PKC is activated by numerous stimulators, which bind to their respective receptors and activate the phospholipase C family of enzymes. These enzymes then generate diacylglycerol (DAG), a lipid derived second messenger, which in turn activates PKC in concert with the small ion calcium. The cleavage of phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate by the phospholipase C is not only leading to the formation of DAG but also inositol trisphosphate (IP3), another second messenger which triggers to the release of Ca²⁺ from intracellular stores [95]. After activation, PKC undergoes conformational changes upon binding to the cell membrane, and may phosphorylate a number of target proteins involved in the regulation of several cellular processes, including cell growth and differentiation [8, 96]. Both cAMP and PKC are reported to participate in the regulation of the expression of the 25-hydroxyvitamin D3 1-α-hydroxylase gene [97].

A study reported that Klotho up-regulates the cAMP and PKC signaling pathway, but suppresses the 25-hydroxyvitamin D3 1-α-hydroxylase gene in kidney cells. This Klotho suppression of 1-α-hydroxylase gene is believed to act through a cAMP- or PKC-independent pathway [42]. Klotho is a regulator of calcium homeostasis [98] and calcium abnormalities are observed in Klotho-/- mice [10]. A possible explanation for this observation is the absence of the role of Klotho induced 1-α-hydroxylase renal gene expression in Klotho-/- mice [99]. However, activation of the PKC signaling pathway by the klotho protein was only demonstrated in renal and testis cells in which the klotho gene is highly expressed. In contrast to this, a cAMP pathway activation was found in each cell lines tested so far [42]. This suggests that another unknown calcium regulation pathway (non-cAMP and a non-PKC pathway), based on Klotho may exist.

Klotho in the Wnt Signaling Pathway

The proto-oncogene Wnt1, first of all identified in 1982 and originally named Int-1, encodes a secreted cysteine-rich protein. There are 19 Wnt genes that can be found in the human genome, and encode secreted glycoproteins that are approximately 40 kDa in size [4, 83, 86]. The Wnt proteins are important secreted factors responsible for cell maintenance and proliferation. Continuous exposure to Wnt proteins results in accelerated cellular senescence in *in vivo* experiments as well as *in vitro* experiments. Klotho can bind to several Wnt protein family members. This Wnt-Klotho interaction inhibits the biological activity of Wnt proteins in cell culture. Klotho-deficient animals have enhanced Wnt signaling, while ectopic Klotho expression antagonizes the activity of endogenous as

Klotho and Intracellular Signaling

Current Molecular Medicine, 2015, Vol. 15, No. 1 33

Fig. (2). Schematic representation of the Klotho participating in intracellular signaling pathways. Klotho protein is involved in several intracellular signaling pathways that are essential for the regulation of many cellular processes, including aging and senescence. See the text for details.

well as exogenous Wnt [44] proteins. The klotho suppression of Wnt signaling may also help to clarify the multiple aging-like phenotypes observed in klotho-/- mice, including abnormal bone mineral density [100]. A defect in klotho gene leads to an impairment of osteoblast and osteoclast differentiation, which is accompanied by a low turnover osteopenia [100]. Since this is a typical characteristic for osteoporosis in humans, the Wnt signaling pathway may be essential for further elucidating cellular and molecular mechanisms implicated in age-related bone loss. This awaits further investigation. Klotho takes part in numerous biological processes, including cell survival and proliferation, autophagy, and resistance to anti-cancer therapies. It represents an important factor in tumorigenesis, cancer progression, and prognosis [76]. Tumor suppressor effects of Klotho have been attributed to the inhibition of Wnt signaling as well as insulin/IGF1, and p53/p21 signaling. On the other hand,

Klotho is silenced in tumor cells, mainly by a hypermethylation of its promoter and by histone deacetylation [101]. Reduced Klotho expression rates through its promoter methylation have also been reported during normal aging processes; however, in addition to an age-related decrease of Klotho expression, other epigenetic mechanisms may contribute to a down-regulation of Klotho. A typical example would be a microRNA (miRNA)-mediated down-regulation of Klotho. In this regard, miRNA-339 and miRNA-556 are found to lead to a direct decrease of Klotho protein expression *in vitro*. These miRNAs may have a role in age-dependent down-regulation of Klotho mRNA [102]. In addition, miRNAs have been identified to be up-regulated in cancer cells and in the aging process [103, 104]. Thus, miRNAs may represent an important tool as potential therapeutic targets and clinical biomarkers of tumors and may similarly influence Klotho down-regulation in cancers as well. *In*

vitro, both secreted and full-length Klotho protein binds to Wnt proteins (Wnt1, Wnt4, and Wnt7a). Experiments performed in kidney cells revealed Klotho as an endogenous antagonist of the Wnt/β-catenin signaling pathway (Fig. 2). Decreased Klotho levels are accompanied by increased Wnt/β-catenin signaling levels, which cause fibrogenesis, thus, clearly indicating a Klotho involvement in CKD by regulating Wnt/β-catenin activities [86]. Moreover, diseased kidneys have decreased Klotho expression rates which are accompanied with an increased β-catenin level [86], an important factor in Wnt signaling [21]. These facts indicate an inverse relation between the Klotho protein and canonical Wnt signaling. In a most recent paper performed in mice, it was shown that circulating Wnt inhibitors participate in the pathogenesis of the CKD-mineral and bone disorder (CKD-MBD) [105]. This complication of kidney diseases causes vascular calcification in early renal failure and is associated with the regulation of Klotho activity.

**CONCLUSION**

The aging suppressor protein Klotho is involved in many biological processes; in particular, it appears to have important roles in the development of multiple age-related diseases. Klotho acts as an essential cofactor for the activation of FGF23-dependent signaling. Klotho, in a FGF23-dependent and FGF23-independent manner, leads to a down-regulation of vitamin D and the phosphate metabolism [29,42,106]. Klotho increases the resistance to oxidative stress, and its protein over-expression, by activating the forkhead transcription factors (FoxO) [31], has been found to induce the expression of the mitochondrial enzyme Mn-SOD [70] that facilitates the removal of ROS. In addition, Klotho protects many cells and tissues from oxidative damage by inhibiting insulin/IGF-1 signaling [32,36,40]. Klotho is also involved in multiple biological functions and in the regulation of several metabolic pathways, including cAMP [7], PKC [42], p53/p21 [43], and Wnt [44]. Through inhibiting RIG-I-mediated inflammation [80] Klotho also suppresses aging. Decreased Klotho gene expression in the kidney increases the activity of the fibrosis marker TGF-β(1), which is a cause of renal fibrosis, a typical final pathology of CKDs [85]. Klotho inhibits senescence by suppressing the p53/p21-sensitive pathway which may be a direct or indirect mechanism through the inactivation of Akt/PKB [84]. Moreover, the Klotho protein increases the activity of ACE via stimulation of the cAMP-PKA signaling pathway. It also up-regulates the activity of the enzyme Mn-SOD and induces NO production [7,91], leading to a protective effect against AngII-induced ROS formation. In addition, Klotho suppresses the 25-hydroxyvitamin D3 1-α-hydroxylase gene in kidney cells through cAMP- or PKC-independent pathways [20,42]. Decreased levels of Klotho are accompanied with increased Wnt/β-catenin signaling, which cause fibrogenesis, thus, suggest that Klotho is participating in CKD by regulating the Wnt/β-catenin activity [86]. Furthermore, the tumor-suppressor properties of Klotho have been determined

in various malignant transformations [76,107,108] and are primarily attributed to the inhibition of Wnt signaling as well as insulin/IGF1, and p53/p21 signaling.

**CONFLICT OF INTEREST**

The authors confirm that this article content has no conflict of interest.

**ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS**

This work was supported by the University of Prishtina of the Republic of Kosovo and by Sigma Aldrich, Germany.

**REFERENCES**

[1] Razzaque MS, Sitara D, Taguchi T, St Arnaud R, Lanske B. Premature aging-like phenotype in fibroblast growth factor 23 null mice is a vitamin D-mediated process. FASEB J 2006; 20:720-722.

[2] Tsujikawa H, Kurotaki Y, Fujimori T, Fukuda K, Nabeshima Y. Klotho, a gene related to a syndrome resembling human premature aging, functions in a negative regulatory circuit of vitamin D endocrine system. Mol Endocrinol 2003; 17:2393-2403.

[3] Wang Y, Sun Z. Klotho gene delivery prevents the progression of spontaneous hypertension and renal damage. Hypertension 2009; 54:810-817.

[4] Satoh M, Nagasu H, Morita Y, Yamaguchi TP, Kanwar YS, Kashihara N. Klotho protects against mouse renal fibrosis by inhibiting Wnt signaling. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol 2012; 303:F1641-F1651.

[5] Mochly-Rosen D, Das K, Grimes KV. Protein kinase C, an elusive therapeutic target? Nat Rev Drug Discov 2012; 11:937-957.

[6] Maekawa Y, Ishikawa K, Yasuda O, *et al.* Klotho suppresses TNF-alpha-induced expression of adhesion molecules in the endothelium and attenuates NF-kappaB activation. Endocrine 2009; 35:341-346.

[7] Rakugi H, Matsukawa N, Ishikawa K, *et al.* Anti-oxidative effect of Klotho on endothelial cells through cAMP activation. Endocrine 2007; 31:82-87.

[8] Dehvari N, Cedazo-Minguez A, Isacsson O, *et al.* Presenilin dependence of phospholipase C and protein kinase C signaling. J Neurochem 2007; 102:848-857.

[9] Semba RD, Cappola AR, Sun K, *et al.* Plasma klotho and cardiovascular disease in adults. J Am Geriatr Soc 2011; 59:1596-1601.

[10] Kuro-o M, Matsumura Y, Aizawa H, *et al.* Mutation of the mouse klotho gene leads to a syndrome resembling ageing. Nature 1997; 390:45-51.

[11] Dermaku-Sopjani M, Kolgeci S, Abazi S, Sopjani M. Significance of the anti-aging protein Klotho. Mol Membr Biol 2013; 30:369-385.

[12] Hu MC, Shi M, Zhang J, Quinones H, Kuro-o M, Moe OW. Klotho deficiency is an early biomarker of renal ischemia-reperfusion injury and its replacement is protective. Kidney Int 2010; 78:1240-1251.

[13] Dermaku-Sopjani M, Sopjani M, Saxena A, *et al.* Downregulation of NaPi-IIa and NaPi-IIb Na-coupled phosphate transporters by coexpression of Klotho. Cell Physiol Biochem 2011; 28:251-258.

[14] John GB, Cheng CY, Kuro-o M. Role of Klotho in aging, phosphate metabolism, and CKD. Am J Kidney Dis 2011; 58:127-134.

[15] Zacchia M, Capasso G. Dehydration: a new modulator of klotho expression. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol 2011; 301:F743-F744.

[16] Kuro O. Klotho in health and disease. Curr Opin Nephrol Hypertens 2012; 21:362-368.

Klotho and Intracellular Signaling

[17] Manya H, Akasaka-Manya K, Endo T. Klotho protein deficiency and aging. Geriatr Gerontol Int 2010; 10 Suppl 1: S80-S87.

[18] Kurosu H, Yamamoto M, Clark JD, *et al.* Suppression of aging in mice by the hormone Klotho. Science 2005; 309: 1829-1833.

[19] Sopjani M, Alesutan I, Dermaku-Sopjani M, *et al.* Regulation of the Na+/K+ ATPase by Klotho. FEBS Lett 2011; 585: 1759-1764.

[20] Almilaji A, Pakladok T, Munoz C, Elvira B, Sopjani M, Lang F. Upregulation of KCNQ1/KCNE1 K+ channels by Klotho. Channels (Austin) 2014; 8: 222-229.

[21] Sopjani M, Alesutan I, Wilmes J, *et al.* Stimulation of Na+/K+ ATPase activity and Na+ coupled glucose transport by beta-catenin. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2010; 402: 467-470.

[22] Dermaku-Sopjani M, Abazi S, Faggio C, Kolgeci J, Sopjani M. AMPK-sensitive cellular transport. J Biochem 2014; 155: 147-158.

[23] Munoz C, Sopjani M, Dermaku-Sopjani M, Almilaji A, Foller M, Lang F. Downregulation of the osmolyte transporters SMIT and BGT1 by AMP-activated protein kinase. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2012; 422: 358-362.

[24] Foller M, Jaumann M, Dettling J, *et al.* AMP-activated protein kinase in BK-channel regulation and protection against hearing loss following acoustic overstimulation. FASEB J 2012; 26: 4243-4253.

[25] Sopjani M, Alesutan I, Dermaku-Sopjani M, *et al.* Down-regulation of Na+-coupled glutamate transporter EAAT3 and EAAT4 by AMP-activated protein kinase. J Neurochem 2010; 113: 1426-1435.

[26] Dermaku-Sopjani M, Almilaji A, Pakladok T, *et al.* Down-regulation of the Na-coupled phosphate transporter NaPi-IIa by AMP-activated protein kinase. Kidney Blood Press Res 2013; 37: 547-556.

[27] Bhavsar SK, Hosseinzadeh Z, Brenner D, *et al.* Energy-sensitive regulation of Na+/K+-ATPase by Janus kinase 2. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 2014; 306: C374-C384.

[28] Hosseinzadeh Z, Sopjani M, Pakladok T, Bhavsar SK, Lang F. Downregulation of KCNQ4 by Janus kinase 2. J Membr Biol 2013; 246: 335-341.

[29] Woudenberg-Vrenken TE, van der Eerden BC, van der Kemp AW, van Leeuwen JP, Bindels RJ, Hoenderop JG. Characterization of vitamin D-deficient klotho-/– mice: do increased levels of serum 1,25(OH)2D3 cause disturbed calcium and phosphate homeostasis in klotho-/– mice? Nephrol Dial Transplant 2012; 27: 4061-4068.

[30] Wang Y, Kuro O, Sun Z. Klotho gene delivery suppresses Nox2 expression and attenuates oxidative stress in rat aortic smooth muscle cells via the cAMP-PKA pathway. Aging Cell 2012; 11: 410-417.

[31] Yamamoto M, Clark JD, Pastor JV, *et al.* Regulation of oxidative stress by the anti-aging hormone klotho. J Biol Chem 2005; 280: 38029-38034.

[32] Chen CD, Podvin S, Gillespie E, Leeman SE, Abraham CR. Insulin stimulates the cleavage and release of the extracellular domain of Klotho by ADAM10 and ADAM17. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2007; 104: 19796-19801.

[33] Matsumura Y, Aizawa H, Shiraki-lida T, Nagai R, Kuro-o M, Nabeshima Y. Identification of the human klotho gene and its two transcripts encoding membrane and secreted klotho protein. Biochem. Biophys Res Commun 1998; 242: 626-630.

[34] Camilli TC, Xu M, O'Connell MP, *et al.* Loss of Klotho during melanoma progression leads to increased filamin cleavage, increased Wnt5A expression, and enhanced melanoma cell motility. Pigment Cell Melanoma Res 2011; 24: 175-186.

[35] Kuro-o M. Disease model: human aging. Trends Mol Med 2001; 7: 179-181.

[36] Doi S, Zou Y, Togao O, *et al.* Klotho inhibits transforming growth factor-beta1 (TGF-beta1) signaling and suppresses renal fibrosis and cancer metastasis in mice. J Biol Chem 2011; 286: 8655-8665.

[37] Li BS, Ma HX, Wang YJ, Wu P. [Klotho gene attenuates the progression of hypertension and heart damage in

Current Molecular Medicine, 2015, Vol. 15, No. 1 35

[38] Hu MC, Shi M, Zhang J, *et al.* Klotho: a novel phosphaturic substance acting as an autocrine enzyme in the renal proximal tubule. FASEB J 2010; 24: 3438-3450.

[39] Cha SK, Ortega B, Kurosu H, Rosenblatt KP, Kuro O, Huang CL. Removal of sialic acid involving Klotho causes cell-surface retention of TRPV5 channel via binding to galectin-1. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2008; 105: 9805-9810.

[40] Wolf I, Levanon-Cohen S, Bose S, *et al.* Klotho: a tumor suppressor and a modulator of the IGF-1 and FGF pathways in human breast cancer. Oncogene 2008; 27: 7094-7105.

[41] Bergwitz C, Juppner H. Regulation of phosphate homeostasis by PTH, vitamin D, and FGF23. Annu Rev Med 2010; 61: 91-104.

[42] Imai M, Ishikawa K, Matsukawa N, *et al.* Klotho protein activates the PKC pathway in the kidney and testis and suppresses 25-hydroxyvitamin D3 1alpha-hydroxylase gene expression. Endocrine 2004; 25: 229-234.

[43] Ikushima M, Rakugi H, Ishikawa K, *et al.* Anti-apoptotic and anti-senescence effects of Klotho on vascular endothelial cells. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2006; 339: 827-832.

[44] Liu H, Ferguson MM, Castilho RM, *et al.* Augmented Wnt signaling in a mammalian model of accelerated aging. Science 2007; 317: 803-806.

[45] Urakawa I, Yamazaki Y, Shimada T, *et al.* Klotho converts canonical FGF receptor into a specific receptor for FGF23. Nature 2006; 444: 770-774.

[46] Faul C, Amaral AP, Oskouei B, *et al.* FGF23 induces left ventricular hypertrophy. J. Clin. Invest 2011; 121: 4393-4408.

[47] Kurosu H, Ogawa Y, Miyoshi M, *et al.* Regulation of fibroblast growth factor-23 signaling by klotho. J Biol Chem 2006; 281: 6120-6123.

[48] Itoh N, Ornitz DM. Evolution of the Fgf and Fgfr gene families. Trends Genet 2004; 20: 563-569.

[49] Bai X, Miao D, Li J, Goltzman D, Karaplis AC. Transgenic mice overexpressing human fibroblast growth factor 23 (R176Q) delineate a putative role for parathyroid hormone in renal phosphate wasting disorders. Endocrinology 2004; 145: 5269-5279.

[50] Ho HK, Pok S, Streit S, *et al.* Fibroblast growth factor receptor 4 regulates proliferation, anti-apoptosis and alpha-fetoprotein secretion during hepatocellular carcinoma progression and represents a potential target for therapeutic intervention. J Hepatol 2009; 50: 118-127.

[51] Andrukhova O, Zeitz U, Goetz R, Mohammadi M, Lanske B, Erben RG. FGF23 acts directly on renal proximal tubules to induce phosphaturia through activation of the ERK1/2-SGK1 signaling pathway. Bone 2012; 51: 621-628.

[52] Sitara D, Kim S, Razzaque MS, *et al.* Genetic evidence of serum phosphate-independent functions of FGF-23 on bone. PLoS Genet 2008; 4: e1000154.

[53] Liu S, Zhou J, Tang W, Jiang X, Rowe DW, Quarles LD. Pathogenic role of Fgf23 in Hyp mice. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab 2006; 291: E38-E49.

[54] Liu S, Zhou J, Tang W, Menard R, Feng JQ, Quarles LD. Pathogenic role of Fgf23 in Dmp1-null mice. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab 2008; 295: E254-E261.

[55] Sitara D, Razzaque MS, Hesse M, *et al.* Homozygous ablation of fibroblast growth factor-23 results in hyperphosphatemia and impaired skeletogenesis, and reverses hypophosphatemia in Phex-deficient mice. Matrix Biol 2004; 23: 421-432.

[56] Shimada T, Urakawa I, Yamazaki Y, *et al.* FGF-23 transgenic mice demonstrate hypophosphatemic rickets with reduced expression of sodium phosphate cotransporter type IIa. Biochem. Biophys Res Commun 2004; 314: 409-414.

[57] Sitara D, Razzaque MS, St Arnaud R, *et al.* Genetic ablation of vitamin D activation pathway reverses biochemical and skeletal anomalies in Fgf-23-null animals. Am J Pathol 2006; 169: 2161-2170.

[58] Fukumoto S, Yamashita T. Fibroblast growth factor-23 is the phosphaturic factor in tumor-induced osteomalacia and may be phosphatonin. Curr Opin Nephrol Hypertens 2002; 11: 385-389.

[59] Perwad F, Zhang MY, Tenenhouse HS, Portale AA. Fibroblast growth factor 23 impairs phosphorus and vitamin D metabolism in vivo and suppresses 25-hydroxyvitamin D-1 alpha-hydroxylase expression in vitro. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol 2007; 293:F1577-F1583.

[60] Gattineni J, Bates C, Twombley K, et al. FGF 23 decreases renal NaPi-2a and NaPi-2c expression and induces hypophosphatemia in vivo predominantly via FGF receptor 1. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol 2009; 297:F282-F291.

[61] Borst O, Munzer P, Schmid E, et al. 1,25(OH) 2 vitamin D 3-dependent inhibition of platelet Ca 2+ signaling and thrombus formation in klotho-deficient mice. FASEB J 2014; 28:2108-2119.

[62] Shumilina E, Nurbaeva MK, Yang W, et al. Altered regulation of cytosolic Ca(2)(+) concentration in dendritic cells from klotho hypomorphic mice. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 2013; 305:C70-C77.

[63] Medici D, Razzaque MS, Deluca S, et al. FGF-23-Klotho signaling stimulates proliferation and prevents vitamin D-induced apoptosis. J Cell Biol 2008; 182:459-465.

[64] Sugiura H, Yoshida T, Tsuchiya K, et al. Klotho reduces apoptosis in experimental ischaemic acute renal failure. Nephrol Dial Transplant 2005; 20:2636-2645.

[65] Koh N, Fujimori T, Nishiguchi S, et al. Severely reduced production of klotho in human chronic renal failure kidney. Biochem. Biophys Res Commun 2001; 280:1015-1020.

[66] Hu MC, Shi M, Zhang J, et al. Klotho deficiency causes vascular calcification in chronic kidney disease. J Am Soc Nephrol 2011; 22:124-136.

[67] Kenyon C. The first long-lived mutants: discovery of the insulin/IGF-1 pathway for ageing. Philos. Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 2011; 366:9-16.

[68] Schmid E, Yan J, Nurbaeva MK, et al. Decreased store operated Ca2+ entry in dendritic cells isolated from mice expressing PKB/SGK-resistant GSK3. PLoS One 2014; 9:e88637.

[69] Mitobe M, Yoshida T, Sugiura H, Shirot a S, Tsuchiya K, Nihei H. Oxidative stress decreases klotho expression in a mouse kidney cell line. Nephron Exp Nephrol 2005; 101:e67-e74.

[70] Kops GJ, Dansen TB, Polderman PE, et al. Forkhead transcription factor FOXO3a protects quiescent cells from oxidative stress. Nature 2002; 419:316-321.

[71] Kokkinaki M, Abu-Asab M, Gunawardena N, et al. Klotho regulates retinal pigment epithelial functions and protects against oxidative stress. J Neurosci 2013; 33:16346-16359.

[72] Kuro-o M. Klotho as a regulator of oxidative stress and senescence. Biol Chem 2008; 389:233-241.

[73] Chen CD, Sloane JA, Li H, et al. The antiaging protein Klotho enhances oligodendrocyte maturation and myelination of the CNS. J Neurosci 2013; 33:1927-1939.

[74] Yang HC, Rossini M, Ma LJ, Zuo Y, Ma J, Fogo AB. Cells derived from young bone marrow alleviate renal aging. J Am Soc Nephrol 2011; 22:2028-2036.

[75] Kuang X, Chen YS, Wang LF, et al. Klotho upregulation contributes to the neuroprotection of ligustilide in an Alzheimer's disease mouse model. Neurobiol Aging 2014; 35:169-178.

[76] Xie B, Zhou J, Shu G, et al. Restoration of klotho gene expression induces apoptosis and autophagy in gastric cancer cells: tumor suppressive role of klotho in gastric cancer. Cancer Cell Int 2013; 13:18.

[77] Shu G, Xie B, Ren F, et al. Restoration of klotho expression induces apoptosis and autophagy in hepatocellular carcinoma cells. Cell Oncol (Dordr) 2013; 36:121-129.

[78] Chen B, Wang X, Zhao W, Wu J. Klotho inhibits growth and promotes apoptosis in human lung cancer cell line A549. J Exp Clin Cancer Res 2010; 29:99.

[79] Abramovitz L, Rubinek T, Ligumsky H, et al. KL1 internal repeat mediates klotho tumor suppressor activities and inhibits bFGF and IGF-I signaling in pancreatic cancer. Clin Cancer Res 2011; 17:4254-4266.

[80] Liu F, Wu S, Ren H, Gu J. Klotho suppresses RIG-I-mediated senescence-associated inflammation. Nat Cell Biol 2011; 13:254-262.

[81] Vonend O, Apel T, Amann K, et al. Modulation of gene expression by moxonidine in rats with chronic renal failure. Nephrol Dial Transplant 2004; 19:2217-2222.

[82] Zhang F, Kato BS, Gardner JP, Kimura M, Spector TD, Ahmadi KR. Lack of association between leukocyte telomere length and genetic variants in two ageing-related candidate genes. Mech Ageing Dev 2007; 128:415-422.

[83] Chen B, Ma X, Liu S, Zhao W, Wu J. Inhibition of lung cancer cells growth, motility and induction of apoptosis by Klotho, a novel secreted Wnt antagonist, in a dose-dependent manner. Cancer Biol Ther 2012; 13:1221-1228.

[84] de Oliveira RM. Klotho RNAi induces premature senescence of human cells via a p53/p21 dependent pathway. FEBS Lett 2006; 580:5753-5758.

[85] Sugiura H, Yoshida T, Shiohira S, et al. Reduced Klotho expression level in kidney aggravates renal interstitial fibrosis. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol 2012; 302:F1252-F1264.

[86] Zhou L, Li Y, Zhou D, Tan RJ, Liu Y. Loss of Klotho contributes to kidney injury by derepression of Wnt/beta-catenin signaling. J Am Soc Nephrol 2013; 24:771-785.

[87] Beckerman R, Prives C. Transcriptional regulation by p53. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 2010; 2:a000935.

[88] Campisi J. Senescent cells, tumor suppression, and organismal aging: good citizens, bad neighbors. Cell 2005; 120:513-522.

[89] Miyachi H, Minamino T, Tateno K, Kunieda T, Toko H, Komuro I. Akt negatively regulates the in vitro lifespan of human endothelial cells via a p53/p21-dependent pathway. EMBO J 2004; 23:212-220.

[90] Chen YJ, Hsiao PW, Lee MT, Mason JL, Ke FC, Hwang JJ. Interplay of PI3K and cAMP/PKA signaling, and rapamycin-hypersensitivity in TGFbeta 1 enhancement of FSH-stimulated steroidogenesis in rat ovarian granulosa cells. J Endocrinol 2007; 192:405-419.

[91] Yang J, Matsukawa N, Rakugi H, et al. Upregulation of cAMP is a new functional signal pathway of Klotho in endothelial cells. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2003; 301:424-429.

[92] Kim HJ, Chang H, Han SH, et al. Epigallocatechin-3-O-(3-O-methyl)-gallate-induced differentiation of human keratinocytes involves klotho-mediated regulation of protein kinase-cAMP responsive element-binding protein signaling. Int J Mol Sci 2014; 15:5749-5761.

[93] Manning G, Whyte DB, Martinez R, Hunter T, Sudarsanam S. The protein kinase complement of the human genome. Science 2002; 298:1912-1934.

[94] Steinberg SF. Structural basis of protein kinase C isoform function. Physiol Rev 2008; 88:1341-1378.

[95] Garcia-Bermejo ML, Leskow FC, Fujii T, et al. Diacylglycerol (DAG)-lactones, a new class of protein kinase C (PKC) agonists, induce apoptosis in LNCaP prostate cancer cells by selective activation of PKCalpha. J Biol Chem 2002; 277:645-655.

[96] Raikwar NS, Liu KZ, Thomas CP. Protein kinase C regulates FLT1 abundance and stimulates its cleavage in vascular endothelial cells with the release of a soluble PIGF/VEGF antagonist. Exp Cell Res 2013; 319:2578-2587.

[97] Avila E, Diaz L, Barrera D, et al. Regulation of Vitamin D hydroxylases gene expression by 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 and cyclic AMP in cultured human syncytiotrophoblasts. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol 2007; 103:90-96.

[98] Imura A, Tsuji Y, Murata M, et al. alpha-Klotho as a regulator of calcium homeostasis. Science 2007; 316:1615-1618.

[99] Alexander RT, Woudenberg-Vrenken TE, Buurman J, et al. Klotho prevents renal calcium loss. J Am Soc Nephrol 2009; 20:2371-2379.

[100] Kawaguchi H, Manabe N, Miyaura C, Chikuda H, Nakamura K, Kuro-o M. Independent impairment of osteoblast and osteoclast differentiation in klotho mouse exhibiting low-turnover osteopenia. J Clin Invest 1999; 104:229-237.

[101] Xie B, Chen J, Liu B, Zhan J. Klotho acts as a tumor suppressor in cancers. Pathol Oncol Res 2013; 19:611-617.

[102] Mehi SJ, Maltare A, Abraham CR, King GD. MicroRNA-339 and microRNA-556 regulate Klotho expression in vitro. Age (Dordr) 2014; 36:141-149.

Klotho and Intracellular Signaling

[103] Ell B, Mercatali L, Ibrahim T, *et al.* Tumor-Induced Osteoclast miRNA Changes as Regulators and Biomarkers of Osteolytic Bone Metastasis. Cancer Cell 2013; 24: 542-556.

[104] Hackl M, Brunner S, Fortschegger K, *et al.* miR-17, miR-19b, miR-20a, and miR-106a are down-regulated in human aging. Aging Cell 2010; 9: 291-296.

[105] Fang Y, Ginsberg C, Seifert M, *et al.* CKD-Induced Wingless/Integration 1 Inhibitors and Phosphorus Cause the CKD-Mineral and Bone Disorder. J Am Soc Nephrol 2014; 25: 1760-1773.

[106] Anour R, Andrukhova O, Ritter E, Zeitz U, Erben RG. Klotho lacks a vitamin D independent physiological role in glucose homeostasis, bone turnover, and steady-state PTH secretion *in vivo*. PLoS One 2012; 7: e31376.

[107] Zhu Y, Xu L, Zhang J, *et al.* Klotho suppresses tumor progression via inhibiting PI3K/Akt/GSK3beta/Snail signaling in renal cell carcinoma. Cancer Sci 2013; 104: 663-671.

[108] Chen L, Liu H, Liu J, *et al.* Klotho endows hepatoma cells with resistance to anoikis via VEGFR2/PAK1 activation in hepatocellular carcinoma. PLoS One 2013; 8: e58413.
