
# Inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor 1 is essential to spinocerebellar ataxia modeling

**Sherry-Ann Brown and Leslie M. Loew**

---

**Journal Name:** Frontiers in Neuroscience  
**ISSN:** 1662-453X  
**Article type:** Mini Review Article  
**Received on:** 04 Nov 2014  
**Accepted on:** 22 Dec 2014  
**Provisional PDF published on:** 22 Dec 2014  
**Frontiers website link:** [www.frontiersin.org](http://www.frontiersin.org)  

**Citation:**  
Brown S and Loew LM (2014) Inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor 1 is essential to spinocerebellar ataxia modeling. *Front. Neurosci.* 8:453. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2014.00453  

**Copyright statement:**  
© 2014 Brown and Loew. This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the [Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY)](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/). The use, distribution and reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the original author(s) or licensor are credited and that the original publication in this journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice. No use, distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these terms.

---

**This Provisional PDF corresponds to the article as it appeared upon acceptance, after rigorous peer-review. Fully formatted PDF and full text (HTML) versions will be made available soon.**

IP3R1 in spinocerebellar ataxia modeling

Inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor 1 is essential to spinocerebellar ataxia modeling

Sherry-Ann Brown${}^{1*}$, Leslie M. Loew${}^{2}$

${}^{1}$ Department of Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA

${}^{2}$ Richard D. Berlin Center for Cell Analysis & Modeling, University of Connecticut Health Center, Farmington, CT, USA

* Correspondence: Dr. Sherry-Ann Brown, Mayo Clinic, 200 First Street SW, Rochester, MN, 55905, USA.

brown.sherryann@mayo.edu

Keywords: ataxia, spinocerebellar, translational, model, computational, inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor 1, Purkinje, carbonic anhydrase related proteins, homer

Abstract

A suite of models was developed to study the role of inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor 1 (IP3R1) in spinocerebellar ataxias (SCAs). Several SCAs are linked to reduced abundance of IP3R1 or to supranormal sensitivity of the receptor to activation by its ligand inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate (IP3). Detailed multidimensional models have been created to simulate biochemical calcium signaling and membrane electrophysiology in cerebellar Purkinje neurons. In these models, IP3R1-mediated calcium release is allowed to interact with ion channel response on the cell membrane. Experimental findings in mice and clinical observations in humans provide data input for the models. The SCA modeling suite helps interpret experimental results and provides suggestions to guide experiments. The models predict IP3R1 supersensitivity in SCA1 and compensatory mechanisms in SCA1, SCA2, and SCA3. Simulations explain the impact of calcium buffer proteins. Results show that IP3R1-mediated calcium release activates voltage-gated calcium-activated potassium channels in the plasma membrane. The SCA modeling suite unifies observations from experiments in a number of SCAs. The cadre of simulations demonstrates the central role of IP3R1.

IP3R1 in spinocerebellar ataxia modeling

### 1 Introduction

Several classes of spinocerebellar ataxia in humans and mice are associated with reduced IP3R1 levels (Matsumoto, Nakagawa et al. 1996, Street, Bosma et al. 1997, Zecevic, Milosevic et al. 1999, Lin, Antalfy et al. 2000, Ogura, Matsumoto et al. 2001, Serra, Byam et al. 2004, Kurnellas, Lee et al. 2007, van de Leemput, Chandran et al. 2007, Chou, Yeh et al. 2008, Novak, Sweeney et al. 2010, Castrioto, Prontera et al. 2011, Marelli, van de Leemput et al. 2011, Huang, Chardon et al. 2012, Obayashi, Ishikawa et al. 2012, Hansen, Meera et al. 2013, Sugawara, Hisatsune et al. 2013) or increased sensitivity of the receptor to IP3 (Inoue, Lin et al. 2001, Chen, Tang et al. 2008, Liu, Tang et al. 2009), or both. Such disorders may be termed 'IP3R1-associated ataxias' (Brown and Loew 2009, Brown and Loew 2012), which also encompasses ataxias with yet undetermined IP3R1 characteristics (e.g., (Huang, Chardon et al. 2012, Conroy, McGgettigan et al. 2014)). Beyond IP3R1-associated ataxias, a vast majority of ataxias converge on IP3R1-dependent signaling (Fig. 1). Schorge et al argue that the unifying feature of many cerebellar ataxias is their impact on IP3R1 (Schorge, van de Leemput et al. 2010).

The SCA modeling suite is a collection of well-mixed (compartmental) and spatial (1D, 3D) computational models that simulate the biochemical and electrophysiological properties of the cerebellar Purkinje neuron involving various calcium signaling and ion channel molecules in constructed or experimentally derived geometries (Supplemental material, Fig. S1 and Table S1). The SCA suite examines the role of IP3R1 in SCA pathophysiology (Brown and Loew 2012), with potential for translational studies.

### 2 Novel predictions from the SCA modeling suite

#### 2.1 Coincidence detection time window at spine IP3R1

Cerebellar Purkinje neurons receive input from more than 150,000 granule cell axons (parallel fibers), leading to hydrolysis of PIP2 and subsequent IP3-mediated calcium release from the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) (Finch and Augustine 1998, Takechi, Eilers et al. 1998, Berridge, Lipp et al. 2000, Cohen 2003) (Fig. 1). Models 1-7 explored PIP2 signaling and IP3 production (Xu, Watras et al. 2003, Hernjak, Slepchenko et al. 2005, Brown, Morgan et al. 2008). Results from Models 4-7 indicated that baseline PIP2 levels are insufficient for requisite IP3 production in the spine, even with apparent anomalous lateral diffusion of PIP2 from the neighboring dendrite (Brown and Loew 2012). On average, the Purkinje neuron has approximately 14 spines per micron of dendrite (Harris and Stevens 1988). Each spine is attached to the dendrite branchlet by a neck with diverse morphology (Harris and Stevens 1989) (see Supplemental Material, S3IP3R1 in dendritic formation and spine morphology). Model 6 results showed that spine necks of varying radii and lengths also restricted diffusion of produced IP3 out of the spine head (Brown, Morgan et al. 2008). This supported experimental results from Santamaria et al., with IP3 diffusing more slowly in spiny dendrites than in aspiny dendrites (Santamaria, Wils et al. 2006). This suggested that spines might compartmentalize IP3 via spine necks. Simulation results from Model 2 suggested local PIP2 sequestration as a likely source of sufficient PIP2, to fine-tune an experimentally observed (Wang, Denk et al. 2000, Sarkisov and Wang 2008) time window between PF and climbing fiber (CF; from the inferior olive) activation.

of the Purkinje neuron spine. Stimulation from a single CF innervating the Purkinje neuron cell body and proximal dendrites leads to calcium influx across the plasma membrane, through voltage-gated calcium channels (Ito, Sakurai et al. 1982) (Fig. 1). Calcium binding of IP3R1 increases open probability of the receptor (Fiala, Grossberg et al. 1996). IP3R1 serves as the gate-keeper for IP3-induced calcium release. Thus, coincidence detection at IP3R1 leads to more calcium release than with activation of IP3R1 by IP3 or calcium alone (Wang, Denk et al. 2000, Hernjak, Slepchenko et al. 2005, Ogasawara, Doi et al. 2008, Sarkisov and Wang 2008, Brown, Moraru et al. 2010).

### 2.2 ‘Compensatory pathology’ in a mouse model of human SCA1

Mutant Ataxin-1, Ataxin-2, and Ataxin-3 have multiple polyglutamine (CAG, polyQ) repeats (Orr, Chung et al. 1993, Kawaguchi, Okamoto et al. 1994, Pulst, Nechiporuk et al. 1996). Corresponding mouse models exhibit complex behavior with reduced IP3R1 abundance (Lin, Antalffy et al. 2000, Serra, Byam et al. 2004, Chou, Yeh et al. 2008, Hansen, Meera et al. 2013) juxtaposed with IP3R1 supersensitivity (Inoue, Lin et al. 2001, Serra, Byam et al. 2004, Chen, Tang et al. 2008, Chou, Yeh et al. 2008, Brown and Loew 2012). IP3R1 supersensitivity has been directly shown in SCA2 and SCA3 (Chen, Tang et al. 2008, Liu, Tang et al. 2009), and speculated in SCA1 (Liu, Tang et al. 2009, Kasumu and Bezprozvanny 2012) (Table 1). All three ataxic mouse models associate with supranormal calcium release (Inoue, Lin et al. 2001, Chen, Tang et al. 2008, Liu, Tang et al. 2009). Models 11 and 12 in the SCA modeling suite support the plausibility of IP3R1 supersensitivity as a necessary component to the Purkinje neuron dysfunction observed in SCA1 (Brown and Loew 2012).

One of many common denominators for downregulation of calcium homeostasis and glutamatergic signaling proteins in polyQ disorders (e.g., (Orr, Chung et al. 1993, Kawaguchi, Okamoto et al. 1994, Koide, Ikeuchi et al. 1994, Trottier, Biancalana et al. 1994, Pulst, Nechiporuk et al. 1996, David, Abbas et al. 1997, Koide, Kobayashi et al. 1999, Nakamura, Jeong et al. 2001)) is transcription factor retinoid acid receptor-related orphan receptor alpha (RORα) (Serra, Duvick et al. 2006, Gehrking, Andresen et al. 2011, Euler, Friedrich et al. 2012). Model 12 results suggest that downregulation of IP3R1, sarcoplasmic reticulum calcium ATPase (SERCA), homer, and various other glutamatergic signaling proteins (Serra, Byam et al. 2004, Chou, Yeh et al. 2008) in SCA1, SCA2, and SCA3 may compensate for IP3R1 supersensitivity (Brown and Loew 2012). IP3R1 expression and sensitivity therefore cannot be considered independently in these polyQ ataxias, but interdependently. Huntington’s disease and dentatorubral-pallidoluysian atrophy (DRPLA) are related polyQ disorders with increased IP3R1 sensitivity and reduced IP3R1 abundance (Liu, Tang et al. 2009, Datta, Choudhury et al. 2011, Euler, Friedrich et al. 2012, Suzuki, Zhou et al. 2012). Although the phenotype in these disorders is very different, Model 12 predicts that downregulation of IP3R1 should compensate for supersensitivity. Conversely, Model 12 suggests that downregulation of calcium buffers such as calbindin and parvalbumin worsen pathology (Brown and Loew 2012) (Supplemental material, S1 Calcium buffers in SCA and Fig. S2). This is supported by experimental observations (Vig, Subramony et al. 1998, Vig, Subramony et al. 2001). Upregulation of any endogenous inhibitors of IP3R1 should also assist with homeostasis (Supplemental Material, S4IP3R1 suppression by CARP).

IP3R1 in spinocerebellar ataxia modeling

2.3 BK Channel in IP3R1-associated ataxia biochemicoelectrophysiological model

IP3R1 interacts closely with the large conductance calcium-activated voltage-gated potassium (BK) channel in glioma cells (Weaver, Olsen et al. 2007). BK channels appear in lipid rafts in the plasma membrane apposed to the smooth ER (sER). IP3R1 also functionally activates the BK channel in arterial smooth muscle cells (Zhao, Neeb et al. 2010). It is thought that in other cell types, including neurons, BK channels may form physical complexes with various plasma membrane calcium channels, resulting in a proximity of only a few nanometers from the calcium channel pores (Dai, Hall et al. 2009).

In Purkinje neurons, BK channels contribute to repolarization of membrane potential transients in dendrites (Miyasho, Takagi et al. 2001) and afterhyperpolarization of action potentials at the soma (Sausbier, Hu et al. 2004). BK channels are involved in several ataxias that converge on IP3R1-dependent signaling. BK knockout mice are ataxic and show markedly decreased spontaneous firing (tonic and bursting) of Purkinje neurons, with longer interspike intervals due to lack of BK contribution to afterhyperpolarization of the sodium (action potential) spikes which would normally help to reset the sodium channels in wild type mice (Sausbier, Hu et al. 2004, Brown and Loew 2012). BK channels are activated by the P/Q-type calcium channels (Walter, Alvinia et al. 2006), which are mutated in episodic ataxia 2 (EA2) (Guida, Trettel et al. 2001, Mantuano, Veneziano et al. 2004, Tonelli, D'Angelo et al. 2006, Walter, Alvinia et al. 2006) and spinocerebellar ataxia 6 (SCA6) (Ishikawa, Tanaka et al. 1997, Bürk, Kaiser et al. 2014). In the SCA modeling suite (Models 8-9, 13-15), BK channels plays a key role in mediating the effects of IP3R1-mediated calcium release on electrophysiological signals (Brown and Loew 2012). Combining electrophysiology with detailed biochemistry leads to emergent properties (altered firing of the Purkinje neuron in Models 13-15) that are not possible to simulate in purely electrophysiological or biochemical models (Brown and Loew 2012).

3 Expanding the SCA Modeling Suite

3.1 Biochemical-electrophysiological modeling

There are other calcium channels that functionally couple with IP3R1. The small conductance calcium-activated potassium (SK) channels are not voltage-gated, but contribute to precision timing (Womack and Khodakhah 2003, Womack, Chevez et al. 2004, Alvinia and Khodakhah 2010, Alvinia and Khodakhah 2010). Targeted overactivation of SK channels in SCA2 mice restores regular pacemaking activity (Kasumu, Hougaard et al. 2012). Isolated underactivation of SK channels without a counteracting mutation also yields ataxic mice (Alvinia and Khodakhah 2010). Addition of this channel to the SCA models (Models 8-9, 13-15) will help mediate the influence of biochemical calcium release on electrophysiology.

3.2 Glutamate receptor modulation by PKC

With insufficient IP3R1, reduced calcium release should result in decreased activation of conventional PKC isoforms. Normally, cytosolic calcium and DAG together activate PKC (Nishizuka 1984) (Fig. 1). PKC phosphorylates α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid receptor (AMPAR), another glutamate receptor, and other molecules

that are recruited to the plasma membrane and induce AMPAR internalization (Chung, Xia et al. 2000, Chung, Steinberg et al. 2003). This depresses Purkinje neuron dendritic spine response to PF stimuli (Fig. 1). Human SCA 14 involve PKC mutations (Alonso, Costa et al. 2005, Shuvaev, Horiuchi et al. 2011, van Gaalen, Vermeer et al. 2013, Ji, Hassler et al. 2014) (Fig. 1) (Table 1), which can lead to aberrant AMPAR modulation. Model 16 ('Brown et al 2012-AMPAR.PKC.PP2A.NO' at www.vcell.org) simulates PKC-AMPAR signaling and can be incorporated into other SCA models (Models 10-15) to investigate SCA 14. This PKC-AMPAR sub-model is adapted from simulations by Ogasawara et al (Ogasawara, Doi et al. 2007, Ogasawara, Doi et al. 2008).

### 3.3 PKC Impact on BK channel activity

Phosphorylation by PKC also inhibits neuronal BK channel activity (Shipston and Armstrong 1996). Decreased PKC levels could therefore attenuate BK inhibition. This would balance suppression of BK channel activation by lower calcium transients in IP3R1-deficient Purkinje spines. Merging Models 13 and 14 with Model 16 could illustrate contributions of BK regulation by PKC phosphorylation to SCAs. Protein kinase A (PKA) (Hall and Armstrong 2000, Widmer, Rowe et al. 2003) and PIP2 activation of BK and other potassium channels (Hilgemann, Feng et al. 2001, Falkenburger, Jensen et al. 2010, Zhang, Chen et al. 2010) could also be added to these models.

## 4 Potential confirmatory studies to test SCA modeling suite predictions

### 4.1 SCA Mouse Models

In addition to SCA1, SCA2, and SCA3 mice (Colomer Gould 2012, Hansen, Meera et al. 2013, Hearst, Shao et al. 2014, Switonski, Szlachcic et al. 2014), there are other mouse models available for testing SCA modeling suite predictions. The IP3R1+/− mice can most be likened to IP3R1 haploinsufficiency in humans with SCA15/SCA16 (Ogura, Matsumoto et al. 2001, van de Leemput, Chandran et al. 2007, Hara, Shiga et al. 2008, Iwaki, Kawano et al. 2008, Di Gregorio, Orsi et al. 2010, Novak, Sweeney et al. 2010, Castrioto, Prontera et al. 2011, Marelli, van de Leemput et al. 2011, Obayashi, Ishikawa et al. 2012) (Model 10). The ITPR1opt/opt mice also have reduced IP3R1. However, IP3R1 is likely misregulated in these mice, as evidenced by IP3R1-mediated calcium transients that paradoxically show less attenuation to repeated stimulation than wild-type mice (Street, Bosma et al. 1997). If IP3R1 sensitivity is increased in ITPR1opt/opt mice, then these mice could serve as an additional candidate model for polyQ ataxias or other ataxias with decreased expression of supersensitive IP3R1 (see Model 11). Similarly, the reported SCA15 mouse model ITPR1Δ18/Δ18 shows reduced levels of IP3R1, but the 18bp mutation is in the regulatory region of IP3R1 (van de Leemput, Chandran et al. 2007). Calcium release and membrane electrophysiology need to be probed in these mice to ascertain whether they match the anticipated physiology of SCA15. Human SCA29 has missense mutations in the regulatory domain of IP3R1 (Huang, Chardon et al. 2012) and would also need such studies in any corresponding mouse model.

IP3R1 in spinocerebellar ataxia modeling

4.2 Experimentally available IC peptides

A number of synthetic experimental peptides resembling sections of the C-terminal of IP3R1 are available for competitive binding in SCA mouse models. The IC4 peptide (also reported as IC1, Q2714-A2749; (Tang, Tu et al. 2003, Tu, Tang et al. 2004)) is available for competitive inhibition of PP1α in ataxias with reduced levels of IP3R1 (simulated in Model 10). IP3R1 dephosphorylation by protein phosphatase alpha (PP1α) decreases IP3R1 sensitivity to IP3 (Tang, Tu et al. 2003). IC4 (IC peptide, Fig. 1) resembles the tip of the C-terminal of IP3R1 that encodes the PP1α-binding domain. All these peptides can be used to validate and confirm predictions from the SCA modeling suite. The IC-G2736X and IC-10 peptides (Tang, Guo et al. 2009) are available for competitive inhibition of mutant Ataxin in ataxias with supersensitive IP3R1 (IC-G2736X simulated in Model 11). Peptide-based therapeutic approaches (Lucchese and Kanduc 2014) could use viral vectors, as explored for Huntington's disease (HD) (Tang, Guo et al. 2009).

4.3 Clinical translation

The SCA modeling suite is poised for continued use in translational studies (Brown, McCullough et al. 2015). Cerebellar IP3R1 levels (Ogura, Matsumoto et al. 2001, van de Leemput, Chandran et al. 2007) in various SCA mouse models could be experimentally correlated with levels of peripheral lymphocyte IP3R1 from the same mice. The two sets of values could be plotted against each other. Levels of peripheral lymphocyte IP3R1 from ataxic individuals (van de Leemput, Chandran et al. 2007) could then potentially be compared with corresponding levels in mice to estimate cerebellar levels in humans. In one study of SCA15, Western blot showed variably reduced IP3R1 levels in peripheral lymphocytes from three affected members of the same family relative to an unaffected family member (van de Leemput, Chandran et al. 2007). Measuring peripheral blood lymphocyte levels of IP3R1 would be relatively noninvasive for humans. Correlated estimates of cerebellar IP3R1 would be useful to help guide therapy, particularly in presymptomatic patients who have undergone genetic testing and counseling (Supplemental Material, S1.6 Presymptomatic staging to consider calbindin modulation).

5 Functional consideration of IP3R1 in ataxia

IP3R-mediated calcium release occurs in various tissues (see (deSouza, Cui et al. 2007, Mondin, Balghi et al. 2009, Chen, Tao et al. 2010, Cardenas, Juretic et al. 2010, Ehrlich, Medina et al. 2010, Healy, Nilsson et al. 2010, Mandal, Shahidullah et al. 2010, Park, Yule et al. 2010) including peripheral lymphocytes, but IP3R1 mutations in mice and humans (Matsumoto, Nakagawa et al. 1996, Street, Bosma et al. 1997, Ogura, Matsumoto et al. 2001, van de Leemput, Chandran et al. 2007) (van de Leemput, Chandran et al. 2007, Hara, Shiga et al. 2008, Iwaki, Kawano et al. 2008, Di Gregorio, Orsi et al. 2010, Huang, Chardon et al. 2012) lead to primarily cerebellar defects. Nevertheless, the IP3R1−/− (Matsumoto, Nakagawa et al. 1996) and IP3R1opt/opt (Street, Bosma et al. 1997) mice also present with epileptic symptoms, and the conditional cerebellum/brainstem IP3R1 knockout mice and waddles mice present with dystonia (Jiao, Yan et al. 2005, Hisatsune, Miyamoto et al. 2013) (Supplemental Material, S5IP3R1 in basal ganglia-independent dystonia).

IP3R1 in spinocerebellar ataxia modeling

Most tissues have similar concentrations of all three IP3R isoforms or favor high levels of IP3R2 or IP3R3 over IP3R1 (De Smedt, Missiaen et al. 1997, Tu, Wang et al. 2005). Yet, 90% of IP3R in the cerebellar Purkinje neuron is IP3R1 (De Smedt, Missiaen et al. 1997). Insufficient levels of IP3R1 remarkably disrupt Purkinje neuron function, as observed in ataxia (SCA15) (van de Leemput, Chandran et al. 2007, Hara, Shiga et al. 2008, Iwaki, Kawano et al. 2008, Di Gregorio, Orsi et al. 2010, Novak, Davis et al. 2010, Novak, Sweeney et al. 2010, Marelli, van de Leemput et al. 2011).

Other tissues such as smooth muscle, which has 75% of IP3R as IP3R1 (De Smedt, Missiaen et al. 1997), and peripheral lymphocytes, in which the major IP3R isoform is also type 1 (de Souza, Cui et al. 2007), likely have compensatory mechanisms involving 25% of IP3R as IP3R2 and IP3R3 to overcome IP3R1 deficits. In addition, there are two regulatory domain phosphorylation site splice variants of IP3R1 (Tu, Miyakawa et al. 2002, Wagner, Li et al. 2003). S(II) is favored in the brain (Wagner, Li et al. 2003). Other tissues, such as smooth muscle and peripheral lymphocytes, may differentially phosphorylate their IP3R1 at S(I) (Tang, Tu et al. 2003) in response to insufficient levels of the receptor.

Further, there is a high density of sER containing IP3R1 in Purkinje spines (calculated average of ~15% of spine volume from (Harris and Stevens 1988)), relative to hippocampal spines (reported as <5% of spine volume from (Harris and Stevens 1989)) (Supplemental material, S6IP3R1 in hippocampal spines), which are important for synaptic plasticity involved in cognitive learning and memory. This suggests that IP3R1 on sER preferentially serves particular functions in Purkinje spines that may manifest differently in other cell types.

All of these reasons underlie the observation that in IP3R1 mutations, and in several human ataxias with biochemical and electrophysiological signals that converge on IP3R1-dependent signaling (Mikoshiba 2007, Schorge, van de Leemput et al. 2010), the primary clinical manifestation is spinocerebellar ataxia.

6 SCA in Computational Systems Neurobiology

Spatial quantitative models have given some insight into how cerebellar Purkinje neuron intracellular processes work together as an efficient system. A computational foundation for studying a wide array of spinocerebellar ataxias that involve mutations in various calcium and potassium channels, kinases, and other molecules, including IP3R1 was developed (Supplemental material, Fig. S1). The result is a practical application of Computational Systems Neurobiology (Brown, Holmes et al. 2012). Using these models to study various ataxias will help us to explain a wide array of experimental observations, elucidate cellular causes of these ataxias in mice and humans, and further understand the relationship between cytosolic calcium and membrane electrophysiology. The SCA modeling suite can help characterize the cellular pathophysiology of IP3R1-associated ataxia. That will help us to understand the biochemical and electrophysiological coupling in excitable membranes, since IP3R1 is highly expressed in the brain, and enriched in the cerebellum (Furuichi, Yoshikawa et al. 1989, De Smedt, Missiaen et al. 1997, Mikoshiba 2007).

IP3R1 in spinocerebellar ataxia modeling

7 Acknowledgement

We are grateful to Dr. Louise McCullough for reading and editing this manuscript.

8 Conflict of Interest Statement

“No conflict of interest relationship exists for any author of this paper. The research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest. There were no payments or services received, financial relationships, patents, copyrights, licenses, royalties, or other relationships or activities related to this submitted work that could be perceived as conflicts of interest.”

9 Authorship

SAB conceived of, analyzed, designed, drafted, critically revised, approved, and agreed to be accountable for this submitted work. LDM analyzed, designed, drafted, critically revised, approved, and agreed to be accountable for this submitted work. LML analyzed, designed, drafted, critically revised, approved, and agreed to be accountable for this submitted work.

10 References

Neuroscience, Sinauer Associates, Inc.

Alonso, I., C. Costa, A. Gomes, A. Ferro, A. Seixas, S. Silva, V. Cruz, P. Coutinho, J. Sequeiros and I. Silveira (2005). "A novel H101Q mutation causes PKCgamma loss in spinocerebellar ataxia type 14." *J Hum Genet* 50(10): 523-529.

Alviña, K. and K. Khodakhah (2010). "KCa Channels as Therapeutic Targets in Episodic Ataxia Type-2." *J Neurosci* 30(21): 7249-7257.

Alviña, K. and K. Khodakhah (2010). "The therapeutic mode of action of 4-aminopyridine in cerebellar ataxia." *J Neurosci* 30(21): 7258-7268.

Berridge, M., P. Lipp and M. Bootman (2000). "The versatility and universality of calcium signalling." *Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol* 1(1): 11-21.

Brown, S., F. Morgan, J. Watras and L. Loew (2008). "Analysis of phosphatidylinositol-4,5-bisphosphate signaling in cerebellar Purkinje spines." *Biophys J* 95(4): 1795-1812.

Brown, S.-A., R. Holmes and L. M. Loew (2012). Spatial Organization and diffusion in neuronal signaling. *Computational Systems Neurobiology*. N. L. Novere, Springer.

Brown, S.-A. and L. M. Loew (2009). "Toward A Computational Model Of IP3R1-associated Ataxia." *Biophysical Journal* 96(3:S1): 96a.

Brown, S.-A., L. D. McCullough and L. M. Loew (2015). "Computational neurobiology is a useful tool in translational neurology: the example of ataxia." *Frontiers in Neuroscience* in review.

Brown, S.-A., I. Moraru, J. Schaff and L. M. Loew (2010). Virtual NEURON: a strategy for merged biochemical and electrophysiological modeling.

Brown, S.-A., F. Morgan, J. Watras and L. M. Loew (2008). Analysis of Phosphatidylinositol-4,5-bisphosphate Signaling in Cerebellar Purkinje Spines.

Brown, S. A. and L. M. Loew (2012). "Computational analysis of calcium signaling and membrane electrophysiology in cerebellar Purkinje neurons associated with ataxia." *BMC Syst Biol* 6(1): 70.

Burright, E., H. Clark, A. Servadio, T. Matilla, R. Feddersen, W. Yunis, L. Duvick, H. Zoghbi and H. Orr (1995). "SCA1 transgenic mice: a model for neurodegeneration caused by an expanded CAG trinucleotide repeat." *Cell* 82(6): 937-948.

Bürk, K., F. J. Kaiser, S. Tennstedt, L. Schöls, F. R. Kreuz, T. Wieland, T. M. Strom, T. Büttner, R. Hollstein, D. Braunholz, J. Plaschke, G. Gillessen-Kaesbach and C. Zühlke (2014). "A novel missense mutation in CACNA1A evaluated by in silico protein modeling is associated with non-episodic spinocerebellar ataxia with slow progression." *Eur J Med Genet* 57(5): 207-211.

Castrioto, A., P. Prontera, E. Di Gregorio, V. Rossi, L. Parnetti, A. Rossi, E. Donti, A. Brusco, P. Calabresi and N. Tambasco (2011). "A novel spinocerebellar ataxia type 15 family with involuntary movements and cognitive decline." *Eur J Neurol* 18(10): 1263-1265.

Chen, J., R. Tao, H. Sun, H. Tse, C. Lau and G. Li (2010). "Multiple Ca2+ signaling pathways regulate intracellular Ca2+ activity in human cardiac fibroblasts." *J Cell Physiol* 223(1): 68-75.

Chen, X., T. Tang, H. Tu, O. Nelson, M. Pook, R. Hammer, N. Nukina and I. Bezprozvanny (2008). "Deranged calcium signaling and neurodegeneration in spinocerebellar ataxia type 3." *J Neurosci* 28(48): 12713-12724.

Chou, A., T. Yeh, P. Ouyang, Y. Chen, S. Chen and H. Wang (2008). "Polyglutamine-expanded ataxin-3 causes cerebellar dysfunction of SCA3 transgenic mice by inducing transcriptional dysregulation." *Neurobiol Dis* 31(1): 89-101.

Chung, H., J. Steinberg, R. Huganir and D. Linden (2003). "Requirement of AMPA receptor GluR2 phosphorylation for cerebellar long-term depression." *Science* 300(5626): 1751-1755.

Chung, H., J. Xia, R. Scannevin, X. Zhang and R. Huganir (2000). "Phosphorylation of the AMPA receptor subunit GluR2 differentially regulates its interaction with PDZ domain-containing proteins." *J Neurosci* 20(19): 7258-7267.

Cohen, D. (2003). "Of rafts and moving water." *Sci STKE* 2003(199): pe36.

Colomer Gould, V. F. (2012). "Mouse models of spinocerebellar ataxia type 3 (Machado-Joseph disease)." *Neurotherapeutics* 9(2): 285-296.

Conroy, J., P. McGgettigan, R. Murphy, D. Webb, S. M. Murphy, B. McCoy, C. Albertyn, D. McCreary, C. McDonagh, O. Walsh, S. Lynch and S. Ennis (2014). "A novel locus for episodic ataxia:UBR4 the likely candidate." *Eur J Hum Genet* 22(4): 505-510.

Cárdenas, C., N. Juretic, J. Bevilacqua, I. García, R. Figueroa, R. Hartley, A. Taratuto, R. Gejman, N. Riveros, J. Molgó and E. Jaimovich (2010). "Abnormal distribution of inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptors in human muscle can be related to altered calcium signals and gene expression in Duchenne dystrophy-derived cells." *FASEB J.*

Dai, S., D. Hall and J. Hell (2009). "Supramolecular assemblies and localized regulation of voltage-gated ion channels." *Physiol Rev* 89(2): 411-452.

Datta, M., A. Choudhury, A. Lahiri and N. P. Bhattacharyya (2011). "Genome wide gene expression regulation by HIP1 Protein Interactor, HIPPI: prediction and validation." *BMC Genomics* 12: 463.

David, G., N. Abbas, G. Stevanin, A. Dürr, G. Yvert, G. Cancel, C. Weber, G. Imbert, F. Saudou, E. Antoniou, H. Drabkin, R. Gemmill, P. Giunti, A. Benomar, N. Wood, M. Ruberg, Y. Agid, J. Mandel and A. Brice (1997). "Cloning of the SCA7 gene reveals a highly unstable CAG repeat expansion." *Nat Genet* 17(1): 65-70.

De Smedt, H., L. Missiaen, J. Parrys, R. Henning, I. Sienaert, S. Vanlingen, A. Gijsens, B. Himpens and R. Casteels (1997). "Isoform diversity of the inositol trisphosphate receptor in cell types of mouse origin." *Biochem J* 322 (Pt 2): 575-583.

de Vries, B., H. Mamsa, A. H. Stam, J. Wan, S. L. Bakker, K. R. Vanmolkot, J. Haan, G. M. Terwindt, E. M. Boon, B. D. Howard, R. R. Frants, R. W. Baloh, M. D. Ferrari, J. C. Jen and A. M. van den Maagdenberg (2009). "Episodic ataxia associated with EAAT1 mutation C186S affecting glutamate reuptake." *Arch Neurol* 66(1): 97-101.

deSouza, N., J. Cui, M. Dura, T. McDonald and A. Marks (2007). "A function for tyrosine phosphorylation of type 1 inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor in lymphocyte activation." *J Cell Biol* 179(5): 923-934.

Di Gregorio, E., L. Orsi, M. Godani, G. Vaula, S. Jensen, E. Salmon, G. Ferrari, S. Squadrone, M. Abete, C. Cagnoli, A. Brussino and A. Brusco (2010). "Two Italian Families with ITPR1 Gene Deletion Presenting a Broader Phenotype of SCA15." *Cerebellum.*

Duarrri, A., J. Jeziorska, M. Fokkens, M. Meijer, H. J. Schelhaas, W. F. den Dunnen, F. van Dijk, C. Verschuuren-Bemelmans, G. Hageman, P. van de Vlies, B. Küsters, B. P. van de Warrenburg, B. Kremer, C. Wijmenga, R. J. Sinke, M. A. Swertz, H. H. Kampina, E. Boddeke and D. S. Verbeek (2012). "Mutations in potassium channel kcnd3 cause spinocerebellar ataxia type 19." *Ann Neurol* 72(6): 870-880.

Dürr, A., G. Stevanin, G. Cancel, C. Duyckaerts, N. Abbas, O. Didierjean, H. Chneiweiss, A. Benomar, O. Lyon-Caen, J. Julien, M. Serdaru, C. Penet, Y. Agid and A. Brice (1996). "Spinocerebellar ataxia 3 and Machado-Joseph disease: clinical, molecular, and neuropathological features." *Ann Neurol* 39(4): 490-499.

Ehrlich, L., G. Medina, M. Khan, M. Powell, K. Mikoshiba and C. Carter (2010). "Activation of the Inositol (1,4,5)-Triphosphate Calcium Gate Receptor is Required for HIV-1 Gag Release." J Virol.

Escayg, A., M. De Waard, D. D. Lee, D. Bichet, P. Wolf, T. Mayer, J. Johnston, R. Baloh, T. Sander and M. H. Meisler (2000). "Coding and noncoding variation of the human calcium-channel beta4-subunit gene CACNB4 in patients with idiopathic generalized epilepsy and episodic ataxia." Am J Hum Genet 66(5): 1531-1539.

Euler, P., B. Friedrich, R. Ziegler, A. Kuhn, K. S. Lindenberg, C. Weiller and B. Zucker (2012). "Gene expression analysis on a single cell level in Purkinje cells of Huntington's disease transgenic mice." Neurosci Lett 517(1): 7-12.

Falkenburger, B., J. Jensen and B. Hille (2010). "Kinetics of PIP2 metabolism and KCNQ2/3 channel regulation studied with a voltage-sensitive phosphatase in living cells." J Gen Physiol 135(2): 99-114.

Fiala, J., S. Grossberg and D. Bullock (1996). "Metabotropic glutamate receptor activation in cerebellar Purkinje cells as substrate for adaptive timing of the classically conditioned eye-blink response." J Neurosci 16(11): 3760-3774.

Finch, E. and G. Augustine (1998). "Local calcium signalling by inositol-1,4,5-trisphosphate in Purkinje cell dendrites." Nature 396(6713): 753-756.

Friedrich, B., P. Euler, R. Ziegler, A. Kuhn, B. G. Landwehrmeyer, R. Luthi-Carter, C. Weiller, S. Hellwig and B. Zucker (2012). "Comparative analyses of Purkinje cell gene expression profiles reveal shared molecular abnormalities in models of different polyglutamine diseases." Brain Res 1481: 37-48.

Furuichi, T., S. Yoshikawa, A. Miyawaki, K. Wada, N. Maeda and K. Mikoshiba (1989). "Primary structure and functional expression of the inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate-binding protein P400." Nature 342(6245): 32-38.

Gehrking, K. M., J. M. Andresen, L. Duvick, J. Lough, H. Y. Zoghbi and H. T. Orr (2011). "Partial loss of Tip60 slows mid-stage neurodegeneration in a spinocerebellar ataxia type 1 (SCA1) mouse model." Hum Mol Genet 20(11): 2204-2212.

Guergueltcheva, V., D. N. Azmanov, D. Angelicheva, K. R. Smith, T. Chamova, L. Florez, M. Bynevelt, T. Nguyen, S. Cherninkova, V. Bojinova, A. Kaprelyan, L. Angelova, B. Morar, D. Chandler, R. Kaneva, M. Bahlo, I. Tournev and L. Kalaydjieva (2012). "Autosomal-recessive congenital cerebellar ataxia is caused by mutations in metabotropic glutamate receptor 1." Am J Hum Genet 91(3): 553-564.

Guida, S., F. Trettel, S. Pagnutti, E. Mantuano, A. Tottene, L. Veneziano, T. Fellin, M. Spadaro, K. Stauderman, M. Williams, S. Volsen, R. Ophoff, R. Frants, C. Jodice, M. Frontali and D. Pietrobon (2001). "Complete loss of P/Q calcium channel activity caused by a CACNA1A missense mutation carried by patients with episodic ataxia type 2." Am J Hum Genet 68(3): 759-764.

Hall, S. and D. Armstrong (2000). "Conditional and unconditional inhibition of calcium-activated potassium channels by reversible protein phosphorylation." J Biol Chem 275(6): 3749-3754.

Hansen, S. T., P. Meera, T. S. Otis and S. M. Pulst (2013). "Changes in Purkinje cell firing and gene expression precede behavioral pathology in a mouse model of SCA2." Hum Mol Genet 22(2): 271-283.

Hara, K., A. Shiga, H. Nozaki, J. Mitsui, Y. Takahashi, H. Ishiguro, H. Yomono, H. Kurisaki, J. Goto, T. Ikeuchi, S. Tsuji, M. Nishizawa and O. Onodera (2008). "Total deletion and a missense mutation of ITPR1 in Japanese SCA15 families." *Neurology* 71(8): 547-551.

Harris, K. and J. Stevens (1988). "Dendritic spines of rat cerebellar Purkinje cells: serial electron microscopy with reference to their biophysical characteristics." *J Neurosci* 8(12): 4455-4469.

Harris, K. and J. Stevens (1989). "Dendritic spines of CA 1 pyramidal cells in the rat hippocampus: serial electron microscopy with reference to their biophysical characteristics." *J Neurosci* 9(8): 2982-2997.

Healy, J., K. Nilsson, H. Hohmeier, J. Berglund, J. Davis, J. Hoffman, M. Kohler, L. Li, P. Berggren, C. Newgard and V. Bennett (2010). "Cholinergic augmentation of insulin release requires ankyrin-B." *Sci Signal* 3(113): ra19.

Hearst, S. M., Q. Shao, M. Lopez, D. Raucher and P. J. Vig (2014). "Focused Cerebellar Laser Light Induced Hyperthermia Improves Symptoms and Pathology of Polyglutamine Disease SCA1 in a Mouse Model." *Cerebellum.*

Hernjak, N., B. Slepchenko, K. Fernald, C. Fink, D. Fortin, I. Moraru, J. Watras and L. Loew (2005). "Modeling and analysis of calcium signaling events leading to long-term depression in cerebellar Purkinje cells." *Biophys J* 89(6): 3790-3806.

Hilgemann, D., S. Feng and C. Nasuhoglu (2001). "The complex and intriguing lives of PIP2 with ion channels and transporters." *Sci STKE* 2001(111): re19.

Hirota, J., H. Ando, K. Hamada and K. Mikoshiba (2003). "Carbonic anhydrase-related protein is a novel binding protein for inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor type 1." *Biochem J* 372(Pt 2): 435-441.

Hisatsune, C., H. Miyamoto, M. Hirono, N. Yamaguchi, T. Sugawara, N. Ogawa, E. Ebisui, T. Ohshima, M. Yamada, T. K. Hensch, M. Hattori and K. Mikoshiba (2013). "IP3R1 deficiency in the cerebellum/brainstem causes basal ganglia-independent dystonia by triggering tonic Purkinje cell firings in mice." *Front Neural Circuits* 7: 156.

Huang, L., J. W. Chardon, M. T. Carter, K. L. Friend, T. E. Dudding, J. Schwartzentruber, R. Zou, P. W. Schofield, S. Douglas, D. E. Bulman and K. M. Boycott (2012). "Missense mutations in ITPR1 cause autosomal dominant congenital nonprogressive spinocerebellar ataxia." *Orphanet J Rare Dis* 7: 67.

Ikeda, Y., K. A. Dick, M. R. Weatherspoon, D. Gincel, K. R. Armbrust, J. C. Dalton, G. Stevanin, A. Dürr, C. Zühlke, K. Bürk, H. B. Clark, A. Brice, J. D. Rothstein, L. J. Schut, J. W. Day and L. P. Ranum (2006). "Spectrin mutations cause spinocerebellar ataxia type 5." *Nat Genet* 38(2): 184-190.

Imbrici, P., A. Cusimano, M. D'Adamo, A. De Curtis and M. Pessia (2003). "Functional characterization of an episodic ataxia type-1 mutation occurring in the S1 segment of hKv1.1 channels." *Pflugers Arch* 446(3): 373-379.

Imbrici, P., M. D'Adamo, D. Kullmann and M. Pessia (2006). "Episodic ataxia type 1 mutations in the KCNA1 gene impair the fast inactivation properties of the human potassium channels Kv1.4-1.1/Kvbeta1.1 and Kv1.4-1.1/Kvbeta1.2." *Eur J Neurosci* 24(11): 3073-3083.

Inoue, T., X. Lin, K. Kohlmeier, H. Orr, H. Zoghbi and W. Ross (2001). "Calcium dynamics and electrophysiological properties of cerebellar Purkinje cells in SCA1 transgenic mice." *J Neurophysiol* 85(4): 1750-1760.

Ishikawa, K., H. Tanaka, M. Saito, N. Ohkoshi, T. Fujita, K. Yoshizawa, T. Ikeuchi, M. Watanabe, A. Hayashi, Y. Takiyama, M. Nishizawa, I. Nakano, K. Matsumayashi, M. Miwa, S. Shoji, I. Kanazawa, S. Tsuji and H. Mizusawa (1997). "Japanese families with autosomal

dominant pure cerebellar ataxia map to chromosome 19p13.1-p13.2 and are strongly associated
with mild CAG expansions in the spinocerebellar ataxia type 6 gene in chromosome 19p13.1."
Am J Hum Genet 61(2): 336-346.

Ito, M., M. Sakurai and P. Tongroach (1982). "Climbing fibre induced depression of both mossy
fibre responsiveness and glutamate sensitivity of cerebellar Purkinje cells." J Physiol 324: 113-
134.

Iwaki, A., Y. Kawano, S. Miura, H. Shibata, D. Matsuse, W. Li, H. Furuya, Y. Ohyagi, T.
Taniwaki, J. Kira and Y. Fukumaki (2008). "Heterozygous deletion of ITPR1, but not SUMF1,
in spinocerebellar ataxia type 16." J Med Genet 45(1): 32-35.

Ji, J., M. L. Hassler, E. Shimobayashi, N. Paka, R. Streit and J. P. Kapfhammer (2014).
"Increased protein kinase C gamma activity induces Purkinje cell pathology in a mouse model of
spinocerebellar ataxia 14." Neurobiol Dis 70C: 1-11.

Jiao, Y., J. Yan, Y. Zhao, L. R. Donahue, W. G. Beamer, X. Li, B. A. Roe, M. S. Ledoux and W.
Gu (2005). "Carbonic anhydrase-related protein VIII deficiency is associated with a distinctive
lifelong gait disorder in waddles mice." Genetics 171(3): 1239-1246.

Kasumu, A. and I. Bezprozvanny (2012). "Deranged Calcium Signaling in Purkinje Cells and
Pathogenesis in Spinocerebellar Ataxia 2 (SCA2) and Other Ataxias." Cerebellum 11(3): 630-
639.

Kasumu, A. W., C. Hougaard, F. Rode, T. A. Jacobsen, J. M. Sabatier, B. L. Eriksen, D.
Strøbaek, X. Liang, P. Egorova, D. Vorontsova, P. Christophersen, L. C. Rønn and I.
Bezprozvanny (2012). "Selective positive modulator of calcium-activated potassium channels
exerts beneficial effects in a mouse model of spinocerebellar ataxia type 2." Chem Biol 19(10):
1340-1353.

Kawaguchi, Y., T. Okamoto, M. Taniwaki, M. Aizawa, M. Inoue, S. Katayama, H. Kawakami,
S. Nakamura, M. Nishimura and I. Akiguchi (1994). "CAG expansions in a novel gene for
Machado-Joseph disease at chromosome 14q32.1." Nat Genet 8(3): 221-228.

Koide, R., T. Ikeuchi, O. Onodera, H. Tanaka, S. Igarashi, K. Endo, H. Takahashi, R. Kondo, A.
Ishikawa and T. Hayashi (1994). "Unstable expansion of CAG repeat in hereditary
dentatorubral-pallidoluysian atrophy (DRPLA)." Nat Genet 6(1): 9-13.

Koide, R., S. Kobayashi, T. Shimohata, T. Ikeuchi, M. Maruyama, M. Saito, M. Yamada, H.
Takahashi and S. Tsuji (1999). "A neurological disease caused by an expanded CAG
trinucleotide repeat in the TATA-binding protein gene: a new polyglutamine disease?" Hum Mol
Genet 8(11): 2047-2053.

Krysa, W., M. Rajkiewicz and A. Sułek (2012). "Rapid detection of large expansions in
progressive myoclonus epilepsy type 1, myotonic dystrophy type 2 and spinocerebellar ataxia
type 8." Neurol Neurochir Pol 46(2): 113-120.

Kurnellas, M., A. Lee, H. Li, L. Deng, D. Ehrlich and S. Elkabes (2007). "Molecular alterations
in the cerebellum of the plasma membrane calcium ATPase 2 (PMCA2)-null mouse indicate
abnormalities in Purkinje neurons." Mol Cell Neurosci 34(2): 178-188.

Lee, Y. C., A. Durr, K. Majczenko, Y. H. Huang, Y. C. Liu, C. C. Lien, P. C. Tsai, Y. Ichikawa,
J. Goto, M. L. Monin, J. Z. Li, M. Y. Chung, E. Mundwiller, V. Shakkottai, T. T. Liu, C. Tesson,
Y. C. Lu, A. Brice, S. Tsuji, M. Burmeister, G. Stevanin and B. W. Soong (2012). "Mutations in
KCND3 cause spinocerebellar ataxia type 22." Ann Neurol 72(6): 859-869.

Lin, X., B. Antalffy, D. Kang, H. Orr and H. Zoghbi (2000). "Polyglutamine expansion down-
regulates specific neuronal genes before pathologic changes in SCA1." Nat Neurosci 3(2): 157-
163.

Liu, J., T. Tang, H. Tu, O. Nelson, E. Herndon, D. Huynh, S. Pulst and I. Bezprozvanny (2009). "Deranged calcium signaling and neurodegeneration in spinocerebellar ataxia type 2." *J Neurosci* 29(29): 9148-9162.

Lucchese, G. and D. Kanduc (2014). "Single Amino Acid Repeats Connect Viruses to Neurodegeneration." *Curr Drug Discov Technol.*

Mandal, A., M. Shahidullah and N. Delamere (2010). "Hydrostatic pressure-induced release of stored calcium in cultured rat optic nerve head astrocytes." *Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci* 51(6): 3129-3138.

Mantuano, E., L. Veneziano, M. Spadaro, P. Giunti, S. Guida, M. Leggio, L. Verriello, N. Wood, C. Jodice and M. Frontali (2004). "Clusters of non-truncating mutations of P/Q type Ca2+ channel subunit Ca(v)2.1 causing episodic ataxia 2." *J Med Genet* 41(6): e82.

Marelli, C., J. van de Leemput, J. O. Johnson, F. Tison, C. Thauvin-Robinet, F. Picard, C. Tranchant, D. G. Hernandez, B. Huttin, J. Boulliat, I. Sangla, C. Marescaux, S. Brique, H. Dollfus, S. Arepalli, I. Benatru, E. Ollagnon, S. Forlani, J. Hardy, G. Stevanin, A. Dürr, A. Singleton and A. Brice (2011). "SCA15 due to large ITPR1 deletions in a cohort of 333 white families with dominant ataxia." *Arch Neurol* 68(5): 637-643.

Matsumoto, M., T. Nakagawa, T. Inoue, E. Nagata, K. Tanaka, H. Takano, O. Minowa, J. Kuno, S. Sakakibara, M. Yamada, H. Yoneshima, A. Miyawaki, Y. Fukuuchi, T. Furuichi, H. Okano, K. Mikoshiba and T. Noda (1996). "Ataxia and epileptic seizures in mice lacking type 1 inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor." *Nature* 379(6561): 168-171.

Mikoshiba, K. (2007). "IP3 receptor/Ca2+ channel: from discovery to new signaling concepts." *Journal of neurochemistry* 102(5): 1426-1446.

Miyasho, T., H. Takagi, H. Suzuki, S. Watanabe, M. Inoue, Y. Kudo and H. Miyakawa (2001). "Low-threshold potassium channels and a low-threshold calcium channel regulate Ca2+ spike firing in the dendrites of cerebellar Purkinje neurons: a modeling study." *Brain Res* 891(1-2): 106-115.

Mondin, L., H. Balghi, B. Constantin, C. Cognard and S. Sebille (2009). "Negative modulation of inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate type 1 receptor expression prevents dystrophin-deficient muscle cells death." *Am J Physiol Cell Physiol* 297(5): C1133-1145.

Moseley, M. L., T. Zu, Y. Ikeda, W. Gao, A. K. Mosemiller, R. S. Daughters, G. Chen, M. R. Weatherspoon, H. B. Clark, T. J. Ebner, J. W. Day and L. P. Ranum (2006). "Bidirectional expression of CUG and CAG expansion transcripts and intranuclear polyglutamine inclusions in spinocerebellar ataxia type 8." *Nat Genet* 38(7): 758-769.

Murchison, D., L. Dove, L. Abbott and W. Griffith (2002). "Homeostatic compensation maintains Ca2+ signaling functions in Purkinje neurons in the leaner mutant mouse." *Cerebellum* 1(2): 119-127.

Nakamura, K., S. Jeong, T. Uchihara, M. Anno, K. Nagashima, T. Nagashima, S. Ikeda, S. Tsuji and I. Kanazawa (2001). "SCA17, a novel autosomal dominant cerebellar ataxia caused by an expanded polyglutamine in TATA-binding protein." *Hum Mol Genet* 10(14): 1441-1448.

Nishizuka, Y. (1984). "The role of protein kinase C in cell surface signal transduction and tumour promotion." *Nature* 308(5961): 693-698.

Novak, M., M. Davis, A. Li, R. Gould, S. Tabrizi, M. Sweeney, H. Houlden, C. Treacy and P. Giunti (2010). "PAW32 ITPR1 gene deletion causes spinocerebellar ataxia 15/16: a genetic, clinical and radiological description of a novel kindred." *J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry* 81(11): e32.

IP3R1 in spinocerebellar ataxia modeling

598 Novak, M. J., M. G. Sweeney, A. Li, C. Treacy, H. S. Chandrashekar, P. Giunti, R. G. Gould, M.
599 B. Davis, H. Houlden and S. J. Tabrizi (2010). "An ITPR1 gene deletion causes spinocerebellar
600 ataxia 15/16: a genetic, clinical and radiological description." *Mov Disord* 25(13): 2176-2182.
601 Obayashi, M., K. Ishikawa, Y. Izumi, M. Takahashi, Y. Niimi, N. Sato, O. Onodera, R. Kaji, M.
602 Nishizawa and H. Mizusawa (2012). "Prevalence of inositol 1, 4, 5-triphosphate receptor type 1
603 gene deletion, the mutation for spinocerebellar ataxia type 15, in Japan screened by gene
604 dosage." *J Hum Genet* 57(3): 202-206.
605 Ogasawara, H., T. Doi, K. Doya and M. Kawato (2007). "Nitric oxide regulates input specificity
606 of long-term depression and context dependence of cerebellar learning." *PLoS Comput Biol* 3(1):
607 e179.
608 Ogasawara, H., T. Doi and M. Kawato (2008). "Systems biology perspectives on cerebellar long-
609 term depression." *Neurosignals* 16(4): 300-317.
610 Ogura, H., M. Matsumoto and K. Mikoshiba (2001). "Motor coordination in mutant mice
611 heterozygous for the type 1 inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor." *Behav Brain Res* 122(2): 215-
612 219.
613 Orr, H., M. Chung, S. Banfi, T. J. Kwiatkowski, A. Servadio, A. Beaudet, A. McCall, L. Duvick,
614 L. Ranum and H. Zoghbi (1993). "Expansion of an unstable trinucleotide CAG repeat in
615 spinocerebellar ataxia type 1." *Nat Genet* 4(3): 221-226.
616 Park, K., D. Yule and W. Bowers (2010). "Impaired TNF-alpha control of IP3R-mediated Ca2+
617 release in Alzheimer's disease mouse neurons." *Cell Signal* 22(3): 519-526.
618 Paulson, H., M. Perez, Y. Trottier, J. Trojanowski, S. Subramony, S. Das, P. Vig, J. Mandel, K.
619 Fischbeck and R. Pittman (1997). "Intranuclear inclusions of expanded polyglutamine protein in
620 spinocerebellar ataxia type 3." *Neuron* 19(2): 333-344.
621 Pulst, S., A. Nechiporuk, T. Nechiporuk, S. Gispert, X. Chen, I. Lopes-Cendes, S. Pearlman, S.
622 Starkman, G. Orozco-Diaz, A. Lunkes, P. DeJong, G. Rouleau, G. Auburger, J. Korenberg, C.
623 Figueroa and S. Sahba (1996). "Moderate expansion of a normally biallelic trinucleotide repeat
624 in spinocerebellar ataxia type 2." *Nat Genet* 14(3): 269-276.
625 Santamaria, F., S. Wils, E. De Schutter and G. Augustine (2006). "Anomalous diffusion in
626 Purkinje cell dendrites caused by spines." *Neuron* 52(4): 635-648.
627 Sarkisov, D. and S. Wang (2008). "Order-dependent coincidence detection in cerebellar Purkinje
628 neurons at the inositol trisphosphate receptor." *J Neurosci* 28(1): 133-142.
629 Sausbier, M., H. Hu, C. Arntz, S. Feil, S. Kamm, H. Adelsberger, U. Sausbier, C. Sailer, R. Feil,
630 F. Hofmann, M. Korth, M. Shipston, H. Knaus, D. Wolfer, C. Pedroarena, J. Storm and P. Ruth
631 (2004). "Cerebellar ataxia and Purkinje cell dysfunction caused by Ca2+-activated K+ channel
632 deficiency." *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA* 101(25): 9474-9478.
633 Schorge, S., J. van de Leemput, A. Singleton, H. Houlden and J. Hardy (2010). "Human ataxias:
634 a genetic dissection of inositol triphosphate receptor (ITPR1)-dependent signaling." *Trends*
635 *Neurosci.*
636 Serra, H., C. Byam, J. Lande, S. Tousey, H. Zoghbi and H. Orr (2004). "Gene profiling links
637 SCA1 pathophysiology to glutamate signaling in Purkinje cells of transgenic mice." *Hum Mol*
638 *Genet* 13(20): 2535-2543.
639 Serra, H., L. Duvick, T. Zu, K. Carlson, S. Stevens, N. Jorgensen, A. Lysholm, E. Burright, H.
640 Zoghbi, H. Clark, J. Andresen and H. Orr (2006). "ROREalpha-mediated Purkinje cell
641 development determines disease severity in adult SCA1 mice." *Cell* 127(4): 697-708.
642 Shipston, M. and D. Armstrong (1996). "Activation of protein kinase C inhibits calcium-
643 activated potassium channels in rat pituitary tumour cells." *J Physiol* 493 (Pt 3): 665-672.

Shuvaev, A. N., H. Horiuchi, T. Seki, H. Goenawan, T. Irie, A. Iizuka, N. Sakai and H. Hirai (2011). "Mutant PKCgamma in spinocerebellar ataxia type 14 disrupts synapse elimination and long-term depression in Purkinje cells in vivo." *The Journal of neuroscience : the official journal of the Society for Neuroscience* **31**(40): 14324-14334.

Street, V., M. Bosma, V. Demas, M. Regan, D. Lin, L. Robinson, W. Agnew and B. Tempel (1997). "The type 1 inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor gene is altered in the opisthotonos mouse." *J Neurosci* **17**(2): 635-645.

Sugawara, T., C. Hisatsune, T. D. Le, T. Hashikawa, M. Hirono, M. Hattori, S. Nagao and K. Mikoshiba (2013). "Type 1 inositol trisphosphate receptor regulates cerebellar circuits by maintaining the spine morphology of purkinje cells in adult mice." *J Neurosci* **33**(30): 12186-12196.

Suzuki, K., J. Zhou, T. Sato, K. Takao, T. Miyagawa, M. Oyake, M. Yamada, H. Takahashi, Y. Takahashi, J. Goto and S. Tsuji (2012). "DRPLA transgenic mouse substrains carrying single copy of full-length mutant human DRPLA gene with variable sizes of expanded CAG repeats exhibit CAG repeat length- and age-dependent changes in behavioral abnormalities and gene expression profiles." *Neurobiol Dis* **46**(2): 336-350.

Switonski, P. M., W. J. Szlachcic, W. J. Krzyzosiak and M. Figiel (2014). "A new humanized ataxin-3 knock-in mouse model combines the genetic features, pathogenesis of neurons and glia and late disease onset of SCA3/MJD." *Neurobiology of disease.*

Takechi, H., J. Eilers and A. Konnerth (1998). "A new class of synaptic response involving calcium release in dendritic spines." *Nature* **396**(6713): 757-760.

Tang, T., C. Guo, H. Wang, X. Chen and I. Bezprozvanny (2009). "Neuroprotective effects of inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor C-terminal fragment in a Huntington's disease mouse model." *J Neurosci* **29**(5): 1257-1266.

Tang, T., H. Tu, Z. Wang and I. Bezprozvanny (2003). "Modulation of type 1 inositol (1,4,5)-trisphosphate receptor function by protein kinase a and protein phosphatase 1 alpha." *J Neurosci* **23**(2): 403-415.

Tonelli, A., M. D'Angelo, R. Salati, L. Villa, C. Germinasi, T. Frattini, G. Meola, A. Turconi, N. Bresolin and M. Bassi (2006). "Early onset, non fluctuating spinocerebellar ataxia and a novel missense mutation in CACNA1A gene." *J Neurol Sci* **241**(1-2): 13-17.

Trottier, Y., V. Biancalana and J. Mandel (1994). "Instability of CAG repeats in Huntington's disease: relation to parental transmission and age of onset." *J Med Genet* **31**(5): 377-382.

Tu, H., T. Miyakawa, Z. Wang, L. Glouchankova, M. Iino and I. Bezprozvanny (2002). "Functional characterization of the type 1 inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor coupling domain SII(+/-) splice variants and the Opisthotonos mutant form." *Biophys J* **82**(4): 1995-2004.

Tu, H., T. Tang, Z. Wang and I. Bezprozvanny (2004). "Association of type 1 inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor with AKAP9 (Yotiao) and protein kinase A." *J Biol Chem* **279**(18): 19375-19382.

Tu, H., Z. Wang, E. Nosyreva, H. De Smedt and I. Bezprozvanny (2005). "Functional characterization of mammalian inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor isoforms." *Biophys J* **88**(2): 1046-1055.

Türkmen, S., G. Guo, M. Garshasbi, K. Hoffmann, A. J. Alshalah, C. Mischung, A. Kuss, N. Humphrey, S. Mundlos and P. N. Robinson (2009). "CA8 mutations cause a novel syndrome characterized by ataxia and mild mental retardation with predisposition to quadrupedal gait." *PLoS Genet* **5**(5): e1000487.

van de Leemput, J., J. Chandran, M. Knight, L. Holtzclaw, S. Scholz, M. Cookson, H. Houlden, K. Gwinn-Hardy, H. Fung, X. Lin, D. Hernandez, J. Simon-Sanchez, N. Wood, P. Giunti, I. Rafferty, J. Hardy, E. Storey, R. Gardner, S. Forrest, E. Fisher, J. Russell, H. Cai and A. Singleton (2007). "Deletion at ITPR1 underlies ataxia in mice and spinocerebellar ataxia 15 in humans." *PLoS Genet* 3(6): e108.

van Gaalen, J., S. Vermeer, M. van Veluw, B. P. van de Warrenburg and D. Dooijes (2013). "A de novo SCA14 mutation in an isolated case of late-onset cerebellar ataxia." *Mov Disord* 28(13): 1902-1903.

Vig, P., S. Subramony, E. Burright, J. Fratkin, D. McDaniel, D. Desaiah and Z. Qin (1998). "Reduced immunoreactivity to calcium-binding proteins in Purkinje cells precedes onset of ataxia in spinocerebellar ataxia-1 transgenic mice." *Neurology* 50(1): 106-113.

Vig, P., S. Subramony and D. McDaniel (2001). "Calcium homeostasis and spinocerebellar ataxia-1 (SCA-1)." *Brain Res Bull* 56(3-4): 221-225.

Wagner, L. n., W. Li and D. Yule (2003). "Phosphorylation of type-1 inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptors by cyclic nucleotide-dependent protein kinases: a mutational analysis of the functionally important sites in the S2+ and S2- splice variants." *J Biol Chem* 278(46): 45811-45817.

Walter, J., K. Alviña, M. Womack, C. Chevez and K. Khodakhah (2006). "Decreases in the precision of Purkinje cell pacemaking cause cerebellar dysfunction and ataxia." *Nat Neurosci* 9(3): 389-397.

Wang, S., W. Denk and M. Häusser (2000). "Coincidence detection in single dendritic spines mediated by calcium release." *Nat Neurosci* 3(12): 1266-1273.

Waters, M. F., N. A. Minassian, G. Stevanin, K. P. Figueroa, J. P. Bannister, D. Nolte, A. F. Mock, V. G. Evidente, D. B. Fee, U. Müller, A. Dürr, A. Brice, D. M. Papazian and S. M. Pulst (2006). "Mutations in voltage-gated potassium channel KCNC3 cause degenerative and developmental central nervous system phenotypes." *Nat Genet* 38(4): 447-451.

Weaver, A., M. Olsen, M. McFerrin and H. Sontheimer (2007). "BK channels are linked to inositol 1,4,5-triphosphate receptors via lipid rafts: a novel mechanism for coupling [Ca(2+)](i) to ion channel activation." *J Biol Chem* 282(43): 31558-31568.

Widmer, H., I. Rowe and M. Shipston (2003). "Conditional protein phosphorylation regulates BK channel activity in rat cerebellar Purkinje neurons." *J Physiol* 552(Pt 2): 379-391.

Womack, M., C. Chevez and K. Khodakhah (2004). "Calcium-activated potassium channels are selectively coupled to P/Q-type calcium channels in cerebellar Purkinje neurons." *J Neurosci* 24(40): 8818-8822.

Womack, M. and K. Khodakhah (2003). "Somatic and dendritic small-conductance calcium-activated potassium channels regulate the output of cerebellar Purkinje neurons." *J Neurosci* 23(7): 2600-2607.

Xu, C., J. Watras and L. Loew (2003). "Kinetic analysis of receptor-activated phosphoinositide turnover." *J Cell Biol* 161(4): 779-791.

Yan, J., Y. Jiao, F. Jiao, J. Stuart, L. R. Donahue, W. G. Beamer, X. Li, B. A. Roe, M. S. LeDoux and W. Gu (2007). "Effects of carbonic anhydrase VIII deficiency on cerebellar gene expression profiles in the wdl mouse." *Neurosci Lett* 413(3): 196-201.

Zecevic, N., A. Milosevic and B. Ehrlich (1999). "Calcium signaling molecules in human cerebellum at midgestation and in ataxia." *Early Hum Dev* 54(2): 103-116.

IP3R1 in spinocerebellar ataxia modeling

733 Zhang, X., X. Chen, C. Jia, X. Geng, X. Du and H. Zhang (2010). "Depolarization increases phosphatidylinositol (PI) 4,5-bisphosphate level and KCNQ currents through PI 4-kinase mechanisms." *J Biol Chem* **285**(13): 9402-9409.

736 Zhao, G., Z. P. Neeb, M. D. Leo, J. Pachaua, A. Adebiyi, K. Ouyang, J. Chen and J. H. Jaggar (2010). "Type 1 IP3 receptors activate BKCa channels via local molecular coupling in arterial smooth muscle cells." *J Gen Physiol* **136**(3): 283-291.

IP3R1 in spinocerebellar ataxia modeling

11 Figure Legend

Figure 1 Calcium signaling in cerebellar Purkinje neuron spiny dendrites. When a parallel fiber (PF) stimulates a distal dendrite of the Purkinje neuron, the neurotransmitter glutamate is released and binds its receptor, metabotropic glutamate receptor (mGluR; from the group C family of G protein-coupled receptors (GPCR)), on the plasma membrane of the Purkinje dendrite (Finch and Augustine 1998, Takechi, Eilers et al. 1998). This leads to the activation of phospholipase C (PLC), a hydrolyzing enzyme that cleaves PIP2 in the plasma membrane to produce diacylglycerol (DAG) and IP3 (Cohen 2003). DAG stays in the membrane, where it can activate cytosolic molecules close to the membrane, such as PKC (Nishizuka 1984). IP3 diffuses away from the reaction site (the plasma membrane) to its receptor on the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) (Berridge, Lipp et al. 2000). IP3 is also free to diffuse out of the spine head, through the spine neck, into the adjacent dendrite, and along the length of dendrite nearby, part of the dendritic reservoir. At the ER, IP3 binds its receptor, IP3R; the channel opens, releasing calcium from the internal store into the cytosol. This rise in calcium can activate calcium-dependent proteins, including calmodulin, various kinases and other enzymes. The climbing fiber (CF) stimulus depolarizes the entire neuron membrane, thus opening the voltage-gated calcium channels (Ito, Sakurai et al. 1982). The calcium that flows into the Purkinje neuron spine can therefore also bind IP3R1, along with IP3 from parallel fiber activation of the spine. SCA, spinocerebellar ataxia; EA, episodic ataxia; QG, quadrupedal gait ataxia; KCh, potassium channels including Kv1.1 (mutated in Episodic Ataxia type 1 (Imbrici, Cusimano et al. 2003)), Kv3.3 (mutated in SCA13 (Waters, Minassian et al. 2006)), Kv4.3 (mutated in SCA19 (Duarr, Jeziorska et al. 2012) and SCA22(Lee, Durr et al. 2012)), BK, and SK, which are respectively, the potassium channel involved in Purkinje membrane repolarization, the large conductance calcium-activated voltage-gated potassium channel, and the small conductance calcium-activated voltage-independent potassium channel; DAG, diacylglycerol a product of PLC hydrolysis that activates PKC along with calcium; PIP2, Phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate, a plasma membrane phospholipid of the inner leaflet that gives rise to DAG and IP3 when hydrolyzed; PLC, phospholipase C, an enzyme that hydrolyzes PIP2 when activated by G-βγ from mGluR; mGluR or Grm1, metabotropic glutamate receptor type 1 (Guergueltcheva, Azmanov et al. 2012); T, other glutamate transporters and receptors including Grid2, Excitatory amino-acid transporter type 1 (EAAT1; mutated in Episodic Ataxia type 6 (de Vries, Mamsa et al. 2009)), Excitatory amino-acid transporter type 4 (EAAT4; Spectrin β, an anchor for EAAT4 and Grm1 is mutated in SCA5 (Ikeda, Dick et al. 2006)), and AMPAR; SOC, Store-operated channels for store-operated calcium entry; B, calcium-binding proteins or buffers including calbindin and parvalbumin (Supplemental material, S1 Calcium buffers in SCA and Fig. S2); mAtaxin, mutant ataxin proteins including Ataxin-1 through Ataxin-7; IC peptide, peptides that resemble the tip of IP3R1 and thereby competitively bind mAtaxin; SERCA, sarcoplasmic reticulum calcium ATPase, a transporter for calcium entry from the cytosol to the smooth endoplasmic reticulum (ER); CARP, Carbonic anhydrase-related protein (particularly CARP VIII), an IP3R1 antagonist (Turkmen, Guo et al. 2009); RYR, ryanodine receptor, a transporter of calcium from the ER to the cytosol in dendrites but not spines in response to binding of specific ligands such as ryanodine; Dantrolene, a drug that inhibits RYR (Supplemental material, S2 Calcium-induced calcium release crosstalk); PMCA, Plasma membrane calcium ATP-ase transports calcium out of the cell; CaCh, calcium channels including store-operate channels (SOC) for store-operated calcium entry and Cav2.1, which is the main P-type calcium channel in PCs with

IP3R1 in spinocerebellar ataxia modeling

787 nonsense/missense mutations causing episodic ataxia type 2 and expansion of CAG repeats  
788 causing SCA 6, and mutations in CavB4 an accessory subunit for Cav2.1 causing EA5 (Escayg,  
789 De Waard et al. 2000); IP3R, inositol trisphosphate receptor (mutated in SCA15/16 and altered  
790 sensitivity in SCA1-3, antagonized in QG ataxia), intracellular calcium release channel on the  
791 endoplasmic reticulum gated by IP3; PKC, protein kinase C (mutated in SCA14) expressed in  
792 Purkinje neurons that helps control expression of surface molecules. Adapted from (Hernjak,  
793 Slepchenko et al. 2005).  
794  
795

| Disorder           | Mutant protein    | Expression   | Sensitivity | Direct Binding | PV/CB Expression | References                                                                 |
|--------------------|------------------|--------------|-------------|----------------|-----------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| SCA 1              | Ataxin-1         | decreased    | M           | E              | decreased       | (Orr, Chung et al. 1993, Burright, Clark et al. 1995, Lin, Antalffy et al. 2000, Inoue, Lin et al. 2001, Liu, Tang et al. 2009) |
| SCA 2              | Ataxin-2         | decreased    | Increased   | E              | decreased       | (Pulst, Nechiporuk et al. 1996, Liu, Tang et al. 2009, Hansen, Meera et al. 2013) |
| SCA 3              | Ataxin-3         | decreased    | Increased   | E              | M               | (Durr, Stevanin et al. 1996, Paulson, Perez et al. 1997, Chen, Tang et al. 2008, Chou, Yeh et al. 2008) |
| SCA 7              | Ataxin-7         | decreased    | M           | M              | decreased       | (David, Abbas et al. 1997, Friedrich, Euler et al. 2012) |
| SCA 8              | Ataxin-8         | M            | M           | M              | M               | (Moseley, Zu et al. 2006, Krysa, Rajkiewicz et al. 2012) |
| SCA 17             | Ataxin-17        | M            | M           | M              | M               | (Nakamura, Jeong et al. 2001) |
| HD                 | Huntingtin       | decreased    | increased   | E              | M               | (Datta, Choudhury et al. 2011, Euler, Friedrich et al. 2012) |
| DLPRA              | DLPRA            | decreased    | M           | E              | decreased       | (Liu, Tang et al. 2009, Suzuki, Zhou et al. 2012) |
| SCA 15             | IP3R1            | decreased    | U           | U              | U               | (van de Leemput, Chandran et al. 2007, Hara, Shiga et al. 2008, Di Gregorio, Orsi et al. 2010) |
| SCA 16             | IP3R1            | decreased    | U           | U              | U               | (Iwaki, Kawano et al. 2008) |
| QG                 | CARP VIII        | U*           | M           | E              | U*              | (Hirot a, Ando et al. 2003, Yan, Jiao et al. 2007, Turkmen, Guo et al. 2009) |

| Plasma membrane cluster | PMCA          | decreased | U | U | U | (Kurnell as, Lee et al. 2007) |
| A-HL                    | mGluR         | U         | U | U | U | (Guergueltcheva, Azmanov et al. 2012) |
| ARCCA                  | Cav 2.1       | U         | U | U | decreased | (Guida, Trettel et al. 2001, Murchison, Dove et al. 2002, Mantuano, Veneziano et al. 2004, Tonelli, D'Angelo et al. 2006) |
| EA 2/leaner            | Cav 2.1       | U         | U | U | U | (Ishikawa, Tanaka et al. 1997) |
| SCA 6                  | PKC-γ         | U         | U | U | U | (Alonso, Costa et al. 2005, Shuvaev, Horiuchi et al. 2011, van Gaalen, |

| SCA 5 | Spectrin β | U | U | U | U | Vermeer et al. 2013, Ji, Hassler et al. 2014) |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| EA6 | EAAT 1 | U | U | U | U | (Ikeda, Dick et al. 2006) |
| EA5 | CavB 4 | U | U | U | U | (de Vries, Mamsa et al. 2009) |
| EA1 | Kv1.1 | U | U | U | U | (Escayg, De Waard et al. 2000) |
| SCA 13 | Kv3.3 | U | U | U | U | (Imbrici, D'Adamo et al. 2006) |
| SCA 19 | Kv4.3 | U | U | U | U | (Waters, Minassian et al. 2006) |
| SCA 22 | Kv4.3 | U | U | U | U | (Du arri, Jezi erska et al. 2012) |
|  |  |  |  |  |  | (Lee, Dur r et al. 2012) |

799 SCA, spinocerebellar ataxia; HD, Huntington's disease; DLPRA, dentatorubral-pallidoluysian atrophy;
800 leaner, mouse model corresponding to EA2; EA, episodic ataxia; QG, quadrupedal gait ataxia; ARCCA,
801 autosomal-recessive congenital cerebellar ataxia.M, predicted by model; E, experimentally observed; U,
802 Untested.U*, tested and unchanged in mouse model very early on at age 14 days, which may be too early
803 to show changes, based on reduced inositol 1, 4, 5-trisphosphate receptor 1(IP3R1) expression at age 26
804 days in the SCA2 mice (Hansen, Meera et al. 2013) (Supplemental material, S4IP3R1 suppression by
805 CARP). ITPR1, intracellular calcium release channel on the endoplasmic reticulum gated by IP3; PKC-γ,
806 kinase expressed in Purkinje neurons; CARP VIII, Carbonic anhydrase-related protein 8(CA8), anIP3R1
807 antagonist (Turkmen, Guo et al. 2009); EAAT1, Excitatory amino-acid transporter type 1(a glutamate
808 transporter); Spectrin β, an excitatory amino-acid transporter type 1(EAAT4; glutamate transporter) and
809 GluRδ2 (Grid2, glutamate receptor) anchor; DAG, diacylglycerol a product of PLC hydrolysis that
810 activates PKC along with calcium; PIP2, Phosphatidylinositol 4, 5-bisphosphate, a plasma membrane
811 phospholipid of the inner leaflet that gives rise to DAG and IP3 when hydrolyzed; PLC, phospholipase C,
812 an enzyme that hydrolyzes PIP2 when activated by G-betagamma from mGluR; mGluR or Grm1,
813 metabotropic glutamate receptor type 1; PMCA, Plasma membrane calcium ATP-ase transports calcium
814 out of the cell; Cav2.1, main P-type calcium channel in PCs, with nonsense/missense mutations causing
815 episodic ataxia type 2 and expansion of CAG repeats causing SCA6; CavB4, accessory subunit that
816 regulates P-type channels encoded by Cav2.1; Kv1.1, Kv3.3, and Kv4.3 are potassium channels that
817 contribute to repolarization of dendritic calcium spikes in Purkinje neurons; A-HL, ataxia and hearing
818 loss in mice, hearing loss in humans. Adapted from (Schorge, van de Leemput et al. 2010).

Figure 1.TIF

Plasma Membrane

PF stimulus
Glutamate
GPCR
α
βγ
Gq
SCA5
EA6
T
Grid2
EAAT1
EAAT4
AMPAR
Ca
Ch
Ext
PMCA
EA5
EA2
SCA6
K Ch

PKC
DAG
SCA14
PLC
PIP₂
B
Calbindin
Parvalbumin
IP₂
IP₃
IP₄
Cytosol
Ca²⁺
mAtaxin
ICpeptide
CARP
SCA1-3, 15-16, QG ataxia
SERCA
ER Membrane
IP₃ R
RYR
ER
Dantrolene
