
REVIEW OF THERAPEUTICS

Relaxin: A Novel Agent for the Treatment of Acute Heart Failure

Suprat S. Wilson,${}^{1*}$ Syed I. Ayaz,${}^{2}$ and Phillip D. Levy${}^{3}$

${}^{1}$Department of Pharmacy, Detroit Receiving Hospital, Detroit, Michigan; ${}^{2}$Department of Emergency Medicine, Wayne State University School of Medicine, Detroit, Michigan; ${}^{3}$Department of Emergency Medicine, Cardiovascular Research Institute, Wayne State University School of Medicine, Detroit, Michigan

Acute heart failure (AHF) is defined by a constellation of signs and symptoms that manifest when new or decompensated ventricular dysfunction is triggered by an acute precipitant such as excessive preload, afterload, or myocardial ischemia. Despite being one of the most frequent causes of hospitalization and cardiovascular mortality, little to no progress has been made over the last few decades to advance the treatment of AHF. Current mainstays of pharmacotherapy for AHF including diuretics, vasodilators, and inotropes can improve symptoms; however, no currently approved agent has been shown to provide lasting outcome benefit for patients with AHF. First discovered in pregnant women where it is known to help with growth of the cervix and assist with the maternal cardiovascular and renovascular responses to pregnancy, relaxin is an endogenous neurohormone that has novel vasoactive properties. In particular, relaxin is a potent vasodilator with a number of pleiotropic effects that may affect cardiac remodeling, making relaxin an attractive compound for use in the management of AHF. Indeed, in two randomized controlled trials, a single 48-hour infusion of relaxin relieved symptoms of AHF with no evidence of major adverse effects. A signal of mortality benefit at 180 days was noted in both trials, prompting a third trial of relaxin powered for 180-day mortality that is currently underway. The pharmacology that underscores the potential benefit of relaxin is discussed and insight is provided into future clinical application of this novel drug should it prove to be the first therapy capable of reducing mortality in AHF.

KEY WORDS relaxin, serelaxin, acute heart failure.
(Pharmacotherapy 2015;**(**):***–***) doi: 10.1002/phar.1548

Acute heart failure (AHF) is defined by a constellation of signs and symptoms that manifest when new or decompensated ventricular dysfunction is triggered by an acute precipitant such as excessive preload, afterload, or myocardial ischemia. ${}^{1}$ Despite being one of the most frequent causes of hospitalization, mortality, and increased health care costs, ${}^{2}$ the treatment of AHF has made little to no progress over the last few decades. ${}^{3,4}$ Current mainstays of therapy for AHF include diuretics, vasodilators, and inotropes. Such therapy often provides adequate relief from symptoms of AHF, ${}^{5}$ but no current approach to treatment has been shown to improve important outcomes in patients with AHF, such as rehospitalizations and death. Moreover, although novel drugs such as nesiritide, levosimendan, rolofylline, tolvaptan, tezosentan, and clevidipine have been tested over the past 2 decades for use in AHF, none have been shown to provide a reduction in either mortality or hospital readmission. ${}^{6}$

Relaxin is an endogenous neurohormone with unique vasoactive properties. A synthetic analog of relaxin showed promise in a preliminary program of studies involving patients with AHF: RELAXin in Acute Heart Failure (RELAX-AHF).

*Address for correspondence: Suprat S. Wilson, Pharmacy Coordinator, Emergency Medicine Services, Detroit Receiving Hospital, Department of Pharmacy, 1B-UHC, 4201 St. Antoine Blvd., Detroit, MI 48085; e-mail: swilsonl@dmc.org

© 2015 Pharmacotherapy Publications, Inc.

The agent is currently being investigated in an ongoing phase III follow-up trial, RELAX-AHF-2 (ClinicalTrials.gov identifier NCT01870778). First discovered in 1926, relaxin has traditionally been viewed as a pregnancy hormone because it was initially thought to be produced only by the corpus luteum of the ovary in pregnant women for whom it causes cervical softening, pubic ligament elongation, and inhibition of spontaneous myometrial contractile activity. It has been subsequently established that relaxin is also produced in the heart, endometrium, mammary gland, placenta, and prostate. Current understanding of relaxin in pregnant women indicates that concentrations of relaxin rise during the first trimester to aid in growth of the cervix and inhibition of uterine contractility, and to assist in the maternal cardiovascular and renal vasodilatory responses to meet the demands of pregnancy. The rise in relaxin concentration during pregnancy also results in increased plasma volume, cardiac output, heart rate, renal blood flow, and decreased blood pressure and vascular resistance. In addition, relaxin aids in the delivery of the fetus by dilating the cervix and loosening the birth canal tissues and ligaments. The vasoactive effects of relaxin during pregnancy were recognized to have potential for benefit in patients with AHF, prompting study of relaxin in this therapeutic application.

Relaxin Pharmacology and Mechanism of Action

Relaxin is a naturally circulating human peptide hormone in the relaxin-insulin peptide family. Although relaxin is structurally similar to insulin, it acts on different receptors and signaling pathways than those of insulin. In humans, the relaxin peptide family consists of seven members encoding the genes relaxin-1, -2 and -3 and insulinlike peptide-3, -4, -5, and -6. Members of the relaxin family peptides appear to have distinct expression profiles and biologic effects; however, many of the specific functions are unknown. The most important member of the family, relaxin-2, is the major circulating form of relaxin hormones in humans and effectively synonymous with the more generic term *relaxin*. Based on its pathway to discovery, relaxin-2 was initially considered to be primarily a reproductive hormone but is now recognized to have many additional physiologic roles. These roles include actions on the cardio-

vascular and renal systems as well as antiinflammatory, angiogenic, and antifibrotic effects. These roles are each important in the underlying pathophysiology of heart failure (HF). Relaxin-2 (henceforth referred to as “relaxin”) is the focus of the remainder of this review.

Relaxin mediates its effects through multiple, complex mechanisms (Figure 1). It acts primarily through G-protein-coupled receptors known as relaxin family peptide (RXFP) receptors 1–4. Of the four RXFP receptors, RXFP1 was the first to be identified and remains of interest because of its actions on the cardiovascular system. RXFP1 is the main binding site for relaxin-2 and has the highest specificity for this member of the peptide family, but it can also bind with relaxin-1 and relaxin-3. RXFP1 receptors are found in the reproductive tissues as well as the brain, kidney, heart, lung, and blood cells.

The binding of relaxin-2 to RXFP1 receptors initiates a series of complex mechanisms and intracellular signaling pathways, some of which are not fully elucidated. Among the more prominent effects are an induction of cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) production, activation of extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1/2 (ERK 1/2) and tyrosine kinases, gene transcription, and nitric oxide (NO) signaling, as well as an interaction with glucocorticoid receptors. Effects on cAMP production are mediated through a coupling of the Gas subunit to adenylate cyclase, resulting in an increase in intracellular concentrations. However, the coupling of the relaxin-2–RXFP1 complex to GaOB negatively modulates the increases in cAMP. RXFP1 recruits coupling to Gα₁₃ (within minutes) via Akt phosphorylation to release G-βγ subunits to activate the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) pathway over time. Relaxin has been shown to have a positive inotropic effect in both failing and nonfailing myocardium, but this action is limited to the atria and not the ventricles. The positive inotropic effect is a result of the increased Gi-PI3K signaling via adenylate cyclase activation. The PI3K pathway subsequently causes translocation of protein kinase C-ζ to further stimulate adenylate cyclase 5, resulting in a subsequent delayed surge in cAMP production (about 20–30 minutes later). Initiation of the PI3K pathway also leads to a rapid activation of p42/44 mitogen-activated protein kinases, resulting in the phosphorylation of ERK 1/2 and increased expression and transcription of vascular endo-

RELAXIN FOR ACUTE HEART FAILURE Wilson et al

A
- **RLX**
- **RXFP receptor**
  - Rapid
  - Sustained
- **Endothelial cell**
- **NOS**
- **ET-1**
- **VEGF receptor**
- **NO**
- **VEGF**
- **GC**
- **cGMP**
- **SYSTEMIC AND RENAL VASODILATION**
- **Smooth muscle cell**

B
- **RLX**
- **RXFP receptor**
- **Epithelial cell**
- **ET-1**
- **ETB receptor**
- **Inhibition of Na+ resorption**
- **NATRIURESIS**

C
- **Rapid Pathway**
  - Gαs
  - GαoB
  - Gα13
  - Gβγ
  - PI3K
  - PK3-ζ
  - Akt
  - ERK 1/2
  - NOS
    - NO
      - pathway
  - AC
  - cAMP
- **Sustained Pathway**
  - NFκB
  - ETB receptor
  - NOS
  - NO
  - MMP2/
  - MMP9
  - Big ET

Figure 1. Proposed mechanism for relaxin stimulation of systemic and renal vasodilation and natriuresis: RXFP-1 receptor-mediated activation of the endothelial ET-B receptor and nitric oxide synthase. The relaxin receptor, RXFP, is located on (A) systemic and renal vascular endothelial cells (EC) and smooth muscle cells in specific vascular beds^{17, 56, 57} and on (B) renal tubular epithelial cells.^{58, 59} Relaxin binding to RXFP1 on vascular EC initiates rapid activation of nitric oxide synthase (NOS) via G proteins coupling to activate phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) pathway (C). This is achieved via phosphorylation of extracellular signal regulated kinase 1/2 (ERK1/2) and Akt activation, both of which lead to NOS activation.^{60} NOS is also stimulated indirectly after sustained relaxin exposure via nuclear factor kappa-light-chain-enhancer of activated β cells–mediated synthesis of the endothelin type b (ETB) receptor and/or induction of matrix metalloproteinases (MMP),^61 which catalyze cleavage of Big ET to active ET1-32 in a sustained manner. NO production causes relaxation of adjacent smooth muscle cell, leading to systemic and renal vasodilation.^36 The endothelial ETB receptor also mediates clearance of ET-1.^31 Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) is also involved in the vasodilation pathway, although its precise role and localization within the vasculature are subject to further research.^26 In the kidney, relaxin-mediated ETB receptor activation may lead to inhibition of sodium resorption and natriuresis.^62–64 AC = adenylate cyclase; cAMP = cyclic adenosine monophosphate; ET = endothelin; GC = guanylyl cyclase; NO = nitric oxide; NFκB = nuclear factor kappa-light-chain-enhancer of activated B cells; RLX = relaxin.

thelial growth factor (VEGF), which is linked to the physiologic effects of relaxin on angiogenesis.^24, 25 In addition, VEGF is known to be involved in the vasodilation pathway, although its precise localization within the vasculature is a subject of ongoing research.^26

Activation of the nitric oxide synthase (NOS) pathway by ERK leads to an increase in the production and expression of NOS including endothelial NOS, inducible NOS, and neuronal NOS.^27 Activation of NOS results in an increase in cyclic guanosine monophosphate concentrations through NO production and guanylyl cyclase activation, resulting in vasodilatory effects.^19, 27 NO also causes an increased expression of matrix metalloproteinases (MMP) 2 and 9, a family of proteinases that contribute to tissue remodeling through collagen degradation.^28 MMP 2 and 9 cleave big endothelin (ET) one to

release ET1-32, which activates ETB receptors, causing NO-dependent vasodilation. This process occurs in a sustained manner. In cardiac cells, relaxin inhibits cardiac fibrosis by reducing fibroblast proliferation and differentiation as well as collagen deposition in response to inflammatory mediators such as transforming growth factor (TGF)-β and angiotensin II.^29 NO also inhibits pSmad2, a mediator involved in the profibrotic effects of TFG-β.^30

Of additional significance in HF are the effects of relaxin on systemic and renal vascular tone via the endothelin system (Figure 1). The homeostatic effects on the endothelin system are maintained by endothelin-A (ETA) and endothelin-B (ETB) receptors. On vascular smooth muscle cells, ETA has vasoconstrictive effects, whereas ETB has both vasoconstrictive and vasodilatory actions.^31 The binding of relaxin to

the endothelin receptor cells initiates the stimulation of NO via the ETB vasodilatory pathway. This results in vasodilation of the systemic vascular smooth muscle. In the kidneys, endolins, mainly ETB, mediate natriuretic and diuretic effects by inhibiting the sodium and chloride transport system and vasopressin-induced water reabsorption at the collecting duct. Specifically, the inhibition of sodium/potassium adenosine triphosphatase activity by the ETB receptor leads to an inhibition of sodium and chloride reabsorption. The activation of the ETB receptor also inhibits cAMP accumulation and increases renal medullary blood flow via the NO pathway and cyclooxygenase metabolites, resulting in natriuresis. Further, activity at the endothelial ETB receptor mediates clearance of ET-1. In patients with chronic HF, increased production and reduced clearance of ET-1 lead to elevated circulating levels of ET-1. Elevated ET-1 levels can contribute to peripheral vasoconstriction and impaired endothelial function in patients with chronic HF. This results in increased central aortic systolic pressure, decreased cardiac output, and decreased arterial compliance. Thus enhanced ET-1 clearance by relaxin via ETB receptors may also lead to improved compliance.

Pharmacokinetics

In general, relaxin pharmacokinetics are linear at lower doses (up to 100 μg/kg/day) and are nonlinear at doses higher than 100 μg/kg/day. The half-life in animal models appears to be dose related, on average 1–2 minutes and 15–16 minutes with bolus doses of 46 and 93 μg/kg, respectively. At high bolus doses of 463 μg/kg, the half-life is as long as 68 minutes, implying nonlinear pharmacokinetics as the dose increases. Similarly, when given as a subcutaneous continuous infusion at doses of 6–100 μg/kg/day in patients with scleroderma, the half-life increased linearly and ranged between 4.75 and 6.55 hours and as long as 14.3 hours with a dose of 200 μg/kg/day. The volume of distribution with bolus dosing averaged 271–336 ml/kg but is much larger if administered subcutaneously as a continuous infusion (mean 896–2481 ml/kg). The discrepancy seen with the volume of distribution may be explained by different models, animal versus human, used in the two studies. The mean clearance exhibits a similar pattern as the half-life at 7.4–10.2 ml/minute/kg at doses lower than 100 μg/kg with bolus

administration. Circulating relaxin is eliminated mainly by the kidneys and to a lesser extent by the liver. Therefore, use of relaxin in patients with hepatic dysfunction, a common occurrence in AHF, should be avoided when possible, or dosage adjustment is recommended if relaxin is required. Elevated relaxin levels are observed in patients with end-stage renal disease, suggesting reduced relaxin clearance with compromised kidney function. Thus it is recommended that if relaxin is used in patients with end-stage renal disease, dosage adjustment is required, and adverse events should be monitored closely. If possible, relaxin should be avoided altogether in this patient population because studies to date have only included patients with mild to moderate renal dysfunction. Extra caution should be used in patients with hepatorenal syndrome as well because clearance of circulating relaxin may be minimal in such individuals.

Efficacy and Safety in Patients with Heart Failure

Relaxin was first studied in Germany in patients with stable HF in a phase I open-label study that investigated the safety and target doses of relaxin. Intravenous relaxin was administered over 24 hours in doses ranging from 10–960 μg/kg/day given in a dose-escalation manner. All patients were continued on their established oral HF medication regimens during the study. Sixteen patients with compensated chronic HF secondary to coronary artery disease, hypertension, or idiopathic cardiomyopathy were included, and all but one were male with New York Heart Association (NYHA) heart failure class II or III and a left ventricular ejection fraction less than 35%. Other inclusion criteria were pulmonary capillary wedge pressure (PCWP) higher than 16 mm Hg or cardiac index lower than 2.5 L/minute/m², serum creatinine concentration less than 2.0 mg/dl and systolic blood pressure (SBP) higher than 85 mm Hg. The safety of relaxin was initially demonstrated in the first cohort of four patients who received 8-hour sequential infusions at 10, 30, and 100 μg/kg/day. This allowed dose escalation in the second cohort (six subjects) to 240, 480, and 960 μg/kg/day in 8-hour sequential infusions. Finally, the last cohort of six subjects received a 24-hour infusion of 960 μg/kg/day, the highest dose that was deemed safe. All patients across all three cohorts, including the 960 μg/kg/day group, tolerated the relaxin infusion for a full

24 hours. Relaxin was well tolerated over the wide dose ranges studied, with no clinically significant infusion-related adverse events observed either during or after the infusions and at follow-up on day 9. On telephone follow-up at 30 days, only one patient was found to have been hospitalized 3 weeks after receiving the relaxin infusion for moderate angina pectoris without progression of coronary artery disease on angiographic evaluation.

In addition to clinical outcomes, this phase I study also evaluated hemodynamic and biomarker responses to varying relaxin doses. Significant decreases in PCWP from baseline were observed at doses of 30, 100, and 960 μg/kg/day; however, an increase in cardiac index and cardiac output (0.67 ± 0.15 L/min/m² and 1.25 ± 0.03 L/min, respectively) and a decrease in systemic vascular resistance (-395 ± 217 dynes/s/cm⁵) reached significance only at the highest dose. The hemodynamic changes observed with infusion of relaxin were consistent with vasodilation but without an apparent dose-response effect. Moreover, no significant changes in SBP, diastolic blood pressure, or heart rate were observed throughout the study period. Circulating N-terminal prohormone brain natriuretic peptide (NT-proBNP) values were also significantly decreased compared with baseline at 2, 8, and 24 hours after infusion in the 10–100 μg/kg/day infusion group and at the end of infusion and at 2 and 12 hours after infusion in the 960 μg/kg/day infusion group. Moreover, serum creatinine and blood urea nitrogen concentrations decreased significantly at doses of 30, 100, and 960 μg/kg/day, signaling potential beneficial effects on renal function with short-term administration. However, at the highest infusion dose of 960 μg/kg/day, a significant increase in serum creatinine concentration was observed on posttreatment follow-up day 9, indicating a possible dose-limiting effect.

Based on the demonstrated safety and tolerability of relaxin in this phase I study, a phase IIb study was conducted to determine the optimal dose of relaxin in patients with AHF. In this double-blind, placebo-controlled, parallel-group study—Relaxin for the Treatment of Patients with Acute Heart Failure (Pre-RELAX-AHF)—234 patients with symptomatic AHF who met inclusion and exclusion criteria (Table 1) were enrolled. Symptomatic AHF was defined by the presence of dyspnea at rest or with minimal exertion, pulmonary congestion on chest radiograph, and increased natriuretic peptide concentrations (brain natriuretic peptide [BNP] ≥350 pg/ml or higher and NT-proBNP ≥1400 pg/ml or higher). Patients were randomized in a double-blinded manner into five parallel-treatment groups using a 3:2:2:2:2 ratio: placebo and four intravenous relaxin groups (10, 30, 100, and 250 μg/kg/day). Experimental treatment was superimposed on standard therapy for AHF (determined by the site investigator or primary treating physician) and continued for 48 hours. The mean ± SD age was 70.3 ± 10.5 years, and 56% were male. Most of the patients included in the study were classified as NYHA class III or IV and had NT-proBNP levels higher than 2000 pg/ml. Mean SBP at screening was 147 mm Hg, and mean estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) was 53.6 mL/minute/1.73 m². Of note, 37.5% of patients had a left ventricular ejection fraction less than 40%. Patients were randomized within a median of 6.6 hours (interquartile range 4.0–13.4 hr) of presentation, and the study drug was started within a mean ± SD of 1.0 ± 1.8 hours after randomization.

The Pre-RELAX-AHF trial had an exploratory dose-finding design that was not powered to evaluate any single prespecified primary endpoint, assessing instead the overall effect of intravenous relaxin using multiple markers of HF. As shown in Table 1, dyspnea and mortality were reduced significantly in the relaxin 30 μg/kg/day group. Greater improvements in physician-assessed signs of AHF, including jugular venous distension, pulmonary rales, and peripheral edema, were also found at day 5 in the 30 μg/kg/day group. Overall, relaxin-treated patients trended toward greater decreases in body weight and less diuretic or vasodilator use (nitroglycerin or nitroprusside) than placebo-treated patients, but these differences were not statistically significant.

Among those with a baseline SBP of 140 mm Hg or lower, there was no significant difference in SBP decrease over the 48-hour infusion period between relaxin- and placebo-treated patients (-13.5 mm Hg vs -12.8 mm Hg, p=0.73). However, a greater reduction in SBP was noted in patients with a baseline SBP higher than 140 mm Hg who received relaxin (-22.5 mm Hg vs -17.6 mm Hg, p=0.04). The occurrence of hypotension (defined as a decrease in SBP to lower than 100 mm Hg or higher than a 40 mm Hg decrease from baseline) that required discontinuation of the study drug was more common in patients who received relaxin than in those who received placebo (23 vs two

Table 1. Phase IIb and III Clinical Trials Investigating Relaxin in Patients with Acute Heart Failure

| Study name, study design, and sample size | Study entry criteria | Prespecified study end points | Major findings | Study limitations |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Pre-RELAX-AHF (phase IIb; double-blind, placebo-controlled, parallel-group; 234 patients) | Main inclusion criteria: Age ≥ 18 yr; presentation with AHF within 16 hr of arrival; SBP > 125 mm Hg at the time of screening; impaired renal function, defined as eGFR 30–75 ml/min/1.73 m² as calculated by the sMDRD equation; receipt of at least 40 mg of IV furosemide (or equivalent dose of alternative loop diuretic) prior to randomization | Main exclusion criteria: use of IV inotropic agents or IV vasodilators (other than IV nitrates at a dose of 0.1 mg/kg/hr if SBP > 150 mmHg); temperature > 38°C, severe pulmonary disease; significant stenotic valvular disease; acute coronary syndrome diagnosed within 45 days or troponin concentration > 3 times the upper limit of normal on local assay | 1. Relief of dyspnea as assessed by change in Likert scale score and change from baseline score using a 100-mm VAS at 6, 12, 24, and 48 hr, and at 3, 4, 5, and 14 days; 2. In-hospital worsening HF to day 5; 3. Renal impairment, defined as ≥ 25% increase in serum creatinine concentration from baseline to day 5; and persistent renal impairment, defined as a serum creatinine concentration increase of ≥ 0.3 mg/dL at both days 5 and 14; 4. Length of initial hospital stay; 5. Days alive and out of hospital to day 60; 6. Death due to CV causes, or readmission for heart failure or renal failure to day 60; 7. Mortality due to CV causes to day 180 | 1. Small sample size; 2. Multiple treatment groups; 3. Absence of a single primary end point; 4. Lack of sufficient power to provide evidence of differences between active therapy and placebo or between different relaxin doses 5. No significant difference in worsening HF (21% vs 14%), LOS (10.2 ± 6.1 days vs 12.0 ± 7.3 days), or days alive out of hospital (47.9 ± 10.1 vs 44.2 ± 14.2) was noted; 3. Proportion of CV deaths or readmissions due to heart or renal failure at day 60 was lower in the relaxin group vs placebo (2.6% vs 17.2%, p=0.053); 4. Proportion of CV deaths at day 180 was lower in the relaxin 30-μg/kg/day group vs placebo (0.0% vs 14.3%, p=0.46); 5. No significant difference in the number of serious adverse events, including the incidence of renal impairment, was noted |

Study name, study design, and sample size

| Study name | RELAX-AHF (phase III; double-blind, placebo-controlled; 1161 patients) |
| --- | --- |
| Main inclusion criteria: same as Pre-RELAX-AHF |
| Main exclusion criteria: Use of IV drugs to treat HF (other than IV nitrates at a dose of 0.1 mg/kg/hour with a mechanical support within 2 hr screening SBP > 150 mm Hg) or >38°C or signs of active infection; known significant pulmonary or valvular disease; AHF due to significant arrhythmias; acute coronary syndrome diagnosed within 45 days or troponin concentration > 3 times the level diagnostic of myocardial infarction on local assay |

### Prespecified study end points

#### Primary end points:
1. Change in patient-reported dyspnea as quantified by the AUC of VAS scores (0–100-mm scale) from baseline to day 5; noted 9 (absolute difference 448 mm hour [95% CI 120–775 mm hour], p=0.007);
2. Proportion of patients reporting moderately or markedly improved dyspnea relative to start of study drug at 3 time points (6, 12, and 24 hrs) using a 7-point Likert scale assessed by change in Likert scale score at 6, 12, and 24 hrs

#### Secondary end points:
1. Days alive and out of hospital evaluated in the context of specific guidance for titration to blood pressure changes, and discontinuation in response to worsening HF events were also tracked
2. CV death or hospital readmission for heart or renal failure before day 60;

### Major findings

#### Relaxin vs placebo:
1. An increase in the VAS AUC for dyspnea through day 5 was noted 9 (absolute difference 448 mm hour [95% CI 120–775 mm hour], p=0.007);
2. No significant difference was found in the proportion of patients reporting moderately or markedly improved dyspnea as assessed by change in Likert scale score at 6, 12, and 24 hrs (27% vs 26%, p=0.70);
3. Efficacy, tolerability, and especially safety of relaxin were evaluated in the context of specific guidance for titration to blood pressure changes, and discontinuation in response to worsening HF events; this may not be replicable in real-world practice;
4. Worsening HF was largely driven by small doses of administered IV diuretics;
5. Worst case imputation was used for dyspnea end points in those with worsening HF;
6. The study was not prospectively designed or powered as a mortality trial with a moderate number of death events recorded (90 CV [35 in the relaxin group, 55 in the placebo group] and all-cause mortality (HR 0.63, 95% CI 0.41–0.96, p=0.028) and all-cause mortality (HR 0.63, 95% CI 0.43–0.93, p=0.02) through day 180 were reduced in relaxin-treated patients through 180 days)

#### Other analyses:
1. Symptoms and signs at multiple time points through day 14;
2. Total IV diuretic dose to day 5;
3. Time to worsening HF up to days 5 and 14;
4. Total hospital and ICU/CCU LOS;
5. All-cause or CV death or hospital readmission for heart or renal failure, individually, at day 60;
6. CV and all-cause mortality to day 180

### Study limitations

1. Although the population enrolled was largely representative of patients with AHF seen in clinical practice, study entry criteria were highly specific, and results might not be wholly generalizable;
2. Although consistency was noted in subgroup analysis, the study was not adequately powered for such comparisons;
3. Efficacy, tolerability, and especially safety of relaxin were evaluated in the context of specific guidance for titration to blood pressure changes, and discontinuation in response to worsening HF events; this may not be replicable in real-world practice;
4. Worsening HF was largely driven by small doses of administered IV diuretics;
5. Worst case imputation was used for dyspnea end points in those with worsening HF;
6. The study was not prospectively designed or powered as a mortality trial with a moderate number of death events recorded (90 CV [35 in the relaxin group, 55 in the placebo group] and all-cause mortality (HR 0.63, 95% CI 0.41–0.96, p=0.028) and all-cause mortality (HR 0.63, 95% CI 0.43–0.93, p=0.02) through day 180 were reduced in relaxin-treated patients through 180 days)

---

AHF = acute heart failure; AUC = area under the curve; CCU = cardiac care unit; CI = confidence interval; CV = cardiovascular; eGFR = estimated glomerular filtration rate; HF = heart failure; HR = hazard ratio; ICU = intensive care unit; IV = intravenous; LOS = length of stay; Pre-RELAX-AHF = Relaxin for Treatment of Acute Heart Failure; sMDRD = simplified Modification of Diet in Renal Disease; VAS = visual analog scale.

The following were additional exclusion criteria for both trials: pregnant or breastfeeding women; administration of IV radiographic contrast agent within 72 hours prior to screening or acute contrast-induced nephropathy at the time of screening; organ transplant recipient, or currently listed for imminent transplantation; major surgery within 30 days of screening; hematoctrit less than 25%; blood transfusion in the previous 14 days, or active life-threatening gastrointestinal bleeding; active menorrhagia or metrorrhagia; major neurologic event including cerebrovascular events in the previous 60 days; acute myocarditis or hypertrophic cardiomyopathy; known hepatic impairment; noncardiac obstructive, restrictive, or constrictive cardiomyopathy; implantation of investigational device, or participation in another trial within 30 days before screening or previous treatment with relaxin; inability to follow instructions or comply with follow-up procedures; and known hypersensitivity to relaxin or similar substances or to any of the excipients.
patients), with no apparent difference based on dose or initial SBP. Most of the blood pressure reductions occurred during the first 6–12 hours of study drug treatment, and drug discontinuation was sufficient to restore or stabilize blood pressure in most cases. Fluid resuscitation was necessary in five patients (two in the placebo group and three in the relaxin groups), and one patient in the 250 μg/kg/day relaxin group required dobutamine. None of the patients in the 10 or 30 μg/kg/day groups required additional treatment for a decrease in blood pressure.

The incidence of renal impairment, defined as an increase in serum creatinine concentration of 25% or more from baseline to day 5 was also similar across all study groups. However, in the highest dose relaxin group (250 μg/kg/day), there was a trend toward increased development of persistent renal impairment, defined as an increase of serum creatinine concentration of at least 0.3 mg/dl at days 5 and 14 (15% in the relaxin group vs 7% in the placebo group, p=0.19). Similarly, the proportion of patients with delayed rise of serum creatinine concentration at day 14 was most pronounced in the 250 μg/kg/day relaxin group (p=0.03), effectively eliminating this dose from further consideration. Although positive clinical effects were observed among dose ranges of 10–100 μg/kg/day, the most prominent effects of improvement in dyspnea across all time points were observed in the 30 μg/kg/day group. Therefore, the 30 μg/kg/day dose was selected for further evaluation in a larger phase III trial based on its efficacy and safety profile.

The phase III study known as the RELAX-AHF was a double-blind, placebo-controlled trial that enrolled essentially the same target population as that in the Pre-RELAX-AHF study (1). A total of 1161 patients with symptomatic AHF were randomized to either intravenous relaxin 30 μg/kg/day (581 subjects) or placebo (580 subjects) for up to 48 hours. Patients in the relaxin and placebo groups were similar with respect to age (mean ± SD 71.6 ± 11.7 vs 72.5 ± 10.8 years), race (94% vs 95% white), sex (63% vs 62% male), presenting SBP (mean ± SD 142 ± 16 vs 142 ± 17 mm Hg), baseline eGFR (mean ± SD 53.7 ± 13.1 vs 53.2 ± 12.9 mL/min/1.73 m²), and baseline NT-proBNP (mean [95% confidence interval (CI)] 5125 [4774–5506] vs 5003 [4633–5404] ng/L). Underlying HF status was effectively the same as well, with an equal proportion in both groups having a baseline ejection fraction less than 40% (55%) and an established NYHA class III or IV (58%). No significant differences in the associated comorbidities including hypertension (85% vs 88%), ischemic heart disease (51% vs 53%), atrial fibrillation or flutter (51% vs 53%), and diabetes mellitus (48% vs 47%), or concomitant HF drugs at baseline (angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors or angiotensin receptor blockers [69% vs 72%], β-blockers [67% vs 70%], and aldosterone antagonists [33% vs 30%]).

Randomization occurred, on average, within 7.8 ± 4.6 hours of presentation for the relaxin group and 7.9 ± 4.7 for the placebo group. Study drug infusion was maintained for the full 48 hours in 929 patients (80%; 445 [77%] and 484 [83%] in the relaxin and placebo groups, respectively). Dyspnea as assessed by one of two coprimary end points (Table 1) was significantly improved in the relaxin-treated group, meeting the study’s prespecified metric for efficacy (i.e., significance at either the two-sided 0.05 level for both end points or the 0.025 level for either single end point). The incidence of worsening HF was also lower among patients who received relaxin as was total hospital length of stay. Although relaxin had no apparent effect on days alive and out of the hospital and cardiovascular death or rehospitalization for heart or renal failure through day 60, its use was associated with a significant reduction in cardiovascular and all-cause mortality at 180 days. Importantly, the observed dyspnea and mortality benefits with relaxin were consistent across subgroups based on a number of important covariates including age, sex, race, geographic region, time from presentation to randomization, baseline SBP, baseline eGFR, history of diabetes, history of atrial fibrillation, left ventricular ejection fraction, history of ischemic heart disease, history of cardiac resynchronization therapy or implantable cardioverter defibrillator, concomitant HF medication use at baseline, and use of intravenous nitrates at randomization.

Relaxin-treated patients required a lower total dose of intravenous loop diuretic through day 5 (mean ± SD 161 ± 265 vs 213 ± 358 mg, p=0.006) and less use of vasoactive drugs (16% vs 11%, p=0.01). As a likely consequence of the differential diuretic dosing, weight loss was significantly greater in the placebo group at day 14 (−3.0 kg in the relaxin group vs −3.6 kg in the placebo group, p=0.23). Other measures including general well-being by visual analog scale (VAS) (but not Likert scale) at days 1, 2, 5, and
14, and objectively determined signs or symptoms of HF (dyspnea on exertion, orthopnea, peripheral edema, pulmonary rales, and jugular venous pressure) at day 2 were significantly better in the relaxin group. In addition, use of relaxin resulted in significantly greater decreases in SBP (~4–6 mmHg) from baseline during (up to 48 hours) and after (up to 24 hours after discontinuation) infusion. However, this was accompanied by a higher frequency of protocol-defined blood pressure-related study drug dose adjustments in the relaxin group (29% vs 18%, p<0.0001), with 13% (vs 7% in the placebo group) requiring a 50% decrease in the infusion rate for an SBP drop of more than 40 mmHg from baseline alone, and 19% (vs 12% in the placebo group) requiring complete discontinuation of study drug for an SBP lower than 100 mmHg. With the exception of a higher incidence of renal impairment in the placebo group (6% in the relaxin group vs 9% in the placebo group, p=0.03), the overall adverse event profile between the two study groups was similar including the development of hypotension-related adverse events through day 5 (5% in the relaxin group vs 4% in the placebo group; p=0.78).

apparent myocardial necrosis (increase of cTnT by 20% or more over baseline at day 2) had an all-cause mortality at 180 days that was 1.8 times greater (95% CI 1.16–2.78). Relaxin administration was associated with significantly lower levels of cTnT (p=0.013) and a decreased incidence of myocardial necrosis compared with placebo (16.5% vs 27.2%; p<0.0001) through day 2. The benefit of relaxin on troponin release was only present during active drug infusion, with no significant differences between the relaxin and placebo groups noted beyond day 2. Similar to cTnT, higher NT-proBNP levels were associated with increased 180-day all-cause mortality, and their reduction (30% or more decrease over baseline) during the first 2 days predicted better prognosis (HR 0.47, 95% CI 0.31–0.69). As with cTnT, administration of relaxin was associated with significantly lower NT-proBNP levels at day 2, and a higher proportion of relaxin-treated patients had a 30% or more decrease in NT-proBNP levels by day 2 (69% in the relaxin group vs 58% in the placebo group, p=0.0002). Taken together, these data suggest that diminished myocardial stress portends better outcomes and that the likelihood of this is increased with relaxin use.

### Effects of Relaxin on Organ Damage and Correlation with Outcomes

One of the main challenges with the interpretation of the RELAX-AHF data is reconciling the demonstrated association between a short-term drug infusion and a protracted (i.e., 180-day) outcome benefit. It has been postulated that relaxin might interfere with acute pathophysiological processes that contribute to subsequent or ongoing organ damage. The existence of such a protective effect is supported by post hoc analysis of Pre-RELAX-AHF and RELAX-AHF data showing biomarker evidence of attenuated cardiac, renal, and liver function and injury in relaxin-treated patients. Likely pleiotropic in nature, these effects appear to contribute to the observed mortality benefit associated with relaxin use.

#### Renal Effects

Worsening renal function, defined as a serum creatinine concentration increase of 0.3 mg/dL or higher or a cystatin-C concentration increase of 0.3 mg/L or higher at day 2, was also associated with a greater risk of 180-day all-cause mortality. Despite similar baseline renal function, patients treated with relaxin had significantly lower serum creatinine and plasma cystatin-C concentrations in the first 5 days compared with placebo. Although a lower proportion of patients who received relaxin developed worsening renal function according to both serum creatinine (10.9% in the relaxin group vs 19.8% in the placebo group, p<0.0001) and cystatin-C (16.0% in the relaxin group vs 23.2% in the placebo group, p=0.0027) concentrations by day 2 of the study, this effect is limited to the postinfusion period because the levels of serum creatinine and cystatin-C normalized by day 14.

#### Cardiac Effects

Overall, both placebo- and relaxin-treated with any doubling in cardiac troponin T (cTnT) levels from baseline were at 1.4 times higher risk of mortality at 180 days (hazard ratio [HR] 1.41, 95% CI 1.21–1.64), whereas those with

#### Hepatic Effects

As with the previous biomarkers, an increase in liver function, as indicated by an increase in

serum transaminase levels (aspartate aminotrans-
ferase [AST] and alanine aminotransferase
[ALT]) by 20% or more over baseline at day 2
was associated with increased 180-day all-cause
mortality. The relaxin-treated group had a lower
proportion of patients with a 20% or more
increase in both ALT (7.1% vs 11.4%, p=0.018)
and AST levels (7% vs 12.7%, p=0.0024) at day
2. The use of relaxin also resulted in a signifi-
cantly larger decrease in both ALT (mean differ-
ence –4.16, 95% CI –6.62 to –1.70 U/L) and
AST (mean difference –5.33, 95% CI –9.04 to
–1.62 U/L) levels compared with placebo.

Future Clinical Applications

Although to date data on relaxin are encour-
aging, hard lessons have been learned from prior
investigation of novel therapeutics, especially ne-
siritide. Such experience clearly helped
refine the RELAX-AHF program, resulting in
studies that, by design, aimed to better align the
primary pharmacologic effects of a novel thera-
peutic (i.e., vasodilation) with the underlying
pathophysiology of a more narrowly defined
AHF phenotype (i.e., largely hypertensive with
mild to moderate renal dysfunction). This design
was well reflected in the prerandomization mean
SBP of the final study population [142 mm Hg],
a distinction that stands out prominently when
compared with similar data from other vasodila-
tor trials including the Acute Study of Clinical
Effectiveness of Nesiritide in Decompensated
Heart Failure (ASCEND-HF [7141 subjects]; mean
SBP 124 mm Hg) and the Value of Endothelin
Receptor Inhibition With Tezosentan in Acute
Heart Failure Studies (VERITAS [1448 subjects];
mean SBP 131 mm Hg). Although this may limit
the eventual label indication for relaxin to those
with moderate blood pressure elevations (should
it ultimately attain approval from the U.S. Food
and Drug Administration [FDA]), it is worth
noting that participants enrolled in RELAX-AHF
were highly reflective of real-world patients with
AHF in the United States and Europe, nearly half
of whom have a mean presenting SBP of 140 mm
Hg or higher, a nonischemic etiology of HF, and
a preserved ejection fraction.

In addition to targeting a more specific pheno-
type, Pre-RELAX-AHF and RELAX-AHF also
sought to enroll patients far earlier in their clini-
cal course than previous studies. This alone
could explain some of the treatment differences
noted. A general association between early
administration of nitroglycerin or other vasoac-
tive therapy and better outcomes was shown in
the Acute Decompensated Heart Failure
(ADHERE) Registry. However, the benefits
of relaxin were noted even among the subgroup
of patients who received intravenous nitrates.
Further, there were clear signals of an organ-
protective effect on post hoc analysis of Pre-
RELAX-AHF and RELAX-AHF data, suggesting
at least some direct clinical benefit with relaxin
treatment. Whether this benefit would exist with
earlier administration of other agents is not
known, but such an approach is currently being
tested in trials of other novel vasodilating com-
pounds including ularitide, a urodilatin analog
(NCT01661634), and TRV 027, a biased ligand
that antagonizes angiotensin-stimulated G-protein
activation while acting as a stimulator of β-arrestin
(NCT01966601).

An association between early treatment and
dyspnea reduction is not surprising, but the clin-
ical meaningfulness of the reported differential
improvement in VAS AUC is far from certain.
Although this did enable RELAX-AHF to meet
one of its two dyspnea end points (at the p<0.025
threshold), the absence of a more robust statistical
difference in VAS AUC and the lack of a clear
benefit on a Likert scale prompted pause for
concern by the FDA during their March 27, 2014,
review on the approvability of relaxin (also known
as serelaxin, which is the generic name of a product
currently under commercial development by Novartis
Pharmaceuticals [Basel, Switzerland]) for an indication
to improve the symptoms of AHF through reduction
of the rate of worsening of heart failure. Reviewers
noted that the RELAX-AHF did not show improvement
in “symptoms” but rather a reduction in just one symptom
(dyspnea) and that the apparent difference in this end
point may have been artifactual, driven by the use of a
prespecified, worst case imputation method for all patients
coded as worsening HF. On sensitivity analyses where a
scaled approach to imputation based on severity of the
worsening HF episode was used, no statistical difference
in VAS AUC was noted. Moreover, the FDA chal-
lenged the notion that relaxin actually reduced true
worsening HF because the definition of this endpoint
was vague, and determination was left to the discretion
of the site investigator. Supportive of this, the vast majority
of cases coded as worsening HF were treated using single
small doses of an intravenous diuretic without delivery of
further or more aggressive therapy.

Although the FDA panel did note a favorable risk-benefit profile, consequent to their efficacy concerns, the request for approval was unanimously rejected.

Beyond the implications for relaxin itself, the FDA review signals a need to better characterize dyspnea and worsening heart failure as endpoints for regulatory approval of novel AHF drugs. Notwithstanding, the potential clinical application of relaxin will be driven largely through demonstration that the observed mortality reduction is real and not merely an artifact of small sample sizes. However, even if this can be shown, questions will linger should this outcome benefit continue to manifest only at a delayed time point with no interval improvement in the preceding disease trajectory. Perhaps this is a consequence of competing risk where patients who live longer are able to experience further episodes of decompensation, thereby accounting for an apparent neutral impact, particularly on rehospitalization, but this has yet to be proven in a prospective manner. A follow-up phase III study to RELAX-AHF powered to evaluate mortality at 180 days (RELAX-AHF 2 [NCT01870778]) was launched in September 2013. Scheduled to enroll a total of 6375 patients using effectively the same entry criteria, RELAX-AHF-2 is on schedule to complete recruitment by June 2016 and will provide much needed definitive evidence regarding the clinical benefits of relaxin and its future as a potential therapy for AHF.

### Dosing and Administration

Based on the results of RELAX-AHF, the established intravenous dose of relaxin is 30 μg/kg/day. When excessive blood pressure reductions (more than 40 mm Hg from baseline) are encountered, the dose should be decreased by 50%. If blood pressure falls below an SBP of 100 mm Hg, regardless of the absolute decrease from baseline, permanent discontinuation of the drug is recommended. Although administration of relaxin to patients with an SBP higher than 125 mm Hg early in the course of AHF treatment appears to be safe according to the preliminary data presented, the maximum infusion duration should not exceed 48 hours. Further, the potential immunogenicity of repeat administration is not known, and treatment with relaxin, at present, is limited to a single lifetime exposure.

### Conclusion

Relaxin is an intriguing hormone that has many favorable pharmacologic properties for treatment of AHF. Based on the result of two randomized controlled trials, relaxin appears to have cardioprotective effects along with a significant benefit of dyspnea relief in patients with AHF. Although vasodilation may be important early after administration, relaxin has a number of pleiotropic effects that are of interest and may be beneficial in the prevention of worsening cardiac function. Continuous infusions of relaxin for 48 hours appear to be well tolerated, and pending results of the ongoing RELAX-AHF 2 trial, relaxin may become a drug routinely used in the near future for the management of AHF patients.

### References

1. Metra M, Teerlink JR, Felker GM, et al. Dyspnoea and worsening heart failure in patients with acute heart failure: results from the Pre-RELAX-AHF study. Eur J Heart Fail 2010; 12 (10):1130–9.
2. Sidney S, Rosamond WD, Howard VJ, Luepker RV. The “heart disease and stroke statistics—2013 update” and the need for a national cardiovascular surveillance system. Circulation 2013;1:21–3.
3. Teerlink JR, Cotter G, Davison BA, et al. Serelaxin, recombinant human relaxin-2, for treatment of acute heart failure (RELAX-AHF): a randomised, placebo-controlled trial. Lancet 2013;9860:29–39.
4. Metra M, Ponikowski P, Cotter G, et al. Effects of serelaxin in subgroups of patients with acute heart failure: results from RELAX-AHF. Eur Heart J 2013;40:3128–36.
5. Ponikowski P, Metra M, Teerlink JR, et al. Design of the RELAXin in Acute Heart Failure Study. Am Heart J 2012;2:149–55.e1.
6. Collins S, Storrow AB, Albert NM, et al. Early management of patients with acute heart failure: state of the art and future directions. A consensus document from the Society for Academic Emergency Medicine/Heart Failure Society of America acute heart failure working group. J Cardiac Fail 2015; 21(1):27–43.
7. Hisaw F. Experimental relaxation of the pubic ligament of the guinea pig. Proc Soc Exp Biol Med 1926;23:661–3.
8. Kakouris H, Eddie LW, Summers RJ. Cardiac effects of relaxin in rats. Lancet 1992;8801:1076–8.
9. Du XJ, Bathgate RA, Samuel CS, Dart AM, Summers RJ. Cardiovascular effects of relaxin: from basic science to clinical therapy. Nat Rev Cardiol 2010;1:48–58.
10. Teichman SL, Unemori E, Dschietzig T, et al. Relaxin, a pleiotropic vasodilator for the treatment of heart failure. Heart Fail Rev 2009;4:321–9.
11. Jeyabalan A, Shroff SG, Novak J, Conrad KP. The vascular actions of relaxin. Adv Exp Med Biol 2007;612:65–87.
12. Gavino ES, Furst DE. Recombinant relaxin: a review of pharmacology and potential therapeutic use. BioDrugs 2001;9:609–14.
13. Zhao Z, Liu T, Li G. Relaxin-2 may offer therapeutic advantages in end-stage heart failure. Int J Cardiol 2012;3:432–3.
14. Samuel CS, Du XJ, Bathgate RA, Summers RJ. “Relaxin” the stiffened heart and arteries: the therapeutic potential for relaxin in the treatment of cardiovascular disease. Pharmacol Ther 2006;2:529–52.
15. Grossman J, Frishman WH. Relaxin: a new approach for the treatment of acute congestive heart failure. Cardiol Rev 2010;6:305–12.

16. van der Westhuizen ET, Halls ML, Samuel CS, et al. Relaxin family peptide receptors—from orphans to therapeutic targets. Drug Discovery Today 2008;15–16:640–51.
17. Hsu SY, Nakabayashi K, Nishi S, et al. Activation of orphan receptors by the hormone relaxin. Science (New York, NY) 2002;5555:671–4.
18. Nistri S, Bigazzi M, Bani D. Relaxin as a cardiovascular hormone: physiology, pathophysiology and therapeutic promises. Cardiovasc Hematol Agents Med Chem 2007;2:101–8.
19. Bathgate RAD, Halls ML, van der Westhuizen ET, Callander GE, Kocan M, Summers RJ. Relaxin family peptides and their receptors. Physiol Rev 2013;93:405–80.
20. Halls ML, Bathgate RA, Summers RJ. Relaxin family peptide receptors RXFP1 and RXFP2 modulate cAMP signaling by distinct mechanisms. Mol Pharmacol 2006;1:214–26.
21. Halls ML, van der Westhuizen ET, Wade JD, Evans BA, Bathgate RA, Summers RJ. Relaxin family peptide receptor (RXFP1) coupling to G(alpha)i3 involves the C-terminal Arg752 and localization within membrane Raft Microdomains. Mol Pharmacol 2009;2:415–28.
22. Dschietzig T, Alexiou K, Kinkel HT, Baumann G, Matschke K, Stangl K. The positive inotropic effect of relaxin-2 in human atrial myocardium is preserved in end-stage heart failure: role of G(i)-phosphoinositide-3 kinase signaling. J Cardiac Fail 2011;2:158–66.
23. Nguyen BT, Dessauer CW. Relaxin stimulates protein kinase C zeta translocation: requirement for cyclic adenosine 3′,5′-monophosphate production. Mol Endocrinol 2005;4:1012–23.
24. Unemori EN, Lewis M, Constant J, et al. Relaxin induces vascular endothelial growth factor expression and angiogenesis selectively at wound sites. Wound Repair Regen 2000;5:361–70.
25. Zhang Q, Liu SH, Erikson M, Lewis M, Unemori E. Relaxin activates the MAP kinase pathway in human endometrial stromal cells. J Cell Biochem 2002;3:536–44.
26. McGuane JT, Danielson LA, Debrah JE, Rubin JP, Novak J, Conrad KP. Angiogenic growth factors are new and essential players in the sustained relaxin vasodilatory pathway in rodents and humans. Hypertension 2011;6:1151–60.
27. Bani D, Failli P, Bello MG, et al. Relaxin activates the L-arginine-nitric oxide pathway in vascular smooth muscle cells in culture. Hypertension 1998;6:1240–7.
28. Chow BS, Chew EG, Zhao C, Bathgate RA, Hewitson TD, Samuel CS. Relaxin signals through a RXFP1-pERK-nNOS-NO-cGMP-dependent pathway to up-regulate matrix metalloproteinases: the additional involvement of iNOS. PLoS ONE 2012;8:e42714.
29. Samuel CS, Unemori EN, Mookerjee I, et al. Relaxin modulates cardiac fibroblast proliferation, differentiation, and collagen production and reverses cardiac fibrosis in vivo. Endocrinology 2004;9:4125–33.
30. Mookerjee I, Hewitson TD, Halls ML, et al. Relaxin inhibits renal myofibroblast differentiation via RXFP1, the nitric oxide pathway, and Smad2. FASEB J 2009;4:1219–29.
31. Schneider MP, Boesen EI, Pollock DM. Contrasting actions of endothelin ET(A) and ET(B) receptors in cardiovascular disease. Annu Rev Pharmacol Toxicol 2007;47:731–59.
32. Danielson LA, Kercher LJ, Conrad KP. Impact of gender and endothelin on renal vasodilation and hyperfiltration induced by relaxin in conscious rats. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol 2000;4:R1298–304.
33. Garvin J, Sanders K. Endothelin inhibits fluid and bicarbonate transport in part by reducing Na+/K+ ATPase activity in the rat proximal straight tubule. J Am Soc Nephrol 1991;5:976–82.
34. Parker JD, Thiessen JJ. Increased endothelin-1 production in patients with chronic heart failure. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol 2004;3:H1141–5.
35. Kiowski W, Sutsch G, Hunziker P, et al. Evidence for endothelin-1-mediated vasoconstriction in severe chronic heart failure. Lancet 1995;8977:732–6.
36. Vuurmans TJ, Boer P, Koomans HA. Effects of endothelin-1 and endothelin-1 receptor blockade on cardiac output, aortic pressure, and pulse wave velocity in humans. Hypertension 2003;6:1253–8.
37. Cossum PA, Dwyer KA, Roth M, et al. The disposition of a human relaxin (hRlx-2) in pregnant and nonpregnant rats. Pharm Res 1992;3:419–24.
38. Seibold JR, Clements PJ, Furst DE, et al. Safety and pharmacokinetics of recombinant human relaxin in systemic sclerosis. J Rheumatol 1998;2:302–7.
39. Hocher B, Ziebig R, Krause R, et al. Relaxin is an independent risk factor predicting death in male patients with end-stage kidney disease. Circulation 2004;19:2266–8.
40. Dschietzig T, Teichman S, Unemori E, et al. Intravenous recombinant human relaxin in compensated heart failure: a safety, tolerability, and pharmacodynamic trial. J Cardiac Fail 2009;3:182–90.
41. Teerlink JR, Metra M, Felker GM, et al. Relaxin for the treatment of patients with acute heart failure (Pre-RELAX-AHF): a multicentre, randomised, placebo-controlled, parallel-group, dose-finding phase IIb study. Lancet 2009;9673:1429–39.
42. Metra M, Cotter G, Davison BA, et al. Effect of serelaxin on cardiac, renal, and hepatic biomarkers in the Relaxin in Acute Heart Failure (RELAX-AHF) development program: correlation with outcomes. J Am Coll Cardiol 2013;2:196–206.
43. Publication Committee for the VI. Intravenous nesiritide vs nitroglycerin for treatment of decompensated congestive heart failure: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA 2002;12:1531–40.
44. O'Connor CM, Starling RC, Hernandez AF, et al. Effect of nesiritide in patients with acute decompensated heart failure. N Engl J Med 2011;1:32–43.
45. Topol EJ. The lost decade of nesiritide. N Engl J Med 2011;1:81–2.
46. McMurray JJ, Teerlink JR, Cotter G, et al. Effects of tezosentan on symptoms and clinical outcomes in patients with acute heart failure: the VERITAS randomized controlled trials. JAMA 2007;17:2009–19.
47. Gheorghiade M, Abraham WT, Albert NM, et al. Systolic blood pressure at admission, clinical characteristics, and outcomes in patients hospitalized with acute heart failure. JAMA 2006;18:2217–26.
48. Gheorghiade M, De Luca L, Fonarow GC, Filippatos G, Metra M, Francis GS. Pathophysiologic targets in the early phase of acute heart failure syndromes. Am J Cardiol 2005;6A:11G–7G.
49. Peacock WF, Emerman C, Costanzo MR, Diercks DB, Lopatin M, Fonarow GC. Early vasoactive drugs improve heart failure outcomes. Congest Heart Fail 2009;6:256–64.
50. Collins SP, Levy PD, Pang PS, Gheorghiade M. The role of the emergency department in acute heart failure clinical trials—enriching patient identification and enrollment. Am Heart J 2013;6:902–9.
51. Mitrovic V, Seferovic PM, Simeunovic D, et al. Haemodynamic and clinical effects of ularitide in decompensated heart failure. Eur Heart J 2006;23:2823–32.
52. Boerrigter G, Soergel DG, Violin JD, Lark MW, Burnett JC Jr. TRV120027, a novel beta-arrestin biased ligand at the angiotensin II type I receptor, unloads the heart and maintains renal function when added to furosemide in experimental heart failure. Circ Heart Fail 2012;5:627–34.
53. Document FaDAB. Cardiovascular and Renal Drugs Advisory Committee Meeting. Accessed October 4, 2014.
54. Heidenreich PA, Sahay A, Kapoor JR, Pham MX, Massie B. Divergent trends in survival and readmission following a hospitalization for heart failure in the Veterans Affairs health care system 2002 to 2006. J Am Coll Cardiol 2010;5:362–8.
55. Krumholz HM, Lin Z, Keenan PS, et al. Relationship between hospital readmission and mortality rates for patients hospitalized with acute myocardial infarction, heart failure, or pneumonia. JAMA 2013;6:587–93.
56. Kohsaka T, Min G, Lukas G, Trupin S, Campbell ET, Sherwood OD. Identification of specific relaxin-binding cells in the human female. Biol Reprod 1998;4:991–9.

57. Novak J, Parry LJ, Matthews JE, et al. Evidence for local relaxin ligand-receptor expression and function in arteries. FASEB J 2006;13:2352–62.
58. Ferreira VM, Gomes TS, Reis LA, et al. Receptor-induced dilatation in the systemic and intrarenal adaptation to pregnancy in rats. PLoS ONE 2009;3:e4845.
59. Bogzil AH, Ashton N. Relaxin-induced changes in renal function and RXFP1 receptor expression in the female rat. Ann N Y Acad Sci 2009;1160:313–6.
60. McGuane JT, Debrah JE, Sautina L, et al. Relaxin induces rapid dilation of rodent small renal and human subcutaneous arteries via PI3 kinase and nitric oxide. Endocrinology 2011;7:2786–96.
61. Dschietzig T, Bartsch C, Richter C, Laule M, Baumann G, Stangl K. Relaxin, a pregnancy hormone, is a functional endo-
thelin-1 antagonist: attenuation of endothelin-1-mediated vasoconstriction by stimulation of endothelin type-B receptor expression via ERK-1/2 and nuclear factor-kappaB. Circ Res 2003;1:32–40.
62. Danielson LA, Sherwood OD, Conrad KP. Relaxin is a potent renal vasodilator in conscious rats. J Clin Investig 1999;4:525–33.
63. Bogzil AH, Eardley R, Ashton N. Relaxin-induced changes in renal sodium excretion in the anesthetized male rat. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol 2005;1:R322–8.
64. Smith MC, Danielson LA, Conrad KP, Davison JM. Influence of recombinant human relaxin on renal hemodynamics in healthy volunteers. J Am Soc Nephrol 2006;11:3192–7.
