
RESEARCH ARTICLE

δ-Catenin interacts with LEF-1 and negatively regulates its transcriptional activity

Yongfeng He¹, Hyunkyung Ki¹, Hangun Kim²* and Kwonseop Kim¹**

1 College of Pharmacy and Research Institute for Drug Development, Chonnam National University, Gwangju 500-757, Korea  
2 College of Pharmacy and Research Institute of Life and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Sunchon National University, Sunchon 540-950, Korea  

---

### Abstract

δ-Catenin and β-catenin belong to different subfamilies of armadillo proteins but share some common binding partners, such as E-cadherin. This is the first study that demonstrated a novel common binding partner for δ-catenin and β-catenin, lymphoid enhancer factor-1 (LEF-1). We found that the N-terminus of δ-catenin (amino acids 85–325) bound to the middle region of LEF-1 unlike β-catenin. Overexpressed δ-catenin entered the nucleus and inhibited LEF-1-mediated transcriptional activity in Bosc23 and DLD-1 cell lines. The current study provided novel insights that will provide a better understanding of the effects of δ-catenin on Wnt/LEF-1-mediated transcriptional activity.

### Keywords: δ-catenin; LEF-1; β-catenin

---

### Introduction

δ-Catenin belongs to the p120-catenin (p120ctn) subfamily of armadillo proteins and shares similar structures with p120ctn (Peifer et al., 1994; Lu et al., 1999). Although armadillo proteins can be generally divided into three parts, N-terminus, C-terminus, and arm repeats in the middle, the structures and functions of each member of the different subfamilies differ from each other. δ-catenin has fewer arm repeats and longer N and C-termini when compared to the β-catenin subfamily of armadillo proteins, making their cellular roles very different. Interestingly, both δ-catenin and β-catenin bind to membrane localized E-cadherin (Lu, Paredes, 1999; Orsulic et al., 1999). In addition, both proteins have been reported to be negatively regulated by GSK3β (Rubinfeld et al., 1996; Oh et al., 2009). More recently, δ-catenin was found to enter the nucleus (Rodova et al., 2004; Gu et al., 2011; Koutras and Levesque, 2011), which is similar to β-catenin. However, unlike β-catenin, δ-catenin’s role in the nucleus remains largely unknown, and its binding partners need to be identified.

δ-Catenin was first identified through its interaction with presenilin-1 (Zhou et al., 1997) and was found to interact with many proteins such as E-cadherin (Lu, Paredes, 1999), densin-180 (Izawa et al., 2002), cortactin (Martinez et al., 2003), sphingosine kinase (Fujita et al., 2004), Cdk/p35 complex (Munoz et al., 2007), dynamin 2 (Koutras and Levesque, 2011), caspase-3 (Gu, Tonthat, 2011), Kaiso (Rodova, Kelly, 2004) and ZIFCAT (Gu, Tonthat, 2011). These different binding partners of δ-catenin indicate that δ-catenin may play different roles in different cellular sub-compartments. For example, δ-catenin binds to E-cadherin, which affects its stability and proteolytic processing at the cell-cell interface (Kim et al., 2012). δ-Catenin may modulate the enzymatic activity in the cytoplasm through its direct interaction with Presenilin-1/γ-secretase complexes or can be the enzymatic substrate of Cdk/p35 complex and caspase-3. Furthermore, it may affect the nuclear function of transcription factors, including Kaiso and ZIFCAT (Rodova, Kelly, 2004; Gu, Tonthat, 2011).

Lymphoid enhancer factor-1 (LEF-1) is a member of LEF/TCF transcription factor family and a well-known binding partner of β-catenin within the nucleus. It consists of three major parts: the N-terminus known as the binding domain of β-catenin, the C-terminus that contains a DNA-binding domain and the middle region known as a Context

---

*Corresponding author: e-mail: hangunkim@sunchon.ac.kr  
**Corresponding author: e-mail: koskim@chonnam.ac.kr  
Conflict of interest: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.  
Abbreviations: LEF-1, lymphoid enhancer factor-1; p120ctn, p120-catenin; N-terminus, amino-terminus; C-terminus, carboxyl-terminus

Y. He et al.

Dependent Regulatory domain. When the signal from Wnt/β-catenin pathway is off, LEF-1 forms a complex with both Groucho and DNAs to function as a transcriptional repressor (Levanon et al., 1998). However, when the signal is on, β-catenin translocates from the membrane into the nucleus and binds to the N-terminus of LEF-1, which activates LEF-1-mediated gene transcription (Eastman and Grossschedl, 1999).

In the present study, we hypothesized that δ-catenin binds to LEF-1 and affects LEF-1/β-catenin-dependent transcription. We found that: 1) δ-catenin binds to LEF-1 via its N-terminus and middle region; 2) Interaction of δ-catenin to LEF-1 fails to interrupt the binding of LEF-1 to β-catenin; 3) Overexpressed δ-catenin enters the nucleus and negatively regulates LEF-1-mediated transcriptional activity.

### Materials and methods

#### Plasmids

The constructs of full length (FL) δ-catenin, ΔN85-325, ΔC and ΔN&C in pEGFP-C1 have been previously described (Kim et al., 2002). LEF-1 plasmid (1-397 amino acids), which was provided to us by Dr. R. Grossschedl (Ludwig-Maximilians University, Munich, Germany), was tagged with HA. Dominant-negative LEF-1 (DNLEF-1), an N-terminally deleted LEF-1 (60 amino acids), was made by PCR amplification using the FL LEF-1 as a template. ΔC343, a C-terminally deleted LEF-1 (55 amino acids) was produced by PCR amplification and subcloning of the resulting products into pcDNA3.1/Zeo(−). The β-catenin plasmid tagged with GFP was previously described (Kim et al., 2000), and p120-catenin1A in a pEGFP-C1 construct was kindly provided by Panos Z. Anastasiadis.

#### Antibodies

Antibodies were purchased from commercial companies as follows: anti-δ-catenin (#611537, BD Bioscience), anti-GFP (#G1544), anti-β-catenin (#C2206), anti-α-tubulin (#T9026, Sigma), anti-lamin B (SC-6216, Santa Cruz) and anti-LEF-1 (#2230, Cell signaling technologies). The HA epitope was detected using media from 12CA5 hybridoma.

#### Cell culture and transfection

Bosc23 cells were cultured in DMEM supplemented with 10% FBS and 1% penicillin/streptomycin at 37°C with 5% CO₂. DLD-1 cells were grown in RPMI supplemented with 10% FBS and 1% penicillin/streptomycin at 37°C with 5% CO₂. Bosc23 cells were transfected using calcium phosphate, while DLD-1 cells were transfected using Lipofectamine Plus reagent (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) according to the manufacturer's instructions.

---

δ-catenin interacts with LEF-1

#### Immunoblotting and immunoprecipitation

Immunoblotting was performed as previously described (Kim et al., 2005). Immunoprecipitation was conducted with lysates from transfected cells that were incubated with primary antibodies for 16h at 4°C and pulled out with Protein G Sepharose (GE healthcare, Uppsala, Sweden) for 3h. The immunoprecipitated proteins were washed twice, denatured at 95°C for 2min in 15 μl of 2× sample buffer (0.1M Tris-HCl, pH 6.8, 0.2M DTT, 4% SDS, 20% glycerol, 0.2% bromophenol blue and 1.43M β-mercaptoethanol) and loaded on a SDS-gel followed by immunoblotting analysis.

#### Cell fractionation

The Subcellular Protein Fractionation Kit for Cultured Cells (78840, Thermo Scientific) was explored to separate cytosolic and nuclear protein extracts. Briefly, transfected cells were collected in PBS and centrifuged at 500×g for 5 min. The supernatant was discarded and the cell pellets were washed twice with PBS. The supernatant was carefully removed again so the cell pellets would be as dry as possible. Next, specific buffers in the kit were added to the tubes containing the cell pellets in a certain order according to the protocol.

Protein extracts from different compartments of cells were subjected to immunoblotting. Anti-lamin B antibody was used as a nuclear protein marker while anti-α-tubulin antibody was used as a cytosolic protein marker.

#### Reporter assay

Briefly, Bosc23 and DLD-1 cells were seeded in a 24 well plate and co-transfected with different combinations of plasmids as follows: TOPFlash+LEF-1, TOPFlash+LEF-1+δ-catenin, TOPFlash+β-catenin, TOPFlash+β-catenin+LEF-1, TOPFlash+LEF-1+p120ctn, TOPFlash+β-catenin+p120ctn, TOPFlash+LEF-1+β-catenin+p120ctn, CyclinD1-luc+LEF-1, CyclinD1-luc+LEF-1+δ-catenin, CyclinD1-luc+LEF-1+β-catenin and CyclinD1-luc+LEF-1+β-catenin+δ-catenin. The cells were harvested at 48 h post-transfection and luciferase activities were measured with a Dual-luciferase Reporter Assay System (Promega). The luciferase values were normalized to Renilla luciferase. Each experiment was performed in triplicate.

---

#### Results

##### δ-Catenin bound to LEF-1 in Bosc23 cells

To elucidate the relationship between LEF-1 and δ-catenin, exogenous LEF-1-HA and GFP-δ-catenin were co-transfected in Bosc23 cells. GFP-β-catenin was used as a positive
control, whereas GFP was used as a negative control. The lysates from these cells were explored by immunoprecipitation. δ-Catenin was observed to form an immuno-complex after purification by anti-HA antibody, whereas GFP was not detected, indicating that δ-catenin interacts with LEF-1 (Figure 1A). Interestingly, the density of β-catenin was higher than that of δ-catenin in the immune-complex (Figure 1A right panel), although protein expression levels of β-catenin were less than that of δ-catenin in whole cell lysates (Figure 1A left panel). This observation suggested that the affinity of LEF-1 to β-catenin was much greater than that to δ-catenin in Bosc23 cells. To confirm the interaction between δ-catenin and LEF-1, reverse immunoprecipitation was performed. LEF-1 was detected in the immune complex purified by anti-δ-catenin antibody (Figure 1B). Taken together, the results indicated that LEF-1 interacted with δ-catenin in Bosc23 cells.

N-terminal deleted δ-catenin abolished its interaction to LEF-1 whereas N or C-terminal deletions of LEF-1 did not affect its binding to δ-catenin

To narrow down the LEF-1 binding region of δ-catenin, GFP-δ-catenin and its deletion mutants (Figure 2A) were co-transfected with LEF-1-HA in Bosc23 cells. Lysates from these cells were subjected to immunoprecipitation with anti-HA antibody. Both FL δ-catenin and its C-terminal deletion mutant were detected in the immune complex but not the N-terminal deletion mutant (Figure 2B), which indicated that amino acids 85–325 of δ-catenin were essential for its ability to bind to LEF-1. To further narrow down the binding

region of LEF-1 to δ-catenin, LEF-1 and its deletion mutants were co-transfected with either δ-catenin or its mutants in Bosc23 cells (Figure 2C–E). Interestingly, neither the C-terminus nor N-terminal deletion mutants of LEF-1 had a decreased binding affinity to δ-catenin, which suggested that the middle part of LEF-1 was responsible for its interaction to δ-catenin.

Interaction of δ-catenin to LEF-1 failed to affect affinity of LEF-1 to β-catenin

To determine if LEF-1 is a common binding partner for δ-catenin and p120ctn, the interaction between p120ctn and LEF-1 was tested. As expected, p120ctn was able to bind to both FL LEF-1 and DNLEF-1 in Bosc23 cells (Figure 3A). Additionally, its affinity to LEF-1 was much lower than that of β-catenin. Although the binding region of LEF-1 to δ-catenin and β-catenin are different, it is possible that binding of δ-catenin to LEF-1 changes its structure, which, in turn, changes its affinity to β-catenin. To rule out this possibility, Bosc23 cells were co-transfected with LEF-1-HA and β-catenin-GFP, either in the presence of GFP or GFP-δ-catenin. The lysates were explored by immunoprecipitation. As shown in Figure 3B and C, the binding of β-catenin to LEF-1 was not decreased by the dose-dependent overexpression of δ-catenin, indicating that δ-catenin did not affect interaction between β-catenin and LEF-1. In contrast, the binding of δ-catenin to LEF-1 was decreased by the β-catenin overexpression (Figure 3C, lane 1 and lane 2), indicating that β-catenin could interrupt the interaction of δ-catenin and LEF-1. Interestingly, β-catenin protein

A
B
Bosc 23
Bosc 23
Input
IP: HA
Input
IP: δ-catenin
GFP
+
-
-
+
-
-
β-catenin-GFP
-
+
-
-
+
-
δ-catenin-GFP
-
-
+
-
-
+
LEF-1-HA
+
+
+
+
+
+
δ-catenin-
β-catenin-
GFP
HA
δ-catenin-GFP
+
+
+
+
GFP
+
-
+
-
LEF-1-HA
-
+
-
+
HA
δ-catenin
GFP
-150KD
-25KD

Figure 1 Interaction between δ-catenin and LEF-1 was observed in Bosc23 cells. (A) Immunoprecipitation was performed with lysates from cells overexpressing various combinations of plasmids, as indicated. Proteins in the lysates were purified by anti-HA antibody and explored by immunoblotting. The left panels were immunoblots with anti-GFP and anti-HA antibodies on whole cell lysates; the right panel was an immunoblot with anti-GFP antibody on the immune complex. (B) Immunoprecipitation was performed on the lysates from cells overexpressing different combination of plasmids, as indicated. Proteins in the lysates were purified by anti-δ-catenin antibody and subjected to immunoblotting with anti-HA, anti-δ-catenin and anti-GFP antibodies.
Y. He et al.

δ-catenin interacts with LEF-1

A Constructs of δ-catenin-GFP
C Constructs of LEF-1

| FL | 1 | 1247 |
| --- | --- | --- |
| ΔN85-325 | 1 84 | 326 | 1247 |
| ΔC207 | 1 | 1040 |
| ΔN&C | 326 | 1040 |

| LEF-1 (-HA) | A | B | C |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| 1 | 60 | 99 | 217 | 287 | 394 397 |
| DN-LEF-1 (-HA) | B | C |
| 60 | 99 | 217 | 287 | 394 397 |
| ΔC343 | A | B | E |
| 1 | 60 | 99 | 217 | 287 | 342 |

B Input
D Input

| LEF-1-HA | β-catenin-G FL | ΔN | ΔC | ΔN&C |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| GFP |  |  |  |  |
| HA |  |  |  |  |
| IP: HA |  |  |  |  |
| GFP |  |  |  |  |

| DN-LEF-1-HA | β-catenin-G FL | ΔN | ΔC | ΔN&C |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| GFP |  |  |  |  |
| HA |  |  |  |  |
| IP: HA |  |  |  |  |
| GFP |  |  |  |  |

| δ-catenin-GFP | LEF-1 | ΔC343 |
| --- | --- | --- |
| Input |  |  |
| GFP |  |  |
| LEF-1 |  |  |
| IP: δ-catenin |  |  |
| LEF-1 |  |  |

Figure 2 N-terminus of δ-catenin and the middle region of LEF-1 were required to interact with each other. (A) Schematic diagram of different constructs of GFP-δ-catenin WT and its deletion mutants. (B) N-terminus of δ-catenin is essential for its interaction with LEF-1. Immunoprecipitation was performed with lysates from Bosc23 cells transfected with the different combinations of plasmids, as indicated. Proteins in the lysates were purified with anti-HA antibody and further subjected to immunoblotting with anti-GFP antibody. The upper panels were immunoblots with anti-GFP and anti-HA antibodies on whole cell lysates; the bottom panel was an immunoblot with anti-GFP antibody on the immune complex. (C) The representative illustration of different LEF-1 constructs. LEF-1 FL and N-terminal deletion of LEF-1 (DNLEF-1: plasmid in which beta-catenin binding domain was deleted) were tagged with HA, whereas the C-terminal deletion of LEF-1 (d-C343: plasmid in which DNA binding domain was disrupted) was not tagged. (D and E) N-terminus and C-terminus of LEF-1 are essential for its interaction to δ-catenin. Immunoprecipitation was performed with lysates from Bosc 23 cells transfected with the different combinations of plasmids, as indicated. Proteins in the lysates were purified with either anti-HA or anti-GFP antibody and further subjected to immunoblotting with anti-GFP and anti-LEF-1 antibodies, respectively.

expression was increased by the overexpression of δ-catenin in a dosage-dependent manner, suggesting that δ-catenin had a positive effect on β-catenin levels. However, β-catenin expression was slightly decreased in the presence of a high dose of δ-catenin (Figure 3C). This may be due to toxicity from transfecting high amounts of DNA. To verify if δ-catenin increased β-catenin levels, we examined endogenous β-catenin expression. As expected, endogenous levels of β-catenin were increased by overexpression of δ-catenin (data not shown).

Interestingly, we observed nuclear distribution of δ-catenin from both cell lines. To elucidate the potential role of nuclear δ-catenin on LEF-1, reporter assays were performed in the two cell lines. As shown in Figure 4B and D, δ-catenin overexpression decreased both TOPFlash and CyclinD1 promoter luciferase activities in a dose-dependent manner. p120ctn overexpression induced the same pattern on TOPFlash activity as well (Figure 4C). These results suggest that nuclear distributed δ-catenin may function as a transcriptional repressor.

δ-Catenin inhibited LEF-1-mediated transcriptional activity in Bosc23 and DLD-1 cells

To determine if δ-catenin affected LEF-1's distribution pattern, fractionation experiments were performed on both transfected Bosc 23 and DLD-1 cells. However, δ-catenin did not significantly affect the distribution of LEF-1.

Discussion

In the present study, the major findings were: 1) δ-catenin and p120ctn interact with LEF-1; 2) the N-terminus of δ-catenin and the middle region of LEF-1 were interact when they bind to each other; 3) overexpression of δ-catenin failed to interrupt the interaction between LEF-1 and β-catenin; 4)

Cell Biol Int 39 (2015) 954–961 © 2015 International Federation for Cell Biology

δ-catenin interacts with LEF-1

Y. He et al.

A
Bosc cells
B
LEF-1-HA
C
LEF-1-HA
β-catenin-G
+ + - - -
δ-catenin-G
- + + -
β-catenin-G
+ - +
p120ctn-G
- + + -
β-catenin-G
+ +
δ-catenin-G
- - + +
GFP
+ + -
LEF-1-HA
+ - + -
GFP
+
DNLEF-1-HA
- + - +
GFP
-
GFP
+
GFP
-
HA
-
HA
-
HA
-
IP: HA
GFP
-
δ-catenin
p120ctn
β-catenin
-δ-catenin
-β-catenin
HA
-LEF-1
-DNLEF-1
Less exposure
GFP
-
HA
-
IP: HA
β-catenin
-
HA
-
GFP
-
-δ-catenin
-β-catenin

Figure 3 The binding region of both δ-catenin and p120ctn on LEF-1 are different from β-catenin. (A) The N-terminus of LEF-1 was not required for its binding to p120ctn. Immunoprecipitation was performed with lysates from Bosc23 cells transfected with the different combinations of plasmids, as indicated. Proteins in the lysates were purified with anti-HA antibody and further subjected to immunoblotting with anti-GFP and anti-HA antibodies. (B,C) δ-Catenin increased β-catenin levels in a dose-dependent manner but failed to affect its binding to LEF-1. Immunoprecipitation was performed with lysates from Bosc23 cells transfected with the different combinations of plasmids, as indicated. Proteins in the lysates were purified with anti-HA antibody and further subjected to immunoblotting with anti-β-catenin, anti-GFP and anti-HA antibodies.

δ-catenin localized to the nucleus and inhibited LEF-1-mediated transcription.

Although δ-catenin is different from β-catenin in the aspect of both structures and functions, they do share some common binding partners, such as E-cadherin (Lu, Paredes, 1999; Orsulic, Huber, 1999). In this study, we identified a new common binding partner, LEF-1. However, there are some interesting observations in this study that need to be discussed. Firstly, it is not surprising to see that δ-catenin and β-catenin bind to different regions of LEF-1, since previous studies have reported that they each bind to a different region of E-cadherin through their arm repeats (Lu, Paredes, 1999; Orsulic, Huber, 1999). Arm repeats of p120ctn have been demonstrated to be an important region for its interactions to various protein binding partners (Daniel and Reynolds, 1999; Ishiyama et al., 2010). But in this study, it was the N-terminal region of δ-catenin (85–325 amino acids) was found to be essential for binding to LEF-1. This observation provides a better understanding of the underlying mechanism by which δ-catenin interacts with other proteins.

Secondly, we found that δ-catenin inhibited TOPFlash luciferase activities to some extent. However, the underlying mechanism is not clear. There are four possibilities: 1) δ-catenin directly binds to LEF-1 in the nucleus to inhibit its transcriptional activity; 2) δ-catenin bridges LEF-1 to other repressors to form a complex; 3) Binding to δ-catenin prevents LEF-1 from binding to β-catenin; 4) δ-catenin binds to LEF-1 in the cytosol, preventing LEF-1 nuclear distribution. The third possibility has been ruled out by our observation that the LEF-1 binding region of δ-catenin was different from that of β-catenin, and overexpression of

δ-catenin failed to affect the interaction between β-catenin and LEF-1. The fourth possibility can be ruled out as well, because we observed that LEF-1 distribution was not significantly affected by δ-catenin. We detected the nuclear distribution of δ-catenin in Bosc23 and DLD-1 cell lines, which is consistent with what has been previously reported in SH SY5Y, 293T and C2C12 cells (Rodova, Kelly, 2004; Gu, Tonthat, 2011; Koutras and Levesque, 2011). Moreover, it has been demonstrated that δ-catenin interacts with transcription factors Kaiso and ZIFCAT (Rodova, Kelly, 2004; Gu et al., 2011). Therefore, the first and second possibilities are most likely. However, the exact mechanisms by which δ-catenin mediates these transcriptional activities remain unknown. Future studies should be conducted to distinguish the first and second possibilities and demonstrate the clear mechanism for δ-catenin-induced inhibition of LEF-1's transcriptional activities.

Last but not least, δ-catenin has been reported to enhance the nuclear distribution of β-catenin in prostate cancer cell lines (Kim et al., 2012; Nopparat et al., 2014), which is not consistent with the current data. Two possibilities need to be considered. First, the pattern of δ-catenin distribution might be different in various cell lines. Stable overexpression of δ-catenin was mainly localized in the membrane and cytosol in Rv-1 prostate cancer cell lines, whereas transient overexpression of δ-catenin led to a high nuclear distribution in DLD-1 cells. Therefore, it is highly likely that δ-catenin induced β-catenin nuclear distribution by promoting E-cadherin processing, which, in turn, activated LEF-1 in Rv-1 cells. While δ-catenin's direct inhibitory effect on LEF-1 was minor in Rv-1 cells stably transfected with δ-catenin, it was significant in DLD-1 cells that were

Y. He et al.
δ-catenin interacts with LEF-1

A

| Bosc 23 cells | DLD-1 cells |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Total | Cytosol | Nucleus | Total | Cytosol | Nucleus |
| LEF-1-HA | LEF-1-HA | LEF-1-HA | LEF-1-HA | LEF-1-HA | LEF-1-HA |
| δ-catenin-GFP | - | + | - | + | - | + | - | + | - | + | - | + |
| δ-catenin | + | - | + | - | + | - | + | - | + | - | + | - |
| HA(LEF-1) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| Lamin B |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| α-tubulin |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |

B

**TOP FLASH activity (HEK293)**  
**TOP FLASH activity (DLD-1)**  

C

**TOPFLASH activity**

D

**CyclinD1 (HEK293)**  

Figure 4 δ-Catenin overexpression decreased LEF-1 mediated transcriptional activity. (A) Nuclear distribution of δ-catenin was observed in two cell lines. Fractionation experiments were performed in both Bosc 23 and DLD-1 cells overexpressing either GFP+LEF-1-HA or GFP-δ-catenin+LEF-1-HA plasmids. Nuclear proteins were normalized to lamin B whereas cytosolic proteins were normalized to α-tubulin. (B, C) TOPFlash luciferase reporter construct was co-transfected with different combination of plasmids into both Bosc 23 and DLD-1 cells, as indicated. Luciferase activities were measured at 48h posttransfection. (D) δ-Catenin inhibited LEF-1 role in Cyclin D1 promoter activity. Cyclin D1 promoter luciferase construct was co-transfected with the plasmids, as indicated. Luciferase activities were assayed at 48h post-transfection.

Cell Biol Int 39 (2015) 954–961 © 2015 International Federation for Cell Biology
$\delta$-catenin interacts with LEF-1

transiently transfected with $\delta$-catenin. Second, the protein could possess activation and inhibitory properties under different circumstances. For example, plakoglobin ($\gamma$-catenin) interacted with LEF-1 as efficiently as $\beta$-catenin in 293T cells (Zhurinsky et al., 2000a) and activated TCF/LEF-dependent transcription without $\beta$-catenin in NCI-H28 cells (Maeda et al., 2004). Plakoglobin has also been reported to have much weaker ability to form a ternary complex with LEF-1 and DNA, compared to $\beta$-catenin (Zhurinsky, Shtutman, 2000a). To explain these contradictory observations, the authors proposed the possibility that proteins such as CBP bind to a certain domain of plakoglobin that may promote the binding of LEF-1-catenin complex to DNA (Zhurinsky et al., 2000b). Likewise, it is possible that involvement of other proteins may determine $\delta$-catenin-mediated LEF-1 transcriptional activity in a context-dependent manner. In our study, $\beta$-catenin interrupted the interaction between $\delta$-catenin and LEF-1, while $\delta$-catenin failed to do so for the $\beta$-catenin and LEF-1 interaction. Therefore, one might suppose that $\delta$-catenin affect $\beta$-catenin/LEF-1 transcription only when $\beta$-catenin is absent. However, as $\delta$-catenin decreased CyclinD1 promoter activity in the $\beta$-catenin and LEF-1 overexpressed condition and also decreased TOPflash activity in DLD1 cells harboring increased wild type $\beta$-catenin due to the loss of APC, the presence of $\beta$-catenin could not be the sole determining factor for the activity.

It should be noted that p120ctn was also found to interact with LEF-1 and inhibit LEF-1-mediated transcription. Regardless of their importance, the interaction between p120ctn and LEF-1 has not been described before except the paper by Daniel and Reynolds where they state in the abstract that p120ctn does not interact with LEF-1 (Daniel and Reynolds, 1999). As binding affinity of p120ctn to LEF-1 is much lower than that of $\beta$-catenin and $\delta$-catenin, this interaction might be passed over. Further studies are expected to be conducted to reconcile this interaction with the physiological and/or pathological roles of p120ctn.

Some biological processes may be affected by the interaction between $\delta$-catenin and LEF-1. We have shown in our previous research that $\delta$-catenin induced the nuclear distribution of $\beta$-catenin by promoting E-cadherin processing when it localizes at the cell-cell interface (Kim et al., 2012). In the cytoplasm, the pools of $\delta$-catenin can be competitive targets of GSK-3$\beta$, which promotes the nuclear translocation of $\beta$-catenin (Oh, Kim, 2009). Therefore, the pools of $\delta$-catenin either at the cell-cell interface or in the cytoplasm seem to activate Wnt/LEF-1 and $\beta$-catenin signaling pathways indirectly through bringing more $\beta$-catenin in the nucleus. However, when $\delta$-catenin itself is accumulated in the nucleus with certain circumstances, it can inactivate Wnt/LEF-1 and $\beta$-catenin signaling pathways through its direct interaction with LEF-1. Wnt/LEF-1 and

$\beta$-catenin signaling pathways play many different biological roles during differentiation and tumorigenesis, but future studies will be required to clarify the biological roles of the interaction between $\delta$-catenin and LEF-1.

In summary, the current study provided novel insights into better understanding the effects of p120ctn subfamily proteins on LEF-1-mediated transcriptional activity.

### Acknowledgements and funding

This study was supported by a grant of the Korean Health Technology R&D Project, Ministry of Health & Welfare, Republic of Korea (A120212) and by Basic Science Research Program through the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) funded by the Ministry of Education, Science and Technology (NRF-2013R1A1A4A01007661, K.K; NRF-2013R1A1A2004677, H.K), Republic of Korea.

### References

Daniel JM, Reynolds AB (1999) The catenin p120(ctn) interacts with Kaiso, a novel BTB/POZ domain zinc finger transcription factor. Mol Cell Biol 19:3614–23.

Eastman Q, Grosschedl R (1999) Regulation of LEF-1/TCF transcription factors by Wnt and other signals. Curr Opin Cell Biol 11:233–40.

Fujita T, Okada T, Hayashi S, Jahangeer S, Miwa N, Nakamura S (2004) Delta-catenin/NPRAP (neural plakophilin-related armadillo repeat protein) interacts with and activates sphingosine kinase 1. Biochem J 382:717–23.

Gu D, Tonthat NK, Lee M, Ji H, Bhat KP, Hollingsworth F, Aldape KD, Schumacher MA, Zwaka TP, McCrea PD (2011) Caspase-3 cleavage links delta-catenin to the novel nuclear protein ZIFCAT. J Biol Chem 286:23178–88.

Ishiyama N, Lee SH, Liu S, Li GY, Smith MJ, Reichardt LF, Ikura M (2010) Dynamic and static interactions between p120 catenin and E-cadherin regulate the stability of cell-cell adhesion. Cell 141:117–28.

Izawa I, Nishizawa M, Ohtakara K, Inagaki M (2002) Densin-180 interacts with delta-catenin/neural plakophilin-related armadillo repeat protein at synapses. J Biol Chem 277:5345–50.

Kim H, He Y, Yang I, Zeng Y, Kim Y, Seo YW, Murnane MJ, Jung C, Lee JH, Min JJ (2012) delta-Catenin promotes E-cadherin processing and activates beta-catenin-mediated signaling: implications on human prostate cancer progression. Biochimica et biophysica acta 1822:509–21.

Kim H, Ki H, Park HS, Kim K (2005) Presenilin-1 D257A and D385A mutants fail to cleave Notch in their endoproteolyzed forms, but only presenilin-1 D385A mutant can restore its gamma-secretase activity with the compensatory overexpression of normal C-terminal fragment. J Biol Chem 280:22462–72.

Kim K, Pang KM, Evans M, Hay ED (2000) Overexpression of beta-catenin induces apoptosis independent of its transactivation function with LEF-1 or the involvement of major Gl cell cycle regulators. Mol Biol Cell 11:3509–23.
Kim K, Sirota A, Chen Yh, YH, Jones SB, Dudek R, Lanford GW, Thakore C, Lu Q (2002) Dendrite-like process formation and cytoskeletal remodeling regulated by delta-catenin expression. Exp Cell Res 275:171–84.

Koutras C, Levesque G (2011) Identification of novel NPRAP/ delta-catenin-interacting proteins and the direct association of NPRAP with dynamin 2. PloS ONE 6:e25379.

Levanon D, Goldstein RE, Bernstein Y, Tang H, Goldenberg D, Stifani S, Paroush Z, Groner Y (1998) Transcriptional repression by AML1 and LEF-1 is mediated by the TLE/ Groucho corepressors. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 95:11590–5.

Lu Q, Paredes M, Medina M, Zhou J, Cavallo R, Peifer M, Orecchio L, Kosik KS (1999) Delta-catenin, an adhesive junction-associated protein which promotes cell scattering. J Cell Biol 144:519–32.

Maeda O, Usami N, Kondo M, Takahashi M, Goto H, Shimokata K, Kusugami K, Sekido Y (2004) Plakoglobin (gamma-catenin) has TCF/LEF family-dependent transcriptional activity in beta-catenin-deficient cell line. Oncogene 23:964–72.

Martinez MC, Ochiishi T, Majewski M, Kosik KS (2003) Dual regulation of neuronal morphogenesis by a delta-catenin-cortactin complex and Rho. J Cell Biol 162:99–111.

Munoz JP, Huichalaf CH, Orellana D, Maccioni RB (2007) Cdk5 modulates beta- and delta-catenin/Pin1 interactions in neural cells. J Cell Biochem 100:738–49.

Nopparat J, Zhang J, Lu JP, Chen YH, Zheng D, Neufer PD, Fan JM, Hong H, Boykin C, Lu Q (2014) Delta-Catenin, a Wnt/beta-catenin modulator, reveals inducible mutagenesis promoting cancer cell survival adaptation and metabolic reprogramming. Oncogene 34:1542–52.

Oh M, Kim H, Yang I, Park JH, Cong WT, Baek MC, Bareiss S, Ki H, Lu Q, No J (2009) GSK-3 phosphorylates delta-catenin and negatively regulates its stability via ubiquitination/proteosome-mediated proteolysis. J Biol Chem 284:28579–89.

Orsulic S, Huber O, Aberle H, Arnold S, Kemler R (1999) E-cadherin binding prevents beta-catenin nuclear localization and beta-catenin/LEF-1-mediated transactivation. J Cell Sci 112(Pt 8):1237–45.

Peifer M, Berg S, Reynolds AB (1994) A repeating amino acid motif shared by proteins with diverse cellular roles. Cell 76:789–91.

Rodova M, Kelly KF, VanSaun M, Daniel JM, Werle MJ (2004) Regulation of the rapsyn promoter by kaiso and delta-catenin. Mol Cell Biol 24:7188–96.

Rubinfeld B, Albert I, Porfiri E, Fiol C, Munemitsu S, Polakis P (1996) Binding of GSK3beta to the APC-beta-catenin complex and regulation of complex assembly. Science 272:1023–6.

Zhou J, Liyanage U, Medina M, Ho C, Simmons AD, Lovett M, Kosik KS (1997) Presenilin 1 interaction in the brain with a novel member of the Armadillo family. Neuroreport 8:1489–94.

Zhurinsky J, Shtutman M, Ben-Ze'ev A (2000a) Differential mechanisms of LEF/TCF family-dependent transcriptional activation by beta-catenin and plakoglobin. Mol Cell Biol 20:4238–52.

Zhurinsky J, Shtutman M, Ben-Ze'ev A (2000b) Plakoglobin and beta-catenin: Protein interactions, regulation and biological roles. J Cell Sci 113(Pt 18):3127–39.

Received 22 August 2014; accepted 14 March 2015. Final version published online 16 April 2015.
