
Scienceexpress

Research Article

The structure of the dynactin complex and its interaction with dynein

Linas Urnavicius,$^{1*}$ Kai Zhang,$^{1*}$ Aristides G. Diamant,$^{1*}$ Carina Motz,$^{1}$ Max A. Schlager,$^{1}$ Minmin Yu,$^{1}$ Nisha A. Patel,$^{2}$ Carol V. Robinson,$^{2}$ Andrew P. Carter$^{1†}$

$^{1}$Medical Research Council Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Division of Structural Studies, Francis Crick Avenue, Cambridge, CB2 0QH, UK. $^{2}$Department of Chemistry, Physical and Theoretical Chemistry Laboratory, University of Oxford, Oxford OX1 3QZ, UK.

*These authors contributed equally to this work.

†Corresponding author. E-mail: cartera@mrc-lmb.cam.ac.uk

Dynactin is an essential cofactor for the microtubule motor cytoplasmic dynein-1. We report the structure of the 23 subunit dynactin complex by cryo-electron microscopy to 4.0 Å. Our reconstruction reveals how dynactin is built around a filament containing eight copies of the actin related protein Arp1 and one of β-actin. Capped at each end by distinct protein complexes, the length of the filament is defined by elongated peptides that emerge from the α-helical shoulder domain. A further 8.2 Å structure of the complex between dynein, dynactin and the motility inducing cargo adaptor Bicaudal-D2 shows how the translational symmetry of the dynein tail matches that of the dynactin filament. The Bicaudal-D2 coiled coil runs between dynein and dynactin to stabilize the mutually dependent interactions between all three components.

Dynactin works with the cytoplasmic dynein-1 motor (dynein) to transport cargos along the microtubule cytoskeleton (1–3). They maintain the cell’s spatial organization, return components from the cell’s periphery and assist with cellular division (4). Mutations in either complex cause neurodegeneration (5) and both can be co-opted by viruses that travel to the nucleus (6). Dynein and dynactin are similar in size and complexity. Dynein contains two copies of 6 different proteins and has a mass of 1.4 MDa. Dynactin, at about 1.0 MDa, contains more than 20 subunits, corresponding to 12 different proteins. Dynactin is built around a filament of actin related protein 1 (Arp1). In analogy to actin, the filament has a barbed and a pointed end; each capped by a different protein complex. On top sits the shoulder domain (7) from which emerges a long projection, corresponding to dynactin's largest subunit p150Glued (DCTN1) (8).

Despite the presence of a dynein binding site in p150Glued (9–II), purified dynein and dynactin only form a stable complex in the presence of the cargo adaptor Bicaudal D2 (BICD2) (12–14), a coiled coil protein associated with transport of vesicles, mRNAs and nuclei (15). This interaction activates dynein and converts it into a highly processive motor (13, 14).

Current models for dynactin’s architecture (7, 16, 17) and its interaction with dynein (13, 14) come from low resolution negative stain and platinum shadowing electron microscopy. A number of questions remain. What makes the filament in dynactin short and defined, when purified Arp1 filaments vary in length (18)? How does dynein bind to dynactin and why does the interaction require BICD2 (12–14)? Why does dynactin, the co-factor for a microtubule motor, contain an actin-related filament? To address these questions we took advantage of recent advances in cryo-electron microscopy (cryo-EM) (19) to improve our structural understanding of dynactin.

Dynactin structure determination

Dynactin is a challenging target for cryo-EM (17). Its extreme preferred orientation on EM grids makes it hard to obtain the broad distribution of views required for a 3D reconstruction. Furthermore dynactin’s thin elongated shape limits its contrast, making it difficult to assign views accurately. We overcame these hurdles (20) to determine cryo-EM maps of native dynactin purified from pig brain (fig. S1); initially at 6.3 Å (table S1: Dynactin-1) and subsequently at 3.9 Å overall and 3.5 Å in the dynactin filament (table S1: Dynactin-2,3,4; Fig. 1, A and B; fig. S2; and movies S1 and S2). We used both maps to build a model of dynactin (Fig. 1C and table S2). The filament and pointed end capping protein Arp11 were built de novo and refined (table S3). Homology models of the barbed end capping protein CapZαβ (2I), and the pointed end proteins p25 (DCTN5) and p27 (DCTN6) (22) were fitted into density. The pointed end protein p62 and the shoulder, which contains p150Glued (DCTN1), p50 (dynamitin or DCTN2) and p24 (DCTN3), were built as backbone models (Fig. 1D).

The dynactin filament contains eight Arp-1 subunits and one β-actin

The dynactin filament is nine subunits long and consists of two protofilaments that wrap around each other (Fig. 1, A and C): five subunits (A, C, E, G, I) in the top protofilament and four (B, D, F, H) in the bottom. The presence of β-actin in the filament is controversial (7, 23). Our cryo-EM map was of sufficient quality (fig. S3A) to show that subunit-H is β-actin (β-actin-H), while the others are Arp1 (Arp1-A to Arp1-I). We confirmed the presence of Arp1 and β-actin at an 8:1 ratio by mass spectrometry-based label-free quantitative proteomic analysis (table S4).

Capping the dynactin filament

The dynactin filament is similar to that of actin (24), consistent with the high (53%) sequence identity between β-actin and Arp1 (fig.S3B). Both consist of four subdomains surrounding a nucleotide binding site (fig.S4). A key contact within the filament is the subdomain-2 loop binding the groove between subdomains 1 and 3 on the neighboring subunit. Blocking this interaction provides a mechanism to cap both actin and dynactin filaments.

At the barbed end of dynactin a CapZαβ heterodimer binds across both protofilaments. The C-terminal helices (tentacles) of CapZα and CapZβ fit into the subdomain 1 and 3 groove on Arp1-B and Arp1-A (Fig. 2A, fig. S5, and movie S3) and prevent further subunit binding. CapZαβ interacts with dynactin in the same way as proposed for the actin filament (25). However, there is a loop (called the plug) (24) that contains four negatively charged residues in Arp1 but only one in actin (Fig. 2B). This loop is close to a cluster of four positively charged residues on CapZα suggesting CapZαβ binds Arp1 with a higher affinity than actin. This explains why a pool of CapZαβ remains bound to dynactin but not to actin, when most CapZαβ is depleted by siRNA (26). The tight binding of CapZαβ reflects its role in stabilizing dynactin's structure.

At the pointed end the bottom protofilament ends in β-actin whereas the top ends in Arp1 (Fig. 1A). This creates a distinctive binding site for Arp11, the most evolutionarily distant of all the actin related proteins (27). Our structural data reveal how a single Arp11 subunit can cap both protofilaments. The bottom protofilament directly binds Arp11 which prevents further subunit addition because its subdomain-2 loop is too short (27) (Fig. 2C). Subunit addition to the Arp1-I subunit on the top protofilament is blocked sterically by subdomain-4 of Arp11 (asterisk in Fig. 2D) and also because the Arp1-I subdomain-2 loop is sequestered by Arp11 (Fig. 2D).

Arp11 binds p25, p27 and p62 to form the pointed end complex (Fig. 2E). The p25 and p27 subunits consist of a triangular β-sheet structure (22) followed by an α-helix (fig. S6). They pack side to edge (fig. S6A) and bind end-on to Arp11 (Fig. 2F). The interaction is reinforced by p62 which wraps around the Arp11:p25-p27 contact site (Fig. 2E). Only Arp11 directly caps the pointed end, suggesting that the other components have a different role such as cargo attachment (28). Indeed, some fungal species contain Arp11 but lack p25, p27 and p62 (29).

subset of particles (Fig. 3B, table S1, and fig. S7) in which it is visible because it docks against the side of dynactin (fig. S8, A and B). The projection is over 50 nm long and contains three coiled coils, which we assigned to those in p150Glued based on their length (fig. S8C). An ~18 nm coiled coil (CC2) emerges from the shoulder and joins a globular domain consisting of a dimer (fig. S8D) of two ~40 kDa subunits (inter coiled domain: ICD). Another ~24 nm coiled coil (CC1B) extends from the ICD before doubling back for ~18 nm (CC1A). Our model predicts that the Cap-Gly domain at the N terminus of CC1A is located close to the ICD. This is not visible in our structure owing to its flexibility and because the majority of our dynactin contains the shorter isoform of p150Glued (p135) which lacks a Cap-Gly domain (Fig. 3A). Our 50 nm projection is similar in appearance to structures observed in the images of dynactin viewed by rotary shadowing (7). Furthermore, the interaction made by CC1A folding back onto CC1B agrees with recent biochemical data (30).

The shoulder’s symmetry is broken by binding the dynactin filament

Previous models suggest the shoulder consists mainly of p150Glued (8). Our finding that most of p150Glued is in the projection implies the shoulder contains predominantly p24 and p50. We confirmed dynactin contains four copies of p50 and 2 copies of p24 (27) because the mass calculated from this stoichiometry matches (table S4) that measured by mass spectrometry (1,066,889 Da - Fig. 3C). We verified this composition by tandem MS (Fig. 3D) and measuring the resulting sub-complexes (table S5).

The shoulder’s flexibility results in a lower resolution cryo-EM map and makes it challenging to assign individual α-helices to specific proteins. Instead the structures reveal an intrinsic two fold symmetry of the shoulder that was not obvious in previous images of dynactin (17). The shoulder contains two identical arms (Fig. 3, E and F), made of bundles of three α-helices (Fig. 1D), which meet at a dimerization domain (fig. S9A). The end of each arm meets another short bundle of helices at an acute angle (hook domain) and a variably positioned paddle domain (Fig. 3E and fig. S9B). The symmetry between the two arms is broken as they twist to contact the dynactin filament.

The stoichiometry of p24 and p50, and their predicted helical and coiled coil structures (8, 3I) suggest each arm contains one helix from p24 and two from p50. The length of p24 (186 residues) is similar to the length of the arm, whereas that of p50 (401 residues) is longer, suggesting p50 contributes to other structures such as the hook or paddle domain. The two p150Glued copies enter the shoulder between the two arms (Fig. 3F), split and run along each arm before joining the hook domains. Thus the role of the p150Glued C terminus is to stick the two p50/p24 arms together.

Extended peptides from the shoulder span the length of
the dynactin filament

The invariant size of the dynactin filament implies some
mechanism specifies its length (7, 17, 32). The shoulder is
the best candidate for dynactin's molecular ruler. Its main
body contacts four Arp1 subunits close to the barbed end
(fig.S10). In addition four extended regions (ERs) emerge
from it and coat the rest of the filament (Fig. 4). The ends of
all four are structurally identical (fig. S11, A to D) suggesting
they correspond to p50 which is the only tetramer in dynac-
tin (8). The ERs are most likely the N-termini of p50, which
are predicted to be unstructured, contain sequence that fits
the clearest parts of the ER density (fig. S11E) and are able
to displace the shoulder from the dynactin filament (26).
Two pairs of ERs emerge from each shoulder paddle (Fig. 4,
A and B). One of each pair contacts the top protofilament:
ER-1 runs from Arp1-C to Arp1-E and ER-2 from Arp1-G to
Arp1-I (Fig. 4C). The other reaches down to contact the bot-
tom protofilament: ER-3 runs from Arp1-B to Arp1-D and
ER-4 contacts Arp1-F (Fig. 4D). The ends of all four ERs oc-
cupy a positively charged groove on the dynactin filament
that is equivalent to the tropomyosin binding groove on
actin (33) (fig. S12, A and B). While structurally different
from tropomyosin (24), the N terminus of p50 is similarly
rich in negatively charged residues (fig. S12C) suggesting
why both bind an equivalent site.

The shoulder and its ERs contact every filament subunit
except for β-actin-H (fig. S12D), suggesting the following
model for dynactin assembly. The shoulder and ERs recruit
eight Arp1s and stabilize their polymerization into a struc-
ture with 5 subunits on the top protofilament and three on
the bottom. The gap in position H is filled by β-actin per-
haps owing to actin's high abundance in the cell. The
unique interface formed by Arp1-I and β-actin-H specifically
recruits Arp11. Together with CapZαβ binding to the barbed
end this results in a highly stable complex of an exactly de-
fined length.

Dynein and BICD bind the dynactin filament

Dynein, dynactin and the N terminus of BICD2 (BICD2N)
only form a stable complex when all three components are
present (12–14). In this dynein-dynactin-BICD2N (DDB)
complex dynein binds dynactin via its tail, while its motor
domains remain flexible (13). Currently there are no 3D
structures of either the dynein tail or its interaction with
dynactin. We therefore formed a stable tail-dynactin-
BICD2N (TDB) complex (fig. S13) and determined its struc-
ture by cryo-EM to 8.2Å (fig. S14 and movie S4).

The dynein tail binds directly to the Arp1 filament (Fig.
5, A and B) stretching from β-actin-H to the barbed end.
The interaction is stabilized by a ~270 residue coiled coil of
BICD2N which runs the length of the filament. Projections
of the TDB complex are very similar to negative stain imag-
es of the DDB complex (fig. S15) (13) suggesting that the
flexible, C-terminal motor domains of dynein lie close to the
barbed end of dynactin (fig. S15). To determine the orienta-
tion of BICD2N we removed the N-terminal GFP tag (table
S1 and fig. S16) and showed that the globular density at one
end disappeared (fig. S16). Therefore the BICD2N termi-
nus lies close to the barbed end and its C terminus emerges
from the pointed end. The C terminus of BICD2 and the
pointed end complex of dynactin, which are implicated in
cargo binding (28, 34), are thus diametrically opposed to the
dynein motor domains (Fig. 5A).

The dynein heavy chain contains an N-terminal dimeri-
zation domain

The dynein tail consists of two copies of the dynein heavy
chain (DHC), intermediate chain (DIC2), light intermediate
chain (DLIC1) and light chains (Roadblock, Tctex and LC8).
The tail, within the TDB complex, contains two elongated S-
shaped domains corresponding to the DHCs: chain-1 and
chain-2 (Fig. 5C). The DHC C-termini, which contain the
binding site for DLIC1 (35), are mainly disordered (Fig. 5B).
The middle of each DHC wraps around a circular density
corresponding in size, shape and position (35) to the WD40
β-propeller of DIC2 (Fig. 5C and fig. S17). Toward their N-
termini the two DHC chains are joined by a small (~40
kDa), globular domain (Fig. 5C). We hypothesized that this
domain represents a previously unknown dimerization do-
main of the DHC itself. To verify this we determined a crys-
tal structure of the N-terminal 557 amino acids of the S.
cerevisiae DHC (Dyn1^1-557) to 5Å resolution (Fig. 5D, fig. S18,
and table S6). This shows two elongated domains, made up
of bundles of α-helices, that fit well with the helices ob-
served by cryo-EM (fig. S18, C and D). Furthermore it re-
veals that the elongated domains are joined by an N-
terminal dimerization domain (Fig. 5D).

In the crystal structure the elongated domains are relat-
ed by rotational symmetry with their C-termini pointing in
opposite directions (Fig. 5D). In the TDB structure, each
elongated domain has rotated about the flexible connection
to the dimerization domain (movie S5) so that they lie paral-
lel to each other (Fig. 5E). This is probably caused by the
light chain mediated dimerization of DIC2 (36, 37) holding
the DHCs together toward their C-termini.

The symmetry in the dynein tail matches the dynactin
filament

The N-termini of the elongated domains have translational
symmetry (a sideways movement relates one onto the other)
(Fig. 5E) which matches that of their binding sites on the
filament (Fig. 5F). They bind adjacent clefts between Arp1-D
& F (chain-1) and Arp1-F & β-actin-H (chain-2) (Fig. 5, F and
G). These sites are equivalent to the myosin motor binding
site on actin (fig. S19 and movie S6). The translational sym-
metry between DHC chains is lost toward their C-termini as
chain-2 twists relative to chain-1 (Fig. 5C). Chain-2 makes no
further contacts with the dynactin filament, whereas chain-1
binds it again at Arp1-A&C (Fig. 5H).
BICD2N is involved in all dynein-tail/dynactin-filament interactions (Fig. 5, F, G, and H; and movie S7). In the Arp1-D/F and Arp1-F/β-actin-H clefts, BICD2N stabilizes the interaction of the DHC chains with the filament (Fig. 5G). At the Arp1-A&C site BICD2N sits between chain-1 and dynactin. The network of contacts from BICD2N to dynein, BICD2N to dynactin and dynein to dynactin explains why all three components must be present to form a stable complex (12–14). The long BICD2N coiled coil may be suited as a cargo adaptor because it spans the length of the dynactin filament. Many other dynein adaptors, including TRAK1&2 (38), RILP (39), Rab11-Fip3, Hook3 and Spindly (14) contain coiled coils and may recruit dynein and dynactin in a similar way. The requirement to form a three-way complex would reduce the chance of stochastic binding of dynein to its cargos.

The shoulder coats three sides of the filament (fig. S12, B and C) leaving the front face free for interaction with BICD2N and the dynein tail. It does not, however, contact dynein in our structure. One well reported interaction between dynein and dynactin involves the p150Glued CC1 region and the N terminus of DIC2 (11). Both regions are too flexible in our structure to be visualized directly. However the p150Glued projection binds to the same face of the dynactin filament as BICD2N (Figs. 3B and 5, A and B) and both occupy the same cleft on the pointed end complex (fig. S8B and Fig. 5B). Thus BICD2N binding could free p150Glued CC1 to make contact with DIC2 and so add an additional contact that stabilizes the TDB complex.

How does recruitment of dynactin by a cargo adaptor (13, 14) activate dynein? Both the microtubule binding Cap-Gly (14) and DIC2 binding CC1B (30) regions of p150Glued have been implicated. Our structure raises a third, but not mutually exclusive, possibility. Studies with artificially dimerized dynein motor domains suggest they self-associate in an auto-inhibited conformation unless they are sufficiently separated (40). We suggest dynactin activates the motor domains by reorienting the two DHCs. Both DHC N-termini are anchored parallel to each other, but the C-termini are forced to twist apart because only one chain binds the second site on dynactin. This hypothesis explains why dynactin is built around an actin-like filament. The translational symmetry of the filament matches that of the DHC N-termini, whereas the filament length provides additional binding sites that force dynein to adopt its active conformation.

### REFERENCES AND NOTES

1. S. R. Gill, T. A. Schroer, I. Szilak, E. R. Steuer, M. P. Sheetz, D. W. Cleveland, Dynactin, a conserved, ubiquitously expressed component of an activator of vesicle motility mediated by cytoplasmic dynein. *J. Cell Biol.* **115**, 1639–1650 (1991). [Medline doi:10.1083/jcb.115.6.1639](https://doi.org/10.1083/jcb.115.6.1639)
2. M. McGrail, J. Gepner, A. Silvanovich, S. Ludmann, M. Serr, T. S. Hays, Regulation of cytoplasmic dynein function in vivo by the *Drosophila* Glued complex. *J. Cell Biol.* **131**, 411–425 (1995). [Medline doi:10.1083/jcb.131.2.411](https://doi.org/10.1083/jcb.131.2.411)
3. M. Plamann, P. F. Minke, J. H. Tinsley, K. S. Bruno, Cytoplasmic dynein and actin-related protein Arp1 are required for normal nuclear distribution in filamentous fungi. *J. Cell Biol.* **127**, 139–149 (1994). [Medline doi:10.1083/jcb.127.1.139](https://doi.org/10.1083/jcb.127.1.139)
4. V. J. Allan, Cytoplasmic dynein. *Biochem. Soc. Trans.* **39**, 1169–1178 (2011). [Medline doi:10.1042/BST0391169](https://doi.org/10.1042/BST0391169)
5. G. Schiavo, L. Greensmith, M. Hafezparast, E. M. C. Fisher, Cytoplasmic dynein heavy chain: The servant of many masters. *Trends Neurosci.* **36**, 641–651 (2013). [Medline doi:10.1016/j.tins.2013.08.001](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tins.2013.08.001)
6. M. P. Dodding, M. Way, Coupling viruses to dynein and kinesin-1. *EMBO J.* **30**, 3527–3539 (2011). [Medline doi:10.1038/emboj.2011.283](https://doi.org/10.1038/emboj.2011.283)
7. D. A. Schafer, S. R. Gill, J. A. Cooper, J. E. Heuser, T. A. Schroer, Ultrastructural analysis of the dynactin complex: An actin-related protein is a component of a filament that resembles F-actin. *J. Cell Biol.* **126**, 403–412 (1994). [Medline doi:10.1083/jcb.126.2.403](https://doi.org/10.1083/jcb.126.2.403)
8. T. A. Schroer, Dynactin. *Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol.* **20**, 759–779 (2004). [Medline doi:10.1146/annurev.cellbio.20.012103.094623](https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.cellbio.20.012103.094623)
9. A. E. Siglin, S. Sun, J. K. Moore, S. Tan, M. Poenie, J. D. Lear, T. Polenova, J. A. Cooper, J. C. Williams, Dynein and dynactin leverage their bivalent character to form a high-affinity interaction. *PLOS ONE* **8**, e59453 (2013). [Medline doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0059453](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0059453)
10. C. Duellberg, M. Trokter, R. Jha, I. Sen, M. O. Steinmetz, T. Surrey, Reconstitution of a hierarchical +TIP interaction network controlling microtubule end tracking of dynein. *Nat. Cell Biol.* **16**, 804–811 (2014). [Medline doi:10.1038/ncb2999](https://doi.org/10.1038/ncb2999)
11. S. J. King, C. L. Brown, K. C. Maier, N. J. Quintyne, T. A. Schroer, Analysis of the dynein-dynactin interaction in vitro and in vivo. *Mol. Biol. Cell* **14**, 5089–5097 (2003). [Medline doi:10.1091/mbc.E03-01-0025](https://doi.org/10.1091/mbc.E03-01-0025)
12. D. Splinter, D. S. Razafsky, M. A. Schlager, A. Serra-Marques, I. Grigoriev, J. Demmers, N. Keijzer, K. Jiang, I. Poser, A. A. Hyman, C. C. Hoogenraad, S. J. King, A. Akhmanova, BICD2, dynactin, and LIS1 cooperate in regulating dynein recruitment to cellular structures. *Mol. Biol. Cell* **23**, 4226–4241 (2012). [Medline doi:10.1091/mbc.E12-03-0210](https://doi.org/10.1091/mbc.E12-03-0210)
13. M. A. Schlager, H. T. Hoang, L. Urnavicius, S. L. Bullock, A. P. Carter, In vitro reconstitution of a highly processive recombinant human dynein complex. *EMBO J.* **33**, 1855–1868 (2014). [Medline doi:10.15252/embj.201488792](https://doi.org/10.15252/embj.201488792)
14. R. J. McKenney, W. Huynh, M. E. Tanenbaum, G. Bhabha, R. D. Vale, Activation of cytoplasmic dynein motility by dynactin-cargo adapter complexes. *Science* **345**, 337–341 (2014). [Medline doi:10.1126/science.1254198](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1254198)
15. M. Dienstbier, X. Li, Bicaudal-D and its role in cargo sorting by microtubule-based motors. *Biochem. Soc. Trans.* **37**, 1066–1071 (2009). [Medline doi:10.1042/BST0371066](https://doi.org/10.1042/BST0371066)
16. J. L. Hodgkinson, C. Peters, S. A. Kuznetsov, W. Steffen, Three-dimensional reconstruction of the dynactin complex by single-particle image analysis. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.* **102**, 3667–3672 (2005). [Medline doi:10.1073/pnas.0409506102](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0409506102)
17. H. Imai, A. Narita, Y. Maéda, T. A. Schroer, Dynactin 3D structure: Implications for assembly and dynein binding. *J. Mol. Biol.* **426**, 3262–3271 (2014). [Medline doi:10.1016/j.jmb.2014.07.010](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmb.2014.07.010)
18. J. B. Bingham, T. A. Schroer, Self-regulated polymerization of the actin-related protein Arp1. *Curr. Biol.* **9**, 223–226 (1999). [Medline doi:10.1016/S0960-9822(99)80095-5](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0960-9822(99)80095-5)
19. X.-C. Bai, G. McMullan, S. H. W. Scheres, How cryo-EM is revolutionizing structural biology. *Trends Biochem. Sci.* **40**, 49–57 (2015). [Medline doi:10.1016/j.tibs.2014.10.005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tibs.2014.10.005)
20. Materials and methods are available as supplementary materials on Science Online.
21. A. Yamashita, K. Maeda, Y. Maéda, Crystal structure of CapZ: Structural basis for actin filament barbed end capping. *EMBO J.* **22**, 1529–1538 (2003). [Medline doi:10.1093/emboj/cdg167](https://doi.org/10.1093/emboj/cdg167)
22. T. Y. Yeh, A. K. Kowalska, B. R. Scipioni, F. K. Cheong, M. Zheng, U. Derewenda, Z. S. Derewenda, T. A. Schroer, Dynactin helps target Polo-like kinase 1 to kinetochores via its left-handed beta-helical p27 subunit. *EMBO J.* **32**, 1023–1035 (2013). [Medline doi:10.1038/emboj.2013.30](https://doi.org/10.1038/emboj.2013.30)
23. E. A. Holleran, M. K. Tokito, S. Karki, E. L. Holzbaur, Centractin (ARP1) associates with spectrin revealing a potential mechanism to link dynactin to intracellular organelles. *J. Cell Biol.* **135**, 1815–1829 (1996). [Medline doi:10.1083/jcb.135.6.1815](https://doi.org/10.1083/jcb.135.6.1815)
24. J. von der Ecken, M. Müller, W. Lehman, D. J. Manstein, P. A. Penczek, S. Raunse, Structure of the F-actin-tropomyosin complex. *Nature* 10.1038/nature14033 (2014).
25. A. Narita, S. Takeda, A. Yamashita, Y. Maéda, Structural basis of actin filament

**scienceexpress** / [sciencemag.org/content/early/recent](http://sciencemag.org/content/early/recent) / 12 February 2015 / Page 4 / 10.1126/science.aaa4080
capping at the barbed-end: A cryo-electron microscopy study. EMBO J. 25, 5626–5633 (2006). Medline doi:10.1038/sj.emboj.7601395

26. F. K. Y. Cheong, L. Feng, A. Sarkeshik, J. R. Yates III, T. A. Schroer, Dynactin integrity depends upon direct binding of dynamitin to Arp1. Mol. Biol. Cell 25, 2171–2180 (2014). Medline doi:10.1091/mbc.E14-03-0842

27. D. M. Eckley, S. R. Gill, K. A. Melkonian, J. B. Bingham, H. V. Goodson, J. E. Heuser, T. A. Schroer, Analysis of dynactin subcomplexes reveals a novel actin-related protein associated with the arp1 minifilament pointed end. J. Cell Biol. 147, 307–320 (1999). Medline doi:10.1083/jcb.147.2.307

28. T. Y. Yeh, N. J. Quintyne, B. R. Scipioni, D. M. Eckley, T. A. Schroer, Dynactin's pointed-end complex is a cargo-targeting module. Mol. Biol. Cell 23, 3827–3837 (2012). Medline doi:10.1091/mbc.E12-07-0496

29. B. Hammesfahr, M. Kollmar, Evolution of the eukaryotic dynactin complex, the activator of cytoplasmic dynein. BMC Evol. Biol. 12, 95 (2012). Medline doi:10.1186/1471-2148-12-95

30. S. K. Tripathy, S. J. Weil, C. Chen, P. Anand, R. B. Vallee, S. P. Gross, Autoregulatory mechanism for dynactin control of processive and diffusive dynein transport. Nat. Cell Biol. 16, 1192–1201 (2014). Medline doi:10.1038/ncb3063

31. K. K. Pfister, S. E. Benashski, J. F. Dillman III, R. S. Patel-King, S. M. King, Identification and molecular characterization of the p24 dynactin light chain. Cell Motil. Cytoskeleton 41, 154–167 (1998). Medline doi:10.1002/(SICI)1097-0169(1998)41:2<154::AID-CM6>3.0.CO;2-E

32. J. P. Lees-Miller, D. M. Helfman, T. A. Schroer, A vertebrate actin-related protein is a component of a multisubunit complex involved in microtubule-based vesicle motility. Nature 359, 244–246 (1992). Medline doi:10.1038/359244a0

33. E. Behrmann, M. Müller, P. A. Penczek, H. G. Mannherz, D. J. Manstein, S. Raunser, Structure of the rigor actin-tropomyosin-myosin complex. Cell 150, 327–338 (2012). Medline doi:10.1016/j.cell.2012.05.037

34. Y. Liu, H. K. Salter, A. N. Holding, C. M. Johnson, E. Stephens, P. J. Lukavsky, J. Walshaw, S. L. Bullock, Bicaudal-D uses a parallel, homodimeric coiled coil with heterotypic registry to coordinate recruitment of cargos to dynein. Genes Dev. 27, 1233–1246 (2013). Medline doi:10.1101/gad.212381.112

35. S. H. Tynan, M. A. Gee, R. B. Vallee, Distinct but overlapping sites within the cytoplasmic dynein heavy chain for dimerization and for intermediate chain and light intermediate chain binding. J. Biol. Chem. 275, 32769–32774 (2000). Medline doi:10.1074/jbc.M001537200

36. J. C. Williams, P. L. Roulhac, A. G. Roy, R. B. Vallee, M. C. Fitzgerald, W. A. Hendrickson, Structural and thermodynamic characterization of a cytoplasmic dynein light chain-intermediate chain complex. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 104, 10028–10033 (2007). Medline doi:10.1073/pnas.0703614104

37. G. Benison, P. A. Karplus, E. Barbar, Structure and dynamics of LC8 complexes with KXTQT-motif peptides: Swallow and dynein intermediate chain compete for a common site. J. Mol. Biol. 371, 457–468 (2007). Medline doi:10.1016/j.jmb.2007.05.046

38. M. van Spronsen, M. Mikhailova, J. Lipka, M. A. Schlager, D. J. van den Heuvel, M. Kuipers, P. S. Wulf, N. Keijzer, J. Demmers, L. C. Kapitein, D. Jaarsma, H. C. Gerritsen, A. Akhmanova, C. C. Hoogenraad, TRAK/Milton motor-adaptor proteins steer mitochondrial trafficking to axons and dendrites. Neuron 77, 485–502 (2013). Medline doi:10.1016/j.neuron.2012.11.027

39. I. Jordens, M. Fernandez-Borja, M. Marsman, S. Dusseljee, L. Janssen, J. Calafat, H. Janssen, R. Wubbolts, J. Neefjes, The Rab7 effector protein RILP controls lysosomal transport by inducing the recruitment of dynein-dynactin motors. Curr. Biol. 11, 1680–1685 (2001). Medline doi:10.1016/S0960-9822(01)00531-0

40. T. Torisawa, M. Ichikawa, A. Furuta, K. Saito, K. Oiwa, H. Kojima, Y. Y. Toyoshima, K. Furuta, Autoinhibition and cooperative activation mechanisms of cytoplasmic dynein. Nat. Cell Biol. 16, 1118–1124 (2014). Medline doi:10.1038/ncb3048

41. J. B. Bingham, S. J. King, T. A. Schroer, in Methods in Enzymology (Elsevier, 1998), vol. 298, pp. 171–184.

42. T. A. Schroer, M. P. Sheetz, Two activators of microtubule-based vesicle transport. J. Cell Biol. 115, 1309–1318 (1991). Medline doi:10.1083/jcb.115.5.1309

43. R. B. Dodd, M. D. Allen, S. E. Brown, C. M. Sanderson, L. M. Duncan, P. J. Lehner, M. Bycroft, R. J. Read, Solution structure of the Kaposi’s sarcoma-associated herpesvirus K3 N-terminal domain reveals a Novel E2-binding C4HC3-type RING domain. J. Biol. Chem. 279, 53840–53847 (2004). Medline doi:10.1074/jbc.M409662200

44. T. G. G. Battye, L. Kontogiannis, O. Johnson, H. R. Powell, A. G. W. Leslie,

iMOSFLM: A new graphical interface for diffraction-image processing with MOSFLM. Acta Crystallogr. D 67, 271–281 (2011). Medline doi:10.1107/S0907444910048675

45. P. Evans, Scaling and assessment of data quality. Acta Crystallogr. D 62, 72–82 (2006). Medline doi:10.1107/S0907444905036693

46. C. Vonrhein, E. Blanc, P. Roversi, G. Bricogne, Automated structure solution with autoSHARP. Methods Mol. Biol. 364, 215–230 (2007). Medline

47. P. Emsley, K. Cowtan, Coot: Model-building tools for molecular graphics. Acta Crystallogr. D 60, 2126–2132 (2004). Medline doi:10.1107/S0907444904019158

48. M. D. Winn, C. C. Ballard, K. D. Cowtan, E. J. Dodson, P. Emsley, P. R. Evans, R. M. Keegan, E. B. Krissinel, A. G. Leslie, A. McCoy, S. J. McNicholas, G. N. Murshudov, N. S. Pannu, E. A. Potterton, H. R. Powell, R. J. Read, A. Vagin, K. S. Wilson, Overview of the CCP4 suite and current developments. Acta Crystallogr. D 67, 235–242 (2011). Medline doi:10.1107/S0907444910045749

49. M. Radermacher, Three-dimensional reconstruction of single particles from random and nonrandom tilt series. J. Electron Microsc. Tech. 9, 359–394 (1988). Medline doi:10.1002/jemt.1060090405

50. X. Li, P. Mooney, S. Zheng, C. R. Booth, M. B. Braunfeld, S. Gubbens, D. A. Agard, Y. Cheng, Electron counting and beam-induced motion correction enable near-atomic-resolution single-particle cryo-EM. Nat. Methods 10, 584–590 (2013). Medline doi:10.1038/nmeth.2472

51. S. H. W. Scheres, RELION: Implementation of a Bayesian approach to cryo-EM structure determination. J. Struct. Biol. 180, 519–530 (2012). Medline doi:10.1016/j.jsb.2012.09.006

52. J. A. Mindell, N. Grigorieff, Accurate determination of local defocus and specimen tilt in electron microscopy. J. Struct. Biol. 142, 334–347 (2003). Medline doi:10.1016/S1047-8477(03)00069-8

53. S. H. Scheres, Beam-induced motion correction for sub-megadalton cryo-EM particles. eLife 3, e03665 (2014). Medline

54. P. B. Rosenthal, R. Henderson, Optimal determination of particle orientation, absolute hand, and contrast loss in single-particle electron cryomicroscopy. J. Mol. Biol. 333, 721–745 (2003). Medline doi:10.1016/j.jmb.2003.07.013

55. G. Tang, L. Peng, P. R. Baldwin, D. S. Mann, W. Jiang, I. Rees, S. J. Ludtke, EMAN2: An extensible image processing suite for electron microscopy. J. Struct. Biol. 157, 38–46 (2007). Medline doi:10.1016/j.jsb.2006.05.009

56. S. H. W. Scheres, R. Núñez-Ramírez, C. O. S. Sorzano, J. M. Carazo, R. Marabini, Image processing for electron microscopy single-particle analysis using XMIPP. Nat. Protoc. 3, 977–990 (2008). Medline doi:10.1038/nprot.2008.62

57. L. A. Kelley, M. J. E. Sternberg, Protein structure prediction on the Web: A case study using the Phyre server. Nat. Protoc. 4, 363–371 (2009). Medline doi:10.1038/nprot.2009.2

58. G. N. Murshudov, P. Skubák, A. A. Lebedev, N. S. Pannu, R. A. Steiner, R. A. Nicholls, M. D. Winn, F. Long, A. A. Vagin, REFMAC5 for the refinement of macromolecular crystal structures. Acta Crystallogr. D 67, 355–367 (2011). Medline doi:10.1107/S0907444911001314

59. E. F. Pettersen, T. D. Goddard, C. C. Huang, G. S. Couch, D. M. Greenblatt, E. C. Meng, T. E. Ferrin, UCSF Chimera—a visualization system for exploratory research and analysis. J. Comput. Chem. 25, 1605–1612 (2004). Medline doi:10.1002/jcc.20084

60. A. Kucukelbir, F. J. Sigworth, H. D. Tagare, Quantifying the local resolution of cryo-EM density maps. Nat. Methods 11, 63–65 (2014). Medline doi:10.1038/nmeth.2727

61. F. Sobott, H. Hernández, M. G. McCammon, M. A. Tito, C. V. Robinson, A tandem mass spectrometer for improved transmission and analysis of large macromolecular assemblies. Anal. Chem. 74, 1402–1407 (2002). Medline doi:10.1021/ac0110552

62. H. Hernández, C. V. Robinson, Determining the stoichiometry and interactions of macromolecular assemblies from mass spectrometry. Nat. Protoc. 2, 715–726 (2007). Medline doi:10.1038/nprot.2007.73

63. J. V. Olsen, L. M. de Godoy, G. Li, B. Macek, P. Mortensen, R. Pesch, A. Makarov, O. Lange, S. Horning, M. Mann, Parts per million mass accuracy on an Orbitrap mass spectrometer via lock mass injection into a C-trap. Mol. Cell. Proteomics 4, 2010–2021 (2005). Medline doi:10.1074/mcp.T500030-MCP200

64. J. Cox, M. Mann, MaxQuant enables high peptide identification rates, individualized p.p.b.-range mass accuracies and proteome-wide protein quantification. Nat. Biotechnol. 26, 1367–1372 (2008). Medline doi:10.1038/nbt.1511

65. B. Schwanhäusser, D. Busse, N. Li, G. Dittmar, J. Schuchhardt, J. Wolf, W. Chen, M. Selbach, Global quantification of mammalian gene expression control. Nature 473, 337–342 (2011). [Medline doi:10.1038/nature10098](https://www.medline.com/doi:10.1038/nature10098)

**ACKNOWLEDGMENTS**

We thank S. Scheres and X. Bai for cryo-EM advice; G. McMullan, C. Savva, J. Grimmett, and T. Darling for technical support; S. Leech for fresh pig brains; V. Beilsten-Edmands for assistance with proteomic analyses; and S. Bullock, R. McKenney, and J. Pennell for comments on the manuscript. We thank Y. Toyoshima for sharing her unpublished negative-stain EM model of the p150Glued projection which helped us to interpret our observations. This work was funded by the Medical Research Council, UK (MC_UP_A025_1011) and a Wellcome Trust New Investigator Award (WT100387). Cryo-EM maps are deposited with the Electron Microscopy Data Bank (EMD-2854, EMD-2855, EMD-2856, EMD-2857, EMD-2860, EMD-2861, EMD-2862), and coordinates are deposited with the Protein Data Bank (5AFT, 5AFU, 5AFR). Author contributions: L.U. prepared dynactin and determined the TDB structure. K.Z. determined the structure of dynactin. A.G.D. and M.Y. determined the DHC N terminus crystal structure. C.M. and M.A.S. prepared the dynein tail complex. N.A.P. and C.V.R performed mass spectrometry. A.P.C. initiated the project and designed the experiments.

**SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS**

[www.sciencemag.org/cgi/content/full/science.aaa4080/DC1](http://www.sciencemag.org/cgi/content/full/science.aaa4080/DC1)

Materials and Methods

Figs. S1 to S19

Tables S1 to S6

References (41–65)

Movies S1 to S7

2 December 2014; accepted 30 January 2015

Published online 12 February 2015

10.1126/science.aaa4080

Fig. 1. Cryo-EM structure of dynactin. (A) A 4.0 Å cryo-EM map of dynactin segmented and colored according to its components. (B) A density map of a β-strand and ADP molecule in Arp1-C. (C) A molecular model of dynactin. (D) 6.3 Å cryo-EM map showing helices in the dynactin shoulder.

Fig. 2. Capping the dynactin filament. (A) The barbed end is capped by CapZ${}_{\alpha\beta}$. (B) CapZ${}_{\alpha\beta}$ contains five positive residues (blue) which interact with four negative residues (orange) on Arp1. The equivalent loop in actin contains only one negative residue. (C) The short Arp11 subdomain-2 loop prevents further subunit addition to the bottom protofilament. (D) Arp11 caps the top protofilament by binding the subdomain-2 loop of Arp1-I and sterically blocking (asterisk) subsequent subunit binding. (E) The pointed end complex: p62 extends over Arp11 to touch $\beta$-actin-H. (F) p25 and p27 pack end-on to Arp11 as a continuation of the bottom protofilament.

Fig. 3. The architecture of the p150<sup>Glued</sup> projection and shoulder. (A) Schematic models of p150<sup>Glued</sup>. (B) An 8.6 Å cryo-EM structure with a docked p150<sup>Glued</sup> projection, colored according to A. (C) Native mass spectrometry of dynactin reveals the mass of the intact complex. (D) Tandem MS confirms the subunit composition of the complex. (E) The shoulder contains two arms (red and blue) that emerge from a dimerization center (green) and end in hook and paddle domains. (F) The C terminus of the p150<sup>Glued</sup> dimer enters the shoulder and splits into separate helices.

Fig. 4. Shoulder peptides coat and measure the dynactin filament. (A and B) Four extended regions (ER1-4) connect to the shoulder paddles. (C) ER1-2 cover the full length of the top Arp1 protfilament. (D) ER3-4 cover the bottom protfilament subunits Arp1-B,D&F, but not the β-actin-H subunit.

Fig. 5. The dynein tail and its interaction with dynactin and BICD2N. (A) Cartoon model of the dynein tail/dynactin/BICD2N complex (TDB). (B) An 8.2 Å cryo-EM structure of TDB. (C) An N-terminal domain dimerizes the dynein heavy chain (DHC) elongated domains, which wrap round the dynein intermediate chain (DIC2). (D) Crystal structure of the S. cerevisiae DHC N terminus (Dyn1<sup>1-557</sup>). (E) The Dyn1<sup>1-557</sup> structure fits well into the cryo-EM map. (F) The translational symmetry of DHC chain-1 and 2 matches the dynactin filament. (G) Interaction of chain-1 with BICD2N and dynactin (asterisks). (H) The second interaction site of chain-1 with dynactin is solely mediated by BICD2N.
