
JBC Papers in Press. Published on April 30, 2015 as Manuscript M115.643817  
The latest version is at http://www.jbc.org/cgi/doi/10.1074/jbc.M115.643817  

Apelin Stimulates Adipose Tissue Browning  

Apelin enhances Brown Adipogenesis and Browning of White Adipocytes  

Aung Than¹, Hui Ling He¹, Si Hui Chua¹, Dan Xu², Lei Sun², Melvin Khee-Shing Leow³, Peng Chen¹  

¹Bioengineering Program, Nanyang Technological University, 70 Nanyang Drive, Singapore 637457  
²Duke-NUS Graduate Medical School, 8 College Road, Singapore 169857  
³Endocrine and Diabetes, Tan Tock Seng Hospital, 11 Jalan Tan Tock Seng, Singapore 308433  

*Running title: Apelin stimulates browning of adipose tissue  

To whom correspondence should be addressed: Dr. Peng Chen, Division of Bioengineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 637457; Tel: (+65) 6514 1086; E-mail: chenpeng@ntu.edu.sg.  

Keywords: Apelin, Adipocyte, Adipose tissue, Browning, Uncoupling protein 1, Metabolic Diseases.  

---

**Background:** The autocrine regulatory roles of apelin on self-remodeling of adipose tissue are not known.

**Results:** Apelin enhances not only the differentiation and metabolic activity of brown adipocytes but also the browning of white adipocytes.

**Conclusion:** Apelin-APJ signaling promotes adipose tissue browning.

**Significance:** Apelin signaling may serve as a potential therapeutic target for obesity and associated metabolic diseases.

---

**SUMMARY**  
Brown adipose tissue expends energy in the form of heat via the mitochondrial uncoupling protein UCP1. Recent studies showed that brown adipose tissue is present in adult humans and may be exploited for its anti-obesity and anti-diabetes actions. Apelin is an adipocyte-derived hormone that plays important roles in energy metabolism. Here, we report that apelin-APJ signaling promotes brown adipocyte differentiation, by increasing the expressions of brown adipogenic and thermogenic transcriptional factors via PI3kinase/Akt and AMPK signaling pathways. It is also found that apelin relieves the TNFα inhibition on brown adipogenesis. In addition, apelin increases the basal activity of brown adipocytes, as evidenced by the increased PGC1α and UCP1 expressions, mitochondrial biogenesis, and oxygen consumption. Finally, we provide both in vitro and in vivo evidence that apelin is able to increase the brown-like characteristics in white adipocytes. This study, for the first time, reveals the brown adipogenic and browning effects of apelin, and suggests a potential therapeutic route to combat obesity and related metabolic disorders.

---

**INTRODUCTION**  
Brown adipose tissue (BAT) is the primary site for non-shivering thermogenesis in response to cold exposure, especially in newborns, through the actions of heat-producing brown fat cells (1,2). Mediated by mitochondrial uncoupling protein 1 (UCP1), brown adipocytes have the ability to uncouple oxidative metabolism of energy substrates (glucose and fat) from ATP synthesis, leading to heat production and energy consumption (1). Recent studies demonstrated that metabolically active BAT, which was thought to disappear after infancy, is present in adult humans, and is inversely correlated with body mass index and visceral fat mass (2-4). Studies have shown that increased amount of BAT is associated with weight loss in obese subjects, and increased brown fat cell differentiation leads to increase in energy consumption and reduction in body weight gain and diet-induced obesity (5-7). BAT also regulates glucose homeostasis and improves insulin sensitivity (8,9). And brown adipogenesis is suppressed in human subjects with insulin

---

Copyright 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

resistance (10). Hence, stimulating brown fat formation could be a novel route to fight against obesity and related metabolic disorders (11). In contrast, excess accumulation of white adipose tissue (WAT) has notorious effects on the development of metabolic disorders, such as diabetes and cardiovascular diseases (12). Interestingly, brown fat-like cells (also known as beige cells) have been identified in WAT, and brown-fat like characteristics (e.g., UCP1 expression) are reduced in WAT of obese humans (13). Studies have demonstrated that increase of beige adipocytes in WAT enhances whole-body energy expenditure and should expectedly reduce the risk of diet-induced obesity and metabolic diseases (14, 15). Differentiation of white adipocytes into beige cells occurs in response to prolonged cold exposure, and can be stimulated by hormones such as β-adrenergic receptor agonists, irisin, thyroid hormone, fibroblast growth factor 21 (FGF21), etc. (15-17). On the other hand, it is increasingly recognized that WAT is not merely a passive depot for storage of excess energy as fat but also the largest endocrine organ producing a variety of bioactive factors called adipokines (18). These adipokines play essential roles in regulating energy metabolism and also influence adipose tissue's own remodeling and functions (18-20). Emerging evidence also suggest that adipokines are important for adipose browning. For example, adiponectin and leptin modulates UCP1 expression in rodent BAT (21, 22) while interleukin-6 is required for cold-induced UCP1 expression in WAT of mice (23). Apelin is a relatively recent member of the adipokine family (24). Apelin regulates various aspects of energy metabolism through APJ receptors, and has been known for its anti-obesity and anti-diabetic properties (25). Apelin promotes insulin sensitivity and glucose utilization in adipose and muscle tissues (26, 27). Apelin injection decreases WAT mass and serum triglyceride level in obese mice, whereas apelin knockout mice have augmented body adiposity and serum free-fatty acid levels (28). Apelin also suppresses white adipocyte differentiation and lipolysis (28, 29). The antagonistic effects of apelin on diet-induced obesity and insulin resistance are attributable to its stimulation on UCP1 expression in BAT and body energy expenditure (30, 31). As apelin production in adipocytes and its plasma level are elevated in obesity (24), we speculate that apelin may provide a beneficial feedback control on

Apelin Stimulates Adipose Tissue Browning

both brown and white adipocytes. Here, we aim for the first time to reveal the effects of apelin on adipose browning (differentiation of brown pre-adipocytes in BAT, metabolic activities of mature brown adipocytes, browning of white adipocytes in WAT).

EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES

Primary pre-adipocyte culture and differentiation

The primary rat brown pre-adipocytes isolated from interscapular BAT were purchased from CosmoBio Co. Ltd, Japan. In some experiments, the primary white and brown pre-adipocytes, isolated from mouse WAT and interscapular BAT were also used. After digestion with 0.2% collagenase and centrifugation (1,500 rpm, 5 min), the stromal vascular fraction (SVF)/pre-adipose cells from WAT and BAT were isolated as described before (32). Pre-adipose cells were seeded in six-well plates, and cultured with the basal growth medium (DMEM supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum - FBS, 1 nM 3,5,3'-triiodothyronine - T3, 1% penicillin and streptomycin), at 37°C and in a humidified atmosphere containing 5% CO₂ and 95% air. For adipocyte differentiation, fully confluent cells (defined as day 0) were treated for 2 days with induction medium (basal growth medium supplemented with 0.5 μg/ml insulin, 1 μM dexamethasone, 0.5 mM isobutylmethylxanthine - IBMX). At day 2, the cells were incubated for another 2 days with growth medium containing insulin, and thereafter, the medium was replenished every other day for the next 6-8 days. Transwell indirect-contact co-culture system (Corning Inc.) was used to co-culture the primary rat brown pre-adipocytes and primary rat macrophages (isolated from adult rat bone marrow tissue; ScienCell Research Lab). The human pre-adipocytes (Zen-Bio Inc.), collected from subcutaneous WAT (non-diabetic subject, BMI 25-29.9), were cultured in DMEM/F-12 (1:1, v/v) containing 10% FBS till confluence. Adipocyte differentiation was then induced similarly as the previously reported (33, 34). Specifically, the cells were treated for 4 days with human adipocyte growth medium (serum-free DMEM/ F-12 containing 33 μM biotin, 17 μM pantothenate, 10 μg/ml transferrin, 1 nM T3) supplemented with 0.5 μg/ml insulin, 0.5 mM IBMX, 1 μM dexamethasone and 1 μM troglitazone. The cells were then incubated in the growth medium containing insulin and dexamethasone for 12-14 days (replenishment

every other day). The mouse 3T3-L1 cells
(white pre-adipose cell line, ATCC) were
cultured in DMEM supplemented with 10%
bovine calf serum till confluence. The cells were
then treated with the induction medium for 2
days (day 0–day 2), followed by growing for 2
more days in the growth medium containing
insulin alone (day 2–day 4). Finally, the cells
were grown for 4–6 days without insulin.
The human mesenchymal stem cells (hMSCs;
Lonza Inc.) collected from bone marrow of
normal subjects were grown in the basal growth
medium till confluence. The stem cells were
subsequently induced to differentiate into
adipocytes as previously described (35).
Specifically, stem cells were treated for 3 days in
the induction medium (plus 200 μM
indomethacin). In the next 12–14 days, the cells
were maintained in the growth medium
containing insulin alone (replenishment every
other day). Adipocyte differentiation was
confirmed by Oil-red-O staining, visual
appearance of intracellular lipid droplets, and
immunoblot analyses of adipocyte specific
proteins (e.g., adipocyte protein 2-ap2, leptin) as
well as brown adipocyte specific proteins (e.g.,
UCP1). At least two different batches (donors)
of the primary cells were used for every
experiment. All culture media, supplements and
sera were purchased from Life Technologies
Corp. (Gibco). Pyr-apelin 13 (pyroglutamated
13-amino-acid peptide), insulin, and troglitazone
were purchased from Tocris Bioscience. All
other reagents and chemicals were obtained from
Sigma-Aldrich Inc.

Animal studies
All animal experimental protocols were
approved by the SingHealth Research Facilities
Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee,
Singapore. Mice (C57BL/6J, 8–10 week old
male) were housed in light- and temperature-
controlled facility (12-hr light/12-hr dark cycle,
21°C), and allowed free access to standard
laboratory food and water. Mice were divided
into apelin-treated and non-treated (100 μl saline,
control) groups. Based on the previous studies
(30, 31), apelin was given at a dose of 0.1
μmol/kg/day (dissolved in 100 μl saline) by
intraperitoneal injection for 12 days. Animals
were sacrificed 24 h after the last dose, and body
and fat tissue weights were measured in all
animals. Inguinal WAT, epididymal WAT, and
interscapular BAT were removed and frozen in
liquid nitrogen for further experiments. Tissues

Apelin Stimulates Adipose Tissue Browning
were homogenized in radioimmunoprecipitation
assay buffer (containing protease inhibitor
cocktail) (Roche Applied Science), and protein
concentration was determined by bicinchoninic
acid (BCA) protein assay (Pierce), before the
immunoblot analyses were carried out (using the
same amount of the protein lysates).

siRNA silencing
Gene silencing of apelin (APLN) or APJ receptor
(APLNR) in brown pre-adipocytes was achieved
using a rat APLN-siRNA or APLNR-siRNA
(Ambion Silencer Select, Life Technology),
respectively. Akt siRNAs (sc-43610, sc-108059;
SantaCruz Biotech) and AMPK siRNAs (sc-
45313, sc-270142) were also used for gene
silencing of Akt or AMPK in adipose cells.
Transfection was done as described previously
(33). Specifically, adipose cells were incubated
with OPTI-MEM containing a complex of
Lipofectamine-RNAiMAX transfection reagent
(0.5% v/v, Life Technology) with siRNAs (25
nM) for 4 hr, followed by addition of basal
growth medium, and incubation for another 1–2
days. Knocking down of protein expressions
were confirmed by immunoblot analyses.

Confocal microscopy
Adipocytes grown on Lab-Tek II chambered
coverglass were fixed with 3.7% formaldehyde
in PBS for 15 min at room temperature (RT),
and then washed twice with ice-cold PBS. In
some experiments, the cells were permeabilized
with 0.1% Triton X-100 for 10 min. After being
blocked with 1% bovine albumin (BSA) in
PBST (PBS with 0.1% tween 20) at RT for 1 hr,
the cells were then incubated (4°C) overnight in
PBST with 1% BSA and primary antibodies
(Santa Cruz Biotech): anti-apelin IgG (sc-33805),
anti-APJ IgG (sc-33823), anti-UCP1 IgG (sc-
6529), anti-β1-AR IgG (sc-568), or anti β3-AR
IgG (sc-50436). After washing with PBS, the
cells were incubated in FITC-labeled or Atto 647
NHS-labeled secondary antibody (Sigma) for 1
hr at RT, followed by washing 3 times with PBS.
Adipocytes were then imaged using a Confocal
Laser Scanning Microscope (LSM 510 Meta,
Carl Zeiss GmbH, Germany). To reveal the
mitochondrial membrane potential and
morphology, adipocytes were incubated with the
growth medium containing 0.2 μM MitoTracker
Red FM (Life Technology) (Ex/Em: 581
nm/644 nm) (at 37°C with 5% CO₂ in a
humidified incubator) for 15 or 30 min, before
live-cell imaging with a confocal microscopy.

MitoTracker Red is widely used to assess both mitochondrial morphology and membrane potential in living cells, since it is selectively localized in mitochondria while its accumulation is dependent on transmembrane potential (34, 36-38).

Western blot analyses

The cells were washed with ice-cold PBS, and collected in M-PER Mammalian Protein Extraction Reagent containing Halt protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (Thermo Fisher). After brief vortex and centrifugation at 4 °C, the supernatant was collected and the protein content was determined by BCA protein assay (Pierce). Each sample with equal amount of proteins was separated through 12% SDS-PAGE before transferred onto a nitrocellulose membrane. The membranes were then blocked for 2 hr at RT in Superblock blocking buffer, followed by subsequent incubation for 12 hr in Tris-buffered saline-Tween solution (TBST) containing primary antibody (1:100-400 dilution). After washing 3 times with TBST, the membrane was incubated for 6 hr with horseradish peroxidase-conjugated secondary antibody (1:2000-4000). The protein bands were detected in a G:BOX Chemi XT4 imaging system (Syngene) using SuperSignal West Pico Chemiluminescent Substrate (Thermo Fisher). Antibodies against apelin (sc-33469), APJ (sc-33823), UCP1 (sc-6529), CIDE-A (sc-366814), aP2 (sc-18661), COX1 (sc-23982), C/EBPβ (sc-150), leptin (Ob, sc-9014), PPARγ (sc-7196), PGC-1α (sc-13067), PRDM16 (sc-55697), β1-AR (sc-568), β3-AR (sc-50436), Akt (sc-8312), phospho-Akt (Ser-474, sc-135651), AMPKα1/2 (sc-25792), or phospho-AMPKα1/2 (Thr-172; sc-33524) were purchased from Santa Cruz Biotech. Antibodies against UCP1 (PA1-24894) or PRDM16 (PA5-20872) from Thermo Fisher were also used in our experiments.

Oxygen consumption rate assay

Oxygen consumption was assessed using Oxygen consumption rate assay kit (MitoXpress-Xtra HS method) (Cayman Chemical) according to manufacturer's instructions. Briefly, pre-adipocytes were grown in 96 well-plates (3 x 10⁴ cells per well) till confluence and induced to differentiate into adipocytes. Adipocytes were treated with 10 μl MitoXpress-Xtra (a phosphorescent oxygen-sensitive probe whose signal increases overtime when O₂ is depleting in the solution) immediately before measuring the fluorescence intensity (Ex/Em: 380 nm/650nm, at 37 °C, 0.5 min interval) using a time-resolved fluorescence plate reader (SpectraMax M5, Molecular Devices). Measurement was performed under a sealed environment (by overlaying each well with HS Mineral Oil) in which the exchange of O₂ is limited. Oxygen-consuming glucose oxidase was used as a reference.

Statistical analyses

Data were analyzed as mean ± SEM. Statistical differences between two means were assessed using Student's t-test (unpaired, two-tailed). One-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) (followed by Tukey's multiple comparisons test) was used to compare differences among multiple groups. A p value < 0.05 was considered to be statistically significant.

RESULTS

Apelin-APJ receptor promotes brown adipocyte differentiation

Apelin/APJ system is present in BAT (39). Here, we found that both apelin and APJ receptor are expressed in brown pre-adipocytes and adipocytes (Figure 1A and H). As shown in Figure 1B and C, exogenous application of apelin (since the induction of differentiation at day 0) significantly increased the number of differentiated brown adipocytes indicated by their multilocular appearance. Pyr-apelin13 (referred as apelin) was used as it is the most active and major apelin isoform enzymatically cleaved from preproapelin (40, 41). Consistently, apelin also promoted the progressive expressions of UCP1 (thermogenesis marker), CIDE-A (brown adipocyte-specific marker), and aP2 (late marker of differentiated adipocyte) (Figure 1D - G) during brown adipogenesis. However, apelin applied at the later stages of differentiation (at day 2 or day 4) failed to increase the number of brown adipocytes (Figure 1C), suggesting the importance of apelin signaling in the initiation of brown adipogenesis. As shown in Figure 1H, after the initial burst increase (first day), preproapelin expression remained steady during brown adipogenesis. And the initial increase of preproapelin can be largely enhanced by exogenous apelin, suggesting that apelin may serve as the positive feedback signal to initiation of differentiation. In support of this notion, the number of mature brown adipocytes, expressions of UCP1, CIDE-

A and aP2 are considerably reduced when apelin and APJ in brown pre-adipocytes were knockdown by siRNAs (Figure 1I - M). Taken together, we provide evidence that apelin-APJ promotes brown adipocyte differentiation through autocrine feedback regulation.

**Apelin remedies inflammation-impaired brown adipogenesis**

BAT mass is lesser in obese humans (3,4). Studies also suggest that adipose tissue inflammation (as characterized by accumulation of macrophages and inflammatory cytokines, such as TNFα) found in obesity may be responsible for reduced brown fat by inhibiting differentiation and inducing apoptosis of brown adipocytes (42-45). To further investigate this, indirect co-culturing of brown pre-adipocytes and macrophages (primary rat macrophages) was performed (Figure 2A) (46). As shown in Figure 2B, co-culturing with macrophages (day0 – day2) significantly decreased the expressions of UCP1, CIDE-A, and aP2 in brown fat cells (at day10), implying that inflammatory factors released from macrophages antagonize brown adipocyte differentiation. This is supported by the observation that direct application of TNFα (major inflammatory factor released from macrophages) reduced the number of brown adipocytes and expressions of brown adipocyte markers (Figure 2C - E). Interestingly, apelin was able to relieve the inhibitory effects of macrophages and TNFα (Figure 2B - E). Together with the fact that apelin expression in adipose tissue and plasma apelin level are elevated in obesity (24), our results suggest a compensatory increase in apelin to inhibited brown adipogenesis by adipose inflammation.

**Apelin stimulates expressions of brown adipogenic and thermogenic transcriptional factors**

A number of transcriptional factors govern the process of adipocyte differentiation and terminal determination of brown adipocytes (e.g., UCP1 expression) (47). Among them, C/EBPβ and PPARγ are critical to initiate both white and brown adipogenesis (47,48) while PRDM16 and PGC1α are essential to brown fat determination by stimulating expressions of thermogenic and brown-specific genes and repressing the expression of white-specific genes (49-51). Here, we observed that, PPARγ and PGC1α exhibited a progressive increase of expression during differentiation, while C/EBPβ and PRDM16

levels were steady (Figure 3A- E). This is consistent with the previous reports (49,52). Notably, apelin treatment increased the expressions of C/EBPβ, PPARγ and PGC1α in the early stage of differentiation, and up-regulated the PRDM16 level throughout the differentiation period (Figure 3). This is in line with the results shown in Figure 1 and 2 that apelin increases the number of differentiated brown adipocytes as well as the expressions of brown fat proteins required for thermogenesis and mitochondrial biogenesis (UCP1, CIDE-A, COX1).

PPARγ is well described as an important regulator of brown adipocyte differentiation (48). However, recent studies suggested that PPARγ does not control the terminal determination of brown adipocytes because PPARγ overexpression in hMSCs only induces white (not brown) fat phenotype (53); UCP1 expression was not suppressed in brown adipocytes of PPARγ-ablated mice (54); high-dose PPARγ agonist increased whitening of brown adipocyte (as indicated by enhanced lipogenesis, decreased UCP1 expression, and enlarged adipocytes with high lipid content and droplet size) (55,56). In line with these previous reports, long-term treatment with PPARγ agonist (troglitazone, 10 μM, day2 – day10) induced more enlarged adipocytes with pale-color and large intracellular lipid droplets (likely due to whitening of differentiated brown adipocytes, Figure 3F).

Consistently, PPARγ agonist stimulated the expression of aP2 (adipocyte differentiation marker) to a much greater extent as compared to the simulated expressions of UCP1 and CIDE-A (brown adipocyte specific markers) (Figure 3G – M). We observed that apelin only stimulated PPARγ expression at the early stage (within 2 days, Figure 3E) and apelin co-treatment with PPARγ agonist (since day2) significantly increased the expressions of UCP1 and CIDE-A, and the number of dark-color brown adipocytes. In contrast, apelin was no able to rectify the inhibited brown differentiation by PPARγ antagonist (T0070907, 1 μM) applied in the first two days (data not shown). Taken together, apelin promotes brown adipogenesis by 1) stimulating expression of adipogenic transcriptional factors (C/EBPβ and PPARγ) at the early stage; 2) up-regulating the transcription factors (PRDM16 and PGC1α) required for thermogenesis and mitochondrial biogenesis and counteracting PPARγ effects in the later stage to

ensure terminal determination of brown phenotype.

Apelin raises the basal metabolic activity of brown adipocytes

Norepinephrine (NE) released from the sympathetic nervous system activates brown adipocytes (including UCP1 expression, mitochondrial biogenesis and respiratory activity), through β-adrenergic receptors (β-AR), particularly β3-AR (1). In agreement with the previous studies (14), NE (6 hr incubation) acutely promoted the expressions of PGC1α (a key regulator of thermogenic gene expression and mitochondrial biogenesis), COX1, UCP1, as well as the oxygen consumption rate (OCR which reflects mitochondrial respiratory activity and metabolic rate) in brown adipocytes (Figure 4 A - C). Similar to the NE-effects, long-term treatment with apelin (3–4 days) increased the expressions of PGC1α, COX1 and UCP1 in brown adipocytes (Figure 4 A and B). Significant up-regulation of β3-AR, but not β1-AR, was also observed (Figure 4 E and F). As shown in Figure 4C and D, apelin was able to stimulate OCR to a level comparable to acute stimulation by NE. However, apelin pre-treatment had little influence on NE-induced protein expressions and OCR (Figure 4 A and C), suggesting that apelin is only stimulatory to the basal metabolic activity.

Mitochondria with abundant UCP1 are responsible for metabolic activities in brown adipocytes. Mitochondrial biogenesis and morphological change (from tubular to spherical) accompany thermogenic activation in brown adipocytes (14,57). We and others have shown that apelin increases mitochondrial biogenesis in white adipocytes and skeletal muscle cells (31,34). As shown in Figure 4G, tubular mitochondria are densely packed in brown adipocytes. Apelin treatment further increased its density, while mitochondria appeared shorter and more spherical in shape. TNFα secreted from macrophages in adipose tissue is deterrent to brown thermogenesis (43,44). In comparison, tubular mitochondria became more elongated in TNFα-treated brown adipocytes. Interestingly, in some brown adipocytes, mitochondria surround small lipid droplets, and these ring-shaped mitochondria are larger and more in apelin-treated cells (data not shown). As shown by a previous study, mitochondrial rings are observed in brown adipocytes treated with the uncoupling proteins which are responsible for reduced

membrane potential and increased oxygen consumption in mitochondria (58). We found that apelin treatment decreased the mitochondrial membrane potential (Figure 4H) (as evidenced by the decreased fluorescence intensity of MitoTracker Red staining), without affecting cell viability (data not shown). Taken together, we provide evidence that apelin stimulates the basal metabolic activities in brown adipocytes.

Apelin increases the browning characteristics in white adipocytes

In addition to classical brown adipocytes, certain white adipocytes can transform into brown-like adipocytes (called beige cells) in response to various stimuli (e.g., cold exposure, etc.) (14). Beige cells are characterized by their multilocular lipid droplets, dark-brown color due to high mitochondrial content, and expression of thermogenic and brown-fat specific genes (e.g., UCP1) (14). As both apelin and APJ are abundantly expressed in white adipocytes (24,59), we sought to investigate the apelin's effects on browning of white adipocytes. Consistent with previous studies (13,60), it was found that UCP1 expression in human white adipocytes is much lower than in brown adipocytes (Figure 5). Similar to its stimulatory effect on brown adipocytes, apelin increased the expression of PRDM16 which is known to promote the browning of white adipocytes (14,61) (Figure 5 A and G). As expected, UCP1 and COX1 expressions were also significantly increased in apelin-treated human white (Figure 5A) and 3T3-L1 adipocytes (mouse white pre-adipose cell line) (day5 - day9) (Figure 5G). Consistently, apelin treatment decreased the mitochondrial membrane potential and enhanced the basal activity of mitochondrial respiration (as evidenced by the increased OCR) (Figure 5 C - E) in human white adipocytes. Some dark-colored multilocular brown-adipocyte like cells was also observed after apelin treatment (Figure 5B and F). All these results indicate that apelin promotes the browning characteristics in white adipocytes.

We and others have previously reported that apelin release from white adipocytes increases over time during adipocyte differentiation (24). Using 3T3-L1 adipocytes, we examined whether apelin induces brown-like phenotype at the late stage of adipocyte differentiation. As shown in Figure 5G, apelin treatment (day2 - day9) decreased the expressions of ap2 (a marker

protein for differentiated adipocytes) (62), suggesting that apelin hinders the terminal differentiation of white adipocytes. This is in line with the previous observation that apelin is able to decrease 3T3-L1 adipocyte differentiation (29). On the other hand, COX1, UCP1, and CIDE-A protein levels (brown adipocyte markers) were not reduced in apelin-treated cells (Figure 5G). Contrarily, knocking down of apelin or APJ receptor decreased the expression ratios of UCP1/aP2 and CIDE-A/aP2 (data not shown). In summary, our results suggest that apelin apparently hinders maturation of white adipocytes while promoting the brown fat-like characteristics during the terminal phase of 3T3-L1 adipocyte differentiation.

We further examined the apelin's effects on browning characteristics during the adipogenic differentiation of human mesenchymal stem cells (hMSCs). A recent study showed that, unless PRDM16 is overexpressed, hMSCs will only differentiate into white adipocytes with low UCP1 expression, even under ectopic expression of PPARγ (53). Similar to human white adipocytes, only low level of UCP1 expression was detected in adipocytes differentiated from hMSCs (Figure 5H). In comparison, UCP1 expression was dramatically increased in apelin-treated cells, together with increased expression of PRDM16 (Figure 5H), similar to its stimulatory effect on brown adipocytes. In contrast, leptin expression was significantly reduced. Previous studies suggest that leptin is white adipocyte specific, since unilocular UCP1-negative adipocytes are leptin-positive whereas multilocular UCP1-positive brown adipocytes are leptin-negative (63, 64). Our experiments on hMSCs further confirm that apelin is able to promote the browning characteristics in white adipocytes, at least in part, by stimulating the expression of PRDM16.

Apelin promotes the browning of WAT in vivo

No significant difference in body weight (Figure 6A) or food intake (data not shown) was observed in control (saline-treated) and apelin-treated mice. Interestingly, the apelin-treated mice exhibited significantly reduced weight of WAT (both inguinal and epididymal WAT) while the weight of interscapular BAT was similar to the control group (Figure 6B and C). Moreover, the protein levels of PRDM16, COX1 and UCP1 (brown adipocyte markers) were elevated in WAT isolated from the apelin-treated mice (Figure 6D).

To further confirm the browning effect of apelin, primary pre-adipocytes were isolated from mouse inguinal WAT, and differentiated into white adipocytes. As shown in Figure 6E, UCP1 (brown adipocyte specific protein) level was much lower in these differentiated white adipocytes, as compared to the brown adipocytes (differentiated from interscapular BAT pre-adipose cells from the same group of mice). In comparison, PRDM16, COX1 and UCP1 expressions were considerably upregulated in apelin-treated white adipocytes (Figure 6F), which is similar to the observations in human and 3T3-L1 white adipocytes (Figure 5). Taken together, apelin's stimulation on WAT browning is confirmed by both in vivo and in vitro mouse experiments.

Apelin's stimulatory effects on brown adipogenesis and browning of white adipocytes are dependent on AMPK and PI3K/Akt signaling pathways

We and others have shown that apelin increases Akt and AMPK phosphorylation in white adipocytes (27, 28, 34). Here, we also found that apelin increased the activation (phosphorylation) of Akt and AMPK in primary rat brown pre-adipocytes (Figure 7A and B). As shown in Figure 7E and F, siRNA knockdown of Akt expression in brown pre-adipocytes precluded the brown adipogenesis, as evidenced by the decreased protein levels of PRDM16, COX1, UCP1, CIDE-A and aP2. Apelin-induced brown adipogenesis was also effectively concealed in Akt-knockout cells. In addition, AMPK protein knockdown in brown pre-adipocytes largely blocked the apelin-induced expressions of PRDM16, UCP1, CIDE-A, and aP2. Previous studies showed that both the PI3K/Akt and AMPK/mTOR signaling are important in brown adipogenesis (65, 66). Therefore, it may be concluded that apelin induces brown adipogenesis, at least in part, by activating the PI3K/Akt and AMPK signaling pathways.

Similar to the browning effects on human and mouse white adipocytes (Figure 5A and 6F), apelin treatment (day 5 - day 9) significantly increased the expressions of PRDM16, COX1 and UCP1 in 3T3-L1 white adipocytes (Figure 7G and H). Also, AMPK protein knockdown significantly blocked the apelin-induced expressions of PRDM16 and UCP1 (Figure 7G and H). Apelin-induced UCP1 expression was

also obscured in Akt-knockout cells. This suggests that the apelin's effect on browning of white adipocytes is also dependent on AMPK signaling pathway.

# DISCUSSION

Adipose browning (including increase of brown adipocyte differentiation in BAT and transformation of beige adipocytes in WAT) not only suppresses obesity through increased energy expenditure but also counteracts the detrimental effects of excess WAT (e.g., insulin resistance) (14, 15). An explosion of interest has been triggered because stimulating adipose browning may be a novel route to combat obesity and associated metabolic diseases. Increasing evidence is mounting to suggest that adipokines secreted by adipocytes play important roles in the self-modeling of adipose tissue (19, 29, 33). But their effects on browning are not well explored.

In this study, we present evidence that apelin secreted by both brown and white adipocytes stimulates adipose browning. Based on our experiments and previous studies, the following scenario may be proposed (Figure 8). In obesity, adipose tissue is in chronic low-grade inflammation, characterized by accumulation of macrophages and inflammatory cytokines which contribute to the development of insulin resistance (45). Inflammatory factors (e.g., TNFα) released from macrophages suppress brown adipocyte formation (Figure 2) (43, 44), and hence reduce BAT mass in obesity (3, 4). Consequently, decreased energy consumption further aggravates the excess energy storage in WAT (1, 15). On the other hand, apelin expression in WAT and its plasma level are elevated in obesity (24). By interacting with APJ receptor, apelin activates PI3K/Akt and AMPK signaling in brown pre-adipocytes (Figure 1 and 7), leading to increased expressions of brown adipogenic and thermogenic transcription factors (Figure 3). As brown adipogenesis progresses, apelin expression increases in BAT, creating an autocrine positive feedback loop which enhances brown adipocyte differentiation (Figure 1) and offsets the TNFα-impaired brown adipogenesis (Figure 2). Apelin induces browning of white adipocytes too (Figure 5 and 6). In addition to the increased number of brown or brown-like adipocytes, apelin also stimulates metabolic activity of adipocytes (Figure 4 and 5). As a result, the body energy consumption increases

(30), and WAT masses are reduced (Figure 6). Moreover, apelin's inhibitory effect on white adipocyte differentiation offers the effective negative feedback to hinder further expansion of WAT (29) (Figure 5G). As described, the unique co-existence of apelin's positive and negative feedback loops compensate the imbalanced development of BAT and WAT found in obesity. On the other hand, disruption of the apelin signaling by silencing apelin or APJ receptor expression decreases the number of brown adipocytes (Figure 1) and increases the number of hypertrophied white adipocytes (29). The above-proposed notion is consistent with the previous studies in rodents showing that 1) apelin treatment increases body temperature and O₂ consumption (30); 2) apelin treatment or BAT transplantation decreases body adiposity and insulin resistance (9, 25); 3) apelin-knockout or BAT-ablated mice exhibit increased central adiposity and insulin resistance (7, 28).

BAT metabolic activity (thus energy consumption) can be enhanced by acute cold exposure (a few hours) (4, 67). This is due to increased sympathetic nervous system activity whereby norepinephrine (NE)-induced cAMP accumulation promotes UCP1 expression and its uncoupling process (1, 14). Prolonged cold exposure (several days) is known to increase BAT mass as well as browning of WAT in humans (5, 68). Interestingly, apelin expression and release from white adipocytes are up-regulated by cAMP (59), and apelin plasma level is raised upon cold exposure (69). It is conceivable that cold-induced apelin increase is an adaptive reaction to stimulate adipose browning. NE stimulated metabolic activities of brown adipocytes however cannot be further augmented by apelin (Figure 4). This is attributable to the fact that apelin and NE antagonize each other on PKA/cAMP signaling. As previously shown, apelin inhibits cAMP production via G(i) protein-coupled APJ receptor (28, 70).

Exercise training also potentiates BAT thermogenesis and browning of WAT (15). Both exercise training and cold exposure increase the circulating levels of irisin and FGF21 (16, 17, 71). These recently found myokine and hepatokine stimulate brown-fat-like thermogenesis in WAT (16, 17). Interestingly, in obese people, exercise only up-regulates muscle expression of apelin, without affecting irisin and FGF21 levels (72). A number of studies show that plasma apelin level is increased after exercise training and cold

exposure (69,73,74). Hence, like irisin and FG21,  
apelin could be regarded as an exercise- and  
cold- induced endocrine activator to promote  
adipose browning. We have previously  
demonstrated in white adipocytes that apelin  
suppresses the release of fatty acids and reactive  
oxygen species (29,34), which are key  
contributors to the pathogenesis of obesity-  
related metabolic disorders. Therefore, apelin are  
able to exert multiple beneficial effects through  
both white and brown adipocytes, and may serve  
as a novel therapeutic target for obesity and  
related metabolic diseases.

REFERENCES

1. Chechi, K., Carpentier, A. C., and Richard, D. (2013) Understanding the brown adipocyte as a contributor to energy homeostasis. *Trends Endocrinol Metab* 24, 408-420
2. Lidell, M. E., and Enerback, S. (2010) Brown adipose tissue--a new role in humans? *Nature reviews. Endocrinology* 6, 319-325
3. Cypess, A. M., Lehman, S., Williams, G., Tal, I., Rodman, D., Goldfine, A. B., Kuo, F. C., Palmer, E. L., Tseng, Y. H., Doria, A., Kolodny, G. M., and Kahn, C. R. (2009) Identification and importance of brown adipose tissue in adult humans. *The New England journal of medicine* 360, 1509-1517
4. van Marken Lichtenbelt, W. D., Vanhommerig, J. W., Smulders, N. M., Drossaerts, J. M., Kemerink, G. J., Bouvy, N. D., Schrauwen, P., and Teule, G. J. (2009) Cold-activated brown adipose tissue in healthy men. *The New England journal of medicine* 360, 1500-1508
5. Yoneshiro, T., Aita, S., Matsushita, M., Kayahara, T., Kameya, T., Kawai, Y., Iwanaga, T., and Saito, M. (2013) Recruited brown adipose tissue as an antiobesity agent in humans. *J Clin Invest* 123, 3404-3408
6. Vijgen, G. H., Bouvy, N. D., Teule, G. J., Brans, B., Hoeks, J., Schrauwen, P., and van Marken Lichtenbelt, W. D. (2012) Increase in brown adipose tissue activity after weight loss in morbidly obese subjects. *J Clin Endocrinol Metab* 97, E1229-1233
7. Lowell, B. B., V, S. S., Hamann, A., Lawitts, J. A., Himms-Hagen, J., Boyer, B. B., Kozak, L. P., and Flier, J. S. (1993) Development of obesity in transgenic mice after genetic ablation of brown adipose tissue. *Nature* 366, 740-742
8. Chondronikola, M., Volpi, E., Borsheim, E., Porter, C., Annamalai, P., Enerback, S., Lidell, M. E., Saraf, M. K., Labbe, S. M., Hurren, N. M., Yfanti, C., Chao, T., Andersen, C. R., Cesani, F., Hawkins, H., and Sidossis, L. S. (2014) Brown Adipose Tissue Improves Whole Body Glucose Homeostasis and Insulin Sensitivity in Humans. *Diabetes*
9. Stanford, K. I., Middelbeek, R. J., Townsend, K. L., An, D., Nygaard, E. B., Hitchcox, K. M., Markan, K. R., Nakano, K., Hirshman, M. F., Tseng, Y. H., and Goodyear, L. J. (2013) Brown adipose tissue regulates glucose homeostasis and insulin sensitivity. *J Clin Invest* 123, 215-223
10. Yang, X., Enerback, S., and Smith, U. (2003) Reduced expression of FOXC2 and brown adipogenic genes in human subjects with insulin resistance. *Obesity research* 11, 1182-1191
11. Cypess, A. M., and Kahn, C. R. (2010) Brown fat as a therapy for obesity and diabetes. *Curr Opin Endocrinol Diabetes Obes* 17, 143-149
12. Grundy, S. M. (2004) Obesity, metabolic syndrome, and cardiovascular disease. *J Clin Endocrinol Metab* 89, 2595-2600
13. Carey, A. L., Vorlander, C., Reddy-Luthmoodoo, M., Natoli, A. K., Formosa, M. F., Bertovic, D. A., Anderson, M. J., Duffy, S. J., and Kingwell, B. A. (2014) Reduced UCP-1 content in in vitro differentiated beige/brite adipocytes derived from preadipocytes of human subcutaneous white adipose tissues in obesity. *PLoS One* 9, e91997
14. Harms, M., and Seale, P. (2013) Brown and beige fat: development, function and therapeutic potential. *Nature medicine* 19, 1252-1263
15. Bartelt, A., and Heeren, J. (2014) Adipose tissue browning and metabolic health. *Nature reviews. Endocrinology* 10, 24-36
16. Bostrom, P., Wu, J., Jedrychowski, M. P., Korde, A., Ye, L., Lo, J. C., Rasbach, K. A., Bostrom, E. A., Choi, J. H., Long, J. Z., Kajimura, S., Zingaretti, M. C., Vind, B. F., Tu, H., Cinti, S., Hojlund, K., Gygi, S. P., and Spiegelman, B. M. (2012) A PGC1-alpha-dependent myokine that drives brown-fat-like development of white fat and thermogenesis. *Nature* 481, 463-468
17. Fisher, F. M., Kleiner, S., Douris, N., Fox, E. C., Mepani, R. J., Verdeguer, F., Wu, J., Kharitonenkov, A., Flier, J. S., Maratos-Flier, E., and Spiegelman, B. M. (2012) FGF21 regulates PGC-1alpha and browning of white adipose tissues in adaptive thermogenesis. *Genes & development* 26, 271-281
18. Trayhurn, P., Bing, C., and Wood, I. S. (2006) Adipose tissue and adipokines--energy regulation from the human perspective. *J Nutr* 136, 1935S-1939S

19. Karastergiou, K., and Mohamed-Ali, V. (2010) The autocrine and paracrine roles of adipokines. *Mol Cell Endocrinol* 318, 69-78

20. Ye, F., Than, A., Zhao, Y., Goh, K. H., and Chen, P. (2010) Vesicular storage, vesicle trafficking, and secretion of leptin and resistin: the similarities, differences, and interplays. *J Endocrinol* 206, 27-36

21. Masaki, T., Chiba, S., Yasuda, T., Tsubone, T., Kakuma, T., Shimomura, I., Funahashi, T., Matsuzawa, Y., and Yoshimatsu, H. (2003) Peripheral, but not central, administration of adiponectin reduces visceral adiposity and upregulates the expression of uncoupling protein in agouti yellow (Ay/a) obese mice. *Diabetes* 52, 2266-2273

22. Commins, S. P., Watson, P. M., Padgett, M. A., Dudley, A., Argyropoulos, G., and Gettyts, T. W. (1999) Induction of uncoupling protein expression in brown and white adipose tissue by leptin. *Endocrinology* 140, 292-300

23. Knudsen, J. G., Murholm, M., Carey, A. L., Bienso, R. S., Basse, A. L., Allen, T. L., Hidalgo, J., Kingwell, B. A., Febbraio, M. A., Hansen, J. B., and Pilegaard, H. (2014) Role of IL-6 in exercise training- and cold-induced UCP1 expression in subcutaneous white adipose tissue. *PLoS One* 9, e84910

24. Boucher, J., Masri, B., Daviaud, D., Gesta, S., Guigne, C., Mazzucotelli, A., Castan-Laurell, I., Tack, I., Knibiehler, B., Carpene, C., Audigier, Y., Saulnier-Blache, J. S., and Valet, P. (2005) Apelin, a newly identified adipokine up-regulated by insulin and obesity. *Endocrinology* 146, 1764-1771

25. Castan-Laurell, I., Dray, C., Attane, C., Duparc, T., Knauf, C., and Valet, P. (2011) Apelin, diabetes, and obesity. *Endocrine* 40, 1-9

26. Yue, P., Jin, H., Aillaud, M., Deng, A. C., Azuma, J., Asagami, T., Kundu, R. K., Reaven, G. M., Quertermous, T., and Tsao, P. S. (2010) Apelin is necessary for the maintenance of insulin sensitivity. *Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab* 298, E59-67

27. Zhu, S., Sun, F., Li, W., Cao, Y., Wang, C., Wang, Y., Liang, D., Zhang, R., Zhang, S., Wang, H., and Cao, F. (2011) Apelin stimulates glucose uptake through the PI3K/Akt pathway and improves insulin resistance in 3T3-L1 adipocytes. *Mol Cell Biochem* 353, 305-313

28. Yue, P., Jin, H., Xu, S., Aillaud, M., Deng, A. C., Azuma, J., Kundu, R. K., Reaven, G. M., Quertermous, T., and Tsao, P. S. (2011) Apelin decreases lipolysis via G(q), G(i), and AMPK-Dependent Mechanisms. *Endocrinology* 152, 59-68

29. Than, A., Cheng, Y., Foh, L. C., Leow, M. K., Lim, S. C., Chuah, Y. J., Kang, Y., and Chen, P. (2012) Apelin inhibits adipogenesis and lipolysis through distinct molecular pathways. *Mol Cell Endocrinol* 362, 227-241

30. Higuchi, K., Masaki, T., Gotoh, K., Chiba, S., Katsuragi, I., Tanaka, K., Kakuma, T., and Yoshimatsu, H. (2007) Apelin, an APJ receptor ligand, regulates body adiposity and favors the messenger ribonucleic acid expression of uncoupling proteins in mice. *Endocrinology* 148, 2690-2697

31. Attane, C., Foussal, C., Le Gonidec, S., Benani, A., Daviaud, D., Wanecq, E., Guzman-Ruiz, R., Dray, C., Bezaire, V., Rancoule, C., Kuba, K., Ruiz-Gayo, M., Levade, T., Penninger, J., Burcelin, R., Penicaud, L., Valet, P., and Castan-Laurell, I. (2012) Apelin treatment increases complete Fatty Acid oxidation, mitochondrial oxidative capacity, and biogenesis in muscle of insulin-resistant mice. *Diabetes* 61, 310-320

32. Kim, H. J., Cho, H., Alexander, R., Patterson, H. C., Gu, M., Lo, K. A., Xu, D., Goh, V. J., Nguyen, L. N., Chai, X., Huang, C. X., Kovalik, J. P., Ghosh, S., Trajkovski, M., Silver, D. L., Lodish, H., and Sun, L. (2014) MicroRNAs are required for the feature maintenance and differentiation of brown adipocytes. *Diabetes* 63, 4045-4056

33. Than, A., Leow, M. K., and Chen, P. (2013) Control of adipogenesis by the autocrine interplays between angiotensin 1-7/Mas receptor and angiotensin II/AT1 receptor signaling pathways. *J Biol Chem* 288, 15520-15531

34. Than, A., Zhang, X., Leow, M. K., Poh, C. L., Chong, S. K., and Chen, P. (2014) Apelin attenuates oxidative stress in human adipocytes. *J Biol Chem* 289, 3763-3774

35. Scott, M. A., Nguyen, V. T., Levi, B., and James, A. W. (2011) Current methods of adipogenic differentiation of mesenchymal stem cells. *Stem cells and development* 20, 1793-1804

36. Johnson, I., and Spence, M. T. Z. (2010) The Molecular Probes Handbook: A Guide to Fluorescent Probes and Labeling Technologies. 11th. Life Technologies; Carlsbad, CA

37. Graves, J. A., Wang, Y., Sims-Lucas, S., Cherok, E., Rothermund, K., Branca, M. F., Elster, J., Beer-Stolz, D., Van Houten, B., Vockley, J., and Prochownik, E. V. (2012) Mitochondrial structure, function and dynamics are temporally controlled by c-Myc. PLoS One 7, e37699

38. Buravkov, S. V., Pogodina, M. V., and Buravkova, L. B. (2014) Comparison of mitochondrial fluorescent dyes in stromal cells. Bulletin of experimental biology and medicine 157, 654-658

39. Butruille, L., Drougard, A., Knauf, C., Moitrot, E., Valet, P., Storme, L., Deruelle, P., and Lesage, J. (2013) The apelinergic system: sexual dimorphism and tissue-specific modulations by obesity and insulin resistance in female mice. Peptides 46, 94-101

40. Zhen, E. Y., Higgs, R. E., and Gutierrez, J. A. (2013) Pyroglutamyl apelin-13 identified as the major apelin isoform in human plasma. Anal Biochem 442, 1-9

41. Pitkin, S. L., Maguire, J. J., Bonner, T. I., and Davenport, A. P. (2010) International Union of Basic and Clinical Pharmacology. LXXIV. Apelin receptor nomenclature, distribution, pharmacology, and function. Pharmacol Rev 62, 331-342

42. Nisoli, E., Briscini, L., Giordano, A., Tonello, C., Wiesbrock, S. M., Uysal, K. T., Cinti, S., Carruba, M. O., and Hotamisligil, G. S. (2000) Tumor necrosis factor alpha mediates apoptosis of brown adipocytes and defective brown adipocyte function in obesity. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 97, 8033-8038

43. Valladares, A., Roncero, C., Benito, M., and Porras, A. (2001) TNF-alpha inhibits UCP-1 expression in brown adipocytes via ERKs. Opposite effect of p38MAPK. FEBS Lett 493, 6-11

44. Sakamoto, T., Takahashi, N., Sawaragi, Y., Naknukool, S., Yu, R., Goto, T., and Kawada, T. (2013) Inflammation induced by RAW macrophages suppresses UCP1 mRNA induction via ERK activation in 10T1/2 adipocytes. American journal of physiology. Cell physiology 304, C729-738

45. Heilbronn, L. K., and Campbell, L. V. (2008) Adipose tissue macrophages, low grade inflammation and insulin resistance in human obesity. Current pharmaceutical design 14, 1225-1230

46. Than, A., Ye, F., Xue, R., Ong, J. W., Poh, C. L., and Chen, P. (2011) The crosstalks between adipokines and catecholamines. Mol Cell Endocrinol 332, 261-270

47. Seale, P., Kajimura, S., and Spiegelman, B. M. (2009) Transcriptional control of brown adipocyte development and physiological function--of mice and men. Genes & development 23, 788-797

48. Nedergaard, J., Petrovic, N., Lindgren, E. M., Jacobsson, A., and Cannon, B. (2005) PPARgamma in the control of brown adipocyte differentiation. Biochimica et biophysica acta 1740, 293-304

49. Kajimura, S., Seale, P., Tomaru, T., Erdjument-Bromage, H., Cooper, M. P., Ruas, J. L., Chin, S., Tempst, P., Lazar, M. A., and Spiegelman, B. M. (2008) Regulation of the brown and white fat gene programs through a PRDM16/CtBP transcriptional complex. Genes & development 22, 1397-1409

50. Seale, P., Kajimura, S., Yang, W., Chin, S., Rohas, L. M., Uldry, M., Tavernier, G., Langin, D., and Spiegelman, B. M. (2007) Transcriptional control of brown fat determination by PRDM16. Cell Metab 6, 38-54

51. Uldry, M., Yang, W., St-Pierre, J., Lin, J., Seale, P., and Spiegelman, B. M. (2006) Complementary action of the PGC-1 coactivators in mitochondrial biogenesis and brown fat differentiation. Cell Metab 3, 333-341

52. Matsuo, K., Bettaieb, A., Nagata, N., Matsuo, I., Keilhack, H., and Haj, F. G. (2011) Regulation of brown fat adipogenesis by protein tyrosine phosphatase 1B. PLoS One 6, e16446

53. Ahfeldt, T., Schinzel, R. T., Lee, Y. K., Hendrickson, D., Kaplan, A., Lum, D. H., Camahort, R., Xia, F., Shay, J., Rhee, E. P., Clish, C. B., Deo, R. C., Shen, T., Lau, F. H., Cowley, A., Mowrer, G., Al-Siddiqi, H., Nahrendorf, M., Musunuru, K., Gerszten, R. E., Rinn, J. L., and Cowan, C. A. (2012) Programming human pluripotent stem cells into white and brown adipocytes. Nature cell biology 14, 209-219

54. He, W., Barak, Y., Hevener, A., Olson, P., Liao, D., Le, J., Nelson, M., Ong, E., Olefsky, J. M., and Evans, R. M. (2003) Adipose-specific peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma knockout causes insulin resistance in fat and liver but not in muscle. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA* 100, 15712-15717

55. Kelly, L. J., Vicario, P. P., Thompson, G. M., Candelore, M. R., Doeber, T. W., Ventre, J., Wu, M. S., Meurer, R., Forrest, M. J., Conner, M. W., Cascieri, M. A., and Moller, D. E. (1998) Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors gamma and alpha mediate in vivo regulation of uncoupling protein (UCP-1, UCP-2, UCP-3) gene expression. *Endocrinology* 139, 4920-4927

56. Festuccia, W. T., Blanchard, P. G., Turcotte, V., Laplante, M., Sariahmetoglu, M., Brindley, D. N., Richard, D., and Deshaies, Y. (2009) The PPARgamma agonist rosiglitazone enhances rat brown adipose tissue lipogenesis from glucose without altering glucose uptake. *American journal of physiology. Regulatory, integrative and comparative physiology* 296, R1327-1335

57. Wikstrom, J. D., Mahdaviani, K., Liesa, M., Sereda, S. B., Si, Y., Las, G., Twig, G., Petrovic, N., Zingaretti, C., Graham, A., Cinti, S., Corkey, B. E., Cannon, B., Nedergaard, J., and Shirihai, O. S. (2014) Hormone-induced mitochondrial fission is utilized by brown adipocytes as an amplification pathway for energy expenditure. *The EMBO journal* 33, 418-436

58. Liu, X., and Hajnoczky, G. (2011) Altered fusion dynamics underlie unique morphological changes in mitochondria during hypoxia-reoxygenation stress. *Cell death and differentiation* 18, 1561-1572

59. Than, A., Tee, W. T., and Chen, P. (2012) Apelin secretion and expression of apelin receptors in 3T3-L1 adipocytes are differentially regulated by angiotensin type 1 and type 2 receptors. *Mol Cell Endocrinol* 351, 296-305

60. Lehr, L., Canola, K., Leger, B., and Giacobino, J. P. (2009) Differentiation and characterization in primary culture of white adipose tissue brown adipocyte-like cells. *International journal of obesity* 33, 680-686

61. Seale, P., Conroe, H. M., Estall, J., Kajimura, S., Frontini, A., Ishibashi, J., Cohen, P., Cinti, S., and Spiegelman, B. M. (2011) Prdm16 determines the thermogenic program of subcutaneous white adipose tissue in mice. *J Clin Invest* 121, 96-105

62. Gregoire, F. M., Smas, C. M., and Sul, H. S. (1998) Understanding adipocyte differentiation. *Physiological reviews* 78, 783-809

63. Cinti, S., Frederich, R. C., Zingaretti, M. C., De Matteis, R., Flier, J. S., and Lowell, B. B. (1997) Immunohistochemical localization of leptin and uncoupling protein in white and brown adipose tissue. *Endocrinology* 138, 797-804

64. Canceillo, R., Zingaretti, M. C., Sarzani, R., Ricquier, D., and Cinti, S. (1998) Leptin and UCP1 genes are reciprocally regulated in brown adipose tissue. *Endocrinology* 139, 4747-4750

65. Hinoi, E., Iezaki, T., Fujita, H., Watanabe, T., Odaka, Y., Ozaki, K., and Yoneda, Y. (2014) PI3K/Akt is involved in brown adipogenesis mediated by growth differentiation factor-5 in association with activation of the Smad pathway. *Biochem Biophys Res Commun* 450, 255-260

66. Vila-Bedmar, R., Lorenzo, M., and Fernandez-Veledo, S. (2010) Adenosine 5'-monophosphate-activated protein kinase-mammalian target of rapamycin cross talk regulates brown adipocyte differentiation. *Endocrinology* 151, 980-992

67. Ouellet, V., Labbe, S. M., Blondin, D. P., Phoenix, S., Guerin, B., Haman, F., Turcotte, E. E., Richard, D., and Carpentier, A. C. (2012) Brown adipose tissue oxidative metabolism contributes to energy expenditure during acute cold exposure in humans. *J Clin Invest* 122, 545-552

68. van der Lans, A. A., Hoeks, J., Brans, B., Vijgen, G. H., Visser, M. G., Vosselman, M. J., Hansen, J., Jorgensen, J. A., Wu, J., Mottaghy, F. M., Schrauwen, P., and van Marken Lichtenbelt, W. D. (2013) Cold acclimation recruits human brown fat and increases nonshivering thermogenesis. *J Clin Invest* 123, 3395-3403

69. Mazzucotelli, A., Ribet, C., Castan-Laurell, I., Daviaud, D., Guigue, C., Langin, D., and Valet, P. (2008) The transcriptional co-activator PGC-1 alpha up regulates apelin in human and mouse adipocytes. *Regulatory peptides* 150, 33-37

Apelin Stimulates Adipose Tissue Browning

70. Masri, B., Morin, N., Pedebernade, L., Knibiehler, B., and Audigier, Y. (2006) The apelin receptor is coupled to Gi1 or Gi2 protein and is differentially desensitized by apelin fragments. *J Biol Chem* **281**, 18317-18326

71. Lee, P., Linderman, J. D., Smith, S., Brychta, R. J., Wang, J., Idelson, C., Perron, R. M., Werner, C. D., Phan, G. Q., Kammula, U. S., Kebebew, E., Pacak, K., Chen, K. Y., and Celi, F. S. (2014) Irisin and FGF21 are cold-induced endocrine activators of brown fat function in humans. *Cell Metab* **19**, 302-309

72. Besse-Patin, A., Montastier, E., Vinel, C., Castan-Laurell, I., Louche, K., Dray, C., Daviaud, D., Mir, L., Marques, M. A., Thalamas, C., Valet, P., Langin, D., Moro, C., and Viguerie, N. (2014) Effect of endurance training on skeletal muscle myokine expression in obese men: identification of apelin as a novel myokine. *International journal of obesity* **38**, 707-713

73. Kadoglou, N. P., Vrabas, I. S., Kapelouzou, A., Lampropoulos, S., Sailer, N., Kostakis, A., Liapis, C. D., and Angelopoulou, N. (2012) The impact of aerobic exercise training on novel adipokines, apelin and ghrelin, in patients with type 2 diabetes. *Medical science monitor : international medical journal of experimental and clinical research* **18**, CR290-295

74. Zhang, J., Ren, C. X., Qi, Y. F., Lou, L. X., Chen, L., Zhang, L. K., Wang, X., and Tang, C. (2006) Exercise training promotes expression of apelin and APJ of cardiovascular tissues in spontaneously hypertensive rats. *Life Sci* **79**, 1153-1159

---

### FOOTNOTE

# This research is supported by the Singapore National Research Foundation under its CBRG grant (CBRG14may001) and administrated by the Singapore Ministry of Health’s National Medical Research Council, and also supported by the Singapore Ministry of Education under its AcRF tier 1 grant (RGT7/13).

---

The abbreviations used are: Akt, protein kinase B; AMPK, 5' adenosine monophosphate-activated protein kinase; APJ, apelin receptor; AR, adrenergic receptor; aP2, adipocyte protein2 (adipocyte-fatty acid-binding protein); COX1, cytochrome c oxidase subunit I; CIDE-A, cell death-inducing DFFA-like effector A; C/EBPβ, CCAAT-enhancer binding protein beta; PPARγ, peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma; PRDM16, PR-domain containing protein 16; PGC-1α, peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma coactivator-1-alpha; PI3K, phosphatidylinositol-3 kinase; NA, norepinephrine; OCR, oxygen consumption rate; TNFα, tumor necrosis factor alpha; UCP1, uncoupling protein 1.

---

### FIGURE LEGENDS

FIGURE 1 Apelin-APJ receptor enhances brown adipocyte differentiation. [A] Confocal images of immunostained apelin and APJ receptor in brown fat cells and their corresponding bright-field images. Scale bars = 10 μm. [B – H] Brown pre-adipocytes were induced to differentiate into adipocytes without (-) (control) or (+) with exposure to 100 nM pyr-apelin13 for different periods of time [B] Representative images of brown pre-adipocytes (day2) and adipocytes (day8). [C] Number of brown adipocytes (multiloculated cells) (at day8) per field-of-view (10x), mean ± SEM (n = 4). [D – G] Time course of the protein expression levels during adipogenesis: UCP1 (~ 33kDa), CIDE-A (~ 26kDa), aP2 (~ 16kDa), actin (~ 42kDa). The representative immunoblots and the statistics (mean ± SEM, n = 4) of the blot densities normalized to actin density (protein expressions at day2 regarded as control). [H] The representative immunoblot of preproapelin (~ 8 kDa) expression in brown fat cells at different stages of differentiation, and the statistics (mean ± SEM, n = 4, blot densities were normalized to that of actin) (expression at 4h as control). [I – M] Brown pre-adipocytes were transfected with control siRNA, apelin siRNA or APJ siRNA, 2 - 3 days before the induction of

differentiation. The representative immunoblot of protein expressions (day10), and the statistics (mean ± SEM, n = 4, blot densities were normalized to that of actin) are shown in [I – L]. Number of brown adipocytes (day8) per field-of-view (10x), mean ± SEM (n = 4) is shown in [M]. Each sample contains same amount of total proteins (as the loading control). Using student's *t*-test *p* < 0.05, **p** < 0.01 vs. control; #*p* < 0.05, ##*p* < 0.01 between indicated pairs.

FIGURE 2 Apelin improves TNFα- and macrophages- impaired brown adipocyte differentiation. [A and B] Brown pre-adipocytes were co-cultured with primary rat macrophages during the first 2 days of differentiation, followed by continuing differentiation for 8 days. Illustration of Transwell co-culturing system is shown in [A]. The representative immunoblots of protein expressions (UCP1, CIDE-A, aP2, actin) (day10) in brown adipocytes, and the statistics (mean ± SEM, n = 4) of blot densities normalized to that of actin are shown in [B]. [C - E] Brown pre-adipocytes were induced to differentiate into brown adipocytes for 8 - 10 days, without (-) (control) or with (+) exposure to pyr-apelin13 and/or 10 ng/ml TNFα. The representative bright field images [C], and the number of brown adipocytes (at day8) per field-of-view (10x) (mean ± SEM, n = 4) [D]. The representative immunoblots of UCP1, CIDE-A, COX1 (~ 57 kDa), aP2, and actin expressions (day10), and the statistics (mean ± SEM, n = 4) of blot densities normalized to that of actin are shown in [E]. Using one-way ANOVA, *p* < 0.05, **p** < 0.01, ***p** < 0.001 vs. control (no treatment); #*p* < 0.05, #*p* < 0.01 between indicated pairs.

FIGURE 3 Apelin increases the expressions of brown adipogenic and thermogenic transcriptional factors. [A – E] Time course of the expressions of C/EBPβ (~ 45kDa), PRDM16 (~ 170kDa), PGC1α (~ 90kDa), PPARγ (~ 57kDa) and actin during brown adipocyte differentiation, without (-) or with (+) exposure to pyr-apelin13. The representative immunoblots and the statistics (mean ± SEM, n = 4, blot densities were normalized to actin density; *p* < 0.05, **p** < 0.01 vs. untreated; Student’s *t*-test) are shown in [A] and [B – E], respectively. [F - M] Brown pre-adipocytes were induced to differentiate into brown adipocytes for 8 - 10 days, without (-) (control) or with (+) exposure to pyr-apelin13 and/or 10 μM troglitazone (added at day2). The representative bright-field images of brown adipocytes and immunoblots of UCP1, CIDE-A, COX1, aP2, and actin expressions in brown adipocytes are shown in [F] and [G], respectively. The statistics (mean ± SEM, n = 4) of the blot densities normalized to that of actin are shown in [H – K]. UCP1/aP2 and CIDE-A/aP2 are density ratios of UCP1, CIDE-A and aP2 [L and M]. Using one-way ANOVA, *p* < 0.05, **p** < 0.01, ***p** < 0.001 vs. untreated; #*p* < 0.05 between indicated pairs.

FIGURE 4 Apelin increases UCP1 expression and basal metabolic activity in brown adipocytes. After 3 - 4 days without (-) (control) or with (+) exposure to pyr-apelin13, brown adipocytes (day10) were treated without (-) or with (+) 1 μM norepinephrine (NE) for 6 hr. [A] The representative immunoblots and statistics (mean ± SEM, n = 4, blot densities were normalized to that of actin) of PGC1α, COX1, UCP1, CIDE-A, and actin expressions in brown adipocytes. Using one-way ANOVA, *p* < 0.05, **p** < 0.01, ***p** < 0.001 vs. untreated. [B] Confocal images of immunostained UCP1 in differently treated brown adipocytes. Scale bars = 10 μm. [C and D] Lifetime fluorescence value of MitoXpress-Xtra assessed as an indication of O₂ consumption rate in brown adipocytes. The statistics (mean ± SEM, n = 6, at 60 min) and the real time-responses of average fluorescence value are shown in [C] and [D], respectively. [E] Confocal images of immunostained β1AR and β3AR in brown adipocytes. Scale bars = 50 μm. [F] Representative immunoblots of β1AR (~ 65 kDa) and β3AR (~ 44 kDa) expressions in brown adipocytes, and the statistics (mean ± SEM, n = 4) of the blot densities normalized to that of actin. [G] The representative confocal images of mitochondria (detected by MitoTracker Red) (upper lane), and their corresponding magnified images of insets (lower lane) in brown adipocytes (day10) after treated without or with pyr-apelin13 and/or 10 ng/ml TNFα (2 – 3 days). Scale bars = 10 μm. [H] The representative confocal images showing the changes of mitochondrial membrane potential (detected by MitoTracker Red), and the statistics of fluorescence intensity (mean ± SEM, n = 12 cells, from 3 – 4 independent experiments). Using Student’s *t*-test, *p* < 0.05, **p** < 0.01 vs. untreated.

Apelin Stimulates Adipose Tissue Browning

FIGURE 5 Apelin increases the browning characteristics in white adipocytes. [A – E] Human white adipocytes (day14) were treated without (-) (control) or with (+) exposure to pyr-apelin13 for 4 days. [F and G] 3T3-L1 adipocytes were treated without (-) (control) or with (+) exposure to pyr-apelin13 (day2 - day9 or day5 - day9). The representative immunoblots of protein expressions (PRDM16, COX1, UCP1, CIDE-A, ap2, actin) in human [A] and 3T3-L1 adipocytes [G]; with their respective statistics (mean ± SEM, n = 4–5, normalized to actin density). [B and F] The representative bright-field images of differently treated human and 3T3-L1 adipocytes. [C and D] The representative confocal images of human adipocytes showing the changes of mitochondrial membrane potential (detected by MitoTracker Red), and the statistics of fluorescence intensity (mean ± SEM, n = 12). [E] Lifetime fluorescence value of MitoXpress-Xtra assessed as an indication of OCR (mean ± SEM, n = 6, at 60 min) in human adipocytes. [H] Human mesenchymal stem cells were induced to differentiate into adipocytes without (-) or with (+) exposure to pyr-apelin13. The representative immunoblots of PRDM16, COX1, UCP1, CIDE-A, aP2, leptin (~ 16 kDa), and actin expressions (day14), and the statistics (mean ± SEM, n = 4–5, normalized to actin density). Using Student’s t-test, *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01 vs. control /no treatment.

FIGURE 6 Both in vivo and in vitro mouse experiments confirm the apelin stimulation on WAT browning. [A] Average body weights, and [B] weights of inguinal WAT (Ig WAT), epididymal WAT (Epi WAT), and interscapular BAT relative to the total body weights, of the control and apelin-treated mice (mean ± SEM, n = 8 per group). [C] The representative images of Ig WAT and Epi WAT isolated from the control and apelin-treated mice. Scale bar = 4 mm. [D] The representative immunoblots of protein expressions (PRDM16, COX1, UCP1, CIDE-A, actin) in Ig WAT isolated from the control and apelin-treated mice, and the statistics of the blot density normalized to that of actin (mean ± SEM, n = 4 per group). [E] The representative immunoblots and the statistics (mean ± SEM, n = 3) of UCP1 and CIDE-A expressions in adipocytes (day 10) differentiated from different pre-adipose cells (1, pre-adipocytes isolated from rat interscapular BAT; 2, mouse interscapular BAT; 3, mouse Ig WAT). [F] The representative immunoblots of protein expressions (PRDM16, COX1, UCP1, CIDE-A, actin), and the respective statistics (mean ± SEM, n = 4, normalized to actin density) from the white adipocytes (day 8, differentiated from pre-adipocytes of mouse Ig WAT) treated without (-) (control) or with (+) pyr-apelin13 for 4 days. Using Student’s t-test, * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001 vs. control.

FIGURE 7 Signaling pathways underlying the apelin-induced brown adipocyte differentiation and browning characteristics of white adipocytes. [A and B] Time course of the phosphorylation and total protein levels of Akt (~ 60 kDa) and AMPK (~ 62 kDa) during brown adipocyte differentiation, without (-) (control) or (+) with exposure to pyr-apelin13. The top panels show the representative immunoblots. The lower panels show the statistics (mean ± SEM, n = 3) of the optical density ratio between pAkt and Akt, or pAMPK and AMPK. (* p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01 vs. control; Student’s t-test) [C and D] Western blot analyses of Akt and AMPK expressions in brown pre-adipocytes [C] and 3T3-L1 adipocytes [D], 2 days after transfected with control-siRNA, Akt-siRNA or AMPK-siRNA. [E and F] Brown pre-adipocytes were transfected with control-siRNA, Akt-siRNA or AMPK-siRNA, 1-2 days before induced to differentiate into adipocytes, without (-) (control) or (+) with exposure to pyr-apelin13. The representative immunoblots and the statistics (mean ± SEM, n = 4, normalized to actin density) of PRDM16, COX1, UCP1, CIDE-A, aP2, and actin expressions in differentiated brown adipocytes (day 10). [G and H] 3T3-L1 adipocytes (day 4) were transfected with control-siRNA, Akt-siRNA or AMPK-siRNA, 1-2 days before without (-) (control) or (+) with exposure to pyr-apelin13 (for 4 days). The representative immunoblots and the statistics (mean ± SEM, n = 4, normalized to actin density) are shown accordingly. Using one-way ANOVA, *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01 vs. control; # p < 0.05, ## p < 0.01, ### p < 0.001 between indicated pairs.

FIGURE 8 Illustration of apelin-induced adipose tissue browning.

FIGURE 1

A Brown preadipocyte Brown adipocyte
APJ APJ Apelin

B Control Apelin
Brown preadipocyte (day2)
40x
Brown adipocyte (day8)
10x

C
Brown adipocytes
(per field of view)

H
Prepro-
apelin
Actin
Apelin
4hr day1 day2 day6

D
UCP1
CIDE-A
aP2
Actin
Apelin
- + - + - +
day2 day6 day8

E
UCP1 Expression

F
CIDE-A Expression

G
aP2 Expression

I
UCP1
CIDE-A
aP2
Actin
Control Apelin APJ
siRNA siRNA siRNA

J
UCP1 Expression

K
CIDE-A Expression

L
aP2 Expression

M
Brown adipocytes
(per field of view)
Control Apelin APJ
siRNA siRNA siRNA

FIGURE 2

A  
Transwell Insert  
Brown fat cells  
Macrophages  
Co-culture  

B  
UCP1  
CIDE-A  
aP2  
Actin  
Apelin  
Control Co-culture  

UCP1 Expression  
0.6  
0.4  
0.2  
0.0  
Apelin – + – +  

CIDE-A Expression  
0.6  
0.4  
0.2  
0.0  
Apelin – + – +  

aP2 Expression  
0.8  
0.6  
0.4  
0.2  
0.0  
Apelin – + – +  

Control Co-culture  

C  
Control  
Apelin  
TNFα  
TNFα + Apelin  

D  
Brown adipocytes (per field of view)  
300  
200  
100  
0  
Apelin – + – +  
TNFα – – + +  

E  
UCP1  
CIDE-A  
COX1  
aP2  
Actin  
Apelin  
TNFα  
– + – +  
– – + +  

UCP1 Expression  
0.8  
0.6  
0.4  
0.2  
0.0  
Apelin – + – +  
TNFα – – + +  

CIDE-A Expression  
0.6  
0.4  
0.2  
0.0  
Apelin – + – +  
TNFα – – + +  

COX1 Expression  
0.6  
0.4  
0.2  
0.0  
Apelin – + – +  
TNFα – – + +  

aP2 Expression  
0.8  
0.6  
0.4  
0.2  
0.0  
Apelin – + – +  
TNFα – – + +  

FIGURE 3

**A**
C/EBPβ  
PRDM16  
PGC1α  
PPARγ  
Actin  

Apelin  
--- + --- + --- +  

day1 day2 day4 day6  

**B**  
C/EBPβ Expression  

Apelin  
--- + --- + --- + --- +  

day1 day2 day4 day6  

**C**  
PRDM16 Expression  

Apelin  
--- + --- + --- + --- +  

day1 day2 day4 day6  

**D**  
PGC1α Expression  

Apelin  
--- + --- + --- + --- +  

day1 day2 day4 day6  

**E**  
PPARγ Expression  

Apelin  
--- + --- + --- + --- +  

day1 day2 day4 day6  

**F**  
Control  
Apelin  
+ Troglitazone  
Apelin + Troglitazone  

**G**  
UCP1  
CIDEC-A  
COX1  
aP2  
Actin  

Apelin  
Troglitazone  
--- + --- +  

**H**  
UCP1 Expression  

Apelin  
Troglitazone  
--- + --- +  

**I**  
CIDEC-A Expression  

Apelin  
Troglitazone  
--- + --- +  

**J**  
COX1 Expression  

Apelin  
Troglitazone  
--- + --- +  

**K**  
aP2 Expression  

Apelin  
Troglitazone  
--- + --- +  

**L**  
UCP1 / aP2  

Apelin  
Troglitazone  
--- + --- +  

**M**  
CIDEC-A / aP2  

Apelin  
Troglitazone  
--- + --- +  

FIGURE 4

A
PGC1α
COX1
UCP1
CIDE-A
Actin
Apelin
NE

B
Control
Apelin
+NE
Apelin + NE

E
β₁ adrenergic receptor
Control
Apelin
β₃ adrenergic receptor
Control
Apelin

G
Control
Apelin
TNFα
TNFα + Apelin
Control
Apelin
TNFα
TNFα + Apelin

C
Mitoxpress Xtra
Lifetime Fluorescence (percent control)
Apelin
NE

D
Mitoxpress Xtra
Lifetime Fluorescence
Time (min)

F
β1 AR
β3 AR
Actin
Apelin
- +
- +

H
Control
Apelin
MitoTracker Red
Fluorescence Intensity
Control
Apelin
-
+


FIGURE 5

**A**
- PRDM16
- COX1
- UCP1
- CIDEC-A
- Actin

**B**
- Human Adipocytes
  - Control
  - Apelin

**C**
- Control
- Apelin

**D**
- Mitotracker Red
- Fluorescence Intensity

**E**
- MitoXpress Xtra
- Lifetime Fluorescence (percent control)

**F**
- 3T3-L1 Adipocytes
  - Control
  - Apelin

**G**
- PRDM16
- COX1
- UCP1
- CIDEC-A
- aP2
- Actin
- Apelin
  - (day2-day9) (day5-day9)

**H**
- PRDM16
- COX1
- UCP1
- CIDEC-A
- aP2
- Leptin
- Actin
- Apelin
  - -
  - +

**Page Number: 21**

FIGURE 6

**A**
- Body Weight (g)
  - Control: Light gray bar
  - Apelin: Dark gray bar

**B**
- Ratio of tissue weight to body weight (mg/g)
  - Ig WAT: Light gray bar
  - Epi WAT: Dark gray bar
  - BAT: Light gray bar

**C**
- Ig WAT, Epi WAT, BAT
  - Control: Left side
  - Apelin: Right side

**D**
- PRDM16, COX1, UCP1, CIDE-A, Actin
  - Control: Left side
  - Apelin: Right side

**E**
- UCP1 Expression, CIDE-A Expression
  - Rat brown Adipocyte: Bar 1
  - Mouse brown Adipocyte: Bar 2
  - Mouse white Adipocyte: Bar 3

**F**
- PRDM16, COX1, UCP1, CIDE-A, Actin
  - Control: Left side
  - Apelin: Right side

FIGURE 7

**A**
pAkt  
Akt  

**B**
pAMPK  
AMPK  

**C**
Akt  
Actin  

Control Akt  
siRNA siRNA  

Control AMPK  
siRNA siRNA  

**D**
Akt  
Actin  

Control Akt  
siRNA siRNA  

Control AMPK  
siRNA siRNA  

**E**
brown adipocyte  

PRDM16  
COX1  
UCP1  
CIDe-A  
aP2  
Actin  

Apelin  
- + - + - +  

Control  
Akt  
AMPK  
siRNA  
siRNA  
siRNA  

**F**
PRDM16 Expression  

COX1 Expression  

UCP1 Expression  

CIDe-A Expression  

aP2 Expression  

Apelin  
- + - + - +  

Control  
Akt  
AMPK  
siRNA  
siRNA  
siRNA  

**G**
white adipocyte  

PRDM16  
COX1  
UCP1  
CIDe-A  
aP2  
Actin  

Apelin  
- + - + - +  

Control  
Akt  
AMPK  
siRNA  
siRNA  
siRNA  

**H**
PRDM16 Expression  

COX1 Expression  

UCP1 Expression  

CIDe-A Expression  

aP2 Expression  

Apelin  
- + - + - +  

Control  
Akt  
AMPK  
siRNA  
siRNA  
siRNA  

FIGURE 8

Adipose tissue
- Adipocyte
- Obesity
- Macrophage
- TNF α

energy expenditure ↑
metabolic activity ↑

Beige/Brown
Adipocyte

Adipose tissue
browning

BAT APJ
Akt, AMPK
PPARγ, PRDM16
UCP1 in brown adipocyte

AMPK
beige adipocyte

PRDM16
UCP1 in white adipocyte

Apelin
circulation
(e.g., from
skeletal muscle)
WAT

**Metabolism:**

Apelin enhances brown adipogenesis and browning of white adipocytes

Aung Than, Hui Ling He, Si Hua Chua, Dan Xu, Lei Sun, Melvin Khee-Shing Leow and Peng Chen  
*J. Biol. Chem.* published online April 30, 2015

---

Access the most updated version of this article at doi: [10.1074/jbc.M115.643817](http://dx.doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M115.643817)

Find articles, minireviews, Reflections and Classics on similar topics on the [JBC Affinity Sites](https://www.jbc.org/site/affinity-sites).

Alerts:
- When this article is cited
- When a correction for this article is posted

Click [here](https://www.jbc.org/site/alerts) to choose from all of JBC's e-mail alerts

This article cites 0 references, 0 of which can be accessed free at [http://www.jbc.org/content/early/2015/04/30/jbc.M115.643817.full.html#ref-list-1](http://www.jbc.org/content/early/2015/04/30/jbc.M115.643817.full.html#ref-list-1)
