
NEWS AND VIEWS

A20 is a regulator of necroptosis

Prajwal Gurung, Si Ming Man & Thirumala-Devi Kanneganti

The anti-inflammatory molecule A20 inhibits necroptotic cell death by inhibiting ubiquitination of the kinase RIPK3 at the Lys5 residue and preventing excessive formation of the RIPK1-RIPK3 necroptotic complex.

Necroptosis is a form of inflammatory cell death executed by the serine-threonine kinases RIPK1 and RIPK3 and the effector protein MLKL. In this issue of Nature Immunology, Onizawa and colleagues report that necroptosis is inhibited by the deubiquitinating enzyme A20 (also known as TNFAP3 ('tumor-necrosis factor (TNF)-induced protein 3'); encoded by *Tnfaip3*)¹. This study demonstrates that A20 prevents RIPK3-mediated necroptosis by blocking ubiquitination of RIPK3 and formation of the RIPK1-RIPK3 complex. Furthermore, genetic deletion of RIPK3 rescues T cells and mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) lacking A20 from the excessive cell death observed in this genotype. In addition, perinatal death is delayed in *Tnfap3⁻/⁻* mice (called 'A20⁻/⁻' mice here) with genomic deletion of RIPK3, which confirms that RIPK3 contributes to premature death in the absence of A20 (Fig. 1).

The transcription factor NF-κB controls the production of pro-inflammatory cytokines induced by signaling via Toll-like receptors, Nod-like receptors and TNF receptors. A20 is an inhibitor of the NF-κB signaling pathway²,³. Although the functions of A20 have been well described in B cells and myeloid cells, its role in T cells is less understood. To study the role of A20 in T cells, Onizawa *et al.* cross mice with loxP-flanked alleles encoding A20 (*A20*<sup>fl/fl</sup>) with mice that express Cre recombinase from the T cell-specific *Cd4* promoter (CD4-Cre) to generate a mouse strain with T cell-specific deletion of A20 (*A20*<sup>fl/fl</sup>*CD4-Cre*)¹. Phenotypic analysis reveals no major defects in either the CD4⁺ T cell compartment or the CD8⁺ T cell compartment in these mice. However, consistent with published studies⁴,⁵, *A20*<sup>fl/fl</sup>*CD4*-Cre T cells are slightly more activated than *A20*<sup>+/fl</sup>*CD4*-Cre (control) T cells and proliferate at a higher rate. Notably, most *A20*<sup>fl/fl</sup>*CD4*-Cre T cells die by 48 h and 72 h after stimulation with antibody to the invariant signaling protein CD3 and antibody to the coreceptor CD28. While A20 has been shown to negatively regulate inflammasome functions and the development of inflammatory disease⁶, here, the death of A20-deficient T cells occurs independently of caspase-mediated activities. Further biochemical analyses reveal that the death of the A20-deficient T cells also does not involve the cytokine FasL or TNF (members of the TNF family that induce apoptosis) but is mediated by RIPK1 and RIPK3 (ref. 1). A20 directly interacts with RIPK3 to block cell death, a finding supported by genetic evidence demonstrating that T cells doubly deficient in A20 and RIPK3 are rescued from necroptosis. Furthermore, the necroptotic death of A20-deficient T cells appears to succeed increased proliferation and activation, akin to 'activation-induced cell death'. Interestingly, the increased death of A20-deficient T cells is independent of the interaction of FasL with its receptor Fas (CD95) that mediates 'activation-induced cell death'. Thus, the upstream signals that promote the death of A20-deficient T cells and the physiological settings in which this might be observed need further investigation.

To address the physiological importance of A20 in T cells, Onizawa *et al.* use experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis, a model of multiple sclerosis¹. They observe that *A20*<sup>fl/fl</sup>*CD4*-Cre mice are protected against the development of experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis and that this protection is reversed by the additional deletion on RIPK3 in T cells. Indeed, Onizawa *et al.* report that *A20*<sup>fl/fl</sup>*CD4*-Cre mice die around 6 months of age¹. Several questions arise from this observation that are open for further investigation, such as the cellular manifestations observed that cause the demise, around 6 months of age, of mice lacking A20 in T cells, and whether the deletion of RIPK3 would allow *A20*<sup>fl/fl</sup>*CD4*-Cre *Ripk3⁻/⁻* doubly deficient mice to survive beyond 6 months.

Necroptosis is observed when the pro-apoptotic molecule caspase-8 or its adaptor FADD are absent or inhibited⁷,⁸. The embryonic death of *Casp8⁻/⁻* or *Fadd⁻/⁻* mice is attributed to excessive RIPK3-mediated necroptosis, as RIPK3 deficiency completely rescues both *Casp8⁻/⁻* mice and *Fadd⁻/⁻* mice from embryonic death⁷,⁸. Here, Onizawa *et al.* report that the necroptosis of A20-deficient T cells does not involve caspases but requires formation of the RIPK1-RIPK3 complex¹. Similar to the RIPK3-mediated rescue of *Casp8⁻/⁻* mice from death, the authors show that RIPK3 deficiency partially rescues mice with germline deletion of A20 (called 'A20⁻/⁻ mice' here) from perinatal death¹. This important finding supports the hypothesis that A20 may regulate necroptosis in other cell types in addition to T cells. In support of this, *A20⁻/⁻* fibroblasts are also susceptible to RIPK1-RIPK3-dependent necroptotic death, which is blocked by deletion of RIPK3. Nevertheless, mice doubly deficient in A20 and RIPK3 succumb before reaching adulthood (around 2–3 weeks of age), which suggests that additional mechanisms cause death in the absence of A20. The driving factors that underpin RIPK3-independent death in these mice require further delineation.

A20 contains both deubiquitinase domains and E3 ligase domains⁹. The catalytic cysteine at position 103 of the amino-terminal OTU domain is required for the deubiquitinase activity of A20, whereas the carboxy-terminal zinc finger (ZF) domains are required for its E3 ligase activity¹⁰. A20 has been shown to regulate TNF-induced NF-κB signaling by directly modulating RIPK1 activity. Specifically, A20 first deubiquitates K63-linked ubiquitination of RIPK1 and then promotes K48-linked ubiquitination of RIPK1 to target RIPK1 for degradation⁹. Using mass spectrometry to look for ubiquitinated residues on RIPK3, Onizawa *et al.* find that the lysine residue at position 5 (Lys5 (K5)) in RIPK3 is ubiquitinated¹. Biochemical analyses further confirm that K63-linked polyubiquitination of RIPK3 at K5 is needed for optimal RIPK1-RIPK3 interaction and induction of RIPK3-mediated necroptosis. Mechanistically, the molecular consequences of the ubiquitination of RIPK3 at K5 remain to be defined. Such ubiquitination might confer protein stability or maintain the stability of the RIPK1-RIPK3 interaction or might act as a platform for recruiting downstream molecules such as MLKL.

Although phosphorylation of RIPK3 activates its kinase activity and has been shown to be important for necroptosis, the importance of ubiquitination at K5 and whether it is required for necroptosis was not known until now. To investigate this issue, Onizawa *et al.* express either wild-type RIPK3 or a RIPK3 mutant with a lysine-to-alanine substitution at position

Prajwal Gurung, Si Ming Man and Thirumala-Devi Kanneganti are in the Department of Immunology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, Tennessee, USA.
e-mail: thirumala-devi.kanneganti@stjude.org

NEWS AND VIEWS

a Wild-type  
b A20 deficiency  
c A20 and RIPK3 double deficiency  

**Figure 1** The ubiquitin-editing enzyme A20 inhibits RIPK3-mediated necroptosis and promotes cell survival. (a) Wild-type T cells or MEFs stimulated with necroptotic activators undergo necroptosis via formation of the RIPK1-RIPK3 complex. A20 prevents overt necroptosis by blocking polyubiquitination of RIPK3 at K5. The amino-terminal OTU domain of A20 contributes to inhibition of the ubiquitination of RIPK3, formation of the RIPK1-RIPK3 complex and necroptosis. The RIPK1 kinase inhibitor necrostatin-1 (Nec-1) also blocks necroptosis. (b) Absence of A20 in cells leads to excessive ubiquitination of RIPK3, formation of the RIPK1-RIPK3 complex and increased necroptosis, which contribute to the perinatal death A20⁻/⁻ mice. (c) Genetic deletion of RIP3 prevents the necroptosis of A20⁻/⁻ cells and also delays the perinatal death of A20⁻/⁻ mice.

5(RIPK3(K5A)) in A20⁻/⁻Ripk3⁻/⁻ fibroblasts and assess the susceptibility of these cells to necroptotic stimuli¹. Expression of wild-type RIPK3 sensitizes A20⁻/⁻Ripk3⁻/⁻ cells to necroptotic stimuli, whereas A20⁻/⁻Ripk3⁻/⁻ cells expressing RIPK3(K5A) are resistant to this, which demonstrates the importance of the ubiquitination of RIPK3 at K5 for the induction of necroptosis. Finally, to elucidate whether a specific enzymatic activity exerted by A20 is crucial for restricting necroptosis, Ozinawa et al. use fibroblasts from mice with point mutations affecting either the OTU domain of A20, which abrogates its deubiquitinase activity (A20OTU mice) or in the ZF4 domain, which abolishes its E3 ligase activity (A20ZF4 mice)¹. A20ZF4 fibroblasts exposed to necroptotic stimuli respond like A20⁻/⁻ cells, whereas A20OTU fibroblasts are more prone to necrosis. Along with additional experiments, this provides compelling evidence that A20 utilizes its OTU deubiquitinating domain to inhibit the ubiquitination of RIPK3 and thereby inhibits necroptosis and inflammation.

Onizawa et al. also reveal that the RIPK1 inhibitor necrostatin-1 is able to inhibit necroptosis in both A20-deficient T cells and A20-deficient MEFs¹. However, it is important to consider the potential off-target effects of this inhibitor¹¹. The roles of RIPK1 and the effector MLKL in necroptosis and the perinatal death of A20⁻/⁻ mice¹² could be further established in the future by crossing A20⁻/⁻ mice with mice that also lack either RIPK1 kinase activity or MLKL.

Overall, key findings made by Onizawa et al. contribute to understanding of the fundamental biology of A20, RIPK3 and necroptotic cell death¹. The finding that ubiquitination of RIPK3 at K5 leads to formation of the RIPK1-RIPK3 complex and subsequent induction of necroptosis sheds clear light on the importance of the ubiquitination of RIPK3 in the context of necroptosis. Whether therapeutic modulation of such ubiquitination alone is sufficient to block premature death is an exciting avenue for future research.

COMPETING FINANCIAL INTERESTS  
The authors declare no competing financial interests.

1. Onizawa, M. *et al.* Nat. Immunol. **16**, 618–627 (2015).  
2. Lee, E.G. *et al.* Science **289**, 2350–2354 (2000).  
3. Catrysse, L., Vereecke, L., Beyaert, R. & van Loo, G. Trends Immunol. **35**, 22–31 (2014).  
4. Giordano, M. *et al.* Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA **111**, 11115–11120 (2014).  
5. Düwel, M. *et al.* J. Immunol. **182**, 7718–7728 (2009).  
6. Vande Walle, L. *et al.* Nature **512**, 69–73 (2014).  
7. Dillon, C.P. *et al.* Cell Rep. **1**, 401–407 (2012).  
8. Oberst, A. *et al.* Nature **471**, 363–367 (2011).  
9. Wertz, I.E. *et al.* Nature **430**, 694–699 (2004).  
10. Ma, A. & Malynn, B.A. Nat. Rev. Immunol. **12**, 774–785 (2012).  
11. Vandenabeele, P., Grootjans, S., Callewaert, N. & Takahashi, N. Cell Death Differ. **20**, 185–187 (2013).  
12. Sun, L. *et al.* Cell **148**, 213–227 (2012).
