
Decoding the genetic basis of Cushing's disease: USP8 in the spotlight

Marily Theodoropoulou¹, Martin Reincke², Martin Fassnacht³, and Masayuki Komada⁴

¹Department of Endocrinology, Max Planck Institute of Psychiatry, Kraepelinstrasse 10, Munich 80804, Germany  
²Medizinische Klinik und Poliklinik IV, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, Germany  
³Department of Medicine I, Endocrine and Diabetes Unit, University Hospital, University of Würzburg, Würzburg, Germany  
⁴Department of Biological Sciences, Tokyo Institute of Technology, Yokohama, Japan  

Corresponding authors:

Marily Theodoropoulou  
Max Planck Institute of Psychiatry  
Kraepelinstrasse 10, Munich 80804, Germany  
Tel: +49 89 30622292  
Fax: +49 89 30622605  
Email: marily@mpipsykl.mpg.de  

Masayuki Komada  
Department of Biological Sciences, Tokyo Institute of Technology  
4259-B16 Nagatsuta, Midori, Yokohama 226-8501, Japan  
Tel: 045-924-5702  
Fax: 045-924-5771  
Email: makomada@bio.titech.ac.jp  

Keywords: Cushing's, tumor, genetics, EGFR, USP8  

Word count: 4.305 (7.324 with references)

Copyright © 2015 European Society of Endocrinology.

Abstract

Cushing's disease arises from pituitary-dependent glucocorticoid excess due to an ACTH secreting corticotroph tumor. Genetic hits in oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes that afflict other pituitary tumor subtypes are not found in corticotrophinomas. Recently, a somatic mutational hotspot was found in up to half of corticotrophinomas in the USP8 gene that encodes a protein that impairs the downregulation of the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) and enables its constitutive signaling. EGF is an important regulator of corticotroph function and its receptor is highly expressed in Cushing's pituitary tumors, where it leads to increased ACTH synthesis *in vitro* and *in vivo*. The mutational hotspot found in corticotrophinomas hyper-activates USP8 enabling it to rescue EGFR from lysosomal degradation and ensure its stimulatory signaling. This review presents the new developments in the genetics of Cushing's disease and focuses on the USP8-EGFR system as trigger and target of corticotroph tumorigenesis.

Introduction

Chronic elevation of adrenocorticotropin (ACTH) concentrations released from corticotroph adenomas leads to Cushing's disease (CD). Its phenotypic features are recent weight gain, central obesity, skin changes, myopathy, disturbed mood and impaired reproductive function, among others. Untreated CD is associated with adverse outcome. If left untreated patients die from infections and cardiovascular consequences of glucocorticoid excess (1). The morphologic basis of CD is corticotroph adenoma consisting of basophil cells expressing immunohistochemically ACTH and other POMC derived peptides (2). Corticotroph adenomas are usually small, and only 10-20% of tumors represent macroadenomas (3). The typical patient with CD is female (female to male ratio 3-5:1) and 20-60 years of age (4). The vast majority of corticotroph adenomas appear to be sporadic: patients with CD do not usually have family history of the disease, making disease-causing germline mutations unlikely. Corticotroph adenomas are typically isolated tumors consisting of a monoclonal cell population in a pituitary of normal size (5, 6, 7). Selective transsphenoidal adenectomy causes remission in 60-96% of patients (8, 9).

Genetic events in CD

The genetic causes underlying corticotroph tumorigenesis have been obscure until recently (10). Mutations in proto-oncogenes like KRAS, RET, PTTG and c-MYC and in tumor suppressors like RB1 are very rarely reported in corticotrophinomas (10). Mutations in the p53 gene (TP53) are extremely rare and were found only in atypical corticotroph (i.e. aggressive) tumors and carcinomas (11, 12). CD is rarely seen in the context of genetic syndromes like multiple
endocrine neoplasia MEN1 (MEN1 encoding menin), MEN4 (CDKN1B encoding p27/KIP1), McCune-Albright syndrome (GNAS oncogene encoding the stimulatory G protein Gsa) and never in Carney complex (PRKAR1A) (13, 14, 15). Patients with McCune-Albright and Carney complex suffer from Cushing's syndrome due to adrenal hyperplasia rather than CD. One case of corticotrophinoma with GNAS mutation was described in a patient with McCune-Albright syndrome (16). A CDKN1B variant has been observed in corticotrophinomas in a large cohort of sporadic pituitary adenomas (17). Similarly CD is rarely found in the context of familial isolated pituitary adenomas (FIPA) that describes the familial occurrence of isolated pituitary adenomas caused by germline aryl hydrocarbon receptor interacting protein (AIP) gene mutations in 20% of cases (18). From a cohort of 74 pediatric patients with isolated CD, one presented with AIP and two with MEN1 mutations (14). Altogether, mutations in MEN1, AIP, CDKN1B or CDKN2C (encoding p18/INK4C) are rarely found in patients with CD (14, 15, 19, 20). These features argue against inheritance caused by germline mutations and propose an acquired genetic basis of CD. CD was featured in an adult and in a pediatric patient with tuberous sclerosis, suggesting a putative role for TSC1 and TSC2 in pituitary tumorigenesis (21, 22). An ACTH-secreting pituitary adenoma was identified in a patient with X-linked congenital adrenal hypoplasia and mutation in the X-linked NR0B1 gene encoding DAX-1 (dosage-sensitive sex reversal, adrenal hypoplasia critical region, on chromosome X, gene 1) (23). Mutations in the DICER1 gene encoding the ribonuclease type III that cleaves pre-microRNA to microRNA were found in pituitary blastomas causing infantile CD (24; 25 de Kock). Mutations in the glucocorticoid receptor gene were described in a patient with CD and resistance to glucocorticoids and in one with Nelson's syndrome (26, 27). Recently a somatic mutational hotspot was found in the gene encoding ubiquitin-specific protease 8 (USP8) in 30-60% of sporadic corticotrophinomas (28, 29). The USP8 protein product controls the lysosomal trafficking and abundance of cell surface receptors like epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) and enables their signaling (30-31).

## The EGFR system in CD

EGF is a prototype growth factor identified by its effect on precocious eyelid opening in newborn mice (32). Soon it became evident that EGF is a potent mitogen that enhances DNA and protein synthesis and shifts metabolic activity in epithelial cells, although it does not have cell transforming capacity per se (33). EGF induces phosphorylation events on plasma membranes and its receptor was identified as a cellular homologue of the v-erbB oncogene and was found to possess intrinsic tyrosine kinase activity and ability to undergo autophosphorylation. EGFR internalization has always been linked to its mitogenic potential (reviewed in 33). Meanwhile experiments in rat pituitary cells demonstrated that EGF does not always elicit a mitogenic response, but can nevertheless alter cell function and response to hormonal signals, revealing a dissociation between the mitogenic and cell differentiation properties (34). EGF was found in thepituitary gland, together with other growth factors, where it acts in an autocrine/paracrine fashion to regulate hormone secretion and cell proliferation (reviewed in 35). The following section will focus on the expression profile and role of EGF and its receptor in ACTH-producing corticotroph cells.

### EGF-EGFR in normal pituitary

EGF-like activity was detected in the secretome of bovine pituitary cell cultures and EGF expression was identified in the mouse and human anterior pituitary gland by *in situ* hybridization and immunohistochemistry. Combined *in situ* hybridization and immunohistochemistry showed *Egf* mRNA mainly in pituitary somatotrophs (36, 37). *Egf* mRNA was also detected in gonadotrophs, and after cold stress in corticotrophs and thyrotrophs (36). In human pituitary gland autopsies, EGF was present in the majority of endocrine cells on the anterior pituitary as determined by immunohistochemistry (38). EGF immunoreactivity was prominent in the cytoplasm of the basophilic cells that infiltrate the posterior pituitary lobe and are ACTH immunopositive and in Crooks cells associated with corticotrophinomas; the majority of EGF-immunopositive cells stained for ACTH (39).

EGF binding sites were detected on the anterior pituitary by autoradiography on cells that were diagnosed as somatotrophs and lactotrophs based on morphology visualized by electron microscopy (40). A monoclonal antibody against the intracellular domain (E3138) revealed EGFR expression in corticotrophs as well as in other pituitary cell subpopulations (36). In human pituitary autopsies, EGFR immunoreactivity was mainly detected in corticotrophs and lactotrophs using antibodies directed against the intracellular (clone F4) and extracellular (clone E30) domains (39, 41).

### EGF-EGFR in pituitary tumors

In pituitary tumors, initial studies linked EGF with nonfunctioning pituitary adenomas, based on secretion and immunohistochemistry (35, 42). However, it soon became evident that EGF is present in human corticotrophinomas and tends to correlate with invasiveness (39, 43). EGF binding was detected in pituitary tumors, despite the initial negative autoradiography results (41, 44, 45). Semiquantitative reverse transcriptase PCR analysis and Northern blot showed EGFR transcript in representatives of all pituitary tumor types, including all the assayed corticotrophinomas (38, 41). In contrast, all tumors were negative for the constitutive active truncated EGFR variant III (41). Initial immunohistochemical analysis revealed EGF and its receptor, as detected by two monoclonal antibodies against the cytoplasmic (clone F4) and extracellular (clone 29.1) EGFR domains, mainly in the majority of the nonfunctioning pituitary adenomas in a set of 54 pituitary adenomas (42). Use of another monoclonal antibody against the extracellular receptor domain (MU 207/clone E30) showed EGFR expression in
representatives from all pituitary tumor types in a series of 28 pituitary tumors (38) and in most corticotrophinomas in a series of 72 paraffin-embedded pituitary tumors (41). The different results obtained with the two monoclonal antibodies recognizing the extracellular EGFR domain may be due to the fact that the clone 29.1 antibody cross-react with glycosidic factors, possibly because it was raised against the carbohydrate epitope of EGFR. The predominance of EGFR in corticotrophinomas became evident by two independent studies on large series of pituitary adenomas (n=58 and n=102) using the clone F4 antibody (39, 41). In both studies, immunopositive corticotrophinomas expressed EGFR in 50% of their endocrine cells. Differences in the sample size and in the immunohistochemistry and antigen retrieval protocols may explain the differences in the findings using the clone F4 antibody between the first (42) and the two subsequent studies (39, 41). All EGFR expressing corticotrophinomas showed immunoreactivity for the phosphorylated EGFR at tyrosine 992, indicative of activated receptor, a phenomenon that tended to be corticotrophinoma-specific as it was not observed in the majority of EGFR-immunopositive acromegalic tumors (41).

### EGFR and corticotroph function

The role of EGF on the regulation of ACTH synthesis was already suspected in the 80s by observing a crosstalk with hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis *in vivo*. EGF was as potent as CRH in triggering ACTH secretion *in vivo* and this was not accompanied by increased CRH and/or AVP indicating a direct pituitary effect (46). A parallel study in monkeys demonstrated that EGF-induced ACTH was due to increased CRH, an action hypothesized to take place on sites outside the blood brain barrier since it cannot be crossed by EGF (47). The direct action of EGF on corticotrophs was confirmed by the increased number of cells expressing POMC and ACTH secretion from both mixed and (corticotroph) enriched cultures, indicating that the presence of other pituitary cell populations does not interfere with its action (48). Furthermore, EGF increased BrdU uptake (indicative of replicating cells) in ACTH enriched dispersed anterior pituitary cells (48). In primary cultures of male mouse anterior pituitaries, EGF treatment enhanced BrdU uptake in ACTH- (as well as in PRL-) immunopositive cells, but not in other pituitary cell subpopulations (37). The EGFR inhibitor RG-13022 decreased the percentage of BrdU labelled cells immunoreactive for ACTH (and PRL), providing functional evidence for the presence of active receptors on corticotroph (and lactotroph) populations (50).

EGF treatment increased *Pomc* transcription and ACTH secretion in EGFR-overexpressing corticotrophinoma cells and in corticotroph tumors from dogs and human patients with Cushing's disease (51). EGFR overexpression in the mouse corticotrophinoma AtT-20 cells (that do not express the receptor) triggered basal *Pomc* transcription (28). All these effects were mediated through Erk1/2 and acted on the proximal to initiation site of the *Pomc* promoter (28, 51). Treatment with the EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitor gefitinib decreased ACTH synthesis and

secretion in human corticotrophinomas *in vitro* and decreased tumor growth and corticosterone levels in a xenograft corticotroph tumor animal model, where it ameliorated the symptoms of CD (51).

In corticotrophinomas EGFR immunoreactivity correlated with EGF (39), suggesting a possible autocrine regulatory loop. This is indicated by the presence of immunoreactivity for the phosphorylated, i.e., activated, receptor in these tumors (41, 52). EGFR expressing corticotrophinomas also had very weak or absent immunoreactivity for the cell cycle inhibitor p27 (41). This is of interest, since loss of p27 protein (but not transcript) is a prominent feature of human corticotrophinomas (53, 54). A hypothesis is that activated EGFR triggers signaling cascades that downregulate p27 in corticotrophinomas, which in addition to the stimulatory action on ACTH synthesis contributes to their tumorigenesis.

## Somatic USP8 mutations in CD

### Regulation of EGFR downregulation by ubiquitination and deubiquitination

Ubiquitin is a 76-amino-acid protein which is highly conserved in eukaryotes. Ubiquitin is conjugated, via the C-terminal carboxyl group, to the ε-amino group of Lys residues in various proteins in the cell by an isopeptide bond (55). Additional ubiquitin molecules are further conjugated to the already-conjugated ubiquitins sequentially, leading to the formation of polyubiquitin chains on the substrate proteins. This post-translational modification, referred to as ubiquitination, is catalyzed by sequential actions of 3 enzymes; ubiquitin-activating enzyme (E1), ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme (E2), and ubiquitin ligase (E3). Approximately 500 E3 enzymes, each of which is considered to ubiquitinate specific substrate proteins, are encoded in the human genome (56). Ubiquitination regulates the fates or functions of the substrate proteins in multiple ways: it participates in protein degradation in the proteasome, DNA repair, endocytosis and lysosomal trafficking, NF-kB signaling, and so on (57). Like protein phosphorylation which is reversed by phosphatases, ubiquitination is a reversible reaction opposed by a family of deubiquitinating enzymes (DUBs) that remove the ubiquitin moiety from substrate proteins by hydrolyzing the isopeptide bond between them (58). The human genome encodes ~90 DUBs (59). The numbers of human E3 enzymes (~500) and DUBs (~90) suggest that the functions of many intracellular proteins are regulated by a balance of ubiquitination and deubiquitination.

For plasma membrane proteins, ubiquitination serves as a signal that delivers the protein from the cell surface to lysosomes (60, 61, 62). In mammalian cells, such a role of ubiquitination has most intensively been studied for EGFR. Upon EGF binding on the cell surface, activated EGFR is rapidly internalized and transported, via early and late endosomes, to lysosomes where EGFR is degraded by proteolytic hydrolases. This process, referred to as receptor downregulation, is a cellular strategy to prevent the cells from responding excessively to EGF due to sustained signals

from activated EGFR (63). An E3 enzyme c-Cbl is recruited to ligand-activated EGFR and ubiquitinates the receptor, adding a tag that targets activated EGFR to lysosomes for degradation (64, 65). We and others have previously shown that USP8, also known as UBPY, is a DUB that deubiquitinates EGFR on early endosomes, thereby removing the lysosome-targeting tag and suppressing its downregulation (30, 66). Vertebrate USP8 proteins have a conserved 14-3-3 protein-binding motif (14-3-3BM), RSYSSP (Fig. 1). 14-3-3 proteins, composed of 7 isoforms in humans, are regulatory proteins which bind to a consensus amino acid sequence, RSXpSXP where X and pS represent any amino acid and phosphorylated Ser, respectively, and thereby regulate the functions (e.g., subcellular localization and enzymatic activity) of various 14-3-3BM-bearing intracellular proteins (67). We have demonstrated that the binding of 14-3-3 proteins to the 14-3-3BM of mouse USP8 suppresses its DUB activity toward ubiquitinated EGFR (68), although how 14-3-3 protein binding regulates USP8 activity has remained unknown until recently.

Hotspot mutations in USP8 in corticotrophinomas

To elucidate the molecular mechanisms underlying the pathogenesis of CD, whole exome analyses of corticotrophinomas removed from pituitaries of the CD patients were performed (28, 29). As a result, 19 different mutations were identified in or adjacent to the 14-3-3BM of USP8, and replicated by targeted sequencing, in 35% (6 out of 17; 27) and 62.5% (75 out of 120; 29) of corticotrophinomas (Fig. 1). Both the mutant and wild-type USP8 sequences were detected in the adenoma DNA samples, and the mutations were not detected in the germline of the patients, suggesting that they are somatic heterozygous mutations.

Among the USP8 mutants examined, p.Ser718Pro, p.Ser718Cys, p.Ser718del, and p.Pro720Arg almost completely lost binding to 14-3-3 proteins, while the p.[Leu713Arg;Tyr717Cys] mutant retained some 14-3-3 binding ability. When immunopurified USP8 mutants were incubated with ubiquitinated EGFR, mutants except for p.[Leu713Arg;Tyr717Cys] exhibited higher DUB activity than wild-type USP8 (28), consistent with our previous results in mouse USP8 lacking 14-3-3 binding (68).

The level of the elevated DUB activity varied among the USP8 mutants. During the course of the experiments, it was noticed that in addition to the 130-kDa full-length form, minor 90-kDa and 40-kDa fragments are present for the p.Ser718Pro, p.Ser718Cys, p.Ser718del, and p.Pro720Arg mutants. They were hardly detected in wild-type USP8, and their levels clearly correlated with the DUB activity of the mutant; mutants with higher levels of the fragments exhibited higher catalytic activity. The fragments were never detected in the p.[Leu713Arg;Tyr717Cys] mutant with similar or even weaker DUB activity than wild-type USP8. Examination of the tryptic peptides of the 90-kDa and 40-kDa fragments by tandem mass spectrometry determined the C-terminus of the 90-kDa fragment as the Lys residue immediately upstream of the 14-3-3BM, and the N-terminus of
the 40-kDa fragment as the first Arg residue of the 14-3-3BM, indicating that the USP8 mutants are susceptible to cleavage adjacent to the 14-3-3BM (Fig. 1). The C-terminal 40-kDa fragment (USP8-C40) harbors the whole catalytic domain and acquires an elevated DUB activity. Introduction of the p.Ser718Pro, p.Ser718Cys, p.Ser718del, or p.Pro720Arg mutation into USP8-C40 did not further elevate the catalytic activity, suggesting that the cleavage but not the amino acid replacements/deletion themselves is responsible for the elevated USP8 activity. Thus, the CD USP8 mutants, except for p.[Leu713Arg;Tyr717Cys], lack 14-3-3 protein binding and are prone to cleavage adjacent to the 14-3-3BM, resulting in high catalytic activity (28).

The CD USP8 mutants affect EGFR downregulation and ACTH synthesis

When the p.Ser718del mutant or C40 form of USP8 was overexpressed in cultured cells, the level of EGF-induced EGFR ubiquitination was reduced compared to cells overexpressing wild-type USP8. Co-immunoprecipitation experiments showed that EGFR from both untreated and EGF-treated cells binds to the wild-type and p.Ser718del mutant as well as C40 forms of USP8 but not the 90-kDa fragment, indicating that USP8-C40 interacts with and excessively deubiquitinates EGFR in vivo, and supporting that EGFR is a bona fide substrate of USP8-C40 (28).

Examination of EGFR endocytosis in cultured cells expressing the CD mutant or C40 forms of USP8 showed that their overexpression, but not of wild-type USP8, causes retention of EGFR on the cell surface after EGF stimulation. A catalytically-inactive mutant of C40 was without effect, indicating that the USP8 mutants inhibit EGFR downregulation in a DUB activity-dependent manner. When recycling of endocytosed EGFR from early endosomes to the plasma membrane was blocked by overexpression of a GDP-fixed mutant of Rab11, a small GTPase required for the recycling pathway (69), EGFR was stuck on Rab11-positive recycling endosomes in C40-expressing cells but not in mock-transfected cells or those expressing a catalytically-inactive mutant of C40. In addition, Immunofluorescence staining of EGF-treated cells for activated (Thr202-and Tyr204-phosphorylated) Erk1/2 showed that Erk1/2 are still active after 2h of EGF treatment in cells overexpressing the CD mutant or C40 forms of USP8. Collectively, these results suggest that the USP8 mutants promote recycling of activated and endocytosed EGFR back to the plasma membrane and cause sustained EGF signaling (28). Consistently, more recent study showed that the EGFR protein level is elevated in human corticotrophinoma tissues with a USP8 mutation, and the level was decreased in primary culture of USP8-mutated corticotrophinomas by RNA interference-mediated depletion of USP8 (29).

The effect of the USP8 mutations on ACTH synthesis and secretion was examined in AtT-20 mouse corticotrophima cells. In EGFR-transfected AtT-20 cells, co-expression of the CD mutant or C40 forms but not wild-type of USP8 further elevated the Pomc promoter activity. Treatment of EGFR-transfected AtT-20 cells with EGF resulted in elevated ACTH secretion from the cells, andoverexpression of the CD mutant or C40 forms of USP8 reinforced the effect of EGF. Elevation in the POMC promoter activity by the CD mutant or C40 forms of USP8 depended on the activator protein-1 (AP1) transcription factor-responsive element in the POMC gene which is activated downstream of Erk1/2 (70; Fig. 2). On the other hand, overexpression of the CD mutant or C40 forms of USP8 did not significantly accelerate the proliferation of EGFR-transfected AtT-20 cells in the presence or absence of EGF compared to that of wild-type USP8, suggesting that in corticotroph, sustained EGF signaling caused by the USP8 mutations affects ACTH synthesis more profoundly than cell proliferation (28). In primary culture of USP8-mutated human corticotrophinomas, USP8 depletion led to reduced level of ACTH secretion (29).

Another role of the CD USP8 mutants in the nucleus?

Cytoplasmic localization of hyper-active USP8-C40 suggests that the cytoplasmic DUB activity of USP8 is responsible for the pathogenesis of CD. Wild-type USP8 is also localized to the cytoplasm in normal human corticotrophs. In corticotrophinomas of the CD patients, however, all the USP8 mutants were detected in the nucleus. Consistently, most of the ectopically-expressed USP8 mutants exhibited nuclear localization also in cultured cells. The p.[Leu713Arg;Tyr717Cys] mutant, which is most exclusively localized to the nucleus among the mutants, does not undergo proteolytic activation. These observations raise the possibility that the CD USP8 mutants have a yet-to-be identified nuclear function which has another important role in the pathogenesis of CD.

Interestingly there is an evidence for nuclear action of EGF. Studies in pituitary tumor cells have shown that EGF accumulates in the nucleus under conditions that inhibit its lysosomal degradation, an effect that was attributed to the fusion of endocytic vesicles with the outer nuclear membrane (71). EGFR was shown to translocate to the nucleus, where it enhances the transcription of genes involved in cell cycle progression like CCND1 encoding cyclin D1 (72). Cyclin D1 overexpression that is the functional characteristic of nuclear EGFR is not featured in human corticotrophinomas (10). Nevertheless, nuclear EGFR was detected by immunofluorescence in this pituitary tumor subtype (50). Nuclear EGFR deubiquitination by nuclearly-located USP8 mutants may regulate the nuclear function of EGFR. Alternatively, the USP8 mutants might have other nuclear substrate(s), whose deubiquitination is responsible for the hypersecretion of ACTH. Transcription factors involved in POMC gene expression are potential candidates for such USP8 substrates.

Implications

We have recently unveiled a molecular basis for the pathogenesis of CD in one-third of the patients: gain-of-function mutations in the DUB gene USP8 lead to excessive deubiquitination and reduced downregulation of EGFR, which in turn result in sustained EGF signaling and hypersecretion of ACTH (28). These outcomes propose that inhibiting USP8 activity incorticotrophinomas could be therapeutic to CD. In addition, because the USP8 mutants are hyper-activated by cleavage, inhibiting the cleavage could also be therapeutic to CD. Identification of the protease responsible for the proteolytic activation of USP8, and screening for chemical compounds that inhibit USP8 or the unidentified USP8 protease, are therefore of medical importance for the development of anti-CD drugs. A more recent manuscript confirmed our observation reporting USP8 mutations in 67 of 108 corticotrophinomas (62%) from Chinese patients (29). Inhibiting EGFR could also be applied to the therapy of CD harboring USP8 mutations because direct inhibition of EGFR by gefitinib in primary cultures of USP8 mutant corticotroph adenomas attenuated ACTH release (29).

Upregulation of EGFR has been implicated in various tumors and cancers (73). However, mutations in the 14-3-3BM of USP8 are rarely found in whole genome analyses of such disease tissues (COSMIC database, http://cancer.sanger.ac.uk/cancergenome/projects/cosmic/). Furthermore, a significantly elevated level of cell proliferation is not observed in corticotrophinomas in the CD patients, raising the possibility that additional proteins besides EGFR are targeted by USP8. If deubiquitinated and stabilized by USP8 mutations they may contribute to the pathogenesis of CD. These could be other corticotroph-specific plasma membrane protein(s) acting upstream of POMC gene expression. Because the USP8 mutants exhibit nuclear localization, it is possible that the target could even be a nuclear protein which, for instance, regulates POMC gene expression.

CD patients with corticotrophinomas positive for USP8 mutations (USP8mut+) were more frequently female and had tendency for smaller tumor size compared to those with USP8 wild type tumors (28). The more extended cohort of Ma et al. (n=120) showed comparable ACTH levels midnight serum cortisol and 24-hour urinary free cortisol in patients with USP8mut+ and wild type corticotrophinomas, despite the smaller size of USP8mut+ tumors (29). This together with the increased levels of tumor POMC transcript in the USP8mut+ tumors suggests ACTH hypersecretion. Further studies are needed to address in detail the clinical impact of USP8 mutations in CD presentation and management. In addition, information is missing on the role of USP8 mutational status in the development of resistance to glucocorticoid feedback inhibition, a hallmark of CD. Glucocorticoid resistance is mainly due to deregulated glucocorticoid receptor trans-repression regulation and chaperon proteins, but the responsible genetic defects remain in their majority unclear (74, 75). Altogether, the finding in CD tumors of a single mutational hotspot on the USP8 gene that encodes for an important regulator of protein stability and function provides with a focal point for the better understanding of corticotroph tumor development and the development of effective tumor-targeted therapies.

Disclosure statement

The Symposion was sponsored by scientific unrestricted grants of the DFG (Re 752/22-1), the European Science Foundation (Ref. Number: 5551) and by the Carl Friedrich von Siemens
Page 11 of 20

Stiftung. MR is supported by a grant from the Else Kröner-Fresenius Stiftung to (2012_A103).

MT, MF and MK have nothing to disclose.

References

1. Tritos NA & Biller BM. Cushing's disease. Handbook of Clinical Neurology 2014 124 221-234. (doi:10.1016/B978-0-444-59602-4.00015-0)

2. Saeger W. Surgical pathology of the pituitary in Cushing's disease. Pathology – Research and Practice 1991 187 613-616. (doi:10.1016/S0344-0338(11)80156-1)

3. Hofmann BM, Hlavac M, Martinez R, Buchfelder M, Müller OA & Fahlbusch R. Long-term results after microsurgery for Cushing disease: experience with 426 primary operations over 35 years. Journal of Neurosurgery 2008 108 9-18. (doi:10.3171/JNS/2008/108/01/0009)

4. Valassi E, Santos A, Yaneva M, Tóth M, Strasburger CJ, Chanson P, Wass JA, Chabre O, Pfeifer M, Feelders RA, Tsagarakis S, Trainer PJ, Franz H, Zopf K, Zacharieva S, Lamberts SW, Tabarin A & Webb SM; ERCUSYN Study Group. The European Registry on Cushing's syndrome: 2-year experience. Baseline demographic and clinical characteristics. European Journal of Endocrinology 2011 165 383-392. (doi:10.1530/EJE-11-0272)

5. Schulte HM, Oldfield EH, Allolio B, Katz DA, Berkman RA & Ali IU. Clonal composition of pituitary adenomas in patients with Cushing's disease: determination by X-chromosome inactivation analysis. The Journal of Clinical Endocrinology and Metabolism 1991 73 1302-1308. (doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1210/jcem-73-6-1302)

6. Gicquel C, Le Bouc Y, Luton JP, Girard F & Bertagna X. Monoclonality of corticotroph macroadenomas in Cushing's disease. The Journal of Clinical Endocrinology and Metabolism 1992 75 472-475. (doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1210/jcem.75.2.1322426)

7. Biller BM, Alexander JM, Zervas NT, Hedley-Whyte ET, Arnold A & Klibanski A. Clonal origins of adrenocorticotropic-secreting pituitary tissue in Cushing's disease. The Journal of Clinical Endocrinology and Metabolism 1992 75 1303-1309. (doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1210/jcem.75.5.1358909)

8. Dimopoulou C, Schopohl J, Rachinger W, Buchfelder M, Honegger J, Reincke M & Stalla GK. Long-term remission and recurrence rates after first and second transsphenoidal surgery for Cushing's disease: care reality in the Munich Metropolitan Region. European Journal of Endocrinology 2013 170 283-292. (doi:10.1530/EJE-13-0634)

9. Petersenn S, Beckers A, Ferone D, van der Lely A, Bollerslev J, Boscaro M, Brue T, Bruzzi P, Casanueva F, Chanson P, Colao A, Reincke M, Stalla G & Tsagarakis S. Systematic review of outcomes in patients with Cushing's disease undergoing trans-sphenoidal surgery: related to criteria for assessing remission and recurrence. European Journal of Endocrinology 2015 Jan 19. (doi:10.1530/EJE-14-0883)

10. Dworakowska D & Grossman AB. The molecular pathogenesis of corticotroph tumours. European Journal of Clinical Investigation 2012 42 665-676. (doi:10.1111/j.1365-2362.2011.02621.x)

11. Kawashima ST, Usui T, Sano T, logawa H, Hagiwara H, Tamanaha T, Tagami T, Naruse M, Hojo M, Takahashi JA, Shimatsu A. P53 gene mutation in an atypical corticotroph adenoma with Cushing's disease. Clinical Endocrinology 2009 70 656-657. (doi:10.1111/j.1365-2265.2008.03404.x)

12. Tanizaki Y, Jin L, Scheithauer BW, Kovacs K, Roncaroli F & Lloyd RV. P53 gene mutations in pituitary carcinomas. Endocrine Pathology 2007 18 217-222. (doi:10.1007/s12022-007-9006-y)

13 Matsuzaki LN, Canto-Costa MH & Hauache OM. Cushing's disease as the first clinical manifestation of multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 (MEN1) associated with an R460X mutation of the MEN1 gene. Clinical Endocrinology 2004 60 142-143. (doi:10.1111/j.1365-2265.2004.01943.x)

14. Stratakis CA, Tichomirowa MA, Boikos S, Azevedo MF, Lodish M, Martari M, et al. The role of germline AIP, MEN1, PRKAR1A, CDKN1B and CDKN2C mutations in causing pituitary adenomas in a large cohort of children, adolescents, and patients with genetic syndromes. *Clinical Genetics* 2010 **78** 457–463. (doi:10.1111/j.1399-0004.2010.01406.x)

15. Tichomirowa MA, Lee M, Barlier A, Daly AF, Marinoni I, Jaffrain-Rea ML, Naves LA, Rodien P, Rohmer V, Faucz FR, Caron P, Estour B, Lecomte P, Borson-Chazot F, Penfornis A, Yaneva M, Guitelman M, Castermans E, Verhaege C, Wémeau JL, Tabarin A, Fajardo Montañana C, Delemer B, Kerlan V, Sadoul JL, Cortet Rudelli C, Archambeaud F, Zacharieva S, Theodoropoulou M, Brue T, Enjalbert A, Bours V, Pellegata NS & Beckers A. Cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor 1B (CDKN1B) gene variants in AIP mutation-negative familial isolated pituitary adenoma kindreds. *Endocrine Related Cancer* 2012 **19** 233–241. (doi:10.1530/ERC-11-0362)

16. Riminucci M, Collins MT, Lala R, Corsi A, Matarazzo P, Gehron Robey P & Bianco P. An R201H activating mutation of the GNAS1 (Galpha) gene in a corticotroph pituitary adenoma. *Molecular Pathology* 2002 **55** 58–60. (doi:10.1136/mp.55.1.58)

17. Sekiya T, Bronstein MD, Benfini K, Longuini VC, Jallad RS, Machado MC, Goncalves TD, Osaki LH, Higashi L, Viana-Jr J, Kater C, Lee M, Molatore S, Francisco G, Chammas R, Naslavsky MS, Schlesinger D, Gama P, Duarte YA, Lebrão ML, Zatz M, Meirelles O, Liberman B, Fragoso MC, Toledo SP, Pellegata NS & Toledo RA. p27 variant and corticotropinoma susceptibility: a genetic and in vitro study. *Endocrine Related Cancer* 2014 **21** 395–404. (doi:10.1530/ERC-13-0486)

18. Daly AF, Vanbellinghen JF, Khoo SK, Jaffrain-Rea ML, Naves LA, Guitelman MA, Murat A, Emy P, Gimenez-Roqueplo AP, Tamburrano G, Raverot G, Barlier A, De Herder W, Penfornis A, Ciccarelli E, Estour B, Lecomte P, Gatta B, Chabre O, Sabaté MI, Bertagna X, Garcia Basavilbaso N, Stalldecker G, Colao A, Ferolla P, Wémeau JL, Caron P, Sadoul JL, Oneto A, Archambeaud F, Calender A, Sinilnikova O, Montañana CF, Cavagnini F, Hana V, Solano A, Delettieres D, Luccio-Camelo DC, Basso A, Rohmer V, Brue T, Bours V, Teh BT, Beckers A. Aryl hydrocarbon receptor-interacting protein gene mutations in familial isolated pituitary adenomas: analysis in 73 families. *The Journal of Clinical Endocrinology and Metabolism* 2007 **92** 1891–1896. (http://dx.doi.org/10.1210/jc.2006-2513)

19. Georgitsi M, Raitila A, Karhu A, Tuppurainen K, Mäkinen MJ, Vierimaa O, Paschke R, Saeger W, van der Luijt RB, Sane T, Robledo M, De Menis E, Weil RJ, Wasik A, Zielinski G, Lucewicz O, Lubinski J, Launonen V, Vahteristo P & Aaltonen LA. Molecular diagnosis of pituitary adenoma predisposition caused by aryl hydrocarbon receptor-interacting protein gene mutations. *Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America* 2007 **104** 4101–4105. (doi: 10.1073/pnas.0700004104)

20. Tichomirowa MA, Barlier A, Daly AF, Jaffrain-Rea ML, Ronchi C, Yaneva M, Urban JD, Petrossians P, Elenkova A, Tabarin A, Desailloud R, Maiter D, Schürmeyer T, Cozzi R, Theodoropoulou M, Sievers C, Bernabeu I, Naves LA, Chabre O, Montañana CF, Hana V, Halaby G, Delemer B, Aizpún JL, Sonnet E, Longás AF, Hagelstein MT, Caron P, Stalla GK, Bours V, Zacharieva S, Spada A, Brue T & Beckers A. High prevalence of AIP gene mutations following focused screening in young patients with sporadic pituitary macroadenomas. *European Journal of Endocrinology* 2011 **165** 509–515. (doi:10.1530/EJE-11-0304)

21. Tigas S, Carroll PV, Jones R, Bingham E, Russell-Jones D, Powell M & Scobie IN. Simultaneous Cushing's disease and tuberous sclerosis; a potential role for TSC in pituitary ontogeny. *Clinical Endocrinology* 2005 **63** 694–695. (doi:10.1111/j.1365-2265.2005.02374.x)

22. Nandagopal R, Vortmeyer A, Oldfield EH, Keil MF & Stratakis CA. Cushing's syndrome due to a pituitary corticotropinoma in a child with tuberous sclerosis: an association or a coincidence? *Clinical Endocrinology* 2007 **67** 639–641. (doi:10.1111/j.1365-2265.2007.02941.x)

23. De Menis E, Roncaroli F, Calvari V, Chiarini V, Pauletto P, Camerino G & Cremonini N. Corticotroph adenoma of the pituitary in a patient with X-linked adrenal hypoplasia congenita due to a novel mutation of the DAX-1 gene. *European Journal of Endocrinology* 2005 **153** 211–215. (doi: doi: 10.1530/eje.1.01958)

24. Sahakitrungruang T, Srichomthong C, Pornkunwilai S, Amornfa J, Shuangshoti S, Kulawonganunchai S, Suphapeetiporn K & Shotelersuk V. Germline and somatic DICER1 mutations in a pituitary blastoma causing infantile-onset Cushing's disease. *The Journal of Clinical Endocrinology and Metabolism* 2014 99 E1487-E1492. (doi:10.1210/jc.2014-1016)

25. de Kock L, Sabbaghian N, Plourde F, Srivastava A, Weber E, Bouron-Dal Soglio D, Hamel N, Choi JH, Park SH, Deal CL, Kelsey MM, Bishop MK, Esbenshade A, Kuttesch JF, Jacques TS, Perry A, Leichter H, Maeder P, Brundler MA, Warner J, Neal J, Zacharin M, Korbonits M, Cole T, Traunecker H, McLean TW, Rotondo F, Lepage P, Albrecht S, Horvath E, Kovacs K, Priest JR, Foulkes WD. Pituitary blastoma: a pathognomonic feature of germ-line DICER1 mutations. *Acta Neuropathologica* 2014 128 111-22. (doi: 10.1007/s00401-014-1285-z)

26. Karl M, Lamberts SW, Koper JW, Katz DA, Huizenga NE, Kino T, Haddad BR, Hughes MR & Chrousos GP. Cushing's disease preceded by generalized glucocorticoid resistance: clinical consequences of a novel, dominant-negative glucocorticoid receptor mutation. *Proceedings of the Association of American Physicians* 1996 108 296-307.

27. Karl M, Von Wichert G, Kempter E, Katz DA, Reincke M, Möning H, Ali IU, Stratakis CA, Oldfield EH, Chrousos GP & Schulte HM. Nelson's syndrome associated with a somatic frame shift mutation in the glucocorticoid receptor gene. *The Journal of Clinical Endocrinology and Metabolism* 1996 81 124-129. (doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1210/jcem.81.1.8550738)

28. Reincke M, Sbiera S, Hayakawa A, Theodoropoulou M, Osswald A, Beuschlein F, Meitinger T, Mizuno-Yamasaki E, Kawaguchi K, Saeki Y, Tanaka K, Wieland T, Graf E, Saeger W, Ronchi CL, Allolio B, Buchfelder M, Strom TM, Fassnacht M & Komada M. Mutations in the deubiquitinase gene USP8 cause Cushing's disease. *Nature Genetics* 2015 47 31-38. (doi:10.1038/ng.3166)

29. Ma ZY, Song ZJ, Chen JH, Wang YF, Li SQ, Zhou LF, Mao Y, Li YM, Hu RG, Zhang ZY, Ye HY, Shen M, Shou XF, Li ZQ, Peng H, Wang QZ, Zhou DZ, Qin XL, Ji J, Zheng J, Chen H, Wang Y, Geng DY, Tang WJ, Fu CW, Shi ZF, Zhang YC, Ye Z, He WQ, Zhang QL, Tang QS, Xie R, Shen JW, Wen ZJ, Zhou J, Wang T, Huang S, Qiu HJ, Qiao ND, Zhang Y, Pan L, Bao WM, Liu YC, Huang CX, Shi YY & Zhao Y. Recurrent gain-of-function USP8 mutations in Cushing's disease. *Cell Research* 2015 25 306-317. (doi:10.1038/cr.2015.20)

30. Mizuno E, Iura T, Mukai A, Yoshimori T, Kitamura N & Komada M. Regulation of epidermal growth factor receptor down-regulation by UBPY-mediated deubiquitination at endosomes. *Molecular Biology of the Cell* 2005 16 5163-5174. (doi:10.1091/mbc.E05-06-0560)

31. Mukai A, Yamamoto-Hino M, Awano W, Watanabe W, Komada M & Goto S. Balanced ubiquitylation and deubiquitylation of Frizzled regulate cellular responsiveness to Wg/Wnt. *The EMBO Journal* 2010 29 2114-2125. (doi:10.1038/emboj.2010.100)

32. Cohen S. Isolation of a mouse submaxillary gland protein accelerating incisor eruption and eyelid opening in the new-born animal. *The Journal of Biological Chemistry* 1962 237 1555-1562.

33. Carpenter G & Cohen S. Epidermal growth factor. *Annual Reviews in Biochemistry.* 1979 48 193-216. (doi:10.1146/annurev.bi.48.070179.001205)

34. Johnson LK, Baxter JD, Vlodavsky I & Gospodarowicz D. Epidermal growth factor and expression of specific genes: effects on cultured rat pituitary cells are dissociable from the mitogenic response. *Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America* 1980 77 394-398.

35. Renner U, Pagotto U, Arzt E & Stalla GK. Autocrine and paracrine roles of polypeptide growth factors, cytokines and vasogenic substances in normal and tumorous pituitary function and growth: a review. *European Journal of Endocrinology* 1996 135 515-532.

36. Fan X & Childs GV. Epidermal growth factor and transforming growth factor-alpha messenger ribonucleic acids and their receptors in the rat anterior pituitary: localization and regulation. *Endocrinology* 1995 136 2284-2293.

37. Honda J, Oomizu S, Kiuchi Y, Komatsu N, Takeuchi S & Takahashi S. Identification of epidermal growth factor mRNA-expressing cells in the mouse anterior pituitary. Neuroendocrinology 2000 71 155-162. (doi:10.1159/000054532)

38. LeRiche VK, Asa SL & Ezzat S. Epidermal growth factor and its receptor (EGF-R) in human pituitary adenomas: EGF-R correlates with tumor aggressiveness. The Journal of Clinical Endocrinology and Metabolism 1996 81 656-662. (doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1210/jcem.81.2.8636285)

39. Kontogeorgos G, Stefaneanu L, Kovacs K & Cheng Z. Localization of epidermal growth factor (EGF) and epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFr) in human pituitary adenomas and nontumorous pituitaries: an immunocytochemical study. Endocrine Pathology 1996 7 63-70.

40. Chabot JG, Walker P & Pelletier G. Distribution of epidermal growth factor binding sites in the adult rat anterior pituitary gland. Peptides 1986 7 45-50.

41. Theodoropoulou M, Arzberger T, Gruebler Y, Jaffrain-Rea ML, Schlegel J, Schaaf L, Petrangeli E, Losa M, Stalla GK & Pagotto U. Expression of epidermal growth factor receptor in neoplastic pituitary cells: evidence for a role in corticotropinoma cells. Journal of Endocrinology 2004 183 385-394. (doi: doi:10.1677/joe.1.05616)

42. Chaidarun SS, Eggo MC, Sheppard MC & Stewart PM. Expression of epidermal growth factor (EGF), its receptor, and related oncoprotein (erbB-2) in human pituitary tumors and response to EGF in vitro. Endocrinology 1994 135 2012-2021. (doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1210/endo.135.5.7956924)

43. Lubke D, Saeger W & Ludecke DK. Proliferation Markers and EGF in ACTH-Secreting Adenomas and Carcinomas of the Pituitary. Endocrine Pathology 1995 6 45-55.

44. Birman P, Michard M, Li JY, Peillon F & Bression D. Epidermal growth factor-binding sites, present in normal human and rat pituitaries, are absent in human pituitary adenomas. The Journal of Clinical Endocrinology and Metabolism 1987 65 275-281. (doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1210/jcem-65-2-275)

45. Jaffrain-Rea ML, Petrangeli E, Lubrano C, Minniti G, Di Stefano D, Sciarra F, Frati L, Tamburrano G, Cantore G & Gulino A. Epidermal growth factor binding sites in human pituitary macroadenomas. Journal of Endocrinology 1998 158 425-433. (doi:10.1677/joe.0.1580425)

46. Polk DH, Ervin MG, Padbury JF, Lam RW, Reviczky AL & Fisher DA. Epidermal growth factor acts as a corticotropin-releasing factor in chronically catheterized fetal lambs. Journal of Clinical Investigation 1987 79 984-988. (doi:10.1172/JCI112910)

47. Luger A, Calogero AE, Kalogeras K, Gallucci WT, Gold PW, Loriaux DL & Chrousos GP. Interaction of epidermal growth factor with the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis: potential physiologic relevance. The Journal of Clinical Endocrinology and Metabolism 1988 66 334-337. (doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1210/jcem-66-2-334)

48. Childs GV, Patterson J, Unabia G, Rougeau D & Wu P. Epidermal growth factor enhances ACTH secretion and expression of POMC mRNA by corticotropes in mixed and enriched cultures. Molecular and Cellular Neuroscience 1991 2 235-243. (doi:10.1016/1044-7431(91)90050-X)

49. Childs GV, Rougeau D & Unabia G. Corticotropin-releasing hormone and epidermal growth factor: mitogens for anterior pituitary corticotropes. Endocrinology 1995 136 1595-1602. (doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1210/endo.136.4.7895669)

50. Oomizu S, Honda J, Takeuchi S, Kakeya T, Masui T & Takahashi S. Transforming growth factor-α stimulates proliferation of mammotrophs and corticotrophs in the mouse pituitary. Journal of Endocrinology 2000 165 493-501. (doi:10.1677/joe.0.1650493)

51. Fukuoka H, Cooper O, Ben-Shlomo A, Mamelak A, Ren SG, Bruyette D & Melmed S. EGFR as a therapeutic target for human, canine, and mouse ACTH-secreting pituitary adenomas. Journal of Clinical Investigation 2011 121 4712-4721. (doi:10.1172/JCI60417)

52. Onguru O, Scheithauer BW, Kovacs K, Vidal S, Jin L, Zhang S, Ruebel KH & Lloyd RV. Analysis of epidermal growth factor receptor and activated epidermal growth factor receptor expression in pituitary adenomas and carcinomas. Modern Pathology 2004 17 772-780. (doi:10.1038/modpathol.3800118)

53. Lidhar K, Korbonits M, Jordan S, Khalimova Z, Kaltsas G, Lu X, Clayton RN, Jenkins PJ, Monson JP, Besser GM, Lowe DG & Grossman AB. Low expression of the cell cycle inhibitor p27Kip1 in normal corticotroph cells, corticotroph tumors, and malignant pituitary tumors. The Journal of Clinical Endocrinology and Metabolism 1999 84 3823-3830.

54. Roussel-Gervais A, Bilodeau S, Vallette S, Berthelet F, Lacroix A, Figarella-Branger D, Brue T & Drouin J. Cooperation between cyclin E and p27(Kip1) in pituitary tumorigenesis. Molecular Endocrinology 2010 24 1835-1845. (doi:10.1210/me.2010-0091)

55. Ciechanover A. The ubiquitin-proteasome proteolytic pathway. Cell 1994 79 13-21. (doi:10.1016/0092-8674(94)90396-4)

56. Gao T, Liu Z, Wang Y, Cheng H, Yang Q, Guo A, Ren J & Xue Y. UUCD: a family-based database of ubiquitin and ubiquitin-like conjugation. Nucleic Acids Research 2013 41 D445-D451. (doi:10.1093/nar/gks1103)

57. Kulathu Y & Komander D. Atypical ubiquitylation - the unexplored world of polyubiquitin beyond Lys48 and Lys63 linkages. Nature Review Molecular Cell Biology 2012 13 508-523. (doi:10.1038/nrm3394)

58. Reyes-Turcu FE, Ventii KH & Wilkinson KD. Regulation and cellular roles of ubiquitin-specific deubiquitinating enzymes. Annual Review of Biochemistry 2009 78 363-397. (doi:10.1146/annurev.biochem.78.082307.091526)

59. Komander D, Clague MJ & Urbé S. Breaking the chains: structure and function of the deubiquitinases. Nature Review Molecular Cell Biology 10 550-563. (doi:10.1038/nrm2731)

60. Clague MJ, Liu H & Urbé, S. Governance of endocytic trafficking and signaling by reversible ubiquitylation. Developmental Cell 2012 23 457-467. (doi:10.1016/j.devcel.2012.08.011)

61. Haglund K & Dikic I. The role of ubiquitylation in receptor endocytosis and endosomal sorting. Journal of Cell Science 2012 125 265-275. (doi:10.1242/jcs.091280)

62. Tanno H & Komada M. The ubiquitin code and its decoding machinery in the endocytic pathway. The Journal of Biochemistry 2013 153 497-504. (doi:10.1093/jb/mvt028)

63. Sorkin A & Waters CM. Endocytosis of growth factor receptors. Bioessays 1993 15 375-382. (doi:10.1002/bies.950150603)

64. Levkowitz G, Waterman H, Zamir E, Kam Z, Oved S, Langdon WY, Beguinot L, Geiger B & Yarden Y. c-Cbl/Sli-1 regulates endocytic sorting and ubiquitination of the epidermal growth factor receptor. Genes and Development 1998 12 3663-3674. (doi:10.1101/gad.12.23.3663)

65. Levkowitz G, Waterman H, Ettenberg SA, Katz M, Tsygankov AY, Alroy I, Lavi S, Iwai K, Reiss Y, Ciechanover A, Lipkowitz S & Yarden Y. Ubiquitin ligase activity and tyrosine phosphorylation underlie suppression of growth factor signaling by c-Cbl/Sli-1. Molecular Cell 1999 4 1029-1040. (doi:10.1016/S1097-2765(00)80231-2)

66. Niendorf S, Oksche A, Kissler A, Löehler J, Prinz M, Schorle H, Feller S, Lewitzky M, Horak I & Knobeloch KP. Essential role of ubiquitin-specific protease 8 for receptor tyrosine kinase stability and endocytic trafficking in vivo. Molecular and Cellular Biology 2007 27 5029-5039. (doi:10.1128/MCB.01566-06)

67. Morrison DK. The 14-3-3 proteins: integrators of diverse signaling cues that impact cell fate and cancer development. *Trends in Cell Biology* 2009 19 16-23. (doi:10.1016/j.tcb.2008.10.003)

68. Mizuno E, Kitamura N & Komada M. 14-3-3-dependent inhibition of the deubiquitinating activity of UBPY and its cancellation in the M phase. *Experimental Cell Research* 2007 313 3624-3634. (doi:10.1128/MCB.01566-06)

69. Welz T, Wellbourne-Wood J & Kerkhoff E. Orchestration of cell surface proteins by Rab11. *Trends in Cell Biology* 2014 24 407-415. (doi:10.1016/j.tcb.2014.02.004)

70. Turjanski AG, Vaqué JP & Gutkind JS. MAP kinases and the control of nuclear events. *Oncogene* 2007 26 3240-3253. (doi:10.1038/sj.onc.1210415)

71. Johnson LK, Vlodavsky I & Baxter JD, Gospodarowicz D. Nuclear accumulation of epidermal growth factor in cultured rat pituitary cells. *Nature* 1980 287 340-343.

72. Lin SY, Makino K, Xia W, Matin A, Wen Y, Kwong KY, Bourguignon L & Hung MC. Nuclear localization of EGF receptor and its potential new role as a transcription factor. *Nature Cell Biology* 2001 3 802-808. (doi:10.1038/ncb0901-802)

73. Roskoski R Jr. The ErbB/HER family of protein-tyrosine kinases and cancer. *Pharmacological Research* 2014 79 34-74. (doi:10.1016/j.phrs.2013.11.002)

74. Bilodeau S, Vallette-Kasic S, Gauthier Y, Figarella-Branger D, Brue T, Berthelet F, Lacroix A, Batista D, Stratakis C, Hanson J, Meij B, Drouin J. Role of Brg1 and HDAC2 in GR trans-repression of the pituitary POMC gene and misexpression in Cushing disease. *Genes & Development* 2006 20 2871-86. (doi:10.1101/gad.1444606)

75. Riebold M, Kozany C, Freiburger L, Sattler M, Buchfelder M, Hausch F, Stalla GK, Paez-Pereda M. A C-terminal HSP 90 inhibitor restores glucocorticoid sensitivity and relieves a mouse allograft model of Cushing disease. *Nature Medicine* 2015 21 276-80. (doi:10.1038/nm.3776)

Legends

Figure 1. Hotspot gain-of-function mutations in USP8 in corticotrophinomas. In wild-type (WT) human USP8, 14-3-3 proteins bind to the 14-3-3BM, RSYSSP, when Ser<sup>718</sup> is phosphorylated. Nineteen hotspot mutations in or around the 14-3-3BM were recently identified in corticotrophinomas taken from the CD patients (28, 29). Pink arrowheads indicate most frequently identified mutations. The mutations lead to the loss of 14-3-3 protein binding and promote USP8 cleavage immediately N-terminal to the 14-3-3BM (experimentally demonstrated for the p.S718P, p.S718C, p.S718del, and p.P720R mutants). The cleaved C-terminal 40-kDa DUB domain (C40) acquires elevated catalytic activity. MIT: microtubule-interacting and trafficking domain; Rhod: rhodanese homology domain; SBM: SH3-binding motif.

Figure 2. Schematic presentation of the impact of USP8 mutations on EGFR trafficking and signaling in corticotrophinoma cells. EGF binding to the receptor results in a series of autophosphorylation events. These trigger several signaling cascades, but also recruit c-Cbl that ubiquitinates the receptor and marks it for endocytosis to the early endosome and subsequent lysosomal degradation. The cleaved catalytic domain of the USP8 mutants (C40), with its higher DUB activity, effectively deubiquitinates EGFR and promotes its recycling to the plasma membrane, where it activates signaling cascades including the Erk1/2 pathway that phosphorylates transcription factors binding to the AP1 responsive element on the POMC promoter. This leads to enhanced POMC transcription and ACTH synthesis. The findings of nuclear localization of EGFR and full-length USP8 mutants (before cleavage) in human corticotrophinomas prompt us to also consider the possibility of nuclear action. EGFR is believed to be translocated from the plasma membrane to the inner nuclear membrane and released into the nucleus (retrograde translocation). The potential mechanism of action and the substrates of USP8 in the corticotrophinoma cell nucleus are at present unclear. P, phosphorylation; Ub, ubiquitin; Blue arrows, USP8-induced signaling events. Punctuated arrows, hypothetical events.

Page 19 of 20

WT
MIT Rhod SBM1 14-3-3 protein P SBM2 DUB
14-3-3BM: ---KLK RSYSSP DITQAIQEEEKRKPTV---
---KRK RSCSSP DITQAIQEEEKRKPTV---
---KLK CSYFSP DITQAIQEEEKRKPTV---
---KLK RFY-SP DITQAIQEEEKRKPTV---
---KLK R------- KRKPTV---
---KLK RSSSSA DITQAIQEEEKRKPTV---
---KLK RSYPSP DITQAIQEEEKRKPTV---
---KLK RSYCSP DITQAIQEEEKRKPTV---
---KLK RSYFSP DITQAIQEEEKRKPTV---
---KLK RSY-SP DITQAIQEEEKRKPTV---
---KLK RSYSPP DITQAIQEEEKRKPTV---
---KLK RSYS-P DITQAIQEEEKRKPTV---
---KLK RSYSPP NITQAIQEEEKRKPTV---
---KLK RSYSSR DITQAIQEEEKRKPTV---
---KLK RSYSSQ DITQAIQEEEKRKPTV---
---KLK RSYSSR DITQTIQEEEKRKPTV---
---KLK RSYSS- --LQAIQEEEKRKPTV---
---KLK RSYSS- -ITQAIQEEEKRKPTV---
---KLK RSYSSP NITQAIQEEEKRKPTV---
---KLK RSYSSP DITQAIQEEEKRKPIV---

mutations in corticotrophinomas

mut
MIT Rhod DUB
cleavage
hyper-active C40 DUB

Figure 1. Hotspot gain-of-function mutations in USP8 in corticotrophinomas. In wild-type (WT) human USP8, 14-3-3 proteins bind to the 14-3-3 BM, RSYSSP, when Ser718 is phosphorylated. Nineteen hotspot mutations in or around the 14-3-3 BM were recently identified in corticotrophinomas taken from the CD patients (28, 29). Pink arrowheads indicate most frequently identified mutations. The mutations lead to the loss of 14-3-3 protein binding and promote USP8 cleavage immediately N-terminal to the 14-3-3 BM (experimentally demonstrated for the p.S718P, p.S718C, p.S718del, and p.P720R mutants). The cleaved C-terminal 40-kDa DUB domain (C40) acquires elevated catalytic activity. MIT: microtubule-interacting and trafficking domain; Rhod: rhodanese homology domain; SBM: SH3-binding motif.
177x180mm (300x300DPI)

Figure 2. Schematic presentation of the impact of USP8 mutations on EGFR trafficking and signaling in corticotrophinoma cells. EGF binding to the receptor results in a series of autophosphorylation events. These trigger several signaling cascades, but also recruit c-Cbl that ubiquitinates the receptor and marks it for endocytosis to the early endosome and subsequent lysosomal degradation. The cleaved catalytic domain of the USP8 mutants (C40), with its higher DUB activity, effectively deubiquitinates EGFR and promotes its recycling to the plasma membrane, where it activates signaling cascades including the Erk1/2 pathway that phosphorylates transcription factors binding to the AP1 responsive element on the POMC promoter. This leads to enhanced POMC transcription and ACTH synthesis. The findings of nuclear localization of EGFR and full-length USP8 mutants (before cleavage) in human corticotrophinomas prompt us to also consider the possibility of nuclear action. EGFR is believed to be translocated from the plasma membrane to the inner nuclear membrane and released into the nucleus (retrograde translocation). The potential mechanism of action and the substrates of USP8 in the corticotrophinoma cell nucleus are at present unclear. P, phosphorylation; Ub, ubiquitin; Blue arrows, USP8-induced signaling events. Punctuated arrows, hypothetical events.
