
Gastroenterology 2015;149:1226–1239

Genetic Landscape and Biomarkers of Hepatocellular Carcinoma

Jessica Zucman-Rossi${}^{1,2,3,4}$ Augusto Villanueva${}^{5,6}$ Jean-Charles Nault${}^{1,2,7}$ Josep M. Llovet${}^{5,8,9}$

${}^{1}$Inserm, UMR-1162, Génomique Fonctionnelle des Tumeurs Solides, Equipe Labellisée Ligue Contre le Cancer, Institut Universitaire d'Hematologie, Paris, France; ${}^{2}$Université Paris Descartes, Labex Immuno-Oncology, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Faculté de Médecine, Paris, France; ${}^{3}$Université Paris 13, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Unité de Formation et de Recherche Santé, Médecine, Biologie Humaine, Bobigny, France; ${}^{4}$Université Paris Diderot, Paris; ${}^{5}$Liver Cancer Program, Division of Liver Diseases, Department of Medicine, Tisch Cancer Institute, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, New York; ${}^{6}$Division of Hematology and Medical Oncology, Department of Medicine, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, New York; ${}^{7}$Service d'hépatologie, Hôpital Jean Verdier, Hôpitaux Universitaires Paris-Seine-Saint-Denis, Assistance-Publique Hôpitaux de Paris, Bondy, France; ${}^{8}$Liver Cancer Translational Research Laboratory, Barcelona-Clínic Liver Cancer Group, Institut d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer (IDIBAPS), Liver Unit, CIBEREHD, Hospital Clínic, Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain; ${}^{9}$Institució Catalana de Recerca i Estudis Avançats (ICREA), Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain

Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) has emerged as a major cause of cancer-related death. Its mortality has increased in Western populations, with a minority of patients diagnosed at early stages, when curative treatments are feasible. Only the multikinase inhibitor sorafenib is available for the management of advanced cases. During the last 10 years, there has been a clear delineation of the landscape of genetic alterations in HCC, including high-level DNA amplifications in chromosome 6p21 (VEGFA) and 11q13 (FGF19/CNND1), as well as homozygous deletions in chromosome 9 (CDKN2A). The most frequent mutations affect TERT promoter (60%), associated with an increased telomerase expression. TERT promoter can also be affected by copy number variations and hepatitis B DNA insertions, and it can be found mutated in preneoplastic lesions. TP53 and CTNNB1 are the next most prevalent mutations, affecting 25%–30% of HCC patients, that, in addition to low-frequency mutated genes (eg, AXIN1, ARID2, ARID1A, TSC1/TSC2, RPS6KA3, KEAP1, MLL2), help define some of the core deregulated pathways in HCC. Conceptually, some of these changes behave as prototypic oncogenic addiction loops, being ideal biomarkers for specific therapeutic approaches. Data from genomic profiling enabled a proposal of HCC in 2 major molecular clusters (proliferation and nonproliferation), with differential enrichment in prognostic signatures, pathway activation and tumor phenotype. Translation of these discoveries into specific therapeutic decisions is an unmet medical need in this field.

Our understanding of the molecular pathogenesis of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) has improved significantly in the last decade. Certainly, cumulative data from high-throughput analyses of large number of samples have provided an accurate landscape of HCC genetic alterations. This has enabled us to delineate some of the key events that might dominate tumor development and progression. Hopefully, translation of this knowledge into new targets and biomarkers might impact HCC decision making, and ultimately improve patient's outcomes. There are, however, some challenges ahead. First, the most prevalent oncogenic mutations are currently undruggable. Second, in those cases where a molecular subclass or a dominant pathway can be identified, there have been minimal efforts to translating this knowledge into clinical trials. Third, the debate on the role of tumor heterogeneity and its assessment in advanced stages has fueled some skepticism on the future of single-biopsy stratified treatments. Finally, our ability to manipulate the immune system in the therapeutic arsenal against HCC is promising but remains to be evaluated. This review will provide an overview of the genetic changes involved in HCC development and progression, as well as discuss the role of molecular markers to stratify patients based on their prognosis and response to therapies.

Abbreviations used in this paper: AFB1, aflatoxin B1; EGF, epidermal growth factor; HBV, hepatitis B virus; HCC, hepatocellular carcinoma; HCV, hepatitis C virus; HGDN, high-grade dysplastic nodules; LGDN, low-grade dysplastic nodules; SNP, single nucleotide polymorphism.

Most current article

© 2015 by the AGA Institute  
0016-5085/$36.00  
[http://dx.doi.org/10.1053/j.gastro.2015.05.061](http://dx.doi.org/10.1053/j.gastro.2015.05.061)

Keywords: Liver Cancer; Genomics; Signaling Pathways; Molecular Therapies.

October 2015

**Genetic Predisposition, Environmental Factors, and Mechanism of Malignant Transformation in Hepatocellular Carcinoma**

### Gene–Environment Interaction in Hepatocellular Carcinoma Predisposition

HCC occurrence results from a complex interplay among genetic and nongenetic host factors, exposure to environmental carcinogens and virus, and development of an underlying chronic liver disease, which, at its ultimate stage (ie, cirrhosis), becomes a certain procarcinogenic field. Although cirrhosis is the “soil” where most of HCC grow, its development on noncirrhotic liver helps us to reappraise the risk factors and mechanisms that lead to HCC development without background liver damage (Figure 1).

#### Mendelian genetic predisposition to hepatocellular carcinoma.
The liver is a very rare target of classical cancer predisposition syndromes. The most frequent monogenic syndromes that predispose to breast, ovarian, or colorectal cancers are usually not associated with development of liver tumors.¹ Exceptionally, HCC can develop in patients with APC germ-line mutations.² However, HCC predispositions are observed in several genetic metabolic diseases, mainly via development of cirrhosis. These rare monogenic diseases include iron (hemochromatosis, HFE1 gene) or copper (Wilson disease, ATP7B gene) overload, tyrosinemia type 1 (FAH gene), porphyria acute intermittent (HMBS gene) or cutanea tarda (UROD gene), and the α1 antitrypsin deficiency (SERPINA1 gene).¹ In addition, genetic alterations of glucose metabolism leading to glycogen storage diseases (particularly type Ia or von Gierke disease, G6PC gene) or to specific maturity onset diabetes of the young type 3 (MODY3, HNF1A gene) can promote genetic liver adenomatosis occurrence and, in a second step, their rare malignant transformation to HCC without cirrhosis.

#### Multifactorial genetic predisposition to hepatocellular carcinoma.
Several single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were identified to be associated with HCC risk.⁶ Among them, many polymorphisms alter biologic pathways of carcinogenesis, including inflammation via TNFA, IL1B, or TGFB; oxidative stress through SOD2 or MPO; iron metabolism with a cooperation between alcohol intake and the HFE1 C282Y mutant variant; DNA repair (MTHFR or XRCC3); cell cycle with a major role of MDM2 and TP53; or growth factor with EGF.

Polymorphisms modulate HCC risk at different steps of the disease, including predisposition to risk factors (eg, viral hepatitis, alcohol intake, or obesity), to the severity of the chronic liver disease and its evolution to cirrhosis, or to the malignant transformation and tumor progression.⁶ They could be used to stratify patients in personalized surveillance policies, and act as candidate targets for chemoprevention strategies. As an example, rs4444903 polymorphism in the 5′ untranslated region that activates EGF was associated with HCC on hepatitis C virus (HCV)-related cirrhosis and validated in independent studies. Epidermal growth factor (EGF) signaling is also involved in HCC development in mice and rat models that can be prevented by tyrosine kinase inhibitors targeting EGF receptor, such as gefitinib. In addition, EGF is among the top-ranked genes of a signature highly correlated with HCC development in HCV cirrhosis. An early clinical chemoprevention trial is currently evaluating whether erlotinib is able to revert this high-risk HCC signature into a low risk (NCT02273362). To date, no drug, including sorafenib, has been able to decrease HCC incidence in high-risk patients, or prevent tumor recurrence after curative treatments.

Most of the polymorphisms associated with HCC development on chronic liver disease are related to specific risk factors. This observation highlights the close relationships among the nature of the exposure, the genetic background, and the mechanism of hepatocyte transformation/proliferation. The association between aflatoxin B1 (AFB1), hepatitis B virus (HBV), and SNP of GSTM1 and GSTT1 is the prototype of a strong interplay between specific exposure to genotoxic contaminant together with viral infection and common polymorphisms to dramatically increase HCC risk. A PNPLA3 polymorphism (coding for a lipase that mediates triacylglycerol hydrolysis) is strongly associated with fatty and alcoholic chronic liver diseases; it is also associated with HCC occurrence. In contrast, contribution of PNPLA3 polymorphism seems only minor in the risk of HCV-HCC.

Recently, genome-wide association studies allowed the analysis of thousands of SNPs in HCC patients compared with controls. A genome-wide association study performed in HCV patients in Japan identified a polymorphism in MICA (gene involved in immune regulation), and another study in the same population identified a different polymorphism in DEPDC5 (gene of unknown function), associated with HCC development. In Chinese patients infected by HBV, SNPs were identified in STAT4 (a key protein of the inflammatory pathway), TPTE2 (a homolog of PTEN), DCL1 (a tumor suppressor gene implicated in HCC pathogenesis), and in a region containing the UBE2B, KIF1B, PGD genes in 4 different studies as being associated with HCC occurrence. All these polymorphisms require validation in patients with various etiologies and at different stages of the liver diseases.

### Early Genetic Alterations in Precancerous Lesions Involved in Malignant Transformation

#### Cirrhosis as a Cancer Field

There is a key event during malignant transformation in cirrhosis that involves damaged cells, possibly hepatocytes, surrounded by fibrosis and vascularized mainly by the portal system switching to highly proliferative cells, vascularized by arterial neovessels with an incremental invasive and metastatic potential. This is a multistep process defined by a precise sequence of lesions: cirrhosis → low-grade dysplastic nodules (LGDN) → high-grade dysplastic nodules (HGDN) → early HCC → progressed HCC and advanced HCC. Several lines of evidence underlined the

1228 Zucman-Rossi et al

HOST FACTORS

Mendelian disease  
Polymorphism  
Genomic imprint of genotoxic  
Potential treatment  

Personalized  
treatment  

POLYMORPHISM  

ENVIRONMENTAL AND VIRAL FACTOR  

Hepatitis C | Metabolic syndrome | Alcohol | Hepatitis B | Aflatoxin | Aristolochic acid | Alcohol + tobacco  
Antiviral treatment | Weight loss, exercise | Abstinence | Vaccine antiviral treatment | Modification of food storage practice | Avoid exposure | Abstinence  

Germline HNF1A mutation | Wilson disease | Hemochromatosis | Tyrosinemia | Glycogen storage disease | α1 antitrypsin deficiency  

Copper chelation phlebotomy...  

Screening  

Hepatocellular adenoma  

CIRRHOSIS  

186 genes molecular signature  

MDM2  
IL10  
TNFα  
EGF  
MICA  
DEPDC5  

TERT (inactivating)  
PNPLA3  

HFE1  

TP53  
MDM2  
IL10  
TNFα  
STAT4  

Insertional mutagenesis  
R249S TP53  
A:T to T:A transversion  
T>C at ApTpX with transcription strand bias  

GTSM1 GSTT1  

Cooperation  

Cancer field effect  

HEPATOCELLULAR CARCINOMA  

Genomic imprint of viral and environmental factor  

Figure 1. Interaction between genetic predisposition, environmental factors, and HCC occurrence. Red, Mendelian inheritance pattern; blue, polymorphisms involved in HCC occurrence; green, HCC genetic imprint of genotoxic exposures; purple, the potential therapies used to reduce HCC incidence.

key role of telomere and telomerase in cirrhosis pathogenesis and tumor initiation. Telomeres are repeat sequences of DNA essential to protect chromosome ends where they are located. They shorten during cell division leading to cell senescence and apoptosis. Telomerase is required for telomere synthesis and is composed of TERC, the RNA template, and of TERT, the enzyme at rate-limiting component of the complex. In human livers, telomerase is not expressed in mature hepatocytes; cirrhotic tissue exhibited telomere shortening with replicative senescence and germline TERT mutations, predicted to decrease telomerase activity, are associated with a higher risk of cirrhosis.

Conversely, telomerase-deficient mouse with experimental liver injury develop cirrhosis, showing that telomere shortening fosters hepatocytes senescence. In contrast, this model enlightened that telomerase reactivation is required in a second step to ensure HCC development.

In humans, telomerase is reactivated in >90% of HCC due to somatic TERT promoter mutations (54%–60%), TERT amplification (5%–6%), or HBV insertion in the TERT promoter (10%–15%) (Figure 2). Interestingly, premalignant lesions exhibit TERT promoter mutations in 6% of LGDN and 19% of HGDN, and frequency of TERT promoter mutations dramatically increases in early HCC.

October 2015

Genetic Landscape in HCC 1229

CIRRHOSIS

TERT promoter mutation

FGF19 ampl.
RB1

TP53, CTNNB1, ARID1A,
ARID2, MLL2, ATM, AXIN1,
RPS6KA3, NFE2L2, KEAP1...

Somatic alterations
Chromosomal
instability

Low-grade
dysplastic
nodule

High-grade
dysplastic
nodule

Early
HCC

Progressed
HCC

Cirrhosis

Tumor portal
thrombosis

Advanced
HCC

Metastasis

NON-CIRRHOTIC LIVER

Viral
oncoprotein

Insertional mutagenesis

HBx

HBV DNA

Human DNA

Specific DNA
mutagenesis

Aflatoxin B1

OCH₃

R249S

TP53

HNF1A,IL6ST,
STAT3,GNAS,FRK,JAK1

CTNNB1

TER T
promoter mutation

Female
Oral
contraception

Hepatocellular
adenoma

Hepatocellular adenoma
at risk of malignant
transformation

Figure 2. Mechanisms of
malignant transformation
in HCC.

(61%) and remains stable in progressed and advanced
HCC.⁴⁸ In addition, whole-exome sequencing of early HCC
and of premalignant lesions revealed no additional recurrent
mutations in classical HCC driver genes.⁴⁹ These results
show that TERT promoter mutation is the earliest recurrent
somatic genetic alteration, behaving as a “gatekeeper” during
the transformation sequence. It also suggests that early
HCC are monoclonal, genetically closer to LGDN and HGDN
harboring TERT promoter mutations compared with pro-
gressed HCC that harbored mutations in many more cancer
genes. Concordantly, there is a phenotypic proximity be-
tween these lesions, what frequently renders pathologic
discrimination between HGDN and early HCC a difficult task,
even among expert liver pathologists.⁵⁰ This paradigm

suggests that early HCC, LGDN, and HGDN harboring TERT
promoter mutations are at high risk for full malignant
transformation/progression to advance HCC, which also
requires additional hits in other cancer genes.

Malignant Transformation of Hepatocellular
Adenoma

In normal liver, HCC can sometimes arise from the ma-
lignant transformation of hepatocellular adenoma, a rare
monoclonal benign proliferation of hepatocytes usually
observed in young women taking oral contraception.⁵¹ Ade-
nomas are classified in 4 molecular subgroups according to
mutations in either HNF1A, CTNNB1 coding for β-catenin, or

in the genes activating the inflammatory pathway as *IL6ST*, *FRK, STAT3, JAK1*, and *GNAS*. [51–53] Hepatocellular adenoma with exon 3 β-catenin–activating mutations have a higher risk of transformation, and *TERT* promoter mutation are involved at the last step of malignant transformation concomitantly with increased global hypomethylation, and chromosomal aberrations. [54,55] However, the sequence of events differs in hepatocellular adenoma compared with cirrhosis: in normal hepatocytes, *CTNNB1* activating mutation is first and associated with monoclonal benign proliferation at risk of transformation, and in cirrhotic hepatocytes, *TERT* promoter mutation occurs earlier. [48,55] Likely, cirrhotic hepatocytes might require early telomerase reactivation to proliferate and escape from senescence.

**Genotoxic Effect as a Cause of Hepatocellular Carcinoma Development**

HCC related to HBV can occur as a consequence of viral proteins, such as HBx with oncogenic properties or due to the viral genome itself with HBV insertional mutagenesis in cancer genes like *TERT, CCNE1*, and *MLL4*. [23,46,56,57] Recently, the adeno-associated virus type 2 (AAV2), a DNA defective virus, was associated with HCC development on normal liver due to insertional mutagenesis in *TERT, CCNA2, CCNE1, TNFSF10* and *MLL4*. [58] Another layer of complexity emerged from the analysis of the cancer genome that carries the imprint of exposure to environmental carcinogens during a patient’s lifetime. [59] Exposure to AFB1, a mycotoxin contaminating food in certain areas of Asia and Africa, is a well-known HCC carcinogen, a phenomena fostered by concomitant chronic HBV infection. AFB1-related HCC have a specific mutational signature due to AFB1-DNA adducts at guanine leading to a high rate of C>A mutations and a specific hot spot of mutations R249S in TP53. [23] In addition, null genotypes of *GTSM1* and *GSTT1*, 2 genes important for carcinogen detoxification that belong to glutathione S transferase family, are associated with an increased risk of HCC development in Asian patients in cooperation with AFB1 exposure and chronic HBV infection. [24] Analysis of the spectrum of nucleotide mutations in HCC enabled to identify signatures over the tumor genome specific of the AFB1 exposure. [49]

Exposure to aristolochic acid, contained in a plant used in Chinese traditional medicine, is associated with urothelial cancer development that bears a highly specific high rate of mutations with T>A transversion. [60] Interestingly, the same mutational signature was identified in a subset of HCC in China, suggesting that aristolochic acid could be primarily involved in HCC pathogenesis in a subset of patients. [60] In addition, next-generation sequencing identified a group of HCCs developed on noncirrhotic liver in France with an overrepresentation of T>C at ApTpX with transcription strand bias, a pattern known to be strongly associated with genotoxic injury. [49] Interestingly, these tumors developed in noncirrhotic patients with high alcohol and tobacco consumption. [49]

All of these results showed that the analysis of the cancer genome is an identity card bearing the archeological features of exposure to carcinogens or perturbation of DNA maintenance. This could be useful to better understand the biologic events that shape HCC development and help identify new risk factors using a molecular-epidemiologic approach. [61]

**Genomic Landscape and Driver Pathways in Liver Carcinogenesis**

Each HCC genome is the result of a unique combination of somatic genetic alterations with a mean numbers of mutations in coding regions varying from 35 to 80 per tumor. [45,49,62–66] If most of the genetic alterations occurred in passenger genes without any predicted functional carcinogenic consequences, then a small numbers of mutations occurred in cancer driver genes that belong to key signaling pathways involved in liver carcinogenesis. [67] An integrated view of recent whole-exome sequencing studies allows identifying the major pathways recurrently mutated in HCC (Figure 3, and Table 1).

**Telomere maintenance.** As telomerase reactivation is key during malignant transformation, 90% of human HCCs harbor an increased telomerase expression. The mechanisms of telomerase reactivation are mutually exclusive and include *TERT* promoter mutations (54%–60%), [44] *TERT* amplification (5%–6%), [65] and HBV insertion in *TERT* promoter (10%–15%). [46,47] *TERT* promoter mutations are frequently associated with *CTNNB1* mutations, suggesting cooperation between telomerase maintenance and β-catenin pathway in liver tumorigenesis. [44,45,49] Other mechanisms of telomerase re-expression remain to be discovered and the role of alternative pathways leading to telomere synthesis, such as alternative lengthening of telomeres, need to be specifically evaluated.

**WNT/β-catenin pathway.** The WNT/β-catenin pathway is pivotal in physiologic embryogenesis, zonation, and metabolic control in the liver. It is the oncogenic pathway most frequently activated in HCC by activating mutations of *CTNNB1* (11%–37%), [68] and inactivating mutations of *AXIN1* (5%–15%), [69] or *APC* (1%–2%). *CTNNB1* mutations, coding for β-catenin, are substitutions or in-frame deletions in a hotspot located in the domain targeted by the APC/AXIN1/GSK3B inhibitory complex. [68] Tumors mutated for *CTNNB1* have also a specific transcriptomic profile with overexpression of classical target genes like *GLUL* and *LGR5*, [70] and a specific histologic pattern with intratumor cholestasis. [71,72]

**P53 cell cycle pathway.** The P53 cell cycle pathway is altered in at least half of HCC patients with frequent *TP53* mutations (12%–48%), [23,49,62,73,74] the tumor suppressor gene more frequently mutated in cancer. Except for the R249S mutation related to AFB1 exposure, no other recurrent *TP53* mutation hotspot has been identified. [62,75] The retinoblastoma pathway that control progression from G1 to S phase of the cell cycle is inactivated in HCC mainly by homozygous deletion of *CDKN2A* (2%–12%) [45,62] or *RB1* mutations (3%–8%). [65] Interestingly, genetic alterations of *CDKN2A* and *RB1* were enriched in tumors with poor prognosis suggesting a role of P21 pathway inactivation in tumor aggressiveness. [49,65] Finally, recurrent HBV insertions in *CCNE1* (cyclin E1, 5%) [46] and amplification of the *CCND1*

October 2015                                                                                   Genetic Landscape in HCC   1231

### Telomere maintenance

- **Cytoplasm**
- **Nucleus**

  - **Telomerase complex**
    - **TERT** (Catalytic enzyme)
    - **TERC** (RNA template)

  - **TERT promoter**
    - Hot spot mutations: 54%–60%*
    - Promoter Gene
    - TERT amplification: 5%–6%
    - Increase telomerase activity

### Cell cycle gene

- **Cytoplasm**
- **Nucleus**

  - **P53 pathway**
    - IRF2: 1%–5%
    - MDM2
    - P53: 12%–48%
    - CCNE1: 5%*
    - ATM: 2%–6%

  - **Retinoblastoma pathway**
    - CDKN2A: 2%–12%
    - Rb: 3%–8%
    - E2F
    - G1/S checkpoint
    - Apoptosis
    - G1/S checkpoint
    - DNA repair

### Wnt/β-catenin

- **Wnt**
- **Frizzled**
- **Inhibitory complex**
  - GSK3β
  - APC
  - Axin1: 5%–15%

- **β-catenin**: 11%–37%
- **Proteasome**: 1%–2%
- **β-catenin**
- **TCF/LEF**

### Oxidative stress pathway

- **Oxidative stress**
  - KEAP1: 2%–8%
  - CUL3
  - NFE2L2: 3%–6%
  - Inhibitory complex
  - Cytoplasm
  - Nucleus
  - Detoxification program

### Akt/mTOR and MAP kinase pathway

- **IGF2**
- **FGF19**: 4%–6%
- **IGFR**
- **FGFR**
- **Ras**: 0%–2%
- **PI3K**: 0%–2%
- **PTEN**: 1%–3%
- **Raf**
- **Akt**
- **Mek 1/2**
- **TSC1/2**: 3%–8%
- **Rsk2**: 2%–9%
- **Erk 1/2**
- **MTORC 1**
- **4EBP**
- **S6K1**
- **Cytoplasm**
- **Nucleus**

### Epigenetic modifier

- **Chromatin remodeling**
  - SWI/SNF complex
    - BAF
      - ARID1A: 4%–17%
      - SNF5
      - BAF155
      - BAF170
      - BRG1
      - ARID1B
    - PBAF
      - Core subunit
        - BAF200
        - ARID2: 3%–18%
        - BAF180
        - BRD7

  - **Histone methyltransferase**
    - MLL: 3%–4%
    - MLL2: 2%–3%
    - MLL3: 3%–6%
    - MLL4: 2%–3%*

Figure 3. The genetic landscape of HCC. Red, activating mutations of oncogenes; blue, inactivating mutations of tumor suppressors. *Gene was recurrently targeted by HBV integration.

---

FGF19 locus (5%–14%), two key proteins involved in cell cycle progression, have been reported in HCC.

Epigenetic modifiers. Epigenetic modifiers are recurrently altered in HCC, with inactivating mutations of ARID1A (4%–17%) and ARID2 (3%–18%) underlining the key role of SWI/SNF chromatin remodeling complexes (BAF and PBAF) as tumor suppressors. The physiologic role of these complexes is to modify chromatin structure and nucleosome position. Indirectly, they modify transcription fate of the cell. Recurrent somatic alterations in the histone methylation writer family mainly in MLL (3%–4%), MLL2 (2%–3%), MLL3 (3%–6%), and MLL4 (2%–3%) genes by mutation or HBV insertions in MLL4 (10%) are also frequent in HCC. In physiologic state, these genes code for proteins that modify histone methylation by adding and removing H3K4 methyl. Altogether, the functional consequences of ARID1A, ARID2, and MLL genes mutations in hepatocarcinogenesis remain to be further explored.

Oxidative stress pathway. The oxidative stress pathway is altered by activating mutations of NRF2 (coded

Table 1. Candidate Drivers as Targets for Therapies in Hepatocellular Carcinoma

| Candidate oncogene addiction loop | Somatic aberration in human samples, % | Altered pathway | GEM impact liver tumor development/progression | In vivo tumor response after selective induction/blockade | Drug (clinical trials in any tumor type) |
|----------------------------------|--------------------------------------|-----------------|------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------|
| DNA amplifications               |                                      |                 |                                              |                                                   |                                         |
| FGF19                            | 5–14<sup>a</sup>                      | AKT/MTOR; RAS/MAPK | Yes                                          | Yes                                             | BLU 9931                                |
| CCND1                           | 5–14<sup>a</sup>                      | Cell cycle      | Yes                                          | Yes                                             | Palbociclib<sup>b</sup>                  |
| VEGFA                           | 7–11<sup>a</sup>                      | AKT/MTOR; RAS/MAPK; angiogenesis | NA                                           | Yes                                             | Bevacizumab, aflibercept                |
| TERT                            | 5–6<sup>a</sup>                       | Telomere maintenance | Yes                                          | Yes                                             | GX301                                   |
|                                                                                          |                                                                                   |                                                |                                                   |                                         | Imtelstat                         |
|                                                                                          |                                                                                   |                                                |                                                   |                                         | GV1001                            |
| MYC                             | 4                                    | Cell cycle      | Yes                                          | Yes                                             | DCR-MYC (RNAi)                          |
| FAK                             | 4                                    | RAS/MAPK        | Yes                                          | Yes                                             | GSK 2256098                             |
| Gene mutations                   |                                      |                 |                                              |                                                   |                                         |
| TERT promoter                   | 54–60                                | Telomere maintenance | Yes                                          | Yes                                             | GX301                                   |
|                                                                                          |                                                                                   |                                                |                                                   |                                         | Imtelstat                         |
|                                                                                          |                                                                                   |                                                |                                                   |                                         | GV1001                            |
| CTNNB1                          | 11–37                                | WNT pathway     | Yes                                          | Yes                                             | PRI-724                                 |
| TP53                            | 12–48                                | Cell cycle      | Yes                                          | Yes                                             | NA                                      |
| ARID1A<sup>c</sup>               | 4–17                                 | Epigenetic modifiers | NA                                           | No                                              | GSK 126                                 |
| ARID2                           | 3–18                                 | Epigenetic modifiers | NA                                           | No                                              | NA                                      |
| AXIN1                           | 5–15                                 | WNT pathway     | NA                                           | No                                              | NA                                      |
| TSC1/TSC2                       | 3–8                                  | AKT/MTOR        | Yes                                          | Yes                                             | Everolimus, Temsirolimus, Sirolimus<sup>c</sup> |
| NFE2L2                          | 3–6                                  | Oxidative stress | Yes                                          | Yes                                             | HSP 90 inhibitors (17-AAG, 17-DMAG)     |
| RPS6KA3                         | 2–9                                  | RAS/MAPK        | No                                           | No                                              | Refametinib                             |
| ATM                             | 2–6                                  | Cell cycle      | Yes                                          | No                                              | NA                                      |
| KEAP1                           | 2–8                                  | Oxidative stress | Yes                                          | No                                              | HSP 90 inhibitors (17-AAG, 17-DMAG)     |
| RB1                             | 3–8                                  | Cell cycle      | Yes                                          | Yes                                             | NA                                      |
| NRAS/HRAS/BRAF                  | 2                                    | RAS/MAPK        | Yes                                          | Yes                                             | Refametinib                             |
| Overexpression                   |                                      |                 |                                              |                                                   |                                         |
| MET                             | 30–50<sup>d</sup>                     | AKT/MTOR; RAS/MAPK | Yes                                          | Yes                                             | Cabozantinib, tivantinib<sup>e</sup>    |
| IGF2                            | 10<sup>d</sup>                        | AKT/MTOR; RAS/MAPK | Yes                                          | Yes                                             | IMC-A12, BI 836845                      |
| PD1/PD-L1                       | NA                                   | Immune checkpoint | NA                                           | Yes                                             | Nivolumab                              |

NA, not available.

<sup>a</sup> High-level DNA focal gains.

<sup>b</sup> CDK4/6 inhibitor.

<sup>c</sup> Target is MTOR (not TSC1/TSC2).

<sup>d</sup> Frequency estimation not based on high-throughput RNA sequencing studies.

<sup>e</sup> Data suggest that tivantinib might not be a specific MET inhibitor.

<sup>f</sup> Target is IGF-IR.

Activating mutations of genes belonging to the RAS family are rarely observed in HCC (<2%), and inactivating mutations of RP6SKA3, coding for the RAS inhibitor RSK2, were identified in 2%–9% of tumors. [62] RSK2, is located downstream mitogen-activated protein kinase and extracellular signal-regulated kinase, and is a known negative control loop of RAS signaling. [84] Inactivation of RSK2 released this negative feedback and induced a constitutive activation of the pathway. [49] Experimental data also suggest that persistent RAS activation may be a mechanism of HCC resistance to sorafenib. [85]

### Molecular Classes

We have described the landscape of mutations and critical pathways involved in the development and progression of HCC. But 2 important questions emerge: Are we able to classify tumors according to the molecular events described here? And can we treat HCC patients based on those biomarkers? Molecular classifications are aimed at providing a molecular understanding of the different biologic events that drive tumor subclasses and also at defining specific biomarkers/targets for therapies. Development of whole-genome expression profiling in the late 1990s had a tremendous impact in biomedical research. [86] The premise was that, despite being at the same clinical stage, tumors are significantly different at a molecular level. Implications are huge, because decision making in oncology relies mainly on clinical staging, and rarely considers tumor molecular singularities. Array-based technologies enabled the analysis of large numbers of transcripts in multiple samples, setting the basis for cancer classification based on expression patterns. [87] These molecular classes reflected different biologic backgrounds with potential implications in patient selection for therapies and prediction of clinical outcomes. For example, gene signatures in breast cancer identified those women who would likely to benefit from adjuvant chemotherapy after resection. [88] This could provide clinicians with additional tools to prevent patient’s exposure to unnecessary drug toxicity. [89] There are 2 layers of information derived from molecular classification in HCC: first, its role as a prognostic or predictive biomarker, and second, its ability to increase our understanding of the molecular pathogenesis of the disease.

In HCC, many groups have reported molecular classification based on genomic profiling (Table 2). [62,90–92] Most of these studies were conducted on resection specimens from patients with different etiologies for their underlying liver disease. Remarkably, despite that marker genes defining each subclass were different across studies, integrative analysis showed that most of them identified common genomic signals reflecting background biology. [93] In other words, different investigators reported molecular subclasses that identified similar patients, probably by spotting core genomic alterations. Figure 4 summarizes our cumulative understanding of gene expression–based HCC subclasses and its integration with additional levels of molecular information. These studies along with a meta-analysis showed that, regardless of the specific nomenclature used for each

class, HCC can be roughly divided into 2 major molecular subtypes. [94] One is broadly characterized by an enrichment of signals related to cell proliferation and progression in the cell cycle (proliferation class) and is generally associated with a more aggressive phenotype, and the second class generally retains molecular features resembling normal hepatic physiology (nonproliferation class) (Figure 4).

#### Proliferation Subclass

The main traits of this class, which account for around 50% of patients, are related to activation of signaling cascades involved in cell proliferation/survival, enrichment of signatures of poor prognosis, and association with clinical characteristics of aggressive tumors and poor outcomes. Activation of signaling pathway is remarkably heterogeneous at the genomic and phenotypic levels. These include AKT/MTOR, [82] MET, [95] TGFB, [96] IGF, [83] RAS/mitogen-activated protein kinase, [97] among others. Interestingly, this class is also enriched in genomic signals that identify markers of progenitor cells, such as epithelial cell adhesion molecule [92,98] or hepatoblastoma-like. [91] The cell of origin in HCC is a highly controversial issue, with recent experimental data supporting oncogenic reprogramming of different cellular lineages into cancer stem cells. [99] A signature derived from hepatoblastomas, the most frequent primary pediatric liver tumor, as well as 2 signatures derived from cholangiocarcinoma, are also enriched in this class, [100–102] as well as Notch, [103] which acts as a master regulator of biliary differentiation. Altogether, these data further reinforce the notion of increased cellular plasticity in these tumors. Different factors might explain increased heterogeneity of the proliferation class, including higher rates of chromosomal instability or enrichment in aberrant epigenetic changes. For example, high-level DNA amplifications of chromosome 11q13 (locus for *FGF19*, *CCND1*, *ORA0V1*, *FGF4*) are enriched in this class, in addition to a DNA methylation-based prognostic signature that mainly correlates with signatures of progenitor cells. [104] MicroRNA deregulation is also prominent in this class, with a clustered enrichment of a primate-specific family of miRNA located in chromosome 19 and microRNA/small nuclear RNA on chromosome 14. [105]

From a clinical standpoint, patients in the proliferation class have aggressive tumors, with higher α-fetoprotein levels, moderately/poor cell differentiation on histology, and frequent vascular invasion. [81,93] HBV-related HCC are predominantly tumors belonging to this class. As predicted, patients with tumors from the proliferation subclass present higher risk of recurrence after resection and lower survival rates. [93,106]

#### Nonproliferation Class

This molecular subclass contains at least 2 critical features: molecularly, it is dominated by activation of Wnt signaling in up to 25% of cases, and others are characterized by immune response; and from a functional perspective, the transcriptome of tumors resemble normal hepatic

Table 2. Prognostic Signatures in Hepatocellular Carcinoma

| Predominant etiology | Clinical endpoint (time-to-event) | REMARK recommendations | First author, year |
|---------------------|----------------------------------|------------------------|--------------------|
| Advanced developmental stage mRNA-based | Alcohol, HCV, HBV | Survival | OK | Nault, 2013<sup>51</sup> |
| 5-gene signature | HBV | Survival | OK | Yamashita, 2008<sup>92</sup> |
| EpCAM-signature | HCV | Survival, HCC development | OK | Hoshida, 2008<sup>118</sup> |
| 186-gene signature (adjacent tissue) | HBV | Survival | OK | Ji, 2009<sup>117</sup> |
| miRNA-based Down-regulation miR-26a | HCV | Survival | OK | Villa, 2015<sup>152</sup> |
| Pending further validation mRNA-based 5-gene risk signature | HBV | Survival | OK | Kim, 2012<sup>153</sup> |
| 65-gene signature | HBV | Late recurrence, survival | OK | Kim, 2014<sup>120</sup> |
| 233-gene signature (adjacent tissue) | HCV, alcohol | Survival | OK | Boyault, 2006<sup>70</sup> |
| G3 subclass | HBV | Survival | OK | Lee, 2006<sup>91</sup> |
| Cluster A/hepatoblast-like | HBV | Survival | OK | Budhu, 2006<sup>119</sup> |
| 17-gene metastasis predictor (adjacent tissue) | HBV | Survival | OK | Roessler, 2010<sup>154</sup> |
| Metastasis-related gene signature | HBV | Survival | OK | Woo, 2010<sup>101</sup> |
| Cholangiocarcinoma-like | HBV | Survival | — | Marquardt, 2011<sup>155</sup> |
| 617-gene SP-ZEB signature | HBV | Venous metastasis, survival | OK | Budhu, 2008<sup>116</sup> |
| miRNA-based 20-miRNA signature | HBV, HCV, alcohol | Survival | OK | Coulouarn, 2009<sup>156</sup> |
| Down-regulation miR-122 | HBV | Survival | OK | Wei, 2013<sup>157</sup> |
| 20-miRNA signature | HCV | Survival | — | Augello, 2012<sup>158</sup> |
| C19MC | HCV | Early recurrence | — | Viswanathan, 2009<sup>159</sup> |
| Down-regulation Let-7 members | HBV | Survival | — | Li, 2008<sup>160</sup> |
| Up-regulation miR-125a | HCV, alcohol | Survival | — | Jiang, 2008<sup>161</sup> |
| 19-miRNA signature | HCV | Recurrence | — | Gramantieri, 2009<sup>162</sup> |
| DNA methylation 36CpG DNA methylation signature | HCV | Survival | OK | Villanueva, 2015<sup>104</sup> |
| Methylation signature | HBV, HCV | Survival | — | Hernandez-Vargas, 2010<sup>163</sup> |
| Genome wide hypomethylation | HBV | Survival | — | Calvisi, 2006<sup>164</sup> |
| Hypermethylation of E-cadherin or GSTP1 | HBV | Survival | — | Lee, 2003<sup>165</sup> |
| Hypermethylation of E-cadherin | HBV | Recurrence | — | Kwon, 2005<sup>166</sup> |

EpCAM, epithelial cell adhesion molecule; REMARK, Reporting Recommendations for Tumor Marker Prognostic Studies.

October 2015                                                                                   Genetic Landscape in HCC 1235

|  | PROLIFERATION CLASS | NON-PROLIFERATION CLASS |
| --- | --- | --- |
| CELL LINEAGE FEATURES | Progenitor-like | Hepatocyte-like | Hepatocyte-like |
| PROGNOSTIC GENE SIGNATURES | EpCAM | Late TGF-β | S3 |
|  | S2 | S1 |  |
|  | Hepatoblastoma-C2 |  | Cluster B |
|  | Hepatoblast-like |  |  |
|  | Cluster A |  |  |
|  | Vascular invasion signature | WNT/CTNNB1 | Poly 7 Immune related |
|  | G1-3 / 5-gene signature | G5-6 |  |
| DNA SOMATIC ALTERATIONS | Chr11q13 amplif. (FGF19/CCND1) | CTNNB1 mut. | DNA ampl. Chr7 |
| SIGNALING PATHWAY ACTIVATION | NOTCH | TGFβ | Classical WNT |
|  | IGF2 | Liver-WNT |  |
|  | RAS/MAPK |  |  |
|  | MET |  |  |
|  | AKT/MTOR |  |  |
| EPIGENETIC-BASED SUBTYPES | 36CpG DNA methylation signature | miRNA Class C2 (C19MC) | miRNA Class B |
|  |  | miRNA Class C3 |  |
| CLINICAL FEATURES | HBV | HCV, Alcohol |  |
|  | High AFP levels | Low AFP levels |  |
|  | Poor differentiation | Well-Mod differentiation |  |
|  | Vascular invasion (+++) | Vascular invasion (+) | Better outcome |
|  | Worse outcome (recurrence/survival) |  |  |

Figure 4. Summary of molecular classification of HCC. Major classes (proliferation and nonproliferation) are depicted based on messenger RNA expression. Additional molecular features affecting DNA structure, pathway deregulation, and epigenetics are overlapped.

at the top of this hierarchical classification, 2 main tumor subclasses with significant differential prevalence of mutations (ie, M) and DNA copy number alterations (ie, C), which suggests that either mutations or chromosomal instability can act as drivers of progression in different tumors.

### Genetic Alterations as Biomarkers

#### Prognosis
HCC prognosis prediction is currently assessed using the Barcelona Clinic Liver Cancer algorithm, as endorsed by the American and European Associations for the Study of Liver Diseases. Barcelona Clinic Liver Cancer relies on a composite of tumor burden, degree of liver damage, and cancer-related symptoms. In terms of molecular-guided prognosis prediction, >40 prognostic gene signatures have been described, although none has become a tangible tool in clinical decision making. Many factors could contribute to this, including that molecular classes have been generated mostly from surgical specimens, limiting its theoretical applicability to patients at earlier stages. There are recurrent discussions on the impact of tumor heterogeneity, both intra- and intermodular, on molecular class predictions based on single biopsies. Despite this, molecular signatures are slowly permeating clinical practice guidelines. A set of criteria has been proposed to determine formal inclusion of molecular-based biomarkers in GPC. Also, the use of archived specimens collected in the context of high-end clinical trials has been suggested as a legitimate source for biomarker development. Most prognostic signatures were generated using transcriptome data, such as the G3, 5-gene epithelial cell adhesion molecule, cluster A, or

hepatoblast-like.^[91] Others used epigenetic data to predict outcomes, like the 36-CpG DNA methylation signature,^[104] the 20-miRNA signature,^[116] or the identification and validation of miR-26 in HBV-HCC (Table 2).^[105,117] Most of them identify patients within the proliferation subclass, however, the 5-gene score is also able to predict prognosis of tumors classified in the nonproliferative subclass (Figure 4). In addition to those derived from the tumor, a number of studies have reported signatures derived from adjacent cirrhotic tissue able to classify HCC patients based on their prognosis. Presumably, these classes capture oncogenic signals reflecting the so-called “field effect.” A 186-gene signature enriched in gene sets associated with inflammation, including interferon signaling, activation of EGF, nuclear factor κB, and tumor necrosis factor-α was able to identify HCC patients, mainly HCV-related, with poor survival after resection, as well was those cirrhotic patients at higher risk for HCC development.^[21,118] Differential inflammation patterns identified with genomic profiling were also determinant to predict intrahepatic metastasis in a cohort of HBV-HCC.^[119] More recently, a 233-gene signature identified in regenerating livers accurately predicts risk of de novo tumor formation (ie, late recurrence) in resected HCC.^[120] Patients with poor prognosis signatures from the tumor (eg, G3, Cluster A) were not significantly enriched in those signatures, conferring poor prognosis from the adjacent tissue (eg, 186-gene signature), as judged by an integrative analysis in a large cohort.^[93] In other words, and similar to prognosis prediction using clinical systems, genomic data from both components (ie, tumor and adjacent tissue) are complementary to maximize prediction accuracy (Table 2).

Recent refinements in these studies have enabled predictions based on individual risk assessments. For example, a nomogram that combines data from the 5-gene score in conjunction with Barcelona Clinic Liver Cancer stage and vascular invasion provides survival estimation on an individual basis.^[114] Similarly, the use of machine learning techniques for class identification and prediction of a DNA methylation-based signature provides a continuous gradient of risk, which ultimately might increase precision in outcome prediction.^[104] Signature-based prognosis predictions require tissue, which might constitute a limitation because HCC diagnosis can be confidently made with imaging techniques. The development of technologies that allow analysis of tumor byproducts in the blood, including cell-free DNA or circulating tumor cells, might facilitate the implementation of molecular-based biomarkers.

### Therapeutic

In oncology, survival benefits from molecular-targeted therapies might be derived as a result of treating all patients with very effective/broad therapies with manageable toxicity, targeting a specific, generally small, subgroup of patients whose tumors are addicted to an oncogenic aberration; and targeting a broad number of patients whose tumors present a frequent mechanism of activation (signaling pathway) or immune response.

Studies in solid tumors have provided a broad picture of the mutational profile and identified a wide range of 5–150 mutations per tumor, depending on exposure to genotoxics (non-small cell lung cancer, melanoma-high mutation rate), tumors developed in infants or hematologic tumors (low-mutation rate).^[122] In HCC, the mean number of mutations in coding regions per tumor is 35–80, among which it has been estimated that there might be 4–8 drivers of oncogene addiction.^[49] The oncogene addiction theory postulates that some tumors harbor certain somatic genetic alterations that dominate the malignant phenotype.^[123] Translation of this principle in cancer management provides the rationale for personalized care, commonly referred as precision medicine. There are many examples of survival benefits achieved after selective inhibition of aberrant molecular somatic events in solid tumors, such as vemurafenib in melanoma with BRAF V600E mutations,^[124] or crizotinib in lung cancer patients with anaplastic lymphoma kinase rearrangements.^[125] Effectiveness of this approach relies on the following factors: dominance of the candidate oncogenic addiction loop in tumor progression, existence of a biomarker able to accurately identify patients with this oncogenic loop, and a therapeutic agent able to selectively and effectively abrogate the loop. Ultimately, a well-designed, properly powered clinical trial enrolling patients with the activated oncogenic loop and treated with its antagonist will determine its clinical implementation.

In HCC, the only effective systemic agent is the BRAF/vascular endothelial growth factor receptor/platelet-derived growth factor receptor inhibitor sorafenib.^[126] No oncogenic addiction loop has been validated yet. In addition, none of the negative phase 3 trials in advanced HCC reported so far used biomarker-based patient enrollment.^[127] It is feasible that not all tumor types can harbor oncogenic addiction loops. In addition, inhibition of a single loop might not suffice to provide enough survival benefits at advanced stages, and could promote growth of resistant clones or metastatic sites. Also, a comprehensive signaling blockade might be needed to achieve clinical responses, as has been shown in breast cancer,^[128] and suggested in resistance models of HCC.^[85]

Among the somatic alterations described previously and signaling pathway activation, we can define 2 areas where biomarkers can be used: targeting oncogenic addiction loops based on the 3 requirements mentioned here, based in human data and experimental models, and targeting signaling cascades or immune checkpoints (Tables 1 and 2).

#### Oncogenic loops. DNA copy number changes. VEGFA (gains in chromosome 6p21) is recurrently described, correlated with expression, and with an estimated prevalence based on fluorescence in situ hybridization of 7%–11%.^[81,129] Also, high VEGF plasma levels are correlated with poor survival;^[130] there is solid evidence of anti-tumor effect after VEGF inhibition in experimental models. VEGFA could have a double pro-tumorigenic effect by promoting angiogenesis and inducing non-cell autonomous over-expression of hepatocyte growth factor.^[129] Early trials with VEGFA inhibitor bevacizumab in unselected populations show modest efficacy and raised some safety concerns.^[131]

FGF19, CCND1 (gains in chromosome 11q13) are described in 5%–14% of HCC, [45,76,81] and are also correlated with high expression levels and poor prognosis.[49] FGF19 blockade with monoclonal antibodies inhibits clonal growth and tumorigenicity in vivo.[76,132] Strikingly, transgenic mouse overexpressing FGF19, which binds to FGFR4 in skeletal muscle, develop HCC,[133] which points toward a dual role of FGF19 in both tumor progression and initiation. In terms of FGF blockade, brivanib, a highly active FGFR1-3 inhibitor, failed to improve survival in unselected advanced HCC populations.[134,135] CCND1 shares genomic locus with FGF19, and it is also frequently amplified in cancer. CDK4/6 dual inhibitors, such as palbociclib or abemaciclib, have shown anti-tumoral activity in experimental models, although data from breast does not confirm a particular benefit of CDK4/6 inhibition in CCND1 amplified tumors.[116]

FAK, MYC (gains in chromosome 8q24) have broad gains described in 4% of HCC, with a single study reporting 26%.[65,66] FAK inhibition induces tumor responses in experimental models of HCC,[137] and selective inhibitors of FAK are currently under clinical development. MYC transgenic mice develop liver cancer and it has a central role during hepatocarcinogenesis.[138] However, the development of effective pharmacologic strategies to inhibit MYC has been challenging.

**Gene mutations.** CTNNB1 is highly prevalent across studies (approximately 25%).[45,49,64] Similar to MYC, difficulties developing selective and nontoxic WNT inhibitors have limited its clinical development,[139] but clearly, CTNNB1 mutation is an appealing candidate for selective targeting.

TSC1/TSC2 are both negative modulators of MTOR cascade, and their inactivation promotes MTOR signaling. Mutations, as well as DNA copy number alterations are described in 2%–14% of HCC.[45,49] Pathway-based analysis underscores the potential driving role of this cascade in HCC,[82] with a significant enrichment in Asian populations.[45] In terms of MTOR inhibition, a phase 1 trial testing everolimus in combination with sorafenib show subtherapeutic concentrations for everolimus and precluded further development of this combination.[140] When tested in second line, everolimus as a single agent failed to significantly improve survival in a phase 3 trial without biomarker-selected patients.[142] Subgroup analyses suggested an increased survival in HBV patients, maybe in relation to a higher AKT/MTOR pathway activation in this population.

NRAS/KRAS/HRAS are mutated in <3% of HCC.[49,65,66] Preliminary data from a phase 2 trial (ie, BASIL [(Assessing BAY86-9766 Plus Sorafenib for the Treatment of Liver Cancer) NCT01204177]) in patients with advanced HCC receiving a combination of MEK inhibitor refametinib (BAY86-9766) plus sorafenib found mutations in approximately 6% of patients (4 of 69)[143]; analysis was conducted on circulating DNA. Three of these four patients had confirmed partial responses. Inactivating mutations in RAS inhibitor RP6SKA3 are more prevalent (2%–9%)[49,62,65] and could also predict response to RAS inhibition. A phase 2 study testing the combination of refametinib and sorafenib in RAS mutant HCCs is ongoing. JAK1 mutation

frequency has been described up to 9% based on whole-genome sequencing data in HBV-HCC.[66] This has not been confirmed in subsequent studies.[45,49,64,65] Experimental evidence suggests that its blockage could have antitumor activity.[66]

### Signaling Pathways or Immune Checkpoints

**MET.** Overexpression at the messenger RNA and protein levels has been described in at least 40%–50% of HCC samples.[144] A subanalysis of the phase 2b trial testing tivantinib vs placebo in second line suggested that the drug was particularly effective in those patients with high expression of MET on immunohistochemistry.[145] There has been some concerns about tivantinib's specificity as an MET inhibitor,[146] but a phase 3 RCT enrolling patients with high MET is currently evaluating its role in second line (NCT02029157).

**IGF2.** Enrichment of high transcript levels of IGF2 (>20-fold) in approximately 10% of HCC samples suggest that it could act as a tumor driver.[83,147] DNA methylation is a reported mechanism for IGF2 deregulation in HCC,[104] and it has been described as an oncogenic partner of Notch-induced HCC.[103] Functional validation indicate that IGF pathway inhibition could be an effective strategy in HCC, but results in early clinical trails using IGF-IR antagonists have shown limited efficacy and significant toxicity.[148]

**PD1/PD-L1.** Both involved in the inhibitory signals to T cells, leading to suppression of anti-tumoral immune response. Data in other solid tumors show remarkable responses after selective inhibition with nivolumab,[149] with a potential role of PD1/PD-L1 as a biomarkers of response. In HCC, intratumoral increased expression of PD1/PD-L1 correlates with poor outcomes, and its inhibition in orthotopic HCC models induces tumor responses.[151] This represents a novel immune-base approach. Studies with checkpoint inhibitors are currently ongoing in phase 2 in HCC.

In conclusion, the studies reported during the last 10 years have been able to delineate the landscape of mutations and genomic alterations occurring in HCC development and progression. This has certainly changed our understanding of the disease. Nonetheless, we are at a point that there is a clear unmet need to translate this knowledge in actual advantages for patients, either in the arena of refining at-risk populations, patient prognosis, and responses to therapies. A huge translational effort needs attention. The research community in HCC has to link discoveries with actual survival benefits and, therefore, it is now about time to demonstrate that biomarkers defining subclasses of patients ultimately might lead to better therapies that change the decision-making process in this complex and heterogeneous disease.

### Supplementary Material

Note: The first 50 references associated with this article are available below in print. The remaining references accompanying this article are available online only with the electronic version of this article. To access the supplementary

material accompanying this article, visit the online version of Gastroenterology at www.gastrojournal.org, and at http://dx.doi.org/10.1053/j.gastro.2015.05.061.

**References**

1. Tommaso AD. Risk of HCC: genetic heterogeneity and complex genetics. J Hepatol 2010;52:252–257.
2. Li M, Gerber DA, Koruda M, et al. Hepatocellular carcinoma associated with attenuated familial adenomatous polyposis: a case report and review of the literature. Clin Colorectal Cancer 2012;11:77–81.
3. Willson JSB, Godwin TD, Wiggins GAR, et al. Primary hepatocellular neoplasms in a MODY3 family with a novel HNF1A germline mutation. J Hepatol 2013;59:904–907.
4. Bacq Y, Jacquemin E, Balabaud C, et al. Familia liver adenomatosis associated with hepatocyte nuclear factor 1α inactivation. Gastroenterology 2003;125:1470–1475.
5. Calderaro J, Labrunie P, Morcette G, et al. Molecular characterization of hepatocellular adenomas developed in patients with glycogen storage disease type I. J Hepatol 2013;58:350–357.
6. Nahon P, Zucman-Rossi J. Single nucleotide polymorphisms and risk of hepatocellular carcinoma in cirrhosis. J Hepatol 2012;57:663–674.
7. Tarhuni A, Rufat P, Sutton A, et al. Impact of cytokine gene variants on the prediction and prognosis of hepatocellular carcinoma in patients with cirrhosis. J Hepatol 2014;61:342–350.
8. Wang Y, Kato N, Hoshida Y, et al. Interleukin-1beta gene polymorphisms associated with hepatocellular carcinoma in hepatitis C virus infection. Hepatology 2003;37:65–71.
9. Migita K, Miyazoe S, Maeda Y, et al. Cytokine gene polymorphisms in Japanese patients with hepatitis B virus infection—association between TGF-beta1 polymorphisms and hepatocellular carcinoma. J Hepatol 2005;42:505–510.
10. Nahon P, Sutton A, Rufat P, et al. Myeloperoxidase and superoxide dismutase 2 polymorphisms comodulate the risk of hepatocellular carcinoma and death in alcoholic cirrhosis. Hepatology 2009;50:1484–1493.
11. Nahon P, Sutton A, Rufat P, et al. A variant in myeloperoxidase promoter hastens the emergence of hepatocellular carcinoma in patients with HCV-related cirrhosis. J Hepatol 2012;56:426–432.
12. Nahon P, Sutton A, Rufat P, et al. Liver iron, HFE gene mutations, and hepatocellular carcinoma occurrence in patients with cirrhosis. Gastroenterology 2008;134:102–110.
13. Lauret E, Rodríguez M, González S, et al. HFE gene mutations in alcoholic and virus-related cirrhotic patients with hepatocellular carcinoma. Am J Gastroenterol 2002;97:1016–1021.
14. Long XD, Ma Y, Qu DY, et al. The polymorphism of XRCC3 codon 241 and AFB1-related hepatocellular carcinoma in Guangxi population, China. Ann Epidemiol 2008;18:572–578.
15. Yuan J-M, Lu SC, Van Den Berg D, et al. Genetic polymorphisms in the methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase

and thymidylate synthase genes and risk of hepatocellular carcinoma. Hepatology 2007;46:749–758.
16. Dharel N, Kato N, Muroyama R, et al. MDM2 promoter SNP309 is associated with the risk of hepatocellular carcinoma in patients with chronic hepatitis C. Clin Cancer Res 2006;12:4867–4871.
17. Yoon YJ, Chang HY, Ahn SH, et al. MDM2 and p53 polymorphisms are associated with the development of hepatocellular carcinoma in patients with chronic hepatitis B virus infection. Carcinogenesis 2008;29:1192–1196.
18. Dayyeh BKA, Yang M, Fuchs BC, et al. A functional polymorphism in the epidermal growth factor gene is associated with risk for hepatocellular carcinoma. Gastroenterology 2011;141:141–149.
19. Pinyol R, Nault J, Quetglas I, et al. Molecular profiling of liver tumors: classification and clinical translation for decision making. Semin Liver Dis 2014;34:363–375.
20. Schiffer E, Housset C, Cacheux W, et al. Gefitinib, an EGFR inhibitor, prevents hepatocellular carcinoma development in the rat liver with cirrhosis. Hepatology 2005;41:307–314.
21. Hoshida Y, Villanueva A, Sangiovanni A, et al. Prognostic gene expression signature for patients with hepatitis C-related early-stage cirrhosis. Gastroenterology 2013;144:1024–1030.
22. Bruix J, Takayama T, Mazzaferro V, et al. STORM: a phase III randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial of adjuvant sorafenib after resection or ablation to prevent recurrence of hepatocellular carcinoma. J Clin Oncol 2014;32:5s; 2014 (Suppl; Abstr 4006).
23. Bressac B, Kew M, Wands J, et al. Selective G to T mutations of p53 gene in hepatocellular carcinoma from southern Africa. Nature 1991;350:429–431.
24. Wang B, Huang G, Wang D, et al. Null genotypes of GSTM1 and GSTT1 contribute to hepatocellular carcinoma risk: evidence from an updated meta-analysis. J Hepatol 2010;53:508–518.
25. Kozlitina J, Xing C, Pertsemlidis A, et al. Genetic variation in PNPLA3 confers susceptibility to nonalcoholic fatty liver disease. Nat Genet 2008;40:1461–1465.
26. Liu YL, Patman GL, Leathart JBS, et al. Carriage of the PNPLA3 rs738409 C>G polymorphism confers an increased risk of non-alcoholic fatty liver disease associated hepatocellular carcinoma. J Hepatol 2014;61:75–81.
27. Nahon P, Valenti L, Henrion J, et al. Association between the PNPLA3 (rs738409 C>G) variant and hepatocellular carcinoma: Evidence from a meta-analysis of individual participant data. Hepatology 2014;59:2170–2177.
28. Singal AG, Manjunath H, Yopp AC, et al. The effect of PNPLA3 on fibrosis progression and development of hepatocellular carcinoma: a meta-analysis. Am J Gastroenterol 2014;109:325–334.
29. Guyot E, Sutton A, Rufat P, et al. PNPLA3 rs738409, hepatocellular carcinoma occurrence and risk model prediction in patients with cirrhosis. J Hepatol 2013;58:312–318.
30. Kumar V, Kato N, Urabe Y, et al. Genome-wide association study identifies a susceptibility locus for

October 2015

HCV-induced hepatocellular carcinoma. Nat Genet 2011; 43:455–458.

31. Miki D, Ochi H, Hayes CN, et al. Variation in the DEPDC5 locus is associated with progression to hepatocellular carcinoma in chronic hepatitis C virus carriers. Nat Genet 2011;43:797–800.

32. Jiang D-K, Sun J, Cao G, et al. Genetic variants in STAT4 and HLA-DQ genes confer risk of hepatitis B virus-related hepatocellular carcinoma. Nat Genet 2013; 45:72–75.

33. Clifford RJ, Zhang J, Meerzaman DM, et al. Genetic variations at loci involved in the immune response are risk factors for hepatocellular carcinoma. Hepatology 2010;52:2034–2043.

34. Chan KYK, Wong C-M, Kwan JS-H, et al. Genome-wide association study of hepatocellular carcinoma in Southern Chinese patients with chronic hepatitis B virus infection. PLoS ONE 2011;6:e28798.

35. Zhang H, Zhai Y, Hu Z, et al. Genome-wide association study identifies 1p36.22 as a new susceptibility locus for hepatocellular carcinoma in chronic hepatitis B virus carriers. Nat Genet 2010;42:767–770.

36. Farazi PA, Depinho RA. Hepatocellular carcinoma pathogenesis: from genes to environment. Nat Rev Cancer 2006;6:674–687.

37. International Consensus Group for Hepatocellular Neoplasia. Pathologic diagnosis of early hepatocellular carcinoma: a report of the international Consensus Group for Hepatocellular Neoplasia. Hepatology 2009; 49:658–664.

38. Satyanarayana A, Manns MP, Rudolph KL. Telomeres and telomerase: a dual role in hepatocarcinogenesis. Hepatology 2004;40:276–283.

39. Calado RT, Young NS. Telomere diseases. N Engl J Med 2009;361:2353–2365.

40. Günes C, Rudolph KL. The role of telomeres in stem cells and cancer. Cell 2013;152:390–393.

41. Hartmann D, Srivastava U, Thaler M, et al. Telomerase gene mutations are associated with cirrhosis formation. Hepatology 2011;53:1608–1617.

42. Rudolph KL, Chang S, Millard M, et al. Inhibition of experimental liver cirrhosis in mice by telomerase gene delivery. Science 2000;287:1253–1258.

43. Farazi PA, Glickman J, Jiang S, et al. Differential impact of telomere dysfunction on initiation and progression of hepatocellular carcinoma. Cancer Res 2003;63:5021–5027.

44. Nault JC, Mallet M, Pilati C, et al. High frequency of telomerase reverse-transcriptase promoter somatic mutations in hepatocellular carcinoma and preneoplastic lesions. Nat Commun 2013;4:1–6.

45. Totoki Y, Tatsuno K, Covington KR, et al. Trans-ancestry mutational landscape of hepatocellular carcinoma genomes. Nat Genet 2014;46:1267–1273.

46. Sung W-K, Zheng H, Li S, et al. Genome-wide survey of recurrent HBV integration in hepatocellular carcinoma. Nat Genet 2012;44:765–769.

47. Paterlini-Bréchot P, Saigo K, Murakami Y, et al. Hepatitis B virus-related insertional mutagenesis occurs frequently in human liver cancers and recurrently targets human telomerase gene. Oncogene 2003;22:3911–3916.

48. Nault JC, Calderaro J, Di Tommaso L, et al. Telomerase reverse transcriptase promoter mutation is an early somatic genetic alteration in the transformation of premalignant nodules in hepatocellular carcinoma on cirrhosis. Hepatology 2014;60:1983–1992.

49. Schulze K, Imbeaud S, Letouze E, et al. Exome sequencing of hepatocellular carcinoma identifies new mutations signatures and potential therapeutic targets. Nat Genet 2015;47:505–511.

50. Di Tommaso L, Sangiovanni A, Borzio M, et al. Advanced precancerous lesions in the liver. Best Pract Res Clin Gastroenterol 2013;27:269–284.

---

Author names in bold designate shared co-first authorship.

Received March 19, 2015. Accepted May 20, 2015.

Reprint requests

Address requests for reprints to: Josep M. Llovet, MD, PhD, Liver Cancer Translational Research Laboratory, Barcelona Clinic Liver Cancer Group, Liver Unit, CIBERehd, Hospital Clínic, IDIBAPS, University of Barcelona, Villarroel 170, 08036 Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain. e-mail: jmllovet@clinic.cat; fax: +34 93 3129406; or Jessica Zucman-Rossi, MD, PhD, INSERM U 1162, Génomique Fonctionnelle des Tumeurs Solides, Paris, France. e-mail: jessica.zucman-rossi@inserm.fr; fax: +33 01 53725192.

Acknowledgments

Author contributions: JZ-R, AV, J-CN, and JML participated in all stages of manuscript production, design, figures, tables, writing, and review of final version.

Conflicts of interest

These authors disclose the following: Josep M. Llovet is consultant for Bayer, BMS, Lilly, Blueprint, Celsion, GSK, and Boehringer-Ingelheim, and has received research grants from Bayer, BMS, Blueprint, and Boehringer-Ingelheim. Jessica Zucman-Rossi is consultant for IntraGen. The remaining authors disclose no conflicts.

Funding

Jessica Zucman-Rossi has grant from the Ligue Contre le Cancer and the INCa with the ICGC project. Josep M. Llovet received grants from the European Commission Framework Programme 7 (Heptromic, proposal number 259744), Samuel Waxman Cancer Research Foundation, Grant I+D Program (SAF 2013-41027), and the Asociación Española Contra el Cáncer (AECC).

1239.e1 Zucman-Rossi et al

Gastroenterology Vol. 149, No. 5

# Supplementary References

51. Nault JC, Bioulac-Sage P, Zucman-Rossi J. Hepatocellular benign tumors-from molecular classification to personalized clinical care. Gastroenterology 2013; 144:888–902.

52. Bluteau O, Jeannot E, Bioulac-Sage P, et al. Bi-allelic inactivation of TCF1 in hepatic adenomas. Nat Genet 2002;32:312–315.

53. Rebouissou S, Amessou M, Couchy G, et al. Frequent in-frame somatic deletions activate gp130 in inflammatory hepatocellular tumours. Nature 2009;457: 200–204.

54. Zucman-Rossi J, Jeannot E, Nhieu JTV, et al. Genotype-phenotype correlation in hepatocellular adenoma: new classification and relationship with HCC. Hepatology 2006;43:515–524.

55. Pilati C, Nault JC, Imbeaud S, et al. Genomic profiling of hepatocellular adenomas reveals recurrent FRK-activating mutations and the mechanisms of malignant transformation. Cancer Cell 2014;25:428–441.

56. Neveuut C, Wei Y, Buendia MA. Mechanisms of HBV-related hepatocarcinogenesis. J Hepatol 2010; 52:594–604.

57. Brechot C, Pourcel C, Louise A, et al. Presence of integrated hepatitis B virus DNA sequences in cellular DNA of human hepatocellular carcinoma. Nature 1980; 286:533–535.

58. Nault JC, Datta S, Imbeaud S, et al. Recurrent AAV2-related insertional mutagenesis in human hepatocellular carcinomas. Nat Genet 2015 Aug 24. http://dx.doi.org/ 10.1038/ng.3389. [Epub ahead of print].

59. Helleday T, Eshtad S, Nik-Zainal S. Mechanisms underlying mutational signatures in human cancers. Nat Rev Genet 2014;15:585–598.

60. Poon SL, Pang S-T, McPherson JR, et al. Genome-wide mutational signatures of aristolochic acid and its application as a screening tool. Sci Transl Med 2013; 5:197–201.

61. Alexandrov LB, Nik-Zainal S, Wedge DC, et al. Signatures of mutational processes in human cancer. Nature 2013;500:415–421.

62. Guichard C, Amaddeo G, Imbeaud S, et al. Integrated analysis of somatic mutations and focal copy-number changes identifies key genes and pathways in hepatocellular carcinoma. Nat Genet 2012; 44:694–698.

63. Huang J, Deng Q, Wang Q, et al. Exome sequencing of hepatitis B virus-associated hepatocellular carcinoma. Nat Genet 2012;44:1117–1121.

64. Cleary SP, Jeck WR, Zhao X, et al. Identification of driver genes in hepatocellular carcinoma by exome sequencing. Hepatology 2013;58:1693–1702.

65. Ahn S-M, Jang SJ, Shim JH, et al. Genomic portrait of resectable hepatocellular carcinomas: implications of RB1 and FGF19 aberrations for patient stratification. Hepatology 2014;60:1972–1982.

66. Kan Z, Zheng H, Liu X, et al. Whole-genome sequencing identifies recurrent mutations in hepatocellular carcinoma. Genome Res 2013;23:1422–1433.

67. Stratton MR, Campbell PJ, Futreal PA. The cancer genome. Nature 2009;458:719–724.

68. La Coste de A, Romagnolo B, Billuart P, et al. Somatic mutations of the beta-catenin gene are frequent in mouse and human hepatocellular carcinomas. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1998;95:8847–8851.

69. Satoh S, Daigo Y, Furukawa Y, et al. AXIN1 mutations in hepatocellular carcinomas, and growth suppression in cancer cells by virus-mediated transfer of AXIN1. Nat Genet 2000;24:245–250.

70. Boyault S, Rickman DS, De Reyniès A, et al. Transcriptome classification of HCC is related to gene alterations and to new therapeutic targets. Hepatology 2006; 45:42–52.

71. Lachenmayer A, Alsinet C, Savic R, et al. Wnt-pathway activation in two molecular classes of hepatocellular carcinoma and experimental modulation by sorafenib. Clin Cancer Res 2012;18:4997–5007.

72. Audard V, Grimber G, Elie C, et al. Cholestasis is a marker for hepatocellular carcinomas displaying beta-catenin mutations. J Pathol 2007;212:345–352. Available at: http://doi.wiley.com/10.1002/path.2169.

73. Fujimoto A, Furuta M, Shiraishi Y, et al. Whole-genome mutational landscape of liver cancers displaying biliary phenotype reveals hepatitis impact and molecular diversity. Nat Commun 2015;6:1–8.

74. Hsu IC, Metcalf RA, Sun T, et al. Mutational hotspot in the p53 gene in human hepatocellular carcinomas. Nature 1991;350:427–428.

75. Fujimoto A, Totoki Y, Abe T, et al. Whole-genome sequencing of liver cancers identifies etiological influences on mutation patterns and recurrent mutations in chromatin regulators. Nat Genet 2012;44:760–764.

76. Sawey ET, Chanrion M, Cai C, et al. Identification of a therapeutic strategy targeting amplified FGF19 in liver cancer by oncogenomic screening. Cancer Cell 2011; 19:347–358.

77. Wang K, Lim HY, Shi S, et al. Genomic landscape of copy number aberrations enables the identification of oncogenic drivers in hepatocellular carcinoma. Hepatology 2013;58:706–717.

78. Li M, Zhao H, Zhang X, et al. Inactivating mutations of the chromatin remodeling gene ARID2 in hepatocellular carcinoma. Nat Genet 2011;43:828–829.

79. Sporn MB, Liby KT. NRF2 and cancer: the good, the bad and the importance of context. Nature 2012; 12:564–571.

80. DeNicola GM, Karreth FA, Humpton TJ, et al. Oncogene-induced Nrf2 transcription promotes ROS detoxification and tumorigenesis. Nature 2011;475:106–109.

81. Chiang DY, Villanueva A, Hoshida Y, et al. Focal gains of VEGFA and molecular classification of hepatocellular carcinoma. Cancer Res 2008;68:6779–6788.

82. Villanueva A, Chiang DY, Newell P, et al. Pivotal role of mTOR signaling in hepatocellular carcinoma. Gastroenterology 2008;135:1972–1983.

83. Tovar V, Alsinet C, Villanueva A, et al. IGF activation in a molecular subclass of hepatocellular carcinoma and preclinical efficacy of IGF-1R blockage. J Hepatol 2010; 52:550–559.

October 2015

84. Douville E, Downward J. EGF induced SOS phosphorylation in PC12 cells involves P90 RSK-2. Oncogene 1997;15:373–383.

85. Rudalska R, Dauch D, Longerich T, et al. RNAi screening identifies a mechanism of sorafenib resistance in liver cancer. Nat Med 2014;1–11.

86. Golub TR. Molecular classification of cancer: class discovery and class prediction by gene expression monitoring. Science 1999;286:531–537.

87. DeRisi J, Penland L, Brown PO, et al. Use of a cDNA microarray to analyse gene expression patterns in human cancer. Nat Genet 1996;14:457–460.

88. van de Vijver MJ, He YD, Van’t Veer LJ, et al. A gene-expression signature as a predictor of survival in breast cancer. N Engl J Med 2002;347:1999–2009.

89. Solin LJ, Gray R, Baehner FL, et al. A multigene expression assay to predict local recurrence risk for ductal carcinoma in situ of the breast. J Natl Cancer Inst 2013;105:701–710.

90. Hoshida Y, Toffanin S, Lachenmayer A, et al. Molecular classification and novel targets in hepatocellular carcinoma: recent advancements. Semin Liver Dis 2010; 30:35–51.

91. Lee J-S, Heo J, Libbrecht L, et al. A novel prognostic subtype of human hepatocellular carcinoma derived from hepatic progenitor cells. Nat Med 2006;12:410–416.

92. Yamashita T, Forgues M, Wang W, et al. EpCAM and alpha-fetoprotein expression defines novel prognostic subtypes of hepatocellular carcinoma. Cancer Res 2008; 68:1451–1461.

93. Villanueva A, Hoshida Y, Battiston C, et al. Combining clinical, pathology, and gene expression data to predict recurrence of hepatocellular carcinoma. Gastroenterology 2011;140:1501–1512.

94. Hoshida Y, Nijman SMB, Kobayashi M, et al. Integrative transcriptome analysis reveals common molecular subclasses of human hepatocellular carcinoma. Cancer Res 2009;69:7385–7392.

95. Kaposi-Novak P. Met-regulated expression signature defines a subset of human hepatocellular carcinomas with poor prognosis and aggressive phenotype. J Clin Invest 2006;116:1582–1595.

96. Coulouarn C, Factor VM, Thorgeirsson SS. Transforming growth factor-β gene expression signature in mouse hepatocytes predicts clinical outcome in human cancer. Hepatology 2008;47:2059–2067.

97. Newell P, Toffanin S, Villanueva A, et al. Ras pathway activation in hepatocellular carcinoma and anti-tumoral effect of combined sorafenib and rapamycin in vivo. J Hepatol 2009;51:725–733.

98. Yamashita T, Wang XW. Cancer stem cells in the development of liver cancer. J Clin Invest 2013; 123:1911–1918.

99. Holczbauer Á, Factor VM, Andersen JB, et al. Modeling pathogenesis of primary liver cancer in lineage-specific mouse cell types. Gastroenterology 2013;145:221–231.

100. Cairo S, Armengol C, De Reyniès A, et al. Hepatic stem-like phenotype and interplay of Wnt/beta-catenin and Myc signaling in aggressive childhood liver cancer. Cancer Cell 2008;14:471–484.

101. Woo HG, Lee JH, Yoon JH, et al. Identification of a cholangiocarcinoma-like gene expression trait in hepatocellular carcinoma. Cancer Res 2010;70:3034–3041.

102. Sia D, Hoshida Y, Villanueva A, et al. Integrative molecular analysis of intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma reveals 2 classes that have different outcomes. Gastroenterology 2013;144:829–840.

103. Villanueva A, Alsinet C, Yanger K, et al. Notch signaling is activated in human hepatocellular carcinoma and induces tumor formation in mice. Gastroenterology 2012; 143:1660–1669.

104. Villanueva A, Portela A, Sayols S, et al. DNA Methylation-based prognosis and epidrivers in hepatocellular carcinoma. Hepatology 2015;61:1945–1956.

105. Toffanin S, Hoshida Y, Lachenmayer A, et al. MicroRNA-based classification of hepatocellular carcinoma and oncogenic role of miR-517a. Gastroenterology 2011; 140:1618–1628.

106. Lee J-S, Chu I-S, Heo J, et al. Classification and prediction of survival in hepatocellular carcinoma by gene expression profiling. Hepatology 2004;40:667–676.

107. Keng VW, Sia D, Sarver AL, et al. Sex bias occurrence of hepatocellular carcinoma in Poly7 molecular subclass is associated with EGFR. Hepatology 2012;57:120–130.

108. Ciriello G, Miller ML, Aksoy BA, et al. Emerging landscape of oncogenic signatures across human cancers. Nat Genet 2013;45:1127–1133.

109. European Association for the Study of the Liver, European Organisation for Research and Treatment of Cancer. EASL-EORTC Clinical Practice Guidelines: management of hepatocellular carcinoma. J Hepatol 2012;56:908–943.

110. Bruix J, Sherman M; American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases. Management of hepatocellular carcinoma: an update. Hepatology 2011;53:1020–1022.

111. Hoshida Y, Moeini A, Alsinet C, et al. Gene signatures in the management of hepatocellular carcinoma. Semin Oncol 2012;39:473–485.

112. Friemel J, Rechsteiner MP, Frick L, et al. Intratumor heterogeneity in hepatocellular carcinoma. Clin Cancer Res 2014;21:1951–1961.

113. Simon RM, Paik S, Hayes DF. Use of archived specimens in evaluation of prognostic and predictive biomarkers. J Natl Cancer Inst 2009;101:1446–1452.

114. Nault JC, De Reyniès A, Villanueva A, et al. A hepatocellular carcinoma 5-gene score associated with survival of patients after liver resection. Gastroenterology 2013;145:176–187.

115. Yamashita T, Ji J, Budhu A, et al. EpCAM-positive hepatocellular carcinoma cells are tumor-initiating cells with stem/progenitor cell features. Gastroenterology 2009;136:1012–1124.

116. Budhu A, Jia HL, Forgues M, et al. Identification of metastasis-related microRNAs in hepatocellular carcinoma. Hepatology 2008;47:897–907.

117. Ji J, Shi J, Budhu A, et al. MicroRNA expression, survival, and response to interferon in liver cancer. N Engl J Med 2009;361:1437–1447.

118. Hoshida Y, Villanueva A, Kobayashi M, et al. Gene expression in fixed tissues and outcome in hepatocellular carcinoma. N Engl J Med 2008;359:1995–2004.

119. Budhu A, Forgues M, Ye Q, et al. Prediction of venous metastases, recurrence, and prognosis in hepatocellular carcinoma based on a unique immune response signature of the liver microenvironment. Cancer Cell 2006; 10:99–111.
120. Kim JH, Sohn BH, Lee H-S, et al. Genomic predictors for recurrence patterns of hepatocellular carcinoma: model derivation and validation. PLoS Med 2014;11:e1001770.
121. Jiang P, Chan CWM, Chan KCA, et al. Lengthening and shortening of plasma DNA in hepatocellular carcinoma patients. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2015:201500076.
122. Vogelstein B, Zhou S. Cancer genome landscapes. Science 2013;339:1546–1558.
123. Weinstein IB. Cancer. Addiction to oncogenes—the Achilles heel of cancer. Science 2002;297:63–64.
124. Chapman PB, Hauschild A, Robert C, et al. Improved survival with vemurafenib in melanoma with BRAF V600E mutation. N Engl J Med 2011;364:2507–2516.
125. Shaw AT, Kim D-W, Nakagawa K, et al. Crizotinib versus chemotherapy in advanced ALK-positive lung cancer. N Engl J Med 2013;368:2385–2394.
126. Llovet JM, Ricci S, Mazzaferro V, et al. Sorafenib in advanced hepatocellular carcinoma. N Engl J Med 2008; 359:378–390.
127. Llovet JM, Villanueva A, Lachenmayer A, et al. Molecular targeted therapies in hepatocellular carcinoma. Nat Rev Clin Oncol 2015;12:408–424.
128. Swain SM, Baselga J, Kim S-B, et al. Pertuzumab, trastuzumab, and docetaxel in HER2-Positive metastatic breast cancer. N Engl J Med 2015;372:724–734.
129. Horwitz E, Stein I, Andreozzi M, et al. Human and mouse VEGFA-amplified hepatocellular carcinomas are highly sensitive to sorafenib treatment. Cancer Discov 2014; 4:730–743.
130. Llovet JM, Pena CEA, Lathia CD, et al. Plasma biomarkers as predictors of outcome in patients with advanced hepatocellular carcinoma. Clin Cancer Res 2012; 18:2290–2300.
131. Siegel AB, Cohen EI, Ocean A, et al. Phase II trial evaluating the clinical and biologic effects of bevacizumab in unresectable hepatocellular carcinoma. J Clin Oncol 2008;26:2992–2998.
132. Desnoyers LR, Pai R, Ferrando RE, et al. Targeting FGF19 inhibits tumor growth in colon cancer xenograft and FGF19 transgenic hepatocellular carcinoma models. Oncogene 2008;27:85–97.
133. Nicholes K, Guillet S, Tomlinson E, et al. A mouse model of hepatocellular carcinoma: ectopic expression of fibroblast growth factor 19 in skeletal muscle of transgenic mice. Am J Pathol 2002;160:2295–2307.
134. Llovet JM, Decaens T, Raoul JL, et al. Brivanib in patients with advanced hepatocellular carcinoma who were intolerant to sorafenib or for whom sorafenib failed: results from the randomized phase III BRISK-PS study. J Clin Oncol 2013;31:3509–3516.
135. Johnson PJ, Qin S, Park JW, et al. Brivanib versus sorafenib as first-line therapy in patients with unresectable, advanced hepatocellular carcinoma: results from the randomized phase III BRISK-FL study. J Clin Oncol 2013;31:3517–3524.
136. Finn RS, Crown JP, Lang I, et al. The cyclin-dependent kinase 4/6 inhibitor palbociclib in combination with letrozole versus letrozole alone as first-line treatment of oestrogen receptor-positive, HER2-negative, advanced breast cancer (PALOMA-1/TRIO-18): a randomised phase 2 study. Lancet Oncol 2015;16:25–35.
137. Shang N, Arteaga M, Zaidi A, et al. FAK is required for c-Met/β-catenin-driven hepatocarcinogenesis. Hepatology 2015;61:214–226.
138. Kaposi-Novak P, Libbrecht L, Woo HG, et al. Central role of c-Myc during malignant conversion in human hepatocarcinogenesis. Cancer Res 2009;69:2775–2782.
139. Anastas JN, Moon RT. WNT signalling pathways as therapeutic targets in cancer. Nat Rev Cancer 2013; 13:1–16.
140. Inoki K, Corradetti MN, Guan K-L. Dysregulation of the TSC-mTOR pathway in human disease. Nat Genet 2005; 37:19–24.
141. Finn RS, Poon RTP, Yau T, et al. Phase I study investigating everolimus combined with sorafenib in patients with advanced hepatocellular carcinoma. J Hepatol 2013;59:1271–1277.
142. Zhu AX, Kudo M, Assenat E, et al. Effect of everolimus on survival in advanced hepatocellular carcinoma after failure of sorafenib. JAMA 2014;312:57.
143. Lim HY, Heo J, Choi HJ, et al. A phase II study of the efficacy and safety of the combination therapy of the MEK inhibitor refametinib (BAY 86-9766) plus sorafenib for Asian patients with unresectable hepatocellular carcinoma. Clin Cancer Res 2014;20:5976–5985.
144. Goyal L, Muzumdar MD, Zhu AX. Targeting the HGF/c-MET pathway in hepatocellular carcinoma. Clin Cancer Res 2013;19:2310–2318.
145. Santoro A, Rimassa L, Borbath I, et al. Tivantinib for second-line treatment of advanced hepatocellular carcinoma: a randomised, placebo-controlled phase 2 study. Lancet Oncol 2013;14:55–63.
146. Michieli P, Di Nicolantonio F. Targeted therapies: Tivantinib—a cytotoxic drug in MET inhibitor’s clothes? Nat Rev Clin Oncol 2013;10:372–374.
147. Breuhahn K, Vreden S, Haddad R, et al. Molecular profiling of human hepatocellular carcinoma defines mutually exclusive interferon regulation and insulin-like growth factor II overexpression. Cancer Res 2004; 64:6058–6064.
148. Abou-Alfa GK, Capanu M, O’Reilly EM, et al. A phase II study of cixutumumab (IMC-A12, NSC742460) in advanced hepatocellular carcinoma. J Hepatol 2014; 60:319–324.
149. Robert C, Long GV, Brady B, et al. Nivolumab in previously untreated melanoma without BRAFMutation. N Engl J Med 2015;372:320–330.
150. Shi F, Shi M, Zeng Z, et al. PD-1 and PD-L1 upregulation promotes CD8+ T-cell apoptosis and postoperative recurrence in hepatocellular carcinoma patients. Int J Cancer 2010;128:887–896.
151. Chen Y, Ramjiawan RR, Reiberger T, et al. CXCR4 inhibition in tumor microenvironment facilitates anti-PD-1 immunotherapy in sorafenib-treated HCC in mice. Hepatology 2015;61:1591–1602.

October 2015

152. Villa E, Critelli R, Lei B, et al. Neoangiogenesis-related genes are hallmarks of fast-growing hepatocellular carcinomas and worst survival. Results from a prospective study. Gut 2015 (in press, doi: 10.1136/gutjnl-2014-308483).

153. Kim JH, Sohn BH, Lee HS, et al. Genomic predictors for recurrence patterns of hepatocellular carcinoma: model derivation and validation. PLoS Med 2015 (in press, doi: 10.1371/journal.pmed.1001770).

154. Roessler S, Budhu A, Forgues M, et al. A unique metastasis gene signature enables prediction of tumor relapse in early-stage hepatocellular carcinoma patients. Cancer Res 2010;70:10202–10212.

155. Marquardt JU, Raggi C, Andersen JB. Human hepatic cancer stem cells are characterized by common stemness traits and diverse oncogenic pathways. Hepatology 2011;54:1031–1042.

156. Coulouarn C, Factor VM, Andersen JB, et al. Loss of miR-122 expression in liver cancer correlates with suppression of the hepatic phenotype and gain of metastatic properties. Oncogene 2009;28:3526–3536.

157. Wei R, Huang GL, Zhang MY, et al. Clinical Significance and prognostic value of microRNA expression signatures in hepatocellular carcinoma. Clin Cancer Res 2013; 19:4780–4791.

158. Augello C, Vaira V, Caruso L, et al. MicroRNA profiling of hepatocarcinogenesis identifies C19MC cluster as a novel prognostic biomarker in hepatocellular carcinoma. Liver Int 2012;32:772–782.


159. Viswanathan SR, Powers JT, Einhorn W, et al. Lin28 promotes transformation and is associated with advanced human malignancies. Nat Genet 2009;41:843–847.

160. Li W, Xie L, He X, et al. Diagnostic and prognostic implications of microRNAs in human hepatocellular carcinoma. Int J Cancer 2008;123:1616–1622.

161. Jiang J, Gusev Y, Aderca I, et al. Association of MicroRNA expression in hepatocellular carcinomas with hepatitis infection, cirrhosis, and patient survival. Clin Cancer Res 2008;14:419–427.

162. Gramantieri L, Fornari F, Ferracin M, et al. MicroRNA-221 Targets Bmf in Hepatocellular Carcinoma and Correlates with Tumor Multifocality. Clin Cancer Res 2009; 15:5073–5081.

163. Hernandez-Vargas H, Lambert MP, Le Calvez-Kelm F, et al. Hepatocellular carcinoma displays distinct DNA methylation signatures with potential as clinical predictors. PLoS ONE 2010;5:e9749.

164. Calvisi D, Ladu S, Gorden A, et al. Ubiquitous activation of Ras and Jak/Stat pathways in human HCC. Gastroenterology 2006;130:1117–1128.

165. Lee S, Lee HJ, Kim J-H, et al. Aberrant CpG island hypermethylation along multistep hepatocarcinogenesis. Am J Pathol 2003;163:1371–1378.

166. Kwon GY, Yoo BC, Koh, et al. Promoter methylation of E-cadherin in hepatocellular carcinomas and dysplastic nodules. J Korean Med Sci 2005;20:242–247.

---

Author names in bold designate shared co-first authorship.
