
Prospects & Overviews

# Dissecting the cannabinergic control of behavior: The where matters

**Arnau Busquets-Garcia, Tiffany Desprez, Mathilde Metna-Laurent, Luigi Bellocchio, Giovanni Marsicano and Edgar Soria-Gomez**

The endocannabinoid system is the target of the main psychoactive component of the plant *Cannabis sativa*, the Δ⁹-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC). This system is composed by the cannabinoid receptors, the endogenous ligands, and the enzymes involved in their metabolic processes, which works both centrally and peripherally to regulate a plethora of physiological functions. This review aims at explaining how the site-specific actions of the endocannabinoid system impact on memory and feeding behavior through the cannabinoid receptors 1 (CB₁R). Centrally, CB₁R is widely distributed in many brain regions, different cell types (e.g., neuronal or glial cells) and intracellular compartments (e.g., mitochondria). Interestingly, cellular and molecular effects are differentially mediated by CB₁R according to their cell-type localization (e.g., glutamatergic or GABAergic neurons). Thus, understanding the cellular and subcellular function of CB₁R will provide new insights and aid the design of new compounds in cannabinoid-based medicine.

**Keywords:**  
endocannabinoids; fear; food intake; memory; mitochondria

---

## Introduction

The endocannabinoid system has been identified as the target of the main psychoactive component of the plant *Cannabis sativa*, the THC, whose structure was elucidated in the 1960s [1]. Moreover, the serendipitous identification and cloning of a G-protein-coupled cannabinoid receptor that responds to THC [2, 3] gave the birth to an explosion of interest in the endocannabinoid research that continues nowadays. Briefly, the endocannabinoid system is composed of at least two receptors, the cannabinoid receptors 1 and 2 (CB₁R and CB₂R, respectively), their endogenous ligands called endocannabinoids and the enzymes involved in their synthesis and inactivation [4]. The endocannabinoids are lipid-derived signaling molecules, such as anandamide (AEA) and 2-arachidonoylglycerol (2-AG). CB₁R is the most abundant seven-transmembrane G protein-coupled receptor in the brain of animals and humans [5, 6], and participates in the control of a wide range of physiological processes (Fig. 1).

CB₁R are expressed in different brain regions such as basal ganglia, cerebellum, and hippocampus, among other structures [5, 6]. At the level of the synapse, CB₁R is mainly localized at the presynaptic terminals [7, 8]. Classically, presynaptic CB₁R activation modulates the release of neurotransmitters via the modulation of voltage-gated ion channels [9, 10] (Fig. 1). CB₁R can stimulate different cellular pathways, such as mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR), the mitogen-activated protein kinases/extracellular signal-regulated kinase (MAPK/ERK), c-Jun N-terminal kinases (JNK), and phosphatidylinositol 3-kinases (PI3K) pathways both in vitro and in vivo [11–14].

---

DOI 10.1002/bies.201500046

---

Group “Endocannabinoids and Neuroadaptation,” NeuroCentre Magendie, INSERM U862, University of Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France

*Corresponding author:*  
Edgar Soria-Gomez  
E-mail: edgar.soria@inserm.fr

**Abbreviations:**  
2-AG, 2-arachidonoylglycerol; α-MSH, α-melanocyte stimulating hormone;

---

AEA, anandamide; AOC, anterior olfactory cortex; ARC, arcuate nucleus; BLA, basolateral amygdala; CB₁R, cannabinoid receptor(s) type-1; CeA, central amygdala; CRH, corticotropin-releasing hormone; LH, lateral hypothalamus; MCH, melanin concentrating hormone; MOB, main olfactory bulb; mPFC, medial prefrontal cortex; NPY, neuropeptide Y; NTS, nucleus of the tractus solitarius; PB, parabrachial nucleus; POMC, pro-opiomelancortin; PVN, paraventricular hypothalamus; THC, Δ⁹-tetrahydrocannabinol; VMH, ventromedial hypothalamus; VTA, ventral tegmental area.

---

Bioessays 37: 1215–1225, © 2015 WILEY Periodicals, Inc. www.bioessays-journal.com 1215

A. Busquets-Garcia et al.

Prospects & Overviews

Memory refers to the faculty of retaining and recalling past experiences based on the processes of learning, retention, and retrieval [24]. The hippocampus is a key brain structure involved in memory formation [25]. This brain region shows high expression of CB₁R [26], and it is likely that the negative effects of cannabinoids on at least certain forms of memory are ascribable to their actions. The impact of exogenous cannabinoids on hippocampal processes is demonstrated by different studies revealing that cannabinoid agonists infused intra-hippocampi induce similar memory deficits as systemic administrations [16, 27, 28]. One of the prominent features of brain functioning is the synchronous oscillatory activity of neuronal networks [29]. Neuronal network oscillations in the γ range have been involved in complex cognitive processes such as memory formation [30]. Notably, CB₁R agonist reduces the power of hippocampal oscillations and activity [31, 32]. Thus, cannabinoid drugs could disrupt memory performance by changing the pattern of hippocampal oscillatory activity (Fig. 2). As we mentioned above, the main neuronal action of CB₁R is the decrease of presynaptic neurotransmitter release [33, 34]. In this sense, electrophysiological data revealed that cannabinoids depress hippocampal synaptic activity and plasticity at CA3-CA1 synapses in brain slices via CB₁R signaling [35]. This function likely represents one of the underlying cellular mechanisms by which cannabinoids produce memory impairments.

CB₁R regulate non-emotional memories in a cell-type-dependent manner

In the hippocampus, CB₁R are much more densely expressed on GABAergic than glutamatergic axon terminals [26, 34, 36, 37]. Cannabinoid-induced memory deficits have been associated with a suppression of GABA release, resulting in an increase in excitatory firing [38]. In this regard, THC administration decreases GABA levels and increases glutamate release in the rat brain [36, 37, 39]. Moreover, THC has been shown to act as a full agonist of CB₁R located at hippocampal GABAergic terminals, although it acts as a partial agonist of the glutamatergic ones [40]. This bimodal control could be the biological basis of the impairment of hippocampal activity induced by cannabinoids [31, 41]. In agreement with this notion, mutant mice overexpressing the GABA transporter type 1 in neurons which show a reduction in GABA transmission, display memory impairment in the object recognition task [42]. Electrophysiological studies show that repetitive low-frequency synaptic stimulation promotes a persistent up-regulation of endocannabinoid signaling at CA1 GABAergic synapses, resulting in long-term synaptic plasticity [43]. Altogether, these results suggest that the imbalance between excitatory and inhibitory transmission produced by cannabinoids could alter hippocampal plasticity, causing the memory impairment (Fig. 2).

The use of conditional knockout mice lacking CB₁R gene either in glutamatergic or GABAergic neurons [44] has revealed

Figure 1. The (endo) cannabinoid synapse. The endocannabinoid system is characterized as a retrograde neuromodulator. After neuronal depolarization and calcium entry, the endocannabinoids (eCB) are synthesized at the postsynaptic level and traveling backwards to bind presynaptic CB₁R. CB₁R activation by endogenous or exogenous cannabinoids triggers several intracellular pathways via Gi/o proteins resulting in the inhibition of neurotransmitter release. By doing this, the endocannabinoid system can control different physiological processes such as memory, fear and feeding behavior.

These pathways play important roles in the cannabinoid-dependent regulation of behavior (energy balance and memory) as well as synaptic plasticity [11–14]. Moreover, CB₁R are also functionally present in glial cells (e.g. astrocytes and microglia) and in different cell compartments, such as endosomes and mitochondria, thereby increasing the physiological repertoire of CB₁R actions [15–17]. Thus, to fully understand the role of the CB₁R in the regulation of physiological and pathological processes it is necessary to dissect its site of action at the regional, cellular, and subcellular level. In this review, we will modestly focus on memory, with special emphasis in aversive processes, and energy balance as two examples where it can be revealed the site-specific action of CB₁R in the body.

How do CB₁R control memory processes?

CB₁R regulate non-emotional memories: The hippocampus as a key target

The research on the pharmacological properties of the plant *C. sativa* has shown that cannabis intake can induce memory loss in humans and animals [18]. Additionally, CB₁R signaling has been shown to be a key regulator of memory processes [13, 19–22]. Indeed, different works have demonstrated that cannabis consumption impairs cognitive processes accompanied by differential activation of several memory-related brain regions [23].

Bioessays 37: 1215–1225, © 2015 WILEY Periodicals, Inc.

Figure 2. The (endo) cannabinoid system in learning and memory. Schematic representation of the different mechanisms involved in the memory impairment induced by cannabinoids. CB₁R activation in different cell types, glutamatergic (red), GABAergic (blue), or astrocytic cells produces an imbalance in the neurotransmitter release. Which results in an augmentation of NMDA-mediated glutamatergic transmission, and subsequently the activation of the Akt-mTOR intracellular pathway. This leads to an aberrant increase in protein synthesis responsible of the memory impairment (top left). Such effects could also be reflected as a change in the oscillatory activity of the hippocampal network (top right), producing an impairment of synaptic plasticity and therefore, memory deficits (bottom).

key insights into the role of CB₁R in memory regulation. As mentioned above, the impairing effects of exogenous cannabinoids on long-term memory have been associated with cannabinergic actions at GABAergic synapses [45]. Conversely, it has been demonstrated that there is no tolerance to the memory impairment produced by cannabinoids that could be explained also by the cell-type-specific localization of CB₁R in either GABA- or glutamatergic neurons [46]. In fact, a recent study has shown that synaptic plasticity in hippocampal circuits driven by the balance between excitation and inhibition is tightly controlled by neuronal CB₁R [47]. Alternative and/or complementary explanations could arise from the recent discovery of the functional expression of CB₁R in astrocytes. Astroglial CB₁R control the activity of neuronal NMDARs, producing long-term plastic changes, via so far unknown mechanisms [48]. Moreover, mice lacking astroglial CB₁R do not present the THC-induced working memory impairment. Furthermore, a novel form of cannabinoid-induced in vivo hippocampal plasticity is fully abolished in these mice [16]. Thus, cannabinoid signaling in hippocampal circuits is a key element underlying mnemonic processes in a site-specific manner.

How does CB₁R control emotional memories?

CB₁R regulates emotional memories involving different brain regions

The necessity of CB₁R signaling in aversive processes has been demonstrated by using several behavioral protocols [49–54]. For example, constitutive $CB_1$ knockout (KO) mice and animals with a pharmacological blockade of CB₁R failed to adapt their fear responses when exposed to stimuli previously associated with an aversive event [55–57]. Thus, revealing that endocannabinoids play a significant role in fear coping behaviors (e.g., freezing).

Different brain regions are involved in the cannabinergic modulation of emotional memory processes. Marsicano et al. (2002) reported that the endocannabinoid tissue levels were increased in the amygdala of mice following the re-exposure of the stimulus associated with an aversive episode [55]. The amygdalar nucleus can be divided into two regions, the central (CeA) and basolateral region (BLA). Intra-CeA administration of the CB₁R antagonist AM251 in mice impaired the extinction of freezing response 24 hours following conditioning. Conversely, intra-BLA application of the same drug selectively blocked extinction of conditioned freezing on the subsequent days. These data were associated with a time-dependent facilitation of short-term inhibitory and excitatory synaptic plasticity in the CeA [55]. Thus, these results suggest that CB₁R signaling controls both excitatory and inhibitory transmission within the amygdala to ensure appropriate adaptation of fear-conditioned freezing [55].

Cumulative evidence indicates that the medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC) is also a critical site for CB₁R-dependent
modulation of acquired fear responses [58–62]. Exposure to an odor previously paired with an electric foot shock strongly increases the bursting activity of a subpopulation of neurons in the mPFC [58]. Importantly, a CB₁R antagonist applied into the mPFC blocked the acquisition of conditioned freezing. This effect was associated with an impairment of the neuronal firing in the mPFC, but also to an altered long-term synaptic plasticity between the BLA and PFC synapses [59–61]. These data indicate that CB₁R transmission in BLA-mPFC synapses participates in the encoding of olfactory fear conditioning. However, intra-mPFC administration of AM251 facilitated the acquisition of conditioned freezing and cardiovascular responses in a contextual fear conditioning procedure [60], suggesting that the CB₁R control of the mPFC activity may differ according to the nature of the conditioned stimuli. In a study conducted by Choi et al. (2012), showed that the expression levels of CB₁R in the mPFC were positively correlated with freezing behavior in classical fear conditioning in mice [63]. Conversely, Draycott et al. (2014) demonstrated a biphasic regulation of fear memories controlled by cannabinoid signaling in the neuronal pathway involving the mPFC and dopaminergic cells in the ventral tegmental area (VTA) [64]: low CB₁R-mPFC activation (likely on glutamatergic cells) leads to an increase in VTA neuronal firing and an enhancement in fear memory, whereas high-cannabinoid transmission (likely on GABAergic cells) produced the opposite effect (i.e. decrease VTA activity and blockade of fear acquisition) [64]. Altogether, these numerous works exemplifies the complexity and region-dependent involvement of the cannabinergic transmission in the mPFC network and its participation in the modulation of fear memories.

Consistent with this concept, a dose-dependent biphasic effect of THC has been described on the coping styles in wild-type mice in classical fear conditioning, with low doses favoring active responses and higher doses promoting passive behaviors. These data reveal a cell type-specific control of CB₁R over the behavioral strategy to cope with fear conditioned stimuli. Importantly, local re-expression of CB₁R in the amygdala of constitutive $CB_{1}$-KO is sufficient for restoring the temporal relationship between passive and active coping in classical fear conditioning by decreasing freezing responses, suggesting that CB₁R in the amygdala contribute to the regulation of the coping style when mice faced to aversive stimuli. A putative model of CB₁R action in amygdalar circuits in fear coping behaviors is shown in Fig. 3.

Additionally, CB₁R located on dopamine D1 receptor positive cells participate in the attenuation of conditioned freezing expression observed in constitutive $CB_{1}$-KO mice [65]. Interestingly, mice lacking CB₁R on cortical glutamatergic neurons present a similar delayed habituation of the freezing response following sensitization, suggesting that the CB₁R-mediated control of cortical glutamatergic transmission is required for mediating the non-associative component of extinction of conditioned freezing [66]. Moreover, a recent study demonstrated that an increase in 2-AG levels promotes the expression of conditioned fear primarily via CB₁R on GABAergic neurons [68]. Conversely, CB₁R located on glutamatergic neurons from the raphe nucleus, the paraventricular hypothalamus, and mediobasal amygdala exert an opposite effect, suggesting that the endocannabinoid system in these regions also mediates

### CB₁R regulates emotional responses in a cell-type-dependent manner

The CB₁R activity on specific cells induces different behavioral consequences on fear expression [65–67]. Recently, the participation of the CB₁R in the temporal expression of the freezing response (passive coping) and active behaviors (rearing, digging, wall rearing/sniffing) was dissected [54]. The decrease of passive responses (i.e. freezing) during tone presentation correlated with an increase of active responses. Thus, the type of response adopted in classical fear conditioning predicts individual active avoidance performances, suggesting that conditioned fear responses are subject to individual variability.

It has been found that the dominant freezing response displayed by $CB_{1}$-KO mice is likely to be accounted for the deletion of CB₁R on cortical glutamatergic neurons. Conversely, the deletion of CB₁R on forebrain GABAergic neurons in GABA-$CB_{1}$-KO leads to the immediate adoption of active coping behaviors in fear conditioning and facilitates active avoidance learning. Acute low and high doses of THC have been proposed to act preferentially at CB₁R on glutamatergic neurons and GABAergic neurons, respectively [37].

**Figure 3.** The (endo) cannabinoid system in fear responses. Putative bimodal control of fear expression by cannabinoid signaling in amygdalar circuits. The absence of cannabinoid signaling in glutamatergic cells leads to an increase in passive responses (**A**) and potentially to an hyperactivation of the central amygdala (CeA), the main amygdalar output. Conversely, the augmentation of active coping strategies observed in animals lacking CB₁R in GABAergic cells (**B**) could be due to an increase of inhibition of glutamatergic cells in the basolateral amygdala (BLA), which, in turn, will result in a reduction of CeA excitation. Thus, amygdalar CB₁R is key in maintaining equilibrium between passive and active coping responses.
conditioned freezing expression [69, 70]. Interestingly, recent studies indicate that astrocyte-signaling controls conditioned fear responding [71, 72]. Given the crucial role of astroglial CB₁R on other forms of learning process [16], one may expect that CB₁R activity could also control fear responses via astroglial mechanisms.

Altogether, the data showed that CB₁R functions in different cell types modulate acquired emotional memories. However, this could also be extended to innate emotional responses (e.g., anxiety) [67], and appetitive or rewarding memories [73]. Thus, CB₁R signaling is an important physiological determinant of coping styles to emotionally relevant aversive stimuli.

## How do CB₁R control food intake?

### CB₁R regulate feeding behavior

One of the other clearest effects of cannabis consumption is the stimulation of appetite and the increase of food intake [74–76]. It has been hypothesized that the levels of endocannabinoids rise gradually during meal intervals and reach a critical level that triggers the motivation to eat [77–79]. Thus, a malfunctioning of these processes could lead to the occurrence of metabolic disorders. Accordingly, the CB₁R antagonist and rimonabant was successfully used in humans to fight obesity. However, because of adverse psychiatric side effects, the drug was withdrawn from the market [80–82]. This particular failure illustrates the need to develop new drugs that are effective and safe in the long-term in order to successfully fight obesity and other metabolic disorders. To this aim, it is necessary to explore and understand thoroughly the different mechanisms of the cannabinergic regulation of food intake (Fig. 4).

### CB₁R modulate the mesolimbic network

Feeding behavior is a multifactorial physiological process involving a complex network of brain circuits coordinated by different cell types [83]. In particular, the mesolimbic dopaminergic pathway is tightly regulated by the endocannabinoid system [84, 85]. Both CB₁R and endocannabinoids are present in the rat limbic forebrain [86], and there is colocalization of CB₁R with dopamine receptors in the striatum [87]. Accordingly, increased AEA in the nucleus accumbens stimulates food intake and c-Fos activation in hypothalamic areas [79] and enhance the hedonic responses toward food stimuli [88]. Moreover, endocannabinoids may also exert control on VTA dopaminergic neurons, where the postsynaptic synthesis of endocannabinoids is under the control of dopaminergic receptors [89, 90]. Interestingly, there is also a relevant functional interplay between the endocannabinoid system and the endogenous opioid system modulating feeding behavior [91]. For instance, the opioid receptor

---

**Figure 4.** The (endo)cannabinoid system in feeding behavior. The endocannabinoid system controls food intake in a bimodal fashion, acting in different brain regions. The hyperphagia induced by endogenous and exogenous cannabinoids is due to the inhibition of glutamatergic transmission in olfactory circuits and certain hypothalamic nuclei. Conversely, the paraventricular hypothalamus (PVN) and ventral striatal regions are the locus for the hypophagic effect of cannabinoid stimulation. The CB₁R antagonists increase noradrenergic and glutamatergic transmission in the periphery and the brainstem, respectively, resulting in an inhibition of feeding behavior. AOC, anterior olfactory cortex; LH, lateral hypothalamus; MOB, main olfactory bulb; NAc, nucleus accumbens; NTS, nucleus of the tractus solitaries; PB, parabrachial nucleus; VMH, ventromedial hypothalamus.

antagonist naloxone and rimonabant have been shown to reduce synergistically food intake at doses that do not alter food intake on their own [92]. Thus, the multiple interactions of CB₁R with other neurochemical systems in the mesolimbic network could enhance the hedonic taste responsiveness to food stimuli [93].

### CB₁R modulate the hypothalamic appetite network

Hypothalamic endocannabinoid levels are modulated in different feeding states [77, 78]. In rodents, the direct involvement of hypothalamic CB₁R in the control of food intake has been shown in the ventromedial hypothalamus (VMH, known as the satiety center). Local administration of AEA in this nucleus causes a general hyperphagic effect, that can be blocked with the administration of rimonabant [94]. The crucial finding of the interaction of the endocannabinoid system with the anorectic hormone leptin, a peripheral hormone produced by fat cells, was first demonstrated by the group of Dr. Vincenzo Di Marzo, where they found elevated endocannabinoid levels in the hypothalamus of animals with an impairment of leptinergic signaling [77].

The lateral hypothalamic area (LH) is mainly formed by two neuronal subpopulations, one expressing orexins and another the melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH). These orexigenic neurons in this brain area express both functional CB₁R [95] and leptin receptors [96]. Moreover, CB₁R receptor stimulation strongly increases the intracellular pathway associated with orexin-A [97]. Considering the projections of the orexigenic

Bioessays 37: 1215–1225, © 2015 WILEY Periodicals, Inc.
neurons to the VTA, they could constitute a site of integration of hypothalamic and extra hypothalamic inputs involved in the orexigenic action of the CB₁R activation. Importantly, it has been described an imbalance between excitation and inhibition in orexinergic neurons controlled by CB₁R activity in animal models lacking leptin signaling [98]. Regarding MCH neuronal activity, electrophysiological experiments demonstrated that MCH neurons are inhibited by GABAergic inputs [96]. Thus, endocannabinoids stimulate the excitability of MCH neurons (by inhibiting GABA release into these cells) leading to an increase in food intake in a leptin dependent manner [96].

The arcuate (ARC) and paraventricular nucleus (PVN) of the hypothalamus are also targets of the ECS. Despite the fact that CB₁R expression is low in intrinsic ARC neurons and particularly in neuropeptide Y (NPY)-positive neurons, evidence suggests that NPY may contribute to the orexigenic action of endocannabinoids [99]. In fact, Gamber et al., (2005) found that AEA stimulates NPY release in a CB₁R-dependent manner [99]. However, further studies are necessary to establish a functional interaction between CB₁R and NPY activity. In the ARC nucleus, there is another neuronal population, in this case with anorexigenic properties, expressing the POMC-derived peptide α-melanocyte stimulating hormone (α-MSH), which is part of the leptin-regulated appetite circuitry [83]. Interestingly, rimonabant reduces the feeding response induced by blocking melanocortin receptors (i.e. MCR4), the main molecular target of α-MSH, whereas this peptide does not affect THC-induced feeding. Furthermore, there is a synergistic effect of sub-anorectic doses of rimonabant and MCR4 agonists [100], indicating that CB₁R are likely downstream of MCR4 signaling and are necessary for α-MSH-mediated changes on feeding behavior. POMC neurons can produce some other peptides like, β-endorphin that can also interact with CB₁R [101]. In this elegant study led by Tamas Horvath [101], it was shown that CB₁R activation could stimulate food intake in satiated animals by increasing the levels of β-endorphin and not α-MSH, enlightening a novel mechanism by which POMC cells could increase food intake.

Regarding cannabinoid action in the PVN, functional crosstalk between endocannabinoids and the corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH) has been described [102, 103]. Indeed, it was shown that CB₁R mRNA is co-expressed with both CRH and CRH type 1 receptor mRNA [87, 95]. Furthermore, Di et al. (2003) demonstrated that endocannabinoids decreases glutamatergic transmission onto CRH-releasing neurons in the PVN [102, 103]. This mechanism is stimulated by a non-genomic effect of glucocorticoids, suggesting that the well-known effect of stress on food intake may partly be caused by CB₁R activation. In this sense, the team of Dr. Jaideep Bains showed that a repetitive stress could impair CB₁R function in the hypothalamus, and the effect was reversed by the presence of a novel stressor [104–106]. The PVN is also an important locus of interaction between the orexigenic hormone ghrelin (produced in the gut) and the endocannabinoid system [107, 108]. The hyperphagic effect of direct intra-PVN injection of ghrelin is blocked by pre-treating rats with rimonabant [107]. Furthermore, ghrelin increases endocannabinoid levels in the hypothalamus leading to a decrease in glutamatergic transmission in the PVN [108],

reducing the excitatory drive onto this nucleus, and likely promoting food intake.

Altogether, these results reveal the site-specific interaction between the endocannabinoid system, the energy status of the animal (e.g. a stressful event such as food deprivation) and its different metabolic indicators (peripheral and central) in hypothalamic control of feeding behavior.

### CB₁R modulate the caudal brainstem and gastrointestinal tract

Brainstem structures (e.g. nucleus of the tractus solitarius, NTS) can sense signals from different peripheral tissues participating in the energy balance (e.g. gastrointestinal tract) [83]. CB₁R are present in both afferent and efferent neurons of the NTS [6] modulating both glutamatergic and GABAergic transmission in these cells [109]. CB₁R are also functionally expressed in the parabrachial nucleus (PBN) [110]. It was found that an acute injection of 2-AG in this brain area could selectively increase consumption of palatable food. These data indicate that the endocannabinoid system can exert food preference by interfering with the central gustatory pathways [110], or potentially by modulating the communication between peripheral organs and brainstem nuclei. For example, in the small intestine, starvation induces a considerable increase in AEA levels, which can be reversed by re-feeding [111]. Intriguingly, CB₁R are expressed in the same vagal afferent neurons that also express cholecystokinin (CCK) type-1 receptor and project to the stomach and duodenum [112, 113]. There is also evidence demonstrating that the endocannabinoid system controls specifically fat consumption by actin in peripheral CB₁R [114]. Thoroughly, these observations indicate that the well-known orexigenic functions of endocannabinoids can also be exerted through the modulation of satiety pathways going from the intestine to the brainstem nuclei. For a more complete review about peripheral effects of cannabinoids, see [115].

### The rimonabant story

The increase of endocannabinoids after fasting strongly contributes to the hyperphagia displayed by starved animals when re-exposed to food. Consistently, the CB₁R antagonist rimonabant exerts a strong reduction of fasting-induced food intake [77]. However, the exact site or sites where this pharmacological effect is exerted were not known. We recently found that Rimonabant acts through sympathetic signals to stimulate glutamatergic transmission in the NTS and consequently reduces food intake [53]. Importantly, these mechanisms were specifically triggered by lipid-deprivation, revealing a nutrient-specific component acutely regulated by CB₁R blockade. Furthermore, the peripheral blockade of sympathetic neurotransmission blunted the central effects of CB₁R blockade, such as increased conditioned fear responses and anxiety-like behaviors [53]. These data demonstrate that independently of their site of origin, important effects of CB₁R blockade are expressed via activation of peripheral sympathetic activity [53]. In fact, although it is out of the scope

Bioessays 37: 1215–1225, © 2015 WILEY Periodicals, Inc.
of this review, there is evidence showing that peripheral blockade of CB₁R is a viable target for the treatment of obesity by modulating peripheral metabolic parameters [116, 117]. Indeed, peripheral CB₁R can modulate feeding behavior through the regulation of different fatty acids such as oleylethanolamide [111].

### CB₁R control food intake in a biphasic way: Glutamate versus GABA

Glutamatergic and GABAergic neurotransmissions exert an opposite role in the regulation of food intake (see Fig. 4). In particular glutamate transmission has been described as an anorectic signal, whereas GABAergic signaling possesses orexigenic properties [118]. The different distribution of CB₁R in different cell types [44] could explain the discrepancies observed in experiments of pharmacological modulation of CB₁R. Indeed, hypophagia induced by CB₁R antagonists is only transient both in animal models and human subjects [119]. Furthermore, treatment with CB₁R agonists leads to biphasic effects, with low-to-moderate doses increasing food intake and moderate to high dose inducing hypophagia [37, 120]. The Glu-CB₁-KO or GABA-CB₁-KO mice [44] have been used in a protocol of fasting-induced hyperphagia [78]. Accordingly, these two mutant mouse lines displayed opposite phenotypes in this paradigm [37]. Due to disinhibited glutamatergic NMDA transmission, Glu-CB₁-KO mice were hypophagic, indicating that CB₁R in this neuronal population is responsible at least in part for the classical orexigenic function of endocannabinoid signaling. Conversely, GABA-CB₁-KO mice ate more food than their wild-type littermates. This phenotype is due to an increased GABA<sub>A</sub> receptor activation, indicating a previously unknown anorectic role of endocannabinoids. Furthermore, acute pharmacological approaches in mutant and wild-type control mice showed that CB₁R activation by low doses of THC increase food intake through modulation of glutamatergic transmission, whereas higher doses of the drug impact on GABAergic transmission in order to decrease food intake. These data further confirm the opposite role of CB₁R-mediated modulation of glutamatergic versus GABAergic transmission. A couple of recent studies (see below) from our group have aimed to identify the brain locus of this bimodal regulation [121, 122].

### CB₁R activation in the paraventricular hypothalamus and ventral striatum induces hypophagia

Several reports (see above) suggest that CB₁R modulate the electrophysiological properties of PVN in fasting condition or in response to the orexigenic hormone ghrelin [108]. Local injections of the CB₁R antagonist AM251 into this region potentiated both fasting and ghrelin-induced hyperphagia. Interestingly, this phenomenon could be blocked by the local infusion of the GABA<sub>A</sub> receptor antagonist picrotoxin, indicating that an increase of GABAergic transmission is the main cause for the hyperphagia induced by CB₁R blockade in the PVN [121]. However, our results revealed that the feeding-suppressing effect caused by the exogenous administration of THC occurs in different brain regions. For example, local AM251 pre-treatment into the ventral striatum prevented the hypophagic effect induced by a moderate-to-high dose of THC [37].

### CB₁R activation in the olfactory system induces hyperphagia

Olfactory circuits are also sensitive to the changes of the energy balance of the organism and participate in the control of feeding behavior [123, 124]. We recently found that the endocannabinoid system controls food intake via olfactory processes [122]. Due to the low levels of expression of CB₁R in cortical glutamatergic neurons, a detailed anatomical analysis of CB₁R expression in the brain failed to detect obvious differences between Glu-CB₁-KO mice and wild-type littermates in many brain regions [37]. However, a clear reduction of glutamatergic CB₁R was evident in the main olfactory bulb (MOB), likely coming from centrifugal projections from the principal neurons of the anterior olfactory cortex (AOC) [122]. According to the data obtained with systemic injections [37], a sub-effective dose of the NMDA receptor antagonist MK801 into the MOB fully abolished the hypophagic phenotype of Glu-CB₁-KO littermates [122]. Further studies pointed out that CB₁R expression in this brain area is necessary and sufficient for stimulating food intake. Furthermore, pharmacological blockade of CB₁R in the MOB of WT mice blocks the hyperphagic effect of THC. Thus, the hyperphagic effect of both endogenous cannabinoids and THC is due to inhibition of glutamatergic transmission in the MOB, through a mechanism of increased olfactory sensitivity [122].

### CB₁R controls the gustatory pathway

As well as olfactory cues, gustatory information is a key regulator of feeding behavior [125]. Importantly, CB₁R are expressed in the taste buds [126]. By using electrophysiological recordings of the gustatory nerve; Yoshida et al. (2010) found that endocannabinoids selectively enhance the gustatory response for sweet taste. This phenomenon is strictly CB₁R dependent and opposes the action of the anorexigenic hormone leptin [126, 127]. Thus, these observations point to a putative interaction between the direct gustatory pathways and peripheral regulation where the endocannabinoid system can exert its hyperphagic action, at least for highly palatable foods.

### Breaking the plasma centric view of CB₁R actions

Although CB₁R are primarily known to signal at the plasma membrane, a proportion of these receptors is also functionally present in mitochondria (mtCB₁R). Until few years ago, cannabinoids were known to alter mitochondrial functions but these effects were fully ascribed to unspecific membrane disturbance induced by these lipid molecules [7, 128]. However, recent results challenge this idea, indicating that

A. Busquets-Garcia et al.

Prospects & Overviews

On the other hand, cannabinoids can also modulate psychological components of feeding behavior such as food anticipation and reward [73, 133, 134]. Also, the fact that intracellular cannabinoid receptors (e.g. mtCB₁) might modulate brain functions further expands the importance of the CB₁R to key cellular brain mechanisms regulating behavior. In this sense, CB₁R is an optimal “tool” for addressing fundamental mechanisms of brain functions and to penetrate the complexity of the processes underlying behavior. Moreover, the involvement of the endocannabinoid system in a plethora of neurological and neuropsychiatric diseases makes this system a very interesting potential target for therapeutic approaches. In this sense, recent evidence demonstrated the involvement of genetic polymorphisms of components of the endocannabinoid system in a variety of human diseases and psychiatric and neurological disorders [135, 136]. Indeed, one of the big challenges in cannabinoid research is to translate what has been found in animal models to human subjects. Always taking into account that the where matters. Overall, understanding the molecular, cellular, network and behavioral functions of the endocannabinoid system will surely contribute strongly to our knowledge of brain processes and will suggest innovative therapeutic strategies for brain disorders.

Figure 5. The (endo) cannabinoid system in the mitochondria. Besides the well-known expression of the CB₁R in the plasma membrane of different cell types, this receptor can be found in intracellular compartments, such as in the mitochondria, where it modulates mitochondrial respiration and energy production. Future research will determine which are the behavioral outputs regulated by the mitochondrial CB₁ (mtCB₁) receptor.

CB₁R are also present in mitochondrial membranes in the periphery, such as in spermatozoa [129] or skeletal muscles (Pedro Grandes, personal communication), and in the brain, where they directly regulate mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation activity (Fig. 5) [15, 130, 131]. Therefore, mitochondrial effects of cannabinoids can be nowadays be ascribed to two potential molecular mechanisms: unspecific alterations of membrane properties and specific receptor-mediated intramitochondrial signaling pathways [132].

A study from our laboratory demonstrated the functional presence of CB₁R on mitochondrial membranes, identifying mitochondrial CB₁R (mtCB₁R) as a direct modulator of bioenergetics cellular processes in the brain [15]. Furthermore, it was shown that this intracellular pool of CB₁R could control synaptic plasticity [15], suggesting its potential to modulate cognitive or physiological processes. Importantly, a recent study showed the presence of mtCB₁R in the POMC neurons of the hypothalamus [101]. Here, CB₁R-dependent mitochondrial mechanisms impact on feeding behavior [101]. However, further studies and more powerful tools are needed to investigate the impact of mtCB₁R on synaptic transmission, brain functions, and behavior (Fig. 5).

### Conclusions

In conclusion, CB₁R signaling represents an important modulator of memory and feeding behavior (Fig. 5). CB₁R exerted these functions through complex mechanisms involving both the brain and the periphery. In the brain, the presence of cannabinoid receptors on different cell types, including excitatory and inhibitory neurons, astrocytes and others, support the idea that the endocannabinoid system is one of the most important neuromodulator systems. Moreover, further investigation is needed to pay more attention in the subtleties of each behavior and to include these findings in the whole picture. For example, an animal’s motivational or arousal state can modify the memory effects of cannabinoids.

### Acknowledgments

We would like to thank Drs. Carolina Muguruza and Raymundo Baez-Mendoza for the critical reading of this manuscript. This study was supported by INSERM (G.M.), EU-Fp7 (REPROBESITY, HEALTH-F2-2008-223713, G.M.), European Research Council (ENDOFOOD, ERC-2010-StG-260515, G.M.), Fondation pour la Recherche Medicale (G.M.), Region Aquitaine (G.M.), LABEX BRAIN (ANR-10-LABX-43), EU-FP7 (HEALTH-603191-PAINCAGE, G.M.), Fyssen Foundation (E.S.-G.), CONACyT (E.S.-G.), Marie Curie fellowship (FP7-PEOPLE-2013-IEF-623638-SCHIZO-mtCB1, A.B.-G.), and French State/Agence Nationale de la Recherche/IdEx (ANR-10-IDEX-03-02, to A.B.-G.).

The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

### References

1. Mechoulam R, Gaoni Y. 1965. A total synthesis of ΔI-delta-1-tetrahydrocannabinol, the active constituent of hashish. *J Am Chem Soc* 87: 3273–5.
2. Matsuda LA, Lolait SJ, Brownstein MJ, Young AC, et al. 1990. Structure of a cannabinoid receptor and functional expression of the cloned cDNA. *Nature* 346: 561–4.
3. Devane WA, Breuer A, Sheskin T, Jarbe TU, et al. 1992. A novel probe for the cannabinoid receptor. *J Med Chem* 35: 2065–9.

Bioessays 37: 1215–1225, © 2015 WILEY Periodicals, Inc.

4. Piomelli D. 2003. The molecular logic of endocannabinoid signalling. Nat Rev Neurosci 4: 873–84.
5. Herkenham M. 1991. Characterization and localization of cannabinoid receptors in brain: an in vitro technique using slide-mounted tissue sections. NIDA Res Monogr 112: 129–45.
6. Tsou K, Brown S, Sanudo-Pena MC, Mackie K, et al. 1998. Immunohistochemical distribution of cannabinoid CB1 receptors in the rat central nervous system. Neuroscience 83: 393–411.
7. Howlett AC. 2002. The cannabinoid receptors. Prostag Oth Lipid M 68–69: 619–31.
8. Howlett AC, Barth F, Bonner TI, Cabral G, et al. 2002. International Union of Pharmacology. XXVII. Classification of cannabinoid receptors. Pharmacol Rev 54: 161–202.
9. Azad SC, Kurz J, Marsicano G, Lutz B, et al. 2008. Activation of CB1 specifically located on GABAergic interneurons inhibits LTD in the lateral amygdala. Learn Mem 15: 143–52.
10. Chevaleyre V, Heifets BD, Kaeser PS, Sudhof TC, et al. 2007. Endocannabinoid-mediated long-term plasticity requires cAMP/PKA signaling and RIM1alpha. Neuron 54: 801–12.
11. Andre A, Gonthier MP. 2010. The endocannabinoid system: its roles in energy balance and potential as a target for obesity treatment. Int J Biochem Cell Biol 42: 1788–801.
12. Bouaboula M, Poinot-Chazel C, Bourrie B, Canat X, et al. 1995. Activation of mitogen-activated protein kinases by stimulation of the central cannabinoid receptor CB1. Biochem J 312: 637–41.
13. Puighermanal E, Marsicano G, Busquets-Garcia A, Lutz B, et al. 2009. Cannabinoid modulation of hippocampal long-term memory is mediated by mTOR signaling. Nat Neurosci 12: 1152–8.
14. Valjent E, Pages C, Rogard M, Besson MJ, et al. 2001. Delta 9-tetrahydrocannabinol-induced MAPK/ERK and Elk-1 activation in vivo depends on dopaminergic transmission. Eur J Neurosci 14: 342–52.
15. Benard G, Massa F, Puente N, Lourenco J, et al. 2012. Mitochondrial CB(1) receptors regulate neuronal energy metabolism. Nat Neurosci 15: 558–64.
16. Han J, Kesner P, Metna-Laurent M, Duan T, et al. 2012. Acute cannabinoids impair working memory through astroglial CB(1) receptor modulation of hippocampal LTD. Cell 148: 1039–50.
17. Bosier B, Bellocchio L, Metna-Laurent M, Soria-Gomez E, et al. 2013. Astroglial CB1 cannabinoid receptors regulate leptin signaling in mouse brain astrocytes. Mol Metab 2: 393–404.
18. Lundqvist T. 2005. Cognitive consequences of cannabis use: comparison with abuse of stimulants and heroin with regard to attention, memory and executive functions. Pharmacol Biochem Behav 81: 319–30.
19. Marsicano G, Lafenetre P. 2009. Roles of the endocannabinoid system in learning and memory. Curr Top Behav Neurosci 1: 201–30.
20. Rueda-Orozco PE, Montes-Rodriguez CJ, Soria-Gomez E, Mendez-Diaz M, et al. 2008. Impairment of endocannabinoids activity in the dorsolateral striatum delays extinction of behavior in a procedural memory task in rats. Neuropsychopharmacology 55: 55–62.
21. Rueda-Orozco PE, Soria-Gomez E, Montes-Rodriguez CJ, Martinez-Vargas M, et al. 2008. A potential function of endocannabinoids in the selection of a navigation strategy by rats. Psychopharmacology 198: 565–76.
22. Akirav I. 2011. The role of cannabinoids in modulating emotional and non-emotional memory processes in the hippocampus. Front Behav Neurosci 5: 34.
23. Bossong MG, Jager G, Bhattacharyya S, Allen P. 2014. Acute and non-acute effects of cannabis on human memory function: a critical review of neuroimaging studies. Curr Pharm Des 20: 2114–25.
24. Milner B, Squire LR, Kandel ER. 1998. Cognitive neuroscience and the study of memory. Neuron 20: 445–68.
25. Squire LR. 2004. Memory systems of the brain: a brief history and current perspective. Neurobiol Learn Mem 82: 171–7.
26. Herkenham M, Lynn AB, Little MD, Johnson MR, et al. 1990. Cannabinoid receptor localization in brain. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 87: 1932–6.
27. Lichtman AH, Dimen KR, Martin BR. 1995. Systemic or intra-hippocampal cannabinoid administration impairs spatial memory in rats. Psychopharmacology 119: 282–90.
28. Suenaga T, Ichitani Y. 2008. Effects of hippocampal administration of a cannabinoid receptor agonist WIN 55, 212-2 on spontaneous object and place recognition in rats. Behav Brain Res 190: 248–52.
29. Duzel E, Penny WD, Burgess N. 2010. Brain oscillations and memory. Curr Opin Neurobiol 20: 143–9.
30. Nyhus E, Curran T. 2010. Functional role of gamma and theta oscillations in episodic memory. Neurosci Biobehav Rev 34: 1023–35.
31. Robbe D, Montgomery SM, Thome A, Rueda-Orozco PE, et al. 2006. Cannabinoids reveal importance of spike timing coordination in hippocampal function. Nat Neurosci 9: 1526–33.
32. Holderith N, Nemeth B, Papp OI, Veres JM, et al. 2011. Cannabinoids attenuate hippocampal gamma oscillations by suppressing excitatory synaptic input onto CA3 pyramidal neurons and fast spiking basket cells. J Physiol 589: 4921–34.
33. Kano M, Ohno-Shosaku T, Hashimoto-Y, Uchigashima M, et al. 2009. Endocannabinoid-mediated control of synaptic transmission. Physiol Rev 89: 309–80.
34. Marsicano G, Lutz B. 2006. Neuromodulatory functions of the endocannabinoid system. J Endocrinol Invest 29: 27–46.
35. Hampson RE, Deadwyler SA. 2000. Cannabinoids reveal the necessity of hippocampal neural encoding for short-term memory in rats. J Neurosci 20: 8932–42.
36. Kawamura Y, Fukaya M, Maejima T, Yoshida T, et al. 2006. The CB1 cannabinoid receptor is the major cannabinoid receptor at excitatory presynaptic sites in the hippocampus and cerebellum. J Neurosci 26: 2991–3001.
37. Bellocchio L, Lafenetre P, Cannich A, Cota D, et al. 2010. Bimodal control of stimulated food intake by the endocannabinoid system. Nat Neurosci 13: 281–3.
38. Katona I, Freund TF. 2012. Multiple functions of endocannabinoid signaling in the brain. Annu Rev Neurosci 35: 529–58.
39. Pistis M, Ferraro L, Pira L, Flore G, et al. 2002. Delta(9)-tetrahydrocannabinol decreases extracellular GABA and increases extracellular glutamate and dopamine levels in the rat prefrontal cortex: an in vivo microdialysis study. Brain Res 948: 155–8.
40. Laaris N, Good CH, Lupica CR. 2010. Delta9-tetrahydrocannabinol is a full agonist at CB1 receptors on GABA neuron axon terminals in the hippocampus. Neuropharmacology 59: 121–7.
41. Hajos N, Katona I, Naiem SS, MacKie K, et al. 2000. Cannabinoids inhibit hippocampal GABAergic transmission and network oscillations. Eur J Neurosci 12: 3239–49.
42. Crozier Willi G, Berger A, Di Marzo V, Bisogno T, et al. 2001. Lipids in neural function: modulation of behavior by oral administration of endocannabinoids found in foods. Nestle Nutr Workshop Ser Clin Perform Programme 5: 169–84; discussion 85–7.
43. Zhu PJ, Lovinger DM. 2007. Persistent synaptic activity produces long-lasting enhancement of endocannabinoid modulation and alters long-term synaptic plasticity. J Neurophysiol 97: 4386–9.
44. Monory K, Massa F, Egertova M, Eder M, et al. 2006. The endocannabinoid system controls key epileptogenic circuits in the hippocampus. Neuron 51: 455–66.
45. Puighermanal E, Marsicano G, Busquets-Garcia A, Lutz B, et al. 2009. Cannabinoid modulation of hippocampal long-term memory is mediated by mTOR signaling. Nat Neurosci 12: 1152–8.
46. Puighermanal E, Busquets-Garcia A, Gomis-Gonzalez M, Marsicano G, et al. 2013. Dissociation of the pharmacological effects of THC by mTOR blockade. Neuropsychopharmacology 38: 1334–43.
47. Monory K, Polack M, Remus A, Lutz B, et al. 2015. Cannabinoid CB1 receptor calibrates excitatory synaptic balance in the mouse hippocampus. J Neurosci 35: 3842–50.
48. Navarrete M, Araque A. 2010. Endocannabinoids potentiate synaptic transmission through stimulation of astrocytes. Neuron 68: 113–26.
49. Ruehle S, Rey AA, Remmers F, Lutz B. 2012. The endocannabinoid system in anxiety, fear memory and habituation. J Psychopharmacol 26: 23–39.
50. Suzuki A, Josselyn SA, Frankland PW, Masushige S, et al. 2004. Memory reconsolidation and extinction have distinct temporal and biochemical signatures. J Neurosci 24: 4787–95.
51. Jacob W, Marsch R, Marsicano G, Lutz B, et al. 2012. Cannabinoid CB1 receptor deficiency increases contextual fear memory under highly aversive conditions and long-term potentiation in vivo. Neurobiol Learn Mem 98: 47–55.
52. Finn DP, Beckett SR, Richardson D, Kendall DA, et al. 2004. Evidence for differential modulation of conditioned aversion and fear-conditioned analgesia by CB1 receptors. Eur J Neurosci 20: 848–52.
53. Bellocchio L, Soria-Gomez E, Quarta C, Metna-Laurent M, et al. 2013. Activation of the sympathetic nervous system mediates hypophagic and anxiety-like effects of CB1 receptor blockade. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 110: 4786–91.

A. Busquets-Garcia et al.

54. Metna-Laurent M, Soria-Gomez E, Verrier D, Conforzi M, et al. 2012. Bimodal control of fear-coping strategies by CB(1) cannabinoid receptors. J Neurosci 32: 7109–18.
55. Marsicano G, Wotjak CT, Azad SC, Bisogno T, et al. 2002. The endogenous cannabinoid system controls extinction of aversive memories. Nature 418: 530–4.
56. Cannich A, Wotjak CT, Kamprath K, Hermann H, et al. 2004. CB1 cannabinoid receptors modulate kinase and phosphatase activity during extinction of conditioned fear in mice. Learn Mem 11: 625–32.
57. Myers KM, Davis M. 2007. Mechanisms of fear extinction. Mol Psychiatry 12: 120–50.
58. Laviolette SR, Lipski WJ, Grace AA. 2005. A subpopulation of neurons in the medial prefrontal cortex encodes emotional learning with burst and frequency codes through a dopamine D4 receptor-dependent basolateral amygdala input. J Neurosci 25: 6066–75.
59. Laviolette SR, Grace AA. 2006. Cannabinoids potentiate emotional learning plasticity in neurons of the medial prefrontal cortex through basolateral amygdala inputs. J Neurosci 26: 6458–68.
60. Tan H, Lauzon NM, Bishop SF, Bechard MA, et al. 2010. Integrated cannabinoid CB1 receptor transmission within the amygdala-prefrontal cortical pathway modulates neuronal plasticity and emotional memory encoding. Cereb Cortex 20: 1486–96.
61. Kamprath K, Romo-Parra H, Haring M, Gaburro S, et al. 2011. Short-term adaptation of conditioned fear responses through endocannabinoid signaling in the central amygdala. Neuropsychopharmacology 36: 652–63.
62. Kuhnert S, Meyer C, Koch M. 2013. Involvement of cannabinoid receptors in the amygdala and prefrontal cortex of rats in fear learning, consolidation, retrieval and extinction. Behav Brain Res 250: 274–84.
63. Choi K, Le T, McGuire J, Xing G, et al. 2012. Expression pattern of the cannabinoid receptor genes in the frontal cortex of mood disorder patients and mice selectively bred for high and low fear. J Psychiatr Res 46: 882–9.
64. Draycott B, Loureiro M, Ahmad T, Tan H, et al. 2014. Cannabinoid transmission in the prefrontal cortex bi-phasicly controls emotional memory formation via functional interactions with the ventral tegmental area. J Neurosci 34: 13096–109.
65. Terzian AL, Drago F, Wotjak CT, Micale V. 2011. The Dopamine and cannabinoid interaction in the modulation of emotions and cognition: Assessing the role of cannabinoid CB1 receptor in neurons expressing dopamine D1 receptors. Front Behav Neurosci 5: 49.
66. Bura SA, Castane A, Ledent C, Valverde O, et al. 2007. Genetic and pharmacological approaches to evaluate the interaction between the cannabinoid and cholinergic systems in cognitive processes. Br J Pharmacol 150: 758–65.
67. Rey AA, Purrio M, Viveros MP, Lutz B. 2012. Biphasic effects of cannabinoids in anxiety responses: CB1 and GABA(B) receptors in the balance of GABAergic and glutamatergic neurotransmission. Neuropharmacology 37: 2624–34.
68. Llorente-Berzal A, Terzian AL, di Marzo V, Micale V, et al. 2015. 2-AG promotes the expression of conditioned fear via cannabinoid receptor type 1 on GABAergic neurons. Psychopharmacology 232: 2811–25.
69. Dubreucq S, Kambire S, Conforzi M, Metna-Laurent M, et al. 2012. Cannabinoid type 1 receptors located on single-minded 1-expressing neurons control emotional behaviors. Neuroscience 204: 230–44.
70. Dubreucq S, Matias I, Cardinal P, Haring M, et al. 2012. Genetic dissection of the role of cannabinoid type-1 receptors in the emotional consequences of repeated social stress in mice. Neuropsychopharmacology 37: 1885–900.
71. Suzuki A, Stern SA, Bozdagi O, Huntley GW, et al. 2011. Astrocyte-neuron lactate transport is required for long-term memory formation. Cell 144: 810–23.
72. Stehberg J, Moraga-Amaro R, Salazar C, Becerra A, et al. 2012. Release of gliotransmitters through astroglial connexin 43 hemichannels is necessary for fear memory consolidation in the basolateral amygdala. FASEB J 26: 3649–57.
73. Vlachou S, Panagis G. 2014. Regulation of brain reward by the endocannabinoid system: a critical review of behavioral studies in animals. Curr Pharm Des 20: 2072–88.
74. Sofia RD, Barry H, 3rd. 1974. Acute and chronic effects of delta 9-tetrahydrocannabinol on food intake by rats. Psychopharmacologia 39: 213–22.
75. Mattes RD, Engelman K, Shaw LM, Elsohly MA. 1994. Cannabinoids and appetite stimulation. Pharmacol Biochem Behav 49: 187–95.
76. Kirkham TC. 2009. Endocannabinoids and the non-homeostatic control of appetite. Curr Top Behav Neurosci 1: 231–53.


77. Di Marzo V, Goparaju SK, Wang L, Liu J, et al. 2001. Leptin-regulated endocannabinoids are involved in maintaining food intake. Nature 410: 822–5.
78. Kirkham TC, Williams CM, Fezza F, Di Marzo V. 2002. Endocannabinoid levels in rat limbic forebrain and hypothalamus in relation to fasting, feeding and satiation: stimulation of eating by 2-arachidonoyl glycerol. Br J Pharmacol 136: 550–7.
79. Soria-Gomez E, Matias I, Rueda-Orozco PE, Cisneros M, et al. 2007. Pharmacological enhancement of the endocannabinoid system in the nucleus accumbens shell stimulates food intake and increases c-Fos expression in the hypothalamus. Br J Pharmacol 151: 1109–16.
80. Ducobu J, Sternon J. 2005. [Rimonabant (Acomplia), specific inhibitor of the endocannabinoid system]. J Pharm Belg 60: 89–91.
81. Sun Y, Chen J. 2012. Rimonabant, gastrointestinal motility and obesity. Curr Neuropharmacol 10: 212–8.
82. Roberfroid D, Lachat C, Lucet C. 2010. Termination of the CRESCENDO trial. Lancet 376: 1983–4; author reply 4 & 5.
83. Berthoud HR. 2006. Homeostatic and non-homeostatic pathways involved in the control of food intake and energy balance. Obesity 14: 197S–200S.
84. Gardner EL. 2005. Endocannabinoid signaling system and brain reward: emphasis on dopamine. Pharmacol Biochem Behav 81: 263–84.
85. Melis M, Pistis M. 2012. Hub and switches: endocannabinoid signalling in midbrain dopamine neurons. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 367: 3276–85.
86. Bisogno T, Berrendero F, Ambrosino G, Cebeira M, et al. 1999. Brain regional distribution of endocannabinoids: implications for their biosynthesis and biological function. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 256: 377–80.
87. Hermann H, Marsicano G, Lutz B. 2002. Coexpression of the cannabinoid receptor type 1 with dopamine and serotonin receptors in distinct neuronal subpopulations of the adult mouse forebrain. Neuroscience 109: 451–60.
88. Mahler SV, Smith KS, Berridge KC. 2007. Endocannabinoid hedonic hotspot for sensory pleasure: anandamide in nucleus accumbens shell enhances 'liking' of a sweet reward. Neuropsychopharmacology 32: 2267–78.
89. Dubreucq S, Durand A, Matias I, Benard G, et al. 2013. Ventral tegmental area cannabinoid type-1 receptors control voluntary exercise performance. Biol Psychiatry 73: 895–903.
90. Melis M, Pistis M, Perra S, Muntoni AL, et al. 2004. Endocannabinoids mediate presynaptic inhibition of glutamatergic transmission in rat ventral tegmental area dopamine neurons through activation of CB1 receptors. J Neurosci 24: 53–62.
91. Corcherio J, Oliva JM, Garcia-Lecumberri C, Martin S, et al. 2004. Repeated administration with Delta 9-tetrahydrocannabinol regulates mu-opioid receptor density in the rat brain. J Psychopharmacol 18: 54–8.
92. Kirkham TC, Williams CM. 2001. Synergistic effects of opioid and cannabinoid antagonists on food intake. Psychopharmacology 153: 267–70.
93. De Luca MA, Solinas M, Bimpisidis Z, Goldberg SR, et al. 2012. Cannabinoid facilitation of behavioral and biochemical hedonic taste responses. Neuropharmacology 63: 161–8.
94. Jamshidi N, Taylor DA. 2001. Anandamide administration into the ventromedial hypothalamus stimulates appetite in rats. Br J Pharmacol 134: 1151–4.
95. Cota D, Marsicano G, Tschop M, Grubler Y, et al. 2003. The endogenous cannabinoid system affects energy balance via central orexigenic drive and peripheral lipogenesis. J Clin Invest 112: 423–31.
96. Jo YH, Chen YJ, Chua SC, Jr., Talmage DA, et al. 2005. Integration of endocannabinoid and leptin signaling in an appetite-related neural circuit. Neuron 48: 1055–66.
97. Hilairet S, Bouaboula M, Carriere D, Le Fur G, et al. 2003. Hypersensitization of the Orexin 1 receptor by the CB1 receptor: evidence for cross-talk blocked by the specific CB1 antagonist, SR 141716. J Biol Chem 278: 23731–7.
98. Cristino L, Busetto G, Imperatore R, Ferrandino I, et al. 2013. Obesity-driven synaptic remodeling affects endocannabinoid control of orexigenic neurons. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 110: 38.
99. Gamber KM, Macarthur H, Westfall TC. 2005. Cannabinoids augment the release of neuropeptide Y in the rat hypothalamus. Neuropharmacology 49: 646–52.
100. Verty AN, McFarlane JR, McGregor IS, Mallet PE. 2004. Evidence for an interaction between CB1 cannabinoid and melanocortin MCR-4 receptors in regulating food intake. Endocrinology 145: 3224–31.
101. Koch M, Varela L, Kim JG, Kim JD, et al. 2015. Hypothalamic POMC neurons promote cannabinoid-induced feeding. Nature 519: 45–50.


Bioessays 37: 1215–1225, © 2015 WILEY Periodicals, Inc.

102. Di S, Malcher-Lopes R, Halmos KC, Tasker JG. 2003. Nongenomic glucocorticoid inhibition via endocannabinoid release in the hypothalamus: a fast feedback mechanism. *J Neurosci* **23**: 4850–7.
103. Malcher-Lopes R, Di S, Marcheselli VS, Weng FJ, et al. 2006. Opposing crosstalk between leptin and glucocorticoids rapidly modulates synaptic excitation via endocannabinoid release. *J Neurosci* **26**: 6643–50.
104. Crosby KM, Inoue W, Pittman QJ, Bains JS. 2011. Endocannabinoids gate state-dependent plasticity of synaptic inhibition in feeding circuits. *Neuron* **71**: 529–41.
105. Wamsteeker JL, Kuzmiski JB, Bains JS. 2010. Repeated stress impairs endocannabinoid signaling in the paraventricular nucleus of the hypothalamus. *J Neurosci* **30**: 11188–96.
106. Bains JS, Cusulin JL, Inoue W. 2015. Stress-related synaptic plasticity in the hypothalamus. *Nat Rev Neurosci* **16**: 377–88.
107. Tucci SA, Rogers EK, Korbonits M, Kirkham TC. 2004. The cannabinoid CB1 receptor antagonist SR 141716 blocks the orexigenic effects of intrahypothalamic ghrelin. *Br J Pharmacol* **143**: 520–3.
108. Kola B, Farkas I, Christ-Crain M, Wittmann G, et al. 2008. The orexigenic effect of ghrelin is mediated through central activation of the endogenous cannabinoid system. *PLoS One* **3**: e1797.
109. Roux J, Wanaverbecq N, Jean A, Lebrun B, et al. 2009. Depolarization-induced release of endocannabinoids by murine dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus nerve neurons differentially regulates inhibitory and excitatory neurotransmission. *Neuropharmacology* **56**: 1106–15.
110. DiPatrizio NV, Simansky KJ. 2008. Activating parabrachial cannabinoid CB1 receptors selectively stimulates feeding of palatable foods in rats. *J Neurosci* **28**: 9702–9.
111. Gomez R, Navarro M, Ferrer B, Trigo JM, et al. 2002. A peripheral mechanism for CB1 cannabinoid receptor-dependent modulation of feeding. *J Neurosci* **22**: 9612–7.
112. Burdyga G, Lal S, Varro A, Dimaline R, et al. 2004. Expression of cannabinoid CB1 receptors by vagal afferent neurons is inhibited by cholecystokinin. *J Neurosci* **24**: 2708–15.
113. Overduin J, Gibbs J, Cummings DE, Reeve JR, Jr. 2014. CCK-58 elicits both satiety and satiation in rats while CCK-8 elicits only satiation. *Peptides* **54**: 71–80.
114. DiPatrizio NV, Joslin A, Jung K-MM, Piomelli D. 2013. Endocannabinoid signaling in the gut mediates preference for dietary unsaturated fats. *FASEB J* **27**: 2513–20.
115. Maccarrone M, Bab I, Bró T, Cabral GA, et al. 2015. Endocannabinoid signaling at the periphery: 50 years after THC. *Trends Pharmacol Sci* **36**: 277–96.
116. Grosshans M, Schwarz E, Bumb JM, Schaefer C, et al. 2014. Oleoylethanolamide and human neural responses to food stimuli in obesity. *JAMA Psychiatry* **71**: 1254–61.
117. O’Keefe L, Simcocks AC, Hryciw DH, Mathai ML, et al. 2014. The cannabinoid receptor 1 and its role in influencing peripheral metabolism. *Diabetes Obes Metab* **16**: 294–304.
118. Kelley AE, Baldo BA, Pratt WE. 2005. A proposed hypothalamic-thalamic-striatal axis for the integration of energy balance, arousal, and food reward. *J Comp Neurol* **493**: 72–85.

119. Fong TM, Heymsfield SB. 2009. Cannabinoid-1 receptor inverse agonists: current understanding of mechanism of action and unanswered questions. *Int J Obesity* **33**: 947–55.
120. Hao S, Avraham Y, Mechoulam R, Berry EM. 2000. Low dose anandamide affects food intake, cognitive function, neurotransmitter and corticosterone levels in diet-restricted mice. *Eur J Pharmacol* **392**: 147–56.
121. Soria-Gomez E, Massa F, Bellocchio L, Rueda-Orozco PE, et al. 2014. Cannabinoid type-1 receptors in the paraventricular nucleus of the hypothalamus inhibit stimulated food intake. *Neuroscience* **263**: 46–53.
122. Soria-Gomez E, Bellocchio L, Reguero L, Lepousez G, et al. 2014. The endocannabinoid system controls food intake via olfactory processes. *Nat Neurosci* **17**: 407–15.
123. Palouzier-Paulignan B, Lacroix M-CC, Aimé P, Baly C, et al. 2012. Olfaction under metabolic influences. *Chem Senses* **37**: 769–97.
124. Soria-Gomez E, Bellocchio L, Marsicano G. 2014. New insights on food intake control by olfactory processes: the emerging role of the endocannabinoid system. *Mol Cell Endocrinol* **397**: 59–66.
125. Loper HB, La Sala M, Dotson C, Steinle N. 2015. Taste perception, associated hormonal modulation, and nutrient intake. *Nutr Rev* **73**: 83–91.
126. Yoshida R, Ohkuri T, Jyotaki M, Yasuo T, et al. 2010. Endocannabinoids selectively enhance sweet taste. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA* **107**: 935–9.
127. Niki M, Jyotaki M, Yoshida R, Yasumatsu K, et al. 2015. Modulation of sweet taste sensitivities by endogenous leptin and endocannabinoids in mice. *J Physiol* **593**: 2527–45.
128. Bartova A, Birmingham MK. 1976. Effect of delta9-tetrahydrocannabinol on mitochondrial NADH-oxidase activity. *J Biol Chem* **251**: 5002–6.
129. Aquila S, Guido C, Santoro A, Gazziero P, et al. 2010. Rimonabant (SR 141716) induces metabolism and acquisition of fertilizing ability in human sperm. *Br J Pharmacol* **159**: 831–41.
130. Valle M, Vitiello S, Bellocchio L, Hebert-Chatelain E, et al. 2014. Pregnenolone can protect the brain from cannabis intoxication. *Science* **343**: 94–8.
131. Hebert-Chatelain E, Reguero L, Puente N, Lutz B, et al. 2014. Cannabinoid control of brain bioenergetics: Exploring the subcellular localization of the CB1 receptor. *Mol Metab* **3**: 495–504.
132. Fisar Z, Singh N, Hroudova J. 2014. Cannabinoid-induced changes in respiration of brain mitochondria. *Toxicol Lett* **231**: 62–71.
133. Jager G, Witkamp RF. 2014. The endocannabinoid system and appetite: relevance for food reward. *Nutr Res Rev* **27**: 172–85.
134. Kirkham TC. 2009. Cannabinoids and appetite: food craving and food pleasure. *Int Rev Psychiatry* **21**: 163–71.
135. Dinu IR, Popa S, Bicu M, Mota E, et al. 2009. The implication of CNR1 gene’s polymorphisms in the modulation of endocannabinoid system effects. *Rom J Intern Med* **47**: 9–18.
136. Vasileiou I, Fotopoulou G, Matzourani M, Patsouris E, et al. 2013. Evidence for the involvement of cannabinoid receptors’ polymorphisms in the pathophysiology of human diseases. *Expert Opin Ther Targets* **17**: 363–77.
