
Neurochem Res
DOI 10.1007/s11064-015-1701-3

---

**ORIGINAL PAPER**

Orthosteric, Allosteric and Biased Signalling at the Relaxin-3 Receptor RXFP3

Martina Kocan${}^{1}$ · Sheng Yu Ang${}^{1}$ · Roger J. Summers${}^{1}$

Received: 9 July 2015 / Revised: 12 August 2015 / Accepted: 13 August 2015

© Springer Science+Business Media New York 2015

---

**Abstract** Relaxin-3 is a neuropeptide that has roles in stress, memory and appetite regulation. The peptide acts on its cognate receptor RXFP3 to induce coupling to inhibitory G proteins to inhibit adenylyl cyclase and activate MAP-kinases such as ERK1/2, p38MAPK and JNK. Other relaxin family peptides can activate the receptor to produce alternative patterns of signalling and there is an allosteric modulator 135PAM1 that displays probe-selectivity. There are now a variety of selective peptide agonists and antagonists that will assist in the determination of the physiological roles of the relaxin-RXFP3 system and its potential as a drug target.

**Keywords** Relaxin-3 · RXFP3 · Biased signalling · Allosteric modulator

Relaxin-3 is the most recently described relaxin family peptide, categorised by the presence of the characteristic RxxxRxxI/V relaxin-binding motif in the B-chain. Unlike other relaxins, the relaxin-3 sequence is well-conserved across species [1–3] and is believed to be the ancestral peptide of the family [1]. In mammals it is primarily a neuropeptide [4] that is involved in stress, memory and appetite regulation [5–14].

---

**The Relaxin-3 Receptor-RXFP3**

The receptor for relaxin-3, RXFP3, is encoded by an intronless gene and is a family A, G protein coupled receptor (GPCR) [15, 16]. Unlike RXFP1 and RXFP2, RXFP3 has a very small N-terminal domain and a distinct signalling profile. RXFP3 was originally termed SALPR or somatostatin and angiotensin-like receptor [17], for its resemblance to class A small peptide GPCRs before recognition that its cognate ligand was relaxin-3 [16]. The receptor and ligand expression profile suggests that relaxin-3 is a neuropeptide [4, 18]. In rat brain, relaxin-3 is expressed primarily in the nucleus incertus, in the pontine raphe nucleus, the anterior, lateral, and ventrolateral periaqueductal gray and in an area dorsal to the lateral substantia nigra [7]. High levels of RXFP3 mRNA are found in the olfactory bulb, paraventricular and supraoptic nuclei, preoptic and posterior areas of the hypothalamus, hippocampus, septum, and amygdala with lower levels in cortex, periaqueductal grey, nucleus incertus, and areas of brain stem [15]. No peripheral tissues express high levels of RXFP3. In contrast to RXFP1 and RXFP2 that require the complete two-chain relaxin family peptide for activation, the relaxin-3 B-chain alone can bind to and activate RXFP3, although with lower potency than the two-chain peptide [19, 20]. Thus binding and activation of RXFP3 differs from that observed for relaxin/RXFP1.

---

**Structural Features of RXFP3: N-terminal and Extracellular Loop Regions**

Comparative sequence analysis of mammalian RXFP3 sequences, molecular modelling and mutagenesis were used to map the relaxin-3 binding site [21] and

---

**Special Issue: In Honor of Philip Beart.**

Roger J. Summers  
Roger.Summers@monash.edu  

${}^{1}$ Drug Discovery Biology, Monash Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Monash University, 399 Royal Parade, Parkville, Melbourne, VIC 3052, Australia

Published online: 21 August 2015
demonstrated that removal of the first 33 amino acids of the  
RXFP3 N-terminus had little effect. This concentrated  
attention on the glutamic and aspartic acid residues in the  
extracellular loops as potential partners for arginine resi-  
dues in relaxin-3. E141 and D145 in ECL1 and E244 in  
ECL2 were identified as essential for relaxin-3 binding  
allowing the docking of the NMR solution structure of  
relaxin-3 [22] into a homology model of RXFP3 based on  
the CXCR4 peptide antagonist crystal structure [23]. R12  
and R16, on the B-chain helical segment of relaxin-3, are  
believed to interact with E244 and D145 on RXFP3  
whereas R26 forms a salt bridge with E141 [21]. This  
model allows for the relaxin-3 C-terminus to insert into a  
“GPCR binding pocket” within the TM domains. Thus  
relaxin-3 residues in the core β-helix are involved in  
RXFP3 binding and the C-terminal RW residues drive  
activation.

### Structural Features of RXFP3: Transmembrane  
Spanning Regions

Chimeras of RXFP3 and the closely related RXFP4 have  
been used to investigate the role of the transmembrane  
(TM) spanning regions in responses to relaxin-3 and the  
RXFP4 cognate ligand insulin-like peptide 5 (INSL5)  
[24]. At the wild-type RXFP3 receptor, relaxin-3 (pIC₅₀  
9.3) was ~200 fold more potent than INSL5 (pIC₅₀ 7.0)  
at competing for ¹²⁵I R3/I5 binding whereas at the  
RXFP4 receptor both ligands displayed similar potency  
(pIC₅₀'s 8.8 and 8.7) [25]. A chimera of RXFP3 con-  
taining TM3 and TM5 of RXFP4 displayed increased  
binding affinity for INSL5 but did not activate GTPγS  
binding demonstrating that these regions are not sufficient  
for INSL5 activation of RXFP3. A similar binding affinity  
and GTPγS binding for both relaxin-3 and INSL5 was  
achieved in a chimera of RXFP3 containing TM2, TM3,  
TM5 and ECL2 of RXFP4 compared with wild-type  
RXFP4, suggesting that all of these regions influenced  
binding and functional responses to INSL5 but not  
relaxin-3 [25]. Interestingly none of the chimeras in  
which RXFP3 regions were replaced by corresponding  
regions from RXFP4 or those where RXFP4 regions were  
replaced by corresponding regions from RXFP3, dis-  
played major changes in potency for relaxin-3 either in  
binding or functional assays. Thus relaxin-3 is able to  
bind to and activate with similar potency a variety of  
chimeras showing a wide degree of structural diversity,  
whereas the requirements for INSL5 were much more  
specific [25]. The mode of activation of RXFP3 by  
relaxin-3 is also unlike the interaction between relaxin  
family peptides and RXFP1 and RXFP2, involving pri-  
marily an interaction with ECL2.

---

### Ligands that Act at RXFP3

#### Orthosteric Ligands: Relaxin-3 and Analogues

Human relaxin-3 has a tertiary structure that resembles  
insulin and other relaxin family peptides [26]. Replacement  
of the relaxin-3 A-chain with the corresponding region  
from INSL5 (R3/I5) does not influence RXFP3 binding or  
activation, but increases specificity by reducing binding to  
and activation of RXFP1 [27]. A similar outcome can be  
achieved by truncation of the relaxin-3 A-chain [20] or by  
deletion of the A-chain disulphide bond [28]. The analogue  
with a B23-27 deletion and arginine addition at B23 is a  
high-affinity, RXFP3-selective, competitive antagonist  
(analogue 3).

Important residues that are essential for relaxin-3 bind-  
ing to RXFP3 are R8, R12, R16, I5 and F20 [19]. The  
B-chain residues R26 and W27 are also required for acti-  
vation [19]. Removal of B-chain C-terminal residues to  
C22 and addition of an arginine residue at the N-terminus,  
when combined with the A-chain of INSL5, produces a  
high affinity RXFP3-selective antagonist R3(BΔ23-27)R/  
I5 [19] (see below). Modification of the B-chain of  
R3(BΔ23-27)R/I5 with the cysteine residues mutated to  
serine [H3(B1-22R)] produces a single chain antagonist  
[29].

#### Biased Agonists Acting at RXFP3

Ligand-directed signalling bias is an increasingly recog-  
nized feature of GPCRs that is characterized by stabilisa-  
tion of particular receptor conformations by ligands to cause  
selective activation of downstream signal transduction  
pathways [30–32]. Although it was suggested [16] that  
only relaxin-3 or its B-chain could bind to and activate  
RXFP3, more recent studies have shown that several  
relaxin peptides interact with RXFP3 to activate distinct  
signalling profiles through different, although sometimes  
overlapping pathways (Fig. 1). In binding and adenylyl  
cyclase inhibition assays, relaxin-3 appeared to be selective  
for RXFP3, with no receptor activation by human relaxin  
(relaxin) or insulin-like peptide 3 (INSL3) [16]. However,  
activation by other relaxin peptides was not examined over  
a wider range of signal transduction pathways, and the  
sensitivity of inhibitory cAMP assays may also be influ-  
enced by the degree of activation of adenylyl cyclase by  
forskolin and by the time of stimulation.

#### Allosteric Modulators

3-[3,5-Bis(trifluoromethyl)phenyl]-1-(3,4-dichlorobenzyl)-  
1-[2-(5-methoxy-1H-indol-3-yl)ethyl]urea (135PAM1) is a  
Orthosteric agonists

Relaxin-3

RXFP3

PI3K
↓
Src
↓
Shc
↓
SOS
↓
Ras
↓
Raf
↓
MEK1/2
↓
ERK1/2
→ AP1 Transcription

PLC
↓
PKC → IkB
Internalisation
NFκB
Transcription
MKK4/7
p38
JNK

GαoB Gαi3
GαoA Gαi2
β-arrestins
AC
↓
cAMP

Transactivation of tyrosine kinase

Canonical signalling

Biased agonists

EGFR
Relaxin-3
RXFP3
Transactivation
PI3K
↓
Grb → Src
↓
Shc
↓
SOS
↓
Ras
↓
Raf
↓
MEK1/2
↓
ERK1/2
→ AP1 Transcription

PLC
↓
PKC → IkB
Internalisation
NFκB
Transcription
MKK4/7
p38
JNK

GαoB Gαi3
GαoA Gαi2
β-arrestins
AC
↓
cAMP

RXFP3
signalling

Allosteric modulator

Indirect signalling

Relaxin-3
RXFP3
PI3K
↓
Src
↓
Shc
↓
SOS
↓
Ras
↓
Raf
↓
MEK1/2
↓
ERK1/2
→ AP1 Transcription

PLC
↓
PKC → IkB
Internalisation
NFκB
Transcription
MKK4/7
p38
JNK

GαoB Gαi3
GαoA Gαi2
β-arrestins
AC
↓
cAMP

Relaxin-3-amide
RXFP3
135PAM
PI3K
↓
Src
↓
Shc
↓
SOS
↓
Ras
↓
Raf
↓
MEK1/2
↓
ERK1/2
→ AP1 Transcription

PLC
↓
PKC → IkB
Internalisation
NFκB
Transcription
MKK4/7
p38
JNK

GαoB Gαi3
GαoA Gαi2
β-arrestins
AC
↓
cAMP

PAM + probe dependence

Biased signalling

Relaxin
RXFP3
PI3K
↓
PLC
↓
Ras
↓
Raf
↓
MEK1/2
↓
ERK1/2
→ AP1 Transcription

PKC
↓
MKK4/7
p38
JNK

GαoB Gαi2
AC
↓
cAMP

Fig. 1 Signal transduction pathways activated by RXFP3 in response to orthosteric, biased and allosteric agonists. Orthosteric ligands such as the cognate ligand relaxin-3 interact with RXFP3 to cause coupling of the receptor with GαoB, Gαi2, GαoA and Gαi3 proteins to inhibit adenylyl cyclase. Relaxin-3 also induces phosphorylation of MAP kinases, activates reporter gene transcription and RXFP3/β-arrestin interactions. Biased agonists such as relaxin activate RXFP3 to promote coupling to GαoB and Gαi2 but not GαoA, Gαi3 or β-arrestins. Relaxin inhibits forskolin-stimulated cAMP accumulation and activates AP-1 but not NF-κB. Allosteric modulation is observed at RXFP3 in the presence of the positive allosteric modulator 135PAM1 that sensitises responses to relaxin-3 amide but not the endogenously produced peptide. Transactivation of the EGFR is observed following activation of RXFP3 in tissues where they coexist

positive allosteric modulator (PAM) that only displays activity with C-terminal amidated relaxin-3 or R3/I5 (probe selectivity [33] (Fig. 1). Binding studies with HEK293-RXFP3 membranes demonstrated that 135PAM1 (≤1 μM) does not directly compete for 125I R3/I5(amide) binding,

Probe selectivity—the allosteric modulation by 135PAM1 only occurs with amidated relaxin analogues and not with the native peptides.

but at higher concentrations behaves as a PAM. R3/I5(amide) competes for 125I R3/I5(amide) binding in a conventional manner [33]. In HEK293-RXFP3 cells co-expressing the promiscuous G protein Gαq15, 135PAM1 shifted Ca²⁺ concentration-response relationships in a limiting manner (i.e. the concentration-response curves shift only so far with increasing 135PAM1 concentrations) to relaxin-3(amide) or R3/I5(amide) but not the free-acid (OH) peptides. Similar results were obtained for inhibition
of CRE reporter gene responses. Although this is the only published example to date of allosteric activity at RXFP3, it does identify an allosteric site on RXFP3 that can be modulated by small molecules.

**RXFP3 Antagonists**

R3(BΔ23-27)R/I5 has been useful for defining the physiological functions of RXFP3. Generically, chimeric peptides with the INSL5 A-chain and relaxin-3 B-chain lack activity at RXFP1 and become antagonists when the relaxin-3 B-chain is truncated [19, 34]. During recombinant production of R3(BΔ23-27)/I5 an extra arginine remained at the N-terminus due to incomplete peptidase “trimming of the RR from the RRRR furin cleavage domain”, and the modified R3(BΔ23-27)R/I5 proved to be a potent antagonist at RXFP3 in both rat and human in vitro systems. The analogue that lacks R23 is a weak agonist with lower affinity at RXFP3 [34]. In rats, administration of R3(BΔ23-27)R/I5 i.c.v. blocks increased food intake in response to the RXFP3 agonist R3/I5. Recently it has been shown that R3(BΔ23-27)R/I5 has a complex antagonist profile and blocks some but not all pathways activated by RXFP3. It also has weak biased agonist properties (see below).

The identification of the important role of R23 in R3(BΔ23-27)R/I5 suggested that these properties might be retained in a B-chain only analogue. The resulting H3(B1-22R) is a high affinity antagonist of RXFP3 that is simpler to produce than the two chain peptides [29]. The peptide blocks increases in feeding produced by i.c.v. injection of R3/I5 in rats [29] and has identified a role for the endogenous relaxin-3 system in addiction [12] as well as in motivated food seeking and consumption in mice [13].

The studies of structure–activity relationships for the relaxin peptides show that unlike RXFP1 and RXFP2, RXFP3 can be activated by peptides comprising only the B-chain. In addition agonists and antagonists have been developed with improved selectivity profiles. Both relaxin and some RXFP3 antagonists display biased agonist properties at RXFP3 and although the physiological importance of this is unclear, biased agonists could represent an approach to novel therapies. The utility of allosteric modulation in vivo is currently limited by probe selectivity.

**Relaxin Family Peptide Receptor 3 (RXFP3) Signalling**

**Canonical Signalling Pathways**

RXFP3 is coupled to inhibitory $G\alpha_{i/o}$ proteins since stimulation by relaxin-3 causes PTX-sensitive inhibition of forskolin-stimulated cAMP accumulation [16]. This signalling pattern is also associated with PI3K- and PKC-dependent phosphorylation of ERK1/2 and other MAPKs [35, 36] (Fig. 1). Both relaxin-3 or its B-chain inhibit adenyl cyclase activity [16], but more recent studies suggest that relaxin also interacts with RXFP3 to activate a unique signalling pattern (see below) [35].

Like many other $G\alpha_{i/o}$-coupled GPCRs, activation of RXFP3 results in a rapid and transient (peak response 2–5 min) increase in ERK1/2 phosphorylation in CHO-K1 and HEK293 cells stably expressing RXFP3 [35, 36] (Fig. 1). ERK1/2 activation also occurs with relaxin-3 B-chain dimer and relaxin albeit with lower potency and efficacy [36] but not with porcine relaxin or INSL3 [35] (Fig. 1). PTX pre-treatment inhibits relaxin-3 stimulated ERK1/2 phosphorylation in CHO-RXFP3 cells by ~90%, and completely abolishes the response in HEK-RXFP3 or SN56 cells [36]. At least two pathways downstream of $G\alpha_{i/o}$ contribute to RXFP3-mediated ERK1/2 phosphorylation in CHO-K1, HEK293 and SN56 cells, since the MAPK response is blocked ~50% by the PI3K inhibitors LY294002 or Wortmannin, and the remainder by general and isoform-selective PKC inhibitors [36] (Fig. 2). Since ERK1/2 phosphorylation appears to be involved in the central feeding responses in rats [37–39], this may be physiologically relevant.

Reporter gene assays have also been used to identify signal transduction mechanisms activated by RXFP3. Since several MAPK signalling pathways (p38 MAPK, [40]; JNK, [41]; and ERK1/2, [42, 43] converge on activator protein 1 (AP-1) elements to increase gene transcription, the use of AP-1-linked reporter gene assays with selective inhibitors can provide useful information on signalling in different cellular backgrounds. Inhibition of $G\alpha_{i/o}$ proteins by PTX blocks RXFP3 mediated AP-1 reporter activation in SN56 cells but not in CHO-RXFP3 and HEK-RXFP3 cells [35] suggesting that AP-1 reporter gene activation was downstream of $G\alpha_{i/o}$ in the mouse-derived cell line but not in the other two cell types [35]. AP-1 reporter gene activation in CHO-RXFP3 and SN56 cells in response to relaxin-3 is completely blocked by the p38 MAPK inhibitor (RWJ67657), whereas MEK (PD98059) or JNK inhibition (SP600125) only partially blocks the response. In HEK-RXFP3 cells, JNK inhibition completely blocks relaxin-3-stimulated AP-1 reporter activation, whereas p38 MAPK or MEK inhibition was only partially effective [35]. This suggests that the hierarchy of the different MAPK signalling pathways varies with the cell background (Fig. 2). In vivo studies show that MAPK signalling is activated in forced swim tests in rats, with marked increases in pMEK1/2, pERK1/2 and pJNK1/2/3 [38]. This is associated with an increase in relaxin-3 mRNA in the nucleus incertus (NI) [5], but more direct links between

Springer
Orthosteric agonists

Relaxin-3

RXFP3

LY294002 Wortmannin

PI3K

Src

Shc

SOS

Ras

PD98059 MEK1/2 ERK1/2

RWJ67657 MKK4/7 JNK SP600125

Transactivation of tyrosine kinase

Canonical signalling

Biased agonists

AG1478

EGFR

Transactivation

RXFP3

Relaxin-3

PI3K

Src

Grb

Shc

SOS

Ras

Raf

MEK1/2

ERK1/2

AP1 Transcription

Indirect signalling

RXFP3

PLC

β-arrestins

PKC

IκB

Internalisation

NFκB

Transcription

RXFP3

signalling - effects of inhibitors

Relaxin

PTX

AC

cAMP

PLC

Ras

Raf

RWJ67657 MEK1/2 ERK1/2

p38

JNK SP600125

AP1 Transcription

Biased signalling

Fig. 2 Summary of the effects of pharmacological inhibitors on signal transduction pathways activated by RXFP3 in response to orthosteric or biased agonists. Pharmacological inhibitors are shown in red and affected pathways in grey (Color figure online)

relaxin-3, RXFP3, MAPK phosphorylation and stress responses remain to be demonstrated.

In the NFkB reporter gene assay, in CHO-K1 and HEK 293 cells transiently expressing RXFP3, and in SN56 cells, stimulation of RXFP3 by relaxin-3 increased activation [35]. This response was blocked by PTX pre-treatment [35] suggesting that it occurs entirely downstream of Gαi/o (Fig. 2). However, the physiological significance of this pathway remains to be determined.

Ligand-Directed Signalling Bias at RXFP3

Ligand-directed signalling bias has been described for relaxin [44] and for the RXFP3 antagonist R3(BΔ23-27)R/I5 [45]. The first study that showed biased signalling produced by relaxin at RXFP3 came from metabolic responses recorded by microphysiometry [44] where relaxin produced a small change in the extracellular acidification rate in CHO-RXFP3 cells. Later studies in CHO-K1, HEK 293 and SN56 cells, showed that relaxin, porcine relaxin and INSL3 all weakly inhibited forskolin-stimulated cAMP accumulation [35]. The ability of INSL3 to activate RXFP3 was species-specific for the human but not the mouse receptor [35]. Although previous studies reported no inhibition of cAMP accumulation by either porcine relaxin or INSL3 [16] the sensitivity of inhibitory cAMP assays is highly dependent on both the degree of activation of adenylyl cyclase by forskolin and the time of stimulation and the differences observed are probably due to different experimental paradigms.

Relaxin and porcine relaxin also caused AP-1 reporter gene activation [35] in CHO-K1 and HEK 293 cells expressing RXFP3 and in SN56 cells with an order of potency relaxin > relaxin-3 > porcine relaxin. Some of the AP-1 activation appeared to be independent of Gαi/o, as PTX failed to completely block porcine relaxin-stimulated activation in CHO-RXFP3 cells. Thus, both relaxin-3 and porcine relaxin can activate AP-1 by a Gαi/o-independent mechanism, suggesting ligand-directed signalling bias [35]. However, in SN56 cells, all of the AP-1 reporter gene responses observed after stimulation of RXFP3 were blocked by PTX, suggesting differences in the pathways involved in mediating the downstream response [35].

In CHO-K1 cells expressing RXFP3, AP-1 responses to relaxin are strongly inhibited by the p38 MAPK inhibitor (RWJ 67657) or the JNK inhibitor (SP 600125), but only weakly by the MEK inhibitor (PD 98059), suggesting that p38 MAPK and JNK are the major MAPKs involved
(Fig. 2). However, in HEK293 cells expressing RXFP3, AP-1 responses to relaxin were decreased by p38MAPK or MEK inhibition but not by JNK inhibition, suggesting that p38MAPK and ERK predominated in these cells. In SN56 cells, p38MAPK, JNK or MEK inhibition were equally effective in blocking the response to relaxin, suggesting that all three kinases were equally important [35]. Thus species and cell type will affect the signalling pattern following RXFP3 activation. Specific assays of pERK1/2, p38 MAPK and pJNK activity in response to relaxin family peptides has confirmed these findings [45] although the Gαi/o-independent pathway still remains to be identified for relaxin-3 and porcine relaxin. In CHO-RXFP3 cells, relaxin activates p38MAPK and ERK1/2 with lower efficacy than relaxin-3 but the two peptides have similar efficacy for JNK1/2/3 phosphorylation. All of the MAPK responses to relaxin and relaxin-3 involved PTX-sensitive G proteins [35, 36, 45] (Fig. 2).

Signalling bias was also seen with the RXFP3 antagonist, R3(BΔ23-27)R/I5, which blocked relaxin-3 AP-1 reporter gene activation but not relaxin AP-1 activation or relaxin-3 NFκB activation [45]. R3(BΔ23-27)R/I5 also activated the serum response element (SRE) reporter but did not block either relaxin or relaxin-3 SRE activation. While R3(BΔ23-27)R/I5 blocked relaxin-3-stimulated p38MAPK and ERK1/2 phosphorylation, it was a weak partial agonist for these signalling pathways. p38MAPK activation in response to R3(BΔ23-27)R/I5 was G protein-independent. Bioluminescence resonance energy transfer (BRET) technology was used to determine interactions between RXFP3 and G proteins and confirmed that relaxin-3-activated RXFP3 interacts with Gαi2, Gαi3, GαoA and GαoB whereas relaxin or R3(BΔ23-27)R/I5 can only cause interactions with Gαi2 or GαoB (Fig. 3). Relaxin-3, but not R3(BΔ23-27)R/I5 or relaxin, promoted RXFP3/β-arrestin interactions and these were blocked by R3(BΔ23-27)R/I5 [45]. This represents strong evidence for ligand directed signalling bias at RXFP3. While signalling bias in response to relaxin in particular is easily observed in recombinant systems it is not known if this is physiologically important or if it can be observed in vivo. Certainly relaxin does not appear to be expressed in regions that also express RXFP3, although receptors located in the brainstem region may be exposed to circulating relaxin. The physiological significance or the viability of biased signalling as a potential target for pharmacological intervention remains to be established.

### Allosteric Modulation of RXFP3

Since the RXFP3 allosteric modulator 135PAM1 (Fig. 1) has only been described in receptor binding studies, and in recombinant systems expressing the promiscuous chimeric

G protein Gαq15 or in CRE reporter gene assays [33], it is not known what pattern of signalling is observed in systems that naturally express RXFP3. In addition, since 135PAM1 has poor solubility and displays probe selectivity with the C-terminal amides that are not naturally occurring, it has limited use experimentally [33].

#### Transactivation of Epidermal Growth Factor Receptors

Epidermal growth factor receptors (EGFR) are expressed endogenously in some cells [46] and can influence RXFP3 signalling [36] (Fig. 1). In RXFP3 expressing HEK cells that endogenously express EGFR, but not in CHO cells where they are absent, the EGFR inhibitor tyrphostin (AG1478) inhibited relaxin-3 ERK1/2 activation by ~40% suggesting that EGFR are transactivated by RXFP3 [36] (Fig. 2). The inhibitor of platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF) receptor autophosphorylation AG370, had no effect on ERK1/2 responses to relaxin-3 in either HEK or CHO cells expressing RXFP3 suggesting that transactivation of the PDGF receptor was not involved [36]. Both AG1478 and AG370 on their own have no effect on ERK1/2 signalling (van der Westhuizen unpublished). In addition, in SN56 cells, that naturally express RXFP3, tyrphostin AG1478 inhibited ~62% of the ERK1/2 response [36] suggesting that transactivation of tyrosine kinase receptors could play an important role in responses to relaxin-3 in some systems. It is possible that in some cells, transactivation of EGFR plays a role in ERK1/2 responses and hence in RXFP3 mediated responses in the CNS, however the physiological significance of transactivation of EGFR by RXFP3 is still unclear.

#### RXFP3 Coupling to Signalling Proteins

##### G proteins Coupling to RXFP3 When Stimulated by Human Relaxin-3

The inhibition of forskolin-stimulated cAMP accumulation in CHO-K1 or HEK293 cells stably expressing RXFP3 or in mouse SN56 cells [16, 36] by relaxin-3 is completely prevented by PTX pre-treatment (Fig. 2) which also inhibited extracellular acidification rate [44] in the cytosensor microphysiometer and ERK1/2 phosphorylation responses to relaxin-3 [47]. Although these studies suggest that RXFP3 is a Gαi/o coupled receptor, identification of the specific G proteins involved was also performed in RXFP3 expressing cells transiently transfected with PTX insensitive (C351I mutation) variants of proteins, that were subsequently treated with PTX (to remove the influence of endogenous Gαi/o proteins) and then examined for recovery of function. Gαi2 was the major G protein involved in the
Fig. 3 Detection of RXFP3-G protein interactions following treatment with the cognate agonist relaxin-3 and the biased ligands relaxin or R3(BΔ23–27)R/I5.

Examination by BRET of interactions between RXFP3-Rluc8, Gγ2-Venus, Gβ1 and one of the Gα subunits (Gαi2, Gαi3, GαoA, GαoB, Gαs, Gαq) co-transfected into Flp-In CHO cells showed that relaxin-3 (1 μM) induced interactions between RXFP3 and Gαi2, Gαi3, GαoA or GαoB (a–d) whereas relaxin (1 μM) or R3(BΔ23–27)R/I5 (1 μM) induced interactions only between RXFP3 and Gαi2 or GαoB proteins and produced a smaller signal compared with relaxin-3 (a, d). BRET interaction only occurs when receptor and G-protein subunits are within 10 nm (f)

inhibition of cAMP accumulation in CHO, whereas in HEK293 cells, Gαi3, GαoB and GαoA were all involved [47]. More recent BRET studies confirm ligand-induced interactions between RXFP3-Rluc8 and G proteins (Gγ2-Venus) in CHO cells where treatment with relaxin-3 caused activation of Gαi2, GαoA and GαoB, but also revealed an interaction between RXFP3 and Gαi3 [45] (Fig. 3). Thus RXFP3 has the potential to couple to Gαi2, Gαi3, GαoA and GαoB following activation by relaxin-3, but the receptor preferentially couples to discrete subsets of these G proteins dependent on cell type.

G protein Coupling to RXFP3 Following Stimulation with the Biased Ligands Relaxin and R3(BΔ23-27)R/I5

Not only did the biased ligands relaxin and R3(BΔ23-27)R/ I5 produce different signalling patterns but both showed a distinct pattern of G protein coupling when examined by BRET [45]. Whereas relaxin-3 promoted coupling to GαoA, GαoB, Gαi2 and Gαi3 the biased ligands could only promote weak coupling of RXFP3 to Gαi2 or GαoB [45] (Fig. 3).

Interactions Between RXFP3 and β-Arrestins

Relaxin-3 but not relaxin or the RXFP3 antagonist R3(BΔ23-27)R/I5 promoted interactions between RXFP3 and β-arrestins, as measured by real-time kinetic BRET between RXFP3-Rluc8 and a β-arrestin fusion protein (β-arrestin 1-Venus or β-arrestin 2-Venus) (Fig. 4). R3(BΔ23-27)R/I5 blocked relaxin-3 stimulated recruitment of β-arrestin 1 and β-arrestin 2 to RXFP3 [45]. However, treatment with PTX to block Gαi/o proteins only partially blocked β-arrestin recruitment, indicating that RXFP3 recruits β-arrestins both by G-protein-dependent and -independent pathways (Fig. 4). To determine whether β-

Fig. 4 RXFP3 receptors interact with β-arrestins and undergo internalisation following stimulation with the cognate ligand relaxin-3 but not with the biased ligands relaxin or R3(BΔ23–27)R/I5. The microscopy shows HEK293 cells transfected with GFP2-labelled RXFP3 receptors. Unstimulated cells or cells incubated with vehicle show RXFP3 receptors localised to the plasma membrane (a, b). Exposure of cells to relaxin-3 but not relaxin causes internalisation of RXFP3 receptors (c, d). Scale bar 10 μM. Examination of interactions between RXFP3-Rluc8 and the β-arrestin fusion proteins (β-arrestin 1-Venus or β-arrestin 2-Venus) co-transfected into Flp-In CHO cells using BRET showed that interactions occurred between RXFP3 and both β-arrestins following treatment with relaxin-3 (1 μM) but not relaxin (1 μM) or R3(BΔ23–27)R/I5 (1 μM). The interactions were partially blocked by pre-treatment with PTX suggesting that RXFP3/β-arrestin interactions utilise both Gi/o-dependent and G protein-independent mechanisms (e, f). BRET interaction only occurs when receptor and β-arrestins are within 10 nm (g)

bias between relaxin and relaxin-3. The detailed mechanisms involved in RXFP3 internalisation, phosphorylation and recycling/degradation in response to relaxin-3 all remain to be determined.

### Conclusions

There has been significant progress in the last few years in understanding the biological roles of the relaxin-3-RXFP3 system in stress [6], memory and appetite regulation [14, 18, 19], although the signalling pathways associated with these functions are less clear. The development of tool compounds that are selective agonists and antagonists based on the relaxin-3 peptide structure has been successful and there are now also potent single chain peptide

antagonists. This has allowed progress to be made in identifying the signalling pathways activated by RXFP3 and how the receptor is regulated. However it is likely that further progress with drugs that target RXFP3 will require the development of small molecule ligands. To date this has resulted in the identification of a PAM that displays probe selectivity but does indicate the presence of an allosteric site on the receptor that could potentially be exploited.

Acknowledgments RJS is supported by National Health and Medical Research Council of Australia Program Grant 1055134.

**References**

1. Wilkinson TN, Speed TP, Tregear GW, Bathgate RA (2005) Evolution of the relaxin-like peptide family. BMC Evol Biol 5:14
2. Yegorov S, Good-Avila SV, Parry L, Wilson BC (2009) Relaxin family genes in humans and teleosts. Ann N Y Acad Sci 1160:42–44
3. Wilkinson TN, Speed TP, Tregear GW, Bathgate RA (2005) Coevolution of the relaxin-like peptides and their receptors. Ann N Y Acad Sci 1041:534–539
4. Bathgate RA, Samuel CS, Burazin TC, Layfield S, Claasz AA, Reytomas IG, Dawson NF, Zhao C, Bond CP, Summers RJ, Parry LJ, Wade JD, Tregear GW (2002) Human relaxin gene 3 (H3) and the equivalent mouse relaxin (M3) gene. Novel members of the relaxin peptide family. J Biol Chem 277:1148–1157
5. Tanaka M, Iijima N, Miyamoto Y, Fukusumi S, Itoh Y, Ozawa H, Ibata Y (2005) Neurons expressing relaxin 3/INSL 7 in the nucleus incertus respond to stress. Eur J Neurosci 21:1659–1670
6. Banerjee A, Shen PJ, Ma S, Bathgate RA, Gundlach AL (2010) Swim stress excitation of nucleus incertus and rapid induction of relaxin-3 expression via CRF1 activation. Neuropharmacology 58:145–155
7. Ma S, Bonaventure P, Ferraro T, Shen PJ, Burazin TC, Bathgate RA, Liu C, Tregear GW, Sutton SW, Gundlach AL (2007) Relaxin-3 in GABA projection neurons of nucleus incertus suggests widespread influence on forebrain circuits via G-protein-coupled receptor-135 in the rat. Neuroscience 144:165–190
8. McGowan BM, Stanley SA, Smith KL, White NE, Connolly MM, Thompson EL, Gardiner JV, Murphy KG, Ghatei MA, Bloom SR (2005) Central relaxin-3 administration causes hyperphagia in male Wistar rats. Endocrinology 146:3295–3300
9. Ganella DE, Callander GE, Ma S, Bye CR, Gundlach AL, Bathgate RA (2013) Modulation of feeding by chronic rAAV expression of a relaxin-3 peptide agonist in rat hypothalamus. Gene Ther 20:703–716
10. Ganella DE, Ma S, Gundlach AL (2013) Relaxin-3/RXFP3 signaling and neuroendocrine function—a perspective on extrinsic hypothalamic control. Front Endocrinol 4:128
11. Ryan PJ, Buchler E, Shabanpoor F, Hossain MA, Wade JD, Lawrence AJ, Gundlach AL (2013) Central relaxin-3 receptor (RXFP3) activation decreases anxiety-and depressive-like behaviours in the rat. Behav Brain Res 244:142–151
12. Ryan PJ, Kastman HE, Krstew EV, Rosengren KJ, Hossain MA, Churilov L, Wade JD, Gundlach AL, Lawrence AJ (2013) Relaxin-3/RXFP3 system regulates alcohol-seeking. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 110:20789–20794
13. Smith CM, Chua BE, Zhang C, Walker AW, Haidar M, Hawkes D, Shabanpoor F, Hossain MA, Wade JD, Rosengren KJ, Gundlach AL (2014) Central injection of relaxin-3 receptor

(RXFP3) antagonist peptides reduces motivated food seeking and consumption in C57BL/6J mice. Behav Brain Res 268:117–126
14. Halls ML, Bathgate RA, Sutton SW, Dschietzig TB, Summers RJ (2015) International Union of Basic and Clinical Pharmacology. XCV. Recent advances in the understanding of the pharmacology and biological roles of relaxin family peptide receptors 1–4, the receptors for relaxin family peptides. Pharmacol Rev 67:389–440
15. Liu C, Chen J, Sutton S, Roland B, Kuei C, Farmer N, Sillard R, Lovenberg TW (2003) Identification of relaxin-3/INSL 7 as a ligand for GPCR142. J Biol Chem 278:50765–50770
16. Liu C, Eriste E, Sutton S, Chen J, Roland B, Kuei C, Farmer N, Jornvall H, Sillard R, Lovenberg TW (2003) Identification of relaxin-3/INSL 7 as an endogenous ligand for the orphan G-protein-coupled receptor GPCR135. J Biol Chem 278:50754–50764
17. Matsumoto M, Kamohara M, Sugimoto T, Hidaka K, Takasaki J, Saito T, Okada M, Yamaguchi T, Furuichi K (2000) The novel G-protein coupled receptor SALPR shares sequence similarity with somatostatin and angiotensin receptors. Gene 248:183–189
18. Bathgate RA, Halls ML, van der Westhuizen ET, Callander GE, Kocan M, Summers RJ (2013) Relaxin family peptides and their receptors. Physiol Rev 93:405–480
19. Kuei C, Sutton S, Bonaventure P, Pudiak C, Shelton J, Zhu J, Nepomuceno D, Wu J, Chen J, Kamme F, Seierstad M, Hack MD, Bathgate RA, Hossain MA, Wade JD, Atack J, Lovenberg TW, Liu C (2007) R3(BDelta23 27)R/I5 chimeric peptide, a selective antagonist for GPCR135 and GPCR142 over relaxin receptor LGR7: in vitro and in vivo characterization. J Biol Chem 282:25425–25435
20. Hossain MA, Rosengren KJ, Haugaard-Jonsson LM, Zhang S, Layfield S, Ferraro T, Daly NL, Tregear GW, Wade JD, Bathgate RA (2008) The A-chain of human relaxin family peptides has distinct roles in the binding and activation of the different relaxin family peptide receptors. J Biol Chem 283:17287–17297
21. Bathgate RA, Oh MH, Ling WJ, Kaas Q, Hossain MA, Gooley PR, Rosengren KJ (2013) Elucidation of relaxin-3 binding interactions in the extracellular loops of RXFP3. Front Endocrinol 4:13
22. Rosengren KJ, Zhang S, Lin F, Daly NL, Scott DJ, Hughes RA, Bathgate RA, Craik DJ, Wade JD (2006) Solution structure and characterization of the LGR8 receptor binding surface of insulin-like peptide 3. J Biol Chem 281:28287–28295
23. Wu B, Chien EY, Mol CD, Fenalti G, Liu W, Katritch V, Abagyan R, Brooun A, Wells P, Bi FC, Hamel DJ, Kuhn P, Handel TM, Cherezov V, Stevens RC (2010) Structures of the CXCR4 chemokine GPCR with small-molecule and cyclic peptide antagonists. Science 330:1066–1071
24. Grosse J, Heffron H, Burling K, Akhter Hossain M, Habib AM, Rogers GJ, Richards P, Larder R, Rimmington D, Adriaenssens AA, Parton L, Powell J, Binda M, Colledge WH, Doran J, Toyoda Y, Wade JD, Aparicio S, Carlton MB, Coll AP, Reimann F, O’Rahilly S, Gribble FM (2014) Insulin-like peptide 5 is an orexigenic gastrointestinal hormone. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 111:11133–11138
25. Zhu J, Kuei C, Sutton S, Kamme F, Yu J, Bonaventure P, Atack J, Lovenberg TW, Liu C (2008) Identification of the domains in RXFP4 (GPCR142) responsible for the high affinity binding and agonistic activity of INSL5 at RXFP4 compared to RXFP3 (GPCR135). Eur J Pharmacol 590:43–52
26. Rosengren KJ, Lin F, Bathgate RA, Tregear GW, Daly NL, Wade JD, Craik DJ (2006) Solution structure and novel insights into the determinants of the receptor specificity of human relaxin-3. J Biol Chem 281:5845–5851
27. Liu C, Chen J, Kuei C, Sutton S, Nepomuceno D, Bonaventure P, Lovenberg TW (2005) Relaxin-3/insulin-like peptide 5 chimeric peptide, a selective ligand for G protein-coupled receptor

(GPCR) 135 and GPCR 142 over leucine-rich repeat-containing G
protein-coupled receptor 7. Mol Pharmacol 67:231–240
28. Shabanpoor F, Akhter Hossain M, Ryan PJ, Belgi A, Layfield S,
Kocan M, Zhang S, Samuel CS, Gundlach AL, Bathgate RA,
Separovic F, Wade JD (2012) Minimization of human relaxin-3
leading to high-affinity analogues with increased selectivity for
relaxin-family peptide 3 receptor (RXFP3) over RXFP1. J Med
Chem 55:1671–1681
29. Haugaard-Kedstrom LM, Shabanpoor F, Hossain MA, Clark RJ,
Ryan PJ, Craik DJ, Gundlach AL, Wade JD, Bathgate RA,
Rosengren KJ (2011) Design, synthesis, and characterization of a
single-chain peptide antagonist for the relaxin-3 receptor RXFP3.
J Am Chem Soc 133:4965–4974
30. Baker JG, Hill SJ (2007) Multiple GPCR conformations and
signalling pathways: implications for antagonist affinity esti-
mates. Trends Pharmacol Sci 28:374–381
31. Kenakin T, Miller LJ (2010) Seven transmembrane receptors as
shapeshifting proteins: the impact of allosteric modulation and
functional selectivity on new drug discovery. Pharmacol Rev
62:265–304
32. Evans BA, Sato M, Sarwar M, Hutchinson DS, Summers RJ
(2010) Ligand-directed signalling at beta-adrenoceptors. Br J
Pharmacol 159:1022–1038
33. Alvarez-Jaimes L, Sutton SW, Nepomuceno D, Motley ST, Cik
M, Stocking E, Shoblock J, Bonaventure P (2012) In vitro
pharmacological characterization of RXFP3 allosterism: an
example of probe dependency. PLoS One 7:e30792
34. Hossain MA, Bathgate RA, Rosengren KJ, Shabanpoor F, Zhang
S, Lin F, Tregear GW, Wade JD (2009) The structural and
functional role of the B-chain C-terminal arginine in the relaxin-3
peptide antagonist, R3(BDelta23-27)R/I5. Chem Biol Drug Des
73:46–52
35. van der Westhuizen ET, Christopoulos A, Sexton PM, Wade JD,
Summers RJ (2010) H2 relaxin is a biased ligand relative to H3
relaxin at the relaxin family peptide receptor 3 (RXFP3). Mol
Pharmacol 77:759–772
36. van der Westhuizen ET, Werry TD, Sexton PM, Summers RJ
(2007) The Relaxin Family Peptide Receptor 3 (RXFP3) activates
ERK1/2 through a PKC dependent mechanism. Mol Pharmacol
71:1618–1629
37. Morikawa Y, Ueyama E, Senba E (2004) Fasting-induced acti-
vation of mitogen-activated protein kinases (ERK/p38) in the
mouse hypothalamus. J Neuroendocrinol 16:105–112

38. Shen CP, Tsimberg Y, Salvadore C, Meller E (2004) Activation
of Erk and JNK MAPK pathways by acute swim stress in rat
brain regions. BMC Neurosci 5:36
39. Sasaguri K, Kikuchi M, Hori N, Yuyama N, Onozuka M, Sato S
(2005) Suppression of stress immobilization-induced phospho-
rylation of ERK 1/2 by biting in the rat hypothalamic paraven-
tricular nucleus. Neurosci Lett 383:160–164
40. Roux PP, Blenis J (2004) ERK and p38MAPK-activated protein
kinases: a family of protein kinases with diverse biological
functions. Microbiol Mol Biol Rev 68:320–344
41. Davis RJ (2000) Signal transduction by the JNK group of MAP
kinases. Cell 103:239–252
42. Price MA, Cruzalegui FH, Treisman R (1996) The p38 and ERK
MAP kinase pathways cooperate to activate ternary complex
factors and c-fos transcription in response to UV light. EMBO J
15:6552–6563
43. Whitmarsh AJ, Davis RJ (1996) Transcription factor AP-1 reg-
ulation by mitogen-activated protein kinase signal transduction
pathways. J Mol Med 74:589–607
44. Van Der Westhuizen E, Sexton PM, Bathgate RA, Summers RJ
(2005) Responses of GPCR135 to human gene 3 (H3) relaxin in
CHO-K1 cells determined by microphysiometry. Ann N Y Acad
Sci 1041:332–337
45. Kocan M, Sarwar M, Hossain MA, Wade JD, Summers RJ (2014)
Signalling profiles of H3 relaxin, H2 relaxin and R3(BDelta23-
27)R/I5 acting at the relaxin family peptide receptor 3 (RXFP3).
Br J Pharmacol 171:2827–2841
46. Shi L, Shi SQ, Saade GR, Chwalisz K, Garfield RE (2000)
Studies of cervical ripening in pregnant rats: effects of various
treatments. Mol Hum Reprod 6:382–389
47. Van der Westhuizen ET (2008) Molecular characterisation of
human and mouse relaxin-3 receptors (RXFP3) in recombinant
and endogenously expressing cell lines. PhD Thesis, Monash
University, Melbourne
48. Luttrell LM, Gesty-Palmer D (2010) Beyond desensitization:
physiological relevance of arrestin-dependent signaling. Phar-
macol Rev 62:305–330
49. Cottrell GS, Padilla BE, Amadesi S, Poole DP, Murphy JE, Hardt
M, Roosterman D, Steinhoff M, Bunnett NW (2009) Endosomal
endothelin-converting enzyme-1: a regulator of beta-arrestin-de-
pendent ERK signaling. J Biol Chem 284:22411–22425
