
Journal of Invertebrate Pathology 132 (2015) 86–100

**Contents lists available at ScienceDirect**

**Journal of Invertebrate Pathology**

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jip

---

**Peptidoglycan recognition protein genes and their roles in the innate immune pathways of the red flour beetle, Tribolium castaneum**

Hiroaki Koyama¹, Daiki Kato, Chieka Minakuchi, Toshiharu Tanaka, Kakeru Yokoi, Ken Miura*

Applied Entomology Laboratory, Graduate School of Bioagricultural Sciences, Nagoya University, Furo-cho, Chikusa, Nagoya 464-8601, Japan

---

**ARTICLE INFO**

Article history:

Received 21 March 2015  
Revised 11 August 2015  
Accepted 15 September 2015  
Available online 16 September 2015  

Keywords:  
Tribolium castaneum  
Innate immunity  
Peptidoglycan recognition protein genes  
RNA interference  

---

**ABSTRACT**

We have previously demonstrated that the functional Toll and IMD innate immune pathways indeed exist in the model beetle, *Tribolium castaneum* while the beetle's pathways have broader specificity in terms of microbial activation than that of *Drosophila*. To elucidate the molecular basis of this broad microbial activation, we here focused on potential upstream sensors of the *T. castaneum* innate immune pathways, peptidoglycan recognition proteins (PGRPs). Our phenotype analyses utilizing RNA interference-based comprehensive gene knockdown followed by bacterial challenge suggested: PGRP-LA functions as a pivotal sensor of the IMD pathway for both Gram-negative and Gram-positive bacteria; PGRP-LC acts as an IMD pathway-associated sensor mainly for Gram-negative bacteria; PGRP-LE also has some roles in Gram-negative bacterial recognition of the IMD pathway. On the other hand, we did not obtain clear phenotype changes by gene knockdown of short-type PGRP genes, probably because of highly inducible nature of these genes. Our results may collectively account for the promiscuous bacterial activation of the *T. castaneum* innate immune pathways at least in part.

© 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

---

**1. Introduction**

One of the hallmarks of insect innate immune response is a massive synthesis of antimicrobial peptides (AMPs) by the fat body, which is functionally homologous to mammalian liver, and the AMPs are secreted into the blood at high concentrations, where they kill invading microbes ([Hultmark, 2003](http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jip.2015.09.003); [Lemaitre and Hoffmann, 2007](http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jip.2015.09.003)). In *Drosophila melanogaster*, this systemic response has been well-established to be mediated by two distinct, NF-κB transcription factor-dependent signaling pathways, namely the Toll and IMD pathways ([Kleino and Silverman, 2014](http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jip.2015.09.003); [Lemaitre and Hoffmann, 2007](http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jip.2015.09.003); [Valanne et al., 2011](http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jip.2015.09.003)). Pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs), for example peptidoglycans, are recognized by a pathway-specific set of pattern-recognition receptors known as peptidoglycan recognition proteins (PGRP) ([Dziarski and Gupta, 2006](http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jip.2015.09.003); [Royet et al., 2011](http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jip.2015.09.003); [Werner et al., 2000](http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jip.2015.09.003)).

PGRPs, which function as a sensor, signal transducer and effector molecule in immune systems, are characterized by the occurrence of at least one PGRP domain that is structurally related to bacteriophage and bacterial type 2 amidases ([Dziarski and Gupta, 2006](http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jip.2015.09.003); [Royet et al., 2011](http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jip.2015.09.003)). PGRP genes are generally classified based on the length of corresponding mRNA into either PGRP-L (long-type) or PGRP-S (short-type) class, rather than on the polypeptide length, and *Drosophila* thereby has six PGRP-L class genes and seven PGRP-S class genes, which generate more protein variants through alternative splicing ([Werner et al., 2000](http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jip.2015.09.003)). Lys-type peptidoglycan found in most Gram-positive bacteria is detected in circulation primarily by PGRP-SA associated with another class protein, Gram-negative binding protein 1 (GNBP1) named so by mistake, as well as by PGRP-SD ([Bischoff et al., 2004](http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jip.2015.09.003); [Gobert et al., 2003](http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jip.2015.09.003); [Wang et al., 2006](http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jip.2015.09.003)), while fungal β-glucan is sensed by GNBP3 ([Gottar et al., 2006](http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jip.2015.09.003)). Recognition of Gram-positive Lys-type peptidoglycan as well as fungal β-glucan by these soluble receptor complexes activates the Toll pathway, ultimately regulating the expression of its target genes ([De Gregorio et al., 2002](http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jip.2015.09.003)). Meanwhile, meso-diaminopimelic acid (DAP)-type peptidoglycan associated with Gram-negative bacteria and Gram-positive bacilli is preferentially recognized by a membrane-bound receptor

---

* Abbreviations: PGRP, peptidoglycan recognition protein; AMP, antimicrobial peptide; PAMP, pathogen-associated molecular patterns; GNBP, Gram-negative binding protein; DAP, meso-diaminopimelic acid; qRT-PCR, real-time quantitative RT-PCR; Att1, attacin1; Att2, attacin2; Att3, attacin3; Cec2, cecropin2; Cec3, cecropin3; Col1, coleoptericin1; Def1, defensin1; Def2, defensin2; Def3, defensin3; RPL32, ribosomal protein L32; RNAi, RNA interference; dsRNA, double strand RNA; malE, maltose binding protein E; RHIM, receptor-interacting protein homeotypic interaction motif.
* Corresponding author.
    * E-mail address: [k-miura@agr.nagoya-u.ac.jp](mailto:k-miura@agr.nagoya-u.ac.jp) (K. Miura).
* Present address: Group of Fungicide, Field Research Department, Research & Development Division, Nippon Soda Co., Ltd., 62-1 Sakabe, Makinohara 421-0412, Japan.

[http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jip.2015.09.003](http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jip.2015.09.003)

0022-2011/© 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PGRP-LC, which leads to the activation of the IMD pathway and its target genes (Choe et al., 2005, 2002; De Gregorio et al., 2002; Kleino and Silverman, 2014). In addition, PGRP-LE has been shown to be involved in DAP-type peptidoglycan recognition. The full-length version senses intracellular occurrence of monomeric peptidoglycan, and the truncated, extracellular version enhances the detection of polymeric peptidoglycan by PGRP-LC (Kaneko et al., 2006; Yano et al., 2008). Whilst these ‘sensor’ PGRPs have lost enzymatic activities, some other PGRPs such as PGRP-SC1 and PGRP-LB retain N-acetylmuramoyl-L-alanine amidase activities, thereby supposed to function as scavengers to prevent excessive immune responses (Kim et al., 2003; Mellroth et al., 2003).

PGRP was first identified and purified from the hemolymph of silkworm Bombyx mori as a sensor protein upstream of the prophenoloxidase activating cascade (Yoshida et al., 1996). This discovery eventually led to the identification and characterization of *Drosophila* PGRP genes (Werner et al., 2000) as well as to the flowering of studies on the *Drosophila* Toll and IMD pathways mentioned above, whereas the functions of PGRPs in non-*Drosophila* insects innate immune pathways have not yet been fully defined partly because the two immune pathways have yet to be characterized clearly in non-*Drosophila* insect systems. In the meantime, Lee and his coworkers, mainly by utilizing reconstitution systems of coleopteran *Tenebrio molitor* immune-related components, have demonstrated the possible mechanisms for extracellular microbial recognition by short-type PGRPs, which is followed by the activation of both the Toll ligand spätzle and prophenoloxidase (Kan et al., 2008; Kim et al., 2008; Park et al., 2007). They have also reported that the Toll signaling activation occurs in *T. molitor* by both Lys-type and DAP-type peptidoglycan (Yu et al., 2010). Contrastingly, the IMD pathway in *T. molitor* has not yet been defined clearly.

The information on roles of PGRP in the Toll or IMD pathway activation in non-*Drosophila* insect species is in this way relatively scarce, but such knowledge is indeed needed from the viewpoints of comparative immunology as well as insect control. In recent years, RNA interference (RNAi)-based technologies for controlling herbivorous insect pests by using transgenic plants expressing double strand RNA (dsRNA) as well as auxiliary factors have seemed to become promising (Baum et al., 2007; Mao et al., 2007, 2013). In this context, therefore, well-characterized immune-related insect genes might provide good targets for such approaches in conjunction with the use of entomopathogenic microbes. The model beetle *Tribolium castaneum* is a serious, world-wide pest damaging grain and stored food (Campbell et al., 2010). The immunity-related genes of *T. castaneum* have been annotated (Zou et al., 2007), and its RNAi-friendly nature provides an excellent system to study the function of genes of interest (Tomoyasu et al., 2008). In a previous paper, we have characterized all the nine of AMP genes in the genome of *T. castaneum* and classified them into IMD-dependent group I, Toll-dependent group III and co-dependent group II besides non-inducible group IV by employing microbial challenge combined with knockdown of the intracellular adaptor protein gene representative of either the Toll or IMD pathway (Yokoi et al., 2012b). In addition to the microbial activation, some *Tribolium* AMP genes are reportedly induced by environmental stress, such as starvation, while some of its stress-related genes are up-regulated conversely by immune challenge (Altincicek et al., 2008; Freitak et al., 2012). We have subsequently demonstrated that the linkage of NF-κB transcription factor classes, namely Dif and Rel, to the Toll and IMD pathways found in *Drosophila* holds true as well in *T. castaneum*, and that potential Dif- and Rel-response elements occur in promoter regions of Toll- and Rel-target AMP genes, respectively (Yokoi et al., 2012a). In these studies, we have noted that the two

immune pathways of the beetle are concomitantly activated by all the microbial species that we used and that this promiscuous activation may represent one of distinctive features of the *Tribolium* innate immune pathways when compared to those in *Drosophila*. The promiscuous activation might be mediated through promiscuous pathogen recognition by upstream sensing modules of the *T. castaneum* Toll and IMD pathways. According to the annotation work (Zou et al., 2007), *T. castaneum* has five long-type and two short-type PGRP genes in the genome. Here, we focused on *T. castaneum* PGRP genes and examined the respective knockdown phenotypes in terms of the bacterial activation of the innate immune pathways.

## 2. Materials and methods

### 2.1. Insect rearing

*T. castaneum* was reared in whole wheat flour in the dark at 30 °C, and staged pupae prepared as in a previous paper (Yokoi et al., 2012b).

### 2.2. Bacteria and injection into insects

Escherichia coli DH5α (Gram-negative), Micrococcus luteus ATCC4698 (Gram-positive), Enterobacter cloacae (Gram-negative) and Bacillus subtilis (a Gram-positive bacillus bearing DAP-type peptidoglycan) were used in this study. Suspensions of heat-killed *E. coli* and *M. luteus* as well as those of live *E. cloacae* and *B. subtilis* were prepared as described in Yokoi et al. (2012a). Fifty nanoliters of heat-killed *E. coli* or *M. luteus* suspensions were injected into wild-type or dsRNA-treated day 3 pupae using a Nanoject II (Drummond Scientific Company) to evoke immune responses. Suspensions of live *E. cloacae* and *B. subtilis* were injected in a similar fashion, and the following survival assays performed (see Section 2.6). *E. cloacae* and *B. subtilis* are the generous gifts from Dr. Y. Yagi of Nagoya University. *M. luteus* ATCC4698 was provided by RIKEN Bioresource Center in Japan.

### 2.3. Sequences of genes and primers

The following *T. castaneum* gene sequences were retrieved from the Beetlebase ([http://www.beetlebase.org](http://www.beetlebase.org)) and utilized in this study: PGRP-LA (GLEAN_02789); PGRP-LB (GLEAN_15689); PGRP-LC (GLEAN_02790); PGRP-LD (GLEAN_02546); PGRP-LE (GLEAN_10508); PGRP-SA (GLEAN_10611); PGRP-SB (GLEAN_13620). The sequences of primer pairs used for real-time quantitative RT-PCR (qRT-PCR) of PGRP genes are listed in Table 1. The primer sequences for the following genes can be found in Yokoi et al. (2012b): Attacin1 (Att1) (GLEAN_07737); Attacin2 (Att2) (GLEAN_07738); Attacin3 (Att3) (GLEAN_07739); Cecropin2 (Cec2) (GLEAN_00499); Cecropin3 (Cec3) (GLEAN_00500); Coleoptericin1 (Col1) (GLEAN_05093); Defensin1 (Def1) (GLEAN_06250); Defensin2 (Def2) (GLEAN_10517); Defensin3 (Def3) (GLEAN_12469); a normalizer gene for qRT-PCR analyses, ribosomal protein L32 (RPL32) (GLEAN_06106).

### 2.4. RNA extraction and qRT-PCR

Total RNA was extracted from the whole body of *T. castaneum* using TRIZOL reagent (Invitrogen). Spectrophotometric scanning of RNA preparations showed that the ratios of A260/A280 and A260/A230 were always above 1.7 and 2.0, respectively. Since only a portion of primer pairs used for the qRT-PCR analyses, namely those of Att1, Att3, Cec2, Def3 and RPL32, span exon-intron boundaries, we used a PrimeScript RT Reagent Kit with gDNA Eraser

Table 1  
Sequences of primer pairs used for qRT-PCR.

| Target gene | Forward primer sequence (5′-3′) | Reverse primer sequence (5′-3′) |
|-------------|-------------------------------|----------------------------------|
| PGRP-LA     | TGCCACCTTAAACTTCTCTAAAC       | GACTGCACCCTTTTGCGAACAT          |
| PGRP-LB     | CCACCGAGCCAATGGCCAAT          | TTGGTGCAATCTTGGCATGGTTT         |
| PGRP-LC     | AGGAAGGCCGGGGGATGGAAA         | GTTGTTTGCAAGCCGTTATCTG          |
| PGRP-LD     | GAAAGCACCGACTTTAGACAA         | TCCCCAGACCGCGGTATTTAA           |
| PGRP-LE     | GAGTTGATTCGGTATGGAGTCA        | TTCCCAACTCTTGATTTCTTCAA         |
| PGRP-SA     | GGAAAGTGATTACGCCCTAAT         | CATGTGAAAATTCTGAATGTTTCG        |
| PGRP-SB     | GTGCCCAAGAAGGGAAATTATGT       | GCGCGCGGTGGCGTCAAAA             |

(TAKARA) that can effectively degrade contaminating genomic DNA prior to the first strand cDNA synthesis. One microgram of total RNA was used for reverse transcription, and an aliquot of the first strand cDNA (typically equivalent to 1/80) subjected to qRT-PCR analyses using a SYBR Premix Ex Taq Perfect Real Time Kit Tli RNaseH Plus (TAKARA) and a Thermal Cycler Dice Real Time System (Model TP800, TAKARA). The homogeneity of qRT-PCR products was confirmed by dissociation analyses. The threshold cycle numbers of the normalizer RPL32 determined by the second derivatives of its primary amplification curves were well consistent between experiments. For detailed PCR conditions, see our previous paper (Yokoi et al., 2012b).

### 2.5. RNAi

Gene knockdown via RNAi was performed as previously reported (Yokoi et al., 2012a,b). In brief, T7 RNA polymerase promoter sequence-tagged cDNA produced by conventional PCR was used as a template for dsRNA synthesis with a MEGAscript RNAi Kit (Ambion). One hundred nanograms of dsRNA for each target were injected into day 0 pupae, either singly or in combination, using a Nanoject II. Seventy-two hours later, the pupae were examined in terms of knockdown efficiency or further challenged with bacteria. dsRNA with a partial maltose binding protein E (malE) sequence served as a negative control. The sequences of primer pairs used for the preparation of T7 RNA polymerase promoter sequence (5′-TAATACGACTCACTATAGGG-3′)-tagged cDNA are presented in Table 2. The sequences of primers for the malE cDNA template preparation appear in Yokoi et al. (2012b).

### 2.6. Survival assay

Day 0 pupae underwent dsRNA injection as in Section 2.5. Seventy-two hours later, the pupae were challenged with live *E. cloacae* (50 nl, A~600~ = 0.1) or *B. subtilis* (50 nl, A~600~ = 2.0), and the survival of pupae thereafter observed every 24 h. Data were presented in Kaplan-Meier plots, and *P*-values calculated by Gehan-Breslow-Wilcoxon test using a commercial software package (Ekuseru-Toukei 2010 ver. 1.13, Social Survey Research Information Co. Ltd).

### 2.7. Protein sequence analyses

Conserved domains and motifs searches were performed using WWW severs of the CD (conserved domain) -search ([http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Structure/cdd/wrpsb.cgi](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Structure/cdd/wrpsb.cgi)) and the PSORT II prediction program ([http://psort.hgc.jp/form2.html](http://psort.hgc.jp/form2.html)). Amino acid sequence alignment was done using the CLUSTAL W algorithm (Thompson et al., 1994).

---

### 3. Results

#### 3.1. Induction profiles of PGRP genes by bacterial challenge

In addition to the robust induction typical of AMP genes, expression levels of some other immune-related genes are also influenced by microbial challenge in both *D. melanogaster* and *T. castaneum* (Altincicek et al., 2013; De Gregorio et al., 2002; Zou et al., 2007). Thus, we first examined the changes of mRNA abundance of all the seven *T. castaneum* PGRP genes after the challenge of *E. coli* or *M. luteus* (Fig. 1). The mRNA levels of *PGRP-LA* significantly increased up to three-fold over the untreated or PBS-injected control by 6 h post bacterial challenges, and the elevated levels still persisted at 24 h (Fig. 1A). The basal expression levels of *PGRP-LB* were much less than those of the other PGRPs, and its bacterial induction did not show a clear tendency (Fig. 1B). *PGRP-LC* showed similar induction profiles to those of *PGRP-LA* whereas the bacterial induction seemed to cease more rapidly (Fig. 1C). The regulation of *PGRP-LD* appeared to be in the reverse direction. The mRNA levels decreased by half at 6 h post bacterial challenge and returned to the control levels by 24 h (Fig. 1D). As to *PGRP-LE*, the mRNA levels were not affected by bacterial challenge at 6 h while at 24 h there seemed to be some induction (Fig. 1E). Importantly, short-types *PGRP-SA* and *PGRP-SB* showed a distinct behavior that resembled those of the IMD pathway-dependent group I AMP genes of *T. castaneum* (Yokoi et al., 2012a,b). The bacterial induction of these two genes was robust and acute, and higher levels than the controls persisted at 24 h post bacterial challenge (Fig. 1F and G). For the induction of both *PGRP-SA* and *PGRP-SB*, *E. coli* was more potent than *M. luteus*. Similarly, both non-catalytic *PGRP-SA* and catalytic *PGRP-SC2* of another beetle species *T. molitor* have been reported to accumulate in the hemolymph after the treatment with Lys-type and DAP-type peptidoglycan (Yu et al., 2010).

#### 3.2. Efficiency of PGRP gene knockdown

In this study, we conducted comprehensive knockdown of PGRP genes, from single to triple knockdown. We first tested whether or not effective gene knockdown occurred in respective combinations of target PGRP genes. The results of single knockdown are presented in Fig. 2A. Most PGRP genes were knocked down effectively, ranging from 82% (*PGRP-LA*) to 56% (*PGRP-LD*) reduction in the mRNA amount whereas the efficiency was lower for *PGRP-LB* (41% reduction). Then, double knockdown was performed in all possible combinations among either the long-types or short-types. In these double knockdown, respective genes exhibited similar tendencies to the cases of single knockdown, and average percent reduction values observed were as follows: around 86% reduction for *PGRP-LA* (Fig. 2B); 17% reduction for *PGRP-LB* (Fig. 2C); 70% reduction for *PGRP-LC* (Fig. 2D); 63% reduction for *PGRP-LD* (Fig. 2E); 74% reduction for *PGRP-LE* (Fig. 2F); 71% reduction for *PGRP-SA* (Fig. 2G); 75% reduction for *PGRP-SB* (Fig. 2G). Triple knockdown of *PGRP-LA*, *PGRP-LC* and *PGRP-LE* were also conducted, and the reduction levels of respective mRNA were around 81%, 73% and 72% (Fig. 2H). All PGRP genes but *PGRP-LB* were thus effectively knocked down, and the reduction level of each gene was well-consistent between single and combined knockdown. As to *PGRP-LB*, however, the basal expression level was considerably lower than those of the other PGRP genes, and RNAi did not work well for this gene. Therefore, we decided to pass over *PGRP-LB* in the following experiments while we do not exclude the possibility that some allele-specific sequence variations might cause an inaccurate determination of the *PGRP-LB* mRNA levels.

H. Koyama et al./Journal of Invertebrate Pathology 132 (2015) 86–100

Table 2  
Sequences of primer pairs used for T7 RNA polymerase promoter tagged cDNA synthesis.

| Target gene | Forward primer sequence (5′-3′) | Reverse primer sequence (5′-3′) |
|-------------|----------------------------------|----------------------------------|
| PGRP-LA     | TAATACGACTCACTATAGGGGCTAG        | TAATACGACTCACTATAGGGGTGGCAGTGG  |
|             | TTTTACCCAACACTGCTAT              | TTAGAGAAAGTT                     |
| PGRP-LB     | TAATACGACTCACTATAGGGATCAC        | TAATACGACTCACTATAGGGATTGTCTTCAA |
|             | CCACCACAGCTACATC                 | CCCCATTTCTCT                      |
| PGRP-LC     | TAATACGACTCACTATAGGGACGTTC       | TAATACGACTCACTATAGGGGCCATTCCAG   |
|             | CTATCAAGGACCAGTGAA               | ACGGGAGACA                        |
| PGRP-LD     | TAATACGACTCACTATAGGGCTAGC        | TAATACGACTCACTATAGGGACCGTTCTAAT  |
|             | CATTTGCCTCTATCTC                 | TTCCCCCTCTGT                      |
| PGRP-LE     | TAATACGACTCACTATAGGGAATGT        | TAATACGACTCACTATAGGGACGGTGGCA    |
|             | CCACATCGGTGACGTTA                | GGTITTTGGATA                      |
| PGRP-SA     | TAATACGACTCACTATAGGGGAAAT        | TAATACGACTCACTATAGGGACAGCTTTAG   |
|             | CGTGAGTCGCACTAGAT                | GCCGGGACTTT                       |
| PGRP-SB     | TAATACGACTCACTATAGGGCTAGC        | TAATACGACTCACTATAGGGGATGCCCAAATC |
|             | AGCTTGGCCGCACITT                 | AGCCGGTAAT                        |

T7 RNA polymerase promoter sequences are in italics.

### 3.3. Single PGRP gene knockdown and induction of readout AMP genes at 6 h post bacterial challenge

First, we examined the effects of single PGRP gene knockdown on the bacterial induction of the following representative AMP genes listed in Table 3: two genes Att1 and Col1 belong to group I, and their induction is dependent mainly on the IMD pathway; one group III gene Cec2 is dependent largely on the Toll pathway; one group II gene Def3 is co-dependent (Yokoi et al., 2012a,b). The pupae treated with dsRNA were subjected further to bacterial challenge, and the mRNA levels of the four representative AMP genes were determined at 6 h post challenge (Fig. 3). For the mRNA levels of these AMP genes in unchallenged, PBS-injected, and bacterially-challenged pupae of the same developmental stage, which are not pretreated with dsRNA, refer to Fig. 1 of Yokoi et al. (2012a).

When challenged by E. coli, the mRNA levels of the group I AMP genes (Att1 and Col1) were not affected appreciably by respective single PGRP knockdown (Fig. 3A and B). In contrast, single PGRP-LA knockdown reduced the mRNA level of the group II AMP gene (Def3) by half (Fig. 3C). The PGRP-LA knockdown significantly elevated the group III AMP gene (Cec2) mRNA, and this was also somewhat true for PGRP-LD and PGRP-LE knockdown, while PGRP-LC knockdown did not affect the Cec2 induction (Fig. 3D). Meanwhile, single PGRP knockdown followed by M. luteus challenge brought about different outcomes. PGRP-LA knockdown clearly suppressed Col1 and Def3 induction in a non-redundant manner (Fig. 3F and G). The PGRP-LA knockdown also attenuated the induction of another group I gene Att1, but to a lesser extent in this case (Fig. 3E). The PGRP-LA knockdown enhanced Cec2 induction (Fig. 3H). For the Cec2 elevation, PGRP-LD knockdown also seemed to be promotive to some extent while PGRP-LC or PGRP-LE knockdown seemed not to have any effect.

### 3.4. Comprehensive double knockdown of PGRP genes and induction of readout AMP genes at 6 h post bacterial challenge

The induction levels of AMP genes at 6 h post bacterial challenge were examined in a similar manner following double knockdown of PGRP genes (Fig. 4). As for group I AMP genes, Att1 and Col1, induction by E. coli was attenuated by about half after the double knockdown of PGRP-LA and PGRP-LC (Fig. 4A and B). Group II Def3 induction by E. coli was suppressed to one-third by the combined knockdown of PGRP-LA and PGRP-LE (Fig. 4C) whereas the other knockdown configurations that included PGRP-LA seemed to be less effective than the single knockdown of PGRP-LA shown in Fig. 3C. In addition, the combined knockdown of PGRP-SA and PGRP-SB somewhat elevated the mRNA levels of this group II

AMP gene (Fig. 4C). As regards group III Cec2 upon E. coli challenge, any of double knockdown seemed not to elevate clearly its induction (Fig. 4D) in contrast to the results of single PGRP knockdown (Fig. 3D). On the other hand, double PGRP gene knockdown followed by M. luteus challenge resulted in distinct outcomes. The induction of group I Att1 and Col1 by M. luteus was suppressed effectively by the double knockdown of PGRP-LA and PGRP-LC (Fig. 4E and F), and the other combinations that included PGRP-LA affected to a lesser extent that did not differ greatly from the case of PGRP-LA single knockdown (Fig. 3E and F). The group II Def3 induction by M. luteus upon double knockdown denoted a similar tendency to E. coli challenge, but the concomitant knock-down of PGRP-LE did not seem to give an additive effect over the single PGRP-LA knockdown (Figs. 3G and 4G). Some double knock-down configurations elevated the Cec2 mRNA levels after M. luteus challenge as in the cases of single PGRP knockdown, and the double knockdown involving PGRP-LA seemed to be most effective in terms of this elevation (Figs. 3H and 4H).

### 3.5. Effects of PGRP gene knockdown on AMP gene induction at 24 h post bacterial challenge

The aforementioned results collectively suggest a primary role of PGRP-LA in the bacterial activation of the T. castaneum IMD pathway and auxiliary roles of PGRP-LC and PGRP-LE as well. We thus focused on these three PGRP genes and investigated the effects of their knockdown at a later time point of AMP gene induction, 24 h post bacterial challenge (Fig. 5). As to the short-type PGRP genes, PGRP-SA and PGRP-SB, the former of which represents a gene encoding a candidate sensor protein upstream of the T. castaneum Toll pathway, only double knockdown of was adopted in these experiments.

For group I Att1 induction by E. coli, single knockdown of PGRP-LA, PGRP-LC or PGRP-LE did not affect the mRNA levels (Fig. 5A) as was found at 6 h post E. coli challenge (Fig. 3A). Double knockdown of PGRP-LA and PGRP-LC significantly suppressed the induction levels (Fig. 5A) as observed at 6 h post challenge (Fig. 4A), while the suppressing effects of PGRP-LA plus PGRP-LE as well as PGRP-LC plus PGRP-LE double knockdown became recognizable at this time point (Fig. 5A). Interestingly, the Att1 mRNA level in this late phase of induction still stayed high in the double knockdown pupae of short-type PGRP-SA and PGRP-SB (Fig. 5A). This might suggest that either or both of the short-type PGRPs are involved in the termination of the IMD pathway activation possibly by adsorbing or catalyzing PAMPs in circulation (see also Section 3.8). Similar tendencies associated with PGRP knockdown were also found for another group I AMP gene, Col1 (Fig. 5B). As regards Def3 induction

Fig. 1. Bacterial induction of PGRP genes. Day 3 pupae were injected with sterile PBS, suspensions of heat-killed E. coli (Ec) or M. luteus (Ml), or left unchallenged (Uc). The mRNA amounts of PGRP-LA (A), PGRP-LB (B), PGRP-LC (C), PGRP-LD (D), PGRP-LE (E), PGRP-SA (F) and PGRP-SB (G) were determined relative to that of RPL32 at 6 and 24 h post treatments. Three to four pupae were used for each treatment, and total RNA extraction was done using this pool of three to four animals. The total RNA fraction was reverse-transcribed, and the resulting cDNA used as a common template for the amplification and determination of the seven distinct PGRP mRNA species as well as for those of RPL32. These procedures, from insect treatment to qRT-PCR-based mRNA determination, were repeated independently at least three times. Results were represented by mean ± SD from three independent experiments. Asterisks denote significant differences (*P* < 0.05) from Uc controls by Student's *t*-test. The ordinate axes in F and G are on logarithmic scales.

at 24 h post E. coli challenge, the double knockdown of PGRP-LA and PGRP-LE was most suppressive to this group II gene, and the single knockdown of PGRP-LA was also found suppressive (Fig. 5C) as respectively observed at 6 h post challenge (Figs. 4C and 3C). As for the single PGRP-LE knockdown, its suppressive effect on Def3 induction became clearer at this time point (Fig. 5C) compared to that at 6 h (Fig. 3C), and the degree of suppression by the PGRP-LE knockdown was similar to that by double knockdown of PGRP-LE and PGRP-LC (Fig. 5C). As to group III Cec2 induction, which appeared to be upregulated typically by

H. Koyama et al./Journal of Invertebrate Pathology 132 (2015) 86–100

Fig. 2. Knockdown of PGRP genes at the mRNA level. dsRNAs were injected into day 0 pupae either singly or in combination, and the mRNA amounts of targeted genes determined 72 h later. A, efficiencies of single knockdown of seven PGRP genes. B, efficiencies of PGRP-LA knockdown are shown when double knockdown was conducted with dsRNA of PGRP-LA along with one of the other four long-type PGRPs. Similarly, C, D, E, and F show, respectively, efficiencies of PGRP-LB, PGRP-LC, PGRP-LD, and PGRP-LE knockdown in respective double knockdown configurations. G, efficiencies of double knockdown of PGRP-SA and PGRP-SB. H, efficiencies of triple knockdown of PGRP-LA, PGRP-LC, and PGRP-LE. MalE dsRNA injection served as a control, and mRNA amounts of respective PGRP genes are presented relative to those for RPL 32. Three to four animals were used for respective categories of dsRNA injection each time, and total RNA extraction and qRT-PCR-based mRNA determination were done using this pool of animals. These procedures, from dsRNA injection to mRNA determination, were independently repeated at least three times. Each bar represents mean ± SD of three independent experiments. Asterisks denote significant differences (*P* < 0.05) from MalE controls by Student's *T*-test.

Table 3  
Four representative read-out AMP genes used in this study.

| AMP gene | Gene group | Regulation |
|----------|------------|------------|
| Att1     | I          | IMD pathway |
| Col1     | I          | IMD pathway |
| Def3     | II         | IMD and Toll pathways |
| Cec2     | III        | Toll pathway |

the single PGRP-LA knockdown at 6 h post E. coli challenge (Fig. 3D), knockdown configurations tested at this time point did not influence greatly the induction levels (Fig. 5D).

Similar experiments were performed using M. luteus as an elicitor. The induction of group I Att1 by M. luteus challenge was suppressed effectively by the single PGRP-LA knockdown, while its knockdown combined with PGRP-LC or PGRP-LE did not seem to enhance the suppression appreciably (Fig. 5E). These trends were also observed for another group I AMP gene, Col1 (Fig. 5F). The mRNA levels of these group I genes stayed high in double knockdown animals of PGRP-SA and PGRP-SB (Fig. 5E and F) as was found for E. coli challenge (Fig. 5A and B). As for group II Def3, its induction almost ceased by this time point, and the suppressing effects of the single or combined PGRP-LA knockdown, which was obvious at 6 h post M. luteus challenge (Fig. 3G and 4G), became ambiguous at 24 h (Fig. 5G). The results of Cec2 induction by M. luteus were similar to those by E. coli (Fig. 5D), and stimulating effects associated with some knockdown configurations at 6 h post challenge (Fig. 3H and 4H) became unclear by this time point (Fig. 5H).

### 3.6. Triple knockdown of PGRP-LA, PGRP-LC and PGRP-LE and AMP gene induction

Finally, triple knockdown of PGRP-LA, PGRP-LC and PGRP-LE was examined as to whether it has additive or synergistic effects over the single or double knockdown. For group I Att1 and Col1, the triple knockdown totally (96% and 97% respectively) suppressed their induction at 24 h post E. coli challenge while in the other configurations with either E. coli or M. luteus challenge, its suppressing effects did not differ much from those by related double knockdown (Fig. 6A and B). Low but appreciable levels of group I gene induction in the triple knockdown at 24 h post M. luteus challenge may represent a contribution of signaling other than the IMD pathway. In the meantime, the triple knockdown abolished group II Def3 induction by E. coli almost completely (93%) at 6 h, and the suppression seemed to become weaker (81%) at 24 h presumably because of its dependence on the Toll pathway (Fig. 6C). When challenged by M. luteus, the triple knockdown did not enhance appreciably the suppressing effects on Def3 compared to the case of single PGRP-LA knockdown at both time points (Fig. 6C). The remaining group II gene induction by M. luteus after the triple knockdown might reflect the regulation through the Toll pathway. Def3 induction by M. luteus usually terminates at around 24 h post challenge (Yokoi et al., 2012a), but in the case shown in Fig. 6C, its marginal induction still seemed to remain. As for group III Cec2, the triple knockdown basically did not change induction levels significantly (Fig. 6D), and these trends were similar to those by included double knockdown (Figs. 4D, H, 5D and H) except for the results at 6 h post M. luteus challenge (Fig. 6D): at this time point, 24% elevation of gene activation was observed, which was not statistically significant, contrary to the cases of double knockdown shown in Fig. 4H.

### 3.7. Knockdown of PGRP genes and host defense to bacteria

As demonstrated in the above sections, several knockdown configurations including PGRP-LA, PGRP-LC and PGRP-LE attenuated the bacterial induction of the representative IMD pathway-dependent group I AMP gene as well as a co-dependent group II AMP gene. Thus, we tested whether or not such levels of suppression influenced host defense by using the triple knockdown and two model bacterial pathogens, *E. cloacae* and *B. subtilis*. In our *Tribolium* experimental system, live *E. coli* or *M. luteus* exhibits only weak virulence even at high dosage, while *E. cloacae* and *B. subtilis* have been successfully used as model pathogens with relatively high virulence (Yokoi et al., 2012a,b). Kaplan-Meier plots presented in Fig. 7A and B show that the survival rates seemed to somewhat decline by the triple knockdown in both cases of *E. cloacae* and *B. subtilis* challenge, but the differences were not statistically significant with *P* values of 0.20 and 0.13, respectively. The positive control, Rel knockdown severely impaired the antibacterial defense in both cases (*P* < 0.0001). We also examined the induction levels of all the nine *T. castaneum* AMP genes in these knockdown animals at 6 h post challenge of *E. cloacae* or *B. subtilis*. The positive control, Rel knockdown, typically reduced the induction levels of group I (Att1, Att2, Col1 and Def2) and group II (Def3) AMP genes to one-tenth and hundredth, respectively at 6 h post challenge (Fig. 7C and D). On the other hand, the triple PGRP gene knockdown only moderately suppressed the AMP gene induction by this time point.

### 3.8. Phylogenetic and domain analyses of T. castaneum PGRP

Given the phenotypes of PGRP gene knockdown animals described above, which suggested a crucial role of PGRP-LA in bacterial induction of AMP genes associated with the IMD pathway, we conducted phylogenetic and domain analyses of *T. castaneum* and *D. melanogaster* PGRPs to check again the relationship among them. Since a minute phylogenetic tree of insect PGRPs including mosquito and honeybee factors in addition to those of *T. castaneum* and *D. melanogaster* has been presented in Fig. 1 of Zou et al. (2007), we do not duplicate it here, but in brief, our analyses also indicated that *T. castaneum* PGRP-LC is not a direct ortholog of *Drosophila* PGRP-LC (data not shown), the products of which play a pivotal role in both extracellular DAP-type peptidoglycan recognition and intracellular signal transduction of the IMD pathway of *Drosophila* (Choe et al., 2005, 2002; Gottar et al., 2002). Meanwhile, the beetle possessed the respective orthologs of *Drosophila* PGRP-LA, PGRP-LE and PGRP-SA (data not shown). Diagrams of domain configuration of *T. castaneum* PGRPs are presented in Fig. 8A. Searches for conserved domains revealed that all the beetle PGRPs possess a single PGRP domain. All invertebrate and vertebrate catalytically active PGRPs in terms of amidase activity are known to have a conserved Zn²⁺ binding site in its peptidoglycan-binding groove (Dziarski and Gupta, 2006). Among amino acid residues engaged in this coordination bond, a cysteine residue, for example Cys₁₆₈, Cys₁₇₂ and Cys₁₇₇ of *D. melanogaster* PGRP-SC1a, PGRP-SB1 and PGRP-LB-C respectively, is found to be critical, and in non-catalytic sensor PGRPs this cysteine residue is substituted mainly by serine and less frequently by other amino acid residues (Mellroth et al., 2003). Based on this criterion, *T. castaneum* PGRP-LB and PGRP-SB were inferred to be amidase-active, scavenger types by the occurrence of a cysteine residue in the corresponding position (Cys₁₆₇ for both proteins) (Fig. 8), whereas the expression of PGRP-LB seemed to be quite low in pupae of the beetle (Fig. 1B). PGRP-LA, PGRP-LC and PGRP-LD have a transmembrane domain, indicating that they are membrane-bound proteins/receptors, whereas PGRP-LB, PGRP-SA and PGRP-SB are demonstrated to be secreted proteins by the occurrence of an N-terminal signal peptide (Fig. 8). On the other hand, PGRP-LE has neither a transmembrane domain nor a signal peptide, suggesting that it is intracellular or secreted by other mechanisms as suggested for the *Drosophila* counterpart (Kaneko et al., 2006). These results obtained by our phylogenetic and domain analyses are basically

H. Koyama et al./Journal of Invertebrate Pathology 132 (2015) 86–100

Fig. 3. Effects of single PGRP gene knockdown on bacterial induction of AMP genes at 6 h. Day 0 pupae were treated singly with dsRNA of seven PGRP genes. Seventy-two hours later, the pupae were challenged with either heat-killed *E. coli* (A–D) or *M. luteus* (E–H). The mRNA amounts of group I AMP gene, Att1 (A and E), another group I Col1 (B and F), group II Def3 (C and G) and group III Cec2 (D and H) were determined relative to those for RPL32 at 6 h post challenge. MalE dsRNA injection provided controls. Three to four animals were used for each category of dsRNA injection, and this was followed by the challenge of either *E. coli* or *M. luteus*. Total RNA extraction and qRT-PCR-based mRNA determination were done using this pool of animals. These experiments, from insect treatment to mRNA determination, were repeated independently at least three times, and bars represent mean ± SD of three independent results. Asterisks denote significant differences (*P* < 0.05) from MalE controls by Student's T-test.

consistent with those presented by Zou et al. (2007). In addition, *Drosophila* PGRP-LC is known to have a receptor-interacting protein homeotypic interaction motifs (RHIM)-like motifs that is shown indispensable to the intracellular IMD signaling, and similar motifs are also found in the fly PGRP-LE and PGRP-LA (Kaneko et al., 2006). We searched for RHIM-like motifs in *T. castaneum* PGRP

H. Koyama et al./Journal of Invertebrate Pathology 132 (2015) 86-100

Fig. 4. Effects of double knockdown of PGRP genes on bacterial induction of AMP genes at 6h. Double knockdown of PGRP genes were conducted among either long-types or short-types as indicated. The mRNA amounts of Att1 (A and E), Col1 (B and F), Def3 (C and G) and Cec2 (D and H) were determined at 6h after the challenges of heat-killed E.coli (A–D) or M.luteus (E–H). The other details were the same as in Fig. 3.

H.Koyama et al./Journal of Invertebrate Pathology 132 (2015) 86–100

Fig. 5. Selected single and double knockdown of PGRP genes and the effects on AMP gene induction at 24h.PGPP-LA, PGRP-LC and PGRP-LE were knocked down either singly or doubly with another long type PGRPs as indicated. For the knockdown of PGRP-SA and PGRP-SB, only double knockdown was performed. The effects of knockdown on the bacterial induction of Att1 (A and E), Col1 (B and F), Def3 (C and G) and Cec2 (D and H) were examined at 24h after E.coli (A-D) or M.luteus (E-H) injection. The other details were the same as in Fig. 3.

proteins and found that a RHIM-like motif-related structure was also conserved in a cytoplasmic portion of T.castaneum PGRP-LA as well as in PGRP-LC and putative full length PGRP-LE (Fig.8B). This may reasonably support the importance of the three PGRP genes in the beetle's IMD signaling, which was shown in this study.

4. Discussion

In this study, we conducted the identification of the PGRP genes responsible for bacterial activation of the Toll and IMD pathways of the model beetle, T.castaneum, and studied whether the broad

Fig. 6. Effects of triple knockdown of PGRP-LA, PGRP-LC and PGRP-LE on microbial AMP gene induction. The triple knockdown was conducted, and the induction levels of Att1 (A), Col1 (B), Def3 (C) and Cec2 (D) examined at 6 and 24 h after E. coli or M. luteus challenge. The ordinate axes are on logarithmic scales. The other details were the same as in Fig. 3.

specificity for the microbial activation exhibited by the two immune pathways of the beetle was explainable on the basis of the specificity of the corresponding PGRP gene products. Our previous studies suggest that the AMP gene induction by the budding yeast, Saccharomyces cerevisiae, is likely to involve other signaling in addition to the canonical Toll and IMD pathways (Yokoi et al., 2012a,b). Thus, we focused on the bacterial AMP gene induction in this study. We systematically knocked down the PGRP genes of T. castaneum and investigated how respective knockdown configurations influenced the bacterial induction of representative readout AMP genes regulated by the Toll, IMD, or both pathways.

For the induction of the IMD pathway readout, group I AMP genes (Att1 and Col1) by Gram-negative E. coli, single knockdown of any of PGRP genes did not alter the induction levels greatly by 6 h post challenge, suggesting that some functional redundancies might exist among the PGRP genes. Therefore, we proceeded to comprehensive double knockdown experiments. The group I gene induction by E. coli was primarily suppressed to one-half through the combined knockdown of PGRP-LA and PGRP-LC. Considering the possibility that the levels of remaining protein might still stay high at 6 h post E. coli challenge, we then employed a longer period of incubation after the challenge. While the single knockdown of PGRP-LA, PGRP-LC or PGRP-LE did not affect the induction levels of group I genes at 24 h post E. coli challenge as seen at 6 h, the double knockdown of PGRP-LA and PGRP-LC exhibited somewhat enhanced suppressing effects when compared to the results at 6 h, which might reflect the decline of the protein levels. Interestingly, the double knockdown of either PGRP-LA or PGRP-LC combined with PGRP-LE took effects at 24 h in terms of group I gene suppression. This might suggest that a PGRP-LE protein isoform involved has a longer half-life than PGRP-LA or PGRP-LC. In support of this idea are the results of E. coli induction of the group I genes after the triple knockdown, in which the suppression rate was higher at 24 h than at 6 h. Alternatively, PGRP-LE may have roles in maintaining the expression of group I AMP genes in the later phase of induction, which might be supported by the induction kinetics of PGRP-LE after bacterial challenge. Given these results, we think that the cell-surface recognition of the Gram-negative E. coli constituents, presumably DAP-type peptidoglycan, and the following intracellular signal transduction of the IMD pathway in T. castaneum are exerted mainly by membrane-bound PGRP-LA and PGRP-LC. PGRP-LE seemed to be involved as well, possibly as a cleaved, extracellular form or an intracellular full-length version found in Drosophila (Kaneko et al., 2006).

The effects of PGRP gene knockdown on the induction of the IMD pathway-dependent group I AMP genes by Gram-positive M. luteus showed a distinct tendency. The single knockdown of PGRP-LA had some suppressing effects at 6 h post challenge in a non-redundant manner, and the effects became more conspicuous at 24 h, probably reflecting the declined levels of remaining PGRP-LA protein. The double knockdown of PGRP-LA combined with another long-type PGRP genes did not suppress greatly the degree of group I gene induction at 24 h post M. luteus challenge compared to the single PGRP-LA knockdown, while at 6 h concomitant PGRP-LC knockdown seemed to have some additive suppressing effects. Based on these results, we think that the IMD pathway activation by the Gram-positive M. luteus constituents, probably Lys-type peptidoglycan, in T. castaneum depends largely on PGRP-LA, and PGRP-LC is likely to have a modest contribution. The results of triple knockdown that did not differ much from those by single PGRP-LA knockdown may support this idea.

Meanwhile, the knockdown of PGRP-SA, the product of which is a candidate upstream component of the T. castaneum Toll pathway, did not suppress the bacterial induction of the Toll readout group III AMP gene, Cec2. This was also true for the other short-type PGRP gene tested, PGRP-SB. We found that these two short-type PGRP

H. Koyama et al./Journal of Invertebrate Pathology 132 (2015) 86–100

A
E. cloacae
dsRNA
- malE
- Rel
- PGRP-LA+LC+LE

B
B. subtilis
dsRNA
- malE
- Rel
- PGRP-LA+LC+LE

C
D
Relative mRNA amount (RPL32)
E. cloacae
B. subtilis
malE
Rel
ACE
Att1
Att2
Att3
Col1
Cec2
Cec3
Def1
Def2
Def3
gene group
I
I
IV
I
III
IV
I
II
Att1
Att2
Att3
Col1
Cec2
Cec3
Def1
Def2
Def3
gene group
I
I
IV
I
III
IV
I
II

Fig. 7. Effects of triple gene knockdown of PGRP-LA, PGRP-LC and PGRP-LE on host defense against two model bacterial pathogens. Day 3 pupae that had undergone dsRNA treatment on day 0 were challenged with either live E. cloacae (A) or live B. subtilis (B), and the survival of pupae monitored every 24 h. For these survival assays, 22–33 pupae were used for each gene knockdown-bacterial challenge combination. MalE dsRNA served as a negative control while Rel dsRNA provided a positive control. *, significantly different from malE-treated controls by Gehan-Breslow-Wilcoxon test. In both cases of the bacterial challenge, the induction levels of all the nine AMP genes were determined at 6 h post infection for the respective knockdown categories (C and D) as was done in Fig. 3. Asterisks denote significant differences (P < 0.05) from malE controls by Student's T-test. The ordinate axes are on logarithmic scales.

A
T. castaneum PGRPs
N
100
200
300
400(aa)
PGRP-LA
PGRP-LB
PGRP-LC
PGRP-LD
PGRP-LE
PGRP-SA
PGRP-SB
PGRP+
PGRP
PGRP
PGRP
PGRP
PGRP+

B
DmPGRP-LCx
209
ALTNSTDVTFCDKHFYEGPV
228
TcPGRP-LC
50
SVMNSNDIHFGNKTFYQGPV
69
DmPGRP-LA-1
63
NLNHSTDVVIIGPMTOYQGPV
82
TcPGRP-LA
55
NVENSKDVIIIGPVTQFHGPV
74
DmPGRP-LE
95
NISNSTNVHIGNVTNINNGNI
114
TcPGRP-LE
102
OITYKSQNVHIGDVTHINGPV
121

Fig. 8. Domain analyses of T. castaneum PGRP proteins. A, diagrams of domain configurations of the beetle PGRPs. Searches for conserved domains and motifs were performed using WWW severs of the CD (conserved domain) -search and the PSORT II prediction program. PGRP, PGRP domain deduced to be non-catalytic; PGRP+, PGRP domain deduced to be amidase-active; M, transmembrane domain; S, signal peptide. The locations of RHIM-like motifs (R) are also shown, based on the analysis in B. B, RHIM-like motifs found in D. melanogaster and T. castaneum PGRP proteins. The amino acid sequences of D. melanogaster (Dm) and T. castaneum (Tc) PGRP proteins were aligned using the CLUSTAL W algorithm. The RHIM-like motifs were searched in the alignment using that in Drosophila PGRP-LC as a reference, and the alignment slightly corrected for better amino acid matching. Accession numbers for Drosophila proteins are: DmPGRP-LA-1, Q95T64; DmPGRP-LCx, Q9GNK5; DmPGRP-LE, Q9VXN9.
genes themselves were highly inducible upon bacterial challenge. In addition, we have a preliminary observation that a significant recovery of the mRNA levels of PGRP-SA and PGRP-SB occurs in the corresponding knockdown animals after bacterial challenge (Koyama et al., unpublished). We suppose at present that this recovery could be one of the reasons for equivocal knockdown phenotypes of these short-type PGRP genes in terms of the Toll readout Cec2 induction. Alternatively, the ambiguous knockdown phenotype might imply the existence of paths that activate the Toll signaling independently of the short-type PGRP protein(s). In contrast, elevated bacterial induction of the Toll readout Cec2 were frequently observed in knockdown animals of PGRP-LA and other long-type PGRP genes such as PGRP-LD at 6 h post bacterial challenge. This elevation may in part reflect the reduction of competitive peptidoglycan binding by these long-type PGRPs through their gene knockdown, which might otherwise counteract the Toll pathway activation by short-type PGRPs. Whatever the case, the regulation of the Toll signaling in T. castaneum seems to be more complex than we expected. The subjects concerning the Toll pathway activation and the involvement of short-type PGRP genes should be explored in more detail in our future studies.

The behavior of group II AMP gene Def3, which has been shown to be co-dependent on the Toll and IMD pathways, in PGRP gene knockdown animals was distinct from those of group I or group III AMP genes. Induction of Def3 by E. coli fell to one-half by single knockdown of PGRP-LA in a non-redundant fashion at 6 h post challenge while PGRP-LE as well seemed to have a little contribution. Indeed, the double knockdown of PGRP-LA and PGRP-LE slightly enhanced the suppression at 6 h post challenge, and the suppression became more recognizable at 24 h. Actually, PGRP-LE single knockdown suppressed Def3 induction to the level comparable to that of PGRP-LA single knockdown at 24 h. By contrast, the concomitant knockdown of PGRP-LC with either PGRP-LA or PGRP-LE weakened the suppressing effects of the latter two, suggesting that PGRP-LC has some inhibitory effects on Def3 induction by E. coli. As mentioned above, PGRP-LA as well as PGRP-LC and PGRP-LE are supposed to mediate the IMD signaling elicited by E. coli, which should lead eventually to the nuclear translocation of cleaved Rel proteins and the transcriptional activation of group I AMP genes. Nonetheless, while single knockdown of PGRP-LA as well as PGRP-LE suppressed the group II Def3 induction by E. coli in a non-redundant manner, only PGRP-LC apparently functioned in the opposite direction. Since the environment in the nuclei regarding the transcription factor species and their concentrations is supposed to be common to the target AMP genes, we consider that the distinct outcomes between group I and group II AMP gene regulation could arise based on the context of regulatory regions of these genes. We previously searched the upstream regions of T. castaneum AMP genes for potential NF-κB response elements (Yokoi et al., 2012a). Our analyses indicate that all the group I AMP genes have a single copy of potential Rel-response element in the proximal promoter region while in the corresponding region of the group II Def3 gene promoter, tandemly-arranged two copies of similar Rel-response elements occur in addition to a single copy of putative Dif-response elements in the distal region. Since the maximal induction levels of group I AMP genes are about one order of magnitude greater than that of the group II AMP gene, we hypothesize here that the extremely high-level expression of group I AMP genes is largely supported by transcription factors other than Rel, such as fat body-specific factors, and by contrast, that the maximal Def3 expression depends on the full occupation of the two copies of Rel-response element by two molecules of Rel protein, which might result in synergistic transcriptional activation. Based on this hypothetical differential gene regulation, it may be a reasonable idea that the group II gene is more sensitive to the decline of the Rel protein concentration, thereby exhibiting

attenuated E. coli-dependent induction even upon single knock-down of PGRP-LA. As for the putative inhibitory function of PGRP-LC in group II gene induction, we speculate that the E. coli constituents (possibly DAP-type peptidoglycan) binding to PGRP-LC might activate not only the IMD signaling but also a undefined inhibitory path specific to the Def3 promoter, and thus PGRP-LC acts in total as a suppressor of Def3. Because the single knockdown of PGRP-LC seemed not to elevate the Def3 induction by E. coli, and because the triple knockdown including PGRP-LC besides PGRP-LA and PGRP-LE was found more suppressing in terms of Def3 induction than the double knockdown of the latter two genes at 6 h post E. coli challenge, this putative PGRP-LC-derived transcriptional inhibition may function depending on nuclear Rel protein concentration of a certain range. Thus, we consider that the induction of group II AMP gene Def3 by Gram-negative E. coli is mainly mediated by the PGRP-LA-IMD signaling and PGRP-LE has some positive contributions as well, while PGRP-LC is likely to function in the opposite direction.

As to Def3 induction by M. luteus, single knockdown of PGRP-LA significantly attenuated the induction at 6 h post challenge. Any of PGRP-LA knockdown combined with other PGRP genes did not enhance greatly the suppressing effects while PGRP-LC was likely to have some counteraction as in the case of E. coli challenge. It is not surprising that when tested at 24 h any of PGRP gene knock-down lost apparent suppressing effects since the induction of Def3 by M. luteus usually returns to levels similar to those of untreated controls by this time point (Yokoi et al., 2012a). The overall tendency of Def3 induction in the early phase of M. luteus challenge was in this way similar to that by E. coli except the apparently low involvement of PGRP-LE. Therefore, we speculate that Def3 induction by Gram-positive M. luteus is mediated mainly by the PGRP-LA-IMD signaling, and PGRP-LC acts as an inhibitory agent. The involvement of putative Toll pathway-associated PGRP gene(s) in the regulation of group II Def3, which is co-dependent on both the Toll and IMD pathways, so far remains ambiguous as in the case of the group III AMP gene.

Drosophila mutants that have genetic defects in upstream PGRPs of the Toll or IMD pathways are highly susceptible to Gram-positive or Gram-negative bacteria (Bischoff et al., 2004; Gobert et al., 2003; Gottar et al., 2002; Michel et al., 2001). We previously showed that the knockdown of either T. castaneum IMD or Rel, which is associated with overall suppression of group I and II AMP gene induction, impairs host defense against two model bacterial pathogens, E. cloacae and B. subtilis (Yokoi et al., 2012a,b). In this study the triple knockdown of PGRP-LA, PGRP-LC and PGRP-LE suppressed to some extent the induction of representative, IMD-dependent group I and co-dependent group II AMP genes by E. coli and M. luteus. Thus, we conducted the survival assays using E. cloacae and B. subtilis following the triple knockdown and found that the triple knockdown did not reduce the survival rates significantly. A positive control, Rel knockdown reduced severely the induction levels of group I and group II AMP genes by 6 h post challenge of E. cloacae or B. subtilis while the observed suppression levels of AMP gene induction by the triple PGRP knockdown were moderate. This might account for the antibacterial host defense phenotypes after the triple knockdown.

We used the pupal stage of T. castaneum in our previous and present studies to dissect the immune pathways of this model beetle. According to our unpublished observations (Kitamoto et al.), larvae and adults of T. castaneum show a similar overall trend of microbial AMP gene induction to that in pupae, while the intensity of response is somewhat higher in pupae than in larvae or adults. The ontogenic changes of AMP gene induction in Drosophila immune system were investigated in early studies. For example, four cecropin genes, CecA1, CecA2, CecB and CecC show differential bacterial induction: the former two are highly inducible in larvaeand adults whereas the latter two are relatively active in early pupae (Samakovlis et al., 1990; Tryselius et al., 1992). The promoter region of dipterocin gene, a readout of the IMD pathway, fused to a reporter β-galactosidase gene exhibits differential activities depending on the developmental stages of the transgenic flies (Reichhart et al., 1992), and these authors speculate that the complex behavior of this AMP gene is controlled through the multiple, potential binding motifs for several distinct transcription factors in its promoter. On the other hand, as for more upstream components of the immune signaling pathways in *Drosophila*, the mRNA for the membrane-bound cytokine receptor Toll, for example, can be detectable from embryonic to adult stages, whereas the mRNA level differs in each stage (Tauszig et al., 2000). Similarly, expression of most *Drosophila* PGRP genes is found detectable in all postembryonic stages (Werner et al., 2000). A series of studies utilizing several gain-of-function and loss-of-function mutants of the Toll gene have revealed that the induction of a Toll pathway read-out AMP gene, drosomycin, depends on the Toll gene function in both larvae and adults (Lemaitre et al., 1996; Manfruelli et al., 1999). In addition, PGRP-LC is shown to function in both larvae and adults as a membrane-bound receptor of the IMD pathway (Choe et al., 2002; Gottar et al., 2002), and the association of PGRP-LE with the IMD pathway has been demonstrated in the both developmental stages (Takehana et al., 2002). Taken together, it is likely that in *Drosophila* as far as the crucial pathway components are available in a certain developmental stage, similar paths of immune signaling are utilized upon microbial infection, while outcomes of the pathway activation could somewhat differ in conjunction with complicated regulation of respective target genes. Meanwhile in *T. castaneum*, the initial comprehensive study on microbial activation of immunity-related genes was performed using adult beetles (Zou et al., 2007), and the following systematic approaches also utilize adults (Altincicek et al., 2013, 2008). It is, therefore, of interest to know whether the immune pathways functioning in *T. castaneum* pupae, which we have so far elucidated, is applicable to larvae or adults. Because our unpublished study shows that similar tendencies of microbial activation of AMP genes are shared by pupae, larvae and adults (Kitamoto et al.), and because the results by others have demonstrated the appreciable expression of crucial genes as well in adults (Altincicek et al., 2013), we consider at present that the immune signaling characteristic to *T. castaneum*, which we have demonstrated in pupae, is likely to holds true for other developmental stages. This question will be addressed in our future studies.

The induced levels of some *T. castaneum* AMP genes in our system differs from those by other research groups (Altincicek et al., 2013, 2008; Freitak et al., 2012; Yokoi et al., 2012a,b; Zou et al., 2007). As discussed also in our previous paper (Yokoi et al., 2012b), we consider that this inconsistency might be accounted for by the differences of experimental conditions, such as developmental stages of animals, insect rearing procedure (e.g., presence or absence of yeast powder in food stuff), elicitors (microbial species or their cell wall components), ways of immune challenge (pricking or microinjection), and incubation time point post challenge. Since our unpublished results suggest that the overall tendencies of microbial AMP gene induction do not differ greatly among larvae, pupae and adults, the above mentioned inconsistency may also be ascribed to the differences of beetle populations or strains. Indeed, a recent study has demonstrated the differential immune responses between two distinct *T. castaneum* populations (Behrens et al., 2014), while in this case an oral delivery of bacteria results in greater differences.

The present study provided the evidence mainly as to the roles of long-type PGRP genes associated with the IMD pathway of this model beetle species. In conclusion, our results suggest that in *T. castaneum*, which lacks a direct homolog of *Drosophila* PGRP-LC,

PGPR-LA functions as a pivotal sensor for both Gram-negative and Gram-positive bacterial infection and activates the IMD pathway. PGRP-LC also seems to be associated with the IMD pathway and function as a sensor for Gram-negative bacterial components, and to a lesser extent for Gram-positive bacterial components. PGRP-LE is supposed to activate the IMD pathway by Gram-negative bacterial components. The occurrence of RHIM-like motif-related structures, as well as the induction kinetics upon bacterial challenge, may support the importance of the three PGRP proteins in the IMD signaling of *T. castaneum*. Collectively, our results strongly suggest the underlying mechanisms for the broad specificity of the bacterial activation exhibited by the *T. castaneum* IMD pathway compared to the *Drosophila* one at the level of sensor proteins. On the other hand, we did not gain clear results in terms of PGRP proteins associated with the bacterial activation of the *T. castaneum* Toll pathway. A better understanding of the function of highly inducible short-type PGRPs should need more studies using a variety of approaches. Such in-depth studies focusing on the functional dissection of respective genes, in conjunction with more comprehensive, large-scale RNAi phenotype screening using this model beetle species (Dönitz et al., 2015; Knorr et al., 2013), may lead to the development of novel control strategies for notorious coleopteran pests, such as the Colorado potato beetle, *Leptinotarsa decemlineata* (Alyokhin et al., 2008).

### Acknowledgments

We thank Dr. Y. Yagi for the generous gift of *E. cloacae* and *B. subtilis*. We also thank Dr. T. Shinoda, Dr. A. Miyashita and Dr. M. Murata for providing *T. castaneum*. This work was supported in part by JSPS KAKENHI Grant Numbers 23658047 and 25450486 to KM.

### References

Altincicek, B., Elashry, A., Guz, N., Grundler, F.M., Vilcinskas, A., Dehne, H.W., 2013. Next generation sequencing based transcriptome analysis of septic-injury responsive genes in the beetle *Tribolium castaneum*. PLoS ONE 8, e52004.

Altincicek, B., Knorr, E., Vilcinskas, A., 2008. Beetle immunity: identification of immune-inducible genes from the model insect *Tribolium castaneum*. Dev. Comp. Immunol. 32, 585–595.

Alyokhin, A., Sewell, G., Choban, R., 2008. Reduced viability of Colorado potato beetle, *Leptinotarsa decemlineata*, eggs exposed to novaluron. Pest Manag. Sci. 64, 94–99.

Baum, J.A., Bogaert, T., Clinton, W., Heck, G.R., Feldmann, P., Ilagan, O., Johnson, S., Plaetinck, G., Munyikwa, T., Pleau, M., Vaughn, T., Roberts, J., 2007. Control of coleopteran insect pests through RNA interference. Nat. Biotechnol. 25, 1322–1326.

Behrens, S., Peuß, R., Milutinović, B., Eggert, H., Esser, D., Rosenstiel, P., Schulenburg, H., Bornberg-Bauer, E., Kurtz, J., 2014. Infection routes matter in population-specific responses of the red flour beetle to the entomopathogen *Bacillus thuringiensis*. BMC Genomics 15, 445.

Bischoff, V., Vignal, C., Boneca, I.G., Michel, T., Hoffmann, J.A., Royet, J., 2004. Function of the *Drosophila* pattern-recognition receptor PGRP-SD in the detection of Gram-positive bacteria. Nat. Immunol. 5, 1175–1180.

Campbell, J.F., Toews, M.D., Arthur, F.H., Arbogast, R.T., 2010. Long-term monitoring of *Tribolium castaneum* populations in two flour mills: rebound after fumigation. J. Econ. Entomol. 103, 1002–1011.

Choe, K.M., Lee, H., Anderson, K.V., 2005. *Drosophila* peptidoglycan recognition protein LC (PGRP-LC) acts as a signal-transducing innate immune receptor. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 102, 1122–1126.

Choe, K.M., Werner, T., Stoven, S., Hultmark, D., Anderson, K.V., 2002. Requirement for a peptidoglycan recognition protein (PGRP) in relish activation and antibacterial immune responses in *Drosophila*. Science 296, 359–362.

De Gregorio, E., Spellman, P.T., Tzou, P., Rubin, G.M., Lemaitre, B., 2002. The Toll and Imd pathways are the major regulators of the immune response in *Drosophila*. EMBO J. 21, 2568–2579.

Dziarski, R., Gupta, D., 2006. The peptidoglycan recognition proteins (PGRPs). Genome Biol. 7, 232.

Dönitz, J., Schmitt-Engel, C., Grossmann, D., Gerischer, L., Tech, M., Schoppmeier, M., Klingler, M., Bucher, G., 2015. iBeetle-Base: a database for RNAi phenotypes in the red flour beetle *Tribolium castaneum*. Nucleic Acids Res. 43, D720–723.

Freitak, D., Knorr, E., Vogel, H., Vilcinskas, A., 2012. Gender- and stressor-specific microRNA expression in *Tribolium castaneum*. Biol. Lett. 8, 860–863.
Gobert, V., Gottar, M., Matskevich, A.A., Rutschmann, S., Royet, J., Belvin, M., Hoffmann, J.A., Ferrandon, D., 2003. Dual activation of the *Drosophila* Toll pathway by two pattern recognition receptors. Science 302, 2126–2130.

Gottar, M., Gobert, V., Matskevich, A.A., Reichhart, J.-M., Wang, C., Butt, T.M., Belvin, M., Hoffmann, J.A., Ferrandon, D., 2006. Dual detection of fungal infections in *Drosophila* via recognition of glucans and sensing of virulence factors. Cell 127, 1425–1437.

Gottar, M., Gobert, V., Michel, T., Belvin, M., Duyk, G., Hoffmann, J.A., Ferrandon, D., Royet, J., 2002. The *Drosophila* immune response against Gram-negative bacteria is mediated by a peptidoglycan recognition protein. Nature 416, 640–644.

Hultmark, D., 2003. *Drosophila* immunity: paths and patterns. Curr. Opin. Immunol. 15, 12–19.

Kan, H., Kim, C.H., Kwon, H.M., Park, J.W., Roh, K.B., Lee, H., Park, B.J., Zhang, R., Zhang, J., Soederhall, K., Ha, N.C., Lee, B.L., 2008. Molecular control of phenoloxidase-induced melanin synthesis in an insect. J. Biol. Chem. 283, 25316–25323.

Kaneko, T., Yano, T., Aggarwal, K., Lim, J.H., Ueda, K., Oshima, Y., Peach, C., Erturk-Hasdemir, D., Goldman, W.E., Oh, B.H., Kurata, S., Silverman, N., 2006. PGRP-LC and PGRP-LE have essential yet distinct functions in the *Drosophila* immune response to monomeric DAP-type peptidoglycan. Nat. Immunol. 7, 715–723.

Kim, C.H., Kim, S.J., Kan, H., Kwon, H.M., Roh, K.B., Jiang, R., Yang, Y., Park, J.W., Lee, H.H., Ha, N.C., Kang, H.J., Nonaka, M., Soderhall, K., Lee, B.L., 2008. A three-step proteolytic cascade mediates the activation of the peptidoglycan-induced Toll pathway in an insect. J. Biol. Chem. 283, 7599–7607.

Kim, M.S., Byun, M., Oh, B.H., 2003. Crystal structure of peptidoglycan recognition protein LB from *Drosophila melanogaster*. Nat. Immunol. 4, 787–793.

Kleino, A., Silverman, N., 2014. The *Drosophila* IMD pathway in the activation of the humoral immune response. Dev. Comp. Immunol. 42, 25–35.

Knorr, E., Bingsohn, L., Kanost, M.R., Vilcinskas, A., 2013. *Tribolium castaneum* as a model for high-throughput RNAi screening. Adv. Biochem. Eng. Biotechnol. 136, 163–178.

Lemaitre, B., Hoffmann, J., 2007. The host defense of *Drosophila melanogaster*. Annu. Rev. Immunol. 25, 697–743.

Lemaitre, B., Nicolas, E., Michaut, L., Reichhart, J.M., Hoffmann, J.A., 1996. The dorsoventral regulatory gene cassette spatzle/Toll/cactus controls the potent antifungal response in *Drosophila* adults. Cell 86, 973–983.

Manfruelli, P., Reichhart, J.M., Steward, R., Hoffmann, J.A., Lemaitre, B., 1999. A mosaic analysis in *Drosophila* fat body cells of the control of antimicrobial peptide genes by the Rel proteins Dorsal and DIF. EMBO J. 18, 3380–3391.

Mao, Y.B., Cai, W.J., Wang, J.W., Hong, G.J., Tao, X.Y., Wang, L.J., Huang, Y.P., Chen, X.Y., 2007. Silencing a cotton bollworm P450 monooxygenase gene by plant-mediated RNAi impairs larval tolerance of gossypol. Nat. Biotechnol. 25, 1307–1313.

Mao, Y.B., Xue, X.Y., Tao, X.Y., Yang, C.Q., Wang, L.J., Chen, X.Y., 2013. Cysteine protease enhances plant-mediated bollworm RNA interference. Plant Mol. Biol. 83, 119–129.

Mellroth, P., Karlsson, J., Steiner, H., 2003. A scavenger function for a *Drosophila* peptidoglycan recognition protein. J. Biol. Chem. 278, 7059–7064.

Michel, T., Reichhart, J.M., Hoffmann, J.A., Royet, J., 2001. *Drosophila* Toll is activated by Gram-positive bacteria through a circulating peptidoglycan recognition protein. Nature 414, 756–759.

Park, J.W., Kim, C.H., Kim, J.H., Je, B.R., Roh, K.B., Kim, S.J., Lee, H.H., Ryu, J.H., Lim, J.H., Oh, B.H., Lee, W.J., Ha, N.C., Lee, B.L., 2007. Clustering of peptidoglycan recognition protein-SA is required for sensing lysine-type peptidoglycan in insects. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 104, 6602–6607.

Reichhart, J.M., Meister, M., Dimarcq, J.L., Zachary, D., Hoffmann, D., Ruiz, C., Richards, G., Hoffmann, J.A., 1992. Insect immunity: developmental and inducible activity of the *Drosophila* dipterericin promoter. EMBO J. 11, 1469–1477.

Royet, J., Gupta, D., Dziarski, R., 2011. Peptidoglycan recognition proteins: modulators of the microbiome and inflammation. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 11, 837–851.

Samakovlis, C., Kimbrell, D.A., Kylsten, P., Engström, A., Hultmark, D., 1990. The immune response in *Drosophila*: pattern of cecropin expression and biological activity. EMBO J. 9, 2969–2976.

Takehana, A., Katsuyama, T., Yano, T., Oshima, Y., Takada, H., Aigaki, T., Kurata, S., 2002. Overexpression of a pattern-recognition receptor, peptidoglycan-recognition protein-LE, activates imd/relish-mediated antibacterial defense and the prophenoloxidase cascade in *Drosophila* larvae. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 99, 13705–13710.

Tauszig, S., Jouanguy, E., Hoffmann, J.A., Imler, J.L., 2000. Toll-related receptors and the control of antimicrobial peptide expression in *Drosophila*. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 97, 10520–10525.

Thompson, J.D., Higgins, D.G., Gibson, T.J., 1994. CLUSTAL W: improving the sensitivity of progressive multiple sequence alignment through sequence weighting, position-specific gap penalties and weight matrix choice. Nucleic Acids Res. 22, 4673–4680.

Tomoyasu, Y., Miller, S.C., Tomita, S., Schoppmeier, M., Grossmann, D., Bucher, G., 2008. Exploring systemic RNA interference in insects: a genome-wide survey for RNAi genes in Tribolium. Genome Biol. 9.

Tryselius, Y., Samakovlis, C., Kimbrell, D.A., Hultmark, D., 1992. CecC, a cecropin gene expressed during metamorphosis in *Drosophila* pupae. Eur. J. Biochem. 204, 395–399.

Valanne, S., Wang, J.H., Rämet, M., 2011. The *Drosophila* Toll signaling pathway. J. Immunol. 186, 649–656.

Wang, L.H., Weber, A.N., Atilano, M.L., Filipe, S.R., Gay, N.J., Ligoxygakis, P., 2006. Sensing of Gram-positive bacteria in *Drosophila*: GNBP1 is needed to process and present peptidoglycan to PGRP-SA. EMBO J. 25, 5005–5014.

Werner, T., Liu, G., Kang, D., Ekengren, S., Steiner, H., Hultmark, D., 2000. A family of peptidoglycan recognition proteins in the fruit fly *Drosophila melanogaster*. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 97, 13772–13777.

Yano, T., Mita, S., Ohmori, H., Oshima, Y., Fujimoto, Y., Ueda, R., Takada, H., Goldman, W.E., Fukase, K., Silverman, N., Yoshimori, T., Kurata, S., 2008. Autophagic control of listeria through intracellular innate immune recognition in *Drosophila*. Nat. Immunol. 9, 908–916.

Yokoi, K., Koyama, H., Ito, W., Minakuchi, C., Tanaka, T., Miura, K., 2012a. Involvement of NF-κB transcription factors in antimicrobial peptide gene induction in the red flour beetle, *Tribolium castaneum*. Dev. Comp. Immunol. 38, 342–351.

Yokoi, K., Koyama, H., Minakuchi, C., Tanaka, T., Miura, K., 2012b. Antimicrobial peptide gene induction, involvement of Toll and IMD pathways and defense against bacteria in the red flour beetle, *Tribolium castaneum*. Results Immunol. 2, 72–82.

Yoshida, H., Kinoshita, K., Ashida, M., 1996. Purification of a peptidoglycan recognition protein from hemolymph of the silkworm, *Bombyx mori*. J. Biol. Chem. 271, 13854–13860.

Yu, Y., Park, J.W., Kwon, H.M., Hwang, H.O., Jang, I.H., Masuda, A., Kurokawa, K., Nakayama, H., Lee, W.J., Dohmae, N., Zhang, J., Lee, B.L., 2010. Diversity of innate immune recognition mechanism for bacterial polymeric meso-diaminopimelic acid-type peptidoglycan in insects. J. Biol. Chem. 285, 32937–32945.

Zou, Z., Evans, J.D., Lu, Z., Zhao, P., Williams, M., Sumathipala, N., Hetru, C., Hultmark, D., Jiang, H., 2007. Comparative genomic analysis of the *Tribolium* immune system. Genome Biol. 8, R177.
