
Accepted Manuscript

Senescence as a general cellular response to stress: A mini-review

Irina Fridlyanskaya, Larisa Alekseenko, Nikolay Nikolsky

PII: S0531-5565(15)30063-2  
DOI: doi: 10.1016/j.exger.2015.09.021  
Reference: EXG 9711  

To appear in: *Experimental Gerontology*

Received date: 2 July 2015  
Revised date: 24 September 2015  
Accepted date: 30 September 2015  

Please cite this article as: Fridlyanskaya, Irina, Alekseenko, Larisa, Nikolsky, Nikolay, Senescence as a general cellular response to stress: A mini-review, *Experimental Gerontology* (2015), doi: 10.1016/j.exger.2015.09.021  

This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.

# Senescence as a General Cellular Response to Stress: A Mini-Review

Irina Fridlyanskaya, Larisa Alekseenko*, Nikolay Nikolsky

Department of Cell Signalization and Transport, Institute of Cytology RAS, St. Petersburg, Russia

*al.l.l@mail.ru

## HIGHLIGHTS

- Senescence is a common cell reaction on stress
- Replicative and induced senescence are mediated by close mechanisms
- Stress-induced senescence is cell type specific

## Abstract

Cellular senescence was initially described as the phenomenon of limited cell divisions that normal cells in culture can undergo during long-term-cultivation. Later it was found that senescence may be induced by various stress factors. The intriguing resemblance between stress-induced and replicative senescence makes questionable the distinction between both types and suggests that the cellular senescence is a common outcome of stress response. Growing evidences support the idea that stress-induced senescence is the cell-type specific.

## Keywords

Stress response, senescence, apoptosis, stem cells

## 1. Introduction

All living organisms experience a wide range of stressors. Cells subjected to different stress factors can be damaged. This damage for cultured cells may be reversible (repair) or irreversible (apoptosis, senescence). Cells undergoing apoptosis die and rapidly disintegrate. Senescent cells, which are defined as irreversibly arrested cells, remain viable, maintain high metabolic activities, and secrete a large number of different substances into the environment. Over the past decade,

apoptosis, or programmed cell death, has been considered a major cellular stress response. According to widespread views, the cell option, apoptosis or senescence, is determined by the magnitude of the stress. Accumulated findings have demonstrated that in many cases the outcome of cell exposure to stress is senescence rather than apoptosis and that this outcome is virtually independent of the severity of the stress (Cmielova et al., 2012). Cellular senescence was first described approximately 60 years ago in long-term fibroblast cultures (Hayflick and Moorhead, 1961). Normal cultured cells gradually lost their proliferative capacity and underwent senescence. Later, cultured cells exposed to different stress factors were shown to exhibit senescence phenotypes. In general, senescence can be described as a state of stable cell cycle arrest in response to diverse stresses. Senescence is proposed to play an important role in organism aging. It is also regarded as a tumor suppression mechanism that functions by limiting aberrant cell proliferation in vivo (Ben-Porath and Weinberg, 2004). We aimed to provide a brief overview of the various aspects of cellular senescence and to show that it is a general cell stress response. The current knowledge regarding various aspects of cellular senescence has been gained primarily from cell culture studies.

2. Cell senescence induced by long-term cultivation (replicative senescence)

Normal human fibroblasts cannot be indefinitely expanded in culture. After a period of rapid proliferation, cell division progressively slows down and finally ceases. Long-term cultures of human diploid fibroblasts consist of viable but irreversibly arrested cells. These observations, which have attracted much attention, have been reproduced in hundreds of experiments on cultured cells from different tissues and species. Notably, the cells used to establish these cultures were of mesenchymal origin or so-called fibroblast-like cells. Normal cells of other tissue origins usually expand poorly in vitro. The limited lifespan of cultured normal cells is termed replicative senescence. The number of normal cell divisions in culture (population doublings) is known as the Hayflick limit. It depends on the species and tissue type employed for cell culture establishment. As a rule, lower limits have been observed in cultures derived from

short-lived animals. Thus, mouse fibroblasts have a Hayflick limit of approximately 15—20 population doublings, whereas the replicative lifespan of human fibroblasts is about 50—100 population doublings (Woo and Poon, 2004). These values vary depending on the donor age and culture conditions. Collectively, these findings have linked the limited proliferative capacity observed in cell cultures to the processes involved in organismal aging. The relevance of in vitro senescence to organism aging has long remained elusive. Monitoring aging in vivo at the cellular level has long been experimentally challenging due to the lack of reliable senescence markers. Progress has been made only after long and careful research into cell senescence in vitro. Aging tissues in humans have been confirmed to have senescent cells (Bernardes and Blasco, 2012). Senescence is regarded as a mechanism that contributes to the cell proliferation control and tumorigenesis suppression. Senescence prevents immortality (infinite division) that arises from cancer-causing mutations. Escape from senescence may be a step in neoplastic transformation. Cultured rodent fibroblasts are able to overcome lifespan boundaries (the Hayflick limit) and to avoid replicative senescence. Cells that escape replicative restrictions spontaneously transform into immortalized and tumor cells with unlimited proliferation potential (Frosina, 2001).

Unlike rodent cells, normal human fibroblasts are incapable of spontaneous transformation in culture. Since the first publications regarding the limited lifespan of cultured human fibroblasts (Hayflick and Moorhead, 1961), no convincing evidence of spontaneous immortalization of cultured human fibroblasts cells has been presented. A few reports regarding spontaneously immortalized (transformed) normal human cells published during the past 60 years have been retracted or corrected. It was demonstrated that the cell lines used in those reports had been cross-contaminated with cells of other origins, i.e., tumor cell lines with unlimited capacities for in vitro proliferation (Torsvik et al., 2012). Regrettably, cancer is not a rare occurrence in humans, but the mechanisms that render normal human fibroblasts refractory to spontaneous transformation in vitro remain uncertain.

Senescent cells exit the proliferative pool and exhibit morphological and molecular markers. The following are hallmarks of senescence: enlarged flattened morphology, senescence-associated β-galactosidase (SA-β-gal) activity, altered pattern of gene expression, and increased secretory activity. β-galactosidase is a lysosomal enzyme that is active at pH 4.0–4.5. Senescent cells have increased lysosomal contents that favor SA-β-gal detection at a higher suboptimal pH of 6.0 (Dimri et al., 1995). A key senescence marker is cell cycle arrest. Usually “old” human fibroblasts accumulate in G0/G1 phase. Organisms also contain a pool of “sleeping” cells in G0 phase (quiescent cells). In vivo stem cells generally persist in a quiescent state. Quiescence means dormancy in an undifferentiated state; however, under appropriate conditions, quiescent cells are capable of re-entering the cell cycle. Quiescent cells share some markers with senescent cells, e.g., SA-β-gal expression (Cho and Hwang, 2012). The fundamental difference between senescence and quiescence is that the cell cycle arrest of senescent cells, unlike in quiescent cells, is irreversible and cannot be resumed by known stimuli. Senescent cells may stay arrested for a long time but are destined to die.

Irreversible inhibition of cell proliferation in senescent fibroblasts is mediated by two inhibitors of cyclin-dependent kinases, p21<sup>CIP1/SDI1/WAF1</sup> (p21) and p16<sup>INK4A</sup> (p16). The up-regulation of their expression is another biomarker for cell senescence. An important hallmark of senescent cells is a senescence-associated secretory phenotype (SASP), which is linked to their hypertrophy. Senescent cells locked in the cell cycle remain metabolically active for a long time and release various factors to the external environment: growth factors, secreted proteases, insoluble proteins/extracellular matrix components. These compounds can modify the microenvironment, thereby affecting other cells (Coppe et al., 2010).

Replicative senescence (the Hayflick limit) is commonly attributed to the progressive shortening of chromosomal termini during successive cell divisions. Telomeres are the physical ends of eukaryotic chromosomes that may function to protect the chromosomes from end-to-end fusion. Telomeres contain both DNA and protein. The DNA component of telomeres consists of

(TTAGGG)n repeats in all vertebrates including humans. The length of these telomeric repeats in human cells decreases with each round of cell division. The rate of this loss in cultured human fibroblasts has been measured as 50-100 bp telomeric DNA with each successive round of cell division (Hodes, 1999). Telomeres are subjected to erosion due to the inability of the DNA replication machinery to replicate DNA completely at the ends of the chromosomes.

The enzyme responsible for the replication of telomeric repeats and for the maintenance of telomere length is telomerase. Its activity is mostly restricted to germline and cancer cells. Normal somatic cells generally lack detectable telomerase activity, and the repair of critically short telomeres by telomerase is limited in most somatic cells. Critically shortened telomeres lose the protection of telomere-binding proteins, resulting in telomere “uncapping”. Uncapped telomeres are recognized as DNA breaks. These telomeres are highly recombinogenic and cause the generation of dicentric chromosomes and anaphase bridges that evoke genomic instability. If unrepaired, DNA damage induces a DNA damage response (DDR) that triggers the signaling cascade to arrest the cell cycle irreversibly (Marthandan et al., 2014).

Senescence research was fueled by an increased interest in stem cells, mesenchymal cells in particular. Unlike other stem cells, mesenchymal cells grow well in culture. Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) were identified approximately 40 years ago (Friedenstein et al., 1968); however, over the last few decades, MSCs have gained much attention for their potential in clinical applications. Stem cells may function to maintain and repair their tissues of origin. A decline in tissue regenerative capacity during aging **have attributed** to stem cell depletion. Therefore, stem cell replication potential and stress responses are of much concern.

MSC cultures have been established from different adult organism sources (e.g., bone marrow, adipose tissue, umbilical cord blood, and menstrual blood) and are often called adult stem cells. Cultured stem cells maintain their self-renewal ability and are able to differentiate into various cell lineages under appropriate conditions. During in vitro cultivation, MSCs of different origins undergo a limited number of divisions and then stop proliferating. Arrested cells

display all characteristic traits of senescence, such as an enlarged and flattened morphology, enhanced SA-β-gal activity, and increased p16 expression (Noh et al., 2010; Alekseenko et al., 2014). Large-scale MSC production is an important task in cell therapy because the frequency of stem cells in organisms is extremely low. Cell mass accumulated by stem cell expansion in vitro should be safe for clinical applications. Of great concern is their oncogenic security during long-term cultivation. Available data have shown that long-term cultivated MSCs like human fibroblasts do not undergo malignant transformation (Wang et al., 2013).

### 3. Stress-induced premature senescence (SIPS)

Radiation, osmotic stress, mechanical stress, oxidative stress, heavy metals, heat shock, and genotoxic drugs are able to halt cell division. Human fibroblasts irradiated with 20 Gy (Cmielova et al., 2012) or exposed to severe heat shock (Alekseenko et al., 2012), and high doses of H₂O₂ (Zdanov et al., 2006) irreversibly lost their proliferative capacity. Studies regarding cells under stress conditions showed a prominent phenotypic resemblance with cells that undergo replicative senescence. This phenomenon is called SIPS or accelerated senescence because the cells display senescent markers shortly after treatment with stress factors (within hours or days) (Toussaint et al., 2000).

A large number of studies regarding the stress response of stem cells have been published in recent years. MSCs of different origins that are exposed to oxidative stress (Burova et al., 2013) high-dose radiation (Cmielova et al., 2012), genotoxic drug (Minieri et al., 2015), and heat shock (Alekseenko et al., 2012) undergo irreversible cell cycle arrest and display the common senescence markers: a modified morphology, DDR, activated cell cycle arrest machinery, and SASP phenotype. These markers demonstrate that the general response of adult stem cell to stress is senescence.

SIPS cells display the same hallmarks as the cells entered the replicative senescence: altered morphology, irreversible cell cycle block, DDR, activation of cell cycle arrest machinery, (p53, p16, p21), metabolic activity (SASP). Fig. 1 shows the major pathway of stress-induced

senescence. Senescence programs triggered by various stress factors are initiated by DNA damage, which causes DNA breaks that activate the DDR. DNA damage induces cell senescence primarily by activating the ATM/ATR-p53-p21-pRb pathway. In most somatic cells, DDR activates the sensor kinases ATM/ATR, which recognize and phosphorylate downstream players of the signaling cascade. Phosphorylation of H2AX histone in sites of DNA breaks forms the γ-H2AX foci required for recruiting and anchoring the DDR players. ATM/ATR phosphorylate and stabilize the transcription factor p53, which triggers the transcription of various genes, including p21 GADD45, inhibitors of cyclin-dependent kinases. Senescence engages p16, another inhibitor of cyclin-dependent kinases. The p16-pRB pathway may be activated through involvement of the p38/MAPK cascade, which is initiated by various stressors. p21 and p16 facilitate the hypophosphorylation of RB. Active RB binds to the transcription factor E2F to regulate cell cycle progression (Sherr and Robert, 1999; Firsanov et al., 2011).

The mechanisms of replicative and accelerated senescence look similar (Fig. 1). The primary ambiguity of these mechanisms concerns the implication of telomere attrition in SIPS. Replicative senescence is commonly believed to be triggered by the erosion and dysfunction of telomeres, whereas SIPS occurs independent of telomere shortening (Suzuki et al., 2001). Growing evidence suggests that SIPS is also mediated by DNA damage and telomere dysfunction (von Zglinicki 2012; Li et al., 2012). In both cases senescence is a cell response to DNA damage either in telomere or other DNA sites.

Strictly speaking, both senescence types, replicative and stress-induced senescence, are closely related phenomena (Ben-Porath et al., 2004). Cultured cells permanently cope with stress factors. Notably, in long-term cultivation experiments, cells are maintained at ambient 20% oxygen, which is not optimal physiologically. Few cells in the human body are exposed to this oxygen concentration. It has been demonstrated that human MSC maintained under a tissue

oxygen level (3–5% O₂) significantly increase in vitro proliferative lifespan before reaching senescence compared to cells cultured in the ambient O₂ environment (Mohyeldin et al., 2010).

Moreover, protease treatments typically applied to cell subculture during long-term cultivation may also be stressful for cells. Thereby, standard culture conditions have components (oxygen content, protease treatment) that are stressful for normal cells. This stress most likely induces senescence, however, the senescence program can be realized gradually (replicative senescence) or rapidly (premature senescence).

Comparison of replicative and stress-induced senescence performed on the same cells is the most informative. These studies demonstrated that both senescence types are very similar. Thus, the proteomic analysis revealed that human fibroblasts underwent replicative and stress-induced senescence share quantitative modification of a number of proteins (Succoio et al., 2015). Human smooth muscle cells entered replicative senescence or doxorubicin-induced senescence exhibited the same senescence hallmarks, although some differences were observed. They concerned, mostly, telomere shortening and the phase of the cell cycle arrest (Bielak-Zmijewska et al., 2014).

4. Cell type specificity of the stress response, senescence or apoptosis

Cellular stress triggers a decision-making process in cells; the cells can either attempt to survive until the stress is resolved through the activation of cytoprotective pathways or die to prevent further damage. In general, cell death can occur by apoptosis or necrosis. Necrosis is observed typically in response to acute damage and is a rapid, passive, destructive process that leads to membrane breakage and to the release of intracellular contents. Apoptosis occurs with less severe damage and is a precisely regulated process of cell suicide. Over the past decade, most studies regarding cellular responses to stress factors such as radiation, cytotoxic agents, and heat exposure have focused on apoptosis, the general physiological program of cell death.

Various stresses have been postulated to induce apoptosis in both normal and cancer cells. After the discovery of SIPS (Toussaint et al., 2000), apoptotic stress inducers became the focus of

attention as potential triggers of SIPS (e.g., irradiation, oxidative stress, genotoxic drugs, and heat shock). The outcome of the cellular stress response, apoptosis or SIPS, was proposed to be dependent on dose. Severe stress induces apoptosis, whereas mild damage induces premature senescence. Some authors have confirmed this hypothesis (Burova et al., 2013). However, mounting evidence has shown that the outcome of cell stress is hardly determined solely by stress level (Childs et al., 2014).

The responses of cells seem to be predetermined by their tissues of origin. The primary response of hematopoietic, lymphoid and germ cells to irradiation is apoptosis induction, whereas the primary response of fibroblast-like cells and solid tumors to irradiation is SIPS induction. Few reports regarding apoptosis induction in fibroblasts cells (Formichi et al., 2006) and induced senescence in lymphoid cells (Yang et al., 2012) have been published; however, in these cases, SIPS and apoptosis usually lack some of their characteristic features, or they are manifested in non-classical forms. Thus, fundamental determinants of whether a cell responds to damage by undergoing senescence or apoptosis are dependent on the cell type and, to some extent, the damage intensity. Fig. 2 illustrates the stress responses of human adult stem cells (MSCs) and embryonic stem cells (ESCs). Adult stem cells undergo SIPS, whereas ESCs exhibit apoptosis. The different reactions of these cells to stress most likely reflect their biological significance. MSCs ensure tissue repair in organism. Senescent cells are metabolically active that may be beneficial for the repair of other damaged cells. ESCs are pluripotent cells derived from early embryos. The cells of early embryos are responsible for the vast diversity of the organism and should employ mechanisms that guarantee their genome integrity. ESCs may exhibit higher stress tolerance than differentiated cells. However, if a stress burden is unbearable, then the cells should die to guarantee healthy or no progeny. Signaling pathways determining cell destiny, i.e., the induction of either apoptosis or senescence, are currently under investigation (Childs et al., 2014). Both senescence and apoptosis are hypothesized to be initiated by cell responses to DNA damage. A key player in both events is the p53 protein. Senescence is accompanied by activation

of the p53/p21/RB pathway. The apoptotic program is driven by p53-regulated expression of pro-apoptotic proteins that triggers the caspase cascade.

## Conclusions

Cellular senescence is defined as the irreversible exit from the cell cycle. First described as the limited proliferation capacity in long-term cultures of normal somatic cells with potential implications in aging, this phenomenon is may be classified as a common cellular response to stress. Accumulated findings favor the assumption of cell type predisposition to stress-induced senescence.

## Conflict of interest

The authors declare no conflict of interest.

## Acknowledgments

The authors thank the Russian Science Foundation (project 14-50-00068) and Russian Federal Agency of Scientific Organizations for the financial support.

## References

Alekseenko, L.L., Zemelko, V.I., Domnina, A.P., Lyublinskaya, O.G., Zenin, V.V., Pugovkina, N.A., Kozhukharova, I.V., Borodkina, A.V., Grinchukm, T.,M., Fridlyanskaya, I.I., Nikolsky, N.N., 2014. Sublethal heat shock induces premature senescence rather than apoptosis in human mesenchymal stem cells. Cell Stress and Chaperones. 19, 355–366.

Alekseenko, L.L., Zemelko, V.V., Zenin, V.V., Pugovkina, N.A., Kozhukharova, I.V., Kovaleva, Z.V., Grinchuk, T.M., Fridlyanskaya, I.I., Nikolsky, N.N., 2012. Heat shock induces apoptosis in human embryonic stem cells but a premature senescence phenotype in their differentiated progeny. Cell Cycle. 11, 3260–3269.

Bielak-Zmijewska, A., Wnuk, M., Przybylska, D., Grabowska W., Lewinska A., Alster O., Korwek Z., Cmoch A., Myszka A., Pikula S., Mosieniak G., Sikora E. 2014. A comparison of replicative senescence and doxorubicin-induced premature senescence of vascular smooth muscle cells isolated from human aorta. Biogerontology. 15, 47-64.

Ben-Porath, I., Weinberg, R.A., 2004. When cells get stressed: an integrative view of cellular senescence. J Clin Invest. 113, 8–13.

Bernardes de Jesus, B., Maria, A., 2012. Blasco Assessing Cell and Organ Senescence Biomarkers. Circ Res. 111, 97–109.

Burova, E., Borodkina, A., Shatrova, A., Nikolsky, N., 2013. Sublethal oxidative stress induces the premature senescence of human mesenchymal stem cells derived from endometrium. Oxid Med Cell Longev. 2013:474931.

Cho, S., Hwang, E.S., 2012. Status of mTOR activity may phenotypically differentiate senescence and quiescence. Mol Cells. 33, 597–604.

Childs, B.J., Baker, D.J., Kirkland, J.L., Campisi, J., van Deursen, J.M., 2014. Senescence and apoptosis: dueling or complementary cell fates? EMBO reports. 15, 1139–1153.

Cmielova, J., Havelek, R., Soukup, T., et al., 2012. Gamma radiation induces senescence in human adult mesenchymal stem cells from bone marrow and periodontal ligaments. Int J Radiat Biol. 88, 393–404.

Coppe, J.P., Desprez, P.Y., Krtolica, A., Campisi, J., 2010. The Senescence-Associated Secretory Phenotype: The Dark Side of Tumor Suppression. Annu Rev Pathol. 5, 99–118.

Dimri, G.P., Lee, X., Basile, G., Acosta, M., Scott, G., Roskelley, C., Pereira-Smith, O., 1995. A biomarker that identifies senescent human cells in culture and in aging skin in vivo. PNAS. 92, 9363–9367.

Firsanov, D.V., Solovjeva, L.V., Svetlova, M.P., 2011. H2AX phosphorylation at the sites of DNA double-strand breaks in cultivated mammalian cells and tissues. Clin Epigenetics. 2, 283–297.

Formichi, P., Radi, E., Battisti, C., Tarquini, E., Leonini A, Di Stefano, A., Federico, A., 2006. Human fibroblasts undergo oxidative stress-induced apoptosis without internucleosomal DNA fragmentation. J. Cell. Physiol. 208, 289–297.

Friedenstein, A.J., Petrakova, K.V., Kurolesova, A.I., Frolova, G.P., 1968. Heterotopic of bone marrow. Analysis of precursor cells for osteogenic and hematopoietic tissues. Transplantation. 6, 230–247.

Frosina, G., 2001. Counteracting spontaneous transformation via overexpression of rate-limiting DNA base excision repair enzymes. Carcinogenesis. 22 (9), 1335–1341.

Hayflick, L., Moorhead, P.S., 1961. The serial cultivation of human diploid cell strains. Exp. Cell Res. 25, 585–621.

Hodes, R.J., 1999. Telomere Length, Aging, and Somatic Cell Turnover. J Exp Med. 190, 153–156.

Li, P., Hou, M., Lou, F., Björkholm, M., Xu, D., 2012. Telomere dysfunction induced by chemotherapeutic agents and radiation in normal human cells. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 44, 1531–1540.

Marthandan, S., Priebe, S., Hemmerich, P., Klement, K., Diekmann, S., 2014. Long-term quiescent fibroblast cells transit into senescence. PLoS One. 9(12):e115597.

Minieri, V., Saviozzi, S., Gambarotta, G., Lo Iacono, M., Accomasso, L., Cibrario Rocchietti, E., Giachino, C., 2015. Persistent DNA damage-induced premature senescence alters the functional features of human bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells. J Cell Mol Med. 19, 734–743.

Mohyeldin, A., Garzyn-Muvdi, T., Quicones-Hinojosa, A., 2010. Oxygen in stem cell biology: a critical component of the stem cell niche. Cell Stem Cell. 7(2), 150–161.

Noh, H.B., Ahn, H.J., Lee, W.J., Kwack, K., Do Kwon, Y., 2010. The molecular signature of in vitro senescence in human mesenchymal stem cells. Genes & Genomics. 32, 87–93.

Sherr, C.J., Roberts, J.M., 1999. CDK inhibitors: positive and negative regulators of G1-phase progression. Genes Dev. 13, 1501–1512.

Succoio M., Comegna M., D'Ambrosio C., Scaloni A., Cimino F., Faraonio R. 2015. Proteomic analysis reveals novel common genes modulated in both replicative and stress-induced senescence. J Proteomics. 128, 18-29.

Suzuki, K., Mori, I., Nakayama, Y., Miyakoda, M., Kodama, S., Watanabe, M., 2001. Radiation-induced senescence-like growth arrest requires TP53 function but not telomere shortening. Radiat Res. 155, 248–253.

Torsvik, A., Røsland, G.V., Bjerkvig, R., 2012. Spontaneous transformation of stem cells in vitro and the issue of cross-contamination. Int J Biol Sci. 8, 1051–1054.

Toussaint, O., Medrano, E.E., von Zglinicki, T. 2000. Cellular and molecular mechanisms of stress-induced premature senescence (SIPS) of human diploid fibroblasts and melanocytes. Exp Gerontol. 35, 927–945.

von Zglinicki, T., 2002. Oxidative stress shortens telomeres. Trends Biochem Sci. 27, 339–344.

Wang, Y., Zhang, Z., Chi, Y., et al., 2013. Long-term cultured mesenchymal stem cells frequently develop genomic mutations but do not undergo malignant transformation. Cell Death Dis. 4:e950.

Woo, R.A and Poon, R.Y., 2004. Activated oncogenes promote and cooperate with chromosomal instability for neoplastic transformation. Genes Dev. 1, 1317–1330.

Yang, M.Y., Lin, P.M., Liu, Y.C., Hsiao, H.H., Yang, W.C., Hsu, J.F., Hsu, C.M., Lin, S.F., 2012. Induction of cellular senescence by doxorubicin is associated with upregulated miR-375 and induction of autophagy in K562 cells. PLoS One. 7:e37205.

Zdanov, S., Remacle, J., Toussaint, O., 2006. Establishment of H2O2-induced premature senescence in human ibroblasts concomitant with increased cellular production of H2O2. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 1067, 210–216.

FIGURE CAPTIONS

Fig. 1. Major pathways of replicative and stress-induced premature senescence.

Fig.2. Stress induced senescence in mesenchymal stem cells but apoptosis in embryonic stem cells.

SA-β-gal staining visualizes senescent cells. Nuclei stained with DAPI are fragmented in apoptotic cells (arrows) but intact in senescent cells.

Oxidative stress, heat shock, drugs, ionization  
radiation, oncogenes, culture stress  

DNA damage  

ATM/ATR  

Chk1/Chk2  

p53  

p21  

Cyclins  
E1/D1  

CDK2/CDK4  

E2F  

RB  

Cell cycle arrest  

G0/G1  

Replicative senescence  

Telomere shortening  

RAS  

RAF  

MEK  

P38/MAPK  

GADD45  

p16  

Cyclin B  

Cdc2  

G0/G1 and/or G2/M  

Stress-induced premature senescence  

SASP  

Telomere shortening?  

Figure 1

Mesenchymal stem cells
Embryonic stem cells

Stress

SA-β-gal
p53
Bax, Bak
p21
Caspases
3, 8, 9
RB

DAPI
No apoptosis
SA-β-gal
Senescence
DAPI
Apoptosis
SA-β-gal
No senescence

Figure 2
