
# Assembly of the Mycobacterial Cell Wall

Monika Jankute, Jonathan A.G. Cox, James Harrison, and Gurdyal S. Besra

School of Biosciences, University of Birmingham, Edgbaston, Birmingham B15 2TT, United Kingdom; email: g.besra@bham.ac.uk

## Keywords

arabinogalactan, biosynthesis, cell wall, lipoarabinomannan, mycolic acids, peptidoglycan

## Abstract

*Mycobacterium tuberculosis* remains one of the most successful bacterial pathogens, claiming over 1.3 million lives worldwide in 2013. The emergence of multidrug-resistant and extensively drug-resistant isolates has prompted the need for new drugs and drug targets. *M. tuberculosis* possesses an unusual cell wall dominated by lipids and carbohydrates that provides a permeability barrier against hydrophilic drugs and is crucial for its survival and virulence. This large macromolecular structure, termed the mycolyl-arabinogalactan-peptidoglycan complex, and the phosphatidyl-*myo*-inositol-based lipoglycans are key features of the mycobacterial cell wall. Assembly of these cell wall components is an attractive target for the development of chemotherapeutics against tuberculosis. Herein, we focus on recent biochemical and molecular insights into these complex molecules of *M. tuberculosis* cell wall.

# Contents

- INTRODUCTION ..... 406
- PEPTIDOGLYCAN ..... 406
  - Structure of Peptidoglycan ..... 406
  - Biosynthesis of Peptidoglycan ..... 408
- ARABINO GALACTAN ..... 409
  - Structure of Arabinogalactan ..... 409
  - Biosynthesis of Arabinogalactan ..... 411
- PHOSPHATIDYL-MYO-INOSITOL MANNO SIDES, LIPOMANNAN, AND LIPOARABINOMANNAN ..... 412
  - Structure of Phosphatidyl-myo-Inositol Mannosides, Lipomannan, and Lipoarabinomannan ..... 412
  - Biosynthesis of Phosphatidyl-myo-Inositol Mannosides, Lipomannan, and Lipoarabinomannan ..... 413
- MYCOLIC ACIDS ..... 415
  - Structure and Biosynthesis of Mycolic Acids ..... 415
- FUTURE PERSPECTIVES ..... 415

# INTRODUCTION

A hallmark of mycobacteria is their intricate cell wall. Inhibition of cell wall assembly has proven useful for tuberculosis chemotherapy; drugs such as ethambutol, isoniazid, ethionamide, and D-cycloserine successfully target the synthesis of its various components. As a result, a complete understanding of cell wall biosynthesis has been a major research objective over the last decade. The cell envelope of *Mycobacterium tuberculosis* consists of three main structural components: (a) the characteristic long-chain mycolic acids, (b) a highly branched arabinogalactan (AG) polysaccharide, and (c) a cross-linked network of peptidoglycan (Figure 1). The entire complex, referred to as mAGP, is essential for cell viability. In addition, an outer membrane segment that contains solvent-extractable lipids, such as inert waxes and glycolipids, intercalates the mycolate layer of the mAGP complex (87–89). Finally, an outermost capsule composed of polysaccharides and proteins completes the cell envelope of *M. tuberculosis*. This review focuses primarily on mycobacterial cell wall core assembly.

# PEPTIDOGLYCAN

## Structure of Peptidoglycan

Peptidoglycan (PG) is present in almost all bacteria, providing shape, rigidity, and osmotic stability to both gram-negative and gram-positive bacilli (108). All PGs produced by bacteria share the same basic core structure: a glycan backbone and short cross-linked peptide side chains (124). The backbone of PG is typically made up of N-acetylglucosamine (GlcNAc) and N-acetylmuramic acid (MurNAc) linked via β(1→4) linkages (21). However, mycobacterial PGs possess one notable structural modification: MurNAc is oxidized to N-glycolylmuramic acid (MurNGlyc) (Figure 2) (76, 104). This modification is believed to be involved in increasing the overall strength of PG by providing sites for hydrogen bonding, as well as in potentially decreasing susceptibility to lysozyme

Figure 1

Schematic representation of *Mycobacterium tuberculosis* cell envelope. The capsular material is not represented here. Abbreviations: Ac/Ac₂PIM₂, tri-/tetra-acylated phosphatidyl-*myo*-inositol-dimannoside; Ac/Ac₂PIM₆, tri-/tetra-acylated phosphatidyl-*myo*-inositol-hexamannoside; AG, arabinogalactan; AGP, arabinogalactan-peptidoglycan complex; DAT, diacetyltrehalose; DPG, diphosphatidyglycerol; GalNH₂, galactosamine residue; k, keto; LAM, lipoarabinomannan; LM, lipomannan; m, methoxy; MA, mycolic acids; MIM, mycobacterial inner membrane; MOM, mycobacterial outer membrane; PAT, polyacyltrehalose; PDIM, phthiocerol dimycocerosate; PE, phosphatidylethanolamine; PG, peptidoglycan; PI, phosphatidyl-*myo*-inositol; SGL, sulfoglycolipid.

MI69CH21-Besra ARI 14 September 2015 11:16

MurNAc-GlcNAc—MurNAc-GlcNAc—MurNAc-GlcNAc

D-ala  
D-ala  
m-DAP  
D-iso-glu  
L-ala  

Trans-  
glycosylase  
PBP1/PBP2  

D-ala  
D-ala  
m-DAP  
D-iso-glu  
L-ala  

D-ala  
D-ala  
m-DAP  
D-iso-glu  
L-ala  

MurNAc-GlcNAc—MurNAc-GlcNAc—MurNAc-GlcNAc  

Periplasm  

MurJ/  
FtsW  

MurNAc-GlcNAc  

P  
P  

MurG  

UMP  

MurX  

UDP-  
GlcNac  

L-ala  
D-iso-glu  
m-DAP  
D-ala  
D-ala  

L-ala  
D-iso-glu  
m-DAP  
D-ala  
D-ala  

MurF  

Cytoplasm  

MurE  

MurD  

UDP-MurNAc  

UDP-MurNAc  

UDP-MurNAc  

L-ala  
D-iso-glu  
m-DAP  
D-ala  
D-ala  

L-ala  
D-iso-glu  
m-DAP  
D-ala  
D-ala  

L-ala  
D-iso-glu  
m-DAP  
D-ala  
D-ala  

MurC  

ATP  

ADP  
Pi  

ATP  

ADP  
Pi  

ATP  

ADP  
Pi  

MurB  

NADPH  

MurA  

UDP-GlcNAc  

Phospho-enol-  
pyruvate  

P  

UDP-enolpyruvyl-  
GlcNAc  

NADP+  

Figure 2  

The biosynthesis pathway of peptidoglycan in *Mycobacterium tuberculosis*.

(21, 104). Tetrapeptide side chains are attached to the muramyl components of the backbone that become cross-linked to provide a mesh-like structure. In *M. tuberculosis*, these side chains consist of L-alanyl-D-isoglutaminyl-meso-diaminopimelyl-D-alanine that is cross-linked between meso-diaminopimelic acid (*m*-DAP) and D-alanine (3→4), which means *M. tuberculosis* has an Alγ-group PG, based on the classification system of Schleifer & Kandler (108). However, mycobacterial PG also has a high number of *m*-DAP to *m*-DAP linkages (3→3), which increase in abundance when the bacilli enter the stationary phase (up to 80% of cross-linkages) (Figure 2) (67). *M. tuberculosis* has the ability to modify these cross-linkages from (3→4) to (3→3) without the requirement of de novo synthesis of PG, which could provide the bacilli with protection from endopeptidases (67). Another unique feature of mycobacterial PG is that it provides the site for AG attachment. The 6 position of some muramyl units of the PG backbone provides a site for a phosphodiester bond to an α-L-rhamnopyranose-(1→3)-α-D-GlcNAc-(1→P) disaccharide bridge (78).

## Biosynthesis of Peptidoglycan

The sequential Mur ligase pathway is the major contributor to the biosynthesis of PG. MurA (Rv1315) has enolpyruvyl transferase activity that adds phospho-enol-pyruvate to UDP-GlcNAc to form UDP-enolpyruvyl-GlcNAc (59). MurB (Rv0482) then utilizes NADPH to reduce the enolpyruvyl moiety from the product of MurA, to a lactoyl ether moiety, to form UDP-MurNAc (12). NamH (Rv3808) then hydroxylates UDP-MurNAc to UDP-MurNGlyc to provide both types of UDP-muramyl substrates (104). From this point, amino acid residues are

408 Jankute et al.

attached to UDP-MurNAc/Glyc by the ATP-dependent Mur ligases, beginning with UDP-N-acetylmuramoyl:L-alanine ligation by MurC (Rv2151c). This is followed by D-isoglutamate ligation by MurD (Rv2155c), *m*-DAP addition by MurE (Rv2158c), and finally D-alanyl-D-alanine ligation by MurF (Rv2157c) (Figure 2) (97). This produces Park's nucleotide, the muramyl-pentapeptide: UDP-MurNAc/Glyc-L-ala-D-isoglu-*m*-DAP-D-ala-D-ala (65). There have been numerous reviews of the ATP-dependent Mur ligase pathway in recent years (8, 36, 117); for *M. tuberculosis*, however, only MurC (75) and MurE (9) have been biochemically characterized.

Park's nucleotide is transferred to decaprenyl phosphate by MurX (Rv2156c), also known as MraY (19). This gives rise to what is known as Lipid I. MurG (Rv2153c) then attaches GlcNAc from UDP-GlcNAc to Lipid I via a β(1→4) linkage between GlcNAc and MurNAc/Glyc to form Lipid II, the final monomeric unit of PG synthesis (121). There is debate as to the identity of the Lipid II flippase, which translocates Lipid II across the plasma membrane. It was initially reported to be MurJ in *Escherichia coli* (Rv3910) by Ruiz (106), but this was later disputed by Mohammadi et al. (94), who identified FtsW (Rv2154c) as having in vitro flippase activity. However, Ruiz’s group (113) has recently reported in vivo data from *E. coli* that lend more credence to the identification of the flippase as MurJ. Nonetheless, more research on both enzymes is needed to fully characterize the mycobacterial Lipid II flippase.

After translocation of Lipid II across the plasma membrane, the bifunctional PonA1/PBP1 (Rv0050) and PonA2/PBP2 (Rv3682) transglycosylate Lipid II monomers by attaching the GlcNAc moiety to the muramyl moiety of the growing PG chain (47). In addition to their transglycosylation domain, PonA1 and PonA2 have transpeptidase activity, which forms the classical (3→4) cross-linkages between *m*-DAP and D-ala, at the expense of cleavage between the D-ala-D-ala peptide side chain (Figure 2) (23). Other domains of PonA1 and PonA2 include a transmembrane helix and a PASTA (abbreviation for PBP and serine/threonine-kinase associated) domain. However, it does not behave as a typical PASTA domain. It does not bind the expected ligands; therefore, further characterization of this domain is required (22). When *M. tuberculosis* enters dormancy, the number of (3→3) cross-linkages between *m*-DAP residues increases through PG rearrangement by nonclassical L,D-transpeptidases (28). Five paralogs within *M. tuberculosis* have been identified: LdtMt1 (Rv0116c), LdtMt2 (Rv2518c), LdtMt3 (Rv1433), LdtMt4 (Rv0192), and LdtMt5 (Rv0483). However, only LdtMt1- and LdtMt2-deficient strains have been shown to display phenotypic differences in PG structure (110). The L,D-transpeptidases perform the conversion from (3→4) to (3→3) cross-linking by cleaving the remaining D-ala residue from the donor chain, leaving behind a tripeptide chain in the stationary phase PG (107).

## ARABINOGALACTAN

### Structure of Arabino galactan

This highly branched macromolecule is composed predominantly of galactose (Gal) and arabinose (Ara) sugar residues, both in the furanose (*f*) ring form (80). In *M. tuberculosis*, about 10–12% of the MurNGlyc residues of PG are covalently attached to AG via a specialized linker unit, α-L-Rhap-(1→3)-α-D-GlcNAc-(1→P) (78). Specifically, this linker unit connects the galactan domain of AG to the C-6 position of selected MurNGlyc residues (78). The galactan component of AG is composed of a linear chain of approximately 30 alternating 5- and 6-linked β-D-Galf residues (30). The highly branched arabinan chains, each containing roughly 30 Araf residues, are connected to the linear galactan at C-5 of some of the β(1→6) Galf residues (14). Previous studies in *M. tuberculosis* and in the closely related *Corynebacterium glutamicum* suggested that three branched-chain arabinan units are attached to the galactan chain at positions 8, 10, and 12 (4, 16,

Arabinogalactan

Myc Myc Myc Myc
AftB
Myc Myc
AftC AftD?
Myc Myc
EmbA EmbB
AftC
EmbA? EmbB?
GlfT1
AftA
R R
Galactan core
Glft2
Rha GlcNAc P Mur
Linker unit

Mycolate attachment sites
Hexa-arabinoside

$\beta(1-2)$Araf
$\alpha(1-5)$Araf
$\alpha(3-5)$Araf
$\alpha(1-3)$Araf
$\beta(1-5)$Galf
$\beta(5-6)$Galf
$\beta(1-6)$Galf
Phosphodiester
Succinyl or GalN residue

**Figure 3**

Structure of mycobacterial arabinogalactan and roles of key enzymes that are responsible for its biosynthesis. Adapted from Reference 51 with permission from Future Medicine.

69). However, recently it has been proposed that only two arabinan units are attached per galactan chain (15). The inner core of the arabinan domain contains a backbone of $\alpha$-5-linked $\alpha$-D-Araf residues with key branching introduced by 3,5-$\alpha$-D-Araf residues (30). Galactosamine (D-GalN) and succinyl substituents were identified on the C-2 position of some inner 3,5-$\alpha$-D-Araf residues (16, 34, 69, 102). It was estimated that one D-GalN residue per AG is present exclusively in the walls of slow-growing mycobacteria and that up to three succinyl esters per AG are present in both slow- and fast-growing mycobacterial species. Interestingly, only nonmycolated arabinan chains were succinylated, and none of the decorated arabinan chains possessed both substituents (16). The nonreducing termini of the arabinan unit consist of a characteristic hexa-arabinoside motif, $[\beta$-D-Araf-(1$\rightarrow$2)-$\alpha$-D-Araf]$_{2}$-3,5-$\alpha$-D-Araf-(1$\rightarrow$5)-$\alpha$-D-Araf, where position 5 of both the terminal $\beta$-D-Araf and the penultimate 2-$\alpha$-D-Araf serves as an attachment site for mycolic acids (79). In *M. tuberculosis*, mycolyl units were shown to cluster in groups of four and occupy only about two-thirds of the available attachment sites on the terminal hexa-arabinoside motif (79). These structural features are summarized in Figure 3.

# Biosynthesis of Arabinogalactan

The biosynthesis of AG begins on the cytoplasmic side of the plasma membrane with the formation of the linker unit that anchors the AG component to PG. WecA (Rv1302) initiates the transfer of GlcNAc-1-P to decaprenyl-phosphate ($C_{50}$-P) to form $C_{50}$-P-P-GlcNAc (53, 85). The linker unit is completed by the rhamnosyltransferase WbbL (Rv3265c), which transfers Rha from dTDP-Rha to the 3 position of GlcNAc of $C_{50}$-P-P-GlcNAc, yielding $C_{50}$-P-P-GlcNAc-Rha (85, 86). The linker unit then serves as an acceptor for the cytoplasmic polymerization of the linear galactan chain. GlfT1 (Rv3782) and GlfT2 (Rv3808c), both of which utilize UDP-Galf, have been identified as bifunctional galactofuranosyltransferases (GalfT) responsible for the synthesis of the galactan chain. Specifically, GlfT1 transfers a Galf residue to the C-4 position of Rha and a second Galf residue to the C-5 position of the first Galf, resulting in $C_{50}$-P-P-GlcNAc-Rha-Galf$_{2}$ (1, 10, 83). The second enzyme, GlfT2, completes the synthesis of the galactan chain by the sequential addition of Galf residues in alternating $\beta(1 \rightarrow 5)$ and $\beta(1 \rightarrow 6)$ linkages, resulting in the production of $C_{50}$-P-P-GlcNAc-Rha-Galf$_{30}$. (63, 105, 129). Recent studies have proposed a processive polymerization mechanism by which GlfT2 controls the length of the galactan chain (71, 77). It is believed that subsequent steps in AG assembly, including arabinan polymerization, take place on the outside of the plasma membrane. Despite investigations into the nature of transport of mycobacterial cell wall polysaccharides, proteins involved in these processes remain largely unknown (20, 32). Chemical analysis of the mature lipid-linked galactan synthesized in vitro suggests that Araf residues are transferred directly onto $C_{50}$-P-P-GlcNAc-Rha-Galf$_{30}$, utilizing decaprenyl-monophosphoryl-D-arabinose (DPA) (130). DPA formation is catalyzed by phosphoribosyl-1-pyrophosphate synthetase PrsA (Rv1017c), decaprenylphosphoryl-5-phosphoribose synthase UbiA (Rv3806c), and a putative phospholipid phosphatase Rv3807c to form DPR. Decaprenylphosphoribose 2′ epimerase composed of DprE1 (Rv3790) and DprE2 (Rv3791) subunits then catalyzes the epimerization of the ribosyl unit of DPR, resulting in DPA (3, 4, 52, 82, 84). Recent studies described a transporter Rv3789, which appears to reorientate DPA to the periplasm, thus positioning this arabinose donor to be utilized in the synthesis of the arabinan domain of both AG and lipoarabinomannan (LAM) (66). The number of ArafTs involved in the assembly of the arabinan domain in AG remains a matter of speculation, but the current structure of AG suggests at least six different ArafTs. Deletion studies in *C. glutamicum*, where AG is dispensable, determined that AftA (Rv3792) transfers three single Araf residues to the 8th, 10th, and 12th Galf residues of $C_{50}$-P-P-GlcNAc-Rha-Galf$_{30}$ (5). It is speculated that further $\alpha(1 \rightarrow 5)$ polymerization of the arabinan domain is catalyzed by EmbA (Rv3794) and EmbB (Rv3795). Deletion of the singular *emb* gene from *C. glutamicum* demonstrated severe reduction of arabinose, resulting in a truncated AG structure with only terminal Araf residues, consistent with this hypothesis (4). Both EmbA and EmbB enzymes were also shown to play a role in forming the characteristic hexa-arabinofuranoside motif (37). Deletion studies in *Mycobacterium smegmatis* identified a branching enzyme AftC (Rv2673) that was responsible for the $\alpha(1 \rightarrow 3)$ branching of the internal arabinan domain of both AG and LAM (17, 18). AftD was proposed as a second $\alpha(1 \rightarrow 3)$-branching enzyme involved in the synthesis of AG and LAM; however, its precise function in the assembly of these components remains to be determined (116). Finally, AftB was shown to catalyze the transfer of the terminal $\beta(1 \rightarrow 2)$ Araf residues from DPA to the terminal hexa-arabinofuranoside motif at the nonreducing end of AG (111).

The addition of succinyl and GalN substituents to the inner regions of arabinan completes the primary structure of AG (16, 34, 115). Although enzymes involved in the transfer of the succinyl residues remain unknown, key components required for the synthesis and addition of the GalN substituent have been recently elucidated (115). PpgS (Rv3631) catalyzes the formation of polyprenol-P-d-GlcNAc, which is deacetylated by an unknown deacetylase, before or after

translocation across the plasma membrane. Rv3779 then transfers the GalN unit to the C-2 position of the 3,5-branched Araf residue of AG (115). It is speculated that the protonated D-GalN may interact with anionic substances, such as negatively charged succinyl residues or phosphates of glycolipids, thus contributing to the rigidity and tightness of the AG structure (16, 34). Moreover, the D-GalN unit, which is found only in slow-growing mycobacteria, was proposed to serve a role during host infection (115). However, the precise function of both D-GalN and succinyl residues remains to be established. Very little evidence has been obtained on how or when mycolic acids are directly transferred onto the AG. In vitro enzyme assays in combination with site-directed mutagenesis studies identified the antigen 85 complex as responsible for the transfer of mycolic acids onto trehalose, yielding trehalose monomycolates (TMM) and trehalose dimycolates (TDM) (11, 48). Inactivation of antigen 85 in *M. tuberculosis* led to reduced transfer of mycolates to the mycobacterial cell wall (48). However, the precise mechanistic details of their involvement in AG mycolation remains to be firmly established.

# PHOSPHATIDYL-MYO-INOSITOL MANNOSIDES, LIPOMANNAN, AND LIPOARABINOMANNAN

## Structure of Phosphatidyl-myo-Inositol Mannosides, Lipomannan, and Lipoarabinomannan

These noncovalently linked glycopholipids [phosphatidyl-myo-inositol mannosides (PIMs) and their more related glycosylated end products, lipomannan (LM) and lipoarabinomannan (LAM)] are abundant in the inner and outer membranes of all *Mycobacterium* species (39, 101, 103). In conjunction with their physiological function, these distinct glycoconjugates play a key role in modulating the host immune response during infection (74, 92, 100, 109). PIMs are unique glycolipids composed of a phosphatidyl-myo-inositol (PI) unit, one to six α-D-mannopyranosyl (Manp) residues, and up to four acyl chains (Figure 4). The PI unit is based on a sn-glycerol-3-phospho-(1-D-myo-inositol) that is further glycosylated with single Manp residues at the O-2 and O-6 positions of myo-inositol resulting in a mannose phosphate inositol (MPI) anchor (6, 7, 39, 98, 112). The structure of the MPI anchor is highly heterogeneous, with variations in the number, location, and nature of acyl chains. Four potential sites of acylation are available on the MPI anchor: 1-OH and 2-OH of the glycerol unit, 3-OH of the myo-inositol residue, and 6-OH of the Manp residue attached to myo-inositol at the O-2 position (58). The most abundant species of PIMs in mycobacteria are the tri- and tetra-acylated phospho-myo-inositol dimannosides (Ac₁PIM₂ and Ac₂PIM₂, respectively) and tri- and tetra-acylated phospho-myo-inositol hexamannosides (Ac₁PIM₆ and Ac₂PIM₆, respectively). Both Ac₁PIM₂ and Ac₁PIM₆ contain two acyl groups on the glycerol moiety and an additional acyl group at either the 3-OH of myo-inositol or the 6-OH of the Manp attached to the O-2 position of myo-inositol, whereas Ac₂PIM₂ and Ac₂PIM₆ possess four acyl groups at all of these positions. In mycobacteria, palmitic and tuberculostearic acyl chains are the most abundant substituents (6, 40, 70).

In all *Mycobacterium* species, LM and LAM both possess a mannan chain that contains approximately 21–34 α(1→6)-linked Manp residues periodically decorated with 5–10 units of single α(1→2)-Manp residues (Figure 4) (25, 56). Notably, in the case of *Mycobacterium chelonae*, branching occurs at the C-3 position (44). The length of the mannan chain and the degree of branching in LM are species specific. The mannan core is further glycosylated with 55–72 Araf residues, resulting in LAM. The arabinan domain contains a single linear α(1→5)-linked Araf chain with 3,5-α-D-Araf branches (17, 56). The nonreducing end of the arabinan domain of LAM terminates in either a branched hexa-arabinoside {[[β-D-Araf-(1→2)-α-D-Araf]₂-3,5-α-D-Araf-(1→5)-α-D-Araf]} or a

Ac<sub>1</sub>/Ac<sub>2</sub>PIM<sub>6</sub>

PimE

PimB'

R<sub>4</sub>

Ino

PimA

R<sub>3</sub>

MPI anchor

PimC

R<sub>1</sub>

R<sub>2</sub>

Lipomannan

MptC

MPI anchor

MptA, MptB

Lipoarabinomannan

Tetra-arabinoside

Hexa-arabinoside

Manose capping

EmbC

AftC

EmbC

AftC AftB? CapA MptC

ArafT

Mannan core

MPI anchor

Succinyl residue

α(1–5)Manp

β(1–2)Araf

α(1–5)Araf

α(3–5)Araf

α(1–3)Araf

α(1–6)Manp

α(2–6)Manp

α(1–2)Manp

Phosphodiester

Myo-inositol

Figure 4

Structure of mycobacterial tri-/tetra-acylated phosphatidylinositol hexamannoside (Ac<sub>1</sub>/Ac<sub>2</sub>PIM<sub>6</sub>), lipomannan and lipoarabinomannan, and roles of key enzymes that are responsible for their biosynthesis.

Abbreviation: MPI, mannosyl phosphate inositol. Adapted from Reference 51 with permission from Future Medicine.

linear tetra-arabinoside [β-D-Araf-(1→2)-α-D-Araf-(1→5)-α-D-Araf-(1→5)-α-D-Araf] (24, 26, 81). The arabinan motifs of LAM are further decorated by capping moieties. *M. tuberculosis* and *Mycobacterium leprae* modify the arabinan termini with a series of α(1→2)-linked Manp residues (ManLAM), whereas *M. smegmatis* possesses phosphoinositol caps (PILAM) (27, 57, 99). The absence of capping moieties (AraLAM) in LAM has been shown in *M. chelonae* (44). In addition, a unique 5-deoxy-5-methylthio-xylofuranose (MTX) substituent linked at C-4 of the terminal Manp of the ManLAM cap was identified in *M. tuberculosis* (54, 119, 122, 123). Interestingly, a similar MTX residue was also identified in the ManLAM of *Mycobacterium kansasii*; however, the substituent was located on the mannan core instead of the capping Manp residues (43). Finally, similarly to AG, succinyl groups were identified on the C-2 position of some inner 3,5-α-D-Araf residues (31).

### Biosynthesis of Phosphatidyl-myoinositol Mannosides, Lipomannan, and Lipoarabinomannan

The early steps of PIM biosynthesis occur in the cytoplasm and employ GDP-Manp as the mannosyl donor. PimA (Rv2610c), an α-mannopyranosyltransferase (ManpT), initiates the transfer of a single Manp residue from GDP-Manp to the 2 position of the myo-inositol ring of PI to yield PIM<sub>1</sub> (46, 60). PIM<sub>1</sub> is then further glycosylated by PimB' (Rv2188c), which transfers the second
single Manp to the 6 position of the $myo$-inositol ring, generating PIM$_2$ (45, 68, 91). This second mannosylation step may occur before or after acylation of PIM$_1$ at the C-6 position of the Manp residue linked to the 2-OH position of $myo$-inositol, catalyzed by the acyltransferase Rv2611c (61). In vitro enzyme assays utilizing PimA and PimB' of *M. smegmatis* demonstrated preference in generating AcPIM$_2$ over AcPIM$_1$, indicating preference of mannosylation over the acylation step (45). However, deletion of *pimB'* in *C. glutamicum* resulted in accumulation of AcPIM$_1$, suggesting that acylation of PIM$_1$ is favored over the second mannosylation step (68, 91). The acyltransferase responsible for the transfer of the fourth acyl chain to the C-3 position of the $myo$-inositol ring, thus forming Ac$_2$PIM$_1$/Ac$_2$PIM$_2$, remains to be established. Previous studies have shown that RvD2-ORF1 from *M. tuberculosis* CDC1551, designated as PimC, catalyzes further mannosylation of Ac$_1$/Ac$_2$PIM$_2$, resulting in Ac$_1$/Ac$_2$PIM$_3$ (64). However, no strong homologs of *pimC* have been identified in *M. tuberculosis* H37Rv or *M. smegmatis*. PimC or a yet-unidentified $\alpha(1 \rightarrow 6)$ ManpT [PimD] catalyzes the subsequent addition of a Manp residue to the nonreducing end of Ac$_1$/Ac$_2$PIM$_3$, resulting in Ac$_1$/Ac$_2$PIM$_4$. Formation of Ac$_1$/Ac$_2$PIM$_4$ marks a branch point in the biosynthesis toward the synthesis of higher PIMs, LM, and LAM (95, 96). Subsequent steps are predicted to occur in the periplasmic space and to employ GT-C glycosyltransferases that utilize polyphosphoryl-phosphate-based mannose donors (PPM) in contrast to the GT-A/B superfamily, which employs nucleotide-derived sugars (13, 73). The transporters that are responsible for flipping PIMs across the plasma membrane remain to be identified. PimE (Rv1159) catalyzes the $\alpha(1 \rightarrow 2)$ addition of a Manp residue to the Ac$_1$/Ac$_2$PIM$_4$, resulting in formation of Ac$_1$/Ac$_2$PIM$_5$ (96). It is not clear whether the transfer of a second Manp residue, thus generating Ac$_1$/Ac$_2$PIM$_6$, is catalyzed by PimE or by a yet-unidentified, putative $\alpha(1 \rightarrow 2)$ ManpT of the GT-C superfamily, which utilizes PPM (96). A parallel pathway employs Ac$_1$/Ac$_2$PIM$_4$ intermediates for the assembly of LM and LAM. Recent studies demonstrated that LpqW (Rv1166) regulates this branch point and promotes the channeling of Ac$_1$/Ac$_2$PIM$_4$ toward LM and LAM biosynthesis (29, 62). MptA (Rv2174) and MptB (Rv1459c) mannosyltransferases synthesize the characteristic $\alpha(1 \rightarrow 6)$ mannan core of LM and LAM. Specifically, in vitro assays in combination with deletion mutations in *C. glutamicum* characterized MptA as responsible for the synthesis of the distal end of the mannan core, whereas MptB was suggested to be involved in the proximal end of the mannan core (55, 90, 91). Although deletion of MptB in *C. glutamicum* resulted in a lack of LM and LAM and diminished $\alpha(1 \rightarrow 6)$ ManpT activity, complementation with MptB (Rv1459c) from *M. tuberculosis* or *M. smegmatis* failed to restore the wild-type phenotype of *C. glutamicum* (91). One could speculate that a slight variance in substrate specificity of the MptB orthologs may be responsible for this discrepancy. In addition, deletion of MptB in *M. smegmatis* had no effect on LM and LAM assembly, suggesting possible gene redundancy (91). Therefore, either an uncharacterized ManpT substitutes for MptB deletion or MptA is responsible for the biosynthesis of both proximal and distal ends of the mannan core. MptC (Rv2181) introduces the single $\alpha(1 \rightarrow 2)$ Manp residues of the mannan backbone, resulting in a mature LM (93). LAM is generated by the addition of 55–70 Araf residues to LM, resulting in an arabinan domain similar to that of AG. It is speculated that a yet-unidentified ArafT primes the mannan core with a few Araf residues in similar fashion as AftA, which primes the galactan chain in AG (50, 92). EmbC (Rv3793) is exclusively responsible for the extension of primed LM with the addition of 12–16 Araf residues in a linear $\alpha(1 \rightarrow 5)$ fashion (2, 114). AftC, a branching enzyme involved in the biosynthesis of AG, was demonstrated to introduce $\alpha(1 \rightarrow 3)$ Araf residues in LAM (17, 18). A second branching $\alpha(1 \rightarrow 3)$ ArafT AftD has been proposed to play a role in LAM biosynthesis; however, its clear function in LAM biosynthesis remains to be determined (116). The nonreducing arabinan domain of LAM is completed by addition of $\beta(1 \rightarrow 2)$ Araf residues, resulting in characteristic tetra-arabinoside and hexa-arabinoside motifs (111). Given that AftB possesses $\beta(1 \rightarrow 2)$ ArafT activity in AG biosynthesis, it is highly likely that it plays a similar

414 Jankute et al.
role in LAM biosynthesis. Unlike the arabinan domain in AG, the arabinan domain of LAM is modified with mannose residues (27, 99). CapA (Rv1635c) has been identified as an α(1→5) ManpT, which utilizes PPM as the sugar donor and attaches the first Manp residue to the nonreducing arabinan termini of LAM (33). The subsequent attachment of at least one α(1→2) Manp residue is catalyzed by MptC (Rv2181), which is also responsible for the addition of single α(1→2) Manp residues to the α(1→6) mannose backbone resulting in ManLAM (56). The enzymes required for the attachment of MTX and succinyl residues to the LAM remain to be established.

## MYCOLIC ACIDS

### Structure and Biosynthesis of Mycolic Acids

These long-chain α-alkyl-β-hydroxy fatty acids (C<sub>70–90</sub>) form an integral component in the mAGP complex and contribute to the fluidity and permeability of the cell wall (72). There are three distinct types: α-Mycolic acids are found in greatest abundance and exist only in a *cis*-cyclopropane configuration, whereas methoxy mycolic acids and keto mycolic acids contain cyclopropane rings in either a *cis-* or *trans*-configuration with an adjacent methyl branch (Figure 5) (87, 127, 128). The biosynthesis of mycolic acids can be illustrated as five distinct stages. Primarily, the short-chain fatty acids (C<sub>16–24</sub>) are synthesized in FAS-I (118). These saturated fatty acids can form the α-alkyl moiety (C<sub>24</sub>) or can be extended by FAS-II to form the mero-chain (C<sub>56</sub>). FAS-II is initiated by a condensation reaction catalyzed by FabH (β-ketoacyl-ACP synthase III) utilizing malonyl-AcpM and palmitoyl-CoA, yielding a β-ketoacyl-AcpM intermediate. This is then reduced by MabA (β-ketoacyl-ACP reductase) to produce β-hydroxyacyl-AcpM, which is then dehydrated by HadAB/BC (β-hydroxyacyl-ACP dehydratase) to produce a *trans*-2-enoyl-AcpM intermediate. This is then reduced by InhA (enoyl-ACP reductase) to produce an acyl-AcpM elongated by two carbons. The FAS-II cycle continues with further condensation, catalyzed by KasA/B (β-ketoacyl-ACP synthase), returning to the above via MabA, HadAB/BC, and InhA. This cycling continues until the acyl chain reaches C<sub>42–62</sub>, forming the saturated long-chain meromycolate.

Various modifications are made to the saturated C<sub>42–62</sub> chain following its synthesis via FAS-II. These modifications provide functional groups to the meromycolate scaffold by various methods, including *cis*-/ *trans*-cyclopropanation, keto and methoxy groups via CmaA1-2-, MmaA1-4-, and PcaA-type enzymes (35, 41, 42). The modifications to the meromycolate chain have been suggested to vary the fluidity and permeability of the cell wall as well as provide protection from the host immune system during infection (131). The meromycolic acid chain (C<sub>42–62</sub>) is activated for the Claisen-type condensation by the generation of a meromycolyl-AMP by FadD32 (fatty acyl-AMP ligase) (38). This meromycolyl-AMP substrate is linked to the α-alkyl short chain (C<sub>22–24</sub>) in a reaction catalyzed by Pks13 to produce α-alkyl-β-keto-mycolic acid, which is subsequently reduced (120). The greatest abundance of mycolic acids within the cell envelope and cell wall is found as bound esters in mAGP and as trehalose mycolates. This process is catalyzed by a process of transport via MmpL3 and the antigen 85 complex (48).

## FUTURE PERSPECTIVES

The biosynthetic pathways of the individual components of the cell wall of *M. tuberculosis* are now largely understood; however, a number of key enzymes in AG biosynthesis remain to be elucidated, as discussed above. Moreover, mechanisms that regulate and coordinate mAGP assembly to spatially arrange this complex within the cell envelope are still to be determined. Determining the translocation mechanism of various lipid-linked sugar substrates, such as

MI69CH21-Besra ARI 14 September 2015 11:16

Mycolic acids in *M. tuberculosis*

Alpha  
![Chemical Structure]

Methoxy  
![Chemical Structure]

Keto  
![Chemical Structure]

$\beta$-OH  
$\beta$-keto  
Acyl  

FAS-I  

Trans-2  

Acetyl-CoA  
Malonyl-CoA  

AccD4/5  

Carboxyacyl-CoA  

Pks13  

Mycolic $\beta$-ketoester  

Meromycolyl-AMP  

Trehalose monomycolate  

Reduction  

CmrA  

Transport  

MmpL3  

PG/AG  

Ag85  

mAGP  

FabD  

FabH  

Malonyl-ACP  

holo-ACP  

apo-ACP  

$\beta$-ketoacyl-ACP  

NADPH  

NADP⁺  

KasA/B  

MabA  

FAS-II  

InhA  

HadAB/BC  

NAD⁺  

NADH  

$\beta$-hydroxyacyl-ACP  

Trans-2-enoyl-ACP  

ACP  

ACP  

ACP  

Figure 5  

A schematic representation of mycolic acid biosynthesis in *Mycobacterium tuberculosis*.

intermediates involved in AG and LM/LAM biosynthesis, and sugar donors, DPA and PPM, may identify ideal drug targets. Although it is not clear how and when these intermediates are translocated to the periplasm, one could speculate that anchoring these molecules to the membrane positions them close to sugar transporters and glycosyltransferases, thus promoting export across the plasma membrane via multiprotein complexes. Recent studies employing a bacterial two-hybrid analysis demonstrated that enzymes involved in the biosynthesis of AG and precursor formation form complicated multiprotein complexes in *C. glutamicum* (49). Similar studies also reported that mycolic acid biosynthesis in *M. tuberculosis* is based on large multiprotein complexes, which are essential for mycobacterial viability, thus providing attractive drug targets (125, 126). Finally, structural and functional analysis of membrane proteins involved in cell wall

assembly lags behind that of soluble proteins involved in mAGP assembly. This is due to the inherent challenge of extracting pure membrane proteins from their native membrane in an active state. New approaches are attempting to address this limitation and will be key to the analysis and structural elucidation of mycobacterial membrane glycosyltransferases.

**DISCLOSURE STATEMENT**

The authors are not aware of any affiliations, memberships, funding, or financial holdings that might be perceived as affecting the objectivity of this review.

**ACKNOWLEDGMENTS**

G.S.B. acknowledges support in the form of a Personal Research Chair from Mr. James Bardrick. We also thank Dr. O.Y.-C. Lee, Dr. H.H.T. Wu, and Dr. L.J. Alderwick for their help in producing the structures of various lipids.

**LITERATURE CITED**

1. Alderwick LJ, Dover LG, Veerapen N, Gurcha SS, Kremer L, et al. 2008. Expression, purification and characterisation of soluble GlfT and the identification of a novel galactofuranosyltransferase Rv3782 involved in priming GlfT-mediated galactan polymerisation in *Mycobacterium tuberculosis*. *Protein Expr. Purif.* 58:332–41
2. Alderwick LJ, Lloyd GS, Ghadbane H, May JW, Bhatt A, et al. 2011. The C-terminal domain of the arabinosyltransferase *Mycobacterium tuberculosis* EmbC is a lectin-like carbohydrate binding module. *PLOS Pathog.* 7:e1001299
3. Alderwick LJ, Lloyd GS, Lloyd AJ, Lovering AL, Eggeling L, Besra GS. 2011. Biochemical characterization of the *Mycobacterium tuberculosis* phosphoribosyl-1-pyrophosphate synthetase. *Glycobiology* 21:410–25
4. Alderwick LJ, Radmacher E, Seidel M, Gande R, Hitchen PG, et al. 2005. Deletion of *Cg-emb* in corynebacterianeae leads to a novel truncated cell wall arabinogalactan, whereas inactivation of *Cg-ubiA* results in an arabinan-deficient mutant with a cell wall galactan core. *J. Biol. Chem.* 280:32362–71
5. Alderwick LJ, Seidel M, Sahm H, Besra GS, Eggeling L. 2006. Identification of a novel arabinofuranosyltransferase (AftA) involved in cell wall arabinan biosynthesis in *Mycobacterium tuberculosis*. *J. Biol. Chem.* 281:15653–61
6. Ballou CE, Lee YC. 1964. The structure of a myoinositol mannoside from *Mycobacterium tuberculosis* glycolipid. *Biochemistry* 3:682–85
7. Ballou CE, Vilkas E, Lederer E. 1963. Structural studies on the myo-inositol phospholipids of *Mycobacterium tuberculosis* (var. *bovis*, strain BCG). *J. Biol. Chem.* 238:69–76
8. Barreteau H, Kovac A, Boniface A, Sova M, Gobec S, Blanot D. 2008. Cytoplasmic steps of peptidoglycan biosynthesis. *FEMS Microbiol. Rev.* 32:168–207
9. Basavannacharya C, Robertson G, Munshi T, Keep NH, Bhakta S. 2010. ATP-dependent MurE ligase in *Mycobacterium tuberculosis*: biochemical and structural characterisation. *Tuberculosis* 90:16–24
10. Belanova M, Dianiskova P, Brennan PJ, Completo GC, Rose NL, et al. 2008. Galactosyl transferases in mycobacterial cell wall synthesis. *J. Bacteriol.* 190:1141–45
11. Belisle JT, Vissa VD, Sievert T, Takayama K, Brennan PJ, Besra GS. 1997. Role of the major antigen of *Mycobacterium tuberculosis* in cell wall biogenesis. *Science* 276:1420–22
12. Benson TE, Walsh CT, Hogle JM. 1996. The structure of the substrate-free form of MurB, an essential enzyme for the synthesis of bacterial cell walls. *Structure* 4:47–54
13. Berg S, Kaur D, Jackson M, Brennan PJ. 2007. The glycosyltransferases of *Mycobacterium tuberculosis*—roles in the synthesis of arabinogalactan, lipoarabinomannan, and other glycoconjugates. *Glycobiology* 17:35–56R

14. Besra GS, Khoo KH, McNeil MR, Dell A, Morris HR, Brennan PJ. 1995. A new interpretation of the structure of the mycolyl-arabinogalactan complex of *Mycobacterium tuberculosis* as revealed through characterization of oligoglycosylalditol fragments by fast-atom bombardment mass spectrometry and ${}^{1}$H nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy. *Biochemistry* 34:4257–66

15. Bhamidi S, Scherman MS, Jones V, Crick DC, Belisle JT, et al. 2011. Detailed structural and quantitative analysis reveals the spatial organization of the cell walls of in vivo grown *Mycobacterium leprae* and in vitro grown *Mycobacterium tuberculosis*. *J. Biol. Chem.* 286:23168–77

16. Bhamidi S, Scherman MS, Rithner CD, Prenni JE, Chatterjee D, et al. 2008. The identification and location of succinyl residues and the characterization of the interior arabinan region allow for a model of the complete primary structure of *Mycobacterium tuberculosis* mycolyl arabinogalactan. *J. Biol. Chem.* 283:12992–3000

17. Birch HL, Alderwick LJ, Appelmelk BJ, Maaskant J, Bhatt A, et al. 2010. A truncated lipoglycan from mycobacteria with altered immunological properties. *PNAS* 107:2634–39

18. Birch HL, Alderwick LJ, Bhatt A, Rittmann D, Krumbach K, et al. 2008. Biosynthesis of mycobacterial arabinogalactan: identification of a novel $\alpha(1 \rightarrow 3)$ arabinofuranosyltransferase. *Mol. Microbiol.* 69:1191–206

19. Bouhss A, Mengin-Lecreulx D, Le Beller D, Van Heijenoort J. 1999. Topological analysis of the MraY protein catalysing the first membrane step of peptidoglycan synthesis. *Mol. Microbiol.* 34:576–85

20. Braibant M, Gilot P, Content J. 2000. The ATP binding cassette (ABC) transport systems of *Mycobacterium tuberculosis*. *FEMS Microbiol. Rev.* 24:449–67

21. Brennan PJ, Nikaido H. 1995. The envelope of mycobacteria. *Annu. Rev. Biochem.* 64:29–63

22. Calvanese L, Falcigno L, Maglione C, Marasco D, Ruggiero A, et al. 2014. Structural and binding properties of the PASTA domain of PonA2, a key penicillin binding protein from *Mycobacterium tuberculosis*. *Biopolymers* 101:712–19

23. Chang YH, Labgold MR, Richards JH. 1990. Altering enzymatic activity: Recruitment of carboxypeptidase activity into an RTEM beta-lactamase/penicillin-binding protein 5 chimera. *PNAS* 87:2823–27

24. Chatterjee D, Bozic CM, McNeil M, Brennan PJ. 1991. Structural features of the arabinan component of the lipoarabinomannan of *Mycobacterium tuberculosis*. *J. Biol. Chem.* 266:9652–60

25. Chatterjee D, Hunter SW, McNeil M, Brennan PJ. 1992. Lipoarabinomannan: multiglycosylated form of the mycobacterial mannosylphosphatidylinositols. *J. Biol. Chem.* 267:6228–33

26. Chatterjee D, Khoo KH, McNeil MR, Dell A, Morris HR, Brennan PJ. 1993. Structural definition of the non-reducing termini of mannose-capped LAM from *Mycobacterium tuberculosis* through selective enzymatic degradation and fast atom bombardment-mass spectrometry. *Glycobiology* 3:497–506

27. Chatterjee D, Lowell K, Rivoire B, McNeil MR, Brennan PJ. 1992. Lipoarabinomannan of *Mycobacterium tuberculosis*: capping with mannosyl residues in some strains. *J. Biol. Chem.* 267:6234–39

28. Cordillot M, Dubee V, Triboulet S, Dubost L, Marie A, et al. 2013. In vitro cross-linking of *Mycobacterium tuberculosis* peptidoglycan by L,D-transpeptidases and inactivation of these enzymes by carbapenems. *Antimicrob. Agents Chemother.* 57:5940–45

29. Crellin PK, Kovacevic S, Martin KL, Brammananth R, Morita YS, et al. 2008. Mutations in pimE restore lipoarabinomannan synthesis and growth in a *Mycobacterium smegmatis lpqW* mutant. *J. Bacteriol.* 190:3690–99

30. Daffe M, Brennan PJ, McNeil M. 1990. Predominant structural features of the cell wall arabinogalactan of *Mycobacterium tuberculosis* as revealed through characterization of oligoglycosyl alditol fragments by gas chromatography/mass spectrometry and by ${}^{1}$H and ${}^{13}$C NMR analyses. *J. Biol. Chem.* 265:6734–43

31. Delmas C, Gilleron M, Brando T, Vercellone A, Gheorghui M, et al. 1997. Comparative structural study of the mannosylated-lipoarabinomannans from *Mycobacterium bovis* BCG vaccine strains: characterization and localization of succinates. *Glycobiology* 7:811–17

32. Dianiskova P, Kordulakova J, Skovierova H, Kaur D, Jackson M, et al. 2011. Investigation of ABC transporter from mycobacterial arabinogalactan biosynthetic cluster. *Gen. Physiol. Biophys.* 30:239–50

33. Dinadayala P, Kaur D, Berg S, Amin AG, Vissa VD, et al. 2006. Genetic basis for the synthesis of the immunomodulatory mannosse caps of lipoarabinomannan in *Mycobacterium tuberculosis*. *J. Biol. Chem.* 281:20027–35

418 Jankute et al.

34. Draper P, Khoo KH, Chatterjee D, Dell A, Morris HR. 1997. Galactosamine in walls of slow-growing mycobacteria. *Biochem. J.* 327(Part 2):519–25

35. Dubnau E, Chan J, Raynaud C, Mohan VP, Laneelle MA, et al. 2000. Oxygenated mycolic acids are necessary for virulence of *Mycobacterium tuberculosis* in mice. *Mol. Microbiol.* 36:630–37

36. El Zoeiby A, Sanschagrin F, Levesque RC. 2003. Structure and function of the Mur enzymes: development of novel inhibitors. *Mol. Microbiol.* 47:1–12

37. Escuyer VE, Lety MA, Torrelles JB, Khoo KH, Tang JB, et al. 2001. The role of the *embA* and *embB* gene products in the biosynthesis of the terminal hexaarabinofuranosyl motif of *Mycobacterium smegmatis* arabinogalactan. *J. Biol. Chem.* 276:48854–62

38. Galandrin S, Guillet V, Rane RS, Leger M, Radha N, et al. 2013. Assay development for identifying inhibitors of the mycobacterial FadD32 activity. *J. Biomol. Screen.* 18:576–87

39. Gilleron M, Jackson M, Nigou J, Puzo G. 2008. Structure, biosynthesis, and activities of the phosphatidyl-myo-inositol-based lipoglycans. In *The Mycobacterial Cell Envelope*, ed. J Daffe, J-M Reyrat, chap. 6. Washington, DC: Am. Soc. Microbiol.

40. Gilleron M, Quesniaux VF, Puzo G. 2003. Acylation state of the phosphatidylinositol hexamannosides from *Mycobacterium bovis* bacillus Calmette Guerin and *Mycobacterium tuberculosis* H37Rv and its implication in Toll-like receptor response. *J. Biol. Chem.* 278:29880–89

41. Glickman MS. 2003. The *mmaA2* gene of *Mycobacterium tuberculosis* encodes the distal cyclopropane synthase of the α-mycolic acid. *J. Biol. Chem.* 278:7844–49

42. Glickman MS, Cox JS, Jacobs WR Jr. 2000. A novel mycolic acid cyclopropane synthetase is required for cording, persistence, and virulence of *Mycobacterium tuberculosis*. *Mol. Cell* 5:717–27

43. Guerardel Y, Maes E, Briken V, Chirat F, Leroy Y, et al. 2003. Lipomannan and lipoarabinomannan from a clinical isolate of *Mycobacterium kansasii*: novel structural features and apoptosis-inducing properties. *J. Biol. Chem.* 278:36637–51

44. Guerardel Y, Maes E, Elass E, Leroy Y, Timmerman P, et al. 2002. Structural study of lipomannan and lipoarabinomannan from *Mycobacterium chelonae*: presence of unusual components with α-1,3-mannopyranose side chains. *J. Biol. Chem.* 277:30635–48

45. Guerin ME, Kaur D, Somashekar BS, Gibbs S, Gest P, et al. 2009. New insights into the early steps of phosphatidylinositol mannoside biosynthesis in mycobacteria: PimB′ is an essential enzyme of *Mycobacterium smegmatis*. *J. Biol. Chem.* 284:25687–96

46. Guerin ME, Kordulakova J, Schaeffer F, Svetlikova Z, Buschiazzo A, et al. 2007. Molecular recognition and interfacial catalysis by the essential phosphatidylinositol mannosyltransferase PimA from mycobacteria. *J. Biol. Chem.* 282:20705–14

47. Hett EC, Chao MC, Rubin EJ. 2010. Interaction and modulation of two antagonistic cell wall enzymes of mycobacteria. *PLOS Pathog.* 6:e1001020

48. Jackson M, Raynaud C, Laneelle MA, Guilhot C, Laurent-Winter C, et al. 1999. Inactivation of the antigen 85C gene profoundly affects the mycolate content and alters the permeability of the *Mycobacterium tuberculosis* cell envelope. *Mol. Microbiol.* 31:1573–87

49. Jankute M, Byng CV, Alderwick LJ, Besra GS. 2014. Elucidation of a protein-protein interaction network involved in *Corynebacterium glutamicum* cell wall biosynthesis as determined by bacterial two-hybrid analysis. *Glycoconj. J.* 31:475–83

50. Jankute M, Grover S, Birch HL, Besra GS. 2014. Genetics of mycobacterial arabinogalactan and lipoarabinomannan assembly. In *Molecular Genetics of Mycobacteria*, ed. GF Hatfull, WR Jacobs Jr, pp. 535–57, Washington, DC: Am. Soc. Microbiol.

51. Jankute M, Grover S, Rana AK, Besra GS. 2012. Arabinogalactan and lipoarabinomannan biosynthesis: structure, biogenesis and their potential as drug targets. *Future Microbiol.* 7:129–47

52. Jiang T, He L, Zhan Y, Zang S, Ma Y, et al. 2011. The effect of *MSMEG_6402* gene disruption on the cell wall structure of *Mycobacterium smegmatis*. *Microb. Pathog.* 51:156–60

53. Jin Y, Xin Y, Zhang W, Ma Y. 2010. *Mycobacterium tuberculosis* Rv1302 and *Mycobacterium smegmatis* *MSMEG_4947* have WecA function and *MSMEG_4947* is required for the growth of *M. smegmatis*. *FEMS Microbiol. Lett.* 310:54–61

54. Joe M, Sun D, Taha H, Completo GC, Croudace JE, et al. 2006. The 5-deoxy-5-methylthio-xylofuranose residue in mycobacterial lipoarabinomannan: absolute stereochemistry, linkage position, conformation, and immunomodulatory activity. *J. Am. Chem. Soc.* 128:5059–72

55. Kaur D, McNeil MR, Khoo KH, Chatterjee D, Crick DC, et al. 2007. New insights into the biosynthesis of mycobacterial lipomannan arising from deletion of a conserved gene. *J. Biol. Chem.* 282:27133–40

56. Kaur D, Obregon-Henao A, Pham H, Chatterjee D, Brennan PJ, Jackson M. 2008. Lipoarabinomannan of *Mycobacterium*: mannose capping by a multifunctional terminal mannosyltransferase. *PNAS* 105:17973–77

57. Khoo KH, Dell A, Morris HR, Brennan PJ, Chatterjee D. 1995. Inositol phosphate capping of the nonreducing termini of lipoarabinomannan from rapidly growing strains of *Mycobacterium*. *J. Biol. Chem.* 270:12380–89

58. Khoo KH, Dell A, Morris HR, Brennan PJ, Chatterjee D. 1995. Structural definition of acylated phosphatidylinositol mannosides from *Mycobacterium tuberculosis*: definition of a common anchor for lipomannan and lipoarabinomannan. *Glycobiology* 5:117–27

59. Kim DH, Lees WJ, Kempsell KE, Lane WS, Duncan K, Walsh CT. 1996. Characterization of a Cys115 to Asp substitution in the *Escherichia coli* cell wall biosynthetic enzyme UDP-GlcNAc enolpyruvyl transferase (MurA) that confers resistance to inactivation by the antibiotic fosfomycin. *Biochemistry* 35:4923–28

60. Kordulakova J, Gillieron M, Mikusova K, Puzo G, Brennan PJ, et al. 2002. Definition of the first mannosylation step in phosphatidylinositol mannoside synthesis: PimA is essential for growth of mycobacteria. *J. Biol. Chem.* 277:31335–44

61. Kordulakova J, Gillieron M, Puzo G, Brennan PJ, Gicquel B, et al. 2003. Identification of the required acyltransferase step in the biosynthesis of the phosphatidylinositol mannosides of *Mycobacterium* species. *J. Biol. Chem.* 278:36285–95

62. Kovacevic S, Anderson D, Morita YS, Patterson J, Haites R, et al. 2006. Identification of a novel protein with a role in lipoarabinomannan biosynthesis in mycobacteria. *J. Biol. Chem.* 281:9011–17

63. Kremer L, Dover LG, Morehouse C, Hitchin P, Everett M, et al. 2001. Galactan biosynthesis in *Mycobacterium tuberculosis*: identification of a bifunctional UDP-galactofuranosyltransferase. *J. Biol. Chem.* 276:26430–40

64. Kremer L, Gurcha SS, Bifani P, Hitchen PG, Baulard A, et al. 2002. Characterization of a putative α-mannosyltransferase involved in phosphatidylinositol trimannoside biosynthesis in *Mycobacterium tuberculosis*. *Biochem. J.* 363:437–47

65. Kurosu M, Mahapatra S, Narayanasamy P, Crick DC. 2007. Chemoenzymatic synthesis of Park’s nucleotide: toward the development of high-throughput screening for MraY inhibitors. *Tetrahedron Lett.* 48:799–803

66. Larrouy-Maumus G, Škovierová H, Dhouib R, Angala SK, Zuberogoitia S, et al. 2012. A small multidrug resistance-like transporter involved in the arabinosylation of arabinogalactan and lipoarabinomannan in mycobacteria. *J. Biol. Chem.* 287:39933–41

67. Lavollay M, Arthur M, Fourgeaud M, Dubost L, Marie A, et al. 2008. The peptidoglycan of stationary-phase *Mycobacterium tuberculosis* predominantly contains cross-links generated by L,D-transpeptidation. *J. Bacteriol.* 190:4360–66

68. Lea-Smith DJ, Martin KL, Pyke JS, Tull D, McConville MJ, et al. 2008. Analysis of a new mannosyltransferase required for the synthesis of phosphatidylinositol mannosides and lipoarabinomannan reveals two lipomannan pools in corynebacterineae. *J. Biol. Chem.* 283:6773–82

69. Lee A, Wu SW, Scherman MS, Torrelles JB, Chatterjee D, et al. 2006. Sequencing of oligoarabinosyl units released from mycobacterial arabinogalactan by endogenous arabinanase: identification of distinctive and novel structural motifs. *Biochemistry* 45:15817–28

70. Lee YC, Ballou CE. 1964. Structural studies on the *myo*-inositol mannosides from the glycolipids of *Mycobacterium tuberculosis* and *Mycobacterium phlei*. *J. Biol. Chem.* 239:1316–27

71. Levengood MR, Splain RA, Kiessling LL. 2011. Monitoring processivity and length control of a carbohydrate polymerase. *J. Am. Chem. Soc.* 133:12758–66

72. Liu J, Barry CE 3rd, Besra GS, Nikaido H. 1996. Mycolic acid structure determines the fluidity of the mycobacterial cell wall. *J. Biol. Chem.* 271:29545–51

73. Liu J, Mushegian A. 2003. Three monophyletic superfamilies account for the majority of the known glycosyltransferases. *Protein Sci.* 12:1418–31

74. Maeda N, Nigou J, Herrmann JL, Jackson M, Amara A, et al. 2003. The cell surface receptor DC-SIGN discriminates between *Mycobacterium* species through selective recognition of the mannose caps on lipoarabinomannan. *J. Biol. Chem.* 278:5513–16

75. Mahapatra S, Crick DC, Brennan PJ. 2000. Comparison of the UDP-N-acetylmuramate:L-alanine ligase enzymes from *Mycobacterium tuberculosis* and *Mycobacterium leprae*. *J. Bacteriol.* 182:6827–30

76. Mahapatra S, Scherman H, Brennan PJ, Crick DC. 2005. N-glycolylation of the nucleotide precursors of peptidoglycan biosynthesis of *Mycobacterium* spp. is altered by drug treatment. *J. Bacteriol.* 187:2341–47

77. May JF, Splain RA, Brotschi C, Kiessling LL. 2009. A tethering mechanism for length control in a processive carbohydrate polymerization. *PNAS* 106:11851–56

78. McNeil M, Daffe M, Brennan PJ. 1990. Evidence for the nature of the link between the arabinogalactan and peptidoglycan of mycobacterial cell walls. *J. Biol. Chem.* 265:18200–6

79. McNeil M, Daffe M, Brennan PJ. 1991. Location of the mycolyl ester substituents in the cell walls of mycobacteria. *J. Biol. Chem.* 266:13217–23

80. McNeil M, Wallner SJ, Hunter SW, Brennan PJ. 1987. Demonstration that the galactosyl and arabinosyl residues in the cell-wall arabinogalactan of *Mycobacterium leprae* and *Mycobacterium tuberculosis* are furanoid. *Carbohydr. Res.* 166:299–308

81. McNeil MR, Robuck KG, Harter M, Brennan PJ. 1994. Enzymatic evidence for the presence of a critical terminal hexa-arabinoside in the cell walls of *Mycobacterium tuberculosis*. *Glycobiology* 4:165–73

82. Meniche X, de Sousa-d'Auria C, Van-der-Rest B, Bhamidi S, Huc E, et al. 2008. Partial redundancy in the synthesis of the D-arabinose incorporated in the cell wall arabinan of Corynebacterineae. *Microbiology* 154:2315–26

83. Mikusova K, Belanova M, Kordulakova J, Honda K, McNeil MR, et al. 2006. Identification of a novel galactosyl transferase involved in biosynthesis of the mycobacterial cell wall. *J. Bacteriol.* 188:6592–98

84. Mikusova K, Huang H, Yagi T, Holsters M, Vereecke D, et al. 2005. Decaprenylphosphoryl arabinofuranose, the donor of the D-arabinofuranosyl residues of mycobacterial arabinan, is formed via a two-step epimerization of decaprenylphosphoryl ribose. *J. Bacteriol.* 187:8020–25

85. Mikusova K, Mikus M, Besra GS, Hancock I, Brennan PJ. 1996. Biosynthesis of the linkage region of the mycobacterial cell wall. *J. Biol. Chem.* 271:7820–28

86. Mills JA, Motichka K, Jucker M, Wu HP, Uhlik BC, et al. 2004. Inactivation of the mycobacterial rhamnosyltransferase, which is needed for the formation of the arabinogalactan-peptidoglycan linker, leads to irreversible loss of viability. *J. Biol. Chem.* 279:43540–46

87. Minnikin DE. 1982. Lipids: complex lipids, their chemistry, biosynthesis and roles. In *The Biology of the Mycobacteria*, ed. CS Ratledge, J Stanford, pp. 95–184. London: Academic

88. Minnikin DE, Kremer L, Dover LG, Besra GS. 2002. The methyl-branched fortifications of *Mycobacterium tuberculosis*. *Chem. Biol.* 9:545–53

89. Minnikin DE, Lee OY, Wu HH, Nataraj V, Donoghue HD, et al. 2015. Pathophysiological implications of cell envelope structure in *Mycobacterium tuberculosis* and related taxa. In *Tuberculosis*, ed. W Ribón, chap. 7, Rijeka, Croatia: Intech

90. Mishra AK, Alderwick LJ, Rittmann D, Tatituri RV, Nigou J, et al. 2007. Identification of an α(1→6) mannopyranosyltransferase (MptA), involved in *Corynebacterium glutamicum* lipomannan biosynthesis, and identification of its orthologue in *Mycobacterium tuberculosis*. *Mol. Microbiol.* 65:1503–17

91. Mishra AK, Alderwick LJ, Rittmann D, Wang C, Bhatt A, et al. 2008. Identification of a novel α(1→6) mannopyranosyltransferase MptB from *Corynebacterium glutamicum* by deletion of a conserved gene, NCgl1505, affords a lipomannan- and lipoarabinomannan-deficient mutant. *Mol. Microbiol.* 68:1595–613

92. Mishra AK, Driessen NN, Appelmelk BJ, Besra GS. 2011. Lipoarabinomannan and related glycoconjugates: Structure, biogenesis and role in *Mycobacterium tuberculosis* physiology and host-pathogen interaction. *FEMS Microbiol. Rev.* 35:1126–57

93. Mishra AK, Krumbach K, Rittmann D, Appelmelk B, Pathak V, et al. 2011. Lipoarabinomannan biosynthesis in Corynebacterineae: The interplay of two α(1→2)-mannopyranosyltransferases MptC and MptD in mannan branching. *Mol. Microbiol.* 80:1241–59

94. Mohammadi T, van Dam V, Sijbrandi R, Vernet T, Zapun A, et al. 2011. Identification of FtsW as a transporter of lipid-linked cell wall precursors across the membrane. *EMBO J.* 30:1425–32

95. Morita YS, Patterson JH, Billman-Jacobe H, McConville MJ. 2004. Biosynthesis of mycobacterial phosphatidylinositol mannosides. *Biochem. J.* 378:589–97

96. Morita YS, Sena CB, Waller RF, Kurokawa K, Sernee MF, et al. 2006. PimE is a polyphosphosphate-mannose-dependent mannosyltransferase that transfers the fifth mannose of phosphatidylinositol mannoside in mycobacteria. *J. Biol. Chem.* 281:25143–55

97. Munshi T, Gupta A, Evangelopoulos D, Guzman JD, Gibbons S, et al. 2013. Characterisation of ATP-dependent Mur ligases involved in the biogenesis of cell wall peptidoglycan in *Mycobacterium tuberculosis*. *PLOS ONE* 8:e60143

98. Nigou J, Gilleron M, Brando T, Puzo G. 2004. Structural analysis of mycobacterial lipoglycans. *Appl. Biochem. Biotechnol.* 118:253–67

99. Nigou J, Gilleron M, Puzo G. 2003. Lipoarabinomannans: From structure to biosynthesis. *Biochimie* 85:153–66

100. Nigou J, Gilleron M, Rojas M, Garcia LF, Thurnher M, Puzo G. 2002. Mycobacterial lipoarabinomannans: Modulators of dendritic cell function and the apoptotic response. *Microbes Infect.* 4:945–53

101. Ortalo-Magne A, Lemassu A, Laneelle MA, Bardou F, Silve G, et al. 1996. Identification of the surface-exposed lipids on the cell envelopes of *Mycobacterium tuberculosis* and other mycobacterial species. *J. Bacteriol.* 178:456–61

102. Peng W, Zou L, Bhamidi S, McNeil MR, Lowary TL. 2012. The galactosamine residue in mycobacterial arabinogalactan is α-linked. *J. Org. Chem.* 77:9826–32

103. Pitarque S, Larrouy-Maumus G, Payre B, Jackson M, Puzo G, Nigou J. 2008. The immunomodulatory lipoglycans, lipoarabinomannan and lipomannan, are exposed at the mycobacterial cell surface. *Tuberculosis (Edinb)* 88:560–65

104. Raymond JB, Mahapatra S, Crick DC, Pavelka MS Jr. 2005. Identification of the *namH* gene, encoding the hydroxylase responsible for the *N*-glycolylation of the mycobacterial peptidoglycan. *J. Biol. Chem.* 280:326–33

105. Rose NL, Completo GC, Lin SJ, McNeil M, Palcic MM, Lowary TL. 2006. Expression, purification, and characterization of a galactofuranosyltransferase involved in *Mycobacterium tuberculosis* arabinogalactan biosynthesis. *J. Am. Chem. Soc.* 128:6721–29

106. Ruiz N. 2008. Bioinformatics identification of MurJ (*MviN*) as the peptidoglycan lipid II flippase in *Escherichia coli*. *PNAS* 105:15553–57

107. Sacco E, Hugonnet JE, Josseaume N, Cremniter J, Dubost L, et al. 2010. Activation of the L,D-transpeptidation peptidoglycan cross-linking pathway by a metallo-D,D-carboxypeptidase in *Enterococcus faecium*. *Mol. Microbiol.* 75:874–85

108. Schleifer KH, Kandler O. 1972. Peptidoglycan types of bacterial cell walls and their taxonomic implications. *Bacteriol. Rev.* 36:407–77

109. Schlesinger LS, Hull SR, Kaufman TM. 1994. Binding of the terminal mannose units of lipoarabinomannan from a virulent strain of *Mycobacterium tuberculosis* to human macrophages. *J. Immunol.* 152:4070–79

110. Schoonmaker MK, Bishai WR, Lamichhane G. 2014. Nonclassical transpeptidases of *Mycobacterium tuberculosis* alter cell size, morphology, the cytosolic matrix, protein localization, virulence, and resistance to β-lactams. *J. Bacteriol.* 196:1394–402

111. Seidel M, Alderwick LJ, Birch HL, Sahm H, Eggeling L, Besra GS. 2007. Identification of a novel arabinofuranosyltransferase AftB involved in a terminal step of cell wall arabinan biosynthesis in *Corynebacterianeae*, such as *Corynebacterium glutamicum* and *Mycobacterium tuberculosis*. *J. Biol. Chem.* 282:14729–40

112. Severn WB, Furneaux RH, Falshaw R, Atkinson PH. 1998. Chemical and spectroscopic characterisation of the phosphatidylinositol manno-oligosaccharides from *Mycobacterium bovis* AN5 and WAg201 and *Mycobacterium smegmatis mc² 155*. *Carbohydr. Res.* 308:397–408

113. Sham LT, Butler EK, Lebar MD, Kahne D, Bernhardt TG, Ruiz N. 2014. Bacterial cell wall. MurJ is the flippase of lipid-linked precursors for peptidoglycan biogenesis. *Science* 345:220–22

114. Shi L, Berg S, Lee A, Spencer JS, Zhang J, et al. 2006. The carboxy terminus of EmbC from *Mycobacterium smegmatis* mediates chain length extension of the arabinan in lipoarabinomannan. *J. Biol. Chem.* 281:19512–26

115. Skovierova H, Larrrouy-Maumus G, Pham H, Belanova M, Barilone N, et al. 2010. Biosynthetic origin of the galactosamine substituent of arabinogalactan in *Mycobacterium tuberculosis*. *J. Biol. Chem.* 285:41348–55

116. Skovierova H, Larrrouy-Maumus G, Zhang J, Kaur D, Barilone N, et al. 2009. AftD, a novel essential arabinofuranosyltransferase from mycobacteria. *Glycobiology* 19:1235–47

117. Smith CA. 2006. Structure, function and dynamics in the mur family of bacterial cell wall ligases. *J. Mol. Biol.* 362:640–55

118. Takayama K, Wang C, Besra GS. 2005. Pathway to synthesis and processing of mycolic acids in *Mycobacterium tuberculosis*. *Clin. Microbiol. Rev.* 18:81–101

119. Treumann A, Xidong F, McDonnell L, Derrick PJ, Ashcroft AE, et al. 2002. 5-Methylthiopentose: A new substituent on lipoarabinomannan in *Mycobacterium tuberculosis*. *J. Mol. Biol.* 316:89–100

120. Trivedi OA, Arora P, Sridharan V, Tickoo R, Mohanty D, Gokhale RS. 2004. Enzymic activation and transfer of fatty acids as acyl-adenylates in mycobacteria. *Nature* 428:441–45

121. Trunkfield AE, Gurcha SS, Besra GS, Bugg TD. 2010. Inhibition of *Escherichia coli* glycosyltransferase MurG and *Mycobacterium tuberculosis* Gal transferase by uridine-linked transition state mimics. *Bioorg. Med. Chem.* 18:2651–63

122. Turnbull WB, Shimizu KH, Chatterjee D, Homans SW, Treumann A. 2004. Identification of the 5-methylthiopentosyl substituent in *Mycobacterium tuberculosis* lipoarabinomannan. *Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. Engl.* 43:3918–22

123. Turnbull WB, Stalford SA. 2012. Methylthioxylose—a jewel in the mycobacterial crown? *Org. Biomol. Chem.* 10:5698–706

124. van Heijenoort J. 2001. Formation of the glycan chains in the synthesis of bacterial peptidoglycan. *Glycobiology* 11:25R–36R

125. Veyron-Churlet R, Bigot S, Guerrini O, Verdoux S, Malaga W, et al. 2005. The biosynthesis of mycolic acids in *Mycobacterium tuberculosis* relies on multiple specialized elongation complexes interconnected by specific protein-protein interactions. *J. Mol. Biol.* 353:847–58

126. Veyron-Churlet R, Guerrini O, Mourey L, Daffe M, Zerbib D. 2004. Protein-protein interactions within the Fatty Acid Synthase-II system of *Mycobacterium tuberculosis* are essential for mycobacterial viability. *Mol. Microbiol.* 54:1161–72

127. Watanabe M, Aoyagi Y, Mitome H, Fujita T, Naoki H, et al. 2002. Location of functional groups in mycobacterial meromycolate chains; the recognition of new structural principles in mycolic acids. *Microbiology* 148:1881–902

128. Watanabe M, Aoyagi Y, Ridell M, Minnikin DE. 2001. Separation and characterization of individual mycolic acids in representative mycobacteria. *Microbiology* 147:1825–37

129. Wheatley RW, Zheng RB, Richards MR, Lowary TL, Ng KK. 2012. Tetrameric structure of the GlfT2 galactofuranosyltransferase reveals a scaffold for the assembly of mycobacterial arabinogalactan. *J. Biol. Chem.* 287:28132–43

130. Wolucka BA, McNeil MR, de Hoffmann E, Chojnacki T, Brennan PJ. 1994. Recognition of the lipid intermediate for arabinogalactan/arabinomannan biosynthesis and its relation to the mode of action of ethambutol on mycobacteria. *J. Biol. Chem.* 269:23328–35

131. Yuan Y, Lee RE, Besra GS, Belisle JT, Barry CE 3rd. 1995. Identification of a gene involved in the biosynthesis of cyclopropanated mycolic acids in *Mycobacterium tuberculosis*. *PNAS* 92:6630–34

New From Annual Reviews:
Annual Review of Cancer Biology
cancerbio.annualreviews.org · Volume 1 · March 2017

Co-Editors: Tyler Jacks, Massachusetts Institute of Technology  
Charles L. Sawyers, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center  

The Annual Review of Cancer Biology reviews a range of subjects representing important and emerging areas in the field of cancer research. The Annual Review of Cancer Biology includes three broad themes: Cancer Cell Biology, Tumorigenesis and Cancer Progression, and Translational Cancer Science.

---

TABLE OF CONTENTS FOR VOLUME 1:

- How Tumor Virology Evolved into Cancer Biology and Transformed Oncology, Harold Varmus
- The Role of Autophagy in Cancer, Naiara Santana-Codina, Joseph D. Mancias, Alec C. Kimmelman
- Cell Cycle–Targeted Cancer Therapies, Charles J. Sherr, Jiri Bartek
- Ubiquitin in Cell-Cycle Regulation and Dysregulation in Cancer, Natalie A. Borg, Vishva M. Dixit
- The Two Faces of Reactive Oxygen Species in Cancer, Colleen R. Reczek, Navdeep S. Chandel
- Analyzing Tumor Metabolism In Vivo, Brandon Faubert, Ralph J. DeBerardinis
- Stress-Induced Mutagenesis: Implications in Cancer and Drug Resistance, Devon M. Fitzgerald, P.J. Hastings, Susan M. Rosenberg
- Synthetic Lethality in Cancer Therapeutics, Roderick L. Beijersbergen, Lodewyk F.A. Wessels, Rene Bernards
- Noncoding RNAs in Cancer Development, Chao-Po Lin, Lin He
- p53: Multiple Facets of a Rubik's Cube, Yun Zhang, Guillermina Lozano
- Resisting Resistance, Ivana Bozic, Martin A. Nowak
- Deciphering Genetic Intratumor Heterogeneity and Its Impact on Cancer Evolution, Rachel Rosenthal, Nicholas McGranahan, Javier Herrero, Charles Swanton

- Immune-Suppressing Cellular Elements of the Tumor Microenvironment, Douglas T. Fearon
- Overcoming On-Target Resistance to Tyrosine Kinase Inhibitors in Lung Cancer, Ibiayi Dagogo-Jack, Jeffrey A. Engelman, Alice T. Shaw
- Apoptosis and Cancer, Anthony Letai
- Chemical Carcinogenesis Models of Cancer: Back to the Future, Melissa Q. McCreery, Allan Balmain
- Extracellular Matrix Remodeling and Stiffening Modulate Tumor Phenotype and Treatment Response, Jennifer L. Leight, Allison P. Drain, Valerie M. Weaver
- Aneuploidy in Cancer: Seq-ing Answers to Old Questions, Kristin A. Knouse, Teresa Davoli, Stephen J. Elledge, Angelika Amon
- The Role of Chromatin-Associated Proteins in Cancer, Kristian Helin, Saverio Minucci
- Targeted Differentiation Therapy with Mutant IDH Inhibitors: Early Experiences and Parallels with Other Differentiation Agents, Eytan Stein, Katharine Yen
- Determinants of Organotropic Metastasis, Heath A. Smith, Yibin Kang
- Multiple Roles for the MLL/COMPASS Family in the Epigenetic Regulation of Gene Expression and in Cancer, Joshua J. Meeks, Ali Shilatifard
- Chimeric Antigen Receptors: A Paradigm Shift in Immunotherapy, Michel Sadelain

---

ANNUAL REVIEWS | CONNECT WITH OUR EXPERTS  
650.493.4400 / 800.523.8635 (US/CAN)  
www.annualreviews.org | service@annualreviews.org

# Contents

My Lifelong Passion for Biochemistry and Anaerobic Microorganisms  
**Rudolf Kurt Thauer** . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Perception and Homeostatic Control of Iron in the Rhizobia and Related Bacteria  
Mark R. O'Brian  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Protein Phosphatases of Pathogenic Bacteria: Role in Physiology and Virulence  
Andaleeb Sajid, Gunjan Arora, Anshika Singhal, Vipin C. Kalia, and Yogendra Singh 527  

Index  

Cumulative Index of Contributing Authors, Volumes 65–69 549  

Errata  

An online log of corrections to *Annual Review of Microbiology* articles may be found at  
http://www.annualreviews.org/errata/micro
