
RESEARCH HIGHLIGHT

**Gasdermin D: the long-awaited executioner of pyroptosis**

Cell Research (2015) 25:1183-1184. doi:10.1038/cr.2015.124; published online 20 October 2015

Inflammatory caspases drive a lytic form of cell death called pyroptosis in response to microbial infection and endogenous damage-associated signals. Two studies now demonstrate that cleavage of the substrate gasdermin D by inflammatory caspases necessitates eventual pyroptotic demise of a cell.

Inflammatory caspases, including caspase-1, -4, -5 and -11, are crucial mediators of inflammation and cell death. Caspase-1 is found in humans and mice. Caspase-4 and -5 are found in humans and the orthologue caspase-11 is found in mice. Inflammatory caspases form part of a dynamic multi-protein complex known as the inflammasome, which orchestrates proteolytic processing of the pro-inflammatory cytokines IL-1β and IL-18. Inflammatory caspases also induce a lytic form of cell death known as pyroptosis. Lipopolysaccharide (LPS) from Gram-negative bacteria introduced into the cytoplasm of host cells during infection potently activates caspase-11 in mice and caspase-4 and -5 in humans [1, 2]. Caspase-4, -5 and -11 directly bind LPS [3], and activation of these caspases triggers pyroptosis, NLRP3 inflammasome activity, and endotoxic shock [4]. How inflammatory caspases precisely regulate these cellular and physiological events is an unresolved question.

Research groups led by Vishva M Dixit [5] and Feng Shao [6] independently identified a key substrate for inflammatory caspases called gasdermin D, which upon its cleavage drives pyroptosis (Figure 1). Dixit and colleagues used a forward genetic approach (treatment of mice with the mutagen ENU) to screen for mutations that would impair activation of the caspase-11-dependent pathway. Through this screen, the authors found that peritoneal macrophages harvested from a mouse strain harboring a mutation in the gene encoding gasdermin D, called *Gsdmd*<sup>I105N/I105N</sup> (owing to an isoleucine-to-asparagine substitution mutation at position 105), did not undergo pyroptosis and release IL-1β in response to LPS transfection. On the other hand, Shao and colleagues utilized CRISPR-Cas9 technology and siRNA-mediated knockdown approaches to pinpoint gasdermin D as a culprit in mediating LPS-induced pyroptosis in mouse and human cells.

Both groups subsequently generated mouse strains with a genomic deletion of gasdermin D (*Gsdmd*<sup>-/-</sup>) to further confirm a requirement for this protein in caspase-11-dependent pyroptosis. They found that *Gsdmd*<sup>-/-</sup> bone marrow-derived macrophages (BMDMs) stimulated with intracellularly-delivered LPS failed to undergo pyroptosis or secrete IL-1β into the cell culture supernatant. Dixit and colleagues also identified a lack of caspase-1 and IL-1β processing in *Gsdmd*<sup>-/-</sup> BMDMs in response to intracellularly-delivered LPS. Both groups deleted gasdermin D in human cell lines via CRISPR/Cas9 technology and observed that these cells were resistant to LPS-induced pyroptosis. Further, Shao and colleagues ruled out a role for gasdermin D in necroptotic and apoptotic cell death pathways. These key observations from both groups collectively establish gasdermin D as a pyroptosis-inducing factor which acts downstream of caspase-4, -5 and -11, leading to physical rupture of the cell membrane that mediates release of matured IL-1β from the cell.

To further dissect how gasdermin D might contribute to the caspase-11-dependent pathway, both groups performed a series of biochemical assays to demonstrate that recombinant caspase-11 cleaved gasdermin D between the Asp276 and Gly277 residues of mouse gasdermin D, generating an N-terminal (30-31-kDa) and a C-terminal fragment (22-kDa). Caspase-4 or -5 also induced cleavage of human gasdermin D. Expression of the N-terminal fragment of gasdermin D alone induced pyroptosis, whereas the C-terminal fragment provided autoinhibition prior to cleavage of the full-length protein. Reconstitution of a mutant gasdermin D bearing a mutation that abolishes its ability to undergo cleavage did not engage pyroptosis.

Shao and colleagues found that other members of the gasdermin family were not cleaved by inflammatory caspases, while caspase-1 also cleaved gasdermin D at the same site as caspase-11. Cleavage of gasdermin D by caspase-1 suggests that this substrate could be involved in pyroptosis mediated by caspase-11-independent canonical inflammasomes [7]. Canonical inflammasomes can be activated by a range of microbe-associated molecular patterns and damaged-associated molecular patterns [8]. Shao and colleagues, indeed, provide evidence that gasdermin D played a role in driving pyroptosis induced by the NLRP3 (LPS plus nigericin), NLRC4 (*Salmonella enterica* serovar Typhimurium or its flagellin), AIM2 (the dsDNA ligand poly(dA:dT)) or Pyrin (*Clostridium difficile* toxin B)

and cellular leakage seen in pyrop-
tosis? Does the N-terminal fragment
of gasdermin D cooperate with other
substrates cleaved by inflammatory cas-
pases to drive pyroptosis? The answers
to these questions will bring us closer to
unveiling the molecular events govern-
ing inflammasome-mediated cell death.
Pyroptosis is a double-edged sword.
Removal of host cells that support
pathogen replication by pyroptosis is a
useful tactic in the host defense against
intracellular bacteria [11]. In contrast,
it also depletes CD4 T cells and drives
immunodeficiency during HIV-1 infec-
tion [12]. The physiological relevance
of gasdermin D and pyroptosis should
now be examined further in a range of
diseases, including cancer and autoin-
flammatory conditions.

Si Ming Man${}^{1}$,
Thirumala-Devi Kanneganti${}^{1}$

${}^{1}$Department of Immunology, St. Jude Children’s
Research Hospital, MS #351, 262 Danny Tho-
mas Place, Memphis, TN 38105, USA
Correspondence: Thirumala-Devi Kanneganti
Tel: +1-901-595-3634; Fax: +1-901-595-5766
E-mail: Thirumala-Devi.Kanneganti@stjude.org

**References**

1. Kayagaki N, Wong MT, Stowe IB, *et al.* Science 2013; 341:1246-1249.
2. Hagar JA, Powell DA, Aachoui Y, *et al.* Science 2013; 341:1250-1253.
3. Shi J, Zhao Y, Wang Y, *et al.* Nature 2014; 514:187-192.
4. Kayagaki N, Warming S, Lamkanfi M, *et al.* Nature 2011; 479:117-121.
5. Kayagaki N, Stowe IB, Lee BL, *et al.* Nature 2015 Sep 16. doi:10.1038/nature15541
6. Shi J, Zhao Y, Wang K, *et al.* Nature 2015 Sep 16. doi:10.1038/nature15514
7. Agard NJ, Maltby D, Wells JA. Mol Cell Proteomics 2010; 9:880-893.
8. Man SM, Kanneganti TD. Immunol Rev 2015; 265:6-21.
9. Wang S, Miura M, Jung YK, *et al.* Cell 1998; 92:501-509.
10. Lamkanfi M, Kanneganti TD, Van Damme P, *et al.* Mol Cell Proteomics 2008; 7:2350-2363.
11. Miao EA, Leaf IA, Treuting PM, *et al.* Nat Immunol 2010; 11:1136-1142.
12. Doitsh G, Galloway NL, Geng X, *et al.* Nature 2014; 505:509-514.

Cell Research | Vol 25 No 11 | November 2015
