
LETTER

Complete nitrification by a single microorganism

Maartje A. H. J. van Kessel$^{1}$, Daan R. Speth$^{1}$, Mads Albertsen$^{2}$, Per H. Nielsen$^{2}$, Huub J. M. Op den Camp$^{1}$, Boran Kartal$^{1,3}$, Mike S. M. Jetten$^{1,4}$ & Sebastian Lücker$^{1}$

Nitrification is a two-step process where ammonia is first oxidized to nitrite by ammonia-oxidizing bacteria and/or archaea, and subsequently to nitrate by nitrite-oxidizing bacteria. Already described by Winogradsky in 1890$^{1}$, this division of labour between the two functional groups is a generally accepted characteristic of the biogeochemical nitrogen cycle$^{2}$. Complete oxidation of ammonia to nitrate in one organism (complete ammonia oxidation; comammox) is energetically feasible, and it was postulated that this process could occur under conditions selecting for species with lower growth rates but higher growth yields than canonical ammonia-oxidizing microorganisms$^{3}$. Still, organisms catalysing this process have not yet been discovered. Here we report the enrichment and initial characterization of two *Nitrospira* species that encode all the enzymes necessary for ammonia oxidation via nitrite to nitrate in their genomes, and indeed completely oxidize ammonium to nitrate to conserve energy. Their ammonia monooxygenase (AMO) enzymes are phylogenetically distinct from currently identified AMOs, rendering recent acquisition by horizontal gene transfer from known ammonia-oxidizing microorganisms unlikely. We also found highly similar *amoA* sequences (encoding the AMO subunit A) in public sequence databases, which were apparently misclassified as methane monooxygenases. This recognition of a novel *amoA* sequence group will lead to an improved understanding of the environmental abundance and distribution of ammonia-oxidizing microorganisms. Furthermore, the discovery of the long-sought-after comammox process will change our perception of the nitrogen cycle.

Nitrification, the aerobic oxidation of ammonium to nitrate is divided into two subsequent reactions: ammonium oxidation to nitrite (equation (1)) and nitrite oxidation to nitrate (equation (2)). These two reactions are catalysed by physiologically distinct clades of microorganisms.

$\text{NH}_{4}^{+} + 1.5\text{O}_{2} \rightarrow \text{NO}_{2}^{-} + \text{H}_{2}\text{O} + 2\text{H}^{+} \quad (\Delta G^{\circ'} = -274.7 \, \text{kJ mol}^{-1})$

$\text{NO}_{2}^{-} + 0.5\text{O}_{2} \rightarrow \text{NO}_{3}^{-} \quad (\Delta G^{\circ'} = -74.1 \, \text{kJ mol}^{-1})$

$\text{NH}_{4}^{+} + 2\text{O}_{2} \rightarrow \text{NO}_{3}^{-} + \text{H}_{2}\text{O} + 2\text{H}^{+} \quad (\Delta G^{\circ'} = -348.9 \, \text{kJ mol}^{-1})$

Even though the existence of a single microorganism capable of oxidizing ammonium to nitrate (equation (3)) was not previously reported, it was proposed that such a microorganism could have a competitive advantage in biofilms and other microbial aggregates with low substrate concentrations$^{3}$.

In this study, to characterize the microorganisms responsible for nitrogen transformations in an ammonium-oxidizing biofilm, we sampled the anaerobic compartment of a trickling filter connected to a recirculation aquaculture system$^{4}$ with an ammonium effluent of less than $100 \, \mu \text{M}$. To enrich for the N-cycling community, a bioreactor was inoculated and supplied with low concentrations of ammonium, nitrite and nitrate under hypoxic conditions ($\leq 3.1 \, \mu \text{M O}_2$). Within 12 months, we obtained a stable enrichment culture that efficiently removed ammonium and nitrite from the medium (Extended Data Fig. 1). The culture showed anaerobic ammonium-oxidizing (anammox) activity (Fig. 1a), and fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) revealed that anammox organisms of the genus *Brocadia* constituted approximately 45% of all FISH-detectable bacteria. Surprisingly, *Nitrospira*-like nitrite-oxidizing bacteria accounted for approximately 15% of the community and co-occurred with the *Brocadia* species in flocs (Fig. 2a). This tight clustering with anammox bacteria was unexpected as both microorganisms require nitrite for growth. Together with the presence of *Nitrospira* at very low oxygen concentrations, this indicated that there could be a functional link between these organisms.

To determine the function of *Nitrospira* in the community, we extracted and sequenced total DNA from the enrichment culture biomass. In total 4.95 gigabase pairs of trimmed metagenomic sequence were obtained and used for *de novo* assembly. By differential coverage and sequence composition-based binning$^{5}$ it was possible to extract high-quality draft genomes of two *Nitrospira* species. The two strains had genomic pairwise average nucleotide identities (ANI)$^{6}$ of 75% and thus clearly represented different species (*Nitrospira* sp.1 and sp.2, Extended Data Fig. 2 and Extended Data Table 1). Surprisingly, both genomes contained the full set of AMO and hydroxylamine dehydrogenase (HAO) genes for ammonia oxidation, in addition to the nitrite oxidoreductase (NXR) subunits necessary for nitrite oxidation in *Nitrospira*$^{7}$. In both species all these genes were localized on a single contiguous genomic fragment, along with general housekeeping genes that allowed reliable phylogenetic assignment. Consequently, these *Nitrospira* species had the genetic potential for the complete oxidation of ammonia to nitrate. No AMO of canonical ammonia-oxidizing bacteria or archaea could be detected in the trimmed metagenomic reads or by *amoA*-specific PCR$^{8,9}$ on DNA extracted from reactor biomass, and no other indications for the presence of ammonia-oxidizing microorganisms were found in the metagenome or by FISH analyses. The AMO structural genes (*amoCAB*) of both *Nitrospira* species, along with the putative additional AMO subunits *amoEDD*$^{10,11}$, formed one gene cluster with *haoAB-cycAB* (encoding HAO, the putative membrane anchor protein HaoB, electron transfer protein cytochrome $c_{554}$ and quinone reducing cytochrome $c_{\text{m552}}$, respectively)$^{12}$ and showed highest similarities to their counterparts in betaproteobacterial ammonia-oxidizing bacteria (60% average amino acid identity to the *Nitrosomonas europaea* genes; Fig. 3 and Supplementary Table 1). The same genomic region also contained genes for copper and haem transport, cytochrome $c$ biosynthesis, and iron storage. These accessory genes were highly conserved in ammonia-oxidizing bacteria but not in other *Nitrospira*$^{7,13}$, indicating their involvement in AMO and HAO biosynthesis or activation. *Nitrospira* sp.1 encoded three discrete *amoC* genes, one of which was clustered with a second, almost identical copy of *amoA* (97.7% amino acid identity). *Nitrospira* sp.2 lacked the second *amoA*, but contained four additional *amoC* and a second *haoA* gene (Supplementary Table 1). Unlike other *Nitrospira*$^{7,13}$, both species lacked enzymes for assimilatory nitrite reduction, indicating adaptation to ammonium-containing

---

$^{1}$Department of Microbiology, IWWR, Radboud University, Heyendaalseweg 135, 6525 AJ Nijmegen, the Netherlands. $^{2}$Center for Microbial Communities, Department of Chemistry and Bioscience, Aalborg University, Fredrik Bajers Vej 7H, 9220 Aalborg, Denmark. $^{3}$Laboratory for Microbiology, University of Gent, K. L. Ledeganckstraat 35, 9000 Gent, Belgium. $^{4}$Department of Biotechnology, TU Delft, Julianalaan 67, 2628 BC Delft, the Netherlands.

RESEARCH LETTER

**Figure 1 | Ammonium oxidation by the enrichment culture.**  
a, $^{29}$N₂ (open circles) and $^{30}$N₂ (filled circles) production from $^{15}$NH₄⁺ by the enrichment culture. b, Ammonium (diamonds) oxidation to nitrate (squares) in aerobic batch incubations in the absence (filled symbols) and presence (open symbols) of ATU. Nitrite concentrations were below the detection limit (<5 μM) at all time points. c, Nitrite (triangles) oxidation to nitrate (squares) in aerobic batch incubations. In b and c, total nitrogen balances are indicated (dashed lines). Symbols in all plots represent averages of three individual experiments. Ammonium concentrations were determined in single measurements, other compounds in triplicate. Error bars represent standard deviations of three biological replicates.

habitats. For ammonium uptake, they encoded low-affinity Rh-type transporters most closely related to Rh50 found in *Nitrosomonas europaea*¹⁴, in contrast to most ammonia-oxidizing and nitrite-oxidizing bacteria that have the high-affinity AmtB-type proteins. Both species encoded ureases and the corresponding ABC transport systems, indicating that urea could be used as an alternative ammonium source. Interestingly, *Candidatus Nitrospira inopinata*, the moderately thermophilic ammonia-oxidizing *Nitrospira* described by Daims et al.¹⁵, encoded a similar set of AMO, HAO and urease proteins, and also lacked genes for assimilatory nitrite reduction. Unlike the two species described here, however, it contained a periplasmic cytochrome c nitrite reductase (NrfA) that could allow it to conserve energy by dissimilatory nitrite reduction to ammonium (DNRA), but might also provide ammonium for assimilation. The evolutionary divergence of these organisms was also reflected in the low ANI values of 70.3–71.6% between *Candidatus N. inopinata* and the two species described here. Concerning their genetic repertoire for nitrite oxidation, sp.2 had four almost identical (>99% amino acid identity) NXR alpha and beta (NxrAB) subunits. Sp.1 had two *nxrAB* copies encoding identical NxrB subunits, but NxrA subunits with amino acid identities of 89.6%, which were separated into distinct clusters in phylogenetic analyses. One homologue branched with sequences from *Nitrospira moscoviensis*, while the other formed a novel sequence cluster together with the sequences from sp.2 (Extended Data Fig. 3).

To ascertain that ammonia oxidation occurred under hypoxic conditions in the enrichment culture, we supplied the bioreactor with $^{15}$N-labelled ammonium. While the anammox bacteria consumed $^{15}$NH₄⁺ and converted it into $^{29}$N₂, a steady increase of $^{30}$N₂ was also observed (Fig. 1a). This formation of $^{30}$N₂ could only be explained by the production of $^{15}$N-labelled nitrite derived through aerobic ammonium oxidation. As metagenomic analyses confirmed that the *Nitrospira* species were the only organism in the enrichment harbouring AMO and HAO, this clearly showed that they were able to perform this reaction even at O₂ concentrations lower than 3.1 μM. To unambiguously link this activity to *Nitrospira*, we visualized the AMO protein *in situ* using batch incubations with reactor biomass and FTCP (fluorescein thiocarbamoylpropargylamine), a fluorescently labelled acetylene analogue that acts as suicide substrate for AMO¹⁶ and covalently binds to the enzyme¹⁷. When counterstained with *Nitrospira*-specific FISH probes, including a newly designed probe specifically targeting the 16S ribosomal RNA-defined phylogenetic group comprising spp.1 and 2 (Extended Data Table 2 and Extended Data Fig. 4), strong FTCP labelling of *Nitrospira* cells was observed, providing strong support for

**Figure 2 | In situ detection of *Nitrospira* and their ammonia-oxidizing capacity.**  
a, Co-aggregation of *Nitrospira* and *Brocadia* in the enrichment. Cells are stained by FISH with probes for all bacteria (EUB338mix, blue), and specific for *Nitrospira* (Ntspa712, green, resulting in cyan) and anammox bacteria (Amx820, red, resulting in magenta). b, AMO labelling by FTCP (green). *Nitrospira* was counterstained by FISH (probes Ntspa662 (blue) and Ntspa476 (red), resulting in white). c, Ammonium-dependent CO₂ fixation by *Nitrospira* shown by FISH-MAR. Silver grain deposition (black) above cell clusters indicates $^{14}$CO₂ incorporation. *Nitrospira* was stained by FISH (probes Ntspa476 (red) and Ntspa662 (blue), resulting in magenta). Images in b and c are representative of two individual experiments, with three (b) or two (c) technical replicates each. Scale bars in all panels represent 10 μm.

Nitrospira sp.1
- $nxrB$
- $nxrA$
- $amoB$
- $amoA$
- $amoC$
- $copD$
- $copC$
- $amoD2$
- $amoD1$
- $amoE$
- $bfr1$
- $bfr2$
- $cycB$
- $cycA$
- $haoB$
- $haoA$
- $ccmI$
- $ccmH$
- $ccmG$
- $ccmF$
- $ccmE$
- $ccmD$
- $ccmC$
- $ccmA$
- $dctA$

Nitrospira sp.2

Nitrosomonas europaea
NC_004757

Nitrosococcus oceani
NC_007484

---

**Figure 3 | Schematic illustration of the AMO genomic region in Nitrospira and selected ammonia-oxidizing bacteria.** The AMO locus in Nitrospira sp.1 in comparison to sp.2 and the beta- and gammaproteobacterial ammonia-oxidizing bacteria Nitrosomonas europaea and Nitrosococcus oceani, respectively. The position of NXR on the AMO-containing Nitrospira contigs is also indicated. Homologous genes are connected by lines. Functions of the encoded proteins are represented by colour, the arrow shows direction of transcription. Numbers specify amino acid identities to Nitrospira sp.1. Parallel double lines designate a break in locus organization. Locus tags for each organism are listed on the right. Genes are drawn to scale. $amo$, ammonia monooxygenase; $bfr$, bacterioferritin; $ccm$, cytochrome c biogenesis; $cop$, copper transport; $cyc$, cytochrome c; $dct$, sodium:dicarboxylate symporter; $hao$, hydroxylamine dehydrogenase; $nxr$, nitrite oxidoreductase.

---

the presence of the ammonia-oxidizing enzyme at the single-cell level (Fig. 2b and Extended Data Fig. 5).

Batch incubations were performed at ambient oxygen concentrations to determine conversion rates of ammonium and nitrite, the level of inhibition by allylthiourea (ATU; a potent inhibitor of bacterial ammonia oxidation$^{18,19}$), and the use of urea as ammonium source for nitrification. Flocs were mechanically disrupted to ensure complete exposure of the biomass to oxygen, which inhibits the anammox and denitrification processes$^{20,21}$. This inhibition was confirmed by the lack of labelled N₂ formation in incubations with ${}^{15}\text{NH}_4^+$. In these incubations (Fig. 1 and Extended Data Fig. 6), the culture oxidized ammonium ($6.0 \pm 1.0\,\mu\text{M h}^{-1}\,\text{NH}_4^+$) and nitrite ($23 \pm 4.7\,\mu\text{M h}^{-1}\,\text{NO}_2^-$) to nitrate. ATU selectively inhibited ammonia oxidation, but did not affect nitrite oxidation rates. Urea was converted to ammonium, which was subsequently oxidized to nitrate ($7.8 \pm 1.1\,\mu\text{M h}^{-1}\,\text{NO}_3^-$), suggesting that these Nitrospira species were capable of using urea as source of ammonia to drive nitrification, as was also reported for some ammonia-oxidizing archaea$^{22}$ and bacteria$^{23}$. This trait could enable them to thrive in environments like fertilized soils, wastewater treatment plants, and many aquatic systems where urea is often present at micromolar levels$^{24}$. However, it should be noted that the two Nitrospira spp. were not the only organisms in the enrichment culture that encoded ureases.

To investigate substrate-dependent inorganic carbon fixation as a proxy for energy conservation from ammonia and nitrite oxidation, we used FISH in combination with microautoradiography (FISH-MAR)$^{25}$. Aerobic incubations with mechanically disrupted flocs were performed in the presence of $500\,\mu\text{M}$ ammonium, $500\,\mu\text{M}$ ammonium with $100\,\mu\text{M}$ ATU, or $500\,\mu\text{M}$ nitrite. Nitrospira incorporated carbon from ${}^{14}\text{C}$-labelled bicarbonate in the presence of either ammonium or nitrite, and ammonia-dependent carbon fixation was strongly inhibited by the addition of ATU (Fig. 2c and Extended Data Fig. 7). Only flocs containing Nitrospira were labelled during all incubations, suggesting that these were the only chemolithoautotrophic nitrifying organisms present in the culture and indeed could conserve energy from the oxidation of ammonia and nitrite.

In 16S rRNA-based phylogenetic analyses, the two ammonia-oxidizing Nitrospira species from our enrichment culture formed two separate lineages within one strongly supported sequence cluster affiliated with Nitrospira sublineage II$^{26}$ (Extended Data Fig. 4). They both grouped with highly similar sequences (>99% nucleotide identity) from a diverse range of habitats, including soil, groundwater, recirculation aquaculture systems, wastewater treatment plants and drinking water distribution systems. The formation of distinct clusters containing sp.1 and sp.2 indicated that the last common ancestor encoded genes for

complete nitrification and that this pathway might be conserved in most organisms affiliated with this sequence group.

To explore the environmental relevance of these Nitrospira, we searched the NCBI nr database$^{27}$ for closely related $amoA$ genes. Surprisingly, we found the AmoA proteins of the two Nitrospira species to be phylogenetically divergent from the described bacterial AmoA sequences. Nitrospira sp.2 AmoA was 97–98% identical to the so-called “unusual” methane monooxygenase (PMO) proteins of Crenothrix polyspora$^{28}$. The two AmoA copies from Nitrospira sp.1 had lower similarities to Crenothrix PmoA (90–91% identity), but also affiliated with this group (Fig. 4). Sequences within this group cannot be amplified by standard $amoA$ primers, but only by $pmoA$ primers when used at reduced stringency$^{29}$. Therefore the public databases only contain few closely related sequences, which were mainly derived from habitats studied for their bacterial methane-oxidizing communities. Highly similar sequences derived from wastewater treatment plants and drinking water systems, however, indicated occurrence of ammonia-oxidizing Nitrospira in a range of engineered and natural environments. We furthermore screened all publicly available shotgun data sets on MG-RAST$^{30}$. Indeed, 168 metagenomes (out of 6,255) and 28 metatranscriptomes (out of 1,051) contained at least two reads affiliated with this $amoA$ group, yielding a total of 3,727 reads that were obtained mainly from soil, sediments and wastewater treatment plants (Extended Data Table 3). Thus, our results showed that the Crenothrix sequence group consists of so far unrecognized AMO sequences overlooked in nitrification studies based on $amoA$ gene detection. Based on these findings, it is highly likely that the PCR-based determination of the Crenothrix $pmoA$ gene from an environmental sample$^{28}$ was erroneous, and this cluster only contains genes encoding AMOs. Nevertheless, with the currently available information it cannot be excluded that certain Crenothrix species attained an $amoA$ gene through lateral gene transfer and use the encoded protein as a surrogate PMO.

In conclusion, here we demonstrated the existence of complete nitrification in a single organism (comamox) and identified two Nitrospira species capable of catalysing this process (equation (3)). In 16S rRNA or $amoA/pmoA$-based studies these organisms would have been classified as nitrite-oxidizing or methane-oxidizing bacteria, respectively. Hence, our results show that a whole group of ammonia-oxidizing organisms was previously overlooked. Our findings furthermore disprove the long-held assumption that nitrification (ammonia oxidation via nitrite to nitrate) is catalysed by two distinct functional groups, thus redefining a key process of the biogeochemical nitrogen cycle.

Based on their physiology, differences in genome content, and separation in different phylogenetic groups in 16S rRNA-based analyses,

RESEARCH LETTER

a                                                                                       b

Thaumarchaeotal AmoA (6)

Actinobacterial HmoA (3)                                                                 Nocardioidaceae bacterium Broad-1, EGD43187

Methylococcaceae EmoA (4)                                                                Hydrogenophaga sp. T4, EWS66135

Proteobacterial PxmA (6)                                                                 Methylomirabilis PmoA (3)

Betaproteobacterial AmoA (14)                                                            Verrucomicrobial PmoA (5)
                                                                                         Alphaproteobacterial PmoA (7)
Environmental cluster (35)                                                                Gammaproteobacterial PmoA (16)
                                                                                         Gammaproteobacterial AmoA (8)
'Unusual' PmoA/novel AmoA (28)

Boreal lake littoral wetland clone M19_47B, FN597181 (13)  
Drinking water distribution system biofilm clone B7233-77, AJ564440 (1)  
Lake Washington sediment clone pmoAa3, DQ367741 (1)  
Eastern Snake River Plain Aquifer clone W10_682_3, DQ008438 (6)  
Riverbed gravel clone OTU89 Cray_13733, LK021635 (1)  
*Crenothrix polyspora*, DQ295904 (3)  
Riverbed gravel clone OTU79 Chess_17756, LK021624 (1)  
Boreal lake littoral soil clone G15_19B, FN597164 (2)  
*Crenothrix polyspora*, DQ295899 (3)  
Artesian well water clone AW-a, DQ984193 (1)  
River floodplain soil clone WP1AD11, FN395324 (2)  
Landfill cover soil clone Der31, EU071122 (1)  
Forest soil clone gp22, AF264136 (2)  
Rice field floodwater clone FW-B, AB222694 (1)  
Acidic forest soil clone P12.5, AY080943 (1)  

Chongxi wetland soil clone pmoAN10, KF264986 (2)  
Rice field microcosm surface soil clone SS-N, AB222695 (1)  
Paddy field rice straw clone RS.F2.3, AB222931 (4)  
Waste water treatment plant Lieshout clone 4, JF706214 (2)  
*Candidatus Nitrospira nitrosa* (2)  
Brazilian ferralsol clone DA33, FN394203 (3)  
Brazilian ferralsol clone OA42, FN394210 (19)  
Paddy field soil clone PS.N.2, AB222896 (2)  
Rice field soil clone 26-2000yo-B, JN591189 (14)  
Paddy field rice straw clone RS.C2, AB222928 (1)  
Paddy soil clone 454-Crenothrix, KP218998 (1)  

Environment cluster (35)

Figure 4 | Phylogenetic analysis of the AmoA/PmoA sequence family. Bayesian interference tree (s.d. = 0.01) showing the affiliation of the *Nitrospira* AmoA. Posterior probabilities ≥70% and ≥90% are indicated by open and filled circles, respectively. Scale bars indicate 10% sequence divergence. a, Radial tree indicating the localization of the novel AmoA/‘unusual’ PmoA sequence group in relation to the main functional groups within the sequence family. Numbers in brackets indicate sequences per group (137 sequences in total). Amo, ammonia monooxygenase; Emo, ethane monooxygenase; Hmo, hydrocarbon/butane monooxygenase; Pmo/Pxm, particulate methane monooxygenase. b, Cladogram detailing the affiliation of the *Nitrospira* sp.1 (green box) and sp.2 (red box) AmoA sequences within this sequence group. *Nitrospira* and *Crenothrix* sequences are depicted in bold. One representative sequence per study is shown for highly similar sequences; numbers in brackets indicate the number of sequences represented.

we propose tentative names for both *Nitrospira* species present in our enrichment: *Candidatus Nitrospira nitrosa* (etymology: L. fem. adj. *nitrosa*, nitrous; the nitrite and nitrate forming *Nitrospira*) for sp.1 and *Candidatus Nitrospira nitrificans* (N.L. part. adj. *nitrificans*, nitrifying; the nitrifying *Nitrospira*) for sp.2. Both species are chemolithoautotrophic and fully oxidize ammonia via nitrite to nitrate.

Online Content Methods, along with any additional Extended Data display items and Source Data, are available in the online version of the paper; references unique to these sections appear only in the online paper.

Received 10 August; accepted 18 November 2015. Published online 26 November 2015.

1. Winogradsky, S. Recherches sur les organismes de la nitrification. *Ann. Inst. Pasteur (Paris)* **4**, 213–231 (1890).
2. Vlaeminck, S. E., Hay, A. G., Maignien, L. & Verstraete, W. In quest of the nitrogen oxidizing prokaryotes of the early Earth. *Environ. Microbiol.* **13**, 283–295 (2011).
3. Costa, E., Pérez, J. & Kreft, J. U. Why is metabolic labour divided in nitrification? *Trends Microbiol.* **14**, 213–219 (2006).
4. Crab, R., Avnimelech, Y., Defoirdt, T., Bossier, P. & Verstraete, W. Nitrogen removal techniques in aquaculture for a sustainable production. *Aquaculture* **270**, 1–14 (2007).
5. Albertsen, M. et al. Genome sequences of rare, uncultured bacteria obtained by differential coverage binning of multiple metagenomes. *Nature Biotechnol.* **31**, 533–538 (2013).
6. Richter, M. & Rosselló-Móra, R. Shifting the genomic gold standard for the prokaryotic species definition. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **106**, 19126–19131 (2009).
7. Lücker, S. et al. A *Nitrospira* metagenome illuminates the physiology and evolution of globally important nitrite-oxidizing bacteria. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **107**, 13479–13484 (2010).
8. Rotthauwe, J. H., Witzel, K. P. & Liesack, W. The ammonia monooxygenase structural gene *amoA* as a functional marker: molecular fine-scale analysis of natural ammonia-oxidizing populations. *Appl. Environ. Microbiol.* **63**, 4704–4712 (1997).
9. Könneke, M. et al. Isolation of an autotrophic ammonia-oxidizing marine archaeon. *Nature* **437**, 543–546 (2005).
10. El Sheikh, A. F., Poret-Peterson, A. T. & Klotz, M. G. Characterization of two new genes, *amoR* and *amoD*, in the *amo* operon of the marine ammonia oxidizer *Nitrosococcus oceani* ATCC 19707. *Appl. Environ. Microbiol.* **74**, 312–318 (2008).
11. Berube, P. M. & Stahl, D. A. The divergent AmoC₃ subunit of ammonia monooxygenase functions as part of a stress response system in *Nitrosomonas europaea*. *J. Bacteriol.* **194**, 3448–3456 (2012).

12. Klotz, M. G. & Stein, L. Y. Nitrifier genomics and evolution of the nitrogen cycle. *FEMS Microbiol. Lett.* **278**, 146–156 (2008).
13. Koch, H. et al. Expanded metabolic versatility of ubiquitous nitrite-oxidizing bacteria from the genus *Nitrospira*. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **112**, 11371–11376 (2015).
14. Lupo, D. et al. The 1.3-Å resolution structure of *Nitrosomonas europaea* Rh50 and mechanistic implications for NH₃ transport by Rhesus family proteins. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **104**, 19303–19308 (2007).
15. Daims, H. et al. Complete nitrification by *Nitrospira* bacteria. *Nature* http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nature16461 (2015).
16. McTavish, H., Fuchs, J. A. & Hooper, A. B. Sequence of the gene coding for ammonia monooxygenase in *Nitrosomonas europaea*. *J. Bacteriol.* **175**, 2436–2444 (1993).
17. Hyman, M. R. & Arp, D. J. ¹⁴C₂H₂- and ¹⁴CO₂-labeling studies of the de novo synthesis of polypeptides by *Nitrosomonas europaea* during recovery from acetylene and light inactivation of ammonia monooxygenase. *J. Biol. Chem.* **267**, 1534–1545 (1992).
18. Taylor, A. E. et al. Use of aliphatic *n*-alkynes to discriminate soil nitrification activities of ammonia-oxidizing thaumarchaea and bacteria. *Appl. Environ. Microbiol.* **79**, 6544–6551 (2013).
19. Ginestet, P., Audic, J.-M., Urbain, V. & Block, J.-C. Estimation of nitrifying bacterial activities by measuring oxygen uptake in the presence of the metabolic inhibitors allylthiourea and azide. *Appl. Environ. Microbiol.* **64**, 2266–2268 (1998).
20. Zumft, W. G. Cell biology and molecular basis of denitrification. *Microbiol. Mol. Biol. Rev.* **61**, 533–616 (1997).
21. Strous, M., Kuenen, J. G. & Jetten, M. S. Key physiology of anaerobic ammonium oxidation. *Appl. Environ. Microbiol.* **65**, 3248–3250 (1999).
22. Alonso-Sáez, L. et al. Role for urea in nitrification by polar marine Archaea. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **109**, 17989–17994 (2012).
23. Burton, S. A. Q. & Prosser, J. I. Autotrophic ammonia oxidation at low pH through urea hydrolysis. *Appl. Environ. Microbiol.* **67**, 2952–2957 (2001).
24. Solomon, C., Collier, J., Berg, G. & Glibert, P. Role of urea in microbial metabolism in aquatic systems: a biochemical and molecular review. *Aquat. Microb. Ecol.* **59**, 67–88 (2010).
25. Wagner, M., Nielsen, P. H., Loy, A., Nielsen, J. L. & Daims, H. Linking microbial community structure with function: fluorescence *in situ* hybridization-microautoradiography and isotope arrays. *Curr. Opin. Biotechnol.* **17**, 83–91 (2006).
26. Daims, H., Nielsen, J. L., Nielsen, P. H., Schleifer, K. H. & Wagner, M. *In situ* characterization of *Nitrospira*-like nitrite-oxidizing bacteria active in wastewater treatment plants. *Appl. Environ. Microbiol.* **67**, 5273–5284 (2001).
27. Johnson, M. et al. NCBI BLAST: a better web interface. *Nucleic Acids Res.* **36**, W5–W9 (2008).
28. Stoecker, K. et al. Cohn’s *Crenothrix* is a filamentous methane oxidizer with an unusual methane monooxygenase. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **103**, 2363–2367 (2006).
29. Luesken, F. A. et al. Diversity and enrichment of nitrite-dependent anaerobic methane oxidizing bacteria from wastewater sludge. *Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol.* **92**, 845–854 (2011).

© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved.

30. Glass, E. M., Wilkening, J., Wilke, A., Antonopoulos, D. & Meyer, F. Using the metagenomics RAST server (MG-RAST) for analyzing shotgun metagenomes. *Cold Spring Harb. Protoc.* http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/pdb.prot5368 (2010).

**Supplementary Information** is available in the online version of the paper.

**Acknowledgements** We would like to thank K. Stultiens, T. van Alen, J. Frank, P. Klaren, L. Pierson and L. Claessens-Joosten for technical assistance, T. Spanings for biofilter maintenance and C. Herbold for the ANI analysis. We are grateful for the use of the confocal microscope from the Microscopic Imaging Centre (MIC, Radboud UMC, Nijmegen) and would like to thank H. Croes and M. Willemse for technical assistance. The LABGeM team and the National Infrastructure “France Genomique” are acknowledged for support within the MicroScope annotation platform. We are thankful to C. Dupont, A. Santoro and M. Saito for consenting to our use of the *Nitrospira marina nxrA* sequences, which were produced by the US Department of Energy Joint Genome Institute. M.A.H.J.v.K was supported by the Technology Foundation STW (grant 13146), D.R.S. by the BE-Basic Foundation (grant fs7-002), M.A. and P.H.N. by the Danish Council for Independent Research (DFF 4005-00369),

M.S.M.J. by the European Research Council (ERC Advanced Grant projects anammox 232937 and Eco_MoM 339880) and the Dutch Ministry of Education, Culture and Science (Gravitation grant SIAM 024002002), B.K. and S.L. by the Netherlands Organization for Scientific Research (NWO VENI grants 863.11.003 and 863.14.019, respectively). The Radboud Excellence Initiative is acknowledged for support to S.L.

**Author Contributions** M.A.H.J.v.K and S.L. executed experiments and analysed data. D.R.S. and M.A. contributed to metagenomic data analyses. M.A. and P.H.N. performed sequencing, assembly and binning. M.A.H.J.v.K., H.J.M.O.d.C., B.K., M.S.M.J. and S.L. planned research. M.A.H.J.v.K., B.K. and S.L. wrote the paper. All authors discussed results and commented on the manuscript.

**Author Information** Metagenomic data is available in the European Nucleotide Archive (ENA) under accession numbers CZQA01000001–CZQA01000015 and CZPZ01000001–CZPZ01000036. Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints. The authors declare no competing financial interests. Readers are welcome to comment on the online version of the paper. Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to S.L. (s.luecker@science.ru.nl).

RESEARCH LETTER

## METHODS

No statistical methods were used to predetermine sample size, the experiments were not randomized, and the investigators were not blinded to allocation during experiments and outcome assessment.

### Enrichment and cultivation.
A bioreactor was inoculated with biomass from a recirculation aquaculture system biofilter (3.5 l, obtained from the anoxic part of the trickling filter compartment) connected to an aquaculture system. The system accommodated common carp (*Cyprinus carpio*, approximately 3.5 kg total weight) and had a total volume of 900 l. The bioreactor (Applikon Biotechnology BV, Schiedam, The Netherlands) consisted of stainless steel and glass, had a 7 l working volume, was equipped with pH and dissolved oxygen sensors (Applikon Dependable Instruments BV Applisens, Schiedam, The Netherlands) and connected to an ADI1030 biocontroller (Applikon Biotechnology BV, Schiedam, The Netherlands). It was operated as a sequencing batch reactor (SBR) with 12 h or 24 h cycles. In the first 5 months, the reactor was operated with a 24 h cycle that consisted of 23 h 15 min filling, 15 min settling (no stirring) and 30 min removal of the supernatant. Afterwards, in 12 h cycles, each filling cycle consisted of 11 h 15 min, followed by 15 min settling and 30 min removal of the supernatant. During every filling period, the reactor was supplied with 600 ml of medium (0.83 ml min⁻¹). The reactor and the medium were flushed constantly with Ar/CO₂ (95%/5% v/v, 10 ml min⁻¹). The temperature was kept at 23 ± 1 °C with a heating blanket and pH was maintained at 6.99 ± 0.1 using a 1 M KHCO₃ solution. The reactor was stirred at 200 rpm. Medium was prepared using aquaculture water taken from the recirculation aquaculture system biofilter. This water contained 300–1,848 μM NO₃⁻, 0–29 μM NO₂⁻ and 0–75 μM NH₄⁺. The water was filter-sterilized (polysulfone filter HF80S, Fresenius Medical Care, Bad Homburg, Germany) and supplemented with 100–500 μM NH₄⁺, 100–450 μM NO₂⁻ and 500 μM NO₃⁻.

### DNA extraction and genome sequencing.
DNA was extracted using the PowerSoil DNA isolation kit (MoBio, Carlsbad, CA) or a CTAB-based extraction method³¹. 1 μg of DNA was used to prepare paired-end sequencing libraries using the TruSeq PCR-free kits (Illumina, San Diego, CA, USA) following the manufacturers recommendation except that the 550 bp protocol was used with 1 μg of input DNA. Mate-pair libraries were prepared using the Nextera Mate-pair kit (Illumina) using the gel-free approach. The prepared libraries were sequenced using an Illumina MiSeq with MiSeq Reagent Kit v3 (2 × 301 bp; Illumina).

### Bioinformatics.
Data generation and binning of metagenome scaffolds to individual genome bins was conducted as described in the mmgenome workflow³² which builds on the multi-metagenome principles⁵. Paired-end Illumina reads in FASTQ format were imported to CLC Genomics Workbench v. 8.0 (CLCBio, Aarhus, Denmark) and trimmed using a minimum phred score of 20, a minimum length of 50bp, allowing no ambiguous nucleotides and trimming off Illumina sequencing adaptors. Mate-pair reads in FASTQ format were trimmed using NextClip³³ and only reads in class A were used for assembly. Passing reads were co-assembled using CLCs *de novo* assembly algorithm, using a kmer of 63 and a minimum scaffold length of 1 kbp. The trimmed metagenome reads were afterwards independently mapped to the assembled scaffolds using CLCs “map reads to reference” algorithm, with a minimum similarity of 95% over 80% of the read length.

Open reading frames were predicted in the assembled scaffolds using the metagenome version of Prodigal³⁴. A set of 107 HMMs of essential single-copy genes³⁵ were searched against the predicted open reading frames using HMMER3³⁶ with default settings, except for the use of the trusted cutoff (-cut_tc). Identified proteins were taxonomically classified using BLASTP against the RefSeq (version 52) protein database with a maximum e-value cutoff of 10⁻⁵. MEGAN³⁷ was used to extract class level taxonomic assignments from the BLAST .xml output file. The script network.pl was used to extract paired-end read connections between scaffolds using a SAM file of the read mappings to the metagenome.

Individual genome bins were extracted using the multi-metagenome principles⁵ and refined using tetranucleotide frequencies, as implemented in the mmgenome R package³². The script extract.fastq.reassembly.pl was used to extract paired-end reads from the binned scaffolds, which were used for re-assembly using SPAdes 3.5.0³⁸. Paired-end and mate-pair connections were used to manually refine the extracted genome bins. For all genomes quality was assessed using coverage plots through the mmgenome R package and by the use of QUAST³⁹ and CheckM⁴⁰ (see Supplementary Table 2 for CheckM counts of single-copy genes). Manual inspection of potential misassemblies was done using Circos⁴¹ as described³². In addition, key regions were manually inspected in CLC Genomics Workbench.

The *Nitrospira* draft genomes were integrated into the MicroScope annotation platform⁴². The automatic annotation of genes in key metabolic pathways was manually refined using the respective tools in MaGe⁴³ as described previously⁷. Genomic pairwise average nucleotide identity values were calculated using BLAST (ANIb) in JSpecies⁶.

---

Absence of canonical bacterial or archaeal *amoA* sequences in the metagenome data was confirmed by searching a set of reference sequences against a BLAST database containing all trimmed metagenome reads.

**Code availability.** The Rmarkdown files used for extracting the genome bins are available for download³².

**Activity assays.** For activity assays, the reactor was supplied with medium containing labelled ammonium (¹⁵NH₄⁺). The medium flow was kept at normal operating rate (0.83 ml min⁻¹) and the biomass was stirred continuously. Isotopic composition of the nitrogen gas produced was analysed using gas chromatography (Agilent 6890 equipped with a Porapak Q column at 80°C and a TCD detector at 300°C; Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA) combined with mass spectrometry (Agilent 5975c, quadruple inert MS).

For batch assays, 150 ml biomass was taken from the reactor and harvested by centrifugation (300g, 10 min). Flocs were disrupted by resuspending the biomass in 1.5 ml mineral medium⁴⁴, followed by rigorous horizontal shaking in the presence of a 0.75 inch glass sphere for 10 min. Subsequently, biomass was washed twice in mineral medium and resuspended in 150 ml mineral medium containing no N-source. 12 ml biomass per incubation was transferred to 30 ml serum bottles and ammonium, nitrite or urea was added (200 μM final concentration). To test for anammox activity and denitrification ¹⁵NH₄⁺ was used and the headspace analysed for labelled dinitrogen gas production as described above. For inhibition experiments ATU was added to a final concentration of 100 μM and biomass was preincubated for 10 min before substrate addition. Bottles were sealed with rubber stoppers and 10 ml air was added to the headspace to ensure slight overpressure. Incubations were performed at room temperature in the dark with mild agitation (50 rpm). At each time point, 0.5 ml sample was taken and stored at −20°C for further analysis.

**Analytical methods.** Ammonium was determined colorimetrically using a modified orthophthal-dialdehyde assay⁴⁵ (detection limit 10 μM) and nitrite (≥5 μM) by the sulfanilamide reaction⁴⁶. Nitrate (≥1 μM) was measured by converting it into nitric oxide at 95°C using a saturated solution of VCl₃ in HCl. Nitric oxide was than measured using a nitric oxide analyser (NOA280i, GE Analytical Instruments, Manchester, UK). To determine the total organic carbon (TOC) concentration of the medium, medium was first acidified to remove inorganic carbon. After 6.5 × dilution with ultrapure water, samples were measured using a TOC-L CPH/CPN analyser (Shimadzu, Duisburg, Germany).

**Fluorescence *in situ* hybridization (FISH).** For FISH analysis, samples from the reactor were fixed with 4% (v/v) paraformaldehyde (PFA), followed by hybridization with fluorescently labelled oligonucleotides as described elsewhere⁴⁷. FISH probes used in this study (Extended Data Table 2) were 5′ labelled with the dyes FLUOS (5(6)-carboxyfluorescein-N-hydroxysuccinimide ester), Cy3 or Cy5 (Thermo Electron Corporation, Ulm, Germany). After hybridization, slides were air-dried and embedded in Vectashield (Vector Laboratories Inc., Burlingame, CA). Probe-conferred fluorescence was recorded on an Zeiss Axioplan 2 (Carl Zeiss AG, Oberkochen, Germany) equipped with a HBO 100 light source and specific filter sets for the detection of FLUOS, Cy3 and Cy5, a Leica TCS SP2 AOBS (Leica Microsystems, Wetzlar, Germany) or a Zeiss LSM510 META (Carl Zeiss AG) confocal laser scanning microscope (CLSM), both equipped with one argon ion (450–514 nm) and two helium neon lasers (543 and 633 nm). Images were recorded with 63 × glycerol or oil immersion objectives at a resolution of 1,024 × 1,024 pixels and 8-bit depth.

For quantifying relative biovolume fractions, PFA-fixed reactor biomass was hybridized to probes Ntspa662, Amx820 and EUB338mix (Extended Data Table 2) as described above. Subsequently, 45 image pairs were recorded at random fields of view using the Leica TCS SP2 AOBS CLSM. The images were imported into the image analysis software *daime*⁴⁸ and evaluated as described elsewhere⁴⁹.

**AMO-labelling.** Washed and disrupted (see above) biomass was incubated for 30 min at room temperature with freshly prepared fluorescein thiocarbamoyl-propargylamine (FTCP, synthesized as described elsewhere¹⁶). After incubation, cells were harvested, washed, PFA-fixed and hybridized to specific FISH probes as described above.

**FISH combined with microautoradiography (FISH-MAR).** FISH-MAR experiments were performed as described before⁵⁰. 150 ml biomass was taken from the reactor and flocs were disrupted as described above. After harvesting and washing, the biomass was resuspended in mineral medium⁴⁴ and transferred to serum bottles. Ammonium or nitrite was added to a final concentration of 500 μM. As controls, incubations with ammonium and ATU (100 μM), without nitrogen source and a dead control (PFA-fixed biomass) were performed. 10 μCi [¹⁴C]-labelled bicarbonate were added to all samples, bottles were sealed with rubber stoppers and incubated at room temperature in the dark for 18 h. After incubation, the biomass was harvested by centrifugation (20,000g, 10 min), PFA-fixed and FISH was performed on coverslips as described above. Hybridized samples were dipped in preheated (48°C) and diluted (1:1 with deionised water) film emulsion (Ilford

Nuclear Emulsion K5, Harman Technology, UK). After overnight drying at room temperature, samples were exposed for 6 days at 4°C and developed in Kodak D19 developer as described before<sup>50</sup>. Images were recorded on a Zeiss LSM510 META CLSM as detailed above. To correct for the different levels of unspecific silver grain deposition in the incubations, the degree of silver grain formation in areas without biomass was compared to the amount of silver grains above biomass flocs. Only cell clusters which showed grain deposition clearly above background level were considered positive.

**Phylogenetic analyses.** 16S rRNA sequences with nucleotide identities ≥98% and *amoA* sequences with identities ≥70%, to the respective sequences of *Nitrospira* sp.1 or sp.2 were identified in the NCBI nr database by BLAST<sup>27</sup>. 16S rRNA sequences were imported into the SILVA<sup>51</sup> small subunit ribosomal RNA database release 119, *amoA* sequences in a custom-made database containing a reference set of *amoA* and *pmoA* sequences. *nxrA* sequences were imported in a custom-made database containing all published sequences from *Nitrospira*, *Nitrospina* and anammox organisms. Sequence alignments for all data sets where generated and manually refined using ARB 5.5<sup>52</sup>. Bayesian interference trees were calculated using MrBayes 3.2.3<sup>53</sup> until a standard deviation <0.01 was reached. For 16S rRNA analyses the GTR substitution model and a 50% conservation filter resulting in 1463 valid alignment positions were used. *amoA* genes were translated into their amino acid sequence and a 10% conservation filter resulting in 264 alignment positions in combination with the WAG substitution model were used for tree calculation. *nxrA* trees were calculated from nucleic acid sequences with the GTR substitution model and without conservation filter, resulting in 2,660 distinct alignment patterns. For all trees 50% majority rule consensus trees are shown.

**Database mining.** All 7,306 public shotgun metagenomes and metatranscriptomes available in MG-RAST<sup>54</sup> were searched for the presence of the diagnostic *amoA* gene. Data sets were downloaded and searched against a small set of characteristic *amoA* sequences using DIAMOND<sup>55</sup> with the default settings. The resulting 44,993 hits were filtered using a BLAST score ratio<sup>56</sup> of the initial alignment score versus the alignment score against the NCBI nr.

---

1. Zhou, J., Bruns, M. A. & Tiedje, J. M. DNA recovery from soils of diverse composition. *Appl. Environ. Microbiol.* **62**, 316–322 (1996).
2. Albertsen, M. mmgenome: tools for extracting individual genomes from metagenomes http://madsalbertsen.github.io/mmgenome/ (2015).
3. Leggett, R. M., Clavijo, B. J., Clissold, L., Clark, M. D. & Caccamo, M. NextClip: an analysis and read preparation tool for Nextera Long Mate Pair libraries. *Bioinformatics* **30**, 566–568 (2014).
4. Hyatt, D. *et al.* Prodigal: prokaryotic gene recognition and translation initiation site identification. *BMC Bioinformatics* **11**, 119 (2010).
5. Dupont, C. L. *et al.* Genomic insights to SAR86, an abundant and uncultivated marine bacterial lineage. *ISME J.* **6**, 1186–1199 (2012).
6. Eddy, S. R., Wheeler, T. J. & the HMMER development team. HMMER: biosequence analysis using profile hidden Markov models. http://hmmер.janelia.org/ (2015).
7. Huson, D. H., Mitra, S., Ruscheweyh, H. J., Weber, N. & Schuster, S. C. Integrative analysis of environmental sequences using MEGAN4. *Genome Res.* **21**, 1552–1560 (2011).
8. Prjibelski, A. D. *et al.* ExSPAnder: a universal repeat resolver for DNA fragment assembly. *Bioinformatics* **30**, i293–i301 (2014).
9. Gurevich, A., Saveliev, V., Vyahhi, N. & Tesler, G. QUAST: quality assessment tool for genome assemblies. *Bioinformatics* **29**, 1072–1075 (2013).
10. Parks, D. H., Imelfort, M., Skennerton, C. T., Hugenholtz, P. & Tyson, G. W. CheckM: assessing the quality of microbial genomes recovered from isolates, single cells, and metagenomes. *Genome Res.* **25**, 1043–1055 (2015).

---

41. Krzywinski, M. *et al.* Circos: an information aesthetic for comparative genomics. *Genome Res.* **19**, 1639–1645 (2009).
42. Vallenet, D. *et al.* MicroScope—an integrated microbial resource for the curation and comparative analysis of genomic and metabolic data. *Nucleic Acids Res.* **41**, D636–D647 (2013).
43. Vallenet, D. *et al.* MaGe: a microbial genome annotation system supported by synteny results. *Nucleic Acids Res.* **34**, 53–65 (2006).
44. Spieck, E. & Lipski, A. in *Methods in Enzymology* Vol. 486 (ed Martin, G. K.) 109–130 (Academic Press, 2011).
45. Taylor, S., Ninjoor, V., Dowd, D. M. & Tappel, A. L. Cathepsin B2 measurement by sensitive fluorometric ammonia analysis. *Anal. Biochem.* **60**, 153–162 (1974).
46. Griess, P. Bemerkungen zu der Abhandlung der HH. Weselsky und Benedikt „Ueber einige Azoverbindungen”. *Ber. Dtsch. Chem. Ges.* **12**, 426–428 (1879).
47. Daims, H., Stoecker, K. & Wagner, M. in *Molecular Microbial Ecology* (eds Osborn, A. M. & Smith, C. J.) Ch. 9, 213–239 (Taylor & Francis, 2005).
48. Daims, H., Lücker, S. & Wagner, M. daime, a novel image analysis program for microbial ecology and biofilm research. *Environ. Microbiol.* **8**, 200–213 (2006).
49. Daims, H. & Wagner, M. Quantification of uncultured microorganisms by fluorescence microscopy and digital image analysis. *Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol.* **75**, 237–248 (2007).
50. Lee, N. *et al.* Combination of fluorescent *in situ* hybridization and microautoradiography—a new tool for structure-function analyses in microbial ecology. *Appl. Environ. Microbiol.* **65**, 1289–1297 (1999).
51. Quast, C. *et al.* The SILVA ribosomal RNA gene database project: improved data processing and web-based tools. *Nucleic Acids Res.* **41**, D590–D596 (2013).
52. Ludwig, W. *et al.* ARB: a software environment for sequence data. *Nucleic Acids Res.* **32**, 1363–1371 (2004).
53. Ronquist, F. & Huelsenbeck, J. P. MrBayes 3: Bayesian phylogenetic inference under mixed models. *Bioinformatics* **19**, 1572–1574 (2003).
54. Meyer, F. *et al.* The metagenomics RAST server – a public resource for the automatic phylogenetic and functional analysis of metagenomes. *BMC Bioinformatics* **9**, 386 (2008).
55. Buchfink, B., Xie, C. & Huson, D. H. Fast and sensitive protein alignment using DIAMOND. *Nature Methods* **12**, 59–60 (2015).
56. Rasko, D. A., Myers, G. S. & Ravel, J. Visualization of comparative genomic analyses by BLAST score ratio. *BMC Bioinformatics* **6**, 2 (2005).
57. Schmid, M. *et al.* Molecular evidence for genus level diversity of bacteria capable of catalyzing anaerobic ammonium oxidation. *Syst. Appl. Microbiol.* **23**, 93–106 (2000).
58. Stahl, D. A. & Amann, R. in *Nucleic Acid Techniques in Bacterial Systematics* (eds Stackebrandt, E. & Goodfellow, M.) (Wiley, 1991).
59. Amann, R. I. *et al.* Combination of 16S rRNA-targeted oligonucleotide probes with flow cytometry for analyzing mixed microbial populations. *Appl. Environ. Microbiol.* **56**, 1919–1925 (1990).
60. Daims, H., Brühl, A., Amann, R., Schleifer, K. H. & Wagner, M. The domain-specific probe EUB338 is insufficient for the detection of all Bacteria: development and evaluation of a more comprehensive probe set. *Syst. Appl. Microbiol.* **22**, 434–444 (1999).
61. Wagner, M., Rath, G., Amann, R., Koops, H.-P. & Schleifer, K.-H. In situ identification of ammonia-oxidizing bacteria. *Syst. Appl. Microbiol.* **18**, 251–264 (1995).
62. Juretschko, S. *et al.* Combined molecular and conventional analyses of nitrifying bacterium diversity in activated sludge: *Nitrosococcus mobilis* and *Nitrospira*-like bacteria as dominant populations. *Appl. Environ. Microbiol.* **64**, 3042–3051 (1998).
63. Mobarry, B. K., Wagner, M., Urbain, V., Rittmann, B. E. & Stahl, D. A. Phylogenetic probes for analyzing abundance and spatial organization of nitrifying bacteria. *Appl. Environ. Microbiol.* **62**, 2156–2162 (1996).
64. Alm, E. W., Oerther, D. B., Larsen, N., Stahl, D. A. & Raskin, L. The oligonucleotide probe database. *Appl. Environ. Microbiol.* **62**, 3557–3559 (1996).

RESEARCH LETTER

a
Ammonia
- load (µmol/d)
- effluent [µM]

b
Nitrite
- load (µmol/d)
- effluent [µM]

Extended Data Figure 1 | Ammonium and nitrite conversion by the enrichment culture. a, b, Inorganic nitrogen load of the enrichment culture per 24 h cycle (filled symbols) and effluent concentrations (open symbols) for ammonium (a, diamonds) and nitrite (b, triangles). Effluent nitrite concentrations were below the detection limit (<5 µM) at all time points. Data points represent the mean of three technical replicates, error bars the standard deviations of these triplicates. Nitrate concentration in the medium varied between 0.5 and 2.0 mM and total organic carbon (TOC) content between 1.30 and 1.44 ppm, which was due to medium preparation with water obtained directly from the recirculation aquaculture system.

a
b

Scaffold Length (Kbp)
- 10
- 50
- 100
- 500
- 1000

Taxonomy
- Acidobacteria
- Alphaproteobacteria
- Bacteroidetes
- Betaproteobacteria
- Chloroflexi
- Firmicutes
- Gammaproteobacteria
- Gemmatimonadetes
- Nitrospirae
- Planctomycetes
- Verrucomicrobia

c
d

Taxonomy
- Nitrospirae

Scaffold Length (Kbp)
- 10
- 50
- 100
- 500
- 1000

Extended Data Figure 2 | Metagenome binning. a, b, Extraction of the Nitrospira sp.1 (a) and sp.2 (b) genome sequences from the metagenome using differential coverage binning. Each circle represents a metagenomic scaffold, with size proportional to scaffold length; the plots contain a total of 47,584 scaffolds. The inlay of each figure shows the secondary binning based on tetranucleotide frequencies, with a total of 331 (a) and 281 (b)

scaffolds included. Taxonomic classification is indicated by colour; a total of 3,158 essential marker genes were detected. The extracted bins are enclosed by a dashed line. c, d, Genome contaminations were excluded by generating linkage maps of the final bins of sp.1 (c, 25 scaffolds) and sp.2 (d, 86 scaffolds) using mate-pair sequencing data.

RESEARCH LETTER

Extended Data Figure 3 | Phylogenetic analysis of NXR. Bayesian interference tree (s.d. = 0.0099) showing the affiliation of the *Nitrospira* sp.1 and sp.2 *nxrA* sequences in comparison to other genome-sequenced *Nitrospira*, *Nitrospina* and anammox bacteria. Posterior probabilities ≥70% and ≥90% are indicated by open and filled circles, respectively. NCBI protein accession numbers for all publicly available sequences are indicated, numbers with an asterisk are IMG gene IDs. The described *Nitrospira* sublineages are indicated by coloured boxes and roman numbers. The scale bar represents 10% sequence divergence. Note the different affiliation of the “*Candidatus N. nitrosa*” (sp.1) *nxrA* sequences. The tree contains 25 sequences from 12 species, belonging to 3 different phyla. Sequences from closely related bacterial putative nitrate reductases were used as outgroup (*n* = 4); the outgroup position is indicated by the arrow.

Homo sapiens gastrointestinal specimen clone ELU0037-T187-S-NIPCRAMgANb_000232, HQ755492  
Homo sapiens gastrointestinal specimen clone ELU0037-T187-S-NIPCRAMgANb_000325, HQ755585  
acidic red soil clone rs-jx36, AB679954  
riparian iron oxidizing biofilm clone 3BR-2H, EU937841  
riparian iron oxidizing biofilm clone 3BR-1G, EU937837  
concrete clone N-85, HM565056  
weathered outcrop clone LWM1-12, HQ674924  
acidophilic nitrifying activated clone AN224, AB809947  
membrane bioreactor biofilm clone M3B11, FJ439855  
moving bed biofilm reactor clone RBCd34, KM200019  
microbial fuel cell electrode biofilm clone 2A-14, JN802217  
tobacco rhizospheric soil clone T3-106, KM200473  
inoculated tobacco rhizospheric soil clone T2-186, KM200425  
tobacco rhizospheric soil clone CK-103, KM200535  
fluidized bed reactor clone o9, AJ224042  
soil clone, JQ366088  
fluidized bed reactor clone g6, AJ224039  
metalliferous peat rhizosphere clone E2006TS6.33, GU983348  
coalbed clone QQSB99, JF417818  
N₂O oxidation system sludge clone NOxi-RB2, AB619693  
Candidatus Nitrospira nitrificans  
Frasassi cave anoxic lake water clone FL0428B_PF20, FJ716415  
groundwater clone fjc-75, JQ278818  
acidophilic nitrifying activated sludge clone AN005, AB809946  

activated sludge clone SBR1015, AF155152  
aquatic Nitrospira clone, AR147420  
activated sludge clone GD1-45, KC551568  
MBR wastewater treatment pilot plant clone 2e, HE964760  
Hanford Site subsurface clone HDB_SION1685, HM186100  
drinking water distribution system simulator clone DSSD45, AY328743  
activated sludge clone SBR2046, AF155155  
sequencing batch reactor clone GC86, Y14644  
autothermal thermophilic aerobic digester clone c13, FN687453  
membrane bioreactor biofilm clone M2B07, FJ439824  
activated sludge clone SBR1024, AF155153  
estrogen-degrading membrane bioreactor clone M1-5, EU015101  
membrane bioreactor biofilm clone M3B50, FJ439870  
activated sludge clone MN-23, KP054177  

Candidatus Nitrospira nitrosa  
Shibayama lagoon iron-oxidizing biofilm clone 9, AB252940  
activated sludge clone P120105_E3, HQ385562  
mine tailing material clone N09CH1_57_59, HF558545  
Figueiras Beach sediments clone FILI-OX110, JQ579759  
marine recirculating aquaculture system clone SF_NOB_Cc11, HM345624  
anthracene-contaminated soil clone T502G8, HM438556  
terrestrial sulfidic spring clone EPS09_OK_001A_47, JX521224  
groundwater clone sf-70, JQ278967  
riparian iron oxidizing biofilm clone 3BR-2CC, EU937877  
MBR wastewater treatment pilot plant clone 156e, HE650091  

Mammoth Cave Karst Aquifer biofilm clone MACA-RR39, GQ500769  
lake water clone N4_089, JX406234  
water reservoir clone Fei_13Dec10m_23, AB930755  
drinking water and groundwater cluster (6)  
drinking water distribution system clone 5A-44, JQ923583  
Chongxi wetland soil clone PR48, JN038835  
sulfidic cave spring microbial mat clone SS_LKC22_UB224, AM490665  

lava tube wall yellow microbial mat clone KA613OOO5, HM445506  
N. lenta et rel. (12)  
Kamchatka volcano mud clone kab58, FJ936775  
cave wall biofilm clone GCaltP6F10, HE603172  
lava tube wall yellow microbial mat clone GM21301f05, JF265912  
soil cluster (5)  
sediment cluster (5)  
moderately thermophilic environmental cluster (5)  
French Guiana coast shallow fluidized muds clone 4_42, KC009989  
Bay of Bengal baroduric sediment clone SDT4S15, JQ073807  

Nitrospira moscoviensis, X82558  
hot spring clone W1B-18, KM221443  
subsurface thermal spring clone FG34B-7, FR846900  
Great Artesian Basin bacterial community clone G19, AF407702  
hot spring clone FWS-B26, KC437362  
subsurface thermal spring clone AB2B-54, FR846920  

Extended Data Figure 4 | 16S rRNA-based phylogenetic analysis.  
Bayesian interference tree (s.d. = 0.0098) showing the affiliation of  
the Nitrospira sp.1 and sp.2 16S rRNA sequences within Nitrospira  
sublineage II. Posterior probabilities ≥70% and ≥90% are indicated by  
open and filled circles, respectively. The strongly supported sequence  
group containing the novel Nitrospira spp. catalysing complete nitrification  
is shaded in grey, the two subgroups containing Nitrospira sp.1 and  
sp.2 (in bold) are highlighted by green and red boxes, respectively.  

N. moscoviensis is depicted in bold for comparison. The curly bracket  
indicates the target group of the newly designed FISH probe Ntspa476  
(see Extended Data Table 2). Scale bar indicates 10% sequence divergence.  
The tree contains a total of 181 sequences; the size of sequence groups is  
indicated in brackets. Sequences from members of Nitrospira sublineages I  
and IV were used as outgroup (n = 24); the outgroup position is indicated  
by the arrow.

Extended Data Figure 5 | Control experiments of AMO-labelling.
a, Cells incubated with the fluorescent dye FTCIP (green) were stained by FISH using probes specific for *Nitrospira* (Ntspa662, red) and all bacteria (EUB338mix, blue). A small cell cluster was stained by FTCIP and targeted by both probes (resulting in a white overlay signal), while all other bacteria (in blue) were not or only slightly stained by FTCIP. The green signal is due to autofluorescence and unspecific FTCIP binding to the floc matrix.
b, Anammox cells (Amx820, blue) showed minor staining by FTCIP (green), but to a much lesser degree than *Nitrospira* (Ntspa662, red; yellow overlay).
c and d, Positive controls: ammonium oxidizing bacteria (*c*, Nso1225 and Nso190, red) in an aerobic enrichment culture and a *Nitrosomonas europaea* pure culture (*d*, NEU, red, and EUB338mix, blue) were stained by FTCIP (resulting in yellow and white overlays, respectively).
e and f, Negative controls: canonical *Nitrospira* in an aerobic enrichment culture (*e*, Ntspa662, blue) and a *Nitrospira moscoviensis* pure culture (*f*, Ntspa662, red, and EUB338mix, blue; magenta overlay) did not show any labelling with FTCIP (green). The two bright green structures in (*c*) and the bright pink signal in (*e*) are due to autofluorescence. Images are representative of two (*a* and *b*) or one (*c* to *f*) individual experiments, with three technical replicates each. Scale bars in all panels represent 10 µm.

a
Nitrite
- ammonium ▲ nitrite ■ nitrate

b
Nitrite + ATU
- ammonium ▲ nitrite ■ nitrate

c
Urea
- ammonium ■ nitrate

d
No substrate
- ammonium ■ nitrate

Extended Data Figure 6 | Batch incubations with nitrite, urea and without substrate.
a, b, Nitrite (triangles) oxidation by the enrichment culture to nitrate (squares) in the absence (a) and in the presence (b) of ATU. The ammonia (diamonds) in b presumably stems from biomass decay and is not oxidized owing to ATU inhibition.
c, Urea conversion to ammonium (diamonds) and subsequent oxidation to nitrate (squares).
d, No-substrate control; minor amounts of ammonium (diamonds)

presumably stem from mineralisation of degrading biomass, leading subsequently to nitrate (squares) formation. Symbols in all plots represent averages of three independent incubations; ammonium was determined in single measurements, nitrite and nitrate in duplicate (a and b) or triplicate (c and d). Error bars represent standard deviations of three biological replicates.

Extended Data Figure 7 | Ammonium and nitrite-dependent CO₂  
fixation shown by FISH-MAR. a–d, FISH with probes for all bacteria  
(EUB338mix, blue), and probes specific for *Nitrospira* (Ntspa662, red;  
resulting in magenta) and anammox bacteria (Amx820, green; resulting  
in cyan). a, Ammonia-dependent carbon fixation. Only *Nitrospira* cells  
were active, as indicated by silver grain deposition. Note the inactive  
anammox cells on the left side of the smaller floc, co-localizing with highly  
active *Nitrospira* cells on the right side of the same floc. b, Inhibition  
of ammonia-dependent carbon fixation by ATU. c, Nitrite-dependent  
carbon fixation. Only *Nitrospira* cells incorporated ¹⁴CO₂. d, No-substrate  
control. Images are representative of two individual experiments, with two  
technical replicates each. Scale bars in all panels represent 10 µm.

Extended Data Table 1 | General genomic characteristics of Nitrospira sp. 1 and sp. 2

| Bin                     | Ca. N. nitrosa (sp. 1)   | Ca. N. nitrificans (sp. 2) |
|-------------------------|--------------------------|----------------------------|
|                         | initial                 | final                      | initial                  | final                    |
| Genome size (bp)        | 4413075                 | 4422398                    | 4088547                  | 4117083                  |
| Contigs                 | 25                      | 15                         | 86                       | 36                       |
| Largest contig (bp)     | 1073143                 | 1804237                    | 335390                   | 475968                   |
| N50                     | 659693                  | 727365                     | 103850                   | 174194                   |
| #Ns per 100 Kbp         | 355                     | 0                          | 420                      | 0                        |
| Completeness*           | 99% (97%)               | >99% (97%)                 | >95% (97%)               | >95% (97%)               |
| Contamination*          | 0% (2.3%)               | 0% (2.3%)                  | <1% (2.8%)               | <1% (2.7%)               |
| Coverage (CTAB)†        | †                       | 13.0                       | †                        | 4.9                      |
| Coverage (Kit)†         | †                       | 10.0                       | †                        | 5.0                      |
| Average G+C content     | †                       | 54.8                       | †                        | 56.6                     |
| Number of coding sequences (CDS) | †                       | 4309                       | †                        | 4502                     |
| rRNA operons            | †                       | 1                          | †                        | 1                        |
| tRNAs                   | †                       | 46                         | †                        | 43                       |

* Values are based on evaluation of the binning plots and manual inspection; numbers in brackets are based on CheckM.
† For details on DNA extraction see Methods section.
‡ These values were only determined for the final genomic bins.

Extended Data Table 2 | FISH probe specifications

| Probe name   | Probe fullname*          | Sequence (5'-3')                     | Binding position† | FA%‡ | Specificity                          | Ref. |
|--------------|--------------------------|-------------------------------------|-------------------|------|---------------------------------------|------|
| Amx 820      | S-* -Amx-0820-a-A-22     | AAAACCCCTACTTAGTGCCC                | 820-841           | 40   | Genera Brocadia, Kuenenia            | 57   |
| Arch 915     | S-D-Arch-0915-a-A-20     | GTGCTCCCCGCACATTCCT                 | 915-934           | nd§  | Domain Archaea                      | 58   |
| Eub 338      | S-D-Bact-0338-a-A-18     | GCTGCCTCCCGTAGGAGT                  | 338-355           | 0-50 | Domain Bacteria                      | 59   |
| Eub338II     | S-* -Bact-0338-b-A-18    | GCAGCCACCCGTAGGTGT                  | 338-355           | 0-50 | Order Planctomycetales               | 60   |
| Eub338III    | S-* -Bact-0338-c-A-18    | GCTGCACCCGTAGGTGT                   | 338-355           | 0-50 | Order Verrucomicrobiales             | 60   |
| NEU          | S-* -Nsm-0651-a-A-18     | CCCCTCTGCTGCACTCTA                  | 653-670           | 40   | Nitrosomonas spp.                   | 61   |
| cNEU         | -                        | TTCATCCCCCTCTGCCG                  | 659-676           | -    | Competitor to NEU                    | 61   |
| NmV          | S-S-Nmob-0174-a-A-18     | TCCTCAGAGACTACGGCG                 | 174-191           | 35   | Nitrosococcus mobilis lineage†       | 62   |
| Nso 190      | S-F-bAOB-0189-a-A-19     | CGATCACCCTGCTTTCTCC                | 189-207           | 55   | Betaproteobacterial AOB              | 63   |
| Nso 1225     | S-F-bAOB-1224-a-A-20     | CGCCATTGTATACGTGTA                  | 1224-1243         | 35   | Betaproteobacterial AOB              | 63   |
| Ntspa 662    | S-G-Ntspa-662-a-A-18     | GGATTCCGCGCTCTCT                   | 662-679           | 35   | Genus Nitrospirae                    | 26   |
| cNtspa 662   | -                        | GGATTCCGCTCTCTCT                   | 662-679           | -    | Competitor to Ntspa 662              | 26   |
| Ntspa 712    | S-* -Ntspa-712-a-A-21    | CGCCTTCGCCACCGGCTTCC               | 712-732           | 35   | Phylum Nitrospirae                   | 26   |
| cNtspa 712   | -                        | CGCCTTCGCCACCGGTGTCC               | 712-732           | -    | Competitor to Ntspa 712              | 26   |
| Ntspa 476    | S-* -Ntspa-0476-a-A-22   | CTGCAGGTACCGTCCGAA                 | 476-494           | 20   | Ca. N. nitrosa, Ca. N. nitricans     | This study |
| cNtspa 476   | -                        | CTGGAGGTACCGTCCGAA                 | 476-494           | -    | Competitor to Ntspa 476              | This study |

*Probe nomenclature according to Almet al. 64  
†Probe binding position according to Escherichia coli 16S rRNA gene numbering.  
‡Percent formamide (v/v) added to the hybridization buffer for optimal hybridization stringency.  
§Not determined.  
‖Probes where used in a equimolar mixture (EUB338mix) to detect all Bacteria.  
†Probe targets N. mobilis, which is affiliated with the betaproteobacterial Nitrosomonas lineage and not the gammaproteobacterial genus Nitrosococcus.  

References 57–64 are cited in this table.

Extended Data Table 3 | Metagenome screening for Nitrospira-like amoA sequences

| Source                     | Geographical location                          | Number of hits | Total reads¹ | Project name                                                                 | Dataset ID² |
|---------------------------|-----------------------------------------------|----------------|--------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------|
| **Metagenome projects**   |                                               |                |              |                                                                              |             |
| River sediment            | Tongue river, Montana, USA                    | 1327           | 556,961,375  | Tongue_all_2011                                                             | 4481956-57;63-72;74-86 |
| Soil                      | Houston, Texas, USA                           | 367            | 321,988,632  | Metagenomic investigation for an ethanol-blended fuel spill                   | 4519753-58;60-64,67-76 |
| Prairie soil              | Auburn, Illinois, USA                         | 119            | 1,075,325,181 | ISA-SMC-2011                                                                | 4502539-2541;2543;2923-2924;2926;2928;2930;2932-33;2935 |
| Soil                      | Ha Noi, Vietnam                               | 94             | 246,030,284  | Rice field                                                                 | 4626743-47;53-54 |
| Garden soil               | Xiamen, Fujian, China                         | 80             | 46,831,964   | 13C labeling Soil Metagenome                                                 | 4635904-5  |
| Air                       | Beijing, China                               | 68             | 978,592,643  | Beijing PM 2.5 and MP 10 Pollutants                                          | 4516402-6403;6455;6459;6637;6651;6802-6803;6910-6911;6952;7064 |
| Agricultural soil         | Amazonia, Brazil                             | 63             | 254,067,071  | Amazon Soil metagenome 2_mendes                                             | 4497370-371;376;391-393;395-396;407-409;411-412 |
| Marine sediment           | Gulf of Mexico, USA                           | 45             | 2,425,926,864 | BP_Sediments                                                               | 4510162-66;68-69;71;73-74 |
| Marine sediment           | Plum Island, Massachusetts, USA               | 33             | 38,370,475   | IGERT Reverse Ecology 2011-2013                                              | 4519628;19632;19636;20031 |
| Activated sludge          | Stanley wwtp, Hong Kong                      | 26             | 16,663,946   | Stanley wwtp activated sludge sample                                         | 4467420   |
| Soil                      | Danum, Malaysia                              | 24             | 43,344,688   | Effect of logging on soil microbial community in tropics                      | 4582264-267;270;798;802-803;805 |
| Agricultural soil         | Richmond, Indiana, USA                       | 23             | 70,731,826   | Earlham Metagenomes 2012                                                    | 4508937-38;40 |
| wwtp sludge               | Malaysia                                     | 23             | 40,000,000   | UTM wastewater treatment plant project A                                     | 4544292-4293;4301;4307;5190;6367-6368;6370;6373;6375 |
| Activated sludge          | Switzerland                                  | 20             | 9,455,087    | Swiss wwtp metatranscriptomics                                               | 4491800   |
| Soil                      | Cologne, Germany                             | 20             | 46,128,675   | Barley                                                                     | 4529836;30504 |
| Alkaline travertine water | Voltri Massif, Liguria, Italy                  | 19             | 42,594,481   | Microbial Biogeography of Serpentinites                                      | 4537864-69 |
| Soil                      | Iowa, USA                                    | 16             | 790,560,095  | GP corn unassembled                                                         | 4539519;21;23;28 |
| Sports facility soil      | Norman, Oklahoma, USA                        | 15             | 10,247,092   | Natural products                                                           | 4573678;83 |
| River water               | Minnesota, USA                               | 14             | 60,806,478   | M3P2012                                                                    | 4534334-35;45-47 |
| Orchard soil              | Haifa, Israel                                | 13             | 27,265,311   | Revital_aft_qc                                                             | 4631721;24 |
| Freshwater sediment       | Rifle, Colorado, USA                         | 8              | 236,916,472  | Subsurface Rifle                                                           | 4465820;4465822 |
| Rizosphere                | Golm, Germany                                | 8              | 32,897,323   | Barley_Rhizomicrobiomics_test_B_PE                                          | 4524591;96 |
| Coral reef                | Xisha island, China                          | 8              | 125,160,089  | S_TS_MG                                                                   | 4580696-698;702 |
| Soil                      | Basque Country, Spain                        | 6              | 3,293,845    | Metal_soil                                                                 | 4510865   |
| Mine soil                 | Coto T xomin, Spain                          | 6              | 196,440      | Pb-Zn-Mine                                                                 | 4580863;73 |
| River biofilm             | West Virginia, USA                           | 6              | 3,487,276    | MTR_GeMS_DNA                                                               | 4589540-1  |
| Marine sediment           | Santa Barbara, California, USA               | 5              | 96,123,985   | Scott_Nitro                                                                | 4537093   |
| Cave microbial mat        | Weebubbie cave, Eucla, Australia             | 4              | 475,608      | Weebubbie Cave Slime Curtain Metagenome                                     | 4448052   |
| Groundwater               | Tulum, Quintana Roo, Mexico                  | 4              | 59,482,508   | Yucatan Groundwater                                                        | 4536382-3  |
| Grassland soil            | Bethel, Minnesota, USA                       | 4              | 71,162,444   | CedarCreek_minsoil_june 2013                                               | 4541645   |
| Soil                      | Amazonia, Brazil                             | 3              | 23,648,292   | Amazon Soil metagenome 1                                                   | 4493652   |
| Freshwater microbial mat  | Hot creek, Colorado, USA                     | 3              | 6,877,377    | International geobiology course 02014PreTrip                                 | 4549766   |
| River sediment            | Athabasca, Alberta, Canada                   | 2              | 2,524,335    | Athabasca-biofilms                                                          | 4482887   |
| **Metatranscriptome projects** |                                           |                |              |                                                                              |             |
| River microbial mat       | West Virginia, USA                           | 523            | 174,983,655  | MTR_GeMS_RNA                                                               | 4597881-86 |
| Oil contaminated soil     | Varennes, Quebec, Canada                     | 164            | 234,156,703  | GenoRem_GH_MT                                                              | 4512573;576-580;586;590;592;608 |
| Soil                      | Kalamazoo, Michigan, USA                     | 28             | 205,252,966  | Miscanthus Metatranscriptome                                                | 4554103   |
| Marine sediment           | Gulf of Mexico, USA                          | 9              | 152,742,090  | MG-Core_Metat_Merged                                                       | 4508038;41;53 |
| Paddy soil                | Jiangdu, China                               | 6              | 52,988,024   | paddy soil                                                                 | 4553284-5  |

* Number of sequences affiliated with the novel AmoA/unusual PmoA sequence group.
¹ Total number of metagenomic reads in the respective MG-RAST project.
² For retrieving these datasets from MG-RAST '3' must be added to the respective dataset ID.
