
REVIEW

Converging roles of caspases in inflammasome activation, cell death and innate immunity

**Si Ming Man and Thirumala-Devi Kanneganti**

Abstract | Inflammatory and apoptotic caspases are central players in inflammation and apoptosis, respectively. However, recent studies have revealed that these caspases have functions beyond their established roles. In addition to mediating cleavage of the inflammasome-associated cytokines interleukin-1β (IL-1β) and IL-18, inflammatory caspases modulate distinct forms of programmed cell death and coordinate cell-autonomous immunity and other fundamental cellular processes. Certain apoptotic caspases assemble structurally diverse and dynamic complexes that direct inflammasome and interferon responses to fine-tune inflammation. In this Review, we discuss the expanding and interconnected roles of caspases that highlight new aspects of this family of cysteine proteases in innate immunity.

---

### Inflammasomes
Multi-protein complexes that activate caspase 1 to induce processing of pro-interleukin-1β and pro-interleukin-18 and to drive pyroptosis.

### Pyroptosis
An inflammatory and lytic form of programmed cell death mediated by inflammatory caspases.

### Apoptosis
A non-inflammatory form of programmed cell death mediated by apoptotic caspases. Apoptotic cells exhibit membrane blebbing (but have an intact cell membrane), DNA fragmentation and cell shrinkage.

The term caspase was introduced in 1996 to embody two functional roles of this group of enzymes. The ‘c’ refers to cysteine proteases, and the ‘aspase’ refers to their ability to cleave after aspartic acid residues¹. Mammalian caspases are broadly divided into two groups based on their functions (TABLE 1). Inflammatory caspases include caspase 1, caspase 4, caspase 5, caspase 11 and caspase 12. With the exception of caspase 12, all inflammatory caspases participate in the activation of inflammasomes to initiate inflammation and the induction of an inflammatory form of programmed cell death known as pyroptosis²⁻⁴. The human genome encodes the inflammatory caspases caspase 1, caspase 4, caspase 5 and caspase 12. By contrast, the mouse genome encodes caspase 1, caspase 11 and caspase 12; caspase 11 being the homologue of human caspase 4 and caspase 5 (REF. 5).

Unlike inflammatory caspases, apoptotic caspases initiate and execute an immunologically silent form of programmed cell death known as apoptosis. Members of the apoptotic caspase family include the initiator caspases caspase 2, caspase 8, caspase 9 and caspase 10, and the effector caspases caspase 3, caspase 6 and caspase 7 (TABLE 1). Unlike humans, rodents do not have a gene encoding caspase 10. Caspase 8 and caspase 9 initiate extrinsic and intrinsic apoptosis, respectively⁶. The extrinsic pathway of apoptosis is induced by death receptors, including FAS (also known as TNFRSF6, CD95 or APT1), tumour necrosis factor receptor 1 (TNFR1), TNFR2 and TNF-related apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL; also known as TNFSF10). Signalling through FAS induces formation of the death-inducing signalling complex, which results in the recruitment of caspase 8 (and caspase 10 in human cells) by the adaptor protein FAS-associated death domain (FADD). Dimerization of caspase 8 triggers the apoptotic cascade⁷. The engagement of TNFR1 by its cognate ligand TNF promotes the formation of a complex comprised of receptor-interacting serine/threonine-protein kinase 1 (RIPK1), FADD and caspase 8. The RIPK1–FADD–caspase 8 complex initiates apoptosis in the cell when there are low levels of the long isoform of FLICE-like inhibitory protein (FLIPL; FLIP is also known as CFLAR)⁸⁻¹¹.

The intrinsic pathway of apoptosis requires the induction of mitochondrial outer membrane permeabilization, which mediates the release of the pro-apoptotic factor cytochrome c for binding by the cytosolic protein apoptotic protease-activating factor 1 (APAF1). APAF1 and caspase 9 assemble a multi-protein complex known as the apoptosome¹²⁻¹⁶. Activation of initiator caspases by either the extrinsic or intrinsic apoptosis pathway engages subsequent activation of caspase 3, caspase 6 and caspase 7. Caspase 14 cannot be classified as either an apoptotic or inflammatory caspase and has a specialized role in the differentiation of keratinocytes¹⁷,¹⁸.

Caspases are expressed by immune cells and non-immune cells and in many tissues and organs. They are produced as inactive zymogens, which consist of a carboxy-terminal protease effector domain comprised of a large subunit and a small subunit (TABLE 1). Caspase 1, caspase 2, caspase 4, caspase 5, caspase 9, caspase 11 and caspase 12 also have an amino-terminal prodomain

Department of Immunology,  
St Jude Children’s Research Hospital, Memphis, Tennessee 38105, USA.  
Correspondence to T.-D.K.  
thirumala-devi.kanneganti@stjude.org  

doi:10.1038/nri.2015.7  
Published online 14 Dec 2015

NATURE REVIEWS | IMMUNOLOGY  
ADVANCE ONLINE PUBLICATION | 1

© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

REVIEWS

Table 1 | Classification of caspases

| Caspase | Classification | Initiator or effector | Genomic location | Domain structure |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  |  |  | Human | Mouse | Prodomain | Protease domain |
| Caspase 1 | Inflammatory | Initiator | 11q23 | 9 A1 | -CARD | Caspase domain |
| Caspase 2 | Apoptotic | Initiator | 7q34–7q35 | 6 B2.1 | -CARD | Caspase domain |
| Caspase 3 | Apoptotic | Effector | 4q34 | 8 B1.1 |  | Caspase domain |
| Caspase 4 | Inflammatory | Initiator | 11q22.2–11q22.3 | Absent | -CARD | Caspase domain |
| Caspase 5 | Inflammatory | Initiator | 11q22.2–11q22.3 | Absent | -CARD | Caspase domain |
| Caspase 6 | Apoptotic | Effector | 4q25 | 3 H1 |  | Caspase domain |
| Caspase 7 | Apoptotic | Effector | 10q25 | 19 D2 |  | Caspase domain |
| Caspase 8 | Apoptotic | Initiator | 2q33–2q34 | 1B | DED-DED | Caspase domain |
| Caspase 9 | Apoptotic | Initiator | 1p36.21 | 4 E1 | -CARD | Caspase domain |
| Caspase 10 | Apoptotic | Initiator | 2q33–2q34 | Absent | DED-DED | Caspase domain |
| Caspase 11 | Inflammatory | Initiator | Absent | 9 A1 | -CARD | Caspase domain |
| Caspase 12* | Inflammatory | Initiator | 11q22.3 | 9 A1 | -CARD | Caspase domain |
| Caspase 14 | Keratinocyte differentiation | Effector | 19p13.1 | 10 C1 |  | Caspase domain |

**Death receptors**  
A subset of receptors within the tumour necrosis factor receptor superfamily that, on binding to their ligands, convey cell death signals.

**FLICE-like inhibitory protein (FLIP).** The long isoform (FLIPL) heterodimerizes with pro-caspase 8 to inhibit apoptosis and potentially inhibits necroptosis. By contrast, the short isoform (FLIPS) promotes necroptosis.

**Apoptosome**  
A multi-protein complex comprised of apoptotic protease-activating factor 1 (APAF1) and caspase 9, which induces the intrinsic pathway of apoptosis.

**Microorganism-associated molecular patterns (MAMPs).** Conserved structures that constitute microorganisms (for example, lipopolysaccharide or flagellin), which are recognized by pattern-recognition receptors.

**Damage-associated molecular patterns (DAMPs).** Molecules that are released by injured cells (for example, ATP or host DNA) and are recognized by pattern-recognition receptors.

**Inflammatory caspases and the inflammasome**  
Caspase 1 is activated in inflammasomes that are initiated by a member of the nucleotide-binding domain

**CARD**, caspase activation and recruitment domain; **DED**, death effector domain. *The human genome encodes 12 caspases. Two isoforms of human caspase 12 have been identified. Caspase 12S is an inactive truncated isoform (not shown), whereas caspase 12L is an active full-length isoform.*

(NOD), leucine-rich repeat (LRR)-containing protein (NLR) family or the pyrin and HIN domain-containing protein (PYHIN) family²¹. The NLR and PYHIN sensors mediate recognition of microorganism-associated molecular patterns (MAMPs) or damage-associated molecular patterns (DAMPs) (BOX 1). So far, five receptors have been established to form an inflammasome, including NOD-, LRR- and pyrin domain-containing protein 1 (NLRP1), NLRP3, NOD-, LRR- and CARD-containing protein 4 (NLRC4), absent in melanoma 2 (AIM2) and pyrin (FIG. 1). Furthermore, interferon-γ (IFNγ)-inducible protein 16 (IFI16), retinoic acid-inducible gene I (RIG-I), NLRP6, NLRP7 and NLRP12 have been suggested to activate caspase 1 (REF. 4). The caspase 1 inflammasome orchestrates antimicrobial effector functions, tissue repair, tumour suppression, metabolic regulation, autoinflammatory disease and cell survival through membrane biogenesis²²⁻²⁷.

Recent studies have identified a role for caspase 4, caspase 5 and caspase 11 in inflammasome signalling (BOX 2). However, our understanding of the biological functions attributed to caspase 1 and caspase 11 gained from mouse studies will probably be re-evaluated in the years ahead in light of findings showing that conventional $Casp1^{-/-}$ mouse strains lack caspase 11 expression²⁸,²⁹. Caspase 4, caspase 5 and caspase 11 have been

2 | ADVANCE ONLINE PUBLICATION

© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

Box 1 | Discovery of caspase 1 and inflammasomes

Caspase 1 was identified in 1989 and named interleukin-1β (IL-1β)-converting enzyme (ICE) owing to its ability to convert the 31 kDa pro-IL-1β into an active 17.5 kDa fragment ${}^{182,183}$. Characterization of purified caspase 1 in 1992 revealed that it is a heterodimeric cysteine protease composed of two subunits, p10 and p20 (REF. 184). Caspase 1 mediates proteolytic processing of IL-18 with similar efficiency ${}^{185}$. In 2002, the existence of a macromolecular protein complex comprised of caspase 1, caspase 5, an adaptor protein known as apoptosis-associated speck-like protein containing a CARD (ASC) and NOD-, LRR- and pyrin domain-containing protein 1 (NLRP1) was described in an overexpression and cell-free system ${}^{21}$. This elegant study provided evidence that caspase 1 is activated in a large multi-protein complex initiated by a member of the NOD, LRR-containing protein (NLR) family. The term inflammasome was then coined to describe its multi-protein composition. In 2004, mutant mouse strains were generated with a genomic deletion of ASC and NOD-, LRR- and CARD-containing protein 4 (NLRC4); macrophages from these mice failed to engage caspase 1 activation and did not process pro-IL-1β in response to infection by the intracellular bacteria Salmonella enterica subsp. enterica serovar Typhimurium ${}^{140}$, thereby providing the first line of genetic evidence for the role of an NLR in the modulation of inflammasome activities under endogenous settings. In addition, three groups independently showed in 2006 that another member of the NLR family, NLRP3, assembles the inflammasome to activate caspase 1 in response to ATP, bacterial RNA molecules and uric acid crystals ${}^{141-143}$. The absent in melanoma 2 (AIM2) and pyrin inflammasomes were subsequently identified in later studies ${}^{146-149,186,187}$. Inflammasomes can be visualized as a distinct speck by fluorescence or confocal microscopy ${}^{95,111,144,145,188}$ (see figure; arrows indicate ASC-caspase 1 inflammasomes in macrophages transfected with double-stranded DNA. Scale bar represents 10 μm).

shown to interact with and activate caspase 1 (REFS 30,31). Further studies have shown that caspase 4, caspase 5 and caspase 11 activate the NLRP3 inflammasome in response to Gram-negative bacteria and intracellularly delivered lipopolysaccharide (LPS), suggesting that caspase 4, caspase 5 and caspase 11 are activators of caspase 1 that promote caspase 1-dependent cleavage of interleukin-1β (IL-1β) and IL-18 (REFS 29,32–41). Direct cleavage of IL-1β and IL-18 by caspase 4 has been proposed ${}^{42,43}$, but further study is required to confirm this observation. Activation of caspase 4, caspase 5 and caspase 11 also leads to pyroptosis and the release of IL-1α and the alarmin high-mobility group box 1 (HMGB1) independently of caspase 1 (REFS 29,32–39,44,45). Emerging evidence now indicates that inflammatory caspases orchestrate distinct functions that do not rely on the effects of IL-1β and IL-18.

### Pyroptosis and other effector functions

Inflammatory caspases orchestrate physiological functions that are independent of their ability to induce the secretion of IL-1β and IL-18. Studies have shown that wild-type mice and mice lacking IL-1β and IL-18 are sensitive to LPS-induced endotoxaemia or Escherichia coli-induced septic shock, whereas mice lacking only caspase 11 or both caspase 1 and caspase 11 are relatively resistant ${}^{31,46-48}$. The contribution of caspase 1 and caspase 11 to LPS-induced endotoxaemia was revisited recently using mice with a genomic deletion of caspase 1 alone. A bacterial artificial chromosome transgene encoding caspase 11 was microinjected into $Casp1^{-/-}Casp11^{-/-}$ mouse embryos to re-establish caspase 11 expression in this mouse line so that it only lacks caspase 1 expression (referred to as $Casp1^{-/-}Casp11^{Tg}$

Alarmin  
A damage-associated molecular pattern that is released by damaged or necrotic cells in response to infection or injury. Alarmins are recognized by pattern-recognition receptors to further activate immune cells.

REVIEWs

a B. anthracis  
b  
c S. Typhimurium  
d F. novicida  
e CMV or vaccinia virus  

Protective antigen  
Lethal factor  

ATP, pore-forming toxins, ion flux and particulate matters  

T3SS  
Vacuole  

Needle Inner rod Flagellin  

Casapse 11-  
independent (canonical)  

NLRC4  

NAIP1 NAIP2 NAIP5 NAIP6  

AIM2  

dsDNA  

Pyrin  

Pro-caspase 1  

NLRC4  

ASC  

PYD  

CARD  

LRR  

NLRP1B  

NLRP3 inflammasome  

NAIP-NLRC4 inflammasome  

AIM2 inflammasome  

Pyrin inflammasome  

NLRP1B inflammasome  

Active caspase 1  

Gasdermin D  

N-terminal fragment  

Pro-IL-1β  

IL-1β  

Pyroptosis  

Toxin-induced modifications of RHO GTPases  

GBPs  

Figure 1 | Caspase 1 and the canonical inflammasomes. a | Release of the Bacillus anthracis anthrax lethal toxin, composed of a protective antigen and a lethal factor, activates the mouse NOD-, leucine-rich repeat (LRR)- and pyrin domain (PYD)-containing protein 1B (NLRP1B) inflammasome by inducing cleavage of NLRP1B${}^{190,191}$. b | NLRP3 responds to numerous activators and physiological aberrations ${}^{141–143}$. Engagement of the NLRP3 inflammasome independently of caspase 11 is known as the canonical NLRP3 inflammasome pathway. c | Certain pathogenic bacteria such as Salmonella enterica subsp. enterica serovar Typhimurium inject proteins into host cells via the type III secretion system (T3SS). These effector proteins are detected by neuronal apoptosis inhibitory proteins (NAIPs) in the cytoplasm, where they engage activation of the NOD-, LRR- and caspase activation and recruitment domain (CARD)-containing protein 4 (NLRC4) inflammasome ${}^{150–156}$. d | The cytosolic bacteria Francisella tularensis subsp. novicida and the double-stranded DNA (dsDNA) mouse cytomegalovirus (CMV) or vaccinia virus release DNA during infection to activate the absent in melanoma 2 (AIM2) inflammasome ${}^{146,149,192,193}$. The transcription factor interferon (IFN)-regulatory factor 1 (IRF1) induces expression of IFN-inducible GTPases known as guanylate-binding proteins (GBPs), which mediate the lysis of *F. novicida* and expose its DNA ${}^{194,195}$. e | Pyrin senses modifications of RHO GTPases caused by RHO-inactivating toxins from bacteria including *Vibrio parahaemolyticus*, *Histophilus somni*, *Clostridium botulinum* and *Burkholderia cepacia* ${}^{186,187}$. Apoptosis-associated speck-like protein containing a CARD (ASC) is an adaptor protein that carries a PYD and CARD and is used to bridge the PYD-bearing inflammasome sensors NLRP3, AIM2 and pyrin with the CARD of pro-caspase 1. Inflammasome sensors carrying a CARD, such as NLRP1B or NLRC4, may engage pro-caspase 1 directly by CARD–CARD interactions. In all cases, caspase 1 drives pro-interleukin-1β (pro-IL-1β) and pro-IL-18 processing. Inflammatory caspases cleave gasdermin D, causing pyroptosis, which allows the release of mature IL-1β and IL-18 from the cell ${}^{62–64}$. The amino-terminal fragment of gasdermin D conveys a signal by caspase 4, caspase 5 and caspase 11 to activate the non-canonical NLRP3 inflammasome.

Non-canonical NLRP3 inflammasome
An inflammasome containing NLRP3 that is activated by Gram-negative bacteria or lipopolysaccharide, requiring activation of caspase 4 or caspase 5 in human cells and caspase 11 in mouse cells.

Canonical inflammasomes
Inflammasomes that do not require caspase 4, caspase 5 and caspase 11 for their activation, including the canonical NLRP3, NLRC4 and AIM2 inflammasomes.

Guanylate-binding proteins
A group of interferon-inducible GTPases produced by the host cell that often target pathogen-containing vacuoles, contributing to the release of pathogens from the vacuole and mediating pathogen killing.

during intraperitoneal infection by the pathogenic bacteria *Burkholderia thailandensis* the effect is largely independent of IL-1β and IL-18 (REF. 53). Epithelial cells infected by *Salmonella enterica* subsp. *enterica* serovar Typhimurium also undergo caspase 1-dependent pyroptosis mediated by the neuronal apoptosis inhibitory protein (NAIP)-NLRC4 inflammasome, leading to physical extrusion of infected cells from the gut epithelium to reduce overall intraepithelial bacterial burden<sup>57</sup>. A similar study showed that caspase 4-dependent pyroptosis controls the amount of S. Typhimurium in human intestinal cell monolayers<sup>43</sup>. In another infection model, the marked susceptibility of mice lacking caspase 1 and caspase 11 to subcutaneous infection by *Francisella tularensis* subsp. *novicida* is not fully recapitulated in wild-type mice injected with neutralizing antibodies specific for IL-1β and IL-18 (REF. 60), which highlights a crucial role for pyroptosis in the control of *F. novicida* infection in addition to IL-1β and IL-18 release. However, a detrimental role for caspase 1-dependent pyroptosis has been observed during HIV-1 infection, whereby pyroptosis depletes quiescent lymphoid CD4<sup>+</sup> T cells and contributes to chronic inflammation and immunodeficiency<sup>61</sup>.

Biochemical analyses have revealed that caspase 4, caspase 5 and caspase 11 directly cleave the substrate gasdermin D, yielding an N-terminal fragment of gasdermin D that drives pyroptosis and activation of the non-canonical NLRP3 inflammasome<sup>62,63</sup> (FIG. 2). Caspase 1 also cleaves gasdermin D to mediate pyroptosis by canonical inflammasomes<sup>62–64</sup> (FIG. 1). However, caspase 1-dependent gasdermin D-independent pyroptosis can be observed following prolonged inflammasome activation, which raises the possibility that other pro-pyroptotic factors exist<sup>62</sup>. Importantly, mice with a deletion of the gene encoding gasdermin D are less susceptible to LPS-induced mortality compared with wild-type mice<sup>62</sup>, providing further support for a role of pyroptosis in the pathogenesis of endotoxaemia.

In addition to infectious diseases, caspase 1 and caspase 11 orchestrate protective responses against colorectal cancer independently of IL-1β and IL-18 in a context-specific manner. Activation of caspase 1 and release of IL-18 via the NLRP3 inflammasome contribute to the protection against colorectal tumorigenesis and subsequent growth of metastasized cancer cells in mice<sup>65–67</sup>. By contrast, activation of the NLRC4 inflammasome prevents cancer through a mechanism that suppresses overt proliferation of colonic crypt cells<sup>68</sup>. How NLRC4 and NLRP3 differentially coordinate caspase 1 functions to achieve IL-18-dependent and -independent effects during colorectal tumorigenesis is largely unknown. Recent studies have also demonstrated a requirement for caspase 11 in mediating resistance against dextran sulfate sodium-induced intestinal inflammation in mice<sup>69–71</sup>. Whether IL-1β and IL-18 are contributing factors in this case is contentious, with both similar and reduced levels of IL-1β and IL-18 being reported in caspase 11-deficient mice treated with dextran sulfate sodium compared with treated wild-type mice<sup>70,71</sup>. Differences in gut microbiota harboured by mice housed in different facilities, together with differences in experimental conditions, could account for these discrepancies. Nevertheless, there is clear evidence to indicate that caspase 1- and caspase 11-mediated cellular and pathological effects might occur independently of the concomitant release of IL-1β and IL-18.

### Inflammatory caspases and LPS sensing

Although the membrane-bound Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4) has been recognized as the bona fide LPS sensor for nearly two decades<sup>72</sup>, recent studies have identified a selective role for caspase 11 in the recognition of LPS. Caspase 11 induces the release of IL-1α, IL-1β and IL-18, and mediates pyroptosis when LPS is transfected or electroporated into the cytoplasm or when Gram-negative bacteria expose their LPS in the cytoplasm<sup>35,36,53</sup> (FIG. 2). Similarly, caspase 4 drives IL-1α and IL-1β secretion and cell death in human monocyte-derived macrophages, monocytes, keratinocytes or epithelial cell lines in response to transfection of LPS<sup>37–39,73</sup>. In addition, the vacuole-restricted pathogens *S*. Typhimurium and *Legionella pneumophila* have been shown to activate caspase 4 and caspase 11 (REFS 33,37,53,73,74), probably owing to aberrant entry of a small proportion of bacteria into the cytoplasm following rupture of the pathogen-containing vacuole caused by guanylate-binding proteins<sup>54,75</sup>.

The presence of a CARD in caspase 11 suggests that a CARD-containing protein might function as an upstream receptor that directly binds LPS. However, a search for a potential binding partner failed to identify an interaction between any CARD-containing proteins and LPS<sup>73</sup>. Instead, caspase 4, caspase 5 and caspase 11 were found to directly bind LPS and its lipid A moiety<sup>73</sup>. Specifically, the full-length 43-kDa form, but not the 38-kDa form, of caspase 11 is precipitated by LPS<sup>73</sup>. Unlabelled LPS competes with biotinylated LPS for caspase 11 binding, whereas biotinylated muramyldipeptide (MDP) and Pam3Cys-Ser-Lys4-trihydrochloride (Pam3CSK4) do not precipitate caspase 11. The surprising observation that certain members of the inflammatory caspase family are sensors of cytosolic LPS clearly broadens the traditional scope of caspase functions.

---

**Box 2 | Cross-species functionality of caspase 4, caspase 5 and caspase 11**

Mouse caspase 11 was identified in 1996 (REF. 30). It shares 46% amino acid sequence identity with mouse caspase 1 and 45% sequence identity with human caspase 1 (REF. 30). Human caspase 4 and caspase 5 share 78% nucleotide sequence identity<sup>79</sup>, indicating that these two genes evolved from a common ancestor by gene multiplication. The expression of caspase 5 and caspase 11 can be upregulated in response to lipopolysaccharide (LPS), other Toll-like receptor (TLR) agonists, interferon-β (IFNβ) or IFNγ in a cell-type specific manner, whereas caspase 4 is constitutively and highly expressed in many cell types<sup>5,30,37,189</sup>. In addition, caspase 4, caspase 5 and caspase 11 are activated following recognition of cytoplasmic LPS from Gram-negative bacteria, leading to activation of the non-canonical NOD-, LRR- and pyrin domain-containing protein 3 (NLRP3) inflammasome<sup>32–34,41</sup>. Caspase 4, caspase 5 and caspase 11 have cross-species activities and are functionally interchangeable in human and mouse cells. Stably expressed caspase 4 or caspase 5 induces pyroptosis in mouse macrophages lacking caspase 11, and caspase 11 induces pyroptosis when introduced into human 293T cells<sup>49,73</sup>.

REVIEWS

Box 3 | Pyroptosis
The term pyroptosis was first proposed in 2001 to describe the pro-inflammatory and caspase 1-dependent nature of Salmonella-induced cell death and to distinguish it from non-inflammatory apoptosis<sup>52</sup>. ‘Pyro’ describes fire or fever and ‘ptosis’ signifies a pro-inflammatory form of programmed cell death. Pyroptosis is characterized by rupture of the cell membrane and release of cellular contents, cell swelling, positivity for annexin V and TUNEL staining, evidence of chromatin condensation and absence of DNA laddering<sup>55,188</sup>. Furthermore, the mitochondria of pyroptotic cells lose membrane potential and release their contents<sup>188</sup>. Several investigators have also referred to caspase 11-induced cell death as pyroptosis<sup>35,36,53,54</sup>. Caspase 11 activates pyroptosis in response to Escherichia coli and other triggers of the non-canonical NOD-, LRR- and pyrin domain-containing protein 3 (NLRP3) inflammasome<sup>29,33</sup>. It is important, however, to note that caspase 11 induces cell death independently of caspase 1 and does not directly cleave interleukin-1β (IL-1β) and IL-18. From this standpoint, it is likely that caspase 1- and caspase 11-dependent pyroptosis have their own set of molecular signatures, some of which might be common. Both caspase 1 and caspase 11 cleave a 53-kDa substrate known as gasdermin D, generating a 31-kDa amino-terminal fragment that initiates pyroptosis and a 22-kDa carboxy-terminal fragment that has unknown functions<sup>62–64</sup>.

Enigmatic roles of caspase 12
Caspase 12 is a member of the inflammatory caspase family and is expressed in many organs<sup>76,77</sup>. An early study indicated that caspase 12 is localized to the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and is activated by ER stress signals but not by other apoptotic stimuli<sup>78</sup>. The human genome encodes either or both the full-length and truncated isoforms of caspase 12, whereas the mouse and rat genomes encode only a full-length caspase 12 (REFS 79,80). The gene that encodes full-length human caspase 12 protein (caspase 12L; also known as the ancestral or active form) spans 8 exons. The inactive, truncated form of human caspase 12 (caspase 12S; also known as the derived or inactive form) consists of only the prodomain owing to a TGA stop codon at amino acid position 125 in exon 4 of the gene. Analysis of the global human population revealed that only 28% of sub-Saharan African populations and less than 1% of populations outside of Africa carry at least one allele for caspase 12L<sup>81</sup>. Further studies revealed that 1.7–12.5% of individuals in certain regions of the Middle East, South Asia and East Asia carry at least one allele encoding caspase 12L<sup>82,83</sup>. Homozygosity for caspase 12L is rare in humans and is found in only 2% of individuals with an African ancestry<sup>80,84</sup>.

The role of caspase 12 in the immune system and the explanation for its loss of function in populations outside of Africa are unclear. Several human and mouse studies suggested that caspase 12 could have a role in the negative regulation of inflammation and caspase 1 activity, as well as confer resistance to bacterial sepsis and infection<sup>80,85</sup>. This is exemplified by a study showing that whole blood cells derived from individuals of African descent expressing caspase 12L produce less IL-1β and granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (also known as CSF2) when stimulated with LPS compared with individuals expressing caspase 12S (REF. 80). By contrast, another study found no correlation between caspase 12 variants and cytokine production<sup>84</sup>. There is some evidence to suggest that homozygosity for caspase 12L is linked to lower baseline joint-narrowing scores in African-Americans with rheumatoid arthritis<sup>86</sup>. However, no association was found between a particular variant of caspase 12 and susceptibility to sepsis induced by the fungal pathogen *Candida albicans* or to community-acquired pneumonia<sup>87,88</sup>. There is also limited evidence to suggest that malaria contributed to the persistence of caspase 12L in African populations<sup>89</sup>. The reason for the apparent discrepancy between these studies is unclear. Nevertheless, it has been proposed that the loss of caspase 12 function in many human populations is indicative of a positive selection event that probably occurred within the past 100,000 years<sup>81</sup>. Consistent with this idea, a loss of caspase 12 function in Europe has been predicted to predate animal domestication and be unrelated to zoonotic infections from livestock<sup>90</sup>.

Biochemical analyses have found that rat caspase 12 cleaves itself and does not induce the cleavage of caspase 1, caspase 3, caspase 4, caspase 5, caspase 8, caspase 9, the apoptotic substrates poly-ADP-ribose polymerases (PARPs) and inhibitor of caspase-activated DNase (ICAD; also known as DFFA), pro-IL-1β, pro-IL-18 or amyloid-β precursor proteins<sup>91</sup>. However, the full-length or a catalytically inactive form of rat caspase 12 interacts with caspase 1 and partially with caspase 5, but not with caspase 9 (REF. 85), and prevents caspase 1 activity and the release of IL-1β in macrophages stimulated with TLR ligands<sup>85,91</sup>. The inhibitory activity of rodent caspase 12 does not seem to be restricted to caspase 1. Overexpression of rat caspase 12 in HEK293T cells dampens the activation of nuclear factor-κB (NF-κB) signalling induced by MDP<sup>92</sup>. Caspase 12 displaces the E3 ubiquitin ligase TNFR-associated factor 6 (TRAF6) in the NOD2-RIPK2 complex and interacts with the kinase RIPK2 (REF. 92). The biochemical functions exhibited by rodent caspase 12 raise the possibility that it might be an anti-inflammatory caspase. However, further studies are required to fully elucidate the immunological repertoire of this understudied caspase.

Caspase 8 and inflammation
Caspase 8 is recognized for its role in apoptosis. However, ongoing investigations have uncovered essential functions for this protease in the regulation of inflammation (FIG. 3). Caspase 8 is required for the activation of NF-κB signalling<sup>93–100</sup> and for direct or indirect cleavage of pro-IL-1β or pro-IL-18 together with or independently of the caspase 1 inflammasome<sup>95,96,101–119</sup>. By contrast, there is also evidence suggesting that caspase 8 contributes to the inhibition of inflammation, including its ability to block inflammasome activities<sup>120</sup>, IFN responses<sup>121,122</sup> and a type of inflammatory programmed cell death known as necroptosis<sup>123,124</sup> (FIG. 3). We discuss below the diverse characteristics of caspase 8 in the context of inflammation.

Modulating NF-κB signalling. Caspase 8 can regulate NF-κB activation. Studies have identified two patients with a homozygous arginine-to-tryptophan mutation in the p18 subunit of caspase 8 that impairs the activation and apoptosis of T cells, B cells and natural killer (NK)

 Necrosis
A type of necrosis and a form of non-apoptotic cell death driven by the kinases RIPK1 and RIPK3 under conditions in which caspase 8 is inhibited.

activation in response to a range of stimuli^{96,97,99,102}. It is worth noting that genomic deletion of Casp8 or Fadd is lethal in embryonic mice^{125–128}, a phenotype that is rescued by genomic deletion of Ripk3 (REFS 129–131). Therefore, studies have used macrophages deficient in both caspase 8 and RIPK3 or FADD and RIPK3. B cells derived from mice lacking caspase 8 only in the B cell population exhibit impaired phosphorylation and nuclear translocation of the p65 subunit of NF-κB and decreased expression of genes encoding IL-6, TNF, IFNβ and CXC-chemokine ligand 10 (CXCL10) in response to LPS stimulation^{94}.

So far, there is no consensus on the molecular mechanism by which caspase 8 mediates NF-κB signalling. One report found that full-length caspase 8 and its catalytic activity are crucial for driving NF-κB activities^{98}, whereas another showed that the DEDs of caspase 8 are sufficient^{132}. Further studies have reported that the catalytic activity of caspase 8 is dispensable for or even reduces NF-κB signalling^{99,132}. A dual and opposing role for caspase 8 has also been proposed, whereby pro-caspase 8 contributes to TNFR1-induced activation of NF-κB whereas activated caspase 8 engages cleavage of NF-κB-inducing kinase (NIK; also known as MAP3K14) to prevent TNFR1-induced NF-κB activation^{99}. Further investigation demonstrated that caspase 8 targets and cleaves FLIP_{L}, which generates an N-terminal p43 fragment and a C-terminal p12 fragment^{100}. The p43 fragment of FLIP_{L}, TRAF2 and caspase 8 form a tripartite complex that subsequently activates the NF-κB signalling pathway^{100}. Despite a lack of clarity with respect to the specific mechanism involved, it is clear that caspase 8 is essential for the activation of NF-κB signalling that leads to the production of a range of pro-inflammatory cytokines.

Direct cleavage of IL-1β. Another pathway by which caspase 8 contributes to inflammation is the conversion of pro-IL-1β to its mature bioactive form. Recombinant caspase 8 directly cleaves human and mouse pro-IL-1β at the Asp117 site — the same site that is targeted by caspase 1 — whereas caspase 3, caspase 7 and caspase 9 or a catalytically inactive mutant of caspase 8 fail to do so^{101–103}. Depending on the stimuli received by the cell, caspase 8 assembles macromolecular complexes of varying complexity to mediate the cleavage of pro-IL-1β (FIG. 3). On recognition of certain fungal and mycobacterial infections in human dendritic cells (DCs), dectin 1 (also known as CLEC7A) and its adaptor SYK promote the formation of a CARD9–BCL-10–MALT1 (mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue lymphoma translocation protein 1) complex that drives the transcription of the gene encoding IL-1β. This complex further recruits apoptosis-associated speck-like protein containing a CARD (ASC; also known as PYCARD) and caspase 8 to form a so-called ‘non-canonical caspase 8 inflammasome’, whereby caspase 8 directly mediates the processing of pro-IL-1β in the absence of caspase 1 (REF. 104). By definition, this complex cannot be classified as an inflammasome as it does not contain an inflammatory caspase.

Direct cleavage of pro-IL-1β by caspase 8 in macrophages has been observed under conditions in which inhibitor of apoptosis proteins (IAPs) are blocked. Genetic deletion of X-linked IAP (XIAP; also known as BIRC4),

cellular IAP1 (cIAP1; also known as BIRC2) and cIAP2 (also known as BIRC3) or inhibition of these IAPs by mimetics of second mitochondrial-derived activator of caspases (SMAC; also known as DIABLO) in

Ligands

A. fumigatus
Candida spp.
M. leprae
Dectin 1
Yersinia spp.

TLR
MDP
Classical
inflammasome
activators
LPS
TLR4
FASL
FAS
Stress-induced
drugs
Pro-apoptotic
stimuli
ER stress
Mitochondrion
SMAC
IAPs
FADD
MYD88
NOD2
SYK
TRIF
RIPK3
RIPK1
Casapse 8
DED-
FADD
Casapse 8
LRR-
NLPR3
PYD
ASC
CARD
Casapse 8
processing unit
Casapse 1
processing unit
p50
p65
NF-κB
NLRP3
FAS
Pro-inflammatory
cytokines
Nucleus
Pro-IL-1β
TNF
and IL-6
Endosome
Poly(I:C)
TLR3
CARD9
MALT1
BCL-10
Casapse 1
inflammasome
‘Non-canonical
casapse 8 inflammasome’

Figure 3 | Caspase 8 mediates initiation of NF-κB signalling and maturation of IL-1β. Ligand recognition by Toll-like receptors (TLRs) leads to signalling via the adaptor MYD88 and subsequent nuclear factor-κB (NF-κB) activation. Caspase 8 and its adaptor FAS-associated death domain (FADD) contribute to this pathway by inducing the transcription of genes encoding pro-inflammatory cytokines, some of which such as pro-interleukin-1β (pro-IL-1β) and pro-IL-18 require further proteolytic processing^{93–100}. Caspase 8 or FADD is also recruited to the nucleotide-binding domain (NOD)-, leucine-rich repeat (LRR)- and caspase activation and recruitment domain (CARD)-containing protein 4 (NLRC4), NOD-, LRR- and pyrin domain (PYD)-containing protein 3 (NLRP3) and absent in melanoma 2 (AIM2) inflammasome complexes activated by classical inflammasome activators (Salmonella enterica subsp. enterica serovar Typhimurium, lipopolysaccharide (LPS) plus ATP or nigericin, Citrobacter rodentium, Escherichia coli, Francisella novicida, double-stranded DNA and Aspergillus fumigatus), in which caspase 8 either activates caspase 1, leading to caspase 1-dependent processing of pro-IL-1β and pro-IL-18, and/or modulates cell death^{95,96,111,112,117}. However, in the absence of caspase 1, caspase 8 may induce apoptosis in the inflammasome speck^{112,113}. Caspase 8 also assembles a range of structurally diverse complexes to directly mediate processing of pro-IL-1β independently of caspase 1. Candida spp., A. fumigatus and Mycobacterium leprae infection trigger dectin 1 and its adaptor SYK to engage a so-called ‘non-canonical caspase 8 inflammasome’ complex that is composed of CARD9, BCL-10, mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue lymphoma translocation protein 1

(MALT1), apoptosis-associated speck-like protein containing a CARD (ASC) and caspase 8. Caspase 8 directly processes pro-IL-1β in the absence of caspase 1 and this process does not require internalization of the pathogen^{104}. In response to TLR3 or TLR4 activators, the adaptor TIR domain-containing adaptor protein inducing IFNβ (TRIF) promotes assembly of a caspase 8 processing unit for direct cleavage of IL-1β in a manner that may require the kinases receptor-interacting serine/threonine-protein kinase 1 (RIPK1) and RIPK3, and the adaptor FAS-associated death domain (FADD)^{101,105–108}. For example, LPS signalling via TLR4–TRIF and an as-yet-unidentified signal released as a result of stress in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) engage caspase 8-dependent processing of IL-1β with or without RIPK3 (REF. 108). LPS-induced TLR4–TRIF signalling and release of second mitochondrial-derived activator of caspases (SMAC), owing to exposure to pro-apoptotic signals delivered by doxorubicin, staurosporine or cycloheximide, activate caspase 8-dependent processing of IL-1β^{106,107}. Here, SMAC or SMAC mimetics suppress inhibitor of apoptosis proteins (IAPs) from blocking RIPK3. During Yersinia pestis infection, RIPK1 and FADD are essential in mediating caspase 8 activation via TRIF- and RIPK3-dependent and -independent mechanisms, whereby activation of caspase 8 ultimately drives caspase 1-mediated processing of IL-1β^{115,116}. Signalling via TLRs induces upregulation of FAS. Interaction between FAS and FASL licenses caspase 8-dependent IL-1β release via FADD, independently of RIPK3 or caspase 1 (REFS 109, 110).

© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved
macrophages results in LPS-induced secretion of IL-1β through a mechanism that depends on both caspase 8 and the caspase 1–NLRP3 inflammasome<sup>102</sup>. When XIAP, cIAP1 and cIAP2 are inhibited, both caspase 1- and caspase 8-dependent pathways of IL-1β secretion are licensed by the common upstream kinase RIPK3, which is suppressed by IAPs<sup>102</sup>. The complex interplay between IAPs was further revealed by studies showing that bone marrow-derived macrophages (BMDMs) or mice with a deletion of the gene encoding cIAP1 or cIAP2 have an impaired ability to activate the NLRP3 inflammasome<sup>133</sup>, whereas deletion of the gene encoding XIAP promotes LPS-induced secretion of IL-1β in a RIPK3-dependent manner<sup>134</sup>. A later study further confirmed that RIPK3 is required for LPS-induced caspase 1- or caspase 8-dependent secretion of IL-1β in mouse bone marrow-derived DCs (BMDCs)<sup>105</sup>. The caspase 8-containing pro-IL-1β processing complex is reported to also contain RIPK1, RIPK3 and FADD, and requires signalling via the TLR adaptor TIR domain-containing adaptor protein inducing IFNβ (TRIF; also known as TICAM1)<sup>105</sup>. This finding is consistent with a previous study showing that the C-terminal receptor-interacting protein homotypic interaction motif (RHIM) of TRIF is essential for driving caspase 8-dependent IL-1β processing<sup>101</sup>.

A role for caspase 1 and caspase 8 in the release of IL-1β has also been described in the context of ER stress<sup>106–108,135–137</sup>. The NLRP3 inflammasome responds to ER stress and induces caspase 1-dependent release of IL-1β in human and mouse cells<sup>135,137</sup>. A further study reported that ER stress induced by an attenuated strain of *Brucella abortus* leads to NLRP3-dependent activation of caspase 2 (REF. 136). Caspase 2 then mediates activation of BH3-interacting domain death agonist (BID) and release of mitochondrial DNA, which leads to the activation of caspase 1 and secretion of IL-1β<sup>136</sup>. Additional studies found that pro-apoptotic chemotherapeutic agents and drugs that induce stress in the ER promote caspase 8-dependent, caspase 1-independent secretion of IL-1β in LPS-primed BMDCs or BMDMs<sup>106–108</sup>. Furthermore, TRIF is required to mediate IL-1β release in this process<sup>106,108</sup>. The amount of cIAP1 is decreased in cells treated with LPS and the pro-apoptotic chemotherapeutic agent doxorubicin<sup>106</sup>, which may imply that cIAP1 has a role as a suppressor of the caspase 8-dependent IL-1β-processing unit<sup>102</sup>. It has, therefore, been proposed that pro-apoptotic stimuli dysregulate mitochondrial functions and induce the release of SMAC from the mitochondria. SMAC then binds to and inhibits IAPs, and thus prevents both IAP-mediated degradation of RIPK3 and inhibition of caspase 8-dependent processing of IL-1β<sup>102,106</sup> (FIG. 3). It is not known whether ER stress directly causes reduced levels of IAPs leading to the secretion of IL-1β. However, RIPK3 has been shown to be partially involved in this TRIF–caspase 8-dependent pathway<sup>108</sup>.

Engagement of FAS by FAS ligand (FASL; also known as TNFSF6 and CD95L) is another pathway by which caspase 8 is activated to cleave IL-1β and IL-18 independently of caspase 1 (REFS 109, 110). In this context, TLR-induced FAS expression drives caspase 8- and FADD-mediated release of IL-1β and IL-18 (REF. 109). The observations that RIPK3 is dispensable for this pathway and that priming by TLR7 — which uses the adaptor MYD88 rather than TRIF — sufficiently induces FAS expression and FASL-mediated IL-1β production<sup>109</sup> indicate that the FAS-regulated caspase 8 complex probably differs in composition to the aforementioned TRIF-dependent caspase 8–RIPK3–RIPK1 complex. The precise architecture of these caspase 8-containing units remains to be defined (FIG. 3). Inhibition of inflammation and of the inflammasome by caspase 8 have also been observed and are further discussed below.

**Caspase 1-dependent processing of IL-1β.** More recent studies have revealed a requirement for caspase 8 in activating caspase 1 within the inflammasome complex to generate bioactive IL-1β<sup>138,139</sup>. Confocal microscopy studies have identified the presence of caspase 8 within the ASC or caspase 1 inflammasome speck in macrophages or DCs infected with *S.* Typhimurium<sup>95,111</sup>, *F.* novicida<sup>112</sup>, *C.* rodentium<sup>96</sup> and *Aspergillus fumigatus*<sup>117</sup> (BOX 1). Super resolution and confocal microscopy studies have further identified bioactive caspase 1 and caspase 8 molecules being bound by a concentric ring of endogenous NLRC4 or NLRP3 and ASC in macrophages infected with *S.* Typhimurium<sup>111</sup>.

In response to canonical inflammasome activators, caspase 1 is required for the processing of pro-IL-1β and pro-IL-18 (REFS 95, 96, 117, 140–156). The role of caspase 8 in this context is to activate caspase 1 or modulate pyroptosis, rather than to participate directly in the processing of pro-IL-1β and pro-IL-18 (FIG. 3). Indeed, recombinant caspase 8 cleaves caspase 1 *in vitro*<sup>96</sup>, allowing caspase 1 to be fully activated to induce the cleavage of pro-IL-1β and pro-IL-18 in response to inflammasome activators LPS and ATP, *C.* rodentium, *Yersinia pestis*, *Yersinia pseudotuberculosis* and *A.* fumigatus<sup>96,115–117</sup>. During *Yersinia* spp. infection, activation of caspase 1 by caspase 8 also requires RIPK1 and FADD, with a partial contribution from TRIF and RIPK3 (REFS 115, 116). In response to β-glucans and heat-killed *C.* albicans, both caspase 1 and caspase 8 regulate IL-1β release independently of one another<sup>118</sup>. Consistent with this concept, prolonged stimulation with LPS and nigericin or infection with *S.* Typhimurium in the absence of caspase 1 activates a delayed pathway leading to caspase 8-dependent processing of IL-1β<sup>95,114</sup>. Caspase 1 and caspase 8 also synergistically contribute to the production of IL-1β that drives the development of osteomyelitis<sup>119</sup>. Mouse neutrophils carrying a missense mutation in the gene encoding proline-serine-threonine phosphatase-interacting protein 2 (PSTPIP2) induce more robust cleavage of IL-1β and release large amounts of IL-1β relative to wild-type neutrophils, which is the basis for the development of spontaneous bone inflammation and destruction. However, genomic deletion of the genes encoding caspase 1 and caspase 8 prevents excessive production of IL-1β and the development of PSTPIP2-mediated osteomyelitis<sup>119</sup>.

---

### **Inhibitor of apoptosis proteins (IAPs)**  
A family of proteins that have multiple functions, including inhibition of apoptosis by binding to apoptotic caspases, E3 ubiquitin ligase activity, regulation of MAPK and NF-κB signalling pathways and regulation of signal transduction by pattern-recognition receptors.

### **Second mitochondrial-derived activator of caspases (SMAC)**  
Endogenous antagonist of inhibitor of apoptosis proteins (IAPs) released from mitochondria in response to death stimuli.

REVIEWS

Precisely how caspase 1 and caspase 8 operate synergistically and independently of one another and the nature of the activators that determine this relationship remain to be fully elucidated. Interestingly, caspase 8-dependent activation of the NLRP3 inflammasome is regulated by RIPK3 and the necroptosis effector mixed lineage kinase domain-like (MLKL) only after prolonged stimulation<sup>157</sup>. This would, in part, reflect the compositional flexibility and dynamics of the caspase 8-containing complex, which is observed when different contextual cues are sensed by the cell at different times. Moreover, the growing evidence supporting a role for caspase 8 in the initiation of inflammation reinforces the perspective that the function of this caspase is clearly not confined to apoptosis.

**Inhibition of inflammation and the inflammasome.** In addition to its pro-inflammatory function, caspase 8 has anti-inflammatory roles. Mice lacking caspase 8 in hepatocytes or DCs develop chronic inflammatory or autoimmune diseases<sup>158,159</sup>. Increased inflammation in mice lacking caspase 8 in DCs could be prevented by deletion of the TLR adaptor MYD88, which suggests a role for caspase 8 in suppressing TLR signalling<sup>159</sup>. In the skin, loss of caspase 8 expression promotes IL-1α secretion and the transcriptional activation of NF-κB-responsive genes during wound healing<sup>160</sup>.

One of the abilities of caspase 8 to modulate inflammation includes inhibition of inflammasome activity (FIG. 4). The deficiency of caspase 8 in mouse DCs results in assembly of the NLRP3 inflammasome and release of IL-1β in response to LPS or Pam3CSK4 even without an inflammasome activator<sup>120</sup>. LPS-induced IL-1β production in DCs lacking caspase 8 requires RIPK1, RIPK3, the effector MLKL and the serine/threonine protein phosphatase PGAM5. This study suggested that LPS stimulation of DCs promotes an association of caspase 8 with FADD to inhibit the assembly of a RIPK1–RIPK3 complex and its downstream effector functions, leading to activation of the NLRP3 inflammasome<sup>120</sup>. It has also been proposed that caspase 8 and FADD bind NLRP3 to directly inhibit the inflammasome<sup>120</sup>. It remains unclear in what context caspase 8 functions as a negative regulator of inflammation and whether this function is cell-type specific.

T cells into the lamina propria, and increased expression of inflammatory markers<sup>164</sup>. Importantly, inhibition of necroptosis by necrostatin 1 largely prevents TNF-induced lethality and small intestinal tissue destruction in these mice<sup>164</sup>. Another report also found that caspase 8 prevents RIPK3-mediated necroptosis, death of enterocytes and immune cell infiltration of the colon<sup>165</sup>. These findings are further supported by a study showing that mice lacking FADD in the intestinal epithelium are hypersusceptible to necrosis of epithelial cells, loss of Paneth cells and the development of colitis — defects that are largely prevented by genomic deletion of the gene encoding RIPK3 (REF. 166). The ability of caspase 8 to provide a checkpoint to suppress necroptosis-induced inflammation adds another layer of functional complexity to this enigmatic protease.

**Apoptotic caspases inhibit type I IFNs**

Apoptotic caspases have a major role in suppressing type I IFN responses. Defective caspase 8 functions have been shown to lead to inflammatory skin disease owing to increased IFN activity<sup>122</sup>. In this study, a mouse strain was generated to carry a set of wild-type caspase 8 alleles and a set of enzymatically defective caspase 8 alleles<sup>122</sup>. This was achieved by microinjecting fertilized oocytes from wild-type mice with a bacterial artificial chromosome carrying a set of alleles encoding caspase 8 lacking enzymatic activity. Mice with a set of wild-type caspase 8 alleles develop normally in the presence of a second set of alleles encoding caspase 8 lacking enzymatic activity<sup>122</sup>. However, deletion of one of the two wild-type alleles encoding caspase 8 results in the development of a chronic inflammatory skin disorder as well as infiltration of leukocytes into the lungs and pancreas<sup>122</sup>. This same study also found that mice lacking caspase 8 specifically in keratinocytes develop cutaneous inflammation. The disease pathogenesis was not a result of TNF, IL-1β or TLR signalling but of increased activation of the transcription factor IFN-regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) and TANK-binding kinase 1 (TBK1) in the epidermis<sup>122</sup>. Furthermore, keratinocytes lacking caspase 8 express increased levels of IFNβ and IFN-inducible proteins following exposure to transfected double-stranded DNA compared with transfected wild-type keratinocytes<sup>122</sup>. Increased expression of IRF3 and IRF7 in BMDCs lacking caspase 8 has also been observed<sup>159</sup>.

More recent studies further highlight a relationship between caspase 8 and other apoptotic caspases and type I IFNs. Recognition of RNA viruses by the cytosolic sensor RIG-I triggers signalling through the adaptor mitochondrial antiviral signalling protein (MAVS; also known as IPS1, VISA and CARDIF) at the mitochondria. RIPK1 is recruited to the mitochondria where it is polyubiquitylated to drive IRF3-dependent production of type I IFNs<sup>121</sup>. Importantly, caspase 8 cleaves polyubiquitylated RIPK1, converting RIPK1 into an inhibitor of RIG-I<sup>121</sup> (FIG. 4). In the absence of caspase 8, fibroblastoid cells or hepatocytes infected with the RNA viruses Sendai virus and vesicular stomatitis virus or stimulated with the synthetic double-stranded RNA poly(I:C) have enhanced activation of IRF3 (REF. 121).

**Inhibition of necroptosis.** An indirect way in which caspase 8 inhibits inflammatory responses is through its ability to inhibit necroptosis — an inflammatory form of programmed cell death mediated by RIPK1 and RIPK3 independently of caspases<sup>20,123,124</sup>. In addition to its ability to bind and inhibit RIPK1–RIPK3-mediated inflammasome activation<sup>120</sup>, caspase 8 cleaves RIPK1, RIPK3 and the deubiquitylating enzyme CYLD, which is responsible for removing ubiquitin chains from RIPK1 and directing its function towards necroptosis<sup>161–163</sup> (FIG. 4). Indeed, spontaneous inflammation that develops in the absence of caspase 8 is prevented by the inhibition of necroptosis<sup>164,165</sup>. Mice with a conditional deletion of the gene encoding caspase 8 in the intestinal epithelium exhibit spontaneous ileitis, loss of Paneth cells and goblet cells, increased infiltration of granulocytes and CD4+
The intrinsic pathway of apoptosis regulated by caspase 9 must also maintain immunological silence. Released mitochondrial DNA owing to mitochondrial outer membrane permeabilization activates the DNA sensor cyclic GMP–AMP synthase (cGAS) and its adaptor stimulator of IFN genes (STING), which induce type I IFNs and IFN-stimulated genes for antiviral defence<sup>167,168</sup>. However, caspase 3, caspase 7 and caspase 9 inhibit the induction of type I IFN responses<sup>167,168</sup> (FIG. 4). Although the molecular mechanism remains to be defined, it has been suggested that apoptotic caspases might cleave cGAS, a regulator of cGAS or mitochondrial DNA itself<sup>167,168</sup>. Release of mitochondrial DNA could engage inflammasome sensors to potentiate the

---

**Figure 4 | Inhibition of inflammation by caspase 8 and other apoptotic caspases.** In the intrinsic pathway of apoptosis, mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) is released owing to mitochondrial outer membrane permeabilization mediated by the pro-apoptotic effector proteins BCL-2-associated X protein (BAX) and BCL-2 antagonist/killer (BAK). Released mtDNA binds to the DNA sensor cGAMP synthase (cGAS), which signals through its adaptor stimulator of interferon (IFN) genes (STING), TANK-binding kinase 1 (TBK1) and IFN-regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) to induce type I IFNs and activate IFN-stimulated genes (ISGs)<sup>167,168</sup>. Cytochrome c is also released by mitochondria, which is sensed by apoptotic protease-activating factor 1 (APAF1). APAF1 and caspase 9 assemble the apoptosome to activate effector caspase 3 and caspase 7 (REFS 12–16). During apoptosis, caspase 3, caspase 7 and caspase 9 prevent signal transduction by the cGAS–STING pathway leading to type I IFN production through an as-yet-undefined mechanism<sup>167,168</sup>. The RNA sensor retinoic acid-inducible gene I (RIG-I) recognizes the double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) viruses Sendai virus and vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV) or the synthetic dsRNA ligand polyinosinic–polycytidylic acid (poly(I:C)). RIG-I interacts with the adaptor mitochondrial antiviral signalling protein (MAVS) at the mitochondria, where the kinase receptor-interacting serine/

threonine-protein kinase 1 (RIPK1) is recruited and undergoes Lys63-linked polyubiquitylation at site Lys377. Mitochondria-associated polyubiquitylated RIPK1 induces activation of antiviral responses via TBK1 and IRF3. Following activation of IRF3, polyubiquitylated RIPK1 is cleaved by caspase 8, whereby cleaved RIPK1 inhibits RIG-I signalling<sup>121</sup>. Caspase 8 also suppresses activation of the nucleotide-binding domain (NOD)-, leucine-rich repeat (LRR)- and pyrin domain (PYD)-containing protein 3 (NLRP3) inflammasome<sup>121</sup>. Upon stimulation of Toll-like receptor 2 (TLR2) or TLR4 in dendritic cells, caspase 8 and FAS-associated death domain (FADD) inhibit the ripoptosome composed of the kinases RIPK3 and RIPK1. In the absence of caspase 8 or FADD, the ripoptosome signals through the effector mixed lineage kinase domain-like (MLKL) and the mitochondrial serine/threonine-protein phosphatase PGAM5 to activate the NLRP3 inflammasome<sup>121</sup>. Caspase 8 and FADD have also been proposed to directly interact with and inhibit NLRP3. There is also evidence to suggest that caspase 8 mediates cleavage of RIPK3, RIPK1 and the deubiquitylating enzyme CYLD as a mechanism to inhibit necroptosis and inflammation<sup>161–163</sup>. ASC, apoptosis-associated speck-like protein containing a caspase activation and recruitment domain (CARD); DED, death effector domain; IL-1β, interleukin-1β; ssRNA, single-stranded RNA.

--- 

**NATURE REVIEWS | IMMUNOLOGY**

© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

**ADVANCE ONLINE PUBLICATION | 11**
Cell-autonomous immunity  
A defence mechanism used by  
the cell to control infection that  
is not traditionally considered  
as part of the immune system.  
Examples include compartmentalization to prevent  
inappropriate entry of bacteria  
into the cytoplasm within a  
eukaryotic cell and production  
of nitric oxide synthases to  
mediate killing of an invading  
microorganism.

**Caspases and cell-autonomous immunity**

The induction of cell-autonomous immunity is essential for host survival in response to infection. The functional roles of caspases and the cytoskeleton are in many ways inextricably linked to cell-autonomous host defence. Caspase 1 activation via the NLRC4 inflammasome controls replication of *L. pneumophila* by inducing maturation of the *L. pneumophila*-containing vacuole. Importantly, caspase 1 cleaves caspase 7 to promote fusion between phagosomes and pathogen-containing vacuoles. A further study has shown that caspase 4, caspase 5 and caspase 11 are essential for the control of *L. pneumophila* replication in macrophages. The mechanism by which caspase 11 contributes to the inhibition of *L. pneumophila* replication depends on the ability of caspase 11 to license actin polymerization through phosphorylation of the actin-binding protein cofilin, ultimately enabling fusion of the *L. pneumophila* vacuole with lysosomes. In addition, the CARD of caspase 11 has been shown to physically interact with the C-terminal WD40 propeller domain of actin-interacting protein 1 (AIP1; also known as DAB2IP), whereby this interaction potentiates cofilin-mediated actin depolymerization.

The relationship between caspases and cell-autonomous immunity is further demonstrated during *S.* Typhimurium infection. In infected macrophages, the NLRC4–caspase 1 axis is required to induce cellular stiffness, leading to impaired movement and uptake of additional bacteria, as well as increased reactive oxygen species production for bacterial killing. Earlier studies have validated a role for caspase 1 in cleaving β-actin and γ-actin, rendering them unable to undergo polymerization. It is possible that caspase 1-dependent restriction of cytoskeletal functions prevents overwhelming infection at the single cell level, which enables the cell to direct resources to killing residing bacteria before phagocytosing more bacteria. This hypothesis would align with the idea that commitment to pyroptosis is made only when the cell no longer has the capacity to kill the residing bacteria.

In the absence of caspase 1, macrophages infected with *S.* Typhimurium and *F.* novicida or transfected with DNA undergo apoptosis and induce robust cleavage of caspase 3, caspase 7, caspase 8 and caspase 9 or the apoptotic substrate PARPs. It is likely that pyroptosis driven by caspase 1 overrides apoptotic cell death during infection by certain bacteria. However, if caspase 1-mediated cell death is somehow bypassed or compromised by bacterial or viral virulence factors that strategically block or mediate evasion of the inflammasome, apoptosis eventually ensues to remove the replicative niche for these pathogens. The synergy between caspases in the context of cell-autonomous immunity further blurs the line between inflammatory and apoptotic caspases. Importantly, these findings provide elegant examples of how caspases control facets of immunity beyond cell death and inflammation.

**Conclusions**

The caspase family members are architects of the body. They maintain homeostasis by dismantling unwanted or damaged cells in a systematic manner. Although caspases are broadly classified into apoptotic and inflammatory caspases, new and exciting studies are continuously unveiling the multifaceted nature of individual caspases in the immune system. Caspases function as pro-inflammatory and anti-inflammatory molecules, as well as having cell-intrinsic roles to orchestrate cell-autonomous immunity. Converging roles of caspases in the immune system are further exemplified by their ability to communicate with one another to maintain immunological silence or to promote inflammatory responses to eliminate invading pathogens. Furthermore, the capacity for inflammatory caspases to mediate sensing of LPS signifies the importance of these proteases in pattern recognition. These elegant and surprising findings challenge the existing functional classification of the caspase family members. The intertwining relationship between caspases will be further defined in the future. Understanding the expanding and interconnected roles of caspases will contribute to the development of therapies that target disease processes associated with dysregulated caspase activity.

---

1. Alnemri, E. S. *et al.* Human ICE/CED-3 protease nomenclature. *Cell* **87**, 171 (1996).
2. Latz, E., Xiao, T. S. & Stutz, A. Activation and regulation of the inflammasomes. *Nat. Rev. Immunol.* **13**, 397–411 (2013).
3. Lamkanfi, M. & Dixit, V. M. Mechanisms and functions of inflammasomes. *Cell* **157**, 1013–1022 (2014).
4. Man, S. M. & Kanneganti, T. D. Regulation of inflammasome activation. *Immunol. Rev.* **265**, 6–21 (2015).
5. Stowe, I., Lee, B. & Kayagaki, N. Caspase-11: arming the guards against bacterial infection. *Immunol. Rev.* **265**, 75–84 (2015).
6. Fuchs, Y. & Steller, H. Live to die another way: modes of programmed cell death and the signals emanating from dying cells. *Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol.* **16**, 329–344 (2015).
7. Ashkenazi, A. & Dixit, V. M. Death receptors: signaling and modulation. *Science* **281**, 1305–1308 (1998).
8. Feoktistova, M. *et al.* cIAPs block ripoptosome formation, a RIP1/caspase-8 containing intracellular cell death complex differentially regulated by cFLIP isoforms. *Mol. Cell* **43**, 449–463 (2011).
9. Tenev, T. *et al.* The ripoptosome, a signaling platform that assembles in response to genotoxic stress and loss of IAPs. *Mol. Cell* **43**, 432–448 (2011).
10. Brenner, D., Blaser, H. & Mak, T. W. Regulation of tumour necrosis factor signalling: live or let die. *Nat. Rev. Immunol.* **15**, 362–374 (2015).
11. Blander, J. M. A long-awaited merger of the pathways mediating host defence and programmed cell death. *Nat. Rev. Immunol.* **14**, 601–618 (2014).
12. Zou, H., Henzel, W. J., Liu, X., Lutschg, A. & Wang, X. Apaf-1, a human protein homologous to *C. elegans* CED-4, participates in cytochrome c-dependent activation of caspase-3. *Cell* **90**, 405–413 (1997).
13. Li, P. *et al.* Cytochrome c and dATP-dependent formation of Apaf-1/caspase-9 complex initiates an apoptotic protease cascade. *Cell* **91**, 479–489 (1997).
14. Srinivasula, S. M., Ahmad, M., Fernandes-Alnemri, T. & Alnemri, E. S. Autoactivation of procaspase-9 by Apaf-1-mediated oligomerization. *Mol. Cell* **1**, 949–957 (1998).
15. Zou, H., Li, Y., Liu, X. & Wang, X. An APAF-1 cytochrome c multimeric complex is a functional apoptosome that activates procaspase-9.
16. Hu, Y., Benedict, M. A., Ding, L. & Nunez, G. Role of cytochrome c and dATP/ATP hydrolysis in Apaf-1-mediated caspase-9 activation and apoptosis. *EMBO J.* **18**, 3586–3595 (1999).
17. Eckhart, L. *et al.* Terminal differentiation of human keratinocytes and stratum corneum formation is associated with caspase-14 activation. *J. Invest. Dermatol.* **115**, 1148–1151 (2000).
18. Lippens, S. *et al.* Epidermal differentiation does not involve the pro-apoptotic executioner caspases, but is associated with caspase-14 induction and processing. *Cell Death Differ.* **7**, 1218–1224 (2000).

© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

19. Creagh, E. M. Caspase crosstalk: integration of apoptotic and innate immune signalling pathways. *Trends Immunol.* **35**, 631–640 (2014).

20. Oberst, A. & Green, D. R. It cuts both ways: reconciling the dual roles of caspase 8 in cell death and survival. *Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol.* **12**, 757–763 (2011).

21. Martinon, F., Burns, K. & Tschopp, J. The inflammasome: a molecular platform triggering activation of inflammatory caspases and processing of proIL-β. *Mol. Cell* **10**, 417–426 (2002). This paper describes the existence of an inflammasome complex that is assembled in the cytoplasm to mediate cleavage of IL-1β. This paper also characterizes the basic architecture of the human NLRP1 inflammasome.

22. Franchi, L., Muñoz-Planillo, R. & Núñez, G. Sensing and reacting to microbes through the inflammasomes. *Nat. Immunol.* **13**, 325–332 (2012).

23. Kanneganti, T. D. Central roles of NLRs and inflammasomes in viral infection. *Nat. Rev. Immunol.* **10**, 688–698 (2010).

24. van de Veerdonk, F. L., Joosten, L. A. & Netea, M. G. The interplay between inflammasome activation and antifungal host defense. *Immunol. Rev.* **265**, 172–180 (2015).

25. Zitvogel, L., Kepp, O., Galluzzi, L. & Kroemer, G. Inflammasomes in carcinogenesis and anticancer immune responses. *Nat. Immunol.* **13**, 343–351 (2012).

26. Wen, H., Ting, J. P. & O’Neill, L. A. A role for the NLRP3 inflammasome in metabolic diseases—did Warburg miss inflammation? *Nat. Immunol.* **13**, 352–357 (2012).

27. Gurcel, L., Abrami, L., Girardin, S., Tschopp, J. & van der Goot, F. G. Caspase-1 activation of lipid metabolic pathways in response to bacterial pore-forming toxins promotes cell survival. *Cell* **126**, 1135–1145 (2006).

28. Kang, S. J. *et al.* Dual role of caspase-11 in mediating activation of caspase-1 and caspase-3 under pathological conditions. *J. Cell Biol.* **149**, 613–622 (2000).

29. Kayagaki, N. *et al.* Non-canonical inflammasome activation targets caspase-11. *Nature* **479**, 117–121 (2011). This study shows that caspase 11 activation in response to infection by Gram-negative bacteria leads to non-canonical NLRP3 inflammasome activity.

30. Wang, S. *et al.* Identification and characterization of Ich-3, a member of the interleukin-1β converting enzyme (ICE)/Ced-3 family and an upstream regulator of ICE. *J. Biol. Chem.* **271**, 20580–20587 (1996).

31. Wang, S. *et al.* Murine caspase-11, an ICE-interacting protease, is essential for the activation of ICE. *Cell* **92**, 501–509 (1998).

32. Rathinam, V. A. *et al.* TRIF licenses caspase-11-dependent NLRP3 inflammasome activation by Gram-negative bacteria. *Cell* **150**, 606–619 (2012).

33. Broz, P. *et al.* Caspase-11 increases susceptibility to *Salmonella* infection in the absence of caspase-1. *Nature* **490**, 288–291 (2012).

34. Gurung, P. *et al.* Toll or interleukin-1 receptor (TIR) domain-containing adaptor inducing interferon-β (TRIF)-mediated caspase-11 protease production integrates Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4) protein- and Nlrp3 inflammasome-mediated host defense against enteropathogens. *J. Biol. Chem.* **287**, 34474–34483 (2012).

35. Kayagaki, N. *et al.* Noncanonical inflammasome activation by intracellular LPS independent of TLR4. *Science* **341**, 1246–1249 (2013).

36. Hagar, J. A., Powell, D. A., Aachoui, Y., Ernst, R. K. & Miao, E. A. Cytoplasmic LPS activates caspase-11: implications in TLR4-independent endotoxic shock. *Science* **341**, 1250–1253 (2013). References 35 and 36 identify an unknown cytoplasmic sensor that mediates recognition of cytosolic LPS independently of TLR4. This sensor was later shown to be caspase 11 (see reference 73).

37. Casson, C. N. *et al.* Human caspase-4 mediates noncanonical inflammasome activation against gram-negative bacterial pathogens. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **112**, 6688–6693 (2015).

38. Schmid-Burgk, J. L. *et al.* Caspase-4 mediates non-canonical activation of the NLRP3 inflammasome in human myeloid cells. *Eur. J. Immunol.* **45**, 2911–2917 (2015).

39. Baker, P. J. *et al.* NLRP3 inflammasome activation downstream of cytoplasmic LPS recognition by both caspase-4 and caspase-5. *Eur. J. Immunol.* **45**, 2918–2926 (2015).

40. Ruhl, S. & Broz, P. Caspase-11 activates a canonical NLRP3 inflammasome by promoting K efflux. *Eur. J. Immunol.* **45**, 2927–2936 (2015).

41. Sander, L. E. *et al.* Detection of prokaryotic mRNA signifies microbial viability and promotes immunity. *Nature* **474**, 385–389 (2011).

42. Fassy, F. *et al.* Enzymatic activity of two caspases related to interleukin-1β-converting enzyme. *Eur. J. Biochem.* **253**, 76–83 (1998).

43. Knodler, L. A. *et al.* Noncanonical inflammasome activation of caspase-4/caspase-11 mediates epithelial defenses against enteric bacterial pathogens. *Cell Host Microbe* **16**, 249–256 (2014).

44. Casson, C. N. *et al.* Caspase-11 activation in response to bacterial secretion systems that access the host cytosol. *PLoS Pathog.* **9**, e1003400 (2013).

45. Lukens, J. R. *et al.* RIP1-driven autoinflammation targets IL-1α independently of inflammasomes and RIP3. *Nature* **498**, 224–227 (2013).

46. Li, P. *et al.* Mice deficient in IL-1β-converting enzyme are defective in production of mature IL-1β and resistant to endotoxic shock. *Cell* **80**, 401–411 (1995).

47. Lamkanfi, M. *et al.* Inflammasome-dependent release of the alarmin HMGB1 in endotoxemia. *J. Immunol.* **185**, 4385–4392 (2010).

48. Sarkar, A. *et al.* Caspase-1 regulates *Escherichia coli* sepsis and splenic B cell apoptosis independently of interleukin-1β and interleukin-18. *Am. J. Respir. Crit. Care Med.* **174**, 1003–1010 (2006).

49. Kajiwara, Y. *et al.* A critical role for human caspase-4 in endotoxin sensitivity. *J. Immunol.* **193**, 335–343 (2014).

50. von Moltke, J. *et al.* Rapid induction of inflammatory lipid mediators by the inflammasome *in vivo*. *Nature* **490**, 107–111 (2012).

51. Keller, M., Ruegg, A., Werner, S. & Beer, H. D. Active caspase-1 is a regulator of unconventional protein secretion. *Cell* **132**, 818–831 (2008).

52. Cookson, B. T. & Brennan, M. A. Pro-inflammatory programmed cell death. *Trends Microbiol.* **9**, 113–114 (2001).

53. Aachoui, Y. *et al.* Caspase-11 protects against bacteria that escape the vacuole. *Science* **339**, 975–978 (2013).

54. Pilla, D. M. *et al.* Guanylate binding proteins promote caspase-11-dependent pyroptosis in response to cytoplasmic LPS. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **111**, 6046–6051 (2014).

55. Jorgensen, I. & Miao, E. A. Pyroptotic cell death defends against intracellular pathogens. *Immunol. Rev.* **265**, 130–142 (2015).

56. Miao, E. A. *et al.* Caspase-1-induced pyroptosis is an innate immune effector mechanism against intracellular bacteria. *Nat. Immunol.* **11**, 1136–1142 (2010).

57. Sellin, M. E. *et al.* Epithelium-intrinsic NAIP/NLRC4 inflammasome drives infected enterocyte expulsion to restrict *Salmonella* replication in the intestinal mucosa. *Cell Host Microbe* **16**, 237–248 (2014).

58. Storek, K. M. & Monack, D. M. Bacterial recognition pathways that lead to inflammasome activation. *Immunol. Rev.* **265**, 112–129 (2015).

59. Chen, K. W. *et al.* The neutrophil NLRC4 inflammasome selectively promotes IL-1β maturation without pyroptosis during acute *Salmonella* challenge. *Cell Rep.* **8**, 570–582 (2014).

60. Mariathasan, S., Weiss, D. S., Dixit, V. M. & Monack, D. M. Innate immunity against *Francisella tularensis* is dependent on the ASC/caspase-1 axis. *J. Exp. Med.* **202**, 1043–1049 (2005).

61. Doitsh, G. *et al.* Cell death by pyroptosis drives CD4 T-cell depletion in HIV-1 infection. *Nature* **505**, 509–514 (2014).

62. Kayagaki, N. *et al.* Caspase-11 cleaves gasdermin D for non-canonical inflammasome signaling. *Nature* **526**, 666–671 (2015).

63. Shi, J. *et al.* Cleavage of GSDMD by inflammatory caspases determines pyroptotic cell death. *Nature* **526**, 660–665 (2015). References 62 and 63 demonstrate that the N-terminal fragment of cleaved gasdermin D drives pyroptosis.

64. Agard, N. J., Maltby, D. & Wells, J. A. Inflammatory stimuli regulate caspase substrate profiles. *Mol. Cell Proteom.* **9**, 880–893 (2010).

65. Zaki, M. H., Vogel, P., Body-Malapel, M., Lamkanfi, M. & Kanneganti, T. D. IL-18 production downstream of the Nlrp3 inflammasome confers protection against colorectal tumor formation. *J. Immunol.* **185**, 4912–4920 (2010).

66. Allen, I. C. *et al.* The NLRP3 inflammasome functions as a negative regulator of tumorigenesis during colitis-associated cancer. *J. Exp. Med.* **207**, 1045–1056 (2010).

67. Dupaul-Chicoine, J. *et al.* The Nlrp3 Inflammasome Suppresses Colorectal Cancer Metastatic Growth in the Liver by Promoting Natural Killer Cell Tumorcidal Activity. *Immunity* **43**, 751–763 (2015).

68. Hu, B. *et al.* Inflammation-induced tumorigenesis in the colon is regulated by caspase-1 and NLRC4. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **107**, 21635–21640 (2010).

69. Demon, D. *et al.* Caspase-11 is expressed in the colonic mucosa and protects against dextran sodium sulfate-induced colitis. *Mucosal Immunol.* **7**, 1480–1491 (2014).

70. Williams, T. M. *et al.* Caspase-11 attenuates gastrointestinal inflammation and experimental colitis pathogenesis. *Am. J. Physiol. Gastrointest. Liver Physiol.* **308**, G139–G150 (2014).

71. Oficjalska, K. *et al.* Protective role for caspase-11 during acute experimental murine colitis. *J. Immunol.* **194**, 1252–1260 (2014). References 69–71 independently identify a role for caspase 11 in mediating protection against colitis-associated colorectal cancer.

72. O’Neill, L. A., Golenbock, D. & Bowie, A. G. The history of Toll-like receptors - redefining innate immunity. *Nat. Rev. Immunol.* **13**, 453–460 (2013).

73. Shi, J. *et al.* Inflammatory caspases are innate immune receptors for intracellular LPS. *Nature* **514**, 187–192 (2014). This study shows that mouse caspase 11 and human caspase 4 and caspase 5 are sensors of cytosolic LPS. The pathogen-sensing capability of caspases clearly broadens their functional repertoire.

74. Case, C. L. *et al.* Caspase-11 stimulates rapid flagellin-independent pyroptosis in response to *Legionella pneumophila*. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **110**, 1851–1856 (2013).

75. Meunier, E. *et al.* Caspase-11 activation requires lysis of pathogen-containing vacuoles by IFN-induced GTPases. *Nature* **509**, 366–370 (2014).

76. Kalai, M. *et al.* Regulation of the expression and processing of caspase-12. *J. Cell Biol.* **162**, 457–467 (2003).

77. Nakagawa, T. & Yuan, J. Cross-talk between two cysteine protease families. Activation of caspase-12 by calpain in apoptosis. *J. Cell Biol.* **150**, 887–894 (2000).

78. Nakagawa, T. *et al.* Caspase-12 mediates endoplasmic-reticulum-specific apoptosis and cytotoxicity by amyloid-β. *Nature* **403**, 98–103 (2000).

79. Fischer, H., Koenig, U., Eckhart, L. & Tschachler, E. Human caspase 12 has acquired deleterious mutations. *Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun.* **293**, 722–726 (2002).

80. Saleh, M. *et al.* Differential modulation of endotoxin responsiveness by human caspase-12 polymorphisms. *Nature* **429**, 75–79 (2004).

81. Xue, Y. *et al.* Spread of an inactive form of caspase-12 in humans is due to recent positive selection. *Am. J. Hum. Genet.* **78**, 659–670 (2006).

82. Kachapati, K., O’Brien, T. R., Bergeron, J., Zhang, M. & Dean, M. Population distribution of the functional caspase-12 allele. *Hum. Mutat.* **27**, 975 (2006).

83. Yavari, M. *et al.* Presence of the functional caspase-12 allele in Indian subpopulations. *Int. J. Immunogenet.* **39**, 389–393 (2012).

84. Ferwerda, B. *et al.* Caspase-12 and the inflammatory response to *Yersinia pestis*. *PLoS ONE* **4**, e6870 (2009).

85. Saleh, M. *et al.* Enhanced bacterial clearance and sepsis resistance in caspase-12-deficient mice. *Nature* **440**, 1064–1068 (2006).

86. Marshall, L. *et al.* Caspase-12 and rheumatoid arthritis in African-Americans. *Immunogenetics* **66**, 281–285 (2014).

87. Rosentul, D. C. *et al.* The impact of caspase-12 on susceptibility to candidemia. *Eur. J. Clin. Microbiol. Infect. Dis.* **31**, 277–280 (2012).

88. Chen, J. *et al.* Lack of association of the caspase-12 long allele with community-acquired pneumonia in people of African descent. *PLoS ONE* **9**, e89194 (2014).

REVIEWs

89. McCall, M. B. *et al.* Persistence of full-length caspase-12 and its relation to malaria in West and Central African populations. *Eur. Cytokine Netw.* 21, 77–83 (2010).

90. Hervella, M. *et al.* The loss of functional caspase-12 in Europe is a pre-neolithic event. *PLoS ONE* 7, e37022 (2012).

91. Roy, S. *et al.* Confinement of caspase-12 proteolytic activity to autoprocessing. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* 105, 4133–4138 (2008).

92. LeBlanc, P. M. *et al.* Caspase-12 modulates NOD signaling and regulates antimicrobial peptide production and mucosal immunity. *Cell Host Microbe* 3, 146–157 (2008).

93. Chun, H. J. *et al.* Pleiotropic defects in lymphocyte activation caused by caspase-8 mutations lead to human immunodeficiency. *Nature* 419, 395–399 (2002).

94. Lemmers, B. *et al.* Essential role for caspase-8 in Toll-like receptors and NF-κB signaling. *J. Biol. Chem.* 282, 7416–7423 (2007).

95. Man, S. M. *et al.* Salmonella infection induces recruitment of Caspase-8 to the inflammasome to modulate IL-1β production. *J. Immunol.* 191, 5239–5246 (2013).

96. Gurung, P. *et al.* FADD and caspase-8 mediate priming and activation of the canonical and noncanonical Nlrp3 inflammasomes. *J. Immunol.* 192, 1835–1846 (2014).

97. Allam, R. *et al.* Mitochondrial apoptosis is dispensable for NLRP3 inflammasome activation but non-apoptotic caspase-8 is required for inflammasome priming. *EMBO Rep.* 15, 982–990 (2014).

98. Su, H. *et al.* Requirement for caspase-8 in NF-κB activation by antigen receptor. *Science* 307, 1465–1468 (2005). This study identifies a human mutation in caspase 8 that leads to impaired activation of NF-κB signalling, demonstrating a role for caspase 8 in inflammation.

99. Hu, W. H., Johnson, H. & Shu, H. B. Activation of NF-κB by FADD, Casper, and caspase-8. *J. Biol. Chem.* 275, 10838–10844 (2000).

100. Kataoka, T. & Tschopp, J. N-terminal fragment of c-FLIP(L) processed by caspase 8 specifically interacts with TRAF2 and induces activation of the NF-κB signaling pathway. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* 24, 2627–2636 (2004).

101. Maelfait, J. *et al.* Stimulation of Toll-like receptor 3 and 4 induces interleukin-1β maturation by caspase-8. *J. Exp. Med.* 205, 1967–1973 (2008). This study demonstrates a requirement for TRIF in the processing of IL-1β by caspase 8, but not by caspase 1, *in vitro*.

102. Vince, J. E. *et al.* Inhibitor of apoptosis proteins limit RIP3 kinase-dependent interleukin-1 activation. *Immunity* 36, 215–227 (2012).

103. Luthi, A. U. *et al.* Suppression of interleukin-33 bioactivity through proteolysis by apoptotic caspases. *Immunity* 31, 84–98 (2009).

104. Gringhuis, S. I. *et al.* Dectin-1 is an extracellular pathogen sensor for the induction and processing of IL-1β via a noncanonical caspase-8 inflammasome. *Nat. Immunol.* 13, 246–254 (2012). This study characterizes a caspase 8-containing unit induced by certain fungal and mycobacterial infections, leading to direct processing of IL-1β independently of caspase 1.

105. Moriwaki, K., Bertin, J., Gough, P. J. & Chan, F. K. A. RIPK3-caspase 8 complex mediates atypical pro-IL-1β processing. *J. Immunol.* 194, 1938–1944 (2015).

106. Antonopoulos, C., El Sanadi, C., Kaiser, W. J., Mocarski, E. S. & Dubyak, G. R. Proapoptotic chemotherapeutic drugs induce noncanonical processing and release of IL-1β via caspase-8 in dendritic cells. *J. Immunol.* 191, 4789–4803 (2013).

107. England, H., Summersgill, H. R., Edye, M. E., Rothwell, N. J. & Brough, D. Release of interleukin-1α or interleukin-1β depends on mechanism of cell death. *J. Biol. Chem.* 289, 15942–15950 (2014).

108. Shenderov, K. *et al.* Cutting edge: endoplasmic reticulum stress licenses macrophages to produce mature IL-1β in response to TLR4 stimulation through a caspase-8- and TRIF-dependent pathway. *J. Immunol.* 192, 2029–2033 (2014).

109. Bossaller, L. *et al.* Cutting edge: FAS (CD95) mediates noncanonical IL-1β and IL-18 maturation via caspase-8 in an RIP3-independent manner. *J. Immunol.* 189, 5508–5512 (2012).

110. Uchiyama, R., Yonehara, S. & Tsutsui, H. Fas-mediated inflammatory response in *Listeria monocytogenes* infection. *J. Immunol.* 190, 4245–4254 (2013).

111. Man, S. M. *et al.* Inflammasome activation causes dual recruitment of NLRC4 and NLRP3 to the same macromolecular complex. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* 111, 7403–7408 (2014).

112. Pierini, R. *et al.* AIM2/ASC triggers caspase-8-dependent apoptosis in *Francisella*-infected caspase-1-deficient macrophages. *Cell Death Differ.* 19, 1709–1721 (2012).

113. Sagulenko, V. *et al.* AIM2 and NLRP3 inflammasomes activate both apoptotic and pyroptotic death pathways via ASC. *Cell Death Differ.* 20, 1149–1160 (2013).

114. Antonopoulos, C. *et al.* Caspase-8 as an Effector and Regulator of NLRP3 Inflammasome Signaling. *J. Biol. Chem.* 290, 20167–20184 (2015).

115. Weng, D. *et al.* Caspase-8 and RIP kinases regulate bacteria-induced innate immune responses and cell death. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* 111, 7391–7396 (2014).

116. Philip, N. H. *et al.* Caspase-8 mediates caspase-1 processing and innate immune defense in response to bacterial blockade of NF-κB and MAPK signaling. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* 111, 7385–7390 (2014).

117. Karki, R. *et al.* Concerted activation of the AIM2 and NLRP3 inflammasomes orchestrates host protection against *Aspergillus* infection. *Cell Host Microbe* 17, 357–368 (2015).

118. Ganesan, S. *et al.* Caspase-8 modulates dectin-1 and complement receptor 3-driven IL-1β production in response to β-glucans and the fungal pathogen, *Candida albicans*. *J. Immunol.* 193, 2519–2530 (2014).

119. Lukens, J. R. *et al.* Dietary modulation of the microbiome affects autoinflammatory disease. *Nature* 516, 246–249 (2014). This study shows that caspase 1 and caspase 8 operate in a concerted manner to drive production of IL-1β in the development of bone inflammation and destruction.

120. Kang, T. B., Yang, S. H., Toth, B., Kovalenko, A. & Wallach, D. Caspase-8 blocks kinase RIPK3-mediated activation of the NLRP3 inflammasome. *Immunity* 38, 27–40 (2013).

121. Rajput, A. *et al.* RIG-I RNA helicase activation of IRF3 transcription factor is negatively regulated by caspase-8-mediated cleavage of the RIP1 protein. *Immunity* 34, 340–351 (2011).

122. Kovalenko, A. *et al.* Caspase-8 deficiency in epidermal keratinocytes triggers an inflammatory skin disease. *J. Exp. Med.* 206, 2161–2177 (2009).

123. Vercammen, D. *et al.* Inhibition of caspases increases the sensitivity of L929 cells to necrosis mediated by tumor necrosis factor. *J. Exp. Med.* 187, 1477–1485 (1998).

124. Holler, N. *et al.* Fas triggers an alternative, caspase-8-independent cell death pathway using the kinase RIP as effector molecule. *Nat. Immunol.* 1, 489–495 (2000).

125. Varfolomeev, E. E. *et al.* Targeted disruption of the mouse Caspase 8 gene ablates cell death induction by the TNF receptors, Fas/Apo1, and DR3 and is lethal prenatally. *Immunity* 9, 267–276 (1998).

126. Sakamaki, K. *et al.* Ex vivo whole-embryo culture of caspase-8-deficient embryos normalize their aberrant phenotypes in the developing neural tube and heart. *Cell Death Differ.* 9, 1196–1206 (2002).

127. Yeh, W. C. *et al.* FADD: essential for embryo development and signaling from some, but not all, inducers of apoptosis. *Science* 279, 1954–1958 (1998).

128. Zhang, J., Cado, D., Chen, A., Kabra, N. H. & Winoto, A. Fas-mediated apoptosis and activation-induced T-cell proliferation are defective in mice lacking FADD/Mort1. *Nature* 392, 296–300 (1998).

129. Oberst, A. *et al.* Catalytic activity of the caspase-8-FLIP(L) complex inhibits RIPK3-dependent necrosis. *Nature* 471, 363–367 (2011).

130. Kaiser, W. J. *et al.* RIP3 mediates the embryonic lethality of caspase-8-deficient mice. *Nature* 471, 368–372 (2011).

131. Dillon, C. P. *et al.* Survival function of the FADD-cFLIP(L) complex. *Cell Rep.* 1, 401–407 (2012).

132. Ando, M. *et al.* Cancer-associated missense mutations of caspase-8 activate nuclear factor-κB signaling. *Cancer Sci.* 104, 1002–1008 (2013).

133. Labbe, K., McIntire, C. R., Doiron, K., Leblanc, P. M. & Saleh, M. Cellular inhibitors of apoptosis proteins cIAP1 and cIAP2 are required for efficient caspase-1 activation by the inflammasome. *Immunity* 35, 897–907 (2011).

134. Yabal, M. *et al.* XIAP restricts TNF- and RIP3-dependent cell death and inflammasome activation. *Cell Rep.* 7, 1796–1808 (2014).

135. Menu, P. *et al.* ER stress activates the NLRP3 inflammasome via an UPR-independent pathway. *Cell Death Dis.* 3, e261 (2012).

136. Bronner, D. N. *et al.* Endoplasmic reticulum stress activates the inflammasome via NLRP3- and caspase-2-driven mitochondrial damage. *Immunity* 43, 451–462 (2015).

137. Lebeaupin, C. *et al.* ER stress induces NLRP3 inflammasome activation and hepatocyte death. *Cell Death Dis.* 6, e1879 (2015).

138. Gurung, P. & Kanneganti, T. D. Novel roles for caspase-8 in IL-1β and inflammasome regulation. *Am. J. Pathol.* 185, 17–25 (2015).

139. Monie, T. P. & Bryant, C. E. Caspase-8 functions as a key mediator of inflammation and pro-IL-1β processing via both canonical and non-canonical pathways. *Immunol. Rev.* 265, 181–193 (2015).

140. Mariathasan, S. *et al.* Differential activation of the inflammasome by caspase-1 adaptors ASC and Ipaf. *Nature* 430, 213–218 (2004). This paper describes a role for NLRC4 and ASC in the engagement of a caspase 1 inflammasome complex under endogenous settings in response to infection with *Salmonella* spp.

141. Mariathasan, S. *et al.* Cryopyrin activates the inflammasome in response to toxins and ATP. *Nature* 440, 228–232 (2006).

142. Kanneganti, T. D. *et al.* Bacterial RNA and small antiviral compounds activate caspase-1 through cryopyrin/Nalp3. *Nature* 440, 233–236 (2006).

143. Martinon, F., Petrilli, V., Mayor, A., Tardivel, A. & Tschopp, J. Gout-associated uric acid crystals activate the NALP3 inflammasome. *Nature* 440, 237–241 (2006). References 141–143 identify that NLRP3 assembles an inflammasome complex to activate caspase 1 in response to ATP, bacterial RNA molecules and uric acid crystals.

144. Broz, P. *et al.* Redundant roles for inflammasome receptors NLRP3 and NLRC4 in host defense against *Salmonella*. *J. Exp. Med.* 207, 1745–1755 (2010).

145. Broz, P., von Moltke, J., Jones, J. W., Vance, R. E. & Monack, D. M. Differential requirement for Caspase-1 autoproteolysis in pathogen-induced cell death and cytokine processing. *Cell Host Microbe* 8, 471–483 (2010).

146. Hornung, V. *et al.* AIM2 recognizes cytosolic dsDNA and forms a caspase-1-activating inflammasome with ASC. *Nature* 458, 514–518 (2009).

147. Fernandes-Alnemri, T., Yu, J. W., Datta, P., Wu, J. & Alnemri, E. S. AIM2 activates the inflammasome and cell death in response to cytoplasmic DNA. *Nature* 458, 509–513 (2009).

148. Roberts, T. L. *et al.* HIN-200 proteins regulate caspase activation in response to foreign cytoplasmic DNA. *Science* 323, 1057–1060 (2009).

149. Burckstummer, T. *et al.* An orthogonal proteomic-genomic screen identifies AIM2 as a cytoplasmic DNA sensor for the inflammasome. *Nat. Immunol.* 10, 266–272 (2009).

150. Amer, A. *et al.* Regulation of *Legionella* phagosome maturation and infection through flagellin and host Ipaf. *J. Biol. Chem.* 281, 35217–35223 (2006).

151. Franchi, L. *et al.* Cytosolic flagellin requires Ipaf for activation of caspase-1 and interleukin 1β in salmonella-infected macrophages. *Nat. Immunol.* 7, 576–582 (2006).

152. Miao, E. A. *et al.* Cytosolic flagellin activates caspase-1 and secretion of interleukin 1β via Ipaf. *Nat. Immunol.* 7, 569–575 (2006).

153. Kofoed, E. M. & Vance, R. E. Innate immune recognition of bacterial ligands by NAIPs determines inflammasome specificity. *Nature* 477, 592–595 (2011).

154. Zhao, Y. & Shao, F. The NAIP-NLRC4 inflammasome in innate immune detection of bacterial flagellin and type III secretion. *Immunol. Rev.* 265, 85–102 (2015).

155. Yang, J., Zhao, Y., Shi, J. & Shao, F. Human NAIP and mouse NAIP1 recognize bacterial type III secretion needle protein for inflammasome activation. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* 110, 14408–14413 (2013).

156. Rayamajhi, M., Zak, D. E., Chavarria-Smith, J., Vance, R. E. & Miao, E. A. Cutting edge: mouse NAIP1 detects the type III secretion system needle protein. *J. Immunol.* **191**, 3986–3989 (2013).

157. Kang, S. *et al.* Caspase-8 scaffolding function and MLKL regulate NLRP3 inflammasome activation downstream of TLR3. *Nat. Commun.* **6**, 7515 (2015).

References 95–97, 112–118 and 157 are important studies that decipher the functional relevance of caspase 8 in controlling the activities of various caspase 1 inflammasomes.

158. Ben Moshe, T. *et al.* Role of caspase-8 in hepatocyte response to infection and injury in mice. *Hepatology* **45**, 1014–1024 (2007).

159. Cuda, C. M. *et al.* Caspase-8 acts as a molecular rheostat to limit RIPK1- and MyD88-mediated dendritic cell activation. *J. Immunol.* **192**, 5548–5560 (2014).

160. Lee, P. *et al.* Dynamic expression of epidermal caspase 8 simulates a wound healing response. *Nature* **458**, 519–523 (2009).

161. Lin, Y., Devin, A., Rodriguez, Y. & Liu, Z. G. Cleavage of the death domain kinase RIP by caspase-8 prompts TNF-induced apoptosis. *Genes Dev.* **13**, 2514–2526 (1999).

162. Feng, S. *et al.* Cleavage of RIP3 inactivates its caspase-independent apoptosis pathway by removal of kinase domain. *Cell Signal* **19**, 2056–2067 (2007).

163. O'Donnell, M. A. *et al.* Caspase 8 inhibits programmed necrosis by processing CYLD. *Nat. Cell Biol.* **13**, 1437–1442 (2011).

164. Gunther, C. *et al.* Caspase-8 regulates TNF-α-induced epithelial necrosis and terminal ileitis. *Nature* **477**, 335–339 (2011).

165. Weinlich, R. *et al.* Protective roles for caspase-8 and cFLIP in adult homeostasis. *Cell Rep.* **5**, 340–348 (2013).

References 164 and 165 demonstrate in *in vivo* models that caspase 8 inhibits inflammation by means of suppressing necroptosis.

166. Welz, P. S. *et al.* FADD prevents RIP3-mediated epithelial cell necrosis and chronic intestinal inflammation. *Nature* **477**, 330–334 (2011).

167. Rongvaux, A. *et al.* Apoptotic caspases prevent the induction of type I interferons by mitochondrial DNA. *Cell* **159**, 1563–1577 (2014).

168. White, M. J. *et al.* Apoptotic caspases suppress mtDNA-induced STING-mediated type I IFN production. *Cell* **159**, 1549–1562 (2014).

References 167 and 168 find that apoptotic caspases of the intrinsic apoptosis pathway negatively regulate cGAS and STING signalling to suppress type I IFN production.

169. Shimada, K. *et al.* Oxidized mitochondrial DNA activates the NLRP3 inflammasome during apoptosis. *Immunity* **36**, 401–414 (2012).

170. Kailasan Vanaja, S. *et al.* Bacterial RNA:DNA hybrids are activators of the NLRP3 inflammasome. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **111**, 7765–7770 (2014).

171. Davidovich, P., Kearney, C. J. & Martin, S. J. Inflammatory outcomes of apoptosis, necrosis and necroptosis. *Biol. Chem.* **395**, 1163–1171 (2014).

172. Mostowy, S. & Shenoy, A. R. The cytoskeleton in cell-autonomous immunity: structural determinants of host defence. *Nat. Rev. Immunol.* **15**, 559–573 (2015).

173. Lamkanfi, M. *et al.* Targeted peptidecentric proteomics reveals caspase-7 as a substrate of the caspase-1 inflammasomes. *Mol. Cell Proteom.* **7**, 2350–2363 (2008).

174. Akhter, A. *et al.* Caspase-7 activation by the Nlrc4/Ipafl inflammasome restricts *Legionella pneumophila* infection. *PLoS Pathog.* **5**, e1000361 (2009).

175. Akhter, A. *et al.* Caspase-11 promotes the fusion of phagosomes harboring pathogenic bacteria with lysosomes by modulating actin polymerization. *Immunity* **37**, 35–47 (2012).

176. Li, J. *et al.* Caspase-11 regulates cell migration by promoting Aip1-Cofilin-mediated actin depolymerization. *Nat. Cell Biol.* **9**, 276–286 (2007).

177. Man, S. M. *et al.* Actin polymerization as a key innate immune effector mechanism to control *Salmonella* infection. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **111**, 17588–17593 (2014).

178. Kayalar, C., Ord, T., Testa, M. P., Zhong, L. T. & Bredesen, D. E. Cleavage of actin by interleukin 1β-converting enzyme to reverse DNase I inhibition. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **93**, 2234–2238 (1996).

179. Mashima, T., Naito, M. & Tsuruo, T. Caspase-mediated cleavage of cytoskeletal actin plays a positive role in the process of morphological apoptosis. *Oncogene* **18**, 2423–2430 (1999).

180. Mashima, T., Naito, M., Fujita, N., Noguchi, K. & Tsuruo, T. Identification of actin as a substrate of ICE and an ICE-like protease and involvement of an ICE-like protease but not ICE in VP-16-induced U937 apoptosis. *Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun.* **217**, 1185–1192 (1995).

181. Puri, A. W., Broz, P., Shen, A., Monack, D. M. & Bogoy, M. Caspase-1 activity is required to bypass macrophage apoptosis upon *Salmonella* infection. *Nat. Chem. Biol.* **8**, 745–747 (2012).

182. Kostura, M. J. *et al.* Identification of a monocyte specific pre-interleukin 1β convertase activity. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **86**, 5227–5231 (1989).

183. Black, R. A., Kronheim, S. R. & Sleath, P. R. Activation of interleukin-1β by a co-induced protease. *FEBS Lett.* **247**, 386–390 (1989).

184. Thornberry, N. A. *et al.* A novel heterodimeric cysteine protease is required for interleukin-1β processing in monocytes. *Nature* **356**, 768–774 (1992).

185. Ghayur, T. *et al.* Caspase-1 processes IFN-γ-inducing factor and regulates LPS-induced IFN-γ production. *Nature* **386**, 619–623 (1997).

186. Gavrilin, M. A. *et al.* Activation of the pyrin inflammasome by intracellular *Burkholderia cenocepacia*. *J. Immunol.* **188**, 3469–3477 (2012).

187. Xu, H. *et al.* Innate immune sensing of bacterial modifications of Rho GTPases by the Pyrin inflammasome. *Nature* **513**, 237–241 (2014).

188. Fernandes-Alnemri, T. *et al.* The pyroptosome: a supramolecular assembly of ASC dimers mediating inflammatory cell death via caspase-1 activation. *Cell Death Differ.* **14**, 1590–1604 (2007).

189. Lin, X. Y., Choi, M. S. & Porter, A. G. Expression analysis of the human caspase-1 subfamily reveals specific regulation of the CASP5 gene by lipopolysaccharide and interferon-γ. *J. Biol. Chem.* **275**, 39920–39926 (2000).

190. Hellmich, K. A. *et al.* Anthrax lethal factor cleaves mouse nlrp1b in both toxin-sensitive and toxin-resistant macrophages. *PLoS ONE* **7**, e49741 (2012).

191. Chavarria-Smith, J. & Vance, R. E. Direct proteolytic cleavage of NLRP1B is necessary and sufficient for inflammasome activation by anthrax lethal factor. *PLoS Pathog.* **9**, e1003452 (2013).

192. Rathinam, V. A. *et al.* The AIM2 inflammasome is essential for host defense against cytosolic bacteria and DNA viruses. *Nat. Immunol.* **11**, 395–402 (2010).

193. Fernandes-Alnemri, T. *et al.* The AIM2 inflammasome is critical for innate immunity to *Francisella tularensis*. *Nat. Immunol.* **11**, 385–393 (2010).

194. Man, S. M. *et al.* The transcription factor IRF1 and guanylate-binding proteins target activation of the AIM2 inflammasome by *Francisella* infection. *Nat. Immunol.* **16**, 467–475 (2015).

195. Meunier, E. *et al.* Guanylate-binding proteins promote activation of the AIM2 inflammasome during infection with *Francisella novicida*. *Nat. Immunol.* **16**, 476–484 (2015).

**Acknowledgements**

Research studies from the authors’ laboratory are supported by the US National Institutes of Health (AR056296, CA163507 and AI101935 to T.-D.K.), the American Lebanese Syrian Associated Charities (to T.-D.K.) and the National Health and Medical Research Council of Australia (NHMRC/R.G. Menzies Early Career Fellowship to S.M.M.). The authors apologize to their colleagues whose work was not cited owing to space limitations.

**Competing interests statement**

The authors declare no competing interests.
