
Annals of Oncology Advance Access published December 17, 2015

Regulation of PD-L1: A novel role of pro-survival signalling in cancer

J. Chen${}^{1,2}$, C. C. Jiang${}^{3}$, L. Jin${}^{3}$ and X. D. Zhang${}^{1,*}$

${}^{1}$School of Biomedical Sciences and Pharmacy, The University of Newcastle,  
Newcastle, Australia  

${}^{2}$School of Biomedical Sciences, The University of Queensland, Brisbane, Australia  

${}^{3}$School of Medicine and Public Health, The University of Newcastle, Newcastle,  
Australia  

*Correspondence: Professor X. D. Zhang, LS3-49, Life Science Building, University  
of Newcastle, Newcastle, Australia Phone: 61 2 49218906; Fax: 61 2 49138184;  
Email: Xu.Zhang@newcastle.edu.au  

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the European Society for Medical  
Oncology. All rights reserved. For permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

Abstract

Evasion of immune system is a hallmark of cancer, which enables cancer cells to escape the attack from immune cells. Cancer cells can express many immune inhibitory signalling proteins to cause immune cell dysfunction and apoptosis. One of these inhibitory molecules is programmed death-ligand 1 (PD-L1), which binds to programmed death 1 (PD-1) expressed on T-cells, B-cells, dendritic cells and natural killer T-cells to suppress anti-cancer immunity. Therefore, anti-PD-L1 and anti-PD-1 antibodies have been used for the treatment of cancer, showing promising outcomes. However, only a proportion of patients respond to the treatments. Further understanding of the regulation of PD-L1 expression could be helpful for the improvement of anti-PD-L1 and PD-1 treatments. Studies have shown that PD-L1 expression is regulated by signalling pathways, transcriptional factors and epigenetic factors. In this review, we summarise the recent progress of the regulation of PD-L1 expression in cancer cells and propose a regulatory model for unified explanation.

Both PI3K and MAPK pathways are involved in PD-L1 regulation but the downstream molecules that control PD-L1 and cell proliferation may differ. Transcriptional factors hypoxia-inducible factor-1α and signal transducer and activation of transcription 3 act on the promoter of PD-L1 to regulate its expression. In addition, microRNAs including miR-570, miR-513, miR-197, miR-34a and miR-200 negatively regulate PD-L1. Clinically, it could increase treatment efficacy of targeted therapy by choosing those molecules that control both PD-L1 expression and cell proliferation.

Key words: Immune checkpoint, Akt, MAPK, NF-κB, STAT3, HIF-1α

Key message:

In this review, we summarize the recent progress in understanding regulation of PD-L1 expression and propose a regulatory model for explanation of commonly observed elevation of PD-L1 in cancer cells. In particular, the significance of multiple pro-survival signal pathways that are aberrantly activated in many types of cancer in PD-1/PD-L1-mediated immune evasion is discussed.

INTRODUCTION

Evasion of the immune system is essential for cancer development, progression, and resistance to treatment. While immunocompromised individuals are associated with increased cancer incidence and poorer prognosis, it is now known that effective immune responses are involved in destruction of cancer cells by many therapeutic agents [1-3]. Considerable efforts have been made to boost host immune responses in patients with cancer. These include administration of immune-stimulating cytokines such as interferon (IFN) and interleukin-2 (IL-2), active immunization to enhance endogenous immune responses such as dendritic cell (DC)-based vaccination, adoptive cell-transfer therapy using autologous cancer-specific cytotoxic T-cells (CTLs) activated and expanded *in vitro* or T cells that are genetically engineered to express chimeric antigen receptors (CARs) that can recognize cancer cell-specific antigens [1, 4-9]. The limitation of boosting immune response only for cancer therapy is the severe side-effects due to off-target effects and the low response rate due to upregulation of immune inhibitory factors on cancer cells[10].

Advances in understanding the role of immune checkpoints in suppression of T-cell activation have led to the development of immune checkpoint inhibitors in the treatment of cancer. Indeed, the blocking antibody (Ab) against T-lymphocyte-associated protein 4 (CTLA-4) ipilimumab (marketed as Yervoy) and the Abs against programmed death 1 (PD-1) nivolumab (marketed as Opdivo, Bristol-Myers Squibb) and pembrolizumab (marketed as Keytruda, also known as MK-3475, Merck) have been approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) to treat metastatic melanoma and non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) [11, 12]. More recently, the Ab against PD-L1 MPDL3280A (Roche) has been approved by the FDA for the treatment of PD-L1 positive NSCLC. Potential applications of these immune checkpoint antibodies in other types of cancers are being evaluated in preclinical and clinical settings. Although immune checkpoint antibodies can achieve long-lasting tumour regression that is evidenced by improved patient progress free survival (PFS) and survival (OS), the low response rate remains a major obstacle that forestalls the lack of benefits in the majority of cancer patients[13]. In this regard, it is of significance that Abs against PD-1/PD-L1 are more active with higher response rates and less adverse effects than ipilimumab. The distinct roles of CTLA-4 and PD-1 in immune regulation (early T-cell activation phase in lymphoid tissues vs. antigen-experienced T-cells in peripheral (tumor) tissues) have promoted studies with combined blockade of CTLA4 and PD-1/PD-L1, and have shown encouraging results. For example, combining nivolumab and ipilimumab resulted in significantly improved 2-year overall survival rate in patients with advanced melanoma [14]. However, adverse effects were also increased with 55% experiencing grade 3 and grade 4 toxicity.
As an important mechanism that negatively regulates T-cell activation to prevent autoimmune responses under physiological conditions, it is not surprising that the expression of PD-L1 is commonly elevated in cancer cells. However, how and when PD-L1 is upregulated during the pathogenesis of cancer remain less well understood.

Recent studies have pointed to a role of oncogenic activation of pro-survival signalling pathways in upregulation of PD-L1 in cancer cells, which is emerging as a common mechanism by which cancer cells fight against the immune system[15-17].

In this review we summarize current knowledge about regulation of PD-L1 by oncogenic pathways in cancer cells and discuss the mechanisms involved. The potential practical implications of the interaction between pro-survival signalling pathways and the immune system will also be deliberated.

## THE PD-1/PD-L1 AXIS

Well-orchestrated T-cell activation is necessary for defending the host against pathogens and preventing autoimmune responses. A T-cell must receive two sets of signals from an antigen-presenting cell (APC): the antigen-specific signal mediated by T-cell receptor recognition of complexes of MHC with the antigen on the surface of an APC, and a second costimulatory signal mediated by interaction of CD28 on the T-cell with CD80 (B7.1) or CD86 (B7.2) on the APC (Fig. 1) [18]. Co-stimulation is mediated by a tightly controlled interplay of stimulatory and inhibitory receptor and ligand pairs[19, 20]. Pairs of inhibitory receptors and ligands expressed on T-cells, APCs, and other types of cells are collectively termed “immune checkpoints”.

Among them are CTLA-4 and PD-1. CTLA-4 is exclusively expressed on T-cells negatively regulates T-cell activation at early phases by competing with CD28 for binding with CD80 and CD86[21, 22]. It is upregulated after antigen-specific activation of a naïve or memory T-cells in lymphoid tissues, leading to decreased
effector function of T-cells. On the other hand, PD-1 is mainly expressed on antigen-experienced memory T-cells in peripheral tissues[19, 23]. It can also be expressed on B-cells, monocytes, dendritic cells (DCs), and NK cells. PD-1 is rapidly upregulated on-cells after exposure to cognate antigens, but is downregulated upon antigen clearance. The engagement of PD-1 on the T-cell surface with its ligand PD-L1 or PD-L2 inhibits T-cell proliferation and effector functions, induces apoptosis, and promotes differentiation of CD4⁺ T-cells into Foxp3⁺ regulatory T-cells[14]. The physiological significance of PD-1 in controlling T-cell activation has been demonstrated by knockout of PD-1 in mice, which resulted in autoimmune diseases such as lupus-like arthritis and glomerulonephritis[24].

Structurally, PD-1 is a type I transmembrane glycoprotein consisting of an IgV type extracellular domain that shares 21-22% sequences identical to other members of the CD28 family[25], a transmembrane region, and an intracellular tail that contains two phosphorylation sites located in an immunoreceptor tyrosine-based inhibitory motif (ITIM) and an immunoreceptor tyrosine-based switch motif (ITSM), which, upon phosphorylation, negatively regulates TCR signals through phosphorylating Src homology phosphatase 1 (SHP-1) and SHP-2. PD-1 exists as a monomeric receptor due to the lack of membrane-proximal cysteine residue necessary for homodimerization. The gene *PDCD1* encoding PD-1 is located in chromosome 2 in human and contains 5 exons[26].

PD-1 has two ligands, PD-L1 and PD-L2, both of which are members of the B7 family of transmembrane proteins[27, 28]. While the expression of PD-L2 is restricted largely to APCs, PD-L1 is expressed on many cell types, including T-cells, B-cells, monocytes, APCs, and epithelial cells, and is upregulated in response to

proinflammatory cytokines such as IFNγ and IL4 through Signal Transducer and

Activator of Transcription 1 (STAT1) and Interferon regulatory factor 1 (IRF1) [29].

PD-L1 is composed of a transmembrane region and two extracellular domains, IgC

and IgV [27, 30]. The cytoplasmic domain of PD-L1 is short and whether it transmits

intracellular signals remains to be established. The gene CD274, encoding PD-L1

protein, contains 7 exons and is located in chromosome 9 in humans[26]. Each exon

encodes a different part of PD-L1 protein as shown in Fig 2 [31]. The functional

importance of PD-L1 has been evidenced by autoimmune diseases in mice deficient

in PD-L1 [32, 33]. In humans, altered PD-L1 expression is associated with systemic

lupus erythematosus.

Similar to many other B7 family costimulatory proteins, PD-L1 can exist as a soluble

form (sPD-L1) in the circulation of healthy individuals. It is mainly produced by

myeloid derived cells including monocytes, macrophages, and DCs[34]. On the other

hand, T-cells do not produce significant amounts of sPD-L1, even when activated.

Significantly, sPD-L1 retains its IgV ligand-binding domain necessary for interaction

with PD-1 and can suppress T-cell activation. The physiological significance of sPD-

L1 remains to be established, but it is intriguing that the expression of sPD-L1 is

commonly elevated in elderly individuals. Cleavage of membrane PD-L1 (mPD-L1)

from the cell surface by Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) has been implicated in the

production of sPD-L1 [34]. sPD-L1 has been found in several human cancer cell lines

including non-small cell lung cancer cell line H1299 cells, lymphoma cell line U-937,

ovarian carcinoma cell line HO8910, lung adenocarcinoma cell line SPCA-1 and

glioblastoma cell line U251[34]. The increased sPD-L1 levels in blood are associated

with metastasis and poor prognosis in breast cancer and diffuse large B-cell

lymphoma[35, 36].

PD-L1 EXPRESSION IN CANCER AS A BIOMARKER

As an immune suppression mechanism, the expression of PD-L1 is elevated in many types of cancer and is often correlated with poorer patient prognosis and predictive of responses to Abs against PD-1/PD-L1[37-39]. Nevertheless, tumours that do not express detectable levels of PD-L1 on the cell surface can also respond to Abs against PD-1, suggesting that the predictive value of PD-L1 expression may not be uniformly applicable to all types of cancer. On the other hand, this may be associated with unresolved technical and biological issues that preclude accurate detection of PD-L1 with a standardized criterion for quantitation of PD-L1 expression in clinical samples.

Moreover, it is well recognized that there are wide intra- and inter-tumoural variations in the expression of PD-L1, which indicates that sampling of tumour tissues may also impinge on the outcome of PD-L1 detection[22]. Regardless, there is increasing evidence showing that the expression of PD-L1 in cancer cells is mediated by oncogenic activation of signalling pathways and is also regulated by factors in the tumour microenvironment[40]. In metastatic melanoma, both PD-L1 and tumor infiltrating immune (mononuclear) cells (TIMC) are associated with prognosis. While expression of TIMC without PD-L1 leads to beneficial treatment outcome, expression of both TIMC and PD-L1 has no such advantage, indicating PD-L1 is negatively associated with prognosis[41]. Under absence of TIMC, expression of PD-L1 does not affect prognosis.

Expression of PD-L1 is associated with poor prognosis in many cancers[42-44]. For example, in melanoma, PD-L1 could be a marker that defines a subset of melanoma with distinct genetic and morpho-phenotypic features, increased aggressiveness and
invasiveness [42]. PD-L1 affects cancer treatment outcomes through various mechanisms. PD-L1 in ovarian cancer cells inhibited CTL function and promoted cancer cell dissemination [43]. PD-L1 may be involved in cell proliferation and progression, which could also be a factor leading to poor prognosis [44]. It has been demonstrated that PD-L1 upregulation due to decreased miR-200, results in dysfunction of CD8 T-cells, which coupled with epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) to increase metastasis[45]. PD-L1 and EMT can regulate each other to form feed-forward regulation [46]. Expression of PD-L1 is associated with drug resistance to anti-cancer therapy such as BRAF inhibitor resistance in metastatic melanoma patients [41]. This could be caused by both PD-L1-induced immune inhibition and PD-L1-promoting cell proliferation.

REGULATION OF PD-L1 EXPRESSION IN CANCER CELLS BY THE MAPK PATHWAY

The MAPK signalling pathway plays a critical role in cell survival and proliferation [47-49]. Under physiological conditions, it is activated by extracellular signals downstream of receptor tyrosine kinases. However, it is aberrantly activated in many types of cancers through oncogenic mutations in its key components. Among them is activating mutations in BRAF with the most common mutation being a glutamic acid for valine substitution at position 600 (V600E), which accounts for over 90% of BRAF mutations found in cancer[50].

The initial evidence that oncogenic activation of the MAPK pathway was associated with cancer cell immune evasion came from the finding that treatment with the mutant BRAF inhibitors was associated with a rapid increase in T-cell infiltration intothe melanoma microenvironment [51, 52]. This was followed by the observation that BRAF inhibitors caused downregulation of PD-L1 expression, which was nevertheless recovered with rebound activation of the pathway and could be reduced by inhibition of downstream kinases using a MEK inhibitor or by knockdown of ERK1/2[15]. These findings provided strong evidence that activation of the MAPK pathway drives the expression of PD-L1 in melanoma cells. Not surprisingly, MAPK activation also appears responsible for upregulation of PD-L1 by oncogenic activation of EGFR in NSCLC[53]. Whether other growth factors drive PD-L1 expression in cancer cells in humans remains to be clarified. However HGF has been shown to upregulate PD-L1 in a mouse melanoma model that was abolished in mice deficient in RAS, an upstream kinase of the MAPK pathway[54, 55].

Of note, the MAPK pathway is also involved in upregulation of PD-L1 in cancer cells upon treatment with chemotherapeutic drugs. For example, paclitaxel induces PD-L1 expression that is abolished by the MEK inhibitor U0126[56]. Moreover, low concentration of cisplatin also triggers the expression of PD-L1 through MAPK activation[57]. These results suggest that activation of the MAPK pathway protects cancer cells from destruction by chemotherapeutic drugs not only by inhibition of cell death signalling, but also through inhibition of the immune response via upregulation of PD-L1.

REGULATION OF PD-L1 EXPRESSION IN CANCER CELLS BY THE PI3K/AKT PATHWAY

Similar to the MAPK pathway, activation of the PI3K/Akt pathway plays an important role in the pathogenesis of cancer by activation of many downstream targets that regulate cell survival, proliferation, and motility[58-60]. This pathway
can also be activated by many growth hormones and cytokines. In cancer, its activation is frequently caused by loss or inactivating mutations of its negative regulator PTEN[59, 61]. Loss of other negative regulators of the pathway such as SHIP or PIB5PA is also involved in constitutive activation of PI3K/Akt in some types of cancer[62, 63].

The role of the PI3K/Akt pathway in regulation of PD-L1 in cancer cells was first suggested by the finding that the addition of a PI3K inhibitor to melanoma cells resistant to BRAF inhibitors led to reduction in PD-L1 expression[15]. This was supported by observations that knockdown of PTEN resulted in upregulation of PD-L1 that was abolished by the inhibition of Akt [16, 17]. Interestingly, although transcriptional upregulation has been shown to be responsible for increased PD-L1 mediated by PI3K/Akt, posttranslational mechanisms have also been implicated, Akt activation in colon cancer cells upregulated the PD-L1 protein without affecting the levels of PD-L1 mRNA expression. It is likely that the PI3K/Akt pathway regulates PD-L1 expression by either transcriptional or posttranscriptional mechanisms in a cell- and tissue-type dependent manner[17]. While Akt inhibition resulted in decreased PD-L1 expression, its downstream effector mTOR/S6 was shown not to mediate Akt-induced PD-L1 expression[15, 64]. In contrast to mTOR, NF-kB which is a downstream target of Akt, has shown to regulate PD-L1 expression[65]. Akt activates NF-kB, which upregulates PD-L1 transcriptionally.

TRANSCRIPTIONAL MECHANISMS INVOLVED IN THE REGULATION
OF PD-L1 EXPRESSION IN CANCER CELLS

Signalling pathways drive PD-L1 expression in cancer cells primarily by
transcriptional upregulation. A number of transcriptional factors have been shown to
be involved, pointing to their important roles in evasion of cancer cells from the
immune system.

HIF-1 (hypoxia-inducible factor alpha)

Increased HIF-1 levels are associated with increased PD-L1 expression and cause
down-regulation of T-Cell function [66-71], suggesting hypoxic environments, which
leads to increased expression of HIF-1, can also result in immune suppression in
addition to promoting cell proliferation and blocking apoptosis. HIF-1 is a major
oncogenic factor [72] and inhibition of HIF-1 has been applied for the treatment of
cancer [73-75]. It regulates PD-L1 through binding to a hypoxia response element
(HRE) of the PD-L1 promoter to activate PD-L1 transcription [76]. There are two
HRE binding sites HRE-1 and HRE-4, with HRE-4 having higher affinity to HIF-1
than HRE1.

STAT3

STAT3 has also been identified to regulate PD-L1 transcriptionally. Mutations of
oncogene chimeric nucleophosmin (NPM)/anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK)
increased PD-L1 and has been abolished by siRNA against STAT3 [77]. STAT3 has
been demonstrated to bind to the PD-L1 promoter to regulate its expression
transcriptionally. Latent membrane protein 1 (LMP1) of Epstein-Barr (EB) virus
increased PD-L1 expression with concomitant increase of phosphorylated STAT3
(pSTAT3) and inhibition of pSTAT3 by the JAK3 inhibitor CP-690550 reduced LMP1-induced PD-L1 expression[78].

### NF-κB

NF-κB, a common transcriptional factor, has been shown to regulate PD-L1. However, details of the associated mechanism are not well studied. NF-κB is involved in LMP1-induced PD-L1 expression as the NF-κB inhibitor caffeic acid phenethyl ester decreased PD-L1 induction [78]. NF-κB is also a major mediator of INF-gamma-induced PD-L1 expression[65]. The NF-κB inhibitor but not MAPK, PI3K and STAT3 inhibitors abolished INF-induced PD-L1 expression.

### EPIGENETIC REGULATION OF PD-L1

Epigenetic regulation has also been shown to involve in PD-L1 expression in cancer cells. Several microRNAs (miRs) are involved in the regulation of PD-L1 expression. MiRs are 22-24 nucleotide in length and are non-coding single stranded RNAs, which regulate gene expression [79]. They can bind to target gene mRNAs to degrade the mRNAs or prevent their translation. MiR-513, miR-570, miR-34a and miR-200 have an inverse relationship with PD-L1 expression [45, 80-82]. These miRs can complement with 3-untranslated regions of PD-L1 to repress PD-L1 protein expression [81]. Introduction of miR-513 into Jurkat cells abolished IFN-gamma-induced PD-L1 expression[83, 84] while introduction of anti-miR-513 into cholangiocytes increased PD-L1 expression. MiR-570 has a similar effect pattern as mutation of the PD-L1 3-untranslated region which resulted in disruption of with the associated miR-570, leading to overexpression of PD-L1[85]. MiR-200-regulated PD-L1 expression has been shown to co-operate with miR-200-caused epithelial to mesenchymal transition to increase cancer metastasis[45]. MiR-197 decreases PD-L1 expression indirectly by targeting PD-L1 regulator STAT3[86].
REGULATORY MODE OF PD-L1

Overall MAPK and PI3K/Akt signalling pathways as well as transcriptional factors HIF-1 and STAT3 are involved in the regulation of PD-L1 expression. Both pathways are well known pro-survival pathways, promoting cancer development through a wide range of downstream targets. Therefore, the regulation of PD-L1 by these pathways may be coupled with other cancer-promoting activities of these pathways, adding a new dimension to the roles of these pathways in cancer. They not only promote cancer cell proliferation but also enable cancer cells to escape immune attack.

A regulatory mode for PD-L1 regulated by various signalling pathways is summarised (Fig. 3). STAT3 and HIF-1 can act on the promoter directly while MAPK/c-Jun facilitates STAT3. Akt also regulates PD-L1 at the post-transcriptional level. NF-κB is known to regulate PD-L1. As it is a transcription factor, it is able to act on the PD-L1 promoter directly. Both Akt and STAT3 are known to regulate NF-κB [87, 88]. However, this is not studied in the setting of PD-L1 regulation. MiR-513 and miR-570 can attack PD-L1 mRNAs directly. A stimulus could regulate PD-L1 expression through various modes. EBV LMP1 can act on STAT3, NF-κB and MAPK/AP1 to cause PD-L1 increase [78]. Inhibition of each pathway can reduce PD-L1 expression [78].

CLINICAL IMPLICATIONS OF THE REGULATION OF PD-L1

EXPRESSION

Increased PD-L1 has been associated with poorer prognosis in several cancers including melanoma, ovarian cancer, lung cancer, nasopharyngeal and renal cell cancer [39, 89-92]. Inhibition of PD-L1 with antibodies improved overall survival rates in patients with these cancers. Excluding currently used antibodies for such therapies, inhibition of PD-L1 expression could also have a therapeutic effect. As PD-
L1 expression is regulated by MAPK and PI3K/Akt signalling pathways, inhibition of these pathways should reduce PD-L1. Indeed, receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors resulted in better treatment outcome in lung cancers with high expression of PD-L1[93, 94]. Therefore, inhibition of signalling pathways could have dual effects, inhibiting cell proliferation and PD-L1 expression. However, signalling molecules involved in PD-L1 regulation may differ from that for cell proliferation. In the PI3K/Akt pathway, Akt inhibition decreased PD-L1 expression while mTOR did not. Thus, selection of molecules for targeted therapy is of importance for treatment efficacy.

Another issue with inhibiting PD-L1 expression is drug resistance. Primary and acquired drug resistance have been major problems in targeted therapy. For example, in melanoma anti-mutated BRAF therapy led to a 50-80% response rate [95, 96]. However, almost all patients obtained acquired drug resistance after 6 months, resulting in treatment failure. Resistance to inhibitors may also be the case in PD-L1 regulation but it is not well studied.

It has been proposed that immunotherapy can be used to combine with targeted therapy[97]. Decreasing PD-L1 expression through signalling inhibition may be combined with anti-PD-L1 or anti-PD-1 therapy. This may increase treatment efficacy by controlling the PD-L1/PD-1 axis at very low levels. Indeed, the use of the signalling inhibitor trametinib to reduce PD-L1 expression together with anti-PD-1 antibodies showed a superior effect[98]. This raises a question in the combination therapy: should anti-PD-L1/anti-PD-1 be used simultaneously or sequentially? Based on the understanding of the regulatory role of PD-L1, it may be better to apply combination therapy simultaneously. This is because signalling inhibitors may take time to reduce PD-L1 expression and anti-PD-L1/PD-1 antibodies could decrease theaxis at a very early stage. In late stage of the treatment, inhibition of signalling pathways may be sufficient to cause PD-L1 reduction.

# CONCLUSIONS

Upregulation of PD-L1 has been demonstrated to be caused by activation of pro-survival pathways MAPK and PI3K/Akt as well as transcriptional factors HIF-1, STAT3 and NF-κB. All of them are well known to promote cancer development by increasing cell proliferation and decreasing apoptosis. Therefore, they regulate both cancer growth and immune escape. Inhibition of MAPK and PI3K/Akt pathways, as well as, transcriptional factors HIF-1, STAT3 and NF-κB should also reduce PD-L1 expression. Combination of anti-PD-L1 and anti-PD-1 antibodies may facilitate the reduction of PD-L1/PD-1 caused immunosuppression.

## Funding

Professor Xu Dong Zhang is supported by NHMRC project grant APP 1083496

## Disclosure

The authors have declared no conflicts of interest.
References

1. Restifo NP, Dudley ME, Rosenberg SA. Adaptive immunotherapy for cancer: harnessing the T cell response. Nature Reviews Immunology 2012; 12: 269-281.
2. Mellman I, Coukos G, Dranoff G. Cancer immunotherapy comes of age. Nature 2011; 480: 480-489.
3. Lake RA, Robinson BW. Immunotherapy and chemotherapy—a practical partnership. Nature Reviews Cancer 2005; 5: 397-405.
4. Rosenberg SA, Restifo NP, Yang JC et al. Adoptive cell transfer: a clinical path to effective cancer immunotherapy. Nature Reviews Cancer 2008; 8: 299-308.
5. Kantoff PW, Higano CS, Shore ND et al. Sipuleucel-T immunotherapy for castration-resistant prostate cancer. New England Journal of Medicine 2010; 363: 411-422.
6. Rosenberg SA. Cell transfer immunotherapy for metastatic solid cancer—what clinicians need to know. Nature reviews Clinical oncology 2011; 8: 577-585.
7. Palucka K, Banchereau J. Cancer immunotherapy via dendritic cells. Nature Reviews Cancer 2012; 12: 265-277.
8. Kochenderfer JN, Rosenberg SA. Treating B-cell cancer with T cells expressing anti-CD19 chimeric antigen receptors. Nature reviews Clinical oncology 2013; 10: 267-276.
9. Cheadle EJ, Gornall H, Baldan V et al. CAR T cells: driving the road from the laboratory to the clinic. Immunological reviews 2014; 257: 91-106.
10. La-Beck NM, Jean GW, Huynh C et al. Immune Checkpoint Inhibitors: New Insights and Current Place in Cancer Therapy. Pharmacotherapy: The Journal of Human Pharmacology and Drug Therapy 2015; 35: 963-976.
11. Brahmer JR, Tykodi SS, Chow LQ et al. Safety and activity of anti-PD-L1 antibody in patients with advanced cancer. New England Journal of Medicine 2012; 366: 2455-2465.

12. Topalian SL, Hodi FS, Brahmer JR et al. Safety, activity, and immune correlates of anti-PD-1 antibody in cancer. New England Journal of Medicine 2012; 366: 2443-2454.
13. Pardoll DM. The blockade of immune checkpoints in cancer immunotherapy. Nature Reviews Cancer 2012; 12: 252-264.
14. Wolchok JD, Kluger H, Callahan MK et al. Nivolumab plus ipilimumab in advanced melanoma. New England Journal of Medicine 2013; 369: 122-133.
15. Jiang X, Zhou J, Giobbie-Hurder A et al. The activation of MAPK in melanoma cells resistant to BRAF inhibition promotes PD-L1 expression that is reversible by MEK and PI3K inhibition. Clinical Cancer Research 2013; 19: 598-609.
16. Mittendorf EA, Philips AV, Meric-Bernstam F et al. PD-L1 Expression in Triple Negative Breast Cancer. Cancer immunology research 2014; canimm.0127.2013.
17. Song M, Chen D, Lu B et al. PTEN loss increases PD-L1 protein expression and affects the correlation between PD-L1 expression and clinical parameters in colorectal cancer. PloS one 2013; 8: e65821.
18. Chen L. Co-inhibitory molecules of the B7-CD28 family in the control of T-cell immunity. Nature Reviews Immunology 2004; 4: 336-347.
19. Ishida Y, Agata Y, Shibahara K, Honjo T. Induced expression of PD-1, a novel member of the immunoglobulin gene superfamily, upon programmed cell death. The EMBO journal 1992; 11: 3887.
20. Ahmadzadeh M, Johnson LA, Heemskerk B et al. Tumor antigen-specific CD8T cells infiltrating the tumor express high levels of PD-1 and are functionally impaired. Blood 2009; 114: 1537-1544.
21. Weber J. Immune checkpoint proteins: a new therapeutic paradigm for cancer—preclinical background: CTLA-4 and PD-1 blockade. In Seminars in oncology. Elsevier 2010; 430-439.

22. Blackburn SD, Crawford A, Shin H et al. Tissue-specific differences in PD-1 and PD-L1 expression during chronic viral infection: implications for CD8 T-cell exhaustion. Journal of virology 2010; 84: 2078-2089.

23. Linsley PS, Greene JL, Brady W et al. Human B7-1 (CD80) and B7-2 (CD86) bind with similar avidities but distinct kinetics to CD28 and CTLA-4 receptors. Immunity 1994; 1: 793-801.

24. Nishimura H, Nose M, Hiai H et al. Development of lupus-like autoimmune diseases by disruption of the PD-1 gene encoding an ITIM motif-carrying immunoreceptor. Immunity 1999; 11: 141-151.

25. Zhang X, Schwartz J-CD, Guo X et al. Structural and functional analysis of the costimulatory receptor programmed death-1. Immunity 2004; 20: 337-347.

26. Keir ME, Butte MJ, Freeman GJ, Sharpe AH. PD-1 and its ligands in tolerance and immunity. Annu. Rev. Immunol. 2008; 26: 677-704.

27. Freeman GJ, Long AJ, Iwai Y et al. Engagement of the PD-1 immunoinhibitory receptor by a novel B7 family member leads to negative regulation of lymphocyte activation. The Journal of experimental medicine 2000; 192: 1027-1034.

28. Latchman Y, Wood CR, Chernova T et al. PD-L2 is a second ligand for PD-1 and inhibits T cell activation. Nature immunology 2001; 2: 261-268.

29. Sharpe AH, Wherry EJ, Ahmed R, Freeman GJ. The function of programmed cell death 1 and its ligands in regulating autoimmunity and infection. Nature immunology 2007; 8: 239-245.

30. Dong H, Zhu G, Tamada K, Chen L. B7-H1, a third member of the B7 family, costimulates T-cell proliferation and interleukin-10 secretion. Nature medicine 1999; 5: 1365-1369.

31. Shi L, Chen S, Yang L, Li Y. The role of PD-1 and PD-L1 in T-cell immune suppression in patients with hematological malignancies. J Hematol Oncol 2013; 6: 74.

32. Topalian SL, Drake CG, Pardoll DM. Targeting the PD-1/B7-H1 (PD-L1) pathway to activate anti-tumor immunity. Current opinion in immunology 2012; 24: 207-212.

33. Francisco LM, Salinas VH, Brown KE et al. PD-L1 regulates the development, maintenance, and function of induced regulatory T cells. The Journal of experimental medicine 2009; 206: 3015-3029.

34. Chen Y, Wang Q, Shi B et al. Development of a sandwich ELISA for evaluating soluble PD-L1 (CD274) in human sera of different ages as well as supernatants of PD-L1+ cell lines. Cytokine 2011; 56: 231-238.

35. Rossille D, Gressier M, Damotte D et al. High level of soluble programmed cell death ligand 1 in blood impacts overall survival in aggressive diffuse large B-Cell lymphoma: results from a French multicenter clinical trial. Leukemia 2014; 28: 2367-2375.

36. Junjun C, Hongbing S, Xiao Z et al. Detection of Soluble B7-H4 Molecules in Serum of Patients with Breast Cancer and its Clinical Significance. Journal of International Translational Medicine 2013; 1: 215-218.

37. Herbst RS, Soria J-C, Kowanetz M et al. Predictive correlates of response to the anti-PD-L1 antibody MPDL3280A in cancer patients. Nature 2014; 515: 563-567.

38. Gao Q, Wang X-Y, Qiu S-J et al. Overexpression of PD-L1 significantly associates with tumor aggressiveness and postoperative recurrence in human hepatocellular carcinoma. Clinical Cancer Research 2009; 15: 971-979.

39. Hamanishi J, Mandai M, Iwasaki M et al. Programmed cell death 1 ligand 1 and tumor-infiltrating CD8+ T lymphocytes are prognostic factors of human ovarian cancer. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 2007; 104: 3360-3365.

40. Spranger S, Spaapen RM, Zha Y et al. Up-regulation of PD-L1, IDO, and Tregs in the melanoma tumor microenvironment is driven by CD8+ T cells. Science translational medicine 2013; 5: 200ra116-200ra116.

41. Massi D, Brusa D, Merelli B et al. The status of PD-L1 and tumor-infiltrating immune cells predict resistance and poor prognosis in BRAFi-treated melanoma patients harboring mutant BRAFV600. Annals of Oncology 2015; mdv255.

42. Massi D, Brusa D, Merelli B et al. PD-L1 marks a subset of melanomas with a shorter overall survival and distinct genetic and morphological characteristics. Annals of Oncology 2014; 25: 2433-2442.

43. Abiko K, Mandai M, Hamanishi J et al. PD-L1 on tumor cells is induced in ascites and promotes peritoneal dissemination of ovarian cancer through CTL dysfunction. Clinical Cancer Research 2013; 19: 1363-1374.

44. Wang L, Liu H, Chen X et al. Immune sculpting of norepinephrine on MHC-I, B7-1, IDO and B7-H1 expression and regulation of proliferation and invasion in pancreatic carcinoma cells. 2012.

45. Chen L, Gibbons DL, Goswami S et al. Metastasis is regulated via microRNA-200/ZEB1 axis control of tumour cell PD-L1 expression and intratumoral immunosuppression. Nature communications 2014; 5.

46. Alsuliman A, Colak D, Al-Harazi O et al. Bidirectional crosstalk between PD-L1 expression and epithelial to mesenchymal transition: Significance in claudin-low breast cancer cells. Molecular cancer 2015; 14: 1.

47. Fang JY, Richardson BC. The MAPK signalling pathways and colorectal cancer. The lancet oncology 2005; 6: 322-327.

48. Downward J. Targeting RAS signalling pathways in cancer therapy. Nature Reviews Cancer 2003; 3: 11-22.

49. Dhillon A, Hagan S, Rath O, Kolch W. MAP kinase signalling pathways in cancer. Oncogene 2007; 26: 3279-3290.

50. Davies H, Bignell GR, Cox C et al. Mutations of the BRAF gene in human cancer. Nature 2002; 417: 949-954.

51. Sumimoto H, Imabayashi F, Iwata T, Kawakami Y. The BRAF-MAPK signaling pathway is essential for cancer-immune evasion in human melanoma cells. The Journal of experimental medicine 2006; 203: 1651-1656.

52. Borre PV, Gunda V, McFadden DG et al. Combined BRAFV600E-and SRC-inhibition induces apoptosis, evokes an immune response and reduces tumor growth in an immunocompetent orthotopic mouse model of anaplastic thyroid cancer. Oncotarget 2014; 5: 3996.

53. Chen N, Fang W, Zhan J et al. Up-regulation of PD-L1 by EGFR Activation Mediates the Immune Escape in EGFR-driven NSCLC: Implication for Optional Immune Targeted Therapy for NSCLC Patients with EGFR Mutation. Journal of thoracic oncology: official publication of the International Association for the Study of Lung Cancer 2015.

54. Landsberg J, Gaffal E, Cron M et al. Autochthonous primary and metastatic melanomas in Hgf-Cdk4R24C mice evade T-cell-mediated immune surveillance. Pigment cell & melanoma research 2010; 23: 649-660.

55. Balan M, Teran EMY, Waaga-Gasser AM et al. Novel Roles of c-Met in the Survival of Renal Cancer Cells through the Regulation of HO-1 and PD-L1 Expression. Journal of Biological Chemistry 2015; jbc.M114.612689.

56. Gong W, Song Q, Lu X et al. Paclitaxel Induced B7-H1 Expression in Cancer Cells via the MAPK Pathway. Journal of Chemotherapy 2011; 23: 295-299.

57. Qin X, Liu C, Zhou Y, Wang G. Cisplatin induces programmed death-1-ligand 1 (PD-L1) over-expression in hepatoma H22 cells via Erk/MAPK signaling pathway. Cellular and molecular biology (Noisy-le-Grand, France) 2009; 56: OL1366-1372.

58. Franke TF, Kaplan DR, Cantley LC. PI3K: downstream AKTion blocks apoptosis. Cell 1997; 88: 435-437.

59. Vivanco I, Sawyers CL. The phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase-AKT pathway in human cancer. Nature Reviews Cancer 2002; 2: 489-501.

60. Chen J. Signaling pathways in HPV-associated cancers and therapeutic implications. Reviews in medical virology 2015; 25: 24-53.
61. Chen J, Zhang XD, Proud C. Dissecting the signaling pathways that mediate cancer in PTEN and LKB1 double-knockout mice. Sci. Signal. 2015; 8: pe1-pe1.
62. Ye Y, Jin L, Wilmott JS et al. PI (4, 5) P2 5-phosphatase A regulates PI3K/Akt signalling and has a tumour suppressive role in human melanoma. Nature communications 2013; 4: 1508.
63. Schurmans S, Roger PP, Erneux C. SHIP2 signaling in normal and pathological situations: its impact on cell proliferation. Advances in biological regulation 2014; 54: 142-151.
64. Cheng H, Liu P, Zhang F et al. A genetic mouse model of invasive endometrial cancer driven by concurrent loss of Pten and Lkb1 is highly responsive to mTOR inhibition. Cancer research 2014; 74: 15-23.
65. Gowrishankar K, Gunatilake D, Gallagher SJ et al. Inducible but Not Constitutive Expression of PD-L1 in Human Melanoma Cells Is Dependent on Activation of NF-κB. 2015.
66. Pollizzi KN, Powell JD. Integrating canonical and metabolic signalling programmes in the regulation of T cell responses. Nature Reviews Immunology 2014; 14: 435-446.
67. Pawelec G, Derhovanessian E, Larbi A. Immunosenescence and cancer. Critical reviews in oncology/hematology 2010; 75: 165-172.
68. Barsoum IB, Koti M, Siemens DR, Graham CH. Mechanisms of hypoxia-mediated immune escape in cancer. Cancer research 2014; 74: 7185-7190.
69. Shehade H, Oldenhove G, Moser M. Hypoxia in the intestine or solid tumors: A beneficial or deleterious alarm signal? European journal of immunology 2014; 44: 2550-2557.

70. Barsoum IB, Smallwood CA, Siemens DR, Graham CH. A mechanism of hypoxia-mediated escape from adaptive immunity in cancer cells. Cancer research 2014; 74: 665-674.

71. Noman MZ, Desantis G, Janji B et al. PD-L1 is a novel direct target of HIF-1α, and its blockade under hypoxia enhanced MDSC-mediated T cell activation. The Journal of experimental medicine 2014; 211: 781-790.

72. Ortmann B, Druker J, Rocha S. Cell cycle progression in response to oxygen levels. Cellular and Molecular Life Sciences 2014; 71: 3569-3582.

73. Brown JM, Wilson WR. Exploiting tumour hypoxia in cancer treatment. Nature Reviews Cancer 2004; 4: 437-447.

74. Wilson WR, Hay MP. Targeting hypoxia in cancer therapy. Nature Reviews Cancer 2011; 11: 393-410.

75. Vaupel P, Mayer A. Hypoxia in cancer: significance and impact on clinical outcome. Cancer and Metastasis Reviews 2007; 26: 225-239.

76. Noman MZ, Chouaib S. Targeting hypoxia at the forefront of anticancer immune responses. OncolImmunology 2014; 3.

77. Marzec M, Zhang Q, Goradia A et al. Oncogenic kinase NPM/ALK induces through STAT3 expression of immunosuppressive protein CD274 (PD-L1, B7-H1). Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 2008; 105: 20852-20857.

78. Fang W, Zhang J, Hong S et al. EBV-driven LMP1 and IFN-γ up-regulate PD-L1 in nasopharyngeal carcinoma: Implications for oncotargeted therapy. Oncotarget 2014; 5: 12189-12202.

79. Bartel DP. MicroRNAs: target recognition and regulatory functions. Cell 2009; 136: 215-233.

80. Wrangle J, Wang W, Koch A et al. Alterations of immune response of non-small cell lung cancer with azacytidine. Oncotarget 2013; 4: 2067.

81. Chen X-M. MicroRNA signatures in liver diseases. World journal of gastroenterology: WJG 2009; 15: 1665.
82. Wang X, Li J, Dong K et al. Tumor suppressor miR-34a targets PD-L1 and functions as a potential immunotherapeutic target in acute myeloid leukemia. Cellular signalling 2015; 27: 443-452.
83. Gong A-Y, Zhou R, Hu G et al. Cryptosporidium parvum induces B7-H1 expression in cholangiocytes by down-regulating microRNA-513. Journal of Infectious Diseases 2010; 201: 160-169.
84. Jardim MJ, Fry RC, Jaspers I et al. Disruption of microRNA expression in human airway cells by diesel exhaust particles is linked to tumorigenesis-associated pathways. Environ Health Perspect 2009; 117: 1745-1751.
85. Wang W, Li F, Mao Y et al. A miR-570 binding site polymorphism in the B7-H1 gene is associated with the risk of gastric adenocarcinoma. Human genetics 2013; 132: 641-648.
86. Fujita Y, Yagishita S, Hagiwara K et al. The Clinical Relevance of the miR-197/CKS1B/STAT3-mediated PD-L1 Network in Chemoresistant Non-small-cell Lung Cancer. Molecular Therapy 2015.
87. Chen J. Multiple signal pathways in obesity-associated cancer. Obesity Reviews 2011; 12: 1063-1070.
88. Yu H, Pardoll D, Jove R. STATs in cancer inflammation and immunity: a leading role for STAT3. Nature Reviews Cancer 2009; 9: 798-809.
89. Hino R, Kabashima K, Kato Y et al. Tumor cell expression of programmed cell death-1 ligand 1 is a prognostic factor for malignant melanoma. Cancer 2010; 116: 1757-1766.
90. Mu C-Y, Huang J-A, Chen Y et al. High expression of PD-L1 in lung cancer may contribute to poor prognosis and tumor cells immune escape through suppressing tumor infiltrating dendritic cells maturation. Medical oncology 2011; 28: 682-688.

91. Thompson RH, Kuntz SM, Leibovich BC et al. Tumor B7-H1 is associated with poor prognosis in renal cell carcinoma patients with long-term follow-up. Cancer research 2006; 66: 3381-3385.

92. Hsu M-C, Hsiao J-R, Chang K-C et al. Increase of programmed death-1-expressing intratumoral CD8T cells predicts a poor prognosis for nasopharyngeal carcinoma. Modern Pathology 2010; 23: 1393-1403.

93. Lin C, Li M, Liu J et al. PD-L1 Expression Predicts Tyrosine Kinase Inhibitor Response and Better Prognosis in a Cohort of Patients with EGFR Mutation-Positive Lung Adenocarcinoma. Clinical Lung Cancer 2015.

94. Velcheti V, Schalper KA, Carvajal DE et al. Programmed death ligand-1 expression in non-small cell lung cancer. Laboratory investigation 2014; 94: 107-116.

95. Solit DB, Rosen N. Resistance to BRAF inhibition in melanomas. The New England journal of medicine 2011; 364: 772.

96. Queirolo P, Picasso V, Spagnolo F. Combined BRAF and MEK inhibition for the treatment of BRAF-mutated metastatic melanoma. Cancer treatment reviews 2015.

97. Vanneman M, Dranoff G. Combining immunotherapy and targeted therapies in cancer treatment. Nature reviews cancer 2012; 12: 237-251.

98. Liu L, Mayes PA, Eastman S et al. The BRAF and MEK Inhibitors Dabrafenib and Trametinib: Effects on Immune Function and in Combination with Immunomodulatory Antibodies Targeting PD1, PD-L1 and CTLA-4. Clinical Cancer Research 2015; clincanres. 2339.2014.

Figure legends

Fig 1. Antigen activation and checkpoint protein inhibition of T-cells

APCs present antigens to TCR, which activates signalling pathways to cause T-cell activation with co-stimulating signals from CD86/CD28 axis. CTLA-4 also binds to CD86, but leading to T-cell inactivation. PD-L1 on both APCs and cancer cells binds to PD-1 to inhibit signaling pathways that activate T-cells. Abbreviations: APC, antigen presenting cell; PD-1, programmed death 1; PD-L1, programmed death-ligand 1; TCR, T-cell receptor; CTLA-4, cytotoxic T-lymphocyte-associated protein 4.

Fig 2. Structures of the PD-L1 gene, mRNA and protein

The PD-L1 gene consists of 7 exons with exon 1 encoding the 5'UTR and exon 2 to exon 6 encoding the signal sequence, IgV-like domain, IgC-like domain, transmembrane and intracellular domains respectively. Exon 7 encodes part of the intracellular domain and 3'UTR. The PD-L1 protein contains a transmembrane domain and two extracellular domains; IgV-like and IgC like.

Fig 3. A regulatory mode for PD-L1 expression in cancer cells

Both MAPK and PI3K Signalling pathways are involved in the regulation of PD-L1 expression. The pathways are activated by gene mutations and growth factors. Activation of MAPK leads to increased activity of c-Jun, which acts together with STAT3 to increase transcription of PD-L1. Activation of Akt increases translation of PD-L1 mRNAs into proteins, which in turn increase activation of Akt. Activated Akt may also act on NF-kB. Hypoxia stimulates transcriptional factors HIF-1, which binds to HRE to increase PD-L1 expression. Transcriptional factors STAT3 and NF-kB can

also act on PD-L1 promoter directly. miRNA-513 and miRNA-570 can degrade PD-
L1 mRNAs. Abbreviations: PD-L1, programmed death-ligand 1; HIF-1, hypoxia
inducible factor-1; HRE, HIF-responsive element; STAT3, signal transducer and
activator of transcription 3;

• Activating mutation

• Inactivating mutation

Fig 1. Antigen activation and checkpoint protein inhibition of T-cells

Growth factors

T-cell activation
T-cell
PD-1
Signalling
pathways
PD-L1
TCR
CD28
CTLA-4
Antigen
MHC
CD86
APC

Fig. 2 Structures of PD-L1 DNA, mRNA and protein

DNA  
EX1 EX2 EX3 EX4 EX5 EX6 EX7  

mRNA  
5'UTR Signal IgV-like IgC-like Trans- Intracellular 3'UTR  
sequence Domain Domain membrane Domain  

Protein  
Signal IgV-like IgC-like membrane  
sequence  

Fig. 3 A regulatory mode for PD-L1 expression in cancer cell

Hypoxia          GFs           GFs

Ras → PI3K → PTEN
RAF
Erk1/2
HIF-1
c-Jun
NF-kB
STAT
3

PD-L1 gene
HRE

mTOR Bcl-2
Akt
PD-L1
Proteins
PD-L1
mRNA

miRNA-513
miRNA-570
