
Hepatology Research 2016                                                                                                   doi: 10.1111/hepr.12650

**Review Article**

# Viral life cycle of hepatitis B virus: Host factors and druggable targets

Kenichi Morikawa,$^{1,2}$ Goki Suda$^{2}$ and Naoya Sakamoto$^{2}$

$^{1}$Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Hokkaido University Hospital; and $^{2}$Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Hokkaido University Graduate School of Medicine, Sapporo, Japan

---

Hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection is a globally distributed health problem. The number of carriers of HBV is estimated to exceed 240 million people worldwide. Compared with uninfected individuals, HBV carriers have an increased risk of developing hepatocellular carcinoma. The prevention of HBV infection is therefore strongly recommended, and a HBV vaccine is available. For carriers, treatment with nucleoside/nucleotide reverse transcriptase inhibitors is available, but infection frequently requires chronic treatment via a lifetime of medication. Thus, curing HBV infection remains a major challenge. However, despite the development of an infectious HBV cell culture system and recent intense research, many aspects of the HBV life cycle remain poorly characterized. In this review, we focus on the current understanding of the HBV life cycle and involved host factors, as well as potential targets for therapeutic intervention against HBV. We also consider possible immunotherapeutic strategies for eliminating HBV, including the removal of cccDNA from infected hepatocytes.

Key words: cccDNA, druggable target, hepatitis B virus, host factor, viral life cycle

---

## INTRODUCTION

Among the confirmed hepatitis viruses, hepatitis B virus (HBV) is the sole DNA virus. HBV (genus Orthohepadnaviridae) belongs to the *Hepadnaviridae* family, a family that also includes woodchuck hepatitis virus, ground squirrel hepatitis virus, woolly monkey hepatitis virus${}^{1}$ and bat hepatitis virus.${}^{2}$ The HBV virion,${}^{3,4}$ also called the Dane particle,${}^{5}$ consists of a lipid bilayer membrane that incorporates a complex outer envelope that includes a mixture of small, middle and large surface proteins (SHB, MHB and LHB, respectively). The membrane/outer envelope encloses an inner icosahedral nucleocapsid, also known as the core particle, which is composed of 120 dimers of core protein. ${}^{6-8}$ The nucleocapsid contains one copy of a partially double-stranded DNA genome that is covalently cross-linked to the viral polymerase protein. The HBV genome is approximately 3200 bp; although this length is relatively short, the genome encodes viral protein efficiently.

Hepatitis B virus infection is a globally distributed health problem. HBV carriers number in excess of 240 million people worldwide. ${}^{9}$ HBV establishes a persistent infection by evading the host immune system, and is a major cause of chronic hepatitis, liver cirrhosis and hepatocellular carcinoma. Recently, de novo HBV reactivation during chemotherapy, immunosuppressive therapy and carcinogenesis has been reported; therefore, anti-HBV treatment has the long-term goal of clearance of hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg). This HBsAg seroclearance is widely recognized as a functional cure even in case of cccDNA persistence. In the future, such treatment also will need to eliminate cccDNA. However, existing treatments like pegylated interferon (PEG IFN) and nucleoside/nucleotide reverse transcriptase inhibitors (NRTI) have the least effect on complete cure of HBV including the elimination of cccDNA as the ultimate goal of HBV therapy. Therefore, new antivirals with different modes of action for treating HBV are under development. In this review, we focus on current understanding of the HBV life cycle, involved host factors and druggable targets (Fig. 1). We also consider immunotherapeutic strategies for eliminating HBV, including cccDNA, from infected hepatocytes.

---

Correspondence: MD, PhD Kenichi Morikawa, Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Hokkaido University Hospital, Kita 15 Nishi 7, Kita-ku, Sapporo-shi, Hokkaido 060-8638, Japan. Email: kenichi.morikawa@med.hokudai.ac.jp

Received 28 December 2015; revision 9 January 2016; accepted 12 January 2016.

© 2016 The Japan Society of Hepatology

K. Morikawa et al.

Hepatology Research 2016

Attachment & Entry

HBV virion  
(Dane particle)

SVP  
(Sphere)

SVP  
(Filament)

HSPG

NTCP

Uncoating

Nuclear import

DNA repair

rcDNA

cccDNA

CYTOPLASM

NUCLEUS

Transcription

Translation

Reverse Transcription

Assembly

Secretion

Recycling

MVB

HBeAg

Core

pgRNA

Capsid Formation

Figure 1 Scheme of HBV life cycle and druggable targets. The entire life cycle of HBV, including attachment, entry, uncoating, trafficking, cccDNA formation, transcription, translation, encapsidation, replication, assembly and secretion, is shown. Druggable targets of various steps in the HBV life cycle and molecules are shown in red.HBeAg, hepatitis B e-antigen; HBsAg, hepatitis B surface antigen; HBV, hepatitis B virus; HBx, hepatitis B x protein; HSPG, heparan sulfate proteoglycan; LHB, large hepatitis B surface protein; MHB, middle hepatitis B surface protein; MVB, multivesicular body; NTCP, sodium taurocholate co-transporting polypeptide; pgRNA, pregenomic RNA; SHB, small hepatitis B surface protein; SVP, subviral particle.

### ATTACHMENT AND ENTRY

At initial attachment, the preS1 region of the LHB protein binds (at low affinity) to heparan sulfate proteoglycan (HSPG) on the surface of hepatocytes, leading to localized concentration of HBV virions. As a second step, the concentrated HBV virions transfer from HSPG to sodium taurocholate co-transporting polypeptide (NTCP, a liver-specific bile acid and bile salt transporter), which has been identified as a HBV entry receptor. The interaction between the N-terminal myristoylated amino acids in the preS1 region of LHB and NTCP, likely in association with as-yet-unrecognized host factors, provides a spark for incorporation into the hepatocyte via clathrin-mediated endocytosis. Both Rab5 (an early endosome factor) and Rab7 (a late endosome factor) have been reported to regulate HBV infection. However, it remains unclear whether acidification through endocytosis is required, and the process of fusion between the viral envelope and the endosomal membrane is not fully understood.

The identification of NTCP as a HBV entry receptor was a key milestone, enabling the development of a novel cell infection system based on HepG2-NTCP cell lines combined with HBV virions produced in cell culture.

Recently, myrcludex B (a HBV preS1-derived lipopeptide) and cyclosporin A (CsA) and its

© 2016 The Japan Society of Hepatology

derivatives (immunosuppressive agents)²²,²³ were shown to directly target NTCP and to exhibit inhibitory effects against HBV entry. Moreover several US Food and Drug Administration-approved drugs (irbesartan, ezetimibe and ritonavir) also have inhibitory activity against NTCP.²⁴ Interestingly, (−)-epigallocatechin-3-gallate reduces HBV entry by accelerating the degradation of NTCP.²⁵ However, to date, only hepatitis B immunoglobulin (HBIG) has been used regularly in a clinical setting to target HBV infection at the entry stage. Specifically, HBIG has been used to prevent reinfection after liver transplantation, to prevent vertical transmission from HBV-infected mother to child, and for postexposure prophylaxis. Targeting NTCP and other entry factors may provide another strategy against HBV infection.

## UNCOATING AND NUCLEAR IMPORT

Following entry into hepatocytes, the HBV nucleocapsid (containing the viral genome) is released into the cytoplasm. The nucleocapsid consists of rcDNA covalently cross-linked to the terminal protein domain of viral polymerase. The C-terminal arginine-rich domain of core protein is believed to facilitate the transport of the nucleocapsid from the cytoplasm to a nuclear pore. At the pore, the nucleocapsid is degraded as part of a process called uncoating, such that only the rcDNA enters the nucleus.²⁶ Uncoating and nuclear import appear to require microtubules and nuclear importin protein,²⁶ but a detailed molecular mechanism for these processes has yet to be determined.

## CCCDNA FORMATION

The conversion from intranuclear rcDNA to cccDNA progresses through multiple stages, including: (i) release of polymerase from the minus strand of rcDNA; (ii) removal of RNA primer from the plus strand of rcDNA; (iii) synthesis of one DNA strand by trimming and filling in; and (iv) ligation. cccDNA synthesis has been presumed to involve host cellular factors, given the minimal coding capacity of the HBV genome. Indeed, tyrosyl-DNA phosphodiesterase 2 recently was identified as a host DNA repair factor that has the ability to cleave polymerase from rcDNA, as required for HBV cccDNA biogenesis.²⁷ However, other host factors associated with cccDNA formation, including DNA repair, remain unknown. cccDNA forms a minichromosome that associates with 15–16 nucleosomes, each consisting of core histones H2A, H2B, H3 and H4 along with the linker histone H1 and non-histone proteins.²⁸ A number of modification factors, including

histones, chromatin-modifying enzymes and viral proteins, as well as core proteins and hepatitis B x protein (HBx), have been identified as transactivators and/or epigenetic regulators of cccDNA formation.²⁹⁻³¹ However, we still lack a detailed molecular mechanism for the formation of cccDNA; targeting of this process remains an unexploited route for inhibition of the HBV life cycle.

cccDNA is the key molecule in the persistence of HBV; elimination of cccDNA remains the ultimate goal for the elimination of HBV infection. Disubstituted sulfonamide compounds were identified as specific inhibitors of cccDNA formation via screening of a small compound molecule library; these compounds were shown to interfere with the conversion of rcDNA to cccDNA.³² Recently, it was reported that activation of the lymphotoxin-β receptor affects the specific degradation of the nuclear cccDNA by a cytidine-deamination mechanism via APOBEC3B up-regulation³³ resembling the activation of APOBEC3A by IFN-α. DNA cleavage enzyme-based strategies that specifically target cccDNA are being evaluated, and include the use of zinc-finger nucleases, transcription activator-like effector nucleases and CRISPER/Cas9 technology.³⁴⁻³⁷ However, wide clinical application of such treatments will require processes for efficient and accurate delivery of these reagents to HBV-infected cells.

## TRANSCRIPTION AND TRANSLATION

CCDNA SERVES AS a template for host RNA polymerase II, which transcribes cccDNA to yield viral RNA of four different lengths: a 3.5-kb (genome-length) RNA, including pregenomic and precore RNA coding for polymerase protein and the precore protein precursor of the secretory hepatitis B e-antigen; 2.4- and 2.1-kb RNA coding for the surface protein; and 0.7-kb RNA coding for the HBx protein. The transcription of viral RNA is regulated by the PreC/C, PreS, S and X promoters as well as by Enhancer 1 and 2 via interaction with liver-specific host transcription factors.³⁸ Interestingly, the HBx protein has a transactivation activity and is involved in transcriptional regulation of viral RNA.³⁰ All of the HBV RNA have 5′-cap structures and 3′-poly-A tails. All four viral RNA are exported from the nucleus to the cytoplasm without splicing; the RNA then are translated into different viral proteins.

Viral messenger RNA could be directly targeted by using siRNA,³⁹⁻⁴³ antisense oligonucleotides, and ribozymes. The most promising results have come from a recent phase 2 clinical trial⁴³ employing siRNA technology to target HBV-specific transcripts. In this study, an siRNA-based drug, named ARC-520, was well tolerated and resulted in

dose-dependent decreases of HBsAg in chronic hepatitis B patients.

# CAPSID FORMATION, REVERSE TRANSCRIPTION AND DNA SYNTHESIS

VIRAL PREGENOMIC RNA (pgRNA) has an ε-stem loop proximal to the 5′-end. Polymerase binding to the ε-stem loop triggers capsid formation. pgRNA is selectively encapsidated within core particles in the cytoplasm together with the polymerase. Within each core particle, viral DNA synthesis is initiated by reverse transcription polymerase activity; following negative strand synthesis and concomitant degradation of the RNA template by RNase H, positive strand DNA synthesis is initiated using short RNA from non-degraded pgRNA as a primer.⁴⁴,⁴⁵ Nucleocapsids containing rcDNA then progress to the next step (envelopment) or are recycled by uncoating and importation into the nucleus of the new rcDNA.

Second-generation NRTI (e.g. entecavir and tenofovir) target the viral polymerase. NRTI have been shown to reduce HBV viremia by 5–6 logs within 1 year, are well tolerated and select drug-resistant variants at very low rates.⁴⁶,⁴⁷ However, NRTI treatment only rarely provides clearance of HBsAg, meaning that many patients will need to take NRTI on a chronic (lifelong) basis.

Phenylpropanamide derivatives were shown to interfere with pgRNA packaging, resulting in the release of immature empty capsids from infected cells. *In vitro* studies have shown that phenylpropanamide derivatives demonstrate synergistic antiviral activity in combination with NRTI.⁴⁸⁻⁵¹

In other work, heteroaryldihydropyrimidines (HAP) have been reported to inhibit both capsid formation and capsid stability.⁵²⁻⁵⁵ Interestingly, both phenylpropanamide derivatives and HAP have been found to be useful for the treatment of NRTI-resistant viral variants.⁴⁸,⁴⁹

# ASSEMBLY AND SECRETION

ALL THREE OF the HBV envelope proteins (SHB, MHB and LHB) have been detected in folded form on the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) membrane. Envelope proteins have been observed to generate empty particles (subviral particles, SVP) in the ER, which are then released through the Golgi body and/or multivesicular body (MVB). Two types of SVP have been seen: spherical and filamentary. In the presence of nucleocapsid, LHB proteins interact with the coated genome to generate a complete HBV virion (a Dane particle). The content ratio of the three envelope proteins is known to differ between Dane particles and SVP; notably, Dane particles are enriched for LHB protein compared with SVP. The mechanism of

HBV virion packaging is proposed to consist of the following steps: (i) nucleocapsid is transported to the surface of the MVB through Nedd4 and γ-2-adaptin;⁵⁶ and (ii) nucleocapsid buds into MVB on contact with HBV envelope proteins via endosomal sorting complex required for transport proteins (Alix, Vsp4 and CHIMP).⁵⁷,⁵⁸ However, the process of migration of HBs proteins from ER to MVB remains unknown. Moreover, the pathway for the secretion of HBV virions also remains unclear. Recently, Rab7 was shown to regulate MVB degradation and also to accelerate the disassembly of HBV virions.⁵⁹

Several inhibitors targeting HBV secretion and budding are in development, including both preclinical⁶⁰⁻⁶² and clinical⁶³ trials. Notably, amphiphilic DNA polymers, which have been shown to interfere with HBsAg release, show a wide range of antiviral activity against HBV, hepatitis C virus and HIV. Inhibition of HBV secretion is expected not only to reduce viremia but also to facilitate recovery of immunity. However, clinical application of inhibitors of secretion and/or budding will require addressing other issues, including the possible pathological effects of ongoing accumulation of cccDNA and of HBV proteins.

# IMMUNOTHERAPEUTIC AGENTS

INCLUDING DEGRADATION OF cccDNA, inhibition of transcription, and prevention of encapsidation, IFN-α shows pleiotropic effects on the HBV life cycle.⁶⁴,⁶⁵ IFN-α also has a key role as an immunomodulator used to treat HBV infection. However, the rate of cure of HBV infection using PEG IFN monotherapy is very rare, even after 48–72 weeks of treatment. Accordingly, many trials have been conducted by using combination therapy with NRTI and PEG IFN, but the resulting data do not support the use of these combinations.

Other cytokines with potential application for treatment of HBV include IFN-γ, which is known as a main player in non-cytolytic clearance of HBV during acute infection,⁶⁶ and tumor necrosis factor (TNF), which also is tracked as a marker in the management of HBV infection. Recently, indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase has been reported to demonstrate IFN-γ-mediated antiviral activity against HBV.⁶⁷,⁶⁸ Additionally, cellular inhibitors of apoptosis proteins (cIAP) have been shown to impede TNF-mediated HBV eradication, an observation that has led to the development of cIAP inhibitors as potential HBV treatments.⁶⁹,⁷⁰ Toll-like receptor 7 (TLR7) agonists⁷¹⁻⁷⁶ and therapeutic vaccines⁷⁷⁻⁷⁹ also have been the subjects of vigorous development projects. The restoration of antiviral

immunity will be imperative for the full cure of HBV-infected individuals.

# SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS

In this review, we described current understanding of the HBV life cycle and associated host factors, including druggable targets that may be used in treating HBV infection. Many of the corresponding drugs are in evaluation via preclinical and/or clinical trials. The combination of present treatments and antiviral drugs in development promises to reduce the severity of HBV infection on a long-term basis. However, we are still a long way away from the complete eradication of HBV, notably including treatments that will permit elimination of cccDNA in carriers. Extended efforts will be needed to obtain a regimen that permits a complete cure of HBV infection.

# ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The authors gratefully acknowledge Tomoe Shimazaki, Machiko Umemura, Takaaki Izumi, Rei Takeda of Morikawa labo members, Koji Ogawa, Takuya Sho, Masato Nakai, Fumiyuki Sato, Seiji Tsunematsu and Jyun Ito of the Hepatology Department of Hokkaido University Hospital, and Hatsumi Ueda, Terumi Hatakeyama, Megumi Kimura, and Emiko Ito for technical support; Ayumi Kachi, Maki Makino, Masumi Kodama and Ayaka Saigo for administrative support; and Masaya Sugiyama, Tomoko Date, and Takaji Wakita for helpful discussions. Funding was provided by the Japan Agency for Medical Research and Development; the Ministry of Health, Labor and Welfare, Japan; the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology, Japan; and the Viral Hepatitis Research Foundation of Japan.

# REFERENCES

1. Lanford RE, Chavez D, Brasky KM, Burns RB III, Rico-Hesse R. Isolation of a hepadnavirus from the woolly monkey, a New World primate. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA* 1998; 95: 5757–61.
2. Drexler JF, Geipel A, König A et al. Bats carry pathogenic hepadnaviruses antigenically related to hepatitis B virus and capable of infecting human hepatocytes. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA* 2013; 110: 16151–6.
3. Dryden KA, Wieland SF, Whitten-Bauer C, Gerin JL, Chisari FV, Yeager M. Native hepatitis B virions and capsids visualized by electron cryomicroscopy. *Mol Cell* 2006; 22: 843–50.
4. Seitz S, Urban S, Antoni C, Bottcher B. Cryo-electron microscopy of hepatitis B virions reveals variability in envelope capsid interactions. *EMBO J* 2007; 26: 4160–7.
5. Dane DS, Cameron CH, Briggs M. Virus-like particles in serum of patients with Australia-antigen-associated hepatitis. *Lancet* 1970; 1: 695–8.
6. Bottcher B, Wynne SA, Crowther RA. Determination of the fold of the core protein of hepatitis B virus by electron cryomicroscopy. *Nature* 1997; 386: 88–91.
7. Conway JF, Cheng N, Zlotnick A, Wingfield PT, Stahl SJ, Steven AC. Visualization of a 4-helix bundle in the hepatitis B virus capsid by cryo-electron microscopy. *Nature* 1997; 386: 91–4.
8. Wynne SA, Crowther RA, Leslie AGW. The crystal structure of the human hepatitis B virus capsid. *Mol Cell* 1999; 3: 771–80.
9. Ott JJ, Stevens GA, Groeger J, Wiersma ST. Global epidemiology of hepatitis B virus infection: new estimates of age-specific HBsAg seroprevalence and endemicity. *Vaccine* 2012; 30: 2212–9.
10. Glebe D, Urban S. Viral and cellular determinants involved in hepadnaviral entry. *World J Gastroenterol* 2007; 13: 22–38.
11. Leistner CM, Gruen-Bernhard S, Glebe D. Role of glycosaminoglycans for binding and infection of hepatitis B virus. *Cell Microbiol* 2008; 10: 122–33.
12. Schulze A, Gripon P, Urban S. Hepatitis B virus infection initiates with a large surface protein-dependent binding to heparan sulfate proteoglycans. *Hepatology* 2007; 46: 1759–68.
13. Sureau C, Salisse J. A conformational heparan sulfate binding site essential to infectivity overlaps with the conserved hepatitis B virus a-determinant. *Hepatology* 2013; 57: 985–94.
14. Yan H, Zhong G, Xu G et al. Sodium taurocholate cotransporting polypeptide is a functional receptor for human hepatitis B and D virus. *eLife* 2012; 1: e00049.
15. Huang HC, Chen CC, Chang WC, Tao MH, Huang C. Entry of hepatitis B virus into immortalized human primary hepatocytes by clathrin-dependent endocytosis. *J Virol* 2012; 86: 9443–53.
16. Macovei A, Petrareanu C, Lazar C, Florian P, Branza-Nichita N. Regulation of hepatitis B virus infection by Rab5, Rab7, and the endolysosomal compartment. *J Virol* 2013; 87: 6415–27.
17. Ni Y, Lempp FA, Mehrle S et al. Hepatitis B and D viruses exploit sodium taurocholate co-transporting polypeptide for species-specific entry into hepatocytes. *Gastroenterology* 2014; 146: 1070–83.
18. Ladner SK, Otto MJ, Barker CS et al. Inducible expression of human hepatitis B virus (HBV) in stably transfected hepatoblastoma cells: a novel system for screening potential inhibitors of HBV replication. *Antimicrob Agents Chemother* 1997; 41: 1715–20.
19. Sells MA, Chen ML, Acs G. Production of hepatitis B virus particles in Hep G2 cells transfected with cloned hepatitis B virus DNA. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA* 1987; 84: 1005–9.
20. Urban S, Bartenschlager R, Kubitz R, Zoulim F. Strategies to inhibit entry of HBV and HDV into hepatocytes. *Gastroenterology* 2014; 147: 48–64.
21. Volz T, Allweiss L, Ben MM et al. The entry inhibitor Myrcludex-B efficiently blocks intrahepatic virus spreading in humanized mice previously infected with hepatitis B virus. *J Hepatol* 2013; 58: 861–7.

22 Nkongolo S, Ni Y, Lempp FA *et al.* Cyclosporin A inhibits hepatitis B and hepatitis D virus entry by cyclophilin-independent interference with the NTCP receptor. *J Hepatol* 2014; 60: 723–31.

23 Watashi K, Sluder A, Daito T *et al.* Cyclosporin A and its analogs inhibit hepatitis B virus entry into cultured hepatocytes through targeting a membrane transporter, sodium taurocholate cotransporting polypeptide (NTCP). *Hepatology* 2014; 59: 1726–37.

24 Blanchet M, Sureau C, Labonte P. Use of FDA approved therapeutics with hNTCP metabolic inhibitory properties to impair the HDV lifecycle. *Antiviral Res* 2014; 106: 111–5.

25 Huang HC, Tao MH, Hung TM, Chen JC, Lin ZJ, Huang C. (−)-Epigallocatechin-3-gallate inhibits entry of hepatitis B virus into hepatocytes. *Antiviral Res* 2014; 111: 100–11.

26 Schmitz A, Schwarz A, Foss M *et al.* Nucleoporin 153 arrests the nuclear import of hepatitis B virus capsids in the nuclear basket. *PLoS Pathog* 2010; 6: e1000741.

27 Koniger C, Wingert I, Marsmann M, Rosler C, Beck J, Nassal M. Involvement of the host DNA-repair enzyme TDP2 in formation of the covalently closed circular DNA persistence reservoir of hepatitis B viruses. *Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A* 2014; 111: E4244–53.

28 Bock CT, Schwinn S, Locarnini S *et al.* Structural organization of the hepatitis B virus minichromosome. *J Mol Biol* 2001; 307: 183–96.

29 Belloni L, Pollicino T, De Nicola F *et al.* Nuclear HBx binds the HBV minichromosome and modifies the epigenetic regulation of cccDNA function. *Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A* 2009; 106: 19975–9.

30 Lucifora J, Arzberger S, Durantel D *et al.* Hepatitis B virus X protein is essential to initiate and maintain virus replication after infection. *J Hepatol* 2011; 55: 996–1003.

31 Pollicino T, Belloni L, Raffa G *et al.* Hepatitis B virus replication is regulated by the acetylation status of hepatitis B virus cccDNA-bound H3 and H4 histones. *Gastroenterology* 2006; 130: 823–37.

32 Cai D, Mills C, Yu W *et al.* Identification of disubstituted sulfonamide compounds as specific inhibitors of hepatitis B virus covalently closed circular DNA formation. *Antimicrob Agents Chemother* 2012; 56: 4277–88.

33 Lucifora J, Xia Y, Reisinger F *et al.* Specific and nonhepatotoxic degradation of nuclear hepatitis B virus cccDNA. *Science* 2014; 343: 1221–8.

34 Chen J, Zhang W, Lin J *et al.* An efficient antiviral strategy for targeting hepatitis B virus genome using transcription activator-like effector nucleases. *Mol Ther* 2014; 22: 303–11.

35 Cradick TJ, Keck K, Bradshaw S, Jamieson AC, McCaffrey AP. Zinc-finger nucleases as a novel therapeutic strategy for targeting hepatitis B virus DNAs. *Mol Ther* 2010; 18: 947–54.

36 Schiffer JT, Swan DA, Stone D, Jerome KR. Predictors of hepatitis B cure using gene therapy to deliver DNA cleavage enzymes: a mathematical modeling approach. *PLoS Comput Biol* 2013; 9: e1003131.

37 Weber ND, Stone D, Sedlak RH *et al.* AAV-mediated delivery of zinc finger nucleases targeting hepatitis B virus inhibits active replication. *PLoS One* 2014; 9: e97579.

38 Tang H, McLachlan A. Transcriptional regulation of hepatitis B virus by nuclear hormone receptors is a critical determinant of viral tropism. *Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A* 2001; 98: 1841–6.

39 Chen Y, Cheng G, Mahato RI. RNAi for treating hepatitis B viral infection. *Pharm Res* 2008; 25: 72–86.

40 Klein C, Bock CT, Wedemeyer H *et al.* Inhibition of hepatitis B virus replication in vivo by nucleoside analogues and siRNA. *Gastroenterology* 2003; 125: 9–18.

41 Lanford RE, Wooddell CI, Chavez D *et al.* ARC-520 RNAi therapeutic reduces hepatitis B virus DNA, S antigen and e antigen in a chimpanzee with a very high viral titer. *Hepatology* 2013; 58: : 707a-a.

42 McCaffrey AP, Nakai H, Pandey K *et al.* Inhibition of hepatitis B virus in mice by RNA interference. *Nat Biotechnol* 2003; 21: 639–44.

43 Yuen MF, Chan HLY, Given B *et al.* Phase II, dose ranging study of ARC-520, a siRNA-based therapeutic, in patients with chronic hepatitis B virus infection. *Hepatology* 2014; 60: : 1280a-a.

44 Beck J, Nassal M. Hepatitis B virus replication. *World J Gastroenterol* 2007; 13: 48–64.

45 Nassal M. Hepatitis B viruses: reverse transcription a different way. *Virus Res* 2008 Jun; 134: 235–49.

46 Chotiyaputta W, Peterson C, Ditah FA, Goodwin D, Lok AS. Persistence and adherence to nucleos(t)ide analogue treatment for chronic hepatitis B. *J Hepatol* 2011; 54: 12–8.

47 Trepo C, Chan HL, Lok A. Hepatitis B virus infection. *Lancet* 2014; 384: 2053–63.

48 Billioud G, Pichoud C, Puerstinger G, Neyts J, Zoulim F. The main hepatitis B virus (HBV) mutants resistant to nucleoside analogs are susceptible in vitro to non-nucleoside inhibitors of HBV replication. *Antiviral Res* 2011; 92: 271–6.

49 Delaney WE, Edwards R, Colledge D *et al.* Phenylpropenamide derivatives AT-61 and AT-130 inhibit replication of wild-type and lamivudine-resistant strains of hepatitis B virus in vitro. *Antimicrob Agents Chemother* 2002; 46: 3057–60.

50 Feld JJ, Colledge D, Sozzi V, Edwards R, Littlejohn M, Locarnini SA. The phenylpropenamide derivative AT-130 blocks HBV replication at the level of viral RNA packaging. *Antiviral Res* 2007; 76: 168–77.

51 King RW, Ladner SK, Miller TJ *et al.* Inhibition of human hepatitis B virus replication by AT-61, a phenylpropenamide derivative, alone and in combination with (−)beta-L-2′,3′-dideoxy-3′-thiacytidine. *Antimicrob Agents Chemother* 1998; 42: 3179–86.

52 Deres K, Schroder CH, Paessens A, *et al.* Inhibition of hepatitis B virus replication by drug-induced depletion of nucleocapsids. *Science* 2003; 299: 893–6.

53 Stray SJ, Bourne CR, Punna S, Lewis WG, Finn MG, Zlotnick A. A heteroaryldihydropyrimidine activates and can misdirect

hepatitis B virus capsid assembly. *Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A* 2005; 102: 8138–43.

54 Stray SJ, Zlotnick A. BAY 41-4109 has multiple effects on Hepatitis B virus capsid assembly. *J Mol Recognit* 2006; 19: 542–8.

55 Wu GY, Zheng XJ, Yin CC *et al.* Inhibition of hepatitis B virus replication by Bay 41-4109 and its association with nucleocapsid disassembly. *J Chemother* 2008; 20: 458–67.

56 Lambert C, Doring T, Prange R. Hepatitis B virus maturation is sensitive to functional inhibition of ESCRT-III, Vps4, and gamma 2-adaptin. *J Virol* 2007; 81: 9050–60.

57 Prange R. Host factors involved in hepatitis B virus maturation, assembly, and egress. *Med Microbiol Immunol* 2012; 201: 449–61.

58 Watanabe T, Sorensen EM, Naito A, Schott M, Kim S, Ahlquist P. Involvement of host cellular multivesicular body functions in hepatitis B virus budding. *Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A* 2007; 104: 10205–10.

59 Inoue J, Krueger EW, Chen J, Cao H, Ninomiya M, McNiven MA. HBV secretion is regulated through the activation of endocytic and autophagic compartments mediated by Rab7 stimulation. *J Cell Sci* 2015; 128: 1696–706.

60 Durantel D, Alotte C, Zoulim F. Glucosidase inhibitors as antiviral agents for hepatitis B and C. *Curr Opin Investig Drugs* 2007; 8: 125–9.

61 Xu YB, Yang L, Wang GF *et al.* Benzimidazole derivative, BM601, a novel inhibitor of hepatitis B virus and HBsAg secretion. *Antiviral Res* 2014; 107: 6–15.

62 Yu W, Goddard C, Clearfield E *et al.* Design, synthesis, and biological evaluation of triazolo-pyrimidine derivatives as novel inhibitors of hepatitis B virus surface antigen (HBsAg) secretion. *J Med Chem* 2011; 54: 5660–70.

63 Mahtab MA, Bazinet M, Vaillant A. Rep 9 ac: A Potent Hbsag Release Inhibitor That Elicits Durable Immunological Control of Chronic Hbv Infection. *Hepatology* 2011; 54: 478a–9a.

64 Hao J, Jin W, Li X *et al.* Inhibition of alpha interferon (IFN-alpha)-induced microRNA-122 negatively affects the anti-hepatitis B virus efficiency of IFN-alpha. *J Virol* 2013; 87: 137–47.

65 Xu C, Guo TC, Mutoloki S, Haugland O, Marjara IS, Evensen O. Alpha Interferon and not gamma interferon inhibits salmonid alphavirus subtype 3 replication in vitro. *J Virol* 2010; 84: 8903–12.

66 Habersetzer F, Moenne-Loccoz R, Meyer N *et al.* Loss of hepatitis B surface antigen in a real-life clinical cohort of patients with chronic hepatitis B virus infection. *Liver Int* 2015; 35: 130–9.

67 Ito H, Ando T, Ando K, *et al.* Induction of hepatitis B virus surface antigen-specific cytotoxic T lymphocytes can

be up-regulated by the inhibition of indoleamine 2, 3-dioxygenase activity. *Immunology* 2014; 142: 614–23.

68 Mao R, Zhang J, Jiang D *et al.* Indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase mediates the antiviral effect of gamma interferon against hepatitis B virus in human hepatocyte-derived cells. *J Virol* 2011; 85: 1048–57.

69 Ebert G, Allison C, Preston S *et al.* Eliminating hepatitis B by antagonizing cellular inhibitors of apoptosis. *Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A* 2015; 112: 5803–8.

70 Ebert G, Preston S, Allison C *et al.* Cellular inhibitor of apoptosis proteins prevent clearance of hepatitis B virus. *Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A* 2015; 112: 5797–802.

71 Gane EJ, Lim YS, Gordon SC *et al.* The oral toll-like receptor-7 agonist GS-9620 in patients with chronic hepatitis B virus infection. *J Hepatol* 2015; 63: 320–8.

72 Menne S, Tumas DB, Liu KH *et al.* Sustained efficacy and seroconversion with the Toll-like receptor 7 agonist GS-9620 in the Woodchuck model of chronic hepatitis B. *J Hepatol* 2015; 62: 1237–45.

73 Lawitz E, Gruener D, Marbury T *et al.* Safety, pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of the oral toll-like receptor 7 agonist GS-9620 in treatment-naive patients with chronic hepatitis C. *Antivir Ther* 2015; 20 (7): 699–708.

74 Fosdick A, Zheng J, Pflanz S *et al.* Pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic properties of GS-9620, a novel Toll-like receptor 7 agonist, demonstrate interferon-stimulated gene induction without detectable serum interferon at low oral doses. *J Pharmacol Exp Ther* 2014; 348: 96–105.

75 Lopatin U, Wolfgang G, Tumas D *et al.* Safety, pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of GS-9620, an oral Toll-like receptor 7 agonist. *Antivir Ther* 2013; 18: 409–18.

76 Lanford RE, Guerra B, Chavez D *et al.* GS-9620, an oral agonist of Toll-like receptor-7, induces prolonged suppression of hepatitis B virus in chronically infected chimpanzees. *Gastroenterology* 2013; 144: 1508–17, 17 e1–10.

77 Alavian SM, Miri SM, Jazayeri SM. Hepatitis B vaccine: prophylactic, therapeutic, and diagnostic dilemma. *Minerva Gastroenterol Dietol* 2012; 58: 167–78.

78 Gupta K, Cooper C. A review of the role of CpG oligodeoxynucleotides as toll-like receptor 9 agonists in prophylactic and therapeutic vaccine development in infectious diseases. *Drugs R&D* 2008; 9: 137–45.

79 Michel ML, Deng Q, Mancini-Bourgine M. Therapeutic vaccines and immune-based therapies for the treatment of chronic hepatitis B: perspectives and challenges. *J Hepatol* 2011; 54: 1286–96.
