
Accepted Manuscript

Roles of Inositol 1,4,5-Trisphosphate Receptors in Spinocerebellar Ataxias

Masayoshi Tada, Masatoyo Nishizawa, Osamu Onodera

PII: S0197-0186(16)30007-9  
DOI: [10.1016/j.neuint.2016.01.007](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuint.2016.01.007)  
Reference: NCI 3812  

To appear in: Neurochemistry International  

Received Date: 24 July 2015  
Revised Date: 5 January 2016  
Accepted Date: 22 January 2016  

Please cite this article as: Tada, M., Nishizawa, M., Onodera, O., Roles of Inositol 1,4,5-Trisphosphate Receptors in Spinocerebellar Ataxias, Neurochemistry International (2016), doi: 10.1016/j.neuint.2016.01.007.

This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.

Title: Roles of Inositol 1,4,5-Trisphosphate Receptors in Spino-cerebellar Ataxias

Masayoshi Tada¹, Masatoyo Nishizawa¹, and Osamu Onodera²

¹Department of Neurology, Brain Research Institute, University of Niigata, Japan  
²Department of Molecular Neuroscience, Center for Bioresources, Brain Research Institute, University of Niigata, Japan  
Address: 1-757 Asahimachidori, Chuo-ku, Niigata-shi, Niigata 951-8155, Japan  

Corresponding author: Osamu Onodera  
Department of Molecular Neuroscience, Center for Bioresources, Brain Research Institute, University of Niigata, Japan  
Address: 1-757 Asahimachidori, Chuo-ku, Niigata-shi, Niigata 951-8155, Japan  
E-mail: onodera@bri.niigata-u.ac.jp

Abstract

Modulation of the intracellular calcium concentration is a ubiquitous signaling system involved in the control of numerous biological processes in a wide variety of cells. Inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate (IP₃) receptors (IP₃Rs), which act as calcium release channels in the ER membrane, play a key role in the regulation of intracellular calcium concentration. IP₃R type 1 (IP₃R1) is the major neuronal IP₃R isoform in the central nervous system and particularly abundant in cerebellar Purkinje cells. Heterozygous deletions or missense mutations in ITPR1, which encodes IP₃R1, result in autosomal dominantly inherited spinocerebellar ataxias (SCAs), including SCA types 15 (SCA15) and 29 (SCA29). In addition, homozygous missense mutations in carbonic anhydrase-related protein VIII (CARP), which suppresses the ability of IP₃ to bind to IP₃R1, cause a recessively inherited ataxia with mild cognitive impairment with/without quadrupedal gait. Moreover, cytosolic calcium overload with excessive IP₃R1 activity has been implicated in the pathogenesis of other SCAs, including SCA types 2 (SCA2) and 3 (SCA3).

These facts indicate that dysregulation of IP₃R-mediated calcium signaling is linked to the pathogenesis of SCAs. Here, we focus on the molecular basis of SCA15 and SCA29, which are caused by mutations in ITPR1. In addition, we discuss other SCAs whose pathogenesis may be linked to aberrant activation of IP₃R-mediated Ca²⁺ signaling.

Abbreviations (alphabetical): AMPA = α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid; ATXN2 = ataxin-2; ATXN3 = ataxin-3; CAMRQ3 = cerebellar ataxia and mental retardation with or without quadrupedal locomotion 3; CARP = carbonic anhydrase-related protein VIII; ER = endoplasmic reticulum; IP₃ = inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate; IP₃R = IP₃ receptor; IP₃R1 = inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor type 1; IRBIT = inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor-binding protein; LTD = long-term depression; mGluR = metabotropic glutamate receptors; nAChR = nicotinic acetylcholine receptor; NCX = sodium-calcium exchanger; NMDA = N-methyl-D-aspartic acid; PMCA = plasma membrane calcium ATPase; RyR = ryanodine receptor; SCA = spinocerebellar ataxia; SERCA = sarcoplasmic/endoplasmic reticulum calcium ATPase; SUMF1 = sulfatase modifying factor 1; VGCC = voltage-gated calcium channel.

1. **Introduction**

Modulation of the cytoplasmic free calcium ($\mathrm{Ca}^{2+}$) concentration is a universal intracellular signaling system involved in the regulation of diverse biological processes, including learning and memory, axonal transport, cell excitability, synaptic transmission, cell division, cell development, and apoptosis (Foskett et al. 2007; Bezprozvanny 2010, Finch et al. 2012; Stutzmann et al. 2011; Goto and Mikoshiba 2011). Inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate ($\mathrm{IP}_{3}$) receptors ($\mathrm{IP}_{3} \mathrm{Rs}$) are a group of $\mathrm{Ca}^{2+}$ channels localized in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) membrane (Foskett et al. 2007; Bezprozvanny 2005). They function to release $\mathrm{Ca}^{2+}$ from the ER, the major intracellular $\mathrm{Ca}^{2+}$ storage organelle, into the cytoplasm in response to the binding of $\mathrm{IP}_{3}$, an intracellular second messenger, which is generated through hydrolysis of phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate by phospholipases C$\beta$ and C$\gamma$ (Figure 1A). This hydrolysis is triggered by binding of the ligand to G protein-coupled or tyrosine phosphorylation-coupled receptors. $\mathrm{IP}_{3} \mathrm{Rs}$, as well as other intracellular membrane $\mathrm{Ca}^{2+}$ channels including the ryanodine receptor (RyR), play a key role in the regulation of intracellular calcium concentration (Figure 1A).

Several lines of evidence suggest that aberrant $\mathrm{IP}_{3} \mathrm{R}$-mediated calcium signaling is implicated in the pathogenesis of spinocerebellar ataxias (SCAs), as well as other age-related neurodegenerative diseases, including Alzheimer's disease and Huntington's disease (Berridge MJ 2010; Bezprozvanny 2011). In this review, we focus on the molecular basis of spinocerebellar ataxia types 15 (SCA15) and 29 (SCA29), which are caused by deletions or missense mutations in the IP3R type 1 gene. In addition, we discuss other SCAs whose pathogenesis may be linked to aberrant activation of $\mathrm{IP}_{3} \mathrm{R}$-mediated $\mathrm{Ca}^{2+}$ signaling.

2. **Isoforms and structures of $\mathrm{IP}_{3} \mathrm{Rs}$**

$\mathrm{IP}_{3} \mathrm{Rs}$ are ubiquitously expressed in all cell types in the mammalian body. Three $\mathrm{IP}_{3} \mathrm{R}$ isoforms, types 1 ($\mathrm{IP}_{3} \mathrm{R} 1$), 2 ($\mathrm{IP}_{3} \mathrm{R} 2$), and 3 ($\mathrm{IP}_{3} \mathrm{R} 3$), are expressed in mammals including humans (Furuichi

et al. 1994; Mikoshiba et al. 1993; Foskett et al. 2007; Taylor et al. 1999; Taylor et al. 2004;

Stutzmann et al. 2011; Goto and Mikoshiba. 2011) and share 60–70% homology in terms of

amino acid sequence (Furuichi et al. 1994; Michikawa et al. 1996). Most tissues express more

than one of these isoforms, and often all three (Taylor et al. 1999; Foskett et al. 2007). The

expression level of each isoform is regulated according to cellular type and state.

IP₃R1 is the major neuronal IP₃R isoform in the central nervous system (Yamada et al. 1994)

and is abundant in the cerebellum, particularly cerebellar Purkinje cells. It is also expressed in

other brain areas, including the cerebral cortex, hippocampus, basal ganglia, and thalamus, as

well as in peripheral tissues (Furuichi et al. 1994; Foskett et al. 2007; Nakanishi et al. 1991;

Sharp et al. 1999). IP₃R1 is a protein comprising 2,758 amino acids and forms a homotetramer in

the intracellular membrane to function as a Ca²⁺ channel. The primary structure of IP₃R1 consists

of three domains, including an IP₃-binding domain in the N terminus, a coupling/regulatory

domain in the middle of the protein, and a transmembrane-spanning domain near the C terminus

(Figure 2). There are at least two consensus protein kinase A phosphorylation sites (S1589 and

S1755) and at least one consensus ATP-binding site (1773-1778) (Nucifora et al. 1995; Foskett

et al. 2007).

3. Consequences of IP₃R1 loss in mice

a. ITPR1-knockout mice

Homozygous ITPR1-knockout mice, in which cytosolic IP₃-induced Ca²⁺ release is almost

completely deficient, generally die in utero, indicating that IP₃R1 is essential for embryonic

development. Even if they survive, the mice exhibit severe ataxia and tonic or tonic-clonic

seizures and die by weaning age or before (Matsumoto et al. 1996; Matsumoto et al. 1999).

Neurophysiological analysis has shown that long-term depression (LTD) is completely

diminished in cerebellar Purkinje cells (Inoue et al. 1998). On the other hand, the effect of IP₃R1

on synaptic plasticity in the hippocampus is complicated. A classical form of LTD induced by

sustained low-frequency stimulation is not affected at the CA3-CA1 synapses (Fujii S et al.

2000), whereas it is diminished at mossy fiber-CA3 synapses (Itoh et al. 2001). Long-term

potentiation (LTP) induced by short-term tetanus (100 Hz, 10 pulses) is enhanced in CA1

synapses. IP₃R1 is indispensable to the induction of depotentiation and suppression of LTP (Fujii

S et al. 2000). These results indicate that IP₃R1-mediated Ca²⁺ signaling plays an important role

in the regulation of synaptic plasticity in different ways in each situation. Purkinje cells show

abnormal dendritic development and enlarged parallel fiber terminals with many vesicles

(Hisatsune et al. 2006). For the dendrite outgrowth, neighboring granule cells have a crucial role.

Precisely, production of brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) in cerebellar granule cells

upon induction by IP₃R1-mediated signaling modifies the efficacy of parallel fiber-Purkinje cell

synapses, resulting in the formation of Purkinje cell dendrites (Hisatsune et al. 2006). Whereas

homozygous ITPR1-deficient mice exhibit distinct phenotypes as described above (Matsumoto

et al. 1999; Matsumoto et al. 1996), heterozygous ITPR1-deficient mice exhibit only mild motor

discoordination, which were observed when tested on a rotating rod (Ogura et al. 2001).

b. Opisthotonus (Opt) mice

The Opisthotonus (Opt) mouse harbors a spontaneous deletion of exons 43 and 44 in ITPR1

that results in an in-frame deletion of amino acid residues 1732–1839 in the coupling/regulatory

domain (Street et al. 1997). Homozygous Opt mice display a characteristic upward arching of the

head and tail, a low birth weight, and loss of balance characterized by falling over and struggling

to get up. The mice begin to exhibit seizures at 2 weeks after birth, and die by weaning age or

before.

The function of recombinant Opt-type protein was largely unaffected, although the Opt-type

deletion involves the ATP-binding property of IP₃R1 (Tu et al. 2002). On the other hand, Opt

IP₃R1 protein is markedly reduced in homozygous Opt mice (Street et al. 1997; Foskett et al.

2010). Street et al. also reported that despite markedly reduced IP3R1 protein levels in

homozygous Opt mice, a strong calcium release from intracellular stores was elicited in Purkinje

neurons, with the calcium response showing less attenuation to repeated application of

quisqualate, an mGluR agonist, in homozygous Opt mice (Street et al. 1997). It is unclear how this

electrophysiological phenotype might occur. The electrophysiological phenotype in the

cerebellar Purkinje neurons of Opt mice could be a consequence of reduced IP3R1 receptor

number, conformational changes resulting from the deletion, and/or removal of specific

modulatory sites from the IP3R1 protein.

c. Δ18 mice

The Δ18 mouse has a homozygous spontaneous 18-bp deletion in exon 36 of ITPR1 that results

in an in-frame deletion of 6 amino acid residues (residues 1533–1538; Glu-Ser-Cys-Ile-Arg-Val)

in the coupling/regulatory domain (van de Leemput 2007). Homozygous Δ18 mice have a low

birth weight and show loss of balance when standing and moving, and die by weaning age. Their

phenotype is similar to that of homozygous ITPR1-knockout and Opt mice (van de Leemput J et

al. 2007; Street et al. 1997; Matsumoto et al. 1996). The functional significance of the 6 deleted

residues, which are not particularly conserved across isoforms and species, remains unclear. The

recombinant Δ1533–1538 IP3R1 protein produces functional IP3R1. In addition, levels of IP3R1

expression are markedly reduced in cerebellar Purkinje cells or the whole brain (van de Leemput

et al. 2007), suggesting that marked reduction of IP3R1 is linked to Δ18 pathogenesis, as is the

case in ITPR1-knockout and Opt mice. These results indicate that marked loss of IP3R1 causes

developmental delay, congenital ataxia, and seizure in mice.

4. SCAs caused by alteration of the IP3R and related genes

a. ITPR1 deletion in humans

In 2007, heterozygous large deletions encompassing exons 1–10, 1–40, and 1–44 of ITPR1 and the adjoining sulfatase modifying factor 1 (SUMF1) were identified in unrelated Australian and British families with SCA15 (van de Leemput et al. 2007), which is a neurodegenerative disorder clinically characterized by autosomal dominant inheritance, pure cerebellar ataxia, and very slow progression (Storey et al. 2001; Gardner et al. 2005, Knight et al. 2003; Hara et al. 2004). Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) reveals marked atrophy of the cerebellar vermis with mild atrophy of the cerebellar hemispheres (Hara et al. 2004; Knight et al. 2003; van de Leemput et al. 2007; Novak et al. 2010; Synofzik et al. 2011). Deletions in the adjacent SUMF1 gene have been found in most patients with SCA15 (van de Leemput et al. 2007; Hara et al. 2008; Ganesamoorthy et al. 2009; Novak et al. 2010; Di Gregorio et al. 2010; Castrioto et al. 2011).

Heterozygous SUMF1 deletions do not cause any diseases, although homozygous SUMF1 deletions can cause mental retardation, seizures, and leukodystrophy (Schlotawa et al. 2011). In addition, a heterozygous large deletion of entire exons only in ITPR1 has been identified in Japanese families, indicating that ITPR1 is the causative gene for SCA15 (Hara et al. 2008; Iwaki et al. 2008).

The prevalence of SCA15 differs markedly among ethnic groups. In Caucasians, pathogenic ITPR1 deletions have been found in 1.8 ~ 8.9% of families with autosomal dominant SCA (AD-SCA) who are negative for repeat expansion SCAs (Ganesamoorthy et al. 2009; Marelli et al. 2011; Synofzik et al. 2011). On the other hand, ITPR1 deletions are quite rare in the Japanese population (Obayashi et al. 2012; Hara et al. 2008).

b. Missense mutations in ITPR1 in SCA15

Two heterozygous missense mutations, V494I (c.1480G>A) and P1059L (c.8581C>T), have also been identified in Australian and Japanese families with SCA15, respectively (Ganesamoorthy et al. 2009; Hara et al. 2008). Valine at position 494 is located in the IP3-binding domain consisting of β-trefoil and armadillo repeat domains (Ganesamoorthy et al. 2009; Foskett

et al. (2007). Proper coordination of both domains is necessary for the binding of IP₃ to IP₃R1.

Proline at position 1059 is located in the coupling/regulatory domain (Figure 2), and highly

conserved in IP₃R1 across species. However, the Ca²⁺ release properties of IP₃R1 bearing the

P1059I mutation are largely unaffected (Yamazaki et al. 2011). It remains to be clarified how

these missense mutations contribute to the pathogenesis of SCA15.

c. Clinical characteristics of SCA15

SCA15 is a neurodegenerative disorder caused by deletion and missense mutations in ITPR1.

The age at onset ranges between 7 and 66 years (usually 30-50 years), with usually gait ataxia but

sometimes tremor (Storey et al. 2001; van de Leemput et al. 2007; Hara et al. 2008; Iwaki et al.

2008). Truncal and limb ataxia and ataxic speech in combination with head and upper limb

postural tremor are core features of the disease. Sometimes brisk reflex are seen, but it never

accompanies pathological reflex nor spasticity. Cognitive function is preserved throughout the

disease course. Disease progression is markedly slow. The relation between the progression rate

and the age at onset is not obvious. Most patients with SCA15 can ambulate independently or

with a cane 10–40 years after onset (Storey et al. 2001; van de Leemput et al. 2007; Hara et al.

2008; Iwaki et al. 2008).

Nerve conduction studies are typically normal, but mild slowing of the conduction velocities of

sensory and motor nerves have been described in affected members of a Japanese family with

SCA15 (Hara et al. 2008). No SCA15 patients, which have pure ITPR1 gene abnormality, have

been reported to show epilepsy or abnormal electroencephalographic features at any disease

stage (Gardner et al. 2005; Hara et al. 2004; Knight et al. 2003; van de Leemput et al. 2007). No

details of neuropathological findings in SCA15 have been available to date.

d. Missense mutations in ITPR1 causing SCA29

SCA29 (MIM 117360) is a neurologic disorder characterized by autosomal dominant

inheritance, early onset in infancy, mild and very slow progressive ataxia, delayed motor

development, and mild cognitive impairment (Dudding et al. 2004, Huang et al. 2012). Various

additional features include nystagmus, dysarthria, and intention tremor. Atrophy or aplasia of the

cerebellum, particularly of the cerebellar vermis, is observed on brain imaging. The severity of

ataxia and intellectual impairment may vary in individual members of the same family. However,

the phenotype of SCA29 can be clearly distinguished from that of SCA15 by onset in infancy,

delayed motor development, and mild cognitive impairment (Dudding et al. 2004, Huang et al.

2012).

Heterozygous missense mutations in ITPR1, including T267M (c.800C>T), T267R

(c.800C>G), S277I (c.830G>T), T594I (c.1781C>T), N602D (c.1804A>G), and V1553M

(c.4657G>A), have been identified as causative mutations for SCA29 (Huang et al. 2012; Fogel

et al. 2014; Ohba et al. 2013; Sasaki et al. 2015). Threonine at position 267, serine at position 277,

threonine at position 594, and asparagine at position 602 are located in the IRBIT (inositol

1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor-binding protein)-binding region (residues 224-604), and valine at

position 1553 is in the carbonic anhydrase-related protein VIII (CARP)-binding region (Ando et

al. 2006; Hirota et al. 2003). Both IRBIT and CARP are known to compete with IP3 for binding

to IP3R1 and suppress IP3R1 activity (Ando et al. 2006; Hirota et al. 2003) (Figure 1C).

e. CARP and ataxias (CAMRQ3)

A homozygous missense mutation, S100P (c.298T>G) in the CA8 gene, which encodes CARP,

has been identified in patients with autosomal recessive congenital ataxia associated with mild

mental retardation and quadrupedal gait (Turkmen et al. 2009). Another homozygous missense

mutation, G162R (c.484G>A), was identified in three related Arabian families with ataxia and

mild cognitive impairment without quadrupedal gait (Kaya et al. 2011). Brain MRI showed

varying degrees of cerebellar atrophy. These conditions are designated as cerebellar ataxia and

mental retardation with or without quadrupedal locomotion 3 (CAMRQ3, MIM 613227). Mutant

CARP protein was strongly reduced in HEK cells that were stably transfected with Flag-tagged

S100P mutant CA8 constructs (Turkmen et al. 2009). Waddles (wdl) mice, harboring a  
spontaneously occurring 19-base-pair deletion in exon 8 of the CA8 gene, exhibit ataxia and  
appendicular dystonia without pathologic changes in the central or peripheral nervous system  
(Jiao et al. 2005). Homozygous wdl mice have almost complete absence of the CARP protein in  
Purkinje cells of the cerebellum, suggesting nonsense-mediated decay of mutant transcripts. On  
the other hand, CARP has been identified as the target antigen of an auto-antibody observed in a  
patient with paraneoplastic cerebellar degeneration (Bataller et al. 2004). Because CARP  
suppresses IP3R1 activity by competing with IP3 for binding to IP3R1 (Ando et al. 2006; Hirota et  
al. 2003), the loss of function of CARP is supposed to result in dysregulation of IP3R1-mediated  
Ca²⁺ signaling (Figure 1C).

f. Molecular pathogenesis of SCA15, SCA29, and CAMRQ3  

Most cases of SCA15 are caused by heterozygous deletions in ITPR1. Indeed, the expression  
levels of ITPR1 mRNA and protein in SCA15 patients have been shown to be reduced than those  
in control subjects (Hara et al. 2008; van de Leemput et al. 2007; Novak et al. 2010). Although  
homozygous ITPR1-deficient mice develop ataxia and epilepsy (Matsumoto et al. 1999;  
Matsumoto et al. 1996), heterozygous ITPR1-deficient mice develop only mild motor  
discoordination, similar to that in SCA15, indicating that cerebellar Purkinje cells are vulnerable  
to the content of IP3R1 (Ogura et al. 2001). Thus, haploinsufficiency of ITPR1 may cause SCA15  
(Figure 1B). Therefore, we can speculate that the missense mutation associated with SCA15  
might also reduce the level of IP3R1 protein. This hypothesis is supported by the fact that the  
functional properties of the mutated IP3R1 (P1059L) are largely unaffected (Yamazaki et al.  
2011).

Intracellular Ca²⁺ homeostasis is important for maintaining the function of neurons,  
particularly Purkinje cells (Hartmann et al. 2005; Mikoshiba et al. 2007). IP3R1 is expressed  
ubiquitously in various regions of the central nervous system including CA1, the basal ganglia,

and the thalamus, and particularly in cerebellar Purkinje cells (Nakanishi et al. 1991; Sharp et al. 1999). Reduced levels or excessive activation of IP3R1 may cause dysregulation of intracellular Ca²⁺ homeostasis, leading to persistent long-standing dysfunction of Purkinje cells and eventually degeneration of selective neuronal populations.

Meanwhile, the molecular mechanisms responsible for SCA29 are poorly understood. If SCA29 is caused by loss of function of IP3R1, then SCA29-associated missense mutations would exert a dominant-negative effect on the function of the homotetrameric proteins of IP3R1. Another possibility, as mentioned above, is that SCA29-associated missense mutations may reduce the binding affinities of IRBIT and CARP to IP3R1, thus increasing the affinity of IP3 to IP3R1, consequently leading to exaggeration of IP3R1-mediated calcium signaling (Ando et al. 2006; Hirota et al. 2003).

CARP was originally identified as an IP3R1-binding protein (Hirota et al. 2003). It is evolutionarily conserved across species, and widely expressed in diverse tissues, particularly abundant in cerebellar Purkinje cells (Hirota et al. 2003). CARP binds to the coupling/regulatory domain of IP3R1 (residues 1387–1647) and suppresses the binding of IP3 to IP3R1 by reducing the affinity of the latter for the former (Hirota et al. 2003), suggesting that CARP regulates IP3R1-mediated Ca²⁺ signaling particularly in Purkinje cells (Figure 1C). Despite the abundant expression of IP3R1 in Purkinje cells, IP3R1-mediated Ca²⁺ release in response to IP3 in Purkinje cells is lower than that in other tissues (Khodakhah et al. 1993; Hirota et al. 2003), leading to the idea that CARP presumably, in part, contributes to suppression of IP3R1-mediated Ca²⁺ release. Therefore, in the pathogenesis of CAMRQ3, it can be speculated that loss of CARP function enhances the sensitivity of IP3 binding to IP3R1, consequently leading to dysregulation of IP3R1-mediated Ca²⁺ signaling in Purkinje cells (Figure 1C).

5. Aberrant IP3R-mediated Ca²⁺ signaling in ataxias caused by expanded polyglutamine

(polyQ) stretches

SCA types 2 (SCA 2) and 3 (SCA 3) are neurodegenerative ataxias showing autosomal dominant inheritance caused by expansions of CAG repeats that encode abnormally expanded polyglutamine (polyQ) in the ataxin-2 (ATXN2) and ataxin-3 (ATXN3) proteins, respectively (Zoghbi et al. 2000; Williams et al. 2008; La Spada et al. 2010; Costa et al. 2012). The mutant ATXN2 and ATXN3 proteins with abnormal polyQ expansion show a tendency to aggregate in cells, resulting in the formation of neuronal inclusion bodies, a prominent pathological hallmark of polyQ diseases (Muchowski et al. 2005; Williams et al. 2008; Nagai et al. 2007; Paulson et al. 1997). The abnormal polyQ expansions alter the interactions of ATXN2 and ATXN3 with other proteins, consequently leading to perturbed proteostasis, transcriptional dysregulation, oxidative stress, impaired neurotransmission, insufficient trophic support, and aberrant cellular excitability (Williams et al. 2008; Costa et al. 2012; Takahashi et al. 2010).

Several lines of evidence indicate that aberrant neuronal Ca²⁺ signaling plays a role in the pathogenesis of polyQ diseases (Chen et al. 2008; Liu et al. 2009). Unlike SCA15, other SCAs are linked to excessive Ca²⁺ flux rather than to suppressed cytosolic Ca²⁺ signaling. Among these SCAs, ATXN2 and ATXN3, which have implicated to maintain physiological function of IP₃R1, are discussed below.

a. SCA 2

SCA 2 is clinically characterized by progressive cerebellar ataxia affecting gait, limbs and speech associated with slow saccades, early hyporeflexia, severe postural or action tremor, peripheral neuropathy, and cognitive disorders (Lastres-Becker et al. 2008; Magana et al. 2012). Cerebellar Purkinje cells are predominantly affected. ATXN2 is expressed ubiquitously, and involved in multiple cellular processes including post-transcriptional and translational regulation of RNA, stress granule formation, endocytosis, cytoskeletal reorganization, and Ca²⁺-mediated

signaling (Albrecht et al. 2004; van de Loo et al. 2009; Neuwald et al. 1998; Satterfield et al. 2006; Lastres-Becker et al. 2008; Ralser et al. 2005a; Ralser et al. 2005b; Shibata et al. 2000; Kozlov et al. 2010; Ciosk et al. 2004; Liu et al. 2009).

Pull-down and co-immunoprecipitation (co-IP) assays have revealed that mutant ATXN2 (58Q), but not wild-type, interacts with IP3R1 at cytosolic C-terminal region (residues 2627–2749) of IP3R1 (Liu et al. 2009). Bilayer reconstitution experiments have shown that association of mutant ATXN2 (58Q) with the receptor increases the sensitivity of IP3R1 to activation by IP3 (Huynh et al. 2000) (Figure 1D). Ca²⁺ imaging experiments have demonstrated a significant increase of Ca²⁺ release from the ER in primary-cultured Purkinje cells from SCA2 transgenic mice (58Q) (Huynh et al. 2000). More recently, long-term suppression of IP3R1-mediated Ca²⁺ signaling by adeno-associated virus (AAV)-mediated expression of the inositol 1,4,5-phosphatase enzyme in Purkinje cells of SCA2 transgenic mice (58Q) was reported to abrogate age-dependent dysfunction in the firing pattern of SCA2 Purkinje cells and associated motor deficits and cell death in SCA2 mice (Kasumu et al. 2012). These findings suggest that excitotoxic Ca²⁺ signaling through IP3R1 plays a role in SCA2 pathogenesis.

b. SCA3

SCA type 3 (SCA3), also known as Machado-Joseph disease, is the most common inherited SCA worldwide (Costa et al. 2012; Tsuji et al. 2008; Paulson et al. 2012). SCA3 is clinically characterized by progressive cerebellar ataxia and variable findings including a dystonic-rigid syndrome, a parkinsonian syndrome, or a combined syndrome of dystonia and peripheral neuropathy. The most affected brain regions are the dentate and pontine nuclei, internal portion of the globus pallidus, substantia nigra, subthalamic nucleus, and spinocerebellar tracts (Stevanin et al. 2000; Yamada et al. 2008; Yamada et al. 2000). The cerebellar cortex is relatively preserved in SCA3 in comparison with other SCAs. The cerebellar Purkinje cells show ubiquitous and abundant expression of ATXN3, which is a 43 kDa cytosolic protein containing

the amino-terminal Josephin domain and three ubiquitin-interacting motifs, functioning as a

deubiquitinating enzyme (Costa et al. 2012).

Aberrant Ca²⁺ signaling has also been implicated in the pathogenesis of SCA3 (Bezprozvanny 2011). Inhibition of the Ca²⁺-dependent protease calpain suppresses the aggregation of mutant ATXN3 in transfected cells (Haacke et al. 2007). In a SCA3 fly model, knockdown of PICK1, which regulates the traffic of ion channels involved in Ca²⁺ homeostasis (Chung et al. 2000; Hanley et al. 2006; McGurk et al. 2012), has been reported to suppress external eye degeneration, insoluble aggregations, and inclusions. Mutant ATXN3 (Q77 and Q127) binds to IP₃R1 and sensitize it to activation by IP₃ as well as ATXN2 (Chen et al. 2008) (Figure 2). In addition, feeding SCA3-YAC-84Q transgenic mice with dantrolene, a clinically relevant stabilizer of intracellular Ca²⁺ signaling, improved their motor performance and prevented neuronal cell loss in affected brain regions (Chen et al. 2008). These findings suggest that derangement of IP₃R1-mediated Ca²⁺ signaling may play an important role in the pathogenesis of SCA3.

6. Roles of IP₃R2 and IP₃R3 in neurological disorders

In current knowledge, ITPR2 and ITPR3 have not been causal genes for neurological disorders yet. Recently, a homozygous missense mutation in ITPR2 was identified in a family exhibiting anhidrosis (Klar et al. 2014). As well as humans, homozygous ITPR2-deficient mice exhibit decreased sweat secretion, but not neurological symptoms.

7. Concluding remarks

We have discussed the molecular basis of SCAs, including SCA15, SCA29, CARP-related ataxia, SCA2, and SCA3, whose pathogenesis is related to aberrant IP₃R-mediated Ca²⁺ signaling. There is increasing evidence that aberrant IP₃R1-mediated Ca²⁺ signaling is also implicated in other age-related neurological diseases including Alzheimer's and Huntington

diseases, as well as SCAs. Despite many advances in our understanding of these fatal
neurological disorders, no preventive treatment yet exists. Clarification of the molecular
mechanisms underlying the neurodegeneration caused by reduced or excessive IP3R1-mediated
Ca²⁺ signaling may lead to new therapeutic approaches for these disorders.

Acknowledgments

This study was supported in part by a Grant-in-Aid for Scientific Research on Priority Areas
(C) from the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology, Japan, and a
Grant-in-Aid for the Research Committee for Ataxic Diseases from the Ministry of Health,
Labor and Welfare, Japan.

Figure legends

Figure 1
Alterations of inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor (IP₃R)-mediated Ca²⁺ signaling in spinocerebellar ataxia type 2 (SCA2), type 3 (SCA3), type 15 (SCA15), and type 29 (SCA29), and cerebellar ataxia and mental retardation with or without quadrupedal locomotion 3 (CAMRQ3).
A. Sources of Ca²⁺ influx include Ca²⁺-permeable α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid (AMPA) and N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) glutamate receptors, voltage-gated Ca²⁺ channels (VGCCs), nicotinic acetylcholine receptors (nAChR), and transient receptor potential type C (TRPC) channels. Ca²⁺ release from the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) into the cytoplasm is mediated by inositol triphosphate receptors (IP₃R) and ryanodine receptors (RyR). Inositol triphosphate (IP₃) can be generated by metabotropic glutamate receptors (mGluR). Sources of Ca²⁺ efflux are the sodium-calcium exchanger (NCX), the plasma membrane calcium ATPase (PMCA), and the sarcoplasmic reticulum calcium ATPase (SERCA).
B. In SCA15, the reduced IP₃R levels result in reduced IP₃R-mediated Ca²⁺ influx.
C. In healthy individuals, the carbonic anhydrase-related protein VIII (CARP) binds to the modulatory domain of IP₃R and suppresses its affinity to IP₃ (left). In CAMRQ3, CARP cannot bind to IP₃R and enhances its affinity to IP₃, resulting in excessive Ca²⁺ influx (right).
D. In SCA2 or SCA3, mutant ataxin-2 (ATXN2) or ataxin-3 (ATXN3) binds to the C-terminal region of IP₃R and enhances its affinity to IP₃, resulting in excessive Ca²⁺ influx.

Figure 2
Structural motifs of inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor type 1 (IP₃R1). IP₃R1 consists of three major domains, including the amino-terminal IP₃-binding region, coupling/regulatory region, and transmembrane region. The structural features include alternative splicing sites SI (318–332),

1 SII (1692–1731), and SIII (917/918). β-trefoil domain (1-435), armadillo repeat domain
2 (436-600), IRBIT-binding region (224-604), carbonic anhydrase-related protein VIII
3 (CARP)-binding region (1387-1647), Opt deletion (1732-1839), Δ18 deletion (1533-1538),
4 ATP-binding site (1773-1778), and ataxin-1-, ataxin-2-binding regions (2627-2736). The point
5 mutateon sites of previously reported patients with SA15 (V494 and P1059) and SCA29 (T267,
6 S277, T594, N602, and V1553) are shown.
7

1 References alphabetically

2 Albrecht M, Golatta M, Wullner U, Lengauer T (2004) Structural and functional analysis of ataxin-2 and ataxin-3. Eur J Biochem 271:3155-3170

3 Ando H, Mizutani A, Kiefer H, Tsuzurugi D, Michikawa T, Mikoshiba K (2006) IRBIT suppresses IP3 receptor activity by competing with IP3 for the common binding site on the IP3 receptor. Mol Cell 22:795-806

4 Bataller L, Sabater L, Saiz A, Serra C, Claramonte B, Graus F (2004) Carbonic anhydrase-related protein VIII: autoantigen in paraneoplastic cerebellar degeneration. Ann Neurol 56:575-579

5 Berridge MJ (2010) Calcium hypothesis of Alzheimer's disease. Pflugers Arch 459:441-449

6 Bezprozvanny I (2005) The inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptors. Cell Calcium 38:261-272

7 Bezprozvanny I (2011) Role of inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptors in pathogenesis of Huntington's disease and spinocerebellar ataxias. Neurochem Res 36:1186-1197

8 Bezprozvanny IB (2010) Calcium signaling and neurodegeneration. Acta Natura e 2:72-82

9 Castrioto A, Prondera P, Di Gregorio E et al. (2011) A novel spinocerebellar ataxia type 15 family with involuntary movements and cognitive decline. Eur J Neurol 18:1263-1265

10 Chen X, Tang TS, Tu H, Nelson O, Pook M, Hammer R, Nukina N, Bezprozvanny I (2008) Deranged calcium signaling and neurodegeneration in spinocerebellar ataxia type 3. J Neurosci 28:12713-12724

11 Chung HJ, Xia J, Scannevin RH, Zhang X, Huganir RL (2000) Phosphorylation of the AMPA receptor subunit GluR2 differentially regulates its interaction with PDZ domain-containing proteins. J Neurosci 20:7258-7267

12 Ciosk R, DePalma M, Priess JR (2004) ATX-2, the C. elegans ortholog of ataxin 2, functions in translational regulation in the germline. Development 131:4831-4841

13 Costa Mdo C, Paulson HL (2012) Toward understanding Machado-Joseph disease. Prog Neurobiol 97:239-257

14 Di Gregorio E, Orsi L, Godani M et al. (2010) Two Italian families with IP3R1 gene deletion presenting a broader phenotype of SCA15. Cerebellum 9:115-123

15 Dudding TE, Friend K, Schofield PW, Lee S, Wilkinson IA, Richards RI (2004) Autosomal dominant congenital non-progressive ataxia overlaps with the SCA15 locus. Neurology 63:2288-2292

16 Finch EA, Tanaka K, Augustine GJ (2012) Calcium as a trigger for cerebellar long-term synaptic depression. Cerebellum 11:706-717

17 Fogel BL, Lee H, Deignan JL, Strom SP, Kantarci S, Wang X, Quintero-Rivera F, Vilain E, Grody WW, Perlman S, Geschwind DH, Nelson SF (2014) Exome sequencing in the clinical diagnosis of sporadic or familial cerebellar ataxia. JAMA Neurol 71:1237-1246

1 Foskett JK (2010) Inositol trisphosphate receptor Ca2+ release channels in neurological diseases.Pflugers Arch460:481-494
2 Foskett JK, White C, Cheung KH, Mak DO (2007) Inositol trisphosphate receptor Ca2+ release channels.Physiol Rev87:593-658
3 Fujii S, Matsumoto M, Igarashi K, Kato H, Mikoshiba K (2000) Synaptic plasticity in hippocampal CA1 neurons of mice lacking type 1 inositol-1,4,5-trisphosphate receptors. Learn Mem7:312–320
4 Furuichi T, Kohda K, Miyawaki A, Mikoshiba K (1994) Intracellular channels. Curr Opin Neurobiol4:294-303
5 Ganesamoorthy D, Bruno DL, Schoumans J et al. (2009) Development of a multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification assay for diagnosis and estimation of the frequency of spinocerebellar ataxia type 15.Clin Chem55:1415-1418
6 Gardner RJ, Knight MA, Hara K, Tsuji S, Forrest SM, Storey E (2005) Spinocerebellar ataxia type 15.Cerebellum4:47-50
7 Goto J, Mikoshiba K (2011) Inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor-mediated calcium release in Purkinje cells: from molecular mechanism to behavior.Cerebellum10:820-833
8 Haacke A, Hartl FU, Breuer P (2007) Calpain inhibition is sufficient to suppress aggregation of polyglutamine-expanded ataxin-3.J Biol Chem282:18851-18856
9 Hanley JG (2006) Molecular mechanisms for regulation of AMPAR trafficking by PICK1. Biochem Soc Trans34:931-935
10 Hara K, Fukushima T, Suzuki T et al. (2004) Japanese SCA families with an unusual phenotype linked to a locus overlapping with SCA15 locus.Neurology62:648-651
11 Hara K, Shiga A, Nozaki H et al. (2008) Total deletion and a missense mutation of IP3R1 in Japanese SCA15 families.Neurology71:547-551
12 Hartmann J, Konnerth A (2005) Determinants of postsynaptic Ca2+ signaling in Purkinje neurons.Cell Calcium37:459-466
13 Hirota J, Ando H, Hamada K, Mikoshiba K (2003) Carbonic anhydrase-related protein is a novel binding protein for inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor type 1.Biochem J372:435-441
14 Hisatsune C, Kuroda Y, Akagi T, Torashima T, Hirai H, Hashikawa T, Inoue T, Mikoshiba K (2006) Inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor type 1 in granule cells, not in Purkinje cells, regulates the dendritic morphology of Purkinje cells through brain-derived neurotrophic factor production.J Neurosci26:10916-10924
15 Huang L, Warman J, Carter MT, Friend KL, Dudding TE, Schwartzentruber J, Zou R, Schofield PW, Douglas S, Bulman DE, Boycott KM (2012) Missense mutations in IP3R1 cause autosomal dominant congenital nonprogressive spinocerebellar ataxia.Orphanet J Rare Dis7:67


1 Huynh DP, Figueroa K, Hoang N, Pulst SM (2000) Nuclear localization or inclusion body
formation of ataxin-2 are not necessary for SCA 2 pathogenesis in mouse or human. Nat
Genet 26:44-50
2 Inoue T, Kato K, Kohda K, Mikoshiba K (1998) Type 1 inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor is
required for induction of long-term depression in cerebellar Purkinje neurons. J Neurosci
18:5366-5373
3 Itoh S, Ito K, Fujii S, Kaneko K, Kato K, Mikoshiba K, Kato H (2001) Neuronal plasticity in
hippocampal mossy fiber-CA 3 synapses of mice lacking the inositol-1,4,5-trisphosphate
type 1 receptor. Brain Res 901:237–246
4 Iwaki A, Kawano Y, Miura S et al. (2008) Heterozygous deletion of IP3R1, but not SUMF1, in
spinocerebellar ataxia type 16. J Med Genet 45:32-35
5 Jiao Y, Yan J, Zhao Y, Donahue LR, Beamer WG, Li X, Roe BA, Ledoux MS, Gu W (2005)
Carbonic anhydrase-related protein VIII deficiency is associated with a distinctive
lifelong gait disorder in waddles mice. Genetics 171:1239-1246
6 Kasumu AW, Liang X, Egorova P, Vorontsova D, Bezprozvanny I (2012) Chronic suppression
of inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor-mediated calcium signaling in cerebellar purkinje
cells alleviates pathological phenotype in spinocerebellar ataxia 2 mice. J Neurosci
32:12786-12796
7 Kaya N, Aldhalaan H, Al-Younes B et al. (2011) Phenotypical spectrum of cerebellar ataxia
associated with a novel mutation in the CA8 gene, encoding carbonic anhydrase (CA)
VIII. Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet 156B:826-834
8 Khodakhah K, Ogden D (1993) Functional heterogeneity of calcium release by inositol
trisphosphate in single Purkinje neurones, cultured cerebellar astrocytes, and peripheral
tissues. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 90:4976-4980
9 Klar J, Hisatsune C, Baig SM, Tariq M, Johansson AC, Rasool M, Malik NA, Ameur A,
Sugiura K, Feuk L, Mikoshiba K, Dahl N (2014) Abolished InsP3R2 function inhibits
sweat secretion in both humans and mice. J Clin Invest 124:4773-4780
10 Knight MA, Kennerson ML, Anney RJ, Matsura T, Nicholson GA, Salimi-Tari P, Gardner RJ,
Storey E, Forrest SM (2003) Spinocerebellar ataxia type 15 (SCA15) maps to 3p 24.2-3pter:
exclusion of the IP3R1 gene, the human orthologue of an ataxic mouse mutant. Neurobiol
Dis 13:147-157
11 Kozlov G, Safaeen N, Rosenauer A, Gehring K (2010) Structural basis of binding of
P-body-associated proteins GW182 and ataxin-2 by the Mle domain of poly(A)-binding
protein. J Biol Chem 285:13599-13606
12 La Spada AR, Taylor JP (2010) Repeat expansion disease: progress and puzzles in disease
pathogenesis. Nat Rev Genet 11:247-258
13 Lastres-Becker I, Rub U, Auburger G (2008) Spinocerebellar ataxia 2 (SCA2). Cerebellum
7:115-124


1 Liu J, Tang TS, Tu H, Nelson O, Herndon E, Huynh DP, Pulst SM, Bezprozvanny I (2009) Deranged calcium signaling and neurodegeneration in spinocerebellar ataxia type 2. J Neurosci 29:9148-9162
2 Magana JJ, Velazquez-Perez L, Cisneros B (2012) Spinocerebellar Ataxia Type 2: Clinical Presentation, Molecular Mechanisms, and Therapeutic Perspectives. Mol Neurobiol
3 Marelli C, van de Leemput J, Johnson JO et al. (2011) SCA 15 due to large IP3R1 deletions in a cohort of 333 white families with dominant ataxia. Arch Neurol 68:637-643
4 Matsumoto M, Nagata E (1999) Type 1 inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor knock-out mice: their phenotypes and their meaning in neuroscience and clinical practice. J Mol Med (Berl) 77:406-411
5 Matsumoto M, Nakagawa T, Inoue T et al. (1996) Ataxia and epileptic seizures in mice lacking type 1 inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor. Nature 379:168-171
6 McGurk L, Bonini NM (2012) Protein interacting with C kinase (PICK1) is a suppressor of spinocerebellar ataxia 3-associated neurodegeneration in Drosophila. Hum Mol Genet 21:76-84
7 Michikawa T, Miyawaki A, Furuichi T, Mikoshiba K (1996) Inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptors and calcium signaling. Crit Rev Neurobiol 10:39-55
8 Mikoshiba K (2007) IP3 receptor/Ca2+ channel: from discovery to new signaling concepts. J Neurochem 102:1426-1446
9 Mikoshiba K, Furuichi T, Miyawaki A et al. (1993) Structure and function of inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor. Ann N Y Acad Sci 707:178-197
10 Muchowski PJ, Wacker JL (2005) Modulation of neurodegeneration by molecular chaperones. Nat Rev Neurosci 6:11-22
11 Nagai Y, Inui T, Popiel HA, Fujikake N, Hasegawa K, Urade Y, Goto Y, Naiki H, Toda T (2007) A toxic monomeric conformer of the polyglutamine protein. Nat Struct Mol Biol 14:332-340
12 Nakanishi S, Maeda N, Mikoshiba K (1991) Immunohistochemical localization of an inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor, P400, in neural tissue: studies in developing and adult mouse brain. J Neurosci 11:2075-2086
13 Neuwald AF, Koonin EV (1998) Ataxin-2, global regulators of bacterial gene expression, and spliceosomal snRNP proteins share a conserved domain. J Mol Med (Berl) 76:3-5
14 Novak MJ, Sweeney MG, Li A et al. (2010) An IP3R1 gene deletion causes spinocerebellar ataxia 15/16: a genetic, clinical and radiological description. Mov Disord 25:2176-2182
15 Nucifora FCJ, Li SH, Danoff S, Ullrich A, Ross CA (1995) Molecular cloning of a cDNA for the human inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor type 1, and the identification of a third alternatively spliced variant. Brain Res Mol Brain Res 32:291-296
16 Obayashi M, Ishikawa K, Izumi Y, Takahashi M, Niimi Y, Sato N, Onodera O, Kaji R,
17 Nishizawa M, Mizusawa H (2012) Prevalence of inositol 1,4,5-triphosphate receptor


1 type 1 gene deletion, the mutation for spinocerebellar ataxia type 15, in Japan screened by
2 gene dosage.J Hum Genet 57:202-206
3 Ogura H, Matsumoto M, Mikoshiba K (2001) Motor coordination in mutant mice
4 heterozygous for the type 1 inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor. Behav Brain Res
5 122:215-219
6 Ohba C, Osaka H, Iai M, Yamashita S, Suzuki Y, Aida N, Shimozawa N, Takamura A, Doi H,
7 Tomita-Katsumoto A, Nishiyama K, Tsurusaki Y, Nakashima M, Miyake N, Eto Y,
8 Tanaka F, Matsumoto N, Saitsu H (2013) Diagnostic utility of whole exome sequencing
9 in patients showing cerebellar and/or vermis atrophy in childhood. Neurogenetics
10 14:225-232
11 Paulson H (2012) Machado-Joseph disease/spinocerebellar ataxia type 3. Handb Clin Neurol
12 103:437-449
13 Paulson HL, Perez MK, Trottier Y et al. (1997) Intracellular inclusions of expanded
14 polyglutamine protein in spinocerebellar ataxia type 3. Neuron 19:333-344
15 Ralser M, Albrecht M, Nonhoff U, Lengauer T, Lehrach H, Krobitsch S (2005) An integrative
16 approach to gain insights into the cellular function of human ataxin-2. J Mol Biol
17 346:203-214
18 Ralser M, Nonhoff U, Albrecht M, Lengauer T, Wanker EE, Lehrach H, Krobitsch S (2005)
19 Ataxin-2 and huntingtin interact with endophilin-A complexes to function in
20 plastin-associated pathways. Hum Mol Genet 14:2893-2909
21 Sasaki M, Ohba C, Iai M, Hirabayashi S, Osaka H, Hiraide T, Saitsu H, Matsumoto N (2015)
22 Sporadic infantile-onset spinocerebellar ataxia caused by missense mutations of the
23 inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor type 1 gene. J Neurol 262:1278-1284
24 Satterfield TF, Pallanck LJ (2006) Ataxin-2 and its Drosophila homolog, ATX2, physically
25 assemble with polyribosomes. Hum Mol Genet 15:2523-2532
26 Schlotawa L, Ennemann EC, Radhakrishnan K, Schmidt B, Chakrapani A, Christen HJ, Moser
27 H, Steinmann B, Dierks T, Gartner J (2011) SUMF1 mutations affecting stability and
28 activity of formylglycine generating enzyme predict clinical outcome in multiple
29 sulfatase deficiency. Eur J Hum Genet 19:253-261
30 Sharp AH, Nucifora FCJ, Blondel O, Sheppard CA, Zhang C, Snyder SH, Russell JT, Ryugo
31 DK, Ross CA (1999) Differential cellular expression of isoforms of inositol
32 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptors in neurons and glia in brain. J Comp Neurol 406:207-220
33 Shibata H, Huynh DP, Pulst SM (2000) A novel protein with RNA-binding motifs interacts
34 with ataxin-2. Hum Mol Genet 9:1303-1313
35 Stevanin G, Durr A, Brice A (2000) Clinical and molecular advances in autosomal dominant
36 cerebellar ataxias: from genotype to phenotype and physiopathology. Eur J Hum Genet
37 8:4-18

1 Storey E, Gardner RJ, Knight MA, Kennerson ML, Tuck RR, Forrest SM, Nicholson GA  
2 (2001) A new autosomal dominant pure cerebellar ataxia.Neurology57:1913-1915  
3 Street VA, Bosma MM, Demas VP, Regan MR, Lin DD, Robinson LC, Agnew WS, Tempel  
4 BL (1997) The type 1 inositol 1, 4, 5-trisphosphate receptor gene is altered in the  
5 opisthotonos mouse.J Neurosci17:635-645  
6 Stutzmann GE, Mattson MP (2011) Endoplasmic reticulum Ca(2+) handling in excitable cells  
7 in health and disease.Pharmacol Rev63:700-727  
8 Synofzik M, Beetz C, Bauer C et al. (2011) Spinocerebellar ataxia type 15: diagnostic  
9 assessment, frequency, and phenotypic features.J Med Genet48:407-412  
10 Takahashi T, Katada S, Onodera O (2010) Polyglutamine diseases: where does toxicity come  
11 from? what is toxicity? where are we going? J Mol Cell Biol2:180-191  
12 Taylor CW, da Fonseca PC, Morris EP (2004) IP(3) receptors: the search for structure. Trends  
13 Biochem Sci29:210-219  
14 Taylor CW, Genazzani AA, Morris SA (1999) Expression of inositol trisphosphate receptors.  
15 Cell Calcium26:237-251  
16 Tsuji S, Onodera O, Goto J, Nishizawa M (2008) Sporadic ataxias in Japan--a population-based  
17 epidemiological study.Cerebellum7:189-197  
18 Tu H, Miyakawa T, Wang Z, Glouchankova L, Iino M, Bezprozvanny I (2002) Functional  
19 characterization of the type 1 inositol 1, 4, 5-trisphosphate receptor coupling domain  
20 SII(+/-) splice variants and the Opisthotonos mutant form.Biophys J82:1995-2004  
21 Turkmen S, Guo G, Garshasbi M et al. (2009) CA8 mutations cause a novel syndrome  
22 characterized by ataxia and mild mental retardation with predisposition to quadrupedal  
23 gait.PLoS Genet5:e1000487  
24 van de Leemput J, Chandran J, Knight MA et al. (2007) Deletion at IP3R1 underlies ataxia in  
25 mice and spinocerebellar ataxia 15 in humans.PLoS Genet3:e108  
26 van de Loo S, Eich F, Nonis D, Auburger G, Nowock J (2009) Ataxin-2 associates with rough  
27 endoplasmic reticulum.Exp Neurol215:110-118  
28 Williams AJ, Paulson HL (2008) Polyglutamine neurodegeneration: protein misfolding  
29 revisited.Trends Neurosci31:521-528  
30 Yamada M, Sato T, Tsuji S, Takahashi H (2008) CAG repeat disorder models and human  
31 neuropathology: similarities and differences.Acta Neuropathol115:71-86  
32 Yamada M, Tsuji S, Takahashi H (2000) Pathology of CAG repeat diseases.Neuropathology  
33 20, 319–325  
34 Yamada N, Makino Y, Clark RA et al. (1994) Human inositol 1, 4, 5-trisphosphate type-1  
35 receptor, InsP3R1: structure, function, regulation of expression and chromosomal  
36 localization.Biochem J302:781-790  
37 Yamazaki H, Nozaki H, Onodera O, Michikawa T, Nishizawa M, Mikoshiba K (2011)  
38 Functional characterization of the P1059L mutation in the inositol 1, 4, 5-trisphosphate  
22

1. receptor type 1 identified in a Japanese SCA 15 family. Biochem Biophys Res Commun
2. 410:754-758
3. Zoghbi HY, Orr HT (2000) Glutamine repeats and neurodegeneration. Annu Rev Neurosci
4. 23:217-247
5.

Figure 1 (Tada M, et al.)

**A Extracellular**

- PMCA
- NCX
- TRPC
- nAChR
- VGCC
- NMDA-R
- Ca²⁺-permeable AMPA-R
- mGluR

**Cytoplasm**
- IP3
- Ca²⁺
- SERCA
- RyR
- IP3R
- Ca²⁺
- ER

**B**
- Ca²⁺
- ER
- Ca²⁺

**C**
- Ca²⁺
- IP3
- CARP
- IP3R
- Ca²⁺
- ER
- Ca²⁺
- IP3
- CARP
- IP3R
- Ca²⁺
- ER

**D**
- Ca²⁺
- IP3
- ATXN2
- IP3R
- Ca²⁺
- ER

**Figure 1**

Alterations of inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor (IP₃R)-mediated Ca²⁺ signaling in spinocerebellar ataxia type 2 (SCA2), type 3 (SCA3), type 15 (SCA15), and type 29 (SCA29), and cerebellar ataxia and mental retardation with or without quadrupedal locomotion 3 (CAMRQ3). A. Sources of Ca²⁺ influx include Ca²⁺-permeable α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid (AMPA) and N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) glutamate receptors, voltage-gated Ca²⁺ channels (VGCCs), nicotinic acetylcholine receptors (nAChR), and transient receptor potential type C (TRPC) channels. Ca²⁺ release from the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) into the cytoplasm is mediated by inositol triphosphate receptors (IP₃R) and ryanodine receptors (RyR). Inositol triphosphate (IP₃) can be generated by metabotropic glutamate receptors (mGluR). Sources of Ca²⁺ efflux are the sodium-calcium exchanger (NCX), the plasma membrane calcium ATPase (PMCA), and the sarcoplasmic/endoplasmic reticulum calcium ATPase (SERCA). B. In SCA15, the reduced IP₃R levels result in reduced IP₃R-mediated Ca²⁺ influx. C. In healthy individuals, the carbonic anhydrase-related protein VIII (CARP) binds to the modulatory domain of IP₃R and suppresses its affinity to IP₃ (left). In CAMRQ3, CARP cannot bind to IP₃R and enhances its affinity to IP₃, resulting in excessive Ca²⁺ influx (right). D. In SCA2 or SCA3, mutant ataxin-2 (ATXN2) or ataxin-3 (ATXN3) binds to the C-terminal region of IP₃R and enhances its affinity to IP₃, resulting in excessive Ca²⁺ influx.

Figure 2 (Tada M, et al.)

IP3-binding domain                      Coupling/Regulatory domain                  Transmembrane domain                     C-terminal tail

S277                                      T594
T267↓ SI                                  V494↓ N602
P1059↓ SIII                               V1553↓ SII

β-trefoil                                armadillo

1                                          436                                   576 600                                    2276                                 2590                                 2749

224 IRBIT-binding region                 1387 CARP-binding region                1647 ATP-binding site                    1773~1778 ataxin-2,
                                                                                                            1533~1538 ▪ Opt deletion            1732~1839 ataxin-3
                                                                                                            △18                              -binding region

Figure 2

Structural motifs of inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor type 1 (IP₃R1). IP₃R1 consists of three major domains, including the amino-terminal IP3-binding region, coupling/regulatory region, and transmembrane region. The structural features include alternative splicing sites SI (318–332), SII (1692–1731), and SIII (917/918). β-trefoil domain (1–435), armadillo repeat domain (436–600), IRBIT-binding region (224–604), carbonic anhydrase-related protein VIII (CARP)-binding region (1387–1647), Opt deletion (1732–1839), Δ18 deletion (1533–1538), ATP-binding site (1773–1778), and ataxin-1-, ataxin-2-binding regions (2627–2736). The point mutation sites of previously reported patients with SA15 (V494 and P1059) and SCA29 (T267, S277, T594, N602, and V1553) are shown.

Highlights (for review)

Modulation of the intracellular calcium concentration is a ubiquitous signaling system involved in the control of numerous biological processes in a wide variety of cells. Inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate (IP₃) receptors (IP₃Rs), which act as calcium release channels in the ER membrane, play a key role in the regulation of intracellular calcium concentration. IP₃R type 1 (IP₃R1) is the major neuronal IP₃R isoform in the central nervous system and particularly abundant in cerebellar Purkinje cells. Heterozygous deletions or missense mutations in *ITPR1*, which encodes IP₃R1, result in autosomal dominantly inherited spinocerebellar ataxias (SCAs), including SCA types 15 (SCA15) and 29 (SCA29). In addition, homozygous missense mutations in carbonic anhydrase-related protein VIII (CARP), which suppresses the ability of IP₃ to bind to IP₃R1, cause a recessively inherited ataxia with mild cognitive impairment with/without quadrupedal gait. Moreover, cytosolic calcium overload with excessive IP₃R1 activity has been implicated in the pathogenesis of other SCAs, including SCA types 2 (SCA2) and 3 (SCA3). These facts indicate that dysregulation of IP₃R-mediated calcium signaling is linked to the pathogenesis of SCAs.

This topic is quite interesting and important for understanding the pathogenic mechanisms underlying spinocerebellar ataxias and developing new therapeutic strategies for the fatal disorders. In this article, we focus on the molecular basis of SCA15 and SCA29, which are caused by mutations in *ITPR1*. In addition, we discuss other SCAs whose pathogenesis may be linked to aberrant activation of IP₃R-mediated Ca²⁺ signaling.
