
Crystal structure of the oligomeric form of the Lassa virus matrix protein Z

Kathryn M. Hastie${}^{1}$, Michelle Zandonatti${}^{1}$, Tong Liu${}^{2,\S}$, Sheng Li${}^{2}$, Virgil L. Woods, Jr.${}^{2,\P}$, and Erica Ollmann Saphire${}^{1,3,*}$

${}^{1}$Dept. of Immunology and Microbial Science,

${}^{2}$Department of Medicine, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093 USA

${}^{3}$The Skaggs Institute for Chemical Biology, The Scripps Research Institute. 10550 North Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, CA 92037 USA.

$\S$ current affiliation: Sequenom, San Diego, CA 92121

$\P$ deceased

* to whom correspondence should be addressed: erica@scripps.edu

Abstract:

The arenavirus matrix protein Z is highly multifunctional and occurs in both monomeric and oligomeric forms. The crystal structure of a dodecamer of Z from Lassa virus presented here illustrates a ring-like structure with a highly basic center. Mutagenesis demonstrates that the dimeric interface within the dodecamer and a Lys-Trp-Lys triad at the center of the ring are important for oligomerization. This structure provides an additional template to explore the many functions of Z.

Importance:

The arenavirus Lassa causes hundreds of thousands of infections each year, many of which develop into fatal hemorrhagic fever. The arenavirus matrix protein Z is highly multifunctional, having at least four distinct roles in the virus life cycle. Z exists in both monomeric and oligomeric forms, each of which likely serves a specific function in the viral life cycle. Here we present the dodecameric form of Lassa Z and demonstrate that Z forms a “wreath” with a highly basic center. This structure, combined with that of monomeric Z, now provide a pair of critical templates by which the multiple roles of Z in the viral life cycle may be interpreted.

Introduction
The family Arenaviridae comprises more than 20 different viral species of which

at least nine cause human disease. Of these, Lassa virus (LASV), an Old World

arenavirus, poses a particularly acute threat due to its endemicity in Western Africa and

its propensity to be transported outside of Africa. For all arenaviruses, replication takes

place in the cytoplasm of infected cells and budding occurs at the plasma membrane.

The matrix protein Z of the arenaviruses acts as a bridge between the viral surface

glycoprotein (GPC), the viral ribonucleoprotein (NP) and host cell budding machinery (9-

11). Z contains an N-terminal myristoylation site for anchoring into the cell membrane, a

central zinc-binding RING motif (12, 13), and C-terminal canonical late-domain motifs,

which are essential for budding (10, 11). Z has also been shown to inhibit both viral and

host cell translation by reducing the affinity of the translation initiation factor eIF4E for

the m7GTP cap of mRNA (14, 15). Furthermore, Z negatively regulates the replication

and transcription of the viral genome (16). Lastly, arenavirus Z proteins have recently

been shown to be involved in the anti-immune response through an interaction between

the N-terminal domain of Z and the CARD domains of RIG-I-like receptors (17).

Previous work demonstrated that the Z proteins of both LASV and the related

arenavirus lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus (LCMV) are initially expressed as

monomers, but assemble spherical “body” structures both *in vitro* (18) and in the

cytoplasm and nucleus of infected cells (19).

The structure of monomeric LASV Z has previously been determined by NMR

(20, 21). The NMR structure provided important insights into the overall structure of Z

and suggested a mechanism for interaction with eIF4E. However, the structure by which

Z monomers self-assemble into oligomeric or “body” forms is still unclear. In order to

3
gain insight into how LASV Z self-assembles, we determined the structure of oligomeric
LASV Z by X-ray crystallography to 2.9 Å.

Materials and Methods

Plasmids.
Full length LASV-Z Josiah in pGEX6p-1 (gift from Juan Carlos de la Torre, The Scripps
Research Institute, La Jolla, California) was engineered with a TEV protease site in
place of the prescission protease site using site-directed mutagenesis to generate
LASV-GST-Z-TEV. LASV-GST-Z-TEV mutants were generated using site-directed
mutagenesis. WT Z and mutants were subcloned into phCMV to generate C-terminally
tagged LASV Z (Z-HA) for use in budding experiments.

Expression and Purification.
WT and mutant LASV GST-Z-TEV were expressed in Rosetta 2(DE3)pLysS
Escherichia coli cells (Novagen) at 37°C and grown in 1L cultures to an OD<sub>600</sub> of 0.4.
Cells were then induced with 500µM IPTG (supplemented with 100µM ZnCl) and
incubated overnight at 25°C with shaking at 300rpm. Expression cultures with harvested
via centrifugation and lysed in 50mM Tris, pH 8.0, 300mM NaCl, and one EDTA-free
complete protease inhibitor tablet (Roche) using an M-110L Laboratory Microfluidizer
(Micro-fluidics). The lysate was cleared by centrifugation and the supernatant was
loaded onto glutathione sepharose 4B beads (GE Healthcare). After the resin was
washed with 10 column volumes of wash buffer (50mM Tris, pH 8.0, 300mM NaCl) the
GST-fusion protein was eluted with 20mM reduced-glutathione in wash buffer. Purified

83 protein was cleaved with a 1:400 ratio of TEV protease:GST-Z-TEV overnight at RT.
84 The cleaved protein was subsequently dialyzed into 25mM Tris, pH 8.5 and 25mM NaCl
85 and further purified by anion exchange, where pure LASV Z was collected in the flow-
86 thru. Following ion exchange purification, the pH of the buffer was adjusted to 7.5 and
87 LASV Z was concentrated to greater than 10mg/ml, allowed to sit for at least 24 hours
88 at 4°C, and then purified on a Superdex-200 GL 10/30 (GE Biosciences) equilibrated
89 with 10mM Tris, pH 7.5 and 150mM NaCl. Fractions from the two major peaks of WT
90 LASV Z, corresponding to a monomer and dodecamer, were used in crystallization trials.
91 
92 Crystallization and Data Collection.
93 Purified LASV Z was screened for crystallization using a TOPAZ microfluidic system
94 (Fluidigm). Hits were translated to hanging drop vapor diffusion using a 1:1 ratio of well
95 solution to protein at 8-12mg/ml. Both the monomeric and dodecameric fractions
96 crystallized in 300-400mM ammonium sulfate, 100mM Hepes pH 7.5 and 17% PEG
97 3350, with crystals reaching full size in 1-3 days. However, only the dodecamer
98 produced diffraction-quality crystals. Crystals were harvested and cryoprotected in 15%
99 glycerol and flash cooled in liquid nitrogen. Crystals belonging to the space group R 32
100 diffracted to 2.9Å at Beam Line 5.2.1 of the Advanced Light Source. A fluorescence scan
101 was performed to confirm the presence of zinc, and data were collected at 1.2827Å
102 corresponding the Zinc-K-edge peak.
103 
104 Data Processing and Structure Determination.

105 Data were indexed, integrated, and scaled in space group R 32 using d*TREK
106 (Rigaku) (1). Structure determination using SAD and subsequent rounds of refinement
107 were carried using PHENIX(2, 3). Iterative cycles of model building were performed
108 using COOT(4). 5% of the reflections were set aside for \( R_{\text{free}} \) calculations. The final
109 structure has an \( R_{\text{free}} \) of 20.5% and a final \( R \)-factor of 18.5% using all the data to 2.9 Å
110 resolution.
111
112 Size-Exclusion Multiangle Light Scattering
113 Purified Z proteins were separated on a Superose 6 gel filtration column (GE
114 Healthcare) pre-equilibrated with buffer (20 mM Tris pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl) and coupled
115 in-line with a miniDAWN TREOS followed by an Optilab T-rEX refractometer (Wyatt
116 Technologies). Data processing and absolute molecular mass calculations were
117 performed using ASTRA software (Wyatt Technologies).
118
119 Deuterium Exchange Mass Spectrometry
120 Prior to conducting the exchange experiments, quench conditions that produced
121 an optimal pepsin fragmentation pattern were established as previously described (5, 6).
122 Functionally deuterated, non-deuterated and equilibrium-deuterated peptides were
123 prepared. Functional deuteration of LASV Z was performed by diluting 2 μl of a 5.0 mg
124 mL⁻¹ stock solution of LASV Z (150 mM NaCl, 10 mM Tris, pH 7.5) into 6 μl of D₂O buffer
125 containing 8.3 mM Tris, 150 mM NaCl, pH 7.15 at 0°C. At 10 s and 1000 s, 12 μl of
126 optimized quench (0.8% formic acid, 16.6% glycerol and 1 M GuHCl) was added and
127 then samples were frozen at -80°C. Non-deuterated samples were prepared by

128 incubation in H₂O buffer containing 8.3mM Tris, 150mM NaCl, pH 7.15 at 0°C.
129 Equilibrium-deuterated samples were prepared by incubation in D₂O buffer containing
130 0.5% formic acid for 3 days at 25°C.
131 The samples were later thawed at 5°C (7) and passed over an AL-20-pepsin
132 column (16µL bed volume (Sigma)), at a flow rate of 20 µl min⁻¹. The resulting peptides
133 were collected on a C18 trap (Michrom MAGIC C18AQ 0.2 × 2) and separated using a
134 C18 reverse phase column (Michrom MAGIC C18AQ 0.2 × 50) running a linear gradient
135 of 8–48% solvent B (80% acetonitrile and 0.01% TFA) over 30 min with column effluent
136 directed into an LCQ mass spectrometer (Thermo-Finnigan LCQ Classic). Data were
137 acquired in both data-dependent MS1:MS2 mode and MS1 profile mode. SEQUEST
138 software (Thermo Finnigan Inc.) was used to identify the sequence of the peptide ions.
139 The centroids of the isotopic envelopes of nondeuterated, functionally deuterated, and
140 equilibrium-deuterated peptides were measured using DXMS Explorer (Sierra Analytics
141 Inc., Modesto, CA), and then converted to corresponding deuteration levels with
142 corrections for back-exchange (8).
143 
144 Results
145 Crystal structure of oligomeric Z. Size-exclusion chromatography coupled with multi-
146 angle light scattering (SEC-MALS) demonstrates that LASV Z exists in monomeric and
147 dodecameric forms (Figure 1). Crystals of the dodecamer grow in 300-400 mM
148 ammonium sulfate, 100 mM HEPES pH 7.5 and 17% PEG 3350 and belong to the
149 space group R 32. The structure of dodecameric Z was determined to 2.9 Å using
150 phases obtained from the two zinc atoms inherent to monomeric Z (Table 1). 5% of the

151 reflections were set aside for \( R_{\text{free}} \) calculations. The final structure has an \( R_{\text{free}} \) of 22.3%
152 and a final \( R \)-factor of 20.5%.
153 The asymmetric unit of the crystal structure consists of an anti-parallel dimer of Z
154 with well-defined density for residues 26–73 in chain A and 26–75 in chain B, which
155 correspond to the RING domain of Z (Fig. 1A). Each Z monomer contains two zinc-
156 binding sites, an \( \alpha \) helix, two anti-parallel \( \beta \) strands and two loop regions: residues 31–
157 40 (loop 1) and residues 61–70 (loop 2). The dimer is formed by hydrophobic
158 interactions between the \( \alpha \)-helices of its two component monomers, A and B (Fig. 1C).
159 The dodecamer is assembled from six dimers related by crystallographic
160 symmetry. Overall, the dodecamer resembles a “wreath” with neighboring dimers in
161 alternating orientations: one up, one down (Fig. 1B). Thus, there does not appear to be
162 a “top” and “bottom” to the ring, but rather two equivalent bi-functional faces—each
163 having three flexible N-termini and three flexible C-termini. The wreath of six A-B dimers
164 is stabilized by a hydrogen bond network between adjacent and crystallographically
165 equivalent chains (i.e. A to A′ and B to B′), and also by a hydrophobic interface
166 surrounding zinc-binding sites I and II between adjacent, non-equivalent chains from
167 different asymmetric units (i.e. A to B′) (Fig. 1C). The outside of the wreath is 70 Å in
168 diameter and uncharged. The central chamber of the ring is 38 Å in diameter and is
169 ringed by repeating triads of K32, W35 and K68. In each triad, the lysine pair
170 sandwiches the tryptophan rings (Fig. 1C), making the inner portion of the dodecamer
171 extremely basic (Fig. 1B).
172

173 Comparison to the monomeric form of Z. Z from the oligomeric (crystal) structure
174 and the monomeric (NMR) structure superimpose with an r.m.s.d. of 2.4 Å. The primary
175 differences can be mapped to three areas: (a) Loop 1 residues K32, W35 and F36
176 adopt different orientations and locations between oligomer and monomer; (b) the α
177 helix in the oligomer of Z is extended (residues 51–60 vs. 51–57 in the NMR monomer);
178 and (c) the C-terminal tail lies in close apposition to zinc site 2 (Zn2) in the oligomer but
179 is more extended in the monomer (Fig. 2A). Repositioning of the C-terminal tail upon
180 oligomerization coincides with isomerization of P72 (Fig. 2A, inset) and results in a shift
181 in the position of Zn2. Proline isomerization is catalyzed by prolyl isomerases in the cell,
182 and without such acceleration is a slow process. Indeed, we find that oligomerization of
183 Z is a concentration and time-dependent process.
184 The NMR-determined structure of monomeric Z is unable, as a static unit, to fit
185 into the oligomer observed via X-ray crystallography due to numerous clashes of both
186 the backbone and side chains. Both backbone and side chains must rotate and
187 translate to form the dodecahedral ring (Fig 2B). Hence, conformational changes are
188 essential for Z oligomerization.
189 The differences between the monomeric and dodecameric Z structures are
190 primarily located in the alpha helix, loop 1 and the C-terminal tail. To determine whether
191 these regions “breathed” or showed flexibility in their positions in solution, we analyzed
192 the LASV Z dodecamer by deuterium exchange mass spectrometry. This method
193 measures the ability of peptide amide hydrogens to freely and reversibly exchange with
194 solvent deuterium. Hydrogens for which mobility is restricted (by conformational
195 anchoring and/or ligand binding) exchange more slowly. Hydrogens for which mobility is

196 unrestricted (conformationally mobile) exchange more rapidly. The three regions that
197 change conformation in dodecamer assembly (extension of the α-helix, loop 1 and the c-
198 terminal tail) show slow H/D exchange kinetics. In contrast, the first four ordered
199 residues of LASV Z (residues 26-30) and the loop around Zn2 (residues 64-68) show
200 moderate to higher H/D kinetics (Figure 4). The extreme N- and C-termini of Z (residues
201 1-25 and residues 76-99) showed very fast H/D exchange rates, indicating these
202 regions are highly flexible. Indeed, residues 1-25 and 76-99 are disordered in the crystal
203 structure and in solution studies by NMR. These results suggest that the dodecamer is
204 a stable unit once formed, and does not interconvert between the monomer and
205 dodecamer on the time scales we studied.
206 
207 Dimerization and the K-W-K triad are important for oligomerization. Wild-type Z
208 elutes as monomers and SDS-resistant dodecamers when purified via size exclusion
209 chromatography. Although the crystallographic asymmetric unit and basic building block
210 of the dodecamer is a dimer of A and B protomers, such dimers are not observed in
211 solution. The dimer is likely a short-lived assembly intermediate.
212 To determine which residues might regulate formation of the Z ring, we made
213 mutations to LASV Z and produced these proteins in E. coli. Purified Z was subjected to
214 SEC-MALS analysis to determine the average molar mass of each mutant (Table 2).
215 We focused our attention on the α-helical dimeric interface and on the residues that shift
216 conformation between the monomer and dodecameric Z structures: the K32-W35-K68
217 triad that forms the center of the ring and P72 that isomerizes in the C-terminal tail. As
218 expected, WT Z elutes as two peaks that correspond to monomeric and dodecameric Z.

219 The mutation K32A (in the KWK triad) produces Z protein that also elutes as monomer
220 and dodecamer. However K32A-bearing Z consistently oligomerizes more quickly and
221 at lower concentrations than WT. In contrast, W35A-bearing Z elutes as a single peak,
222 shifted ~1 ml from that of the WT monomer. While the elution volume of W35A
223 compared to size-exclusion standards alone would suggest that the ZW35A mutant
224 forms a dimer, the more accurate MALS analysis demonstrates that W35A produces
225 only monomeric Z (Table 2). The shift in elution volume may result from differing
226 interaction with the column or a change in shape. Mutations L56R (A-B dimer interface)
227 or K68A (KWK triad) produce Zs that elute as only monomer, with elution volume
228 consistent with WT and K32A-generated monomers. Lastly, mutation of P72 to alanine
229 results in almost exclusively oligomeric Z. SEC-MALS analysis shows that the P72A-
230 bearing Z oligomer has a stoichiometry similar to that of WTZ, although this mutant
231 elutes slightly before WTZ and the peak is broader, indicating a more polydisperse
232 sample. In addition, the P72A mutation renders oligomeric Z sensitive to SDS. Based on
233 these results, we conclude that both the KWK triad and the A-B dimer interface are
234 important for oligomerization. Further, isomerization of P72 may provide an energy
235 barrier to control formation of the ring.
236 
237 Discussion
238 The structure of the Lassa virus matrix protein in a stable, wreath-like
239 dodecameric assembly presented here illustrates the conformational changes required
240 for oligomerization. Previous NMR and mutational studies of LASV Z and eIF4E
241 demonstrated that residues F30, K32, S33, W35, N38 and K39 of Z are involved in

242 interaction with eIF4E (20). These residues are inaccessible in the oligomeric crystal
243 structure, but accessible in the monomeric NMR structure. Curiously, analytical
244 ultracentrifugation, SEC, and electron microscopy studies of the closely related LCMV Z
245 protein all indicate that eIF4E can interact with both oligomeric and monomeric forms of
246 LCMV Z (22). Further, assembly of LCMV Z into oligomeric bodies greatly increases its
247 ability to regulate eIF4E (22). It is worth noting, however, that analytical
248 ultracentrifugation studies of LCMV Z demonstrate that it forms 24-member “bodies”
249 (18), as opposed to the 12-member oligomer observed here for Lassa Z. Hence, either
250 LCMV Z may form a different oligomeric structure to interact with eIF4E, or eIF4E may
251 bind to some yet-to-be-determined oligomeric structure of arenavirus Z that is distinct
252 from the structure presented here.
253 Of particular interest is the highly basic nature of the inside of the dodecameric
254 ring. A negatively charged binding partner has not been previously identified for any
255 arenavirus Z. One potential partner is RNA, as has been observed bound to the center
256 of the oligomeric ring forms of the matrix proteins VP 40 from Ebola virus (23) and M
257 from Borna disease virus (24). Our dodecamer assembles from purified monomer. Both
258 the purified monomer and its dodecamer have A 260/280 ratios of 0.74, suggesting very
259 little, if any, nucleic acid co-purifies with the protein. Further, incubation of the ring with a
260 6-nucleotide single-stranded RNA and re-purification via size-exclusion did not result in
261 a shift in the A 260/280 value of the eluting protein (data not shown). Previous work by
262 Kranzuch and Whelan demonstrated MACV Z forms a 1:1 interaction with the
263 polymerase to inhibit RNA synthesis and that Z does not directly bind to RNA to achieve
264 this function (25). The RNA-binding ring form of Ebola virus VP 40 appears to be

265 involved in transcriptional regulation rather than matrix assembly (26). However, work
266 by Capul, et al. demonstrated that the K68A mutation in LASV Z (which renders purified
267 Z monomeric and reduces basic charge at the center) results in greater than wild-type
268 levels of negative regulation of a LCMV minigenome, while the P72A mutation (which
269 accelerates ring formation) impairs the ability of Z to negatively regulate the expression
270 of the minigenome (27). Our findings that the K68A mutation results in monomeric Z
271 and the P72A mutation results in oligomeric Z suggests that for LASV, like MACV, the
272 regulatory role of Z is driven by monomeric Z and that the monomer does not bind to
273 RNA. Thus, the basic interface of the LASV Z ring may point to yet another, as-yet
274 unknown, binding partner and/or function for Z, such as interaction with the negatively
275 charged phospholipids of the cellular bilayer.
276 The exact role or roles of this conformationally rearranged dodecamer of Z
277 remains unknown. However, the fact that this oligomeric ring is built through
278 rearrangement of tertiary and quaternary structure is not surprising, as Z may follow in
279 the same vein as other viral matrix “transformer” proteins (23, 26, 28). Indeed, the four-
280 gene genome of the arenaviruses has an even greater need for highly plastic
281 polypeptides that can adopt different structures to achieve multiple functions. The
282 structure of Z presented here, combined with that of the previously determined
283 monomer, provide a pair of templates by which the separate and critical roles of Z may
284 be interpreted. These conformations of Z and point mutations which accelerate (K32A)
285 or prevent (W53A, L56R and K68A) oligomerization, will serve as a guide for further
286 biological experimentation to explore how the structures of Z confer its multiple
287 functions in the virus lifecycle.

288

289 Acknowledgements

290 The authors wish to acknowledge the Viral Hemorrhagic Fever Research Consortium

291 and contract HHSN272200900049C (BAA-NIAID-DAIT-NIHAI 2008031), an

292 Investigators in Pathogenesis of Infectious Diseases award from the Burroughs

293 Wellcome Fund, and the Skaggs Institute for Chemical Biology, for support; and

294 Beamline 5.0.2 of the Advanced Light Source (Berkeley, CA) for data collection. The

295 authors declare no conflicts of interest. Crystallographic structure factors and

296 coordinates are deposited into the Protein Data Bank with accession number XXXX.

297

298

References

1. Pflugrath JW. 1999. The finer things in X-ray diffraction data collection. Acta Crystallogr D Biol Crystallogr 55:1718-1725.
2. Adams PD, Afonine PV, Bunkoczi G, Chen VB, Davis IW, Echols N, Headd JJ, Hung LW, Kapral GJ, Grosse-Kunstleve RW, McCoy AJ, Moriarty NW, Oeffner R, Read RJ, Richardson DC, Richardson JS, Terwilliger TC, Zwart PH. 2010. PHENIX: a comprehensive Python-based system for macromolecular structure solution. Acta Crystallogr D Biol Crystallogr 66:213-221.
3. Panjikar S.P., V., Lamzin, V., Weiss, M.S., Tucker, P.A. 2009. On the combination of molecular replacement and single anomalous diffraction phasing for automated structure determination. Acta Cryst D65:1089-1097.
4. Emsley P, Lohkamp B, Scott WG, Cowtan K. 2010. Features and development of Coot. Acta Crystallogr D Biol Crystallogr 66:486-501.
5. Li S, Tsalkova T, White MA, Mei FC, Liu T, Wang D, Woods VL, Jr., Cheng X. 2011. Mechanism of Intracellular cAMP Sensor Epac 2 Activation: cAMP-INDUCED CONFORMATIONAL CHANGES IDENTIFIED BY AMIDE HYDROGEN/DEUTERIUM EXCHANGE MASS SPECTROMETRY (DXMS). J Biol Chem 286:17889-17897.
6. Hsu S, Kim Y, Li S, Durrant ES, Pace RM, Woods VL, Jr., Gentry MS. 2009. Structural insights into glucan phosphatase dynamics using amide hydrogen-deuterium exchange mass spectrometry. Biochemistry 48:9891-9902.
7. Hamuro Y, Anand GS, Kim JS, Juliano C, Stranz DD, Taylor SS, Woods VL, Jr. 2004. Mapping intersubunit interactions of the regulatory subunit (RIalpha) in the type I holoenzyme of protein kinase A by amide hydrogen/deuterium exchange mass spectrometry (DXMS). J Mol Biol 340:1185-1196.
8. Zhang Z, Smith DL. 1993. Determination of amide hydrogen exchange by mass spectrometry: a new tool for protein structure elucidation. Protein Sci 2:522-531.
9. Capul AA, Perez M, Burke E, Kunz S, Buchmeier MJ, de la Torre JC. 2007. Arenavirus Z-glycoprotein association requires Z myristoylation but not functional RING or late domains. J Virol 81:9451-9460.
10. Perez M, Craven RC, de la Torre JC. 2003. The small RING finger protein Z drives arenavirus budding: implications for antiviral strategies. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 100:12978-12983.
11. Strecker T, Eichler R, Meulen J, Weissenhorn W, Dieter Klenk H, Garten W, Lenz O. 2003. Lassa virus Z protein is a matrix protein and sufficient for the release of virus-like particles [corrected]. J Virol 77:10700-10705.
12. Salvato MS, Schweighofer KJ, Burns J, Shimomaye EM. 1992. Biochemical and immunological evidence that the 11 kDa zinc-binding protein of lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus is a structural component of the virus. Virus Res 22:185-198.
13. Salvato MS, Shimomaye EM. 1989. The completed sequence of lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus reveals a unique RNA structure and a gene for a zinc finger protein. Virology 173:1-10.
14. Campbell Dwyer EJ, Lai H, MacDonald RC, Salvato MS, Borden KL. 2000. The lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus RING protein Z associates with eukaryotic initiation

factor4E and selectively represses translation in a RING-dependent manner. J Virol 74:3293-3300.

15. Kentsis A, Dwyer EC, Perez JM, Sharma M, Chen A, Pan ZQ, Borden KL. 2001. The RING domains of the promyelocytic leukemia protein PML and the arenaviral protein Z repress translation by directly inhibiting translation initiation factor eIF4E. Mol Biol 312:609-623.

16. Cornu TI, de la Torre JC. 2001. RING finger Z protein of lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus (LCMV) inhibits transcription and RNA replication of an LCMV S-segment minigenome. J Virol 75:9415-9426.

17. Xing J, Ly H, Liang Y. 2015. The Z proteins of pathogenic but not nonpathogenic arenaviruses inhibit RIG-I-like receptor-dependent interferon production. J Virol 89:2944-2955.

18. Kentsis A, Gordon RE, Borden KL. 2002. Self-assembly properties of a model RING domain. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 99:667-672.

19. Borden KL, Campbelldwyer EJ, Carlile GW, Djavani M, Salvato MS. 1998. Two RING finger proteins, the oncoprotein PML and the arenavirus Z protein, colocalize with the nuclear fraction of the ribosomal P proteins. J Virol 72:3819-3826.

20. Volpon L, Osborne MJ, Capul AA, de la Torre JC, Borden KLB. 2010. Structural characterization of the Z RING-eIF4E complex reveals a distinct mode of control for eIF4E. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 107:5441-5446.

21. Volpon L, Osborne MJ, Borden KL. 2008. NMR assignment of the arenaviral protein Z from Lassa fever virus. Biomol NMR Assign 2:81-84.

22. Kentsis A, Gordon RE, Borden KL. 2002. Control of biochemical reactions through supramolecular RING domain self-assembly. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 99:15404-15409.

23. Gomis-Ruth FX, Dessen A, Timmins J, Bracher A, Kolesnikowa L, Becker S, Klenk HD, Weissenhorn W. 2003. The matrix protein VP 40 from Ebola virus octamerizes into pore-like structures with specific RNA binding properties. Structure 11:423-433.

24. Neumann P, Lieber D, Meyer S, Dautel P, Kerth A, Kraus I, Garten W, Stubbs MT. 2009. Crystal structure of the Born disease virus matrix protein (BDV-M) reveals ssRNA binding properties. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 106:3710-3715.

25. Kranzusch PJ, Whelan SP. 2011. Arenavirus Z protein controls viral RNA synthesis by locking a polymerase-promoter complex. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 108:19743-19748.

26. Bornholdt ZA, Noda T, Abelson DM, Halfmann P, Wood MR, Kawaoka Y, Saphire EO. 2013. Structural rearrangement of ebola virus VP 40 begets multiple functions in the virus life cycle. Cell 154:763-774.

27. Capul AA, de la Torre JC, Buchmeier MJ. 2011. Conserved residues in Lassa fever virus Z protein modulate viral infectivity at the level of the ribonucleoprotein. J Virol 85:3172-3178.

28. Dessen A, Volchkov V, Dolnik O, Klenk HD, Weissenhorn W. 2000. Crystal structure of the matrix protein VP 40 from Ebola virus. EMBO J 19:4228-4236.

29. Wen J, Arakawa T, Philo JS. 1996. Size-exclusion chromatography with on-line light-scattering, absorbance, and refractive index detectors for studying proteins and their interactions. Anal Biochem 240:155-166.

30. Baker NA, Sept D, Joseph S, Holst MJ, McCammon JA. 2001. Electrostatics of nanosystems: application to microtubules and the ribosome. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 98:10037-10041.

Figure Legends

Figure 1. SEC-MALS analysis of wild-type and mutant Z proteins. Light-scattering analysis of each protein was used to determine the absolute molar mass for each peak (29). Stoichiometries for each protein were determined using the molar mass calculated for the monomeric form. Some mutations yield only one peak (monomer), while WT and others also yield dodecamers. The exclusion volume of the column is indicated by an arrow.

Figure 2. Structure of the oligomeric form of LASV Z. (A) The asymmetric unit is comprised of a dimer of Z, in which one monomer is colored yellow and the other blue. Although the construct used for crystallization encodes full-length Z, only residues 26-73 are ordered in monomer A and residues 26-75 are ordered in monomer B. Bound zinc atoms, two per monomer, are illustrated by grey spheres. (B) Above, crystallographic symmetry generates the dodecameric “wreath”, comprised of six dimers of Z. Below, the electrostatic surface potential of oligomeric Z calculated using APBS (30) shows the center of the wreath is highly basic. Positive surface is colored blue; negative surface is colored red with significant limits of ±10 kT/e.b. (C) The four interfaces of oligomeric LASV Z. The underlying structure of the basic inner surface of the wreath includes residues K32, W35 and K68. Dimerization of Z is mediated through hydrophobic

interactions between the alpha helix of each monomer. A hydrogen bond network forms

the hydrophilic interface between related monomers (A to A' and B to B'). Interactions

between adjacent dimers (A to B and B'; B to A and A') are mediated through a

hydrophobic interface.

Figure 3. Comparison of the monomeric and oligomeric Z structures. (A) The

monomeric NMR structure of Z (magenta, PDB code 2KO5) is superimposed on one

copy of Z in the dodecamer (blue). The primary differences can be mapped to the

backbone and side chains of loop 1 residues K32, W35 and F36 (right), an extension of

the alpha helix (left), and the location of the C-terminal tail and position of the second

Zn-binding site (left). Repositioning of the tail results in isomerization of P72 (inset). (B)

Left: Superimposition of four copies of the monomeric NMR structure of LASV Z

(magenta and green) onto the dodecamer reveals that the conformation of monomeric Z

is incompatible with dodecamerization. W35 and F36 of one monomer (A and A';

magenta) sterically clash with the alpha helix and C-terminal tail, respectively, of the

opposing monomer (B and B'; green). These regions are indicated with arrows. Right:

four copies of the X-ray structure of LASV Z (blue and yellow) are shown for comparison.

Surface representation is shown for only one “dimer” of the four copies for clarity.

Figure 4. Deuterium exchange mass spectrometry analysis of the Z oligomer. Top:

Ten- and 1000-second amide hydrogen-deuterium exchange maps for LASV Z.

Exchange rates are colored from blue (slow-exchanging rates) to red (fast-exchanging

434 amides). Bottom: The cartoon representation of one-third of the LASV Z dodecamer is
435 colored based on the ten-second exchange rates.

Table 1. Data collection, phasing and refinement statistics (SAD) for the crystal structure of dodecameric Z

| Dodecameric Z, Zn Peak |
|------------------------|
| **Data collection**     |
| Space group            | R3₂                     |
| Cell dimensions        |                         |
| $a, b, c (\AA)$        | 116.89, 116.89, 82.53    |
| $\alpha, \beta, \gamma (^{\circ})$ | 90, 90, 120          |
| Wavelength ($\AA$)     | 1.2827                   |
| Resolution ($\AA$)     | 38.22-2.90 (3.0-2.9)      |
| $R_{\text{merge}}$     | 0.074 (0.390)            |
| $I/\sigma(I)$          | 10.2 (2.8)               |
| Completeness (%)       | 99.8 (100.0)             |
| Redundancy             | 4.8 (4.73)               |

| **Refinement**         |
| Resolution ($\AA$)     | 38.22-2.90 (3.66-2.9)     |
| No. unique reflections | 4923                      |
| $R_{\text{work}}/R_{\text{free}}$ | 18.26/19.30 |
| Ramachandran favored (%) | 96.00                    |
| Ramachandran outliers (%) | 1.00                    |
| No. atoms              |                           |
| Protein                | 822                       |
| Ligand/ion             | 4                         |
| Water                  | 2                         |
| $B$ values             |                           |
| Protein                | 89.00                     |
| Ligand/ion             | 94.80                     |
| Water                  | 69.90                     |
| R.m.s deviations       |                           |
| Bond lengths ($\AA$)   | 0.005                     |
| Bond angles ($^{\circ}$) | 1.110                    |

A

|  |  |  |  |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| 1.2 |  |  |  |  |
| 1 |  |  |  |  |
| 0.8 |  |  |  |  |
| 0.6 |  |  |  |  |
| 0.4 |  |  |  |  |
| 0.2 |  |  |  |  |
| 0 |  |  |  |  |

Column volume (mL)

LASVZ WT
LASVZK32A
LASVZW35A
LASVZL56R
LASVZK68A
LASVZP72A

B

|  | Expected mass for monomer (kDa) | Elution Volume (mLs) | Average mass from SEC-MALS/RI (kDa) | Calculated stoichiometry | Elution Volume (mLs) | Average mass from SEC-MALS/RI (kDa) | Calculated stoichiometry |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Peak 1 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| Peak 2 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| WTZ | 10.7 | 19.3 | 11.6 | 1.13 | 14.6 | 140 | 12.11 |
| K32A | 10.6 | 19.3 | 10.0 | 0.94 | 14.6 | 117 | 11.65 |
| W35A | 10.6 | 18.1 | 11.3 | 1.07 | N/A | N/A |  |
| L56R | 10.7 | 19.3 | 11.2 | 1.06 | N/A | N/A |  |
| K68A | 10.6 | 19.3 | 11.0 | 1.04 | N/A | N/A |  |
| P72A | 10.7 | 19.4 | 12.3 | 1.15 | 14.3 | 160 | 13.01 |

Fig. 1, Hastie, et al

A

Zn2
C73
N26
Zn1

Zn1
N26
C75

B

C

Basic interface

Dimeric interface

Hydrophilic interface

Hydrophobic interface

Fig. 2, Hastie, et al

Zn1
N
C-terminal
tail shifted
extended
helix

loop 1
F36
W35
Zn1
F36
K32
L71
Zn2
W35
N
L71
K32
C

P72 isomerization

M69
L71
P72
T73
P70

B
B
N
A'
F36
P72
W35
C
A
W35
P72
F36
C
B'
NMR

B
N
C
A'
P72
F36
W35
F36
W35
P72
C
B'
N
A
X-Ray

Fig. 3, Hastie, et al

10s
1000s
1............20............40............60............80............100
SMGNKQAKAPESKDSPRASLI PDATHLGPQFCKSCWFENKGGLVECNNHYLCINCLTLLLLSVSNRCPICKMPLPTKLIRPSAAPTAAPPYGAADSIIRPPYP

C
N
Loop 1
I
II
C
N
Loop 2
I
II
N
C

Deuteration level
10% 50% 90%

Fig. 4, Hastie, et al
