
CHAPTER THREE

# Ion Channels in Neurological Disorders

Pravir Kumar$^{*,†,1}$, Dhiraj Kumar$^*$, Saurabh Kumar Jha$^*$,  
Niraj Kumar Jha$^*$, Rashmi K. Ambasta$^*$  

* Molecular Neuroscience and Functional Genomics Laboratory, Delhi Technological University (Formerly DCE), Delhi, India  
† Department of Neurology, Adjunct faculty, Tufts University School of Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts, USA  
$^1$ Corresponding author: e-mail address: Pravir.Kumar@tufts.edu  

## Contents

1. Introduction                                                                                                      98
   1.1 Intricacy of Ion Channels in Membrane Physiology                                                              99
   1.2 Role of Ion Channels in the Brain Homeostasis                                                                99
   1.3 Impact of Channels on Blood-Brain Barrier                                                                   100
   1.4 How Channels Affect Gap Junctions, Release of Ions, and Homeostasis?                                         101
   1.5 What Are the Different Channels That Cause Ion Disturbance in Neurological Disorders?                        102
2. Aberrant Channels in NDDs                                                                                       103
   2.1 Alzheimer's Disease                                                                                         103
   2.2 Parkinson's Disease                                                                                        115
   2.3 Huntington's Disease                                                                                       116
   2.4 Multiple Sclerosis                                                                                         117
   2.5 Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis                                                                              118
3. Therapeutics Approach to Correct Altered Channel Function in NDDs                                               121
4. Conclusion                                                                                                       125
Acknowledgments                                                                                                    125
Glossary                                                                                                           126
References                                                                                                         126

## Abstract

The convergent endeavors of the neuroscientist to establish a link between clinical neu-  
rology, genetics, loss of function of an important protein, and channelopathies behind  
neurological disorders are quite intriguing. Growing evidence reveals the impact of ion  
channels dysfunctioning in neurodegenerative disorders (NDDs). Many neurological/  
neuromuscular disorders, viz, Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease, Huntington's dis-  
ease, multiple sclerosis, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, and age-related disorders are cau-  
sed due to altered function or mutation in ion channels. To maintain cell homeostasis,  
ion channels are playing a crucial role which is a large transmembrane protein. Further,  
these channels are important as it determines the membrane potential and playing  

Advances in Protein Chemistry and Structural Biology, Volume 103  
ISSN 1876-1623  
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/bs.apcsb.2015.10.006  
© 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
critically in the secretion of neurotransmitter. Behind NDDs, losses of pathological proteins and defective ion channels have been reported and are found to aggravate the disease symptoms. Moreover, ion channel dysfunctions are eliciting a range of symptoms, including memory loss, movement disabilities, neuromuscular sprains, and strokes. Since the possible mechanistic role played by aberrant ion channels, their receptor and associated factors in neurodegeneration remained elusive; therefore, it is a challenging task for the neuroscientist to implement the therapeutics for targeting NDDs. This chapter reviews the potential role of the ion channels in membrane physiology and brain homeostasis, where ion channels and their associated factors have been characterized with their functional consequences in neurological diseases. Moreover, mechanistic role of perturbed ion channels has been identified in various NDDs, and finally, ion channel modulators have been investigated for their therapeutic intervention in treating common NDDs.

---

### 1. INTRODUCTION

Ion channels are the important constituents of neurons, which is responsible for triggering nerve impulse and synaptic transmission (neurotransmitter’s release). These channels are divided into two major classes, viz, (i) voltage-gated ($\mathrm{Na}^{+}$, $\mathrm{K}^{+}$, $\mathrm{Ca}^{2+}$, $\mathrm{Cl}^{-}$) and (ii) ligand-gated (nicotinic acetylcholine receptors (nAChRs), $\gamma$-amino butyric acid (GABA), $N$-methyl-$D$-aspartate receptors (NMDARs), ryanodine receptors (RyRs)) that are involved in impulse transmission across the synapses. These channels play a crucial role in various intracellular and extracellular processes of the brain, for instance, cell communication, cell adhesion, and cell migration. Moreover, it also allows the brain to receive and route information via producing electrical signals in order to maintain normal brain homeostasis ([Kurachi & North, 2004](https://doi.org/10.1038/nrn1499)). However, research over the past few decades has identified various genetic defects or aberrations in channel-forming genes, which are responsible for numerous neurological outcomes, such as memory disorders, movement disorders, and neuromuscular disorders. Therefore, such type of diseases that occurred due to faulty ion channels has been classified as neurological channelopathies, which include myotonia, congenital myasthenic syndromes, malignant hyperthermia, and periodic paralysis ([Cooper & Jan, 1999](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0896-6273(00)81506-0)). Furthermore, there are several neurodegenerative disorders (NDDs), including Alzheimer’s disease (AD), Parkinson’s disease (PD), Huntington’s disease (HD), multiple sclerosis (MS), and Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) that exhibit defective ion channels, but their related mechanism is quite elusive. In order to solve thismystery, this chapter explores the pertinent role of ion channels in neurons and their associated NDDs. Further, therapeutic potential of well-known channel blockers and modulators has been explored, depicting their role in disease prevention, which might be a promising therapeutic agent for the treatment of the most common NDDs.

### 1.1 Intricacy of Ion Channels in Membrane Physiology

Ion channel protein creates a passage for ions like sodium, potassium, calcium, and chloride to travel across the impermeable lipid bilayer. Further, it is involved in regulating various physiological processes, for instance, electrical conduction in neuronal cell, muscular contraction, and release of neurotransmitters (Lodish et al., 2000). Ion channels are known to govern three prominent roles in regulating membrane physiology that is (i) setting up membrane potential of cells where movement of ions across the membrane constitutes a potential gradient that determines resting potentials of membrane and generates action potentials. For instance, at the beginning of action potential, sodium channels rapidly open and potassium channels close which causes depolarization; however, within a few milliseconds, sodium channels close, and calcium channels open to sustain a depolarized state. Later on, calcium channels get inactivated and potassium channels open that again causes membrane repolarization (Barnett & Larkman, 2007), (ii) transmission of electrical signals, i.e., opening and closing of channels constitute electrical signals in excitable tissues like neurons and muscles, (iii) maintain electrolytic balance across cell membrane to regulate cell volume (Strange, 2004), and (iv) generation of regulatory signals in the cell. These ion channels enable ion flow to constitute electric signals that trigger intracellular signaling cascades linked with neurotransmitter release, hormonal secretion, muscular contraction, and altered gene expression (Gouaux & Mackinnon, 2005). Thus, ion channel research improves our understanding of cellular activity and organ function in normal versus diseased condition. Apart from ion channels, other proteins like transporters and pumps also play a significant role in regulating the membrane physiology.

### 1.2 Role of Ion Channels in the Brain Homeostasis

To maintain physiological equilibrium in the brain, proper functioning of ion channel is essential, for instance, maintaining ionic balance across postsynaptic neuronal membrane. Moreover, an ion influx through the channels regulates a number of processes that include neuronal growth anddifferentiation, synaptic plasticity, neurotransmitter release, neuronal gene expression, neuronal motility, and excitability. Further, cellular responses to humoral or synaptic inputs are determined by multiple ion channels that are expressed by a specific neuron (Kurachi & North, 2004). The ion channel activity is frequently modulated by hormones and neurotransmitters that are involved in central regulation of metabolism in the brain (Sohn, 2013). Upon oxygen deprivation in the brain, glutamate (an excitatory neurotransmitter) causes the cationic influx through ion channels thereby triggering excitotoxicity due to anoxic depolarization (Madry, Haglerød, & Attwell, 2010; Weilinger et al., 2013). Importantly, during ischemia, excessive release of glutamate from the presynaptic terminal leads to overactivation of glutamate receptors (NMDA and AMPA) that causes an excessive influx of calcium ions. Further, these receptors activate pannexin-1 channels that get hyperactivated and release ATP outside. This extracellular overburden of glutamate and ATP consecutively activates various complexes that trigger apoptotic and necrotic cascades eventually leading to neuronal injury or death (Abbracchio, Burnstock, Verkhratsky, & Zimmermann, 2009). Recent reports advocate the dysregulation of energy and glucose homeostasis due to defective ion channel subunits in specific neuronal populations (Liu et al., 2012; Parton et al., 2007). Moreover, ion channels are also known to control cell migration and organization in central nervous system (Ariano et al., 2006; Komuro & Kumada, 2005), where ion channels are involved in the regulation of signaling processes; therefore, any disturbances in the structure and function of channels would have detrimental effects on nervous system. Elevated intracellular ion level disturbs the homeostasis and lead to the development of NDDs. The prominent cause for ion imbalance is the defective ion channels encoded by mutated genes. For instance, calcium ion channel mutations govern the onset of spinocerebellar ataxia, episodic ataxia type 2, X-linked congenital stationary night blindness, and familial hemiplegic migraine (Pietrobon, 2002). Furthermore, mutated sodium, potassium, and calcium channels, or acetylcholine- and glycine-gated channels are known to cause epilepsy, Lambert–Eaton myasthenic syndrome, hyperekplexia, schizophrenia, AD, and PD (Kim, 2014).

### 1.3 Impact of Channels on Blood–Brain Barrier

The blood–brain barrier (BBB) is the semipermeable barrier of endothelial cell lining that separates the brain from circulating blood and hence plays a
critical defense system for the brain against blood-borne toxins, proteins, and cells, which are the prime requisite for the healthy functioning of the brain. It is comprised of four cellular components that include endothelial cells, astrocytic end feet, microglial cells, and pericytes. These cells interact among themselves directly or indirectly to selectively regulate the passage of molecules and cells in the brain (Wolburg & Lippoldt, 2002) that maintains the neurovascular cell homeostasis (Abbott, Ronnback, & Hansson, 2006). Moreover, the BBB functionalities have been maintained by different cell junctions at BBB sites that are tight junctions, adherent junctions, and gap junctions. Tight junction enables cell sealing via cell sheet formation, whereas adherent junction allows the cell attachment with neighboring cells or with the extracellular matrix. Likewise, gap junction facilitates the transmission of chemical or electrical signals among interacting cells (Omidi & Gumbleton, 2005). Moreover, the restrictive function of BBB is provided by tight junction, while selective permeability is provided by the intricate transport machineries present at the membrane of brain capillary endothelial cells that are responsive to the autocrine and paracrine signals (Rubin & Staddon, 1999). Therefore, any disturbances in BBB integrity would govern the onset of numerous neurological disorders in response to brain inflammation caused by infiltrating leukocytes; cytokines from blood and thus activated glial cells affect the extracellular milieu around neurons. For instance, dysfunctioning of BBB caused infiltration of the tumor necrosis factor-α in the brain which has been found to aggravate the progression of PD (Qin et al., 2007). Similarly, damaged biotrafficking across BBB has also been associated with numerous neurological disorders such as epilepsy, strokes, traumatic brain injury, AD, and PD (Friedman, Kaufer, & Heinemann, 2009; Lo, Dalkara, & Moskowitz, 2003; Zlokovic, 2008).

### 1.4 How Channels Affect Gap Junctions, Release of Ions, and Homeostasis?

Multicellular organisms maintain their tissue/organ homeostasis with the help of cell communication machinery, by which it responds differently with the change in environmental conditions. Such cell communication machinery includes gap junctions, which are intercellular channels clustered in specialized regions of plasma membrane (Mese, Richard, & White, 2006). These gap junctional channels mediate cytoplasmic connections between two cells and provide a medium for the transport of small metabolites like glucose, ions like K⁺/Ca²⁺ and secondary messengers like cAMP, cGMP, and IP3 (inositol 1,4,5-triphosphate) (Kanno & Loewenstein, 1964;

Lawrence, Beers, & Gilula, 1978). Moreover, gap junctional communication is responsible for controlling numerous physiological processes, which include cell motility, cell growth or proliferation, cell differentiation, cell synchronization, and metabolic coordination of vascular cell (Vinken et al., 2006; White & Paul, 1999). Furthermore, in a complex tissue like nervous tissue, gap junctions mediate electrical coupling and recovery upon neuronal injury. These gap junctional intercellular channels are encoded by two families of proteins, pannexins and connexins, which are expressed in highly active neuronal cells, astrocytes, and oligodendrocytes. In mammals, pannexins are reported to form hemichannels while connexins to form both gap junction channels and hemichannels. For instance, connexin proteins in animals are comprised of 12 subunits, which are assembled as a hemichannel, i.e., 6 connexin subunits in each connected cell (Goodenough, Paul, & Jesaitis, 1988). Further, gap junctional channels are responsible for cytoplasmic connection between cells thereby coordinating their electrical and metabolic activity, whereas hemichannels interconnect intra- and extracellular compartments of cells thus providing a diffusion pathway for ions and small molecules (Figueroa et al., 2014). Mutations and structural aberrations in connexins have been reported in various diseases such as hereditary epilepsy, neoplasms, bacterial/parasitic infections and also in AD (Mylvaganam, Ramani, Krawczyk, & Carlen, 2014; Quintanilla, Orellana, & Von Bernhardi, 2012; Vega et al., 2013). However, gap junctional channels protect neurons via spatial buffering of neurotoxic substrates, but under stressful conditions during neuronal injury, microglial cells get overactivated and release proinflammatory cytokines (TNF and IL-1) that hamper gap junctional homeostasis thereby hindering astroglial communication in the brain (Orellana et al., 2009). Continual glial activation in response to toxic proteins expressed in numerous neurodegenerative diseases induce glial hemichannels and gap junctions that contribute to neurodegeneration during inflammation and thus disrupt the brain homeostasis (Orellana et al., 2009).

### 1.5 What Are the Different Channels That Cause Ion Disturbance in Neurological Disorders?

The drastic increase in the incidence of neurological disorders associated with aberrant ion channels had been reported in past 20 years. There are two types of channels: ligand- and voltage-gated that are associated with ion disturbance in various neurological disorders (Kumar, Ambasta, & Kumar, 2014). For instance, mutated nAChRs, ionotropic glutamate

receptors, γ-amino butyric acid type A receptors (GABAARs), and P2X receptors (P2XR) dysfunctions are associated with epilepsy, Alzheimer's, and PD progression (Lemoine et al., 2012). Likewise, defective sodium channels SCN2A, SCN8A, and SCN9A have been found to cause ataxia, epilepsy, seizures, periodic paralysis, and sensitivity to pain (Eijkelkamp et al., 2012; Meisler & Kearney, 2005). Similarly, potassium channel mutations are linked to the pathogenesis of dyskinesias, seizures, epilepsy, and ataxias (Kim, 2014). Further calcium ion channel aberrations are observed in the patients affected with ataxia, paralysis, and migraine (George, 2004). Furthermore, these defective ion channels have been reported to govern the pathophysiology of a range of diverse neurological disorders, which has been summarized in Table 1, and their molecular architecture has been depicted in Fig. 1.

---

### 2. ABERRANT CHANNELS IN NDDs

#### 2.1 Alzheimer's Disease

AD is a form of dementia mainly characterized by cognitive dysfunction, memory loss, and neuronal death. The focal hallmark of this disease relies on diverse factors, including Aβ accumulation, tau hyperphosphorylation, mutations in the catalytic domain of γ secretase (Zhao & Zhao, 2013). However, abnormal levels of intracellular ions (Ca²⁺, Na⁺, K⁺, and Cl⁻) have been reported to cause ionic imbalance that is also associated with AD pathogenesis (Fig. 2A). In 1992, Hardy and Higgins first reported that Aβ peptides perturb Ca²⁺ homeostasis in neurons and increase intracellular Ca²⁺, which was later confirmed by Mattson and his colleagues (Hardy & Higgins, 1992). Presently, several successive studies laid the foundation for a novel idea: Aβ peptides are in part, toxic to neurons because they form aberrant ion channels in neuronal membranes and thereby disrupt neuronal homeostasis (Itkin et al., 2011). Moreover, accumulated Aβ peptides have the potential to disrupt the activity of numerous calcium conducting ion channels including, voltage-gated calcium channels (VGCCs): L-, N-, P/Q-, and R-type calcium channels (Kim & Rhim, 2011; Neelands, King, & Macdonaldm, 2000; Nimnrich & Gross, 2012) and ligand-gated calcium channels: NMDARs, nAChRs, and RyRs channels (Danysz & Parsons, 2012; Oulès et al., 2012; Parri & Dineley, 2010). Normally, an influx of Ca²⁺ ions are tightly regulated that evokes neurotransmitters release such as glutamate from presynaptic terminal and trigger downstream signals to govern various cellular processes—synaptogenesis, synaptic transmission,

Table 1 Ion Channels and Their Associated Neurological Diseases

| Channels       | Involved Genes | Associated Proteins/Subunits                     | Functions                                                                                   | Neurological Diseases                  | References                          |
|----------------|----------------|------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------|--------------------------------------|
| Ca²⁺ channels  | CACNA1D        | Caᵥ1.3 (α-1D subunit)                          | It provides pacemaking activity to DA neuron; any alteration in their functions leads to high Ca²⁺ load to neurons | PD                                     | Dragicevic et al. (2014)            |
|                | CACNA1F        | Caᵥ1.4 (α-1F subunit)                          | It provides cell's ability to generate and transmit electrical signals. Moreover, it is also involved in transportation of Ca²⁺ across cell membranes | Aland Island eye disease and cone-rod dystrophy | Boycott, Pearce, and Bech-Hansen (2000) |
|                | CACNA1A        | Caᵥ2.1 (α-1A subunit)                          | It provides P/Q-type current in Purkinje and granule cells and also to presynaptic terminals                                      | FHM, SCA 6, and EA 2                   | Bruun et al. (2015)                 |
|                | CACNA1C        | Caᵥ1.2 (α-1C subunit)                          | It provides pacemaking activity to DA neuron; any alteration in their functions leads to high Ca²⁺ load to neuron. Moreover, it is also associated with toxic Aβ | AD and schizophrenia                  | Koran, Hohman, and Thornton-Wells (2014), Takahashi, Glatt, Uchiyama, Faraone, and Tsuang (2015) |

| CACNA1H Caᵥ3.2 | It makes neuronal cells prone IGE and CAE | Eckle et al. (2014) |
| --- | --- | --- |
| (α-1H subunit) | to disease by directly altering neuronal electrical properties and indirectly by changing gene expression |  |
| CACNB4 | β-4 Subunit | It plays a vital role in Ca²⁺ channel function by modulating G protein inhibition, increasing Ca²⁺ influx, controlling the α-1 subunit membrane targeting, and shifting the voltage dependence of activation and inactivation | IGE, JME, and EA5 | Delgado-Escueta, Koeleman, Bailey, Medina, and Durón (2013) and Etemad, Campiglio, Obermair, and Flucher (2014) |
| HVA(Ca⁺) | – | It changes the neuronal Ca²⁺ HD homeostasis and also altered the Na⁺ and K⁺ channel function |  | Cepeda, Wu, André, Cummings, and Levine (2006) |
| BEST1 | β-4 subunit | It is believed to function as chloride channels that may also serve as regulators of intracellular Ca²⁺ signaling | Bestrophinopathy, vitelliform macular dystrophy, and autosomal recessive retinitis pigmentosa | Lin et al. (2015) and Marmorstein et al. (2015) |
| RYR1 | – | The RyRs are a family of Ca²⁺ release channels, found on intracellular Ca²⁺ storage/ release organelles. It involves in intracellular Ca²⁺ release | MHS and CCD | Murayama et al. (2015) |

Table 1 Ion Channels and Their Associated Neurological Diseases—cont'd

| Channels | Involved Genes | Associated Proteins/Subunits | Functions | Neurological Diseases | References |
|----------|----------------|------------------------------|-----------|------------------------|------------|
|          | TRPA1          | Subfamily A, member 1        | It is believed to function as a mechanical and chemical stress sensor. However, it is involved in signal transduction and growth control | FEPS      | Kremeyer et al. (2010) |
|          | TRPM1          | Subfamily M, member 1        | It mediates Ca²⁺ entry into the cells | CSNB1C     | Bellone et al. (2013)   |
|          | TRPV4          | Subfamily V, member 4        | In the brain, it is involved in the regulation of systemic osmotic pressure | congenital dSMA and CMT2C | (Evangelista et al. (2015) |
| K⁺       | KCNA1          | Kv1.1                        | It involves in repolarization of axon and also interferes with the demyelinating process of axons | EA1 and MS | Lassche et al. (2014) and Wacker et al. (2012) |
| channels | KCNA2          | Kv1.2                        | It interferes with demyelinating process of axons | MS         | Wacker et al. (2012)    |

| KCNA 3 | Kᵥ1.3 | It is associated with LPS-activated microglia as well as toxic Aβ. However, it also interferes with the demyelinating process of axons | AD and MS | Chung, Lee, Joe, and Uhm (2001) and Rus et al. (2005) |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| KCNA 5 | Kᵥ1.5 | It function is associated with AD toxic Aβ as well as involved in regulatory process of insulin secretion |  | Chung et al. (2001) |
| KCNC 3 | Kᵥ3.3 | It mediates the voltage-dependent K⁺ permeability of excitable membranes | SCA 13 | Irie, Matsuzaki, Sekino, and Hirai (2014) |
| KCNQ 2 | Kᵥ7.2 | It involves in repolarization activity of axons | BFNS and EIEE 7 | Ambrosino et al. (2015) and Gürsoy and Erçal (2015) |
| KCNQ 3 | Kᵥ7.3 | It involves in repolarization activity of axons | BFNS | Miceli et al. (2015) |
| KCNQ 4 | Kᵥ7.4 | It plays a crucial role in the regulation of neuronal excitability in association with KCNQ 3 | DFNB2A | Gao, Yechikov, Vázquez, Chen, and Nie (2013) |

Table 1 Ion Channels and Their Associated Neurological Diseases—cont'd

| Channels | Involved Genes | Associated Proteins/Subunits | Functions | Neurological Diseases | References |
|----------|----------------|-----------------------------|-----------|------------------------|------------|
| KCNJ3    | Kir3.1         | It associates with Kir3.2 to form GIRK-1 in neurons that direct to degeneration of DA neurons | PD | Lüscher and Slesinger (2010) |
| KCNJ2    | Kir2.1         | It is having a greater tendency to allow K⁺ to flow into a cell rather than out of a cell. Further, it participates in establishing action potential and excitability of neuronal and muscle cells | Andersen-Tawil syndrome | Ördög et al. (2015) |
| KCNJ6    | Kir3.2         | It causes increasing influx of Na⁺ as a substitute of K⁺ that lead to cause developmental loss of cells in the cerebellum and SNc of DA neurons | PD | Hartfield et al. (2014) |
| KCNJ10   | Kir4.1         | It is characterized by having a greater tendency to allow K⁺ influx into the cells | HD, IGE, and EAST syndrome | Cross et al. (2013) and Tong et al. (2014) |
| KCNMA1   | KCa1.1         | It involves in controlling of smooth muscle tone and neuronal excitability | GEPD | Lee and Cui (2009) |

KCNT1          KCa4.1         It is having diverse functions, NFLE5 and EIEE14 such as regulating neurotransmitter release, insulin secretion, neuronal excitability, and cell volume                                                                                     Møller et al. (2015) and Ohba et al. (2015)
K-ATP channels -               It makes membrane potential PD hyperpolarized and also reduces SNDA activity                                                                                                   Schiemann et al. (2012)
Na+ channels    SCN1A         Na, 1.1(α-1 subunit) It increases Na+ influx in somatodendritic cells                                                                                                         GEFS+, SMEI, Dravet syndrome, and FHM3 Gürsoy and Erçal (2015) and Helbig (2015)
                SCN1B         β-1 Subunit It modulates the function of α-subunit of Na+ channels                                                                                                       GEFS+ Helbig (2015)
                SCN2A         Na, 1.2 (α-subunit) It increases fast Na+ influx in MS and GEFS+ axons and also involved in axonal degeneration                                                               Black, Newcombe, Trapp, and Waxman (2007) and Nakayama (2009)
                SCN5A         Na, 1.5 (α-subunit) It is involved in axonal degeneration and promotes Ca2+ influx in a neuron that interferes with demyelinating neurons                                          MS, cerebellar ataxia, and EAE Black, Newcombe, and Waxman (2010)
                SCN8A         Na, 1.6 (α-subunit)                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Black et al. (2007)
                SCN10A        Na, 1.8 (α-subunit)                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Damarjian, Craner, Black, and Waxman (2004)
                SCN2A         Na, 2.1 (α-subunit) It is responsible for the generation and propagation of action potentials in neurons as well as muscle tissues                                              BFIE and EIEE11 Yoshitomi et al. (2015)

Table 1 lon Channels and Their Associated Neurological Diseases—cont'd

| Channels         | Involved Genes | Associated Proteins/Subunits | Functions                                                                                   | Neurological Diseases                          | References                     |
|------------------|----------------|------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------|---------------------------------|
| SCN9A            |                | Na, 1.7 (α-subunit)          | It plays a crucial role in the generation and conduction of action potentials and therefore, important for electrical signaling by most excitable cells | CIP and small fiber neuropathy                 | Emery et al. (2015)           |
| SCN4A            |                | Na, 1.4 (α-subunit)          | It is responsible for the generation and propagation of action potentials in neurons as well as muscle tissues                                      | CMS, HYPP, PMC, and PAM                      | Basali and Prayson (2015) and Wang et al. (2015) |
| Cl− channels     | CLIC 1         | –                            | Functional in activated microglia during oxidative stress                                                                 | AD                                              | Skaper, Facci, and Giusti (2013) |
| Cyclic nucleotide-gated channel | CNGA 1                       | α-1 Subunit                     | It plays a critical role in phototransduction                                                          | Autosomal recessive retinitis pigmentosa       | Winkler et al. (2013)         |
|                  | CNGA 3         | α-3 Subunit                 | It is responsible for normal vision and olfactory signal transduction                                                    | CRD                                             | Shaikh et al. (2015)         |
| CNGB 1           |                | β-1 Subunit                 | It regulates the ion influx into the rod photoreceptor outer segment in response to light-induced alteration in intracellular cGMP concentrations | Autosomal recessive retinitis pigmentosa       | Michalakis et al. (2014)      |

| CNGB 3 | β-3 Subunit | It regulates the ion influx into ACHM 3 and JMD the rod photoreceptor outer segment in response to light-induced alteration in intracellular cGMP concentrations | Nishiguchi, Sandberg, Gorji, Berson, and Dryja (2005) |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Glycine | GLRA1 | α-1 Subunit | Directs inhibitory role in brainstem and spinal cord | FH and hereditary hyperekplexia | Chau, Roitfarb, Carabuena, and Camann (2015) |
| receptors | GLRB | β-Subunit | It has an inhibitory role against the glycine receptor that mediates postsynaptic inhibition in the spinal cord and other regions of CNS | Hereditary hyperekplexia | Chau et al. (2015) |
| Nicotinic | CHRNB2 | β-2 Subunit | Involves in modulation of neurotransmitters release | ADNFLE and NFLE | Boillot and Baulac (2015) and Conti et al. (2015) |
| Ach | CHRNA2 | α-2 Subunit | Involves in modulation of neurotransmitters release | ADNFLE and NFLE | Boillot and Baulac (2015) and Conti et al. (2015) |
| receptors | CHRNA4 | α-4 Subunit | It is involved in modulation of neurotransmitters release | ADNFLE | Boillot and Baulac (2015) |
| CHRNA1 | α-1 Subunit | It plays a crucial role in ACh binding/channel gating and neuromuscular organogenesis. Further, it leads to opening of an ion-conducting channel across the plasma membrane | Multiple pterygium syndrome | Chen (2012) |
| CHRND | δ-Subunit |  |  |  |  |
| CHRNG | γ-Subunit |  |  |  |  |

Table 1 Ion Channels and Their Associated Neurological Diseases—cont'd

| Channels       | Involved Genes | Associated Proteins/Subunits | Functions                                                                 | Neurological Diseases                          | References                                      |
|----------------|----------------|------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------|
|                | CHRN B1        | β-1 Subunit                 | It is involved in opening of an ion-conducting channel across the plasma membrane | CMS                                           | Mihaylova et al. (2010)                         |
|                | CHRNE          | ε-Subunit                  |                                                                          |                                               |                                                 |
| GABA receptors | GABRG2         | γ-2 Subunit                | It directs inhibitory role against GABAergic neurons                              | GEFS+ and Dravet syndrome                      | Helbig (2015) and Ishii et al. (2014)           |
|                | GABRA1         | α-1 Subunit                | It directs inhibitory role against GABAergic neurons                              | GEFS+, Dravet syndrome, CAE, and JME           | Helbig (2015), Hirose (2014), and Ishii et al. (2014) |
|                | GABRA6         | α-6 Subunit                | in the brain that act as a ligand-gated Cl⁻ channels                               |                                               |                                                 |
|                | GABRB3         | β-3 Subunit                |                                                                          |                                               |                                                 |

PD, Parkinson's disease; CAE, childhood absence epilepsy; JME, juvenile myoclonic epilepsy; EA5, episodic ataxia type 5; FHM, familial hemiplegic migraine; SCA6, spinocerebellar ataxia type 6; EA2, episodic ataxia type 2; AD, Alzheimer's disease; HD, Huntington disease; MHS, malignant hyperthermia susceptibility; CCD, central core disease; FEPS, familial episodic pain syndrome; CSNB1C, congenital stationary night blindness type 1C; congenital distal spinal muscular atrophy; CMT2C, Charcot–Marie–Tooth neuropathy type 2C; SCA13, spinocerebellar ataxia type 13; EIEE7, early infantile epileptic encephalopathy type 7; DFNB2A, deafness, autosomal dominant, type 2A; EAST syndrome (epilepsy, ataxia, sensorineural deafness, and tubulopathy); GEPD, generalized epilepsy with paroxysmal dyskinesia; NFLE5, nocturnal frontal lobe epilepsy type 5; EIEE14, early infantile epileptic encephalopathy type 14; FHM3, familial hemiplegic migraine type 3; EAE, experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis; BFIE, benign familial infantile epilepsy; EIEE11, early infantile epileptic encephalopathy type 11; CIP, congenital indifference to pain; CMS, congenital myasthenic syndrome; HYPP, hyperkalemic periodic paralysis; PMC, paramyotonia congenital; PAM, potassium-aggravated myotonia; EA1, episodic ataxia type 1; MS, multiple sclerosis; BFNS, benign familial neonatal seizures; IGE, idiopathic generalized epilepsy; GEFS+, generalized epilepsy with febrile seizures plus; FH, familial hyperekplexia; ADNFLE, autosomal dominant nocturnal frontal lobe epilepsy; CRD, juvenile cone–rod dystrophy; ACHM3, achromatopsia type 3; JMD, juvenile macular degeneration; NFLE, nocturnal frontal lobe epilepsy.

Neurological Channelopathies

Figure 1 Architecture of ion channels involved in neurological disorders (A) voltage-gated calcium channel, (B) voltage-gated potassium channel, (C) inward rectifier potassium channel, (D) calcium-activated potassium channel, (E) voltage-gated sodium channel, (F) voltage-gated chloride channel, (G) ATP-sensitive potassium channel, (H) cyclic nucleotide-gated ion channel, (I) calcium-activated chloride ion channel; BEST1-Bestrophin-1, (J) GABA (γ-amino butyric acid) receptor, (K) glycine receptor, (L) nACH (nicotinic acetylcholine) receptor, (M) TRP (transient receptor potential) channel, and (N) RYR1 (ryanodine) receptor; DHPR, dihydropyridine receptor.

synaptic plasticity, neuronal growth, and survival. However, in case of AD, Ca²⁺ flux gets perturbed in response to increased oxidative stress and disturbed energy metabolism that alter the normal functioning of glutamate receptor, glucose transporters, and ion-motive ATPases ([Itkin et al., 2011](https://doi.org/10.1038/nrn3075)). For instance, accumulated Aβ has been found to elevate the cellular Ca²⁺ ion level by plasma membrane L-type Ca²⁺ channels and Na⁺/K⁺-ATPase activity in the hippocampus and cortex region in the brain thereby causing excessive excitatory responses, i.e., glutamate excitotoxicity and ultimately neuronal death ([Camandola & Mattson, 2011](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2010.09.014)). Interestingly, catalytic subunit of γ-secretase, i.e., presenilin-1 is also found to be responsible for leaking Ca²⁺ ion from endoplasmic reticulum to the cytoplasm through Ca²⁺ leak channels and, thus increases the cellular load of Ca²⁺ ion in AD brain ([Tu et al., 2006](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M511558200)). Moreover, recent studies reported the Ca²⁺ homeostasis disrupting role of transient receptor potential (TRP) channels in AD. Thus, increased intracellular Ca²⁺ ion also modulates amyloid-β precursor protein (AβPP) processing and affects multiple downstream cascades, including tau metabolism, suppression of housekeeping genes, and loss of autophagic function, thereby exacerbating the symptoms of AD ([Yamamoto, Wajima, Hara, Nishida, & Mori, 2007](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jneurosci.2007.01.058)). Furthermore, K⁺ channel aberrations have also been reported in AD patients. Since the potassium channel plays a crucial role in action potential generation and in maintaining the resting potential, therefore, any hindrance in K⁺ channel causes impaired neurotransmission leading to neuronal damage. Further, accumulated Aβ has shown to inhibit voltage-dependent fast-inactivating K⁺ currents in hippocampal neurons ([Pouloupolou et al., 2010](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroscience.2010.03.038)). Moreover, voltage-gated K⁺ channels (Kᵥ1.3, Kᵥ1.5) and calcium-activated K⁺ channel (KCNN4/KCa3.1) have been reported to cause neurodegeneration in response to neuroinflammation caused by toxic Aβ via microglial activation ([Kaushal, Koeberle, Wang, & Schlichter, 2007](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2006.08.008)). Likewise, the Kᵥ3 subfamilies of K⁺ channel subunits, which possess the ability of fast repolarization of action potential, are also found to be compromised and downregulated in AD ([Bhullar & Rupasinghe, 2013](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2013.02.006)). In another case, 113-pSTEA-sensitive K⁺ channel was absent in fibroblasts from AD patients compared with normal human fibroblasts in peripheral tissues. Thus, affected K⁺ channel activity also causes intracellular Ca²⁺ overload, resulting in altered neuronal excitability that may eventually lead to neuronal death ([Mocali et al., 2014](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2014.01.014)). Recently, a new intracellular chloride channel 1 (CLIC1) has been identified on plasma membrane of activated microglial cells in the hippocampus of mild AD patients. Upon Aβ stimulation of microglia, CLIC1 channels get

highly expressed and are responsible for the change in membrane anion permeability of the neuron thereby leading to neuronal death (Novarino et al., 2004). In addition to these channels, nAChR also acts as a major culprit of AD brain because cholinergic depletion may increase the production of Aβ and aggravate its neurotoxicity by altering signal transduction events coupled with cholinergic neurotransmission (Buckingham, Jones, Brown, & Sattelle, 2009). Further, the expressions of nAChR subtypes, i.e., α7 and α4β2 are reported to be highly expressed in AD-affected brain regions, thereby suggesting a role of these receptors in the AD etiopathology. The degree of reduction in cortical acetylcholine correlates well with the severity of symptoms in AD (Nery et al., 2013).

## 2.2 Parkinson's Disease

PD is the second most common brain illness affecting 1% of the old age (60–65 years) population, primarily characterized by postural instability, bradykinesia, tremor at rest, and rigidity. There are diverse factors responsible for PD pathogenesis, including activity related to cellular Ca²⁺ overload, mitochondrial dysfunction, oxidative or metabolic stress, and particularly, few neurotoxins that make neuronal cells more prone to cell death (Massano & Bhatia, 2012). However, ion channels also play a decisive role in regulating various metabolic processes in the brain; therefore, any perturbations in channels have been reported to cause malfunctioning of neurons (Fig. 2B). For instance, ATP-sensitive potassium channel Kir6.2 along with Sur1 protein gets highly expressed in dopaminergic (DA) neurons in the substantia nigra pars compacta (SNc) and causes excitotoxicity, thus have been implicated in disease progression (Gong et al., 2014). Likewise, mutations in Kir3.2 channel (G protein-gated inwardly rectifying K1 channel) make it nonselective that leads to the increase in conduction of Na⁺ ions as a substitute for highly selective K⁺ ions thereby causing loss of cells in cerebellum and DA neurons in SNc (Shieh, Coghlan, Sullivan, & Gopalakrishnan, 2000). Moreover, Kir3.1 together with Kir3.2 form the G protein-gated inwardly rectifying potassium-1/2 (GIRK-1/GIRK-2) channels in neurons and direct degeneration of DA neurons in PD brain (Shieh et al., 2000). Similarly, voltage-gated T-type Ca²⁺ channels (TTCCs) and Ca²⁺-sensitive voltage-gated A-type K⁺ channels together with voltage-gated LTCCs (L-type Ca²⁺ channels) and ATP-sensitive K⁺ (K-ATP) channels contribute toward basal ganglia dysfunction in SNc DA neurons thereby leading to progressive loss of neuronal firing, thus
causing PD (Dragicevic, Schieman, & Liss, 2015). Further, LTCCs act as an autonomous pacemaker of the neuron that is responsible for the maintenance of basal DA tone in target, such as the striatum. For instance, Ca_v1.2 and Ca_v1.3 LTCCs are active during pacemaking activity of DA neurons in SNc and cause a continuous increase in intracellular Ca²⁺ levels that result in increased oxidative and mitochondrial stress, which provoke selective vulnerability of neuronal cell toward death (Dragicevic et al., 2015). Besides in a subpopulation of medial SNc DA neurons, K-ATP channel activity also facilitated the switching from tonic firing to NMDAR (glutamate receptor)-mediated bursting *in vivo* that lead to phasic DA release. When glutamate binds to the receptor, they elicit opening of the NMDAR channel with the subsequent influx of Ca²⁺ into the cell. Consequently, any alterations in glutamate transmission cause dyskinesias in PD (Schiemann et al., 2012). Recently, a new ion channel, i.e., Hvl proton channel, has been shown to be expressed in human brain microglia, immune tissues, which are required for NADPH oxidase generation of superoxide during the respiratory burst in phagocytic leukocytes and lead to neurodegeneration like PD (Wu et al., 2012).

### 2.3 Huntington's Disease

HD is a hereditary NDD characterized by cognitive loss, emotional imbalance, and uncoordinated movements. It is caused by an autosomal dominant mutation in Huntingtin (Htt) gene responsible for the expansion of CAG trinucleotide repeat >36 that leads to the synthesis of polyglutamine tract, thus mutated HTT (mHTT) protein is prone to aggregation and found to form intracellular accumulations in different cell types (Labbadia & Morimoto, 2013). Tong et al. investigated the functional implication of ion channels in different cell types for identifying the etiopathology of HD using mouse models. Altered Kir4.1 channel activity has been reported in mHTT expressing striatal astrocytes that disrupted the extracellular K⁺ homeostasis thereby causing hyperexcitability, i.e., HD motor symptoms in striatal neurons. However, normal Kir4.1 channel is one of the predominant astrocytal K⁺ channels that are crucial for maintaining resting membrane potential of the cells and also for maintaining extracellular K⁺ buffering in the brain (Tong et al., 2014). Moreover, mHTT in HD is reported to alter the function of high-voltage-activated (HVA) Ca²⁺ channels (Miller & Bezprozvanny, 2010). Interestingly, apart from Ca²⁺ channel dysfunction, various other ion channels (Na⁺, K⁺, Cl⁻) have also shown their reduced expression in numerous studies on HD mouse models;
for instance, in a study, auxiliary subunit (β4) of sodium channel is found to be downregulated in the striatum of mouse models and patients, while induced expression of β4 leads to the neurite outgrowth in Neuro2a cells in hippocampus signifying their role in neurite degeneration in transgenic mice and HD patients (Oyama et al., 2006). Similarly, other groups detected decreased expression of K⁺ channel subunits (Kir2.1/Kir2.3) in striatal neurons of HD transgenic mouse models (Ariano et al., 2005). Moreover, expression of muscular ClC-1 chloride channel is also significantly reduced in R6/2 HD mouse model (Waters, Varuzhanyan, Talmadge, & Voss, 2013); therefore, functional alteration of these channels disturbs the ion homeostasis in cortical pyramidal neurons, thereby affecting the neurotransmitter release, synaptic integration, and genetic expression, which play a contributing role in cortical dysfunction in HD (Fig. 2C).

## 2.4 Multiple Sclerosis

MS is an immune-mediated chronic degenerative disorder of the central nervous system, where gradual demyelination takes place in patches throughout the brain and spinal cord. The typical symptoms of this disease include loss of coordination, muscular weakness, visual and lingual disturbances, which are most frequent among young individuals in industrialized societies. It has been characterized with the inflammatory neuronal damage caused by the abundance of macrophages, T lymphocytes, microglial, and dendritic cells (Fitzner & Simons, 2010). Here, neurons are primarily injured by the infiltrating lymphocytes and macrophages either by the direct cell contact or by toxicity mediators, i.e., glutamate or nitric oxide and indirectly by the loss of oligodendrocytes and myelin sheath. Apart from inflammatory mediators, redistribution of certain voltage/ligand-gated ion channels and transporters has been reported to be associated with altered electrical activity, intracellular calcium overload, compromised mitochondrial activity, and subsequently neuronal death (Fig. 2D; Meuth, Melzer, Kleinschnitz, Budde, & Wiendl, 2009). Further, alterations in the expression pattern of specific voltage-gated Na⁺ channel isoforms (Naᵥ1.2, Naᵥ1.5, Naᵥ1.6, and Naᵥ1.8) have been reported in MS, and their overloading is involved in axonal degeneration followed by cerebellar dysfunction (Craner et al., 2004; Waxman, 2006). Moreover, Naᵥ channels trigger the Na⁺ influx into axons that ultimately raise the level of intra-axonal Ca²⁺ ions and interfere with the myelination of axons thereby leading to the pathogenicity of MS. Furthermore, calcium channel (Caᵥ1.2, Caᵥ1.3, Caᵥ1.4, and N-type; Caᵥ2.2) and potassium channel isoforms (Kᵥ1.1, Kᵥ1.2, Kᵥ1.3, and
Kᵥ3.1b subtype) are also found to be upregulated that interfered with the conduction in demyelinating axons (Judge, Lee, Bever, & Hoffman, 2006; Kornek et al., 2001). Thus, elevated calcium levels are responsible for triggering apoptotic signals and neuronal degeneration in MS. Recently, a new cation channel, i.e., transient receptor potential melastatin-4 (TRPM4) channel has been implicated in MS that gets expressed in response to inflammatory CNS lesions (Schattling et al., 2012). However, there is no direct evidence for chloride channel dysfunction in MS, but few studies have reported autosomal recessive ClC-2 chloride channel deficiency in patients affected with leukoencephalopathy (Depienne et al., 2013).

## 2.5 Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis

ALS is a chronic motor neurodegenerative disease with invariable fatality and is characterized by substantial loss of motor neurons in motor cortex, brain stem, and spinal cord. The patients experience gradual muscular weakness, fasciculation, atrophy that ultimately leads to impairment in voluntary movement (Guatteo et al., 2007). However, exact mechanism for ALS is still illusive, but studies are going on animal models to investigate the plausible cause. Previous reports suggested that spontaneous activation of voltage-gated Na⁺ channel (Naᵥ1.5) is responsible for the contraction of mammalian denervated muscle fibers (Kallen et al., 1990; Zona, Pieri, & Carunchio, 2006). Moreover, substantial reduction of potassium channel (Kᵥ1.2) expression has also been observed in human sporadic ALS (Shibuya et al., 2011). The persistent Na⁺ ion conduction followed by sudden drop in K⁺ ion conductance is responsible for axonal hyperexcitability thereby leading to the symptoms of ALS (Kanai et al., 2006). Furthermore, the motor neurons that innervate tongue muscles are also vulnerable to degeneration in ALS which is found to be linked with differential expression of VGCCs. Other studies have also shown immunoreactivity with various calcium ion channels (L-type, N-type, P/Q-type, and T-type) in ALS patients and animal models (Gonzalez et al., 2011; Kimura et al., 1994; Lennon & Lambert, 1989). Interestingly, implications of mitochondrial channelopathy in the progression of ALS have been investigated by Israelson et al. who found that mutant superoxide dismutase 1 (SOD1) inhibits the mitochondrial voltage-dependent anion channel-1 (VDAC1/porin-1) and causes mitochondrial-dependent apoptosis, i.e., fatal paralysis in ALS. However, the plausible mechanism associated with ion channel dysfunction in ALS has been illustrated in Fig. 2E, but further researches are going
Amyloid beta (Aβ) ↑↑

LGCHs  
[NMDARs, nAChRs, and RyRs]

VGCCs  
[L, N, P/Q, and R]

Forms aberrant  
ion channels  

CLIC-1  
Neuroinflammation  
Microglial cell  

TRP channels  
AβPP  
processing  

Tau  
metabolism  

Autophagy  
functions  

Housekeeping  
excitotoxicity  
genes  

Ca²⁺ overload  

Altered ion  
homeostasis  

Na⁺/K⁺-ATPase pump  

VGKCHs  
[Kᵥ1.3, Kᵥ1.5, and K_ca 3.1]  

Repolization of  
action potential  

Ca²⁺ leak  
channels  

PSN ↑↑  
Oxidative stress  

Glutamate  

Neurotoxicity  
Neuronal death  

Neuron  

Alzheimer's disease  

---

Mutation  

Kir3.1+ Kir3.2  
ATP-sensitive  
K⁺ channel  

LTCCHs  
[Caᵥ1.2, Caᵥ1.3]  

Kir6.2+SUR1  
Na⁺ ↑↑  
(nonselective ion)  

K-ATP  

TTCCHs  
Ca²⁺-sensitive  
voltage-gated A-  
type K⁺ channel  

Excitotoxicity of DA  
neuron  

Ca²⁺ overload  

Mitochondrial and oxidative  
stress ↑↑  

Progressive loss  
of neuronal firing  

Super oxide  
NADPH oxidase↑↑  

HV1 proton  
channel  

Neuron  
Neuronal death  

Parkinson’s disease  

---

mHTT aggregates  
[HVA Ca²⁺, Naᵥ β4,  
Kir2.1,Kir2.3-and CLC-1]  

Ionic imbalance  

Altered synaptic  
transmission  

Neurodegeneration  

Striatal astrocytes  
mHTT aggregates  

Altered Kir4.1  

Altered K⁺ homeostasis  
(extracellular)  

Neuron  

Huntington’s disease  

---

VGCCs  
[Caᵥ1.2, Caᵥ1.3,  
Caᵥ1.4,and Caᵥ2.2]  

VGKCHs  
[Kᵥ1.1, Kᵥ1.2,  
Kᵥ1.3,and Kᵥ3.1b]  

VGSCHs  
[Naᵥ1.2, Naᵥ1.5,  
Naᵥ1.6, and Naᵥ1.8]  

Ionic imbalance ← TRPM4 channel  

Ca²⁺ overload  

Altered electrical  
activity  

Interfere with  
myelination process  

Altered mitochondrial  
activity  

Inflammatory mediators  
(cytokines) ↑↑  

Macrophages, T-  
lymphocytes, microglial  
cells-and dendrites  

Inflammation  

Demyelination/neurodegeneration  

Neuron  

Multiple sclerosis  

---

Stress ↑↑  

Mutated SOD1  

VGSCHs  
[Naᵥ1.5]  

VGKCHs  
[Kᵥ1.2]  

VGCCs  
[L, N, P/Q-and T]  

VDAC1/porin-1 ↓↓  

Mitochondrial  
apoptosis  

Mitochondria  

Axonal  
hyperexcitability  

Neuronal loss  

Neuron  

Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis  

---

Figure 2 Molecular mechanism of ion channel-mediated pathogenesis of neurodegenerative disorders: (A) Alzheimer's disease, (B) Parkinson's disease, (C) Huntington's disease, (D) multiple sclerosis, and (E) amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. VGCCs, voltage-gated calcium channels; LGCHs, ligand-gated channels; VGKCHs, voltage-gated potassium channels; NMDARs, N-methyl-D-aspartate receptors; nAChRs, nicotinic acetylcholine receptors; RyRs, ryanodine receptors; CLIC-1, chloride intracellular channel 1; TRP, transient receptor potential channel; AβPP, amyloid-β protein precursor; PSN, presenilins; LTCCHs, L-type calcium channels; TTCCHs, T-type calcium channels; VGSCHs, voltage-gated sodium channels; mHTT, mutant Huntingtin protein; VDAC1, voltage-dependent anion channel 1.

on to investigate the exact mechanism involved in its pathogenesis (Israelson et al., 2010).

Moreover, the pathological mechanism associated with these aberrant ion channels in NDDs has been summarized in Table 2.

Table 2 Defective Channels and Their Associated Mechanisms in NDDs

| Neurodegenerative Disorders | Defective Channels | Associated Mechanisms | References |
|-----------------------------|--------------------|-----------------------|------------|
| Alzheimer's disease         | L-, N-, P/Q-, R-type Ca<sup>2+</sup> channel, Ca<sup>2+</sup> leak channel, K<sub>V</sub>1.3, K<sub>V</sub>1.5, K<sub>Ca</sub>3.1 channel, CLIC1 channel, Aβ channel, TRP channel, Na<sup>+</sup>/K<sup>+</sup> ATPase pump, ligand-gated NMDARs, nAChRs, RyRs channel | In response to Aβ burden and oxidative stress, K<sub>V</sub><sup>+</sup>, Ca<sub>V</sub><sup>2+</sup>, K<sub>ca</sub><sup>+</sup>, Cl<sup>-</sup>, Ca<sup>2+</sup> leaky channel, and ligand-gated channels disrupt ionic homeostasis thereby leading to calcium overload, which alters the neuronal excitability and membrane ion permeability causing neurodegeneration | (Camandola and Mattson (2011), Danysz and Parsons (2012), Itkin et al. (2011), Neelands et al. (2000), Novarino et al. (2004), and Yamamoto et al. (2007)) |
| Parkinson's disease          | Ca<sub>V</sub>1.2, Ca<sub>V</sub> 1.3, T-type Ca<sup>2+</sup> channel, KCa<sub>V</sub><sup>+</sup> A-type channel, K<sub>ATP</sub><sup>+</sup> channel, Kir3.1, Kir3.2, Kir6.2 + SUR1 channel, Hv1 proton channel, Ligand-gated NMDARs channel | Mutational defects in Ca<sub>V</sub><sup>2+</sup>, KCa<sub>V</sub><sup>+</sup>, K<sub>ATP</sub><sup>+</sup>, Kir, Hv1, and ligand-gated channels create sodium and calcium overburden causing excitotoxicity in DA neurons that lead to progressive loss of neuronal firing | Dragicevic et al. (2015), Gong et al. (2014), Schiemann et al. (2012), Shieh et al. (2000), and Wu et al. (2012) |
| Huntington's disease         | HVA Ca<sup>2+</sup> channel, Kir2.1, Kir2.3, Kir4.1 channel, Na<sub>V</sub>β4 channel, CLIC1 channel | Mutant HTT protein affects the function of HVA Ca<sup>2+</sup>, Navβ4, Kir, and Cl<sup>-</sup> channel thereby disrupting K<sup>+</sup>/Cl<sup>-</sup> homeostasis and causes hyperexcitability in striatal neurons | (Ariano et al. (2005), Labbadia and Morimoto (2013), Miller and Bezprozvanny (2010), Oyama et al. (2006), and Waters et al. (2013)) |

Table 2 Defective Channels and Their Associated Mechanisms in NDDs—cont'd

| Neurodegenerative Disorders | Defective Channels | Associated Mechanisms | References |
|-----------------------------|--------------------|-----------------------|------------|
| Multiple sclerosis          | Naᵥ1.2, Naᵥ1.5,   | Altered Naᵥ⁺, Kᵥ⁺,   | Craner et al. (2004), Judge et al. (2006), Kornek et al. (2001), Meuth et al. (2009), Schattling et al. (2012), and Waxman (2006) |
|                             | Naᵥ1.6, Naᵥ1.8    | Ca²⁺ channels along   |            |
|                             | channel, Kᵥ1.1,   | with TRPM-4 cation    |            |
|                             | Kᵥ1.2, Kᵥ1.3,     | channel are responsible for ionic imbalance and Ca²⁺ overburden that interfere with the myelination process leading to cerebellar dysfunction |
|                             | Kᵥ3.1b channel,   |                       |            |
|                             | Caᵥ1.2, Caᵥ1.3,   |                       |            |
|                             | Caᵥ1.4, Caᵥ2.2    |                       |            |
|                             | channel, TRPM-    |                       |            |
|                             | 4 channel         |                       |            |
| Amyotrophic                  | Naᵥ1.5 channel,   | Stress-affected       | Gonzalez et al. (2011), Israelson et al. (2010), Kanai et al. (2006), Shibuya et al. (2011), and Zona et al. (2006) |
| lateral sclerosis           | Kᵥ1.2 channel,    | defective Naᵥ⁺, Kᵥ⁺, |            |
|                             | L-, N-, P/Q-,     | Ca²⁺, VDAC1/porin1 channels are responsible for ionic imbalance, axonal hyperexcitability, and mitochondrial apoptosis thereby leading to neurodegeneration |
|                             | T-type Ca²⁺       |                       |            |
|                             | channels,         |                       |            |
|                             | VDAC1/porin1      |                       |            |
|                             | channel           |                       |            |

---

### 3. THERAPEUTICS APPROACH TO CORRECT ALTERED CHANNEL FUNCTION IN NDDs

The malfunctioning of ion channels associated with neurological disorders is gradually being identified and makes it a remarkable area of neuroscience research. It has been spreading in a wide range of neurological outcomes, including memory, movement, and neuromuscular disorders. Most of these diseases develop in response to the genetic aberrations in the channel coding proteins that disturb the ionic balance in the brain and have been classified as neurological channelopathies. In different cases, these channels either get overly expressed or get repressed thereby contributing to the symptoms of the diseases. Therefore, it is crucial to control the ionic imbalance caused by the defective ion channels with the help of their blockers or stimulators in order to regain the ionic homeostasis. For this purpose, nowadays, several biological compounds are being implicated to
target defective ion channels and their associated receptors, which reduce cell toxicity. For instance, antiepileptic drug, levetiracetam, has been used to counteract the depletion of Kᵥ4.2 channel in AD in order to maintain the normal dendritic excitability and synaptic plasticity of neurons (Hall et al., 2015). Likewise, zonisamide has benefitted the PD patients by inhibiting T-type Ca²⁺ currents in the subthalamic nucleus, and this drug is now in clinical trials (Yang, Tai, Pan, & Kuo, 2014). Similarly, pyrimidine-2,4,6-triones has been used as an antagonist for Caᵥ1.3 (L-type) channel against cell loss in PD without any side effects (Kang et al., 2012). Moreover, L-type calcium channels are blocked with the orally deliverable dihydropyridines (DHPs: Adalat, Bayer; Norvasc, Pfizer; Plendil, AstraZeneca) in early-onset PD (Surmeier, Guzman, Sanchez-Padilla, & Schumacker, 2011). However, DHPs along with memantine are also used nowadays for the treatment of late-onset AD. They reduce the toxic effect of calcium ions by blocking Ca²⁺ entry into the neurons (Nimmrich & Eckert, 2013). Furthermore, in case of HD, benzamil (Ben), a chemical agent is used to block the function of acid-sensing ion channel (ASIC) in order to maintain the ion permeability in the brain (Wong et al., 2008). Similarly, many other biological compounds have been implicated and identified so far to target the defective ion channels in the brain that are summarized in Table 3. These biological compounds have their own specific targets, where they bind to act and reduce the severity of neurological outcomes. Additionally, an alternative approach for targeting ion channels could be modulation

Table 3 Ion Channel Modulators in Neurodegenerative Disorders

| Biomolecules | Specific Targets | Principle | References |
|--------------|-------------------|------------|------------|
| Waixenicin A | TRPM7 calcium-permeable divalent cation channels | NDDs (neuronal cell death under ischemic stresses) | Turlova et al. (2014) |
| Memantine (MN) | NMDA receptor | HD, AD, PD, and SCA1 | Anitha, Nandhu, Anju, Jes, and Paulose (2011), Izuka, Nakamura, and Hirai (2015), Tronci et al. (2014), and Tu, Okamoto, Lipton, and Xu (2014) |
Table 3 Ion Channel Modulators in Neurodegenerative Disorders—cont'd

| Biomolecules                          | Specific Targets                     | Phenotypes         | References                                                                 |
|---------------------------------------|--------------------------------------|--------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Tetrahydrohyperforin                  | TRPC channels                        | AD                 | Montecinos-Oliva, Schuller, Parodi, Melo, and Inestrosa (2014)               |
| CFM 6104                              | VGSCs                                | MS                 | Al-Izki et al. (2014)                                                   |
| Oxcarbazepine                         | VGSCs                                | MS                 | Lidster et al. (2013)                                                   |
| Zinc (Zn²⁺)                           | Amyloid channels                     | AD                 | Di Scala et al. (2014)                                                  |
| HC-067047, apamin, and charybdotoxin   | TRPV4 channels                       | Aβ-induced oxidative stress | Zhang, Papadopoulos, and Hamel (2013)                                  |
| Dalfampridine                         | VGKCs and ASIC1a                     | MS                 | Boiko, Kucher, Eaton, and Stockand (2013)                               |
| Mifepristone                          | Glucocorticoid receptors, VGCCs, and NMDA receptors | Hypobaric hypoxia (HH)-induced NDDs | Baitharu, Deep, Jain, Prasad, and Ilavazhagan (2013)                    |
| Nimodipine                            | VGCCs and NMDA receptors             | Iron-induced neurotoxicity in brain | Lockman et al. (2012)                                                   |
| Methyllycaconitine, α-bungarotoxin, and mecaylamine | nAChRs                      | AD                 | Ni, Marutle, and Nordberg (2013)                                       |
| Tetrodotoxin (TTX)                    | VGSCs                                | Axonal degeneration | Persson et al. (2013)                                                  |
| Black tea extract and rosmarinic acid | Mitochondrial ion channels           | AD and PD          | Camilleri et al. (2013)                                                |
| Epigallocatechin gallate (EGCG)       | nAChRs                               | AD                 | Zhang et al. (2014)                                                    |
| Dihydropyridine and benzothiazepine   | VDCCs and mitochondrial Na (+)/Ca(2+) exchanger (MNCX) | AD                 | Fernández-Morales et al. (2012)                                       |
| Scutellarin                           | nAChRs                               | Dementia           | Guo, Wang, and Huang (2011)                                             |
| Baicalein                             | NMDA receptors                       | NDDs               | Wang et al. (2011)                                                     |

Continued

Table 3 Ion Channel Modulators in Neurodegenerative Disorders—cont'd

| Biomolecules                          | Specific Targets                | Phenotypes                     | References                                      |
|---------------------------------------|---------------------------------|---------------------------------|------------------------------------------------|
| Icariin                              | VGCCs                           | AD                              | Li, Tsai, Li, and Wang (2010)                   |
| Total flavonoids of Jiawei Wuzi Yanzong prescription | VGCCs                           | AD                              | Li, Cai, Li, and Wang (2009)                   |
| Minocycline                          | Mitochondrial ion channels      | HD and ALS                      | Antonenko, Rokitskaya, Cooper, and Krasnikov (2010) |
| Nicotine                             | nAChRs                          | PD                              | Quik, Perez, and Bordia (2012)                 |
| Iptakalim                            | Mitochondrial ATP-sensitive potassium channels | PD                              | Hu et al. (2005)                               |
| 4-Hydroxy-2, 3-nonenal (4HN)          | NMDA receptors                  | Oxidative stress-associated NDDs | Lu, Chan, Haughey, Lee, and Mattson (2001)     |
| PcTx1 venom                          | ASIC1a                          | Neuronal injury following cerebral ischemia (stroke) | McCarthy, Rash, Chassagnon, King, and Widdop (2015) |
| GS967                                | VGSCs                           | Epilepsy                        | Anderson et al. (2014)                         |
| Flunarizine (FLN)                    | VGSCs                           | Migraine prophylaxis            | Ye et al. (2011)                               |
| Nifedipine and Nimodipine             | VGCCs                           | PD                              | Ritz et al. (2010)                             |
| Gabapentin                           | VGCCs                           | Epilepsy                        | Omori et al. (2009)                            |
| Amantadine                           | NMDA receptors                  | HD and PD                       | Verhagen et al. (2002) and Crosby, Deane, and Clarke (2003) |
| Dimebon                             | NMDA receptors                  | AD, HD, and schizophrenia       | Egea et al. (2014)                             |
| BL-1020                              | GABA<sub>A</sub>                | Schizophrenia                   | Geffen et al. (2009)                           |
of their accessory proteins, as they are responsible for controlling the channel kinetics. Moreover, neurological ion channel function may also be controlled by changes in voltage, chemical interaction, or by mechanical perturbation. These strategies may also be beneficial for therapeutic purposes to prevent neurological diseases caused by defective ion channels.

### 4. CONCLUSION

In this chapter, we described the potential role of ion channels in controlling the membrane physiology and maintaining brain homeostasis. Moreover, their impact on BBB and gap junctions has been demonstrated for better understanding of neurological diseases that are caused by ion channel dysfunctioning. Numerous ion channels have been catalogued that are associated with the onset of various chronic neurological disorders, and their functional roles have been elucidated. The experimental evidence reports that NDDs are supplemented by inflammations, neurotoxic protein accumulations, physiological stress, and mitochondrial dysfunctions. These pathological changes are responsible for disturbance in the normal physiological process and brain homeostasis that lead to the disease progression. We also described the architecture of ion channels associated with neurological disorders to demonstrate the mechanism of ion conductance in neurons that could be beneficial for designing novel drugs at specific target for therapeutic intervention. Further disease pathology of AD, PD, HD, MS, and ALS has been elucidated with respect to defective ion channels. These channels were found to be a causative factor for neurodegeneration by various mechanisms that include calcium overload, neuronal hyperexcitability, and altered membrane ion permeability, progressive loss of neuronal firing, mitochondrial apoptosis and interference with the myelination process. Additionally, channel modulators have been identified that play a crucial role in the reversing the chronic effects of aberrant ion channels. Moreover, unraveling their regulatory mechanism in neurodegeneration could shed light on emerging better therapeutic strategies.

### ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We would like to thanks the senior management of Delhi Technological University for constant support and encouragement. There is no conflict or competing interest declared by authors.
GLOSSARY

**Voltage-gated ion channels** A class of transmembrane pores forming proteins, which are establishing the resting potential, action potential, electrical firing and regulating the efflux and influx of ions across the membrane by opening and closing of gates.

**Blood–Brain Barrier (BBB)** A dynamic semipermeable filter that allows only the essential and rich nutrients to cross the central nervous system and interplay a complex function between different types of cell, for instance, endothelial cells, astrocytes, and pericytes. It inhibits the entry of toxic chemicals and pathogens that harm the central nervous system. This endothelial membrane is very important to regulate and maintain the brain homeostasis.

**Gap junction** A bunch of intracellular channels which allow direct cell–cell transfer of ions and small molecules.

**Channelopathy** Heterogeneous group of disorders caused due to improper function of ion channels that are located in the membrane or in various cell organelles.


REFERENCES

Abbott, N. J., Ronnback, L., & Hansson, E. (2006). Astrocyte–endothelial interactions at the blood–brain barrier. *Nature Reviews. Neuroscience*, 7, 41–53.

Abbracchio, M. P., Burnstock, G., Verkhratsky, A., & Zimmermann, H. (2009). Purinergic signaling in the nervous system: An overview. *Trends in Neurosciences*, 32, 19–29.

Al-Izki, S., Pryce, G., Hankey, D. J., Lidster, K., von Kutzleben, S. M., Browne, L., et al. (2014). Lesional-targeting of neuroprotection to the inflammatory penumbra in experimental multiple sclerosis. *Brain*, 137, 92–108.

Ambrosino, P., Alaimo, A., Bartollino, S., Manocchio, L., De Maria, M., Mosca, I., et al. (2015). Epilepsy-causing mutations in Kv7.2 C-terminus affect binding and functional modulation by calmodulin. *Biochimica et Biophysica Acta*, 1852, 1856–1866.

Anderson, L. L., Thompson, C. H., Hawkins, N. A., Nath, R. D., Petersohn, A. A., & Rajamani, S. (2014). Antiepileptic activity of preferential inhibitors of persistent sodium current. *Epilepsia*, 55, 1274–1283.

Anitha, M., Nandhu, M. S., Anju, T. R., Jes, P., & Paulose, C. S. (2011). Targeting glutamate mediated excitotoxicity in Huntington’s disease: Neural progenitors and partial glutamate antagonist—Memantine. *Medical Hypotheses*, 76, 138–140.

Antonenko, Y. N., Rokitskaya, T. I., Cooper, A. J., & Krasnikov, B. F. (2010). Minocycline chelates Ca2+, binds to membranes, and depolarizes mitochondria by formation of Ca2+-dependent ion channels. *Journal of Bioenergetics and Biomembranes*, 42, 151–163.

Ariano, M. A., Cepeda, C., Calvert, C. R., Flores-Hernández, J., Hernández-Echeagaray, E., Klapstein, G. J., et al. (2005). Striatal potassium channel dysfunction in Huntington’s disease transgenic mice. *Journal of Neurophysiology*, 93, 2565–2574.

Ariano, P., Enriquez, J., Gilardino, A., Ferraro, M., Lovisolo, D., & Distasi, C. (2006). Calcium signals and the in vitro migration of chick ciliary ganglion cells. *Cell Calcium*, 40, 63–71.

Baitharu, I., Deep, S. N., Jain, V., Prasad, D., & Ilavazhagan, G. (2013). Inhibition of glucocorticoid receptors ameliorates hypobaric hypoxia induced memory impairment in rat. *Behavioural Brain Research*, 240, 76–86.

Barnett, M. W., & Larkman, P. M. (2007). The action potential. *Practical Neurology*, 7, 192–197.

Basali, D., & Prayson, R. A. (2015). Episodic weakness and vacuolar myopathy in hypokalemic periodic paralysis. *Journal of Clinical Neuroscience*, 22, 1846–1847.

Bellone, R. R., Holl, H., Setaluri, V., Devi, S., Maddodi, N., Archer, S., et al. (2013). Evidence for a retroviral insertion in TRPM1 as the cause of congenital stationary night blindness and leopard complex spotting in the horse. *PLoS One*, 8, e78280.

Bhullar, K. S., & Rupasinghe, H. P. (2013). Polyphenols: Multipotent therapeutic agents in neurodegenerative diseases. *Oxidative Medicine and Cellular Longevity*, 2013, 891748.

Black, J. A., Newcombe, J., Trapp, B. D., & Waxman, S. G. (2007). Sodium channel expression within chronic multiple sclerosis plaques. *Journal of Neuropathology & Experimental Neurology*, 66, 828–837.

Black, J. A., Newcombe, J., & Waxman, S. G. (2010). Astrocytes within multiple sclerosis lesions upregulate sodium channel Nav1.5. *Brain*, 133, 835–846.

Boiko, N., Kucher, V., Eaton, B. A., & Stockand, J. D. (2013). Inhibition of neuronal degenerin/epithelial Na+ channels by the multiple sclerosis drug 4-aminopyridine. *The Journal of Biological Chemistry*, 288, 9418–9427.

Boillot, M., & Baulac, S. (2015). Genetic models of focal epilepsies. *Journal of Neuroscience Methods*, S0165–0270, 00220–00224.

Boycott, K. M., Pearce, W. G., & Bech-Hansen, N. T. (2000). Clinical variability among patients with incomplete X-linked congenital stationary night blindness and a founder mutation in CACNA1F. *Canadian Journal of Ophthalmology*, 35, 204–213.

Bruun, M., Hjermind, L. E., Thomsen, C., Danielsen, E., Thomsen, L. L., Pinborg, L. H., et al. (2015). Familial hemiplegic migraine type 1 associated with parkinsonism: A case report. *Case Reports in Neurology*, 14, 84–89.

Buckingham, S. D., Jones, A. K., Brown, L. A., & Sattelle, D. B. (2009). Nicotinic acetylcholine receptor signalling: Roles in Alzheimer’s disease and amyloid neuroprotection. *Pharmacological Reviews*, 61, 39–61.

Camandola, S., & Mattson, M. P. (2011). Aberrant subcellular neuronal calcium regulation in aging and Alzheimer’s disease. *Biochimica et Biophysica Acta*, 1813, 965–973.

Camilleri, A., Zarb, C., Caruana, M., Ostermeier, U., Ghio, S., & Högen, T. (2013). Mitochondrial membrane permeabilisation by amyloid aggregates and protection by polyphenols. *Biochimica et Biophysica Acta*, 1828, 2532–2543.

Cepeda, C., Wu, N., André, V. M., Cummings, D. M., & Levine, M. S. (2006). The corticostriatal pathway in Huntington’s disease. *Progress in Neurobiology*, 81, 253–271.

Chau, A., Roitfarb, M., Carabuena, J. M., & Camann, W. (2015). Anesthetic management of a parturient with hyperekplexia. *A & A Case Reports*, 4, 103–106.

Chen, C. P. (2012). Prenatal diagnosis and genetic analysis of fetal akinesia deformation sequence and multiple pterygium syndrome associated with neuromuscular junction disorders: A review. *Taiwanese Journal of Obstetrics & Gynecology*, 51, 12–17.

Chung, S., Lee, J., Joe, E. H., & Uhm, D. Y. (2001). Beta-amyloid peptide induces the expression of voltage dependent outward rectifying K+ channels in rat microglia. *Neuroscience Letters*, 300, 67–70.

Conti, V., Aracri, P., Chiti, L., Brusco, S., Mari, F., & Marini, C. (2015). Nocturnal frontal lobe epilepsy with paroxysmal arousals due to CHRNA2 loss of function. *Neurology*, 14, 1520–1528.

Cooper, E. C., & Jan, L. Y. (1999). Ion channel genes and human neurological disease: Recent progress, prospects, and challenges. *Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America*, 96, 4759–4766.

Craner, M. J., Newcombe, J., Black, J. A., Hartle, C., Cuzner, M. L., & Waxman, S. G. (2004). Molecular changes in neurons in multiple sclerosis: Altered axonal expression of Nav1.2 and Nav1.6 sodium channels and Na+/Ca2+ exchanger. *Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America*, 101, 8168–8173.

Crosby, N. J., Deane, K. H., & Clarke, C. E. (2003). Amantadine for dyskinesia in Parkinson’s disease. *Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews*, 2, CD003467.

Cross, J. H., Arora, R., Heckemann, R. A., Gunny, R., Chong, K., Carr, L., et al. (2013). Neurological features of epilepsy, ataxia, sensorineural deafness, tubulopathy syndrome. *Developmental Medicine and Child Neurology*, 55, 846–856.

Damarjian, T. G., Craner, M. J., Black, J. A., & Waxman, S. G. (2004). Upregulation and colocalization of p75 and Nav1.8 in Purkinje neurons in experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis. *Neuroscience Letters*, 369, 186–190.

Danysz, W., & Parsons, C. G. (2012). Alzheimer’s disease, β-amyloid, glutamate, NMDA receptors and memantine—Searching for the connections. *British Journal of Pharmacology*, 167, 324–352.

Delgado-Escueta, A. V., Koeleman, B. P., Bailey, J. N., Medina, M. T., & Durón, R. M. (2013). The quest for juvenile myoclonic epilepsy genes. *Epilepsy & Behavior*, 1, 52–57.

Depienne, C., Bugiani, M., Dupuits, C., Galanaud, D., Touitou, V., Postma, N., et al. (2013). Brain white matter oedema due to ClC-2 chloride channel deficiency: An observational analytical study. *Lancet Neurology*, 12, 659–668.

Di Scala, C., Troadec, J. D., Lelièvre, C., Garmy, N., Fantini, J., & Chahinian, H. (2014). Mechanism of cholesterol-assisted oligomeric channel formation by a short Alzheimer β-amyloid peptide. *Journal of Neurochemistry*, 128, 186–195.

Dragicevic, E., Poetschke, C., Duda, J., Schlaudraff, F., Lammel, S., Schiemann, J., et al. (2014). Cav1.3 channels control D2-autoreceptor responses via NCS-1 in substantia nigra dopamine neurons. *Brain*, 137, 2287–2302.

Dragicevic, E., Schiemann, J., & Liss, B. (2015). Dopamine midbrain neurons in health and Parkinson’s disease: Emerging roles of voltage-gated calcium channels and ATP-sensitive potassium channels. *Neuroscience*, 284, 798–814.

Eckle, V. S., Shcheglovitov, A., Vitko, I., Dey, D., Yap, C. C., Winckler, B., et al. (2014). Mechanisms by which a CACNA1H mutation in epilepsy patients increases seizure susceptibility. *The Journal of Physiology*, 592, 795–809.

Egea, J., Romero, A., Parada, E., León, R., Dal-Cim, T., & López, M. G. (2014). Neuroprotective effect of dimebon against ischemic neuronal damage. *Neuroscience*, 267, 11–21.

Eijkelkamp, N., Linley, J. E., Baker, M. D., Minett, M. S., Cregg, R., Werdehausen, R., et al. (2012). Neurological perspectives on voltage-gated sodium channels. *Brain*, 135, 2585–2612.

Emery, E. C., Habib, A. M., Cox, J. J., Nicholas, A. K., Gribble, F. M., Woods, C. G., et al. (2015). Novel SCN9A mutations underlying extreme pain phenotypes: Unexpected electrophysiological and clinical phenotype correlations. *The Journal of Neuroscience*, 35, 7674–7681.

Etemad, S., Campiglio, M., Obermair, G. J., & Flucher, B. E. (2014). The juvenile myoclonic epilepsy mutant of the calcium channel β(4) subunit displays normal nuclear targeting in nerve and muscle cells. *Channels (Austin, Tex.)*, 8, 334–343.

Evangelista, T., Bansagi, B., Pyle, A., Griffin, H., Douroudis, K., Polvikoski, T., et al. (2015). Phenotypic variability of TRPV4 related neuropathies. *Neuromuscular Disorders*, 6, 516–521.

Fernández-Morales, J. C., Arranz-Tagarro, J. A., Calvo-Gallardo, E., Maroto, M., Padín, J. F., & García, A. G. (2012). Stabilizers of neuronal and mitochondrial calcium cycling as a strategy for developing a medicine for Alzheimer’s disease. *ACS Chemical Neuroscience*, 3, 873–883.

Figueroa, V. A., Retamal, M. A., Cea, L. A., Salas, J. D., Vargas, A. A., Verdugo, C. A., et al. (2014). Extracellular gentamicin reduces the activity of connexin hemichannels and interferes with purinergic Ca(2+) signaling in HeLa cells. *Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience*, 4(8), 265.

Fitzner, D., & Simons, M. (2010). Chronic progressive multiple sclerosis—Pathogenesis of neurodegeneration and therapeutic strategies. *Current Neuropharmacology*, 8, 305–315.

Friedman, A., Kaufer, D., & Heinemann, U. (2009). Blood–brain barrier break-down-inducing astrocytic transformation: Novel targets for the prevention of epilepsy. *Epilepsy Research*, 85, 142–149.

Gao, Y., Yechikov, S., Vázquez, A. E., Chen, D., & Nie, L. (2013). Impaired surface expression and conductance of the KCNQ4 channel lead to sensorineural hearing loss. *Journal of Cellular and Molecular Medicine*, 17, 889–900.

Geffen, Y., Nudelman, A., Gil-Ad, I., Rephaeli, A., Huang, M., Savitsky, K., et al. (2009). BL-1020: A novel antipsychotic drug with GABAergic activity and low catalepsy, is efficacious in a rat model of schizophrenia. *European Neuropsychopharmacology*, 1, 1–13.

George, A. L., Jr. (2004). Inherited channelopathies associated with epilepsy. *Epilepsy Currents—American Epilepsy Society*, 4, 65–70.

Gong, X. G., Sun, H. M., Zhang, Y., Zhang, S. J., Gao, Y. S., Feng, J., et al. (2014). Da-bu-yin-wan and qian-zheng-san to neuroprotect the mouse model of Parkinson’s disease. *Evidence-Based Complementary and Alternative Medicine*, 2014, 729195.

Gonzalez, L. E., Kotler, M. L., Vattino, L. G., Conti, E., Reisin, R. C., Mulatz, K. J., et al. (2011). Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis-immunoglobulins selectively interact with neuromuscular junctions expressing P/Q-type calcium channels. *Journal of Neurochemistry*, 119, 826–838.

Goodenough, D. A., Paul, D. L., & Jesaitis, L. (1988). Topological distribution of two connexin32 antigenic sites in intact and split rodent hepatocyte gap junctions. *The Journal of Cell Biology*, 107, 1817–1824.

Gouaux, E., & Mackinnon, R. (2005). Principles of selective ion transport in channels and pumps. *Science*, 310, 1461–1465.

Guatteo, E., Carunchio, I., Pieri, M., Albo, F., Canu, N., Mercuri, N. B., et al. (2007). Altered calcium homeostasis in motor neurons following AMPA receptor but not voltage-dependent calcium channels’ activation in a genetic model of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. *Neurobiology of Disease*, 28, 90–100.

Guo, L. L., Wang, Y. L., & Huang, Y. (2011). Effect of scutellarin on expressions of nicotinic acetylcholine receptor protein and mRNA in the brains of dementia rats. *Zhongguo Zhong xi yi jie he za zhi Zhongguo Zhongxiyi jiehe zazhi*, 31, 789–793.

Gürsoy, S., & Erçal, D. (2015 Aug 13). Diagnostic approach to genetic causes of early-onset epileptic encephalopathy. *Journal of Child Neurology*. pii: 0883073815599262. [Epub ahead of print] PubMed PMID:26271793.

Hall, A. M., Throesch, B. T., Buckingham, S. C., Markwardt, S. J., Peng, Y., Wang, Q., et al. (2015). Tau-dependent Kv4.2 depletion and dendritic hyperexcitability in a mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease. *The Journal of Neuroscience*, 35, 6221–6230.

Hardy, J. A., & Higgins, G. A. (1992). Alzheimer’s disease—The amyloid cascade hypothesis. *Science*, 256, 184–185.

Hartfield, E. M., Yamasaki-Mann, M., Ribeiro Fernandes, H. J., Vowles, J., James, W. S., Cowley, S. A., et al. (2014). Physiological characterisation of human iPS-derived dopaminergic neurons. *PLoS One*, 9, e87388.

Helbig, I. (2015). Genetic causes of generalized epilepsies. *Seminars in Neurology*, 35, 288–292.

Hirose, S. (2014). Mutant GABA(A) receptor subunits in genetic (idiopathic) epilepsy. *Progress in Brain Research*, 213, 55–85.

Hu, L. F., Wang, S., Shi, X. R., Yao, H. H., Sun, Y. H., Ding, J. H., et al. (2005). ATP-sensitive potassium channel opener iptakalim protected against the cytotoxicity of MPP+ on SH-SY5Y cells by decreasing extracellular glutamate level. *Journal of Neurochemistry*, 94, 1570–1579.

Izuka, A., Nakamura, K., & Hirai, H. (2015). Long-term oral administration of the NMDA receptor antagonist memantine extends life span in spinocerebellar ataxia type 1 knock-in mice. *Neuroscience Letters*, 592, 37–41.
Irie, T., Matsuzaki, Y., Sekino, Y., & Hirai, H. (2014). Kv3.3 channels harbouring a mutation of spinocerebellar ataxia type 13 alter excitability and induce cell death in cultured cerebellar Purkinje cells. *The Journal of Physiology*, 592, 229–247.

Ishii, A., Kanaumi, T., Sohda, M., Misumi, Y., Zhang, B., Kakinuma, N., et al. (2014). Association of nonsense mutation in GABRG2 with abnormal trafficking of GABAA receptors in severe epilepsy. *Epilepsy Research*, 108, 420–432.

Israelson, A., Arbel, N., Da Cruz, S., Ilieva, H., Yamanaka, K., Shoshan-Barmatz, V., et al. (2010). Misfolded mutant SOD1 directly inhibits VDAC1 conductance in a mouse model of inherited ALS. *Neuron*, 67, 575–587.

Itkin, A., Dupres, V., Dufrêne, Y. F., Bechinger, B., Ruysschaert, J. M., & Raussens, V. (2011). Calcium ions promote formation of amyloid β-peptide (1-40) oligomers causally implicated in neuronal toxicity of Alzheimer’s disease. *PLoS One*, 6, e18250.

Judge, S. I., Lee, J. M., Bever, C. T., Jr., & Hoffman, P. M. (2006). Voltage-gated potassium channels in multiple sclerosis: Overview and new implications for treatment of central nervous system inflammation and degeneration. *Journal of Rehabilitation Research and Development*, 43, 111–122.

Kallen, R. G., Sheng, Z. H., Yang, J., Chen, L. Q., Rogart, R. B., & Barchi, R. L. (1990). Primary structure and expression of a sodium channel characteristic of denervated and immature rat skeletal muscle. *Neuron*, 4, 233–242.

Kanai, K., Kuwabara, S., Misawa, S., Tamura, N., Ogawara, K., Nakata, M., et al. (2006). Altered axonal excitability properties in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: Impaired potassium channel function related to disease stage. *Brain*, 129, 953–962.

Kang, S., Cooper, G., Dunne, S. F., Dusel, B., Luan, C. H., Surmeier, D. J., et al. (2012). CaV1.3-selective L-type calcium channel antagonists as potential new therapeutics for Parkinson’s disease. *Nature Communications*, 3, 1146.

Kanno, Y., & Loewenstein, W. R. (1964). Low-resistance coupling between gland cells. Some observations on intercellular contact membranes and intracellular pace. *Nature*, 201, 194–195.

Kaushal, V., Koeberle, P. D., Wang, Y., & Schlichter, L. C. (2007). The Ca2+-activated K+ channel KCNN4/KCa3.1 contributes to microglia activation and nitric oxide-dependent neurodegeneration. *The Journal of Neuroscience*, 27, 234–244.

Kim, J. B. (2014). Channelopathies. *Korean Journal of Pediatrics*, 57, 1–18.

Kim, S., & Rhim, H. (2011). Effects of amyloid-β peptides on voltage-gated L-type Ca(V)1.2 and Ca(V)1.3 Ca(2+) channels. *Molecules and Cells*, 32, 289–294.

Kimura, F., Smith, R. G., Delbono, O., Nyormoi, O., Schneider, T., Nastainczyk, W., et al. (1994). Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis patient antibodies label Ca2+ channel alpha 1 subunit. *Annals of Neurology*, 35, 164–171.

Komuro, H., & Kumada, T. (2005). Ca2+ transients control CNS neuronal migration. *Cell Calcium*, 37, 387–393.

Koran, M. E., Hohman, T. J., & Thornton-Wells, T. A. (2014). Genetic interactions found between calcium channel genes modulate amyloid load measured by positron emission tomography. *Human Genetics*, 133, 85–93.

Kornek, B., Storch, M. K., Bauer, J., Djamshidian, A., Weisert, R., Wallstroem, E., et al. (2001). Distribution of a calcium channel subunit in dystrophic axons in multiple sclerosis and experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis. *Brain*, 24, 1114–1124.

Kremeyer, B., Lopera, F., Cox, J. J., Momin, A., Rugiero, F., Marsh, S., et al. (2010). A gain-of-function mutation in TRPA1 causes familial episodic pain syndrome. *Neuron*, 66, 671–680.

Kumar, D., Ambasta, R. K., & Kumar, P. (2014). Mutational consequences of aberrant ion channels in neurological disorders. *The Journal of Membrane Biology*, 247, 1083–1127.

Kurachi, Y., & North, A. (2004). Ion channels: Their structure, function and control an overview. *The Journal of Physiology*, 554, 245–247.
Labbadia, J., & Morimoto, R. I. (2013). Huntington’s disease: Underlying molecular mechanisms and emerging concepts. *Trends in Biochemical Sciences*, 38, 378–385.

Lassche, S., Lainez, S., Bloem, B. R., van de Warrenburg, B. P., Hofmeijer, J., Lemmink, H. H., et al. (2014). A novel KCNA1 mutation causing episodic ataxia type I. *Muscle & Nerve*, 2, 289–291.

Lawrence, T. S., Beers, W. H., & Gilula, N. B. (1978). Transmission of hormonal stimulation by cell-to-cell communication. *Nature*, 272, 501–506.

Lee, U. S., & Cui, J. (2009). β subunit-specific modulations of BK channel function by a mutation associated with epilepsy and dyskinesia. *The Journal of Physiology*, 587, 1481–1498.

Lemoine, D., Jiang, R., Taly, A., Chataigneau, T., Specht, A., & Grutter, T. (2012). Ligand-gated ion channels: New insights into neurological disorders and ligand recognition. *Chemical Reviews*, 112, 6285–6318.

Lennon, V. A., & Lambert, E. H. (1989). Autoantibodies bind solubilized calcium channel-omega-conotoxin complexes from small cell lung carcinoma: A diagnostic aid for Lambert-Eaton myasthenic syndrome. *Mayo Clinic Proceedings*, 64, 1498–1504.

Li, L., Cai, H., Li, L., & Wang, X. (2009). Effect of total flavonoids of jiawei wuzi yanzong prescription on VGCCs induced by amyloid-beta25–35 peptide in CA1 pyramidal neurons of rat hippocampal slice. *Zhongguo Zhong xi yi jie he za zhi Zhongxiyi jiehe zazhi*, 34, 1975–1978.

Li, L., Tsai, H. J., Li, L., & Wang, X. M. (2010). Icariin inhibits the increased inward calcium currents induced by amyloid-beta(25–35) peptide in CA1 pyramidal neurons of neonatal rat hippocampal slice. *The American Journal of Chinese Medicine*, 38, 113–125.

Lidster, K., Jackson, S. J., Ahmed, Z., Munro, P., Coffey, P., Giovannoni, G., et al. (2013). Neuroprotection in a novel mouse model of multiple sclerosis. *PLoS One*, 8, e79188.

Lin, Y., Gao, H., Liu, Y., Liang, X., Liu, X., Wang, Z., et al. (2015). Two novel mutations in the bestrophin-1 gene and associated clinical observations in patients with best vitelliform macular dystrophy. *Molecular Medicine Reports*, 12, 2584–2588.

Liu, T., Kong, D., Shah, B. P., Ye, C., Koda, S., Saunders, A., et al. (2012). Fasting activation of AgRP neurons requires NMDA receptors and involves spinogenesis and increased excitatory tone. *Neuron*, 73, 511–522.

Lo, E. H., Dalkara, T., & Moskowitz, M. A. (2003). Mechanisms, challenges and opportunities in stroke. *Nature Reviews. Neuroscience*, 4, 399–415.

Lockman, J. A., Geldenhuys, W. J., Jones-Higgins, M. R., Patrick, J. D., Allen, D. D., & Van der Schyf, C. J. (2012). NGP1–01, a multi-targeted polycyclic cage amine, attenuates brain endothelial cell death in iron overload conditions. *Brain Research*, 1489, 133–139.

Lodish, H., Berk, A., Zipursky, S. L., Matsudaira, P., Baltimore, D., & Darnell, J. (2000). *Molecular cell biology* (4th ed.). New York: W.H. Freeman. Section 21.4, Chapter 15.1–15.8.

Lu, C., Chan, S. L., Haughey, N., Lee, W. T., & Mattson, M. P. (2001). Selective and biphasic effect of the membrane lipid peroxidation product 4-hydroxy-2,3-nonenal on N-methyl-D-aspartate channels. *Journal of Neurochemistry*, 78, 577–589.

Lüscher, C., & Slesinger, P. A. (2010). Emerging roles for G protein-gated inwardly rectifying potassium (GIRK) channels in health and disease. *Nature Reviews. Neuroscience*, 5, 301–315.

Madry, C., Haglerød, C., & Attwell, D. (2010). The role of pannexin hemichannels in the anoxic depolarization of hippocampal pyramidal cells. *Brain*, 133, 3755–3763.

Marmorstein, A. D., Kinnick, T. R., Stanton, J. B., Johnson, A. A., Lynch, R. M., & Marmorstein, L. Y. (2015). Bestrophin-1 influences transepithelial electrical properties and Ca2+ signaling in human retinal pigment epithelium. *Molecular Vision*, 21, 347–359.

Massano, J., & Bhatia, K. P. (2012). Clinical approach to Parkinson’s disease: Features, diagnosis, and principles of management. *Cold Spring Harbor Perspectives in Medicine*, 2, a008870.

McCarthy, C. A., Rash, L. D., Chassagnon, I. R., King, G. F., & Widdop, R. E. (2015). PcTx1 affords neuroprotection in a conscious model of stroke in hypertensive rats via selective inhibition of ASIC1a. *Neuropharmacology*, 99, 650–657.

Meisler, M. H., & Kearney, J. A. (2005). Sodium channel mutations in epilepsy and other neurological disorders. *Journal of Clinical Investigation*, 115, 2010–2017.

Mese, G., Richard, G., & White, T. W. (2006). Gap junctions: Basic structure and function. *Journal of Investigative Dermatology*, 127, 2516–2524.

Meuth, S. G., Melzer, N., Kleinschnitz, C., Budde, T., & Wiendl, H. (2009). Multiple sclerosis a channelopathy? Targeting ion channels and transporters in inflammatory neurodegeneration. *Der Nervenarzt*, 80, 422–429.

Miceli, F., Striano, P., Soldovieri, M. V., Fontana, A., Nardello, R., & Robbiano, A. (2015). A novel KCNQ3 mutation in familial epilepsy with focal seizures and intellectual disability. *Epilepsia*, 56, e15–e20.

Michalakis, S., Koch, S., Sothilingam, V., Garcia Garrido, M., Tanimoto, N., Schulze, E., et al. (2014). Gene therapy restores vision and delays degeneration in the CNGB1(–/–) mouse model of retinitis pigmentosa. *Advances in Experimental Medicine and Biology*, 801, 733–739.

Mihaylova, V., Scola, R. H., Gervini, B., Lorenzoni, P. J., Kay, C. K., Werneck, L. C., et al. (2010). Molecular characterisation of congenital myasthenic syndromes in Southern Brazil. *Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery & Psychiatry*, 81, 973–977.

Miller, B. R., & Bezprozvanny, I. (2010). Corticostriatal circuit dysfunction in Huntington’s disease: Intersection of glutamate, dopamine and calcium. *Future Neurology*, 5, 735–756.

Mocali, A., Della Malva, N., Abete, C., Mitidieri Costanza, V. A., Bavazzano, A., & Boddi, V. (2014). Altered proteolysis in fibroblasts of Alzheimer patients with predictive implications for subjects at risk of disease. *International Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease*, 2014, 520152.

Møller, R. S., Heron, S. E., Larsen, L. H., Lim, C. X., Ricos, M. G., Bayly, M. A., et al. (2015). Mutations in KCNT1 cause a spectrum of focal epilepsies. *Epilepsia*, 56, e114–e120.

Montecinos-Oliva, C., Schuller, A., Parodi, J., Melo, F., & Inestrosa, N. C. (2014). Effects of tetrahydrohyperforin in mouse hippocampal slices: Neuroprotection, long-term potentiation and TRPC channels. *Current Medicinal Chemistry*, 21, 3494–3506.

Murayama, T., Kurebayashi, N., Yamazawa, T., Oyamada, H., Suzuki, J., Kanemaru, K., et al. (2015). Divergent activity profiles of type 1 ryanodine receptor channels carrying malignant hyperthermia and central core disease mutations in the amino-terminal region. *PLoS One*, 10, e0130606.

Mylvaganam, S., Ramani, M., Krawczyk, M., & Carlen, P. L. (2014). Roles of gap junctions, connections, and pannexins in epilepsy. *Frontiers in Physiology*, 5, 172.

Nakayama, J. (2009). Progress in searching for the febrile seizure susceptibility genes. *Brain & Development*, 5, 359–365.

Neelands, T. R., King, A. P., & Macdonaldm, R. L. (2000). Functional expression of L-, N-, P/Q-, and R-type calcium channels in the human NT2-N cell line. *Journal of Neurophysiology*, 84, 2933–2944.

Nery, A. A., Magdesian, M. H., Trujillo, C. A., Sathler, L. B., Juliano, M. A., Juliano, L., et al. (2013). Rescue of amyloid-beta-induced inhibition of nicotinic acetylcholine receptors by a peptide homologous to the nicotine binding domain of the alpha 7 sub-type. *PLoS One*, 8, e67194.

Ni, R., Marutle, A., & Nordberg, A. (2013). Modulation of α7 nicotinic acetylcholine receptor and fibrillar amyloid-β interactions in Alzheimer’s disease brain. *Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease*, 33, 841–851.

Nimmrich, V., & Eckert, A. (2013). Calcium channel blockers and dementia. *British Journal of Pharmacology*, 169, 1203–1210.

Nimmrich, V., & Gross, G. (2012). P/Q-type calcium channel modulators. *British Journal of Pharmacology*, 167, 741–759.

Nishiguchi, K. M., Sandberg, M. A., Gorji, N., Berson, E. L., & Dryja, T. P. (2005). Cone cGMP-gated channel mutations and clinical findings in patients with achromatopsia, macular degeneration, and other hereditary cone diseases. *Human Mutation*, 25, 248–258.

Novarino, G., Fabrizi, C., Tonini, R., Denti, M. A., Malchiodi-Albedi, F., Lauro, G. M., et al. (2004). Involvement of the intracellular ion channel CLIC1 in microglia-mediated beta-amyloid-induced neurotoxicity. *The Journal of Neuroscience*, 24, 5322–5330.

Ohba, C., Kato, M., Takahashi, N., Osaka, H., Shiihara, T., Tohyama, J., et al. (2015). De novo KCNT1 mutations in early-onset epileptic encephalopathy. *Epilepsia*, 56, e121–e128.

Omidi, Y., & Gumbleton, M. (2005). Biological membranes and barriers. In R. Mahato (Ed.), *Biomaterials for delivery and targeting of proteins and nucleic acids* (pp. 220–263). New York: CRC Press.

Omori, Y., Kagaya, K., Enomoto, R., Sasaki, A., Andoh, T., Nojima, H., et al. (2009). A mouse model of sural nerve injury-induced neuropathy: gabapentin inhibits pain-related behaviors and the hyperactivity of wide-dynamic range neurons in the dorsal horn. *Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences*, 109, 532–539.

Ördög, B., Hategan, L., Kovács, M., Seprényi, G., Kohajda, Z., Nagy, I., et al. (2015). Identification and functional characterisation of a novel KCNJ2 mutation, Val302del, causing Andersen-Tawil syndrome. *Canadian Journal of Physiology and Pharmacology*, 17, 1–7.

Orellana, J. A., Sáez, P. J., Shoji, K. F., Schalper, K. A., Palacios-Prado, N., Velarde, V., et al. (2009). Modulation of brain hemichannels and gap junction channels by pro-inflammatory agents and their possible role in neurodegeneration. *Antioxidants & Redox Signaling*, 2, 369–399.

Oulès, B., Del Prete, D., Greco, B., Zhang, X., Lauritzen, I., Sevalle, J., et al. (2012). Ryanodine receptor blockade reduces amyloid-β load and memory impairments in Tg2576 mouse model of Alzheimer disease. *The Journal of Neuroscience*, 32, 11820–11834.

Oyama, F., Miyazaki, H., Sakamoto, N., Becquet, C., Machida, Y., Kaneko, K., et al. (2006). Sodium channel beta4 subunit: Down-regulation and possible involvement in neuritic degeneration in Huntington’s disease transgenic mice. *Journal of Neurochemistry*, 98, 518–529.

Parri, R. H., & Dineley, T. K. (2010). Nicotinic acetylcholine receptor interaction with beta-amyloid: Molecular, cellular, and physiological consequences. *Current Alzheimer Research*, 7, 27–39.

Parton, L. E., Ye, C. P., Coppari, R., Enriori, P. J., Choi, B., Zhang, C. Y., et al. (2007). Glucose sensing by POMC neurons regulates glucose homeostasis and is impaired in obesity. *Nature*, 449, 228–232.

Persson, A. K., Kim, I., Zhao, P., Estacion, M., Black, J. A., & Waxman, S. G. (2013). Sodium channels contribute to degeneration of dorsal root ganglion neurites induced by mitochondrial dysfunction in an in vitro model of axonal injury. *The Journal of Neuroscience*, 3319, 250–261.

Pietrobon, D. (2002). Calcium channels and channelopathies of the central nervous system. *Molecular Neurobiology*, 25, 31–50.

Pouloupolou, C., Markakis, I., Davaki, P., Tsaltas, E., Rombos, A., Hatzimanolis, A., et al. (2010). Aberrant modulation of a delayed rectifier potassium channel by glutamate in Alzheimer’s disease. *Neurobiology of Disease*, 37, 339–348.

Qin, L. Y., Wu, X. F., Block, M. L., Liu, Y. X., Bresse, G. R., Hong, J. S., et al. (2007). Systemic LPS causes chronic neuroinflammation and progressive neurodegeneration. *Glia*, 55, 453–462.

Quik, M., Perez, X. A., & Bordia, T. (2012). Nicotine as a potential neuroprotective agent for Parkinson’s disease. *Movement Disorders*, 8, 947–957.

Quintanilla, R. A., Orellana, J. A., & Von Bernhardi, R. (2012). Understanding risk factors for Alzheimer’s disease: Interplay of neuroinflammation, connexin-based communication and oxidative stress. *Archives of Medical Research*, 43, 632–644.

Ritz, B., Rhodes, S. L., Qian, L., Schernhammer, E., Olsen, J. H., & Friis, S. (2010). L-type calcium channel blockers and Parkinson disease in Denmark. *Annals of Neurology*, 67, 600–606.

Rubin, L. L., & Staddon, J. M. (1999). The cell biology of the blood-brain barrier. *Annual Review of Neuroscience*, 22, 11–28.

Rus, H., Pardo, C. A., Hu, L., Darrah, E., Cudrici, C., Niculescu, T., et al. (2005). The voltage-gated potassium channel Kv1.3 is highly expressed on inflammatory infiltrates in multiple sclerosis brain. *Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America*, 102, 11094–11099.

Schattling, B., Steinbach, K., Thies, E., Kruse, M., Menigoz, A., Ufer, F., et al. (2012). TRPM4 cation channel mediates axonal and neuronal degeneration in experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis and multiple sclerosis. *Nature Medicine*, 18, 1805–1811.

Schiemann, J., Schlaudraff, F., Klose, V., Bingmer, M., Seino, S., Magill, P. J., et al. (2012). K-ATP channels in dopamine substantia nigra neurons control bursting and novelty-induced exploration. *Nature Neuroscience*, 15, 1272–1280.

Shaikh, R. S., Reuter, P., Sisk, R. A., Kausar, T., Shahzad, M., Maqsood, M. I., et al. (2015). Homozygous missense variant in the human CNGA3 channel causes cone-rod dystrophy. *European Journal of Human Genetics*, 23, 473–480.

Shibuya, K., Misawa, S., Arai, K., Nakata, M., Kanai, K., Yoshiyama, Y., et al. (2011). Markedly reduced axonal potassium channel expression in human sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: An immunohistochemical study. *Experimental Neurology*, 232, 149–153.

Shieh, C. C., Coghlan, M., Sullivan, J. P., & Gopalakrishnan, M. (2000). Potassium channels: Molecular defects, diseases, and therapeutic opportunities. *Pharmacological Reviews*, 52, 557–594.

Skaper, S. D., Facci, L., & Giusti, P. (2013). Intracellular ion channel CLIC1: Involvement in microglia-mediated β-amyloid peptide(1–42) neurotoxicity. *Neurochemical Research*, 38, 1801–1808.

Sohn, J. W. (2013). Ion channels in the central regulation of energy and glucose homeostasis. *Frontiers in Neuroscience*, 7, 85.

Strange, K. (2004). Cellular volume homeostasis. *Advances in Physiology Education*, 28, 155–159.

Surmeier, D. J., Guzman, J. N., Sanchez-Padilla, J., & Schumacker, P. T. (2011). The role of calcium and mitochondrial oxidative stress in the loss of substantia nigra pars compacta dopaminergic neurons in Parkinson’s disease. *Neuroscience*, 198, 221–231.

Takahashi, S., Glatt, S. J., Uchiyama, M., Faraone, S. V., & Tsuang, M. T. (2015). Meta-analysis of data from the Psychiatric Genomics Consortium and additional samples supports association of CACNA1C with risk for schizophrenia. *Schizophrenia Research*, 168, 429–433.

Tong, X., Ao, Y., Faas, G. C., Nwaobi, S. E., Xu, J., Haustein, M. D., et al. (2014). Astrocyte Kir4.1 ion channel deficits contribute to neuronal dysfunction in Huntington’s disease model mice. *Nature Neuroscience*, 17, 694–703.

Tronci, E., Fidalgo, C., Zianni, E., Collu, M., Stancampiano, R., Morelli, M., et al. (2014). Effect of memantine on L-DOPA-induced dyskinesia in the 6-OHDA-lesioned rat model of Parkinson’s disease. *Neuroscience*, 265, 245–252.

Tu, H., Nelson, O., Bezprozvanny, A., Wang, Z., Lee, S. F., Hao, Y. H., et al. (2006). Presenilins form ER Ca2+ leak channels, a function disrupted by familial Alzheimer’s disease-linked mutations. *Cell*, 126, 981–993.

Tu, S., Okamoto, S., Lipton, S. A., & Xu, H. (2014). Oligomeric Aβ-induced synaptic dysfunction in Alzheimer’s disease. *Molecular Neurodegeneration*, 9, 48.

Turlova, E., Bae, C. Y., Deurloo, M., Chen, W., Barszczyk, A., Horgen, F. D., et al. (2014 Dec 11). TRPM7 regulates axonal outgrowth and maturation of primary hippocampal neurons. *Molecular Neurobiology*. [Epub ahead of print] PubMed PMID:25502295.

Vega, J. L., Subiabre, M., Figueroa, F., Schalper, K. A., Osorio, L., González, J., et al. (2013). Role of gap junctions and hemichannels in parasitic infections. *BioMed Research International*, 2013, 589130.

Verhagen, M. L., Morris, M. J., Farmer, C., Gillespie, M., Mosby, K., Wuu, J., et al. (2002). Huntington’s disease: A randomized, controlled trial using the NMDA-antagonist amantadine. *Neurology*, 59, 694–699.

Vinken, M., Vanhaecke, T., Papeleu, P., Snykers, S., Henkens, T., & Rogiers, V. (2006). Connexins and their channels in cell growth and cell death. *Cellular Signalling*, 18, 592–600.

Wacker, S. J., Jurkowski, W., Simmons, K. J., Fishwick, C. W., Johnson, A. P., Madge, D., et al. (2012). Identification of selective inhibitors of the potassium channel Kv1.1-1.2(3) by high-throughput virtual screening and automated patch clamp. *ChemMedChem*, 7, 1775–1783.

Wang, X. Y., Ren, B. W., Yong, Z. H., Xu, H. Y., Fu, Q. X., & Yao, H. B. (2015). Mutation analysis of CACNA1S and SCN4A in patients with hypokalemic periodic paralysis. *Molecular Medicine Reports*, 12, 6267–6274.

Wang, W., Wang, F., Yang, Y. J., Hu, Z. L., Long, L. H., Fu, H., et al. (2011). The flavonoid baicalein promotes NMDA receptor-dependent long-term potentiation and enhances memory. *British Journal of Pharmacology*, 162, 1364–1379.

Waters, C. W., Varuzhanyan, G., Talmadge, R. J., & Voss, A. A. (2013). Huntington disease, skeletal muscle is hyperexcitable owing to chloride and potassium channel dysfunction. *Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America*, 110, 9160–9165.

Waxman, S. G. (2006). Axonal conduction and injury in multiple sclerosis: The role of sodium channels. *Nature Reviews. Neuroscience*, 7, 932–941.

Weilinger, N. L., Maslieieva, V., Bialecki, J., Sridharan, S. S., Tang, P. L., & Thompson, R. J. (2013). Ionotropic receptors and ion channels in ischemic neuronal death and dysfunction. *Acta Pharmacologica Sinica*, 34, 39–48.

White, T. W., & Paul, D. L. (1999). Genetic diseases and gene knockouts reveal diverse connexin functions. *Annual Review of Physiology*, 61, 283–310.

Winkler, P. A., Ekenstedt, K. J., Occelli, L. M., Frattaroli, A. V., Bartoe, J. T., Venta, P. J., et al. (2013). A large animal model for CNGB1 autosomal recessive retinitis pigmentosa. *PLoS One*, 8, e72229.

Wolburg, H., & Lippoldt, A. (2002). Tight junctions of the blood-brain barrier: Development, composition and regulation. *Vascular Pharmacology*, 38, 323–337.

Wong, H. K., Bauer, P. O., Kurosawa, M., Goswami, A., Washizu, C., Machida, Y., et al. (2008). Blocking acid-sensing ion channel alleviates Huntington’s disease pathology via an ubiquitin-proteasome system-dependent mechanism. *Human Molecular Genetics*, 17, 3223–3235.

Wu, L. J., Wu, G., Akhavan Sharif, M. R., Baker, A., Jia, Y., Fahey, F. H., et al. (2012). The voltage-gated proton channel Hv1 enhances brain damage from ischemic stroke. *Nature Neuroscience*, 15, 565–573.

Yamamoto, S., Wajima, T., Hara, Y., Nishida, M., & Mori, Y. (2007). Transient receptor potential channels in Alzheimer’s disease. *Biochimica et Biophysica Acta*, 1772, 958–967.

Yang, Y. C., Tai, C. H., Pan, M. K., & Kuo, C. C. (2014). The T-type calcium channel as a new therapeutic target for Parkinson’s disease. *Pflügers Archiv—European Journal of Physiology*, 466, 747–755.

Ye, Q., Yan, L. Y., Xue, L. J., Wang, Q., Zhou, Z. K., Xiao, H., et al. (2011). Flunarizine blocks voltage-gated Na(+) and Ca(2 +) currents in cultured rat cortical neurons: A possible locus of action in the prevention of migraine. *Neuroscience Letters*, 487, 394–399.

Yoshitomi, S., Takahashi, Y., Ishizuka, M., Yamaguchi, T., Watanabe, A., Nasu, H., et al. (2015). Three patients manifesting early infantile epileptic spasms associated with 2q24.3 microduplications. *Brain & Development*, 37, 874–879.

Zhang, L., Papadopoulos, P., & Hamel, E. (2013). Endothelial TRPV4 channels mediate dilation of cerebral arteries: Impairment and recovery in cerebrovascular pathologies related to Alzheimer’s disease. *British Journal of Pharmacology*, 170, 661–670.

Zhang, X., Wu, M., Lu, F., Luo, N., He, Z. P., & Yang, H. (2014). Involvement of α7 nAChR signaling cascade in epigallocatechin gallate suppression of β-amyloid-induced apoptotic cortical neuronal insults. *Molecular Neurobiology*, 49, 66–77.

Zhao, Y., & Zhao, B. (2013). Oxidative stress and the pathogenesis of Alzheimer’s disease. *Oxidative Medicine and Cellular Longevity*, 2013, 316523.

Zlokovic, B. V. (2008). The blood–brain barrier in health and chronic neurodegenerative disorders. *Neuron*, 57, 178–201.

Zona, C., Pieri, M., & Carunchio, I. (2006). Voltage-dependent sodium channels in spinal cord motor neurons display rapid recovery from fast inactivation in a mouse model of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. *Journal of Neurophysiology*, 96, 3314–3322.
