
Please cite this article as: Tonnus et al., “Death is my Heir”—Ferroptosis Connects Cancer Pharmacogenomics and Ischemia-Reperfusion Injury, Cell Chemical Biology (2016), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.chembiol.2016.02.003

**Cell Chemical Biology**
**Previews**

compounds play for the producer; and, especially, is each FlvA2 lanthipeptide dedicated to a different function? As is often the case for genome-driven approaches, the original hosts might not be immediately accessible to genetic manipulation, limiting the number of tools that can be used to address those questions.

Natural products have provided important tools to probe fundamental biological processes and a large number of drugs for human, veterinary, and agricultural applications. Genome mining has introduced a paradigm shift versus bioactivity-based screening in the discovery of new natural products, especially from microbial sources (see Figure 1). This approach allows the “seeing” of molecules that escaped the biases of previous approaches, which relied on production of the desired compound by the original strain under laboratory conditions at concentrations sufficient to allow detection by the selected method (Monciardini et al., 2014). In the genome-mining approach, compounds of interest can be produced in the native host, after heterologous expression or through enzymatic synthesis. So, few options are available and, with sufficient effort, partial or complete production of the desired compound can be achieved, as Zhao and van der Donk nicely demonstrate. At the same time, however, we are still ill-equipped to advance through the next step, going from structure to bioactivity and, possibly, function (see Figure 1). Progress in this area cannot be expected from a single laboratory or institution, but might require a concerted effort and centralized resources for scientists to evaluate the activity of newly discovered compounds.

**REFERENCES**

- Arnison, P.G., Bibb, M.J., Bierbaum, G., Bowers, A.A., Bugni, T.S., Bulaj, G., Camarero, J.A., Campopiano, D.J., Challis, G.L., Clardy, J., et al. (2013). Nat. Prod. Rep. 30, 108–160.
- Iorio, M., Sasso, O., Maffioli, S.I., Bertorelli, R., Monciardini, P., Sosio, M., Bonezzi, F., Summa, M., Brunati, C., Bordoni, R., et al. (2014). ACS Chem. Biol. 9, 398–404.
- Jungmann, N.A., van Herwerden, E.F., Hügeland, M., and Süssmuth, R.D. (2016). ACS Chem. Biol. 11, 69–76.
- Lewis, K. (2013). Nat. Rev. Drug Discov. 12, 371–387.
- Maffioli, S.I., Cruz, J.C., Monciardini, P., Sosio, M., and Donadio, S. (2015). J. Ind. Microbiol. Biotechnol. Published online October 29, 2015. http://link.springer.com/article/10.1007%2Fs10295-015-1703-9.
- Monciardini, P., Iorio, M., Maffioli, S., Sosio, M., and Donadio, S. (2014). Microb. Biotechnol. 7, 209–220.
- Ortega, M.A., and van der Donk, W.A. (2016). Cell Chem. Biol. 23, 31–44.
- Weber, T., Blin, K., Duddela, S., Krug, D., Kim, H.U., Bruccoleri, R., Lee, S.Y., Fischbach, M.A., Müller, R., Wohlleben, W., et al. (2015). Nucleic Acids Res. 43, W237–W243.
- Zhao, X., and van der Donk, W.A. (2016). Cell Chem. Biol. 23, this issue, 246–256.
- Zotchev, S.B., Sekurova, O.N., and Katz, L. (2012). Curr. Opin. Biotechnol. 23, 941–947.

---

**The importance of being chaperoned: HSP90 and necroptosis**

Annette V. Jacobsen${}^{1,2}$ and John Silke${}^{1,2,*}$

${}^{1}$The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Melbourne, VIC 3052, Australia  
${}^{2}$Department of Medical Biology, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia  

*Correspondence: silke@wehi.edu.au  
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.chembiol.2016.02.003

Necroptosis is a form of regulated cell death implicated in a range of inflammatory diseases. In this issue of *Cell Chemical Biology*, Li et al. (2016) describe a novel inhibitor of necroptosis that targets the chaperone protein HSP90.

Regulated cell death in multicellular organisms has an important role in development, pathogen control, and ongoing clearance of damaged, defective, and senescent cells during life. Cell death can be initiated via signaling pathways triggered by a range of different intrinsic and extrinsic stimuli, the most well-known being the caspase-dependent, largely immunologically silent apoptosis. In addition, regulated cell death mechanisms with associated inflammatory consequences have also been identified, including necroptosis, pyroptosis, and ferroptosis. Although this inflammation may be beneficial to promote an initial immune response, when prolonged or deregulated it can have adverse effects. This is exemplified by aberrant necroptosis, which has been implicated in the pathogenesis of a range of inflammatory and neurodegenerative diseases, as well as having a role in the development of ischemia/reperfusion injuries (Zhou and Yuan, 2014).

Necroptosis can be initiated by activation of death receptors and microbial pattern recognition receptors in a caspase-independent manner and typically involves activation and phosphorylation of the receptor interacting protein kinases RIPK1 and RIPK3. After activation, RIPK3 phosphorylates the pseudokinase mixed lineage kinase domain-like (MLKL), the most downstream known obligate effector of necroptosis. Upon activation, MLKL translocates to cellular

Cell Chemical Biology 23, February 18, 2016 ©2016 Elsevier Ltd All rights reserved 205

Please cite this article as: Tonnus et al., “Death is my Heir”—Ferroptosis Connects Cancer Pharmacogenomics and Ischemia-Reperfusion Injury, Cell Chemical Biology (2016), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.chembiol.2016.02.003

Cell Chemical Biology
Previews

membranes, causing their destabilization and subsequent cell death, although the mechanisms involved in this are not fully understood (Figure 1). Any of these steps could theoretically be targeted to block necroptosis and thereby potentially ameliorate chronic inflammatory diseases. So far, small molecule inhibitors of RIPK1, RIPK3 and MLKL have all been identified, although none have yet made it to the clinic.

In this issue of *Cell Chemical Biology*, Li et al. (2016) identify the natural product Kongensin A as an inhibitor of TNF-dependent necroptosis. Using chemical probes, they demonstrate that the direct molecular target of Kongensin A is heat shock protein 90 (HSP90), a molecular chaperone responsible for the stabilization and activity of over 200 known protein clients, including many kinases. Unlike most HSP90 inhibitors, which bind the N- and C-terminal domains of HSP90 and inhibit its ATPase activity (Patki and Pawar, 2013), Kongensin A was found to bind the middle domain of HSP90. This region is important for the binding of HSP90 “client” proteins, including many that interact with the kinase-specific co-chaperone cell division cycle 37 (CDC37) (Figure 1A). Li et al. (2016) show that treatment with Kongensin A disrupts HSP90 association with CDC37 while preserving HSP90 ATPase activity, resulting in the degradation of a number of HSP90 kinase clients, including those involved in necroptotic signaling (Figures 1B and 1C).

It is well known that HSP90 inhibition can promote apoptosis, and this accounts for a large number of HSP90 inhibitors that have been tested as anti-cancer drugs (Patki and Pawar, 2013); however, HSP90 inhibition can also disrupt necroptotic signaling in several ways. As with many other HSP90 clients, it has been demonstrated by several groups that RIPK1 is proteasomally degraded upon

proteins that mimic phosphorylation by RIPK3 (Bigenzahn et al., 2015; Jacobsen et al., 2016). These results imply that HSP90 function is required for activated MLKL to kill, although at what stage in its activation is still unclear, and highlights that HSP90 plays important roles at several points in the necrotic cell death pathway (Figure 1D).

Taken together, these findings suggest that all three of these proteins require interaction with the HSP90:CDC37 chaperone complex for their stability and function (Figure 1). This suggestion is further supported because treatment with either conventional HSP90 inhibitors or Kongensin A is sufficient to induce protein degradation (Figure 1B), with this becoming most apparent between 12 to 24 hr of treatment (Jacobsen et al., 2016; Li et al., 2015); however, upon induction of necroptotic cell death, phosphorylation of MLKL by RIPK3 is already present by six hours. This timing emphasizes that when HSP90 inhibitors are added together with a necroptotic stimulus, protective effects are likely to be due to a more direct role for HSP90 function than simply protein stabilization, and during necroptosis there are a number of points in which HSP90 chaperoning may be required to mediate protein-protein interactions or assist in conformational changes and/or phosphorylation events (Figure 1C). Consistent with this, Li et al. (2016) observe a number of changes to necroptosis signaling after treatment with Kongensin A, such as decreased phosphorylation of both RIPK3 and MLKL, loss of RIPK1:RIPK3 interaction, and inability of RIPK3 to form the cytoplasmic punctae commonly seen after necroptosis is induced (Figure 1D). Li et al. (2016) show that disrupting the association between HSP90 and CDC37 by Kongensin A is sufficient to inhibit necroptosis and provide us with a deeper

HSP90 inhibition using a range of HSP90 inhibitors (Vanden Berghe et al., 2003; Gentle et al., 2011; Lewis et al., 2000). Likewise, RIPK3 has also been found to be dependent on HSP90 and the co-chaperone CDC37 for its stability and proper functioning (Cho et al., 2009; Li et al., 2015). Significantly, HSP90 inhibition was also shown to provide protection against necroptotic cell death when RIPK3 was activated independent of RIPK1 signaling (Li et al., 2015). Most recently, MLKL has also been shown to be a direct HSP90 client, and like RIPK3, also requires HSP90 activity for its function (Bigenzahn et al., 2015; Jacobsen et al., 2016; Zhao et al., 2016). It is of note that in the case of MLKL, it was possible to show that HSP90 inhibition protected against cell death caused by activated MLKL mutant

Figure 1. The Role of HSP90 in Necroptosis
(A) HSP90 chaperoning of kinase clients requires interaction with the co-chaperone CDC37, which mediates client access to HSP90. Chaperoning is then mediated by conformational changes of HSP90, triggered by the hydrolysis of ATP within the catalytic N-terminal domain.
(B) Prolonged competitive inhibition of the ATP-binding site with conventional HSP90 inhibitors induces proteasomal degradation of the three key necroptotic effector proteins. Disrupting the interaction between HSP90 and CDC37 with Kongensin A has a similar effect on client proteins. This effect is greatest for RIPK1.
(C) In the presence of an intact chaperone system, a necroptotic signal induces the association of RIPK1 and RIPK3, and RIPK3 phosphorylation and activation. RIPK3 in turn phosphorylates the downstream effector, MLKL, which induces cell death via oligomerization and membrane translocation/permeabilization.
(D) HSP90 inhibition blocks necroptosis at a number of levels, including disrupting RIPK1:RIPK3 interactions, blocking the phosphorylation of RIPK3 and MLKL, and MLKL oligomerization/membrane translocation.

Please cite this article as: Tonnus et al., “Death is my Heir”—Ferroptosis Connects Cancer Pharmacogenomics and Ischemia-Reperfusion Injury, Cell Chemical Biology (2016), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.chembiol.2016.02.004

**Cell Chemical Biology**
**Previews**

appreciation of the importance of protein chaperoning for this cell death pathway. The distinct mechanism of this compound compared to other HSP90 inhibitors makes Kongensin A a useful additional tool to explore how HSP90 interacts with its client proteins in general. To date, the focus of development of HSP90 inhibitors has been on exploiting their pro-apoptotic and anti-tumor effects, and a number of these compounds are being investigated in clinical trials against a variety of different cancers (Patki and Pawar, 2013). The papers discussed in this preview suggest that all three signaling molecules in necroptosis require HSP90 chaperoning. Although, as Oscar Wilde noted, “the truth is never pure and rarely simple,” the data clearly raise the possibility that HSP90 inhibitors have the potential to limit the severity of

necroptosis- and inflammation- associated disease.

**REFERENCES**

Bigenzahn, J.W., Fauster, A., Rebsamen, M., Kandasamy, R.K., Scorzoni, S., Vladimer, G.I., Mueller, A.C., Gstaiger, M., Zuber, J., Bennett, K.L., and Superti-Furga, G. (2015). Mol. Cell. Proteomics. mcp.O115.055350. Published online December 29, 2015. [http://dx.doi.org/10.1074/mcp.O115.055350](http://dx.doi.org/10.1074/mcp.O115.055350).

Cho, Y.S., Challa, S., Moquin, D., Genga, R., Ray, T.D., Guildford, M., and Chan, F.K.M. (2009). Cell 137, 1112–1123.

Gentle, I.E., Wong, W.W.L., Evans, J.M., Bankovacki, A., Cook, W.D., Khan, N.R., Nachbur, U., Rickard, J., Anderton, H., Moulin, M., et al. (2011). J. Biol. Chem. 286, 13282–13291.

Jacobsen, A.V., Lowes, K.N., Tanzer, M.C., Lucet, I.S., Hildebrand, J.M., Petrie, E.J., van Delft, M.F., Liu, Z., Conos, S.A., Zhang, J.-G., et al. (2016). Cell Death Dis. 7, e2051.

Lewis, J., Devin, A., Miller, A., Lin, Y., Rodriguez, Y., Neckers, L., and Liu, Z.G. (2000). J. Biol. Chem. 275, 10519–10526.

Li, D., Xu, T., Cao, Y., Wang, H., Li, L., Chen, S., Wang, X., and Shen, Z. (2015). Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 112, 5017–5022.

Li, D., Li, C., Li, L., Chen, S., Wang, L., Li, Q., Wang, X., Lei, X., and Shen, Z. (2016). Cell Chem. Biol. 23, this issue, 257–266.

Patki, J.M., and Pawar, S.S. (2013). Pathol. Oncol. Res. 19, 631–640.

Vanden Berghe, T., Kalai, M., van Loo, G., Declercq, W., and Vandenabeele, P. (2003). J. Biol. Chem. 278, 5622–5629.

Zhao, X.M., Chen, Z., Zhao, J.B., Zhang, P.P., Pu, Y.F., Jiang, S.H., Hou, J.J., Cui, Y.M., Jia, X.L., and Zhang, S.Q. (2016). Cell Death Dis. 7, e2089.

Zhou, W., and Yuan, J. (2014). Semin. Cell Dev. Biol. 35, 14–23.

---

**Monstrous Mycobacterial Lipids**

Jessica Seeliger<sup>1</sup> and D. Branch Moody<sup>2,*</sup>

<sup>1</sup>Department of Pharmacological Sciences, Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, NY 11790, USA  
<sup>2</sup>Division of Rheumatology, Immunology and Allergy, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA  
*Correspondence: bmoody@partners.org  
[http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.chembiol.2016.02.004](http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.chembiol.2016.02.004)

When it comes to lipid diversity, no bacterial genus approaches *Mycobacterium*. In this issue of *Cell Chemical Biology*, Burbaud et al. (2016) provide a multi-genic working model for the biosynthesis of trehalose polyphosphate (TPP), one of the largest known lipids in mycobacteria. They demonstrate that this lipid is made by diverse mycobacterial species, including those of medical importance.

Mycobacteria are ubiquitous on planet Earth and show the broadest possible range of virulence. *Mycobacterium tuberculosis* remains a leading worldwide cause of death from infection. Mycobacterial species in the middle of the virulence spectrum are the focus of substantial research because they cause lesser, but still formidable, human diseases; for example, *M. leprae*, *M. ulcerans* and *M. avium* infection lead to leprosy, buruli ulcer, and *Mycobacterium avium* complex (MAC) disease, respectively. In contrast to these slow-growing, pathogenic organisms, species like *M. smegmatis* serve as tractable model systems for experiments that can be conducted rapidly

and safely outside the biosafety level 3 suite.

Given the devastating human cost of mycobacterial disease, one might expect that the basic biochemical building blocks of mycobacterial cells would be cataloged in textbooks. Considering lipid membranes, most bacteria synthesize several major lipids, such as membrane phospholipids and a few specialized, disease-determining lipids such as lipopolysaccharide (LPS); however, mycobacteria produce both ubiquitous phospholipids and an extraordinarily diverse array of genus-specific lipids. These diverse lipids have been collected into databases such as MycoMass and Mtb Lipid DB, which span more than 100 named subclasses according to the LIPID MAPS naming criteria (Layre et al., 2011; Sartain et al., 2011). Even these resources represent an incomplete view of the mycobacterial lipid repertoire, as mass spectrometry-based lipidomics systems detect many hundreds of intermediates whose mass values do not appear in any database (Layre and Moody, 2013). Further, for lipids whose structures are well established, such as sulfolipid-1 (SL-1) and palyacyltrehalose (PAT) (Figure 1A), the genetic and enzymatic basis for their stepwise production is only now coming to light (Seeliger et al., 2012; Touchette et al., 2015). Thus, even in the twenty-first

Cell Chemical Biology 23, February 18, 2016 ©2016 Elsevier Ltd All rights reserved 207
