
Accepted Manuscript

Title: Modulation of endothelial function by Toll like receptors

Author: Beatriz Salvador Alicia Arranz Sara Francisco Laura Córdoba Carmen Punzón Miguel Ángel Llamas Manuel Fresno

PII: S1043-6618(16)30134-7  
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/doi:10.1
Damage signals/  
pathogen molecules  

HMGB1  
Flagelin  
aPL  
Hialuronan  
oxLDL  

Toll-like receptors  

Endothelial cell  

Homeostasis  

Angiogenesis/tissue  
repair  

Pro-inflammatory mediators  
VEGF  
Tissue Factor  

Inflammation  

Defence against  
pathogens  

STOP  

Barrier/Permeability  

Coagulation  

Endothelial cell activation through TLRs responds to a number of pathogen and damage associated molecules and permits the endothelium to mount an appropriate response. Therefore, endothelial cells are not only crucial for homeostasis maintenance and coagulation regulation but also for host defence against pathogens and tissue damage repair. However, excessive and/or chronic TLR stimulation may lead to disease.

Modulation of endothelial function by Toll like receptors

Beatriz Salvador${}^{1}$, Alicia Arranz${}^{2}$, Sara Francisco${}^{1,2}$, Laura Córdoba${}^{1}$ Carmen Punzón${}^{1}$, Miguel Ángel Llamas${}^{1}$ and Manuel Fresno${}^{1,2}$

1 Diomune SL, Parque Científico de Madrid, Madrid, Spain  
2 Centro de Biología Molecular “Severo Ochoa”, Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, Madrid, Spain,

Correspondence to Beatriz Salvador: [bsalvador@diomune.com](bsalvador@diomune.com)  

Diomune SL, Parque Científico de Madrid, C/ Faraday 7, 28049 Madrid, Spain  

Alicia Arranz: [alicia.arranz@csic.es](alicia.arranz@csic.es)  
Sara Francisco: [sfrancisco@diomune.com](sfrancisco@diomune.com)  
Laura Córdoba: [lcordoba@diomune.com](lcordoba@diomune.com)  
Carmen Punzón: [cpunzon@diomune.com](cpunzon@diomune.com)  
Miguel Ángel Llamas: [mallamas@diomune.com](mallamas@diomune.com)  
Manuel Fresno: [mfresno@cbm.csic.es](mfresno@cbm.csic.es)

* Color print required

1. Abstract

Endothelial cells (EC) are able to actively control vascular permeability, coagulation, blood pressure and angiogenesis. Most recently, a role for endothelial cells in the immune response has been described. Therefore, the endothelium has a dual role controlling homeostasis but also being the first line for host defence and tissue damage repair thanks to its ability to mount an inflammatory response. Endothelial cells have been shown to express pattern-recognition receptors (PPR) including Toll-like receptors (TLR) that are activated in response to stimuli within the bloodstream including pathogens and damage signals. TLRs are strategic mediators of the immune response in endothelial cells but they also regulate the angiogenic process critical for tissue repair. Nevertheless, endothelial activation and angiogenesis can contribute to some pathologies. Thus, inappropriate endothelial activation, also known as endothelial dysfunction, through TLRs contributes to tissue damage during autoimmune and inflammatory diseases such as atherosclerosis, hypertension, ischemia and diabetes associated cardiovascular diseases. Also TLR induced angiogenesis is required for the growth of some tumors, atherosclerosis and rheumatoid arthritis, among others. In this review we discuss the importance of various TLRs in modulating the activation of endothelial cells and their importance in immunity to infection and vascular disease as well as their potential as therapeutic targets.

Keywords: Endothelial cell, immune response, pattern recognition, Toll-like receptors, angiogenesis, endothelial dysfunction.

2. The endothelium

The endothelium consists of a monolayer of Endothelial Cells (ECs) that form the inner lining of the blood vessels (arteries, veins and capillaries) and the lymphatic system. It forms an interface between the lumen and the vessel wall and consequently is in constant interaction with the circulating blood. The endothelium forms a vast network that not only provides a physical barrier to control the vascular permeability, coagulation pathways and vasomotor tone but also serves a multitude of functions that help to maintain organ homeostasis.

The ECs are therefore located at the interface between circulating blood and the surrounding tissue. These unique multifunctional cells are able to react to physical and chemical stimuli within the bloodstream thanks to membrane receptors. These stimuli include growth factors, coagulant, and anticoagulant proteins, cytokines and chemokines, low-density lipoprotein (LDL), nitrous oxide, etc. Thanks to this capacity the endothelium plays an active role in the regulation of vascular tone, cellular adhesion and aggregation, vascular smooth muscle migration and resistance to thrombosis.

Physiologically, ECs favour a relaxed vascular tone and low levels of oxidative stress by releasing mediators such as nitric oxide (NO), prostacyclin-2 (PGI2) and endothelin (ET)-1 and by regulating angiotensin II activity. The endothelium also regulates vascular permeability, leukocyte adhesion and aggregation and thrombosis and is involved in angiogenesis. Thus, endothelial function is essential for vascular integrity.

Nonetheless, ECs unique location, widespread distribution and constant contact with circulating fluids also justify their key roles during infection and disease. Although ECs are not regarded as classical immune cells, they are critically involved in the

inflammatory response and are actively participating in innate immunity. This is
mediated through pattern recognition receptors (PRR) contributing to host defence
against pathogens and tissue repair [1]. However, their inappropriate activation also
contributes to tissue damage during autoimmune and inflammatory diseases.
Endothelial activation refers to any change in the endothelium homeostatic control
mechanisms. In response to a variety of stimuli, the endothelium undergoes changes that
allow its participation in the inflammatory response [2,3]. This condition is also known as
endothelial dysfunction and results in expression of pro-inflammatory chemokines and
cytokines (such as interleukin (IL)-1, IL-6, Tumor Necrosis Factor alpha (TNF-α) and
interferon gamma (IFN-γ)), and adhesion molecules (such as ICAM-1, VCAM-1 and E-
selectin) designed to interact with leukocytes and platelets and target inflammation to
specific tissues and pro-thrombotic factors. It is also accompanied by oxidative stress and
abnormal vascular tone modulation. Endothelial dysfunction can be triggered by a wide
range of agents including pathogens and cell/tissue damage signals. Endothelial
dysfunction has been linked to a variety of disease conditions, including atherosclerosis,
systemic autoimmune diseases, diabetes mellitus, coronary artery disease, hypertension
and hypercholesterolemia [2-4].

3. Toll-Like receptors in ECs

As previously stated, besides circulating chemokines and cytokines, the functions of
vascular ECs are modified by exogenous activators such as infectious agents (virus,
bacteria entering the bloodstream) or endogenous triggers like Damage-associated
molecular pattern molecules (DAMPs) released by injured or stressed tissues and cells.

Toll-Like Receptors (TLRs) recognize infectious components (Pathogen-associated molecular pattern molecules (PAMPs) as well as DAMPs and are fundamental in activating innate mechanisms in ECs [5].

TLRs are a family of highly conserved pathogen recognition receptors (PRRs) first discovered in Drosophila [6]. They contribute to the initiation of the innate immune responses by engagement of pathogens or DAMP ligands liberated from host tissues.

They belong to the “interleukin-1 receptor/Toll-like receptor superfamily”, a class of PRRs and bind diverse microbial products and injury-induced endogenous ligands [7].

PAMPs include various bacterial components such as lipopolysaccharide (LPS, recognized by TLR4), peptidoglycan (TLR 1, 2 and 6), flagellin (TLR5), and viral double-stranded RNAs (TLR3). DAMPs include heat shock proteins (HSPs), high-mobility group box 1 protein (HMGB1), ATP, uric acid, cholesterol crystals and host DNAs.

TLR1-10 have been identified in both human and mice whereas TLR11-13 are only expressed in mice. They can be classified as cell membrane TLRs (TLR1, 2, 4, 5, 6, and 11) and intracellular TLRs (TLR3, 7, 8, 9, 10, and 13) localized in intracellular vesicles including the endoplasmic reticulum, endosome, and lysosome [8, 9].

TLRs are key mediators of innate immunity and respond to their ligands following two inflammatory cascades (Figure 1); 1. activation of myeloid differentiating factor 88-dependent pathway (MyD88), leading to nuclear factor kappa-B (NFκB) and Mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPK) activation and production of pro-inflammatory cytokines [10]; 2. MyD88-independent downstream signalling pathways (TLR4 and TLR3), which triggers the induction of interferon-β (IFN-β) [11].

Figure 1. TLR signalling in endothelial cells. TLRs are activated in response to both pathogen and damage associated signalling molecules that, through MyD88 and/or TRIF pathways, activate downstream signalling via MAPK, NF-κB and IRF3. TLR may interact/activate NADPH oxidase (NOX) leading to ROS accumulation. This results in the production of pro-inflammatory mediators that control the immune response, angiogenesis related molecules that govern vessel formation and adhesion molecules that regulate vascular permeability and also ensues changes in coagulation through regulation of tissue factor and thrombomodulin expression. Some endothelial molecules such as Ang1, may negatively regulate this process.

While TLRs expression is nearly ubiquitous in immune cells, it is less widespread in cells

of non-hematopoietic origin, such as ECs [12, 13]. However, all TLRs have been detected

in one or another type of ECs (see Table 1). In general, TLR 2 and TLR 4 are ubiquitously

present within the vasculature, whereas TLR 7 and TLR 9 are sparse, and TLR 1, TLR 3,

TLR 5, TLR 6, TLR 8 and TLR 10 are expressed in selective patterns. Gene transcripts for

TLR 1-10 in ECs present different expression levels depending on the specific cell type

[14], which may reflect specialized functions of different ECs [15]. Since ECs are

heterogeneous, harbouring a specific phenotype and function depending on the

tissue/organ in which they are located it stands to reason that TLR expression is

dependent on ECs origin/location and therefore on cell type specific. Human vascular

beds including aorta and subclavian, carotid, mesenteric, iliac, and temporal arteries

express TLR 4 and TLR 2 (and its TLR 1 and TLR 6 co-receptors) while TLR 3 is mostly

expressed in the aorta, and expression of TLR 7 and 9 is limited to the iliac artery [16].

Furthermore, it has been shown in humans that ECs from lymph nodes expressed TLR 1-

6 and TLR 9 but thymus derived ECs lacked TLR 5 [15].

Table 1: TLR expression in Endothelial cells

| Human TLR | Umbilical vein [12,14,17] | Pulmonary artery [14,16] | Aortic artery [16] | Subclavian artery [16] | Carotid artery [16] | Mesenteric artery [16] | Iliac artery [16] | Temporal artery [16] | Coronary Artery [12] | Lymphatic [15] | Thymus [15] | Microvascular [12,17,18] | Dermal [17,19] | Cerebral [20] | Endothelial Progenitor Cells* [21,22] |
|------------|--------------------------|-------------------------|--------------------|------------------------|----------------------|---------------------|-------------------|---------------------|---------------------|----------------|---------------|-----------------------------|-----------------|----------------|-------------------------------|
| TLR 1      | +                        | +                       | +                  | +                      | +                    | +                   | +                 | +                   | +                   | +               | +             | +                           | +                | +              | +                             |
| TLR 2      | +                        | +                       | +                  | +                      | +                    | +                   | +                 | +                   | +                   | +               | +             | + (- in liver)               | +                | +              | +                             |
| TLR 3      | +                        | +                       | +                  | +                      | +                    | +                   | +                 | +                   | +                   | +               | +             | +                           | +                | +              | +                             |
| TLR 4      | +                        | +                       | +                  | +                      | +                    | +                   | +                 | +                   | +                   | +               | +             | +                           | +                | +              | +                             |
| TLR 5      | +                        | +                       | +/–                | +                      | +                    | +                   | +                 | +                   | +                   | +               | +             | +                           | +                | +              | +                             |
| TLR 6      | +                        | +                       | +/–                | +                      | +                    | +                   | +                 | +                   | +                   | +               | +             | +                           | +                | +              | +                             |
| TLR 7      | +                        | +                       | +/–                | +                      | +                    | +                   | +                 | +                   | +                   | +               | +             | +                           | +                | +              | +                             |
| TLR 8      | +                        | +                       | +/–                | +                      | +                    | +                   | +                 | +                   | +                   | +               | +             | +                           | +                | +              | +                             |
| TLR 9      | +                        | +                       | +/–                | +                      | +                    | +                   | +                 | +                   | +                   | +               | +             | +                           | +                | +              | +                             |
| TLR 10     | +                        | +                       | +/–                | +                      | +                    | +                   | +                 | +                   | +                   | +               | +             | +                           | +                | +              | +                             |

(+) expressed; (–) expression not detected; (+/–) low/in frequent expression  
* from human umbilical cord blood

The activation of ECs through TLRs can be direct through interaction with ligand molecules, or may require a prior inflammatory stimuli such as IFN-γ, lipopolysaccharide (LPS), TNF-α or IL1b. Besides, activation by cytokines and chemokines can also modulate TLRs expression in ECs. Moreover, there is a crosstalk among TLRs. For example, the expression of TLR2 is low in some ECs but its expression can be up-regulated after TLR4 signalling [13, 23]. This is particularly relevant when considering the increasing evidence of negative crosstalk between TLR2 and TLR4 where TLR2 ligands signals specifically block TLR4-TRIF signalling pathway [24]. Differential expression of TLRs in the endothelium may also occur in response for example to high glucose conditions that increase the expression of TLR2 and TLR4 in ECs [25, 26].

Interestingly, a particular type of ECs, liver sinusoidal ECs (LSECs) may act as unique antigen presenting cells (APC) to T cells being this activity tuned by TLR2, TLR3 or TLR4 ligands [27]. In addition, TLR activated ECs indirectly regulate local inflammation by inducing IL1b release by monocytes and increasing CD14 expression and macrophage survival [28].

As previously stated, in addition to components from infectious agents entering the bloodstream, TLRs can be activated by endogenous ligands released by injured or stressed cells and tissues (see Table 2). Heat shock protein 60 and angiotensin II have been described as endogenous agonists of TLR4 showing vasoactive properties [29].

Moreover, TLR2 may sense oxidized high-density lipoprotein (HDL) from patients with chronic kidney disease, reducing nitric oxide (NO) bioavailability, and leading to inflammation and impairment of endothelial repair capacity [29]. Mitochondrial DNA released from dying cells activate TLR9 also leads to endothelial dysfunction and

174 hypertension [30]. Other endogenous ligands of TLR 2 include HMGB 1 (a transcription
175 factor and a secreted pro-inflammatory cytokine), hyaluronic acid and biglycan [5].
176
177 Table 2: Endothelial TLRs and Disease

| Disease/Condition                | Implicated Endothelial TLRs                          | Related agonists                                      |
|----------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------|
| Sepsis                           | TLR 2, TLR 4, TLR 5 [12,17,31-35]                    | LPS and other bacterial components                     |
| Viral hemorrhagic fever          | TLR 3[36]                                            | dsRNA                                                 |
| Inflammatory bowel diseases      | TLR 3, TLR 5[37]                                    | Inflammatory bowel diseases                            |
| Behcet's disease                 | TLR 3[38]                                            |                                                       |
| Acute Lung injury                | TLR 3, TLR 4[39]                                     |                                                       |
| Atherosclerosis                  | TLR 1, TLR 2, TLR 3, TLR 4, TLR 9[36,40-47]           | HMGB 1, Oxidized low density lipoprotein (LDL), high density lipoprotein (HDL) |
| Aortic aneurism                  | TLR 4[48]                                            | Aortic aneurism                                       |
| Arterial thrombosis              | TLR 4[49]                                            | Arterial thrombosis                                   |
| Systemic sclerosis/Tissue fibrosis | TLR 4[50]                                            | Hyaluronan                                            |
| Diabetes related inflammatory conditions | TLR 2, TLR 4[25, 26, 51-57]                         | HMGB 1                                                 |
| Hypertension                     | TLR 4, TLR 9[29, 47, 58-63]                          | HMGB 1, HDL, mitochondrial DNA                         |
| Metabolic syndrome               | TLR 2, TLR 4[64, 65]                                 | Metabolic syndrome                                    |
| Ischemia/reperfusion injury      | TLR 2, TLR 4[23, 66-72]                              | HMGB 1                                                 |
| Rheumatoid arthritis             | TLR 2[73]                                            | Rheumatoid arthritis                                  |
| Liver fibrosis                   | TLR 4[74]                                            |                                                       |
| Antiphospholipid syndrome        | TLR 2, TLR 4[75-79]                                  | beta 2-glycoprotein I, anti-phospholipid antibodies    |

Tumor/cancer                                                                 TLR 2, TLR 3, TLR 4, HMGB1, ω-(2-carboxyethyl) pyrrole (CEP)
                                                                                   TLR 9 [80-82] [83]
Alloreactivity and chronic graft rejection                                        [84]
Heavy metal induced inflammatory conditions                                       TLR 4 [85]
Spinal cord injury secondary damage                                               TLR 4 [86]

Likely to avoid excessive tissue damage, TLRs activation in innate immune cells leads to

"endotoxin tolerance", which causes them to become refractory to subsequent TLRs re-

stimulation by a secondary endotoxin challenge after a prior exposure. This phenomenon

has been described in sepsis [14] as well as in other pathologies such as acute coronary

syndromes (ACS), cystic fibrosis and myocardial infarction [87, 88]. Interestingly, vein

ECs cannot be tolerized which may have key implications in the pathogenesis of systemic

inflammatory conditions. The graphic abstract summarises endothelial TLR activation.

4. Toll-Like receptors in angiogenesis

An important protective mechanism after an ischemic insult or injury is angiogenesis,

defined as the growth of new vessels by ECs from pre-existing vascular networks.

Angiogenesis is essential during growth and development and crucial for wound healing

and tissue repair, protecting tissues against necrosis following acute ischemic injury by

rescuing them from the perpetuation of inflammatory cascades resulting from chronically

impaired tissue perfusion. Nevertheless, angiogenesis can also be detrimental in some

pathologies including tumor growth, atherosclerosis and Rheumatoid Arthritis (RA).

Numerous studies demonstrate a key role of TLRs expression and signalling in the

195 endothelium for the regulation of the angiogenic process. However, the role of different
196 TLRs in this process is complex. Angiogenesis shows many mechanistic similarities to
197 inflammation and both TLR 2 and TLR 4 seem to be required for efficient vessel
198 formation since their activation results in the production of angiogenic factors such as
199 VEGF (Figure 1) [89]. TLR 4 is able to regulate the invasive capacity of liver ECs by
200 promoting extracellular protease production both in vitro and in vivo [74]. In addition,
201 TLR 2/6 stimulation exhibits a considerable angiogenic potential stimulating the
202 proliferation and migration of ECs in vitro in matrigel assays via GM-CSF released by
203 the ECs [90]. Recent studies demonstrate a central role of high mobility group box
204 protein 1 (HMGB1) in angiogenesis and related conditions, such as cancer, wound-
205 healing, and ischemia. This chromatin-binding protein can, after tissue damage, be
206 actively released by the cell acting as a prototype alarmin that is able to mediate the
207 immune response and regulate endothelial permeability and vascular growth through
208 TLRs and the receptor for advanced glycation end products (RAGE) signalling pathways
209 [91-93]. Endothelial progenitor cell (EPC) recruitment is also mediated by HMGB1
210 interaction with TLR 4 through the up-regulation of stromal cell-derived factor-1 (SDF-1),
211 a central chemokine in the recruitment of EPCs to the neo-angiogenic sites during
212 neovascularization. Furthermore, the effect of TLR 2 stimulatory ligands results in the
213 activation of NFkB and the production of pro-inflammatory cytokines and stimulates
214 important pro-angiogenic processes such as blood perfusion [68, 73, 83, 90].
215 TLRs may also prevent angiogenesis. TLR 2 blocking antibodies have been shown to
216 have pro-angiogenic effects in vitro on ECs through a mechanism that involves a
217 crosstalk between TLR 2 and CXCR 4 receptor and the activation of CXCR 4 canonical

signal transduction pathway in a TLR 2 activation independent manner [94]. Also, TLR 2
deficiency in mice has been linked to preservation of vascular function and protection
from ischemia and atherosclerosis lesion progression. However, while TLR 2 deficient
mice exhibit increased neovascularization following induction of hindlimb ischemia, this
effect seems to be mediated by immune cells rather than by ECs [95]. Moreover, EPCs
from cord blood are able of homing in vivo to neovascularization sites where they
proliferate and differentiate forming new vessels. Interestingly, they express almost all
TLRs, except TLR 7 and TLR 8 but only specific activation of TLR 3 and not of TLR 1, 2,
4, 5, 6, or 9 inhibits cell proliferation and impairs their angiogenic properties [96].
There is also a crosstalk between angiogenic factors and TLRs. Thus, angiopoietin-1
(Ang-1), required for vascular integrity and ECs survival, inhibits TLR 4 signalling in
HUVECs by blocking NFkB most likely through regulation of the expression of miR-
146-5p that in turn down-regulates both IRAK1 and TRAF6 protein expression (Figure 1)
[97].

5. Toll-Like receptors in pathogen recognition within the
endothelium

Bacteraemia and viraemia are characterised by pathogens entering the bloodstream. Since
the large surface of the endothelium is in continuous contact with circulating blood, ECs
are among the first cells exposed to pathogens or pathogen-derived products and also
some endogenous molecules, which are released upon tissue damage. The endothelium is
also the specific target for important pathogens such as Rickettsia or Chlamydia.

As part of the innate immune system, ECs respond to these contacts by producing inflammatory mediators and expressing surface molecules [1]. Besides, there are many pathophysiological conditions that result in microbial traslocation to the blood. Bacterial translocation has been described in hemorrhagic shock, trauma, severe burns, cirrhosis, pancreatitis, cancer and infections [98]. In this sense, widely distributed microvascular ECs are uniquely placed to carry a central role during infection and injury.

This privileged position allows the endothelium to contribute to the host's protective response to infection or even to inflammatory disorders such as sepsis. Recognition of the pathogens is mediated by PRRs, mainly TLRs. They sense PAMPs derived from microbes such as the bacterial cell wall components lipopolysaccharide (LPS) and peptidoglycan or microbial nucleic acids. For example, gram-negative bacteria activates ECs mainly in a TLR 4/MD 2 dependent manner, and gram-positive bacteria is preferentially recognized by TLR 2 [24]. This active role of the endothelium includes production of inflammatory cytokines, control of coagulation cascades and regulation of leukocyte trafficking (Figure 1). These innate immune reactions normally contribute to the containment and elimination of the invading microbes. TLRs agonists, including bacterial LPS and lipopeptides, directly up-regulate microvascular ECs expression of inflammatory mediators. TLRs activation modulates ECs permeability, and the expression of coagulation pathway intermediaries and microvascular thrombi have been hypothesized to trap microorganisms, thereby limiting the spread of infection. While not viewed as classical immune cells, ECs are able to sense and respond specifically to different pathogenic insults. For example, resting endometrial ECs constitutively express all TLRs. Interestingly, activation of a particular TLRs (TLR 3 vs. TLR 9) results in

262 qualitative and quantitative changes in the induced inflammatory response due to
263 different cytokine/chemokine profiles [99]. Pathogens like Salmonella are able to infect
264 the intestinal epithelium and translocate to the mucosal and submucosal layers. The
265 presence of TLR 4 and TLR 5 (which detect bacterial LPS and flagellin, respectively) in
266 the intestinal endothelium prevents these invasive bacteria from entering the intestinal
267 microcirculation, preventing systemic infection and septic illness. In fact, the high
268 expression of TLR 5 in human intestinal microvascular ECs and its ability to up-regulate
269 the expression of adhesion molecules upon recognition of bacterial flagellin supports its
270 key role in the endothelial immune response against bacteria [17]. Likewise, outer
271 membrane vesicles from gram-negative bacteria containing bacterial membrane
272 components are able to initiate inflammatory responses in human ECs [100].
273 However, endothelial activation considerably contributes to inflammation and ensuing
274 clinical characteristics of numerous infections characterized by vascular hyper-
275 permeability, microvascular thrombosis and excessive inflammation, and can therefore be
276 involved in harmful microvascular dysfunction and organ failure during systemic
277 infections. For instance, ECs dysfunction is an important feature of many hemorrhagic
278 fevers [101].
279 Furthermore, bacterial infection correlates with increased risk of atherosclerosis and
280 arterial cells are responsive to a wider range of bacterial PAMPs, acting on TLR 2, TLR 4,
281 TLR 5 and TLR 9, than venous cells which may be one of the reasons arteries are more
282 susceptible to plaque formation during the development of carotid atheroma [44].
283 A generalized and overwhelming activation of ECs by microbial and endogenous danger
284 molecules as well as cytokines can be harmful and lead to coagulopathy and increased

vascular permeability, which together promote sepsis-induced organ failure. Stimulation
of endothelial TLR 4 results in the induction of multiple chemokines and cytokines genes
implicated in sepsis such as CXCL 6, CXCL 8, IL1b and TNF-α [32]. Acute lung injury
and pulmonary failure caused by infections, including sepsis, are among the leading
causes of intensive care unit admission. In fact, LPS mediated activation of ECs TLR 4,
rather than direct neutrophil activation, is responsible for accumulation of neutrophils in
the lungs leading to pulmonary failure [33]. Also, TLR 4 triggering in pulmonary artery
ECs increases apoptosis and cell death [102]. Neutrophil accumulation is further
enhanced by the recognition of bacterial lipoproteins in ECs. TLR 2 activation specifically
induces the expression of IL 6, IL 8, CSF 2, CSF 3, ICAM-1 and E-selectin and participates
in neutrophil recruitment and adhesion that can contribute to lung damage during sepsis
[31].
Signalling through TLRs in response to bacterial LPS goes beyond the canonical pathway
in ECs and also involves heterotrimeric G proteins [103]. These proteins are required for
full activation of IFN signalling mediated by TLR 3 and TLR 4 in ECs, and mediate
MAPK and AKT activation. Interplay of TLRs and G protein receptors is also seen in the
cooperative effect of LPS, a TLR ligand, and Sphingosine 1 phosphate (S1P) that acts
through G-protein coupled receptors to regulate proliferation, migration, differentiation,
angiogenesis and lymphocyte trafficking [104]. Co-stimulation of ECs with LPS and S1P
results in increased induction of pro-inflammatory mediators.
In addition, viral dsRNA is recognized by TLR 3 in human ECs, resulting in the up-
regulation of tissue factor and down-regulation of thrombomodulin through NFκB,
MAPK and IRF-3 activation inducing a pro-coagulant state and disrupted homeostasis

leading to viral hemorrhagic fever [36]. Coagulation is also affected by bacterial DNA
recognition through TLR 9, and activation of TLR 9 in ECs has been shown to shift the
balance of tissue factor/tissue factor pathway inhibitor towards a pro-coagulant
phenotype that could contribute to pathologies where high amounts of bacterial DNA are
present, like acute coronary artery diseases and sepsis [105]. Also in sepsis, TLR 9 and
CD14 in the endothelium have been shown to be decisive in the development of vascular
dysfunction [35].
During intestinal inflammation the gut microbiota plays a role in initiating and
maintaining an innate immune response that is accompanied by pro-angiogenic activity
of ECs mediated by activation of both TLRs and nucleotide-binding domain leucine-rich
repeat containing (NLRs) PRRs. In human intestinal microvascular ECs, TLRs activation
results in proliferation, migration, and vessel sprouting and in vivo angiogenesis [106].
Such inappropriate EC activation of intestinal immune responses by the microbiome is
associated with chronic inflammatory conditions such as inflammatory bowel disease
[37].
Behcet's disease is a rare multisystem inflammatory disorder characterised by activation
of the vascular endothelium resulting in coagulopathy and endothelial dysfunction [107].
Even though its etiology is unknown, bacterial infection has also been associated with
triggering of Behcet's disease flares by activation of TLR 2 in monocytes leading to IL 17
up-regulation, and contributing to the increase in neutrophil adhesion. Recently, however,
TLR 3 activation in ECs has also been associated with the production of neutrophil
adhesion molecules such as ICAM-1 y E-selectin (Figure 1) which may also contribute
for Behcet's disease flares [38].

Importantly, homeostasis maintenance in the blood-brain barrier is critical in the
protection against deathly pathogens. Cerebral ECs, the main components of this barrier
express TLR 2, 3, 4 and 6 in both rats and humans and oxidative stress as well as TNF-α
have been shown to up-regulate their expression. Moreover, activation of TLR 2/6 in ECs
results in increased barrier permeability presumably due to down-regulation of junctional
proteins through an ERK1/2 kinase dependent mechanism [20].

6. Endothelial TLRs in inflammation and vascular disease

The immune response to infection and/or injury results in inflammation which is a major
contributing factor to many vascular events, including cardiovascular diseases such as
atherosclerosis, obesity, diabetes, hypertension, ischemia/reperfusion damage, etc. Ideally,
the inflammatory response is short and localized; however, excessive inflammation can
occur leading to a variety of pathologic conditions. Numerous data support a major role
of ECs in vascular inflammatory response and therefore its importance in the
development of several vascular disorders. ECs at the site of inflammation are target,
active participants and key regulators of inflammatory processes at the same time.
Significant progress has been recently made in the understanding of the complex
molecular pathways that control the immune response in ECs, and the pivotal role of
pattern-recognition receptors such as TLRs to mediate inflammatory responses (see Table
2).

Patients with chronic inflammatory diseases manifest endothelial dysfunction, which is a
response to alterations in the endothelial function and precedes the development of
atherosclerosis. Functions of vascular ECs are modified by exogenous activators such as

infectious agents or endogenous triggers such as cytokines or injury associated molecules.
Activation of ECs is induced by circulating cytokines, TNF-α, ROS, oxidized Low-
density Lipoprotein (LDL), autoantibodies and traditional risk factors include smoking,
aging, hypercholesterolemia, hypertension and hyperglycemia.

6.1 Atherosclerosis

Atherosclerosis is a pathology that leads to vessel obstruction due to inflammation
associated with atherosclerotic lesions (atherome plaques). It is the result of injury related
endothelial dysfunction, resulting in increased expression of adhesion molecules, pro-
inflammatory cytokines, pro-thrombotic factors and exacerbated oxidative stress. Several
TLRs (TLR 1, TLR 2 and TLR 4) have been detected in the endothelium in the
atherosclerotic plaques [41]. Both TLR 2 and TLR 4 have been associated with
atherosclerosis and inhibition or deletion of TLR 2 and TLR 4 have been shown to protect
against experimental atherosclerosis [43, 48, 108]. Reports even show how TLRs are able
to act synergistically with other membrane receptors, such as the nucleotide-binding
domain, leucine-rich repeat-containing receptor (NLR), in the endothelium to mediate
site specific-inflammation [109]. Moreover, it has been proposed that vessel wall derived
TLR 4 (especially in endothelial and smooth muscle cells) rather than TLR 4 derived from
platelets and leukocytes, plays a significant role in the initial thrombus formation [49].
Since atherosclerosis can also be exacerbated by infection with pathogens known to be
recognized by TLRs, it is possible that TLR 3 and TLR 9 (cytomegalovirus and herpes
simplex virus) or TLR 7 (coxsackie B virus) may also participate in atherosclerosis and
endothelial inflammation. In fact, in vitro endothelial TLR 3 activation also influences
vascular integrity by impairing vasodilation and inducing the production of Reactive

Oxygen Species (ROS) and reduced migration leading to the formation of atherosclerotic
plaques in Apolipoprotein-E deficient mice [40]. ECs have been shown to produce ROS
in response to TLR 2 and TLR 4 activation in a mechanism mediated by nicotinamide
adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADPH) oxidases (Nox) (Figure 1) [110, 111]. TLR 4
activation in microvascular ECs results in up-regulation of pro-inflammatory chemokines
and cytokines (especially IL 6), growth factors and adhesion molecules. This IL-6 results
in production of Matrix Metalloproteinase-1 (MMP-1) by mononuclear cells [112].
Therefore, endothelial TLR activation is potentially involved in neovascularization-
associated plaque vulnerability given the crucial role of pro-inflammatory cytokines and
MMPs in plaque rupture [113]. TLRs activation of the endothelium also promotes both
lipid and leukocyte accumulation within the plaques. In addition, oxidized LDL is able to
stimulate TLR 2 and TLR 4 inducing the production of Bone Morphogenetic Protein-2
(BMP-2), a pro-inflammatory cytokine involved in vascular calcification in human
coronary artery ECs through NF-kB and ERK 1/2 pathways [114].
Site-specific plaque development is the result of disturbed hydrodynamic blood flow. The
in vivo endothelial expression of TLR 2 is restricted to disturbed blood flow regions
exposed in LDL receptor deficient mice and its expression contributes to early
atherosclerotic processes in these lesion prone areas [42]. Flow suppression in vitro
appears to have atheroprotective effects. It results in induced Stimulating Factor 1 (SP 1)
phosphorylation which inhibits its binding to TLR 2 promoter. Consequently, TLR 2
expression decreases, blocking LPS and TNF-α induced TLR 2 up-regulation in human
coronary artery ECs [115].
Furthermore, several conditions associated with chronic inflammation linked to TLRs

activation in the endothelium have been linked to the development of atherosclerosis.

6.2 Diabetes

Diabetic patients show increased risk for atherosclerosis and cardiovascular diseases.

High glucose levels have been associated with increased TLR 2 and TLR 4 expression in

ECs resulting in increased reactivity to LPS stimuli [26, 52]. Hyperglycemia induces

TLR 2 and TLR 4 expression in human retinal ECs resulting in increased downstream

signalling possibly mediated by ROS and possibly contributing to the pathogenesis of

Diabetic retinopathy [26].

Also, increase of TLR 2 and TLR 4 expression has been shown in Type I diabetes mellitus

patients [56] and TLR 2 expression has been linked with diabetic nephropathy [54]. Even

when the TLR 2 and TLR 4 protein levels are the same, coronary artery ECs from Type I

diabetic patients show augmented NFκB activation and enhanced inflammatory responses

to TLRs specific ligands [51]. This is even more relevant considering that Type I diabetes

mellitus patients show increased circulating levels of ligands for both TLR 2 and TLR 4

[53].

6.3 Hypertension

A contribution of the immune response in the pathogenesis of hypertension (a major risk

factor for atherosclerosis, cardiovascular diseases, heart failure and stroke) is clear and

leads to immune cell infiltrates in the kidney and vasculature which likely contribute to

end-organ damage. In fact, low-grade systemic inflammation is a common hallmark of

hypertension. The hypothesis is that elevated blood pressure causes tissue damage that

results in cellular debris (DAMPs) that initiates a local aberrant vascular inflammation

through activation of PRRs including TLRs in both resident vascular cells and infiltrating

leukocytes. TLR 4 activation in the endothelium contributed to hypertension and low-
grade inflammation and might play a role in the augmented vascular contractility in
spontaneous hypertensive rats [60]. Also, activation of TLR 4 by Angiotensin II (Ang-II)
contributes to hypertension associated endothelial dysfunction by mechanisms involving
oxidative stress and MyD88 dependent JNK/NFkB signalling pathways activation [61].
Consistently, inhibition of TLR 4 decreases ROS production and MyD88/IL 6 expression
in arteries of spontaneous hypertensive rats [62]. Mitochondrial DNA also contributes to
hypertension, associated with exaggerated levels of cell death resulting in elevated
circulating levels of cell-free mitochondrial CpG DNA, via TLR 9 immune activation [63].
However, specific endothelial TLR 9 activation has not been assessed.
Similarly, activation of TLR 4 by the endogenous ligand HMGB1 has been shown to
inhibit VEGF mediated endothelial pulmonary cell (PAEC) migration but not
proliferation [116] and to contribute to the pathogenesis of pulmonary hypertension [117].
Interestingly, in contrast to human umbilical vein EC, the effect of HMGB1 on PAEC
seems to be independent from NFkB activation and rather depends on interferon response
factor 3 (IRF 3) [116].
Other TLRs like TLR 9 have been implicated in HMGB1 mediated activation during
vascular inflammation, however, bone marrow-derived cells and not vascular cells seem
to be implicated in TLR 9 dependent response [45]. Nevertheless, when deregulated,
angiogenesis and vascular dysfunction exacerbate the damage during chronic
inflammatory conditions. It has been shown that HMGB1 is secreted in response to
glucose concentration fluctuations that also result in overexpression of TLR 2 and TLR 4
in the vascular endothelium. Therefore, HMGB1 may play a pivotal role in contributing

to diabetes and microvascular complications through NFkB activation in ECs [55].

6.4 Metabolic syndrome

During Metabolic syndrome (MetS), a state of chronic inflammation that confers increased risk for diabetes and cardiovascular diseases, both TLR2 and TLR4 have increased activity in ECs. Consistently, patients with MetS present increased levels of PAMP/DAMP binding proteins sCD14, lipopolysaccharide binding protein (LBP) and damage signalling HMGB-1 protein [64]. Besides, numerous studies indicate that a propensity for cardiovascular diseases such as hypertension and more specifically MetS may be programmed during in utero fetal development. This so-called “programmed hypertension” has also been linked to TLRs activation. It has been proposed that danger signals during sub-optimal pregnancy result in immune system activation through TLRs and lead to fetal maladaptive responses that may lead to gene expression modification and adult vascular complications [65].

6.5 Ischemia and angiogenesis-related disorders

In acute kidney injury, TLR4 and its ligand, extracellular HMGB1 that accumulates as a result of ischemia related tissue injury, are required for the expression of adhesion molecules by ECs and thus facilitate leukocyte infiltration [71]. After hepatic ischemia/reperfusion increasing LPS was found bound to TLR in ECs, and TLR4 deficiency has been shown to protect mice from endothelial dysfunction after hepatic ischemic insult [69]. HMGB1 is also able to activate both canonical and non-canonical signalling through TLR4 interaction depending on the ECs type, being able to inhibit Human Pulmonary Artery ECs migration while in Human Umbilical Vein ECs it promotes angiogenesis [92, 116], and has been shown to contribute to the pathogenesis of

468 pulmonary hypertension [117]. Increased expression of TLR4 on ECs also occurs after
469 reperfusion in acute kidney injury and HMGB1, released by injured cells, increases the
470 expression of adhesion molecules on ECs [72].
471 Also, endothelial as well as leukocytic expression of TLR2 is involved in post-ischemic
472 coronary artery dysfunction in mice, and it has been shown that TLR2 deficiency delays
473 recovery from ischemic injury [66]. Likewise, TLR-2, but not TLR4, deficiency in
474 pulmonary endothelial and epithelial cells reduced MAPK activation and cytokine
475 secretion [67]. Not only TLR2 and TLR4 play a significant role in the modulation of
476 inflammation and tissue repair after ischemia [70], but also their cross-talk appears to
477 regulate inflammation in ECs. TLR4 induces inflammation via IL6 production and at the
478 same time it up-regulates TLR2 expression [23]. Moreover, it appears that HMGB1-
479 would signal trough TLR2 directly to mediate its pro-angiogenic effects or that HMGB1-
480 TLR4 signalling would be a downstream event of TLR2 signalling since TLR2 knock-out
481 cells appear unresponsive to this ligand [23]. Oxidative stress associated damage is a key
482 player in many scenarios involving ischemia/reperfusion such as organ transplant,
483 cerebrovascular accidents, myocardial infarction, etc. As previously stated, TLRs
484 activated ECs are a main contributor to the induction of ROS, and many data demonstrate
485 the involvement of TLRs signalling as a mediator of oxidative stress injury in
486 ischemia/reperfusion and angiogenesis [83, 118].
487 Inflammatory-induced angiogenesis is a critical early event in chronic inflammatory
488 disorders such as rheumatoid arthritis (RA), an autoimmune disease characterized by
489 cartilage and bone degradation. Expression of TLR2 and TLR4 is increased in RA in the
490 perivascular regions of the joins and signalling through TLR2 induces Angiotensin 2

(Ang 2) and MMP 2 and 9 expression (Figure 1) resulting in angiogenic tube formation  
and ECs migration and invasion [73]. Ang 2 receptor Tie 2 signalling pathway activation  
is at least in part responsible for these pro-angiogenic effects [73]. TLR 2 synergized with  
IFN-γ increases NO production [119]. The role of endothelial TLR 4 activation in RA is  
still unclear since some reports indicate that, even though it induces NFκB and increases  
adhesion molecule and chemokine expression, it does not seem linked to endothelial  
dysfunction in RA patients [120]  
Another angiogenesis related autoimmune disorder is the Antiphospholipid syndrome  
(APS), characterized by the presence of antiphospholipid antibodies (aPL) and associated  
with thrombosis and recurrent fetal loss. Recent studies point to TLRs as central players  
in the pathological effects of these antiphospholipid antibodies [79]. Intracellular  
receptors TLR 7 and TLR 8 seem to be key in the antiphospholipid binding especially in  
monocytes, endothelial and dendritic cells [79]. Also TLR 2 and TLR 4 are membrane  
targets for these antibodies and mediate the deleterious effects and ECs activation [76],  
[77]. Besides, TLR 4 could act as a co-receptor for beta 2 glycoprotein I contributing to  
ECs activation mediated by aPL [77]. In addition, TLR 4 polymorphisms are protective  
against LPS induced inflammation in antiphospholipid syndrome (APS) patients [78]. It  
has been proposed that the pathological consequences of APS seem to result from a  
combination of events. The presence of circulating antibodies will representing a  
precondition that induces TLR hyperactivity. In this case, APS-associated clotting would  
most likely result from a secondary hit resulting in pro-inflammatory signalling [75].  
Angiogenesis is also linked with pathologies such as liver fibrosis, associated with  
increased endotoxin within the gut lumen and the portal circulation. Activation of ECs

514 through TLR 4 is an important factor linked to the development of liver fibrosis. Systemic
515 sclerosis associated skin and lung fibrosis, along with pathologic angiogenesis, were
516 abrogated in TLR 4 deficient mice and TLR 4 expression was increased in ECs in systemic
517 sclerosis patients [50].
518 Migration, proliferation and transformation of endothelial and endothelial progenitor cells
519 can also lead to tumor development and metastasis through pathological angiogenesis and
520 lymphangiogenesis. TLR involvement is also crucial in these processes with TLR 4
521 signalling in lymphatic ECs being critical for LPS-induced inflammation-mediated
522 lymphangiogenesis [80].
523 6.6 Allo-reactivity and transplant rejection
524 A role for maladaptive immune responses and TLRs activation in allo-reactivity and
525 transplant rejection in ECs has also been recognized. Mutations in PRRs including TLR 4
526 have been shown to affect the risk for graft-versus-host disease after allogeneic
527 transplantation [121] and treatment with a TLR 9 agonist worsened the prognosis of graft-
528 versus-host disease in experimental animals [122] while TLR 9 deficiency might even
529 result in increased survival [123]. In response to pro-inflammatory cytokines and TLRs
530 ligands (a consequence of an inflammatory situation such as the acute phase of organ
531 transplant), ECs induce the initiation of the CD4+T cell allo-immune response that in
532 turn promotes rejection and chronic graft injury [84]. When acute kidney injury takes
533 place during organ transplant, exacerbated TLR 4 mediated response may also lead to
534 rejection [71].
535 6.7 Heavy metal exposure
536 Even heavy metal exposure has been linked with inflammation, endothelial dysfunction

and cardiovascular disease and consistently, a crucial role for endothelial TLR activation
has been demonstrated in the MyD 88 dependent inflammatory response induced by zinc
and nickel [85].

7. Endothelial TLRs as a therapeutic target

In summary, ECs inflammatory responses are a number of tightly controlled cooperative
signalling networks in response to various stimuli both exogenous (pathogens) and
endogenous (injury signals and pro-inflammatory mediators). Other cells such as smooth
muscle cells, fibroblasts, and immune cells within the vasculature also serve as the targets
and/or regulators of vascular activation and are therefore implicated in the pathogenesis
of atherosclerosis, hypertension, fibrosis, ischemia, diabetes and other vascular
inflammation and angiogenesis related disorders described above.

A central role of TLRs in vascular dysfunction and angiogenesis related pathologies as
well as in pathogen recognition has been outlined. Considering this, the potential role of
TLRs in mediating inflammation and the consequent development of associated
complications make them attractive drug candidates. TLRs represent a crucial link
between atherosclerosis and inflammation, which makes them potential cardiovascular
disease treatment targets.

TLR signaling also participates in adult neovascularization, a crucial process in a number
of ischemia-related conditions and in tumor growth [96]. TLR activation stimulates EPCs
recruitment to initiate neovascularization through EPCs differentiation into endothelial

cells and/or by eliciting paracrine effects [124]. Therefore, TLR mediated EPC mobility

may represent a potential target for modulating the process of neoangiogenesis.

Blocking TLRs signalling by different methods (including specific antagonists, anti-TLR

antibodies, inhibitors of the down-stream signalling pathways) is currently discussed in

the context of the treatment of a variety of vascular diseases [125] and new TLRs-

targeted drugs are being developed and tested for a number of inflammation related

diseases. Recently, miRNAs have been shown to regulate TLR function [126] and

therefore should also be considered when looking for potential therapeutic avenues. In

particular, up-regulation of miRNAs was associated with TLR3 dependent endothelial

cell function modulation [96] even though the authors considered unlikely that these

miRNAs play a critical role in the regulation of the biological processes.

For instance, TLR2 inhibition on hematopoietic stem cells has been proposed as a way to

enhance stem cell function for the treatment of vascular diseases [95]. Also, TLR3 has

been shown to modulate the function of umbilical cord blood derived endothelial

progenitor cells that have emerged as a potential therapeutic approach in cardiovascular

diseases [96].

So far, several already marketed treatments for diabetes (statins) and hypertension

(angiotensin receptor blockers) have been also shown to down-regulate TLRs expression

but whether TLRs down-regulation plays a role in the efficacy of these drugs remains

unknown [56].

On the other hand, synthetic TLRs agonists such as imiquimod have been proven

effective for the topical treatment of viral infections and skin cancers.

However, the role of TLRs stimulation in the modulation of autoimmune, allergic and
immunological responses requires careful consideration for the development of
therapeutic drugs taking into consideration that TLRs directed anti-inflammatory
therapies can affect the behaviour of ECs and vascular therapeutics can influence
inflammation. Also, cell type differences in TLRs activation and signalling have been
described that will have critical impact on the results of TLRs targeted drugs. For
example, activation of TLR4 is generally considered to have pro-inflammatory effects on
the vasculature; however, other studies have shown a novel cardio-protective role for
TLR4 in vascular homeostasis [127]. This can be explained by differences in TLR4
function in immune versus non-immune vascular cells. Moreover, recent studies have
demonstrated that while interference with TLRs signalling in ECs improves
atherosclerosis, in macrophages this interference resulted in exacerbated vascular
inflammation and lesion formation [128]. Perhaps, targeted TLRs therapeutics (e.g. to
ECs) will be safer and more effective leading to cell type specific effects and avoiding
off-targets effects that can arise from general TLRs inhibition such as unwanted
immunodeficiency. Another possible way to avoid compromising the patient immune
system is to develop drugs able to modulate rather than completely block TLRs signalling.

8. Acknowledgements

This study was supported by grants to M. Fresno from the Spanish Ministerio de Ciencia
e Innovación (SAF 210-18733 and SAF 2013-42850), HOMIN-317057-FP7-PEOPLE-
2012-IT from European Union Seventh Framework Program, RED RICET

RD12/0018/0004 and PIE13/00041 (BIOIMID) both from Instituto de Salud “Carlos III”,
S-2010/BMD-2332 from the Comunidad de Madrid and the Fundación Ramón Areces.
Sara Francisco is supported by a predoctoral fellowship under the TOLLerant-ETN
action, Marie Sklodowska-Curie grant agreement N° 642157 from the European Union
Horizon 2020 program.

References

1. Pober JS, Sessa WC. Evolving functions of endothelial cells in inflammation. Nat Rev Immunol 2007; 7:803-815.
2. Steyers CM, 3rd, Miller FJ, Jr. Endothelial dysfunction in chronic inflammatory diseases. Int J Mol Sci 2014; 15:11324-11349.
3. Murdaca G, Colombo BM, Cagnati P, Gulli R, Spano F, Puppo F. Endothelial dysfunction in rheumatic autoimmune diseases. Atherosclerosis 2012; 224:309-317.
4. Rajendran P, Rengarajan T, Thangavel J, Nishigaki Y, Sakthisekaran D, Sethi G, Nishigaki I. The vascular endothelium and human diseases. Int J Biol Sci 2013; 9:1057-1069.
5. Xiao L, Liu Y, Wang N. New paradigms in inflammatory signaling in vascular endothelial cells. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol 2014; 306:H317-325.
6. Anderson KV, Jurgens G, Nusslein-Volhard C. Establishment of dorsal-ventral polarity in the drosophila embryo: Genetic studies on the role of the toll gene product. Cell 1985; 42:779-789.
7. Akira S, Uematsu S, Takeuchi O. Pathogen recognition and innate immunity. Cell 2006; 124:783-801.
8. Mogensen TH. Pathogen recognition and inflammatory signaling in innate immune defenses. Clin Microbiol Rev 2009; 22:240-273, Table of Contents.
9. Iwasaki A, Medzhitov R. Toll-like receptor control of the adaptive immune responses. Nat Immunol 2004; 5:987-995.

628 10 Akira S, Takeda K. Toll-like receptor signalling. Nat Rev Immunol
629 2004;4:499-511.
630 11 Toshchakov V, Jones BW, Perera PY, Thomas K, Cody MJ, Zhang S,
631 Williams BR, Major J, Hamilton TA, Fenton MJ, Vogel SN. Tlr4, but not tlr2, mediates
632 ifn-beta-induced stat1alpha/beta-dependent gene expression in macrophages. Nat
633 Immunol 2002;3:392-398.
634 12 Khakpour S, Wilhelmsen K, Hellman J. Vascular endothelial cell toll-like
635 receptor pathways in sepsis. Innate Immun 2015
636 13 Opitz B, Eitel J, Meixenberger K, Suttorp N. Role of toll-like receptors,
637 nod-like receptors and rig-i-like receptors in endothelial cells and systemic infections.
638 Thromb Haemost 2009;102:1103-1109.
639 14 Wang W, Deng M, Liu X, Ai W, Tang Q, Hu J. Tlr4 activation induces
640 nontolerant inflammatory response in endothelial cells. Inflammation 2011;34:509-518.
641 15 Garrafa E, Imberti L, Tiberio G, Prandini A, Giulini SM, Caimi L.
642 Heterogeneous expression of toll-like receptors in lymphatic endothelial cells derived
643 from different tissues. Immunol Cell Biol 2011;89:475-481.
644 16 Pryschep O, Ma-Krupa W, Younge BR, Goronzy JJ, Weyand CM.
645 Vessel-specific toll-like receptor profiles in human medium and large arteries.
646 Circulation 2008;118:1276-1284.
647 17 Maaser C, Heidemann J, von Eiff C, Lugering A, Spahn TW, Binion DG,
648 Domschke W, Lugering N, Kucharzik T. Human intestinal microvascular endothelial
649 cells express toll-like receptor 5: A binding partner for bacterial flagellin. J Immunol
650 2004;172:5056-5062.

651  18  Pegu A, Qin S, Fallert Junecko BA, Nisato RE, Pepper MS, Reinhart TA.
652  Human lymphatic endothelial cells express multiple functional tlr s. J Immunol
653  2008;180:3399-3405.
654  19  Fitzner N, Clauberg S, Essmann F, Liebmann J, Kolb-Bachofen V. Human
655  skin endothelial cells can express all 10 tlr genes and respond to respective ligands. Clin
656  Vaccine Immunol 2008;15:138-146.
657  20  Nagyoszi P, Wilhelm I, Farkas AE, Fazakas C, Dung NT, Hasko J,
658  Krizbai IA. Expression and regulation of toll-like receptors in cerebral endothelial cells.
659  Neurochem Int 2010;57:556-564.
660  21  He J, Xiao Z, Chen X, Chen M, Fang L, Yang M, Lv Q, Li Y, Li G, Hu J,
661  Xie X. The expression of functional toll-like receptor 4 is associated with proliferation
662  and maintenance of stem cell phenotype in endothelial progenitor cells (epcs). J Cell
663  Biochem 2010;111:179-186.
664  22  Xiao Z, Yang M, Fang L, Lv Q, He Q, Deng M, Liu X, Chen X, Chen M,
665  Xie X, Hu J. Extracellular nucleotide inhibits cell proliferation and negatively regulates
666  toll-like receptor 4 signalling in human progenitor endothelial cells. Cell Biol Int
667  2012;36:625-633.
668  23  Xu J, Benabou K, Cui X, Madia M, Tzeng E, Billiar T, Watkins S,
669  Sachdev U. Tlr4 deters perfusion recovery and upregulates tlr2 in ischemic skeletal
670  muscle and endothelial cells. Mol Med 2015
671  24  Elson G, Dunn-Siegrist I, Daubeuf B, Pugin J. Contribution of toll-like
672  receptors to the innate immune response to gram-negative and gram-positive bacteria.
673  Blood 2007;109:1574-1583.

674 25 Jialal I, Pahwa R. The evolving role of toll-like receptors in diabetic
vascular complications. J Diabetes Complications 2015; 29:617-620.
675 
676 26 Rajamani U, Jialal I. Hyperglycemia induces toll-like receptor-2 and -4
expression and activity in human microvascular retinal endothelial cells: Implications for
diabetic retinopathy. J Diabetes Res 2014; 2014:790902.
677 
678 
679 27 Liu J, Jiang M, Ma Z, Dietze KK, Zelinsky G, Yang D, Dittmer U,
Schlaak JF, Roggendorf M, Lu M. Tlr 1/2 ligand-stimulated mouse liver endothelial cells
secrete il-12 and trigger cd8+t cell immunity in vitro. J Immunol 2013; 191:6178-6190.
680 
681 
682 28 Ward JR, Francis SE, Marsden L, Suddason T, Lord GM, Dower SK,
Crossman DC, Sabroe I. A central role for monocytes in toll-like receptor-mediated
activation of the vasculature. Immunology 2009; 128:58-68.
683 
684 
685 29 McCarthy CG, Goulopoulos S, Wenceslau CF, Spitler K, Matsumoto T,
Webb RC. Toll-like receptors and damage-associated molecular patterns: Novel links
between inflammation and hypertension. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol
2014;306:H184-196.
686 
687 
688 
689 30 McCarthy CG, Webb RC. The toll of the gridiron: Damage-associated
molecular patterns and hypertension in american football. FASEB journal : official
publication of the Federation of American Societies for Experimental Biology
2016;30:34-40.
690 
691 
692 
693 31 Wilhelmsen K, Mesa KR, Prakash A, Xu F, Hellman J. Activation of
endothelial tlr2 by bacterial lipoprotein upregulates proteins specific for the neutrophil
response. Innate Immun 2012; 18:602-616.
694 
695 


696 32 Gatheral T, Reed DM, Moreno L, Gough PJ, Votta BJ, Sehon CA, Rickard DJ, Bertin J, Lim E, Nicholson AG, Mitchell JA. A key role for the endothelium in nod1 mediated vascular inflammation: Comparison to tlr4 responses. PLoS One 2012; 7:e42386.
699 33 Andonegui G, Bonder CS, Green F, Mullaly SC, Zbytnuik L, Raharjo E,
700 Kubes P. Endothelium-derived toll-like receptor-4 is the key molecule in lps-induced
701 neutrophil sequestration into lungs. J Clin Invest 2003; 111:1011-1020.
702 34 Stark RJ, Aghakasiri N, Rumbaut RE. Platelet-derived toll-like receptor 4
703 (tlr-4) is sufficient to promote microvascular thrombosis in endotoxemia. PLoS One
704 2012;7:e41254.
705 35 Ehrentraut SF, Dorr A, Ehrentraut H, Lohner R, Lee SH, Hoeft A,
706 Baumgarten G, Knuefermann P, Boehm O, Meyer R. Vascular dysfunction following
707 polymicrobial sepsis: Role of pattern recognition receptors. PLoS One 2012; 7:e44531.
708 36 Shibamiya A, Hersemeyer K, Schmidt Woll T, Sedding D, Daniel JM,
709 Bauer S, Koyama T, Preissner KT, Kanse SM. A key role for toll-like receptor-3 in
710 disrupting the hemostasis balance on endothelial cells. Blood 2009; 113:714-722.
711 37 Cromer WE, Mathis JM, Granger DN, Chaitanya GV, Alexander JS. Role
712 of the endothelium in inflammatory bowel diseases. World J Gastroenterol 2011; 17:578-
713 593.
714 38 Neves FS, Spiller F. Possible mechanisms of neutrophil activation in
715 behcet's disease. Int Immunopharmacol 2013; 17:1206-1210.
716 39 Hilberath JN, Carlo T, Pfeffer MA, Croze RH, Hastrup F, Levy BD.
717 Resolution of toll-like receptor 4-mediated acute lung injury is linked to eicosanoids and
718 suppressor of cytokine signaling 3. Fasebj 2011; 25:1827-1835.


719 40 Zimmer S, Steinmetz M, Asdonk T, Motz I, Coch C, Hartmann E, Barchet W, Wassmann S, Hartmann G, Nickenig G. Activation of endothelial toll-like receptor 3

720 impairs endothelial function. Circ Res 2011; 108:1358-1366.

721 41 Edfeldt K, Swedenborg J, Hansson GK, Yan ZQ. Expression of toll-like

722 receptors in human atherosclerotic lesions: A possible pathway for plaque activation.

723 Circulation 2002; 105:1158-1161.

724 42 Mullick AE, Soldau K, Kisses WB, Bell TA, 3rd, Tobias PS, Curtiss LK.

725 Increased endothelial expression of toll-like receptor 2 at sites of disturbed blood flow

726 exacerbates early atherogenic events. J Exp Med 2008; 205:373-383.

727 43 Cole JE, Mitra AT, Monaco C. Treating atherosclerosis: The potential of

728 toll-like receptors as therapeutic targets. Expert Rev Cardiovasc Ther 2010; 8:1619-1635.

729 44 Erridge C, Burdess A, Jackson AJ, Murray C, Riggio M, Lappin D,

730 Milligan S, Spickett CM, Webb DJ. Vascular cell responsiveness to toll-like receptor

731 ligands in carotid atheroma. Eur J Clin Invest 2008; 38:713-720.

732 45 Hirata Y, Kurobe H, Higashida M, Fukuda D, Shimabukuro M, Tanaka K,

733 Higashikuni Y, Kitagawa T, Sata M. Hmgb1 plays a critical role in vascular

734 inflammation and lesion formation via toll-like receptor 9. Atherosclerosis 2013; 231:227-

735 233.

736 46 Feng Y, Cai ZR, Tang Y, Hu G, Lu J, He D, Wang S. Tlr4/nf-kappa b

737 signaling pathway-mediated and oxldl-induced up-regulation of lox-1, mcp-1, and vcam-

738 l expressions in human umbilical vein endothelial cells. Genet Mol Res 2014; 13:680-695.

739 47 Speer T, Rohrer L, Blyszczuk P, Shroff R, Kuschnerus K, Krankel N,

740 Kania G, Zewinger S, Akhmedov A, Shi Y, Martin T, Perisa D, Winnik S, Muller MF,

742 Sester U, Wernicke G, Jung A, Gutteck U, Eriksson U, Geisel J, Deanfield J, von
743 Eckardstein A, Luscher TF, Fliser D, Bahlmann FH, Landmesser U. Abnormal high-
744 density lipoprotein induces endothelial dysfunction via activation of toll-like receptor-2.
745 Immunity 2013; 38:754-768.
746 48 Huggins C, Pearce S, Peri F, Neumann F, Cockerill G, Pirianov G. A
747 novel small molecule tlr 4 antagonist (iaxo-102) negatively regulates non-hematopoietic
748 toll like receptor 4 signalling and inhibits aortic aneurysms development. Atherosclerosis
749 2015; 242:563-570.
750 49 Ren M, Li R, Luo M, Chen N, Deng X, Yan K, Zeng M, Wu J.
751 Endothelial cells but not platelets are the major source of toll-like receptor 4 in the
752 arterial thrombosis and tissue factor expression in mice. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp
753 Physiol 2014; 307:R901-907.
754 50 Takahashi T, Asano Y, Ichimura Y, Toyama T, Taniguchi T, Noda S,
755 Akamata K, Tada Y, Sugaya M, Kadono T, Sato S. Amelioration of tissue fibrosis by
756 toll-like receptor 4 knockout in murine models of systemic sclerosis. Arthritis Rheumatol
757 2015; 67:254-265.
758 51 Li J, Jin C, Cleveland JC, Jr., Ao L, Xu D, Fullerton DA, Meng X.
759 Enhanced inflammatory responses to toll-like receptor 2/4 stimulation in type 1 diabetic
760 coronary artery endothelial cells: The effect of insulin. Cardiovasc Diabetol 2010; 9: 90.
761 52 Chen YY, Chen J, Hu JW, Yang ZL, Shen YL. Enhancement of
762 lipopolysaccharide-induced toll-like receptor 2 expression and inflammatory cytokine
763 secretion in huvecs under high glucose conditions. Life Sci 2013; 92:582-588.


764 53 Devaraj S, Dasu MR, Park SH, Jialal I. Increased levels of ligands of toll-
like receptors 2 and 4 in type 1 diabetes. Diabetologia 2009; 52:1665-1668.
765 54 Devaraj S, Tobias P, Kasinath BS, Ramsamooj R, Afify A, Jialal I.
Knockout of toll-like receptor-2 attenuates both the proinflammatory state of diabetes and
incipient diabetic nephropathy. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol 2011; 31:1796-1804.
766 55 Mudaliar H, Pollock C, Ma J, Wu H, Chadban S, Panchapakesan U. The
role of tlr 2 and 4-mediated inflammatory pathways in endothelial cells exposed to high
glucose. PLoS One 2014; 9: e108844.
767 56 Jialal I, Kaur H. The role of toll-like receptors in diabetes-induced
inflammation: Implications for vascular complications. Curr Diab Rep 2012
768 57 Jain SK, Rains JL. Toll-like receptor-4 and vascular inflammation in
diabetes: Editorial. Cytokine 2011; 55:446-447.
769 58 Singh MV, Chapleau MW, Harwani SC, Abboud FM. The immune system
and hypertension. Immunol Res 2014; 59:243-253.
770 59 Trott DW, Harrison DG. The immune system in hypertension. Adv
Physiol Educ 2014; 38:20-24.
771 60 Bomfim GF, Dos Santos RA, Oliveira MA, Giachini FR, Akamine EH,
Tostes RC, Fortes ZB, Webb RC, Carvalho MH. Toll-like receptor 4 contributes to blood
pressure regulation and vascular contraction in spontaneously hypertensive rats. Clin Sci
(Lond) 2012; 122:535-543.
772 61 Hernanz R, Martinez-Revelles S, Palacios R, Martin A, Cacho feiro V,
Aguado A, Garcia-Redondo L, Barrus MT, de Batista PR, Briones AM, Salaices M,


786 Alonso MJ. Toll-like receptor 4 contributes to vascular remodelling and endothelial
dysfunction in angiotensin ii-induced hypertension. Br J Pharmacol 2015; 172:3159-3176.
787 Bomfim GF, Echem C, Martins CB, Costa TJ, Sartoretto SM, Dos Santos
RA, Oliveira MA, Akamine EH, Fortes ZB, Tostes RC, Webb RC, Carvalho MH. Toll-
like receptor 4 inhibition reduces vascular inflammation in spontaneously hypertensive
rats. Life Sci 2015; 122:1-7.
788 McCarthy CG, Wenceslau CF, Goulopoulou S, Ogbi S, Baban B, Sullivan
789 JC, Matsumoto T, Webb RC. Circulating mitochondrial DNA and toll-like receptor 9 are
790 associated with vascular dysfunction in spontaneously hypertensive rats. Cardiovasc Res
791 2015;107:119-130.
792 Jialal I, Rajamani U, Adams-Huet B, Kaur H. Circulating pathogen-
793 associated molecular pattern-binding proteins and high mobility group box protein 1 in
794 nascent metabolic syndrome: Implications for cellular toll-like receptor activity.
795 Atherosclerosis 2014; 236:182-187.
796 Thompson JA, Webb RC. Potential role of toll-like receptors in
797 programming of vascular dysfunction. Clin Sci (Lond) 2013; 125:19-25.
798 Favre J, Musette P, Douin-Echinard V, Laude K, Henry JP, Arnal JF,
799 Thuliez C, Richard V. Toll-like receptors 2-deficient mice are protected against
800 postischemic coronary endothelial dysfunction. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol
801 2007;27:1064-1071.
802 Phelan P, Merry HE, Hwang B, Mulligan MS. Differential toll-like
803 receptor activation in lung ischemia reperfusion injury. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg
804 2015;149:1653-1661.

809 68 Xu Y, Zhou Y, Lin H, Hu H, Wang Y, Xu G. Toll-like receptor 2 in
810 promoting angiogenesis after acute ischemic injury. Int J Mol Med 2013; 31:555-560.
811 69 Ellett JD, Atkinson C, Evans ZP, Amani Z, Balish E, Schmidt MG,
812 Schnellmann RG, Chavin KD. Toll-like receptor 4 knockout mice are protected from
813 endothelial overactivation in the absence of kupffer cells after total hepatic
814 ischemia/reperfusion. Liver Transpl 2011; 17:1089-1098.
815 70 Brea D, Blanco M, Ramos-Cabrera P, Moldes O, Arias S, Perez-Mato M,
816 Leira R, Sobrino T, Castillo J. Toll-like receptors 2 and 4 in ischemic stroke: Outcome
817 and therapeutic values. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 2011; 31:1424-1431.
818 71 Lu CY, Winterberg PD, Chen J, Hartono JR. Acute kidney injury: A
819 conspiracy of toll-like receptor 4 on endothelia, leukocytes, and tubules. Pediatr Nephrol
820 2012;27:1847-1854.
821 72 Chen J, John R, Richardson JA, Shelton JM, Zhou XJ, Wang Y, Wu QQ,
822 Hartono JR, Winterberg PD, Lu CY. Toll-like receptor 4 regulates early endothelial
823 activation during ischemic acute kidney injury. Kidney Int 2011; 79:288-299.
824 73 Saber T, Veale DJ, Balogh E, McCormick J, NicAnUltaigh S, Connolly M,
825 Fearon U. Toll-like receptor 2 induced angiogenesis and invasion is mediated through the
826 tie 2 signalling pathway in rheumatoid arthritis. PLoS One 2011; 6:e23540.
827 74 Jagavelu K, Routray C, Shergill U, O'Hara SP, Faubion W, Shah VH.
828 Endothelial cell toll-like receptor 4 regulates fibrosis-associated angiogenesis in the liver.
829 Hepatology 2010; 52:590-601.
830 75 Benhamou Y, Bellien J, Armengol G, Brakenhielm E, Adriouch S, Jacob
831 M, Remy-Jouet I, Le Cam-Duchez V, Monteil C, Renet S, Jouen F, Drouot L, Menard JF,

832 Borg JY, Thuliez C, Boyer O, Levesque H, Richard V, Joannides R. Role of toll-like
833 receptors 2 and 4 in mediating endothelial dysfunction and arterial remodeling in primary
834 arterial antiphospholipid syndrome. Arthritis Rheumatol 2014; 66:3210-3220.
835 76 Alard JE, Gaillard F, Daridon C, Shoenfeld Y, Jamin C, Youinou P. Tlr 2
836 is one of the endothelial receptors for beta 2-glycoprotein i. J Immunol 2010; 185:1550-
837 1557.
838 77 Borghi MO, Raschi E, Grossi C, Chighizola CB, Meroni PL. Toll-like
839 receptor 4 and beta 2 glycoprotein i interaction on endothelial cells. Lupus 2014; 23:1302-
840 1304.
841 78 Pierangeli SS, Vega-Ostertag ME, Raschi E, Liu X, Romay-Penabad Z,
842 De Micheli V, Galli M, Moia M, Tincani A, Borghi MO, Nguyen-Oghalai T, Meroni PL.
843 Toll-like receptor and antiphospholipid mediated thrombosis: In vivo studies. Ann
844 Rheum Dis 2007; 66:1327-1333.
845 79 von Landenberg P. Toll-like receptors play a crucial part in the
846 pathophysiological activity of antiphospholipid antibodies. Auto Immun Highlights
847 2011; 2:53-57.
848 80 Ji RC. Macrophages are important mediators of either tumor-
849 or inflammation-induced lymphangiogenesis. Cell Mol Life Sci 2012; 69:897-914.
850 81 Paone A, Galli R, Gabellini C, Lukashev D, Starace D, Gorlach A, De
851 Cesaris P, Ziparo E, Del Bufalo D, Sitkovsky MV, Filippini A, Riccioli A. Toll-like
852 receptor 3 regulates angiogenesis and apoptosis in prostate cancer cell lines through
853 hypoxia-inducible factor 1 alpha. Neoplasia 2010; 12:539-549.

854 82 Grote K, Schutt H, Schieffer B. Toll-like receptors in angiogenesis.
855 Scientific World Journal 2011; 11:981-991.
856 83 West XZ, Malinin NL, Merkulova AA, Tischenko M, Kerr BA, Borden
857 EC, Podrez EA, Salomon RG, Byzova TV. Oxidative stress induces angiogenesis by
858 activating tlr2 with novel endogenous ligands. Nature 2010; 467:972-976.
859 84 Taflin C, Charron D, Glotz D, Mooney N. Regulation of the cd4+t cell
860 allo-immune response by endothelial cells. Hum Immunol 2012; 73:1269-1274.
861 85 Tsou TC, Liou SH, Yeh SC, Tsai FY, Chao HR. Crucial role of toll-like
862 receptors in the zinc/nickel-induced inflammatory response in vascular endothelial cells.
863 Toxicol Appl Pharmacol 2013; 273:492-499.
864 86 Impellizzeri D, Ahmad A, Di Paola R, Campolo M, Navarra M, Esposito
865 E, Cuzzocrea S. Role of toll like receptor 4 signaling pathway in the secondary damage
866 induced by experimental spinal cord injury. Immunobiology 2015; 220:1039-1049.
867 87 Fernandez-Ruiz I, Arnalich F, Cubillos-Zapata C, Hernandez-Jimenez E,
868 Moreno-Gonzalez R, Toledano V, Fernandez-Velasco M, Vallejo-Cremades MT,
869 Esteban-Burgos L, de Diego RP, Llamas-Matias MA, Garcia-Arumi E, Marti R, Bosca L,
870 Andreu AL, Lopez-Sendon JL, Lopez-Collazo E. Mitochondrial damps induce endotoxin
871 tolerance in human monocytes: An observation in patients with myocardial infarction.
872 PLoS One 2014; 9: e95073.
873 88 Lopez-Collazo E, del Fresno C. Pathophysiology of endotoxin tolerance:
874 Mechanisms and clinical consequences. Crit Care 2013; 17: 242.
875 89 de Groot D, Hoefer IE, Grundmann S, Schoneveld A, Haverslag RT, van
876 Keulen JK, Bot PT, Timmers L, Piek JJ, Pasterkamp G, de Kleijn DP. Arteriogenesis

877 requires toll-like receptor 2 and 4 expression in bone-marrow derived cells. J Mol Cell
878 Cardiol 2011; 50:25-32.
879 90 Grote K, Schuett H, Salguero G, Grothusen C, Jagielska J, Drexler H,
880 Muhlradt PF, Schieffer B. Toll-like receptor 2/6 stimulation promotes angiogenesis via
881 gm-csf as a potential strategy for immune defense and tissue regeneration. Blood
882 2010;115:2543-2552.
883 91 Yang S, Xu L, Yang T, Wang F. High-mobility group box-1 and its role in
884 angiogenesis. J Leukoc Biol 2014; 95:563-574.
885 92 Lin Q, Yang XP, Fang D, Ren X, Zhou H, Fang J, Liu X, Zhou S, Wen F,
886 Yao X, Wang JM, Su SB. High-mobility group box-1 mediates toll-like receptor 4-
887 dependent angiogenesis. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol 2011; 31:1024-1032.
888 93 Huang W, Liu Y, Li L, Zhang R, Liu W, Wu J, Mao E, Tang Y. Hmgbl
889 increases permeability of the endothelial cell monolayer via rage and src family tyrosine
890 kinase pathways. Inflammation 2012; 35:350-362.
891 94 Wagner NM, Bierhansl L, Noldge-Schomburg G, Vollmar B, Roesner JP.
892 Toll-like receptor 2-blocking antibodies promote angiogenesis and induce erk1/2 and akt
893 signaling via cxcr4 in endothelial cells. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol 2013; 33:1943-
894 1951.
895 95 Wagner NM, Bierhansl L, Butschkau A, Noeldge-Schomburg G, Roesner
896 JP, Vollmar B. Tlr2-deficiency of ckit+bone marrow cells is associated with augmented
897 potency to stimulate angiogenic processes. Int J Clin Exp Pathol 2013; 6:2813-2823.
898 96 Grelier A, Cras A, Balitrand N, Delmau C, Lecourt S, Lepelletier Y,
899 Riesterer H, Freida D, Lataillade JJ, Lebousse-Kerdiles MC, Cuccini W, Pefault de

900 Latour R, Marolleau JP, Uzan G, Larghero J, Vanneaux V. Toll-like receptor 3 regulates
901 cord blood-derived endothelial cell function in vitro and in vivo. Angiogenesis
902 2013;16:821-836.
903 97 Echavarria R, Mayaki D, Neel JC, Harel S, Sanchez V, Hussain SN.
904 Angiopoietin-1 inhibits toll-like receptor 4 signalling in cultured endothelial cells: Role
905 of mir-146b-5p. Cardiovasc Res 2015; 106:465-477.
906 98 Macintire DK, Bellhorn TL. Bacterial translocation: Clinical implications
907 and prevention. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 2002; 32:1165-1178.
908 99 Krikun G, Potter JA, Abrahams VM. Human endometrial endothelial cells
909 generate distinct inflammatory and antiviral responses to the tlr 3 agonist, poly(i:C) and
910 the tlr 8 agonist, viral ssrna. Am J Reprod Immunol 2013; 70:190-198.
911 100 Soult MC, Lonergan NE, Shah B, Kim WK, Britt LD, Sullivan CJ. Outer
912 membrane vesicles from pathogenic bacteria initiate an inflammatory response in human
913 endothelial cells. J Surg Res 2013; 184:458-466.
914 101 Dalrymple NA, Mackow ER. Virus interactions with endothelial cell
915 receptors: Implications for viral pathogenesis. Curr Opin Virol 2014; 7:134-140.
916 102 Ali I, Nanchal R, Husnain F, Audi S, Konduri GG, Densmore JC,
917 Medhora M, Jacobs ER. Hypoxia preconditioning increases survival and decreases
918 expression of toll-like receptor 4 in pulmonary artery endothelial cells exposed to
919 lipopolysaccharide. Pulm Circ 2013; 3:578-588.
920 103 Dauphinee SM, Voelcker V, Tebaykina Z, Wong F, Karsan A.
921 Heterotrimeric gi/go proteins modulate endothelial tlr signaling independent of the
922 myd 88-dependent pathway. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol 2011; 301:H2246-2253.

923 104 Fernandez-Pisonero I, Duenas AI, Barreiro O, Montero O, Sanchez-
924 Madrid F, Garcia-Rodriguez C. Lipopolysaccharide and sphingosine-1-phosphate
925 cooperate to induce inflammatory molecules and leukocyte adhesion in endothelial cells.
926 J Immunol 2012; 189:5402-5410.
927 105 El Kebir D, Damlaj A, Makhezer N, Filep JG. Toll-like receptor 9
928 signaling regulates tissue factor and tissue factor pathway inhibitor expression in human
929 endothelial cells and coagulation in mice. Crit Care Med 2015; 43:e179-189.
930 106 Schirbel A, Kessler S, Rieder F, West G, Rebert N, Asosingh K,
931 McDonald C, Fiocchi C. Pro-angiogenic activity of tlr's and nlr's: A novel link between
932 gut microbiota and intestinal angiogenesis. Gastroenterology 2013; 144:613-623.e619.
933 107 Butta NV, Fernandez-Bello I, Lopez-Longo FJ, Jimenez-Yuste V.
934 Endothelial dysfunction and altered coagulation as mediators of thromboembolism in
935 behcet disease. Semin Thromb Hemost 2015; 41:621-628.
936 108 Cole JE, Georgiou E, Monaco C. The expression and functions of toll-like
937 receptors in atherosclerosis. Mediators Inflamm 2010; 2010:393946.
938 109 Nishio H, Kanno S, Onoyama S, Ikeda K, Tanaka T, Kusuhara K,
939 Fujimoto Y, Fukase K, Sueishi K, Hara T. Nod1 ligands induce site-specific vascular
940 inflammation. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol 2011; 31:1093-1099.
941 110 Lee JH, Joo JH, Kim J, Lim HJ, Kim S, Curtiss L, Seong JK, Cui W,
942 Yabe-Nishimura C, Bae YS. Interaction of nadph oxidase 1 with toll-like receptor 2
943 induces migration of smooth muscle cells. Cardiovasc Res 2013; 99:483-493.
944 111 Park HS, Jung HY, Park EY, Kim J, Lee WJ, Bae YS. Cutting edge:
945 Direct interaction of tlr4 with nad(p)h oxidase 4 isozyme is essential for

946 lipopolysaccharide-induced production of reactive oxygen species and activation of nf-
947 kappa b. J Immunol 2004; 173:3589-3593.
948 112 Lu Z, Li Y, Jin J, Zhang X, Lopes-Virella MF, Huang Y. Toll-like
949 receptor 4 activation in microvascular endothelial cells triggers a robust inflammatory
950 response and cross talk with mononuclear cells via interleukin-6. Arterioscler Thromb
951 Vasc Biol 2012; 32:1696-1706.
952 113 Newby AC. Metalloproteinase expression in monocytes and macrophages
953 and its relationship to atherosclerotic plaque instability. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol
954 2008; 28:2108-2114.
955 114 Su X, Ao L, Shi Y, Johnson TR, Fullerton DA, Meng X. Oxidized low
956 density lipoprotein induces bone morphogenetic protein-2 in coronary artery endothelial
957 cells via toll-like receptors 2 and 4. J Biol Chem 2011; 286:12213-12220.
958 115 Dunzendorfer S, Lee HK, Tobias PS. Flow-dependent regulation of
959 endothelial toll-like receptor 2 expression through inhibition of spl activity. Circ Res
960 2004; 95:684-691.
961 116 Bauer EM, Shapiro R, Billiar TR, Bauer PM. High mobility group box 1
962 inhibits human pulmonary artery endothelial cell migration via a toll-like receptor 4-and
963 interferon response factor 3-dependent mechanism(s). J Biol Chem 2013; 288:1365-1373.
964 117 Bauer EM, Shapiro R, Zheng H, Ahmad F, Ishizawar D, Comhair SA,
965 Erzurum SC, Billiar TR, Bauer PM. High mobility group box 1 contributes to the
966 pathogenesis of experimental pulmonary hypertension via activation of toll-like receptor
967 4. Mol Med 2012; 18:1509-1518.

968 118 Gill R, Tsung A, Billiar T. Linking oxidative stress to inflammation: Toll-
like receptors. Free Radic Biol Med 2010; 48:1121-1132.
969 
970 119 Tsolmongyn B, Koide N, Jambalganiin U, Odkhuu E, Naiki Y, Komatsu T,
971 Yoshida T, Yokochi T. A toll-like receptor 2 ligand, pam3csk4, augments interferon-
972 gamma-induced nitric oxide production via a physical association between myd 88 and
973 interferon-gamma receptor in vascular endothelial cells. Immunology 2013; 140:352-361.
974 120 Menghini R, Campia U, Tesauro M, Marino A, Rovella V, Rodia G,
975 Schinzari F, Tolusso B, di Daniele N, Federici M, Zoli A, Ferraccioli G, Cardillo C. Toll-
976 like receptor 4 mediates endothelial cell activation through nf-kappab but is not
977 associated with endothelial dysfunction in patients with rheumatoid arthritis. PLoS One
978 2014;9:e99053.
979 121 Elmaagacli AH, Koldehoff M, Hindahl H, Steckel NK, Trenschel R,
980 Peceny R, Ottinger H, Rath PM, Ross RS, Roggendorf M, Grosse-Wilde H, Beelen DW.
981 Mutations in innate immune system nod 2/card 15 and tlr-4 (thr399ile) genes influence the
982 risk for severe acute graft-versus-host disease in patients who underwent an allogeneic
983 transplantation. Transplantation 2006; 81:247-254.
984 122 Taylor PA, Ehrhardt MJ, Lees CJ, Panoskaltsis-Mortari A, Krieg AM,
985 Sharpe AH, Murphy WJ, Serody JS, Hemmi H, Akira S, Levy RB, Blazar BR. Tlr
986 agonists regulate alloresponses and uncover a critical role for donor apcs in allogeneic
987 bone marrow rejection. Blood 2008; 112:3508-3516.
988 123 Heimesaat MM, Nogai A, Bereswill S, Plickert R, Fischer A,
989 Loddenkemper C, Steinhoff U, Tchapchet S, Thiel E, Freudenberg MA, Gobel UB,

990 Uharek L. Myd88/tlr 9 mediated immunopathology and gut microbiota dynamics in a  
novel murine model of intestinal graft-versus-host disease. Gut 2010; 59:1079-1087.

991 Yang S, Yang TS, Wang F, Su SB. High-mobility group box-1-toll-like  

992 receptor 4 axis mediates the recruitment of endothelial progenitor cells in alkali-induced  

993 corneal neovascularization. Int Immunopharmacol 2015; 28:450-458.

994 Lin E, Freedman JE, Beaulieu LM. Innate immunity and toll-like receptor  

995 antagonists: A potential role in the treatment of cardiovascular diseases. Cardiovasc Ther  

996 2009;27:117-123.

997 He X, Jing Z, Cheng G. Micrornas: New regulators of toll-like receptor  

998 signalling pathways. Biomed Res Int 2014; 2014: 945169.

999 Harrington LS, Lundberg MH, Waight M, Rozario A, Mitchell JA.  

1000 Reduced endothelial dependent vasodilation in vessels from tlr4(-/-) mice is associated  

1001 with increased superoxide generation. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2011; 408:511-515.

1002 Polykratis A, van Loo G, Xanthoulea S, Hellmich M, Pasparakis M.  

1003 Conditional targeting of tumor necrosis factor receptor-associated factor 6 reveals  

1004 opposing functions of toll-like receptor signaling in endothelial and myeloid cells in a  

1005 mouse model of atherosclerosis. Circulation 2012; 126:1739-1751.
