
Appl Microbiol Biotechnol
DOI 10.1007/s00253-016-7650-1

MINI-REVIEW

**Genetic control and regulatory mechanisms of succinoglycan and curdlan biosynthesis in genus *Agrobacterium***

Dan Wu<sup>1</sup> · Ang Li<sup>1</sup> · Fang Ma<sup>1</sup> · Jixian Yang<sup>1</sup> · Yutong Xie<sup>1</sup>

Received: 5 April 2016 / Revised: 18 May 2016 / Accepted: 21 May 2016

© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2016

---

### Abstract
*Agrobacterium* is a genus of gram-negative bacteria that can produce several typical exopolysaccharides with commercial uses in the food and pharmaceutical fields. In particular, succinoglycan and curdlan, due to their good quality in high yield, have been employed on an industrial scale comparatively early. Exopolysaccharide biosynthesis is a multiple-step process controlled by different functional genes, and various environmental factors cause changes in exopolysaccharide biosynthesis through regulatory mechanisms. In this mini-review, we focus on the genetic control and regulatory mechanisms of succinoglycan and curdlan produced by *Agrobacterium*. Some key functional genes and regulatory mechanisms for exopolysaccharide biosynthesis are described, possessing a high potential for application in metabolic engineering to modify exopolysaccharide production and physicochemical properties. This review may contribute to the understanding of exopolysaccharide biosynthesis and exopolysaccharide modification by metabolic engineering methods in *Agrobacterium*.

### Keywords
Exopolysaccharide · *Agrobacterium* · Genetic control · Regulatory mechanisms

---

### Introduction

The *Agrobacterium* genus, a type of gram-negative soil bacteria, is an α-Proteobacteria of the Rhizobiales order and Rhizobiaceae family, and its species are well known as plant pathogens of agricultural significance (Farrand et al. 2003; Young et al. 2003). However, several typical exopolysaccharides produced by *Agrobacterium* have attracted more attention for their applications in the food, pharmaceutical, and other fields and have been employed on an industrial scale. In particular, a variety of studies have been conducted on the succinoglycan and curdlan produced by *Agrobacterium*.

Succinoglycan is a type of heteropolysaccharide derivative mainly composed of a glucan in which succinyl groups are bound to some hydroxyl groups of the glucopyranose monomers. Succinoglycans show high stability even under extreme operational conditions (high temperature, high pressure, extreme pH, and high shear rates) and have been used as thickening, stabilizing, emulsifying, texturizing, and gelling agents (Nampoothiri et al. 2003). The *Agrobacterium* genus, compared to the other succinoglycan-producing bacterial strains, was employed on an industrial scale earliest. It has been reported that succinoglycans can be produced by *Agrobacterium radiobacter* and *Agrobacterium tumefaciens* (Hisamatsu et al., 1977, 1978). The fermentation methods and conditions for succinoglycan production in *Agrobacterium* strains have also been extensively studied to improve the yield of succinoglycans (Knipper et al. 1993; Stredansky et al. 1999). Curdlan produced by the *Agrobacterium* genus is a linear homopolysaccharide composed of (1 → 3)-β-glucans with no branching and has been mostly studied in recent years. Several *Agrobacterium* strains have been identified as curdlan-producing bacterial strains, including *Agrobacterium* sp. and *A. radiobacter*. Among

Ang Li  
ang.li.harbin@gmail.com  

Jixian Yang  
yangxj@hit.edu.cn  

1 State Key Laboratory of Urban Water Resource and Environment, School of Municipal and Environmental Engineering, Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin 150090, People’s Republic of China

Published online: 02 June 2016
these strains, *Agrobacterium* sp. ATCC 31749 can produce the highest amount of curdlan and has been the most studied as the model system in the research of curdlan biosynthesis. Although *A. tumefaciens* C58 has the closest fully sequenced genome to *Agrobacterium* sp. ATCC 31749 and has intact genes for curdlan biosynthesis, this strain has not been observed to make curdlan. Curdlan has been used in applications such as food additives, food ingredients, sustained-release suppository, inhibition of blood coagulation, and dementia treatment (Kim et al. 1999). Moreover, curdlan can be used in high-value applications as a main component of potential anti-tumor and anti-HIV treatments that require specific functional properties. Studies on the properties of curdlan biosynthesis have been extensively conducted, and improved fermentation methods have been developed as described in previous reviews (McIntosh et al. 2005; Zhan et al. 2012; Ortiz Martinez et al. 2015). However, further applications of succinoglycan and curdlan produced by *Agrobacterium* require large-scale production and high-value applications with specific functional properties.

Metabolic engineering is the most promising method to exopolysaccharide modification in recent studies. Many successful metabolic engineering methods have been reported to increase the yield of xanthan, gellan, bacterial cellulose, and levan (Freitas et al. 2011; Bae et al. 2004). Genetic modification and alteration of regulatory pathways can modify exopolysaccharide production and physicochemical properties; these processes require knowledge of genetic control and regulatory mechanisms of exopolysaccharide biosynthesis. With the development of omics-based technologies and bioinformatics, the genome and transcriptome profiles of *Agrobacterium* have been acquired in recent years. Goodner et al. (2001) completed the whole genome sequencing of *A. tumefaciens* strain C58 (Goodner et al. 2001; Wood et al. 2001), and the genome sequence and regulatory mechanisms of curdlan-producing *Agrobacterium* sp. strain ATCC 31749 have been successively reported (Ruffing et al. 2011; Ruffing and Chen 2012). These studies offer the knowledge of genetic information for exopolysaccharide biosynthesis and its regulatory mechanisms in *Agrobacterium*.

In this mini-review, we focus on the succinoglycan and curdlan of industrial interest produced by *Agrobacterium*. We summarize the genetic control and regulatory mechanisms of exopolysaccharide biosynthesis in *A. tumefaciens* strain C58 and *Agrobacterium* sp. strain ATCC 31749 as our typical models. Some promising metabolic engineering strategies for exopolysaccharide modification are discussed. This integrated genetic information could a better understanding of the exopolysaccharide biosynthetic pathway, and its global regulatory mechanisms and contribute to exopolysaccharide modification in further applications.

### Genes involved in succinoglycan biosynthesis

Exopolysaccharide biosynthesis is a multiple-step process coordinated by many specific functional proteins, and the related genes encoding these proteins are usually arranged in large gene clusters (Glucksmann et al., 1993). Succinoglycan (EPS I) biosynthesis and its regulatory mechanisms have been studied best in *Sinorhizobium meliloti*. *Agrobacterium* is closely related to *S. meliloti* and produces an exopolysaccharide chemically similar to that of *S. meliloti* (Sutherland, 1985; Aird et al. 1991).

In *S. meliloti*, a large *exo/exs* cluster (~35 kb) exists on the pSymB megaplasmid, and 28 *exo/exs* genes in several operons are involved in succinoglycan biosynthesis (Fig. 1). However, studies on *exo* genes in *Agrobacterium* have been less detailed than in *S. meliloti*. Cangelosi et al. (1987) isolated several *exo* mutants of *A. tumefaciens* and cloned the corresponding DNA; most of the genes involved in this synthesis were functionally interchangeable between the two genera. Aird et al. (1991) also isolated non-mucoid *exo* mutants of an *A. radiobacter* strain. Based on the gene sequence query, there are 23 *exo* genes in *A. tumefaciens* strain C58 that are involved in succinoglycan biosynthesis, 19 of which are found to cluster on the linear chromosome and four of which are scattered on the circular chromosome (Table 1). Seven *exs* genes are also present in the linear chromosome in *A. tumefaciens* strain C58, for which related reports are absent. Genetic organization of the *exo/exs* gene cluster of *A. tumefaciens* strain C58 is predicted in Fig. 1 based on GenBank Accession No. AE007869.2, and Fig. 2 shows the predicted pathway of succinoglycan biosynthesis in *A. tumefaciens* strain C58. The *exo* genes on the linear chromosome are responsible for encoding enzymes for the sugar nucleotide synthesis, repeating unit assembly, modification, and polymerization and export of succinoglycan. Moreover, *exoD*, *exoR*, *exol*, and *chvG* (*exoS*), regulators of succinoglycan biosynthesis, are on the circular chromosome in *A. tumefaciens* strain C58.

Based on the gene annotation, three genes (*exoC*, *exoB*, and *exoN*) are needed for the synthesis of nucleotide sugar precursors in *A. tumefaciens* C58 genomes. The *exoC* gene encodes phosphoglucomutase, which catalyzes the transformation of glucose-6-phosphate to glucose-1-phosphate, and the *exoB* gene encodes UDP-glucose-4-epimerase, which is responsible for the synthesis of UDP-galactose from UDP-glucose in *A. tumefaciens* (Uttaro et al. 1990,1993). Mutations in both *exoC* and *exoB* genes cause deficient succinoglycan biosynthesis. However, *exoC* mutants can produce extremely low levels of another major exopolysaccharide, cyclic beta-1, 2-glucan (Cangelosi et al. 1987). The protein encoded by the *exoN* gene possesses a UDP-glucose pyrophosphorylase activity and is required for the synthesis of UDP-glucose from glucose-1-phosphate.
Appl Microbiol Biotechnol

(a) *A. tumefaciens* strain C58

(b) *S. meliloti*

Fig. 1 Genetic organization of gene cluster of exopolysaccharide biosynthesis. **a** *exs/exo* gene cluster of exopolysaccharide biosynthesis in *A. tumefaciens* strain C58. **b** *exs/exo* gene cluster of exopolysaccharide biosynthesis in *S. meliloti* (Janczarek 2011)

The *exoY* and *exoF* genes are responsible for the addition of galactose to the lipid carrier that initiates synthesis of the succinoglycan subunit. *exoY* and *exoF* mutants are deficient in succinoglycan biosynthesis in *A. tumefaciens* (Tiburtius et al. 1996; Müller et al. 1992). The next step of adding glucose residues, which is the key step for succinoglycan biosynthesis, is conducted by glycosyltransferases (GTs) encoded by the *exoALMOUW* genes (Glucksmann et al. 1993). GTs are responsible for the transfer of sugar residues and the formation of glycosidic bonds. It has been reported that mutations in *exoA*, *exoL*, and *exoM* genes completely abolish succinoglycan production and mutations in *exoU* and *exoW* genes result in no detectable amount of succinoglycan in *S. meliloti* (Becker et al. 1993). The orthologs of *exo* genes encoding GTs are all present in genomes of *A. tumefaciens* strain C58. Yuan et al. (2008) found that 12 *exo* genes (*exoPNMLKHTWUQYI*) were involved in succinoglycan biosynthesis in *A. tumefaciens* in an acidic environment based on transcriptome profiling and functional analysis. Moreover, through analysis of the CAZy database, ExoALMOUW were demonstrated to show similarity with GT family 2, which contains a variety of inverting GTs that utilize a diverse range of nucleotide-sugar donors and participate in the synthesis of various types of exopolysaccharides (Saxena et al. 1995). Therefore, it is supposed that *exoALMOUW* genes are involved in the assembly of the exopolysaccharide repeating unit in *A. tumefaciens*.

(Jofre and Becker, 2009). ExoQ protein (like Wzy protein) is needed for high-molecular weight (HMW) succinoglycan biosynthesis, and ExoT (like Wzx protein) is involved in low-molecular-weight (LMW) succinoglycan production in *S. meliloti* (González et al., 1998). In *S. meliloti*, the modifications of growing succinoglycan repeating units are achieved by the protein products of *exo* genes (*exoZ*, *exoH*, and *exoV*) by adding non-sugar proteins. Among these proteins, ExoH provides succinyl, while ExoV is involved in the addition of pyruvyl residues, and *exoZ* encodes acetyltransferase. These modification genes affecting the physical properties of exopolysaccharides are found in genomes of *A. tumefaciens* strain C58. However, the function of these genes in *Agrobacterium* requires verification to modify succinoglycan by genetic modification.

Regulation of succinoglycan biosynthesis in *Agrobacterium*

There are at least 25 two-component regulatory systems controlling regulatory networks and cascades in the *A. tumefaciens* genome (Goodner et al. 2001; Wood et al. 2001), and the acid-activated ChvG/ChvI system leads to the regulation of succinoglycan biosynthesis in *A. tumefaciens* strain C58. ChvG, as a sensor kinase, monitors environmental parameters and activates the response regulator, which is highly homologous to the *exoS* gene in *S. meliloti*. ChvI, as a response regulator, regulates succinoglycan biosynthesis through influence on *exo* gene expression. Tomlinson et al. (2010) also observed that *chvG* mutants in *A. tumefaciens* showed a decrease in *exoY* expression and succinoglycan

Table 1 General characteristics of the genes in the exs/exo cluster of A. tumefaciens strain C58

| Gene      | Designation | Length (bp) | Protein product ID | Protein family | Protein function annotation                                                                 |
|-----------|-------------|-------------|--------------------|----------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Atu3009   | exoZ        | 1068        | AAK90374.1         |                | Exopolysaccharide production protein                                                        |
| Atu3325   | exoQ        | 1269        | AAK90067.1         |                | Exopolysaccharide production protein                                                        |
| Atu3326   | exoF        | 1257        | AAK90066.1         |                | Exopolysaccharide production protein                                                        |
| Atu3327   | exoY        | 681         | AAK90065.2         |                | Succinoglycan exopolysaccharide biosynthesis protein                                          |
| Atu3344   | exsD        | 756         | AAK90046.1         |                | Radical activating protein                                                                |
| Atu3345   | exsC        | 357         | AAK90045.1         |                | 6-pyruvoyl tetrahydropterin synthase                                                       |
| Atu3346   | exsB        | 711         | AAK90044.1         |                | Succinoglycan biosynthesis regulator                                                       |
| Atu3564   | exsH        | 1398        | AAK89834.2         |                | Endo-1, 3-1, 4-beta-glycanase                                                             |
| Atu3863   | exsE        | 1482        | AAK89555.2         |                | ABC transporter, nucleotide binding/ATPase protein                                         |
| Atu4014   | exsI        | 231         | AAK89412.2         |                | Transcriptional regulator                                                                 |
| Atu4049   | exoP        | 2394        | AAK89379.1         |                | Exopolysaccharide polymerization/transport protein                                          |
| Atu4050   | exoN        | 906         | AAK89378.2         |                | UTP-glucose-1-phosphate uridylyltransferase                                                |
| Atu4051   | exoO        | 981         | AAK89377.1         | GT2            | Succinoglycan biosynthesis Glycosyltransferase                                              |
| Atu4052   | exoM        | 945         | AAK89376.1         | GT2            | UDP-hexose transferase                                                                    |
| Atu4053   | exoA        | 999         | AAK89375.2         | GT2            | Succinoglycan biosynthesis protein                                                         |
| Atu4054   | exoL        | 1182        | AAK89374.1         |                | Succinoglycan biosynthesis protein                                                         |
| Atu4055   | exoK        | 792         | AAK89373.2         | GH16           | endo-1, 3-1, 4-beta-glycanase                                                             |
| Atu4056   | exoH        | 1149        | AAK89372.2         |                | Succinoglycan biosynthesis protein                                                         |
| Atu4057   | exoT        | 1479        | AAK89371.2         |                | Succinoglycan biosynthesis transport protein                                                |
| Atu4058   | exoW        | 966         | AAK89370.2         | GT2            | Succinoglycan biosynthesis protein                                                         |
| Atu4059   | exoV        | 969         | AAK89369.1         |                | Succinoglycan biosynthesis protein                                                         |
| Atu4060   | exoU        | 990         | AAK89368.2         | GT2            | Succinoglycan biosynthesis Glycosyltransferase                                              |
| Atu4061   | exoX        | 279         | AAK89367.2         |                | Exopolysaccharide production repressor protein                                              |
| Atu4074   | exoC        | 1629        | AAK89355.2         |                | Phosphoglucomutase                                                                        |
| Atu4166   | exoB        | 987         | AAK89269.2         |                | UDP-glucose 4-epimerase                                                                   |
| Atu4728   | exsA        | 1803        | AAK88722.1         |                | ABC transporter, nucleotide binding/ATPase protein                                         |
| Atu0033   | chvG(exoS)  | 1791        | AAK85857.1         |                | Two component sensor kinase                                                               |
| Atu1226   | exoD        | 645         | AAK87026.2         |                | ExoD protein                                                                              |
| Atu1715   | exoR        | 795         | AAK87488.1         |                | Exopolysaccharide production negative regulator                                            |
| Atu1887   | exoI        | 555         | AAK87652.2         |                | Succinoglycan biosynthesis protein                                                         |

production. In A. tumefaciens, exoR encodes a negative regulator of succinoglycan biosynthesis, which is genetically coupled to the ChvG/ChvI system. Tomlinson et al. (2010) reported that exoR mutants produced approximately 4-fold greater soluble exopolysaccharide amounts than wild type in A. tumefaciens. Heckel et al. (2014) found that 16 exo genes involved in succinoglycan biosynthesis showed increased expression in exoR mutants and suggested that ExoR could repress the expression of these exo genes through the inhibitory activity of the ChvG/ChvI system in A. tumefaciens. In fact, ExoR regulation of succinoglycan biosynthesis, biofilm formation, and motility contributes to the response to acidic conditions through controlling the interaction between ChvG and ChvI (Heckel et al. 2014). The ros gene encodes Ros protein, which controls the expression of plant conjugal-transfer genes and the plant oncogene ipt. It has been reported that the rosAR genes of A. radiobacter and ros gene of A. tumefaciens can

molecule AHL. LuxR, as a cytoplasmic receptor for that signal, is involved in the regulation of target genes in response to changes in AHL concentration (Whitehead et al. 2001). In *A. tumefaciens*, *traI* encodes the LuxI-like protein TraI, which is responsible for the synthesis of the AHL *N*-3-oxo-octanoyl-L-homoserine lactone (3-oxo-C8HSL), as well as traces of *N*-octanoyl-L-homoserine lactone and octanoyl-homoserine lactone. The LuxR-like protein TraR, encoded by *traR*, is a cytoplasmic receptor for 3-oxo-C8HSL, with specific interaction occurring between TraR and 3-oxo-C8HSL (Zhu et al. 1998).

### Genes involved in curdlan biosynthesis

Curdlan is produced by a fermentation process in *Agrobacterium* sp. ATCC 31749 under nitrogen exhaustion. The main process of curdlan biosynthesis in *Agrobacterium* sp. ATCC 31749 includes two pathways (Fig. 3), as follows: UDP-glucose biosynthesis and ATP regeneration through the tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle and electron transfer chain (ETC) (Zhang et al. 2011). As the key effectors and precursors for curdlan biosynthesis, ATP regeneration and UDP-glucose biosynthesis are crucial for curdlan biosynthesis. Furthermore, the operon *crdASC* plays a dominant role in the curdlan biosynthesis of *Agrobacterium* sp. ATCC 31749.

The *exoC* gene-encoded phosphoglucomutase is also responsible for the carbon metabolism in *Agrobacterium* sp. ATCC 31749. Increased transcription of the *exoC* gene leads to carbon flux to the curdlan biosynthetic pathway to respond to nitrogen starvation (Yu et al. 2011a, b). The *galU* gene in *Agrobacterium* sp. ATCC 31749, which is more than 98 % identical to that in *A. tumefaciens* C58, encodes UTP-glucose-1-phosphate uridylyltransferase (GalU), which is involved in the formation of UDP-glucose from glucose-1-phosphate and UTP. The level of *galU* gene transcription changes significantly under oxygen gradient conditions, indicating that *galU* is a key gene that controls the production of sugar nucleotides for curdlan biosynthesis.

At the same time, UDP-glucose biosynthesis requires the ATP from the ETC or TCA cycle to convert UDP into UTP. Therefore, ATP regeneration is another key factor for curdlan biosynthesis. As shown in Fig. 3, four terminal respiratory oxidases participating in the electron-transfer chain pathway are encoded by *cyoA*, *catD*, *cydA*, and *fixN* in *Agrobacterium* sp. ATCC 31749. Sequence and transcriptional analyses under oxygen gradient conditions reveal that the levels of *cyoA* and *fixN* gene transcription are significantly changed and controlled by the oxygen level. Additionally, differences in levels of *catD* gene transcription, caused by diverse oxygen gradient conditions, result in variations in curdlan yields. Simultaneously, the transcriptional level of TCA cycle genes (*sdhB*, *mdh*, and *icdA*) also show significant changes during

Fig. 3 The glucose metabolic pathway of curdlan biosynthesis Agrobacterium sp. ATCC 31749 (Zhan et al. 2012; Donot et al. 2012). G-6-P glucose-6-phosphate, G-1-P glucose-1-phosphate, UDP-G UDP-glucose, F-6-P fructose-6-phosphate, GA-6-P glucosamine-6-phosphate, GA-1-P glucosamine-1-phosphate, acetyl-CoA acetyl coenzyme A, α-KG α-ketoglutarate, Succi succinate, Fm fumarate, Mal malate, galU UTP-curdlan fermentation under oxygen gradient conditions in Agrobacterium sp. ATCC 31749. Moreover, under relatively high oxygen conditions, the highest yield of curdlan corresponded with significantly upregulated expression of ETC genes (cyoA, catD, and fixN), TCA genes (icd, sdhB, and mdh), and the galU gene (Zhang et al. 2011). These results demonstrate that the genes participating in the TCA cycle, ETC, and UDP-glucose biosynthesis are required for curdlan biosynthesis in Agrobacterium sp. ATCC 31749 (Kim et al. 1999; Zheng et al. 2007).

An initial study has found that crdA, crdS, crdC, and crdR are essential for curdlan biosynthesis (Stasinopoulos et al. 1999). In the operon crdASC, crdS is responsible for the transfer of the glucose residue from UDP-glucose to the growing polymer chain of curdlan. CrdS, which shows similarity with GT family 2, mediates the polymerization on the cytoplasmic face of the inner membrane. crdS mutants abolish curdlan production, and the induced mutation can be complemented by a cloned crdS amplicon, thereby demonstrating that crdS is essential for curdlan biosynthesis (Karnezis et al. 2003). The functions of the crdA and crdC genes are unclear because no homologs of the genes are found. CrdA is predicted to be a membrane-anchored protein with a large periplasmic C-terminal domain, while CrdC, with a cleavable signal sequence, is predicted to be a periplasmic protein. However, crdA mutants abolish curdlan production, unlike crdC mutants, which produce some curdlan (McIntosh et al. 2005). Karnezis et al. (2003) reported that CrdASC probably form a membrane-associated, oligomeric, biosynthetic complex.

glucose-1-phosphate uridylyltransferase, mdh malate dehydrogenase, icd isocitrate dehydrogenase, sdhB succinate dehydrogenase, cydA cytochrome d terminal oxidase subunit I, cyoA cytochrome bo terminal oxidase subunit II, catD cytochrome caa3-type terminal oxidase, fixN cytochrome cbb3-type terminal oxidase

Nearly 100-fold upregulation of the crdASC operon is present upon transition to nitrogen starvation based on transcriptome analysis, demonstrating the prominent role of the crdASC operon in curdlan biosynthesis of Agrobacterium strains (Ruffing and Chen, 2012). crdR, located at separate loci, is not linked to the crdASC cluster, and crdR mutations lead to the absence of curdlan production. Yu et al. (2015) have determined that CrdR, as a positive regulator, could improve curdlan biosynthesis in Agrobacterium sp. ATCC31749 and that crdR is located upstream from the crdA start codon. It also has been inferred that CrdR regulates curdlan biosynthesis through influence on expression of the crdASC operon. A. tumefaciens strain C58 has homologs of curdlan-production genes (crdASCR), but curdlan has not been observed to be produced by strain C58. The function of these genes in strain C58 are still not well understood (Anguillesi 2003). Further research on the crdASCR genes is needed to complete the pathway of curdlan biosynthesis.

Regulation of curdlan biosynthesis in Agrobacterium sp.

Many potential regulatory genes and mechanisms associated with environmental signals regulating curdlan biosynthesis (including nitrogen, oxygen, phosphate, and pH) have been identified. The relationship between environmental signals and metabolic flux is a key factor for the regulation of curdlan biosynthesis. Metabolic flux is converted from cell
growth to curdlan biosynthesis under nitrogen exhaustion. Kim et al. (1999) found that increased UMP levels resulted in more metabolic flux to the curdlan biosynthetic pathway by the improvement of UDP-glucose biosynthesis under limited nitrogen. It also has been reported that more carbon flux flowed to the curdlan biosynthetic pathway, with high curdlan production and low specific growth rate, under nitrogen exhaustion (Wu et al. 2012). Based on the genome sequence of ATCC 31749, the genes participating in nitrogen regulation include the sigma factor associated with nitrogen-limited metabolism (*rpoN*), the nitrogen signaling cascade (*ntrBC*, *ntrXY*, and *glnBDK*), and nitrogen fixation (*fixK*, *nifR*, and *ptsN*) (Ruffing et al. 2011). NtrC-NtrB is a two-component system involved in the nitrogen signaling cascade when nitrogen is exhausted and *ntrBC* mutants abolish curdlan production on a yeast extract/glucose substrate in *Agrobacterium* sp. ATCC 31749. The *ntrBC* genes can be used to initiate nitrogen assimilation under nitrogen exhaustion (McIntosh et al. 2005). Carbon flux is then converted from cell growth to curdlan biosynthesis to produce curdlan to defend against nitrogen starvation (Wu et al. 2012; Yu et al. 2011a, b). Therefore, nitrogen regulation is the main factor among several environmental factors affecting curdlan biosynthesis and the *ntrBC* operon is the key regulatory mechanism for curdlan biosynthesis. Moreover, *nifR* is found as the first gene in the *ntrBC* operon and NtrC regulation is RpoN-independent (Ruffing and Chen 2012).

It has been reported that energy efficiency rather than substrate availability is the major factor for curdlan biosynthesis in *Agrobacterium* sp. WXC12 (Zheng et al. 2007). Environmental signals trigger the changes in metabolic flux by controlling translation levels of the genes involved in ATP regeneration and UDP-glucose biosynthesis, as described above in *Agrobacterium* sp. ATCC 31749 (Jin et al. 2008; Zhang et al. 2011). Some regulatory mechanisms can improve expression of these key genes to enhance curdlan biosynthesis in response to environmental signal stress. FixL-FixJ, which is present in *A.* *tumefaciens* strain C58, is a promising two-component system involved in oxygen regulation in *Agrobacterium* sp. ATCC 31749 (Zhang et al. 2012). Acidocalcisomes, as energy provisions, are responsible for pH regulation in curdlan biosynthesis. The *rrpP* gene, involved in pH regulation, encodes the membrane-bound proton-translocating pyrophosphatase (Ruffing and Chen 2012). However, the global regulatory mechanisms of curdlan biosynthesis in *Agrobacterium* remain unclear and further research is needed, which is important for the application of metabolic engineering methods.

Two GTP-derived second messengers are responsible for the response to environmental signals. Exopolysaccharide biosynthesis can be regulated by bis-(3′, 5′)-cyclic-dimeric-guanosine monophosphate (c-di-GMP) in some strains, including in cellulose synthesis in *A.* *tumefaciens*. The level of

the c-di-GMP signal is regulated by the relative activity of GGDEF and EAL domain proteins. At the same time, activation or inactivation of these proteins occurs as a response to different environmental signals (Romling et al., 2005). A total of 31 predicted genes are involved in coding for GGDEF domain proteins in the genome sequence of ATCC 31749. Transcriptome profiling of ATCC 31749 subsequently shows that three GGDEF domain proteins are upregulated in gene expression under nitrogen limitation; in particular, the AGRO_3967 mutant shows a 57 % decrease in curdlan production. These results suggest that c-di-GMP serves as a regulator in the regulatory mechanisms of curdlan biosynthesis in *Agrobacterium*. The signal (p)ppGp, which consists of guanosine tetraphosphate (ppGpp) and guanosine pentaphosphate (pppGpp), accumulates in response to multiple stress conditions, including nitrogen limitation. Curdlan synthesis is abolished when the genes responsible for synthesis of the stringent response signal (p)ppGpp are lacking. Mutations in *relA/spoT*, which encode a GTP pyrophosphohydrolase/synthetase, completely eliminate curdlan biosynthesis in ATCC 31749 under nitrogen-limited conditions (Ruffing and Chen 2012).

### Metabolic engineering strategies for exopolysaccharide modification

Bacterial exopolysaccharides have received extensive attention because of their structural variability, providing high yield and specific properties to meet different requirements. Metabolic engineering strategies have been studied to modify exopolysaccharide production and physicochemical properties (Schmid et al. 2015; Becker 2015). However, there are few reports on exopolysaccharide modification by metabolic engineering methods in *Agrobacterium*.

The biosynthetic processes of exopolysaccharide, including synthesis of sugar nucleotide precursors, assembly of the repeating unit, and polymerization and export, can be attempted to be controlled to modify exopolysaccharides in *Agrobacterium* (Freitas et al. 2011). In other exopolysaccharide-production strains, exopolysaccharide modifications have been successfully realized through controlling genes involved in these biosynthetic processes. The nucleotide sugar precursors derived from central carbon metabolism are firstly synthesized in exopolysaccharide biosynthesis, which is a rate-limiting step for exopolysaccharide production. Looijesteijn et al. (1999) reported that overexpression of the *fbp* gene, which is involved in the synthesis of sugar nucleotides from fructose, led to the improvement of exopolysaccharide production on a fructose sugar substrate in *Lactococcus lactis*. Moreover, exopolysaccharide biosynthesis can be improved by increasing the activity of GTsassociated with this process, and heterologous expression of new GT genes or overexpression of existing GT genes in exopolysaccharide-producing bacteria can change the sugar composition of polymers. It has been reported that a small increase in exopolysaccharide production was present based on the overexpression of the priming GT *epsD* gene in *Lactococcus lactis*. (van Kranenburg et al. 1997, 1999a; Boels et al. 2001). In addition, it has been shown that the physical properties of exopolysaccharides are affected by substituent groups such as acyl- or pyruvyl-groups and can likely be changed by regulation of the relevant genes (Hassler and Doherty 1990). Most regulatory mechanisms mediate exopolysaccharide biosynthesis through controlling the expression of these key genes in response to environmental changes. Therefore, the genes involved in these biosynthetic processes and regulatory mechanisms are candidate genes for metabolic engineering strategies in *Agrobacterium*.

However, the knowledge of these biosynthetic processes and regulatory mechanisms remains limited. In some cases, the yield and physicochemical properties of exopolysaccharides have not shown significant improvements. Further research is needed for confirmation of the carbon metabolic pathway and global regulatory mechanisms of exopolysaccharide biosynthesis in *Agrobacterium*, which are important for large-scale production and high-value applications of exopolysaccharides by metabolic engineering strategies.

Acknowledgments This work was supported by grants from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 51578179), the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (No. HIT.NSRIF. 2015095) and the Postdoctoral Scientific Research Development Fund of Heilongjiang Province in 2014 (No. LBH-Q14076).

Compliance with ethical standards

Conflict of interest The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.

Ethical approval This article does not contain any studies with human participants or animals performed by any of the authors.

References

Aird ELH, Brightwell G, Jones MA, Johnston AWB (1991) Identification of the *exo* loci required for exopolysaccharide synthesis in *Agrobacterium radiobacter* NCIB 11883. Microbiology 137(10): 2287–2297

Anguillesi A (2003) Molecular biology of curdlan biosynthesis by *Agrobacterium* sp. ATTC 31749. MSc thesis. La Trobe University, Melbourne

Bae SO, Sugano Y, Ohi K, Shoda M (2004) Features of bacterial cellulose synthesis in a mutant generated by disruption of the diguanylate cyclase 1 gene of *Acetobacter xylinum* BPR 2001. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 65(3): 315–322

Becker A (2015) Challenges and perspectives in combinatorial assembly of novel exopolysaccharide biosynthesis pathways. Front Microbiol 6

Becker A, Kleickmann A, Keller M, Arnold W, Pühler A (1993) Identification and analysis of the *Rhizobium meliloti exoAMONP* genes involved in exopolysaccharide biosynthesis and mapping of promoters located on the *exoHKLAMONP* fragment. Mol Gen Genet 241(3–4): 367–379

Bertram-Drogatz PA, Quester I, Becker A, Pühler A (1998) The *Sinorhizobium meliloti* MucR protein, which is essential for the production of high-molecular-weight succinoglycan exopolysaccharide, binds to short DNA regions upstream of *exoH* and *exoY*. Mol Gen Genet 257(4): 433–441

Boels IC, van Kranenburg R, Hugenholtz J, Kleerebezem M, de Vos WM (2001) Sugar catabolism and its impact on the biosynthesis and engineering of exopolysaccharide production in lactic acid bacteria. Int Dairy J 11(9): 723–732

Brightwell G, Hussain H, Tiburtius A, Yeoman KH, Johnston AWB (1995) Pleiotropic effects of regulatory *ros* mutants of *Agrobacterium radiobacter* and their interaction with Fe and glucose. Mol Plant-Microbe Interact 8(5): 747–754

Cangelosi GA, Hung LYNN, Puvanesarajah V, Stacey G, Ozga DA, Leigh JA, Nester EW (1987) Common loci for *Agrobacterium tumefaciens* and *Rhizobium meliloti* exopolysaccharide synthesis and their roles in plant interactions. J Bacteriol 169(5): 2086–2091

Close TJ, Tait RC, Kado CI (1985) Regulation of Ti plasmid virulence genes by a chromosomal locus of *Agrobacterium tumefaciens*. J Bacteriol 164(2): 774–781

Donot F, Fontana A, Baccou JC, Schorr-Galindo S (2012) Microbial exopolysaccharides: main examples of synthesis, excretion, genetics and extraction. Carbohydr Polym 2: 951–962

Farrand SK, van Berkum PB, Oger P (2003) *Agrobacterium* is a definable genus of the family *Rhizobiaceae*. Int J Syst Evol Microbiol 53(5): 1681–1687

Freitas F, Alves VD, Reis MA (2011) Advances in bacterial exopolysaccharides: from production to biotechnological applications. Trends Biotechnol 29(8): 388–398

Glucksmann MA, Reuber TL, Walker GC (1993) Genes needed for the modification, polymerization, export and processing of succinoglycan by *Rhizobium meliloti*: a model for succinoglycan biosynthesis. J Bacteriol 175(21): 7045–7055

González JE, Semino CE, Wang LX, Castellano-Torres LE, Walker GC (1998) Biosynthetic control of molecular weight in the polymerization of the octasaccharide subunits of succinoglycan, a symbiotically important exopolysaccharide of *Rhizobium meliloti*. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 95(23): 13477–13482

González JE, Marketon MM (2003) Quorum sensing in nitrogen-fixing rhizobia. Microbiol Mol Biol Rev 67(4): 574–592

Goodner B, Hinkle G, Gattung S, Miller N, Blanchard M, Qulollo B, Slater S (2001) Genome sequence of the plant pathogen and biotechnology agent *Agrobacterium tumefaciens* C58. Science 294(5550): 2323–2328

Janczarek M (2011) Environmental signals and regulatory pathways that influence exopolysaccharide production in rhizobia. Int J Mol Sci 12(11): 7898–7933

Jin LH, Um HJ, Yin CJ, Kim YH, Lee JH (2008) Proteomic analysis of curdlan-producing *Agrobacterium* sp. in response to pH downshift. J Biotechnol 138(3): 80–87

Jofre E, Becker A (2009) Production of succinoglycan polymer in *Sinorhizobium meliloti* is affected by SMb21506 and requires the N-terminal domain of ExoP. Mol Plant-Microbe Interact 22(12): 1656–1668

Hassler RA, Doherty DH (1990) Genetic engineering of polysaccharide structure: production of variants of xanthan gum in *Xanthomonas campestris*. Biotechnol Prog 6(3): 182–187

Springer
Heckel BC, Tomlinson AD, Morton ER, Choi JH, Fuqua C (2014) *Agrobacterium tumefaciens exoR* controls acid response genes and impacts exopolysaccharide synthesis, horizontal gene transfer, and virulence gene expression. J Bacteriol 196(18):3221–3233

Hisamatsu M, Ott I, Amemura A, Harada T, Nakanishi I, Kimura K (1977) Change in ability of *Agrobacterium* to produce water-soluble and water-insoluble β-glucans. Microbiology 103(2):375–379

Hisamatsu M, Sano K, Amemura A, Harada T (1978) Acidic polysaccharides containing succinic acid in various strains of *Agrobacterium*. Carbohydr Res 61(1):89–96

Karnezis T, Karnezis T, Epa VC, Stone BA, Stanisich VA (2003) Topological characterization of an inner membrane (1 → 3)-β-D-glucan (curdlan) synthase from *Agrobacterium* sp. strain ATCC 31749. Glycobiology 13(10):693–706

Kim MK, Lee IY, Ko JH, Rhee YH, Park YH (1999) Higher intracellular levels of uridinemonophosphate under nitrogen-limited conditions enhance metabolic flux of curdlan synthesis in *Agrobacterium* species. Biotechnol Bioeng 62(3):317–323

Knipper M, Senechal A, Raffar M (1993) Composition deÂrivant d'un succinoglycane, son proceÂde de preÂparation et ses applications. EP 0 527 061 A1

Looijesteijn PJ, Boels IC, Kleerebezem M, Hugenholtz J (1999) Regulation of exopolysaccharide production by *Lactococcus lactis* subsp. cremoris by the sugar source. Appl Environ Microbiol 65(11):5003–5008

Li A, Geng J, Cui D, Shu C, Zhang S, Yang J, Hu S (2011) Genome sequence of *Agrobacterium tumefaciens* strain F2, a bioflocculant-producing bacterium. J Bacteriol 193(19):5531–5531

McIntosh M, Stone BA, Stanisich VA (2005) Curdlan and other bacterial (1 → 3)-β-D-glucans. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 68(2):163–173

Müller P, Keller M, Weng WM, Quandt J, Arnold W, Pühler A (1992) Genetic analysis of the *Rhizobium meliloti exoYFQ* operon: ExoY is homologous to sugar transferases and ExoQ represents a transmembrane protein. Mol Plant-Microbe Interact 6(1):55–65

Nampoothiri KM, Singhania RR, Sabarinath C, Pandey A (2003) Fermentative production of gellan using *Sphingomonas paucimobilis*. Process Biochem 38(11):1513–1519

Ortiz Martinez C, Pereira Ruiz S, Carvalho Fenelon V, Rodrigues de Morais, G, Luciano Baesso, M, Matioli, G (2015) Characterization of curdlan produced by *Agrobacterium* sp. IFO 13140 cells immobilized in a loofa sponge matrix, and application of this biopolymer in the development of functional yogurt. J Sci Food Agric

Romling U, Gomelsky M, Galperin MY (2005) C-di-GMP: the dawning of a novel bacterial signaling system. Mol Microbiol 57(3):629–639

Ruffing AM, Castro-Melchor M, Hu WS, Chen RR (2011) Genome sequence of the curdlan-producing *Agrobacterium* sp. strain ATCC 31749. J Bacteriol 193(16):4294–4295

Ruffing AM, Chen RR (2012) Transcriptome profiling of a curdlan-producing *Agrobacterium* reveals conserved regulatory mechanisms of exopolysaccharide biosynthesis. Microb Cell Factories 11(1):1–13

Saxena IM, Brown RM Jr, Fevre M, Geremia RA, Henrissat B (1995) Multidomain architecture of β-glycosyl transferases: implications for mechanism of action. J Bacteriol 177(6):1419–1424

Schmid J, Sieber V, Rehm B (2015) Bacterial exopolysaccharides: biosynthesis pathways and engineering strategies. Front Microbiol 6

Shrout JD, Nerenberg R (2012) Monitoring bacterial twitter: does quorum sensing determine the behavior of water and wastewater treatment biofilms? Environ Sci Technol 46(4):1995–2005

Skorupska A, Janczarek M, Marczak M, Mazur A, Król J (2006) Rhizobial exopolysaccharides: genetic control and symbiotic functions. Microb Cell Factories 5(1):7

Stasinopoulos SJ, Fisher PR, Stone BA, Stanisich VA (1999) Detection of two loci involved in (1 → 3)-β-glucan (curdlan) biosynthesis by *Agrobacterium* sp. ATCC31749, and comparative sequence analysis of the putative curdlan synthase gene. Glycobiology 9(1):31–41

Stredansky M, Conti E, Bertocchi C, Navarini L, Matulova M, Zanetti F (1999) Fed-batch production and simple isolation of succinoglycan from *Agrobacterium tumefaciens*. Biotechnol Tech 13(1):7–10

Sutherland IW (1985) Biosynthesis and composition of gram-negative bacterial extracellular and wall polysaccharides. Annu Rev Microbiol 39(1):243–270

Tiburtius A, de Luca NG, Hussain H, Johnston AW (1996) Expression of the *exoY* gene, required for exopolysaccharide synthesis in *Agrobacterium*, is activated by the regulatory *ros* gene. Microbiology 142(9):2621–2629

Tomlinson AD, Ramey-Hartung B, Day TW, Merritt PM, Fuqua C (2010) *Agrobacterium tumefaciens* ExoR represses succinoglycan biosynthesis and is required for biofilm formation and motility. Microbiology 156(9):2670–2681

Uttaro AD, Cangelosi GA, Geremia RA, Nester EW, Ugalde RA (1990) Biochemical characterization of avirulent *exoC* mutants of *Agrobacterium tumefaciens*. J Bacteriol 172(3):1640–1646

Uttaro AD, Ielpi L, Ugalde RA (1993) Galactose metabolism in *Rhizobiaceae*: characterization of *Agrobacterium tumefaciens exoB* mutants. Microbiology 139(5):1055–1062

van Kranenburg R, Marugg JD, van Swam II, Willem NJ, de Vos WM (1997) Molecular characterization of the plasmid encoded *eps* gene cluster essential for exopolysaccharide biosynthesis in *Lactococcus lactis*. Mol Microbiol 24(2):387–397

van Kranenburg R, van Swam I, Marugg JD, Kleerebezem M, de Vos WM (1999a) Exopolysaccharide biosynthesis of the glycosyltransferase genes involved in synthesis of the polysaccharide backbone. J Bacteriol 181(1):338–340

Whitehead NA, Barnard AM, Slater H, Simpson N, Salmond GP (2001) Quorum-sensing in gram-negative bacteria. FEMS Microbiol Rev 25(4):365–404

Wood DW, Setubal JC, Kaul R, Monks DE, Kitajima JP, Okura VK, Olson MV (2001) The genome of the natural genetic engineer *Agrobacterium tumefaciens* C58. Science 294(5550):2317–2323

Wu D, Li A, Yang JX, Ma F, Chen H, Pi SS, Wei W (2015) N-3-oxo-octanoyl-homoserine lactone as a promoter to improve the microbial flocculant production by an exopolysaccharide bioflocculant-producing bacterium *Agrobacterium tumefaciens* F2. RSC Adv 5(109):89531–89538

Wu JR, Yu LJ, Zhan XB, Zheng ZY, Lu J, Lin CC (2012) NtrC-dependent regulatory network for curdlan biosynthesis in response to nitrogen limitation in *Agrobacterium* sp. ATCC 31749. Process Biochem 47(11):1552–1558

Yang JX, Wu D, Li A, Guo HJ, Chen H, Pi SS, Ma F (2016) The addition of N-hexanoyl-homoserine lactone to improve the microbial flocculant production of *Agrobacterium tumefaciens* strain F2, an exopolysaccharide bioflocculant-producing bacterium. Appl Biochem Biotechnol. doi:[10.1007/s12010-016-2027-6](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12010-016-2027-6)

Young JM, Kuykendall LD, Martinez-Romero E, Kerr A, Sawada H (2003) Classification and nomenclature of *Agrobacterium* and *Rhizobium*—a reply to Farrand et al. (2003). Int J Syst Evol Microbiol 53(5):1689–1695

Yuan ZC, Liu P, Saenkham P, Kerr K, Nester EW (2008) Transcriptome profiling and functional analysis of *Agrobacterium tumefaciens* reveals a general conserved response to acidic conditions (pH 5.5) and a complex acid-mediated signaling involved in *Agrobacterium*-plant interactions. J Bacteriol 190(2):494–507

Yu L, Wu J, Liu J, Zhan X, Zheng Z, Lin CC (2011a) Enhanced curdlan production in *Agrobacterium* sp. ATCC 31749 by addition of low-polyphosphates. Biotechnol Bioprocess Eng 16(1):34–41

Yu LJ, Wu JR, Zheng ZZ, Lin CC, Zhan XB (2011b) Changes in gene transcription and protein expression involved in the response of

Agrobacterium sp. ATCC 31749 to nitrogen availability during curdlan production. Appl Biochem Microbiol 47(5):487–493

Yu XQ, Zhang C, Yang LP, Zhao LM, Lin C, Liu ZJ, Mao ZC (2015) CrdR function in a curdlan-producing Agrobacterium sp. ATCC31749 strain. BMC Microbiol 15:25

Zhan XB, Lin CC, Zhang HT (2012) Recent advances in curdlan biosynthesis, biotechnological production, and applications. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 93(2):525–531

Zhang HT, Zhan XB, Zheng ZY, Wu JR, Yu XB, Jiang Y, Lin CC (2011) Sequence and transcriptional analysis of the genes responsible for curdlan biosynthesis in Agrobacterium sp. ATCC31749 under simulated dissolved oxygen gradients conditions. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 91(1):163–175

Zhang HT, Zhan XB, Zheng ZY, Wu JR, English N, Yu XB, Lin CC (2012) Improved curdlan fermentation process based on optimization of dissolved oxygen combined with pH control and metabolic characterization of Agrobacterium sp. ATCC 31749. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 93(1):367–379

Zheng ZY, Lee JW, Zhan XB, Shi Z, Wang L, Zhu L, Wu JR, Lin CC (2007) Effect of metabolic structures and energy requirements on curdlan production by Alcaligenes faecalis. Biotechnol Bioprocess Eng 12(4):359–365

Zhu J, Beaber JW, More MI, Fuqua C, Eberhard A, Winans SC (1998) Analogs of the autoinducer 3-oxo-octanoyl-homoserine lactone strongly inhibit activity of the TraR protein of Agrobacterium tumefaciens. J Bacteriol 180(20):5398–5405
