
This article was downloaded by: [University of Otago]
On: 08 July 2015, At: 19:28
Publisher: Taylor & Francis
Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number: 1072954 Registered office: 5 Howick Place,
London, SW1P 1WG

Molecular & Cellular Oncology
Publication details, including instructions for authors and subscription information:
http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/kmco20

Ferroptosis: a missing piece of puzzle in the p53
blueprint?

Shang-Jui Wang<sup>a</sup>, Yang Ou<sup>a</sup>, Le Jiang<sup>a</sup> & Wei Gu<sup>a</sup>
<sup>a</sup>Institute for Cancer Genetics, and Department of Pathology and Cell Biology College of Physicians & Surgeons, Columbia University, 1130 St. Nicholas Ave, New York, NY 10032, USA

Accepted author version posted online: 21 May 2015.

CrossMark
[Click for updates]

To cite this article: Shang-Jui Wang, Yang Ou, Le Jiang & Wei Gu (2015): Ferroptosis: a missing piece of puzzle in the p53 blueprint?, Molecular & Cellular Oncology, DOI: 10.1080/23723556.2015.1046581

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/23723556.2015.1046581

Disclaimer: This is a version of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to authors and researchers we are providing this version of the accepted manuscript (AM). Copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof will be undertaken on this manuscript before final publication of the Version of Record (VoR). During production and pre-press, errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal relate to this version also.

PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE

Taylor & Francis makes every effort to ensure the accuracy of all the information (the “Content”) contained in the publications on our platform. However, Taylor & Francis, our agents, and our licensors make no representations or warranties whatsoever as to the accuracy, completeness, or suitability for any purpose of the Content. Any opinions and views expressed in this publication are the opinions and views of the authors, and are not the views of or endorsed by Taylor & Francis. The accuracy of the Content should not be relied upon and should be independently verified with primary sources of information. Taylor and Francis shall not be liable for any losses, actions, claims, proceedings, demands, costs, expenses, damages, and other liabilities whatsoever or howsoever caused arising directly or indirectly in connection with, in relation to or arising out of the use of the Content.

This article may be used for research, teaching, and private study purposes. Any substantial or systematic reproduction, redistribution, reselling, loan, sub-licensing, systematic supply, or distribution in any form to anyone is expressly forbidden. Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://www.tandfonline.com/page/terms-and-conditions

Ferroptosis: a missing piece of puzzle in the p53 blueprint?

Shang-Jui Wang, Yang Ou, Le Jiang, Wei Gu*

Institute for Cancer Genetics, and Department of Pathology and Cell Biology  
College of Physicians & Surgeons, Columbia University  
1130 St. Nicholas Ave, New York, NY 10032, USA  

Running Title:  
p53-mediated regulation of Ferroptosis  

Keywords: Ferroptosis, p53, metabolism, non-apoptotic cell death  
and tumor suppression  

*Corresponding author  
e-mail: wg8@cumc.columbia.edu  

Abstract  

Recent evidence has indicated that canonical functions of p53 (i.e. apoptosis and growth arrest) are dispensable for p53-mediated tumor suppression. Jiang et al. uncovers a novel function of p53 that contributes to tumor suppression through regulation of cystine metabolism, ROS responses and ferroptosis. The p53-mediated ferroptotic response via SLC7A11 denotes an extra layer of defense against tumorigenesis in conjunction with other p53 functions.
Since the discovery of the tumor proteins p53 (TP53, best known as p53) more than 30 years ago, its role in tumor suppression has always generated remarkable interest in the field of cancer biology. Cumulative efforts from the scientific community are constantly expanding the scope of p53 function in mediating tumor suppression that now covers a diverse array of cellular processes. Despite the multiplicity of p53 functions, it has long been thought that p53 thwarts tumorigenesis through its most phenotypically prominent features—apoptosis and cell growth arrest. Recently, however, this "central dogma" of p53-mediated tumor suppressing mechanism has been challenged.

Studies from our group and others have shown that apoptosis and cell growth arrest functions of p53 may in fact be dispensable for p53-mediated tumor suppression. Knock-in mice that express p53³KR, an acetylation-deficient p53 variant at specific lysine residues that lacks the ability to transcriptionally activate pro-apoptotic and cell cycle arrest genes (while retaining metabolic regulation), are not tumor-prone and exhibit survival curves similar to that of wild-type mice. Similarly, study on a transactivation-compromised mutant variant of p53, p53²⁵,²⁶, demonstrated that tumor suppression can occur in the absence of a majority of p53 downstream targets. All these evidence points toward one thing—unknown targets of p53 may contribute significantly to its tumor suppressor function. It is with this in mind that led us to uncover the link between p53 and ferroptosis described in Jiang et al.

Embarking on the search for novel p53 targets, we came across the SLC7A11 [solute carrier family 7 (anionic amino acid transporter light chain, xc⁻ system), member 11] gene via microarray screening. SLC7A11 gene codes for a component of the cystine/glutamate antiporter (system xc⁻). Inhibition of cystine uptake by system xc⁻ causes an iron-dependent accumulation of lipid reactive oxygen species (ROS) and eventual cell death, a process known as ferroptosis. Not only is SLC7A11 a novel repression target of p53, but p53³KR retains the capacity to negatively regulate its expression, and as a result, sensitizes cells to undergo ferroptosis, which is triggered independently from other known forms of cell death. Ferroptosis represents a previously missing piece of puzzle in the grand scheme of p53-dependent tumor suppression. Indeed, our work demonstrated that ferroptosis proceeds independently from apoptosis and cell cycle arrest to curb cancer cell growth in p53³KR-expressing cells and xenografts. Upon reconstitution of robust SLC7A11 expression in cancer cells, ferroptosis is inhibited, presumably by replenishing intracellular glutathione levels and decreasing ROS accumulation. Ferroptosis also contributes to the embryonic lethality observed in Mdm2⁻/⁻-mouse embryos, which were unable to be rescued by ablating the apoptotic and growth arrest functions of p53 (via p53³KR knock-in), but the developmental defect was substantially reversed with ferroptosis inhibitor treatment.Overall, p53-mediated ferroptosis could account for the tumor suppressive function of p53<sup>3KR</sup> in mice observed in our previous study.

There is a long-standing notion that p53 responds to DNA damage and elicits downstream target effects that either temporarily halts cell cycle progression to repair DNA, or terminates the cell if damage is irrevocable. DNA damage triggers ATM-CHK2 and ATR-CHK1 signaling pathways, which are two of many pathways that stabilize and activates p53.<sup>1</sup> While p53 plays a pivotal role in modulating intracellular ROS levels, it is unclear whether p53 responds directly to ROS stress or accumulation. However, our findings revealed that ROS stress can induce ferroptosis in cells that retain p53-dependent repression of SLC7A11, suggesting that at least one downstream effector of p53 constitutes an element in the cellular response to ROS-mediated strain.<sup>5</sup> The intrinsically lower basal level of SLC7A11 expression in cells with intact p53 function may serve as a preemptive mechanism to guard against ROS-induced cellular damage - ROS accumulation up to a threshold (dependent on the expression of SLC7A11, and thereby, the capacity of the cell to cope with ROS) in which a cell deems incapacitating will result in elimination to prevent deleterious consequences.

Our work sheds light on an additional layer of defense by p53 against cellular injury. We propose here a model of p53-mediated response to stress that encapsulates various aspects of p53 functions (Figure 1). Both DNA damage and elevation of intracellular ROS from exogenous stress or cellular metabolism can be fatal in excess, but they could also promote aberrant proliferation and malignant transformation in affected cells under suitable conditions. Hence, p53 plays a intricate role in ensuring the balance between cell survival and death to maintain cellular integrity. Two divergent p53 functions can ensue upon cellular injury from ROS insult - increase production of antioxidant glutathione as a result of p53-mediated TP53-inducible glycolysis and apoptosis regulator (TIGAR) and glutaminase 2 (GLS2) activation to quench excess ROS,<sup>8-10</sup> or allow the ROS to accrue beyond reversal and ferroptosis ensues. If DNA damage were to occur, canonical functions of p53, namely growth arrest/DNA repair and apoptosis, would then decide the fate of the cell, hinging on the severity of the damage.<sup>1</sup> This model is congruent to the tumor suppressive phenomenon observed in p53<sup>3KR</sup>-mice, in which the regulation of downstream targets (TIGAR, GLS2, and SLC7A11) that may modulate cell fate relating to ROS levels remains intact.

Still, many unanswered questions have arisen from our work that would require further investigation. First of all, it is possible that there are additional components of the ferroptosis pathway that are regulated by p53. Ferroptosis is a fairly novel phenomenon just described recently, and certainly, there are yet much to be uncovered regarding its mechanism and modulating factors, of which may involve p53. Secondly, evidence begs the question of whether p53-mediated ferroptosis require the activation of p53 beyond

3its basal activity. Our observations in MEF cells led us to believe that the discrepancy in SLC7A 11 expression under basal p53 activity (or the lack thereof) can directly influence the extent of ferroptotic response. However, we also noted that p53 activation via Nutlin treatment may sensitize cells to ROS-induced ferroptosis. Given that p53 is a master regulator of an abundance of cellular processes, a better understanding of if and how p53 responds to ROS fluctuation in cells may provide further insight on the upstream signaling of ferroptosis, which leads us to the next question. Does p53 directly respond to ROS stress or accumulation? While nutrient and energy-sensing pathways involving mTOR1/AMPK can trigger p53 activation upon metabolic stress, which are often associated with redox imbalances, it is still unclear if there is a direct link between ROS and p53.

In conclusion, uncovering the link between p53 and ferroptosis opened a new door for p53 biology and advanced one step closer to understanding the mechanism underlying p53-mediated tumor suppression. Our work also shed light on the potential therapeutic implication of promoting ferroptosis in p53-retaining tumors via ROS-inducing small molecules (i.e., Erastin, tert-butyl hydroperoxide [tBHP]) in the presence of p53 activation (i.e., via Nutlin treatment).

Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest

No potential conflicts of interest were disclosed.

Funding

This work was supported by the National Cancer Institute of the National Institutes of Health under Award 5R01 CA172023, 5R01 CA166294, 5R01CA085533 and 2P01CA080058 to W.G. The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent the official views of the National Institutes of Health. S-J Wang, and L. Jiang were also supported by NIH cancer biology training grant T32-CA09503.
References

1. Juntila MR, Evan GI. p53—a Jack of all trades but master of none. Nature Rev Cancer 2009; 9(11): 821–9; PMID: 19776747; http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nrc2728
2. Berkers CR, Maddocks OD, Cheung EC, Mor I, Vousden KH. Metabolic regulation by p53 family members. Cell Metab 2013; 18(5): 617–33; PMID: 23954639; http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cmet.2013.06.019
3. Li T, Kon N, Jiang L, Tan M, Ludwig T, Zhao Y, Baer R, Gu W. Tumor suppression in the absence of p53-mediated cell-cycle arrest, apoptosis, and senescence. Cell 2012; 149(6): 1269–83; PMID: 22682249; http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2012.04.026
4. Brady CA, Jiang D, Mello SS, Johnson TM, Jarvis LA, Kozak MM, Kenzelmann Broz D, Basak S, Park EJ, McLaughlin ME, et al. Distinct p53 transcriptional programs dictate acute DNA-damage responses and tumor suppression. Cell 2011; 145(4): 571–83; PMID: 21565614; http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2011.03.035
5. Jiang L, Kon N, Li T, Wang SJ, Su T, Hibshoosh H, Baer R, Gu W. Ferroptosis as a p53-mediated activity during tumour suppression. Nature 2015; 520(7545): 57–62; PMID: 25799988; http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nature14344
6. Dixon SJ, Lemberg KM, Lamprecht MR, Skouta R, Zaitsev EM, Gleason CE, Patel DN, Bauer AJ, Cantley AM, Yang WS, et al. Ferroptosis: an iron-dependent form of nonapoptotic cell death. Cell 2012; 149(5): 1060–72; PMID: 22632970; http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2012.03.042
7. Yang WS, SriRamaratnam R, Welsch ME, Shimada K, Skouta R, Viswanathan VS, Cheah JH, Clemons PA, Shamji AF, Clish CB, et al. Regulation of ferroptotic cancer cell death by GPX4. Cell 2014; 156(1–2): 317–31; PMID: 24439385; http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2013.12.010
8. Bensaad K, Tsuruta A, Selak MA, Vidal MN, Nakano K, Bartrons R, Gottlieb E, Vousden KH. TIGAR, a p53-inducible regulator of glycolysis and apoptosis. Cell 2006; 126(1): 107–20; PMID: 16839880
9. Hu W, Zhang C, Wu R, Sun Y, Levine A, Feng Z. Glutaminase 2, a novel p53 target gene regulating energy metabolism and antioxidant function. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2010; 107(16): 7455–60; PMID: 20378837; http://dx.doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1001006107
10. Suzuki S, Tanaka T, Poyurovsky MV, Nagano H, Mayama T, Ohkubo S, Lokshin M, Hosokawa H, Nakayama T, Suzuki Y, et al. Phosphate-activated glutaminase (GLS2), a p53-inducible regulator of glutamine metabolism and reactive oxygen species. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2010; 107(16): 7461–66; PMID: 20351271; http://dx.doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1002459107

Figure 1. p53-mediated control of cell survival and death upon cellular injury.

Various p53 functions can maintain homeostasis and genomic integrity of cells. Deleterious effects of DNA damage can be eliminated by activation of p53, which may trigger either DNA repair or apoptosis, depending on the severity of the damage. Similarly, p53 can confer protection against ROS insult as well. TIGAR and GLS2 can promote antioxidant synthesis (glutathione), while p53-mediated repression of SLC7A11 and subsequent ferroptosis can prevent over-accumulation of ROS that may promote tumorigenesis. Abbr. - GSH, glutathione.
