
JVI Accepted Manuscript Posted Online 22 June 2016  
J. Virol. doi:10.1128/JVI.00407-16  
Copyright © 2016, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

Cell-free versus cell-to-cell infection by HIV-1 and HTLV-1:  
exploring the link among viral source, viral trafficking and viral  
replication  

Hélène Dutartre${}^{1,2,3,4,5\#}$, Mathieu Clavière${}^{1,2,3,4,5}$, Chloé Journo${}^{1,2,3,4,5}$, and Renaud Mahieux${}^{1,2,3,4,5}$  

Equipe Oncogénèse Rétrovirale${}^{1}$, Equipe labellisée “Ligue Nationale Contre le Cancer”${}^{2}$,  
Centre international de recherche en infectiologie INSERM U1111 - CNRS UMR 5308${}^{3}$, Ecole  
Normale Supérieure de Lyon${}^{4}$, Université Lyon 1 LabEx ECOFECT - Eco-evolutionary  
dynamics of infectious diseases${}^{5}$.  

Running head: comparative study of HTLV-1 and HIV-1 infection in T and dendritic cells  

#: Correspondence: Hélène Dutartre, helene.dutartre@ens-lyon.fr INSERM U1111 Ecole  
Normale Supérieure de Lyon, 46 allée d’Italie, 69364 Lyon Cedex 07, France.  

Abstract: 212 words  
Word count: 4745 words

ABSTRACT

HIV-1 and HTLV-1 are complex retroviruses mainly infecting CD4⁺ T lymphocytes. In addition, antigen-presenting cells such as dendritic cells (DCs) are targeted in vivo by both viruses, although to a lesser extent. Interaction of HIV-1 with DCs plays a key role in viral dissemination from the mucosa to CD4⁺ T lymphocytes present in lymphoid organs. While similar mechanisms may occur for HTLV-1 as well, most HTLV-1 data were obtained from T-cell studies, and little is known regarding the trafficking of this virus in DCs. We first compared the efficiency of cell-free versus cell-associated viral sources of both retroviruses at infecting DCs. We showed that both HIV-1 and HTLV-1 cell-free particles are poorly efficient at productively infecting DCs, except if DC-SIGN has been engaged. Furthermore, while SAMHD1 accounts for restriction of cell-free HIV-1 infection, it is not involved in HTLV-1 restriction. In addition, cell-free viruses mainly lead to a non-productive DC infection leading to trans-infection of T-cells, a process important for HIV-1 spread but not for that of HTLV-1. Finally, we show that T:DC cell-to-cell transfer implies viral trafficking in vesicles that may both increase productive infection of DCs (“cis-infection”) and allow viral escape from immune surveillance. Altogether, these observations allowed us to draw a model on HTLV-1 and HIV-1 trafficking in DCs.

INTRODUCTION

Human T-Lymphotropic Virus type 1 (HTLV-1) and Human Immunodeficiency Virus type 1 (HIV-1) infect 5-10 (1) and 30 million individuals worldwide, respectively (2). HTLV-1 is present in clusters of high endemicity such as Japan, inter-tropical Africa, the Caribbean and South America (3), whereas HIV-1 is pandemic. Interestingly, while both viruses infect CD4⁺ T cells *in vivo*, the consequences of infection are opposite. After a long period of clinical latency, HTLV-1 infection leads to either to Adult T Leukemia (ATL) (4), an uncontrolled CD4⁺ T lymphocyte proliferation of very poor prognosis, or to an inflammatory disorder named HTLV-1 Associated Myelopathy / Tropical Spastic Paraparesis (HAM/TSP) in a fraction of infected individuals (5). On the other hand, HIV-1 is associated with CD4⁺ T lymphocyte death and causes Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome (AIDS) (for a review see (6)).

Interestingly, both viruses also infect Antigen-Presenting Cells (APC) to a lesser extent, among which different subtypes of Dendritic Cells (DCs), such as myeloid DCs, Monocyte-Derived DCs (MDDCs) and plasmacytoid DC (pDCs) (7-10). After viral entry in mucosal tissues during sexual intercourse or breastfeeding (11, 12), DCs can be used as viral carriers, thus allowing the virus to reach lymphoid organs where it infects CD4⁺ T lymphocytes (13). Thus, both retroviruses may hijack (i) the ability of DCs to capture pathogens and (ii) their vesicular traffic pathways in order to be transmitted to target cells without requiring a productive viral cycle (i.e. by trans-infection of T-cells). Trans-infection is probably the main route of HIV-1 transfer to T-cells, since *in vitro*, MDDCs are poorly permissive to HIV-1 replication. This is due to several restriction factors amongst which SAM domain and HD domain-containing protein 1 (SAMHD-1) (14) (Figure 1A) that depletes cellular dNTP and prevents HIV-1 reverse transcription (15).

In contrast, SAMHD1 does not restrict HTLV-1 in monocytes *in vivo* (9, 16, 17), although it does *in vitro* (18), and also does not prevent MDDC infection (19). Importantly, cis-infection (i.e. productive infection of DCs) seems to be required for HTLV-1 transfer to T-cells, *in vitro* (20) as well as in experimentally infected macaques (17).

The first step of viral infection relies on envelope binding to specific receptors followed by fusion and entry. In the case of HTLV-1, the gp46 envelope protein successively binds to Heparan Sulfate Proteoglycans (HSPGs), Neuropilin-1 (NRP-1) and GLUT-1 (21), while HIV-1 gp120 requires CD4 and CXCR4 (or CCR5). Fusion requires HTLV-1 gp21 and HIV-1 gp41. After reverse transcription, the pre-integration complex is translocated into the nucleus where viral cDNA integrates into the cell genome (see (22) for a review). Later, viral transcription and translation lead to expression of viral proteins (23, 24). Finally, viral components eventually assemble and egress as new particles.
This model has been established in CD4+ T-cells. Except for binding and reverse transcription, none of these steps has been investigated in DCs in the case of HTLV-1 infection. Here, we review the current knowledge on the puzzling HTLV-1 cycle in DCs and compare it to that of HIV-1. We also discuss how DC cis-infection and/or trans-infection of T-cells may allow viral transfer to CD4⁺ T-cells. We provide a focus on the source of viral inoculum, i.e. cell-free particles or cell-associated viruses, and analyze how these distinct viral sources may drive distinct viral trafficking modalities in DCs and determine distinct infection outcomes.

CELL-FREE OR CELL-ASSOCIATED VIRUSES USE SPECIFIC ENTRY AND TRAFFICKING ROUTES IN IMMATURE DCS AND DETERMINE THE OUTCOME OF INFECTION

DC infection may occur after capture of cell-free particles present in fluids or after cell-cell contact with an infected CD4+ T cell (for a review (13, 25)). Cell-free HIV-1 viruses infect both T-cells and MDDCs, but infection is more efficient after cell-to-cell transfer (26, 27). Using mathematical models, Iwami et al. indeed estimated that cell-to-cell transfer of HIV-1 contributes to 60% of viral infection (28). In contrast, cell-free HTLV-1 virus is poorly capable of infecting either CD4+ T-cells or MDDCs (20, 29, 30). It is worth noting that cell-free HTLV-1 viruses are extremely rare *in vivo*. This may explain why the risk of becoming infected by HTLV-1 with cell-free blood products is negligible (1).

Most HTLV-1 particles released in the supernatant of infected cells display an incomplete capsid shell, suggesting a defect in viral assembly (31). In addition, HTLV-1 particles are unstable, with a half-life decrease in infectivity of 0.6 h (32). In light of this observation, one may hypothesize that viral assembly of cell-free HTLV-1 viruses may not allow production of a significant percentage of infectious particles, in contrast to viral assembly during cell-to-cell transmission.

Entering DCs as cell-free virus.

Both HIV-1(co)-receptors (CD4 and CCR5, respectively) are expressed at the surface of DCs (33). Similarly, HTLV-1 receptors NRP-1 and GLUT-1 are also all expressed in MDDCs (34, 35). Binding to CD4 and CCR5 was also described during cell-free HIV-1 infection of DCs (36). Binding to HSPGs allows cell-free HTLV-1 docking on DC membrane (34). Then, NRP-1/HTLV-1 gp46 interaction occurs in a process that is partially dependent upon
108 HSPG/HTLV-1gp 46 interaction (35). The different modes of cell-free particle entry into DCs
are shown in figure 1.

109 Besides specific receptors, a number of viruses use DC-SIGN (Dendritic Cell-Specific

110 Intercellular adhesion molecule-3-Grabbing Non-integrin), a C-type lectin receptor, as an

111 attachment factor (37). DC-SIGN is expressed in all DC subsets including MDDCs, but is

112 absent from T-cells. Both HTLV-1 and HIV-1 bind to DC-SIGN (34, 38, 39). DC-SIGN binds

113 the soluble form of HTLV-1 SU (gp46) (34) but does not interact with the HTLV-1 Receptor

114 Binding Domain (RBD) involved in the interaction of HTLV-1 SU with NRP-1 and GLUT-1

115 (38). Thus, the molecular basis of DC-SIGN interaction with HTLV-1 remains to be defined.

116 DC-SIGN ectopic expression in THP-1 cells results in their productive infection by cell-free

117 HTLV-1 (34). Conversely, silencing DC-SIGN in MDDCs, or neutralizing DC-SIGN with

118 antibodies, prevents HTLV-1 binding and infection (34). Finally, efficient infection of MDDCs

119 with cell-free virus is dependent upon the presence of GLUT-1 and DC-SIGN, but does not

120 require HSPG or NRP-1 (34), suggesting that DC-SIGN might be sufficient for HTLV-1 to

121 bind MDDCs. This could expose the GLUT-1 binding domain present in gp46 and promote

122 viral fusion. These results illustrate one major difference in receptor requirement between DC

123 and CD4+T-cell infection. It is worth noting that cell-free viruses used in these experiments

124 may have been in fact biofilm-entrapped viruses rather than true free viral particles (see next

125 section). Indeed, we have recently shown that HTLV-1 free particles purified from the

126 supernatant of chronically infected cells are poorly capable of infecting MDCCs in contrast to

127 purified biofilm (20).

128 In the HIV-1 model, DC-SIGN binding to gp120 results in stabilization of the gp120/CD4

129 complex (36). This contributes to faster conformational changes in gp120, leading to the

130 formation and exposition of an helix involved in the binding to CCR5. Thus, not only does

131 DC-SIGN increase HIV-1 capture at the plasma membrane, but it also promotes infection

132 through the stabilization of the gp120/CD4 complex and subsequent CCR5-dependent

133 membrane fusion.

134 In addition to attachment and fusion enhancement, HIV-1 gp120 binding to DC-SIGN induces

135 signal transduction leading to Raf1 activation, phosphorylation of p65/RelA and recruitment

136 of transcription elongation factor b (p-TEFb) on HIV-1 promoter thus allowing viral expression

137 (40). Interestingly, blocking gp120:DC-SIGN interaction, Raf1 silencing or inhibition of Raf1

138 activation during HIV-1 exposure abolishes DC infection (40), suggesting that DC-SIGN

139 signaling may also alleviate the intracellular restriction. Interestingly, SAMHD-1

140 phosphorylation overcomes HIV-1 restriction (41, 42). SAMHD-1 phosphorylation can be

141 induced by myeloid cell activation (41) or by opsonized HIV-1 particles (43). In addition, co-

143 culturing MDDCs with T-cells down-regulates SAMHD-1, thus allowing HIV-1 replication in
144 MDDCs (44). Thus DC-SIGN signaling may induce SAMHD-1 phosphorylation that would
145 then relieve restriction. Finally, HIV-1 reverse transcriptase (RT) has evolved to efficiently
146 synthesize DNA in the presence of low dNTP concentration (45, 46), suggesting that even in
147 presence of SAMHD1, HIV-1 can replicate in DCs, although with a delayed kinetics. Although
148 not described during HTLV-1 infection, such signaling events after gp46 binding to DC-SIGN
149 cannot be excluded, and may also activate HTLV-1 LTR transcription (Figure 1B). However,
150 a few incoming HIV-1 particles are present in vesicles (47), after internalization through
151 clathrin-independent CD4-rich raft domains (48), thus allowing a pH-independent fusion from
152 these Virus-Containing Compartments (VCCs) leading to productive infection (47-49) (Figure
153 1B).

154 Cell-free HIV-1 is also internalized by endocytosis in MDDCs (49) or by macropinocytosis in
155 macrophages (47). Most viral particles that enter through macropinocytosis are directed
156 towards endo-lysosomal compartments and degraded (Figure 1C).

157

158 Entering DCs after cell-cell contact

159 Compared to cell-free infection, DC infection with HIV-1 is more efficient after cell-to-cell
160 contact (50). This is likely due to the fact that co-culture with T-cells can overcome SAMHD-1
161 restriction (44). Nevertheless, there are few data describing viral entry in DCs after contact
162 with infected cells. One can hypothesize that increased DC infection efficiency could result
163 from signaling either through DC-SIGN after its interaction with HIV-1 gp120 (40, 51), or
164 through InterCellular Adhesion Molecule-1 (ICAM-1) after its interaction with lymphocyte
165 function-associated antigen-1 (LFA-1) on infected CD4+ T lymphocytes (52) during the
166 formation of the “viral synapse” (VS), although these structures have only been observed in
167 the case of T-cell infection (33, 53, 54). The VS interface was imaged using electron
168 tomography in cell lines (53, 55), revealing a very complex architecture with multiple
169 membrane invaginations and projections.

170 The viral synapse is formed after engagement of HIV-1 or HTLV-1 Env proteins present at
171 the plasma membrane of infected cells with their cognate receptors on target cells. This is
172 followed by engagement of adhesion molecules through protein complexes involving ICAM,
173 (LFA-1) (56, 57) and tetraspanin such as CD81 and CD82. These proteins are also required
174 for the establishment of immune synapses (58). They interact with Gag proteins in
175 tetraspanin-enriched membrane domains (59, 60) (Figure 2). VS are stabilized or surrounded
176 by virally-induced cellular protrusions, i.e. filopodia in the case of HIV-1 (61, 62), or conduits
177 for HTLV-1 (63).

178 Both VS formation and filopodia-dependent stabilization involve cytoskeleton remodeling in
179 infected cells. In the context of DC to T-cell transmission, HIV-1 triggers actin polymerization
180 through the use of the formin 2 Rho-GTPase, CDC 42 and Env, Nef and Gag viral proteins
181 (51). HTLV-1 alters actin polymerization through p8, which is responsible for increasing
182 conduits formation (64), and through Tax by upregulating Gem (65). In HTLV-1-infected cells,
183 Gem co-localizes with actin and strongly increases both formation of conjugate(s) between
184 infected and uninfected lymphocytes, and viral transfer (65). In contrast to HIV-1, CDC 42 is
185 not involved in HTLV-1-induced actin polymerization, although it interacts with Tax in CD4+T
186 lymphocytes (66). Both retroviruses are also known to act on the microtubule network by
187 inducing MTOC polarization during VS formation (67, 68). MTOC polarization is a hallmark of
188 the immune synapse. Importantly, it occurs in the donor cell and not in the target cell in the
189 case of the VS (69), thus implying a direct role of viral proteins independently of TcR
190 triggering. HTLV-1 Tax protein localization close to the MTOC in infected CD4+ T-cells
191 suggests a role for Tax in microtubules manipulation leading to MTOC polarization (68).
192 Virions can be released in the synaptic cleft (53-55, 70, 71) after polarized assembly and
193 budding at the cell-cell contact. After a VS is established, HTLV-1 Env and Gag and the
194 HTLV-1 viral RNA accumulate at the site of contact and are rapidly transferred to the target
195 cell (53) (Figure 2). Both receptor and co-receptor expression in recipient cells are necessary
196 for productive infection. NRP-1 and GLUT-1 have been shown to co-localize at the site of
197 contact in uninfected cells during HTLV-1 cell-to-cell transfer, and are also likely to promote
198 VS formation (72, 73). During HIV-1 infection, visualization of cell-to-cell transfer using live
199 imaging showed a random localization of Gag followed by its rapid polarization at the contact
200 zone after the formation of the VS (74, 75). This leads to Gag multimerization and viral
201 budding within the close connection between the donor and the target cell (74). In contrast,
202 the viral protein(s) involved in MTOC polarization during HIV-1-induced VS remain(s)
203 unknown. Multiple synapses can also occur, leading to concomitant viral delivery to several
204 target cells (76).

205 Virus may also be transferred from biofilm-like structures present in at the surface of HTLV-1
206 infected cells (77). Biofilm-like structures consist in an extracellular carbohydrate-rich matrix
207 in which viral particles are embedded together with extracellular matrix proteins such as
208 collagen, agrin and linker proteins (for instance, galectin-3 or tetherin) (77, 78). Interestingly,
209 expression of most of these proteins is induced or increased during HTLV-1 infection via Tax
210 expression (79). Immunofluorescence data revealed that viral particles entrapped in this
211 structure are able to rapidly reach uninfected lymphocytes, through contacts both outside
212 and within the viral synapse (77). This suggests that VS formation and virus transfer within
213 VS may not be concomitant to viral assembly at the synapse, and that already assembled

214 viruses entrapped in biofilms could also be transferred to uninfected cells during intimate cell-
215 cell contacts. It was suggested that viruses stored in biofilm at the plasma membrane could
216 account for 80% of the infectious capacity of HTLV-1-infected lymphocytes (77). In addition
217 we have shown that purified biofilm-like structures are sufficient for infecting primary T-
218 lymphocytes and DCs (20). Biofilm production has not been described yet in the context of
219 HIV-1 infection.
220 
221 Does budding in the infected donor cell occur at the plasma membrane or in vesicles during
222 cell-to-cell transfer?
223 VS does not lead to cellular membrane fusion, suggesting that plasma membrane-associated
224 Env proteins may be fusion-incompetent. These proteins would be necessary during the
225 early steps of VS formation through interaction with their receptors CD4 or Glut1 but not for
226 budding. Following interaction with Gag the formation of HIV-1 nascent virions requires a
227 functional secretion vesicle pathway. This suggests that plasma membrane-associated Env
228 proteins are not involved in viral budding during VS (80-83). Escape from antibody
229 neutralization, which is a common feature of cell-to-cell viral transmission (26, 27, 84) could
230 be the consequence of immature HIV-1 Env conformation at the plasma membrane.
231 Interestingly, blocking HIV-1 Env trafficking through the secretion vesicular pathway has no
232 effect on infectious cell-free virus production (80), emphasizing that viral budding of cell-free
233 particles differs from that of cell-cell transmitted virus. This hypothesis is further supported by
234 studies showing that different Env-Gag interactions govern cell-free or cell-to-cell
235 transmission (82, 85, 86). Interestingly, co-localization of HIV-1 virions with late endosomes
236 in chronically infected cells (87) led to the hypothesis that viral assembly and budding may
237 also occur inside the cell rather than at the plasma membrane. In contrast, budding at the
238 plasma membrane may be the preferred mechanism of viral production in newly infected
239 cells (87). HIV-1 virions could bud preferentially in MVB and be released in the synaptic cleft
240 after fusion of MVB with the plasma membrane (88, 89). Thus, viral assembly may initiate at
241 the plasma membrane, but viral budding could occur in MVB. Viral release would then use
242 the endosomal-sorting pathway in a way similar to that of exosomes.
243 The same mechanisms may also occur for HTLV-1 assembly before VS transmission. Both
244 interactions between HTLV-1 Gag proteins and proteins belonging to the ESCRT
245 (endosomal sorting complexes required for transport) pathway (90-92), as well as Gag
246 trafficking through the multivesicular body (MVB) were reported (93, 94). This suggests that
247 viral budding requires MVB machinery. However, these results are difficult to reconcile with
248 viral assembly at the plasma membrane. This may be linked to different mechanisms of viral

249 release that occur either in a cell-free context or during cell-cell contacts. As exemplified in
250 the HIV-1 model (87), different budding mechanisms, i.e. at plasma membrane or inside
251 vesicles, may occur in newly infected T-cell or in chronically infected T-cells respectively.
252 
253 Viral capture in vesicles during cell-to-cell transfer?
254 An important number of virions are able to enter the target cell during transmission through
255 the VS.(95) This could account for the resistance against antiviral drugs that is observed
256 during cell-to-cell spread (for a review see (96)). Alternatively, efficient cell-to-cell
257 transmission could be the consequence of a different viral entry pathway, although still
258 dependent on the production of infectious virus particles (97) as described for the HIV-1 VS
259 between T-cells (for a review, (25)). After viral delivery through a VS between infected and
260 uninfected T-cells, viral fusion proceeds after the internalization of the particles in vesicles
261 whose nature is still debated (74, 98, 99). This could rely on macropinocytosis or dynamin-
262 dependent endocytosis (99). This entry process may also be independent of Env-CD4
263 interaction at the plasma membrane (81) (see previous section). However, once in the
264 vesicles, immature HIV-1 Gag proteins undergo endosomal maturation allowing modification
265 of Env conformation and co-receptor-dependent fusion that induces the release of HIV-1
266 capsids into the cytoplasm, thus leading to productive infection (81) (see Figure 2 “entry in
267 target cells”). DCs are specialized in antigen uptake via endocytosis. Since viral capture
268 occurs via endocytosis during VS between T-cells, it is conceivable that viral entry will also
269 occur through endocytosis if DCs form a VS with an infected T-cells.
270 However, little is known about the mechanism that facilitates HTLV-1 uptake after its
271 transmission across the VS or after contact with biofilm, although it is conceivable that this
272 would also occur via endocytosis. This hypothesis is supported by electron microscopy
273 analyses of MDDCs co-cultured with HTLV-1-infected lymphocytes showing some particles
274 internalized in vesicles (38). Whether these vesicles result from macropinocytosis or
275 endocytosis after synaptic transfer of HTLV-1, and whether this process leads to productive
276 HTLV-1 infection is currently unknown.
277 
278 Viral transfer to T-cells after DC cis-infection
279 Since HIV-1-infected DCs are rare, and HTLV-1 release in the supernatant of infected DCs
280 seems limited (8), information is lacking regarding HIV-1 or HTLV-1 budding in productively
281 infected DCs. Nevertheless, productively infected DCs are capable of transferring virus to T-
282 cells after cell-cell contact (8, 100-102). Whether transfer occurs via formation of a VS,

283 involving MTOC relocalization in infected DCs and polarized budding, or via an infectious
284 synapse, i.e. independently of Env protein recognition, is unclear (103) (Figure 3).
285 In infected macrophages, HIV-1 is found in large intracytoplasmic vacuoles that are often
286 referred to as Virus-Containing Compartments (VCCs) (88, 89, 104-110). Interestingly these
287 membrane structures also exist in DCs (107). Electron microscopy and tomography revealed
288 that HIV-1 buds at the limiting membrane of the VCCs (88, 89, 107). VCCs are distinct from
289 endosomes since they lack classical markers such as EE1A and are inaccessible to BSA-
290 gold beads (104), and show unique vesicular structures (105-107). VCCs also contain
291 tetraspanin proteins such as CD81, CD82, CD63, and CD36 (111, 112), a hallmark of MVB,
292 that were also shown to be critical for viral release in T-cells. Finally, these VCCs contain
293 GM3 sphingolipid-rich lipid raft domains that are also found in plasma membrane lipid rafts
294 (for a review (113)). Thus, VCCs have been suggested to represent viral assembly platforms
295 in infected macrophages, and can be related to the MVB observed in DCs. VCC-contained
296 HIV-1 remains infectious for long periods of time (114) and rapid release of cell-free HIV-1
297 from the VCCs into the extracellular milieu can be induced by external addition of ATP (115).
298 In addition, infected macrophages can rapidly transfer HIV-1 to target T-cells after a cell-to-
299 cell contact (116), leading to the collapse of the VCCs toward the point of contact in a
300 process resembling an infectious synapse (see next section) (107) (figure 3). Finally, indirect
301 evidence suggests that DC-to-T-cell viral transfer is mediated by a VS (102).
302 With respect to HTLV-1 transfer from infected DCs to T-cells, a vesicular localization of the
303 virus was reported in infected DCs (38), suggesting that budding could also take place in
304 vesicles. Then viral transfer to target T-cell might occur via an infectious synapse.
305 
306 CELL-FREE VIRUSES CAPTURE BY MATURE DC CAN LEAD TO TRANS INFECTION
307 OF T-CELLS
308 DC-mediated HIV-1 trans-infection of T-cells occurs within the first 24 hours of viral capture
309 (101). It is characterized by the transfer of infectious viral particles without viral replication. In
310 this case, viral transfer occurs after the formation of an immune synapse between DCs and
311 T-cells (103), in a mechanism that is thought to be very similar to the infectious synapse
312 observed between macrophages and T-cells (Figure 3). In DCs, the mechanism of DC-
313 mediated cell-free HIV-1 “trans-infection” of T-cells is well documented, while HTLV-1 trans-
314 infection (after cell-to-cell contact) is barely described (8). In the following section, we will
315 review how HIV-1 can use DCs as Trojan horses for trans-infection and we will discuss how
316 HTLV-1 might use the same pathway.

317

318 Surfing of HIV-1 cell-free particles and viral “sac-like” components.

319 How cell-free HIV-1 virus is captured upon trans-infection of T-cells and whether it traffics

320 through specific compartments or whether it only “surfs” along the plasma membrane before

321 being delivered to T-cells is still a matter of debate. Indeed, conflicting results have been

322 reported regarding the nature of the compartments where HIV-1 particles accumulate after

323 cell-free virus capture.

324 Initially, trans-infection was related to capture of HIV-1 cell-free particles after DC-SIGN

325 engagement (117, 118). Virus accumulation in an intracellular non-acidic, tetraspanin-

326 enriched, compartment, suggested a localization within MVB (119), similar to the situation in

327 productively infected macrophages (see previous section). However, plasma membrane-

328 bound HIV-1 cell-free particles have also been described in TLR4 agonist-matured MDDCs

329 (LPS-matured MDDCs), where DC-SIGN expression is low (121, 124). The virus then “surfs”

330 outside the plasma membrane using actin-dependent polarized movements and accumulates

331 in invaginated domains continuous with the plasma membrane (120). Viral capture is highly

332 dynamic in LPS-matured MDDCs and involves continuous exchange of particles with the

333 extracellular milieu. Indeed, constant remodeling of the compartment content could favor the

334 capture of viruses, but also the release of entrapped ones (50). These “sac-like”

335 compartments were shown to be distinct from classical endosomal, lysosomal or antigen-

336 presenting compartments. They are CD63 and CD81 tetraspanins positive (120), a feature

337 reminiscent of VCCs observed in macrophages. Since connection of “sac-like” structures to

338 plasma membrane is very thin (121), it is likely that HIV-1-positive MVB-like compartments

339 and “sac-like” compartments connected to the plasma membrane represent identical

340 structures described under different experimental settings. Finally, “sac-like” structures

341 containing viruses were also observed at the contact sites formed between MDDCs and T-

342 cells, suggesting that they may be involved in viral transfer (122) in a process that differs

343 from the VS described with productively infected cells.

344

345 HIV-1 receptors for trans-infection

346 Until recently, the nature of the molecules involved in cell-free HIV-1 capture upon trans-

347 infection remained undetermined. Although DC-SIGN was reported to bind HIV-1 in

348 immature DCs (117, 118), inhibition of DC-SIGN expression did not affect trans-infection

349 (123). In addition, and unlike the immature DC situation, HIV-1 capture by mature MDDCs is

350 independent of gp120 (124). Finally, DC maturation results in a reduced macropinocytosis

(125), while HIV-1 capture and transfer to T-cells is enhanced (121, 126, 127). Altogether, these observations exclude DC-SIGN as an important player for HIV-1 trans-infection.

Interesting HIV-1 capture is dramatically dependent upon sphingolipid contents of incoming viral particles (124, 128). Moreover, incorporation of membrane gangliosides during budding of viruses within plasma membrane lipid rafts of infected T-cells strictly controls the ability of mature MDDCs to transfer HIV-1 to T-cells (129, 130). Incorporation of α2-3 GM3 ganglioside into HIV-1 particles is responsible for viral capture and trans-infection of T-cells by mature MDDCs (131). Transcriptomic analysis of matured MDDCs displaying different abilities to capture and transfer HIV-1 to T-cells allowed the identification of Siglec-1 as an important molecule for HIV-1 trans-infection (122). Direct interaction of GM3 with Siglec-1 was further demonstrated (122, 132). Siglec-1 co-localizes with HIV-1 in “sac-like” compartments and accumulates at the infectious synapse when LPS-matured MDDCs are co-cultured with T-cells (122, 133, 134), further demonstrating that DC-mediated trans-infection of T-cells relies on Siglec-1. However, these studies also highlighted the fact that trans-infection is not per-se dependent upon viral components recognition. Indeed, Siglec-1 has also been identified as the receptor for exosomes (132, 135). This finding shed light on earlier studies showing that HIV-1 trafficking in infected cells or in mature MDDCs was very similar to that of exosomes (124). Thus, trans-infection of T-cells after HIV-1 capture by mature MDDCs by HIV-1 could represent a hijacked process of cell-to-cell communication based on exosome capture.

HIV-1 transfer to T-cells after capture by mature DC

Once captured in VCCs, MVB or “sac-like” membrane invaginations, viruses may be transferred to target T-cells. As already mentioned for cis-infected DCs, transfer of viral particles stored in intracellular compartments is not triggered by the virus, as it is the case during VS formation. It is rather related to immune synapse highjacking and its switch into an infectious synapse (103) (Figure 3). In contrast to the VS, infectious synapses between HIV-1-containing DCs and uninfected T-cells do not rely upon Env-CD4 interactions but are dependent on LFA-ICAM-1 and are enhanced by TcR triggering (103). Thus, blocking CD4 on the target T-cell does not decrease the number of conjugates with DCs, but decreases the number of HIV-1 viruses bound to the T-cell membrane at the synapse, thus resulting in a decreased number of infected T-cells (103, 136). Cell-cell contacts consist in large sheet-like membrane structures derived from DCs that wrap around T-cell, resulting in large cell-cell contacts at the infectious synapse (136). In addition, membrane protrusions originating from T-cells were also found within the virus “sac-like” compartment of trans-infected DCs,

386 allowing viruses to bind both at the tips of the T-cell protrusions and along the length of the
387 protrusions, probably after viral surfing (136) (Figure 3).

388

389 Does HTLV-1 also trans-infect T-cells after capture by DCs?

390 HTLV-1 transfer to T-cells after DC-mediated trans-infection has not been documented, but
391 is very likely to exist. Several lines of evidence support this hypothesis.

392 First, HTLV-1 transfer from DCs to T-cells occurs in two waves: during the first hours after
393 viral capture, and after several days of infection (8). This is reminiscent of trans- and cis-
394 infection described for HIV-1, respectively. Short exposure of MDDCs or pDCs to cell-free
395 HTLV-1 in the presence of AZT does not prevent subsequent viral transfer to T-cells,
396 suggesting trans-infection. In contrast, AZT treatment prevents the ability of DCs to transmit
397 the virus to T-cells when DCs are treated for longer periods with AZT along with cell-free
398 HTLV-1 before being exposed to target T-cells (8), thus demonstrating productive cis-
399 infection of DCs.

400 Second, HTLV-1 egress likely parallels the exosome secretion pathway (137), suggesting
401 that lipid composition of HTLV-1 particles might also allow viral capture by Siglec-1 in DCs.

402 Third, productive infection of DC by HTLV-1 is prevented in LPS- and prostaglandin E2-
403 matured MDDCs (35). Such a maturation induces VEGF expression in MDDCs, which
404 competes with HTLV-1 Env proteins binding on NRP-1/HSPG complex, thus resulting in a
405 decrease in viral capture and to a subsequent lack of infection. This is in sharp contrast with
406 data showing that DC maturation increases HIV-1 capture and trans-infection of T-cells but
407 reduces cis-infection (121, 126, 127). It suggests that different DCs maturation processes
408 may have different outcomes. Similarly, LPS-matured MDDCs could have a different
409 susceptibility to cis-infection by HTLV-1 than immature MDDCs, despite efficient viral
410 capture. Finally, since capture of small-sized vesicles by LPS-matured MDDCs is not
411 restricted to viral components but to lipid components (135), HTLV-1 capture by LPS-
412 matured MDDCs is expected to be increased compared to immature MDDCs. Viral capture
413 as well as susceptibility to HTLV-1 infection of MDDCs matured in different conditions
414 remains to be investigated.

415

416 CONCLUSION

417 HIV-1 and HTLV-1 can enter and/or replicate in DCs and T-cells. However, few studies have
418 compared side by side the efficiency of the viral sources in infecting DCs and/or T-cells.

419 Virus delivery as cell-free particles or through cell-cell contact leads to different modes of
420 viral capture, interaction with different receptors, different routes of trafficking and additional
421 signaling. In addition, DC exposure to the virus results both in cis-infection of DCs and/or
422 DC-mediated trans-infection of T-cells, adding a higher level of complexity to the system.
423 Current data are consistent with a model where both productive (cis)-infection and trans-
424 infection coexist in immature and mature DCs. Cis-infection of immature DCs by HIV-1 or
425 HTLV-1 occurs at a low level. DC maturation enhances viral capture and ability to transfer
426 virus, while diminishing productive infection. Enhanced ability of mature DCs to trans-infect
427 T-cells would be involved in rapid viral spread, a process that could happen in lymph nodes,
428 where both naive T-cells and mature DCs are present.
429 Many pieces of the HTLV-1 cycle in DCs are still missing and further investigations are
430 needed to allow the identification of cellular and viral actors involved in this process, and the
431 role of DC cis-and/or trans-infection in HTLV-1 pathogenesis.
432
433

435 Acknowledgments

We thank Dr Louis-Marie Bloyet, and Dr Patrick Lécine for critical reading of the manuscript and helpful discussions. We thank Patrick Lane from ScEYEnce Studios for graphical enhancement of the figures. This work was supported by Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale (INSERM), and by La Ligue Contre le Cancer (programme équipes labellisées). RM is supported by ENS and by a PHRT program (AP-HP).

Figure 1: Cell-free virus entry determines the fate of infection in DCs. Cell-free viruses can use at least 3 non-exclusive pathways to enter DCs. (A): in the absence of DC-SIGN, viral binding in enriched lipid raft areas could lead to viral membrane fusion at the plasma membrane. Restriction factors in the cytoplasm will prevent viral replication. (B): in the presence of DC-SIGN in lipid rafts, its interaction with viral glycoproteins leads to signaling (represented as broken arrow) favoring the productive infection. DC-SIGN triggering leads to viral internalization in ill-identified vesicles (named here VCC, see text for details), in which viral fusion could occur. (C): if viral capture occurs in the absence of co-receptor and DC-SIGN, virions are internalized in clathrin-rich endosomes and directed towards degradation.

Figure 2: Infection after cell-cell contact: the viral synapse. Viral synapse is characterized by an intimate contact between the infected donor cell (left) and the target cell (right). The formation of the VS can be arbitrarily divided in 6 steps. 1-Cell-cell contact is established through interactions between fusion-incompetent viral Env proteins (represented in yellow) and ICAM-1 on the donor cell side and viral receptor (represented in blue) and LFA-1 on the target cell. 2-Adhesion leads to MTOC polarization and virion assembly at the cell-cell contact in the donor cell. 3-Neo-synthesized virions are released in the synaptic cleft. 4-Polarized capture of virions by the target cell is driven by Env-receptor interaction. 5-Captured virions are internalized through endocytosis in the target cell. 6-Gag maturation in endosomes leads to Env-mediated viral fusion and release of viral capsids in the cytosol allowing productive infection.

Figure 3: The infectious synapse between cis-infected DC or mature DC that have captured virions, and T-cells. (1) In contrast to the VS, the infectious synapse depends first on the formation of an immune synapse. This initial contact, that is independent of viral protein engagement, induces (2) protusions of T-cell membranes filopodes inside VCCs where viruses are stored allowing virus capture at the tips of the protrusions, and /or (3) VCCs collapse and (4) release of viruses at the synapse leading to T-cell infection.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

1. Gessain A, Cassar O. 2012. Epidemiological Aspects and World Distribution of HTLV-1 Infection. Front Microbiol 3: 388.
2. ONUSIDA. 2013. AIDS by the numbers. www.unaids.org.
3. Bruhn R, Mahieux R, Murphy EL. In press. Human lymphotropic viruses: HTLV-1 and HTLV- 2. . Clinical Virology 4th edition, ASM press.
4. Uchiyama T, Yodoi J, Sagawa K, Takatsuki K, Uchino H. 1977. Adult T-cell leukemia: clinical and hematologic features of 16 cases. Blood 50: 481-492.
5. Gessain A, Barin F, Vernant J, Gout O, Maurs L, Calender A, de Thé G. 1985. Antibodies to human T-lymphotropic virus type-I in patients with tropical spastic paraparesis. Lancet 2: 407-410.
6. Gallo RC, Montagnier L. 2003. The discovery of HIV as the cause of AIDS. N Engl J Med 349: 2283-2285.
7. Cunningham AL, Donaghy H, Harman AN, Kim M, Turville SG. 2010. Manipulation of dendritic cell function by viruses. Current Opinion in Microbiology 13: 524-529.
8. Jones KS, Petrow-Sadowski C, Huang YK, Bertolette DC, Ruscetti FW. 2008. Cell-free HTLV-1 infects dendritic cells leading to transmission and transformation of CD4(+) T cells. Nat Med 14: 429-436.
9. Macatonia SE, Cruickshank JK, Rudge P, Knight SC. 1992. Dendritic cells from patients with tropical spastic paraparesis are infected with HTLV-1 and stimulate autologous lymphocyte proliferation. AIDS Res Hum Retroviruses 8: 1699-1706.
10. Wu L, KewalRamani VN. 2006. Dendritic-cell interactions with HIV: infection and viral dissemination. Nature reviews Immunology 6: 859-868.
11. Blattner WA, Nomura A, Clark JW, Ho GY, Nakao Y, Gallo R, Robert-Guroff M. 1986. Modes of transmission and evidence for viral latency from studies of human T-cell lymphotropic virus type I in Japanese migrant populations in Hawaii. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 83: 4895-4898.
12. Hino S, Katamine S, Kawase K, Miyamoto T, Doi H, Tsuji Y, Yamabe T. 1994. Intervention of maternal transmission of HTLV-1 in Nagasaki, Japan. Leukemia 8 Suppl 1: S68-70.
13. Pique C, Jones KS. 2012. Pathways of cell-cell transmission of HTLV-1. Front Microbiol 3: 378.
14. Laguette N, Sobhian B, Casartelli N, Ringeard M, Chable-Bessia C, Segeral E, Yatim A, Emiliani S, Schwartz O, Benkirane M. 2011. SAMHD1 is the dendritic- and myeloid-cell- specific HIV-1 restriction factor counteracted by Vpx. Nature 474: 654-657.
15. Lahouassa H, Daddacha W, Hofmann H, Ayinde D, Logue EC, Dragin L, Bloch N, Maudet C, Bertrand M, Gramberg T, Pancino G, Priet S, Canard B, Laguette N, Benkirane M, Transy C, Landau NR, Kim B, Margottin-Goguet F. 2012. SAMHD1 restricts the replication of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 by depleting the intracellular pool of deoxynucleoside triphosphates. Nat Immunol 13: 223-228.
16. Nascimento CR, Lima MA, Serpa MJdA, Espindola O, Leite ACC, Echevarria-Lima J. 2011. Monocytes from HTLV-1-infected patients are unable to fully mature into dendritic cells. Blood 117: 489-499.
17. Valeri V, Hryniewicz A, Andresen V, Jones K, Fenizia C, Bialuk I, Chung H, Fukumoto R, Parks R, Ferrari M, Nicot C, Cecchinato V, Ruscetti F, Franchini G. 2010. Requirement of the human T-cell leukemia virus p12 and p30 products for infectivity of human dendritic cells and macaques but not rabbits. Blood 116: 3809-3817.
18. Sze A, Belgaoui SM, Olagnier D, Lin R, Hiscott J, van Grevenynghe J. 2013. Host restriction factor SAMHD1 limits human T cell leukemia virus type 1 infection of monocytes via STING-mediated apoptosis. Cell Host Microbe 14: 422-434.
19. Gramberg T, Kahle T, Bloch N, Wittmann S, Müllers E, Daddacha W, Hofmann H, Kim B, Lindemann D, Landau NR. 2013. Restriction of diverse retroviruses by SAMHD1. Retrovirology 10: 26.

20. Alais S, Mahieux R, Dutartre H. 2015. Viral Source-Independent High Susceptibility of Dendritic Cells to Human T-Cell Leukemia Virus Type 1 Infection Compared to That of T Lymphocytes. J Virol 89:10580-10590.
21. Jones KS, Lambert S, Bouttier M, Benit L, Ruscetti FW, Hermine O, Pique C. 2011. Molecular aspects of HTLV-1 entry: functional domains of the HTLV-1 surface subunit (SU) and their relationships to the entry receptors. Viruses 3:794-810.
22. Marx A, Alian A. 2015. The Road Less Traveled: HIV's Use of Alternative Routes through Cellular Pathways. J Virol 89:5204-5212.
23. Journo C, Douceron E, Mahieux R. 2009. HTLV gene regulation: because size matters, transcription is not enough. Future Microbiol 4:425-440.
24. Brady J, Kashanchi F. 2005. Tat gets the "green" light on transcription initiation. Retrovirology 2:69.
25. Alvarez RA, Barria MI, Chen BK. 2014. Unique features of HIV-1 spread through T cell virological synapses. PLoS Pathog 10:e1004513.
26. Zhong P, Agosto LM, Munro JB, Mothes W. 2013. Cell-to-cell transmission of viruses. Curr Opin Virol 3:44-50.
27. Mazurov D, Ilinskaya A, Heidecker G, Lloyd P, Derse D. 2010. Quantitative comparison of HTLV-1 and HIV-1 cell-to-cell infection with new replication dependent vectors. PLoS pathogens 6:e1000788.
28. Iwami S, Takeuchi JS, Nakaoka S, Mammano F, Clavel F, Inaba H, Kobayashi T, Misawa N, Aihara K, Koyanagi Y, Sato K. 2015. Cell-to-cell infection by HIV contributes over half of virus infection. Elife 4.
29. Kuroda Y, Kurohara K, Fujiyama F, Takashima H, Endo C, Matsui M, Neshige R, Kakigi R. 1992. Systemic interferon-alpha in the treatment of HTLV-I-associated myelopathy. Acta Neurol Scand 86:82-86.
30. de Rossi A, Aldovini A, Franchini G, Mann D, Gallo RC, Wong-Staal F. 1985. Clonal selection of T lymphocytes infected by cell-free human T-cell leukemia/lymphoma virus type I: parameters of virus integration and expression. Virology 143:640-645.
31. Cao S, Maldonado JO, Grigsby IF, Mansky LM, Zhang W. 2015. Analysis of human T-cell leukemia virus type 1 particles by using cryo-electron tomography. J Virol 89:2430-2435.
32. Shinagawa M, Jinno-Oue A, Shimizu N, Roy BB, Shimizu A, Hoque SA, Hoshino H. 2012. Human T-cell leukemia viruses are highly unstable over a wide range of temperatures. J Gen Virol 93:608-617.
33. Coleman CM, Gelais CS, Wu L. 2013. Cellular and viral mechanisms of HIV-1 transmission mediated by dendritic cells. Advances in experimental medicine and biology 762:109-130.
34. Jain P, Manuel SL, Khan ZK, Ahuja J, Quann K, Wigdahl B. 2009. DC-SIGN mediates cell-free infection and transmission of human T-cell lymphotropic virus type 1 by dendritic cells. J Virol 83:10908-10921.
35. Lambert S, Bouttier M, Vassy R, Seigneuret M, Cari P-S, Janvier S, Heveker N, Ruscetti FW, Perret G, Jones KS, Pique C. 2009. HTLV-1 uses HSPG and neuropilin-1 for entry by molecular mimicry of VEGF165. Blood 113:5176-5185.
36. Hijazi K, Wang Y, Scala C, Jeffs S, Longstaff C, Stieh D, Haggarty B, Vanham G, Schols D, Balzarini J, Jones IM, Hoxie J, Shattock R, Kelly CG. 2011. DC-SIGN increases the affinity of HIV-1 envelope glycoprotein interaction with CD4. PLoS one 6:e28307.
37. Mercer J, Greber UF. 2013. Virus interactions with endocytic pathways in macrophages and dendritic cells. Trends Microbiol 21:380-388.
38. Ceccaldi P-EE, Delebecque F, Prevost M-CC, Moris A, Abastado J-PP, Gessain A, Schwartz O, Ozden S. 2006. DC-SIGN facilitates fusion of dendritic cells with human T-cell leukemia virus type 1-infected cells. Journal of virology 80:4771-4780.
39. Lee B, Leslie G, Soilleux E, UOD, Baik S, Levroney E, Flummerfelt K, Swiggard W, Coleman N, Malim M, Doms R. 2001. cis Expression of DC-SIGN allows for more efficient entry of human and simian immunodeficiency viruses via CD4 and a coreceptor. Journal of virology 75:12028-12038.
40. Gringhuis SI, van der Vlist M, van den Berg LM, den Dunnen J, Litjens M, Geijtenbeek TB. 2010. HIV-1 exploits innate signaling by TLR 8 and DC-SIGN for productive infection of dendritic cells. Nature immunology 11:419-426.
41. Cribier A, Descours B, Valadao AL, Laguette N, Benkirane M. 2013. Phosphorylation of SAMHD1 by cyclin A2/CDK1 regulates its restriction activity toward HIV-1. Cell Rep 3:1036-1043.

588 42. Arnold LH, Kunzelmann S, Webb MR, Taylor IA. 2015. A continuous enzyme-coupled assay for triphosphohydrolase activity of HIV-1 restriction factor SAMHD1. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 59:186-192.

591 43. Posch W, Steger M, Knackmuss U, Blatzer M, Baldauf HM, Doppler W, White TE, Hortnagl P, Diaz-Griffero F, Lass-Florl C, Hackl H, Moris A, Keppler OT, Wilflingseder D. 2015. Complement-Opsonized HIV-1 Overcomes Restriction in Dendritic Cells. PLoS Pathog 11:e1005005.

595 44. Su B, Biedma ME, Lederle A, Peressin M, Lambotin M, Proust A, Decoville T, Schmidt S, Laumont G, Moog C. 2014. Dendritic Cell-Lymphocyte Cross Talk Downregulates Host Restriction Factor SAMHD1 and Stimulates HIV-1 Replication in Dendritic Cells. Journal of virology 88:5109-5121.

599 45. Lenzi GM, Domaol RA, Kim DH, Schinazi RF, Kim B. 2015. Mechanistic and Kinetic Differences between Reverse Transcriptases of Vpx Coding and Non-coding Lentiviruses. J Biol Chem 290:30078-30086.

602 46. Lenzi GM, Domaol RA, Kim DH, Schinazi RF, Kim B. 2014. Kinetic variations between reverse transcriptases of viral protein X coding and noncoding lentiviruses. Retrovirology 11:111.

605 47. Gobeil L-A, Lodge R, Tremblay MJ. 2013. Macropinocytosis-like HIV-1 internalization in macrophages is CCR5 dependent and leads to efficient but delayed degradation in endosomal compartments. Journal of virology 87:735-745.

608 48. van Wilgenburg B, Moore MD, James WS, Cowley SA. 2014. The Productive Entry Pathway of HIV-1 in Macrophages Is Dependent on Endocytosis through Lipid Rafts Containing CD4. PloS one 9.

611 49. Janas AM, Dong C, Wang JH, Wu L. 2008. Productive infection of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 in dendritic cells requires fusion-mediated viral entry. Virology 375:442-451.

613 50. Izquierdo-Useros N, Esteban O, Rodriguez-Plata MT, Erkizia I, Prado JG, Blanco J, Garcia-Parajo MF, Martinez-Picado J. 2011. Dynamic imaging of cell-free and cell-associated viral capture in mature dendritic cells. Traffic (Copenhagen, Denmark) 12:1702-1713.

617 51. Nikolic DS, Lehmann M, Felts R, Garcia E, Blanchet FP, Subramaniam S, Piguet V. 2011. HIV-1 activates Cdc42 and induces membrane extensions in immature dendritic cells to facilitate cell-to-cell virus propagation. Blood 118:4841-4852.

620 52. Jolly C, Mitar I, Sattentau QJ. 2007. Adhesion molecule interactions facilitate human immunodeficiency virus type 1-induced virological synapse formation between T cells. J Virol 81:13916-13921.

623 53. Igakura T, Stinchcombe JC, Goon PK, Taylor GP, Weber JN, Griffiths GM, Tanaka Y, Osame M, Bangham CR. 2003. Spread of HTLV-I between lymphocytes by virus-induced polarization of the cytoskeleton. Science 299:1713-1716.

626 54. Nejmeddine M, Bangham CR. 2010. The HTLV-1 Virological Synapse. Viruses 2:1427-1447.

627 55. Jolly C. 2004. HIV-1 Cell to Cell Transfer across an Env-induced, Actin-dependent Synapse. Journal of Experimental Medicine 199:283-293.

629 56. Barnard AL, Igakura T, Tanaka Y, Taylor GP, Bangham CR. 2005. Engagement of specific T-cell surface molecules regulates cytoskeletal polarization in HTLV-1-infected lymphocytes. Blood 106:988-995.

632 57. Jolly C, Mitar I, Sattentau QJ. 2007. Adhesion Molecule Interactions Facilitate Human Immunodeficiency Virus Type 1-Induced Virological Synapse Formation between T Cells. Journal of Virology 81:13916-13921.

635 58. Lagaudriere-Gesbert C, Lebel-Binay S, Hubeau C, Fradelizi D, Conjeaud H. 1998. Signaling through the tetraspanin CD82 triggers its association with the cytoskeleton leading to sustained morphological changes and T cell activation. Eur J Immunol 28:4332-4344.

638 59. Jolly C, Sattentau QJ. 2007. Human immunodeficiency virus type 1 assembly, budding, and cell-cell spread in T cells take place in tetraspanin-enriched plasma membrane domains. J Virol 81:7873-7884.

641 60. Jolly C, Sattentau QJ. 2005. Human Immunodeficiency Virus Type 1 Virological Synapse Formation in T Cells Requires Lipid Raft Integrity. Journal of Virology 79:12088-12094.

643 61. Aggarwal A, lemma TL, Shih I, Newsome TP, Samantha M, Cunningham AL, Turville SG. 2012. Mobilization of HIV spread by diaphanous 2 dependent filopodia in infected dendritic cells. PLoS pathogens 8.

646 62. Sowinski S, Jolly C, Berninghausen O, Purbhoo MA, Chauveau A, Kohler K, Oddos S, Eissmann P, Brodsky FM, Hopkins C, Onfelt B, Sattentau Q, Davis DM. 2008. Membrane

nanotubes physically connect T cells over long distances presenting a novel route for HIV-1
transmission. Nat Cell Biol 10:211-219.
Van Prooyen N, Gold H, Andresen V, Schwartz O, Jones K, Ruscetti F, Lockett S, Gudla
P, Venzon D, Franchini G. 2010. Human T-cell leukemia virus type 1 p8 protein increases
cellular conduits and virus transmission. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of
the United States of America 107:20738-20743.
Van Prooyen N, Andresen V, Gold H, Bialuk I, Cynthia P-M, Franchini G. 2010. Hijacking
the T-cell communication network by the human T-cell leukemia/lymphoma virus type 1
(HTLV-1) p12 and p8 proteins. Molecular aspects of medicine 31:333-343.
Chevalier SA, Turpin J, Cachat A, Afonso PV, Gessain A, Brady JN, Pise-Masison CA,
Mahieux R. 2014. Gem-induced cytoskeleton remodeling increases cellular migration of
HTLV-1-infected cells, formation of infected-to-target T-cell conjugates and viral transmission.
PLoS Pathog 10:e1003917.
Wu K, Bottazzi ME, de la Fuente C, Deng L, Gitlin SD, Maddukuri A, Dadgar S, Li H,
Vertes A, Pumfery A, Kashanchi F. 2004. Protein profile of tax-associated complexes. The
Journal of biological chemistry 279:495-508.
Jolly C. 2010. T cell polarization at the virological synapse. Viruses 2:1261-1278.
Nejmeddine M, Barnard AL, Tanaka Y, Taylor GP, Bangham CR. 2005. Human T-
lymphotropic virus, type 1, tax protein triggers microtubule reorientation in the virological
synapse. The Journal of biological chemistry 280:29653-29660.
Lehmann M, Nikolic DS, Piguet V. 2011. How HIV-1 takes advantage of the cytoskeleton
during replication and cell-to-cell transmission. Viruses 3:1757-1776.
McDonald D, Wu L, Bohks SM, KewalRamani VN, Unutmaz D, Hope TJ. 2003.
Recruitment of HIV and its receptors to dendritic cell-T cell junctions. Science 300:1295-1297.
Majorovits E, Nejmeddine M, Tanaka Y, Taylor GP, Fuller SD, Bangham CR. 2008.
Human T-lymphotropic virus-1 visualized at the virological synapse by electron tomography.
PloS one 3.
Ghez D, Lepelletier Y, Lambert S, Fourneau JM, Blot V, Janvier S, Arnulf B, van Endert
PM, Heveker N, Pique C, Hermine O. 2006. Neuropilin-1 is involved in human T-cell
lymphotropic virus type 1 entry. J Virol 80:6844-6854.
Takenouchi N, Jones KS, Lisinski I, Fugo K, Yao K, Cushman SW, Ruscetti FW,
Jacobson S. 2007. GLUT1 is not the primary binding receptor but is associated with cell-to-
cell transmission of human T-cell leukemia virus type 1. J Virol 81:1506-1510.
Hubner W, McNerney GP, Chen P, Dale BM, Gordon RE, Chuang FY, Li XD, Asmuth DM,
Huser T, Chen BK. 2009. Quantitative 3D video microscopy of HIV transfer across T cell
virological synapses. Science 323:1743-1747.
Groppelli E, Starling S, Jolly C. 2015. Contact-induced mitochondrial polarization supports
HIV-1 virological synapse formation. J Virol 89:14-24.
Rudnicka D, Feldmann J, Porrot F, Wietgrefe S, Guadagnini S, Prevost MC, Estaquier J,
Haase AT, Sol-Foulon N, Schwartz O. 2009. Simultaneous cell-to-cell transmission of
human immunodeficiency virus to multiple targets through polysynapses. J Virol 83:6234-
6246.
Pais-Correia AM, Sachse M, Guadagnini S, Robbiati V, Lasserre R, Gessain A, Gout O,
Alcover A, Thoulouze MI. 2010. Biofilm-like extracellular viral assemblies mediate HTLV-1
cell-to-cell transmission at virological synapses. Nat Med 16:83-89.
Rizkallah G, Mahieux R, Dutartre H. 2015. [Intercellular transmission of HTLV-1: not all
mechanisms have been revealed]. Med Sci (Paris) 31:629-637.
Chevalier SA, Durand S, Dasgupta A, Radonovich M, Cimarelli A, Brady JN, Mahieux R,
Pise-Masison CA. 2012. The transcription profile of Tax-3 is more similar to Tax-1 than Tax-
2: insights into HTLV-3 potential leukemogenic properties. PLoS One 7:e41003.
Jolly C, Welsch S, Michor S, Sattentau QJ. 2011. The regulated secretory pathway in
CD4(+) T cells contributes to human immunodeficiency virus type-1 cell-to-cell spread at the
virological synapse. PLoS Pathog 7:e1002226.
Dale BM, McNerney GP, Thompson DL, Hubner W, de Los Reyes K, Chuang FY, Huser
T, Chen BK. 2011. Cell-to-cell transfer of HIV-1 via virological synapses leads to endosomal
virion maturation that activates viral membrane fusion. Cell Host Microbe 10:551-562.
Durham ND, Chen BK. 2015. HIV-1 Cell-Free and Cell-to-Cell Infections Are Differentially
Regulated by Distinct Determinants in the Env gp41 Cytoplasmic Tail. J Virol 89:9324-9337.

706 83. Abela IA, Berlinger L, Schanz M, Reynell L, Gunthard HF, Rusert P, Trkola A. 2012. Cell-to-cell transmission enables HIV-1 to evade inhibition by potent CD4bs directed antibodies. PLoS Pathog 8:e1002634.
707 
708 
709 84. Schiffner T, Sattentau QJ, Duncan CJ. 2013. Cell-to-cell spread of HIV-1 and evasion of neutralizing antibodies. Vaccine 31:5789-5797.
710 
711 85. Beaumont E, Vendrame D, Verrier B, Roch E, Biron F, Barin F, Mammano F, Brand D. 2009. Matrix and envelope coevolution revealed in a patient monitored since primary infection with human immunodeficiency virus type 1. J Virol 83:9875-9889.
712 
713 
714 86. Brandenberg OF, Rusert P, Magnus C, Weber J, Boni J, Gunthard HF, Regoes RR, Trkola A. 2014. Partial rescue of V1V2 mutant infectivity by HIV-1 cell-cell transmission supports the domain's exceptional capacity for sequence variation. Retrovirology 11:75.
715 
716 
717 87. Grigorov B, Arcanger F, Roingeard P, Darlix JL, Muriaux D. 2006. Assembly of infectious HIV-1 in human epithelial and T-lymphoblastic cell lines. J Mol Biol 359:848-862.
718 
719 88. Pelchen-Matthews A, Kramer B, Marsh M. 2003. Infectious HIV-1 assembles in late endosomes in primary macrophages. J Cell Biol 162:443-455.
720 
721 89. Raposo G, Moore M, Innes D, Leijendekker R, Leigh-Brown A, Benaroch P, Geuze H. 2002. Human Macrophages Accumulate HIV-1 Particles in MHC II Compartments. Traffic.
722 
723 90. Sundquist WI, Krausslich HG. 2012. HIV-1 assembly, budding, and maturation. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med 2:a006924.
724 
725 91. Urata S, Yokosawa H, Yasuda J. 2007. Regulation of HTLV-1 Gag budding by Vps4A, Vps4B, and ALP1/Alix. Virology Journal 4:66.
726 
727 92. Dorjbai B, Derse D, Lloyd P, Soheilian F, Nagashima K, Heidecker G. 2011. The role of ITCH protein in human T-cell leukemia virus type 1 release. J Biol Chem 286:31092-31104.
728 
729 93. Dorweiler IJ, Ruone SJ, Wang H, Barry RW, Mansky LM. 2006. Role of the human T-cell leukemia virus type 1 PTAP motif in Gag targeting and particle release. J Virol 80:3634-3643.
730 
731 94. Blot V, Perugi F, Gay B, Prevost MC, Briant L, Tangy F, Abriel H, Staub O, Dokhlar MC, Pique C. 2004. Nedd4.1-mediated ubiquitination and subsequent recruitment of Tsg101 ensure HTLV-1 Gag trafficking towards the multivesicular body pathway prior to virus budding. J Cell Sci 117:2357-2367.
732 
733 
734 
735 95. Russell RA, Martin N, Mitar I, Jones E, Sattentau QJ. 2013. Multiple proviral integration events after virological synapse-mediated HIV-1 spread. Virology 443:143-149.
736 
737 96. Agosto LM, Uchil PD, Mothes W. 2015. HIV cell-to-cell transmission: effects on pathogenesis and antiretroviral therapy. Trends Microbiol 23:289-295.
738 
739 97. Monel B, Beaumont E, Vendrame D, Schwartz O, Brand D, Mammano F. 2012. HIV cell-to-cell transmission requires the production of infectious virus particles and does not proceed through env-mediated fusion pores. J Virol 86:3924-3933.
740 
741 98. Bosch B, Grigorov B, Senserrick J, Clotet B, Darlix JL, Muriaux D, Este JA. 2008. A clathrin-dynamin-dependent endocytic pathway for the uptake of HIV-1 by direct T cell-to-cell transmission. Antiviral Res 80:185-193.
742 
743 
744 
745 99. Sloan RD, Kuhl BD, Mesplede T, Munch J, Donahue DA, Wainberg MA. 2013. Productive entry of HIV-1 during cell-to-cell transmission via dynamin-dependent endocytosis. J Virol 87:8110-8123.
746 
747 
748 100. Do T, Murphy G, Earl LA, Del Prete GQ, Grandinetti G, Li GH, Estes JD, Rao P, Trubey CM, Thomas J, Spector J, Bliss D, Nath A, Lifson JD, Subramaniam S. 2014. Three-dimensional imaging of HIV-1 virological synapses reveals membrane architectures involved in virus transmission. J Virol 88:10327-10339.
749 
750 
751 
752 101. Turville SG, Santos JJ, Frank I, Cameron PU, Wilkinson J, Miranda-Saksena M, Dable J, Stossel H, Romani N, Piatak M, Jr., Lifson JD, Pope M, Cunningham AL. 2004. Immunodeficiency virus uptake, turnover, and 2-phase transfer in human dendritic cells. Blood 103:2170-2179.
753 
754 
755 
756 102. Clotet-Codina I, Bosch B, Senserrick J, Fernandez-Figueras MT, Pena R, Ballana E, Bofill M, Clotet B, Este JA. 2009. HIV endocytosis after dendritic cell to T cell viral transfer leads to productive virus infection. Antiviral Res 83:94-98.
757 
758 
759 103. Rodriguez-Plata MT, Puigdomenech I, Izquierdo-Useros N, Puertas MC, Carrillo J, Erkizia I, Clotet B, Blanco J, Martinez-Picado J. 2013. The infectious synapse formed between mature dendritic cells and CD4(+) T cells is independent of the presence of the HIV-1 envelope glycoprotein. Retrovirology 10:42.
760 
761 
762 
763 104. Jouve M, Sol-Foulon N, Watson S, Schwartz O, Benaroch P. 2007. HIV-1 Buds and Accumulates in “Nonacidic” Endosomes of Macrophages. Cell Host & Microbe 2:85-95.
764 

765 105. Gaudin R, Berre S, Cunha de Alencar B, Decalf J, Schindler M, Gobert FX, Jouve M, Benaroch P. 2013. Dynamics of HIV-containing compartments in macrophages reveal sequestration of virions and transient surface connections. PLoS One 8: e69450.
766 
767 106. Benaroch P, Billard E, Gaudin R, Schindler M, Jouve M. 2010. HIV-1 assembly in macrophages. Retrovirology 7: 29.
768 
769 107. Welsch S, Groot F, Krausslich HG, Keppler OT, Sattentau QJ. 2011. Architecture and regulation of the HIV-1 assembly and holding compartment in macrophages. J Virol 85: 7922-7927.
770 
771 108. Kramer B, Pelchen-Matthews A, Deneka M, Garcia E, Piguet V, Marsh M. 2005. HIV interaction with endosomes in macrophages and dendritic cells. Blood Cells Mol Dis 35: 136-142.
772 
773 109. Finzi A, Brunet A, Xiao Y, Thibodeau J, Cohen EA. 2006. Major histocompatibility complex class II molecules promote human immunodeficiency virus type 1 assembly and budding to late endosomal/multivesicular body compartments. Journal of virology 80: 9789-9797.
774 
775 110. Finzi A, Perlman M, Bourgeois-Daigneault MC, Thibodeau J, Cohen EA. 2013. Major histocompatibility complex class-II molecules promote targeting of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 virions in late endosomes by enhancing internalization of nascent particles from the plasma membrane. Cell Microbiol 15: 809-822.
776 
777 111. Berre S, Gaudin R, Cunha de Alencar B, Desdouits M, Chabaud M, Naffakh N, Rabaza-Gairi M, Gobert FX, Jouve M, Benaroch P. 2013. CD36-specific antibodies block release of HIV-1 from infected primary macrophages and its transmission to T cells. J Exp Med 210: 2523-2538.
778 
779 112. Deneka M, Pelchen-Matthews A, Byland R, Ruiz-Mateos E, Marsh M. 2007. In macrophages, HIV-1 assembles into an intracellular plasma membrane domain containing the tetraspanins CD81, CD9, and CD53. J Cell Biol 177: 329-341.
780 
781 113. Mariani C, Desdouits M, Favard C, Benaroch P, Muriaux DM. 2014. Role of Gag and lipids during HIV-1 assembly in CD4(+) T cells and macrophages. Front Microbiol 5: 312.
782 
783 114. Sharova N, Swingler C, Sharkey M, Stevenson M. 2005. Macrophages archive HIV-1 virions for dissemination in trans. EMBO J 24: 2481-2489.
784 
785 115. Graziano F, Desdouits M, Garzetti L, Podini P, Alfano M, Rubartelli A, Furlan R, Benaroch P, Poli G. 2015. Extracellular ATP induces the rapid release of HIV-1 from virus containing compartments of human macrophages. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 112: E3265-3273.
786 
787 116. Groot F, Welsch S, Sattentau QJ. 2008. Efficient HIV-1 transmission from macrophages to T cells across transient virological synapses. Blood 111: 4660-4663.
788 
789 117. Geijtenbeek TB, Torensma R, van Vliet SJ, van Duijnhoven GC, Adema GJ, van Kooyk Y, Figdor CG. 2000. Identification of DC-SIGN, a novel dendritic cell-specific ICAM-3 receptor that supports primary immune responses. Cell 100: 575-585.
790 
791 118. Kwon DS, Gregorio G, Bitton N, Hendrickson WA, Littman DR. 2002. DC-SIGN-mediated internalization of HIV is required for trans-enhancement of T cell infection. Immunity 16: 135-144.
792 
793 119. Garcia E, Pion M, Pelchen-Matthews A, Collinson L, Arrighi JF, Blot G, Leuba F, Escola JM, Demaurex N, Marsh M, Piguet V. 2005. HIV-1 trafficking to the dendritic cell-T-cell infectious synapse uses a pathway of tetraspanin sorting to the immunological synapse. Traffic 6: 488-501.
794 
795 120. Yu HJ, Reuter MA, McDonald D. 2008. HIV traffics through a specialized, surface-accessible intracellular compartment during trans-infection of T cells by mature dendritic cells. PLoS pathogens 4.
796 
797 121. Wang JH, Janas AM, Olson WJ, Wu L. 2007. Functionally distinct transmission of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 mediated by immature and mature dendritic cells. J Virol 81: 8933-8943.
798 
799 122. Izquierdo-Useros N, Lorizate M, Puertas MC, Rodriguez-Plata MT, Zangger N, Erikson E, Pino M, Erkizia I, Glass B, Clotet B, Keppler OT, Telenti A, Kräusslich H-G, Martinez-Picado J. 2012. Siglec-1 Is a Novel Dendritic Cell Receptor That Mediates HIV-1 Trans-Infection Through Recognition of Viral Membrane Gangliosides. PLoS Biol 10: e1001448.
800 
801 123. Boggiano C, Manel N, Littman DR. 2007. Dendritic cell-mediated trans-enhancement of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 infectivity is independent of DC-SIGN. J Virol 81: 2519-2523.
802 
803 124. Izquierdo-Useros N, Mar N-G, Archer J, Hatch SC, Erkizia I, Blanco J, Borràs FE, Puertas MC, Connor JH, T F-F, Maria, Moore L, Clotet B, Gummuluru S, Javier M-P.
804 
805 
806 
807 
808 
809 
810 
811 
812 
813 
814 
815 
816 
817 
818 
819 
820 
821 
822 
823 

824 2009. Capture and transfer of HIV-1 particles by mature dendritic cells converges with the exosome-dissemination pathway. Blood 113:2732-2741.
825 
826 125. Austyn JM. 1998. Dendritic cells. Curr Opin Hematol 5:3-15.
827 126. Dong C, Janas AM, Wang J-HH, Olson WJ, Wu L. 2007. Characterization of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 replication in immature and mature dendritic cells reveals dissociable cis- and trans-infection. Journal of virology 81:11352-11362.
828 
829 
830 127. Izquierdo-Useros N, Blanco J, Erkizia I, Fernandez-Figueras MT, Borras FE, Naranjo-Gomez M, Bofill M, Ruiz L, Clotet B, Martinez-Picado J. 2007. Maturation of blood-derived dendritic cells enhances human immunodeficiency virus type 1 capture and transmission. J Virol 81:7559-7570.
831 
832 
833 
834 128. Hatch SC, Archer J, Gummuluru S. 2009. Glycosphingolipid composition of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) particles is a crucial determinant for dendritic cell-mediated HIV-1 trans-infection. J Virol 83:3496-3506.
835 
836 
837 129. Nguyen DH, Hildreth JE. 2000. Evidence for budding of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 selectively from glycolipid-enriched membrane lipid rafts. J Virol 74:3264-3272.
838 
839 130. Ono A, Freed EO. 2001. Plasma membrane rafts play a critical role in HIV-1 assembly and release. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 98:13925-13930.
840 
841 131. Puryear WB, Yu X, Ramirez NP, Reinhard BM, Gummuluru S. 2012. HIV-1 incorporation of host-cell-derived glycosphingolipid GM3 allows for capture by mature dendritic cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 109:7475-7480.
842 
843 
844 132. Puryear WB, Akiyama H, Geer SD, Ramirez NP, Yu X, Reinhard BM, Gummuluru S. 2013. Interferon-inducible mechanism of dendritic cell-mediated HIV-1 dissemination is dependent on Siglec-1/CD169. PLoS Pathog 9:e1003291.
845 
846 
847 133. Akiyama H, Ramirez NG, Gudheti MV, Gummuluru S. 2015. CD169-mediated trafficking of HIV to plasma membrane invaginations in dendritic cells attenuates efficacy of anti-gp120 broadly neutralizing antibodies. PLoS Pathog 11:e1004751.
848 
849 
850 134. Pino M, Erkizia I, Benet S, Erikson E, Fernandez-Figueras MT, Guerrero D, Dalmau J, Ouchi D, Rausell A, Ciuffi A, Keppler OT, Telenti A, Krausslich HG, Martinez-Picado J,
851 
852 135. Izquierdo-Useros N. 2015. HIV-1 immune activation induces Siglec-1 expression and enhances viral trans-infection in blood and tissue myeloid cells. Retrovirology 12:37.
853 
854 135. Izquierdo-Useros N, Lorizate M, Contreras FX, Rodriguez-Plata MT, Glass B, Erkizia I, Prado JG, Casas J, Fabrias G, Krausslich HG, Martinez-Picado J. 2012. Sialyllactose in viral membrane gangliosides is a novel molecular recognition pattern for mature dendritic cell capture of HIV-1. PLoS Biol 10:e1001315.
855 
856 
857 
858 136. Felts RL, Narayan K, Estes JD, Shi D, Trubey CM, Fu J, Hartnell LM, Ruthel GT, Schneider DK, Nagashima K, Bess JW, Jr., Bavari S, Lowekamp BC, Bliss D, Lifson JD,
859 
860 Subramaniam S. 2010. 3D visualization of HIV transfer at the virological synapse between dendritic cells and T cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 107:13336-13341.
861 
862 137. Jaworski E, Narayanan A, Van Duyne R, Shabbeer-Meyerling S, lordanskiy S, Saifuddin M, Das R, Afonso PV, Sampey GC, Chung M, Popratiloff A, Shrestha B, Sehgal M, Jain P, Vertes A, Mahieux R, Kashanchi F. 2014. Human T-lymphotropic virus type 1-infected cells secrete exosomes that contain Tax protein. J Biol Chem 289:22284-22305.
863 
864 
865 
866 
867 
868 
869 
870 
871 
872 
873 

Author bios

Pr. Renaud Mahieux, PhD

Renaud Mahieux obtained his PhD from Paris 6 university in 1997. He is Professor of Virology at the Ecole Normale Supérieure de Lyon, France, Head of the ENS-Lyon biology department, and leads the "retroviral oncogenesis laboratory" at the Center for International Research in Infectiology (CIRI Lyon, U1111 France). The main objectives of the team are to understand the physiopathology of the Human T cell Leukemia Virus Type 1 (HTLV-1) infection and to develop new regimen that could either prevent the occurrence of Adult T cell Leukemia or that would allow patients treatment. To achieve this goal, his team takes advantage of combined expertise of its members, of several in vitro or in vivo models. The team also benefits from ongoing collaborations with clinicians, epidemiologists, biochemists, and chemists.

Dr. Chloé Journo, PhD

Chloé Journo is an Assistant Professor, teaching Virology and Immunology at the Ecole Nationale Supérieure de Lyon. She obtained her PhD in Virology in 2010 from ENS-Lyon after a Master degree at Institut Pasteur in Paris. Her research activity focuses on the molecular mechanisms leading to HTLV-1-induced cell transformation. She studies the properties of two viral proteins, Tax and the antisense HBZ protein and investigates how interactions of these viral proteins with cellular partners affect NF-kB pathway, cell-cycle checkpoints and gene expression.

Dr. Hélène Dutartre, PhD

Helene Dutartre is a senior scientist from INSERM. She obtained a PhD in 1997 in Immunology from the Université de la Méditerranée (Marseille, France) at the research center for cancerology of Marseille (CRCL, Marseille.). She has a background on HIV-1 and HCV virus-host interactions, at the interface of immunology and virology acquired from her training in the teams of Pr Daniel Olive (CRCL, Marseille France), Dr Bruno Canard (AFMB, Marseille, France) and Dr Jacques Blanchereau (BIIR, Dallas Tx, USA). In Pr. Renaud Mahieux' team since 2012, her current interest focuses on understanding the interaction between the HTLV-1 oncivirus with innate cells, to provide new strategies for anti-cancer treatment.

Mathieu Claviere

Mathieu Claviere is a PhD student at CIRI in the team of Pr. M Faure. He performed his master degree in 2014 at the Ecole normale Supérieure de Lyon in Pr. Mahieux' team under the supervision of Dr Dutartre where he studied HTLV-1 dendritic cell trafficking. His current interest covers the contribution of autophagic cellular process on viral and bacterial infections.

A
Mb fusion?
Lipid
raft
Restriction?
No productive
infection

B
Internalization
Lipid raft
DC-SIGN
signal
transduction
VCCs?
Productive
infection

C
Internalization
Clathrin
endosomes
Endosomal
degradation

DC-SIGN
Viral receptor (CD4 or NRP-1)
Viral co-receptor (CCR5; CXCR4 or Glut-1)

Donor cell                                                                 Target cell

ICAM-1     LFA-1
ENV
Gag
CD82
MTOC
Lipid
raft

Viral receptor (CD4 or NRP-1)
DC-SIGN
Viral co-receptor
(CCR5; CXCR4
or Glut-1)

Productive
infection

1. Env/receptor and ICAM/LFA interactions
2. MTOC polarization
   Plasma membrane assembly
   and/or
   Polarized secretion of vesicles
3. Polarized budding/release
4. Polarized capture
5. Internalization before fusion
6. Gag maturation and pH independent fusion

VCCs

1. Immune synapse formation
2. T-cell protrusions in VCCs
3. Collapse of VCCs and membrane wrapping
4. Infectious synapse and viral transfer

Donor cell

Target cell

Pr. Renaud Mahieux, PhD

Dr. Chloé Journo, PhD

Dr. Hélène Dutartre, PhD

Mathieu Claviere
