
Accepted Manuscript

Keeping our calcium in balance to maintain our balance

Melanie D. Mark, Jan Claudius Schwitalla, Michelle Groemmke, Stefan Herlitze

PII: S0006-291X(16)31135-4  
DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2016.07.020  
Reference: YBBRC 36097  

To appear in: Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communications  

Received Date: 30 May 2016  
Accepted Date: 4 July 2016  

Please cite this article as: M.D. Mark, J.C. Schwitalla, M. Groemmke, S. Herlitze, Keeping our calcium in balance to maintain our balance, Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communications (2016), doi: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2016.07.020.

This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.

Special Issue Neurodegeneration: Emerging Mechanisms of Neurodegenerative Disorders

# Keeping Our Calcium in Balance to Maintain Our Balance

## Abbreviated title: Deranged Calcium Signaling in Hereditary Ataxic Disorders

Melanie D. Mark¹, Jan Claudius Schwitalla¹, Michelle Groemmke¹ and Stefan Herlitze¹

¹Department of Zoology and Neurobiology, ND7/31, Ruhr University Bochum, Universitätsstr. 150, D-44780 Bochum, Germany

Corresponding author: Dr. Melanie D Mark, ¹Department of Zoology and Neurobiology, ND7/31, Ruhr University Bochum, Universitätsstr. 150, D-44780 Bochum, Germany, melanie.mark@rub.de

Conflict of Interest: None

Abstract
Calcium is a key signaling molecule and ion involved in a variety of diverse processes in our central nervous system (CNS) which include gene expression, synaptic transmission and plasticity, neuronal excitability and cell maintenance. Proper control of calcium signaling is not only vital for neuronal physiology but also cell survival. Mutations in fundamental channels, transporters and second messenger proteins involved in orchestrating the balance of our calcium homeostasis can lead to severe neurodegenerative disorders, such as Spinocerebellar (SCA) and Episodic (EA) ataxias. Hereditary ataxias make up a remarkably diverse group of neurological disorders clinically characterized by gait ataxia, nystagmus, dysarthria, trunk and limb ataxia and often atrophy of the cerebellum. The largest family of hereditary ataxias is SCAs which consists of a growing family of 42 members. A relatively smaller family of 8 members compose the EAs. The gene mutations responsible for half of the EA members and over 35 of the SCA subtypes have been identified, and several have been found to responsible for cerebellar atrophy, abnormal intracellular calcium levels, dysregulation of Purkinje cell pacemaking, altered cerebellar synaptic transmission and/or ataxia in mouse models. Although the genetic diversity and affected cellular pathways of hereditary ataxias is broad, one common theme amongst these genes is their effects on maintaining calcium balance in primarily the cerebellum. There is emerging evidence that the pathogenesis of hereditary ataxias may be caused by imbalances in intracellular calcium due to genetic mutations in calcium-mediating proteins. In this review we will discuss the current evidence supporting the role of deranged calcium as the culprit to neurodegenerative diseases with a primary focus on SCAs and EAs.

Keywords
ataxia, calcium, spinocerebellar ataxia, episodic ataxia, cerebellum, Purkinje cells

Introduction
Calcium plays a fundamental role in neuronal physiology by regulating the release of neurotransmitters from presynaptic terminals to evoke LTP[1, 2] and LTD[3, 4], forms of synaptic plasticity important for learning and memory in the hippocampus and motor learning in the cerebellum. In addition calcium is vital for neuronal excitability, especially in the precise pacemaking of cerebellar Purkinje cells (PC) which is necessary to execute motor coordination and is dependent on the rise of intracellular calcium[5, 6]. As a second messenger, calcium has been demonstrated to regulate diverse processes important for the fundamental maintenance and health of neurons such as gene expression, synaptogenesis, dendritic development, apoptosis and neuronal survival[7]. The modulation of calcium is tightly regulated by a complex protein network to control its amplitude, temporal and spatial movements in neuronal compartments to evoke a specific biological event. Under resting conditions, neurons maintain low intracellular free calcium levels [Ca²⁺]i of around 200 nM compared to the high extracellular calcium concentrations of approximately 1 mM. However following an electrical or receptor mediated stimulation, [Ca²⁺]i can increase to 500 µM via for example extracellular calcium influx through voltage gated calcium channels (VGCC), ligand gated ion channels such as N-Methyl-D-Aspartate receptor (NMDAR) or transient receptor potential channels (TRPC) or metabotropic glutamate receptor (mGluR; Fig 1). Additionally [Ca²⁺]i levels can rise from intracellular calcium stores in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) via ryanodine (RyR) and inositol-1,4,5-triphosphate (IP₃R) receptors (Fig 1). Interestingly the major neuronal IP₃R isoform, IP₃R1 is abundant in the cerebellum and in particular PCs. Equally important as the rise of [Ca²⁺]i in neurons is the tightly regulated return to basal levels to prevent Ca²⁺ toxicity and neuronal death. This is accomplished by Ca²⁺ binding proteins (i.e. calbindin, parvalbumin, calmodulin, calretinin, calcineurin), Ca²⁺ transporters (i.e. Ca²⁺ ATPase, sodium calcium exchanger) and organelle uptake via the sarcoplasmic-endoreticulum Ca²⁺-ATPase (SERCA) and mitochondrial uniporter[7] (Fig 1). Since calcium is a universal messenger in a wide variety of neuronal functions, perturbations in its homeostasis can lead to devastating neurological disorders such as SCAs and EAs.

Hereditary ataxias are an extremely heterogeneous group of neurodegenerative disorders typically but not exclusively characterized by a progressive ataxia including atrophy of the cerebellum. One of the most common hereditary ataxias are the SCAs. Spinocerebellar ataxias are a diverse,

genetically autosomal dominant disorder consisting of a constantly growing family of 42 subtypes. Over 20 years ago the first gene defect associated with a specific SCA, type 1 (SCA1), was genetically localized and later identified as a polyglutamine repeat (polyQ) in the ataxin-1 gene (ATXN1) [8, 9] (Table I). Currently, more than 35 SCA mutations have been linked to a specific gene, but the molecular mechanism remains unknown in about 40% of cases[9]. The most common subtypes, SCA1, 2, 3, 6 and 7, are all caused by nucleotide repeat expansions. In contrast to the late onset SCAs, EAs have an early onset as early as infant ages. Episodic ataxias are also an autosomal dominant disorder characterized by severe bouts of ataxia which can be induced by startle, stress, exertion and chemical agents such as alcohol and caffeine. To date there are 8 EA subtypes, where EA1, 2 and 5 are channelopathies and EA6 contains a mutation in the excitatory amino acid transporter (EAAT) gene. Although the genetic diversity and affected cellular pathways of hereditary ataxias is broad, there is emerging evidence that the pathogenesis may be caused by an imbalance of neuronal calcium homeostasis. This imbalance can manifest either in the Ca²⁺ buffering capacities, Ca²⁺ exclusion activities, alterations in Ca²⁺ channel activities or due to excitotoxicity which eventually leads to neuronal dysfunction, cerebellar atrophy and ataxia.

The majority of hereditary ataxias display cerebellar atrophy, particularly in their PCs. Purkinje cells are the sole output of the cerebellar cortex and provide encoded information necessary to execute motor planning and coordination. Hence disruptions in PC activity and viability can lead to ataxia[10]. This encoded information is thought to be encrypted in the firing rate of PC activity. Therefore it is vital to maintain the precision of pacemaking in PCs to prevent the loss or degradation of encoded information. This precision of pacemaking in PCs is accomplished by calcium activated potassium channel (KCa). The activation of KCa is dependent on the rise of [Ca²⁺]i. Glutamate, an excitatory neurotransmitter, generates the initial, transient rise in Ca²⁺ in PCs by activating AMPA and mGluR receptors (Fig 1). Stimulated AMPARs depolarize the membrane which trigger voltage gated calcium channels and a large influx of [Ca²⁺]i. Additionally mGluRs evoke the release of [Ca²⁺]i from ER stores via the IP₃/DAG pathway and IP₃Rs (Fig 1). The coassembly of KCa and Cav channels along with Ca²⁺ associated proteins orchestrates this precise and tightly regulated firing in PCs, synaptic plasticity and gene transcription[11, 12]. Subtle alterations of [Ca²⁺]i levels can cause irregular firing, uncoupling of neurotransmission, abnormal transcriptional events and activation of toxic cascades leading to cell death and ataxia. Interestingly, mutations in many of these Ca²⁺ associated proteins lead to ataxic disorders in mice and humans. Since there are no therapeutic options for individuals suffering from ataxia, it is crucial to understand the molecular mechanisms underlying hereditary ataxias, so we can find effective therapeutic treatments. In this review we will discuss the different proteins and their mechanisms implicated in deranged Ca²⁺ signaling and neurodegenerative diseases with a primary focus on SCAs and EAs.

Deranged Ca²⁺ signaling in SCAs with mutations in IP₃R1 and IP₃R1-associated proteins

In 1993 spinocerebellar ataxia type 1 (SCA1) was the first SCA subtype to be genetically mapped and identified as a expansion of ≥39 glutamine repeats in the ataxin 1 (ATXN1polyQ) protein[8, 9, 13] (Table I). Spinocerebellar ataxia type 1 affected individuals initially experience incoordination of hands and ataxic gait which progresses to dysarthria (slurred speech), dysphagia (difficulties swallowing) and in some cases hypotonia (weakness of muscles) and spasticity. They also display a severe atrophy and loss of PCs from their cerebellum. Although there is strong aggregation of ATXN1polyQ in PCs of SCA1 patients, this is not sufficient to initiate the pathogenesis. Nuclear translocation of the ATXN1polyQ is necessary for the pathogenesis of the disease[14]. ATXN1polyQ destabilizes the nuclear transcription receptors, retinoic acid-receptor-related orphan receptor alpha (RORα) and specificity protein 1 (SP-1) resulting in the downregulation of several Ca²⁺ related proteins which include IP₃R1 (releases ER Ca²⁺ stores), Homer (post-synaptic density scaffolding protein which binds mGluR1 to IP₃R1), SERCA (Ca²⁺ ATPase which pumps cytosolic Ca²⁺ into the SR), calcium binding proteins calbindin and parvalbumin, glutamate transporter EAAT4 and its stabilizer β-III spectrin, T-type voltage gated calcium channels and transient receptor potential type 3 calcium channels (TRPC3, Fig 2) [15-17]. Although some of these Ca²⁺ related proteins have opposing effects on the [Ca²⁺]i levels in

PCs, additional studies demonstrating that cerebellar PCs in SCA1 patients and mice display reduced levels of calcium buffering proteins during early stages of the disease[18] and the fact that SCA1 mice crossed with calbindin knockout mice results in an accelerated SCA1 phenotype[16], suggests excitotoxic calcium levels as the pathogenesis for the SCA1 disorder. Reduced calbindin levels were also reported in SCA2 and SCA7 mouse models[19, 20]. These mice have also been shown to suffer from excess [Ca²⁺]i levels which supports the role of deranged calcium levels in SCAs. Recently SCA1 mice were found to exhibit prolonged parallel fiber mGluR1-dependent synaptic currents and calcium signaling. mGluR1 stimulates the release of internal ER Ca²⁺ stores and is critical for cerebellar function in mice and humans. Remarkably, acute treatment of SCA1 mice with a low dose of the potent and specific activity-dependent mGluR1 negative allosteric modulator, JNJ16259685, shortened the prolonged mGluR1 currents, thereby reducing calcium signaling and rescuing ataxia[21]. Altogether these data support the involvement of excitotoxic calcium levels in the progression of SCA1 pathogenesis.

Similar to SCA1, SCA2 is a progressive cerebellar disorder caused by a polyQ repeat (>31) in the ataxin 2 (ATXN2polyQ) protein (Table I). However nuclear localization and inclusion body formation of ATXN2polyQ are not necessary for its pathogenesis[22]. Although the diseased protein is expressed ubiquitously, cerebellar PCs are particularly affected resulting in a >75% loss[23]. Complete knockout of ATXN2 orthologs in drosophila and Caenorhabditis elegans is lethal, but viable in mice, suggesting a compensatory effect by other ataxin proteins and a toxic gain of function[24, 25]. Supporting evidence for a gain of function was shown in transgenic SCA2 mice overexpressing 58 polyQ repeat specifically in cerebellar PCs. These mice exhibited age dependent motor deficits, loss of PC dendritic aborization, and PC dark cell degeneration, one mode of cell death. Furthermore the ATXN2polyQ containing a 58 repeats but not the wild type ATXN2 consisting of a 22 polyQ expansion specifically associated with the C terminus of IP₃R1. Furthermore cultured PCs from these SCA2 mice led to a sensitization of the receptor and increase [Ca²⁺]i levels[22, 26, 27]. Inhibition of RyRs with ryanodine or dantrolene (Ca²⁺ stabilizer) returned calcium levels back to normal in cultured PCs and reduced PC death. Moreover long term treatment of SCA2 mice with dantrolene or chronic suppression of IP₃R mediated Ca²⁺ signaling by an associated adenovirus (AAV) mediated expression of IP₃ phosphatase (5PP) in PCs of SCA2 mice attenuated PC death and age dependent ataxia[26-28]. SCA2 mice also demonstrate an abnormally high PC bursting firing pattern compared to wild type mice as seen in other ataxic mouse models i.e. EA2, tottering and SCA6[28]. Since proper PC pacemaking is crucial for motor coordination and dependent on Kca, the lab of Brezprovanny tested the effects of various positive modulators to the small conductance Kca (SK) on PC firing and ataxia in SCA2 mice. Surprisingly, SK modulators not only reverted bursting firing patterns to a more tonic pattern but more importantly alleviated behavioral and neuropathological deficits of aging SCA2 trangenic mice[28, 29]. Recent microarray analyses observed downregulations of key factors in calcium homeostasis pathways such as Rora tpr α ATXN2 knockout mice and an upregulation of tpr1 in ATXN2-CAG42 knockin mice[30]. Collectively these data implicate the involvement of elevated calcium signaling in SCA2 pathogenesis and provide potential therapeutic options for treating ataxia in the future (Fig 2).

Spinocerebellar ataxia type 3, also known as Machado-Joseph disease is the most common inherited ataxia worldwide followed by SCA6, 2, and 1. Clinically individuals suffering from SCA3 display a progressive cerebellar ataxia which may be accompanied by dystonic-rigidity syndrome, a parkinsonian syndrome or a combination of dystonia and peripheral neuropathy syndromes, despite their relatively unaffected cerebellum[31]. Unlike most hereditary ataxias, SCA3 patients show nuclear inclusions and degeneration of the spinocerebellar tracts, dentate nucleus, pontine and other brainstem nuclei, substantia nigra and pallidum[32]. SCA3 is caused by a polyQ expansion ranging from 52-86 in the C terminus of ataxin 3 (ATXN3, Table I)[33]. ATXN3 contains a deubiquitinating, Josephin and 3 ubiquitinating interaction motifs in its N terminus and acts as a transcriptional repressor. The polyQ repeats do not appear to have any effect on its deubiquitinating activity[34-36]. SCA3 knockout mice also did not show any behavioral phenotype despite their increased protein ubiquitination levels, suggesting that ATXN3polyQ is probably not due to a loss of function[37]. In transgenic drosophila SCA3 models containing 78 polyQ

expansions, ATXN3<sup>polyQ</sup> was found to interact with the suppressor PICK1 (protein interacting with C kinase 1) [38], a transport protein that regulates the trafficking of ion channel subunits involved in Ca<sup>2+</sup> homeostasis[39]. Knockdown of PICK1 in SCA3 drosophila model suppressed external eye degeneration, insoluble aggregations and inclusions[38]. Additionally, ATXN3<sup>polyQ</sup> was found to bind and activate IP<sub>3</sub>R1 leading to an increase in calcium release similar to SCA 2 (Fig 2). Transgenic SCA3 mice containing 84 polyQ repeats exhibited a recovery of age dependent motor coordination deficits and neuronal loss in substantia nigra and pontine nuclei regions following dantrolene treatments[27, 40]. Inhibitors to Ca<sup>2+</sup> dependent protease calpain reduced aggregation of ATXN3<sup>polyQ</sup> in transfected cells[41]. Together with the SCA2 evidence mentioned above, these data suggest an enhanced sensitivity of IP<sub>3</sub>R1 by ATXN2<sup>polyQ</sup> and ATXN3<sup>polyQ</sup> which leads to increases in intracellular calcium, alterations in gene transcription of calcium associated proteins and finally SCA pathogenesis.

Spinocerebellar ataxia type 15 and 16 (SCA15/16) is purely cerebellar ataxia, clinically characterized by truncal and limb ataxia and dysarthria accompanied sometimes with head and upper limb tremors. The progression of SCA15/16 is very slow where most patients can walk independently or with minor assistance of a cane 10-40 yrs after onset. The onset of symptoms ranges between 7 and 66 yrs of age, however the average onset of age is 30-50 yrs[31, 42]. In 2007 van de Leemput identified heterozygous large deletions responsible for the IP<sub>3</sub> binding site in the *iptr1* gene from affected British and Australian families[43]. Later Japanese families were identified with a different missense mutation in the *iptr1* gene which also leads to a large deletion in the coupling and regulatory domains[31, 42, 44, 45] (Table I). *Iptr1* is the gene responsible for expressing IP<sub>3</sub>Rs which as mentioned above mediate internal calcium release from the ER. *Iptr1* is essential for embryonic development since the majority of homozygous *iptr1* knockout mice die *in utero* and the few offspring which survive birth exhibit severe ataxia with tonic-clonic seizures and die at weaning ages[31]. Interesting, LTD in PCs of surviving *iptr1* knockout mice was completely diminished suggesting an important role of IP<sub>3</sub>R mediated calcium signaling for synaptic plasticity[31]. Pathologically PCs from *iptr1* knockout mice showed abnormal dendritic processes and enlarged parallel fibers terminals[46]. Proper PF-PC synapses are dependent on IP<sub>3</sub>R mediated calcium signaling which release brain derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF), resulting in proper dendritic and synapse formation. In contrast heterozygous *iptr1* deficient mice demonstrated only mild motor incoordination which is more reflective of the disease progression in humans[47]. More representative SCA15/16 mouse models, Opisthotonus (*Opt*) and Δ18 mice contain spontaneous homozygous deletions in *iptr1* which results in a frame deletion of the regulatory/coupling domain. Homozygous mice from both lines display low birth weights, ataxia, and die at weaning ages[43, 48]. Additionally *Opt* mice exhibit seizures and an upward arching of head and tail[48]. Although a functional IP<sub>3</sub>R1 protein is expressed, it is dramatically reduced in the brain and thus leading to a similar phenotype as the homozygous *iptr1* knockout mice[43]. Therefore, results from these mouse models implicate a loss of IP<sub>3</sub>R1 function as the cause of SCA15/16 and the importance of IP<sub>3</sub>R mediated Ca<sup>2+</sup> signaling for LTD and proper dendritic morphology in cerebellar PCs (Fig 2).

SCA29 is also a neurological disorder caused by heterozygous missense mutations in *iptr1* which result in a distinguishable phenotype from SCA15/16[49-52]. In contrast to SCA15/16, SCA29 patients show an early onset in infancy, delayed motor development and mild cognitive impairment[31, 49]. They also experience nystagmus, dysarthria, tremors and atrophy of the cerebellum especially in the vermis[31, 49, 53]. Mutations in *iptr1* were localized to the binding regions of CARP (carbonic anhydrase related protein) and IRBIT (IP3 receptor binding protein). Both proteins are known to compete with IP<sub>3</sub> to suppress IP<sub>3</sub>R1 activity[54, 55]. More studies will be needed to determine the molecular mechanisms underlying SCA29. However we can speculate that missense mutation in the *iptr1* will most likely lead to an increase of internal calcium due to the uncoupling of CARP and IRBIT, thereby increasing the receptor sensitivity to IP<sub>3</sub> or a decrease in internal calcium due to the loss of functional IP<sub>3</sub>R1s.

A congenital ataxia associated with mental retardation and quadrupedal gait 3 (CAMRQ3) was initially found in a family from Iraq and later 3 Arabian families without quadrupedal

locomotion[56, 57]. Patients presented varying degrees of cerebellar atrophy. In contrast to the previously discussed ataxias, CAMRQ3 is caused by an autosomal recessive missense mutation in CA8, the gene which encodes CARP. As discussed above, CARP suppresses IP₃R1 activity in PCs which leads to a decrease in release of internal ER calcium stores. Heterologous expression of CARP protein containing the same mutation identified in CAMRQ3 patients from Iraqi was drastically reduced in human embryonic kidney (HEK) cells. A similar effect was observed in a mouse model waddles (wdl) harboring a spontaneous, 19 bp deletion in CA8 where CARP protein was almost completely absent from cerebellar PCs. Waddles mice exhibit ataxia and appendicular dystonia without pathological changes in their CNS or PNS[58]. Antibodies to CARP were also detected in the serum of patients with paraneoplastic cerebellar degeneration.[59]. The grave loss of CARP in HEK expressing cells and wdl mice points to a nonsense mediated decay of transcripts or enhanced degradation of protein which possibly leads to a loss of IP₃R suppression and increased [Ca²⁺] levels.

Deranged Ca²⁺ signaling in SCAs with mutations in Ca²⁺ associated signaling proteins

SCAs are not restricted mutations in ion channels, transporters or receptors which directly regulate calcium but also proteins supporting the cellular scaffold. Plasma membranes are organized into highly specialized domains to segregate and organize functionally related membrane proteins by a spectrin-based membrane skeleton[60]. To date 6 mutations in β-III spectrin (SPTBN2) were determined to be the cause of SCA5[61-64] (Table 1). SCA5 is an autosomal dominant neurodegenerative disorder characterized by an adult onset, slowly progressive, pure cerebellar ataxia phenotype accompanied by extensive atrophy of the cerebellum and PCs. SCA5 is sometimes known as "Lincoln ataxia" because the largest known family is descended from relatives of the United States President Abraham Lincoln. Spectrin is highly expressed in PCs and has been shown to stabilize and anchor the glutamate transporter, EAAT4 (excitatory amino acid transporter) to the plasma membrane and thereby enhancing glutamate transport[65]. On the other hand mutant β-III spectrin fails to restrict the lateral mobility and proper distribution of EAAT4 in cell culture and human SCA5 tissue samples which implicates an important role of β-III spectrin in the stabilization or trafficking of membrane proteins[64, 66]. Surprisingly, knockout mice of EAAT4 did not demonstrate any obvious motor deficits or cerebellar PC degeneration[67]. However creation of a conditional transgenic mouse model (TRE-SPΔ39; mutation in American SCA5 family) expressing a 39 bp in frame β-III spectrin deletion only in PCs did exhibit progressive, late onset motor incoordination and cerebellar degeneration. In addition, TRE-SPΔ39 mice displayed altered mGluR1α distribution at PC dendritic spines and reduced mGluR1 mediated Ca²⁺ responses and LTP but not wild type β-III spectrin expressing mice[68]. The C terminus of β-III spectrin was also demonstrated to interact directly with mGluR1α[68]. These results indicate that mutant β-III spectrin causes improper localization and reduced mGluR1 mediated Ca²⁺ responses at PC dendritic spines, resulting in glutamatergic and synaptic plasticity abnormalities and finally pathogenesis of SCA5.

Spinocerebellar ataxia type 6 is a progressive, degenerative neurological disorder characterized by its late onset and almost pure cerebellar ataxia sometimes accompanied by episodic dyskinesia, nystagmus and vertigo. SCA6 belongs to a family of autosomal dominant ataxias caused by an expanded CAG repeat in exon 47 of P/Q type calcium channel gene (CACNA1A, Table I)[69]. Unaffected individuals normally have a polyQ expansion ranging from Q4-Q18, however SCA6 patients have a range of Q21-Q33 which is relatively short compared to the other polyQ diseases. Interestingly the length of the polyQ repeats is inversely correlated to the age of onset and directly correlated to the severity of the disease. SCA6 is a prototype of cerebellar cortical or cerebello-olivary atrophy and accounts for up to 30% of the SCAs in certain geographical regions such as Japan and up to 15% in the USA[70]. SCA6 patients show marked atrophy of the cerebellar vermis and to a lesser extent of the hemispheres. The disease leads to a remarkable loss of Purkinje cells (PCs) in the cerebellar cortex. The surviving PCs in SCA6 patients have drastically reduced dendritic trees and smaller cell bodies. Previously reported Caᵥα₁2.1 knockin mouse models ranging from polyQ28 to polyQ30 revealed no SCA6 like characteristics or physiological effects on the Caᵥα₁2.1 channel[71, 72]. Knockin mouse models

expressing polyQ84 and polyQ118 revealed an age- and dose-dependent augmentation in cerebellar degeneration and motor coordination[71, 73], however contain 2-3 fold more polyQs as in humans. We recently reported transgenic mouse lines expressing only the carboxy terminus (CT) containing the polyQ expansion of 27 in the P/Q type calcium channel α subunit (CT-longQ27) and CT-short as a control specifically in cerebellar PCs. Moreover, the CT containing the polyQ expansion of the P/Q type calcium channel α subunit undergoes proteolytic degradation leading to a more stable diseased CT protein fragment, which specifically accumulates in cytosolic and to a lesser extent in nuclear PC protein aggregates from SCA6 patients. Surprisingly, these diseased CT peptide fragments containing protein aggregates are smaller and granular in size as compared to the more larger, nuclear aggregates found in unaffected individuals. These small, granular aggregates were exclusively distributed in PCs and not found in neighboring granule, dentate, inferior olive, pyramidal, medulla oblongata or basal ganglia neurons[74]. Since the CT of the Caᵥα₁2.1 interacts with several intracellular proteins involved in trafficking, subcellular localization and function of the channel, cell growth, neurite outgrowth and gene transcription, the more stable, diseased CT fragments may potentially be acting as a dominant negative peptide to interfere with the normal interactions between P/Q type calcium channels and its substrates (binding partners) leading to the formation of toxic oligomers, transcriptional dysregulation, aberrant protein interactions, cytotoxicity and impaired axonal transport and cellular homeostasis[75-81]. In order to test whether the diseased CT fragment (long CT carrying 27 Qs) was sufficient to cause SCA6 like symptoms in mice, we expressed P/Q type channel protein fragments from the two human splice variants found in SCA6 patients, in PCs of mice using viral and transgenic approaches[82]. We demonstrated that the overexpression of the diseased CT fragment and not the normal, short CT fragment in PCs was sufficient to cause late onset ataxia (>8 months of age), PC degeneration and deficits in associative motor learning in mice. In addition the diseased CT fragment impaired LTD and LTP at parallel fiber(PF)-PC synapses and altered spontaneous PC activity which is regulated by Kca[82]. Interestingly, higher bursting patterns in spontaneous PC activity is also observed in SCA2, SCA6 and EA2 which is caused by a loss in P/Q type channel function and will be discussed later. Du et al[83] designed 2 transgenic mouse lines expressing the CACNA1A CT with either 4 (normal, PC-αACTWT) or 33 (PC-αACTSCA6) polyQ tracts specifically in PCs. Interestingly, both αACTWT and αACTSCA6 peptide fragments were detected in PC nuclei but only PC-αACTSCA6 mice displayed progressive ataxia and gait disturbances. Additionally they showed that expression of αACTWT (Q11) but not αACTSCA6 increased expression of genes (i.e. granulin (GRN), Ca²⁺ ATPase, plasma membrane 2 (PMCA2), TATA box binding protein-associated factor of RNA pol II (TAF1) and B cell translation gene (BTG1)) involved in neurite outgrowth and development. Despite the conflicting reports whether the polyQ repeats in the P/Q type channel cause a gain or loss of function[84-88], previous findings indicate that both increases or decreases in calcium can lead to altered PC activity, reduced PC synaptic plasticity and ataxia. In addition the toxic CT polyQ expansions from the P/Q type channel may affect the expression of calcium-associated proteins (kinases, transporters or channels) which mediate the intracellular calcium levels (Fig 2).

SCA14 is caused by mutations in the C terminus 1 domain (C1) of PKCy ein. This domain binds diacylglycerol and is necessary for translocation and regulation of PKCy kinase activity. Eighteen from the 22 SCA14 mutations are concentrated in this C1 domain. Biochemical assays demonstrated that PKCy mutants failed to phosphorylate and inactivate TRPC3, resulting in a sustained Ca²⁺ influx into the cell[89]. In agreement with this study, an independent group showed that the SCA14 mutant, PKCy exhibited an exposed C terminus, resulting in a decrease of functional kinase[90]. SCA14 associated mutations in the C1 domain also form aggregates which are highly toxic to neuronal cells and may contribute to the loss of PCs in SCA14 patients[91]. These data indicate that mutations in the PKCy inactivate the TRPC3 channel by phosphorylation, thus creating high [Ca²⁺]i levels and abnormal calcium mediated signaling in PCs via PKC which contribute to the neurodegenerative characteristics of SCA14.

Another factor known to be the cause of SCA27 is fibroblast growth factor 14 (FGF14) which belongs to the family of fibroblast growth factor homologous factors (FHF). FGF14 is not a growth factor but a regulator of ion channels[92, 93]. The N terminus of the auxiliary subunit β for FGF14 remains intracellular to bind to the C terminus of voltage-gated Na⁺ channels (Naᵥ) and regulate the resurgent Naᵥ current in cerebellar PCs to support repetitive firing[94-96]. More importantly, FGF14 in granule cells is a potent regulator of P/Q type Ca²⁺ channels (the dominant presynaptic Ca²⁺ channel in granule cells) and synaptic transmission[97]. In addition knockdown of FGF14 or expression of the SCA27 causing FGF14 mutants in GCs reduced Ca²⁺ currents and diminished vesicular recycling, a marker for presynaptic Ca²⁺ influx. As a consequence, excitatory postsynaptic currents (EPSCs) at the PF-PC synapse were markedly diminished. Interestingly FGF14 knockout mice develop ataxia and dystonia, and their PCs have impaired spontaneous and repetitive firing due to alter Naᵥ expression[98, 99]. Fibroblast growth factor homologous factors are multimodal, regulating several discrete neuronal signaling events which may result in dysregulation of Ca²⁺ channel function and eventually SCA27 pathogenesis.

Spinocerebellar ataxia type 28 (SCA28) is an autosomal dominant, neurodegenerative disease characterized by unbalanced standing, gait incoordination, hyperreflexia of the lower limbs, nystagmus, and ophthalmoparesis. Several SCA28 causing missense mutations have been identified in the mitochondrial protease AFG3L2 gene localized to chromosome 18p11.22-q11.2[100, 101]. AFG3L2 belongs to the ATPases associated with various cellular activities protease superfamily and assembles with paraplegin in the inner mitochondrial membrane where they mediate the selective degradation of nonassembled and damaged proteins[102]. Heterozygous SCA28 mice exhibit a progressive decline in motor function and dark degeneration of Purkinje cells (PC-DCD) of mitochondrial origin similar to SCA28 patients[103]. The mitochondria in cultured Afg3l2-deficient PCs ineffectively buffer evoked Ca²⁺ peaks, resulting in enhanced cytoplasmic Ca²⁺ concentrations, which subsequently triggers PC-DCD. In SCA28 mice, partial genetic silencing of the metabotropic glutamate receptor mGluR1 decreased Ca²⁺ influx in PCs and reversed both PC-DCD and ataxic phenotype. Moreover, administration of the ceftriaxone, an antibiotic able to increase expression of the astrocyte glutamate transporter EAAT2, promoted synaptic glutamate clearance in PCs, thereby reducing Ca²⁺ influx and relieving ataxia in SCA28 mice[104]. Together, the results indicate that ineffective mitochondrial Ca²⁺ handling in PCs underlies SCA28 pathogenesis.

SCA41 is a very rare SCA, reported in 1 case who was presented with 2 yrs of progressive imbalance, ataxic gait and mild atrophy of the cerebellar vermis. This SCA41 patient was found to have a point mutation in the trpc3 gene[105]. The trpc3 gene encodes a nonselective cation channel coupled to intracellular signaling pathways, including mGluR1 dependent synaptic transmission[106]. TRPC3 is highly expressed in cerebellar PCs and may allow the release of intracellular calcium via a process called capacitative calcium entry[107, 108]. Although the mouse model Moonwalker (Mwk) containing a point mutation in trpc3 gene was described over 5 yrs ago as having motor and coordination defects and loss of cerebellar Purkinje cells, not until recently was there a similar case in humans[109]. Based on the work in the Mwk mouse model we know that SCA41 is a dominantly inherited disorder caused by a gain of function mutation in trpc3. Purkinje cells in Mwk mice show intrinsic excitability and TRPC3 mediated loss of type II unibrush polar cells (UBC)[110]. They also display impairments in PC dendritic growth and synapse formation before 3 wks of age that are accompanied by alterations of calcium signaling. Despite these early aberrant calcium signaling events, PC loss occurs several months later, where the loss of TRPC3 mediated activity and protein in type II UBCs occurs by 1 month of age which correlates more with the ataxic phenotype of Mwk mice[110]. Recently transcriptomic analysis of developing Purkinje cells from Mwk mice displayed significant gene and protein expression differences in molecules involved in lipid metabolism. Ceramide treatment of orphanotypic cerebellar cultures also improved dendritic outgrowth of Mwk PCs[111]. Collectively, these studies implement an important role of TRPC3 in PC firing, dendritic development and synapse formation and lipid metabolism. Additionally, the studies reveal how abnormal Ca²⁺ activation in cerebellar neurons can lead to devastating disorders such as SCA41.

Recently a mutation in an arginine to histine at position 1715 was identified in the voltage sensor S4 segment of the T-type channel protein Caᵥ3.1 and called SCA42[112]. Transient expression of this mutation in HEK293T cells demonstrated a positive shift in the current-voltage and the steady-state activation curves, whereas the inactivation curve had a higher slope factor. In silico model of deep cerebellar nuclei neurons suggested that this mutation results in decreased neuronal excitability[112]. Further studies will be needed to establish the calcium effects of this mutation in the T-type channel and its role in SCA 42. However, this study strengthens the hypothesis that deranged calcium levels may play a crucial role in the pathogenesis of hereditary ataxias.

## Deranged Ca²⁺ signaling in other Neurodegenerative Diseases

Episodic ataxia type 2 (EA2) is a rare autosomal dominant, congenital neurological disorder characterized by episodes of ataxic gait, dysarthria, nystagmus, vertigo, and nausea. These episodic attacks usually last minutes to hours but can go on for days in severe cases. They can be induced by mental or physical stress, exertion, fever, and chemicals such as caffeine and alcohol. Often EA2 patients may have overlapping symptoms (i.e., migraines, epilepsy, dystonia, cognitive impairments) associated with other dominant disorders like familial hemiplegic migraine type 1 (FMH1) and SCA6 which compound the diagnosis and treatment of the disease[113-115]. The onset of the disease can range from 2 to 32 years of age. EA2 results from a wide range of mutations in the pore-forming α1A subunit of P/Q type calcium channel located on chromosome 19p13 (Table I)[116]. Since these mutations are spread throughout the gene, it is difficult to harbour “hot spots” for mutations in the CACNA1A gene for easier diagnosis. More than 50 mutations in EA2 patients have been identified which include missense, nonsense, deletion, and insertion mutations[117]. As mentioned above, the P/Q type calcium channel are found throughout the CNS with an exceptionally high expression in cerebellar PCs where they mediate a variety of Ca²⁺ dependent processes, including neurotransmitter release, synaptic plasticity, membrane excitability, and gene expression[118]. Heterologous expression studies of human EA2 Caᵥ2.1 channel mutants demonstrated complete to severe loss of channel function[119-123]. Coexpression of the wildtype and EA2 Caᵥ2.1 channel mutants led to ER retention and reduction of WT channel expression which eventually resulted in reduced Ca²⁺ currents[120, 121, 124]. Additional studies showed that the EA2 mutant channels are misfolded and acting as dominant negative mutants by driving the WT associated subunits to ER associated degradation[121]. Spontaneous Ca²⁺ channel mouse mutants including tottering, rolling Nagoya, rocker, and tottering-4j exhibit a similar phenotype as seen in human EA2 patients, including progressive ataxia, dystonia, dyskinesia, and with the exception of rocker absence seizures. Tottering, tottering-4j, and rocker also showed stress- and chemical-induced dyskinesia. In addition to the spontaneous mouse mutations, the complete knockout of the α₁2.1 subunit gene has been created independently by two groups[117, 125, 126]. Homozygous mice, however, develop severe ataxia and die after three to four weeks. Heterozygous knockout and spontaneously occurring EA2 mutant mouse models appear phenotypically normal. Postnatal conditional knockout of the α₁2.1 subunit gene from either cerebellar PCs or GCs depicted a similar phenotype as the spontaneous mutant mice, showing absence seizures and stress-induced dyskinesia[127-129]. More recently, a knockin mouse model of EA2 containing a missense mutation in α₁2.1 subunit gene of the P/Q type channel presented a 70% reduction in PC Caᵥ2.1 current density; however, normal motor function and cerebellar morphology[130]. Only after pairing the EA2 allele with a knockout allele of the P/Q type channel was sufficient to cause moderate motor deficits but not chemical- or stress-induced dyskinesia or cerebellar degeneration[130]. In support of a loss of function, EA2 mouse models show a loss of calcium channel function which led to abnormal neurotransmission, spontaneous firing, and Kᵥa activation in PCs. Treatment of tottering mice with activators of SK Kᵥa, EBIO (1-ethyl-2-benzimidazolinone) and chlorzoxazone and the broad spectrum Kᵥa, 4-aminopyridine improved motor function and intrinsic PC pacemaking[131-133]. More importantly, 4-aminopyridine treatment of EA2 patients with nystagmus showed decreased attack frequency and improved quality of life[134]. Collectively, these results strongly support the hypothesis that a loss of Ca²⁺ plays an important role in EA2 pathogenesis and potential therapeutic agents are in trials.

Episodic Ataxia 5 (EA5) is an extremely rare, autosomal dominant EA found in only 2 families and one unrelated patient[135]. Individuals suffering from EA5 experience similar clinical symptoms as EA2 patients which are compounded with idiopathic generalized epilepsy. In contrast to EA2, EA5 is caused by missense mutations in the auxiliary subunit β4 of the P/Q type calcium channel, one of which leads to a premature truncation. The β4 subunit is the most prominent auxiliary subunit found in cerebellar PCs and plays a critical role in the targeting of calcium channels to the cell membrane, modulating ionic currents, and promoting synaptic release in the CNS[136]. Heterologous expression studies with the EA5 truncated β4 subunits or complete loss of β4 subunits resulted in a decrease in P/Q type channel activation kinetics[135]. Similar effects were seen in a lethargic mouse model of EA5 where a spontaneous insertion in the β4 subunit gene resulted also in a premature termination and loss of the protein in the brain[135, 137]. These lethargic mice are autosomal recessive and have a similar phenotype as EA5 patients which include severe ataxia, stressed induced dyskinesia, focal motor abnormalities and brief periods of behavioral arrest accompanied by absence seizures[138, 139]. Despite compensation from other β only 20% of the homozygous lethargic mice survive beyond weaning ages, where heterozygous mice appear normal[136]. Loss of β4 in lethargic mice reveal depressed EPSPs (evoked postsynaptic currents) from their cerebellar PF/PC synapses, reduced dendritic arborization and diminished pacemaking firing frequency[140]. Altogether these results point to the fact that a decrease in calcium due to a loss of P/Q type channel activity can depress cerebellar PC morphology, pacemaking activity and synaptic transmission which eventually leads to ataxia in humans (Fig 2).

Episodic ataxia type 6 (EA6) can be clinically distinguished from the other EAs in their long duration of episodic attacks, epilepsy, nystagmus and tinnitus. Like EA2 affected individuals, EA6 patients can also suffer from migraines and alternating hemiplegia. So far EA6 has been reported in only 2 families with missense mutations in SLC1A3 which encodes EAAT1[141, 142]. EAAT1 is a glial glutamate transporter, expressed primarily in the caudal brainstem and cerebellum and is important in removing glutamate from the synaptic cleft[143, 144]. In heterologous functional assays the P290R mutation identified in one family suffering from EA6 leads to a complete loss of glutamate reuptake and is associated with a severe EA phenotype with month long attacks, seizures, and alternating hemiplegia[141]. In contrast, the C186S mutation found in another EA6 family has a mild effect on glutamate reuptake and is correlated with a milder EA phenotype[142]. Surprisingly, coexpression of the mutant EAAT1 and wild-type EAAT1 reduced the surface density of EAAT1 transporters and hence glutamate uptake activity but not of two other transporters EAAT2 or EAAT3, suggesting that mutant EAAT1 specifically multimerizes with wild type EAAT1 to exert its dominant negative effect[141]. Since a complete loss of function in EAAT1 knock out mice develop normally and show only mild to moderate ataxia when challenged which is not similar to the human P290R mutation phenotype, the P290R mutation in humans is more than likely not due to a loss of function and may have other dominant negative effects in cerebellum[145]. More studies need to be performed to determine the impact of these EA6 mutations on intracellular calcium levels and the pathogenesis of the disorder. However, one can postulate that excess glutamate in the synaptic cleft leads to an overexcitation of mGluR1, AMPARs and NMDARs thus enhancing intracellular calcium levels from both internal and external sources.

In 2012 an autosomal recessive cerebellar ataxia accompanied by an early onset was identified in Roma patients in Bulgaria[146]. Patients presented with global developmental delay, moderate to severe stance and gait ataxia, dysarthria, mild dysdiadochokinesia, dysmetria and tremors, intellectual deficit, and mild pyramidal signs accompanied with progressive generalized cerebellar atrophy. Two novel variants located 7 bp apart within a unique 6q24 linkage region which encodes mGluR1 (Table I). Metabotropic glutamate receptors are highly expressed in cerebellar Purkinje cells and play an important role in cerebellar development and synaptic plasticity. The two mutations affect a gene region critical for alternative splicing and the generation of receptor isoform. Expression of ataxic mGluR1 mutations (Grm1) in cells resulted in aberrant transcripts skipping exon 8 or ending in intron 8 and encoding various species of nonfunctional receptors either lacking the transmembrane domain and containing abnormal intracellular tails or

completely missing the tail[146]. Mice deficient in mGluR1 display nonprogressive ataxia, deficiency in cerebellar LTD and impaired motor learning[147]. These deficits in LTD are most likely due to the improper regression of climbing fibers from cerebellar Purkinje cells during development[148]. Other missense mutations in Grm1 gene were localized to ligand binding region of mGluR1 in the recoil wobbler and nmf373 mice. Not surprising, these mGluR1 mutant mice exhibit a similar phenotype to the Roma patients, an autosomal recessive, early onset ataxia with the exception that no gross histological abnormalities were evident[149]. Antibodies to mGluR1 and Homer-3, a postsynaptic scaffolding protein that binds mGluR1, are present in patient sera suffering from cerebellar autoimmune ataxias[150-152]. In addition antibodies to mGluR1 block LTD in mouse cerebellar slices, and more importantly administration of immunoglobulins to mGluR1 reverses the ataxia, suggesting a loss of mGluR1 function in this autoimmune ataxia[152, 153]. Even though the functional impact of these mGluR1 mutations from the Roma patients is unclear, considering the fact that mGluR1 is a key player in releasing internal ER stores via the PKC/DAG pathway and in other calcium mediated downstream pathways, aberrant calcium signaling almost certainly plays a role in causing this hereditary ataxia (Fig 2).

## Concluding remarks

Calcium is a critical second messenger in the cerebellum for activating G protein coupled receptors like mGluR1 and their downstream pathways to regulate gene expression, neuronal development and maintenance and apoptosis. In addition it is an important ion for mediating neuronal excitability, synaptic plasticity and pacemaking activity of PCs. Every calcium associated protein regardless if it is merely a scaffolding or calcium buffering protein or a key calcium channel such as P/Q type calcium channel or IP₃R is vital for building a stable network to orchestrate the balance of calcium in our neurons. Mutations in any of these calcium associated proteins disrupt the stability of this network which can affect multiple pathways in PCs leading to devastating hereditary diseases such as SCAs and EAs (Fig 2). Mouse models for several of these hereditary ataxic diseases have identified essential molecular pathways involved in the pathogenesis of ataxias. From these mouse models we know that properly regulated LTD and synaptic plasticity, pacemaking, gene expression of calcium associated proteins and maintenance of PCs are all important mechanisms for normal motor coordination. Furthermore treatment of ataxic mice with antagonists to Kca or calcium stabilizers improved their pacemaking, synaptic transmission and ataxia. Since the identification of the first gene responsible for SCA1 over 23 years ago, we still do not have sufficient therapeutic options for individuals suffering from ataxia. However pharmacological treatments in mouse models for ataxia may provide hopeful therapeutic options for the future.

## Acknowledgements

This work was supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft MA 5806/1-1 (MDM) and He2471/8-1 (SH). JCS and MG are graduate students supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft SFB 874 (SH) and DFG MA 5806/2-1 (MDM) respectively.

## References

1. Grover, L.M. and T.J. Teyler, Two components of long-term potentiation induced by different patterns of afferent activation. Nature, 1990. 347(6292): p. 477-9.
2. Impey, S., et al., Induction of CRE-mediated gene expression by stimuli that generate long-lasting LTP in area CA1 of the hippocampus. Neuron, 1996. 16(5): p. 973-82.
3. Bolshakov, V.Y. and S.A. Siegelbaum, Postsynaptic induction and presynaptic expression of hippocampal long-term depression. Science, 1994. 264(5162): p. 1148-52.
4. Christie, B.R., J.C. Magee, and D. Johnston, Dendritic calcium channels and hippocampal long-term depression. Hippocampus, 1996. 6(1): p. 17-23.
5. Sudhof, T.C., The synaptic vesicle cycle. Annu Rev Neurosci, 2004. 27: p. 509-47.

6. Womack, M.D., C. Hoang, and K. Khodakhah, Large conductance calcium-activated potassium channels affect both spontaneous firing and intracellular calcium concentration in cerebellar Purkinje neurons. Neuroscience, 2009.162(4): p. 989-1000.
7. Kawamoto, E.M., C. Vivar, and S. Camandola, Physiology and pathology of calcium signaling in the brain. Front Pharmacol, 2012.3: p. 61.
8. Orr, H.T., et al., Expansion of an unstable trinucleotide CAG repeat in spinocerebellar ataxia type 1. Nat Genet, 1993.4(3): p. 221-6.
9. Matilla-Duenas, A., et al., Consensus paper: pathological mechanisms underlying neurodegeneration in spinocerebellar ataxias. Cerebellum, 2014.13(2): p. 269-302.
10. Ito, M., The Cerebellum and Neural Control Raven, New York, 1984.
11. Berkefeld, H., et al., BKCa-Cav channel complexes mediate rapid and localized Ca2+-activated K+ signaling. Science, 2006.314(5799): p. 615-20.
12. Muller, C.S., et al., Quantitative proteomics of the Cav2 channel nano-environments in the mammalian brain. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA, 2010.107(34): p. 14950-7.
13. Banfi, S., et al., Mapping and cloning of the critical region for the spinocerebellar ataxia type 1 gene (SCA1) in a yeast artificial chromosome contig spanning 1.2 Mb. Genomics, 1993.18(3): p. 627-35.
14. Klement, I.A., et al., Ataxin-1 nuclear localization and aggregation: role in polyglutamine-induced disease in SCA1 transgenic mice. Cell, 1998.95(1): p. 41-53.
15. Lin, X., et al., Polyglutamine expansion down-regulates specific neuronal genes before pathologic changes in SCA1. Nat Neurosci, 2000.3(2): p. 157-63.
16. Vig, P.J., et al., Relationship between ataxin-1 nuclear inclusions and Purkinje cell specific proteins in SCA-1 transgenic mice. J Neurol Sci, 2000.174(2): p. 100-10.
17. Serra, H.G., et al., RORalpha-mediated Purkinje cell development determines disease severity in adult SCA1 mice. Cell, 2006.127(4): p. 697-708.
18. Vig, P.J., S.H. Subramony, and D.O. McDaniel, Calcium homeostasis and spinocerebellar ataxia-1 (SCA-1). Brain Res Bull, 2001.56(3-4): p. 221-5.
19. Rolfs, A., et al., Clinical features and neuropathology of autosomal dominant spinocerebellar ataxia (SCA17). Ann Neurol, 2003.54(3): p. 367-75.
20. Hansen, S.T., et al., Changes in Purkinje cell firing and gene expression precede behavioral pathology in a mouse model of SCA2. Hum Mol Genet, 2013.22(2): p. 271-83.
21. Power, E.M., A. Morales, and R.M. Empson, Prolonged Type 1 Metabotropic Glutamate Receptor Dependent Synaptic Signaling Contributes to Spino-Cerebellar Ataxia Type 1. J Neurosci, 2016.36(18): p. 4910-6.
22. Huynh, D.P., et al., Nuclear localization or inclusion body formation of ataxin-2 are not necessary for SCA2 pathogenesis in mouse or human. Nat Genet, 2000.26(1): p. 44-50.
23. Bezprozvanny, I., Role of inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptors in pathogenesis of Huntington's disease and spinocerebellar ataxias. Neurochem Res, 2011.36(7): p. 1186-97.
24. Kiehl, T.R., H. Shibata, and S.M. Pulst, The ortholog of human ataxin-2 is essential for early embryonic patterning in C. elegans. J Mol Neurosci, 2000.15(3): p. 231-41.
25. Satterfield, T.F., S.M. Jackson, and L.J. Pallanck, A Drosophila homolog of the polyglutamine disease gene SCA2 is a dosage-sensitive regulator of actin filament formation. Genetics, 2002.162(4): p. 1687-702.
26. Liu, J., et al., Deranged calcium signaling and neurodegeneration in spinocerebellar ataxia type 2. J Neurosci, 2009.29(29): p. 9148-62.

27. Kasumu, A. and I. Bezprozvanny, Deranged calcium signaling in Purkinje cells and pathogenesis in spinocerebellar ataxia 2 (SCA 2) and other ataxias. Cerebellum, 2012. 11(3): p.630-9.
28. Kasumu, A.W., et al., Chronic suppression of inositol 1,4,5-triphosphate receptor-mediated calcium signaling in cerebellar purkinje cells alleviates pathological phenotype in spinocerebellar ataxia 2 mice. J Neurosci, 2012. 32(37): p.12786-96.
29. Egorova, P.A., et al., In vivo analysis of cerebellar Purkinje cell activity in SCA 2 transgenic mouse model. J Neurophysiol, 2016: p.jn009132015.
30. Halbach, M.V., et al., Atxn2 Knockout and CAG42-Knock-in Cerebellum Shows Similarly Dysregulated Expression in Calcium Homeostasis Pathway. Cerebellum, 2016.
31. Tada, M., M. Nishizawa, and O. Onodera, Roles of inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptors in spinocerebellar ataxias. Neurochem Int, 2016. 94: p.1-8.
32. Stevanin, G., A. Durr, and A. Brice, Clinical and molecular advances in autosomal dominant cerebellar ataxias: from genotype to phenotype and physiopathology. Eur J Hum Genet, 2000. 8(1): p.4-18.
33. Paulson, H.L., et al., Machado-Joseph disease gene product is a cytoplasmic protein widely expressed in brain. Ann Neurol, 1997. 41(4): p.453-62.
34. Burnett, B., F. Li, and R.N. Pittman, The polyglutamine neurodegenerative protein ataxin-3 binds polyubiquitylated proteins and has ubiquitin protease activity. Hum Mol Genet, 2003. 12(23): p.3195-205.
35. Winborn, B.J., et al., The deubiquitinating enzyme ataxin-3, a polyglutamine disease protein, edits Lys 63 linkages in mixed linkage ubiquitin chains. J Biol Chem, 2008. 283(39): p.26436-43.
36. Evert, B.O., et al., Ataxin-3 represses transcription via chromatin binding, interaction with histone deacetylase 3, and histone deacetylation. J Neurosci, 2006. 26(44): p.11474-86.
37. Schmitt, I., et al., Inactivation of the mouse Atxn3 (ataxin-3) gene increases protein ubiquitination. Biochem Biophys Res Commun, 2007. 362(3): p.734-9.
38. McGurk, L. and N.M. Bonini, Protein interacting with C kinase (PICK1) is a suppressor of spinocerebellar ataxia 3-associated neurodegeneration in Drosophila. Hum Mol Genet, 2012. 21(1): p.76-84.
39. Hanley, J.G., Molecular mechanisms for regulation of AMPAR trafficking by PICK1. Biochem Soc Trans, 2006. 34(Pt 5): p.931-5.
40. Chen, X., et al., Deranged calcium signaling and neurodegeneration in spinocerebellar ataxia type 3. J Neurosci, 2008. 28(48): p.12713-24.
41. Haacke, A., F.U. Hartl, and P. Breuer, Calpain inhibition is sufficient to suppress aggregation of polyglutamine-expanded ataxin-3. J Biol Chem, 2007. 282(26): p.18851-6.
42. Iwaki, A., et al., Heterozygous deletion of ITPR1, but not SUMF1, in spinocerebellar ataxia type 16. J Med Genet, 2008. 45(1): p.32-5.
43. van de Leemput, J., et al., Deletion at ITPR1 underlies ataxia in mice and spinocerebellar ataxia 15 in humans. PLoS Genet, 2007. 3(6): p.e108.
44. Hara, K., et al., Total deletion and a missense mutation of ITPR1 in Japanese SCA 15 families. Neurology, 2008. 71(8): p.547-51.
45. Yamazaki, H., et al., Functional characterization of the P1059L mutation in the inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor type 1 identified in a Japanese SCA 15 family. Biochem Biophys Res Commun, 2011. 410(4): p.754-8.
46. Hisatsune, C., et al., Inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor type 1 in granule cells, not in Purkinje cells, regulates the dendritic morphology of Purkinje cells through brain-derived neurotrophic factor production. J Neurosci, 2006. 26(42): p.10916-24.

47. Ogura, H., M. Matsumoto, and K. Mikoshiba, Motor coordination in mutant mice heterozygous for the type 1 inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor. Behav Brain Res, 2001.122(2): p. 215-9.
48. Street, V.A., et al., The type 1 inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor gene is altered in the opisthotonos mouse. J Neurosci, 1997.17(2): p. 635-45.
49. Huang, L., et al., Missense mutations in ITPR1 cause autosomal dominant congenital nonprogressive spinocerebellar ataxia. Orphanet J Rare Dis, 2012.7: p. 67.
50. Fogel, B.L., et al., Exome sequencing in the clinical diagnosis of sporadic or familial cerebellar ataxia. JAMA Neurol, 2014.71(10): p. 1237-46.
51. Ohba, C., et al., Diagnostic utility of whole exome sequencing in patients showing cerebellar and/or vermis atrophy in childhood. Neurogenetics, 2013.14(3-4): p. 225-32.
52. Sasaki, M., et al., Sporadic infantile-onset spinocerebellar ataxia caused by missense mutations of the inositol 1,4,5-triphosphate receptor type 1 gene. J Neurol, 2015.262(5): p. 1278-84.
53. Dudding, T.E., et al., Autosomal dominant congenital non-progressive ataxia overlaps with the SCA15 locus. Neurology, 2004.63(12): p. 2288-92.
54. Ando, H., et al., IRBIT suppresses IP3 receptor activity by competing with IP3 for the common binding site on the IP3 receptor. Mol Cell, 2006.22(6): p. 795-806.
55. Hirota, J., et al., Carbonic anhydrase-related protein is a novel binding protein for inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor type 1. Biochem J, 2003.372(Pt 2): p. 435-41.
56. Turkmen, S., et al., CA8 mutations cause a novel syndrome characterized by ataxia and mild mental retardation with predisposition to quadrupedal gait. PLoS Genet, 2009.5(5): p. e1000487.
57. Kaya, N., et al., Phenotypical spectrum of cerebellar ataxia associated with a novel mutation in the CA8 gene, encoding carbonic anhydrase (CA) VIII. Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet, 2011.156B(7): p. 826-34.
58. Jiao, Y., et al., Carbonic anhydrase-related protein VIII deficiency is associated with a distinctive lifelong gait disorder in waddles mice. Genetics, 2005.171(3): p. 1239-46.
59. Bataller, L., et al., Carbonic anhydrase-related protein VIII: autoantigen in paraneoplastic cerebellar degeneration. Ann Neurol, 2004.56(4): p. 575-9.
60. Machnicka, B., et al., Spectrins: a structural platform for stabilization and activation of membrane channels, receptors and transporters. Biochim Biophys Acta, 2014.1838(2): p. 620-34.
61. Wang, Y., et al., A Japanese SCA5 family with a novel three-nucleotide in-frame deletion mutation in the SPTBN2 gene: a clinical and genetic study. J Hum Genet, 2014.59(10): p. 569-73.
62. Elsayed, S.M., et al., Autosomal dominant SCA5 and autosomal recessive infantile SCA are allelic conditions resulting from SPTBN2 mutations. Eur J Hum Genet, 2014.22(2): p. 286-8.
63. Cho, E. and B.L. Fogel, A family with spinocerebellar ataxia type 5 found to have a novel missense mutation within a SPTBN2 spectrin repeat. Cerebellum, 2013.12(2): p. 162-4.
64. Dick, K.A., et al., Spinocerebellar ataxia type 5. Handb Clin Neurol, 2012.103: p. 451-9.
65. Jackson, M., et al., Modulation of the neuronal glutamate transporter EAAT4 by two interacting proteins. Nature, 2001.410(6824): p. 89-93.
66. Ikeda, Y., et al., Spectrin mutations cause spinocerebellar ataxia type 5. Nat Genet, 2006.38(2): p. 184-90.
67. Maragakis, N.J. and J.D. Rothstein, Glutamate transporters: animal models to neurologic disease. Neurobiol Dis, 2004.15(3): p. 461-73.

68. Armbrust, K.R., et al., Mutant beta-III spectrin causes mGluR1alpha mislocalization and functional deficits in a mouse model of spinocerebellar ataxia type 5. J Neurosci, 2014. 34(30): p.9891-904.
69. Zhuchenko, O., et al., Autosomal dominant cerebellar ataxia (SCA 6) associated with small polyglutamine expansions in the alpha 1A-voltage-dependent calcium channel. Nat Genet, 1997. 15: p.62-9.
70. Sasaki, H., I. Yabe, and K. Tashiro, The hereditary spinocerebellar ataxias in Japan. Cytogenet Genome Res, 2003. 100(1-4): p.198-205.
71. Watase, K., et al., Spinocerebellar ataxia type 6 knockin mice develop a progressive neuronal dysfunction with age-dependent accumulation of mutant CaV 2.1 channels. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA, 2008. 105(33): p.11987-92.
72. Saegusa, H., et al., Properties of human Cav 2.1 channel with a spinocerebellar ataxia type 6 mutation expressed in Purkinje cells. Mol Cell Neurosci, 2007. 34(2): p.261-70.
73. Unno, T., et al., Development of Purkinje cell degeneration in a knockin mouse model reveals lysosomal involvement in the pathogenesis of SCA6. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA, 2012. 109(43): p.17693-8.
74. Ishiguro, T., et al., The carboxy-terminal fragment of alpha(1A) calcium channel preferentially aggregates in the cytoplasm of human spinocerebellar ataxia type 6 Purkinje cells. Acta Neuropathol, 2010. 119(4): p.447-64.
75. Herlitze, S., Sorting and trafficking of voltage gated Ca²⁺ channels in neurons: The C-terminus and the dynein motor complex Cellscience Reviews, 2005. 1(4): p.4-10.
76. Maximov, A. and I. Bezprozvanny, Synaptic targeting of N-type calcium channels in hippocampal neurons. J Neurosci, 2002. 22(16): p.6939-52.
77. Maximov, A., T.C. Sudhof, and I. Bezprozvanny, Association of neuronal calcium channels with modular adaptor proteins. J Biol Chem, 1999. 274(35): p.24453-6.
78. Herlitze, S., et al., Targeting Mechanisms of High Voltage-Activated Ca2+ Channels. J Bioenerg Biomembr, 2003. 35: p.621-637.
79. Herlitze, S. and M.D. Mark, Distribution and targeting mechanisms of voltage activated Ca2+ channels. Voltage-gated calcium channels, ed. G.W. Zamponi. 2005, Georgetown, Texas: Kluwer Academic/Plenum Publishers, New York, New York. 113-40.
80. Lai, M., et al., Atctex1-Ca2+ channel complex for selective surface expression of Ca2+ channels in neurons. Nat Neurosci, 2005. 8(4): p.435-42.
81. Hibino, H., et al., RIM binding proteins (RBPs) couple Rab3-interacting molecules (RIMs) to voltage-gated Ca(2+) channels. Neuron, 2002. 34(3): p.411-23.
82. Mark, M.D., et al., Spinocerebellar ataxia type 6 protein aggregates cause deficits in motor learning and cerebellar plasticity. J Neurosci, 2015. 35(23): p.8882-95.
83. Du, X., et al., Second cistron in CACNA1A gene encodes a transcription factor mediating cerebellar development and SCA6. Cell, 2013. 154(1): p.118-33.
84. Piedras-Renteria, E.S., et al., Increased expression of alpha 1A Ca2+ channel currents arising from expanded trinucleotide repeats in spinocerebellar ataxia type 6. J Neurosci, 2001. 21(23): p.9185-93.
85. Chen, H. and E.S. Piedras-Renteria, Altered frequency-dependent inactivation and steady-state inactivation of polyglutamine-expanded alpha1A in SCA6. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol, 2007. 292(3): p.C1078-86.
86. Matsuyama, Z., et al., Direct alteration of the P/Q-type Ca2+ channel property by polyglutamine expansion in spinocerebellar ataxia 6. J Neurosci, 1999. 19(12): p.RC14.
87. Restituito, S., et al., The polyglutamine expansion in spinocerebellar ataxia type 6 causes a beta subunit-specific enhanced activation of P/Q-type calcium channels in Xenopus oocytes. J Neurosci, 2000. 20(17): p.6394-403.

88. Toru, S., et al., Spino cerebellar ataxia type 6 mutation alters P-type calcium channel function. J Biol Chem, 2000. 275(15): p. 10893-8.
89. Adachi, N., et al., Enzymological analysis of mutant protein kinase Cgamma causing spinocerebellar ataxia type 14 and dysfunction in Ca2+ homeostasis. J Biol Chem, 2008. 283(28): p. 19854-63.
90. Jeziorska, J., et al., SCA14 mutation V138E leads to partly unfolded PKCgamma associated with an exposed C-terminus, altered kinetics, phosphorylation and enhanced insolubilization. J Neurochem, 2014. 128(5): p. 741-51.
91. Takahashi, H., et al., Identification and characterization of PKCgamma, a kinase associated with SCA14, as an amyloidogenic protein. Hum Mol Genet, 2015. 24(2): p. 525-39.
92. Dalski, A., et al., Mutation analysis in the fibroblast growth factor 14 gene: frameshift mutation and polymorphisms in patients with inherited ataxias. Eur J Hum Genet, 2005. 13(1): p. 118-20.
93. van Swieten, J.C., et al., A mutation in the fibroblast growth factor 14 gene is associated with autosomal dominant cerebellar ataxia [corrected]. Am J Hum Genet, 2003. 72(1): p. 191-9.
94. Lou, J.Y., et al., Fibroblast growth factor 14 is an intracellular modulator of voltage-gated sodium channels. J Physiol, 2005. 569(Pt 1): p. 179-93.
95. Yan, H., et al., FGF14 modulates resurgent sodium current in mouse cerebellar Purkinje neurons. Elife, 2014. 3: p. e04193.
96. Liu, C., S.D. Dib-Hajj, and S.G. Waxman, Fibroblast growth factor homologous factor 1B binds to the C terminus of the tetrodotoxin-resistant sodium channel rNav1.9a (NaN). J Biol Chem, 2001. 276(22): p. 18925-33.
97. Yan, H., J.L. Pablo, and G.S. Pitt, FGF14 regulates presynaptic Ca2+ channels and synaptic transmission. Cell Rep, 2013. 4(1): p. 66-75.
98. Wang, Q., et al., Ataxia and paroxysmal dyskinesia in mice lacking axonally transported FGF14. Neuron, 2002. 35(1): p. 25-38.
99. Shakkottai, V.G., et al., FGF14 regulates the intrinsic excitability of cerebellar Purkinje neurons. Neurobiol Dis, 2009. 33(1): p. 81-8.
100. Cagnoli, C., et al., SCA28, a novel form of autosomal dominant cerebellar ataxia on chromosome 18p11.22-q11.2. Brain, 2006. 129(Pt 1): p. 235-42.
101. Di Bella, D., et al., Mutations in the mitochondrial protease gene AFG3L2 cause dominant hereditary ataxia SCA28. Nat Genet, 2010. 42(4): p. 313-21.
102. Koppen, M. and T. Langer, Protein degradation within mitochondria: versatile activities of AAA proteases and other peptidases. Crit Rev Biochem Mol Biol, 2007. 42(3): p. 221-42.
103. Maltecca, F., et al., Haploinsufficiency of AFG3L2, the gene responsible for spinocerebellar ataxia type 28, causes mitochondria-mediated Purkinje cell dark degeneration. J Neurosci, 2009. 29(29): p. 9244-54.
104. Maltecca, F., et al., Purkinje neuron Ca2+ influx reduction rescues ataxia in SCA28 model. J Clin Invest, 2015. 125(1): p. 263-74.
105. Fogel, B.L., S.M. Hanson, and E.B. Becker, Do mutations in the murine ataxia gene TRPC3 cause cerebellar ataxia in humans? Mov Disord, 2015. 30(2): p. 284-6.
106. Hartmann, J., et al., TRPC3 channels are required for synaptic transmission and motor coordination. Neuron, 2008. 59(3): p. 392-8.
107. Zhu, X., et al., trp, a novel mammalian gene family essential for agonist-activated capacitative Ca2+ entry. Cell, 1996. 85(5): p. 661-71.

108. Martin-Trujillo, A., et al., Genotype of an individual single nucleotide polymorphism regulates DNA methylation at the TRPC3 alternative promoter. Epigenetics, 2011. 6(10): p.1236-41.
109. Becker, E.B., et al., A point mutation in TRPC3 causes abnormal Purkinje cell development and cerebellar ataxia in moonwalker mice. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA, 2009. 106(16): p.6706-11.
110. Sekerkova, G., et al., Early onset of ataxia in moonwalker mice is accompanied by complete ablation of type II unipolar brush cells and Purkinje cell dysfunction. J Neurosci, 2013. 33(50): p.19689-94.
111. Dulneva, A., et al., The mutant Moonwalker TRPC3 channel links calcium signaling to lipid metabolism in the developing cerebellum. Hum Mol Genet, 2015. 24(14): p.4114-25.
112. Coutelier, M., et al., A Recurrent Mutation in CACNA1G Alters Cav3.1 T-Type Calcium- Channel Conduction and Causes Autosomal-Dominant Cerebellar Ataxia. Am J Hum Genet, 2015. 97(5): p.726-37.
113. Jodice, C., et al., Episodic ataxia type 2 (EA2) and spinocerebellar ataxia type 6 (SCA6) due to CAG repeat expansion in the CACNA1A gene on chromosome 19p. Hum Mol Genet, 1997. 6(11): p.1973-8.
114. Mantuano, E., et al., Spinocerebellar ataxia type 6 and episodic ataxia type 2: differences and similarities between two allelic disorders. Cytogenet Genome Res, 2003. 100(1-4): p.147-53.
115. Romaniello, R., et al., A wide spectrum of clinical, neurophysiological and neuroradiological abnormalities in a family with a novel CACNA1A mutation. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry, 2010. 81(8): p.840-3.
116. Ophoff, R.A., et al., Familial hemiplegic migraine and episodic ataxia type-2 are caused by mutations in the Ca2+ channel gene CACNL1A4. Cell, 1996. 87(3): p.543-52.
117. Pietrobon, D., CaV 2.1 channelopathies. Pflugers Arch, 2010. 460(2): p.375-93.
118. Tsien, R.W. and R. Malinow, Changes in presynaptic function during long-term potentiation. Ann NY Acad Sci, 1991. 635: p.208-20.
119. Guida, S., et al., Complete loss of P/Q calcium channel activity caused by a CACNA1A missense mutation carried by patients with episodic ataxia type 2. Am J Hum Genet, 2001. 68(3): p.759-64.
120. Jeng, C.J., et al., Dominant-negative effects of episodic ataxia type 2 mutations involve disruption of membrane trafficking of human P/Q-type Ca2+ channels. J Cell Physiol, 2008. 214(2): p.422-33.
121. Mezghrani, A., et al., A destructive interaction mechanism accounts for dominant- negative effects of misfolded mutants of voltage-gated calcium channels. J Neurosci, 2008. 28(17): p.4501-11.
122. Spacey, S.D., et al., Functional implications of a novel EA2 mutation in the P/Q-type calcium channel. Ann Neurol, 2004. 56(2): p.213-20.
123. Wan, J., et al., CACNA1A mutations causing episodic and progressive ataxia alter channel trafficking and kinetics. Neurology, 2005. 64(12): p.2090-7.
124. Raike, R.S., et al., Dominant-negative suppression of Cav2.1 currents by alpha(1) 2.1 truncations requires the conserved interaction domain for beta subunits. Mol Cell Neurosci, 2007. 34(2): p.168-77.
125. Fletcher, C.F., et al., Dystonia and cerebellar atrophy in Cacna1a null mice lacking P/Q calcium channel activity. Faseb J, 2001. 15(7): p.1288-90.
126. Jun, K., et al., Ablation of P/Q-type Ca(2+) channel currents, altered synaptic transmission, and progressive ataxia in mice lacking the alpha(1A)-subunit. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA, 1999. 96(26): p.15245-50.

127. Mark, M.D., et al., Delayed postnatal loss of P/Q-type calcium channels recapitulates the absence epilepsy, dyskinesia, and ataxia phenotypes of genomic Cacna1a mutations. J Neurosci, 2011.31(11): p.4311-26.
128. Todorov, B., et al., Purkinje Cell-Specific Ablation of Ca(V) 2.1 Channels is Sufficient to Cause Cerebellar Ataxia in Mice. Cerebellum, 2012.
129. Maejima, T., et al., Postnatal loss of P/Q-type channels confined to rhombic-lip-derived neurons alters synaptic transmission at the parallel fiber to purkinje cell synapse and replicates genomic Cacna1a mutation phenotype of ataxia and seizures in mice. J Neurosci, 2013.33(12): p.5162-74.
130. Rose, S.J., et al., The first knockin mouse model of episodic ataxia type 2. Exp Neurol, 2014.261:p.553-62.
131. Walter, J.T., et al., Decreases in the precision of Purkinje cell pacemaking cause cerebellar dysfunction and ataxia. Nat Neurosci, 2006.9(3): p.389-97.
132. Alvina, K. and K. Khodakhah, KCa channels as therapeutic targets in episodic ataxia type-2. J Neurosci, 2010.30(21): p.7249-57.
133. Alvina, K. and K. Khodakhah, The therapeutic mode of action of 4-aminopyridine in cerebellar ataxia. J Neurosci, 2010.30(21): p.7258-68.
134. Strupp, M., et al., A randomized trial of 4-aminopyridine in EA2 and related familial episodic ataxias. Neurology, 2011.77(3): p.269-75.
135. Escayg, A., et al., Coding and noncoding variation of the human calcium-channel beta 4-subunit gene CACNB4 in patients with idiopathic generalized epilepsy and episodic ataxia. Am J Hum Genet, 2000.66(5): p.1531-9.
136. Burgess, D.L., et al., beta subunit reshuffling modifies N- and P/Q-type Ca2+ channel subunit compositions in lethargic mouse brain. Mol Cell Neurosci, 1999.13(4): p.293-311.
137. McEnery, M.W., T.D. Copeland, and C.L. Vance, Altered expression and assembly of N-type calcium channel alpha1B and beta subunits in epileptic lethargic (lh/lh) mouse. J Biol Chem, 1998.273(34): p.21435-8.
138. Hosford, D.A., et al., The role of GABAB receptor activation in absence seizures of lethargic (lh/lh) mice. Science, 1992.257(5068): p.398-401.
139. Khan, Z. and H.A. Jinnah, Paroxysmal dyskinesias in the lethargic mouse mutant. J Neurosci, 2002.22(18): p.8193-200.
140. Benedetti, B., A. Benedetti, and B.E. Flucher, Loss of the Calcium Channel beta Subunit Impairs Parallel Fiber Volley and Purkinje Cell Firing in Cerebellum of Adult Ataxic Mice. Eur J Neurosci, 2016.
141. Jen, J.C., et al., Mutation in the glutamate transporter EAAT1 causes episodic ataxia, hemiplegia, and seizures. Neurology, 2005.65(4): p.529-34.
142. de Vries, B., et al., Episodic ataxia associated with EAAT1 mutation C186S affecting glutamate reuptake. Arch Neurol, 2009.66(1): p.97-101.
143. Kawakami, H., et al., Cloning and expression of a human glutamate transporter. Biochem Biophys Res Commun, 1994.199(1): p.171-6.
144. Banner, S.J., et al., The expression of the glutamate re-uptake transporter excitatory amino acid transporter 1 (EAAT1) in the normal human CNS and in motor neurone disease: an immunohistochemical study. Neuroscience, 2002.109(1): p.27-44.
145. Watase, K., et al., Motor discoordination and increased susceptibility to cerebellar injury in GLAST mutant mice. Eur J Neurosci, 1998.10(3): p.976-88.
146. Guergueltcheva, V., et al., Autosomal-recessive congenital cerebellar ataxia is caused by mutations in metabotropic glutamate receptor 1. Am J Hum Genet, 2012.91(3): p.553-64.

147. Aiba, A., et al., Deficient cerebellar long-term depression and impaired motor learning in mGluR1 mutant mice. Cell, 1994. 79(2): p. 377-88.
148. Levenes, C., et al., Incomplete regression of multiple climbing fibre innervation of cerebellar Purkinje cells in mGLuR1 mutant mice. Neuroreport, 1997. 8(2): p. 571-4.
149. Sachs, A.J., et al., The mouse mutants recoil wobbler and nmf373 represent a series of Grm1 mutations. Mamm Genome, 2007. 18(11): p. 749-56.
150. Hoftberger, R., et al., Patient with homer-3 antibodies and cerebellitis. JAMA Neurol, 2013. 70(4): p. 506-9.
151. Sillevis Smitt, P., et al., Paraneoplastic cerebellar ataxia due to autoantibodies against a glutamate receptor. N Engl J Med, 2000. 342(1): p. 21-7.
152. Power, E.M., N.A. English, and R.M. Empson, Are Type 1 metabotropic glutamate receptors a viable therapeutic target for the treatment of cerebellar ataxia? J Physiol, 2016.
153. Coesmans, M., et al., Mechanisms underlying cerebellar motor deficits due to mGluR1- autoantibodies. Ann Neurol, 2003. 53(3): p. 325-36.

Figure 1 Calcium signaling in cerebellar Purkinje cells.
Rises in intracellular calcium levels in cerebellar Purkinje cells can occur by either an electrical stimulation (yellow lightning bolts) which activates voltage gated calcium channels (VGCC, ie P/Q type channel) or a G protein coupled receptor stimulation (GPCR, ie mGluR). Following a receptor mediated stimulation, the neurotransmitter glutamate (green dots) is released and binds N-Methyl-D-Aspartate (NMDAR) and α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid receptors (AMPAR) to contribute to the depolarization (Na⁺ influx, blue dots) of the cell and intracellular calcium (yellow dots) levels in the case of NMDARs. Further activation of metabotropic glutamate receptor 1 by glutamate initiates the G protein, Gq cascade where phospholipase C activation produces diacylglycerol (DAG) and inositol triphosphate (IP₃, hexagon). DAG remains in the membrane where it can stimulate the calcium channel, transient receptor potential channels (TRPC) to further increase intracellular calcium levels. IP₃ diffuses to the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) to trigger the release of internal calcium stores via the calcium channel, IP₃R. Additional calcium increases from ER stores by ryanodine receptors (RyR) are initiated by calcium itself. Calcium can also stimulate the calcium activated potassium channels (KCa, grey dots) which have been shown to be important for maintaining the pacemaking activity in PCs. Equally important is the return of intracellular calcium to basal levels. This is accomplished by Ca²⁺ binding proteins such as calbindin and parvalbumin (large green circles), Ca²⁺ transporters (Ca²⁺ Trnsp; i.e. Ca²⁺ ATPase, sodium calcium exchanger) and organelle uptake via the sarcoplasmic-endoreticulum Ca²⁺-ATPase (SERCA) and mitochondrial uniporter (not shown).

Figure 2 Mutations in calcium associated proteins which cause abnormal calcium signaling and are associated with hereditary ataxias.
An electrical stimulation triggers the opening of voltage gated P/Q type and T type calcium channels (VGCC) which leads to an increase in intracellular calcium (Ca²⁺, yellow dots) and the activation of calcium activated potassium channels (KCa, grey dots), a crucial channel for maintaining the pacemaking activity in PCs. Mutations in the P/Q type calcium channels leads to a decrease in [Ca²⁺]i influx (dashed red arrow) in episodic ataxia type 2 (EA2; α1A subunit) and EA5 (β subunit). Mutations in a modulator of P/Q type channels, FGF14 (fibroblast growth factor 14) also diminishes [Ca²⁺]i levels in PCs and causes SCA27. A polyglutamine expansion (polyQ) mutation in the carboxy terminus of the P/Q type calcium channel leads to alterations in gene expression and the activation of KCa which are responsible for spinocerebellar ataxia type 6 (SCA6). Moreover missense mutations in the VGCC T type were found to be responsible for SCA42. G protein coupled receptor stimulation (GPCR) by the neurotransmitter glutamate (Glu, green dots) generates the release of [Ca²⁺]i ER (endoplasmic reticulum) stores via the diacylglycerol (DAG)/protein kinase C (PKC) pathway. Mutations in proteins coupled to this second

messenger system including mGluR1 (metabotropic glutamate receptor 1) and PKC (protein kinase C) lead to decreased [Ca²⁺] levels and cause the respective neurodegenerative diseases Roma families from Bulgaria and SCA14. Production of DAG and IP₃ (inositol triphosphate) can subsequently induce the calcium channels, transient receptor potential channel (TRPC) and IP₃R respectively, to augment [Ca²⁺] levels. Mutations in TRPC3 and IP₃R1 results in a loss of [Ca²⁺] and neurodegenerative diseases, SCA41 and SCA15/16 respectively. In contrast other mutations in IP₃R1 can also prevent the suppression from CARP (carbonic anhydrase related protein), leading to rises in [Ca²⁺] levels (solid red arrows) and SCA29. Mutations in CARP results in a loss of protein and IP₃R suppression, increased [Ca²⁺] levels and eventually congenital ataxia associated with mental retardation and quadrupedal gait 3 (CAMRQ3). PolyQ expansion mutations in ataxin (Atxn) 2 and 3 which bind and sensitize IP₃R1 also cause surges in [Ca²⁺] levels and the ataxias, SCA2 and SCA3. Destabilization of the mGluR1 and EAAT4 (excitatory amino acid transporter) due to mutations in spectrin leads to a reduction in mGluR1 mediated responses, an induction glutamate transport via EAAT4 and as a consequence SCA5 occurs. Missense mutations in EAAT1 leads to a complete loss of glutamate reuptake and is associated with the debilitating disease EA6. PolyQ expansion mutations in Atxn1 destabilize the nuclear transcription receptors, retinoic acid-receptor-related orphan receptor alpha (RORα) and specificity protein 1 (SP-1) resulting in the downregulation of several Ca²⁺ associated proteins and SCA1.

| Disease subtype | Gene Location | Protein | DNA mutations | Calcium signaling |
|-----------------|--------------|---------|---------------|------------------|
| SCA 1           | 6p22.3       | Ataxin 1 | (CAG) 39-82   | Increase         |
| SCA 2           | 12q24.12     | Ataxin 2 | (CAG) 33-64   | Increase         |
| SCA 3/MJD       | 14q32.12     | Ataxin 3 | (CAG) 52-86   | Increase         |
| SCA 5           | 11q13.2      | β-III spectrin | non-repeat & deletion | Decrease        |
| SCA 6           | 19p13.2      | Cav 2.1 (P/Q type) | (CAG) 19-33 | Increase/Decrease |
| SCA 14          | 19q13.42     | PKCγ    | non-repeat    | Increase         |
| SCA 15          | 3p26.1       | ITPR1   | non-repeat & deletion | Decrease        |
| SCA 16          | 8q23-q24.1   | ITPR1   | non-repeat & deletion | Decrease        |
| SCA 27          | 13q33.1      | FGF 14  | non-repeat    | Decrease         |
| SCA 28          | 18p11.21     | ATPase associated protease family | non-repeat | Increase         |
| SCA 29          | 3p26.1       | ITPR1   | non-repeat    | Not Determined   |
| SCA 41          | 4q27         | TRPC3   | non-repeat    | Decrease         |
| SCA 42          | 17q21.33     | Cav 3.1 (T-type) | non-repeat | Decrease         |
| EA2             | 19p13.13     | Cav 2.1 (P/Q type) | non-repeat & deletion | Decrease        |
| EA5             | 2q22-q23     | Cavβ4   | non-repeat & deletion | Decrease        |
| EA6             | 5p13.2       | EAAT1   | non-repeat    | Increase         |
| CAMRQ3orQG      | 8q12.1       | CARP VIII | non-repeat | Increase         |
| (Roma families from Bulgaria) | 6q24 | mGluR1 | deletion | Not Determined   |

Extracellular

Ca²⁺  
Trnsp  

NMDAR AMPAR VGCC  
Kₐ  
K⁺  
Glu  

mGluR1  

PLC  

α  
Gβγ  

DAG  

TRPC  

IP₃  
PKC  

Calbindin  
Parvalbumin  

Na⁺  
Ca²⁺  

SERCA  
RyR  
IP₃R  

Cytosol  

ER

ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

Extracellular

(SCA6/42  
EA2/5)  
VGCC  

KCa  

(EA6)  
EAAT  

Glu (Roma families  
from Bulgaria)  
mGluR1  

Spectrin  

(SCA5)  
Shank  

Homer1  

PLC  

Gβγ  

DAG  

IP3  

TRPC  

(SCA14)  
PKC  

Calbindin  
Parvalbumin  

FGF14  
(SCA27)  

Ca²⁺  

SERCA  

RyR  

IP₃R  

(SCA15/16)  

(SCA29)  

ER  

(SCA1)  
ATXN1  

(CAMRQ3)  
CARP  

ATXN2/3  

PMCA2  

TBP  

SP-1  

RORα  

GRN  

PolyQ  

CBP  

Nucleus

- Deranged calcium signaling may be the cause of hereditary ataxias.
- Gene mutations in calcium-mediating proteins lead to abnormal intracellular calcium levels and neurodegenerative diseases like Spinocerebellar and Episodic ataxias.
- Pharmacological treatments in mouse models for hereditary ataxias may provide therapeutic options for the future.
