
Review in Advance first posted online  
on August 3, 2016. (Changes may  
still occur before final publication  
online and in print.)

Integrins as Herpesvirus  
Receptors and Mediators  
of the Host Signalosome  

Gabriella Campadelli-Fiume,$^{1}$  
Donna Collins-McMillen,$^{2}$ Tatiana Gianni,$^{1}$  
and Andrew D. Yurochko$^{2,3}$  

$^{1}$Department of Experimental, Diagnostic and Specialty Medicine, University of Bologna,  
40126 Bologna, Italy; email: gabriella.campadelli@unibo  

$^{2}$Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Center for Molecular and Tumor Virology,  
and Center for Cardiovascular Diseases and Sciences, Louisiana State University Health  
Sciences Center, Shreveport, Louisiana 71130; email: ayuroc@lsuhsc.edu  

$^{3}$Feist-Weiller Cancer Center and Center for Excellence in Arthritis and Rheumatology,  
Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center, Shreveport, Louisiana 71130  

Annu. Rev. Virol. 2016. 3:13.1–13.22  

The Annual Review of Virology is online at  
virology.annualreviews.org  

This article’s doi:  
10.1146/annurev-virology-110615-035618  

Copyright © 2016 by Annual Reviews.  
All rights reserved  

**Keywords**  
HSV, EBV, HCMV, KSHV, integrins, signal transduction  

**Abstract**  
The repertoire of herpesvirus receptors consists of nonintegrin and integrin molecules. Integrins interact with the conserved glycoproteins gH/gL or gB. This interaction is a conserved biology across the *Herpesviridae* family, likely directed to promote virus entry and endocytosis. Herpesviruses exploit this interaction to execute a range of critical functions that include $(a)$ relocation of nonintegrin receptors (e.g., herpes simplex virus nectin1 and Kaposi’s sarcoma-associated herpesvirus EphA2), or association with nonintegrin receptors (i.e., human cytomegalovirus EGFR), to dictate species-specific entry pathways; $(b)$ activation of multiple signaling pathways (e.g., Ca$^{2+}$ release, c-Src, FAK, MAPK, and PI3K); and $(c)$ association with Rho GTPases, tyrosine kinase receptors, Toll-like receptors, which result in cytoskeletal remodeling, differential cell type targeting, and innate responses. In turn, integrins can be modulated by viral proteins (e.g., Epstein-Barr virus LMPs) to favor spread of transformed cells. We propose that herpesviruses evolved a multipartite entry system to allow interaction with multiple receptors, including integrins, required for their sophisticated life cycle.

VI03CH13-CampadelliFiume     ARI     26 July 2016     14:53

**INTRODUCTION**

Integrins are a large superfamily of cell surface receptors critical for cell-to-cell and cell-to-extracellular matrix communications (1). These α-β heterodimers span the plasma membrane and transmit bidirectional signals that regulate key cellular functions, including proliferation, migration, apoptosis, and differentiation (2). There are at least 18 α and 8 β subunits that can be assembled into 24 unique receptors (1, 3) with varied tissue distribution, binding properties, and signaling characteristics (4, 5). Ligand-activated integrins cluster and form large signaling assemblies with various kinases (3, 6), adaptors, or Rho GTPases to create distinct signalosomes that can be ligand and cell type specific. They also associate with and/or influence a number of receptors, including various receptor tyrosine kinases such as growth factor receptors [e.g., epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)] and Toll-like receptors (TLRs). Through this array of interactions, integrins regulate a wide range of biological processes, such as angiogenesis, cell division, development, endocytosis, homeostasis, innate and adaptive responses, motility, and wound healing, as well as disease states, including cancer and chronic inflammatory diseases (7, 8). Because of their broad cellular distribution and control of key functions, a large number of pathogens, including viruses, likely evolved to exploit integrins for their infectious cycle.

A group of pathogens that evolved to include cellular integrins in their repertoire of entry receptors is the Herpesviridae family, divided into three subfamilies (*Alphaherpesvirinae*, *Betaherpesvirinae*, and *Gammaherpesvirinae*), whose respective members are herpes simplex virus (HSV) and varicella-zoster virus (VZV); human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) and human herpesviruses 6 and 7 (HHV-6 and -7); and Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) and Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV). All herpesviruses enter host cells via two major pathways: (*a*) fusion of the viral envelope with the plasma membrane or (*b*) endocytic uptake followed by fusion with an endocytic vesicle (9–11). Herpesviruses exploit multiple cell surface receptors for entry into target cells, likely to broaden cellular tropism and allow individual herpesviruses to infect their specific target cell (11).

A peculiar feature of herpesviruses is the use of a multipartite apparatus of glycoproteins, activated in a cascade fashion to promote attachment and entry (12, 13). The apparatus consists of three components. The first is attachment glycoproteins. The second is species-specific glycoproteins—exemplified by HSV glycoprotein (g)D, EBV gp42, KSHV ORF4 and gpK8.1A, the gH-associated HCMV glycoproteins gO and UL128–131, and HHV-6 gQ1 and gQ2—that usually initiate the activation cascade. The third is a core fusion apparatus made of gH/gL and gB, which is conserved across the family. gB executes virion-to-cell fusion in the prototypical herpesviruses, HSV and EBV (12, 14), but can also function as a receptor-binding and signaling protein ligand in HCMV and KSHV (15–17). gH/gL is thought to be an intermediate in the glycoprotein cascade (12, 18–20).

The notion that most herpesviruses use integrins as a key component for entry emerged from a series of insightful discoveries over the past 15–20 years, summarized briefly below. To our knowledge, the first hint came from the Minson and Browne group (21). They mutated the RGD motif in HSV gH but found no effect on entry. It was later demonstrated that HSV gH interchangeably employs α<sub>v</sub>β<sub>6</sub> and α<sub>v</sub>β<sub>8</sub> integrins as entry receptors. The latter interacts with HSV gH independently of the RGD motif. In retrospect, no phenotype of the RGD mutant virus would have been apparent in cells that express α<sub>v</sub>β<sub>8</sub> in addition to other α<sub>v</sub> integrins. Years later, the same authors studied the binding of α<sub>v</sub> integrins to soluble gH/gL and found α<sub>v</sub>β<sub>3</sub> as the most likely candidate (22, 23). Meanwhile, Xiao et al. (24) reported the involvement of β<sub>1</sub> integrins in epithelial cell entry through the EBV-specific glycoprotein BMRF-2, whereas the Chandran laboratory (25) showed that α<sub>3</sub>β<sub>1</sub> integrins serve as receptor for KSHV, with gB, not gH/gL, as the ligand. HCMV is potentially more complex: Wang and colleagues (26) showed

Campadelli-Fiume et al.

Changes may still occur before final publication online and in print

Table 1 Integrins involved in herpesvirus entry

| Virus                     | Integrin         | Target glycoprotein       | Biological effect or function                                                                 | Reference(s) |
|---------------------------|------------------|--------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------|
| Herpes simplex virus      | $\alpha_{v}\beta_{3}$ | gH/gL                   | Routing factor to lipid rafts and endosomes and triggering of endocytosis                      | 37, 38       |
|                           | $\alpha_{v}\beta_{6}$<br>$\alpha_{v}\beta_{8}$ | gH/gL                   | Entry receptors, triggering of endocytosis                                                | 33, 40       |
| Human cytomegalovirus     | $\alpha_{2}\beta_{1}$<br>$\alpha_{6}\beta_{1}$ | gH/gL                   | Entry receptors in fibroblasts                                                           | 27           |
|                           | $\alpha_{v}\beta_{3}$ | gH/gL                   | Entry receptors in fibroblasts and trophoblasts                                             | 26, 27, 41   |
|                           | $\beta_{1}$        | gB                       | Entry receptor                                                                        | 17           |
|                           | $\alpha_{1}\beta_{1}$<br>$\alpha_{3}\beta_{1}$ | gH/gL/UL128-131          | Entry receptors in trophoblasts                                                          | 41           |
|                           | $\beta_{1}$ and $\beta_{3}$ | gH/gL/UL128-131<br>and gB | Entry receptors in monocytes                                                             | 28, 43       |
|                           | $\beta_{1}$ and $\beta_{3}$ | gH/gL/UL128-131          | Entry receptors in epithelial and endothelial cells                                        | 42, 54–56    |
| Epstein-Barr virus       | $\alpha_{v}\beta_{5}$<br>$\alpha_{v}\beta_{6}$<br>$\alpha_{v}\beta_{8}$ | gH/gL                   | Epithelial cell entry receptors                                                         | 29, 30; reviewed in 62 |
| Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus | $\alpha_{3}\beta_{1}$<br>$\alpha_{v}\beta_{3}$<br>$\alpha_{5}\beta_{5}$<br>$\alpha_{9}\beta_{1}$ | gB                       | Entry receptors in fibroblasts, epithelial cells, and endothelial cells                  | Reviewed in 79 |

demonstrated in HSV and HCMV. Integrin-mediated activation of gH or gB serves as  
a checkpoint and synchronizes endocytosis with the cascade of viral glycoprotein activation.  
4. According to this view, the multipartite glycoprotein system of herpesviruses provides an  
opportunity to make use of an enlarged repertoire of receptors.

# INTEGRINS AS HERPESVIRUS ENTRY RECEPTORS

## Herpes Simplex Virus Entry

Three integrins participate in HSV infection (Table 1). $\alpha_{v}\beta_{3}$ integrin defines the entry pathway  
and contributes to the recognition of incoming virions via an innate response, whereas $\alpha_{v}\beta_{6}$ and  
$\alpha_{v}\beta_{8}$ integrins participate as coreceptors for virus entry. Their cellular and tissue distribution  
is similar. They are essentially epithelial and endothelial cell integrins expressed in proliferating  
epithelia ($\beta_{6}$); keratinocytes; neural tissue and peripheral nerves ($\beta_{8}$); fibroblasts and healing tissues  
($\beta_{8}$); endothelia; and various types of tumors, including in prostate cancer, breast cancer, ovarian  
cancer, and melanoma ($\beta_{3}$). All three integrins bind gH/gL. However, $\alpha_{v}\beta_{6}$ and $\alpha_{v}\beta_{8}$ integrins  
bind gH/gL at high ($10^{-8} M$) affinity, whereas $\alpha_{v}\beta_{3}$ binds gH/gL at lower ($10^{-6} M$) affinity (33).

HSV enters different cells by different routes (Figure 1), namely by fusion of the virion envelope  
with plasma membranes, by fusion with neutral or acidic endosomes, or by macropinocytosis (9,  
10, 34–36). The routes are dictated by the cell and not by variations in composition of the virion  
proteins. A major cellular determinant that routes HSV to one or the other entry pathway is  
$\alpha_{v}\beta_{3}$ integrin, which relocates the major receptor nectin1 to lipid rafts (37, 38). In this way,  
$\alpha_{v}\beta_{3}$ integrin promotes HSV infection through a pathway that initiates at the lipid-raft platform,  
proceeds through dynamin 2 and acidic endosomes, and is independent of caveolin1 (37). At this  
stage, $\alpha_{v}\beta_{3}$ integrin elicits early signaling activities and also interacts with TLR2, as detailed  
below.

$\alpha_{v}\beta_{6}$ and $\alpha_{v}\beta_{8}$ integrins participate in HSV entry as additional receptors (or coreceptors)  
relative to the gD receptors (33). Several lines of evidence support this notion. HSV infection of  
epithelial, neuronal, and keratinocytic cells is inhibited by cell pre-exposure to function-blocking  
antibodies to integrins or by depletion of specific integrins. The simultaneous depletion of both  
$\beta_{6}$ and $\beta_{8}$ integrins reduces virus entry to a much greater extent, implying that HSV uses $\alpha_{v}\beta_{6}$ and  
$\alpha_{v}\beta_{8}$ integrins in an interchangeable manner. The strong inhibition of HSV entry by antibodies  
to $\beta_{6}$ and $\beta_{8}$ integrins, or through their depletion, indicates the key role these two integrins play in  
HSV entry (33). $\alpha_{v}\beta_{6}$ and $\alpha_{v}\beta_{8}$ integrins are required for HSV entry irrespective of the pathway  
of entry.

With respect to the role played by $\alpha_{v}\beta_{6}$ and $\alpha_{v}\beta_{8}$ integrins in HSV infection, key features are  
as follows:

1. When $\alpha_{v}\beta_{6}$ and $\alpha_{v}\beta_{8}$ integrins are expressed alone in J cells (modified BHK cells), which  
do not express any gD receptor (in the absence of nectin1), they do not enable HSV infec-  
tion. However, they do increase infection of nectin1-positive J cells. Thus, $\alpha_{v}\beta_{6}$ and $\alpha_{v}\beta_{8}$  
integrins do not suffice as HSV receptors for entry, and their role is in addition to, and not  
alternative to, that of the gD receptors. Essentially, they serve as coreceptors (33).

2. $\alpha_{v}\beta_{6}$ and $\alpha_{v}\beta_{8}$ integrins enable virion endocytosis into acidic or neutral endosomes. In this  
respect, they play a role essentially similar to that played during entry of other herpesviruses  
(e.g., HCMV) (Figure 1) and of other families of viruses, including adenoviruses, some  
picornaviruses, reoviruses, and hantaviruses (39).

3. The RGD motif in gH is required for HSV infection mediated by $\alpha_{v}\beta_{6}$ integrin, but not by  
$\alpha_{v}\beta_{8}$ integrin. As mentioned above, this difference explains the earlier observation by the

Plasma
membrane
fusion

Entry receptor
(coreceptor)

Integrins

Attachment
receptor

Endocytosis

Figure 1

Herpesvirus-integrin interactions important for viral entry. A generic herpesvirus is shown binding to attachment receptors, entry receptors (coreceptors), and/or integrins. A variety of β integrins are engaged across the Herpesviridae family (see Tables 1 and 2). The virion interaction with cognate receptors triggers specific entry pathways; three examples are shown. (1) Fusion at the plasma membrane mediated by integrin and nonintegrin receptors (e.g., herpes simplex virus infection of Vero cells, Epstein-Barr virus infection of epithelial cells, and human cytomegalovirus infection of fibroblasts). (2) Endocytosis mediated by integrin and nonintegrin receptors (e.g., herpes simplex virus infection of most epithelial cells, human cytomegalovirus infection of epithelial and endothelial cells and of monocytes, and Kaposi’s sarcoma–associated herpesvirus infection of multiple cell types). (3) Endocytosis mediated by nonintegrin receptors (e.g., Epstein-Barr virus infection of B cells).

Minson and Browne group (21) that a recombinant virus mutated in the RGD motif of gH is infectious, likely via α<sub>v</sub>β<sub>8</sub> integrin.

4. α<sub>v</sub>β<sub>6</sub> and α<sub>v</sub>β<sub>8</sub> integrins participate in the cascade of glycoprotein activation that starts with receptor-bound gD, then propagates to gH/gL and finally to gB.

A key finding was that integrins induce conformational changes to gH/gL; namely, they promote the displacement of gL from the gH/gL heterodimer (40). Because this displacement takes place only when all the actors of the entry apparatus (gD, gB, nectin1) are present and is prevented by a potent neutralizing antibody to gH/gL, which blocks virus infection, the displacement appears to be part of the process of gH activation critical for HSV entry. The implication is that gL functions as an inhibitor of gH and maintains gH in an inhibited form until receptor-bound gD and integrins signal to gH/gL. Given the multipartite nature of the entry machinery and their stepwise activation, putting both virion endocytosis and glycoprotein activation under the control of integrins might synchronize the two events and ensure that the fusion machinery is not prematurely activated, and exhausted, until endocytosis takes place. In conclusion, the α<sub>v</sub>β<sub>6</sub> and α<sub>v</sub>β<sub>8</sub> integrins constitute a checkpoint in the process of HSV glycoprotein activation.

# Human Cytomegalovirus Entry

During HCMV infection, the use of cellular integrins as receptors for entry is a more complex scenario when compared with the analogous process in alphaherpesviruses. A number of distinct combinations of α and β integrin chains are involved in HCMV entry; however, the particular subset of integrin heterodimers used varies among cell types infected. This variance results in functional differences both in the entry process and in the later events of viral infection, many of which seem designed to ensure that infection proceeds properly in each cell type.

The earliest reports identify α₂β₁, α₆β₁, and αᵥβ₃ integrins as important receptors required for HCMV entry into the model cell type of fibroblasts (26, 27). Subsequent findings revealed a role for α₁β₁, α₃β₁, and αᵥβ₃ integrins in entry into trophoblasts (41), a clinically important cell type given the severe pathogenesis associated with congenital HCMV infection. As subsequently shown, simultaneous activation of both β₁ and β₃ integrins is required for HCMV entry into endothelial cells and monocytes (28, 42, 43), two cell types that contribute to hematogenous dissemination and viral persistence. Taken together, these data indicate that HCMV universally binds the β₁ and β₃ integrin subfamilies, using their signaling capacity to modulate the process of viral entry (Table 1), and binds α subunits with a higher degree of variance (α₂ and α₆ in fibroblasts versus α₁ and α₃ in trophoblasts), hinting that perhaps the α chains dictate the cell type-specific factors associated with HCMV entry and signaling (further discussed below). Thus, it appears that HCMV has evolved to exploit the flexible nature of integrin signaling to create cell type-specific functional differences that benefit the virus. We propose that differences in the signaling events associated with entry (Figure 1) may shape the environment of an infected cell, setting the stage for differential cell type-specific outcomes that, when considered cumulatively, optimize the viral life cycle.

The entry process begins with an initial tethering to cellular heparan sulfate proteoglycans (HSPGs) by the HCMV glycoproteins gM/gN (44) or gB (45). This attachment event is necessary, but not sufficient, for viral entry and is followed by an additional binding event(s) to a group of coreceptors, held in close association on the cell surface in lipid rafts. Independent reports implicate either EGFR/integrin (46, 47) or platelet-derived growth factor receptor (PDGFR)/integrin (48) coreceptor complexes as playing a key role in the process of HCMV entry. HCMV binds a number of additional cellular receptors [e.g., major histocompatibility complex (MHC) I] (49–53), although not all participate in viral entry. Remarkably, the common receptor to all entry events appears to be cellular integrins. Consistent with this, Feire et al. (27) showed that blocking α₂β₁, α₆β₁, or αᵥβ₃ integrin with function-blocking antibodies reduced viral entry into fibroblasts. Likewise, the use of function-blocking antibodies against both β₁ and β₃ integrins prior to ex vivo infection greatly reduced HCMV entry into primary monocytes (28, 43).

Of further interest, and adding to the complexity of entry events, additional differences in entry efficiency can be attributed to variance in the viral glycoprotein complex serving as a ligand for cellular integrins. HCMV expresses two different gH/gL complexes: a gH/gL/gO trimeric complex, sufficient for viral attachment and entry into fibroblasts (54, 55), and a pentameric complex composed of gH, gL, and UL128–131, required for efficient entry into epithelial, endothelial, and dendritic cells as well as monocytes (28, 55–59). Although both the trimeric and pentameric gH/gL complexes are capable of binding β₁ and β₃ integrins, only HCMV possessing the pentameric complex can fully activate the integrin-c-Src signaling axis to promote efficient entry into target monocytes (28) and, presumably, into epithelial and endothelial cells. Together, these findings support the notion that HCMV takes advantage of the widespread distribution and variance in integrin heterodimers among various cell types to create differential infection outcomes that are cell type specific and can be tailored to meet various goals at different stages of the viral life cycle.

# Epstein-Barr Virus Entry

EBV targets essentially two types of cells: B cells and epithelial cells (reviewed in 60–62). Infection of B cells requires the interaction between the attachment glycoprotein gp350 or its splice variant gp220 and complement receptor 2 or CD21, followed by the interaction of gp42 with MHC II (63, 64) (Table 1; Figure 1). The activated gp42 is thought to transmit a signal to gH/gL and gB, with no further activation of the glycoproteins by cellular receptors, including integrins (reviewed in 12, 65, 66). Thus, gp42 confers specificity to B cell entry and is the determinant for B cell tropism. Some apparently contrasting results pointed to β₁ integrins, which interact with the BMRF-2 glycoprotein (24). These integrins are expressed by naive B cells of distinct lymphoid origin and by memory B cells from nasal mucosa-associated lymphoid tissues. Their expression increases susceptibility of memory B cells (67). In an independent study, a mutant virus deleted in BMRF-2 exhibited approximately 50% reduction in EBV attachment to oral epithelial cells, but not to B cells, suggesting that BMRF-2 is critical for EBV infection of oral epithelial cells, but not of B cells (23).

Entry into epithelial cells is independent of gp42 and MHC II and involves the direct interaction of gH/gL with one of three epithelial αᵥ integrins: αᵥβ₅, αᵥβ₆, or αᵥβ₈. The αᵥ integrin–gH/gL interaction is thought to provide the direct trigger for activation of gB. Evidence rests on the finding that addition of soluble integrins can substitute for membrane-bound integrins and trigger fusion with epithelial cells (29, 30). This type of experiment argues that the role of the integrin is not to bring the virion and cell in close proximity (62). It favors the view that the effect exerted by the soluble receptor is a conformational change to the virion ligand, in this case gH/gL, and that this change is part of the activation process of gH/gL. Additional evidence for the triggering role of the gH/gL-integrin interaction and a conformational change in gH/gL at the interface between domains I and II is provided by mutational analysis of gH/gL (68). Whether this change includes the releases gL remains to be investigated.

The presence of gp42 hinders gH/gL interaction with integrins (62). Essentially, EBV switches from B cell to epithelial cell infection because virion envelopes contain the tripartite gH/gL/gp42 complex as well as the bipartite gH/gL complex. Virus grown in B cells carries a higher proportion of the bipartite complex than does virus grown in epithelial cells; therefore, it would be prone to infect epithelial cells (62). In vivo, the infection of epithelial cells may take place by transfer from B cells, probably via a viral synapse (69). This transfer involves gH/gL and occurs through cocapping of EBV with integrins (β₁, αᵥβ₆, lymphocyte function–associated antigen 1, CD11b) as well as additional adhesion molecules (intracellular adhesion molecule 1, CD48) at the virological synapse. In essence, αᵥ integrins provide EBV the portal of entry into epithelial cells and the possibility of expanding tropism to these cellular targets.

# Kaposi’s Sarcoma–Associated Herpesvirus Entry

KSHV enters fibroblasts via dynamin-dependent clathrin-dependent endocytosis—a peculiar pathway not described for other herpesviruses (70, 71)—and enters endothelial cells, an important target for KSHV, via dynamin-independent macropinocytosis (71) (Table 1; Figure 1). The different pathways appear to be consequent to differences in signaling elicited by the various receptors, as outlined below. The virion glycoproteins involved in attachment/entry are two unique glycoproteins, ORF4 and gpK8.1A, plus the conserved gH/gL and gB.

In addition to the HSPG attachment receptors engaged by gB (15), gH (72), ORF4 (73), and gpK8.1A (74, 75), two receptors are engaged in a sequential manner during infection of fibroblasts, epithelial cells, and endothelial cells: Ephrin type A receptor 2 (EphA2) (72, 76, 77) and integrins

(16, 25, 78). The gH/gL interaction with EphA2 is critical for infection of epithelial and endothelial cells and for triggering endocytosis (76). gB interacts in an interchangeable manner with $\alpha_{3}\beta_{1}$, $\alpha_{v}\beta_{3}$, and $\alpha_{v}\beta_{5}$ integrins (Table 1) to mediate entry into fibroblasts and endothelial cells (reviewed in 79). Of note, the KSHV interaction with integrins by way of gB is unique. Most herpesviruses bind integrins via gH/gL. HCMV interacts with integrins through both gH/gL and gB. Evidence for integrin involvement rests in the findings that antibodies against $\alpha_{v}$ and $\beta_{1}$ integrins block viral attachment to fibroblasts and endothelial cells (25, 78, 80) and that pretreatment with soluble $\alpha_{3}\beta_{1}$, $\alpha_{v}\beta_{3}$, and $\alpha_{v}\beta_{5}$ integrins inhibits infection of a variety of cell types (78). $\alpha_{3}\beta_{1}$, $\alpha_{v}\beta_{3}$, and $\alpha_{v}\beta_{5}$ integrins bind gB via a traditional RGD domain (16), consistent with the finding that pretreatment of fibroblasts or endothelial cells with soluble RGD peptides, or antibodies against RGD-gB peptides, reduces KSHV entry (25). gB also binds $\alpha_{9}\beta_{1}$ integrins, and pretreatment with $\alpha_{9}-$ and $\beta_{1}$-blocking antibodies reduces binding and entry in both cell types (81). However, the importance of $\alpha_{9}\beta_{1}$ integrins in KSHV infection remains to be further investigated.

# THE INTEGRIN-DEPENDENT HERPESVIRAL SIGNALOSOME ACTIVATED AT VIRUS ATTACHMENT/ENTRY

## Herpes Simplex Virus

A series of events take place during HSV attachment/entry and appear to depend on integrin signaling (Figure 2). Ca$^{2+}$ release from intracellular stores and the concomitant activation of focal adhesion kinase (FAK) were decreased upon the simultaneous silencing of $\alpha_{v}$ and $\beta_{3}$ subunits or in the absence of gH from virions (82). Although the silencing of $\alpha_{v}$ integrin may have reduced the expression of integrins other than $\beta_{3}$ (e.g., $\beta_{6}$, $\beta_{8}$), the body of evidence pointing to $\alpha_{v}\beta_{3}$ integrin as the signaling molecule is nonetheless convincing. Thus, phosphorylation of c-Src and Akt, two kinases downstream of FAK, is prevented upon $\beta_{3}$ integrin silencing (83). These events may favor actin cytoskeleton rearrangements and thus enable capsid transport to the nucleus.

A second series of events not ascribed to integrins, but likely dependent on them, are the dynamics of actin filaments. Integrins activate the family of Rho GTPases, including Cdc42, Rac1, and RhoA (84), which affect filopodia, lamellipodia, and stress fiber formation, respectively (85). HSV induces filopodia formation through Cdc42 activation, likely to enable virion surfing to the site of entry in the plasma membrane (34). Interestingly, Cdc42 and Rac1 activation were observed in polarized epithelia of MDCKII cells at sites of HSV entry. Dominant negative forms of these small GTPases blocked virus entry (86). Together with Ca$^{2+}$ release, changes in the actin cytoskeleton may favor endocytosis.

## Human Cytomegalovirus

Similar to HSV, HCMV infection induces cellular changes likely dependent on integrins. These include changes in intracellular Ca$^{2+}$ homeostasis (87) and activation of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) (88), FAK (89), paxillin, and c-Src (43, 89) (Figure 2). Additionally, a number of transcription factors are activated in response to HCMV infection, including some that are downstream of integrins, such as c-Fos and c-Jun (90), as well as nuclear factor κB (NF-κB) (91–93), resulting in transcriptional reprogramming of infected cells (Table 2). Although cellular activation is a common theme among a variety of HCMV-infected cell types, there are also differential cell type-specific outcomes. For example, in permissive cells, viral activation of cellular signaling cascades results in transactivation of the major viral immediate early promoter, leading to viral gene transcription and productive infection (94–96). In nonpermissive monocytes,

Changes may still occur before final publication online and in print

VI03CH13-CampadelliFiume ARI 26 July 2016 14:53

### Signaling at virus attachment/entry
Common to the Herpesviridae family

### Coactivation of integrins and additional receptors
Species-specific host responses

#### Signalosome:
- Ca²⁺ flux,
- Rho GTPases,
- c-Src, MAPK, PI3K,
- NF-κB, etc.

#### Entry receptor (coreceptor)
- Integrins

#### Additional receptor
- Integrins

#### Cytoskeletal changes (promote entry and cellular motility)

#### Cell invasion

#### Transcription factor activation (e.g., NF-κB)
- ↑ Viral genes
- ↑ Cellular genes

#### ↑ Innate responses
- ↑ Proinflammatory events

---

**Figure 2**

The integrin-dependent signalosome in herpesvirus-infected cells. A generic herpesvirus binds to integrins and entry receptors/coreceptors and/or additional receptors. In addition to integrins, entry receptors/coreceptors (e.g., HVEM, EGFR, PDGFR, EphA2, MHC II) and/or additional receptors (TLR2, TLR4) are engaged across the *Herpesviridae* family. This results in a variety of cellular signaling pathways and cell responses. Some responses are common to the family (e.g., Ca²⁺ flux, cytoskeletal changes, activation of the c-Src–PI3K–Akt axis), whereas others are specific to one or some species (e.g., interaction with EGFR or TLRs); all may lead to cellular motility, invasion, innate defense, or immune responses. This triggering of defensive processes can be detrimental to the infecting virus, which therefore puts in place viral countermeasures, or it can be usurped by the infecting herpesvirus to positively regulate the infection process. Ultimately, a common evolutionary theme of herpesvirus infections is the use of gH/gL and/or gB binding to integrins as a conserved mechanism to modulate critical cellular processes during infection.

Virus-induced signaling cascades promote functional changes that allow viral dissemination and persistence. Indeed, activation of PI3K and NF-κB following HCMV infection of monocytes promotes changes in cell motility and migration as well as cytokine/chemokine expression, all of which promote efficient dissemination of HCMV in target carrier monocytes (92, 93, 97–101).

Virus-altered motility occurs through changes in the cytoskeleton, and in the case of infected monocytes, it is also required for viral entry (43). In contrast, the cytoskeleton does not seem to play a role during entry into fibroblasts. However, integrin-dependent changes to the cytoskeleton appear to be another common theme among herpesviruses; for HCMV, these changes provide a compelling molecular link between integrin activation and the cell type–specific effects observed during HCMV infection. Bidirectional cross talk occurs between the EGFR and integrin signaling axes following HCMV infection of fibroblasts (26), whereas unidirectional cross talk from integrin to EGFR is seen in monocytes (102). Taken together, differences in integrin-associated signaling following HCMV infection, as well as differences in the downstream effects, suggest that HCMV

www.annualreviews.org • Herpesviruses and Integrins I3.9

Changes may still occur before final publication online and in print

| Virus | Integrin | Additional receptor (coreceptor) or modulating molecule | Targets and responses | Reference(s) |
|-------|----------|----------------------------------------------------|----------------------|--------------|
| Herpes simplex virus | $\alpha_{v}\beta_{3}$ | TLR-2 | ↑ Innate response | 33, 83, 122, 127 |
| Human cytomegalovirus | $\beta_{1}$ and $\beta_{3}$ | EGFR | Vesicle trafficking in monocytes | 148 |
| Human cytomegalovirus | $\beta_{1}$ and $\beta_{3}$ | EGFR | ↑ Inflammatory responses and motility, survival, and differentiation of monocytes | 43, 47, 149–153 |
| Human cytomegalovirus | $\beta_{1}$ and $\beta_{3}$ | EGFR | ↑ Signaling pathways (e.g., MAPK, PI3K, c-Src) and transcriptional regulation (i.e., NF-$\kappa$B) in endothelial cells, fibroblasts, and monocytes | 42, 92, 93, 95–102, 136, 154, 155 |
| Human cytomegalovirus | $\beta_{1}$ and $\beta_{3}$ | EGFR | ↑ Endothelial cell motility, proliferation, and tubular morphogenesis | 42, 154 |
| Human cytomegalovirus | $\beta_{1}$ and $\beta_{3}$ | TLR | Select cellular and cytokine regulation | 52, 53 |
| Epstein-Barr virus | $\alpha_{5}$ | LMP1 | c-Src, FAK, and metastatic potential | 137, 138 |
| Epstein-Barr virus | $\alpha_{v}$ | LMP2 | Syk, Akt, FAK, cell migration, and metastatic potential | 140 |
| Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus | $\alpha_{3}\beta_{1}$<br>$\alpha_{v}\beta_{3}$<br>$\alpha_{5}\beta_{5}$<br>$\alpha_{9}\beta_{1}$ | EphA2, xCT, and others | ↑ Signaling pathways (i.e., PI3K, c-Cbl, c-Src, FAK, MAPK, NF-$\kappa$B) | 70, 71, 77, 78, 103–106, 110, 112, 115; reviewed in 79 |

addition, Ephrin receptors, which mediate KSHV entry into a variety of cell types, induce integrin activation and signaling (113, 114).

Although the different entry pathways share many molecular players, there exist cell type–dependent differences related to lipid rafts (Table 2). EphA2-mediated PI3K activation occurs at lipid rafts in endothelial cells and independently of lipid rafts in fibroblasts. In endothelial cells during virion attachment, c-Cbl relocates KSHV, $\alpha_{3}\beta_{1}$ and $\alpha_{v}\beta_{3}$ (but not $\alpha_{v}\beta_{5}$) integrins, and xCT to lipid rafts. Integrins recruit EphA2 to the signaling complex. Thereafter, FAK and c-Src induce macropinocytosis (77, 112). This is in contrast to fibroblasts, in which KSHV, HSPGs, EphA2, and integrins are all associated, but not at lipid rafts (70, 71, 115). In addition to $\alpha_{3}\beta_{1}$ and $\alpha_{v}\beta_{3}$ integrins, $\alpha_{v}\beta_{5}$ integrin is recruited to fibroblast signaling complexes. FAK, c-Src, and PI3K signaling drive virion internalization; dynamin pinches off the endocytic vesicle, which is directed to RAB5$^{+}$ early endosomes (115). Importantly, in addition to determining the cell type–specific pathway of entry, differences in lipid-raft (or non-lipid-raft) complexes control whether the infection will be productive, at least in endothelial cells (77, 112).

---

**SPECIES-SPECIFIC HOST RESPONSES ELICITED THROUGH THE INTEGRIN SIGNALOSOME**

**Innate Response to Herpes Simplex Virus Elicited Through Integrin Cooperation with TLRs**

The host innate response to HSV is elicited by incoming virions, including virions defective in fusion (e.g., gD$^{-/-}$ virions), and is followed by a more sustained response dependent on viral protein synthesis (116, 117; reviewed in 118, 119). It is also elicited by TLRs and non-TLR sensors. TLR2 provides a major contribution in epithelial and neuronal cells, whereas the cytoplasmic sensors provide a major response in monocytic cells (118, 120–122). The early NF-$\kappa$B response is counteracted by the immediate early proteins ICP0 and ICP27 and the virion host shutoff RNase, referred to as VHS RNase (119, 123–126).

$\alpha_{v}\beta_{3}$ integrin plays a critical role as a cellular defense mechanism against HSV. Essentially, it serves as a sensor of HSV in conjunction with the plasma membrane TLRs, particularly TLR2 and its heterodimeric partners (Table 2) (122, 127, 128). $\alpha_{v}\beta_{3}$ integrin signals through two pathways. The major pathway is in cooperation with TLR2 and leads to augmentation of myeloid differentiation factor 88 (MYD88) signaling (83). This signaling pathway connects TLR2 to the NF-$\kappa$B pathway. The combined $\alpha_{v}\beta_{3}$ integrin–TLR2 signal elicits strong interferon (IFN)-1 induction, NF-$\kappa$B activation, and a polarized set of cytokines and receptors, including IL-2 and IL-10 (122). It is triggered by the simultaneous binding of virion gH/gL to TLR2 and to $\alpha_{v}\beta_{3}$ integrins and the consequent cross-linking of the two types of receptors (83). It occurs in epithelial, including keratinocytic, and neuronal cell lines, that is, in cells that represent experimental models of HSV targets in humans (129). The second pathway is elicited by $\alpha_{v}\beta_{3}$ integrin alone, independently of TLR2; signals through c-Src, Syk, card-9, and Trif; and targets interferon regulatory factor (IRF)3 and IRF7. This cascade provides an overall modest contribution to the innate response, compared to the contribution provided by the integrin–TLR2 response (122). $\alpha_{v}\beta_{6}$ and $\alpha_{v}\beta_{8}$ integrins, the entry coreceptors, do not contribute to the innate response (127).

The importance of the $\alpha_{v}\beta_{3}$ integrin defense mechanism is underscored by the observation that HSV deploys countermeasures, including the immediate early ICP0 protein. Replication of the $\Delta$ICP0 mutant is rescued to wild-type levels when the $\alpha_{v}\beta_{3}$ integrin–TLR2 defensive arm is absent (122). One of the cytoplasmic activities of ICP0 is to promote the degradation of the MYD88 adaptor (130). Likely, this is the mechanism by which ICP0 counteracts the cooperative $\alpha_{v}\beta_{3}$

integrin–TLR2 response. The αvβ3 integrin–TLR2 response is also elicited by lipopolysaccharide (122). In particular, β3 integrin physically interacts with bacterial pathogens (131, 132) and delivers bacterial lipopeptide to TLR2, thus inducing inflammatory cytokines.

**NPC:** nasopharyngeal carcinoma

**LMP:** latent membrane protein

**Human Cytomegalovirus Uses the Proinflammatory Process for Viral Persistence**

Like HSV, HCMV appears to trigger an antiviral innate immune response after activating TLR2 during the entry process (52, 53). This process is likely similar to what occurs in HSV, where integrins are complexed with TLR2 and TLR2 is incidentally activated as an undesirable side effect of the entry process. In both replication-permissive fibroblasts and nonpermissive monocytes, there is a strong proinflammatory immune response (53, 101, 133). In fibroblasts, newly synthesized viral gene products inhibit the induction of the antiviral response triggered by HCMV binding and entry (133). However, no such viral response exists in infected monocytes, which are initially nonpermissive for viral replication and de novo synthesis of viral gene products (134). By contrast, for HSV, the integrin–TLR axis leads to IFN production and is therefore essentially defensive. HCMV has evolved to twist the proinflammatory immune response of infected monocytes to create a favorable environment that promotes viral dissemination, a strategy that once again seems to reflect important differences in binding/signaling events between these two cell types. For example, the activation of PI3K and NF-κB seen following HCMV infection of monocytes promotes changes in cellular products that regulate cell motility, transendothelial migration, and cytokine/chemokine expression, which collectively promote efficient dissemination of HCMV in carrier monocytes (92, 93, 97–101). In support of this finding, knockdown of the related murine cytomegalovirus CC chemokine homolog, MCK-2, decreases in vivo dissemination of this virus (135). These signaling events are likewise responsible for inducing the distinct M1/M2 polarization observed in differentiating monocytes/macrophages following HCMV infection (136), an important event required for the establishment of viral persistence, as HCMV-differentiated macrophages support viral replication and the full viral life cycle (134). Importantly, these differences could be the result of differential signaling among the various integrin heterodimers used for entry into distinct target cell types.

**Epstein-Barr Virus Usurps Integrin Signaling to Modulate Migration and Invasion of Epithelial Cells**

EBV infection is associated with malignancies of both B cell and epithelial cell origin. They include Burkitt’s lymphoma, a subset of Hodgkin’s lymphoma, nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC), and gastric carcinoma (119). In culture, EBV efficiently immortalizes and transforms B cells. The transforming program of EBV rests in part on its ability to usurp the integrin signaling cascade. This is achieved through the aid of the latent membrane proteins 1 and 2 (LMP-1 and -2) (Table 2).

LMP-1 is considered the EBV oncoprotein, as it induces B cell and fibroblast transformation and is expressed in NPC. LMP-1 is a polytopic membrane protein with six membrane-spanning domains and a signaling C terminus capable of binding tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-associated factors (TRAFs) and the TNF receptor-associated death domain protein (TRADD). Signaling culminates in activation of NF-κB, c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK), and mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) (for a review, see 137). LMP-1’s contribution to transformation is exerted in part through the promotion of a promigratory phenotype via effects on cell surface proteins, a phenomenon exemplified by epithelial-mesenchymal transition in epithelial cell lines. In

Campadelli-Fiume et al.

particular, LMP-1 induced the assembly of focal adhesions with increased production of fibronectin and recruitment of α₅ integrin, c-Src kinases, and N-cadherin to focal adhesion complexes. In the case of EBV, the involvement of α₅ integrin, its downstream target c-Src, and N-cadherin in focal adhesion assembly promotes oncogenic intracellular signaling mechanisms and likely contributes to the metastatic potential of NPC (138).

LMP-2 is expressed in NPC, Hodgkin’s lymphoma, and transformed lymphocytes (139). LMP-2A is not required for EBV-dependent transformation, but it inhibits cell differentiation and promotes epithelial cell migration. These activities are effected in part through regulation of αᵥ integrin, which modulates adhesion, migration, and invasion of epithelial cells. Specifically, the N-terminal cytoplasmic tail of LMP-2A carries an immunoreceptor tyrosine-based activation motif (ITAM) that activates the protein kinases Syk, Akt, and FAK. LMP-2A also induces the membrane aggregation of αᵥ integrin, which in turn targets c-Src and FAK. Cumulatively, this circuit can favor migration of different cell types (140).

## Kaposi’s Sarcoma–Associated Herpesvirus Triggers Innate Responses via Endosomal and Plasma Membrane TLRs

KSHV triggers innate responses mainly via plasma membrane TLR and non-TLR sensors (reviewed in 141, 142). KSHV nucleic acids trigger endosomal TLRs (143, 144). TLR4 is activated upon KSHV entry and is subsequently downmodulated through the MAPK pathway. The viral ligand for TLR4 remains unclear. However, given that UV-inactivated KSHV triggers TLR4, the viral ligand is likely an envelope glycoprotein (145). TLR4 signaling leads to the production of proinflammatory cytokines in human lymphatic endothelial cells.

Of note, KSHV has evolved multiple strategies for thwarting the antiviral response. For example, KSHV encodes a set of viral proteins and miRNAs that target the type I IFN response pathway at multiple checkpoints, including upstream sensors and adaptors as well as a variety of downstream signaling molecules (142). Peculiar are a family of proteins with homology to cellular IRFs; these have been termed vIRFs. vIRF1, vIRF2, and vIRF3 block IFN-1 signaling mediated by TLR3. Among the targeted proteins is MYD88 (146), which may therefore represent a common control point to counteract the antiviral innate response by herpesviruses. Recently, it was shown that activation of TLR7 and TLR8 by a variety of stimuli results in the reactivation of KSHV from latency (147). As such, KSHV has evolved to twist and utilize the innate responses for its own benefit, a common theme among many herpesviruses. The role of integrin in these signaling activities was not investigated. Inasmuch as the activation of some TLRs is positively regulated by integrins (127), cooperation is expected, as described above for the HSV gH–TLR2–β₃ integrin axis.

## CONCLUDING REMARKS

In recent years, cumulative findings from many laboratories have shown that herpesviruses incorporate integrins into their repertoire of attachment/entry-signaling receptors. Our aim in this review is to highlight that, although a number of viruses employ integrins as their portal of entry, members of the *Herpesviridae* family have evolved to exploit the varied signaling capabilities of integrins to add layers of sophistication to their life cycle. We propose that herpesviruses make use of a multipartite system of glycoproteins for attachment, entry, and infection, as this allows the usage of a plurality of receptors: cell type–specific receptors (e.g., HSV nectin1, HCMV EGFR and PDGFR, EBV CD21 and MHC II, KSHV EphA2) that direct cellular tropism and a variety integrins that enable the conserved elements of the entry process, particularly endocytosis.

while simultaneously activating the key signaling pathways required for individual virus species.

The integrin-mediated signalosome provides functions common to the *Herpesviridae* family, exemplified by Ca²⁺ release, cytoskeleton rearrangements required for entry and viral dissemination (through enhanced movement of infected cells), regulation of different entry pathways, and transcription factor activation required for cellular and viral gene expression. In addition, it provides functions specific to individual herpesvirus species, as exemplified by elicitation of the innate response, regulation of HCMV persistence, potentiation of EBV transforming ability, and broadening of the tropism to allow different viruses to target specific sets of cells. Integrin involvement may, however, come with a price, in the form of unfavorable effects, such as activation of the innate or proinflammatory responses. Herpesviruses pay their toll and then block the negative side effects by putting in place specific evasion strategies or by subverting the proinflammatory and antiviral responses to favor viral persistence. Once again, appraisal of the literature on herpesviruses and integrins has shown us how clever these viruses are and how they have evolved to utilize the cell’s biology and physiology to promote their successful lifelong persistence and widespread dissemination in nature.

---

### SUMMARY POINTS

1. Like many other viruses, herpesviruses include integrins in the global repertoire of receptors.
2. Herpesviruses employ integrins preferably as coreceptors, rather than as receptors, likely for diversification of the spectrum of targeted cells.
3. Integrins interact with the components of the herpesviral core fusion apparatus, namely the conserved glycoproteins gH/gL or gB. This interaction is a conserved biology across the family. Likely, the major function of integrins is to enable herpesvirus entry, most frequently by endocytosis.
4. Herpesviruses evolved to exploit the richness of the signaling cascades triggered by integrins to accomplish two important functions: (*a*) family-common signals, exemplified by Ca²⁺ flux, association with Rho GTPases and cytoskeletal changes, regulation of the pathways of entry, activation of transcription factors, and reprogramming of cellular transcription; and (*b*) species-specific effects, exerted mainly through association with additional receptors, exemplified by elicitation of the innate response, regulation of HCMV persistence, potentiation of EBV transforming ability, and broadening of cellular tropism.

---

### DISCLOSURE STATEMENT

The authors are not aware of any affiliations, memberships, funding, or financial holdings that might be perceived as affecting the objectivity of this review.

---

### ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We thank our colleagues for critical reading of this manuscript. We also thank the sources of funding that have provided support for our studies. Work in the G.C.F. laboratory was supported by European Research council ADG grant 340060, which also covers the salary of T.G., and by Campadelli-Fiume et al.

Changes may still occur before final publication online and in print

the Italian Association for Cancer Research grant IG14535. Work in the A.D.Y. laboratory was funded by a fellowship from the Center for Cardiovascular Diseases and Sciences at Louisiana State University Health Sciences, Shreveport (D.C.M.); an American Heart Association Predoctoral Fellowship (14PRE20310027) (D.C.M.); the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (AI56077) (A.D.Y.); and the National Institute of General Medical Sciences (P30GM110703) (A.D.Y.).

**LITERATURE CITED**

1. Alberts B, Johnson A, Lewis J, Raff M, Roberts K, Walter P. 2002. Integrins. In *Molecular Biology of the Cell*, ed. B Alberts, A Johnson, J Lewis, M Raff, K Roberts, P Walter, pp. 1113–18. New York: Garland Sci. 4th ed.
2. Berman AE, Kozlova NI, Morozevich GE. 2003. Integrins: structure and signaling. *Biochemistry* 68:1284–99
3. Desgrosellier JS, Cheresh DA. 2010. Integrins in cancer: biological implications and therapeutic opportunities. *Nat. Rev. Cancer* 10:9–22
4. Hynes RO. 2002. Integrins: bidirectional, allosteric signaling machines. *Cell* 110:673–87
5. Barczyk M, Carracedo S, Gullberg D. 2010. Integrins. *Cell Tissue Res.* 339:269–80
6. Campbell ID, Humphries MJ. 2011. Integrin structure, activation, and interactions. *Cold Spring Harb. Perspect. Biol.* 3:a004994
7. Luo BH, Springer TA. 2006. Integrin structures and conformational signaling. *Curr. Opin. Cell Biol.* 18:579–86
8. Caswell PT, Vadrevu S, Norman JC. 2009. Integrins: masters and slaves of endocytic transport. *Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell. Biol.* 10:843–53
9. Nicola AV, McEvoy AM, Straus SE. 2003. Roles for endocytosis and low pH in herpes simplex virus entry into HeLa and Chinese hamster ovary cells. *J. Virol.* 77:5324–32
10. Gianni T, Campadelli-Fiume G, Menotti L. 2004. Entry of herpes simplex virus mediated by chimeric forms of nectin1 retargeted to endosomes or to lipid rafts occurs through acidic endosomes. *J. Virol.* 78:12268–76
11. Pellett PE, Roizman B. 2013. *Herpesviridae*. See Reference 156, pp. 1802–22
12. Connolly SA, Jackson JO, Jardetzky TS, Longnecker R. 2011. Fusing structure and function: a structural view of the herpesvirus entry machinery. *Nat. Rev. Microbiol.* 9:369–81
13. Campadelli-Fiume G, Amasio M, Avitabile E, Cerretani A, Forgieri C, et al. 2007. The multipartite system that mediates entry of herpes simplex virus into the cell. *Rev. Med. Virol.* 17:313–26
14. Heldwein EE, Lou H, Bender FC, Cohen GH, Eisenberg RJ, Harrison SC. 2006. Crystal structure of glycoprotein B from herpes simplex virus 1. *Science* 313:217–20
15. Akula SM, Pramod NP, Wang FZ, Chandran B. 2001. Human herpesvirus 8 envelope-associated glycoprotein B interacts with heparan sulfate-like moieties. *Virology* 284:235–49
16. Wang FZ, Akula SM, Sharma-Walia N, Zeng L, Chandran B. 2003. Human herpesvirus 8 envelope glycoprotein B mediates cell adhesion via its RGD sequence. *J. Virol.* 77:3131–47
17. Feire AL, Roy RM, Manley K, Compton T. 2010. The glycoprotein B disintegrin-like domain binds β₁ integrin to mediate cytomegalovirus entry. *J. Virol.* 84:10026–37
18. Stampfer SD, Heldwein EE. 2013. Stuck in the middle: structural insights into the role of the gH/gL heterodimer in herpesvirus entry. *Curr. Opin. Virol.* 3:13–19
19. Backovic M, DuBois RM, Cockburn JJ, Sharff AJ, Vaney MC, et al. 2010. Structure of a core fragment of glycoprotein H from pseudorabies virus in complex with antibody. *PNAS* 107:22635–40
20. Campadelli-Fiume G, Menotti L, Avitabile E, Gianni T. 2012. Viral and cellular contributions to herpes simplex virus entry into the cell. *Curr. Opin. Virol.* 2:28–36
21. Galdiero M, Whiteley A, Bruun B, Bell S, Minson T, Browne H. 1997. Site-directed and linker insertion mutagenesis of herpes simplex virus type 1 glycoprotein H. *J. Virol.* 71:2163–70
22. Parry C, Bell S, Minson T, Browne H. 2005. Herpes simplex virus type 1 glycoprotein H binds to αᵥβ₃ integrins. *J. Gen. Virol.* 86:7–10

www.annualreviews.org • Herpesviruses and Integrins I3.15

Changes may still occur before final publication online and in print

23. Xiao J, Palefsky JM, Herrera R, Berline J, Tugizov SM. 2008. The Epstein-Barr virus BMRF-2 protein facilitates virus attachment to oral epithelial cells. *Virology* 370:430–42

24. Xiao J, Palefsky JM, Herrera R, Tugizov SM. 2007. Characterization of the Epstein-Barr virus glycoprotein BMRF-2. *Virology* 359:382–96

25. Akula SM, Pramod NP, Wang FZ, Chandran B. 2002. Integrin α₃β₁ (CD 49c/29) is a cellular receptor for Kaposi’s sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV/HHV-8) entry into the target cells. *Cell* 108:407–19

26. Wang X, Huang DY, Huang SM, Huang ES. 2005. Integrin αᵥβ₃ is a coreceptor for human cytomegalovirus. *Nat. Med.* 11:515–21

27. Feire AL, Koss H, Compton T. 2004. Cellular integrins function as entry receptors for human cytomegalovirus via a highly conserved disintegrin-like domain. *PNAS* 101:15470–75

28. Nogalski MT, Chan GCT, Stevenson EV, Collins-McMillen D, Yurochko AD. 2013. The HCMV gH/gL/UL128–131 complex triggers the specific cellular activation required for efficient viral internalization into target monocytes. *PLOS Pathog.* 9:e1003463

29. Chesnokova LS, Hutt-Fletcher LM. 2011. Fusion of Epstein-Barr virus with epithelial cells can be triggered by αᵥβ₅ in addition to αᵥβ₆ and αᵥβ₈, and integrin binding triggers a conformational change in glycoproteins gHgL. *J. Virol.* 85:13214–23

30. Chesnokova LS, Nishimura SL, Hutt-Fletcher LM. 2009. Fusion of epithelial cells by Epstein-Barr virus proteins is triggered by binding of viral glycoproteins gHgL to integrins αᵥβ₆ or αᵥβ₈. *PNAS* 106:20464–69

31. Azab W, Lehmann MJ, Osterrieder N. 2013. Glycoprotein H and α₄β₁ integrins determine the entry pathway of alphaherpesviruses. *J. Virol.* 87:5937–48

32. Van de Walle GR, Peters ST, VanderVen BC, O’Callaghan DJ, Osterrieder N. 2008. Equine herpesvirus 1 entry via endocytosis is facilitated by αᵥ integrins and an RSD motif in glycoprotein D. *J. Virol.* 82:11859–68

33. Gianni T, Salvioli S, Chesnokova LS, Hutt-Fletcher LM, Campadelli-Fiume G. 2013. αᵥβ₆- and αᵥβ₈-integrins serve as interchangeable receptors for HSV gH/gL to promote endocytosis and activation of membrane fusion. *PLOS Pathog.* 9:e1003806

34. Clement C, Tiwari V, Scanlan PM, Valyi-Nagy T, Yue BY, Shukla D. 2006. A novel role for phagocytosis-like uptake in herpes simplex virus entry. *J. Cell Biol.* 174:1009–21

35. Mercer J, Schelhaas M, Helenius A. 2010. Virus entry by endocytosis. *Annu. Rev. Biochem.* 79:803–33

36. Milne RS, Nicola AV, Whitbeck JC, Eisenberg RJ, Cohen GH. 2005. Glycoprotein D receptor-dependent, low-pH-independent endocytic entry of herpes simplex virus type 1. *J. Virol.* 79:6655–63

37. Gianni T, Gatta V, Campadelli-Fiume G. 2010. αᵥβ₃-integrin routes herpes simplex virus to an entry pathway dependent on cholesterol-rich lipid rafts and dynamin2. *PNAS* 107:22260–65

38. Gianni T, Campadelli-Fiume G. 2012. αᵥβ₃-integrin relocates nectin1 and routes herpes simplex virus to lipid rafts. *J. Virol.* 86:2850–55

39. Stewart PL, Nemerow GR. 2007. Cell integrins: commonly used receptors for diverse viral pathogens. *Trends Microbiol.* 15:500–7

40. Gianni T, Massaro R, Campadelli-Fiume G. 2015. Dissociation of HSV gL from gH by αᵥβ₆- or αᵥβ₈-integrin promotes gH activation and virus entry. *PNAS* 112:E3901–10

41. Maidji E, Genbacev O, Chang HT, Pereira L. 2007. Developmental regulation of human cytomegalovirus receptors in cytotrophoblasts correlates with distinct replication sites in the placenta. *J. Virol.* 81:4701–12

42. Bentz GL, Yurochko AD. 2008. Human CMV infection of endothelial cells induces an angiogenic response through viral binding to EGF receptor and β₁ and β₃ integrins. *PNAS* 105:5531–36

43. Nogalski MT, Chan G, Stevenson EV, Gray S, Yurochko AD. 2011. Human cytomegalovirus-regulated paxillin in monocytes links cellular pathogenic motility to the process of viral entry. *J. Virol.* 85:1360–69

44. Kari B, Gehrz R. 1992. A human cytomegalovirus glycoprotein complex designated gC-II is a major heparin-binding component of the envelope. *J. Virol.* 66:1761–64

Campadelli-Fiume et al.

Changes may still occur before final publication online and in print

45. Compton T, Nowlin DM, Cooper NR. 1993. Initiation of human cytomegalovirus infection requires initial interaction with cell surface heparan sulfate. *Virology* 193:834–41

46. Wang X, Huong SM, Chiu ML, Raab-Traub N, Huang ES. 2003. Epidermal growth factor receptor is a cellular receptor for human cytomegalovirus. *Nature* 424:456–61

47. Chan GCT, Nogalski MT, Yurochko AD. 2009. Activation of EGFR on monocytes is required for human cytomegalovirus entry and mediates cellular motility. *PNAS* 106:22369–74

48. Soroceanu L, Akhavan A, Cobbs CS. 2008. Platelet-derived growth factor-α receptor activation is required for human cytomegalovirus infection. *Nature* 455:391–95

49. Grundy JE, McKeating JA, Ward PJ, Sanderson AR, Griffiths PD. 1987. β₂ microglobulin enhances the infectivity of cytomegalovirus and when bound to the virus enables class I HLA molecules to be used as a virus receptor. *J. Gen. Virol.* 68:793–803

50. Wright JF, Kurosaky A, Wasi S. 1994. An endothelial cell-surface form of annexin II binds human cytomegalovirus. *Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun.* 198:983–89

51. Soderberg C, Giugni TD, Zaia JA, Larsson S, Wahlberg JM, Moller E. 1993. CD13 (human aminopeptidase N) mediates human cytomegalovirus infection. *J. Virol.* 67:6576–85

52. Boehme KW, Guerrero M, Compton T. 2006. Human cytomegalovirus envelope glycoproteins B and H are necessary for TLR2 activation in permissive cells. *J. Immunol.* 177:7094–102

53. Compton T, Kurt-Jones EA, Boehme KW, Belko J, Latz E, et al. 2003. Human cytomegalovirus activates inflammatory cytokine responses via CD14 and Toll-like receptor 2. *J. Virol.* 77:4588–96

54. Hahn G, Revello MG, Patrone M, Percivalle E, Campanini G, et al. 2004. Human cytomegalovirus UL131–128 genes are indispensable for virus growth in endothelial cells and virus transfer to leukocytes. *J. Virol.* 78:10023–33

55. Wang D, Shenk T. 2005. Human cytomegalovirus UL131 open reading frame is required for epithelial cell tropism. *J. Virol.* 79:10330–38

56. Wang D, Shenk T. 2005. Human cytomegalovirus virion protein complex required for epithelial and endothelial cell tropism. *PNAS* 102:18153–58

57. Gerna G, Percivalle E, Lilleri D, Lozza L, Fornara C, et al. 2005. Dendritic-cell infection by human cytomegalovirus is restricted to strains carrying functional UL131–128 genes and mediates efficient viral antigen presentation to CD8⁺ T cells. *J. Gen. Virol.* 86:275–84

58. Adler B, Scrivano L, Ruzcics Z, Rupp B, Sinzger C, Koszinowski U. 2006. Role of human cytomegalovirus UL131A in cell type-specific virus entry and release. *J. Gen. Virol.* 87:2451–60

59. Straschewski S, Patrone M, Walther P, Gallina A, Mertens T, Frascaroli G. 2011. Protein pUL128 of human cytomegalovirus is necessary for monocyte infection and blocking of migration. *J. Virol.* 85:5150–58

60. Spear PG, Longnecker R. 2003. Herpesvirus entry: an update. *J. Virol.* 77:10179–85

61. Connolly SA, Jackson JO, Jardetzky TS, Longnecker R. 2011. Fusing structure and function: a structural view of the herpesvirus entry machinery. *Nat. Rev. Microbiol.* 9:369–81

62. Chesnokova LS, Jiang R, Hutt-Fletcher LM. 2015. Viral entry. *Curr. Top. Microbiol. Immunol.* 391:221–35

63. Mullen MM, Haan KM, Longnecker R, Jardetzky TS. 2002. Structure of the Epstein-Barr virus gp42 protein bound to the MHC class II receptor HLA-DR1. *Mol. Cell* 9:375–85

64. Nemerow GR, Mold C, Schwend VK, Tollefson V, Cooper NR. 1987. Identification of gp350 as the viral glycoprotein mediating attachment of Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) to the EBV/C3d receptor of B cells: sequence homology of gp350 and C3 complement fragment C3d. *J. Virol.* 61:1416–20

65. Sathiyamoorthy K, Jiang J, Hu YX, Rowe CL, Mohl BS, et al. 2014. Assembly and architecture of the EBV B cell entry triggering complex. *PLOS Pathog.* 10:e1004309

66. Resing ME, van Leeuwen D, Verreck FA, Gomez R, Heemskerk B, et al. 2003. Interference with T cell receptor-HLA-DR interactions by Epstein-Barr virus gp42 results in reduced T helper cell recognition. *PNAS* 100:11583–88

67. Dorner M, Zucol F, Alessi D, Haerle SK, Bossart W, et al. 2010. β₁ integrin expression increases susceptibility of memory B cells to Epstein-Barr virus infection. *J. Virol.* 84:6667–77

68. Chen J, Jardetzky TS, Longnecker R. 2013. The large groove found in the gH/gL structure is an important functional domain for Epstein-Barr virus fusion. *J. Virol.* 87:3620–27

69. Shannon-Lowe C, Rowe M. 2011. Epstein-Barr virus infection of polarized epithelial cells via the basolateral surface by memory B cell-mediated transfer infection. *PLOS Pathog.* 7:e1001338

70. Akula SM, Naranatt PP, Walia NS, Wang FZ, Fegley B, Chandran B. 2003. Kaposi’s sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (human herpesvirus 8) infection of human fibroblast cells occurs through endocytosis. *J. Virol.* 77:7978–90

71. Raghu H, Sharma-Walia N, Veettil MV, Sadagopan S, Chandran B. 2009. Kaposi’s sarcoma-associated herpesvirus utilizes an actin polymerization-dependent macropinocytic pathway to enter human dermal microvascular endothelial and human umbilical vein endothelial cells. *J. Virol.* 83:4895–911

72. Hahn A, Birkmann A, Wies E, Dorer D, Mahr K, et al. 2009. Kaposi’s sarcoma-associated herpesvirus gH/gL: glycoprotein export and interaction with cellular receptors. *J. Virol.* 83:396–407

73. Mark L, Lee WH, Spiller OB, Villoutreix BO, Blom AM. 2006. The Kaposi’s sarcoma-associated herpesvirus complement control protein (KCP) binds to heparin and cell surfaces via positively charged amino acids in CCP1-2. *Mol. Immunol.* 43:1665–75

74. Birkmann A, Mahr K, Ensser A, Yaguboglu S, Titgemeyer F, et al. 2001. Cell surface heparan sulfate is a receptor for human herpesvirus 8 and interacts with envelope glycoprotein K8.1. *J. Virol.* 75:11583–93

75. Wang FZ, Akula SM, Pramod NP, Zeng L, Chandran B. 2001. Human herpesvirus 8 envelope glycoprotein K8.1A interaction with the target cells involves heparan sulfate. *J. Virol.* 75:7517–27

76. Hahn AS, Kaufmann JK, Wies E, Naschberger E, Panteleev-Ivlev J, et al. 2012. The Ephrin receptor tyrosine kinase A2 is a cellular receptor for Kaposi’s sarcoma-associated herpesvirus. *Nat. Med.* 18:961–66

77. Chakraborty S, Veettil MV, Bottero V, Chandran B. 2012. Kaposi’s sarcoma-associated herpesvirus interacts with EphrinA2 receptor to amplify signaling essential for productive infection. *PNAS* 109:E1163–72

78. Veettil MV, Sadagopan S, Sharma-Walia N, Wang FZ, Raghu H, et al. 2008. Kaposi’s sarcoma-associated herpesvirus forms a multimolecular complex of integrins (α<sub>v</sub>β<sub>5</sub>, α<sub>v</sub>β<sub>3</sub>, and α<sub>3</sub>β<sub>1</sub>) and CD98-xCT during infection of human dermal microvascular endothelial cells, and CD98-xCT is essential for the postentry stage of infection. *J. Virol.* 82:12126–44

79. Veettil MV, Bandyopadhyay C, Dutta D, Chandran B. 2014. Interaction of KSHV with host cell surface receptors and cell entry. *Viruses* 6:4024–46

80. Garrigues HJ, Rubinchikova YE, Dipersio CM, Rose TM. 2008. Integrin α<sub>v</sub>β<sub>3</sub> binds to the RGD motif of glycoprotein B of Kaposi’s sarcoma-associated herpesvirus and functions as an RGD-dependent entry receptor. *J. Virol.* 82:1570–80

81. Walker LR, Hussein HA, Akula SM. 2014. Disintegrin-like domain of glycoprotein B regulates Kaposi’s sarcoma-associated herpesvirus infection of cells. *J. Gen. Virol.* 95:1770–82

82. Cheshenko N, Trepanier JB, Gonzalez PA, Eugenin EA, Jacobs WR Jr., Herold BC. 2014. Herpes simplex virus type 2 glycoprotein H interacts with integrin α<sub>v</sub>β<sub>3</sub> to facilitate viral entry and calcium signaling in human genital tract epithelial cells. *J. Virol.* 88:10026–38

83. Gianni T, Campadelli-Fiume G. 2014. The epithelial α<sub>v</sub>β<sub>3</sub>-integrin boosts the MYD88-dependent TLR2 signaling in response to viral and bacterial components. *PLOS Pathog.* 10:e1004477

84. Ladwein M, Rottner K. 2008. On the Rho’d: the regulation of membrane protrusions by Rho-GTPases. *FEBS Lett.* 582:2066–74

85. Favoreel HW, Enquist LW, Feierbach B. 2007. Actin and Rho GTPases in herpesvirus biology. *Trends Microbiol.* 15:426–33

86. Hoppe S, Schelhaas M, Jaeger V, Liebig T, Petermann P, Knebel-Morsdorf D. 2006. Early herpes simplex virus type 1 infection is dependent on regulated Rac1/Cdc42 signalling in epithelial MDCKII cells. *J. Gen. Virol.* 87:3483–94

87. Himpsens B, Proot P, Neyts J, De Smedt H, De Clercq E, Casteels R. 1995. Human cytomegalovirus modulates the Ca<sup>2+</sup> response to vasopressin and ATP in fibroblast cultures. *Cell Calcium* 18:111–19

88. Johnson RA, Wang X, Ma XL, Huang SM, Huang ES. 2001. Human cytomegalovirus up-regulates the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3-K) pathway: inhibition of PI3-K activity inhibits viral replication and virus-induced signaling. *J. Virol.* 75:6022–32

Campadelli-Fiume et al.

Changes may still occur before final publication online and in print

89. Streblow DN, Vomaske J, Smith P, Melnychuk R, Hall L, et al. 2003. Human cytomegalovirus chemokine receptor US28-induced smooth muscle cell migration is mediated by focal adhesion kinases and Src. *J. Biol. Chem.* 278:50456–65

90. Boldogh I, AbuBakar S, Deng CZ, Albrecht T. 1991. Transcriptional activation of cellular oncogenes *fos, jun*, and *myc* by human cytomegalovirus. *J. Virol.* 65:1568–71

91. Kowalik TF, Wing B, Haskill JS, Azizkhan JC, Baldwin ASJ, Huang ES. 1993. Multiple mechanisms are implicated in the regulation of NF-κB activity during human cytomegalovirus infection. *PNAS* 90:1107–11

92. Yurochko AD, Kowalik TF, Huong SM, Huang ES. 1995. Human cytomegalovirus upregulates NK-κB activity by transactivating the NF-κB p105/p50 and p65 promoters. *J. Virol.* 69:5391–400

93. Yurochko AD, Hwang ES, Rasmussen L, Keay S, Pereira L, Huang ES. 1997. The human cytomegalovirus UL55 (gB) and UL75 (gH) glycoprotein ligands initiate the rapid activation of Sp1 and NF-κB during infection. *J. Virol.* 71:5051–59

94. Caposio P, Dreano M, Garotta G, Gribaudo G, Landolfo S. 2004. Human cytomegalovirus stimulates cellular IKK2 activity and requires the enzyme for productive replication. *J. Virol.* 78:3190–95

95. DeMeritt IB, Milford LE, Yurochko AD. 2004. Activation of the NF-κB pathway in human cytomegalovirus-infected cells is necessary for efficient transactivation of the major immediate-early promoter. *J. Virol.* 78:4498–507

96. DeMeritt IB, Podduturi JP, Tilley AM, Nogalski MT, Yurochko AD. 2006. Prolonged activation of NF-κB by human cytomegalovirus promotes efficient viral replication and late gene expression. *Virology* 346:15–31

97. Yurochko AD, Mayo MW, Poma EE, Baldwin ASJ, Huang ES. 1997. Induction of the transcription factor Sp1 during human cytomegalovirus infection mediates upregulation of the p65 and p105/p50 NF-κB promoters. *J. Virol.* 71:4638–48

98. Smith MS, Bentz GL, Smith PM, Bivens ER, Yurochko AD. 2004. HCMV activates PI(3)K in monocytes and promotes monocyte motility and transendothelial migration in a PI(3)K-dependent manner. *J. Leukoc. Biol.* 76:65–76

99. Smith MS, Bivens-Smith ER, Tilley AM, Bentz GL, Chan G, et al. 2007. Roles of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase and NF-κB in human cytomegalovirus-mediated monocyte diapedesis and adhesion: strategy for viral persistence. *J. Virol.* 81:7683–94

100. Yurochko AD. 2008. Human cytomegalovirus modulation of signal transduction. *Curr. Top Microbiol. Immunol.* 325:205–20

101. Yurochko AD, Huang ES. 1999. Human cytomegalovirus binding to human monocytes induces immunoregulatory gene expression. *J. Immunol.* 162:4806–16

102. Chan G, Nogalski MT, Stevenson EV, Yurochko AD. 2012. Human cytomegalovirus induction of a unique signalsome during viral entry into monocytes mediates distinct functional changes: a strategy for viral dissemination. *J. Leukoc. Biol.* 92:743–52

103. Naranatt PP, Akula SM, Zien CA, Krishnan HH, Chandran B. 2003. Kaposi’s sarcoma-associated herpesvirus induces the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase-PKC-ζ-MEK-ERK signaling pathway in target cells early during infection: implications for infectivity. *J. Virol.* 77:1524–39

104. Sharma-Walia N, Naranatt PP, Krishnan HH, Zeng L, Chandran B. 2004. Kaposi’s sarcoma-associated herpesvirus/human herpesvirus 8 envelope glycoprotein gB induces the integrin-dependent focal adhesion kinase-Src-phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase-Rho GTPase signal pathways and cytoskeletal rearrangements. *J. Virol.* 78:4207–23

105. Krishnan HH, Sharma-Walia N, Streblow DN, Naranatt PP, Chandran B. 2006. Focal adhesion kinase is critical for entry of Kaposi’s sarcoma-associated herpesvirus into target cells. *J. Virol.* 80:1167–80

106. Veettil MV, Sharma-Walia N, Sadagopan S, Raghu H, Sivakumar R, et al. 2006. RhoA-GTPase facilitates entry of Kaposi’s sarcoma-associated herpesvirus into adherent target cells in a Src-dependent manner. *J. Virol.* 80:11432–46

107. Greene W, Gao SJ. 2009. Actin dynamics regulate multiple endosomal steps during Kaposi’s sarcoma-associated herpesvirus entry and trafficking in endothelial cells. *PLOS Pathog.* 5:e1000512

108. Kaleeba JA, Berger EA. 2006. Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus fusion-entry receptor: cystine transporter xCT. *Science* 311:1921–24

109. Fenczik CA, Zent R, Dellos M, Calderwood DA, Satriano J, et al. 2001. Distinct domains of CD98hc regulate integrins and amino acid transport. *J. Biol. Chem.* 276:8746–52

110. Feral CC, Zijlstra A, Tkachenko E, Prager G, Gardel ML, et al. 2007. CD98hc (SLC3A2) participates in fibronectin matrix assembly by mediating integrin signaling. *J. Cell Biol.* 178:701–11

111. Kabir-Salmani M, Fukuda MN, Kanai-Azuma M, Ahmed N, Shiokawa S, et al. 2008. The membrane-spanning domain of CD98 heavy chain promotes α₅β₃ integrin signals in human extravillous trophoblasts. *Mol. Endocrinol.* 22:707–15

112. Chakraborty S, ValiyaVeetil M, Sadagopan S, Paudel N, Chandran B. 2011. c-Cbl-mediated selective virus-receptor translocations into lipid rafts regulate productive Kaposi’s sarcoma-associated herpesvirus infection in endothelial cells. *J. Virol.* 85:12410–30

113. Pasquale EB. 2005. Eph receptor signalling casts a wide net on cell behaviour. *Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell. Biol.* 6:462–75

114. Himanen JP, Saha N, Nikolov DB. 2007. Cell-cell signaling via Eph receptors and ephrins. *Curr. Opin. Cell Biol.* 19:534–42

115. Dutta D, Chakraborty S, Bandyopadhyay C, ValiyaVeetil M, Ansari MA, et al. 2013. EphrinA2 regulates clathrin mediated KSHV endocytosis in fibroblast cells by coordinating integrin-associated signaling and c-Cbl directed polyubiquitination. *PLOS Pathog.* 9:e1003510

116. Gregory D, Hargett D, Holmes D, Money E, Bachenheimer SL. 2004. Efficient replication by herpes simplex virus type 1 involves activation of the IkB kinase-IkB-p65 pathway. *J. Virol.* 78:13582–90

117. Taddeo B, Zhang W, Lakeman F, Roizman B. 2004. Cells lacking NF-κB or in which NF-κB is not activated vary with respect to ability to sustain herpes simplex virus 1 replication and are not susceptible to apoptosis induced by a replication-incompetent mutant virus. *J. Virol.* 78:11615–21

118. Paludan SR, Bowie AG, Horan KA, Fitzgerald KA. 2011. Recognition of herpesviruses by the innate immune system. *Nat. Rev. Immunol.* 11:143–54

119. Roizman B, Knipe DM, Whitley RJ. 2013. Herpes simplex viruses. See Reference 156, pp. 1823–97

120. Kurt-Jones EA, Chan M, Zhou S, Wang J, Reed G, et al. 2004. Herpes simplex virus 1 interaction with Toll-like receptor 2 contributes to lethal encephalitis. *PNAS* 101:1315–20

121. Kurt-Jones EA, Belko J, Yu C, Newburger PE, Wang J, et al. 2005. The role of Toll-like receptors in herpes simplex infection in neonates. *J. Infect. Dis.* 191:746–48

122. Gianni T, Leoni V, Chesnokova LS, Hutt-Fletcher LM, Campadelli-Fiume G. 2012. α₅β₃-integrin is a major sensor and activator of innate immunity to herpes simplex virus-1. *PNAS* 109:19792–97

123. Taddeo B, Zhang W, Roizman B. 2006. The UL41 protein of herpes simplex virus 1 degrades RNA by endonucleolytic cleavage in absence of other cellular or viral proteins. *PNAS* 103:2827–32

124. Cotter CR, Kim WK, Nguyen ML, Yount JS, Lopez CB, et al. 2011. The virion host shutoff protein of herpes simplex virus 1 blocks the replication-independent activation of NF-κB in dendritic cells in the absence of type I interferon signaling. *J. Virol.* 85:12662–72

125. Hardwicke MA, Sandri-Goldin RM. 1994. The herpes simplex virus regulatory protein ICP27 contributes to the decrease in cellular mRNA levels during infection. *J. Virol.* 68:4797–810

126. Sandri-Goldin RM, Mendoza GE. 1992. A herpesvirus regulatory protein appears to act post-transcriptionally by affecting mRNA processing. *Genes Dev.* 6:848–63

127. Casiraghi C, Gianni T, Campadelli-Fiume G. 2016. α₅β₃-integrin boosts the innate response elicited in epithelial cells through plasma membrane and endosomal Toll-like receptors. *J. Virol.* 90:4243–48

128. Leoni V, Gianni T, Salvioli S, Campadelli-Fiume G. 2012. Herpes simplex virus glycoproteins gH/gL and gB bind Toll-like receptor 2, and soluble gH/gL is sufficient to activate NF-κB. *J. Virol.* 86:6555–62

129. Gianni T, Leoni V, Campadelli-Fiume G. 2013. Type I interferon and NF-κB activation elicited by herpes simplex virus gH/gL via α₅β₃ integrin in epithelial and neuronal cell lines. *J. Virol.* 87:13911–6

130. van Lint AL, Murawski MR, Goodbody RE, Severa M, Fitzgerald KA, et al. 2010. Herpes simplex virus immediate-early ICP0 protein inhibits Toll-like receptor 2-dependent inflammatory responses and NF-κB signaling. *J. Virol.* 84:10802–11

Campadelli-Fiume et al.

Changes may still occur before final publication online and in print

131. Gerold G, Abu Ajaj K, Bienert M, Laws HJ, Zychlinsky A, de Diego JL. 2008. A Toll-like receptor 2–integrin β₃ complex senses bacterial lipopeptides via vitronectin. *Nat. Immunol.* 9:761–68

132. Ulanova M, Gravelle S, Barnes R. 2009. The role of epithelial integrin receptors in recognition of pulmonary pathogens. *J. Innate Immun.* 1:4–17

133. Browne EP, Wing B, Coleman D, Shenk T. 2001. Altered cellular mRNA levels in human cytomegalovirus-infected fibroblasts: viral block to the accumulation of antiviral mRNAs. *J. Virol.* 75:12319–30

134. Maciejewski JP, Bruening EE, Donahue RE, Sellers SE, Carter C, et al. 1993. Infection of mononucleated phagocytes with human cytomegalovirus. *Virology* 195:327–36

135. Saederup N, Aguirre SA, Sparer TE, Bouley DM, Mocarski ES. 2001. Murine cytomegalovirus CC chemokine homolog MCK-2 (m131-129) is a determinant of dissemination that increases inflammation at initial sites of infection. *J. Virol.* 75:9966–76

136. Chan GCT, Bivens-Smith ER, Smith MS, Yurochko AD. 2009. NF-κB and phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase activity mediates the HCMV-induced atypical M1/M2 polarization of monocytes. *Virus Res.* 144:329–33

137. Raab-Traub N. 2002. Epstein-Barr virus in the pathogenesis of NPC. *Semin. Cancer Biol.* 12:431–41

138. Wasil LR, Shair KH. 2015. Epstein-Barr virus LMP1 induces focal adhesions and epithelial cell migration through effects on integrin-α5 and N-cadherin. *Oncogenesis* 4:e171

139. Cen O, Longnecker R. 2015. Latent Membrane Protein 2 (LMP2). *Curr. Top Microbiol. Immunol.* 391:151–80

140. Fotheringham JA, Coalson NE, Raab-Traub N. 2012. Epstein-Barr virus latent membrane protein-2A induces ITAM/Syk- and Akt-dependent epithelial migration through αᵥ-integrin membrane translocation. *J. Virol.* 86:10308–20

141. Brown J, Wang H, Hajishengallis GN, Martin M. 2011. TLR-signaling networks: an integration of adaptor molecules, kinases, and cross-talk. *J. Dent. Res.* 90:417–27

142. Brulois K, Jung JU. 2014. Interplay between Kaposi’s sarcoma-associated herpesvirus and the innate immune system. *Cytokine Growth Factor Rev.* 25:597–609

143. West J, Damania B. 2008. Upregulation of the TLR3 pathway by Kaposi’s sarcoma-associated herpesvirus during primary infection. *J. Virol.* 82:5440–49

144. West JA, Gregory SM, Sivaraman V, Su L, Damania B. 2011. Activation of plasmacytoid dendritic cells by Kaposi’s sarcoma-associated herpesvirus. *J. Virol.* 85:895–904

145. Lagos D, Vart RJ, Gratrix F, Westrop SJ, Emuss V, et al. 2008. Toll-like receptor 4 mediates innate immunity to Kaposi sarcoma herpesvirus. *Cell Host Microbe* 4:470–83

146. Zhao Q, Liang D, Sun R, Jia B, Xia T, et al. 2015. Kaposi’s sarcoma-associated herpesvirus-encoded replication and transcription activator impairs innate immunity via ubiquitin-mediated degradation of myeloid differentiation factor 88. *J. Virol.* 89:415–27

147. Gregory SM, West JA, Dillon PJ, Hilscher C, Dittmer DP, Damania B. 2009. Toll-like receptor signaling controls reactivation of KSHV from latency. *PNAS* 106:11725–30

148. Kim JH, Collins-McMillen D, Caposio P, Yurochko AD. 2016. Viral binding-induced signaling drives a unique and extended intracellular trafficking pattern during infection of primary monocytes. *PNAS*. In press

149. Chan GCT, Bivens-Smith ER, Smith MS, Smith PM, Yurochko AD. 2008. Transcriptome analysis reveals human cytomegalovirus reprograms monocyte differentiation toward an M1 macrophage. *J. Immunol.* 181:698–711

150. Chan GCT, Nogalski MT, Bentz GL, Smith MS, Parmater A, Yurochko AD. 2010. PI3K-dependent upregulation of Mcl-1 by human cytomegalovirus is mediated by epidermal growth factor receptor and inhibits apoptosis in short-lived monocytes. *J. Immunol.* 184:3213–22

151. Chan GCT, Nogalski MT, Yurochko AD. 2012. Human cytomegalovirus stimulates monocyte-to-macrophage differentiation via the temporal regulation of caspase 3. *J. Virol.* 86:10714–23

152. Collins-McMillen D, Kim JH, Nogalski MT, Stevenson EV, Chan GC, et al. 2015. HCMV promotes survival of infected monocytes via a distinct temporal regulation of cellular Bcl-2 family proteins. *J. Virol.* 90:2356–71

153. Smith MS, Bentz GL, Alexander JS, Yurochko AD. 2004. Human cytomegalovirus induces monocyte differentiation and migration as a strategy for dissemination and persistence. *J. Virol.* 78:4444–53

154. Bentz GL, Jarquin-Pardo M, Chan GCT, Smith MS, Sinzger C, Yurochko AD. 2006. Human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) infection of endothelial cells promotes naive monocyte extravasation and transfer of productive virus to enhance hematogenous dissemination of HCMV. *J. Virol.* 80:11539–55

155. Chan G, Bivins-Smith ER, Smith MS, Yurochko AD. 2008. Transcriptome analysis of NF-κB- and phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase-regulated genes in human cytomegalovirus-infected monocytes. *J. Virol.* 82:1040–46

156. Knipe DM, Howley PM, eds. 2013. *Fields Virology*. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins
