
Fundamentals of allergy and immunology

Interleukins (from IL-1 to IL-38), interferons, transforming growth factor β, and TNF-α: Receptors, functions, and roles in diseases

Mübeccel Akdis, MD, PhD, Alar Aab, MSc, Can Altunbulakli, MSc, Kursat Azkur, DVM, Rita A. Costa, MSc, Reto Crameri, PhD, Su Duan, MD, Thomas Eiwegger, MD, Andrzej Eljaszewicz, PhD, Ruth Ferstl, PhD, Remo Frei, PhD, Mattia Garbani, PhD, Anna Globinska, MSc, Lena Hess, MD, Carly Huitema, PhD, Terufumi Kubo, MD, Zsolt Komlosi, MD, Patricia Konieczna, PhD, Nora Kovacs, MD, Umut C. Kucuksezer, PhD, Norbert Meyer, MD, Hideaki Morita, MD, Judith Olzhausen, PhD, Liam O’Mahony, PhD, Marija Pezer, PhD, Moira Prati, MSc, Ana Rebane, PhD, Claudio Rhyner, PhD, Arturo Rinaldi, MSc, Milena Sokolowska, MD, PhD, Barbara Stanic, PhD, Kazunari Sugita, MD, Angela Treis, PhD, Willem van de Veen, PhD, Kerstin Wanke, PhD, Marcin Wawrzyniak, PhD, Paulina Wawrzyniak, MSc, Oliver F. Wirz, MSc, Josefina Sierra Zakzuk, MD, and Cezmi A. Akdis, MD Davos, Switzerland

There have been extensive developments on cellular and molecular mechanisms of immune regulation in allergy, asthma, autoimmune diseases, tumor development, organ transplantation, and chronic infections during the last few years. Better understanding the functions, reciprocal regulation, and counterbalance of subsets of immune and inflammatory cells that interact through interleukins, interferons, TNF-α, and TGF-β offer opportunities for immune interventions and novel treatment modalities in the era of development of biological immune response modifiers particularly targeting these molecules or their receptors. More than 60 cytokines have been designated as interleukins since the initial discoveries of monocyte and lymphocyte interleukins (called IL-1 and IL-2, respectively). Studies of transgenic or gene-deficient mice with altered expression of these cytokines or their receptors and analyses of mutations and polymorphisms in human genes that encode these products have provided essential information about their functions. Here we review recent developments on IL-1 to IL-38, TNF-α, TGF-β, and interferons. We highlight recent advances during the last few years in this area and extensively discuss their cellular sources, targets, receptors, signaling pathways, and roles in immune regulation in patients with allergy and asthma and other inflammatory diseases. (J Allergy Clin Immunol 2016;138:984-1010.)

Key words: Cytokines, interleukins, T cells, B cells, dendritic cells, innate immune response, adaptive immune response, humoral immune response, allergy and asthma

From the Swiss Institute of Allergy and Asthma Research (SIAF), University of Zurich. Supported by the Swiss National Science Foundation no. 310030_156823 and 320030-159870 and the Christine Kühne-Center for Allergy Research and Education (CKCARE).

Disclosure of potential conflict of interest: M. Akdis is employed by the Swiss Institute of Allergy and Asthma Research, University of Zurich and has received grants from PREDICTA: European Commission’s Seventh Framework programme no. 260895 and the Swiss National Science Foundation. R. Crameri is employed by the Swiss Institute of Allergy and Asthma Research and has received grants from the Swiss National Science Foundation. L. O’Mahony has consultant arrangements with Alimentary Health Ltd and has received grants from GlaxoSmithKline. M. Pezer has received grants from the European Academy of Allergy and Clinical Immunology, the Global Allergy and Asthma European Network (GA²LEN), and the International Society for Applied Biological Sciences. C. Rhyner is employed by the Swiss Institute of Allergy and Asthma Research and has received a grant from the Commission for Technology and Innovation. B. Stanic is employed by AO Research Institute Davos. C. Akdis has consultant arrangements with Actellion, Aventis, Stallergenes, Allergopharma, and Circacia; is employed by the Swiss Institute of Allergy and Asthma Research, University of Zurich; and has received grants from Novartis, PREDICTA: European Commission’s Seventh Framework programme no. 260895, Swiss National Science Foundation, MeDALL: European Commission’s Seventh Framework Programme no. 261357, and Christine Kühne-Center for Allergy Research and Education. The rest of the authors declare that they have no relevant conflicts of interest.

Received for publication October 19, 2015; revised June 7, 2016; accepted for publication June 9, 2016.

Available online August 28, 2016.

Corresponding author: Mübeccel Akdis, MD, PhD, Swiss Institute of Allergy and Asthma Research (SIAF), Obere Strasse 22, CH7270 Davos, Switzerland. E-mail: akdism@siaf.uzh.ch.

The CrossMark symbol notifies online readers when updates have been made to the article such as errata or minor corrections

0091-6749/$36.00

© 2016 American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jaci.2016.06.033

Since the discovery of IL-1 in 1977, approximately 360,000 published scientific articles have referred to interleukins. Secreted proteins that bind to their specific receptors and play a role in intercellular communication among leukocytes are named interleukins. The nomenclature has been continuously evolving, and assignments of new members to the IL-1 family have been taking place (see Table E1 in this article’s Online Repository at www.jacionline.org).[1] Interleukins are assigned to each family based on sequence homology and receptor chain similarities or functional properties (Fig 1). We have learned in the last decades since the discovery of T<sub>H</sub> subsets[2,3] that almost all immune cells display different functional subsets characterized by distinct surface receptors and cytokine profiles, such as CD4 and CD8 T cells, B cells, innate lymphoid cells (ILCs), natural killer (NK) cells, and dendritic cells (DCs).[4-6]

Investigations of the mechanisms of immune and inflammatory cell functions have identified a growing list of interleukins. Their interactions among different cell types that contribute to their effector and suppressive functions are shown in Table I. Phenotypes of cytokine- or receptor-deficient, as well as

J ALLERGY CLIN IMMUNOL
VOLUME 138, NUMBER 4

| Abbreviations used |
| --- |
| AIT: Allergen-specific immunotherapy |
| APC: Antigen-presenting cell |
| Breg: Regulatory B |
| γc: Common γ chain |
| CRS: Chronic rhinosinusitis |
| DC: Dendritic cell |
| FOXP3: Forkhead box P3 |
| ILC: Innate lymphoid cell |
| KO: Knockout |
| NK: Natural killer |
| Ra: Receptor antagonist |
| TLR: Toll-like receptor |
| Treg: Regulatory T |
| TSLP: Thymic stromal lymphopoietin |
| TSLPR: TSLP receptor |

Effector T<sub>H</sub>2 cells produce IL-4, IL-5, IL-9, and IL-13.<sup>11</sup> In addition, thymic stromal lymphopoietin (TSLP), IL-25, IL-31, and IL-33 contribute to the development and intensity of T<sub>H</sub>2 responses and inflammation.<sup>12-14</sup> These cytokines have roles in the production of allergen-specific IgE, eosinophilia, mucus, tissue migration of T<sub>H</sub>2 cells and eosinophils, regulation of tight junctions, and epithelial barrier integrity.<sup>15-18</sup> They are essential players in immune response to helminths.<sup>19</sup> T<sub>H</sub>1 cells produce IFN-γ, which protects against intracellular pathogens and plays a role in activation and chemokine production of resident tissue cells and activation-induced cell death of skin keratinocytes, mucosal epithelial cells, and T cells.<sup>20-22</sup>

The discovery of T<sub>H</sub>17 cells has enabled a novel approach to inflammatory processes, autoimmunity, and immune response to extracellular infections. T<sub>H</sub>17 cells are characterized by their expression of IL-17A, IL-17F, IL-6, IL-8, TNF-α, IL-22, and IL-26.<sup>23,24</sup> There is still an ongoing debate and no clear distinction between T<sub>H</sub>17 and T<sub>H</sub>22 cells in human subjects because the main cytokine of T<sub>H</sub>22 cells, IL-22, can be produced by T<sub>H</sub>17 cells.<sup>25</sup> The combination of TGF-β and IL-4 reprograms the differentiation of T<sub>H</sub>9 cells, which produce IL-9 and IL-10.<sup>26</sup> These cells show a distinction to T<sub>H</sub>2 cells and might represent a clinically relevant T-cell subset linked to food allergy.<sup>27</sup> Follicular helper T cells represent a large subset of effector T cells in lymphoid tissues and provide help to B cells.<sup>28,29</sup> They support the differentiation of antigen-specific B cells into memory and plasma cells.

cytokine-overexpressing, transgenic mice and mutations and relevant polymorphisms in human subjects are listed in Table E2 in this article’s Online Repository at www.jacionline.org. Association of cytokines with diseases together with anticytokines/anticytokine receptor treatment options are shown in Table II. Fig 1 shows receptor families and common use of receptors between interleukins. Cytokine-driven differentiation of T-cell subsets is shown in Fig 2. The intensive interaction of cytokines and other mediators with cell subsets during type 2 inflammation, which takes places in patients with asthma, atopic dermatitis, allergic rhinitis, chronic rhinosinusitis (CRS), and helminth infections, is shown in Fig 3.

In the main text below we present a functional approach in subgrouping these cytokines, linking various categorization systems. First, we describe different cell subsets named or defined by the main cytokines produced. Next, we describe the cytokine families based on their sequence homology and evolutionary relationship, common receptor chains, or major function of the whole group. Groups of cytokines are listed in Table E1 in this article’s Online Repository. Additionally, all of the interleukins have been listed in numeric order, with an extensive emphasis on their structure, receptors, cellular sources, targets, signaling pathways, and roles in immune regulation in patients with allergy, asthma, and other inflammatory diseases in the text portion in this article’s Online Repository at www.jacionline.org.

## EFFECTOR CD4 T-CELL SUBSETS

CD4<sup>+</sup> T cells are divided into distinct subsets according to their cytokine profile.<sup>2</sup> They differentiate from naive T cells, and their cytokine expression profile depends on the types of antigen-presenting cells (APCs), the type of the initial innate immune response, the adjuvanticity of the molecules presented with the antigen, and the existence and dose of many small molecules and other cytokines in the microenvironment.<sup>7</sup> CD4<sup>+</sup> naive T cells can differentiate into T<sub>H</sub>1, T<sub>H</sub>2, T<sub>H</sub>9, T<sub>H</sub>17, T<sub>H</sub>22, and follicular effector T cells, as well as different subsets of regulatory T (Treg) cells.<sup>4,8,9</sup> Based on their respective cytokine profiles, responses to chemokines, and interactions with other cells, these T-cell subsets can promote the development of different types of inflammatory responses (Fig 2). Both innate and effector mechanisms play essential roles during the development of allergic disease.<sup>10</sup>

## TREG CELLS AND OTHER REGULATORY CELLS

Treg cell subsets have distinct phenotypes and include constitutive and inducible subsets of CD4<sup>+</sup>CD25<sup>+</sup> forkhead box P3 (FOXP3)<sup>+</sup> Treg cells and type 1 Treg cells.<sup>30,31</sup> Allergen tolerance and allergen-specific immunotherapy (AIT) are one of the most representative areas in which Treg cells display their major role.<sup>32-34</sup> The production of IL-10 and TGF-β from other cells is decisive for their immune regulatory functions. Subsets of CD8<sup>+</sup> T cells, γδ T cells, IL-10–producing B cells, IL-10–producing NK cells, DCs, and macrophages might contribute to immune suppression or regulation.<sup>3,35</sup>

## ILC SUBSETS

Immune responses in populations of lymphoid cells that lack rearranged antigen receptors and markers for myeloid and lymphoid lineages, such as T, B, and NK cells, show similarities to T<sub>H</sub>1, T<sub>H</sub>2, and T<sub>H</sub>17/T<sub>H</sub>22 types of immune responses. These cells are defined as ILC1s, ILC2s, and ILC3s. ILC1s mainly produce IFN-γ, ILC2s produce IL-5 and IL-13,<sup>36</sup> and ILC3s produce IL-17 and IL-22.<sup>5</sup> ILCs control the mucosal environment through close interaction with epithelial cells and other tissue cells, cytokine production, and induction of chemokines that recruit suitable cell populations to initiate and promote distinct types of immune response development and tissue inflammation.<sup>14</sup> These cells can be detected in several body fluids and tissues, such as sputum, peripheral blood, nasal polyps, and the esophagus, for their characterization in patients with allergy and asthma.<sup>36,37</sup>

## MAST CELLS AND BASOPHILS

Mast cells and basophils play a crucial role in type I allergy, as well as in innate and adaptive immune responses.<sup>38</sup> Recent studies in human and mouse models have shown that basophils perform nonredundant effector functions and significantly contribute to

986 AKDIS ET AL

J ALLERGY CLIN IMMUNOL  
OCTOBER 2016

IL-2R  

A  
low  
affinity  
IL-2Rα  

intermediate  
affinity  

high  
affinity  
IL-2Rα  

IL-2  
IL-2  
IL-2  

γc  
γc  
γc  

IL-2β  
IL-4Rα  
IL-7Rα  
IL-9Rα  
IL-21Rα  
IL-2Rβ  

IL-4  
IL-7  
IL-9  
IL-21  
IL-15  

IL-13R  
TSLPR  

IL-13  
TSLP  

IL-13R  
IL-7Rα  

IL-4Rα  

B  

C  

IL-3  
GM-CSF  
IL-5  

IL-3Rα  
GMRα  
IL-5Rα  

βc  
βc  
βc  

IL-4  
IL-13  

IL-4Rα  
IL-4Rα  
IL-4Rα  
IL-4Rα  
IL-13Rα1  
IL-13Rα2  
IL-13Rα1  

D  

E  

IL-19  
IL-24  
IL-20  
IL-22  
IL-26  
IL-28  
IL-29  

IL-10  

IL-10R2  
IL-10R1  
IL-20R1  
IL-20R2  
IL-22R1  
IL-10R2  
IL-20R1  
IFNLR1  

TNF-α  
TNF-α  
TGF-β  

TNFR1  
TNFR2  
TGFRI  

F  

G  

IL-12  
IL-23  
IL-27  
IL-35  

p35 p40  
p19 p40  
p28 EB13  
p35 EB13  

IL-12Rβ1  
IL-12Rβ2  
IL-12Rβ1  
gp130  
IL-12Rβ1  
gp130  

IFN-α  
IFN-β  
IFN-β  
IFN-γ  

IFAR2  
IFAR1  
IFAR1  
FGR1  

FIG 1. Cytokine receptors. A, Receptors of the IL-2 family, which is composed of IL-2, IL-4, IL-7, IL-9, IL-15, and IL-21. Receptors contain the common cytokine receptor γ chain (CD132, γc). IL-13R shares IL-4Rα with IL-4, and TSLPR shares IL-7R with IL-7. B, Receptors for IL-3, IL-5, and GM-CSF are heterodimers of a unique

the development and progression of T<sub>H</sub>2 cytokine-mediated inflammation.^[38,39] Mast cells are localized at the interface with the external environment, such as the skin, respiratory tract, conjunctiva, and gastrointestinal tract. Mast cells contribute to the maintenance of tissue homeostasis, with important roles in wound repair, revascularization, and protective responses to bacterial infection and venoms. They synthesize many interleukins and release them on activation through IgE cross-linking or innate immune response receptors.^[38,40]

### EPITHELIAL CELLS

Airway epithelial cells, gut epithelium, keratinocytes, and other epithelia are at the interface of the human body and the environment. Thus they form a complex physicochemical barrier and the first line of defense against environmental cues, such as viruses, bacteria, fungi, parasites, allergens, and inorganic particles. Epithelial cells regulate both innate and adaptive immunity, among others, through the production of various costimulatory molecules, chemokines, cytokines, and lipid mediators in response to environmental stimuli sensed by the rich panel of intracellular sensors, such as Toll-like receptors (TLRs), NOD-like receptors, melanoma differentiation-associated protein 5, and retinoic acid-inducible gene 1.^[41] After sensing of allergens, epithelial cells can produce IL-1α, IL-25, IL-33, TSLP, and GM-CSF.^[41] These cytokines start to orchestrate T<sub>H</sub>2 immunity. However, when allergens have additional protease activity and/or are accompanied by microbial components, such as endotoxins or inorganic particles, epithelial secretory responses can lead to mixed T<sub>H</sub>2 and T<sub>H</sub>17 immunity or even T<sub>H</sub>1 responses.^[42,43] In response to viruses, epithelial cells produce a wide range of mediators, such as type I interferons, GM-CSF, RANTES/CCL5, and IFN-γ-induced protein 1/CXCL10.^[44] These mediators orchestrate further downstream innate and adaptive antiviral immune responses.

---

complex disease, such as asthma, different pathogenic mechanisms can cause similar disease symptoms; however, they might require different treatment methods.^[47]

These putative pathophysiologic mechanisms identifying disease subgroups are addressed by the term endotype. Classification of complex diseases based on the concept of endotypes provides advantages for epidemiologic, genetic, and drug-related studies.^[48] Accurate endotyping with biomarkers reflects the natural history of the disease and aims to predict treatment response. Accordingly, recent studies have focused on better understanding of endotypes of allergic diseases, allergen-specific immunotherapy (AIT), asthma, CRS,^[49] and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and development of biomarkers to stratify patients that also include novel interleukins and microRNAs that regulate their expression.^[50] Many cytokines and their receptors have been therapeutic targets in clinical studies, and several anticytokine antibodies and/or cytokine receptor antagonists (Ras) have been approved and registered (Table II). Because several clinical trials with anticytokine approaches did not fulfill the primary outcomes in patients with highly heterogeneous diseases, such as asthma, there is a hope that implementing the endotype concept of these diseases will help to tailor the right treatment to the right patient.

### THE IL-1 FAMILY

IL-1 was first described as a protein that induced fever and was called human leukocytic pyrogen, which comprises 2 major proteins: IL-1α and IL-1β.^[51] Although IL-1α and IL-1β have minimal sequence homology, they were thought to have similar biological properties; however, these properties are becoming more distinct because of different clinical responses to biological targeting of these 2 interleukins. There are fundamental differences in their localization, maturation, and secretion.^[51] IL-1α is translated into pro–IL-1α, an already biologically active form, whereas IL-1β is translated into pro–IL-1β, which has no biological activity, until it is processed by the activation of inflammasome and caspase-1. IL-1α and IL-1β exert similar effects by binding to the IL-1 type I receptor. They can also bind to the IL-1 type II receptor, which acts as a decoy receptor and is not involved in signal transduction. The IL-1 family of cytokines comprises 11 members, including 7 proinflammatory agonists (IL-1α, IL-1β, IL-18, IL-33, IL-36α, IL-36β, and IL-36γ) and 4 defined or putative antagonists (IL-1Ra, IL-36Ra, IL-37, and IL-38) exerting anti-inflammatory activities.

IL-1Ra and IL-1 are synthesized and released in response to the same stimuli.^[52] IL-1Ra lacks the IL-1 receptor accessory protein interacting domain, so that its binding to IL-1 type I receptor inhibits IL-1 signaling.^[53] Therapies under development for some inflammatory disorders involve neutralization of IL-1 activity

---

α chain and the common β chain (βc, CD131) subunit. C, Receptors for IL-4 and IL-13 consist of 2 receptor chains: IL-4Rα (CD124) and γc. IL-4 and IL-13 bind to IL-4R, which consists of IL-4Rα and the IL-13Rα1 chain. IL-13R consists of 2 subunits, IL-13Rα1 and IL-13Rα2, and signaling occurs through the IL-4R complex type II, which consists of IL-4Rα and IL-13Rα. D, Based on similarities in their intron-exon structure, conserved secondary protein structures, and similar types of receptors, the following cytokines have been classified as IL-10 family members: IL-10, IL-19, IL-20, IL-22, IL-24, IL-26, IL-28, and IL-29. They share common receptor subunits, as shown. E, TNF-α binds to TNFRI and TNFR2, and TGF-β binds to heterodimer receptor consisting of TGF-βR1 and TGF-βR2. F, IL-12R consists of 2 subunits: IL-12Rβ1 and IL-12Rβ3. A heterodimer of IL-12Rβ1 and IL-23R binds IL-23. IL-12Rβ2 shows homology to the gp130 subunit of IL-27R. G, IFN-α and IFN-β bind to the heterodimer receptor consisting of IFNAR1 and IFNAR2; in addition, IFN-β binds to IFNAR1, and IFN-γ binds to the IFN-γR1 and IFN-γR2 heterodimer.

through administration of IL-1Ra and anti–IL-1 neutralizing mAbs. 54 IL-1Ra-deficient mice spontaneously have chronic inflammatory polyarthritis (see Table E2). In a phase 1 clinical study IL-1Ra has reduced inhaled LPS-induced airway neutrophilia as a candidate for the treatment of neutrophilic asthma. 55 The balance between expression levels of IL-1 family cytokines and activation and inhibition of inflammasomes, their Ras, and functional and decoy receptors, is decisive in the generation of proinflammatory and/or homeostatic functions. 56,57

### IL-18

IL-18 is a member of the IL-1 family expressed by a range of inflammatory cell types. 58 Assembly of the inflammasome in cells activates caspase-1 and, subsequently, proteolysis and release of the cytokines IL-1β and IL-18, as well as pyroptotic cell death. 54 Although it was originally discovered as an inducer of IFN-γ production, IL-18 alone induces only small amounts, whereas its combination with IL-12 induces high levels of IFN-γ production by T cells. The biological activity of IL-18 can be neutralized by the IL-18–binding protein, which binds mature IL-18 with a high affinity. IL-18 expression correlates with disease activities of rheumatoid arthritis and Crohn disease. IL-18–deficient mice are more susceptible to bacterial infections than normal mice and have uncontrolled disease progression that is accompanied by reduced T<sub>H</sub>1 cell responses (see Table E2). IL-37, a recently described cytokine, requires the receptors IL-18Rα and IL-1R8 to carry out its signal transduction. 59

### IL-33

As a member of the IL-1 family, IL-33 is a potent inducer of type 2 responses in T cells and ILCs through its receptor, ST2. 60,61 The soluble form of ST2 is released by fibroblasts, macrophages, and monocytes in the presence of LPS, TNF-α, IL-1, or T<sub>H</sub>2 cell clones. Soluble ST2 inhibits binding of IL-33 to its receptor and is a negative regulator of its activity. Levels of soluble ST2 are increased in patients with inflammatory conditions, such as systemic lupus erythematosus, rheumatoid arthritis, idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis, asthma, progressive systemic sclerosis, Behçet disease, Wegener granulomatosis, severe trauma, and sepsis. ST2-deficient mice have normal maturation of T<sub>H</sub>2 cells but altered antigen-specific T<sub>H</sub>2-type responses, increased rates of ventricular fibrosis, and cardiomyocyte hypertrophy in response to ventricular pressure overload. IL33–ILIRL1 pathway polymorphisms are associated with asthma and specific wheezing phenotypes; most of the single nucleotide polymorphisms are associated with intermediate-onset wheeze, a phenotype closely associated with allergic sensitization. 62 In addition, infection of the respiratory epithelium with rhinovirus can antagonize tolerance to inhaled antigen through combined induction of TSLP, IL-33, and OX40 ligand. 63 As an interesting recent finding, IL-33 can impair barrier function of the skin by downregulating filaggrin expression. 17

### IL-36

IL-36 is another proinflammatory family member of IL-1 and a common mediator of innate and adaptive immune responses. It is inhibited by IL-36Ra 64 and uses mitogen-activated protein kinase and nuclear factor κB pathways, exerting proinflammatory effect in vivo and in vitro. IL-38 binds to IL-36 receptor, as does IL-36Ra, and has similar biological effects on immune cells. Both IL-38 and IL-36Ra have anti-inflammatory biological effects. Recently, high expression of IL-36 has been reported in transcriptomic analyses of AD lesions. 65

### IL-37

IL-37 was originally defined as IL-1 family member 7, which is found in monocytes, tonsil plasma cells, and breast carcinoma cells. 66 Recently, IL-1R8 was found to act as the coreceptor for IL-37–IL-18Rα, and this interaction was required for the anti-inflammatory function of IL-37. 59 TGF-β and several TLR ligands induce production of high levels of IL-37 by PBMCs, and proinflammatory cytokines, such as IL-18, IFN-γ, IL-1β, and TNF, moderately increase IL-37 levels. 67 IL-37b transgenic mice are protected from LPS-induced shock through reductions in proinflammatory cytokine levels and inhibition of DC activation (see Table E2). 67

### IL-38

IL-38 is also a member of the IL-1 cytokine family and shares some characteristics of IL-1Ra, binding the same IL-1 receptor type I. The IL1F10 gene is located in the IL-1 family cluster on chromosome 2 in human subjects and mice between the genes encoding IL-36Ra and IL-1Ra. IL-38 is highly homologous to IL-36Ra and IL-1Ra, suggesting that it might act as an IL-1 family antagonist. IL-38 expression was reported in skin, tonsil, thymus, spleen, fetal liver, and salivary glands. 68 IL-38 plays a role in the pathogenesis of inflammatory diseases, exerting a protective effect in some autoimmune diseases. The effects of IL-38 might resemble those of IL-36Ra because it binds to the IL-36 receptor and inhibits its effects, particularly the T<sub>H</sub>17 response. 53

### THE COMMON γ CHAIN CYTOKINE FAMILY

The common γ chain (γc) family consists of IL-2, IL-4, IL-7, IL-9, IL-15, and IL-21 and was named for binding of these factors to the γc receptor (CD132; Fig 1). They act mainly as growth and proliferation factors for progenitors and mature cells and also have roles in lineage-specific cell differentiation. 69

### IL-2

IL-2, which was discovered more than 30 years ago in supernatants of activated T cells, is mainly produced by CD4<sup>+</sup> and CD8<sup>+</sup> T cell–activated DCs and NK and NKT cells. 70 IL-2R consists of 3 subunits: the ligand-specific α chain IL-2Rα (CD25), the β chain IL-2Rβ (CD122, which is also part of the IL-15R complex), and γc (Fig 1). All 3 subunits are required for assembly of the high-affinity IL-2R. On T-cell activation, IL-2Rα is rapidly upregulated and participates in the formation of a high-affinity quaternary complex, which activates multiple signal transduction pathways. IL-2 is essential for the development of Treg cells, and IL-2Rα is a marker for the flow cytometric identification of Treg and regulatory B (Breg) cells in resting conditions. 71,72 IL-2 is a regulator of ILCs and acts as a B-cell growth factor, stimulates antibody synthesis, and promotes proliferation and differentiation of NK cells to increase their cytolytic functions. 73

| Cytokine         | Structure      | Size (molecular weight) | Receptors                          | Cell sources                                                                 | Cell targets                                                                 | Major functions                                                                                                                                                                                                 |
|-------------------|----------------|-------------------------|------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| IL-1α and IL-1β   | Heterodimer    | 17 kDa                  | IL-1 type 1 receptor, IL-1 type 2 receptor | Macrophages, monocytes, lymphocytes, keratinocytes, microglia, megakaryocytes, neutrophils, fibroblasts, synovial lining cells | T cells, fibroblasts, epithelial and endothelial cells                              | Induction of proinflammatory proteins; hematopoiesis; differentiation T<sub>H</sub>17 cells; development of IL-10-producing Breg cells in mouse spleens and mesenteric lymph nodes |
| IL-1Ra            | Heterodimer (antagonist) | 16.1–20 kDa | IL-1 type 1 receptor, IL-1 type 2 receptor | Monocytes, macrophages, fibroblasts, neutrophils, endothelial and epithelial cells, and keratinocytes | T cells, fibroblasts, epithelial and endothelial cells                              | Antagonism of IL-1                                                                                                                                                                                                 |
| IL-2              | Monomer        | 15.5 kDa                | IL-2R                              | CD4<sup>+</sup> and CD8<sup>+</sup> T cells, activated T cells, DCs, NK and NKT cells, mast cells, and ILCs | CD4<sup>+</sup> and CD8<sup>+</sup> T cells, NK and B cells, and ILCs             | Proliferation of effector T and B cells; development of Treg cells; differentiation and proliferation of NK cells; growth factor for B cells and stimulus for antibody synthesis; proliferation and cytokine production in ILCs |
| IL-3              | Monomer        | 15 kDa                  | IL-3 receptor α+βc (CD131)          | T cells, macrophages, NK cells, mast cells, eosinophils, stromal cells | Erythroid progenitors, granulocytes, macrophages, progenitor cells, CD34<sup>+</sup> basophils, eosinophils, megakaryocytes, monocytes, Treg and endothelial cells | Hematopoietic growth factor; activation of basophils and eosinophils; differentiation of DCs and Langerhans cells; enhancement of IL-2-induced proliferation and differentiation of B cells; improvement of antigen uptake; phagocytosis in macrophages |
| IL-4              | Monomer        | 15 kDa                  | IL-4R type I, IL-4R type II          | T<sub>H</sub>2 cells, basophils, eosinophils, mast cells, NKT cells and γ/δT cells | T and B cells                                                               | Induction of T<sub>H</sub>2 differentiation; IgE class-switching; upregulation of class II MHC expression on B cells; upregulation of CD23 and IL-4R; survival factor for B and T cells; role in tissue adhesion and inflammation |
| IL-5              | Homodimer      | 15 kDa                  | IL-5R                              | T<sub>H</sub>2 cells, activated eosinophils and mast cells, T<sub>C</sub>2 cells, γ/δT cells, NK and NKT cells and CD4<sup>+</sup>c-Kit<sup>+</sup>CD3ε<sup>-</sup>IL2Ra<sup>-</sup> (Peyer patches), ILC2s | Eosinophils, basophils and mast cells, Treg cells, neutrophils and monocytes       | Differentiation and function of myeloid cells; increment of eosinophils chemotactic activity and adhesion capacity; involvement in remodeling and wound healing |

| Cytokine | Structure | Size (molecular weight) | Receptors | Cell sources | Cell targets | Major functions |
|----------|-----------|------------------------|-----------|--------------|--------------|-----------------|
| IL-6     | Homodimer | 19-26 kDa              | IL-6R (sIL-6R) gp130 | Endothelial cells, fibroblasts, monocytes/ macrophages, T cells, B cells, granulocytes, smooth muscle cells, eosinophils, chondrocytes, osteoblasts, mast cells, glial cells, and keratinocytes | Hepatocytes, leukocytes, T cells, B cells, hematopoietic cells | Induction of acute-phase proteins in hepatocytes; leukocyte trafficking and activation; T-cell differentiation, activation, and survival; B-cell production of IgG, IgM, and IgA; hematopoiesis; involvement in osteoclastogenesis and bone resorption and recruitment of mesenchymal vascular cells; neoangiogenesis in vivo; synovial fibroblast proliferation and cartilage degradation; survival of cholinergic neurons and induction of adrenocorticotropic hormone synthesis |
| IL-7     | Monomer   | 25 kDa                 | IL-7R and sIL-7R      | Epithelial cells, keratinocytes, DCs, B cells, and monocytes/ macrophages | Developing B and T lymphocytes, mature T cells, NK cells, and ILCs | Proliferation of pre-B and pro-B cells (mice); megakaryocyte maturation; V(D)J recombination; naive T-cell survival; proliferation of thymocytes; development and maintenance of ILCs; synthesis induction of inflammatory mediators in monocytes |
| IL-8     | Homodimer | 16 kDa                 | CXCR1 and CXCR2       | Monocytes, macrophages, neutrophils, lymphocytes, endothelial cells, epithelial cells, fibroblasts, keratinocytes, chondrocytes, synovial cells, hepatocytes, smooth muscle and skeletal muscle cells | Neutrophils, NK cells, T cells, basophils, eosinophils, mast cells, monocytes, and endothelial cells | Chemoattractant for neutrophils, NK cells, T cells, basophils, and eosinophils; mobilization of hematopoietic stem cells; angiogenesis |
| IL-9     | Monomer   | 14 kDa                 | IL-9R                 | TH2, TH9, TH17, and Treg cells, mast cells, eosinophils, ILCs | B, T, and mast cells; hematopoietic cells; airway epithelial cells; airway smooth muscle cells; and intestinal epithelial cells | T and mast cell growth factor; inhibition of TH1-cytokines; proliferation of CD8+ T cells and mast cells; IgE, chemokine, and mucus production in bronchial epithelial cells |

| Cytokine | Structure | Size (molecular weight) | Receptors | Cell sources | Cell targets | Major functions |
|----------|-----------|------------------------|-----------|--------------|--------------|-----------------|
| IL-10    | Homodimer | 20.5 kDa (predicted size of precursor protein) <br> 18.6 kDa (predicted size mature protein, monomer) | IL-10R1/IL-10R2 complex | T cells, B cells, monocytes, macrophages, and DCs | Macrophages, monocytes, T cells, B cells, NK cells, mast cells, DCs, and granulocytes | Immunosuppressive effect through APCs or direct effects on T-cell subsets; suppression of IgE and induction of IgG by B cells in human subjects |
| IL-11    | Monomer   | 19 kDa                 | IL-11Ra + gp130 | Bone marrow cells, fibroblasts, epithelial cells, endothelial cells, vascular smooth muscle cells, synoviocytes, osteoblasts | Myeloid, erythroid, and megakaryocyte progenitors, osteoclasts, epithelial cells, hepatocytes, macrophages, neurons | Growth factor for myeloid, erythroid, megakaryocyte progenitors and plasmacytoma cells; protection of epithelial cells and connective tissue; induction of acute-phase proteins; inhibition of monocytes and macrophage activity; promotion of neuronal development; bone remodeling, by stimulation of osteoclasts and inhibition of osteoblasts |
| IL-12    | Heterodimer (p35/p40) | 35 kDa (IL-12a p35) + 40 kDa (IL12bp40) | IL-12Rβ1 and IL-12Rβ2 | Monocytes, macrophages, neutrophils, microglia, DCs, B cells | T cells (T<sub>H</sub>1 cells), NK cells | Development and maintenance of T<sub>H</sub>1 cells; activation of NK cells; support of DC maturation; induction of cytotoxicity |
| IL-13    | Monomer   | 10 kDa                 | IL-13Rα1 and IL-13Rα2 | T, NKT, and mast cells; basophils and eosinophils; and ILCs | B cells, mast cells, epithelial cells, eosinophils, smooth muscle cells, and macrophages | Switching to IgG<sub>4</sub> and IgE, upregulation of CD23, MHC class II on B cells, and induction of CD11b, CD11c, CD18, and CD29; CD23 and MHC class II on monocytes; activation of eosinophils and mast cells; recruitment and survival of eosinophils; defense against parasite infections |
| IL-14    | Monomer   | 53 kDa                 | IL-14R | T cells, T-cell clones, B-lineage and T-lineage lymphoma cell lines | B cells, certain leukemia cells | Proliferation of activated B cells |
| IL-15    | Monomer   | 14-15 kDa              | IL-15R | Monocytes, macrophages, DCs and activated CD4<sup>+</sup> T cells, keratinocytes, skeletal muscle cells, fibroblasts, various epithelial cells, bone marrow stromal cells, nerve cells | NK cells, NKT cells, monocytes, macrophages, DCs, neutrophils, eosinophils, mast cells, T cells and B cells | T-cell activation; proliferation and activation of NK cells; differentiation of γ/δ T cells; homeostasis of CD8<sup>+</sup> memory, NK, and NKT cells; enhancement of T<sub>H</sub>2 differentiation; prevention of neutrophils and eosinophils from apoptosis |
(Continued)

| Cytokine | Structure | Size (molecular weight) | Receptors | Cell sources | Cell targets | Major functions |
|----------|-----------|------------------------|-----------|--------------|--------------|-----------------|
| IL-16    | Homotetramer | 56 kDa | CD4 | T cells, eosinophils, mast cells, eosinophils, monocytes, DCs, fibroblasts, epithelial cells, synoviocytes | T cells, monocytes, macrophages, DCs, eosinophils, mast cells | Modulation of T-cell response; chemoattractant for CD4<sup>+</sup>T cells, CD8<sup>+</sup>T cells, monocytes, mast cells, and eosinophils |
| IL-17A   | Cysteine knot, homodimer or heterodimer | 35 kDa | IL-17RA (=IL-17R) | Th17 cells, CD8<sup>+</sup>T cells, NK cells, NKT cells, γδT cells, neutrophils, ILCs | Epithelial/endothelial cells, fibroblasts, osteoblasts, monocytes, macrophages, B and T lymphocytes, myelomonocytic cells and marrow stromal cells | Induction of proinflammatory cytokines, chemokines, and metalloproteases; recruitment and activation of neutrophils |
| IL-17B,C,D | Cysteine knot, homodimer | 41, 40, and 52 kDa | For IL-17B: IL-17RB (=IL-17H1, IL-25R) For IL-17C: IL-17RA to IL-17RE For IL-17D: SEF | IL-17B: neuronal cells, chondrocytes; IL-17C: mucosal epithelial cells; IL-17D: resting B and T cells, skeletal muscle, brain, adipose tissue, heart, lung, and pancreas | Monocytes, endothelial cells, myofibroblasts, epithelial cells | Induction of antimicrobial peptides, proinflammatory cytokines, chemokines, and metalloproteases; IL-17B: chondrogenesis and osteogenesis; IL-17C: influence on intestinal barrier function; IL-17D: suppression of myeloid progenitor cell proliferation |
| IL-17F   | Cysteine knot, homodimer or heterodimer | 44 kDa | IL-17RA (=IL-17R) and IL-17RC (=IL-17RL) | Th17 cells, CD8<sup>+</sup>T cells, NK cells, NKT cells, γδT cells, neutrophils, basophils, mast cells, monocytes | Epithelial/endothelial cells, fibroblasts, osteoblasts, monocytes, macrophages, B and T lymphocytes, myelomonocytic cells and marrow stromal cells | Induction of proinflammatory cytokines, chemokines, and metalloproteases; recruitment and activation of neutrophils |
| IL-18    | Heterodimer | 22.3 kDa | IL-18 receptor | Macrophages, DCs, epithelial cells, chondrocytes, osteoblasts, Kupffer cells, keratinocytes, astrocytes, renal tubular epithelial cells | T cells, NK cells, macrophages, epithelial cells, chondrocytes | Induction of IFN-γ in the presence of IL-12; enhancement of NK cell cytotoxicity, promoting Th1 or Th2 cell responses depending on cytokine milieu |
| IL-19    | Monomer | 20.5 kDa: predicted size of precursor; 17 kDa: predicted size of mature protein; 35-40 kDa: found in transfected cells, glycosylated | IL-20R1/IL-20R2 | Monocytes, keratinocytes, endothelial and epithelial cells, B cells | Keratinocytes | Induction of Th2 cytokines; enhanced production of IL-6, TNF-α, and IL-10 in monocytes |
| IL-20    | Monomer | 20 kDa (predicted size of precursor), 17.5 kDa (predicted size of mature protein) | IL-20R1/IL-20R2 and IL-22R1/IL-20R2 | Monocytes, keratinocytes, epithelial and endothelial cells | Keratinocytes, monocytes, epithelial and stromal cells in skin, lung, pancreas, and breast tissues | Role in skin biology |
| IL-21    | Four-helix bundle, monomer | 15 kDa | IL-21R | T cells (predominantly Th17 and Th9), NK cells | CD4<sup>+</sup>T cells, CD8<sup>+</sup>T cells, B cells, DCs, macrophages, keratinocytes | B-cell proliferation, differentiation, and survival; T-cell growth factor; NKT cell proliferation when combined with either IL-2 or IL-15 |
(Continued)

| Cytokine                | Structure                                                                 | Size (molecular weight)                                                                                     | Receptors                                                                                                      | Cell sources                                                                                                   | Cell targets                                                                                                  | Major functions                                                                                               |
|-------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| IL-22                   | Six anti-parallel α-helices, monomer                                    | 23 kDa                                                                                                    | IL-22R                                                                                                        | Activated T cells (predominantly T<sub>H</sub>17 and T<sub>H</sub>22 cells), NKT cells, activated NK cells, lymphoid tissue-inducer cells, ILCs | Keratinocytes and epithelial cells of kidney, small intestine, liver, colon, lung, and particularly pancreas and skin | Pathogen defense; wound healing; tissue reorganization                                                        |
| IL-23 (p19+p40)         | Heterodimer                                                              | IL-12bp40 = 40 kDa, IL-23p19 = 19 kDa                                                                      | IL-23R                                                                                                        | Phagocytic cells, macrophages, and activated DCs from peripheral tissues, including the skin, intestinal mucosa, and lungs | T cells (T<sub>H</sub>17 cells), NK and NKT cells, eosinophils, monocytes, macrophages, DCs, and epithelial cells | Stimulation of proinflammatory IL-17; enhancement of T cell proliferation and promotion of memory T cells; activation of NK cells; regulation of antibody production |
| IL-24                   | Homodimer and monomer                                                   | 23.8 kDa (predicted size of unprocessed precursor), 18 kDa (unglycosylated mature protein), 35 kDa (observed size of secreted IL-24, glycosylated) | IL-20R1/IL-20R2 and IL-22R1/IL-20R2                                                                         | Melanocytes, T cells, monocytes, normal human epidermal keratinocytes, B cells                                | Cancer cells                                                                                                  | Tumor suppression                                                                                             |
| IL-25 (IL-17E)          | Homodimer                                                               | 19 kDa                                                                                                    | IL-17RA and IL-17RB                                                                                           | T<sub>H</sub>2 cells, mast and epithelial cells, eosinophils, and basophils from atopic subjects                    | T<sub>H</sub>2 memory cells, fibroblasts, basophils, NKT cells, macrophages, and ILC2s                          | Induction of T<sub>H</sub>2 responses and inhibition of both T<sub>H</sub>1 and T<sub>H</sub>17 cell responses; induction of IgE, IgG<sub>1</sub>, IL-4, IL-5, IL-13, and IL-9 production |
| IL-26                   | Six α-helices, homodimer                                                | 38 kDa                                                                                                    | IL-10R2 chain and IL-20R1 chain                                                                               | Memory T cells, NK cells, activated T<sub>H</sub>17 cells                                                       | Epithelial cells, binds heparin                                                                                | Activation and regulation of epithelial cells                                                                  |
| IL-27 (p28+EBI3)        | Heterodimer                                                             | IL-27ap28 = 28 kDa; IL-27bEBI-3 = 25.4 kDa                                                                 | WSX-1 and gp130                                                                                               | Activated DCs, macrophages, epithelial cells                                                                   | T cells, NK cells                                                                                              | Induction of T-bet, promoting T<sub>H</sub>1 cell differentiation; inhibition of T<sub>H</sub>17 cells response through STAT1 |
| IL-28A/B/IL29 (IFN-λ family) | Monomer                                                                | IL-28A = 22.3 kDa; IL-28B = 22.2 kDa; IL-29 = 21.9 kDa                                                     | IL-28R1/IL-10R2                                                                                               | Nucleated cell types, particularly DCs, in response to viral infection                                          | Tissue-resident cells, primary monocytes, myeloid and plasmacytoid DCs, and CD4<sup>+</sup> cells               | Downregulation of T<sub>H</sub>2 response and upregulation of T<sub>H</sub>1 response; induction of tolerogenic DCs and consequent promotion and expansion of Treg cells |
| IL-30 (p28 subunit of IL-27) | Heterodimer                                                           | 28 kDa                                                                                                    |                                                                                                              |                                                                                                               |                                                                                                               | Prevention and treatment of cytokine-induced liver injury                                                                                                                 |
| IL-31                   | Four-helix bundle                                                       | 24 kDa                                                                                                    | IL-31RA/OSMRβ                                                                                                | Activated CD4<sup>+</sup>T cells (mainly T<sub>H</sub>2) and CD8<sup>+</sup>T cells, monocytes, macrophages, DCs, mast cells, keratinocytes, and fibroblasts | Keratinocytes, epithelial cells, dorsal root ganglia, eosinophils, mast cells, basophils, and monocytes          | Induction of IL-6, IL-8, CXCL1, CXCL8, CCL2, and CCL8 production in keratinocytes and upregulation of chemokine mRNA expression in epithelial cells; induction of growth factor and chemokine expression in epithelial cells; inhibition of proliferation and apoptosis in epithelial cells |

| Cytokine | Structure | Size (molecular weight) | Receptors | Cell sources | Cell targets | Major functions |
|----------|-----------|------------------------|-----------|--------------|--------------|-----------------|
| IL-32    | Unknown   | 14.9-26.6 kDa          | Unknown   | Monocytes, macrophages, NK cells, T cells, epithelial cells | Macrophages, DCs, T cells, PBMCs, monocytes | Induction of TNF-$\alpha$, IL-8, and IL-6 and apoptosis of epithelial cells |
| IL-33    | $\beta$-Trefoil fold | 30 kDa (active form = 18 kDa) | ST2 | Necrotic cells, nuocytes, and fibroblasts on mechanical stress; stromal cells on cell damage; epithelial cells | Basophils, mast cells, eosinophils, DCs, macrophages, NK cells, NKT cells, T lymphocytes, B lymphocytes, endothelial cells, epithelial cells, fibroblasts, ILCs | Transcriptional repressor activity; induction of T$_H$2-type inflammation on mucosal tissues; maturation factor for bone marrow-derived DCs accompanied by the release of proinflammatory cytokines; enhanced integrin expression in basophils and eosinophils; inducer of ILCs |
| IL-34    | Homodimer | 39-kDa monomers        | Colony-stimulating factor 1 receptor | Heart, brain, liver, kidney, spleen, thymus, testes, ovary, small intestine, prostate, and colon; most abundant in spleen | Monocytes, macrophages | Regulator of myeloid lineage differentiation, proliferation, and survival; microglial proliferation |
| IL-35    | Heterodimer (p35+EBI3) | 60 kDa | IL-12$\beta$2/gp130; IL-12$\beta$2/IL-12$\beta$2; gp130/gp130 | Treg cells, monocytes, vascular endothelial cells, smooth muscle cells, and epithelial cells | NK cells and activated T cells | Reduction of effector T-cell proliferation; increase of IL-10 production and Treg cell proliferation |
| IL-36    |           |                       | IL-36Ra   | Internal endothelial tissues and skin, bone marrow-derived macrophages | Keratinocytes and other epithelial barriers; at lower levels on DCs, naive CD4$^+$T cells, differentiated T$_H$1 and T$_H$2 cells; very low levels on T$_H$17 cells | Promotion of the early inflammatory response to tissue injury or infection |
| IL-37    | Unknown   | 17-24 kDa             | IL-18R$\alpha$ and IL-18BP | Monocytes, tonsil plasma cells, breast carcinoma cells, some colon carcinoma cells, melanomas, and lung carcinomas | DCs | Inhibition of IL-18 activity and innate immunity |
| IL-38    |           | 17 kDa                | IL-1R1 with low affinity, IL-36R | Basal epithelia of skin, spleen, fetal liver, placenta, and thymus and proliferating B cells of the tonsils | | Inhibition of the production of T$_H$17 response cytokines; antagonism of IL-36 |
| IFN-$\alpha$, IFN-$\beta$ | Homodimer | 15-21 kDa (IFN-$\alpha$) and 22 kDa (IFN-$\beta$) | IFNAR | Mainly plasmacytoid DCs, but all nucleated cells can produce IFN-$\alpha$$\beta$ in response to viral infection | All cells express IFNAR in low numbers | Defense against viral infection by orchestrating adaptive immune responses; stimulation of DC capability to present antigens; stimulation of macrophage antibody-dependent cytotoxicity; activation of naive T cells; promotion of development and proliferation of the B1 subset; trigger of apoptosis of tumor cells, as well as virus-infected cells |

TABLE I. (Continued)

| Cytokine | Structure     | Size (molecular weight) | Receptors          | Cell sources                                                                 | Cell targets                                                                                          | Major functions                                                                                                                                                                                                 |
|----------|---------------|------------------------|--------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| IFN-γ    | Homodimer     | 40-60 kDa              | IFNGR1/IFNGR2      | NK and NKT cells, macrophages, myelomonocytic cells, T_H1 cells, cytotoxic T lymphocytes, and B cells                                      | Epithelial cells, macrophages, DCs, NK cells, T and B cells                                                                                                  | Antiviral properties; promotion of cytotoxic activity and T_H1 differentiation; upregulation of MHC class I and II; inhibition of cell growth; proapoptotic effects and control of activation-induced cell death; induction of epithelial apoptosis in skin and mucosa |
| TGF-β    | Homodimer     | 25 kDa                 | TβR-I and TβR-II   | A large variety of cells, including epithelial cells, fibroblasts, and immune cells, such as eosinophils, macrophages, and Treg cells       | Epithelial and endothelial and mesenchymal and immune cells, including CD8T cells, CD4T cells, NK cells, monocytes, macrophages, neutrophils, and eosinophils         | Coordination of the proper development of the cardiac system and bone formation; induction of epithelial and endothelial transition; balance of proinflammatory and anti-inflammatory effects by decreasing the cellular growth of almost all immune cell precursors; regulation of the differentiation of several T_H cell subsets and induction of Treg cells; immune tolerance |
| TNF-α    | Homotrimer    | 26 kDa membrane-bound form + 17 kDa soluble form | TNFR1 (p55/60, CD120a) and TNFR2 (p75/80, CD120b) | Activated macrophages, monocytes, CD4⁺ T cells, B cells, neutrophils, NK cells, and mast cells, fibroblasts, astrocytes, microglial cells, endothelial cells, smooth muscle cells, adipocytes, intrinsic renal cells, and others | Nucleated cells                                                                                                                                           | Host defense; double role as a proinflammatory mediator by initiating a strong inflammatory response and an immunosuppressive mediator by limiting the extent and duration of inflammatory processes and by inhibiting the development of autoimmune diseases and tumorigenesis; epithelial apoptosis |

SEF, Similar expression to FGFs; STAT, signal transducer and activator of transcription.

IL-4

IL-4 is produced by T_H2 cells, type 2 ILCs, basophils, mast cells, and eosinophils. There are 2 types of IL-4Rs (Fig 1). IL-4 regulates allergic conditions and the protective immune response against helminths and other extracellular parasites. IL-4 is the major stimulus of T_H2 cell development and induces IgE class-switching in B cells (Figs 2 and 3). It also suppresses type 1 immunity development, including T_H1 cells and M1 macrophages. IL-4 increases expression of class II MHC molecules in B cells, upregulates B-cell receptors, increases expression of CD23, prolongs the lifespan of T and B cells in culture, and mediates tissue adhesion and inflammation. IL-4 and IL-4Ra knockout (KO) mice have defects in T_H2 cell differentiation and reduced serum IgG₁ and IgE levels. There have been extensive clinical trials targeting IL-4 and IL-13 pathways, with more promising results on anti-IL-13 approaches for the treatment of asthma and atopic dermatitis.

IL-7

IL-7 is also known as pre-B-cell growth factor or lymphopoietin 1. IL-7R is present on most T cells and on progenitors of B cells and bone marrow macrophages. It consists of IL-7Ra (CD127) and γc (CD132) chains (Fig 1). IL-7 responses are determined by expression of IL-7Ra, which is shared with the TSLP receptor, because γc is ubiquitously expressed on lymphocytes. IL-7 critically acts cooperatively with signaling through the pre-T-cell receptor to coordinate proliferation, differentiation, and T-cell receptor α recombination of thymocytes. IL-7 signaling contributes to survival, proliferation, and development

| Cytokine                | Disease association                                                                                          | Therapeutic application                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |
|-------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| IL-1α and IL-1β         | Rheumatoid arthritis, multiple sclerosis, systemic lupus erythematosus, psoriasis, inflammatory bowel disease, Graves disease, diabetes, cryopyrin-associated periodic syndromes, cancer, bacterial and viral infections, atopic dermatitis, asthma, osteoarthritis, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, Alzheimer disease, atherosclerosis, myocardial infarction | Treatment: Cryopyrin-associated periodic syndromes, gout Drugs: Human mAbs targeting only IL-1β (ILARIS/ canakinumab), dimeric fusion protein consisting of human IL-1R (IL-1R1) and IL-1 receptor accessory protein (IL-1RAcP) linked with Fc region of human IgG₁ that neutralizes IL-1 (IL-1 Trap/rilonacept) Clinical trials: Adult-onset Still disease, systemic juvenile idiopathic arthritis, Schnitzler syndrome, osteoarthritis, hereditary periodic fevers, atrial fibrillation, HIV, cardiovascular disease (see also IL-1Ra) |
| IL-1Ra (antagonist)     | Rheumatoid arthritis, multiple sclerosis, systemic lupus erythematosus, psoriasis, juvenile idiopathic arthritis, Still disease, type 1 diabetes, inflammatory bowel disease, atopic dermatitis, asthma | Treatment: Rheumatoid arthritis Drugs: Recombinant nonglycosylated human IL-1Ra (anakinra) Clinical trials: Type I diabetes, metabolic syndrome, hypersecretion, type 2 diabetes mellitus, HIV, neurologic disorders, heart failure, acute myocardial infarction, Kawasaki disease, cancer |
| IL-2                    | T cell-mediated autoimmune and inflammatory diseases, X-Linked severe combined immunodeficiency 1 | Treatment: Cancer, leukemia, and infectious diseases; use in bone marrow transplantation and to prevent kidney transplantation rejection Drugs: Recombinant human IL-2 (Proleukin, Interking), recombinant protein combining IL-2 and diphtheria toxin (Denileukin Diftitox), humanized IL-2Ra chain blocking mAbs (daclizumab, basiliximab) Clinical trials: Cancer, chronic graft-versus-host disease, multiple sclerosis, type I diabetes, thrombocytopenia, ulcerative colitis, Sjögren syndrome, different autoimmune and inflammatory diseases |
| IL-3                    | Allergic asthma, cancer, lymphocytic and acute myeloid leukemias, inflammatory arthritis | Drugs: Fusion toxin composed of catalytic and translocation domains of diphtheria toxin (DT388) linked to IL-3 (DT388Il3), recombinant human IL-3 (IL-3) Clinical trials: Breast neoplasms, leukemia, myelodysplastic syndromes, blastic plasmacytoid DC neoplasm, HIV infections; cytopenias |
| IL-4                    | Allergic asthma, allergic rhinitis, diabetes mellitus, parasite infection, chronic lymphocytic leukemia | Therapy: Asthma Drugs: Soluble recombinant human IL-4 receptor (pitrakinra), humanized blocking mAbs specific for IL-4 (pascolizumab) Clinical trials: tuberculosis |
| IL-5                    | Asthma, atopic dermatitis, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, eosinophilic gastrointestinal diseases, hypereosinophilic syndrome, Churg-Strauss syndrome and eosinophilic nasal polyposis | Therapy: Asthma Drugs: Humanized blocking mAbs specific for IL-5 (mepolizumab), mAbs targeting IL-5 receptor (MEDI-563/benralizumab), humanized mAbs (reslizumab) Clinical trials: Hypereosinophilic syndrome, COPD, atopic dermatitis, asthma |
| IL-6                    | Systemic lupus erythematosus, psoriasis, rheumatoid arthritis, juvenile idiopathic arthritis, B-cell malignancy, Castleman disease, pulmonary fibrosis, chronic inflammatory diseases, plasmacytoma/multiple myeloma, cardiac myxoma, asthma | Treatment: Rheumatoid arthritis, systemic juvenile idiopathic arthritis, Castleman disease Drugs: Humanized mAbs targeting IL-6R (Actemra/ tocilizumab) Clinical trials: Acute graft-versus-host disease, type 1 diabetes mellitus, dermatomyositis, schizophrenia, sclerosis, hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis, myocardial infarction, diabetic macular edema, arthritis, cardiovascular disease, primary Sjögren syndrome, leukemia |
| IL-7                    | Multiple sclerosis, type 1 diabetes, rheumatoid arthritis, primary biliary cirrhosis, inflammatory bowel disease, atopic dermatitis, inhalation allergy, sarcoidosis, graft-versus-host disease | Drugs: Human recombinant IL-7 (CYT 107) Clinical trials: Cancer treatment, improving recovery after allogeneic stem cell transplantation, HIV therapy, sepsis, lymphopenia, cancer |

| Cytokine       | Disease association                                                                                   | Therapeutic application                                                                                                                                                                                                 |
|----------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| IL-8           | Rheumatoid arthritis, psoriasis, bacterial and viral infections, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, cystic fibrosis; cancer, acute myeloid leukemia, myelodysplastic syndromes, HIV infection | Drugs: Full human mAbs targeting IL-8 (HuMax-IL-8, ABX-IL-8) Clinical trials: Pustulosis palmoplantaris, cancer, chronic bronchitis and COPD                                                                                     |
| IL-9           | Helminth infections, Hodgkin lymphoma, asthma and food allergy                                                                                                     | Drug: Humanized mAbs specific for IL-9 (MEDI-528) Tested in clinical trials: Asthma treatment                                                                                                                           |
| IL-10          | Systemic lupus erythematosus, rheumatoid arthritis, diabetes mellitus, inflammatory bowel disease, allergic asthma, allergic rhinitis, atopic dermatitis, bee venom allergy, contact dermatitis, cancer | Drugs: Human recombinant IL-10 (Tenovil), fusion protein consisting of targeting antibody and IL-10 (Dekavil/F8-IL-10) Clinical trials: Rheumatoid arthritis                                                                    |
| IL-11          | Allergic asthma and cancer                                                                                                                                     | Drugs: Recombinant human IL-11 (oprelvekin) Clinical trials: Chemotherapy-induced thrombocytopenia, leukemia, hemostatic disorders                                                                                          |
| IL-12(p35/p40) | Bacterial infections, inflammatory bowel disease, psoriasis, cancer                                                                                               | Treatment: Psoriatic arthritis and severe plaque psoriasis Approved drugs: Anti-IL-12/23 human IgG₁ mAbs (ustekinumab), recombinant human IL-12 (NM-IL-12) Clinical trials: Lymphoma, wound infection, cancer, leukemia, HIV, infectious disease, multiple sclerosis, Behçet disease, acute radiation syndrome, CVID |
| IL-13          | Asthma, allergic rhinitis, and fibrosis                                                                                                                         | Drugs: Humanized mAbs specific for IL-13 (lebrikizumab), soluble IL-13Ra2-Fc fusion protein (QAX 576, IMA 638), human anti-IL-13 mAbs (tralokinumab) Clinical trials: Asthma, atopic dermatitis, idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis, COPD |
| IL-14          | Systemic lupus erythematosus, Sjögren syndrome, lymphoma                                                                                                          |                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |
| IL-15          | Rheumatoid arthritis, psoriasis, diabetes mellitus, autoimmune vasculitis, systemic lupus erythematosus, pemphigus vulgaris, multiple sclerosis, celiac disease, Behçet disease, asthma, sarcoidosis, inflammatory bowel diseases, inflammatory synovitis | Drugs: Recombinant human IL-15 (rhIL-15), fusion protein IL-15N72D:IL-15RaSu/Fc (ALT-803), human mAbs against IL-15 (AMG-714) Clinical trials: AML, cancer, HIV infection (as adjuvant), cancer, rheumatoid arthritis, celiac disease |
| IL-16          | Atopic dermatitis, allergic asthma, Crohn disease, rheumatoid arthritis, HCV, tuberculosis, HIV, multiple sclerosis, cancer, multiple myeloma                                                                 |                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |
| IL-17A         | Rheumatoid arthritis, multiple sclerosis, inflammatory bowel disease, psoriasis, allergic asthma, atopic dermatitis, contact hypersensitivity, graft-versus-host-disease                                      | Treatment: Severe plaque psoriasis Drugs: Human mAb binding to IL-17A (secukinumab/A IN 457) Clinical trials: Psoriatic arthritis, rheumatoid arthritis, nail psoriasis, ankylosing spondylitis, chronic plaque-type psoriasis |
| IL-17B, C, D   | Rheumatoid arthritis, allergic asthma, inflammatory cardiomyopathy, Wegener granuloma, multiple sclerosis, psoriasis                                                                                   |                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |
| IL-17F         | Inflammatory bowel disease, psoriasis, allergic asthma, rheumatoid arthritis, Crohn disease                                                                                                   |                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |
| IL-18          | Bacterial and viral infections, rheumatoid arthritis, psoriasis, multiple sclerosis, type I diabetes, Crohn disease, Alzheimer disease, allergic rhinitis, atopic dermatitis, asthma                                                                                   | Drugs: Recombinant human IL-18 (SB-485232, Tadekinig alfa) Clinical trials: Cancer and lymphoma (in combination with other therapies), psoriasis, Still disease |
| IL-19          | Psoriasis, asthma, atopic dermatitis, arthritis, cancer                                                                                                           |                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |
| IL-20          | Psoriasis, rheumatoid arthritis, obesity, atherosclerosis, ulcerative colitis, asthma, cancer, osteoporosis                                                                                       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |
| IL-21          | Cancer, systemic lupus erythematosus, rheumatoid arthritis, EAE, Behçet disease                                                                                     | Drugs: Recombinant human IL-21 (Denenicokin/BMS-982470), IL-21-specific mAbs (NNC 0114-0006) Clinical trials: Cancer, lymphoma, leukemia, rheumatoid arthritis, diabetes mellitus (type 1), Crohn disease |
| IL-22          | Psoriasis, inflammatory bowel disease, cancer                                                                                                                    | Drugs: Recombinant protein containing a human IL-22 dimer (F 652), human mAbs specific for IL-22 Clinical trials: Acute graft-versus-host disease, atopic dermatitis, rheumatoid arthritis, psoriasis |

Cytokine                      | Disease association                                                                                   | Therapeutic application                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
IL-23(p19+p40)                | Exacerbate organ-specific autoimmune inflammation, Crohn disease, and psoriasis                                                                 | Drugs: Human mAbs directed against IL-12 and IL-23 (Ustekinumab), mAbs against IL-23 (LY 3074828, guselkumab, tildrakizumab) Clinical trials: Systemic lupus erythematosus, graft-versus-host disease, axial spondyloarthritis psoriasis, colitis, Crohn disease, type 1 diabetes mellitus, dermatitis, Behçet disease, CVID, multiple sclerosis  
IL-24                         | Melanoma, psoriasis                                                                                 |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
IL-25(IL-17E)                 | Gastrointestinal disorders, chronic rhinosinusitis, atopic dermatitis, allergic asthma                                                          |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
IL-26                         | Inflammatory bowel disease                                                                          |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
IL-27(p28+EBI3)               | Immune pathology caused by uncontrolled inflammatory response, Crohn disease or ulcerative colitis, asthma, and HIV                              |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
IL-28A/B/IL29 (IFN-λ family)  | Allergy (IgE-mediated food allergy, atopic dermatitis) and atopic asthma, autoimmune diseases, HBV, HCV, and cancer                               | Drugs: Pegylated interferon Lambda-1a (pegIFNλ), pegylated recombinant IL-29 (PEG-rIL-29) Clinical trials: Hepatitis C infection                                                                                                                 
IL-30 (p28 subunit of IL-27)   |                                                                                                                                                                |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
IL-31                         | Atopic dermatitis, allergic contact dermatitis, prurigo nodularis, chronic spontaneous urticaria, nonatopic eczema, asthma, and other inflammatory disorders                                                   | Drugs: Anti-IL-31 mAbs (BMS-981164) Tested in clinical trials: Atopic dermatitis                                                                                                                                                                     
IL-32                         | Autoimmune diseases, such as rheumatoid arthritis, inflammatory bowel disease, Crohn disease, chronic rhinosinusitis, atopic dermatitis, asthma, cancer                                                       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
IL-33                         | Autoimmune and cardiovascular diseases, asthma, rheumatoid arthritis, gastrointestinal tract and lung disorders, parasite infections                                                                        |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
IL-34                         | Synovitis, rheumatoid arthritis, Sjögren syndrome                                                                                     |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
IL-35(p35+EBI3)               | Tumor pathogenesis, asthma, atopic dermatitis, allergic rhinitis and celiac disease                                                                                       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
IL-36                         | Psoriasis, asthma                                                                                   |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
IL-37                         | Rheumatoid arthritis, systemic lupus erythematosus, atopic dermatitis                                                                                                  |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
IL-38                         | Systemic lupus erythematosus                                                                        |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
IFN-α, IFN-β                  | Viral infections, systemic lupus erythematosus, polymyositis, rheumatoid arthritis, multiple sclerosis, asthma                                                              | IFN-α Treatment: Hairy cell leukemia, malignant melanoma, AIDS-related Kaposi sarcoma, hepatitis C infections, multiple sclerosis, genital warts, hepatitis C with HIV coinfection, hepatitis B, general viral infections, myelogenous leukemia, cutaneous T-cell lymphoma, follicular non-Hodgkin lymphoma, renal cell carcinoma, Drugs: IFN-α-con-1 (Infergen), IFN-α-n3 leukocyte derived (Alferon-N), Pegylated IFN-α-2a (Pegasys), Recombinant IFN-α-2b (Intron A), PEG recombinant IFN-α-2b (PEG Intron) Clinical trials: HIV infections, polycythemia vera, thrombocytopenia, leukemia, myeloproliferative disorders, hepatocellular carcinoma, cancer, chronic myeloid leukemia, COPD, diabetes mellitus type 1 IFN-β Treatment: Clinically isolated syndrome, relapsing multiple sclerosis, early/relapsing multiple sclerosis Drugs: IFN-β-1a (Avonex, Rebiferon), IFN-β-1b (Betasteron) Clinical trials: Ulcerative colitis, asthma, respiratory disease syndrome, cancer, HTLV-I Infection  
IFN-γ                         | Susceptibility to intracellular pathogen infection and tumor development, type 1 diabetes, rheumatoid arthritis, atopic dermatitis, EAE                                                                  | Treatment: Chronic granulomatous disease, osteoporosis, autoimmune diseases (Crohn disease) Drugs: Humanized anti-IFN-γ mAbs (fontolizumab), Bioengineered IFN-γ1b (Actimmune) Clinical trials: HIV infection, Friedreich ataxia, glioblastoma, gliosarcoma, autosomal dominant osteopetrosis type 2, pulmonary fibrosis, sepsis, uveitis, inherited ophthalmic diseases, cancer  

J ALLERGY CLIN IMMUNOL
VOLUME 138, NUMBER 4

TABLE II. (Continued)

| Cytokine | Disease association | Therapeutic application |
|----------|---------------------|------------------------|
| TGF-β    | Alzheimer disease, cardiovascular pathologies, cancer, allergic rhinitis, fibrosis | Drugs: Synthetic antisense oligodeoxynucleotide (trabedersen/AP12009), human mAbs against TGF-β1, TGF-β2, and TGF-β3 (fresolimumab/GC1008); acetic salt of a 14mer peptide from human TGF-β1 type III receptor (P144); TβR-I inhibitor (Galunisertib/LY2157299) Clinical trials: Anaplastic astrocytoma, glioblastoma, pancreatic neoplasms, melanoma, colorectal neoplasms, anaplastic astrocytoma, metastatic breast cancer, diffuse systemic sclerosis, primary focal segmental glomerulosclerosis, non-small cell lung cancer, primary brain tumors, skin fibrosis, hepatocellular carcinoma and non-small cell lung cancer (recurrent) |
| TNF-α    | Psoriasis, psoriatic arthritis, rheumatoid arthritis, juvenile arthritis, ankylosing spondylitis, inflammatory bowel disease, Crohn disease, ulcerative colitis, systemic sclerosis, systemic lupus erythematosus, pulmonary diseases, allergic diseases (asthma, allergic rhinitis, and atopic dermatitis), insulin resistance, depression, cancer, vascular diseases, neurological diseases | Treatment: Crohn disease, ulcerative colitis, psoriasis, psoriatic arthritis, ankylosing spondylitis, rheumatoid arthritis, Behçet disease, ulcerative colitis, moderate-to-severe chronic psoriasis, juvenile idiopathic arthritis, ankylosing spondylitis, moderate-to-severe plaque psoriasis, ulcerative colitis Drugs: Chimeric blocking mAbs specific for TNF-α (infliximab/INN), human anti-TNF-α mAbs (adalimumab/D2E7), humanized anti-TNF-α mAbs (certolizumab pegol), human anti-TNF-α mAbs (golimumab), soluble p75 TNF receptor-Fc fusion (etanercept) Clinical trials: Peripheral spondyloarthritis, osteoarthritis, hidradenitis suppurativa, uveitis, sarcoidosis, mucocutaneous lymph node syndrome, Kawasaki disease, leukemia and lymphoma, graft-versus-host disease |

AML, Acute myeloid leukemia; COPD, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease; CVID, common variable immunodeficiency; EAE, experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis; HBV, hepatitis B virus; HCV, hepatitis C virus; HTLV-I, human T-lymphotropic virus type I.

of naive and memory B and T cells, mature T cells, and NK cells. Studies of IL-7 and IL-7Rα KO mice have shown that IL-7 is important for homeostatic T- and B-cell development (see Table E2). IL-7R expression is a marker of ILCs. ${}^{5}$

### IL-9

IL-9 was first discovered in mice, where it was found to be a potent antigen-independent growth factor for T cells ${}^{78}$ and mast cells. T${}_{H}$2 cells and ILC2s are the main sources of IL-9 production; mast cells (mainly within the airways of asthmatic subjects) and eosinophils secrete IL-9 to a lesser extent. IL-9 inhibits cytokine production by T${}_{H}$1 cells, promotes IgE production by B cells, induces chemokine and mucus secretion by bronchial epithelial cells, and promotes proliferation of mast cells. IL-9 has important roles in the pathogenesis of asthma models and in helminth infections. A new population of T cells, T${}_{H}$9 cells, which produce IL-9 and IL-10, have been proposed to contribute to inflammation, mast cell accumulation, and activation (Figs 2 and 3). ${}^{26,79}$ Allergen-specific T${}_{H}$1 and T${}_{H}$2 responses are both enhanced by IL-9. ${}^{27,80}$

### IL-21

IL-21 is produced by T cells, NKT cells, and the follicular helper subset of CD4${}^{+}$ T cells. The receptor for IL-21 is expressed on various cells, indicating a broad spectrum of action. IL-21 affects B-cell functions by strongly inducing their proliferation, regulating antibody production, and preventing their apoptosis and differentiation into plasma cells. ${}^{29}$ Cytotoxic activity and proliferation of CD8${}^{+}$ T cells, NK cells, and NKT cells increase on stimulation with IL-21.

### THE IL-10 FAMILY

The IL-10 subfamily of cytokines comprises IL-10, IL-19, IL-20, IL-22, IL-24, IL-26, IL-28, and IL-29. ${}^{83,84}$ Their binding to IL-10R2, IL-20R1, IL-20R2, IL-22R1, and IL-28R1 and distinct expression of these receptors in immune system and tissue cells characterize their functions (Fig 1).

### IL-15

IL-15 is structurally homologous to IL-2 and was discovered to have the ability to induce T-cell, NK cell, and ILC proliferation, like IL-2. ${}^{81}$ IL-15R consists of the IL-15Rα chain, the IL-2Rβ chain, and γc (Fig 1). ${}^{76,82}$ IL-15 is produced by nonimmune

1000 AKDIS ET AL

J ALLERGY CLIN IMMUNOL  
OCTOBER 2016

found, suggesting that polymorphisms related to protection against helminths during evolution might be associated with increased risk of allergic diseases. ${ }^{90}$

**FIG 2.** Differentiation of naive T cells to functional T-cell subsets. Differentiation of naive CD4 T cells into distinct phenotypes occurs on TCR activation driven by dendritic cells, which migrate into the lymph nodes after allergen uptake. IL-4 is important for differentiation of naive T cells into $T_{H} 2$ cells, which can further differentiate into the $T_{H} 9$ lineage. Development of $T_{H} 1$ cells requires the presence of IFN-$\gamma$ and IL-12. The transcription factors T-bet and GATA-3 play an important role in differentiation of $T_{H} 1$ and $T_{H} 2$ cell lineages, respectively. The combination of TGF-$\beta$ and IL-6 facilitates $T_{H} 17$ differentiation, which is regulated by the transcription factor RORC2, whereas Treg cell programming requires TGF-$\beta$ and IL-2 and is controlled by FoxP3.

**IL-10**

IL-10 is an anti-inflammatory interleukin produced mainly by monocytes, T cells (mainly type 1 Treg cells), B cells (mainly Breg cells), a small fraction of NK cells, macrophages, and DCs. Recently demonstrated human Breg cells play a significant role in immune suppression and increase in AIT, ${ }^{35,71}$ and their IL-10 production is regulated by B-cell linker protein. ${ }^{85}$ Mast cells can also produce IL-10, which limits the rate of leukocyte infiltration, inflammation, and skin disorders, such as contact dermatitis; this also occurs after chronic UVB irradiation. The receptor complex for IL-10 is comprised of 2 chains: IL-10R1 and IL-10R2 (Fig 1). IL-10 directly affects APC functions by downregulating the expression of MHC class II and costimulatory molecules on the surfaces of macrophages and monocytes. IL-10 inhibits the expression of many proinflammatory cytokines, chemokines, and chemokine receptors. Clinically, it might mediate allergen tolerance in AIT and exposure to high doses of allergens, such as beekeepers and cat owners. ${ }^{30,86,87}$ IL-10 directly affects $T_{H} 2$ cell activation by suppressing CD28, CD2, and signaling of the inducible T-cell costimulator through the tyrosine phosphatase Src homology domain 2–containing protein tyrosine phosphatase 1 (SHP-1). In contrast to its inhibitory effects on T cells, IL-10 promotes the survival, proliferation, and differentiation of human B cells and increases IgG $_{4}$ production. ${ }^{35,71,88}$ Several mouse models demonstrate the importance of IL-10 in regulation of the inflammatory response (see Table E2). IL-10KO mice have normal lymphocyte and antibody responses but show reduced growth and anemia and spontaneous chronic colitis. In patients with colitis with IL-10/IL-10R deficiency in hematopoietic lineage cells, hematopoietic stem cell transplantation should be considered as a potentially curative therapeutic option. ${ }^{89}$ In addition, coassociations between $I L 10$ polymorphisms, IL-10 production, helminth infection, and asthma/wheeze have been

**IL-19**

IL-19 binds to a heterodimeric receptor comprising IL-20R1 and IL-20R2: this receptor complex also binds IL-20 and IL-24. IL-19 is expressed by LPS-stimulated monocytes, and low levels have been observed in B cells. ${ }^{91}$ Mouse IL-19 stimulates production of IL-6 and TNF-$\alpha$ and induces apoptosis and production of reactive oxygen species in monocytes, indicating a role in proinflammatory responses. IL-19 might promote $T_{H} 2$ cell responses because it induces IL-4, IL-5, IL-10, and IL-13 expression by activated T cells. ${ }^{84}$ Increased levels of IL-19 have been observed in asthmatic patients, whereas lower circulating levels and increased epidermal expression of IL-19 were observed in patients with psoriasis. An immunosuppressive role has been suggested for IL-19, IL-20, and IL-24 during *Staphylococcus aureus* infection because of their signaling through the IL-20 receptor. ${ }^{92}$

**IL-20**

The IL-20 subfamily of cytokines (ie, IL-19, IL-20, IL-22, IL-24, and IL-26) have been grouped together to form the IL-20 subfamily based on their use of common receptor subunits and similarities in their biological functions. ${ }^{83}$ IL-20 can signal through a complex of IL-20R1 and IL-20R2 (also binds IL-19 and IL-24) or a complex of IL-22R1 and IL-20R2 (also binds IL-24; Fig 1). IL-20 is mainly produced by LPS-stimulated monocytes and DCs but also by epithelial and endothelial cells and keratinocytes. IL-20 has important functions in the skin. Transgenic overexpression in mice caused skin abnormalities that include hyperkeratosis, a thickened epidermis, and a compact stratum corneum. ${ }^{93}$ Together with IL-19, IL-20 appears to have a role in the pathogenesis of psoriasis: mRNA of these cytokines and their receptors was detected in psoriatic lesions but not in uninvolved skin from the same subjects.

**IL-22**

IL-22 is expressed by activated $T_{H} 22$ cells, ILC3s, mast cells, and NK-22 cells. ${ }^{94}$ The IL-10R2 chain, which is shared with other cytokine receptors, is ubiquitously expressed. In contrast, the IL-22R1 chain is not detected on immune cells but rather in the kidneys, small intestine, liver, colon, lung, and particularly the pancreas and skin. IL-22 induces genes that are involved in the antimicrobial defenses of keratinocytes. IL-22 is upregulated during bacterial infection, psoriasis, and atopic dermatitis. ${ }^{95}$ Although IL-22 has been associated with inflammatory disorders, it might also have anti-inflammatory effects. ${ }^{96,97}$ For example, IL-22 inhibits IFN-$\gamma$–induced secretion of the proinflammatory chemokines CCL5/RANTES and CXCL10/interferon-inducible protein 10 and antagonizes IFN-$\gamma$ in lung inflammation. ${ }^{98}$ IL-13 ${ }^{+}$ T cells display increased IL-22 levels in patients with atopic dermatitis, whereas IL-17 and IFN-$\gamma$ coexpression with IL-22 becomes predominant in patients with psoriasis. ${ }^{99}$ IL-22 and IFN-$\lambda$ act synergistically for the induction of interferon-stimulated genes and control of rotavirus infection. ${ }^{100}$

J ALLERGY CLIN IMMUNOL
VOLUME 138, NUMBER 4

FIG 3. Cytokine and other mediator networks in allergic inflammation. Epithelial barrier impairment during inflammation can allow penetration of allergens through the tissues. Allergens with protease activity can cleave epithelial cell tight junction proteins and gain access to submucosal DCs. Once activated and loaded with antigens, DCs mature and migrate to local lymph nodes and present processed allergen peptides to naive T cells through MHC class II molecules. Naive T cells in the presence of IL-4 differentiate into Th2 cells. The Th2-type cytokines IL-4 and IL-13, which are produced not only by Th2 cells but also by ILC2s, are involved in immunoglobulin class-switch recombination in B cells, which leads to IgE production. IgE binds to FcεRI on the surfaces of tissue-resident mast cells, sensitizing them. Subsequent release of mast cell–associated mediators, such as histamine, tryptase, prostaglandins, leukotrienes, and cytokines, induced goblet cell hyperplasia, smooth muscle contraction, vasodilation, increased vascular permeability, and intensified mucus production. During allergic inflammation, activated epithelial cells release TSLP, IL-25, and IL-33, which also contribute to the Th2 response. Highly activated epithelial cells undergo apoptosis. Th17 and Th1 cells mediate neutrophil recruitment, whereas eosinophilia is induced by IL-5, IL-25, and IL-33. Immunoregulatory cytokines, such as IL-10 and TGF-β, released by Treg cells can suppress Th2-type immune responses and control airway inflammation and remodeling. IL-10–producing B~R1~ cells inhibit effector T cells. LTs, Leukotrienes; LTC4, leukotriene C4; MBP, major basic protein; PGD2, prostaglandin D2; ROS, reactive oxygen species.

### IL-24

IL-24 is expressed by normal melanocytes, T cells, and monocytes [101] and binds to complexes comprising IL-22R1 and IL-20R2 or IL-20R1 and IL-20R2 (Fig 1). [102] IL-24 specifically inhibits tumor growth, and its antitumor activities require phosphorylation. [103] In a phase I clinical trial intratumoral injections of a nonreplicating adenovirus vector that carried *IL24* were well tolerated and induced apoptosis in large volumes of tumor tissue. [104] T cell–derived microvesicles induce mast cells to produce IL-24, which might have implications for allergic inflammations of the skin and lung. [105]

### IL-26

IL-26 was discovered during the analysis of human T cells after transformation by *Herpesvirus saimiri*. [106] Interestingly, mice and rats do not have the *IL26* gene, whereas zebrafish, chickens, and frogs do, and its evolutionary conservation is limited. IL-26 expression seems to be restricted to memory T cells, NK cells, and Th17 cells. [107] The receptor for IL-26 consists of the IL-10R2 chain, which is part of other receptors in this cytokine family, and the IL-20R1 chain (Fig 1). [108] In contrast to IL-10R2, IL-20R1 has not been detected in immune cells, but IL-20R1 is expressed on several types of epithelial cells and skin, testis, heart, placenta, salivary gland, and prostate cells. [93] There have been few studies on its physiologic function or role in disease processes because mice do not carry *IL26*. IL-26 is expressed by Th17 cells and might have proinflammatory effects in disorders such as Crohn disease. A recent functional study suggested that Th17 cells promote microbial killing and innate immune sensing of DNA through IL-26. [109]

IL-28A, IL-28B, and IL-29 (IFN-λ)

IL-28A, IL-28B, and IL-29 (alternatively termed IFN-λ2, IFN-λ3 and IFN-λ1, respectively) have homology with type I interferons, although the intron-exon structure of their genes more closely resembles that of the IL-10 family. A new gene upstream of IL-28B was discovered in 2013, and it was designated IFNL4. This gene encodes IFN-λ4 and is similar to IFN-λ3. IL-28A, IL-28B, and IL-29 all signal through the same receptor complex, which is composed of a single IL-28R1 (alternatively named IFN-λR1, CRF2-12, or LICR) chain and an IL-10R2 chain (Fig 1). Expression of IL-28 and IL-29 is induced by exposure of cells to polyinosinic-polycytidylic acid or viral infection, indicating their antiviral activities. IL-28 and IL-29 inhibit replication of hepatitis B and C viruses, and therefore they might be used to treat patients infected with these viruses. Interestingly, IL-28 and IL-29 might also promote the development of tolerogenic DCs.

THE IL-12 FAMILY

IL-12, IL-23, IL-27, and IL-35 share receptor and ligand chains (Fig 1). Their functions differ because of their expression on different cell types and combinations of different receptor chains. IL-30 is the alternative designation for the p28 subunit of IL-27.

IL-12

The bioactive form of IL-12 (IL-12p70), first described as NK-stimulating factor, is a heterodimer that consists of 2 subunits: a 35-kDa light chain (p35) and a 40-kDa heavy chain (p40). It is produced by activated monocytes, macrophages, neutrophils, microglia, and DCs. In contrast, the p40 subunit, referred to as IL-12p40 and secreted in the absence of p35 as either monomer or homodimer by APCs, was shown to inhibit IL-12-dependent immune functions acting as an antagonist of IL-12 receptors. Bioactive IL-12 mediates the development and maintenance of T_H1 cells by inducing IFN-γ production by T_H1 and NK cells. In addition, it plays an important role for the induction of ILC1s. IL-12 indirectly activates the antimicrobial, antiparasitic, and antitumor activity of macrophages and promotes cytolytic activity of NK cells and lymphokine-activated killer cells. Reduced IL-12 production impairs T_H1 responses and increases susceptibility to infection with intracellular pathogens. In neonatal DCs dectin-1 activation unlocks IL12A expression and reveals their T1-inducing potency. IL-12 controls the homeostasis of Treg cells by eliminating them, as observed during the elimination of pathogen-specific Treg cells during *Mycobacterium tuberculosis* infection.

IL-23

IL-23 includes the IL-12p40 subunit and a distinct IL-23p19 subunit (Fig 1). IL-23 is mainly produced by phagocytic cells, macrophages, and activated DCs from peripheral tissues, including the skin, intestinal mucosa, and lungs. Activated and memory T cells express high levels of IL-23R, along with NK and NKT cells, eosinophils, monocytes, macrophages, DCs, and epithelial cells. IL-23 contributes to the development of T_H17 cells, and a population of ILCs respond to IL-23 and might have a role in the pathogenesis of inflammatory bowel disease. A recent study has shown a link of IL-23 to alopecia areata lesional cytokine profiles.

IL-27

IL-27 is a heterodimeric cytokine consisting of p28 and EBI3 subunits. The p28 chain is related to IL-12p35, whereas the EBI3 chain is related to IL-12p40 and structurally resembles soluble IL-6R (Fig 1). IL-27 is expressed predominantly by DCs and macrophages and endothelial cells. IL-27 promotes early commitment of naive T cells to the T_H1 cell lineage. It directly antagonizes the development of T_H17 cell responses and limits the induction of inflammation by cells that produce IL-17 in the central nervous system. IL-27 also limits the development of uveitis and scleritis by cells that produce IL-17 and induces FOXP3 expression by Treg cells. Recent studies also suggested mechanisms that might play a role in immune privilege and immune tolerance. CD4⁺ T cells of asthmatic patients are resistant to IL-27-mediated inhibition. This can be linked to resistance of T_H2 cells by their IL-4– to IL-27-induced reprogramming toward T_H1 cells. IL-27 expression in bronchoalveolar lavage cells associates with type 2 immunity and asthma severity. In addition, IL-27 stimulates the effector functions of human NK cells and increases their IL-18 responsiveness. IL-27 induces CD39, which acts on DCs to suppress the T-cell response and autoimmunity. IL-27 plays a role in antitumor immunity, as shown in patients with prostate cancer.

IL-35

IL-35 is a heterodimeric cytokine consisting of EBI3 and the p35 subunit of IL-12 (Fig 1). EBI3 is specifically expressed in mouse FOXP3⁺ Treg cells, and the EBI3/p35 heterodimer is constitutively secreted by these cells. The increased expression of EBI3 and IL12 p35 in mouse FOXP3⁺ Treg cells compared with effector T cells and transcription analyses indicated that EBI3 expression is regulated by FOXP3. IL-35 stimulation of mouse CD4⁺CD25⁺ Treg cells induced IL-10 production but did not influence FOXP3 expression. CD4⁺CD25⁺ T cells expanded in the presence of IL-35 were able to suppress the proliferation of CD4⁺CD25⁻ effector T cells. IL-35, but not EBI3 alone, inhibited differentiation of mouse CD4⁺ T cells into T_H17 cells that produce IL-17. Furthermore, IL-35 reduced the incidence of arthritis, numbers of arthritic paws, and pathologic features in mice with collagen-induced arthritis in parallel to increased serum levels of IL-10 and IFN-γ and reduced induction of IL-17.

CYTOKINES OF TYPE 2 IMMUNE RESPONSE

Cytokines produced during the induction and function of T_H2 and ILC2 responses with the contribution of epithelial cells, DCs, ILCs, T cells, eosinophils, mast cells, and basophils include IL-4, IL-5, IL-9, IL-13, IL-25, IL-31, IL-33, and TSLP. A default role for these cytokines can be suggested in immunity against helminth infections, with IgE production and eosinophilia, as well as decreased tissue injury, during severe type 1 inflammation (Fig 3). IL-4 and IL-9 have been highlighted at the “common γ chain cytokines” and IL-33 in the “IL-1 family” sections above.

IL-5

IL-5 was initially described as an eosinophil and B-cell growth factor; it is mainly produced by CD4⁺ T_H2 cells, activated eosinophils, mast cells, CD8⁺ Tc2 cells, γδ T cells, NK cells, NKT cells, and CD4⁻c-Kit⁻CD3ε⁻IL-2Ra⁺ cells in Peyer patches. Its receptor shares the β chain (CD131) with IL-3 and GM-CSF

J ALLERGY CLIN IMMUNOL
VOLUME 138, NUMBER 4

(Fig 1). IL-5 promotes proliferation, activation, differentiation, survival, and adhesion of eosinophils. T<sub>H</sub>2 cells that secrete IL-5 recruit eosinophils and contribute to the induction of airway hyperreactivity in asthmatic patients.<sup>134</sup> Levels of IL-5, T<sub>H</sub>2 cells, and eosinophils are increased in cases of bronchoalveolar lavage and correlate with asthma severity. IL-5–deficient mice develop normally but are resistant to induction of experimental asthma, reduce expulsion of *Nippostrongylus brasiliensis*, and have fewer IgA<sup>+</sup> cells in the lamina propria compared with control mice. Anti–IL-5 therapy seems to be efficient in patients with eosinophilic asthma, eosinophilic esophagitis, and CRS.<sup>75,135,136</sup>

**IL-13**

IL-13 is expressed by activated T<sub>H</sub>2 cells, mast cells, basophils, eosinophils, and NKT cells. Its receptors are IL-13Rα1 and IL-13Rα2, and signaling occurs through the IL-4R complex type II, which consists of IL-4Rα and IL-13Rα1 (Fig 1).<sup>137</sup> IL-13R chains are regulated during viral infection and inflammation.<sup>138</sup> IL-13 activates the same signal transduction pathways as IL-4 and induces IgE production. It also activates and recruits mast cells and eosinophils and promotes their survival. A combination of polymorphisms in genes, which takes place in the IL-4 and IL-13 pathways, increases the risk of asthma by 16.8-fold; polymorphisms in only the *IL13* gene increase the incidence of asthma exacerbations in children and increase total IgE levels and eosinophil numbers in blood samples.<sup>139</sup> IL-13 KO mice produce less IL-4, IL-5, IL-10, and IgE and do not have goblet cell hyperplasia (see Table E2). They are unable to expel *N brasiliensis*, indicating the role of IL-13 in parasite defense. IL-13Rα1–deficient mice lack features of asthma and airway remodeling. IL-5 and IL-13 from the ILC2s play an important role in the setting of eosinophilic asthma. There were significantly greater numbers of sputum IL-5<sup>+</sup>IL-13<sup>+</sup>ILC2s in patients with severe asthma whose airway eosinophilia was greater than 3%, despite normal blood eosinophil numbers.<sup>140</sup>

**IL-25 (IL-17E)**

Because of homology with IL-17 family members, IL-25 has also been named IL-17E. It is produced by polarized T<sub>H</sub>2 cells,<sup>141</sup> mast cells, eosinophils, and basophils from atopic subjects. IL-25 induces production of T<sub>H</sub>2-associated cytokines. IL-25 KO mice do not expel *N brasiliensis* efficiently because of subtle changes in the induction of T<sub>H</sub>2-type cytokine responses and are very susceptible to experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis. Transgenic expression of IL-25 leads to blood eosinophilia and increased levels of IgE, IgG<sub>1</sub>, IL-5, and IL-13. IL-25 might be involved in asthma pathogenesis. It is expressed at high levels in the lungs of sensitized mice after allergen challenge, and transgenic mice that express IL-25 only in lungs have increased numbers of eosinophils and CD4<sup>+</sup>T cells on allergen-specific stimulation. Anti–IL-25 treatment reduced the number of polyps, mucosal edema and thickness, collagen deposition, and infiltration of inflammatory cells, such as eosinophils and neutrophils, in a mouse chronic rhinitis model, suggesting a role in the pathogenesis of CRS with nasal polyps.<sup>142</sup>

**IL-31**

IL-31 is expressed by activated CD4<sup>+</sup>T cells (mostly by T<sub>H</sub>2 cells) and at lower levels by CD8<sup>+</sup>T cells. IL-31 signals through a heterodimeric receptor complex that consists of the IL-31RA and oncostatin M receptor β; this receptor is expressed mainly by keratinocytes but also by epithelial cells, dorsal root ganglia, eosinophils, basophils, and monocytes. IL-31 is induced by IL-4 and promotes T<sub>H</sub>2-driven inflammation.<sup>143</sup> IL-31 expression is increased in patients with atopic dermatitis, contact dermatitis, and prurigo nodularis. IL-31RA is a functional receptor expressed by a small subpopulation of IL-31Ra<sup>+</sup>/TRPV1<sup>+</sup>/TRPA1<sup>+</sup> neurons and is a critical neuroimmune link between T<sub>H</sub>2 cells and sensory nerves for the generation of T cell–mediated itch.<sup>144</sup> Transgenic overexpression of IL-31 in mice results in a phenotype that resembles nonatopic dermatitis.<sup>13</sup> IL31 mRNA is upregulated in the lungs after antigen challenge in a mouse model of airway inflammation.<sup>145</sup> In addition, serum IL-31 levels are increased in a subset of patients with mastocytosis and correlate with disease severity.

**TSLP**

Cellular sources of TSLP include keratinocytes, airway epithelial cells, intestinal epithelial cells, thymic stromal cells, tonsillar crypt epithelial cells, mast cells, and basophils.<sup>146</sup> Structurally, TSLP resembles IL-7. TSLP is released in response to viral, bacterial, and parasitic pathogens; TLR engagement; and other cytokines, such as IL-1β, TNF-α, IL-4, and IL-13.<sup>146</sup> TSLP acts through a heterodimeric receptor, TSLP receptor (TSLPR), which consists of the IL-7Rα chain and a unique TSLPR chain resembling the common cytokine receptor γ chain.<sup>147</sup> Activation of TSLPR leads to signal transducer and activator of transcription 5 phosphorylation. TSLP acts on DCs, monocytes, CD4<sup>+</sup>T cells, mast cells, and B cells, promoting development of the T<sub>H</sub>2 inflammatory response, often in cooperation with IL-25 and IL-33 and other cytokines.<sup>146,148</sup> TSLP has been reported to play a pivotal role in allergic asthma, with anti-TSLP (AMG157) antibody showing promising efficacy in reducing allergen-induced inflammation in primates and human subjects.<sup>149,150</sup> TSLP is also associated with atopic dermatitis.<sup>151</sup> Aside from its role in allergic inflammation, TSLP has been implicated to play a role in CRS with nasal polyps, idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis, primary spontaneous pneumothorax, breast cancer, pancreatic cancer, cervical cancer, and lung cancer. TSLP has been extensively reviewed elsewhere.<sup>146,152,153</sup>

**INTERLEUKINS WITH CHEMOKINE ACTIVITY**

**IL-8**

IL-8 was identified as a neutrophil-specific chemotactic factor and later classified as a member of the CXC chemokine family. IL-8 is produced by a variety of cells, such as monocytes and macrophages, neutrophils, lymphocytes, and endothelial and epithelial cells, after stimulation with IL-1α, IL-1β, IL-17, TNF-α, or TLRs.<sup>154</sup> The receptors for IL-8 are CXCR1 (IL-8RA) and CXCR2 (IL-8RB).<sup>155</sup> The major effector functions of IL-8 are activation and recruitment of neutrophils to the site of infection or injury. In addition to neutrophils, IL-8 also attracts NK cells, T cells, basophils, and GM-CSF– or IL-3–primed eosinophils.<sup>156</sup> Increased IL-8 concentrations were found in inflammatory sites in patients with diseases such as psoriasis, rheumatoid arthritis, respiratory syncytial virus infection, asthma, and chronic obstructive pulmonary diseases.<sup>157</sup>

IL-16

IL-16 was discovered as a T cell–specific chemoattractant. Pro–IL-16, its 80-kDa precursor protein, is cleaved by caspase-3, resulting in a 60-kDa N-terminal fragment and a 14- to 17-kDa C-terminal fragment. The N-terminal fragment regulates the cell cycle, whereas the C-terminal fragment forms homotetramers (56 kDa) that mediate cytokine functions. IL16 mRNA and pro–IL-16 are constitutively expressed in T cells, eosinophils, and monocytes, whereas nonimmune cells, such as epithelial cells and fibroblasts, must be activated to transcribe IL16 mRNA. IL-16 mediates its biological activity through CD4. IL-16 inhibits T-cell proliferation, promotes TH1-mediated responses, and reduces TH2-mediated inflammation by activating the release of TNF-α, IL-1β, and IL-15 and concomitantly inhibiting IL-4 and IL-5 production.

THE IL-17 FAMILY

IL-17A, also called IL-17 in some studies, is the founding member of this structurally distinct cytokine family. It binds as a homodimer or a heterodimer with IL-17F to its receptor, IL-17RA. IL-17A is expressed by activated CD4+ TH17 cells (Fig 3), but its expression has also been detected in CD8+ T cells, γδ T cells, NK cells, and neutrophils. During TH17 differentiation, human naive T cells must be exposed to IL-1β, IL-6, IL-23, and TGF-β before they express maximum levels of IL-17. RORC2 in human subjects acts as the main transcription factor. Consistent with the broad expression pattern of its receptor, IL-17A acts on a variety of cells, which respond by upregulating expression of proinflammatory cytokines, chemokines, and metalloproteases. By inducing cells to produce chemokines, IL-17A attracts neutrophils to mediate defenses against different pathogens. IL-17A and TH17 cells are involved in several inflammatory disorders, including rheumatoid arthritis and multiple sclerosis. Similarly, they are upregulated in mouse models of collagen-induced arthritis and experimental autoimmune encephalitis. Increased IL-17A levels have also been found in patients with psoriasis, inflammatory bowel disease, and allergic asthma and atopic dermatitis. Diesel exhaust is one of the factors that induce IL-17 in asthmatic patients. IL-17A is not inhibited by steroids in asthmatic patients, whereas 1α,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 shows an inhibitory role. Steroid-resistant asthma was suggested to have IL-17A (high) and IFN-γ (high) endotypes.

In contrast to its homologue IL-17A, IL-17B and its receptor IL-17RB are not expressed in immune cells but instead in spinal cord, testis, small intestine, pancreas, stomach, prostate, ovary, colon mucosa, and cartilage. IL-17C induces production of proinflammatory cytokines and metalloproteases by certain cells and has been associated with pathologic conditions, such as arthritic paws of mice with collagen-induced arthritis. IL-17D is highly expressed in skeletal muscle, brain, adipose tissue, heart, lung, and pancreas tissue. Lower levels are also found in bone marrow, fetal liver, kidney, lymph node, placenta, spleen, thymus, tonsils, resting CD4+ T cells, and resting B cells.

Among the IL-17 family members, IL-17A and IL-17F have the highest degree of homology; they are 50% identical at the protein level. IL-17F binds to the same receptor as IL-17A (IL-17RA), although with lower affinity. IL-17A and IL-17F form heterodimers, as expected from their structural similarities. There are 2 isoforms of IL-17F expressed by activated TH17 cells. Like IL-17A, IL-17F acts on many cell types and

induces similar proinflammatory cytokines and chemokines. Double-positive IL-17+IL-22+ cells with memory characteristics are observed in lung draining lymph nodes of patients with cystic fibrosis, and IL-17A and neutrophils have a central role in fibrosis in the lungs of patients with hypersensitivity pneumonitis. IL-17A seems to be more expressed in patients with psoriasis and intrinsic-type atopic dermatitis skin compared with those with extrinsic-type atopic dermatitis skin. Severe atopic dermatitis is characterized by selective expansion of circulating TH2/TC2 and TH22/TC22 cells, but not TH17/TC17 cells, within the skin-homing T-cell population.

OTHER INTERLEUKINS

IL-3

IL-3, IL-5, and GM-CSF share a common receptor subunit β chain (CD131), and their functions partially overlap (Fig 1). IL-3 is expressed by T cells, macrophages, stromal cells, NK cells, mast cells, and eosinophils. On binding to IL-3, the β chain forms a heterodimer with the cytokine-specific α chain. IL-3 is a multilineage hematopoietic growth factor that functions in synergy with other cytokines during early stages of hematopoiesis. In combination with erythropoietin or GM-CSF and granulocyte colony-stimulating factor, IL-3 induces erythroid or granulocyte-macrophage lineages, respectively. IL-3 and TNF-α promote proliferation of CD34+ progenitor cells; IL-3 also increases the activation and release of mediators from eosinophils and basophils in response to IgE FcεR crosslinking. Mice that do not produce β chains lack IL-3, IL-5, or GM-CSF signaling; these hematopoietic cytokines mediate TH2-mediated allergic airway inflammation by inducing eosinophil accumulation, airway hyperresponsiveness, mucus hypersecretion, and IgE production. IL-3 is essential in basophil activation in patients with allergic asthma.

IL-6

IL-6 is a member of the IL-6–type family of cytokines, which includes leukemia inhibitor factor, ciliary neurotrophic factor, and oncostatin M. Its receptor consists of an IL-6–binding chain (IL-6Rα) and the signal-inducing component (gp130). IL-6R exists in membrane-bound and soluble forms. IL-6 is a multifunctional pleiotropic cytokine involved in regulation of immune responses, acute-phase responses, hematopoiesis, and inflammation. It is produced by endothelial cells, fibroblasts, monocytes, and macrophages in response to different stimuli (IL-1, IL-17, and TNF-α) during systemic inflammation. In innate immunity IL-6 directs leukocyte trafficking and activation and induces production of acute-phase proteins by hepatocytes. IL-6 promotes T-cell proliferation, B-cell differentiation and survival, and plasma cell production of IgG, IgA, and IgM. In addition, allergen-induced IL-6 promotes type 2 and type 17 airway inflammation.

IL-11

IL-11 is expressed by stromal cells, including fibroblasts, epithelial cells, endothelial cells, osteoblasts, and several tumor cell lines. It binds a heterodimeric receptor consisting of IL-11Rα and gp130. IL-11Rα binds IL-11 with high levels of specificity, whereas gp130 is shared by receptors for IL-11, IL-6, ciliary neurotrophic factor, leukemia inhibitory factor, oncostatin M, and cardiotrophin-1. IL-11 stimulates hematopoiesis by supporting

the proliferation of myeloid, erythroid, and megakaryocyte progenitor cells. ${ }^{181}$ Recombinant IL-11 has been approved for the treatment of thrombocytopenia, a major dose-limiting hematologic complication of chemotherapy for cancer, ${ }^{182}$ and recombinant human IL-11 is a protective factor in patients with severe sepsis with thrombocytopenia. ${ }^{183}$

### IL-14

IL-14 was first described as a high-molecular-weight B-cell growth factor. Two transcripts are produced from opposite strands of the $I L 14$ gene, termed IL-14$\alpha$ and IL-14$\beta$. ${ }^{184}$ IL-14 is produced by T cells and B- and T-lineage lymphoma cell lines. ${ }^{185}$ IL-14 binds and signals through a 90-kDa receptor expressed on activated B cells to promote B-cell proliferation. This receptor is expressed especially on germinal center B cells and surface IgD ${ }^{\text {low }}$ human tonsil B cells, including B1 cells and activated B2 cells, and is expressed in patients with autoimmune thyroiditis. ${ }^{186}$ Phenotypes of transgenic mice that overexpress IL-14$\alpha$ resemble features of systemic lupus erythematosus or Sjögren syndrome; older transgenic mice have B-cell malignancies (CD5 ${ }^{+}$ B-cell lymphoma) similar to those observed in patients with these disorders, and the mice have hypergammaglobulinemia with IgG, IgA, and IgM autoantibodies. ${ }^{184}$

### IL-32

IL-32 was originally described as an mRNA that was called NK cell transcript 4, which encoded a protein with many characteristics of a cytokine. The main sources of IL-32 are activated T cells and NK cells; epithelial cells express IL-32 on stimulation with TNF-$\alpha$, IFN-$\gamma$, IL-1$\beta$, and IL-18. ${ }^{187}$ Proteinase 3 cleaves IL-32$\alpha$, resulting in formation of 2 peptides that upregulate production of proinflammatory cytokines by mouse and human monocytes. ${ }^{187}$ IL-32 is highly expressed in synovial tissue samples from patients with rheumatoid arthritis, and expression levels are associated with disease severity. ${ }^{187}$ IL-32 also regulates keratinocyte apoptosis and contributes to eczema formation in patients with atopic dermatitis.

IL-32 is induced by IFN-$\gamma$, TNF-$\alpha$, T ${ }_{H} 1$ cells, and rhinovirus in bronchial epithelial cells. It inhibits angiogenesis, and its serum levels are associated with a good treatment response in asthmatic patients. ${ }^{189}$ Although IL-32 is not expressed by rodents, transgenic overexpression of IL-32 by endothelial and hematopoietic cells in mice intensified vascular inflammation and exacerbated sepsis.

### IL-34

IL-34 is expressed in various tissues, including the heart, brain, liver, kidney, spleen, thymus, testes, ovary, small intestine, prostate, and colon, and is most abundant in the spleen. ${ }^{190}$ The receptor for IL-34 is colony-stimulating factor 1 receptor, and it is required for the development of Langerhans cells and microglia. ${ }^{191}$ IL-34 stimulates monocyte and macrophage proliferation and development. It is highly expressed in atopic dermatitis lesions. ${ }^{192}$

### IFN-$\gamma$

Cells from the innate (eg, NK cells, NKT cells, macrophages, and myelomonocytic cells) and adaptive (eg, T ${ }_{H} 1$ cells, cytotoxic T lymphocytes, and B cells) immune systems produce IFN-$\gamma$.

High IFN-$\gamma$ levels are expressed by T ${ }_{H} 1$ cells, activating macrophages to kill microbes, promoting cytotoxic activities of other cells, and inducing apoptosis of epithelial cells in the skin and mucosa (Fig 3). ${ }^{193}$ In addition to its role in the development of a T ${ }_{H} 1$-type response and the B-cell isotype switch to IgG ${ }_{2 \mathrm{a}}$ (in mice), IFN-$\gamma$ regulates MHC class I and II protein expression and antigen presentation. IFN-$\gamma$ also inhibits cell growth and apoptosis and controls extension of the immune response by inducing activation-induced cell death of CD4 ${ }^{+}$ T cells. ${ }^{20,22}$ IFN-$\gamma$ plays a role in keratinocyte apoptosis in eczema formation, ${ }^{22}$ and loss-of-function variants in $I F N G R 1$ are linked to atopic dermatitis complicated by eczema herpeticum. ${ }^{194}$ In addition, steroid-resistant severe asthma is characterized by IL-17A (high) and IFN-$\gamma$ (high) endotypes. ${ }^{167}$

#### IFN-$\alpha$ and IFN-$\beta$

All nucleated cells can produce and respond to IFN-$\alpha \beta$ in the context of a viral infection, but plasmacytoid DCs are the most abundant source, producing up to 1000-fold more IFN-$\alpha \beta$ (and IFN-$\lambda$) than other cell types. ${ }^{195}$ After viral entry, pathogen-associated molecular patterns and danger and stress signals can lead to type I interferon production. ${ }^{196}$ Cytosolic (eg, melanoma differentiation-associated protein 5 and retinoic acid-inducible gene 1) and endosomal (TLR3, TLR7, and TLR9) receptors can sense nucleic acids of viral origin and induce their production. ${ }^{197}$ IFN-$\alpha \beta$ bind both to a specific cell-surface receptor complex (IFNAR) on both the virus-infected cell and nearby uninfected cells. The receptor complex consists of 2 known subunits: IFNAR-1 and IFNAR-2. Their biological effects are mainly mediated by the transcriptional control of interferon-inducible genes (approximately 1000), but direct mechanisms acting on translation have also been described. ${ }^{198}$

Antiviral activity mediated by IFNAR requires induction of the enzyme 2′-5′-oligoadenylate synthetase, a double-stranded RNA-dependent protein kinase, as well as a myxovirus resistance protein. Early production of IFN-$\beta$ is very important because it induces other cells (infected or noninfected) to make IFN-$\alpha$, thus amplifying and maintaining the type I interferon response. IFN-$\alpha$ and IFN-$\beta$ can directly influence immune cells through IFNAR and indirectly by inducing chemokines for recruitment of immune cells to the site of infection. Type I interferons induce secretion of a second wave of cytokines, such as IL-15, to regulate NK cell and memory CD8 T-cell numbers and activities. ${ }^{199}$

IFN-$\alpha$ and IFN-$\beta$ are critical for DC stimulation and activation of naive T cells, B-cell development, and antibody production. Normally, self-nucleic acids do not activate adaptive immune responses, but their coupling to host antimicrobial components can activate TLR9 and induce type I interferon secretion by DCs, providing the initial scenario for boosting autoreactive clones in susceptible subjects. ${ }^{200}$ Increased type I interferon levels are found in patients with several autoimmune diseases and have been associated with disease mechanisms. ${ }^{201}$ In regard to allergic diseases, type I interferons inhibit type 2 responses through different mechanisms, such as IL-21 and IL-13R $\alpha 2$ (a decoy receptor) upregulation. ${ }^{138}$ Allergic patients produce less type I interferons in response to viruses. ${ }^{202}$ Different mechanisms have been suggested to be related to dampened type I interferon responses in atopic subjects, ${ }^{203}$ such as suppression by suppressor of cytokine signaling genes, which might play a role in decreased viral clearance in the epithelium of asthmatic patients. ${ }^{203}$

TGF-β

The 3 highly homologous isoforms of TGF-β belong to the large TGF-β superfamily. They are made up of a secretory peptide, the prodomain, also called latency-associated peptide, and the active C-terminal peptide. Before secretion, TGF-β dimerizes and forms, together with latency-associated peptide and the latent TGF-β–binding protein, a large complex that binds to the extracellular matrix.²⁰⁴ TGF-β needs to be released and activated with proteolysis, pH drop, reactive oxygen species, or αV integrins to bind to its receptor.²⁰⁴ The canonical signaling pathway for TGF-β uses the SMAD2/3 pathway, but after binding to TGF-βRI and TGF-βRII, a variety of other pathways are activated. TGF-β is produced by a variety of cells, such as epithelial cells, fibroblasts, and immune cells (eg, macrophages, eosinophils, and lymphocytes). TGF-β is one of the major cytokines for the suppressive function of Treg cells²⁰⁵ and differentiation of proinflammatory Th17 and Th9 cells.²⁰⁶ Most body cells express TGF-β receptors and can respond to TGF-β signaling. TGF-β plays a role in embryonic development, especially of the skeleton and cardiovascular system. It influences structural changes of tissues through induction of mesenchymal transition from epithelial and endothelial cells²⁰⁷ by controlling extracellular matrix deposition,²⁰⁸ apoptosis induction, and inhibition of proliferation. Inhibition of proliferation is also a major feature in the balancing influence of TGF-β on the immune system. TGF-β is part of the pathologic mechanisms behind autoimmune diseases,²⁰⁹ Marfan syndrome and Duchenne muscle atrophy,²¹⁰ Alzheimer disease,²¹¹ fibrotic disorders,²¹² cancer, allergic diseases, and osteoarthritis. Several studies suggest that TGF-β1 might play a role in remodeling in patients with several diseases, including eosinophilic esophagitis.²¹³,²¹⁴ Because of its variety of functions, TGF-β often has a double-faced effect in patients with these diseases but still represents a promising therapeutic target.

TNF-α

TNF-α was first described as TNF, a protein in sera of mice infected with BCG and treated with LPS, which caused hemorrhagic necrosis of different transplanted tumors *in vivo* and cytosis of a mouse fibrosarcoma cell line *in vitro*.²¹⁷ TNF-α is an important pleiotropic cytokine involved in host defense, inflammation, and apoptosis. It plays a double role in regulation of immune responses, acting both as a proinflammatory mediator, initiating a strong inflammatory response, and an immunosuppressive mediator, inhibiting the development of autoimmune diseases and tumorigenesis, and exhibiting a vital role in maintenance of immune homeostasis by limiting the extent and duration of inflammatory processes. TNF-α plays an important role in host defense against viral, bacterial, fungal, and parasitic pathogens, in particular against intracellular bacterial infections, such as *Mycobacterium tuberculosis* and *Listeria monocytogenes*. High systemic TNF-α levels can lead to septic shock. Local increases in TNF-α concentrations cause the 5 cardinal signs of inflammation: heat, swelling, redness, pain, and loss of function. TNF-α is involved in the development of allergic diseases, particularly asthma²¹⁸ and atopic dermatitis.¹⁹³

FUTURE DIRECTIONS

Several new cytokines are likely to be categorized as interleukins within the several hundred secreted proteins that regulate communication among immune system cells and between the immune system and resident tissue cells. The growing list of interleukins requires a better classification strategy and improved understanding of their functions. Classification according to sequence homogeneity, structure, and common receptor chains is useful; however, most interleukins do not fit into any particular structural category. Bioinformatics data and information about their roles in the evolution of the immune system, as well as their nonimmune functions, in mammals should also be taken into consideration. Categories according to sequence homology and evolutionary relationship (IL-1, IL-10, and IL-17 families) and common receptor chains (γ chain cytokines), as well as subgrouping according to major functions (type 2 interleukins and chemokines), have been taken into consideration in this extensive review article.

REFERENCES

1. Dinarello C, Arend W, Sims J, Smith D, Blumberg H, O’Neill L, et al. IL-1 family nomenclature. Nat Immunol 2010;11:973.
2. Lloyd CM, Saglani S. T cells in asthma: influences of genetics, environment, and T-cell plasticity. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2013;131:1267-74.
3. Akdis M, Burgler S, Crameri R, Eiwegger T, Fujita H, Gomez E, et al. Interleukins, from 1 to 37, and interferon-gamma: receptors, functions, and roles in diseases. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2011;127:701-21, e1-70.
4. Akdis M, Akdis CA. Mechanisms of allergen-specific immunotherapy: multiple suppressor factors at work in immune tolerance to allergens. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2014;133:621-31.
5. Annunziato F, Romagnani C, Romagnani S. The 3 major types of innate and adaptive cell-mediated effector immunity. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2015;135:626-35.
6. Christianson CA, Goplen NP, Zafar I, Irvin C, Good JT Jr, Rollins DR, et al. Persistence of asthma requires multiple feedback circuits involving type 2 innate lymphoid cells and IL-33. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2015;136:59-68.e14.
7. Sharma S, Zhou X, Thibault DM, Himes BE, Liu A, Szeﬂer SJ, et al. A genome-wide survey of CD4(+) lymphocyte regulatory genetic variants identifies novel asthma genes. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2014;134:1153-62.
8. Vickery BP, Scurlock AM, Kulis M, Steele PH, Kamilaris J, Berglund JP, et al. Sustained unresponsiveness to peanut in subjects who have completed peanut oral immunotherapy. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2014;133:468-75.
9. Hinks TS, Zhou X, Staples KJ, Dimitrov BD, Manta A, Petrossian T, et al. Innate and adaptive T cells in asthmatic patients: relationship to severity and disease mechanisms. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2015;136:323-33.
10. Gold MJ, Antignano F, Halim TY, Hirota JA, Blanchet MR, Zaph C, et al. Group 2 innate lymphoid cells facilitate sensitization to local, but not systemic, TH2-inducing allergen exposures. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2014;133:1142-8.
11. Akdis M. Healthy immune response to allergens: T regulatory cells and more. Curr Opin Immunol 2006;18:738-44.
12. Kang CM, Jang AS, Ahn MH, Shin JA, Kim JH, Choi YS, et al. Interleukin-25 and interleukin-13 production by alveolar macrophages in response to particles. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol 2005;33:290-6.
13. Dillon SR, Sprecher C, Hammond A, Bilsborough J, Rosenfeld-Franklin M, Presnell SR, et al. Interleukin 31, a cytokine produced by activated T cells, induces dermatitis in mice. Nat Immunol 2004;5:752-60.
14. Morita H, Arae K, Unno H, Miyauchi K, Toyama S, Nambu A, et al. An interleukin-33-mast cell-interleukin-2 axis suppresses papain-induced allergic inflammation by promoting regulatory T cell numbers. Immunity 2015;43:175-86.
15. Soyka MB, Wawrzyniak P, Eiwegger T, Holzmann D, Treis A, Wanke K, et al. Defective epithelial barrier in chronic rhinosinusitis: The regulation of tight junctions by IFN-gamma and IL-4. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2012;130:1087-96.
16. Kubo T, Wawrzyniak P, Morita H, Sugita K, Wanke K, Kast JI, et al. CpG-DNA enhances the tight junction integrity of the bronchial epithelial cell barrier. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2015;136:1413-6, e1-8.
17. Seltmann J, Roesner LM, von Hesler FW, Wittmann M, Werfel T. IL-33 impacts on the skin barrier by downregulating the expression of filaggrin. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2015;135:1659-61.e4.
18. Georas SN, Rezaee F. Epithelial barrier function: at the front line of asthma immunology and allergic airway inflammation. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2014;134:509-20.
19. Smits HH, Akdis CA. In utero priming by worms protects against respiratory allergies. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2014;134:1280-1.

J ALLERGY CLIN IMMUNOL
VOLUME 138, NUMBER 4

20. Akkoc T, de Koning PJ, Ruckert B, Barlan I, Akdis M, Akdis CA. Increased activation-induced cell death of high IFN-gamma-producing T(H)1 cells as a mechanism of T(H)2 predominance in atopic diseases. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2008;121:652-8.e1.

21. Yoo JK, Kim TS, Hufford MM, Braciale TJ. Viral infection of the lung: host response and sequelae. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2013;132:1263-77.

22. Rebane A, Zimmermann M, Aab A, Baurecht H, Koreck A, Karelson M, et al. Mechanisms of IFN-gamma-induced apoptosis of human skin keratinocytes in patients with atopic dermatitis. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2012;129:1297-306.

23. Harrington LE, Hatton RD, Mangan PR, Turner H, Murphy TL, Murphy KM, et al. Interleukin 17-producing CD4+ effector T cells develop via a lineage distinct from the T helper type 1 and 2 lineages. Nat Immunol 2005;6:1123-32.

24. Akdis M, Palomares O, van de Veen W, van Splunter M, Akdis CA. TH17 and TH22 cells: a confusion of antimicrobial response with tissue inflammation versus protection. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2012;129:1438-49.

25. Wawrzyniak M, Ochsner U, Wirz O, Wawrzyniak P, van de Veen W, Akdis CA, et al. A novel, dual cytokine-secretion assay for the purification of human Th22 cells that do not co-produce IL-17A. Allergy 2016;71:47-57.

26. Sehra S, Yao W, Nguyen ET, Glosson-Byers NL, Akhtar N, Zhou B, et al. TH9 cells are required for tissue mast cell accumulation during allergic inflammation. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2015;136:433-40.e1.

27. Brough HA, Cousins DJ, Munteanu A, Wong YF, Sudra A, Makinson K, et al. IL-9 is a key component of memory TH cell peanut-specific responses from children with peanut allergy. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2014;134:1329-38.e10.

28. King C, Tangye SG, Mackay CR. T follicular helper (TFH) cells in normal and dysregulated immune responses. Annu Rev Immunol 2008;26:741-66.

29. de Wit J, Jorritsma T, Makuch M, Remmerswaal EB, Klaasse Bos H, Souwer Y, et al. Human B cells promote T-cell plasticity to optimize antibody response by inducing coexpression of T(H)1/T(FH) signatures. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2015;135:1053-60.

30. Akdis M, Akdis CA. Therapeutic manipulation of immune tolerance in allergic disease. Nat Rev Drug Discov 2009;8:645-60.

31. Raedler D, Ballenberger N, Klucker E, Bock A, Otto R, Prazeres da Costa O, et al. Identification of novel immune phenotypes for allergic and nonallergic childhood asthma. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2015;135:81-91.

32. Suarez-Fueyo A, Ramos T, Galan A, Jimeno L, Wurtzen PA, Marin A, et al. Grass tablet sublingual immunotherapy downregulates the TH2 cytokine response followed by regulatory T-cell generation. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2014;133:130-8, e1-2.

33. Fox EM, Tornero MN, Evans H, Mitre E. Immunologic characterization of 3 murine regimens of allergen-specific immunotherapy. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2015;135:1341-51, e1-7.

34. Akdis CA, Akdis M. Advances in allergen immunotherapy: aiming for complete tolerance to allergens. Sci Transl Med 2015;7:280ps6.

35. Stanic B, van de Veen W, Wirz OF, Ruckert B, Morita H, Sollner S, et al. IL-10-overexpressing B cells regulate innate and adaptive immune responses. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2015;135:771-80.e8.

36. Doherty TA, Baum R, Newbury RO, Yang T, Dohil R, Aquino M, et al. Group 2 innate lymphocytes (ILC2) are enriched in active eosinophilic esophagitis. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2015;136:792-4.e3.

37. Nagakumar P, Denney L, Fleming L, Bush A, Lloyd CM, Saglani S. Type 2 innate lymphoid cells in induced sputum from children with severe asthma. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2016;137:624-6.e6.

38. Harvima IT, Levi-Schaffer F, Draber P, Friedman S, Polakovicova I, Gibbs BF, et al. Molecular targets on mast cells and basophils for novel therapies. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2014;134:530-44.

39. Siracusa MC, Kim BS, Spergel JM, Artis D. Basophils and allergic inflammation. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2013;132:789-801.

40. Munoz-Cano R, Pascal M, Bartra J, Picado C, Valero A, Kim DK, et al. Distinct transcriptome profiles differentiate nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug-dependent from nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug-independent food-induced anaphylaxis. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2016;137:137-46.

41. Hammad H, Lambrecht BN. Barrier epithelial cells and the control of type 2 immunity. Immunity 2015;43:29-40.

42. Schuijs MJ, Willart MA, Vergote K, Gras D, Deswarte K, Ege MJ, et al. Farm dust and endotoxin protect against allergy through A20 induction in lung epithelial cells. Science 2015;349:1106-10.

43. Lambrecht BN, Hammad H. The immunology of asthma. Nat Immunol 2015;16:45-56.

44. Vareille M, Kieninger E, Edwards MR, Regamey N. The airway epithelium: soldier in the fight against respiratory viruses. Clin Microbiol Rev 2011;24:210-29.

45. Bauer RN, Manohar M, Singh AM, Jay DC, Nadeau KC. The future of biologics: applications for food allergy. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2015;135:312-23.

46. Ortega VE, Meyers DA. Pharmacogenetics: implications of race and ethnicity on defining genetic profiles for personalized medicine. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2014;133:16-26.

47. Anderson WC 3rd, Szeﬂer SJ. New and future strategies to improve asthma control in children. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2015;136:848-59.

48. Agache I, Sugita K, Morita H, Akdis M, Akdis CA. The complex type 2 endotype in allergy and asthma: from laboratory to bedside. Curr Allergy Asthma Rep 2015;15:29.

49. Akdis CA, Bachert C, Cingi C, Dykewicz MS, Hellings PW, Naclerio RM, et al. Endotypes and phenotypes of chronic rhinosinusitis: a PRACTALL document of the European Academy of Allergy and Clinical Immunology and the American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2013;131:1479-90.

50. Hennig C, Ilginus C, Boztug K, Skokowa J, Marodi L, Szaflarska A, et al. High-content cytometry and transcriptomic biomarker profiling of human B-cell activation. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2014;133:172-80, e1-10.

51. Dinarello CA, Renfer L, Wolff SM. Human leukocytic pyrogen: purification and development of a radioimmunoassay. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1977;74:4624-7.

52. Eisenberg SP, Evans RJ, Arend WP, Verderber E, Brewer MT, Hannum CH, et al. Primary structure and functional expression from complementary DNA of a human interleukin-1 receptor antagonist. Nature 1990;343:341-6.

53. Garlanda C, Dinarello CA, Mantovani A. The interleukin-1 family: back to the future. Immunity 2013;39:1003-18.

54. Guo H, Callaway JB, Ting JP. Inﬂammasomes: mechanism of action, role in disease, and therapeutics. Nat Med 2015;21:677-87.

55. Hernandez ML, Mills K, Almond M, Todoric K, Aleman MM, Zhang H, et al. IL-1 receptor antagonist reduces endotoxin-induced airway inﬂammation in healthy volunteers. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2015;135:379-85.

56. Coll RC, Robertson AA, Chae JJ, Higgins SC, Munoz-Planillo R, Inserra MC, et al. A small-molecule inhibitor of the NLRP3 inflammasome for the treatment of inﬂammatory diseases. Nat Med 2015;21:248-55.

57. Sokolowska M, Chen LY, Liu Y, Martinez-Anton A, Qi HY, Logun C, et al. Pros-taglandin E2 Inhibits NLRP3 Inﬂammasome Activation through EP4 Receptor and Intracellular Cyclic AMP in Human Macrophages. J Immunol 2015;194:5472-87.

58. Okamura H, Tsutsi H, Komatsu T, Yutsudo M, Hakura A, Tanimoto T, et al. Cloning of a new cytokine that induces IFN-gamma production by T cells. Nature 1995;378:88-91.

59. Nold-Petry CA, Lo CY, Rudloff I, Elgass KD, Li S, Gantier MP, et al. IL-37 requires the receptors IL-18Ralpha and IL-1R8 (SIGIRR) to carry out its multifaceted anti-inﬂammatory program upon innate signal transduction. Nat Immunol 2015;16:354-65.

60. Schmitz J, Owyang A, Oldham E, Song Y, Murphy E, McClanahan TK, et al. IL-33, an interleukin-1-like cytokine that signals via the IL-1 receptor-related protein ST2 and induces T helper type 2-associated cytokines. Immunity 2005;23:479-90.

61. Licona-Limon P, Kim LK, Palm NW, Flavell RA. TH2, allergy and group 2 innate lymphoid cells. Nat Immunol 2013;14:536-42.

62. Savenije OE, Mahachie John JM, Granell R, Kerkhof M, Dijk FN, de Jongste JC, et al. Association of IL33-IL-1 receptor-like 1 (IL1RL1) pathway polymorphisms with wheezing phenotypes and asthma in childhood. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2014;134:170-7.

63. Mehta AK, Duan W, Doerner AM, Traves SL, Broide DH, Proud D, et al. Rhino-virus infection interferes with induction of tolerance to aeroantigens through OX40 ligand, thymic stromal lymphopoietin, and IL-33. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2016;137:278-88.e6.

64. Shaik Y, Sabatino G, Maccauro G, Varvara G, Murmura G, Saggini A, et al. IL-36 receptor antagonist with special emphasis on IL-38. Int J Immunopathol Pharmacol 2013;26:27-36.

65. Suarez-Farinas M, Ungar B, Correa da Rosa J, Ewald DA, Rozenblit M, Gonzalez J, et al. RNA sequencing atopic dermatitis transcriptome proﬁling provides insights into novel disease mechanisms with potential therapeutic implications. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2015;135:1218-27.

66. Bufler P, Azam T, Gamboni-Robertson F, Reznikov LL, Kumar S, Dinarello CA, et al. A complex of the IL-1 homologue IL-1F7b and IL-18-binding protein reduces IL-18 activity. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2002;99:13723-8.

67. Nold MF, Nold-Petry CA, Zepp JA, Palmer BE, Bufler P, Dinarello CA. IL-37 is a fundamental inhibitor of innate immunity. Nat Immunol 2010;11:1014-22.

68. Palomo J, Dietrich D, Martin P, Palmer G, Gabay C. The interleukin (IL)-1 cytokine family—balance between agonists and antagonists in inﬂammatory diseases. Cytokine 2015;6:25-37.

69. Yamane H, Paul WE. Cytokines of the gamma(c) family control CD4+ T cell differentiation and function. Nat Immunol 2012;13:1037-44.

70. Morgan DA, Ruscetti FW, Gallo R. Selective in vitro growth of T lymphocytes from normal human bone marrows. Science 1976;193:1007-8.

1008 AKDIS ET AL

J ALLERGY CLIN IMMUNOL
OCTOBER 2016

71. van de Veen W, Stanic B, Yaman G, Wawrzyniak M, Sollner S, Akdis DG, et al. IgG4 production is confined to human IL-10-producing regulatory B cells that suppress antigen-specific immune responses. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2013;131:1204-12.

72. Wegrzyn AS, Jakiela B, Ruckert B, Jutel M, Akdis M, Sanak M, et al. T-cell regulation during viral and nonviral asthma exacerbations. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2015;36:194-7.

73. Roediger B, Kyle R, Tay SS, Mitchell AJ, Bolton HA, Guy TV, et al. IL-2 is a critical regulator of group 2 innate lymphoid cell function during pulmonary inflammation. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2015;136:1653-63.

74. Howard M, Farrar J, Hilfiker M, Johnson B, Takatsu K, Hamaoka T, et al. Identification of a T cell-derived B cell growth factor distinct from interleukin 2. J Exp Med 1982;155:914-23.

75. Chung KF. Targeting the interleukin pathway in the treatment of asthma. Lancet 2015;386:1086-96.

76. Wang X, Lupardus P, Laporte SL, Garcia KC. Structural biology of shared cytokine receptors. Annu Rev Immunol 2009;27:29-60.

77. Boudil A, Matei IR, Shih HY, Bogdanoski G, Yuan JS, Chang SG, et al. IL-7 coordinates proliferation, differentiation and Tcra recombination during thymocyte beta-selection. Nat Immunol 2015;16:397-405.

78. Uyttenhove C, Coulie PG, Van Snick J. T cell growth and differentiation induced by interleukin-HP1/IL-6, the murine hybridoma/plasmacytoma growth factor. J Exp Med 1988;167:1417-27.

79. Veldhoen M, Uyttenhove C, van Snick J, Helmby H, Westendorf A, Buer J, et al. Transforming growth factor-beta ‘reprograms’ the differentiation of T helper 2 cells and promotes an interleukin 9-producing subset. Nat Immunol 2008;9:1341-6.

80. Liu J, Harberts E, Tammaro A, Girardi N, Filler RB, Fishelevich R, et al. IL-9 regulates allergen-specific Th1 responses in allergic contact dermatitis. J Invest Dermatol 2014;134:1903-11.

81. Grabstein KH, Eisenman J, Shanebeck K, Rauch C, Srinivasan S, Fung V, et al. Cloning of a T cell growth factor that interacts with the beta chain of the interleukin-2 receptor. Science 1994;264:965-8.

82. Ikemizu S, Chirifu M, Davis SJ. IL-2 and IL-15 signaling complexes: different but the same. Nat Immunol 2012;13:1141-2.

83. Rutz S, Wang X, Ouyang W. The IL-20 subfamily of cytokines—from host defence to tissue homeostasis. Nat Rev Immunol 2014;14:783-95.

84. Oral HB, Kotenko SV, Yilmaz M, Mani O, Zumkehr J, Blaser K, et al. Regulation of T cells and cytokines by the interleukin-10 (IL-10)-family cytokines IL-19, IL-20, IL-22, IL-24 and IL-26. Eur J Immunol 2006;36:380-8.

85. Jin G, Hamaguchi Y, Matsushita T, Hasegawa M, Le Huu D, Ishiura N, et al. B-cell linker protein expression contributes to controlling allergic and autoimmune diseases by mediating IL-10 production in regulatory B cells. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2013;131:1674-82.

86. Meiler F, Zumkehr J, Klunker S, Ruckert B, Akdis CA, Akdis M. In vivo switch to IL-10-secreting T regulatory cells in high dose allergen exposure. J Exp Med 2008;205:2887-98.

87. Palomares O, Martin-Fonecha M, Lauener R, Traidl-Hoffmann C, Cavkaytar O, Akdis M, et al. Regulatory T cells and immune regulation of allergic diseases: roles of IL-10 and TGF-beta. Genes Immun 2014;15:511-20.

88. Akdis CA, Akdis M. Mechanisms of immune tolerance to allergens: role of IL-10 and Tregs. J Clin Invest 2014;124:4678-80.

89. Engelhardt KR, Shah N, Faizura-Yeop I, Kocacik Uygun DF, Frede N, Muise AM, et al. Clinical outcome in IL-10- and IL-10 receptor-deficient patients with or without hematopoietic stem cell transplantation. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2013;131:825-30.

90. Figueiredo CA, Barreto ML, Alcantara-Neves NM, Rodrigues LC, Cooper PJ, Cruz AA, et al. Coassociations between IL10 polymorphisms, IL-10 production, helminth infection, and asthma/wheeze in an urban tropical population in Brazil. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2013;131:1683-90.

91. Gallagher G, Dickensheets H, Eskdale J, Izotova LS, Mirochnichenko OV, Peat JD, et al. Cloning, expression and initial characterization of interleukin-19 (IL-19), a novel homologue of human interleukin-10 (IL-10). Genes Immun 2000;1:442-50.

92. Myles IA, Fontecilla NM, Valdez PA, Vithayathil PJ, Naik S, Belkaid Y, et al. Signaling via the IL-20 receptor inhibits cutaneous production of IL-1beta and IL-17A to promote infection with methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus. Nat Immunol 2013;14:804-11.

93. Blumberg H, Conklin D, Xu W, Grossmann A, Brender T, Carollo S, et al. Interleukin 20: discovery, receptor identification, and role in epidermal function. Cell 2001;104:9-19.

94. Mashiko S, Bouguermouh S, Rubio M, Baba N, Bissonnette R, Sarfati M. Human mast cells are major IL-22 producers in patients with psoriasis and atopic dermatitis. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2015;136:351-9.e1.

95. Zheng Y, Danilenko DM, Valdez P, Kasman I, Eastham-Anderson J, Wu J, et al. Interleukin-22, a T(H)17 cytokine, mediates IL-23-induced dermal inflammation and acanthosis. Nature 2007;445:648-51.

96. Sugimoto K, Ogawa A, Mizoguchi E, Shimomura Y, Andoh A, Bhan AK, et al. IL-22 ameliorates intestinal inflammation in a mouse model of ulcerative colitis. J Clin Invest 2008;118:534-44.

97. Eyreich S, Eyreich K, Pennino D, Carbone T, Nasorri F, Pallotta S, et al. Th22 cells represent a distinct human T cell subset involved in epidermal immunity and remodeling. J Clin Invest 2009;119:3573-85.

98. Pennino D, Bhavsar PK, Effner R, Avitabile S, Venn P, Quaranta M, et al. IL-22 suppresses IFN-gamma-mediated lung inflammation in asthmatic patients. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2013;131:562-70.

99. Teraki Y, Sakurai A, Izaki S. IL-13/IL-22-coproducing T cells, a novel subset, are increased in atopic dermatitis. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2013;132:971-4.

100. Hernandez PP, Mahlakoiv T, Yang I, Schwierzeck V, Nguyen N, Guendel F, et al. Interferon-lambda and interleukin 22 act synergistically for the induction of interferon-stimulated genes and control of rotavirus infection. Nat Immunol 2015;16:698-707.

101. Jiang H, Lin JJ, Su ZZ, Goldstein NI, Fisher PB. Subtraction hybridization identifies a novel melanoma differentiation associated gene, mda-7, modulated during human melanoma differentiation, growth and progression. Oncogene 1995;11:2477-86.

102. Wang M, Tan Z, Zhang R, Kotenko SV, Liang P. Interleukin 24 (MDA-7/MOB-5) signals through two heterodimeric receptors, IL-22R1/IL-20R2 and IL-20R1/IL-20R2. J Biol Chem 2002;277:7341-7.

103. Panneerselvam J, Shanker M, Jin J, Branch CD, Muralidharan R, Zhao YD, et al. Phosphorylation of interleukin (IL)-24 is required for mediating its anti-cancer activity. Oncotarget 2015;6:16271-86.

104. Tong AW, Nemunaitis J, Su D, Zhang Y, Cunningham C, Senzer N, et al. Intratumoral injection of INGN 241, a nonreplicating adenovector expressing the melanoma-differentiation associated gene-7 (mda-7/IL24): biologic outcome in advanced cancer patients. Mol Ther 2005;11:160-72.

105. Shefler I, Pasmanik-Chor M, Kidron D, Mekori YA, Hershko AY. T cell-derived microvesicles induce mast cell production of IL-24: relevance to inflammatory skin diseases. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2014;133:217-24, e1-3.

106. Knappe A, Hor S, Wittmann S, Fickenscher H. Induction of a novel cellular homolog of interleukin-10, AK155, by transformation of T lymphocytes with herpesvirus saimiri. J Virol 2000;74:3881-7.

107. Wilson NJ, Boniface K, Chan JR, McKenzie BS, Blumenschein WM, Mattson JD, et al. Development, cytokine profile and function of human interleukin 17-producing helper T cells. Nat Immunol 2007;8:950-7.

108. Hor S, Pirzer H, Dumoutier L, Bauer F, Wittmann S, Sticht H, et al. The T-cell lymphokine interleukin-26 targets epithelial cells through the interleukin-20 receptor 1 and interleukin-10 receptor 2 chains. J Biol Chem 2004;279:33343-51.

109. Meller S, Di Domizio J, Voo KS, Friedrich HC, Chamilos G, Ganguly D, et al. TH17 cells promote microbial killing and innate immune sensing of DNA via interleukin 26. Nat Immunol 2015;16:970-9.

110. Sheppard P, Kindsvogel W, Xu W, Henderson K, Schlutsmeyer S, Whitmore TE, et al. IL-28, IL-29 and their class II cytokine receptor IL-28R. Nat Immunol 2003;4:63-8.

111. Prokunina-Olsson L, Muchmore B, Tang W, Pfeiffer RM, Park H, Dickensheets H, et al. A variant upstream of IFNL3 (IL28B) creating a new interferon gene IFNL4 is associated with impaired clearance of hepatitis C virus. Nat Genet 2013;45:164-71.

112. Robek MD, Boyd BS, Chisari FV. Lambda interferon inhibits hepatitis B and C virus replication. J Virol 2005;79:3851-4.

113. Mennechet FJ, Uze G. Interferon-lambda-treated dendritic cells specifically induce proliferation of FOXP3-expressing suppressor T cells. Blood 2006;107:4417-23.

114. Kobayashi M, Fitz L, Ryan M, Hewick RM, Clark SC, Chan S, et al. Identification and purification of natural killer cell stimulatory factor (NKSF), a cytokine with multiple biologic effects on human lymphocytes. J Exp Med 1989;170:827-45.

115. Jones LL, Chaturvedi V, Uyttenhove C, Van Snick J, Vignali DA. Distinct subunit pairing criteria within the heterodimeric IL-12 cytokine family. Mol Immunol 2012;51:234-44.

116. Serafini N, Vosshenrich CA, Di Santo JP. Transcriptional regulation of innate lymphoid cell fate. Nat Rev Immunol 2015;15:415-28.

117. Hsieh CS, Macatonia SE, Tripp CS, Wolf SF, O'Garra A, Murphy KM. Development of TH1 CD4+ T cells through IL-12 produced by Listeria-induced macrophages. Science 1993;260:547-9.

118. Lemoine S, Jaron B, Tabka S, Ettreiki C, Deriaud E, Zhivaki D, et al. Dectin-1 activation unlocks IL12A expression and reveals the T1 potency of neonatal dendritic cells. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2015;136:1355-68.

J ALLERGY CLIN IMMUNOL
VOLUME 138, NUMBER 4

119. Shafiani S, Dinh C, Ertelt JM, Moguche AO, Siddiqui I, Smigiel KS, et al. Pathogen-specific Treg cells expand early during mycobacterium tuberculosis infection but are later eliminated in response to Interleukin-12. Immunity 2013;38:1261-70.
120. Parham C, Chirica M, Timans J, Vaisberg E, Travis M, Cheung J, et al. A receptor for the heterodimeric cytokine IL-23 is composed of IL-12Rbeta1 and a novel cytokine receptor subunit, IL-23R. J Immunol 2002;168:5699-708.
121. Buonocore S, Ahern PP, Uhlig HH, Ivanov II, Littman DR, Maloy KJ, et al. Innate lymphoid cells drive interleukin-23-dependent innate intestinal pathology. Nature 2010;464:1371-5.
122. Suarez-Farinas M, Ungar B, Noda S, Shroff A, Mansouri Y, Fuentes-Duculan J, et al. Alopecia areata profiling shows T1, T2, and IL-23 cytokine activation without parallel T17/T22 skewing. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2015;136:1277-87.
123. Pflanz S, Timans JC, Cheung J, Rosales R, Kanzler H, Gilbert J, et al. IL-27, a heterodimeric cytokine composed of EBI3 and p28 protein, induces proliferation of naive CD4(+) T cells. Immunity 2002;16:779-90.
124. Lucas S, Ghilardi N, Li J, de Sauvage FJ. IL-27 regulates IL-12 responsiveness of naive CD4+ T cells through Stat1-dependent and -independent mechanisms. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2003;100:15047-52.
125. Batten M, Li J, Yi S, Kljavin NM, Danilenko DM, Lucas S, et al. Interleukin 27 limits autoimmune encephalomyelitis by suppressing the development of interleukin 17-producing T cells. Nat Immunol 2006;7:929-36.
126. Ouaked N, Mantel PY, Bassin C, Burgler S, Siegmund K, Akdis CA, et al. Regulation of the foxp3 gene by the Th1 cytokines: the role of IL-27-induced STAT1. J Immunol 2009;182:1041-9.
127. Tsoumakidou M, Tousa S, Semitekolou M, Panagiotou P, Panagiotou A, Morianos I, et al. Tolerogenic signaling by pulmonary CD1c+ dendritic cells induces regulatory T cells in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease by IL-27/IL-10/inducible costimulator ligand. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2014;134:944-54.e8.
128. Xie M, Mustovich AT, Jiang Y, Trudeau JB, Ray A, Ray P, et al. IL-27 and type 2 immunity in asthmatic patients: association with severity, CXCL9, and signal transducer and activator of transcription signaling. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2015;135:386-94.
129. Ziblat A, Domaica CI, Spallanzani RG, Iraolagoitia XL, Rossi LE, Avila DE, et al. IL-27 stimulates human NK-cell effector functions and primes NK cells for IL-18 responsiveness. Eur J Immunol 2015;45:192-202.
130. Mascanfroni ID, Yeste A, Vieira SM, Burns EJ, Patel B, Sloma I, et al. IL-27 acts on DCs to suppress the T cell response and autoimmunity by inducing expression of the immunoregulatory molecule CD39. Nat Immunol 2013;14:1054-63.
131. Di Carlo E, Sorrentino C, Zorzoli A, Di Meo S, Tupone MG, Ognio E, et al. The antitumor potential of Interleukin-27 in prostate cancer. Oncotarget 2014;5:10332-41.
132. Devergne O, Birkenbach M, Kieff E. Epstein-Barr virus-induced gene 3 and the p35 subunit of interleukin 12 form a novel heterodimeric hematopoietin. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1997;94:12041-6.
133. Collison LW, Workman CJ, Kuo TT, Boyd K, Wang Y, Vignali KM, et al. The inhibitory cytokine IL-35 contributes to regulatory T-cell function. Nature 2007;450:566-9.
134. Yang M, Hogan SP, Mahalingam S, Pope SM, Zimmermann N, Fulkerson P, et al. Eotaxin-2 and IL-5 cooperate in the lung to regulate IL-13 production and airway eosinophilia and hyperreactivity. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2003;112:935-43.
135. Barnes PJ. Therapeutic approaches to asthma-chronic obstructive pulmonary disease overlap syndromes. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2015;136:531-45.
136. Fajt ML, Wenzel SE. Asthma phenotypes and the use of biologic medications in asthma and allergic disease: the next steps toward personalized care. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2015;135:299-310.
137. LaPorte SL, Juo ZS, Vaclavikova J, Colf LA, Qi X, Heller NM, et al. Molecular and structural basis of cytokine receptor pleiotropy in the interleukin-4/13 system. Cell 2008;132:259-72.
138. Campbell-Harding G, Sawkins H, Bedke N, Holgate ST, Davies DE, Andrews AL. The innate antiviral response upregulates IL-13 receptor alpha2 in bronchial fibroblasts. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2013;131:849-55.
139. Hunninghake GM, Soto-Quiros ME, Avila L, Su J, Murphy A, Demeo DL, et al. Polymorphisms in IL13, total IgE, eosinophilia, and asthma exacerbations in childhood. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2007;120:84-90.
140. Smith SG, Chen R, Kjarsgaard M, Huang C, Oliveria JP, O'Byrne PM, et al. Increased numbers of activated group 2 innate lymphoid cells in the airways of patients with severe asthma and persistent airway eosinophilia. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2015;137:75-86.
141. Fort MM, Cheung J, Yen D, Li J, Zurawski SM, Lo S, et al. IL-25 induces IL-4, IL-5, and IL-13 and Th2-associated pathologies in vivo. Immunity 2001;15:985-95.
142. Shin HW, Kim DK, Park MH, Eun KM, Lee M, So D, et al. IL-25 as a novel therapeutic target in nasal polyps of patients with chronic rhinosinusitis. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2015;135:1476-85.e7.

143. Stott B, Lavender P, Lehmann S, Pennino D, Durham S, Schmidt-Weber CB. Human IL-31 is induced by IL-4 and promotes TH2-driven inflammation. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2013;132:446-54.e5.
144. Cevikbas F, Wang X, Akiyama T, Kempkes C, Savinko T, Antal A, et al. A sensory neuron-expressed IL-31 receptor mediates T helper cell-dependent itch: involvement of TRPV1 and TRPA1. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2014;133:448-60.
145. Hartmann K, Wagner N, Rabenhorst A, Pflanz L, Leja S, Forster A, et al. Serum IL-31 levels are increased in a subset of patients with mastocytosis and correlate with disease severity in adult patients. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2013;132:232-5.
146. Saenz SA, Taylor BC, Artis D. Welcome to the neighborhood: epithelial cell-derived cytokines license innate and adaptive immune responses at mucosal sites. Immunol Rev 2008;226:172-90.
147. Park LS, Martin U, Garka K, Gliniak B, Di Santo JP, Muller W, et al. Cloning of the murine thymic stromal lymphopoeitin (TSLP) receptor: Formation of a functional heteromeric complex requires interleukin 7 receptor. J Exp Med 2000;192:659-70.
148. Siracusa MC, Saenz SA, Wojno ED, Kim BS, Osborne LC, Ziegler CG, et al. Thymic stromal lymphopoeitin-mediated extramedullary hematopoiesis promotes allergic inflammation. Immunity 2013;39:1158-70.
149. Cheng DT, Ma C, Niewoehner J, Dahl M, Tsai A, Zhang J, et al. Thymic stromal lymphopoeitin receptor blockade reduces allergic inflammation in a cynomolgus monkey model of asthma. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2013;132:455-62.
150. Gauvreau GM, O'Byrne PM, Boulet LP, Wang Y, Cockcroft D, Bigler J, et al. Effects of an anti-TSLP antibody on allergen-induced asthmatic responses. N Engl J Med 2014;370:2102-10.
151. Wilson SR, The L, Batia LM, Beattie K, Katibah GE, McClain SP, et al. The epithelial cell-derived atopic dermatitis cytokine TSLP activates neurons to induce itch. Cell 2013;155:285-95.
152. Divekar R, Kita H. Recent advances in epithelium-derived cytokines (IL-33, IL-25, and thymic stromal lymphopoeitin) and allergic inflammation. Curr Opin Allergy Clin Immunol 2015;15:98-103.
153. Ying G, Zhang Y, Tang G, Chen S. Functions of thymic stromal lymphopoeitin in non-allergic diseases. Cell Immunol 2015;295:144-9.
154. Coelho AL, Hogaboam CM, Kunkel SL. Chemokines provide the sustained inflammatory bridge between innate and acquired immunity. Cytokine Growth Factor Rev 2005;16:553-60.
155. Holmes WE, Lee J, Kuang WJ, Rice GC, Wood WI. Structure and functional expression of a human interleukin-8 receptor. Science 1991;253:1278-80.
156. Burke SM, Issekutz TB, Mohan K, Lee PW, Shmulevitz M, Marshall JS. Human mast cell activation with virus-associated stimuli leads to the selective chemotaxis of natural killer cells by a CXCL8-dependent mechanism. Blood 2008;111:5467-76.
157. Beigelman A, Isaacson-Schmid M, Sajol G, Baty J, Rodriguez OM, Leege E, et al. Randomized trial to evaluate azithromycin's effects on serum and upper airway IL-8 levels and recurrent wheezing in infants with respiratory syncytial virus bronchiolitis. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2015;135:1171-8.e1.
158. Center DM, Cruikshank W. Modulation of lymphocyte migration by human lymphokines. I. Identification and characterization of chemoattractant activity for lymphocytes from mitogen-stimulated mononuclear cells. J Immunol 1982;128:2563-8.
159. Baier M, Bannert N, Werner A, Lang K, Kurth R. Molecular cloning, sequence, expression, and processing of the interleukin 16 precursor. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1997;94:5273-7.
160. Richmond J, Tuzova M, Cruikshank W, Center D. Regulation of cellular processes by interleukin-16 in homeostasis and cancer. J Cell Physiol 2014;229:139-47.
161. Schmidt-Weber CB, Akdis M, Akdis CA. TH17 cells in the big picture of immunology. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2007;120:247-54.
162. Burgler S, Ouaked N, Bassin C, Basinski TM, Mantel PY, Siegmund K, et al. Differentiation and functional analysis of human T(H)17 cells. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2009;123:588-95, e1-7.
163. Hwang SY, Kim HY. Expression of IL-17 homologs and their receptors in the synovial cells of rheumatoid arthritis patients. Mol Cell 2005;19:180-4.
164. McAleer JP, Kolls JK. Directing traffic: IL-17 and IL-22 coordinate pulmonary immune defense. Immunol Rev 2014;260:129-44.
165. Manners S, Alam R, Schwartz DA, Gorska MM. A mouse model links asthma susceptibility to prenatal exposure to diesel exhaust. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2014;134:63-72.
166. Nanzer AM, Chambers ES, Ryanna K, Richards DF, Black C, Timms PM, et al. Enhanced production of IL-17A in patients with severe asthma is inhibited by lalpha,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 in a glucocorticoid-independent fashion. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2013;132:297-304.e3.
167. Chambers ES, Nanzer AM, Pfeffer PE, Richards DF, Timms PM, Martineau AR, et al. Distinct endotypes of steroid-resistant asthma characterized by IL-17A(high) and IFN-gamma(high) immunophenotypes: potential benefits of calcitriol. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2015;136:628-37.e4.

168. Li H, Chen J, Huang A, Stinson J, Heldens S, Foster J, et al. Cloning and characterization of IL-17B and IL-17C, two new members of the IL-17 cytokine family. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2000;97:773-8.
169. Starnes T, Broxmeyer HE, Robertson MJ, Hromas R. Cutting edge: IL-17D, a novel member of the IL-17 family, stimulates cytokine production and inhibits hematopoiesis. J Immunol 2002;169:642-6.
170. Starnes T, Robertson MJ, Sledge G, Kelich S, Nakshatri H, Broxmeyer HE, et al. Cutting edge: IL-17F, a novel cytokine selectively expressed in activated T cells and monocytes, regulates angiogenesis and endothelial cell cytokine production. J Immunol 2001;167:4137-40.
171. Hymowitz SG, Filvaroff EH, Yin JP, Lee J, Cai L, Risser P, et al. IL-17s adopt a cystine knot fold: structure and activity of a novel cytokine, IL-17F, and implications for receptor binding. EMBO J 2001;20:5332-41.
172. Chan YR, Chen K, Duncan SR, Lathrop KL, Latoche JD, Logar AJ, et al. Patients with cystic fibrosis have inducible IL-17(+)IL-22(+) memory cells in lung draining lymph nodes. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2013;131:1117-29.
173. Hasan SA, Eksteen B, Reid D, Paine HV, Alansary A, Johansson K, et al. Role of IL-17A and neutrophils in fibrosis in experimental hypersensitivity pneumonitis. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2013;131:1663-73.
174. Czarnowicki T, Gonzalez J, Shemer A, Malajian D, Xu H, Zheng X, et al. Severe atopic dermatitis is characterized by selective expansion of circulating TH2/TC2 and TH22/TC22, but not TH17/TC17, cells within the skin-homing T-cell population. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2015;136:104-15.e7.
175. Lantz CS, Boesiger J, Song CH, Mach N, Kobayashi T, Mulligan RC, et al. Role for interleukin-3 in mast-cell and basophil development and in immunity to parasites. Nature 1998;392:90-3.
176. Salter BM, Oliveria JP, Nusca G, Smith SG, Watson RM, Comeau M, et al. Thymic stromal lymphopoietin activation of basophils in patients with allergic asthma is IL-3 dependent. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2015;136:1636-44.
177. Honda M, Yamamoto S, Cheng M, Yasukawa K, Suzuki H, Saito T, et al. Human soluble IL-6 receptor: its detection and enhanced release by HIV infection. J Immunol 1992;148:2175-80.
178. Hirano T, Taga T, Nakano N, Yasukawa K, Kashiwamura S, Shimizu K, et al. Purification to homogeneity and characterization of human B-cell differentiation factor (BCDF or BSFp-2). Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1985;82:5490-4.
179. Ullah MA, Revez JA, Loh Z, Simpson J, Zhang V, Bain L, et al. Allergen-induced IL-6 trans-signaling activates γδ T cells to promote type 2 and type 17 airway inflammation. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2015;136:1065-73.
180. Cherel M, Sorel M, Lebeau B, Dubois S, Moreau JF, Bataille R, et al. Molecular cloning of two isoforms of a receptor for the human hematopoietic cytokine interleukin-11. Blood 1995;86:2534-40.
181. Paul SR, Schendel P. The cloning and biological characterization of recombinant human interleukin 11. Int J Cell Cloning 1992;10:135-43.
182. Bhatia M, Davenport V, Cairo MS. The role of interleukin-11 to prevent chemotherapy-induced thrombocytopenia in patients with solid tumors, lymphoma, acute myeloid leukemia and bone marrow failure syndromes. Leuk Lymphoma 2007;48:9-15.
183. Wan B, Zhang H, Fu H, Chen Y, Yang L, Yin J, et al. Recombinant human interleukin-11 (IL-11) is a protective factor in severe sepsis with thrombocytopenia: a case-control study. Cytokine 2015;76:138-43.
184. Shen L, Zhang C, Wang T, Brooks S, Ford RJ, Lin-Lee YC, et al. Development of autoimmunity in IL-14alpha-transgenic mice. J Immunol 2006;177:5676-86.
185. Sahasrabuddhe CG, Morgan J, Sharma S, Mehta S, Martin B, Wright D, et al. Evidence for an intracellular precursor for human B-cell growth factor. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1984;81:7902-6.
186. Khan FA, Al-Jameil N, Khan MF, Al-Rashid M, Tabassum H. Thyroid dysfunction: an autoimmune aspect. Int J Clin Exp Med 2015;8:6677-81.
187. Dinarello CA, Kim SH. IL-32, a novel cytokine with a possible role in disease. Ann Rheum Dis 2006;65(suppl 3):iii61-4.
188. Meyer N, Zimmermann M, Burgler S, Bassin C, Woehrl S, Moritz K, et al. IL-32 is expressed by human primary keratinocytes and modulates keratinocyte apoptosis in atopic dermatitis. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2010;125:858-65.e10.
189. Meyer N, Christoph J, Makrinioti H, Indermitte P, Rhyner C, Soyka M, et al. Inhibition of angiogenesis by IL-32: possible role in asthma. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2012;129:964-73.e7.
190. Droin N, Solary E. Editorial: CSF1R, CSF-1, and IL-34, a “menage a trois” conserved across vertebrates. J Leukoc Biol 2010;87:745-7.
191. Wang Y, Szretter KJ, Vermi W, Gilfillan S, Rossini C, Cella M, et al. IL-34 is a tissue-restricted ligand of CSF1R required for the development of Langerhans cells and microglia. Nat Immunol 2012;13:753-60.
192. Esaki H, Ewald DA, Ungar B, Rozenblit M, Zheng X, Xu H, et al. Identification of novel immune and barrier genes in atopic dermatitis by means of laser capture microdissection. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2015;135:153-63.
193. Zimmermann M, Koreck A, Meyer N, Basinski T, Meiler F, Burgler S, et al. TWEAK and TNF-alpha cooperate in the induction of keratinocyte-apoptosis. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2011;127:200-7.
194. Gao L, Bin L, Rafaels NM, Huang L, Potee J, Ruczinski I, et al. Targeted deep sequencing identifies rare loss-of-function variants in IFNGR1 for risk of atopic dermatitis complicated by eczema herpeticum. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2015;136:1591-600.
195. Coccia EM, Severa M, Giacomini E, Monneron D, Remoli ME, Julkunen I, et al. Viral infection and Toll-like receptor agonists induce a differential expression of type I and lambda interferons in human plasmacytoid and monocyte-derived dendritic cells. Eur J Immunol 2004;34:796-805.
196. Claudio N, Dalet A, Gatti E, Pierre P. Mapping the crossroads of immune activation and cellular stress response pathways. EMBO J 2013;32:1214-24.
197. Durbin RK, Kotenko SV, Durbin JE. Interferon induction and function at the mucosal surface. Immunol Rev 2013;255:25-39.
198. Livingstone M, Sikstrom K, Robert PA, Uze G, Larsson O, Pellegrini S. Assessment of mTOR-dependent translational regulation of interferon stimulated genes. PLoS One 2015;10:e0133482.
199. Richer MJ, Pewe LL, Hancock LS, Hartwig SM, Varga SM, Harty JT. Inflammatory IL-15 is required for optimal memory T cell responses. J Clin Invest 2015;125:3477-90.
200. Schmidt NW, Jin F, Lande R, Curk T, Xian W, Lee C, et al. Liquid-crystalline ordering of antimicrobial peptide-DNA complexes controls TLR9 activation. Nat Mater 2015;14:696-700.
201. Reder AT, Feng X. Aberrant type i interferon regulation in autoimmunity: opposite directions in MS and SLE, shaped by evolution and body ecology. Front Immunol 2013;4:281.
202. Baraldo S, Contoli M, Bazzan E, Turato G, Padovani A, Marku B, et al. Deficient antiviral immune responses in childhood: distinct roles of atopy and asthma. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2012;130:1307-14.
203. Gielen V, Sykes A, Zhu J, Chan B, Macintyre J, Regamey N, et al. Increased nuclear suppressor of cytokine signaling 1 in asthmatic bronchial epithelium suppresses rhinovirus induction of innate interferons. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2015;136:177-88.e11.
204. Shi M, Zhu J, Wang R, Chen X, Mi L, Walz T, et al. Latent TGF-beta structure and activation. Nature 2011;474:343-9.
205. Butz H, Racz K, Hunyady L, Patocs A. Crosstalk between TGF-beta signaling and the microRNA machinery. Trends Pharmacol Sci 2012;33:382-93.
206. Gutcher I, Donkor MK, Ma Q, Rudensky AY, Flavell RA, Li MO. Autocrine transforming growth factor-beta1 promotes in vivo Th17 cell differentiation. Immunity 2011;34:396-408.
207. Derynck R, Akhurst RJ. Differentiation plasticity regulated by TGF-beta family proteins in development and disease. Nat Cell Biol 2007;9:1000-4.
208. Biernacka A, Dobaczewski M, Frangogiannis NG. TGF-beta signaling in fibrosis. Growth Factors 2011;29:196-202.
209. Sanjabi S, Zenewicz LA, Kamanaka M, Flavell RA. Anti-inflammatory and pro-inflammatory roles of TGF-beta, IL-10, and IL-22 in immunity and autoimmunity. Curr Opin Pharmacol 2009;9:447-53.
210. Habashi JP, Judge DP, Holm TM, Cohn RD, Loeys BL, Cooper TK, et al. Losartan, an AT1 antagonist, prevents aortic aneurysm in a mouse model of Marfan syndrome. Science 2006;312:117-21.
211. Caraci F, Spampinato S, Sortino MA, Bosco P, Battaglia G, Bruno V, et al. Dysfunction of TGF-beta1 signaling in Alzheimer’s disease: perspectives for neuroprotection. Cell Tissue Res 2012;347:291-301.
212. Meulmeester E, Ten Dijke P. The dynamic roles of TGF-beta in cancer. J Pathol 2011;223:205-18.
213. Beppu LY, Anilkumar AA, Newbury RO, Dohl R, Broide DH, Aceves SS. TGF-beta1-induced phospholamban expression alters esophageal smooth muscle cell contraction in patients with eosinophilic esophagitis. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2014;134:1100-7.e4.
214. Rajan J, Newbury RO, Anilkumar A, Dohl R, Broide DH, Aceves SS. Long-term assessment of esophageal remodeling in patients with pediatric eosinophilic esophagitis treated with topical corticosteroids. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2015;137:147-56.
215. Akhurst RJ. The paradoxical TGF-beta vasculopathies. Nat Genet 2012;44:838-9.
216. Wakefield LM, Hill CS. Beyond TGFbeta: roles of other TGFbeta superfamily members in cancer. Nat Rev Cancer 2013;13:328-41.
217. Carswell EA, Old LJ, Kassel RL, Green S, Fiore N, Williamson B. An endotoxin-induced serum factor that causes necrosis of tumors. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1975;72:3666-70.
218. Brown SD, Brown LA, Stephenson S, Dodds JC, Douglas SL, Qu H, et al. Characterization of a high TNF-alpha phenotype in children with moderate-to-severe asthma. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2015;135:1651-4.
