
JBC Papers in Press. Published on October 12, 2016 as Manuscript M116.751917  
The latest version is at http://www.jbc.org/cgi/doi/10.1074/jbc.M116.751917  

The Muscular Dystrophy Gene TMEM5 Encodes a Ribitol β1-4 Xylosyltransferase Required for  
the Functional Glycosylation of Dystroglycan  

Hiroshi Manya¹, §, Yoshiki Yamaguchi², §, Motoi Kanagawa³, Kazuhiro Kobayashi³,  
Michiko Tajiri⁴, Keiko Akasaka-Manya¹, Hiroko Kawakami⁵, Mamoru Mizuno⁵,  
Yoshinao Wada⁴, Tatsushi Toda³, and Tamao Endo¹,*  

Running title: *TMEM5 is a β1-4 xylosyltransferase*  

From ¹Molecular Glycobiology, Research Team for Mechanism of Aging, Tokyo Metropolitan  
Geriatric Hospital and Institute of Gerontology, Tokyo 173-0015, Japan,  
²Structural Glycobiology Team, Systems Glycobiology Research Group, RIKEN-Max Planck Joint  
Research Center for Systems Chemical Biology, RIKEN Global Research Cluster, Wako, Saitama 351-0198, Japan,  
³Division of Neurology/Molecular Brain Science, Kobe University Graduate School of Medicine, Kobe, Hyogo 650-0017, Japan,  
⁴Department of Molecular Medicine, Osaka Medical Center and Research Institute for Maternal and Child Health, Izumi, Osaka 594-1101, Japan,  
⁵Laboratory of Glyco-organic Chemistry, The Noguchi Institute, Itabashi, Tokyo 173-0003, Japan.  

§These authors contributed equally to this work.  

*To whom correspondence should be addressed: Dr. Tamao Endo, Molecular Glycobiology, Research Team for Mechanism of Aging, Tokyo Metropolitan Geriatric Hospital and Institute of Gerontology, 35-2 Sakaecho, Itabashi-ku, Tokyo 173-0015, Japan. Tel: +81-3-3964-3241 (ext.4400), Fax: +81-3-3579-4776. E-mail: endo@tmig.or.jp  

Keywords: TMEM5, O-mannosyl glycan, xylosyltransferase, dystroglycan, muscular dystrophy  

---

ABSTRACT  

A defect in O-mannosyl glycan is the cause of α-dystroglycanopathy, a group of congenital muscular dystrophies caused by aberrant α-dystroglycan (α-DG) glycosylation. Recently, the entire structure of O-mannosyl glycan, [3GlcAβ1-3Xylα1]n-3GlcAβ1-4Xyl-Rbo5P-1Rbo5P-3GalNAcβ1-3GlcNAcβ1-4(phospho-6)Manα1-, which is required for the binding of α-DG to extracellular matrix ligands, has been proposed. However, the linkage of the first Xyl residue to ribitol-5-phosphate (Rbo5P) is not clear. TMEM5 is a gene product responsible for α-dystroglycanopathy and was reported as a potential enzyme involved in this linkage formation, although the experimental evidence is still incomplete. Here, we report that TMEM5 is a xylosyltransferase that forms the Xylβ1-4Rbo5P linkage on O-mannosyl glycan. The anomeric configuration and linkage position of the product (β1-4 linkage) was determined by NMR analysis. The introduction of two missense mutations in TMEM5 found in α-dystroglycanopathy patients impaired xylosyltransferase activity. Furthermore, the disruption of the TMEM5 gene by CRISPR/Cas9 abrogated the elongation of the (-3GlcAβ1-3Xylα1-) unit on O-mannosyl glycan. Based on these results, we concluded that TMEM5 acts as a UDP-D-xylose:ribitol-5-phosphate β1-4 xylosyltransferase in the biosynthetic pathway of O-mannosyl glycan.  

---

O-Mannosyl glycan is a type of O-glycan in which the reducing terminal

Copyright 2016 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.
mannose is attached to proteins via Ser and  
Thr residues. A defect in O-mannosyl glycan  
of α-dystroglycan (α-DG) is the cause of  
α-dystroglycanopathy, a group of congenital  
muscular dystrophies with neuronal migration  
disorders (1,2). Recent studies have revealed  
the various structures of O-mannosyl glycans,  
and these structures are classified into three  
types: core M1, GlcNAcβ1-2Man; core M2,  
GlcNAcβ1-2 (GlcNAcβ1-6)Man; and core  
M3, GalNAcβ1-3GlcNAcβ1-4Man (1,3-7). Many  
genes responsible for  
α-dystroglycanopathy were shown to be  
involved in core M3 processing (1,2). Therefore,  
understanding the  
pathomechanism of α-dystroglycanopathy  
requires determining the complete structure  
and biosynthetic mechanism of this glycan.  

Recently, several groups,  
including ours, proposed the entire glycan  
structure  
on  
core  
M3,  
[3GlcAβ1-3Xylα1]n-3GlcAβ1-4Xyl-Rbo5P  
-1Rbo5P-3GalNAcβ1-3GlcNAcβ1-4(phospho-6)Manα1-peptide/protein (Fig. 1) (8-13). Glycans  
containing ribitol-5-phosphate  
(Rbo5P) were first identified in mammals,  
and several reports confirmed the presence of  
Rbo5P in the glycan on α-DG (14,15). The  
tandem Rho5P moiety extends from the  
GalNAc residue in the core M3 glycan to a  
GlcA/Xyl unit, which serves as a primer for a  
(-3GlcAβ1-3Xylα1-) polysaccharide chain.  
The (-3GlcAβ1-3Xylα1-) repeat is required  
for the binding of α-DG to extracellular  
matrix ligands such as laminin, and a defect  
in the (-3GlcAβ1-3Xylα1-) repeat was  
thought to cause α-dystroglycanopathy (7,9).  
The (-3GlcAβ1-3Xylα1-) repeat is formed  
by the action of LARGE, which has both  
GlcA transferase activity and Xyl transferase  
activity (9).  

The biosynthetic pathway of  
O-mannosyl glycan is initiated by the transfer  
of mannosse to Ser or Thr via  
POMT1/POMT2 in the endoplasmic  
reticulum (ER) (8). Subsequently, the  
phosphocore M3 unit  
(GalNAcβ1-3GlcNAcβ1-4(phospho-6)Man-)  
is formed by GTDC2, B3GALNT2, and  
SGK196 in the ER (10), and the first and  

second Rbo5P are then transferred by fukutin  
and FKRP, respectively, in the Golgi (13).  
Then, a GlcA/Xyl unit is formed to serve as a  
primer for the (-3GlcAβ1-3Xylα1-) repeat.  
The first GlcA/Xyl unit is not formed by the  
action of LARGE (11,12). Defects in this  
biosynthetic pathway seem to result in the  
loss of laminin binding and cause  
α-dystroglycanopathy. Recently, the GlcA in  
this unit was shown to be formed via a β1-4  
linkage to Xyl by the action of B4GAT1  
(11,12). However, how the Xyl is linked to  
the tandem Rbo5P structure and the identity  
of the xylosyltransferase that forms this  
linkage remain unclear.  

TMEM5 was thought to be a  
candidate enzyme involved in the  
LARGE-independent synthesis of the  
GlcA/Xyl  
unit, because the  
(-3GlcAβ1-3Xylα1-) repeat was absent in  
α-dystroglycanopathy patients with a  
mutation in the TMEM5 gene (16). TMEM5  
was one of the proteins of uncertain function  
among the gene products responsible for  
α-dystroglycanopathy (16,17). The latest  
report suggested that TMEM5 was a potential  
xylosyltransferase (15). However, there was  
no direct evidence that the Xyl was  
transferred to Rbo5P, and hence, the role of  
TMEM5 activity in glycan biosynthesis is  
still not fully characterized.  

In the present study, we  
determined the enzymatic activity of TMEM5  
and examined the effect of the mutations  
found in α-dystroglycanopathy patients on  
TMEM5 enzyme activity. The effect of  
CRISPR/Cas9-mediated TMEM5 gene  
deletion on core M3 processing was also  
analyzed. Finally, we proposed the complete  
glycan structure of functional α-DG.  

RESULTS  

TMEM5 is a  
xylosyltransferase—To address the possibility  
that TMEM5 acts as a xylose transferase to  
form Xyl-Rbo5P, we prepared a soluble form  
of TMEM5 (sTMEM5) and examined its  
activity using a potential glycopeptide  
substrate that contained the full glycan  
structure of FKRP products, based on our  
previous report (Fig. 1) (13). Additionally,  because the FKTN product has a Rbo5P residue on the non-reducing terminal of core M3 (Fig. 1), we also examined whether the FKTN product served as an acceptor substrate for TMEM5. sTMEM5 was expressed in HEK293T cells and immunoprecipitated with anti-c-Myc antibody agarose. Immunoprecipitated sTMEM5 was detected at the appropriate molecular weight (55 kDa) by western blotting (Fig. 2A). The FKRP or FKTN product was incubated with sTMEM5 and UDP-Xyl and separated by HPLC. However, the reaction product and/or unreacted-substrate eluted as single peaks in all cases (Fig. 2B): the FKRP product peak eluted at 19.6 min with or without sTMEM5, and the FKTN product peak eluted at 19.9 min with sTMEM5. Because it is impossible to follow the enzyme reaction under these conditions, we decided to use UDP-[¹⁴C]Xyl as a donor substrate to examine whether Xyl was transferred to the acceptor substrates. We detected significant incorporation of radioactivity into the acceptor substrate only when sTMEM5 was reacted with FKRP product but not with the FKTN product (Fig. 2C). MS analysis revealed that the TMEM5 product (*m/z* 2343.2, Fig. 2E) was increased by 132.1 Da (which corresponds to a Xyl residue) compared with the FKRP product (*m/z* 2211.1, Fig. 2D). These results showed that TMEM5 might recognize the second Rbo5P on the FKRP product as an acceptor substrate, but not the Rbo5P in the FKTN product. In addition, the MS data of the TMEM5 product (Fig. 2E) showed that the Xyl residue was quantitatively transferred to the acceptor substrate, and this fraction was subjected to NMR analysis.

NMR analysis of the TMEM5 product—We performed a detailed NMR analysis to determine the structure of the TMEM5 product. ¹H, ¹³C, and ³¹P assignments of the TMEM5 product were obtained through a series of 1D and 2D NMR measurements, including 1D ³¹P, 2D ¹H-¹³C heteronuclear single quantum correlation (HSQC) and 2D ¹H-³¹P heteronuclear multiple-bond correlation (HMBC). The assignments of TMEM5 product and its substrate (FKRP product) are summarized in

Table 1. Then, we compared the NMR spectra of the TMEM5 product with those of the substrate (Fig. 3). Significant chemical shift differences were observed for the second ribitol (Rbo') signals but not for the other signals, suggesting that Xyl is attached to the Rbo' residue. In particular, Rbo'C4 showed a large ¹³C downfield shift (8 ppm). Additionally, an inter-residue NOE was observed between XylH1 and Rbo'H4 (Fig. 4). Thus, we concluded that Xyl is linked to the C4 position of Rbo'. The anomericity of the Xyl residue was examined by the scalar coupling constants. *J*(H1,H2) and *¹J*(C1,H1) of the Xyl residue were 8.7 Hz and 163 Hz, respectively (Fig. 5), clearly indicating a β-linkage. Therefore, TMEM5 is an enzyme that transfers Xyl from UDP-Xyl to the C4 position of the second Rbo' of the core M3 glycan via a β-linkage.

Effect of mutations found in α-dystroglycanopathy patients on TMEM5 activity—Several mutations in the TMEM5 gene have been identified in α-dystroglycanopathy patients (16, 18). We examined the effects of two missense mutations, Y339C and R340L, on TMEM5 activity. The ³³⁹Y and ³⁴⁰R residues are located in the exostosin domain (putative catalytic domain) of TMEM5 (16). We prepared soluble forms of these TMEM5 mutants, which we immunoprecipitated using the same method as for the wild-type protein (Fig. 2A). These mutants were incubated with the FKRP product and UDP-[¹⁴C]Xyl and subjected to HPLC. Although the expression levels of the two mutant proteins were slightly reduced compared with the wild-type protein, determined by western blotting (Fig. 2A), the incorporation of radioactivity into the FKRP product was completely absent in both mutants (Fig. 2F). The results indicated that these missense mutations disrupted TMEM5 xylosyltransferase activity.

Inhibition of GlcA/Xyl repeat biosynthesis in TMEM5-CRISPR cells—We also generated TMEM5-deficient HAP1 cells using the CRISPR/Cas9 system and examined whether the Xylβ1–4Rbo5P structure was disrupted. To this end, we expressed recombinant DG/Fc-fusion protein (DGFc) in
the TMEM5-deficient cells and then analyzed the sugar chain structure by MS, as previously reported (13). We confirmed the disruption of the functional glycosylation of α-DG by western blotting using the IIH6 antibody, which recognizes the (-3GlcAβ1-3Xylα1-) repeat synthesized by LARGE (Fig. 6A). Rescue experiments confirmed that the abnormal glycosylation of α-DG was caused by the disruption of TMEM5. When DGFc was expressed in normal HAP1 cells, glycopeptides modified with tandem Rbo5P structures, an additional GlcAβ1-4Xyl, and 3GlcAβ1-3Xylα1 units were mainly eluted from an ion exchange column with 0.5 M ammonium acetate (13) (Fig. 6D). In the case of the TMEM5-deficient HAP1 cells, several signals were assigned to glycopeptides containing tandem Rbo5P structure; however, no signals were assigned to glycopeptides containing the additional Xyl moiety (Figs. 6B and C). These data confirmed that TMEM5 synthesizes the Xylβ1-4Rbo5P linkage in the α-DG sugar chain and that the absence of this structure results in the lack of functional glycan.

The TMEM5 product acts as an acceptor substrate for B4GAT1—Previously, the formation of a GlcA/Xyl unit was reported to serve as a primer for the (-3GlcAβ1-3Xylα1-) repeat, with the GlcA residue being transferred by B4GAT1 (Fig. 1)(11, 12). Because our data indicate that TMEM5 forms the Xylβ1-4Rbo5P linkage, we examined whether the TMEM5 product served as an acceptor for B4GAT1 or LARGE. Immunoprecipitated soluble B4GAT1 (sB4GAT1) and soluble LARGE (sLARGE) migrated at the appropriate molecular weights on SDS-PAGE gels, and the expression levels of these two proteins were comparable in western blots (Fig. 7A). The TMEM5 product and UDP-[14C]GlcA were incubated with sB4GAT1 or sLARGE and subjected to HPLC (Fig. 7B). Radioactivity was incorporated into the TMEM5 product only in the reaction with sB4GAT1, but not in the reaction with sLARGE (Fig. 7C). The sLARGE activity was confirmed using p-nitrophenyl

(pNP)-α-Xyl as an acceptor substrate (Figs. 7D and E). This result verified that the Xyl residue transferred by TMEM5 acts as an acceptor for B4GAT1.

DISCUSSION

In the present study, we determined that the TMEM5 enzyme is a UDP-D-xylose:ribitol-5-phosphate β1-4 xylosyltransferase; our data offer the last piece of the biosynthetic pathway of functional α-DG glycan. TMEM5 is one of the gene products responsible for α-dystroglycanopathy (16, 17) and was thought to be a candidate enzyme involved in the synthesis of the LARGE-independent GlcA/Xyl unit (16). Recent work revealed TMEM5 as a potential xylosyltransferase that was responsible for transferring Xyl to Rbo5P (15). The observation that CDP-Rbo functioned as an acceptor substrate suggested that TMEM5 requires a phosphodiester-linked Rbo (15). However, there was no direct evidence showing that the Xyl was transferred to Rbo5P in the core M3 glycan. Therefore, we sought to elucidate the role of TMEM5 in α-DG glycan biosynthesis (Fig. 1).

We first prepared a glycopeptide substrate that contains the full glycan structure of the FKRP product (13) to examine whether TMEM5 transfers Xyl to Rbo5P of the FKRP product. As shown in Figs. 2C and D, TMEM5 transferred Xyl to the FKRP product but not to the FKTN product. Next, we determined the position, anomeric configuration, and glycosidic linkage of the transferred Xyl residue in the TMEM5 product by NMR (Figs. 3–5) and found that TMEM5 attaches β-Xyl to the C4 position of the second Rbo' in the tandem Rbo5P structure. The C4 position of the second Rbo' is chemically close to the phosphodiester linkage connecting the first Rbo and second Rbo'. Experimental evidence showed that TMEM5 did not add a significant amount of Xyl to the mono-Rbo found in the FKTN product. Thus, TMEM5 likely requires a tandem Rbo5P structure, at least in part, for efficient Xyl addition. Based on these results,

we concluded that TMEM5 is a
UDP-D-xylose:ribitol-5-phosphate β1-4
xylosyltransferase, and the complete structure
of core M3 is proposed (Fig. 1).
TMEM5 is similar to exostosin
(EXT1), a glycosyltransferase
that participates in heparan sulfate proteoglycan
synthesis (16). TMEM5 is a type II
membrane protein, and the extracellular
domain (amino acids 31-443) contains an
exostosin domain (amino acids 213-353),
which is a putative catalytic domain. Several
missense frameshift mutations in the TMEM5
gene have been detected in
α-dystroglycanopathy patients, and these
mutations are located around the exostosin
domain (16, 18). We found that two missense
mutations, Y339C and R340L, abolished
TMEM5 activity (Fig. 2F). This result
suggests that these mutations disrupt the
function of the catalytic domain and abolish
the generation of the (-3GlcAβ1-3Xyla1-)
repeat. The absence of the
(-3GlcAβ1-3Xyla1-) repeat
in TMEM5-deficient HAP1 cells suggests the
lack of an alternative pathway to compensate
for TMEM5 function in core M3 glycan
processing.
As shown Fig. 7, we confirmed
that the TMEM5 product served as an
acceptor substrate for B4GAT1. B4GAT1 has
been reported to prefer β-linked Xyl over
α-linked Xyl (12). This observation is
consistent with our finding that the Xyl is
linked to the second Rbo' on the TMEM5
product via a β-linkage. Although B4GAT1
clearly recognizes at least β1-4-linked Xyl,
further experiments are needed to
characterize the substrate specificity of
B4GAT1, such as determining the importance
of the linkage and the necessity of Rbo5P. On
the other hand, LARGE did not transfer GlcA
to the β1-4-linked Xyl residue on the
TMEM5 product. This result is consistent
with
the finding
that the
glucuronosyltransferase activity of LARGE is
specific to α-linked Xyl and not to β-linked
Xyl (9). Therefore, the formation of the
GlcAβ1-4 linkage by B4GAT1 is required for
LARGE action. The (-3GlcAβ1-3Xyla1-)
repeat generated by LARGE is also known to

require an additional GlcA/Xyl unit. Our data
revealed this unit to be
GlcAβ1-4Xylβ1-4Rbo5P. Interestingly, core
M3 uses two types of GlcA/Xyl units,
GlcAβ1-3Xyla1-3 and GlcAβ1-4Xylβ1-4,
to form functional glycans. Furthermore, the
(-3GlcAβ1-3Xyla1-) repeat, which is
synthesized by LARGE, is composed of
α-Xyl. The different Xyl linkages produced
by TMEM5 and LARGE might be important
for the step-by-step construction of
O-mannosyl glycan.
Here, we have identified the
enzymatic function of TMEM5, which
produces a Xylβ1-4Rbo5P. We believe that
TMEM5 synthesizes this structure on the core
M3 of α-DG but may possibly act on other
glycans and/or other proteins. The
(-3GlcAβ1-3Xyla1-) repeat generated by
LARGE resembles glycosaminoglycan chains
(heparan sulfate, chondroitin sulfate, etc.),
which consist of repeating disaccharides are
synthesized by copolymerases with dual
glycosyltransferase activities. It is important
to survey other proteins for TMEM5 activity
to elucidate the function of the
(-3GlcAβ1-3Xyla1-) repeat and laminin
binding.

EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES
Plasmid construction—The cDNA
encoding human TMEM5 was cloned from
HEK293 cells by RT-PCR using the primers
TMEM5F
(TAGGGATCCGCCGCCACCATGGAGGC
CGGGCCGCCCCGGCAGCGCCAG) and
TMEM5R
(AGATCTAGATGCTATCAGAAGGCTGAC
CAATGAGTCCAG). The PCR product was
inserted into the BamHI and XbaI sites of the
pEF1V5/His vector. To generate the
sTMEM5, the cDNA encoding Arg31 to the
C-terminal stop codon was amplified using
the
primers recTMEM5
(TATGAATTCACGCCGCCGCCAGGCGC
CGGCCGGGT) and recTMEM5R
(AGACTCGAGTTAACTTTTATTATTCAT
TAAAAATGAGCTTTTCTAA). The PCR
product encoding sTMEM5 was digested
with EcoRI/XbaI and inserted into the EcoRI
and XbaI sites of ss2-His/Myc-pcDNA3.1.

Missense mutations (16) were generated by site-directed mutagenesis using a two-sided splicing method involving overlapping extension. The ss2-His/Myc-TMEM5-pcDNA3.1 plasmid was used as the template. The following primer pairs were used for the first PCR:

p.Y339C, [Y3339C.F  
(CGGAGTAAACACAGAATGCTGTGCGAATCTATGAGGCTTTGCTC) and BGHpA  
(CTAGAAGGCACAGTCGAGGC]] and [T7  
(TAATACGACTCACTATAGG) and Y3339C.R  

(GAGCAAGCCTCATAGATTCCGACAGCATCTGTGTTTACTCCG)] ; and p.R340L, [R340L.F  
(GAGTAAACACAGAATGCTATCTTATCTATGAGGCTTGCTCATG) and BGHpA] and [T7 and R340L.R  
(CATAGGAGCAAGCCTCATAGATAAGATAGCATCTGTGTTTACTC)]. The PCR products for each mutant were mixed, extended, and amplified using the T7 and BGHpA primer pair. The second PCR products were digested with EcoRI/XbaI and then inserted into the EcoRI and XbaI sites of ss2-His/Myc-pcDNA3.1.

The cDNA encoding human B4GAT1 was cloned by RT-PCR from human brain total RNA (Clontech Laboratories, Mountain View, CA) using the primers

(CCGGAATTCGCCGCCACCATGCAGATGTCCTACGCCATCCGGTGC) and iGnT1r  
(GCCTCTAGAGCACGGTCGGGGAGAGTTGGGTACTTG). The PCR product was inserted into the EcoRI and XbaI sites of the pcDNA3.1 Myc/His vector. The sB4GAT1 was generated by PCR amplification of the cDNA encoding Gly35 to the C-terminal stop using the primers recB3GNT1F  
(TATGAATTCAGGACTGCACGGGCAGGAGGAGCAAGACCAA) and recB3GNT1R  
(AGACTCGAGTCAGCAGCGTCGGGGGAGAGTTGGGGTACTT). The PCR product encoding sB4GNT1 was digested with EcoRI/XhoI and inserted into the EcoRI and XbaI sites of ssl-His/Myc-pcDNA3.1.

The cDNA encoding human LARGE and the sLARGE expression vector were described previously (13).

Preparation and analysis of the cells with CRISPR/Cas9 genome editing—The CRISPR/Cas9 targeting sequence for TMEM5 was GAAGAATGGAATCCTTGGGA. The oligonucleotide was inserted into the Cas9 Smart Nuclease All-in-One vector (System Biosciences, Mountain View, CA) with an additional 8-base sequence at the 5′ end. The vector was transfected into HAP1 cells (Haplogen, Vienna, Austria). IIH6-negative cells were sorted by fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS; MoFlo, Beckman Coulter, Brea, CA). HAP1 cells were cultured in Iscove’s Modified Dulbecco’s Medium (IMDM, Wako Pure Chemical Industries) supplemented with 10% FBS and penicillin/streptomycin. Each cell clone was verified for IIH6 reactivity by western blotting and DNA sequencing. The mutation comprised a 1-bp insertion that introduced a frame shift. For the rescue experiments, TMEM5-V5 was expressed in TMEM5-deficient HAP1 cells. Normal, TMEM5-deficient, and TMEM5-rescued HAP1 cells were solubilized with 1% Triton X-100 in Tris-buffered saline (TBS; 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4, and 150 mM NaCl) containing a protease inhibitor cocktail (Nacalai Tesque, Kyoto, Japan). Protein concentrations were determined using Lowry's method, and then equal amounts of protein were incubated with wheat germ agglutinin (WGA) beads (Vector Laboratories) or anti-V5 beads (Medical & Biological Laboratories, Nagoya, Japan) to prepare DG or TMEM5, respectively. The bound materials were eluted with Laemmli Sample Buffer and analyzed by western blotting. The following antibodies were used for western blotting: mouse monoclonal IIH6 against glycosylated α-DG (Merck Millipore, Darmstadt, Germany), a rat monoclonal antibody against the α-DG core protein (3D7) (19), and a mouse monoclonal antibody against the V5 tag (Nacalai Tesque). Preparation and MS analysis of DGFc were performed as described previously (13).

Preparation of enzyme sources—The expression plasmids were

transfected into HEK293T cells with sGTDC 2, sB3GALNT2, sfukutin, sFKRP and sTMEM5, 100 mM MES (pH 6.5), 2.5–5 mM donor substrate, 0.2–2 mM acceptor peptide, 10 mM MnCl₂, 10 mM MgCl₂, 0.5% Triton X-100, and 200 μl of enzyme-bound agarose; Lipofectamine 3000 (Life Technologies Japan, Tokyo, Japan). Recombinant proteins were immunoprecipitated from 1 ml of culture supernatant using 10 μl of anti-c-Myc antibody agarose (rabbit polyclonal, Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO). The protein-bound agaroses were used as the enzyme sources. Samples (2.5 μl of agarose) were separated by SDS-PAGE (10% gel), and the proteins were transferred to PVDF membranes. The membranes were blocked with 5% skim milk in 137 mM NaCl, 2.7 mM KCl, 10 mM Na₂HPO₄, 1.8 mM KH₂PO₄ and 0.05% Tween 20 (PBS-T), incubated with anti-c-Myc polyclonal antibody (A-14-goat, Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Dallas, TX) in 5% skim milk PBS-T, and treated with horseradish peroxidase (HRP)-conjugated anti-goat IgG (GE Healthcare, Buckinghamshire, England) in 5% skim milk PBS-T. Proteins that bound to the antibody were visualized with an ECL kit (GE Healthcare).

Preparation of the substrates for the glycosyltransferase assay—A series of glycopeptides were used as native-like substrates for the glycosyltransferase assay (Fig. 1) and were synthesized from the mannosyl peptide [Ac-AT(Man)PAPVAAIGPK-NH₂; Man-peptide] using GTDC 2, B3GALNT 2, SGK 196, fukutin and FKRP as described previously (13). Briefly, the Man-peptide was generated by solid-phase synthesis using 9-fluorenyloxymethylcarbonyl (Fmoc) chemistry (13). The peptide sequence corresponds to the amino acid sequence of mouse α-DG (Ala 314-Pro 324) and replaces the Thr residues at the potential O-GlcNAc glycosylation sites with Ala. The recombinant sGTDC 2, sB3GALNT 2, sSGK 196, sfukutin, sFKRP and sTMEM 5 proteins were expressed in HEK293T cells and were immunoprecipitated from the culture supernatants with the anti-c-Myc antibody agarose (Sigma-Aldrich). The protein-bound agaroses were used as the enzyme sources. The enzyme reactions were performed in a 400-μl reaction volume at 37°C for 16 h using the following buffer conditions:

sTMEM 5, the sTMEM 5 mutants, sB4GAT 1 or sLARGE were expressed and immunoprecipitated with the anti-c-Myc antibody-agarose conjugate. The protein-bound agaroses were used as the enzyme sources. The enzymatic reactions were performed in a 20-μl reaction volume containing 100 mM MES, pH 6.5, 1 mM [¹⁴C]-labeled donor substrate (75,000 dpm/nmol), 0.1 mM acceptor peptide, 10 mM MnCl₂, 10 mM MgCl₂, 0.5% Triton X-100, and 5 μl of the enzyme-bound agarose at 37°C for 1–12 h. pNP-α-Xyl (1 mM, Sigma-Aldrich) was also used as an acceptor for sLARGE activity. Donor substrates were purchased from the following sources: UDP-[¹⁴C]Xyl (xylose-¹⁴C(U), PerkinElmer, Waltham, MA); UDP-[¹⁴C]GlcA (glucuronyl-¹⁴C(U), American Radiolabeled Chemicals, Saint Louis, MO); and UDP-GlcA (Toyobo). Each product was separated with a

Mightysil RP-18GP Aqua column (5 x 250 mm) (KANTO CHEMICAL). Solvent A was 0.1% TFA in distilled water, and solvent B was 0.1% TFA in acetonitrile. Peptides were eluted at a flow rate of 1 ml/min using a linear gradient of 0–40% solvent B. Peptide separation was monitored by determining the absorbance at 214 nm, and the radioactivity of each fraction (1 ml) was measured with a liquid scintillation counter.

Mass spectrometry—Matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization (MALDI) time-of-flight (TOF) MS was used to elucidate the glycopeptide structures. MALDI linear TOF measurements were carried out on a Voyager DE Pro MALDI TOF mass spectrometer equipped with a nitrogen pulsed laser (337 nm) (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA). Typically, 0.1–1 pmol of the glycopeptide samples was dissolved in a 1-μl solution of 10 mg/ml 2,5-dihydroxybenzoic acid (DHB) in 0.1% TFA and 30% acetonitrile on a MALDI sample target and dried. The measurements were carried out in positive ion mode.

NMR analysis—NMR spectra were recorded with 500 MHz and 600 MHz NMR spectrometers (BrukerBioSpin) equipped with a 5-mm TXI cryogenic probe and a BBO probe, respectively. The probe temperature was set to 25 °C or 6 °C. The sample was dissolved in D₂O (99.99 atom%D), and the sample concentration was 0.25 mM for the TMEM5 substrate and 0.33 mM for the TMEM5 product. ¹H chemical shifts were reported relative to the external standard 4,4-dimethyl-4-silapentane-1-sulfonic acid. The ¹³C and ³¹P chemical shifts were calibrated using an indirect reference based on the X/¹H resonance ratios 0.251449530 (¹³C/¹H) and 0.404808636 (³¹P/¹H). NMR signals were assigned by a series of one- and two-dimensional measurements, including 1D ¹H, 1D ³¹P, 1D selective nuclear Overhauser effect spectroscopy (NOESY), 2D ¹H-¹³C HSQC, 2D ¹H-¹³C HSQC-total correlation spectroscopy (TOCSY), and 2D ¹H-³¹P HMBC spectra. The ³JHH and ¹JCH coupling constants of the Xyl anomeric signal were obtained from 1D ¹H and 2D ¹³C-coupled ¹H-¹³C HSQC spectra, respectively. To estimate the coupling constants, the final digital resolution in the ¹H-dimension was set to 4.9 Hz/point for the ¹³C-decoupled HSQC spectrum and 1.2 Hz/point for the ¹³C-coupled HSQC spectrum. The NMR data were processed with XWIN-NMR (ver. 3.5) or TopSpin (ver. 2.1), and the spectra were displayed using XWIN-PLOT (ver. 3.5).

Conflict of Interest: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

Author contributions: H.M., Y.Y., M.K., and K.K. designed the project, performed the experiments, analyzed and interpreted the data, and wrote the manuscript. H.M. and K.A. identified the enzyme activities and generated glycopeptides for NMR. M.K. and K.K. constructed the plasmids and generated the CRISPR cells. Y.Y. performed the NMR analysis. M.T. performed the MS analysis. H.K. and M.M. generated essential reagents. Y.W., T.T., and T.E. designed the project, edited the manuscript, and jointly supervised the research. H.M. and T.E. are responsible for all reagents and data. All authors discussed the data and the manuscript.

**REFERENCES**

1. Endo, T. (2015) Glycobiology of alpha-dystroglycan and muscular dystrophy. *J. Biochem* 157, 1–12
2. Manya, H., and Endo, T. (2015) O-Mannosyl Glycan and Muscular Dystrophy. in Sugar Chains: Decoding the Functions of Glycans (Suzuki, T., Ohtsubo, K., and Taniguchi, N. eds.), Springer Japan, Tokyo. pp 235–258
3. Chiba, A., Matsumura, K., Yamada, H., Inazu, T., Shimizu, T., Kusunoki, S., Kanazawa, I., Kobata, A., and Endo, T. (1997) Structures of sialylated O-linked oligosaccharides of bovine peripheral nerve alpha-dystroglycan. The role of a novel O-mannosyl-type oligosaccharide in the binding of alpha-dystroglycan with laminin. *J. Biol. Chem.* 272,

4. Inamori, K., Endo, T., Ide, Y., Fujii, S., Gu, J., Honke, K., and Taniguchi, N. (2003) Molecular cloning and characterization of human GnT-IX, a novel beta1,6-N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase that is specifically expressed in the brain. *J. Biol. Chem.* 278, 43102-43109

5. Kaneko, M., Alvarez-Manilla, G., Kamar, M., Lee, I., Lee, J. K., Troupe, K., Zhang, W., Osawa, M., and Pierce, M. (2003) A novel beta(1,6)-N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase V (GnT-VB)(1). *FEBS Lett.* 554, 515-519

6. Inamori, K., Endo, T., Gu, J., Matsuo, I., Ito, Y., Fujii, S., Iwasaki, H., Narimatsu, H., Miyoshi, E., Honke, K., and Taniguchi, N. (2004) N-Acetylglucosaminyltransferase IX acts on the GlcNAc beta 1,2-Man alpha 1-Ser/Thr moiety, forming a 2,6-branched structure in brain O-mannosyl glycan. *J. Biol. Chem.* 279, 2337-2340

7. Yoshida-Moriguchi, T., Yu, L., Stalnaker, S. H., Davis, S., Kunz, S., Madson, M., Oldstone, M. B., Schachter, H., Wells, L., and Campbell, K. P. (2010) O-mannosyl phosphorylation of alpha-dystroglycan is required for laminin binding. *Science* 327, 88-92

8. Manya, H., Chiba, A., Yoshida, A., Wang, X., Chiba, Y., Jigami, Y., Margolis, R. U., and Endo, T. (2004) Demonstration of mammalian protein O-mannosyltransferase activity: coexpression of POMT1 and POMT2 required for enzymatic activity. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 101, 500-505

9. Inamori, K., Yoshida-Moriguchi, T., Hara, Y., Anderson, M. E., Yu, L., and Campbell, K. P. (2012) Dystroglycan function requires xylosyl- and glucuronyltransferase activities of LARGE. *Science* 335, 93-96

10. Yoshida-Moriguchi, T., Willer, T., Anderson, M. E., Venzke, D., Whyte, T., Muntoni, F., Lee, H., Nelson, S. F., Yu, L., and Campbell, K. P. (2013) SGK196 is a glycosylation-specific O-mannose kinase required for dystroglycan function. *Science* 341, 896-899

11. Praissman, J. L., Live, D. H., Wang, S., Ramiah, A., Chinoy, Z. S., Boons, G. J., Moremen, K. W., and Wells, L. (2014) B4GAT1 is the priming enzyme for the LARGE-dependent functional glycosylation of alpha-dystroglycan. *eLife* 3, e03943

12. Willer, T., Inamori, K., Venzke, D., Harvey, C., Morgensen, G., Hara, Y., Beltran Valero de Bernabe, D., Yu, L., Wright, K. M., and Campbell, K. P. (2014) The glucuronyltransferase B4GAT1 is required for initiation of LARGE-mediated alpha-dystroglycan functional glycosylation. *eLife* 3, e03941

13. Kanagawa, M., Kobayashi, K., Tajiri, M., Manya, H., Kuga, A., Yamaguchi, Y., Akasaka-Many, K., Furukawa, J., Mizuno, M., Kawakami, H., Shinohara, Y., Wada, Y., Endo, T., and Toda, T. (2016) Identification of a Post-translational Modification with Ribitol-Phosphate and Its Defect in Muscular Dystrophy. *Cell Rep.* 14, 2209-2223

14. Gerin, I., Ury, B., Breloy, I., Bouchet-Seraphin, C., Bolsee, J., Halbout, M., Graff, J., Vertommen, D., Muccioli, G. G., Seta, N., Cuisset, J. M., Dabaj, I., Quijano-Roy, S., Grahn, A., Van Schaftingen, E., and Bommer, G. T. (2016) ISPD produces CDP-ribitol used by FKTN and FKRP to transfer ribitol phosphate onto alpha-dystroglycan. *Nat. Commun* 7, 11534

15. Praissman, J. L., Willer, T., Sheikh, M. O., Toi, A., Chitayat, D., Lin, Y. Y., Lee, H., Stalnaker, S. H., Wang, S., Prabhakar, P. K., Nelson, S. F., Stemple, D. L., Moore, S. A., Moremen, K. W., Campbell, K. P., and Wells, L. (2016) The functional O-mannose glycan on alpha-dystroglycan contains a phospho-ribitol primed for matriglycan addition. *eLife* 5, e14473

16. Vuillaumier-Barrot, S., Bouchet-Seraphin, C., Chelbi, M., Devisme, L., Quentin, S., Gazal, S., Laquerriere, A., Fallet-Bianco, C., Loget, P., Odent, S., Carles, D., Bazin, A., Aziza, J., Clemenson, A., Guimiot, F., Bonnere, M., Monnot, S., Bole-Feysot, C.,

Bernard, J. P., Loeuillet, L., Gonzales, M., Socha, K., Grandchamp, B., Attie-Bitach, T., Encha-Razavi, F., and Seta, N. (2012) Identification of mutations in TMEM5 and ISPD as a cause of severe cobblestone lissencephaly. *Am. J. Hum. Genet.* 91, 1135-1143

Jae, L. T., Raaben, M., Riemersma, M., van Beusekom, E., Blomen, V. A., Velds, A., Kerkhoven, R. M., Carette, J. E., Topaloglu, H., Meinecke, P., Wessels, M. W., Lefeber, D. J., Whelan, S. P., van Bokhoven, H., and Brummelkamp, T. R. (2013) Deciphering the glycosylome of dystroglycanopathies using haploid screens for lassa virus entry. *Science* 340, 479-483

Astrea, G., Pezzini, I., Picillo, E., Pasquariello, R., Moro, F., Ergoli, M., D'Ambrosio, P., D'Amico, A., Politano, L., and Santorelli, F. M. (2016) TMEM5-associated dystroglycanopathy presenting with CMD and mild limb-girdle muscle involvement. *Neuromuscul. Disord.* 26, 459-461

Ohtsuka, Y., Kanagawa, M., Yu, C. C., Ito, C., Chiyo, T., Kobayashi, K., Okada, T., Takeda, S., and Toda, T. (2015) Fukutin is prerequisite to ameliorate muscular dystrophic phenotype by myofiber-selective LARGE expression. *Sci. Rep.* 5, 8316

## FOOTNOTES

This work was supported by the National Center of Neurology and Psychiatry (NCNP; Intramural Research Grant 26-8 to T.T. and T.E.), the Japan Agency for Medical Research and Development (AMED; 16gm0810010h0201 to H.M., 16gm0810010h0001 to M.K. and 15dk0310041h0002 to T.T.), the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science (JSPS; 26253057 to T.T., 16K08262 to T.E., 23390081 to Y.W., 15H04352 and 24687017 to M.K., 26670499 and 16H05353 to K.K. and 24619014 to M.T.), the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology of Japan (MEXT; 26110712 to M.K., and 26110727 to H.M.), and the Mizutani Foundation for Glycoscience (150171 to H.M.).

The abbreviations used are: α-DG, α-dystroglycan; B3GALNT2, β-1,3-N-acetylgalactosaminyltransferase 2; B4GAT1, β-1,4-glucuronyltransferase 1; core M1, GlcNAcβ1-2Man; core M2, GlcNAcβ1-2 (GlcNAcβ1-6) Man; core M3, GalNAcβ1-3GlcNAcβ1-4Man; CRISPR, clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats; Cas9, CRISPR-associated protein 9; FKTN, fukutin; FKRP, fukutin-related protein; GlcA, glucuronic acid; GlcNAc, N-acetylglucosamine; GTDC2, protein O-mannose β-1,4-N-acetylgalactosaminyltransferase 2; Hex, hexose; HexNAc, N-acetylhexosamine; HMBC, heteronuclear multiple-bond correlation; HSQC, heteronuclear single quantum correlation; LARGE, like-acetylglucosaminyltransferase; Man, mannose; pNP, p-nitrophenyl; POMK, protein-O-mannose kinase; POMT, protein O-mannosyltransferase; Rbo, ribitol; Rbo5P, ribitol-5-phosphate; SGK196, protein kinase-like protein sugen kinase 196; TMEM5, transmembrane protein 5; WGA, wheat germ agglutinin; Xyl, xylose.

## FIGURE LEGENDS

FIGURE 1. Biosynthesis of the core M3 structure of the O-mannosyl glycan and the structures of the acceptor substrates and products used in this study. P, phosphate; Rbo5P, ribitol-5-phosphate; CDP-Rbo, CDP-ribitol.

FIGURE 2. Assay of the xylosyltransferase activity of TMEM5. (A) Immunoprecipitation of the Myc-tagged proteins. Soluble Myc-tagged proteins in the culture supernatant were immunoprecipitated with anti-Myc-agarose (rabbit polyclonal) and subjected to western blotting with an anti-Myc antibody (goat polyclonal). The migration positions of the molecular weight standards are shown on the left. (B and C) Assay for TMEM5 activity with the FKTN or FKRP product. After a 12-h reaction at 37°C, the substrate and product were separated by HPLC, and
the UV absorbance was detected at 215 nm (B); the \[^{14}C\]Xyl-labeled product was detected via liquid scintillation counting (C). (D and E) The MALDI-TOF MS spectra of the TMEM5 substrate (D) and its product (E) prepared by the nonradioactive reaction (37 °C for 12 h). (F) Function of the TMEM5 mutant proteins. After a 12-h reaction at 37 °C, the substrate and product were separated by HPLC, and the \[^{14}C\]Xyl-labeled product was detected.

FIGURE 3. Comparison of the NMR spectra of the TMEM5 substrate and its product. (upper panel) 2D \({ }^{1} \mathrm{H}-{ }^{-}{ }^{13} \mathrm{C}\) HSQC spectra of the TMEM5 substrate (black) and the TMEM5 product (red). (lower panel) 2D \({ }^{1} \mathrm{H}-{ }^{-}{ }^{31} \mathrm{P}\) HMBC spectrum of the TMEM5 product. Rbo, first ribitol; Rbo', second ribitol; x, low-molecular-weight impurities. The NMR spectra were collected at 298 K.

FIGURE 4. Xyl is linked to the C4 position of the second ribitol. (upper panel) 2D \({ }^{1} \mathrm{H}-{ }^{-}{ }^{13} \mathrm{C}\) HSQC spectrum of the TMEM5 product at 279 K. (lower panel) 1D selective NOESY spectrum of the TMEM5 product at 279 K. The Xyl H1 signal was selectively inverted with a Gaussian-shaped pulse of 160 ms. The mixing time was set to 200 ms. Rbo', second ribitol.

FIGURE 5. Xyl is linked to the second ribitol via a β-linkage. (A) 1D \({ }^{1} \mathrm{H}-\mathrm{NMR}\) spectrum (anomeric region) of the TMEM5 product. (B) Overlay of the 2D \({ }^{1} \mathrm{H}-{ }^{-}{ }^{13} \mathrm{C}\) HSQC spectrum of the TMEM5 product (anomeric region) with \({ }^{13} \mathrm{C}\)-decoupling during acquisition (shown in black) and 2D \({ }^{1} \mathrm{H}-{ }^{-}{ }^{13} \mathrm{C}\) HSQC spectrum of the TMEM5 product (anomeric region) without \({ }^{13} \mathrm{C}\)-decoupling (shown in red). The NMR spectra were collected at 298 K. The final digital resolution in the \({ }^{1} \mathrm{H}\)-dimension was set to 4.9 Hz/point for the \({ }^{13} \mathrm{C}\)-decoupled \({ }^{1} \mathrm{H}-{ }^{-}{ }^{13} \mathrm{C}\) HSQC spectrum (black) and to 1.2 Hz/point for \({ }^{13} \mathrm{C}\)-coupled \({ }^{1} \mathrm{H}-{ }^{-}{ }^{13} \mathrm{C}\) HSQC spectrum (red).

FIGURE 6. Abnormal glycosylation in TMEM5-deficient cells. (A) The enrichment of α-DG with WGA-agarose was analyzed by western blotting with antibodies against the α-DG core protein (core) and glycosylated α-DG (IIH6). Normal, parent HAP1 cells; TMEM-KO, TMEM5-deficient cells; KO rescue, TMEM5-deficient cells transfected with V5-TMEM5. V5-TMEM5 expression was confirmed by an anti-V5 antibody. (B - D) MS of DGFc expressed in TMEM5-KO HAP1 cells (B and C) or normal HAP1 cells (D). Glycopeptides were recovered from 0.25 M (B) and 0.5 M (C and D) ammonium acetate fractions via ion exchange chromatography. The ions containing core M3 are indicated with their estimated compositions and summarized in the table. Peaks labeled with “a” and “b” in panel D indicate glycopeptides modified with GlcA/Xyl unit(s). The graphical annotations show the structure abbreviations in the table. DGFc peptide contains five Thr residues. pep, peptide; H, Hex; N, HexNAc; P, phosphate. Note that there were variations in the Hex/HexNAc modification patterns on the glycopeptides.

FIGURE 7. The TMEM5 product is a substrate for B4GAT1. (A) Immunoprecipitation of the Myc-tagged proteins. Soluble Myc-tagged proteins in the culture supernatant were immunoprecipitated with anti-Myc-agarose (rabbit polyclonal) and subjected to western blotting with an anti-Myc antibody (goat polyclonal). The migration positions of the molecular weight standards are shown on the left. (B-E) After a 12-h reaction at 37 °C, the substrate and product were separated by HPLC, and the UV absorbance was detected at 215 nm (B and D); the \[^{14} \mathrm{C}\]GlcA-labeled product was detected via liquid scintillation counting (C and E).
Manα1– peptide (Man-peptide)

UDP-GlcNAc GTDC2

UDP-GalNAc B3GALNT2

ATP SGK196 (POMK)

GalNAcβ1–3GlcNAcβ1–4(P6)Manα1–peptide (phosphocoreM3 -peptide)

CDP-Rbo FKTN

Rbo5P–3GalNAcβ1–3GlcNAcβ1–4(P6)Manα1–peptide (FKTN product)

CDP-Rbo FKRP

Rbo5P
Figure 2, Manya et al.

A
(kDa)
250
150
100
75
50
37
25
20

IP: anti-myc (from rabbit)
IB: anti-myc (from goat)

B
enzyme (-) + FKRP product
40
UV absorbance (mV)
20
0
TMEM5 + FKRP product
40
20
0
TMEM5 + FKTN product
40
20
0
Time (min)
15
20
25

C
Figure 3, Manya et al.

ppm

60
65
70
75
80
85
90
95
100
105

TMEM5 substrate
TMEM5 product

Man-C1
GlcNAc-C1
GalNAc-C1
Xyl-C1

Rbo'-C5
Xyl-C5
Rbo'-C4
Xyl-C4
Xyl-C2
Xyl-C3
Rbo'-C3 Rbo'-C2

HO
1
HO
2
OH
3

Figure 4, Manya et al.

ppm

60
65
70
75
80
85
90
95
100
105

Xyl-H1
Rbo'-H4
Xyl-H3
Xyl-H5(ax)

4.8    4.6    4.4    4.2    4.0    3.8    3.6    3.4    ppm

Xyl-H1
Rbo'-H4
Xyl-H3
Xyl-H5(ax)

4.
Figure 5, Manya et al.

A

Xyl-H1
$^{3}J_{\mathrm{H1,H2}} = 8.7 \, \text{Hz}$

B

ppm
103
104
105
106
107
108

Man-C1
GlcNAc-C1
GalNAc-C1
Xyl-C1
$^{1}J_{\mathrm{C1,H1}} = 163 \, \text{Hz}$

$^{13}\mathrm{C}$


Figure 6, Manya et al.

A

| α-DG (IIH6) | α-DG (Core) | TMEM5 (V5) |
|--------------|-------------|------------|
| 150 -        | 150 -       | 75 -       |
| 100 -        | 100 -       | 50 -       |
| 75 -         | 75 -        |            |

| Normal | KO rescue | TMEM-KO | Normal | KO rescue | TMEM-KO |

B. TMEM5-KO 0.
C. TMEM5-KO 0.5M

| peak | m/z    | structure                          |
|------|--------|------------------------------------|
| 5    | 5951.9 | pep+3H1N+(coreM3+P)x2+Rbo5Px2     |
| 7    | 6166.0 | pep+3H1N+(coreM3+P)x2+Rbo5Px3     |
| 8    | 6380.2 | pep+3H1N+(coreM3+P+Rbo5Px
D. Normal 0.5M

| peak | m/z     | structure                                      |
|------|---------|------------------------------------------------|
| 1-a  | 5449.5  | pep+2H1N+coreM3+P+Rbo5Px2+XG                  |
| 1-b  | 5757.8  | pep+2H1N+coreM3+P+Rbo5Px2+XGx2                |
| 2-a  | 5611.7  | pep+3H1N+coreM3+P
Figure 7, Manya et al.

A

(kDa)
250
150
100
75
50
37
25
20

B4GAT1
LARGE

IP: anti-myc
(from rabbit)
IB: anti-myc
(from goat)

B

enzyme (-)

80

40

0

B4GAT1

80

40

0

LARGE

80

40

0

UV absorbance (mV)

Time (min)

C

12000

[14C]G
Table 1. ${}^{1}$H and ${}^{13}$C chemical shifts of TMEM5 substrate and product

| glycan | Residue | H1     | H2     | H3     | H4     | H5     | H6     |
|--------|---------|--------|--------|--------|--------|--------|--------|
|        |         | C1     | C2     | C3     | C4     | C5     | C6     |
| TMEM5  | Man     | 4.92   | 3.87   | 3.
The muscular dystrophy gene TMEM5 encodes a ribitol β1-4 Xylosyltransferase required for the functional glycosylation of dystroglycan

Hiroshi Manya, Yoshiki Yamaguchi, Motoi Kanagawa, Kazuhiro Kobayashi, Michiko Tajiri, Keiko Akasaka-Manya, Hiroko Kawakami, Mamoru Mizuno, Yoshinao Wada, Tatsushi Toda and Tamao Endo

J. Biol. Chem. published online October 12, 2016

---

Access the most updated version of this article at doi: [10.1074/jbc.M116.751917](http://dx.doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M116.751917)

Alerts:
- When this article is cited
- When a correction for this article is posted

Click here to choose from all of JBC's e-mail alerts

This article cites 0 references, 0 of which can be accessed free at [http://www.jbc.org/content/early/2016/10/12/jbc.M116.751917.full.html#ref-list-1](http://www.jbc.org/content/early/2016/10/12/jbc.M116.751917.full.html#ref-list-1)
