
Mol Neurobiol  
DOI 10.1007/s12035-016-0205-8

Determining the Roles of Inositol Trisphosphate Receptors in Neurodegeneration: Interdisciplinary Perspectives on a Complex Topic

Silvia Honda Takada<sup>1</sup> · Juliane Midori Ikebara<sup>1</sup> · Erica de Sousa<sup>1</sup> · Débora Sterzeck Cardoso<sup>1</sup> · Rodrigo Ribeiro Resende<sup>2</sup> · Henning Ulrich<sup>3</sup> · Martin Rückl<sup>4</sup> · Sten Rüdiger<sup>4</sup> · Alexandre Hiroaki Kihara<sup>1,5</sup>

Received: 1 June 2016 / Accepted: 11 October 2016  
© Springer Science+Business Media New York 2016

**Abstract** It is well known that calcium (Ca<sup>2+</sup>) is involved in the triggering of neuronal death. Ca<sup>2+</sup> cytosolic levels are regulated by Ca<sup>2+</sup> release from internal stores located in organelles, such as the endoplasmic reticulum. Indeed, Ca<sup>2+</sup> transit from distinct cell compartments follows complex dynamics that are mediated by specific receptors, notably inositol trisphosphate receptors (IP3Rs). Ca<sup>2+</sup> release by IP3Rs plays essential roles in several neurological disorders; however, details of these processes are poorly understood. Moreover, recent studies have shown that subcellular location, molecular identity, and density of IP3Rs profoundly affect Ca<sup>2+</sup> transit in neurons. Therefore, regulation of IP3R gene products in specific cellular vicinities seems to be crucial in a wide range of cellular processes from neuroprotection to neurodegeneration. In this regard, microRNAs seem to govern not only IP3Rs translation levels but also subcellular accumulation.

Combining new data from molecular cell biology with mathematical modelling, we were able to summarize the state of the art on this topic. In addition to presenting how Ca<sup>2+</sup> dynamics mediated by IP3R activation follow a stochastic regimen, we integrated a theoretical approach in an easy-to-apply, cell biology-coherent fashion. Following the presented premises and in contrast to previously tested hypotheses, Ca<sup>2+</sup> released by IP3Rs may play different roles in specific neurological diseases, including Alzheimer's disease and Parkinson's disease.

**Keywords** Huntington’s disease · Spino cerebellar ataxia · SCA · Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis · ALS · miRNA

**Introduction**

It is well known that the control of calcium (Ca<sup>2+</sup>) cytosolic levels is essential for several processes in the cell [1, 2]. Ca<sup>2+</sup> of internal cellular stores is released by the activation of receptors in a phenomenon known as Ca<sup>2+</sup>-induced Ca<sup>2+</sup> release (CICR). Because Ca<sup>2+</sup> is ubiquitously observed as an intracellular messenger, CICR should be spatially confined to governing specific signalling pathways. It is now becoming evident that the precise localization of Ca<sup>2+</sup> channels in the cell is a fundamental parameter for the triggering of distinct signalling cascades [3], particularly considering that the action of Ca<sup>2+</sup> in the cytosol ranges within a micrometric scale. In recent years, it has been described that intracellular Ca<sup>2+</sup> levels are locally regulated by distinct mechanisms encompassing the presence of several families of receptors, such as inositol trisphosphate receptors (IP3Rs).

The role of Ca<sup>2+</sup> in cell survival is unclear. Recent reports are not in accordance with regard to the possible role of Ca<sup>2+</sup> in the

**Electronic supplementary material** The online version of this article (doi:10.1007/s12035-016-0205-8) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

Alexandre Hiroaki Kihara  
alexandrekhihara@gmail.com  

1 Laboratório de Neurogenética, Universidade Federal do ABC, São Bernardo do Campo, SP, Brazil  
2 Cell Signaling and Nanobiotechnology Laboratory, Department of Biochemistry and Immunology, Institute of Biological Sciences, Federal University of Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte, MG, Brazil  
3 Departamento de Bioquímica, Instituto de Química, Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo, SP, Brazil  
4 Institute of Physics, Humboldt University at Berlin, Berlin, Germany  
5 Departamento de Fisiologia e Biofísica, Instituto de Ciências Biomédicas, Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo, SP, Brazil

Published online: 22 October 2016

progression of brain disorders and neurodegenerative processes [4–7]. In this review, by analysing both experimental and theoretical approaches, we present new interpretations of the mechanisms underlying pro- and antiapoptotic events involving IP3Rs. This perspective is essential for the development of new therapeutic strategies for nervous system disorders.

### IP3Rs Do Not Accumulate in Obvious and Expected Subcellular Locations

Initiation and propagation of Ca²⁺ signals depend on the precise subcellular localization of IP3R and determine, in many cases, the physiological consequences of Ca²⁺ release [8]. The classical view describes IP3Rs as being located in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) [8–11]; however, some studies have shown nuclear locations for IP3Rs [12]. Indeed, Ca²⁺ pumps were commonly accepted to be located only in the outer nuclear membrane; however, IP3Rs are also present on the inner nuclear membrane, facing the nucleoplasm [13]. Thus, Ca²⁺ puffs observed in the perinuclear region may originate from nucleoplasmic Ca²⁺ [14, 15].

Moreover, IP3Rs can be present in the plasma membrane, allowing extracellular Ca²⁺ to enter the cell. This particular location of IP3Rs has been detected in many cells [16], although in the nervous system, till date, IP3Rs located in the plasma membrane have been reported only in olfactory receptor neurons [17, 18].

Ca²⁺ pumps belonging to both the sarcoplasmic/endoplasmic reticulum Ca²⁺-ATPase and secretory pathway Ca²⁺/Mn²⁺-ATPase families [19], as well as some Ca²⁺-binding proteins [20, 21] and Ca²⁺ release channels as part of the IP3R family [22, 23] can be found in the Golgi apparatus. The ER and mitochondria are physically connected in different cell types, forming junctions described as mitochondria-associated membranes (MAMs). One of the main roles of this junction is Ca²⁺ signalling that can directly influence cell death processes, and therefore, the role of MAMs in neurological disorders deserves special attention [24–26]. It was postulated that Ca²⁺ released from the ER via IP3Rs generate MAMs, providing sufficient Ca²⁺ for the activation of uniporters at mitochondria [27]. The IP3Rs, particularly IP3R3, are highly compartmentalized at MAMs and provide direct and proper mitochondrial Ca²⁺ signalling [28].

IP3Rs can be located in other regions, such as dendrites and dendritic spines, as shown by Satoh and coworkers in a study of cerebellar Purkinje cells. In Purkinje cells, the distribution of IP3Rs showing the highest concentration of immunogold-labelled cells was found in a population of smooth-surfaced structures that had direct continuity with membranes of the ER and could be found in both the cell body and dendrites up to the dendritic spines [29]. This localization of IP3Rs has a direct influence in synaptic transmission.

In another study, the distribution of IP3Rs was observed in clusters along pyramidal neuron dendrites in the hippocampal CA1 area, and the region of dendritic branch points showed an increase in free intracellular Ca²⁺ concentration ([Ca²⁺]i), suggesting that these regions are equipped for regenerative, IP3R-dependent internal Ca²⁺ release [30–32].

In dendritic spines, there are interactions between scaffold proteins. Shank is a scaffold protein that is localized at postsynaptic sites of brain excitatory synapses [33]. This protein has the ability to recruit Homer, another scaffold protein, to postsynaptic sites, thereby promoting the maturation of dendritic spines and the enlargement of spine heads. Furthermore, Shank and Homer cooperate to induce accumulation of IP3Rs in dendritic spines and formation of putative multisynaptic spines [34], and Homer–Shank interactions allow rapid local transfer of diffusible messengers between signalling proteins such as metabotropic glutamate receptors (mGluRs) and IP3R. This interaction contributes to effective delivery of IP3 to IP3Rs. When there is some stress or intense stimulation, Homer 1a is rapidly expressed and disrupts these interactions [35].

### How Is IP3R Accumulation Regulated?

An interesting question concerning IP3Rs is how accumulation is controlled in specific subcellular locations. Whereas the existence of transport of IP3Rs to specific cellular vicinities is already accepted [36–38], other possible mechanisms have been proposed, including local control of translation [39, 40]. In this regard, several studies have disclosed the role of noncoding RNAs, notably in the role of microRNAs (miRNAs). miRNAs are small RNAs that function as negative regulators of gene expression at the posttranscriptional level, mostly through events taking place in the cytoplasm. miRNAs are encoded by genes and processed to form ribonucleoprotein complexes that bind to messenger RNA (mRNA) targets to repress translation or to degrade transcripts [41]. Approximately 2500 mature miRNA sequences have been described in the human genome, according to miRBase [42]. This class of noncoding RNA composes one of the largest domains of molecules able to regulate gene expression [43].

Interestingly, evidence of miRNA regulation of IP3Rs has been described in tissues other than the central nervous system (CNS). As reported in some studies, IP3R2 presents binding sequences to miRNA-133a [44]. Indeed, the role of miRNA-133a in the regulation of IP3R2 was described in a left ventricular hypertrophy disease model [45]. The control of IP3R translation by miRNA-506 has also been studied in the liver [46]. It has been observed that various liver disorders, ranging from fibrosis to cholestasis, occur when there are changes in expression levels of several miRNAs [47, 48].

Mol Neurobiol

miRNAs have important roles in neuronal physiology, ranging from development to phenotype preservation. It is also broadly documented that miRNAs act in specific subcellular localizations, such as in dendrites, where they are involved in spine structure regulation and synaptic plasticity [49]. Considering the abundant presence of miRNAs in the brain [50], in this review, we describe the possibility of similar events occurring in the brain. To our knowledge, there are no studies correlating IP3R expression with miRNAs in the nervous system. We suggest that miRNAs can regulate the expression of IP3Rs in nervous system diseases in which the expression of $IP3Rs$ are altered or in physiological conditions.

In an attempt to fill this knowledge gap, we combined the predictive power of six algorithms to find miRNAs that can regulate IP3Rs: TargetScan [51], RNAhybrid [52], PITA [53], PicTar [54], miRanda [55], and miRWalk [56]. After this first step, we considered just miRNAs that are present in the nervous system [57]. Our refined prediction list contains 22 miRNAs that might regulate $IP3R1$, 54 miRNAs for $IP3R2$, and 6 miRNAs that could regulate IP3R3 translation.

The process of miRNA regulation on protein translation and function is very complex [58]. Indeed, it encompasses several aspects, such as base pairing, the structure of target mRNA, and the concentration of both RNA species. However, an interesting factor recently described is the synergic action of miRNAs. It is known that the distance between miRNA sites in the same target RNA can modulate the power of regulation of each miRNA. Overlapping miRNA-binding sites or those up to 13 nucleotides long promote competition between the involved miRNAs. On the other hand, miRNA-binding sites spaced from 13 to 56 nucleotides may result in a synergic interaction because the first aligned miRNA enhances the probability of the second miRNA alignment. Finally, miRNA-binding sites spaced by more than 56 nucleotides act separately and do not influence each other [59]. Following this algorithm, we were able to disclose the possible interactions of miRNAs and the effect on the regulation of IP3Rs. Our predictions indicated that regulation of IP3Rs by miRNAs is more complex than the common view suggested (Fig. 1). Indeed, we were able to determine miRNA interactions for each IP3R member. We predicted that 22 miRNAs may interact with IP3R1, 54 miRNAs may interact with $IP3R2$, and only 6 miRNAs interact with $IP3R3$. In all matrices, blue dots represent no effects between miRNA sites and red and green dots mean competition and synergic effects, respectively. The pie charts on the right illustrate the proportions of blue, red, and green dots for $IP3R1$ (231 interactions, 42 competitive, and 6 synergic), $IP3R2$ (1431 interactions, 29 competitive, and 25 synergic), and $IP3R3$ (15 interactions, 0 competitive, and 2 synergic).

Regulation of translation by miRNAs in specific subcellular vicinities has been investigated in several cell types, including neurons [60], where specific mechanisms in the control of miRNA activity have been described [61–63]. Indeed,

subcellular distribution of IP3Rs is not static, but changes according to the physiological status of the cell. For this reason, the cell regulates not only IP3R expression but also its distribution [8, 64]. An example is cluster formation of the ER accompanied by alterations in IP3R localization and the increase in sensitivity of $\mathrm{Ca}^{2+}$ release by IP3 that occurs during development. In marine protostome worms (phylum Nemertea), the ER of maturing oocytes forms numerous distinct clusters that are about 5 μm in diameter. After fertilization, a normal series of $\left[\mathrm{Ca}^{2+}\right]_{i}$ oscillations is generated and eventually disassembles the ER clusters at around the time the oscillations cease [65]. The clustering of the ER and gathering of IP3Rs facilitate the formation of highly sensitive $\mathrm{Ca}^{2+}$ release sites and aid $\mathrm{Ca}^{2+}$ wave initiation and propagation [66].

### IP3Rs Mediate $\mathrm{Ca}^{2+}$ Signalling Following a Stochastic Regimen

IP3R accumulation in subcellular locations reviewed above controls two aspects that are crucial to shaping intracellular $\mathrm{Ca}^{2+}$ signals: subcellular organization and stochasticity. Both features have attracted much interest in recent work, including numerous publications on mathematical modelling of $\mathrm{Ca}^{2+}$ signals. The multiple spatial scales and a related hierarchy of collective behaviour and spatiotemporal patterns [3] also shape the temporal dynamics of these signals. This fact becomes particularly relevant when considering that release events at the different scales can be associated with distinct functional roles in cellular communication.

The smallest events on the $\mathrm{Ca}^{2+}$ signal hierarchy are openings of single channels called *blips*. Experimental observation of larger but still localized release events called *puffs* [67] indicated that functioning IP3R channels are grouped into clusters on the ER membrane. Clusters contain a few tens of channels and their opening depends on local diffusion of $\mathrm{Ca}^{2+}$ and CICR between adjacent channels (see below). $\mathrm{Ca}^{2+}$ signals, therefore, carry a strong spatial component. Further, it was found that puffs, lasting from a few tens to a few hundreds of milliseconds, are strongly stochastic events [68].

The most obvious source of noise is the small number of channels and the relatively small number of possible channel states. Together, the two properties that we have mentioned—spatial localization and noise—constitute a very complex system not usually studied in standard systems biology. Mathematically, for ab initio modelling of channel gating, one represents the stochastic dynamics by means of a Markov chain for each of the channels in a cluster, which is the discrete state of each individual channel that is considered (see [69] for a review). An exemplary gating model for single-channel behaviour is presented below.

Recent modelling studies addressed two main questions [70–74]: (1) What is the role of noise for the generation of

Fig. 1 Presumptive miRNAs regulating IP3Rs and their possible interactions. **a** Matrices of miRNA interactions for each IP3R member. The arrows point to crescent order of miRNA names in each matrix. The large matrix refers to $IP3R2$ (54 predicted miRNAs), the medium-size one refers to $IP3R1$ (22 predicted miRNAs), and the small one refers to $IP3R3$ (6 predicted miRNAs). Blue dots represent no effects between miRNA sites and red and green dots mean competition and synergic effects, respectively. The pie charts on the right illustrate the proportions of blue, red, and green dots for **b** $IP3R1$ (231 interactions, 42 competitive, and 6 synergic), **c** $IP3R2$ (1431 interactions, 29 competitive, and 25 synergic), and **d** $IP3R3$ (15 interactions, 0 competitive, and 2 synergic).

Ca²⁺ signals? and (2) What is the role of noisy Ca²⁺ puffs in global oscillations of Ca²⁺ and waves? It is not clear, first, how exactly the individual and strongly random puffs are organized into global release events, which, at least in some cell types, appear to be fairly regular. Second, the time scales of puffs and waves are very disparate. After addressing these questions, we give some attention to the issue of how Ca²⁺ signals are terminated. On a more abstract level, we also discuss how the considerable complexity of the Ca²⁺ dynamics model can be mathematically reduced.

### Stochastic Single-Channel Gating

The gating dynamics of a single channel bears the origin of collective behaviour in cells as well as noise. IP3Rs regulate Ca²⁺ release in response to binding of Ca²⁺ and IP3 to binding sites on the cytosolic side of the channels [75, 76]. Ca²⁺ released by a channel diffuses within the cytosol and increases the open probability of neighbouring channels by binding to their activating binding sites. This forms the self-amplifying mechanism of CICR, which is crucial for all intracellular calcium release types. Furthermore, increased Ca²⁺ concentrations also induce inhibitory binding to receptors and thus termination of calcium signals [77].

To study the dynamics of a single IP3R, numerous models for the gating of subunits have been discussed; the most important of which is the DYK model [78]. An IP3R consists of four identical binding subunits fitting the tetrameric structure

of the channel. In the original DYK model, there are three binding sites on each subunit: an activating site for Ca²⁺, an inhibiting Ca²⁺ site, and an IP3 binding site. The three binding sites allow for eight different states of each subunit. Using patch-clamp techniques, kinetic rates can then be obtained by rate fitting from the dependence of open fractions and mean open-and-close times of Ca²⁺ and IP3 concentrations [76]. Typically, binding processes for channel activation are fast and of high affinity, while inhibition binding is much slower and occurs only at high cytosolic Ca²⁺ concentrations. Owing to thermal noise, binding and dissociation of Ca²⁺ and IP3 are stochastic events. This stochastic process is coupled to the concentration of cytosolic Ca²⁺ because, on the one hand, the binding probabilities depend on it, and on the other hand, the open and closed states of a channel determine the concentration field. Several further models of single-channel gating have been devised. For an overview of recent models, see the publication by Rüdiger [69].

#### Subcellular Signals: From Discrete Models to Effective Langevin Equations

A very important determinant in the shaping of Ca²⁺ signals is the clustered distribution of IP3R channels on the membrane of the ER. Channels are grouped in clusters that consist of up to a few tens of channels. Earlier experimental studies were limited by the fact that the structure of clusters was below the level of imaging resolution, and researchers concluded that
clusters are tightly packed collections of channels. It was deduced that clusters are of 0.5-μm extent and contain around 30 channels [79]. Newer visualization techniques allow an identification of single-channel opening and closing on the basis of Ca²⁺ fluorescence and have led to the conclusion that the number of channels per cluster is 10 or fewer [80].

Mathematical and computational analysis can provide an indirect estimate of these characteristics. Modelling of Ca²⁺ concentration dynamics takes into account Ca²⁺ diffusion, binding to buffers as well as transport to and from the intracellular storage compartments, mainly in the ER. Diffusion of Ca²⁺ and binding/unbinding of Ca²⁺ to buffer proteins is usually modelled by reaction-diffusion equations, while transport through the ER membrane is given by influx conditions on the ER surface. Due to the multiple spatial scales (very high local Ca²⁺ concentration around open channels versus intermediate concentrations in a cluster and very small amounts of Ca²⁺ diffusion towards adjacent clusters), attention has to be given to spatial discretization in numerical schemes. In one line of research, a three-dimensional simulation software [81] was established using the finite element method. PDE solver is based on locally grid-adaptive finite elements in space that resolve the extreme spatial gradients of Ca²⁺ concentrations close to the channel. Typically, a spatial grid of <1 nm is needed in the close neighbourhood of a channel, while the grid distance relaxes to around 500 nm far from the channels. This allows an efficient representation of the domain with accuracy unmatched in earlier numerical approaches to the problem.

The stochastic gating transitions such as the DYK model sketched above are governed by schemes defining the states, transitions, and transition rates. The standard method used to numerically time-advance such states is the Gillespie method. Here, however, the Gillespie method needs to be coupled to the time-stepping of a reaction-diffusion equation, for which a special hybrid deterministic-stochastic algorithm was developed [81].

The three-dimensional simulation tool permitted investigation of the interior Ca²⁺ distribution around clustered channels by taking into account the spatial separation of channels. It was found that Ca²⁺ distributions around open channels are strongly inhomogeneous at the scale of a cluster for realistic channel distances [82]. This leads to separation of Ca²⁺ scale to a large self-coupling value (concentration at the channel pore of an open channel) and the much smaller cluster domain value, defined as an appropriate average Ca²⁺ concentration at closed channels while others are open. It was shown that incorporating spatial separation (as opposed to a tight cluster model) leads to models that allow a better quantitative description of experimentally observed puffs [83].

A further step in theoretical analysis of Ca²⁺ signals from clusters is the mathematical reduction of basic parts of the model. Elimination of the reaction-diffusion part of the hybrid model is possible by approximating cluster domain concentrations by a fitted nonlinear dependence on the number of open

channels. A computationally inexpensive Markovian model is obtained, which can then be cast in the form of a stochastic differential equation [69]. Its solutions replicate puffs in neuroblastoma cells, particularly concerning the lifetime and frequency of puffs. This method allows to characterize the underlying mathematical structure of Ca²⁺ puffs within the regime of stochastic excitability. Thus, Ca²⁺ puffs as dynamic phenomena are in the same class of dynamic systems as the noise-driven spikes found in the celebrated Hodgkin–Huxley equations for neuronal membrane potentials. Methods of mathematical analysis employed extensively for action potentials are therefore expected to be fruitful in stochastic analysis of Ca²⁺ signals as well.

## Towards Unified Modelling of Local and Global Ca²⁺ Signals

Release on the scale of the cell involves globally synchronized channels and yields cellwide oscillations [84–86] or waves [87–89] that can last up to several tens of seconds. In a number of experimental studies, researchers have characterized puffs as the basic building blocks of global signals [90, 91]. Since puffs are noise-driven, as discussed above, it has been argued that the randomness of single-channel behaviour carries over to waves [72]. According to this idea, a random opening of channels in one or several clusters triggers the activation of adjacent clusters, thus facilitating the spreading of a wave through the cell.

These models would also provide an explanation of the inherent randomness of Ca²⁺ oscillations, which is apparent most clearly in their fluctuating interspike period. However, a full model of Ca²⁺ signals that encompasses puffs and global oscillations and their randomness, based on these ideas, has not been put forward. Related to that, it has not been clarified how the termination of puffs, which is thought to occur by inhibiting Ca²⁺ binding to the receptors, can be combined with the long lifetime of global release and waves. A step towards a unified description of puffs and waves has been achieved in a model of release from a cluster that allows for unbinding of IP3 from the channels during long-lasting release events [74]. It was found that the model dynamically exhibits short events corresponding to the Ca²⁺ puffs, as well as long-lasting events that carry substantial Ca²⁺ release during a wave. While the short-release events are terminated by inhibition, the long-lasting events decay after only a few seconds by a mechanism that involves unbinding of IP3 from the receptors. Thus, a transition from local to global Ca²⁺ release is primarily a transition in the local release, which leads to higher Ca²⁺-mediated coupling and spreading of activity (Fig. 2). These simulations are based on a hybrid stochastic-deterministic model for calcium spreading and release (for details see Appendix). Comparison to experiments has shown that this model can explain many facets of local and global signals, includingthe extended lifetime of waves and the refractoriness of channels after a wave [74].

# The Role of Ca²⁺ Release Noise

A final issue to discuss here is the role of noise in the Ca²⁺ signalling processes. The discussion above shows that noise has a central role in the generation of Ca²⁺ signals, particularly for puffs. This assessment was grounded on the observation that dynamic systems underlying realistic models of Ca²⁺ puffs do not allow for a limit cycle behaviour in the absence of noise [69]. It is not clear, however, in which sense noise can be beneficial or at least in which sense the setup of Ca²⁺ channels in low copy number clusters can carry an advantage for signal or information transmission in a cell.

A basic discussion of this question presumably needs to distinguish between local and global signals. On the one hand, it has been known for many years that, in the context of gene regulation, Ca²⁺ signals are transmitted by global oscillations and that the information is encoded in their frequency. Recently, it has been shown that in certain regimes of gene promoter kinetics, an oscillatory signal can in fact reduce the noise in protein translation compared with a constant signal [92]. It is not clear, however, how this result can be upheld in the case of Ca²⁺ oscillations, where the oscillation period is strongly fluctuating around its mean.

On the other hand, recent work on Ca²⁺ regulation of genes has shown that Ca²⁺ can activate gene expression even in the absence of synchronized release (i.e. when the Ca²⁺ is locally and irregularly released). Spatial compartmentalization may indeed improve the reliability of signalling [93]. In the context of intracellular Ca²⁺ signals, one could assume that the input signal—for instance, an extracellular stimulation of the cell—is conveyed by the individual clusters in parallel and then integrated into a control signal for gene regulation. A detailed discussion of these questions is needed for an assessment of the biological role of clustering and noise in dynamic Ca²⁺ signals.

## Unbalancing Ca²⁺ Dynamics: What Do We Know About IP3R Functional Expression in Different CNS Diseases?

As discussed, Ca²⁺ release consists of complex, hierarchically organized and finely regulated dynamics in physiological conditions. Changes in this interconnected, multiscale equilibrium frequently are related to pathological states, as described in CNS diseases. Perturbation of ER homeostasis contributes to the pathogenesis of various neurodegenerative diseases [94–96]. Indeed, Ca²⁺ release from ER can trigger signalling mechanisms that lead to cell death, and the depletion of Ca²⁺ in ER can induce ER stress [97]. The role of IP3R1 has been described for some neurodegenerative diseases, such as

Huntington’s disease (HD), spinocerebellar ataxias (SCAs), and Alzheimer’s disease (AD; Fig. 3). These diseases present an enormous medical, social, financial, and scientific challenge and abnormalities in neuronal Ca²⁺ signalling are probably present in many of them.

### Huntington’s Disease

HD is a progressive, autosomal dominant neurodegenerative disorder caused by a CAG repeat expansion in exon 1 of the huntingtin (*HTT*) gene, a condition that has been recapitulated in the YAC128 mouse model [98]. The disease’s onset is typically in early adult life [99] and is characterized by motor abnormalities, including chorea and psychiatric disturbance with gradual dementia. The brain regions primarily affected are the striatum and cerebral cortex, with progressive neuronal loss [99] that mainly affects GABAergic medium spiny neurons (MSNs) [100]. The mutant huntingtin (mHtt) protein acquires a ‘toxic gain of function’ [101], including deregulated neuronal Ca²⁺ signalling, because mHtt binds directly and specifically to the C-terminal region of IP3R1 [102–104] and its affinity increases when mHtt is associated with huntingtin-associated protein 1A [102].

Disturbed neuronal Ca²⁺ signalling plays a significant role in the degeneration of MSNs that contain full-length mHtt, but not all its fragments are toxic to neurons [105]. In primary MSN cultures of YAC128 mice, the analysis of glutamate-induced apoptosis indicated that 2-aminoethoxydiphenyl borate, a membrane-permeable IP3R blocker, is neuroprotective, confirming the involvement of IP3R1 in MSN degeneration. The authors in the same study described a pathway that directly links disturbed Ca²⁺ signalling and degeneration of MSNs in the caudate nucleus in HD [100].

In another study, researchers found that viral delivery of a peptide that disrupts the association between mHtt and IP3R1 protected the YAC128 MSNs in vitro and in vivo [106], reinforcing the association of mHtt and IP3R1 in HD. It was also reported that continuous overactivation of IP3R1 pathways can lead to compensatory upregulation of neuronal store-operated Ca²⁺ entry (SOCE) [107]. Additional support for the role of IP3R1 in HD was provided by studies that revealed an association with impaired ER stress chaperone protein GRP78 in R6/2 mice, a distinct HD animal model [108].

IP3Rs are allosteric proteins and when the allostery is defective, alterations in cellular function can occur. It has been demonstrated that pleiotropic enzyme transglutaminase type 2 targets the allosteric domain of IP3R1 and negatively regulates IP3R1-mediated Ca²⁺ signalling and autophagy. This regulation depends on the covalent posttranslational modification of the Gln2746 residue tethered to the adjacent subunit by transglutaminase type 2. In HD models, both modification of Gln2746 and alteration in IP3R1 function were observed, which indicate a pathological role in this disease [109].
Mol Neurobiol

a single channel
b cluster of channels
c array of clusters

d

cluster

0 time, s 100

Fig. 2 The multiple spatial and temporal scales of Ca²⁺ signals. Representation of endoplasmic reticulum (ER) membrane and channels located in the membrane (bottom) and local Ca²⁺ concentration at the membrane (top). a Ca²⁺ blips released from a single channel. b Ca²⁺ puffs released from several channels in a cluster. c Ca²⁺ signals released from an array of clusters. d Representation of Ca²⁺ waves in a simulation of clusters of channels arranged in an 8 × 8 grid. In this particular representation, the Ca²⁺ concentration in one column of eight clusters is visualized. The equations solved to obtain these waves are summarized in the Appendix.

### SpinoCerebellar Ataxias

Similarly to HD, SCAs are inherited in an autosomal dominant fashion, and neuropathological findings usually reveal neuronal inclusions of polyglutamine aggregates, which are caused by CAG repeat alteration. The most frequent symptoms are cerebellar atrophy, progressive balance difficulties, and incoordination of movement (ataxia) related to neurodegeneration of cerebellar Purkinje cells or related neurons, such as those at spinocerebellar, pontocerebellar, and olivocerebellar connections [110]. There are several forms of hereditary ataxia, but the genetic basis of ataxias is not completely known [111].

SCAs comprise a heterogeneous group with more than 30 autosomal dominant genetic and neurodegenerative disorders, with 17 different gene loci identified. In fact, different pathogenic mechanisms have been described in SCAs. There is an emerging evidence of a fundamental cellular signalling pathway disruption in the majority of these mutated genes, which could explain the main characteristics of the disease, such as Purkinje cell death, cerebellar atrophy, and ataxia. Indeed, it has been proposed that characteristic SCA pathogenesis does not begin until Ca²⁺ signalling pathways are disrupted in cerebellar Purkinje cells as a result of either an excitotoxic increase or a compensatory suppression of Ca²⁺ signalling [98, 112].

One of the first reports associating IP3R1 with ataxias showed that (1) most IP3R1-deficient mice generated by gene targeting died in utero and (2) born animals had severe ataxia and tonic or tonic-clonic seizures and died by the weaning period [113]. Since that report, a suite of models has been developed to study the role of IP3R1 in SCAs. The SCAs are linked to reduced IP3R1 levels or to increased sensitivity of the receptor to activation by IP3 [114].

The IP3R1 in Purkinje cells plays a crucial role in controlling the maintenance of synaptic circuits between parallel fibres and Purkinje cells in the mature cerebellum. The lack of IP3R1 in Purkinje cells in adult mice caused a dramatic increase in the spine density and spine length of Purkinje cells, resulting in severe ataxia [115]. SCA type 15 (SCA15) is caused by deletion and missense mutations in the *IP3R1* gene, indicating an important role of *IP3R1* in the development of SCAs [116]. As a consequence of *IP3R1* gene mutation, IP3R levels decrease, resulting in a reduction of IP3R-mediated Ca²⁺ influx [117].

SCA2 is caused by expanded glutamine repeats located in the N-terminal region of the ataxin 2 gene (*ATXN2*). Using an SCA2-58Q transgenic mouse, it was observed that mutant Atx2-58Q associates with the cytosolic C-terminal region of IP3R1 and increases its sensitivity to activation by IP3 [118]. To test the hypothesis that the resulting supranormal Ca²⁺ released by the cerebellar Purkinje cell ER plays a key role in the development of SCA2 pathology, chronic suppression of IP3R-mediated Ca²⁺ signalling was performed in Purkinje cells of a SCA2 transgenic mouse model. The results supported the important role of supranormal Ca²⁺ signalling in SCA2

Fig. 3 Role of IP3R in neurodegenerative diseases.

a General mechanisms of IP3R participation in neuronal cell death. When stimuli disturb the cellular ion homeostasis, accumulation of glutamate in the synaptic cleft can occur, leading to overactivation of N-methyl-d-aspartate receptor (NMDAR), α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid receptor (AMPAR), and mGluR. The mGluR activates the primary effector via G protein and secondary messengers, such as IP3 and diacylglycerol (DAG) from phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate (PIP2). IP3 binds to their receptors located in the ER, resulting in release of Ca²⁺ stores to cytosol. The increase in free intracellular Ca²⁺ concentration ([Ca²⁺]i triggers nitric oxide (NO) production and activation of proteases and generates reactive oxygen species (ROS) by the mitochondria, leading to damage of the cell membrane. Furthermore, mitochondria-associated membrane (MAM) is a complex constituted by IP3R and a mitochondria protein that can induce activation of proapoptotic molecules. Ca²⁺ also can induce synaptic vesicle fusion to the cell membrane, causing additional glutamate release in the next synaptic cleft.

b In Huntington's disease (HD), the mutant huntington (mHtt) protein acquires a ‘toxic gain of function’, including deregulated neuronal Ca²⁺ signalling, once mHtt binds directly and specifically to the C-terminal region of IP3R. In addition,

pathogenesis and suggested that partial inhibition of IP3-mediated Ca²⁺ signalling could provide therapeutic benefit for patients with SCA2 [98].

Notably, not only the supranormal Ca²⁺ release is associated with ataxia phenotype. The reduced Ca²⁺ release via IP3R1 also leads to Purkinje cell dysfunction and an ataxia phenotype, suggesting that there is a narrow range of optimal IP3-

mHtt can also bind to mitochondria, causing dysregulation of Ca²⁺ release. c Spinocerebellar ataxia type 15 (SCA15; left) is caused by deletion and missense mutations of the IP3R gene, and consequently, the Ca²⁺ signalling becomes aberrant, contributing to development of ataxia in Purkinje cells. In SCA 2 (right), the mutant Atx2-58Q associates with the cytosolic C-terminal region of IP3R1 and increases the sensitivity of IP3R1 to activation by IP3. d In familial Alzheimer’s disease (FAD), the mutation in genes coding presenilin 1 (PS1), presenilin 2 (PS2), or amyloid precursor proteins (APPs) leads to production of a toxic form of amyloid β (Aβ42), which affects Ca²⁺ homeostasis at early stages of AD development. Aβ42 induces Ca²⁺ influx across the plasma membrane and from intracellular stores, and FAD mutations in presenilins lead to leaking of ER Ca²⁺ channels and elevated ER Ca²⁺ levels, resulting in enhanced IP3R1-mediated Ca²⁺ release. e In amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), it was observed cytosolic aggregation of the nuclear RNA-binding protein (RBP) 43 kDa transactive response DNA-binding domain protein (TDP-43). IP3R1 is a strong modulator of TDP-43 nucleocytoplasmic shuttling. Decreased activity of IP3R1 may lead to potentiated recruitment of TDP-43 by ubiquitin-positive autophagosomes, constituting a possible treatment of ALS symptoms.

mediated Ca²⁺ signalling that correlates with proper function and long-term survival of Purkinje cells [98].

Alzheimer’s Disease

Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is an age-related neurodegenerative disorder commonly divided into two subtypes: sporadic

Mol Neurobiol

Alzheimer’s disease (SAD) and the genetically encoded familial Alzheimer’s disease (FAD) [119]. About 1 to 2 % of patients with AD present with early-onset FAD caused by mutations in genes coding presenilin 1 (PS1), presenilin 2 (PS2), or amyloid precursor proteins (APPs) [120]. These proteins act in the production of amyloid β (Aβ), and presenilins participate in the cleavage of APP to generate Aβ. Because of the mutation, these proteins produce a toxic, amyloidogenic form of Aβ, which is Aβ42 [119]. Both Aβ and presenilins unbalance Ca²⁺ homeostasis at early stages of AD development, affecting synaptic transmission and function before neuritic plaque development [121].

The abnormal IP3 signalling seems to be involved in the pathogenesis of AD. Deregulation of Ca²⁺ homeostasis can contribute to the toxic action of the AD-associated Aβ. Aβ42 induces Ca²⁺ fluxes across the plasma membrane and release from intracellular stores. The application of soluble oligomeric forms of Aβ42 induces an elevation in intracellular Ca²⁺. IP3 signalling contributes to Aβ42-stimulated Ca²⁺ release, and the Aβ42-stimulated Ca²⁺ signals persist in the absence of extracellular Ca²⁺, showing a significant contribution of Ca²⁺ release from the ER Ca²⁺ store to the generation of these signals [122]. Besides that, the imbalance of Ca²⁺ homeostasis and accumulation of Aβ result in impairment of redox homeostasis, contributing to cerebrovascular damage of AD [123].

In FAD models, it has previously been described that there is a deregulation of Ca²⁺ dynamics. The IP3-mediated Ca²⁺ release was shown to be greatly enhanced in AD fibroblasts [124], and later similar results were observed in AD mouse models and in *Xenopus* oocytes expressing human PS1 and PS2 mutant constructs [125]. It was described that presenilins function as ER Ca²⁺ leak channels and that FAD mutations in presenilins lead to elevated ER Ca²⁺ levels [126–128], which results in enhanced IP3R1-mediated Ca²⁺ release [120]. In animal models of FAD, genetic reduction of IP3R1 levels was able to normalize exaggerated Ca²⁺ signalling in cortical and hippocampal neurons. In 3 × Tg mice, reduction of IP3R1 expression attenuated Aβ accumulation and tau hyperphosphorylation and rescued hippocampal long-term potentiation and memory deficits. All these results reinforce that the exaggerated Ca²⁺ levels are mediated by IP3Rs and that targeting the IP3 signalling pathway could thereby be a therapeutic strategy for patients with AD who have PS mutations [129, 130].

Although involvement of Ca²⁺ was described in FAD models, little is known about the features of Ca²⁺ dynamics in SAD. To investigate the role of Ca²⁺ during the early stages of SAD, SOCE and IP3R-mediated Ca²⁺ release were studied in B lymphocytes from patients with MCI or SAD and compared with those of nondemented subjects (NDS). No differences were found in Ca²⁺ levels in the ER or in the rising and falling SOCE slopes; however, it was shown that SAD and MCI cells were more prone to IP3R activation than were NDS cells and also that they had enhanced magnitude of Ca²⁺ influx during SOCE [119].

### Parkinson’s Disease

Parkinson’s disease (PD) is an age-related neurodegenerative disorder caused by progressive loss of dopamine-secreting neurons within the substantia nigra pars compacta, and it is often associated with diffuse Lewy body deposition. PD is characterized by bradykinesia, tremor, and motor impairment [131, 132]. In postmortem studies using brains of patients with PD, a reduction of about 50 % was observed in the IP3 binding sites localized in the caudate nucleus, putamen, and pallidum, while there were no differences in the frontal cortex [133].

Using the 6-hydroxydopamine rat model of PD, an elevation in IP3 levels was observed in the cerebral cortex, causing extracellular release of Ca²⁺, which in turn enhanced metabolic stress on mitochondria. This stress led to excessive oxidative phosphorylation and increased ROS production. Increased activity of *Bax* gene expression was observed. This activity exerts its effects by compromising membrane integrity and promoting leakage of apoptogenic factors into the cytosol, resulting in demise of the cell [134].

Multiple cellular events, such as oxidative stress, mitochondrial dysfunction, ER stress, and intracellular Ca²⁺ homeostasis impairment, seem to be involved in dopaminergic neuronal death in PD [135–138]. The ER stress is induced by unfolded proteins that activate molecules such as activating transcription factor 6, inositol-requiring enzyme 1 (IRE1), and protein kinase RNA-like endoplasmic reticulum kinase, which are the major ER stress sensors of the unfolded protein response [139]. IRE1α is a key regulator that underlies cell survival and Ca²⁺ homeostasis during ER responses, and little is known about the molecular mechanisms by which excessive ER stress triggers cell death and Ca²⁺ deregulation via the IRE1α signalling pathway. Son and colleagues showed that inactivation of IRE1α by RNA interference increased cytosolic Ca²⁺ concentration in SH-SY5Y cells, leading to cell death [94]. This increase is caused by dissociation of the Ca²⁺-binding IP3 inhibitor calcium- and integrin-binding protein 1 (CIB1) and increased complex formation of CIB1 with the proapoptotic apoptosis signal-regulating kinase 1 (ASK1) that otherwise remains inactivated in the IRE1α-tumour necrosis factor receptor-associated factor 2 (‘TRAF2’)-ASK1 complex.

### Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis

Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a multisystemic and multifactorial syndrome characterized by demise of motor neurons in the spinal cord, brain cortex, and brainstem. Since the first gene responsible for familial forms of ALS, *SOD1*, was discovered, comprehension of the biological, genetic, and clinical processes of ALS has increased significantly [140].

IP3Rs are located not only in the CNS but also in the peripheral nervous system. Myelinated axons have distinctive, specialized regions, and the structure of these axons is composed of Ranvier nodes, paranodes, and juxtaparanodes. The three isoforms of IP3Rs were found in the rat sciatic nerve, interestingly, at the Ranvier nodes. IP3R1 is clustered at the nodes with similar distribution of Nav1.6 sodium channels that correspond to the major voltage-gated channels in the human brain [141]. IP3R3, in turn, is present in the paranodal regions of the nodes, and IP3R2 is concentrated in the vicinity of the nodes. IP3R1 and IP3R2 are expressed to a great degree in the nuclei of Schwann cells, and IP3R3 is expressed at many levels in nonmyelinated Schwann cells. IP3R1 is also expressed in Schmidt–Lanterman incisures [142].

Studies have shown that a mouse defective in the synthesis of some types of myelin lipids has aberrant paranodal junctions [143]. Purkinje cells of mice defective in the synthesis of cerebroside sulfotransferase (CST) present IP3R1 cluster in axons, while the IP3R1 labelling in wild-type (WT) mice was stained throughout Purkinje axons. In quantitative terms, Western blot analysis showed no significance difference between WT and CST animals. These results suggest that there is a reorganization of IP3R1 in clusters and a possibility that the accumulation of IP3R1 is an initial change in the axon with disrupted paranodal axo-glial junction [144].

A suspected indirect cause of motor neuron deterioration in ALS is the cytosolic aggregation of the nuclear RNA-binding protein 43 kDa transactive response DNA-binding domain protein (TDP-43). It was identified around 60 genes whose silencing increased the cytosolic localization of TDP-43, including nuclear pore complex components and regulators of G₂/M cell cycle transition. Furthermore, IP3R1 was identified as a strong modulator of TDP-43 nucleocytoplasmic shuttling. The decreased IP3R1 induced by small interfering RNA or chemical inhibition of IP3R1 activity leads to TDP-43 nuclear export in immortalized cells and primary neurons and strongly potentiates the recruitment of TDP-43 to ubiquitin-positive autophagosomes. In summary, these data show that IP3-gated Ca²⁺ is a key regulator of TDP-43 nucleoplasmic shuttling and proteostasis, suggesting that pharmacological inhibition of IP3R1 can contribute to amelioration of ALS symptoms [145].

### Conclusions

We offer an abridged version of current knowledge of the participation of IP3Rs in neurodegenerative diseases. Since Ca²⁺ plays essential roles in several cellular processes, changes in IP3R subcellular localization unbalance the hierarchically organized, complex dynamics of Ca²⁺ release. IP3R translation in specific subcellular vicinities is subject to miRNA control, and possible interactions of these short-length molecules with IP3R transcripts are reported for the first time in this work. Considering the ubiquitous presence of Ca²⁺ as principal signalling molecule, it becomes clear that IP3Rs are deeply involved in maintenance of cellular homeostasis and cellular fate decisions. Taken together, the data discussed here provide perspectives for the potential treatment of neurodegenerative diseases by therapeutic modulation of IP3 receptor expression and activity.

#### Acknowledgments

HU is grateful for grants from Fundação de Amparo à Pesquisa do Estado de São Paulo (FAPESP, 2012/50880-4) and Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Científico e Tecnológico (CNPq, 486294/2012-9 and 467465/2014-2), Brazil. SR acknowledges support from the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (RU1660/2-1 and IRTG 1740). AHK is grateful for grants from FAPESP (2014/16711-6) and CNPq (308608/2014-3). Alexandre Hiroaki Kihara acknowledges the support from grant numbers FAPESP 2011/50151-0 e FAPESP 2015/50122-0.

### Appendix: Description of Mathematical Model

In this appendix, we will give a brief description of the main equations solved to obtain Fig. 2. The system we solved is shown in Supplementary Fig. 1. It consists of two parts, which are solved in a coupled, so-called hybrid way. The left of Supplementary Fig. 1 shows the system of equation schematically. It consists of ordinary differential equations (ODEs), one for each cluster, which represent the evolution of the calcium concentration at the cluster. This equation takes into account the effect of diffusion of calcium as well as the chemical reactions with calcium-binding proteins. The solution of this equation controls the rate of opening of calcium channels in the cluster. Equations for adjacent clusters are coupled by a modified diffusional terms.

Briefly, we set up a biophysical model for spread of intracellular Ca²⁺ release in an 8 × 8 array of clusters of channels. The IP₃ concentration is here assumed to be homogenous in the dendrite. The model builds on our earlier modelling work [74] based on an FEM solver for partial differential equations. In an effort to reduce the model’s complexity, we here aim to replace the detailed reaction-diffusion model of Ca²⁺ with sets of coupled ordinary differential equations, where each cluster is represented by one ODE. FEM simulations show that the spatio-temporal concentration field of Ca²⁺ ‘lives’ on three different scales in terms of its concentration and spatial extension. First, if a channel is open, its feedback by binding Ca²⁺ released by the channel outweighs any other contribution. The local nano-domain can take on concentrations of 100 μM and more. Second, if a channel is closed, it experiences highly variable dynamics because of openings and closings of channels in the same cluster. These occur at microdomain concentrations of about 1–10 μM. Third, if a cluster is inactive (i.e. no open channel) for some time, there is diffusion of Ca²⁺ from other active cluster leading to a bulk concentration which

is much smaller than the former contributions but may become sufficient to trigger the inactive cluster.

The following model serves to reproduce those multiple-scale features by

\[
\frac{\partial c_{b,i}}{\partial t} = \gamma_b n_{o,i} - P_p \frac{c_{b,i}^2}{c_{b,i}^2 + K_p^1} + P_l
\]

phenomenological equations. The bulk concentration \( c_{b,i} \) at cluster \( i \) evolves by where the first term models the accumulating concentration offset, which is proportional to the open channel number of cluster \( i \) at time \( t \), denoted as \( n_{o,i} \). The second term models SERCA pumps, which remove Ca²⁺ from the bulk and are given by a Hill-type function. Further, we incorporate the intra-cluster coupling dynamics and coupling of clusters by the following equation:

\[
c_i(t) = c_{b,i}(t) + n_{0,i} \gamma_c + \alpha \sum_{j \in C_i} \max \left( 0, c_{b,j} - c_{b,i} \right)
\]

Here max(\( x, y \)) is the maximum value of \( x \) and \( y \). This concentration \( c_i(t) \) then provides the concentration at a closed channel relevant for the Ca²⁺-binding events of that channel. Intra-cluster feedback is proportional to the number of open channels (\( \gamma_c \)). The coefficient \( \alpha \) controls coupling strength between clusters and \( C_i \) denotes the set of direct neighbours of cluster \( i \) on a one-dimensional lattice of clusters. Lastly, if a channel is open, we set its concentration to a fixed large value (>100 μM).

For the second part of the model, we have to define discrete and stochastic gating transitions of each channel in each cluster. Each channels gating transitions, including its opening and closing, are modelled by a Markov chain. Conversely, the opening of a channel, regulated by gating, controls the calcium concentration around the channel and the cluster. The transition of the Markov chain represent processes of the DeYoung–Keizer-type as described in the main text. Further details on the model can be found in [Rückl and Rüdiger, to be published].

The right panel in Supplementary Fig. 1 illustrates the numerical methods to solve the hybrid equations. The Markov chains are represented by Master equations, which are solved by numerically computing stochastic representations. We employ a method based on the Gillespie method, which was modified here to take into account the concentrations and propensities changing in time [81]. The coupled ODEs are solved time discretized by a standard time-stepping scheme.

### References

1. Berridge MJ (1993) Inositol trisphosphate and calcium signalling. Nature 361(6410):315–325. doi:[10.1038/361315a0](https://doi.org/10.1038/361315a0)
2. Rooney TA, Thomas AP (1993) Intracellular calcium waves generated by ins(1,4,5)P3-dependent mechanisms. Cell Calcium 14(10):674–690
3. Berridge MJ, Bootman MD, Roderick HL (2003) Calcium signalling: dynamics, homeostasis and remodelling. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 4(7):517–529. doi:[10.1038/nrm1155](https://doi.org/10.1038/nrm1155)
4. Frazier HN, Maimaiti S, Anderson KL, Brewer LD, Gant JC, Porter NM, Thibault O (2016) Calcium’s role as nuanced modulator of cellular physiology in the brain. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. doi:[10.1016/j.bbrc.2016.08.105](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbrc.2016.08.105)
5. Zhou Q, Yen A, Rymarczyk G, Asai H, Trengrove C, Aziz N, Kirber MT, Mostoslavsky G et al (2016) Impairment of PARK14-dependent Ca(2+) signalling is a novel determinant of Parkinson’s disease. Nat Commun 7:10332. doi:[10.1038/ncomms10332](https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms10332)
6. Grauel MK, Maglione M, Reddy-Alla S, Willmes CG, Brockmann MM, Trimbuch T, Rosenmund T, Pangalos M et al (2016) RIM-binding protein 2 regulates release probability by fine-tuning calcium channel localization at murine hippocampal synapses. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. doi:[10.1073/pnas.1605256113](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1605256113)
7. Shah SZ, Hussain T, Zhao D, Yang L (2016) A central role for calcineurin in protein misfolding neurodegenerative diseases. Cell Mol Life Sci. doi:[10.1007/s00018-016-2379-7](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00018-016-2379-7)
8. Vermassen E, Parrys JB, Mauger JP (2004) Subcellular distribution of the inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptors: functional relevance and molecular determinants. Biol Cell 96(1):3–17. doi:[10.1016/j.biolcel.2003.11.004](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biolcel.2003.11.004)
9. Baumann O, Walz B (2001) Endoplasmic reticulum of animal cells and its organization into structural and functional domains. Int Rev Cytol 205:149–214
10. Ivanova H, Vervliet T, Missiaen L, Parrys JB, De Smedt H, Bultynck G (2014) Inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor-isoform diversity in cell death and survival. Biochim Biophys Acta 1843(10):2164–2183. doi:[10.1016/j.bbamcr.2014.03.007](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbamcr.2014.03.007)
11. Bezprozvanny I, Watras J, Ehrlich BE (1991) Bell-shaped calcium-response curves of ins(1,4,5)P3- and calcium-gated channels from endoplasmic reticulum of cerebellum. Nature 351(6329):751–754. doi:[10.1038/351751a0](https://doi.org/10.1038/351751a0)
12. Echevarria W, Leite MF, Guerra MT, Zipfel WR, Nathanson MH (2003) Regulation of calcium signals in the nucleus by a nucleoplasmic reticulum. Nat Cell Biol 5(5):440–446. doi:[10.1038/ncb980](https://doi.org/10.1038/ncb980)
13. Humbert JP, Matter N, Artault JC, Koppler P, Malviya AN (1996) Inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor is located to the inner nuclear membrane vindicating regulation of nuclear calcium signaling by inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate. Discrete distribution of inositol phosphate receptors to inner and outer nuclear membranes. J Biol Chem 271(1):478–485
14. Lipp P, Thomas D, Berridge MJ, Bootman MD (1997) Nuclear calcium signalling by individual cytoplasmic calcium puffs. EMBO J 16(23):7166–7173. doi:[10.1093/emboj/16.23.7166](https://doi.org/10.1093/emboj/16.23.7166)
15. Tovey SC, de Smet P, Lipp P, Thomas D, Young KW, Missiaen L, De Smedt H, Parrys JB et al (2001) Calcium puffs are generic InsP(3)-activated elementary calcium signals and are downregulated by prolonged hormonal stimulation to inhibit cellular calcium responses. J Cell Sci 114(Pt 22):3979–3989
16. Taylor CW, Dellis O (2006) Plasma membrane IP3 receptors. Biochem Soc Trans 34(Pt 5):910–912. doi:[10.1042/BST0340910](https://doi.org/10.1042/BST0340910)
17. Fadool DA, Ache BW (1992) Plasma membrane inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate-activated channels mediate signal transduction in lobster olfactory receptor neurons. Neuron 9(5):907–918
18. Munger SD, Gleeson RA, Aldrich HC, Rust NC, Ache BW, Greenberg RM (2000) Characterization of a phosphoinositide-mediated odor transduction pathway reveals plasma membrane localization of an inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor in lobster olfactory receptor neurons. J Biol Chem 275(27):20450–20457. doi:[10.1074/jbc.M001989200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M001989200)

Springer

19. Wuytack F, Raeymaekers L, Missiaen L (2003) PMR1/SPCA Ca2+ pumps and the role of the Golgi apparatus as a Ca2+ store. Pflugers Arch 446(2): 148–153. doi:10.1007/s00424-003-1011-5
20. Scherer PE, Lederkremer GZ, Williams S, Fogliano M, Baldini G, Lodish HF (1996) Cab45, a novel (Ca2+)-binding protein localized to the Golgi lumen. J Cell Biol 133(2): 257–268
21. Lin P, Yao Y, Hofmeister R, Tsien RY, Farquhar MG (1999) Overexpression of CALNUC (nucleobindin) increases agonist and thapsigargin releasable Ca2+ storage in the Golgi. J Cell Biol 145(2): 279–289
22. Pinton P, Pozzan T, Rizzuto R (1998) The Golgi apparatus is an inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate-sensitive Ca2+ store, with functional properties distinct from those of the endoplasmic reticulum. EMBO J 17(18): 5298–5308. doi:10.1093/emboj/17.18.5298
23. Surroca A, Wolff D (2000) Inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate but not ryanodine-receptor agonists induces calcium release from rat liver Golgi apparatus membrane vesicles. J Membr Biol 177(3): 243–249. doi:10.1007/s002320010008
24. Area-Gomez E (2014) Assessing the function of mitochondria-associated ER membranes. Methods Enzymol 547: 181–197. doi:10.1016/B978-0-12-801415-8.00011-4
25. Vance JE (1990) Phospholipid synthesis in a membrane fraction associated with mitochondria. J Biol Chem 265(13): 7248–7256
26. Hayashi T, Rizzuto R, Hajnoczky G, Su TP (2009) MAM: more than just a housekeeper. Trends Cell Biol 19(2): 81–88. doi:10.1016/j.tcb.2008.12.002
27. Rizzuto R, Duchen MR, Pozzan T (2004) Flirting in little space: the ER/mitochondria Ca2+ liaison. Sci STKE 2004 (215): rel1. doi:10.1126/stke.2152004rel1
28. Mendes CC, Gomes DA, Thompson M, Souto NC, Goes TS, Goes AM, Rodrigues MA, Gomez MV et al (2005) The type III inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor preferentially transmits apoptotic Ca2+ signals into mitochondria. J Biol Chem 280(49): 40892–40900. doi:10.1074/jbc.M506623200
29. Satoh T, Ross CA, Villa A, Supattapone S, Pozzan T, Snyder SH, Meldolesi J (1990) The inositol 1,4,5,-trisphosphate receptor in cerebellar Purkinje cells: quantitative immunogold labeling reveals concentration in an ER subcompartment. J Cell Biol 111(2): 615–624
30. Fitzpatrick JS, Hagenston AM, Hertle DN, Gipson KE, Bertetto-D’Angelo L, Yeckel MF (2009) Inositol-1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor-mediated Ca2+ waves in pyramidal neuron dendrites propagate through hot spots and cold spots. J Physiol 587(Pt 7): 1439–1459. doi:10.1113/jphysiol.2009.168930
31. Miyazaki K, Ross WN (2013) Ca2+ sparks and puffs are generated and interact in rat hippocampal CA1 pyramidal neuron dendrites. J Neurosci 33(45): 17777–17788. doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2735-13.2013
32. Segal M, Korkotian E (2014) Endoplasmic reticulum calcium stores in dendritic spines. Front Neuroanat 8: 64. doi:10.3389/fnana.2014.00064
33. Sheng M, Kim E (2000) The Shank family of scaffold proteins. J Cell Sci 113(Pt 11): 1851–1856
34. Sala C, Piech V, Wilson NR, Passafaro M, Liu G, Sheng M (2001) Regulation of dendritic spine morphology and synaptic function by Shank and Homer. Neuron 31(1): 115–130. doi:10.1016/S0896-6273(01)00339-7
35. Konieczny V, Keebler MV, Taylor CW (2012) Spatial organization of intracellular Ca2+ signals. Semin Cell Dev Biol 23(2): 172–180. doi:10.1016/j.semcdb.2011.09.006
36. Sala C, Roussignol G, Meldolesi J, Fagni L (2005) Key role of the postsynaptic density scaffold proteins Shank and Homer in the functional architecture of Ca2+ homeostasis at dendritic spines in hippocampal neurons. J Neurosci 25(18): 4587–4592. doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4822-04.2005

37. Ondrias K, Lencesova L, Sirova M, Labudova M, Pastorekova S, Kopacek J, Krizanova O (2011) Apoptosis induced clustering of IP(3)R1 in nuclei of non-differentiated PC12 cells. J Cell Physiol 226(12): 3147–3155. doi:10.1002/jcp.22665
38. Pantazaka E, Taylor CW (2011) Differential distribution, clustering, and lateral diffusion of subtypes of the inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor. J Biol Chem 286(26): 23378–23387. doi:10.1074/jbc.M111.236372
39. Tovey SC, Dedos SG, Rahman T, Taylor EJ, Pantazaka E, Taylor CW (2010) Regulation of inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptors by cAMP independent of cAMP-dependent protein kinase. J Biol Chem 285(17): 12979–12989. doi:10.1074/jbc.M109.096016
40. Geyer M, Huang F, Sun Y, Vogel SM, Malik AB, Taylor CW, Komarova YA (2015) Microtubule-associated protein EB3 regulates IP3 receptor clustering and Ca(2+) signaling in endothelial cells. Cell Rep 12(1): 79–89. doi:10.1016/j.celrep.2015.06.001
41. Huang V, Li LC (2012) miRNA goes nuclear. RNA Biol 9(3): 269–273. doi:10.4161/rna.19354
42. Kozomara A, Griffiths-Jones S (2014) miRBase: annotating high confidence microRNAs using deep sequencing data. Nucleic Acids Res 42(Database issue): D68–D73. doi:10.1093/nar/gkt1181
43. Landgraf P, Rusu M, Sheridan R, Sewer A, Iovino N, Aravin A, Pfeffer S, Rice A et al (2007) A mammalian microRNA expression atlas based on small RNA library sequencing. Cell 129(7): 1401–1414. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2007.04.040
44. Care A, Catalucci D, Felicetti F, Bonci D, Addario A, Gallo P, Bang ML, Segnalini P et al (2007) MicroRNA-133 controls cardiac hypertrophy. Nat Med 13(5): 613–618. doi:10.1038/nm1582
45. Drawnel FM, Wachten D, Molkentin JD, Maillet M, Aronsen JM, Swift F, Sjaastad I, Liu N et al (2012) Mutual antagonism between IP(3)RII and miRNA-133a regulates calcium signals and cardiac hypertrophy. J Cell Biol 199(5): 783–798. doi:10.1083/jcb.201111095
46. Ananthanarayanan M, Banales JM, Guerra MT, Spirli C, Munoz-Garrido P, Mitchell-Richards K, Tafur D, Saez E et al (2015) Post-translational regulation of the type III inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor by miRNA-506. J Biol Chem 290(1): 184–196. doi:10.1074/jbc.M114.587030
47. Szabo G, Bala S (2013) MicroRNAs in liver disease. Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol 10(9): 542–552. doi:10.1038/nrgastro.2013.87
48. Marin JJ, Bujanda L, Banales JM (2014) MicroRNAs and cholestatic liver diseases. Curr Opin Gastroenterol 30(3): 303–309. doi:10.1097/MOG.0000000000000051
49. Saugstad JA (2010) MicroRNAs as effectors of brain function with roles in ischemia and injury, neuroprotection, and neurodegeneration. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 30(9): 1564–1576. doi:10.1038/jcbfm.2010.101
50. Griffiths-Jones S, Grocock RJ, van Dongen S, Bateman A, Enright AJ (2006) miRBase: microRNA sequences, targets and gene nomenclature. Nucleic Acids Res 34(Database issue): D140–D144. doi:10.1093/nar/gkj112
51. Agarwal V, Bell GW, Nam JW, Bartel DP (2015) Predicting effective microRNA target sites in mammalian mRNAs. eLife 4. doi:10.7554/eLife.05005
52. Kruger J, Rehmsmeier M (2006) RNAhybrid: microRNA target prediction easy, fast and flexible. Nucleic Acids Res 34(Web Server issue): W451–454. doi:10.1093/nar/gkl243
53. Kertesz M, Iovino N, Unnerstall U, Gaul U, Segal E (2007) The role of site accessibility in microRNA target recognition. Nat Genet 39(10): 1278–1284. doi:10.1038/ng2135
54. Krek A, Grun D, Poy MN, Wolf R, Rosenberg L, Epstein EJ, MacMenamin P, da Piedade I et al (2005) Combinatorial microRNA target predictions. Nat Genet 37(5): 495–500. doi:10.1038/ng1536

55. John B, Enright AJ, Aravin A, Tuschl T, Sander C, Marks DS (2004) Human MicroRNA targets. PLoS Biol 2(11): e363. doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.0020363
56. Dweep H, Sticht C, Pandey P, Gretz N (2011) miRWalk—database: prediction of possible miRNA binding sites by “walking” the genes of three genomes. J Biomed Inform 44(5): 839–847. doi:10.1016/j.jbi.2011.05.002
57. Lopez JP, Diallo A, Cruceanu C, Fiori LM, Laboissiere S, Guillet I, Fontaine J, Ragoussis J et al (2015) Biomarker discovery: quantification of microRNAs and other small non-coding RNAs using next generation sequencing. BMC Med Genet 8: 35. doi:10.1186/s12920-015-0109-x
58. Paschon V, Takada SH, Ikebara JM, Sousa E, Raeisossadati R, Ulrich H, Kihara AH (2016) Interplay between exosomes, microRNAs and toll-like receptors in brain disorders. Mol Neurobiol 53(3): 2016–2028. doi:10.1007/s12035-015-9142-1
59. Grimson A, Farh KK, Johnston WK, Garrett-Engele P, Lim LP, Bartel DP (2007) MicroRNA targeting specificity in mammals: determinants beyond seed pairing. Mol Cell 27(1): 91–105. doi:10.1016/j.molcel.2007.06.017
60. Higa GS, de Sousa E, Walter LT, Kinjo ER, Resende RR, Kihara AH (2014) MicroRNAs in neuronal communication. Mol Neurobiol 49(3): 1309–1326. doi:10.1007/s12035-013-8603-7
61. Kinjo ER, Higa GS, de Sousa E, Casado OA, Damico MV, Britto LR, Kihara AH (2013) A possible new mechanism for the control of miRNA expression in neurons. Exp Neurol 248: 546–558. doi:10.1016/j.expneurol.2013.07.022
62. de Sousa E, Walter LT, Higa GS, Casado OA, Kihara AH (2013) Developmental and functional expression of miRNA-stability related genes in the nervous system. PLoS One 8(5): e56908. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0056908
63. Kinjo ER, Higa GS, Santos BA, de Sousa E, Damico MV, Walter LT, Morya E, Valle AC et al (2016) Pilocarpine-induced seizures trigger differential regulation of microRNA-stability related genes in rat hippocampal neurons. Scientific reports 6: 20969. doi:10.1038/srep20969
64. Colosetti P, Tunwell RE, Cruttwell C, Arsanto JP, Mauger JP, Cassio D (2003) The type 3 inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor is concentrated at the tight junction level in polarized MDCK cells. J Cell Sci 116(Pt 13): 2791–2803. doi:10.1242/jcs.00482
65. Stricker SA, Smythe TL (2003) Endoplasmic reticulum reorganizations and Ca2+ signaling in maturing and fertilized oocytes of marine protostome worms: the roles of MAPKs and MPF. Development 130(13): 2867–2879
66. Swillens S, Dupont G, Combettes L, Champeil P (1999) From calcium blips to calcium puffs: theoretical analysis of the requirements for interchannel communication. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 96(24): 13750–13755
67. Yao Y, Choi J, Parker I (1995) Quantal puffs of intracellular Ca2+ evoked by inositol trisphosphate in Xenopus oocytes. J Physiol 482(Pt 3): 533–553
68. Sun XP, Callamaras N, Merchant JS, Parker I (1998) A continuum of InsP3-mediated elementary Ca2+ signalling events in Xenopus oocytes. J Physiol 509(Pt 1): 67–80
69. Rudiger S (2014) Excitability in a stochastic differential equation model for calcium puffs. Phys Rev E Stat Nonlinear Soft Matter Phys 89(6): 062717. doi:10.1103/PhysRevE.89.062717
70. Shuai JW, Jung P (2002) Stochastic properties of Ca(2+) release of inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor clusters. Biophys J 83(1): 87–97. doi:10.1016/S0006-3495(02)75151-5
71. Coombes S, Timofeeva Y (2003) Sparks and waves in a stochastic fire-diffuse-fire model of Ca2+ release. Phys Rev E Stat Nonlinear Soft Matter Phys 68(2 Pt 1): 021915. doi:10.1103/PhysRevE.68.021915
72. Skupin A, Kettenmann H, Falcke M (2010) Calcium signals driven by single channel noise. PLoS Comput Biol 6(8). doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1000870
73. DeRemigio H, Smith GD (2005) The dynamics of stochastic attrition viewed as an absorption time on a terminating Markov chain. Cell Calcium 38(2): 73–86. doi:10.1016/j.ceca.2005.06.007
74. Ruckl M, Parker I, Merchant JS, Nagaiah C, Johenning FW, Rudiger S (2015) Modulation of elementary calcium release mediates a transition from puffs to waves in an IP3R cluster model. PLoS Comput Biol 11(1): e1003965. doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1003965
75. Bezprozvanny I (2005) The inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptors. Cell Calcium 38(3–4): 261–272. doi:10.1016/j.ceca.2005.06.030
76. Foskett JK, White C, Cheung KH, Mak DO (2007) Inositol trisphosphate receptor Ca2+ release channels. Physiol Rev 87(2): 593–658. doi:10.1152/physrev.00035.2006
77. Parker I, Ivorra I (1990) Inhibition by Ca2+ of inositol trisphosphate-mediated Ca2+ liberation: a possible mechanism for oscillatory release of Ca2+. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 87(1): 260–264
78. De Young GW, Keizer J (1992) A single-pool inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate-receptor-based model for agonist-stimulated oscillations in Ca2+ concentration. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 89(20): 9895–9899
79. Shuai J, Rose HJ, Parker I (2006) The number and spatial distribution of IP3 receptors underlying calcium puffs in Xenopus oocytes. Biophys J 91(11): 4033–4044. doi:10.1529/biophysj.106.088880
80. Smith IF, Parker I (2009) Imaging the quantal substructure of single IP3R channel activity during Ca2+ puffs in intact mammalian cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 106(15): 6404–6409. doi:10.1073/pnas.0810799106
81. Rudiger S, Shuai JW, Huisenga W, Nagaiah C, Warnecke G, Parker I, Falcke M (2007) Hybrid stochastic and deterministic simulations of calcium blips. Biophys J 93(6): 1847–1857. doi:10.1529/biophysj.106.099879
82. Rudiger S, Nagaiah C, Warnecke G, Shuai JW (2010) Calcium domains around single and clustered IP3 receptors and their modulation by buffers. Biophys J 99(1): 3–12. doi:10.1016/j.bpj.2010.02.059
83. Rudiger S, Shuai JW, Sokolov IM (2010) Law of mass action, detailed balance, and the modeling of calcium puffs. Phys Rev Lett 105(4): 048103
84. Woods NM, Cuthbertson KS, Cobbold PH (1986) Repetitive transient rises in cytoplasmic free calcium in hormone-stimulated hepatocytes. Nature 319(6054): 600–602. doi:10.1038/319600a0
85. Berridge MJ (1990) Temporal aspects of calcium signalling. Adv Second Messenger Phosphoprotein Res 24: 108–114
86. Thomas RC (1989) Proton channels in snail neurones. Does calcium entry mimic the effects of proton influx? Ann NY Acad Sci 574: 287–293
87. Lechleiter J, Girard S, Peralta E, Clapham D (1991) Spiral calcium wave propagation and annihilation in *Xenopus laevis* oocytes. Science 252(5002): 123–126
88. Camacho P, Lechleiter JD (1993) Increased frequency of calcium waves in *Xenopus laevis* oocytes that express a calcium-ATPase. Science 260(5105): 226–229
89. Merchant JS, Parker I (2001) Role of elementary Ca(2+) puffs in generating repetitive Ca(2+) oscillations. EMBO J 20(1–2): 65–76. doi:10.1093/emboj/20.1.65
90. Parker I, Choi J, Yao Y (1996) Elementary events of InsP3-induced Ca2+ liberation in Xenopus oocytes: hot spots, puffs and blips. Cell Calcium 20(2): 105–121
91. Bootman MD, Berridge MJ, Lipp P (1997) Cooking with calcium: the recipes for composing global signals from elementary events. Cell 91(3): 367–373

92. Tostevin F, de Ronde W, ten Wolde PR (2012) Reliability of frequency and amplitude decoding in gene regulation. Phys Rev Lett 108(10):108104
93. Mugler A, Tostevin F, ten Wolde PR (2013) Spatial partitioning improves the reliability of biochemical signaling. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 110(15):5927–5932. doi:[10.1073/pnas.1218301110](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1218301110)
94. Son SM, Byun J, Roh SE, Kim SJ, Mook-Jung I (2014) Reduced IRE1alpha mediates apoptotic cell death by disrupting calcium homeostasis via the InsP3 receptor. Cell Death Dis 5:e1188. doi:[10.1038/cddis.2014.129](https://doi.org/10.1038/cddis.2014.129)
95. Zhang HY, Wang ZG, Lu XH, Kong XX, Wu FZ, Lin L, Tan X, Ye LB et al (2015) Endoplasmic reticulum stress: relevance and therapeutics in central nervous system diseases. Mol Neurobiol 51(3):1343–1352. doi:[10.1007/s12035-014-8813-7](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12035-014-8813-7)
96. Coppola-Segovia V, Cavarsan C, Maia FG, Ferraz AC, Nakao LS, Lima MM, Zanata SM (2016) ER stress induced by Tunicamycin triggers alpha-synuclein Oligomerization dopaminergic neurons death and Locomotor impairment: a new model of Parkinson’s disease. Mol Neurobiol. doi:[10.1007/s12035-016-0114-x](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12035-016-0114-x)
97. Li JQ, Yu JT, Jiang T, Tan L (2015) Endoplasmic reticulum dysfunction in Alzheimer’s disease. Mol Neurobiol 51(1):383–395. doi:[10.1007/s12035-014-8695-8](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12035-014-8695-8)
98. Kasumu A, Bezprozvanny I (2012) Deranged calcium signaling in Purkinje cells and pathogenesis in spinocerebellar ataxia 2 (SCA2) and other ataxias. Cerebellum 11(3):630–639. doi:[10.1007/s12311-010-0182-9](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12311-010-0182-9)
99. Vonsattel JP, Myers RH, Stevens TJ, Ferrante RJ, Bird ED, Richardson EP Jr (1985) Neuropathological classification of Huntington’s disease. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 44(6):559–577
100. Tang TS, Slow E, Lupu V, Stavrovskaya IG, Sugimori M, Llinas R, Kristal BS, Hayden MR et al (2005) Disturbed Ca2+ signaling and apoptosis of medium spiny neurons in Huntington’s disease. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 102(7):2602–2607. doi:[10.1073/pnas.0409402102](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0409402102)
101. Tobin AJ, Signer ER (2000) Huntington’s disease: the challenge for cell biologists. Trends Cell Biol 10(12):531–536
102. Tang TS, Tu H, Chan EY, Maximov A, Wang Z, Wellington CL, Hayden MR, Bezprozvanny I (2003) Huntingtin and huntingtin-associated protein 1 influence neuronal calcium signaling mediated by inositol-(1,4,5) triphosphate receptor type 1. Neuron 39(2):227–239
103. Kaltenbach LS, Romero E, Becklin RR, Chettier R, Bell R, Phansalkar A, Strand A, Torcassi C et al (2007) Huntingtin interacting proteins are genetic modifiers of neurodegeneration. PLoS Genet 3(5):e82. doi:[10.1371/journal.pgen.0030082](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgen.0030082)
104. Bezprozvanny I (2007) Inositol 1,4,5-tripshosphate receptor, calcium signalling and Huntington’s disease. Subcell Biochem 45:323–335
105. Zhang H, Li Q, Graham RK, Slow E, Hayden MR, Bezprozvanny I (2008) Full length mutant huntingtin is required for altered Ca2+ signaling and apoptosis of striatal neurons in the YAC mouse model of Huntington’s disease. Neurobiol Dis 31(1):80–88. doi:[10.1016/j.nbd.2008.03.010](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nbd.2008.03.010)
106. Tang TS, Guo C, Wang H, Chen X, Bezprozvanny I (2009) Neuroprotective effects of inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor C-terminal fragment in a Huntington’s disease mouse model. J Neurosci 29(5):1257–1266. doi:[10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4411-08.2009](https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4411-08.2009)
107. Wu J, Shih HP, Vigont V, Hrdlicka L, Diggins L, Singh C, Mahoney M, Chesworth R et al (2011) Neuronal store-operated calcium entry pathway as a novel therapeutic target for Huntington’s disease treatment. Chem Biol 18(6):777–793. doi:[10.1016/j.chembiol.2011.04.012](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chembiol.2011.04.012)
108. Higo T, Hamada K, Hisatsune C, Nukina N, Hashikawa T, Hattori M, Nakamura T, Mikoshiba K (2010) Mechanism of ER stress-
induced brain damage by IP(3) receptor. Neuron 68(5):865–878. doi:[10.1016/j.neuron.2010.11.010](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2010.11.010)
109. Hamada K, Terauchi A, Nakamura K, Higo T, Nukina N, Matsumoto N, Hisatsune C, Nakamura T et al (2014) Aberrant calcium signaling by transglutaminase-mediated posttranslational modification of inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptors. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 111(38):E3966–E3975. doi:[10.1073/pnas.1409730111](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1409730111)
110. Subramony SH, Durr A (2012) Inherited ataxias. Handb Clin Neurol 103:vii. doi:[10.1016/B978-0-444-51892-7.00051-6](https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-444-51892-7.00051-6)
111. Brown SA, Loew LM (2012) Computational analysis of calcium signaling and membrane electrophysiology in cerebellar Purkinje neurons associated with ataxia. BMC Syst Biol 6:70. doi:[10.1186/1752-0509-6-70](https://doi.org/10.1186/1752-0509-6-70)
112. Bezprozvanny I (2012) Presenilins: a novel link between intracellular calcium signaling and lysosomal function? J Cell Biol 198(1):7–10. doi:[10.1083/jcb.201206003](https://doi.org/10.1083/jcb.201206003)
113. Matsumoto M, Nakagawa T, Inoue T, Nagata E, Tanaka K, Takano H, Minowa O, Kuno J et al (1996) Ataxia and epileptic seizures in mice lacking type 1 inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor. Nature 379(6561):168–171. doi:[10.1038/379168a0](https://doi.org/10.1038/379168a0)
114. Brown SA, Loew LM (2014) Integration of modeling with experimental and clinical findings synthesizes and refines the central role of inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor 1 in spinocerebellar ataxia. Front Neurosci 8:453. doi:[10.3389/fnins.2014.00453](https://doi.org/10.3389/fnins.2014.00453)
115. Sugawara Y, Echigo R, Kashima K, Minami H, Watanabe M, Nishikawa Y, Muranishi M, Yoneda M et al (2013) Intracellular calcium level is an important factor influencing ion channel modulations by PLC-coupled metabotropic receptors in hippocampal neurons. Brain Res 1512:9–21. doi:[10.1016/j.brainres.2013.03.040](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.brainres.2013.03.040)
116. Hara K, Shiga A, Nozaki H, Mitsui J, Takahashi Y, Ishiguro H, Yomono H, Kurisaki H et al (2008) Total deletion and a missense mutation of ITPR1 in Japanese SCA15 families. Neurology 71(8):547–551. doi:[10.1212/01.wnl.0000311277.71046.a0](https://doi.org/10.1212/01.wnl.0000311277.71046.a0)
117. Tada M, Nishizawa M, Onodera O (2016) Roles of inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptors in spinocerebellar ataxias. Neurochem Int 94:1–8. doi:[10.1016/j.neuint.2016.01.007](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuint.2016.01.007)
118. Liu J, Tang TS, Tu H, Nelson O, Herndon E, Huynh DP, Pulst SM, Bezprozvanny I (2009) Deranged calcium signaling and neurodegeneration in spinocerebellar ataxia type 2. J Neurosci 29(29):9148–9162. doi:[10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0660-09.2009](https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0660-09.2009)
119. Jaworska A, Dzbek J, Styczynska M, Kuznicki J (2013) Analysis of calcium homeostasis in fresh lymphocytes from patients with sporadic Alzheimer’s disease or mild cognitive impairment. Biochim Biophys Acta 1833(7):1692–1699. doi:[10.1016/j.bbamcr.2013.01.012](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbamcr.2013.01.012)
120. Fedorenko OA, Popugaeva E, Enomoto M, Stathopulos PB, Ikura M, Bezprozvanny I (2014) Intracellular calcium channels: inositol-1,4,5-trisphosphate receptors. Eur J Pharmacol 739:39–48. doi:[10.1016/j.ejphar.2013.10.074](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejphar.2013.10.074)
121. Woods NK, Padmanabhan J (2012) Neuronal calcium signaling and Alzheimer’s disease. Adv Exp Med Biol 740:1193–1217. doi:[10.1007/978-94-007-2888-2_54](https://doi.org/10.1007/978-94-007-2888-2_54)
122. Jensen LE, Bultynck G, Luyten T, Amijee H, Bootman MD, Roderick HL (2013) Alzheimer’s disease-associated peptide Abeta42 mobilizes ER Ca(2+) via InsP3R-dependent and -independent mechanisms. Front Mol Neurosci 6:36. doi:[10.3389/fnmol.2013.00036](https://doi.org/10.3389/fnmol.2013.00036)
123. Fonseca AC, Moreira PI, Oliveira CR, Cardoso SM, Pinton P, Pereira CF (2015) Amyloid-beta disrupts calcium and redox homeostasis in brain endothelial cells. Mol Neurobiol 51(2):610–622. doi:[10.1007/s12035-014-8740-7](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12035-014-8740-7)
124. Ito E, Oka K, Etcheberrigaray R, Nelson TJ, McPhie DL, Tofel-Grehl B, Gibson GE, Alkon DL (1994) Internal Ca2+

Mol Neurobiol

125. mobilization is altered in fibroblasts from patients with Alzheimer disease. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 91(2):534–538
126. Bezprozvanny I, Mattson MP (2008) Neuronal calcium mishandling and the pathogenesis of Alzheimer’s disease. Trends Neurosci 31(9):454–463. doi:10.1016/j.tins.2008.06.005
127. Nelson O, Tu H, Lei T, Bentahir M, de Strooper B, Bezprozvanny I (2007) Familial Alzheimer disease-linked mutations specifically disrupt Ca2+ leak function of presenilin 1. J Clin Invest 117(5): 1230–1239. doi:10.1172/JCI30447
128. Tu H, Nelson O, Bezprozvanny A, Wang Z, Lee SF, Hao YH, Serneels L, De Strooper B et al (2006) Presenilins form ER Ca2+ leak channels, a function disrupted by familial Alzheimer’s disease-linked mutations. Cell 126(5):981–993. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2006.06.059
129. Zhang C, Browne A, Kim DY, Tanzi RE (2010) Familial Alzheimer’s disease mutations in presenilin 1 do not alter levels of the secreted amyloid-beta protein precursor generated by beta-secretase cleavage. Curr Alzheimer Res 7(1):21–26
130. Cheung KH, Mei L, Mak DO, Hayashi I, Iwatubo T, Kang DE, Foskett JK (2010) Gain-of-function enhancement of IP3 receptor modal gating by familial Alzheimer’s disease-linked presenilin mutants in human cells and mouse neurons. Sci Signal 3(114): ra22. doi:10.1126/scisignal.2000818
131. Shilling D, Muller M, Takano H, Mak DO, Abel T, Coulter DA, Foskett JK (2014) Suppression of InsP3 receptor-mediated Ca2+ signaling alleviates mutant presenilin-linked familial Alzheimer’s disease pathogenesis. J Neurosci 34(20):6910–6923. doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5441-13.2014
132. Groger A, Kolb R, Schafer R, Klose U (2014) Dopamine reduction in the substantia nigra of Parkinson’s disease patients confirmed by in vivo magnetic resonance spectroscopic imaging. PLoS One 9(1):e84081. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0084081
133. Perrett RM, Alexopoulou Z, Tofaris GK (2015) The endosomal pathway in Parkinson’s disease. Mol Cell Neurosci. doi:10.1016/j.mcn.2015.02.009
134. Kitamura N, Hashimoto T, Nishino N, Tanaka C (1989) Inositol 1, 4,5-trisphosphate binding sites in the brain: regional distribution, characterization, and alterations in brains of patients with Parkinson’s disease. J Mol Neurosci 1(3):181–187
135. Nandhu MS, Paul J, Kuruvilla KP, Malat A, Romeo C, Paulose CS (2011) Enhanced glutamate, IP3 and cAMP activity in the cerebral cortex of unilateral 6-hydroxydopamine induced Parkinson’s rats: effect of 5-HT, GABA and bone marrow cell supplementation. J Biomed Sci 18:5. doi:10.1186/1423-0127-18-5
136. Cali T, Ottolini D, Brini M (2011) Mitochondria, calcium, and endoplasmic reticulum stress in Parkinson’s disease. Biofactors 37(3):228–240. doi:10.1002/biof.159
137. Smith WW, Jiang H, Pei Z, Tanaka Y, Morita H, Sawa A, Dawson VL, Dawson TM et al (2005) Endoplasmic reticulum stress and mitochondrial cell death pathways mediate A53T mutant alpha-synuclein-induced toxicity. Hum Mol Genet 14(24):3801–3811. doi:10.1093/hmg/ddi396
138. Chung CY, Khurana V, Auluck PK, Tardiff DF, Mazzulli JR, Soldner F, Baru V, Lou Y et al (2013) Identification and rescue of alpha-synuclein toxicity in Parkinson patient-derived neurons. Science 342(6161):983–987. doi:10.1126/science.1245296
139. Jiang P, Gan M, Lin WL, Yen SH (2014) Nutrient deprivation induces alpha-synuclein aggregation through endoplasmic reticulum stress response and SREBP2 pathway. Front Aging Neurosci 6:268. doi:10.3389/fnagi.2014.00268
140. Walter P, Ron D (2011) The unfolded protein response: from stress pathway to homeostatic regulation. Science 334(6059):1081–1086. doi:10.1126/science.1209038
141. Cozzolino M, Pesaresi MG, Gerbino V, Grosskreutz J, Carri MT (2012) Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: new insights into underlying molecular mechanisms and opportunities for therapeutic intervention. Antioxid Redox Signal 17(9):1277–1330. doi:10.1089/ars.2011.4328
142. O’Brien JE, Meisler MH (2013) Sodium channel SCN8A (Nav1.6): properties and de novo mutations in epileptic encephalopathy and intellectual disability. Front Genet 4:213. doi:10.3389/fgene.2013.00213
143. Martinez-Gomez A, Dent MA (2007) Expression of IP3 receptor isoforms at the nodes of Ranvier in rat sciatic nerve. Neuroreport 18(5):447–450. doi:10.1097/WNR.0b013e32805868a6
144. Ishibashi T, Dupree JL, Ikenaka K, Hirahara Y, Honke K, Peles E, Popko B, Suzuki K et al (2002) A myelin galactolipid, sulfatide, is essential for maintenance of ion channels on myelinated axon but not essential for initial cluster formation. J Neurosci 22(15):6507–6514
145. Ishibashi T, Kodama A, Baba H (2015) Disruption of paranodal axo-glial interaction and/or absence of sulfatide causes irregular type I inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor deposition in cerebellar Purkinje neuron axons. J Neurosci Res 93(1):19–27. doi:10.1002/jnr.23465
146. Kim SH, Zhan L, Hanson KA, Tibbetts RS (2012) High-content RNAi screening identifies the type 1 inositol triphosphate receptor as a modifier of TDP-43 localization and neurotoxicity. Hum Mol Genet 21(22):4845–4856. doi:10.1093/hmg/dds321
