
FERROPTOSIS

**Oxidized PEs trigger death**

Ferroptosis is characterized by accumulation of lipid peroxidation products and lethal ROS, but the source and identity of lipid death signals that cause toxicity are poorly defined. New studies reveal that ACSL4 controls sensitivity to ferroptosis and that oxidized phosphatidylethanolamines are critical for ferroptosis execution.

Katharina D'Herde & Dmitri V Krysko

Ferroptosis is a newly discovered iron-dependent form of regulated cell death that is distinct from apoptosis and necroptosis morphologically, biochemically and genetically^{1,2}. Ferroptosis results from antioxidant system dysfunction leading to the loss of cellular redox homeostasis; it is characterized by the accumulation of lipid peroxidation products and has been implicated in various pathological conditions of the brain, kidney, liver and heart. Ferroptosis can be caused either by small molecules (e.g., artesunate) or by conditions that inhibit glutathione biosynthesis (e.g., erastin) or the glutathione-dependent antioxidant enzyme glutathione peroxidase 4 (GPX4; e.g., RSL3)^{3,4}. Recently, genes required for the induction of ferroptosis have been identified, including some encoding proteins involved in lipid metabolism, such as acyl-CoA synthetase long-chain family member 4 (ACSL4) and lysophosphatidylcholine acyltransferase 3 (refs. 5,6). However, the specific downstream lipid changes that drive ferroptosis and the nature of the lipid death signals responsible for ferroptosis induction are poorly defined. Together, Doll et al.^7 now have shown that ACSL4 functions as a critical determinant of ferroptosis sensitivity by modulating cellular (phospho)lipid composition, while Kagan et al.^8 have identified oxidized species of phosphatidylethanolamines (PE) as lipid death signals that drive the execution of ferroptosis.

Doll et al.^7 used two independent approaches to identify ACSL4 as a key regulator of ferroptosis: a genome-wide CRISPR-based genetic screen and microarray analysis. AcsI4 knockout cells were as resistant to lipid peroxidation as to ferroptosis. Re-expression of ACSL4 specifically resensitized the cells to undergo ferroptosis and lipid peroxidation after GPX4 inactivation by inhibitor treatment, suggesting that ACSL4 has a key function in ferroptosis. The researchers elegantly demonstrated (Fig. 1a) that the thiazolidinedione class of hypoglycemic drugs can inhibit ferroptosis *in vitro* and *in vivo* in a genetic model of acute renal failure (a conditional knockout of Gpx4). They demonstrated that the protective effect of thiazolidinediones against ferroptosis is mediated through inhibition of ACSL4 and not through the compounds’ effect on PPAR-γ, which may explain the results of previous studies^8 in which the beneficial activity of thiazolidinediones could not be attributed mainly on their direct effects on PPARγ function.

Kagan et al.^9 used a well-designed interdisciplinary approach combining redox global phospholipidomics, reverse genetics, bioinformatics and systems biology to identify the oxidized phospholipids generated during ferroptosis (Fig. 1a). After a global redox phospholipidomics LC-MS/MS analysis of RSL-3-treated Pfal cells, the authors identified more than 300 individual species of phospholipids belonging to different classes of phospholipids, including phosphatidylcholine, PE, phosphatidylserine, phosphatidylglycerol, phosphatidylinositol and cardiolipin. Of note, only 130 of these species were oxygenated, and these were distributed among different phospholipid classes, with the notable exception of cardiolipin. In order to filter out the potential lipid death signals, the authors applied several quantitative inclusion criteria (such as a significant increase in content in ferroptotic versus control cells; correlation with cell death; reduced contents of nonoxygenated oxidizable precursors in AcsI4 knockout cells; and elevated levels in Gpx4 knockout cells *in vitro* and Gpx4 knockout mice *in vivo*). After these stringent criteria were applied, only four molecular species of phospholipids in only one class of phospholipids emerged: doubly and triply oxygenated species of PE. Further, Kagan et al.^9 found that PEs containing arachidonoyl (AA) and adrenoyl moieties (AdA) were the preferred substrates for oxidation and were involved in the execution of ferroptosis. Importantly, the authors showed that oxygenated AA-PE and AdA-PE species are present in the ER-associated compartments and accumulate during induction of ferroptosis *in vitro* and *in vivo*^9. The authors demonstrated that the levels of these species were significantly reduced in mice treated with the ferroptosis inhibitor liproxstatin-1. Of note, when oxygenated AA-PE species were added exogenously, they strongly enhanced ferroptosis triggered by GPX4 inhibition even in resistant AcsI4 knockout cells, thus pointing to the role of oxidized PE as a potential ferroptotic death signal. Moreover, Kagan et al.^9 reported that 15-lipoxygenase (but not cyclooxygenases and cytochrome P450) is involved in generating peroxidation signals, whereas vitamin E, a lipid-soluble antioxidant known to protect against ferroptosis, blocks ferroptosis by suppressing the activity of lipoxygenases. Thus, this study suggests a new mechanism of action of vitamin E in protection against this cell death modality.

One hallmark of ferroptosis is the accumulation of lipid peroxidation products and lethal reactive oxygen species (ROS). One working model is that ROS generated during ferroptosis induction can come from several sources, including iron-mediated ROS production by the Fenton reaction, during glucose and glutamine metabolism and when glutathione levels and GPX4 activity are reduced^{1,10}. The mysterious ROS reactions with the polyunsaturated fatty acids of lipid membranes induce subsequent lipid peroxidation, culminating in ferroptotic cell death. In tight collaboration, and using an interdisciplinary approach, the two groups^{7,9} have ‘demystified’ the reaction mechanisms and demonstrated that genetic or pharmacological suppression of ACSL4-mediated AA or AdA esterification into PE decreases the synthesis of two proferroptotic phospholipid substrates, AA-PE and AdA-PE, and thereby reduces ferroptosis. In their work, Kagan et al.^9 explain that 15-lipoxygenases generate lipid death signals (i.e., doubly and triply oxygenated (15-hydroperoxy)-diacylated PE species), whereas vitamin E suppresses the enzymatic activity of 15-lipoxygenase and therefore

also other outstanding questions. Since PE undergoes oxidation in the ER-associated compartments, how do ER stressors affect ferroptosis? Is the oxygenation of PE a ferroptotic signal also at play in other mechanisms of ferroptosis induction, and what is the role of oxygenated PE in the modulation of inflammation? Can PE oxidation be detected and used as a specific biomarker of ferroptotic cell death in human pathologies associated with ferroptosis? Answers to these questions will permit better understanding of the molecular mechanisms of ferroptosis and will provide the necessary insights for the development of novel treatment strategies for human pathologies associated with ferroptosis, such as cancer cell death, tissue injury and T cell immunity.

Katharina D'Herde is at the Department of Basic Medical Sciences, and Dmitri V. Krysko is at the Department of Basic Medical Sciences and Cancer Research Institute Ghent (CRIG), Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium.

e-mail: dmitri.krysko@ugent.be

Published online 14 November 2016  
http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nchembio.2261

**References**

1. Dixon, S.J. *et al.* Cell **149**, 1060–72 (2012).
2. Moreno-Gonzalez, G., Vandenberghe, P. & Krysko, D.V. Am. J. Respir. Crit. Care Med. **194**, 415–428 (2016).
3. Friedmann Angeli, J.P. *et al.* Nat. Cell Biol. **16**, 1180–1191 (2014).
4. Gao, M., Monian, P., Quadri, N., Ramasamy, R. & Jiang, X. Mol. Cell **59**, 298–308 (2015).
5. Dixon, S.J. *et al.* ACS Chem. Biol. **10**, 1604–1609 (2015).
6. Yuan, H., Li, X., Zhang, X., Kang, R. & Tang, D. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. **478**, 1338–1343 (2016).
7. Doll, S. *et al.* Nat. Chem. Biol. **12**, http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nchembio.2238 (14 November 2016).
8. Chawla, A. *et al.* Nat. Med. **7**, 48–52 (2001).
9. Kagan, V.E. *et al.* Nat. Chem. Biol. **12**, http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nchembio.2238 (14 November 2016).
10. Yang, W.S. *et al.* Cell **156**, 317–331 (2014).
11. Kagan, V.E. *et al.* Nat. Chem. Biol. **1**, 223–232 (2005).

**Competing financial interests**

The authors declare no competing financial interests.
