
G Model
MIMM-5034; No. of Pages 6

ARTICLE IN PRESS

**Molecular Immunology xxx (2016) xxx–xxx**

Contents lists available at **ScienceDirect**
**Molecular Immunology**
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/molimm

# Salmonella-induced inflammasome activation in humans

Damien Bierschenk, Dave Boucher, Kate Schroder*

Institute for Molecular Bioscience, and Centre for Inflammation and Disease Research, The University of Queensland, St. Lucia, 4072, Australia

## ARTICLE INFO

Article history:
Received 24 June 2016
Received in revised form 1 November 2016
Accepted 17 November 2016
Available online xxx

Keywords:
Salmonella
Inflammasome
Caspase
NOD-like receptor
Toll-like receptor

## ABSTRACT

Inflammasomes are macromolecular complexes that assemble upon recognition of pathogen- or danger-associated molecular patterns. Inflammasome assembly is nucleated by the oligomerisation of specific, activated pattern recognition receptors within the cytosol. Inflammasomes function as platforms for the activation of the caspase-1 protease, which in turn triggers the maturation and secretion of the pro-inflammatory cytokines IL-1β and IL-18, and initiates pyroptosis, a highly inflammatory form of lytic cell death. Recently, additional inflammatory caspases (murine caspase-11, and human caspase-4/5) were also reported to be activated upon a pyroptosis-inducing ‘non-canonical inflammasome’ by direct recognition of lipopolysaccharide (LPS), a pathogen-associated molecular pattern. Here we review and discuss recent advances in our understanding of inflammasome-mediated host defence against *Salmonella* particularly in human cells, and their implications for cellular survival and cytokine secretion.

© 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

## 1. Introduction

*Salmonella enterica* is a flagellated enteric Gram-negative bacterium causing over 200 million cases of disease globally each year. *S.* *enterica* is typically ingested orally, and can be carried asymptomatically or cause enteric fever (typhoid fever), diarrhea or sepsis (*Coburn et al.*, 2007). *S.* *enterica* pathogenesis depends upon both the host immune status (*Gordon*, 2008) and the virulence of the serovar (*Fierer and Guiney*, 2001). *S.* *enterica* serovar *typhi* (*S.* Typhi) is a human-restricted pathogen that causes typhoid fever. Typhoid fever is often modelled in mice by systemic challenge with *S.* *enterica* serovar Typhimurium (*S.* Typhimurium). In humans, *S.* Typhimurium generally causes self-limiting gastroenteritis but can lead to sepsis and mortality in immunocompromised individuals (*Coburn et al.*, 2007; *de Jong et al.*, 2012). The pathogenicity of *S.* *enterica* serovars is determined by various virulence factors, which are mainly encoded by *Salmonella* pathogenicity islands (SPIs) (*de Jong et al.*, 2012). *S.* Typhimurium encodes 12 SPIs, SPI1-6, 9, 11, 12,

---

### Abbreviations:

AIM2, absent in melanoma 2; ASC, apoptosis-associated speck-like protein containing a caspase recruitment domain; DAMP, danger-associated molecular pattern; GBP, guanylate-binding proteins; IL, interleukin; LPS, lipopolysaccharide; NLR, NOD-like receptor; PAMP, pathogen-associated molecular pattern; PRR, pattern recognition receptor; SCV, *Salmonella*-containing vacuole; SPI, *Salmonella* pathogenicity island; T3SS, Type 3 secretion system; TLR, Toll-like receptor.

* Corresponding author at: Institute for Molecular Bioscience, The University of Queensland, St. Lucia, Brisbane, 4072, Australia.
E-mail address: K.Schroder@imb.uq.edu.au (K. Schroder).

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.molimm.2016.11.009

0161-5890/© 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

Please cite this article in press as: Bierschenk, D., et al., Salmonella-induced inflammasome activation in humans. Mol. Immunol. (2016), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.molimm.2016.11.009

G Model
MIMM-5034; No. of Pages 6

ARTICLE IN PRESS

D. Bierschenk et al./Molecular Immunology xxx (2016) xxx–xxx

2010; Monteleone et al., 2015). Activated inflammatory caspases also cleave pro-Gasdermin-D to drive pyroptosis, a lytic form of cell death that triggers inflammation (Boucher et al., 2014; Shi et al., 2015; Kayagaki et al., 2015; He et al., 2015). In this review we will highlight recent advances in the inflammasome field with a specific focus on Salmonella and human inflammasome biology.

2. Salmonella invasion of the gut epithelium

Ingestion of Salmonella delivers the bacterium in the gastrointestinal (GI) tract. The human gut is colonised by its natural microbiota which suppress pathogen growth and compete for nutrients (Kamada et al., 2013). In mice, paneth cells respond to invasive Salmonella by secreting antimicrobial peptides such as C-type lectins RegIIIβ/γ (Godinez et al., 2009; Bevins and Salzman, 2011). Secreted RegIIIγ kills other intestinal pathogenic bacteria (Brandl et al., 2008, 2007), but not Salmonella spp., while RegIIIβ kills various commensal bacteria (Stelter et al., 2011). Thus, it appears that Salmonella induces the secretion of these C-type lectins to reduce competition for nutrients and confer a growth advantage for Salmonella over the natural microbiota, resulting in Salmonella colonisation of the gut. The human orthologue of RegIIIγ, RegIIIA (also known as HIP/PAP), is bactericidal to Gram-positive bacteria but not to Gram-negative bacteria (Mukherjee et al., 2014; Cash et al., 2006), suggesting Salmonella may employ a similar mechanism during infection of humans.

In order to escape the hostile environment of the gut, Salmonella has to breach the thick mucus layer present in the GI tract to reach the underlying epithelial cells (Hansson, 2012). Salmonella flagella propel the bacterium against the mucus flow towards the epithelial cells (Stecher et al., 2004). To penetrate the underlying epithelial barrier Salmonella attaches to the epithelial cells via fimbrial adhesins and promotes bacterial uptake via epithelial membrane ruffling (Baumler et al., 1996; Takeuchi, 1967). However, Salmonella preferentially enters microfold (M) cells (Jones et al., 1994). These specialised intestinal epithelial cells sample the gut lumen and transcytose antigens and microorganisms to the underlying Peyer’s patches (Mabbott et al., 2013).

3. Toll-like receptor detection of Salmonella Typhimurium

Breaching the epithelium allows Salmonella to evade the hostile environment of the gut, but its translocation to the underlying lamina propria allows for recognition by innate immune cells associated with the gut-associated lymphoid tissue (GALT). The GALT consists of a broad variety of leukocytes including monocytes, macrophages, dendritic cells and neutrophils (Rydstrom and Wick, 2007; Broz et al., 2012a), and these cells express a wide variety of PRRs for pathogen detection. Salmonella is initially sensed by TLRs, which are expressed on the cell surface and in the endosomal system of GALT and epithelial cells (Abreu, 2010).

TLRs recognise various PAMPs associated with Gram-negative bacteria, such as Salmonella. Such TLR-activating PAMPs include lipoprotein(TLR1/2 or TLR2/6 heterodimers)(Aliprantis et al., 1999; Takeda et al., 2002), lipopolysaccharide (TLR4) (Poltorak et al., 1998), flagellin (TLR5) (Hayashi et al., 2001) and unmethylated CpG DNA (TLR9) (Hemmi et al., 2000) (Fig. 1). PAMP-induced homo and heterodimerisation of TLRs facilitates downstream signalling via four major signalling adaptors, all of which contain a Toll/interleukin-1 (TIR) domain. These adaptors are myeloid differentiation primary-response protein 88 (MYD88), MYD88-adaptor-like protein (MAL), TIR domain-containing adaptor protein inducing IFN-β (TRIF) and the TRIF-related adaptor molecule (TRAM). TLR5 and TLR9, when stimulated with synthetic ligands, signal solely via MYD88 while TLR1/2, TLR4, TLR2/6 and TLR9

signalling induced by natural ligands additionally requires MAL for MyD88-dependent signalling (Gay et al., 2014; Bonham et al., 2014). TLR4 is unusual in that it can localise both to the cell surface and the endosome. TLR4 recognises extracellular LPS to trigger MyD88-dependent signalling at the plasma membrane, after which it relocates to the endosome to signal via TRIF and TRAM (Tanimura et al., 2008). TLR signalling generally leads to the recruitment and activation of the IL-1R-associated kinases (IRAKs) and TNF receptor-associated factors (TRAFs), and leads to the activation of transcription factors, including nuclear factor-κB (NF-κB) and members of the interferon-regulatory factor (IRF) family (O’Neill et al., 2013).

Activated NF-κB induces the transcription of pro-inflammatory cytokines such as pro-IL-1β (Lawrence, 2009). As IL-1β signalling stimulates the expression of genes associated with inflammation and autoimmune disease, the activity of this cytokine is tightly regulated to maintain homeostasis (Dinarello, 2002), and is regulated by at least two distinct signals. IL-1β is initially expressed as an inactive precursor protein, pro-IL-1β, that requires maturation for activity upon the IL-1 receptor. Pro-IL-1β is poorly expressed by most resting cells, so a priming signal (signal 1) is required for its transcriptional induction and expression. Intracellular pro-IL-1β expression is induced by TLRs or specific pro-inflammatory cytokines that activate NF-κB. Such signals also mildly promote the expression of the related cytokine, pro-IL-18 (Schroder et al., 2012a), but pro-IL-18 is constitutively expressed by many cell types (Puren et al., 1999). Pro-IL-1β and pro-IL-18 maturation to their active cytokines is controlled by the protease caspase-1 (signal 2). Mature IL-1β and IL-18 exit the cell through a poorly characterised unconventional secretion pathway (Monteleone et al., 2015).

4. Conventional inflammasomes activated by Salmonella Typhimurium

Active caspase-1 is generated by pro-caspase-1 recruitment to large signalling complexes, the inflammasomes. Inflammasome assembly is usually triggered by cytosolic NOD-like receptors (NLRs e.g. NLRP1, NLRP3, NLRC4, NLRP6) or inflammasome-nucleating proteins from other PRR families (e.g. AIM2, PYRIN). Inflammasome-nucleating PRR are primarily expressed by immune cells, but can also be expressed by non-immune cells such as epithelial cells (Knodler et al., 2014; Sellin et al., 2014). These PRRs surveil the intracellular environment for PAMPs and danger-associated molecular patterns (DAMP), and upon sensing such signals, nucleate the assembly of an inflammasome complex. Most inflammasomes are composed of a PRR, the apoptosis-associated speck-like protein containing a caspase recruitment domain (ASC), and caspase-1 (Schroder and Tschopp, 2010). For example, danger detection by NLRP3 triggers ATP-dependent NLRP3 oligomerisation (Duncan et al., 2007) and recruitment of the ASC inflammasome adaptor protein. ASC has unusual prion-like properties; its recruitment to inflammasomes triggers its polymerisation to generate a large signalling platform known as the ‘speck’. The ASC speck recruits pro-caspase-1 through homotypic interactions between ASC and pro-caspase-1 CARD domains, leading to cluster-induced dimerisation, auto-proteolysis, and caspase-1 activation (Martinon et al., 2002; Srinivasula et al., 2002). Active caspase-1 then cleaves the pro-inflammatory cytokines pro-IL-1β and pro-IL-18 into their active, secreted forms (Schroder and Tschopp, 2010). Caspase-1 is additionally required for the processing and secretion of the human anti-inflammatory cytokine IL-37 (Bulau et al., 2014) and also cleaves non-cytokine substrates. A new caspase-1 substrate, pro-Gasdermin-D, was recently identified (Agard et al., 2010) and mature Gasdermin-D was recently shown to form plasma mem-

Please cite this article in press as: Bierschenk, D., et al., Salmonella-induced inflammasome activation in humans. Mol. Immunol. (2016), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.molimm.2016.11.009

G Model
MIMM-5034; No. of Pages 6

ARTICLE IN PRESS

D. Bierschenk et al. / Molecular Immunology xxx (2016) xxx–xxx

Salmonella

Flagellin
LPS
Lipoproteins

TLR5
TLR4
TLR2:TLR1/6

MyD88
MAL
MyD88
MAL
MyD88

IRAK

NF-KB

Pro-IL-1β
Pro-IL-18

IL-1β
IL-18

Salmonella-containing
vacuole

T3SS

Phagosome
CpG DNA

T3SS
Flagellin

NLRC4
NLRP3

NLR
ASC
Pro-Caspase-1

Active Caspase-1

Gasdermin-D
Gasdermin-D

Pyroptosis

Secretion

Fig. 1. A model for inflammasome activation by Salmonella in human macrophages. Salmonella elicits the activation of multiple inflammasomes via a variety of ligands. Efficient inflammasome pathway activation requires at least 2 signals: (1) Extracellular and endosomal TLR signalling upregulates pro-IL-1β and NLRP3 expression and mildly induces pro-IL-18. (2) Sensing of intracellular Salmonella ligands via NLRs or pro-inflammatory caspases enables the activation of conventional inflammasomes (NLRP3, NLRC4) or non-canonical CASP4/5 inflammasomes, resulting in caspase-dependent secretion of mature pro-inflammatory cytokines IL-1β and IL-18, and pro-Gasdermin-D cleavage to initiate cell death by pyroptosis. See text for details.

brane pores to initiate cell death by pyroptosis (Shi et al., 2015; Kayagaki et al., 2015; He et al., 2015; Ding et al., 2016).

Salmonella infection of immune cells induces the bacterium to upregulate SPI2 expression, leading to the formation and maintenance of the Salmonella-containing vacuole (SCV), an intracellular replicative niche for Salmonella. However, Salmonella is unable to completely avoid detection by phagocytes, and multiple inflammasomes can signal during the early invasion stages of S. Typhimurium infection. Salmonella utilises the SPI1 system, expressed during logarithmic growth-phase, to actively infect phagocytes (Hansen-Wester and Hensel, 2001). In utilising SPI1, the bacterium activates the NLRC4 inflammasome, resulting in caspase-1 activation and rapid cell death (Mariathasan et al., 2004). The NLRC4 inflammasome is specifically activated by intracellular bacteria, wherein PAMPs that are translocated into the host cell cytosol by the bacterial T3SS are recognised by the neuronal apoptosis inhibitory protein, NAIP (Vance, 2015). Detection of bacterial ligands by NAIPs leads to hetero-oligomerisation with NLRC4 and the assembly of a NAIP/NLRC4 inflammasome that recruits and activates procaspase-1 (Hu et al., 2015; Zhang et al., 2015). While mice express multiple NAIP genes, humans encode a single NAIP gene whose transcript can be differentially spliced (Vance, 2015; Kortmann et al., 2015). In mice, Salmonella-related structures are recognised by distinct NAIPs; flagellin is recognised by NAIP5, while the needle and rod components of the T3SS are sensed by NAIP1 and NAIP2, respectively (Vance, 2015). Initial studies with human myeloid cell lines (THP-1 and U937) suggested that human NAIP recognised the T3SS rod and needle, but not flagellin (Yang et al., 2013). However, more recent studies identified an alternative NAIP protein, arising from splice variation, that is expressed in primary human macrophages and detects flagella, triggering NLRC4/NAIP inflammasome assembly and caspase-1 activation (Kortmann et al., 2015). During in vivo murine infection, the NLRC4/NAIP inflammasome restricts S. Typhimurium through multiple mechanisms.

Please cite this article in press as: Bierschenk, D., et al., Salmonella-induced inflammasome activation in humans. Mol. Immunol. (2016), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.molimm.2016.11.009

G Model
MIMM-5034; No. of Pages 6

ARTICLE IN PRESS

D. Bierschenk et al./Molecular Immunology xxx (2016) xxx–xxx

Firstly, the NLRC4/NAIP inflammasome induces the expulsion of S. Typhimurium-infected enterocytes into the gut lumen, as a means to stop Salmonella from breaching epithelial barrier defences (Sellin et al., 2014). Secondly, NLRC4/NAIP activation in macrophages induces cytoskeletal changes and cellular stiffness leading to reduced uptake of S. Typhimurium (Man et al., 2014a). Salmonella-infected macrophages additionally secrete IL-1β to recruit neutrophils, and undergo NLRC4/NAIP-mediated pyroptosis, to remove the microbe’s replicative niche and render Salmonella susceptible to neutrophil-mediated killing (Miao et al., 2010). Finally, recruited neutrophils themselves activate the NLRC4/NAIP inflammasome upon sensing S. Typhimurium to trigger further IL-1β production, in a positive feedback loop to recruit and activate further neutrophils (Chen et al., 2014). Neutrophils, however, do not undergo caspase-1-mediated pyroptosis; their sustained lifespan presumably allows them to execute their classical anti-microbial functions (neutrophil extracellular traps, degranulation, reactive oxygen production) to clear the infection (RemijSEN et al., 2011).

In vivo murine studies identified an unexpected redundancy between the NLRC4/NAIP and NLRP3 inflammasomes during S. Typhimurium infection. A structurally diverse range of microbial and non-microbial signals activate the NLRP3 inflammasome, so it is likely that their ability to activate NLRP3 is indirect, for example through inducing cell stress. Salmonella activates the NLRP3 inflammasome via distinct signals compared to the NLRC4/NAIP inflammasome, although both pathways lead to pro-caspase-1 activation and IL-1β production. Genetic ablation of both NLRC4 and NLRP3 in mice leads to increased susceptibility to infection (Broz et al., 2010), and both NLRC4 and NLRP3 appear to be necessary for optimal ASC speck formation and can be recruited to the same macromolecular complex (Broz et al., 2010; Man et al., 2014b; Qu et al., 2016). The NLRP3 inflammasome is also activated by cytosolic bacterial RNA in both humans and mouse, although interestingly, mRNA, tRNA and rRNA elicited the human NLRP3 inflammasome, while only mRNA activated murine NLRP3 (Sha et al., 2014). A recent study identified an alternative mechanism for NLRP3 inflammasome activation in human monocytes. Human monocyte exposure to extracellular LPS triggered maturation of IL-1β via NLRP3, caspase-1 and caspase-8 without inducing concomitant pyroptosis or potassium (K⁺) efflux (Gaidt et al., 2016), which is generally required for NLRP3 inflammasome activation (Munoz-Planillo et al., 2013). Thus extracellular LPS may be sufficient for induction of human IL-1β-dependent responses, such as neutrophilia, although the impact of such responses on host defence is yet unclear.

In addition to the NLRC4/NAIP and NLRP3 inflammasomes, absent in melanoma-2 (AIM2) also contributes to host defence by suppressing Salmonella-induced disintegration of the intestinal epithelial barrier in mice (Hu et al., 2016). AIM2 recognises cytosolic double-stranded DNA to nucleate ASC polymerisation and caspase-1 activation (Hornung et al., 2009), and AIM2 inflammasome function is critical for host defences against the facultative intracellular Gram-negative bacterium Francisella tularensis (Fernandes-Alnemri et al., 2010). Whether host defence against Salmonella is provided by the AIM2 inflammasome, or an inflammasome-independent molecular function of AIM2, is yet unclear (Hu et al., 2016; Wilson et al., 2015).

et al., 2011). A growing literature now suggests that some functions that were originally attributed to caspase-1 are in fact driven by caspase-11. Newly-described functions for caspase-11 include pathological roles in murine endotoxin shock (Hagar et al., 2013; Kayagaki et al., 2013) and functions in host defence during infection with Gram-negative bacteria (Knodler et al., 2014; Sellin et al., 2014; Case et al., 2013; Aachoui et al., 2013; Casson et al., 2013). Unexpectedly, the CARD domain of caspase-11 directly binds cytoplasmic LPS (Shi et al., 2014), to assemble the so-called ‘non-canonical inflammasome’ that activates caspase-11 proteolytic function. While the extracellular LPS sensor, TLR4, is not required for assembly of this non-canonical inflammasome (Hagar et al., 2013; Kayagaki et al., 2013), TLR4 signalling induces interferon-β-dependent caspase-11 expression and thereby licenses caspase-11 function (Wang et al., 1996; Rathinam et al., 2012). Two independent studies recently reported that caspase-11 cleaves pro-Gasdermin-D to initiate pyroptosis (Shi et al., 2015; Kayagaki et al., 2015). Humans encode two orthologs of murine Casp11, CASP4 and CASP5, with distinct expression regulation profiles. Like Casp11, CASP5 expression can be induced by pro-inflammatory stimuli such as LPS, while CASP4 is constitutively expressed by many cell types and its expression is not regulated by LPS (Schroder et al., 2012b; Lin et al., 2000). Similar to murine caspase-11, human caspase-4 functions appear to include the recognition of cytosolic LPS (Shi et al., 2014; Baker et al., 2015), pro-Gasdermin-D processing (Shi et al., 2015; Kayagaki et al., 2015), endotoxin sensitivity (Kajiwara et al., 2014) and the recognition of Gram-negative bacteria (Knodler et al., 2014; Baker et al., 2015; Casson et al., 2015), while caspase-5 is implicated in direct intracellular LPS recognition (Shi et al., 2014), signalling downstream of extracellular LPS (Vigano et al., 2015), pro-Gasdermin-D processing (Shi et al., 2015) and protection against Gram-negative bacteria (Baker et al., 2015).

Various studies have investigated the potential of caspase-11, –4 and –5 to initiate innate immune responses to intracellular S. Typhimurium infection or Salmonella-derived PAMPs (e.g. LPS). A seminal study demonstrated that stationary phase S. Typhimurium induces caspase-11-dependent pyroptosis independently of SPI1 (Broz et al., 2012b). In epithelial cells, caspase-11 and caspase-4 provide host defence against enteric pathogens (Knodler et al., 2014; Sellin et al., 2014). Human intestinal epithelial cells required caspase-4 for both IL-18 secretion and pyroptosis, which prevented bacterial colonisation. Soon after penetration of the gut epithelia, Salmonella infects phagocytes, and generates the SCV. Besides providing a favourable niche for replication, sequestration of Salmonella within the SCV of epithelia or phagocytes also prevents inflammatory caspases from detecting the bacterium’s LPS. A recent report characterised an elegant mechanism by which vacuolar S. Typhimurium is exposed to caspase-11 in murine macrophages; S. Typhimurium infection elicits the interferon-induced expression of small guanylate-binding proteins (GBPs), which associate with the SCV and trigger SCV lysis and resultant cytosolic S. Typhimurium detection by caspase-11 (Meunier et al., 2014). In human primary macrophages caspase-4 is the major inflammatory caspase driving pyroptosis downstream of cytosolic LPS or S. Typhimurium infection (Baker et al., 2015; Casson et al., 2015). Whether human macrophages and epithelia employ a similar mechanism to mouse for SCV disruption and cytosolic LPS exposure is currently unclear. Interestingly, upon cytosolic LPS detection, pyroptosis can be genetically uncoupled from secretion of mature IL-1β, as caspase-4/11-induced pro-IL-1β maturation requires Gasdermin-D-induced activation of the NLRP3 inflammasome while cell death proceeds independently of NLRP3 (Shi et al., 2015; Kayagaki et al., 2015, 2011; Baker et al., 2015; Schmid-Burgk et al., 2015). Given that NLRP3 activation generally requires a fall in intracellular K⁺ levels (Munoz-Planillo et al., 2013), and that

5. Non-canonical inflammasome activation by Salmonella Typhimurium

The recent discovery that caspase-1 knockout mice carry a passenger null mutation for Casp11 prompted re-evaluation of caspase-1 functions initially defined with these mice (Kayagaki

Please cite this article in press as: Bierschenk, D., et al., Salmonella-induced inflammasome activation in humans. Mol. Immunol. (2016), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.molimm.2016.11.009

G Model
MIMM-5034; No. of Pages 6

ARTICLE IN PRESS

D. Bierschenk et al. / Molecular Immunology xxx (2016) xxx–xxx

NLRP3 activation upon LPS transfection in murine macrophages requires caspase-11-mediated cleavage of Gasdermin-D (Kayagaki et al., 2015) and can be blocked by culturing cells in high extracellular K⁺ (Ruhl and Broz, 2015), it appears likely that K⁺ efflux during pyroptosis is responsible for NLRP3 activation in this context. In the human monocytic cell line, THP-1, NLRP3 responses to transfected LPS require caspase-4 (Schmid-Burgk et al., 2015), and pro-Gasdermin-D is an established caspase-4 substrate, so it is likely that a similar mechanism controls LPS-induced NLRP3 activation in human cells, although this is not yet formally demonstrated.

Although less well studied than caspase-4, caspase-5 is also implicated in host protection against S. Typhimurium infection (Baker et al., 2015). In contrast to caspase-11 and caspase-4, caspase-5 was recently reported to be required for IL-1β release during internalisation of extracellular LPS by human monocytes, through processes involving Syk kinase and Ca²⁺ mobilisation (Vigano et al., 2015). Surprisingly, in this context caspase-5 did not trigger monocyte pyroptosis, despite the ability of caspase-5 to cleave pro-Gasdermin-D upon activation by ectopic overexpression in human embryonic kidney 293 (HEK 293) cells (Shi et al., 2015; Kayagaki et al., 2015). Additionally, caspase-5 genetic ablation did not prevent pyroptosis or IL-1β secretion upon intracellular LPS delivery in the human monocytic tumor cell line, THP-1 (Baker et al., 2015). CASP5 deficiency did, however, reduce, pyroptosis and IL-1β secretion when THP-1 cells were infected with S. Typhimurium (Baker et al., 2015), suggesting the possibility that caspase-5 activation requires an additional, LPS-independent, signal delivered during live S. Typhimurium infection.

### Acknowledgements

We thank Kylie Georgas for her kind graphic assistance. This work was supported by the National Health and Medical Research Council of Australia (Project Grant 1064945 to KS), the Australian Research Council (Fellowship FT130100361 to KS), The University of Queensland (UQ Postdoctoral Fellowship to D. Boucher, UQ Centennial Scholarship to D. Bierschenk), the Australian Government Department of Education and Training (International Postgraduate Research Scholarship to D. Bierschenk) and the Fonds de Recherche du Québec en Santé (Postdoctoral Fellowship to D. Boucher).

### References

Aachoui, Y., et al., 2013. Caspase-11 protects against bacteria that escape the vacuole. Science 339, 957–958.

Abreu, M.T., 2010. Toll-like receptor signalling in the intestinal epithelium: how bacterial recognition shapes intestinal function. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 10, 131–144.

Agard, N.J., Maltby, D., Wells, J.A., 2010. Inflammatory stimuli regulate caspase substrate profiles. Mol. Cell. Proteomics 9, 880–893.

Akira, S., Uematsu, S., Takeuchi, O., 2006. Pathogen recognition and innate immunity. Cell 124, 783–801.

Aliprantis, A.O., et al., 1999. Cell activation and apoptosis by bacterial lipoproteins through toll-like receptor-2. Science 285, 736–739.

Baker, P.J., et al., 2015. NLRP3 inflammasome activation downstream of cytoplasmic LPS recognition by both caspase-4 and caspase-5. Eur. J. Immunol. 45, 2918–2926.

Baumler, A.J., Tsolis, R.M., Heffron, F., 1996. Contribution of fimbrial operons to attachment to and invasion of epithelial cell lines by Salmonella typhimurium. Infect. Immun. 64, 1862–1865.

Bevins, C.L., Salzman, N.H., 2011. Paneth cells, antimicrobial peptides and maintenance of intestinal homeostasis. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 9, 356–368.

Bonham, K.S., et al., 2014. A promiscuous lipid-binding protein diversifies the subcellular sites of toll-like receptor signal transduction. Cell 156, 705–716.

Boucher, D., Chen, K.W., Schroder, K., 2015. Burn the house, save the day: pyroptosis in pathogen restriction. Inflammasome 2, 1–6.

Brandl, K., Plitas, G., Schnabl, B., DeMatteo, R.P., Pamer, E.G., 2007. MyD88-mediated signals induce the bactericidal lectin RegIII gamma and protect mice against intestinal Listeria monocytogenes infection. J. Exp. Med. 204, 1891–1900.

Brandl, K., et al., 2008. Vancomycin-resistant enterococci exploit antibiotic-induced innate immune deficits. Nature 455, 804–807.

Broz, P., et al., 2010. Redundant roles for inflammasome receptors NLRP3 and NLRC4 in host defense against Salmonella. J. Exp. Med. 207, 1745–1755.

Broz, P., Ohlson, M.B., Monack, D.M., 2012a. Innate immune response to Salmonella typhimurium, a model enteric pathogen. Gut Microbes 3, 62–70.

Broz, P., et al., 2012b. Caspase-11 increases susceptibility to Salmonella infection in the absence of caspase-1. Nature 490, 288–291.

Bulau, A.M., et al., 2014. Role of caspase-1 in nuclear translocation of IL-37, release of the cytokine, and IL-37 inhibition of innate immune responses. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 111, 2650–2655.

Case, C.L., et al., 2013. Caspase-11 stimulates rapid flagellin-independent pyroptosis in response to Legionella pneumophila. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 110, 1851–1856.

Cash, H.L., Whitham, C.V., Behrendt, C.L., Hooper, L.V., 2006. Symbiotic bacteria direct expression of an intestinal bactericidal lectin. Science 313, 1126–1130.

Casson, C.N., et al., 2013. Caspase-11 activation in response to bacterial secretion systems that access the host cytosol. PLoS Pathog. 9, e1003400.

Casson, C.N., et al., 2015. Human caspase-4 mediates noncanonical inflammasome activation against gram-negative bacterial pathogens. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 112, 6688–6693.

Chen, K.W., et al., 2014. The neutrophil NLRC4 inflammasome selectively promotes IL-1beta maturation without pyroptosis during acute Salmonella challenge. Cell Rep. 8, 570–582.

Coburn, B., Grassl, G.A., Finlay, B.B., 2007. Salmonella, the host and disease: a brief review. Immunol. Cell Biol. 85, 112–118.

Dinarello, C.A., 2002. The IL-1 family and inflammatory diseases. Clin. Exp. Rheumatol. 20, S1–13.

Ding, J., et al., 2016. Pore-forming activity and structural autoinhibition of the gasdermin family. Nature 535, 111–116.

Duncan, J.A., et al., 2007. Cryopyrin/NALP3 binds ATP/dATP, is an ATPase, and requires ATP binding to mediate inflammatory signaling. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 104, 8041–8046.

Fernandes-Alnemri, T., et al., 2010. The AIM2 inflammasome is critical for innate immunity to Francisella tularensis. Nat. Immunol. 11, 385–393.

Fierer, J., Guiney, D.G., 2001. Diverse virulence traits underlying different clinical outcomes of Salmonella infection. J. Clin. Invest. 107, 775–780.

Gaidt, M.M., et al., 2016. Human monocytes engage an alternative inflammasome pathway. Immunity 44, 833–846.

Gay, N.J., Symmons, M.F., Gangloff, M., Bryant, C.E., 2014. Assembly and localization of Toll-like receptor signalling complexes. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 14, 546–558.

---

Please cite this article in press as: Bierschenk, D., et al., Salmonella-induced inflammasome activation in humans. Mol. Immunol. (2016), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.molimm.2016.11.009

G Model
MIMM-5034; No. of Pages 6

ARTICLE IN PRESS

D. Bierschenk et al. / Molecular Immunology xxx (2016) xxx–xxx

Godinez, I., et al., 2009. Interleukin-23 orchestrates mucosal responses to Salmonella enterica serotype Typhimurium in the intestine. Infect. Immun. 77, 77–98.

Gordon, M.A., 2008. Salmonella infections in immunocompromised adults. J. Infect. 56, 413–422.

Hagar, J.A., Powell, D.A., Aachoui, Y., Ernst, R.K., Miao, E.A., 2013. Cytoplasmic LPS activates caspase-11: implications in TLR4-independent endotoxic shock. Science 341, 1250–1253.

Hansen-Wester, I., Hensel, M., 2001. Salmonella pathogenicity islands encoding type III secretion systems. Microbes Infect. 3, 549–559.

Hansson, G.C., 2012. Role of mucus layers in gut infection and inflammation. Curr. Opin. Microbiol. 15, 57–62.

Hayashi, F., et al., 2001. The innate immune response to bacterial flagellin is mediated by Toll-like receptor 5. Nature 410, 1099–1103.

He, W.T., et al., 2015. Gasdermin D is an executor of pyroptosis and required for interleukin-1beta secretion. Cell Res. 25, 1285–1298.

Hemmi, H., et al., 2000. A Toll-like receptor recognizes bacterial DNA. Nature 408, 740–745.

Hornung, V., et al., 2009. AIM2 recognizes cytosolic dsDNA and forms a caspase-1-activating inflammasome with ASC. Nature 458, 514–518.

Hu, Z., et al., 2015. Structural and biochemical basis for induced self-propagation of NLRC4. Science 350, 9–404.

Hu, G.Q., et al., 2016. AIM2 contributes to the maintenance of intestinal integrity via Akt and protects against Salmonella mucosal infection. Mucosal Immunol. 9, 1330–1339.

Jones, B.D., Ghori, N., Falkow, S., 1994. Salmonella typhimurium initiates murine infection by penetrating and destroying the specialized epithelial M cells of the Peyer's patches. J. Exp. Med. 180, 15–23.

Kajiwara, Y., et al., 2014. A critical role for human caspase-4 in endotoxin sensitivity. J. Immunol. 193, 335–343.

Kamada, N., Chen, G.Y., Inohara, N., Nunez, G., 2013. Control of pathogens and pathobionts by the gut microbiota. Nat. Immunol. 14, 685–690.

Kayagaki, N., et al., 2011. Non-canonical inflammasome activation targets caspase-11. Nature 479, 117–121.

Kayagaki, N., et al., 2013. Noncanonical inflammasome activation by intracellular LPS independent of TLR4. Science 341, 1246–1249.

Kayagaki, N., et al., 2015. Caspase-11 cleaves gasdermin D for non-canonical inflammasome signaling. Nature 526, 666–671.

Knodler, L.A., et al., 2014. Noncanonical inflammasome activation of caspase-4/caspase-11 mediates epithelial defenses against enteric bacterial pathogens. Cell Host Microbe 16, 249–256.

Kortmann, J., Brubaker, S.W., Monack, D.M., 2015. Cutting edge: inflammasome activation in primary human macrophages is dependent on flagellin. J. Immunol. 195, 815–819.

Kumar, H., Kawai, T., Akira, S., 2011. Pathogen recognition by the innate immune system. Int. Rev. Immunol. 30, 16–34.

LaRock, D.L., Chaudhary, A., Miller, S.I., 2015. Salmonellae interactions with host processes. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 13, 191–205.

Lawrence, T., 2009. The nuclear factor NF-kappaB pathway in inflammation. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 1, a001651.

Lin, X.Y., Choi, M.S., Porter, A.G., 2000. Expression analysis of the human caspase-1 subfamily reveals specific regulation of the CASP5 gene by lipopolysaccharide and interferon-gamma. J. Biol. Chem. 275, 39920–39926.

Mabbott, N.A., Donaldson, D.S., Ohno, H., Williams, I.R., Mahajan, A., 2013. Microfold (M) cells: important immunosurveillance posts in the intestinal epithelium. Mucosal Immunol 6, 666–677.

Man, S.M., et al., 2014a. Actin polymerization as a key innate immune effector mechanism to control Salmonella infection. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 111, 17588–17593.

Man, S.M., et al., 2014b. Inflammasome activation causes dual recruitment of NLRC4 and NLRP3 to the same macromolecular complex. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 111, 7403–7408.

Mariathasan, S., et al., 2004. Differential activation of the inflammasome by caspase-1 adaptors ASC and Ipaf. Nature 430, 213–218.

Martinon, F., Burns, K., Tschopp, J., 2002. The inflammasome: a molecular platform triggering activation of inflammatory caspases and processing of proIL-beta. Mol. Cell 10, 417–426.

Meunier, E., et al., 2014. Caspase-11 activation requires lysis of pathogen-containing vacuoles by IFN-induced GTPases. Nature 509, 366–370.

Miao, E.A., et al., 2010. Caspase-1-induced pyroptosis is an innate immune effector mechanism against intracellular bacteria. Nat. Immunol. 11, 1136–1142.

Monteleone, M., Stow, J.L., Schroder, K., 2015. Mechanisms of unconventional secretion of IL-1 family cytokines. Cytokine 74, 3–8.

Mukherjee, S., et al., 2014. Antibacterial membrane attack by a pore-forming intestinal C-type lectin. Nature 505, 103–107.

Munoz-Planillo, R., et al., 2013. K(+) efflux is the common trigger of NLRP3 inflammasome activation by bacterial toxins and particulate matter. Immunity 38, 1142–1153.

O'Neill, L.A., Golenbock, D., Bowie, A.G., 2013. The history of Toll-like receptors – redefining innate immunity. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 13, 453–460.

Poltorak, A., et al., 1998. Defective LPS signaling in C3H/HeJ and C57BL/10ScCr mice: mutations in Tlr4 gene. Science 282, 2085–2088.

Puren, A.J., Fantuzzi, G., Dinarello, C.A., 1999. Gene expression, synthesis, and secretion of interleukin 18 and interleukin 1beta are differentially regulated in human blood mononuclear cells and mouse spleen cells. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 96, 2256–2261.

Qu, Y., et al., 2016. NLRP3 recruitment by NLRC4 during Salmonella infection. J. Exp. Med. 213, 877–885.

Rathinam, V.A., et al., 2012. TRIF licenses caspase-11-dependent NLRP3 inflammasome activation by gram-negative bacteria. Cell 150, 606–619.

RemijSEN, Q., et al., 2011. Dying for a cause: NETosis, mechanisms behind an antimicrobial cell death modality. Cell Death Differ. 18, 581–588.

Ruhl, S., Broz, P., 2015. Caspase-11 activates a canonical NLRP3 inflammasome by promoting K(+) efflux. Eur. J. Immunol. 45, 2927–2936.

Rydstrom, A., Wick, M.J., 2007. Monocyte recruitment, activation, and function in the gut-associated lymphoid tissue during oral Salmonella infection. J. Immunol. 178, 5789–5801.

Schmid-Burgk, J.L., et al., 2015. Caspase-4 mediates non-canonical activation of the NLRP3 inflammasome in human myeloid cells. Eur. J. Immunol. 45, 2911–2917.

Schroder, K., Tschopp, J., 2010. The inflammasomes. Cell 140, 821–832.

Schroder, K., et al., 2012a. Acute lipopolysaccharide priming boosts inflammasome activation independently of inflammasome sensor induction. Immunobiology 217, 1325–1329.

Schroder, K., et al., 2012b. Conservation and divergence in Toll-like receptor 4-regulated gene expression in primary human versus mouse macrophages. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 109, E944–E953.

Sellin, M.E., et al., 2014. Epithelium-intrinsic NAIP/NLRC4 inflammasome drives infected enterocyte expulsion to restrict Salmonella replication in the intestinal mucosa. Cell Host Microbe 16, 237–248.

Sha, W., et al., 2014. Human NLRP3 inflammasome senses multiple types of bacterial RNAs. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 111, 16059–16064.

Shi, J., et al., 2014. Inflammatory caspases are innate immune receptors for intracellular LPS. Nature 514, 187–192.

Shi, J., et al., 2015. Cleavage of GSDMD by inflammatory caspases determines pyroptotic cell death. Nature 526, 660–665.

Srinivasula, S.M., et al., 2002. The PYRIN-CARD protein ASC is an activating adaptor for caspase-1. J. Biol. Chem. 277, 21119–21122.

Stecher, B., et al., 2004. Flagella and chemotaxis are required for efficient induction of Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium colitis in streptomycin-pretreated mice. Infect. Immun. 72, 4138–4150.

Stelter, C., et al., 2011. Salmonella-induced mucosal lectin RegIIIbeta kills competing gut microbiota. PLoS One 6, e20749.

Takeda, K., Takeuchi, O., Akira, S., 2002. Recognition of lipopeptides by Toll-like receptors. J. Endotoxin Res. 8, 459–463.

Takeuchi, A., 1967. Electron microscope studies of experimental Salmonella infection: I. Penetration into the intestinal epithelium by Salmonella typhimurium. Am. J. Pathol. 50, 109–136.

Tanimura, N., Saitoh, S., Matsumoto, F., Akashi-Takamura, S., Miyake, K., 2008. Roles for LPS-dependent interaction and relocation of TLR4 and TRAM in TRIF-signaling. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 368, 94–99.

Vance, R.E., 2015. The NAIP/NLRC4 inflammasomes. Curr. Opin. Immunol. 32, 84–89.

Vigano, E., et al., 2015. Human caspase-4 and caspase-5 regulate the one-step non-canonical inflammasome activation in monocytes. Nat. Commun. 6, 8761.

Wang, S., et al., 1996. Identification and characterization of Ich-3, a member of the interleukin-1beta converting enzyme (ICE)/Ced-3 family and an upstream regulator of ICE. J. Biol. Chem. 271, 20580–20587.

Wilson, J.E., et al., 2015. Inflammasome-independent role of AIM2 in suppressing colon tumorigenesis via DNA-PK and Akt. Nat. Med. 21, 906–913.

Yang, J., Zhao, Y., Shi, J., Shao, F., 2013. Human NAIP and mouse NAIP1 recognize bacterial type III secretion needle protein for inflammasome activation. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 110, 14408–14413.

Zhang, L., et al., 2015. Cryo-EM structure of the activated NAIP2-NLRC4 inflammasome reveals nucleated polymerization. Science 350, 404–409.

de Jong, H.K., Parry, C.M., van der Poll, T., Wiersinga, W.J., 2012. Host-pathogen interaction in invasive Salmonellosis. PLoS Pathog. 8, e1002933.

Matsuura, M., Kawasaki, K., Kawahara, K., Mitsuyama, M., 2012. Evasion of human innate immunity without antagonizing TLR4 by mutant Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium having penta-acylated lipid A. Innate Immun. 18, 764–773.


Please cite this article in press as: Bierschenk, D., et al., Salmonella-induced inflammasome activation in humans. Mol. Immunol. (2016), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.molimm.2016.11.009
