
ACCEPTED ARTICLE PREVIEW

Accepted Article Preview: Published ahead of advance online publication

Mechanisms of RIPK3-induced inflammation

Inbar Shlomovitz, Sefi Zargrian, Motti Gerlic

Cite this article as: Inbar Shlomovitz, Sefi Zargrian, Motti Gerlic, Mechanisms of RIPK3-induced inflammation, Immunology and Cell Biology accepted article preview 15 December 2016; doi:10.1038/icb.2016.124.

This is a PDF file of an unedited peer-reviewed manuscript that has been accepted for publication. NPG are providing this early version of the manuscript as a service to our customers. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting and a proof review before it is published in its final form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers apply.

Received 3 November 2016; revised 24 November 2016; accepted 27 November 2016; Accepted article preview online 15 December 2016

© 2016 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved.

ACCEPTED ARTICLE PREVIEW

Mechanisms of RIPK3-induced inflammation

Inbar Shlomovitz${}^{1}$, Sefi Zargrian${}^{1}$, Motti Gerlic${}^{1}$

${}^{1}$Department of Clinical Microbiology and Immunology, Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv 69978, Israel

The authors declare no financial conflicts of interest.

Correspondence: Motti Gerlic, ${}^{1}$Department of Clinical Microbiology and Immunology, Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv 69978, Israel.  
Email: mgerlic@post.tau.ac.il, Ph: +972-3-640-9400

Keywords

Necroptosis; pyroptosis; apoptosis; cell death; RIPK3; Inflammation; MLKL; RIPK1

Author Contributions

Conceptualization, M.G.; Writing – Review & Editing, I.S., S.Z and M.G.

Acknowledgments

This work was performed in partial fulfillment of the requirements for a Ph.D/M.Sc. degree of (I.S. and S.Z.), Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Israel. This work was supported by the Israel Society Foundation (ISF) (grant #1416/15), alpha-1 foundation, Recanati Foundation and the Varda and Boaz Dotan Research Center.

Abstract

© 2016 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved.

Receptor interacting protein kinase 3 (RIP3/RIPK3) is a multifunctional regulator of cell death and inflammation. It controls signalling downstream of the TNF receptor family, DAI and TLRs. Today, it is also widely recognised as a component of caspase-independent cell death known as necroptosis, and cytokine production via activation of the inflammasome. Its role in inflammasome activation, in particular, make the interpretation of its role in vivo more complex. In this review we focus on divergent roles for RIPK3 in cell death and inflammation.

## Introduction

Non-apoptotic cell death has become synonymous with inflammation, and many of the regulatory proteins of these phenomena share common upstream regulators. The receptor-interacting protein (RIP) kinase 1 (RIPK1) is perhaps the archetypal example of such a regulator. RIPK1 plays a dual role in inflammation by regulating NF-κB- and interferon regulatory factor (IRF)-dependent gene expression, or by regulating apoptosis (a caspase-dependent cell death) and necroptosis (a RIPK3/MLKL-dependent and caspase-independent cell death). Similar to RIPK1, the third member of the family, RIPK3, first described in 1999<sup>1,2</sup>, plays a dual role in inflammation and cell death.

## RIPK3 structure

The Ripk3 gene is located on chromosome 14 in both human and mouse. It encodes a 518 amino acid (aa) protein with a molecular mass of 57 kDa in human<sup>1,2</sup>, and a 486 aa protein with a molecular mass of 53 kDa in mice<sup>3</sup> (see Figure 1). Like other family members, RIPK3 is a threonine/serine protein kinase, and it shares ~30% identity and ~60% similarity with the two previously discovered members, RIPK1 and RIPK2. The N-terminal kinase domains display the highest homology<sup>1,2</sup>. ATP binding and enzymatic activity is coordinated by Lys50 (Lys51 in mouse). A K50A mutation diminished its kinase activity and prevented auto-phosphorylation<sup>1,2,4</sup>.

RIPK3 has several phosphorylation sites but only some of them have a described function. Ser227 (and Thr231/Ser232 in mouse RIPK3) and Ser199 (Ser204 in

mouse) in human RIPK3 are essential for the recruitment and activation of the downstream necroptotic effector, mixed-lineage-kinase domain-like (MLKL) 5-8.

In contrast to RIPK1 and RIPK2, which possess a death domain (DD) and caspase activation and recruitment domain (CARD), RIPK3 has a unique C terminal RIP homotypic interaction motif (RHIM), found also in the intermediate domain of RIPK1<sup>1</sup>. This RHIM domain enables homotypic protein-protein interactions<sup>9</sup>.

## Kinase and scaffold functions

Like RIPK1, the kinase activity of RIPK3 is necessary for caspase-independent cell death<sup>10</sup>. However, kinase-dead RIPK3 (D161N mutant) cells undergo increased rates of apoptosis due to the assembly of a RIPK3-RIPK1-FADD-caspase 8 complex<sup>11</sup>. RIPK3 is therefore important to control different forms of cell death. These kinase-independent phenotypes suggest that RIPK3 may influence the composition and activity of cell death complexes by acting as a scaffold for interacting partners.

## Signalling of RIPK3

RIPK3 regulates several pathways, which include the TLRs, the TNF receptor family, DAI, and IFN receptors. Following activation of these receptors, RIPK3 is recruited to RIPK1 where it oligomerizes via a RIP homotypic interaction motif (RHIM). During DAI signalling RIPK3 binds directly to the RHIM domain of DAI.

## Regulation of gene expression by Ripk3

RIPK3 appears to control NFκB-dependent gene expression however support for this conclusion is drawn from conflicting studies. Overexpression of RIPK3 induces NFκB activation in HEK293 and Phoenix-A cells<sup>2, 3</sup>, but it inhibits TRIF-dependent NFκB activation in HEK293T cells<sup>12</sup>. In contrast, RIPK3-deficient fibroblasts and macrophages demonstrated normal NFκB activation after stimulation with TNFα or TLR ligands<sup>13</sup>. These data suggest that RIPK3 is unlikely to influence NFκB activation, at least in fibroblasts and macrophages. However, it is possible that RIPK3 plays a role in NFκB gene induction in other cell types or in response to other stimuli. For example, bone marrow-derived dendritic cells (BMDCs) but not bone

© 2016 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved.

marrow-derived macrophages (BMDMs) from RIPK3-deficient mice showed a lower NFκB activation and cytokine production upon LPS stimulation. This deficit contributes to defective repair of the intestinal epithelium in a murine DSS-colitis model<sup>14</sup>. Taken together these results indicate that although RIPK3 may directly influence NFκB activation its role in NFκB activation *in vivo* needs to be carefully studied.

### RIPK3 in cell death

RIPK3 is mainly described as a regulator of necroptotic cell death, but it is now known to also regulate apoptosis and pyroptosis (a caspase-1-dependent cell death) (see Figure 2).

#### Necroptosis

Necroptosis can be triggered by caspase-8 inhibition<sup>15</sup>, as illustrated by the protection a RIPK3-deficiency affords germline deficiencies in caspase-8, FADD or RIPK1 in the embryo and the neonate<sup>16-21</sup>.

In the absence of caspase-8 activity, RIPK1 and RIPK3 undergo RIP homotypic interaction motif (RHIM)-dependent oligomerization. This oligomerization promotes phosphorylation of RIPK1, RIPK3 and MLKL, and it leads to necroptosis (Figure 2). Once phosphorylated, RIPK3 recruits MLKL through its C-terminal kinase-like domain, and phosphorylates MLKL at Thr357 and Ser358<sup>5</sup>. The phosphorylated form of MLKL can translocate to the plasma cell membrane, oligomerize and compromise membrane integrity<sup>22-25</sup>. This event leads to cell rupture, and the release of danger-associated-molecular-patterns (DAMPs) that promote inflammation<sup>15, 26</sup>.

#### Apoptosis

RIPK3 does not influence apoptosis induced in thymocytes by PMA, inomycin, dexamethasone or FasL<sup>13</sup>. However, when the kinase activity of RIPK3 is pharmacologically or genetically (D161N) inhibited, RIPK3 can trigger caspase-8-dependent apoptosis (Figure 2). Overexpression of RIPK3 can induce apoptosis, as can be conclude by the fact that caspase inhibition is required in the setting of RIPK3

© 2016 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved.

overexpression to prevent cell death ${}^{11,27}$. The proposed interaction between RIPK3 and the large pro-domains of caspases 2, 8, 9, and 10 have been reported using co-precipitation methodologies, suggesting an adaptor-independent mechanism of cell death induction by RIPK3 ${}^{1}$. RIPK3 kinase-dead mice (D161N) die prematurely from caspase-8-mediated apoptosis, supporting a role for RIPK3 in apoptosis ${}^{11}$ (Figure 2). In support of these genetic studies, high concentrations of RIPK3 kinase inhibitors also induce caspase-dependent cell death ${}^{27}$. These data suggest that pharmacological inhibition of RIPK3 may trigger unexpected activation of the apoptotic machinery.

### Pyroptosis (Inflammasome-dependent cell death)

The inflammasome-dependent cell death, pyroptosis, is characterized by the assembly of a multi-protein complex called the inflammasome, which leads to the processing and activation of caspase-1 and finally to the processing and release of the pro-inflammatory cytokines IL-1β and IL-18 ${}^{28}$. Caspase-1 can also be activated in a RIPK3-dependent manner ${}^{29-32}$, a process dubbed the Ripflammasome (Figure 2). The NLRP3 inflammasome is activated in BMDMs or BMDCs in a RIPK3-dependent manner when IAPs are antagonized by Smac mimetics ${}^{29-32}$. This can explain why RIPK3 deficient BMDCs were shown to secrete lower levels of IL-1β after LPS stimulation ${}^{14}$. Similarly, Casp8 ${}^{-/-}$ BMDCs have a constitutively active form of the RIPK3-dependent NLRP3 inflammasome ${}^{33}$. Caspase-8 can also induce the processing of IL-1β into its active form in response to Smac-mimetics ${}^{29}$, chemotherapeutic drugs ${}^{34}$ or FasL ${}^{35}$.

The use of pan caspase inhibitors, such as zVAD-fmk, limits the study of proteolytic events during the necroptotic process. Indeed, when necroptosis was induced using the caspase inhibitor QVD-OPh, at a dose that fails to inhibit caspase-1, MLKL induced NLRP3-inflammasome activation and processing of caspase-1 and IL-1β ${}^{29-32}$. Like Casp8 ${}^{-/-}$ BMDCs ${}^{33}$, Ripk1 ${}^{-/-}$ BMDMs were found to be primed for inflammasome activation in a RIPK3-dependent manner ${}^{18}$. RIPK3 deficiency does not alter caspase-1 activation or IL-1β processing in response to canonical NLRP3 inflammasome activators in human monocytes, BMDM or BMDC ${}^{30,31,36}$.

Pyroptosis can be triggered by infection or NLR engagement and/or activation. The RIPK1-RIPK3-caspase-8 complex triggers caspase-1 activation and cell death of murine macrophages infected with *Yersinia pestis*, suggesting RIPK3 involvement in pyroptosis<sup>37</sup>. The A20 ubiquitin editing enzyme supports assembly of a RIPK3-dependent complex of Lys-63-ubiquitinated pro-IL-1β and unanchored polyubiquitin, restricting access to caspase-1 and caspase-8 within the NLRP3 inflammasome<sup>38</sup> to inhibit pro-IL-1β processing.

### RIPK3 in disease

#### During infectious disease
Apoptosis serves an important mode of defence against some infections. Pathogen virulence factors target apoptosis to enable replication and maintain infection. When apoptosis is blocked, caspase-independent, RIPK3-dependent forms of cell death can limit pathogen replication and dissemination<sup>39</sup>. However, cell leakage following caspase-independent cell death may accelerate pathogen dissemination within the host<sup>40</sup>.

Vaccinia virus expresses potent inhibitors of apoptosis that block caspase-1, -8, and -9<sup>41, 42</sup> as well as bcl-2 homologs<sup>43, 44</sup> and an inflammasome inhibitor<sup>45</sup>. Despite these virulence factors, cell death proceeds via RIPK1/RIPK3-dependent necroptosis<sup>46, 47</sup>. *Ripk3*<sup>-/-</sup> mice fail to eliminate virus replication demonstrating the key role played by this non-apoptotic cell death pathway during infection<sup>47</sup>. Murine cytomegalovirus (MCMV) is a double-stranded DNA virus that encodes cell death inhibitors that target caspases (vICA) and RIPK3 (vIRA, product of M45 gene)<sup>48</sup>. This last MCMV virulence factor contains an RHIM domain that binds RIPK3 and prevents DAI-dependent non-canonical necroptosis (RIPK1 non-dependent necroptosis)<sup>49</sup>. The human cytomegalovirus also inhibits necroptosis but does so downstream of MLKL via an undefined mechanism<sup>50</sup>. Herpes simplex virus type 1 and type 2 induce RIPK3-MLKL-dependent necroptosis in mice via expression of the RHIM domain-containing proteins ICP6 and ICP10, respectively<sup>51, 52</sup>. However, the same proteins inhibit TNFα-induced necroptosis in human cells<sup>53</sup> suggesting some species and/or cell type selectivity in function. Influenza A virus induces both apoptosis and

necroptosis. Replicating virus induces the assembly of a RIPK3-containing complex with RIPK1, MLKL and FADD. It was suggested that downstream to this complex, MLKL drives necroptosis while FADD mediates apoptosis as Ripk3⁻/⁻, Ripk3⁻/⁻Fadd⁻/⁻ and Mlkl⁻/⁻Fadd⁻/⁻ mice are more susceptible to Influenza A virus infection compared to wild-type and Mlkl⁻/⁻ mice controls. Surprisingly, this also indicates an apoptotic role for RIPK3 when necroptosis is inhibited during viral infection<sup>54</sup>.

Necroptosis plays key roles in immune responses to bacterial pathogens. The gram-negative bacteria, Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium, induces inflammasome formation and caspase-1-mediated pyroptotic cell death in macrophages. S. Typhimurium also induces RIPK3-dependent necroptosis in macrophages, probably as a pathway to evade immunity<sup>55</sup>. RIPK1-RIPK3-dependent mitochondrial ROS production can contribute to bacteria killing. However, macrophage necroptosis contributes to the release of mycobacterium to the extracellular environment<sup>56</sup>. In a bacterial polymicrobial model of sepsis, in which TNFα can play a major role, Ripk3⁻/⁻ mice were protected from cecal-ligation puncture (CLP)-induced disease<sup>57</sup>. Staphylococcus aureus induces necroptosis via actions on RIPK1, RIPK3 and MLKL. In a pulmonary model of infection, RIPK3-deficient mice display increased numbers of alveolar macrophages and reduced bacterial loads<sup>58</sup>. In contrast, RIPK3- and MLKL-deficient mice were more susceptible to skin and systemic MRSA infection due to impaired apoptosis and IL-1β production<sup>59</sup>. These results suggest that the route of infection, the dose of MRSA, the organs impacted, and the systemic activation of necroptosis and inflammasome may decide whether RIPK3 inhibition is beneficial or detrimental to animal physiology.

**Auto-inflammation**

RIPK3 can influence acute and chronic inflammation, and it plays key roles in sterile and auto-inflammatory pathologies (Figure 3). RIPK3 depletion protects from demyelination in a multiple sclerosis model<sup>60</sup>. This is likely a consequence of inhibition of necroptosis because necrostatin-1s (nec-1s) also had a protective effect. RIPK3 depletion also protects from ischemia-reperfusion injury<sup>61</sup>, atherosclerosis in Ldlr⁻/⁻ and ApoE⁻/⁻ mice<sup>62</sup>. RIPK3 deficiency protects from cone cell death (Rd10⁻/⁻)<sup>63</sup>, dsRNA-induced retinal degradation<sup>64</sup> and retinitis pigmentosa<sup>65</sup> via a TNF-

dependent necroptotic pathology as nec-1s could protect while TNFα was found to be elevated. RIPK3 may play dual roles in skin pathologies seen in mice lacking caspase-8<sup>66</sup>, FADD<sup>67</sup> or RIPK1<sup>18, 68</sup> by inhibition of necroptosis and inflammation; because protection is seen upon inhibition of necroptosis by nec-1s treatment or MLKL deletion, or inhibition of inflammation by TNF, TNFR1 or MyD88 deletion. Similar, RIPK3 deletion impaired TNF and MyD88 dependent inflammation due to deletion of FADD<sup>69</sup> or caspase-8<sup>66</sup> in intestinal epithelial cell. TNF-dependent engraftment failure of Ripk1<sup>-/-</sup> hematopoietic progenitor cells<sup>18, 70</sup> was also protected by RIPK3 deletion. Furthermore, RIPK3 deficiency protects from: ethanol- or acetaminophen-induced liver injury<sup>71, 72</sup> and attenuated methionine- and choline-deficient diet-induced liver injury, steatosis, inflammation, fibrosis and oxidative stress<sup>73</sup>.

In agreement, RIPK3 activation or high expression of RIPK3 was demonstrated in cortical lesions from MS brain specimens<sup>74</sup>; in skin lesions of patients with toxin epidermal necrolysis<sup>75</sup>; in kidney tissues from subtotal nephrectomy - model for chronic kidney injury<sup>76</sup>; in the white adipose tissue of obese mice fed with a choline-deficient high-fat diet and in visceral white adipose tissue of obese humans<sup>77</sup>; and in non-alcoholic fatty liver disease<sup>78</sup>.

RIPK3 deficiency also has deleterious outcomes in some models of disease. Loss of RIPK3 worsens liver parenchymal cell TAK1 deletion-induced inflammatory hepatocarcinogenesis<sup>78</sup>, while genetic RIPK3 inactivation promotes increased adipocyte apoptosis, inflammation and impaired insulin signaling<sup>77</sup>.

RIPK3 was recently implicated in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and heart failure. Loss of optineurin (OPTN) contributes to familial and sporadic ALS. In an animal model of ALS, demyelination and axonal degeneration in the CNS were caused by activation of RIPK1, RIPK3 and MLKL. The axonal pathology of OPTN-deficient mice was pharmacologically diminished by nec-1 treatment and by RIPK3-deficiency or expression of a kinase-dead form of RIPK1. Furthermore, similar results were found in another ALS model, SOD1G93A transgenic mice, and in human ALS pathological samples<sup>79</sup>.

ACCEPTED ARTICLE PREVIEW

Necroptosis is known to be involved in various cardiac pathological conditions, such as ischemia-reperfusion injury and heart failure. RIPK3 triggers myocardial necroptosis by activation of Ca²⁺-calmodulin-dependent protein kinase (CaMKII) in ischemia-reperfusion or doxorubicin models for heart failure induction.

### Concluding remarks

Much has been learned in recent years about the mechanisms and role of RIPK3 in cell death and inflammatory signalling and pathologies. Thus, it is tempting to propose pharmacological inhibitors of the RIPK3 cascade to alleviate these syndromes. However, questions regarding the applicability of pharmacological inhibitors of RIPK3 remain due to the involvement of RIPK3 in different cell death mechanisms and inflammatory processes. One important consideration is related to the complicated dialogue between RIPK1 and RIPK3. RIPK3 inhibition can lead to apoptosis, although inhibitors of RIPK3 are now available that target other phosphorylation events on RIPK3 avoiding apoptosis induction. The relative importance of RIPK3 in NLRP3 inflammasome formation in vivo and in humans remains to be determined. Indeed, a recent study challenged few of the published positive effects of RIPK3 inhibition in different pathologies, while also revealing few pathologies in which RIPK3 inhibition outcomes were better than MLKL inhibition. This study further emphasizes the beneficial effect of targeting multi-mechanisms simultaneously and thus, RIPK3 remains an attractive target due to the potential to target a multifunctional regulator of cell death and inflammation.

As part of the journey for translating the accumulated knowledge to clinical use, RIPK3 is being tested as a biomarker. In a recent clinical study examined RIPK3 serum levels in patients with heart failure or myocardial infarction. It was found that in patients with normal levels of troponin-I prior to percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI), serum levels of RIPK3 and troponin-I after the intervention enabled to distinguish between patients with a preserved left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) and patients with impaired left ventricular function. This findings suggest that serum levels of RIPK3 together with troponin-I may identify patients with a decreased LVEF, which will allow for an early shift to more intensive therapy.

Taken together, the take home message from all the above roles of RIPK3 in gene regulation and cell death is that we still have a long way to go before we completely understand the complexity of RIPK3 in cell death, signal transduction and in pathological inflammation in vivo. Until then we should be carefully interpreting in-vivo and disease results regarding the cell death mechanisms when RIPK3 is involved, while elucidating its complex roles in disease may enable the development of inhibitors for specific applications.


Figure Legends

Figure 1. RIPK3 structure, functional mutation and role during embryonic development and neonatal life.

Schematic structure and summary of in-vitro and in-vivo experimental mutation of human RIPK3 (hRIPK3) (A) and mouse RIPK3 (mRIPK3) (B). (C) The role of RIPK3 during embryonic development and neonatal life. Inhibition of RIPK3 kinase activity by mutation of D161N on RIPK3 drives RIPK1-dependent and caspase-8-dependent apoptosis and embryonic lethality.

Figure 2. RIPK3 role in necroptosis, apoptosis and inflammasome activation.

Cell death pathways can be triggered by numerous factors including death receptor ligation, extracellular and intracellular pathogens associate molecular patterns (PAMPs) and inflammasome activation by danger associate molecular patterns (DAMPs). When caspase activity is blocked, TLR ligation and a cytoplasmic complex comprising RIPK1 and RIPK3 can drive necroptotic death. Phosphorylation and oligomerization of RIPK3 activates necroptosis by inducing phosphorylation of MLKL and its translocation to the cell membrane. The cellular contents released from necroptotic cells can serve as DAMPs to further induce inflammation. Genetically and pharmacologically inhibiting RIPK3 kinase activity to inhibit necroptosis may also lead to the formation of a FADD-RIPK1-RIPK3-Caspase-8 complex to activate caspase-8 to induce apoptosis. Pyroptosis is induced by the formation of the inflammasome complex to induce caspase-1 activation and IL-1β and IL-18 maturation. Inflammasome activation and pyroptosis can directly be activated by RIPK3 in a still unknown mechanism.

Figure 3. Evidence for RIPK3 regulation of models of inflammation and tissue damage.

Evidence, mainly from mouse models of disease, of RIPK3 importance as a mediator of tissue damage. RIPK3 contribution to cell death versus inflammatory cytokine production in these disease processes has been extremely challenging. Elucidating its complex roles in disease may enable the development of inhibitors for specific applications.


© 2016 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved.
References

1. Sun X, Lee J, Navas T, Baldwin DT, Stewart TA, Dixit VM. RIP3, a novel apoptosis-inducing kinase. J Biol Chem 1999; 274(24): 16871-5.

2. Yu PW, Huang BC, Shen M, Quast J, Chan E, Xu X et al. Identification of RIP3, a RIP-like kinase that activates apoptosis and NF-kappaB. Curr Biol 1999; 9(10): 539-42.

3. Pazdernik NJ, Donner DB, Goebl MG, Harrington MA. Mouse receptor interacting protein 3 does not contain a caspase-recruiting or a death domain but induces apoptosis and activates NF-kappaB. Mol Cell Biol 1999; 19(10): 6500-8.

4. Zhang DW, Shao J, Lin J, Zhang N, Lu BJ, Lin SC et al. RIP3, an energy metabolism regulator that switches TNF-induced cell death from apoptosis to necrosis. Science 2009; 325(5938): 332-6.

5. Sun L, Wang H, Wang Z, He S, Chen S, Liao D et al. Mixed lineage kinase domain-like protein mediates necrosis signaling downstream of RIP3 kinase. Cell 2012; 148(1-2): 213-27.

6. McQuade T, Cho Y, Chan FK. Positive and negative phosphorylation regulates RIP1- and RIP3-induced programmed necrosis. The Biochemical journal 2013; 456(3): 409-15.

7. Chen W, Zhou Z, Li L, Zhong CQ, Zheng X, Wu X et al. Diverse sequence determinants control human and mouse receptor interacting protein 3 (RIP3) and mixed lineage kinase domain-like (MLKL) interaction in necroptotic signaling. J Biol Chem 2013; 288(23): 16247-61.

8. He S, Wang L, Miao L, Wang T, Du F, Zhao L et al. Receptor interacting protein kinase-3 determines cellular necrotic response to TNF-alpha. Cell 2009; 137(6): 1100-11.

9. Sun X, Yin J, Starovasnik MA, Fairbrother WJ, Dixit VM. Identification of a novel homotypic interaction motif required for the phosphorylation of receptor-interacting protein (RIP) by RIP3. J Biol Chem 2002; 277(11): 9505-11.

10. Feng S, Yang Y, Mei Y, Ma L, Zhu DE, Hoti N et al. Cleavage of RIP3 inactivates its caspase-independent apoptosis pathway by removal of kinase domain. Cell Signal 2007; 19(10): 2056-67.

11. Newton K, Dugger DL, Wickliffe KE, Kapoor N, de Almagro MC, Vucic D et al. Activity of protein kinase RIPK3 determines whether cells die by necroptosis or apoptosis. Science 2014; 343(6177): 1357-60.

12. Meylan E, Burns K, Hofmann K, Blancheteau V, Martinon F, Kelliher M et al. RIP1 is an essential mediator of Toll-like receptor 3-induced NF-kappa B activation. Nat Immunol 2004; 5(5): 503-7.

13. Newton K, Sun X, Dixit VM. Kinase RIP3 is dispensable for normal NF-kappa Bs, signaling by the B-cell and T-cell receptors, tumor necrosis factor receptor 1, and Toll-like receptors 2 and 4. Mol Cell Biol 2004; 24(4): 1464-9.

14. Moriwaki K, Balaji S, McQuade T, Malhotra N, Kang J, Chan FK. The necroptosis adaptor RIPK3 promotes injury-induced cytokine expression and tissue repair. Immunity 2014; 41(4): 567-78.

15. Silke J, Rickard JA, Gerlic M. The diverse role of RIP kinases in necroptosis and inflammation. Nat Immunol 2015; 16(7): 689-97.

16. Dillon CP, Weinlich R, Rodriguez DA, Cripps JG, Quarato G, Gurung Pet al. RIPK1 blocks early postnatal lethality mediated by caspase-8 and RIPK3. Cell 2014; 157(5): 1189-202.

17. Kaiser WJ, Daley-Bauer LP, Thapa RJ, Mandal P, Berger SB, Huang C et al. Vital role for RIP1 in suppressing necrotic as well as apoptotic cell death during mammalian parturition. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2014.

18. Rickard JA, O'Donnell JA, Evans JM, Lalaoui N, Poh AR, Rogers T et al. RIPK1 regulates RIPK3-MLKL-driven systemic inflammation and emergency hematopoiesis. Cell 2014; 157(5): 1175-88.

19. Dowling JP, Nair A, Zhang J. A novel function of RIP1 in postnatal development and immune homeostasis by protecting against RIP3-dependent necroptosis and FADD-mediated apoptosis. Front Cell Dev Biol 2015; 3: 12.

20. Kaiser WJ, Upton JW, Long AB, Livingston-Rosanoff D, Daley-Bauer LP, Hakem R et al. RIP3 mediates the embryonic lethality of caspase-8-deficient mice. Nature 2011; 471(7338): 368-72.

21. Oberst A, Dillon CP, Weinlich R, McCormick LL, Fitzgerald P, Pop C et al. Catalytic activity of the caspase-8-FLIP(L) complex inhibits RIPK3-dependent necrosis. Nature 2011; 471(7338): 363-7.

22. Chen X, Li W, Ren J, Huang D, He WT, Song Y et al. Translocation of mixed lineage kinase domain-like protein to plasma membrane leads to necrotic cell death. Cell Res 2014; 24(1): 105-21.

23. Cai Z, Jitkaew S, Zhao J, Chiang HC, Choksi S, Liu J et al. Plasma membrane translocation of trimerized MLKL protein is required for TNF-induced necroptosis. Nat Cell Biol 2014; 16(1): 55-65.

24. Dondelinger Y, Declercq W, Montessuit S, Roelandt R, Goncalves A, Bruggeman I et al. MLKL compromises plasma membrane integrity by binding to phosphatidylinositol phosphates. Cell Rep 2014; 7(4): 971-81.


© 2016 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved.
25. Hildebrand JM, Tanzer MC, Lucet IS, Young SN, Spall SK, Sharma P et al. Activation of the pseudokinase MLKL unleashes the four-helix bundle domain to induce membrane localization and necroptotic cell death. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2014; 111(42): 15072-7.

26. Pasparakis M, Vandenabeele P. Necroptosis and its role in inflammation. Nature 2015; 517(7534): 311-20.

27. Mandal P, Berger SB, Pillay S, Moriwaki K, Huang C, Guo H et al. RIP3 induces apoptosis independent of pronecrotic kinase activity. Mol Cell 2014; 56(4): 481-95.

28. Croker BA, O'Donnell JA, Gerlic M. Pyroptotic death storms and cytopenia. Curr Opin Immunol 2014; 26: 128-37.

29. Vince JE, Wong WW, Gentle I, Lawlor KE, Allam R, O'Reilly L et al. Inhibitor of apoptosis proteins limit RIP3 kinase-dependent interleukin-1 activation. Immunity 2012; 36(2): 215-27.

30. Lawlor KE, Khan N, Mildenhall A, Gerlic M, Croker BA, D'Cruz AA et al. RIPK3 promotes cell death and NLRP3 inflammasome activation in the absence of MLKL. Nature communications 2015; 6: 6282.

31. Yabal M, Muller N, Adler H, Knies N, Gross CJ, Damgaard RB et al. XIAP restricts TNF- and RIP3-dependent cell death and inflammasome activation. Cell Rep 2014; 7(6): 1796-808.

32. Hockendorf U, Yabal M, Jost PJ. RIPK3-dependent cell death and inflammasome activation in FLT3-ITD expressing LICs. Oncotarget 2016.

33. Kang TB, Yang SH, Toth B, Kovalenko A, Wallach D. Caspase-8 blocks kinase RIPK3-mediated activation of the NLRP3 inflammasome. Immunity 2013; 38(1): 27-40.

34. Antonopoulos C, El Sanadi C, Kaiser WJ, Mocarski ES, Dubyak GR. Proapoptotic chemotherapeutic drugs induce noncanonical processing and release of IL-1beta via caspase-8 in dendritic cells. J Immunol 2013; 191(9): 4789-803.

35. Bossaller L, Chiang PI, Schmidt-Lauber C, Ganesan S, Kaiser WJ, Rathinam VA et al. Cutting edge: FAS (CD95) mediates noncanonical IL-1beta and IL-18 maturation via caspase-8 in an RIP3-independent manner. J Immunol 2012; 189(12): 5508-12.

36. Gaidt MM, Ebert TS, Chauhan D, Schmidt T, Schmid-Burgk JL, Rapino F et al. Human Monocytes Engage an Alternative Inflammasome Pathway. Immunity 2016; 44(4): 833-46.

37. Weng D, Marty-Roix R, Ganesan S, Proulx MK, Vladimer GI, Kaiser WJ et al. Caspase-8 and RIP kinases regulate bacteria-induced innate immune responses and cell death. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2014; 111(20): 7391-6.

38. Duong BH, Onizawa M, Oses-Prieto JA, Advincula R, Burlingame A, Malynn BA et al. A20 restricts ubiquitination of pro-interleukin-1beta protein complexes and suppresses NLRP3 inflammasome activity. Immunity 2015; 42(1): 55-67.

39. Guo H, Kaiser WJ, Mocarski ES. Manipulation of apoptosis and necroptosis signaling by herpesviruses. Medical microbiology and immunology 2015; 204(3): 439-48.

40. Silke J, Vaux DL. IAP gene deletion and conditional knockout models. Seminars in cell & developmental biology 2015; 39: 97-105.

41. Dobbelstein M, Shenk T. Protection against apoptosis by the vaccinia virus SPI-2 (B13R) gene product. Journal of virology 1996; 70(9): 6479-85.

42. Yu E, Zhai D, Jin C, Gerlic M, Reed JC, Liddington R. Structural determinants of caspase-9 inhibition by the vaccinia virus protein, F1L. J Biol Chem 2011; 286(35): 30748-58.

43. Wasilenko ST, Stewart TL, Meyers AF, Barry M. Vaccinia virus encodes a previously uncharacterized mitochondrial-associated inhibitor of apoptosis. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2003; 100(24): 14345-50.

44. Aoyagi M, Zhai D, Jin C, Aleshin AE, Stec B, Reed JC et al. Vaccinia virus N1L protein resembles a B cell lymphoma-2 (Bcl-2) family protein. Protein science : a publication of the Protein Society 2007; 16(1): 118-24.

45. Gerlic M, Faustin B, Postigo A, Yu EC, Proell M, Gombosuren N et al. Vaccinia virus F1L protein promotes virulence by inhibiting inflammasome activation. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2013; 110(19): 7808-13.

46. Chan FK, Shisler J, Bixby JG, Felices M, Zheng L, Appel M et al. A role for tumor necrosis factor receptor-2 and receptor-interacting protein in programmed necrosis and antiviral responses. J Biol Chem 2003; 278(51): 51613-21.

47. Cho YS, Challa S, Moquin D, Genga R, Ray TD, Guildford M et al. Phosphorylation-driven assembly of the RIP1-RIP3 complex regulates programmed necrosis and virus-induced inflammation. Cell 2009; 137(6): 1112-23.

48. Upton JW, Kaiser WJ, Mocarski ES. Cytomegalovirus M45 cell death suppression requires receptor-interacting protein (RIP) homotypic interaction motif (RHIM)-dependent interaction with RIP1. J Biol Chem 2008; 283(25): 16966-70.

49. Upton JW, Kaiser WJ, Mocarski ES. DAI/ZBP1/DLM-1 complexes with RIP3 to mediate virus-induced programmed necrosis that is targeted by murine cytomegalovirus vIRA. Cell host & microbe 2012; 11(3): 290-7.

50. Omoto S, Guo H, Talekar GR, Roback L, Kaiser WJ, Mocarski ES. Suppression of RIP3-dependent necroptosis by human cytomegalovirus. J Biol Chem 2015; 290(18): 11635-48.

51. Wang X, Li Y, Liu S, Yu X, Li L, Shi C et al. Direct activation of RIP3/MLKL-dependent necrosis by herpes simplex virus 1 (HSV-1) protein ICP6 triggers host antiviral defense. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2014; 111(43): 15438-43.

52. Huang Z, Wu SQ, Liang Y, Zhou X, Chen W, Li L et al. RIP1/RIP3 binding to HSV-1 ICP6 initiates necroptosis to restrict virus propagation in mice. Cell host & microbe 2015; 17(2): 229-42.

53. Guo H, Omoto S, Harris PA, Finger JN, Bertin J, Gough PJ et al. Herpes simplex virus suppresses necroptosis in human cells. Cell host & microbe 2015; 17(2): 243-51.

54. Nogusa S, Thapa RJ, Dillon CP, Liedmann S, Oguin TH, 3rd, Ingram JP et al. RIPK3 Activates Parallel Pathways of MLKL-Driven Necroptosis and FADD-Mediated Apoptosis to Protect against Influenza A Virus. Cell host & microbe 2016; 20(1): 13-24.

55. Robinson N, McComb S, Mulligan R, Dudani R, Krishnan L, Sad S. Type I interferon induces necroptosis in macrophages during infection with Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium. Nat Immunol 2012; 13(10): 954-62.

56. Roca FJ, Ramakrishnan L. TNF dually mediates resistance and susceptibility to mycobacteria via mitochondrial reactive oxygen species. Cell 2013; 153(3): 521-34.

57. Duprez L, Takahashi N, Van Hauwermeiren F, Vandendriessche B, Goossens V, Vanden Berghe T et al. RIP kinase-dependent necrosis drives lethal systemic inflammatory response syndrome. Immunity 2011; 35(6): 908-18.

58. Kitur K, Parker D, Nieto P, Ahn DS, Cohen TS, Chung S et al. Toxin-induced necroptosis is a major mechanism of Staphylococcus aureus lung damage. PLoS pathogens 2015; 11(4): e1004820.

59. Kitur K, Wachtel S, Brown A, Wickersham M, Paulino F, Penaloza HF et al. Necroptosis Promotes Staphylococcus aureus Clearance by Inhibiting Excessive Inflammatory Signaling. Cell Rep 2016; 16(8): 2219-30.

60. Ofengeim D, Ito Y, Najafov A, Zhang Y, Shan B, DeWitt JP et al. Activation of necroptosis in multiple sclerosis. Cell Rep 2015; 10(11): 1836-49.

61. Linkermann A, Brasen JH, Darding M, Jin MK, Sanz AB, Heller JO et al. Two independent pathways of regulated necrosis mediate ischemia-reperfusion injury. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2013; 110(29): 12024-9.

62. Lin J, Li H, Yang M, Ren J, Huang Z, Han F et al. A role of RIP3-mediated macrophage necrosis in atherosclerosis development. Cell Rep 2013; 3(1): 200-10.

63. Murakami Y, Matsumoto H, Roh M, Suzuki J, Hisatomi T, Ikeda Y et al. Receptor interacting protein kinase mediates necrotic cone but not rod cell death in a mouse model of inherited degeneration. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2012; 109(36): 14598-603.

64. Murakami Y, Matsumoto H, Roh M, Giani A, Kataoka K, Morizane Y et al. Programmed necrosis, not apoptosis, is a key mediator of cell loss and DAMP-mediated inflammation in dsRNA-induced retinal degeneration. Cell Death Differ 2014; 21(2): 270-7.

65. Sato K, Li S, Gordon WC, He J, Liou GI, Hill JM et al. Receptor interacting protein kinase-mediated necrosis contributes to cone and rod photoreceptor degeneration in the retina lacking interphotoreceptor retinoid-binding protein. The Journal of neuroscience: the official journal of the Society for Neuroscience 2013; 33(44): 17458-68.

66. Weinlich R, Oberst A, Dillon CP, Janke LJ, Milasta S, Lukens JR et al. Protective roles for caspase-8 and cFLIP in adult homeostasis. Cell Rep 2013; 5(2): 340-8.

67. Bonnet MC, Preukschat D, Welz PS, van Loo G, Ermolaeva MA, Bloch W et al. The adaptor protein FADD protects epidermal keratinocytes from necroptosis in vivo and prevents skin inflammation. Immunity 2011; 35(4): 572-82.

68. Dannappel M, Vlantis K, Kumari S, Polykratis A, Kim C, Wachsmuth L et al. RIPK1 maintains epithelial homeostasis by inhibiting apoptosis and necroptosis. Nature 2014; 513(7516): 90-4.

69. Welz PS, Wullaert A, Vlantis K, Kondylis V, Fernandez-Majada V, Ermolaeva M et al. FADD prevents RIP3-mediated epithelial cell necrosis and chronic intestinal inflammation. Nature 2011; 477(7364): 330-4.

70. Roderick JE, Hermance N, Zelic M, Simmons MJ, Polykratis A, Pasparakis M et al. Hematopoietic RIPK1 deficiency results in bone marrow failure caused by apoptosis and RIPK3-mediated necroptosis. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2014; 111(40): 14436-41.

71. Roychowdhury S, McMullen MR, Pisano SG, Liu X, Nagy LE. Absence of receptor interacting protein kinase 3 prevents ethanol-induced liver injury. Hepatology 2013; 57(5): 1773-83.

72. Ramachandran A, McGill MR, Xie Y, Ni HM, Ding WX, Jaeschke H. Receptor interacting protein kinase 3 is a critical early mediator of acetaminophen-induced hepatocyte necrosis in mice. Hepatology 2013; 58(6): 2099-108.

73. Afonso MB, Rodrigues PM, Carvalho T, Caridade M, Borralho P, Cortez-Pinto H et al. Necroptosis is a key pathogenic event in human and experimental murine models of non-alcoholic steatohepatitis. Clin Sci (Lond) 2015; 129(8): 721-39.

74. Dhib-Jalbut S, Kalvakolanu DV. Microglia and necroptosis: The culprits of neuronal cell death in multiple sclerosis. Cytokine 2015; 76(2): 583-4.

75. Kim SK, Kim WJ, Yoon JH, Ji JH, Morgan MJ, Cho H et al. Upregulated RIP3 Expression Potentiates MLKL Phosphorylation-Mediated Programmed Necrosis in Toxic Epidermal Necrolysis. J Invest Dermatol 2015; 135(8): 2021-30.

76. Zhu Y, Cui H, Xia Y, Gan H. RIPK3-Mediated Necroptosis and Apoptosis Contributes to Renal Tubular Cell Progressive Loss and Chronic Kidney Disease Progression in Rats. PLoS one 2016; 11(6): e0156729.

77. Gautheron J, Vucur M, Schneider AT, Severi I, Roderburg C, Roy S et al. The necroptosis-inducing kinase RIPK3 dampens adipose tissue inflammation and glucose intolerance. Nature communications 2016; 7: 11869.

78. Vucur M, Reisinger F, Gautheron J, Janssen J, Roderburg C, Cardenas DV et al. RIP3 inhibits inflammatory hepatocarcinogenesis but promotes cholestasis by controlling caspase-8- and JNK-dependent compensatory cell proliferation. Cell Rep 2013; 4(4): 776-90.

79. Ito Y, Ofengeim D, Najafov A, Das S, Saberi S, Li Y et al. RIPK1 mediates axonal degeneration by promoting inflammation and necroptosis in ALS. Science 2016; 353(6299): 603-8.

80. Zhang T, Zhang Y, Cui M, Jin L, Wang Y, Lv F et al. CaMKII is a RIP3 substrate mediating ischemia- and oxidative stress-induced myocardial necroptosis. Nature medicine 2016; 22(2): 175-82.

81. Newton K, Dugger DL, Maltzman A, Greve JM, Hedehus M, Martin-McNulty B et al. RIPK3 deficiency or catalytically inactive RIPK1 provides greater benefit than MLKL deficiency in mouse models of inflammation and tissue injury. Cell Death Differ 2016; 23(9): 1565-76.

82. Kashlov JK, Donev IS, Doneva JG, Valkov VD, Kirkorova AD, Ghenev PI et al. Serum levels of RIPK3 and troponin I as potential biomarkers for predicting impaired left ventricular function in patients with myocardial infarction with ST segment elevation and normal troponin I levels prior percutaneous coronary intervention. Biosci Trends 2016; 10(4): 294-9.

© 2016 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved.

A
hRIPK3
22 51
Kinase domain P P
142
199 227 280
424
469
RHIM domain
518

B
mRIPK3
5 24 51
Kinase domain P P
119 143 161
231/232 284
204/207/211
410
457
RHIM domain
486

| Mutation | Phenotype | Reference |
|----------|-----------|-----------|
| K51A/D   | Kinase dead | Protects from necroptosis | Sun, 1999<br>Yu, 1999 |
| ATP binding pocket |  |  |  |
| D142N    |  |  | Sun, 2012 |
| S199A    | Phosphorylation sites | Prevents MLKL recruitment, protects from necroptosis | He, 2009<br>McQuade, 2013 |
| S227A    |  | Not by inhibiting kinase activity | Sun, 2012<br>McQuade, 2013 |

| Mutation | Phenotype | Reference |
|----------|-----------|-----------|
| K5A      | Ubiquitination site | Decreased RIPK1-RIPK3 complex formation and better survival under necroptosis stimulation | Onizawa, 2015 |
| C119G    | S-nitrosylation site | Prevents S-nitrosylation, auto-phosphorylation, RIPK1-RIPK3 interaction and necroptosis | Miao, 2015 |
| K51A     | ATP binding pocket |  | Zhang, 2009 |
| D143A    | Kinase dead | Protects from necroptosis | Sun, 2012 |
| D161G    |  |  |  |
| D161N    |  | Spontaneous apoptosis | Mandel, 2014 |
| S204/207/211A | Phosphorylation sites | Prevents MLKL recruitment, protects from necroptosis | By inhibiting kinase activity | McQuade, 2013 |
| T231A/S232A |  | Not by inhibiting kinase activity | Chen, 2013 |
| QIG 449-451AAA | RHIM domain | Protects from necroptosis, and RIPK3-dependent apoptosis | Zhang, 2009<br>Wu, 2014 |
| PPRT 459-462AAAA |  | Prevents RIP3/RIP1 homotypic interaction and protects from necroptosis | Cho, 2009 |
| Ripk3D161ND161N | Kinase dead | Die during embryogenesis (apoptosis) | Newton, 2014 |
| RipK3K51AK51A |  | Viable and fully immunocompetent | Mandal, 2014 |

C
Genotype
E10.5
E19/P0
Adult
Reference

Ripk3−
Newton 2004

Ripk3D161ND161N
+Mlkf−
+Trif−
+Dai−
+Cyld−
+Tnfr1−or+Tnfr1−Dr3−
+cFlip−
+Ripk1D138ND138N
+Ripk1−
+Casp8−
Newton 2014

Ripk3K51AK51A
Mandal 2014

2016 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved.

Extracellular

PAMP  
(LPS)

TLR4

IFNα/β/γ

IFNαR/  
IFNγR

Cell death  
receptors

JAK  
STAT

TRIF

RIPK1  
RIPK3

PKR

FADD

cFLIP  

Caspase-8

RIPK1

Endosome

Virus

dsRNA

TLR3

Reduced  
caspase-8 activity  
or FADD, cIAPs  
absent

Active  
Caspase-1

Inflammasome

Bacteria

Virus

Pro-IL-1β & Pro-IL-18

IL-1β &  
IL-18

Pyroptosis

DAMPs?

IL-1α

mtDNA

HMGB1

MCMV  
viral dsDNA

DAI

RIPK3

RIPK1

RIPK3

MLKL

Active  
Caspase-8

FADD

Caspase-8

RIPK1  
RIPK3

Kinase dead  
(K51A, D161G,  
D161N or D143N)

GSK RIPK3i  
(840/843/872)

Kinase  
dead  
D161N

Necrosis

ATP

Apoptosis

Cytoplasm

Evidence for RIPK3 regulation  
of models of inflammation and tissue damage  

Eye  
RIPK3 deletion **protects** from cone cell  
death (Rd10⁻/⁻) (Murakami, 2012), dsRNA-induced  
retinal degradation (Murakami, 2014) and  
retinitis pigmentosa (Sato, 2013).  

Skin  
RIPK3 deletion **prevents** epidermal hyperplasia  
in caspase-8 (Weinlich, 2013), FADD (Bonnet, 2011)  
or RIPK1 depletion (Rickard, 2014, Dannappel, 2014),  
RIPK3 levels are upregulated in lesional  
skin of patients with Toxin epidermal necrolysis  
(Kim, 2015).  

Liver  
RIPK3 depletion **protects** ethanol- or  
acetaminophen-induced liver injury  
(Roychowlnury, 2013, Ramachandran, 2013),  
but **worsens** liver parenchymal cell TAK1  
deletion-induced inflammatory hepatocarcinogenesis  
(Vucur, 2013), circulating levels of RIPK3  
are elevated in non-alcoholic fatty liver disease.  
RIPK3 deficiency **attenuated** methionine and  
choline deficient diet-induced liver injury,  
steatosis, inflammation, fibrosis and  
oxidative stress. (Afonso, 2015).  

Adipose tissue  
RIPK3 is over expressed in the white adipose tissue  
of obese mice fed with a choline-deficient high-fat diet  
and in visceral white adipose tissue of obese humans.  
Genetic RIPK3 inactivation **promotes** increased  
Caspase-8-dependent adipocyte apoptosis, inflammation  
and impaired insulin signaling indicating for glucose  
intolerance (Gautheron, 2016).  

Intestine  
RIPK3 deletion **prevents** inflammation due to deletion  
of FADD (Welz, 2011) or caspase-8 (Weinlich, 2013)  
in intestinal epithelial cell. RIPK1 deletion causes  
intestinal cell death and pathology is **prevented**  
by RIPK3 deletion (Rickard, 2014, Dannappel, 2014).  

Brain  
Activation of RIPK3 was demonstrated in  
cortical lesions from MS brain specimens  
(Dhib-Jalbut, 2015). RIPK3 deficiency **protects**  
from Demyelination in the Corpus Callosum  
after Cuprizone induced multiple sclerosis  
model (Ofengeim, 2015) and from  
OPTN deficient ALS model (Ito, 2016)  

Vascular  
RIPK3 deletion **protects** from  
atherosclerosis in Ldlr⁻/⁻ and ApoE⁻/⁻ mice  
(Lin, 2013) and from ischemia-reperfusion  
or doxorubicin models for heart failure  
(Zhang, 2016)  

Pancreas  
RIPK3 deletion **protects** from  
cerulein-induced acute pancreatitis  
(He, 2009).  

Kidney  
RIPK3 depletion **protects** from  
ischemia-reperfusion injury  
(Linkermann, 2013) and  
**improves** renal transplant survival  
(Lau, 2013). RIPK3 levels  
in the kidney tissues were increased  
in subtotal nephrectomy-model for  
chronic kidney injurt in rats comared  
to controls (Zhu, 2016).  

Bone marrow  
RIPK3 deletion **protects** from Ripk1⁻/⁻  
hematopoietic progenitor cell engraftment  
failure (Rickard, 2014, Roderick, 2014).
