
Cell Host & Microbe

Human Cytomegalovirus Tegument Protein UL82 Inhibits STING-Mediated Signaling to Evade Antiviral Immunity

Graphical Abstract

Authors
Yu-Zhi Fu, Shan Su, Yi-Qun Gao, ..., Min-Hua Luo, Yan-Yi Wang, Hong-Bing Shu

Correspondence
shuh@whu.edu.cn

In Brief
Whether and how HCMV proteins target the host immune system for evasion is enigmatic. Fu et al. found that HCMV protein UL82 inhibits STING-mediated signaling by impairing its cellular trafficking and complex formation, leading to inhibition of innate antiviral response and immune evasion by HCMV.

Highlights
- HCMV tegument protein UL82 negatively regulates STING-mediated signaling
- UL82 inhibits cellular trafficking of STING by disrupting its translocation complex
- UL82 also impairs the recruitment of TBK1 and IRF3 to the STING complex
- UL82 deficiency promotes host antiviral response and inhibits HCMV replication

Fu et al., 2017, Cell Host & Microbe 21, 1–13
February 8, 2017 © 2017 Elsevier Inc.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.chom.2017.01.001

Please cite this article in press as: Fu et al., Human Cytomegalovirus Tegument Protein UL82 Inhibits STING-Mediated Signaling to Evade Antiviral Immunity, Cell Host & Microbe (2017), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.chom.2017.01.001

**Cell Host & Microbe**

**Article**

# Human Cytomegalovirus Tegument Protein UL82 Inhibits STING-Mediated Signaling to Evade Antiviral Immunity

Yu-Zhi Fu,$^{1}$ Shan Su,$^{2}$ Yi-Qun Gao,$^{1}$ Pei-Pei Wang,$^{3}$ Zhe-Fu Huang,$^{3}$ Ming-Ming Hu,$^{2}$ Wei-Wei Luo,$^{2}$ Shu Li,$^{1}$ Min-Hua Luo,$^{3}$ Yan-Yi Wang,$^{4}$ and Hong-Bing Shu$^{1,2,4,*}$

$^{1}$State Key Laboratory of Virology, College of Life Sciences, Wuhan University, Wuhan, China 430072  
$^{2}$Medical Research Institute, Collaborative Innovation Center for Viral Immunology, School of Medicine, Wuhan University, Wuhan, China 430071  
$^{3}$Wuhan Institute of Virology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Wuhan, China 430071  
$^{4}$Lead Contact  

*Correspondence: shuh@whu.edu.cn*  
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.chom.2017.01.001

## SUMMARY

Recognition of human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) DNA by the cytosolic sensor cGAS initiates STING-dependent innate antiviral responses. HCMV can antagonize host immune responses to promote latency infection. However, it is unknown whether and how HCMV targets the cGAS-STING axis for immune evasion. Here we identified the HCMV tegument protein UL82 as a negative regulator of STING-dependent antiviral responses. UL82 interacted with STING and impaired STING-mediated signaling via two mechanisms. UL82 inhibited the translocation of STING from the ER to perinuclear microsomes by disrupting the STING-iRhom2-TRAPβ translocation complex. UL82 also impaired the recruitment of TBK1 and IRF3 to the STING complex. The levels of downstream antiviral genes induced by UL82-deficient HCMV were higher than those induced by wild-type HCMV. Conversely, wild-type HCMV replicated more efficiently than the UL82-deficient mutant. These findings reveal an important mechanism of immune evasion by HCMV.

## INTRODUCTION

Human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) is a human pathogenic herpesvirus belonging to the subfamily of betaherpesvirus, which causes global epidemics and complications in AIDS patients and organ transplant recipients, and is a major factor of birth defects (Cheeran et al., 2009). HCMV infection is also associated with inflammatory and proliferative diseases such as certain cardiovascular diseases and cancers (Söderberg-Nauclér, 2006). However, there is no vaccine to prevent HCMV infection, and the drugs currently approved for the treatment of HCMV infectious diseases suffer from low bioavailability, toxicity, and the formation of resistant viruses (Biron, 2006). HCMV proteins could suppress efficiently cellular and organismal defenses, which are pivotal for establishing immune evasion and latency infection (Amsler et al., 2013).

The HCMV genome contains >200 open reading frames, although many have not been demonstrated to encode proteins (Murphy et al., 2003a, 2003b).

Upon infection of a permissive cell, the genes of HCMV are expressed in a regulated cascade: immediate-early genes are expressed first, followed by early and then late genes. Abundant HCMV proteins target all types of antiviral immune responses including innate and adaptive immune responses. For example, the tegument proteins such as UL38 (Moorman et al., 2008), UL83 ((Browne and Shenk, 2003; Cristea et al., 2010; Li et al., 2013), UL21a (Caffarelli et al., 2013), TRS1/IRS1 (Ziehr et al., 2016), and UL26 (Mathers et al., 2014) modulate innate and adaptive immune responses through distinct mechanisms.

Innate immune response is pivotal for host defense against viral infection. Upon infection, viral DNA is detected by cytosolic sensors. Although various cytosolic DNA sensors have been identified, it has been well established that the cyclic GMP/AMP synthase cGAS is the widely used cytosolic DNA sensor (Sun et al., 2013). Upon sensing of viral DNA, cGAS catalyzes the synthesis of cGAMP, which in turn binds to the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) associated adaptor protein STING (also called MITA) (Ishikawa and Barber, 2008; Ishikawa et al., 2009; Ran et al., 2014; Sun et al., 2009; Zhong et al., 2008, 2009; Zhou et al., 2014). STING then translocates via Golgi apparatus to perinuclear punctuate aggregates or microsomes. In these trafficking processes, STING recruits the kinase TBK1 and the transcription factor IRF3, leading to the phosphorylation of IRF3 by TBK1 and induction of downstream antiviral genes (An et al., 2015; Chen et al., 2016; Lei et al., 2010; Saitoh et al., 2009; Shu and Wang, 2014; Tanaka and Chen, 2012; Zhong et al., 2008; Zhou et al., 2014). Recent studies reveal that the ER-associated iRhom2 protein plays an important role in mediating STING trafficking and stability after viral infection (Luo et al., 2016).

Recently, it has been demonstrated that the cGAS-STING axis is essential for mediating innate immune responses to HCMV (Paijo et al., 2016). However, whether HCMV proteins target the cGAS-STING axis for immune evasion is unknown. In this study, we screened HCMV proteins that could antagonize

Please cite this article in press as: Fu et al., Human Cytomegalovirus Tegument Protein UL82 Inhibits STING-Mediated Signaling to Evade Antiviral Immunity, Cell Host & Microbe (2017), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.chom.2017.01.001

**Figure 1. Identification of HCMV UL82 as an Inhibitor of DNA-Triggered Signaling**

(A) UL82 inhibits cGAS-STING-induced ISRE activation in a dose-dependent manner. HEK293 cells were transfected with ISRE-luc reporter, expression plasmids for cGAS, STING, and increased amounts of the indicated HCMV proteins for 20 hr before luciferase assays. The lower blots show the expression levels of the transfected UL proteins.

(B) UL82 inhibits HCMV- and HSV-1-induced transcription of antiviral genes in HFFs. UL82 stable HFFs were uninfected or infected with HCMV (MOI = 1) and HSV-1 (MOI = 1) for the indicated times before qPCR analysis.

(C) M82 inhibits HCMV- and MCMV-induced transcription of antiviral genes in MLFs. M82-stable MLFs were un-infected or infected with HCMV or MCMV for the indicated times before qPCR analysis.

(D) UL82 inhibits DNA-induced transcription of antiviral genes in HFFs. UL82 stable HFFs were transfected with HSV120 (2 μg/mL) or B-DNA (2 μg/mL) for the indicated times before qPCR analysis.

Please cite this article in press as: Fu et al., Human Cytomegalovirus Tegument Protein UL82 Inhibits STING-Mediated Signaling to Evade Antiviral Immunity, Cell Host & Microbe (2017), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.chom.2017.01.001

cGAS-STING-induced expression of IFN-β, which identified the major tegument protein UL82 (also known as pp71) as a candidate protein. The UL82 transcription unit is first expressed during the early-late kinetics ([Hensel et al., 1996](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0022-2836(96)80045-8)). The UL82 protein is localized to the cytoplasm and nucleus ([Penkert and Kalejta, 2010](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.virol.2010.05.010); [Shen et al., 2008](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmb.2008.05.008)). A mutant virus lacking UL82 produces reduced levels of viral progeny after infection, suggesting that UL82 is important for HCMV replication ([Bresnahan and Shenk, 2000](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0022-2836(00)96935-8)). UL82 is the first HCMV tegument protein characterized as a transactivator, which activates the major immediate early promoter and initiates viral gene expression ([Bresnahan and Shenk, 2000](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0022-2836(00)96935-8)). UL82 can bind to the retinoblastoma protein (Rb), resulting in its degradation and enhanced progression through the cell cycle ([Kalejta and Shenk, 2003](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0092-8674(03)00058-6)). UL82 can also interact with the cellular protein Daxx to facilitate viral transcription ([Cantrell and Bresnahan, 2005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmb.2005.03.027); [Saffert and Kalejta, 2006](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmb.2006.02.027)). In this study, we found that UL82 acted as an important inhibitor of the cGAS-STING-mediated induction of downstream antiviral genes upon HCMV infection or cytosolic DNA stimulation. UL82 interacted with STING and iRhom2, prevented the trafficking of STING, and impaired the assembly of the STING-TBK1-IRF3 complexes. Our findings reveal an important mechanism of immune evasion of HCMV.

both MCMV- and HCMV-induced transcription of *IFNB1*, *ISG56*, and *TNF* genes ([Figure 1C](#fig1)), suggesting a conserved role of UL82 in inhibiting virus-triggered induction of antiviral genes. In addition, UL82 also inhibited transcription of *IFNB1*, *ISG56*, and *TNF* genes induced by the transfected viral DNA mimics HSV120 and B-DNA in HFF cells ([Figure 1D](#fig1)). Consistently, ectopic expression of UL82 inhibited phosphorylation of TBK1, IRF3, and p65 induced by HCMV, HSV-1, and transfected DNA ([Figures 1E](#fig1) and [1F](#fig1)), suggesting that UL82 inhibits viral DNA-triggered downstream signaling events. In these experiments, STING was downregulated after HCMV and HSV-1 infection, which is a mechanism of timely termination of innate antiviral response to avoid immune damage as previously reported ([Hu et al., 2016](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2016.01.038); [Konno et al., 2013](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2013.05.032); [Luo et al., 2016](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.immuni.2016.01.014)). In contrast, UL82 did not have marked effects on phosphorylation of TBK1, IRF3, and p65 induced by Sendai virus (a RNA virus) in HFFs ([Figure S2A](#figS2)), as well as on IFN-β-induced activation of STAT1/2 ([Figure S2B](#figS2)), suggesting that UL82 specifically inhibits viral DNA-triggered induction of downstream antiviral genes.

### Knockdown of UL82 Enhances HCMV-Triggered Antiviral Response

Because ectopic expression of UL82 inhibited virus-triggered induction of downstream antiviral genes, we next examined the role of endogenous UL82 in innate antiviral response. We have used the RNAi knockdown strategy that has been successfully used by previous studies ([Lau et al., 2015](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2015.03.027); [Ma et al., 2015](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2015.03.026)). We constructed two UL82-RNAi plasmids that could inhibit the mRNA and protein levels of UL82 but not its neighboring UL83 and UL44 ([Figures S3A](#figS3) and [S3B](#figS3)). qPCR analysis indicated that knockdown of UL82 promoted HCMV- but not HSV-1-induced transcription of *IFNB1*, *ISG56*, and *TNF* genes in HFF ([Figure 2A](#fig2)) and THP1 cells ([Figure S3C](#figS3)). Consistently, knockdown of UL82 also increased HCMV- but not HSV-1-induced phosphorylation of TBK1, IRF3, and p65 in HFF ([Figure 2B](#fig2)) or THP1 ([Figure S3D](#figS3)) cells. These results suggest that knockdown of UL82 increases HCMV-triggered antiviral response.

### Interaction of UL82 with STING

Next we investigated the molecular mechanisms on the negative regulatory role of UL82 in innate antiviral response. Reporter assays indicated that UL82 could inhibit ISRE activation mediated by overexpression of cGAS and STING but not their downstream components TBK1 and IRF3-5D (an active IRF3 mutant) ([Figure 3A](#fig3)). In addition, UL82 also inhibited cGAMP-induced transcription of *IFNB1*, *ISG56*, and *TNF* genes ([Figure 3B](#fig3)). Transient transfection and coimmunoprecipitation experiments indicated that UL82 as well as M82 was associated with STING but not TBK1 ([Figure 3C](#fig3)). Endogenous coimmunoprecipitation experiments indicated that UL82 was associated with STING in HFFs following HCMV infection ([Figure 3D](#fig3)). Domain-mapping experiments indicated that the C terminus of STING (aa 151–379) and a middle fragment of U82 (aa 194–372) were sufficient for

(E) UL82 impairs HCMV- and HSV-1-induced phosphorylation of downstream components. UL82 stable HFFs were untreated or infected with HCMV (MOI = 1) or HSV-1 (MOI = 1) for the indicated times before immunoblot analysis. The lower panels are results of RT-PCR analysis for viral or cellular RNAs.

(F) UL82 impairs HSV120 (2 μg/mL)- and B-DNA (2 μg/mL)-induced phosphorylation of downstream components. UL82 stable HFFs were transfected with HSV120 or B-DNA for the indicated times before immunoblot analysis.

Graphs show mean ± SD, n = 3. *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01. See also [Figures S1](#figS1) and [S2](#figS2).

Cell Host & Microbe 21, 1–13, February 8, 2017 3

Please cite this article in press as: Fu et al., Human Cytomegalovirus Tegument Protein UL82 Inhibits STING-Mediated Signaling to Evade Antiviral Immunity, Cell Host & Microbe (2017), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.chom.2017.01.001

**Figure 2. Knockdown of UL82 Increases HCMV-Induced Expression of Downstream Antiviral Genes**

(A) Effects of UL82-RNAi plasmids on HCMV- and HSV-1-induced transcription of antiviral genes. UL82-RNAi stable HFFs were infected with HCMV (MOI = 1) or HSV-1 (MOI = 1) for the indicated times before qPCR analysis.

(B) Effects of UL82-RNAi plasmids on HCMV- and HSV-1-induced phosphorylation of downstream components. UL82-RNAi stable HFFs were infected with HCMV (MOI = 1) or HSV-1 (MOI = 1) for the indicated times before immunoblot analysis. Graphs show mean ± SD, n = 3. *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01. See also Figure S3.

of STING. UL82 inhibited accumulation of STING in perinuclear microsomes induced by infection of HCMV or HSV-1, or transfection of synthetic HSV120 DNA (Figures 4E–4G). In coimmunoprecipitation experiments, UL82 interacted with iRhom2, but not TRAPβ, and inhibited the associations of STING-TRAPβ and iRhom2-TRAPβ, but not STING-iRhom2 (Figure 4H). These results suggest that UL82 impairs the trafficking of STING after viral infection by disrupting the STING-iRhom2-TRAPβ translocation complex.

In the process of STING trafficking, TBK1 and IRF3 are recruited to the STING complex, in which IRF3 is phosphorylated by TBK1 and activated. Consistent with the results that UL82 inhibited HCMV- and HSV-1-induced phosphorylation of TBK1 and IRF3, transient transfection and coimmunoprecipitation experiments indicated that UL82 also inhibited the associations of STING-TBK1 and STING-IRF3 but not its dimerization (Figure 5A). Endogenous coimmunoprecipitation experiments indicated that UL82 inhibited the recruitment of TBK1 and IRF3 to the STING complex as well as the association of TBK1 with IRF3 in HFFs infected with HCMV (Figure 5B). In vitro GST pull-down assays further confirmed that UL82 disrupted the interactions of STING-TBK1 and STING-IRF3 (Figure 5C). These results suggest that UL82 impairs the assembly of the STING-TBK1-IRF3 activation complex.

Previous studies suggest that the deubiquitination enzyme EIF3S5 mediates the deubiquitination of STING and promotes its stability (Luo et al., 2016). Overexpression of UL82 did not affect the interaction of iRhom2-EIF3S5 or STING-EIF3S5 (Figure S4B). Consistently, UL82 did not affect K48-linked polyubiquitination of STING (Figure S4C). These results suggest that UL82 does not affect EIF3S5-mediated stability of STING.

**UL82 T223 Is Essential for Its Ability to Inhibit Virus-Triggered Signaling**

Previous studies suggest that T223 of UL82 is phosphorylated, which is important for its transcriptional activity (Shen et al.,

their interaction (Figure 3E). Additionally, UL82 (194–372) was sufficient for inhibiting the activation of IFN-β promoter mediated by cGAS and STING (Figure 3F). These results suggest that UL82 inhibits innate antiviral response by targeting STING.

**UL82 Disrupts the STING-iRhom2-TRAPβ and STING-TBK1-IRF3 Complexes**

Previously, it has been shown that cGAMP-induced oligomerization is critical for STING-mediated signaling; therefore, we examined whether UL82 affects this process. The results indicated that overexpression of UL82 did not affect the oligomerization of STING induced by cGAMP or HCMV infection (Figure S4A).

Previous studies have demonstrated that iRhom2 bridges the translocon protein TRAPβ to STING and is critical for the trafficking of STING to perinuclear punctuate structures or microsomes and subsequent induction of downstream antiviral genes (Ishikawa and Barber, 2008; Ishikawa et al., 2009; Li et al., 2015b; Luo et al., 2016; Tanaka and Chen, 2012). We found that UL82 was localized at the ER (Figure 4A), but not mitochondria (Figure 4B), and co-localized with STING (Figure 4C). UL82 was localized at the ER in both Sting+/+ and Sting−/− MLFs (Figure 4D), suggesting that UL82 is localized at ER independent

4 Cell Host & Microbe 21, 1–13, February 8, 2017

Please cite this article in press as: Fu et al., Human Cytomegalovirus Tegument Protein UL82 Inhibits STING-Mediated Signaling to Evade Antiviral Immunity, Cell Host & Microbe (2017), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.chom.2017.01.001

---

**Figure 3. UL82 Acts at the Level of STING**

(A) Effects of UL82 on ISRE activation mediated by various components. HEK293 cells were transfected with ISRE reporter, the indicated expression plasmids, and increased amounts of UL82 expression plasmid for 20 hr before luciferase assays.

(B) UL82 inhibits cGAMP-induced transcription of antiviral genes in HFFs. Control or UL82-transduced HFFs were transfected with cGAMP (0.2 μg/mL) for 6 hr before qPCR analysis of IFN-β, ISG56, and TNF mRNA abundance.

(C) Association of UL82 or M82 with human or murine STING. HEK293T cells were transfected with the indicated plasmids for 20 hr before coimmunoprecipitation and immunoblot analysis with the indicated antibodies.

(D) Association of endogenous UL82 with STING in HFFs. The HFF cells were left untreated or infected with HCMV for 12 hr before coimmunoprecipitation and immunoblot analysis with the indicated antibodies.

(E) Domain mapping of the UL82-STING interaction. The experiments were performed similar to those in (B). Schematic representations are also shown.

(F) The effects of UL82 mutants on cGAS-STING-mediated activation of ISRE. HEK293T cells were transfected with ISRE reporter, and mammalian expression plasmids for cGAS, STING, UL82, and its truncation mutants for 20 hr before luciferase assays.

Graphs show mean ± SD, n = 3. *p < 0.05. See also Figure S4.

Please cite this article in press as: Fu et al., Human Cytomegalovirus Tegument Protein UL82 Inhibits STING-Mediated Signaling to Evade Antiviral Immunity, Cell Host & Microbe (2017), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.chom.2017.01.001

A | B | C
--- | --- | ---
UL82 | UL82 | UL82
(Flag) | (Flag) | (Flag)
ER | Mito | STING
(GFP) | (RFP) | (HA)
DAPI | DAPI | DAPI
Merge | Merge | Merge

D | F | G
--- | --- | ---
UL82 | Mock | HSV 120
(Flag) | Sting | Sting
ER | (Flag) | (Flag)
DAPI | DAPI | DAPI
Merge | Merge | Merge

E
---
Mock
Sting
(Flag)
ER-
Tracker
DAPI
Merge

HCMV
Sting
(Flag)
ER-
Tracker
DAPI
Merge

HSV-1
Sting
(Flag)
ER-
Tracker
DAPI
Merge

H
---
HA-UL82:
+ +
MyC-UL82:
- +
MyC-UL82:
- +
MyC-UL82:
- +
Flag-iRhom2:
+ -
Flag-TRAPβ:
+ +
Flag-TRAPβ:
+ +
Flag-iRhom2:
+ +
Flag-TRAPβ:
- +
HA-STING:
+ +
HA-iRhom2:
+ +
HA-STING:
+ +
IP: lg αF lg αF
WB
-UL82
-lgH
Lysate
-HA-UL82
-iRhom2
-TRAPβ
IP: lg αF lg αF
WB
-STING
Lysate
-TRAPβ
-STING
IP: lg αF lg αF
WB
-iRhom2
Lysate
-TRAPβ
-STING
-UL82
IP: lg αF lg αF
WB
-IgH
Lysate
-iRhom2
-STING

Figure 4. UL82 Impairs the Trafficking of STING

(A and B) UL82 is localized to the ER (A), but not to mitochondria (B). HEK 293 were transfected with UL82-Flag, ER-GFP, or Mito-RFP as indicated for 18 hr before confocal microscopy.

(C) Colocalization of UL82 with STING. HEK 293 cells were transfected with UL82-Flag and STING-HA as indicated for 18 hr before confocal microscopy.
(legend continued on next page)

6 Cell Host & Microbe 21, 1–13, February 8, 2017
Please cite this article in press as: Fu et al., Human Cytomegalovirus Tegument Protein UL82 Inhibits STING-Mediated Signaling to Evade Antiviral Immunity, Cell Host & Microbe (2017), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.chom.2017.01.001

**DISCUSSION**

Previous studies have demonstrated that the cGAS-STING pathways mediate innate immune responses to HCMV. Here we investigated whether the cGAS-STING axis is targeted by HCMV proteins for immune evasion. Using expression screens, we identified UL82 as a negative regulator of STING-mediated induction of downstream antiviral genes and innate antiviral response.

Several evidences suggest that UL82 directly targets STING for inhibition of innate antiviral response. First, UL82 was associated with STING. Second, overexpression of UL82 inhibited cGAS-, cGAMP-, and STING- but not TBK1-mediated induction of downstream antiviral genes. Overexpression of UL82 also inhibited HCMV-, MCMV-, and HSV-1-induced signaling and transcription of downstream antiviral genes. Conversely, knockdown of UL82 by RNAi or deletion of UL82 gene in HCMV genome increased induction of downstream antiviral genes by the viruses. Third, UV-inactivated HCMV induced higher levels of downstream antiviral genes in comparison to untreated viruses, and UL82 also inhibited IFNB1 transcription induced by UV-inactivated HCMV, suggesting that UL82 directly affects HCMV-induced transcription of IFNB gene. Consistently, phosphorylation of TBK1, IRF3, and p65 induced by HCMV-ΔUL82 was markedly increased in comparison to that induced by wild-type HCMV in HFF, THP1, and DC cells (Figure 6E). The associations of STING with TBK1 or IRF3 were increased following infection with HCMV-ΔUL82 compared to wild-type HCMV (Figure 6F).

To investigate the effects of UL82 on viral replication, we determined the effects of ectopic expression or deficiency of UL82 on the replication HCMV in wild-type or STING-deficient HFFs. As shown in Figures 7A and 7B, both wild-type HCMV and HCMV-ΔUL82 virus production in STING-knockdown cells was increased in comparison to control cells, consistent with a critical role of STING in innate antiviral response. Interestingly, while ectopically expressed UL82 increased HCMV production in both control and STING-knockdown cells, the percentage increased by UL82 was approximate 3-fold in STING-knockdown cells in comparison to approximate 2-fold in control cells (Figure 7A). On the other hand, the production of HCMV-ΔUL82 viruses in STING-knockdown cells decreased approximately 2.5-fold in comparison to wild-type HCMV, whereas the production of HCMV-ΔUL82 viruses in wild-type cells decreased approximately 4-fold in comparison to wild-type HCMV (Figure 7B). These results suggest that UL82 plays a direct role in evasion of innate antiviral response and contributes to the production of HCMV in cells.

(D) UL82 is localized to the ER in Sting+/+ or Sting−/− MLFs. The experiments were performed similar to those in (C).

(E–G) UL82 impairs HCMV-, HSV-1-, or HSV120-triggered trafficking of STING. UL82 stably transduced Sting−/−-MLF-Sting-Flag cells were infected with HCMV (MOI = 1) (E) or HSV-1 (MOI = 1) (F) or transfected with HSV120 (G) for 4 hr before confocal microscopy.

(H) UL82 disrupts the STING-iRhom2-TRAPβ complex. HEK293T cells were transfected with the indicated plasmids for 20 hr before coimmunoprecipitation and immunoblot analysis with the indicated antibodies.

Graphs show mean ± SD, n = 3. *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01.

Cell Host & Microbe 21, 1–13, February 8, 2017 7
Please cite this article in press as: Fu et al., Human Cytomegalovirus Tegument Protein UL82 Inhibits STING-Mediated Signaling to Evade Antiviral Immunity, Cell Host & Microbe (2017), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.chom.2017.01.001

A

| MyC-UL82: | - | + |
| --- | --- | --- |
| Flag-TBK1: | + | + |
| HA-STING: | + | + |

IP: lg αF lg αF

WB

- IgH
- HA-p-STING
- Flag-TBK1
- HA-p-STING
- HA-STING
- Myc-UL82

Lysate

---

MyC-UL82:

| - | + |
| --- | --- |
| Flag-STING: | + | + |
| HA-IRF3: | + | + |

IP: lg αHA lg αHA

WB

- IgH
- Flag-STING
- HA-IRF3
- Flag-STING
- Myc-UL82

Lysate

---

MyC-UL82:

| - | + |
| --- | --- |
| Flag-STING: | + | + |
| HA-STING: | + | + |

IP: lg αF lg αF

WB

- IgH
- HA-STING
- Flag-STING
- HA-STING
- Myc-UL82

Lysate

---

B

| IP: | αSTING | IgG |
| --- | --- | --- |
| Vec | UL82 |  |
| HCMV: 0 3 6 0 3 6 6(h) |  |  |

WB

- TBK1
- STING

Lysate

- TBK1
- STING
- UL82
- β-actin

---

| IP: | αIRF3 | IgG |
| --- | --- | --- |
| Vec | UL82 |  |
| HCMV: 0 3 6 0 3 6 6(h) |  |  |

WB

- STING
- TBK1
- IRF3
- STING
- UL82
- β-actin

Lysate

---

C

| Input | Pull-down |
| --- | --- |
| GST: | - | + | + | - | - |
| GST-STING(151-379): | - | - | - | + | + |
| Flag-TBK1: | + | + | + | + | + |
| HA-UL82: | - | + | - | + | - | + |

Flag-TBK1
HA-UL82
GST-STING(151-379)
GST

Coomassie

---

| Input | Pull-down |
| --- | --- |
| GST: | - | + | + | - | - |
| GST-STING(151-379): | - | - | - | + | + |
| Flag-IRF3: | + | + | + | + | + |
| HA-UL82: | - | + | - | + | - | + |

Flag-IRF3
HA-UL82
GST-STING(151-379)
GST

Coomassie

---

**Figure 5. UL82 Impairs the Recruitment of TBK1 and IRF3 to STING**

(A) UL82 disrupts the associations of STING-TBK1 and STING-IRF3. HEK293T cells were transfected with the indicated plasmids for 20hr before coimmuno-precipitation and immunoblot analysis with the indicated antibodies.

(B) UL82 inhibits the endogenous association of STING-TBK1-IRF3. UL82 stable HFFs were untreated or infected with HCMV for the indicated times before coimmunoprecipitation and immunoblot analysis with the indicated antibodies.

(C) UL82 impairs the interaction of STING with TBK1 or IRF3 in vitro. Purified GST-GST-STING (151–379) was used to pull down transiently expressed Flag-TBK1, Flag-IRF3, and/or UL82-HA as indicated.

See also Figure S5.

alanine also impaired its ability to antagonize STING-mediated signaling. It is possible that a conserved structure of UL82 is required for its multiple activities in viral transcription and immune evasion.

Cellular and biochemical experiments suggest that UL82 inhibits virus-triggered induction of downstream antiviral genes

by two distinct mechanisms. UL82 does not affect cGAMP-induced oligomerization and EIF3S5-mediated stability of STING. Instead, UL82 interacted with both STING and iRhom2 and disrupted the association of STING with TRAPβ, an important component of the translocon complex. Accordingly, UL82 impaired the translocation of STING from the ER to the

8 Cell Host & Microbe 21, 1–13, February 8, 2017

Please cite this article in press as: Fu et al., Human Cytomegalovirus Tegument Protein UL82 Inhibits STING-Mediated Signaling to Evade Antiviral Immunity, Cell Host & Microbe (2017), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.chom.2017.01.001

A
HFF
IFNB1 ISG56 ISG15 TNF IL-6 IL-1B
mRNA Level
0 6 12 0 6 12 0 6 12 0 6 12 0 6 12 0 6 12 (h)
□ HCMV-WT ■ HCMV-ΔUL82

B
THP1
IFNB1 ISG56 ISG15 TNF IL-6 IL-1B
mRNA Level
0 6 12 0 6 12 0 6 12 0 6 12 0 6 12 0 6 12 (h)
□ HCMV-WT ■ HCMV-ΔUL82

C
Macrophage DC
IFNB1 ISG56 TNF IL-6 IFNB1 ISG56 TNF IL-6
mRNA Level
0 6 12 0 6 12 0 6 12 0 6 12 0 6 12 0 6 12 0 6 12 0 6 12 (h)
□ HCMV-WT ■ HCMV-ΔUL82

D E
HFF THP1 DC
HCMV HCMV- HCMV- HCMV- HCMV- HCMV-
HCMV-UV WT ΔUL82 WT ΔUL82 WT ΔUL82
UL82+CMV
UL82+HCMV-UV
0 6 12 - - - 0 6 12 - - - 0 6 12 - - - (h)
HFF-IFNB1
mRNA Level
0 1.5 3 6 12 (h)
* * * * *
-p-TBK1
TBK1
-p-IRF3
IRF3
-p-p65
p65
-UL82
-β-actin

F
IP: αSTING IgG IP: αIRF3 IgG
HCMV-WT HCMV-ΔUL82 HCMV-WT HCMV-ΔUL82
HCMV: 0 3 6 0 3 6 (h) HCMV: 0 3 6 0 3 6 (h)
WB -TBK1 -STING -TBK1 -STING
Lysate -STING -β-actin Lysate -IRF3 -TBK1 -STING -β-actin

(legend on next page)

Cell Host & Microbe 21, 1–13, February 8, 2017 9

Please cite this article in press as: Fu et al., Human Cytomegalovirus Tegument Protein UL82 Inhibits STING-Mediated Signaling to Evade Antiviral Immunity, Cell Host & Microbe (2017), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.chom.2017.01.001

**Figure 7. Roles of UL82 on HCMV Replication**

(A) UL82 enhances HCMV replication. The indicated cells were infected with HCMV (MOI = 1), and the supernatants were harvested at 48, 60, 72, and 96 hr post infection, respectively, for measurements of viral titers with standard TCID50 assays.

(B) Effects of UL82 deficiency on the replication of HCMV. The indicated cells were infected with wild-type HCMV or HCMV-ΔUL82, respectively, for 48, 60, 72, and 96 hr. The supernatants were then harvested for measurements of the viral titers with standard TCID50 assays.

the interplay of HCMV and the host and for rational vaccine design and antiviral drug development against HCMV infection.

**EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES**

**Reagents and Antibodies**
Lipofectamine 2000 (Invitrogen); RNase inhibitor (Thermo); Dual-specific luciferase assay kit (Promega); polybrene (Millipore); SYBR (BIORAD); mouse antibodies against Flag, and β-actin (Sigma), and HA (Covance); rabbit polyclonal antibodies against UL82, UL44, IRF3, and p65 (Santa Cruz Biotechnology), TBK1 and phospho-TBK1(S172) (Abcam), STING and phospho-IRF3(S396) (CST); HEK293 and THP1 cells (ATCC) were purchased from the indicated manufacturers. HEK293T cells were originally provided by Dr. Gary Johnson (National Jewish Health); HSV-1 and SeV (Li et al., 2012; Zhong et al., 2008), HCMV (AD169 strain) and HFFs (Fu et al., 2015; Li et al., 2015a), and Sting−/− MLF-Sting-Flag cells were previously described (Luo et al., 2016).

**Expression Cloning**
The cDNA expression clones encoding 64 independent HCMV cDNAs were constructed by standard molecular biology technique. The clones were individually transfected into HEK293 cells together with an ISRE reporter plasmid for 20 hr before luciferase assays.

**Constructs**
IFN-β and ISRE luciferase reporter plasmids and mammalian expression plasmids for HA-, Flag-tagged STING, and its mutants, TBK1 and IRF3, were previously described (Liu et al., 2016; Xu et al., 2005; Zhong et al., 2008). HA-cGAS, Flag-UL82, HA-UL82, Myc-UL82, and UL82 mutants were constructed by standard molecular biology technique.

**Figure 6. UL82 Deficiency Facilitates Innate Antiviral Responses**

(A and B) Effects of UL82 deficiency on transcription of downstream antiviral genes. HFFs (A) or THP1 cells (B) were infected with wild-type HCMV (MOI = 1) or HCMV-ΔUL82 (MOI = 1) for the indicated times before qPCR analysis.

(C) HCMV-ΔUL82 viruses elicit stronger immune responses in primary human monocyte-derived macrophages and dendritic cells (DCs) than those elicited by wild-type HCMV. Cells were infected with wild-type HCMV (MOI = 1) or HCMV-ΔUL82 (MOI = 1) for the indicated times before qPCR analysis.

(D) Inhibition of UL82 on IFNB1 transcription induced by UV-inactivated HCMV. Control or UL82 stable cells were infected with wild-type or UV-inactivated HCMV before qPCR analysis.

(E) Effects of UL82 deficiency on phosphorylation of downstream components. The indicated cells were infected with wild-type HCMV (MOI = 1) or HCMV-ΔUL82 (MOI = 1) for the indicated times before immunoblot analysis.

(F) Effects of UL82 deficiency on the association of STING-TBK1-IRF3. HFFs were infected with wild-type HCMV (MOI = 1) or HCMV-ΔUL82 (MOI = 1) for the indicated times before coimmunoprecipitation and immunoblot analysis.

Graphs show mean ± SD, n = 3. *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01.

10 Cell Host & Microbe 21, 1–13, February 8, 2017

Please cite this article in press as: Fu et al., Human Cytomegalovirus Tegument Protein UL82 Inhibits STING-Mediated Signaling to Evade Antiviral Immunity, Cell Host & Microbe (2017), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.chom.2017.01.001

**DNA Oligonucleotides**

The following oligonucleotides were used to stimulate cells:

HSV120: 5′-AGACGGTATATTTTTGCGTTATCACTGTCCCGGATTGGACA CGGTCTTGTGGGATAGGCATGCCAAGGCATATGGGTTAACCCC TTTTTATTTGTGGCGGGTTTTTTGGAGGACTT-3′;

B-DNA: dsDNA with a sequence of poly(dA-dT)·poly(dT-dA).

UL82: forward, ACGACACCGTAGACCTGACC; reverse, AAAGAGGTGC AGTCCGCTAA

UL83: forward, GCAGAACCATGGAAAGAGC; reverse, GTCCTCTTCCA CGTCAGAGC

UL44: forward, ATCTAGATTTCGGCGTGGTG; reverse, GTGGAAACTGA CGCGGTTAT

**Fluorescent Confocal Microscopy**

The cells were incubated with the ER-Tracker Green or Mito-Tracker Red (Invitrogen) following protocols recommended by the manufacturer. The cells were then fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde for 10 min and observed with an Olympus confocal microscope under a 60× oil objective.

**Transfection and Reporter Assays**

HEK293T and HEK293 cells were transfected by standard calcium phosphate precipitation method. HFFs and MLFs were transfected by lipofectamine 2000, according to procedures recommended by the manufacturer.

**RNAi**

Double-stranded oligonucleotides corresponding to the target sequences were cloned into the pSuper.Retro-RNAi plasmid (Oligoengine). The following sequences were targeted for UL82 mRNA: #1 5′-GCTGGTGGACCTCAAC AACTT-3′, #2 5′-GCCAATGGATCATGCTGTTTC-3′, #3 5′-GCATACATCCCC AGTACATCG-3′. The sequence targeted by the control RNAi plasmid is 5′-GGAAGATGTATGGAGACATGG-3′.

**RNAi-Transduced Stable HFF and THP-1 Cells**

The 293 cells were transfected with two packaging plasmids (pGAG-Pol and pVSV-G) together with a control or UL82-RNAi retroviral plasmid. 24 hr later, cells were incubated with new medium without antibiotics for another 24 hr. The recombinant virus-containing medium was filtered and then added to HFF or THP-1 cells in the presence of polybrene (6 μg/mL). The infected cells were selected with puromycin (0.5–1.0 μg/mL) for 10 days before additional experiments.

**Coimmunoprecipitation and Immunoblot Analysis**

HEK293 cells (1 × 10⁷), THP1, or HFF cells (3 × 10⁷) were lysed in 1 mL NP-40 lysis buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl [pH 7.4], 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1% Nonidet P-40, 10 μg/mL aprotinin, 10 μg/mL leupeptin, and 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride). Coimmunoprecipitation and immunoblot analyses were performed as previously described (Hu et al., 2015; Hu et al., 2014; Xu et al., 2005).

**GST Pull-Down Assay**

GST-STING (ΔN) was bound to glutathione agarose beads and incubated for 3 hr with lysates from HEK293T cells transiently expressing Flag-TBK1 or Flag-IRF3 together with an empty or UL82-HA plasmid. The beads were washed three times each with lysis buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl [pH 7.4], 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1% Nonidet P-40, 10 μg/mL aprotinin, 10 μg/mL leupeptin, and 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride), then mixed with an equal volume of 2× SDS loading buffer and boiled for 10 min. The input/elutes were resolved by SDS-PAGE and analyzed by Coomassie staining and/or immunoblot analysis (Wu et al., 2015).

**CRISPR/Cas9-Mediated Genome Editing of HCMV**

The experiments were performed as previously described (Kanda et al., 2016; van Diemen et al., 2016). Briefly, potential guide RNAs (gRNAs) targeting UL82 gene were analyzed using the CRISPR Design tool. Double-stranded oligos were cloned into the lentiCRISPRv1 vector and cotransfected with packaging plasmids into HEK293T cells. Lentiviral particles were collected and used to transduce HFFs. The HFF-gRNA cells were infected with serial dilution of HCMV in 96-well plates 20 days before qPCR and immunoblot analysis with antibodies. To gain the complete HCMV-ΔUL82 strain, the second screen was performed similarly as previously described. The HCMV-ΔUL82 single-clone strain was amplified in the HFF-UL82 cells. The UL82 gRNA target sequence is 5′-CACC GTGCCCGGGACAGTCCGGCTT-3′.

**qPCR**

Total RNA was isolated for qPCR analysis to measure mRNA levels of the indicated genes. Data shown are the relative abundance of the indicated mRNA normalized to that of GAPDH. Primer sequences for IFNB1, ISG56, ISG15, TNF, IL6, IL-1β, and GAPDH were previously described (Li et al., 2012). Primer sequences for UL82, UL83, and UL44 were the following.

**SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION**

Supplemental Information includes five figures and can be found with this article online at <http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.chom.2017.01.001>.

**AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS**

H.-B.S., Y.-Y.W., and Y.-Z.F. conceived and designed the study; Y.-Z.F., S.S., Y.-Q.G., P.-P.W., and Z.-F.H. performed the experiments; H.-B.S., Y.-Y.W., Y.-Z.F., M.-M.H., W.-W.L., S.L., and M.-H.L. analyzed the data and advised on the experiments; M.-H.L. provided important reagents; H.-B.S. and Y.-Z.F. wrote the manuscript.

**ACKNOWLEDGMENTS**

This work was supported by grants from the Ministry of Science and Technology of China (2016YFA0502100, 2014CB910103) and the National Natural Science Foundation of China (31630045, 31521091, 91429304).

Received: August 4, 2016  
Revised: December 2, 2016  
Accepted: January 2, 2017  
Published: January 26, 2017  

**REFERENCES**

Amsler, L., Verweij, M.C., and DeFilippis, V.R. (2013). The tiers and dimensions of evasion of the type I interferon response by human cytomegalovirus. J. Mol. Biol. 425, 4857–4871.

An, T., Li, S., Pan, W., Tien, P., Zhong, B., Shu, H.B., and Wu, S. (2015). DYRK2 Negatively Regulates Type I Interferon Induction by Promoting TBK1 Degradation via Ser527 Phosphorylation. PLoS Pathog. 11, e1005179.

Biron, K.K. (2006). Antiviral drugs for cytomegalovirus diseases. Antiviral Res. 71, 154–163.

Bresnahan, W.A., and Shenk, T.E. (2000). UL82 virion protein activates expression of immediate early viral genes in human cytomegalovirus-infected cells. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 97, 14506–14511.

Browne, E.P., and Shenk, T. (2003). Human cytomegalovirus UL83-coded pp65 virion protein inhibits antiviral gene expression in infected cells. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 100, 11439–11444.

Caffarelli, N., Fehr, A.R., and Yu, D. (2013). Cyclin A degradation by primate cytomegalovirus protein pUL21a counters its innate restriction of virus replication. PLoS Pathog. 9, e1003825.

Cantrell, S.R., and Bresnahan, W.A. (2005). Interaction between the human cytomegalovirus UL82 gene product (pp71) and hDaxx regulates immediate-early gene expression and viral replication. J. Virol. 79, 7792–7802.

Cheeran, M.C., Lokensgard, J.R., and Schleiss, M.R. (2009). Neuropathogenesis of congenital cytomegalovirus infection: disease mechanisms and prospects for intervention. Clin. Microbiol. Rev. 22, 99–126.

Chen, L.T., Hu, M.M., Xu, Z.S., Liu, Y., and Shu, H.B. (2016). MSX1 Modulates RLR-Mediated Innate Antiviral Signaling by Facilitating Assembly of TBK1-Associated Complexes. J. Immunol. 197, 199–207.

Please cite this article in press as: Fu et al., Human Cytomegalovirus Tegument Protein UL82 Inhibits STING-Mediated Signaling to Evade Antiviral Immunity, Cell Host & Microbe (2017), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.chom.2017.01.001

Christensen, M.H., Jensen, S.B., Miettinen, J.J., Luecke, S., Prabakaran, T., Reiner, L.S., Mettenleiter, T., Chen, Z.J., Knipe, D.M., Sandri-Goldin, R.M., et al. (2016). HSV-1 ICP27 targets the TBK1-activated STING signalsome to inhibit virus-induced type I IFN expression. EMBO J. 35, 1385–1399.

Cristea, I.M., Moorman, N.J., Terhune, S.S., Cuevas, C.D., O’Keefe, E.S., Rout, M.P., Chait, B.T., and Shenk, T. (2010). Human cytomegalovirus pUL83 stimulates activity of the viral immediate-early promoter through its interaction with the cellular IFI16 protein. J. Virol. 84, 7803–7814.

Fu, Y.R., Liu, X.J., Li, X.J., Shen, Z.Z., Yang, B., Wu, C.C., Li, J.F., Miao, L.F., Ye, H.Q., Qiao, G.H., et al. (2015). MicroRNA miR-21 attenuates human cytomegalovirus replication in neural cells by targeting Cdc25a. J. Virol. 89, 1070–1082.

Hensel, G.M., Meyer, H.H., Buchmann, I., Pommerehne, D., Schmolke, S., Plachter, B., Radsak, K., and Kern, H.F. (1996). Intracellular localization and expression of the human cytomegalovirus matrix phosphoprotein pp71 (ppUL82): evidence for its translocation into the nucleus. J. Gen. Virol. 77, 3087–3097.

Hu, M.M., Yang, Q., Zhang, J., Liu, S.M., Zhang, Y., Lin, H., Huang, Z.F., Wang, Y.Y., Zhang, X.D., Zhong, B., and Shu, H.B. (2014). TRIM38 inhibits TNFα- and IL-1β-triggered NF-κB activation by mediating lysosome-dependent degradation of TAB2/3. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 111, 1509–1514.

Hu, M.M., Xie, X.Q., Yang, Q., Liao, C.Y., Ye, W., Lin, H., and Shu, H.B. (2015). TRIM38 Negatively Regulates TLR3/4-Mediated Innate and Inflammatory Responses by Two Sequential and Distinct Mechanisms. J. Immunol. 195, 4415–4425.

Hu, M.M., Yang, Q., Xie, X.Q., Liao, C.Y., Lin, H., Liu, T.T., Yin, L., and Shu, H.B. (2016). Sumoylation Promotes the Stability of the DNA Sensor cGAS and the Adaptor STING to Regulate the Kinetics of Response to DNA Virus. Immunity 45, 555–569.

Ishikawa, H., and Barber, G.N. (2008). STING is an endoplasmic reticulum adaptor that facilitates innate immune signalling. Nature 455, 674–678.

Ishikawa, H., Ma, Z., and Barber, G.N. (2009). STING regulates intracellular DNA-mediated, type I interferon-dependent innate immunity. Nature 461, 788–792.

Kalejta, R.F., and Shenk, T. (2003). Proteasome-dependent, ubiquitin-independent degradation of the Rb family of tumor suppressors by the human cytomegalovirus pp71 protein. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 100, 3263–3268.

Kanda, T., Furuse, Y., Oshitani, H., and Kiyono, T. (2016). Highly Efficient CRISPR/Cas9-Mediated Cloning and Functional Characterization of Gastric Cancer-Derived Epstein-Barr Virus Strains. J. Virol. 90, 4383–4393.

Konno, H., Konno, K., and Barber, G.N. (2013). Cyclic dinucleotides trigger ULK1 (ATG1) phosphorylation of STING to prevent sustained innate immune signaling. Cell 155, 688–698.

Lau, L., Gray, E.E., Brunette, R.L., and Stetson, D.B. (2015). DNA tumor virus oncogenes antagonize the cGAS-STING DNA-sensing pathway. Science 350, 568–571.

Lei, C.Q., Zhong, B., Zhang, Y., Zhang, J., Wang, S., and Shu, H.B. (2010). Glycogen synthase kinase 3β regulates IRF3 transcription factor-mediated antiviral response via activation of the kinase TBK1. Immunity 33, 878–889.

Li, Y., Chen, R., Zhou, Q., Xu, Z., Li, C., Wang, S., Mao, A., Zhang, X., He, W., and Shu, H.B. (2012). LSM14A is a processing body-associated sensor of viral nucleic acids that initiates cellular antiviral response in the early phase of viral infection. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 109, 11770–11775.

Li, T., Chen, J., and Cristea, I.M. (2013). Human cytomegalovirus tegument protein pUL83 inhibits IFI16-mediated DNA sensing for immune evasion. Cell Host Microbe 14, 591–599.

Li, X.J., Liu, X.J., Yang, B., Fu, Y.R., Zhao, F., Shen, Z.Z., Miao, L.F., Rayner, S., Chavanas, S., Zhu, H., et al. (2015a). Human Cytomegalovirus Infection Dysregulates the Localization and Stability of NICD1 and Jag1 in Neural Progenitor Cells. J. Virol. 89, 6792–6804.

Li, Z., Liu, G., Sun, L., Teng, Y., Guo, X., Jia, J., Sha, J., Yang, X., Chen, D., and Sun, Q. (2015b). PPM1A regulates antiviral signaling by antagonizing TBK1-mediated STING phosphorylation and aggregation. PLoS Pathog. 11, e1004783.

Liu, T.T., Yang, Q., Li, M., Zhong, B., Ran, Y., Liu, L.L., Yang, Y., Wang, Y.Y., and Shu, H.B. (2016). LSM14A Plays a Critical Role in Antiviral Immune Responses by Regulating MITA Level in a Cell-Specific Manner. J. Immunol. 196, 5101–5111.

Luo, W.W., Li, S., Li, C., Lian, H., Yang, Q., Zhong, B., and Shu, H.B. (2016). iRhom2 is essential for innate immunity to DNA viruses by mediating trafficking and stability of the adaptor STING. Nat. Immunol. 17, 1057–1066.

Ma, Z., Jacobs, S.R., West, J.A., Stopford, C., Zhang, Z., Davis, Z., Barber, G.N., Glaunsinger, B.A., Dittmer, D.P., and Damania, B. (2015). Modulation of the cGAS-STING DNA sensing pathway by gammaherpesviruses. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 112, E4306–E4315.

Mathers, C., Schafer, X., Martínez-Sobrido, L., and Munger, J. (2014). The human cytomegalovirus UL26 protein antagonizes NF-κB activation. J. Virol. 88, 14289–14300.

Moorman, N.J., Cristea, I.M., Terhune, S.S., Rout, M.P., Chait, B.T., and Shenk, T. (2008). Human cytomegalovirus protein UL38 inhibits host cell stress responses by antagonizing the tuberous sclerosis protein complex. Cell Host Microbe 3, 253–262.

Murphy, E., Rigoutsos, I., Shibuya, T., and Shenk, T.E. (2003a). Reevaluation of human cytomegalovirus coding potential. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 100, 13585–13590.

Murphy, E., Yu, D., Grimwood, J., Schmutz, J., Dickson, M., Jarvis, M.A., Hahn, G., Nelson, J.A., Myers, R.M., and Shenk, T.E. (2003b). Coding potential of laboratory and clinical strains of human cytomegalovirus. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 100, 14976–14981.

Paijo, J., Döring, M., Spanier, J., Grabski, E., Nooruzzaman, M., Schmidt, T., Witte, G., Messerle, M., Hornung, V., Kaever, V., and Kalinke, U. (2016). cGAS Senses Human Cytomegalovirus and Induces Type I Interferon Responses in Human Monocyte-Derived Cells. PLoS Pathog. 12, e1005546.

Penkert, R.R., and Kalejta, R.F. (2010). Nuclear localization of tegument-delivered pp71 in human cytomegalovirus-infected cells is facilitated by one or more factors present in terminally differentiated fibroblasts. J. Virol. 84, 9853–9863.

Ran, Y., Shu, H.B., and Wang, Y.Y. (2014). MITA/STING: a central and multifaceted mediator in innate immune response. Cytokine Growth Factor Rev. 25, 631–639.

Saffert, R.T., and Kalejta, R.F. (2006). Inactivating a cellular intrinsic immune defense mediated by Daxx is the mechanism through which the human cytomegalovirus pp71 protein stimulates viral immediate-early gene expression. J. Virol. 80, 3863–3871.

Saitoh, T., Fujita, N., Hayashi, T., Takahara, K., Satoh, T., Lee, H., Matsunaga, K., Kageyama, S., Omori, H., Noda, T., et al. (2009). Atg9a controls dsDNA-driven dynamic translocation of STING and the innate immune response. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 106, 20842–20846.

Shen, W., Westgard, E., Huang, L., Ward, M.D., Osborn, J.L., Chau, N.H., Collins, L., Marcum, B., Koach, M.A., Bibbs, J., et al. (2008). Nuclear trafficking of the human cytomegalovirus pp71 (ppUL82) tegument protein. Virology 376, 42–52.

Shu, H.B., and Wang, Y.Y. (2014). Adding to the STING. Immunity 41, 871–873.

Söderberg-Nauclér, C. (2006). Does cytomegalovirus play a causative role in the development of various inflammatory diseases and cancer? J. Intern. Med. 259, 219–246.

Sun, W., Li, Y., Chen, L., Chen, H., You, F., Zhou, X., Zhou, Y., Zhai, Z., Chen, D., and Jiang, Z. (2009). ERIS, an endoplasmic reticulum IFN stimulator, activates innate immune signaling through dimerization. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 106, 8653–8658.

Sun, L., Wu, J., Du, F., Chen, X., and Chen, Z.J. (2013). Cyclic GMP-AMP synthase is a cytosolic DNA sensor that activates the type I interferon pathway. Science 339, 786–791.

Tanaka, Y., and Chen, Z.J. (2012). STING specifies IRF3 phosphorylation by TBK1 in the cytosolic DNA signaling pathway. Sci. Signal. 5, ra20.

Taylor, R.T., and Bresnahan, W.A. (2005). Human cytomegalovirus immediate-early 2 gene expression blocks virus-induced beta interferon production. J. Virol. 79, 3873–3877.

Please cite this article in press as: Fu et al., Human Cytomegalovirus Tegument Protein UL82 Inhibits STING-Mediated Signaling to Evade Antiviral Immunity, Cell Host & Microbe (2017), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.chom.2017.01.001

van Diemen, F.R., Kruse, E.M., Hooykaas, M.J., Bruggeling, C.E., Schürch, A.C., van Ham, P.M., Imhof, S.M., Nijhuis, M., Wiertz, E.J., and Lebbink, R.J. (2016). CRISPR/Cas9-Mediated Genome Editing of Herpesviruses Limits Productive and Latent Infections. PLoS Pathog. 12, e1005701.

Wu, J.J., Li, W., Shao, Y., Avey, D., Fu, B., Gillen, J., Hand, T., Ma, S., Liu, X., Miley, W., et al. (2015). Inhibition of cGAS DNA Sensing by a Herpesvirus Virion Protein. Cell Host Microbe 18, 333–344.

Xu, L.G., Wang, Y.Y., Han, K.J., Li, L.Y., Zhai, Z., and Shu, H.B. (2005). VISA is an adapter protein required for virus-triggered IFN-beta signaling. Mol. Cell 19, 727–740.

Zhang, G., Chan, B., Samarina, N., Abere, B., Weidner-Glunde, M., Buch, A., Pich, A., Brinkmann, M.M., and Schulz, T.F. (2016). Cytoplasmic isoforms of Kaposi sarcoma herpesvirus LANA recruit and antagonize the innate immune DNA sensor cGAS. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 113, E1034–E1043.

Zhong, B., Yang, Y., Li, S., Wang, Y.Y., Li, Y., Diao, F., Lei, C., He, X., Zhang, L., Tien, P., and Shu, H.B. (2008). The adaptor protein MITA links virus-sensing receptors to IRF3 transcription factor activation. Immunity 29, 538–550.

Zhong, B., Zhang, L., Lei, C., Li, Y., Mao, A.P., Yang, Y., Wang, Y.Y., Zhang, X.L., and Shu, H.B. (2009). The ubiquitin ligase RNF5 regulates antiviral responses by mediating degradation of the adaptor protein MITA. Immunity 30, 397–407.

Zhou, Q., Lin, H., Wang, S., Wang, S., Ran, Y., Liu, Y., Ye, W., Xiong, X., Zhong, B., Shu, H.B., and Wang, Y.Y. (2014). The ER-associated protein ZDHHC1 is a positive regulator of DNA virus-triggered, MITA/STING-dependent innate immune signaling. Cell Host Microbe 16, 450–461.

Ziehr, B., Vincent, H.A., and Moorman, N.J. (2016). Human Cytomegalovirus pTRS1 and pIRS1 Antagonize Protein Kinase R To Facilitate Virus Replication. J. Virol. 90, 3839–3848.
