
# DAI Another Way: Necroptotic Control of Viral Infection

**Jason W. Upton**${}^{1,*}$ **and William J. Kaiser**${}^{2}$

${}^{1}$Department of Molecular Biosciences, LaMontagne Center for Infectious Disease, Institute for Cellular and Molecular Biology, University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX 78712, USA

${}^{2}$Department of Microbiology, Immunology, & Molecular Genetics, University of Texas Health Sciences Center at San Antonio, San Antonio, TX 78229, USA

*Correspondence: upton@austin.utexas.edu  
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.chom.2017.01.016*

Interrogation of murine cytomegalovirus (MCMV)-encoded cell-death suppressors revealed that necroptosis functions as a trap door to eliminate virally infected cells. This crucial host defense pathway is orchestrated by the sensing of infection by DAI/ZBP-1, engagement of the kinase RIPK3, and subsequent membrane permeabilization by the pseudokinase MLKL.

Programmed cell death in the context of host-pathogen interactions highlights the intrinsic capacity of virtually every cell in metazoans to “altruistically” commit suicide during pathogen engagement. This premature death of infected cells functions as perhaps the most ancient firewall against lethal infection by limiting replication and dissemination while concomitantly alerting neighboring cells to impending threat. The wide array of apoptosis inhibitors encoded by many viral pathogens unequivocally supports the importance of cell death in antiviral defense, predicating subversion of apoptosis for establishment and execution of successful infection. More recently, the role of RIPK3-dependent programmed necrosis, or necroptosis, has emerged as an alternative, nonapoptotic form of programmed cell death that is important in disease and infection. Initially, we were addressing the role of cell-death suppression in the pathogenesis of a virus, murine cytomegalovirus (MCMV), in its natural host. Almost a decade ago, an unanticipated series of observations in the laboratory of Edward Mocarski at Emory University identified the first direct viral inhibitor of necroptosis encoded by the M45 gene product of MCMV. The manuscript, “Virus Inhibition of RIP3-Dependent Necrosis,” published in the April 2010 issue of *Cell Host & Microbe* (*Upton et al.*, 2010), established necroptosis as an important intrinsic host defense against viral infection and highlighted the necessity of subversion of this pathway for pathogenesis. With this $10^{\text{th}}$ Anniversary issue of *Cell Host & Microbe*, we are grateful for the opportunity to share our perspectives on this discovery as well as its role in directing subsequent efforts.

Seminal work by Wolfram Brune and colleagues initially described the M45 gene product of MCMV as a cell-tropism determinant (*Brune, 2011*). The M45 protein is the conserved, though catalytically inactive, herpesvirus homolog of the ribonucleotide reductase large subunit (R1) (*Brune, 2011*) that is dispensable for MCMV replication in NIH3T3 cells. A transposon library of MCMV mutants revealed the role of M45 for virus growth in macrophage and endothelial cells, two important cell types for MCMV in vivo. Importantly, attenuation in endothelial and macrophage cells correlated with the rapid death of infected cells prior to viral replication. MCMV encodes several potent suppressors of apoptosis; these include the viral inhibitor of caspase-8 induced apoptosis (vICA/M36), which blocks extrinsic apoptosis via direct suppression of caspase-8 activation (*Brune, 2011*), as well as inhibitors such as the viral mitochondrial inhibitor of apoptosis (vMIA/m38.5) and the viral inhibitor of Bak oligomerization (vIBO/m41.1) that inhibit intrinsic apoptosis by targeting Bax and Bak, respectively (*Brune, 2011*). Our interest in interrogating M45 function developed from the perplexing question of why M45 was essential in some cells and not others, given the well-known capacity of MCMV to block both major arms of the apoptotic machinery. Thus, the nonredundant function of M45 as a cell-death suppressor raised a number of important questions. Were cell-death pathways that were triggered by viral infection wired in a novel fashion in different cell types? Were the known cell-death inhibitors that were encoded by MCMV insufficient to broadly block apoptosis, thereby necessitating additional suppressor functions conferred by M45? Our initial intention was to employ M45-deficient viruses as a means to elucidate the role of macrophages and endothelial cell types during MCMV infection in the host while characterizing a potential novel antiviral pathway that was targeted by MCMV to promote pathogenesis.

To address M45 function, the cell death suppressor activity was mapped to the N-terminal extension of M45, a region outside the conserved R1 domain (*Upton et al.*, 2008). A series of BLAST searches with sequences from this region revealed sequence homology to the linker region of the receptor-interacting protein kinase 1 (RIPK1), a well-characterized enzyme and adaptor protein that regulates TNF signal transduction and cell death. Importantly, this region of RIPK1 had previously been characterized as harboring a RIP homotypic interaction motif (RHIM), a domain that was present in several other cellular proteins, including the kinase RIPK3, the Toll-like receptor 3/4 adaptor protein TRIF, and the DNA-dependent activator of interferon regulatory factors (DAI), also known as ZBP1 (*Upton and Chan, 2014*). These domains mediate interactions between RHIM-containing proteins, enabling RIPK1, RIPK3, TRIF, and DAI to bind to one another, which leads to NF-$\kappa$B activation as well as to caspase 8-dependent apoptosis (*Upton and Chan, 2014*). The identification of a putative RHIM in M45 suggested that MCMV might directly target cellular RHIM-mediated protein-protein interactions for pathogenesis.

Cell Host & Microbe

Commentary

RIPK1, RIPK3, TRIF, and DAI via its putative RHIM, formally demonstrating M45 as a viral RHIM-containing protein. Importantly, an intact RHIM in M45 was essential for inhibition of TNF-induced apoptosis as well as virus-induced cell death ([Upton et al., 2008](https://doi.org/10.1038/nature06937)). Thus, M45 functions as a viral inhibitor of RIP activation (vIRA); this led to the hypothesis that M45 targets RIPK1 to block virus-induced apoptosis following death receptor activation. However, we were surprised to find that virus-induced cell death did not involve apical or effector caspase processing and occurred even in the presence of caspase inhibitors. Thus, caspase activity was dispensable for MCMV-induced cell death, suggesting a death modality other than apoptosis. Our emerging hypothesis began to reconcile the function of M45 as a nonredundant cell-death suppressor and drew our attention to characterization of this alternate, caspase-independent cell death pathway that terminates virally infected cells.

For many years, it had been noted that signaling by Fas or TNF in the presence of a caspase inhibitor has the capacity to drive a nonapoptotic, necrotic form of cell death in specific cell types. The molecular basis for this alternate death pathway was first established with the identification of RIPK1 and its kinase activity as crucial for FAS-induced necrosis; some years later, this death pathway was named “necroptosis” ([Vandenabeele et al., 2010](https://doi.org/10.1038/nrm2936)). Given the necrotic phenotype of cells infected with M45-deficient virus and the ability of M45 to bind to the RHIM of RIPK1, we initially anticipated that MCMV infection might activate the necroptotic pathway induced by death receptors. In support of this possibility, overexpression of wild-type (WT) M45, but not RHIM-deficient M45, blocked TNF-induced necroptosis ([Upton et al., 2010](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2010.08.034)). To specifically investigate the role of the vIRA RHIM in pathogenesis, we generated a recombinant MCMV virus, M5mutRHIM, in which four conserved amino acids in the RHIM of M45 were mutated ([Upton et al., 2010](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2010.08.034)). This mutant recapitulated the pro-cell-death phenotypes of M45-deficient viruses, indicating the RHIM-dependency of death suppression by vIRA during actual infection. We also found a striking correlation: cell lines that were sensitive to TNF-induced nec-

tein RIPK3 was only expressed in cells sensitive to both virus-induced necrosis and TNF-induced necroptosis. This led us to focus our efforts on the role of RIPK3. Knockdown or elimination of RIPK3, in contrast to RIPK1, prevented M5mutRHIM virus-induced necroptosis and restored viral growth in cell culture ([Upton et al., 2010](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2010.08.034)). RIPK3 kinase activity emerged as essential for the execution of necroptosis in response to both MCMV and death receptor signaling ([Upton et al., 2010](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2010.08.034)), and these results were later confirmed following the prevention of virus-induced necroptosis by small-molecule RIPK3-kinase inhibitors ([Kaiser et al., 2013](https://doi.org/10.1038/nature12779)). M5mutRHIM virus failed to replicate in WT mice and showed no signs of infection ([Upton et al., 2010](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2010.08.034)). Severely immunocompromised NSG mice, which lack mature B and T lymphocytes and functional NK cells and have defective cytokine signaling, that were infected with the M5mutRHIM virus survived infection, whereas WT virus-infected animals succumbed; this indicated not only that the M45 gene was critical for virus replication in vivo, but that its RHIM-mediated functions were required to subvert signaling in a cell-autonomous fashion ([Upton et al., 2010](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2010.08.034)). Importantly, infection of RIPK3-deficient mice or RIPK3 kinase-dead knockin mice resulted in a complete normalization of M5mutRHIM pathogenesis. This line of investigation confirmed the in vitro requirement of RIPK3 in limiting viral infection and revealed RIPK3 as the direct causal target of vIRA-RHIM-mediated suppression during infection ([Figure 1C](#fig1)). Collectively, this series of observations established necroptosis as an important antiviral host response and provided powerful genetic evidence for the importance and specificity of the vIRA-RIPK3 interaction for viral pathogenesis. Congruent with our finding that RIPK3 controlled MCMV infection, Chan and colleagues demonstrated that the increased lethality of vaccinia virus (VV) infection in mice was largely due to a TNFR2-RIPK1-RIPK3-mediated necroptosis pathway, and that mice lacking RIPK3 succumbed to infection with significantly higher viral loads ([Cho et al., 2009](https://doi.org/10.1038/nature07674)). More recently, we and others have demonstrated that herpes simplex virus (HSV-1/2) blocks RIPK3-dependent necroptosis in human cells by disrupting RHIM interactions with

Cell Host & Microbe 21, March 8, 2017 291

Cell Host & Microbe

domain-like (MLKL) for membrane disruption and death (Kaiser et al., 2013). Thus a linear DAI-RIPK3-MLKL axis controls herpesvirus infection, and subversion of this pathway allows for productive virus infection both in vitro and in vivo.

Although the pathways of virus- and TNF-induced necroptosis appear to converge at the level of RIPK3 activation and the execution step requiring MLKL membrane disruption (Figure 1D), the role of DAI as an upstream effector during viral infection provides a unique opportunity to interrogate its role in innate immunity. DAI had previously been characterized as a putative cytosolic dsDNA sensor (Takaoka et al., 2007) and was predicted to sense dsDNA viruses such as herpesviruses. However, our recent work found that influenza A virus (IAV), a segmented, negative-strand RNA virus, triggers a DAI-RIPK3-dependent necrotic pathway (Nogusa et al., 2016; Thapa et al., 2016). DAI binds to IAV genomic RNA late in infection and activates RIPK3-dependent necroptosis to limit infection both in vitro and in vivo (Figure 1A; Thapa et al., 2016). Furthermore, even in the absence of viral infection, DAI has been shown to promote RIPK3-driven lethality in mice lacking the RHIM domain of RIPK1, suggesting that RIPK1 suppresses DAI activation of RIPK3—or, alternatively, that DAI suppresses RIPK1 activation of RIPK3 (Berghe and Kaiser, 2016). These results reveal a number of unresolved questions as to the mechanism(s) driving DAI-dependent necroptosis: these include elucidation of the function of DAI as an interferon-inducible RHIM and definitive demonstration of DAI as a sensor protein by identifying specific DAI-activating ligands. Thus, ongoing efforts will be critical to elucidate specific molecular cues that promote and control DAI-RIPK3 activation in response to RNA and DNA viruses as well as in noninfectious settings.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We thank Edward Mocarski for all of the opportunities, training, and guidance he has provided, especially in support of the observations and ideas discussed here. We thank Hongyan Guo for assistance with graphic illustrations. Work was supported by National Institutes of Health Public Service Grant DP1 OD012198 (to W.J.K.), by the Cancer Prevention & Research Institute of Texas (CPRIT) Scholar Award (R1202, to J.W.U.), and

Figure 1. Activation and Viral Inhibition of Necroptosis Signaling

A) TNF receptor engagement results in the association and activation of a RIPK1-RIPK3 complex (necrosome).

B) MCMV and IAV infections drive DAI association with RIPK3, leading to its activation and necroptosis. HSV1/2 infection drives RIPK3-dependent death in murine cells, but not human cells.

C) MCMV-encoded vIRA directly inhibits RIPK3 RHIM-dependent signaling induced by viral infection through DAI or from death receptors via RIPK1. Similarly, the HSV1/2 homolog UL39 blocks RIPK1-RIPK3 association and subsequent necroptosis in human cells.

D) Death-receptor and virally induced necroptosis share a common pathway downstream of RIPK3 and require the activation of pseudokinase MLKL.

UL39, the HSV-encoded homolog of vIRA (Figure 1C; Guo et al., 2015), further supporting a role for necroptosis suppression during viral infection in both mice and humans.

Having established a RIPK1-independent mechanism of RIPK3 activation following infection that involves RHIM interactions, we extended our studies to the other cellular RHIM-containing proteins, TRIF and DAI. M45mutRHIM virus remained as attenuated in mice lacking TRIF as in normal animals (Upton et al., 2010). In contrast, M45mutRHIM virus replication was restored in mice lacking DAI in a similar manner to the RIPK3 knockout mice (Upton et al., 2012), thus establishing DAI an apical RHIM-adaptor

292 Cell Host & Microbe 21, March 8, 2017

by the William and Ella Owens Medical Research Foundation (201402505-001, to J.W.U.).

**REFERENCES**

Berghe, T.V., and Kaiser, W.J. (2016). Oncotarget 3, 1–2.

Brune, W. (2011). Virus Res. 157, 144–150.

Cho, Y.S., Challa, S., Moquin, D., Genga, R., Ray, T.D., Guildford, M., and Chan, F.K. (2009). Cell 137, 1112–1123.

Guo, H., Kaiser, W.J., and Mocarski, E.S. (2015). Med. Microbiol. Immunol. (Berl.) 204, 439–448.

Kaiser, W.J., Upton, J.W., and Mocarski, E.S. (2008). J. Immunol. 181, 6427–6434.

Kaiser, W.J., Daley-Bauer, L.P., Thapa, R.J., Mandal, P., Berger, S.B., Huang, C., Sundararajan, A., Guo, H., Roback, L., Speck, S.H., et al. (2014). Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 111, 7753–7758.

Kaiser, W.J., Sridharan, H., Huang, C., Mandal, P., Upton, J.W., Gough, P.J., Sehon, C.A., Marquis, R.W., Bertin, J., and Mocarski, E.S. (2013). J. Biol. Chem. 288, 31268–31279.

Nogusa, S., Thapa, R.J., Dillon, C.P., Liedmann, S., Oguin, T.H., 3rd, Ingram, J.P., Rodriguez, D.A., Kosoff, R., Sharma, S., Sturm, O., et al. (2016). Cell Host Microbe 20, 13–24.

Takaoka, A., Wang, Z., Choi, M.K., Yanai, H., Negishi, H., Ban, T., Lu, Y., Miyagishi, M., Kodama, T., Honda, K., et al. (2007). Nature 448, 501–505.

Thapa, R.J., Ingram, J.P., Ragan, K.B., Nogusa, S., Boyd, D.F., Benitez, A.A., Sridharan, H., Kosoff, R., Shubina, M., Landsteiner, V.J., et al. (2016). Cell Host Microbe 20, 674–681.

Upton, J.W., and Chan, F.K. (2014). Mol. Cell 54, 273–280.

Upton, J.W., Kaiser, W.J., and Mocarski, E.S. (2008). J. Biol. Chem. 283, 16966–16970.

Upton, J.W., Kaiser, W.J., and Mocarski, E.S. (2010). Cell Host Microbe 7, 302–313.

Upton, J.W., Kaiser, W.J., and Mocarski, E.S. (2012). Cell Host Microbe 11, 290–297.

Vandenabeele, P., Galluzzi, L., Vanden Berghe, T., and Kroemer, G. (2010). Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 11, 700–714.
