
# ESCRTing Necroptosis

Hongyan Guo$^{1,*}$ and William J. Kaiser$^{1,*}$

$^{1}$Department of Microbiology, Immunology, and Molecular Genetics, University of Texas Heath San Antonio, 7703 Floyd Curl Drive, San Antonio, TX 78229, USA

*Correspondence: kaiserw@uthscsa.edu  
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2017.03.030

Necroptosis is a highly inflammatory form of programmed cell death that results from MLKL-mediated disruption of the cell membrane. In this issue of *Cell*, Gong et al. challenge the notion that MLKL activation is a point of no return by identifying mechanisms to counterbalance necroptosis, sustain plasma membrane integrity, and prolong cell viability.

Programmed necrosis, or necroptosis, is as an alternate death pathway that eliminates cells when caspase activity is limited and functions as an essential host defense pathway against viral infection. Necroptotic signaling by death receptors, toll-like receptors, and the viral sensor DAI (also known as ZBP1) converges on the receptor-interacting protein kinase 3 (RIPK3/RIP3). Autophosphorylated RIPK3 recruits and phosphorylates the pseudokinase mixed lineage kinase domain-like (MLKL), leading to MLKL activation through a multistep process that involves oligomerization, exposure of the amino terminal 4 helical bundle, and membrane permeabilization (*Weinlich et al.*, 2017). In this issue of *Cell*, Douglas Green and colleagues reveal that the endosomal sorting complexes required for transport (ESCRT)-III machinery antagonizes the execution phase of necroptosis by sustaining plasma membrane integrity (*Gong et al.*, 2017). These repair processes counterbalance MLKL-mediated membrane damage to prolong the death throes, allowing for sufficient production of inflammatory cues, and in certain contexts can even fully resuscitate a cell that would otherwise be fated to die.

Aside from the requisite levels of RIPK3 and MLKL essential for necroptosis induction, numerous studies have identified key regulatory steps in necroptosis signaling (*Weinlich et al.*, 2017). Crucial brakes include ubiquitination and caspase inhibition, but these processes seem to dominate in regulating apical signaling events in the necroptotic hierarchy. The E3 ligases cIAP1 and cIAP2 restrict RIPK1 recruitment and activation of RIPK3 following TNF stimulation. Similarly, basal prosurvival levels of caspase 8 prevent necrosome assembly, at least in part by directly cleaving RIP kinases, and in most settings, caspase 8 must be inhibited for RIPK3 autophosphorylation. A third level of control involves RIPK3 oligomerization via a carboxy-terminal RIP homotypic interaction motif (RHIM), and the fundamental importance of this oligomerization step is highlighted by the number of herpesviruses that have evolved strategies to directly subvert RHIM signaling to prevent anti-viral necroptosis (*Upton and Kaiser*, 2017).

MLKL targeting of cell membranes has been regarded as the point of no return during necroptosis and thus beyond regulatory control. Such a simplistic assumption is now challenged by this current study, which unveils a role for ESCRT-III in controlling cell fate downstream of MLKL (*Gong et al.*, 2017). In initial experiments, Gong et al. noted that similar to apoptosis, phosphatidylserine (PS) exposure on the surface of necroptotic cells precedes an overall collapse in membrane integrity. Thus, PS exposure is a common feature of both death modalities and cannot be used to differentiate one from the other; however, during necroptosis, permeable plasma membrane bubbles are actively shed, and in contrast to apoptotic bodies, these bubbles appeared devoid of cytoplasmic contents. To isolate this final execution phase of necroptosis, the authors selected a reductionist approach to directly trigger MLKL oligomerization and induce necroptosis in the absence of any confounding upstream signaling events. After activation, MLKL localized to sites of broken membrane bubbles, where it recruited ESCRT-III components, including CHMP4B. ESCRT-III had previously been demonstrated to be essential for membrane repair after laser light damage (*Jimenez et al.*, 2014), and CHMP4B colocalization with MLKL puncta at sites of bubble formation is consistent with the known role of ESCRT in constricting and severing membrane necks. Furthermore, the translocation of ESCRT-III components was dependent on a transient MLKL-dependent Ca$^{2+}$ influx. Thus, ESCRT-III machinery shed damaged (PS-exposed) membranes after MLKL activation in a Ca$^{2+}$-dependent fashion (*Figure 1*). This series of observations suggests that ESCRT actively opposes the destructive capacity of MLKL by mitigating membrane damage.

The requirement of ESCRT-III components for cell survival has been attributed to the diverse processes controlled by the ESCRT pathway, ranging from endosomal trafficking to mitosis, membrane repair, and nuclear envelope reformation (*Christ et al.*, 2017). Remarkably, Gong et al. reveal that the loss of ESCRT-III components decreased cell viability through aberrant activation of necroptosis in their cell culture settings. In both human and murine cells, suppression of a number of different ESCRT components led to enhanced sensitivity to TNF-induced necroptosis even in the absence of IAP antagonists, caspase inhibition, or even detectable levels of phospho-MLKL, indicating that compromise in ESCRT dramatically shifts the balance in favor of death. To address the question of whether ESCRT contributes to limiting necroptosis in vivo, the authors analyzed samples from kidney transplants at excision and compared them to biopsies obtained after an ischemic interval prior to transplant to the recipient. A marked increase in phospho-MLKL signal was

TNF-induced  
necroptosis  

TNF  
TNFR  

RIPK1  

RIPK3  

2X FV  
Dimerizer  

MLKL  
2X FV  
Dimerizer  

CYTOPLASM  

MLKL oligomerization  

MLKL attacks  
plasma  
membrane  
(PS exposed)  

Ca²⁺  

ESCRT-III  

Broken  
membrane  
shed  

Figure 1. ESCRT-III Antagonizes Necroptosis  
Necroptosis induction after TNF stimulation or drug-inducible oligomerization of RIPK3 or MLKL leads to rapid Ca²⁺ influx and phosphatidylserine (PS) exposure prior to membrane permeabilization. ESCRT-III components are recruited to localized sites of MLKL-directed membrane damage and resuscitate necroptotic cells by actively shedding broken membrane blebs.

evident in the ischemic samples despite  
the absence of any cell death. RNA  
sequencing analysis revealed elevation  
of not only RIPK3 and MLKL, but also  
several ESCRT components. Though  
correlative, these data suggest the possi-  
bility that ESCRT buffers stressed tissues  
from necroptosis. It will be fascinating to  
determine whether this cytoprotective  
pattern of ESCRT expression is sustained  
in other settings. Furthermore, the pheno-  
types of ESCRT mutant cells and mice  
should be interrogated for potential nec-  
roptosis dysregulation.  
In the context of viral infection, the rapid  
elimination of infected cells prevents viral  
replication and spread, so what is the func-  
tional consequence of delaying necropto-  
sis? Necroptotic cells release damage-  
associated molecular patterns (DAMPs)  
that sculpt the immune response; how-  
ever, the concomitant transcriptional pro-  
gram that includes NF-κB activated during  
necroptosis seems to be the major driver of  
inflammation and immunogenicity of nec-  
roptotic cells (Kearney and Martin, 2017;  
Yatim et al., 2015). Gong et al. demonstrate  
that dilating the time to death enabled cells  
sufficient time to produce increased  
levels of cytokines and chemokines. This  

augmented inflammatory signature pro-  
moted the generation of a robust CD8⁺  
T cell response to antigen expressed by  
dying cells. Thus, by altering the kinetics  
of necroptosis, ESCRT may enhance cross  
priming to facilitate anti-viral immune re-  
sponses. Numerous enveloped viruses  
hijack the ESCRT machinery for viral  
budding, and an important question re-  
mains as to whether virus manipulation  
of ESCRT influences anti-viral necropto-  
sis. Interestingly, human cytomegalovirus  
(HCMV) blocks necroptosis downstream  
of MLKL phosphorylation (Omoto et al.,  
2015), and it is tempting to hypothesize  
that HCMV may be targeting membrane  
repair processes to resist activated  
MLKL. Other outstanding questions that  
need to be addressed include uncovering  
the mechanism for the loss of phospho-  
MLKL after sub-lethal necroptotic stimula-  
tion. Phospho-MLKL was neither shed nor  
degraded, suggesting that an unidentified  
phosphatase may cooperate with ESCRT  
to resuscitate necroptotic cells. Alto-  
gether, the identification of ESCRT as a  
crucial suppressor of MLKL represents an  
exciting advance and highlights the dy-  
namic processes that define the “I’m not  
dead yet” status of necroptotic cells.  

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS  
Work in the authors’ laboratory is supported  
by funding from the NIH (DP5 OD012198) and  
the William and Ella Owens Medical Research  
Foundation.  

REFERENCES  
Christ, L., Raiborg, C., Wenzel, E.M., Campsteijn,  
C., and Stenmark, H. (2017). Trends Biochem.  
Sci. 42, 42–56.  
Gong, Y.-N., Guy, C., Olauson, H., Becker, J.U.,  
Yang, M., Fitzgerald, P., Linkermann, A., and Green,  
D.R. (2017). Cell 169, this issue, 286–300.  
Jimenez, A.J., Maiuri, P., Lafaurie-Janvore, J., Di-  
voux, S., Piel, M., and Perez, F. (2014). Science  
343, 1247136.  
Kearney, C.J., and Martin, S.J. (2017). Mol. Cell 65,  
965–973.  
Omoto, S., Guo, H., Talekar, G.R., Roback, L., Kai-  
ser, W.J., and Mocarski, E.S. (2015). J. Biol. Chem.  
290, 11635–11648.  
Upton, J.W., and Kaiser, W.J. (2017). Cell Host  
Microbe 21, 290–293.  
Weinlich, R., Oberst, A., Beere, H.M., and Green,  
D.R. (2017). Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 18,  
127–136.  
Yatim, N., Jusforgues-Saklani, H., Orozco, S.,  
Schulz, O., Barreira da Silva, R., Reis e Sousa,  
C., Green, D.R., Oberst, A., and Albert, M.L.  
(2015). Science 350, 328–334.
