
Molecular Cell

LSM12 and ME31B/DDX6 Define Distinct Modes of Posttranscriptional Regulation by ATAXIN-2 Protein Complex in Drosophila Circadian Pacemaker Neurons

Graphical Abstract

Authors
Jongbo Lee, Eunseok Yoo, Hoyeon Lee, Keunhee Park, Jin-Hoe Hur, Chunghun Lim

Correspondence
clim@unist.ac.kr

In Brief
Lee et al. discover that ATAXIN-2 protein complex switches between activator and repressor modes of posttranscriptional regulation via its associating factors LSM12 and ME31B/DDX6. This, in turn, defines PERIOD-dependent and -independent clock functions of ATAXIN-2 that contribute to 24 hr periodicity and high-amplitude rhythms, respectively, in circadian behaviors in Drosophila.

Highlights
- ATX2-associating factors LSM12 and ME31B sustain circadian behaviors in Drosophila
- LSM12 acts as a TYF-specific adaptor to stimulate PER translation
- ATX2 associates with NOT1 via ME31B and supports NOT1-mediated gene silencing
- Two ATX2 complexes contribute to 24 hr periodicity and rhythmicity, respectively

Lee et al., 2017, Molecular Cell 66, 129–140
April 6, 2017 © 2017 Elsevier Inc.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2017.03.004

Molecular Cell
Article

LSM12 and ME31B/DDX6 Define Distinct Modes of Posttranscriptional Regulation by ATAXIN-2 Protein Complex in Drosophila Circadian Pacemaker Neurons

Jongbo Lee,$^{1,3}$ Eunseok Yoo,$^{1,3}$ Hoyeon Lee,$^{1,3}$ Keunhee Park,$^{1,3}$ Jin-Hoe Hur,$^{2}$ and Chunghun Lim$^{1,4,*}$

$^{1}$School of Life Sciences, Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology (UNIST), Ulsan 44919, Republic of Korea  
$^{2}$UNIST-Olympus Biomed Imaging Center, UNIST, Ulsan 44919, Republic of Korea  
$^{3}$Co-first author  
$^{4}$Lead Contact  

*Correspondence: clim@unist.ac.kr  
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2017.03.004

---

### SUMMARY

ATAXIN-2 (ATX2) has been implicated in human neurodegenerative diseases, yet it remains elusive how ATX2 assembles specific protein complexes to execute its physiological roles. Here we employ the posttranscriptional co-activator function of *Drosophila* ATX2 to demonstrate that LSM12 and ME31B/DDX6 are two ATX2-associating factors crucial for sustaining circadian rhythms. LSM12 acts as a molecular adaptor for the recruitment of TWENTY-FOUR (TYF) to ATX2. The ATX2-LSM12-TYF complex thereby stimulates TYF-dependent translation of the rate-limiting clock gene *period* (*per*) to maintain 24 hr periodicity in circadian behaviors. In contrast, ATX2 contributes to NOT1-mediated gene silencing and associates with NOT1 in a ME31B/DDX6-dependent manner. The ME31B/DDX6-NOT1 complex does not affect PER translation but supports high-amplitude behavioral rhythms along with ATX2, indicating a PER-independent clock function of ATX2. Taken together, these data suggest that the ATX2 complex may switch distinct modes of posttranscriptional regulation through its associating factors to control circadian clocks and ATX2-related physiology.

---

### INTRODUCTION

Posttranscriptional regulation diversifies eukaryotic gene expression via a wide range of regulatory mechanisms. Tissue-specific transcriptomic analyses have indicated that neuronal mRNAs are potent substrates for the posttranscriptional processing such as alternative splicing and polyadenylation (Miura et al., 2013; Raj and Blencowe, 2015). RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) may thus have evolved neuron-specific regulatory mechanisms to support complex and prompt changes in neuronal gene expression and the relevant physiologies. Consistent with this, genetic defects in RBPs have been associated with several neurological disorders, many of which involve pathogenic RBP aggregations in highly susceptible neurons (Ramaswami et al., 2013).

Spinocerebellar ataxia type 2 (SCA2) is an autosomal dominant ataxia that is caused by mutational expansion of the polyglutamine (polyQ) tract in the gene product of human Ataxin-2 (ATXN2/ATX2) (Imbert et al., 1996; Pulst et al., 1996; Sanpei et al., 1994). Intermediate polyQ expansion in the ATX2 protein has also been correlated with an increased risk of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS; also known as Lou Gehrig’s disease) (Elden et al., 2010). In SCA2 patients, severe neuronal loss is most evident in Purkinje cells of the cerebellum. Consistent with this, ATX2 proteins are abundantly expressed in Purkinje neurons, accumulate with age, and localize to cytoplasmic puncta (Huynh et al., 1999). Interestingly, however, SCA2 patients do not display pathogenic inclusions of the mutant ATX2 protein in the affected cerebellum (Huynh et al., 1999; Huynh et al., 2000). This suggests that the pathogenesis of SCA2 may not simply reflect the general toxicity of aberrant polyQ aggregations, but rather might be due to the genetic perturbation of ATX2 function.

ATX2 homologs are well conserved across eukaryotic species, and their physiological functions have been studied in different model organisms (Kiehl et al., 2000; Mangus et al., 1998). For example, homozygous ATX2-knockout mice are viable and show mutant phenotypes such as obesity, hyperactivity, and reduced fertility (Huynh et al., 2009; Kiehl et al., 2006; Lastres-Becker et al., 2008). However, they do not display anatomic defects in the cerebellar Purkinje neurons, suggesting that gain-of-function effects of the polyQ expansion may contribute to ATX2-dependent neurodegeneration. Alternatively, the murine ATX2-like (ATX2L) gene, a mammalian paralog of ATX2, could compensate for ATX2 knockout through functional redundancy. In contrast, *Drosophila* has a single ATX2 homolog and its loss-of-function mutation is lethal in the homozygous state (Satterfield et al., 2002). ATX2 has important functions in the *Drosophila* nervous system, such as contributing to circadian behaviors (Lim and Allada, 2013a; Zhang et al., 2013) and long-term memory (McCann et al., 2011; Sudhakaran et al., 2014), as shown by the transgenic manipulation of its dosage in specific neurons.

ATX2 and the other RBPs share an N-terminal like-Sm (Lsm) domain and a C-terminal polyA-binding protein (PABP)-interacting motif (PAM2). Based on this sequence homology, it has long been thought that ATX2 proteins might participate in RNA

Molecular Cell 66, 129–140, April 6, 2017 © 2017 Elsevier Inc.

Figure 1. A Genetic Screen Identifies Lsm12 and me31B Important for Circadian Locomotor Rhythms in Drosophila

(A) A schematic diagram of ~150 circadian pacemaker neurons in each hemisphere of fly brain. Large and small ventral lateral neurons (l-LNv and s-LNv, respectively) express a circadian neuropeptide PDF important for the behavioral rhythms in constant dark (DD). LNd, dorsal LN; 5<sup>th</sup>s-LNv, PDF-negative LNv; DN, dorsal neuron; LPN, lateral posterior neuron.

(B) Lsm12 or me31B RNAi flies show long-period locomotor rhythms or poor rhythmicity, respectively. Each RNAi transgene was overexpressed by TD2 (tim-Gal4 > UAS-DCR2). Circadian periods of the locomotor rhythms in DD were determined by chi-square periodograms (y axis). Power of rhythmicity was calculated by power (P) minus significance (S) values (x axis). Data were averaged from 12–105 male flies per each RNAi transgene.

(C) The averaged actograms of TD2 control, Lsm12 RNAi, and me31B RNAi flies for three light:dark (LD) cycles of 12 hr on and 12 hr off followed by seven DD cycles. White colors, L phases; gray colors, D phases.

(D) Depletion of LSM12 or ME31B in PDF neurons is sufficient to affect circadian behaviors in DD. Circadian periods (top) or power of rhythmicity (bottom) were measured in individual flies. Data represent mean ± SEM (n = 20–91). PD2, Pdf-Gal4 > UAS-DCR2. **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001 to heterozygous controls as determined by one-way ANOVA, Tukey’s post hoc test.

See also Figure S1 and Table S1.

metabolism ([Albrecht et al., 2004](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0308161101)). Indeed, biochemical analyses have revealed that ATX2 proteins associate with translating polyribosomes ([Satterfield and Pallanck, 2006](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2006.05.024)), bind RNA transcripts in both PAM2-dependent and -independent manners ([Lim and Allada, 2013a](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2013.02.037); [Yokoshi et al., 2014](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M114.561586)), and form a complex with other known RBPs, including PABP ([Satterfield and Pallanck, 2006](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2006.05.024)), ME31B/DDX6 RNA helicase ([Nonhoff et al., 2007](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M702810200)), TDP-43 ([Elden et al., 2010](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2010.06.036)), and FUS ([Farg et al., 2013](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2013.03.027)), the latter two of which are major disease proteins implicated in ALS. At present, however, it is poorly understood how these ATX2-associating factors assemble into a specific protein complex and/or how they contribute to the biological function of the ATX2 complex in vivo.

To address these questions, we employed the posttranscriptional co-activator function of *Drosophila* ATX2 important for circadian locomotor behaviors ([Lim and Allada, 2013a](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2013.02.037); [Zhang et al., 2013](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M113.492648)). We identify LSM12 and ME31B as two key components of the ATX2 complex to sustain circadian periodicity and rhythm amplitude, respectively. Furthermore, we demonstrate mechanistic bases of how LSM12 and ME31B contribute differently to two opposing effects of the ATX2 complex on the posttranscriptional gene expression. These findings could help generalize the molecular principles underlying ATX2-dependent gene regulation and may provide insight into the molecular pathogeneses of SCA2 and/or ALS.

**RESULTS**

**A Genetic Screen Identifies Lsm12 and me31B Important for Circadian Locomotor Rhythms in Drosophila**

The translational regulator TWENTY-FOUR (TYF) employs ATX2 to activate the translation of the rate-limiting circadian clock gene *period* (*per*), thereby defining a posttranscriptional co-activator function of ATX2 in *Drosophila* circadian clocks ([Lim and Allada, 2013a](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2013.02.037); [Lim et al., 2011](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2011.05.028); [Zhang et al., 2013](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M113.492648)). The ATX2-dependent translation of PER is most evident in ~150 circadian pacemaker neurons present in adult fly brains (Figure 1A). Genetic disruptions in *Atx2* or *tyf* dampen the high-amplitude PER cycling with 24 hr periodicity in these cells, leading to

Figure 2. Lsm12 in Circadian Pacemaker Neurons Sustains 24 hr Periodicity in Circadian Behaviors

(A) A schematic diagram of genomic deletions in Lsm12 mutant alleles. Darker gray, exons; lighter gray, untranslated regions; arrowheads, transcriptional termination sites.

(B and C) A chromosomal deletion Df(1)ED7153 fails to complement Lsm12 mutant alleles. Circadian periods were measured in male flies hemizygous for control (Lsm12Δ2) or Lsm12 deletion alleles (B), or in female trans-heterozygotes with Df(1)ED7153 (C). Data represent mean ± SEM (n = 15–63 male flies; n = 16–41 female virgins). n.s., not significant; *p < 0.05, ***p < 0.001 to Lsm12Δ2 or heterozygous controls as determined by one-way ANOVA, Tukey’s post hoc test.

(D and E) LSM12 overexpression in cry-expressing clock neurons rescues long-period locomotor rhythms in Lsm12 mutants. The averaged actograms per each genotype (n = 23–42) were double-plotted (D). White colors, L phases; gray colors, D phases. Circadian periods were measured in control or Lsm12Δ3 flies with each combination of Gal4 and UAS transgenes (E). Data represent mean ± SEM (n = 23–48). n.s., not significant; ***p < 0.001 to cry-Gal4 control in wild-type as determined by one-way ANOVA, Tukey’s post hoc test.

See also Figure S2 and Tables S2 and S3.

Figure 3. Dampened PER Expression Causes Long-Period Locomotor Rhythms in *Lsm12* Mutants

(A) *Lsm12* mutant flies (*Lsm12<sup>Δ6</sup>*) display lower PER levels in circadian pacemaker neurons than control (*Lsm12<sup>Δ2</sup>*). PER and TIM protein levels in clock neurons were quantified at the indicated zeitgeber times (ZT; lights on at ZT0, lights off at ZT12) in LD cycles and normalized to the values in control at ZT0 (set as 100%). Data represent mean ± SEM (n = 10–26). Representative confocal images of PDF-expressing s-LNv were shown on the left. *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001 to *Lsm12<sup>Δ2</sup>* control at each ZT as determined by Student’s t test.

(B) A genomic *per* transgene harboring an ~13.2 kb wild-type *per* locus (p{13.2per-HAHis}) rescues long-period locomotor rhythms in *Lsm12* mutants. Data represent mean ± SEM (n = 29–63). n.s., not significant; ***p < 0.001 as determined by one-way ANOVA, Tukey’s post hoc test.

(C) PER overexpression in *cry*-expressing clock neurons rescues long-period locomotor rhythms in *Lsm12* mutants. Data represent mean ± SEM (n = 25–42).

(D) Depletion of LSM12 but not ME31B exaggerates the period-lengthening effects of TYF dominant-negative (TYF∆C5). TYF∆C5 was co-expressed with *me31B* or *Lsm12* RNAi transgene in PDF neurons by Mz520-Gal4. Data represent mean ± SEM (n = 21–36).

See also Figure S2 and Tables S4 and S5.

LSM12 in circadian pacemaker neurons, no significant effect was seen in the free-running circadian behaviors of wild-type flies, but the long-period locomotor rhythms in *Lsm12*-deletion flies were rescued (Figures 2D and 2E and Table S3). This further verifies that the circadian phenotypes observed in the *Lsm12*-deletion mutants were indeed due to the genetic deficit in *Lsm12* rather than the effects of other genes. We confirmed that *Lsm12*-deletion mutants normally develop PDF neurons and their axonal projections by staining adult fly brains with anti-PDF antibody (Figure S2D). RU486-induced, adult-specific expression of LSM12 by Elav-GeneSwitch-Gal4 driver (Osterwalder et al., 2001) was sufficient to rescue the long periods seen in *Lsm12* mutants (Figure S2E and Table S3), suggesting that neuronal LSM12 plays a relatively direct role in sustaining 24 hr periodicity in adult flies. Together with the *Lsm12* RNAi phenotypes above, these data convincingly demonstrate that *Lsm12* expression in the circadian pacemaker neurons is necessary and sufficient to maintain 24 hr locomotor rhythms.

Dampened PER Cycling in Circadian Pacemaker Neurons Leads to Long-Period Locomotor Rhythms in *Lsm12* Mutants

Dampened PER cycling in circadian pacemaker neurons, but not in whole fly heads, is a hallmark of the molecular defects that are observed in *tyf* mutants and Atx2 RNAi flies and cause their behavioral phenotypes (Lim and Allada, 2013a; Lim et al., 2011; Zhang et al., 2013). Protein analyses in the peripheral clock tissues (i.e., the eye) revealed that *Lsm12* deletion does not affect the circadian oscillations in PER and TIM levels (Figure S2F). However, the peak levels of PER in all lateral pacemaker neurons of the *Lsm12*-deletion mutants were reduced to ~27%–37% of the excision controls, leading to low-amplitude PER rhythms (Figure 3A). *Lsm12* effects on TIM levels were most evident near the lights-on point in light:dark (LD) cycle of 12 hr on and 12 hr off, possibly reflecting weaker stabilization of TIM by reduced PER in *Lsm12* mutants. These data suggest that PER might be limiting for 24 hr periodicity.

Figure 4. ME31B Sustains Rhythmic Outputs from Circadian Pacemaker Neurons via a PER-Independent ATX2 Pathway

(A) ME31B depletion does not dampen PER and TIM rhythms in PDF-expressing s-LNv. PER and TIM protein levels were quantified at each time point in LD cycles and normalized to the peak values in TD2 control flies (set as 100%). Data represent mean ± SEM (n = 10–22). *p < 0.05 to TD2 control at a given time point as determined by Student’s t test.

(B and C) ME31B depletion abolishes daily oscillations in PDF levels at the axonal terminus of s-LNv. Dorsal projections from s-LNv were visualized by confocal imaging of anti-PDF staining at each ZT in LD cycles (B). The area positive for anti-PDF staining and its integrated intensity were measured from the fluorescence signals above a threshold level (C). Data represent mean ± SEM (n = 12–19). n.s., not significant; **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001 to TD2 control at the same ZT as determined by one-way ANOVA, Tukey’s post hoc test.

(D) Modest depletion of ATX2 and ME31B non-additively dampens the rhythm amplitude in circadian behaviors. Atx2 and me31B RNAi transgenes were overexpressed in cry-expressing clock neurons by the relatively weak cry-Gal4. Data represent mean ± SEM (n = 21–69). n.s., not significant; ***p < 0.001 to controls for the me31B RNAi transgene as determined by one-way ANOVA, Tukey’s post hoc test.

See also Table S6.

in Lsm12 mutants, as similarly seen in tyf mutants and Atx2 RNAi flies.

Consistent with this hypothesis, insertion of a genomic per transgene (Figure 3B) or PER overexpression in pacemaker neurons (Figure 3C) partially but significantly rescued Lsm12 mutant behaviors (Table S4). The overexpression of ATX2 or TYF failed to comparably rescue Lsm12 mutants, validating the specificity of the PER rescue. Importantly, modest depletion of LSM12 in PDF neurons exaggerated the period-lengthening effects of TYFΔC5, a dominant-negative form of TYF lacking the translation-activation domain (Lim and Allada, 2013a), but the depletion did not affect the circadian periods in control flies (Figure 3D and Table S5). Taken together, the phenotypic analogy between tyf and Lsm12 mutants, and their genetic interaction with respect to circadian periods strongly suggest that Lsm12 may be involved in the TYF-dependent clock pathway via its contribution to PER rhythms.

me31B Supports Behavioral Rhythmicity via a PER-Independent ATX2 Pathway

Partial deletions of the me31B locus cause homozygous lethality during development (Nakamura et al., 2001). Accordingly, we further examined circadian phenotypes in me31B RNAi flies to elucidate possible mechanisms that might underlie poor rhythmicity by ME31B depletion. Daily oscillations of PER and TIM proteins were very robust in PDF neurons of me31B RNAi flies (Figure 4A). We thus reasoned that me31B effects on clocks are likely PER independent, and they might implicate a circadian output pathway that transmits the timing information from the molecular clocks. Daily cycling accumulation of the circadian neuropeptide PDF in the axonal terminus of small ventral lateral neurons (LNv) requires functional clocks (Park et al., 2000). Moreover, the PDF rhythms constitute the clock output pathway through which small LNv controls the neural activity and TIM expression in PDF receptor-expressing clock neurons to synchronize the circadian phases in the neural network of neuroanatomically distinguishable clock cells (Lin et al., 2004; Peng et al., 2003; Seluzicki et al., 2014). By immunostaining whole-mount brains with anti-PDF antibody, we first confirmed that control flies displayed the robust PDF rhythms (Figure 4B). However, the intensity of anti-PDF staining in me31B RNAi flies was much higher than that in control flies at the trough time point (ZT16). The quantification of anti-PDF signals indeed validated that PDF levels did not significantly oscillate in me31B RNAi flies (Figure 4C), as consistent with their behavioral arrhythmicity.

Figure 5. LSM12 and ME31B Associate with the ATX2-TYF Complex

(A) LSM12 associates with the ATX2-TYF complex in *Drosophila* S2 cells. Soluble S2 extracts were immunoprecipitated by pre-immune control, anti-ATX2, or anti-TYF antibodies. Purified immunoprecipitation (IP) complexes were resolved by SDS-PAGE and immunoblotted with specific antibodies (left). Input, 4.5% of soluble extracts used in each IP. Asterisk indicates rabbit immunoglobulin. Protein size markers were shown on the right.

(B) The translation-activation domain of TYF (TYF-C5) is necessary for the association with ATX2 and LSM12 in circadian pacemaker neurons. FLAG-tagged TYF or TYFΔC5 proteins were expressed in *tim*-expressing clock neurons of transgenic flies. Head extracts were prepared at each ZT in LD cycles and immunoprecipitated by anti-FLAG antibody.

(C) The C-terminal RecA-like domain of ME31B associates with the ATX2-TYF complex. S2 cells were transfected with expression vectors for EGFP or EGFP-ME31B fusion proteins as indicated at the top. Soluble extracts were prepared at 48 hr after transfection and immunoprecipitated by anti-GFP antibody. Arrowhead indicates each EGFP-fusion protein.

See also Figure S3.

To determine if *me31B* effects on the circadian rhythmicity are Atx2 dependent, we investigated their genetic interaction in free-running locomotor behaviors. ME31B depletion by the relatively weak *cry*-Gal4 driver decreased the behavioral rhythmicity very modestly (Figure 4D and Table S6). However, the *me31B* RNAi phenotype was significantly enhanced by the co-expression of Atx2 RNAi transgene while circadian behaviors in wild-type backgrounds were not impaired by the same degree of ATX2 depletion. We failed to detect genetic interaction between *me31B* and *tyf* in circadian behaviors (Figure 3D and Table S5). In addition, PER overexpression rescued long-period rhythms but not the rhythmicity phenotype in Atx2 RNAi flies (*Lim* and *Alada*, 2013a). Taken together, the non-additive effects of Atx2 and *me31B* suggest that they may act together in the same genetic pathway to sustain circadian rhythmicity, likely via the clock output from robust PER rhythms.

**LSM12 and ME31B Associate with the ATX2-TYF Complex**

To elucidate the molecular bases underlying the genetic interactions of *Lsm12* and *me31B* with the ATX2-TYF pathway, we biochemically analyzed the endogenous ATX2-TYF protein complex using a series of immunoprecipitation (IP) experiments. IP using anti-ATX2 or anti-TYF antibodies, but not pre-immune antibody, co-purified LSM12 and PABP along with the ATX2-TYF complex from soluble extracts of *Drosophila* S2 cells (Figure 5A). TRAILER HITCH (TRAL), a *Drosophila* homolog of LSM14, was not enriched in the ATX2 or TYF IP, validating the specificity. RNase treatment did not disrupt LSM12 interaction with the ATX2-TYF complex (Figure S3A), excluding the possibility that intermediate RNA molecules mediate their indirect association. To assess the ATX2-TYF complex present in clock-related neurons, we expressed epitope-tagged TYF proteins in *tim*-expressing cells and affinity purified the TYF complex from fly head extracts. Under these conditions, FLAG-tagged TYF efficiently co-purified with endogenous LSM12, ATX2, and PABP (Figure 5B). Deletion of the translation-activation domain of TYF (TYFΔC5) abolished its association with the ATX2-PABP complex as well as LSM12, suggesting that LSM12 might be involved in TYF-dependent translational activation. A similar IP of FLAG-tagged LSM12 also confirmed its specific association with the ATX2-TYF complex in the clock neurons (Figure S3B). These data demonstrate that LSM12 is a core component of the ATX2-TYF complex in vivo and in vitro.

In contrast, we failed to detect any enrichment of endogenous ME31B in the ATX2-TYF complex in S2 cell extracts (Figure 5A). Given that DDX6 (a mammalian homolog of ME31B) forms diverse, biochemically distinct protein complexes (*Ayache et al.*, 2015; *Bish et al.*, 2015), we speculated that the ME31B enrichment might not be readily detectable in the endogenous ATX2-TYF complex. To verify this possibility, we overexpressed epitope-tagged ME31B proteins and performed a reciprocal IP in S2 cells. EGFP-fused ME31B, but not EGFP itself, efficiently co-purified all the endogenous components of the ATX2-TYF complex (including LSM12) in an RNase-insensitive manner (Figures 5C and S3C). Deletion mapping revealed that the C-terminal RecA-like domain in ME31B (ME31B-C) associated with the ATX2-TYF complex (*Tritschler et al.*, 2009; *Tritschler et al.*, 2008). The N-terminal deletion modestly weakened ME31B interaction with the ATX2-LSM12-TYF complex, but not with

Figure 6. LSM12 Is a TYF-Specific Molecular Adaptor in the ATX2 Complex to Support TYF-Dependent Translation

(A) Head extracts from control ($Lsm12^{Δ2}$) and $Lsm12$ mutant flies ($Lsm12^{Δ6}$) were immunoprecipitated with pre-immune control or anti-ATX2 antibodies. Purified IP complexes were resolved by SDS-PAGE and immunoblotted with specific antibodies (left). Input, 2.5% of soluble extracts used in each IP.

(B) LSM12 depletion disrupts the association of ATX2 with the translation-activation domain of TYF (TYF-C5). FLAG-tagged TYF-C5 or TYFΔC5 proteins were expressed in EGFP (control)- or LSM12-depleted S2 cells. Their soluble extracts were immunoprecipitated by anti-FLAG antibody.

(C) Depletion of ATX2 or LSM12 abolishes the 5′-cap association of TYF. Soluble extracts were prepared from dsRNA-treated S2 cells and incubated with m7-GTP affinity beads to purify the cap-binding protein complexes. EIF4E and TUBULIN proteins were positive and negative controls, respectively. Input, 4.5% of soluble extracts used in each pull down.

(D) LSM12 depletion suppresses translational activation by RNA-tethered TYF. Firefly luciferase (FLUC) RNA reporter containing MS2-binding sites, Renilla luciferase (RLUC) RNA reporter, and MS2 fusion proteins (MS2 or TYF-MS2) were co-expressed in EGFP- or LSM12-depleted S2 cells. Specific depletion of endogenous LSM12 protein was confirmed by immunoblotting (top). Dual luciferase reporter assays were performed at 48 hr after transfection. Activation fold was calculated by normalizing to the FLUC/RLUC value in EGFP-depleted cells expressing MS2. Data represent mean ± SEM (n = 5). n.s., not significant; ***p < 0.001 as determined by one-way ANOVA, Tukey’s post hoc test.

See also Figures S4 and S5.

PABP or NOT1, likely indicating their independent association with ME31B. Finally, we confirmed that the non-competitive association of LSM12 and DDX6 with ATX2 is conserved in human homologs (Figures S3D and S3E).

### LSM12 Is a Molecular Adaptor that Mediates the ATX2-TYF Interaction

To dissect the molecular architecture of the ATX2-TYF complex, we first compared the biochemical composition of the endogenous ATX2 complex in wild-type and $Lsm12$-deletion mutants. Importantly, the enrichment of TYF in the ATX2 IP was diminished in head extracts of $Lsm12$ mutant flies, whereas the lack of LSM12 protein did not affect the ATX2-PABP interaction (Figure 6A). Moreover, the association of the ATX2 complex with clock gene mRNAs was comparable between wild-type and $Lsm12$ mutants (Figure S4), consistent with our previous findings that the RNA-binding activity of the ATX2 complex is PABP dependent but TYF independent (Lim and Allada, 2013a). To confirm these in vivo data, we overexpressed the translation-activation domain of TYF (TYF-C5) in S2 cells and used it as a bait protein to pull down the endogenous ATX2 complex. In this reciprocal IP, LSM12 depletion disrupted the interaction between TYF-C5 and ATX2 (Figure 6B). These results clearly show that LSM12 is specifically necessary for the stable interaction between ATX2 and TYF.

The recognition of a 5′-cap structure (7-methylguanosine; m7-GTP) by specific translation initiation factors promotes ribosomal assembly and cap-dependent translational initiation (Sonenberg and Hinnebusch, 2009). We previously suggested that TYF-dependent translational activation might implicate its association with the cap-binding complex (Lim et al., 2011). Here, we questioned whether ATX2 or ATX2-associating factor could be involved in this process. Cap pull-down assays using m7-GTP affinity beads confirmed that the ATX2-PABP complex associates with the 5′-cap independently of TYF, LSM12, or ME31B (Figure 6C). Deletion of the PABP-interacting PAM2 motif in ATX2, however, abolished its 5′-cap association (Figure S5). Since PABP interacts with the cap-associating translation initiation factor eIF4G (Sonenberg and Hinnebusch, 2009), it is likely that PABP links ATX2 to eIF4G in the cap-binding complex. While ATX2 depletion in S2 cells posttranscriptionally decreased the protein levels of TYF and LSM12 under our experimental conditions (data not shown), ATX2-depleted S2 cells did not show any enrichment of TYF in the cap pull down (Figure 6C). Importantly, LSM12
depletion alone was sufficient to specifically dissociate TYF from the cap-binding complex. These results support a model that ATX2 may recruit TYF to the 5′-cap via LSM12 for TYF-dependent translation. LSM12 depletion in S2 cells indeed suppressed the TYF-dependent activation of reporter gene expression in an RNA-tethering assay (Figure 6D). Given our previous results showing that RNAi-mediated depletion of ATX2 but not ME31B similarly abolished the translational activation by RNA-tethered TYF (Lim and Allada, 2013a), these data convincingly demonstrate that LSM12 acts as a TYF-specific molecular adaptor of the ATX2 complex to support TYF-dependent translational activities.

**ATX2 Associates with NOT1 in a ME31B-Dependent Manner and Supports NOT1-Mediated Gene Silencing**

ME31B/DDX6 has been implicated in microRNA (miRNA)-dependent gene silencing by its direct association with a scaffold protein NOT1 of the CCR4-NOT deadenylase complex (Chen et al., 2014; Mathys et al., 2014; Rouya et al., 2014). These observations give rise to the possibility that ME31B and NOT1 collaboratively contribute to the high-amplitude circadian rhythms via the clock output pathway. NOT1 depletion did not affect PER and TIM rhythms in PDF neurons (Figure 7A). However, it dampened daily oscillations in the axonal PDF levels (Figure 9B) and the rhythm amplitude in DD behaviors (Figure 7C and Table S7). The heterozygosity of hypomorphic Atx2 mutation non-additively exaggerated the poor rhythmicity in Not1 RNAi flies, indicating their genetic interaction. Collectively, the Not1 RNAi phenotypes mimicked those in me31B RNAi flies although a floor effect made it difficult to determine if Not1 interacts with me31B on the same genetic pathway for the circadian rhythmicity (Figure S6 and Table S7).

Coimmunoprecipitation (coIP) experiments validated that the N-terminal 298 amino acids in ATX2 (ATX2-N) bind NOT1 as well as all endogenous TYF, LSM12, and ME31B proteins (Figure 7D) (Lim and Allada, 2013a). The ATX2-N does not include PAM2, and the enrichment of PABP in the ATX2-N IP was not evident, excluding the possible implication of PABP in the ATX2-NOT1 interaction. Importantly, ME31B depletion disrupted the association of ATX2-N with NOT1, but not with LSM12 and TYF. Given that ME31B depletion did not affect NOT1 levels, these data suggest that ME31B facilitates the selective assembly of the ATX2-NOT1 complex, differentiating its structural role from that of LSM12.

To examine Atx2 effects on Not1 function, we employed the posttranscriptional activity of NOT1 silencing domain (SD; amino acids 909–1,560). A homologous region in human NOT1 has been shown to directly bind DDX6 and exhibit the DDX6-dependent gene-silencing activity in RNA-tethering assays (Chen et al., 2014; Kuzuoglu-Ozturk et al., 2016; Mathys et al., 2014; Rouya et al., 2014). RNA-tethered NOT1 SD indeed repressed the reporter expression regardless of the 3′ end polyadenylations (i.e., polyadenylation in FLUC-boxB; no polyadenylation in FLUC-boxB-HhR, self-cleaving hammerhead ribozyme, and FLUC-boxB-HSL, histone stem-loop) (Eulalio et al., 2009) (Figure 7E). Consistent with previous observations (Kuzuoglu-Ozturk et al., 2016; Mathys et al., 2014), ME31B depletion de-repressed the gene-silencing activity of NOT1 SD most evidently on the HSL-containing reporter. Importantly, we found that ATX2 depletion comparably masked the repressive effects of NOT1 SD.

These data reveal an important role of ATX2 in the deadenylation-independent posttranscriptional silencing by NOT1. While both HhR and HSL reporters lack poly-A tails (Eulalio et al., 2009), it has been suggested that HSL-binding protein associates with translation initiation factors at 5′ end of mRNAs to stimulate translation (Gorgoni et al., 2005; Ling et al., 2002). Accordingly, the phenotypic difference between HhR and HSL reporters implies that effects of Atx2 and me31B on the NOT1 activity may require the intimate interaction between 5′-cap and 3′ end of polyA-deficient or deadenylation-resistant RNA molecules. Taken together, our data provide mechanistic insight into how the ATX2 complex could switch its posttranscriptional effects to shape circadian behaviors, as discussed below.

**DISCUSSION**

Posttranscriptional regulation is emerging as an important clock mechanism that supports robust circadian gene expression (Lim and Allada, 2013b). Identification of the ATX2-TYF complex has been one of the strongest pieces of evidence that pacemaker neuron-specific, translational control of a core clock gene plays a pivotal role in sustaining circadian rhythms (Lim and Allada, 2013a; Lim et al., 2011; Zhang et al., 2013). These studies also identified ATX2 as a posttranscriptional co-activator for a specific RNA-binding protein. Here we demonstrate that two ATX2-associating factors govern circadian periods and rhythmicity, respectively, by switching the ATX2 complex into distinct modes of posttranscriptional regulation (Figure S7).

A yeast homolog of Lsm12 was initially identified as an interacting partner of Atx2 by a two-hybrid screen (Ito et al., 2001). Their biochemical association was subsequently confirmed by analyses in translating ribosomal complexes (Fleischer et al., 2006). Nevertheless, the functional significance of LSM12 has been largely unknown. We established Lsm12-deficient animal models to demonstrate that the genetic, biochemical, and molecular pathway of ATX2-LSM12-TYF sustains 24 hr periodicity via TYF-dependent translation of PER. The conservation of ATX2-LSM12 interaction across eukaryotic species supports the idea that they may have co-evolved as a functional module for the posttranscriptional activity. By contrast, TYF is an insect-specific RBP that associates with per mRNAs independently of the ATX2-LSM12 complex (Lim and Allada, 2013a). We thus reason that other RBPs may analogously recruit the ATX2 co-activator complex via LSM12 to stimulate the translation of their own target mRNAs. These findings far advance our understanding of the generalizable modes of action for the ATX2 co-activator and establish a principal mechanism for ATX2-dependent posttranscriptional regulation.

On the other hand, our genetic analyses implicate me31B and Not1 in a PER-independent clock function of Atx2 to sustain high-amplitude rhythms in circadian behaviors and PDF cycling, which is distinguishable from the ATX2-LSM12-TYF pathway. Compared to the molecular mechanisms underlying the rhythmic expression of PER, how the molecular clocks generate the rhythmic output from the circadian pacemaker neurons is poorly understood. It is thus challenging to pinpoint a rate-limiting gene for the me31B- and Not1-dependent circadian rhythmicity. Nonetheless, our data strengthen the significance of the previously reported

136 Molecular Cell 66, 129–140, April 6, 2017
Figure 7. ATX2 Associates with NOT1 in a ME31B-Dependent Manner and Supports NOT1-Mediated Gene Silencing

(A) NOT1 depletion does not dampen PER and TIM rhythms in PDF-expressing s-LNv. PER and TIM protein levels were quantified at each time point in LD cycles and normalized to the peak values in Pdf-Gal4 control flies (set as 100%). Data represent mean ± SEM (n = 16–23). **p < 0.01 to Pdf-Gal4 control at a given time point as determined by Student’s t test.

(B) NOT1 depletion abolishes daily oscillations in PDF levels at the axonal terminus of s-LNv. The area positive for anti-PDF staining and its integrated intensity were measured from the fluorescence signals above a threshold level. Data represent mean ± SEM (n = 18–23). n.s., not significant; ***p < 0.001 as determined by one-way ANOVA, Tukey’s post hoc test.

(C) NOT1 depletion and the heterozygosity of hypomorphic Atx2 mutation (Atx2[0]/+) non-additively dampens the rhythm amplitude in circadian behaviors. Data represent mean ± SEM (n = 28–39). n.s., not significant; ***p < 0.001 to Pdf-Gal4 controls as determined by one-way ANOVA, Tukey’s post hoc test.

(D) ME31B depletion disrupts the association of NOT1 with the ATX2 complex. FLAG-tagged ATX2-N proteins were expressed in dsRNA-treated S2 cells as indicated at the top. Soluble extracts were immunoprecipitated by anti-FLAG antibody. Purified IP complexes were resolved by SDS-PAGE and immunoblotted with specific antibodies (left). Input, 4.5% of soluble extracts used in each IP.

(E) Depletion of ATX2 or ME31B de-represses gene silencing by RNA-tethered NOT1 silencing domain (SD). FLUC RNA reporters containing λN-binding sites (boxB), RLUC RNA reporter, and λN fusion proteins (λN or λN-NOT1 SD) were co-expressed in dsRNA-treated S2 cells as indicated at the top. Dual luciferase reporter assays were performed at 48 hr after transfection. Repression fold per dsRNA was calculated by inversely normalizing to the FLUC/RLUC value in λN-expressing S2 cells. Data represent mean ± SEM (n = 3). HhR, hammerhead ribozyme; HSL, histone stem-loop at 3′ end of the FLUC reporter. n.s., not significant; **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001 to dsEGFP control as determined by one-way ANOVA, Tukey’s post hoc test.

See also Figure S6 and Table S7.

interaction between ME31B/DDX6 and NOT1 in a physiologically relevant context (Chen et al., 2014; Mathys et al., 2014; Rouya et al., 2014). Moreover, we discovered that ATX2 supports NOT1-dependent gene silencing and that ME31B specifically promotes the assembly of ATX2-NOT1 complex.

These findings elucidate how the ATX2 complex could be geared toward a posttranscriptional repressor via ME31B and NOT1. In addition, stronger effects of Atx2 and me31B on the deadenylation-independent gene silencing by NOT1 predict that the substrate specificity of the ATX2-ME31B-NOT1 complex might be conferred by short polyA-tail length in mRNAs, possibly including those involved in the clock output process. Given the implication of CCR4-NOT in miRNA-dependent gene regulation, our results explain Atx2 effects on the miRNA-mediated gene silencing (McCann et al., 2011). It is thus possible that generic deficits in the miRNA pathways collectively form the basis for the compromised rhythmicity seen in RNAi flies relevant to the ATX2-ME31B-NOT1 complex. This notion is consistent with the previous observations that dysfunction in the miRNA pathway impairs the rhythm amplitude in circadian behaviors (Chen and Rosbash, 2016; Kadener et al., 2009; Lerner et al., 2015; Luo and Sehgal, 2012; Zhang and Emery, 2013).
ME31B/DDX6 is considered as a molecular hub that forms distinct sets of protein complexes with posttranscriptional regulatory activities in human cells (Ayache et al., 2015; Bish et al., 2015). Interestingly, the de-capping activator EDC3, the translational repressor TRAL/LSM14, ATX2, and NOT1 all commonly target the C-terminal RecA-like domain of ME31B/DDX6 (Figure 5C), possibly implicating their mutually exclusive assembly into the ME31B/DDX6 complex (Ozgur et al., 2015; Tritschler et al., 2009; Tritschler et al., 2008). ATX2 homologs do not contain a highly conserved FDF motif that mediates the competitive binding of EDC3 and TRAL to ME31B/DDX6 (Tritschler et al., 2009). In addition, NOT1 excludes EDC3 and PAT1 from the ME31B/DDX6 complex but favors the assembly of the CUP/4E-T-ME31B/DDX6-NOT1 complex (Ozgur et al., 2015), analogously to the structural organization of the ATX2-ME31B-NOT1 complex. Accordingly, the genetic perturbations in Atx2 may shift the molecular and subcellular balance of the ME31B/DDX6-associating complexes, thereby affecting posttranscriptional gene expression more broadly.

Taken together, we demonstrate that specific ATX2-associating factors set the distinct modes of posttranscriptional regulation by the ATX2 protein complex. Given the evolutionary conservation of the modular architecture in the ATX2 complex, we propose that RBP-specific engagement of the ATX2-LSM12 complex and substrate-specific posttranscriptional effects of the ATX2-ME31B-NOT1 complex may constitute two fundamental mechanisms in ATX2-dependent gene expression. It will be particularly interesting to determine if these ATX2-associating factors play similar roles in other ATX2-relevant physiology such as neurodegenerative disorders.

### STAR★METHODS

Detailed methods are provided in the online version of this paper and include the following:

- **KEY RESOURCES TABLE**
- **CONTACT FOR REAGENT AND RESOURCE SHARING**
- **EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND SUBJECT DETAILS**
  - Drosophila melanogaster
  - Drosophila S2 cells
- **METHOD DETAILS**
  - Transgenic flies
  - Behavioral analyses
  - Construction of expression vectors
  - Generation of polyclonal antibodies
  - Whole-mount immunostaining
  - Quantitative analyses of whole-brain imaging
  - RNA interference and RNA-tethering assays
  - Immunoprecipitation and cap pull-down assays
  - RNA immunoprecipitation and analyses
- **QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS**

### SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION

Supplemental Information includes seven figures and seven tables and can be found with this article online at [http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2017.03.004](http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2017.03.004).

---

### AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS

C.L. conceived the research; J.L., E.Y., H.L., K.P., and C.L. performed the experiments; J.L., E.Y., H.L., J.-H.H., and C.L. analyzed the data; C.L. wrote the manuscript with input from J.L. and E.Y.

### ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We thank J. Choe, P. Emery, A.D. Gitler, E. Izaurralde, E.Y. Kim, C. Lee, A. Nakamura, M. Ramaswami, E. Wahle, Bloomington *Drosophila* stock center, NIG-Fly stock center, Vienna *Drosophila* RNAi center, and Developmental Studies Hybridoma Bank for reagents. This work was supported by the Basic Science Research Program through the National Research Foundation (NRF) funded by the Ministry of Science, ICT and Future Planning (MSIP), the Republic of Korea (NRF-2014R1A1A1003184), and by the Korea Health Technology R&D Project through the KHIDI funded by the Ministry of Health & Welfare, the Republic of Korea (HI16C1747).

Received: April 11, 2016  
Revised: January 4, 2017  
Accepted: March 3, 2017  
Published: April 6, 2017  

### REFERENCES

- Albrecht, M., Golatta, M., Wüllner, U., and Lengauer, T. (2004). Structural and functional analysis of ataxin-2 and ataxin-3. Eur. J. Biochem. 271, 3155–3170.
- Ayache, J., Bénard, M., Ernoult-Lange, M., Minshall, N., Standart, N., Kress, M., and Weil, D. (2015). P-body assembly requires DDX6 repression complexes rather than decay or Ataxin2/2L complexes. Mol. Biol. Cell 26, 2579–2595.
- Bish, R., Cuevas-Polo, N., Cheng, Z., Hambardzumyan, D., Munschauer, M., Landthaler, M., and Vogel, C. (2015). Comprehensive Protein Interactome Analysis of a Key RNA Helicase: Detection of Novel Stress Granule Proteins. Biomolecules 5, 1441–1466.
- Blanchardon, E., Grima, B., Klarsfeld, A., Chélot, E., Hardin, P.E., Prétat, T., and Rouyer, F. (2001). Defining the role of *Drosophila* lateral neurons in the control of circadian rhythms in motor activity and eclosion by targeted genetic ablation and PERIOD protein overexpression. Eur. J. Neurosci. 13, 871–888.
- Chen, X., and Rosbash, M. (2016). mir-276a strengthens *Drosophila* circadian rhythms by regulating timeless expression. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 113, E2965–E2972.
- Chen, Y., Boland, A., Kuzuoğlu-Öztürk, D., Bawankar, P., Loh, B., Chang, C.T., Weichenrieder, O., and Izaurralde, E. (2014). A DDX6-CNOT1 complex and W-binding pockets in CNOT9 reveal direct links between miRNA target recognition and silencing. Mol. Cell 54, 737–750.
- Dietzl, G., Chen, D., Schnorrer, F., Su, K.C., Barinova, Y., Fellner, M., Gasser, B., Kinsey, K., Oppel, S., Scheiblauer, S., et al. (2007). A genome-wide transgenic RNAi library for conditional gene inactivation in *Drosophila*. Nature 448, 151–156.
- Elden, A.C., Kim, H.J., Hart, M.P., Chen-Plotkin, A.S., Johnson, B.S., Fang, X., Armakola, M., Geser, F., Greene, R., Lu, M.M., et al. (2010). Ataxin-2 intermediate-length polyglutamine expansions are associated with increased risk for ALS. Nature 466, 1069–1076.
- Eulalio, A., Huntzinger, E., Nishihara, T., Rehwinkel, J., Fauser, M., and Izaurralde, E. (2009). Deadenylation is a widespread effect of miRNA regulation. RNA 15, 21–32.
- Farg, M.A., Soo, K.Y., Warraich, S.T., Sundaramoorthy, V., Blair, I.P., and Atkin, J.D. (2013). Ataxin-2 interacts with FUS and intermediate-length polyglutamine expansions enhance FUS-related pathology in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Hum. Mol. Genet. 22, 717–728.
- Fleischer, T.C., Weaver, C.M., McAfee, K.J., Jennings, J.L., and Link, A.J. (2006). Systematic identification and functional screens of uncharacterized proteins associated with eukaryotic ribosomal complexes. Genes Dev. 20, 1294–1307.

138 Molecular Cell 66, 129–140, April 6, 2017Gorgoni, B., Andrews, S., Schaller, A., Schümerperli, D., Gray, N.K., and Müller, B. (2005). The stem-loop binding protein stimulates histone translation at an early step in the initiation pathway. RNA 11, 1030–1042.

Grima, B., Chélot, E., Xia, R., and Rouyer, F. (2004). Morning and evening peaks of activity rely on different clock neurons of the Drosophila brain. Nature 431, 869–873.

Guruharsha, K.G., Rual, J.F., Zhai, B., Mintseris, J., Vaidya, P., Vaidya, N., Beekman, C., Wong, C., Rhee, D.Y., Cenaj, O., et al. (2011). A protein complex network of Drosophila melanogaster. Cell 147, 690–703.

Huynh, D.P., Del Bigio, M.R., Ho, D.H., and Pulst, S.M. (1999). Expression of ataxin-2 in brains from normal individuals and patients with Alzheimer’s disease and spinocerebellar ataxia 2. Ann. Neurol. 45, 232–241.

Huynh, D.P., Figueroa, K., Hoang, N., and Pulst, S.M. (2000). Nuclear localization or inclusion body formation of ataxin-2 are not necessary for SCA2 pathogenesis in mouse or human. Nat. Genet. 26, 44–50.

Huynh, D.P., Maalouf, M., Silva, A.J., Schweizer, F.E., and Pulst, S.M. (2009). Dissociated fear and spatial learning in mice with deficiency of ataxin-2. PLoS ONE 4, e6235.

Imbert, G., Saudou, F., Yvert, G., Devys, D., Trottier, Y., Garnier, J.M., Weber, C., Mandel, J.L., Cancel, G., Abbas, N., et al. (1996). Cloning of the gene for spinocerebellar ataxia 2 reveals a locus with high sensitivity to expanded CAG/glutamine repeats. Nat. Genet. 14, 285–291.

Ito, T., Chiba, T., Ozawa, R., Yoshida, M., Hattori, M., and Sakaki, Y. (2001). A comprehensive two-hybrid analysis to explore the yeast protein interactome. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 98, 4569–4574.

Kadener, S., Menet, J.S., Sugino, K., Horwich, M.D., Weissbein, U., Nawathean, P., Vagin, V.V., Zamore, P.D., Nelson, S.B., and Rosbash, M. (2009). A role for microRNAs in the Drosophila circadian clock. Genes Dev. 23, 2179–2191.

Kaneko, M., and Hall, J.C. (2000). Neuroanatomy of cells expressing clock genes in Drosophila: transgenic manipulation of the period and timeless genes to mark the perikarya of circadian pacemaker neurons and their projections. J. Comp. Neurol. 422, 66–94.

Kiehl, T.R., Shibata, H., and Pulst, S.M. (2000). The ortholog of human ataxin-2 is essential for early embryonic patterning in C. elegans. J. Mol. Neurosci. 15, 231–241.

Kiehl, T.R., Nechiporuk, A., Figueroa, K.P., Keating, M.T., Huynh, D.P., and Pulst, S.M. (2006). Generation and characterization of Sca2 (ataxin-2) knockout mice. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 339, 17–24.

Kim, E.Y., Ko, H.W., Yu, W., Hardin, P.E., and Edery, I. (2007). A DOUBLETIME kinase binding domain on the Drosophila PERIOD protein is essential for its hyperphosphorylation, transcriptional repression, and circadian clock function. Mol. Cell. Biol. 27, 5014–5028.

Kim, E.Y., Jeong, E.H., Park, S., Jeong, H.J., Edery, I., and Cho, J.W. (2012). A role for O-GlcNAcylation in setting circadian clock speed. Genes Dev. 26, 490–502.

Kuzuoğlu-Öztürk, D., Bhandari, D., Huntzinger, E., Fauser, M., Helms, S., and Izaurralde, E. (2016). miRISC and the CCR4-NOT complex silence mRNA targets independently of 43S ribosomal scanning. EMBO J. 35, 1186–1203.

Lastres-Becker, I., Brodesser, S., Lütjohann, D., Azizov, M., Buchmann, J., Hintermann, E., Sandhoff, K., Schürmann, A., Nowock, J., and Auburger, G. (2008). Insulin receptor and lipid metabolism pathology in ataxin-2 knock-out mice. Hum. Mol. Genet. 17, 1465–1481.

Lerner, I., Bartok, O., Wolfson, V., Menet, J.S., Weissbein, U., Afik, S., Haimovich, D., Gafni, C., Friedman, N., Rosbash, M., and Kadener, S. (2015). Clk post-transcriptional control denoises circadian transcription both temporally and spatially. Nat. Commun. 6, 7056.

Lim, C., and Allada, R. (2013a). ATAXIN-2 activates PERIOD translation to sustain circadian rhythms in Drosophila. Science 340, 875–879.

Lim, C., and Allada, R. (2013b). Emerging roles for post-transcriptional regulation in circadian clocks. Nat. Neurosci. 16, 1544–1550.

Lim, C., Lee, J., Choi, C., Kilman, V.L., Kim, J., Park, S.M., Jang, S.K., Allada, R., and Choe, J. (2011). The novel gene twenty-four defines a critical translational step in the Drosophila clock. Nature 470, 399–403.

Lin, Y., Stormo, G.D., and Taghert, P.H. (2004). The neuropeptide pigment-dispersing factor coordinates pacemaker interactions in the Drosophila circadian system. J. Neurosci. 24, 7951–7957.

Ling, J., Morley, S.J., Pain, V.M., Marzluff, W.F., and Gallie, D.R. (2002). The histone 3′-terminal stem-loop-binding protein enhances translation through a functional and physical interaction with eukaryotic initiation factor 4G (eIF4G) and eIF3. Mol. Cell. Biol. 22, 7853–7867.

Luo, W., and Sehgal, A. (2012). Regulation of circadian behavioral output via a MicroRNA-JAK/STAT circuit. Cell 148, 765–779.

Mangus, D.A., Amrani, N., and Jacobson, A. (1998). Pbp1p, a factor interacting with Saccharomyces cerevisiae poly(A)-binding protein, regulates polyadenylation. Mol. Cell. Biol. 18, 7383–7396.

Mathys, H., Basquin, J., Ozgur, S., Czarnocki-Cieciura, M., Bonneau, F., Aartse, A., Dziembowski, A., Nowotny, M., Conti, E., and Filipowicz, W. (2014). Structural and biochemical insights to the role of the CCR4-NOT complex and DDX6 ATPase in microRNA repression. Mol. Cell 54, 751–765.

McCann, C., Holohan, E.E., Das, S., Dervan, A., Larkin, A., Lee, J.A., Rodrigues, V., Parker, R., and Ramaswami, M. (2011). The Ataxin-2 protein is required for microRNA function and synapse-specific long-term olfactory habituation. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 108, E655–E662.

Miura, P., Shenker, S., Andreu-Agullo, C., Westholm, J.O., and Lai, E.C. (2013). Widespread and extensive lengthening of 3′ UTRs in the mammalian brain. Genome Res. 23, 812–825.

Nakamura, A., Amikura, R., Hanyu, K., and Kobayashi, S. (2001). Me31B silences translation of oocyte-localizing RNAs through the formation of cytoplasmic RNP complex during Drosophila oogenesis. Development 128, 3233–3242.

Nonhoff, U., Ralser, M., Welzel, F., Piccini, I., Balzereit, D., Yaspo, M.L., Lehrach, H., and Krobitsch, S. (2007). Ataxin-2 interacts with the DEAD/H-box RNA helicase DDX6 and interferes with P-bodies and stress granules. Mol. Biol. Cell 18, 1385–1396.

Osterwalder, T., Yoon, K.S., White, B.H., and Keshishian, H. (2001). A conditional tissue-specific transgene expression system using inducible GAL4. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 98, 12596–12601.

Ozgur, S., Basquin, J., Kamenska, A., Filipowicz, W., Standart, N., and Conti, E. (2015). Structure of a Human 4E-T/DDX6/CNOT1 Complex Reveals the Different Interplay of DDX6-Binding Proteins with the CCR4-NOT Complex. Cell Rep. 13, 703–711.

Park, J.H., Helfrich-Förster, C., Lee, G., Liu, L., Rosbash, M., and Hall, J.C. (2000). Differential regulation of circadian pacemaker output by separate clock genes in Drosophila. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 97, 3608–3613.

Peng, Y., Stoleru, D., Levine, J.D., Hall, J.C., and Rosbash, M. (2003). Drosophila free-running rhythms require intercellular communication. PLoS Biol. 1, E13.

Pulst, S.M., Nechiporuk, A., Nechiporuk, T., Gispert, S., Chen, X.N., Lopes-Cendes, I., Pearlman, S., Starkman, S., Orozco-Diaz, G., Lunkes, A., et al. (1996). Moderate expansion of a normally biallelic trinucleotide repeat in spinocerebellar ataxia type 2. Nat. Genet. 14, 269–276.

Raj, B., and Blencowe, B.J. (2015). Alternative Splicing in the Mammalian Nervous System: Recent Insights into Mechanisms and Functional Roles. Neuron 87, 14–27.

Ramaswami, M., Taylor, J.P., and Parker, R. (2013). Altered ribostasis: RNA-protein granules in degenerative disorders. Cell 154, 727–736.

Renn, S.C., Park, J.H., Rosbash, M., Hall, J.C., and Taghert, P.H. (1999). A pdf neuropeptide gene mutation and ablation of PDF neurons each cause severe abnormalities of behavioral circadian rhythms in Drosophila. Cell 99, 791–802.

Rouya, C., Siddiqui, N., Morita, M., Duchaine, T.F., Fabian, M.R., and Sonenberg, N. (2014). Human DDX6 effects miRNA-mediated gene silencing via direct binding to CNOT1. RNA 20, 1398–1409.
Sanpei, K., Takano, H., Igarashi, S., Sato, T., Oyake, M., Sasaki, H., Wakisaka, A., Tashiro, K., Ishida, Y., Ikeuchi, T., et al. (1996). Identification of the spinocerebellar ataxia type 2 gene using a direct identification of repeat expansion and cloning technique, DIRECT. Nat. Genet. 14, 277–284.

Satterfield, T.F., and Pallanck, L.J. (2006). Ataxin-2 and its Drosophila homolog, ATX2, physically assemble with polyribosomes. Hum. Mol. Genet. 15, 2523–2532.

Satterfield, T.F., Jackson, S.M., and Pallanck, L.J. (2002). A Drosophila homolog of the polyglutamine disease gene SCA2 is a dosage-sensitive regulator of actin filament formation. Genetics 162, 1687–1702.

Seluzicki, A., Flourakis, M., Kula-Eversole, E., Zhang, L., Kilman, V., and Allada, R. (2014). Dual PDF signaling pathways reset clocks via TIMELESS and acutely excite target neurons to control circadian behavior. PLoS Biol. 12, e1001810.

Sonenberg, N., and Hinnebusch, A.G. (2009). Regulation of translation initiation in eukaryotes: mechanisms and biological targets. Cell 136, 731–745.

Stoleru, D., Peng, Y., Agosto, J., and Rosbash, M. (2004). Coupled oscillators control morning and evening locomotor behaviour of Drosophila. Nature 431, 862–868.

Sudhakaran, I.P., Hillebrand, J., Dervan, A., Das, S., Holohan, E.E., Hülsmeier, J., Sarov, M., Parker, R., VijayRaghavan, K., and Ramaswami, M. (2014). FMRP and Ataxin-2 function together in long-term olfactory habituation and neuronal translational control. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 111, E99–E108.

Suh, J., and Jackson, F.R. (2007). Drosophila ebony activity is required in glia for the circadian regulation of locomotor activity. Neuron 55, 435–447.

Temme, C., Zhang, L., Kremmer, E., Ihling, C., Chartier, A., Sinz, A., Simonelig, M., and Wahle, E. (2010). Subunits of the Drosophila CCR4-NOT complex and their roles in mRNA deadenylation. RNA 16, 1356–1370.

Tritschler, F., Eulalio, A., Helms, S., Schmidt, S., Coles, M., Weichenrieder, O., Izaurralde, E., and Truffault, V. (2008). Similar modes of interaction enable Trailer Hitch and EDC3 to associate with DCP1 and Me31B in distinct protein complexes. Mol. Cell. Biol. 28, 6695–6708.

Tritschler, F., Braun, J.E., Eulalio, A., Truffault, V., Izaurralde, E., and Weichenrieder, O. (2009). Structural basis for the mutually exclusive anchoring of P body components EDC3 and Tral to the DEAD box protein DDX6/Me31B. Mol. Cell 33, 661–668.

Yokoshi, M., Li, Q., Yamamoto, M., Okada, H., Suzuki, Y., and Kawahara, Y. (2014). Direct binding of Ataxin-2 to distinct elements in 3′ UTRs promotes mRNA stability and protein expression. Mol. Cell 55, 186–198.

Zekri, L., Kuzuoğlu-Öztürk, D., and Izaurralde, E. (2013). GW182 proteins cause PABP dissociation from silenced miRNA targets in the absence of deadenylation. EMBO J. 32, 1052–1065.

Zhang, Y., and Emery, P. (2013). GW182 controls Drosophila circadian behavior and PDF-receptor signaling. Neuron 78, 152–165.

Zhang, Y., Ling, J., Yuan, C., Dubruille, R., and Emery, P. (2013). A role for Drosophila ATX2 in activation of PER translation and circadian behavior. Science 340, 879–882.

Zhao, J., Kilman, V.L., Keegan, K.P., Peng, Y., Emery, P., Rosbash, M., and Allada, R. (2003). Drosophila clock can generate ectopic circadian clocks. Cell 113, 755–766.

STAR★METHODS

KEY RESOURCES TABLE

| REAGENT or RESOURCE | SOURCE | IDENTIFIER |
|---|---|---|
| Antibodies |  |  |
| Rabbit polyclonal anti-TYF | This paper (Ab Frontier) | R2(IP, WB) |
| Rabbit polyclonal anti-LSM12 | This paper (Ab Frontier) | R1(WB), R2(IP) |
| Rabbit polyclonal anti-ATX2 | This paper (Ab Frontier) | R1(IP), R2(WB) |
| Rabbit polyclonal anti-PABP | This paper (Ab Frontier) | R2(WB) |
| Rabbit polyclonal anti-ME31B | This paper (Ab Frontier) | R1(WB) |
| Rabbit polyclonal anti-ME31B | Nakamura et al., 2001 | N/A |
| Mouse monoclonal anti-ME31B | Nakamura et al., 2001 | N/A |
| Rat polyclonal anti-TRAL | Tritschler et al., 2008 | N/A |
| Rabbit polyclonal anti-EIF4E | Zekri et al., 2013 | N/A |
| Rabbit polyclonal anti-EIF4G | Zekri et al., 2013 | N/A |
| Rabbit polyclonal anti-NOT1 | Temme et al., 2010 | N/A |
| Mouse monoclonal anti-NOT1 | Temme et al., 2010 | N/A |
| Rabbit polyclonal anti-PER | Laboratory of Eun Young Kim | N/A |
| Guinea pig polyclonal anti-TIM | Lim et al., 2011 | N/A |
| Mouse monoclonal anti-PDF | Developmental Studies Hybridoma Bank (DSHB) | PDF C7 |
| Mouse monoclonal anti-TUBULIN | DSHB | E7 |
| Mouse monoclonal anti-V5 | Thermo Fisher Scientific | Cat#R 960-25; RRID: AB_2556564 |
| Mouse monoclonal anti-HA | Lim et al., 2011 | N/A |
| Mouse monoclonal anti-FLAG | Sigma-Aldrich | Cat#F 1804; RRID: AB_262044 |
| Mouse monoclonal anti-GFP | NeuroMab | Cat#75-132; RRID: AB_10672529 |
| Rabbit polyclonal anti-GFP | Santa Cruz Biotechnology | Cat#sc-8334; RRID: AB_641123 |
| Alexa Fluor 488 AffiniPure Donkey Anti-Rabbit IgG (H+L) | Jackson ImmunoResearch | Cat#711-545-152; RRID: AB_2313584 |
| Alexa Fluor 594 AffiniPure Donkey Anti-Guinea Pig IgG (H+L) | Jackson ImmunoResearch | Cat#706-585-148; RRID: AB_2340474 |
| Alexa Fluor 647 AffiniPure Donkey Anti-Mouse IgG (H+L) | Jackson ImmunoResearch | Cat#715-605-150; RRID: AB_2340862 |
| Chemicals, Peptides, and Recombinant Proteins |  |  |
| HIS-ATX2-N150 (amino acids 1-150) | This paper | N/A |
| HIS-LSM12 | This paper | N/A |
| HIS-ME31B | This paper | N/A |
| GST-PABP | This paper | N/A |
| GST-TYF (amino acids 1469-1899) | This paper | N/A |
| Critical Commercial Assays |  |  |
| Dual-Luciferase Reporter Assay System | Promega | Cat#E 1960 |
| Clarity Western ECL substrate | Bio-Rad | Cat# 1705061 |
| Experimental Models: Cell Lines |  |  |
| D. melanogaster: Cell line S2 | Thermo Fisher Scientific | Cat#R 69007 |
| Experimental Models: Organisms/Strains |  |  |
| D. melanogaster: P element insertion in Lsm12 locus: y[1] w[67c23] P{w[+mC] y[+mDint2]} EPgy2}CG15735[EY01098] | Bloomington Drosophila Stock Center (BDSC) | BDSC: 15060 |
| D. melanogaster: chromosomal deficiency of Lsm12 locus: Df(1)ED7153, w[1118] P{w[+mW.Scer\FRT.hs3]} 3'.RS5+3.3'}ED7153/FM7h | BDSC | BDSC: 8953 |

(Continued on next page)

Continued

| REAGENT or RESOURCE                                                                 | SOURCE                                      | IDENTIFIER           |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------|----------------------|
| D. melanogaster: P element insertion in Atx2 locus: ry[506]                              | BDSC                                        | BDSC:11688           |
| P{ry[+t7.2]=PZ}Atx2[06490]/TM3, ry[RK] Sb[1] Ser[1]                                   |                                             |                      |
| D. melanogaster: RNAi of Lsm12: y[1] sc[*] v[1];                                      | BDSC                                        | BDSC:34666 (T 34666) |
| P{y[+t7.7] v[+t1.8]=TRiP.HMS01143}attP2                                               |                                             |                      |
| D. melanogaster: RNAi of me31B: y[1] v[1];                                            | BDSC                                        | BDSC:28566 (T 28566) |
| P{y[+t7.7] v[+t1.8]=TRiP.HM05052}attP2                                                |                                             |                      |
| D. melanogaster: RNAi of me31B: y[1] v[1];                                            | BDSC                                        | BDSC:38923 (T 38923) |
| P{y[+t7.7] v[+t1.8]=TRiP.GL00695}attP40/CyO                                           |                                             |                      |
| D. melanogaster: RNAi of Not1: y[1] v[1];                                             | BDSC                                        | BDSC:28681 (T 28681) |
| P{y[+t7.7] v[+t1.8]=TRiP.JF03096}attP2                                                |                                             |                      |
| D. melanogaster: RNAi of Lsm12: P{KK109445}VIE-260B                                   | Vienna Drosophila Resource Center (VDRC)   | VDRC:101762 (v101762)|
| D. melanogaster: RNAi of Atx2: P{KK100423}VIE-260B                                     | VDRC                                        | VDRC:108843 (v108843)|
| D. melanogaster: RNAi of me31B: 4916R-2                                               | National Institute of Genetics             | NIG:4916R-2          |
| D. melanogaster: genomic deletion of Lsm12 locus: Lsm12Δ3                             | This paper                                 | N/A                  |
| D. melanogaster: genomic deletion of Lsm12 locus: Lsm12Δ6                             | This paper                                 | N/A                  |
| D. melanogaster: genomic deletion of Lsm12 locus: Lsm12Δ9                             | This paper                                 | N/A                  |
| D. melanogaster: genomic deletion of Lsm12 locus: Lsm12Δ12                            | This paper                                 | N/A                  |
| D. melanogaster: genomic deletion of Lsm12 locus: Lsm12Δ14                            | This paper                                 | N/A                  |
| D. melanogaster: wild-type control of Lsm12 deletion: Lsm12Δ2                         | This paper                                 | N/A                  |
| D. melanogaster: C-terminally FLAG-tagged Lsm12 cDNA under the control of UAS: UAS-LSM12 #6 | This paper                                 | N/A                  |
| D. melanogaster: C-terminally FLAG-tagged Lsm12 cDNA under the control of UAS: UAS-LSM12 #9 | This paper                                 | N/A                  |
| D. melanogaster: wild-type per cDNA under the control of UAS: UAS-PER16                | Blanchardon et al., 2001                   | N/A                  |
| D. melanogaster: C-terminally FLAG-tagged Atx2 cDNA under the control of UAS: UAS-ATX2-3F | Lim and Allada, 2013a                      | N/A                  |
| D. melanogaster: C-terminally FLAG-tagged tyf cDNA under the control of UAS: UAS-TYF-3F | Lim and Allada, 2013a                      | N/A                  |
| D. melanogaster: C-terminally FLAG-tagged tyf dominant-negative cDNA under the control of UAS: UAS-TYFΔC5-3F | Lim and Allada, 2013a                      | N/A                  |
| D. melanogaster: C-terminally V5-tagged tyf dominant-negative cDNA under the control of UAS: UAS-TYFΔC5-V5 | Lim and Allada, 2013a                      | N/A                  |
| D. melanogaster: genomic transgene of per locus: p{13.2per-HAHis}                     | Kim et al., 2007                           | N/A                  |
| D. melanogaster: Gal4 transgene expressed by Pdf promoter: Pdf-Gal4                    | Renn et al., 1999                          | N/A                  |
| D. melanogaster: Gal4 transgene expressed by tim promoter: tim-Gal4                    | Kaneko and Hall, 2000                      | N/A                  |
| D. melanogaster: Gal4 transgene expressed by cry promoter: cry-Gal4-13                 | Zhao et al., 2003                          | N/A                  |
| D. melanogaster: pan-neuronal Gal4 transgene activated by RU486: Elav-GeneSwitch-Gal4   | Osterwalder et al., 2001                   | N/A                  |

**Oligonucleotides**

| Primer:T7-dsATX2#1 Forward:taatacgactcactataggg TGAACAAACAATAGCAAGCGG | Lim and Allada, 2013a (Macrogen) | N/A |
| Primer:T7-dsATX2#1 Reverse:taatacgactcactataggg GGCGGGCACTATCCAATTCTA | Lim and Allada, 2013a (Macrogen) | N/A |
| Primer:T7-dsATX2#2 Forward:taatacgactcactataggg CCGGTGGTTAAGAAGCATGT | Lim and Allada, 2013a (Macrogen) | N/A |

Continued

| REAGENT or RESOURCE | SOURCE | IDENTIFIER |
| --- | --- | --- |
| Primer:T7-dsATX2#2Reverse:taatacgactcactataggg GAATTGTTGCTGGTGTTGGTG | Lim and Allada, 2013a (Macrogen) | N/A |
| Primer:T7-dsTYFForward:taatacgactcactataggg AAGCCAACGAAGCCTAGTCA | Lim and Allada, 2013a (Macrogen) | N/A |
| Primer:T7-dsTYFReverse:taatacgactcactataggg CAGGCATTCCAGTTCCTTGT | Lim and Allada, 2013a (Macrogen) | N/A |
| Primer:T7-dsLSM12Forward:taatacgactcactataggg AACGGCAACTTTGATGATCC | This paper (Macrogen) | N/A |
| Primer:T7-dsLSM12Reverse:taatacgactcactataggg AGAGATGAGGACGTGGGAGA | This paper (Macrogen) | N/A |
| Primer:T7-dsME31BForward:taatacgactcactataggg TCGACCCAACCAAAGGACTAC | Lim and Allada, 2013a (Macrogen) | N/A |
| Primer:T7-dsME31BReverse:taatacgactcactataggg ATCTCGTAAGGCTCGCGTAA | Lim and Allada, 2013a (Macrogen) | N/A |

Recombinant DNA

| Plasmid:pUAST-LSM12 | This paper | N/A |
| --- | --- | --- |
| Plasmid:pGEX4T-1/PABP | This paper | N/A |
| Plasmid:pGEX4T-1/TYF(aminoacids1469-1899) | This paper | N/A |
| Plasmid:pDuetHis/ATX2-N150(aminoacids1-150) | This paper | N/A |
| Plasmid:pDuetHis/LSM12 | This paper | N/A |
| Plasmid:pDuetHis/ME31B | This paper | N/A |
| Plasmid:pAc5.1/V5-His | Thermo Fisher Scientific | Cat#V411020 |
| Plasmid:pAc5.1/hATXN2-V5(aminoacids1-511) | This paper | N/A |
| Plasmid:pAc5.1/GST-V5 | Lim et al., 2011 | N/A |
| Plasmid:pAc5.1/3xHA | Lim et al., 2011 | N/A |
| Plasmid:pAc5.1/hLSM12-3xHA | This paper | N/A |
| Plasmid:pAc5.1/EGFP | This paper | N/A |
| Plasmid:pAc5.1/DDX6-EGFP | This paper | N/A |
| Plasmid:pAc5.1B-EGFP-DmMe31B | Tritschler et al., 2008 | Addgene #21682 |
| Plasmid:pAc5.1B-EGFP-DmMe31B-N(aminoacids1-267) | This paper | N/A |
| Plasmid:pAc5.1B-EGFP-DmMe31B-C(aminoacids268-459) | This paper | N/A |
| Plasmid:pAc5.1/3xFLAG | Lim and Allada, 2013a | N/A |
| Plasmid:pAc5.1/ATX2-3xFLAG | Lim and Allada, 2013a | N/A |
| Plasmid:pAc5.1/ATX2ΔPAM2-3xFLAG | Lim and Allada, 2013a | N/A |
| Plasmid:pAc5.1/ATX2-N-3xFLAG | Lim and Allada, 2013a | N/A |
| Plasmid:pAc5.1/TYF-C5-3xFLAG | Lim and Allada, 2013a | N/A |
| Plasmid:pAc5.1/TYFΔC5-3xFLAG | Lim and Allada, 2013a | N/A |
| Plasmid:pAc5.1/MS2-V5 | Lim et al., 2011 | N/A |
| Plasmid:pAc5.1/TYF-MS2-V5 | Lim et al., 2011 | N/A |
| Plasmid:pAc5.1/5UTR-FLUC-3UTR-6xBS | Lim et al., 2011 | N/A |
| Plasmid:pAc5.1/RLUC | Lim et al., 2011 | N/A |
| Plasmid:pAc5.1B-lambdaN-HA | Eulalio et al., 2009 | Addgene #21302 |
| Plasmid:pAc5.1B-lambdaN-HA-NOT1SD (aminoacids909-1560) | This paper | N/A |
| Plasmid:pAc5.1-FLUC-5BoxB | Eulalio et al., 2009 | Addgene #21301 |
| Plasmid:pAc5.1-FLUC-5BoxB-HhR | Eulalio et al., 2009 | N/A |
| Plasmid:pAc5.1-FLUC-5BoxB-HSL | Eulalio et al., 2009 | N/A |

Continued

| REAGENT or RESOURCE | SOURCE | IDENTIFIER |
|---------------------|--------|------------|
| Software and Algorithms |  |  |
| DAM Data Acquisition Software | Trikinetics | http://www.trikinetics.com/ |
| DAM File Scan Software | Trikinetics | http://www.trikinetics.com/ |
| ClockLab | Actimetrics | http://actimetrics.com/products/clocklab/ |
| Excel | Microsoft | https://www.office.com/ |
| IBM SPSS Statistics | IBM | https://www.ibm.com/us-en/marketplace/statistical-analysis-and-reporting |
| ImageJ |  | https://imagej.net |
| LightCycler 480 Software, Version 1.5 | Roche | Cat#04994884001 |
| SnapDragon | DRSC/TRiP Functional Genomics Resources | http://www.flyrnai.org/snapdragon |

| Other |  |  |
| Drosophila Activity Monitor (DAM) | Trikinetics | DAM2 |
| Drosophila Environment Monitor | Trikinetics | DEnM |
| Power Supply Interface Unit | Trikinetics | PSIU9 |
| Anti-FLAG M2 Affinity Gel | Sigma-Aldrich | Cat#A2220 |
| Anti-V5 Agarose Affinity Gel | Sigma-Aldrich | Cat#A7345 |
| Protein A Magnetic Beads | New England BioLabs | Cat#S1425S |
| Protein G Magnetic Beads | New England BioLabs | Cat#S1430S |
| Ni-NTA Agarose | QIAGEN | Cat#30210 |
| Glutathione Sepharose 4 Fast Flow | GE Healthcare | Cat#17513201 |
| Immobilized γ-Aminophenyl-m7GTP (C10-spacer) | Jena Bioscience | Cat#AC-155S |
| Effectene Transfection Reagent | QIAGEN | Cat#301427 |
| MEGAscript T7 Kit | Thermo Fisher Scientific | Cat#AM1334 |
| Prime Q-Mastermix | GeNet Bio | Cat#9202 |

---

**CONTACT FOR REAGENT AND RESOURCE SHARING**

Further information and requests for resources and reagents should be directed to and will be fulfilled by the Lead Contact, Chunghun Lim ([clim@unist.ac.kr](http://clim@unist.ac.kr)).

---

**EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND SUBJECT DETAILS**

**Drosophila melanogaster**

Flies were reared on standard cornmeal-yeast-agar medium (5.4% cornmeal, 1.3% yeast, 0.7% soy flour, 0.4% agar, 4.2% starch syrup, 0.4% propionic acid, and 0.8% methyl 4-hydroxybenzoate) at 25°C. We tested ~one week old male flies in all the behavioral analyses and immunofluorescence assays. Virgin female flies trans-heterozygous for the genomic deletion alleles in *Lsm12* locus were tested for the genetic complementation in free-running circadian behaviors (*Figure 2C* and *Table S2*). For immunoprecipitation, immunoblotting and quantitative transcript analyses, both male and female flies of the same genotype were sampled in groups.

**Drosophila S2 cells**

S2 cells were cultured in Shields and Sang M3 insect medium (Sigma-Aldrich) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum and 1% penicillin-streptomycin (Thermo Fisher Scientific) at 25°C. For maintenance, cell cultures with 100% confluency were split at 1:4 dilution with fresh media. For transient transfection or incubation with double-stranded RNAs, S2 cells were diluted from the confluent culture at 1:2.6 on the same day of the experiments. Transient transfections were performed using Effectene Transfection Reagent according to the manufacturer's instructions (QIAGEN)

e4 Molecular Cell 66, 129–140.e1–e7, April 6, 2017

# METHOD DETAILS

## Transgenic flies

CG15735<sup>EY01098</sup> (a P element insertion upstream of the transcription start site of *Lsm12*), *Df(1)ED7153* (a chromosomal deficiency line covering *Lsm12* locus), and *Atx2<sup>06490</sup>* (a hypomorphic P element insertion in the 5′ untranslated region, upstream of the translation start codon of *Atx2*) ([Satterfield et al., 2002](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0092-8674(02)00924-8)) were obtained from Bloomington *Drosophila* stock center. P element excision lines from the EY01098 allele were established by a standard genetic scheme and verified by the PCR amplification of isolated genomic DNA with appropriate sets of primers and DNA sequencing. RNAi stocks including *Atx2* RNAi (v108843), *Lsm12* RNAi (v101762, T34666), *me31B* RNAi (T28566, T38923, 4916R-2), and *Not1* RNAi (T28681) were obtained from Bloomington *Drosophila* stock center, NIG-Fly stock center, and Vienna *Drosophila* RNAi center. UAS-LSM12 transgenic lines were generated by germ-line transformation with the transgenic construct harboring LSM12 cDNA under the control of UAS (BestGene Inc.). *Pdf-Gal4*, *tim-Gal4*, *cry-Gal4*, *Mz520-Gal4*, *Elav-Gal4 Elav-GeneSwitch-Gal4*, UAS-PER16, UAS-ATX2-3F, UAS-TYF-3F, UAS-TYFΔC5-3F, UAS-TYFΔC5-V5, and p{13.2per-HAHis} transgenic lines were described previously ([Blanchardon et al., 2001](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0960-9822(01)00209-0); [Kaneko and Hall, 2000](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0960-9822(00)00580-3); [Kim et al., 2007](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2007.01.055); [Lim and Allada, 2013a](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2013.01.047); [Lim et al., 2011](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2011.02.013); [Osterwalder et al., 2001](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0960-9822(01)00190-5); [Renn et al., 1999](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0960-9822(99)80142-7); [Zhao et al., 2003](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0960-9822(03)00003-9)).

## Behavioral analyses

Individual flies were placed into glass vials containing 5% sucrose and 2% agar, entrained by four light: dark (LD) cycles of 12 hr on and 12 hr off at 25°C and then transferred to constant darkness (DD). Locomotor activities were recorded in 1 min bins using the *Drosophila* Activity Monitor (DAM) system (TriKinetics). Behavioral data collected from the first to the 7th DD cycle were extracted in 30 min bins and analyzed to determine the free-running period length and power of rhythmicity in individual flies using the ClockLab analysis software (Actimetrics). The confidence interval of the chi-square periodogram was set to 0.05 with the testing range of period lengths from 14 hr to 34 hr. The power of rhythmicity (P-S) was calculated by subtracting a Significance value (the minimum measurement considered rhythmic at a given period length with the confidence interval) from a Power value (the observed rhythmicity measurement at the given period length). Flies were defined as rhythmic if their power of rhythmicity values were greater than 10. All the genotypes were tested in multiple behavioral runs. Per each genotype, circadian periods were averaged from rhythmic flies only whereas the power of rhythmicity values were averaged from all the flies tested. The averaged locomotor activity profiles were analyzed using Microsoft Excel.

## Construction of expression vectors

cDNAs corresponding to the amino acids 1–267 or 268–459 of ME31B protein were PCR-amplified and replaced the full-length cDNA in pAc5.1B-EGFP-DmMe31B (a gift from E. Izaurralde) ([Tritschler et al., 2008](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2008.02.015)) to express EGFP-fused ME31B-N or ME31B-C proteins, respectively. cDNA corresponding to the amino acids 909–1560 of NOT1 protein was PCR-amplified from a full-length NOT1 cDNA and inserted into pAc5.1B-λN-HA (gifts from E. Izaurralde) (Addgene plasmid #21302) to express λN-fused NOT1 SD protein in the RNA-tethering assay. DDX6 and hLSM12 cDNAs were reverse-transcribed and amplified from total RNAs in a human breast cancer cell line MCF-7, and cloned into pAc5.1/EGFP or pAc5.1/3xHA to express EGFP- or HA-tagged proteins, respectively. hATXN2-N cDNA corresponding to the amino acids 1–511 of wild-type hATXN2 protein was similarly amplified from a human ATXN2 cDNA (a gift from A.D. Gitler) ([Elden et al., 2010](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2010.06.033)) and cloned into pAc5.1/V5-His (Invitrogen) to express V5-tagged protein. To bacterially express and purify GST- or His-tagged recombinant proteins, cDNAs were cloned into pGEX4T-1 (GE Healthcare) or a modified pDuet vector (a gift from C. Lee), respectively. S2 expression vectors for ATX2-3F, ATX2ΔPAM2-3F, ATX2-N-3F, TYF-C5-3F, TYFΔC5-3F, MS2-V5, TYF-MS2-V5, and RLUC; and RNA-tethering reporters including pAc5.1/5UTR-FLUC-3UTR-6xBS, pAc5.1-FLUC-5BoxB, pAc5.1-FLUC-5BoxB-HhR, and pAc5.1-FLUC-5BoxB-HSL (gifts from E. Izaurralde) have been described previously ([Eulalio et al., 2009](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2009.05.026); [Lim and Allada, 2013a](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2013.01.047); [Lim et al., 2011](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2011.02.013)).

## Generation of polyclonal antibodies

Bacterial expression vectors for HIS-ATX2-N150 (amino acids 1–150), HIS-LSM12, HIS-ME31B, GST-PABP and GST-TYF (amino acids 1469–1899) proteins were individually transformed into BL21 competent *E. coli*. The expression of each recombinant protein was induced by incubating the bacterial cultures with 1 mM Isopropyl-β-D-thiogalactoside (Sigma-Aldrich) for 3 hr at 37°C or overnight at 18°C. Cells were harvested by centrifugation and lysed in a lysis buffer (25 mM Tris-Cl, pH 7.5, 300 mM NaCl, 10% glycerol, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM dithiothreitol, 0.5% Nonidet P-40, and 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride). After clarification by centrifugation, GST- or His-tagged proteins were affinity-purified using Glutathione Sepharose 4 Fast Flow (GE Healthcare) or Ni-NTA Agarose (QIAGEN), respectively, according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Purified proteins were dialyzed against a dialysis buffer (25 mM Tris-Cl, pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, and 30% glycerol) and injected in two rabbits (R1 and R2) per each recombinant protein to generate polyclonal antibodies (AbFrontier).

## Whole-mount immunostaining

Groups of male flies were transferred to new vials of standard cornmeal-yeast-agar medium (∼8 flies/vial) and entrained by 4 LD cycles at 25°C. Brains were dissected in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) at the indicated time of the LD cycle and soaked in PBS containing 3.7% formaldehyde (Sigma-Aldrich) for 28 min. Fixed brains were briefly washed three times in PBS and then washed three
times in PBS containing 0.3% Triton X-100 (PBS-T) for 10 min per each wash. Permeabilized brains were incubated with a blocking buffer (PBS-T containing 5% normal goat serum) for 30 min at room temperature and then with primary antibodies diluted in the blocking buffer containing 0.05% sodium azide for 2 days at 4°C. The primary antibodies used in our immunostaining experiments were rabbit anti-PER (1:4,000 dilution; a gift from E.Y. Kim)(Kim et al., 2012), guinea pig anti-TIM (1:2,000 dilution; a gift from J. Choe)(Lim et al., 2011), mouse anti-PDF (1:40 dilution; Developmental Studies Hybridoma Bank) and rabbit anti-ME31B (1:2,000 dilution; a gift from A. Nakamura) antibodies. After the incubation with primary antibodies, brains were washed three times in PBS-T for 20 min per each wash and then incubated with secondary antibodies diluted at 1:600 in PBS-T for 2 days at 4°C. The secondary antibodies used in our immunostaining experiments were Alexa Fluor 488-conjugated anti-rabbit IgG, Alexa Fluor 594-conjugated anti-guinea pig IgG, and Alexa Fluor 647-conjugated anti-mouse IgG (Jackson ImmunoResearch Laboratories). Finally, brains were washed three times in PBS-T for 20 min per each wash and mounted in VECTASHIELD antifade mounting medium (Vector Laboratories).

### Quantitative analyses of whole-brain imaging

For the quantification of PER and TIM levels in circadian pacemaker neurons, dissected brains were triply stained with rabbit anti-PER, guinea pig anti-TIM, and mouse anti-PDF antibodies. Confocal image stacks were obtained using FV1000 (Olympus) and quantitatively analyzed using ImageJ software as described previously (Lim et al., 2011). Each group of the circadian pacemaker neurons (i.e., s-LNv, l-LNv, PDF-negative LNv, and LNd) was identified by their size, neuroanatomical location, and signals for anti-PDF staining. The mean fluorescence intensity of anti-PER or anti-TIM staining was measured in individual neurons using ImageJ software and averaged per each group of the circadian pacemaker neurons. To normalize the mean fluorescence intensity measured in different hemispheres, the mean fluorescence intensity was first subtracted by the mean background intensity (i.e., the baseline fluorescence from non-specific antibody staining) and then divided by the mean background intensity. The normalized mean fluorescence intensity per each group of the clock neurons was averaged from all hemispheres examined at each time-point in LD cycles. The relative PER or TIM levels were then calculated by normalizing to the peak values in controls (set as 100%). To quantify PDF levels at the dorsal projections from small LNv, the fluorescence signals above a threshold level were measured from each z stacked confocal image to calculate the area positive for anti-PDF staining and its integrated intensity.

### RNA interference and RNA-tethering assays

Gene-specific primers were designed by SnapDragon software ([http://www.flyrnai.org/snapdragon](http://www.flyrnai.org/snapdragon)) to generate T7 promoter-primed DNA templates specific to each amplicon for the RNAi-mediated depletion. The target region was PCR-amplified from genomic DNA or cDNA clone, and used as a template to synthesize dsRNAs by in vitro transcription using MEGAscript T7 kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Thermo Fisher Scientific). DNA templates were removed by DNase I digestion and dsRNAs were subsequently purified using phenol-chloroform extraction followed by ethanol precipitation. Finally, dsRNAs were dissolved in RNase-free water, quantified by UV spectrometry, and stored at –20°C prior to use. For RNAi-mediated depletion experiments, S2 cells on 6-well plates were incubated with 15 μg of each purified dsRNA for 4 days before we performed cap pull-down, immunoblotting, or quantitative transcript analyses. Alternatively, transient transfections with an appropriate set of expression vectors were performed 2 days after the incubation of dsRNAs with S2 cells. For immunoprecipitation, S2 cells on 6-well plate were transfected with 400 ng of expression vectors for epitope-tagged proteins. For RNA-tethering assays, S2 cells on 6-well plates were co-transfected with 20 ng of FLUC reporter plasmid, 20 ng of RLUC control reporter plasmid, and 360 ng of expression vector for MS2-fusion proteins. For RNA-tethering experiments using boxB reporters and λN-fusion proteins, the total amount of transfected DNAs was scaled down proportionally to transfect S2 cells on 12-well plates. Transfected cells were harvested at 48 hr after transfection and lysed for immunoprecipitation or reporter assays. Dual luciferase reporter assays were performed according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Promega) as described previously (Lim and Allada, 2013a).

### Immunoprecipitation and cap pull-down assays

Immunoprecipitation (IP) and m<sup>7</sup>-GTP pull-down assays were performed as described previously (Lim and Allada, 2013a; Lim et al., 2011). S2 cells on 100-mm dish (or in an equivalent size of the culture) or one hundred fifty of fly heads were homogenized in a lysis buffer (25 mM Tris-Cl, pH 7.5, 300 mM NaCl, 10% glycerol, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM dithiothreitol, 0.5% Nonidet P-40, and 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride) at 4°C for 20 min with gentle rocking. Prior to the clarification by centrifugation, the molar concentration of NaCl in the extracts was adjusted to 150 mM. Thirty microliters of the soluble extracts served as input while the rest of extracts was incubated with 2 μL of anti-serum or pre-immune serum for 1.5 hr at 4°C with gentle rocking. Where indicated, FLAG-, V5- or EGFP-tagged proteins were immunoprecipitated by anti-FLAG M2 affinity gel (Sigma-Aldrich), anti-V5 agarose affinity gel (Sigma-Aldrich), or anti-GFP antibody (NeuroMab), respectively.

For cap pull-down assays, immobilized γ-Aminophenyl-m7GTP (Jena Bioscience) was added to the soluble extracts to affinity-purify the cap-binding protein complexes.

For IPs using unconjugated antibodies, pre-equilibrated Protein A or G magnetic beads (New England BioLabs) were added to the extracts and incubated for additional 1.5 hr at 4°C with gentle rocking. The beads were washed four times with the same buffer. Each half of proteins in the immune complex and input fraction was resolved by 6% and 9.5% SDS-PAGE, respectively, transferred to Protran nitrocellulose membranes (GE Healthcare), and incubated with a specific set of primary antibodies. Primary antibodies

e6 Molecular Cell 66, 129–140.e1–e7, April 6, 2017used in our immunoblotting experiments were rabbit anti-TYF (1:2,000 dilution), rabbit anti-LSM12 (1:2,000 dilution), rabbit anti-ATX2 (1:2,000 dilution), rabbit anti-PABP (1:5,000 dilution), rabbit anti-ME31B (1:2,000 dilution), rabbit and mouse anti-NOT1 (1:2,000 dilution; gifts from E. Wahle and M. Goetze) ([Temme et al., 2010](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2010.04.017)), rat anti-TRAL (1:2,000 dilution; a gift from E. Izaurralde), rabbit anti-ELF4E and anti-ELF4G (1:3,000 dilution; gifts from E. Izaurralde) ([Zekri et al., 2013](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2013.08.019)), rabbit anti-PER (1:2,000 dilution; a gift from E.Y. Kim), guinea pig anti-TIM and mouse anti-HA (1:2,000 dilution; gifts from J. Choe), rabbit anti-GFP (1:1,000 dilution; Santa Cruz Biotechnology), mouse anti-FLAG (1:1,000 dilution; Sigma-Aldrich), mouse anti-V5 (1:5,000 dilution; Thermo Fisher Scientific), and mouse anti-TUBULIN (1:1,000 dilution; Developmental Studies Hybridoma Bank). Horseradish peroxidase-conjugated secondary antibodies (Jackson Immuno Research Laboratories) were used to recognize the primary antibodies and further detected by Clarity Western ECL blotting substrate (Bio-Rad) using ImageQuant LAS 4000 (GE Healthcare).

### RNA immunoprecipitation and analyses

Two hundred of fly heads were homogenized in a HEPES RIP buffer (20 mM HEPES pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM dithiothreitol, 0.5% Nonidet P-40, 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride, 250 U/ml SUPERase-In, protease inhibitors), lysed at 4°C for 20 min with gentle rocking, and then clarified twice by centrifugation at 4°C for 15 min per each. Total RNAs were directly purified from one fourth of the soluble extracts (served as input) using Trizol reagent (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and reverse-transcribed with random hexamers by M-MLV reverse transcriptase (Promega) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The rest of head extracts were incubated with 2 μL of anti-ATX2 serum or pre-immune serum for 1.5 hr at 4°C with gentle rocking. Pre-equilibrated Protein A magnetic beads were then added to the extracts and incubated for additional 1.5 hr at 4°C with gentle rocking. The beads were washed five times with the same buffer. Immunoprecipitated RNAs were extracted with Trizol reagent (Thermo Fisher Scientific), precipitated by isopropanol and then reverse transcribed as described above. cDNAs prepared from input and IP RNAs were quantitatively analyzed by SYBR Green-based Prime Q-Mastermix (GeNet Bio) using LightCycler 480 realtime PCR system (Roche). For quantitative transcript analyses in fly heads or S2 cells, RNAs were purified from total homogenate using Trizol reagent (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and digested by DNase I according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Promega). DNase I was subsequently removed by phenol-chloroform extraction. RNA samples were further purified by ethanol precipitation and reverse-transcribed by M-MLV reverse transcriptase with random hexamers. cDNA samples were quantitatively analyzed by realtime PCR with gene-specific primers as described above.

### QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS

The quantification procedures for all of the behavioral, imaging, luciferase, and RNA analyses were described in the figure legends and METHOD DETAILS above. IBM SPSS Statistics and Microsoft Excel were used for one-way ANOVA and Student’s t test, respectively. The statistical details of experiments, including the statistical tests used and exact value of n, can be found in the figure legends and supplemental tables.