
JVI Accepted Manuscript Posted Online 3 May 2017  
J. Virol. doi:10.1128/JVI.00295-17  
Copyright © 2017 American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

JVI00295-17-REVISED

Subversion of host responses to energy insufficiency by Us3 supports  
HSV-1 replication during stress  

Elizabeth I. Vink¹, James R. Smiley³, and Ian Mohr¹,²*  

¹Department of Microbiology  
NYU School of Medicine  

²Laura & Issac Perlmutter Cancer Center  
NYU Langone Medical Center  
New York, NY USA  

³Li Ka Shing Institute of Virology,  
Department of Medical Microbiology & Immunology,  
University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada  

*corsponding author  

Running title: Us3 enables HSV-1 replication during low energy stress  

Contact  
Ian Mohr  
Tel: 212 263-0415  
ian.mohr@med.nyu.edu

43 ABSTRACT

44 Cellular stress responses to energy insufficiency can impact virus reproduction.

45 In particular, activation of the host AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) by low

46 energy could limit protein synthesis by inhibiting mTORC1. Although many

47 herpesviruses, including herpes simplex virus-1 (HSV-1), stimulate mTORC1,

48 how HSV-1-infected cells respond to energy availability, a physiological indicator

49 regulating mTORC1, has not been investigated. In addition, the impact of low

50 energy stress on productive HSV-1 growth and viral genetic determinants

51 potentially enabling replication under physiological stress remain undefined.

52 Here, we demonstrate that mTORC1 activity in HSV-1-infected cells is largely

53 insensitive to stress induced by simulated energy insufficiency. Furthermore,

54 resistance of mTORC1 activity to low energy-induced stress, while not

55 significantly influenced by the HSV-1 UL46-encoded PI3-kinase-Akt activator,

56 was dependent upon the ser/thr kinase activity of Us3. A Us3-deficient virus was

57 hypersensitive to low energy-induced stress, as infected cell protein synthesis

58 and productive replication were reduced compared to cells infected with a Us3-

59 expressing virus. Although Us3 did not detectably prevent energy stress-induced

60 AMPK activation, it enforced mTORC1 activation despite the presence of

61 activated AMPK. In the absence of applied low energy stress, AMPK activity in

62 infected cells was restricted in a Us3-dependent manner. This establishes that

63 the Us3 kinase not only activated mTORC1, but additionally enabled sustained

64 mTORC1 signaling during simulated energy insufficiency that would otherwise

65 restrict protein synthesis and virus replication. Moreover, it identifies the alpha-

66 herpesvirus specific Us3 kinase as an mTORC1 activator that subverts the host
67 cell energy-sensing program to support viral productive growth irrespective of
68 physiological stress. (250 words)
69
70
71 IMPORTANCE
72 Like all viruses, herpes simplex virus type-1 (HSV-1) reproduction relies upon
73 numerous host energy intensive processes, the most demanding of which is
74 protein synthesis. In response to low energy, the cellular AMP-activated protein
75 kinase (AMPK) triggers a physiological stress response that antagonizes
76 mTORC1, a multi-subunit host kinase that controls protein synthesis. This could
77 restrict virus protein production and growth. Here, we establish that the HSV-1
78 Us3 protein kinase subverts the normal response to low energy-induced stress.
79 While Us3 doesn't prevent AMPK activation by low energy, it enforces mTORC1
80 activation and overrides a physiological response that couples energy availability
81 and protein synthesis. These results help explain how reproduction of HSV-1, a
82 ubiquitous, medically significant human pathogen causing a spectrum of
83 diseases ranging from the benign to life threatening, occurs during physiological
84 stress. This is important because HSV-1 reproduction triggered by physiological
85 stress is characteristic of reactivation of life-long latent infections. (149 words)
86
87

INTRODUCTION

Besides its critical role in nearly all fundamental biological processes, the availability of sufficient cellular energy resources sits poised to impact viral replication. The primary sensor of energy sufficiency conserved in most eukaryotes is the host AMP-activated protein kinase AMPK (1). By detecting even small increases in intracellular AMP or ADP abundance, AMPK coordinates ATP production with consumption, effectively managing cellular energy homeostasis in response to physiological stress (1, 2). While AMPK controls numerous metabolic pathways, protein synthesis is particularly vulnerable to changes in energy sufficiency as it among the most energy demanding processes (3). Moreover, it is vital for viral replication as all viruses are completely reliant upon host ribosomes for their protein synthesis needs (4).

Indeed, unrestricted activation of AMPK can limit productive replication of many viruses (5), including those from the medically important herpesvirus family. While AMPK activation reportedly restricts replication of Kaposi's sarcoma associated herpesvirus, its impact on replication of the beta herpesvirus HCMV is more complex (6). Although activation of AMPK shapes carbon and nucleotide metabolism to support HCMV replication, inhibitory effects of AMPK activation on protein synthesis are averted through the actions of specific viral factors (7-9). In contrast, precisely how AMPK activation is regulated in cells infected with alpha herpesvirus subfamily member, herpes simplex virus-1 (HSV-1), and might control productive viral replication remains unknown.

111 Following infection of epithelial cells at mucosal surfaces, HSV-1 establishes  
112 a life-long, latent infection in neurons within peripheral nervous system  
113 ganglia. During latency, expression of the approximately 80 ORFs associated  
114 with virus propagation is repressed and infectious virus is not detected (10, 11).  
115 In response to physiological stress, episodes of productive viral replication  
116 resulting in infectious virus production and shedding at mucosal surfaces ensue.  
117 Many environmental and physiologic stresses associated with reactivation inhibit  
118 the activity of the mechanistic target of rapamycin, mTORC1 (12). A multi-subunit  
119 cellular kinase, mTORC1 integrates fundamental physiological inputs, including  
120 energy sufficiency, to coordinate catabolic vs anabolic responses (2). Although  
121 inhibiting mTORC1 limits viral protein production and restricts HSV-1 replication  
122 (13), the capacity of HSV-1 to overcome physiological cues indicating energy  
123 insufficiency, which would limit mTORC1 activation, remains unknown.  

124 By sensing increased AMP and ADP intracellular abundance, AMPK  
125 responds to changes in adenosine nucleotide levels (Fig. 1A). Activation of the  
126 heterotrimeric enzyme, comprised of catalytic alpha (isoform α1 or α2) and  
127 regulatory beta (isoform β1 or β2) and gamma (isoform γ1, γ2, or γ3) subunits,  
128 begins upon binding AMP by the gamma subunit (14, 15). The resulting  
129 conformational changes in the alpha subunit unmasks residue T172, which is  
130 phosphorylated by one of several AMPK activating kinases. While LKB1,  
131 CaMKKβ, and TAK1 can all phosphorylate T172, LKB1 primarily activates AMPK  
132 in response to energy insufficiency (16-18). As T172 phosphorylation is required  

134 for full AMPK activation, AMP and ADP binding to the γ subunit further enforce
135 AMPK activation by inhibiting T172 dephosphorylation (19). Phosphorylation of
136 the tuberous sclerosis complex (TSC) subunit TSC2 on residues T1227 and
137 S1345, by AMPK activates the Rheb GTPase-activating protein (GAP) activity of
138 TSC, which results in Rheb·GDP accumulation and prevents mTORC1 activation
139 (20). AMPK can also inhibit mTORC1 directly by phosphorylating the raptor
140 subunit (21). Thus, failure to restrict AMPK activation or suppress AMPK-
141 dependent inhibition of mTORC1 might limit productive viral replication.
142 
143 Activation of mTORC1 in cells productively infected with HSV-1 is dependent
144 upon the viral Us3 ser/thr kinase (13), an enzyme unique to alpha-herpesviruses
145 (Fig. 1B). While it lacks detectable primary sequence homology with the host Akt
146 kinase outside of an identifiable ATP binding motif, Us3 directly phosphorylates
147 many Akt substrates on sites targeted by Akt, including TSC2 (13). In contrast to
148 TSC2 phosphorylation by AMPK, phosphorylation of TSC2 on residues S939 and
149 T1462 by Akt or Us3 inhibits TSC Rheb-GAP activity. The resulting Rheb·GTP
150 accumulation, in turn, activates mTORC1 (13). Once activated, mTORC1
151 subsequently stimulates viral protein synthesis by phosphorylating and
152 inactivating the translational repressor, 4E-BP1 (13). Besides Us3, which acts
153 downstream of Akt to activate mTORC1, the UL46-encoded gene product
154 VP11/12 interacts with the PI3-kinase regulatory subunit p85 to stimulate Akt
155 (22). While AMPK activation reportedly only modestly reduces virus replication in

156 neurons, the capacity of HSV-1 encoded function(s) to antagonize AMPK activity,
157 their identity, and mechanism of action remain undefined (23, 24).
158 
159 Here, we demonstrate that HSV-1 infection alters the responsiveness of
160 mTORC1 to physiological stress induced by energy insufficiency. Unlike
161 uninfected cells, where mTORC1 is inhibited by activated AMPK, mTORC1
162 activation is sustained in HSV-1 infected cells exposed to simulated energy
163 insufficient conditions. Resistance of HSV-1-infected cells to low energy-induced
164 stress, while not primarily influenced by VP11/12, was dependent upon Us3
165 ser/thr kinase activity. By sustaining mTORC1 activity during energy
166 insufficiency, Us3 facilitated infected cell protein synthesis and productive
167 replication. Significantly, we show that Us3 did not prevent energy stress-induced
168 AMPK activation. Instead, stress-induced AMPK activation in cells infected with a
169 Us3-deficient virus inhibited mTORC1 signaling in a manner dependent upon
170 TSC2, a shared substrate of both AMPK and Us3. Together, these results
171 establish that HSV-1 not only enforces mTORC1 activation, but additionally
172 subverts the host cell energy sensing program to support viral productive growth
173 irrespective of physiological stress.
174 

175 MATERIALS AND METHODS
176 Cell culture, viruses, and chemicals. Normal Human Dermal
177 Fibroblasts (NHDFs; purchased from Lonza, Walkersville MD) were grown in
178 Dulbecco's modified Eagle medium (DMEM) supplemented with 5% fetal bovine
179 serum and growth arrested by serum deprivation in 0.2% fetal bovine serum as
180 described (25). Vero cells (ATCC) were grown in DMEM supplemented with 5%
181 calf serum. HSV1wt, HSV1ΔUs3 (R7041), HSV1K220AUs3 mutant (VRR1204),
182 and HSV1ΔUs3 repair (VRR1202repair) F-strain viruses were described in (26,
183 27). Kos37 strain viruses WTHSV1, ΔUs3, ΔUL46, ΔUs3ΔUL46 were described
184 in (28). AICAR (#9944) was purchased from Cell Signaling Technology.
185 Compound C (#171260) was purchased from Millipore.
186
187 Antibodies and siRNAs. S6K1 (#9202), S6K1-pThr389 (#9234), AMPK (#2532),
188 Phospho-AMPKa1 (Ser485)/AMPKa2 (Ser491) (#4185), AMPK-pT172 (#2531),
189 ACC (#3662), ACC-pS79 (#11818), and TSC2 (#3612) were purchased from
190 Cell Signaling Technology. The tubulin antibody (#T5168) was from
191 Sigma, anti-HSC70 (#10011384) was from Cayman, and anti-4EBP1 (A300-
192 501A) was from Bethyl Laboratories. The TSC2 siRNA (13) was chemically
193 synthesized by Sigma: CCA AUG UCC UCU UGU GUC UUU. AllStars negative control
194 siRNA was purchased from Qiagen. To deplete TSC2, NHDFs seeded in a 12-
195 well dish were transfected with siRNA using Lipofectamine RNAiMax (Invitrogen)
196 according to the manufacturer's instructions. After 24h, the transfection protocol

197 was repeated. The following day, cells were growth-arrested by serum
198 deprivation in 0.2% FBS for 72h and then infected with HSV-1.
199 
200 Multicycle virus growth assay. NHDFs were seeded in a 6 well dish; upon
201 reaching confluence (4.4 x 10⁵ cells per well), cells were growth-arrested in 0.2%
202 FBS for 72h as described. Cells were infected with 100 pfu virus in 0.5 ml media
203 per well for 1.5 h after which the virus inoculum was removed and replaced with
204 fresh media. At 12 hpi, infected cells were treated with 1 mM AICAR or left
205 untreated. Infected cultures were collected at 96 hpi, freeze-thawed three times,
206 and infectious virus production quantified by plaque assay on Vero cells.
207 
208 Quantification of protein synthesis. Infected NHDFs were metabolically
209 labeled for 45 min with methionine- and cysteine-free DMEM supplemented with
210 70 μCi/ml ³⁵S Express (Perkin-Elmer). Total protein was isolated, boiled in SDS
211 sample buffer, and then precipitated in 10% trichloroacetic acid (TCA) on ice for
212 30 min. Acid-insoluble protein was collected onto Whatman GF-C filters which
213 were subsequently washed twice in 10% TCA and twice in 100% ethanol.
214 Radioactivity collected on the filters was quantified by liquid scintillation counting.
215 

216 RESULTS

217 Responses of mTORC 1 to energy insufficiency are subverted in HSV-1

218 infected cells. To investigate how mTORC 1 responds to physiological cues

219 indicative of energy insufficiency in HSV-1-infected cells, phosphorylation of the

220 mTORC 1 substrates S6K 1 and the translational repressor 4E-BP 1 were

221 measured after exposure to the AMPK activator 5-Aminoimidazole-4-

222 carboxamide 1-1-β-D-ribofuranoside (AICAR). An analog of adenosine

223 monophosphate (AMP), AICAR activates AMPK by simulating a high ratio of

224 AMP:ATP (29). As AMPK is a multifunctional kinase that regulates several

225 metabolic processes in addition to mTORC 1 activity, care was taken to avoid

226 pretreatment of cells with AICAR. Instead, primary normal human dermal

227 fibroblasts (NHDFs) mock-infected or infected with wild-type HSV-1 (HSV1wt)

228 were either left untreated or supplemented with AICAR at 12 hours post-infection

229 (hpi). By this time in the virus productive growth cycle, HSV-1 is especially reliant

230 upon mTORC 1 activity to stimulate viral mRNA translation. After limited exposure

231 to AICAR for 3 h, total protein was isolated at 15 hpi, and analyzed by

232 immunoblotting (Fig. 2). AICAR treatment activated AMPK in both mock-and

233 HSV1wt-infected cells as indicated by the presence of AMPK phosphorylation on

234 residue Thr 172 (p-T 172). While the AMPK p-T 172 signal was greater in mock-

235 infected, AICAR-treated cells compared to infected cells, overall AMPK

236 abundance was also greater in mock-infected cultures (compare lanes 2 to 4)

237 making precise comparisons of the extent of AMPK activation difficult.

238

239 In asynchronous NHDF cultures, the translational repressor 4E-BP1 exists as
240 a heterogeneous collection of phosphorylated isoforms within the population. They
241 are readily fractionated by SDS-PAGE on high percentage gels and detected by
242 immunoblotting. Dividing cells with activated mTORC1 are enriched with
243 hyperphosphorylated isoforms, whereas non-dividing cells accumulate
244 hypophosphorylated isoforms reflecting the natural coordination of mTORC1
245 signaling with proliferation in this cell type. Thus, at the time of sampling, the
246 control 4E-BP1 population in mock infected, untreated cultures is predominantly
247 but not completely hypophosphorylated (Fig 2). Activation of AMPK resulted in
248 accumulation of the mTORC1 substrate 4E-BP1 in its hypophosphorylated form
249 and did not detectably stimulate p70S6K phosphorylation (p-S6K1), consistent
250 with enforced mTORC1 inhibition under these conditions (Fig. 2, compare lanes
251 1 to 2). In contrast, hyperphosphorylated 4E-BP1 and p-S6K1 accumulated in
252 HSV-1-infected cells (Fig. 2, compare lanes 1 to 3). Furthermore, S6K1 and 4E-
253 BP1 phosphorylation were less sensitive to AMPK activation in HSV-1-infected
254 cells compared to mock-infected cells (Fig 2, compare lane 2 to 4). This
255 demonstrates that phosphorylation of key mTORC1 substrates 4E-BP1 and
256 S6K1 in HSV-1-infected cells is relatively insensitive to AMPK activation. It
257 further suggests that mTORC1 activation and signaling in HSV-1 infected cells is
258 resistant to simulated energy insufficiency, and raises the possibility that this
259 phenotype results from subversion of cellular energy sensing cues or responses
260 by a viral function.
261

262 Identification of HSV-1 genes required to maintain mTORC1 signaling
263 during low energy stress. Energy insufficiency activates AMPK and inhibits
264 mTORC1, whose activity is regulated in part by PI3-kinase-Akt signaling in
265 uninfected cells. Since HSV-1 Us3 and UL46 gene products commandeer control
266 of the cellular PI3-kinase-Akt signaling axis (Fig1B; refs (22, 28)), how these
267 viral functions might subvert infected-cell responses to energy insufficiency was
268 investigated. NHDFs were either mock-infected, infected with WT HSV1, Us3-
269 deficient (ΔUs3), UL46 deficient (ΔUL46), or Us3-UL46 doubly-deficient HSV-1
270 (ΔUs3ΔUL46). After 12h, cells were left untreated or energy insufficiency was
271 simulated by AICAR treatment. Cell lysates were prepared at 15 hpi and
272 mTORC1 activation analyzed by immunoblotting for phosphorylated mTORC1
273 substrates p70S6K1 and 4E-BP1 (Fig3A). AICAR exposure effectively activated
274 AMPK in infected cells as indicated by similar T172 phosphorylation levels (p-
275 T172) irrespective of the presence or absence of Us3 and/or UL46 gene
276 products. Interestingly, limited AMPK p-T172 accumulation under unstressed,
277 energy-replete conditions was greater in cells infected with either of the two Us3-
278 deficient (ΔUs3, ΔUs3ΔUL46) viruses in this experiment (Fig3A; compare lanes
279 5 and 9 to 3 and 7) and in subsequent panels (Fig5A, compare lane 5 to 3; Fig
280 5B, compare lane 5 to 3; Fig6, compare 5, 9 to 3; Fig7, compare lanes 1, 2 to 5,
281 6). This suggests that HSV-1 infection activates AMPK, perhaps by inducing low
282 energy stress, and this is primarily countered by Us3. In cells infected with
283 ΔUL46 or WT HSV1 (Fig3A compare lanes 3, 4 to lanes 7, 8), which both
284 express Us3, phosphorylation of p70S6K1 and 4E-BP1 were relatively insensitive

285 to AICAR-induced AMPK activation compared to mock-infected cells. In contrast,
286 hypophosphorylated 4E-BP1 accumulated and p70S6K1 phosphorylation was
287 reduced in cells infected with either Us3-deficient virus (ΔUs3, ΔUs3ΔUL46)
288 upon AICAR exposure (Fig 3A compare lanes 5, 6 to 9, 10). Furthermore,
289 appreciable differences in S6K1 phosphorylation or 4EBP1 hyperphosphorylation
290 were not detected upon comparing cells infected with ΔUs3 to ΔUs3ΔUL46 and
291 exposed to AICAR-induced energy insufficiency. Thus, the presence or absence
292 of the UL46 gene in a Us3-deficient isogenic background, did not detectably
293 impact S6K1 phosphorylation or 4E-BP1 hyperphosphorylation in response
294 AICAR-induced energy insufficiency. Although we are unable to detect a role for
295 UL46 under these conditions, these results demonstrate that the HSV-1Us3
296 gene encodes a function responsible for enforcing mTORC1 activation under low
297 energy stress in primary fibroblasts. Moreover, they suggest that Us3 is the
298 primary virus-encoded genetic determinant capable of countering AMPK
299 activation and physiological stress resulting from energy insufficiency.
300 
301 To determine if the relative resistance of mTORC1 activation in HSV-1-
302 infected cells to energy insufficient cues required Us3 kinase activity, NHDFs
303 were mock-infected or infected with a Us3-deletion mutant (HSV1ΔUs3), a virus
304 that expresses a catalytically inactive Us3 mutant protein (HSV1K220A), or
305 HSV1wt.At3or12hpi cells were untreated or supplemented with AICAR. Total
306 protein was collected at 15hpi and 4E-BP1 phosphorylation evaluated by
307 immunoblotting (Fig. 3B). Compared to cultures infected with HSV1wt,

308 hyperphosphorylated 4E-BP1 accumulated to reduced levels in cultures infected
309 with HSV1ΔUs3 or HSV1K220A as we reported previously (13). However,
310 activation of AMPK by AICAR addition at 3 hpi suppressed 4E-BP1
311 hyperphosphorylation in all cultures infected with HSV-1 (Fig. 3B). While
312 hyperphosphorylation of the mTORC1 substrate 4E-BP1 in cultures infected with
313 HSV1wt was comparatively insensitive to AMPK activation at 12 hpi,
314 phosphorylation of 4E-BP1 in cultures infected with either HSV1ΔUs3 or HSV1
315 K220A Us3 remained sensitive to energy insufficiency simulated by AICAR (Fig.
316 3B, compare lane 2 to 3, 4). This shows that mTORC1 activation in HSV-1-
317 infected cells become increasingly resistant to energy insufficiency simulated by
318 AICAR between 3-12 hpi. This timeframe correlates with the synthesis and
319 accumulation of the Us3 delayed-early protein. Furthermore, the insensitivity of
320 mTORC1 signaling in HSV-1 infected cells to low energy-induced AMPK
321 activation was dependent upon the ser/thr kinase activity of the Us3 gene
322 product. Finally, the dependence upon Us3 was not strain specific as it was
323 readily observed using mutant viruses independently produced in different
324 genetic backgrounds (strain KOS in Fig 3A and strain F in Fig 3B).
325
326 Us3 promotes protein synthesis and productive replication during energy
327 stress. To evaluate how the capacity of Us3 to stimulate mTORC1 during
328 energy insufficiency impacts productive HSV-1 growth, the influence of Us3 upon
329 protein synthesis and virus reproduction and spread was measured. NHDFs
330 infected with HSV1wt or HSV1ΔUs3 were either untreated or subjected to low

331 energy-induced stress simulated with AICAR at 12 hpi. After metabolic pulse
332 labeling with \[^{35}S\] amino acids, total protein was isolated and quantified by liquid
333 scintillation counting of acid-insoluble radioactivity (Fig4A). Whereas AMPK
334 activation did not significantly reduce ongoing protein synthesis in cells infected
335 with HSV1wt, energy insufficiency significantly and selectively reduced protein
336 synthesis by approximately 40 percent in cells infected with a Us3-deficient virus.
337 This establishes that the capacity of HSV-1 infected cells to sustain normal rates
338 of protein synthesis under conditions of energy insufficiency is Us3 dependent.

339

340 To define the corresponding impact of energy insufficiency on productive
341 virus replication, NHDFs infected with HSV1wt or HSV1ΔUs3 were either
342 untreated or stimulated with AICAR at 12 hpi to induce low energy stress. The
343 experiment was performed at low MOI, as this is likely more physiological than
344 high MOI infections and allows virus replication and spread through the culture to
345 be assessed. Cultures were collected at 4d post-infection (Fig4B) and the
346 amount of infectious virus produced quantified by plaque assay in Vero cells.
347 While activating AMPK did not significantly reduce productive replication of
348 HSV1wt, productive growth of HSV1ΔUs3 was reduced by 15-fold. Together,
349 these results show that the Us3-deficient virus is hypersensitive to energy stress-
350 induced AMPK activation. This demonstrates that the capacity of HSV-1 to
351 productively replicate to wild-type levels during AMPK activation induced by
352 simulated energy insufficiency is Us3-dependent. Taken together, these results
353 are consistent with the Us3 gene product acting as a virus-encoded determinant

354 that counters stress responses associated with energy insufficiency and sustains
355 productive virus growth under stress.
356 
357 HSV-1 infection does not preclude energy stress-induced AMPK activation.
358 Although AMPK is activated by T 172 phosphorylation (pT 172), the cellular kinase
359 Akt can limit LKB1-mediated AMPK activation by phosphorylating the AMPK
360 catalytic subunits α1/α2 on residues S485/491 (30, 31). Given that Us3 and Akt
361 share some substrates (13), and that both Us3 and UL46 can influence Akt
362 activity (22, 28), AMPK phosphorylation in cells infected with WT HSV-1, aUs3-
363 deficient virus, a UL46-deficient virus, or a virus doubly deficient for Us3 and
364 UL46 was compared. NHDFs mock-infected or infected with WT, ΔUs3, ΔUL46,
365 or ΔUs3ΔUL46 were left untreated or exposed to AICAR to activate AMPK at 12
366 hpi. Total protein was collected at 15 hpi and the phosphorylation status of
367 AMPK evaluated by immunoblotting (Fig. 5A). AICAR exposure increased AMPK
368 T172 and S485/491 phosphorylation in mock-infected cells. Similar levels of
369 T172 and S485/491 AMPK phosphorylation were likewise observed in cells
370 infected with WT, ΔUs3, ΔUL46, or ΔUs3ΔUL46 and treated with AICAR (Fig 5A,
371 lanes 2, 4, 6, 8, 10). These results suggest that Us3 and UL46 do not detectably
372 regulate AMPK phosphorylation during simulated energy insufficiency. While
373 analogous levels of pS485/491 phosphorylation were detected in infected and in
374 mock-infected cells in the absence of acute energy stress (Fig 5A, lanes 1, 3, 5,
375 7, and 9), greater AMPK pT172 accumulation was consistently observed in cells
376 infected with Us3-deficient HSV-1 compared to WT HSV-1-or ΔUL46-infected

377 cells (Fig 5A, compare lane 9, 5 and 3; Fig 5B, compare 9, 5, and 3; Fig 3A,
378 compare 3, 9, and 5; Fig 6, compare 5, 9 to 3; Fig 7, compare 1, 2 to 5, 6). This
379 suggests that Us3 impairs AMPK T172 phosphorylation and naturally limits
380 AMPK activation in the absence of AICAR-induced energy insufficiency.
381 
382 To investigate whether Us3 and UL46 influence AMPK activity,
383 phosphorylation of Acetyl-CoA Carboxylase (ACC), an AMPK substrate, was
384 measured. Phosphorylation of ACC Ser79 by AMPK inhibits ACC catalytic
385 activity to downregulate fatty acid biosynthesis (32) (Fig. 1). NHDFs mock-
386 infected or infected with WT, ΔUs3, ΔUL46, or ΔUs3ΔUL46 were exposed to
387 AICAR or left untreated at 12 hpi. Total protein was collected at 15 hpi and ACC
388 ser79 phosphorylation evaluated by immunoblotting (Fig. 5B). AICAR induced
389 AMPK p-T172 phosphorylation resulted in a corresponding accumulation of
390 phosphorylated ACC (p-ACC) in both mock-treated and infected cells, indicating
391 an increase in AMPK catalytic activity (Fig 5B, lanes 2, 4, 6, 8, 10). These results
392 show that HSV-1 does not prevent AMPK activation or antagonize AMPK
393 catalytic activity at least with respect to its substrate ACC in response to energy
394 stress. In the absence of acute AICAR-induced energy stress, a small increase in
395 AMPK p-T172 and p-ACC was observed in cells infected with Us3-deficient
396 viruses (ΔUs3, ΔUs3ΔUL46) compared to cells infected with Us3-expressing
397 viruses (WT, ΔUL46; Fig 5B, compare lanes 9, 5 with 7, 3). Together, these
398 results indicate that while HSV-1 does not prevent phosphorylation of AMPK or
399 its substrate ACC in response to acute energy stress, Us3 may control AMPK

400 under energy-replete conditions.
401 
402 Suppression of AMPK activity in HSV 1-infected cells is Us3-dependent
403 To directly investigate the ability of Us3 and UL46 to control AMPK,
404 phosphorylation of ACC was measured during HSV-1 infection in the absence of
405 AICAR treatment. Sensitivity to compound C, a selective small molecule AMPK
406 inhibitor, was used to verify that any observed changes in phosphorylation
407 reflected altered AMPK activity (33). Compound C is an ATP-competitive inhibitor
408 that has been shown to impede the phosphorylation of AMPK T172 in HCMV-
409 infected cells (9). NHDFs were mock-infected, or infected with WT HSV1, ΔUs3,
410 ΔUL46, or ΔUs3ΔUL46 and then treated with compound Cat12hpi or left
411 untreated. Total protein isolate was collected at 15hpi and analyzed by
412 immunoblotting. As expected, AMPK pT172 abundance was greater in cells
413 infected with ΔUs3 and ΔUs3ΔUL46 compared to cultures mock-infected or
414 infected with WT HSV1 or ΔUL46 (Fig 6, compare lanes 5 and 9 to 1, 3, and 7).
415 The increase in pT172 levels in response to infection with ΔUs3 or ΔUs3ΔUI46
416 was sensitive to compound C (Fig 6 compare lanes 5 to 6 and 9 to 10).
417 Compound C also induced a modest increase in phosphorylated S6K1
418 abundance in ΔUs3- and ΔUs3ΔUL46-infected NHDFs (Fig. 6 compare lanes 5
419 and 6, 9 and 10), demonstrating that inhibiting AMPK increased mTORC1
420 activity. Significantly, p-ACC accumulated to a greater degree in cells infected
421 with Us3-deficient viruses (ΔUs3, ΔUs3ΔUL46) than in cells infected with a Us3-
422 expressing (WT, ΔUL46) virus (Fig 6, compare lanes 5 and 9 to 1, 3, and 7). P-

423 ACC accumulation was sensitive to compound C, consistent with it being  
424 dependent upon AMPK catalytic activity (Fig. 6, compare lane 5 to 6 and 9 to 10).  
425 Together, these results demonstrate that AMPK is activated in cells infected with  
426 ΔUs3orΔUs3ΔUL46 and indicate that the suppression of AMPK activity in  
427 HSV 1-infected cells is US 3-dependent. Thus, although Us 3 and UL 46 do not  
428 detectably prevent AMPK activation in response to acute low energy stress  
429 simulated by AICAR, Us 3 effectively limits AMPK activation during infection in the  
430 absence of acute, AICAR-induced energy stress.  

431  

432 Inhibition of mTORC1 by AMPK is TSC2-dependent in ΔUs3-infected cells.  
433 Since mTORC1 was insensitive to energy insufficiency and AMPK activation  
434 induced by low energy-induced stress was not suppressed in HSV-1 infected  
435 cells, it was possible that Us 3 interfered with AMPK signaling to mTORC1. AMPK  
436 reportedly restricts mTORC1 both directly and indirectly, the latter through TSC2  
437 (2, 21); Fig 1). Both Us 3 and AMPK directly phosphorylate TSC2, albeit on  
438 different residues and with different outcomes. TSC2 phosphorylation by Us 3  
439 inhibits TSC Rheb·GAP, stimulating mTORC1. In contrast, TSC2  
440 phosphorylation by AMPK activates TSC Rheb·GAP, repressing mTORC1 (2).  
441 Thus, whether TSC contributed to the insensitivity of mTORC1 to low energy  
442 stress in HSV-1 infected cells was investigated. To address this, NHDFs treated  
443 with control, NS siRNA, or TSC2-specific siRNA were mock-infected or infected  
444 with HSV1wt or HSV1ΔUs3. Cultures were left untreated or treated with AICAR  
445 at 12 hpi and mTORC1 activation was analyzed 15 hpi by immunoblotting (Fig. 7).

446 While S6K1 phosphorylation and hyperphosphorylated 4E-BP1 in HSV1wt-
447 infected cells were relatively insensitive to AICAR, S6K1 phosphorylation was not
448 detected and hypophosphorylated 4EBP1 accumulated in AICAR-treated
449 cultures that were infected with HSV1ΔUs3 (Fig 7, compare lanes 1, 3 with 5, 7).
450 In agreement with previously reported results, S6K1 phosphorylation and 4E-BP1
451 hyperphosphorylation were stimulated in HSV1ΔUs3-infected cultures upon
452 TSC2-depletion, indicating that TSC2 restricts mTORC1 activation in the
453 absence of Us3 (Fig 7, compare lane 5 to 6). Compared to cells infected with
454 HSV1wt, a modest increase in AMPK pT172 levels was observed in cells
455 infected with HSV1ΔUs3 (Fig 7, compare lanes 1 to 5). Significantly, whereas
456 S6K1 phosphorylation was reduced and hypophosphorylated 4E-BP1
457 accumulated in response to AICAR in cultures infected with HSV1ΔUs3, S6K1
458 phosphorylation and 4E-BP1 hyper-phosphorylation were relatively insensitive to
459 AICAR in HSV-1ΔUs3-infected cultures treated with TSC2 siRNA (Fig 7,
460 compare lanes 7 to 8). Thus, TSC2 depletion allowed sustained mTORC1
461 signaling in cells infected with HSV-1ΔUs3 when AMPK activation was induced
462 by AICAR. This established that AMPK activated in response to simulated energy
463 insufficiency limits mTORC1 activation by targeting TSC2, a direct substrate of
464 Us3.
465

466 DISCUSSION

467 While HSV-1 reproduction triggered in response to physiological stress is

468 characteristic of reactivation (34), the capacity of HSV-1 to productively replicate

469 under stress is poorly understood. Likewise, specific underlying genetic

470 determinants enabling productive virus replication under physiological stress

471 have not been systematically defined. By integrating signals indicating availability

472 of fundamental physiological cues, the cellular kinase mTORC1 coordinates

473 specific anabolic or catabolic responses (2, 35). In addition, HSV-1 Us3 ser/thr

474 kinase stimulates mTORC1 (13). However, whether mTORC1 in HSV-1-infected

475 cells remains responsive to critical indicators like energy availability, which

476 naturally regulate mTORC1, and the potential of physiological signals that

477 regulate mTORC1 to control productive HSV-1 replication has not been explored.

478 Here, we establish that mTORC1 activity in HSV-1-infected cells is largely

479 insensitive to stress induced by energy insufficiency. Furthermore, we show that

480 resistance of mTORC1 activity to low energy-induced stress is dependent upon

481 the kinase activity of Us3. Compared to cells infected with WT virus, protein

482 synthesis and productive virus replication in cells infected with a Us3-deficient

483 virus were hypersensitive to low energy-induced stress induced by AICAR.

484 Although Us3 restricted AMPK activity in HSV-1-infected cells that were not

485 exposed to AICAR, Us3 did not detectably prevent acute energy stress-induced

486 activation of AMPK. Instead, Us3 effectively prevented AMPK activated in

487 response to AICAR-induced energy stress from inhibiting mTORC1. Significantly,

488 inhibition of mTORC1 in ΔUs3-infected cells by stress-induced AMPK activation

489 was dependent upon TSC 2, a direct substrate of AMPK and Us3. Thus, not only  
490 does Us3 stimulate mTORC1 activity but additionally sustains mTORC1 signaling  
491 under conditions of energy insufficiency that would otherwise inhibit protein  
492 synthesis and interfere with productive virus replication. In this capacity, Us3  
493 represents a virus-encoded mTORC1 activator that sustains mTORC1 function  
494 irrespective of AMPK activation in response to low energy stress.  

495  
496 Productive virus replication is dependent upon numerous energy intensive  
497 macromolecular processes. Activation of AMPK by the ATP turnover resulting  
498 from viral infection could stimulate catabolic processes and inhibit mTORC1.  
499 Through its substrates p70S6K1 and the translational repressor 4E-BP1,  
500 mTORC1 coordinates protein synthesis output in response to a variety of  
501 physiological insults, including energy insufficiency (2). Failure to enforce  
502 mTORC1 activation reduces synthesis of proteins needed to manufacture  
503 progeny virus and restricts HSV-1 reproduction (13, 36). The capacity to sustain  
504 mTORC1 activation during their productive growth cycle is conserved among  
505 representative herpesvirus subfamily members (4). Significantly, both HSV-1, an  
506 alpha herpesvirus, and HCMV, a beta herpesvirus, can sustain mTORC1  
507 activation even though AMPK is activated (8). This is unusual, as inhibiting  
508 mTORC1 in response to energy insufficiency represents an important means of  
509 conserving energy for cell survival (37). Indeed, TSC-deficient cells, which  
510 constitutively activate mTORC1, die upon low energy induced stress induced by  
511 glucose starvation, accumulating p53, and activating the UPR (20, 38, 39). Loss

512 of LKB 1, an AMPK-activating kinase, allows some tumor cells where mTORC1 is
513 constitutively activated to avoid this fate by preventing AMPK activation (40). The
514 more limited time scale of survival needed to complete a viral reproductive cycle
515 coupled with a variety of virus-encoded functions that prevent cell death are likely
516 contributing factors that allow activation of both AMPK and mTORC1 without
517 catastrophic effects on virus replication.
518 
519 Despite stimulating Akt, VP11/12 did not significantly influence mTORC1
520 activation in HSV-1-infected NHDFs during low energy-induced stress under
521 these experimental conditions. Consistent with this finding, PI3-kinase activation
522 by insulin in uninfected cells also did not preclude AMPK activation by low energy
523 stress (31). Nevertheless, our observations do not preclude a more pronounced
524 role for VP11/12 in other cell types, including neurons, or in mitigating mTORC1
525 responses to other forms of stress.
526 
527 Sustained mTORC1 activation in HSV-1 infected cells exposed to acute
528 energy insufficiency was dependent upon the Us3 ser/thr kinase. By directly
529 phosphorylating TSC2 S939, T1462, Us3 enforced constitutive mTORC1
530 activation (13). We now show that insensitivity of mTORC1 signaling to stress-
531 induced AMPK activation in HSV-1 infected cells is dependent upon the Us3
532 kinase activity. While we cannot exclude a direct role of AMPK acting on the
533 mTORC1 raptor subunit, inhibition of mTORC1 by activated AMPK in ΔUs3-
534 infected cells was dependent upon TSC2, a direct substrate of both AMPK and

535 Us 3. This suggests that an underlying conflict between AMPK, which stimulates
536 TSC, and Us 3, which inhibits TSC, determines the sensitivity of mTORC1 to low
537 energy-induced AMPK activation. Although precisely how Us 3 dominates and
538 interferes with AMPK action on TSC2 remain to be determined, molecular
539 conflicts of this nature can have a powerful impact upon viral replication (41).
540 Significantly, targeting TSC by HSV-1 Us 3 to sustain mTORC1 activity during low
541 energy-induced stress in infected cells mirrors findings in uninfected cells, where
542 inhibition of mTORC1 activity by AICAR is compromised in TSC2-deficient cells
543 (42). This allows HSV-1 to efficiently enforce and sustain mTORC1 activation
544 during energy insufficiency via a single viral function that targets a single host
545 gene product. In addition, it enables AMPK to be activated in response to acute
546 energy insufficiency without concomitant mTORC1 inhibition. A distinct but
547 related strategy operates in HCMV-infected cells whereby AMPK activation
548 stimulates productive HCMV replication (7, 9). Instead of the Us3 kinase, which
549 is specific to alpha herpesviruses, HCMV encodes the TSC2 binding protein
550 UL38 to antagonize TSC activity and stimulate mTORC1 (43). This precludes
551 AMPK-mediated inhibition of mTORC1 while supporting AMPK-dependent
552 metabolic changes conducive to virus reproduction (7, 9). Compared to beta
553 herpesviruses like HCMV, alpha herpesviruses have a substantially faster
554 productive growth cycle that may not require AMPK activation. While AMPK is not
555 naturally activated by HSV-1 infection in fibroblasts, it could play a more
556 prominent role in other cell types like neurons, which are particularly reliant on
557 glucose, metabolically highly active, and sensitive to energy insufficiency (44-46).

558 Significantly, AMPK activation and activity in HSV 1-infected cells was restricted in
559 a Us3-dependent manner. This might potentially protect the infected cell from the
560 ATP turnover associated with infection, precluding subsequent AMPK activation
561 in response to a rise in AMP concentration. Alternatively, Us3 might prevent
562 AMPK activation through unconventional, non-canonical means.
563 
564 The capacity to sustain productive replication under physiological stress,
565 including energy insufficiency, is a critical adaption for herpesvirus family
566 members. Virus reproduction from latent reservoirs requires episodic productive
567 replication triggered in response to stress and the emerging evidence suggests
568 that discrete stress responsive host cell signaling pathways regulate entry into
569 the productive growth cycle (12). In the case of HSV-1, changes in neuronal
570 homeostasis are sensed by mTORC1 signaling, which integrates fundamental
571 environmental and physiologic cues to control entry into the productive growth
572 cycle (34). Physiological stress interrupts mTORC1 signaling and stimulates
573 latently-infected neurons to commence the virus reproductive cycle (12). Thus,
574 hijacking mTORC1 as a sensor of neuronal homeostasis allows the virus to
575 respond to a variety of physiological insults (34). In the case of limited oxygen,
576 which like energy insufficiency also inhibits mTORC1 signaling, the productive
577 replication cycle is not only triggered but can be completed (12). To complete the
578 virus productive growth cycle under physiological stress, HSV-1 and other
579 herpesvirus family members likely rely upon an array of viral functions akin to
580 Us3 that mitigate the potentially detrimental inhibitory effects of physiological

581 stress, including energy insufficiency, on mTORC1 activation.
582
583
584
585

586 ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

587 We thank members of the Mohr lab and Angus Wilson for stimulating

588 discussions, and Christopher Bianco for critically reading the manuscript.

590

591

592

593 FUNDING INFORMATION

594 This work was supported by grants from the NIH to IM (R01GM056927,

595 AI073898) and grants from the Canadian Institutes for Health Research (FRN

596 12172) and Alberta Innovates-Health Solutions to JRS. JRS. is a Canada

597 Research Chair in Molecular Virology (Tier I). EIV was supported in part by NIH

598 grant 5T32AI7647 and an American Cancer Society Postdoctoral fellowship

599 (Grant PF-16-048-01-MPC). The funders had no role in study design, data

600 collection and interpretation, or the decision to submit the work for publication

601

REFERENCES

1. Hardie DG. 2011. AMP-activated protein kinase: an energy sensor that regulates all aspects of cell function. Genes & development 25:1895-1908.
2. Inoki K, Kim J, Guan KL. 2012. AMPK and mTOR in cellular energy homeostasis and drug targets. Annual review of pharmacology and toxicology 52:381-400.
3. Buttgereit F, Brand MD. 1995. A hierarchy of ATP-consuming processes in mammalian cells. The Biochemical journal 312(Pt 1):163-167.
4. Jan E, Mohr I, Walsh D. 2016. A Cap-to-Tail Guide to mRNA Translation Strategies in Virus-Infected Cells. Annual review of virology 3:283-307.
5. Mankouri J, Harris M. 2011. Viruses and the fuel sensor: the emerging link between AMPK and virus replication. Reviews in medical virology 21:205-212.
6. Cheng F, He M, Jung JU, Lu C, Gao SJ. 2016. Suppression of Kaposi's Sarcoma-Associated Herpesvirus Infection and Replication by 5'-AMP-Activated Protein Kinase. Journal of virology 90:6515-6525.
7. McArdle J, Moorman NJ, Munger J. 2012. HCMV targets the metabolic stress response through activation of AMPK whose activity is important for viral replication. PLoS pathogens 8:e1002502.
8. Kudchodkar SB, Del Prete GQ, Maguire TG, Alwine JC. 2007. AMPK-mediated inhibition of mTOR kinase is circumvented during immediate-early times of human cytomegalovirus infection. Journal of virology 81:3649-3651.
9. Terry LJ, Vastag L, Rabinowitz JD, Shenk T. 2012. Human kinome profiling identifies a requirement for AMP-activated protein kinase during human cytomegalovirus infection. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 109:3071-3076.
10. Roizman B, Zhou G. 2015. The 3 facets of regulation of herpes simplex virus gene expression: A critical inquiry. Virology 479-480:562-567.
11. Bloom DC. 2016. Alphaherpesvirus Latency: A Dynamic State of Transcription and Reactivation. Advances in virus research 94:53-80.
12. Kobayashi M, Wilson AC, Chao MV, Mohr I. 2012. Control of viral latency in neurons by axonal mTOR signaling and the 4E-BP translation repressor. Genes & development 26:1527-1532.
13. Chuluunbaatar U, Roller R, Feldman ME, Brown S, Shokat KM, Mohr I. 2010. Constitutive mTORC1 activation by a herpesvirus Akt surrogate stimulates mRNA translation and viral replication. Genes & development 24:2627-2639.
14. Hardie DG, Schaffer BE, Brunet A. 2016. AMPK: An Energy-Sensing Pathway with Multiple Inputs and Outputs. Trends in cell biology 26:190-201.
15. Xin FJ, Wang J, Zhao RQ, Wang ZX, Wu JW. 2013. Coordinated regulation of AMPK activity by multiple elements in the alpha-subunit. Cell research 23:1237-1240.
16. Hong SP, Leiper FC, Woods A, Carling D, Carlson M. 2003. Activation of yeast Snf1 and mammalian AMP-activated protein kinase by upstream

kinases. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States
of America 100:8839-8843.
Woods A, Dickerson K, Heath R, Hong SP, Momcilovic M, Johnstone SR,
Carlson M, Carling D. 2005.Ca2+/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase
kinase-beta acts upstream of AMP-activated protein kinase in mammalian
cells.Cell metabolism 2:21-33.
Herrero-Martin G, Hoyer-Hansen M, Garcia-Garcia C, Fumarola C, Farkas
T, Lopez-Rivas A, Jaattela M. 2009.TAK1 activates AMPK-dependent
cytoprotective autophagy in TRAIL-treated epithelial cells. The EMBO journal
28:677-685.
Oakhill JS, Steel R, Chen ZP, Scott JW, Ling N, Tam S, Kemp BE. 2011.
AMPK is a direct adenylate charge-regulated protein kinase. Science
332:1433-1435.
Inoki K, Zhu T, Guan KL. 2003.TSC2 mediates cellular energy response to
control cell growth and survival.Cell 115:577-590.
Gwinn DM, Shackelford DB, Egan DF, Mihaylova MM, Mery A, Vasquez
DS, Turk BE, Shaw RJ. 2008.AMPK phosphorylation of raptor mediates a
metabolic checkpoint.Molecular cell 30:214-226.
Wagner MJ, Smiley JR. 2011.Herpes simplex virus requires VP11/12 to
activate Src family kinase-phosphoinositide 3-kinase-Akt signaling. Journal of
virology 85:2803-2812.
Martin C, Leyton L, Arancibia Y, Cuevas A, Zambrano A, Concha MI, Otth
C. 2014.Modulation of the AMPK/Sirt1 axis during neuronal infection by
herpes simplex virus type 1.Journal of Alzheimer's disease :JAD 42:301-312.
Leyton L, Hott M, Acuna F, Caroca J, Nunez M, Martin C, Zambrano A,
Concha MI, Otth C. 2015.Nutraceutical activators of AMPK/Sirt1 axis inhibit
viral production and protect neurons from neurodegenerative events
triggered during HSV-1 infection.Virus research 205:63-72.
Walsh D, Mohr I. 2004.Phosphorylation of eIF4E by Mnk-1 enhances HSV-1
translation and replication in quiescent cells.Genes & development 18:660-
672.
Ryckman BJ, Roller RJ. 2004.Herpes simplex virus type 1 primary
envelopment: UL34 protein modification and the US3-UL34 catalytic
relationship.Journal of virology 78:399-412.
Purves FC, Longnecker RM, Leader DP, Roizman B. 1987.Herpes simplex
virus 1 protein kinase is encoded by open reading frame US3 which is not
essential for virus growth in cell culture.Journal of virology 61:2896-2901.
Eaton HE, Saffran HA, Wu FW, Quach K, Smiley JR. 2014.Herpes simplex
virus protein kinases US3 and UL13 modulate VP11/12 phosphorylation,
virion packaging, and phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase/Akt signaling activity.
Journal of virology 88:7379-7388.
Sullivan JE, Brocklehurst KJ, Marley AE, Carey F, Carling D, Beri RK.
1994.Inhibition of lipolysis and lipogenesis in isolated rat adipocytes with
AICAR, a cell-permeable activator of AMP-activated protein kinase.FEBS
letters 353:33-36.

692 30. Horman S, Vertommen D, Heath R, Neumann D, Mouton V, Woods A,
693 Schlattn er U, Wallimann T, Carling D, Hue L, Rider MH. 2006. Insulin
694 antagonizes ischemia-induced Thr 172 phosphorylation of AMP-activated
695 protein kinase alpha-subunits in heart via hierarchical phosphorylation of
696 Ser 485/491. The Journal of biological chemistry 281:5335-5340.
697 31. Kovacic S, Solty s CL, Barr AJ, Shiojima I, Walsh K, Dyck JR. 2003. Akt
698 activity negatively regulates phosphorylation of AMP-activated protein
699 kinase in the heart. The Journal of biological chemistry 278:39422-39427.
700 32. Ha J, Daniel S, Broyles SS, Kim KH. 1994. Critical phosphorylation sites for
701 acetyl-CoA carboxylase activity. The Journal of biological chemistry
702 269:22162-22168.
703 33. Zhou G, Myers R, Li Y, Chen Y, Shen X, Fenyk-Melody J, Wu M, Ventre J,
704 Doebber T, Fujii N, Musi N, Hirshman MF, Goodyear LJ, Moller DE. 2001.
705 Role of AMP-activated protein kinase in mechanism of metformin action. The
706 Journal of clinical investigation 108:1167-1174.
707 34. Wilson AC, Mohr I. 2012. A cultured affair: HSV latency and reactivation in
708 neurons. Trends in microbiology 20:604-611.
709 35. Laplante M, Sabatini DM. 2012. mTOR signaling in growth control and
710 disease. Cell 149:274-293.
711 36. Moorman NJ, Shenk T. 2010. Rapamycin-resistant mTORC1 kinase activity
712 is required for herpesvirus replication. Journal of virology 84:5260-5269.
713 37. Dibble CC, Manning BD. 2013. Signal integration by mTORC1 coordinates
714 nutrient input with biosynthetic output. Nature cell biology 15:555-564.
715 38. Ozcan U, Ozcan L, Yilmaz E, Duvel K, Sahin M, Manning BD, Hotamisligil
716 GS. 2008. Loss of the tuberous sclerosis complex tumor suppressors triggers
717 the unfolded protein response to regulate insulin signaling and apoptosis.
718 Molecular cell 29:541-551.
719 39. Lee CH, Inoki K, Karbowniczek M, Petroulakis E, Sonenberg N, Henske
720 EP, Guan KL. 2007. Constitutive mTOR activation in TSC mutants sensitizes
721 cells to energy starvation and genomic damage via p53. The EMBO journal
722 26:4812-4823.
723 40. Carretero J, Medina PP, Blanco R, Smit L, Tang M, Roncador G, Maestre L,
724 Conde E, Lopez-Rios F, Clevers HC, Sanchez-Cespedes M. 2007.
725 Dysfunctional AMPK activity, signalling through mTOR and survival in
726 response to energetic stress in LKB1-deficient lung cancer. Oncogene
727 26:1616-1625.
728 41. Elde NC, Malik HS. 2009. The evolutionary conundrum of pathogen mimicry.
729 Nature reviews. Microbiology 7:787-797.
730 42. Brugarolas J, Lei K, Hurley RL, Manning BD, Reiling JH, Hafen E, Witters
731 LA, Ellisen LW, Kaelin WG, Jr. 2004. Regulation of mTOR function in
732 response to hypoxia by REDD1 and the TSC1/TSC2 tumor suppressor
733 complex. Genes & development 18:2893-2904.
734 43. Moorman NJ, Cristea IM, Terhune SS, Rout MP, Chait BT, Shenk T. 2008.
735 Human cytomegalovirus protein UL38 inhibits host cell stress responses by
736 antagonizing the tuberous sclerosis protein complex. Cell host & microbe
737 3:253-262.


738 44. Spasic MR, Callaerts P, Norga KK. 2009. AMP-activated protein kinase  
739 (AMPK) molecular crossroad for metabolic control and survival of neurons.  
740 The Neuroscientist: a review journal bringing neurobiology, neurology and  
741 psychiatry 15:309-316.  
742 45. Poels J, Spasic MR, Callaerts P, Norga KK. 2009. Expanding roles for AMP-  
743 activated protein kinase in neuronal survival and autophagy. BioEssays:  
744 news and reviews in molecular, cellular and developmental biology 31:944-  
745 952.  
746 46. Ronnett GV, Ramamurthy S, Kleman AM, Landree LE, Aja S. 2009. AMPK  
747 in the brain: its roles in energy balance and neuroprotection. Journal of  
748 neurochemistry 109 Suppl 1:17-23.  
749  
750

FIGURE LEGENDS

Figure 1. Control of mTORC1 signaling by AMPK in response to energy insufficiency. A) In uninfected cells, accumulation of AMP or ADP relative to ATP signals energy insufficiency and activates AMPK. The binding of AMP to AMPK exposes Thr 172, which is phosphorylated by an AMPK-activating enzyme, such as LKB1. Once activated, AMPK stimulates TSC Rheb-GAP activity by phosphorylating TSC2 on residues T1227 and S1345. Besides promoting Rheb·GDP accumulation, AMPK phosphorylates the mTORC1 subunit raptor, both of which inhibit mTORC1 activation. B) HSV-1 UL46-encoded VP11/12 stimulates PI3K activity which activates Akt. Both the host Akt and the HSV-1 Us3 ser/thr kinases phosphorylate TSC2 on residues S939 and T1462. This inhibits TSC Rheb GAP activity and allows Rheb·GTP accumulation, which subsequently activates mTORC1. Thus, differential phosphorylation of TSC2 residues by either AMPK or Akt/Us3 respectively stimulate or inhibit TSC Rheb-GAP activity, which in turn inhibits or activates mTORC1.

Figure 2. HSV-1 sustains mTORC1 activity in cells exposed to energy insufficiency. NHDFs growth arrested by serum deprivation were mock-infected or infected with wild-type (WT) HSV-1 (strain F). Cultures were either untreated (-) or treated (+) with AICAR at 12 hpi. Total protein was isolated at 15 hpi, fractionated by SDS-PAGE and analyzed by immunoblotting using the indicated antibodies.

Figure 3. HSV-1-enforced mTORC1 activation during energy insufficiency

requires Us3 kinase activity but does not detectably depend upon VP11/12.

A) NHDFs growth arrested by serum deprivation were mock-infected or infected with wild-type (WT) HSV-1 Kos 37, a Us3 deletion mutant (ΔUs3), a VP11/12 deletion mutant (ΔUL46), or a virus doubly deleted for Us3 and VP11/12 (ΔUs3ΔUL46) (MOI= 5). Cultures were either untreated (-) or treated (+) with AICAR at 12 hpi. Total protein was isolated at 15 hpi, fractionated by SDS-PAGE and analyzed by immunoblotting using the indicated antibodies. B) As in A except NHDFs were infected with F-strain WT HSV-1 (HSV1wt), a Us3-deficient virus (HSV1ΔUs3), or a virus containing a Us3 kinase-deficient Us3 allele (HSV1K220A).

Figure 4. Hypersensitivity of Us3-deficient HSV-1 to energy insufficiency

A) NHDFs growth arrested by serum deprivation were infected with wild-type (WT) HSV-1 strain F or a Us3 deletion mutant (HSV-1ΔUs3) (MOI= 5). Cultures were either untreated (solid grey bars) or treated (solid black bars) with AICAR at 12 hpi. Cultures were metabolically pulse-labeled for 45 min with ${}^{35}$S-amino acids at 14 hpi. Protein synthesis was quantified by measuring acid-insoluble radioactivity using liquid scintillation counting. Incorporation of ${}^{35}$S was normalized to untreated cells. (N = 5, p-values determined by one sample t-tests. Error bars = SEM.) B) As in A except NHDFs were infected at low MOI (MOI= 2x10${}^{-4}$) to measure virus reproduction and spread through the culture. After 4d, cell-free

lysates were prepared by freeze thawing and infectious virus quantified by
plaque assay using Vero cells (N = 3, p-values determined by 2-way ANOVA with
multiple comparisons).

Figure 5. Acute energy stress-induced AMPK activity in HSV-1-infected
cells is independent of US3 and UL46. NHDFs growth arrested by serum
deprivation were mock-infected, infected with wild-type (WT) HSV-1 Kos 37, a
Us3 deletion mutant (ΔUs3), a UL46 deletion mutant (ΔUL46), or a virus doubly
deleted for Us3 and VP11/12 (ΔUs3ΔUL46) (MOI=5). Cultures were either
untreated (-) or treated (+) with AICAR at 12 hpi, Total protein was isolated at 15
hpi, fractionated by SDS-PAGE and analyzed by immunoblotting to determine
the phosphorylation status of A) AMPK or B) ACC. Accumulation of ICP0, a key
HSV-1 IE regulatory protein, was monitored as a marker of infection.

Figure 6. Inhibition of AMPK catalytic activity in HSV1-infected cells is Us3-
dependent. Growth-arrested NHDFs were mock-infected, infected with wild-type
(WT) HSV-1 Kos 37, a Us3 deletion mutant (ΔUs3), a UL46 deletion mutant
(ΔUL46), or a virus doubly deleted for Us3 and UL46 (ΔUs3ΔUL46) (MOI=5).
Cultures were either untreated (-) or treated (+) with compound C at 12 hpi, Total
protein was isolated at 15 hpi, fractionated by SDS-PAGE and analyzed by
immunoblotting using the indicated antibodies.

Figure 7. Hypersensitivity of mTORC1 to energy insufficiency in ΔUs3-

820 infected cells is relieved by TSC2-depletion. NHDFs were treated with TSC2
821 siRNA (+) or non-silencing, control siRNA (-), growth-arrested by serum
822 deprivation, and mock-infected (M) or infected with WT HSV-1 (strain F) or aUs3
823 deletion mutant (HSV-1 ΔUs3). Cultures were either untreated (-) or treated (+)
824 with AICAR at 12 hpi. Total protein was isolated at 15 hpi, fractionated by SDS-
825 PAGE and analyzed by immunoblotting using the indicated antibodies.
826 Accumulation of ICP0, a key HSV-1 IE regulatory protein, was monitored as a
827 marker of infection.
828 
829 
830 

A.

Energy  
Stress  
↓  

T172-  
P-AMPK  
→  

TSC1  
TBC1D7  
TSC2  
P-T1227  
P-S1345  

S79-  
P-ACC  
↓  

mTORC1  
←  
X  

Rheb  
GDP  

p-4EBP1  
p-S6K1  
Translation  

B.

PI3K  
↓  

Us3  
AKT  
↓  

Energy  
Stress  
↓ ?  

AMPK  
→ ?  

TSC2  
P-S939  
P-T1462  

TSC1  
TBC1D7  

mTORC1  
←  
GTP  
Rheb  

p-4EBP1  
p-S6K1  
Translation  

VP11/12

Figure 1

Hyper-
Hypo-
p85S6K1-
p70S6K1-
p85S6K1-
p70S6K1-

| M | WT |
|---|----|
| - | +  |
| + | -  |
|   | +  |

AICAR
4EBP1
p-S6K1
S6K1
Tubulin
AMPK p-T172
AMPK

1 2 3 4

Figure 2

A.
ΔUs3
M WT ΔUs3 ΔUL46 ΔUL46
- + - + - + - + - +
AICAR

Hyper-
Hypo-

4EBP1
p-S6K1
S6K1
HSC 70
AMPK p-T 172
AMPK

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10

B.

Mock
HSV1ΔUs3 Repair
HSV1K220A
HSV1ΔUs3

4EBP1
AICAR 3 hpi
AICAR 12 hpi

-Hyper
-Hypo
-Hyper
-Hypo
-Hyper
-Hypo
-Hyper
-Hypo

1 2 3 4

Figure 3

A.

| Relative 35S incorporation |
|---------------------------|
| 1.4                       |
| 1.2                       |
| 1.0                       |
| 0.8                       |
| 0.6                       |
| 0.4                       |
| 0.2                       |
| 0.0                       |

- HSV1WT
- HSV1ΔUs3

- Untreated
- AICAR

B.

| Log10 pfu/ml |
|--------------|
| 8            |
| 7            |
| 6            |
| 5            |
| 4            |
| 3            |
| 2            |
| 1            |
| 0            |

- HSV1WT
- HSV1ΔUs3

- Untreated
- AICAR

Figure 4

A.
$\Delta Us3$
$\begin{array}{ccccccc}
M & WT & \Delta Us3 & \Delta UL46 & \Delta UL46 \\
- & - & - & - & + & + & + \\
\end{array}$
AICAR
AMPK p-T 172
AMPK p-S 485/S 49
AMPK
ICP0
HSC 70
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10

B.
$\Delta Us3$
$\begin{array}{ccccccc}
M & WT & \Delta Us3 & \Delta UL46 & \Delta UL46 \\
- & + & - & + & - & + & + \\
\end{array}$
AICAR
pACC
ACC
AMPK p-T 172
AMPK
ICP0
HSC 70
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10

Figure 5

$\Delta Us3$

| M | WT | $\Delta Us3$ | $\Delta UL46$ | $\Delta UL46$ |
|---|----|-------------|--------------|--------------|
| - | -   | -           | -            | -            |
| + | +   | +           | +            | +            |

Compound C

pACC  
ACC  
pS6K1  
S6K1  
AMPK p-T172  
AMPK  
Tubulin  

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10

Figure 6

HSV1WT          HSV1ΔUs3
- + - +         - + - +
Hyper-
Hypo-
p85S6K1-
p70S6K1-
4EBP1
p-S6K1
S6K1
ICP0
TSC2
AMPK p-T 172
AMPK
HSC70
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8

Figure 7
