
Accepted Manuscript

Wnt signaling, a novel pathway regulating blood pressure? State of the art review

Maen D. Abou Ziki, Arya Mani

PII: S0021-9150(17)30190-9  
DOI: [10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2017.05.001](http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2017.05.001)  
Reference: ATH 15046  

To appear in: Atherosclerosis  

Received Date: 15 November 2016  
Revised Date: 6 April 2017  
Accepted Date: 3 May 2017  

Please cite this article as: Abou Ziki MD, Mani A, Wnt signaling, a novel pathway regulating blood pressure? State of the art review, Atherosclerosis (2017), doi: 10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2017.05.001.

This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.

Wnt dysregulation
- CNS → Insulin signaling → Vagal tone
- Vascular factors → Arterial calcification/stiffening, and VSMCs proliferation
- Cardiac factors → Cardiac remodeling and hypertrophy
- Renal factors → Renovascular disease, renin and aldosterone regulation

Hypertension
- Environmental factors

Canonical Wnt
- Nervous system factors → Insulin signaling → Vagal tone (Nucleus tractus solitarius)

Wnt signaling, a novel pathway regulating blood pressure? State of the art review

Maen D. Abou Ziki, Arya Mani*

Departments of Internal Medicine and Genetics, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06510, USA

*Corresponding author: Arya.mani@yale.edu (A. Mani)

Abstract

Recent antihypertensive trials show conflicting results on blood pressure (BP) targets in patient populations with different metabolic profiles, with lowest benefit from tight BP control observed in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus. This paradox could arise from the heterogeneity of study populations and underscores the importance of precision medicine initiatives towards understanding and treating hypertension. Wnt signaling pathways and genetic variations in its signaling peptides have been recently associated with metabolic syndrome, hypertension and diabetes, generating a breakthrough for advancement of precision medicine in the field of hypertension.

We performed a review of PubMed for publications addressing the contributions of Wnt to BP regulation and hypertension. In addition, we performed a manual search of the reference lists for relevant articles, and included unpublished observations from our laboratory.

There is emerging evidence for Wnt's role in BP regulation and its involvement in the pathogenesis of hypertension. Wnt signaling has pleiotropic effects on distinct pathways that involve vascular smooth muscle plasticity, and cardiac, renal, and neural physiology.

Hypertension is a heterogeneous disease with unique molecular pathways regulating its response to therapy. Recognition of these pathways is a prerequisite to identify novel targets for drug development and personalizing medicine. A review of Wnt signaling reveals its emerging role in BP regulation and as a target for novel drug development that has the potential to transform the therapy of hypertension in specific populations.

Keywords: Wnt, β-catenin, hypertension, blood pressure, diabetes, metabolic syndrome

I. Introduction

Canonical Wnt signaling is a highly conserved pathway named after the first gene discovered in the cascade; the “W”ingless gene in drosophila and its mouse homologue “INT”

(1). The Wnt cascade is ubiquitous in metazoans and is active in most tissue types throughout the lifecycle. During embryogenesis it has been implicated in controlling the mechanics of cell proliferation, migration, differentiation, apoptosis, establishment of cell polarity, and body axis determinations (2). Derangements in Wnt signaling have been associated with developmental disorders, cancers, fibrotic disorders and cardiovascular disease. The involvement of Wnt in this wide spectrum of biologic processes and human diseases has fueled research efforts into its components. The cascade is complex, involving an array of ligands, receptors, and multiple downstream effectors defining the canonical and non-canonical pathways. The newly uncovered molecular connections offer many challenges and new opportunities for novel classes of pharmacotherapies. Of special interest to this review is the link between Wnt and hypertension.

Hypertension affects approximately 30% of adults in the United States (3, 4) and is associated with serious complications that can be fatal. Worldwide, there are over 1 billion individuals suffering from the disease, and by 2025 this number is estimated to increase by 50% (5).

Hypertension is a component of metabolic syndrome (MetS), which also encompasses truncal obesity, glucose intolerance, atherogenic dyslipidemias, a pro-thrombotic state, and a pro-inflammatory state. These heritable cardio-metabolic traits tend to cluster more than predicted by random chance, and significantly increase the risk for cardiovascular mortality (6).

Hypertension has a high rate of heritability estimated at 30-68% (7, 8) and in rare cases is inherited as a single gene disorder (9-11). However, this disease is heterogeneous and is affected by the interplay of genetic and environmental factors that regulate or modify its determinants

such as vascular tone, volume status, cardiac function, neural function, and endocrine function.

This heterogeneity is also reflected in the distinct responses to pharmacotherapies and blood

pressure targets observed in populations with different ethnicities (12) or metabolic profiles. The

Action to Control Cardiovascular Risk in Diabetes Blood Pressure (ACCORD-BP) trial (13) and

the Systolic Blood Pressure Intervention Trial (SPRINT) trial (14) showed that strict blood

pressure control reduces cardiovascular events in non-diabetic patients, however, there was no

benefit in diabetics with MetS. This suggests different pathogenesis of hypertension in subjects

with and without type 2 diabetes mellitus. Therefore, precision medicine initiatives might help

provide optimum outcomes. The links between Wnt, hypertension and MetS are recent, exciting

discoveries that may open a new front in cardiovascular risk stratification or risk modulation.

Does targeting Wnt signaling satisfy the demands placed by precision medicine for the treatment

of hypertension? What are the challenges and concerns associated with such intervention?

In this review, we will summarize the current evidence and the potential for novel therapeutics

targeting this pathway.

II. Methods

We used a comprehensive search of MEDLINE with PubMed interface for original studies in

English that reported on hypertension and Wnt from January 1, 1900 to March 1, 2016. Search

terms included keywords that referred to Wnt, and Hypertension. The search strategy was ("Wnt

signaling"[MAJR] OR (WNT[TIAB] OR "β-catenin" OR "beta catenin")) AND

("Hypertension"[MAJR] OR (high blood pressure) OR "Blood pressure"[MAJR]). Overall, we

screened 176 articles retrieved through this systematic search. Moreover, the reference lists were

hand-searched for pertinent articles. We also discuss unpublished observations from our

laboratory. Studies addressing pulmonary hypertension and Wnt were excluded.

III. What are the mechanisms of Wnt signaling?

Wnt ligands are a family of nineteen lipidated-glycoproteins. Different ligands preferentially activate the canonical or non-canonical Wnt pathways, which reciprocally inhibit each others (15). The Wnt receptors belong to the Frizzled (Fz) receptor family, which includes 10 different trans-membrane proteins in humans (16). In addition, there are several co-receptors such as LDL receptor-related proteins (LRP) 5 and 6, the Derailed/receptor tyrosine kinase (RYK) (17), and ROR trans-membrane tyrosine kinases. (18, 19) The LRP 5/6 co-receptors activate the canonical cascade whereas the RYK and ROR-transmembrane tyrosine kinase co- receptors activate the non-canonical pathways.

β-catenin is a key molecule in the canonical Wnt pathway. It functions as an adherens junction protein, but more importantly as a transcriptional activator. At baseline, cytoplasmic β-catenin is in constant turnover being synthesized and destroyed intracellularly. The β-catenin destruction complex is composed of APC (adenomatous polyposis coli), Axin, CK-1 (casein kinase 1), and GSK 3 (glycogen synthase kinase 3) proteins. The destruction complex phosphorylates β-catenin and targets it for ubiquitination to keep the cytoplasmic levels within tight regulation and thus prevents β-catenin from translocating into the nucleus (20). Canonical Wnt signaling in essence overrides this inhibitory state, causes β-catenin cytoplasmic buildup, translocation into the nucleus, and activation of gene transcription.

The cascade is initiated when the Wnt ligand binds to the Fz receptor and LRP 5/6 co-receptors (20). This binding activates Dishevelled, which inhibits the destruction complex and thus rescues β-catenin. Once β-catenin translocates to the nucleus it binds to a variety of transcription factors such as the T-cell factor (TCF)/lymphoid enhancer factor (LEF) family of transcription factors, and many other co-activators (21, 22) as shown in Fig. 1A.

In contrast, non-canonical Wnt signaling involves at least two distinct pathways; the planar cell

polarity pathway and the calcium-signaling pathway, both of which are independent from β-

catenin (20). The cell polarity pathway regulates the actin cytoskeleton, determines cell polarity

and migration. Binding of Wnt4, Wnt5a or Wnt11 to Fz and non-canonical Fz co-receptors such

as RYK, and ROR2, activates the Rho and Rac GTPases, leading to cytoskeletal modifications

(20). Activation of the calcium pathway causes the release of Ca²⁺ from the endoplasmic

reticulum via G-protein signaling (23). Moreover, activation of the non-canonical Wnt pathway

wields an antagonistic effect on the canonical pathway through the Nemo-like kinase (NLK) -

mediated phosphorylation and ubiquitination of TCF7L2 (24) (Fig. 1B).

IV. What diseases are associated with Wnt signaling defects?

Mutations in the Wnt pathway have been associated with multiple developmental

disorders such as Fuhrman syndrome (25), Tetra-amelia syndrome (26), caudal duplication

syndrome (27), sclerosteosis (28), and familial exudative vitreo-retinopathy (29) among others.

Moreover, mutations in pathway components such as APC and β-catenin are causally linked to

the development of many forms of cancer (30, 31), including familial adenomatous polyposis

(32) and Wilms' tumor (33). Additionally, aberrant Wnt signaling has been detected in fibrotic

diseases such as idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (34), renal fibrosis (35), and systemic sclerosis

(36). Contributions to vascular disease such as pulmonary arterial hypertension and

atherosclerosis have also been noted.

Interestingly, genetic investigations of families with extreme forms of MetS, severe hypertension

and type 2 diabetes have led to the discovery of several mutations in the Wnt signaling cascade.

These included p.R611C, p.R473Q, p.R360H, and p.N433S variants in the LRP6 gene that are

associated with autosomal dominant MetS with early onset coronary artery disease and

1 atherosclerosis (37, 38). Common variants in the LRP6 gene have also been associated with
2 arterial calcification in a genome wide association study (GWAS) of African Americans (39). A
3 common (p.1062V) variant of LRP6 has been strongly associated with carotid artery
4 atherosclerosis (CAA) in hypertensive patients (40). In addition, common genetic variants in the
5 TCF7L2 gene have been associated with the risk for type 2 diabetes, hyperlipidemia and
6 coronary artery disease (41), indicating the broader role of this downstream Wnt effector in
7 common diseases. Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of TCF7L2 such as rs7903146 and
8 rs17685538 have been associated with elevated blood pressure (42).

9

10 V. Is there a relationship between Wnt signaling and hypertension?
11 Multiple lines of evidence suggest the existence of such a relationship. These include data from
12 genome wide association studies, genetic kindred studies, in vivo mammalian experiments, in
13 vitro experiments, in addition to collateral links to cardiac, renal and neural physiology.
14 1. Evidence from genome wide association studies
15 GWAS scans the genome for common single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in association
16 with a disease and takes advantage of linkage disequilibrium between the SNPs and nearby
17 polymorphisms. This means that identified SNPs can be the disease-causing mutations or more
18 likely be linked to other disease causing polymorphisms in relevant genes, a phenomenon known
19 as disequilibrium. Several GWAS studies have been performed in relation to blood pressure and
20 hypertension.

21

22 Among the over 50 identified genes, there are two that fall in the Wnt signaling pathways. In a
23 study of 76,064 Europeans, the WNT3 gene that encodes a canonical Wnt ligand was directly
24 associated with pulse pressure and mean arterial pressure (43). There is ample experimental

1 evidence implicating WNT3 in vascular disease such as arterial calcification, transforming
2 growth factor (TGF) and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) regulation (44).
3 
4 The SOX-6 gene was associated with hypertension and blood pressure in a study of 1,017
5 African Americans (45). The SOX family of transcription factors has emerged as modulators of
6 canonical Wnt/β-catenin signaling both in development and disease states. Recent evidence
7 suggests that SOX proteins physically interact with β-catenin and modulate the transcription of
8 Wnt-target genes. SOX-6 can directly bind to β-catenin in a region of the armadillo repeats,
9 which overlaps with the site where TCF, another modulator of β-catenin, binds (46–49). Wnt
10 signaling also regulates SOX expression in feedback regulatory loops that further calibrate
11 cellular β-catenin/TCF activity. Interestingly, the Renin promoter is downregulated by SOX3,
12 another member of the SOX family. This suggests that a direct effect of SOX on the renin
13 angiotensin system could also underlie its contribution to BP regulation (50).

14 
15 2. Evidence from outlier kindreds
16 Our group has identified an autosomal dominant form of metabolic syndrome and premature
17 coronary artery disease caused by the Arg611Cys substitution in LRP6. Mutation carriers
18 compared to non-mutation carriers had an average systolic BP of 168 ± 21 mmHg versus 116 ±
19 5 mmHg (*p*-value = 8 × 10⁻⁵), and an average diastolic BP of 100 ± 14 mmHg versus 81 ± 7 mmHg
20 (*p*-value = 0.0025), respectively. While obesity is a major component of metabolic syndrome and
21 is strongly associated with hypertension, hypertension in most patients with LRP6Arg611Cys
22 variant preceded the obesity. In fact, the mean BMI of the patients at the onset of disease was
23 24.6, and none had a BMI greater than 26 (38). Functional characterization of these mutations
24 has shown that they impair canonical (37) and activate non-canonical Wnt (21, 51).

3. Experimental evidence

In a series of experiments, Sumida et al. (52) created a physiological model of hypertension by infusing mice with angiotensin II. This resulted in about 70 mmHg elevation in BP. It was demonstrated that blood pressure elevation in response to angiotensin II infusions activates β-catenin and induces VSMC proliferation. VSMC proliferation was observed within 1 week of angiotensin II infusion into mice, and arterial remodeling within 6 weeks post transfusion (52, 53). Similarly, β-catenin signaling was activated early in the hypertensive state, at 1-week post infusion, and was preferentially activated in aortic VSMCs rather than endothelial cells. Furthermore, β-catenin signaling and VSMC proliferation were blunted when lowering BP using hydralazine during the same time period (52).

4. Wnt and BP regulation in the central nervous system

The nucleus tractus solitarius (NTS) located in the dorsal medulla of the brainstem is the main modulatory site of blood pressure (BP) and sympathetic nerve activity. Insulin has been implicated in the regulation of the baroreceptor reflex in the NTS as it easily crosses the blood brain barrier (54, 55). It has been shown to be involved in NTS mediated BP control via the PI3K-Akt-NO synthase cascade (56-58). Interestingly, Wnt signaling in the NTS is defective in hypertension, as evidenced by decreased phosphorylation of LRP6 (activation) and GSK-3β (deactivation) in genetic (spontaneously hypertensive rats or SHR) and dietary (fructose fed mice) models of hypertension. It has been shown that intraventricular infusion of Wnt3a into the brains of SHR rats lowers BP, decreases heart rate, and increases nitric oxide release (59). This effect was reversed with the administration of Wnt antagonist Dickkopf-1 (DKK1) (59, 60). Similar results were obtained in the fructose-fed-induced hypertension model. Therefore, increased

1 Wnt3a and β-catenin signaling in the NTS of the brain might mitigate hypertension. In another
2 set of experiments, rats exhibit reduced BP and heart rate in response to insulin injection into the
3 NTS (56). Wnt3a administration significantly increased downstream insulin signaling in the NTS
4 of SHR rats and fructose-fed hypertensive rats (59). Further studies showed that the interaction
5 between GSK 3-β and IRS 1 plays a central role in Wnt3a-mediated hypotensive effects in the
6 NTS (59). Overall, current evidence suggests that the neuronal regulation of blood pressure is
7 dependent on coordinated interaction of insulin and Wnt signaling.
8
9 5. Wnt and cardiac function
10 Cardiac output is a determinant of systemic blood pressure. Wnt/β-catenin has been linked to
11 adult cardiac function and remodeling. Wnt/β-catenin signaling plays a pivotal role during
12 cardiac development via a biphasic signal. Initially, a strong Wnt signal activates mesenchymal
13 to cardiomyocyte transition followed by a downregulated signal that leads to cardiomyocyte
14 differentiation (61). In adult life, reduced Wnt signaling activation is associated with decreased
15 cardiac hypertrophy (62). Activation of canonical Wnt leads to inhibition of the glycogen
16 synthase GSK 3-β, a potent inhibitor of cardiomyocyte hypertrophy, while simultaneously
17 increasing the β-catenin mediated transcription of hypertrophy genes (62). β-catenin has been
18 shown to redistribute and accumulate at higher levels in the nuclei of cardiomyocytes in
19 hypertensive rats (63). In a recent study of pressure-induced left ventricular hypertrophy and
20 heart failure elicited by transverse aortic constriction (TAC), activation of GSK 3 was associated
21 with decreased hypertrophy, fibrosis and left ventricular dysfunction (64). Interestingly, GSK 3
22 was activated by 2,5-Dimethylcelecoxib, a derivative of celecoxib that inhibits Akt (a negative
23 regulator of GSK 3), but is unable to inhibit the cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) (64). Suppression of
24 prostacyclin production via inhibition of COX-2 has been previously associated with adverse

1 thromboembolic cardiovascular outcomes (65, 66). On the other hand, decreased GSK3β activity
2 in GSK3β hetero-deficient mice led to more hypertrophy, and interstitial fibrosis.
3 Interestingly, the levels of miR-29-α, which is positively linked to Wnt regulation (67, 68), has
4 been found to be significantly higher in the serum of hypertensive patients with left ventricular
5 hypertrophy compared to those with hypertension and without hypertrophy (69, 70).
6 Accordingly, inhibition of miR-29-α in a mouse model led to suppression of cardiomyocyte
7 hypertrophy and the associated hypertrophy markers (69). Blocking Wnt signaling in
8 hypertensive rats leads to inhibition of myofibroblast migration into the myocardium and its
9 secretion of collagen 1 with reduction of the myocardial fibrosis (71-73).

11 **6. Wnt and renal function**
12 Wnt regulates formation of the renal medulla. The urine concentrating ability of the renal
13 medulla is related to its length, and blunting of the medulla is a common cause of renal diseases.
14 The medulla, composed of loop-of-henle, collecting ducts, interstitium, and vasa recta plays an
15 important role in water and electrolyte homeostasis and BP control. Nephron quantity is related
16 to susceptibility to hypertension and chronic kidney disease. Specific Wnt proteins such as Wnt
17 7b are highly expressed in the collecting ducts. Defective Wnt7b signaling leads to change in the
18 cell orientation along the collecting ducts, leading to duct dilation instead of elongation (74).
19 Wnt9b and Wnt4 are also involved in nephron development (75).
20 The Pro-renin receptor, a receptor for renin and pro-renin molecules, acts as an accessory protein
21 in the intracellular proton pump (H⁺ATPase) (76) implicated in autophagy (77) and is a recent
22 addition to the Renin-Angiotensin-Aldosterone system implicated in BP regulation (78). The
23 pro-renin receptor (PRR) interacts with and activates the Wnt co-receptors LRP5 and 6 (79).

Notably, Wnt signaling and autophagy have been shown to be inter-related (80). Interestingly,
PRR is involved in the planar-cell-polarity pathway of Wnt signaling in Drosophila (81).
Mutations in the pro-renin receptor in human subjects are associated with hypertension (82, 83).
Moreover, ablation of the pro-renin receptor in mice resulted in significantly decreased number
of nephrons during development that was attributed to impaired response to the Wnt/β-catenin
signaling (84). The Wnt/β-catenin canonical signaling seems to act downstream of PRR in
initiating the mesenchyme to epithelial transition and is thought to regulate nephron progenitor
cell self-renewal and differentiation in part via Six2 (85, 86).
Another line of investigation implicated Wnt signaling in regulation of aldosterone, volume
status and blood pressure in mice. This effect seems to be mediated via the APC protein, a major
component of the β-catenin destruction complex, and its downstream effector SGK-1 that
increases adrenal release of aldosterone, and absolute renal Na⁺ absorption (87, 88).
Moreover, there is strong evidence that Wnt signaling is activated in response to kidney injury
and along with the Notch and Hedgehog pathways drive renal fibrosis (35).

VI. The potential role of Wnt signaling in hypertensive vasculopathy

Vascular smooth muscle cell (VSMC) loss of plasticity or de-differentiation has been
associated with hypertension (89) and plays a critical role in arterial remodeling observed in
hypertension (90). Wnt/β-catenin signaling is implicated in proliferation and differentiation of
smooth muscle cells during embryonic and postnatal angiogenesis (91, 92). Moreover, Wnt
signaling is involved in vascular smooth muscle plasticity in adults in response to injury such as
acute arterial ligation or mechanical injury to the arterial lumen (93-95). Recent findings suggest
three distinct mechanisms by which Wnt signaling components contribute to VSMC remodeling.

These can be broken down into macrovascular effects, microvascular effects and immune

mediated mechanisms.

1. Macrovascular

In a series of experiments, our group determined that altered LRP6 function contributes to

pathological VSMC proliferation that is observed in coronary artery disease (96). We found that

LRP6 is overexpressed in sub-intima and muscularis layers of atherosclerotic lesions.

Overexpression of the LRP6<sup>R611C</sup> variant, which is associated with autosomal dominant MetS

and hypertension, in aortic VSMCs resulted in reduced VSMC proliferation and cyclin D1

expression in response to Wnt3a stimulation compared to wild type LRP6 vector and uninfected

cells (96). This is consistent with prior experiments showing reduced but not complete inhibition

of canonical Wnt signaling among the LRP6R611C mutants (38). This finding suggested that

VSMC proliferation in the LRP6<sup>R611C</sup> mutants is independent of canonical Wnt. Further

investigations revealed that platelet-derived growth factor β (PDGF-β) induced VSMC

proliferation in cells expressing the R611C mutation compared to wild type or un-transfected

controls (96). PDGF-β is a known mitogen that activates ERK 1/2 (97) and STAT 1 (98)

pathways. Wildtype LRP6 forms complexes with the PDGF-β receptor and targets it to

degradation, unlike the R611C mutant (96). Moreover, LRP6 inhibits ERK 1/2 and STAT 1

phosphorylation, whereas the R611C mutant increased ERK and STAT 1 phosphorylation in

response to PDGF-β (96).

Knock-in mice carrying the LRP6R611C mutation in a homozygous state exhibited thickened

aorta on chow diet and neointima formation and occlusive coronary arteries on high fat diet.

There was increased expression of PDGF receptors, PDGF ligands, and insulin growth factor 1

(IGF1) in the aortic media (51). In addition, these mice exhibited increased expression of

vascular progenitor cell markers vimentin and c-kit, and decreased expression of contractile

proteins in isolated VSMCs (51). In addition, the latter expression profile was partially reversed

with Wnt3a administration over a 3-week period, which correlated with reductions in aortic

medial thickness. The altered expression profile in the knock-in mice is attributed to activation of

the SP1 transcription factor (51), an established regulator of VSMC plasticity that is normally

inhibited by canonical Wnt signaling (99-101). Wnt3a administration had little effect on β-

catenin levels in the R611C mutant. However, there was a significant increase in TCF7L2

expression in VSMC following Wnt3a administration to LRP6<sup>R611C</sup> mice. This correlated with

decreased SP1 expression and reversal of PDGF activity. We later showed that TCF7L2 inhibits

SP1 by direct binding to the T-C-A-A-A-G motif downstream from its transcription initiation

site (51).

Therefore, impaired function of the LRP6/TCF7L2 axis could induce VSMCs plasticity and

initiate aberrant vascular wall remodeling. The importance of these findings is derived from the

characterization of a causal mutation associated with diabetes, hypertension and premature

coronary artery disease in human subjects. Interestingly, mice with VSMC-specific LRP6

knockout develop arterial calcification (102), which is also seen in human mutation carriers.

2. Microvascular

Wnt can directly stimulate VSMC proliferation via canonical pathway activation. This was

demonstrated in vitro by Wnt stimulation of cultured human aortic smooth muscle cells or and

by addition of lithium chloride, which stabilizes β-catenin via inhibiting GSK3 (52).

Interestingly, the VSMC proliferation was also independent of mitogen-activated protein kinases

such as ERK (52). Inhibition of β-catenin by PKF115-584 or by genetic knockout in the same

mouse model didn't lower BP but inhibited remodeling (52). Therefore, it can be concluded that

the β-catenin mediated VSMC remodeling is a consequence and not a mediator of hypertension

in this model. These observations reflect early events in angiotensin II induced hypertension and

hypertensive arterial remodeling.

3. Immune mediated

Another mechanism is a Wnt-independent, C1q-mediated arterial remodeling via activation of β-

catenin signaling. The C1q complement protein exerts its effects without complement cascade

activation. At the cellular level, the M2 macrophages, which exhibit an anti-inflammatory

phenotype, move into the aortic adventitia in response to high BP and secrete C1q that activates

β-catenin by enzymatic cleavage of LRP6 by C1s. The truncated LRP6 is constitutively activated

and phosphorylates uncleaved LRP6 receptors and activates β-catenin (103). Recruitment of

macrophages to the aortic adventitia has been shown to be critical for β-catenin signaling, as

depletion of the monocyte lineage from these mice abolished the signal and VSMC proliferation

(52). Study of macrophage humoral factors implicated interleukin 4 (IL-4) in promoting

complement C1q production from M2 type macrophages, independent of the complement

cascade (52). C1q then stimulates the β-catenin pathway in a dose-dependent manner, triggering

VSMC proliferation and arterial remodeling in the early phase of hypertension. These effects

were relatively suppressed but not completely inhibited with C1 inhibitors (52), which suggests

the presence of other pathways regulating VSMC proliferation in hypertension.

VII. Pharmacology

The Wnt pathway is complex, delicately balanced, and might not lend itself to safe

pharmacologic tinkering. There are over 27 compounds at different stages of clinical trials that

are known to modulate Wnt signaling (104). Some of them are FDA approved such as; the anti-

1 helmithic agent Pyrvinium targeting CK1α, Lithium targeting GSK3, Celecoxib targeting COX2,
2 and Sulindac and aspirin targeting COX1 and 2. Others in phase I or II trials include; OMP-18R5
3 (mAb) an antibody targeting Frizzled, and OMP-54F28 (FZD8-Fc fusion) a decoy receptor
4 targeting Wnt ligands and Romosozumab, a humanized anti-sclerostin monoclonal antibody used
5 for osteoporosis. Inhibitors of β-catenin, TCF, Dishevelled, Transkyrase and other Wnt
6 components are also under investigation (104). However, many of these agents are being
7 developed as chemotherapeutic agents and are likely teratogenic as they target the crucial
8 components in the Wnt pathway. Vitamins A retinoid derivatives and vitamin D interact with
9 nuclear receptors that inhibit Wnt signaling by competing for nuclear β-catenin (Shah JBC 2003,
10 Palmer JBC 2001) or activating the transcription of inhibitory genes. There are no current studies
11 on Wnt pharmacotherapies for hypertension management. It remains to be seen whether current
12 or newer agents that target downstream effectors of Wnt can safely be used to specifically treat
13 hypertension or mitigate the deleterious cardiovascular remodeling.

14

15 VIII. Future directions and conclusions

16 Although blood pressure (BP) follows a normal distribution in the population, the cutoff value
17 for hypertension is defined arbitrarily at a pressure above 140/85mmHg, on the higher end of BP
18 distribution at which point the benefits of medical intervention may exceed those of inaction
19 (105). This one-size-fits-all stratification scheme has proven to be problematic. Although its
20 simplicity lends it for easy use by clinicians, it falls short of capturing major variations in
21 individuals or subgroups within the population. While the cardiovascular risk is present and
22 incrementally increases at a systolic blood pressure as low as 115mmHg (106), high quality
23 trials have failed to show reduction of risk across the entire population by merely targeting a
24 strict blood pressure numeral (13, 14, 107). Most recently, the Heart Outcomes Prevention Trial

(HOPE-3) showed lack of overall benefit from blood pressure lowering in subjects with  
intermediate risk for cardiovascular events. The study population was demographically  
heterogeneous, and the metabolic profiles also varied significantly among the study participants  
(108). This invites a personalized medicine approach based on genetic and metabolic profiling  
for effective study and treatment of hypertension. Additionally, blood pressure is a complex  
emergent phenotype that is not controlled by any single cell line, tissue, or organ. Instead it is  
regulated by multiple organ systems. Nonetheless, complex phenotypes have oftentimes been  
successfully reduced to defects in single molecular pathways. The strong evidence from human  
studies associating Wnt defects with severe forms of MetS and hypertension; in addition to the  
cumulating data on Wnt's entanglement in cardiovascular physiology offer bright prospects for  
therapeutics in an untapped pathway.  
Extensive review of the current literature suggests a bidirectional relationship between Wnt and  
blood pressure regulation though more investigation is necessary to tease-out this “chicken  
versus egg” association. Some evidence of causation comes from animal models where changes  
of Wnt signaling in the brainstem caused alterations in systemic blood pressure. However, these  
findings still need to be meaningfully extrapolated to humans. Indirect evidence of causation  
comes from GWAS and genetic kindred studies of autosomal dominant MetS; where mutations  
in Wnt components segregated with severe hypertension in the members of the same family.  
Evidence of lesser weight emerges from indirect correlations of Wnt defects linked to organ  
dysfunction such as renal fibrosis and kidney disease, which in turn contribute to hypertension.  
On the other hand, animal models of induced hypertension showed that hypertension causes  
dynamic changes in Wnt signaling, which in turn drive pathologic vascular remodeling. This is  
also corroborated by human and animal studies on cardiac hypertrophic remodeling which seems  
to be worse in hypertensive subjects with aberrant Wnt signaling.

Therefore, focusing research efforts on decoding the Wnt pathway will lead to better understanding of hypertension and factors that underlie association of diverse MetS traits. The concept of a unifying molecular pathophysiology for hypertension and other traits observed in MetS is promising and may lead to more effective and novel classes of treatment for these prevalent burdensome disorders.

Nascent therapeutics in this domain will have to account for the complexity of Wnt signaling, and the multi-dimensional cross talk between Wnt and other pathways and between the different arms of the Wnt pathways.

Figure legends

Fig. 1. Wnt signaling pathways.

(A) The canonical pathway is activated once Wnt binds to the frizzled (FZD) receptor and LRP-5/6 co-receptor, thus recruiting disheveled (DVL) protein that inhibits the β-catenin destruction complex. Consequently, β-catenin accumulates in the cytoplasm and diffuses into the nucleus, binds to other transcription factors and activates gene expression. The non-canonical pathways (A and B) do not involve β-catenin. The planar cell polarity pathway (B) is activated once Wnt binds to FZD and the RYK/ROR co-receptor recruiting DVL and resulting in activation of the Rho and Rac signaling cascades. This causes cytoskeletal modifications and alteration in gene expression via the JNK pathway. The calcium signaling non-canonical pathway (C) involves Wnt binding to a G-protein coupled FZD that results in activation of phospholipase C (PLC) and phosphodiesterase 6, this leads to inositol triphosphate (IP3) production and stimulation of

1 intracellular calcium release. The calcium cascade involves activation of CAMKII, PKC and
2 alteration in gene transcription via the calcineurin-NFAT mechanism.
3 
4 Conflict of interest
5 The authors declared they do not have anything to disclose regarding conflict of interest with
6 respect to this manuscript.
7 
8 Financial support
9 This manuscript was supported by grants from the National Institutes of Health (NIH)
10 (1R01HL122830and1R01HL122822toAryaMani).
11 
12 References:
13 
14 1. Nusse R, Brown A, Papkoff J, Scambler P, Shackleford G, McMahon A, et al. A new
15 nomenclature for int-1 and related genes: the Wnt gene family. Cell. 1991; 64(2): 231.
16 2. MacDonald BT, Tamai K, He X. Wnt/beta-catenin signaling: components,
17 mechanisms, and diseases. Dev Cell. 2009; 17(1): 9-26.
18 3. Egan BM, Zhao Y, Axon RN. US trends in prevalence, awareness, treatment, and
19 control of hypertension, 1988-2008. JAMA. 2010; 303(20): 2043-50.
20 4. Wright JD, Hughes JP, Ostchega Y, Yoon SS, Nwankwo T. Mean systolic and diastolic
21 blood pressure in adults aged 18 and over in the United States, 2001-2008. Natl Health Stat
22 Report. 2011(35): 1-22, 4.
23 5. Kearney PM, Whelton M, Reynolds K, Muntner P, Whelton PK, He J. Global burden of
24 hypertension: analysis of worldwide data. Lancet. 2005; 365(9455): 217-23.

1 6. Abou Ziki MD, Mani A. Metabolic syndrome: genetic insights into disease
2 pathogenesis. Curr Opin Lipidol. 2016.
3 7. Hottenga JJ, Boomsma DI, Kupper N, Posthuma D, Snieder H, Willemsen G, et al.
4 Heritability and stability of resting blood pressure. Twin Res Hum Genet. 2005; 8(5): 499-
5 508.
6 8. Kupper N, Willemsen G, Riese H, Posthuma D, Boomsma DI, de Geus EJ. Heritability
7 of daytime ambulatory blood pressure in an extended twin design. Hypertension.
8 2005; 45(1): 80-5.
9 9. Garovic VD, Hilliard AA, Turner ST. Monogenic forms of low-renin hypertension. Nat
10 Clin Pract Nephrol. 2006; 2(11): 624-30.
11 10. Hassan-Smith Z, Stewart PM. Inherited forms of mineralocorticoid hypertension.
12 Curr Opin Endocrinol Diabetes Obes. 2011; 18(3): 177-85.
13 11. Simonetti GD, Mohaupt MG, Bianchetti MG. Monogenic forms of hypertension. Eur J
14 Pediatr. 2012; 171(10): 1433-9.
15 12. Materson BJ, Reda DJ, Cushman WC, Massie BM, Freis ED, Kochar MS, et al. Single-
16 drug therapy for hypertension in men. A comparison of six antihypertensive agents with
17 placebo. The Department of Veterans Affairs Cooperative Study Group on Antihypertensive
18 Agents. N Engl J Med. 1993; 328(13): 914-21.
19 13. Group AS, Cushman WC, Evans GW, Byington RP, Goff DC, Jr., Grimm RH, Jr., et al.
20 Effects of intensive blood-pressure control in type 2 diabetes mellitus. N Engl J Med.
21 2010; 362(17): 1575-85.
22 14. Group SR, Wright JT, Jr., Williamson JD, Whelton PK, Snyder JK, Sink KM, et al. A
23 Randomized Trial of Intensive versus Standard Blood-Pressure Control. N Engl J Med.
24 2015; 373(22): 2103-16.

1 15. Nusse R. Wnt signaling. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol. 2012; 4(5).
2 16. He X, Semenov M, Tamai K, Zeng X. LDL receptor-related proteins 5 and 6 in
3 Wnt/beta-catenin signaling: arrows point the way. Development. 2004; 131(8): 1663-77.
4 17. Lu W, Yamamoto V, Ortega B, Baltimore D. Mammalian Ryk is a Wnt coreceptor
5 required for stimulation of neurite outgrowth. Cell. 2004; 119(1): 97-108.
6 18. Kani S, Oishi I, Yamamoto H, Yoda A, Suzuki H, Nomachi A, et al. The receptor
7 tyrosine kinase Ror2 associates with and is activated by casein kinase epsilon. J Biol Chem.
8 2004; 279(48): 50102-9.
9 19. Mikels AJ, Nusse R. Purified Wnt5a protein activates or inhibits beta-catenin-TCF
10 signaling depending on receptor context. PLoS Biol. 2006; 4(4): e115.
11 20. Komiya Y, Habas R. Wnt signal transduction pathways. Organogenesis.
12 2008; 4(2): 68-75.
13 21. Wang S, Song K, Srivastava R, Dong C, Go GW, Li N, et al. Nonalcoholic fatty liver
14 disease induced by noncanonical Wnt and its rescue by Wnt3a. FASEB J. 2015; 29(8): 3436-
15 45.
16 22. Singh R, De Aguiar RB, Naik S, Mani S, Ostadsharif K, Wencker D, et al. LRP6
17 enhances glucose metabolism by promoting TCF7L2-dependent insulin receptor
18 expression and IGF receptor stabilization in humans. Cell Metab. 2013; 17(2): 197-209.
19 23. Kohn AD, Moon RT. Wnt and calcium signaling: beta-catenin-independent pathways.
20 Cell Calcium. 2005; 38(3-4): 439-46.
21 24. Ishitani T, Ninomiya-Tsuji J, Nagai S, Nishita M, Meneghini M, Barker N, et al. The
22 TAK1-NLK-MAPK-related pathway antagonizes signalling between beta-catenin and
23 transcription factor TCF. Nature. 1999; 399(6738): 798-802.

1 25. Woods CG, Stricker S, Seemann P, Stern R, Cox J, Sherridan E, et al. Mutations in
2 WNT7A cause a range of limb malformations, including Fuhrmann syndrome and Al-
3 Awadi/Raas-Rothschild/Schinzel phocomelia syndrome. Am J Hum Genet. 2006; 79(2): 402-
4 8.
5 26. Niemann S, Zhao C, Pascu F, Stahl U, Aulepp U, Niswander L, et al. Homozygous
6 WNT3 mutation causes tetra-amelia in a large consanguineous family. Am J Hum Genet.
7 2004; 74(3): 558-63.
8 27. Oates NA, van Vliet J, Duffy DL, Kroes HY, Martin NG, Boomsma DI, et al. Increased
9 DNA methylation at the AXIN1 gene in a monozygotic twin from a pair discordant for a
10 caudal duplication anomaly. Am J Hum Genet. 2006; 79(1): 155-62.
11 28. Balemans W, Ebeling M, Patel N, Van Hul E, Olson P, Dioszegi M, et al. Increased bone
12 density in sclerosteosis is due to the deficiency of a novel secreted protein (SOST). Hum
13 Mol Genet. 2001; 10(5): 537-43.
14 29. Xu Q, Wang Y, Dabdoub A, Smallwood PM, Williams J, Woods C, et al. Vascular
15 development in the retina and inner ear: control by Norrin and Frizzled-4, a high-affinity
16 ligand-receptor pair. Cell. 2004; 116(6): 883-95.
17 30. Logan CY, Nusse R. The Wnt signaling pathway in development and disease. Annu
18 Rev Cell Dev Biol. 2004; 20: 781-810.
19 31. Clevers H. Wnt/beta-catenin signaling in development and disease. Cell.
20 2006; 127(3): 469-80.
21 32. Kinzler KW, Nilbert MC, Vogelstein B, Bryan TM, Levy DB, Smith KJ, et al.
22 Identification of a gene located at chromosome 5q21 that is mutated in colorectal cancers.
23 Science. 1991; 251(4999): 1366-70.

1 33. Major MB, Camp ND, Berndt JD, Yi X, Goldenberg SJ, Hubbert C, et al. Wilms tumor
2 suppressor WTX negatively regulates WNT/beta-catenin signaling. Science.
3 2007;316(5827):1043-6.
4 34. Chilosi M, Poletti V, Zamo A, Lestani M, Montagna L, Piccoli P, et al. Aberrant
5 Wnt/beta-catenin pathway activation in idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. Am J Pathol.
6 2003;162(5):1495-502.
7 35. Edeling M, Ragi G, Huang S, Pavenstadt H, Susztak K. Developmental signalling
8 pathways in renal fibrosis: the roles of Notch, Wnt and Hedgehog. Nat Rev Nephrol.
9 2016;12(7):426-39.
10 36. Dees C, Distler JH. Canonical Wnt signalling as a key regulator of fibrogenesis-
11 implications for targeted therapies? Exp Dermatol. 2013; 22(11): 710-3.
12 37. Singh R, Smith E, Fathzadeh M, Liu W, Go GW, Subrahmanyam L, et al. Rare
13 nonconservative LRP 6 mutations are associated with metabolic syndrome. Hum Mutat.
14 2013;34(9):1221-5.
15 38. Mani A, Radhakrishnan J, Wang H, Mani A, Mani MA, Nelson-Williams C, et al. LRP 6
16 mutation in a family with early coronary disease and metabolic risk factors. Science.
17 2007;315(5816):1278-82.
18 39. Wojczynski MK, Li M, Bielak LF, Kerr KF, Reiner AP, Wong ND, et al. Genetics of
19 coronary artery calcification among African Americans, a meta-analysis. BMC Med Genet.
20 2013;14:75.
21 40. Sarzani R, Salvi F, Bordicchia M, Guerra F, Battistoni I, Pagliaricci G, et al. Carotid
22 artery atherosclerosis in hypertensive patients with a functional LDL receptor-related
23 protein 6 gene variant. Nutr Metab Cardiovasc Dis. 2011; 21(2): 150-6.

1 41. Muendlein A, Saely CH, Geller-Rhomberg S, Sonderegger G, Rein P, Winder T, et al.
2 Single nucleotide polymorphisms of TCF7L2 are linked to diabetic coronary
3 atherosclerosis. PLoS One. 2011; 6(3): e17978.
4 42. Delgado-Lista J, Perez-Martinez P, Garcia-Rios A, Phillips CM, Williams CM, Gulseth
5 HL, et al. Pleiotropic effects of TCF7L2 gene variants and its modulation in the metabolic
6 syndrome: from the LIPGENE study. Atherosclerosis. 2011; 214(1): 110-6.
7 43. Wain LV, Verwoert GC, O'Reilly PF, Shi G, Johnson T, Johnson AD, et al. Genome-wide
8 association study identifies six new loci influencing pulse pressure and mean arterial
9 pressure. Nat Genet. 2011; 43(10): 1005-11.
10 44. Al-Aly Z. Arterial calcification: a tumor necrosis factor-alpha mediated vascular Wnt-
11 opathy. Transl Res. 2008; 151(5): 233-9.
12 45. Adeyemo A, Gerry N, Chen G, Herbert A, Doumatey A, Huang H, et al. A genome-wide
13 association study of hypertension and blood pressure in African Americans. PLoS Genet.
14 2009; 5(7): e1000564.
15 46. Iguchi H, Urashima Y, Inagaki Y, Ikeda Y, Okamura M, Tanaka T, et al. SOX6
16 suppresses cyclin D1 promoter activity by interacting with beta-catenin and histone
17 deacetylase 1, and its down-regulation induces pancreatic beta-cell proliferation. J Biol
18 Chem. 2007; 282(26): 19052-61.
19 47. Zorn AM, Barish GD, Williams BO, Lavender P, Klymkowsky MW, Varmus HE.
20 Regulation of Wnt signaling by Sox proteins: XSox17 alpha/beta and XSox3 physically
21 interact with beta-catenin. Mol Cell. 1999; 4(4): 487-98.
22 48. Akiyama H, Lyons JP, Mori-Akiyama Y, Yang X, Zhang R, Zhang Z, et al. Interactions
23 between Sox9 and beta-catenin control chondrocyte differentiation. Genes Dev.
24 2004; 18(9): 1072-87.

1 49. Sinner D, Kordich JJ, Spence JR, Opoka R, Rankin S, Lin SC, et al. Sox17 and Sox4 differentially regulate beta-catenin/T-cell factor activity and proliferation of colon carcinoma cells. Mol Cell Biol. 2007; 27(22): 7802-15.
2 50. Araujo FC, Milsted A, Watanabe IK, Del Puerto HL, Santos RA, Lazar J, et al. Similarities and differences of X and Y chromosome homologous genes, SRY and SOX3, in regulating the renin-angiotensin system promoters. Physiol Genomics. 2015; 47(5): 177-86.
3 51. Srivastava R, Zhang J, Go GW, Narayanan A, Nottoli TP, Mani A. Impaired LRP6- TCF7L2 Activity Enhances Smooth Muscle Cell Plasticity and Causes Coronary Artery Disease. Cell Rep. 2015; 13(4): 746-59.
4 52. Sumida T, Naito AT, Nomura S, Nakagawa A, Higo T, Hashimoto A, et al. Complement Clq-induced activation of beta-catenin signalling causes hypertensive arterial remodelling. Nat Commun. 2015; 6: 6241.
5 53. Letavernier E, Perez J, Bellocq A, Mesnard L, de Castro Keller A, Haymann JP, et al. Targeting the calpain/calpastatin system as a new strategy to prevent cardiovascular remodeling in angiotensin II-induced hypertension. Circ Res. 2008; 102(6): 720-8.
6 54. McKernan AM, Calaresu FR. Insulin microinjection into the nucleus tractus solitarii of the rat attenuates the baroreceptor reflex. J Auton Nerv Syst. 1996; 61(2): 128-38.
7 55. Ruggeri P, Molinari C, Brunori A, Cogo CE, Mary DA, Picchio V, et al. The direct effect of insulin on barosensitive neurones in the nucleus tractus solitarii of rats. Neuroreport. 2001; 12(17): 3719-22.
8 56. Huang HN, Lu PJ, Lo WC, Lin CH, Hsiao M, Tseng CJ. In situ Akt phosphorylation in the nucleus tractus solitarii is involved in central control of blood pressure and heart rate. Circulation. 2004; 110(16): 2476-83.

1 57. Chiang HT, Cheng WH, Lu PJ, Huang HN, Lo WC, Tseng YC, et al. Neuronal nitric oxide synthase activation is involved in insulin-mediated cardiovascular effects in the nucleus tractus solitarii of rats. Neuroscience. 2009; 159(2): 727-34.
2 58. Tseng CJ, Liu HY, Lin HC, Ger LP, Tung CS, Yen MH. Cardiovascular effects of nitric oxide in the brainstem nuclei of rats. Hypertension. 1996; 27(1): 36-42.
3 59. Cheng PW, Chen YY, Cheng WH, Lu PJ, Chen HH, Chen BR, et al. Wnt Signaling Regulates Blood Pressure by Downregulating a GSK-3beta-Mediated Pathway to Enhance Insulin Signaling in the Central Nervous System. Diabetes. 2015; 64(10): 3413-24.
4 60. Bafico A, Liu G, Yaniv A, Gazit A, Aaronson SA. Novel mechanism of Wnt signalling inhibition mediated by Dickkopf-1 interaction with LRP 6/Arrow. Nat Cell Biol. 2001; 3(7): 683-6.
5 61. Zelarayan L, Gehrke C, Bergmann MW. Role of beta-catenin in adult cardiac remodeling. Cell Cycle. 2007; 6(17): 2120-6.
6 62. van de Schans VA, van den Borne SW, Strzelecka AE, Janssen BJ, van der Velden JL, Langen RC, et al. Interruption of Wnt signaling attenuates the onset of pressure overload-induced cardiac hypertrophy. Hypertension. 2007; 49(3): 473-80.
7 63. Zheng Q, Chen P, Xu Z, Li F, Yi XP. Expression and redistribution of beta-catenin in the cardiac myocytes of left ventricle of spontaneously hypertensive rat. J Mol Histol. 2013; 44(5): 565-73.
8 64. Fujita A, Takahashi-Yanaga F, Morimoto S, Yoshihara T, Arioka M, Igawa K, et al. 2, 5-Dimethylcelecoxib prevents pressure-induced left ventricular remodeling through GSK-3 activation. Hypertens Res. 2016.

1 65. Solomon SD, McMurray JJ, Pfeffer MA, Wittes J, Fowler R, Finn P, et al.
2 Cardiovascular risk associated with celecoxib in a clinical trial for colorectal adenoma
3 prevention. N Engl J Med. 2005; 352(11): 1071-80.
4 66. Solomon SD, Wittes J, Finn PV, Fowler R, Viner J, Bertagnolli MM, et al.
5 Cardiovascular risk of celecoxib in 6 randomized placebo-controlled trials: the cross trial
6 safety analysis. Circulation. 2008; 117(16): 2104-13.
7 67. Kapinas K, Kessler C, Ricks T, Gronowicz G, Delany AM. miR-29 modulates Wnt
8 signaling in human osteoblasts through a positive feedback loop. J Biol Chem.
9 2010; 285(33): 25221-31.
10 68. Tan M, Wu J, Cai Y. Suppression of Wnt signaling by the miR-29 family is mediated
11 by demethylation of WIF-1 in non-small-cell lung cancer. Biochem Biophys Res Commun.
12 2013; 438(4): 673-9.
13 69. Han W, Han Y, Liu X, Shang X. Effect of miR-29a inhibition on ventricular
14 hypertrophy induced by pressure overload. Cell Biochem Biophys. 2015; 71(2): 821-6.
15 70. Roncarati R, Viviani Anselmi C, Losi MA, Papa L, Cavaretta E, Da Costa Martins P, et
16 al. Circulating miR-29a, among other up-regulated microRNAs, is the only biomarker for
17 both hypertrophy and fibrosis in patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. J Am Coll
18 Cardiol. 2014; 63(9): 920-7.
19 71. Shao S, Cai W, Sheng J, Yin L. Role of SDF-1 and Wnt signaling pathway in the
20 myocardial fibrosis of hypertensive rats. Am J Transl Res. 2015; 7(8): 1345-56.
21 72. Marinou K, Christodoulides C, Antoniades C, Koutsilieris M. Wnt signaling in
22 cardiovascular physiology. Trends Endocrinol Metab. 2012; 23(12): 628-36.
23 73. ter Horst P, Smits JF, Blanksteijn WM. The Wnt/Frizzled pathway as a therapeutic
24 target for cardiac hypertrophy: where do we stand? Acta Physiol (Oxf). 2012; 204(1): 110-7.
27

1 74. Yu J. Wnt signaling and renal medulla formation. Pediatr Nephrol. 2011; 26(9): 1553-
2 7.
3 75. Halt K, Vainio S. Coordination of kidney organogenesis by Wnt signaling. Pediatr
4 Nephrol. 2014; 29(4): 737-44.
5 76. Ludwig J, Kerscher S, Brandt U, Pfeiffer K, Getlawi F, Apps DK, et al. Identification
6 and characterization of a novel 9.2-kDa membrane sector-associated protein of vacuolar
7 proton-ATPase from chromaffin granules. J Biol Chem. 1998; 273(18): 10939-47.
8 77. Binger KJ, Muller DN. Autophagy and the (Pro) renin Receptor. Front Endocrinol
9 (Lausanne). 2013; 4: 155.
10 78. Nguyen G, Delarue F, Burckle C, Bouzhir L, Giller T, Sraer JD. Pivotal role of the
11 renin/prorenin receptor in angiotensin II production and cellular responses to renin. J Clin
12 Invest. 2002; 109(11): 1417-27.
13 79. Cruciat CM, Ohkawara B, Acebron SP, Karaulanov E, Reinhard C, Ingelfinger D, et al.
14 Requirement of prorenin receptor and vacuolar H+-ATPase-mediated acidification for Wnt
15 signaling. Science. 2010; 327(5964): 459-63.
16 80. Gao C, Cao W, Bao L, Zuo W, Xie G, Cai T, et al. Autophagy negatively regulates Wnt
17 signalling by promoting Dishevelled degradation. Nat Cell Biol. 2010; 12(8): 781-90.
18 81. Hermle T, Saltukoglu D, Grunewald J, Walz G, Simons M. Regulation of Frizzled-
19 dependent planar polarity signaling by a V-ATPase subunit. Curr Biol. 2010; 20(14): 1269-
20 76.
21 82. Hirose T, Hashimoto M, Totsune K, Metoki H, Asayama K, Kikuya M, et al. Association
22 of (pro) renin receptor gene polymorphism with blood pressure in Japanese men: the
23 Ohasama study. Am J Hypertens. 2009; 22(3): 294-9.

1 83. Ott C, Schneider MP, Delles C, Schlaich MP, Hilgers KF, Schmieder RE. Association of
2 (pro) renin receptor gene polymorphism with blood pressure in Caucasian men.
3 Pharmacogenet Genomics. 2011; 21(6): 347-9.
4 84. Song R, Preston G, Kidd L, Bushnell D, Sims-Lucas S, Bates CM, et al. Prorenin
5 receptor is critical for nephron progenitors. Dev Biol. 2015.
6 85. Karner CM, Das A, Ma Z, Self M, Chen C, Lum L, et al. Canonical Wnt9b signaling
7 balances progenitor cell expansion and differentiation during kidney development.
8 Development. 2011; 138(7): 1247-57.
9 86. Park JS, Ma W, O'Brien LL, Chung E, Guo JJ, Cheng JG, et al. Six2 and Wnt regulate
10 self-renewal and commitment of nephron progenitors through shared gene regulatory
11 networks. Dev Cell. 2012; 23(3): 637-51.
12 87. Bhandaru M, Kempe DS, Rotte A, Rexhepaj R, Kuhl D, Lang F. Hyperaldosteronism,
13 hypervolemia, and increased blood pressure in mice expressing defective APC. Am J Physiol
14 Regul Integr Comp Physiol. 2009; 297(3): R571-5.
15 88. Just A. Going with the Wnt? Focus on "Hyperaldosteronism, hypervolemia, and
16 increased blood pressure in mice expressing defective APC". Am J Physiol Regul Integr
17 Comp Physiol. 2009; 297(3): R568-70.
18 89. Pauletto P, Sarzani R, Rappelli A, Chiavegato A, Pessina AC, Sartore S. Differentiation
19 and growth of vascular smooth muscle cells in experimental hypertension. Am J Hypertens.
20 1994; 7(Pt 1): 661-74.
21 90. Kontaraki JE, Marketou ME, Zacharis EA, Parthenakis FI, Vardas PE. Differential
22 expression of vascular smooth muscle-modulating microRNAs in human peripheral blood
23 mononuclear cells: novel targets in essential hypertension. J Hum Hypertens.
24 2014; 28(8): 510-6.

1 91. Itaranta P, Chi L, Seppanen T, Niku M, Tuukkanen J, Peltoketo H, et al. Wnt-4 signaling is involved in the control of smooth muscle cell fate via Bmp-4 in the medullary stroma of the developing kidney. Dev Biol. 2006; 293(2): 473-83.
2 92. Cohen ED, Ihida-Stansbury K, Lu MM, Panettieri RA, Jones PL, Morrisey EE. Wnt signaling regulates smooth muscle precursor development in the mouse lung via a tenascin C/PDGFR pathway. J Clin Invest. 2009; 119(9): 2538-49.
3 93. Wang X, Xiao Y, Mou Y, Zhao Y, Blanksteijn WM, Hall JL. A role for the beta-catenin/T-cell factor signaling cascade in vascular remodeling. Circ Res. 2002; 90(3): 340-7.
4 94. Tsaousi A, Williams H, Lyon CA, Taylor V, Swain A, Johnson JL, et al. Wnt 4/beta-catenin signaling induces VSMC proliferation and is associated with intimal thickening. Circ Res. 2011; 108(4): 427-36.
5 95. Mill C, George SJ. Wnt signalling in smooth muscle cells and its role in cardiovascular disorders. Cardiovasc Res. 2012; 95(2): 233-40.
6 96. Keramati AR, Singh R, Lin A, Faramarzi S, Ye ZJ, Mane S, et al. Wild-type LRP 6 inhibits, whereas atherosclerosis-linked LRP6R611C increases PDGF-dependent vascular smooth muscle cell proliferation. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2011; 108(5): 1914-8.
7 97. Zhan Y, Kim S, Izumi Y, Izumiya Y, Nakao T, Miyazaki H, et al. Role of JNK, p38, and ERK in platelet-derived growth factor-induced vascular proliferation, migration, and gene expression. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2003; 23(5): 795-801.
8 98. Simon AR, Takahashi S, Severgnini M, Fanburg BL, Cochran BH. Role of the JAK-STAT pathway in PDGF-stimulated proliferation of human airway smooth muscle cells. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2002; 282(6): L1296-304.
9 99. Lin X, Wang Z, Gu L, Deuel TF. Functional analysis of the human platelet-derived growth factor A-chain promoter region. J Biol Chem. 1992; 267(35): 25614-9.


100. Park GH, Plummer HK, 3rd, Krystal GW. Selective Sp1 binding is critical for maximal activity of the human c-kit promoter. Blood. 1998; 92(11): 4138-49.
101. Zhang X, Diab IH, Zehner ZE. ZBP-89 represses vimentin gene transcription by interacting with the transcriptional activator, Sp1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2003; 31(11): 2900-14.
102. Cheng SL, Ramachandran B, Behrmann A, Shao JS, Mead M, Smith C, et al. Vascular smooth muscle LRP6 limits arteriosclerotic calcification in diabetic LDLR-/-mice by restraining noncanonical Wnt signals. Circ Res. 2015; 117(2): 142-56.
103. Naito AT, Sumida T, Nomura S, Liu ML, Higo T, Nakagawa A, et al. Complement C1q activates canonical Wnt signaling and promotes aging-related phenotypes. Cell. 2012; 149(6): 1298-313.
104. Kahn M. Can we safely target the WNT pathway? Nat Rev Drug Discov. 2014; 13(7): 513-32.
105. Evans JG, Rose G. Hypertension. Br Med Bull. 1971; 27(1): 37-42.
106. Lewington S, Clarke R, Qizilbash N, Peto R, Collins R, Prospective Studies C. Age-specific relevance of usual blood pressure to vascular mortality: a meta-analysis of individual data for one million adults in 61 prospective studies. Lancet. 2002; 360(9349): 1903-13.
107. Yusuf S, Lonn E, Pais P, Bosch J, Lopez-Jaramillo P, Zhu J, et al. Blood Pressure and Cholesterol Lowering in Persons without Cardiovascular Disease. N Engl J Med. 2016; 374(21): 2032-43.
108. Lonn EM, Bosch J, Lopez-Jaramillo P, Zhu J, Liu L, Pais P, et al. Blood Pressure Lowering in Intermediate-Risk Persons without Cardiovascular Disease. N Engl J Med. 2016; 374(21): 2009-20.

(a) Canonical Wnt

Wnt  
FZD  
LRP-5/6  

AXIN  
GSK-3  
CK1  

β-catenin  
β-catenin  

TCF  
Gene expression  

(b) Non-canonical Wnt: Planar Cell Polarity  

Wnt  
FZD  
RYK/ROR  

DVL  

Rac  
Rho  

JNK  
Cytoskeleton  

JUN  
Gene expression  

(c) Non-canonical Wnt: Calcium signaling  

Wnt  
FZD  
G Protein  

DVL  

PLC  
PDE6  

IP3  
Ca²⁺  

Calcineurin  
PKC  

CAMKII  

NFAT  
Gene expression  

Figure 1

Highlights:

1. Mutations in Wnt signaling components have been implicated in metabolic traits such as hypertension and hyperlipidemia.
2. Wnt signaling influences peripheral and central regulation of blood pressure.
3. Derangements in Wnt signaling cause vascular smooth muscle remodeling that may underlie arterial calcification, high blood pressure and vascular diseases.
4. Further dissection of Wnt signaling pathway in blood vessels may help with development of novel therapeutics against hypertension.
