
Published online: June 12, 2017

**Review**

---

# Calcineurin–NFAT signalling in myeloid leucocytes: new prospects and pitfalls in immunosuppressive therapy

Kamila Bendickova, Federico Tidu & Jan Fric*

---

## Abstract

Myeloid leucocytes mediate host protection against infection and critically regulate inflammatory responses in body tissues. Pattern recognition receptor signalling is crucial for myeloid cell responses to pathogens, but growing evidence suggests an equally potent role for Calcineurin–NFAT signalling in control of myeloid cell function. All major subsets of myeloid leucocytes employ Calcineurin–NFAT signalling during immune responses to pathogens and/or tissue damage, but the influence this pathway exerts on pathogen clearance and host susceptibility to infection is not fully understood. Recent data from experimental models indicate that Calcineurin-NFAT signalling is essential for infection control, and calcineurin inhibitors used in transplantation medicine (including cyclosporine A and tacrolimus) are now being tested for efficacy in a diverse range of inflammatory conditions and autoimmune pathologies. Efforts to repurpose calcineurin inhibitor drugs for new therapeutic applications may yield rapid improvements in clinical outcomes, but the potential impact of these compounds on myeloid cell function in treated patients is largely unknown. Here we discuss Calcineurin–NFAT control of myeloid leucocyte function in the context of recent therapeutic developments and ongoing clinical studies.

### Keywords
cyclosporine A; Dectin-1; immunosuppression; tacrolimus; TLR4

DOI 10.15252/emmm.201707698 | Received 19 February 2017 | Revised 22 May 2017 | Accepted 23 May 2017

See the Glossary for abbreviations used in this article.

---

## Introduction

During an adaptive immune response, engagement of the T-cell receptor stimulates an increase in intracellular calcium that promotes calmodulin binding to the serine/threonine protein phosphatase enzyme calcineurin. Once activated in this way, calcineurin can dephosphorylate nuclear factor of activated T-cell (NFAT) transcription factors, which modify gene expression and regulate immune responses. The Calcineurin–NFAT pathway was initially described in T cells, where NFAT acts as a master regulator of lymphocyte development, expression of interleukin (IL)-2, and controls major effector T-cell functions. Accordingly, drugs developed to inhibit Calcineurin–NFAT binding such as cyclosporine A and tacrolimus have proven highly effective at suppressing T-cell responses and preventing allograft rejection in transplantation medicine. While long regarded as a specific regulator of T-cell activity, NFAT signalling was later also identified in other cell types including B cells (Muller & Rao, 2010), and was reported to mediate embryogenic development of multiple tissues including the hematopoietic system (Muller *et al.*, 2009). These data suggested that the influence of Calcineurin–NFAT on immunity was not restricted to T cells alone and that potent effects outside the adaptive immune response were likely.

Despite widespread use in clinical settings, the mechanisms by which Calcineurin–NFAT inhibitors suppress host immunity are not as specific as was initially thought. Various studies of cyclosporine A and tacrolimus treatment have revealed a surprising ability of these drugs to disrupt T-cell activation without impacting on Ca²⁺ flux (Metcalfe *et al.*, 1994), and impair lymphocyte responses via effects on the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway (Su *et al.*, 1994; Matsuda *et al.*, 1998) in NFAT-independent manner. Given that NFAT can also cooperate with transcription factors such as AP-1 and NF-kB to modify immune responses (Crabtree, 1989), it is perhaps not surprising that calcineurin inhibitors are now thought to mediate wide-ranging effects that can also impact on myeloid cell function. The key roles of Calcineurin–NFAT signalling in myeloid cell biology have recently been discussed elsewhere (Muller & Rao, 2010; Fric *et al.*, 2012), and myeloid lineages not directly involved in host immunity to pathogens will not be discussed in detail here. The current review instead focuses on Calcineurin–NFAT control of myeloid immunity because the growing number of clinical studies is now seeking to manipulate this pathway for therapeutic benefit in diverse human pathologies. Indeed, all five members of the NFAT family are known to be involved in regulation of immune responses (Macian, 2005), and a major risk of immunosuppressive therapy in human patients is increased susceptibility to opportunistic infections. Consequently, investigators seeking to repurpose calcineurin inhibitor drugs for new disease indications must consider recent

---

Center for Translational Medicine (CTM), International Clinical Research Center (ICRC), St. Anne’s University Hospital Brno, Brno, Czech Republic  
*Corresponding author. Tel: +420 511 158 279; E-mail: jan.fric@fnusa.cz

© 2017 The Authors. Published under the terms of the CC BY 4.0 license

Glossary

Adaptive immune response  
Branch of immune system evolved in vertebrates to provide more specific recognition of dangerous antigens. Lymphocytes adapt to specific pathogen and confer lifelong protective immunity due to immunologic memory of adaptive response. In addition to specificity, the immunologic memory is the major benefit of adaptive immunity as it activates rapid and robust protective response in case of re-exposure to the same antigen.

Calcineurin inhibitors  
Drugs that prevent calcineurin-driven dephosphorylation and activation of nuclear factor of activated T cells (NFAT). The archetypal drugs in this class are cyclosporine A and tacrolimus which have revolutionized the field of organ transplantation. The main purpose of these inhibitors is to suppress T-cell responses to allografts.

Drug repurposing  
Strategy of testing approved agents for new therapeutic applications. This is an important approach used to accelerate the discovery of new treatment strategies and reduce costs associated with development of novel compounds. Drug repurposing is typically guided by detailed molecular knowledge of the target pathologies.

Fungal morphotypes  
Some fungi species including *Aspergillus fumigatus* develop through different morphotypic stages; this includes conidia, swollen conidia and fully germinated hyphae. This process has important consequence for pattern recognition receptor stimulation as *Aspergillus* morphotypes express different amounts of β-glucans on the surface.

Immune synapse  
Cell–cell communication used by immune cells. The formation of immune synapses is the initial event leading to adaptive immunity response and is characterized by membrane rearrangements in both cell types involved.

Immunomodulatory chemokines and cytokines  
Signalling compounds secreted by various cells to orchestrate immune response to a desired level, that is immunopotentiation, immunosuppression or induction of immunologic tolerance.

Immunosuppressive therapy  
Therapeutic administration of drugs that inhibit immune responses. Immunosuppressive drugs target several different mechanisms and are primarily used to prevent rejection of tissue grafts and transplants as well as suppress autoimmune diseases and inflammatory disorders.

Innate response  
Branch of the immune system that allows direct and immediate responses to pathogens. In vertebrates, this evolutionarily conserved host protection strategy is complemented by the adaptive immune system.

Lupus nephritis  
Inflammatory disease affecting the kidney and, more specifically, glomeruli. It is caused by systemic lupus erythematosus and can lead to kidney failure. Systemic lupus erythematosus is an autoimmune disease caused by production of autoimmune antibodies against nuclear antigens associated with chronic inflammation.

Myeloid immunity  
Immune response mediated by cells of myeloid origin such as granulocytes, macrophages, monocytes and some dendritic cell subsets. Upon pathogen invasion, myeloid cells are rapidly recruited to the site of infection, where they exert their effector functions (cytokine secretion, phagocytosis, etc.).

Ontogeny  
All developmental changes occurring throughout the existence of an individual organism. In cell biology, ontogeny refers specifically to developmental and differentiation processes within a cell lineage.

Pattern recognition receptors  
Set of innate immune receptors that recognize molecular patterns associated with pathogens or tissue damage. Advances in understanding of their molecular mechanisms of action are leading to the development of new therapies.

Physical form of the antigen  
Immunogenicity of soluble and particulate form of antigens is different, for example pattern recognition receptor binds the two forms of β-glucan differently. Differences in this process following ligation by soluble versus particulate ligands enable receptor-driven distinction between the two forms of the same antigen.

Plasmacytoid DCs  
Subset of dendritic cells specialized in rapid type I interferon production mainly in response to viruses or nucleic acids. pDCs have been implicated in pathogenesis of autoimmune diseases characterized by type I IFN signature.

Rheumatoid arthritis  
Chronic autoimmune disorder associated with tissue inflammation of the joints. Several clinical trials have already shown beneficial effects of immunosuppression in patients affected by this condition.

Sjogren's syndrome  
Autoimmune disorder characterized by chronic inflammation, infiltration of immune cells to exocrine organs and progressive destruction of moisture-producing glands.

T-cell receptor  
Complex of integral membrane proteins, which recognizes specific antigen and activate T cells. The variety of TCR is established by developmentally regulated TCR gene rearrangements followed by predominantly intra-thymic selection processes.

reports that NFAT signalling exerts a critical influence on innate immune function, as well as emerging evidence that these therapies disrupt pathways known to be essential for myeloid cell defence against pathogens.

Pattern recognition receptors initiate Calcineurin–NFAT signalling in myeloid leucocytes

NFAT activation in dendritic cells (DCs) and macrophages was first observed upon cell activation through Dectin-1 (Goodridge et al,

2007), and was soon followed by reports that NFAT activation could also be triggered by other pattern recognition receptors (PRRs) including TLR4 and CD14 (Fig 1).

Initial mechanistic studies sought to understand how NFAT regulates gene expression in DCs exposed to various types of pathogen (Granucci et al, 2001, 2003). In particular, much early research focused on the role of the CD14-MD2-TLR4 pathway in modulating NFAT signalling (Zanoni et al, 2009). This critical signalling axis is now known to exert complex effects on DC function via a range of different mechanisms, including LPS binding to CD14, which can induce calcium flux without the involvement of TLR4 (Zanoni et al,

Published online: June 12, 2017  
Kamila Bendickova et al Insight into recent clinical studies of calcineurin inhibitors  
EMBO Molecular Medicine  

Figure 1. PRR signal integration with the Calcineurin–NFAT pathway.  
Multiple different pattern recognition receptors (PRRs) have been reported to trigger Calcineurin–NFAT signalling upon ligand binding. In particular, TLRs and C-type lectin receptors (CLR) play critical roles in NFAT activation during innate immune responses. The observation that LPS exposure can stimulate NFAT-mediated IL-2 expression focused the majority of early research on the role of TLR4 (Granucci et al, 2001, 2003). The LPS co-receptor CD14 was later also reported to promote Calcineurin–NFAT activation via recruitment of Syk (Zanoni et al, 2009). In mast cells, heterodimers of TLR1-TLR2 recognize Pam₃CSK₄ and drive the recruitment of Fc-γ receptor which contains ITAM motifs (Jin et al, 2016). TLR9 can also promote NFAT activation upon exposure to *Aspergillus fumigatus* conidia in acidified endosomes, which results in recruitment of BTK, activation of PLCγ followed by increase in intracellular calcium concentration and NFAT translocation to the nucleus (Herbst et al, 2015). Alternatively, Syk recruitment, PLCγ activation and nuclear localization of NFAT can instead be induced by ligand binding of ITAM-containing CLRs such as Dectin-1 (Goodridge et al, 2007), macrophage-inducible Ca²⁺-dependent lectin (Mincle) (Yamasaki et al, 2008) and CLEC-2 (Mourao-Sa et al, 2011; Severin et al, 2011).

2009), and internalization of the entire CD14-MD2-TLR4 complex which instead promotes interferon production (Kagan et al, 2008; Zanoni et al, 2011). Subsequent work has suggested that a large number of innate cell functions could be controlled by protein complexes such as these termed “signalling organelles” which cooperate to alter intracellular calcium levels and regulate gene expression (Zanoni et al, 2011; Chiang et al, 2012; Kagan, 2012). While it is now widely accepted that calcineurin can dephosphorylate NFAT to facilitate transcription factor translocation to the nucleus in myeloid cells as well as in lymphocytes, two important questions remain unresolved (i) which PRRs are involved in mediating this process? and (ii) why are NFAT-driven expression programs highly specific to different cells and tissues?

Calcineurin–NFAT activity has now been reported in almost all subsets of myeloid cells (Muller & Rao, 2010; Fric et al, 2012). Most recently, an important role of NFAT1 was identified in microglia subjected to chronic LPS stimulation (Ma et al, 2015). Other investigators have dissected the translocation/turnover kinetics of the dephosphorylated nuclear fraction of NFAT3 and 4 in monocytes activated through TLR2/4 (Minematsu et al, 2011). In human mast

cells, calcium mobilization is activated by triggering of TLR-2, which has been linked with NFAT-mediated transcriptional responses to *Leishmania* (Zaidi et al, 2006; Bhattacharjee et al, 2016). Calcineurin–NFAT signalling has also been shown to regulate mast cell activation (Walczak-Drzewiecka et al, 2008), survival (Ulleras et al, 2008) and cytokine expression (Monticelli et al, 2004; Klein et al, 2006). Furthermore, recognition of bacterial or fungal entry into host cells via cytoplasmic PRRs known as NOD-like receptors (NLRs) has also been shown to influence Calcineurin–NFAT activation (Tourneur et al, 2013; Vandewalle et al, 2014). The various PRR-dependent mechanisms of Calcineurin–NFAT activation identified in myeloid leucocytes are summarized in Fig 1.

Features of the Calcineurin–NFAT signalling cascade in myeloid cells

A key advance in understanding how PRR ligation triggers Calcineurin–NFAT signalling was the discovery that cytoplasmic calcium levels are the sole determinant of calcineurin activity

following leucocyte exposure to LPS (Zanoni *et al.*, 2009) or the Dectin-1 ligand curdlan (Xu *et al.*, 2009). While originally described in signalling downstream of the T-cell receptor, immune receptor tyrosine-based activation motifs (ITAM) are now also known to contribute to signal transduction in myeloid cells upon ligation of Dectin-1 and other C-type lectin receptors including CLEC-2 (Mourao-Sa *et al.*, 2011; Severin *et al.*, 2011).

In a signalling cascade comparable with that displayed by T cells, myeloid cells undergo dephosphorylation of ITAM motifs by Src kinases to create a binding site for spleen tyrosine kinase (Syk), which is the major integrator of PRR signals that induce intracellular calcium flux. These shared early signalling events suggest that Dectin-1 initiation of phagocytic activity in myeloid cells is the functional equivalent of immune synapse formation for T-cell stimulation (Goodridge *et al.*, 2011). Syk subsequently cooperates with Src kinases to activate phospholipase γ (PLCγ), which represents the major point of convergence between PRR signalling and Calcineurin-NFAT activation by stimuli including Dectin-1 ligands (Xu *et al.*, 2009). Evidence that PLCγ plays a major role in DC biology was first reported by Tassi *et al.*, who observed that bone marrow-derived DCs (BMDCs) derived from PLCγ-deficient mice were unable to prime T-cell expression of IL-17 in response to Dectin-1 binding (Tassi *et al.*, 2009). PLCγ also contributes to myeloid cell ontogeny due to activation by the key growth factors M-CSF and G-CSF in lineage progenitor cells (Barbosa *et al.*, 2014).

An important signalling event in NFAT activation is ligand internalization and/or intense clustering of signalling molecules to lipid rafts. This process can be readily observed in response to molecules in particulate form such as β-glucan or zymosan (Goodridge *et al.*, 2007), but has also been shown to occur following a LPS challenge. CD14-mediated internalization of LPS into signalling compartments activates Syk/PLCγ and promotes intracellular calcium flux in monocytes, macrophages and DCs (Zanoni *et al.*, 2011; Vigano *et al.*, 2015). We and others have also reported that signalling through PRRs can induce calcium flux and activate Calcineurin-NFAT signalling upon recognition of complex particulate antigens including whole bacteria and fungal conidia (Fric *et al.*, 2014b). Indeed, while zymosan binding to Dectin-1 alone is sufficient to activate Calcineurin-NFAT signalling, *Aspergillus fumigatus* can also trigger TLR9 and Bruton’s tyrosine kinase (Btk) in addition to Dectin-1, leading to further upregulation of Calcineurin-NFAT activity (Strijbis *et al.*, 2013; Herbst *et al.*, 2015).

also likely to impact on antimicrobial immune responses via additional mechanisms that have yet to be identified. Indeed, previous studies of NFAT-dependent genes have relied mainly on global gene expression analyses in genetically engineered mouse models; hence, there are currently only limited data available on NFAT binding sites in myeloid cells. However, using an alternative chip-on-chip approach, Yu *et al.* performed genome-wide mapping of potential target sites in human DCs to identify that NFAT1 can modulate expression of critical immunomodulatory chemokines and cytokines including IL-2, IL-12p40 and IL-23 (Yu *et al.*, 2015). Similar strategies have also been used to identify cooperation between NFAT4 and transcription factor IRF7 in binding to IFN promoters in plasmacytoid DCs (Bao *et al.*, 2016).

So far there are only limited data available from studies of human tissues and patient samples to support a role for NFAT in myeloid cell responses to major pathogens *in vivo*. However, signalling through TLR4 and NOD1, which impact on the Calcineurin-NFAT pathway, correlate with phagocytic activity in human renal transplant recipients who exhibit increased susceptibility to *E. coli* infection (Tourneur *et al.*, 2013). When combined with extensive data available from experimental models, these findings provide clear evidence that Calcineurin-NFAT signalling in myeloid cells is critically involved in host protection against infection. It is therefore highly likely that drug inhibition of Calcineurin-NFAT signalling in myeloid cells will disrupt numerous mechanisms of innate immune protection in treated human patients.

Calcineurin–NFAT-regulated genes in myeloid cells control fungal infection

The first NFAT-regulated genes to be identified included IL-2 expression induced by triggering of the T-cell receptor (Shaw *et al.*, 1988). An important observation in this context was that stimulation of DCs with microbial compounds can also induce NFAT-dependent production of IL-2 (Granucci *et al.*, 2001, 2003; Zanoni *et al.*, 2009). While both NFAT- and MAPK-dependent effects of calcineurin inhibition on myeloid cell development were also identified, these were not initially linked with altered host susceptibility to infection (Miranda & Johnson, 2007; Fric *et al.*, 2014a). Indeed, Calcineurin-NFAT-driven IL-2 expression can also be triggered by DC phagocytosis of sterile adjuvants including alum, SiO₂ particles and monosodium urate crystals (Khameneh *et al.*, 2017).

A role for calcium-NFAT signalling in innate immunity was initially identified in NK cells (Aramburu *et al.*, 1995), and later reported in macrophages and DCs stimulated through Dectin-1 using either *Candida albicans* or zymosan, which modulated expression of key transcription factors (Egr2, Egr3) and pro-inflammatory mediators including Cox-2, IL-2, IL-10 and IL-12p70 (Goodridge *et al.*, 2007; Xu *et al.*, 2009). These data suggest that a wide range of effects can be mediated by calcium-NFAT signalling, especially via DC-derived IL-2 which has been identified as a key mediator of NK cell activation (Granucci *et al.*, 2004, 2006) and regulatory T-cell (T-reg) maintenance (Guiducci *et al.*, 2005). Indeed, recent work using an intranasal *Aspergillus fumigatus* infection model has demonstrated an important role for DC-derived IL-2 in mucosal immune responses *in vivo* (Zelante *et al.*, 2015). In this report, conditional knockout of IL-2 expression in CD11c⁺ cells was sufficient to disrupt fungus

Calcineurin–NFAT control of bacterial and viral infections

Engagement of the Calcineurin-NFAT pathway has now been detected in myeloid cell responses to bacteria (Zanoni *et al.*, 2009; Minematsu *et al.*, 2011; Ranjan *et al.*, 2014), parasitic infections (Kayama *et al.*, 2009) and viruses (Miskin *et al.*, 1998, 2000). In human DC, exposure to cyclosporine A reduces interferon (IFN)-α responses to Sendai virus (Tajima *et al.*, 2003), while macrophages from NFAT4 knockout mice display reduced iNOS expression and attenuated bactericidal activity in a sepsis model, consistent with the ability of calcineurin inhibitors to block NFAT4 binding to the iNOS promoter (Ranjan *et al.*, 2014). Given that the NFAT family can also cooperate with transcription factors such as NF-κB to modulate gene expression (Bronk *et al.*, 2014), the Calcineurin-NFAT pathway is

Published online: June 12, 2017

Kamila Bendickova et al Insight into recent clinical studies of calcineurin inhibitors

EMBO Molecular Medicine

recognition, inhibit phagocytosis and impair Th17 responses to live conidia. Correlation of NFAT signalling with DC production of the antifungal protein pentraxin-3 has been also reported in a model of intravenous *A. fumigatus* infection (Zelante *et al.*, 2017). Consequently, host deficiency in calcineurin signalling or lack of IL-2 expression in myeloid cells confers a significant increase in *A. fumigatus*-associated mortality in rodents (Zelante *et al.*, 2015).

While IL-2 cytokine clearly has a major role to play in regulating cross talk between innate and adaptive immune cells (Malek & Castro, 2010; Yuan *et al.*, 2015), other NFAT-regulated genes involved in host protection against infection include Cox-2, PGE-2 and various immunomodulatory cytokines (Zanoni *et al.*, 2012). For example, tacrolimus treatment leads to a significant decrease in TNF expression by murine macrophages infected with *A. fumigatus* (Herbst *et al.*, 2015). These data demonstrate that Calcineurin–NFAT signalling not only represents a central component of adaptive immunity but also plays important roles in innate responses. Consequently, the increased risk of bacterial and fungal infections observed in transplant patients treated with calcineurin inhibitors is likely due to defects in innate pathogen recognition in addition to suppression of T-cell responses.

### Myeloid Calcineurin–NFAT function in immunopathology

Myeloid cells accumulate in host tissues and organs in a range of different pathologies including chronic inflammatory disorders, malignancies and autoimmune diseases (Nicholson *et al.*, 2009). PRR signalling in myeloid cells has been the target of rheumatoid arthritis (RA) experimental therapy (Kim *et al.*, 2014). Escolano *et al.* (2014) showed that calcineurin impairment in macrophages drives the development of an anti-inflammatory phenotype, with potential beneficial effects in some pathologies. Critical to many of these disease processes is antigen presentation by monocytes, macrophages and DCs, which stimulate T cells to produce pro-inflammatory cytokines and mediate potent effector functions. While myeloid cell induction of T-cell-mediated immunity is critical for eliminating pathogens from infected tissues, these responses can also damage host tissues if directed against self-antigens or not subsequently resolved. The range of clinical settings in which calcineurin inhibitor drugs might prove efficacious is therefore extremely broad, and the potential side effects likely include elevated risk of a wide variety of infections (Table 1).

Invasive fungal infections are a major cause of morbidity and mortality in immunocompromised patients (Pappas *et al.*, 2010), and both experimental and clinical studies have demonstrated that the Calcineurin–NFAT pathway collaborates with NF-κB to coordinate macrophage TNF responses to *Aspergillus* (Herbst *et al.*, 2015). Similarly, administration of calcineurin inhibitors is associated with defects in neutrophil/macrophage control of fungal germination and hyphal growth that likely increase pathology in transplant recipients (Imbert *et al.*, 2016; Shah *et al.*, 2016). The discovery that defective Calcineurin–NFAT signalling in myeloid cells confers increased susceptibility to *C. albicans* infection in mice (Greenblatt *et al.*, 2010) has also led to the development of new models of infection in immunocompromised hosts that more closely resemble human clinical scenarios. In one such model of pulmonary aspergillosis, disruption of Calcineurin–NFAT signalling impaired fungal killing in alveolar macrophages, leading to sustained inflammatory responses in the lung, enhanced tissue destruction and increased rates of mortality (Herbst *et al.*, 2013, 2015). An alternative model of invasive aspergillosis has also been used to demonstrate that NFAT-dependent expression of IL-2 in DCs is required for optimal Th17 responses in the lung, which decreases inflammatory pathology and reduces risk of mortality following infection (Zelante *et al.*, 2015, 2017). In the peritoneal cavity, calcineurin inhibition during opportunistic *Saccharomyces cerevisiae* infection was reported to impair macrophage expression of CCR2 chemokines, impair neutrophil mobilization and delay pathogen clearance (Busch *et al.*, 2016). The process of phagocytosis itself has also been identified as a driver of NFAT activation in macrophages, which may employ the TLR9-BTK-Calcineurin–NFAT (MyD88-independent) pathway as a mechanism of intracellular pathogen detection (Herbst *et al.*, 2015). There is now substantial evidence that Calcineurin–NFAT signalling in myeloid cells affects the outcome of fungal infections in particular, although only limited data are available on how myeloid cell responses to fungi are altered in human patients receiving immunosuppressive therapy. Indeed, drug effects on non-immune lineages including epithelial cells that also express fungus-sensing PRRs may further modify patient outcomes. Indeed, a recent study demonstrated that upregulation of Dectin-1 in airway epithelial cells enhanced pro-inflammatory responses to *A. fumigatus*, increased neutrophil recruitment to the lungs and improved rates of *Aspergillus* clearance and host survival (Liu *et al.*, 2015). However, it remains unconfirmed whether this Dectin-1-dependent ability of epithelial cells to protect against fungal infection is mediated by NFAT.

### Autoimmune disorders as targets for immunosuppressive therapies

The discovery that drug inhibition of the Calcineurin–NFAT pathway potently suppresses T-cell responses led to a revolution in transplant medicine (Yeh & Markmann, 2013). While clinical usage of calcineurin inhibitors began in the 1980s, additional effects of these drugs on myeloid cell biology were not appreciated until almost 20 years later. Extensive efforts are now being made to better understand the full range of effects induced by calcineurin inhibitors and to identify new therapeutic applications for these drugs in a wide range of disease indications. While there is huge potential to improve therapy options for several major human disorders, these strategies will likely also confer increased infection risk due to disruption of myeloid cell responses to commensal organisms and pathogenic microbes.

In a previous study of calcineurin inhibitor effects on macrophage function in murine colitis, LPS-induced expression of IL-12p40, IL-12p70 and IL-23 was significantly reduced by treatment with tacrolimus or the calcineurin inhibitory peptide 11R-VIVIT (Elloumi *et al.*, 2012). These data suggest that selective blockade of NFAT might be a promising therapeutic strategy in inflammatory bowel diseases. These findings are consistent with an earlier report that inactivation of calcineurin in myeloid cells can induce a form of LPS tolerance that inhibits inflammation (Jennings *et al.*, 2009). Administration of calcineurin inhibitors may therefore also provide effective protection against LPS toxicity in disorders such as sepsis. Indeed, the range of pathologies in which calcineurin inhibition is

| Model Disease                     | Cell type       | Host   | Pathogen          | Study    | Inhibitor Gene KO         | Genes, Phenotype                                                                 | References               |
|-----------------------------------|-----------------|--------|-------------------|----------|--------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------|
| FUNGI                             |                 |        |                   |          |                          |                                                                                  |                          |
| Invasive fungal infection         | BMDM            | Ms     | C. albicans      | In vitro | CsA VIVIT                | Egr 2, Egr 3, Cox-2, IL-2, IL-10, IL-12p70                                           | Goodridge et al (2007)   |
|                                   | BMDC            |        |                   |          |                          |                                                                                  |                          |
|                                   | Neut MF         | Ms     | C. albicans      | In vivo  | CsA CnB                  | Mortality                                                                        | Greenblatt et al (2010)  |
|                                   |                 |        |                   | In vitro | NFAT 2                   |                                                                                  |                          |
|                                   |                 |        |                   |          | NFAT 4                   |                                                                                  |                          |
|                                   | Al.MF           | Ms     | A. fumigatus      | In vivo  | FK506                    | Hyperinflammation, Mortality                                                     | Herbst et al (2013)      |
|                                   | DC              | Ms     | A. fumigatus      | In vivo  | CsA FK 506               | Mortality, IL-2, Th 17 regulation                                                | Zelante et al (2015)     |
|                                   |                 |        |                   | In vitro | CnB                      |                                                                                  |                          |
|                                   | Neut MF         | Ms Hu  | A. fumigatus      | In vivo  | FK506                    | Mortality                                                                        | Herbst et al (2015)      |
|                                   |                 | Zf     |                   | In vitro |                          |                                                                                  |                          |
|                                   | DC Neut MF      | Ms     | A. fumigatus      | In vivo  | CnB                      | Mortality, Ptx-3                                                                 | Zelante et al (2017)     |
|                                   |                 |        |                   | In vitro |                          |                                                                                  |                          |
|                                   | Neut            | Hu     | A. fumigatus      | Ex vivo  | CsA FK 506               | A.f. growth control                                                             | Imbert et al (2016)      |
|                                   |                 |        |                   | In vitro |                          |                                                                                  |                          |
|                                   | MF              | Hu     | A. fumigatus      | In vivo  | FK506                    | Inflammatory response, A.f. growth control                                       | Shah et al (2016)        |
|                                   |                 | Zf     |                   | In vitro |                          |                                                                                  |                          |
| YEAST                             |                 |        |                   |          |                          |                                                                                  |                          |
| Opportunistic infection           | MF              | Ms     | S. cerevisiae     | In vivo, | CsA FK 506               | CCR 2 chemokines, clearance of infection                                          | Busch et al (2016)       |
|                                   |                 |        |                   | In vitro |                          |                                                                                  |                          |
| BACTERIA/PAMPs                    |                 |        |                   |          |                          |                                                                                  |                          |
| Sepsis                            | MF              | Ms     | LPS               | In vivo  | CsA, VIVIT               | iNOS, Bactericidal activity                                                      | Ranjan et al (2014)      |
|                                   |                 |        |                   | In vitro |                          |                                                                                  |                          |
| Colitis IBD                       | MF              | Ms     | LPS               | In vivo  | FK506VIVIT               | IL-12p40, IL-12p70, IL-23                                                        | Elloumi et al (2012)     |
|                                   |                 |        |                   | In vitro |                          |                                                                                  |                          |
| Acute pyelonephritis              | Neut DC         | Ms Hu  | E.coli            | In vivo  | CsA VIVIT                | Chemokines, Susceptibility                                                       | Tourneur et al (2013)    |
|                                   | MF              |        |                   | In vitro |                          |                                                                                  |                          |
| Bacterial infection               | Mo              | Ms     | LPS               | In vivo  | FK506CnB                 | LPS tolerance                                                                   | Jennings et al (2009)    |
|                                   | MF              |        |                   | In vitro |                          |                                                                                  | Kang et al (2007)        |
|                                   | DC              |        |                   |          |                          |                                                                                  |                          |
| PARASITES                         |                 |        |                   |          |                          |                                                                                  |                          |
| Chagas disease                    | BMDC            | Ms     | T. cruzi          | In vivo  | FK506NFAT 2              | TLR-independent, calcium-dependent, IFN-g production                                | Kayama et al (2009)      |
|                                   | RAW             |        |                   | In vitro |                          |                                                                                  |                          |
|                                   | 264             |        |                   |          |                          |                                                                                  |                          |
| VIRUSES                           |                 |        |                   |          |                          |                                                                                  |                          |
| African swine fever               | MF              | Pig    | African swine     | In vitro | CnA deletion             | Virus protein inhibits CnB activity                                              | Miskin et al (2000)      |
|                                   |                 |        | fever virus       |          |                          |                                                                                  | Miskin et al (1998)      |
| Sendai virus                      | DC              | Hu     | Sendai virus      | In vitro | CsA                      | IFN-α                                                                            | Tajima et al (2003)      |
| STERILE PARTICLES                 |                 |        |                   |          |                          |                                                                                  |                          |
| Vaccination                       | DC              | Ms     | Alum adjuvants    | In vivo  | CsA FK 506               | IL-2, CD 4 proliferation, Humoral response                                         | Khameneh et al (2017)    |
|                                   |                 |        |                   | In vitro |                          |                                                                                  |                          |

Species abbreviations: mouse (Ms), human (Hu), Candida (C.), Trypanosoma (T.). Cell types: bone marrow-derived macrophages (BMDMs), bone marrow-derived dendritic cells (BMDCs), neutrophils (Neut), alveolar macrophages (Al.MF), monocytes (Mo), cyclosporine A (CsA), tacrolimus (FK506), calcineurin (Cn).

Published online: June 12, 2017  
Kamila Bendickova et al Insight into recent clinical studies of calcineurin inhibitors  
EMBO Molecular Medicine  

**A**

| Number of clinical trials |
|--------------------------|
| 600                      |
|                          |
| Cyclosporine A           |
| Tacrolimus               |
|                          |
| 400                      |
|                          |
| 200                      |
|                          |
| 0                        |
| 2008-2010                |
| 2011-2013                |
| 2014-2016                |
| Years                    |

**B**

CYCLOSPORINE A  
Sjogren's syndrome  
membranous nephropathy  
Severe aplastic anaemia  
Rheumatoid arthritis  
Lupus nephritis  
TACROLIMUS  

**Figure 2. Clinical testing of calcineurin inhibitors cyclosporine A and tacrolimus in autoimmune disorders.**  
(A) Increasing number of clinical studies testing “off-label” calcineurin inhibitor use for the treatment of autoimmune disorders. Histograms show studies of tacrolimus and cyclosporine A as well as the year each study was completed or last updated (clinicaltrials.gov). (B) Graphical overview of the major autoimmune disorders targeted using calcineurin inhibitors.

condition known as Sjogren’s syndrome is reportedly associated with abnormal activation of Th17 cells and has also been shown to respond well to combination therapy including cyclosporine A. Together, these data demonstrate that cyclosporine and tacrolimus can provide therapeutic benefit in human rheumatoid disorders and potentially other diseases in which myeloid cell function has been implicated.

Numerous *in vitro* studies and investigations in animal models have indicated that calcineurin inhibition can potently inhibit inflammatory cytokine expression without inducing severe side effects. While the range of potential drug effects on host susceptibility to infection appears extensive, additional effects of calcineurin inhibitors on myeloid cell activity in autoimmune disease are also likely to be identified in future. Indeed, the potent immunosuppressive properties of myeloid cells have already been confirmed in studies of tolerogenic DCs in RA (Hilkens et al., 2010; Hilkens &

**Table 2. Overview of clinical studies using calcineurin inhibitors to treat autoimmune disorders.**

| Pathology              | Inhibitor | Monotherapy          | In combination         |
|------------------------|-----------|----------------------|------------------------|
| Rheumatoid arthritis   | FK506     | NCT 02837978         | Methotrexate—          |
|                        |           | NCT 01511003         | NCT 02837978           |
|                        |           |                      | Methotrexate—          |
|                        |           |                      | NCT 01746680           |
|                        |           |                      | Sarilumab—             |
|                        |           |                      | NCT 02373202           |
|                        |           |                      | Biologens—             |
|                        |           |                      | NCT 01870908           |
| Membranous nephropathy | FK506     | Rituximab            | NCT 00843856           |
|                        |           |                      | Mycophenolate—         |
|                        |           |                      | NCT 01955187           |
|                        | CsA       | NCT 01282073         | Rituximab              |
|                        |           | NCT 01180036         | NCT 00977977           |
| Lupus nephritis        | FK506     | NCT 01410747         |                        |
|                        |           | NCT 01316133         |                        |
|                        |           | NCT 02457221         |                        |
|                        |           | NCT 01580865         |                        |
|                        |           | NCT 02630628         |                        |
| Severe aplastic anaemia| CsA       | Eltrombopag + hATG   | NCT 01623167           |
|                        |           | hATG or rAGT         | NCT 00260689           |
|                        |           | Alemtuzumab—         | NCT 000195624          |
| Sjogren’s syndrome     | CsA       | NCT 02004067         |                        |
|                        |           | NCT 02370550         |                        |

Isaacs, 2013) and via development of novel tissue-specific DC-based immunotherapies (Mbongue *et al.*, 2014). Further investigations will therefore be required to better understand the role of Calcineurin-NFAT signalling in control of myeloid cell function in human patients, to target this pathway more effectively in future and achieve greater therapeutic benefit for patients with a range of increasingly common pathologies.

**Concluding remarks**

In the current review, we have summarized recent advances in understanding the role played by calcineurin/NFAT-regulated genes in the control of myeloid leucocyte responses to infection. Due to decades of clinical use in transplant settings, there is little concern

**Pending issues**
- How far are drug effects on myeloid cells responsible for the increased infection risk observed in patients treated with calcineurin inhibitors?
- How can new knowledge of the roles played by Calcineurin-NFAT signalling be effectively translated into novel therapeutic strategies?
- How do calcineurin inhibitors impact on development and maintenance of different myeloid cells populations in immunosuppressed patients?

© 2017 The Authors  
EMBO Molecular Medicine 7

regarding the safety of calcineurin inhibitor drug use in human patients. While most of the clinical studies discussed in this review carefully assessed infection risk associated with immunosuppressive therapies, the contribution of myeloid cell dysfunction in treated patients has been largely overlooked. To our knowledge, no previous study has reported a link between immunosuppressive therapy and dysregulation of myeloid immunity. However, data from infection models and studies in genetically engineered animals clearly indicate a major role for Calcineurin-NFAT signalling in myeloid cell protection against pathogens.

### Acknowledgements

We wish to thank Dr. Neil McCarthy of Insight Editing London for critical review of the manuscript. Authors are supported by European Social Fund and European Regional Development Fund—Project MAGNET (No. CZ.02.1.01/0.0/0.0/15_003/0000492).

### Conflict of interest

The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.

### References

- Alfaadhèl T, Cattran D (2015) Management of membranous nephropathy in western countries. *Kidney Dis* 1: 126–137
- Aramburu J, Azzoni L, Rao A, Perussia B (1995) Activation and expression of the nuclear factors of activated T cells, NFATp and NFATc, in human natural killer cells: regulation upon CD16 ligand binding. *J Exp Med* 182: 801–810
- Bao M, Wang Y, Liu Y, Shi P, Lu H, Sha W, Weng L, Hanabuchi S, Qin J, Plumas J et al (2016) NFATC3 promotes IRF7 transcriptional activity in plasmacytoid dendritic cells. *J Exp Med* 213: 2383–2398
- Barbosa CM, Bincoletto C, Barros CC, Ferreira AT, Paredes-Gamero EJ (2014) PLCgamma2 and PKC are important to myeloid lineage commitment triggered by M-SCF and G-CSF. *J Cell Biochem* 115: 42–51
- Bhattacharjee A, Majumder S, Das S, Ghosh S, Biswas S, Majumdar S (2016) Leishmania donovani-induced prostaglandin E2 generation is critically dependent on host toll-like receptor 2-cytosolic phospholipase A2 signaling. *Infect Immun* 84: 2963–2973
- Bronk CC, Yoder S, Hopewell EL, Yang S, Celis E, Yu XZ, Beg AA (2014) NF-kappaB is crucial in proximal T-cell signaling for calcium influx and NFAT activation. *Eur J Immunol* 44: 3741–3746
- Busch R, Murti K, Liu J, Patra AK, Muhammad K, Knobeloch KP, Lichtinger M, Bonifer C, Wortge S, Waismann A et al (2016) NFATc1 releases BCL6-dependent repression of CCR2 agonist expression in peritoneal macrophages from Saccharomyces cerevisiae infected mice. *Eur J Immunol* 46: 634–646
- Chiang CY, Veckman V, Limmer K, David M (2012) Phospholipase Cgamma-2 and intracellular calcium are required for lipopolysaccharide-induced Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4) endocytosis and interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) activation. *J Biol Chem* 287: 3704–3709
- Crabtree GR (1989) Contingent genetic regulatory events in T lymphocyte activation. *Science* 243: 355–361
- Elloumi HZ, Maharshak N, Rao KN, Kobayashi T, Ryu HS, Muhlbauer M, Li F, Jobin C, Plevy SE (2012) A cell permeable peptide inhibitor of NFAT inhibits macrophage cytokine expression and ameliorates experimental colitis. *PLoS ONE* 7: e34172

Escolano A, Martinez-Martinez S, Alfranca A, Urso K, Izquierdo HM, Delgado M, Martin F, Sabio G, Sancho D, Gomez-del Arco P et al (2014) Specific calcineurin targeting in macrophages confers resistance to inflammation via MKP-1 and p38. *EMBO J* 33: 1117–1133
Fric J, Zelante T, Wong AY, Mertes A, Yu HB, Ricciardi-Castagnoli P (2012) NFAT control of innate immunity. *Blood* 120: 1380–1389
Fric J, Lim CX, Mertes A, Lee BT, Vigano E, Chen J, Zolezzi F, Poidinger M, Larbi A, Strobl H et al (2014a) Calcium and calcineurin-NFAT signaling regulate granulocyte-monocyte progenitor cell cycle via Flt3-L. *Stem Cells* 32: 3232–3244
Fric J, Zelante T, Ricciardi-Castagnoli P (2014b) Phagocytosis of particulate antigens – all roads lead to calcineurin/NFAT signaling pathway. *Front Immunol* 4: 513
Goodridge HS, Simmons RM, Underhill DM (2007) Dectin-1 stimulation by Candida albicans yeast or zymosan triggers NFAT activation in macrophages and dendritic cells. *J Immunol* 178: 3107–3115
Goodridge HS, Reyes CN, Becker CA, Katsumoto TR, Ma J, Wolf AJ, Bose N, Chan AS, Magee AS, Danielson ME et al (2011) Activation of the innate immune receptor Dectin-1 upon formation of a “phagocytic synapse”. *Nature* 472: 471–475
Granucci F, Vizzardelli C, Pavelka N, Feau S, Persico M, Virzi E, Rescigno M, Moro G, Ricciardi-Castagnoli P (2001) Inducible IL-2 production by dendritic cells revealed by global gene expression analysis. *Nat Immunol* 2: 882–888
Granucci F, Feau S, Angeli V, Trottein F, Ricciardi-Castagnoli P (2003) Early IL-2 production by mouse dendritic cells is the result of microbial-induced priming. *J Immunol* 170: 5075–5081
Granucci F, Zanoni I, Pavelka N, Van Dommelen SL, Andoniou CE, Belardelli F, Degli Espositi MA, Ricciardi-Castagnoli P (2004) A contribution of mouse dendritic cell-derived IL-2 for NK cell activation. *J Exp Med* 200: 287–295
Granucci F, Zanoni I, Ricciardi-Castagnoli P (2006) Natural killer (NK) cell functions can be strongly boosted by activated dendritic cells (DC). *Eur J Immunol* 36: 2819–2820
Greenblatt MB, Aliprantis A, Hu B, Glimcher LH (2010) Calcineurin regulates innate antifungal immunity in neutrophils. *J Exp Med* 207: 923–931
Guiducci C, Valzasina B, Dislich H, Colombo MP (2005) CD40/CD40L interaction regulates CD4⁺ CD25⁺ T reg homeostasis through dendritic cell-produced IL-2. *Eur J Immunol* 35: 557–567
Herbst S, Shah A, Carby M, Chusney G, Kikkeri N, Dorling A, Bignell E, Shaunak S, Armstrong-James D (2013) A new and clinically relevant murine model of solid-organ transplant aspergillosis. *Dis Model Mech* 6: 643–651
Herbst S, Shah A, Mazon Moya M, Marzola V, Jensen B, Reed A, Birrell MA, Saijo S, Mostowy S, Shaunak S et al (2015) Phagocytosis-dependent activation of a TLR9-BTK-calcineurin-NFAT pathway co-ordinates innate immunity to *Aspergillus fumigatus*. *EMBO Mol Med* 7: 240–258
Hilkens CM, Isaacs JD, Thomson AW (2010) Development of dendritic cell-based immunotherapy for autoimmunity. *Int Rev Immunol* 29: 156–183
Hilkens CM, Isaacs JD (2013) Tolerogenic dendritic cell therapy for rheumatoid arthritis: where are we now? *Clin Exp Immunol* 172: 148–157
Hirai T, Ikeda K, Fujishiro M, Tsushima H, Hayakawa K, Suzuki S, Yamaguchi A, Nozawa K, Morimoto S, Takasaki Y et al (2017) The effectiveness of new triple combination therapy using synthetic disease-modifying anti-rheumatic drugs with different pharmacological function against rheumatoid arthritis: the verification by an in vitro and clinical study. *Clin Rheumatol* 36: 51–58

Published online: June 12, 2017

Kamila Bendickova et al Insight into recent clinical studies of calcineurin inhibitors EMBO Molecular Medicine

Imbert S, Bresler P, Boissonnas A, Gauthier L, Souchet L, Uzunov M, Leblond V, Mazier D, Nguyen S, Fekkar A (2016) Calcineurin inhibitors impair neutrophil activity against *Aspergillus fumigatus* in allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplant recipients. *J Allergy Clin Immunol* 138: 860–868

Jennings C, Kusler B, Jones PP (2009) Calcineurin inactivation leads to decreased responsiveness to LPS in macrophages and dendritic cells and protects against LPS-induced toxicity *in vivo*. *Innate immunity* 15: 109–120

Jin M, Yu B, Zhang W, Zhang W, Xiao Z, Mao Z, Lai Y, Lin D, Ma Q, Pan E *et al* (2016) Toll-like receptor 2-mediated MAPKs and NF-kappaB activation requires the GNAO1-dependent pathway in human mast cells. *Integr Biol* 8: 968–975

Kagan JC, Su T, Horng T, Chow A, Akira S, Medzhitov R (2008) TRAM couples endocytosis of Toll-like receptor 4 to the induction of interferon-beta. *Nat Immunol* 9: 361–368

Kagan JC (2012) Signaling organelles of the innate immune system. *Cell* 151: 1168–1178

Kang YJ, Kusler B, Otsuka M, Hughes M, Suzuki N, Suzuki S, Yeh WC, Akira S, Han J, Jones PP (2007) Calcineurin negatively regulates TLR-mediated activation pathways. *J Immunol* 179: 4598–4607

Kayama H, Koga R, Atarashi K, Okuyama M, Kimura T, Mak TW, Uematsu S, Akira S, Takayanagi H, Honda K *et al* (2009) NFATc1 mediates Toll-like receptor-independent innate immune responses during *Trypanosoma cruzi* infection. *PLoS Pathog* 5: e1000514

Khameneh HJ, Ho AW, Spreafico R, Derks H, Quek HQ, Mortellaro A (2017) The Syk-NFAT-IL-2 pathway in dendritic cells is required for optimal sterile immunity elicited by alum adjuvants. *J Immunol* 198: 196–204

Kim SJ, Chen Z, Chamberlain ND, Essani AB, Volin MV, Amin MA, Volkov S, Gravallese EM, Arami S, Swedler W *et al* (2014) Ligation of TLR5 promotes myeloid cell infiltration and differentiation into mature osteoclasts in rheumatoid arthritis and experimental arthritis. *J Immunol* 193: 3902–3913

Klein M, Klein-Hessling S, Palmetshofer A, Serfling E, Tertilt C, Bopp T, Heib V, Becker M, Taube C, Schild H *et al* (2006) Specific and redundant roles for NFAT transcription factors in the expression of mast cell-derived cytokines. *J Immunol* 177: 6667–6674

Kraaij T, Bredewold OW, Trompet S, Huizinga TW, Rabelink TJ, de Craen AJ, Teng YK (2016) TAC-TIC use of tacrolimus-based regimens in lupus nephritis. *Lupus Sci Med* 3: e000169

Liu ZC, Wang M, Sun WK, Xia D, Tan MM, Ding Y, Qian Q, Su X, Shi Y (2015) Up-regulation of Dectin-1 in airway epithelial cells promotes mouse defense against invasive pulmonary aspergillosis. *Int J Clin Exp Med* 8: 17489–17497

Ma B, Yu J, Xie C, Sun L, Lin S, Ding J, Luo J, Cai H (2015) Toll-like receptors promote mitochondrial translocation of nuclear transcription factor nuclear factor of activated T-cells in prolonged microglial activation. *J Neurosci* 35: 10799–10814

Macian F (2005) NFAT proteins: key regulators of T-cell development and function. *Nat Rev Immunol* 5: 472–484

Malek TR, Castro I (2010) Interleukin-2 receptor signaling: at the interface between tolerance and immunity. *Immunity* 33: 153–165

Matsuda S, Moriguchi T, Koyasu S, Nishida E (1998) T lymphocyte activation signals for interleukin-2 production involve activation of MKK6-p38 and MKK7-SAPK/JNK signaling pathways sensitive to cyclosporin A. *J Biol Chem* 273: 12378–12382

Mbongue J, Nicholas D, Firek A, Langridge W (2014) The role of dendritic cells in tissue-specific autoimmunity. *J Immunol Res* 2014: 857143

Metcalfe S, Alexander D, Turner J (1994) FK506 and cyclosporin A each inhibit antigen-specific signaling in the T cell line 171 in the absence of a calcium signal. *Cell Immunol* 158: 46–58

Minematsu H, Shin MJ, Celil Aydemir AB, Kim KO, Nizami SA, Chung GJ, Lee FY (2011) Nuclear presence of nuclear factor of activated T cells (NFAT) c3 and c4 is required for Toll-like receptor-activated innate inflammatory response of monocytes/macrophages. *Cell Signal* 23: 1785–1793

Miranda MB, Johnson DE (2007) Signal transduction pathways that contribute to myeloid differentiation. *Leukemia* 21: 1363–1377

Miskin JE, Abrams CC, Goatley LC, Dixon LK (1998) A viral mechanism for inhibition of the cellular phosphatase calcineurin. *Science* 281: 562–565

Miskin JE, Abrams CC, Dixon LK (2000) African swine fever virus protein A238L interacts with the cellular phosphatase calcineurin via a binding domain similar to that of NFAT. *J Virol* 74: 9412–9420

Misra DP, Parida JR, Chowdhury AC, Agarwal V (2014) Pulmonary co-infection with *Nocardia* and *Aspergillus* in a patient with adult-onset Still’s disease receiving steroids and tacrolimus. *BMJ Case Rep* 2014 doi:10.1136/bcr-2014-207335

Monticelli S, Solymar DC, Rao A (2004) Role of NFAT proteins in IL13 gene transcription in mast cells. *J Biol Chem* 279: 36210–36218

Mourao-Sa D, Robinson MJ, Zelenay S, Sancho D, Chakravarty P, Larsen R, Plantinga M, Van Rooijen N, Soares MP, Lambrecht B *et al* (2011) CLEC-2 signaling via Syk in myeloid cells can regulate inflammatory responses. *Eur J Immunol* 41: 3040–3053

Muller MR, Sasaki Y, Stevanovic I, Lamperti ED, Ghosh S, Sharma S, Gelinas C, Rossi DJ, Pipkin ME, Rajewsky K *et al* (2009) Requirement for balanced Ca/NFAT signaling in hematopoietic and embryonic development. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA* 106: 7034–7039

Muller MR, Rao A (2010) NFAT, immunity and cancer: a transcription factor comes of age. *Nat Rev Immunol* 10: 645–656

Naniwa T, Iwagaitu S, Kajiura M (2017) Efficacy of add-on tacrolimus on methotrexate to maintain clinical remission after rediscontinuation of a tumor necrosis factor inhibitor in rheumatoid arthritis patients who relapsed shortly after discontinuation of the same tumor necrosis factor inhibitor due to clinical remission. *Mod Rheumatol* 27: 29–34

Nicholson LB, Raveney BJ, Munder M (2009) Monocyte dependent regulation of autoimmune inflammation. *Curr Mol Med* 9: 23–29

Pappas PG, Alexander BD, Andes DR, Hadley S, Kauffman CA, Freifeld A, Anaissie EJ, Brumble LM, Herwaldt L, Ito J *et al* (2010) Invasive fungal infections among organ transplant recipients: results of the Transplant-Associated Infection Surveillance Network (TRANSNET). *Clin Infect Dis* 50: 1101–1111

Ranjan R, Deng J, Chung S, Lee YG, Park GY, Xiao L, Joo M, Christman JW, Karpurapu M (2014) The transcription factor nuclear factor of activated T cells c3 modulates the function of macrophages in sepsis. *J Innate Immun* 6: 754–764

Schiff M, Beaulieu A, Scott DL, Rashford M (2010) Mycophenolate mofetil in the treatment of adults with advanced rheumatoid arthritis: three 24-week, randomized, double-blind, placebo- or cyclosporin-controlled trials. *Clin Drug Invest* 30: 613–624

Severin S, Pollitt AY, Navarro-Nunez L, Nash CA, Mourao-Sa D, Eble JA, Senis YA, Watson SP (2011) Syk-dependent phosphorylation of CLEC-2: a novel mechanism of hem-immunoreceptor tyrosine-based activation motif signaling. *J Biol Chem* 286: 4107–4116

Shah A, Kannambath S, Herbst S, Rogers A, Soresi S, Carby M, Reed A, Mostowy S, Fisher MC, Shaunak S *et al* (2016) Calcineurin orchestrates lateral transfer of *Aspergillus fumigatus* during macrophage cell death. *Am J Respir Crit Care Med* 194: 1127–1139

Published online: June 12, 2017

**EMBO Molecular Medicine**

Insight into recent clinical studies of calcineurin inhibitors Kamila Bendickova et al

Shaw JP, Utz PJ, Durand DB, Toole JJ, Emmel EA, Crabtree GR (1988) Identification of a putative regulator of early T cell activation genes. Science 241: 202–205

Strijbis K, Tafesse FG, Fairn GD, Witte MD, Dougan SK, Watson N, Spooner E, Esteban A, Vyas VK, Fink GR *et al* (2013) Bruton’s Tyrosine Kinase (BTK) and Vav1 contribute to Dectin1-dependent phagocytosis of Candida albicans in macrophages. PLoS Pathog 9: e1003446

Su B, Jacinto E, Hibi M, Kallunki T, Karin M, Ben-Neriah Y (1994) JNK is involved in signal integration during costimulation of T lymphocytes. Cell 77: 727–736

Tajima K, Amakawa R, Ito T, Miyaji M, Takebayashi M, Fukuhara S (2003) Immunomodulatory effects of cyclosporin A on human peripheral blood dendritic cell subsets. Immunology 108: 321–328

Takahashi N, Fujibayashi T, Kida D, Hirano Y, Kato T, Kato D, Saito K, Kaneko A, Yabe Y, Takagi H *et al* (2015) Concomitant methotrexate and tacrolimus augment the clinical response to abatacept in patients with rheumatoid arthritis with a prior history of biological DMARD use. Rheumatol Int 35: 1707–1716

Tassi I, Cella M, Castro I, Gilfillan S, Khan WN, Colonna M (2009) Requirement of phospholipase C-gamma2 (PLCgamma2) for Dectin-1-induced antigen presentation and induction of TH1/TH17 polarization. Eur J Immunol 39: 1369–1378

Tourneur E, Ben Mkaddem S, Chassin C, Bens M, Goujon JM, Charles N, Pellefigues C, Aloulou M, Hertig A, Monteiro RC *et al* (2013) Cyclosporine A impairs nucleotide binding oligomerization domain (Nod1)-mediated innate antibacterial renal defenses in mice and human transplant recipients. PLoS Pathog 9: e1003152

Ulleras E, Karlberg M, Moller Westerberg C, Alfredsson J, Gerondakis S, Strasser A, Nilsson G (2008) NFAT but not NF-kappaB is critical for transcriptional induction of the prosurvival gene A1 after IgE receptor activation in mast cells. Blood 111: 3081–3089

Vandewalle A, Tourneur E, Bens M, Chassin C, Werts C (2014) Calcineurin/NFAT signaling and innate host defence: a role for NOD1-mediated phagocytic functions. Cell Commun Signal 12: 8

Vigano E, Diamond CE, Spreafico R, Balachander A, Sobota RM, Mortellaro A (2015) Human caspase-4 and caspase-5 regulate the one-step non-canonical inflammasome activation in monocytes. Nat Commun 6: 8761

Walczak-Drzewiecka A, Ratajewski M, Wagner W, Dastych J (2008) HIF-1alpha is up-regulated in activated mast cells by a process that involves calcineurin and NFAT. J Immunol 181: 1665–1672

Xu S, Huo J, Lee KG, Kurosaki T, Lam KP (2009) Phospholipase Cgamma2 is critical for Dectin-1-mediated Ca²⁺ flux and cytokine production in dendritic cells. J Biol Chem 284: 7038–7046

Yamaguchi M, Ando M, Yamamoto R, Akiyama S, Kato S, Katsuno T, Kosugi T, Sato W, Tsuboi N, Yasuda Y *et al* (2014) Patient age and the prognosis of idiopathic membranous nephropathy. PLoS ONE 9: e110376

Yamasaki S, Ishikawa E, Sakuma M, Hara H, Ogata K, Saito T (2008) Mincle is an ITAM-coupled activating receptor that senses damaged cells. Nat Immunol 9: 1179–1188

Yeh H, Markmann JF (2013) Transplantation: are calcineurin inhibitors safer than mTOR inhibitors? Nat Rev Nephrol 9: 11–13

Yu HB, Yurieva M, Balachander A, Foo I, Leong X, Zelante T, Zolezzi F, Poidinger M, Ricciardi-Castagnoli P (2015) NFATc2 mediates epigenetic modification of dendritic cell cytokine and chemokine responses to dectin-1 stimulation. Nucleic Acids Res 43: 836–847

Yuan X, Dee MJ, Altman NH, Malek TR (2015) IL-2Rbeta-dependent signaling and CD103 functionally cooperate to maintain tolerance in the gut mucosa. J Immunol 194: 1334–1346

Zaidi AK, Thangam ER, Ali H (2006) Distinct roles of Ca²⁺ mobilization and G protein usage on regulation of Toll-like receptor function in human and murine mast cells. Immunology 119: 412–420

Zanoni I, Ostuni R, Capuano G, Collini M, Caccia M, Ronchi AE, Rocchetti M, Mingozzi F, Foti M, Chirico G *et al* (2009) CD14 regulates the dendritic cell life cycle after LPS exposure through NFAT activation. Nature 460: 264–268

Zanoni I, Ostuni R, Marek LR, Barresi S, Barbalat R, Barton GM, Granucci F, Kagan JC (2011) CD14 controls the LPS-induced endocytosis of Toll-like receptor 4. Cell 147: 868–880

Zanoni I, Ostuni R, Barresi S, Di Gioia M, Broggi A, Costa B, Marzi R, Granucci F (2012) CD14 and NFAT mediate lipopolysaccharide-induced skin edema formation in mice. J Clin Invest 122: 1747–1757

Zelante T, Wong AY, Ping TJ, Chen J, Sumatoh HR, Vigano E, Hong Bing Y, Lee B, Zolezzi F, Fric J *et al* (2015) CD103(+) dendritic cells control Th17 cell function in the lung. Cell Rep 12: 1789–1801

Zelante T, Wong AY, Mencarelli A, Foo S, Zolezzi F, Lee B, Poidinger M, Ricciardi-Castagnoli P, Fric J (2017) Impaired calcineurin signaling in myeloid cells results in downregulation of pentraxin-3 and increased susceptibility to aspergillosis. Mucosal Immunol 10: 470–480

Zhang C, Zhang J, Yang B, Wu C (2008) Cyclosporin A inhibits the production of IL-17 by memory Th17 cells from healthy individuals and patients with rheumatoid arthritis. Cytokine 42: 345–352

License: This is an open access article under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License, which permits use, distribution and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
