
JB Accepted Manuscript Posted Online 10 July 2017  
J. Bacteriol. doi:10.1128/JB.00154-17  
Copyright © 2017 American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

Progress in our understanding of Wzx flippase for translocation of bacterial membrane lipid-linked oligosaccharide  

Yaoqin Hong${}^{1,2}$, Michael A. Liu${}^{2}$ and Peter R. Reeves${}^{2,*}$  

${}^{1}$ Department of Microbiology, School of Molecular and Cellular Biology, University of Illinois, Urbana, Illinois 61801, USA  

${}^{2}$ School of Life and Environmental Sciences, University of Sydney, Camperdown, NSW 2006, Australia  

* Correspondence to Peter Reeves (peter.reeves@sydney.edu.au)

Abstract
Translocation of lipid-linked oligosaccharides is a common theme across prokaryotes and eukaryotes. For bacteria, such activity is used in cell wall construction, polysaccharide synthesis and the relatively recently discovered protein glycosylation. To the best of our knowledge, the Gram-negative inner-membrane flippase Wzx was the first protein identified as being involved in oligosaccharide translocation, and yet we still have only a limited understanding of this protein after three decades of research. At present, Wzx is known to be a multi-transmembrane protein with enormous sequence diversity that flips oligosaccharide substrates with varying degrees of preference. In this review, we provide an overview of the major findings for this protein, with a particular focus on substrate preference.

Introduction
Gram-negative bacteria produce a variety of glycoconjugates as part of their cell-surface architecture. Notable examples include capsules, enterobacterial common antigen (ECA), colanic acid, exopolysaccharides (EPS), and lipopolysaccharide (LPS). These can have important roles in survival, cell attachment, colonization and ability to establish infection.

The glycan components of most glycoconjugates are polysaccharides synthesized by either the Wzx/Wzy pathway or the ABC transporter pathway (1, 2). The ABC transporter pathway requires the Wzm and Wzt proteins for glycan translocation, and is typically associated with the biosynthesis of homopolymeric cell-surface polysaccharides (3), although there are many heteropolymeric polysaccharides with relatively simple structures, known to be synthesized by the ATP-binding cassette (ABC) transporter system (4). However, the vast majority of cell-surface polysaccharides with a complex structure are produced by the Wzx/Wzy pathway. For example, the O-antigen components of nearly all Escherichia coli and Salmonella enterica LPS molecules are made this way (5, 6).

The Wzx/Wzy pathway
Bacterial surface polysaccharide synthesis always involves the membrane-embedded lipid carrier, undecaprenyl phosphate (Und-P), which comprises a long-chain C55 polyisoprene lipid with the phosphate head presumably exposed on the cytoplasmic surface of the inner membrane (IM). It is worth noting that the saccharide component of peptidoglycan is also dependent on this lipid for synthesis (7). In the Wzx/Wzy pathway (Figure 1), an oligosaccharide repeat unit (RU) is assembled on the cytoplasmic face of the inner membrane (IM), starting with an initial transferase (IT) adding a sugar phosphate group onto Und-P to form a pyrophosphate linkage (Und-PP) (8). This is followed by sequential addition of the remaining sugars to produce a full-length oligosaccharide, normally between 3 and 8 sugars. These membrane-anchored oligosaccharides are then flipped across the IM to the periplasmic face by the Wzx flippase, where they are polymerized by Wzy into polysaccharides with variable numbers of RUs, often referred to as O units in the case of O antigens. A Wzz chain length regulator normally interacts with Wzy in a yet to be understood manner to confer a distinctive modal chain-length distribution (9-13). The resultant polysaccharides are then removed from the Und-P moiety, and in the case of O antigens, attached to lipid A-core by the ligase WaaL to give mature LPS.

Discovery of Wzx flippase for polysaccharide translocation
In 1972, Osborn and colleagues (14) demonstrated that O-unit assembly took place on the cytoplasmic face of the IM, and that the subsequent polymerization and ligation steps occurred on the periplasmic face, implying that a translocation step must exist for O-antigen synthesis, in which the Und-PP-linked

O units are flipped across the inner membrane. The translocation of Und-PP-linked RUs is therefore a critical step in the Wzx/Wzy pathway, allowing the translocation of substrates so that the subsequent polymerization/ligation steps can proceed. However, it was not until 1996 that Liu, et al. (15) proposed that Wzx was the flippase responsible for O-unit translocation. Experimental support for this proposal was obtained by Rick, et al. (16), who developed an *in vitro* assay using the ECA Wzx and Nerol-P, a two isoprene-unit “amphipathic” form of the 11 isoprene-unit “hydrophobic” Und-P moiety. ${}^{3}$H-labeled N-acetylglucosamine phosphate (GlcNAc-P), the first sugar of the *E. coli* ECA trisaccharide RU, was added to Nerol-P to produce Nerol-PP-linked ${}^{3}$H-GlcNAc. The data showed that ECA Wzx was required for movement of Nerol-PP-linked ${}^{3}$H-GlcNAc into and out of everted membrane vesicles, which was proposed to occur by translocation while the Nerol-PP-linked ${}^{3}$H-GlcNAc was in the membrane.

However, it is important to note that while the natural Und-PP-linked GlcNAc is IM-associated, most of the amphipathic Nerol-PP-linked derivative would have been associated with the much larger aqueous phase, thus affecting the level of substrate available to the Wzx flippase at any given time. Hence, Wzx translocation of the Nerol-PP-linked GlcNAc substrate would have required movement from the aqueous to the membrane phase before translocation and then the reverse after translocation, and also would involve translocation of much more Nerol-PP-linked GlcNAc than of Und-PP-linked GlcNAc, meaning that the 20 min observed by Rick, et al. as being required to reach equilibrium would not represent *in vivo* Und-PP-linked GlcNAc translocation rates.

### Wzx translocation mechanism

Marino, et al. (17) showed that in *S. enterica* serovar Typhimurium, in which the O-antigen RU first sugar is galactose (Gal), addition of the proton ionophore, dinitrophenol, reduces synthesis of Und-PP-linked Gal *in vivo* about 30-fold. This was attributed to a requirement for a H${}^{+}$ gradient to drive translocation for further processing, as enzymatic formation of Und-PP-linked Gal does not require energy. In contrast, Rick, et al. (16) had suggested a model of passive diffusion, because presence of ATP or proton motive force did not change the kinetics in their *in vitro* model discussed above. However, there are processes required to maintain the available stock of Und-P including conversion of the Und-PP released as glycosyl transferases transfer sugars from NDP-sugars to Und-P, and its subsequent translocation to the cytoplasmic face. Hence, the requirement for the H${}^{+}$ gradient for *in vivo* synthesis may lie elsewhere.

Wzx proteins belong to the polysaccharide transport (PST) family, one of 12 in the MOP (multidrug/oligosaccharide lipid/polysaccharide exporter) superfamily (http://www.tcdb.org/search/result.php?tc=2.A.66). All have multiple transmembrane segments (TMS), with 12a common number (18). The MATE family are known to be antiporters (19) and it was suggested that this may be a general MOP feature based on their homologies. Several MATE transporters have been shown to use either an H${}^{+}$ or Na${}^{+}$ ion gradient to drive import or export and recently the *Vibrio cholerae* NorM has been shown to use both (20), although it was previously thought that each transporter used only one or the other (21, 22). Islam, et al. (23) also proposed an H${}^{+}$-dependent antiporter mechanism for translocation in the *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* PAO1 Wzx (22) based on the their observation of Wzx-dependent release of I${}^{-}$ ions from membrane vesicles, driven by the H${}^{+}$ gradient. It is possible that in the case of the Nerol-PP-linked O units used by Rick, et al. (16), *in vitro* translocation can occur by diffusion, but that in living cells an ion gradient is required, as is proposed by Islam, et al. (23), at least for normal rates of translocation. A more detailed review on the progress of this research has been published recently (24).

Studies of *E. coli* O157 Wzx (25, 26) and *P. aeruginosa* PAO1 Wzx (25, 26) both identified charged residues essential for translocation, some of which are located in the TMS. There are no structures available yet for PST proteins, although the structure of the V. cholerae MATE transporter protein NorM has been used by Islam, et al. (27) to model the *P. aeruginosa* Wzx structure. NorM has its 12 TMS in two groups of six that are hinged to enclose a space that can be exposed on the inner or outer face of the cytoplasmic membrane (28). A similar space was found in the PAO1 modelled structure, and it was proposed that the six charged residues found to be essential for translocation interact with the two negatively-charged RU residues (27). However, it is important to note that most O antigens are not charged, and comparison of the number of charged residues in the TMS of six *E. coli*, *S. enterica* and *Shigella* Wzx with *P. aeruginosa* PAO1 Wzx shows that while Wzx<sub>PAO1</sub> has the highest number of confirmed charged TMS residues, two flippases for uncharged O antigens have similar numbers based on computational analysis (Table 1).

While we currently have a limited understanding of the PST family, the recently available structures of the MurJ and PglK translocase proteins from related families also provide some useful insights. MurJ flips the Lipid II intermediate used in synthesis of the peptidoglycan RU. It has 14 TMS, as opposed to the typical 12 TMS among other PST proteins, with the additional two being at the C-terminal end. The *Thermosipho africanus* MurJ structure is now known to 2 Å resolution (29) for a crystal form of the protein trapped in the inward facing conformation, whereas earlier structures were in the outward facing conformation. This enabled the authors to propose a model for translocation, based on the cavity opening alternately on the inner and outer surface of the membrane. The 12 TMS shared with other MATE structures are in two bundles that form a V-shape opening to the surface, for which the bending between the two bundles might drive transitions between inward and outward-facing conformations to allow substrate translocation (29). The MurJ cavity also shows a cationic charged site as in the proposed Wzx<sub>PAO1</sub> model (27). Interestingly, modelling of substrate binding suggested that TMS 13 and TMS 14 could form a groove with a hydrophobic inner surface, that could associate with the Und-P moiety (29). If this is indeed the case, then while it is a very interesting finding, it cannot apply to those MATE proteins for which there are structures, as these have the more common 12 TMS, as do many PST family proteins, including the Wzx<sub>PAO1</sub> used for the modelling discussed above (27). It is also interesting that some PST family members are predicted to have 14 TMS, including the *S. enterica* group E Wzx, and one can speculate that the Und-P moiety could be in the hydrophobic centre of the membrane in some Wzx during translocation, but in other Wzx in a hydrophobic groove between TMS 13 and TMS 14. The path by which Und-PP-linked RUs move through the membrane is not yet known, which raises the question of whether both the Und-P and RU components go through the cavity or does the Und-P component remain in the membrane? Islam and Lam have suggested that the Und-P component remains in the membrane (27), but there is no direct evidence.

It is also instructive to compare the MOP superfamily with PglK, a member of the better-understood ABC transporter family in the ATP-Binding Cassette superfamily, which have a TMS domain for substrate translocation, and an ABC domain in the cytoplasm, that provides energy. PglK has six TMS, but is present as a dimer (30) with two bundles. The overall appearance is of two hinged lobes as is found for MurJ (29), to give a central cavity that can be open to one side or the other. The movements reported are very similar to those reported or proposed for MOP transporters. It is speculated “that during (...) flipping, the 55-carbon polyisoprenyl tail enters the inward-facing cavity from the lipid bilayer to fold ('curl up') into the very bottom of the cavity, where the surface is hydrophobic.”

146 Enormous diversity of polysaccharide RUs and Wzx flippases

147 Many bacterial polysaccharides are enormously diverse in structure, which is thought to be driven by

148 environmental factors, such as host immune response during invasion in the case of pathogens (31). This

149 diversity is particularly well-studied in O antigens, and has been reviewed in detail (32). The genes

150 specific for O-antigen synthesis generally occur as a gene cluster—for example all but one of the 46S.

151 enterica O-antigen gene clusters are at two loci (5). It appears that gene cluster replacement at these loci

152 by horizontal gene transfer across the diverse collection of cell surface polysaccharide gene clusters

153 within a species plays a key role in allowing rapid changes in the antigenic nature of bacteria. There are

154 also detailed reviews on diversity in structure and genetics of polysaccharides in specific species (5, 6,

155 33–36). It is noteworthy that Wzx are similarly diverse, as exemplified by the presence of 20Wzx forms

156 among 25 Acinetobacter polysaccharide gene clusters (37), 27 in the 45 Salmonella O-antigen gene

157 clusters (5), and 8 in the 18 Yersinia pseudotuberculosis gene clusters (38). Indeed, wzx genes are often

158 regarded as serotype-specific traits and are frequently used in molecular typing schemes (39–45). It

159 appears that the diversity of polysaccharide RUs and Wzx sequences are well correlated.

160 

161 Evidence for Wzx substrate preference

162 Based on the high degree of diversity exhibited by both polysaccharide RUs and Wzx flippases, a logical

163 conclusion would be that the Wzx sequence variability is required to accommodate the wide range of

164 available polysaccharide RU structures. However, it is important to note that under normal conditions,

165 Wzx flippases are expressed in very limited amounts (46) and, as discussed below, over-expression of

166 Wzx can mask the substantial levels of discrimination shown by some Wzx. We start our discussion of

167 specificity with a study (47) that used direct chromosomal wzx gene replacements with the expectation

168 that expression would not be greatly affected by the substitution. The set of S. enterica strains

169 expressing group B1, D1, D2 and E O antigens, were used as their structures share a common 3-sugar

170 backbone, and differ in the absence (group E), or presence of a dideoxyhexose (DDH) side-branch

171 sugar, being abequose (Abe) in group B1 and tyvelose (Tyv) in groups D1 and D2 (48). Group C2 has

172 the same backbone sugars arranged in a different order, but also has a side-branch Abe residue (48). For

173 the O-antigen structures and Wzx flippases discussed, see Figure 2. It is important to note that prior to

174 polymerization by Wzy, all of the O-antigen side-branch sugars actually represent the terminal O-unit

175 residues, and will be recognized as such by Wzx. There are four distinct Wzx forms (Wzx_B, Wzx_C2,

176 Wzx_D and Wzx_E). Each of the O antigens (except for D1 and D2 which share Wzx_D) has a unique

177 corresponding Wzx, and each was found to have a strong preference for its native substrate, with highly

178 inefficient translocation occurring when presented with an alternative O unit. For instance, when Wzx_B,

179 Wzx_C2 or Wzx_D were presented with their native O unit, but lacking a DDH sugar, there was a great

180 reduction in the amount of LPS with O antigen, with little or no long-chain O antigen present, indicating

181 that each of these flippases had a strong preference for the presence of a DDH sugar (47, 49). However,

182 overexpression of these wzx genes from a separate plasmid was found to substantially increase the levels

183 of long-chain O antigen, proving that the previous low levels were due to inefficient translocation.

184 Particularly with the D2 and E O units, which use the same Wzy, so polymerization should not be

185 affected. Additionally, when the wzx_D gene was replaced with wzx_E in a mutant group D2 strain without

186 the DDH side branch, O-antigen production was dramatically enhanced (47). Restoration of the Tyv

187 side-branch on the O unit almost completely abolished O-antigen synthesis, thus demonstrating that

188 Wzx_E had a strong preference for the O unit lacking a DDH residue (47). Overall, these findings

189 demonstrated that single changes in the structure of otherwise-identical O units were sufficient to

190 dramatically affect the ability of each Wzx to flip an O unit, highlighting the level of specificity that is

191 possible for some Wzx.

An independent study undertaken around the same time (50) highlighted an interesting situation in which *Pantoea stewartii* and *Erwinia amylovora* produce related EPS that exist in two forms, having either a glucose (Glc) or a pyruvate (Pyr) moiety at the terminal end of their respective side-branch groups (see Figure 3 for EPS structures and Wzx relatedness). The two Wzx that flip the pyruvate-containing form are 76% identical and those that flip the Glc-containing form are 86% identical. All other pairings appear to be unrelated. A simple explanation for this is that the Glc and Pyr associated Wzx occurred in the common ancestor of the two species, in which case the level of divergence indicates that the situation is ancestral.

Earlier studies of Wzx specificity in *E. coli* (51) did not find any evidence that Wzx flippases had a strong preference for their cognate RU. Marolda, et al. (52) showed in a series of complementation experiments that when expressed from separate plasmids, Wzx flippases whose cognate O units had the same first sugar, GlcNAc, as the *E. coli* O16O unit could fully complement the loss of Wzx<sub>016</sub>, but other Wzx flippases that normally flip substrates with markedly different first sugars (galactose, Gal or N-acetylglucosamine, Fuc2NAc) could not. See Figure 4 for the set of O-antigen structures and relevant Wzx discussed. This led to the conclusion that Wzx flippases were specific only for the first sugar of an RU substrate. However, this was later shown to be due to overexpression of Wzx (53), which in retrospect is not too surprising as the vector included the strong tac promoter.

Hong and Reeves (53) later used direct chromosomal replacements to substitute the *E. coli* K-12 *wzx*<sub>016</sub> gene with the same set of four alternative *wzx* genes used by Marolda, et al. (52), and then examined the ability of each Wzx to translocate the O16 and O111O units under these conditions. It was found that for both the O16 and O111O units, only the cognate Wzx flippase (Wzx<sub>016</sub> and Wzx<sub>0111</sub>, respectively) could efficiently translocate that O unit (53), with the next best flippase being substantially less effective for the respective substrates, even though several other flippases had cognate substrates with the same first sugar. These results showed that contrary to previous suggestions (52), Wzx flippases have a preference for their cognate O units that extends beyond the first sugar. Furthermore, overexpression of Wzx<sub>016</sub> from a separate plasmid was found to significantly improve the translocation of the O111O unit (53), confirming that inefficient O-unit translocation can be improved by increasing the amount of Wzx within the cell and providing an explanation for the discrepancy between these findings and those of Marolda et al. (52). It is important to note however that the special status of the first sugar is not affected by the new data, as Wzx flippases for O units with different first sugars were clearly less efficient at flipping the O16O unit than flippases for O units with the same first sugar (53).

We should note that the interpretations of Wzx substrate preference described here are mostly limited to observation of LPS-PAGE profiles. An alternative explanation might be that the difference in substrate can affect either the WaaL ligase or the LPS export process. Nonetheless, this is unlikely as both of these systems are known to work with a wide range of substrates.

The discovery that Wzx often have a strong preference for their cognate substrate provides an explanation for the enormous diversity of Wzx within a species. However the current data covers only a small number of RUs, and much more work is needed to determine if Wzx substrate preference is always as strict as observed by Hong, et al. (47). There are several known instances of structurally-diverse O antigens having the same Wzx, which suggests the possibility of more relaxed Wzx substrate preference. For example, in *P. aeruginosa*, the O2, O5, O16, O18 and O20 serotypes have the same *wzx*

gene (54), and likewise the *Y. pseudotuberculosis* O:1a, O:1b, O:1c, O:5a, O:5b, O:11 and O:15O-  
antigen gene clusters have the same *wzx* gene (55). Furthermore, it appears that *S. enterica Wzx*<sub>D</sub> and  
Wzx<sub>B</sub> cannot distinguish between O units with Abe and Tyv side-branch residues (47). Further studies  
will be required to better determine which structural features of RUs are the most important  
determinants of Wzx substrate preference.

Growth defects associated with disrupted Wzx translocation

Mutations that disrupt O-antigen synthesis can have a catastrophic effect on growth (56–59), and mutants  
often revert quickly or acquire secondary mutations (56, 57, 60) that compensate for the first mutation.  
The first such observation was made by Yuasa, et al. (56) who had great difficulty maintaining an *S.*  
*enterica* group B1 *abe* mutant, and similar phenomena have also been observed for O antigens of *E. coli*  
(53, 61, 62) and *P. aeruginosa* (60). It is also known for *Streptococcus pneumoniae* capsule synthesis,  
that mutations blocking complete RU synthesis or membrane flipping are lethal unless rescued by  
suppressor mutations (63, 64). Blockages in the earlier steps of the *Rhizobium meliloti* succinoglycan  
synthesis pathway have been shown to be necessary to obtain viable mutants affecting the later steps  
(65), and a similar situation has also been described in *Staphylococcus aureus*, where mutations to  
teichoic acid synthesis genes are lethal except in a genetic background where the first committed step  
has been nullified (66).

The growth defect or cell death resulting from mutations of O-antigen synthesis genes has often been  
attributed to the sequestration of Und-P that prevents it from being used in other pathways, and this has  
been confirmed recently (61, 67). It appears that inefficient translocation affects the recycling of the  
Und-P pool, as further processing of the Und-PP linked substrates requires them to be flipped to the  
periplasmic face of the membrane. This leads to the several cell surface polysaccharide pathways  
competing with peptidoglycan synthesis for the undersupplied Und-P, resulting in cell abnormality and  
death (61, 67). Similar effects have been observed for mutations affecting synthesis of other  
polysaccharides that utilize Und-P as a lipid carrier (61, 67).

Deleterious O-antigen mutants can be maintained in strains in which O-antigen synthesis is controlled at  
or before the reaction that commits the product to O-unit synthesis, allowing cultures to grow without  
difficulty until O-unit synthesis is initiated. This approach was pioneered by Osborn, et al., who utilized  
an *S. enterica* group B1 Δ*galE* mutant in several studies to act as a parental strain that suppressed O-  
antigen production prior to addition of exogenous Gal (47, 68, 69). Several derivatives of this parental  
strain with deletions of O-antigen genes (68) have been shown to stop growing soon after activation of  
O-antigen synthesis, and exhibit clear signs of cell lysis within one hour. Interestingly, it appears that  
mutations affecting cytoplasmic RU assembly (Δ*abe* and Δ*wbaV*) and flipping (Δ*wzx*) are lethal,  
whereas those that affect synthesis after the RU is flipped to the periplasmic face (Δ*wzy* and Δ*waaL*)  
have no effect on growth (68). A likely explanation is that the observed lethality is caused by inefficient  
translocation of incomplete Und-PP-linked RUs by Wzx, or complete loss of translocation when Wzx is  
absent. This was confirmed in a *S. enterica* group C2 mutant that produces an O unit lacking a side-  
branch Abe and experiences lethality, where the growth defect was shown to be abolished when  
translocation was improved by overexpression of the *wzx* gene (49). It should be noted that Xayarath and  
Yother (64) reported lethal mutations in the capsule Wzy polymerase, although this is not the case for O-  
antigen synthesis (57, 68, 69).

The evolution of Wzx specificity
If Wzx flippases are highly adapted to their cognate O-unit structure, then evolution of a new structure will require not only the incorporation of genes for RU synthesis and polymerization, but also adaptation of the wzx gene to allow efficient translocation of the new structure, or alternatively replacement with a new wzx gene. A comparison of the O antigens in *E. coli* and *S. enterica* gives some insights into the evolution of O-antigen gene clusters. Twenty-four *S. enterica* O-antigen forms are either identical or very similar to *E. coli* O antigens, in both gene cluster and O-unit structure. This is attributed to the gene clusters having been in the common ancestor, and the levels of divergence are generally consistent with that (4). The sugar pathway genes are conserved for each sugar, but the glycosyltransferase (GT) and processing genes generally show no shared patterns, and any similarity is restricted to just part of the gene cluster. It appears that each gene cluster has been assembled independently. It is unlikely that many of them were assembled in either species, and most must have been acquired by transfer from other species. The other O antigens show very few cases of such similarity. However, the exceptions observed are cases where restructuring appears to have happened within *E. coli/Shigella* or *S. enterica*, or during divergence of these related genera, and several are described in detail in reviews of the O antigens (5, 33). Here we briefly examine a few selected examples. Note that virtually all Shigella are phylogenetically part of *E. coli* (70), and the *Shigella dysenteriae* O1 O antigen is here called D1.

**Shigella D1 and E. coli O148.** The D1 O antigen structure is unique, but was found to be a simple variation of the *E. coli* O148 structure, and clearly was derived from an O148 gene cluster by inactivation of a glucosyltransferase gene that was functionally replaced by a galactosyltransferase gene on a plasmid (71). The corresponding Glc and Gal residues are in otherwise identical four-sugar O units. The probable sequence of events was the gain of the new GT gene on the plasmid, followed by mutational inactivation of the original GT gene, since the alternative order would result in production of a truncated O unit that Wzx would likely be unable to translocate efficiently. The shared gene products have 95–99% identity at amino acid level, with Wzx identity at 98.4%. D1 is one of the three *Shigella* forms responsible for most cases of shigellosis, and also is the most virulent (33), so is clearly very successful, but there is no evidence of adaptation of Wzx for the new O unit, possibly because this structural change did not require it.

**E. coli O86 and O127.** Both main chains are the same, but O86 has a side-branch Gal on the third sugar, while O127 has two O-acetyl moieties on the fourth sugar. The two gene clusters align very well, and the GT gene and O-acetyl transferase genes responsible for the side-branches are alternative genes located between wzx and wzy. However, while genes upstream of wzx show 99–100% amino acid identity, and those downstream of wzy are 50 and 59% identical, the wzx and wzy genes are completely different with 13–16% identity (72) (Figure 5A). In this case, it appears that one of the wzx genes came from an external source as part of a rearrangement. However in the absence of a potential source for one of the wzx genes, we have no means of determining which is the new arrival, but it does look like a substitution of one set of five genes with another five gene set, as the junction in identity levels is within the upstream manB and downstream gnd genes.

**E. coli O24 and O56.** Much more informative is the situation with the *E. coli* O24 gene cluster, which is clearly derived from the O56 gene cluster, as it has remnants of two GT genes present in the O56 cluster, as well as two new GT genes clearly derived from other *E. coli* gene clusters (73) (Figure 5B). It is clear that two GTs were lost and replaced by two different GTs. The effect was to change the first sugar from GlcNAc to GalNAc, and the side-branch sugar from Gal to Glc. The Wzx and Wzy proteins are only 75% identical, compared with 83–89% for the other four shared proteins. In this case it seems likely that
there has been adaptation of the Wzx and Wzy processing proteins to the change in O-unit structure and
that this is reflected in the higher level of wzx and wzy divergence than for other genes. These are
examples of the dynamics of wzx and other genes over evolutionary time frames, but there is currently
no experimental information on the adaptation of Wzx flippases in response to the RU structural change.

The S. enterica Gal-initiated set of O antigens. The S. enterica Gal-initiated group of eight related
serotypes have very similar O antigens (Figure 2) and gene clusters (48) in which the levels of sequence
divergence in some of the shared genes suggest that divergence started long before the divergence of
Escherichia and Salmonella, thus implying that the group entered Salmonella as a set of related gene
clusters (31). This is clearly speculative but indicative of the time frame for the evolution that must have
occurred. The strains were proposed to have arisen from an ancestral group E form closely resembling
the current E4 form, before gaining the wbaK gene found in El, E2, and E3 (74). It appears that the
divergence of group B2, the form proposed to have given rise to B1, D1-D3 and C2-C3, involved the
incorporation of novel genetic elements into the gene cluster, including genes for a DDH abequose side
branch for the O-antigen RU and a new wzx gene (31). In groups D1, D2 and D3 the DDH side-branch
switched from Abe to Tyv by gaining genes responsible for synthesis and attachment of the new sugar
(31). The group DWzx, and the WbaV GT for tyvelose have about 55% and 54% respectively amino
acid identity to those of group B (75). It was shown in 1968 that the group B WbaV transfers Tyv in
vitro at about 20% of its rate for abequose, and has no detectable activity on paratose (< ~3%) (76).
However, when group B and D strains with the genes for Abe or Tyv deleted are complemented with
either a cloned abe gene (for Abe) or cloned prt-tyv genes (for Tyv), no differences were detected on
SDS-PAGE (47), suggesting that despite the substantial divergence between of both wzx and wbaV
genes, these Wzx flippases discriminate very little between translocation of O units with Tyv or Abe.
The ~55% divergence of Wzx and WbaV, and greater divergence for ManB and ManC, suggest that the
evolution of this set of O-antigens occurred over a much longer time frame than species divergence, as
discussed in Reeves, et al. (48).

Why is the Wzx/Wzy pathway so dominant for heteropolymer diversity?
The major difference between the two pathways is that in the ABC transporter pathway, the polymer is
made on the cytoplasmic face and then translocated, whereas in the Wzx/Wzy pathway only a single RU
is translocated. It is possible that the Wzx flippase can more easily be adapted to the wide range of RUs
that use that biosynthetic pathway, but we do not know enough about translocation to speculate in detail.
If so then it is perhaps Wzx that represents the key to the extent of diversity in prokaryote surface
polysaccharides. The diversity in Wzy is easily accounted for as Wzy is effectively a GT that makes a
typical glycosyl linkage, but differs from a GT in using an RU on Und-PP as the donor instead of a sugar
on a nucleotide triphosphate (69). There is no obvious reason why Wzy cannot be as diverse as typical
GTs.

It is also interesting that in E. coli capsules, the Wzt/Wzm proteins that carry out the translocation step
are much less diverse than are the Wzx proteins of the O antigens. In this case the Wzt/WzM pair have
to be able to handle all of the capsule polymers and this would presumably restrict the nature of the
structures that could be processed.

Wzx substrate preference has implications for polysaccharide evolution and biotechnology
The level of Wzx preference, and the effect this preference has in causing a growth defect and lethality
when presented with alternate RU structures, can have implications for how new polysaccharides can

evolve. Many O antigen gene clusters show evidence of a history of structural change, and it may well  
be that Wzx has to adapt to the new structure by a series of mutational changes to regain an efficient rate  
of translocation with the new RU. This requirement for efficient translocation may be a major barrier for  
the evolution of new RU structures. However as discussed above, we currently have very little  
information on the extent of Wzx specificity, which will require quantitative studies.  

This substrate preference for efficient translocation will also affect our ability to modify Wzx/Wzy  
pathways for biotechnology. It is interesting to note that when Valderrama-Rincon, et al. (77) assembled  
a human-like glycan pathway in E. coli K-12, translocation was presumably achieved by native  
flippases, such as WzxO16. As such, it is unsurprising that the production yield was extremely low for  
commercial use, with one of the most likely explanations for this being insufficient flipping by Wzx.  
The discovery that overexpression of Wzx flippases can often substantially compensate for otherwise  
inefficient flipping could provide a means to greatly enhance the production of foreign RUs.  

Concluding remarks  
It has been over three decades since we first established the role of the Wzx flippase in the synthesis of  
complex polysaccharides in bacteria (15). However, our understanding of this very important group of  
proteins has been largely restricted by the many difficulties associated with working on membrane  
protein complexes and using substrates that remain membrane-associated until they are removed from  
Und-PP and reach their final destinations (15, 23, 25-27, 47, 49, 50, 52, 53, 60, 78-81). To conclude,  
while we can be confident that the multi-TMS Wzx protein is the central player in the flipping of Und-  
PP-linked RUs across inner membrane, and that there are varied levels of substrate preferences, we still  
know very little of the details. The flipping of complex lipid pyrophosphate linked oligosaccharides is a  
common theme found across prokaryotes and eukaryotes, and we are still at the beginning of  
understanding this very important process.  

References  
1. Whitfield C. 1995. Biosynthesis of lipopolysaccharide O antigens. Trends in Microbiology  
   3:178-185.  
2. Raetz CRH, Whitfield C. 2002. Lipopolysaccharide endotoxins. Annual Review of  
   Biochemistry 71:635-700.  
3. Greenfield LK, Whitfield C. 2012. Synthesis of lipopolysaccharide O-antigens by ABC  
   transporter-dependent pathways. Carbohydrate research 356:12-24.  
4. Whitfield C, Trent MS. 2014. Biosynthesis and Export of Bacterial Lipopolysaccharides. Annu.  
   Rev. Biochem.  
5. Liu B, Knirel YA, Feng L, Perepelov AV, Senchenkova SN, Reeves PR, Wang L. 2014.  
   Structural diversity in Salmonella O antigens and its genetic basis. FEMS Microbiol Rev 38:56-  
   89.  
6. Iguchi A, Iyoda S, Kikuchi T, Ogura Y, Katsura K, Ohnishi M, Hayashi T, Thomson NR.  
   2015. A complete view of the genetic diversity of the Escherichia coli O-antigen biosynthesis  
   gene cluster. DNA Res 22:101-107.  
7. van Heijenoort J. 2007. Lipid intermediates in the biosynthesis of bacterial peptidoglycan.  
   Microbiol Mol Biol Rev 71:620-635.  
8. Reeves PR, Cunneen MM. 2009. Biosynthesis of O-antigen chains and assembly, p. 319-335.  
   In Moran AP, Holst O, Brennan PJ, von Itzstein M (ed.), Microbial Glycobiology: Structures,  
   Relevance and Applications. Elsevier, Amsterdam.

9. Woodward R, Yi W, Li L, Zhao G, Eguchi H, Sridhar PR, Guo H, Song JK, Motari E, Cai L, Kelleher P, Liu X, Han W, Zhang W, Ding Y, Li M, Wang PG. 2010. In vitro bacterial polysaccharide biosynthesis: defining the functions of Wzy and Wzz. Nature Chemical Biology 6:418-423.

10. Islam ST, Huszczyński SM, Nugent T, Gold AC, Lam JS. 2013. Conserved-residue mutations in Wzy affect O-antigen polymerization and Wzz-mediated chain-length regulation in Pseudomonas aeruginosa PAO1. Sci Rep 3:3441.

11. Nath P, Tran EN, Morona R. 2015. Mutational Analysis of the Shigella flexneri O-Antigen Polymerase Wzy: Identification of Wzz-Dependent Wzy Mutants. J Bacteriol 197:108-119.

12. Nath P, Morona R. 2015. Mutational analysis of the major periplasmic loops of Shigella flexneri Wzy: identification of the residues affecting O antigen modal chain length control, and Wzz-dependent polymerization activity. Microbiology 161:774-785.

13. Nath P, Morona R. 2015. Detection of Wzy/Wzz interaction in Shigella flexneri. Microbiology 161:1797-1805.

14. Osborn MJ, Gander JE, Parisi E. 1972. Mechanism of assembly of the outer membrane of Salmonella typhimurium: Site of synthesis of lipopolysaccharide. J. Biol. Chem. 247:3973-3986.

15. Liu D, Cole R, Reeves PR. 1996. An O-antigen processing function for Wzx (RfbX): a promising candidate for O-unit flippase. Journal of Bacteriology 178:2102-2107.

16. Rick PD, Barr K, Sankaran K, Kajimura J, Rush JS, Waechter CJ. 2003. Evidence that the wzxE gene of Escherichia coli K-12 encodes a protein involved in the transbilayer movement of a trisaccharide-lipid intermediate in the assembly of Enterobacterial common antigen. Journal of Biological Chemistry 278:16534.

17. Marino PA, McGrath BC, Osborn MJ. 1991. Energy dependence of O-antigen synthesis in Salmonella typhimurium. J Bacteriol 173:3128-3133.

18. Hvorup RN, Winnén B, Chang AB, Jiang Y, Zhou XF, Saier MH, Jr. 2003. The multidrug/oligosaccharyl-lipid/polysaccharide (MOP) exporter superfamily. European Journal of Biochemistry 270:799-813.

19. Paulsen IT, Beness AM, Saier Jr. MH. 1997. Analysis of the protein constituents of transport systems catalyzing export of complex carbohydrates in bacteria. Mol. Microbiol. 143:2685-2699.

20. Jin Y, Nair A, van Veen HW. 2014. Multidrug transport protein NorM from Vibrio cholerae simultaneously couples to sodium-and proton-motive force. Journal of Biological Chemistry 289:14624-14632.

21. Tanaka Y, Hipolito CJ, Maturana AD, Ito K, Kuroda T, Higuchi T, Katoh T, Kato HE, Hattori M, Kumazaki K, Tsukazaki T, Ishitani R, Suga H, Nureki O. 2013. Structural basis for the drug extrusion mechanism by a MATE multidrug transporter. Nature 496:247-251.

22. Kuroda T, Tsuchiya T. 2009. Multidrug efflux transporters in the MATE family. BBA Proteins and Proteomics 1794:763-768.

23. Islam ST, Eckford PD, Jones ML, Nugent T, Bear CE, Vogel C, Lam JS. 2013. Proton-dependent gating and proton uptake by Wzx support O-antigen-subunit antiport across the bacterial inner membrane. MBio 4:e00678-00613.

24. Islam ST, Lam JS. 2013. Wzx flippase-mediated membrane translocation of sugar polymer precursors in bacteria. Environ. Microbiol. 15:1001-1015.

25. Marolda CL, Li B, Lung M, Yang M, Hanuszkiewicz A, Rosales AR, Valvano MA. 2010. Membrane topology and identification of critical amino acid residues in the Wzx O-antigen translocase from Escherichia coli O157:H4. Journal of Bacteriology 192:6160-6171.

26. Islam ST, Lam JS. 2012. Wzx flippase-mediated membrane translocation of sugar polymer

468 precursors in bacteria. Environmental Microbiology.
469 27. Islam ST, Fieldhouse RJ, Anderson EM, Taylor VL, Keates RA, Ford RC, Lam JS. 2012. A
470 cationic lumen in the Wzx flippase mediates anionic O-antigen subunit translocation in
471 Pseudomonas aeruginosa PAO1. Molecular Microbiology 84:1165-1176.
472 28. He X, Szewczyk P, Karyakin A, Evin M, Hong WX, Zhang Q, Chang G. 2010. Structure of a
473 cation-bound multidrug and toxic compound extrusion transporter. Nature 467:991-994.
474 29. Kuk AC, Mashalidis EH, Lee S-Y. 2016. Crystal structure of the MOP flippase MurJ in an
475 inward-facing conformation. Nature Structural & Molecular Biology.
476 30. Perez C, Gerber S, Boilevin J, Bucher M, Darbre T, Aebi M, Reymond J-L, Locher KP.
477 2015. Structure and mechanism of an active lipid-linked oligosaccharide flippase. Nature
478 524:433-438.
479 31. Reeves PR. 1995. Role of O-antigen variation in the immune response. Trends in Microbiology
480 3:381-386.
481 32. Reeves PR, Cunneen MM. 2011. Evolution of lipopolysaccharide biosynthesis genes, p. 283-
482 307. In Valvano MA, Knirel YA (ed.), Bacterial lipopolysaccharide. Springer Verlag.
483 33. Liu B, Knirel YA, Feng L, Perepelov AV, Senchenkova SN, Wang Q, Reeves PR, Wang L.
484 2008. Structure and genetics of Shigella O antigens. FEMS Microbiology Reviews 32:627-653.
485 34. Bentley SD, Aanensen DM, Mavroidi A, Saunders D, Rabbinowitsch E, Collins M,
486 Donohoe K, Harris D, Murphy L, Quail MA, Samuel G, Skovsted IC, Kaltoft MS, Barrell
487 B, Reeves PR, Parkhill J, Spratt BG. 2006. Genetic analysis of the capsular biosynthetic locus
488 from all 90 pneumococcal serotypes. PLoS Genet 2:262-269 (e231).
489 35. Pan YJ, Lin TL, Chen CT, Chen YY, Hsieh PF, Hsu CR, Wu MC, Wang JT. 2015. Genetic
490 analysis of capsular polysaccharide synthesis gene clusters in 79 capsular types of Klebsiella spp.
491 Sci Rep 5:15573.
492 36. Stenutz R, Weintraub A, Widmalm G. 2006. The structures of Escherichia coli O-
493 polysaccharide antigens. FEMS Microbiology Reviews 30:382-403.
494 37. Hu D, Liu B, Dijkshoorn L, Wang L, Reeves PR. 2013. Diversity in the major polysaccharide
495 antigen of Acinetobacter baumannii assessed by DNA sequencing, and development of a
496 molecular serotyping scheme. PLoS ONE 8:e70329.
497 38. Kenyon JJ, Cunneen MM, Reeves PR. 2017. Genetics and evolution of Yersinia
498 pseudotuberculosis O-specific polysaccharides: a novel pattern of O-antigen diversity. Fems
499 microbiology reviews 41:200-217.
500 39. Iguchi A, Iyoda S, Seto K, Morita-Ishihara T, Scheutz F, Ohnishi M. 2015. Escherichia coli
501 O-Genotyping PCR: a Comprehensive and Practical Platform for Molecular O Serogrouping. J
502 Clin Microbiol 53:2427-2432.
503 40. Kong F, Wang W, Tao J, Wang L, Wang Q, Sabananthan A, Gilbert GL. 2005. A
504 molecular-capsular-type prediction system for 90 Streptococcus pneumoniae serotypes using
505 partial cpsA-cpsB sequencing and wzy-or wzx-specific PCR. Journal of Medical Microbiology
506 54:351-356.
507 41. Feng L, Senchenkova SN, Tao J, Shashkov AS, Liu B, Shevelev SD, Reeves PR, Xu J,
508 Knirel YA, Wang L. 2005. Structural and genetic characterization of enterohemorrhagic
509 Escherichia coli O145 O antigen and development of an O145 serogroup-specific PCR assay.
510 Journal of Bacteriology 187:758-764.
511 42. DebRoy C, Fratamico PM, Roberts E, Davis MA, Liu Y. 2005. Development of PCR assays
512 targeting genes in O-antigen gene clusters for detection and identification of Escherichia coli
513 O45 and O55 serogroups. Applied and Environmental Microbiology 71:4919-4924.

514 43. Beutin L, Tao J, Feng L, Krause G, Zimmermann S, Gleier K, Xia Q, Wang L. 2005. Sequence analysis of the Escherichia coli O15 antigen gene cluster and development of a PCR assay for rapid detection of intestinal and extraintestinal pathogenic E. coli O15 strains. J Clin Microbiol 43:703-710.
515 
516 
517 
518 44. Guo H, Feng L, Tao J, Zhang C, Wang L. 2004. Identification of Escherichia coli O172 O-antigen gene cluster and development of a serogroup-specific PCR assay. Journal of Applied Microbiology 97:181-190.
519 
520 
521 45. Feng L, Wang W, Tao J, Guo H, Krause G, Beutin L, Wang L. 2004. Identification of Escherichia coli O114 O-antigen gene cluster and development of an O114 serogroup-specific PCR assay. Journal of Clinical Microbiology 42:3799-3804.
522 
523 
524 46. Li G-W, Burkhardt D, Gross C, Weissman JS. 2014. Quantifying absolute protein synthesis rates reveals principles underlying allocation of cellular resources. Cell 157:624-635.
525 
526 47. Hong Y, Cunneen MM, Reeves PR. 2012. The Wzx translocases for Salmonella enterica O-antigen processing have unexpected serotype specificity. Molecular Microbiology 84:620-623.
527 
528 48. Reeves PR, Cunneen MM, Liu B, Wang L. 2013. Genetics and evolution of the Salmonella galactose-initiated set of O antigens. PLoS One 8:e69306.
529 
530 49. Liu MA, Stent TL, Hong Y, Reeves PR. 2015. Inefficient translocation of a truncated O unit by a Salmonella Wzx affects both O-antigen production and cell growth. FEMS Microbiol Lett 362:10.1099/mic.1090.000113.
531 
532 
533 50. Wang X, Yang F, von Bodman SB. 2012. The genetic and structural basis of two distinct terminal side branch residues in stewartan and amylovoran exopolysaccharides and their potential role in host adaptation. Molecular Microbiology:no-no.
534 
535 
536 51. Feldman MF, Marolda CL, Monteiro MA, Perry MB, Parodi AJ, Valvano MA. 1999. The activity of a putative polyisoprenol-linked sugar translocase (Wzx) involved in Escherichia coli O antigen assembly is independent of the chemical structure of the O repeat. J. Biol. Chem. 274:35129-35138.
537 
538 
539 
540 52. Marolda CL, Vicarioli J, Valvano MA. 2004. Wzx proteins involved in biosynthesis of O antigen function in association with the first sugar of the O-specific lipopolysaccharide subunit. Microbiology 150:4095-4105.
541 
542 
543 53. Hong Y, Reeves PR. 2014. Diversity of O-antigen repeat-unit structures can account for the substantial sequence variation in Wzx translocases. Journal of Bacteriology 196:1713-1722.
544 
545 54. Islam ST, Lam JS. 2014. Synthesis of bacterial polysaccharides via the Wzx/Wzy-dependent pathway. Can J Microbiol 60:697-716.
546 
547 55. Kenyon JJ, Cunneen MM, Reeves PR. 2017. Genetics and evolution of Yersinia pseudotuberculosis O-specific polysaccharides: a novel pattern of O-antigen diversity. FEMS Microbiol Rev:10.1093/femsre/fux1002.
548 
549 
550 56. Yuasa R, Levinthal M, Nikaido H. 1969. Biosynthesis of cell wall lipopolysaccharide in mutants of Salmonella. J. Bacteriol. 100:433-444.
551 
552 57. Mäkelä PH, Stocker BAD. 1984. Genetics of lipopolysaccharide, p. 59-137. In Rietschel ET (ed.), Handbook of endotoxin, vol. I. Elsevier Science Publishers., Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
553 
554 58. Rick PD, Wolksi S, Barr K, Ward S, Ramsay-Sharer L. 1988. Accumulation of a lipid-linked intermediate involved in enterobacterial common antigen synthesis in Salmonella typhimurium mutants lacking dTDP-glucose pyrophosphorylase. J. Bacteriol. 170:4008-4014.
555 
556 
557 59. Rick PD, Osborn MJ. 1972. Isolation of a mutant of Salmonella typhimurium dependent on D-arabinose-5-phosphate for growth and synthesis of 3-deoxy-D-manno-octulosonate. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 69:3756-3760.
558 
559 


The OCR has been converted into Markdown format as requested.
560 60. Burrows LL, Lam JS. 1999. Effect of wzx (rfbX) mutations on A-band and B-band lipopolysaccharide biosynthesis in Pseudomonas aeruginosa O5. Journal of Bacteriology 181:973-980.
561 61. Jorgenson MA, Young KD. 2016. Interrupting Biosynthesis of O Antigen or the Lipopolysaccharide Core Produces Morphological Defects in Escherichia coli by Sequestering Undecaprenyl Phosphate. Journal of Bacteriology 198:3070-3079.
562 62. Cuthbertson L, Powers J, Whitfield C. 2005. The C-terminal domain of the nucleotide-binding domain protein Wzt determines substrate specificity in the ATP-binding cassette transporter for the lipopolysaccharide O-antigens in Escherichia coli serotypes O8 and O9a. J Biol Chem 280:30310-30319.
563 63. James DB, Yother J. 2012. Genetic and biochemical characterizations of enzymes involved in Streptococcus pneumoniae serotype 2 capsule synthesis demonstrate that Cps2T (WchF) catalyzes the committed step by addition of beta1-4 rhamnose, the second sugar residue in the repeat unit. Journal of Bacteriology 194:6479-6489.
564 64. Xayarath B, Yother J. 2007. Mutations blocking side chain assembly, polymerization, or transport of a Wzy-dependent Streptococcus pneumoniae capsule are lethal in the absence of suppressor mutations and can affect polymer transfer to the cell wall. J Bacteriol 189:3369-3381.
565 65. Reuber TL, Walker GC. 1993. Biosynthesis of succinoglycan, a symbiotically important exopolysaccharide of Rhizobium meliloti. Cell 74:269-280.
566 66. D'Elia MA, Pereira MP, Chung YS, Zhao W, Chau A, Kenney TJ, Sulavik MC, Black TA, Brown ED. 2006. Lesions in teichoic acid biosynthesis in Staphylococcus aureus lead to a lethal gain of function in the otherwise dispensable pathway. Journal of bacteriology 188:4183-4189.
567 67. Jorgenson MA, Kannan S, Laubacher ME, Young KD. 2016. Dead-end intermediates in the enterobacterial common antigen pathway induce morphological defects in Escherichia coli by competing for undecaprenyl phosphate. Mol Microbiol 100:1-14.
568 68. Hong Y, Reeves PR. 2016. Model for the Controlled Synthesis of O-Antigen Repeat Units Involving the WaaL Ligase. mSphere 1:e00074-00015.
569 69. Hong Y, Morcilla VA, Liu MA, Russell EL, Reeves PR. 2015. Three Wzy polymerases are specific for particular forms of an internal linkage in otherwise identical O units. Microbiology 161:1639-1647.
570 70. Pupo GM, Lan R, Reeves PR. 2000. Multiple independent origins of Shigella clones of Escherichia coli and convergent evolution of many of their characteristics. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 97:10567-10572.
571 71. Feng L, Perepelov AV, Zhao G, Shevelev SD, Wang Q, Senchenkova SN, Shashkov AS, Geng Y, Reeves PR, Knirel YA, Wang L. 2007. Structural and genetic evidence that the Escherichia coli O148 O antigen is the precursor of the Shigella dysenteriae type 1 O antigen and identification of a glucosyltransferase gene. Microbiology 153:139-147.
572 72. Feng L, Han W, Wang Q, Bastin DA, Wang L. 2005. Characterization of Escherichia coli O86 O-antigen gene cluster and identification of O86-specific genes. Veterinary Microbiology 106:241-248.
573 73. Cheng J, Wang Q, Wang W, Wang Y, Wang L, Feng L. 2006. Characterization of E.coli O24 and O56 O antigen gene clusters reveals a complex evolutionary history of the O24 gene cluster. Current Microbiology 53:470-476.
574 74. Hong Y, Duda KA, Cunneen MM, Holst O, Reeves PR. 2013. The WbaK acetyltransferase of Salmonella enterica group E gives insights into O antigen evolution. Microbiology 159:2316-2322.

Liu D, Verma NK, Romana LK, Reeves PR. 1991. Relationships among the *rfb* regions of *Salmonella* serovars A, B, and D. J. Bacteriol. 173:4814-4819.

Osborn MJ, Weiner IM. 1968. Biosynthesis of a bacterial lipopolysaccharide. VI. Mechanism of incorporation of abequose into the O-antigen of *Salmonella typhimurium*. J Biol Chem 243:2631-2639.

Valderrama-Rincon JD, Fisher AC, Merritt JH, Fan YY, Reading CA, Chhiba K, Heiss C, Azadi P, Aebi M, DeLisa MP. 2012. An engineered eukaryotic protein glycosylation pathway in *Escherichia coli*. Nat Chem Biol 8:434-436.

Marczak M, Dzwierzynska M, Skorupska A. 2013. Homo- and heterotypic interactions between Pss proteins involved in the exopolysaccharide transport system in *Rhizobium leguminosarum* bv. *trifolii*. Biological Chemistry 394:541-559.

Islam ST, Taylor VL, Qi M, Lam JS. 2010. Membrane Topology Mapping of the O-Antigen Flippase (Wzx), Polymerase (Wzy), and Ligase (WaaL) from *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* PAO1 Reveals Novel Domain Architectures. MBio 1:e00189-00110.

Marolda CL, Tatar LD, Alaimo C, Aebi M, Valvano MA. 2006. Interplay of the Wzx translocase and the corresponding polymerase and chain length regulator proteins in the translocation and periplasmic assembly of lipopolysaccharide O antigen. Journal of Bacteriology 188:5124-5135.

Feldman MF, Marolda CL, Monteiro MA, Perry MB, Parodi AJ, Valvano MA. 1999. The activity of a putative polyisoprenol-linked sugar translocase (Wzx) involved in *Escherichia coli* O antigen assembly is independent of the chemical structure of the O repeat. J Biol Chem 274:35129-35138.

Kearse M, Moir R, Wilson A, Stones-Havas S, Cheung M, Sturrock S, Buxton S, Cooper A, Markowitz S, Duran C, Thierer T, Ashton B, Meintjes P, Drummond A. 2012. Geneious Basic: an integrated and extendable desktop software platform for the organization and analysis of sequence data. Bioinformatics 28:1647-1649.

Tusnady GE, Simon I. 2001. The HMMTOP transmembrane topology prediction server. Bioinformatics 17:849-850.

Cunneen MM, Reeves PR. 2008. Membrane topology of the *Salmonella enterica* serovar Typhimurium Group B O-antigen translocase Wzx. FEMS Microbiol. Lett. 287:76-84.

Figure Legends

Figure 1. A schematic pathway for O-antigen synthesis in S. enterica group B1. Step 1, Transfer by initial transferase WbaP of galactose-1-phosphate (Gal-P) to Und-P to give Und-PP-linked Gal, followed by glycosyltransferases, WbaN, WbaU and WbaV that build the remainder of the O unit sequentially; Step 2, Wzx translocation of the O unit across the membrane; Step 3, Polymerisation at the reducing end of a growing Und-PP-linked O-unit polymer by Wzy, in effect extending the chain length by one for each cycle, with a modal chain length distribution for O antigen achieved by interaction between Wzy and Wzz; Step 4, ligation catalyzed by WaaL, the reaction that incorporates O antigen into LPS.

Figure 2. The repeat-unit structures of S. enterica galactose-initiated O antigens. The glycosyltransferases for internal linkages are named and the amino acid identity levels for Wzx are shown relative to Wzx_B1. The identity levels were calculated using pairwise comparisons of a Geneious alignment in Geneious 8.1.5 (82), with the following settings: Global alignment with free end gaps, BLOSUM 62, with gap penalty and gap extension penalty set at 12, and 3 for refinement iterations. The relatedness was determined by examining dotplot analysis. Abbreviations: Abe, abequose; Gal, galactose, Man, mannose; Rha, rhamnose; Tyv, tyvelose; OAc, O-acetyl group. Note that structural post-translocation modifications by addition of side-branch glucose or O-acetyl moieties are not included in the figure, as they are not relevant to Wzx function.

Figure 3. The two forms of exopolysaccharide produced by P. stewartii and E. amylovora. The gene comparisons are of amino-acid identity calculated as described for Figure 2. Note that the asmL genes are typical wzx genes, but we have retained here the terminology used in the original paper (50). The wzxl and amsLl genes are in the main gene clusters and translocate the structures with a terminal pyruvate moiety, while wzx2 and amsL2 are at a different locus and translocate the structures with a terminal glucose residue. Abbreviations: Gal, galactose; Glc, glucose; GlcA, Glucuronic acid, Pyr, pyruvate.

Figure 4. The E. coli O16, O7, O111, O157, S. flexneri 2a and S. enterica group B1 O-antigen repeat units, and Wzx identity levels relative to Wzx_O16. Note that post-translocation structural modifications are not included as they are irrelevant to Wzx activity. The identity levels and relatedness to Wzx_O16 were determined as described for Figure 2. Note that the GT function for S. flexneri 2a WbgF and WbhH are not yet understood. Abbreviations: Abe, abequose; Gal, galactose; Galf, galactofuranose; GalNAc, N-acetylgalactosamine; Glc, glucose; GlcNAc, N-acetylglucosamine; Col, colitose; PerNAc, N-acetylperosamine; Fuc, fucose; Man, mannose; Rha, rhamnose; VioNAc, N-acetylviosamine.

Figure 5. Evolving O-antigen repeat-unit structures can have an impact on Wzx form. The data was extracted from previous work (5, 72, 73). Abbreviations: Ac, O-acetyl group; Fuc, fucose; Gal, galactose; GalNAc, N-acetylgalactosamine; Glc, glucose; GlcNAc, N-acetylglucosamine; Rha4NAc, N-acetyl-D-perosamine; Neu5Ac, N-acetylneuraminic acid. The figure is taken from Hong and Reeves (68) with permission.

| Methodology               | Wzx flippases                | Charged TMS A.A.                          | Total TMS charge A.A. | Reference |
|---------------------------|-----------------------------|------------------------------------------|----------------------|-----------|
| PTMS                      | E.coli K-12/O 16            | K, 2; H, 0; R, 2; E, 1; D, 0             | 5                    | (83)      |
| PTMS                      | E.coli O7                   | K, 2; H, 1; R, 1; E, 1; D, 0             | 5                    | (83)      |
| PTMS                      | E.coli O111                 | K, 3; H, 1; R, 1; E, 2; D, 2             | 8                    | (83)      |
| PTMS                      | S.flexneri2a                | K, 2; H, 1; R, 2; E, 2; D, 2             | 8                    | (83)      |
| PTMS                      | S.enterica group B1 LT2     | K, 1; H, 0; R, 1; E, 0; D, 2             | 4                    | (83)      |
| PTMS                      | P.aeruginosa PAO1O 5        | K, 2; H, 0; R, 1; E, 3; D, 2             | 8                    | (83)      |
| PTMS                      | E.coli O157                 | K, 2; H, 0; R, 0; E, 0; D, 2             | 4                    | (83)      |
| Confirmatory PTMS         | E.coli O157                 | K, 2; H, 0; R, 0; E, 0; D, 2             | 4                    | (25)      |
| Confirmatory PTMS         | S.enterica group BLT 2      | K, 3; H, 0; R, 1; E, 0; D, 2             | 6                    | (84)      |
| Random insertion based TMS | P.aeruginosa PAO1O 5        | K, 4; H, 0; R, 5; E, 4; D, 4             | 17                   | (79)      |

PERIPLASM

INNER MEMBRANE

WbaP
UDP—UMP
WbaN
dTDP
WbaU
GDP
WbaV
CDP

Sequential transfer of O-unit sugars
Step 1

WZX
Wzy Wzz
WaaL

Translocation across IM
Step 2

Polymerization of O units to optimal chain length
Step 3

Ligation to lipid A-core and release UndPP
Step 4

Key
UndP $\mathbb{P}$
UndPP $\mathbb{P}\mathbb{P}$
Gal
Rha
Abe
Man
lipid A-core

Group  Repeat-Unit Structure                                                                 Wzx
B1     $\rightarrow$2)-D-Man-(α1$\rightarrow$4)-L-Rha-(α1$\rightarrow$3)-D-Gal-(α1$\rightarrow$   WZX<sub>B</sub>
       WbaV Abe                                                                                   (NA)
       WbaN                                                                                       WbaU
B2     $\rightarrow$6)-D-Man-(α1$\rightarrow$4)-L-Rha-(α1$\rightarrow$3)-D-Gal-(α1$\rightarrow$   WZX<sub>B</sub>
       WbaV Abe                                                                                   (98%)
       WbaN                                                                                       WbaU
D1     $\rightarrow$2)-D-Man-(α1$\rightarrow$4)-L-Rha-(α1$\rightarrow$3)-D-Gal-(α1$\rightarrow$   WZX<sub>D</sub>
       WbaV Tyv                                                                                   (56%)
       WbaN                                                                                       WbaU
D2     $\rightarrow$6)-D-Man-(β1$\rightarrow$4)-L-Rha-(α1$\rightarrow$3)-D-Gal-(α1$\rightarrow$   WZX<sub>D</sub>
       WbaV Tyv                                                                                   (55%)
       WbaO                                                                                       WbaU
E      $\rightarrow$6)-D-Man-(β1$\rightarrow$4)-L-Rha-(α1$\rightarrow$3)-D-Gal-(α1$\rightarrow$   WZX<sub>E</sub>
       WbaO                                                                                       WbaU
       (19%, unrelated)
C2     $\rightarrow$4)-L-Rha-(α1$\rightarrow$2)-D-Man-(α1$\rightarrow$2)-D-Man-(α1$\rightarrow$3)-D-Gal-(α1$\rightarrow$   WZX<sub>C2</sub>
       WbaR Abe                                                                                   (5%, unrelated)
       WbaL                                                                                       WbaQ
       OAc                                                                                       WbaW
                                                                                                 WbaZ

| Species           | EPS            | Repeat-Unit Structure                                                                 | Wzx   | Homology to                                                                 |
|-------------------|----------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------|
|                   | stewartan      | Glc<br>(β1↓6) **WceO**<br>Gal<br>(α1↓6)<br>GlcA<br>(β1↓4)<br>→3)-Gal-(α1→6)-Glc-(β1 → 3)-Gal-(β1→ | Wzx2  | Wzx1 (17%, unrelated)<br>AmsL1 (21%, unrelated)<br>AmsL2 (68%, related)       |
| P. stewartii     |                |                                                                                     |       |                                                                             |
|                   | pyr-stewartan  | Pyr<br>(4↓↓6) **WceJ**<br>Gal<br>(α1↓6)<br>GlcA<br>(β1↓4)<br>→3)-Gal-(α1→6)-Glc-(β1 → 3)-Gal-(β1→ | Wzx1  | Wzx2 (17%, unrelated)<br>AmsL1 (76%, related)<br>AmsL2 (21%, unrelated)      |
|                   |                |                                                                                     |       |                                                                             |
|                   | amylovoran     | Pyr<br>(4↓↓6) **AmsJ**<br>Gal<br>(α1↓6)<br>GlcA<br>(β1↓4)<br>→3)-Gal-(α1→6)-Glc-(β1 → 3)-Gal-(β1→ | AmsL1 | Wzx1 (76%, related)<br>Wzx2 (21%, unrelated)<br>AmsL2 (18%, unrelated)      |
| E. amylovora     |                |                                                                                     |       |                                                                             |
|                   | gluco-amylovor | Glc<br>(β1↓6) **AmsO**<br>Gal<br>(α1↓6)<br>GlcA<br>(β1↓4)<br>→3)-Gal-(α1→6)-Glc-(β1 → 3)-Gal-(β1→ | AmsL2 | Wzx1 (18%, unrelated)<br>Wzx2 (68%, related)<br>AmsL1 (18%, unrelated)      |
|                   | an             |                                                                                     |       |                                                                             |

Group                       Repeat-Unit Structure                                                                 WZX (homology to O16)
E. coli K-12/O16           → 2)-D-Galf-(β1→6)-D-Glc-(α1→3)-L-Rha-(α1→3)-D-GlcNAc-(α1→ WbbI WbbK WbbL WZX<sub>O16</sub> (NA)
E. coli O111               → 4)-D-Glc-(α1→4)-D-Gal-(β1→3)-D-GlcNAc-(β1→ WbdM WbdH WZX<sub>O111</sub> (4%, unrelated)
E. coli O7                 → 3)-VioNAc-(β1→2)-D-Man-(α1→4)-D-Gal-(β1→3)-D-GlcNAc-(β1→ WbbB WbbC WbbD WZX<sub>O7</sub> (20%, unrelated)
E. coli O157               → 2)-D-PerNAc-(α1→3)-L-Fuc-(α1→4)-D-Glc-(β1→3)-D-GalNAc-(α1→ WbdP WbdO WbdN WZX<sub>O157</sub> (3%, unrelated)
S. flexneri 2a             → 1)-L-Rha-(α1→3)-L-Rha-(α1→2)-L-Rha-(α1→2)-D-GlcNAc-(β3→ WbgF/WbgG WZX<sub>Sf2a</sub> (21%, unrelated)
S. enterica B1             → 2)-D-Man-(α1→4)-L-Rha-(α1→3)-D-Gal-(α1→ WbaN WbaU WZX<sub>SeB1</sub> (7%, unrelated)

A

| EO127 | gne | wcmA | gmd | fcl | gmmmanC | manB | wzx | wdbR | wzy | wcmC | wfbl |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| DNA identity% | 99 | 99 | 98 | 96 | 98 | 99 | 50 | 47 | 54 | 67 | 63 |
| Protein identity% | 99 | 100 | 100 | 99 | 98 | 99 | 15 | 13 | 16 | 59 | 50 |

| EO86 | gne | wcmA | gmd | fcl | gmm | manC | manB | wzx | wcmB | wzy | wcmC | wcmD |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |

Ac (~70%)


     3
WfbI
     4
Ac (~40%)



-> 2)-L-Fuc-(α1→2)-D-Gal-(β1→3)-D-GalNAc-(α1→3)-D-GalNAc-(α1→



D-Gal
   α1
WcmB
   3



-> 4)-L-Fuc-(α1→2)-D-Gal-(β1→3)-D-GalNAc-(α1→3)-D-GalNAc-(α1→


WcmD
WcmC
WcmA

---

B

| EO24 | wbdN | wzy | nnaDnnaB | nnaC | nnaA | wfaN | wzy | wzx | wfgE |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| DNA identity% |  | 85 | 85 | 81 | 83 | 83 | 79 | 79 |  |
| Protein identity% |  | 88 | 89 | 75 | 83 | 83 | 75 | 75 |  |

| EO56 | nnaDnnaB | nnaC | nnaA | wfaP | wfaQ | wfaN | wzy | wzx |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |

D-Glc

   α1
WigE
   2
WbdN



-> 7)-Neu5Ac-(α2 → 3)-D-Glc-(β1 → 3)-D-GalNAc-(β1 →


D-Gal

   α1
WiaM
   2
WfaP



-> 7)-Neu5Ac-(α2 → 3)-D-Glc-(β1 → 3)-D-GalNAc-(β1 →


WfaN
