
JVI Accepted Manuscript Posted Online 23 August 2017  
J. Virol. doi:10.1128/JVI.01718-16  
Copyright © 2017 American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

Epstein-Barr Virus LMP1 Mediated Oncogenicity  

Liang Wei Wang${}^{1,2}$, Sizun Jiang${}^{1,2}$ and Benjamin E. Gewurz${}^{*,1,2,3}$  

${}^{1}$Division of Infectious Disease, Brigham & Women's Hospital, ${}^{2}$Program in Virology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115; ${}^{3}$Broad Institute of Harvard and MIT, Cambridge, MA 02142  

*Corresponding author. E-mail: bgewurz@bwh.harvard.edu  

ABSTRACT  

Epstein-Barr virus Latent Membrane Protein 1 (LMP1) is expressed in multiple human malignancies, including nasopharyngeal carcinoma, Hodgkin and immunosuppression-associated lymphomas. LMP1 mimics CD40 signaling to activate multiple growth and survival pathways, in particular NF-κB. LMP1 has critical roles in EBV-driven B-cell transformation, and its expression causes fatal lymphoproliferative disease in immunosuppressed mice. Here, we review recent developments in studies of LMP1 signaling, LMP1-induced host dependency factors, mouse models of LMP1 lymphogenesis and anti-LMP1 immunotherapy approaches.  

KEYWORDS: gamma herpesvirus, NF-kB, CD40, super-enhancer, oncogene

Introduction

Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) was the first human tumor virus identified (1) and is associated with 200,000 human cancers annually (2). EBV's potent B-cell growth transforming properties became apparent shortly after its discovery, providing an important insight into the association between EBV and human cancers (3, 4).

Subsequent studies identified that EBV transforms primary B-cells through expression of its latency III program, comprised of nine viral proteins, two small RNAs and miRNAs.

Elegant reverse genetic analysis revealed that only five EBV oncoproteins and viral miRNAs are necessary for conversion of primary B-cells into continuously proliferating lymphoblastoid cell lines (LCLs) (5, 6). Of these, only Latent Membrane Protein 1 (LMP1) transforms rodent fibroblasts (7) and is sufficient to cause B-cell lymphoproliferative disease in mice (8, 9). LMP1 is highly expressed in immune suppression-associated lymphomas, including post-transplant lymphoproliferative disease and Hodgkin lymphoma (5).

LMP1 signals from lipid rafts to induce proliferation, survival, migration and immune evasion pathways (10, 11). Transmembrane domains induce LMP1 clustering to activate signaling from a 200 residue cytoplasmic tail. Reverse genetic analysis identified two LMP1 signaling domains (Fig. 1) critical for EBV-mediated B-cell growth transformation (12). Together, these Transformation Effector Site (TES)/C-terminal Activation Region (CTAR) 1 and 2 mimic CD40, a member of the TNF receptor family and key B-cell costimulatory receptor. LMP1 constitutively activates NF-κB, mitogen-

activated protein kinase, phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase and interferon regulatory factor
pathways. The LMP1 CTAR3 domain also activates SUMOylation pathways to control
migration and promote latency (13-15).

In this GEM, we focus on recently identified aspects of LMP1-mediated NF-κB
activation, which is critical for lymphoblastoid B-cell transformation, growth and survival,
and therefore a potential therapeutic target. Yet, genomic approaches identified
thousands of LMP1/NF-κB target genes, raising the question of which are critical for
LMP1-mediated oncogenicity. We highlight the use ChIP-seq and CRISPR/Cas9
genetic approaches to identify key LMP1 and viral super-enhancer-induced host
dependency factors. We also review recent advances in mouse models of LMP1
lymphogenesis, and adoptive immunotherapy approaches to eradicate LMP1+ cells.
Readers are referred to a recent LMP1 review for aspects not covered here due to
space constraints (16).

LMP1-MEDIATED CANONICAL NF-κB PATHWAY.

LMP1-mediated canonical NF-κB activation remodels the host cell transcriptional
program (2) and is critical for LCL survival (17, 18). Canonical NF-κB blockade for
decreases mitochondrial membrane potential and rapidly induces apoptosis (18, 19).
Hence, it is of significant interest to understand how LMP1 TES2 activates NF-κB.
TES2 initiates NF-κB activity by recruiting the adaptor protein TNF receptor (TNFR)
associated death domain (TRADD). Yet, in contrast to TNFR, TES2 binds the TRADD
death domain to prevent caspase activation (Figure 1) (20, 21). Also in contrast to the
TNFR pathway, TRAF6 is apparently the first ubiquitin ligase activated by TES2 and is

essential for downstream NF-κB and MAPK signaling (22–25). While CD40 and LMP1

each use the germinal center kinase TNIK to activate TRAF6 (26), CD40 does not

signal through TRADD. Taken together, these observations indicate that TES2 initiates

canonical NF-κB and MAPK signaling by a unique mechanism, and a key future

objective will be to identify LMP1-selective chemical antagonists.

TRAF6 catalyzes the assembly of lysine 63-linked polyubiquitin (K63pUb) chains,

which recruit and activate TAK1, a key MAPK and canonical NF-κB pathway kinase (22,

27, 28). We recently found that LCL LMP1 signalosomes are highly K63-modified (29),

and may serve to recruit TAK1 to LMP1 complexes. K63pUb chains also recruit the

linear ubiquitin assembly complex (LUBAC), which catalyzes methionine (or M1) linked

pUb chains. LMP1 complexes are also highly decorated by M1pUb chains (29), and

LUBAC is critical for TES2NF-κB activation (22, 30). LMP1 also triggers M1 chain

attachment to the IkB kinase (IKK) component NEMO (IKKγ), a key regulatory protein of

the kinase IKKB (30). The NEMO UBAN domain binds to M1pUb chains and is

necessary for LMP1 canonical NF-κB activation (31). RNAi or CRISPR disruption of

LUBAC subunit HOIP impairs LCL growth and triggers LCL apoptosis (29, 30). Ubiquitin

chains may therefore juxtapose TAK1 with its target IKK-β to drive TES2-mediated NF-

κB activation, which culminates in degradation of the IkBa inhibitor and nuclear

translocation of RelA or cRel containing dimeric NF-κB transcription factors (Figure 1).

TES1 independently activates canonical NF-κB (32). We recently reported that TES1

induces K63-pUb chain attachment to TRAF2, which together with TRAF1, recruits and

activates LUBAC (29) (Figure 1). Interestingly, the human T-cell leukemia virus TAX

oncoprotein instead catalyzes mixed K63-M1 pUb chains that instead juxtapose TAK1

and IKK complexes (33, 34). Further studies are required to determine whether mixed

K63-M1 pUb chains also signal downstream of LMP1.

The LMP1 NON-CANONICAL NF-κB Pathway

The non-canonical NF-κB pathway has important roles in B-cell development,

activation and survival. LMP1 TES1 strongly induces non-canonical NF-κB

signaling (32, 35-37), perhaps underlying the observation that TES1 is required for EBV-

mediated B-cell transformation (38). While activation of additional pathways by TES1

may contribute to this phenotype (39), the key non-canonical pathway NF-κB subunit

p52 is necessary for LCL growth and survival, underscoring LCL dependence on EBV-

induced non-canonical pathway activity (40).

The mechanism by which LMP1 activates non-canonical NF-κB remains

incompletely understood. In resting cells, non-canonical NF-κB activity is suppressed by

TRAF3, which serves as an adaptor protein that binds to the cIAP1/2/TRAF2 Ub ligase

complex and also to the key non-canonical pathway kinase NIK. In the presence of

TRAF3, cIAP1/2/TRAF2 targets NIK for proteasomal degradation, preventing activation

of its downstream target IKKα. CD40 activates non-canonical activity by causing

cIAP1/2/TRAF2 to instead target TRAF3 for degradation, which allows NIK to

accumulate (41). NIK then phosphorylates the kinase IKKα, which induces proteasomal

processing of the NF-κB subunit p100 precursor into the mature p52 form. P52-

containing NF-κB dimers then translocate to the nucleus to modulate target gene

expression (Figure 1).

LMP 1 appears to use a mechanism distinct from CD40 to activate non-canonical
pathway activity, since TRAF3 binds tightly to LMP1 and is robustly expressed in LCLs.
While LMP1 and CD40 use a similar 'PxQxT' motif to recruit TRAF3, additional
hydrogen bond interactions enable LMP1 to more tightly associate with TRAF3 (42).
LMP1 may therefore induce non-canonical pathway signaling by sequestering TRAF3 to
disrupt its association with cIAP1/2/TRAF2 and/or NIK. In support, TRAF3 over-
expression blocks LMP1-mediated non-canonical NF-κB activation (43), and dominant
negative TRAF3 expression inhibits LMP1-driven fibroblast transformation (39). LMP1
also binds to TRAF2 (44), yet molecular TRAF2 roles downstream of TES1 remain
incompletely understood. Ultimately, LMP1 TES1 activates NIK and IKKα, which are
each critical for TES1-induced non-canonical NF-κB activity (35, 45).

LYMPHOBLASTOID B-CELL NF-κB GENOMIC BINDING LANDSCAPE

Microarray profiling studies suggest that LMP1 targets thousands of host genes in
epithelial and B-lymphocytes. To systematically investigate how LMP1-activated NF-κB
subunits target host genes, we performed chromatin immunoprecipitation of the LCL
NF-κB transcription factor subunits RelA, RelB, cRel, p50 and p52 followed by deep
sequencing (ChIP-seq) (46). An intriguing LCL NF-κB genomic binding landscape was
identified, with 11 NF-κB distinct subunit binding patterns (SBP) at enhancers and 10 at
promoters. Subunits activated by both the LMP1 canonical and noncanonical
pathways each contributed to most SBPs. This complexity may stem from the fact that
concurrent LMP1 canonical and non-canonical pathway activity causes nuclear
translocation of up to 13 distinct NF-κB dimeric trasncription factors. Interestingly,

134 exclusive occupancy by the prototypic NF-κB heterodimers RelA:p50, cRel:p50 and
135 RelB:p52 are rare. Distinct gene ontology terms were enriched at each of these
136 clusters, suggesting non-redundant LCL roles (46). These results provide insights into
137 why LMP1 TES1 and TES2 domains may each be necessary to fully-activate target
138 genes during B-cell transformation, yet raise questions about the mechanisms that
139 establish LCL enhancer and promoter SBPs, when these patterns are established in the
140 course of EBV-mediated B-cell transformation, and the extent to which individual NF-κB
141 subunits are necessary for target gene regulation at these sites.

142 Nearly one-third of LCL genome NF-κB occupied sites do not have an identifiable κB
143 DNA motif, suggesting that NF-κB may be recruited to these sites via cross-talk with
144 other EBV-activated pathways (46). For instance, the IRF4 DNA motif is highly-enriched
145 at promoter sites occupied only by LMP1/non-canonical pathway-activated p52.
146 EBNA3C and LMP1 upregulate IRF4 expression (17, 47), which may then tether p52 to
147 these sites. Similarly, an E-box motif is enriched at LCL promoters bound predominantly
148 by LMP1/canonical pathway activated cRel, suggesting that an E-box bound host
149 transcription factor such as c-Myc may tether cRel homodimers to these sites. Cross-
150 talk may underlie key NF-κB subunit-specific roles downstream of LMP1, which await
151 further characterization.

152 Cross-talk between NF-κB and other nuclear transcription factors likely shapes many
153 LMP1 effects on host gene expression. Unexpectedly, ChIP-seq analysis revealed that
154 the forkhead box transcription factor FoxM1 co-occupies nearly half of all LCL NF-κB
155 sites (46). The κB DNA motif, rather than a forkhead box motif, is highly enriched at

these sites, suggesting that DNA-bound NF-κB may recruit FoxM1. FoxM1 knockdown

significantly impairs expression of LCL NF-κB target genes and triggers rapid LCL

apoptosis, suggesting that FoxM1 is a key co-factor at these sites. Further studies are

required to identify how EBV upregulates and activates FoxM1, how FoxM1 is recruited

to NF-κB bound LCL sites, and in particular how it co-activates expression of key

targets such as Tak1 and cIAP2 (46).

**VIRAL SUPER-ENHANCERS TARGET KEY HOST DEPENDENCY FACTORS**

Super-enhancers (SE) are transcriptional elements that strongly up-regulate genes

important for cell identity and oncogenic state (48). LCL ChIP-seq analysis identified the

first viral super-enhancers, comprised of five LMP1-activated NF-κB subunits and four

EBNAs (49). Host genes targeted by the 187EBV SE are expressed more highly than

other LCL genes and include BCL2, c-Myc and the oncogenic micro-RNA miR-155.

Interestingly, c-Myc is targeted by independent EBV SE, which loop to the c-Myc

promoter from 525 and 428 kilobases upstream (50-52). CRISPR/Cas9-mediated

knockout of either SE strongly impairs c-Myc expression and induces LCL death,

underscoring EBV SE roles in lymphoblastoid B-cell growth and survival. EBV SE are

exquisitely sensitive to NF-κB or BET bromodomain antagonists, such as the small

molecule JQ1, which arrest LCL growth and induces apoptosis (49).

We used genome-wide CRISPR/Cas9 loss-of-function screens to systematically

identify key EBV-induced host dependency factors. Top screen hits were enriched for

EBV SE targets and included cFLIP, BATF, IRF4 and IRF2, which were found to be

critical for evasion of EBV-induced tumor suppressor responses (40). Perhaps as an

178 oncogene induced stress response, the EBV latency III program stimulates
179 lymphoblastoid B-cell TNFα production, which necessitates LMP1-induced cFLIP to
180 block extrinsic apoptosis and necroptosis pathways. LMP1-induced cFLIP may also
181 protect cells in vivo from TNFα produced by cell-mediated immune responses to EBV
182 infection.
183 EBV oncogenic stress is a potent stimulus for transcriptional upregulation of the
184 intrinsic apoptosis executioner protein BIM. To circumvent BIM induction, LMP1 and
185 EBNA proteins upregulate the transcription factors BATF and IRF4, which together with
186 EBNA3 repressor complexes, block BIM induction. CRISPR knockout of IRF4 or BATF
187 strongly induces BIM and triggers rapid LCL apoptosis. BATF/Jun and IRF4
188 cooperatively bind to a composite BIM promoter AP-1-interferon site, which they co-
189 occupy with EBNA3 proteins. Taken together with the finding that the BATF/IRF4 motif
190 is enriched at LCL EBNA3A and 3C binding sites (53, 54), we hypothesize that
191 BATF/IRF4 tether EBNA3 proteins to DNA to enable assembly of repressor complexes
192 at key LCL genomic sites including BIM.
193 EBV IRF4 dependency triggers another tumor suppressor response, since a key
194 IRF4 B-cell target gene is Blimp1, a master regulator of plasma cell differentiation that
195 blocks c-Myc. To overcome this barrier, LMP1, EBNA3 and EBV miRNAs each down-
196 modulate Blimp1 (40, 55, 56). LMP1 upregulates IRF2 and its co-repressor IRF2BP2 via
197 EBV SEs, which may form repressor complexes at a Blimp1 promoter interferon
198 response element to counteract IRF4 effects on Blimp1 (40). EBNA3A and 3C also block
199 LCL Blimp1 upregulation, and withdrawal of EBNA3A and 3C expression triggered
200 plasma cell differentiation (56). Further studies are required to determine whether

LMP 1-activated IRF4, BATF4 and perhaps IRF2 tether EBNA3 co-repressor complexes  
at the Blimp1 promoter. Underscoring the EBV need to counteract Blimp1, EBV-miR-  
BHRF1-2 further reduces Blimp1 expression (57).  

LMP1 PROMOTES AEROBIC GLYCOLYSIS  

LMP1 acts as a metabolism master regulator in lymphoblastoid and nasopharyngeal  
carcinoma cells (NPC) by promoting aerobic glycolysis, the so-called Warburg effect  
that supplies transformed cells with ATP and anabolic building blocks (58). In a  
pioneering study, LMP1-mediated NF-κB and AKT/PI3K pathways were found to  
enhance the transcription and plasma membrane translocation of glucose transporter 1  
(GLUT1) (58). LMP1 signaling also increases GLUT1 half-life to further upregulate  
GLUT1 (59), and also enhances glycolytic flux by upregulating the first glycolysis  
pathway enzyme, hexokinase 2 (60). NF-κB inhibition represses glucose uptake,  
induces autophagy and caspase-independent cell death (58).  

LMP1 plays a key role in establishing the Warburg effect in newly-infected primary  
human B cells, where glycolytic flux correlates with LMP1 levels during growth  
transformation (61). LMP1 is sufficient to induce aerobic glycolysis in NPC cells (60),  
and GLUT1 depletion suppresses nasopharyngeal epithelial cell aerobic glycolysis,  
proliferation and colony formation (62). Further studies are required to determine  
whether additional EBV latency proteins contribute to this phenotype. Interestingly,  
LMP1-mediated aerobic glycolysis drives expansion of myeloid-derived suppressor cells  
in the NPC tumor microenvironment (59), which may facilitate immune-escape. LMP1 is  

also secreted from NPC and B-cells in exosome vesicles, and further shape the tumor

microenvironment(63-65).

MOUSE MODELS OF LMP1 LYMPHOMAGENESIS

Mouse models have provided key insights into LMP1 oncogenicity *in vivo*. In classic studies, LMP1 was found to transform rodent fibroblasts, to drive epithelial xenograft tumor formation (7, 66) and to accelerate B-cell lymphomagenesis (9). When expressed alone or together with LMP2A from an early stage of B-cell development, immune- surveillance prevents lymphomagenesis (8, 67). Notably, loss of T-cell surveillance results in LMP1-driven fatal lymphoproliferative disease within 60 days (8).

Most EBV-driven lymphomas arise from germinal center (GC) B-cells, where LMP1 and LMP2A are co-expressed, together with EBNA1 in the EBV latency II expression program. EBV latency II is observed in Hodgkin lymphoma (HL) and also in NPC. GC B-cell LMP1 and LMP2A co-expression causes rapidly fatal lymphoproliferative disease in T-cell deficient mice (68), further highlighting the key role of immune-surveillance in countering LMP1 oncogenicity. NK cells also have key host defense roles necessary for host defense against EBV, and combined T/NK-cell depletion results in massive LMP1/LMP2A-driven GC B-cell outgrowth, plasmablast differentiation and death within 12 days (69).

HL are thought to arise from crippled GC B-cells, rescued from apoptosis by oncogenic mutations or by EBV infection, perhaps explaining why nearly 40% of HL are EBV-infected (70). In support of a pathogenic LMP1 role in HL, NF-κB activation mutations are observed at significantly higher frequencies in EBV-negative HL tumors

then in EBV-infected samples (70). GC B-cell LMP1 and LMP2A co-expression induces

transcriptional changes that overlap with gene signatures found in classical Hodgkin

Reed-Sternberg (HRS) cells. These include expression of the therapeutic target CD30

(69) and the non-B-cell lineage markers perforin and granzyme, which are uniquely co-

expressed in HRS cells.

LMP1 knockout markedly impairs EBV lymphomagenesis in a cord-blood humanized

mouse model. In the absence of LMP1, low frequency development of EBV+

lymphomas was dependent on CD40 signaling induced by T-cells, which likely provides

similar growth and survival signals as LMP1, albeit at lower levels (71). Simultaneous

LMP1 and LMP2A deletion further reduced and delayed the onset of tumors, but did not

completely eliminate lymphoma development (72).

It will be interesting to identify key CD40-induced host dependency factors in these

models, the extent to which they overlap with identified EBV-induced LCL dependency

factors, and whether CD40-mediated NF-κB activation can substitute for that of LMP1 in

driving assembly of NF-κB and EBNA containing SE at key sites, such as cFLIP, IRF4

and IRF2. A limitation of currently available humanized mouse models is that germinal

center development is impaired, and consequently, cell with EBV latency II expression

are rarely observed. As humanized models continue to develop, it will be of significant

interest to study LMP1 roles in latency II GC B-cells.

IMMUNOTHERAPEUTIC APPROACHES TARGETING LMP1

LMP1 lacks enzymatic function and has not yet proven to be a druggable target.

However, the expression of LMP1 by epithelial and B-cell malignancies is increasingly

being targeted in adoptive T-cell immunotherapies. LMP1-specific cytotoxic T-
lymphocytes (CTLs) can be found in most EBV+ individuals at low frequency, and can
be expanded *in vitro* for adoptive immunotherapy. Adoptive CTL approaches were first
used to treat lymphoproliferative diseases in hematopoietic stem cell transplant
recipients, which express the full complement of EBV latency III antigens (73, 74).

Adoptive immunotherapy approaches are also in development to overcome the less
immunogenic EBV latency II antigens. LMP1 and LMP2A-specific cytotoxic T-cells
have induced remission in patients with high-risk or relapsed EBV+ Hodgkin and non-
Hodgkin lymphomas (74, 75). Adoptive CTL approaches targeting latency II antigens
are in development for the treatment of NPC (76). An adenoviral vector-based vaccine
has shown promise for targeting LMP2A, EBNA1 and when expressed, LMP1 in
nasopharyngeal carcinoma (77-79). LMP1 drives the expression of the T-cell inhibitory
receptor PD-L1 (80-82), and PD-1-PD-L1 immune checkpoint blockade has improved
EBV+ lymphoma and NPC treatment responses (19, 83-85). It will be of interest to
determine whether checkpoint-blockade, perhaps together with strategies to induce
EBV lytic gene expression, synergize with adoptive immunotherapy approaches.

FUTURE DIRECTIONS

Despite significant advances in the understanding of LMP1-mediated oncogenicity,
many key questions remain. Within the cytosol, a more complete understanding of how
LMP1 TES1 and TES2 initiate NF-κB signaling is an important objective, as this
appears to significantly differentiate LMP1 from CD40. It is likely that additional pathway
components remain to be identified, and focused genetic and proteomic approaches

288 promise to identify LMP1 signalosome components selectively important for TES1-
289 mediated NIK stabilization and for TES2-mediated TRAF6 activation.

290 CRISPR/Cas9 engineering should enable focused studies of NF-κB pathway-specific
291 roles, including at early timepoints after primary B-cell infection by EBV. For instance,
292 recent studies indicate that LMP1 is expressed with delayed kinetics after primary B-cell
293 infection (86). Knockout of key pathway components promises to reveal why LMP1-
294 induced canonical and non-canonical NF-κB are each critical for LCL growth and
295 survival, when they first become critical dependency factors, and how cross-talk
296 between LMP1-activated NF-κB, MAP kinase, PI3 kinase and interferon regulatory
297 factor pathways sculpts target gene regulation. Similarly, LMP1 and LMP2A are typically
298 co-expressed and co-localize in cell membranes, yet mechanisms by which they
299 synergistically regulate a wide-range of GC B-cell target genes are yet to be
300 identified (69).

301 Major principles of NF-κB nuclear regulation downstream of LMP1 await further
302 studies. CRISPR/Cas9 analysis suggests that multiple NF-κB subunits are critical for
303 lymphoblastoid B-cell survival, yet little is presently known about their unique
304 dependency factor roles. For instance, defining the mechanisms by which up to 13
305 distinct LMP1-activated NF-κB transcription factor dimers are targeted to distinct LCL
306 enhancer and promoter sites will be an important objective.

307 EBVSE are highly sensitive to perturbation and are potentially druggable therapeutic
308 targets. It will therefore be of significant interest to determine how LMP1-activated NF-
309 κB and EBNA establish EBVSE, why they form at particular LCL sites, whether EBNA

and NF-κB interact within viral SE, and to define other host transcription factors
necessary for their formation. Similarly, how EBV SE target LCL promoters by long-
range DNA interactions, and specifically whether NF-κB promotes DNA looping at these
sites, are open questions. Do LMP1 and LMP2A trigger formation of super-enhancers in
HL and NPC, where they are expressed in the absence of EBNA 2, 3A, 3CorLP? If so,
what are their genomic targets? What are the key EBV-induced host dependency
factors in these tumors?

EBV latency III expression causes transformed B-cell addiction to host cell factors. It
may ultimately be possible to use small molecule approaches to exploit these LMP1-
induced synthetic lethal dependencies, including LMP1-mediated induction of cFLIP,
IRF2, IRF4. Indeed, transcription factors have increasingly become potentially
druggable targets, for instance as substrates for small molecule-induced ubiquitin
proteasome pathway degradation.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS: We apologize to colleagues whose work we could not cite
because of space limitation.

FUNDING INFORMATION: This work, including the efforts of Benjamin Gewurz, was
funded by a Burroughs Wellcome Foundation Career Award in Medical Sciences, and
by the Brigham & Women's hospital. SJ is funded by a Howard Hughes Predoctoral
Fellowship. LW is supported by an ASTAR fellowship.

Figure Legends

Figure 1. LMP1-mediated canonical and non-canonical NF-κB activation pathways.
The LMP1 TES2 domain recruits TRADD to activate TRAF6, which assembles K63-
linked pUb chains. K63-pUb chains recruit and activate the kinase TAK1 and the
LUBAC complex, which attaches Methionine 1-linked (M1) pUb chains to NEMO. TAK1
activates IKKβ, which then phosphorylates IkBα to enable RelA:p50 and cRel:p50
nuclear translocation. Canonical NF-κB is further activated by TES1, which recruits
TRAFs 1 and 2, likely as a heterotrimer. TES1 triggers K63-pUb chain attachment to
TRAF2, which together with TRAF1, recruits and activates LUBAC. K63 and M1-linked
pUb chains facilitate IKKβ activation by TAK1. LMP1 TES1 also stimulates non-
canonical NF-κB activation, perhaps by sequestering TRAF3 to enable accumulation of
the kinase NIK. IKKα is then activated by NIK and phosphorylates p100 to trigger its
proteasomal processing into the mature p52NF-κB subunit. p52 complexes translocate
into the nucleus to regulate target gene expression. Not shown here, concurrent LMP1-
mediated canonical and non-canonical pathway activation causes nuclear translocation
of up to 13 NF-κB transcription factor dimers.

Figure 2. LMP1-activated NF-κB transcription factors and EBNA super-
enhancers. In B-cells with the EBV latency III expression program, LMP1-activated NF-
κB, as well as EBNA2, LP, 3A, 3Cform187EBV super-enhancers, together with other
host transcription factors. Histone 3 lysine 27 acetylation (H3K27ac, shown in red) and
Pol II ChIP-seq signals are markedly elevated at these sites. CTCF and cohesin-

353 mediated DNA looping enables a subset of EBV super-enhancers to target host
354 promoters by long-range DNA interactions. EBV super-enhancer targets are more
355 highly expressed than LCL genes targeted by typical enhancers, and drive the
356 expression of key EBV-induced host dependency factors.
357 
358 
359 

REFERENCES

1. Epstein A. 2015. Why and How Epstein-Barr Virus Was Discovered 50 Years Ago. Curr Top Microbiol Immunol 390:3-15.
2. Gewurz BE, Mar JC, Padi M, Zhao B, Shinners NP, Takasaki K, Bedoya E, Zou JY, Cahir-McFarland E, Quackenbush J, Kieff E. 2011. Canonical NF-kappaB activation is essential for Epstein-Barr virus latent membrane protein 1 TES2/CTAR2 gene regulation. J Virol 85:6764-6773.
3. Pope JH, Horne MK, Scott W. 1968. Transformation of foetal human keukocytes in vitro by filtrates of a human leukaemic cell line containing herpes-like virus. Int J Cancer 3:857-866.
4. Pattengale PK, Smith RW, Gerber P. 1973. Selective transformation of B lymphocytes by E.B. virus. Lancet 2:93-94.
5. Longnecker R, Kieff, E and Cohen, JL. 2013. Epstein-Barr Virus, p 1898-1959. In Knipe DMaH, P.M. (ed), Fields Virology, 6 ed, vol 2. Lippincott, Williams and Wilkins, Philadelphia.
6. Feederle R, Haar J, Bernhardt K, Linnstaedt SD, Bannert H, Lips H, Cullen BR, Delecluse HJ. 2011. The members of an Epstein-Barr virus microRNA cluster cooperate to transform B lymphocytes. J Virol 85:9801-9810.
7. Wang D, Liebowitz D, Kieff E. 1985. An EBV membrane protein expressed in immortalized lymphocytes transforms established rodent cells. Cell 43:831-840.
8. Zhang B, Kracker S, Yasuda T, Casola S, Vanneman M, Homig-Holzel C, Wang Z, Derudder E, Li S, Chakraborty T, Cotter SE, Koyama S, Currie T, Freeman GJ, Kutok JL, Rodig SJ, Dranoff G, Rajewsky K. 2012. Immune surveillance and therapy of lymphomas driven by Epstein-Barr virus protein LMP1 in a mouse model. Cell 148:739-751.
9. Kulwichit W, Edwards RH, Davenport EM, Baskar JF, Godfrey V, Raab-Traub N. 1998. Expression of the Epstein-Barr virus latent membrane protein 1 induces B cell lymphoma in transgenic mice. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 95:11963-11968.
10. Higuchi M, Izumi KM, Kieff E. 2001. Epstein-Barr virus latent-infection membrane proteins are palmitoylated and raft-associated: protein 1 binds to the cytoskeleton through TNF receptor cytoplasmic factors. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 98:4675-4680.
11. Meckes DG, Jr., Menaker NF, Raab-Traub N. 2013. Epstein-Barr virus LMP1 modulates lipid raft microdomains and the vimentin cytoskeleton for signal transduction and transformation. J Virol 87:1301-1311.
12. Kaye KM, Izumi KM, Kieff E. 1993. Epstein-Barr virus latent membrane protein 1 is essential for B-lymphocyte growth transformation. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 90:9150-9154.
13. Bentz GL, Whitehurst CB, Pagano JS. 2011. Epstein-Barr virus latent membrane protein 1 (LMP1) C-terminal-activating region 3 contributes to LMP1-mediated cellular migration via its interaction with Ubc9. J Virol 85:10144-10153.
14. Bentz GL, Moss CR, 2nd, Whitehurst CB, Moody CA, Pagano JS. 2015. LMP1-Induced Sumoylation Influences the Maintenance of Epstein-Barr Virus Latency through KAP1. J Virol 89:7465-7477.
15. Izumi KM, Cahir McFarland ED, Riley EA, Rizzo D, Chen Y, Kieff E. 1999. The residues between the two transformation effector sites of Epstein-Barr virus latent membrane protein 1 are not critical for B-lymphocyte growth transformation. J Virol 73:9908-9916.
16. Kieser A, Sterz KR. 2015. The Latent Membrane Protein 1 (LMP1). Curr Top Microbiol Immunol 391:119-149.

17. Cahir-McFarland ED, Carter K, Rosenwald A, Gilt nane JM, Henrickson SE, Staudt LM, Kieff E. 2004. Role of NF-kappa B in cell survival and transcription of latent membrane protein 1-expressing or Epstein-Barr virus latency III-infected cells. J Virol 78:4108-4119.
18. Keller SA, Hernandez-Hopkins D, Vider J, Ponomarev V, Hyjek E, Schattner EJ, Ceser man E. 2006. NF-kappaB is essential for the progression of KSHV- and EBV-infected lymphomas in vivo. Blood 107:3295-3302.
19. Goodman A, Patel SP, Kurzrock R. 2017. PD-1-PD-L1 immune-checkpoint blockade in B-cell lymphomas. Nat Rev Clin Oncol 14:203-220.
20. Schneider F, Neugebauer J, Griese J, Liefold N, Kutz H, Briseno C, Kieser A. 2008. The viral oncoprotein LMP1 exploits TRADD for signaling by masking its apoptotic activity. PLoS Biol 6:e8.
21. Izumi KM, Cahir McFarland ED, Ting AT, Riley EA, Seed B, Kieff ED. 1999. The Epstein-Barr virus oncoprotein latent membrane protein 1 engages the tumor necrosis factor receptor-associated proteins TRADD and receptor-interacting protein (RIP) but does not induce apoptosis or require RIP for NF-kappaB activation. Mol Cell Biol 19:5759-5767.
22. Gewurz BE, Towfic F, Mar JC, Shinn ers NP, Takasaki K, Zhao B, Cahir-McFarland ED, Quackenbush J, Xavier RJ, Kieff E. 2012. Genome-wide siRNA screen for mediators of NF-kappaB activation. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 109:2467-2472.
23. Luftig M, Prinarakis E, Yasui T, Tsichritzis T, Cahir-McFarland E, Inoue J, Nakano H, Mak TW, Yeh WC, Li X, Akira S, Suzuki N, Suzuki S, Mosialos G, Kieff E. 2003. Epstein-Barr virus latent membrane protein 1 activation of NF-kappaB through IRAK1 and TRAF6. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 100:15595-15600.
24. Schultheiss U, Puschner S, Kremmer E, Mak TW, Engelmann H, Hammerschmidt W, Kieser A. 2001. TRAF6 is a critical mediator of signal transduction by the viral oncogene latent membrane protein 1. EMBO J 20:5678-5691.
25. Arcipowski KM, Stunz LL, Bishop GA. 2014. TRAF6 is a critical regulator of LMP1 functions in vivo. Int Immunol 26:149-158.
26. Shkoda A, Town JA, Griese J, Romio M, Sarioglu H, Knofel T, Giehler F, Kieser A. 2012. The germinal center kinase TNIK is required for canonical NF-kappaB and JNK signaling in B-cells by the EBV oncoprotein LMP1 and the CD40 receptor. PLoS Biol 10:e1001376.
27. Wu L, Nakano H, Wu Z. 2006. The C-terminal activating region 2 of the Epstein-Barr virus-encoded latent membrane protein 1 activates NF-kappaB through TRAF6 and TAK1. J Biol Chem 281:2162-2169.
28. Arcipowski KM, Bishop GA. 2012. Roles of the kinase TAK1 in TRAF6-dependent signaling by CD40 and its oncogenic viral mimic, LMP1. PLoS One 7:e42478.
29. Greenfeld H, Takasaki K, Walsh MJ, Ersing I, Bernhardt K, Ma Y, Fu B, Ashbaugh CW, Cabo J, Mollo SB, Zhou H, Li S, Gewurz BE. 2015. TRAF1 Coordinates Polyubiquitin Signaling to Enhance Epstein-Barr Virus LMP1-Mediated Growth and Survival Pathway Activation. PLoS Pathog 11:e1004890.
30. Wang L, Wang Y, Zhao J, Ren J, Hall KH, Moorman JP, Yao ZQ, Ning S. 2017. The Linear Ubiquitin Assembly Complex Modulates Latent Membrane Protein 1 Activation of NF-kappaB and Interferon Regulatory Factor 7. J Virol 91.
31. Boehm D, Gewurz BE, Kieff E, Cahir-McFarland E. 2010. Epstein-Barr latent membrane protein 1 transformation site 2 activates NF-kappaB in the absence of NF-kappaB essential modifier residues 133-224 or 373-419. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 107:18103-18108.
32. Kung CP, Raab-Traub N. 2010. Epstein-Barr virus latent membrane protein 1 modulates distinctive NF-kappaB pathways through C-terminus-activating region 1 to regulate epidermal growth factor receptor expression. J Virol 84:6605-6614.

33. Shibata Y, Tokunaga F, Goto E, Komatsu G, Gohda J, Saeki Y, Tanaka K, Takahashi H, Sawasaki T, Inoue S, Oshiumi H, Seya T, Nakano H, Tanaka Y, Iwai K, Inoue JI. 2017. HTLV-1 Tax Induces Formation of the Active Macromolecular IKK Complex by Generating Lys 63-and Met 1-Linked Hybrid Polyubiquitin Chains. PLoS Pathog 13:e1006162.

34. Wang C, Long W, Peng C, Hu L, Zhang Q, Wu A, Zhang X, Duan X, Wong CC, Tanaka Y, Xia Z. 2016. HTLV-1 Tax Functions as a Ubiquitin E3 Ligase for Direct IKK Activation via Synthesis of Mixed-Linkage Polyubiquitin Chains. PLoS Pathog 12:e1005584.

35. Luftig M, Yasui T, Soni V, Kang MS, Jacobson N, Cahir-McFarland E, Seed B, Kieff E. 2004. Epstein-Barr virus latent infection membrane protein 1 TRAF-binding site induces NIK/IKK alpha-dependent noncanonical NF-kappaB activation. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 101:141-146.

36. Eliopoulos AG, Caamano JH, Flavell J, Reynolds GM, Murray PG, Poyet JL, Young LS. 2003. Epstein-Barr virus-encoded latent infection membrane protein 1 regulates the processing of p100NF-kappaB2top52viaanIKKgamma/NEMO-independent signaling pathway. Oncogene 22:7557-7569.

37. Saito N, Courtois G, Chiba A, Yamamoto N, Nitta T, Hironaka N, Rowe M, Yamamoto N, Yamaoka S. 2003. Two carboxyl-terminal activation regions of Epstein-Barr virus latent membrane protein 1 activate NF-kappaB through distinct signaling pathways in fibroblast cell lines. J Biol Chem 278:46565-46575.

38. Izumi KM, Kaye KM, Kieff ED. 1997. The Epstein-Barr virus LMP1 amino acid sequence that engages tumor necrosis factor receptor associated factors is critical for primary B lymphocyte growth transformation. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 94:1447-1452.

39. Mainou BA, Everly DN, Jr., Raab-Traub N. 2007. Unique signaling properties of CTAR1inLMP1-mediated transformation. J Virol 81:9680-9692.

40. Ma Y, Walsh MJ, Bernhardt K, Ashbaugh CW, Trudeau SJ, Ashbaugh IY, Jiang S, Jiang C, Zhao B, Root DE, Doench JG, Gewurz BE. 2017. CRISPR/Cas9 Screens Reveal Epstein-Barr Virus-Transformed B Cell Host Dependency Factors. Cell Host Microbe 21:580-591 e587.

41. Vallabhapurapu S, Matsuzawa A, Zhang W, Tseng PH, Keats JJ, Wang H, Vignali DA, Bergsagel PL, Karin M. 2008. Nonredundant and complementary functions of TRAF2 and TRAF3in a ubiquitination cascade that activates NIK-dependent alternative NF-kappaB signaling. Nat Immunol 9:1364-1370.

42. Wu S, Xie P, Welsh K, Li C, Ni CZ, Zhu X, Reed JC, Satterthwait AC, Bishop GA, Ely KR. 2005. LMP1 protein from the Epstein-Barr virus is a structural CD40 decoy in B lymphocytes for binding to TRAF3. J Biol Chem 280:33620-33626.

43. Song YJ, Kang MS. 2010. Roles of TRAF2 and TRAF3 in Epstein-Barr virus latent membrane protein 1-induced alternative NF-kappaB activation. Virus Genes 41:174-180.

44. Mosialos G, Birkenbach M, Yalamanchili R, VanArsdale T, Ware C, Kieff E. 1995. The Epstein-Barr virus transforming protein LMP1 engages signaling proteins for the tumor necrosis factor receptor family. Cell 80:389-399.

45. Sylla BS, Hung SC, Davidson DM, Hatzivassiliou E, Malinin NL, Wallach D, Gilmore TD, Kieff E, Mosialos G. 1998. Epstein-Barr virus-transforming protein latent infection membrane protein 1 activates transcription factor NF-kappaB through a pathway that includes the NF-kappaB-inducing kinase and the IkappaB kinases IKKalpha and IKKbeta. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 95:10106-10111.

46. Zhao B, Barrera LA, Ersing I, Willox B, Schmidt SC, Greenfeld H, Zhou H, Mollo SB, Shi TT, Takasaki K, Jiang S, Cahir-McFarland E, Kellis M, Bulyk ML, Kieff E, Gewurz BE. 2014. The NF-kappaB genomic landscape in lymphoblastoid B cells. Cell Rep 8:1595-1606.

47. Banerjee S, Lu J, Cai Q, Saha A, Jha HC, Dzeng RK, Robertson ES. 2013. The EBV Latent Antigen 3C Inhibits Apoptosis through Targeted Regulation of Interferon Regulatory Factors 4 and 8. PLoS Pathog 9:e1003314.

48. Loven J, Hoke HA, Lin CY, Lau A, Orlando DA, Vakoc CR, Bradner JE, Lee TI, Young RA. 2013. Selective inhibition of tumor oncogenes by disruption of super-enhancers. Cell 153:320-334.

49. Zhou H, Schmidt SC, Jiang S, Willox B, Bernhardt K, Liang J, Johannsen EC, Kharchenko P, Gewurz BE, Kieff E, Zhao B. 2015. Epstein-Barr virus oncoprotein super-enhancers control B cell growth. Cell Host Microbe 17:205-216.

50. Zhao B, Zou J, Wang H, Johannsen E, Peng CW, Quackenbush J, Mar JC, Morton CC, Freedman ML, Blacklow SC, Aster JC, Bernstein BE, Kieff E. 2011. Epstein-Barr virus exploits intrinsic B-lymphocyte transcription programs to achieve immortal cell growth. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 108:14902-14907.

51. Wood CD, Veenstra H, Khasnis S, Gunnell A, Webb HM, Shannon-Lowe C, Andrews S, Osborne CS, West MJ. 2016. MYC activation and BCL2L11 silencing by a tumour virus through the large-scale reconfiguration of enhancer-promoter hubs. Elife 5.

52. Jiang S, Zhou H, Liang J, Gerdt C, Wang C, Ke L, Narita Y, Colson T, Gewurz BG, Li G, Kieff E, Zhao B. 2017. 3D genome landscape of Epstein-Barr Virus oncoproteins and virus activated NF-kB in lymphoblastoid cells. Cell Host Microbe In Press.

53. Schmidt SC, Jiang S, Zhou H, Willox B, Holthaus AM, Kharchenko PV, Johannsen EC, Kieff E, Zhao B. 2015. Epstein-Barr virus nuclear antigen 3A partially coincides with EBNA3C genome-wide and is tethered to DNA through BATF complexes. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 112:554-559.

54. Jiang S, Willox B, Zhou H, Holthaus AM, Wang A, Shi TT, Maruo S, Kharchenko PV, Johannsen EC, Kieff E, Zhao B. 2014. Epstein-Barr virus nuclear antigen 3C binds to BATF/IRF4 or SPI1/IRF4 composite sites and recruits Sin3A to repress CDKN2A. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 111:421-426.

55. Vrzalikova K, Vockerodt M, Leonard S, Bell A, Wei W, Schrader A, Wright KL, Kube D, Rowe M, Woodman CB, Murray PG. 2011. Down-regulation of BLIMP1alpha by the EBV oncogene, LMP-1, disrupts the plasma cell differentiation program and prevents viral replication in B cells: implications for the pathogenesis of EBV-associated B-cell lymphomas. Blood 117:5907-5917.

56. Styles CT, Bazot Q, Parker GA, White RE, Paschos K, Allday MJ. 2017. EBV epigenetically suppresses the B cell-to-plasma cell differentiation pathway while establishing long-term latency. PLoS Biol 15:e2001992.

57. Ma J, Nie K, Redmond D, Liu Y, Elemento O, Knowles DM, Tam W. 2016. EBV-miR-BHRF1-2 targets PRDM1/Blimp1: potential role in EBV lymphomagenesis. Leukemia 30:594-604.

58. Sommermann TG, O'Neill K, Plas DR, Cahir-McFarland E. 2011. IKKbeta and NF-kappaB transcription govern lymphoma cell survival through AKT-induced plasma membrane trafficking of GLUT1. Cancer Res 71:7291-7300.

59. Cai TT, Ye SB, Liu YN, He J, Chen QY, Mai HQ, Zhang CX, Cui J, Zhang XS, Busson P, Zeng YX, Li J. 2017. LMP1-mediated glycolysis induces myeloid-derived suppressor cell expansion in nasopharyngeal carcinoma. PLoS Pathog 13:e1006503.

60. Xiao L, Hu ZY, Dong X, Tan Z, Li W, Tang M, Chen L, Yang L, Tao Y, Jiang Y, Li J, Yi B, Li B, Fan S, You S, Deng X, Hu F, Feng L, Bode AM, Dong Z, Sun LQ, Cao Y. 2014. Targeting Epstein-Barr virus oncoprotein LMP1-mediated glycolysis sensitizes nasopharyngeal carcinoma to radiation therapy. Oncogene 33:4568-4578.

61. McFadden K, Hafez AY, Kishton R, Messinger JE, Nikitin PA, Rathmell JC, Luftig MA. 2016. Metabolic stress is a barrier to Epstein-Barr virus-mediated B-cell immortalization. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 113:E782-790.

62. Zhang J, Jia L, Lin W, Yip YL, Lo KW, Lau VM, Zhu D, Tsang CM, Zhou Y, Deng W, Lung HL, Lung ML, Cheung LM, Tsao SW. 2017. Epstein-Barr Virus-Encoded Latent Membrane Protein 1

547 Uregulates Glucose Transporter 1 Transcription via the mTORC1/NF-kappaB Signaling Pathways. J Virol 91.
548 Hurwitz SN, Nkosi D, Conlon MM, York SB, Liu X, Tremblay DC, Meckes DG, Jr. 2017. CD 63.
549 Regulates Epstein-Barr Virus LMP1 Exosomal Packaging, Enhancement of Vesicle Production,
550 and Noncanonical NF-kappaB Signaling. J Virol 91.
551 Verweij FJ, van Eijndhoven MA, Hopmans ES, Vendrig T, Wurdinger T, Cahir-McFarland E, Kieff
552 E, Geerts D, van der Kant R, Neefjes J, Middeldorp JM, Pegtel DM. 2011. LMP1 association with
553 CD63 in endosomes and secretion via exosomes limits constitutive NF-kappaB activation. EMBO
554 J30:2115-2129.
555 Meckes DG, Jr., Shair KH, Marquitz AR, Kung CP, Edwards RH, Raab-Traub N. 2010. Human
556 tumor virus utilizes exosomes for intercellular communication. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
557 107:20370-20375.
558 Baichwal VR, Sugden B. 1988. Transformation of Balb3T3 cells by the BNLF-1 gene of Epstein-
559 Barr virus. Oncogene 2:461-467.
560 Vrazo AC, Chauchard M, Raab-Traub N, Longnecker R. 2012. Epstein-Barr virus LMP2A reduces
561 hyperactivation induced by LMP1 to restore normal B cell phenotype in transgenic mice. PLoS
562 Pathog 8:e1002662.
563 Wirtz T, Weber T, Kracker S, Sommermann T, Rajewsky K, Yasuda T. 2016. Mouse model for
564 acute Epstein-Barr virus infection. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 113:13821-13826.
565 Minamitani T, Ma Y, Zhou H, Kida H, Tsai CY, Obana M, Okuzaki D, Fujio Y, Kumanogoh A, Zhao
566 B, Kikutani H, Kieff E, Gewurz BE, Yasui T. 2017. Mouse model of Epstein-Barr virus LMP1-and
567 LMP2A-driven germinal center B-cell lymphoproliferative disease. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
568 114:4751-4756.
569 Weniger MA, Kuppers R. 2016. NF-kappaB deregulation in Hodgkin lymphoma. Semin Cancer
570 Biol 39:32-39.
571 Ma SD, Xu X, Plowshay J, Ranheim EA, Burlington WJ, Jensen JL, Asimakopoulos F, Tang W,
572 Gulley ML, Cesarmen E, Gumperz JE, Kenney SC. 2015. LMP1-deficient Epstein-Barr virus
573 mutant requires T cells for lymphomagenesis. J Clin Invest 125:304-315.
574 Ma SD, Tsai MH, Romero-Masters JC, Ranheim EA, Huebner SM, Bristol JA, Delecluse HJ,
575 Kenney SC. 2017. Latent Membrane Protein 1 (LMP1) and LMP2A Collaborate To Promote
576 Epstein-Barr Virus-Induced B Cell Lymphomas in a Cord Blood-Humanized Mouse Model but Are
577 Not Essential. J Virol 91.
578 Doubrovina E, Oflaz-Sozmen B, Prockop SE, Kernan NA, Abramson S, Teruya-Feldstein J,
579 Hedvat C, Chou JF, Heller G, Barker JN, Boulad F, Castro-Malaspina H, George D, Jakubowski A,
580 Koehne G, Papadopoulos EB, Scaradavou A, Small TN, Khalaf R, Young JW, O'Reilly RJ. 2012.
581 Adoptive immunotherapy with unselected or EBV-specific T cells for biopsy-proven EBV+
582 lymphomas after allogeneic hematopoietic cell transplantation. Blood 119:2644-2656.
583 Heslop HE, Slobod KS, Pule MA, Hale GA, Rousseau A, Smith CA, Bollard CM, Liu H, Wu MF,
584 Rochester RJ, Amrolia PJ, Hurwitz JL, Brenner MK, Rooney CM. 2010. Long-term outcome of
585 EBV-specific T-cell infusions to prevent or treat EBV-related lymphoproliferative disease in
586 transplant recipients. Blood 115:925-935.
587 Bollard CM, Gottschalk S, Torrano V, Diouf O, Ku S, Hazrat Y, Carrum G, Ramos C, Fayad L,
588 Shpall EJ, Pro B, Liu H, Wu MF, Lee D, Sheehan AM, Zu Y, Gee AP, Brenner MK, Heslop HE,
589 Rooney CM. 2014. Sustained complete responses in patients with lymphoma receiving
590 autologous cytotoxic T lymphocytes targeting Epstein-Barr virus latent membrane proteins. J
591 Clin Oncol 32:798-808.
592 Li J, Chen QY, He J, Li ZL, Tang XF, Chen SP, Xie CM, Li YQ, Huang LX, Ye SB, Ke M, Tang LQ, Liu
593 H, Zhang L, Guo SS, Xia JC, Zhang XS, Zheng LM, Guo X, Qian CN, Mai HQ, Zeng YX. 2015. Phase
594

595 I trial of adoptively transferred tumor-infiltrating lymphocyte immunotherapy following concurrent chemoradiotherapy in patients with locoregionally advanced nasopharyngeal carcinoma. Oncoimmunology 4:e976507.

596

597

598 77. Smith C, Tsang J, Beagley L, Chua D, Lee V, Li V, Moss DJ, Coman W, Chan KH, Nicholls J, Kwong D, Khanna R. 2012. Effective treatment of metastatic forms of Epstein-Barr virus-associated nasopharyngeal carcinoma with a novel adenovirus-based adoptive immunotherapy. Cancer Res 72:1116-1125.

600

601

602 78. Ngo MC, Ando J, Leen AM, Ennamuri S, Lapteva N, Vera JF, Min-Venditti A, Mims MP, Heslop HE, Bollard CM, Gottschalk S, Rooney CM. 2014. Complementation of antigen-presenting cells to generate T lymphocytes with broad target specificity. J Immunother 37:193-203.

604

605 79. Lin X, Gudgeon NH, Hui EP, Jia H, Qun X, Taylor GS, Barnardo MC, Lin CK, Rickinson AB, Chan AT. 2008. CD4 and CD8T cell responses to tumour-associated Epstein-Barr virus antigens in nasopharyngeal carcinoma patients. Cancer Immunol Immunother 57:963-975.

607

608 80. Green MR, Rodig S, Juszczynski P, Ouyang J, Sinha P, O'Donnell E, Neuberg D, Shipp MA. 2012. Constitutive AP-1 activity and EBV infection induce PD-L1 in Hodgkin lymphomas and posttransplant lymphoproliferative disorders: implications for targeted therapy. Clin Cancer Res 18:1611-1618.

610

611

612 81. Fang W, Zhang J, Hong S, Zhan J, Chen N, Qin T, Tang Y, Zhang Y, Kang S, Zhou T, Wu X, Liang W, Hu Z, Ma Y, Zhao Y, Tian Y, Yang Y, Xue C, Yan Y, Hou X, Huang P, Huang Y, Zhao H, Zhang L. 2014. EBV-driven LMP1 and IFN-gamma up-regulate PD-L1 in nasopharyngeal carcinoma: Implications for oncotargeted therapy. Oncotarget 5:12189-12202.

615

616 82. Bi XW, Wang H, Zhang WW, Wang JH, Liu WJ, Xia ZJ, Huang HQ, Jiang WQ, Zhang YJ, Wang L. 2016. PD-L1 is upregulated by EBV-driven LMP1 through NF-kappaB pathway and correlates with poor prognosis in natural killer/T-cell lymphoma. J Hematol Oncol 9:109.

618

619 83. Ma SD, Xu X, Jones R, Delecluse HJ, Zumwalde NA, Sharma A, Gumperz JE, Kenney SC. 2016. PD-1/CTLA-4 Blockade Inhibits Epstein-Barr Virus-Induced Lymphoma Growth in a Cord Blood Humanized-Mouse Model. PLoS Pathog 12:e1005642.

621

622 84. Ansell SM, Lesokhin AM, Borrello I, Halwani A, Scott EC, Gutierrez M, Schuster SJ, Millenson MM, Cattry D, Freeman GJ, Rodig SJ, Chapuy B, Ligon AH, Zhu L, Grosso JF, Kim SY, Timmerman JM, Shipp MA, Armand P. 2015. PD-1 blockade with nivolumab in relapsed or refractory Hodgkin's lymphoma. N Engl J Med 372:311-319.

625

626 85. Chua ML, Wee JT, Hui EP, Chan AT. 2016. Nasopharyngeal carcinoma. Lancet 387:1012-1024.

627 86. Price AM, Tourigny JP, Forte E, Salinas RE, Dave SS, Luftig MA. 2012. Analysis of Epstein-Barr virus-regulated host gene expression changes through primary B-cell outgrowth reveals delayed kinetics of latent membrane protein 1-mediated NF-kappaB activation. J Virol 86:11096-11106.

LMP1

TES1
- TRAF 3/5
- TRAF 1/2
  - M1
  - M1
  - M1
  - LUBAC
    - K63
    - K63
    - K63
    - K63
    - K63
    - K63
    - TAB 2/3
      - P TAK1
        - P NEMO
          - IKKα
          - IKKβ
            - P IkBα
              - RelA p50
                - p50
                  - cRel
                    - p50
                      - kB
TES2
- TRADD
- TRAF 6
- TNIK
  - M1
  - M1
  - M1
    - P IkBα
      - cRel
        - p50
          - kB

Non-Canonical Pathway
- NIK
  - P
    - IKKα
      - P
        - P RelB
          - p100
            - Nucleus
              - RelB
                - p52
                  - kB

Canonical Pathway
- P IkBα
  - cRel
    - p50
      - kB

EBNAs
NF-κB
Host TF
Cohesin
CTCF
RNA Pol II
H3K27ac
Signal
EBV Super
Enhancer
EBV regulated gene
