
JVI Accepted Manuscript Posted Online 4 October 2017  
J. Virol. doi:10.1128/JVI.00850-17  
Copyright © 2017 American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

Atomic Structures of Minor Proteins VI and VII in the Human Adenovirus  

Xinghong Dai${}^{a,b,c}$ Lily Wu${}^{b,c}$ Ren Sun${}^{b,c}$ Z. Hong Zhou${}^{a,b}$  

Department of Microbiology, Immunology, and Molecular Genetics${}^{a}$;  
California NanoSystems Institute${}^{b}$;  
Department of Molecular and Medical Pharmacology${}^{c}$, University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA.  

Address correspondence to Z. Hong Zhou, [Hong.Zhou@UCLA.edu](Hong.Zhou@UCLA.edu)  

Running Title: pVII mediates genome-capsid co-assembly of adenovirus  

Keywords: human adenovirus, cement protein structure, dsDNA genome packaging, genome-capsid co-assembly, endosomal escape  

Word count for the abstract: 208  

Word count for the text: 4072

ABSTRACT

Human adenoviruses (Ad) are dsDNA viruses associated with infectious diseases, yet better known as tools for gene delivery and oncolytic anti-cancer therapy. Atomic structures of Ad provide the basis for the development of antivirals and for engineering efforts towards more effective applications. Since 2010, atomic models of human Ad5 have been independently derived from photographic film cryoEM and X-ray crystallography, but discrepancies exist concerning the assignment of cement proteins IIIa, VIII and IX. To clarify these discrepancies, here we have employed the technology of direct electron-counting to obtain a cryoEM structure of human Ad5 at 3.2 Å resolution. Our improved structure unambiguously confirmed our previous cryoEM models of proteins IIIa, VIII and IX and explained the likely cause of conflict in the crystallography models. The improved structure also allows the identification of three new components in the cavities of hexons – the cleaved N-terminus of precursor protein VI (pVIIn), the cleaved N-terminus of precursor protein VII (pVIIIn2), and mature protein VI. The binding of pVIIIn2—by extension that of genome-condensing pVII—to hexons is consistent with the previously proposed dsDNA genome-capsid co-assembly for adenoviruses, which resembles that of ssRNA viruses but differs from the well-established mechanism of pumping dsDNA into a preformed protein capsid, as exemplified by tailed bacteriophages and herpesviruses.

IMPORTANCE

Adenovirus is a double-edged sword to humans – as a widespread pathogen and a bioengineering tool for anti-cancer and gene therapy. Atomic structure of the virus provides the basis for antiviral and application developments, but conflicting atomic models from conventional/film cryoEM and X-ray crystallography for important cement proteins IIIa, VIII, and IX have caused confusion. Using the cutting-edge cryoEM technology with electron counting, we improved the structure of human adenovirus type 5 and confirmed our previous models of cement proteins IIIa, VIII, and IX, thus clarifying the inconsistent structures. The improved structure also reveals atomic details of membrane-lytic protein VI and genome-condensing protein VII and supports the previously proposed genome-capsid co-assembly mechanism for adenoviruses.

INTRODUCTION

Human adenoviruses (Ad) are widespread and associated with respiratory, eye, and gastrointestinal infections that might become life-threatening particularly in young children and immunocompromised individuals (1). General vaccination against Ad is not available because of the existence of more than 60 serotypes of the virus (2). There is also considerable interest in developing derivatives of Ad for therapeutic applications, for example, as gene transfer vectors or oncolytic viruses for cancer therapy (3, 4). Understanding the virion structure of Ad provides crucial insights for the development of antivirals and more effective virus-based therapeutics.

The capsid of Ad is composed of three major capsid proteins (hexon, penton base, and fiber) and four minor capsid proteins (IIIa, VI, VIII, and IX, also known as cement proteins). The pseudo T=25 icosahedral capsid has 240 trimeric hexons and 12 pentons each with trimeric fiber. It encloses the 36-kilobase long, double-stranded DNA (dsDNA) viral genome along with six additional proteins (IVa2, V, VII, μ, terminal protein, and the viral protease). Structures of isolated Ad hexon, penton base, or fiber have been well-characterized by X-ray crystallography (5-7). Previous cryo electron microscopy (cryoEM) studies of Ad virion at low or intermediate resolution have revealed the organization of the major capsid components and possible distribution of some of the minor capsid proteins (8-11). In 2010, our group have reported a 3.6 Å resolution cryoEM structure of human adenovirus type 5 (Ad5) virion, along with new atomic models for proteins IIIa, VIII, and IX (12). At the same time, Reddy et al. published a crystal structure of Ad5 at 3.5 Å resolution with an atomic model for protein VIII (13), and, in 2014, a crystal structure at 3.8 Å with atomic models of IIIa, V, VI, VIII, and IX (14).

While these structures have been highly sought-after and their publications were heralded as major advances in the field of structural biology (15), confusions persisted due to the substantial differences between structural interpretations of the cryoEM map (12) and the X-ray crystallography structure (13, 14). For example, protein IIIa was assigned to densities

surrounding the penton base inside the virus in the cryoEM model (12) but was placed to the  
outer surface of the virus in the crystallography studies (14). The C-terminal ~40 residues of  
protein IX was modeled to form the characteristic 4-helix bundles in cryoEM studies (11, 12) but  
was deemed flexible/invisible in the crystal (14, 16). For protein VIII, although the localization of  
the protein roughly agreed between the cryoEM and the crystallography studies, major  
differences exist in the two models (12-14). Such differences have not gone unnoticed; readers  
have raised concerns regarding the discrepancies between the crystallographic models and  
prior structural and biochemical results (17, 18).

These discrepancies have created uncertainty, which could impede efforts of structure-  
based engineering of human Ad. This prospect compelled us to further improve the structure of  
Ad5, by taking advantage of the state-of-the-art electron-counting cryoEM technology. The  
improved structure at 3.2 Å resolution not only confirms our previous models of proteins IIIa, VIII,  
and IX from the film data, but also allows us to identify three new protein components in the  
cavities of hexons—the cleaved N-terminus of precursor protein VI (pVIln), the cleaved N-  
terminus of precursor protein VII (pVIIln2), and a segment of mature protein VI. These new  
discoveries, particularly the unexpected distribution of pVIIln2 and VI, provide new insights into  
adenovirus genome packaging, virion maturation, and endosomal escape during infection.

## RESULTS

### Overall structure

We recorded 5,600 electron-counting movies of a freshly prepared Ad5 sample with a K2 direct  
electron detector attached to the end of an energy filter in a Titan Krios electron microscope,  
and by averaging ~53,000 particles from these movies, obtained a 3D structure at 3.2 Å  
resolution (Fig. 1, Fig. 2A and Table 1). The larger number of particle images, the much better  
contrast and higher signal-to-noise ratio of these images than those of our previous film data

together have led to much better resolved sidechains in the cryoEM map than our previous 3.6

Å resolution structure (12). Subtle differences between sidechains, such as those among Val,

Leu and Ile, between Phe and Tyr, or between Lys and Arg, are now discernable in our cryoEM

map (Fig. 2B). The identification of amino acids in our map and their match with protein

sequences provide direct evidences in support of our atomic models (Fig. 3). Atomic models

derived from this new map for both major capsid proteins (hexon and penton base) and

previously modeled minor capsid proteins (IIIa, VIII and IX) all agree with the previous cryoEM

study (12).

Proteins IIIa and VIII: minor proteins on the inner surface

As reported, two cement proteins – IIIa and VIII – were identified on the inner surface of Ad5

capsid (12). On the inner surface around each 5-fold axis, five copies of protein IIIa cement the

gaps between the penton base and peripentonal hexons (Fig. 1B and D), amounting to a total

of 60 copies per virion. Two copies of protein VIII are located in each asymmetric unit of the

capsid – one close to the 3-fold axis, and the other to the 5-fold axis with contact with protein

IIIa (Fig. 1B), totaling 120 copies per virion. Despite their quasi-equivalent locations, the two

protein VIII molecules have identical structure. By contrast, in the crystallography study (14),

densities around the 5-fold axes have been modeled as proteins V and VI, instead of IIIa; two

protein VIII molecules have been assigned to densities at positions similar to protein VIII

locations in our cryoEM structure but their models are much simpler. Overall, the densities for

the internal cement proteins have the best quality in our cryoEM map with prominent side-chain

features for de novo atomic modeling as evidenced in Figure 3A and B, Movie S1, and Movie

S2. The excellent agreement of amino acid residues between the atomic models of protein IIIa

and VIII and their corresponding densities eliminates any doubts about their assignments.

Protein IX: the minor protein on the outer surface

114 Sequence analysis has indicated that the C-terminal region of protein IX is a long α-helix with
115 strong propensity for coiled-coil formation (11). In our prior model, protein IX has an extended
116 configuration with an N-terminal triskelion domain and a C-terminal coiled-coil helix joined by a
117 long flexible loop (Fig. 1C). An external interaction network (Fig. 3 in reference 12) is formed
118 among 240 molecules of protein IX through interactions involving its two ends: the N-termini of
119 three protein IX molecules join to form a triskelion and the C-termini of four protein IX molecules
120 bundle to form a 4-helix-bundle coiled coil (Fig. 1C and Fig. 4). This model is verified in this
121 study by the improved density maps in both the triskelion and coiled-coil domains, as
122 highlighted by the consistency between the atomic model and cryoEM densities of the bulky
123 sidechains of Tyr14, Trp22, Arg26, Arg92 and Arg96 (Fig. 3C, Movie S3). By contrast, in the
124 crystallographic structure, although each triskelion was correctly identified as a homo-trimer of
125 protein IX N-terminal segment, the polarity of the protein chain (N to C) was opposite to that in
126 our cryoEM model, leading to incorrect sequence registration and the suggestion of flexible
127 (thus invisible) C-terminal coiled-coil helix bundle (14, 16).

128 In our model, each 4-helix bundle is formed by the C-terminal helices of four protein IX
129 molecules, three parallel and one antiparallel (Fig. 1C, Fig. 4A), consistent with previous low-
130 resolution cryoEM study of Ad5 with peptide-tag/Fab labeled protein IX (19). In stark contrast to
131 the extended configuration of the triskelion and helix bundle domains of protein IX in human Ad5,
132 the cryoEM structure of the bovine adenovirus type 3 reveals a parallel 3-helix bundle
133 immediately above the triskelion (17), which can be explained by the shorter connecting loop
134 between its coiled-coil helix and triskelion domain than that of human Ad5 (20). The incorrect
135 polarity assignment of protein IX triskelion in the crystallography model has led to the proposal
136 of an invisible 3-helix bundle posited above the triskelion, similar to the observed arrangement
137 in bovine adenovirus type 3; while the visible 4-helix bundle was interpreted as a subdomain of
138 protein IIIa containing two helix-turn-helix segments (14, 16). Aside from the well-resolved

sidechain densities in two helices of the 4-helix bundle (Fig. 3C), the following two additional

pieces of evidence also support the validity of our protein IX model. First, we observed four

threads of densities, three from the bottom and one from the top, connecting the 4-helices in

each helix bundle to four neighboring protein IX triskelion branches, directly supporting our

proposed arrangement of the 4-helix bundle containing three parallel and one antiparallel

helices of protein IX C-terminus (Fig. 4B). Second, as the general rule of protein modeling, the

sidechains in an α-helix should be slightly pointing towards the N-terminal end of the helix.

Based on this rule, the polarity, as established by the pointing directions of sidechain densities

(dashed lines in Fig. 4C), of one of the four helices differs from that of the other three in the 4-

helix bundle. Therefore, the interpretation of the observed 4-helix bundle as two helix-turn-helix

segments (*i.e.*, two helices have inverted orientations from the other two) of protein IIIa in the

crystallography study (14) is incompatible with this observation.

Identification and modeling of proteins VI, pVIn, and pVIIn2 in the inner cavity of hexon

Unlike the above described minor proteins that play structural roles in virion assembly, minor

proteins VI and VII, and their precursor proteins pVI and pVII, play critical functional roles in

endosomal escape during viral entry (21, 22) and in genome condensation (23), respectively.

Unfortunately, the mechanisms behind the functions of VI and VII have been elusive due to the

lack of structural information. The improved quality of our new structure has now allowed us to

identify parts of protein VI and VII, and build atomic models *de novo*, offering clues about how

they work.

Both proteins VI and VII are located in the inner cavities of hexons based on high-

resolution features of their sidechains in our cryoEM map (Fig. 5A-D). Segment 109–143 of

protein VI (sequence number as in pVI) crosses the opening of the inner cavity of each hexon

(Fig. 5D and E). Lining the wall of the hexon cavity are two copies of the cleaved N-terminus of

pVI (pVIn) — a side product of pVI maturation catalyzed by the adenovirus protease (AVP).

Region 5-33 of the 33-a.a. long pVIn has been modeled with the N-terminal 4 residues being  
flexible (Fig. 5D and E). Identification of VI and pVIn in the inner cavity of hexon is consistent  
with previous biochemical data showing that pVI has high affinity to hexon (24, 25) and pVIn  
binds at the base of the hexon cavity in mature virion (26).

Unexpectedly, a segment spanning a.a. 14-24 of the cleaved N-terminus of pVII, which  
we name as pVII n2, has been identified for density also lining the wall of hexon cavity and  
occupying the third, equivalent position to those of the two pVIn molecules (Fig. 5D and E). Our  
structural observation of pVII n2 spanning only 14-24 (instead of 1-24) of pVII is consistent with  
mass spectrometric measurements showing that pVII is cleaved for a second time at a non-  
consensus cleavage site at a.a. 13/14 in addition to the consensus site at a.a. 24/25 recognized  
by AVP (27).

Although the models of VI, pVIn and pVII n2 are relatively short, they are supported by  
consistency between the model and well-resolved sidechain densities in each molecule as  
illustrated in Figure 5E. Particularly, the similarly-shaped and equivalently-positioned pVIn and  
pVII n2 densities are differentiated based on bulky sidechains of Arg16, Phe17, Lys20, and  
Phe22 in pVII n2 contrasting non-bulky Gly26, Thr27, Ser28 and Ser31 in the corresponding  
region of pVIn (Fig. 5E). These results contradict both the protein VI and pVIn models in the  
crystallography study (14) in two ways: part of protein IIIa density was mistaken for protein VI in  
the crystallography structure, as described above in the section concerning protein IIIa; and for  
pVIn, the polarity of the protein chain in the crystallography model is opposite to that in our  
cryoEM model reported here.

The protein VI density we modeled is only a small fraction of the full-length mature  
protein VI (a.a. 109-143 versus 34-239 as numbered in pVI), suggesting that both its N- and C-  
terminal regions are flexible. Since the ordered part of protein VI blocks the opening of the  
hexon cavity with both ends (Pro109 and Thr143 in Fig. 5E) on the inner side of the cavity (Fig.

189 5D), it is conceivable that the flexible N- and C-terminal regions are both inside the cavity. This
190 notion is supported by the existence of disordered densities in the deep cavity of hexons (Fig.
191 5F). Particularly, the density at the dead end of the cavity is as strong as hexon proteins (Fig.
192 5C). The N-terminal region of mature protein VI has an amphipathic α-helix that was
193 demonstrated to function as a membrane penetrator for endosomal escape during viral infection
194 (21, 22). The deduced location of protein VI N-terminus situated deep inside the hexon cavity
195 may have implications for protein VI's function in endosomal escape for adenoviruses.

196 Interactions of pVIIn and pVIIn2 with hexon

197 The newly observed pVIIn and pVIIn2 have similar but distinguishable interactions with hexon
198 subunits (Fig. 6). There is a MSGG and MFGG sequence at the C-terminus of pVIIn and pVIIn2,
199 respectively (Fig. 5E), both of which are part of the (M/I/L)XGG-X consensus site recognized by
200 AVP in the corresponding precursor protein (28). In both pVIIn and pVIIn2, the two glycine
201 residues fold back towards the N-terminus (Fig. 5E), and either a serine (Ser31 of pVIIn) or a
202 phenylalanine (Phe22 of pVIIn2) residue points to an equivalent pocket in the hexon wall, giving
203 rise to the similar appearances of the two molecules in this region (Fig. 6B-E). However, density
204 of the bulky Phe22 residue in pVIIn2 is readily distinguishable from that of the Ser31 residue in
205 pVIIn, and their interactions with hexon residues in the pocket are distinct from one another. For
206 pVIIn, the polar sidechain of Ser31 forms a hydrogen bond with the sidechain of hexon residue
207 Arg872, which in turn is further stabilized by hydrogen-bonding with Glu921 of the same hexon
208 subunit (Fig. 6D). For pVIIn2, the sidechain of Phe22 inserts into a hydrophobic pocket formed
209 by Leu368, Leu372, Leu647, Leu919, Leu870, Phe712, and Ala679 of the hexon subunit, while
210 the Arg872 sidechain gating the pocket adopts a conformation different from that in the pVIIn-
211 binding state due to steric effect (Fig. 6E). A second main binding site shared by pVIIn and
212 pVIIn2 is near the top edge of the hexon wall. Ile25 of pVIIn and Leu15 of pVIIn2 bind to an

213 equivalent hydrophobic pocket formed by Leu24, Leu28, Val29, Ala32, Leu41, Phe45 of one
214 hexon subunit and Leu630, Leu634 of a second subunit (Fig. 6B, C, and F).
215 Besides those two binding sites along the hexon wall shared with pVIIIn2, the N-terminal
216 region of pVIn is also stabilized by binding in a groove at the rim of the hexon cavity (Fig. 6A).
217 The groove is contributed by all of the three subunits in the hexon trimer. This observation is
218 consistent with previously proposed binding site of pVIn spanning hexon residues 32-65, which
219 was mapped with hydrogen-deuterium exchange mass spectrometry (26). Furthermore, the two
220 short β-strands of pVIn, segment 16-18 and segment 11-13, augment with β-strand 49-51 in a
221 hexon subunit. For one of the two pVIn molecules, the β-augmentation is further extended to β-
222 strands 120-123 and 113-115 in protein VI (Fig. 6A).

223 The above VI, pVIn, and pVIIIn2 models were derived from densities in the cavity of
224 hexon H2 because those densities have the best quality. When fitting these models derived
225 from hexon H2 into densities in the cavity of the other three hexons (H1, H3, and H4), we found
226 that pVIn and pVIIIn are competing for the three binding sites in each hexon, which is expected
227 considering their similar binding sites along the hexon wall. In other words, the well-defined
228 arrangement of two pVIn and one pVIIIn in hexon H2 seems to be an exception other than the
229 rule. The competitive binding of pVIn and pVIIIn2 also explains the puzzling stoichiometry of
230 ~350 copies of protein VI (29, 30) binding to 240 copies of hexon trimers in each virion: this
231 copy number of VI is too large if only one VI binds each hexon, but too small if three VI's bind
232 each hexon.

233 DISCUSSION

234 CryoEM has come of age as a tool for deciphering molecular interactions in large complexes.
235 Electron-counting enabled by direct electron detection cameras has significantly improved the
236 contrast of cryoEM images and the quality of 3D reconstructions (31, 32). The improved cryoEM

structure of human Ad5 from electron-counting cryoEM presented in this study has confirmed

our previous cryoEM models of cement proteins IIIa, VIII and IX (12), thus clarified the

contradicting interpretations in the literature regarding their structural roles (13, 14). More

significantly, the improved cryoEM reconstruction has allowed us to identify and model three

protein fragments related to functionally important minor proteins VI and VII inside human Ad5.

Protein VI (or its precursor protein pVI) is a multifunctional protein in the life cycle of

adenovirus. Prior to capsid assembly, pVI escorts hexons into cell nucleus (33) and after a

capsid is assembled, pVI is involved in the activation of AVP (34, 35) for maturation cleavage

of many precursor proteins, including itself (36). Most importantly, protein VI is responsible for

endosomal escape of the virus during cell entry (21, 22). Release of protein VI from the virion

for endosomal escape was proposed to occur through partial disassembly of the capsid at

vertex region triggered by the low pH condition inside the endosome (21). The trail of literature

seems to suggest that this proposal was likely influenced by the incorrect assignment of protein

VI to the protein IIIa densities beneath the peripentonal hexons (9) (see Results above). Our

localization of mature protein VI inside all hexons and hidden deeply in the cavity makes the

mechanism of its release intriguing. It remains to be seen how the low pH in endosome triggers

the release of the membrane-lytic protein VI, leading to rupture of endosomal membrane and

escape of the capsid.

Protein VII is a major core protein, totaling 600-800 copies per virion as measured by

mass spectrometry (29, 30). Sequence analysis of protein VII has revealed the presence of four

highly-basic domains separated by several predicted α helices, leading to the speculation of

histone/protamine-like structure and function of protein VII (23). In vitro nuclease digestion of Ad

genome suggested that protein VII likely works in a unit of six to condense the viral dsDNA

genome to form chromatin-like structure as in eukaryotic cells (23, 37). It is hard to conceive

how such condensed genome with protein VII together can pass through a portal complex like

those in tailed dsDNA bacteriophages and herpesviruses (i.e., the headful dsDNA genome

packaging mechanism) (38-40). Such a portal complex was proposed to exist in adenovirus (41)

but is yet to be identified. To the contrary, our data is consistent with the co-assembly

mechanism proposed previously (42), although we cannot rule out the possibility of headful

DNA packaging in adenoviruses. Such a co-assembly mechanism utilizes the genome as a

scaffold for capsid assembly, resembling that of many ssRNA viruses (43-45). The binding of

pVII n2, and by extension the precursor protein pVII, in the cavity of all hexons bears similarity to

the extensive interactions between ssRNA viral genome and the capsid inner surface (43):

While the dsDNA viral genome is being condensed by pVII and other core proteins into a

chromatin-like structure, the N-termini of those pVII at the periphery of this genomic core

provide numerous anchor points for capsomers to assemble around it. After assembly, the AVP

activated by the dsDNA and the cleaved C-terminal segment of pVI (46, 47) cleaves off the N-

terminal segment of pVII [and probably other packaging-related minor core proteins too, such as

L152/55k (48, 49)] to free up the genomic core from tethering to the capsid shell so that it can

be released in the next round of infection. Indeed, immature adenovirus particles, represented

by the protease-impaired temperature-sensitive Ad2 mutant ts1 (50, 51) grown at non-

permissive temperature, have difficulties in uncoating and genome release (52, 53). Two

cryoEM structures of such immature Ad2 particles both revealed that the capsid was tightly

connected to the genomic core (52, 54). Should such a co-assembly mechanism withstand the

test of future experiments, it would represent a novel mechanism for dsDNA virus assembly,

drastically distinctive from the well-established mechanism of pumping dsDNA into a preformed

protein capsid, as exemplified by many tailed dsDNA bacteriophages and herpesviruses (38-40).

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Virus culture and purification. To get homogeneous sample for high resolution cryoEM

structure determination, we chose to purify mature virions from the media of viral culture instead

287 of from cytoplasm of infected cells as generally practiced, to avoid contamination of any
288 immature or partially mature particles. The E1B gene-attenuated oncolytic Ad-ΔE1B 19/55 (55)
289 containing wild-type Ad5 capsid was inoculated into confluent 293T cells (ATCC CRL-3216) with
290 MOI (multiplicity of infection) 0.01. Three days post infection, the supernatant was collected and
291 clarified by centrifuging at 10,000g for 15min. Viral particles were pelleted by centrifuging at
292 100,000g for 1h, resuspended in TBS buffer containing 20mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.4), 150mM NaCl
293 and 1mM MgCl₂, and purified in CsCl density gradient by centrifuging at 100,000g overnight.
294 The virus band was collected, dialyzed overnight in TBS buffer, and concentrated with a
295 Millipore Amicon Ultrafiltration unit with 100 kDa nominal molecular weight limit. A final volume
296 of 30 μl concentrated sample was typically obtained starting from 1L of virus culture.

297 CryoEM sample preparation and data collection. To prepare cryoEM sample, an aliquot of
298 2.5 μl sample was applied to a Quantifoil R2/1Cu grid, blotted with filter paper and plunge-
299 frozen in liquid ethane with an FEI Vitrobot. CryoEM images were collected with Leginon (56) on
300 an FEI Titan Krios electron microscope equipped with Gatan imaging filter (GIF) and K2 Summit
301 direct detection camera. The K2 camera was operated in super-resolution mode. A nominal
302 magnification of 81,000x was used, giving a pixel size of 0.85 Å/pixel at the sample level. A slit
303 width of 20eV was set for the energy filter. Movies were recorded with an electron dose rate
304 below 8e-per physical pixel per second. An accumulated dose of 25e-/Å² on the sample was
305 fractionated into a movie stack of 32 image frames.

306 Data processing and structure determination. For each of the total 5,608 movies recorded,
307 the frames were aligned for drift correction with the method described previously (32). All the
308 frames except the first one were averaged to produce micrographs. Defocus value was set to -2
309 μm during imaging session, and was determined with CTFFIND3 (57) to be in the range of -0.5
310 to -3 μm in the images. Particles were picked with Ethan (58) and preprocessed with EMAN (59).
311 Center and orientation parameters of each particle were determined and refined iteratively with

312 the common-line-based method using the IMIRS software package (60, 61). 3D reconstructions
313 were carried out with the GPU program eLite3D (62). Resolution was determined based on the
314 FSC (Fourier shell correlation) equals 0.143 criterion (63). Density map rendering and figure
315 preparation were carried out with UCSF Chimera (64).

316 Atomic model building. Atomic model building for the hexon, penton base, protein IIIa, VIII,
317 and IX started with fitting our previous atomic model (PDB ID 3iyn) (12) into the density map in
318 Chimera, followed by iterative manual adjustment in Coot (65) and real space refinement in
319 Phenix (66). Atomic models of pVIn, pVIIIn2, and VI were built *ab initio* with Coot and refined
320 with Phenix. Assignment of pVIIIn2 was not inferred from any previous knowledge, but a result of
321 systematic screening/elimination of other possible protein sequences in adenovirus mature
322 virion. Each protein sequence was tested multiple times at both N- and C-terminus. We found
323 that only pVIIIn2 sequence fitted satisfactorily in the resolved sidechain densities.

324 Accession numbers. The cryoEM density map and the atomic models are deposited to the
325 EMDB and PDB under the accession numbers EMD-7034 and 6B1T, respectively.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

We are grateful to Robin Parks and Kathy Poulin for providing reagents that were used during the pursuit of this study. This project was supported in part by grants from the National Institutes of Health [GM 071940, DE 025567, and AI 094386, and indirectly through its National Center for Advancing Translational Science (NCATS) UCLA CTSI Grant#UL1TR001881]. We acknowledge the use of instruments at the Electron Imaging Center for Nanomachines supported by UCLA and by instrumentation grants from NIH (1S10OD018111, 1U24GM116792) and NSF (DBI-1338135).

ADDENDUM

A paper from the Reddy group reporting a cryoEM structure of Adenovirus D26 (67) appears recently. Their new assignments for minor proteins IIIa, VIII, and IX correct the previous crystal models and are now consistent with our assignments; however, their model of minor protein pVIn has the opposite sequence polarity from that presented here and pVIIn2 and mature VI were not identified in the cavity of hexons.

REFERENCES

1. Ghebremedhin B. 2014. Human adenovirus: Viral pathogen with increasing importance. European journal of microbiology & immunology 4:26-33.
2. Huang GH, Xu WB. 2013. [Recent advance in new types of human adenovirus]. Bingduxue bao = Chinese journal of virology 29:342-348.
3. Appaiahgari MB, Vrati S. 2015. Adenoviruses as gene/vaccine delivery vectors: promises and pitfalls. Expert opinion on biological therapy 15:337-351.
4. Rosewell Shaw A, Suzuki M. 2016. Recent advances in oncolytic adenovirus therapies for cancer. Current opinion in virology 21:9-15.
5. Roberts MM, White JL, Grutter MG, Burnett RM. 1986. Three-dimensional structure of the adenovirus major coat protein hexon. Science 232:1148-1151.
6. van Raaij MJ, Mitra ki A, Lavigne G, Cusack S. 1999. A triple beta-spiral in the adenovirus fibre shaft reveals a new structural motif for a fibrous protein. Nature 401:935-938.

7. Zubieta C, Schoehn G, Chroboczek J, Cusack S. 2005. The structure of the human adenovirus 2 penton. Molecular cell 17:121-135.
8. Stewart PL, Burnett RM, Cyrklaff M, Fuller SD. 1991. Image reconstruction reveals the complex molecular organization of adenovirus. Cell 67:145-154.
9. Stewart PL, Fuller SD, Burnett RM. 1993. Difference imaging of adenovirus: bridging the resolution gap between X-ray crystallography and electron microscopy. The EMBO journal 12:2589-2599.
10. Fabry CM, Rosa-Calatrava M, Conway JF, Zubieta C, Cusack S, Ruigrok RW, Schoehn G. 2005. A quasi-atomic model of human adenovirus type 5 capsid. The EMBO journal 24:1645-1654.
11. Saban SD, Silvestry M, Nemerow GR, Stewart PL. 2006. Visualization of alpha-helices in a 6-angstrom resolution cryoelectron microscopy structure of adenovirus allows refinement of capsid protein assignments. Journal of virology 80:12049-12059.
12. Liu H, Jin L, Koh SB, Atanasov I, Schein S, Wu L, Zhou ZH. 2010. Atomic structure of human adenovirus by cryo-EM reveals interactions among protein networks. Science 329:1038-1043.
13. Reddy VS, Natchiar SK, Stewart PL, Nemerow GR. 2010. Crystal structure of human adenovirus at 3.5 Å resolution. Science 329:1071-1075.
14. Reddy VS, Nemerow GR. 2014. Structures and organization of adenovirus cement proteins provide insights into the role of capsid maturation in virus entry and infection. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 111:11715-11720.
15. Harrison SC. 2010. Looking inside adenovirus. Science 329:1026-1027.
16. Reddy VS, Nemerow GR. 2014. Reply to Campos: Revised structures of adenovirus cement proteins represent a consensus model for understanding virus assembly and disassembly. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 111:E4544-E4545.
17. Cheng L, Huang X, Li X, Xiong W, Sun W, Yang C, Zhang K, Wang Y, Liu H, Huang X, Ji G, Sun F, Zheng C, Zhu P. 2014. Cryo-EM structures of two bovine adenovirus type 3 intermediates. Virology 450-451:174-181.
18. Vellinga J, van den Wollenberg DJ, van der Heijdt S, Rabelink MJ, Hoeben RC. 2005. The coiled-coil domain of the adenovirus type 5 protein IX is dispensable for capsid incorporation and thermostability. Journal of virology 79:3206-3210.
19. Fabry CM, Rosa-Calatrava M, Moriscot C, Ruigrok RW, Boulanger P, Schoehn G. 2009. The C-terminal domains of adenovirus serotype 5 protein IX assemble into an antiparallel structure on the facets of the capsid. Journal of virology 83:1135-1139.
20. Campos SK. 2014. New structural model of adenoviral cement proteins is not yet concrete. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 111:E4542-E4543.
21. Wiethoff CM, Wodrich H, Gerace L, Nemerow GR. 2005. Adenovirus protein VI mediates membrane disruption following capsid disassembly. Journal of virology 79:1992-2000.
22. Maier O, Galan DL, Wodrich H, Wiethoff CM. 2010. An N-terminal domain of adenovirus protein VI fragments membranes by inducing positive membrane curvature. Virology 402:11-19.
23. Sung MT, Cao TM, Coleman RT, Budelier KA. 1983. Gene and protein sequences of adenovirus protein VII, a hybrid basic chromosomal protein. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 80:2902-2906.
24. Matthews DA, Russell WC. 1995. Adenovirus protein-protein interactions: molecular parameters governing the binding of protein VI to hexon and the activation of the adenovirus 23K protease. The Journal of general virology 76(Pt 8):1959-1969.
25. Graziano V, McGrath WJ, Suomalainen M, Greber UF, Freimuth P, Blainey PC, Luo G, Xie XS, Mangel WF. 2013. Regulation of a viral protease by a peptide and DNA in one-dimensional

space: I. binding to DNA AND to hexon of the precursor to protein VI, pVI, of human adenovirus.
The Journal of biological chemistry 288:2059-2067.

SniJder J, Benevento M, Moyer CL, Reddy V, Nemerow GR, Heck AJ. 2014. The cleaved N-
terminus of pVI binds peripentonal hexons in mature adenovirus. Journal of molecular biology
426:1971-1979.

Blanche F, Monegier B, Faucher D, Duchesne M, Audhuy F, Barbot A, Bouvier S, Daude G,
Dubois H, Guillemin T, Maton L. 2001. Polypeptide composition of an adenovirus type 5 used in
cancer gene therapy. Journal of chromatography. A 921:39-48.

Webster A, Russell S, Talbot P, Russell WC, Kemp GD. 1989. Characterization of the adenovirus
proteinase: substrate specificity. The Journal of general virology 70(Pt 12):3225-3234.

van Oostrum J, Burnett RM. 1985. Molecular composition of the adenovirus type 2 virion.
Journal of virology 56:439-448.

Lehmberg E, Traina JA, Chakel JA, Chang RJ, Parkman M, McCaman MT, Murakami PK, Lahidji
V, Nelson JW, Hancock WS, Nestaas E, Pungor E, Jr. 1999. Reversed-phase high-performance
liquid chromatographic assay for the adenovirus type 5 proteome. Journal of chromatography. B,
Biomedical sciences and applications 732:411-423.

Milazzo AC, Cheng A, Moeller A, Lyumkis D, Jacovetty E, Polukas J, Ellisman MH, Xuong NH,
Carragher B, Potter CS. 2011. Initial evaluation of a direct detection device detector for single
particle cryo-electron microscopy. Journal of structural biology 176:404-408.

Li X, Mooney P, Zheng S, Booth CR, Braunfeld MB, Gubbens S, Agard DA, Cheng Y. 2013.
Electron counting and beam-induced motion correction enable near-atomic-resolution single-
particle cryo-EM. Nature methods 10:584-590.

Wodrich H, Guan T, Cingolani G, Von Seggern D, Nemerow G, Gerace L. 2003. Switch from
capsid protein import to adenovirus assembly by cleavage of nuclear transport signals. The
EMBO journal 22:6245-6255.

Webster A, Hay RT, Kemp G. 1993. The adenovirus protease is activated by a virus-coded
disulphide-linked peptide. Cell 72:97-104.

Mangel WF, McGrath WJ, Toledo DL, Anderson CW. 1993. Viral DNA and a viral peptide can act
as cofactors of adenovirus virion protease activity. Nature 361:274-275.

Mangel WF, San Martin C. 2014. Structure, function and dynamics in adenovirus maturation.
Viruses 6:4536-4570.

Corden J, Engelking HM, Pearson GD. 1976. Chromatin-like organization of the adenovirus
chromosome. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America
73:401-404.

Jiang W, Chang J, Jakana J, Weigele P, King J, Chiu W. 2006. Structure of epsilon 15
bacteriophage reveals genome organization and DNA packaging/injection apparatus. Nature
439:612-616.

Lander GC, Tang L, Casjens SR, Gilcrease EB, Prevelige P, Poliakov A, Potter CS, Carragher B,
Johnson JE. 2006. The structure of an infectious P22 virion shows the signal for headful DNA
packaging. Science 312:1791-1795.

Catalano CE. 2005. Viral Genome Packaging Machines: Genetics, Structure, and Mechanism.
Springer US.

Christensen JB, Byrd SA, Walker AK, Strahler JR, Andrews PC, Imperiale MJ. 2008. Presence of
the adenovirus IVa2 protein at a single vertex of the mature virion. Journal of virology 82:9086-
9093.

Zhang W, Arcos R. 2005. Interaction of the adenovirus major core protein precursor, pVII, with
the viral DNA packaging machinery. Virology 334:194-202.

449  43. Dai X, Li Z, Lai M, Shu S, Du Y, Zhou ZH, Sun R. 2017. In situ structures of the genome and genome-delivery apparatus in a single-stranded RNA virus. Nature 541:112-116.
450  44. Rolfsson O, Middleton S, Manfield IW, White SJ, Fan B, Vaughan R, Ranson NA, Dykeman E,
451  Twarock R, Ford J, Cheng Kao C, Stockley PG. 2016. Direct Evidence for Packaging Signal-Mediated Assembly of Bacteriophage MS2. Journal of molecular biology 428:431-448.
452  45. Verlinden Y, Cuconati A, Wimmer E, Rombaut B. 2000. Cell-free synthesis of poliovirus: 14S subunits are the key intermediates in the encapsidation of poliovirus RNA. The Journal of general virology 81:2751-2754.
453  46. Graziano V, Luo G, Blainey PC, Perez-Berna AJ, McGrath WJ, Flint SJ, San Martin C, Xie XS, Mangel WF. 2013. Regulation of a viral proteinase by a peptide and DNA in one-dimensional space: II. adenovirus proteinase is activated in an unusual one-dimensional biochemical reaction. The Journal of biological chemistry 288:2068-2080.
454  47. Blainey PC, Graziano V, Perez-Berna AJ, McGrath WJ, Flint SJ, San Martin C, Xie XS, Mangel WF. 2013. Regulation of a viral proteinase by a peptide and DNA in one-dimensional space: IV. viral proteinase slides along DNA to locate and process its substrates. The Journal of biological chemistry 288:2092-2102.
455  48. Condezo GN, Marabini R, Ayora S, Carazo JM, Alba R, Chillon M, San Martin C. 2015. Structures of Adenovirus Incomplete Particles Clarify Capsid Architecture and Show Maturation Changes of Packaging Protein L1 52/55k. Journal of virology 89:9653-9664.
456  49. Perez-Berna AJ, Mangel WF, McGrath WJ, Graziano V, Flint J, San Martin C. 2014. Processing of the l1 52/55k protein by the adenovirus protease: a new substrate and new insights into virion maturation. Journal of virology 88:1513-1524.
457  50. Weber J. 1976. Genetic analysis of adenovirus type 2 III. Temperature sensitivity of processing viral proteins. Journal of virology 17:462-471.
458  51. Yeh-Kai L, Akusjarvi G, Alestrom P, Pettersson U, Tremblay M, Weber J. 1983. Genetic identification of an endoproteinase encoded by the adenovirus genome. Journal of molecular biology 167:217-222.
459  52. Perez-Berna AJ, Marabini R, Scheres SH, Menendez-Conejero R, Dmitriev IP, Curiel DT, Mangel WF, Flint SJ, San Martin C. 2009. Structure and uncoating of immature adenovirus. Journal of molecular biology 392:547-557.
460  53. Perez-Berna AJ, Ortega-Esteban A, Menendez-Conejero R, Winkler DC, Menendez M, Steven AC, Flint SJ, de Pablo PJ, San Martin C. 2012. The role of capsid maturation on adenovirus priming for sequential uncoating. The Journal of biological chemistry 287:31582-31595.
461  54. Silvestry M, Lindert S, Smith JG, Maier O, Wiethoff CM, Nemerow GR, Stewart PL. 2009. Cryo-electron microscopy structure of adenovirus type 2 temperature-sensitive mutant 1 reveals insight into the cell entry defect. Journal of virology 83:7375-7383.
462  55. Kim J, Cho JY, Kim JH, Jung KC, Yun CO. 2002. Evaluation of E1B gene-attenuated replicating adenoviruses for cancer gene therapy. Cancer gene therapy 9:725-736.
463  56. Suloway C, Pulokas J, Fellmann D, Cheng A, Guerra F, Quispe J, Stagg S, Potter CS, Carragher B. 2005. Automated molecular microscopy: the new Leginon system. Journal of structural biology 151:41-60.
464  57. Mindell JA, Grigorieff N. 2003. Accurate determination of local defocus and specimen tilt in electron microscopy. Journal of structural biology 142:334-347.
465  58. Kivioja T, Ravantti J, Verkhovsky A, Ukkonen E, Bamford D. 2000. Local average intensity-based method for identifying spherical particles in electron micrographs. Journal of structural biology 131:126-134.
466  59. Ludtke SJ, Baldwin PR, Chiu W. 1999. EMAN: semiautomated software for high-resolution single-particle reconstructions. Journal of structural biology 128:82-97.

Liang Y, Ke EY, Zhou ZH. 2002. IMIRS: a high-resolution 3D reconstruction package integrated with a relational image database. Journal of structural biology 137:292-304.

Liu H, Cheng L, Zeng S, Cai C, Zhou ZH, Yang Q. 2008. Symmetry-adapted spherical harmonics method for high-resolution 3D single-particle reconstructions. Journal of structural biology 161:64-73.

Zhang X, Zhang X, Zhou ZH. 2010. Low cost, high performance GPU computing solution for atomic resolution cryoEM single-particle reconstruction. Journal of structural biology 172:400-406.

Rosenthal PB, Henderson R. 2003. Optimal determination of particle orientation, absolute hand, and contrast loss in single-particle electron cryomicroscopy. Journal of molecular biology 333:721-745.

Pettersen EF, Goddard TD, Huang CC, Couch GS, Greenblatt DM, Meng EC, Ferrin TE. 2004. UCSF Chimera--a visualization system for exploratory research and analysis. Journal of computational chemistry 25:1605-1612.

Emsley P, Lohkamp B, Scott WG, Cowtan K. 2010. Features and development of Coot. Acta crystallographica. Section D, Biological crystallography 66:486-501.

Adams PD, Afonine PV, Bunkoczi G, Chen VB, Davis IW, Echols N, Headd JJ, Hung LW, Kapral GJ, Grosse-Kunstleve RW, McCoy AJ, Moriarty NW, Oeffner R, Read RJ, Richardson DC, Richardson JS, Terwilliger TC, Zwart PH. 2010. PHENIX: a comprehensive Python-based system for macromolecular structure solution. Acta crystallographica. Section D, Biological crystallography 66:213-221.

Yu X, Veesler D, Campbell MG, Barry ME, Asturias FJ, Barry MA, Reddy VS. 2017. Cryo-EM structure of human adenovirus D26 reveals the conservation of structural organization among human adenoviruses. Science advances 3:e1602670.

FIGURE LEGENDS

FIG 1 Distribution and structure of minor proteins IIIa, VIII, and IX in the virion of human Ad5. (A and B) The outer surface (A) and inner surface (B) views of human Ad5 capsid. The electron-counting cryoEM density map of human Ad5 virion at 3.2 Å resolution is differentially colored according to the identities of penton base (P), hexons (H1-H4), minor proteins IX (purple in A), IIIa (red in B), and VIII (magenta in B). (C) Atomic models of minor proteins IX, IIIa, and VIII. Each model is rainbow-colored blue to red from N-terminus to C-terminus of the protein chain. The numbers denote protein sequence numbers at boundaries of the model. Three copies of protein IX N-terminal region, and four copies of protein IX C-terminal region, assemble into the triskelion and 4-helix bundle, respectively. Note the three parallel and one antiparallel configuration of coiled-coil helices in the 4-helix bundle.

533 FIG 2 Resolution assessment of the electron-counting cryoEM structure of human Ad5 virion. (A)
534 Final resolution of the density map was estimated to be 3.2 Å by the FSC=0.143 criterion (63).
535 (B) High resolution features of some protein sidechains in the density map of cement protein VIII.
536 Note that subtle differences among Val, Leu, and Ile, between Phe and Tyr, or between Lys and
537 Arg, are discernible.

538 FIG 3 Validating our previous models of protein IIIa, VIII, and IX with the improved structure of
539 human Ad5 from electron-counting cryoEM. Example densities (semi-transparent surface) of
540 protein IIIa (A), VIII (B), and IX (C) are segmented out from the 3.2 Å resolution cryoEM
541 reconstruction and fitted with the corresponding atomic models (sticks) to showcase the validity
542 of our model. Some bulky sidechains are labeled. Note that only two high-quality helices in the
543 protein IX 4-helix bundle are shown for clarity. These two helices are antiparallel.

544 FIG 4 Cement protein IX forms the triskelion and 4-helix bundle on the outer surface of Ad5
545 capsid. (A) Distribution of four protein IX molecules in each asymmetric unit of Ad5 capsid. The
546 C-terminal regions of four protein IX molecules assemble into a 4-helix bundle, while their N-
547 terminal regions are distributed in four triskelions. Quasi-equivalent hexons H1-H4 are labeled.
548 (B) Densities connecting the N-terminal triskelion domain of protein IX to its C-terminal coiled-
549 coil helix in the 4-helix bundle are discernable when lowering the displaying threshold. The
550 density map is viewed from the same orientation as the model in (A) with densities of hexon H2
551 and H3 hidden for clarity. Only two of the four triskelions and their linker densities to the 4-helix
552 bundle are shown for clarity. Note that the brown density links the triskelion to a helix from the
553 top of the 4-helix bundle, while the magenta density (and the other two not shown) links the
554 triskelion to a helix from the bottom of the 4-helix bundle. (C) Polarities of the four helices in the
555 4-helix bundle. Because protein sidechains in an α-helix should be slightly pointing to the N-
556 terminal end of the helix, polarities of the four helices can be unambiguously determined based

on the orientation of sidechain densities as denoted by dashed lines. The four helices are

determined to be three parallel and one antiparallel.

FIG 5 Identification and modeling of protein VI, pVIn, and pVIln2 in the inner cavity of hexon. (A)

A facet of Ad5 capsid viewed from inside of the capsid. The density map is differentially colored

the same way as in Fig. 1 A and B, except that previously un-modeled densities are highlighted

yellow. Note that those un-modeled densities are mainly distributed in the cavities of hexons. (B,

C) A “remnant map” was calculated by removing densities of hexon, penton base, protein IIIa,

VIII, and IX, leaving previously un-modeled densities alone. The density map in B is flipped over

in C to show the cup-shaped densities hiding deeply in the cavity of each hexon, which are

attributable to the disordered N- and/or C-terminal regions of protein VI. (D) A zoom-in view of

hexon H2. Location of this hexon is marked with a dashed hexagon in (A). Three subunits of the

hexon trimer and minor proteins in the cavity of the hexon are differentially colored. The hexon

trimer was displayed at threshold of 3σ (σ is the standard deviation), pVIn (cyan or magenta)

and pVIln2 (gold) at 2.75σ, and mature VI (green) at 1.75σ. (E) Atomic models (sticks) of pVIn,

pVIln2, and VI fitted into their corresponding cryoEM densities (semi-transparent surface), with

some landmark residues labeled. Only one of the two equivalent copies of pVIn is shown.

Schematics at the bottom show maturational cleavages in pVI and pVII. Each precursor protein

is represented as a bar with the polypeptide length in amino acids indicated in the center.

Consensus cleavage sites are denoted by arrows, non-consensus site by arrowhead. (F)

Disordered densities hidden deeply in the cavity of hexon H2. Surface presentation of the hexon

was calculated with atomic models of the hexon trimer and removed one half to expose the

inner cavity of the hexon. The nomenclature of hexon base, hexon tower, and the β-constriction

site is following that in the literature (5). Disordered densities (yellow) in the cavity were

segment out from the cryoEM density map and displayed at threshold of 0.9σ. The model of a

protein VI (green ribbon) crossing the opening of the cavity is also shown. The two dashed lines

denote that the disordered densities are speculated to be attributable to the un-modeled N- and  
C-terminal regions of the protein VI.

FIG 6 Binding sites of pVIn, pVIn2 and protein VI in the cavity of hexon. (A) Atomic model of  
hexon H2 corresponding to the density map shown in Fig. 5D. The two insets are zoom-in views  
of the boxed regions showing β-augmentation interactions among hexon subunit, pVIn, and VI.  
(B, C) Overall view of the binding sites of pVIn (B) and pVIn2 (C) in the hexon wall. (D, E)  
Comparison of pVIn (D) and pVIn2 (E) C-termini binding to two equivalent pockets in the hexon  
wall. These are zoom-in views in boxed regions in (B) and (C) respectively. Note the similar  
shapes of pVIn and pVIn2 in this region, but prominently distinguishable pVIn Ser31 and pVIn2  
Phe22 densities, as well as distinct interactions with labeled hexon residues. (F) A second  
binding site shared by pVIn and pVIn2 in the capsid wall. This site of a hydrophobic pocket is  
bound by pVIn2 Leu15 as shown in boxed region in (C) and zoomed-in view here, or by pVIn  
Ile25 as shown in (B).

| Model to map fit (CC around atoms) | 0.8551 |
| --- | --- |
| RMS deviations from ideal values | Bond length (Å) | 0.007 |
|  | Bond angle (°) | 0.823 |
| All-atom clashscore | 5.69 |
| Molprobity score | 1.60 |
| Ramachandran plot (%) | Outliers | 0.02 |
|  | Allowed | 4.23 |
|  | Favored | 95.74 |
| Rotamer outliers (%) | 0.03 |
| Cbeta deviations | 0 |

A
C
P
H1
H4
H2
H3
7
57
67
protein IX
outside view
B
protein IIIa
D
4
301
E
protein VIII
227
2
111
158
inside view
4-helix
bundle
triskelion
133
N
C
C
N
N
N

A

FSC
0.75
0.5
0.25
0.143
0
0.05 0.1   0.15    0.2     0.25      0.3       0.35
Resolution (1/Å)
1/3.2Å

B

Val196        Leu56         Ile5          Lys3
Trp11        Phe198        Tyr27        Arg30

A   Protein IIIa
Q29
W27
R33
M31
M35
F188 Y181 Q190
V180
Y187

B   Protein VIII
T62
Q58
R53
H50
V44
M40
L55
F212
F201
Y197
V196
R51
R48
F198
N199
F216
Y208

C   Protein IX
L114
R112
L110
L107
L124
Q127
L103
L131
K99
R96
4-helix bundle region
R26
Y14
W22
L15
Triskelion region

A

H1

H4

H2

H3

B

Contour Threshold = 3.0δ

Contour Threshold = 1.5δ

C

N

C

N

C

N

Contour Threshold = 0.5δ

A
inside view
H1
H2
H3
H4

B
remnant map

C
180°

D
hexon
pVIn
pVIn2
hexon
β-constriction
hexon tower
hexon base

E
N5
F6
I25
R12
M19
W22
M30
S31
N29
G33
G32
F18
L15
H13
R16
M21
G14
F17
K20
G24
G23
F22

F
hexon
hexon
C
N
VI

pVI
N
250
C
33
239

pVII
N
13
198
C
24

A

pVIn
18
16
11
13
51
49
hexon

B

pVIn

C

pVIn2
L15
F22

D

E921
R872
S31
pVIn

E

R872
A679
F22
L647
L919 L870
pVIn2
L372
L368
F712

F

L24
pVIn2
V29
L28
L15
F45
A32
L634
L630
L41
