
JCP Online First, published on November 2, 2017 as 10.1136/jclinpath-2017-204853

PD-L1

Anthousa Kythreotou,¹ Abdul Siddique,¹ Francesco A Mauri,¹ Mark Bower,² David J Pinato¹

---

### ABSTRACT

Programmed death ligand 1 (PD-L1) is the principal ligand of programmed death 1 (PD-1), a coinhibitory receptor that can be constitutively expressed or induced in myeloid, lymphoid, normal epithelial cells and in cancer. Under physiological conditions, the PD-1/PD-L1 interaction is essential in the development of immune tolerance preventing excessive immune cell activity that can lead to tissue destruction and autoimmunity. PD-L1 expression is an immune evasion mechanism exploited by various malignancies and is generally associated with poorer prognosis. PD-L1 expression is also suggested as a predictive biomarker of response to anti-PD-1/PD-L1 therapies; however, contradictory evidence exists as to its role across histotypes. Over the years, anti-PD-1/PD-L1 agents have gained momentum as novel anticancer therapeutics, by inducing durable tumour regression in numerous malignancies including metastatic lung cancer, melanoma and many others. In this review, we discuss the immunobiology of PD-L1, with a particular focus on its clinical significance in malignancy.

---

### INTRODUCTION

Programmed death ligand 1 (PD-L1), otherwise known as B7-H1 or CD274, is the first functionally characterised ligand of the coinhibitory programmed death receptor 1 (PD-1). Together with its cognate ligand PD-L2, PD-L1 plays a key role in maintaining peripheral and central immune cell tolerance through binding to the PD-1 receptor.

---

### STRUCTURE

PD-L1 is encoded by the PDCDL1 gene and is found on chromosome 9 in humans at position p24.1.² First described by Dong *et al* in 1999 as B7-H1, PD-L1 was recognised as the third member of the B7 protein family, displaying a 15%–20% homology with B7.1 and B7.2 proteins.³ The full length of PD-L1 is encoded within seven exons, corresponding to a 40kDa protein of 290 amino acids. PD-L1 is a type 1 transmembrane protein and consists of IgV-like and IgC-like extracellular domains, a hydrophobic transmembrane domain and a short cytoplasmic tail made from 30 amino acids, with unclear signal transduction properties.⁴

---

### EXPRESSION OF PD-L1

PD-L1 expression can be constitutive or inducible. Constitutive, low-level PD-L1 expression can be found, on resting lymphocytes, antigen-presenting cells (APCs) and in corneal, syncytiotrophoblastic and Langerhans’ islet cells where it contributes to tissue homeostasis in proinflammatory responses.¹ PD-L1 confers certain tissues such as placenta, testis and the anterior chamber of the eye an ‘immune privileged’ status, where inoculation of exogenous antigens is tolerated without induction of an inflammatory/immune response.⁵ In the context of inflammation and/or infection, PD-L1 is induced as a suppressive signal on haematopoietic, endothelial and epithelial cells.⁶ PD-L1 expression is primarily influenced by toll-like receptors (TLRs), a subtype of non-catalytic receptors, highly expressed in APCs and activated by pathogen-associated molecular patterns. TLR-mediated regulation of PD-L1 relies on the activation of the MEK/ERK kinases, which enhance PD-L1 messenger RNA (mRNA) transcription via nuclear factor kappa B. Interferon-γ (IFN-γ) receptors 1 and 2 are also implicated in regulating PD-L1 expression, largely through Jak/STAT-mediated activation of IRF-1. Interferon-mediated activation of Jak/STAT can also up-regulate PD-L1 expression through the MEK/ERK and the phosphatidylinositol 3 kinase (PI3K)/AKT pathway, which exerts a permissive role on PD-L1 transcription through phosphorylation of mammalian target of rapamycin.⁷

In carcinogenesis, PD-L1 can be overexpressed as a result of driver oncogenic events. Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutations, for instance, positively correlate with PD-L1 expression in lung cancer, with EGFR inhibitors acting as repressors of PD-L1 transcription.⁸ In phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN)-mutant tumours, PD-L1 overexpression is sustained by unrestrained activation of the PI3K/AKT pathway.⁹ In T cell lymphoma, the nucleophosmin (NPM)/anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) fusion gene up-regulates PD-L1 via constitutive STAT3 activation.¹⁰

---

### PD-L1/PD-1 ACTIVATION AND SIGNAL TRANSDUCTION

The biological functions of PD-L1 depend on binding with PD-1 (CD279), a 288 amino acid long type 1 transmembrane receptor encoded by the PDCD1 gene and physiologically expressed on lymphocytes and myeloid cells (figure 1). PD-1 is composed of an extracellular IgV-like domain and a transmembrane region. Its intracellular tail is composed of tyrosine based switch motif (ITSM) and immune receptor tyrosine based inhibitory motif sequences.¹¹

On ligation with PD-L1, recruitment of Src homology 2 domain containing phosphatases 1 and 2 (SHP-1/SHP-2) to the ITSM causes dephosphorylation of signalling kinases such as CD3ζ, PKCθ and ZAP70 resulting in a global inhibitory action of T cell expansion.¹² Such inhibitory response is secondary to inactivation of the

---

### Correspondence to

Dr David J Pinato, NIHR Academic Clinical Lecturer in Medical Oncology, Imperial College London, Hammersmith Hospital Campus, London W120HS, UK; david.pinato09@imperial.ac.uk

---

### Accepted 19 October 2017

To cite: Kythreotou A, Siddique A, Mauri FA, *et al*. *J Clin Pathol* Published Online First: [please include Day Month Year]. doi:10.1136/jclinpath-2017-204853

---

### BMJ Copyright Article author (or their employer) 2017. Produced by BMJ Publishing Group Ltd under licence.

Gene of the month

Tumour microenvironment

IFN-γ

TUMOUR CELL

PI3K

PTEN

PIP3

Akt

mTOR

S6K1

NF-κB

IRF-1

PD-L1 Promoter

PD-L1 Gene

miR-513

Endoplasmic reticulum

3'UTR

5'UTR

PD-L1 mRNA

MHC

TCR

APC

Growth factor receptors

PD-L1

PD-1

MHC

TCR

ZAP70

PLC-γ

PTEN

CK2

JUN

Akt

NF-κB

PKCθ

CD28

ERK

MEK

RAF

RAS

AP-1

Cell proliferation

Differentiation

Survival

PD-1 Gene

PD-1 Promoter

PD-L1 mRNA

Endoplasmic reticulum

ITIM

ITSIM

PD-1

T CELL

Figure 1 A schematic representation illustrating the signalling molecules that are linked with or influenced by the programmed death 1 (PD-1)/ programmed death ligand 1 (PD-L1) interaction, as well as the cellular processes they affect.

PI3K-Akt and Ras-MEK-ERK cascades. Casein kinase 2 is a target of SHP-2. Casein kinase 2 (CK-2) dephosphorylation leads to unrestrained activation of PTEN, a physiological PI3K-Akt signalling antagonist. The inhibitory effect of PD-1 on the Ras-MEK-ERK cascade mostly depends on direct inhibition of Ras and dephosphorylation of phospholipase Cγ.

FUNCTIONS OF PD-L1

Central and peripheral tolerance

The PD-1/PD-L1 pathway is crucial for the development of immune tolerance, a process of negative selection of autoreactive lymphocytes taking place in primary (central tolerance) and secondary lymphoid organs (peripheral tolerance). High PD-L1 expression is in fact demonstrated within the thymus and on dendritic cells, where the PD-L1/PD-1 interaction prevents the proliferation and differentiation of naïve T cells. Knock-out of PD-1/PD-L1 leads to autoimmunity in animal models with lupus-like arthritis, glomerulonephritis and diabetes. In humans, immune-related toxicity is a recognised class effect of anti-PD-1/PD-L1 antibodies, where colitis, endocrinopathy and immune/inflammatory dermatoses are common complications.

Immune exhaustion

Immune exhaustion, that is, the progressive impairment of effector T cell function following persistent antigen presentation, is a physiological mechanism that prevents tissue destruction in chronic infection. A cardinal feature of T cell exhaustion includes the induction of various coinhibitory pathways including PD-1/PD-L1. HIV-specific CD4/CD8 cells coexpress PD-1, and a similar role for PD-1/PD-L1 has been found in viral hepatitis and tuberculosis, where impairment of effector T cell function is induced through apoptosis, inhibition of T cell replication and maturation as well as parallel induction of regulatory T cells.

Regulation of the anticancer immune response

Persistent up-regulation of PD-1 is commonly found in tumour-infiltrating lymphocytes, where PD-L1 expression is

Gene of the month

Table 1 The principal PD-1/PD-L1 checkpoint inhibitors currently approved and in clinical development

| Nivolumab (BMS-936558) | Pembrolizumab (MK-3475) | Atezolizumab (MPDL3280A) | Durvalumab (MEDI 4732) | Avelumab (MSB0010718C) | Pidilizumab (CT-011) |
|-------------------------|------------------------|--------------------------|------------------------|-----------------------|---------------------|
| Target                  | PD-1                   | PD-1                     | PD-L1                  | PD-L1                 | PD-L1               | PD-1                |
| Monoclonal antibody class | Fully human IgG 4     | Humanised IgG4k          | Humanised IgG 1        | Engineered IgG1k      | Fully human         | Humanised           |
|                          |                        |                          |                        |                       | IgG1                | IgG1k               |
| Stage of clinical       | FDA approved           | FDA approved             | FDA approved           | FDA approved          | FDA approved        | Phase II            |
| development             | Phase III              | Phase III                | Phase III              | Phase III             | Phase III           |                     |
| Approved indication     | Melanoma (2014),       | Melanoma (2014),         | Urothelial carcinoma   | Urothelial carcinoma  | Merkel cell carcinoma |
|                         | NSCLC (2015), RCC (2015), urothelial carcinoma | NSCLC (2016), HNSCC (2016), Hodgkin's lymphoma | (2016),             | (2017)              | (2017)              |
|                         | MMR-d colorectal cancer (2017) | MMR-d tumours (2017) |                      |                       |                     |                     |
| Companion PD-L1 assay   | Dako 28-8 (rabbit)     | Dako22c3 (mouse)         | Ventana SP 142 (rabbit) | Ventana SP 263 (rabbit) | NA                  |                     |
| Target cells            | TC                     | TC                       | TC                     | TC                    |                     |                     |
|                         | IC                     | IC                       | IC                     |                       |                     |                     |
| Cut-off for positivity  | NSCLC >1%-5%           | NSCLC >1%TC any IC       | Urothelial >5% IC      | Urothelial:           |                     |                     |
|                         | RCC >5%                | (as second-line therapy) | NSCLC >10% IC or       | ≥25%TC or IC if IC    |                     |                     |
|                         |                        |                          | ≥50% TC                | present in >1% of     |                     |                     |
|                         |                        |                          |                        | specimen              |                     |                     |
|                         |                        |                          |                        | >25%TC or 100% IC     |                     |                     |
|                         |                        |                          |                        | if IC present in <1% of |                     |                     |
|                         |                        |                          |                        | specimen              |                     |                     |
|                         |                        |                          |                        | NSCLC:                |                     |                     |
|                         |                        |                          |                        | ≥25%TC                |                     |                     |

FDA, Food and Drug Administration; HNSCC, head and neck squamous cell carcinoma; IC, infiltrating cells; MMR-d, mismatch repair deficient; NSCLC, non-small cell lung cancer; PD-1, programmed death 1; PD-L1, programmed death ligand 1; RCC, renal cell carcinoma; TC, tumour cells.

exploited by malignant cells to avoid immune destruction. Interestingly, PD-1 activation by PD-L1 up-regulates Slug, Snail and Twist through the MAPK/ERK pathway suggesting a link between tumour invasiveness and antitumour immune control. PD ligands are also regulated by hypoxia-inducible factor-1α implying an interplay with neoangiogenesis, an independent hallmark of cancer progression.

### PD-L1 EXPRESSION IN MALIGNANCY

Expression of PD-L1 either in tumour or in infiltrating immune cells has been verified predominantly by immunohistochemistry (IHC) in a variety of tumours, suggesting a role for the PD-1/PD-L1 axis as a prognostic trait and therapeutic target across multiple histotypes. However, IHC-based detection of PD-L1 expression is constrained by preanalytical and analytical variability including heterogeneity in antibody clones, scoring methodology and intrinsic biological variation in PD-L1 expression due to the type of specimen analysed (surgical resection vs biopsy, primary tumour vs metastasis, archival vs fresh frozen) as well as prior treatment status. The complex interplay between these factors plays a major role in the diffusion and clinical application of PD-L1 IHC assays as predictive biomarkers of response to PD-1/PD-L1 inhibitors.

#### Melanoma

The prevalence of PD-L1 expression in melanoma ranges from 24% to 49%, being highest (~60%) in tumours arising from chronic sun-damaged skin and lowest in uveal melanoma (10%). PD-L1 independently predicts for poorer prognosis, being strongly correlated to tumour thickness, lymphatic and visceral spread, and in BRAF-mutant melanoma, PD-L1 overexpression is an adaptive feature of resistance to BRAF inhibitors. In the KEYNOTE-001 trial, patients with PD-L1-overexpressing tumours had response rates >50% and longer progression-free and overall survival. However, the durable responses observed in PD-L1-negative tumours led to unrestricted licensing of anti-PD-1/PD-L1 therapies irrespective of PD-L1 status.

#### Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer (NSCLC)

Approximately 20%-30% of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) express PD-L1 in >50% of the sampled tumour and infiltrating immune cells. PD-L1-positive NSCLCs are characterised by a fainter lymphocytic infiltrate and shorter disease-free survival. However, in a large study of 982 patients prospectively accrued in three adjuvant chemotherapy trials, PD-L1 expression in either tumour or stroma did not predict survival despite the use of different thresholds. PD-L1 expression enriches for responses to anti-PD-1/PD-L1 antibodies. In a study of 184 NSCLC cases treated with

#### Epithelial Ovarian Cancer (EOC)

PD-L1 expression is common to 70% of EOC and predicts for worse 5-year survival rates (53%) compared with PD-L1-negative tumours (80%). PD-L1 inversely correlated with CD8+ T cell infiltrate suggesting its role in impairing the antitumour cytotoxic response, a renowned positive prognostic trait in EOC. Mechanistic studies have shown induction of PD-L1 expression to attenuate the cytolytic activity of CD8+ T cells in vitro and

Kythreotou A, et al. J Clin Pathol 2017;0:1–6.doi:10.1136/jclinpath-2017-204853

promote the peritoneal spread of EOC. ${ }^{60}$ PD-L1 expression strongly depends on IFN-$\gamma$ release within the tumour microenvironment: genetic silencing of the IFN-$\gamma$ receptor 1 decreases tumoural PD-L1 expression and improves survival in animal models. ${ }^{61}$

### Breast cancer
PD-L1 expression is observed in invasive lobular and ductal breast cancer, where it is associated with local recruitment of PD-L1-positive CD8+ T lymphocytes. ${ }^{62,63}$ Analysis of RNA-sequencing datasets has confirmed PD-L1 mRNA overexpression to be associated with a number of adverse prognostic factors such as negative hormone receptor status, Her-2-positive status, higher tumour grade, stage and proliferative index. ${ }^{64}$ PD-L1 expression is typical of 20% of triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) as a result of constitutive transcriptional activation secondary to PTEN loss. ${ }^{65}$ PD-L1-overexpressing TNBC is molecularly defined by abundant cytotoxic T cell infiltrate and higher complete response rates to neoadjuvant chemotherapy, ${ }^{64}$ findings that are in support of the development of anti-PD-1/PD-L1 inhibitors in TNBC. ${ }^{66}$

### Gastrointestinal malignancies
In gastro-oesophageal cancers, PD-L1 status is a negative predictor of outcome and is associated with nodal and visceral metastases and a more intense regulatory T cell infiltrate. ${ }^{67,68}$ Response rates to pembrolizumab in PD-L1-overexpressing gastro-oesophageal tumours approach 20%. ${ }^{69}$ In colorectal cancer, tumoural expression of PD-L1 is infrequent (5%) and strongly associated with PD-1-positive lymphocytic infiltrate and mismatch-repair deficiency (MMR-d), features precluding to high immunogenicity and responsiveness to anti-PD-1/PD-L1 therapies. ${ }^{70,71}$ In cholangiocarcinoma, PD-L1 expression ranges from 11% to 30% and is linked to worse prognosis. ${ }^{72,73}$ The prevalence of PD-L1 expression is 20% in hepatocellular cancer and correlates with higher alpha-fetoprotein levels, vascular invasion, poor differentiation and hepatic reserve.

Pancreatic cancer is poorly immunogenic due the presence of a dense immunosuppressive desmoplastic microenvironment. PD-L1 expression is scarce, and responses to single agent PD-1/PD-L1 targeted inhibitors are low. ${ }^{76-78}$

### Other malignancies
The range of tumours where the PD-1/PD-L1 pathway is emerging as a potential therapeutic target is rapidly expanding. PD-L1 overexpression has been shown to identify a group of 15%-20% of head and neck squamous cell carcinomas (HNSCCs) with poorer prognosis and enhanced chemoresistance. ${ }^{79,80}$ In urothelial malignancies, PD-L1 expression is low in tumour cells (4%) but higher in infiltrating lymphocytes (34%), a trait that predicts for improved survival in metastatic patients. ${ }^{81-83}$ B cell lymphomas rely heavily on the PD-1/PD-L1 immune checkpoint as a tumorigenic mechanism. In Hodgkin lymphoma (HL), Reed-Sternberg cells are commonly characterised by PD-L1 gene amplification, justifying the response rates in excess of 85% observed in chemorefractory HL treated with nivolumab. ${ }^{84,85}$

PD-L1 is involved in avoidance of tumour rejection in non-HL and in different subtypes of leukaemia. ${ }^{85}$ Blast cells are PD-L1 immunopositive in acute myeloid leukaemia, where PD-L1 expression attenuates antitumour cytolysis and predicts for a higher risk of relapse. ${ }^{86}$

---

### PD-1/PD-L1 INHIBITORS
The PD-1/PD-L1 interaction is an established therapeutic target in immuno-oncology which led to ‘Breakthrough of the Year’ status in 2013. ${ }^{87}$ Selective inhibition of PD-1 or PD-L1 is not biologically identical due to the distinct spectrum of molecular interactions that characterise the ligand and receptor. Inhibition of PD-1, for instance, halts immunosuppressive signals derived from PD-L1 and PD-L2, whereas blockade of PD-L1 exerts inhibitory effects on PD-1 and B7.1 receptors. ${ }^{88}$ In terms of clinical efficacy, therapeutic equivalence between the two approaches is presumed but not definitely proven.

As shown in **table 1**, on the basis of the significant survival benefit and durable responses observed in phase II/III studies, antibodies inhibiting PD-1/PD-L1 have become, to date, clinically approved therapies in seven oncological indications.

However, a number of challenges still exist in optimising the delivery of PD-1/PD-L1 inhibitors and expanding their use as safe and effective therapies across indications.

In cancer, responses are limited to a fraction of patients. Combined inhibition of PD-1 and CTLA-4 has resulted in doubling of response rates at the price, however, of increased toxicity. ${ }^{51}$ These results have paved the way to a number of combination studies with other systemic anticancer therapies and locoregional treatments. ${ }^{48}$

An improved characterisation of predictive correlates of response to PD-1/PD-L1 inhibitors is expected to improve patient selection and facilitate the delivery of personalised immunotherapy. Besides harmonisation of PD-L1 IHC testing, prediction of response will require multitechnology integration to comprehensively evaluate tumour-intrinsic and tumour-extrinsic factors, including somatic mutational load, MMR-d status, proinflammatory signatures and many other factors. ${ }^{89}$

Lastly, the non-oncological development of PD-1/PD-L1 inhibitors in disease areas with a paucity of effective therapeutic targets including chronic infection and immune pathology might further expand the clinical relevance of PD-L1 as a therapeutic target in human disease. ${ }^{90}$

---

**Handling editor** Runjan Chetty

**Contributors** Conception or design: DJP. Acquisition, analysis or interpretation of data: AK, AS, FAM, MB and DJP. Drafting the work or revising it critically for important intellectual content: AK, AS, FAM, MB and DJP. Final approval of the version to be published: AK, AS, FAM, MB and DJP.

**Competing interests** None declared.

**Provenance and peer review** Commissioned; internally peer reviewed.

© Article author(s) (or their employer(s) unless otherwise stated in the text of the article) 2017. All rights reserved. No commercial use is permitted unless otherwise expressly granted.

---

### REFERENCES
1. Boussiotis VA. Molecular and biochemical aspects of the PD-1 checkpoint pathway. *N Engl J Med* 2016;375:1767–78.
2. NCBI gene resource CD274 molecule [Homo sapiens (human)]-gene-NCBI. 2017 https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/gene (accessed 29 Jun 2017).
3. Dong H, Zhu G, Tamada K, *et al.* B7-H1, a third member of the B7 family, costimulates T-cell proliferation and interleukin-10 secretion. *Nat Med* 1999;5:1365–9.
4. Chen J, Jiang CC, Jin L, *et al.* Regulation of PD-L1: a novel role of pro-survival signalling in cancer. *Ann Oncol* 2016;27:409–16.
5. Wang LL, Li ZH, Hu XH, *et al.* The roles of the PD-1/PD-L1 pathway at immunologically privileged sites. *Am J Reprod Immunol* 2017;78.
6. Keir ME, Butte MJ, Freeman GJ, *et al.* PD-1 and its ligands in tolerance and immunity. *Annu Rev Immunol* 2008;26:677–704.
7. Ritprajak P, Azuma M. Intrinsic and extrinsic control of expression of the immunoregulatory molecule PD-L1 in epithelial cells and squamous cell carcinoma. *Oral Oncol* 2015;51:221–8.

Downloaded from http://jcp.bmj.com/ on November 4, 2017 - Published by group.bmj.com

---

**Gene of the month**

8 Azuma K, Ota K, Kawahara A, *et al.* Association of PD-L1 overexpression with activating EGFR mutations in surgically resected non-small-cell lung cancer. *Ann Oncol* 2014;25:1935–40.

9 Suzuki A, Itami S, Ohishi M, *et al.* Keratinocyte-specific Pten deficiency results in epidermal hyperplasia, accelerated hair follicle morphogenesis and tumor formation. *Cancer Res* 2003;63:674–81.

10 Marzec M, Zhang Q, Goradia A, *et al.* Oncogenic kinase NPM/ALK induces through STAT3 expression of immunosuppressive protein CD274 (PD-L1, B7-H1). *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA* 2008;105:20852–7.

11 Boussiotis VA, Chatterjee P, Li L. Biochemical signaling of PD-1 on T cells and its functional implications. *Cancer J* 2014;20:265–71.

12 Yokosuka T, Takamatsu M, Kobayashi-Imanishi W, *et al.* Programmed cell death 1 forms negative costimulatory microclusters that directly inhibit T cell receptor signaling by recruiting phosphatase SHP2. *J Exp Med* 2012;209:1201–17.

13 Patsoukis N, Li L, Sari D, *et al.* PD-1 increases PTEN phosphatase activity while decreasing PTEN protein stability by inhibiting casein kinase 2. *Mol Cell Biol* 2013;33:3091–8.

14 Roberts PJ, Der CJ. Targeting the Raf-MEK-ERK mitogen-activated protein kinase cascade for the treatment of cancer. *Oncogene* 2007;26:3291–310.

15 Bivona TG, Pérez De Castro I, Ahearn IM, *et al.* Phospholipase Cgamma activates ras on the golgi apparatus by means of RasGRP1. *Nature* 2003;424:694–8.

16 Haendeler J, Yin G, Hojo Y, *et al.* GIT1 mediates Src-dependent activation of phospholipase cgamma by angiotensin II and epidermal growth factor. *J Biol Chem* 2003;278:49936–44.

17 Xing Y, Hogquist KA. T-cell tolerance: central and peripheral. *Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol* 2012;4.

18 Nishimura H, Honjo T, Minato N. Facilitation of beta selection and modification of positive selection in the thymus of PD-1-deficient mice. *J Exp Med* 2000;191:891–8.

19 Probst HC, McCoy K, Okazaki T, *et al.* Resting dendritic cells induce peripheral CD8+ T cell tolerance through PD-1 and CTLA-4. *Nat Immunol* 2005;6:280–6.

20 Nishimura H, Nose M, Hiai H, *et al.* Development of lupus-like autoimmune diseases by disruption of the PD-1 gene encoding an ITIM motif-carrying immunoreceptor. *Immunity* 1999;11:141–51.

21 Keir ME, Liang SC, Guleria I, *et al.* Tissue expression of PD-L1 mediates peripheral T cell tolerance. *J Exp Med* 2006;203:883–95.

22 Kumar V, Chaudhary N, Garg M, *et al.* Current diagnosis and management of immune related adverse events (irAEs) induced by immune checkpoint inhibitor therapy. *Front Pharmacol* 2017;8:49.

23 Wherry EJ, Kurachi M. Molecular and cellular insights into T cell exhaustion. *Nat Rev Immunol* 2015;15:486–99.

24 Kaufmann DE, Kavanagh DG, Pereyra F, *et al.* Upregulation of CTLA-4 by HIV-specific CD4+ T cells correlates with disease progression and defines a reversible immune dysfunction. *Nat Immunol* 2007;8:1246–54.

25 Day CL, Kaufmann DE, Kiepiela P, *et al.* PD-1 expression on HIV-specific T cells is associated with T-cell exhaustion and disease progression. *Nature* 2006;443:350–.

26 Wherry EJ. T cell exhaustion. *Nat Immunol* 2011;131:492–9.

27 Patsoukis N, Sari D, Boussiotis VA. PD-1 inhibits T cell proliferation by upregulating p27 and p15 and suppressing Cdc25A. *Cell Cycle* 2012;11:4305–9.

28 Sheppard KA, Fitz LJ, Lee JM, *et al.* PD-1 inhibits T-cell receptor induced phosphorylation of the ZAP70/CD3zeta signalosome and downstream signaling to PKCtheta. *FEBS Lett* 2004;574(1-3):37–41.

29 Charlton JJ, Chatzidakis I, Tsoukatou D, *et al.* Programmed death-1 shapes memory phenotype CD8 T cell subsets in a cell-intrinsic manner. *J Immunol* 2013;190:6104–14.

30 Francisco LM, Sage PT, Sharpe AH. The PD-1 pathway in tolerance and autoimmunity. *Nat Rev Immunol Rev* 2010;236:219–42.

31 Pardoll DM. The blockade of immune checkpoints in cancer immunotherapy. *Nat Rev Cancer* 2012;12:252–64.

32 Hanahan D, Weinberg RA. Hallmarks of cancer: the next generation. *Cell* 2011;144:646–74.

33 Cao Y, Zhang L, Kamimura Y, *et al.* B7-H1 overexpression regulates epithelial-mesenchymal transition and accelerates carcinogenesis in skin. *Cancer Res* 2011;71:1235–43.

34 Olmeda D, Montes A, Moreno-Bueno G, *et al.* Snai1 and Snai2 collaborate on tumor growth and metastasis properties of mouse skin carcinoma cell lines. *Oncogene* 2008;27:4690–701.

35 Conacci-Sorrell M, Simcha I, Ben-Yedidia T, *et al.* Autoregulation of E-cadherin expression by cadherin-cadherin interactions. *J Cell Biol* 2003;163:847–57.

36 Pece S, Gutkind JS. Signaling from E-cadherins to the MAPK pathway by the recruitment and activation of epidermal growth factor receptors upon cell-cell contact formation. *J Biol Chem* 2000;275:41227–33.

37 Pinato DJ, Black JR, Troussil S, *et al.* Programmed cell death ligands expression in phaeochromocytomas and paragangliomas: Relationship with the hypoxic response, immune evasion and malignant behavior. *Oncoimmunology* 2017:e1358332.

38 Pinato DJ, Shiner RJ, White SD, *et al.* Intra-tumoral heterogeneity in the expression of programmed-death (PD) ligands in isogenic primary and metastatic lung cancer: Implications for immunotherapy. *Oncoimmunology* 2016;5:e1213934.

39 Patel SP, Kurzrock R. PD-L1 expression as a predictive biomarker in cancer immunotherapy. *Mol Cancer Ther* 2015;14:847–56.

40 Herbst RS, Baas P, Kim DW, *et al.* Pembrolizumab versus docetaxel for previously treated, PD-L1-positive, advanced non-small-cell lung cancer (KEYNOTE-010): a randomised controlled trial. *Lancet* 2016;387:1540–50.

41 Scheel AH, Ansén S, Schultheis AM, *et al.* PD-L1 expression in non-small cell lung cancer: correlations with genetic alterations. *Oncoimmunology* 2016;5.

42 Konishi J, Yamazaki K, Azuma M, *et al.* B7-H1 expression on non-small cell lung cancer cells and its relationship with tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes and their PD-1 expression. *Clin Cancer Res* 2004;10:5094–100.

43 Okita R, Maeda A, Shimizu K, *et al.* PD-L1 overexpression is partially regulated by EGFR/HER2 signaling and associated with poor prognosis in patients with non-small-cell lung cancer. *Cancer Immunol Immunother* 2017;66:865–76.

44 Tsao MS, Le Teuff G, Shepherd FA, *et al.* PD-L1 protein expression assessed by immunohistochemistry is neither prognostic nor predictive of benefit from adjuvant chemotherapy in resected non-small cell lung cancer. *Ann Oncol* 2017;28:882–9.

45 Herbst RS, Soria JC, Kowanetz M, *et al.* Predictive correlates of response to the anti-PD-L1 antibody MPDL3280A in cancer patients. *Nature* 2014;515:563–7.

46 Garon EB, Rizvi NA, Hui R, *et al.* Pembrolizumab for the treatment of non-small-cell lung cancer. *N Engl J Med* 2015;372:2018–28.

47 Reck M, Rodríguez-Abreu D, Robinson AG, *et al.* Pembrolizumab versus chemotherapy for PD-L1-positive non-small-cell lung cancer. *N Engl J Med* 2016;375:1823–33.

48 Kumar R, Collins D, Dolly S, *et al.* Targeting the PD-1/PD-L1 axis in non-small cell lung cancer. *Curr Probl Cancer* 2017;41:111–24.

49 McLaughlin J, Han G, Schalper KA, *et al.* Quantitative assessment of the heterogeneity of PD-L1 expression in non-small-cell lung cancer. *JAMA Oncol* 2016;2:46–54.

50 Hirsch FR, McElhinny A, Stanforth D, *et al.* PD-L1 immunohistochemistry assays for lung cancer: results from phase 1 of the blueprint PD-L1 IHC assay comparison project. *J Thorac Oncol* 2017;12:208–22.

51 Larkin J, Chiarion-Sileni V, Gonzalez R, *et al.* Combined nivolumab and ipilimumab or monotherapy in untreated melanoma. *N Engl J Med* 2015;373:23–34.

52 Weber JS, D’Angelo SP, Minor D, *et al.* Nivolumab versus chemotherapy in patients with advanced melanoma who progressed after anti-CTLA-4 treatment (CheckMate 037): a randomised, controlled, open-label, phase 3 trial. *Lancet Oncol* 2015;16:375–84.

53 Robert C, Long GV, Brady B, *et al.* Nivolumab in previously untreated melanoma without BRAF mutation. *N Engl J Med* 2015;372:320–30.

54 Kaunitz GJ, Cottrell TR, Lilo M, *et al.* Melanoma subtypes demonstrate distinct PD-L1 expression profiles. *Lab Invest* 2017;97:1063–71.

55 Hino R, Kabashima K, Kato Y, *et al.* Tumor cell expression of programmed cell death-1 ligand 1 is a prognostic factor for malignant melanoma. *Cancer* 2010;116:1757–66.

56 Jiang X, Zhou J, Giobbie-Hurder A, *et al.* The activation of MAPK in melanoma cells resistant to BRAF inhibition promotes PD-L1 expression that is reversible by MEK and PI3K inhibition. *Clin Cancer Res* 2013;19:598–609.

57 Daud AI, Wolchok JD, Robert C, *et al.* Programmed death-ligand 1 expression and response to the anti-programmed death 1 antibody pembrolizumab in melanoma. *J Clin Oncol* 2016;34:4102–9.

58 Hamanishi J, Mandai M, Iwasaki M, *et al.* Programmed cell death 1 ligand 1 and tumor-infiltrating CD8+ T lymphocytes are prognostic factors of human ovarian cancer. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA* 2007;104:3360–5.

59 Hwang WT, Adams SF, Tahirovic E, *et al.* Prognostic significance of tumor-infiltrating T cells in ovarian cancer: a meta-analysis. *Gynecol Oncol* 2012;124:192–8.

60 Abiko K, Mandai M, Hamanishi J, *et al.* PD-L1 on tumor cells is induced in ascites and promotes peritoneal dissemination of ovarian cancer through CTL dysfunction. *Clin Cancer Res* 2013;19:1363–74.

61 Abiko K, Matsumura N, Hamanishi J, *et al.* IFN-γ from lymphocytes induces PD-L1 expression and promotes progression of ovarian cancer. *Br J Cancer* 2015;112:1501–9.

62 Thompson ED, Taube JM, Asch-Kendrick RJ, *et al.* PD-L1 expression and the immune microenvironment in primary invasive lobular carcinomas of the breast. *Mod Pathol* 2017.

63 Cimino-Mathews A, Thompson E, Taube JM, *et al.* PD-L1 (B7-H1) expression and the immune tumor microenvironment in primary and metastatic breast carcinomas. *Hum Pathol* 2016;47:52–63.

64 Sabatier R, Finetti P, Mamessier E, *et al.* Prognostic and predictive value of PDL1 expression in breast cancer. *Oncotarget* 2015;6:5449–64.

65 Mittendorf EA, Philips AV, Meric-Bernstam F, *et al.* PD-L1 expression in triple-negative breast cancer. *Cancer Immunol Res* 2014;2:361–70.

66 Baracco EE, Pietrocola F, Buqué A, *et al.* Inhibition of formyl peptide receptor 1 reduces the efficacy of anticancer chemotherapy against carcinogen-induced breast cancer. *Oncoimmunology* 2016;5.

67 Wu C, Zhu Y, Jiang J, *et al.* Immunohistochemical localization of programmed death-1 ligand-1 (PD-L1) in gastric carcinoma and its clinical significance. *Acta Histochem* 2006;108:19–24.

68 Hou J, Yu Z, Xiang R, *et al.* Correlation between infiltration of FOXP3+ regulatory T cells and expression of B7-H1 in the tumor tissues of gastric cancer. *Exp Mol Pathol* 2014;96:284–91.

Gene of the month

69 Muro K, Chung HC, Shankaran V, *et al.* Pembrolizumab for patients with PD-L1-positive advanced gastric cancer (KEYNOTE-012): a multicentre, open-label, phase 1b trial. *Lancet Oncol* 2016;17:717–26.

70 Le DT, Uram JN, Wang H, *et al.* PD-1 blockade in tumors with mismatch-repair deficiency. *N Engl J Med* 2015;372:2509–20.

71 Efstathiou JA, Noda M, Rowan A, *et al.* Intestinal trefoil factor controls the expression of the adenomatous polyposis coli-catenin and the E-cadherin-catenin complexes in human colon carcinoma cells. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA* 1998;95:3122–7.

72 Sabbatino F, Villani V, Yearley JH, *et al.* PD-L1 and HLA class I antigen expression and clinical course of the disease in intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma. *Clin Cancer Res* 2016;22:470–8.

73 Walter D, Herrmann E, Schnitzbauer AA, *et al.* PD-L1 expression in extrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma. *Histopathology* 2017;71:383–92.

74 Calderaro J, Rousseau B, Amaddeo G, *et al.* Programmed death ligand 1 expression in hepatocellular carcinoma: relationship with clinical and pathological features. *Hepatology* 2016;64:2038–46.

75 Finkelmeier F, Canli Ö, Tal A, *et al.* High levels of the soluble programmed death-ligand (sPD-L1) identify hepatocellular carcinoma patients with a poor prognosis. *Eur J Cancer* 2016;59:152–9.

76 Wang L, Ma Q, Chen X, *et al.* Clinical significance of B7-H1 and B7-1 expressions in pancreatic carcinoma. *World J Surg* 2010;34:1059–65.

77 Lu C, Talukder A, Savage NM, *et al.* JAK-STAT-mediated chronic inflammation impairs cytotoxic T lymphocyte activation to decrease anti-PD-1 immunotherapy efficacy in pancreatic cancer. *Oncoimmunology* 2017;6.

78 Feng M, Xiong G, Cao Z, *et al.* PD-1/PD-L1 and immunotherapy for pancreatic cancer. *Cancer Lett* 2017;407:57–65.

79 Müller T, Braun M, Dietrich D, *et al.* PD-L1: a novel prognostic biomarker in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma. *Oncotarget* 2017;8:52889.

80 Lee Y, Shin JH, Longmire M, *et al.* CD44+ cells in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma suppress T-cell-mediated immunity by selective constitutive and inducible expression of PD-L1. *Clin Cancer Res* 2016;22:3571–81.

81 Wankowicz SAM, Werner L, Orsola A, *et al.* Differential expression of PD-L1 in high grade T1 vs muscle invasive bladder carcinoma and its prognostic implications. *J Urol* 2017;198:817–23.

82 Inman BA, Sebo TJ, Frigola X, *et al.* PD-L1 (B7-H1) expression by urothelial carcinoma of the bladder and BCG-induced granulomata. *Cancer* 2007;109:1499–505.

83 Bellmunt J, Mullane SA, Werner L, *et al.* Association of PD-L1 expression on tumor-infiltrating mononuclear cells and overall survival in patients with urothelial carcinoma. *Ann Oncol* 2015;26:812–7.

84 Roemer MG, Advani RH, Ligon AH, *et al.* PD-L1 and PD-L2 genetic alterations define classical hodgkin lymphoma and predict outcome. *J Clin Oncol* 2016;34:2690–7.

85 Goodman A, Patel SP, Kurzrock R. PD-1-PD-L1 immune-checkpoint blockade in B-cell lymphomas. *Nat Rev Clin Oncol* 2017;14:203–20.

86 Berthon C, Driss V, Liu J, *et al.* In acute myeloid leukemia, B7-H1 (PD-L1) protection of blasts from cytotoxic T cells is induced by TLR ligands and interferon-gamma and can be reversed using MEK inhibitors. *Cancer Immunol Immunother* 2010;59:1839–49.

87 Couzin-Frankel J. Breakthrough of the year 2013. Cancer immunotherapy. *Science* 2013;342:1432–3.

88 Topalian SL, Drake CG, Pardoll DM. Targeting the PD-1/B7-H1(PD-L1) pathway to activate anti-tumor immunity. *Curr Opin Immunol* 2012;24:207–12.

89 Pitt JM, Vétizou M, Daillère R, *et al.* Resistance mechanisms to immune-checkpoint blockade in cancer: tumor-intrinsic and -extrinsic factors. *Immunity* 2016;44:1255–69.

90 Chamoto K, Al-Habsi M, Honjo T. Role of PD-1 in immunity and diseases. *Curr Top Microbiol Immunol* 2017.

Downloaded from http://jcp.bmj.com/ on November 4, 2017 - Published by group.bmj.com

JCP PD-L1

Anthousa Kythreotou, Abdul Siddique, Francesco A Mauri, Mark Bower and David J Pinato

*J Clin Pathol* published online November 2, 2017

---

Updated information and services can be found at:  
http://jcp.bmj.com/content/early/2017/11/02/jclinpath-2017-204853

These include:

References  
This article cites 81 articles, 22 of which you can access for free at:  
http://jcp.bmj.com/content/early/2017/11/02/jclinpath-2017-204853#BIBL

Email alerting service  
Receive free email alerts when new articles cite this article. Sign up in the box at the top right corner of the online article.

---

Notes

---

To request permissions go to:  
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions

To order reprints go to:  
http://journals.bmj.com/cgi/reprintform

To subscribe to BMJ go to:  
http://group.bmj.com/subscribe/
