
Function and mechanism of the pyrin inflammasome

Rosalie Heilig${}^{1}$ and Petr Broz${}^{1,2}$

${}^{1}$Biozentrum, University of Basel, Klingelbergstrasse 50/70, 4056 Basel, Switzerland  
${}^{2}$Department of Biochemistry, University of Lausanne, Chemin des Boveresses 155, 1066 Epalinges, Switzerland  

correspondence to: petr.broz@unil.ch  

Keywords: Pyrin, MEFV, Inflammasome, pyroptosis, FMF  

Abstract  

Pyrin, encoded by the MEFV gene, is an intracellular pattern recognition receptor that assembles inflammasome complexes in response to pathogen infections. Mutations in the MEFV gene have been linked to autoinflammatory diseases such as Familial Mediterranean Fever (FMF) or pyrin-associated autoinflammation with neutrophilic dermatosis (PAAND). Recent insights have now revealed how pyrin is activated during infection, providing a molecular basis for the understanding of such disease-causing mutations in pyrin. Interestingly, pyrin does not directly recognize molecular patterns (pathogen- or host-derived danger molecules), but rather responds to disturbances in cytoplasmic homeostasis caused by the infection. In the case of pyrin, these perturbations, recently defined as 'homeostasis-altering molecular processes' (HAMPs), are processes leading to the inactivation of the RhoA GTPase. This review attempts to combine early observation and findings with the most recent discoveries on how pyrin detects inactivation of RhoA to shed light on the function and mechanism of pyrin activation.

Received: 21/07/2017; Revised: 15/09/2017; Accepted: 10/11/2017  

This article has been accepted for publication and undergone full peer review but has not been through the copyediting, typesetting, pagination and proofreading process, which may lead to differences between this version and the Version of Record. Please cite this article as doi: [10.1002/eji.201746947](https://doi.org/10.1002/eji.201746947).

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

Pyrin, a pattern recognition receptor that senses inactivating modifications of RhoA GTPase that are induced by pathogens. Inactivation of RhoA leads to pyrin activation, inflammasome assembly and pyroptotic cell death. This review discusses the recently discovered activation mechanism of pyrin in the context of previous findings.

RhoA
GTP
→ PKN1/2 → PYRIN
14-3-3

pathogen

RhoA
GDP
× PKN1/2 × PYRIN
14-3-3

PYROPTOSIS

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

Introduction

The observation of inherited pathogenic periodic fevers and inflammation prevalent in Mediterranean regions led to first clinical descriptions of a disease now known as Familial Mediterranean Fever (FMF) [1], one of the most common hereditary autoinflammatory syndromes. Further studies revealed that FMF, was an autosomal recessive disease associated with mutations in the MEFV gene, which encodes a protein named pyrin [2],[3]. Pyrin belongs to the group of cytosolic pattern recognition receptors (PRRs) that control innate immune responses upon the detection of pathogen or host derived danger signals, so called pathogen/danger-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs/DAMPs). Upon activation, several of these receptors, including pyrin, assemble multiprotein signaling complexes called inflammasomes, which recruit and activate caspase-1, a proinflammatory protease [4]. Active caspase-1 drives inflammation by promoting the proteolytic maturation and secretion of cytokines such as interleukin (IL)-1β and IL-18, and by initiating a necrotic type of cell death known as pyroptosis. Pyroptosis is caused by the Gasdermin-D (GSDMD) protein which, upon cleavage by caspase-1, forms large permeability pores in the cellular plasma membrane [5]–[9].

Recent literature provides new perspectives on the type of ligands that activate pyrin and on its unusual activation mechanism which is distinct from other well-characterized inflammasome forming PRRs. Moreover, new studies also find evidence for a unique participation of the cytoskeleton during pyrin inflammasome activation. This review sets out to integrate previous observations and discoveries on the pyrin inflammasome with most recent findings. Additionally, we attempt to pinpoint shortcomings and potential gaps in the literature which will need to be addressed in the future.

Protein structure, function and interactions

Pyrin (Marenostrin, TRIM 20) is a large protein (86 kDa) encoded by the human MEFV gene located on chromosome 16, or the mouse analog *Mefv*, on murine chromosome 16, showing 48% of sequence similarity. Pyrin is mostly found in immune cells [2],[10] (neutrophils, monocytes and dendritic cells) and its expression can be upregulated by various cytokines IFN-γ, LPS, TNF-α, IL-4 and IL-10 [10]–[14]. Sequence alignment and secondary structure predictions allowed identification of four functional units in human pyrin: the pyrin domain (PYD), a zinc finger domain (bBox), a coiled coil (CC) domain and a B30.2/SPRY domain (Fig. 1A). By contrast, mouse pyrin also contains the PYD bBox and CC, but lacks a B30.2/SPRY domain.

Human pyrin is often classified as a member of the TRIM protein family, although the usual ring motif is switched out for the PYD motif. Members of the TRIM protein family normally contain a ring, bBox, coiled-coil and an optional B30.2 domain [15],[16]. The lack of the ring domain classifies pyrin as an “incomplete TRIM protein” which is accompanied by the loss of E3 ubiquitin ligase activity conferred by the ring domain. Nevertheless, it has been proposed that pyrin can recognize specific substrates and assemble a direct precision autophagy machinery [17]. The family of TRIM proteins eg. TRIM5α, 21, 25, 27 and 30 exert function in innate immunity mostly in the restriction of viral infections [15].
TRIM5α of old world monkeys binds to the capsid of human immunodeficiency virus-1 (HIV-1) provoking premature uncoating of the viral capsid and inability to reverse transcribe its genome [18]. TRIM25 activates RIG-1 early during viral infection thereby, positively influencing the antiviral response [19],[20]. However, additional studies are required to further characterize pyrin as a autophagic receptor.

The established function of pyrin in human and mouse cells is linked to inflammasomes, multiprotein signaling complexes that promote inflammation and that are formed by a cytosolic pattern recognition receptor, the adaptor protein ASC [apoptosis-associated speck-like protein containing a caspase recruitment domain (CARD)] and pro-caspase-1. Studies in the early 2000s showed that pyrin could modulate ASC-dependent cell death, and that domains similar to the PYD domain of pyrin were also found in many proteins involved in cell death and inflammation [21]. Thus, the PYD was initially called PAAD, named after the protein families from which it was discovered: pyrin, AIM (absent-in-melanoma), ASC, and death-domain (DD)-like. After the discovery of the inflammasome complexes in 2002, it became gradually clear that pyrin was involved in inflammasome complex assembly, either as a complex-forming receptor [22] or as a regulatory protein, as postulated by several studies (see below) [23]–[25]. A landmark study by Xu et al. finally brought an end to this controversy and demonstrated that pyrin by itself assembles an inflammasome complex upon recognition of inactivating modification of the RhoA GTPase [26] (see next chapter for a detailed description of the activation mechanism).

Pyrin is quite distinct among inflammasome-forming receptors and only shares the PYD domain with well-known receptors such as NLRP1, NLRP3 and AIM2; members of the nucleotide-binding oligomerization domain like receptors (NLRs) or PYHIN protein families [27]. The PYD domain of inflammasome forming receptors is important for the interaction with the adaptor protein ASC, which upon recruitment to the receptor oligomerizes into filaments through its PYD and recruits pro-caspase-1 into the complex via its CARD (Caspase recruitment domain) [28]. The interaction of the pyrin<sup>PYD</sup> with the ASC<sup>PYD</sup> was initially observed in a two-hybrid screen using pyrin as a bait, and later confirmed by immunofluorescent microscopy [11],[29]. Studies investigating the specific homotypic interaction between pyrin<sup>PYD</sup> and the ASC<sup>PYD</sup> propose a requirement of two specific binding sites on the ASC<sup>PYD</sup> and the presence of three ASC binding sites of the pyrin<sup>PYD</sup> [30]. Importantly, it has been also shown for several inflammasomes (NLRP3, NLRC4 and AIM2) that only oligomeric, i.e. activated, receptors can initiate ASC filament formation and thus inflammasome complex assembly. Oligomerization of pyrin should therefore play a role in pyrin inflammasome formation as well, which is consistent with reports that pyrin oligomerizes via its coiled-coil domain and that it is found in cells as a trimer [31].

Apart from the well-established interaction of the pyrin<sup>PYD</sup> and the ASC<sup>PYD</sup>, early studies also reported interaction between pyrin and other inflammasome components and even pro-IL-1β. The SPRY-domain for example, was found to directly interact with NLRP1, NLRP2 and NLRP3 as well as caspase-1 and caspase-4 based on co-immunoprecipitation experiments of overexpressed, tagged

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
constructs in 293T cells [25]. Though a strong evidence for these interactions in a more physiological setting was missing, studies using *Mefv*-deficient cells (from mice with a large 21-kb deletion of the pyrin locus) or *Mefv* gene knock-down, suggested an inhibitory role of pyrin towards the NLRP1, NLRP3 and NLRC4 inflammasomes, due to mildly enhanced IL-1β release in absence of pyrin [23],[25],[32]. In addition, other studies suggested that the SPRY domain could interact with pro-IL-1β and caspase-1 and consequently limit the production of mature IL-1β [23],[25]. Based on these findings, it was therefore initially postulated that pyrin might be a negative regulator of other inflammasomes [23]–[25] and that mutations in the B30.2 domain cause FMF due to a loss of this regulation and enhanced inflammasome activation (i.e. loss-of-function). However, newer studies re-examined this hypothesis using new strains of *Mefv*⁻/⁻ mice and found that macrophages from these *Mefv*⁻/⁻ mice responded normally to activators of canonical inflammasomes (NLRP3, NLRP1 or NLRC4), suggesting that pyrin does not act as a regulator of inflammasomes [22],[26]. Furthermore, since knock-in mice expressing mutant B30.2 alleles had increased levels of caspase-1 activity, FMF was proposed to be caused by gain-of-function mutations in pyrin [22].

### Activation of the pyrin inflammasome

Many successful pathogens (viruses, bacteria or even parasites) replicate within host cells, either in vacuolar compartments or directly in the cytosol. Entry into cells often involves the manipulation of existing cellular systems such as the endocytosis or phagocytosis machineries. Bacteria for example can either bind directly to surface receptors to trigger their uptake or inject effectors via bacterial secretion systems forcing the cellular system to initiate their uptake [33]. Either entry route into the cell depends on rearrangement of the actin cytoskeleton to enable their uptake into endocytic vesicles or phagosomes and direct them from the cell periphery to the interior [34]. One of the prime bacterial targets is the RhoA GTPase, a molecular switch that can convert between an active GTP- and an inactive GDP-bound state. The quick conversion allows RhoA to control the actin dynamics e.g. promoting actin polymerization by activating the downstream target Arp2/3 complex [35].

Guarding the preferential entry route of pathogens by monitoring modulations made to the family of Rho GTPases, which regulate cytoskeletal remodeling, would thus allow indirect recognition of pathogen infection. Indeed, two NLR sensors, NOD1/2, known for recognizing bacterial cell wall components, have been proposed to detect changes in the cytoskeletal dynamics of host cells, by recognizing “over”-activation of Rho family GTPases [36]. Pyrin was also proposed to act as a sensor for the actin cytoskeletal dynamics, based on the observation that treatment of mouse primary macrophages, human THP-1, pyrin complemented DC2.4 and U937 cells with the cytotoxin of *Clostridium difficile* TcdB results in caspase-1 dependent cell death and release of pro-inflammatory cytokines [26]. Further analysis of this mechanism revealed that the pyroptotic cell death induced by TcdB is dependent on toxin-induced modification (glucosylation) of the Switch-I region of RhoA, which results in the inactivation of the RhoA GTPase. The activation of pyrin is not only restricted to TcdB. Other bacterial toxins or effector proteins such as IbpA (*Histophilus somni*)/VopS (*Vibrio*

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

parahaemolyticus), TcdA (C. difficile), TecA (Burkholderia cenocepacia), and C3 (Clostridium botulinum) toxin that also modify the Switch-I region of RhoA, either by adenylation, glucosylation, deamination or ADP ribosylation respectively, were also found to trigger pyrin activation [26],[35],[37]–[43]. Interestingly, pyrin only recognized inhibition of RhoA but not the inhibition of other small GTPases, such as Rac and Cdc42 [26]. Since no direct interaction between Pyrin and RhoA was observed [26], and since the above-mentioned modifications occur at different residues in RhoA, the authors of the study proposed that RhoA inactivation is sensed by pyrin in an indirect way. These findings confirmed that pyrin was not an inflammasome regulator, but indeed acted as a inflammasome-forming PRR that guards the activity of RhoA GTPase in analogy to the “guard hypothesis” proposed for plant R proteins.Guard proteins survey the activity of specific host proteins by sensing their modification by bacterial effector proteins.[44],[45].

The ingenious mechanism by which pyrin detects the inhibition of RhoA was subsequently addressed in several studies [41],[43]. Hypothesizing that signaling pathways downstream of RhoA suppress pyrin activation, Chae and colleagues investigated if RhoA effector kinases, notably ROCKs and PKNs, which belong to the protein kinase C (PKC) superfamily, are involved in pyrin inhibition. Evidence for the involvement of protein kinases was supported by the finding that treatment of BMDMs with the protein kinase inhibitor staurosporine induced cell death and pyrin-mediated release of IL-1β. These findings suggested that pyrin was active when kinases were inhibited. Subsequent knockdown of the PKCs Rock1/2 did not have an effect, but knock-down of PKN1/PKN2 caused spontaneous release of IL-1β in a pyrin dependent manner. Since PKN1 was found to interact with human pyrin, the authors investigated if pyrin could be phosphorylated and found that PKN1/2 phosphorylated human pyrin at S208 and S242. Interestingly, the same residues were previously reported to be phosphorylated and to mediate the interaction with 14-3-3 ε and τ, based on yeast-2 hybrid screening [46]. 14-3-3s are a family of phosphoserine binding proteins that are expressed in all eukaryotic cells and regulate the function of many signaling proteins. These observations were confirmed by Gao et al. who found that phosphorylation of the corresponding residues in mouse pyrin (S205 and S241) is necessary for 14-3-3 binding and that toxin stimulation caused de-phosphorylation of pyrin and disrupted 14-3-3 binding [41]. Based on these findings, it was proposed that in the context of pathogen infection, inactivation of RhoA by bacterial toxins results in loss of PKN1/2 activity and thus de-phosphorylation of S208/242 (S205/241) [41],[43], with subsequent release of 14-3-3. This step is thought to relieve inhibition, likely resulting in a conformational change that triggers the activation of the pyrin protein (Fig. 1B). It has previously been suggested that cytosolic pyrin resides autoinhibited in the resting state, possibly by intramolecular interactions e.g. of the Bbox coiled coil with SPRY of B30.2 [25]. The open, active confirmation would then allow the pyrinPYD to interact with the PYD domain of ASC and initiate inflammasome assembly. The importance of the pyrin inflammasome inactivation by 14-3-3 proteins has also been highlighted in a patient study with newly-identified mutations in pyrin that caused a disease that was phenotypically distinct from FMF. This disorder, named as pyrin-associated autoinflammation with neutrophilic dermatosis (PAAND), was linked to a substitution of S242 for an arginine and the inability of 14-3-3 binding,

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
ensuing in excessive or auto-activation of the pyrin inflammasome, pyroptosis and exaggerated release of pro-inflammatory cytokines responsible for systemic inflammation [47].

Overall all these studies have demonstrated that the mechanism by which pyrin recognizes inactivation of RhoA is unique and distinct from other well-characterized inflammasome forming PRRs that recognize PAMPs/DAMPs directly (NLRC4, AIM2), and are more closely related to the NLRP3 inflammasome, which presumably also recognizes perturbation in cellular homeostasis. Monitoring these perturbations, recently defined as 'homeostasis-altering molecular processes' (HAMPs) by Liston and Masters [48], has been thus proposed to be a flexible mechanism of the innate immunity to detect evolutionary novel infections since it does not rely on the recognition of conserved molecules. However, given the potent response triggered by pyrin activation, it is not surprising that pathogens have found ways to prevent its activation. Fascinating examples of this strategy are the pathogenic bacteria *Yersinia pestis* and *Yersinia pseudotuberculosis*. These aforementioned pathogens manipulate the host by introducing bacterial effectors, YopE, a GTPase activating protein (GAP) and YopT, a cysteine protease cleaving the plasma membrane associated RhoA, via a bacterial type 3 secretion thereby modifying and inactivating the RhoA GTPase. To counteract pyrin activation that would be triggered after RhoA inactivation, *Yersinia spp.* inject yet another effector, called YopM that is able to directly phosphorylate and activate the serine/threonine protein kinase C-related kinases thus ensuring the autoinhibition of pyrin [49],[50].
Role of the cytoskeleton in pyrin inflammasome activation

Though a lot is known about the entry mechanism and use of host cytoskeleton in infection, the role of the cytoskeleton during the inflammatory response is less clear and many links are missing. In general, the cytoskeleton is involved in a plethora of processes during a leukocyte response, such as migration, extravasation and phagocytosis. The involvement of the cytoskeleton in activation of inflammasomes has also been reported, since microtubule de-stabilizing drugs such as nocodazole and colchicine reduce NLRP3 dependent IL-1β release [51]. A possible mechanism could be that these drugs block the positioning of the NLRP3 inflammasome, which has been proposed to be dependent on the microtubule network [52],[53].

Intriguingly, the mechanism of action of colchicine, the most frequently prescribed drug for FMF treatment, remains elusive [54]. This has raised the question of whether and how pyrin interacts with microtubules/actin and how colchicine-induced disruption of microtubules would inhibit inflammation seen in FMF patients. Initial publications investigating the interaction of pyrin with the cytoskeleton reported co-localization of overexpressed full-length pyrin with tubulin and actin stress fibres [55][56], but the physiological relevance of these findings was not further examined. Although actin polymerization drugs and inhibitors of actin targets were unable to block pyrin activation, a recent genetic disease phenotype observed in mice linked to actin dynamics, was shown to be pyrin dependent. Mutations in the mouse Wdr1, which facilitates actin disassembly, have been shown to result in autoinflammation and increased release of IL-18 in a pyrin-dependent manner, suggesting that in this context pyrin activation involves actin disassembly [42],[57]. Other recent studies have shown that colchicine blocks both activation of the mouse and human pyrin inflammasome after RhoA inactivation [26],[41]–[43], suggesting microtubule dynamics somehow control pyrin activation. However, at which stage of pyrin activation microtubules are involved remains unclear. Park and colleagues propose that depolymerization of microtubules by colchicine results in the release of RhoA activator guanine-nucleotide-exchange factor (GEF)-H1, which is inactive when bound to microtubules [43],[58],[59]. Consistently, they found that colchicine treatment either activated RhoA or reversed the inhibition of RhoA activity by C3 toxin. In contrast to these findings, Gao et al. observed that several drugs that either destabilized (colchicine, vinblastine, BAL27862) or stabilize (paclitaxel) microtubules did not affect TcdB-induced 14-3-3ε dissociation from pyrin nor dephosphorylation at S205/24, but reduced ASC speck formation, caspase-1 activation, IL-1β release and pyroptosis [41]. Similarly, Van Gorp and colleagues found that colchicine did not block TcdA-induced dephosphorylation of pyrin in macrophages and 293T cells [42]. This indicates that, even if microtubule dynamics are disrupted pharmacologically, the pyrin inflammasome receptor is still activated, but cannot initiate inflammasome assembly. Therefore, colchicine would function downstream of the receptor activation, either at the level of pyrin oligomerization or ASC recruitment, or would help de-phosphorylated pyrin to traffic to a specific sub-cellular site that allows activation, similarly to NLRP3 [52],[53]. Interestingly, colchicine does not have inhibitory effect on other inflammasome receptors such as NLRP1b, NLRP3,

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

NLRC4 or AIM2 [26], [42]. Thus, inhibition of ASC oligomerization and downstream steps can be ruled out as targets of colchicine.

# Role of pyrin in disease and mechanism of disease-causing pyrin mutations

Familial Mediterranean Fever (FMF) is a periodic fever syndrome (OMIM: 249100), a monogenic, autosomal recessive homozygous or compound heterozygous inherited gain of function disease caused by mutations of the MEFV gene. Certain geographical regions and ethnic groups such as North African Jewish, Jewish, Armenian, Turkish and Arab populations show a higher predominance of FMF [2], [3]. Patients affected by the mutations are mostly diagnosed clinically and the presence of FMF associated mutations is confirmed by genetic testing. FMF disease manifests as self-limiting recurring fever episodes, inflammation and, less frequently, amyloidosis, joint pain (arthritis), pericarditis and serositis, mostly caused by infiltration of leukocytes [60]–[63]. Treatment of FMF patients involves administration of colchicine, which prevents the outbreak of inflammation and Anakinra (IL-1 receptor antagonist) in cases of colchicine resistance [63], [64]. To date most of the mutations described lie in the C-terminal region of pyrin in the B30.2 domain (Infevers: fmf.igh.cnrs.fr). Although the availability and documentation of case studies has expanded, no clear genotype-phenotype association can be made. Medical guidelines provide predictions for mutations displaying milder forms of FMF such as heterozygous M680I, M694V, M694I, V726A-E148Q or higher prevalence of severe disease development and amyloidosis such as seen in homozygous M694V [65]–[69]. As described above, a second genetic disease, PAAND, has been recently identified and linked to the substitution of S242 with an arginine. Phenotypically it differs from FMF, in that it is characterized by the childhood-onset recurrent episodes of neutrophilic dermatosis, fever, elevated acute-phase reactants, arthralgia, and myalgia/myositis [47].

Some of these disease-associated mutations have been tested *in vitro* for their ability to promote ASC-speck formation and the consequent inflammation in order to identify the molecular mechanism of their action. For example, the exaggerated IL-1β production observed in patients with S242R mutations can now be explained by the lack of the 14-3-3 binding site. The percentage of cells with ASC-speck formation wasn't enhanced in common pyrin mutations R202Q, G304R, V726A, M680I, M694V [42], [47], [70], [71]. On the other hand, higher percentage of speck-containing cells and higher cytokine release was observed in S242R mutations which increased in an additive manner upon inclusion of the M694V mutation [47]. Intriguingly, colchicine was shown to fail blocking IL-1β/-18 release after TcdA-induced pyrin inflammasome activation in PMBCs from patients with M694V mutations in pyrin [42], suggesting that mutations in the B30.2 had not a direct effect on the level of pyrin inflammasome activation, but disrupted the requirement for microtubules for pyrin activation. However, in contrast to these findings, Park et al. found that colchicine was able to reduce spontaneous IL-1β production in PBMCs of FMF patients [43].

The reason for the high mutation frequency in the pyrin domain B30.2, has been a matter of debate since its discovery. The explanation for mutations accumulating in B30.2 is most likely coupled to its

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

function and therefore complicated by the lack of knowledge about the function of B30.2. Many different types of interactions with B30.2 have been suggested e.g. binding to microtubules, binding to other inflammasome receptors and acting as a direct target for autophagy, yet no unambiguous functional evidence has been found.

The functional element B30.2 is restricted to vertebrates, most likely due to the coupling of the PRY to SPRY element since SPRY element is also present in primitive organisms [15], [16], [72]. Genetic studies of B30.2 during primate evolution revealed mutations occurring unevenly across species and at irregular speed compared to an expected neutral evolution [73]. Moreover, mutations are often reappearances of ancestral amino acids at the same position. The counter-evolution and vague geographical/ethnic restriction limits a founder effect and points toward a gradual change such as selective pressure by a pathogen [73]. In retrospective, it is difficult to reconstruct historical infection events in order to interpret higher resistance or facilitated clearance of pathogens to mutated pyrin. Two publications suggest a possible explanation for the higher occurrence of pyrin mutation linked to pathogenic pressure in infection by *Mycobacterium tuberculosis* and *Brucella melitensis* [74], [75]. The analysis was based on demographic studies and unfortunately no direct role for pyrin during *Mycobacterium/Brucella* infection could so far be shown [74], [75].

It was also speculated that mutations in B30.2 reduced the accessibility of S208/S242 for PKN1/2 phosphorylation, therefore lowering the activation threshold of pyrin in patients with the corresponding mutations. In respect to this hypothesis mouse pyrin should therefore be more easily phosphorylated and exhibit a higher activation threshold due to the absence of the steric hindrance caused by the B30.2 domain. [43]. An interesting autoinhibitory mechanism has been found in the human NLRP1 receptor, wherein the N-terminal PYD sterically inhibits its self-oligomerization and therefore activation. Studies of mutations (A54T, A66V, M77T) or complete deletion of the PYD of human Nlrp1 are linked to sterile inflammation suggesting that the mutated N-terminus (PYD) sterically inhibits its own autoinhibition, ensuing activation and development of the sterile inflammation[76]. The steric inhibition might add an additional layer of control for activation and inactivation of the inflammasome wildtype receptor. It is tempting to speculate that mutations in B30.2 of the pyrin inflammasome might lead to an altered structure, thus resulting in steric hindrance of the regular autoinhibition generated by the interaction of C-terminus with its coiled-coil domain resulting in inflammasome autoactivation.

The pyrin protein has not only been involved in FMF but also in other periodic fever syndromes such as the autosomal recessive inherited HIDS, mevalonate aciduria (MA) or the pyogenic disorder “Syndrome of pyogenic arthritis with pyoderma gangrenosum and acne” (PAPA). Mutations in the proline-serine-threonine phosphatase interacting protein 1 (PSTPIP1) have been shown to result in PAPA. Yeast 2 hybrid studies, immunofluorescence and co-immunoprecipitation experiments suggest PSTPIP1 to interact with pyrin; possibly by the bBox motif necessary for the interaction. Mutations in PSTPIP1 at A230T and E250Q result in hyperphosphorylation of the protein and increased binding to pyrin. Additionally, immunofluorescent microscopy implies PSTPIP1 being targeted to the speck by pyrin. Whether the interaction of native PSTPIP1 influences pyrin regulation or activation will require a more detailed investigation [31], [55], [77].

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
A recent publication reported the autoinflammatory disease HIDS associated to inflammation and increased release of IL-1β dependent on a dysregulation of pyrin activation [78]. Mutation or deficiency of mevalonate provoke a defective prenylation of proteins such as RhoA. This results in RhoA inactivation and activation of the pyrin inflammasome [43], [79].

## Conclusion

Key studies published in the last few years have expanded the knowledge on pyrin inflammasome activation and function. This work was triggered by the discovery that RhoA inactivation serves a signal for pyrin activation, and facilitated the finding of the protein kinases (PKN1/2), a downstream target of RhoA, that are responsible for the pyrin phosphorylation. Furthermore, the intricate mechanism by which pyrin phosphorylation and 14-3-3 binding inhibits pyrin activation has begun to emerge. Though important discoveries for the activation mechanism of pyrin have been made, many questions regarding activation and function remain. It isn’t clear how pyrin is dephosphorylated and 14-3-3 released and whether the activation is due to a conformational change. The relevance of observations concerning interactions of the B30.2 domain with other inflammasomes, caspase-1 and pro-IL-1β remain obscure. Similarly, the role of the B30.2 domain in the activation mechanism of human pyrin remains unclear, as is the reason and consequences for the lack of the B30.2 in mouse pyrin. And finally, the role of the cytoskeleton, especially in respect to treatment with colchicine requires a more detailed investigation. The mode of action of colchicine is especially important to understand since it might lead to the discovery of additional treatments for FMF and other periodic fever syndromes associated with mutations in pyrin.

## ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

The authors apologize to investigators whose contributions were not cited more extensively because of space limitations. This work was supported by PP00P3_165893 of the Swiss National Science Foundation to P.B. and a Werner Siemens Fellowship (FFE Fellowship) to R.H..

### Conflict of interest

The authors declare no commercial or financial conflict of interest.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
REFERENCES

1. Ehrenfeld EN, Eliakim M, Rachmilewitz M, Jerusalem IT. Recurrent Polyserositis (Familial Mediterranean Fever; Periodic Disease*) A Report of Fifty-Five Cases. Am. J. Med. 1961; 31:107–123.

2. French FMF Consortium. A candidate gene for familial Mediterranean fever. Nat. Genet. 1997; 17:25–31.

3. The International FMF Consortium. Ancient missense mutations in a new member of the RoRet gene family are likely to cause familial Mediterranean fever. The International FMF Consortium. Cell. 1997; 90:797–807.

4. Broz P, Dixit VM. Inflammasomes: mechanism of assembly, regulation and signalling. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 2016; 16:407–20.

5. Shi J, Zhao Y, Wang K, Shi X, Wang Y, Huang H, Zhuang Y, et al. Cleavage of GSDMD by inflammatory caspases determines pyroptotic cell death. Nature. 2015; 526:660–665.

6. Kayagaki N, Stowe IB, Lee BL, O'Rourke K, Anderson K, Warming S, Cuellar T, et al. Caspase-11 cleaves gasdermin D for non-canonical inflammasome signalling. Nature. 2015; 526:666–671.

7. Sborgi L, Rühl S, Mulvihill E, Pipercevic J, Heilig R, Stahlberg H, Farady C, et al. GSDMD membrane pore formation constitutes the mechanism of pyroptotic cell death. EMBO J. 2016; 35:e201694696-13.

8. Aglietti RA, Estevez A, Gupta A, Ramirez MG, Liu PS, Kayagaki N, Ciferri C, et al. GsdmD p30 elicited by caspase-11 during pyroptosis forms pores in membranes. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 2016; 113:7858–63.

9. Ding J, Wang K, Liu W, She Y, Sun Q, Shi J, Sun H, et al. Pore-forming activity and structural autoinhibition of the gasdermin family. Nature. 2016; 535:111–116.

10. Centola M, Wood G, Frucht DM, Galon J, Aringer M, Farrell C, Kingma DW, et al. The gene for familial Mediterranean fever, MEFV, is expressed in early leukocyte development and is regulated in response to inflammatory mediators. Blood. 2000; 95:3223–3231.

11. Chae JJ, Komarow HD, Cheng J, Wood G, Raben N, Liu PP, Kastner DL. Targeted disruption of pyrin, the FMF protein, causes heightened sensitivity to endotoxin and a defect in macrophage apoptosis. Mol. Cell. 2003; 11:591–604.

12. Gavrilin MA, Mitra S, Seshadri S, Nateri J, Berhe F, Hall MW, Wewers MD. Pyrin critical to macrophage IL-1β response to Francisella challenge. J. Immunol. (Baltimore, Md 1950). 2009;

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

182:7982–7989.

13. Tidow N, Chen X, Müller C, Kawano S, Gombart AF, Fischel-Ghodsian N, Koeffler HP. Hematopoietic-specific expression of MEFV, the gene mutated in familial Mediterranean fever, and subcellular localization of its corresponding protein, pyrin. *Blood*. 2000; 95:1451–1455.

14. Seshadri S, Duncan MD, Hart JM, Gavrilin MA, Wewers MD. Pyrin Levels in Human Monocytes and Monocyte-Derived Macrophages Regulate IL-1 Processing and Release. *J. Immunol.* 2007; 179:1274–1281.

15. D'Cruz AA, Babon JJ, Norton RS, Nicola NA, Nicholson SE. REVIEW Structure and function of the SPRY/B30.2 domain proteins involved in innate immunity. 2012.

16. Perfetto L, Gherardini PF, Davey NE, Diella F, Helmer-Citterich M, Cesareni G. Exploring the diversity of SPRY/B30.2-mediated interactions. *Trends Biochem. Sci.* 2013; 38:38–46.

17. Kimura T, Jain A, Choi SW, Mandell MA, Schroder K, Johansen T, Deretic V. TRIM-mediated precision autophagy targets cytoplasmic regulators of innate immunity. *J. Cell Biol.* 2015; 210:973–989.

18. Stremlau M, Owens CM, Perron M, Kiessling M, Autissier P, Sodroski J. The cytoplasmic body component TRIM5a restricts HIV-1 infection in Old World monkeys. *Nature*. 2004; 427:848–853.

19. Gack MU, Shin YC, Joo C-H, Urano T, Liang C, Sun L, Takeuchi O, *et al.* TRIM25 RING-finger E3 ubiquitin ligase is essential for RIG-I-mediated antiviral activity.

20. Ozato K, Shin D-M, Chang T-H, Morse HC. TRIM family proteins and their emerging roles in innate immunity. *Nat. Rev. Immunol.* 2008; 8:849–60.

21. Pawłowski K, Pio F, Chu Z, Reed JC, Godzik A. PAAD - a new protein domain associated with apoptosis, cancer and autoimmune diseases. *Trends Biochem. Sci.* 2001; 26:85–7.

22. Chae JJ, Cho YH, Lee GS, Cheng J, Liu PP, Feigenbaum L, Katz SI, *et al.* Gain-of-Function Pyrin Mutations Induce NLRP3 Protein-Independent Interleukin-1β Activation and Severe Autoinflammation in Mice. *Immunity*. 2011; 34:755–768.

23. Chae JJ, Wood G, Masters SL, Richard K, Park G, Smith BJ, Kastner DL. The B30.2 domain of pyrin, the familial Mediterranean fever protein, interacts directly with caspase-1 to modulate IL-1β production. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.* 2006; 103:9982–7.

24. Hesker PR, Nguyen M, Kovarova M, Ting JPY, Koller BH. Genetic Loss of Murine Pyrin, the Familial Mediterranean Fever Protein, Increases Interleukin-1β Levels. *PLoS One*. 2012; 7.

25. Papin S, Cuenin S, Agostini L, Martinon F, Werner S, Beer HD, Grutter C, *et al.* The SPRY domain of Pyrin, mutated in familial Mediterranean fever patients, interacts with inflammasome components and inhibits proIL-1β processing. *Cell Death Differ.* 2007; 14:1457–1466.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

26. Xu H, Yang J, Gao W, Li L, Li P, Zhang L, Gong Y-N, *et al.* Innate immune sensing of bacterial modifications of Rho GTPases by the Pyrin inflammasome. *Nature*. 2014; 513:237–41.

27. Broz P, Monack DM. Molecular mechanisms of inflammasome activation during microbial infections. *Immunol. Rev.* 2011; 243:174–190.

28. Dick MS, Sborgi L, Rühl S, Hiller S, Broz P. ASC filament formation serves as a signal amplification mechanism for inflammasomes. *Nat. Commun.* 2016; 7:11929.

29. Richards N, Schaner P, Diaz A, Stuckey J, Shelden E, Wadhwa A, Gumucio DL. Interaction between Pyrin and the Apoptotic Speck Protein (ASC) Modulates ASC-induced Apoptosis *. J. Biolo.* 2001; 276:39320–39329.

30. Vajjhala PR, Kaiser S, Smith SJ, Ong Q-R, Soh SL, Stacey KJ, Hill JM. Identification of Multifaceted Binding Modes for Pyrin and ASC Pyrin Domains Gives Insights into Pyrin Inflammasome Assembly *. 2014.*

31. Yu JW, Fernandes-Alnemri T, Datta P, Wu J, Juliana C, Solorzano L, McCormick M, *et al.* Pyrin Activates the ASC Pyroptosome in Response to Engagement by Autoinflammatory PSTPIP1 Mutants. *Mol. Cell.* 2007; 28:214–227.

32. Hesker PR, Nguyen M, Kovarova M, Ting JP, Koller BH. Genetic Loss of Murine Pyrin, the Familial Mediterranean Fever Protein, Increases Interleukin-1β Levels. 2012; 7.

33. Cossart P. Bacterial Invasion: The Paradigms of Enteroinvasive Pathogens. *Science (80-).* 2004; 304:242–248.

34. Serge Mostowy and Avinash R. Shenoy. The cytoskeleton in cell-autonomous immunity: structural determinants of host defence. *Nat. Rev. Immunol.* 2015; 15:559–573.

35. Aktories K. Bacterial protein toxins that modify host regulatory GTPases. *Nat. Rev. Microbiol.* 2011; 9:487–498.

36. Keestra AM, Winter MG, Auburger JJ, Fräßle SP, Xavier MN, Winter SE, Kim A, *et al.* Manipulation of small Rho GTPases is a pathogen-induced process detected by Nod1 HHS Public Access. *Nat. April.* 2013; 11:233–237.

37. Yarbrough ML, Li Y, Kinch LN, Grishin N V., Ball HL, Orth K. AMPylation of Rho GTPases by Vibrio VopS Disrupts Effector Binding and Downstream Signaling. *Science.* 2009; 323.

38. Just I, Selzer J, Wilm M, Eichel-Streiber C von, Mann M, Aktories K. Glucosylation of Rho proteins by Clostridium difficile toxin B. *Nature.* 1995; 375:500–503.

39. Aktories K, Hall A. Botulinum ADP-ribosyltransferase C3: a new tool to study low molecular weight GTP-binding proteins. *Trends Pharmacol. Sci.* 1989; 10:415–418.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

40. Aubert DF, Xu H, Yang J, Chen S, Valvano MA, Shao F, Shi X, et al. A Burkholderia Type VI Effector Deamidates Rho GTPases to Activate the Pyrin Inflammasome and Trigger Inflammation. Cell Host Microbe. 2016; 19:664–674.

41. Gao W, Yang J, Liu W, Wang Y, Shao F. Site-specific phosphorylation and microtubule dynamics control Pyrin inflammasome activation. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 2016; 113:E4857–E4866.

42. Gorp H Van, Saavedra PH V, Vasconcelos NM De, Opdenbosch N Van. Familial Mediterranean fever mutations lift the obligatory requirement for microtubules in Pyrin inflammasome activation. 2016; 113:5–10.

43. Park YH, Wood G, Kastner DL, Chae JJ. Pyrin inflammasome activation and RhoA signaling in the autoinflammatory diseases FMF and HIDS. Nat. Immunol. 2016; 21:1–10.

44. Jones JDG, Dangl JL. The plant immune system. Nature. 2006; 444:323–329.

45. Mackey D, Holt BF, Wiig A, Dangl JL. RIN4 interacts with Pseudomonas syringae type III effector molecules and is required for RPM1-mediated resistance in Arabidopsis. Cell. 2002; 108:743–54.

46. Jérru I, Papin S, L'Hoste S, Duquesnoy P, Cazeneuve C, Camonis J, Amselem S. Interaction of pyrin with 14.3.3 in an isoform-specific and phosphorylation-dependent manner regulates its translocation to the nucleus. Arthritis Rheum. 2005; 52:1848–1857.

47. Masters SL, Lagou V, Jeru I, Baker PJ, Van Eyck L, Parry DA, Lawless D, et al. Familial autoinflammation with neutrophilic dermatosis reveals a regulatory mechanism of pyrin activation. Sci. Transl. Med. 2016; 8:332ra45-332ra45.

48. Liston A, Masters SL. Homeostasis-altering molecular processes as mechanisms of inflammasome activation. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 2017; 17:208–214.

49. Chung LK, Park YH, Zheng Y, Kastner DL, Chae JJ, Bliska JB, Chung LK, et al. The Yersinia Virulence Factor YopM Hijacks Host Kinases to Inhibit Type III Effector-Triggered Activation of the Pyrin Inflammasome Article The Yersinia Virulence Factor YopM Hijacks Host Kinases to Inhibit Type III Effector-Triggered Activation of the Py. Cell Host Microbe. 2016:1–11.

50. Ratner D, Orning MPA, Proulx MK, Wang D, Gavrيلin MA, Wewers MD, Alnemri ES, et al. The Yersinia pestis Effector YopM Inhibits Pyrin Inflammasome Activation. PLoS Pathog. 2016; 12:1–17.

51. Martinon F, Pétrilli V, Mayor A, Tardivel A, Tschopp J. Gout-associated uric acid crystals activate the NALP3 inflammasome. Nature. 2006; 440:237–241.

52. Misawa T, Takahama M, Kozaki T, Lee H, Zou J, Saitoh T, Akira S. Microtubule-driven spatial arrangement of mitochondria promotes activation of the NLRP3 inflammasome. Nat. Immunol. 2013; 14:454–461.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

53. Li X, Thome S, Ma X, Amrute-Nayak M, Finigan A, Kitt L, Masters L, et al. ARTICLE MARK4 regulates NLRP3 positioning and inflammasome activation through a microtubule-dependent mechanism. Nat. Commun. 2017; 8.

54. Goldfinger SE. Colchicine for familial Mediterranean fever. new Engl. J. Med. 1972.

55. Waite AL, Schaner P, Richards N, Balci-Peynircioglu B, Masters SL, Brydges SD, Fox M, et al. Pyrin modulates the intracellular distribution of PSTPIP1. PLoS One. 2009; 4:1–15.

56. Mansfield E, Chae JJ, Komarow HD, Brotz TM, Frucht DM, Aksentijevich I, Kastner DL. The familial Mediterranean fever protein, pyrin, associates with microtubules and colocalizes with actin filaments. Blood. 2001; 98:851–859.

57. Kim ML, Chae JJ, Park YH, Nardo D De, Stirzaker RA, Ko H, Tye H, et al. Aberrant actin depolymerization triggers the pyrin inflammasome and autoinflammatory disease that is dependent on IL-18, not IL-1β. 2015; 212:927–938.

58. Zenke FT, Krendel M, DerMardirossian C, King CC, Bohl BP, Bokoch GM. p21-activated Kinase 1 Phosphorylates and Regulates 14-3-3 Binding to GEF-H1, a Microtubule-localized Rho Exchange Factor. J. Biol. Chem. 2004; 279:18392–18400.

59. Krendel M, Zenke FT, Bokoch GM. Nucleotide exchange factor GEF-H1 mediates cross-talk between microtubules and the actin cytoskeleton. Nat. Cell Biol. 2002; 4:294–301.

60. Centola M, Aksentijevich I, Kastner DL. The hereditary periodic fever syndromes: molecular analysis of a new family of inflammatory diseases. Hum. Mol. Genet. 1998; 7:1581–1588. [pii].

61. Livneh A, Langevitz P, Zemer D, Zaks N, Kees S, Lidar T, Migdal A, et al. Criteria for the diagnosis of familial Mediterranean fever. Arthritis Rheum. 1997; 40:1879–1885.

62. Masters SL, Simon A, Aksentijevich I, Kastner DL. Horror Autoinflammaticus: The Molecular Pathophysiology of Autoinflammatory Disease. Annu. Rev. Immunol. 2009; 27:621–668.

63. Ozen S, Demirkaya E, Erer B, Livneh A, Ben-Chetrit E, Giancane G, Ozdogan H, et al. EULAR recommendations for the management of familial Mediterranean fever: Table 1. Ann. Rheum. Dis. 2016; 75:644–651.

64. Ben-Zvi I, Livneh A. Colchicine failure in familial mediterranean fever and potential alternatives: Embarking on the Anakinra trial. Isr. Med. Assoc. J. 2014; 16:271–273.

65. Alghamdi M. Familial Mediterranean fever, review of the literature. Clin. Rheumatol. 2017.

66. Touitou I. The spectrum of Familial Mediterranean Fever (FMF) mutations. 2001:473–483.

67. Manukyan G, Aminov R. Update on pyrin functions and mechanisms of familial mediterranean

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

fever. Front. Microbiol. 2016; 7:1–8.

68. Mukhin NA, Kozlovskaya L V., Bogdanova M V., Rameev V V., Moiseev S V., Simonyan AK. Predictors of AA amyloidosis in familial Mediterranean fever. Rheumatol. Int. 2015; 35:1257–1261.

69. Sever F, Kobak S, Goksel Ö, Goksel T, Orman M, Berdeli A. Prevalence and significance of MEFV gene mutations in patients with gouty arthritis. Rheumatol. Int. 2016; 36:1585–1589.

70. Yu J-W, Wu J, Zhang Z, Datta P, Ibrahim I, Taniguchi S, Sagara J, et al. Cryopyrin and pyrin activate caspase-1, but not NF-κB, via ASC oligomerization. Cell Death Differ. 2006; 13:236–249.

71. Taskiran EZ, Cetinkaya A, Balci-Peynircioglu B, Akkaya YZ, Yilmaz E. The effect of colchicine on pyrin and pyrin interacting proteins. J. Cell. Biochem. 2012; 113:3536–3546.

72. Sardiello M, Cairo S, Fontanella B, Ballabio A, Meroni G. BMC Evolutionary Biology Genomic analysis of the TRIM family reveals two groups of genes with distinct evolutionary properties. BMC Evol. Biol. 2008; 8.

73. Schaner P, Richards N, Wadhwa a, Aksentijevich I, Kastner D, Tucker P, Gumucio D. Episodic evolution of pyrin in primates: human mutations recapitulate ancestral amino acid states. Nat. Genet. 2001; 27:318–21.

74. Ross JJ. Goats, germs, and fever: Are the pyrin mutations responsible for familial Mediterranean fever protective against Brucellosis?

75. Cattan D. Familial Mediterranean fever: is low mortality from tuberculosis a specific advantage for MEFV mutations carriers? Mortality from tuberculosis among Muslims, Jewish, French, Italian and Maltese patients in StateTunis (Tunisia) in the first half of the 20t. Clin Exp. Rheumatol. 2003; 4:53–54.

76. Franklin Zhong AL, Mama O, Sborgi L, Saad A, Hiller S, Reversade B, Zhong FL, et al. Germline NLRP1 Mutations Cause Skin Inflammatory and Cancer Susceptibility Syndromes via Inflammasome Activation. Cell. 2016; 167:187–202.

77. Shoham NG, Centola M, Mansfield E, Hull KM, Wood G, Wise CA, Kastner DL. Pyrin binds the PSTPIP1/CD2BP1 protein, defining familial Mediterranean fever and PAPA syndrome as disorders in the same pathway. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 2003; 100:13501–13506.

78. Van Der Meer JM, Radl J, Meyer CLM, Vossen J, Van Nieuwkoop J, Lobatto S, Van Furth R. Hyperimmunoglobulinaemia D and Periodic Fever: a New Syndrome. Lancet. 1984; 323:1087–1090.

79. Akula MK, Shi M, Jiang Z, Foster CE, Miao D, Li AS, Zhang X, et al. Control of the innate immune response by the mevalonate pathway. Nat. Immunol. 2016; 17:922–929.

FIGURE LEGENDS

Fig. 1. Schematic outline of pyrin and its activation mechanism. A. Domain organization of human pyrin indicating the four major domains and reported single nucleotide polymorphism. B. Mechanism of pyrin activation indicating targets of bacterial proteins that either activate pyrin or modulate pyrin activity. In an inactive state pyrin is kept autoinhibited by 14-3-3ε which is bound to the phosphorylated pyrin. The phosphorylation is maintained by kinases (PKN1/2) which in turn are activated and phosphorylated by the RhoA GTPase. Upon inactivation of RhoA by bacterial effector proteins, such as IbpA, TecA, VopS, TcdA/B, YopT, YopE and C3, PKN1/2 is dephosphorylated. As a consequence, pyrin phosphorylation is reduced resulting in dissociation of 14-3-3ε and relieving pyrin autoinhibition. This allows the assembly of the pyrin inflammasome and initiation of the pro-inflammatory cell death pyroptosis. A specialized bacterial effector YopM is able to circumvent the dephosphorylation of the kinase, thereby preventing pyrin activation. Colchicine a microtubule stabilizer reduces pyrin activation in patients with Familial Mediterranean Fever (FMF) which carry mutations in the gene (MEFV) encoding pyrin.

A

R143P, E148Q, R151S,
E167D, T177I, S179I,
P180R, G196W, S208A,
E225D, S242R, T267I,
A268V, P283L, A289V,
E299G, T309M, R354W

P646L, L649P, D661N,
G678E, M780I, M680L,
T681I, Y688X, M694V,
M694L, M694I, K695R,
V704I, L709R, R717S,
V726A, F743L, A744S,
M582L, S749C, R761H, I722V,
I591T,
P780T
A595V

NH₂ PYD Bbox coiled-coil B30.2 COOH
1 92 370 412 420 440 597 776
Exons: 1 2 3 4 5 7 10

B

Inactive State Active State

14-3-3
PP
YopM
PKN 1/2
Ibpa
TecA
VopS
TcdA/B
YopT
Rho
GTP
P
C3
Rho
GDP
P
microtubules
colchicine
ASC
p20
caspase-1
p10
Cell death and
cytokine release
