
LETTER

Structure and assembly of the Ebola virus nucleocapsid

William Wan${}^{1\ddagger}$, Larissa Kolesnikova${}^{2}$, Mairi Clarke${}^{1}$, Alexander Koehler${}^{2}$, Takeshi Noda${}^{3,4}$, Stephan Becker${}^{2}$ & John A. G. Briggs${}^{1,5}$

Ebola and Marburg viruses are filoviruses: filamentous, enveloped viruses that cause haemorrhagic fever${}^{1}$. Filoviruses are within the order Mononegavirales${}^{2}$, which also includes rabies virus, measles virus, and respiratory syncytial virus. Mononegaviruses have non-segmented, single-stranded negative-sense RNA genomes that are encapsidated by nucleoprotein and other viral proteins to form a helical nucleocapsid. The nucleocapsid acts as a scaffold for virus assembly and as a template for genome transcription and replication. Insights into nucleoprotein–nucleoprotein interactions have been derived from structural studies of oligomerized, RNA-encapsidating nucleoprotein${}^{3-6}$, and cryo-electron microscopy of nucleocapsid${}^{7-12}$ or nucleocapsid-like structures${}^{11-13}$. There have been no high-resolution reconstructions of complete mononegavirus nucleocapsids. Here we apply cryo-electron tomography and subtomogram averaging to determine the structure of Ebola virus nucleocapsid within intact viruses and recombinant nucleocapsid-like assemblies. These structures reveal the identity and arrangement of the nucleocapsid components, and suggest that the formation of an extended $\alpha$-helix from the disordered carboxy-terminal region of nucleoprotein-core links nucleoprotein oligomerization, nucleocapsid condensation, RNA encapsidation, and accessory protein recruitment.

Nucleoprotein (NP) 1–450 is an Ebola NP truncation mutant that encapsidates cellular RNA to form condensed helices with dimensions similar to those of the inner core of viral nucleocapsids (NCs)${}^{11,14,15}$. This truncation removes the 289 C-terminal residues, which contain a long, disordered linker and a small C-terminal domain (CTD)${}^{16}$. We recombinantly expressed and purified NP 1–450 helices (Extended Data Fig. 1), and determined their structure by subtomogram averaging (Fig. 1a, Extended Data Table 1 and Extended Data Fig. 1) to a resolution of 6.6 Å (Extended Data Fig. 2), allowing clear identification of $\alpha$-helical densities. We initially fitted available NP crystal structures${}^{17-19}$ as rigid bodies into the electron microscopy (EM) density. N- and C-terminal regions of NP 1–450, absent in the crystal structures, were visible in the EM density (Fig. 1b). We modelled these regions and then performed flexible fitting to generate a structural model for the helical NP (Fig. 1c, Extended Data Figs 3 and 4 and Supplementary Video 1).

A putative RNA-encapsulation cleft is located on the outside of the helix between the N- and C-terminal lobes of NP (Fig. 1d–g, j, k). A continuous density runs along the cleft of each NP; we attribute this density to cellular RNA. This density can accommodate six nucleotides per NP (Extended Data Fig. 3), consistent with previous calculations${}^{11}$. It has been proposed that Ebola NP, like other mononegaviruses${}^{3-6}$, encapsidates RNA in the cleft by closing the N- and C-terminal lobes${}^{17-19}$. However, our NP 1–450 helices show the two lobes in the same ‘open’ conformation as the RNA-free crystal structures${}^{17-19}$ (Fig. 1b, c and Extended Data Fig. 3b, 5). Rather than by closing the lobes, the RNA is encapsidated by a C-terminal $\alpha$-helix (Fig. 1c, j). This $\alpha$-helix is disordered in solution${}^{19}$, but in the assembled NP helix it forms a long, extended $\alpha$-helix that runs up the outside of NP, clamping the RNA. The C-terminal, RNA-contacting end of the clamp-helix (residues 398–405) is highly positively charged (Fig. 1c, j, k and Extended Data Fig. 4, Supplementary Video 1). The clamp-helix extends along the penultimate $\alpha$-helix in both the same and the neighbouring NP subunit (Fig. 1f, g), forming a ‘stabilizing ribbon’ of stacked $\alpha$-helices that run along the NP helix.

NP contains a binding pocket between helices 13 and 15 (Fig. 1i, j) that can bind different helical peptides, including two from VP35 (refs 17, 19) and one formed by part of the penultimate helix of NP core${}^{18}$. In the assembled NP 1–450 helices, we find that this pocket is bound by the N-terminal $\alpha$-helix of the adjacent NP subunit (Fig. 1h, i and Supplementary Video 1), analogous to interactions seen in other mononegaviruses${}^{20}$. This is consistent with the proposal that NP is maintained in a monomeric state by occupation of this pocket by VP35 (refs 17, 19) (or by part of the penultimate helix${}^{18}$), until it is displaced by an NP N-terminal helix in tandem with RNA encapsidation.

In addition to NP and RNA, assembly of a complete filovirus NC requires co-expression of VP35, the filovirus analogue of the P protein, a polymerase co-factor found in other mononegaviruses, and VP24, which is unique to filoviruses${}^{11,15,21}$. VP35 and VP24 are interferon antagonists${}^{22-25}$. We produced NP–VP24–VP35–VP40 virus-like particles (VLPs) (Extended Data Fig. 1), and determined the structures of their NCs by subtomogram averaging (Fig. 2a, b and Extended Data Fig. 1). The inner NC layer had a resolution of 7.3 Å, while the flexible outer layers were resolved to lower resolutions (Extended Data Fig. 2). This structure is consistent with previous low-resolution structures of filovirus NCs${}^{10,11}$. The NP subunits in the inner layer of the NC have the same structure as those in the NP 1–450 helices; our model for NP 1–450 fits this layer well as a rigid body (Fig. 2c, d and Supplementary Video 1).

The repeating unit of the assembled NC consists of two adjacent copies of NP, one of which has a large protrusion of additional density on the outside of the helix (Fig. 2b, purple density), while the other has a smaller protrusion of additional density (Fig. 2b, orange density). We masked out the densities occupied by NP and RNA, leaving only these outer protrusions. We then performed a global fitting search using available crystal structures of VP24, the CTD of VP35, and the small, globular NP CTD (residues 641–739) (Extended Data Fig. 6). We identified VP24 in two positions immediately adjacent to NP: one in the small protrusion and one in the large (Fig. 2d and Extended Data Fig. 6). We did not identify a unique fit for NP CTD or VP35. The requirement of VP35 for proper NC formation, the radial position of VP35 determined by immuno-EM${}^{10}$, and the size of the large peripheral density, suggests that VP35 is located within this density.

Unusually, the orientation of VP24 differs in the two outer protrusions. In the small protrusion, a face of VP24 (including the N terminus of helix 1, the ends and adjoining loop of helix 5 and 6, helix 7, and the N-terminal end of helix 8) binds directly to the N-terminal lobe of the

---

${}^{1}$Structural and Computational Biology Unit, European Molecular Biology Laboratory, Meyerhofstraße 1, 69117 Heidelberg, Germany. ${}^{2}$Institut für Virologie, Philipps-Universität Marburg, Hans-Meerwein-Straße 2, 35043 Marburg, Germany. ${}^{3}$Laboratory of Ultrastructural Virology, Institute for Frontier Life and Medical Sciences, Kyoto University, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan. ${}^{4}$PRESTO, Japan Science and Technology Agency, Saitama 332-0012, Japan. ${}^{5}$Structural Studies Division, MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Francis Crick Avenue, Cambridge CB2 0QH, UK. ${}^{\ddagger}$Present address: Department of Molecular Structural Biology, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Am Klopferspitz 18, 82152 Martinsried, Germany.

Figure 1 | Structure of Ebola NP 1–450. a, The structure of an NP 1–450 helix, visualized by placing the structure of the subunit at the positions and orientations determined by subtomogram averaging. For ease of visualization, adjacent rungs are coloured dark and light grey; a single subunit is highlighted in pink. b–j, Structure of the NP 1–450 helix determined by subtomogram averaging (grey isosurface, putative RNA density in yellow) fitted with models of consecutive NP subunits coloured in cyan and blue. b, c, Crystal structure (Protein Data Bank (PDB) accession number 4YPI) (b) and our model (PDB accession number 6EHL) (c) fitted into the density map. Arrowhead indicates empty density corresponding to the N-terminal helix; arrow indicates empty density corresponding to the clamp-helix. All remaining panels use our NP model from c. d, e, Wide (d) and focused (e) outer view of the RNA encapsidated

into the cleft of NP. Above the RNA is the N-terminal lobe of the NP core; below the RNA are the penultimate- (purple) and clamp-helices (brown). f, g, Wide (f) and focused (g) view showing the stabilizing ribbon formed by the penultimate- and clamp-helices. h, i, Wide (h) and focused (i) view showing the N-terminal helix of the blue subunit binding into a pocket in the neighbouring cyan subunit. In i the N-terminal helix of the blue NP is coloured green; it binds into a pocket in the cyan NP formed by helix-13 (red) and helix-15 (pink). j, Coloured schematic of NP subunit; N-terminal lobe in green, orange, and cyan; C-terminal lobe in blue, pink, purple, red, and brown. A key to helix numbering is provided in Extended Data Fig. 4. k, Electrostatic potential maps calculated from our NP 1–450 model. Scale bars, 20 Å.

The two NP–VP24 binding modes generally alternate along the NC helix, but we observed positions in NP–VP24–VP35–VP40 VLPs, and Ebola and Marburg viruses, where a single NP insertion breaks this pattern (Extended Data Fig. 9). Such single NP molecules often appear in several consecutive rungs, creating a short ‘seam’ along the helix. This implies that VP24 binding is influenced by its neighbours on adjacent rungs. It is unclear why the virus has evolved the unusual alternating VP24 binding, but we suggest that the apparent 2:2:1 NP:VP24:VP35 stoichiometry packages the appropriate amounts of VP24 and VP35 into the virus, and may allow for their regulation of replication and antagonization of immune responses upon infection of a new cell.

In the absence of both VP24 and VP35, NP–RNA assemblies do not condense unless regions downstream of the NP clamp-helix are truncated¹⁹. This suggests that these disordered regions hinder condensation through steric, entropic, or other effects, and that binding of VP24 and VP35 to these disordered regions overcomes this hindrance. Our structure also suggests that interactions between VP24/VP35 lobes across rungs of the helix may directly promote condensation.

Here we show that in fully assembled NP, the C-terminal helix forms a long, extended α-helix with a positively charged end that clamps the RNA. The extended helix contributes to interactions with adjacent NP molecules both along and between helical rungs, while positioning the downstream disordered regions in the vicinity of the VP24

Figure 2 | Structure of Ebola NP–VP24–VP35–VP40 VLPs. **a**, The structure of an Ebola NP–VP24–VP35–VP40 VLP helix, visualized by placing the density of a subunit in positions and orientations determined by subtomogram averaging. For ease of visualization, adjacent rungs are in dark and light grey; a single subunit is highlighted in pink. **b**, Ebola NP–VP24–VP35–VP40 VLP subunit densities. NP subunits are in blue and cyan, the small outer protrusion is in orange, and the large outer protrusion is in purple. The continuous yellow density is RNA. Densities along the same rung are in dark grey; densities from other rungs are transparent. **c**, Detailed view of the RNA-encapsulation region; the outer densities are sliced to reveal the NP–RNA interface. This interface is nearly identical to that shown in Fig. 1d. **e**–**f**, Molecular models fitted into

the EM densities. The two NP models are in blue and cyan while the two VP24 models are shown in orange and purple; model colours match the density colours in **b**. Highlighted on the EM densities in green is a VP24 surface region including the N-terminal end of helix 1, the ends and loop joining helix 5 and 6, helix 7, and the N-terminal end of helix 8. In the orange VP24 this region binds NP; in the purple VP24 this region binds VP35. **d**, Side view of an individual asymmetric unit; the density threshold is set to show weaker unassigned densities. **e**, **f**, Detailed views of VP24 fits in the large (**e**) and small (**f**) outer protrusions, respectively (see also Extended Data Fig. 6). Density thresholds are set to show helical densities. Scale bars, 20 Å. See also Supplementary Video 1.

We propose a model in which oligomerization of NP, probably by removal of a VP35 peptide¹⁹, induces partial ordering of the clamp-helix, bringing the C-terminal end of the clamp-helix into the vicinity

Figure 3 | Structure of Ebola and Marburg NCs from intact viruses. **a**, **d**, Visualizations of Ebola (**a**) and Marburg NCs (**d**). Visualizations consist of subunit densities positioned using the positions and orientations determined by subtomogram averaging. **b**, **e**, Subunit densities of Ebola (**b**) and Marburg NCs (**e**). NC densities are in cyan and blue. The small and large outer protrusions are in orange and purple, respectively. Green

density is extra disordered density in Marburg NC. Grey densities show other subunits on the same rung; densities from adjacent rungs are transparent. RNA density is in yellow. **c**, **f**, Molecular model fits of NP and VP24 in Ebola (**c**) and Marburg NC subunits (**f**). Model colours correspond with colours in **b** and **e**. Scale bars, 20 Å.

of the RNA-encapsidation cleft, thereby forming a metastable positively charged region that promotes RNA encapsidation. RNA encapsidation results in stabilization and rigidification of the clamp-helix; the cascade of RNA encapsidation and clamp-helix rigidification induces formation of the ‘stabilizing ribbon’ and provides a structured interface for inter-rung contacts. In Ebola NP 1–450, this process results in condensation; in full length NP, the rigidification of the clamp-helix is probably hindered by C-terminal residues of NP, producing a semi-condensed state which then recruits VP24 and VP24-VP35 to complete condensation. In this model, the transition of the clamp-helix between a short, open, solution form and a long, closed, assembled form provides the mechanistic link between oligomerization of NP–RNA, RNA encapsidation, condensation of the NP helix, and recruitment of other viral proteins to the NC.

**Online Content** Methods, along with any additional Extended Data display items and Source Data, are available in the online version of the paper; references unique to these sections appear only in the online paper.

Received 8 June; accepted 4 October 2017.  
Published online 8 November 2017.

1. Feldmann, H., Sanchez, A. & Geisbert, T. in *Fields Virology* (eds Knipe, D. M. & Howley, P. M.) 923–956 (Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2013).
2. Lamb, R. A. in *Fields Virology* (eds Knipe, D. M. & Howley, P. M.) 880–884 (Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2013).
3. Albertini, A. A. V. *et al.* Crystal structure of the rabies virus nucleoprotein-RNA complex. *Science* **313**, 360–363 (2006).
4. Green, T. J., Zhang, X., Wertz, G. W. & Luo, M. Structure of the vesicular stomatitis virus nucleoprotein-RNA complex. *Science* **313**, 357–360 (2006).
5. Tawar, R. G. *et al.* Crystal structure of a nucleocapsid-like nucleoprotein-RNA complex of respiratory syncytial virus. *Science* **326**, 1279–1283 (2009).
6. Alayyoubi, M., Leser, G. P., Kors, C. A. & Lamb, R. A. Structure of the parainfluenza virus 5 nucleoprotein-RNA complex. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **112**, E1792–E1799 (2015).
7. Ge, P. *et al.* Cryo-EM model of the bullet-shaped vesicular stomatitis virus. *Science* **327**, 689–693 (2010).
8. Cox, R. *et al.* Structural studies on the authentic mumps virus nucleocapsid showing uncoiling by the phosphoprotein. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **111**, 15208–15213 (2014).
9. Gutsche, I. *et al.* Near-atomic cryo-EM structure of the helical measles virus nucleocapsid. *Science* **348**, 704–707 (2015).
10. Bharat, T. A. M. *et al.* Cryo-electron tomography of Marburg virus particles and their morphogenesis within infected cells. *PLoS Biol.* **9**, e1001196 (2011).
11. Bharat, T. A. M. *et al.* Structural dissection of Ebola virus and its assembly determinants using cryo-electron tomography. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **109**, 4275–4280 (2012).
12. Beniac, D. R. *et al.* The organisation of Ebola virus reveals a capacity for extensive, modular polyploidy. *PLoS ONE* **7**, e29608 (2012).
13. Bakker, S. E. *et al.* The respiratory syncytial virus nucleoprotein-RNA complex forms a left-handed helical nucleocapsid. *J. Gen. Virol.* **94**, 1734–1738 (2013).
14. Noda, T., Hagiwara, K., Sagara, H. & Kawaoka, Y. Characterization of the Ebola virus nucleoprotein-RNA complex. *J. Gen. Virol.* **91**, 1478–1483 (2010).

15. Huang, Y., Xu, L., Sun, Y. & Nabel, G. J. The assembly of Ebola virus nucleocapsid requires virion-associated proteins 35 and 24 and posttranslational modification of nucleoprotein. *Mol. Cell* **10**, 307–316 (2002).
16. Dziubańska, P. J., Derewenda, U., Ellena, J. F., Engel, D. A. & Derewenda, Z. S. The structure of the C-terminal domain of the *Zaire ebolavirus* nucleoprotein. *Acta Crystallogr. D* **70**, 2420–2429 (2014).
17. Leung, D. W. *et al.* An intrinsically disordered peptide from Ebola virus VP35 controls viral RNA synthesis by modulating nucleoprotein-RNA interactions. *Cell Reports* **11**, 376–389 (2015).
18. Dong, S. *et al.* Insight into the Ebola virus nucleocapsid assembly mechanism: crystal structure of Ebola virus nucleoprotein core domain at 1.8 Å resolution. *Protein Cell* **6**, 351–362 (2015).
19. Kirchdoerfer, R. N., Abelson, D. M., Li, S., Wood, M. R. & Saphire, E. O. Assembly of the Ebola virus nucleoprotein from a chaperoned VP35 complex. *Cell Rep.* **12**, 140–149 (2015).
20. Ruigrok, R. W., Crépin, T. & Kolakofsky, D. Nucleoproteins and nucleocapsids of negative-strand RNA viruses. *Curr. Opin. Microbiol.* **14**, 504–510 (2011).
21. Noda, T., Aoyama, K., Sagara, H., Kida, H. & Kawaoka, Y. Nucleocapsid-like structures of Ebola virus reconstructed using electron tomography. *J. Vet. Med. Sci.* **67**, 325–328 (2005).
22. Zhang, A. P. P. *et al.* The ebolavirus VP24 interferon antagonist: know your enemy. *Virulence* **3**, 440–445 (2012).
23. Zhang, A. P. P. *et al.* The Ebola virus interferon antagonist VP24 directly binds STAT1 and has a novel, pyramidal fold. *PLoS Pathog.* **8**, e1002550 (2012).
24. Leung, D. W. *et al.* Structure of the Ebola VP35 interferon inhibitory domain. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **106**, 411–416 (2009).
25. Leung, D. W. *et al.* Structural basis for dsRNA recognition and interferon antagonism by Ebola VP35. *Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol.* **17**, 165–172 (2010).

**Supplementary Information** is available in the online version of the paper.

**Acknowledgements** The Briggs laboratory acknowledges financial support from the European Molecular Biology Laboratory and from the European Research Council (ERC) under the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme (ERC-CoG-648432 MEMBRANEFUSION). The Becker group was supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (Sonderforschungsbereich 1021) and by the German Center for Infection Research (DZIF). This work was supported by an EMBO long-term fellowship, ALTF 748-2014, awarded to W.W. We thank Y. Kawaoka for support during this collaborative study and W. J. H. Hagen for assistance during tomographic data collection.

**Author Contributions** W.W., S.B., and J.A.G.B. designed and interpreted experiments. L.K., M.C., A.K., and T.N. prepared specimens. W.W. collected data and performed image processing. W.W. and J.A.G.B. analysed data and wrote the manuscript with support from all authors.

**Author Information** Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints. The authors declare no competing financial interests. Readers are welcome to comment on the online version of the paper. Publisher’s note: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations. Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to J.A.G.B. (john.briggs@mrc-lmb.cam.ac.uk).

**Reviewer Information** *Nature* thanks I. Gutsche, M. Luo and E. Saphire for their contribution to the peer review of this work.

METHODS

No statistical methods were used to predetermine sample size. The experiments were not randomized. The investigators were not blinded to allocation during experiments and outcome assessment.

**Cell lines.** HEK293T and VeroE6 cells were obtained from the American Type Culture Collection. HuH7 cells were obtained from Japanese Collection of Research Bioresources. VeroE6 and HuH7 cell lines were tested for mycoplasma contamination. HEK293T cells are listed in the database of commonly misidentified cell lines maintained by the International Cell Line Authentication Committee, but were used as they are well-established tools for the expression of VLPs: the cells themselves were not studied.

**Expression and purification of Ebola NP 1–450 NC-like assemblies.** Expression and purification of Ebola NP 1–450 assemblies were performed as previously described [11]. HEK293T cells were transfected with plasmid and lysed 3 days after transfection in lysis buffer (10 mM Tris·HCl (pH 7.8), 0.15 M NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 0.1% Nonidet P-40 and protease inhibitor mixture (Roche)). Assemblies were purified by a discontinuous 25–40% (w/w) CsCl gradient centrifugation at 250,000g at 20°C for 1 h. The assembly band was pelleted by ultracentrifugation at 200,000g at 4°C for 30 min. The pellet was resuspended and fixed in 1% paraformaldehyde before storage and transport at 4°C.

**Expression and purification of Ebola NP–VP24–VP35–VP40 VLPs.** HEK293T cells were transfected with full length NP, VP24, VP35, and VP40 plasmids. Supernatant was collected 3 days after transfection and clarified by centrifugation at 800g for 10 min at 4°C. The remaining steps were performed at 4°C. VLPs were pelleted through a 20% (w/v) sucrose cushion in TNE buffer (50 mm Tris–HCl pH 7.4, 100 mm NaCl, 0.1 mm EDTA) at 230,000g for 3 h, resuspended in TNE buffer, and separated on a Nycodenz step gradient (2.5%, 5%, 7.5%, 10%, 15%, 20%, 30% (v/v)) at 34,400g for 15 min. Fractions 4–6 were collected and checked by negative-stain EM; fractions confirmed to contain VLPs were pooled and pelleted at 92,000g for 2 h. Final pellets were resuspended in TNE.

**Preparation of inactivated Ebola and Marburg viruses.** Experiments with infectious filoviruses have been carried out at the BSL-4 facility of Philipps-University Marburg, according to national regulations with the approval of the competent supervisory authorities (Regierungspräsidium Gießen, public health office, Marburg). Virus specimens were grown, purified, and fixed as previously described [10,11]. Briefly, VeroE6 or Huh7 cells were infected with Ebola virus Zaire (strain Mayinga) or Marburg virus, respectively. Supernatant was collected 1 day after infection, and centrifuged at 4°C for 2 h at approximately 77,000g through a 20% (w/w) sucrose cushion to purify virus particles. The virus pellet was resuspended in PBS (deficient in calcium and magnesium), re-pelleted, and inactivated with paraformaldehyde (final concentration 4%) in DMEM for 24 h by filling the tube completely. The viruses were pelleted and the 4% paraformaldehyde solution in DMEM (w/v) was replaced with a fresh solution of 4% paraformaldehyde. The sample was removed from the BSL-4 facility after an additional 24 h.

**Cryo-electron tomography.** Degassed C-Flat 2/2-3C grids were glow discharged for 30 s at 20 mA. Virus or VLP solution was diluted with 10 nm colloidal gold; 2.5 μl of this mixture was applied to each grid and plunge frozen into liquid ethane using a FEI Vitrobot Mark 2. Grids were stored in liquid nitrogen until imaging.

Tomographic imaging was performed as described previously [26]. Imaging was performed on a FEI Titan Krios at 300 keV using a Gatan Quantum 967 LS energy filter with a slit width of 20 eV and a Gatan K2xp direct detector. Tomograms were acquired from –60° to 60° with 3° steps using SerialEM [27] and a dose-symmetric tilt-scheme [28]. Images were acquired in super-resolution mode.

Frames were aligned with either K2Align software, which uses the MotionCorr algorithm [29], or with the frame alignment algorithm built into serialEM; frames were aligned and Fourier cropped to 4k × 4k, giving a final pixel size of 1.78 Å per pixel. Defocus for each tilt was determined by CTFFIND4 (ref. 30). Tilt images were filtered by cumulative electron dose using the exposure-dependent attenuation function and critical exposure constants described elsewhere [26,31]. Tilt images were contrast transfer function (CTF)-corrected using ctffindflip [32] and tomograms were reconstructed using weighted back projection in IMOD [33]. Tomograms with poor fiducial alignment were discarded (Extended Data Table 1). Poor fiducial alignment was defined as alignment residual above one pixel in 2 × binned data or retaining fewer than eight fiducial markers. CTF-corrected unbinned tomograms were binned by 2 × (3.56 Å per pixel) and 4 × (7.12 Å per pixel) with a Lanczos two-lobe anti-aliasing filter.

Detailed data set parameters are given in Extended Data Table 1.

**Subtomogram averaging.** NC and NC-like filaments were previously shown to have multiple helical symmetries that sporadically switch along each filament [10,11], hindering the use of helical reconstruction methods, which depend on data with regular helical symmetry. To address this problem, we previously used a combination of subtomogram averaging to determine local symmetries and helical reconstruction for structure determination [10,11]. Such approaches yielded resolutions of 34 and 41 Å for Marburg and Ebola viruses, respectively, which were at the time better than subtomogram averaging. Subtomogram averaging makes no use of helical symmetry parameters and has recently proved capable of near-atomic resolution structure determination [26]. We therefore elected to apply subtomogram averaging for structure determination.

Filaments of interest were identified in 4×-binned tomograms using Amira visualization software (FEI Visualization Sciences Group). Using Amira and the EM toolbox [34], points along the filament centres were selected. These were used to define the filament axes and generate an oversampled cylindrical grid for each NC or NC-like assembly; gridpoints that served as initial extraction points for subtomograms were therefore arbitrarily positioned relative to underlying NC subunits.

Initial references were generated by subtomogram averaging of single NC filaments using 4× binned data. Subtomogram averaging was performed using TOM [35], AV3 (ref. 36), and dynamo [37], and scripts derived from their functions. Initial Euler angles were derived from the cylindrical grid, providing an initial average that was a section of a tube. From there a six-dimensional search was performed to refine Euler angles and Cartesian shifts, resulting in a low-resolution structure; this reference was used to align the full data set.

Since NC filaments are polar, relative polarities of each filament with respect to the initial reference were determined by performing subtomogram averaging on 30 subtomograms from each filament, with and without an extra 180° in-plane rotation. Constrained cross-correlation values of rotated and unrotated subtomograms were compared to determine relative polarity.

After determination of relative polarities, 4× binned subtomograms were roughly aligned with a low-pass filter of approximately 35 Å. After convergence of subunits, oversampled particles were removed using distance thresholding. A lower constrained cross-correlation threshold was set at a value to exclude subtomograms that had misaligned to positions away from the helical NC. The data sets were then split into ‘odd and even’ sets, and aligned independently from this point on. Subtomograms were re-extracted with 2× binning and halfsets were aligned independently until the six-dimensional search converged. Subtomograms were then extracted from 1× binned data.

Alignment of 1× binned data was performed using a modified wedge mask for the calculation of the constrained cross-correlation and subsequent weighted averaging [38]. Rather than a binary wedge mask, the modified wedge masks represent the amplitude of the determined CTF and applied exposure filters at each tilt.

The approximate helical symmetries of NCs can be estimated from the subunit positions determined by subtomogram averaging. Helical parameters were estimated from lattice maps of ten NCs by measuring the distances between subunits along several helical rungs and counting the number of subunits within these distances. Ebola NP 1–450 had an average helical pitch of 71 ± 1 Å, with subunits per turn ranging from 25.3 to 28.3 (with integer steps). Ebola NP–VP24–VP35–VP40 NC-like structures had an average pitch of 75 ± 3 Å with 12.8 or 13.8 subunits per turn. Ebola virus NC had an average pitch of 74 ± 1 Å and 11.9 or 12.9 subunits per turn while Marburg virus NC had an average pitch of 77 ± 1 Å and 14.8 or 15.8 subunits per turn. It is important to note that helical symmetry is not applied during structure determination by subtomogram averaging. The variability of the helical symmetry parameters, and the presence of ‘misincorporated NP’ (see below), means that these parameters cannot be directly applied for helical reconstruction methods.

Visualization of tomograms and electron density maps were done with UCSF Chimera [39].

**Identification of misincorporated NP.** Lattice maps illustrate the positions and orientations of the subtomograms after alignment to the reference, and were used to assess the helical symmetry of the NC (Extended Data Fig. 9). For NP–VP24–VP35–VP40 VLPs and viral NCs, each subtomogram corresponds to two copies of NP and is represented by one cyan arrow. Occasionally positions were identified where neighbouring subunits were separated by 1.5 times the expected distance, a ‘gap’. An average inter-subunit vector describing the translation between subunits around a gap was determined by averaging 20 vectors from manually picked positions across the data set. The average inter-subunit vector was then used to search the data set; at each instance of a vector match, a position was defined at the midpoint of the vector and an orange arrow was placed at this position (Extended Data Fig. 9).

Since lattice maps generated from subtomogram averaging contain a fraction of false positive and false negative positions, an exact quantification of the number of misincorporated NPs cannot be performed, but on the basis of the results of this search we estimate 1.3% of NPs are misincorporated in Ebola virus and 0.6% in Marburg virus. In Ebola virus, approximately 28% of misincorporated NPs are

part of a ‘seam’; that is, they have a misincorporated NP in a neighbouring position on an adjacent rung. For Marburg virus this is approximately 22%. The probabilities for randomly distributed misincorporations to be part of a seam are only approximately 2.6% for Ebola virus and 1.2% for Marburg virus. The presence of seams indicates that the binding mode of VP24 is influenced by its neighbour in the adjacent rung. The binding mode of VP24 alternates along the helix, indicating that the binding mode of any one VP24 molecule is also influenced by the binding mode of its neighbour on the same rung.

**Local resolution estimation.** Local resolution was determined by calculating local Fourier shell correlations (FSCs). Local FSCs were calculated by padding the references and calculating mask-corrected FSCs⁴⁰ in moving windows of 96 pixels using spherical masks with radial Gaussian mollification of 28 pixels. Windows were calculated along a three-dimensional grid with four-pixel spacing. For each grid point, local FSC plots were used for local low-pass filtering, figure of merit weighting, and sharpening⁴¹.

Resolution was also estimated for each protein layer using three cylindrical FSC masks made in the Dynamo software package³⁷ (Extended Data Fig. 3). The circular cross-section of each masks contained a full NC subunit: that is, two NPs, two VP24 s, and the unassigned densities. The three masks had varying heights and positions, and were centred on either the NP core, VP24 layer, or outer unassigned density layer. The three masks were used on each subtomogram average, with the exception of NP 1–450, which was only measured with the NP core mask.

**Structure modelling and fitting.** Chain C of the 4YPI Ebola NP crystal structure was edited in Coot⁴². Specifically, the last two C-terminal helices were moved into the EM densities as rigid bodies. The final C-terminal helix was extended to fit the length of the tubular density in the EM map through the addition of a segment of ideal α-helix. The missing N-terminal helix and loop was built by first extending the loop from the N-terminal beta-hairpin following the loop density. A segment of ideal α-helix was then added to fit the tubular density. Models were then fitted into the 6.6 Å density map of NP1–450 using molecular dynamics flexible fitting⁴³ and NAMD⁴⁴ using explicit solvent.

A six-nucleotide RNA oligomer from measles virus NC⁹ (PDB accession number 4UFT) was fitted into the NP 1–450 density. First, the N-terminal lobe of measles NP–RNA was aligned with the N-terminal lobe of our NP model using the matchmaker tool in UCSF Chimera³⁹. The measles RNA model was then split from the NP and rigid-body fitted into the segmented RNA density of Ebola NP 1–450. This fitting was also performed for the two adjacent NP subunits in the subtomogram average; the distance between the terminal oxygen of one segment and the terminal phosphorous of the adjacent segment is approximately 2.6 Å. This is only about 1 Å longer than a standard phosphate bond, and given that this is a rigid body fit, it suggests that the density corresponds to repeating six-nucleotide segments. This is in agreement with previous estimates¹¹.

**Rigid-body fitting by global search.** The central subunit was segmented from a subtomogram averaging map of NP–VP24–VP35–VP40. Two copies of our refined NP model were fitted into the model as rigid bodies; densities were generated from the PDB structures with the Chimera molmap tool³⁹ and subtracted from the EM density. The remaining densities (Extended Data Fig. 6) represent the protruding outer densities. Crystal structures of VP24 (ref. 45; PDB accession number 4M0Q), VP35 CTD²⁴ (PDB accession number 3FKE), and NP CTD¹⁶ (PDB accession number 4QB0) were randomly fitted into the remaining densities as rigid bodies, using global search mode of the Chimera fitmap tool³⁹. PDB structures were placed into the difference map as densities at 8.5 Å resolution: that is, the local resolution of the regions directly next to NP (Extended Data Fig. 2), in 10,000 random positions and orientations and locally refined. Final positions were grouped by cross-correlation and plotted into histograms (Extended Data Fig. 6). For VP24 (Extended Data Fig. 6), the histogram showed two high-scoring outliers, indicating unique fits outside of the bulk distribution. Visual analysis of these showed fitting of secondary structure elements, confirming these as correct positions. No high-scoring outliers were observed when fitting with VP35 or NP CTD, the best fits were not within the regions directly next to NP, and they were not in regions with resolved secondary structural elements.

With the position of VP24 confirmed, densities corresponding to VP24 were subtracted from the maps, leaving only the unassigned peripheral densities (Extended Data Fig. 6). VP35 CTD and NP CTD were fitted as before, but with resolution set to 15.2 Å, corresponding to the local resolution in this region (Extended Data Fig. 2). At this resolution, fitting is primarily driven by the overall molecular envelope of the search model: that is, size and overall shape. While the folded domains of VP35 and NP CTD can both be accommodated in the remaining densities, they cannot be conclusively positioned at this resolution.

The smaller of the two unassigned peripheral densities is very weak in the virus NC, suggesting that this position is rarely occupied in the virus. Differences in expression level in the VLP system may lead to more frequent protein binding at this position.

Our structural data do not reveal the position of the long, disordered linker between the NP core and the NP CTD¹⁶, nor do they reveal the position of the N-terminal approximately 200 residues of VP35. These residues may partly contribute to the unassigned peripheral densities and/or they may have a flexible conformation relative to the NC and therefore not be resolved in the structure.

**Code availability.** Modifications were made to the TOM³⁵ and AV3 (ref. 36) packages to implement modified wedge masks, local FSC calculations, and local map sharpening. The modified and additional MATLAB scripts can be downloaded from http://www.embl.de/research/units/scb/briggs/services/index.php under the GPL v.3 licence for academic and non-commercial use.

**Data availability.** Subtomogram averaging structures and representative tomograms for Ebola NP 1–450, Ebola NP–VP24–VP35–VP40, Ebola virus, and Marburg virus have been deposited in the Electron Microscopy Data Bank under accession numbers EMD-3869, EMD-3870, EMD-3871, EMD-3872, EMD-3873, EMD-3874, EMD-3875, and EMD-3876. Models for Ebola NP, and NP–VP24 have been deposited in the PDB under accession numbers 6EHL and 6EHM.

26. Schur, F. K. M. *et al.* An atomic model of HIV-1 capsid-SP1 reveals structures regulating assembly and maturation. *Science* **353**, 506–508 (2016).

27. Mastronarde, D. N. Automated electron microscope tomography using robust prediction of specimen movements. *J. Struct. Biol.* **152**, 36–51 (2005).

28. Hagen, W. J. H., Wan, W. & Briggs, J. A. G. Implementation of a cryo-electron tomography tilt-scheme optimized for high resolution subtomogram averaging. *J. Struct. Biol.* **197**, 191–198 (2017).

29. Li, X. *et al.* Electron counting and beam-induced motion correction enable near-atomic-resolution single-particle cryo-EM. *Nat. Methods* **10**, 584–590 (2013).

30. Rohou, A. & Grigorieff, N. CTFFIND4: fast and accurate defocus estimation from electron micrographs. *J. Struct. Biol.* **192**, 216–221 (2015).

31. Grant, T. & Grigorieff, N. Measuring the optimal exposure for single particle cryo-EM using a 2.6 Å reconstruction of rotavirus VP6. *eLife* **4**, e06980 (2015). vol no

32. Xiong, Q., Morphew, M. K., Schwartz, C. L., Hoenger, A. H. & Mastronarde, D. N. CTF determination and correction for low dose tomographic tilt series. *J. Struct. Biol.* **168**, 378–387 (2009).

33. Kremer, J. R., Mastronarde, D. N. & McIntosh, J. R. Computer visualization of three-dimensional image data using IMOD. *J. Struct. Biol.* **116**, 71–76 (1996).

34. Pruggnaller, S., Mayr, M. & Frangakis, A. S. A visualization and segmentation toolbox for electron microscopy. *J. Struct. Biol.* **164**, 161–165 (2008).

35. Nickell, S. *et al.* TOM software toolbox: acquisition and analysis for electron tomography. *J. Struct. Biol.* **149**, 227–234 (2005).

36. Förster, F., Medalia, O., Zauberman, N., Baumeister, W. & Fass, D. Retrovirus envelope protein complex structure *in situ* studied by cryo-electron tomography. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **102**, 4729–4734 (2005).

37. Castaño-Díez, D., Kudryashev, M., Arheit, M. & Stahlberg, H. Dynamo: a flexible, user-friendly development tool for subtomogram averaging of cryo-EM data in high-performance computing environments. *J. Struct. Biol.* **178**, 139–151 (2012).

38. Frangakis, A. S. *et al.* Identification of macromolecular complexes in cryoelectron tomograms of phantom cells. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **99**, 14153–14158 (2002).

39. Pettersen, E. F. *et al.* UCSF Chimera—a visualization system for exploratory research and analysis. *J. Comput. Chem.* **25**, 1605–1612 (2004).

40. Chen, S. *et al.* High-resolution noise substitution to measure overfitting and validate resolution in 3D structure determination by single particle electron cryomicroscopy. *Ultramicroscopy* **135**, 24–35 (2013).

41. Rosenthal, P. B. & Henderson, R. Optimal determination of particle orientation, absolute hand, and contrast loss in single-particle electron cryomicroscopy. *J. Mol. Biol.* **333**, 721–745 (2003).

42. Emsley, P., Lohkamp, B., Scott, W. G. & Cowtan, K. Features and development of Coot. *Acta Crystallogr. D* **66**, 486–501 (2010).

43. Trabuco, L. G., Villa, E., Schreiner, E., Harrison, C. B. & Schulten, K. Molecular dynamics flexible fitting: a practical guide to combine cryo-electron microscopy and X-ray crystallography. *Methods* **49**, 174–180 (2009).

44. Phillips, J. C. *et al.* Scalable molecular dynamics with NAMD. *J. Comput. Chem.* **26**, 1781–1802 (2005).

45. Edwards, M. R. *et al.* The Marburg virus VP24 protein interacts with Keap1 to activate the cytoprotective antioxidant response pathway. *Cell Rep.* **6**, 1017–1025 (2014).

Ebola NP 1-450                      Ebola NP-VP24-VP35-VP40               Ebola Virus                          Marburg Virus

Tomogram

Subtomogram Average

Extended Data Figure 1 | Representative orthoslices of tomograms and subtomogram averages. Top row, orthoslices through the middle of representative tomograms of the NC and NC-like assemblies. Bottom row, orthoslices taken through the structures determined by subtomogram averaging. The inside of the NC helix is on the left. Scale bars, 20 nm.

© 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.

RESEARCH LETTER

Ebola NP 1-450
Ebola NP-VP24-VP35-VP40

FSC
0.143
0
6.6 Å
Resolution in Angstroms

FSC
0.143
0
15.2 Å
8.4 Å
7.3 Å
Resolution in Angstroms

Ebola Virus
Marburg Virus

FSC
0.143
0
13.8 Å
9.7 Å
9.1 Å
Resolution in Angstroms

FSC
0.143
0
15.9 Å
10.6 Å
8.6 Å
Resolution in Angstroms

Extended Data Figure 2 | Local resolution maps and FSCs of NC and NC-like assemblies. In each panel, the small inset shows the full subtomogram averaging structure of part of the helix with a central subunit coloured. Subtomogram averaging maps are locally filtered and sharpened. The isolated central subunits are shown zoomed in. The surface is coloured according to local resolution in ångströms, as defined by the colour map on the right. FSC curves are calculated using cylindrical masks, with a circular cross-section of approximately one viral subunit (two NPs and outer protrusions) and height centred at each protein layer; green is for NP core, yellow is for VP24 layer, and red is for outer unassigned density layer. In general, the NP core has high, homogeneous resolutions while outer subunits have decreasing resolution with respect to their distance from the NP core.

© 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.

Extended Data Figure 3 | Model of NP from subtomogram averaging compared with NP crystal structure and with modelled RNA.

a, Different views of the subtomogram averaging derived NP model (cyan) and the NP crystal structure¹⁷ (pink, PDB accession number 4YPI). Left is a view from inside the NC helix, centre is a cross-sectional view of the NC, and right is a view from outside the NC. b, The NP model in the EM density from our NP 1–450 subtomogram averaging structure. Left shows a cross-sectional view of NC. In the RNA density (yellow) is a rigid-body fit of the six-nucleotide RNA segment from measles virus NP⁹ (PDB accession number 4UFT). Centre and right, three NP–RNA models from the left panel are fitted as rigid bodies. Centre is a view from the outside of the NC, and right is a focused view of the RNA density. Scale bars, 20 Å.

RESEARCH LETTER

α-0
16 ESDMDYHKILTAGLSVQQGIVRQRVIPVYQVNNLEEICQLIIQAFEAGVDFQESADSFLLMLCLHHAYQGDYKLFLESGAVKYLEGHGFRFEVKKRDGVK 115
β-1
α-1
α-2
α-3
α-4
β-2
α-5
α-6
α-7
α-8
α-9
α-10
α-11
116 RLEELLPAVSSGKNIKRTLAAMPEEETTEANAGQFLSFASLFLPKLVVGEKACLEKVQRQIQVHAEQGLIQYPTAWQSVGHMMVIFRLMRTNFLIKFLLI 215
α-11
α-12
α-13
β-3
α-14
α-15
α-16
α-17
α-18 α-19
216 HQGMHMVAGHDANDAVISNSVAQARFSGLLIVKTVLDHILQKTERGVRLHPLARTAKVKNEVNSFKAALSSLAKHGEYAPFARLLNLSGVNNLEHGLFPQ 315
α-20
α-21
α-22
316 LSAIALGVATAHGSTLAGVNVGEOYQQLREAATEAEKQLQQYAESRELDHLGLDDQEKKILMNFHQKKNEISFQQTNAMVTLRKERLAKL 405

Extended Data Figure 4 | Sequence and secondary structure of NP model. Our NP model contains NP residues 16–405. Secondary structure elements are highlighted and coloured according to Fig. 1j. Secondary structure labels follow that of crystal structure 4YPI¹⁷.

© 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.

Ebola Virus
This study

Measles Virus
PDB: 4UFT

Parainfluenza
Virus 5
PDB: 4XJN

Rabies Virus
PDB: 2GTT

Respiratory
Syncytial Virus
PDB: 2WJ8

Extended Data Figure 5 | Comparison of mononegavirus NPs and encapsidated RNA. Each row shows two views of each NP: left is a cross-sectional view of the NC, with the centre of the NC axis to the left; right is a view of the NP from outside the NC. Scale bar, 20 Å.
© 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.

RESEARCH LETTER

**Fitting Histogram**

**Top Two Fits**

**a**

| VP24 | Outer Density Fit |
| --- | --- |
| Counts |  |
| 3000 |  |
| 2000 |  |
| 1000 |  |
| 0 |  |
| 0.7 | 0.8 | 0.9 | 1 |
| Cross Correlation |  |

| VP35 | Outer Density Fit |
| --- | --- |
| Counts |  |
| 3000 |  |
| 2000 |  |
| 1000 |  |
| 0 |  |
| 0.7 | 0.8 | 0.9 | 1 |
| Cross Correlation |  |

| NP-CTD | Outer Density Fit |
| --- | --- |
| Counts |  |
| 3000 |  |
| 2000 |  |
| 1000 |  |
| 0 |  |
| 0.7 | 0.8 | 0.9 | 1 |
| Cross Correlation |  |

**b**

| VP35 Unassigned | Density Fit |
| --- | --- |
| Counts |  |
| 3000 |  |
| 2000 |  |
| 1000 |  |
| 0 |  |
| 0.7 | 0.8 | 0.9 | 1 |
| Cross Correlation |  |

| NP-CTD Unassigned | Density Fit |
| --- | --- |
| Counts |  |
| 3000 |  |
| 2000 |  |
| 1000 |  |
| 0 |  |
| 0.7 | 0.8 | 0.9 | 1 |
| Cross Correlation |  |

Extended Data Figure 6 | Global fit of Ebola crystal structures into the subtomogram averaging structure of Ebola NP–VP24–VP35–VP40 NC-like assembly. Left column shows histograms for random rigid-body fits. Coloured arrows identify the fits illustrated in the other columns. Second column shows the top two scoring fits within the targeted density. The last two columns show detailed views of the highest and second-highest scoring fits, respectively. **a**, Fits into the full outer densities; densities are shown at 1.5σ, except the detailed view of the VP24 fits, which are shown at 2.5σ. The fits of VP24 are high-scoring outliers indicating correct fits, and are those shown in Fig. 2. **b**, Fits into the VP24-subtracted outer protrusion densities; densities are shown at 1.2σ.

© 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.

Ebola NP 1-450                                      Ebola NP-VP24-VP35-VP40

Extended Data Figure 7 | Stabilization of NP helix 6 upon outer protein binding. The top of each panel shows the cross-section of NC-like structures. In light grey are two NC subunits. The bottom of each panel shows a detailed view of the two NC subunits with molecular models fitted. Helix 6 (arrow) in NP 1–450 shows nearly no density, while in NP–VP24–VP35–VP40, binding of VP24 stabilizes this helix. Scale bars, 50 Å.

© 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.

RESEARCH LETTER

Ebola NP 1-450                                                                                     Ebola NP-VP25-VP35-VP40                                                                                   Overlay

Extended Data Figure 8 | Different inter-rung contacts between Ebola NP 1–450 and NP-VP24–VP35–VP40. Top row shows part of the helix viewed from the inside. Subunits on adjacent rungs are highlighted in grey; these correspond to the subunits fitted by the NP models on the bottom rows. The relative positions of NP molecules across the inter-rung contact differ by 8.3 Å. Scale bars, 20 Å.

© 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.

Extended Data Figure 9 | Lattice map revealing the helical symmetry of Ebola NC. Cyan arrows denote the positions of one asymmetric unit (two copies of NP, each of which has VP24 bound in a different orientation), as determined by subtomogram averaging. Orange arrows denote positions where a single NP subunit is present that disrupts the normal alternating arrangement of VP24 binding position. Single NP subunits often appear on consecutive rungs along higher-order helical symmetries, forming ‘seams’ along the NC helix. This suggests that VP24 binding is not only influenced by the neighbouring subunits along the NP helix, but also by neighbouring subunits on adjacent rungs.

Extended Data Table 1 | Summary of tomographic data acquisition and image processing

| Data collection and processing | Ebola NP 1-450 (EMD-3869) (PDB6EHL) | Ebola NP-VP24-VP35-VP40 (EMD-3871) (PDB6EHM) | Ebola Virus (EMD-3873) | Marburg Virus (EMD-3875) |
|-------------------------------|----------------------------------|------------------------------------------------|-----------------------|--------------------------|
| Magnification                 | 81,000x                          | 81,000x                                          | 81,000x               | 81,000x                  |
| Voltage (kV)                  | 300                              | 300                                              | 300                   | 300                      |
| Electron exposure (e-/Å²)     | ~80-120                          | ~100                                             | ~140                  | ~80                      |
| Defocus range (µm)            | -2.0 to -4.5                     | -2.0 to -4.5                                     | -2.0 to -4.5          | -2.0 to -4.5             |
| Detector                      | Gatan Quantum K2                 | Gatan Quantum K2                                 | Gatan Quantum K2      | Gatan Quantum K2         |
| Energy filter                 | Yes                              | Yes                                              | Yes                   | Yes                      |
| Slit width (eV)               | 20                               | 20                                               | 20                    | 20                       |
| Tilt range (min/max, step)    | -60/60°, 3°                      | -60/60°, 3°                                      | -60/60°, 3°           | -60/60°, 3°              |
| Tilt scheme                   | Hagen scheme                     | Hagen scheme                                     | Hagen scheme          | Hagen scheme             |
| Pixel size (Å)                | 1.78                             | 1.78                                             | 1.78                  | 1.78                     |
| Tomograms (used/acquired)     | 63/64                            | 56/64                                            | 117/157               | 73/82                    |
| Filaments                     | 248                              | 191                                              | 151                   | 89                       |
| Symmetry imposed              | None                             | None                                             | None                  | None                     |
| Final subtomograms (no.)      | 127,346                          | 35,366                                           | 108,630               | 65,800                   |
| Map resolution (Å)            | 0.143                            | 0.143                                            | 0.143                 | 0.143                    |
| FSC threshold                 |                                  |                                                  |                       |                          |
| Map resolution range (Å)      | 6.6                              | 7.3–15.2                                         | 9.1–13.8              | 8.6–15.9                 |

# Life Sciences Reporting Summary

Nature Research wishes to improve the reproducibility of the work that we publish. This form is intended for publication with all accepted life science papers and provides structure for consistency and transparency in reporting. Every life science submission will use this form; some list items might not apply to an individual manuscript, but all fields must be completed for clarity.

For further information on the points included in this form, see [Reporting Life Sciences Research](https://www.nature.com/nature-research/editorial-policies/reporting-summary). For further information on Nature Research policies, including our [data availability policy](https://www.nature.com/nature-research/editorial-policies/data-availability), see [Authors & Referees](https://www.nature.com/nature-research/editorial-policies/authors-referees) and the [Editorial Policy Checklist](https://www.nature.com/nature-research/editorial-policies/editorial-policy-checklist).

## Experimental design

1. **Sample size**
   - Describe how sample size was determined.
     - Sample sizes were determined by available electron microscopy time and density of particles on electron microscopy grids.

2. **Data exclusions**
   - Describe any data exclusions.
     - All acquired tilt-series were analyzed and data was later excluded as is usual for such image processing studies. First, tilt-series that showed imaging problems or poor fiducial alignment (described in methods section) were excluded (58 from 367 series, Extended Data Table 1). Misaligned subtomograms were excluded from averages based on cross-correlation scores and visual analysis of lattice maps (described in methods section).

3. **Replication**
   - Describe whether the experimental findings were reliably reproduced.
     - Structures determined in this manuscript are essentially replicates of previously published results. However, our current results are from different preparations, microscopes, and processing pipelines. The current results are consistent with previous findings, but the higher-resolution structure determination in this manuscript has provided new insights and observations.

4. **Randomization**
   - Describe how samples/organisms/participants were allocated into experimental groups.
     - For independent subtomogram alignment, datasets were split into odd and even subsets based on subtomogram number. Subtomogram numbers are effectively randomized per filament.

5. **Blinding**
   - Describe whether the investigators were blinded to group allocation during data collection and/or analysis.
     - Blinding was not applicable to this study.

Note: all studies involving animals and/or human research participants must disclose whether blinding and randomization were used.

6. Statistical parameters

For all figures and tables that use statistical methods, confirm that the following items are present in relevant figure legends (or in the Methods section if additional space is needed).

- n/a | Confirmed
- ☐ The exact sample size $(n)$ for each experimental group/condition, given as a discrete number and unit of measurement (animals, litters, cultures, etc.)
- ☐ A description of how samples were collected, noting whether measurements were taken from distinct samples or whether the same sample was measured repeatedly
- ☐ A statement indicating how many times each experiment was replicated
- ☐ The statistical test(s) used and whether they are one- or two-sided (note: only common tests should be described solely by name; more complex techniques should be described in the Methods section)
- ☐ A description of any assumptions or corrections, such as an adjustment for multiple comparisons
- ☐ The test results (e.g., $P$ values) given as exact values whenever possible and with confidence intervals noted
- ☐ A clear description of statistics including central tendency (e.g., median, mean) and variation (e.g., standard deviation, interquartile range)
- ☐ Clearly defined error bars

See the web collection on [statistics for biologists](https://www.nature.com/collections/qghhjg) for further resources and guidance.

### Software

Policy information about [availability of computer code](https://www.nature.com/articles/s41592-018-0023-x)

7. Software

Describe the software used to analyze the data in this study.

> Software used for electron tomography and tomogram reconstruction are SerialEM, IMOD, and CTFFIND4, all of which are available as open-source packages. Subtomogram averaging used the open-source packages TOM, AV3, and Dynamo, but with modifications to the scripts. Modified scripts are available on request.

For manuscripts utilizing custom algorithms or software that are central to the paper but not yet described in the published literature, software must be made available to editors and reviewers upon request. We strongly encourage code deposition in a community repository (e.g., GitHub). Nature Methods [guidance for providing algorithms and software for publication](https://www.nature.com/articles/nmeth.f.713) provides further information on this topic.

### Materials and reagents

Policy information about [availability of materials](https://www.nature.com/articles/s41592-018-0023-x)

8. Materials availability

Indicate whether there are restrictions on availability of unique materials or if these materials are only available for distribution by a for-profit company.

> Samples are available, subject to regulatory restrictions on samples that may constitute biological hazards.

9. Antibodies

Describe the antibodies used and how they were validated for use in the system under study (i.e., assay and species).

> No antibodies were used.

10. Eukaryotic cell lines

a. State the source of each eukaryotic cell line used.

> HEK-293T from ATCC. VeroE6 from ATCC. Huh-7 from JCRB.

b. Describe the method of cell line authentication used.

> VeroE6 and Huh-7 lines were authenticated by DSZM. https://www.dsmz.de/services/services-human-and-animal-cell-lines/authentication-of-human-cell-lines.html

c. Report whether the cell lines were tested for mycoplasma contamination.

> VeroE6 and Huh-7 cell lines were tested for mycoplasma contamination.

d. If any of the cell lines used are listed in the database of commonly misidentified cell lines maintained by ICLAC, provide a scientific rationale for their use.

> HEK-293T cells are listed in the database. HEK-293T cells were used as they are well suited for the expression of virus-like particles. The cells themselves are not being studied; they are tools for virus-like-particle expression.

- **Animals and human research participants**

Policy information about [studies involving animals](#); when reporting animal research, follow the [ARRIVE guidelines](#)

11. Description of research animals  
Provide details on animals and/or animal-derived materials used in the study.

| No animals were used. |

Policy information about [studies involving human research participants](#)

12. Description of human research participants  
Describe the covariate-relevant population characteristics of the human research participants.

| Study did not involve humans. |
