
JVI Accepted Manuscript Posted Online 13 December 2017  
J. Virol. doi:10.1128/JVI.01981-17  
Copyright © 2017 American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

Human Cytomegalovirus UL111A and US27 gene products enhance the CXCL12/CXCR4  
signaling axis via distinct mechanisms  

Carolyn C. Tu<sup>a</sup>, Kathleen L. Arnolds<sup>a</sup>, Christine M. O'Connor<sup>b</sup>, and Juliet V. Spencer<sup>a#</sup>  

Department of Biology, University of San Francisco, San Francisco, California, United States of  
America<sup>a</sup>; Genomic Medicine Institute, Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland,  
Ohio, United States of America<sup>b</sup>  

#Corresponding author: jspencer@usfca.edu (JVS)  

Running title: Increased CXCR4 signaling in HCMV infection  

Abstract word count: 249  
Importance word count: 150  
Text word count: 5236

Abstract

Human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) is a prevalent pathogen that establishes lifelong infection in the host. Virus persistence is aided by extensive manipulation of the host immune system, particularly cytokine and chemokine signaling pathways. The HCMV UL111A gene encodes cmvIL-10, an ortholog of human interleukin-10 that has many immunomodulatory effects. We found that cmvIL-10 increased signaling outcomes from human CXCR4, a chemokine receptor with essential roles in hematopoiesis and immune cell trafficking, in response to its natural ligand CXCL12. Calcium flux and chemotaxis to CXCL12 was significantly greater in the presence of cmvIL-10 in monocytes, epithelial cells, and fibroblasts that express CXCR4. CmvIL-10 effects on CXCL12/CXCR4 signaling required the IL-10 receptor and Stat3 activation. Heightened signaling occurred both in HCMV-infected cells as well as in uninfected bystander cells, suggesting that cmvIL-10 may broadly influence chemokine networks by paracrine signaling during infection. Moreover, CXCL12/CXCR4 signaling was amplified in HCMV-infected cells compared to mock-infected cells even in the absence of cmvIL-10. Enhanced CXCL12/CXCR4 outcomes were associated with expression of the virally encoded chemokine receptor US27, and CXCL12/CXCR4 activation was reduced in cells infected with a deletion mutant lacking US27 (TB40/E-mCherry-US27Δ). US27 effects were Stat3-independent but required close proximity to CXCR4 in cell membranes of either HCMV-infected or US27-transfected cells. Thus, HCMV encodes two proteins, cmvIL-10 and US27, that exhibit distinct mechanisms for enhancing CXCR4 signaling. Either individually or in combination, cmvIL-10 and US27 may enable HCMV to exquisitely manipulate CXCR4 signaling to alter host immune responses and modify cell trafficking patterns during infection.

Importance

The human chemokine system plays a central role in host defense, as evidenced by the many strategies devised by viruses for manipulating it. Human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) is widespread in the human population, but infection rarely causes disease except in immune compromised hosts. We found that two different HCMV proteins, cmvIL-10 and US27, act through distinct mechanisms to up-regulate the signaling activity of a cellular chemokine receptor, CXCR4. CmvIL-10 is a secreted viral cytokine that affects CXCR4 signaling in both infected and uninfected cells, while US27 is a component of the virus particle and impacts CXCR4 activity only in infected cells. Both cmvIL-10 and US27 promote increased intracellular calcium signaling and cell migration in response to chemokine CXCL12 binding to CXCR4. Our results demonstrate that HCMV exerts fine control over the CXCL12/CXCR4 pathway, which could lead to enhanced virus dissemination, altered immune cell trafficking, and serious health implications for HCMV patients.

Introduction

Human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) is a member of the Herpesviridae family that is widespread in the general population, causing significant disease mainly in immune compromised hosts (1). Infection in pregnant women can have dire consequences for the fetus, and HCMV is the leading infectious cause of birth defects in the United States, resulting in sensorineural deficiencies, including deafness, blindness, and mental retardation (2). Solid organ and stem cell transplant recipients are also vulnerable to HCMV disease, and while anti-viral treatment is standard, drug resistant isolates are emerging at an alarming rate (3). Moreover, current therapeutics target only productively infected cells, leaving a reservoir of latently infected cells that can subsequently reactivate and cause recurrent disease. A better understanding of how HCMV manipulates the host immune system is necessary to develop preventative and/or improved treatment options.

Following primary infection, HCMV establishes lifelong latency. Latent infection is characterized by a quiescent state in which virus particles are undetected, punctuated by periods of reactivation and virus replication. Transmission occurs upon shedding of infectious virus in body fluids such as urine, blood, and saliva (4). HCMV has adapted for successful coexistence with humans through an arsenal of mechanisms to evade host immune responses, particularly by modulating host cytokine and chemokine signaling networks. HCMV encodes one functional cytokine (UL111A), one receptor with similarity to TNF family receptors (UL144), two alpha chemokines (UL146, UL147), and four chemokine receptors (US27, US28, UL33, and UL78) (5). Thus, HCMV is highly adept at manipulating host cytokine and chemokine signaling pathways to avoid immune clearance and facilitate lifelong persistence.
HCMV UL111A encodes an ortholog of human cellular interleukin-10 (hIL-10), known as

cmvIL-10. CmvIL-10 has only 27% sequence identity to hIL-10, but the three dimensional

structure is highly conserved, enabling cmvIL-10 to bind with high affinity to the cellular IL-10

receptor (IL-10R) (6, 7). Engagement of IL-10R by cmvIL-10 dimers results in activation of the

Jak/Stat3 signaling cascade. The receptor associated JAK1 (Janus kinase 1) phosphorylates

Stat3, which homodimerizes and translocates to the nucleus to activate transcription, producing

immune suppressive effects that include inhibition of inflammatory cytokine synthesis, down-

regulation of MHC class I and class II, and impaired dendritic cell maturation (8, 9). UL111A is

expressed during both lytic and latent infection (10, 11) and induces expression of hIL-10 by

monocytes, further contributing to the immune suppressive environment (12). CmvIL-10 has

been detected in peripheral blood of HCMV+ healthy blood donors (13), and its anti-

inflammatory effects are likely to play a significant role in facilitating virus persistence (12, 14,

15). However, many cells express the IL-10R, and the full extent of cmvIL-10 effects on host

cells is unknown.

Chemokine receptors are a subset of the G protein-coupled receptor (GPCR) superfamily, having

a characteristic seven transmembrane structure and associating with heterotrimeric G proteins

that become activated and signal in response to ligand binding. US28 is a bona fide chemokine

receptor that binds and signals in response to multiple host chemokines including

CX3CL1/Fractalkine, CCL2/MCP-1, CCL5/RANTES, and CCL7/MCP-3 (16–19), and also plays

a role in latency (20, 21). In contrast, US27, UL33, and UL78 are currently considered orphan

receptors, having no affinity or known response to chemokine treatment (22, 23). US28 can also

signal constitutively, activating phospholipase C and NF-κB (24), while UL33 constitutively
activates CREB signaling (25). US 27, US 28, UL 33, and UL 78 are all components of HCMV

virions (21, 26-30), suggesting that upon virus fusion with the cell membrane, these viral GPCRs

could immediately influence cell signaling networks.

The function of US 27 during HCMV infection is poorly understood. A viral mutant lacking

US 27 limited the virus to direct cell-to-cell spread, indicating that US 27 may be required for

spreading via the extracellular route (31), which is consistent with US 27's presence in the virus

particle. The US 27 gene is highly conserved among different HCMV strains and retained even

in laboratory strains that have lost many virulence genes (32, 33), suggesting that US 27 has

important functions during virus infection. Expression of US 27 in multiple cell types results in

two notable phenotypes: increased cell proliferation and survival rates (34, 35) and enhanced

signaling responses from CXCR 4 (23, 36), a human chemokine receptor that plays essential roles

in development, hematopoiesis, and immune cell trafficking (37).

CXCR 4 is expressed on many cell types and induces calcium mobilization and chemotaxis upon

binding of its chemokine ligand, CXCL 12 (also known as SDF-1, stromal derived factor-1)

through activation of Ga<sub>i</sub> and Ga<sub>q</sub> (38, 39). CXCL 12 is highly expressed in stromal tissues,

particularly bone marrow; stem cells are retained there through high affinity CXCL 12/CXCR 4

interactions and mobilized to depart and travel to tissues when that interaction is inhibited or

weakened. CXCR 4 is a highly tunable receptor, and other proteins can profoundly impact

downstream signaling. CXCR 4 has been documented to interact with CCR 2 (40) and CXCR 7

(41), resulting in decreased sensitivity to CXCL 12. In addition to these cellular chemokine

receptors, viral GPCRs can interact with CXCR 4 and impair CXCL 12-induced signaling. For

example, Epstein-Barr virus BILF1 scavenges Gαi proteins to inhibit CXCL12/CXCR4 signaling

(42), and HCMV US28, UL33 and UL78 all reduce CXCL12-induced calcium flux and

migration (43, 44). Additionally, UL33 and UL78 block the ability of CXCR4 to serve as a co-

factor for HIV entry (43). In direct contrast, HCMV US27 enhances CXCL12-mediated calcium

mobilization and cell migration through CXCR4 and is the first viral GPCR known to increase

CXCR4 signaling (23). Other cellular proteins can interact with CXCR4 to increase signaling

outcomes, including complement receptor C3a (39, 45), S1P receptor (46), and the T cell

receptor (47). In addition to these membrane receptors, secreted proteins like hIL-10 also

influence CXCR4 signaling (48). Both hIL-10 and cmvIL-10 promote B cell survival and

proliferation (49-51), and maintenance of the peritoneal B cell compartment requires hIL-10,

which stimulates proliferation and chemotaxis of B lymphocytes by enhancing signaling through

CXCR4 (48). Since cmvIL-10 has been found to retain most functions of hIL-10 to date (52,

53), we investigated whether cmvIL-10 could increase CXCR4 signaling outcomes and provide

HCMV with yet another mechanism for fine-tuning signals along the CXCL12/CXCR4 axis.

Results

We examined the impact of cmvIL-10 on CXCR4 signaling using two cell types that

endogenously express CXCR4 and IL-10R: HEK293 epithelial cells and THP-1 monocytes.

Cells were loaded with a calcium-sensitive fluorescent dye and stimulated with CXCL12,

resulting in a rapid and transient increase in fluorescence due to calcium release from

intracellular stores (Fig1A, B). The peak fluorescence intensity was significantly higher when

cmvIL-10 was included with the CXCL12 stimulus, demonstrating that cmvIL-10 could indeed

augment CXCR4 signaling. While cmvIL-10 increased calcium flux in response to a range of

146 CXCL 12 concentrations (Fig. 1C), cmvIL-10 alone did not induce calcium flux (Fig. 1A, B gray
147 dashed line). To determine if cmvIL-10 also enhanced chemotaxis to CXCL 12, HEK 293 cells
148 were placed in the top chamber of a transwell, separated by a porous filter from the lower
149 chamber containing CXCL 12. Cells that responded to the chemokine gradient and traversed the
150 filter into the lower chamber were quantified after four hours. The classic bell-shaped curve for
151 chemotaxis was observed, with maximal cell movement toward 0.1 ng/ml CXCL 12 and reduced
152 cell migration at higher and lower doses (Fig 1D, E). Basal cell movement was comparable in
153 both cell types tested with or without cmvIL-10, but migration toward CXCL 12 increased
154 significantly when cmvIL-10 was present (Fig 1D, E), demonstrating that cmvIL-10 augments
155 signaling outcomes of the CXCL 12/CXCR 4 axis.
156 
157 Direct comparison of cmvIL-10 and hIL-10 revealed that cmvIL-10 was slightly more potent at
158 increasing CXCL 12/CXCR 4 calcium flux (Fig 2A) and cell migration (Fig 2B), but this
159 difference was statistically significant at only one dose of CXCL 12 (Fig 2B, 0.01 ng/ml
160 CXCL 12). Because hIL-10 and cmvIL-10 are well documented to activate Stat 3 upon binding to
161 the IL-10R (12, 51, 54-56), we next investigated Stat 3 activation in the context of
162 CXCL 12/CXCR 4 signaling. Both cmvIL-10 and hIL-10 triggered activation of Stat 3 in the
163 presence or absence of CXCL 12, as evidenced by detection of phosphorylated Stat 3 via Western
164 blot (Fig 2C). In contrast, CXCL 12 alone did not result in any detectable Stat 3 phosphorylation,
165 suggesting that Stat 3 is not a downstream effector of endogenously expressed CXCR 4. To
166 investigate whether cmvIL-10 impacted CXCR 4 expression levels, we analyzed CXCR 4
167 transcripts and protein content in cells treated with cmvIL-10 for 2 or 24 hours. The results
168 demonstrate that cmvIL-10 treatment did not affect CXCR 4 gene expression (Fig 3A, B) or

protein levels (Fig 3C). These data are in agreement with previous results showing hIL-10 had

no impact on CXCR4 expression at the same time points (48), suggesting that the mechanism by

which cmvIL-10 and hIL-10 enhance CXCL12/CXCR4 signaling does not involve increasing

CXCR4 receptor levels. Overall, our results indicate that cmvIL-10 is comparable to hIL-10 in

ability to enhance CXCL12-mediated calcium flux and chemotaxis through CXCR4.

Because Stat3 activation was evident upon treatment with cmvIL-10 and Stat3 mediates most

effects of cmvIL-10, we investigated whether the IL-10R/Stat3 pathway was required for cmvIL-

10 effects on CXCL12/CXCR4 calcium flux. First, we measured calcium flux following

stimulation with CXCL12 and cmvIL-10 in the presence of an IL-10R neutralizing antibody

(NAb) (Fig 4A). The NAb did not affect total calcium mobilization by CXCL12 alone (dashed

lines) but did prevent increased calcium release mediated by cmvIL-10 (solid lines). The

outcome was the same when calcium flux was measured in cells transfected with siRNA directed

against IL-10R (Fig 4B), which resulted in drastically reduced IL-10R expression (Fig 4C) and

prevented an increase in calcium flux due to cmvIL-10 (Fig 4B, solid lines). We then examined

the need for Stat3 activation by evaluating calcium mobilization in the presence of Stat3 inhibitor

S31-201. The effects of cmvIL-10 were ablated in the presence of the inhibitor (Fig 4D, solid

lines), while CXCL12 responses were not affected (dashed lines), demonstrating that cmvIL-10

increases calcium flux in a Stat3-dependent manner. These results were confirmed by

transfecting siRNA directed against Stat3 (Fig 4E, F), which reduced Stat3 expression and

inhibited cmvIL-10 mediated enhancement of CXCL12/CXCR4 calcium signaling. Finally, we

examined chemotaxis in the presence of the Stat3 inhibitor and found that cmvIL-10's ability to

increase migration toward CXCL12 was completely blocked (Fig 4G). These results

192 demonstrate that Stat 3 signaling is not required for CXCL12-induced effects through CXCR4.
193 However, cmvIL-10, acting through the IL-10R/Stat 3 pathway, can facilitate significant
194 increases in CXCL12/CXCR4-mediated calcium flux and chemotaxis.
195
196 CmvIL-10 is a secreted protein that may act on any cell that expresses the IL-10R. Our initial
197 observation was that cmvIL-10 enhanced CXCL12/CXCR4 calcium flux and chemotaxis in
198 epithelial and monocytic cell lines (Fig 1). The cells evaluated thus far were not HCMV-infected
199 and instead may represent bystander cells that could be exposed to secreted cmvIL-10 via
200 paracrine signaling during an infection. Therefore, we next asked whether CXCL12/CXCR4
201 signaling in HCMV-infected cells might also be affected by cmvIL-10. Newborn human
202 foreskin fibroblasts (NuFF) were mock-or HCMV-infected using the BAC-derived clinical
203 strain TB40/E-mCherry (31), and after 72 hours viral gene expression was confirmed by RT-
204 PCR using primers specific for exon 4 of UL123 (immediate early gene IE1) (Fig 5A). Flow
205 cytometry was performed to verify IL-10R expression by NuFF cells (Fig 5B), and no change in
206 IL-10R levels was observed following HCMV infection (Fig 5C). Next, we evaluated calcium
207 signaling in response to CXCL12 and found that while mock-infected cells exhibited calcium
208 flux upon addition of CXCL12, total calcium release was higher in the presence of cmvIL-10
209 (Fig 5D). Likewise, the peak level of calcium release was also significantly higher in HCMV-
210 infected cells in the presence of cmvIL-10. Finally, the addition of cmvIL-10 in our transwell
211 migration assay resulted in a significant increase in chemotaxis of either mock-or HCMV-
212 infected cells toward CXCL12 in the presence of cmvIL-10 (Fig 5E). These results confirm that
213 cmvIL-10 alone enhances CXCL12/CXCR4 signaling outcomes in HCMV-infected cells, as well
214 as in uninfected cells via paracrine effects.

215 While investigating the impact of cmvIL-10 in HCMV-infected cells, we observed that infected
216 cells exhibited higher peak calcium flux in response to CXCL 12 (Fig5D) and significantly
217 greater migration toward CXCL 12 than mock-infected cells (Fig5E). Since we have previously
218 observed that HCMV US 27 promotes increased CXCL 12-induced calcium and migration
219 responses through CXCR 4 in transfected cells (23, 36), we asked whether the increased
220 CXCL 12/CXCR 4 signaling in infected NuFF cells could be attributed to US 27. To this end,
221 NuFF cells were mock-infected or infected with either BAC-derived TB 40/E-m Cherry wild type
222 virus (WT) or TB 40/E-m Cherry-US27Δ (US27Δ), a deletion mutant lacking the US 27 open
223 reading frame (31). As expected, expression of the UL123 and UL111A genes was evident
224 following infection with either virus, while expression of US 27 was detected in WT-infected
225 cells only (Fig6A). WT-infected cells exhibited significantly higher peak calcium responses in
226 response to CXCL 12 stimulation than either mock-or US27Δ-infected cells (Fig6B),
227 demonstrating that US 27 was responsible for the increased CXCL 12/CXCR 4 signaling observed
228 during NuFF infection. However, the addition of cmvIL-10 resulted in even greater peak
229 calcium response, regardless of infection status (Fig6C), suggesting that cmvIL-10 could
230 augment CXCR 4-mediated calcium flux independently of US27. WT-infected cells also
231 exhibited increased cell migration toward CXCL 12 compared to mock-or US27Δ-infected cells,
232 and again cmvIL-10 treatment augmented total cell migration (Fig6D). Further evidence that
233 enhanced cell migration was due, at least in part to US 27, came from transfected HEK293 cells
234 expressing US 27, which resulted in significantly increased migration (Fig6E) and calcium
235 responses to CXCL 12 (Fig6F) compared to HEK293 cells alone or HEK293 cells expressing
236 HCMV US 28. Again, treatment with cmvIL-10 further enhanced the magnitude of these

238 CXCL12/CXCR4 signaling outcomes (Fig 6E, F black bars), demonstrating that cmvIL-10 could
239 either supplement US27 effects on the CXCL12/CXCR4 signaling pathway or act independently
240 of US27. While cmvIL-10 effects required Stat3 (Fig. 4D, E), treatment with Stat3 inhibitor
241 S31-201 had no impact on the ability of US27 to enhance calcium flux induced by CXCL12
242 treatment in transfected HEK293 cells (Fig 6G), demonstrating that US27 effects are Stat3-
243 independent. Finally, to determine whether US27 from one cell could act in trans on CXCR4 in
244 another cell, calcium flux was measured in Fluo-4 labeled HEK293 cells in the presence of
245 unlabeled HEK293-US27 cells (UN). However, the addition of unlabeled HEK293-US27 cells
246 did not result in higher peak calcium response than labeled cells alone (Fig 6H), suggesting that
247 the US27 from the unlabeled cells was not able to act in trans to potentiate CXCR4 activity in
248 the labeled HEK293 cells. These results suggest that cmvIL-10 and US27 influence
249 CXCL12/CXCR4 through distinct mechanisms. Whereas cmvIL-10 effects were Stat3-
250 dependent and evident in both uninfected bystander and HCMV-infected fibroblasts, US27 acts
251 in a Stat3-independent fashion but must be present in the same cell as CXCR4 to impact
252 signaling.
253 
254 While fibroblasts are useful for examining virus infection in vitro, monocytes play a central role
255 in HCMV infection in vivo and serve as vehicles for hematogenous dissemination of virus to
256 multiple organ sites in the body (57-62). Monocytes were purified from the peripheral blood of
257 healthy donors and infected with HCMV TB40/E-mCherry at an MOI of 5. After 24 hours,
258 mCherry fluorescence was evident, indicating virus infection (Fig 7A). Mock or infected
259 monocytes were evaluated for migration mediated by CXCR4, and infected cells exhibited
260 greater chemotaxis toward CXCL12 (Fig 7B). The addition of cmvIL-10 to either mock or

261 infected cells resulted in an increase in overall cell movement. Flow cytometry confirmed that  
262 monocytes express both IL-10R and CXCR4, and that CXCR4 surface levels increased  
263 following infection while IL-10R levels were unchanged (Fig7C). These results indicate that  
264 HCMV infection promotes increased movement of primary monocytes toward CXCL12 that can  
265 be further enhanced by cmvIL-10.  

266 We further probed the possibility of association between US27 and CXCR4 using  
267 immunofluorescence microscopy and the proximity ligation assay (PLA), a powerful technique  
268 for detecting and quantifying protein interactions with single molecule resolution (63). First,  
269 HEK293 cells expressing FLAG-tagged US27 or US28 were cultivated in glass-bottom chamber  
270 slides, fixed and stained with primary antibodies directed against CXCR4 or the FLAG epitope  
271 tag, followed by fluorochrome-conjugated secondary antibodies (Fig8A). US27 and US28  
272 expression levels were comparable, and US27 was evident throughout the cell, with the majority  
273 of protein concentrated in regions adjacent to the nucleus. US28 was also expressed across the  
274 cell and exhibited a speckled distribution pattern with less concentration in the peri-nuclear  
275 region. CXCR4 was also distributed throughout the cell, consistent with reports that this  
276 receptor, like US27 and US28 (26, 27, 64), undergoes constitutive endocytosis (36, 65). US27  
277 and CXCR4 exhibited more co-localization than did US28 and CXCR4, as indicated by yellow  
278 where the red and green spectra overlapped in merged images (Fig8A). Next, staining was  
279 performed in HEK293 cells again, but this time using secondary antibodies conjugated to short  
280 oligonucleotide probes. Ligation of the plus and minus strands to a linker occurs when the two  
281 probes are within 30nm of each other, resulting in a red fluorescent amplicon visualized as a  
282 discrete spot by fluorescence microscopy (66). Numerous spots were evident in HEK293-US27

cells, signifying that US 27 and CXCR4 are in close proximity in these cells (Fig8B, left panel).

In contrast, only a few spots were detected in HEK 293-US 28 cells using the same antibody combination (Fig8B, right panel), demonstrating that US 27 and CXCR4 are preferentially found in close association. To evaluate whether US 27 was also found in close proximity to CXCR4 during virus infection, NuFF cells were infected with the laboratory BAC-derived HCMV strain AD169 expressing GFP (67). We were unable to use TB 40/E-mCherry virus for these experiments due to spectral overlap between the PLA signal and the mCherry signal, however, US 27 and US 28 are both highly conserved between HCMV strains AD169 and TB 40/E (32, 33). Using antibodies directed against CXCR4 and the N-terminus of US 27, numerous red spots were detected in HCMV-infected cells (Fig8C, left panel), indicating that US 27 and CXCR4 were found within 30nm of one another. In direct contrast, only a few spots were seen in the same cells stained with antibodies against CXCR4 and the N-terminus of US 28 (Fig8C, right panel). These results indicate that US 27 is preferentially found in close proximity to CXCR4 in cell membranes during HCMV infection of fibroblasts.

Discussion

The successful co-existence of HCMV with its host is intricate and complex due to numerous techniques HCMV has developed for controlling host cell function. A wide range of immunomodulatory functions have been described for cmvIL-10 since its discovery in 2000 (6, 12, 53, 68, 69), yet new functions continue to be identified. Here we report that cmvIL-10 can enhance signaling through the CXCL12/CXCR4 axis, which could have potential ramifications for signaling in and trafficking of infected cells, as well as uninfected bystander or immune effector cells (Fig 9). Moreover, we found that during HCMV infection of fibroblasts, US 27 was

307 responsible for enhanced signaling along the CXCL12/CXCR4 axis through a distinct
308 mechanism from that of cmvIL-10.
309 
310 Our data reveal that cmvIL-10 mediates enhanced CXCL12/CXCR4 signaling in coordination
311 with Stat 3 through engagement of the IL-10R. Since most effects of cmvIL-10 are mediated by
312 Stat 3 activation, these results are not surprising. What is remarkable, however, is that calcium
313 mobilization occurs rapidly, within seconds of ligand binding, which suggests that Stat 3 must be
314 acting in a distinct and novel manner from its role as a nuclear transcription factor in order to
315 rapidly facilitate the increased calcium release and chemotaxis that we observed. In support of
316 our findings, several non-canonical functions of Stat 3 outside of the known role as a
317 transcription factor are now coming to light. In particular, Stat 3 can localize to focal adhesions
318 and promote cell movement through interactions with FAK (focal adhesion kinase) and Rho/Rac
319 proteins (70-72), which is consistent with our observations that cmvIL-10 stimulated increased
320 cell migration. Furthermore, recent evidence suggests that Stat 3 interacts with mitochondrial
321 transporter GRIM-19 (73) and mediates calcium release from the mitochondria (74, 75).
322 Although the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) has been the best characterized intracellular storage
323 site regulating cytosolic calcium, mitochondria have now been identified as important regulators
324 of calcium signaling through the mitochondrial calcium uniporter (MCU) (76). While we have
325 identified a novel role for Stat 3 in potentiation of CXCL12/CXCR4 signaling, more work is
326 necessary to clarify the mechanistic basis for signal enhancement by cmvIL-10. Among the
327 questions we are examining are whether these mechanisms are the same in both uninfected
328 bystander cells and virus-infected cells. Other HCMV proteins, such as IE1 (77) and US28 (78)

329 influence Stat 3 activity during infection, so additional studies are needed in order to understand
330 the full range of classic and non-canonical Stat 3 functions during virus infection.
331 
332 One additional note about our findings is that we saw no evidence for Stat 3 phosphorylation in
333 response to CXCL 12 treatment (Fig 3C), nor did treatment with a Stat 3 inhibitor impair
334 CXCL 12-mediated calcium flux (Fig 4D) or cell migration (Fig 4G). Although Stat 3 has been
335 reported to occur in response to CXCL 12 treatment, this appears to be true only in cases where
336 CXCR 4 is highly overexpressed, either in experimental systems (79) or in certain cancers (80,
337 81). In agreement with our results, Ahr et al. found no Stat 3 phosphorylation in response to
338 CXCL 12 in HEK 293 cells (79), rather Stat 3 phosphorylation was detected only in HEK 293 cells
339 transfected to overexpress CXCR 4 (79). These data support our findings by showing that Stat 3
340 can influence CXCR 4 signaling outcomes, which we documented across multiple cell
341 types expressing endogenous levels of CXCR 4.
342 
343 In contrast to the Stat 3-dependent effects of cmvIL-10, we found that US 27 enhanced CXCR 4
344 signaling through a distinct mechanism. US 27 effects did not require Stat 3, but did necessitate
345 the presence of US 27 in the same cell with CXCR 4. In support of these findings, using the
346 proximity ligation assay, we demonstrated that US 27 and CXCR 4 are found in close association
347 in cell membranes (Fig 7), although these data do not conclusively demonstrate that the two
348 proteins physically interact to form a heteromeric complex. Additional investigations are
349 necessary to fully elucidate the impact of US 27 and the other HCMV GPCRs on CXCR 4
350 signaling. A recent study found that HCMV infection of human umbilical vein endothelial cells
351 (HUVECs) resulted in decreased CXCR 4 surface expression, and this down-regulation was

attributed to US28, in part through the use of a US28 deletion mutant (44). The effects of US28

did not appear to involve formation of heteromeric complexes with CXCR4, but instead were

reported to occur through signaling crosstalk (44). Although cell migration was not examined in

the preceding study, several groups have reported significantly reduced migration by infected

cells (82-86), which is not surprising considering that late in infection, the actin cytoskeleton is

remodeled and cytopathic effects are readily observed. However, US27 and the other viral

GPCR are present in the virion (21, 28-30), thus it is likely that these receptors could have

immediate effects on cell signaling after virus entry and influence CXCR4 activity at an early

stage of infection. HCMV GPCRs may impact CXCR4 signaling even in cells like monocytes

that are not productively infected but are instead sites of viral latency (87) and are considered

vehicles for virus dissemination (58, 88, 89). Notably, Smith et al. found that infection of

primary human monocytes increased trans-endothelial migration and cell movement (58).

Migration toward CXCL12 could have significant implications for the trafficking of infected

cells *in vivo*, but it will be necessary to examine the impact of US27 and the other viral GPCRs

in a range of cell types at various time points in order to develop a comprehensive picture.

Regulation of CXCR4 activity is of critical importance, as this receptor is widely expressed and

plays roles in many physiological processes (38). Homozygous mutations in either CXCR4 or

CXCL12 in mice are lethal, and heterozygous mutations result in severe developmental defects

(90, 91), underscoring the crucial role of CXCL12-CXCR4 signaling in development. There are no

known CXCR4 inactivating mutations reported in the human population, unlike for chemokine

receptors like CCR5 with multiple ligands and signaling redundancy, which may undergo

mutation without detrimental health effects (92). However, regulation of CXCR4 activity is

375 critical and the congenital immunodeficiency syndrome Warts, Hypogammaglobulinemia,
376 Infections, and Myelokathexis (WHIM) results from increased CXCR4 signaling (93). These
377 patients exhibit chronic reduction of circulating white blood cells and neutropenia, rendering
378 them highly susceptible to bacterial and viral infections (38, 93, 94). The importance of CXCR4
379 in mediating cell movement is also evident in cancer. CXCR4 is a useful prognostic marker for
380 leukemia and breast cancer, strongly correlating with increased metastasis (95, 96). While
381 HCMV DNA and proteins have been detected in some tumors, including breast, prostate, and
382 malignant gliomas (97-100), the association between HCMV and cancer is not well understood.
383 It remains to be seen whether HCMV, and in particular, modulation of CXCR4 activity by the
384 virus, may contribute to cancer progression and metastasis formation.
385 
386 In summary, we have demonstrated a novel function for cmvIL-10 in enhancing CXCR4
387 signaling. Although cmvIL-10 exerts mainly immune suppressive effects (53), the viral cytokine
388 stimulated heightened CXCR4 activity, resulting in greater calcium flux and cell migration
389 toward CXCL12. Notably, cmvIL-10 enhanced CXCL12/CXCR4 signaling in a Stat3-
390 dependent manner, in contrast to US27, which acted independently of Stat3 but required close
391 proximity to CXCR4. Signal transduction pathways can be exceedingly complex, and there are
392 many facets of these interactions still to be examined, such as whether cmvIL-10 acts in an
393 autocrine manner during virus infection or if cmvIL-10 can enhance signaling induced by
394 ubiquitin, an alternative ligand for CXCR4 (101). Moreover, there is a truncated form of cmvIL-
395 10, designated latency-associated cmvIL-10 (LAcmvIL-10), that results from alternative splicing
396 of UL111A (102). LAcmvIL-10 is expressed during both lytic and latent infection (10, 103) but
397 fails to efficiently bind IL-10R or induce Stat3 activation (51, 54). Future studies will determine

whether LAcmvIL-10 can also impact CXCR4 signaling. Results from such studies, coupled
with our findings presented herein, contribute to our understanding of HCMV manipulation of
immune pathways to facilitate persistence, providing valuable insights for vaccine development
or the identification of novel therapeutics.

Materials and Methods

Cells and Viruses. Human embryonic kidney cells, HEK 293 (American Type Culture
Collection, Manassas, VA) and Newborn human foreskin fibroblasts, NuFF-1 (MTI-GlobalStem,
Gaithersburg, MD) were cultivated in Eagles Minimal Essential Media (MEM) with 10% fetal
bovine serum (FBS, Atlanta Biologicals, Norcross, GA). HEK 293 cells stably expressing
HCMV US 27 and US 28 encoded in the p3X-FLAG vector (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, Missouri)
were described previously and cultivated as above (34). THP-1 cells (acute monocytic leukemia,
ATCC) and primary monocytes were grown in suspension in RPMI media supplemented with
10% FBS, 2 mM L-glutamine, 1.5 g/L sodium bicarbonate, 4.5 g/L glucose, 10 mM HEPES, 1.0
mM sodium pyruvate and 0.05 mM 2-mercaptoethanol. Primary human monocytes were
isolated from buffy coats of healthy human donors by Ficoll density gradient centrifugation and
magnetic separation with anti-CD14 microbeads (Miltenyi Biotec, San Diego, CA) as previously
described (55). Laboratory strain AD 169 (ATCC), BAC-derived laboratory strain AD 169-GFP
(67), and the BAC-derived clinical strains TB 40/E-mCherry (WT) and TB 40/E-US27Δ-mCherry
(31) virus stocks were prepared on confluent NuFF monolayers and virus titers determined by
the TCID₅₀ method (31).

420 Calcium Flux Assay. Calcium flux assays were performed using 5x10^5 cells/ml per sample
421 resuspended in RPMI with 25mM of HEPES and labeled with Fluo-4AM (Invitrogen, Grand
422 Island, NY) as described previously (23). Fluorescence intensity was measured for 20sec to
423 establish baseline, then stimulus was added directly into the sample. Purified recombinant
424 CXCL12 (Peprotech, Rocky Hill, NJ), cmvIL-10 and hIL-10 (R&D Systems Minneapolis, MN)
425 were used at 100ng/ml, unless otherwise noted. Where indicated, cells were pre-treated with 10
426 μMS3I-201 Stat3 inhibitor (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA) or 30μg/ml IL-10R
427 neutralizing antibody (NAb) (Santa Cruz) for 30min prior to assay. For siRNA knockdown,
428 HEK293 cells were transfected with 30pmol IL-10R siRNA (Santa Cruz), Stat3 II, or control
429 siRNA (Cell Signaling) using Lipofectamine RNAiMAX (Invitrogen) and harvested for calcium
430 flux assay after 72hrs. For trans-complementation assays, HEK293 or 293-US27 cells were
431 labeled with Fluo-4, and an equal number of unlabeled cells were added prior to addition of
432 CXCL12.
433 
434 Cell Migration. Transwell migration assays were performed by adding 75μl of cell suspension
435 (5x10^4 cells/ml) in migration media (MEM or RPMI 1650 media + 0.5% FBS) into the upper
436 chamber of a 96-well transwell plate with 5.0μm pores (Corning-Costar, Corning, NY). The
437 lower chamber contained 235μl of migration media with CXCL12 plus or minus cmvIL-10 as
438 indicated. After 4hrs at 37°C, cells in the lower chamber were quantified using Cell Titre-Glo
439 (Promega, Madison, WI) according to manufacturer's instructions. Where indicated, 10μmS3I-
440 201 Stat3 inhibitor or DMSO was added to migration media.
441 

442 Western Blotting. Cell lysates were prepared, separated using SDS-PAGE, and transferred to
443 nitrocellulose as described previously (35). Membranes were probed overnight at 4°C with
444 primary antibody diluted according to manufacturer's instructions. Antibodies against total
445 Stat3, phosho-Stat3, MAPK were from Cell Signaling Technology (Danvers, MA) and IL-10Ra
446 and CXCR4 antibodies were from Santa Cruz Biotechnology (Dallas, TX). For detection, the
447 membrane was incubated with alkaline phosphatase-conjugated secondary antibody and bands
448 visualized via Western Blue Substrate reagent (Promega).

449

450 RNA Analysis. RNA was extracted with the RNeasy Midi Kit (Qiagen, Valencia, CA) and
451 cDNA prepared via iScript cDNA synthesis (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA) using Ex-Taq polymerase
452 (Clontech, Mountain View, CA) according to manufacturer's instructions. cDNA was then
453 amplified with PCR program: 94°C, 5 min; then 35 cycles of 94°C, 30 sec, 58°C, 30 sec, 72°C, 1
454 min, and products were visualized by electrophoresis. The gene specific primers used are as
455 follows: UL123: 5'-GTGAGTCCGAGGAGATGAAATG-3' (forward) and
456 5'CTCGTAGATAGGCAGCATGAAC-3' (reverse); US27: 5'-
457 GACGGACAAGCTTCGATGACCACCTCTACAAATAATC-3' (forward) and 5'-
458 CGACGAGCTGCAGTTACAACAGAAATTCCCTCCTC-3' (reverse); UL111A: 5'-
459 CAGATTGCAAGATCTCCGCGTCACCTT-3' (forward) and 5'-
460 TCCTGAGACAGCCGACTAATCACGGAC-3' (reverse); β-actin: 5'-
461 AAGAGAGGCATCCTCACC-3' (forward) and 5'-TACATGGCTGGGTGTTG-3' (reverse);
462 CXCR4: 5'-CCGTGGCAAACTGGTACTTT-3' (forward) and 5'-
463 CCCTTGGAGTGTCAGCAGCTT-3' (reverse). Quantitative real Time PCR (qPCR) was
464 performed using the same CXCR4 and β-actin primers above using the CFX 96 real time

machine (BioRad, Hercules, CA) and SYBR green with the following parameters: 95°C for 10  
minutes; 40 cycles of 95°C for 15 seconds and 60°C for 1 minute. Data were analyzed using the  
ΔΔCt method as described previously (35).  

Flow Cytometry  

Cells were harvested using Cellstripper (Corning), blocked in FACS buffer (PBS+1% BSA +  
0.01% NaN₃) supplemented with 10% FBS, and then resuspended in FACS buffer and stained  
with anti-IL-10R-FITC (Cambridge Bio, Brookline, MA) or IgG₂a-FITC isotype control, or anti-  
CXCR4-FITC (Santa Cruz Biotech) or IgG₁-FITC isotype control on ice in the dark for 1 hr.  

Cells were washed three times, resuspended in FACS buffer + 2% paraformaldehyde, and  
analyzed using the BD Accuri C6 flow cytometer.  

Immunofluorescence (IF) Microscopy and Proximity Ligation Assay (PLA)  

Cells were seeded into 16-well chamber slides (Lab-Tek, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham,  
MA) at 1.5 x 10⁵ cells/well and then fixed with 4% PFA. Slides were washed with PBS and the  
cells were permeabilized with 0.5% Triton X-100 in PBS. For standard IF, cells were co-stained  
with anti-CXCR4 goat polyclonal (1:100) and anti-FLAG mouse monoclonal antibody (1:500)  
followed by goat anti-mouse FITC and donkey anti-goat TRITC (1:250), then Prolong Gold  
mounting medium with DAPI (Invitrogen) was added. For PLA, the Duo Link In Situ Red  
Starter Kit (Sigma) was used according to the manufacturer's instructions. Cells were prepared  
as above and stained with anti-CXCR4 goat polyclonal (1:100) and either anti-FLAG (1:500), or  
anti-US27 or anti-US28 mouse monoclonal antibody (1:100). All washes and probe dilutions  
were carried out in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions and then Prolong Gold

488 added. A Zeiss LSM 700 laser scanning confocal microscope (Zeiss, Oberkochen, Germany) was
489 used, and Z-stack images are represented as maximum density projections.
490 
491 Acknowledgments
492 The authors thank Kate Allaire and Jeff Oda for excellent technical assistance and Dr. Rhonda
493 Cardin for helpful discussions. This work was supported by NIH grants AI111232 (to JVS) and
494 AI119415 (to CMO), American Heart Association grant 15SDG23000029 (to CMO) and USF
495 Faculty Development Funds (to JVS). The funders had no role in the study design, data
496 collection and interpretation, or the decision to submit the work for publication.
497 
498 References
499 1. Staras SA, Dollard SC, Radford KW, Flanders WD, Pass RF, Cannon MJ. 2006.
500 Seroprevalence of cytomegalovirus infection in the United States, 1988-1994. Clin Infect
501 Dis 43:1143-1151.
502 2. Cannon MJ, Schmid DS, Hyde TB. 2010. Review of cytomegalovirus seroprevalence
503 and demographic characteristics associated with infection. Rev Med Virol 20:202-213.
504 3. Azevedo LS, Pierrotti LC, Abdala E, Costa SF, Strabelli TM, Campos SV, Ramos
505 JF, Latif AZ, Litvinov N, Maluf NZ, Caiaffa Filho HH, Pannuti CS, Lopes MH,
506 Santos VA, Linardi Cda C, Yasuda MA, Marques HH. 2015. Cytomegalovirus
507 infection in transplant recipients. Clinics (Sao Paulo) 70:515-523.
508 4. Goodrum F, Caviness K, Zagallo P. 2012. Human cytomegalovirus persistence. Cell
509 Microbiol 14:644-655.

5. Spencer JV. 2012. Trojan Horses and Fake Immunity Idols: Molecular Mimicry of Host Immune Mediators by Human Cytomegalovirus, p 41-64. *In Tiring GMaS* (ed), Herpesviridae - A Look Into This Unique Family of Viruses. InTech.

6. Kotenko SV, Saccani S, Izotova LS, Mirochnichenko OV, Pestka S. 2000. Human cytomegalovirus harbors its own unique IL-10 homolog (cmvIL-10). Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 97:1695-1700.

7. Jones BC, Logsdon NJ, Josephson K, Cook J, Barry PA, Walter MR. 2002. Crystal structure of human cytomegalovirus IL-10 bound to soluble human IL-10R1. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 99:9404-9409.

8. Spencer JV, Lockridge KM, Barry PA, Lin G, Tsang M, Penfold ME, Schall TJ. 2002. Potent immunosuppressive activities of cytomegalovirus-encoded interleukin-10. J Virol 76:1285-1292.

9. Chang WL, Baumgarth N, Yu D, Barry PA. 2004. Human cytomegalovirus-encoded interleukin-10 homolog inhibits maturation of dendritic cells and alters their functionality. J Virol 78:8720-8731.

10. Jenkins C, Abendroth A, Slobedman B. 2004. A Novel Viral Transcript with Homology to Human Interleukin-10 Is Expressed during Latent Human Cytomegalovirus Infection. J Virol 78:1440-1447.

11. Lockridge KM, Zhou SS, Kravitz RH, Johnson JL, Sawai ET, Blewett EL, Barry PA. 2000. Primate cytomegaloviruses encode and express an IL-10-like protein. Virology 268:272-280.

12. Avdic S, McSharry BP, Steain M, Poole E, Sinclair J, Abendroth A, Slobedman B. 2016. Human cytomegalovirus encoded cmvIL-10 amplifies its immunomodulatory potential by upregulating human IL-10 in monocytes. J Virol 90:3819-3827.

13. Young VP, Mariano MC, Tu CC, Allaire KM, Avdic S, Slobedman B, Spencer JV. 2017. Modulation of the Host Environment by Human Cytomegalovirus with Viral Interleukin 10 in Peripheral Blood. J Infect Dis 215:874-882.

14. Mason GM, Jackson S, Okecha G, Poole E, Sissons JG, Sinclair J, Wills MR. 2013. Human cytomegalovirus latency-associated proteins elicit immune-suppressive IL-10 producing CD4(+) T cells. PLoS Pathog 9:e1003635.

15. Poole E, Avdic S, Hodkinson J, Jackson S, Wills M, Slobedman B, Sinclair J. 2014. Latency-associated viral interleukin-10 (IL-10) encoded by human cytomegalovirus modulates cellular IL-10 and CCL 8 Secretion during latent infection through changes in the cellular microRNA hsa-miR-92a. J Virol 88:13947-13955.

16. Gao JL, Murphy PM. 1994. Human cytomegalovirus open reading frame US 28 encodes a functional beta chemokine receptor. J Biol Chem 269:28539-28542.

17. Kledal TN, Rosenkilde MM, Schwartz TW. 1998. Selective recognition of the membrane-bound CX3C chemokine, fractalkine, by the human cytomegalovirus-encoded broad-spectrum receptor US 28. FEBS Lett 441:209-214.

18. Kuhn DE, Beall CJ, Kolattukudy PE. 1995. The cytomegalovirus US 28 protein binds multiple CC chemokines with high affinity. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 211:325-330.

19. Houlihan CF, Larke NL, Watson-Jones D, Smith-McCune KK, Shiboski S, Gravitt PE, Smith JS, Kuhn L, Wang C, Hayes R. 2012. Human papillomavirus infection and

554 increased risk of HIV acquisition. A systematic review and meta-analysis. AIDS
555 26:2211-2222.
556 20. Beisser PS, Laurent L, Virelizier JL, Michelson S. 2001. Human cytomegalovirus
557 chemokine receptor gene US28 is transcribed in latently infected THP-1 monocytes. J
558 Virol 75:5949-5957.
559 21. Humby MS, O'Connor CM. 2015. Human Cytomegalovirus US28 Is Important for
560 Latent Infection of Hematopoietic Progenitor Cells. J Virol 90:2959-2970.
561 22. Bodaghi B, Jones TR, Zipeto D, Vita C, Sun L, Laurent L, Arenzana-Seisdedos F,
562 Virelizier JL, Michelson S. 1998. Chemokine sequestration by viral chemoreceptors as a
563 novel viral escape strategy: withdrawal of chemokines from the environment of
564 cytomegalovirus-infected cells. J Exp Med 188:855-866.
565 23. Arnolds KL, Lares AP, Spencer JV. 2013. The US27 gene product of human
566 cytomegalovirus enhances signaling of host chemokine receptor CXCR4. Virology
567 439:122-131.
568 24. Casarosa P, Bakker RA, Verzijl D, Navis M, Timmerman H, Leurs R, Smit MJ.
569 2001. Constitutive signaling of the human cytomegalovirus-encoded chemokine receptor
570 US28. J Biol Chem 276:1133-1137.
571 25. Casarosa P, Gruijthuijsen YK, Michel D, Beisser PS, Holl J, Fitzsimons CP, Verzijl
572 D, Bruggeman CA, Mertens T, Leurs R, Vink C, Smit MJ. 2003. Constitutive
573 signaling of the human cytomegalovirus-encoded receptor UL33 differs from that of its
574 rat cytomegalovirus homolog R33 by promiscuous activation of G proteins of the Gq, Gi,
575 and Gs classes. J Biol Chem 278:50010-50023.

26. Fraile-Ramos A, Kledal TN, Pelchen-Matthews A, Bowers K, Schwartz TW, Marsh M. 2001. The human cytomegalovirus US 28 protein is located in endocytic vesicles and undergoes constitutive endocytosis and recycling. Mol Biol Cell 12:1737-1749.

27. Fraile-Ramos A, Pelchen-Matthews A, Kledal TN, Browne H, Schwartz TW, Marsh M. 2002. Localization of HCMV UL 33 and US 27 in endocytic compartments and viral membranes. Traffic 3:218-232.

28. Margulies BJ, Browne H, Gibson W. 1996. Identification of the human cytomegalovirus G protein-coupled receptor homologue encoded by UL 33 in infected cells and enveloped virus particles. Virology 225:111-125.

29. Margulies BJ, Gibson W. 2007. The chemokine receptor homologue encoded by US 27 of human cytomegalovirus is heavily glycosylated and is present in infected human foreskin fibroblasts and enveloped virus particles. Virus Res 123:57-71.

30. Varnum SM, Streblow DN, Monroe ME, Smith P, Auberry KJ, Pas a-Tolic L, Wang D, Camp DG, 2nd, Rodland K, Wiley S, Britt W, Shenk T, Smith RD, Nelson JA. 2004. Identification of proteins in human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) particles: the HCMV proteome. J Virol 78:10960-10966.

31. O'Connor CM, Shenk T. 2011. Human cytomegalovirus pUS27G protein-coupled receptor homologue is required for efficient spread by the extracellular route but not for direct cell-to-cell spread. J Virol 85:3700-3707.

32. Murphy E, Yu D, Grimwood J, Schmutz J, Dickson M, Jarvis MA, Hahn G, Nelson JA, Myers RM, Shenk TE. 2003. Coding potential of laboratory and clinical strains of human cytomegalovirus. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 100:14976-14981.

598 33. Scarborough JA, Paul JR, Spencer JV. 2017. Evolution of the ability to modulate host
chemokine networks via gene duplication in human cytomegalovirus (HCMV). Infect
Genet Evol 51:46-53.
600
601 34. Lares AP, Tu CC, Spencer JV. 2013. The human cytomegalovirus US 27 gene product
enhances cell proliferation and alters cellular gene expression. Virus Res 176:312-320.
602
603 35. Tu CC, Spencer JV. 2014. The DRY box and C-terminal domain of the human
cytomegalovirus US 27 gene product play a role in promoting cell growth and survival.
604
605 PLoS One 9: e113427.
606 36. Boeck JM, Spencer JV. 2017. Effect of human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) US27 on
CXCR 4 receptor internalization measured by fluorogen-activating protein (FAP)
607 biosensors. PLoS One 12: e0172042.
608
609 37. Teicher BA, Fricker SP. 2010. CXCL 12 (SDF-1)/CXCR 4 pathway in cancer. Clin
610 Cancer Res 16:2927-2931.
611 38. Busillo JM, Benovic JL. 2007. Regulation of CXCR 4 signaling. Biochim Biophys Acta
612 1768:952-963.
613 39. Mohle R, Drost AC. 2012. G protein-coupled receptor crosstalk and signaling in
614 hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells. Ann N Y Acad Sci 1266:63-67.
615 40. Sohy D, Parmentier M, Springael JY. 2007. Allosteric transinhibition by specific
616 antagonists in CCR 2/CXCR 4 heterodimers. J Biol Chem 282:30062-30069.
617 41. Levoye A, Balabanian K, Baleux F, Bachelerie F, Lagane B. 2009. CXCR 7
618 heterodimerizes with CXCR 4 and regulates CXCL 12-mediated G protein signaling.
619 Blood 113:6085-6093.

42. Nijmeijer S, Leurs R, Smit MJ, Vischer HF. 2010. The Epstein-Barr virus-encoded G protein-coupled receptor BILF1 hetero-oligomerizes with human CXCR4, scavenges Galphai proteins, and constitutively impairs CXCR4 functioning. J Biol Chem 285:29632-29641.

43. Tadagaki K, Tudor D, Gbahou F, Tschische P, Waldhoer M, Bomsel M, Jockers R, Kamal M. 2012. Human cytomegalovirus-encoded UL33 and UL78 heteromerize with host CCR5 and CXCR4 impairing their HIV coreceptor activity. Blood 119:4908-4918.

44. Frank T, Reichel A, Larsen O, Stilp AC, Rosenkilde MM, Stamminger T, Ozawa T, Tschammer N. 2016. Attenuation of chemokine receptor function and surface expression as an immunomodulatory strategy employed by human cytomegalovirus is linked to vGPCR US28. Cell Commun Signal 14:31.

45. Reca R, Mastellos D, Majka M, Marquez L, Ratajczak J, Franchini S, Glodek A, Honczarenko M, Spruce LA, Janowska-Wieczorek A, Lambris JD, Ratajczak MZ. 2003. Functional receptor for C3a anaphylatoxin is expressed by normal hematopoietic stem/progenitor cells, and C3a enhances their homing-related responses to SDF-1. Blood 101:3784-3793.

46. Seitz G, Boehmler AM, Kanz L, Mohle R. 2005. The role of sphingosine 1-phosphate receptors in the trafficking of hematopoietic progenitor cells. Ann NY Acad Sci 1044:84-89.

47. Kremer KN, Clift IC, Miamen AG, Bamidele AO, Qian NX, Humphreys TD, Hedin KE. 2011. Stromal cell-derived factor-1 signaling via the CXCR4-TCR heterodimer requires phospholipase C-beta 3 and phospholipase C-gamma 1 for distinct cellular responses. J Immunol 187:1440-1447.

48. Balabanian K, Foussat A, Bouchet-Delbos L, Couderc J, Krzysiek R, Amara A, Baleux F, Portier A, Galanaud P, Emilie D. 2002. Interleukin-10 modulates the sensitivity of peritoneal B lymphocytes to chemokines with opposite effects on stromal cell-derived factor-1 and B-lymphocyte chemoattractant. Blood 99:427-436.

49. Go NF, Castle BE, Barrett R, Kastelein R, Dang W, Mosmann TR, Moore KW, Howard M. 1990. Interleukin 10, a novel B cell stimulatory factor: unresponsiveness of X chromosome-linked immunodeficiency B cells. J Exp Med 172:1625-1631.

50. Itoh K, Hirohata S. 1995. The role of IL-10 in human B cell activation, proliferation, and differentiation. J Immunol 154:4341-4350.

51. Spencer JV, Cadaoas J, Castillo PR, Saini V, Slobedman B. 2008. Stimulation of B lymphocytes by cmvIL-10 but not LAcmvIL-10. Virology 374:164-169.

52. McSharry BP, Avdic S, Slobedman B. 2012. Human Cytomegalovirus Encoded Homologs of Cytokines, Chemokines and their Receptors: Roles in Immunomodulation. Viruses 4:2448-2470.

53. Slobedman B, Barry PA, Spencer JV, Avdic S, Abendroth A. 2009. Virus-encoded homologs of cellular interleukin-10 and their control of host immune function. J Virol 83:9618-9629.

54. Jenkins C, Garcia W, Godwin MJ, Spencer JV, Stern JL, Abendroth A, Slobedman B. 2008. Immunomodulatory properties of a viral homolog of human interleukin-10 expressed by human cytomegalovirus during the latent phase of infection. J Virol 82:3736-3750.

55. Spencer JV. 2007. The cytomegalovirus homolog of interleukin-10 requires phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase activity for inhibition of cytokine synthesis in monocytes. J Virol 81:2083-2086.

56. Moore KW, de Waal Malefyt R, Coffman RL, O'Garra A. 2001. Interleukin-10 and the interleukin-10 receptor. Annu Rev Immunol 19:683-765.

57. Taylor-Wiedeman J, Sissons JG, Borysiewicz LK, Sinclair JH. 1991. Monocytes are a major site of persistence of human cytomegalovirus in peripheral blood mononuclear cells. J Gen Virol 72 (Pt 9):2059-2064.

58. Smith MS, Bentz GL, Alexander JS, Yurochko AD. 2004. Human cytomegalovirus induces monocyte differentiation and migration as a strategy for dissemination and persistence. J Virol 78:4444-4453.

59. Gerna G, Baldanti F, Revello MG. 2004. Pathogenesis of human cytomegalovirus infection and cellular targets. Hum Immunol 65:381-386.

60. Gerna G, Zipeto D, Percivalle E, Parea M, Revello MG, Maccario R, Peri G, Milanesi G. 1992. Human cytomegalovirus infection of the major leukocyte subpopulations and evidence for initial viral replication in polymorphonuclear leukocytes from viremic patients. J Infect Dis 166:1236-1244.

61. Taylor-Wiedeman J, Sissons P, Sinclair J. 1994. Induction of endogenous human cytomegalovirus gene expression after differentiation of monocytes from healthy carriers. J Virol 68:1597-1604.

62. Chan G, Nogalski MT, Stevenson EV, Yurochko AD. 2012. Human cytomegalovirus induction of a unique signalsome during viral entry into monocytes mediates distinct functional changes: a strategy for viral dissemination. J Leukoc Biol 92:743-752.

63. Soderberg O, Gullberg M, Jarvius M, Ridderstrale K, Leuchowius KJ, Jarvius J,
    Wester K, Hydbring P, Bahram F, Larsson LG, Landegren U. 2006. Direct
    observation of individual endogenous protein complexes in situ by proximity ligation.
    Nat Methods 3:995-1000.

64. Mokros T, Rehm A, Droese J, Oppermann M, Lipp M, Hopken UE. 2002. Surface
    expression and endocytosis of the human cytomegalovirus-encoded chemokine receptor
    US28 is regulated by agonist-independent phosphorylation. J Biol Chem 277:45122-
    45128.

65. Zhang Y, Foudi A, Geay JF, Berthebaud M, Buet D, Jarrier P, Jalil A, Vainchenker
    W, Louache F. 2004. Intracellular localization and constitutive endocytosis of CXCR4 in
    human CD34+ hematopoietic progenitor cells. Stem Cells 22:1015-1029.

66. Fredriksson S, Gullberg M, Jarvius J, Olsson C, Pietras K, Gustafsdottir SM,
    Ostman A, Landegren U. 2002. Protein detection using proximity-dependent DNA
    ligation assays. Nat Biotechnol 20:473-477.

67. Yu D, Silva MC, Shenk T. 2003. Functional map of human cytomegalovirus AD169
    defined by global mutational analysis. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 100:12396-12401.

68. Avdic S, Cao JZ, McSharry BP, Clancy LE, Brown R, Steain M, Gottlieb DJ,
    Abendroth A, Slobedman B. 2013. Human cytomegalovirus interleukin-10 polarizes
    monocytes toward a deactivated M2c phenotype to repress host immune responses. J
    Virol 87:10273-10282.

69. Avdic S, McSharry BP, Slobedman B. 2014. Modulation of dendritic cell functions by
    viral IL-10 encoded by human cytomegalovirus. Front Microbiol 5:337.

709 70. Badgwell DB, Lu Z, Le K, Gao F, Yang M, Suh GK, Bao JJ, Das P, Andreeff M,
710 Chen W, Yu Y, Ahmed AA, W SLL, Bast RC, Jr. 2012. The tumor-suppressor gene
711 ARHI(DIRAS3) suppresses ovarian cancer cell migration through inhibition of the Stat 3
712 and FAK/Rho signaling pathways. Oncogene 31:68-79.
713 71. Thakur R, Trivedi R, Rastogi N, Singh M, Mishra DP. 2015. Inhibition of STAT 3,
714 FAK and Src mediated signaling reduces cancer stem cell load, tumorigenic potential and
715 metastasis in breast cancer. Sci Rep 5:10194.
716 72. Zhang HF, Lai R. 2014. STAT 3 in Cancer-Friend or Foe? Cancers (Basel) 6:1408-1440.
717 73. Tammineni P, Anugula C, Mohammed F, Anjaneyulu M, Larner AC, Sepuri NB.
718 2013. The import of the transcription factor STAT 3 into mitochondria depends on
719 GRIM-19, a component of the electron transport chain. J Biol Chem 288:4723-4732.
720 74. Yang R, Lirussi D, Thornton TM, Jelley-Gibbs DM, Diehl SA, Case LK, Madesh M,
721 Taatjes DJ, Teuscher C, Haynes L, Rincon M. 2015. Mitochondrial Ca(2)(+) and
722 membrane potential, an alternative pathway for Interleukin 6 to regulate CD 4 cell
723 effector function. Elife 4.
724 75. Yang R, Rincon M. 2016. Mitochondrial Stat 3, the Need for Design Thinking. Int J Biol
725 Sci 12:532-544.
726 76. Raffaello A, Mammucari C, Gherardi G, Rizzuto R. 2016. Calcium at the Center of
727 Cell Signaling: Interplay between Endoplasmic Reticulum, Mitochondria, and
728 Lysosomes. Trends Biochem Sci 41:1035-1049.
729 77. Reitsma JM, Sato H, Nevels M, Terhune SS, Paulus C. 2013. Human cytomegalovirus
730 IE1 protein disrupts interleukin-6 signaling by sequestering STAT 3 in the nucleus. J
731 Virol 87:10763-10776.

78. Slinger E, Maussang D, Schreiber A, Siderius M, Rahbar A, Fraile-Ramos A, Lira SA, Soderberg-Naucler C, Smit MJ. 2010. HCMV-encoded chemokine receptor US28 mediates proliferative signaling through the IL-6-STAT3 axis. Sci Signal 3:ra58.

79. Ahr B, Denizot M, Robert-Hebmann V, Brelot A, Biard-Piechaczyk M. 2005. Identification of the cytoplasmic domains of CXCR4 involved in Jak2 and STAT3 phosphorylation. J Biol Chem 280:6692-6700.

80. Liu X, Xiao Q, Bai X, Yu Z, Sun M, Zhao H, Mi X, Wang E, Yao W, Jin F, Zhao L, Ren J, Wei M. 2014. Activation of STAT3 is involved in malignancy mediated by CXCL12-CXCR4 signaling in human breast cancer. Oncol Rep 32:2760-2768.

81. Shen HB, Gu ZQ, Jian K, Qi J. 2013. CXCR4-mediated Stat3 activation is essential for CXCL12-induced cell invasion in bladder cancer. Tumour Biol 34:1839-1845.

82. Frascaroli G, Varani S, Blankenhorn N, Pretsch R, Bacher M, Leng L, Bucala R, Landini MP, Mertens T. 2009. Human cytomegalovirus paralyzes macrophage motility through down-regulation of chemokine receptors, reorganization of the cytoskeleton, and release of macrophage migration inhibitory factor. J Immunol 182:477-488.

83. Frascaroli G, Varani S, Moepps B, Sinzger C, Landini MP, Mertens T. 2006. Human cytomegalovirus subverts the functions of monocytes, impairing chemokine-mediated migration and leukocyte recruitment. J Virol 80:7578-7589.

84. Varani S, Frascaroli G, Homman-Loudiyi M, Feld S, Landini MP, Soderberg-Naucler C. 2005. Human cytomegalovirus inhibits the migration of immature dendritic cells by down-regulating cell-surface CCR1 and CCR5. J Leukoc Biol 77:219-228.

753 85. Warner JA, Zwezdaryk KJ, Day B, Sullivan DE, Pridjian G, Morris CA. 2012. Human cytomegalovirus infection inhibits CXCL12-mediated migration and invasion of human extravillous cytotrophoblasts. Virol J 9: 255.

754 86. Reinhardt B, Godfrey R, Fellbrich G, Frank H, Luske A, Olieslagers S, Mertens T, Waltenberger J. 2014. Human cytomegalovirus infection impairs endothelial cell chemotaxis by disturbing VEGF signalling and actin polymerization. Cardiovasc Res 104:315-325.

755 87. Sinclair J, Sissons P. 1996. Latent and persistent infections of monocytes and macrophages. Intervirology 39:293-301.

756 88. Chan G, Bivins-Smith ER, Smith MS, Smith PM, Yurochko AD. 2008. Transcriptome analysis reveals human cytomegalovirus reprograms monocyte differentiation toward an M1 macrophage. J Immunol 181:698-711.

757 89. Smith MS, Bentz GL, Smith PM, Bivins ER, Yurochko AD. 2004. HCMV activates PI(3)K in monocytes and promotes monocyte motility and transendothelial migration in a PI(3)K-dependent manner. J Leukoc Biol 76:65-76.

758 90. Zou YR, Kottmann AH, Kuroda M, Taniuchi I, Littman DR. 1998. Function of the chemokine receptor CXCR4 in haematopoiesis and in cerebellar development. Nature 393:595-599.

759 91. Nagasawa T, Hirota S, Tachibana K, Takakura N, Nishikawa S, Kitamura Y, Yoshida N, Kikutani H, Kishimoto T. 1996. Defects of B-cell lymphopoiesis and bone-marrow myelopoiesis in mice lacking the CXC chemokine PBSF/SDF-1. Nature 382:635-638.

775 92. Samson M, Libert F, Doranz BJ, Rucker J, Liesnard C, Farber CM, Saragosti S,
776 Lapoumeroulie C, Cognaux J, Forceille C, Muyldermans G, Verhofstede C,
777 Burtonboy G, Georges M, Imai T, Rana S, Yi Y, Smyth RJ, Collman RG, Doms
778 RW, Vassart G, Parmentier M. 1996. Resistance to HIV-1 infection in caucasian
779 individuals bearing mutant alleles of the CCR-5 chemokine receptor gene. Nature
780 382:722-725.
781 93. Hernandez PA, Gorlin RJ, Lukens JN, Taniuchi S, Bohinjec J, Francois F, Klotman
782 ME, Diaz GA. 2003. Mutations in the chemokine receptor gene CXCR4 are associated
783 with WHIM syndrome, a combined immunodeficiency disease. Nat Genet 34:70-74.
784 94. Rajagopal S, Rajagopal K, Lefkowitz RJ. 2010. Teaching old receptors new tricks:
785 biasing seven-transmembrane receptors. Nat Rev Drug Discov 9:373-386.
786 95. Rhodes LV, Short SP, Neel NF, Salvo VA, Zhu Y, Elliott S, Wei Y, Yu D, Sun M,
787 Muir SE, Fonseca JP, Bratton MR, Segar C, Tilghman SL, Sobolik-Delmaire T,
788 Horton LW, Zaja-Milatovic S, Collins-Burow BM, Wadsworth S, Beckman BS,
789 Wood CE, Fuqua SA, Nephew KP, Dent P, Worthylake RA, Curiel TJ, Hung MC,
790 Richmond A, Burow ME. 2011. Cytokine receptor CXCR4 mediates estrogen-
791 independent tumorigenesis, metastasis, and resistance to endocrine therapy in human
792 breast cancer. Cancer Res 71:603-613.
793 96. Furusato B, Mohamed A, Uhlen M, Rhim JS. 2010. CXCR4 and cancer. Pathol Int
794 60:497-505.
795 97. Cobbs CS, Harkins L, Samanta M, Gillespie GY, Bharara S, King PH, Nabors LB,
796 Cobbs CG, Britt WJ. 2002. Human cytomegalovirus infection and expression in human
797 malignant glioma. Cancer Res 62:3347-3350.

98. Harkins L, Volk AL, Samanta M, Mikolaenko I, Britt WJ, Bland KI, Cobbs CS. 2002. Specific localisation of human cytomegalovirus nucleic acids and proteins in human colorectal cancer. Lancet 360:1557-1563.

99. Samanta M, Harkins L, Klemm K, Britt WJ, Cobbs CS. 2003. High prevalence of human cytomegalovirus in prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia and prostatic carcinoma. J Urol 170:998-1002.

100. Taher C, de Boniface J, Mohammad AA, Religa P, Hartman J, Yaiw KC, Frisell J, Rahbar A, Soderberg-Naucler C. 2013. High prevalence of human cytomegalovirus proteins and nucleic acids in primary breast cancer and metastatic sentinel lymph nodes. PLoS One 8:e56795.

101. Saini V, Marchese A, Majetschak M. 2010. CXC chemokine receptor 4 is a cell surface receptor for extracellular ubiquitin. J Biol Chem 285:15566-15576.

102. Jenkins C, Garcia W, Godwin MJ, Spencer JV, Stern JL, Abendroth A, Slobedman B. 2008. Immunomodulatory properties of a viral homolog of human interleukin-10 expressed by human cytomegalovirus during the latent phase of infection. Journal of Virology 82:3736-3750.

103. Jenkins C, Garcia W, Abendroth A, Slobedman B. 2008. Expression of a human cytomegalovirus latency-associated homolog of interleukin-10 during the productive phase of infection. Virology 370:285-294.

Figure Legends

Figure 1. CmvIL-10 enhances CXCL12/CXCR4-mediated calcium flux and cell migration.
(A) HEK293 or (B) THP-1 cells loaded with Fluo-4AM were stimulated with 100 ng/ml CXCL12 in the presence or absence of 100 ng/ml cmvIL-10 and fluorescence intensity were measured by flow cytometry over time. Arrow indicates stimulus addition. RFU, relative fluorescence units. (C) Peak calcium flux in HEK293 cells was measured in response to CXCL12 alone or in combination with 100 ng/ml cmvIL-10. (D) Transwell migration of HEK293 or (E) THP-1 cells towards CXCL12 in the lower chamber +/- 100 ng/ml cmvIL-10 after four hours. Cell numbers were quantified by Cell Titer Glo assay. RLU, relative light units. Error bars, standard error among 3 replicates; *p < 0.01, paired Student's t-test.

Figure 2. Increased CXCL12-CXCR4 signaling with cmvIL-10 and hIL-10. (A) HEK293 cells were loaded with Fluo-4AM calcium indicator dye, then stimulated with 100 ng/ml CXCL12 alone or in the presence of cmvIL-10 or hIL-10. Arrow indicates stimulus addition. hIL-10 and cmvIL-10 alone are dashed lines on baseline. (B) Transwell migration assay with HEK293 cells in the upper chamber and varying doses of CXCL12 in the presence or absence of cmvIL-10 or hIL-10 (100 ng/ml) in the lower chamber. Cells were quantified by Cell Titer Glo after 4 hours. Error bars, standard error among 3 replicates, *p < 0.01 by paired Student's t-test. (C) HEK293 cells were treated with 100 ng/ml CXCL12, hIL-10, and/or cmvIL-10 as indicated for 15 min, then total cell lysates were harvested and immunoblotted with the indicated antibodies.

Figure 3. CmvIL-10 does not impact CXCR4 gene expression or protein levels. HEK 293  
cells were treated with CXCL12 (100 ng/ml) and/or cmvIL-10 (100 ng/ml) for 2 hrs or 24 hrs.  
(A) Total RNA was harvested for qPCR analysis. Fold change was calculated relative to the  
mock treated control (Con) cells. Error bars, standard error among 3 replicates. (B) The cDNA  
from (A) was used to amplify CXCR4 or β-actin by PCR. The resulting products were  
visualized via agarose gel electrophoresis. (C) Cells were treated as above then lysed, and total  
protein was harvested and immunoblotted for CXCR4 or total MAPK (protein loading control).  

Figure 4. CmvIL-10 requires IL-10R and Stat3 to enhance CXCR4 signaling. Calcium  
response in Fluo-4 AM loaded HEK293 cells stimulated with 100 ng/ml CXCL12 +/- 100 ng/ml  
cmvIL-10 and (A) IL-10R neutralizing antibody (NAb), or (B) IL-10R siRNA. Relative  
fluorescence units (RFU) measured by flow cytometry, arrow indicates stimulus addition. (C)  
Lysates were harvested from siRNA-transfected cells and assessed for IL-10R and MAPK  
expression by immunoblot. (D) Calcium response in Fluo-4 AM loaded HEK293 cells  
stimulated with 100 ng/ml CXCL12 +/- 100 ng/ml cmvIL-10 and Stat3 inhibitor, or (E) Stat3  
siRNA. (F) Lysates were harvested from siRNA-transfected cells and probed with antibodies to  
Stat3 or MAPK by immunoblot. (G) Transwell migration of HEK293 cells towards CXCL12 in  
the lower chamber +/- 100 ng/ml cmvIL-10 with 10 μM Stat3 inhibitor or DMSO. Error bars,  
standard error among 3 replicates; *p < 0.01 by paired Student's t-test vs. CXCL12 alone (gray)  
and CXCL12 + cmvIL-10 + Stat3 Inhib (stripes).  

Figure 5. cmvIL-10 enhances CXCR4 signaling in HCMV infected cells. (A) NuFF cells  
were infected with TB 40/E-mCherry (MOI=1). Total RNA was harvested from mock or HCMV-

infected NuFFs at 72 hrs post-infection (hpi), reverse transcribed, and UL123 (IE1) or b-actin  
genes were amplified. The resulting bands were visualized via agarose gel electrophoresis. (B)  
Mock- or HCMV-infected NuFF cells were stained with IL-10R-FITC or isotype control  
antibody and analyzed by flow cytometry. (C) Flow cytometric comparison of mock- or  
HCMV-infected NuFF cells for mCherry fluorescence as a measure of infection (left panel) or  
IL-10R stained as above (right panel). (D) Calcium response was evaluated in Fluo-4 AM  
loaded mock- or HCMV-infected cells stimulated with 100 ng/ml CXCL12 +/- 100 ng/ml  
cmvIL-10 at 72 hpi. Relative fluorescence units (RFU) were measured by flow cytometry, and  
arrow indicates stimulus addition. (E) Transwell migration of mock (gray bars) or HCMV-  
infected (black bars) NuFF cells toward CXCL12 in the lower chamber +/- 100 ng/ml cmvIL-10  
(mock = striped bars, HCMV = white bars) was measured at 72 hpi. Error bars, standard error  
among 3 replicates; *p < 0.01 by paired Student's t-test.

Figure 6. HCMV US27 and cmvIL-10 enhance CXCR4 signaling via distinct mechanisms.  
(A) NuFF cells were infected with HCMV TB40/E-mCherry (WT) or US27Δ (MOI=1, 72 hrs).  
Total RNA was harvested, RT-PCR performed with indicated gene specific primers, and  
resulting bands visualized via agarose gel electrophoresis. (B) Calcium release was measured in  
mock or infected cells loaded with Fluo-4. Peak fluorescence intensity following stimulation  
with 100 ng/ml CXCL12 is shown. (C) Calcium release measured as in (B) +/- 100 ng/ml  
cmvIL-10. (D) Migration of cells through a transwell was measured using 5x10^4 mock or  
infected cells in the upper chamber and 0.1 ng/ml CXCL12 +/- 100 ng/ml cmvIL-10 in the lower  
chamber. Cells in the lower chamber were quantified after 4 hrs via Cell Titer Glo. (E) HEK 293  
cells expressing US27 or US28 were evaluated for transwell migration and (F) calcium flux as

above. (G) Calcium flux in HEK293 or HEK293-US27 cells +/- Stat3 inhibitor (S31-201) or DMSO, or (H) in the presence of additional unlabeled (UN) HEK293 or HEK293-US27 cells. Error bars represent standard error, * indicates p < 0.01, ns=not significant by paired Student's t test.

Figure 7. cmvIL-10 enhances CXCR4 signaling in primary monocytes. (A) CD14+ monocytes were infected with HCMV TB40/E-mCherry (MOI=5) for 24 hrs and then analyzed by flow cytometry. (B) Transwell migration of monocytes to the indicated doses of CXCL12 +/- 100 ng/ml cmvIL-10 in the lower chamber. Cells in the lower chamber were quantified after 4 hrs via Cell Titer Glo. (C) Monocytes were stained with antibodies directed against CXCR4, IL-10R, or appropriate isotype control and analyzed via flow cytometry at 24 hpi.

Figure 8. US27 is found in close proximity to CXCR4. (A) Immunofluorescence microscopy of HEK293-US27 or HEK293-US28 cells stained with anti-FLAG (green) and anti-CXCR4 (red) followed by goat anti-mouse FITC and donkey anti-goat TRITC secondary antibodies, respectively. Nuclei were visualized with DAPI (blue). Scale bar = 10 μm. (B) HEK293-US27 or HEK293-US28 cells stained with anti-FLAG and anti-CXCR4 followed by oligonucleotide conjugated secondary antibodies and amplification using DuoLink kit for the proximity ligation assay (PLA). Red PLA spots indicate receptors in close proximity. (C) NuFF cells infected with AD169-GFP (MOI=1, 72 hpi) and stained with antibodies against CXCR4 and US27 (left) or CXCR4 and US28 (right) followed by DuoLink PLA. Infected cells are shown in green, and red indicates PLA spots. Images were captured using a Zeiss LSM 700 laser scanning confocal

microscope and representative images are shown. For PLA (B, C) images are maximum
intensity projections from Z-stacks.

Figure 9. Effects of US27 and cmvIL-10 on CXCR4 signaling during HCMV infection. (A)
US27 is present in cell membranes immediately following virus fusion and entry. US27 can
boost signaling output resulting from CXCL12 engagement of CXCR4, triggering higher levels
of calcium release and enhanced chemotaxis to stromal cells expressing CXCL12. Infected cells
ultimately produce cmvIL-10, which is secreted into the extracellular environment. CmvIL-10
can act through the IL-10R and Stat3 to increase CXCL12/CXCR4 signaling in infected cells
(autocrine signaling), but can also act in a paracrine manner on other bystander cells (B) which
may be recruited to aid in processes such as virus dissemination or immune evasion. N=nucleus,
C=cytoplasm. Dashed arrows indicate signaling events, solid arrow indicate functional
outcomes.

HEK293

Calcium Flux  
(ΔRFU x 10³)

Time (sec)

THP-1

Calcium Flux  
(ΔRFU x 10³)

Time (sec)

CXCL12  
CXCL12 + cmvIL-10  
cmvIL-10  

CXCL12  
CXCL12 + cmvIL-10  
cmvIL-10  

Calcium Flux  
(Peak ΔRFU x 10³)  

CXCL12 (ng/ml)

Migration (RLU x 10⁵)  

CXCL12 (ng/ml)

Migration (RLU x 10⁵)  

CXCL12 (ng/ml)

A

Calcium Flux  
(ARFU x 10³)

Time (sec)

B

Migration (RLU x 10⁵)

CXCL12 (ng/ml)

C

CXCL12   - + - - + + +  
cmvIL-10 - - + - + - +  
hIL-10   - - - + + + +  

86 kD -  
pStat3  

86 kD -  
Total Stat3

A

Fold Change
3
2
1
0
Con    CXCL12   Both    cmvIL-10

B

CXCL12  -   +   +   -
cmvIL-10  -   -   +   +
CXCR4
β-actin

C

CXCR4
MAPK

CXCR4
MAPK
-47 kD
-42/44 kD

2 hrs

Fold Change
3
2
1
0
Con    CXCL12   Both    cmvIL-10

CXCL12  -   +   +   -
cmvIL-10  -   -   +   +
CXCR4
β-actin
-400 bp
-200 bp

24 hrs

A
- CXCL12
- + cmvIL-10
- + IL-10R NAb
- + cmvIL-10 + NAb

Calcium Flux  
(ARFU x 10³)

Time (sec)

B
- CXCL12
- + cmvIL-10
- + IL-10R siRNA
- + cmvIL-10 + siRNA

Calcium Flux  
(ARFU x 10³)

Time (sec)

C
siRNA treatment  
Control    IL-10R  
IL-10R  
- 90 kD  
MAPK  
- 42/44 kD  

D
- CXCL12
- + cmvIL-10
- + Stat3 Inhib
- + cmvIL-10 + Inhib

Calcium Flux  
(ARFU x 10³)

Time (sec)

E
- CXCL12
- + cmvIL-10
- + Stat3 siRNA
- + cmvIL-10 + siRNA

Calcium Flux  
(ARFU x 10³)

Time (sec)

F
siRNA treatment  
Control    Stat3  
Stat3  
- 86 kD  
MAPK  
- 42/44 kD  

G
Migration (RLU x 10⁵)  

CXCL12 (ng/ml)  

□ CXCL12 only  
■ + cmvIL-10  
■ + cmvIL-10 + Stat3 Inhib  
□ + cmvIL-10 + DMSO

A

Mock          HCMV
UL123 - 373 bp
β-actin - 293 bp

B

Mock                     HCMV infected
Isotype                  Isotype
IL-10R                   IL-10R

C

Mock                      Mock
HCMV                      HCMV
mCherry                   IL-10R

D

--- Mock infected
--- HCMV infected
--- Mock + cmvIL-10
--- HCMV + cmvIL-10

Calcium Flux (ARFU x 10³)
150
100
50
0
Time (sec)
0    20    40    60

E

□ Mock infected
■ HCMV Infected
□ Mock + cmvIL-10
□ HCMV + cmvIL-10

Migration (RLU x 10⁵)
100
75
50
25
0
CXCL12 (ng/ml)
0     0.01      0.1       1

A

| UL123 | - 373 bp |
| --- | --- |
| US27 | - 500 bp |
| UL111A | - 461 bp |
| β-actin | - 293 bp |

B

| Calcium Flux (Peak ΔRFU x 10³) |
| --- |
| Mock |  |
| WT | * |
| US27Δ | * |

C

| Calcium Flux (Peak ΔRFU x 10³) |
| --- |
| CXCL12 |  |
| CXCL12 + cmvIL-10 | * |

D

| Migration (RLU x 10⁵) |
| --- |
| CXCL12 | * |
| CXCL12 + cmvIL-10 | * |

E

| Migration (RLU x 10⁵) |
| --- |
| CXCL12 | * |
| CXCL12 + cmvIL-10 | * |

F

| Calcium Flux (Peak ΔRFU x 10³) |
| --- |
| CXCL12 | * |
| CXCL12 + cmvIL-10 | * |

G

| Calcium Flux (Peak ΔRFU x 10³) |
| --- |
| CXCL12 only | ns |
| + Stat3 Inhib |  |
| + DMSO |  |

H

| Calcium Flux (Peak ΔRFU x 10³) |
| --- |
| CXCL12 only | ns |
| + HEK293 UN | * |
| + US27 UN | ns |

A

Mock  
HCMV  

Cell Count  

mCherry  

B

Mock infected  
■ HCMV infected  
□ Mock + cmvIL-10  
□ HCMV + cmvIL-10  

Migration (RLU × 10³)  

CXCL12 (ng/ml)  

C

Mock  
HCMV  
Overlay  

IL-10R  
Isotype  

IL-10R  
Isotype  

Mock  
HCMV  
IL-10R  

CXCR4  
Isotype  

CXCR4  
Isotype  

Mock  
HCMV  
CXCR4  

Fluorescence Intensity  

A

| US27 | CXCR4 | Merge |

| --- | --- | --- |

| US28 | CXCR4 | Merge |

B

| CXCR4 + US27 | CXCR4 + US28 |
| --- | --- |
| 10 μm | 10 μm |

C

| CXCR4 + US27 | CXCR4 + US28 |
| --- | --- |
| 10 μm | 10 μm |

A. HCMV-infected cell

- CXCL12
- CXCR4
- US27
- Ca²⁺
- Stat3
- IL-10R
- cmvIL-10
- Autocrine
- Chemotaxis to tissues where CXCL12 is highly expressed

B. Bystander cell (not infected)

- CXCL12
- CXCR4
- Ca²⁺
- Stat3
- IL-10R
- Paracrine
