
Inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptors and neurodegenerative disorders

Polina A. Egorova${}^{1}$, Ilya B. Bezprozvanny${}^{1,2*}$

${}^{1}$Laboratory of Molecular Neurodegeneration, Peter the Great St. Petersburg Polytechnic University, St. Petersburg, Russia;

${}^{2}$Department of Physiology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas, USA

Running title: *IP3R and neurodegeneration*

Article type : Review Article

*Address for reprint requests and other correspondence:*

Dr. Ilya Bezprozvanny, 5323 Harry Hines Blvd., ND12.200, Dallas, TX 75390, USA

E-mail: Ilya.Bezprozvanny@UTSouthwestern.edu

Abstract

Inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor (IP3R) is an intracellular ion channel that mediates the release of calcium ions from the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). IP3R plays a role in basic biological functions, such as cell division, differentiation, fertilization, and cell death; and is involved in developmental processes including learning, memory, and behavior. Deregulation of neuronal calcium signaling results in disturbance of cell homeostasis, synaptic loss and dysfunction, eventually leading to cell death. Three IP3R subtypes have been identified in mammalian cells and the predominant isoform in neurons is IP3R type 1. Dysfunction of IP3R1 may play a role in the pathogenesis of certain neurodegenerative diseases as enhanced activity of IP3R was observed in models of

This article has been accepted for publication and undergone full peer review but has not been through the copyediting, typesetting, pagination and proofreading process, which may lead to differences between this version and the Version of Record. Please cite this article as doi: 10.1111/febs.14366

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

Huntington’s disease (HD), spinocerebellar ataxias (SCAs) and Alzheimer's disease (AD). These results suggest that IP3R-mediated signaling is a potential target for treatment of these disorders. In this review we discuss the structure, functions and regulation of IP3R in healthy neurons and in conditions of neurodegeneration.

Keywords: inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor, calcium signaling, neurodegenerative diseases, neuronal loss, polyglutamine disorders

List of abbreviations

- AAV – adeno-associated viruses
- ACA – autoimmune cerebellar ataxia
- AD – Alzheimer's disease
- AdA – adenophostin A
- ADCA – autosomal dominant cerebellar ataxia
- ADSA – autosomal dominant sensory ataxia
- ALG-2 – apoptosis-linked gene 2
- APP – amyloid precursor protein
- ARM – armadillo repeats
- ATP – adenosine triphosphate
- Aβ – beta amyloid
- BH domain – Bcl-2 homology domain
- CaBP1 – calcium-binding protein 1
- CaMKII – calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II
- Ca²⁺ – calcium
- CF – climbing fiber
- cGMP – cyclic guanosine monophosphate
- CHERP – Ca²⁺ homeostasis endoplasmic reticulum protein
- Cryo-EM – electron cryomicroscopy
- CTD – C-terminal domain
- Cyt c – cytochrome c
- DAG – diacylglycerol
- DHPG – 3,5-dihydroxyphenylglycine
- DUB – deubiquitinating enzyme
- ER – endoplasmic reticulum
- FAD – familial Alzheimer disease
- GFP – green fluorescent protein

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

HAP1 – huntingtin-associated protein 1  
HD – Huntington’s disease  
HelD – helical domain  
Htt – huntingtin  
IBC – IP3-binding core  
ICR – inositol 1,4,5-triphosphate-induced calcium release  
ILD – “intervening lateral” domain  
IL-1β – interleukin 1β  
IP3 – inositol 1,4,5-triphosphate  
IP3R – inositol 1,4,5-triphosphate receptor  
IRBIT – IP3R binding protein released with IP3  
KO – knock-out  
LBD – ligand-binding domain  
LNK – helical linker domain  
LPS – lipopolysaccharide  
LTD – long-term depression  
MAMs – mitochondria-associated ER membranes  
MCI – mild cognitive impairment  
MCU – mitochondrial calcium uniporter  
mGluR – metabotropic glutamate receptor  
Mito – mitochondria  
mPTP – mitochondrial permeability transition pore  
MRI – Magnetic resonance imaging  
mRNA – messenger RNA  
MSN – medium spiny neurons  
NDS – non-demented subjects  
NMDAR – N-methyl-D-aspartate receptors  
NMR – nuclear magnetic resonance  
NT – N-terminal region  
Opt – *opisthotonos*  
PC – Purkinje cell  
PF – parallel fiber  
PIP2 – phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate  
PKA – protein kinase A  
PLC – phospholipase C  
polyQ – polyglutamine  
PS – presenilin  

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

PTK – protein tyrosine kinase  
QA – quisqualate  
ROCK – rho-associated kinase  
RyRs – ryanodine receptors  
SAD – sporadic Alzheimer's disease  
SCA – spinocerebellar ataxia  
SD – IP3-binding suppressor domain  
SOC – store-operated calcium entry  
STIM2 – stromal interaction molecule 2  
SUMF1 – sulfatase modifying factor 1  
TG – transglutaminase type 2  
TMD – transmembrane domain  
TNFα – tumor necrosis factor α  
WT – wild type  
YAC – yeast artificial chromosome  
β-TF1 – β-trefoil domain  
5PP – inositol 1,4,5-triphosphate-phosphatase enzyme  

## Introduction

Inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptors (IP3Rs) represent a family of intracellular ion channels that mediate calcium (Ca²⁺) release from the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) following stimulation by second messenger inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate (IP3). Generation of IP3 molecules is caused by the activation of phospholipase C (PLC) in response to the activation of G protein-coupled receptors such as serotonergic receptors, adrenergic receptors, calcitonin receptors, histamine receptors, metabotropic glutamate receptors, muscarinic receptors, and many others (1) (Fig. 1). Upon extracellular stimulation - by various agonists such as hormones, neurotransmitters, growth factors, odorants and neurotrophins - PLC cleaves phospholipid phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate (PIP2) into the secondary messenger molecules diacylglycerol (DAG) and IP3 (Fig. 1). DAG stays bound to the membrane, and soluble IP3 is released into the cytosol. IP3 then binds to the IP3R and this leads to the IP3R-induced Ca²⁺ release (ICR) from the ER (Fig. 1), causing the increase of cytosolic concentration of Ca²⁺, that leads to a cascade of intracellular responses and influences the activity of various proteins and enzymes (2). Thus, IP3Rs play a key role in cell signaling by transforming extracellular molecular signals into intracellular signals (3). It was recently shown that ICR initiates at numerous immobile sites and more intense stimulation increases the probability of a site initiating a calcium puff without increasing the underlying number of competent calcium release sites (4).

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
Electrophysiological, biochemical, and direct structure determination methods have revealed the structure and function of IP3R. Cell biological and biochemical studies have shown that IP3Rs are involved in the regulation of basic biological functions, including cell division, differentiation, fertilization, development, and cell death; and play a role during developmental processes, such as learning, memory, and behavior (5).

There is evidence to suggest that disturbed calcium signaling in neurons may play a key role in the pathogenesis of neurodegenerative disorders such as Huntington's disease (HD), spinocerebellar ataxias (SCAs) and Alzheimer's disease (AD). Experiments using HD, SCA2 and SCA3 transgenic mouse models have supported a link between deregulation of calcium signaling and neuronal cell death (6). Deregulation of calcium signaling in neurons may also play a role in the pathogenesis of SCA15/16, SCA29, Gillespie syndrome, sensory ataxia, and some other neurodegenerative disorders (Table 1). These data indicated that IICR might be one of the causes of pathophysiological events in neuronal cells (7, 8).

There are three IP3R isoforms present in all types of mammalian cells. This review is devoted mainly to IP3R type 1 because it is the predominant isoform in neurons and the best studied isoform. We will first highlight the studies that report the structure and function of IP3Rs and then discuss the role of IP3R in several neurodegenerative disorders. IP3Rs represent a potentially valuable drug target for the treatment of these disorders and for modulating the activity of neurons and other cells.

### Identification of IP3Rs

The IP3-binding protein was initially purified from a rat cerebellum by Professor Snyder’s research team in 1988. In this study the purified receptor was observed as a band of 260 kDa on polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis under denaturing conditions (9). Using antibodies directed against a purified IP3R, immunocytochemical studies in rat cerebellar Purkinje cells (PCs) showed that IP3R was localized on the ER membrane, on the portion of subplasmalemmal cisternae, and on the nuclear membrane, but not in the mitochondria or on the cell membrane. The authors concluded that IP3-induced calcium release (IICR) in cerebellar PCs is based not only on the activities of receptors localised to a single organelle, but on the coordination of receptor activities of both rough and smooth ER, and possibly by other smooth surfaced cellular structures that include IP3R molecules (10).

The primary sequence of mouse IP3R1 was determined in 1989 by Professor Mikoshiba’s group. Previously their studies had revealed PCs degeneration in mutant mice that had very low expression of a glycoprotein called P400 (11). Cloning and expression of functional P400 protein from cerebellar PCs have shown that this protein is a receptor for IP3, a second messenger that mediates the release of intracellular calcium (12). At the same time, Professor Sudhof’s group determined partial and complete sequence of rat IP3R1 following functional analysis of Purkinje cell-specific protein PCD6 (13, 14).

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.The three genes that encode three IP3R subtypes (IP3R1, IP3R2 and IP3R3) have been identified and cloned in mammalian cells (15). The expression of different IP3R subtypes is cell type-dependent (16), (8); for example, cerebellar PCs mainly express IP3R1, insulin-secreting β-cells express IP3R3 (17) and cardiac myocytes express predominantly IP3R2 (18). The IP3R1 isoform is observed predominantly in central nervous system neurons, but most other tissues express at least two and often all three IP3R isoforms at different ratios. Additional diversity of IP3R isoforms is caused by alternative splicing. For example, molecular cloning of a human and rat IP3R1cDNA revealed the presence of three alternatively spliced variants (19). Recent studies have shown that Ca²⁺-binding protein ALG-2 (apoptosis-linked gene 2) and ALG-2-interacting protein CHERP (Ca²⁺ homeostasis endoplasmic reticulum protein) participate in the regulation of alternative splicing of IP3R exons 41 and 42 (20). Also receptor diversity can result from heterooligomeric interactions between various IP3R isoforms. Immunoprecipitation using isoform-specific antibodies showed that distinct types of IP3R subunits assemble to form homo- and heterotetramers (21).

## Structure, function and regulation of IP3Rs

The three mammalian IP3R isoforms contain 2,700–2,800 amino acid residues and share 60–70% sequence identity and a common domain structure (22). Recently the near-atomic (4.7 Å) resolution cryo-ElectronMicroscopy (cryo-EM) structure of unbound IP3R1 purified from rat cerebellum was reported by Serysheva's group (23). Each IP3R1 subunit consists of ten domains (Fig. 2A), which are organized in tetrameric structure around a central four-fold axis forming the ion-permeation pathway (Fig. 3A). IP3R protein has a large cytosolic domain that represents about 90% of the protein sequence and includes the N-terminal region (NT) and C-terminal tail (Fig. 2A). The remaining regions are transmembrane and luminal domains. At the NT of each subunit, two adjacent β-trefoil domains (β-TF1 and β-TF2; residues 1–436) form apical densities around the central four-fold axis of the cytosolic region. After the β-TF2 domain, there are three consecutive α-helical domains (ARM1–ARM3, residues 437–2192) formed by ensembles of armadillo solenoid folds with the helical domain (HelD, residues 715-1029) between ARM1 (residues 436-604) and ARM2 (residues 1030-1494) (23) (Fig. 2A). The flexible architecture of the ARM domains in IP3R provides interfaces for recognition and binding of different modulatory proteins (Fig. 2B) (24). The first two armadillo repeats of the ARM1 and the two preceding β-TF domains form the ligand-binding domain (LBD) (Fig. 2A). The β-TF1 domain (residues 5-225) was named the IP3-binding suppressor domain (SD), and the β-TF2 (residues 226-435) with two α-helices of ARM1 represent the IP3-binding core (IBC) domain (Fig. 2A), also divided as β-IBC and α-IBC subdomains, accordingly. After ARM3 (residues 1594-2192), the subunit extends into the “intervening lateral” domain (ILD, residues 2193–2272) that contains two anti-parallel β-strands followed by a helix-turn-helix motif. The C terminus of the ILD is connected to the transmembrane region, comprised of six α-helices (TM1–TM6), a pore (P)-helix and three lumenal loops (23). The C-terminal domain (CTD) contains an α-helix (residues

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
2681–2731) connected at its NT to TM6 via a helical linker domain (LNK, residues 2601–2680) (Fig. 2A).

The central core of IP3R1 is formed by one transmembrane and one cytosolic four-helix bundles connected via four two-helix LNK domains (Fig. 3A). The transmembrane bundle contains four TM6 helices and the cytosolic bundle is formed by four CTD α-helices, one helix from each of four subunits. A bundle of TM6 helices including a series of hydrophobic residues shape the calcium permeation pathway (Fig. 3A). The cytosolic part of this TM6 bundle has negatively charged residues and may facilitate the transport of calcium ions into the cytosol. The TM5 helices are located against the TM6 helices forming the central bundle. TM5 and TM6 are connected by the lumenal loop containing a short P-helix (residues 2531-2544) and a conserved selectivity filter (residues 2546-2552). There is a possibility that the P-helices may be affected by a structural rearrangement during the open state of the channel (23). The central bundle is connected to the flanking TM1-TM4 bundle via an amphipathic α-helix (TM4-5), which is located parallel to the cytosolic membrane leaflet (23). The possible function of TM4-5 helix is the control of the movements of the pore-lining helices of IP3R (25). The SD and IBC of each subunit make up triangular structure (23, 26). The four LBDs form a cytoplasmic apical density around the CTD bundle (23). The ARM2 (ten armadillo repeats), ARM3 (six armadillo repeats), and HelD link IBC domain with the channel-forming region.

The IP3R channel gating can be regulated by various intracellular factors. Generally, the regulation of IP3R activity is complex, but the main modulators are IP3 (Fig. 2A) and calcium (Fig. 2B) (16, 27). IP3 molecules bind to the amino terminal region of IP3R and calcium ions to the middle coupling region. Two basic models of IP3R gating by IP3 molecules were proposed: direct binding between IBC/SD domains and central pore domain (28), and long-distance coupling from IBC to the channel (29, 30). Recent cryo-EM analysis of IP3R1 has revealed that IBC is located about 79 Å apart from the calcium conducting pore and directly interacts with the CTD through a long helical bundle connecting to the pore forming TM6 (23). The cryo-EM structure also suggests that IP3R gating has several different initiation points which mechanically couple intracellular signals to a common ion-conduction pathway conserved in many ion channels (23). Previous experiments on crystallization of the LBD, solved in both the IP3-bound and unbound states (26, 31), revealed that IP3 molecules bind between the β-IBC and α-IBC subdomains and lead to the closure of the IP3-binding pocket and motion of the SD. The region between the β-TF1 and β-TF2 domains allows β-TF1 to twist in response to IP3 binding to the IBC (26, 31). The signal then presumably propagates towards the transmembrane domains (TMDs) via inter-subunit interactions (Fig. 3B) (23). The ARM3 domain includes a possible calcium-sensor region (residues 1933-2271) (Fig. 2B), which mediates the channel gating (32). Most likely, the interactions between the β-TF1 and ARM3 domains propagate IP3-mediated conformational changes in the LBD to the pore (23). The β-TF1 loop (residues 136-139) contacts the ARM2 domain and specifies modulatory activities for IICR (23). Thus, β-TF1 domain

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

plays an important role in coupling IP3 binding and activation of the channel gate. Presumably, IP3 binding also leads to a conformational change of the CTD that plays a critical role in the IP3 signal conduction to the TMDs (23, 33). In IP3R1 cryo-EM structure, the CTDs are connected to LNK domains (23), which represent structural analogues to the CTD domains in the ryanodine receptor 1 (RyR1) (34). Both LNK domain in IP3R1 and CTD domain in RyR1 contain a zinc-finger motif, which may have an important role in coordinating metals that influence channel gating (34). The CTD also contains the domain that presumably is required for IP3R tetramerization (35).

The recent published results of crystallographic analysis of IP3R1 provided low-resolution (6-8 Å) structures and confirmed the cryo-EM findings about IP3R1 structure (36). With a use of channel mutagenesis and X-ray crystallography of the large cytosolic domain of mouse IP3R1 in apo and holo states, the long-range gating mechanism was identified (36). An IP3-dependent conformation change is transmitted from IBC to the calcium permeation pathway through α-helices forming ARM1, HelD and ARM3 domains containing the leaflet region. Mutation analyses of the leaflet region revealed important roles of both residues facing the cytosolic domain and residues facing the central four-fold axis (36). Noteworthy, the leaflet structure (36) corresponds to the first two strands of the ILD observed in the full, tetrameric IP3R1 channel (23). Thus, authors supported the mechanism of signal transduction through the ILD/LNK interface originally proposed by Fan et al. (23).

In addition to calcium and IP3 there are other allosteric IP3R modulators, including ATP, (Fig. 2B) that interact with IP3R (16, 24). Study on the outer membrane of isolated Xenopus laevis oocyte nuclei has revealed that the fungal metabolite adenophostin A (AdA) and its analogues are also potent agonists of the IP3R (Fig. 2B) (37). Recently, a rapid, sensitive and flexible way for measuring IP3 concentrations in the cytosol, termed Competitive Fluorescent Ligand Assay” (CFLA), was a designed using a fluorescent AdA analogue (38).

The negative regulation of IP3R gating may be caused by the presence of calcium-binding protein 1 (CaBP1), a neuron-specific member of the calmodulin superfamily (Fig. 2B). Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) paramagnetic relaxation enhancement analysis has shown that the C lobe of CaBP1 binds to the cytosolic N-terminal region (residues 1-604) of IP3R1 by means of hydrophobic interactions. Docking analyses and paramagnetic relaxation enhancement structural restraints demonstrated that CaBP1 formed a ring around the cytosolic entrance of the IP3R, stabilizing interactions between NTs of tetrameric IP3R. Thus, the authors concluded that CaBP1 inhibits IP3R activity by clamping the intersubunit movements and thereby stabilizing the closed state of the channel (39). The other protein that suppresses IP3R activity is IP3R binding protein released with IP3 (IRBIT) (Fig. 2B). IRBIT suppresses IP3R activation through competition with IP3 for the common binding site on IP3R (40).

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
Recently the apoptotic regulator Bcl-2 protein family member Bok was reported as a novel component of IP3R complexes (Fig. 2B) (41). Bcl-2-related proteins are localized to the ER (42), bind to the IP3Rs (43) and regulate the ER-mediated cell viability via IICR modulation (44). Recent studies have shown that Bcl-2 homology 4 (BH4) domain of Bok protein binds constitutively to the residues 1895-1903 of the coupling domain of IP3R and this binding is very potent (Fig. 2B). Bok protected IP3R from proteolysis both *in vitro* and *in vivo* during apoptosis (41). Another Bcl-2 family member, Bcl-$x_{L}$ was found to modulate single IP3R channels with biphasic concentration dependence. The BH3 domain of Bcl-$x_{L}$ binds two BH3 domain-like helices H1 and H4 in the C-terminus of IP3R (Fig. 2B) leading to the IP3R gating activation (45). Helix H1 represents residues 2571-2606 and helix H4 represents residues 2690-2732 in the IP3R1 sequence (45). According to cryo-EM data, the proposed H1 BH3 motif of IP3R1 represents the most of TM6 $\alpha$-helix together with the first $\alpha$-helix from LNK domain while the proposed H4 BH3 motif represents the $\alpha$-helix in CTD domain (23). Sequence alignment of BH3 domains from Bcl-2 related proteins has revealed conserved BH3-like sequences in both H1 and H4 (45). Meanwhile gating inhibition is observed when Bcl-$x_{L}$ binds to one BH3 domain-like helix and to a previously identified Bcl-2 interaction site in the coupling domain of IP3R. Disruption of these interactions provokes apoptosis and reduces the viability of cells (45).

The activity of IP3R can also be regulated by phosphorylation by different kinases (16, 27). Among them the cAMP-dependent protein kinase (PKA), protein kinase C (PKC), cGMP-dependent protein kinase (PKG), calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II (CaMKII) and different protein tyrosine kinases (PTK) (Fig. 2B). Moreover, IP3R might also be regulated by redox status and interacting proteins (16).

The activation of IP3R leads to the calcium release from the ER and, as a consequence, to the increase of the intracellular calcium concentrations. In neurons this process can affect the various cellular activities such as cell proliferation, differentiation, cell development, gene expression, apoptosis, neurotransmission and synaptic plasticity (46). Behavioral experiments revealed that IP3Rs are involved in memory formation, in particular they are required during long-term memory (47). Recently, Mikoshiba's research group has shown that the IP3R1 in cerebellar Purkinje cells plays a crucial role in controlling the maintenance of parallel fiber (PF)-PCs synaptic circuits in the mature cerebellum *in vivo* (48). Also it has been shown that IP3R1, together with other important intracellular proteins, plays a significant role in PC dendritic development (49). Thus, proper regulation of IP3R activity is necessary for normal brain development and function.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
Mutations in IP3R1 gene and ataxias

The physiological function of IP3R has been investigated using IP3R transgenic animals. Previous experiments have shown that most IP3R1 knock-out (KO) mice didn't survive the period of prenatal development (50). The surviving IP3R1-KO mice display severe ataxia and tonic-chronic seizures and die by the age of 3-4 weeks. An electroencephalogram study of these mice confirmed that they suffer from epileptic symptoms. Continuous electroencephalographic recordings of IP3R1-KO mice have shown paroxysmal polyspike activities, whereas only stable background activities were observed in control mice (50). However, the histological examination and microscopic investigation of the brain slices and peripheral tissues of IP3R1-deficient mice have not revealed any apparent pathology (50). Further, electrophysiological studies performed in mice with disrupted IP3R1 gene demonstrated impaired cerebellar long-term depression (LTD) form of synaptic plasticity at the PF-PC synapse (51).

IP3R functions were also studied using opisthotonos (opt) mice and Δ18 mice. The opt mutation represents a spontaneous mutation that arose in a C57BL/Ks-db²J mice colony. These mutant mice display some features of the ataxic and convulsive phenotype. Genetic data showed that the IP3R1 gene is modified in the opt mice (52). A partial deletion in the IP3R1 gene removes two exons but does not interrupt the translational reading frame. The expression of the altered protein was significantly reduced in opt homozygotes, most likely because of the instability of the mutant IP3R1 protein. The altered protein was also predicted to have lost several modulatory sites. Calcium response to mGluR1 activation by quisqualate (QA) is reduced in PC cells from opt homozygotes when compared to control mice with the same QA treatment. Thus, it was concluded that the distinctive ataxia and convulsion phenotype, typical for opt mice, are likely to be caused by the disturbed function of IP3R1 (52). Furthermore, using the Spodoptera frugiperda cells expression system and planar lipid bilayers, the recombinant predominant neuronal isoform of IP3R1, named IP3R1-SII(+), was compared with nonneuronal isoform IP3R1-SII(-), and IP3R1-opt channel. These results showed that IP3R1-opt channel is functional, but it has a lower conductance and much lower ATP-binding activity when compared to the WT IP3R1 (53). Thus, it was concluded that the pathological phenotype of opt mice is caused primarily by reduction of IP3R1 expression levels.

In Δ18 mice an in-frame deletion of 18 base pairs within the exon 36 of IP3R1 gene occurs that results in the deletion of residues 1533–1538 in the regulatory domain (54). To study the role of this deletion, heterozygous Δ18 mice were crossed with heterozygous opt mice. The phenotype of IP3R1<sup>opt/Δ18</sup> mice was similar to that of the homozygous Δ18, opt mice, and IP3R1-KO mice. Similar to the homozygous opt mice, the in-frame deletion of residues 1533–1538 in the middle coupling domain of Δ18 mutants resulted in significant reduction of IP3R1 expression in cerebellar PCs (54). The Δ18 mutant mice may be used as a valuable mouse model for Spinocerebellar ataxias 15/16 (SCA15/16) (55).

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

Alterations in IP3R1 function appear to play a significant role in human ataxias (Table 1) (56, 57). The first SCA15 case was identified in 2001 as a rarely occurring slow progressive autosomal dominant ataxia. The distinguishing feature of this disorder is head tremor. In SCA15 patients, the atrophy of the cerebellum (especially anterior and dorsal vermis) is observed. The locus for SCA15 was mapped to various deletions of the IP3R1 gene on the distal short arm of chromosome 3 (58-61). SCA16 is also caused by the IP3R1 gene mutation, and this autosomal dominant cerebellar ataxia (ADCA) subtype has now been merged with SCA15 (62). The genetic defects in SCA15 were identified in families from Australia, Japan, and the UK. The partial deletions including both the IP3R1 gene and sulfatase modifying factor 1 (SUMF1) gene have been detected in Australian and British families with SCA15 (54). The research team from Japan described a 414-kb deletion including the whole IP3R1 gene and exon 1 of SUMF1 in SCA15 patients from the same family. This mutation led to the reduction of expression levels of IP3R1 and SUMF1 mRNAs (approximately two-fold lower). Thus, IP3R1 may represent the genetic basis in some cases of SCA15 (63). Meanwhile, British research group identified no IP3R1 gene mutations in the study on unrelated ADCA III families (n = 38). Obtained results suggested that point mutations or deletions in IP3R1 gene are a rare cause of SCA15/16 (58). In support of this it was found that IP3R1 gene deletions are infrequent and cause about 1% of all ADCA (64).

All of the above refers to subjects of continental western European origin. However, cases of SCA15/16 also have been detected in Japan. In 2010, a Japanese family with slowly progressive SCA was found. Detailed clinical, genetic, and radiological description of their genotype revealed mutations in the IP3R1 gene and serial magnetic resonance imaging showed moderate cerebellar atrophy with mild inferior parietal and temporal cortical volume loss (65). Genetic analysis of these patients revealed a deletion of 346,487 bp in the IP3R1 gene. Western blotting of the lymphoblastoid cell line protein confirmed reduced IP3R1 protein levels. Thus, this study confirmed that SCA15 is a slowly progressive ataxia, which is caused by a reduction in expression levels and partial loss of IP3R1 function. The authors concluded that afflicted patients with nonprogressive or slowly progressive SCA should be screened for mutations in the IP3R1 gene (65).

Recently, a pathogenic gain-of-function missense mutation within the SD of IP3R1 was reported to cause SCA29 without cerebellar atrophy or other neuroimaging abnormalities. The mutant IP3R1 showed a significantly higher IP3-binding activity than observed in wild type (WT) IP3R1 case, and thus promoted the enhanced calcium release in SCA29 patients (66).

Novel pathological mutations of IP3R1 were recently found in seven patients from four families that represented about 16.8% of the total number of patients with congenital cerebellar and/or vermis atrophy taking part in the survey. All these mutations were localized in the IBC domain (67). Recently heterozygous IP3R1 missense mutations were found in four unrelated patients with sporadic

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

infantile-onset SCA from among 60 families with SCA. Three of these mutations were localized in LBD and one in IBC domain of IP3R1 (68).

The Gillespie syndrome is characterized by iris hypoplasia, mild to moderate intellectual disability and aniridia that can be associated with cerebellar ataxia. Recently *de novo* missense mutations in the *IP3R1* gene were detected in 5 families with Gillespie syndrome and these mutations were located mainly in the TMD of IP3R1 (69) (Table 1). New pathological mutations were identified in two other families with Gillespie syndrome. These mutations were localized also in the TMD of IP3R1, representing a recurrent deletion and a novel missense mutation next to the hydrophobic residue within a constriction region of the channel pore. Authors concluded that *IP3R1* gene screening should be done in patients with congenital cerebellar ataxia with or without iris hypoplasia (70).

It is noteworthy that not only mutations in the *IP3R1* gene may cause ataxia, but also mutations in genes encoding proteins of the IP3R1 signaling pathway. For example, autosomal dominant sensory ataxia (ADSA), a neurodegenerative disorder characterized by the destruction of the posterior columns of the spinal cord, is caused by the point mutation in the ER membrane ubiquitin ligase RNF170 that participates in the ubiquitination of activated IP3R. Recent studies have revealed that the disease-causing point mutation in RNF170 disrupts salt bridges between its TMD that provokes RNF170 destabilization and leads to the IICR inhibition (71).

IP3R1 is also involved in the pathogenesis of different types of cerebellar ataxia. Recently in the study of patients with autoimmune cerebellar ataxia (ACA) the new serum autoantibodies with high specificity to PCs were detected. Via different immunological methods IP3R1 was identified as the target antigen of this reactivity. Thus, it was shown that IP3R1 represents a diagnostic serum marker of ACA (72).

### Huntington disease

Huntington disease (HD) is a polyglutamine (polyQ) expansion neurodegenerative disorder with autosomal-dominant mode of inheritance. This disease presents itself typically during mid-life, but it can also manifest itself at any time between infancy and senescence, with a progressive dementia and abnormal movements that usually takes the form of chorea - rapid dance-like movements, typically of the hands and neck. Moreover symptoms can include dystonia, incoordination, cognitive decline, and behavioural difficulties (73). HD symptoms are caused by neuronal death, which, in turn, is caused by the presence of an expanded polyQ tract in the huntingtin (htt) protein. This mutant htt is detected in almost every cell type, but its toxicity affects to neurons of certain areas of the brain, such as the cortex, caudate nucleus and putamen. In affected areas of the brain, mutant htt is found not in its intact monomeric form, but in the form of N-terminal fragments, oligomers and polymers, all of which accumulate with some other proteins in the cortex. There is a suggestion that the aggregates and insoluble inclusions containing mutant htt are toxic to neurons

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
(74). Up until now the biological function of WT htt has remained unclear. There are some experimental data showing that normal htt takes part in signal transduction in each cell type via acting to organize components of signal transduction complexes (75).

The htt-associated protein-1A (HAP1A) was isolated by our laboratory in a yeast two-hybrid screen with the IP3R1 carboxyl terminus; and an IP3R1-HAP1A-htt ternary complex is formed both in vitro and in vivo (76). The experiments in planar lipid bilayers revealed that IP3R1 activation by IP3 is sensitized by mutant htt, but not by normal htt. Furthermore, the transfection of full-length mutant htt or caspase-resistant mutant htt, but not normal htt, into medium spiny striatal mice neurons facilitates Ca²⁺ release in response to threshold concentrations of the selective mGluR1/5 agonist 3,5-dihydroxyphenylglycine (DHPG). These findings identified a novel molecular link between htt and IP3R1-mediated neuronal Ca²⁺ signaling and provided a possible mechanism for the deregulation of cytosolic Ca²⁺ signaling in HD (76) (Fig 4). Association of mutant Huntingtin with IP3R was independently confirmed in an unbiased proteomics screen (77). Expression of human mutant htt transgene in *Drosophila melanogaster* model causes retinal degeneration and IP3R1 expression modified the eye pathological phenotype of mutant htt flies; the reduction of expression of the IP3R1 suppressed it, whereas enhanced expression made it more severe (77). These results are consistent with the hypothesis that mutant htt causes abnormal activity of IP3R (Table 1).

To investigate the role of HAP1 protein, experiments on transgenic mice with targeted disruption of both HAP1 alleles (HAP1 -/-) were conducted (78). HAP1 is expressed in the medium spiny neurons (MSN) and HAP1A facilitates functional effects of both normal htt and mutant htt on IP3R1 in planar lipid bilayers. HAP1 facilitates potentiation of IP3R1-mediated Ca²⁺ release by mutant htt in mouse MSN (78). In further experiments using an yeast artificial chromosome (YAC) transgenic mouse model of HD, the connection between disturbed calcium signaling and apoptosis of HD MSN was investigated (79). The results show that repetitive application of glutamate elevates cytosolic Ca²⁺ levels in MSN from the YAC128 mice but not in MSN from the WT mice. Thus, application of glutamate results in apoptosis in YAC128 MSN but not in WT MSN. In relation to IP3R1, the analysis of glutamate-induced apoptosis of the YAC128 MSN revealed that membrane-permeable IP3R blockers 2-APB and Enoxaparin (Lovenox) are neuroprotective (Fig. 4) and may have a therapeutic potential for treatment of HD (79).

Mut-htt-IP3R1 association is mediated by a cytosolic carboxy-terminal tail of IP3R1 (a 122 amino-acid long IC10 fragment). To evaluate the importance of mut-htt association with IP3R1 for HD pathology, the lentiviral and adeno-associated viruses (AAV), expressing the GFP-IC10 fusion protein, were generated, and a series of experiments with YAC128 HD transgenic mice was performed (80). It appeared that infection with the Lenti-GFP-IC10 protein stabilized Ca²⁺ signaling in cultured YAC128 MSN and protected YAC128 MSN from glutamate-induced apoptosis.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
Furthermore, intra-striatal *in vivo* injections of AAV1-GFP-IC10 significantly alleviated motor deficits and reduced MSN loss and shrinkage in YAC128 mice. Thus, mut-htt-IP3R1 association is important for HD pathogenesis and it thus IP3R1 is a potential therapeutic target for HD. This data also supports potential use of IC10 peptide as a novel HD therapeutic agent (80). In further experiments, it was shown that chronically enhanced calcium leakage from YAC128 MSN ER caused the reduction in the ER calcium level and led to the increased STIM2-mediated store-operated calcium entry (SOC), and that resulted in the MSN spine loss both *in vitro* and *vivo* (81).

There are other regulatory mechanisms of IP3R1 activity that might possibly be used in HD therapy. IP3R1 tetrameric assembly is regulated by the ER chaperone GRP78 and IP3R1-GRP78 association is impaired in the brain of HD model mice. These results suggest a role for GRP78 and ER stress in HD pathology (82). It has been shown that vimentin type III intermediate filament sequesters IRBIT into perinuclear inclusions causing a decrease in the interaction between IRBIT and IP3R1 and suppression of the IP3 binding to IP3R1. Enhanced IICR leads to the increased aggregation of mutant htt. Vimentin overexpression enhanced and knock-down reduced the mutant htt aggregation. Phosphorylation of Ser71 and Ser38 residues in vimentin is mediated by rho-associated kinases (ROCKs). ROCK inhibitor Y-27632 inhibits vimentin phosphorylation and reduces the effect of vimentin on mutant htt aggregation. Therefore, the authors suggested that the regulation of vimentin levels and phosphorylation might be a promising therapeutic strategy for HD and other polyQ disorders (83).

The allosteric regulation in IP3R1 also plays an important role in the proper functioning of this receptor. Recently a new mode of permanent allosteric state of IP3R1 was discovered, namely the covalent modification of IP3R1 at Gln 2746 catalysed by transglutaminase type 2 (TG2). TG catalyses protein cross-linking between Gln and Lys residues via an isopeptide bond. Modification of Gln 2746 in IP3R1 was observed in HD models (84). Ablation of TG2 in HD mice led to the increase of mice lifespan and motor activity improvement. Up-regulation of TG2 enhanced the Gln 2746 modification of IP3R1, and TG2 suppressed IICR in HD. Thus, the authors proposed a potential role of this modification in causing abnormal calcium signaling in HD neurons (84).

### Spino-cerebellar ataxias type 2 and 3

Similar to HD, the spino-cerebellar ataxia type 2 (SCA2) is a progressive, degenerative, inherited disorder caused by expanded CAG repeats encoding a long polyQ tract in the ataxin-2 protein (85). Symptoms of SCA2 include a progressive cerebellar syndrome with ataxia of gait and stance, ataxia of limb movements, dysarthria, ophthalmoplegia, pyramidal and extrapyramidal disorders, muscular rigidity and other severe neurological symptoms (86-88). To this day the pathogenesis of SCA2 is still unclear. Similar to WT ataxin-2, polyQ-expanded abnormal ataxin-2 protein is expressed in each cell type without noticeable aggregation or inclusion bodies (89).

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

Nonetheless, the PCs in the cerebellar cortex of SCA2 patients are highly affected with over 75% neuronal loss in the terminal stage of the disease (87).

In our experiments on planar lipid bilayers model system using single channel recordings of IP3R1 co-expressed with polyQ-expanded ataxin-2, we have shown that abnormal ataxin-2 protein (but not WT ataxin-2) binds to the C-terminal domain of the IP3R1 (Fig 4). The expression of mutant ataxin-2 significantly increased the sensitivity of IP3R1 to activation by IP3 (Fig. 4) (90). Further experiments on calcium imaging conducted in primary PCs cultures from SCA2-58Q transgenic and WT mice have identified the significantly enhanced IICR via IP3R1 in SCA2-58Q PCs, but not in WT PCs. To suppress RyRs and IICR in PC cultures ryanodine or dantrolene were applied (Fig. 4). The impact of polyQ-expanded ataxin-2 was abolished since, in the presence of dantrolene, IICR returned to WT levels. We suggested that dantrolene and ryanodine improved disturbed calcium signaling by suppressing Ca²⁺ release induced by IICR that is enhanced by the RyR (90). Long term feeding of SCA2-58Q mice with dantrolene rescued motor coordination defects and alleviated loss of PC cells (90).

To further test the hypothesis that IICR plays an important role in SCA2, the chronic suppression of IICR was attained by AAV-mediated expression of the IP3-phosphatase enzyme (5PP) in SCA2-58Q PCs (Fig. 4) (91). The patch-clamp experiments on cerebellar slices showed that virus-mediated 5PP overexpression improved age-dependent impairment in the electrophysiological activity of SCA2 PCs. Experiments on motor activity evaluation revealed that chronic 5PP overexpression also alleviated age-dependent motor coordination difficulties and PC death in SCA2-58Q mice (91). These results support the key role of deranged Ca²⁺ signaling in SCA2 pathogenesis. Thus, we may conclude that partial suppression of IICR could provide therapeutic benefit for SCA2 patients and possibly for patients with other types of SCAs (7, 91).

In a recent study we compared the functional properties of PCs from the intact cerebella of aging WT and SCA2-58Q transgenic mice using an in vivo recording technique. We observed significant and age-dependent loss of firing precision of PCs in SCA2-58Q mice (92). The reason for loss of precision firing by SCA2-58Q PCs may be due to the toxic effects of mutant ataxin-2 leading to the dysregulation of IICR (7, 92, 93).

SCA3 is a neurodegenerative disease also caused by a polyQ expansion in the C-terminal domain of ataxin-3 protein (94). SCA3 is characterized by irreversible degeneration of spinocerebellar tracts, dentate nucleus, pontine and other brainstem nuclei, substantia nigra and pallidum (95) (96). The cerebellar atrophy is however, less pronounced than in SCA2, and but, unlike SCA2 pathogenesis, nuclear inclusions containing polyQ-expanded ataxin-3 have been found in neurons of the affected brain areas.. Ataxin-3 has been associated with the ubiquitin-proteasome system and

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
transcriptional regulation. The ataxin-3 includes three ubiquitin-interacting motifs and N-terminal Josephin domain which points to ataxin-3 function as deubiquitinating enzyme (DUB). The polyQ tract has no effect on DUB function of ataxin-3 (97), so it may be concluded that neuropathology in SCA3 is mainly due to a gain of toxic function mediated by the expanded polyQ tract. Normal ataxin-3 binds to target DNA sequences in the promoter of the matrix metalloproteinase-2 gene and represses transcription by recruitment of histone deacetylase 3, the nuclear receptor corepressor, and deacetylation of histones bound to the promoter (98). In transfected mouse neuroblastoma N2a and human embryonic kidney 293T cells, the aggregation of polyQ-expanded ataxin-3 could be blocked by the suppression of Ca²⁺-dependent protease calpain (99). Similar to polyQ-expanded htt and mutant ataxin-2, we demonstrated that polyQ-expanded ataxin-3, but not normal ataxin-3, interacts with IP3R1 and leads to its activation (100) (Fig. 4). Moreover, the long-term treatment of SCA3-YAC-84Q mutant mice with Ca²⁺ stabilizer dantrolene, improved age-dependent impairment of motor activity in these mice and prevented neuronal cell death in the cerebellum (100). Similarly to SCA2 cases, these improvements can be explained by the suppression of Ca²⁺ release resulting from disturbed IICR that is overextended by the RyR in neurons (Fig. 4).

Recent studies, using mathematical methods, have shown that IP3R1 is required to modulate the SCA disease state. A suite of computational models was developed to study SCAs and the role of IP3R1 in their pathogenesis (101). The SCA modeling suite represents a collection of compartmental and spatial models that simulate the biochemical and electrophysiological properties of the cerebellar PCs including the effect of various ion channel molecules and calcium signaling on PC functions. The models predict IP3R1 hypersensitivity in SCA1 and compensatory mechanisms in SCA2, and SCA3. The study also has revealed that IICR activates voltage-gated calcium-activated potassium channels in the cell membrane. Authors concluded that the SCA modeling suite might help to characterize the cellular pathophysiology of IP3R1-associated cerebellar ataxia (101).

All these studies suggest that disturbed neuronal Ca²⁺ signaling mediated via IP3R1 may play an essential role in the pathogenesis of polyQ-expansion neurodegenerative disorders.

### Alzheimer’s disease

Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a widespread neurodegenerative disorder which affects primarily senior people. Symptoms mostly involve slowly developing and irreversible neurodegeneration. The etiology of AD is still under discussion, but the advanced age is regarded as a principle risk factor. The main criteria of AD are accumulation of extracellular β amyloid (Aβ) plaques or enhancement of the Aβ₄₂:Aβ₄₀ ratio, intracellular neurofibrillary tangles and neuronal loss (102). The most common form of AD is sporadic AD (SAD). In a small fraction of cases, autosomal dominant familial cases of the disease (FAD) manifest in middle age. FAD is caused by the mutations in presenilins (PS1 and PS2) and amyloid precursor protein (APP) (103). Presenilins are components of a protein complex

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.that proteolytically processes APP into Aβ peptides. The most popular hypothesis of AD is the “amyloid hypothesis”, whereby defective processing and clearance of APP to Aβ lead to the accumulation of Aβ plaques and to AD pathology (104). Also there is an opinion that toxic forms of Aβ can induce Ca²⁺ influx into neurons by inducing membrane-associated oxidative stress or by forming an oligomeric pore in the membrane, thereby rendering neurons vulnerable to excitotoxicity and apoptosis (105).

Neuronal calcium signaling is dysregulated in AD (105). Ca²⁺ imaging experiments performed in Xenopus oocytes demonstrated that expression of FAD PS1 mutants potentiates IP3-mediated Ca²⁺ release (106) (Table 1). Enhanced IICR was also observed in Ca²⁺ imaging experiments performed with cortical neurons from PS1 FAD mutant mice (107). The mechanism responsible for these observations remains controversial. Our group suggested that presenilins act as ER calcium leak channels, and FAD mutations in presenilins disrupt this function, leading to ER Ca²⁺ overload and excessive IICR (108, 109). The function of presenilins as ER Ca²⁺ leak channels was supported by results of unbiased genetic screen for ER Ca²⁺ modulators (110). Another hypothesis is that gating of IP3R1 can be directly potentiated by FAD presenilins (111, 112). More recently it was shown that genetic reduction of IP3R1 normalizes disturbed calcium signaling in FAD PS1 mice and thus alleviates mutant PS-linked FAD pathogenesis (113). The computational modeling of single IP3R activity was used to analyze and quantify the pathological enhancement of IP3R function by FAD-causing mutant PS (114). The combination of the experimental data and computational modeling was used in further research for studying the differences in mitochondrial calcium influx in cells expressing WT and FAD-causing mutant PS (115). Using experimental data on IICR, together with a computational model of cell bioenergetics, a data-driven Markov chain model for IP3R gating, and a model for the dynamics of the mitochondrial permeability transition pore (mPTP) the difference in mPTP opening in WT and mutant PS cells was shown. No mPTP opening occurred in control WT cells whereas mPTP opened in cells with mutant PS (115). It was reasoned that mutant PS causes disturbed IICR that activates the ER-MCU leading to the mPTP opening and eventually to cell death (115, 116).

It appears that AD-linked Aβ can also affect IP3R function. In Ca²⁺ imaging experiments with DT40 cells and DT40 cells deficient in the three IP3R isoforms (DT40 TKO), the mechanisms of Aβ-mediated Ca²⁺ release from the ER were analyzed. Aβ₄₂-induced Ca²⁺ release from the ER includes an Aβ₄₂ sequence-specific component, which is IP3R-dependent, and another component, which is peptide sequence- and IP3R-independent (117). The effect of Aβ₄₂ oligomers on IICR was studied in astrocytes derived from the entorhinal cortex (EC) and from the hippocampus from WT and 3×Tg-AD transgenic mice (118). The treatment of WT astrocytes with Aβ₄₂ increased the expression of IP3R1 and mGluR5 in hippocampal astrocytes and provoked IICR only in hippocampal and not EC

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
astrocytes. Treatment with Aβ₄₂ did not affect IICR in astrocytes isolated from AD mice. Based on these results, authors suggested that expression of AD-related mutant genes disturbs calcium signaling in astroglia. These experiments have shown that Aβ₄₂ deregulates mGluR5 and IP3R, the key elements of astrocytic calcium homeostasis. The effects of Aβ₄₂ on calcium signaling in astrocytes were compared to effects of pro-inflammatory agents such as tumor necrosis factor α (TNFα), interleukin 1β (IL-1β), and bacterial toxin lipopolysaccharide (LPS). Aβ₄₂ induces SOC, while the other agents inhibited SOC. Treatment with Aβ₄₂ significantly increased mRNA levels of IP3R1/2 and mGluR5, whereas pro-inflammatory agents reduced expression of those mRNAs (119).

Studies with mouse cortical neurons showed that the extended treatment with Aβ₄₂ oligomers selectively disrupts IICR since the amplitude of the intracellular calcium release in response to IP3-generating agonists (such as DHPG) was decreased - whereas in response to caffeine it was increased - compared with control neurons treated with monomeric form of Aβ₄₂. Conversely, no effect of synthetic Aβ₄₂ oligomers on neuronal calcium store dynamics was observed in neurons during the acute application of Aβ₄₂. Thus, these data revealed disturbed ER calcium signaling in neurons exposed to Aβ₄₂ oligomers and promote the potential use of the IP3R and RyR stabilizers in AD therapy (120).

Experiments on primary cortical astrocyte cultures have revealed that Aβ neurotoxic fragment (Aβ₂₅₋₃₅) provokes the dysregulation of calcium signaling and induces apoptosis in a concentration-dependent manner, leading to enhanced IICR. It was shown that the treatment with calcium chelator BAPTA reduced Aβ-mediated apoptosis in astrocytes. Thus, it has been concluded that Aβ fragment modulates IP3R activity, increases IICR, and leads to apoptosis observed in AD (121).

The AD pathology also involves mitochondrial toxicity that might be induced by Aβ and its interference with N-methyl-D-aspartate receptors (NMDARs). Experiments on primary cortical neurons showed that treatment with Aβ+NMDA significantly increased intracellular calcium level and provoked immediate mitochondrial repolarization, when compared to Aβ or NMDA alone. Pharmacological inhibition of IP3R and mitochondrial calcium uniporter (MCU) revealed that Aβ+NMDA-induced calcium increase involved IICR and mitochondrial calcium entry through the MCU (122).

Recent study on SAD patients and patients with mild cognitive impairment (MCI), which is typical for the onset of AD, has shown that SOC and IICR are enhanced in the cytoplasm in unmodified B lymphocytes form MCI and SAD patients compared to control non-demented subjects (NDS). IP3R activation led to an increase in intracellular calcium level in SAD and MCI lymphocytes compared to NDS cells. The basal intracellular calcium level was similar in SAD cells and NDS cells, whereas MCI cells were characterized by higher basal cellular calcium level. Authors concluded that lymphocytes obtained from MCI patients may be promising for early SAD diagnosis (123).

Overall, these results suggest that IP3R function is enhanced in variety of AD models and that inhibition of IP3R may help to prevent neuronal loss in AD.

## Conclusion

IP3R is involved in the control of key physiological processes, such as learning and memory, cell division and proliferation, differentiation, fertilization, development and cell death. Significant progress in understanding the structure and function of IP3R has been achieved by the application of structural studies (23). Dysfunction of IP3R plays a key role in many neurodegenerative disorders, including HD, SCAs and AD. Disturbance of IP3R functions leads to the deranged Ca²⁺ signaling, and more often to enhanced IICR. Thus, IP3R represents a potentially effective therapeutic target for treatment of neurodegenerative disorders via regulating the disturbed Ca²⁺ signaling in affected brain regions.

There have already been attempts to suppress IICR in the context of neurodegenerative diseases. A chronic suppression of IICR was achieved by viral expression of the IP3-phosphatase enzyme in PCs of the SCA2-58Q mouse model. This alleviated the pathological phenotype in SCA 2 mice, reduced neuronal cell death and improved motor coordination (91). Moreover, IICR might be pharmacologically blocked with caffeine (124) and by therapeutic levels of lithium in the presence of neuronal calcium sensor-1 (125). There are several other potential approaches to inhibit IICR in the context of neurodegeneration. Future studies will give us more details about physiological functions of IP3R in normal conditions and pathology and will provide us new ways to search for treatment of incurable neurodegenerative diseases.

## Acknowledgements

We are grateful to members of laboratory of Molecular Neurodegeneration for advice and suggestions and to Polina Plotnikova for administrative assistance. IB is a holder of the Carl J. and Hortense M. Thomsen Chair in Alzheimer's Disease Research. PE is a holder of Presidential Stipend 3635.2016.4. This work was supported by R01NS080152 (IB), R01NS056224 (IB), by the state grant 17.991.2017/4.6 (IB) and by the Russian Science Foundation Grant 14-25-00024-II (IB). The financial support was divided in the following way: research work related to Table 1 and Figure 1 was supported by the state grant 17.991.2017/4.6, research work related to Figures 2, 3 and 4 was supported by the Russian Science Foundation Grant 14-25-00024-II.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

References

1. Rhee SG, Choi KD. Regulation of inositol phospholipid-specific phospholipase C isozymes. The Journal of biological chemistry. 1992;267(18):12393-6. Epub 1992/06/25.
2. Alberts B. Molecular biology of the cell. 4th ed. New York: Garland Science; 2002. xxxiv, 1548 p. p.
3. Mikoshiba K. IP3 receptor/Ca2+ channel: from discovery to new signaling concepts. Journal of neurochemistry. 2007;102(5):1426-46. Epub 2007/08/19.
4. Keebler MV, Taylor CW. Endogenous signalling pathways and caged-IP3 evoke Ca2+ puffs at the same abundant immobile intracellular sites. Journal of cell science. 2017. Epub 2017/09/13.
5. Bosanac I, Alattia JR, Mal TK, Chan J, Talarico S, Tong FK, et al. Structure of the inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor binding core in complex with its ligand. Nature. 2002;420(6916):696-700.
6. Bezprozvanny I. Role of inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptors in pathogenesis of Huntington's disease and spinocerebellar ataxias. Neurochemical research. 2011;36(7):1186-97. Epub 2011/01/07.
7. Egorova P, Popugaeva E, Bezprozvanny I. Disturbed calcium signaling in spinocerebellar ataxias and Alzheimer's disease. Seminars in cell & developmental biology. 2015;40:127-33. Epub 2015/04/08.
8. Hisatsune C, Mikoshiba K. IP3 receptor mutations and brain diseases in human and rodents. Journal of neurochemistry. 2017;141(6):790-807. Epub 2017/02/18.
9. Supattapone S, Worley PF, Baraban JM, Snyder SH. Solubilization, purification, and characterization of an inositol trisphosphate receptor. J Biol Chem. 1988;263:1530-4.
10. Ross CA, Meldolesi J, Milner TA, Satoh T, Supattapone S, Snyder SH. Inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor localized to endoplasmic reticulum in cerebellar Purkinje neurons. Nature. 1989;339:468-70
11. Mikoshiba K, Huchet M, Changeux JP. Biochemical and immunological studies on the P400 protein, a protein characteristic of the Purkinje cell from mouse and rat cerebellum. Developmental neuroscience. 1979;2(6):254-75. Epub 1979/01/01.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

12. Furuichi T, Yoshikawa S, Miyawaki A, Wada K, Maeda N, Mikoshiba K. Primary structure and functional expression of the inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate-binding protein P<sub>400</sub>. Nature. 1989;342:32-8.

13. Mignery G, Sudhof TC, Takei K, De Camilli P. Putative receptor for inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate similar to ryanodine receptor. Nature. 1989;342:192-5.

14. Mignery GA, Newton CL, Archer BT, Sudhof TC. Structure and expression of the rat inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor. J Biol Chem. 1990;265:12679-85.

15. Ross CA, Danoff SK, Schell MJ, Snyder SH, Ullrich A. Three additional inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptors: molecular cloning and differential localization in brain and peripheral tissues. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 1992;89:4265-9.

16. Foskett JK, White C, Cheung KH, Mak DO. Inositol Trisphosphate Receptor Ca2+ Release Channels. Physiol Rev. 2007;87(2):593-658.

17. Taylor CW, Genazzani AA, Morris SA. Expression of inositol trisphosphate receptors. Cell calcium. 1999;26(6):237-51.

18. Perez PJ, Ramos-Franco J, Fill M, Mignery GA. Identification and functional reconstitution of the type 2 inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor from ventricular cardiac myocytes. The Journal of biological chemistry. 1997;272(38):23961-9.

19. Nucifora FC, Jr., Li SH, Danoff S, Ullrich A, Ross CA. Molecular cloning of a cDNA for the human inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor type 1, and the identification of a third alternatively spliced variant. Brain Res Mol Brain Res. 1995;32(2):291-6.

20. Sasaki-Osugi K, Imoto C, Takahara T, Shibata H, Maki M. Nuclear ALG-2 protein interacts with Ca2+ homeostasis endoplasmic reticulum protein (CHERP) Ca2+-dependently and participates in regulation of alternative splicing of inositol trisphosphate receptor type 1 (IP3R1) pre-mRNA. The Journal of biological chemistry. 2013;288(46):33361-75. Epub 2013/10/01.

21. Monkawa T, Miyawaki A, Sugiyama T, Yoneshima H, Yamamoto-Hino M, Furuichi T, et al. Heterotetrameric complex formation of inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor subunits. The Journal of biological chemistry. 1995;270(24):14700-4.

22. Furuichi T, Kohda K, Miyawaki A, Mikoshiba K. Intracellular channels. Current Opinion

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

Neurobiol. 1994;4:294-303.

23. Fan G, Baker ML, Wang Z, Baker MR, Sinyagovskiy PA, Chiu W, et al. Gating machinery of InsP3R channels revealed by electron cryomicroscopy. Nature. 2015;527(7578):336-41. Epub 2015/10/13.

24. Serysheva, II. Toward a high-resolution structure of IP(3)R channel. Cell calcium. 2014;56(3):125-32. Epub 2014/08/28.

25. Schug ZT, da Fonseca PC, Bhanumathy CD, Wagner L, 2nd, Zhang X, Bailey B, et al. Molecular characterization of the inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor pore-forming segment. The Journal of biological chemistry. 2008;283(5):2939-48. Epub 2007/11/21.

26. Seo MD, Velamakanni S, Ishiyama N, Stathopulos PB, Rossi AM, Khan SA, et al. Structural and functional conservation of key domains in InsP3 and ryanodine receptors. Nature. 2012;483(7387):108-12. Epub 2012/01/31.

27. Bezprozvanny I. The inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptors. Cell calcium. 2005;38:261-72.

28. Boehning D, Joseph SK. Direct association of ligand-binding and pore domains in homo- and heterotetrameric inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptors. The EMBO journal. 2000;19(20):5450-9. Epub 2000/10/18.

29. Hamada K, Terauchi A, Mikoshiba K. Three-dimensional rearrangements within inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor by calcium. The Journal of biological chemistry. 2003;278(52):52881-9. Epub 2003/11/01.

30. Hamada K, Mikoshiba K. Revisiting channel allostery: a coherent mechanism in IP(3) and ryanodine receptors. Science signaling. 2012;5(225):pe24. Epub 2012/05/25.

31. Lin CC, Baek K, Lu Z. Apo and InsP(3)-bound crystal structures of the ligand-binding domain of an InsP(3) receptor. Nature structural & molecular biology. 2011;18(10):1172-4. Epub 2011/09/06.

32. Tu H, Nosyreva E, Miyakawa T, Wang Z, Mizushima A, Ino M, et al. Functional and biochemical analysis of the type 1 inositol (1,4,5)-trisphosphate receptor calcium sensor. Biophysical journal. 2003;85(1):290-9. Epub 2003/06/28.

33. Schug ZT, Joseph SK. The role of the S4-S5 linker and C-terminal tail in inositol 1,4,5-

trisphosphate receptor function. The Journal of biological chemistry. 2006;281(34):24431-40. Epub 2006/07/04.

34. Bhanumathy C, da Fonseca PC, Morris EP, Joseph SK. Identification of functionally critical residues in the channel domain of inositol trisphosphate receptors. The Journal of biological chemistry. 2012;287(52):43674-84. Epub 2012/10/23.

35. Galvan DL, Mignery GA. Carboxyl-terminal sequences critical for inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor subunit assembly. The Journal of biological chemistry. 2002;277(50):48248-60. Epub 2002/10/16.

36. Hamada K, Miyatake H, Terauchi A, Mikoshiba K. IP3-mediated gating mechanism of the IP3 receptor revealed by mutagenesis and X-ray crystallography. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2017;114(18):4661-6.

37. Mak DO, McBride S, Foskett JK. ATP-dependent adenophostin activation of inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor channel gating: kinetic implications for the durations of calcium puffs in cells. The Journal of general physiology. 2001;117(4):299-314.

38. Oura T, Murata K, Morita T, Nezu A, Arisawa M, Shuto S, et al. Highly Sensitive Measurement of Inositol 1,4,5-Trisphosphate by Using a New Fluorescent Ligand and Ligand Binding Domain Combination. Chembiochem : a European journal of chemical biology. 2016;17(16):1509-12. Epub 2016/06/03.

39. Li C, Enomoto M, Rossi AM, Seo MD, Rahman T, Stathopulos PB, et al. CaBP1, a neuronal Ca2+ sensor protein, inhibits inositol trisphosphate receptors by clamping intersubunit interactions. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2013;110(21):8507-12. Epub 2013/05/08.

40. Ando H, Kawai K, Mikoshiba K. IRBIT: a regulator of ion channels and ion transporters. Biochimica et biophysica acta. 2014;1843(10):2195-204. Epub 2014/02/13.

41. Schulman JJ, Wright FA, Kaufmann T, Wojcikiewicz RJ. The Bcl-2 protein family member Bok binds to the coupling domain of inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptors and protects them from proteolytic cleavage. The Journal of biological chemistry. 2013;288(35):25340-9. Epub 2013/07/26.

42. Szegezdi E, Macdonald DC, Ni Chonghaile T, Gupta S, Samali A. Bcl-2 family on guard at the ER. American journal of physiology Cell physiology. 2009;296(5):C941-53. Epub 2009/03/13.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

43. Chen R, Valencia I, Zhong F, McColl KS, Roderick HL, Bootman MD, et al. Bcl-2 functionally interacts with inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptors to regulate calcium release from the ER in response to inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate. The Journal of cell biology. 2004;166(2):193-203. Epub 2004/07/21.

44. Lewis A, Hayashi T, Su TP, Betenbaugh MJ. Bcl-2 family in inter-organelle modulation of calcium signaling: roles in bioenergetics and cell survival. Journal of bioenergetics and biomembranes. 2014;46(1):1-15. Epub 2013/10/01.

45. Yang J, Vais H, Gu W, Foskett JK. Biphasic regulation of InsP3 receptor gating by dual Ca2+ release channel BH3-like domains mediates Bcl-xL control of cell viability. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2016;113(13):E1953-62. Epub 2016/03/16.

46. Berridge MJ, Bootman MD, Lipp P. Calcium - a life and death signal. Nature. 1998;395:645-8.

47. Baker KD, Edwards TM, Rickard NS. The role of intracellular calcium stores in synaptic plasticity and memory consolidation. Neuroscience and biobehavioral reviews. 2013;37(7):1211-39. Epub 2013/05/04.

48. Sugawara T, Hisatsune C, Le TD, Hashikawa T, Hirono M, Hattori M, et al. Type 1 Inositol Trisphosphate Receptor Regulates Cerebellar Circuits by Maintaining the Spine Morphology of Purkinje Cells in Adult Mice. Journal of Neuroscience. 2013;33(30):12186-+.

49. Shimobayashi E, Kapfhammer JP. Calcium signaling, PKC gamma, IP3R1 and CAR8 link spinocerebellar ataxias and Purkinje cell dendritic development. Current neuropharmacology. 2017. Epub 2017/05/31.

50. Matsumoto M, Nakagawa T, Inoue T, Nagata E, Tanaka K, Takano H, et al. Ataxia and epileptic seizures in mice lacking type 1 inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor. Nature. 1996;379(6561):168-71.

51. Inoue T, Kato K, Kohda K, Mikoshiba K. Type 1 inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor is required for induction of long-term depression in cerebellar Purkinje neurons. J Neurosci. 1998;18(14):5366-73. Epub 1998/07/03.

52. Street VA, Bosma MM, Demas VP, Regan MR, Lin DD, Robinson LC, et al. The type 1

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor gene is altered in the opisthotonos mouse. J Neurosci. 1997;17(2):635-45.

53. Tu H, Miyakawa T, Wang Z, Glouchankova L, Iino M, Bezprozvanny I. Functional characterization of the type 1 inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor coupling domain SII(+/-) splice variants and the opisthotonos mutant form. Biophysical journal. 2002;82:1995-2004.

54. van de Leemput J, Chandran J, Knight MA, Holtzclaw LA, Scholz S, Cookson MR, et al. Deletion at ITPR1 underlies ataxia in mice and spinocerebellar ataxia 15 in humans. PLoS genetics. 2007;3(6):e108. Epub 2007/06/26.

55. Brown SA, Loew LM. Computational analysis of calcium signaling and membrane electrophysiology in cerebellar Purkinje neurons associated with ataxia. BMC systems biology. 2012;6:70. Epub 2012/06/19.

56. Schorge S, van de Leemput J, Singleton A, Houlden H, Hardy J. Human ataxias: a genetic dissection of inositol triphosphate receptor (ITPR1)-dependent signaling. Trends Neurosci. 2010;33(5):211-9. Epub 2010/03/17.

57. Kasumu A, Bezprozvanny I. Deranged Calcium Signaling in Purkinje Cells and Pathogenesis in Spinocerebellar Ataxia 2 (SCA2) and Other Ataxias. Cerebellum (London, England). 2012;11(3):630-9.

58. van de Leemput J, Wavrant-De Vrieze F, Rafferty I, Bras JM, Giunti P, Fisher EM, et al. Sequencing analysis of the ITPR1 gene in a pure autosomal dominant spinocerebellar ataxia series. Movement disorders : official journal of the Movement Disorder Society. 2010;25(6):771-3. Epub 2010/05/04.

59. Marelli C, van de Leemput J, Johnson JO, Tison F, Thauvin-Robinet C, Picard F, et al. SCA15 due to large ITPR1 deletions in a cohort of 333 white families with dominant ataxia. Archives of neurology. 2011;68(5):637-43. Epub 2011/05/11.

60. Obayashi M, Ishikawa K, Izumi Y, Takahashi M, Niimi Y, Sato N, et al. Prevalence of inositol 1, 4, 5-triphosphate receptor type 1 gene deletion, the mutation for spinocerebellar ataxia type 15, in Japan screened by gene dosage. Journal of human genetics. 2012;57(3):202-6. Epub 2012/02/10.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

61. Novak MJ, Sweeney MG, Li A, Treacy C, Chandrashekar HS, Giunti P, et al. An ITPR1 gene deletion causes spinocerebellar ataxia 15/16: a genetic, clinical and radiological description. Movement disorders : official journal of the Movement Disorder Society. 2010;25(13):2176-82. Epub 2010/07/30.

62. Storey E, Gardner RJ. Spinocerebellar ataxia type 15. Handbook of clinical neurology. 2012;103:561-5. Epub 2011/08/11.

63. Hara K, Shiga A, Nozaki H, Mitsui J, Takahashi Y, Ishiguro H, et al. Total deletion and a missense mutation of ITPR1 in Japanese SCA15 families. Neurology. 2008;71(8):547-51.

64. Hald T, Lo Fo Wong DM, Aarestrup FM. The attribution of human infections with antimicrobial resistant Salmonella bacteria in Denmark to sources of animal origin. Foodborne pathogens and disease. 2007;4(3):313-26. Epub 2007/09/22.

65. Novak MJ, Sweeney MG, Li A, Treacy C, Chandrashekar HS, Giunti P, et al. An ITPR1 gene deletion causes spinocerebellar ataxia 15/16: A genetic, clinical and radiological description. Mov Disord. 2010. Epub 2010/07/30.

66. Casey JP, Hirouchi T, Hisatsune C, Lynch B, Murphy R, Dunne AM, et al. A novel gain-of-function mutation in the ITPR1 suppressor domain causes spinocerebellar ataxia with altered Ca2+ signal patterns. Journal of neurology. 2017;264(7):1444-53. Epub 2017/06/18.

67. Barresi S, Niceta M, Alfieri P, Brankovic V, Piccini G, Bruselles A, et al. Mutations in the IRBIT domain of ITPR1 are a frequent cause of autosomal dominant nonprogressive congenital ataxia. Clinical genetics. 2017;91(1):86-91. Epub 2016/04/12.

68. Sasaki M, Ohba C, Iai M, Hirabayashi S, Osaka H, Hiraide T, et al. Sporadic infantile-onset spinocerebellar ataxia caused by missense mutations of the inositol 1,4,5-triphosphate receptor type 1 gene. Journal of neurology. 2015;262(5):1278-84. Epub 2015/03/22.

69. Gerber S, Alzayady KJ, Burglen L, Bremond-Gignac D, Marchesin V, Roche O, et al. Recessive and Dominant De Novo ITPR1 Mutations Cause Gillespie Syndrome. Am J Hum Genet. 2016;98(5):971-80. Epub 2016/04/26.

70. Dentici ML, Barresi S, Nardella M, Bellacchio E, Alfieri P, Bruselles A, et al. Identification of novel and hotspot mutations in the channel domain of ITPR1 in two patients with Gillespie

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

syndrome. Gene. 2017;628:141-5. Epub 2017/07/13.

71. Wright FA, Lu JP, Sliter DA, Dupre N, Rouleau GA, Wojcikiewicz RJ. A Point Mutation in the Ubiquitin Ligase RNF170 That Causes Autosomal Dominant Sensory Ataxia Destabilizes the Protein and Impairs Inositol 1,4,5-Trisphosphate Receptor-mediated Ca2+ Signaling. The Journal of biological chemistry. 2015;290(22):13948-57. Epub 2015/04/18.

72. Jarius S, Scharf M, Begemann N, Stocker W, Probst C, Serysheva, II, et al. Antibodies to the inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor type 1 (ITPR1) in cerebellar ataxia. J Neuroinflammation. 2014;11:206.

73. Walker FO. Huntington's disease. Lancet. 2007;369(9557):218-28. Epub 2007/01/24.

74. Hoffner G, Soues S, Djian P. Aggregation of expanded huntingtin in the brains of patients with Huntington disease. Prion. 2007;1(1):26-31. Epub 2007/01/01.

75. MacDonald ME. Huntingtin: alive and well and working in middle management. Sci STKE. 2003;2003(207):pe48.

76. Tang TS, Tu H, Chan EY, Maximov A, Wang Z, Wellington CL, et al. Huntingtin and huntingtin-associated protein 1 influence neuronal calcium signaling mediated by inositol-(1,4,5) triphosphate receptor type 1. Neuron. 2003;39(2):227-39. Epub 2003/07/23.

77. Kaltenbach LS, Romero E, Becklin RR, Chettier R, Bell R, Phansalkar A, et al. Huntingtin interacting proteins are genetic modifiers of neurodegeneration. PLoS genetics. 2007;3(5):e82.

78. Tang TS, Tu H, Orban PC, Chan EY, Hayden MR, Bezprozvanny I. HAP1 facilitates effects of mutant huntingtin on inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate-induced Ca release in primary culture of striatal medium spiny neurons. The European journal of neuroscience. 2004;20(7):1779-87.

79. Tang TS, Slow E, Lupu V, Stavrovskaya IG, Sugimori M, Llinas R, et al. Disturbed Ca2+ signaling and apoptosis of medium spiny neurons in Huntington's disease. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2005;102(7):2602-7. Epub 2005/02/08.

80. Tang TS, Guo C, Wang H, Chen X, Bezprozvanny I. Neuroprotective effects of inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor C-terminal fragment in a Huntington's disease mouse model. J Neurosci. 2009;29(5):1257-66. Epub 2009/02/06.

81. Wu J, Ryskamp DA, Liang X, Egorova P, Zakharova O, Hung G, et al. Enhanced Store-

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

Operated Calcium Entry Leads to Striatal Synaptic Loss in a Huntington's Disease Mouse Model. J Neurosci. 2016;36(1):125-41.

82. Higo T, Hamada K, Hisatsune C, Nukina N, Hashikawa T, Hattori M, et al. Mechanism of ER stress-induced brain damage by IP(3) receptor. Neuron. 2010;68(5):865-78.

83. Bauer PO, Hudec R, Goswami A, Kurosawa M, Matsumoto G, Mikoshiba K, et al. ROCK-phosphorylated vimentin modifies mutant huntingtin aggregation via sequestration of IRBIT. Molecular neurodegeneration. 2012;7:43. Epub 2012/08/30.

84. Hamada K, Terauchi A, Nakamura K, Higo T, Nukina N, Matsumoto N, et al. Aberrant calcium signaling by transglutaminase-mediated posttranslational modification of inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptors. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014;111(38):E3966-75. Epub 2014/09/10.

85. Pulst SM, Nechiporuk A, Nechiporuk T, Gispert S, Chen XN, Lopes-Cendes I, et al. Moderate expansion of a normally biallelic trinucleotide repeat in spinocerebellar ataxia type 2. Nat Genet. 1996;14(3):269-76.

86. Filla A, De Michele G, Santoro L, Calabrese O, Castaldo I, Giuffrida S, et al. Spinocerebellar ataxia type 2 in southern Italy: a clinical and molecular study of 30 families. Journal of neurology. 1999;246(6):467-71.

87. Schols L, Bauer P, Schmidt T, Schulte T, Riess O. Autosomal dominant cerebellar ataxias: clinical features, genetics, and pathogenesis. Lancet Neurol. 2004;3(5):291-304.

88. Lastres-Becker I, Rub U, Auburger G. Spinocerebellar ataxia 2 (SCA2). Cerebellum. 2008;7(2):115-24.

89. Huynh DP, Figueroa K, Hoang N, Pulst SM. Nuclear localization or inclusion body formation of ataxin-2 are not necessary for SCA2 pathogenesis in mouse or human. Nat Genet. 2000;26(1):44-50.

90. Liu J, Tang TS, Tu H, Nelson O, Herndon E, Huynh DP, et al. Deranged calcium signaling and neurodegeneration in spinocerebellar ataxia type 2. J Neurosci. 2009;29(29):9148-62. Epub 2009/07/25.

91. Kasumu AW, Liang X, Egorova P, Vorontsova D, Bezprozvanny I. Chronic suppression of inositol 1,4,5-triphosphate receptor-mediated calcium signaling in cerebellar purkinje cells alleviates

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

pathological phenotype in spinocerebellar ataxia 2 mice. J Neurosci. 2012;32(37):12786-96. Epub 2012/09/14.

92. Egorova PA, Zakharova OA, Vlasova OL, Bezprozvanny IB. In vivo analysis of cerebellar Purkinje cell activity in SCA2 transgenic mouse model. Journal of neurophysiology. 2016;115(6):2840-51. Epub 2016/03/18.

93. Kasumu A, Bezprozvanny I. Deranged calcium signaling in Purkinje cells and pathogenesis in spinocerebellar ataxia 2 (SCA2) and other ataxias. Cerebellum. 2012;11(3):630-9. Epub 2010/05/19.

94. Paulson HL, Das SS, Crino PB, Perez MK, Patel SC, Gotsdiner D, et al. Machado-Joseph disease gene product is a cytoplasmic protein widely expressed in brain. Ann Neurol. 1997;41(4):453-62.

95. Stevanin G, Durr A, Brice A. Clinical and molecular advances in autosomal dominant cerebellar ataxias: from genotype to phenotype and physiopathology. Eur J Hum Genet. 2000;8(1):4-18.

96. Coutinho P, Andrade C. Autosomal dominant system degeneration in Portuguese families of the Azores Islands. A new genetic disorder involving cerebellar, pyramidal, extrapyramidal and spinal cord motor functions. Neurology. 1978;28(7):703-9.

97. Burnett B, Li F, Pittman RN. The polyglutamine neurodegenerative protein ataxin-3 binds polyubiquitylated proteins and has ubiquitin protease activity. Human molecular genetics. 2003;12(23):3195-205.

98. Evert BO, Araujo J, Vieira-Saecker AM, de Vos RA, Harendza S, Klockgether T, et al. Ataxin-3 represses transcription via chromatin binding, interaction with histone deacetylase 3, and histone deacetylation. J Neurosci. 2006;26(44):11474-86. Epub 2006/11/03.

99. Haacke A, Hartl FU, Breuer P. Calpain inhibition is sufficient to suppress aggregation of polyglutamine-expanded ataxin-3. The Journal of biological chemistry. 2007;282(26):18851-6.

100. Chen X, Tang TS, Tu H, Nelson O, Pook M, Hammer R, et al. Deranged calcium signaling and neurodegeneration in spinocerebellar ataxia type 3. J Neurosci. 2008;28(48):12713-24. Epub 2008/11/28.

101. Brown SA, Loew LM. Integration of modeling with experimental and clinical findings

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

synthesizes and refines the central role of inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor 1 in spinocerebellar ataxia. Frontiers in neuroscience. 2014;8:453. Epub 2015/02/06.

102. Forman MS, Trojanowski JQ, Lee VM. Neurodegenerative diseases: a decade of discoveries paves the way for therapeutic breakthroughs. Nature medicine. 2004;10(10):1055-63. Epub 2004/10/02.

103. Tanzi RE, Bertram L. Twenty years of the Alzheimer's disease amyloid hypothesis: a genetic perspective. Cell. 2005;120(4):545-55.

104. Hardy J, Selkoe DJ. The amyloid hypothesis of Alzheimer's disease: progress and problems on the road to therapeutics. Science. 2002;297(5580):353-6. Epub 2002/07/20.

105. Bezprozvanny I, Mattson MP. Neuronal calcium mishandling and the pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease. Trends Neurosci. 2008;31(9):454-63.

106. Leissring MA, Paul BA, Parker I, Cotman CW, LaFerla FM. Alzheimer's presenilin-1 mutation potentiates inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate-mediated calcium signaling in Xenopus oocytes. Journal of neurochemistry. 1999;72(3):1061-8. Epub 1999/02/26.

107. Stutzmann GE, Caccamo A, LaFerla FM, Parker I. Dysregulated IP3 signaling in cortical neurons of knock-in mice expressing an Alzheimer's-linked mutation in presenilin1 results in exaggerated Ca2+ signals and altered membrane excitability. J Neurosci. 2004;24(2):508-13. Epub 2004/01/16.

108. Tu H, Nelson O, Bezprozvanny A, Wang Z, Lee SF, Hao YH, et al. Presenilins form ER Ca2+ leak channels, a function disrupted by familial Alzheimer's disease-linked mutations. Cell. 2006;126(5):981-93. Epub 2006/09/09.

109. Nelson O, Tu H, Lei T, Bentahir M, de Strooper B, Bezprozvanny I. Familial Alzheimer disease-linked mutations specifically disrupt Ca2+ leak function of presenilin 1. The Journal of clinical investigation. 2007;117(5):1230-9. Epub 2007/04/14.

110. Bandara S, Malmersjo S, Meyer T. Regulators of Calcium Homeostasis Identified by Inference of Kinetic Model Parameters from Live Single Cells Perturbed by siRNA. Science signaling. 2013;6(283):ra56.

111. Cheung KH, Shineman D, Muller M, Cardenas C, Mei L, Yang J, et al. Mechanism of Ca2+

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

disruption in Alzheimer's disease by presenilin regulation of InsP(3) receptor channel gating. Neuron. 2008;58(6):871-83.

112. Cheung KH, Mei L, Mak DO, Hayashi I, Iwatubo T, Kang DE, et al. Gain-of-function enhancement of IP3 receptor modal gating by familial Alzheimer's disease-linked presenilin mutants in human cells and mouse neurons. Science signaling. 2010;3(114):ra22. Epub 2010/03/25.

113. Shilling D, Muller M, Takano H, Mak DO, Abel T, Coulter DA, et al. Suppression of InsP3 receptor-mediated Ca2+ signaling alleviates mutant presenilin-linked familial Alzheimer's disease pathogenesis. J Neurosci. 2014;34(20):6910-23. Epub 2014/05/16.

114. Mak DO, Cheung KH, Toglia P, Foskett JK, Ullah G. Analyzing and Quantifying the Gain-of-Function Enhancement of IP3 Receptor Gating by Familial Alzheimer's Disease-Causing Mutants in Presenilins. PLoS computational biology. 2015;11(10):e1004529. Epub 2015/10/07.

115. Toglia P, Ullah G. The gain-of-function enhancement of IP3-receptor channel gating by familial Alzheimer's disease-linked presenilin mutants increases the open probability of mitochondrial permeability transition pore. Cell calcium. 2016;60(1):13-24. Epub 2016/05/18.

116. Toglia P, Cheung KH, Mak DO, Ullah G. Impaired mitochondrial function due to familial Alzheimer's disease-causing presenilins mutants via Ca(2+) disruptions. Cell calcium. 2016;59(5):240-50. Epub 2016/03/14.

117. Jensen LE, Bultynck G, Luyten T, Amijee H, Bootman MD, Roderick HL. Alzheimer's disease-associated peptide Abeta42 mobilizes ER Ca(2+) via InsP3R-dependent and -independent mechanisms. Frontiers in molecular neuroscience. 2013;6:36. Epub 2013/11/10.

118. Grolla AA, Sim JA, Lim D, Rodriguez JJ, Genazzani AA, Verkhratsky A. Amyloid-beta and Alzheimer's disease type pathology differentially affects the calcium signalling toolkit in astrocytes from different brain regions. Cell death & disease. 2013;4:e623. Epub 2013/05/11.

119. Ronco V, Grolla AA, Glasnov TN, Canonico PL, Verkhratsky A, Genazzani AA, et al. Differential deregulation of astrocytic calcium signalling by amyloid-beta, TNFalpha, IL-1beta and LPS. Cell calcium. 2014;55(4):219-29. Epub 2014/03/25.

120. Lazzari C, Kipanyula MJ, Agostini M, Pozzan T, Fasolato C. Abeta 42 oligomers selectively disrupt neuronal calcium release. Neurobiology of aging. 2015;36(2):877-85. Epub 2014/12/03.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

121. Oseki KT, Monteforte PT, Pereira GJ, Hirata H, Ureshino RP, Bincoletto C, et al. Apoptosis induced by Abeta25-35 peptide is Ca(2+)-IP3 signaling-dependent in murine astrocytes. The European journal of neuroscience. 2014;40(3):2471-8. Epub 2014/05/16.

122. Ferreira IL, Ferreiro E, Schmidt J, Cardoso JM, Pereira CM, Carvalho AL, et al. Abeta and NMDAR activation cause mitochondrial dysfunction involving ER calcium release. Neurobiology of aging. 2015;36(2):680-92. Epub 2014/12/03.

123. Jaworska A, Dzbek J, Styczynska M, Kuznicki J. Analysis of calcium homeostasis in fresh lymphocytes from patients with sporadic Alzheimer's disease or mild cognitive impairment. Biochimica et biophysica acta. 2013;1833(7):1692-9. Epub 2013/01/29.

124. Bezprozvanny I, Bezprozvannaya SG, Ehrlich BE. Caffeine-induced inhibition of inositol (1,4,5)-trisphosphate-gated calcium channels from cerebellum. Molec Biol Cell. 1994;5:97-103.

125. Schlecker C, Boehmerle W, Jeromin A, DeGray B, Varshney A, Sharma Y, et al. Neuronal calcium sensor-1 enhancement of InsP3 receptor activity is inhibited by therapeutic levels of lithium. The Journal of clinical investigation. 2006;116(6):1668-74.

126. Vanderheyden V, Devogelaere B, Missiaen L, De Smedt H, Bultynck G, Parys JB. Regulation of inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate-induced Ca2+ release by reversible phosphorylation and dephosphorylation. Biochimica et biophysica acta. 2009;1793(6):959-70. Epub 2009/01/10.

| Disease                     | Gene    | Protein                                      | Function                                   | Mutation type     | Reference   |
|-----------------------------|---------|---------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------|--------------------|-------------|
| SCA 15/16                   | IP3R1   | Inositol 1,4,5-triphosphate receptor type 1 | Calcium signaling                         | Deletion           | (58-61, 68) |
| SCA 29                      | IP3R1   | Inositol 1,4,5-triphosphate receptor type 1 | Calcium signaling                         | Missense mutation  | (66,68)     |
| Nonprogressive congenital ataxia | IP3R1   | Inositol 1,4,5-triphosphate receptor type 1 | Calcium signaling                         | Missense mutation  | (67)        |
| Gillespie syndrome          | IP3R1   | Inositol 1,4,5-triphosphate receptor type 1 | Calcium signaling                         | Missense mutation  | (69,70)     |
| ADSA                       | RNF170  | Ring finger protein 170                    | Ubiquitination of activated IP3R          | Missense mutation  | (71)        |
| HD                          | HTT     | Huntingtin                                  | Mutant htt binds with IP3R and increases its sensitivity to IP3 molecules | PolyQ         | (76,77)     |
| SCA 2                       | ATXN2   | Ataxin-2                                    | Mutant atxn-2 binds with IP3R and increases its sensitivity to IP3 molecules | PolyQ         | (90,91)     |
| SCA 3                       | ATXN3   | Ataxin-3                                    | Mutant atxn-3 binds with IP3R and increases its sensitivity to IP3 molecules | PolyQ         | (100)       |
| FAD                         | PSEN1   | Presenilin-1                                | PS1 mutants potentiate IICR               | Missense mutation  | (107-117)   |

extracellular
signaling molecule

activated
phospholipase C
PIP2
DAG

EXTRACELLULAR
SPACE

CYTOSOL

activated
receptor

GTP

activated G protein

Ca²⁺
dependent
proteins

Ca²⁺

IP3R

ER

Ca²⁺

activated
C-kinase

cleavage

IP3

phosphorylates
cell proteins

Fig. 1

Figure 1. The IP3R activation pathway.

Extracellular agonist activates receptor which binds to a specific G protein that causes phospholipase C (PLC) activation, leading to the phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate (PIP2) cleavage to generate inositol 1,4,5-triphosphate (IP3) and diacylglycerol (DAG). The DAG (together with bound Ca²⁺ and phosphatidylserine – not shown) activates C-kinase that starts signal transduction cascades. IP3 molecules diffuse through the cytosol to the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), bind the inositol 1,4,5-triphosphate receptor (IP3R) leading to inositol 1,4,5-triphosphate-induced calcium release (ICR) and further activation of Ca²⁺-dependent proteins.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

A

Ligand-binding  
domain (LBD)

IP3-binding  
suppressor  
domain  
(SD)  

Regulatory domain  

Pore-  
forming  
region  

Linker  
domain  

Intervening  
lateral domain  

Trans-  
membrane  
domain  

C-terminal  
domain  

β-trefoil domains Helical domain Armadillo repeats ILD LNK CTD  

5 225 226 604  

β-TF1 β-TF2 ARM1 HeID ARM2 ARM3 TMD  

1 550 1100 1650 2200 2750  

SI SII SIII  

318-322 918-926 1692-1731  

B  

CaM Fyn IRBIT CaBP1 CaMKII CaM PKA Bok ATP Bcl-x<sub>L</sub> Htt  

Ada PKG  

× × × × × × × ×  

1 353 550 1-604 1100 1564-1584 1650 1895-1903 2200 2571-2606 2750 2627-2736  

106-128 226-604 568-585 1-1078 1588 1773-1780 2016-2021 2690-2732  

49-81  

× - Calcium binding sites  

Fig. 2  

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

Figure 2. Domain structure of IP3R.

(A) Four key regions are highlighted: the N-terminal ligand-binding region, the large regulatory region, the transmembrane/pore-forming region, and the C-terminal region. Ten domains detected by cryo-EM are color-coded. SI, SIII, and SII refer to the three splice sites. (B) Putative binding sites for several channel-specific ligands are indicated in the primary linear structure of IP3R: CaM – calmodulin, Fyn – tyrosine-protein kinase Fyn, IRBIT – IP3R binding protein released with IP3, Ada – adenophostin, CaBP1 – calcium-binding protein 1, CaMKII – calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II, PKA – cAMP-dependent protein kinase A, PKG – cGMP-dependent protein kinase, ATP – ATP-binding, Htt – huntingtin. Amino acid residue numbering is the same as for the mouse IP3R1 (GI: 313104120). Calcium binding sites are indicated by red crosses (23, 24, 126). Please note that in the current article we use abbreviation for helical domain as HelD instead the original HD since we use the HD abbreviation for Huntington disease.

Figure 3. Schematic illustration of the tetrameric IP3R Ca²⁺ release channel.

(A) Central core structure of IP3R1. Calcium release axis formed by four transmembrane domains and four cytosolic C-terminal domains connected via four helical linker domains is indicated by the dashed line; arrows illustrate the bundle handedness. (B) Model for gating mechanism of IP3R1 activation by IP3 (color-coded by subunit): IP3 binds between the β-IP3-binding core and α-IP3-binding core subdomains leading to the signal propagation from β-IP3-binding core to C-terminal domain/linker domains and from suppressor domains to ARM3/intervening lateral domains of neighboring subunits, and then further to the pore formed by transmembrane domains (23).

Glutamate
mGluR1/5
5PP
IP3
Ca²⁺
RyR
2-APB
Enoxaparin
Dantrolene
Ca²⁺
ER
Mito
MCU
Cyt c
Apoptosis
SCA2/3
HD

Fig. 4

Figure 4. Calcium hypothesis of polyQ disorders pathogenesis.

Molecules of glutamate activate metabotropic glutamate receptor (mGluR), then inositol 1,4,5-triphosphate (IP3) molecules release into the cytoplasm and activate inositol 1,4,5-triphosphate receptor (IP3R) on the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) membrane. Next calcium influx from ER to the cytoplasm is observed and this represents IP3-induced calcium release (IICR). It was shown that mutant ataxin-2, ataxin-3 and huntingtin proteins (PolyQmut), but not wild type polyQ proteins bind with IP3R and increase their sensitivity to IP3 molecules. Hyperactivation of IP3R causes deranged calcium signaling in PCs. Ca²⁺ ions, greatly increased in their number, are pumped to the mitochondria (Mito) through the mitochondrial calcium uniporter (MCU) that leads to mitochondrial swelling, followed later by the rupture of outer mitochondrial membrane and next pro-apoptotic factors like cytochrome c (Cyt c) come into the cytoplasm and initiate apoptosis. Hence, dramatically increased IICR can be suppressed by adeno-associated virus-mediated expression of the IP3-phosphatase enzyme (5PP) which converts IP3 into non-active form IP2. Also calcium release from ER can be reduced with the use of dantrolene, a blocker of ryanodine receptors (RyRs) or IP3R blockers 2-APB and Enoxaparin.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
