
# RAS and PD-L1: A Masters’ Liaison in Cancer Immune Evasion

**Nicole Glodde**¹ and **Michael Hölzel**¹,*  
*¹Unit for RNA Biology, Department of Clinical Chemistry and Clinical Pharmacology, University of Bonn, 53105 Bonn, Germany*  
*Correspondence: michael.hoelzel@ukb.uni-bonn.de*  
*https://doi.org/10.1016/j.immuni.2017.12.001*

Mutant RAS is a major oncoprotein in human cancer and PD-L1 is a key driver of cancer immune evasion. In this issue of *Immunity*, Coelho et al. (2017) demonstrate that oncogenic RAS signaling promotes tumor immune escape by stabilizing PD-L1 mRNA.

The immune system can effectively restrain tumor growth, but unfortunately tumors can escape from immune surveillance by many mechanisms. The clinical success of immune checkpoint blockers has demonstrated that the PD-1:PD-L1 axis is a major driver of immune escape in human tumors including non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) (Garon et al., 2015). Binding of PD-L1 (CD274) to the PD-1 receptor on T cells confers a state of “exhaustion,” which impairs T cells in their capacity to kill the cancer cells. Tumors exploit induction of PD-L1 in order to prevent their elimination through the immune system and this has strongly fostered interest in understanding the regulation of PD-L1 expression. Interferon-γ (IFN-γ) is the best-characterized signal from the tumor microenvironment that leads to rapid transcriptional upregulation of PD-L1 mRNA and protein level. Recent unbiased genetic screens have identified the so far uncharacterized proteins CMTM6 and CMTM4 as positive regulators of PD-L1 protein stability with remarkable selectivity (Mezzadra et al., 2017). Both factors enhance PD-L1 expression on tumor cells and thereby impair tumor-specific T cell activity. Interestingly, the PD-L1 gene itself is also subject to genomic alterations in different types of cancers (Kataoka et al., 2016). Rearrangements in the 3′ untranslated region (UTR) result in truncated PD-L1 transcripts with enhanced stability, arguing that increased PD-L1 levels confer a selective growth advantage to tumor cells. Furthermore, the data also show that the 3′ UTR of PD-L1 mRNA critically contributes to post-transcriptional regulation of PD-L1 protein expression.

In this issue of *Immunity*, Coelho et al. (2017) unveil a so far unknown link between oncogenic RAS signaling in cancer cells and increased PD-L1 mRNA stability, which leads to elevated PD-L1 surface expression and impaired tumor immune surveillance. There are three RAS genes (HRAS, KRAS, and NRAS) and among those, KRAS is the most frequently mutated oncogene in human cancer. RAS mutations abrogate intrinsic GTPase activity and lock mutant RAS proteins in the activated GTP-bound state leading to constitutive downstream signaling, which includes the RAF-MEK-ERK and the PI3K-AKT pathways. Based on a recent clinical trial that reported increased PD-L1 expression in NSCLC with KRAS mutations (Garon et al., 2015), Coelho et al. (2017) asked whether oncogenic RAS signaling directly regulates PD-L1 expression. Using a non-transformed pneumocyte cell line expressing a tamoxifen-regulatable ER-KRAS<sup>G12V</sup> fusion protein, the authors found rapid and profound upregulation of PD-L1 mRNA and surface protein level upon activation of oncogenic RAS. In contrast to IFN-γ, induction of PD-L1 by activated RAS did not involve a transcriptional response, but it was mediated by an increased half-life of the PD-L1 mRNA. Subsequent experiments with small molecule inhibitors identified the RAF-MEK-ERK cascade as a critical regulator of PD-L1 mRNA stability. Importantly, Coelho et al. (2017) corroborated their findings by showing downregulation of PD-L1 in KRAS<sup>G12C</sup> mutant human NSCLC cell lines treated with selective KRAS<sup>G12C</sup> or MEK inhibitors.

In order to elucidate the molecular mechanism of how RAS signaling regulates PD-L1 mRNA stability, the authors analyzed the 3′ UTR region and identified several AU-rich elements (AREs). AREs are known to confer mRNA instability through binding of AU-rich element binding proteins (AUBPs), which recruit protein complexes for targeted mRNA decay. Using their panel of NSCLC cell lines, Coelho et al. (2017) performed genetic gain- and loss-of-function experiments for several known AUBPs and obtained the most consistent results for tristetraprolin (TTP, also known as ZFP36). TTP physically bound to PD-L1 mRNA and depletion or overexpression of TTP reciprocally increased or decreased PD-L1 mRNA and protein level in an ARE-dependent manner. Taken together, the authors identified the RNA-binding protein TTP as a suppressor of PD-L1 expression by enhancing the degradation of PD-L1 mRNA.

ERK is known to phosphorylate TTP and to impair its activity. This would have been an obvious mechanism linking the RAS-RAF-MEK-ERK cascade with the regulation of PD-L1 mRNA stability via TTP. Unexpectedly, Coelho et al. (2017) unraveled a different pathway downstream of ERK that critically controlled TTP activity in the context of oncogenic RAS signaling. The authors found that ERK-driven reactive oxygen species (ROS) production activated the p38-MK2 stress kinase cascade, causing phosphorylation of TTP at two newly identified serine phosphorylation sites (S68/S186 in human TTP). Importantly, phosphorylation of TTP at these two relevant residues reduced TTP-mediated instability of PD-L1 mRNA (Figure 1).

Finally, Coelho et al. (2017) addressed how TTP influences tumor growth and immune surveillance using the CT26 and MC38 syngeneic colon cancer models. Enforced TTP expression reduced PD-L1 surface level, promoted T cell

Immunity 47, December 19, 2017 © 2017 Elsevier Inc. 1007

Cyclooxygenase-2 (PTGS2, COX-2) is an enzyme that generates prostaglandin E2 (PGE₂), which was recently shown to drive tumor-promoting inflammation and to restrain anti-tumor immunity (Zelenay et al., 2015). In their study, Coelho et al. (2017) did not investigate the contribution of COX-2 and PGE₂ to tumor immune escape, but their data suggest that PD-L1 is the key mechanism downstream of TTP. Nevertheless, it is likely that the ROS-p38-MK2-TTP cascade also controls the expression of additional key factors involved in cancer immune escape. In this case, TTP could emerge as a central signaling hub controlling the cancer and immune cell crosstalk.

Furthermore, it will be interesting to see how the ROS-p38-MK2-TTP cascade modulates cytokine and chemokine expression patterns. Some chemokines enhance T cell recruitment and enforce anti-tumor immune responses, whereas others fuel tumor-promoting inflammation. Thus, TTP-dependent control of ARE-containing cytokine mRNAs could have ambiguous effects on tumor immune surveillance. As infiltrating immune cells are major sources of cytokines in the tumor microenvironment, it remains to be addressed whether the ROS-p38-MK2-TTP cascade regulates cytokine expression in immune cells, and in which subtypes. Such studies will increase our understanding of how, for example, MEK inhibitors, which act upstream of the ROS-p38-MK2-TTP cascade, modulate immune cell functions and interactions. Indeed, MEK inhibitor co-treatment improves anti-tumor T cell activity (Ebert et al., 2016). Interestingly, TTP deficiency in CD8⁺ T cells and macrophages enhances anti-tumor CD8⁺ responses through altered cytokine expression (Wang et al., 2017). As another example, the c-MET receptor tyrosine kinase, which is an upstream activator of the RAS pathway, controls neutrophil recruitment and function in response to cancer immunotherapy (Glodde et al., 2017). Of note, TTP-deficient neutrophils have a reduced apoptosis rate through stabilization of the mRNA encoding for the anti-apoptotic protein MCL1 (Ebner et al., 2017). This suggests that TTP critically regulates myeloid immune cell functions and phenotypes in the tumor microenvironment. Thus, TTP-dependent effects of oncogenic signal transduction

**Figure 1. Oncogenic RAS Signaling Impairs Tumor Immune Surveillance through Stabilization of PD-L1 mRNA**

Constitutively activated receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs) or RAS mutations cause oncogenic RAS signaling in cancer cells. RAS activates the RAF-MEK-ERK downstream signaling cascade, which leads to increased ROS production and activation of the stress kinases p38 and MK2. MK2 then phosphorylates the RNA-binding protein TTP (tristetraprolin, also known as ZFP36). Phosphorylation of TTP reduces its activity to degrade PD-L1 mRNA via binding to AU-rich elements (AREs) in the 3′ UTR. As a consequence, increased PD-L1 mRNA level leads to increased PD-L1 protein expression on the surface of cancer cells and impaired anti-tumor immunity.

infiltration, and restrained tumor growth. This effect was absent in mice depleted for CD4⁺ and CD8⁺ T cells as well as in immunodeficient mice, which confirmed the predominant immunological mechanism. With regard to selectivity for PD-L1, co-expression of full-length PD-L1 lacking the 3′ UTR region completely abrogated the tumor growth inhibitory effects mediated by TTP overexpression.

The importance of the work by Coelho et al. (2017) lies in the fact that it connects RAS and PD-L1, two master drivers of oncogenesis and cancer immune evasion, respectively. The authors also unveiled a phosphorylation-dependent mechanism of how oncogenic RAS signaling impairs the activity of the RNA-binding protein TTP, causing PD-L1 mRNA stabilization. From a translational perspective, the study delineates several opportunities for rational combinations of small molecule inhibitors with current cancer immunotherapies. Based on Coelho et al. (2017), mutant RAS inhibitors promise to foster anti-tumor immunity in

1008 Immunity 47, December 19, 2017

inhibitors on immune cells can influence anti-tumor immunity, a knowledge that is needed to optimally combine these inhibitors with cancer immunotherapy.

In summary, the work by Coelho et al. (2017) unveiled a novel molecular mechanism of PD-L1 regulation that is controlled by oncogenic RAS signaling. It highlights the importance of non-cancer cell-autonomous mechanisms for tumor development driven by major oncogenes like RAS. The study also opens up new avenues for the improvement of current cancer immunotherapies by targeting PD-L1 mRNA stability with small molecule inhibitors in tumors lacking genomic rearrangements of the PD-L1 3′ UTR region. As RAS mutations and PD-L1 overexpression are common in human cancer, the findings by Coelho et al. (2017) delineate therapeutic strategies with broad clinical applicability.

**ACKNOWLEDGMENTS**

This work was supported by grants to M.H. from the Else-Kröner Fresenius Stiftung (2013_A297), the DFG (HO4281/2-1), and the DFG cluster of excellence (EXC1023). M.H. is a member of DFG cluster of excellence ImmunoSensation (EXC1023).

**REFERENCES**

Coelho, M.A., de Carné Trécesson, S., Rana, S., Zecchin, D., Moore, C., Molina-Arcas, M., East, P., Spencer-Dene, B., Nye, E., Barnouin, K., et al. (2017). Oncogenic RAS signalling promotes tumour immunoresistance by stabilising PD-L1 mRNA. Immunity 47, this issue, 1083–1099.

Ebert, P.J.R., Cheung, J., Yang, Y., McNamara, E., Hong, R., Moskalenko, M., Gould, S.E., Maecker, H., Irving, B.A., Kim, J.M., et al. (2016). MAP kinase inhibition promotes T cell and anti-tumor activity in combination with PD-L1 checkpoint blockade. Immunity 44, 609–621.

Ebner, F., Sedlyarov, V., Tasciyan, S., Ivin, M., Kratochvill, F., Gratz, N., Kenner, L., Villunger, A., Sixt, M., and Kovarik, P. (2017). The RNA-binding protein tristetraprolin schedules apoptosis of pathogen-engaged neutrophils during bacterial infection. J. Clin. Invest. 127, 2051–2065.

Garon, E.B., Rizvi, N.A., Hui, R., Leigh, N., Balmanoukian, A.S., Eder, J.P., Patnaik, A., Aggarwal, C., Gubens, M., Horn, L., et al.; KEYNOTE-001 Investigators (2015). Pembrolizumab for the treatment of non-small-cell lung cancer. N. Engl. J. Med. 372, 2018–2028.

Glodde, N., Bald, T., van den Boorn-Konijnenberg, D., Nakamura, K., O’Donnell, J.S., Szczepanski, S., Brandes, M., Eickhoff, S., Das, I., Shridhar, N., et al. (2017). Reactive neutrophil responses dependent on the receptor tyrosine kinase c-MET limit cancer immunotherapy. Immunity 47, 789–802.

Kataoka, K., Shiraishi, Y., Takeda, Y., Sakata, S., Matsumoto, M., Nagano, S., Maeda, T., Nagata, Y., Kitanaka, A., Mizuno, S., et al. (2016). Aberrant PD-L1 expression through 3′-UTR disruption in multiple cancers. Nature 534, 402–406.

Kratochvill, F., Machacek, C., Vogl, C., Ebner, F., Sedlyarov, V., Gruber, A.R., Hartweger, H., Vielnascher, R., Karaghiosoff, M., Rülicke, T., et al. (2011). Tristetraprolin-driven regulatory circuit controls quality and timing of mRNA decay in inflammation. Mol. Syst. Biol. 7, 560.

Mezzadra, R., Sun, C., Jae, L.T., Gomez-Eerland, R., de Vries, E., Wu, W., Logtenberg, M.E.W., Slager, M., Rozeman, E.A., Hofland, I., et al. (2017). Identification of CMTM6 and CMTM4 as PD-L1 protein regulators. Nature 549, 106–110.

Wang, Q., Ning, H., Peng, H., Wei, L., Hou, R., Hoff, D.F., and Liu, J. (2017). Tristetraprolin inhibits macrophage IL-27-induced activation of antitumour cytotoxic T cell responses. Nat. Commun. 8, 867.

Zelenay, S., van der Veen, A.G., Böttcher, J.P., Snelgrove, K.J., Rogers, N., Acton, S.E., Chakravarty, P., Girotti, M.R., Marais, R., Quezada, S.A., et al. (2015). Cyclooxygenase-dependent tumor growth through evasion of immunity. Cell 162, 1257–1270.


---

# Feeling Exhausted? Tuning Irf4 Energizes Dysfunctional T Cells

Vijaykumar Chennupati${}^{1}$ and Werner Held${}^{1,*}$

${}^{1}$Department of Oncology, University of Lausanne, 1066 Epalinges, Switzerland

*Correspondence: werner.held@unil.ch

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.immuni.2017.11.028

The regulatory mechanisms governing T cell exhaustion remain incompletely understood. Man et al. (2017) and Wu et al. (2017) report that the T cell receptor responsive transcription factor Irf4 promotes T cell exhaustion in chronic viral infection but dampens exhaustion in response to tissue allografts.

T cell exhaustion refers to an alternative differentiation program associated with persistent antigen exposure, which is characterized by reduced effector functions, altered metabolic status, and the transcriptional induction of negative regulators of T cell function (Wherry and Kurachi, 2015). While T cell exhaustion reduces immune attack of healthy tissues, it severely limits effector responses against chronic viral infections and tumors. Accordingly, relieving exhaustion has become a prime therapeutic focus to improve immune responses to chronic infection and cancer. Conversely, promoting T cell exhaustion may be a valuable approach to prevent allograft rejection or control autoimmune diseases.

Two papers in this issue of *Immunity* address the role of interferon regulatory factor 4 (Irf4) in the T cell response to chronic viral infection (Man et al., 2017) and tissue allografts (Wu et al., 2017). Despite substantial homology with other members of the Irf family, Irf4 expression is not induced by interferons but occurs rapidly in response to T cell receptor (TCR) stimulation. The level of Irf4 expression is proportional to the affinity of the TCR for antigen and determines the extent of clonal CD8+ T cell expansion and effector differentiation in response

Immunity 47, December 19, 2017 © 2017 Elsevier Inc. 1009
