
JVI Accepted Manuscript Posted Online 3 January 2018  
J. Virol. doi:10.1128/JVI.00099-17  
Copyright © 2018 American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

Evasion of Cytosolic DNA-Stimulated Innate Immune Responses by  
HSV-1  

Chunfu Zheng${}^{1,2,3}$*  

1. Department of Immunology, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Fujian Medical University,  
   Minhou, Fuzhou, 350108, China.  

2. Department of Cardiovascular Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital and The Institute for  
   Cardiovascular Science, Soochow University, Suzhou, Jiangsu 215123, China  

3. Adjunct professor, Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Infectious diseases,  
   University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, T2N 4N1, Canada  

* Corresponding author: Chunfu Zheng, Ph.D.  
Department of Immunology, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Fujian Medical University,  
Minhou, Fuzhou, 350108, China.  

Tel/Fax: +86-591 22862459  
E-mail: zheng.alan@hotmail.com  

KEYWORDS  
HSV-1, immune evasion, DNA sensing, innate immunity, interferon  

ABSTRACT  
Recognition of virus-derived nucleic acids by host pattern recognition receptors

(PRRs) is crucial for early defense against viral infections. Recent studies revealed that PRRs also include several newly identified DNA sensors, most of which could activate the downstream adaptor stimulator of interferon genes (STING) and lead to the production of host antiviral factors. Herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1) is extremely successful to establish an effective infection due to its capacity to counteract host innate antiviral responses. In the present review, I summarized the most recent findings on the molecular mechanisms utilized by HSV-1 to target different steps of the cellular DNA sensor-mediated antiviral signal pathway.

INTRODUCTION

The type I interferon (IFN-I) signal pathway is in the first line of host defense by

56 inducing a wide range of antiviral effectors to eliminate invading pathogens.
57 Recognition of viral constituents by host pattern recognition receptors (PRRs) is the
58 first step to activate the IFN-I pathway which ultimately induces the expression of
59 multiple IFN-stimulated genes (ISGs) and instigates innate antiviral responses. Viral
60 DNA and/or RNA, as well as the nucleic acids produced during viral life circle, are
61 important pathogen-associated molecular patterns that can induce host immune
62 responses. In addition, viral infection could also trigger mitochondrial stress resulting
63 in the release of mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) into the cytosol. Therefore, host
64 utilizes various innate immune sensors to detect these viral derived nucleic acids as
65 well as mtDNA, including several members of the Toll-like receptor family and
66 certain cytosolic DNA and/or RNA sensors.
67 Over the past decade, numerous cytosolic DNA sensors and adaptors, including
68 DEAD box polypeptide 41 (DDX41), DNA-dependent activator of IRFs (DAI),
69 absent in melanoma 2 (AIM2), gamma-interferon-inducible protein (IFI16) and cyclic
70 GMP-AMP synthase (cGAS), have been identified and characterized, while most of
71 these DNA sensors function upstream of the adaptor protein STING and trigger IFN-I
72 production in various cell types (1-6). These findings have broadened our
73 understanding of cytosolic DNA sensing and signaling that lead to the production of
74 IFN-I and inflammatory cytokines.
75 Herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1) is a human restricted DNA virus. Different
76 from most viruses, HSV-1 typically causes an acute lytic infection, and then
77 establishes a lifelong latent infection in the trigeminal ganglia. Previous studies have
78 reported that HSV-1 can successfully establish a latent infection because it is adept at
79 modulating the host/virus interactions (7). In this review, I briefly introduce the most
80 recent findings on host antiviral innate immune responses initiated by the newly
81 identified cytosolic DNA sensors and the countermeasures utilized by HSV-1 to target
82 different steps in the cellular DNA sensor-mediated antiviral signal pathway.

83

84 HOST ANTIVIRAL RESPONSES INITIATED BY CYTOSOLIC DNA
85 SENSORS

Although several DNA sensors, such as DDX41 and DAI, were suggested as potential

cytosolic DNA sensors and were reported to play a role on viral restriction, further

studies showed that they were dispensable for DNA-induced responses in a variety of

cell lines, suggesting that these DNA sensors play a redundant or cell-type specific

role (4, 8).

### cGAS/STING

cGAS, also known as MB21D1 and C6orf150, is now considered as a

nonredundant and major cytosolic DNA sensor. The cGAS/STING mediated DNA

sensing signal pathway is important for cellular innate responses and intrinsic

resistance to DNA virus infection (9, 10). It has been demonstrated that HSV-1 capsid

underwent K48-linked ubiquitination and was degraded by the proteasome, and the

genomic DNA was released into the cytoplasm (11). Moreover, HSV-1 has been

reported to trigger mitochondrial stress which lead to the release of mitochondrial

DNA into the cytosol (12). Both result in the exposure of DNA fragments to the

cytosolic DNA sensor cGAS, which then utilizes GTP and ATP to produce cGAMP to

activate STING, and the latter recruits TANK-binding kinase 1 (TBK1) and traffics

from endoplasmic reticulum to a perinuclear endosomal compartment, leading to the

activation of IFN regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) and production of IFN-I. Knock-down of

cGAS using shRNA reduced DNA induced IRF3 activation and IFN production,

meanwhile, cGAS knockout mice were more susceptible to HSV-1 infection

compared with the wild-type siblings (9).

### IFI16

IFI16 belongs to the PYHIN family that contains a pyrin domain on its

N-terminus and two C-terminal HIN domains, and has also been identified as a

nonredundant DNA binding protein. Different from other cytosolic DNA sensors,

IFI16 shuttles between the nucleus and the cytoplasm, and is predominantly nuclear

with only a small fraction been detected in the cytoplasm at resting state. Upon

infection, IFI16 recognizes and directly associates with HSV-1-derived DNA in the

nucleus, then it interacts with and is acetylated by histone acetyltransferase p300,

resulting in its cytoplasmic redistribution where it interacts with STING, and

116 subsequently induces IRF-3 phosphorylation as well as IFN production to restrict
117 viral replication (13, 14). IFI16 has also been shown to directly bind to HSV-1
118 promoters and prevent its association with transcriptional activators, hence inhibiting
119 HSV-1 replication through modulating histone modifications (15). In addition, IFI16
120 could interact with apoptosis-associated speck-like protein containing a CARD (ASC)
121 and procaspase-1 to assemble inflammasome in the nucleus during infection (16).
122
123 EVASION OF CYTOSOLIC DNA SENSOR-MEDIATED VIRAL
124 RECOGNITION
125 Although the cytosolic DNA sensing pathway is activated during viral infection,
126 HSV-1 has developed multiple mechanisms to attenuate host antiviral machinery and
127 facilitate viral infection and replication. Recent studies have reported that HSV-1 can
128 evade the DNA sensor-mediated antiviral responses both at the level of recognition
129 through multiple DNA sensors, and the innate immune signaling through the
130 STING-TBK1-IRF3orNF-kB axis (Fig. 1).
131 As the main cytosolic DNA sensor, cGAS is essential for IFN production and the
132 establishment of a host antiviral state, therefore, HSV-1 must evolve certain strategies
133 to antagonize the cGAS/STING pathway for effective infection. Recently, we
134 identified HSV-1 tegument protein UL41, an endoribonuclease also known as the
135 virion host shutoff protein, targeted the cGAS/STING-mediated cellular DNA-sensing
136 pathway by selectively degrading cGAS mRNA via its RNase activity (17).
137 HSV-1 immediate early (IE) protein ICP0 is an E3 ubiquitin ligase and plays a
138 critical role during HSV-1 replication, latency, and reactivation. Johnson et al. and
139 Orzalli et al. reported that HSV-1 specifically targeted IFI16 for proteasome
140 degradation via viral E3 ubiquitin ligase ICP0, while Everett et al. argued that
141 expression of ICP0 alone was neither sufficient nor necessary to degrade IFI16 as
142 infection with ICP0-null HSV-1 also resulted in IFI16 degradation (18, 19). Despite
143 these seemingly contradictory findings, a most recent study by Orzalli et al. revealed
144 that HSV-1 UL41 protein also contributed to the loss of IFI16 expression by
145 degrading its mRNA in tumor-derived cells (20).

146 Apart from directly inhibiting the cytosolic DNA sensors as described above, Sun
147 et al. discovered that HSV-1 ubiquitin-specific protease (UL36USP) could inhibit
148 viral capsid ubiquitination and subsequent degradation through its DUB activity to
149 block viral genomic DNA from being released into the cytosol, thus avoiding
150 DNA-sensing induced antiviral innate immune responses, although this inhibitory
151 effect was weaker compared with its homologues in gamma-herpesviruses (21).
152
153 MANIPULATION OF DNA-STIMULATED SIGNAL
154 Growing evidence shows that STING, also known as TMEM 173, MITA, ERIS and
155 MPYS, is the common adaptor protein downstream of many DNA sensors and plays a
156 critical role in innate immune signal. STING is anchored in the endoplasmic
157 reticulum in resting cells through four transmembrane domains residing in its
158 N-terminal region. Once activated, STING recruits TBK1 and IRF3 via its C terminus
159 and facilitates the phosphorylation of IRF3 by TBK1 (22). Kalamvoki et al. reported
160 that HSV-1 infection affected the stability and function of STING in a cell
161 type-dependent manner, which was dependent on the functional integrity of ICP0 and
162 US3-PK (23). A recent study has demonstrated that UL46 was required for
163 downregulation of STING-mediated DNA sensing signal pathway. UL46 could bind
164 to both STING and TBK1, and these interactions may influence STING function
165 during HSV-1 infection (24). However, the molecular mechanisms on how HSV-1
166 infection affects STING activation remain to be determined.
167 TBK1 is involved in both RIG-I-like receptor (RLR) and DNA sensor-mediated
168 antiviral signals, thus is a central regulator of IFN-I induction (25, 26). We recently
169 identified VP24, a serine protease of HSV-1, abrogated the interaction between TBK1
170 and IRF3, hence preventing activation of the important transcription factor IRF3 and
171 IFN-I production (27). Christensen et al. found that HSV-1 ICP27, an IE protein
172 conserved among all herpesviruses, interacted with TBK1 and STING in a manner
173 that required both TBK1 activity and the RGG motif in ICP27, resulting in impaired
174 IRF3 activation and IFN-I production (28). It is worth noting that ICP27 regulates the
175 production of many viral genes, through stimulating transcription of viral early and

176 late genes and promoting translation of several viral transcripts (29). Therefore, it is
177 plausible that ICP 27 might also affect IFN-I signal pathway through the regulation of
178 other viral gene products.
179 The transcription of IFN-I depends on both NF-κB and IRFs that bind to distinct
180 regulatory domains in the promoter. Our recent study showed that UL36USP could
181 deubiquitinate IkBa and prevent its degradation and, finally, abrogate NF-κB
182 activation (30). HSV-1 UL24, another conserved viral protein crucial for efficient
183 viral replication, was found to bind to the endogenous NF-κB subunits p65 and p50
184 and abrogated their nuclear translocation under infection, resulting in the inhibition of
185 cGAS/STING-induced NF-κB activation (31).
186 It is worth noting that many adaptors and transcription factors further downstream
187 in the DNA sensor-mediated signal pathway, such as TBK1, IRF3, p65, p50 et al., are
188 shared by the RLR-mediated IFN-I signal pathway. Previous studies have
189 demonstrated that HSV-1 has evolved certain strategies to target these adaptors and
190 transcription factors. For example, the serine/threonine protein kinase US3 could
191 inhibit IFN-I signal by hyperphosphorylating IRF3 and p65, respectively (32, 33).
192 UL42 interacted with and inhibited the nuclear translocation of p65 and p50, while
193 VP16 inhibited IRF3 from recruiting its coactivator CREB-binding protein (34, 35).
194 Therefore, it is plausible to consider that viral proteins targeting these molecules in
195 the RLR-mediated signal pathway may also inhibit cytosolic DNA sensing signal
196 through a similar mechanism.

197
198 CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS

199 Notably, great progress has been made in the past few years in identifying novel host
200 antiviral components and unraveling the impact of these new elements on viral
201 infection. However, HSV-1 has in turn evolved various strategies to counteract the
202 host antiviral immune response. The interplay between HSV-1 and the host antiviral
203 innate immunity is very intricate, with viral proteins targeting multiple steps of
204 cellular DNA sensor-mediated antiviral signal pathway. Here we summarized the most
205 recent findings on HSV-1-mediated immune evasion via targeting different steps in

206 the cellular DNA sensor-mediated antiviral signal pathway, which would provide a
207 new insight into the understanding of host-virus interaction. It is worth noting that,
208 although tegument proteins could function immediately after infection, several viral
209 proteins involved in immune evasion are synthesized during the late phase of
210 infection. Therefore, these late proteins may play a role in downregulating the
211 sustained activation of innate immune responses. This would greatly facilitate viral
212 persistence through modulating host antiviral responses at both early and late phase of
213 infection.
214 Meanwhile, with increasing understanding of the interactions between HSV-1
215 infection and host DNA sensor-mediated antiviral signal pathway, it raises more
216 important questions that need to be addressed. Firstly, there is still a need to validate
217 and evaluate the importance of the aforementioned findings through in vivo studies.
218 Secondly, how do these evasion strategies impact viral capacity to a latent or lytic
219 form of infection in vivo? Lastly, and perhaps most challengingly, how do these
220 mechanisms relate to human viral disease pathogenesis? Future studies should focus
221 on these questions, and hopefully the answers will help identifying and developing
222 novel antiviral approaches against HSV-1 infection, especially for its latent infection.

223

224 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
225 This review summarizes only the most recent findings on HSV-1 mediated evasion of
226 cytosolic DNA-stimulated innate immune responses. We apologize for incomplete
227 coverage due to the space limitations. Work in the Zheng laboratory relevant to this
228 article was supported by grants from the National Natural Science Foundation of
229 China (81571974 and 81772182).

230

231 REFERENCES
232 1. Zhang Z, Yuan B, Bao M, Lu N, Kim T, Liu YJ. 2011. The helicase DDX41 senses intracellular
233 DNA mediated by the adaptor STING in dendritic cells. Nature immunology 12:959-965.
234 2. Takaoka A, Wang Z, Choi MK, Yanai H, Negishi H, Ban T, Lu Y, Miyagishi M, Kodama T, Honda
235 K, Ohba Y, Taniguchi T. 2007. DAI (DLM-1/ZBP1) is a cytosolic DNA sensor and an activator of
236 innate immune response. Nature 448:501-505.

3. Unterholzner L, Keating SE, Baran M, Horan KA, Jensen SB, Sharma S, Sirois CM, Jin T, Latz E, Xiao TS, Fitzgerald KA, Paludan SR, Bowie AG. 2010. IFI16 is an innate immune sensor for intracellular DNA. Nature immunology 11:997-1004.
4. Sun L, Wu J, Du F, Chen X, Chen ZJ. 2013. Cyclic GMP-AMP synthase is a cytosolic DNA sensor that activates the type I interferon pathway. Science 339:786-791.
5. Wu J, Chen ZJ. 2014. Innate immune sensing and signaling of cytosolic nucleic acids. Annual review of immunology 32:461-488.
6. Burckstümmer T, Baumann C, Bluml S, Dixit E, Dürnberger G, Jahn H, Planyavsky M, Bilban M, Colinge J, Bennett KL. 2009. An orthogonal proteomic-genomic screen identifies AIM2 as a cytoplasmic DNA sensor for the inflammasome. Nature immunology 10:266-272.
7. Su C, Zhan G, Zheng C. 2016. Evasion of host antiviral innate immunity by HSV-1, an update. Virology journal 13:38.
8. Ishii KJ, Kawagoe T, Koyama S, Matsui K, Kumar H, Kawai T, Uematsu S, Takeuchi O, Takeshita F, Coban C. 2008. TANK-binding kinase-1 delineates innate and adaptive immune responses to DNA vaccines. Nature 451:725-729.
9. Li XD, Wu J, Gao D, Wang H, Sun L, Chen ZJ. 2013. Pivotal roles of cGAS-cGAMP signaling in antiviral defense and immune adjuvant effects. Science 341:1390-1394.
10. Parker ZM, Murphy AA, Leib DA. 2015. Role of the DNA Sensor STING in Protection from Lethal Infection following Corneal and Intracerebral Challenge with Herpes Simplex Virus 1. Journal of virology 89:11080-11091.
11. Horan KA, Hansen K, Jakobsen MR, Holm CK, Soby S, Unterholzner L, Thompson M, West JA, Iversen MB, Rasmussen SB, Ellermann-Eriksen S, Kurt-Jones E, Landolfo S, Damania B, Melchjorsen J, Bowie AG, Fitzgerald KA, Paludan SR. 2013. Proteasomal degradation of herpes simplex virus capsids in macrophages releases DNA to the cytosol for recognition by DNA sensors. Journal of immunology 190:2311-2319.
12. West AP, Khoury-Hanold W, Staron M, Tal MC, Pineda CM, Lang SM, Bestwick M, Duguay BA, Raimundo N, MacDuff DA, Kaech SM, Smiley JR, Means RE, Iwasaki A, Shadel GS. 2015. Mitochondrial DNA stress primes the antiviral innate immune response. Nature 520:553-557.
13. Ansari MA, Dutta S, Veettil MV, Dutta D, Iqbal J, Kumar B, Roy A, Chikoti L, Singh VV, Chandran B. 2015. Herpesvirus Genome Recognition Induced Acetylation of Nuclear IFI16 Is Essential for Its Cytoplasmic Translocation, Inflammasome and IFN-beta Responses. PLoS pathogens 11:e1005019.
14. Li T, Diner BA, Chen J, Cristea IM. 2012. Acetylation modulates cellular distribution and DNA sensing ability of interferon-inducible protein IFI16. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 109:10558-10563.
15. Johnson KE, Bottero V, Flaherty S, Dutta S, Singh VV, Chandran B. 2014. IFI16 restricts HSV-1 replication by accumulating on the hsv-1 genome, repressing HSV-1 gene expression, and directly or indirectly modulating histone modifications. PLoS pathogens 10:e1004503.
16. Johnson KE, Chikoti L, Chandran B. 2013. Herpes simplex virus 1 infection induces activation and subsequent inhibition of the IFI16 and NLRP3 inflammasomes. Journal of virology 87:5005-5018.
17. Su C, Zheng C. 2017. Herpes simplex virus 1 abrogates the cGAS/STING-mediated cytosolic DNA-sensing pathway via its virion host shutoff protein, UL41. Journal of virology 91:e02414-02416.

281 18. Orzalli MH, DeLuca NA, Knipe DM. 2012. Nuclear IFI 16 induction of IRF-3 signaling during herpesviral infection and degradation of IFI 16 by the viral ICP0 protein. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 109:E3008-3017.

282 19. Cuchet-Lourenço D, Anderson G, Sloan E, Orr A, Everett RD. 2013. The viral ubiquitin ligase ICP0 is neither sufficient nor necessary for degradation of the cellular DNA sensor IFI 16 during herpes simplex virus 1 infection. Journal of virology 87:13422-13432.

283 20. Orzalli MH, Broekema NM, Knipe DM. 2016. Relative Contributions of Herpes Simplex Virus 1ICP0 and vhs to Loss of Cellular IFI16 Vary in Different Human Cell Types. Journal of virology 90:8351-8359.

284 21. Sun C, Schattgen SA, Pisitkun P, Jorgensen JP, Hilterbrand AT, Wang LJ, West JA, Hansen K, Horan KA, Jakobsen MR, O'Hare P, Adler H, Sun R, Ploegh HL, Damania B, Upton JW, Fitzgerald KA, Paludan SR. 2015. Evasion of innate cytosolic DNA sensing by a gammaherpesvirus facilitates establishment of latent infection. Journal of immunology 194:1819-1831.

285 22. Ishikawa H, Ma Z, Barber GN. 2009. STING regulates intracellular DNA-mediated, type I interferon-dependent innate immunity. Nature 461:788-792.

286 23. Kalamvoki M, Roizman B. 2014. HSV-1 degrades, stabilizes, requires, or is stung by STING depending on ICP0, the US3 protein kinase, and cell derivation. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 111:E611-617.

287 24. Deschamps T, Kalamvoki M. 2017. Evasion of the STING DNA sensing pathway by the VP11/12 of herpes simplex virus type 1. Journal of virology:JVI.00535-00517.

288 25. Tanaka Y, Chen ZJ. 2012. STING specifies IRF3 phosphorylation by TBK1 in the cytosolic DNA signaling pathway. Science signaling 5:ra20-ra20.

289 26. Abe T, Barber GN. 2014. Cytosolic-DNA-mediated, STING-dependent proinflammatory gene induction necessitates canonical NF-kB activation through TBK1. Journal of virology 88:5328-5341.

290 27. Zhang D, Su C, Zheng C. 2016. Herpes Simplex Virus 1 Serine Protease VP 24 Blocks the DNA-Sensing Signal Pathway by Abrogating Activation of Interferon Regulatory Factor 3. Journal of virology 90:5824-5829.

291 28. Christensen MH, Jensen SB, Miettinen JJ, Luecke S, Prabakaran T, Reinert LS, Mettenleiter T, Chen ZJ, Knipe DM, Sandri-Goldin RM, Enquist LW, Hartmann R, Mogensen TH, Rice SA, Nyman TA, Matikainen S, Paludan SR. 2016. HSV-1 ICP27 targets the TBK1-activated STING signalsome to inhibit virus-induced type I IFN expression. The EMBO journal 35:1385-1399.

292 29. Sandri-Goldin RM. 2011. The many roles of the highly interactive HSV protein ICP27, a key regulator of infection. Future microbiology 6:1261-1277.

293 30. Ye R, Su C, Xu H, Zheng C. 2017. Herpes simplex virus 1 ubiquitin-specific protease UL36 abrogates NF-kB activation in DNA sensing signal pathway. Journal of virology 91:e02417-02416.

294 31. Xu H, Su C, Pearson A, Mody CH, Zheng C. 2017. Herpes Simplex Virus 1 UL24 Abrogates the DNA Sensing Signal Pathway by Inhibiting NF-kB Activation. Journal of virology 91:e00025-00017.

295 32. Wang K, Ni L, Wang S, Zheng C. 2014. Herpes simplex virus 1 protein kinase US3 hyperphosphorylates p65/RelA and dampens NF-kappaB activation. Journal of virology 88:7941-7951.

325 33. Wang S, Wang K, Lin R, Zheng C. 2013. Herpes simplex virus 1 serine/threonine kinase US 3 hyperphosphorylates IRF 3 and inhibits beta interferon production. Journal of virology 87:12814-12827.

328 34. Zhang J, Wang S, Wang K, Zheng C. 2013. Herpes simplex virus 1 DNA polymerase processivity factor UL42 inhibits TNF-alpha-induced NF-kappaB activation by interacting with p65/RelA and p50/NF-kappaB1. Medical microbiology and immunology 202:313-325.

331 35. Xing J, Ni L, Wang S, Wang K, Lin R, Zheng C. 2013. Herpes simplex virus 1-encoded tegument protein VP16 abrogates the production of beta interferon (IFN) by inhibiting NF-kappaB activation and blocking IFN regulatory factor 3 to recruit its coactivator CBP. Journal of virology 87:9788-9801.

340 FIGURE LEGEND

341 Fig. 1 Evasion of DNA sensor-mediated IFN-I signal pathway by HSV-1. Cytosolic DNA sensors, such as cGAS, IFI16, DDX41 and DAI, recognizes dsDNA in the cytosol and triggers IFN-I production through a series of signal transmission. Multiple steps in the DNA sensor-mediated IFN-I signal pathway can be targeted by HSV-1 proteins, including both DNA sensor-mediated viral recognition and subsequent signaling. Solid lines indicate confirmed interactions between host molecules and HSV-1 proteins. Dashed lines indicate uncertain interactions that need to be further studied.

DNA virus
UL36USP
CGAS
ATP
GTP
2′-cGAMP
5′
GMP
AMP
3′
STING
TBK1
IKBα
Ub
Ub
P65
P50
ICPO, VP11/12
UL36USP
UL41
DAI
DDX41
IFI16
ICPO
ICP27
VP24
IRF3
IRF3
US3
cytoplasm
nucleus
CBP
IRF3
IRF3
VP16
P65
P50
Type I IFN
IFN-α/β promoter
