
www.kidney-international.org

**Transcription factors that determine parathyroid development power PTH expression**

Tally Naveh-Many¹ and Justin Silver²

Studies in patients with hypoparathyroidism and knockout mouse models have revealed key transcriptional cascades central for parathyroid organogenesis. Among the transcription factors essential for parathyroid development, Gata3, GCM2, and MafB, are expressed in the developing parathyroids as well as postnatally, implying that they also regulate parathyroid-specific gene expression and function in the adult. PTH gene expression is determined by transcriptional and posttranscriptional mechanisms. The study by Morito *et al.* demonstrates that MafB contributes to the stimulation of the parathyroid by hypocalcemia and uremia.

*Kidney International* (2018) 93, 7–9; [https://doi.org/10.1016/j.kint.2017.08.026](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.kint.2017.08.026)

Copyright © 2017, International Society of Nephrology. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

see basic research on page 54

Recent studies suggest that the mechanisms controlling parathyroid embryonic development are linked to parathyroid function postnatally. The parathyroid glands develop from a shared initial organ primordium together with the thymus. Both organs arise from the third pharyngeal pouch endoderm and surrounding neural crest cells. Humans have 2 additional superior parathyroid glands that develop from the fourth pouch. In mice, the third pouch forms during embryonic days (E) 9 to 10.5. A transcriptional network involving Hoxa3, Pax1/Pax9, Eyal, Tbx1, Sox3, and Six1/Six4 controls early pouch patterning and formation of the parathyroid/thymus common primordium. After formation of the third pouch, it becomes subdivided into 2 molecularly distinct domains. The parathyroid-destined domain can be distinguished from day E10.5 by the expression of the transcription factor Gcm2 (glial cells missing 2), which is required for parathyroid differentiation and survival. Forkhead box N1 expression marks the thymus domain. Each primordium separates into a single parathyroid gland and a thymic lobe at E12.5 through 13.5. The parathyroids are “dragged” along by the migrating thymus lobes until the separation process is complete and then move to their eventual adult locations by about E14.5, adjacent to or embedded in the thyroid gland (Figure 1). Mice that lack Hoxa3, Pax1/9, Eyal, or Six1/4 have a normal initial pouch formation, but then fail to form or have hypoplastic parathyroids and thymus. Hoxa3⁻/⁻ mutants fail to initiate the formation of the parathyroid/thymus primordia. In these mutants, Gcm2 is expressed in its normal domain, but at very low levels, indicating that Hoxa3 upregulates Gcm2 expression. Eyal and Six1,4 are also required for Gcm2 expression, and mutants result in the loss of parathyroid precursor cells through apoptosis. As loss of Gcm2 itself is sufficient to cause apoptosis, it is possible that the effects of all of these genes, either individually or as a pathway, are mediated by their effect on Gcm2 expression.

Gata3, Gcm2, and MafB transcription factors constitute a genetic cascade regulating parathyroid development and parathyroid hormone (PTH) expression. GATA3 (GATA binding protein 3) haploinsufficiency results in congenital hypoparathyroidism, deafness, and renal dysplasia syndrome in humans. Gata3⁻/⁻ mouse embryos lack Gcm2 expression and exhibit gross defects in the third and fourth pharyngeal pouches, including absent parathyroid-thymus primordia. Gata3⁺/⁻ mice are viable and have apparently normal parathyroid glands. However, when fed a diet low in calcium and vitamin D, plasma PTH levels and calcium concentrations are lower than those in wild-type mice, indicating partial parathyroid dysfunction in the gata3⁺/⁻ mice. Gata3 directly binds and regulates gcm2 expression. Gcm2 is expressed predominantly in the pharyngeal pouches and, at later stages, in the developing and mature parathyroid glands. Once the parathyroid domain is established, upregulation of Gcm2 expression is necessary and sufficient for parathyroid differentiation and survival. Mutations of the gcm2 gene in humans lead to familial isolated hypoparathyroidism. Genetic ablation of gcm2 in mice results in parathyroid agenesis and hypoparathyroidism. Without Gcm2 function, parathyroid precursor cells fail to differentiate and then undergo apoptosis by E12, resulting in the apathyroid phenotype. Serum PTH levels were low or undetectable in gcm2 knockout mice. In conditional gcm2 knockout mice, immunoreactive PTH was identified within a few thymus cells in wild-type and homozygous knockout mice, consistent with the proposal that expression of PTH in medullary thymic epithelial cells provides a source of self-antigen for negative selection. Recent work has excluded the thymus as a

Hadassah Hebrew University Medical Center, Jerusalem, Ein Karem, Israel

Correspondence: Tally Naveh-Many, Hadassah Hebrew University Medical Center, POB 12000, Jerusalem, Ein Karem 91200, Israel. E-mail: TALLY@hadassah.org.il; tally@huji.ac.il

*Kidney International* (2018) 93, 7–24

commentary

Figure 1 | Parathyroid embryonic development and the regulators of PTH expression and parathyroid cell proliferation. (a) Diagram of the third and fourth pharyngeal pouches showing the embryonic location of the parathyroid and thymus-fated domains in humans and the postnatal position of the parathyroids adjacent to the thyroid glands. (b) Schematic presentations of a parathyroid cell and daughter cells. The different regulators of PTH gene expression, secretion, and parathyroid cell proliferation are shown. Calcium, 1,25D, the high phosphate of uremia, and FGF23 all regulate PTH secretion and PTH gene expression through transcriptional and posttranscriptional mechanisms. In prolonged hypocalcemia and uremia, there is also parathyroid cell proliferation as shown by the 2 small cells on the right. miRNAs are essential for the activation of the parathyroid in secondary hyperparathyroidism. Among the factors affecting parathyroid organogenesis, GATA3, Gcm2, and MafB are all essential for normal gland development and physically interact to activate the *PTH* gene promoter postnatally. MafB contributes to the increased PTH and cyclin D2 expression in secondary hyperparathyroidism. 1,25(OH)₂D₃, 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D₃; CaR, calcium-sensing receptor; CKD, chronic kidney disease; FGF23, fibroblast growth factor 23; FGFR, fibroblast growth factor receptor; mRNAs, microRNAs; PTH, parathyroid hormone; 5′-UTR, 5′ untranslated region. Modified from Naveh-Many T. Minireview: the play of proteins on the parathyroid hormone messenger ribonucleic acid regulates its expression. *Endocrinology*. 2010;151(4):1398–1402, by permission of Oxford University Press.

source of circulating PTH in humans and mice. It is possible that the normal process of parathyroid organogenesis in both mice and humans leads to the generation of multiple small parathyroid clusters in addition to the main parathyroid glands.⁴

MafB (transcriptional activator v-maf musculoaponeurotic fibrosarcoma oncogene homologue B) is a basic leucine zipper transcription factor expressed in the developing parathyroid after E11.5 and postnatally. MafB expression is lost in the parathyroid primordium of *gcm2* null mice. The parathyroid glands of *mafB*⁻/⁻ mice are mislocalized between the thymus and thyroid. In *mafB*⁻/⁻ mice, the parathyroids do not separate from the thymus during embryological development.³ Therefore, MafB regulates later steps of parathyroid development, the separation from the thymus and migration toward the thyroid.

Of Gata3, Gcm2, and MafB transcription factors, Gata3 is the most upstream, followed by Gcm2, and then MafB, which is the most downstream in parathyroid development.¹ This cascade is critical for parathyroid development. However, expression of Gata3, Gcm2, and MafB persists after parathyroid morphogenesis,³ suggesting that they are components of a gene regulatory program that governs parathyroid-specific gene expression and function. Gata3, Gcm2, and MafB form a transcriptional complex that mediates parathyroid-specific PTH expression. *In vitro* analyses in heterologous cells revealed that Gata3, Gcm2, and MafB physically interact and synergistically activate the *PTH* gene promoter.¹ Of these 3 transcription factors driving PTH expression, the *in vivo* functions of Gata3 and Gcm2 have been established, whereas the activity of MafB in parathyroid physiology and disease remains unclear.

In this issue of *Kidney International*, Morito et al.⁶ (2017) suggest that MafB plays a role in secondary hyperparathyroidism. Deletion of MafB had no effect on serum PTH levels and mineral metabolism under normal conditions. This is in contrast to the decreased serum PTH levels at postnatal day 0 in *mafB*⁻/⁻ mice reported previously.³ However, stimulation of the parathyroid by prolonged uremia in *MafB*⁺/⁻ mice resulted in an impaired increase in serum PTH, PTH mRNA, and parathyroid cell proliferation. Both PTH and cyclin D2, but not cyclin D1, expression were blunted in *MafB*⁺/⁻ uremic mice, suggesting that MafB contributes to the increased PTH and cyclin D2 expression in

Kidney International (2018) **93**, 7–24
secondary hyperparathyroidism. Acute hypocalcemia-induced PTH secretion and PTH mRNA were also impaired in $MafB^{+/}$ and in global MafB knockout mice. The authors conclude that MafB plays a role in regulation of PTH expression, but that this effect may be less important than its role in controlling the development and differentiation of the parathyroid gland. It is intriguing that transcription factors that affect parathyroid morphogenesis are expressed and functional in parathyroid physiology. The increased expression of MafB by both adenine-induced renal failure and ethylenediamine tetraacetic acid-induced hypocalcemia in wild-type mice suggests that a reduction in extracellular calcium concentrations regulates MafB through the calcium-sensing receptor.

The parathyroid is geared to respond to changes in serum calcium sensed by the calcium-sensing receptor. Calcium controls PTH secretion, PTH synthesis, and parathyroid cell proliferation. Both calcium and uremia regulate PTH gene expression by posttranscriptional mechanisms that affect PTH mRNA stability rather than PTH transcription. Regulated binding of protective and decay-promoting PTH mRNA binding proteins to a defined and evolutionary conserved element in the PTH mRNA 3'-untranslated region determines PTH mRNA levels in response to hypocalcemia and experimental uremia. This binding is orchestrated by the enzymatic activity of the cis-trans isomerase, Pin1. In addition, 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D₃, through the vitamin D receptor, acts on the PTH promoter to decrease PTH transcription. Fibroblast growth factor 23 acts on the parathyroid by activating the fibroblast growth factor klotho heterodimer to decrease PTH expression

and parathyroid cell proliferation (Figure 1).

Recent studies have demonstrated a significant role for microRNAs (miRNAs) in the development of secondary hyperparathyroidism. miRNAs downregulate gene expression and have vital roles in cell function and development. The role of miRNAs in the parathyroid was demonstrated using mice with parathyroid-specific deletion of Dicer, the enzyme essential for miRNA maturation (PT-Dicer$^{-/-}$ mice). Remarkably, the PT-Dicer$^{-/-}$ mice failed to increase serum PTH after acute hypocalcemia in vivo and in vitro. The PT-Dicer$^{-/-}$ mice also had an impaired increase in serum PTH, PTH mRNA, and parathyroid cell proliferation after both chronic hypocalcemia and uremia. Therefore, miRNAs are essential for the stimulation of the parathyroid by hypocalcemia and uremia. miRNA profiling by deep sequencing in parathyroid glands from experimental hyperparathyroidism models and patients receiving dialysis showed that human and rodent parathyroids share similar miRNA profiles. Parathyroids from normal and uremic rats segregated on the basis of their miRNA expression profiles, as did human parathyroid glands from normal and secondary hyperparathyroidism patients. Inhibition of specific miRNAs that were abundant and dysregulated in secondary hyperparathyroidism modified PTH secretion in vivo and in vitro. The evolutionary conservation of abundant miRNAs in normal parathyroid glands and the regulation of these miRNAs in secondary hyperparathyroidism as well as the effect of specific miRNAs on PTH expression indicate their importance for parathyroid function and the development of secondary hyperparathyroidism. MafB contributes to the increased PTH and cyclin D2

expression in secondary hyperparathyroidism. Future studies may link MafB to the other mechanisms that regulate the parathyroid such as the calcium-sensing receptor, the vitamin D receptor, fibroblast growth factor 23, and miRNAs.

DISCLOSURE

All the authors declared no competing interests.

REFERENCES

1. Han SI, Tsunekage Y, Kataoka K. Gata3 cooperates with Gcm2 and MafB to activate parathyroid hormone gene expression by interacting with SP1. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2015;411:113–120.

2. Chojnowski JL, Masuda K, Trau HA, et al. Multiple roles for HOXA3 in regulating thymus and parathyroid differentiation and morphogenesis in mouse. Development. 2014;141:3697–3708.

3. Kamitani-Kawamoto A, Hamada M, Moriguchi T, et al. MafB interacts with Gcm2 and regulates parathyroid hormone expression and parathyroid development. J Bone Miner Res. 2011;26:2463–2472.

4. Manley NR. Embryology of the parathyroid. In: Brandi ML, Brown EM, eds. Hypoparathyroidism. Milan: Springer Milan; 2015:11–18.

5. Grigorieva IV, Mirczuk S, Gaynor KU, et al. Gata3-deficient mice develop parathyroid abnormalities due to dysregulation of the parathyroid-specific transcription factor Gcm2. J Clin Invest. 2010;120:2144–2155.

6. Morito N, Yoh K, Usui T, et al. Transcription factor MafB may play an important role in secondary hyperparathyroidism. Kidney Int. 2018;93:54–68.

7. Nechama M, Uchida T, Yosef-Levi IM, et al. The peptidyl-prolyl isomerase Pin1 determines parathyroid hormone mRNA levels and stability in rat models of secondary hyperparathyroidism. J Clin Invest. 2009;119:3102–3114.

8. Shilo V, Ben Dov IZ, Nechama M, et al. Parathyroid-specific deletion of dicer-dependent microRNAs abrogates the response of the parathyroid to acute and chronic hypocalcemia and uremia. FASEB J. 2015;29:3964–3976.

9. Shilo V, Mor-Yosef Levi I, Abel R, et al. Let-7 and MicroRNA-148 Regulate Parathyroid Hormone Levels in Secondary Hyperparathyroidism. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2017;28:2353–2363.