
JBC Papers in Press. Published on January 17, 2018 as Manuscript RA117.001614

The latest version is at http://www.jbc.org/cgi/doi/10.1074/jbc.RA117.001614

Teichoic acid glycosylation in Gram-positive bacteria

Discovery of genes required for lipoteichoic acid glycosylation predicts two distinct mechanism for wall teichoic acid glycosylation

Jeanine Rismondo, Matthew G. Percy, Angelika Grundling*

From the Section of Microbiology and Medical Research Council Centre for Molecular Bacteriology and Infection, Imperial College London, London SW7 2AZ.

Running title: Teichoic acid glycosylation in Gram-positive bacteria

*To whom correspondence should be addressed: Angelika Grundling: Section of Microbiology and Medical Research Council Centre for Molecular Bacteriology and Infection, Imperial College London, London SW7 2AZ; a.grundling@imperial.ac.uk; Tel +44 (0) 207 594 5256

Keywords: Gram-positive bacteria, cell wall, teichoic acid, glycosyltransferase, Staphylococcus, Bacillus, glycosylation, lipoteichoic acid, wall teichoic acid, bacterial glycobiology

---

**ABSTRACT**

The bacterial cell wall is an important and highly complex structure that is essential for bacterial growth because it protects bacteria from cell lysis and environmental insults. A typical Gram-positive bacterial cell wall is composed of peptidoglycan and the secondary cell wall polymers, wall teichoic acid (WTA) and lipoteichoic acid (LTA). In many Gram-positive bacteria, LTA is a polyglycerol-phosphate chain that is decorated with D-alanine and sugar residues. However, the function of and proteins responsible for the glycosylation of LTA are either unknown or not well-characterized. Here, using bioinformatics, genetic, and NMR spectroscopy approaches, we found that the *Bacillus subtilis csbB* and *yfhO* genes are essential for LTA glycosylation. Interestingly, the *Listeria monocytogenes* gene *lmo1079*, which encodes a YfhO ortholog, was not required for LTA glycosylation, but instead was essential for WTA glycosylation. LTA is polymerized on the outside of the cell and hence can only be glycosylated extracellularly. Based on the similarity of the genes coding for YfhO orthologs that are required in *B. subtilis* for LTA glycosylation or in *L. monocytogenes* for WTA glycosylation, we hypothesize that WTA glycosylation might also occur extracellularly in *Listeria* species. Finally, we discovered that in *L. monocytogenes lmo0626* (*gtlB*) was required for LTA glycosylation, indicating that the encoded protein has a similar function to YfhO, even though the proteins are not homologous. Together, our results enable us to propose an updated model for LTA glycosylation and also indicate that glycosylation of WTA might occur through two different mechanisms in Gram-positive bacteria.

The bacterial cell wall is a highly complex and very important structure—it maintains the cell shape and protects bacteria from cell lysis and environmental insults. The main cell wall components present in Gram-positive bacteria, such as *Bacillus subtilis*, *Listeria monocytogenes* and *Staphylococcus aureus* are peptidoglycan and teichoic acids. Teichoic acids are anionic carbohydrate-containing polymers that are present in two forms: wall teichoic acid (WTA), which is covalently linked to the N-acetylmuramic acid residues of the peptidoglycan polymer, and lipoteichoic acid (LTA), which is embedded in the cytoplasmic membrane via a lipid anchor (1-3). Recent studies have shown that WTA is crucial for the virulence and β-lactam resistance of *S. aureus* and *L. monocytogenes* (4-6), whereas LTA is important for cell viability and cell division in these human pathogens (7, 8). In the soil bacterium *B. subtilis*, the absence of LTA affects divalent cation homeostasis and leads to increased sensitivity to diverse antibiotics and lysozyme and the absence of WTA leads to drastic morphological alterations (9). It has also been shown that the deficiency in LTA synthesis leads to smaller colony sizes due to a failure in the execution of the colony developmental program in *B. subtilis* (10). Additionally, *B. subtilis* cells lacking both, WTA and LTA, are not viable, reflecting the importance of these cell polymers (9). Due to the impact of WTA and LTA for cell viability and virulence, the

Copyright 2018 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

enzymes required for their synthesis are considered suitable targets for the development of new antimicrobial compounds (11-13). The biosynthesis of LTA has been extensively studied in B. subtilis, S. aureus and L. monocytogenes (3, 8, 14-17). B. subtilis produces type I LTA, which is composed of an unbranched 1-3 linked polyglycerol-phosphate (GroP) backbone chain that is attached to the outer layer of the bacterial membrane via a glycolipid anchor (14, 16). Each GroP subunit can be modified with D-alanine or N-acetylglucosamine (GlcNAc) residues (18-21). L. monocytogenes also produces a type I LTA, however in this organism the GroP subunits are substituted with D-alanine and galactose residues (22, 23). The enzymes required for the D-alanylation of LTA are encoded by the dltABCD operon and have been characterized in a number of studies (2, 24, 25). In contrast to the D-alanylation process, little is known about the enzymes responsible for LTA glycosylation. Fischer and co-workers proposed a model for the addition of sugar residues to LTA based on biochemical studies performed three decades ago (21, 26-28). According to this model, a cytoplasmic glycosyltransferase (GT) uses a nucleotide-activated sugar to form a C<sub>55</sub>-P sugar intermediate, which is subsequently transported across the membrane by a flippase enzyme. The sugar molecule is subsequently transferred onto LTA by the action of a second GT (27, 28). As the polyglycerol-phosphate backbone of LTA is polymerized on the outside of the cell, this final step needs to be catalyzed by a GT with an extracellular active site. Recently, GtlA (locus tag Lmo0933 in strain EGD-e) has been identified as the putative cytoplasmic GT involved in the glycosylation process of LTA in the L. monocytogenes strain 10403S (29), although biochemical evidence for such an activity is still lacking. This protein is anchored by two C-terminal transmembrane helices to the membrane and contains a large N-terminal cytoplasmic enzymatic domain. NMR analysis of LTA produced by a gtlA mutant strain confirmed the absence of galactose modifications. Additionally, cell extracts obtained from the gtlA mutant strain showed a stronger LTA signal on western-blots using a polyglycerol phosphate-specific antibody as compared to a WT strain, suggesting that the LTA backbone structure is better recognized by the antibody in the absence of

Teichoic acid glycosylation in Gram-positive bacteria

sugar modifications (29). GtlA belongs to the GT 2-family of glycosyltransferases and is characterized by a GT-A fold. GT-A fold glycosyltransferases assume a Rossmann-fold with seven or more β-sheets, which is typical for proteins that bind nucleotides (30, 31); in L. monocytogenes, the likely substrate of GtlA is UDP-galactose. A second feature of enzymes with a GT-A fold is the presence of a conserved DxD motif, which interacts with the phosphate group of the nucleotide-activated sugar. This interaction requires a divalent cation, which in many cases is a Mn<sup>2+</sup> ion (31-33). However, the remaining proteins required for the glycosylation of LTA in L. monocytogenes are still unknown. Also, none of the enzymes involved in the LTA glycosylation process of B. subtilis, including the enzyme required for the production of the C<sub>55</sub>-P sugar intermediate, the transfer of this intermediate from the inner to the outer leaflet of the membrane or the enzyme that transfers the sugar residue to the polyglycerol backbone, have been identified. Here, we show that deletion of the csbB and yfhO genes in B. subtilis led to a loss of sugar modifications on LTA. Interestingly, the L. monocytogenes YfhO ortholog, Lmo1079, is not involved in LTA but WTA glycosylation. Instead, we found that the absence of Lmo0626 (here renamed GtlB) has an impact on LTA glycosylation, and we hypothesize that this protein performs the extracellular LTA glycosylation step in L. monocytogenes. With this we not only discovered additional genes required for LTA glycosylation, but the work also allowed us to propose an alternative, extracellular, glycosylation mechanism for wall teichoic acid.

Results

CsbB is required for LTA glycosylation in B. subtilis. We have recently reported that the annotated glycosyltransferase GtlA likely catalyzes the first step of the LTA glycosylation process in L. monocytogenes (29). However, the enzymes involved in this process in other bacteria, including B. subtilis, remain unknown. To identify proteins required for LTA glycosylation in B. subtilis, the L. monocytogenes GtlA protein sequence was used as query sequence in a BLASTP search against the B. subtilis 168 genome. This identified three orthologs, YkcC (e-value: 1e-158), CsbB (e-value: 5e-68) and YkoT (e-value: 1e-60), all of which are encoded in a two-gene operon (Fig. 1A). Analysis using the Pfam database (pfam.xfam.org) indicated
that YkcC, CsbB and YkoT encode GT-A fold  
family 2 glycosyltransferases, which are known to  
transfer sugar moieties from nucleotide-activated  
sugars such as UDP-glucose, UDP-GlcNAc or  
UDP-galactose to a variety of substrates, including  
the lipid carrier C55-P (34-36). To assess whether  
YkcC, CsbB and YkoT are involved in the LTA  
glycosylation process in B. subtilis, ykcC, csbB and  
ykoT deletion strains were constructed by replacing  
the respective gene in B. subtilis 168 with an  
antibiotic resistance marker. To determine if  
deletion of one of these genes impacts LTA  
synthesis, anti-LTA western-blot analysis was  
performed on cell extracts derived from the WT and  
mutant B. subtilis strains. The LTA isolated from  
strain 168ΔcsbB yielded a stronger signal as  
compared to the WT strain (Fig.1B), indicating that  
the structure or the amount of the LTA polymer is  
changed in the absence of CsbB. In contrast, the  
anti-LTA signal for strains with a ykcC or ykoT  
deletion was indistinguishable from that seen for  
the WT (Fig.1B). To determine the chemical  
structure of LTA in the WT and mutant strains, the  
polymer was isolated and analyzed by 1D H NMR.  
LTA purified from WT B. subtilis 168 showed the  
expected spectrum—peaks derived from the CH2  
groups of the GroP backbone (colored green in Fig  
2A), the CH2 and CH3 groups of the fatty acid chain  
(colored orange in Fig2A), the non-exchangeable  
protons from the D-Ala substitutions (colored blue  
in Fig2A) and the GlcNAc modification (colored  
yellow in Fig2A) could be assigned, as previously  
described (29, 37-39). The spectra, including the  
peaks for the nonexchangeable protons derived  
from the GlcNAc residues, were essentially  
identical for the LTA isolated from the ykcC and  
ykoT deletion strains to that of the WT strain,  
indicating that the proteins encoded by these two  
genes are not involved in the LTA glycosylation  
process in B. subtilis under the conditions used (Fig.  
S1). In contrast, the GlcNAc-specific peaks were  
absent in the NMR spectra obtained from the LTA  
isolated from the csbB mutant (Fig.2B). To confirm  
that the phenotype is due to inactivation of csbB, a  
copy of csbB expressed from its native promoter  
was introduced into the amyE locus of the csbB  
mutant. The LTA western-blot signal (Fig1B) and  
NMR peaks corresponding to GlcNAc (Fig.2C)  
were restored to WT levels in the complementation  
strain. These results highlight that CsbB is required  
for the decoration of LTA with GlcNAc residues in  

B. subtilis during vegetative growth. While  
biochemical evidence is still lacking, we presume  
that CsbB functions as the cytoplasmic LTA  
glycosyltransferase.  

The B. subtilis YfhO protein is involved in the  
LTA glycosylation process in B. subtilis. Analysis  
of the genomic ykcC, csbB and ykoT regions  
highlighted that all three genes are encoded in an  
operon with a second gene, namely ykcB, yfhO and  
ykoS, respectively (Fig.1A). YkcB, YfhO and  
YkoS show similarities to members of GT-C family  
glycosyltransferases, which are characterized by 8-  
13 transmembrane helices and a DxD or modified  
(DxE, ExD, DDx or DEx) motif in an extracellular  
loop (34). GT-C enzymes are good candidate  
enzymes for transferring the glycosyl group from  
the lipid intermediate to the LTA backbone on the  
outside of the cell. Since CsbB is required for LTA  
glycosylation in B. subtilis, we hypothesized that  
YfhO, the predicted GT-C enzyme encoded in the  
same operon, could also be involved in the LTA  
glycosylation process. To test this, a yfhO mutant  
was constructed and the LTA isolated from this  
strain was analyzed by western blot. Similar to the  
csbB mutant, the LTA signal for the yfhO deletion  
strain was stronger than that of the WT strain (Fig.  
3). This phenotype could be complemented by  
expressing the complete csbB-yfhO operon from the  
native promoter from the amyE locus in the yfhO  
mutant strain (yfhO+csbB-yfhO, Fig.3). To ensure  
that the complementation does not result from the  
overexpression of csbB, the csbBD97A-yfhO operon,  
which produces a non-functional CsbB variant, was  
constructed and introduced into the yfhO mutant and  
the csbB mutant. Previous work had shown that  
the CsbBD97A variant, in which the second D residue  
of the conserved DxD motif predicted to be  
required for binding of a divalent cation is mutated,  
is inactive (40). An increased LTA signal was  
observed on western blots for cell extracts obtained  
from the B. subtilis csbB+csbBD97A-yfhO strain and  
no GlcNAc-specific peaks were observed by NMR  
analysis of purified LTA, confirming the inactivity  
of CsbBD97A (Fig.3 and Fig.S2). On the other hand,  
introduction of the csbBD97A-yfhO operon into the  
yfhO background led to partial  
complementation of the phenotype (Fig.3). These  
data indicate that YfhO is involved in the LTA  
glycosylation process in B. subtilis. To investigate  
this further, LTA was isolated from the yfhO mutant  
and the $yfhO+csbB_{D97A}-yfhO$ complementation strain, as well as the WT control strain, and analyzed by NMR. GlcNAc-specific peaks were absent in the sample derived from the $yfhO$ deletion strain, but again present in the complementation strain (Fig. 4). We also constructed $B$. subtilis $yk c B$ and $y k o S$ mutants, with deletions in the other two genes coding for predicted GT-C-like glycosyltransferases. However, LTA glycosylation was not abolished in these strains under the conditions tested (Fig. S3). Taken together, these data show that YfhO is involved in the LTA glycosylation process in $B$. subtilis. While biochemical evidence is still lacking, we hypothesize that the $B$. subtilis YfhO protein likely acts as extracellular GT-C type glycosyltransferase and moves the GlcNAc sugar moieties from a C55- P intermediate onto the LTA backbone on the outside of the cell.

LTA glycosylation has no impact on chain length and percentage of D-alanine substitutions in $B$. subtilis. The polymerization of the LTA backbone takes place on the outside of the cell and hence the transfer of D-alanine and sugar residues must also take place on the outside of the cell. Furthermore, individual glycerol-phosphate subunits are either modified with a D-alanine or sugar residue but not with both. It is conceivable that the LTA polymerization and modification processes are coordinated and that the absence of sugar modifications could impact the amount of D- alanine substitutions or even the chain length of LTA, in case sugar residues are introduced while the LTA backbone is still polymerized. To determine whether the chain length and/or the percentage of D-alanine modifications are changed in the absence of sugar modifications, the peaks of the NMR spectra were integrated and the LTA chain length and % modification calculated using a previously published method and described in the experimental procedures section (29). For each strain, three NMR spectra obtained from three independent LTA extractions were analyzed. The LTA isolated from WT $B$. subtilis 168 had a calculated chain length of 17.74 ± 1.04 GroP units and 62.07 ± 11.32% and 27.05 ± 1.79% of the GroP residues were modified with D-alanine and GlcNAc residues, respectively (Fig. 5). No significant difference in chain length (21.62 ± 2.46 and 20.16 ± 2.19 GroP units, Fig. 5A) or percentage of D-

alanine substitutions (63.89 ± 12.92% and 67.95 ± 13.15%, Fig. 5B) was observed for the $csbB$ or $yfhO$ mutant strain. The percentage of GlcNAc residues in the $csbB+csbB$ and $yfhO+csbB_{D97A}-yfhO$ complementation strains were 33.74 ± 3.21% and 34.33 ± 1.22 and therefore comparable to the percentage of sugar substitutions present in the LTA isolated from the WT $B$. subtilis strain 168 (Fig. 5B). Taken together, these data suggest that the LTA chain length and %D-alanine substitutions are not affected by the presence or absence of sugar modifications in $B$. subtilis 168, when grown under standard laboratory conditions.

The $L$. monocytogenes YfhO ortholog Lmo1079 is involved in WTA but not LTA glycosylation. So far, the only protein known to be involved in the LTA glycosylation process in $L$. monocytogenes is GtlA, an annotated GT with a predicted cytoplasmic catalytic domain (29). To identify additional $L$. monocytogenes proteins involved in the LTA glycosylation process, we performed a homology search using the $B$. subtilis YfhO protein as query sequence. This yielded Lmo1079 as the only close ortholog with an e-value of 1e-39. In previous work, it has been shown that deletion of $l m o 1079$ prevents binding of the phage-derived protein CBDP35, which recognizes terminal GlcNAc residues on the bacterial cell surface, to $L$. monocytogenes EGD-e (41). LTA in $L$. monocytogenes is modified with galactose residues, whereas terminal GlcNAc moieties are found on WTA in $L$. monocytogenes strains EGD-e and 10403S. Therefore, these previous findings indicate that Lmo1079 is likely required for the glycosylation of WTA with GlcNAc residues (41), but the structure of WTA produced by an $l m o 1079$ deletion strain has not yet been analyzed. To specifically determine the role of Lmo1079 in WTA glycosylation, and potentially in the glycosylation of LTA, a strain lacking $l m o 1079$ (10403SΔ$l m o 1079$) was constructed. Next, the WTA and LTA polymers were isolated from WT 10403S and the $l m o 1079$ mutant and analyzed by NMR. As expected, GlcNAc moieties were present on the WTA polymer isolated from the WT strain but absent from the $l m o 1079$ mutant (Fig. 6A and 6B). In contrast, no differences between the NMR spectra for LTA isolated from the WT and $l m o 1079$ mutant strains were observed and galactose residues were present on the LTA isolated from

both strains (Fig. 6C and 6D). Taken together, these data show that Lmo1079 is involved in a different process than YfhO, its closest ortholog in B. subtilis; Lmo1079 is needed for the glycosylation of WTA in L. monocytogenes, whereas YfhO is essential for LTA glycosylation in B. subtilis. The wider implications that closely related proteins are involved in WTA glycosylation in one bacterial species but LTA glycosylation in another bacterial species will be addressed in detail in the discussion section.

The L. monocytogenes GtlB protein is required for LTA glycosylation. Lmo1079 is the only L. monocytogenes protein that shows clear homology to the B. subtilis YfhO protein. However, as shown above, the protein could be excluded as the potential extracellular LTA GT in L. monocytogenes. Therefore, we used a bioinformatics approach to try and identify candidate proteins that could potentially act as extracellular GT involved in the LTA glycosylation process in L. monocytogenes. We reasoned that such a protein likely assumes a GT-C fold. As enzymes with such a fold have 8-13 transmembrane helices and a big extracellular loop containing the catalytic site of the protein (34), we performed a bioinformatics analysis in order to identify membrane proteins of unknown function in L. monocytogenes containing 8 or more transmembrane helices and at least one extracellular loop of at least 50 amino acids. Genes coding for possible candidates were deleted in L. monocytogenes 10403S and the LTA in these mutant strains was analyzed by western blot. A strain with a deletion of lmo0626, which encodes a membrane protein with 8 transmembrane helices and an extracellular loop of 61 amino acids, showed a similar decrease in the anti-LTA signal as seen for the gtlA mutant (Fig. 7A). The L. monocytogenes protein Lmo0626 was renamed GtlB for glycosyltransferase LTA B. To confirm that the increased LTA signal is due to the deletion of gtlB, a complementation strain was constructed by introducing a functional copy of gtlB placed under IPTG-inducible expression control into the gtlB mutant strain yielding strain 10403SΔgtlBpIMK3-gtlB(gtlB+igtLB). Anti-LTA western blot analysis using cell extracts isolated from this strain grown in the absence of IPTG showed the expected increased LTA signal on western blots (Fig. 7A). However,

the signal was not as strong as for extracts prepared from the original gtlB mutant, indicating low level gtlB expression even in the absence of IPTG. When the gtlB complementation strain was grown in the presence of IPTG, the LTA signal was reduced, indicating successful complementation (Fig. 7A). Indeed, no signal was detected in the complementation strain, probably due to overexpression of GtlB upon IPTG induction (Fig. 7A). Next, LTA was isolated from WT10403S, the gtlB mutant and the complementation strain (gtlB+igtLB) grown in the presence of IPTG and subsequently analyzed by H NMR. The NMR spectra for the LTA isolated from the WT10403S strain showed the expected peaks, which were assigned to the different LTA components according to published spectra (29, 37-39) (Fig. 7B). On the other hand, the peaks derived from the galactose residues were absent in the gtlB deletion strain but again present in the complementation strain (Fig. 7C and 7D). To determine if the absence of GtlB affects the LTA chain length and %D-alanine substitution, these parameters were calculated from the integral values of the different peaks. LTA isolated from WT10403S had a chain length of 13.11 ± 0.95 GroP units and 56.38 ± 4.05% and 29.32 ± 2.65% were modified with D-alanine and galactose, respectively (Fig. 8). Similar values were calculated for the LTA isolated from the gtlB complementation strain (13.62 ± 0.41 GroP units, 52.56 ± 1.37% D-alanine and 35.84 ± 1.08% galactose substitutions). Interestingly, deletion of gtlB did not only result in an absence of galactose residues, but the LTA polymer was also significantly longer with a calculated length of 18.11 ± 1.39 GroP units (Fig. 8A). On the other hand, the absence of gtlB did not influence the percentage of D-alanine modifications which remained at 53.3 ± 1.99% (Fig. 8B). Altogether, these results show that GtlB is necessary for the glycosylation of LTA in L. monocytogenes and we hypothesize that this protein functions as extracellular glycosyltransferase, similar to the B. subtilis YfhO protein, and transfers galactose residues onto the LTA backbone.

Global analysis of GtlB proteins and identification of conserved aspartic acid residues required for function. Although the L. monocytogenes GtlB and B. subtilis YfhO proteins show only limited sequence identity, our results
suggest that both proteins are involved in the LTA glycosylation process. The B. subtilis YfhO protein forms part of the YfhO-domain Pfam protein family PF09586. Currently, more than 1800 sequences in over 1000 species are listed in this Pfam family with a large number of proteins found in Firmicutes, but also some in Actinobacteria and Bacteroidetes. Consistent with our hypothesis that YfhO acts as a glycosyltransferase, some members of this family are annotated GT-C glycosyltransferases, which are characterized by 8-13 transmembrane helices and a DxD or modified DxE, ExD, DDx or DEx motif, followed by a short stretch of hydrophobic residues (34, 42). B. subtilis YfhO has 13 predicted transmembrane helices and a large extracellular loop of 389 amino acids connecting the last two transmembrane helices (Fig. 9A). Two possible DxD motifs, D₄₅₀LD and D₄₈₀DD, are present in this loop of the B. subtilis YfhO protein. However, a Jalview alignment of 870 B. subtilis YfhO homologs, which share at least 30% sequence identity, indicated that neither of these DxD motifs is conserved, making the prediction of residues potentially involved in enzyme catalysis difficult. No Pfam family is currently available for proteins that are homologous to the L. monocytogenes GtlB protein. Using the L. monocytogenes GtlB protein sequence as query sequence in a BLASTP search, just over 1000 proteins with greater than 20% identity could be identified. These proteins are mainly present in Listeria and Bacillus sp. (Table S3). The L. monocytogenes GtlB protein has only 8 predicted transmembrane helices and a much smaller extracellular loop, which connects the first and second transmembrane helices (Fig. 9B). While no DxD or modified DxD motif could be identified, GtlB-like proteins contain a conserved DxxD (D₃₅NLD₃₈ in GtlB) motif in this loop (Fig. 9C), and these aspartic acid residues could potentially form part of an active site. In addition, several highly conserved hydrophobic residues are found downstream of the DxxD motif, which is similar to what has been reported for the active sites of other GT-C-fold glycosyltransferases (Fig. 9C). To test if the conserved aspartic acid residues are essential for the function of GtlB, an alanine mutagenesis experiment was performed. gtlB alleles with the appropriate base substitutions to change amino acid D₃₅, D₃₈ and as control S₃₉ to an alanine were placed under IPTG-inducible expression control and

integrated into the chromosome of the L. monocytogenes gtlB mutant strain, allowing for IPTG-dependent expression of the different GtlB variants. Cell extracts of strains expressing gtlB, gtlB₃₅A, gtlB₃₈A and gtlB₃₉A were prepared and the LTA detected by western blot (Fig. 9D). As described earlier, an increased signal was observed for a gtlB mutant containing the empty plasmid vector and the signal was again reduced upon expression of a functional GtlB protein (Fig. 9D). The expression of the GtlB₃₉A variant complemented the gtlB mutant phenotype, as indicated by the weak anti-LTA signal, suggesting that residue S39 is dispensable for GtlB function (Fig. 9D). However, no complementation was observed in strains expressing the GtlB₃₅A and GtlB₃₈A variants (Fig. 9D). These data highlight that the aspartate residues at position 35 and 38 in GtlB, with a predicted location in the first extracellular loop, are required for protein function and hence could form part of an extracellular active site. The L. monocytogenes strain used in this study is a 1/2a serovar strain; however, based on flagella and cell wall (somatic) antigens, 13 different L. monocytogenes serovars have been described (43, 44). Differences in WTA structure and glycosylation pattern provides the bases for differences in the somatic antigen (45), and for instance GlcNAc modifications are not present on WTA in all L. monocytogenes serovars (46, 47). Consistent with this, close homologs to Lmo1079, which is required in Listeria for the addition of GlcNAc residues onto WTA are only present in some but not all L. monocytogenes serovars (Table S3). On the other hand, a close homolog to GtlB, which is required for LTA glycosylation, is present in all 13 Listeria serovars as well as Listeria innocua, Listeria ivanovii and Listeria seeligeri (Table S3), indicating that the LTA is likely modified with galactose residues in these strains.

Discussion

As part of this work, we identified several new proteins required for the glycosylation of LTA in B. subtilis and L. monocytogenes and as described below propose a new model for the WTA glycosylation process in L. monocytogenes. In previous work, GtlA (Lmo0933) was shown to be involved in the glycosylation of LTA in L. monocytogenes (29). The three close B. subtilis orthologs, YkcC, YkoT and CsbB, are predicted
glycosyltransferases with an N-terminal bacterial membrane by the TarGH ABC transporter
cytoplasmic catalytic domain that assumes a GT-A and subsequently linked to peptidoglycan by Lcp
fold and is linked by two C-terminal enzymes (53-56). WTA of B. subtilis is modified
transmembrane helices to the membrane. Here, we with glucose residues by the glycosyltransferase
show that a B. subtilis csbB mutant, but not mutants TagE in the cytoplasm of the cell and subsequently
with deletions in the other two genes, lacks GlcNAc moved across the membrane by the TagGH
modifications on LTA (Fig. 1B, Fig. 2B and Fig. transporter (Fig. 10B) (57, 58). Glycosylation of
S1). Previously it was speculated that CsbB WTA can take place in the cytoplasm of the cell as
functions in a cell wall synthesis-related process WTA is polymerized within the cell. This is in
(48, 49) and our study shows that this process is the contrast to polyglycerol-phosphate LTA, which is
glycosylation of the cell wall polymer LTA. polymerized on the outside of the cell and hence
Fischer and co-workers were the first to can only by glycosylated on the extracellular side
present a model for the LTA glycosylation process of the membrane. However, based on the homology
in which a cytoplasmic GT initially transfers a of the L. monocytogenes WTA glycosylation
sugar moiety onto a C<sub>55</sub>-P lipid carrier (21, 26-28). enzymes with the enzymes involved in the B.
After the carrier is ‘flipped’ from the inner leaflet subtilis LTA glycosylation process uncovered as
to the outer leaflet of the membrane by a flippase part of this work, we propose that glycosylation of
enzyme, a second extracellular GT was suggested WTA might not universally take place in the
to transfer the sugar moiety onto the GroP units of cytoplasm of the cell. Instead, we hypothesize that
LTA (21, 26-28). Due to the similarity of CsbB to the glycosylation of WTA in L. monocytogenes
the C<sub>55</sub>-P glycosyltransferase GtrB in Gram- 10403S and EGD-e, 1/2a serovar strains and likely
negative bacteria, Inoue and co-workers suggested a number of other serovar strains (Table S3), takes
that CsbB can glycosylate the lipid carrier C<sub>55</sub>-P place on the outside of the cell and proceeds via the
(40). This is in good agreement with our hypothesis production of a C<sub>55</sub>-P-sugar intermediate that is
that CsbB produces a C<sub>55</sub>-P-GlcNAc intermediate transported across the membrane and subsequently
(Fig. 10A). csbB is co-transcribed with yfhO (40) utilized for the glycosylation of WTA on the
and the data presented in our study show that the its outside of the cell (Fig. 10D). WTA in L.
absence leads to the lack of sugar modifications on monocytogenes 10403S is decorated with GlcNAc
LTA suggesting that yfhO might encode a GT-C- residues and several L. monocytogenes proteins
fold glycosyltransferase responsible for the transfer required for the glycosylation of WTA have been
of the GlcNAc residues onto the LTA polymer on identified in previous studies (41, 59-61). One of
the outside of the cell (Fig. 4B and Fig. 10A). YfhO these is Lmo2550, a GT-A fold glycosyltransferase
is a membrane protein with 13 predicted with a predicted cytoplasmic catalytic domain that
transmembrane helices and a large extracellular is linked via two C-terminal transmembrane helices
loop between the last two transmembrane helices to the membrane. Lmo2550 shares a high degree of
(Fig 9A), which could aid in the transfer of the similarity to the B. subtilis CsbB protein (e-value:
GlcNAc residues onto the LTA chain (Fig. 4B and 4e-91) (59, 60, 62) (Table S3). Hence it is likely that
Fig. 10A). The identity of the protein that facilitates both proteins, L. monocytogenes Lmo2550 and B.
the flipping of the C<sub>55</sub>-P-GlcNAc intermediate subtilis CsbB, catalyze the same reaction, which we
across the membrane remains unknown; potentially predict is the formation of a C<sub>55</sub>-P-GlcNAc lipid
YfhO could be responsible for the flipping of the intermediate in the cytoplasm of the cell (Fig. 10).
C<sub>55</sub>-P-sugar intermediate in addition to the transfer Another protein required for the WTA
of the sugar onto LTA, which will be interesting to glycosylation process in L. monocytogenes is
experimentally test in future biochemical studies. Lmo2549 (59, 60). Lmo2549, also named GtcA, is
Not only LTA, but also WTA is a membrane protein with four predicted
glycosylated in Gram-positive bacteria. This transmembrane helices and a GtrA-domain. The
process is best characterized in S. aureus, where exact function of GtcA is not known, however
two cytoplasmic GTs, TarM and TarS, transfer α- based on homology to small multidrug resistance
and β-GlcNAc residues, respectively, onto the (SMR) transporters, GtcA and other members of
growing WTA chain (4, 50-52). Once glycosylated, this family could be involved in the flipping of
the WTA polymer is transported across the lipid-linked intermediates across the membrane as


This Markdown output directly reflects the OCR content from the provided image without any additional formatting or interpretation.
previously suggested (Fig. 10D) (63-65). In the
case of *L. monocytogenes* 10403S, we hypothesize
that this would be the C<sub>55</sub>-P-GlcNAc lipid
intermediate. However, it should be noted that
biochemical evidence for such flippase activity is
still lacking. Finally, the Lmo1079 protein has been
implicated in the WTA glycosylation pathway in *L.*
*monocytogenes* (41, 61). Lmo1079 shows a high
degree of similarity to the *B.* *subtilis*
transmembrane protein YfhO (e-value: 1e-39), which,
we suggest is a GT-C-fold
glycosyltransferase responsible for the transfer of
the GlcNAc residues to the *B.* *subtilis* LTA polymer
on the outside of the cell (Fig. 10A). As part of this
work, we purified WTA and LTA from an *L.*
*monocytogenes* lmo1079 mutant strain and show
that this protein is indeed required for WTA
glycosylation but not required for the glycosylation
of LTA (Fig. 6). It is tempting to speculate that both
proteins, *L.* *monocytogenes* Lmo1079 and *B.*
*subtilis* YfhO, act as extracellular
glycosyltransferases and move GlcNAc residues
from C<sub>55</sub>-P lipid intermediates onto the WTA or
LTA polymers, respectively on the outside of the
cell. Taken together, this suggests that WTA in
Gram-positive bacteria can not only be
glycosylated on the inside of the cell as described
until now but also on the outside of the membrane
(Fig. 10).
    LTA in *L.* *monocytogenes* strain 10403S is
modified with galactose residues (22, 23, 29). Since
inactivation of Lmo1079, the only clear ortholog to
the *B.* *subtilis* YfhO protein in *L.* *monocytogenes*,
did not abolish the glycosylation of LTA (Fig. 6D),
a different protein must have been responsible for
the transfer of galactose residues onto the LTA
polymer. Our work indicates that the
transmembrane protein GtlB (Lmo0626) is a good
candidate protein to catalyze this reaction, as the
sugar modifications on LTA were absent in a gtlB
mutant (Fig. 7C and Fig. 10C). The *B.* *subtilis* YfhO
and *L.* *monocytogenes* GtlB proteins have different
topologies and share little similarity on an amino
acid level (Fig. 9A-B). Nevertheless, our results
show that both proteins are involved in the LTA
glycosylation process and we propose that both
proteins transfer C<sub>55</sub>-P-linked sugar residues onto
cell wall polymers on the outside of the cell. GtlB
is characterized by 8 transmembrane helices and a
relatively large extracellular loop of 61 amino acids
between the first and second predicted TM helix

that may be involved in the sugar transfer (Fig. 9B).
Furthermore, the GtlB protein in *L.* *monocytogenes*
strain EGD-e, which is 100% identical to the *L.*
*monocytogenes* 10403S protein analyzed in this
study, is annotated to contain a PMT-2 domain
(GenBank: CAC98704.1). PMT domains are found
in proteins of the dolichyl-phosphate-mannose
protein mannosyltransferase family, which catalyze
O-linked glycosylation of proteins. Members of the
PMT family include the L-Ara4-N lipid A
transferase ArnT of *Escherichia coli* and
*Salmonella typhimurium*, which is responsible for
the glycosylation of Lipid A, and the Pmt (Cg1014)
protein of *Corynebacterium glutamicum*, which is
necessary for the glycosylation of secreted proteins
(66, 67). Further bioinformatics analysis revealed
that the *L.* *monocytogenes* GtlB protein shows some
similarity to the *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*
arabinosyltransferase TfpW, which has been
described as a GT-C fold glycosyltransferase
associated with the glycosylation of type IV pili
(42). These findings strengthen our hypothesis that
the *L.* *monocytogenes* GtlB protein might act as the
second glycosyltransferase responsible for the
transfer of galactose residues on the outside of the
cell to the LTA polymer (Fig. 10C), although
biochemical evidence is still lacking. GtlB
possesses a modified DxxD motif in the first
predicted extracellular loop that is a characteristic
of GT-C glycosyltransferases. Our alanine
substitution analysis indicated that both aspartic
acid residues, D35 and D38, are crucial for GtlB
function and for the glycosylation of LTA. A
conserved DxxD motif has also been identified in
other GT-C type glycosyltransferases, including the
WecA protein from *E.* *coli*, the alpha-(1-6)-
mannopyranosyltransferases Rv1459c and Rv2174
of *M.* *tuberculosis* and MptB of *C.* *glutamicum* (68-
70), further highlighting that the enzymatic site of
GtlB is likely on the extracellular site of the
membrane.

Glycosyltransferases are widely distributed
among bacteria. In particular, GT-A-type
glycosyltransferases such as the *B.* *subtilis* CsbB
and *L.* *monocytogenes* GtlA proteins characterized
as part of this and a previous study (29) are found
in a large number of bacteria. The distribution of
such glycosyltransferases, which are likely
responsible for the production of C<sub>55</sub>-P-sugar
intermediates, is presented in Table S3 for the
different *L.* *monocytogenes* serovars as well as a

selected number of other well-studied Gram-
positive bacteria. YfhO and GtlB homologs were
not present in all bacteria listed in Table S3.
However, we could still identify around 5150 and
1005 proteins, which share greater than 20%
identity to YfhO of B. subtilis and GtlB of L.
monocytogenes, respectively. YfhO-like proteins
are not only found in Bacillus and Listeria sp. But
are also present in a range of other Gram-positive
bacteria including different Staphylococcus sp. and
Streptococcus pneumoniae (Table S3). We would
expect that these GT-C fold enzymes are also
involved in the glycosylation of an extracellular cell
wall component in these species. However, as
highlighted by the findings presented in this study,
the exact nature of the cell wall polymer that is
modified cannot easily be predicted solely based on
homology and will await future experimental
studies. GtlB-like proteins are less widely
distributed and primarily found in Listeria and
Bacillus sp. Interestingly, the L. monocytogenes
GtlB protein shares 49% identity with the B. subtilis
YkoS protein (Tab. S3). ykoS is co-transcribed with
ykoT, which codes for a GT-A-fold
glycosyltransferase that we analyzed as part of this
study (Fig. 1A and Fig. S1). The ykoST operon of
B. subtilis is expressed during sporulation and
regulated by SigG and SpoVT (71) and has also
been shown to be under the expression control of
the YkoH-YkoG two component system (72).
Neither of these two proteins is required for LTA
glycosylation (Fig. S1, Fig. S3 and data not shown)
under standard growth conditions and hence the
target for the predicted glycosyltransferases YkoS
and YkoT is unknown. However, it is tempting to
speculate that the proteins are required for the
glycosylation of an extracellular cell wall polymer
or perhaps even protein during the sporulation
process.

Taken together, we identified several new enzymes
required for the glycosylation of LTA in B. subtilis
and L. monocytogenes and speculate that these
enzymes function as cytoplasmic or extracellular
glycosyltransferases, although
biochemical
evidence is still lacking. GT-C
fold
glycosyltransferases are notoriously difficult to
predict bioinformatically and based on the genetic
evidence presented in this work, we suggest that
YfhO- and GtlB-like proteins are novel classes of
GT-C fold glycosyltransferases. Taken together,
our findings will help us to determine the function

Teichoic acid glycosylation in Gram-positive bacteria

of sugar modifications on LTA in Gram-positive
bacteria, which has remained elusive up to date. But
perhaps most importantly, another implication of
our work is that WTA in Gram-positive bacteria
might be glycosylated via two different
mechanisms, one taking place inside the cell and a
second novel mechanism taking place on the
outside of the cell.

Experimental procedures

Bacterial strains and growth conditions. All
strains and plasmids used in this study are listed in
Table S1. Escherichia coli and B. subtilis strains
were grown in Luria-Bertani (LB) medium and L.
monocytogenes strains in brain heart infusion (BHI)
medium at 37°C unless otherwise stated. If
necessary, antibiotics and supplements were added
to the medium at the following concentrations: for
E. coli cultures, ampicillin (Amp) at 100 μg/ml,
chloramphenicol (Cam) at 20 μg/ml, erythromycin
(Erm) at 10 μg/ml and kanamycin (Kan) at 30
μg/ml, for B. subtilis cultures, chloramphenicol
(Cam) at 5 μg/ml, erythromycin (Erm) at 5 μg/ml,
kanamycin (Kan) at 10 μg/ml, and for L.
monocytogenes cultures, chloramphenicol (Cam) at
10 μg/ml, kanamycin (Kan) at 30 μg/ml, IPTG at 1
mM. In this study, we used L. monocytogenes strain
10403S and derivatives thereof. However, L.
monocytogenes EGD-e gene and locus tag numbers
were used as this was the first fully sequenced L.
monocytogenes strain and the corresponding
10403S locus tag numbers are given in parenthesis.
Strain and plasmid construction. All primers
used in this study are listed in Table S2. For the
construction of B. subtilis strains with gene
deletions, 1kb-DNA fragments upstream and
downstream of the respective gene were amplified,
the products digested with ApaI and XhoI and
ligated to an antibiotic resistance cassette. The
antibiotic resistance cassettes were obtained by
digesting plasmids pCN34 (Kan), pCN38 (Cam)
and pCN49 (Erm) with restriction enzymes ApaI
and XhoI. Up- and downstream ykcC fragments
were generated by PCR using primers
ANG 1534/1535 and ANG 1536/1537 and ykoS
fragments using primers ANG 1564/1565 and
ANG 1566/1567. The fragments were digested with
ApaI and XhoI and ligated with the Cam cassette.
Up- and downstream fragments for ykB were
generated by PCR using primer pairs
ANG 1540/1541 and ANG 1542/1543 and csbB

fragments with primer pairs ANG 1546/1547 and  
ANG 1548/1549, and these fragments were digested  
and ligated with a Kan cassette. The up- and  
downstream regions of yfhO and ykoT were  
amplified using primer pairs ANG 1552/1553 and  
ANG 1554/1555, and ANG 1558/1559 and  
ANG 1560/1561, respectively, digested and fused to  
an Erm cassette. Subsequently, the purified ligation  
products were transformed into B. subtilis 168, and  
transformants selected on LB agar plates containing  
the appropriate antibiotics. The replacement of the  
target gene with the antibiotic marker was verified  
by PCR resulting in the construction of the B.  
subtilis strains 168ΔykcC::cam (ANG 2747),  
168ΔykcB::kan (ANG 2748), 168ΔcsbB::kan  
(ANG 2749), 168ΔyfhO::erm (ANG 2750),  
168ΔykoT::erm (ANG 2751) and 168ΔykoS::cam  
(ANG 2752). For complementation analysis of the  
csbB mutant, plasmid pDG1662-csbB was  
constructed. To this end, the csbB gene including  
the upstream promoter region was amplified from  
B. subtilis 168 chromosomal DNA using primers  
ANG 1624/1625, the product digested with BamHI  
and HindIII and inserted into plasmid pDG1662,  
which has been cut with the same enzymes. The  
resulting plasmid pDG1662-csbB was recovered in  
E. coli XL1-Blue yielding strain ANG 2905. The  
yfhO mutation in strain 168ΔyfhO::erm was  
complemented by introducing the complete csbB-  
yfhO operon including the native promoter  
proceeding csbB. The csbB-yfhO operon was  
amplified with primers ANG 1624/1628, the  
fragment cut with BamHI and HindIII and inserted  
into plasmid pD1662 yielding plasmid pDG1662-  
csbB-yfhO. In addition, plasmid pDG1662-  
csbBD97A-yfhO was produced for the expression of  
an inactive CsbB variation with an D97A amino  
acid substitution. For this purpose, PCR products  
were generated with primer pairs ANG 1624/1731  
and ANG 1628/1732 introducing the required base  
change in csbB as part of the primer sequences. The  
products were fused by a second PCR using primers  
ANG 1624 and ANG 1628. The fragment was  
digested with BamHI and HindIII and ligated with  
pDG1662, yielding plasmid pDG1662-csbBD97A-  
yfhO. Plasmids pDG1662-csbB-yfhO and  
pDG1662-csbBD97A-yfhO were recovered in E. coli  
XL1-Blue yielding strains ANG 3508 and  
ANG 3303, respectively. All three  
complementation plasmids were linearized with  
XhoI and transformed into B. subtilis 168 mutant  

strains where the plasmids integrate by double cross  
over recombination into the amyE locus. This  
resulted in the generation of the B. subtilis strains  
168ΔcsbB::kan amyE::csbB (ANG 3017),  
168ΔcsbB::kanamyE::csbBD97A-yfhO (ANG 3305),  
168ΔyfhO::eramyE::csbB-yfhO (ANG 3510) and  
168ΔyfhO::erm amyE::csbBD97A-yfhO  
(ANG 3304).  
For the markerless in-frame deletion of the L.  
monocytogenes genes lmo1079 (lmrg_00541) and  
lmo0626 (lmrg_00309, gtlB), 1kb-DNA fragments  
up- and downstream of the respective gene were  
amplified by PCR using primer pairs  
ANG 1527/1528 and ANG 1529/1530 (lmo1079) or  
ANG 2516/2517 and ANG 2518/2519 (gtlB). The  
resulting PCR products were fused by PCR using  
the outside primer ANG 1527/ANG 1530 (lmo1079)  
or ANG 2516/ANG 2519 (gtlB). The products were  
cut with BamHI and KpnI and ligated with plasmid  
pKSV7 that had been digested with the same  
enzymes. This resulted in the generation of  
plasmids pKSV7-Δlmo1079 and pKSV7-ΔgtlB,  
which were recovered in E. coli XL1-Blue yielding  
strains ANG 2793 and ANG 4232, respectively. The  
plasmids were subsequently electroporated into L.  
monocytogenes 10403S and the genes deleted by  
allelic exchange using a previously described  
procedure (73). The deletion of the respective gene  
was verified by PCR, resulting in the construction  
of L. monocytogenes strains 10403SΔlmo1079  
(ANG 2794) and 10403SΔgtlB (ANG 4264). For  
complementation analysis of the gtlB mutant,  
plasmid pIMK3-gtlB was constructed. Plasmid  
pIMK3 carries the P_help promoter, which allows for  
IPTG-dependent gene expression. The gtlB gene  
was amplified using primers ANG 2708 and  
ANG 2709, the product digested with NcoI and SalI  
and ligated with pIMK3. Plasmid pIMK3-gtlB was  
recovered in E. coli XL1-Blue yielding strain  
ANG 4401. Additionally, point mutations were  
introduced into the gtlB gene for the expression of  
GtlB variants with D35A, D38A and S39A amino  
acid substitutions. For this purpose, primer pairs  
ANG 2708/2791 (D35A), ANG 2708/2902 (D38A)  
and ANG 2708/2793 (S39A) were used to amplify  
the 5'end of gtlB introducing the respective base  
changes as part of the primer sequence. The 3'end  
of gtlB was amplified using primers  
ANG 2709/2790 (D35A), ANG 2709/2901 (D38A)  
and ANG 2709/2792 (S39A). The appropriate  
fragments were fused in a second PCR using

primers ANG 2708 and ANG 2709. The PCR products were cut with NcoI and Sall and ligated with pIMK3 that had been cut with the same enzymes. The resulting plasmids were recovered in E. coli XL1-Blue yielding strains XL1-Blue pIMK3-gtlB<sub>D35A</sub> (ANG 4630), XL1-Blue pIMK3-gtlB<sub>D38A</sub> (ANG 4769) and XL1-Blue pIMK3-gtlB<sub>S39A</sub> (ANG 4631). The pIMK3 derivatives as well as the empty pIMK3 plasmid were transformed into L. monocytogenes strain 10403SΔgtlB by electroporation, resulting in the construction of strains 10403SΔgtlB pIMK3 (ANG 4637), 10403SΔgtlB pIMK3-gtlB<sub>D35A</sub> (ANG 4443), 10403SΔgtlB pIMK3-gtlB<sub>D38A</sub> (ANG 4648), 10403SΔgtlB pIMK3-gtlB<sub>S39A</sub> (ANG 4775) and 10403SΔgtlB pIMK3 (ANG 4638).

Preparation of cell extract and western blot analysis. B. subtilis 168 (WT) and the indicted mutant strains were grown for 20–22 h in 5 ml LB medium at 30°C. Bacteria from 4 ml culture were collected by centrifugation for 30 min at 17,000 × g and bacterial pellets suspended in 2× SDS-PAGE sample buffer to an OD<sub>600</sub> = 3. Samples were boiled for 45 min, centrifuged for 5 min and 10 μl loaded on 15% SDS-PAGE gel. For LTA detection, the humanized monoclonal LTA antibody (Gift from Biosynexus Incorporated, Gaithersburg, MD, USA) and the HRP-conjugated polyclonal rabbit anti-human IgA, IgG, Kappa, Lambda antibody (Dako Cytomation) were used at 1:5,000 and 1:10,000 dilutions, respectively. L. monocytogenes 10403S (WT) and the different mutant strains were grown overnight in 5 ml BHI medium at 37°C. The expression of gtlB (and the different variants) from the P<sub>help</sub> promoter was induced by the addition of 1 mM IPTG to the medium. Cell extracts for LTA detection were prepared as described previously (8). LTA was detected using a polyglycerol-phosphate-specific antibody (Clone 55 from HyCult biotechnology) and an HRP-conjugated anti-mouse IgG (Cell Signaling Technologies, USA) at 1:4,000 and 1:10,000 dilutions, respectively. Western blots were developed by the enhanced chemiluminescence method and the signal detected using a ChemiDoc Touch Imager (Bio-Rad). All experiments were performed at least three times and representative images are shown.

LTA and WTA isolation. For the isolation of LTA from B. subtilis, strains were grown overnight in 3 L LB medium and cells were collected by centrifugation. For the isolation of LTA from L. monocytogenes, the strains were grown overnight in 2 to 3 L BHI medium and when required the medium was supplemented with 1 mM IPTG and the bacteria were harvested by centrifugation. LTA was purified and analyzed using one-dimensional <sup>1</sup>H nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) as described previously (7, 29). Briefly, LTA was extracted with butanol and purified by hydrophobic interaction chromatography using a 24 × 1.6 cm octylsepharose column. Fractions containing LTA were identified by western blotting using the humanized monoclonal LTA or polyglycerol-phosphate-specific antibody. The LTA-containing fractions were pooled and lyophilized. WTA was purified and analyzed by NMR as previously described (74). Briefly, bacteria from 5 L cultures of L. monocytogenes 10403S and 10403SΔlmo1079 grown to mid-log phase (OD<sub>600</sub> of 0.6–1) in BHI medium at 37°C were collected by centrifugation and subsequently washed with 1 M NaCl of pH 5.8. The cells were disrupted using a bead beater and the cell debris collected by centrifugation. After washing the cell wall material with 1 M NaCl pH 5.8, 0.5% SDS pH 5.8 and water of pH 5.8, the material was suspended in water and incubated for 30 min at 60°C. The cell wall material was recovered by centrifugation, washed with water and suspended in 0.15 mM Tris/HCl pH 7.0 containing 0.2 mg/ml trypsin and incubated at 37°C for 18 h. The next day, the material was collected by centrifugation, washed with 1 M Tris pH 7.0, 1 M Tris pH 7.0 containing 1 M NaCl, 1 M Tris pH 7.0 and three times with water. The cell wall material was then incubated for 18 h at 4°C with 10% TCA to hydrolyze the WTA from the peptidoglycan. The peptidoglycan was removed by centrifugation and the WTA was precipitated with 0.1 volume of 3 M sodium acetate pH 5.2 and 3 volumes of ice-cold 95% ethanol and left overnight at –80°C. The WTA was recovered by centrifugation, washed with ethanol and air-dried. As final step, the WTA was suspended in 1 ml water and lyophilized.

NMR analysis of cell wall polymers. To analyze the LTA and WTA polymers by <sup>1</sup>H NMR, 2 mg LTA or 6 mg WTA were suspended and lyophilized twice in 500 μl D<sub>2</sub>O of 99.96% purity. In the final step, the LTA or WTA preparations were suspended in 500 μl D<sub>2</sub>O of 99.99% purity and NMR spectra were recorded on a 600-MHz Bruker Advance III spectrometer equipped with a TCI

Teichoic acid glycosylation in Gram-positive bacteria

cryoprobe. To ensure accurate integration of the signals, NMR spectra were recorded at 303K with a total recycling time of 5s and a 'H flip angle of approximately 30°. Three independent LTA and WTA extractions were performed for each strain shown in the main text and once for the data presented in the supplemental material. The data were analyzed using the Topspin 3.5 software (Bruker Biospin, Ltd) and the spectra annotated according to previously published NMR spectra (29, 37-39, 45, 74-78). To determine the LTA chain length and percentage of D-alanine and sugar modifications the different peaks were integrated and chain length and % modification calculations were performed for the B. subtilis and L. monocytogenes LTA as previously described (17, 29). Briefly, the area under the peak at 4.3 ppm corresponding to the CH group of D-alanine, was used as a reference and set to 1. The integration values for the peaks of the different LTA components, namely GroP, D-alanine, GlcNAc or Gal, and fatty acids, were determined and adjusted by the number of nonexchangeable protons; for the LTA samples isolated from B. subtilis these are 58 protons for the lipid anchor, 5 for GroP, 4 for D-alanine and 10 for GlcNAc. For the LTA samples isolated from L. monocytogenes the calculations are based on 58 protons for the lipid anchor, 5 for GroP, 4 for D-alanine and 7 for Gal modifications. Dividing the proton-adjusted value for GroP by the proton-adjusted value for the lipid anchor gives the chain length of the LTA. To determine the percentage of substitution, the proton-adjusted values for D-alanine and GlcNAc (B. subtilis) or D-alanine and Gal (L. monocytogenes) were divided by the proton-adjusted value for GroP and then multiplied by 100. The average values and standard deviations from three biological replicates were determined and plotted.

Sequence analysis and protein alignments. For the identification of potential homologs of the L. monocytogenes GtlA and GtlB proteins and of the B. subtilis YfhO protein, the corresponding protein sequences were used in BLASTP searches against the NCBI non-redundant protein sequence database (79). Sequences of proteins with a minimum query coverage of 60% and a minimum sequence identity of 20% to GtlB were downloaded and used for further analysis in Jalview (80). A multiple sequence alignment of GtlB and its homologs was performed with Clustal omega setting the L. monocytogenes GtlB protein as reference. The alignment was subsequently used to generate a sequence logo motif using the web-based application WebLogo (81).

Conflict of interest: The authors declare that they have no conflicts of interest with the content of this article.

Author contributions: JR, MPG and AG, designed and analyzed the experiment, JR and MPG, performed the experiments; JR. and AG wrote the manuscript.

Footnotes: This work was funded by the European Research Council grant 260371 and the Wellcome Trust grant 100289 to AG, the German research foundation (DFG) grant RI 292/1-1 to JR and MGP was funded through a studentship provided by the UK Clinical research collaboration (Centre for Infection Prevention and Management).

Teichoic acid glycosylation in Gram-positive bacteria

References

1. Araki, Y., and Ito, E. (1989) Linkage units in cell walls of gram-positive bacteria. *Crit Rev Microbiol* 17, 121-135
2. Neuhaus, F. C., and Baddiley, J. (2003) A continuum of anionic charge: structures and functions of D-alanyl-teichoic acids in gram-positive bacteria. *Microbiol Mol Biol Rev* 67, 686-723
3. Percy, M. G., and Gründling, A. (2014) Lipoteichoic acid synthesis and function in gram-positive bacteria. *Annual review of microbiology* 68, 81-100
4. Brown, S., Xia, G., Luhachack, L. G., Campbell, J., Meredith, T. C., Chen, C., Winstel, V., Gekeler, C., Irazoqui, J. E., Peschel, A., and Walker, S. (2012) Methicillin resistance in *Staphylococcus aureus* requires glycosylated wall teichoic acids. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA* 109, 18909-18914
5. Krawczyk-Balska, A., and Lipiak, M. (2013) Critical role of a ferritin-like protein in the control of *Listeria monocytogenes* cell envelope structure and stability under beta-lactam pressure. *PLoS One* 8, e77808
6. Spears, P. A., Havell, E. A., Hamrick, T. S., Goforth, J. B., Levine, A. L., Thomas Abraham, S., Heiss, C., Azadi, P., and Orndorff, P. E. (2016) *Listeria monocytogenes* Wall Teichoic Acid Decoration in Virulence and Cell-to-Cell Spread. *Mol Microbiol*
7. Gründling, A., and Schneewind, O. (2007) Synthesis of glycerol phosphate lipoteichoic acid in *Staphylococcus aureus*. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA* 104, 8478-8483
8. Webb, A. J., Karatsa-Dodgson, M., and Gründling, A. (2009) Two-enzyme systems for glycolipid and polyglycerolphosphate lipoteichoic acid synthesis in *Listeria monocytogenes*. *Mol Microbiol* 74, 299-314
9. Schirner, K., Marles-Wright, J., Lewis, R. J., and Errington, J. (2009) Distinct and essential morphogenic functions for wall- and lipo-teichoic acids in *Bacillus subtilis*. *EMBO J* 28, 830-842
10. Mamou, G., Fiyaksel, O., Sinai, L., and Ben-Yehuda, S. (2017) Deficiency in Lipoteichoic Acid Synthesis Causes a Failure in Executing the Colony Developmental Program in *Bacillus subtilis*. *Frontiers in microbiology* 8, 1991
11. Xia, G., and Peschel, A. (2008) Toward the pathway of *S. aureus* WTA biosynthesis. *Chem Biol* 15, 95-96
12. Richter, S. G., Elli, D., Kim, H. K., Hendrickx, A. P., Sorg, J. A., Schneewind, O., and Missiakas, D. (2013) Small molecule inhibitor of lipoteichoic acid synthesis is an antibiotic for Gram-positive bacteria. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA* 110, 3531-3536
13. Pasquina, L. W., Santa Maria, J. P., and Walker, S. (2013) Teichoic acid biosynthesis as an antibiotic target. *Current opinion in microbiology* 16, 531-537
14. Fischer, W. (1990) Bacterial Phosphoglycolipids and Lipoteichoic Acids. in *Glycolipids, Phosphoglycolipids, and Sulfoglycolipids* (Kates, M. ed.), Springer US, Boston, MA. pp 123-234
15. Kiriukhin, M. Y., Debabov, D. V., Shinabarger, D. L., and Neuhaus, F. C. (2001) Biosynthesis of the glycolipid anchor in lipoteichoic acid of *Staphylococcus aureus* RN4220: role of YpfP, the diglucosyldiacylglycerol synthase. *J Bacteriol* 183, 3506-3514
16. Reichmann, N. T., and Gründling, A. (2011) Location, synthesis and function of glycolipids and polyglycerolphosphate lipoteichoic acid in Gram-positive bacteria of the phylum Firmicutes. *FEMS Microbiol Lett* 319, 97-105
17. Wörmann, M. E., Corrigan, R. M., Simpson, P. J., Matthews, S. J., and Gründling, A. (2011) Enzymatic activities and functional interdependencies of *Bacillus subtilis* lipoteichoic acid synthesis enzymes. *Mol Microbiol* 79, 566-583
18. Fischer, W., and Rosel, P. (1980) The alanine ester substitution of lipoteichoic acid (LTA) in *Staphylococcus aureus*. *FEBS letters* 119, 224-226
19. Iwasaki, H., Shimada, A., and Ito, E. (1986) Comparative studies of lipoteichoic acids from several *Bacillus* strains. *J Bacteriol* 167, 508-516
20. Fischer, W. (1988) Physiology of lipoteichoic acids in bacteria. *Adv Microb Physiol* 29, 233-302

21. Iwasaki, H., Shimada, A., Yokoyama, K., and Ito, E. (1989) Structure and glycosylation of lipoteichoic acids in *Bacillus* strains. *J Bacteriol* 171, 424-429

22. Hether, N. W., and Jackson, L. L. (1983) Lipoteichoic acid from *Listeria monocytogenes*. *J Bacteriol* 156, 809-817

23. Uchikawa, K., Sekikawa, I., and Azuma, I. (1986) Structural studies on lipoteichoic acids from four *Listeria* strains. *J Bacteriol* 168, 115-122

24. Heaton, M. P., and Neuhaus, F. C. (1992) Biosynthesis of D-alanyl-lipoteichoic acid: cloning, nucleotide sequence, and expression of the *Lactobacillus casei* gene for the D-alanine-activating enzyme. *J Bacteriol* 174, 4707-4717

25. Abachin, E., Poyart, C., Pellegrini, E., Milohanic, E., Fiedler, F., Berche, P., and Trieu-Cuot, P. (2002) Formation of D-alanyl-lipoteichoic acid is required for adhesion and virulence of *Listeria monocytogenes*. *Mol Microbiol* 43, 1-14

26. Mancuso, D. J., and Chiu, T. H. (1982) Biosynthesis of glucosyl monophosphoryl undecaprenol and its role in lipoteichoic acid biosynthesis. *J Bacteriol* 152, 616-625

27. Yokoyama, K., Araki, Y., and Ito, E. (1988) The function of galactosyl phosphorylpolyphrenol in biosynthesis of lipoteichoic acid in *Bacillus coagulans*. *Eur J Biochem* 173, 453-458

28. Fischer, W. (1994) Lipoteichoic acid and lipids in the membrane of *Staphylococcus aureus*. *Med Microbiol Immunol* 183, 61-76

29. Percy, M. G., Karinou, E., Webb, A. J., and Gründling, A. (2016) Identification of a Lipoteichoic Acid Glycosyltransferase Enzyme Reveals that GW-Domain-Containing Proteins Can Be Retained in the Cell Wall of *Listeria monocytogenes* in the Absence of Lipoteichoic Acid or Its Modifications. *J Bacteriol* 198, 2029-2042

30. Rao, S. T., and Rossmann, M. G. (1973) Comparison of super-secondary structures in proteins. *J Mol Biol* 76, 241-256

31. Breton, C., Snajdrova, L., Jeanneau, C., Koca, J., and Imberty, A. (2006) Structures and mechanisms of glycosyltransferases. *Glycobiology* 16, 29R-37R

32. Breton, C., Bettler, E., Joziasse, D. H., Geremia, R. A., and Imberty, A. (1998) Sequence-function relationships of prokaryotic and eukaryotic galactosyltransferases. *Journal of biochemistry* 123, 1000-1009

33. Breton, C., and Imberty, A. (1999) Structure/function studies of glycosyltransferases. *Curr Opin Struct Biol* 9, 563-571

34. Liu, J., and Mushegian, A. (2003) Three monophyletic superfamilies account for the majority of the known glycosyltransferases. *Protein Sci* 12, 1418-1431

35. Breazeale, S. D., Ribeiro, A. A., McClerren, A. L., and Raetz, C. R. (2005) A formyltransferase required for polymyxin resistance in *Escherichia coli* and the modification of lipid A with 4-Amino-4-deoxy-L-arabinose. Identification and function oF UDP-4-deoxy-4-formamido-L-arabinose. *J Biol Chem* 280, 14154-14167

36. Lairson, L. L., Henrissat, B., Davies, G. J., and Withers, S. G. (2008) Glycosyltransferases: structures, functions, and mechanisms. *Annual review of biochemistry* 77, 521-555

37. Morath, S., Geyer, A., and Hartung, T. (2001) Structure-function relationship of cytokine induction by lipoteichoic acid from *Staphylococcus aureus*. *The Journal of experimental medicine* 193, 393-397

38. Morath, S., Geyer, A., Spreitzer, I., Hermann, C., and Hartung, T. (2002) Structural decomposition and heterogeneity of commercial lipoteichoic Acid preparations. *Infect Immun* 70, 938-944

39. Morath, S., Stadelmaier, A., Geyer, A., Schmidt, R. R., and Hartung, T. (2002) Synthetic lipoteichoic acid from *Staphylococcus aureus* is a potent stimulus of cytokine release. *The Journal of experimental medicine* 195, 1635-1640

40. Inoue, H., Suzuki, D., and Asai, K. (2013) A putative bactoprenol glycosyltransferase, CsbB, in *Bacillus subtilis* activates SigM in the absence of co-transcribed YfhO. *Biochem Biophys Res Commun* 436, 6-11

Teichoic acid glycosylation in Gram-positive bacteria

41. Eugster, M. R., Morax, L. S., Huls, V. J., Huwiler, S. G., Leclercq, A., Lecuit, M., and Loessner, M. J. (2015) Bacteriophage predation promotes serovar diversification in *Listeria monocytogenes*. Mol Microbiol 97, 33-46

42. Kus, J. V., Kelly, J., Tessier, L., Harvey, H., Cvitkovich, D. G., and Burrows, L. L. (2008) Modification of *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* Pa5196 type IV Pilins at multiple sites with D-Araf by a novel GT-C family Arabinosyltransferase, TfpW. J Bacteriol 190, 7464-7478

43. Graves, L. M., Swaminathan, B., and Hunter, S. B. (1999) Subtyping *Listeria monocytogenes*. In E. T. Ryser and E. H. Marth (ed.), *Listeria*, listeriosis and food safety. Marcel Dekker Inc., New York, N.Y., 251-297

44. Seeliger, H. P. R., and Höhne, K. (1979) Serotyping of *Listeria monocytogenes* and related species. Methods Microbiol 13, 31-49

45. Kamisango, K., Fujii, H., Okumura, H., Saiki, I., Araki, Y., Yamamura, Y., and Azuma, I. (1983) Structural and immunochemical studies of teichoic acid of *Listeria monocytogenes*. Journal of biochemistry 93, 1401-1409

46. Fiedler, F. (1988) Biochemistry of the cell surface of *Listeria* strains: a locating general view. Infection 16 Suppl 2, S92-97

47. Shen, Y., Boulos, S., Sumrall, E., Gerber, B., Julian-Rodero, A., Eugster, M. R., Fieseler, L., Nystrom, L., Ebert, M. O., and Loessner, M. J. (2017) Structural and functional diversity in *Listeria* cell wall teichoic acids. J Biol Chem 292, 17832-17844

48. Akbar, S., and Price, C. W. (1996) Isolation and characterization of *csbB*, a gene controlled by *Bacillus subtilis* general stress transcription factor sigma B. Gene 177, 123-128

49. Huang, X., and Helmann, J. D. (1998) Identification of target promoters for the *Bacillus subtilis* sigma X factor using a consensus-directed search. J Mol Biol 279, 165-173

50. Xia, G., Maier, L., Sanchez-Carballo, P., Li, M., Otto, M., Holst, O., and Peschel, A. (2010) Glycosylation of wall teichoic acid in *Staphylococcus aureus* by TarM. J Biol Chem 285, 13405-13415

51. Winstel, V., Xia, G., and Peschel, A. (2014) Pathways and roles of wall teichoic acid glycosylation in *Staphylococcus aureus*. Int J Med Microbiol 304, 215-221

52. Sobhanifar, S., Worrall, L. J., Gruninger, R. J., Wasney, G. A., Blaukopf, M., Baumann, L., Lameignere, E., Solomonson, M., Brown, E. D., Withers, S. G., and Strynadka, N. C. (2015) Structure and mechanism of *Staphylococcus aureus* TarM, the wall teichoic acid alpha-glycosyltransferase. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 112, E576-585

53. Schirmer, K., Stone, L. K., and Walker, S. (2011) ABC transporters required for export of wall teichoic acids do not discriminate between different main chain polymers. ACS Chem Biol 6, 407-412

54. Kawai, Y., Marles-Wright, J., Cleverley, R. M., Emmins, R., Ishikawa, S., Kuwano, M., Heinz, N., Bui, N. K., Hoyland, C. N., Ogasawara, N., Lewis, R. J., Vollmer, W., Daniel, R. A., and Errington, J. (2011) A widespread family of bacterial cell wall assembly proteins. EMBO J 30, 4931-4941

55. Dengler, V., Meier, P. S., Heusser, R., Kupferschmied, P., Fazekas, J., Friebe, S., Staufer, S. B., Majcherczyk, P. A., Moreillon, P., Berger-Bachi, B., and McCallum, N. (2012) Deletion of hypothetical wall teichoic acid ligases in *Staphylococcus aureus* activates the cell wall stress response. FEMS Microbiol Lett 333, 109-120

56. Chan, Y. G., Frankel, M. B., Dengler, V., Schneewind, O., and Missiakas, D. (2013) *Staphylococcus aureus* mutants lacking the LytR-CpsA-Psr family of enzymes release cell wall teichoic acids into the extracellular medium. J Bacteriol 195, 4650-4659

57. Lazarevic, V., and Karamata, D. (1995) The *tagGH* operon of *Bacillus subtilis* 168 encodes a two-component ABC transporter involved in the metabolism of two wall teichoic acids. Mol Microbiol 16, 345-355

58. Allison, S. E., D'Elia, M. A., Arar, S., Monteiro, M. A., and Brown, E. D. (2011) Studies of the genetics, function, and kinetic mechanism of TagE, the wall teichoic acid glycosyltransferase in *Bacillus subtilis* 168. *J Biol Chem* 286, 23708-23716

59. Promadej, N., Fiedler, F., Cossart, P., Dramsi, S., and Kathariou, S. (1999) Cell wall teichoic acid glycosylation in *Listeria monocytogenes* serotype 4b requires *gtcA*, a novel, serogroup-specific gene. *J Bacteriol* 181, 418-425

60. Eugster, M. R., Haug, M. C., Huwiler, S. G., and Loessner, M. J. (2011) The cell wall binding domain of *Listeria* bacteriophage endolysin PlyP35 recognizes terminal GlcNAc residues in cell wall teichoic acid. *Mol Microbiol* 81, 1419-1432

61. Denes, T., den Bakker, H. C., Tokman, J. I., Guldimann, C., and Wiedmann, M. (2015) Selection and Characterization of Phage-Resistant Mutant Strains of *Listeria monocytogenes* Reveal Host Genes Linked to Phage Adsorption. *Appl Environ Microbiol* 81, 4295-4305

62. Autret, N., Dubail, I., Trieu-Cuot, P., Berche, P., and Charbit, A. (2001) Identification of new genes involved in the virulence of *Listeria monocytogenes* by signature-tagged transposon mutagenesis. *Infect Immun* 69, 2054-2065

63. Kolly, G. S., Mukherjee, R., Kilacskova, E., Abriata, L. A., Raccaud, M., Blasko, J., Sala, C., Dal Peraro, M., Mikusova, K., and Cole, S. T. (2015) GtrA Protein Rv3789 Is Required for Arabinosylation of Arabinogalactan in *Mycobacterium tuberculosis*. *J Bacteriol* 197, 3686-3697

64. Larrouy-Maumus, G., Skovierova, H., Dhouib, R., Angala, S. K., Zuberogoitia, S., Pham, H., Villela, A. D., Mikusova, K., Noguera, A., Gilleron, M., Valentinova, L., Kordulakova, J., Brennan, P. J., Puzo, G., Nigou, J., and Jackson, M. (2012) A small multidrug resistance-like transporter involved in the arabinosylation of arabinogalactan and lipoarabinomannan in mycobacteria. *J Biol Chem* 287, 39933-39941

65. Yerushalmi, H., Lebendiker, M., and Schuldiner, S. (1995) EmrE, an *Escherichia coli* 12-kDa multidrug transporter, exchanges toxic cations and H+ and is soluble in organic solvents. *J Biol Chem* 270, 6856-6863

66. Trent, M. S., Ribeiro, A. A., Lin, S., Cotter, R. J., and Raetz, C. R. (2001) An inner membrane enzyme in *Salmonella* and *Escherichia coli* that transfers 4-amino-4-deoxy-L-arabinose to lipid A: induction on polymyxin-resistant mutants and role of a novel lipid-linked donor. *J Biol Chem* 276, 43122-43131

67. Mahne, M., Tauch, A., Puhler, A., and Kalinowski, J. (2006) The *Corynebacterium glutamicum* gene *pmt* encoding a glycosyltransferase related to eukaryotic protein-O-mannosyltransferases is essential for glycosylation of the resuscitation promoting factor (Rpf2) and other secreted proteins. *FEMS Microbiol Lett* 259, 226-233

68. Amer, A. O., and Valvano, M. A. (2002) Conserved aspartic acids are essential for the enzymic activity of the WecA protein initiating the biosynthesis of O-specific lipopolysaccharide and enterobacterial common antigen in *Escherichia coli*. *Microbiology* 148, 571-582

69. Berg, S., Kaur, D., Jackson, M., and Brennan, P. J. (2007) The glycosyltransferases of *Mycobacterium tuberculosis* - roles in the synthesis of arabinogalactan, lipoarabinomannan, and other glycoconjugates. *Glycobiology* 17, 35-56R

70. Mishra, A. K., Alderwick, L. J., Rittmann, D., Wang, C., Bhatt, A., Jacobs, W. R., Jr., Takayama, K., Eggeling, L., and Besra, G. S. (2008) Identification of a novel alpha(1-->6) mannopyranosyltransferase MptB from *Corynebacterium glutamicum* by deletion of a conserved gene, NCgl1505, affords a lipomannan- and lipoarabinomannan-deficient mutant. *Mol Microbiol* 68, 1595-1613

71. Arrieta-Ortiz, M. L., Hafemeister, C., Bate, A. R., Chu, T., Greenfield, A., Shuster, B., Barry, S. N., Gallitto, M., Liu, B., Kacmarczyk, T., Santoriello, F., Chen, J., Rodrigues, C. D., Sato, T., Rudner, D. Z., Driks, A., Bonneau, R., and Eichenberger, P. (2015) An experimentally supported model of the *Bacillus subtilis* global transcriptional regulatory network. *Molecular systems biology* 11, 839

72. Kobayashi, K., Ogura, M., Yamaguchi, H., Yoshida, K., Ogasawara, N., Tanaka, T., and Fujita, Y. (2001) Comprehensive DNA microarray analysis of *Bacillus subtilis* two-component regulatory systems. *J Bacteriol* 183, 7365-7370

73. Camilli, A., Tilney, L. G., and Portnoy, D. A. (1993) Dual roles of *plcA* in *Listeria monocytogenes* pathogenesis. *Mol Microbiol* 8, 143-157

74. Reichmann, N. T., Cassona, C. P., and Gründling, A. (2013) Revised mechanism of D-alanine incorporation into cell wall polymers in Gram-positive bacteria. *Microbiology* 159, 1868-1877

75. Kopp, U., Roos, M., Wecke, J., and Labischinski, H. (1996) Staphylococcal peptidoglycan interpeptide bridge biosynthesis: a novel antistaphylococcal target? *Microb Drug Resist* 2, 29-41

76. Strandén, A. M., Ehlert, K., Labischinski, H., and Berger-Bächi, B. (1997) Cell wall monoglycine cross-bridges and methicillin hypersusceptibility in a *femAB* null mutant of methicillin-resistant *Staphylococcus aureus*. *J Bacteriol* 179, 9-16

77. Bernal, P., Zloh, M., and Taylor, P. W. (2009) Disruption of D-alanyl esterification of *Staphylococcus aureus* cell wall teichoic acid by the β-lactam resistance modifier (-)-epicatechin gallate. *J Antimicrob Chemother* 63, 1156-1162

78. Brauge, T., Sadovskaya, I., Faille, C., Benezech, T., Maes, E., Guerardel, Y., and Midelet-Bourdin, G. (2016) Teichoic acid is the major polysaccharide present in the *Listeria monocytogenes* biofilm matrix. *FEMS Microbiol Lett* 363, fnv229

79. Altschul, S. F., Gish, W., Miller, W., Myers, E. W., and Lipman, D. J. (1990) Basic local alignment search tool. *J Mol Biol* 215, 403-410

80. Waterhouse, A. M., Procter, J. B., Martin, D. M., Clamp, M., and Barton, G. J. (2009) Jalview Version 2--a multiple sequence alignment editor and analysis workbench. *Bioinformatics* 25, 1189-1191

81. Crooks, G. E., Hon, G., Chandonia, J. M., and Brenner, S. E. (2004) WebLogo: a sequence logo generator. *Genome Res* 14, 1188-1190

82. Ogura, M., Ohsawa, T., and Tanaka, T. (2008) Identification of the sequences recognized by the *Bacillus subtilis* response regulator YrkP. *Biosci Biotechnol Biochem* 72, 186-196

83. Ogura, M., Tsukahara, K., and Tanaka, T. (2010) Identification of the sequences recognized by the *Bacillus subtilis* response regulator YclJ. *Arch Microbiol* 192, 569-580

84. Cao, M., and Helmann, J. D. (2004) The *Bacillus subtilis* extracytoplasmic-function sigmaX factor regulates modification of the cell envelope and resistance to cationic antimicrobial peptides. *J Bacteriol* 186, 1136-1146

85. Sonnhammer, E. L., von Heijne, G., and Krogh, A. (1998) A hidden Markov model for predicting transmembrane helices in protein sequences. *Proc Int Conf Intell Syst Mol Biol* 6, 175-182

Teichoic acid glycosylation in Gram-positive bacteria

FIGURES and FIGURE LEGENDS

Figure 1. *B. subtilis* operons coding for *L. monocytogenes* GtlA orthologs. (A) *B. subtilis* operons coding for predicted GT-A fold glycosyltransferases YkcC, CsbB and YkoT with homology to the *L. monocytogenes* GtlA enzyme and the predicted GT-C fold glycosyltransferases YkcB, YfhO and YkoS, respectively. The distance between adjacent genes is given in base pairs (bp) and the gene orientation is indicated by the arrowheads. Promoters are indicated by black arrows and transcription terminators by a loop structure. The *ykcBC* operon is part of the YclJ and YrkP regulon (82, 83). Earlier studies indicated that the *csbB-yfhO* operon is expressed from σ<sup>X</sup> and σ<sup>B</sup> dependent promoters and the *ykoST* operon from a σ<sup>G</sup> dependent promoter (40, 48, 71, 84). (B) LTA analysis by western blot. Cell extracts of *B. subtilis* strains 168 (WT), *ykcC*, *ykoT*, *csbB* mutants and the complementation strain *csbB+csbB* were prepared and separated on a 15% SDS PAGE gel. LTA was detected by western blot using a humanized monoclonal LTA-specific antibody and an HRP-linked anti-human antibody. A representative blot from four independent experiments is shown.

Teichoic acid glycosylation in Gram-positive bacteria

A  
WT  

Gro-2-CH  
(D-ala)  

GlcNAc  
1H  

GroP /  
GlcNAc  

D-ala  
C-H  

GlcNAc  
4H  

CH₂(α)  

D-ala  
CH₃  

Ac  

CH₂  

CH₃  

5.5  5.0  4.5  4.0  3.5  3.0  2.5  2.0  1.5  1.0 ppm  

B  
csbB  

Gro-2-CH  
(D-ala)  

GroP  

D-ala  
C-H  

CH₂(α)  

D-ala  
CH₃  

CH₂  

CH₃  

5.5  5.0  4.5  4.0  3.5  3.0  2.5  2.0  1.5  1.0 ppm  

C  
csbB  
+csbB  

Gro-2-CH 1H  
(D-ala)  

GlcNAc  

GroP /  
GlcNAc  

D-ala  
C-H  

GlcNAc  
4H  

CH₂(α)  

D-ala  
CH₃  

GlcNAc  
Ac  

CH₂  

CH₃  

5.5  5.0  4.5  4.0  3.5  3.0  2.5  2.0  1.5  1.0 ppm  

Figure 2. NMR analysis of LTA isolated from WT *B. subtilis* 168, *csbB* mutant and complementation strains. NMR spectra of LTA derived from *B. subtilis* strains (A) 168 (WT), (B) *csbB* mutant and (C) the *csbB+csbB* complementation strain. Colored boxes and labels indicate nonexchangeable protons derived from the different LTA components. Peaks were assigned as previously described (17,37-39). The different peaks for the protons and acetyl group of GlcNAc are labelled with 1H, 4H and Ac, respectively. Gray boxes highlight peaks resulting from residual citrate, a buffer component used during the LTA purification procedure. The spectra are representatives of three independent experiments.

Teichoic acid glycosylation in Gram-positive bacteria

Figure 3. LTA production in WT B. subtilis 168, csbB and yfhO deletion and complementation strains. Cell extracts were prepared from overnight cultures of B. subtilis 168 (WT), csbB, csbB+csbB, csbB+csbB<sub>D97A</sub>-yfhO, yfhO, yfhO+csbB<sub>D97A</sub>-yfhO and yfhO+csbB-yfhO mutant and complementation strains and separated on a 15% SDS PAGE gel. The LTA was detected by western blot using a humanized monoclonal LTA-specific antibody and an HRP-linked anti-human antibody. A representative blot from five independent experiments is shown.

Teichoic acid glycosylation in Gram-positive bacteria

A  
WT  

Gro-2-CH 1H  
(D-ala)  

GlcNAc  

D-ala  
C-H  

GroP /  
GlcNAc  

GlcNAc  
4H  

CH₂(α)  

Ac  

GlcNAc  

D-ala  
CH₃  

CH₂  

CH₃  

5.5  5.0  4.5  4.0  3.5  3.0  2.5  2.0  1.5  1.0 ppm  

B  
yfhO  

Gro-2-CH  
(D-ala)  

D-ala  
C-H  

GroP  

CH₂(α)  

D-ala  
CH₃  

CH₂  

CH₃  

5.5  5.0  4.5  4.0  3.5  3.0  2.5  2.0  1.5  1.0 ppm  

C  
yfhO  
+csbB<sub>D97A</sub>-yfhO  

Gro-2-CH 1H  
(D-ala)  

GlcNAc  

D-ala  
C-H  

GroP /  
GlcNAc  

GlcNAc  
4H  

CH₂(α)  

Ac  

GlcNAc  

D-ala  
CH₃  

CH₂  

CH₃  

5.5  5.0  4.5  4.0  3.5  3.0  2.5  2.0  1.5  1.0 ppm  

Figure 4. NMR analysis of LTA isolated from *B. subtilis* wildtype 168, *yfhO* mutant and complementation strains. (A-C) NMR spectra of LTA obtained from *B. subtilis* (A) 168 (WT), (B) the *yfhO* mutant and (C) the *yfhO*+*csbB*<sub>D97A</sub>*-yfhO* complementation strain. Colored boxes and labels indicate nonexchangeable protons derived from the different LTA components. Peaks were assigned as previously described (17, 37-39). The different peaks for the protons and acetyl group of GlcNAc are labelled with 1H, 4H and Ac, respectively. Gray boxes highlight peaks resulting from residual citrate, a buffer component used during the LTA purification procedure. The spectra are representatives of three independent experiments. The spectrum for the *B. subtilis* 168 (WT) LTA is the same as shown in Fig. 2A.

Teichoic acid glycosylation in Gram-positive bacteria

Figure 5. Determination of LTA chain length and percentages of D-alanine and GlcNAc substitutions. The peaks in the NMR spectra obtained from LTA isolated from *B. subtilis* strains 168 (WT), *csbB*, *csbB+csbB*, *yfhO* and *yfhO+csbBD97A-yfhO* (*yfhO+yfhO*) were integrated and (A) the chain length and (B) percentages of D-alanine and GlcNAc substitutions determined. The average values and standard deviations from three independent experiments were determined and plotted. Two-tailed unpaired t-tests identified only significant differences for the percentage of GlcNAc substitution between the WT *B. subtilis* 168 and *csbB* or *yfhO* mutant strains with *p*-values < 0.05.

Teichoic acid glycosylation in Gram-positive bacteria

A Wall teichoic acid  
WT  
RboP /  
GlcNAc  
Rha  
GlcNAc  
Ac  
Rha  
1H  

B Wall teichoic acid  
Imo 1079  
RboP  
Rha  

C Lipoteichoic acid  
WT  
GroP /  
Gal  
D-ala  
CH₃  
Gro-2-CH  
(D-ala)  
C-H  
Gal  
1H  

D Lipoteichoic acid  
Imo 1079  
GroP /  
Gal  
D-ala  
CH₃  
C-H  
CH₂ CH₃  

Figure 6. Detection of sugar modifications on WTA and LTA using ¹H NMR. (A-B) NMR spectra of WTA derived from *L. monocytogenes* (A) 10403S (WT) and (B) the *lmo1079* mutant. Peaks of nonexchangeable protons were assigned to the different WTA components according to previously published spectra (45, 74, 78). The different peaks for the protons and acetyl group of GlcNAc are labelled with 1H, 4H and Ac, respectively. One representative spectrum from three independent experiments is shown. (C-D) NMR spectra of LTA derived from *L. monocytogenes* (C) 10403S (WT) and (D) the *lmo1079* mutant strain. Peaks of nonexchangeable protons were assigned to the different LTA components using previously published spectra and highlighted in colored boxes (29, 37-39). Gray boxes indicate residual citrate, a component of the buffer used for LTA purification. The spectra for *lmo1079* are representatives of three independent experiments. LTA of strain 10403S was isolated once as a control.

Teichoic acid glycosylation in Gram-positive bacteria

Figure 7. LTA production in WT *L. monocytogenes* 10403S, the *gtlB* mutant and the complementation strain. (A) LTA detection by western blot. Cell extracts were prepared from the *L. monocytogenes* strains 10403S (WT), the *ltaS* and *gtlA* mutant control strains, as well as the *gtlB* mutant and complementation strain *gtlB+igtLB* grown in the absence (-) or presence (+) of IPTG. The extracts were separated on a 15% SDS PAGE gel and the LTA detected by western blot using a polyglycerol-phosphate-specific monoclonal antibody. Strains *ltaS* and *gtlA* were included as negative and positive control, respectively. (B-D) NMR spectra of LTA isolated from strains (A) 10403S (WT), (B) *gtlB* and (C) *gtlB+igtLB* (grown in the presence of IPTG). Colored boxes and labels indicate nonexchangeable protons derived from the different LTA components. Peaks were assigned as previously described (29, 37-39). Gray boxes indicate residues of citrate, a buffer component used for the LTA purification. The spectra are representatives of three independent experiments.

Teichoic acid glycosylation in Gram-positive bacteria

Figure 8. Determination of chain length, % D-alanine and galactose modifications of LTA from WT $L$. monocytogenes, the $gtlB$ mutant and the complementation strain. The different peaks in the NMR spectra obtained from LTA isolated from $L$. monocytogenes strains 10403S (WT), $gtlB$ and $gtlB+igtLB$ were integrated and (A) the chain length and (B) percentages of D-alanine and galactose substitutions determined. The average values and standard deviations from three independent experiments were calculated and plotted. Two-tailed unpaired t-tests identified significant differences for the number of GroP units of LTA isolated from the WT versus $gtlB$ deletion strain with a p-value < 0.05 (indicated by *).

Teichoic acid glycosylation in Gram-positive bacteria

A B. subtilis YfhO
B L. monocytogenes GtlB

C L. monocytogenes GtlB
D

Figure 9. Topology of YfhO and GtlB-like proteins and identification of conserved residues required for GtlB function. (A-B) Topology models of (A) *B. subtilis* YfhO and (B) *L. monocytogenes* GtlB as predicted using the TMHMM v. 2.0 server (85). (C) WebLogo showing the conserved DxxD motif in the first extracellular loop of GtlB. Protein sequences of GtlB homologs with ≥ 20% identity were aligned in Jalview (80) and the alignment used to create a WebLogo motif (81). The WebLogo motif for amino acid region 25-50 of GtlB is shown, with amino acids 35 and 38 being the conserved aspartic acid residues. (D) LTA production in strains expressing different GtlB variants. *L. monocytogenes* strains 10403S (WT), *gtlB*, *gtlB+igtlB*, *gtlB+igtlB*<sub>D35A</sub>, *gtlB+igtlB*<sub>D38A</sub> and *gtlB+igtlB*<sub>S39A</sub> were grown overnight in BHI medium at 37°C in the presence of 1 mM IPTG. Cell extracts were prepared and separated on a 15% SDS PAGE and the LTA detected using a polyglycerol-phosphate-specific monoclonal LTA antibody. A representative image of three independent experiments is shown.

Teichoic acid glycosylation in Gram-positive bacteria

A  
Bacillus subtilis LTA  

B  
Bacillus subtilis WTA  

C  
Listeria monocytogenes LTA  

D  
Listeria monocytogenes WTA  

Figure 10. Models for the LTA and WTA glycosylation processes in *B. subtilis* and *L. monocytogenes*. (A-B) Proposed model for the glycosylation process of LTA (A) and WTA (B) in *B. subtilis*. (A) Based on the genetic data presented in this study, we suggest that LTA in *B. subtilis* is glycosylated with the aid of the cytoplasmic glycosyltransferase (GT) CsbB, which we predict transfers GlcNAc residues to the C55-P lipid carrier (step 1). The C55-P-GlcNAc intermediate is then transported across the membrane by an unknown flippase enzyme (step 2). We further hypothesize that the GlcNAc residues are then transferred onto LTA by the GT candidate enzyme YfhO (step 3). (B) WTA of *B. subtilis* is modified with glucose residues in a process that takes place in the cytoplasm of the cell and that is catalyzed as previously reported by the GT TagE, which uses UDP-Glucose as substrate (step 1) (58). The glycosylated WTA is subsequently transported across the membrane via TagGH (step 2) (57). (C-D) Proposed model for the LTA (C) and WTA (D) glycosylation process in *L. monocytogenes*. (C) LTA in *L. monocytogenes* is modified with galactose residues. In the first step, GtlA, which is thought to act as cytoplasmic GT, transfers galactose molecules to the C55-P lipid carrier (29). The sugar-lipid intermediate is then transported across the membrane by an unknown flippase enzyme (step 2) and the galactose residues are subsequently transferred onto the LTA on the outside of the cell and we suggest that this step is catalyzed by GtlB (step 3). (D) For WTA glycosylation in *L. monocytogenes*, the cytoplasmic GT Lmo2550 likely produces a C55-P-GlcNAc lipid intermediate (step 1) that is subsequently transported across the membrane by a flippase, a function that might be provided by Lmo2549 (also referred to as GtcA) (step 2). As final step, we suggest that Lmo1079, a *B. subtilis* YfhO ortholog, transfers the GlcNAc molecule onto WTA on the outside of the cell (step 3).

Discovery of genes required for lipoteichoic acid glycosylation predicts two distinct mechanism for wall teichoic acid glycosylation

Jeanine Rismondo, Matthew G Percy and Angelika Gründling

J. Biol. Chem. published online January 17, 2018

---

Access the most updated version of this article at doi: [10.1074/jbc.RA117.001614](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.RA117.001614)

Alerts:
- [When this article is cited](#)
- [When a correction for this article is posted](#)

[Click here](#) to choose from all of JBC's e-mail alerts
