
Trends in Genetics

Review

ALS Genes in the Genomic Era and their Implications for FTD

Hung Phuoc Nguyen,$^{1,2}$ Christine Van Broeckhoven,$^{1,2}$ and Julie van der Zee$^{1,2,*}$

Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a complex neurodegenerative disease, characterized genetically by a disproportionately large contribution of rare genetic variation. Driven by advances in massive parallel sequencing and applied on large patient-control cohorts, systematic identification of these rare variants that make up the genetic architecture of ALS became feasible. In this review paper, we present a comprehensive overview of recently proposed ALS genes that were identified based on rare genetic variants (TBK1, CHCHD10, TUBA4A, CCNF, MATR3, NEK1, C21orf2, ANXA11, TIA1) and their potential relevance to frontotemporal dementia genetic etiology. As more causal and risk genes are identified, it has become apparent that affected individuals can carry multiple disease-associated variants. In light of this observation, we discuss the oligogenic architecture of ALS. To end, we highlight emerging key molecular processes and opportunities for therapy.

### Highlights

- High-throughput DNA sequencing, including whole-genome and -exome sequencing, has proven a successful strategy for gene identification in ALS.
- Substantial progress in gene identification revealed recurrent key molecular mechanisms in ALS, including proteostasis and autophagy, RNA processing, cytoskeleton dynamics, mitochondrial dysfunction, and DNA damage response.
- ALS and FTD are partners of one disease continuum, consequently gene identification in ALS is impacting FTD genetic etiology and vice versa.
- The emerging concept of oligogenic inheritance in ALS, and possibly also in FTD, has implications on gene identification, genetic testing, and genetic counseling, as well as therapy development.

### ALS and the ALS-FTD spectrum

Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a devastating progressive adult-onset neurodegenerative disease, affecting both lower and upper motor neurons in the central nervous system. Core clinical symptoms include weakness in limbs and bulbar muscles, respiratory failure, hyperreflexia, and spasticity of arms or legs. Disease onset occurs on average between 40 and 70 years of age, although younger patients have been reported. Disease progression is often aggressive, with patients dying within 3–5 years postdiagnosis. The estimated annual incidence is from one to three cases per 100,000 people worldwide [1]. ALS is most often sporadic (see Glossary) but about 5% of patients have a positive family history. Currently, mutations in more than 25 genes have been associated with ALS, with the C9orf72 repeat expansion mutation and SOD1 mutation as the most common genetic causes (please see Table 1 for list of gene/protein abbreviations used throughout the manuscript).

ALS is closely related to frontotemporal dementia (FTD). Like ALS, FTD is a progressive neurodegenerative disease characterized by degeneration of the frontal and temporal lobes of the brain, resulting in disturbances of behavior, personality, and language. It is estimated that up to 50% of ALS patients show signs of behavioral dysfunction and/or subtle cognitive impairment, resembling dementia, and up to 15% of ALS patients reach the diagnostic criteria of FTD (referred to as ALS-FTD or FTD-ALS patients) [2–4]. Conversely, the same holds true for FTD [5,6]. At the genetic level, mutations in multiple genes contribute to the etiology of both ALS and FTD, as best represented by the C9orf72 repeat expansion, TBK1, VCP, and TARDBP mutations. By contrast, other genes are specifically associated with only one of the diseases, such as SOD1 for ALS or MAPT and GRN for FTD. Although TARDBP mutations are rare in ALS and FTD (<1%), pathologically, aggregation of TAR DNA-binding protein 43 (TDP-43) in affected brain regions and motor neurons are found in the majority of ALS (up to 97%) and FTD (up to 50%) patients [7,8]. Owing to this extensive clinical, genetic, and pathological

1 Neurodegenerative Brain Diseases Group, Center for Molecular Neurology, VIB, Antwerp, Belgium  
2 Institute Born-Bunge, University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium  

*Correspondence: julie.vanderzee@uantwerpen.vib.be (J. van der Zee).

Trends in Genetics, Month Year, Vol. xx, No. yy
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tig.2018.03.001
© 2018 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

Trends in Genetics

Table 1. List of Gene and Protein Abbreviations Used Throughout the Manuscript

| Genes     | Description                                                                 |
|-----------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| ANXA1     | Annexin A11                                                                 |
| ATXN2    | Ataxin-2                                                                    |
| C9orf72   | Chromosome 9 open reading frame 72                                           |
| C21orf2   | Chromosome 21 open reading frame 2 protein                                   |
| CCNF      | Cyclin F                                                                    |
| CHCHD10   | Coiled-coil-helix-coiled-coil-helix domain-containing protein 10             |
| FUS       | FUS RNA-binding protein                                                     |
| GRN       | granulin precursor                                                          |
| hnRNPA1   | Heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein A1                                   |
| hnRNPA2B1 | Heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein A2/B1                                |
| MAPT      | Microtubule-associated protein tau                                          |
| MATR3     | Matrin 3                                                                    |
| NEK1      | NIMA-related kinase 1                                                       |
| PFN1      | Profilin 1                                                                  |
| SOD1      | Superoxide dismutase 1                                                      |
| TARDBP    | TAR DNA-binding protein                                                     |
| TBK1      | TANK-binding kinase 1                                                       |
| TIA1      | T cell-restricted intracellular antigen-1                                    |
| TUBA4A    | Tubulin alpha4A protein                                                     |
| VCP       | Valosin containing protein                                                  |

| Proteins  | Description                                                                 |
|-----------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| ALS2      | Als in                                                                      |
| CCS       | Copper chaperone for superoxide dismutase                                   |
| CHCHD3    | Coiled-coil-helix-coiled-coil-helix domain-containing protein 3             |
| CHCHD6    | Coiled-coil-helix-coiled-coil-helix domain-containing protein 6             |
| CHCHD10   | Coiled-coil-helix-coiled-coil-helix domain-containing protein 10             |
| GLE1      | Nucleoporin GLE1                                                            |
| IKK       | Inhibitor of kappa B kinase                                                 |
| MICOS     | Mitochondrial contact site and cristae organizing system                     |
| NFkB      | Nuclear factor kappa-light-chain-enhancer of activated B cells               |
| NIMA      | Never-in-mitosis A                                                          |
| OPTN      | Optineurin                                                                  |
| RAB8      | Ras-related protein Rab-8                                                   |
| RAB39     | Ras-related protein Rab-39                                                  |
| RRM2      | Ribonucleotide-diphosphate reductase subunit M2                              |
| SCF       | Skp1-Cul1-F-box                                                             |
| SMCR8     | Smith-Magenis syndrome chromosome region, candidate 8 homolog                |
| SQSTM1/p62| Sequestosome 1                                                              |
| TARDBP/TDP-43 | TAR DNA-binding protein                                                |
| VAPB      | Vesicle-associated membrane protein-associated protein B/C                  |
| WDR41     | WD repeat domain 41                                                         |

Glossary

- **CRISPR/Cas9**: a gene-editing technology that can target and edit parts of the genome with high accuracy.
- **Disease anticipation**: a phenomenon whereby a genetic disorder presents with earlier disease onset and increased disease severity as it is passed on from one generation to the next. The underlying disease mechanism is a dynamic mutation or repeat expansion in the DNA, such as is seen in Huntington's disease.
- **DNA damage response**: a cellular network involved in detecting, signaling, and repairing DNA damage.
- **Genetic modifier**: a genetic factor that can modify the expression level of a particular gene.
- **Loss-of-function (LOF) mutation**: mutation resulting in the loss or reduction of protein or protein function.
- **Massive parallel sequencing (MPS)**: also known as next-generation sequencing (NGS), is a non-Sanger-based high-throughput DNA sequencing approach generating millions to billions of sequence reads in parallel.
- **Missense mutation**: a point mutation in which a single nucleotide change results in a codon for another amino acid.
- **Nonsense-mediated mRNA decay (NMD)**: a surveillance pathway that degrades mRNAs carrying premature termination codons.
- **Oligogenic model**: an inheritance model in which mutations in different genes work together to cause disease.
- **Penetrance**: the percentage of individuals carrying a disease-causing genetic variant that expresses the disease phenotype.
- **Pleiotropy**: a genetic phenomenon whereby certain gene mutations or variants can influence more than one distinct clinical phenotype.
- **Proteostasis**: or protein homeostasis is a biological process that regulates the abundance and folding of proteins within the cells.
- **Repeat-associated non-AUG (RAN) translation**: a noncanonical translational process producing homopolymeric expansion proteins in

overlap, ALS and FTD are now considered partners of a disease continuum, referred to as the ALS-FTD spectrum, rather than two separate disease entities.

### Novel ALS Genes in the Genomic Era

Mutations in the major established causal ALS genes (SOD1, TARDBP, FUS, VCP, C9orf72, and PFN1) account for approximately 60%–70% of familial ALS (fALS) and about 10% of apparently sporadic ALS (sALS) cases [9], with the GGGGCC hexanucleotide expansion mutation in the 5′ noncoding region of C9orf72 being by far the biggest contributor (Box 1). However, this also indicates that more genes remain to be uncovered. In recent years, advances in massive parallel sequencing approaches such as whole-genome sequencing (WGS) and whole-exome sequencing (WES), hand in hand with large-scale collaborations [which have previously led to the success of genome-wide association studies (GWAS) in ALS] have facilitated a new wave of gene discovery. These studies are specifically designed to identify rare variants that confer disease risk, variants that are typically not picked up by GWAS, which, by design, target common variants. This has led to the recent identification of at least nine genes carrying such rare causal variants, including TBK1, CHCHD10, TUBA4A, MATR3, CCNF, NEK1, C21orf2, ANXA11, and TIA1 (Table 2) [10–19]. Here, we will discuss supportive evidence for their respective impact on the genetic architecture of ALS and FTD and linked molecular pathways.

#### Box 1. C9orf72

In 2011, the discovery of a noncoding hexanucleotide repeat expansion (GGGGCC) mutation in the 5′ noncoding region of the C9orf72 gene drastically shifted the field, with up to 40% of fALS patients carrying such a repeat expansion. The C9orf72 gene was identified in multiple multigenerational families presenting with FTD-ALS or ALS-FTD and linked to chromosome 9p21 [86–88]. Also in FTD, the C9orf72 repeat expansion is the most common genetic cause, explaining 25% of familial FTD and up to 88% of familial patients with both ALS and FTD [118].

Notably, C9orf72 repeat size is highly polymorphic, and the cut-off to distinguish normal from pathogenic expansions remains somewhat ambiguous (for more on sizing of the repeat and cut-off of pathogenicity, see GeneReviews on C9orf72 [119]). In general, in unaffected individuals repeat size varies from two to 24 repeat units, whereas in both ALS and FTD patients the repeat expands from several hundred to several thousand repeats. The smallest repeat with evidence of cosegregation with disease was 50 repeat units [120]. Currently, the relationship between repeat size and disease phenotype (ALS versus FTD) or onset age is being investigated and some studies provide evidence for disease anticipation [120,121].

Little is known about the normal function of the C9orf72 protein, complicating functional characterization, but three major pathological mechanisms have been proposed: (i) loss-of-function and haploinsufficiency. The GGGGCC repeat expansion in the C9orf72 promoter suppresses gene expression, leading to loss of mutant transcript and protein, as seen for other repeat expansion disorders such as fragile X syndrome and Friedrich’s ataxia [88]. However, there is evidence challenging the loss-of-function mechanism hypothesis [104,105,108,122]. (ii) RNA toxicity. Expanded sense (GGGGCC) and antisense (GGCCCC) RNA transcripts form toxic RNA foci, which sequester essential RNA-binding proteins and impair the RNA processing machinery, similar to that of myotonic dystrophy type 1 [87,123]. By contrast, modeling in *Drosophila* argued against an RNA toxicity mechanism [124,125]. Flies with a transgene of 160 GGGGCC repeats expressed it, spliced, and formed many sense RNA foci in the nucleus [125]. Yet, no neurodegeneration was observed, suggesting that the accumulation of RNA foci is not sufficient to trigger neurodegeneration. (iii) Proteotoxicity from dipeptide repeat (DPR) aggregates. Repeat-associated non-AUG (RAN) translation of GGGGCC or GGCCCC RNA transcripts generate toxic poly-GA, poly-GP, poly-GR, poly-PA, and poly-PR peptides (in each of the three reading frames), leading to DPR-positive inclusions. These characteristic inclusions are predominant in the cerebellum, hippocampus, and frontotemporal cortex, alongside TDP-43 pathology [126]. Several studies demonstrated that C9orf72-derived DPRs are toxic, impair nucleocytoplasmic transport, and can cause neurodegeneration and behavioral deficits [124,127–134]. By contrast, human postmortem studies found no correlation between DPR protein pathology load and distribution and degree of neurodegeneration or phenotype (ALS, FTD, or mixed ALS-FTD), contesting that DPR protein aggregation is the major pathomechanism in C9orf72 pathogenesis [135]. As outlined above, it is clear that the relative contribution of these three molecular mechanisms is still actively debated and further investigated. Nevertheless, it is very likely that a combination of multiple mechanisms is at play.

Table 2. Overview of Recent ALS Genes with Relative Mutation Frequencies in Different ALS and FTD Cohorts and Associated Pathways

| Gene     | Locus    | Inheritance | Level of evidence<sup>a</sup> | Mutation frequency                                                                 | TDP-43 pathology | Implicated disease pathway                                      |
|----------|----------|-------------|-----------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------|
|          |          |             |                             | Overall ALS (%) | Familial ALS (%) | Sporadic ALS (%) | Overall FTD (%) | Familial FTD (%) | Sporadic FTD (%) | ALS-FTD (%) |           |          |
| TBK1<sup>b</sup> | 12q14.2 | AD<sup>c</sup> | Established            | 1.3              | 3                | <1               | 2               | 1                | <1               | 3–4        | +         | Autophagy, inflammation |
| CHCHD10  | 22q11.23 | AD          | Established            | <1               | 2                | <1               | <1              | <1               | <1               |            | +         | Mitochondrial dysfunction, synaptic integrity |
| TUBA4A   | 2q35     | AD          | To be validated         | <1               | 1                | <1               | <1              | <1               |                  |            | –         | Cytoskeletal dynamics, axonal transport |
| MATR3    | 5q31.2   | AD          | Established            | <1               | 1–2              | 1                | –               | –                | –                |            | +         | RNA metabolism |
| CCNF     | 16p13.3  | AD          | Established            | <1               | 0.6–3.3          | <1               | 4<sup>d</sup>    | –                | –                |            | +         | Proteostasis |
| NEK1<sup>b</sup> | 4q33      | n.d.<sup>c</sup> | To be validated         | 1                | 1–2              | <1               | –               | –                | –                | n.d.       | –         | DNA damage responses, cell cycle control, cytoskeletal organization, mitochondrial membrane regulation |
| C21orf2<sup>b</sup> | 21q22.3 | n.d.       | To be validated         | <1               | –                | –                | –               | –                | –                |            | n.d.      | DNA damage response, cytoskeletal organization |
| ANXA11   | 10q22.3  | AD          | To be validated         | 1.1              | 1                | 1.7              | –               | –                | –                |            | +         | Proteostasis |
| TIA1     | 2p13.3   | AD          | To be validated         | <1               | 2.2              | <1               | –               | –                | <1               |            | +         | RNA metabolism |

<sup>a</sup> Level of evidence for the recently identified genes in the ALS-FTD spectrum is classified as 'established' or 'to be validated', based on following criteria: established, genes have been replicated by different studies, including supportive evidence from functional studies; to be validated, gene findings based on single study, further validation in different study populations and/or functional studies required.

<sup>b</sup> Mutation frequencies include only loss-of-function mutations.

<sup>c</sup> Abbreviations: AD, autosomal dominant inheritance; n.d., inheritance mode not determined yet.

<sup>d</sup> Frequency was counted in 99 FTD-TDP patients [15].

TBK1

Large-scale WES studies, followed by rare variant burden analysis, associated TBK1 with ALS as well as FTD [13, 14]. TBK1 is a multifunctional kinase involved in multiple cellular processes, including the innate immune response and inflammation, autophagy, and cell proliferation. It is an important member of the IKK-kinase family involved in the regulation of interferon type 1 and NFκB signal transduction [20]. The majority of TBK1 mutations are loss-of-function (LOF) mutations producing premature termination codons (PTCs), triggering nonsense-mediated mRNA decay (NMD), and resulting in the loss of mutant transcript and subsequent loss or reduction of TBK1 protein [21, 22]. In addition to LOF mutations such as frameshift and nonsense mutations, in-frame amino acid deletions were also shown to be pathogenic through loss of TBK1 protein or phosphorylated TBK1 (pTBK1) [21, 23]. By contrast, missense mutations were observed in both patients and control individuals. Therefore, it was proposed that missense mutations with a verified functional effect on kinase activity or substrate binding, for example, may lead to partial loss of protein function, and in that case should be considered risk alleles rather than causal variants [23].

TBK1 interacts and phosphorylates several protein substrates that were linked to the ALS-FTD spectrum and which participate in autophagic processes, including OPTN and SQSTM1/p62 [24–26]. TBK1 also phosphorylates and likely activates SMCR8 in the C9orf72/SMCR8/WDR41 complex, which acts as a GDP/GTP exchange factor for RAB8 and RAB39, two RAB GTPases involved in autophagy [27] (Figure 1, Key Figure). Notably, the TBK1 Glu696Lys C-terminal domain mutant was shown to abolish interaction with OPTN and prevented recruitment, retention, and activation of both proteins on damaged mitochondria [14, 28]. In turn, mutant OPTN reduced TBK1 expression [22], cementing the relationship between TBK1 and OPTN in the disease pathogenesis of ALS and the ALS-FTD spectrum.

Taken together, TBK1 LOF mutations account for approximately 1.3% of ALS, 0.4% of FTD, and 3%–4% of ALS-FTD patients (Table 2) [13, 14, 21–23, 29–33]. TBK1 can be considered an established causal gene, based on conclusive linkage in multiple families, replication in many cohorts from different origin, and supportive functional evidence suggesting a role in autophagy and neuroinflammation.

CHCHD10

CHCHD10 was first linked to ALS in an extended French family with a complex phenotype of ALS, FTD, cerebellar ataxia, and mitochondrial myopathy, resulting from mitochondrial DNA breakage syndrome [11]. The same mutation was found in an additional family with pathology-confirmed FTD-ALS [11]. CHCHD10 forms part of the multiprotein complex MICOS, together with mitofilin, CHCHD3, and CHCHD6, which plays a critical role in the formation and maintenance of cristae structure [34]. Functional characterization showed that the CHCHD10 Ser59Lys mutant led to the fragmentation of the mitochondrial network and the loss of cristae junctions, linking mitochondrial dysfunction to ALS-FTD etiology (Figure 1 and Box 2) [11]. Thus far, 14 patient-only mutations in CHCHD10, including 12 missense and two nonsense mutations, were reported in ALS-FTD spectrum patients. Also, two CHCHD10 missense mutations located in cis, were found to cosegregate in a multigenerational kindred with isolated mitochondrial myopathy [35–37].

Although mutation frequencies across multiple studies reach <1% (Table 2) [11, 35–45], there is supportive evidence for a causal role of CHCHD10 in ALS and FTD, based on cosegregation in multiple families; replication in ALS, FTD, and ALS-FTD patients from different origins; and functional biological data that directly implicates mitochondrial dysfunction.

Trends in Genetics

ARTICLE IN PRESS

Key Figure

Inferred Key Molecular Mechanisms in ALS-FTD Spectrum Pathology.

(A) Impaired autophagy/proteostasis

(B) Disturbed RNA metabolism

(C) Mitochondrial dysfunction

(D) Impaired DNA repair

(E) Cytoskeletal defect

Microglia
Oligodendrocyte
Astrocyte
Neuron

Figure 1. (A) Mutations in TBK1, OPTN, SQSTM1 (p62), UBQLN2, VCP, and CCNF impair protein degradation by affecting the UPS and autophagy pathways. Annexin A11 is involved in vesicular trafficking between the Golgi and ER. Through its binding with calycyclin (S10036) it regulates proteostasis. Mutant annexin A11 aggregates and also sequesters wild type protein, possibly resulting in defective proteostasis and, in turn, TDP-43 accumulation. (B) Disturbances in RNA processing result from mutations in TARDBP, FUS, MATR3, TIA1, hnRNPA1, hnRNA2B1, and C9orf72. Cytoplasmic aggregation of TDP-43 and FUS are common pathological hallmarks in both ALS and FTD. (C) Identification of CHCHD10 mutations has underscored the role of mitochondrial dysfunction in ALS. C21orf2, and C9orf72 are also associated with impaired DNA damage response. (D) Similar to TARDBP and FUS, NEK1, C21orf2, and C9orf72 are also associated with impaired DNA damage response. (E) Like PFN1, mutations in TUBA4A alter cytoskeleton dynamics, which affects microtubule integrity and axonal transport; this is also likely for TDP-43. The red stars represent mutated proteins. Abbreviations: ALS, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis; DPR, dipeptide repeat aggregates; ER, endoplasmic reticulum; FTD, frontotemporal dementia; RAN, repeat-associated non-AUG translation; UPS, ubiquitin-proteasome system.

Trends in Genetics

**Box 2. Key Molecular Processes in ALS**

The seemingly endless discovery of novel ALS genes has highlighted the involvement of multiple cellular mechanisms and molecular pathways in ALS etiology (see Figure 1 in main text). Yet, how dysfunction of these different pathways results in the same disease phenotype is still poorly understood.

TDP-43 aggregation and associated pathology is the pathological hallmark in up to 97% of ALS patients [7], suggesting that TDP-43 is central to the disease process. Wild type TDP-43 is predominantly located in the nucleus, where it regulates RNA splicing of numerous transcripts, including its own. By contrast, mutant TDP-43 aggregates and mislocalizes to the cytoplasm [136]. As for TARDBP, mutations in other RNA regulatory genes such as MATR3, hnRNPA1, and hnRNPA2B1 are also associated with TDP-43 proteinopathy by impairing RNA processing, likely via direct interaction with TDP-43 [10,137,138]. Together with FUS, ATXN2, TIA1, and hnRNPA1, TDP-43 forms stress granules, which are later degraded by autophagy [9,18,19]. Notably, both FUS and TDP-43 were also linked to DNA damage response [139], as is the case for NEK1 and C21orf2.

Another RNA processing protein, the RNA export mediator GLE1, was associated with ALS [140]. However, the functional relationship between GLE1 and TDP-43 remains ambiguous. One hypothesis is that GLE1 is involved in the nuclear export of RNA targets of TDP-43 and FUS [140]. C9orf72 repeat expansions carriers also develop TDP-43 proteinopathy in affected brain regions and motor neurons [141]. Recently, the characteristic cytoplasmic DPR inclusions of C9orf72 repeat expansions carriers (Box 1) were shown to inhibit nuclear import of TDP-43 [142]. Apart from RNA processing genes, mutations in VCP, UBQLN2, OPTN, CCNF, TBK1, and ANXA11 can impair protein degradation through the ubiquitin-proteasome system, vesicular transport, and autophagy, which likely regulate the removal of TDP-43 from the cytoplasm [18,136].

For CHCHD10, the most recent study in a series of *Caenorhabditis elegans*, mouse, and cell models reported that during mitochondrial stress, CHCHD10 is translocated from the mitochondria and directly interacts with TDP-43. This interaction results in the translocation of this CHCD10-TDP-43 protein complex to the nucleus and subsequently prevents nuclear exit of TDP-43 back to the cytoplasm, which was less efficient in mutant CHCHD10 [143]. It is of interest that, in the mitochondria, CHCHD10 was recently shown to interact with CHCHD2, a protein and gene linked to Parkinson’s disease, and that this protein complex is required for efficient mitochondrial respiration [144,145]. Similar to PFN1, mutations in TUBA4A were demonstrated to destabilize the microtubule network [12]. As microtubule network integrity is a prerequisite for proper axonal transport, TUBA4A seems to indirectly contribute to the transport of target proteins along the axon, including TDP-43 [146,147].

### TUBA4A

In a cohort of fALS index patients, an excess of patient variants within the TUBA4A gene was found [12]. TUBA4A encodes one of eight human α-tubulins, which polymerize with β-tubulins to form the microtubule cytoskeleton. In primary motor neurons, TUBA4A mutants displayed impaired microtubule network assembly and dynamics, and multiple ubiquitinated cytoplasmic inclusions (Figure 1 and Box 2). Replication studies identified 11 nonsynonymous and three PTC variants in about 1% of fALS and 0.4% of sALS patients (Table 2) [12,36,46]. Although ALS was the predominant phenotype in TUBA4A carriers, a few carriers were diagnosed with cognitive problems or FTD [12,36] (Table 2). However, an extended study in 814 FTD patients ascertained in Spain did not identify TUBA4A carriers [47].

While TUBA4A variants were identified in multiple studies and modeling of TUBA4A mutants demonstrated impaired cytoskeletal dynamics, TUBA4A variants are either absent from or very rare in patient cohorts. Also, there is no evidence so far of cosegregating TUBA4A variants with disease in affected families. Therefore, for now, there is insufficient evidence to support a causal role for TUBA4A in ALS and FTD (Table 2).

### MATR3

Exome sequencing in an unresolved kindred identified cosegregating missense mutations in MATR3 [10]. Across studies, MATR3 missense mutations were observed in 0.5%–2% of ALS patients (Table 2) [10,48–53]. While in the discovery family, multiple patients were diagnosed with ALS and dementia [10], so far MATR3 was not screened in FTD patents. MATR3 is a

Trends in Genetics

nuclear matrix protein that binds DNA and RNA through its zinc finger domains and RNA recognition motifs (RRMs) [54], and is assumed to stabilize certain messenger RNA species. Furthermore, MATR3 was shown to function as a direct splicing repressor by binding intronic regions flanking repressed exons [55]. An *in vivo* study demonstrated that overexpressing MATR3 mice develop hindlimb paralysis and forelimb muscle atrophy, suggesting that dysregulation of MATR3 is involved in neuromuscular functioning [56]. Notably, MATR3 interacts with two other RNA-binding proteins that were genetically linked to ALS, namely TDP-43 and FUS. It was found that MATR3 can be sequestered to cytoplasmic aggregates by mutant FUS (*Figure 1* and *Box 2*) [10,57]. Another study demonstrated that MATR3 mutations lead to nuclear export defects of TDP-43 and FUS mRNA [58]. Rare MATR3-positive cytoplasmic inclusions were observed in an ALS patient carrying a C9orf72 repeat expansion, potentially unravelling a common cellular pathway for both genes, although these observations need confirmation and further functional studies [10].

The overall data, including cosegregation of MATR3 in multiple ALS families, the presence of rare MATR3 variants in patient groups of different populations, the interaction of MATR3 with TDP-43 and FUS, its involvement in splicing regulation, and the neuromuscular phenotype of an overexpressing MATR3 mouse model, are in favor of a causal role for MATR3 in ALS (*Table 2*).

### CCNF

Genome-wide linkage analysis identified a CCNF missense mutation cosegregating in a large ALS-FTD Australian kindred from British ancestry [15]. Further genetic screening of CCNF identified another 10 missense mutations [15]. Across populations from Australia, Europe, America, and Asia, CCNF mutations accounted for 0.6%–3.3% of fALS-FTD patients (*Table 2*) [15,59]. CCNF codes for cyclin F, a member of the cyclin protein family, though it does not bind cyclin-dependent kinases [60,61]. Cyclin F is the founding member of the F-box family of substrate recognition subunits of the SCF ubiquitin ligase complexes, shown to control genome stability through ubiquitin-mediated proteolysis [60]. CCNF catalyzes the transfer of activated ubiquitin to targeted proteins, which are then degraded via the ubiquitin-proteasome system (UPS) [62]. The CCNF mutant, Ser621Gly, impaired this degradation system by disrupting the Lys48-specific ubiquitylation, leading to accumulation of ubiquitinated proteins, including RRM2 and TDP-43, in neuronal cells (*Figure 1* and *Box 2*) [15,63]. Comparable with TBK1, CCNF interacts with SQSTM1, an autophagic receptor that recognizes and transfers ubiquitinated proteins for autophagic degradation [63]. In a recent study in zebrafish, disruption of axonal outgrowth by the mutant Ser621Gly CCNF was observed, suggesting a toxic gain-of-function mechanism for CCNF mutations in ALS patients [64].

The genetic findings, together with the functional data obtained in cellular and animal modeling of CCNF mutants displaying impaired ubiquitin-proteasome/autophagy pathways and axonal outgrowth, support a role for CCNF in the ALS-FTD spectrum (*Table 2*).

### NEK1 and C21orf2

LOF variants identified in the NEK1 gene were significantly enriched in 2303 ALS patients compared with 1059 control individuals [16]. Overall, rare variants in NEK1 were observed in 3%–5% of ALS patients, with LOF variants accounting for nearly 1% (*Table 2*) [13,16,65,66]. NEK1 belongs to the highly conserved protein family of NIMA-related serine/threonine kinases involved in cell cycle control, ciliogenesis, mitochondrial membrane regulation, and DNA damage response [67–70]. In neurons, NEK proteins participate in maintaining the cytoskeleton network [71], linked to ALS etiology by TUBA4A (see above) [12] and PFN1 [72]. Together with the two ALS proteins, vesicle-associated membrane protein-associated protein B/C

(VAPB) and alsin (ALS2), NEK1 interacts with the chromosome 21 open reading frame 2 (C21orf2) in DNA damage repair (Figure 1 and Box 2) [13,73]. C21orf2 was also recently identified as an ALS gene with an increased rare-variant burden of both LOF and nonsynonymous variants (Table 2) [17]. Remarkably, autosomal recessive mutations in both NEK1 and C21orf2 are linked to a skeletal disorder, axial spondylometaphyseal dysplasia, emphasizing the genetic and functional link between these genes and proteins [74,75]. Together, these findings support the role of NEK1-C21orf2 interaction in DNA damage response in ALS pathogenesis.

Because of the limited replication data in ALS cohorts and the lack of confirmed cosegregation with fALS, NEK1 and C21orf2 are considered ALS risk genes (Table 2). Also, NEK1 and C21orf2 have so far not been investigated in FTD and therefore their contribution to FTD is not clear for now (Table 2).

### ANXA11

Exome sequencing in 751 fALS identified missense mutations in ANXA11, including a founder mutation p.Asp40Gly [18]. The annexin A11 protein belongs to the annexin protein family of calcium-dependent phospholipid-binding proteins, involved in vesicle trafficking, apoptosis, exocytosis, and cytokinesis. Missense variants in this gene had previously been associated with autoimmune disorders [76]. ANXA11 carriers present clinically with classical ALS with relatively late disease onset on average 67 years. Postmortem analysis of a p.Asp40Gly carrier showed classic ALS-related p62/SQSTM1 and TDP-43 pathology, as well as unique ANXA11 pathology of abundant skein-like, tubular, filamentous, and basket-like annexin A11-positive aggregates in spinal motor neurons and hippocampal axons. Annexin A11 is involved in vesicular trafficking between the Golgi and endoplasmic reticulum. In vitro studies demonstrated that annexin A11 is present in both the nucleus and cytoplasm. In the cytoplasm, annexin A11 was found in vesicle-like structures and foci that were diffusely distributed throughout the soma, axons, and dendrites. Mutant annexin A11 lost association with vesicle-like structures and had a tendency to aggregate. When aggregating, mutant annexin A11 also sequestered wild-type protein and interfered in a dominant negative manner with the normal function of annexin A11. Moreover, mutant annexin A11 lost its binding property with interaction partner calcyclin, a protein active in proteostasis, rendering annexin A11 less soluble and prone to aggregation. Conversely, increased expression of calcyclin in astrocytes of ALS patients seems to prevent aggregation of mutant annexin A11, possibly by clearance of insoluble annexin A11 by enabling proteasomal degradation (Figure 1 and Box 2).

Mutations in ANXA11 were observed in about 1% fALS and 1.7% sALS patients and implicate calcium-binding proteins and defective intracellular trafficking in ALS pathogenesis [18]. The identification of an ANXA11 founder mutation in affected relatives from multiple families and of additional missense mutations in unrelated ALS patients strongly supports ANXA11 as a causal ALS gene. Further studies in ALS and FTD cohorts and families will help determine the contribution of ANXA11 mutations to the genetic etiology of these diseases and provide a better understanding of the role of impaired proteostasis in the pathophysiology of ALS-FTD (Table 2).

### TIA1

Exome sequencing in an unresolved European ALS-FTD family with TDP-43 brain pathology identified cosegregation of a missense mutation, p.Pro362Leu, in the TIA1 gene [19]. Similar to several other ALS genes, TIA1 encodes a RNA-binding protein comprising a prion-like low-complexity sequence domain (LCD). Mutations in this domain were associated with Welander

distal myopathy, a pathology also characterized by aggregates of TDP-43 and p62 [77–79]. Analysis of 1039 ALS or ALS-FTD patients and 3036 control persons uncovered another six carriers of nonsynonymous variants in the LCD of *TIA1*, but none in controls, accounting for ~2% fALS and <0.5% sALS patients [19]. Autopsied brain and spinal cord of *TIA1* carriers confirmed TDP-43 pathology in the extra-motor neocortex, motor cortex, and spinal cord. In addition, frequent hyaline Lewy body-like cytoplasmic inclusions in the lower motor neurons were consistently observed. *TIA1* assembles into membraneless organelles like **stress granules**. Mutant *TIA1* displayed altered biophysical properties with enhanced liquid–liquid phase separation, believed to precede stress granules formation [19]. TDP-43 is recruited to these *TIA1*-positive stress granules and becomes rapidly immobile and insoluble, suggesting that mutant *TIA1* promotes accumulation of TDP-43 through impaired stress granules dynamics (Figure 1 and Box 2).

Despite the functional evidence of *TIA1* in altered stress granule dynamics and TDP-43 aggregation, genetic replication in extended patient cohorts and significant cosegregation data in informative families is missing. Therefore, the true genetic contribution of *TIA1* to risk for ALS or FTD remains to be determined.

### Oligogenic Architecture of ALS

For many years, when a pathogenic mutation was present in *SOD1* it was assumed to be the only genetic cause leading to ALS in a patient carrier or affected family. In some families, however, the single *SOD1* mutation did not fully explain disease segregation, since some *SOD1* carriers never developed disease and other patients did not carry the *SOD1* mutation [80]. These observations questioned the **penetrance** of *SOD1* mutations and suggested an **oligogenic model** for ALS, meaning that other mutated genes may be needed to fully express the disease. Subsequently, many studies showed that the frequency of ALS patients and families carrying two or more mutations in ALS-associated genes is higher than expected by chance [66,81–83], providing evidence that ALS is an oligogenic disease caused by multiple rare variants with additive or synergistic effects on disease presentation.

The identification of the *C9orf72* repeat expansion as the most common genetic cause of ALS, explaining 40% of fALS and 10% of sALS cases, has further underscored the influence of oligogenic inheritance in ALS [84,85]. Because of its high prevalence, co-occurrence of multiple mutations is most often observed in combination with a *C9orf72* repeat expansion. Among the 74 reported double (or triple) mutation carriers, 51 (69%) carried a *C9orf72* repeat expansion (Table 3). Furthermore, *C9orf72* repeat expansions were identified in unaffected relatives and were occasionally also detected in unrelated control cohorts [86–88], suggesting incomplete penetrance. Indeed, in *C9orf72* carriers, it appears that additional mutations in genes associated with the ALS-FTD spectrum may drive disease presentation in the direction of ALS, FTD, or a combination of both symptomatologies (i.e., act as **genetic modifiers** of disease phenotype). Looking at Table 3, some striking correlations can be observed. Combined with *FUS* (*n* = 3), *OPTN* (*n* = 4), *ANG* (*n* = 3), or *SOD1* (*n* = 2), *C9orf72* carriers always present with only ALS. By contrast, combined with *GRN* (*n* = 6), all *C9orf72* patients had only FTD. *GRN* mutations are exclusively linked to FTD, which likely explains the latter correlation. The same goes for *C9orf72* with a second mutation in *SOD1* and ALS. A *C9orf72* repeat expansion, together with a *NEK1* mutation, repeatedly resulted in an ALS phenotype (*n* = 4), but once resulted in ALS-FTD. Since *NEK1* mutation screens in FTD cohorts are yet missing, it may be premature to draw conclusions on its potential impact on the FTD phenotype. Inheritance of *C9orf72* with *TARDBP* (*n* = 8) or *TBK1* (*n* = 3), resulted in all three presentations of the ALS-FTD spectrum.

| Variant 1 | Pathogenicity | Variant 2 | Pathogenicity | Variant 3 | Pathogenicity<sup>b</sup> | ALS/FTD | Family history | Age of onset (years) | Refs |
|-----------|---------------|-----------|---------------|-----------|----------------------|---------|-----------------|---------------------|------|
| C9orf2    | P             | TARDBPp.Ala382Thr | P           |               |                      | ALS-FTD | +               | 43-45              | [148] |
| C9orf2    | P             | TARDBPp.Ala321Val | LP          |               |                      | ALS     | +               | 37                 |      |
| C9orf2    | P             | TARDBPp.Asn352Ser | LP          |               |                      | ALS     | +               | 42-47              |      |
| C9orf2    | P             | TARDBPp.Ala382Thr | P           |               |                      | ALS     | +               | 47                 |      |
| C9orf2    | P             | TARDBPp.Ser292del | VUS         |               |                      | FTD     | +               | 47-54              |      |
| C9orf2    | P             | TARDBPp.Ala382Thr | P           |               |                      | ALS-FTD | +               | 43.8               |      |
| C9orf2    | P             | TARDBPp.Asn267Ser | LP          |               |                      | FTD     | +               |                   |      |
| C9orf2    | P             | FUSp.Gln210His   | VUS         |               |                      | ALS     | +               | 58                 |      |
| C9orf2    | P             | FUSp.Gly174del   | VUS         |               |                      | ALS     | +               | 62                 |      |
| C9orf2    | P             | FUSp.Arg521Cys   | LP          |               |                      | ALS     | +               | 40                 |      |
| C9orf2    | P             | SOD1p.Asp110Tyr  | VUS         |               |                      | ALS     | +               | 59                 |      |
| C9orf2    | P             | SOD1p.Asp90Ala   | VUS         |               |                      | ALS     | +               | 51                 |      |
| C9orf2    | P             | GRNp.Tyr294Cys   | VUS         |               |                      | FTD     | +               | 64                 |      |
| C9orf2    | P             | GRNp.Cys466Lysfs*46 | LP        |               |                      | FTD     | +               | 52                 |      |
| C9orf2    | P             | GRNp.Arg493*     | P           |               |                      | FTD     | +               | 50                 |      |
| C9orf2    | P             | GRNp.Arg493*     | P           |               |                      | FTD     |                 | 62                 |      |
| C9orf2    | P             | GRNp.Cys31fs     | LP          |               |                      | FTD     | +               | 59.5               |      |
| C9orf2    | P             | ANGp.Ile46Val    | VUS         |               |                      | ALS     |                 | 38                 |      |
| C9orf2    | P             | ANGp.Lys17Ile    | VUS         |               |                      | ALS     | +               | 47                 |      |
| C9orf2    | P             | OPTNp.Glu322Lys  | VUS         |               |                      | ALS     | +               | 50                 |      |
| C9orf2    | P             | OPTNp.Asp128Glufs*22 | VUS     |               |                      | ALS     | +               | 46                 |      |
| C9orf2    | P             | SQSTM1p.Arg212Cys | VUS         |               |                      | ALS-FTD | +               | 63                 |      |
| C9orf2    | P             | SQSTM1p.Val153Ile | VUS         |               |                      | ALS     | +               |                   |      |
| C9orf2    | P             | UBQLN2p.Gly502_Ile504del | VUS |               |                      | ALS     | +               | 52                 |      |
| C9orf2    | P             | PRPHp.Arg133Pro   | VUS         |               |                      | ALS     |                 | 70                 |      |
| C9orf2    | P             | PSEN2p.Ile146Val  | VUS         |               |                      | FTD     | +               | 68                 |      |
| C9orf2    | P             | MAPTp.Pro301Leu   | LP          |               |                      | FTD     | +               | 53                 |      |
| C9orf2    | P             | VAPBp.Val234Ile   | VUS         |               |                      | ALS     | +               | 65                 |      |
| C9orf2    | P             | DAOp.Arg38His    | VUS         |               |                      | ALS     | +               | 42                 |      |
| C9orf2    | P             | DCTN1p.Ile196Val  | VUS         |               |                      | ALS     | +               |                   |      |
| C9orf2    | P             | SETXp.Ile2547Thr  | VUS         |               |                      | ALS     | +               |                   |      |

| Variant 1                | Pathogenicity | Variant 2               | Pathogenicity | Variant 3               | Pathogenicity<sup>b</sup> | ALS/FTD   | Family history | Age of onset (years) | Refs |
|--------------------------|---------------|-------------------------|---------------|-------------------------|------------------------|-----------|----------------|---------------------|------|
| TARDBP p.Gly287Ser       | LP            | VAPB p.Met170Ile        | VUS           |                         |                        | ALS       |                |                     |      |
| TARDBP p.Asn352Ser       | LP            | ANG p.Lys17Ile          | VUS           |                         |                        | ALS-FTD   | +              | 61                  |      |
| SOD1 p.Ala5Val           | LP            | DAO p.Ser345Phe         | VUS           |                         |                        | ALS       | +              |                     |      |
| SOD1 p.Pro67Ala          | LP            | SETX p.Ile2547Thr       | VUS           |                         |                        | ALS       | +              |                     |      |
| SOD1 p.Gly93Asp          | P             | ANG p.Arg121Cys         | VUS           |                         |                        | ALS       |                | 72                  |      |
| FUS p.Arg485Trp          | VUS           | SETX p.Ile2547Thr       | VUS           |                         |                        | ALS       |                |                     |      |
| FUS p.Arg521Cys          | LP            | ANG p.Lys17Ile          | VUS           |                         |                        | ALS       | +              | 53                  |      |
| DCTN1 p.Arg1049Gln       | VUS           | SETX p.Ser323Asn        | VUS           |                         |                        | ALS       |                |                     |      |
| DCTN1 p.Thr1249Ile       | VUS           | SETX p.Met274Val       | VUS           |                         |                        | ALS       |                |                     |      |
| TAF15 p.Arg408Cys        | VUS           | SETX p.Ile2547Thr       | VUS           | SETX p.Thr14Ile         | VUS                    | ALS       |                |                     |      |
| SETX p.Cys1554Gly        | VUS           | DCTN1 p.His1270Gln      | VUS           | FIG4 p.Met694Val        | VUS                    | ALS       |                |                     |      |
| OPTN Ala481Val          | VUS           | OPTN p.Gln235*          | VUS           |                         |                        | FTD       | +              | 64                  | [22] |
| OPTN p.Gly538Glufs* 27   | LP            | TBK1 p.Arg117*          | LP            |                         |                        | FTD       |                | 68                  |      |
| C9orf2                   | P             | TBK1 p.Gly244Val        | VUS           |                         |                        | ALS-FTD   | +              | 41                  | [23] |
| C9orf2                   | P             | OPTN p.Glu322Lys        | VUS           |                         |                        | ALS       |                | 74                  | [149] |
| SQSTM1 p.Arg33Val        | VUS           | TBK1 p.Met690fs         | LP            |                         |                        | ALS       |                | 66                  | [48] |
| C9orf2                   | P             | TBK1 p.Glu476fs         | LP            |                         |                        | ALS       | +              | 44                  | [33] |
| C9orf2                   | P             | TBK1 p.Leu277Val        | VUS           |                         |                        | ALS       |                | 26                  |      |
| C9orf2                   | P             | NEK1 p.Asn745Lys        | VUS           |                         |                        | ALS       |                | 65                  |      |
| OPTN p.Gln314Leu        | VUS           | TBK1 p.Ala705fs         | LP            |                         |                        | ALS       |                | 46                  |      |
| TARDBP p.Gly287Ser       | LP            | NEK1 p.Ala341Thr        | VUS           |                         |                        | ALS       |                | 64                  |      |
| C9orf2                   | P             | NEK1 p.Arg232Cys        | VUS           |                         |                        | ALS-FTD   |                |                     | [66] |
| C9orf2                   | P             | NEK1 p.Arg261His        | VUS           |                         |                        | ALS       |                |                     |      |
| C9orf2                   | P             | NEK1 p.Arg261His        | VUS           |                         |                        | ALS       |                |                     |      |
| C9orf2                   | P             | NEK1 p.Arg261His        | VUS           |                         |                        | ALS       |                |                     |      |
| C9orf2                   | P             | NEK1 p.Ser1036*         | VUS           | TUBA4A p.Thr38Met       | VUS                    | ALS       | +              | 47                  |      |
| TARDBP p.Tyr374*         | LP            | NEK1 p.Arg261His        | VUS           |                         |                        | ALS       | +              | 47                  |      |
| SOD1 p.Ile114Thr         | LP            | NEK1 p.Asn745Lys        | VUS           |                         |                        | ALS+D     | +              |                     |      |
| C9orf2                   | P             | VCP p.Arg155His         | P             |                         |                        | ALS       |                |                     | [92] |
| C9orf2                   | P             | TARDBP p.Ala321Val      | LP            |                         |                        | ALS       | +              |                     |      |
| C9orf2                   | P             | UBQLN2 p.Thr334Met      | VUS           |                         |                        | ALS       |                |                     |      |

| Variant 1       | Pathogenicity | Variant 2               | Pathogenicity | Variant 3               | Pathogenicity<sup>b</sup> | ALS/FTD | Family history | Age of onset (years) | Refs   |
|------------------|---------------|-------------------------|---------------|-------------------------|--------------------------|---------|----------------|---------------------|--------|
| C9orf2           | P             | ALS2p.Ser654Gly         | VUS           |                         |                          | ALS     | +              |                     |        |
| C9orf2           | P             | ANGp.Lys78Glu           | VUS           |                         |                          | ALS     | +              |                     |        |
| C9orf2           | P             | OPTNc.626+1G>T          | VUS           |                         |                          | ALS     |                |                     |        |
| SOD1p.Asp77Tyr   | VUS           | FUSp.Ser135Asn          | VUS           |                         |                          | ALS     | +              |                     |        |
| FUSp.Arg269Trp   | VUS           | OPTNp.Arg271His         | VUS           |                         |                          | ALS     | +              |                     |        |
| UBQLN2p.Gln460Arg | VUS           | SOD1p.Asp91Ala          | VUS           |                         |                          | ALS     | +              |                     |        |
| SOD1p.Ile114Thr  | LP            | ALS2p.Pro1288Leu        | VUS           |                         |                          | ALS     | +              |                     |        |
| TARDBPp.Met337Val | P             | TARDBPp.Asn179Asp       | VUS           |                         |                          | ALS     |                |                     |        |
| C9orf2           | P             | TYROBPp.Val47Ala        | VUS           | CSF1Rp.Gly747Arg        | VUS                      | D       | +              | 49                  | [150]  |
| C9orf2           | P             | TREM2p.Glu151Lys        | VUS           |                         |                          | D       | +              | 53                  |        |
| C9orf2           | P             | GSNp.Glu268Lys          | VUS           | SOD1p.Ala141Ala         | LP                       | ALS-FTD | +              | 70                  |        |
| C9orf2           | P             | GRNc.-2C>T             | LP            |                         |                          | FTD     | +              | 65                  |        |

<sup>a</sup> Abbreviations: ALS, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis; D, dementia unspecified; FTD, frontotemporal dementia; LP, likely pathogenic; P, pathogenic; VUS, variant of unknown significance.

<sup>b</sup> Variant classification according to Sherloc, a comprehensive refinement of the ACMG-AMP guidelines [151].

Trends in Genetics

When C9orf72 repeat expansions carriers are excluded, mutations in multiple ALS genes appear mostly in pure ALS patients (83%), and double mutations are most often observed with TARDBP and NEK1 (Table 3). In a Belgian cohort of ALS and ALS-FTD patients, additional mutations in ALS genes were detected in over 50% of NEK1 carriers; the most frequent of these was the C9orf72 repeat expansion [66], a frequency that was significantly higher than expected by chance. Most striking was the cosegregating of the NEK1 p.Ser1036*LOF mutation in two affected siblings with fALS and cognitive impairment, who also carried a C9orf72 repeat expansion and TUBA4A p.Thr381Met variant, and presented with early disease onsets of 47 and 52 years (Table 3) [36,66].

In the past, identification of ALS gene mutations made use of single gene-based Sanger sequencing. Consequently, rare ALS genes were not systematically evaluated and mutations in these genes are likely underrepresented in mutation databases. Recently, high-throughput DNA parallel sequencing has proven to be the most effective approach in simultaneously analyzing panels of genes and identifying multiple gene mutation carriers, accounting for 1%-4% of ALS patients [66,89–92]. One study revealed that patients carrying multiple mutations develop ALS 10 years earlier than patients carrying a mutation in a single ALS gene [91]. In line with this observation, another study reported that ALS patients carrying a single or no mutation had longer survival times than patients carrying multiple mutations [93], suggesting that oligogenic variants may also influence disease progression and severity in ALS.

### Opportunities for Therapy

To date, there is no effective cure for ALS. Since 1995, the antiglutamatergic agent riluzole has been the only pharmacological treatment administered to ALS patients, with a median increased survival of up to 3 months [94]. This year, the US FDA approved edaravone as an ALS drug, after successful clinical trials in Japan and South Korea [95,96]. Edaravone is a neuroprotective drug that acts as an antioxidant. Treatment reduced functional decline over a period of 6 months when started early in the disease progress [97,98]. Still, these two ALS drugs have only limited beneficial effects, and no drug is available that significantly extends the lifespan of ALS patients, indicating that better therapies are urgently needed. Hereto, the rapid development in genetic studies identifying new ALS genes and related disease pathways hold promises for new therapeutic strategies (Figure 1 and Box 2). For example, targeting ALS genes, genetic modifiers, or related disease molecules with antisense oligonucleotides (ASOs) have shown promising results. In Phase I of a clinical trial, the direct delivery of ASOs against SOD1 to the CSF of fALS patients by intrathecal infusion was able to eliminate mutant SOD1 without adverse effects [99]. Currently, clinical trials with second generation ASOs against SOD1 have entered Phase I (NCT02623699). In line with these findings, ASO treatment against SOD1 improved survival of human fALS iPSC, and decreased expression of apoptotic markers [100]. Further, in SOD1 p.Gly93Ala transgenic mice, inactivation by ASOs of an important microRNA associated with inflammatory response (miR-155), significantly prolonged the survival and disease duration of the mice [101,102]. Notably, for the first time, the progression of ALS could be controlled (i.e., started and stopped, by treatment of SOD1 p.Gly93Ala mice with the PET-imaging agent CuATSM) [103]. CuATSM is known to deliver copper into the CNS, and is used here to promote the maturation of SOD1, through the CCS protein which completes SOD1 maturation by inserting copper. When SOD1 lacks this metal cofactor, it tends to misfold and become toxic, often leading to the degeneration of motor neurons. For C9orf72 (Box 1), the use of ASOs against the regions flanking the GGCCCC repeat prevented the formation of RNA foci and dipeptide repeat pathology [104–107]. In adult mouse brain and spinal cord, C9orf72 RNA levels were reduced to 60%–70% after 3 weeks of intracerebro-ventricular stereotactic injection with ASOs [108]. Apart from causal genes, genetic modifiers

have also been targeted. Expanded polyglutamine repeats in ATXN2 cause spinocerebellar ataxia type 2 but, intermediate repeats were associated with an increased risk for ALS [89,109,110]. ATXN2 forms a complex with TDP-43 and is a potent modifier of TDP-43 toxicity in animal and cellular models [111]. Silencing of ATXN2 mediated by ASOs or crossing ATXN2 knockout mice with TDP-43 transgenic mice, improved survival of the mice and reduced TDP-43 pathology [112].

Using the CRISPR/Cas9 technology to target mutant genes and reintroduce wild type copies by adeno-associated viral (AAV) vectors, will be of interest for the development of precision therapy in the future. Although the use of AAVs for gene delivery has its limitations, such as lower gene expression and limited exogenous DNA fragment size, AVVs have been shown to be safe (nonpathogenic), with low immunogenicity, ability to cross the blood-brain barrier, and efficient transfection of DNA to different cell types such as neurons, glia, or astrocytes, with long-term effects [113]. Deletion of the C9orf72 repeat expansion in patient-derived iPSCs by CRISPR/Cas9 prevented the formation of RNA foci and rescued hypermethylation at the C9orf72 locus, without changing mRNA or protein expression levels [114]. CRISPR/Cas9 is currently being used to engineer new ALS animal models for multiple ALS genes, which, in turn, will open new avenues for the development of precision therapies in the future [115].

### Concluding Remarks

Progress in genome technology and gene discovery in the past few years has drastically improved our understanding of the multiple disease pathways involved in ALS, including autophagy, cytoskeleton dynamics, mitochondrial dysfunction, RNA processing, and DNA damage repair. However, questions remain (see Outstanding Questions). It has become increasingly clear that ALS is genetically complex (Box 3), with an important contribution of

#### Box 3. ALS: A Complex Disease

ALS is a complex disease with a strong genetic contribution. About 5% of patients have first and second degree affected relatives [152]. Mendelian ALS was linked to rare mutations in genes SOD1, C9orf72, TARDBP, and FUS. The Mendelian inheritance can however be obscured by reduced and/or age-related penetrance, and this likely explains why these causal mutations can also be detected in sporadic cases. Furthermore, in apparently sporadic patients, twin studies estimated the heritability to be as high as 60% [153].

Some patients appear to carry more than one rare disease-causing mutation. An increasing number of studies are showing that the number of patients with multiple ALS-associated mutations is higher than what can be expected by chance, based on the individual mutation frequencies of the respective genes [66,81,82,83], underscoring the oligogenic component to ALS.

In addition to rare variants [minor allele frequency (MAF) < 1%], it was estimated that the contribution of common variation (MAF > 5%) to the heritability of sALS is ~12% [154]. Large GWAS have identified multiple risk loci associated with ALS, although not all could be replicated in independent populations, and so most of the heritability of sALS remains unresolved [154].

In addition to genetic predisposition, the role of environmental factors in ALS has been widely investigated. Most studied environmental factors include exposure to heavy metals, electromagnetic fields and electric shocks, pesticides, cyanotoxins, and excessive physical activity. So far, pesticide exposure, and the genetic predisposition to pesticide-induced damage, seems to be the only environmental effect for which the literature evidence is supporting a role in neurodegeneration and ALS. All other investigated environmental factors so far, have given conflicting and inconclusive results (for more on environmental factors in ALS see [155]).

Taken together, these multilevel contributions classify ALS as a complex disorder with a monogenic component of rare high-penetrant variants, an oligogenic component of rare intermediate penetrant variants, and a multifactorial component of common risk variants, possibly all under the influence of gene–environment interactions.

---

**Outstanding Questions**

What are the molecular mechanisms that drive disease presentation of ALS-FTD spectrum gene mutations (e.g., in C9orf72 or TBK1) towards an ALS phenotype rather than an FTD phenotype, and vice versa? What are the genetic factors or modifiers that affect disease presentation?

It is remarkable that many ALS genes were associated with distinct clinical phenotypes such as proteinopathies of muscle and bone (VCP, HNRNPA1, HNRNPA2B1, MATR3, TIA1), (spino) cerebellar ataxia (ATXN2, CHCHD10), mitochondrial myopathy (CHCHD10), and autoimmune disorders (ANXA11). What are the molecular mechanisms that underlie this high degree of pleiotropy and can these mechanisms be exploited for disease-modifying therapies?

How do CHCHD10 mutations trigger TDP-43 aggregation? Why does the interaction between mutant CHCHD10 and TDP-43 fail to keep TDP-43 in the nucleus?

Do TUBA4A mutations directly or indirectly alter axonal transport of TDP-43?

MATR3-positive cytoplasmic inclusions were observed in a C9orf72 repeat expansion carrier. Therefore, the question arises whether there is a direct connection between C9orf72 and MATR3 and if, through its DNA/RNA-binding properties, MATR3 can bind the C9orf72 repeat?

No significant cosegregation of NEK1 or C21orf2 mutations has so far been described. What is the degree of penetrance of these variants/mutations and are they strong enough to lead to disease on their own or do they require the burden of additional ALS-associated gene mutations?

How do dipeptide repeats (DPRs) affect nucleocytoplasmic transport of TDP-43 and other proteins? Is there any link with GLE1?

How do ANXA11 mutations affect proteostasis, calcyclin interaction,

Trends in Genetics

ARTICLE IN PRESS

rare genetic variation of high to intermediate penetrance, in addition to common risk variants with small effect sizes. It is important that this complex genetic architecture of ALS is taken into account when proceeding with gene discovery studies, genetic testing and counseling, and therapy development.

The identification of the C9orf72 repeat expansion exemplifies that noncoding DNA variations, which are not covered by WES, also contribute to ALS. Although WES is now widely used in gene identification studies, there is no doubt that WGS will soon replace WES as the standard method for gene discovery. Thanks to the Project MinEii and the ‘Ice bucket challenge’, WGS data of more than 15 000 ALS patients and 7500 healthy control individuals from around the world will be released. These large-scale genomics data, together with related omics information obtained from transcriptomics, proteomics, and metabolomics analyses, will shed further light on unresolved genetic causes, postgenomic effects, and involved molecular pathways in ALS, and associated therapeutic opportunities. Hopefully, in the near future, comparable initiatives to generate global full-genome publicly available data in FTD, will be set up.

For many years, small model organisms have been used to screen drug targets and develop therapies for ALS. Although the human and animal genome are closely related, post-translational modifications and gene expression among species may differ significantly; consequently some drugs may have beneficial effects in animal ALS models but not in humans [116]. With the introduction of genome editing technology, generating large knock-in animal models or human iPSCs, that more closely mimic the patients’ genomic context, will overcome overexpression, off-target, and mosaic effects, which holds great promise for the future [117]. Patient-derived iPSCs can effectively be used for high-throughput screening of FDA approved drugs. Also, the development of modern intrathecal administration of ASOs for silencing of different ALS targets, in combination with safe delivery methods, will enable us to develop more effective clinical therapies.

**Acknowledgments**

Research by the authors is funded in part by the Belgian Science Policy Office Interuniversity Attraction Poles program, the Flemish Government initiated Flanders Impulse Program on Networks for Dementia Research (VIND) and the Methusalem Excellence Program, the Research Foundation Flanders (FWO), and the University of Antwerp Research Fund, Belgium.

**Resources**

i. https://clinicaltrials.gov  
ii. www.projectmine.com  

**References**

1. Marin, B. *et al.* (2017) Variation in worldwide incidence of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: a meta-analysis. *Int. J. Epidemiol.* 46, 57–74  
2. Ringholz, G.M. *et al.* (2005) Prevalence and patterns of cognitive impairment in sporadic ALS. *Neurology* 65, 586–590  
3. Wheaton, M.W. *et al.* (2007) Cognitive impairment in familial ALS. *Neurology* 69, 1411–1417  
4. Robberecht, W. and Philips, T. (2013) The changing scene of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. *Nat. Rev. Neurosci.* 14, 248–264  
5. Burrell, J.R. *et al.* (2011) Motor neuron dysfunction in frontotemporal dementia. *Brain* 134, 2582–2594  
6. Van Langenhove, T. *et al.* (2017) Predicting development of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis in frontotemporal dementia. *J. Alzheimers Dis.* 58, 163–170  
7. Ling, S.C. *et al.* (2013) Converging mechanisms in ALS and FTD: disrupted RNA and protein homeostasis. *Neuron* 79, 416–438  

8. Mackenzie, I.R. and Neumann, M. (2016) Molecular neuropathology of frontotemporal dementia: insights into disease mechanisms from postmortem studies. *J. Neurochem.* 138, 54–70  
9. Renton, A.E. *et al.* (2014) State of play in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis genetics. *Nat. Neurosci.* 17, 17–23  
10. Johnson, J.O. *et al.* (2014) Mutations in the Matrin 3 gene cause familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. *Nat. Neurosci.* 17, 664–666  
11. Bannwarth, S. *et al.* (2014) A mitochondrial origin for frontotemporal dementia and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis through CHCHD10 involvement. *Brain* 137, 2329–2345  
12. Smith, B.N. *et al.* (2014) Exome-wide rare variant analysis identifies TUBA4A mutations associated with familial ALS. *Neuron* 84, 324–331  
13. Cirulli, E.T. *et al.* (2015) Exome sequencing in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis identifies risk genes and pathways. *Science* 347, 1436–1441  

vesicular transport, and TDP-43 accumulation?

How does TIA1 recruit TDP-43 to stress granules and does mutant TIA1 promote TDP-43 accumulation and aggregation?

Are TIA1 mutations limited to the prion-like low-complexity domain (LCD) or can genetic variation outside the LCD also predispose to ALS or FTD?

Trends in Genetics

ARTICLE IN PRESS

14. Freischmidt, A. *et al.* (2015) Haploinsufficiency of TBK1 causes familial ALS and fronto-temporal dementia. *Nat. Neurosci.* 18, 631–636  
15. Williams, K.L. *et al.* (2016) CCNF mutations in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and frontotemporal dementia. *Nat. Commun.* 7, 11253  
16. Kenna, K.P. *et al.* (2016) NEK1 variants confer susceptibility to amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. *Nat. Genet.* 48, 1037–1042  
17. van Rheenen, W. *et al.* (2016) Genome-wide association analyses identify new risk variants and the genetic architecture of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. *Nat. Genet.* 48, 1043–1048  
18. Smith, B.N. *et al.* (2017) Mutations in the vesicular trafficking protein annexin A11 are associated with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. *Sci. Transl. Med.* 9, eaae9157  
19. Mackenzie, I.R. *et al.* (2017) TIA1 mutations in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and frontotemporal dementia promote phase separation and alter stress granule dynamics. *Neuron* 95, 808–816  
20. Oakes, J.A. *et al.* (2017) TBK1: a new player in ALS linking autophagy and neuroinflammation. *Mol. Brain* 10, 5  
21. Gijselinck, I. *et al.* (2015) Loss of TBK1 is a frequent cause of frontotemporal dementia in a Belgian cohort. *Neurology* 85, 2116–2125  
22. Pottier, C. *et al.* (2015) Whole-genome sequencing reveals important role for TBK1 and OPTN mutations in frontotemporal lobar degeneration without motor neuron disease. *Acta Neuropathol.* 130, 77–92  
23. van der Zee, J. *et al.* (2017) TBK1 mutation spectrum in an extended European patient cohort with frontotemporal dementia and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. *Hum. Mutat.* 38, 297–309  
24. Maruyama, H. *et al.* (2010) Mutations of optineurin in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. *Nature* 465, 223–226  
25. Fecto, F. *et al.* (2011) SQSTM1 mutations in familial and sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. *Arch. Neurol.* 68, 1440–1446  
26. van der Zee, J. *et al.* (2014) Rare mutations in SQSTM1 modify susceptibility to frontotemporal lobar degeneration. *Acta Neuropathol.* 128, 397–410  
27. Ciura, S. *et al.* (2016) The most prevalent genetic cause of ALS-FTD, C9orf72 synergizes the toxicity of ATXN2 intermediate polyglutamine repeats through the autophagy pathway. *Autophagy* 12, 1406–1408  
28. Richter, B. *et al.* (2016) Phosphorylation of OPTN by TBK1 enhances its binding to Ub chains and promotes selective autophagy of damaged mitochondria. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.* 113, 4039–4044  
29. Williams, K.L. *et al.* (2015) Novel TBK1 truncating mutation in a familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis patient of Chinese origin. *Neurobiol. Aging* 36, 3334.e1–3334.e5  
30. Shu, S. *et al.* (2016) Screening of the TBK1 gene in familial and sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis patients of Chinese origin. *Amyotroph. Lateral Scler. Frontotemporal Degener.* 17, 605–607  
31. Tsai, P.C. *et al.* (2016) Mutational analysis of TBK1 in Taiwanese patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. *Neurobiol. Aging* 40, 191.e11–191.e16  
32. Kim, Y.E. *et al.* (2017) Genetic and functional analysis of TBK1 variants in Korean patients with sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. *Neurobiol. Aging* 50, 170.e1–170.e6  
33. Black, H.A. *et al.* (2017) Genetic epidemiology of motor neuron disease-associated variants in the Scottish population. *Neurobiol. Aging* 51, 178.e11–178.e20  
34. Genin, E.C. *et al.* (2016) CHCHD10 mutations promote loss of mitochondrial cristae junctions with impaired mitochondrial genome maintenance and inhibition of apoptosis. *EMBO Mol. Med.* 8, 58–72  
35. Ajroud-Driss, S. *et al.* (2015) Mutation in the novel nuclear-encoded mitochondrial protein CHCHD10 in a family with autosomal dominant mitochondrial myopathy. *Neurogenetics* 16, 1–9  

36. Perrone, F. *et al.* (2017) Investigating the role of ALS genes CHCHD10 and TUBA4A in Belgian FTD-ALS spectrum patients. *Neurobiol. Aging* 51, 177.e9–177.e16  
37. Che, X.Q. *et al.* (2017) Genetic features of MAPT, GRN, C9orf72 and CHCHD10 gene mutations in Chinese patients with frontotemporal dementia. *Curr. Alzheimer Res.* 14, 1102–1108  
38. Chaussenot, A. *et al.* (2014) Screening of CHCHD10 in a French cohort confirms the involvement of this gene in frontotemporal dementia with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis patients. *Neurobiol. Aging* 35, 2884  
39. Johnson, J.O. *et al.* (2014) Mutations in the CHCHD10 gene are a common cause of familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. *Brain* 137, e311  
40. Muller, K. *et al.* (2014) Two novel mutations in conserved codons indicate that CHCHD10 is a gene associated with motor neuron disease. *Brain* 137, e309  
41. Dols-Icardo, O. *et al.* (2015) Analysis of the CHCHD10 gene in patients with frontotemporal dementia and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis from Spain. *Brain* 138, e400  
42. Kurzwelly, D. *et al.* (2015) A distinct clinical phenotype in a German kindred with motor neuron disease carrying a CHCHD10 mutation. *Brain* 138, e376  
43. Ronchi, D. *et al.* (2015) CHCHD10 mutations in Italian patients with sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. *Brain* 138, e372  
44. Zhang, M. *et al.* (2015) Mutation analysis of CHCHD10 in different neurodegenerative diseases. *Brain* 138, e380  
45. Shen, S. *et al.* (2017) CHCHD10 mutations in patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis in mainland China. *Neurobiol. Aging* 54, 214.e7–214.e10  
46. Pensato, V. *et al.* (2015) TUBA4A gene analysis in sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: identification of novel mutations. *J. Neurol.* 262, 1376–1378  
47. Dols-Icardo, O. *et al.* (2016) Assessing the role of TUBA4A gene in frontotemporal degeneration. *Neurobiol. Aging* 38, 215.e13–215.e14  
48. Borghero, G. *et al.* (2014) Genetic architecture of ALS in Sardinia. *Neurobiol. Aging* 35, 2882.e7–2882.e12  
49. Origone, P. *et al.* (2015) A novel Arg147Trp MATR3 missense mutation in a slowly progressive ALS Italian patient. *Amyotroph. Lateral Scler. Frontotemporal Degener.* 16, 530–531  
50. Lin, K.P. *et al.* (2015) Mutational analysis of MATR3 in Taiwanese patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. *Neurobiol. Aging* 36, 2005e1–2005.e4  
51. Leblond, C.S. *et al.* (2016) Replication study of MATR3 in familial and sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. *Neurobiol. Aging* 37, 209.e17–209.e21  
52. Xu, L. *et al.* (2016) MATR3 mutation analysis in a Chinese cohort with sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. *Neurobiol. Aging* 38, 218.e3–218.e4  
53. Marangi, G. *et al.* (2017) Matrin 3 variants are frequent in Italian ALS patients. *Neurobiol. Aging* 49, 218.e1–218.e7  
54. Salton, M. *et al.* (2011) Matrin 3 binds and stabilizes mRNA. *PLoS One* 6, e23882  
55. Coelho, M.B. *et al.* (2015) Nuclear matrix protein Matrin 3 regulates alternative splicing and forms overlapping regulatory networks with PTB. *EMBO J.* 34, 653–668  
56. Moloney, C. *et al.* (2016) Transgenic mice overexpressing the ALS-linked protein Matrin 3 develop a profound muscle phenotype. *Acta Neuropathol. Commun.* 4, 122  
57. Yamaguchi, A. and Takanashi, K. (2016) FUS interacts with nuclear matrix-associated protein SAFB1 as well as Matrin 3 to regulate splicing and ligand-mediated transcription. *Sci. Rep.* 6, 35195  
58. Boehringer, A. *et al.* (2017) ALS associated mutations in Matrin 3 alter protein-protein interactions and impede mRNA nuclear export. *Sci. Rep.* 7, 14529  
59. Pan, C. *et al.* (2017) Mutations of CCNF gene is rare in patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and frontotemporal dementia

from mainland China. *Amyotroph. Lateral Scler. Frontotemporal Degener.* 18, 265–268

60. D'Angiolella, V. *et al.* (2013) A cyclin without cyclin-dependent kinases: cyclin F controls genome stability through ubiquitin-mediated proteolysis. *Trends Cell Biol.* 23, 135–140

61. Klein, D.K. *et al.* (2015) Cyclin F suppresses B-Myb activity to promote cell cycle checkpoint control. *Nat. Commun.* 6, 5800

62. Bai, C. *et al.* (1996) SKP1 connects cell cycle regulators to the ubiquitin proteolysis machinery through a novel motif, the F-box. *Cell* 86, 263–274

63. Lee, A. *et al.* (2018) Pathogenic mutation in the ALS/FTD gene, CCNF, causes elevated Lys48-linked ubiquitylation and defective autophagy. *Cell. Mol. Life Sci.* 75, 335–354

64. Hogan, A.L. *et al.* (2017) Expression of ALS/FTD-linked mutant CCNF in zebrafish leads to increased cell death in the spinal cord and an aberrant motor phenotype. *Hum. Mol. Genet.* 26, 2616–2626

65. Brenner, D. *et al.* (2016) NEK1 mutations in familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. *Brain* 139, e28

66. Nguyen, H.P. *et al.* (2017) NEK1 genetic variability in a Belgian cohort of ALS and ALS-FTD patients. *Neurobiol. Aging* 61, 255.e1–255.e7

67. Shalom, O. *et al.* (2008) The mammalian Nek1 kinase is involved in primary cilium formation. *FEBS Lett.* 582, 1465–1470

68. Chen, Y. *et al.* (2009) Nek1 regulates cell death and mitochondrial membrane permeability through phosphorylation ofVDAC1. *Cell Cycle* 8, 257–267

69. Pelegrini, A.L. *et al.* (2010) Nek1 silencing slows down DNA repair and blocks DNA damage-induced cell cycle arrest. *Mutagenesis* 25, 447–454

70. Chen, Y. *et al.* (2011) Nek1 kinase functions in DNA damage response and checkpoint control through a pathway independent of ATM and ATR. *Cell Cycle* 10, 655–663

71. Chang, J. *et al.* (2009) The NIMA-family kinase Nek3 regulates microtubule acetylation in neurons. *J. Cell Sci.* 122, 2274–2282

72. Wu, C.H. *et al.* (2012) Mutations in the profilin 1 gene cause familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. *Nature* 488, 499–503

73. Fang, X. *et al.* (2015) The NEK1 interactor, C21ORF2, is required for efficient DNA damage repair. *Acta Biochim. Biophys. Sin. (Shanghai)* 47, 834–841

74. Wang, Z. *et al.* (2016) Axial spondylometaphyseal dysplasia is caused by C21orf2 mutations. *PLoS One* 11, e0150555

75. Wang, Z. *et al.* (2017) Axial spondylometaphyseal dysplasia is also caused by NEK1 mutations. *J. Hum. Genet.* 62, 503–506

76. Wang, J. *et al.* (2014) Annexin A11 in disease. *Clin. Chim. Acta* 431, 164–168

77. Brand, P. *et al.* (2016) Distal myopathy with coexisting heterozygous TIA1 and MYH7 variants. *Neuromuscul. Disord.* 26, 511–515

78. Hackman, P. *et al.* (2013) Welander distal myopathy is caused by a mutation in the RNA-binding protein TIA1. *Ann. Neurol.* 73, 500–509

79. Klar, J. *et al.* (2013) Welander distal myopathy caused by an ancient founder mutation in TIA1 associated with perturbed splicing. *Hum. Mutat.* 34, 572–577

80. Felbecker, A. *et al.* (2010) Four familial ALS pedigrees discordant for two SOD1 mutations: are all SOD1 mutations pathogenic? *J. Neurol. Neurosurg. Psychiatry* 81, 572–577

81. van Blitterswijk, M. *et al.* (2012) Evidence for an oligogenic basis of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. *Hum. Mol. Genet.* 21, 3776–3784

82. Veldink, J.H. (2017) ALS genetic epidemiology ‘How simplex is the genetic epidemiology of ALS?’ *J. Neurol. Neurosurg. Psychiatry* 88, 537

83. Zou, Z. *et al.* (2017) Genetic epidemiology of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: a systematic review and meta-analysis. *J. Neurol. Neurosurg. Psychiatry* 88, 540–549

84. Majounie, E. *et al.* (2012) Frequency of the C9orf72 hexanucleotide repeat expansion in patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and frontotemporal dementia: a cross-sectional study. *Lancet Neurol.* 11, 323–330

85. Cruts, M. *et al.* (2013) Current insights into the C9orf72 repeat expansion diseases of the FTLD/ALS spectrum. *Trends Neurosci.* 36, 450–459

86. Renton, A.E. *et al.* (2011) A hexanucleotide repeat expansion in C9ORF72 is the cause of chromosome 9p21-linked ALS-FTD. *Neuron* 72, 257–268

87. DeJesus-Hernandez, M. *et al.* (2011) Expanded GGGGCC hexanucleotide repeat in noncoding region of C9ORF72 causes chromosome 9p-linked FTD and ALS. *Neuron* 72, 245–256

88. Gijselinck, I. *et al.* (2012) A C9orf72 promoter repeat expansion in a Flanders-Belgian cohort with disorders of the frontotemporal lobar degeneration-amyotrophic lateral sclerosis spectrum: a gene identification study. *Lancet Neurol.* 11, 54–65

89. Dekker, A.M. *et al.* (2016) Large-scale screening in sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis identifies genetic modifiers in C9orf72 repeat carriers. *Neurobiol. Aging* 39, 220.e9–220.e15

90. Kenna, K.P. *et al.* (2013) Delineating the genetic heterogeneity of ALS using targeted high-throughput sequencing. *J. Med. Genet.* 50, 776–783

91. Cady, J. *et al.* (2015) Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis onset is influenced by the burden of rare variants in known amyotrophic lateral sclerosis genes. *Ann. Neurol.* 77, 100–113

92. Morgan, S. *et al.* (2017) A comprehensive analysis of rare genetic variation in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis in the UK. *Brain* 140, 1611–1618

93. Pang, S.Y. *et al.* (2017) Burden of rare variants in ALS genes influences survival in familial and sporadic ALS. *Neurobiol. Aging* 59, 238.e9–238.e15

94. Miller, R.G. *et al.* (2012) Riluzole for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS)/motor neuron disease (MND). *Cochrane Database Syst. Rev.* 3, CD001447

95. Sawada, H. (2017) Clinical efficacy of edaravone for the treatment of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. *Expert Opin. Pharmacother.* 18, 735–738

96. Martinez, A. *et al.* (2017) Drugs in clinical development for the treatment of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. *Expert Opin. Investig. Drugs* 26, 403–414

97. Abe, K. *et al.* (2014) Confirmatory double-blind, parallel-group, placebo-controlled study of efficacy and safety of edaravone (MCI-186) in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis patients. *Amyotroph. Lateral Scler. Frontotemporal Degener.* 15, 610–617

98. Al-Chalabi, A. *et al.* (2017) July 2017 ENCALS statement on edaravone. *Amyotroph. Lateral Scler. Frontotemporal Degener.* 18, 471–474

99. Miller, T.M. *et al.* (2013) An antisense oligonucleotide against SOD1 delivered intrathecally for patients with SOD1 familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: a phase 1, randomised, first-in-man study. *Lancet Neurol.* 12, 435–442

100. Nizzardo, M. *et al.* (2016) Morpholino-mediated SOD1 reduction ameliorates an amyotrophic lateral sclerosis disease phenotype. *Sci. Rep.* 6, 21301

101. Koval, E.D. *et al.* (2013) Method for widespread microRNA-155 inhibition prolongs survival in ALS-model mice. *Hum. Mol. Genet.* 22, 4127–4135

102. Butovsky, O. *et al.* (2015) Targeting miR-155 restores abnormal microglia and attenuates disease in SOD1 mice. *Ann. Neurol.* 77, 75–99

103. Williams, J.R. *et al.* (2016) Copper delivery to the CNS by CuATSM effectively treats motor neuron disease in SOD (G93A) mice co-expressing the copper-chaperone-for-SOD. *Neurobiol. Dis.* 89, 1–9

104. Sareen, D. *et al.* (2013) Targeting RNA foci in iPSC-derived motor neurons from ALS patients with a C9ORF72 repeat expansion. *Sci. Transl. Med.* 5, 208ra149

Trends in Genetics

ARTICLE IN PRESS

105. Donnelly, C.J. *et al.* (2013) RNA toxicity from the ALS/FTD C9ORF72 expansion is mitigated by antisense intervention. *Neuron* 80, 415–428  
106. Jiang, J. *et al.* (2016) Gain of toxicity from ALS/FTD-linked repeat expansions in C9ORF72 is alleviated by antisense oligonucleotides targeting GGGGCC-containing RNAs. *Neuron* 90, 535–550  
107. Gendron, T.F. *et al.* (2017) Poly(GP) proteins are a useful pharmacodynamic marker for C9ORF72-associated amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. *Sci. Transl. Med.* 9, eaai7866  
108. Lagier-Tourenne, C. *et al.* (2013) Targeted degradation of sense and antisense C9orf72 RNA foci as therapy for ALS and frontotemporal degeneration. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.* 110, E4530–E4539  
109. Lattante, S. *et al.* (2014) Contribution of ATXN2 intermediary polyQ expansions in a spectrum of neurodegenerative disorders. *Neurology* 83, 990–995  
110. van Blitterswijk, M. *et al.* (2014) Ataxin-2 as potential disease modifier in C9ORF72 expansion carriers. *Neurobiol. Aging* 35, 2421.e13–2421.e17  
111. Elden, A.C. *et al.* (2010) Ataxin-2 intermediate-length polyglutamine expansions are associated with increased risk for ALS. *Nature* 466, 1069–1075  
112. Becker, L.A. *et al.* (2017) Therapeutic reduction of ataxin-2 extends lifespan and reduces pathology in TDP-43 mice. *Nature* 544, 367–371  
113. Naso, M.F. *et al.* (2017) Adeno-associated virus (AAV) as a vector for gene therapy. *BioDrugs* 31, 317–334  
114. Pribadi, M. *et al.* (2016) CRISPR-Cas9 targeted deletion of the C9orf72 repeat expansion mutation corrects cellular phenotypes in patient-derived iPSC cells. *Biorxiv* Published online 5 May 2016. http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/051193  
115. Tu, Z. *et al.* (2015) CRISPR/Cas9: a powerful genetic engineering tool for establishing large animal models of neurodegenerative diseases. *Mol. Neurodegener.* 10, 35  
116. Gordon, P.H. *et al.* (2007) Efficacy of minocycline in patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: a phase III randomised trial. *Lancet Neurol.* 6, 1045–1053  
117. Clerc, P. *et al.* (2016) A look into the future of ALS research. *Drug Discov. Today* 21, 939–949  
118. Van Mossevelde, S. *et al.* (2017) Relationship between C9orf72 repeat size and clinical phenotype. *Curr. Opin. Genet. Dev.* 44, 117–124  
119. Cruts, M. *et al.* (2015) C9orf72-related amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and frontotemporal dementia. In *GeneReviews* (Adam, M. P. *et al.*, eds), University of Washington  
120. Gijselinck, I. *et al.* (2016) The C9orf72 repeat size correlates with onset age of disease, DNA methylation and transcriptional downregulation of the promoter. *Mol. Psychiatry* 21, 1112–1124  
121. Van Mossevelde, S. *et al.* (2017) Clinical evidence of disease anticipation in families segregating a C9orf72 repeat expansion. *JAMA Neurol.* 74, 445–452  
122. Fratta, P. *et al.* (2013) Homozygosity for the C9orf72 GGGGCC repeat expansion in frontotemporal dementia. *Acta Neuropathol.* 126, 401–409  
123. Wheeler, T.M. and Thornton, C.A. (2007) Myotonic dystrophy: RNA-mediated muscle disease. *Curr. Opin. Neurol.* 20, 572–576  
124. Mizielinska, S. *et al.* (2014) C9orf72 repeat expansions cause neurodegeneration in *Drosophila* through arginine-rich proteins. *Science* 345, 1192–1194  
125. Tran, H. *et al.* (2015) Differential toxicity of nuclear RNA foci versus dipeptide repeat proteins in a *Drosophila* model of C90RF72 FTD/ALS. *Neuron* 87, 1207–1214  
126. Mori, K. *et al.* (2013) Bidirectional transcripts of the expanded C9orf72 hexanucleotide repeat are translated into aggregating dipeptide repeat proteins. *Acta Neuropathol.* 126, 881–893  

127. Kwon, I. *et al.* (2014) Poly-dipeptides encoded by the C9orf72 repeats bind nucleoli, impede RNA biogenesis, and kill cells. *Science* 345, 1139–1145  
128. Zhang, Y.J. *et al.* (2014) Aggregation-prone c9FTD/ALS poly(GA) RAN-translated proteins cause neurotoxicity by inducing ER stress. *Acta Neuropathol.* 128, 505–524  
129. Yang, D. *et al.* (2015) FTD/ALS-associated poly(GR) protein impairs the Notch pathway and is recruited by poly(GA) into cytoplasmic inclusions. *Acta Neuropathol.* 130, 525–535  
130. Freibaum, B.D. *et al.* (2015) GGGGCC repeat expansion in C9orf72 compromises nucleocytoplasmic transport. *Nature* 525, 129–133  
131. Jovicic, A. *et al.* (2015) Modifiers of C9orf72 dipeptide repeat toxicity connect nucleocytoplasmic transport defects to FTD/ALS. *Nat. Neurosci.* 18, 1226–1229  
132. Zhang, K. *et al.* (2015) The C9orf72 repeat expansion disrupts nucleocytoplasmic transport. *Nature* 525, 56–61  
133. Shi, K.Y. *et al.* (2017) Toxic PRn poly-dipeptides encoded by the C9orf72 repeat expansion block nuclear import and export. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.* 114, E1111–E1117  
134. Yin, S. *et al.* (2017) Evidence that C9ORF72 dipeptide repeat proteins associate with U2 snRNP to cause sis-splicing in ALS/FTD patients. *Cell Rep.* 19, 2244–2256  
135. Mackenzie, I.R. *et al.* (2015) Quantitative analysis and clinico-pathological correlations of different dipeptide repeat protein pathologies in C9ORF72 mutation carriers. *Acta Neuropathol.* 130, 845–861  
136. Scotter, E.L. *et al.* (2015) TDP-43 proteinopathy and ALS: insights into disease mechanisms and therapeutic targets. *Neurotherapeutics* 12, 352–363  
137. Kim, H.J. *et al.* (2013) Mutations in prion-like domains in hnRNPA2B1 and hnRNPA1 cause multisystem proteinopathy and ALS. *Nature* 495, 467–473  
138. Buratti, E. *et al.* (2005) TDP-43 binds heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein A/B through its C-terminal tail: an important region for the inhibition of cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator exon 9 splicing. *J. Biol. Chem.* 280, 37572–37584  
139. Hill, S.J. *et al.* (2016) Two familial ALS proteins function in prevention/repair of transcription-associated DNA damage. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.* 113, E7701–E7709  
140. Kaneb, H.M. *et al.* (2015) Deleterious mutations in the essential mRNA metabolism factor, hGle1, in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. *Hum. Mol. Genet.* 24, 1363–1373  
141. Chew, J. *et al.* (2015) Neurodegeneration C9ORF72 repeat expansions in mice cause TDP-43 pathology, neuronal loss, and behavioral deficits. *Science* 348, 1151–1154  
142. Khosravi, B. *et al.* (2017) Cytoplasmic poly-GA aggregates impair nuclear import of TDP-43 in C9orf72 ALS/FTLD. *Hum. Mol. Genet.* 26, 790–800  
143. Woo, J.A. *et al.* (2017) Loss of function CHCHD10 mutations in cytoplasmic TDP-43 accumulation and synaptic integrity. *Nat. Commun.* 8, 15558  
144. Funayama, M. *et al.* (2015) CHCHD2 mutations in autosomal dominant late-onset Parkinson's disease: a genome-wide linkage and sequencing study. *Lancet Neurol.* 14, 274–282  
145. Straub, I.R. *et al.* (2017) Loss of CHCHD10-CHCHD2 complexes required for respiration underlies the pathogenicity of a CHCHD10 mutation in ALS. *Hum. Mol. Genet.* 27, 178–189  
146. Fallini, C. *et al.* (2012) The ALS disease protein TDP-43 is actively transported in motor neuron axons and regulates axon outgrowth. *Hum. Mol. Genet.* 21, 3703–3718  
147. De Vos, K.J. and Hafezparast, M. (2017) Neurobiology of axonal transport defects in motor neuron diseases: opportunities for translational research? *Neurobiol. Dis.* 105, 283–299  
148. Lattante, S. *et al.* (2015) Defining the genetic connection linking amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) with frontotemporal dementia (FTD). *Trends Genet.* 31, 263–273

Trends in Genetics

149. Bury, J.J. *et al.* (2016) Oligogenic inheritance of optineurin (OPTN) and C9ORF72 mutations in ALS highlights localisation of OPTN in the TDP-43-negative inclusions of C9ORF72-ALS. *Neuropathology* 36, 125–134

150. Giannoccaro, M.P. *et al.* (2017) Multiple variants in families with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and frontotemporal dementia related to C9orf72 repeat expansion: further observations on their oligogenic nature. *J. Neurol.* 264, 1426–1433

151. Nykamp, K. *et al.* (2017) Sherloc: a comprehensive refinement of the ACMG-AMP variant classification criteria. *Genet. Med.* 19, 1105–1117

152. Byrne, S. *et al.* (2011) Rate of familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: a systematic review and meta-analysis. *J. Neurol. Neurosurg. Psychiatry* 82, 623–627

153. Al-Chalabi, A. *et al.* (2010) An estimate of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis heritability using twin data. *J. Neurol. Neurosurg. Psychiatry* 81, 1324–1326

154. Fogh, I. *et al.* (2014) A genome-wide association meta-analysis identifies a novel locus at 17q11.2 associated with sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. *Hum. Mol. Genet.* 23, 2220–2231

155. Bozzoni, V. *et al.* (2016) Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and environmental factors. *Funct. Neurol.* 31, 7–19

20 Trends in Genetics, Month Year, Vol. xx, No. yy
