
Trends in Pharmacological Sciences

Review

# Emerging Actors in Diabetic Cardiomyopathy: Heartbreaker Biomarkers or Therapeutic Targets?

Xavier Palomer,$^{1,2,3}$ Javier Pizarro-Delgado,$^{1,2,3}$ and Manuel Vázquez-Carrera$^{1,2,3,*}$

The diabetic heart is characterized by metabolic disturbances that are often accompanied by local inflammation, oxidative stress, myocardial fibrosis, and cardiomyocyte apoptosis. Overall changes result in contractile dysfunction, concentric left ventricular (LV) hypertrophy, and dilated cardiomyopathy, that together affect cardiac output and eventually lead to heart failure, the foremost cause of death in diabetic patients. There are currently several validated biomarkers for the diagnosis and risk assessment of cardiac diseases, but none is capable of discriminating patients with diabetic cardiomyopathy (DCM). In this review we point to several novel candidate biomarkers from new activated molecular pathways (including microRNAs) with the potential to detect or prevent DCM in its early stages, or even to treat it once established. The prospective use of selected biomarkers that integrate inflammation, oxidative stress, fibrosis, and metabolic dysregulation is widely discussed.

## Diabetic Cardiomyopathy: Where We Are

DCM is currently defined as myocardial dysfunction that develops in diabetic patients, and which is not directly attributable to hypertension, valve disease, or coronary artery disease. Its prevalence ranges from 20% to 60% in the diabetic population [1,2], and affects both people with type 1 (DM1) and type 2 (DM2) diabetes [3]. The diabetic heart is characterized by metabolic disturbances, which, together with subcellular component abnormalities and immunological alterations, locally prompt inflammation, oxidative stress (see Glossary), mitochondrial dysfunction, and apoptosis. Overall changes result in extracellular cardiac remodeling and fibrosis, contractile dysfunction, concentric LV hypertrophy, and dilated cardiomyopathy, which affect cardiac output and eventually lead to heart failure, the foremost cause of death in diabetic patients [4].

Current criteria to diagnose DCM (Box 1) include LV diastolic dysfunction, reduced LV ejection fraction (LVEF), pathological cardiac hypertrophy, and interstitial fibrosis [5]. However, it is often difficult to identify DCM in its early stages because of its heterogeneity. For this reason, it is essential that early molecular events are identified that would allow early diagnosis. This would enable a reliable assessment of the disease, and would boost the use of novel therapeutic strategies to delay or prevent its progression to heart failure. Nowadays, there is an increased trend towards the identification of new activated molecular pathways and mediators involved in the pathogenesis of DCM. Quantification of molecular biomarkers could provide an interesting tool both to improve DCM detection and to discover new therapeutic targets (Box 2). Despite the considerable panel of candidates, however, no molecule has proved to be useful in clinical practice to date. Thus, the identification of potential cardiac biomarkers that are released during early and reversible alterations

### Highlights

- DCM is a relatively prevalent disease associated with high rates of morbidity and mortality.
- The current criteria to diagnose DCM include LV diastolic dysfunction, reduced LV ejection fraction, pathological LV hypertrophy, and interstitial fibrosis. However, it is difficult to identify DCM in its early stages because of its heterogeneity.
- There are some validated biomarkers for the diagnosis and risk assessment of numerous cardiac diseases, but none of them is able to discriminate patients with DCM.
- The diabetic heart is characterized by metabolic disturbances that are often accompanied by local inflammation, oxidative stress, myocardial fibrosis, and cardiomyocyte apoptosis. The discovery of selected biomarkers that integrate these processes is of great interest to detect or prevent DCM in its early stages, or even to treat it once established.

$^1$Department of Pharmacology, Toxicology, and Therapeutic Chemistry, Institut de Biomedicina de la Universitat de Barcelona (IBUB), Barcelona, Spain  
$^2$Research Institute, Hospital Sant Joan de Déu, Barcelona, Spain  
$^3$Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red (CIBER) de Diabetes y Enfermedades Metabólicas Asociadas (CIBERDEM), Faculty of Pharmacy and Food Sciences, University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain  

*Correspondence: mvazquezcarrera@ub.edu (M. Vázquez-Carrera).

452 Trends in Pharmacological Sciences, May 2018, Vol. 39, No. 5 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tips.2018.02.010  
© 2018 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

Trends in Pharmacological Sciences

Box 1. Clinical Features and Diagnostic Methods of DCM

The diabetic heart is mostly characterized by concentric LV hypertrophy, dilated cardiomyopathy, and extracellular fibrosis. Cardiac remodeling during DCM occurs in different phases. The first area in which obvious pathological changes usually occur is the myocardial interstitium. This is often followed by perivascular fibrosis and LV hypertrophy, which result in impaired relaxation and passive filling of the left ventricle (diastolic dysfunction) [3]. Diastolic dysfunction is generally the earliest functional abnormality detected in DCM, and may even be found in asymptomatic diabetic patients and patients with good glycemic control. Conversely, systolic dysfunction, defined as the inability of the myocardium to eject an adequate blood volume, is less frequent and typically develops in the later stages of the disease.

Despite the different techniques that are now available, there is no gold-standard diagnostic test for DCM. Indeed, DCM is usually detected through the identification of systolic dysfunction at late stages of the disease when heart failure is already established. Endomyocardial biopsy sampling and cardiac catheterization are accurate methods for diagnosing diastolic dysfunction in the early stages, but, because of the high risk they pose, their use has been confined to research settings [37]. 2D and more recently 3D echocardiography are valuable inexpensive and non-invasive tools to detect functional and structural cardiac disorders in real time, including early fibrosis and cardiac hypertrophy [37]. Magnetic resonance imaging displays greater accuracy and reproducibility than echocardiography, and is valid for measuring LV mass, myocardial steatosis, and diastolic dysfunction, in addition to providing data about myocardial fibrosis. Nevertheless, it is currently only used for research purposes owing to its demanding time, cost, and expertise requirements. Finally, positron emission tomography scanning has been successfully used to detect myocardial metabolic abnormalities in murine models of DCM and asymptomatic DM2 patients.

Box 2. Treatment Approaches for DCM

There are no formal guidelines regarding the management of DCM but, as a general rule, therapy includes lifestyle modifications (weight loss, restriction of total energy intake, and regular physical activity), improvement of glycemic control, lipid-lowering drugs, and the management of heart failure itself.

The PPARγ agonists thiazolidinediones (TZDs) are hypoglycemic insulin-sensitizing drugs that improve myocardial glucose metabolism in addition to displaying some beneficial anti-inflammatory and profibrinolytic effects [106]. However, chronic TZD treatment may favor the occurrence of symptoms that resemble heart failure, and for that reason they are not recommended in patients suffering this pathology [3]. Likewise, metformin is a first-line medication for the treatment of DM2 that prevents DCM in experimental models and reduces morbidity and mortality in overweight patients with heart failure and diabetes, but that was till recently contraindicated in patients with heart failure because it causes lactic acidosis [3]. Similarly conflicting results have been reported with other classic antidiabetic medicines (sulfonylureas and insulin) [15]. With regard to newer antidiabetic drugs (glucagon-like peptide-1 mimetic agents and dipeptidyl peptidase 4 inhibitors) [15], or lipid-lowering drugs (statins) [107], there are some encouraging data pointing to their cardioprotective effects, but additional clinical trials will be necessary to determine their efficacy and safety in DCM.

The antihypertensive drugs angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors, renin inhibitors, and angiotensin II receptor blockers also protect the heart in both human and animal models of DCM [3]. Similarly, β-adrenoreceptor antagonists [108] and calcium channel blockers [109] have both shown protective effects against DCM, suggesting their putative suitability in hypertensive patients with DCM. Finally, antianginal metabolic modulators (trimetazidine, ranolazine) are also promising drugs for treating DCM in the near future because they may correct the metabolic dysregulation occurring during this pathology, and at the same time they display beneficial pleiotropic effects on oxidative stress, lipotoxicity, calcium handling, and apoptosis [3].

is of great interest. Numerous molecules with autocrine and paracrine effects are excreted by the heart in response to the structural and functional alterations associated with diabetes. These molecules are involved in processes as diverse as inflammation, metabolism, contractility, fibrosis, hypertrophy, and apoptosis. Interestingly, increasing evidence points to a potential link between chronic low-grade inflammation, fibrosis, and metabolic dysregulation in heart diseases [4]. For that reason, we focus on those molecules of cardiac origin that could mediate the crosstalk between inflammation, cardiac remodeling, and metabolic dysregulation in the failing heart during diabetes.

Molecular Basis of DCM

Metabolic Remodeling Plays a Key Role in DCM

The pathophysiological mechanisms of DCM are multifactorial (Figure 1), although it is widely accepted that metabolic dysregulation plays a pivotal role in its development. Free fatty acids

Glossary

Advanced glycation end-products (AGEs): proteins or lipids that are glycated and oxidized as a consequence of persistent exposure to high concentrations of reducing sugars (e.g., glucose), and that are causatively associated with the complications of diabetes.

Apoptosis: genetically programmed cell death that is characterized by the fragmentation of nuclear DNA, and which aims to eliminate DNA-damaged, superfluous, or unwanted cells.

Autophagy: homeostatic process that involves cell degradation of unnecessary or dysfunctional cytoplasmic components ranging from protein aggregates to whole organelles through the action of lysosomes.

Cardiac hypertrophy: abnormal thickening of the heart muscle that results from cardiomyocyte enlargement and changes in the extracellular matrix.

Cardiac output: volume of blood being pumped by the heart per unit time.

Cardiac remodeling: the result of an imbalance between pro- and antifibrotic factors that promotes extracellular matrix protein deposition. The resultant cardiac fibrosis impairs cardiomyocyte contractility and, ultimately, leads to cardiac stiffness and heart failure.

Cardiac steatosis: excessive accumulation of triglycerides in cardiomyocytes.

Cytokines and chemokines: extracellular mediators that participate in the regulation of acute and chronic inflammation.

Diastolic dysfunction: impaired ventricular relaxation and filling resulting in a higher end-diastolic pressure for a given end-diastolic volume.

Dilated cardiomyopathy: condition in which the heart becomes enlarged and cannot pump blood efficiently.

Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress: the ER is the subcellular organelle responsible for protein folding and maturation. Any perturbation that hinders these processes gives rise to the accumulation of unfolded or misfolded proteins, leading to the activation of the unfolded protein

Trends in Pharmacological Sciences, May 2018, Vol. 39, No. 5 453
(FFAs) are the preferred energy substrate in the adult heart, although other substrates such as glucose, lactate, or ketone bodies may provide additional fuel sources. At the transcriptional level, cardiac metabolism is mostly regulated by the **peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor** (PPAR)/PPARγ coactivator-1α (PGC-1α) axis which, together with its transcriptional targets, plays a central role in DCM [6]. One of these target genes, pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase 4 (PDK4), encodes the enzyme that catalyzes the rate-limiting step of glucose oxidation and is chronically upregulated in the diabetic heart [7]. By contrast, the uptake of FAs and glucose in the heart is mediated, respectively, by fatty acid translocase (FAT/CD36) and the insulin-induced glucose transporter 4 (GLUT4), which are both transcriptionally regulated by PPAR/PGC-1α. Under **insulin resistance**, GLUT4 is internalized while FAT/CD36 becomes preferentially localized to the sarcolemma, thus promoting a substrate shift toward increased mitochondrial FA β-oxidation as the sole fuel source [8–10]. Despite the higher FA oxidation rate, myocardial lipid accumulation is a hallmark of the diabetic heart, and **cardiac steatosis** is currently regarded as a major cause of DCM [4,11]. The ensuing accumulation of toxic lipid intermediates (lipotoxicity) is characterized by the activation of the proinflammatory transcription factor nuclear factor-κB (NF-κB) and the appearance of **endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress** and mitochondrial dysfunction that are linked to myocyte apoptosis, myocardial fibrosis, and contractile dysfunction [3,12].

### The Role of Inflammation and Fibrosis

Elevated FFA plasma levels and hyperglycemia activate NF-κB in cardiomyocytes [6]. The resultant increased expression and secretion of **cytokines and chemokines** exerts several autocrine effects via downstream activation of activator protein-1 (AP-1) and NF-κB itself which are actively involved in the development of heart failure during DCM [4,13].

Hyperglycemia also induces the formation of **advanced glycation end-products (AGEs)** within the cardiomyocytes [14], which, through the interaction with their receptor (RAGE, receptor for AGE), trigger NF-κB activation, hence modifying overall gene expression in cardiomyocytes and reducing cardiac contractility [13]. Hyperglycemia-derived AGEs induce the formation of structural proteins, type I and III collagens, promote the covalent crosslinking between various extra- and intracellular proteins, and elicit a switch in expression from the α myosin heavy chain (MHC) isoform to the β-MHC isoform [3,15]. These changes favor interstitial fibrosis, myocardial stiffness, and subsequent LV diastolic dysfunction.

### Oxidative Stress and Apoptosis

Hyperglycemia and undue FA oxidation in mitochondria during DCM promote reactive oxygen species (ROS) accumulation in cardiomyocytes, which lead to oxidative stress and are involved in all stages of DCM, including cardiac hypertrophy, fibrosis, contractile dysfunction, and heart failure [15]. An excess of ROS promotes the uncoupling of oxidative metabolism, induces DNA, protein, and lipid oxidative damage, triggers NF-κB activation, and gives rise to endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress [3]. As a result, myocardial energy generation is impaired, calcium handling is disturbed, and cardiac contractility and efficiency are reduced [3,12]. In murine cardiomyocytes, oxidative stress directly induces insulin resistance via upregulation of extracellular signal-regulated protein kinase (ERK) 1/2 activity, which inhibits the NF-E2-related factor 2 (Nrf2), a transcription factor that protects against sustained oxidative stress [16].

ROS accumulation also hastens cardiomyocyte apoptosis, which is often observed in the myocardium of animal models and patients with diabetes [15]. Apoptosis is caused by several mechanisms, including the activation of DNA reparative enzymes such as poly

454 Trends in Pharmacological Sciences, May 2018, Vol. 39, No. 5

---

**response (UPR) by the ER. The purpose of the UPR is to promote cell survival by mitigating the adverse effects of ER stress, and this is achieved by arresting general mRNA translation, facilitating protein degradation, and enhancing the production of molecular chaperones involved in protein folding.**

**Fibroblast growth factors (FGFs):** small signaling proteins (~150–300 amino acids) with diverse biological functions, mainly in development and metabolism. The family comprises up to 23 members (FGF1–FGF23) which display paracrine, intracrine, and endocrine actions.

**Insulin resistance:** condition in which the cells of the body do not respond properly to the hormone insulin.

**MicroRNA (miRNA):** an endogenous non-coding small RNA that modulates gene expression by targeting mRNAs for post-transcriptional repression.

**Oxidative stress:** refers to elevated intracellular levels of reactive oxygen species (ROS) that cause damage to lipids, proteins, and DNA. It is caused by an imbalance between the production of free radicals and the ability of the body to counteract or detoxify their harmful effects by antioxidants.

**Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors (PPARs):** subfamily of the nuclear receptor superfamily that regulates transcriptional gene expression and plays essential roles in the regulation of cellular differentiation, development, and metabolism. PPARs comprise three isotypes: PPARα, PPARβ/δ, and PPARγ.
Trends in Pharmacological Sciences

CellPress
REVIEWS

Diabetes

Glucose

Insulin

FA

Bloodstream

FAT
CD36

↑ FA uptake

Impaired insulin
signaling

Cardiac lipid accumulation

Ceramides
DAG

ER stress

PKC
↑ AGEs
ROS

PGC-1α
PPAR

CPT1
FAT/CD36
PDK4

Cytokines
Chemokines
Collagens
MMPs
TGF-β...

NF-κB

AP-1

Nucleus

↓ PDC
↑ CPT1

↓ Glucose
oxidation

↑ FA
oxidation

Mitochondrial
dysfunction

ROS

Apoptosis
Cardiac
steatosis
↓ Cardiac
contractility
Fibrosis
Inflammation
↓ Metabolic
flexibility (↓ ATP)
Oxidative
stress

Cardiac dysfunction

Diabetic cardiomyopathy

Figure 1. Major Pathophysiological Mechanisms of Diabetic Cardiomyopathy. Diabetes induces an increase in plasma free fatty acid (FA) and glucose levels, which are internalized into cardiomyocytes by FA translocase (FAT/CD36) and the insulin-induced glucose transporter 4 (GLUT4), respectively. Excess FA stimulates the peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR)/PGC-1α (PPARγ coactivator-1α) pathway, leading to increased transcription of genes involved in FA uptake and oxidation (CPT1, carnitine palmitoyl-transferase 1, and FAT/CD36). Expression of another PPAR-induced gene, the pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase 4 (PDK4), decreases glucose oxidation by inactivating the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex (PDC). This causes an increase in FA oxidation, which leads to mitochondrial dysfunction, loss of metabolic flexibility and energy production efficiency (ATP) by the heart, and the generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) by the mitochondria. By contrast, downregulated insulin signaling as a consequence of insulin resistance prevents GLUT4 translocation from intracellular vesicles towards the sarcolemma, thus reducing glucose uptake and utilization, and promoting a substrate shift toward increased mitochondrial FA β-oxidation. Despite the higher FA oxidation rate, myocardial lipid accumulation (cardiac steatosis) occurs, and the subsequent formation of toxic lipid intermediates (ceramides and diacylglycerol, DAG) contributes to the development of heart failure. These intermediates activate the proinflammatory NF-κB and activator protein-1 (AP-1) transcription factors and favor the onset of endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress and mitochondrial dysfunction. Furthermore, hyperglycemia also induces the formation of advanced glycation end-products (AGEs) and ROS within the cardiomyocytes, which trigger NF-κB activation, hence inducing inflammation (cytokines and chemokines) and interstitial fibrosis (MMP, matrix metalloproteinase; TGF-β, transforming growth factor β). ROS accumulation also hastens apoptosis and brings on ER stress in cardiomyocytes. As a consequence, calcium handling is disturbed and cardiac contractility is reduced, overall leading to cardiac dysfunction.

(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP), or through interference with nitric oxide metabolism [15]. PARP also activates NF-κB and diverts glucose metabolism from its usual glycolytic pathway, thus favoring hyperglycemia-induced cell injury. The ensuing accumulation of glycolytic intermediates will, in turn, harm cardiac tissue via AGE formation and protein kinase C activation [15,17].

Trends in Pharmacological Sciences, May 2018, Vol. 39, No. 5 455

Trends in Pharmacological Sciences

Box 3. Regulation of Heart Contraction by Calcium
Calcium ions are pivotal regulators in the process of excitation-contraction coupling in the heart. Once the action potential reaches the cardiomyocyte, the cell membrane is depolarized and calcium enters the cell through voltage-dependent L-type calcium channels in the sarcolemma. This increased intracellular calcium activates the ryanodine receptors located in the sarcoplasmic reticulum to trigger the massive release of further calcium ions from this store. Then, cytosolic calcium binds to myofilaments to begin cardiomyocyte contraction. Removal of calcium from the cytosol results in the opposite process of cardiomyocyte relaxation, and this is mostly carried out by pumping calcium back into the sarcoplasmic reticulum by SERCA (sarcoplasmic/endoplasmic reticulum Ca²⁺-ATPase), although other processes may (mitochondrial calcium uniport, PMCA or plasma-membrane Ca²⁺-ATPase, and Na⁺/Ca²⁺ exchange pumps).

Other Pathophysiological Mechanisms
ER stress is partly responsible for cardiomyocyte cell death in the heart of diabetic rats [18]. When ER stress is limited, activation of the unfolded protein response potentiates **autophagy** as a short-term strategy to protect cardiac cells during diabetes [19]. By contrast, persistent ER stress activates NF-κB, p38 MAPK (mitogen-activated protein kinase), and JNK (c-Jun N-terminal kinase) pathways, which in turn are responsible for the induction of ER stress-mediated cardiomyocyte apoptosis [20]. ER stress also alters cardiomyocyte calcium uptake and handling, thus aggravating diastolic relaxation dysfunction [3]. In fact, calcium ions are pivotal regulators of the process of excitation-contraction coupling in the heart (Box 3), and dysfunctional intracellular calcium signaling and transport have been observed in various murine models of diabetes [21–23], as well as in diabetic patients with diastolic dysfunction [24].

Where Are We Going? Emerging Actors in DCM

Metabolism-Related Molecular Biomarkers
The metabolic inflexibility that distinguishes the diabetic myocardium is characterized by increased rates of FA uptake and mitochondrial oxidation as the predominant energy source. This affects the cardiac muscle by diverse mechanisms and acts on different cardiomyocyte compartments [25]. The inability of the diabetic heart to switch between substrates in the presence of different stressors may offer novel biomarkers representing the ‘struggle’ of the heart to deal with these conditions. For instance, the phosphocreatine (PCr)/ATP ratio (Figure 2) is significantly reduced in the diabetic heart. Magnetic resonance spectroscopic imaging is suitable for the determination of phosphocreatine, ATP, and triglyceride accumulation in the myocardium [3]. A recent study demonstrates that the PCr/ATP ratio predicts diastolic dysfunction in obese patients without cardiovascular risk factors [26]. However, it is not able to discriminate DCM from other pathologies [3]. For instance, the PCr/ATP ratio is also reduced in patients with hypertensive heart disease without diabetes or overt systolic dysfunction [27].

The striated muscle-specific E3 ligase TRIM72 (tripartite motif-containing 72, or mitsugumin 53, MG53) is another potential therapeutic target because it induces systemic insulin resistance, dyslipidemia, and hyperglycemia. Its expression is also increased in the myocardium during diabetes [28]. Cardiac-specific overexpression of TRIM72 in mice results in insulin resistance because it drives ubiquitin-dependent degradation of the insulin receptor and insulin receptor substrate 1 [28]. This is followed by steatosis and, finally, severe DCM characterized by myocardial hypertrophy, fibrosis, and cardiac dysfunction. Further metabolic effects of TRIM72 arise from the transcriptional upregulation of PPARα-target genes involved in FA uptake and metabolism, together with PDK-mediated repression of glycolysis [28]. Remarkably, PDKs, in particular PDK4, have emerged as interesting candidates for diabetes therapy because they might link inflammation, apoptosis, and insulin resistance [29,30]. TRIM72 also plays an important role in cardiac fibrosis, probably by modulating transforming growth factor (TGF)-β [31]. Conversely, several lines of evidence have identified TRIM72 as an important

456 Trends in Pharmacological Sciences, May 2018, Vol. 39, No. 5

Trends in Pharmacological Sciences

CellPress
REVIEWS

Sarcolemma

Ceramides
DAG

Lipid
droplet

ER stress: altered
membrane synthesis,
Ca²⁺ release

TRIM72

Insulin
IRS1
IR

IRS1
Ub
Ub
Ub

Glut4

↑ Glucose

FA
FAT
CD36
FABP3<sub>pm</sub>
Bloodstream

↑ FA uptake

Cardiac lipid accumulation

FABP3<sub>c</sub>

Apoptosis

PGC-1α
PPAR
FABP3
TP53INP2

Nucleus

Autophagy
Glycolysis
Glucose-6P → Pyruvate

Myofibrils

PCr
Cr

mmCK
ADP
ATP

Muscle
contraction

↑ PDC
↓ Glucose
oxidation
↑ FA
oxidation
↓ ATP
ADP

Mitochondria

mtCK

Sarcoplasm

Trends in Pharmacological Sciences

Figure 2. Emerging Metabolism-Related Components in Diabetic Cardiomyopathy. In the phosphocreatine (PCr)/creatine (Cr) 'shuttle' system, phosphate is transferred from the ATP formed in the mitochondria to Cr via mitochondrial creatine kinase (mtCK), generating PCr. PCr then diffuses into the cytoplasm, where the muscle-type creatine kinase (mmCK) forms Cr and ATP, the latter participating in myofibril (cardiomyocyte) contraction. The fatty acid (FA) binding protein 3 (FABP3) is a cardiac-specific PPAR-target protein induced during diabetes that transports long-chain FAs to the mitochondria for their subsequent oxidation, and also to the nucleus to activate PPAR-dependent gene expression. FABP3 is involved in cardiac steatosis and mitochondrial dysfunction by excess FA delivery, and also has an antiapoptotic role. The formation of toxic lipid intermediates (ceramides and diacylglycerol, DAG) induces endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress, thus altering membrane synthesis and reducing calcium release (i.e., cardiomyocyte contraction). TRIM72 (tripartite motif-containing 72) impairs insulin signaling because it drives ubiquitin (Ub)-dependent degradation of insulin receptor (IR) and insulin receptor substrate 1 (IRS1), thus increasing the reliance of the heart on FAs as an energy source and PPAR activity. TRIM72 also plays an important role in cardiac fibrosis through the modulation of the transforming growth factor (TGF)-β. In a similar way, TP53INP2 (tumor protein p53 inducible nuclear protein 2), the expression of which is induced by PPARα, regulates the expression of important glycolytic enzymes involved in glucose uptake and glycogen storage in cardiomyocytes. TP53INP2 is also a key regulator of autophagy and protein degradation, thus hindering the expression of hypertrophic genes, particularly in the context of hyperglycemia.

cardioprotective factor. Cardiac ischemia/reperfusion insults downregulate myocardial TRIM72 protein levels, whereas elevation of TRIM72 protects cardiomyocytes from oxidative injury and alleviates cardiac ischemia/reperfusion injury [32]. Overall, the data suggest that, in acute myocardial infarction and cardiac ischemia/reperfusion injury, a transient and short-term increase of TRIM72 could protect against acute damage, whereas specific inhibition of its E3 ligase activity might prevent insulin resistance and lipid dysregulation in the heart.

Trends in Pharmacological Sciences, May 2018, Vol. 39, No. 5 457

Similarly, TP53INP2 (tumor protein p53 inducible nuclear protein 2), the expression of which is induced by PPARα, regulates the expression of important glycolytic enzymes involved in glucose uptake and glycogen storage in cardiomyocytes [33]. Its protein levels are reduced in muscle from streptozotocin-induced diabetic mice and in obese diabetic db/db mice [28], as well as in muscle from DM2 patients [34]. TP53INP2 is a bifunctional protein that acts as a nuclear coactivator and key regulator of basal autophagy and protein degradation; as a consequence, it hinders the expression of hypertrophic genes, particularly in the context of hyperglycemia [33,34]. Therefore, its activation in the heart might be therapeutically useful to delay cardiac hypertrophy and to prevent the metabolic dysregulation that is characteristic of DCM.

Because cardiac steatosis is a hallmark of DCM, the identification of factors released during this process could be useful to detect or prevent the disease. The FA-binding protein 3 (FABP3), a cardiac-specific PPAR-induced protein that transports FAs from the plasma membrane to the mitochondria for their subsequent oxidation after conjugation with carnitine by CPT-1 (carnitine palmitoyltransferase 1), is released into the plasma after the onset of cell damage in patients with systolic dysfunction or heart failure [35]. FABP3 is detected in the serum of DM2 patients with early cardiac injury [36], and correlates with cardiac insulin resistance in mice [37]. FABP3 is also increased in patients with hypertrophic and dilated cardiomyopathy, or heart failure [36]. By contrast, patients with reduced LVEF owing to doxorubicin-induced cardiotoxicity display lower plasma levels of FABP3 [38]. FABP3 also protects against oxidative stress and mitochondrial dysfunction, and exerts an antiapoptotic role in cardiac cells [39]. Overall, the data suggest that FABP3 might not only be a suitable diagnostic tool but also a promising therapeutic target for treating DCM.

Some autocrine and paracrine molecules secreted by the heart or the epicardial adipose tissue could also be useful as metabolism-related DCM biomarkers. Activin A is released in DM2 patients and is capable of inhibiting insulin secretion [40]. Moreover, plasma activin A levels are inversely correlated with myocardial glucose metabolism [41]. Activin A-mediated blockade of insulin-mediated phosphorylation of phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K)/Akt [40], a key regulator of myocardial glucose uptake, could account for these metabolic changes, and could reflect early DCM development. An even more promising biomarker is insulin-like growth factor binding protein-7 (IGFBP-7), a modulator of insulin receptor activity and signaling that displays a positive correlation with increased collagen deposition, fibrosis, and cardiac hypertrophy in diabetes [37,42]. In fact, serum IGFBP-7 and TGF-β levels are elevated in diabetic patients, particularly in those displaying diastolic dysfunction [42]. In support, IGFBP-7 has been identified as a biomarker associated with cardiac hypertrophy and heart failure through systematic proteomic studies [43], as well as in patients with diastolic dysfunction and heart failure [44]. Of note, IGFBP-7 displayed a similar performance and discrimination capacity as natriuretic peptide B.

## Molecular Biomarkers Involved in Inflammation and Fibrosis

Several proinflammatory cytokines (interleukins IL-1 and IL-6; monocyte chemoattractant protein 1, MCP1; and tumor necrosis factor-α, TNF-α) involved in the progression of heart failure are secreted by both cardiomyocytes and cardiac fibroblasts of diabetic patients, particularly in those with diastolic dysfunction [15,42]. These classical inflammatory biomarkers produce various autocrine and paracrine effects, including insulin resistance, mitochondrial injury, oxidative stress, fibrosis, and apoptosis (Figure 3) [42]. Proinflammatory cytokines have previously been designated as potential biomarkers in the early detection of DCM, although their plasma levels do not discriminate between DCM and other cardiac pathologies, nor are they useful for stratifying patients according to their risk [45]. Furthermore, therapies aimed at

Trends in Pharmacological Sciences

CellPress
REVIEWS

Sarcolemma
GDF15
ERK
p38
JNK
NF-κB
AP-1
YKL40
Sp1
Nucleus
HMGB1
Cytokines
Chemokines
Collagens
MMPs
TGF-β
YKL40...
Insulin resistance
Apoptosis
Fibrosis and hypertrophy
Inflammation
Oxidative stress
Sarcoplasm
CT-1
JAK
STAT
PPAR?
ERK
AKT
JNK
p38
TGF-β
IGFB7
Gal-3
Hyperglycemia
Mitochondria
MICU1
Ca²⁺
ROS
Apoptosis
and fibrosis
Cardiac
contractility
RAGE
HMGB1
Myocardial interstitium
and bloodstream
Macrophage
Fibroblast
Infiltration
Glucose
Glut4
IRS1
IR
AKT
Insulin

Figure 3. Emerging Molecules Involved in Inflammation and Fibrosis. Cardiotrophin-1 (CT-1) promotes cardiac fibrosis and remodeling, and inhibits apoptosis, by activating the JAK/STAT3 (janus kinase/signal transducer and activator of transcription 3) pathway. Galectin-3 (Gal-3), which is locally secreted by macrophages and fibroblasts, promotes inflammation and fibrosis by enhancing myofibroblast proliferation, the accumulation of extracellular matrix, and macrophage infiltration by stimulating the TGF-β (transforming growth factor β) signaling pathway. Gal-3 also interferes with insulin signaling by binding to the insulin receptor (IR). YKL-40 attenuates NF-κB-dependent inflammation (cytokines and chemokines), apoptosis, tissue remodeling, and fibrosis (MMPs, collagens, TGF-β). Likewise, through the inhibition of NF-κB, GDF15 (growth differentiation factor 15) suppresses the synthesis and secretion of proinflammatory cytokines (TNF-α, IL-6). HMGB1 (high-mobility group box 1), the expression of which is induced in cardiomyocytes and cardiac fibroblasts by hyperglycemia, and may be released to the myocardial interstitium, boosts fibrosis and inflammation through the activation of MAPKs (ERK1/2 and JNK) and NF-κB. Its effects rely on binding to the receptor for advanced glycation end-products (RAGE) and Toll-like receptors (not shown). HMGB1 also displays negative ionotropic effects. Downregulation of MICU1 (mitochondrial calcium uptake 1) in the heart during diabetes contributes to myocardial mitochondria-dependent intrinsic apoptosis and fibrosis, and also favors oxidative stress. Finally, insulin-like growth factor binding protein-7 (IGFBP-7) increases collagen deposition, fibrosis, and cardiac hypertrophy, and interferes with insulin signaling.

inhibiting these cytokines (TNF-α, IL-1β) have failed to ameliorate inflammation-induced insulin resistance and DCM in clinical studies [46].

Cardiotrophin-1 (CT-1), which belongs to the IL-6 family of cytokines, is released by cardiac fibroblasts and cardiomyocytes in response to mechanical, metabolic, and hypoxic stress [47]. Through the activation of gp130, CT-1 promotes cell survival by PI3K/Akt phosphorylation-induced inactivation of the proapoptotic Bcl-2-associated death promoter (BAD) protein [47].
If the stressor persists, CT-1 promotes deleterious cardiac fibrosis, remodeling, hypertrophy, and dysfunction, and eventually heart failure [47]. CT-1 promotes cardiomyocyte hypertrophy through the JAK/STAT3 (janus kinase/signal transducer and activator of transcription 3) and ERK5 pathways, whereas by activating p42/44 MAPK and PI3K/Akt it promotes cardiomyocyte survival [48]. CT-1 has also been proposed to activate NF-κB and to induce insulin-stimulated glucose uptake by cardiac cells, thus playing a crucial role in regulating glucose metabolism [37]. Plasma CT-1 levels are increased in patients with DM2 or impaired glucose tolerance, and these levels positively correlate with glycemia and LV hypertrophy [49,50]. However, its high expression in other tissues besides the heart and its increased expression in other non-diabetic cardiomyopathies hinder its usefulness as a biomarker in DCM [47].

Soluble ST2 (suppression of tumorigenicity 2) is a cardiac biomarker cleared by the FDA for assessing the prognosis of patients diagnosed with chronic heart failure [47]. ST2 is regarded as a decoy receptor for IL-33, thus preventing the protective effects of this cytokine in obesity and cardiac remodeling [51]. Interestingly, DM2 patients exhibit higher plasma levels of soluble ST2, especially in individuals with diastolic dysfunction and inappropriate glycemic control [52]. However, it remains to be elucidated whether this is a consequence rather than a cause of the inflammatory activation observed in the heart. In support of ST2 as a suitable biomarker for DCM, plasma levels of this receptor were independently associated with cardiovascular mortality in patients with heart failure and diabetes, and the combination of ST2 with troponin T significantly increased its discrimination potential [53]. These biomarkers could be useful to predict the clinical course of heart failure both in the general population and in diabetic patients.

Chitinase-3-like protein 1 (CHI3L1 or YKL-40) is a glycoprotein whose plasma levels are elevated in patients with diabetes or obesity, and also in people suffering from myocardial infarction, coronary artery disease, or ischemic heart disease [54]. Its plasma levels positively correlate with insulin resistance and the lipid profile (FFAs and triglycerides) in DM2 patients [55]. YKL-40 is involved in cell proliferation and differentiation, and could potentially protect the heart by attenuating inflammation, apoptosis, tissue remodeling, and fibrosis [54,56]. YKL-40 inhibits p38 and JNK MAPKs, thus counteracting the inflammatory responses induced by TNF-α and IL-1, and reduces the expression of matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) [55]. Secretion of YKL-40 is regulated by NF-κB [56] and Sp1 (specificity protein 1) [57]. The latter is a transcription factor that, together with PPARα and NR2F2 (nuclear receptor subfamily 2 group F member 2), is responsible for decreasing FA utilization in the hypertrophied heart [58]. Thus, YKL-40 has potential not only to become a biomarker for DCM but also to prevent or even treat the condition once established. However, the fact that insulin treatment does not correct YKL-40 serum levels in persons with DM2 [59] casts doubt on its feasibility as a suitable biomarker for DCM.

Another interesting mediator of the inflammatory response is HMGB1 (high-mobility group box 1), the expression of which is increased in the heart during diabetes [60]. During DCM, HMGB1 translocates from the nucleus to the cytoplasm and even to the myocardial interstitium, where it boosts fibrosis and inflammation [60]. These effects rely on the activation of MAPK and NF-κB pathways, subsequent stimulation of collagen deposition, increases in MMP2 and MMP9 activity, and production of TNF-α and IL-6 [60,61]. Inhibition of HMGB1 decreases myocardial inflammation and fibrosis in diabetic mice, thus ameliorating LV dysfunction and cardiac remodeling [60]. It also protects the heart against hyperglycemia-induced apoptosis by down-regulating ERK1/2 and caspase-3 activities [62], thus pointing to HMGB1 inhibition as a novel therapeutic target in the treatment of DCM, even once established [63]. In this regard,

460 Trends in Pharmacological Sciences, May 2018, Vol. 39, No. 5
downregulation of HMGB1 has been reported to attenuate diabetes-induced cardiac dysfunction by inhibiting inflammation, oxidative stress, fibrosis, and apoptosis [63,64].

During DCM the deposition of extracellular matrix protein impairs contractility and ultimately leads to cardiac stiffness and progression towards heart failure. Therefore, extracellular matrix synthesis and turnover could be a useful biomarker for the recognition, diagnosis, and even prevention of fibrosis in DCM. In this regard, plasma levels of procollagen type 1 propeptide and MMP7 are positively correlated with diastolic dysfunction in diabetic patients, while MMP2 levels are reduced in experimental models of DM1 and DM2 displaying cardiac fibrosis and diastolic dysfunction [37]. MMP9 levels are increased in myocardial fibrosis and heart failure, and, interestingly, pharmacological or genetic inhibition of MMPs ameliorates cardiac remodeling in mice [65]. Likewise, procollagen type III amino peptide in serum is an indicator of extracellular matrix turnover that has been proposed as a marker of early LV dysfunction in subjects with insulin resistance [66].

In the course of DCM the proinflammatory transcription factors NF-κB and AP-1 contribute to the overexpression of collagens, fibronectin, and TGF-β, thereby enhancing extracellular matrix protein accumulation [13]. Cardiac and plasma TGF-β levels are correlated with the degree of fibrosis in DCM, particularly in subjects with concomitant diastolic dysfunction, and, notably, inhibition of TGF-β in animal models of DM2 prevents diastolic dysfunction [37,42]. AP-1, which is mostly composed of JUN and FOS heterodimers, regulates extracellular matrix deposition and decreases contractility and cell permeability, inducing cardiomyocyte hypertrophy and fibrosis [67]. It is worth mentioning that downregulation of FOS transcription by miR-146a can inhibit MMP9 activity [68], thus suggesting that this microRNA (miRNA) could be a promising therapeutic tool for preventing cardiac disorders associated with enhanced inflammation and fibrosis in the heart. Furthermore, miR-146a might prevent myocardial lipid accumulation and subsequent lipotoxic cardiomyopathy because FOS is also an activator of lipid biosynthesis via a transcription-independent mechanism [69].

Growth differentiation factor 15 (GDF15), which belongs to the TGF-β superfamily and is highly expressed in the heart, suppresses the synthesis and secretion of proinflammatory cytokines (TNF-α and IL-6) and modulates cell growth and differentiation [70]. Its plasma levels are increased in diabetic patients, and positively correlate with obesity, fasting glucose levels, insulin resistance, plasma triglycerides, and the proinflammatory marker C-reactive protein (CRP) [45], thus representing another potential biomarker. However, its usefulness in predicting disease progression, prognosis, or cardioprotection is hindered by the fact that GDF15 is non-specific for metabolic diseases and is associated with increased cancer incidence in patients with DM2 [70].

Finally, galectin-3 (or Mac-2) is a β-galactoside-binding lectin that is regarded as one of the key links between fibrosis, inflammation, and adverse cardiac remodeling in heart failure [71]. In rodent models of heart failure, galectin-3 is locally secreted by activated macrophages and fibroblasts, and exerts its profibrotic action by enhancing myofibroblast proliferation, the accumulation of extracellular matrix, macrophage infiltration, and cardiac hypertrophy via stimulation of the TGF-β signaling pathway [71,72]. Measurement of galectin-3 plasma levels has been proposed as a good predictor and prognostic biomarker of LV systolic dysfunction and heart failure in diabetic subjects [73]. Galectin-3 might also be of therapeutic interest in DCM because its inhibition prevents the increase of profibrotic and proinflammatory markers in some organs [74]. Similarly, its administration to mice causes insulin resistance and glucose intolerance, whereas its pharmacological or genetic inhibition improves insulin sensitivity in

obese mice [46]. The same authors demonstrated that galectin-3 interferes with insulin signaling by directly binding to the insulin receptor.

**Myocardial Contractile and Prohypertrophic Biomarkers**

Troponins are multiprotein complexes constituted by Troponin I (TnI), C (TnC) and T (TnT) that regulate calcium-mediated interaction between actin and myosin, thus being directly related to myocardial contractility. They are released into the circulation from the myocardium during inflammatory processes and in experimental models of diabetes, particularly in those animals also with heart failure [3,75], suggesting that they could be useful biomarkers for DCM. Tnl and TnT isoforms are currently used as necrosis markers in clinical practice because their serum levels may be predictive for cardiovascular death in patients with myocardial infarction and heart failure [76].

In addition, mitochondrial calcium uptake 1 (MICU1), a key regulator of mitochondrial Ca²⁺ uptake, is downregulated in the heart during diabetes [77]. This contributes to myocardial mitochondria-dependent intrinsic apoptosis and the progression of DCM. Of note, MICU1 downregulation caused by hyperglycemia and hyperlipidemia in cardiomyocytes is due to inhibition of Sp1, which is diminished in several tissues from diabetic patients [77]. Importantly, its overexpression in the heart partially prevents the development of DCM by activating the antioxidant system, and by reducing myocardial fibrosis and subsequent cardiac hypertrophy [77], thus pointing to MICU1 activation as a novel therapeutic target in DCM.

Non-physiological hypertrophy is characterized by cardiomyocyte enlargement, increased protein synthesis, and reactivation of fetal gene expression including β-MHC and the natriuretic peptides A and B (ANP and BNP). These neurohormones are produced and secreted by cardiac cells during heart failure to counteract the onset of volume and pressure overload via their vasodilator and natriuretic effects [78]. Not surprisingly, plasma ANP and BNP, as well as the biologically inactive precursor N-terminal fragment of BNP (NTproBNP), are currently utilized as biomarkers for heart failure and myocardial infarction [37,45], and could also be valuable in the diagnosis or prevention of DCM. In fact, raised plasma BNP levels are positively correlated with insulin resistance in prediabetic subjects [79], and display good predictive capacity for LV dysfunction and heart failure in DCM [107,75]. However, the specific role, if any, of natriuretic peptides in DCM onset and development remains controversial. Some studies report reduced plasma levels and deficient ANP and BNP signaling in obese, insulin-resistant, and diabetic subjects [80], but the opposite has also been described [81]. This apparent contradiction could be explained by the proposed biphasic association of BNP with DM2, in which the diabetes risk would decrease when BNP concentrations lie within the so-called 'physiological range', but would rise when BNP levels increase due to pathophysiological conditions (i.e., myocardial infarction and heart failure).

**Miscellaneous Biomarkers: miRNAs and Fibroblast Growth Factors (FGFs)**

Numerous miRNAs are differentially expressed in cardiac tissue of a streptozotocin-induced mouse model of DM1; some of them exert their deleterious effects through targeting genes associated with cardiac hypertrophy and fibrosis [82]. Among miRNAs regulating cardiac fibrosis, miR-21, miR-29b, miR-142-3p, and miR-700 [83], which act through pathways requiring p38 MAPK activation, modulation of TGF-β activity, and synthesis of type I collagen, are of particular interest. Other interesting miRNAs include miR-133a, miR-150, and miR-373, which regulate cardiac hypertrophy and fibrosis by modulating the activity of the myocyte enhancer factor 2C transcription factor [82–85]. In a similar way, miR-208a is a prohypertrophic cardiac-specific miRNA that acts through the repression of myostatin and GATA4 [83].
Hyperglycemia induces cardiomyoblast expression of miR-1 and miR-34a which promote apoptosis [82]. miR-1 also negatively regulates calcium signaling during cardiac contractility by targeting Junctin, a component of the ryanodine receptor Ca²⁺ release channel complex [86]. In a DM2 rat model, miR-320 promotes apoptosis by targeting genes encoding vascular endothelial growth factor and fibroblast growth factors (FGFs) [82], while key regulators of apoptosis, including p53 and p21, are induced by miR-30c and miR-181a during DCM [87]. In addition, overexpression of miR-141 in streptozotocin-induced diabetic mice disrupts mitochondrial energy production by inhibiting the expression of an inner mitochondrial phosphate transporter, which eventually results in cell death [82]. On the other hand, miR-30d, which is enhanced in a DM1 animal model, promotes cardiomyocyte inflammation-induced apoptosis through the activation of caspase-1 and the secretion of proinflammatory cytokines [88]. The same research group suggested an opposite role for miR-9 [89]. More recently, Deng *et al.* reported a significant reduction in the levels of circulating miR-24 in blood of DM2 patients with coronary heart disease [90]. Because miR-24 directly targets YKL40, this results in an interesting and potentially beneficial increase in YKL40 expression. Finally, studies investigating the role of miRNAs in the regulation of autophagy and mitophagy during DCM have revealed important roles for miR30a, miR-133a, miR-212, and miR-221 [83].

miRNAs also stand out because of their extensive effects on the control of glucose uptake and cardiac metabolism in the diabetic heart. For instance, miR-133a reduces the levels of GLUT4 expression [91], whereas miR-223 induces GLUT4 protein expression [92]. Other examples include the miR-199a/miR-214 cluster, which inhibits PPARβ/δ to impair mitochondrial FA oxidation [93], and miR-451, which exacerbates lipotoxicity and cardiac hypertrophy in a mouse model of DM2 through the suppression of AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) activity, a master regulator of cardiac glucose and FA metabolism [94].

In summary, the expression of numerous miRNAs is dysregulated in the heart and may be modified in the plasma of diabetic individuals. For this reason, miRNAs have been proposed as potential serum biomarkers for the prognosis and diagnosis of patients with DCM. As an example, a recently published study indicated that plasma miR-19b-3p and miR-181b-5p levels could be suitable biomarkers of DCM in asymptomatic diabetic patients [95]. Moreover, because several of these miRNAs are causatively associated with the disease, the development of anti-miRNAs (antagomiRs) and miRNA mimics to target them could be a potential approach for future therapeutic intervention. For instance, intravenous administration of antagomiRs targeting miR-132 and miR-133 protects the heart against cardiac fibrosis, hypertrophy, and heart failure [96, 97], and cardiomyocyte-specific miR-451 knockout mice are partially resistant to diabetes-induced cardiac hypertrophy and contractile dysfunction [94].

With regard to FGFs, the most notable in the heart are FGF1, FGF2, and, above all, FGF21 and FGF23. FGF1 displays high expression in the heart and is transcriptionally induced by PPARα, PPARβ/δ, and PPARγ agonists [98]. FGF2, which is expressed in both cardiomyocytes and fibroblasts, causes extracellular matrix deposition and apoptosis, thus leading to pathological cardiac hypertrophy [98]. FGF21 and FGF23 function as local signaling molecules in metabolism through the activation of FGF receptors using α-Klotho or β-Klotho as a cofactor.

The liver is the main site of expression and release of FGF21 into the blood, although it is also produced by cardiomyocytes, where it acts in an autocrine manner [99]. In the heart, FGF21 is under the transcriptional control of the sirtuin 1–PPARα pathway [99]. FGF21 displays powerful antidiabetic effects owing to its broad systemic metabolic actions, which include improvement of glucose homeostasis and insulin sensitivity [100]. However, a paradoxically abnormal

Trends in Pharmacological Sciences, May 2018, Vol. 39, No. 5 463
elevation of serum FGF21 levels is observed during obesity, and especially in insulin resistance [100]. In response to prohypertrophic stimuli, FGF21 knockout mice exhibit enhanced cardiac hypertrophy and inflammation compared to wild-type controls, in addition to greater repression of FA oxidation [99]. Treatment with exogenous FGF21 reverses all these changes. Likewise, a more recent study highlighted the antioxidative role of FGF21 in the heart [101]. As a result, FGF21 reduces ROS production and protects the heart against inflammatory or prohyper-trophic stimuli [101]. Interestingly, ablation of FGF21 in a mouse model of DM1 exacerbates DCM through a FAT/CD36-mediated increase in cardiac lipid uptake and accumulation, which in turn impairs cardiac lipid and glucose utilization, and mitochondrial function [102]. This exacerbates cardiac oxidative stress and provokes inflammation and cardiomyocyte apoptosis. Conversely, FGF21 overexpression improves hyperglycemia-induced DCM via attenuation of cardiac hypertrophy, fibrosis, oxidative stress, and inflammation, in a process requiring both β-Klotho and AMPK [102].

Less is known about FGF23. It regulates phosphorus homeostasis in the kidney and parathy-roid glands, and some studies have unveiled a causal role for FGF23 in the pathogenesis of LV hypertrophy via activation of phospholipase Cγ and calcineurin-NFAT (nuclear factor in activated T cells) signaling pathways [103]. In the diabetic population, plasma levels of FGF23 are increased [104], and some studies point to its suitability as an atherosclerosis biomarker in these patients [105].

### Concluding Remarks

The relatively slow evolution of DCM and its associated high morbidity and mortality make the validation of new, reliable, and specific biomarkers that would allow more efficient and early diagnosis of utmost importance. Several standardized biomarkers have been validated by the FDA for the diagnosis and risk assessment of various cardiac diseases to date, but they are not able to distinguish patients with DCM, particularly in the early stages – when still asymptomatic but after dysregulation of cardiac metabolism, inflammation, and fibrosis has already begun. Moreover, assessment of DCM is challenging in clinical practice owing to the atypical and diverse presentation of signs and symptoms.

The pathophysiology of DCM has several interconnected backgrounds, including metabolic dysregulation, low-grade inflammation, oxidative stress, myocardial fibrosis, and cardiomyocyte apoptosis, which, overall, contribute to the progression and fatal outcomes of the disease. Therefore, the best approach to detect DCM before the appearance of clinical symptoms and irreversible complications will likely involve combining echocardiographic imaging techniques to evaluate changes in cardiac structure and function with the quantification of a panel of minimally invasive biomarkers covering the main diabetes-induced alterations in the heart (see Outstanding Questions). This multi-biomarker approach would be relatively time-consuming and may incur a higher cost than traditional biomarkers, but would improve the diagnosis and prognosis of the disease, and would bypass the problems encountered when relying on single biomarkers.

In this review we highlight several candidates that fulfill the requirements for becoming biomarkers with the potential to detect or prevent DCM, or even to treat it once established. Among them, FABP3, activin A, CT-1, YKL40, galectin-3, IGFBP-7, FGF21, and several miRNAs stand out because they can be measured by minimally invasive methods, they integrate several pathophysiological pathways, and, last but not least, they are also potentially capable of distinguishing patients with DCM in the early stages of disease. Of course, further preclinical studies will be necessary to unequivocally elucidate the role of these biomarkers in

---

**Outstanding Questions**

- Will it be possible in the near future to detect or prevent DCM in its early stages, or even to treat it once established?
- Is the combination of imaging techniques with the quantification of a panel of biomarkers the best approach to detecting DCM?
- Will it be possible to develop novel biomarkers with potential to discriminate between DCM and other cardiac diseases? Will it be the combination of biomarkers that integrate inflammation, oxidative stress, fibrosis, and metabolic dysregulation useful to selectively discriminate DCM?
- Will candidate biomarkers belonging to the newly discovered molecular pathways provide new tools to improve the diagnosis of DCM? Will these biomarkers also be useful as therapeutic strategies to treat DCM? Are non-coding RNAs appropriate as novel biomarkers with potential to detect or prevent DCM, or even to treat it once established?
- Is the quantification of a panel of biomarkers (the multi-biomarker approach) covering the main diabetes-induced alterations in the heart (i.e., inflammation, oxidative stress, fibrosis, and metabolic dysregulation) a suitable, reliable, and feasible method to improve the diagnosis and prognosis of the disease? What is the best approach to develop, optimize, and validate this multi-biomarker panel?

464 Trends in Pharmacological Sciences, May 2018, Vol. 39, No. 5
the development and progression of DCM, and to fine-tune their detection methods. Furthermore, additional clinical data will be necessary to explain some of the conflicting results observed in clinical trials and to establish key values or ranges of these biomarkers according to the type and severity of diabetes, and the characteristics of the patients.

### Acknowledgments

We apologize to contributors to the field whose work could not be cited here owing to space restrictions. We thank the University of Barcelona Language Advisory Service for their assistance. Funding for the authors is from the Spanish Ministry of Economy and Competitiveness (SAF2015-64146-R), the Fundació La Marató de TV3, and CIBER de Diabetes y Enfermedades Metabólicas Asociadas (CIBERDEM). CIBERDEM is an initiative of the Instituto de Salud Carlos III (ISCIII), Spanish Ministry of Economy and Competitiveness.

### References

1. Redfield, M.M. *et al.* (2003) Burden of systolic and diastolic ventricular dysfunction in the community: appreciating the scope of the heart failure epidemic. *JAMA* 289, 194–202
2. Thrainsdottir, I.S. *et al.* (2005) The association between glucose abnormalities and heart failure in the population-based Reykjavik study. *Diabetes Care* 28, 612–616
3. Lee, W.S. and Kim, J. (2017) Diabetic cardiomyopathy: where we are and where we are going. *Korean J. Intern. Med.* 32, 404–421
4. Palomer, X. *et al.* (2013) An overview of the crosstalk between inflammatory processes and metabolic dysregulation during diabetic cardiomyopathy. *Int. J. Cardiol.* 168, 3160–3172
5. Fontes-Carvalho, R. *et al.* (2015) Diastolic dysfunction in the diabetic continuum: association with insulin resistance, metabolic syndrome and type 2 diabetes. *Cardiovasc. Diabetol.* 14, 4
6. Wang, Z.V. and Hill, J.A. (2015) Diabetic cardiomyopathy: catabolism driving metabolism. *Circulation* 131, 771–773
7. Hsieh, M.C. *et al.* (2008) Regulation of the PDK4 isozyme by the Rb-E2F1 complex. *J. Biol. Chem.* 283, 27410–27417
8. Harmancey, R. *et al.* (2012) Insulin resistance improves metabolic and contractile efficiency in stressed rat heart. *FASEB J.* 26, 3118–3126
9. Dirks, E. *et al.* (2011) High fat diet induced diabetic cardiomyopathy. *Prostaglandins Leukot. Essent. Fatty Acids* 85, 219–225
10. Burkart, E.M. *et al.* (2007) Nuclear receptors PPARbeta/delta and PPARalpha direct distinct metabolic regulatory programs in the mouse heart. *J. Clin. Invest.* 117, 3930–3939
11. Rijzewijk, L.J. *et al.* (2008) Myocardial steatosis is an independent predictor of diastolic dysfunction in type 2 diabetes mellitus. *J. Am. Coll. Cardiol.* 52, 1793–1799
12. van de Weijer, T. *et al.* (2011) Lipotoxicity in type 2 diabetic cardiomyopathy. *Cardiovasc. Res.* 92, 10–18
13. Lorenzo, O. *et al.* (2011) Potential role of nuclear factor kappaB in diabetic cardiomyopathy. *Mediators Inflamm.* 2011, 652097
14. Younce, C.W. *et al.* (2010) Hyperglycaemia-induced cardiomyocyte death is mediated via MCP-1 production and induction of a novel zinc-finger protein MCPIP. *Cardiovasc. Res.* 87, 665–674
15. Asghar, O. *et al.* (2009) Diabetic cardiomyopathy. *Clin. Sci.* 116, 741–760
16. Tan, Y. *et al.* (2011) Diabetic downregulation of Nrf2 activity via ERK contributes to oxidative stress-induced insulin resistance in cardiac cells *in vitro* and *in vivo*. *Diabetes* 60, 625–633
17. Du, X. *et al.* (2003) Inhibition of GAPDH activity by poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase activates three major pathways of hyperglycemic damage in endothelial cells. *J. Clin. Invest.* 112, 1049–1057
18. Li, Z. *et al.* (2007) Involvement of endoplasmic reticulum stress in myocardial apoptosis of streptozocin-induced diabetic rats. *J. Clin. Biochem. Nutr.* 41, 58–67
19. Palomer, X. *et al.* (2014) PPARbeta/delta attenuates palmitate-induced endoplasmic reticulum stress and induces autophagic markers in human cardiac cells. *Int. J. Cardiol.* 174, 110–118
20. Hamid, T. *et al.* (2011) Cardiomyocyte NF-kappaB p65 promotes adverse remodelling, apoptosis, and endoplasmic reticulum stress in heart failure. *Cardiovasc. Res.* 89, 129–138
21. Hattori, Y. *et al.* (2000) Diminished function and expression of the cardiac Na⁺-Ca²⁺ exchanger in diabetic rats: implication in Ca²⁺ overload. *J. Physiol.* 527, 85–94
22. Pereira, L. *et al.* (2006) Mechanisms of [Ca²⁺]i transient decrease in cardiomyopathy of db/db type 2 diabetic mice. *Diabetes* 55, 608–615
23. Vetter, R. *et al.* (2002) Transgenic overexpression of the sarcoplasmic reticulum Ca²⁺ATPase improves reticular Ca²⁺ handling in normal and diabetic rat hearts. *FASEB J.* 16, 1657–1659
24. Jweied, E.E. *et al.* (2005) Depressed cardiac myofilament function in human diabetes mellitus. *Am. J. Physiol. Heart. Circ. Physiol.* 289, H2478–H2483
25. Berthiaume, J.M. *et al.* (2017) Mitochondrial NAD⁺/NADH redox state and diabetic cardiomyopathy. *Antioxid. Redox Signal.* Published online December 11, 2017. http://dx.doi.org/10.1089/ars.2017.7415
26. Rayner, J.J. *et al.* (2017) The relative contribution of metabolic and structural abnormalities to diastolic dysfunction in obesity. *Int. J. Obes.* Published online October 4, 2017. http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/ijo.2017.239
27. Burkhard, T. *et al.* (2009) Cardiac ³¹P-MRS compared to echocardiographic findings in patients with hypertensive heart disease without overt systolic dysfunction – preliminary results. *Eur. J. Radiol.* 71, 69–74
28. Liu, F. *et al.* (2015) Upregulation of MG53 induces diabetic cardiomyopathy through transcriptional activation of peroxisome proliferation-activated receptor alpha. *Circulation* 131, 795–804
29. Dlamiñi, Z. *et al.* (2015) Pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase 4 (PDK4) could be involved in a regulatory role in apoptosis and a link between apoptosis and insulin resistance. *Exp. Mol. Pathol.* 98, 574–584
30. Palomer, X. *et al.* (2011) The interplay between NF-kappaB and E2F1 coordinately regulates inflammation and metabolism in human cardiac cells. *PLoS One* 6, e19724
31. Zhao, J. and Lei, H. (2016) Tripartite motif protein 72 regulates the proliferation and migration of rat cardiac fibroblasts via the transforming growth factor-beta signaling pathway. *Cardiology* 134, 340–346
32. Zhang, Y. *et al.* (2017) MG53: biological function and potential as a therapeutic target. *Mol. Pharmacol.* 92, 211–218
33. Seldin, M.M. *et al.* (2017) A systems genetics approach identifies Trp53inp2 as a link between cardiomyocyte glucose utilization and hypertrophic response. *Am. J. Physiol. Heart. Circ. Physiol.* 312, H728–H741
34. Sala, D. *et al.* (2014) Autophagy-regulating TP53INP2 mediates muscle wasting and is repressed in diabetes. *J. Clin. Invest.* 124, 1914–1927
Trends in Pharmacological Sciences

35. Hoffmann, U. *et al.* (2015) Ischemic biomarker heart-type fatty acid binding protein (hFABP) in acute heart failure – diagnostic and prognostic insights compared to NT-proBNP and troponin I. *BMC Cardiovasc. Disord.* 15, 50
36. Akbal, E. *et al.* (2009) Serum heart type fatty acid binding protein levels in metabolic syndrome. *Endocrine* 36, 433–437
37. Lorenzo-Almoros, A. *et al.* (2017) Diagnostic approaches for diabetic cardiomyopathy. *Cardiovasc. Diabetol.* 16, 28
38. Yu, L.R. *et al.* (2018) Immune response proteins as predictive biomarkers of doxorubicin-induced cardiotoxicity in breast cancer patients. *Exp. Biol. Med.* 243, 248–255
39. Shen, Y. *et al.* (2013) Silencing of FABP3 inhibits proliferation and promotes apoptosis in embryonic carcinoma cells. *Cell Biochem. Biophys.* 66, 139–146
40. Blumensatt, M. *et al.* (2013) Activin A impairs insulin action in cardiomyocytes via up-regulation of miR-143. *Cardiovasc. Res.* 100, 201–210
41. Chen, W.J. *et al.* (2013) Activin A is associated with impaired myocardial glucose metabolism and left ventricular remodeling in patients with uncomplicated type 2 diabetes. *Cardiovasc. Diabetol.* 12, 150
42. Shaver, A. *et al.* (2016) Role of serum biomarkers in early detection of diabetic cardiomyopathy in the West Virginian population. *Int. J. Med. Sci.* 13, 161–168
43. Chugh, S. *et al.* (2013) Pilot study identifying myosin heavy chain 7, desmin, insulin-like growth factor 7, and annexin A2 as circulating biomarkers of human heart failure. *Proteomics* 13, 2324–2334
44. Gandhi, P.U. *et al.* (2016) Insulin-like growth factor-binding protein-7 as a biomarker of diastolic dysfunction and functional capacity in heart failure with preserved ejection fraction: results from the RELAX trial. *JACC Heart Fail* 4, 860–869
45. Berezin, A.E. (2016) Cardiac biomarkers in diabetes mellitus: new dawn for risk stratification? *Diabetes Metab. Syndr.* 11 (Suppl. 1), S201–S208
46. Li, P. *et al.* (2016) Hematopoietic-derived galectin-3 causes cellular and systemic insulin resistance. *Cell* 167, 973–984
47. Hogas, S. *et al.* (2017) Potential novel biomarkers of cardiovascular dysfunction and disease: cardiotrophin-1, adipokines and galectin-3. *Arch. Med. Sci.* 13, 897–913
48. Takahashi, N. *et al.* (2005) Hypertrophic responses to cardiotrophin-1 are not mediated by STAT3, but via a MEK5-ERK5 pathway in cultured cardiomyocytes. *J. Mol. Cell Cardiol.* 38, 185–192
49. Gamella-Pozuelo, L. *et al.* (2015) Plasma cardiotrophin-1 as a marker of hypertension and diabetes-induced target organ damage and cardiovascular risk. *Medicine (Baltimore)* 94, e1218
50. Hung, H.C. *et al.* (2013) Increased cardiotrophin-1 in subjects with impaired glucose tolerance and newly diagnosed diabetes. *Int. J. Cardiol.* 169, e33–e34
51. Rehman, S.U. *et al.* (2008) Characteristics of the novel interleukin family biomarker ST2 in patients with acute heart failure. *J. Am. Coll. Cardiol.* 52, 1458–1465
52. Fousteris, E. *et al.* (2011) Toll/interleukin-1 receptor member ST2 exhibits higher soluble levels in type 2 diabetes, especially when accompanied with left ventricular diastolic dysfunction. *Cardiovasc. Diabetol.* 10, 101
53. Alonso, N. *et al.* (2016) Impact of diabetes on the predictive value of heart failure biomarkers. *Cardiovasc. Diabetol.* 15, 151
54. Kastrup, J. (2012) Can YKL-40 be a new inflammatory biomarker in cardiovascular disease? *Immunobiology* 217, 483–491
55. Rathcke, C.N. *et al.* (2006) YKL-40, a biomarker of inflammation, is elevated in patients with type 2 diabetes and is related to insulin resistance. *Inflamm. Res.* 55, 53–59
56. Ling, H. and Recklies, A.D. (2004) The chitinase 3-like protein human cartilage glycoprotein 39 inhibits cellular responses to the inflammatory cytokines interleukin-1 and tumour necrosis factor-alpha. *Biochem. J.* 380, 651–659
57. Rehli, M. *et al.* (2003) Transcriptional regulation of CHI3L1, a marker gene for late stages of macrophage differentiation. *J. Biol. Chem.* 278, 44058–44067
58. Tian, R. (2003) Transcriptional regulation of energy substrate metabolism in normal and hypertrophied heart. *Curr. Hypertens. Rep.* 5, 454–458
59. Vela, D. *et al.* (2017) Insulin treatment corrects hepcidin but not YKL-40 levels in persons with type 2 diabetes mellitus matched by body mass index, waist-to-height ratio, C-reactive protein and Creatinine. *BMC Endocr. Disord.* 17, 53
60. Wang, W.K. *et al.* (2014) Inhibition of high-mobility group box 1 improves myocardial fibrosis and dysfunction in diabetic cardiomyopathy. *Int. J. Cardiol.* 172, 202–212
61. Volz, H.C. *et al.* (2010) HMGB1: the missing link between diabetes mellitus and heart failure. *Basic Res. Cardiol.* 105, 805–820
62. Wang, W.K. *et al.* (2014) HMGB1 mediates hyperglycaemia-induced cardiomyocyte apoptosis via ERK/Ets-1 signalling pathway. *J. Cell Mol. Med.* 18, 2311–2320
63. Wu, H. *et al.* (2016) Reduced HMGB 1-mediated pathway and oxidative stress in resveratrol-treated diabetic mice: a possible mechanism of cardioprotection of resveratrol in diabetes mellitus. *Oxid. Med. Cell. Longev.* 2016, 9836860
64. Wang, W.K. *et al.* (2017) Ulinastatin attenuates diabetes-induced cardiac dysfunction by the inhibition of inflammation and apoptosis. *Exp. Ther. Med.* 14, 2497–2504
65. Matsusaka, H. *et al.* (2006) Targeted deletion of matrix metalloproteinase 2 ameliorates myocardial remodeling in mice with chronic pressure overload. *Hypertension* 47, 711–717
66. Quilliot, D. *et al.* (2005) Myocardial collagen turnover in normotensive obese patients: relation to insulin resistance. *Int. J. Obes.* 29, 1321–1328
67. Wang, M. *et al.* (2009) Breviscapine ameliorates hypertrophy of cardiomyocytes induced by high glucose in diabetic rats via the PKC signaling pathway. *Acta Pharmacol. Sin.* 30, 1081–1091
68. Palomer, X. *et al.* (2015) miR-146a targets c-Fos expression in human cardiac cells. *Dis. Model Mech.* 8, 1081–1091
69. Caputto, B.L. *et al.* (2014) c-Fos: an AP-1 transcription factor with an additional cytoplasmic, non-genomic lipid synthesis activation capacity. *Biochim. Biophys. Acta* 1841, 1241–1246
70. Unsicker, K. *et al.* (2013) The multiple facets of the TGF-beta family cytokine growth/differentiation factor-15/macrophage inhibitory cytokine-1. *Cytokine Growth Factor Rev.* 24, 373–384
71. Besler, C. *et al.* (2017) Plasma and cardiac galectin-3 in patients with heart failure reflects both inflammation and fibrosis: implications for its use as a biomarker. *Circ. Heart Fail.* 10, e003804
72. Yu, L. *et al.* (2013) Genetic and pharmacological inhibition of galectin-3 prevents cardiac remodeling by interfering with myocardi al fibrogenesis. *Circ. Heart Fail.* 6, 107–117
73. Pugliese, G. *et al.* (2014) Galectin-3 in diabetic patients. *Clin. Chem. Lab. Med.* 52, 1413–1423
74. Martinez-Martinez, E. *et al.* (2018) Galectin-3 pharmacological inhibition attenuates early renal damage in spontaneously hypertensive rats. *J. Hypertens.* 36, 368–376
75. Korkmaz-Icoz, S. *et al.* (2016) Left ventricular pressure-volume measurements and myocardial gene expression profile in type 2 diabetic Goto-Kakizaki rats. *Am. J. Physiol. Heart. Circ. Physiol.* 311, H958–H971
76. Russell, N.E. *et al.* (2009) Troponin T and pro-B-type natriuretic peptide in fetuses of type 1 diabetic mothers. *Diabetes Care* 32, 2050–2055
77. Ji, L. *et al.* (2017) MICU1 alleviates diabetic cardiomyopathy through mitochondrial Ca²⁺-dependent antioxidant response. *Diabetes* 66, 1586–1600
78. Martin-Du-Pan, R.C. and Golay, A. (2017) Paradoxal decrease and metabolic effects of BNP in obese patient. *Rev. Med. Suisse* 13, 660–663 (in French)
79. Fu, S. *et al.* (2016) Deep analyses of the associations of a series of biomarkers with insulin resistance, metabolic syndrome, and

80. diabetes risk in nondiabetic middle-aged and elderly individuals: results from a Chinese community-based study. *Clin. Interv. Aging* 11, 1531–1538
Moro, C. (2016) Targeting cardiac natriuretic peptides in the therapy of diabetes and obesity. *Expert Opin. Ther. Targets* 20, 1445–1452
81. Coue, M. and Moro, C. (2016) Natriuretic peptide control of energy balance and glucose homeostasis. *Biochimie* 124, 84–91
82. Leon, L.E. *et al.* (2016) Subclinical detection of diabetic cardiomyopathy with microRNAs: challenges and perspectives. *J. Diabetes Res.* 2016, 6143129
83. Guo, R. and Nair, S. (2017) Role of microRNA in diabetic cardiomyopathy: from mechanism to intervention. *Biochim. Biophys. Acta* 1863, 2070–2077
84. Duan, Y. *et al.* (2013) miR-150 regulates high glucose-induced cardiomyocyte hypertrophy by targeting the transcriptional co-activator p300. *Exp. Cell Res.* 319, 173–184
85. Duisters, R.F. *et al.* (2009) miR-133 and miR-30 regulate connective tissue growth factor: implications for a role of microRNAs in myocardial matrix remodeling. *Circ. Res.* 104, 170–178
86. Yildirim, S.S. *et al.* (2013) Relationship between downregulation of miRNAs and increase of oxidative stress in the development of diabetic cardiac dysfunction: junctin as a target protein of miR-1. *Cell Biochem. Biophys.* 67, 1397–1408
87. Raut, S.K. *et al.* (2016) miR-30c and miR-181a synergistically modulate p53-p21 pathway in diabetes induced cardiac hypertrophy. *Mol. Cell. Biochem.* 417, 191–203
88. Li, X. *et al.* (2014) MicroRNA-30d regulates cardiomyocyte pyroptosis by directly targeting foxo3a in diabetic cardiomyopathy. *Cell Death Dis.* 5, e1479
89. Jeyabal, P. *et al.* (2016) MicroRNA-9 inhibits hyperglycemia-induced pyroptosis in human ventricular cardiomyocytes by targeting ELAVL1. *Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun.* 471, 423–429
90. Deng, X. *et al.* (2017) Circulating miRNA-24 and its target YKL-40 as potential biomarkers in patients with coronary heart disease and type 2 diabetes mellitus. *Oncotarget* 8, 63038–63046
91. Horie, T. *et al.* (2009) MicroRNA-133 regulates the expression of GLUT4 by targeting KLF15 and is involved in metabolic control in cardiac myocytes. *Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun.* 389, 315–320
92. Lu, H. *et al.* (2010) MicroRNA-223 regulates Glut4 expression and cardiomyocyte glucose metabolism. *Cardiovasc. Res.* 86, 410–4120
93. el Azzouzi, H. *et al.* (2013) The hypoxia-inducible microRNA cluster miR-199a approximately 214 targets myocardial PPAR-delta and impairs mitochondrial fatty acid oxidation. *Cell Metab.* 18, 341–354
94. Kuwabara, Y. *et al.* (2015) MicroRNA-451 exacerbates lipotoxicity in cardiac myocytes and high-fat diet-induced cardiac hypertrophy in mice through suppression of the LKB1/AMPK pathway. *Circ. Res.* 116, 279–288
95. Copier, C.U. *et al.* (2017) Circulating miR-19b and miR-181b are potential biomarkers for diabetic cardiomyopathy. *Sci. Rep.* 7, 13514
96. Ucar, A. *et al.* (2012) The miRNA-212/132 family regulates both cardiac hypertrophy and cardiomyocyte autophagy. *Nat. Commun.* 3, 1078
97. Care, A. *et al.* (2007) MicroRNA-133 controls cardiac hypertrophy. *Nat. Med.* 13, 613–618
98. Jonker, J.W. *et al.* (2012) A PPARgamma-FGF1 axis is required for adaptive adipose remodelling and metabolic homeostasis. *Nature* 485, 391–394
99. Planavila, A. *et al.* (2013) Fibroblast growth factor 21 protects against cardiac hypertrophy in mice. *Nat. Commun.* 4, 2019
100. Diaz-Delfin, J. *et al.* (2012) TNF-alpha represses beta-Klotho expression and impairs FGF21 action in adipose cells: involvement of JNK1 in the FGF21 pathway. *Endocrinology* 153, 4238–4245
101. Planavila, A. *et al.* (2015) Fibroblast growth factor 21 protects the heart from oxidative stress. *Cardiovasc. Res.* 106, 19–31
102. Wu, F. *et al.* (2017) FGF21 ameliorates diabetic cardiomyopathy by activating the AMPK-paraoxonase 1 signaling axis in mice. *Clin. Sci.* 131, 1877–1893
103. Faul, C. *et al.* (2011) FGF23 induces left ventricular hypertrophy. *J. Clin. Invest.* 121, 4393–4408
104. Berezin, A.E. (2016) Diabetes mellitus related biomarker: the predictive role of growth-differentiation factor-15. *Diabetes Metab. Syndr.* 10 (Suppl. 1), S154–S157
105. Laurado, G. *et al.* (2015) FGF-23/vitamin D axis in type 1 diabetes: the potential role of mineral metabolism in arterial stiffness. *PLoS One* 10, e0140222
106. McGuire, D.K. and Inzucchi, S.E. (2008) New drugs for the treatment of diabetes mellitus. Part I: thiazolidinediones and their evolving cardiovascular implications. *Circulation* 117, 440–449
107. Van Linthout, S. *et al.* (2007) Anti-inflammatory effects of atorvastatin improve left ventricular function in experimental diabetic cardiomyopathy. *Diabetologia* 50, 1977–1986
108. Sharma, V. and McNeill, J.H. (2011) Parallel effects of beta-adrenergic receptor blockade on cardiac function and fatty acid oxidation in the diabetic heart: confronting the maze. *World J. Cardiol.* 3, 281–302
109. Mohamad, H.E. *et al.* (2011) Management of cardiac fibrosis in diabetic rats; the role of peroxisome proliferator activated receptor gamma (PPAR-gamma) and calcium channel blockers (CCBs). *Diabetol. Metab. Syndr.* 3, 4
