
REVIEWS

Corrected: Publisher Correction

---

# The cytoplasmic dynein transport machinery and its many cargoes

**Samara L. Reck-Peterson**${}^{1,2*}$, **William B. Redwine**${}^{1,3}$, **Ronald D. Vale**${}^{4}$ and **Andrew P. Carter**${}^{5*}$

**Abstract** | Cytoplasmic dynein 1 is an important microtubule-based motor in many eukaryotic cells. Dynein has critical roles both in interphase and during cell division. Here, we focus on interphase cargoes of dynein, which include membrane-bound organelles, RNAs, protein complexes and viruses. A central challenge in the field is to understand how a single motor can transport such a diverse array of cargoes and how this process is regulated. The molecular basis by which each cargo is linked to dynein and its cofactor dynactin has started to emerge. Of particular importance for this process is a set of coiled-coil proteins — activating adaptors — that both recruit dynein–dynactin to their cargoes and activate dynein motility.

---

### Lissencephaly
Derived from Greek for ‘smooth brain’; a spectrum of developmental disorders characterized by defective neuronal migration and the resulting lack of brain folds and grooves.

---

The microtubule cytoskeleton is responsible for long-distance movements and spatial organization of intracellular vesicles, organelles and large protein-containing and RNA-containing complexes in many eukaryotic cells. Microtubules are polarized structures with a minus end and a plus end. In interphase cells, microtubule plus ends are typically located near the periphery. Minus ends originate from microtubule organizing centres (MTOCs), which are often located close to the nucleus but can also be found at other locations in the cell. In mitosis, microtubules reorganize to form the spindle, with the microtubule minus ends focused at the two poles. The molecular motors, dyneins (minus-end-directed) and kinesins (primarily plus-end-directed), are responsible for many microtubule-based functions. Notably, plants and some algae lack dynein genes in their genomes.

Dyneins were first discovered as the motors that drive flagellar beating in *Tetrahymena pyriformis*. Subsequently, two dynein isoforms were found that are responsible for movement in the cytoplasm (cytoplasmic dynein 1) and cilia (cytoplasmic dynein 2). This Review will focus on cytoplasmic dynein 1 (subsequently referred to as dynein). Dynein is an essential gene in a number of organisms, including *Drosophila melanogaster* and mice, and mutations in the dynein transport machinery have been linked to neurological diseases. These include neurodegenerative disorders such as the Parkinson disease-like Perry syndrome, spinal muscular atrophy–lower extremity predominant (SMA-LED), hereditary motor neuron disease and Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease. They also include neurodevelopmental diseases such as lissencephaly, as well as other malformations of cortical development and intellectual disabilities.

Remarkably, a single dynein functions in the cytoplasm in animal cells, which is in contrast to the ~40 kinesins that perform related functions. This suggests dynein uses a different strategy to interact with its cargoes compared with kinesin. Here, we address how a single dynein transports such a diversity of cargoes. We first discuss the structure of the dynein-based transport machinery. We then describe the main cargoes of dynein, which we group under four categories: membranes, RNAs, proteins and viruses. We have limited this Review to interphase functions of dynein, as its mitotic and meiotic roles have been covered elsewhere.

## The dynein transport machinery

After the discovery of dynein, it became clear that other factors were required for its activity. A high-molecular-weight complex, later named dynactin, was found to be necessary for vesicle movement along microtubules. However, the two complexes only interacted weakly in vitro. This interaction was shown to become stronger in the presence of an N-terminal domain of protein bicaudal D homologue 2 (BICD2), BICD2-N, which is predominantly coiled-coil. BICD2 is the human homologue of bicaudal D (BicD), which was originally identified as a polarity factor in *D. melanogaster*. Recent studies demonstrated that BICD2-N dramatically activates the motility of isolated dynein–dynactin complexes to move long distances in vitro. Additional coiled-coil-containing proteins have also been shown to activate dynein–dynactin motility (TABLE ). We refer to these coiled-coil proteins as activating adaptors. These proteins have the dual property of both activating motility and linking dynein–dynactin to their cargoes. Collectively, these results suggest the dynein transport machine consists of the dynein complex, the dynactin complex and a coiled-coil-containing activating

---

${}^{1}$Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA, USA.

${}^{2}$Division of Biological Sciences, Cell and Developmental Biology Section, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA, USA.

${}^{3}$Department of Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.

${}^{4}$Department of Cellular and Molecular Pharmacology and the Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA.

${}^{5}$MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Cambridge, UK.

*e-mail*: sreckpeterson@ucsd.edu; cartera@mrc-lmb.cam.ac.uk

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41580-018-0004-3

---

© 2018 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.

Table 1 | Activating adaptors and candidate activating adaptors for dynein–dynactin

| Activator or candidate activator | Evidence | Cargo |
| --- | --- | --- |
| **Confirmed activating adaptors (active in in vitro motility assays)** |  |  |
| BICD2 | Reconstituted motility ${}^{14,15}$ and relocation assay ${}^{225}$ | • COP1-independent Golgi-to-ER vesicles ${}^{58}$<br>• Golgi vesicles ${}^{57}$<br>• Nuclear pore complexes ${}^{200}$ |
| BICDL1 | Reconstituted motility ${}^{16}$ | RAB6 vesicles ${}^{61}$ |
| SPDL1 | Co-IP motility ${}^{14}$ | Kinetochore ${}^{228}$ |
| HOOK1 | Lysate motility and relocation assay ${}^{227}$ | RAB5 early endosomes ${}^{70}$<br>Claithrin-independent cargoes ${}^{229}$ |
| HOOK3 | Reconstituted motility ${}^{24}$, co-IP motility ${}^{14}$, lysate motility and relocation assay ${}^{227}$ | • RAB5 early endosomes ${}^{70}$<br>• Golgi ${}^{230}$ |
| NIN | Reconstituted motility ${}^{98}$ | Unknown |
| NINL | Reconstituted motility ${}^{98}$ | MICAL3 and RAB8A containing vesicles ${}^{63}$ |
| RAB11FIP3 | Co-IP motility ${}^{14}$ | Recycling endosomes ${}^{28}$ |
| **Candidate activating adaptors** |  |  |
| BICD1 | Co-IP ${}^{231}$ | • COP1-independent Golgi-to-ER vesicles ${}^{58}$<br>• Microtubule arrays ${}^{231}$ |
| BICDL2 | Homology to BICD proteins ${}^{61}$ | RAB13 vesicles ${}^{61}$ |
| HOOK2 | Homology to Hook proteins | • Spermatid intramanchette trafficking ${}^{222}$<br>• Centrosomal proteins ${}^{175}$ |
| CCDC88A | Co-IP ${}^{98}$ | Unknown |
| CCDC88B | Co-IP ${}^{233}$ | Secretory lysosomes (lytic granules) ${}^{213}$ |
| CCDC88C | Co-IP ${}^{98}$ | Unknown |
| NUMA | Co-IP ${}^{234}$ | Minus ends of microtubules in the spindle ${}^{132,235}$ |
| TRAK1 | Co-IP ${}^{111}$ | Mitochondria ${}^{181}$ |
| TRAK2 | Co-IP ${}^{111}$ | Mitochondria ${}^{181}$ |
| HAP1 | Co-IP ${}^{75,76,208}$ | Many membrane cargoes ${}^{75}$ |

Each activator or candidate activator is listed along with its cargoes. Cargoes are defined by their reliance on dynein or dynactin for movement or localization. We have not included known activator interacting proteins where there is not yet evidence for dynein–dynactin involvement for their trafficking. BICD, protein bicaudal D homologue; BICDL1, BICD family-like cargo adapter 1 (also known as BICDR1); CCDC88A, girdin; CCDC88B, coiled-coil domain-containing protein 88B; CCDC88C, dapple; co-IP, co-immunoprecipitation; COP1, E3 ubiquitin-protein ligase RFWD2; ER, endoplasmic reticulum; HAP1, huntingtin-interacting protein 1; HOOK, protein Hook homologue; MICAL3, [F-actin]-monooxygenase MICAL3; NIN, ninein; NINL, ninein-like; NUMA, nuclear mitotic apparatus protein; RAB, RAS-related protein; RAB11FIP3, RAB11 family-interacting protein 3; SPDL, Spindly; TRAK, trafficking kinesin-binding protein.

adaptor (such as BICD2) (FIG. 10; TABLE 1). Below, we provide an overview of these three central components, as well as two additional regulators, LIS1 (also known as PAFAH1B1 or platelet-activating factor acetylhydrolase IB subunit-α) and Nudel, a small protein family comprised of two related proteins NDE1 (nuclear distribution protein nudE homologue 1) and NDEL1 (nuclear distribution protein nudE-like 1). Both LIS1 and Nudel associate with the dynein complex and are required for many functions of dynein. Beyond activating adaptors, other connections between dynein and its cargoes have been shown to be involved in dynein transport (BOX 1).

### Structure of dynein

Human dynein is a 1.4 MDa complex composed of six different polypeptides, all of which are present in two copies (FIG. 1a). There is a single dynein heavy chain (DHC) (encoded by DYNC1H1) and two isoforms of each of the other components: the intermediate chains (DIC; encoded by DYNC1IC1 and DYNC1IC2), the light intermediate chains (DLIC; encoded by DYNC1LI1 and DYNC1LI2) and the three dynein light chain (DLC) families: Roadblock (Robl; encoded by DYNLRB1 and DYNLRB2), LC8 (encoded by DYNLL1 and DYNLL2) and Tctex (encoded by DYNLT1 and DYNLT3).

The DHC is 4,634 amino acids long and contains a C-terminal motor domain and an N-terminal tail domain. Starting from the N terminus of the DHC, the tail contains a dimerization domain (residues 1–200), followed by an extended region made up of nine helical bundles (residues 201–1420) ${}^{16-18}$ (FIG. 1b). The last helical bundle of the tail joins the motor domain, which consists of the linker (itself also made of helical bundles), a ring of six AAA+ domains and a C-terminal domain. The motor domain binds to its track via a microtubule-binding domain (MTBD) at the end of a coiled-coil stalk that emerges from the AAA+ ring ${}^{19,20}$. Dynein moves along microtubules by coupling ATP-induced conformational changes in the AAA+ ring with bending and straightening of the linker ${}^{21}$.

---

AAA+ domains  
Domains that are a highly conserved ATPase fold.

REVIEWs

a Dynein  
WD40  
domain  
DLIC  
C terminus  
RAS-like  
domain  
AAA+  
domain  
Linker  
Stalk  

b Dynein tail  
NDD  
Robl  
DIC  
LC8  
Tctex  
DIC  
N terminus  
α13  
MTBD  

c Dynactin p150glued N terminus  
CC2  
ARP11  
CAP-Gly  
Shoulder  
p62  
p27  
p25  
Pointed  
end  
Actin  
ARP1  
Barbed  
end  
ARP1 filament  

d Confirmed activating adaptors  
DLIC  
BICD2  
DLIC  
RAB6  
BICDL1  
DLIC  
RAB6  
SPDL1  
DLIC  
RZZ  
HOOK3  
DLIC  
FTS  
NINL  
DLIC  
RAB11  
RAB11FIP3  
DLIC  
RAB11  

Candidate activating adaptors  
TRAK1  
HAP1  
NUMA  
CCDC88B  

Other adaptors  
DLIC RAB7  
RILP  
JIP3  
WD40  

e  
Dynactin  
Dynein  
BICD2 N terminus  
Coiled coil  
Interaction between  
DLIC C-terminal tail  
and the activating  
adaptor  
Microtubule  

Increased speed,  
force and  
processivity  
Barbed  
end  

BICDL1  

Fig. 1 | The dynein transport machinery. a | Cartoon of cytoplasmic dynein 1. The two dynein heavy chains (DHCs) are linked together by an N-terminal dimerization domain (NDD) and have a C-terminal motor domain with a microtubule-binding domain (MTDB) at the end of a long antiparallel coiled-coil stalk. The dynein intermediate chains (DIC) have extended N termini that bind dimers of the dynein light chains Roadblock (Robl), LC8 and Tctex. The dynein light intermediate chain (DLIC) has an extended C terminus. b | Structure of the dynein tail [16,18] (PDB accession numbers: 6F1T and 5NVU) showing the NDD and nine helical bundles (1–9; neighbouring bundles are shown in different shades of blue for distinction) in the DHC and depicting interactions of DHC with the DIC and DLIC. The DIC WD40 domain binds bundles 4 and 5, whereas the RAS-like domain of the DLIC binds to bundles 5 and 7, using its N-terminal and C-terminal helices (α1 and α13). The DIC and DLIC extended termini are not shown. The structure of helical bundles 8 and 9 is approximate. c | Dynactin is built around a filament of eight actin-related proteins (α-actinin (ARP1)). At the barbed end are capping proteins (F-actin capping protein CAPZ). At the pointed end is an actin monomer, another actin-related protein (actin-related protein 3B (ARP11)) and a complex of three proteins (p62, p27 and p25). The shoulder domain binds the filament via extended N-terminal peptides of p50 dynamitin. The p150 component extends from the shoulder, containing stretches of coiled coils (CC2, CC1b and CC1a). At the N terminus of p150 are the basic and CAP-Gly domains that can interact with microtubules. d | Domain structure of known and candidate activating adaptors (see also TABLE 1). Reported sites of interactions are indicated above each cartoon. Key shows domains identified in the literature or by InterPro. e | Dynein-dynactin-activator complexes on microtubules. The activating adaptors protein bicaudal D homologue 2 (BICD2) or BICD family-like cargo adapter 1 (BICDL1; also known as BICDR1) run along the dynactin filament and recruit the DHCs. BICD2 preferentially recruits one dynein dimer (left), whereas BICDL1 recruits two dimers (right). CCDC88B, coiled-coil domain-containing protein 88B; FTS, AKT-interacting protein (also known as AKTIP); HAP1, huntingtin-interacting protein 1; HOOK3, protein Hook homologue 3; JIP3, c-Jun-N-terminal kinase-interacting protein 3; LGN, G-protein-signalling modulator 2; NINL, ninein-like; NUMA, nuclear mitotic apparatus protein; RAB, RAS-related protein; RAB11FIP3, RAB11 family-interacting protein 3; RH, RILP homology; RILP, RAB-interacting lysosomal protein; RZZ, Rod–ZW10–Zwilch complex; SPDL1, Spindly; TRAK1, trafficking kinesin-binding protein 1.

Box 1 | Other connections between dynein and its cargo

In addition to the activating adaptors or candidate activating adaptors (TABLE 1), a number of other links between dynein–dynactin and its cargoes have been reported. Here, we present some prominent examples.

**RAB-interacting lysosomal protein**

RAB-interacting lysosomal protein (RILP) is required for dynein–dynactin recruitment to RAS-related protein 7 (RAB7) lysosomes<sup>34</sup>. Because RILP interacts with the HOPS complex, it may be involved in linking dynein–dynactin to RAB7 (FIG. 1c). Purified RILP co-precipitates with purified dynein light intermediate chain 1 (DLIC1), suggesting a direct interaction with the complex<sup>23,35</sup>.

**Huntingtin and huntingtin-associated protein 1**

Huntingtin (HTT) and huntingtin-associated protein 1 (HAP1) associate with membrane vesicles<sup>75</sup> and are transported in neurons along microtubules<sup>380</sup>. HTT is linked to signalling endosomes<sup>97</sup> and autophagosomes<sup>405</sup>. HTT and HAP1 knockdown decreases retrograde movement of autophagosomes<sup>63</sup>. HTT binds purified dynein<sup>105</sup>, suggesting a direct interaction that does not require dynactin. HAP1 co-immunoprecipitates with dynactin component p150 from brain lysate<sup>76,208</sup>. HAP1 contains a coiled-coil domain and has sequence similarity to trafficking kinesin-binding protein (TRAK) and BICD family-like cargo adapter 1 (BICDL1; also known as BICDR1)<sup>60</sup> (FIG. 1d; TABLE 1), raising the possibility that it is a BICD-like activating adaptor.

**c-Jun N-terminal kinase-interacting proteins**

c-Jun N-terminal kinase-interacting proteins (JIPs) are implicated in the motility of dynein–dynactin cargoes. JIP1 depletion inhibits retrograde transport of amyloid precursor protein<sup>709</sup> and autophagosomes<sup>106</sup> in neurons. JIP3 co-immunoprecipitates with dynactin and co-localizes with dynein and dynactin on vesicles in neurons<sup>33</sup>. JIP1 lacks coiled coils, whereas JIP3 contains two short stretches of coiled coil (FIG. 1d). JIP4 is closely related to JIP3 and shares the same domain architecture.

**Ankyrin 2**

Mice with ankyrin 2 (AnkB) deletion show reduction in the speed of fast axonal transport of early endosomes, lysosomes, mitochondria and synaptic vesicles. AnkB binds the lipid phosphatidylinositol 3-phosphate (PI3P) on membrane cargoes and directly contacts the pointed-end complex of dynactin<sup>85</sup>.

**Sorting nexins**

Sorting nexins (SNXs) are a large family of membrane-associated proteins that contain a lipid binding PX domain. Affinity-tagged SNX5 and SNX6 co-precipitate with dynein and/or dynactin from human cell lysates<sup>210,211</sup>.

**Spectrin**

Spectrin is a peripheral membrane protein that co-immunoprecipitates with dynactin<sup>87</sup>. While a two-hybrid screen reported an interaction between spectrin and α-centractin (ARP1)<sup>188</sup>, the structure of the dynein–dynactin–BICD2 complex shows little fully exposed ARP1 available for binding<sup>17</sup>.

**Snapin**

Snapin is a SNARE interacting protein, which is part of the biogenesis of lysosome-related organelles complex 1 (BLOC-1)<sup>213</sup>. It has been implicated in the retrograde movement of late endosomes and suggested to be a dynein adaptor<sup>86</sup>. Snapin is required for dynein to localize to late endosomes, and glutathione-S-transferase (GST)–snapin co-precipitates with dynein and dynactin components from brain lysate<sup>206</sup>. However, because these in vitro experiments were done in the absence of other BLOC-1 complex members, they should be revisited.

**Direct cargo binding to dynein**

In addition to its interaction with activating adaptors, the DLICs can form direct interactions with cargoes, such as the adenoviral hexon protein<sup>35</sup>, pericentrin<sup>215</sup> and partitioning defective 3 homolog (PAR3)<sup>222</sup>. The dynein light chains (DLCs) LC8 and Tctex bind motifs found in many proteins, leading to the idea that these DLCs directly recruit proteins to dynein. However, because these motif binding sites on the DLCs bind to the dynein intermediate chain (DIC) N terminus, the current consensus is that this is not the case<sup>217</sup>. Many of the DLC binding motifs likely recruit LC8 or Tctex for dynein-independent functions, such as dimerization. However, there is some evidence for cargoes connecting to dynein via DLCs, including some viruses<sup>182</sup>, rhodopsin<sup>207,218</sup> and the Rho guanine nucleotide exchange factor 2 (ARHGEF2)<sup>219</sup>. Additional structural studies will be required to determine if peptides from these proteins can bind to DLCs that are already in complex with the DIC N-terminal peptides; NMR mapping experiments suggest that this is possible<sup>219,220</sup>.

---

The DIC contains a WD40 domain that binds the DHC helical bundles 4 and 5 and an extended ~230 residue N-terminus. The extended N-termini of both DICs are held together by dimers of DLCs. Tctex and LC8 dimers bind toward the N-terminal end of the extended region, whereas the Robl dimer binds closer to the WD40 domains. Robl also docks on the WD40 domain of one of the DICs. The DLIC contains a RAS-like domain that contacts DHC helical bundles 6 and 7 (REFS<sup>16,18</sup>). The DLIC is further anchored onto the DHC by N-terminal and C-terminal helices (α1 and α13, respectively) that span out and contact DHC helical bundles 8 and 5, respectively (FIG. 1b). The two DLICs have extended ~130-residue C termini (FIG. 1a), which contain two α-helices (α14 and α15)<sup>22</sup>. The DLIC C termini contact activating adaptors<sup>22–24</sup>, and in some cases may also provide a direct link to cargo (BOX 1).

**WD40 domain**

A structural domain formed from WD40 repeats, themselves composed of approximately 40 amino acids and often ending in tryptophan (W), followed by aspartic acid (D).

**SNARE**

Proteins that are anchored to either donor or acceptor membranes, mediating fusion between distinct membranes.

**BLOC-1**

A multisubunit protein complex that contributes to membrane tubulation, which is important for sorting and organelle biogenesis in the endolysosomal system.

**Structure of dynactin**

The 1.1 MDa dynactin complex is composed of 23 subunits (11 different polypeptides; FIG. 1c)<sup>25</sup>. Its central feature is a short actin-like filament, which contains eight copies of the actin-related protein α-centractin (ARP1) (encoded by ACTR1A and ACTR1B) and one copy of β-actin (encoded by ACTB). The filament is capped at the barbed end by the F-actin capping protein CAPZ (encoded by CAPZA1 or CAPZA2 and CAPZB) and at the pointed end by another actin-related protein, ARP11 (encoded by ACTR10). Three other proteins, p62 (encoded by DCTN4), p27 (encoded by DCTN6) and p25 (encoded DCTN5), bind ARP11 to form a pointed-end complex. A shoulder domain sits on the filament near the barbed end. It is composed of two copies of p150<sup>glued</sup> (p150; encoded by DCTN1), four copies of p50 dynamitin (p50; encoded by DCTN2) and two copies of p24 (encoded by DCTN3). Extended peptides corresponding to the N terminus of p50 emerge from the shoulder and wrap around one side of the filament. The C terminus of p150 is buried in the shoulder, and the N terminus forms a flexible extension with two stretches of coiled coil (CC1 and CC2) interrupted by a globular domain. CC1 contains two halves, CC1a and CC1b, which form a hairpin structure. At the extreme N terminus of p150 are the CAP-Gly and basic domains, which have been implicated in microtubule binding<sup>26</sup>.

REVIEWS

---

**RAS-like domain**  
A protein domain with sequence similarity to the GTPase domain of RAS.

**Barbed end**  
The end where myosin can be seen protruding when actin filaments are decorated with myosin motor domains and visualized by electron microscopy; similar nomenclature is used to refer to the equivalent end of the α-contractin (ARP1) minifilament in dynactin.

**Pointed end**  
The end where myosin cannot be seen protruding when actin filaments are decorated with myosin motor domains and visualized by electron microscopy; similar nomenclature is used to refer to the equivalent end of the α-contractin (ARP1) minifilament in dynactin.

**EF hands**  
A helix–loop–helix protein structural domain that often confers a protein with calcium-binding ability.

**β-propellers**  
A protein structural domain characterized by four to eight wedge-shaped β-sheets arranged similarly to the blades on a propeller.

---

**Activating adaptors**

At the time of writing, eight activating adaptors have been shown to promote long-distance movement of dynein–dynactin complexes in vitro (FIG. 1d; TABLE 1). There are no sequence motifs that are common to all of these activating adaptors. Instead, the common features are the presence of a long (>200 residues) coiled coil, a binding site for the DLIC C terminus [23,24,27] and a binding site for proteins (for example, RAS-related protein 6 (RAB6), RAB11, the Rod–ZW10–Zwisch (RZZ) complex and AKT-interacting protein (FTS; also known as AKTIP)) that link the adaptors to their cargoes (FIG. 1d).

Activating adaptors contain at least three different types of binding sites for the DLIC C terminus. BICD2, the BICD-related protein BICD family-like cargo adapter 1 (BICDL1; also known as BICDR1) and the kinetochore binding adaptor SPDL1 (Spindly) likely bind the DLIC via a motif referred to as the ‘CC1 box’ in their coiled coil [27]. The CC1 box contains an AxxG sequence (where x denotes any amino acid). By contrast, protein Hook homologue 3 (HOOK3) and HOOK1 use a small Hook domain, which is located N-terminal to their coiled coils [24]. The penultimate helix (α14) in the DLIC C terminus is the contact site for BICD2, SPDL1 and HOOK3 [22]. The activating adaptor RAB11 family-interacting protein 3 (RAB11FIP3) also binds the DLIC C terminus. The exact site of interaction is not yet known, but the region of RAB11FIP3 (residues 2–435) [28] that interacts with the DLIC contains a pair of EF hands. Interestingly, the same type of domain is also found in the activating adaptors ninein (NIN) and ninein-like (NINL), although these proteins have not yet been shown to bind the DLIC. All of the activating adaptors are known or predicted to be dimers.

Cryo-electron microscopy (cryo-EM) structures have been solved for dynein and dynactin in complex with three different activating adaptors (BICD2, BICDL1 and HOOK3) [16,17]. These cryo-EM maps are at medium (BICDL1) to low (BICD2, HOOK3) resolution in the regions around the activating adaptors but are sufficient to reveal the main ways in which the activating adaptors bring dynein and dynactin together. In all cases, a ~250 residue coiled coil of the activating adaptor runs along the length of the dynactin filament (FIG. 1e). Their N termini lie close to the barbed end of the dynactin filament, and their C termini contact the pointed end complex. The coiled coils of the activating adaptors interact with dynactin slightly differently, especially towards the pointed end. This is consistent with the lack of conserved motifs in the coiled coils of different activating adaptors. Interestingly, BICD2, HOOK3 and BICDL1 can all recruit two dynein dimers at a time [16,29], although for BICD2, the recruitment of a second dynein dimer appears to be less efficient [16]. The second dynein lies next to the first along the dynactin filament (FIG. 1e). These interactions, mediated by activating adaptors, recruit dynein to dynactin so that the individual DHCs bind in grooves between dynactin filament subunits [16,17]. Importantly, these interactions induce large conformational changes in dynein that align its motor domains so that both MTBDs can bind microtubules [18]. This likely underlies how activating adaptors increase the ability of dynein to move over long distances. The ability to recruit two dyneins to one dynactin further enhances this effect [16,29].

Dynein and dynactin also interact via the N terminus of the DIC contacting CC1 of p150 (REF.[20]). This interaction may reinforce the interactions described above. Alternatively, a recent report suggested that this DIC–p150 interaction inhibits dynein [31], raising the possibility that binding of an activating adaptor disrupts this interaction.

The activation of dynein includes a number of steps in addition to binding activating adaptors. Dynein in isolation can exist in an inhibited form, referred to as the ‘Phi (φ)-particle’ (REF.[32]), which not only binds weakly to microtubules but is also unable to bind dynactin and activating adaptors [18]. The mechanism by which the φ-particle opens up is not yet known.

In addition to the known activating adaptors, there are a number of possible candidate activating adaptors (FIG. 1d; TABLE 1). These proteins contain long coiled coils and co-immunoprecipitate with both dynein and dynactin. Sequence analysis suggests many of these putative activating adaptors have domains that bind the DLIC, although as of yet, this has not been directly tested. Trafficking kinesin-binding protein 1 (TRAK1), TRAK2 and huntingtin-interacting protein 1 (HAP1) contain the CC1 box motif [27], whereas nuclear mitotic apparatus protein (NUMA), girdin (CCDC88A), coiled-coil domain-containing protein 88B (CCDC88B) and daple (CCDC88C) all contain Hook domains (FIG. 1d).

An interesting question is whether RAB-interacting lysosomal protein (RILP) and c-Jun-N-terminal kinase-interacting protein 3 (JIP3) are activating adaptors. Similar to known activating adaptors, both proteins can interact with dynein and dynactin [33,34], with RILP directly binding to the DLIC [23,35]. While RILP and JIP3 both have regions of coiled coil, they are not long enough to bind to dynein and dynactin in the same way as other activating adaptors (FIG. 1d). They may therefore fall into a category of nonactivating adaptors (BOX 1) that serve as links between the dynein complex and cargo without the activation function.

---

**Dynein regulation by LIS1 and Nudel**

Two other central regulators of dynein are LIS1 and Nudel. They have been linked to dynein function genetically in many organisms (reviewed recently in REF.[36]). LIS1, a dimer of two β-propellers, binds directly to the motor domain of dynein at two distinct sites [37,38]. Nudel proteins are coiled-coil-containing proteins that interact with the DIC and LC8, as well as with LIS1 (REFS [39–41]). There is evidence that Nudel may tether LIS1 to dynein [38,40]. The molecular mechanism of LIS1-mediated regulation appears to be complex as in vitro experiments have revealed a range of LIS1 functions, including decreasing [38,42,43] and increasing velocity of the dynein motor [37,44,45]. Based on experiments using *Saccharomyces cerevisiae* dynein, the effects LIS1 exerts on dynein depend on the nucleotide state at its third AAA+ domain [37]. The function of Nudel also appears to be complex as it can both enhance [38,46] and oppose

---

386 | JUNE 2018 | VOLUME 19

© 2018 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.
www.nature.com/nrm

Trafficking:
- ER and ER-derived vesicles (unknown)
- Golgi and post-Golgi vesicles (BICD1, BICD2*, BICDL1*, BICDL2*, NINL* and HOOK2)
- Early and late endosomes (HOOK1*, HOOK3* and HAP1)
- Signalling endosomes (HOOK1*, HOOK3* and HAP1)
- Recycling endosomes (RAB11FIP3*)
- Melanosomes (NINL*)
- Autophagosomes (HAP1)
- Mitochondria (TRAK1 and TRAK2)
- Lipid droplets (unknown)
- Peroxisomes (unknown)
- RNPs (BicD in flies)
- Aggresomes (unknown)
- Viruses (unknown)

Positioning:
- Nucleus (BICD2*)
- Centrosome (NINL*, NIN* and HOOK2)
- Golgi apparatus (unknown)

Fig. 2 | Many cargoes of dynein and their activating adaptors. A highly stylized schematic of a cell depicts many of the dynein cargoes discussed in this Review. Some cargoes are actively trafficked along microtubules, while for others the role of dynein is to position them. Activating adaptors (marked with a star) and candidate activating adaptors are listed where there is some experimental evidence that they are involved in transport or positioning. BicD, bicaudal D; BICD, protein bicaudal D homologue; BICDL1, BICD family-like cargo adapter 1 (also known as BICDR1); BICDL2, BICD family-like cargo adapter 2; ER, endoplasmic reticulum; HAP1, huntingtin-interacting protein 1; HOOK, protein Hook homologue; NIN, ninein; NINL, ninein-like; RAB11FIP3, RAB11 family-interacting protein 3; RNPs, ribonucleoproteins; TRAK, trafficking kinesin-binding protein.

---

LIS1 function in vitro ${}^{42,43}$. LIS1 — probably in complex with Nudel proteins — has been implicated in multiple cellular processes, including localizing dynein to microtubule plus ends, initiating cargo transport and supporting the ability of dynein to transport high-load cargoes (reviewed recently in REF. ${}^{36}$).

**Dynein cargoes**

The remainder of this Review focuses on the wide range of cargoes that dynein transports (FIG. 2). Studies with dextrans suggested that, whereas 500 kDa molecules can diffuse freely across a cell, complexes larger than 2 MDa are confined and effectively immotile ${}^{47}$. Thus, cargoes for dynein are typically large objects, such as organelles and ribonucleoprotein (RNP) or protein complexes. Dynein can also act while it is anchored at the cell cortex, where it can act as a tether and/or generate pulling forces. Although many of these cargoes move bidirectionally owing to the interplay between dynein and kinesin, here we focus on dynein-based motility. For each cargo, we describe its physiological role and discuss the evidence for the involvement of dynein in its dynamics. We also describe the current state of knowledge for how each cargo is linked to dynein–dynactin, highlighting the role of known or candidate activating adaptors (FIGS 1d,2; TABLE 1). Our focus will be on vertebrates, although results from other organisms, such as flies and filamentous fungi, are also discussed.

**Membrane cargoes**

There are many discrete membrane-bound compartments in eukaryotic cells. Some of these are marked by small GTPases of the RAB family. RABs bind effector proteins to direct trafficking processes, including membrane tethering, fusion and movement mediated by molecular motors ${}^{48}$. Disrupting dynein function (BOX 2) alters the cellular localization or motile properties of many of these membrane compartments.

**Endoplasmic reticulum.** The endoplasmic reticulum (ER) is a meshwork of membranes consisting of tubules and sheets. Tubules are particularly dynamic, and their movements require dynein as they are inhibited by overexpression of the dynactin component p50, which is a classic method for disrupting dynein–dynactin function ${}^{49}$ (BOX 2). Similarly, overexpression of p50 showed that dynein–dynactin is responsible for transporting ER membranes in neuronal dendrites ${}^{50}$.

Dynein also moves vesicles originating from the ER, which is spread throughout the cell, to the cell centre. These vesicles coalesce to form the ERGIC (endoplasmic reticulum Golgi intermediate compartment), a precursor compartment of the Golgi apparatus. Evidence for this comes from visualization of a secreted viral protein that exits the ER and moves rapidly to the centre of the cell. This movement is disrupted by

**Cell cortex**
The cytoplasmic face of the plasma membrane.

REVIEW S

Box 2 | Methods to study dynein function and activation

Components of the dynein machinery have been depleted using RNAi and CRISPR methods, and genetic studies have revealed the functions of many components. Several other widely used methods have been important for determining if dynein or dynactin are involved in a process of interest. Overexpression of dynactin components, such as p50 (REF. 221) (FIG. 1c) or one of the coiled-coil segments (CC1) of p150 (REF. 222) (FIG. 1c), results in the disruption of many dynein–dynactin-dependent processes. The exact mechanism of disruption is not completely clear but probably involves disruption of the dynein–dynactin interaction 223. Antibodies raised against the dynein intermediate chains (DICs) (FIG. 1a) have also been extensively used to block dynein function in cell-free systems or systems amenable to antibody injection 224.

A number of methods have been used to provide evidence that a dynein adaptor is an activating adaptor. All activating adaptors co-immunoprecipitate with dynein and dynactin, providing an initial suggestion that a candidate adaptor is an activating adaptor 98. Cell-based relocation assays have also been used to provide evidence for dynein–dynactin activation 225,226. In these experiments, a candidate activator is targeted to a largely non-motile organelle, such as the peroxisome. Any increase in minus-end-directed peroxisome motility provides indirect evidence that a candidate adaptor could be an activating adaptor. For example, the amino terminus (NT) of protein bicaudal D homologue 2 (BICD2) can be fused to the rapamycin-binding domain FRB. FKBP, which also binds rapamycin, is fused to an organelle-targeting protein, such as the peroxisomal protein peroxisomal biogenesis factor 3 (PEX3). In the presence of rapamycin, BICD2 enhances peroxisome motility 226 (see figure part a).

In vitro motility experiments can also provide indirect evidence for activating adaptors. For example, candidate activators can be used to immunoprecipitate dynein and dynactin from cell lysates or tissue extracts, and the motile properties of the immunoprecipitated complex can then be assessed using single-molecule motility assays 28,98. A variation of this method is to visualize dynein or dynactin directly in lysates without prior immunoprecipitation 27.

The gold standard for determining if a candidate adaptor is a dynein–dynactin activator is to reconstitute motility from purified components, as has been done for BICD2, BICD family-like cargo adapter 1 (BICDL1; also known as BICDR1), protein Hook homologue 3 (HOOK3), ninein (NIN) and ninein-like (NINL) 14–16,24,98. In this approach, each protein or protein complex is purified separately, and at least one component is tagged with a fluorescent marker. Motility is then monitored using total internal reflection microscopy. Bond fide activators lead to processive dynein–dynactin motility (see figure part b).


a


b


Microscope glass

Fig. 3 | Mechanisms linking dynein and dynactin to membrane cargoes. **a** | Dynein–dynactin associates with Golgi-derived vesicles using the activating adaptors protein bicaudal D homologue 2 (BICD2) or BICD family-like cargo adapter 1 (BICDL1; also known as BICDR1), depending on the cell type. Both BICD2 and BICDL1 bind, via their C-terminal coiled coils, to a dimer of the small GTPase RAS-related protein RAB6. RAB6 binds to Golgi-derived membranes via its prenyl tails, as do other RABs<sup>48</sup>. **b** | Early endosomes recruit dynein–dynactin via the activating adaptors protein Hook homologue 1 (HOOK1) or HOOK3. These adaptors bind AKT-interacting protein (FTS; also known as AKTIP), and FTS and hook-interacting protein (FHIP) to form the FHF complex. FHIP is reported to bind directly to the early endosome marker RAB5. RAB5 also binds huntingtin (HTT), which is linked to huntingtin-interacting protein 1 (HAP1), another potential activating adaptor. The phosphatidylinositol 3-phosphate (PI3P)-binding protein ankyrin 2 (ANKB) binds the pointed end of dynactin and is also important for early endosome transport. How these and other dynein–dynactin adaptors work together is unknown. **c** | Late endosomes are marked with RAB7, which binds RAB-interacting lysosomal protein (RILP) and the cholesterol sensor oxysterol-binding protein-related protein 1 (ORP1L). RILP binds the dynein light intermediate chain (DLIC). RILP also binds the HOPS complex, which interacts with the FHF complex, raising the possibility that Hook proteins also link dynein–dynactin to late endosomes. As with early endosomes, other potential dynein–dynactin links have been reported for the movement of late endosomes. **d** | In filamentous fungi, some cargoes (peroxisomes, endoplasmic reticulum-membrane-derived vesicles, lipid droplets and ribonucleoproteins) associate with the dynein transport machinery indirectly by hitchhiking on early endosomes, which can directly recruit the transport machinery via the Hook-containing FHF complex (see part **b**). PxdA is a putative tether that links peroxisomes to early endosomes, although how it may interact with both peroxisomes and early endosomes is unknown.

---

A related isoform, BICDL2, binds to RAB13 (REF.<sup>61</sup>) and is also associated with post-Golgi trafficking<sup>62</sup>. The activating adaptor NINL and the candidate activating adaptor HOOK2 (TABLE 1) have both been implicated in trafficking RAB8-marked Golgi-derived vesicles that are destined for the base of the primary cilium<sup>63,64</sup>.

**Total internal reflection microscopy**  
A microscopy technique that results in illumination of only a region approximately 100nm from the coverslip surface, allowing high signal-to-noise ratios to be achieved, which makes it feasible to image and track single molecules.

**Endolysosomal system.** Endocytosis is the process of internalizing portions of the plasma membrane, which can contain receptors and their ligands. Internalized membranes are sorted to various destinations, including recycling endosomes, late endosomes, multivesicular bodies (MVBs), the TGN and the lysosome. Each compartment is marked by one or more RAB GTPases.

Dynein is required for trafficking throughout the endolysosomal system. For example, knockout of dynein in mouse cells disperses lysosomes and endosomes<sup>7</sup>. Overexpression of p50 disrupts early and late endosome and lysosome distribution<sup>56</sup>, inhibits trafficking of signalling receptors from the cell surface towards the centre of the cell<sup>65</sup> and blocks transport of endosomes along nerve axons<sup>66</sup>.

Early endosomes are marked with the RAB5 GTPase. Activating adaptors of the Hook family have been

REVIEW S

implicated in linking these vesicles to dynein. Hook was first shown to have a role in endocytic trafficking in *D. melanogaster*⁶⁷. Experiments in filamentous fungi subsequently linked Hook to dynein, showing that a Hook homologue was required to link Rab5-marked early endosomes to the dynein machinery⁶⁸,⁶⁹. Mammals have three Hook-related proteins (HOOK1, HOOK2 and HOOK3). HOOK1 and HOOK3 have been directly linked to dynein-driven movement of early endosomes in axons⁷⁰.

Hook proteins are part of a complex called FHF, named after its components FTS (encoded by AKTIP), a Hook-related protein, and FTS and hook-interacting protein (FHIP, encoded by FAM160A2)⁷¹,⁷². The GTP-bound form of RAB5 interacts with the FHF complex in both *D. melanogaster*⁷³ and human cell⁷⁰ extracts. In *Aspergillus nidulans*, FhipA (FHIP) can bind to early endosomes in the absence of the other two components⁷², and two-hybrid interaction studies with human proteins suggest that FHIP binds directly to the GTP-bound form of RAB5 (REF.⁷⁰). This suggests the FHF complex binds directly to RAB5 on early endosomes via the FHIP component, and the Hook protein recruits the dynein–dynactin complex (FIG. 3b).

Another potential connection between dynein and early endosomes is via huntingtin (HTT) and HAP1 (BOX 1; FIG. 1d). HTT binds to the GTP-bound form of RAB5 (REF.⁷³) and has been linked to the movement of signalling endosomes (see also below)⁷⁴ and other membranous cargoes. In addition, HTT binds dynein⁷⁵, and HAP1 binds dynactin⁷⁶. HAP1 is a candidate activating adaptor based on its homology to other adaptors (TABLE 1; FIG. 1d). An intriguing question is whether both HTT–HAP1 and the FHF complex are found on the same early endosomes or whether they provide alternate routes to recruit dynein–dynactin (FIG. 3b).

Late endosomes are marked with the GTPase RAB7. RAB7 forms a complex with the cholesterol sensor oxysterol-binding protein-related protein 1 (ORP1L) and RILP⁷⁷ (BOX 1). RILP binds to GTP-bound RAB7 (REF.⁷⁸), directly binds the DLIC²³,³⁵ and is required to recruit dynein and dynactin to late endosomes and lysosomes³⁴ (FIG. 3c). Interestingly, the ORP1L–RAB7–RILP complex also interacts with the HOPS complex⁷¹, which is implicated in late endosome trafficking⁷⁹. The HOPS complex binds to the Hook-containing FHF complex³⁰,⁸¹, raising the possibility that late endosomes also engage Hook proteins to link them to dynein⁸² (FIG. 3c). If this is confirmed, it will suggest that, as with early endosomes, there are multiple ways in which dynein can be recruited to late endosomes. Late endosomes mature into lysosomes, which are found in a perinuclear region in some cell types. This positioning has also been linked to dynein–dynactin⁵⁶, and there is evidence that lysosome motility and positioning are mediated by the same factors that are used by late endosomes⁸³.

In addition to the adaptors described above, a number of other proteins have been implicated in the association of dynein with the endolysosomal system, including JIP3 (REFS⁸⁹,⁹⁴), ankyrin B⁸⁵, snapin⁸⁶ and spectrin⁸⁷ (FIG. 3b,c; BOX 1). These proteins all lack long coiled coils, suggesting they are not activating adaptors. This

raises the question of whether these proteins act together with an activating adaptor or can provide an alternate means of activating dynein–dynactin.

A subset of endosomes contains receptors that signal in the cytoplasm after internalization. These endosomes, called signalling endosomes, have been well studied in neurons, where growth factors bind to receptors at the nerve synapse, undergo endocytosis and are transported back along the axon to the cell body by dynein–dynactin. For example, β-nerve growth factor (NGF) and brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) bind to the high-affinity nerve growth factor receptor (TRKA) and BDNF/NT-3 growth factors receptor (TRKB), respectively⁶⁸. These NGF–TRKA and BDNF–TRKB complexes co-localize with both RAB5-marked early endosomes⁶⁹ and RAB7-marked late endosomes in axons⁶⁰, suggesting that signalling endosomes use the same adaptors as early and late endosomes.

Many cells also have an endosomal compartment near the MTOC that is a nexus for receptor recycling to the plasma membrane and is distinct from early endosomes. These recycling endosomes are marked by RAB11 (REF.⁹¹). RAB11FIP3 is a RAB11-interacting protein that is required to maintain the structure of recycling endosomes⁹² and activates dynein–dynactin motility in vitro¹⁷ (FIG. 1d; TABLE 1). RAB11FIP3 is also required to deliver membranes to cilia¹⁰³ and the cytokinetic furrow⁹⁴. As with endosomes, other adaptors may also recruit dynein–dynactin to recycling endosomes. For example, JIP3 has been shown to have a role in the movement of recycling endosomes during cytokinesis¹²³.

Melanosomes. Melanosomes are pigment-containing organelles related to lysosomes. In many vertebrates, their movements are regulated to control skin colour changes. In pigmented cells of *Xenopus laevis*, antibodies against the DLIC block melanosome movement towards the cell centre⁹⁶. In zebrafish lacking the protein Ninl, melanosome transport is severely impaired. NINL interacts with components of the dynein and dynactin complex as shown via mass spectrometry experiments⁹⁷,⁹⁸, and human NINL is an activating adaptor²⁰⁸, suggesting that NINL is the activating adaptor for melanosome motility.

Autophagosomes. Autophagosomes are double-membrane vesicles formed after engulfment of organelles and proteins destined for destruction by autophagy. They are marked with the ubiquitin-related protein LC3. In HeLa cells, autophagosomes move to the cell centre and cluster with lysosomes⁹⁹. In neurons, autophagosomes can form at the axon tip¹⁰⁰ and then fuse with lysosome-associated membrane glycoprotein 1 (LAMP1)-marked or RAB7-marked late endosomes to initiate transport towards the cell body¹⁰⁰–¹⁰². Autophagosomes can also form in the soma¹⁰³.

A role for dynein in autophagy came from the observation that overexpression of p50 or p150 CC1 (BOX 2) impairs autophagic clearance¹⁰⁴. Furthermore, injection of an anti-DIC antibody inhibits clustering of LC3 autophagosomes in HeLa cells⁹⁹, and p150 CC1 overexpression inhibits their movement in neurons¹⁰⁰. Because moving autophagosomes can fuse with late endosomes,

Recycling endosomes
Endocytic vesicles characterized by the presence of the RAS-related protein RAB11 that direct the anterograde trafficking of materials to the cell surface.

Late endosomes
Pre-lysosomal endocytic vesicles with lower internal pH relative to early endosomes and characterized by the presence of the protein RAS-related protein RAB7a (RAB7).

Multivesicular bodies (MVBs). Late endosomes that contain multiple internalized vesicles.

HOPS complex
A multisubunit membrane-tethering complex that participates in organelle fusion events within the endolysosomal system in concert with RAB proteins.

a Hook protein may be the activating adaptor for dynein-mediated autophagosome transport. There is also evidence that HTT and the candidate activating adaptor HAP1 are important for autophagosome motility ${ }^{105}$. JIP1 is also necessary for autophagosome motility ${ }^{105,106}$. JIP1 is structurally unrelated to JIP3 and lacks any predicted coiled coil, suggesting it is not an activating adaptor. Intriguingly, autophagosomes have different motile properties compared with endosomes and lysosomes ${ }^{107}$. It is not yet clear what accounts for these differences.

**Mitochondria.** Mitochondria move bidirectionally along microtubules and pause frequently. Their motility can respond to, for example, changes in cell signalling and axon growth, which can lead to their accumulation in areas with high metabolic requirements ${ }^{108}$. Mutations in *D. melanogaster* dynein impair movement of mitochondria in axons, suggesting a direct role of dynein in retrograde movement (from the periphery to the cell body) of mitochondria ${ }^{109}$. Both dynein and kinesin associate with mitochondria via the protein Milton (TRAK1 and TRAK2 in humans), which binds to the mitochondrial outer membrane protein Miro (RHOT1 and RHOT2 in humans) ${ }^{110}$. TRAK proteins co-precipitate dynein and dynactin from brain extracts ${ }^{111}$, suggesting they interact with the dynein motor. TRAK1 and TRAK2 contain a region with similarity to BICDL1 and HAP1 ${ }^{60}$, raising the possibility that the TRAK proteins are activating adaptors of dynein–dynactin for mitochondrial motility (BOX 1; FIG. 1d).

**Peroxisomes.** Peroxisomes perform a variety of metabolic functions, including the breakdown of fatty acids and metabolism of hydrogen peroxide. Peroxisomes are relatively evenly distributed in cells, and only 10–15% of them are mobile in many cell types ${ }^{112}$. Overexpression of p50 disrupts peroxisome motility in mammalian cells ${ }^{113}$. The candidate activating adaptor TRAK2 has been implicated in peroxisome motility, along with a splice variant of the TRAK-binding protein mitochondrial Rho GTPase 1 (RHOT1; also known as Milton in *D. melanogaster*) ${ }^{114}$.

In filamentous fungi, where peroxisomes move in a kinesin-dependent and dynein-dependent manner ${ }^{115}$, they do so by hitchhiking on moving early endosomes ${ }^{54,116}$. Peroxisomes co-migrate with RabA (Rab5)-marked early endosomes and require endosome motility for movement. In *A. nidulans*, PxdA, a long coiled-coil-containing protein is required for hitchhiking and may act to tether the two organelles ${ }^{116}$ (FIG. 3d). It is not clear if the hitchhiking mechanism is used for peroxisome motility outside of filamentous fungi.

**Lipid droplets.** Lipid droplets serve as lipid storage compartments and also provide a source of membrane lipid precursors ${ }^{117}$. Like peroxisomes, they show both diffusive and microtubule-dependent movements ${ }^{118}$. Genetic studies in *D. melanogaster* and filamentous fungi have implicated kinesin and dynein in the bidirectional motility of lipid droplets ${ }^{54,119,120}$. In *D. melanogaster*, BicD, which is related to the mammalian BICD proteins, has been shown to have a role in lipid droplet movement ${ }^{121}$. However, it is

**Nuclei.** Dynein-dependent movement and positioning of nuclei occurs in many organisms ranging from yeast to humans. In mitosis, dynein positions the spindle, which ultimately leads to nuclear positioning ${ }^{122,123}$. In interphase cells, dynein also has direct roles in nuclear movement or positioning. Early demonstrations of this included the discoveries that filamentous fungi with mutations in dynein or dynactin subunits had nuclear positioning defects ${ }^{124,125}$ and *Caenorhabditis elegans* embryos depleted of dynein or dynactin had defects in pronuclei movement ${ }^{126}$. In vertebrate cells, dynein is responsible for the movement of nuclei during cell migration ${ }^{127,128}$, interkinetic nuclear migration in neural progenitor cells ${ }^{129}$, and distributing and positioning nuclei in developing muscle cells (myoblasts) ${ }^{130,131}$.

These different nuclear movements can be driven by dynein that is directly connected to the nucleus or by cortically anchored dynein pulling on microtubules emanating from MTOCs. A number of proteins have been identified as being important for linking dynein to the cell cortex or nuclear membrane. In mitosis, NUMA and the G-protein-signalling modulator 2 (GSPM2; also known as LGN) complex anchor dynein to the cortex ${ }^{132}$. In interphase, dynein is anchored to the nucleus by BICD2 via the nucleoporin E3 SUMO-protein ligase RANBP2 (REFS ${ }^{133,134}$). The nuclear pore complex protein NUP133 and Nudel proteins also have a role in localizing dynein to the nucleus ${ }^{133,135}$. In some cell types, dynein may be recruited by different mechanisms. For example, partitioning defective 6 homologue β (PAR6β) is required for dynactin localization to the nuclear envelope in myotubes, and its depletion reduces the movement of recently fused myoblast nuclei within myotubes ${ }^{132}$. In *C. elegans*, a protein related to the Hook family of activating adaptors, ZYG-12, is important for attaching dynein to the nuclear membrane ${ }^{136}$.

**RNA cargoes**

Subcellular localization of mRNAs is a mechanism to locally control gene expression in many organisms ${ }^{137}$. The role of dynein in RNA localization was discovered in *D. melanogaster* ${ }^{138}$, where mutations in the DHC or injection of antibodies against the DHC or p50 all lead to defects in mRNA localization in the fly syncytial blastoderm ${ }^{139}$. In mammalian cells, there is no direct evidence for the role of dynein in RNA localization, although the DIC co-immunoprecipitates with the RNA-binding proteins Staufen ${ }^{140}$ and La ${ }^{141}$.

mRNAs are transported in complex with proteins as RNPs. In *D. melanogaster*, the localization of many RNAs requires BicD, and the formation of transport competent mRNP complexes requires the RNA-binding protein Egalitarian (Egl). Egl binds directly to RNA and the C-terminal cargo-binding domain of BicD, thus linking RNA to the dynein transport machinery ${ }^{142}$. The dynein–dynactin–BicD–Egl complex has an essential

Nurse cells  
A group of 15 polyploid  
*Drosophila melanogaster*  
ovarian cells that share a  
cytoplasm with each other and  
the developing oocyte and  
function to support the  
development of the oocyte by  
providing nutrients and  
biomolecules (mRNAs and  
proteins) through intercellular  
connections called ring canals.

Dendritic branching  
The process by which a  
dendrite, the portion of neuron  
that receives signals from other  
cells, forms the cellular  
projections it contributes to  
synapses.

Polysomes  
The complex formed by two or  
more ribosomes  
simultaneously engaged in  
translation along the length of  
a single messenger RNA.

14-3-3 protein  
A conserved family of adaptor  
proteins that interact with  
diverse proteins and regulate  
their function through, for  
example, altered localization,  
activity or stability.

Importins  
Proteins that recognize and  
deliver proteins with nuclear  
localization signals into the  
nucleus through nuclear pores.

γ-tubulin  
Tubulin family member that, as  
a component of γ-tubulin ring  
complexes, templates nascent  
microtubules.

role during oogenesis in flies by controlling the localization  
of *oskar* and *bicoid* mRNAs, which are involved in  
anterior–posterior axis determination of the embryo [143].  
These mRNAs, packaged as mRNPs, are transported  
from nurse cells into the oocyte along polarized micro-  
tubule arrays, requiring dynein, dynactin, BicD and  
Egl for movement [144,145]. Once inside the oocyte, *bicoid*  
continues to require dynein to maintain its localization [146].  
BicD also contributes to RNA localization in  
fly neurons, where it interacts with the RNA-binding  
factor nuclear fragile X mental retardation-interacting  
protein 2 (NUFIP2; also known as FMRP) [147]. BicD and  
FMRP interact and move together bidirectionally in  
fly neurons, and both proteins are required for normal  
levels of dendritic branching [147].

In filamentous fungi, RNAs are distributed by hitch-  
hiking on early endosomes [148]. For example, in *U. maydis*,  
mRNA-containing polysomes are distributed throughout  
the cytoplasm by their association with dynein and  
kinesin-driven early endosomes [149,150]. It remains to be  
explored if hitchhiking is used by higher eukaryotes as a  
means to distribute or localize mRNA transcripts.

**Protein cargoes**

*Aggresomes and misfolded proteins.* Misfolded proteins  
are processed either by chaperones, which refold them,  
or the ubiquitin-proteasome system, which removes  
them by proteolysis. When these pathways are over-  
whelmed, cells temporarily sequester these toxic pro-  
tein species. The misfolded proteins are transported to  
juxtanuclear structures known as aggresomes that can  
be eventually processed by autophagy [151]. Overexpression  
of p50 (BOX 1) prevents the formation of aggresomes,  
implicating dynein–dynactin in their formation [152,153].  
Three pathways have been reported to recognize mis-  
folded proteins and connect them to dynein–dynactin.  
The first depends on histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6),  
which links polyubiquitylated proteins to dynein–  
dynactin [154]. The precise protein–protein interactions  
underlying the connection of HDAC6 to dynein–  
dynactin are not known. A second pathway uses seques-  
tosome 1 (SQSTM1) to link polyubiquitylated proteins  
to dynein through an interaction with the DIC [154].  
HDAC6 and SQSTM1 interact with each other [155],  
although depletion of HDAC6 increases the amount  
of SQSTM1 that interacts with dynein, suggesting that  
HDAC6-dependent and SQTSM1-dependent pathways  
act competitively [156]. A third pathway uses the heat shock  
protein 70 (HSP70) co-chaperone BAG family molecu-  
lar chaperone regulator 3 (BAG3) to couple misfolded  
proteins to the dynein–dynactin complex. This pathway  
does not require ubiquitylation to target proteins to the  
aggresome [157]. The BAG3–dynein interaction is bridged  
by the 14-3-3 protein, which interacts with BAG3 and  
the DIC [158]. No known activating adaptor has so far been  
implicated in aggresome formation.

along microtubules. This relocalizes them to the nucleus  
where they activate a transcriptional response [159]. The  
transcription factor signal transducers and activators  
of transcription 3 (STAT3) immunoprecipitates with  
dynein, and disruption of microtubules prevents its  
accumulation in the nucleus in response to axon dam-  
age [160]. The connection between dynein and STAT3 may  
involve importins, as a peptide that blocks the STAT3  
interaction with importin reduces the ability of STAT3 to  
immunoprecipitate with dynein [160,161].

**Intermediate filaments and microtubules.** Intermediate  
filaments are cytoskeletal components that contribute to  
cell shape, motility and organelle positioning [162]. Dynein  
participates in the subcellular distribution of vimentin  
intermediate filaments. Vimentin moves along microtu-  
bules [163], and overexpression of p50 (BOX 1) redistributes  
vimentin from the perinuclear region to the cell peri-  
phery [155]. In addition, vimentin co-immunoprecipitates  
with dynactin [165]. Depletion of the DHC also impairs the  
retrograde motility of intermediate filaments present in  
neurons, known as neurofilaments [166]. This might reflect  
a direct interaction of dynein with some neurofilaments,  
as neurofilament M interacts with the DIC [167].

It has also been shown that dynein can contribute to  
the movement of microtubules. Cell body-originating  
microtubules are transported into developing axons  
in rat neuron cultures via a process that is blocked by  
overexpression of p50 (REF. [168]) (BOX 1). Because these  
dynein-dependent microtubule movements are anter-  
ograde (in the opposite direction from normal dynein  
transport in the axon), it suggests that the microtubules  
move by sliding over dynein anchored to the cortex [166].  
Cortically anchored dynein also drives the formation  
of a uniformly polarized microtubule network in  
*D. melanogaster* neurons [169].

**Centrosomal components.** Centrosomes are the sites of  
microtubule nucleation and typically anchor microtubule  
minus ends [170]. Dynein has a role in transporting proteins  
to the centrosome. For example, overexpression of the  
CC1 domain of the dynactin subunit p150 (BOX 2) disrupts  
the localization of CDK5 regulatory subunit-associated  
protein 2 (CDK5RAP2; also known as CEP215) to the  
centrosome [171]. CDK5RAP2 is required for γ-tubulin local-  
ization and microtubule polymerization [172]. CDK5RAP2  
contains a long region of a predicted coiled coil and  
co-immunoprecipitates with the DIC, although further  
work will be required to determine if it is an activating  
adaptor for dynein cargoes destined for the centrosome.  
There is evidence that the known or candidate activating  
adaptors NIN, NINL and HOOK2 are enriched at the  
centrosome [173–175]. NIN and NINL have a role in nucleat-  
ing microtubules, suggesting that they transport factors  
required for this process to centrosomes.

Centriolar satellites are smaller motile structures that  
contribute material to centrosomes and are important  
for ciliogenesis [176]. Dynein interacts with components of  
satellites [177], and overexpression of p50 (BOX 1) disperses  
them [158]. In neuroblastoma cells, the activating adaptor  
HOOK3 localizes to and is important for the function of  
centriolar satellites, raising the possibility that HOOK3

**Transcription factors.** Although small proteins can  
move quickly by diffusion, there is evidence that some are  
transported by dynein. For example, transcription fac-  
tors are translated locally in axons in response to nerve  
injury and then transported in a retrograde direction

Table 2 | Viruses interacting with dynein during their life cycle

| Virus | Presence of the viral envelope | Replication site | Role of dynein in viral life cycle | Evidence for dynein involvement |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Class 1 (dsDNA) |  |  |  |  |
| HSV | Env | Nuc | Transport (direct) | HSV movement requires microtubules<sup>236</sup>; p50 blocks movement<sup>236</sup> |
| Pseudorabies virus | Env | Nuc | Transport (direct) | GFP-tagged capsids move retrograde in axons<sup>237</sup>; pUL36 on mitochondria relocates them to perinuclear regions<sup>196</sup> |
| Adenovirus | Non-env | Nuc | Transport (direct) | Viruses do not co-localize with endosomes by electron microscopy; p50 blocks perinuclear accumulation<sup>197</sup> |
| Polyomavirus | Non-env | Nuc | Transport (vesicles?) | p50 blocks virus at cell periphery<sup>238</sup> |
| Bovine papilloma viruses | Non-env | Nuc | Transport (vesicles) | Transport in endosomes; viruses remain at the periphery with nocodazole treatment<sup>239</sup> |
| Vaccinia virus (pox virus) | Env | Cyt | Assembly (direct) | p50 blocks perinuclear accumulation of newly assembled virus particles<sup>187</sup> |
| African swine fever virus | Env | Cyt | Assembly (?) | p50 blocks viral replication at perinuclear regions<sup>225</sup> |
| Class II (ssDNA) |  |  |  |  |
| Adeno-associated virus (parvovirus) | Non-env (replication defective) | Nuc | Transport (vesicles) | Axonal transport of labelled viruses in RAB7 vesicles<sup>161</sup> |
| Circovirus | Non-env | Nuc | Transport (vesicles) | Nocodozaole disrupts perinuclear accumulation<sup>220</sup> |
| Canine parvovirus | Non-env | Nuc | Transport (direct?) | Anti-dynein antibody reduces perinuclear accumulation<sup>199</sup> |
| Class III (dsRNA) |  |  |  |  |
| Reoviruses (for example, rotavirus) | Non-env | Cyt | Transport (vesicles) | Viral particles in endosomes accumulate in perinuclear regions<sup>186</sup> |
| Class IV (+ssRNA) |  |  |  |  |
| Dengue virus (flavivirus) | Env | Cyt | Transport (vesicles) and Assembly (vesicles) | Viruses co-localize with endosomes and accumulate in perinuclear regions<sup>189</sup> |
| Hepatitis C (flavivirus) | Env | Cyt | Cell organization | HCV clustering of lipid droplets in perinuclear regions<sup>191</sup> requires viral protein NS5A and dynein<sup>240</sup> |
| Class V (-ssRNA) |  |  |  |  |
| Influenza virus | Env | Cyt | Transport (vesicles) | Anti-dynein antibody inhibits rapid endosome transport to perinuclear regions<sup>183</sup> |
| Rabies virus | Env | Cyt | Transport (vesicles) | Long distance tracking of labelled virus<sup>190</sup>; rabies envelope G protein can confer retrograde transport<sup>200</sup> |
| Hantaa virus | Env | Cyt | Transport (direct) | p50 blocks perinuclear accumulation of N proteins expressed recombinantly or upon viral infection<sup>178</sup> |
| Class VI (ssRNA-RT) |  |  |  |  |
| Human foamy virus | Env | Cyt and nuc | Transport (vesicles) | p50 blocks perinuclear accumulation of viruses or isolated Gag proteins<sup>184</sup> |
| Mason-Pfizer monkey virus | Env | Cyt and nuc | Transport (direct) | p50 blocks perinuclear accumulation of Gag polyproteins<sup>241</sup> |
| Class VII (dsDNA-RT) |  |  |  |  |
| Hepatitis B | Env | Cyt and nuc | Cell organization | Triggers dynein clustering of mitochondria in perinuclear regions<sup>192</sup> |

Viruses are listed by class: classification based on nucleic acid (DNA or RNA), strandedness (ss, single-stranded; or ds, double-stranded), sense (+ strand or – strand) and whether they use a reverse transcriptase (RT). Dynein is involved in different aspects of the viral life cycle, irrespective of whether the viruses are enveloped (Env) or non-enveloped (Non-env), or whether they replicate in the nucleus (Nuc) or cytoplasm (Cyt). Roles of dynein can include transport of viruses to the perinuclear region during infection (via a direct connection or by transporting them in endosomes). Dynein can also transport components during assembly of new viruses or can have a role reorganizing the cell in response to viral infection. Evidence for the role of dynein in viral infection is accumulation near the nucleus (perinuclear). Further support comes from showing that the viral components are dispersed or fail to accumulate when nocodazole is used to depolymerize microtubules, p50 is overexpressed (p50 block) or an anti-dynein antibody is injected. Direct visualization of viruses moving in the retrograde direction in axons also indicates a role for dynein. HCV, hepatitis C virus; HSV, herpes simplex virus; NS5A, genome polyprotein; N, nucleocapsid; RAB, RAS-related protein.

activates dynein–dynactin to drive the movement of satellite components towards the MTOC<sup>179</sup>.

Finally, dynein also has a role in tethering centrosomes to the nucleus. Depletion of BICD2 or RANBP2, which are located in the nucleus, severs the tight association of centrosomes and the nucleus<sup>134</sup>.

## Viruses

There are seven classes of viruses, and members from every class use dynein for some aspect of their life cycle (TABLE 2). The most common roles are related to viral replication. For example, DNA and RNA viruses that replicate in the nucleus use dynein motility to reach it<sup>180–183</sup>. Some retroviruses, which reverse transcribe their RNA genomes into DNA in the cytoplasm, use dynein to deliver the DNA to the nucleus for integration into the nuclear genome<sup>184</sup>. In addition, some DNA and RNA viruses that replicate in the cytoplasm in ‘perinuclear factories’ also require dynein to accumulate at these sites<sup>185–189</sup>.

In addition to using dynein to reach their site of replication, some viruses use dynein at other stages of their life cycles. Rabies virus uses dynein for motility along neural axons, which allows it to spread from the site of infection to other parts of the nervous system<sup>190</sup>. Dengue virus may use dynein during the assembly of new viral particles<sup>189</sup>. Hepatitis C virus triggers dynein-dependent clustering of lipid droplets at the MTOC, which are then incorporated into newly formed viral particles<sup>191</sup>. Hepatitis B virus uses dynein to cluster mitochondria close to the nucleus, perhaps to provide energy for its replication<sup>192</sup>. Finally, there is evidence that influenza virus requires dynein to disassemble the viral capsid to release its RNA to the cytoplasm. HDAC6 is also required for this release step, suggesting that HDAC6 serves as a dynein adaptor in this context<sup>193</sup>.

The connections between viruses and dynein during viral particle transport can either be direct or indirect. Examples of viruses that use direct interactions include herpes simplex virus and pseudorabies virus<sup>194</sup>. In these cases, the viral inner tegument proteins (which are attached to the capsid) are required for dynein binding<sup>195</sup>. The prime candidate for interaction with dynein is pUL36, which is a potential activating adaptor of dynein, as it is active in a relocation assay<sup>196</sup> (BOX 2). Adenoviral particles may also travel by direct interaction with dynein after infection and may use this transport to reach the nucleus<sup>197</sup>. The adenovirus capsid protein, hexon, immunoprecipitates with dynein and interacts with both the DLIC and DIC<sup>108</sup>. The interaction with dynein is stimulated by phosphorylation of the RAS-like domain of DLIC<sup>35</sup>, suggesting a direct interaction with dynein. However, the role of dynactin in adenoviral intracellular transport is less clear, as dynactin did not immunoprecipitate with hexon<sup>108</sup>, but p50 overexpression (BOX 1) blocked nuclear accumulation of the adenovirus<sup>197</sup>. There is also evidence that other viruses interact directly with dynein–dynactin<sup>184,188,199</sup>.

Examples of indirect dynein-based transport involve viruses that move intracellularly within endosomes. Adeno-associated viral particles, for example, which move along neural axons, co-localize with RAB7 vesicles<sup>181</sup>. Rabies viral particles also move within vesicles and, in this form, are transported along neuronal axons<sup>190</sup>. Their dynein-directed movement depends on the envelope glycoprotein, as it was shown that incorporating this protein into retroviral capsids allows retrograde transport of retroviral particles along axons<sup>200</sup>. How the viral glycoprotein regulates dynein is a mystery, as it is localized within the moving endosome rather than on its cytoplasmic face.

# Conclusions and perspectives

While a vast number of dynein cargoes have been described, there are likely to be many more. For example, recent proteomic experiments have identified a number of putative new cargoes linked to dynein by the BICD1, BICD2, HOOK1, HOOK3, NIN or NINL activating adaptors<sup>98</sup>. Here, we have focused largely on cargoes that dynein translocates along microtubules, but dynein can also function anchored at the cell cortex, where it can capture the plus ends of dynamic microtubules<sup>201</sup>. New dynein cargoes may include specific cortical sites that anchor dynein, as suggested by studies that find dynein on the cortex at adherens junctions<sup>202</sup> and focal adhesions<sup>203</sup>, and the numerous cortically localized proteins found in the dynein interactome<sup>98</sup>.

This large number of dynein cargoes raises many questions related to how dynein achieves cargo specificity. What molecular interactions mediate binding of dynein to new cargoes? Do some cargoes hitchhike rather than recruit dynein directly<sup>53</sup>?

In this Review, we have emphasized the role of activating adaptors in dynein–dynactin motility. A question for the future will be to determine if all dynein cargoes, including viruses, require an activating adaptor. Reconstitution experiments will be required to verify if all current candidate activating adaptors (that is, BICD1, HOOK2, CCDC88A, CCDC88B, CCDC88C, TRAK1, TRAK2, NUMA and HAP1) are indeed able to activate dynein–dynactin motility. If there are fewer activating adaptors than cargoes, how does dynein achieve cargo specificity? Additional proteins that are not activating adaptors are likely required to regulate dynein. For example, as discussed above, the dynein–dynactin interacting proteins, RILP, JIP3 and HTT may be involved in adding cargo specificity to an already activated dynein–dynactin complex.

There may also be mechanisms to activate dynein that do not require activating adaptors. Presumably, these factors will also release dynein from its autoinhibited φ-conformation<sup>17</sup>. It is also possible that large clusters of dynein motors could overcome the need for activating adaptors or even for the interaction with dynactin, as dynein groups can processively move beads in vitro in the absence of both dynactin and any activator<sup>204</sup>.

Finally, while we have focused on dynein-based movements in this Review, many cargoes move bidirectionally<sup>205</sup>. Some cargoes that move bidirectionally can switch directions rapidly, implying that there is coordination between motors with opposite polarity. What regulates this coordination? Do activating adaptors, some of which can also bind kinesins<sup>61,98,206</sup>, have a role in this process?

Published online 16 Apr 2018

1. Gibbons, I. R. & Rowe, A. J. Dynein: a protein with adenosine triphosphatase activity from cilia. *Science* **149**, 424–426 (1965). Describes the original discovery of dynein.
2. Paschal, B. M., Shpetner, H. S. & Vallee, R. B. MAP 1C is a microtubule-activated ATPase which translocates microtubules in vitro and has dynein-like properties. *J. Cell Biol.* **105**, 1273–1282 (1987). Describes the discovery of cytoplasmic dynein 1.
3. Paschal, B. M. & Vallee, R. B. Retrograde transport by the microtubule-associated protein MAP 1C. *Nature* **330**, 181–183 (1987). Shows that cytoplasmic dynein 1 is a minus-end-directed motor.
4. Pazour, G. J., Dickert, B. L. & Witman, G. B. The DHC1b (DHC2) isoform of cytoplasmic dynein is required for flagellar assembly. *J. Cell Biol.* **144**, 473–481 (1999).
5. Porter, M. E., Bower, R., Knott, J. A., Byrd, P. & Dentler, W. Cytoplasmic dynein heavy chain 1b is required for flagellar assembly in Chlamydomonas. *Mol. Biol. Cell* **10**, 693–712 (1999).
6. Gepner, J. et al. Cytoplasmic dynein function is essential in *Drosophila melanogaster*. *Genetics* **142**, 865–878 (1996).
7. Harada, A. et al. Golgi vesiculation and lysosome dispersion in cells lacking cytoplasmic dynein. *J. Cell Biol.* **141**, 51–59 (1998). Characterization of dynein knockout mice, which shows that dynein is essential during development.
8. Lipka, J., Kuijpers, M., Jaworski, J. & Hoogenraad, C. C. Mutations in cytoplasmic dynein and its regulators cause malformations of cortical development and neurodegenerative diseases. *Biochem. Soc. Trans.* **41**, 1605–1612 (2013).
9. Raaijmakers, J. A. & Medema, R. H. Function and regulation of dynein in mitotic chromosome segregation. *Chromosoma* **123**, 407–422 (2014).
10. Gill, S. R. et al. Dynactin, a conserved, ubiquitously expressed component of an activator of vesicle motility mediated by cytoplasmic dynein. *J. Cell Biol.* **115**, 1639–1650 (1991).
11. Schroer, T. A. & Sheetz, M. P. Two activators of microtubule-based vesicle transport. *J. Cell Biol.* **115**, 1309–1318 (1991). Along with reference 10, describes the discovery of dynactin.
12. Splinter, D. et al. BICD2, dynactin, and LIS1 cooperate in regulating dynein recruitment to cellular structures. *Mol. Biol. Cell* **23**, 4226–4241 (2012). Shows that the N-terminal domain of BICD2 strengthens the interaction between dynein and dynactin and activates motility in cells.
13. Mohler, J. & Wieschaus, E. F. Dominant maternal-effect mutations of *Drosophila melanogaster* causing the production of double-abdomen embryos. *Genetics* **112**, 803–822 (1986).
14. McKenney, R. J., Huynh, W., Tanenbaum, M. E., Bhabha, G. & Vale, R. D. Activation of cytoplasmic dynein motility by dynactin-cargo adapter complexes. *Science* **345**, 337–341 (2014).
15. Schlager, M. A., Hoang, H. T., Urnavicius, L., Bullock, S. L. & Carter, A. P. In vitro reconstitution of a highly processive recombinant human dynein complex. *EMBO J.* **33**, 1855–1868 (2014). Along with reference 14, shows that coiled-coil containing activators like BICD2, along with dynactin, activate mammalian dynein to move processively.
16. Urnavicius, L. et al. Cryo-EM shows how dynactin recruits two dyneins for faster movement. *Nature* **554**, 202–206 (2018). Describes the high-resolution structure of the dynein tail and shows that some activating adaptors preferentially recruit two dynein dimers.
17. Urnavicius, L. et al. The structure of the dynactin complex and its interaction with dynein. *Science* **347**, 1441–1446 (2015). Reveals the structural basis for dynein activation by dynactin and the activating adaptor, BICD2.
18. Zhang, K. et al. Cryo-EM reveals how human cytoplasmic dynein is auto-inhibited and activated. *Cell* **169**, 1303–1314.e18 (2017). Demonstrates how dynactin activates the ability of dynein to move long distances.
19. Kon, T. et al. The 2.8 Å crystal structure of the dynein motor domain. *Nature* **484**, 345–350 (2012).
20. Schmidt, H., Gleave, E. S. & Carter, A. P. Insights into dynein motor domain function from a 3.3 Å crystal structure. *Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol.* **19**, 492–7, S1 (2012).
21. Schmidt, H., Zalyte, R., Urnavicius, L. & Carter, A. P. Structure of human cytoplasmic dynein-2 primed for its power stroke. *Nature* **518**, 435–438 (2015).
22. Lee, I. G. et al. A conserved interaction of the dynein light intermediate chain with dynein-dynactin effectors necessary for processivity. *Nat. Commun.* **9**, 986 (2018).
23. Schroeder, C. M., Ostrem, J. M., Hertz, N. T. & Vale, R. D. A. Ras-like domain in the light intermediate chain bridges the dynein motor to a cargo-binding region. *eLife* **3**, e03351 (2014). Identifies the C-terminus of the DLIC as a binding site for activating adaptors.
24. Schroeder, C. M. & Vale, R. D. Assembly and activation of dynein-dynactin by the cargo adaptor protein Hook3. *J. Cell Biol.* **214**, 309–318 (2016).
25. Carter, A. P., Diamant, A. G. & Urnavicius, L. How dynein and dynactin transport cargos: a structural perspective. *Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol.* **37**, 62–70 (2016).
26. Waterman-Storer, C. M., Karki, S. & Holzbaur, E. L. The p150Glued component of the dynactin complex binds to both microtubules and the actin-related protein centrin (Arp-1). *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **92**, 1634–1638 (1995).
27. Gama, J. B. et al. Molecular mechanism of dynein recruitment to kinetochores by the Rod-Zw10-Zwilch complex and Spindly. *J. Cell Biol.* **216**, 943–960 (2017). Identifies the CC1 box for DLIC binding in activating adaptors.
28. Horgan, C. P., Hanscom, S. R., Jolly, R. S., Futter, C. E. & McCaffrey, M. W. Rab11-FIP3 links the Rab11 GTPase and cytoplasmic dynein to mediate transport to the endosomal-recycling compartment. *J. Cell Sci.* **123**, 181–191 (2010).
29. Grotjahn, D. A. et al. Cryo-electron tomography reveals that dynactin recruits a team of dyneins for processive motility. *Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol.* **25**, 203–207 (2018). Along with reference 16, shows that dynactin can recruit two dynein dimers.
30. Siglin, A. E. et al. Dynein and dynactin leverage their bivalent character to form a high-affinity interaction. *PLoS ONE* **8**, e59453 (2013).
31. Kobayashi, T., Miyashita, T., Murayama, T. & Toyoshima, Y. Y. Dynactin has two antagonistic regulatory domains and exerts opposing effects on dynein motility. *PLoS ONE* **12**, e0183672 (2017).
32. Torisawa, T. et al. Autoinhibition and cooperative activation mechanisms of cytoplasmic dynein. *Nat. Cell Biol.* **16**, 1118–1124 (2014).
33. Cavalli, V., Kujala, P., Klumperman, J. & Goldstein, L. S. Sunday Driver links axonal transport to damage signaling. *J. Cell Biol.* **168**, 775–787 (2005).
34. Jordens, I. et al. The Rab7 effector protein RILP controls lysosomal transport by inducing the recruitment of dynein-dynactin motors. *Curr. Biol.* **11**, 1680–1685 (2001).
35. Scherer, J., Yi, J. & Vallee, R. B. PKA-dependent dynein switching from lysosomes to adenovirus: a novel form of host-virus competition. *J. Cell Biol.* **205**, 163–177 (2014).
36. Cianfrocco, M. A., DeSantis, M. E., Leschziner, A. E. & Reck-Peterson, S. L. Mechanism and regulation of cytoplasmic dynein. *Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol.* **31**, 83–108 (2015).
37. DeSantis, M. E. et al. Lis1 has two opposing modes of regulating cytoplasmic dynein. *Cell* **170**, 1197–1208. e12 (2017). Shows that LIS1 has two functionally distinct binding sites on the dynein motor domain.
38. Huang, J., Roberts, A. J., Leschziner, A. E. & Reck-Peterson, S. L. Lis1 acts as a “clutch” between the ATPase and microtubule-binding domains of the dynein motor. *Cell* **150**, 975–986 (2012).
39. McKenney, R. J., Weil, S. J., Scherer, J. & Vallee, R. B. Mutually exclusive cytoplasmic dynein regulation by NudE-Lis1 and dynactin. *J. Biol. Chem.* **286**, 39615–39622 (2011).
40. Wang, S. & Zheng, Y. Identification of a novel dynein binding domain in nudel essential for spindle pole organization in Xenopus egg extract. *J. Biol. Chem.* **286**, 587–593 (2011).
41. Zykiewicz, E. et al. The N-terminal coiled-coil of Ndel1 is a regulated scaffold that recruits LIS1 to dynein. *J. Cell Biol.* **192**, 433–445 (2011).
42. Torisawa, T. et al. Functional dissection of LIS1 and NDEL1 towards understanding the molecular mechanisms of cytoplasmic dynein regulation. *J. Biol. Chem.* **286**, 1959–1965 (2011).
43. Yamada, M. et al. LIS1 and NDEL1 coordinate the plus-end-directed transport of cytoplasmic dynein. *EMBO J.* **27**, 2471–2483 (2008).
44. Baumbach, J. et al. Lissencephaly-1 is a context-dependent regulator of the human dynein complex. *eLife* **6**, e21768 (2017).
45. Gutierrez, P. A., Ackermann, B. E., Vershinin, M. & McKenney, R. J. Differential effects of the dynein-regulatory factor Lissencephaly-1 on processive dynein-dynactin motility. *J. Biol. Chem.* **292**, 12245–12255 (2017).
46. Wang, S. et al. Nudel/NudE and Lis1 promote dynein and dynactin interaction in the context of spindle morphogenesis. *Mol. Biol. Cell* **24**, 3522–3533 (2013).
47. Seksek, O., Biwersi, J. & Verkman, A. S. Translational diffusion of macromolecule-sized solutes in cytoplasm and nucleus. *J. Cell Biol.* **138**, 131–142 (1997).
48. Hutagalung, A. H. & Novick, P. J. Role of Rab GTPases in membrane traffic and cell physiology. *Physiol. Rev.* **91**, 119–149 (2011).
49. Wozniak, M. J. et al. Role of kinesin-1 and cytoplasmic dynein in endoplasmic reticulum movement in VERO cells. *J. Cell Sci.* **122**, 1797–1989 (2009).
50. Valenzuela, J. I. et al. Transport along the dendritic endoplasmic reticulum mediates the trafficking of GABAB receptors. *J. Cell Sci.* **127**, 3382–3395 (2014).
51. Presley, J. F. et al. ER-to-Golgi transport visualized in living cells. *Nature* **389**, 81–85 (1997). Elegantly demonstrates the role of dynein in transporting proteins from the ER to the Golgi apparatus.
52. Roghi, C. & Allan, V. J. Dynamic association of cytoplasmic dynein heavy chain 1a with the Golgi apparatus and intermediate compartment. *J. Cell Sci.* **112**, 4673–4685 (1999).
53. Salogiannis, J. & Reck-Peterson, S. L. Hitchhiking: a non-canonical mode of microtubule-based transport. *Trends Cell Biol.* **27**, 141–150 (2017).
54. Guimaraes, S. C. et al. Peroxisomes, lipid droplets, and endoplasmic reticulum “hitchhike” on motile early endosomes. *J. Cell Biol.* **211**, 945–954 (2015).
55. Wedlich-Soldner, R., Straube, A., Friedrich, M. W. & Steinberg, G. A balance of KIF1A-like kinesin and dynein organizes early endosomes in the fungus Ustilago maydis. *EMBO J.* **21**, 2946–2957 (2002).
56. Burkhardt, J. K., Echeverri, C. J., Nilsson, T. & Vallee, R. B. Overexpression of the dynamitin (p50) subunit of the dynactin complex disrupts dynein-dependent maintenance of membrane organelle distribution. *J. Cell Biol.* **139**, 469–484 (1997).
57. Hoogenraad, C. C. et al. Mammalian Golgi-associated Bicaudal-D2 functions in the dynein-dynactin pathway by interacting with these complexes. *EMBO J.* **20**, 4041–4054 (2001). Demonstrates a link between BICD2 and dynein-dynactin.
58. Matanis, T. et al. Bicaudal-D regulates COPI-independent Golgi-ER transport by recruiting the dynein-dynactin motor complex. *Nat. Cell Biol.* **4**, 986–992 (2002). Shows that BICD proteins recruit dynein to RAB6-labelled Golgi vesicles.
59. Yadav, S., Puthenveedu, M. A. & Linstedt, A. D. Golgin 160 recruits the dynein motor to position the Golgi apparatus. *Dev. Cell* **23**, 153–165 (2012).
60. Schlager, M. A. et al. Bicaudal d family adaptor proteins control the velocity of Dynein-based movements. *Cell Rep.* **8**, 1248–1256 (2014).
61. Schlager, M. A. et al. Pericentrosomal targeting of Rab6 secretory vesicles by Bicaudal-D-related protein 1 (BICDR-1) regulates neuritogenesis. *EMBO J.* **29**, 1637–1651 (2010).
62. Nokes, R. L., Fields, I. C., Collins, R. N. & Folsch, H. Rab13 regulates membrane trafficking between TGN and recycling endosomes in polarized epithelial cells. *J. Cell Biol.* **182**, 845–853 (2008).
63. Bachmann-Gagescu, R. et al. The ciliopathy protein CC2D2A associates with NINL and functions in RAB8-MICAL3-regulated vesicle trafficking. *PLoS Genet.* **11**, e1005575 (2015).
64. Baron Gaillard, C. L. et al. Hook2 is involved in the morphogenesis of the primary cilium. *Mol. Biol. Cell* **22**, 4549–4562 (2011).
65. Driskell, O. J., Mironov, A., Allan, V. J. & Woodman, P. G. Dynein is required for receptor sorting and the morphogenesis of early endosomes. *Nat. Cell Biol.* **9**, 113–120 (2007).
66. Heerssen, H. M., Pazyra, M. F. & Segal, R. A. Dynein motors transport activated Trks to promote survival of target-dependent neurons. *Nat. Neurosci.* **7**, 596–604 (2004).

REVIEWs

67. Kramer, H. & Phistry, M. Mutations in the *Drosophila* hook gene inhibit endocytosis of the boss transmembrane ligand into multivesicular bodies. *J. Cell Biol.* **133**, 1205–1215 (1996).

68. Bielska, E. et al. Hook is an adapter that coordinates kinesin-3 and dynein cargo attachment on early endosomes. *J. Cell Biol.* **204**, 989–1007 (2014).

69. Zhang, J. et al. HookA is a novel dynein-early endosome linker critical for cargo movement in vivo. *J. Cell Biol.* **204**, 1009–1026 (2014). Along with reference 68, identifies a role for Hook proteins in dynein-based endosome motility.

70. Guo, X., Farias, G. G., Mattera, R. & Bonifacino, J. S. Rab5 and its effector FHF contribute to neuronal polarity through dynein-dependent retrieval of somatodendritic proteins from the axon. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **113**, E5318–E5327 (2016).

71. Xu, L. et al. An FTS/Hook/p107(FHIP) complex interacts with and promotes endosomal clustering by the homotypic vacuolar protein sorting complex. *Mol. Biol. Cell* **19**, 5059–5071 (2008).

72. Yao, X., Wang, X. & Xiang, X. FHIP and FTS proteins are critical for dynein-mediated transport of early endosomes in *Aspergillus*. *Mol. Biol. Cell* **25**, 2181–2189 (2014).

73. Gillingham, A. K., Sinka, R., Torres, I. L., Lilley, K. S. & Munro, S. Toward a comprehensive map of the effectors of rab GTPases. *Dev. Cell* **31**, 358–373 (2014).

74. Gauthier, L. R. et al. Huntingtin controls neurotrophic support and survival of neurons by enhancing BDNF vesicular transport along microtubules. *Cell* **118**, 127–138 (2004).

75. Caviston, J. P., Ross, J. L., Antony, S. M., Tokito, M. & Holzbaur, E. L. Huntingtin facilitates dynein/dynactin-mediated vesicle transport. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **104**, 10045–10050 (2007).

76. Engelender, S. et al. Huntingtin-associated protein 1 (HAP1) interacts with the p150Glued subunit of dynactin. *Hum. Mol. Genet.* **6**, 2205–2212 (1997).

77. Johansson, M. et al. Activation of endosomal dynein motors by stepwise assembly of Rab7-RILP-p150Glued, ORP1L, and the receptor betall spectrin. *J. Cell Biol.* **176**, 459–471 (2007).

78. Wu, M., Wang, T., Loh, E., Hong, W. & Song, H. Structural basis for recruitment of RILP by small GTPase Rab7. *EMBO J.* **24**, 1491–1501 (2005).

79. Spang, A. Membrane tethering complexes in the endosomal system. *Front. Cell Dev. Biol.* **4**, 35 (2016).

80. Lin, X. et al. RILP interacts with HOPS complex via VPS41 subunit to regulate endocytic trafficking. *Sci. Rep.* **4**, 7282 (2014).

81. van der Kant, R. et al. Late endosomal transport and tethering are coupled processes controlled by RILP and the cholesterol sensor ORP1L. *J. Cell Sci.* **126**, 3462–3474 (2013).

82. Szatmari, Z. et al. Rab11 facilitates cross-talk between autophagy and endosomal pathway through regulation of Hook localization. *Mol. Biol. Cell* **25**, 522–531 (2014).

83. Pu, J., Guardia, C. M., Keren-Kaplan, T. & Bonifacino, J. S. Mechanisms and functions of lysosome positioning. *J. Cell Sci.* **129**, 4329–4339 (2016).

84. Drerup, C. M. & Nechiporuk, A. V. JNK-interacting protein 3 mediates the retrograde transport of activated c-Jun N-terminal kinase and lysosomes. *PLoS Genet.* **9**, e1003303 (2013).

85. Lorenzo, D. N. et al. A PIK3C3-ankyrin-B-dynactin pathway promotes axonal growth and multiorganelle transport. *J. Cell Biol.* **207**, 735–752 (2014).

86. Cai, Q. et al. Snapin-regulated late endosomal transport is critical for efficient autophagy-lysosomal function in neurons. *Neuron* **68**, 73–86 (2010).

87. Holleran, E. A., Tokito, M. K., Karki, S. & Holzbaur, E. L. Centractin (ARP1) associates with spectrin revealing a potential mechanism to link dynactin to intracellular organelles. *J. Cell Biol.* **135**, 1815–1829 (1996).

88. Schmieg, N., Menendez, G., Schiavo, G. & Terenzio, M. Signalling endosomes in axonal transport: travel updates on the molecular highway. *Semin. Cell Dev. Biol.* **27**, 32–43 (2014).

89. Delcroix, J. D. et al. NGF signaling in sensory neurons: evidence that early endosomes carry NGF retrograde signals. *Neuron* **39**, 69–84 (2003).

90. Saxena, S., Bucci, C., Weis, J. & Kruttgen, A. The small GTPase Rab7 controls the endosomal trafficking and neuritogenic signaling of the nerve growth factor receptor TrkA. *J. Neurosci.* **25**, 10930–10940 (2005).

91. Welz, T., Wellbourne-Wood, J. & Kerkhoff, E. Orchestration of cell surface proteins by Rab11. *Trends Cell Biol.* **24**, 407–415 (2014).

92. Horgan, C. P. et al. Rab11-FIP3 is critical for the structural integrity of the endosomal recycling compartment. *Traffic* **8**, 414–430 (2007).

93. Wang, J. & Deretic, D. The Arf and Rab11 effector FIP3 acts synergistically with ASAP1 to direct Rabin8 in ciliary receptor targeting. *J. Cell Sci.* **128**, 1375–1385 (2015).

94. Wilson, G. M. et al. The FIP3-Rab11 protein complex regulates recycling endosome targeting to the cleavage furrow during late cytokinesis. *Mol. Biol. Cell* **16**, 849–860 (2005).

95. Montagnac, G. et al. ARF6 Interacts with JIP4 to control a motor switch mechanism regulating endosome traffic in cytokinesis. *Curr. Biol.* **19**, 184–195 (2009).

96. Reilein, A. R. et al. Differential regulation of dynein-driven melanosome movement. *Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun.* **309**, 652–658 (2003).

97. Dona, M. et al. NINL and DZANK1 co-function in vesicle transport and are essential for photoreceptor development in zebrafish. *PLoS Genet.* **11**, e1005574 (2015).

98. Redwine, W. B. et al. The human cytoplasmic dynein interactome reveals novel activators of motility. *eLife* **6**, e28257 (2017). A proteomics resource of the cytoplasmic dynein interactome.

99. Kimura, S., Noda, T. & Yoshimori, T. Dynein-dependent movement of autophagosomes mediates efficient encounters with lysosomes. *Cell Struct. Funct.* **33**, 109–122 (2008).

100. Maday, S., Wallace, K. E. & Holzbaur, E. L. Autophagosomes initiate distally and mature during transport toward the cell soma in primary neurons. *J. Cell Biol.* **196**, 407–417 (2012).

101. Cheng, X. T., Zhou, B., Lin, M. Y., Cai, Q. & Sheng, Z. H. Axonal autophagosomes recruit dynein for retrograde transport through fusion with late endosomes. *J. Cell Biol.* **209**, 377–386 (2015).

102. Lee, S., Sato, Y. & Nixon, R. A. Lysosomal proteolysis inhibition selectively disrupts axonal transport of degradative organelles and causes an Alzheimer’s-like axonal dystrophy. *J. Neurosci.* **31**, 7817–7830 (2011).

103. Maday, S. & Holzbaur, E. L. Compartment-specific regulation of autophagy in primary neurons. *J. Neurosci.* **36**, 5933–5945 (2016).

104. Ravikumar, B. et al. Dynein mutations impair autophagic clearance of aggregate-prone proteins. *Nat. Genet.* **37**, 771–776 (2005).

105. Wong, Y. C. & Holzbaur, E. L. The regulation of autophagosome dynamics by huntingtin and HAP1 is disrupted by expression of mutant huntingtin, leading to defective cargo degradation. *J. Neurosci.* **34**, 1293–1305 (2014).

106. Fu, M. M., Nirschl, J. J. & Holzbaur, E. L. LC3 binding to the scaffolding protein JIP1 regulates processive dynein-driven transport of autophagosomes. *Dev. Cell* **29**, 577–590 (2014).

107. Klinman, E. & Holzbaur, E. L. Comparative analysis of axonal transport markers in primary mammalian neurons. *Methods Cell Biol.* **131**, 409–424 (2016). Shows different types of retrograde transport of many key cargoes in axons.

108. Hollenbeck, P. J. & Saxton, W. M. The axonal transport of mitochondria. *J. Cell Sci.* **118**, 5411–5419 (2005).

109. Pilling, A. D., Horiuchi, D., Lively, C. M. & Saxton, W. M. Kinesin-1 and Dynein are the primary motors for fast transport of mitochondria in *Drosophila* motor axons. *Mol. Biol. Cell* **17**, 2057–2068 (2006).

110. Schwarz, T. L. Mitochondrial trafficking in neurons. *Cold Spring Harb. Perspect. Biol.* **5**, a011304 (2013).

111. van Spronsen, M. et al. TRAK/Milton motor-adaptor proteins steer mitochondrial trafficking to axons and dendrites. *Neuron* **77**, 485–502 (2013).

112. Neuhaus, A., Eggeling, C., Erdmann, R. & Schliebs, W. Why do peroxisomes associate with the cytoskeleton? *Biochim. Biophys. Acta* **1863**, 1019–1026 (2016).

113. Schrader, M., King, S. J., Stroh, T. A. & Schroer, T. A. Real time imaging reveals a peroxisomal reticulum in living cells. *J. Cell Sci.* **113**, 3663–3671 (2000).

114. Okumoto, K. et al. New splicing variants of mitochondrial Rho GTPase-1 (Miro) transport peroxisomes. *J. Cell Biol.* **217**, 619–633 (2017).

115. Egan, M. J., Tan, K. & Reck-Petersen, S. L. Lis1 is an initiation factor for dynein-driven organelle transport. *J. Cell Biol.* **197**, 971–982 (2012).

116. Salogiannis, J., Egan, M. J. & Reck-Petersen, S. L. Peroxisomes move by hitchhiking on early endosomes using the novel linker protein PxdA. *J. Cell Biol.* **212**, 289–296 (2016).

117. Thiam, A. R., Farese, R. V. Jr & Walther, T. C. The biophysics and cell biology of lipid droplets. *Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol.* **14**, 775–786 (2013).

118. Targett-Adams, P. et al. Live cell analysis and targeting of the lipid droplet-binding adipocyte differentiation-related protein. *J. Biol. Chem.* **278**, 15998–16007 (2003).

119. Gross, S. P., Welte, M. A., Block, S. M. & Wieschaus, E. F. Dynein-mediated cargo transport in vivo. A switch controls travel distance. *J. Cell Biol.* **148**, 945–956 (2000).

120. Shubeita, G. T. et al. Consequences of motor copy number on the intracellular transport of kinesin-1-driven lipid droplets. *Cell* **135**, 1098–1107 (2008).

121. Larsen, K. S., Xu, J., Cermelli, S., Shu, Z. & Gross, S. P. BicaudalD actively regulates microtubule motor activity in lipid droplet transport. *PLoS ONE* **3**, e3763 (2008).

122. McNally, F. J. Mechanisms of spindle positioning. *J. Cell Biol.* **200**, 131–140 (2013).

123. Moore, J. K., Stuchell-Brereton, M. D. & Cooper, J. A. Function of dynein in budding yeast: mitotic spindle positioning in a polarized cell. *Cell. Motil. Cytoskeleton* **66**, 546–555 (2009).

124. Plamann, M., Minke, P. F., Tinsley, J. H. & Bruno, K. S. Cytoplasmic dynein and actin-related protein Arp1 are required for normal nuclear distribution in filamentous fungi. *J. Cell Biol.* **127**, 139–149 (1994).

125. Xiang, X., Beckwith, S. M. & Morris, N. R. Cytoplasmic dynein is involved in nuclear migration in *Aspergillus nidulans*. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **91**, 2100–2104 (1994).

126. Gonczy, P., Pichler, S., Kirkham, M. & Hyman, A. A. Cytoplasmic dynein is required for distinct aspects of MTOC positioning, including centrosome separation, in the one cell stage *Caenorhabditis elegans* embryo. *J. Cell Biol.* **147**, 135–150 (1999).

127. Dujardin, D. L. et al. A role for cytoplasmic dynein and LIS1 in directed cell movement. *J. Cell Biol.* **163**, 1205–1211 (2003).

128. Tsai, J. W., Bremner, K. H. & Vallee, R. B. Dual subcellular roles for LIS1 and dynein in radial neuronal migration in live brain tissue. *Nat. Neurosci.* **10**, 970–979 (2007).

129. Tsai, J. W., Lian, W. N., Kemal, S., Kriegstein, A. R. & Vallee, R. B. Kinesin 3 and cytoplasmic dynein mediate interkinetic nuclear migration in neural stem cells. *Nat. Neurosci.* **13**, 1463–1471 (2010).

130. Cadot, B., Gache, V. & Gomes, E. R. Moving and positioning the nucleus in skeletal muscle—one step at a time. *Nucleus* **6**, 373–381 (2015).

131. Folker, E. S., Schulman, V. K. & Baylies, M. K. Translocating myonuclei have distinct leading and lagging edges that require kinesin and dynein. *Development* **141**, 355–366 (2014).

132. Radulescu, A. E. & Cleveland, D. W. NuMA after 30 years: the matrix revisited. *Trends Cell Biol.* **20**, 214–222 (2010).

133. Hu, D. J. et al. Dynein recruitment to nuclear pores activates apical nuclear migration and mitotic entry in brain progenitor cells. *Cell* **154**, 1300–1313 (2013).

134. Splinter, D. et al. Bicaudal D2, dynein, and kinesin-1 associate with nuclear pore complexes and regulate centrosome and nuclear positioning during mitotic entry. *PLoS Biol.* **8**, e1000350 (2010). Demonstrates a role for BICD2 in dynein recruitment to nuclear pores.

135. Bolhy, S. et al. A Nup133-dependent NPC-anchored network tethers centrosomes to the nuclear envelope in prophase. *J. Cell Biol.* **192**, 855–871 (2011).

136. Malone, C. J. et al. The *C. elegans* hook protein, ZYG-12, mediates the essential attachment between the centrosome and nucleus. *Cell* **115**, 825–832 (2003).

137. Bullock, S. L. Messengers, motors and mysteries: sorting of eukaryotic mRNAs by cytoskeletal transport. *Biochem. Soc. Trans.* **39**, 1161–1165 (2011).

138. Bullock, S. L. & Ish-Horowicz, D. Conserved signals and machinery for RNA transport in *Drosophila* oogenesis and embryogenesis. *Nature* **414**, 611–616 (2001). Demonstrates a role for BicD in RNA localization.

139. Wilkie, G. S. & Davis, I. *Drosophila* wingless and pair-rule transcripts localize apically by dynein-mediated transport of RNA particles. *Cell* **105**, 209–219 (2001).

140. Gershoni-Emek, N. et al. Proteomic analysis of dynein-interacting proteins in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis synaptosomes reveals alterations in the RNA-binding protein Staufen1. *Mol. Cell Proteom.* **15**, 506–522 (2016).

141. van Niekerk, E. A. et al. Sumoylation in axons triggers retrograde transport of the RNA-binding protein La. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **104**, 12913–12918 (2007).

142. Dienstbier, M., Boehl, F., Li, X. & Bullock, S. L. Egalitarian is a selective RNA-binding protein linking mRNA localization signals to the dynein motor. *Genes Dev.* **23**, 1546–1558 (2009).

143. Weil, T. T. mRNA localization in the *Drosophila* germline. *RNA Biol.* **11**, 1010–1018 (2014).

144. Clark, A., Meignin, C. & Davis, I. A. Dynein-dependent shortcut rapidly delivers axis determination transcripts into the *Drosophila* oocyte. *Development* **134**, 1955–1965 (2007).

145. Mische, S., Li, M., Serr, M. & Hays, T. S. Direct observation of regulated ribonucleoprotein transport across the nurse cell/oocyte boundary. *Mol. Biol. Cell* **18**, 2254–2263 (2007).

146. Weil, T. T., Forrest, K. M. & Gavis, E. R. Localization of bicoid mRNA in late oocytes is maintained by continual active transport. *Dev. Cell* **11**, 251–262 (2006).

147. Bianco, A., Dienstbier, M., Salter, H. K., Gatto, G. & Bullock, S. L. Bicaudal-D regulates fragile X mental retardation protein levels, motility, and function during neuronal morphogenesis. *Curr. Biol.* **20**, 1487–1492 (2010).

148. Haag, C., Steuten, B. & Feldbrugge, M. Membrane-coupled mRNA trafficking in fungi. *Annu. Rev. Microbiol.* **69**, 265–281 (2015).

149. Baumann, S., König, J., Köpke, J. & Feldbrugge, M. Endosomal transport of septin mRNA and protein indicates local translation on endosomes and is required for correct septin filamentation. *EMBO Rep.* **15**, 94–102 (2014).

150. Higuchi, Y., Ashwin, P., Roger, Y. & Steinberg, G. Early endosome motility spatially organizes polysome distribution. *J. Cell Biol.* **204**, 343–357 (2014).

151. Garcia-Mata, R., Gao, Y. S. & Sztul, E. Hassles with taking out the garbage: aggravating aggresomes. *Traffic* **3**, 388–396 (2002).

152. Garcia-Mata, R., Bebok, Z., Sorscher, E. J. & Sztul, E. S. Characterization and dynamics of aggresome formation by a cytosolic GFP-chimera. *J. Cell Biol.* **146**, 1239–1254 (1999).

153. Johnston, J. A., Illing, M. E. & Kopito, R. R. Cytoplasmic dynein/dynactin mediates the assembly of aggresomes. *Cell. Motil. Cytoskeleton* **53**, 26–38 (2002).

154. Kawaguchi, Y. et al. The deacetylase HDAC6 regulates aggresome formation and cell viability in response to misfolded protein stress. *Cell* **115**, 727–738 (2003).

155. Yan, J. et al. SOSTM1/p62 interacts with HDAC6 and regulates deacetylase activity. *PLoS ONE* **8**, e76016 (2013).

156. Calderilla-Barbosa, L. et al. Interaction of SOSTM1 with the motor protein dynein — SOSTM1 is required for normal dynein function and trafficking. *J. Cell Sci.* **127**, 4052–4063 (2014).

157. Gamerding, M., Kaya, A. M., Wolfrum, U., Clement, A. M. & Behl, C. BAG3 mediates chaperone-based aggresome-targeting and selective autophagy of misfolded proteins. *EMBO Rep.* **12**, 149–156 (2011).

158. Xu, Z. et al. 14-3-3 protein targets misfolded chaperone-associated proteins to aggresomes. *J. Cell Sci.* **126**, 4173–4186 (2013).

159. Perry, R. B. & Fainzilber, M. Local translation in neuronal processes — in vivo tests of a “heretical hypothesis”. *Dev. Neurobiol.* **74**, 210–217 (2014).

160. Ben-Yakov, K. et al. Axonal transcription factors signal retrogradely in lesioned peripheral nerve. *EMBO J.* **31**, 1350–1363 (2012).

161. Hanz, S. et al. Axoplasmic importins enable retrograde injury signaling in lesioned nerve. *Neuron* **40**, 1095–1104 (2003).

162. Lowery, J., Kuczmarski, E. R., Herrmann, H. & Goldman, R. D. Intermediate filaments play a pivotal role in regulating cell architecture and function. *J. Biol. Chem.* **290**, 17145–17153 (2015).

163. Hookway, C. et al. Microtubule-dependent transport and dynamics of vimentin intermediate filaments. *Mol. Biol. Cell* **26**, 1675–1686 (2015).

164. Helfand, B. T., Mikami, A., Vallee, R. B. & Goldman, R. D. A requirement for cytoplasmic dynein and dynactin in intermediate filament network assembly and organization. *J. Cell Biol.* **157**, 795–806 (2002).

165. Payne, C., Rawe, V., Ramalho-Santos, J., Simerly, C. & Schatten, G. Preferentially localized dynein and perinuclear dynactin associate with nuclear pore complex proteins to mediate genomic union during mammalian fertilization. *J. Cell Sci.* **116**, 4727–4738 (2003).

166. He, Y. et al. Role of cytoplasmic dynein in the axonal transport of microtubules and neurofilaments. *J. Cell Biol.* **168**, 697–703 (2005).

167. Wagner, O. I. et al. The interaction of neurofilaments with the microtubule motor cytoplasmic dynein. *Mol. Biol. Cell* **15**, 5092–5100 (2004).

168. Ahmad, F. J., Echeverri, C. J., Vallee, R. B. & Baas, P. W. Cytoplasmic dynein and dynactin are required for the transport of microtubules into the axon. *J. Cell Biol.* **140**, 391–401 (1998).

169. del Castillo, U., Winding, M., Lu, W. & Gelfand, V. I. Interplay between kinesin-1 and cortical dynein during axonal outgrowth and microtubule organization in *Drosophila* neurons. *eLife* **4**, e10140 (2015).

170. Tang, N. & Marshall, W. F. Centrosome positioning in vertebrate development. *J. Cell Sci.* **125**, 4951–4961 (2012).

171. Jia, Y., Fong, K. W., Choi, Y. K., See, S. S. & Qi, R. Z. Dynamic recruitment of CDK5RAP2 to centrosomes requires its association with dynein. *PLoS ONE* **8**, e68523 (2013).

172. Fong, K. W., Choi, Y. K., Rattner, J. B. & Qi, R. Z. CDK5RAP2 is a pericentrilar protein that functions in centrosomal attachment of the gamma-tubulin ring complex. *Mol. Biol. Cell* **19**, 115–125 (2008).

173. Casenghi, M. et al. Polo-like kinase 1 regulates Nlp, a centrosome protein involved in microtubule nucleation. *Dev. Cell* **5**, 113–125 (2003).

174. Mogensen, M. M., Malik, A., Piel, M., Bouckson-Castaing, V. & Bornens, M. Microtubule minus-end anchorage at centrosomal and non-centrosomal sites: the role of ninein. *J. Cell Sci.* **113**, 3013–3023 (2000).

175. Szebenyi, G., Hall, B., Yu, R., Hashim, A. I. & Kramer, H. Hook2 localizes to the centrosome, binds directly to centriolin/CEP110 and contributes to centrosomal function. *Traffic* **8**, 32–46 (2007).

176. Hori, A. & Toda, T. Regulation of centriolar satellite integrity and its physiology. *Cell. Mol. Life Sci.* **74**, 213–229 (2017).

177. Kim, J. C. et al. The Bardet-Biedl protein BBS4 targets cargo to the pericentrilar region and is required for microtubule anchoring and cell cycle progression. *Nat. Genet.* **36**, 462–470 (2004).

178. Dammermann, A. & Merdes, A. Assembly of centrosomal proteins and microtubule organization depends on PCM-1. *J. Cell Biol.* **159**, 255–266 (2002).

179. Ge, X., Frank, C. L., Calderón de Anda, F. & Tsai, L. H. Hook3 interacts with PCM1 to regulate pericentrilar material assembly and the timing of neurogenesis. *Neuron* **65**, 191–203 (2010).

180. Cao, J. et al. Circovirus transport proceeds via direct interaction of the cytoplasmic dynein IC1 subunit with the viral capsid protein. *J. Virol.* **89**, 2777–2791 (2015).

181. Castle, M. J., Perlson, E., Holzbaur, E. L. & Wolfe, J. H. Long-distance axonal transport of AAV9 is driven by dynein and kinesin-2 and is trafficked in a highly motile Rab7-positive compartment. *Mol. Ther.* **22**, 554–566 (2014).

182. Dodding, M. P. & Way, M. Coupling viruses to dynein and kinesin-1. *EMBO J.* **30**, 3527–3539 (2011).

183. Lakadamyali, M., Rust, M. J., Babcock, H. P. & Zhuang, X. Visualizing infection of individual influenza viruses. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **100**, 9280–9285 (2003).

184. Petit, C. et al. Targeting of incoming retroviral Gag to the centrosome involves a direct interaction with the dynein light chain 8. *J. Cell Sci.* **116**, 3433–3442 (2003).

185. Alonso, C. et al. African swine fever virus protein p54 interacts with the microtubular motor complex through direct binding to light-chain dynein. *J. Virol.* **75**, 9819–9827 (2001).

186. Mainou, B. A. et al. Reovirus cell entry requires functional microtubules. *mBio* **4**, e00405–13 (2013).

187. Ploubidou, A. et al. Vaccinia virus infection disrupts microtubule organization and centrosome function. *EMBO J.* **19**, 3932–3944 (2000).

188. Ramanathan, H. N. et al. Dynein-dependent transport of the hantaan virus nucleocapsid protein to the endoplasmic reticulum-Golgi intermediate compartment. *J. Virol.* **81**, 8634–8647 (2007).

189. Shrivastava, N., Sripada, S., Kaur, J., Shah, P. S. & Cecilia, D. Insights into the internalization and retrograde trafficking of Dengue 2 virus in BHK-21 cells. *PLoS ONE* **6**, e25229 (2011).

190. Klingel, Y., Conzelmann, K. K. & Finke, S. Double-labeled rabies virus: live tracking of enveloped virus transport. *J. Virol.* **82**, 237–245 (2008).

191. Boulant, S. et al. Hepatitis C virus core protein induces lipid droplet redistribution in a microtubule- and dynein-dependent manner. *Traffic* **9**, 1268–1282 (2008).

192. Kim, S. et al. Hepatitis B virus x protein induces perinuclear mitochondrial clustering in microtubule- and Dynein-dependent manners. *J. Virol.* **81**, 1714–1726 (2007).

193. Banerjee, I. et al. Influenza A virus uses the aggresome processing machinery for host cell entry. *Science* **346**, 473–477 (2014).

194. Lycke, E. et al. Herpes simplex virus infection of the human sensory neuron. An electron microscopy study. *Arch. Virol.* **101**, 87–104 (1988).

195. Radtke, K. et al. Plus- and minus-end directed microtubule motors bind simultaneously to herpes simplex virus capsids using different inner tegument structures. *PLoS Pathog.* **6**, e1000991 (2010).

196. Zaichick, S. V. et al. The herpesvirus VP1/2 protein is an effector of dynein-mediated capsid transport and neuroinvasion. *Cell Host Microbe* **13**, 193–203 (2013). Provides evidence that a herpes virus contains a protein that can activate dynein-dynactin transport.

197. Suomalainen, M. et al. Microtubule-dependent plus- and minus end-directed motilities are competing processes for nuclear targeting of adenovirus. *J. Cell Biol.* **144**, 657–672 (1999).

198. Bremner, K. H. et al. Adenovirus transport via direct interaction of cytoplasmic dynein with the viral capsid hexon subunit. *Cell Host Microbe* **6**, 523–535 (2009).

199. Suukkanen, S. et al. Exploitation of microtubule cytoskeleton and dynein during parvoviral traffic toward the nucleus. *J. Virol.* **77**, 10270–10279 (2003).

200. Mazaraki, N. D. et al. Rabies virus glycoprotein pseudotyping of lentiviral vectors enables retrograde axonal transport and access to the nervous system after peripheral delivery. *Hum. Mol. Genet.* **10**, 2109–2121 (2001).

201. Laan, L. et al. Cortical dynein controls microtubule dynamics to generate pulling forces that position microtubule asters. *Cell* **148**, 502–514 (2012).

202. Ligon, L. A., Karki, S., Tokito, M. & Holzbaur, E. L. Dynein binds to beta-catenin and may tether microtubules at adherens junctions. *Nat. Cell Biol.* **3**, 913–917 (2001).

203. Rosse, C. et al. Binding of dynein intermediate chain 2 to paxillin controls focal adhesion dynamics and migration. *J. Cell Sci.* **125**, 3733–3738 (2012).

204. Mallik, R., Rai, A. K., Barak, P., Rai, A. & Kunwar, A. Teamwork in microtubule motors. *Trends Cell Biol.* **23**, 575–582 (2013).

205. Hancock, W. O. Bidirectional cargo transport: moving beyond tug of war. *Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol.* **15**, 615–628 (2014).

206. Grigoriev, I. et al. Rab6 regulates transport and targeting of exocytic carriers. *Dev. Cell* **13**, 305–314 (2007).

207. Block-Galarza, J. et al. Fast transport and retrograde movement of huntingtin and HAP 1 in axons. *Neuroreport* **8**, 2247–2251 (1997).

208. Li, S. H., Gutekunst, C. A., Hersch, S. M. & Li, X. J. Interaction of huntingtin-associated protein with dynactin P150Glued. *J. Neurosci.* **18**, 1261–1269 (1998).

209. Fu, M. M. & Holzbaur, E. L. JIP1 regulates the directionality of APP axonal transport by coordinating kinesin and dynein motors. *J. Cell Biol.* **202**, 495–508 (2013).

210. Hong, Z. et al. The retromer component SNX6 interacts with dynactin p150(Glued) and mediates endosome-to-TGN transport. *Cell Res.* **19**, 1334–1349 (2009).

211. Wassmer, T. et al. The retromer coat complex coordinates endosomal sorting and dynein-mediated transport, with carrier recognition by the trans-Golgi network. *Dev. Cell* **17**, 110–122 (2009).

212. Holleran, E. A. et al. βIII spectrin binds to the Arp1 subunit of dynactin. *J. Biol. Chem.* **276**, 36598–36605 (2001).

213. Starcevic, M. & Dell'Angelica, E. C. Identification of snapin and three novel proteins (BLOS1, BLOS2, and BLOS3/reduced pigmentation) as subunits of biogenesis of lysosome-related organelles complex-1 (BLOC-1). *J. Biol. Chem.* **279**, 28393–28401 (2004).

214. Tyynan, S. H., Purohit, A., Doxsey, S. J. & Vallee, R. B. Light intermediate chain 1 defines a functional

subfraction of cytoplasmic dynein which binds to pericentrin. *J. Biol. Chem.* **275**, 32763–32768 (2000).

215. Schmoranz, J. et al. Par3 and dynein associate to regulate local microtubule dynamics and centrosome orientation during migration. *Curr. Biol.* **19**, 1065–1074 (2009).

216. Williams, J. C. et al. Structural and thermodynamic characterization of a cytoplasmic dynein light chain-intermediate chain complex. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **104**, 10028–10033 (2007).

217. Tai, A. W., Chuang, J. Z., Bode, C., Wolfrum, U. & Sung, C. H. Rhodopsin's carboxy-terminal cytoplasmic tail acts as a membrane receptor for cytoplasmic dynein by binding to the dynein light chain Tctex-1. *Cell* **97**, 877–887 (1999).

218. Tai, A. W., Chuang, J. Z. & Sung, C. H. Cytoplasmic dynein regulation by subunit heterogeneity and its role in apical transport. *J. Cell Biol.* **153**, 1499–1509 (2001).

219. Meiri, D. et al. Mechanistic insight into the microtubule and actin cytoskeleton coupling through dynein-dependent RhoGEF inhibition. *Mol. Cell* **45**, 642–655 (2012).

220. Wu, H., Maciejewski, M. W., Takebe, S. & King, S. M. Solution structure of the Tctex1 dimer reveals a mechanism for dynein-cargo interactions. *Structure* **13**, 213–223 (2005).

221. Echeverri, C. J., Paschal, B. M., Vaughan, K. T. & Vallee, R. B. Molecular characterization of the 50-kD subunit of dynactin reveals function for the complex in chromosome alignment and spindle organization during mitosis. *J. Cell Biol.* **132**, 617–633 (1996). Presents the discovery that p50 overexpression inhibits dynein function.

222. Quintyne, N. J. et al. Dynactin is required for microtubule anchoring at centrosomes. *J. Cell Biol.* **147**, 321–334 (1999). Presents the discovery that overexpression of the CC1 fragment of the p150 dynactin subunit inhibits dynein function.

223. Schroer, T. A. *Dynactin*. *Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol.* **20**, 759–779 (2004).

224. Steffen, W. et al. The involvement of the intermediate chain of cytoplasmic dynein in binding the motor complex to membranous organelles of *Xenopus* oocytes. *Mol. Biol. Cell* **8**, 2077–2088 (1997).

225. Hoogenraad, C. C. et al. Bicaudal D induces selective dynein-mediated microtubule minus end-directed transport. *EMBO J.* **22**, 6004–6015 (2003). The first use of a relocation assay to monitor dynein recruitment and activation.

226. Kapitein, L. C. et al. Probing intracellular motor protein activity using an inducible cargo trafficking assay. *Biophys. J.* **99**, 2143–2152 (2010).

227. Olenick, M. A., Tokito, M., Boczkowska, M., Dominguez, R. & Holzbaur, E. L. Hook adaptors induce unidirectional processive motility by enhancing the dynein-dynactin interaction. *J. Biol. Chem.* **291**, 18239–18251 (2016).

228. Griffis, E. R., Stuurman, N. & Vale, R. D. Spindly, a novel protein essential for silencing the spindle assembly checkpoint, recruits dynein to the kinetochore. *J. Cell Biol.* **177**, 1005–1015 (2007).

229. Maldonado-Baez, L., Cole, N. B., Kramer, H. & Donaldson, J. G. Microtubule-dependent endosomal sorting of clathrin-independent cargo by Hook1. *J. Cell Biol.* **201**, 233–247 (2013).

230. Walenta, J. H., Didier, A. J., Liu, X. & Kramer, H. The Golgi-associated hook3 protein is a member of a novel family of microtubule-binding proteins. *J. Cell Biol.* **152**, 923–934 (2001). Describes the discovery of the Hook family of proteins.

231. Fumoto, K., Hoogenraad, C. C. & Kikuchi, A. GSK-3beta-regulated interaction of BICD with dynein is involved in microtubule anchorage at centrosome. *EMBO J.* **25**, 5670–5682 (2006).

232. Okuda, H. et al. LRGUK1 is part of a multiprotein complex required for manchette function and male fertility. *FASEB J.* **31**, 1141–1152 (2017).

233. Ham, H., Huynh, W., Schoon, R. A., Vale, R. D. & Billadeau, D. D. HkRP3 is a microtubule-binding protein regulating lytic granule clustering and NK cell killing. *J. Immunol.* **194**, 3984–3996 (2015).

234. Merdes, A., Heald, R., Samejima, K., Earnshaw, W. C. & Cleveland, D. W. Formation of spindle poles by dynein/dynactin-dependent transport of NuMA. *J. Cell Biol.* **149**, 851–862 (2000).

235. Hueschen, C., Kenny, S. J., Xu, K. & Dumont, S. NuMA targets dynein to microtubule minus-ends at mitosis. *bioRxiv* [https://doi.org/10.1101/148692](https://doi.org/10.1101/148692) (2017).

236. Dohner, K. et al. Function of dynein and dynactin in herpes simplex virus capsid transport. *Mol. Biol. Cell* **13**, 2795–2809 (2002).

237. Smith, G. A., Pomeranz, L., Gross, S. P. & Enquist, L. W. Local modulation of plus-end transport targets herpesvirus entry and egress in sensory axons. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **101**, 16034–16039 (2004).

238. Zila, V., Difato, F., Klimova, L., Huerfano, S. & Forstova, J. Involvement of microtubular network and its motors in productive endocytic trafficking of mouse polyomavirus. *PLoS ONE* **9**, e96922 (2014).

239. Liu, W. J. et al. Association of bovine papillomavirus type 1 with microtubules. *Virology* **282**, 237–244 (2001).

240. Eyre, N. S. et al. Dynamic imaging of the hepatitis C virus NS5A protein during a productive infection. *J. Virol.* **88**, 3636–3652 (2014).

241. Sfakianos, J. N., LaCasse, R. A. & Hunter, E. The M-PMV cytoplasmic targeting-retention signal directs nascent Gag polypeptides to a pericentriolar region of the cell. *Traffic* **4**, 660–670 (2003).

**Acknowledgements**

The authors thank M. DeSantis, J. Salogiannis and J. Srouji for critical comments on the manuscript. S.L.R.-P. is a Howard Hughes Medical Institute-Simons Faculty Scholar and is funded by National Institutes of Health (NIH) grants R01GM107214 and R01GM121772. A.P.C. is funded by the Wellcome Trust (WT100387) and the Medical Research Council, UK (MC_UP_A025_1011). R.D.V. is a Howard Hughes Medical Institute investigator and funded by NIH grant R01 GM097312. The authors apologize to their colleagues whose work they did not have space to cite. We dedicate this review to the memory of Ian Gibbons, discoverer of dynein, who passed away earlier this year.

**Author contributions**

S.L.R.-P., A.P.C. and W.B.R. researched data for the article. S.L.R.-P., A.P.C. and R.D.V. discussed the content of the article, S.L.R.-P., A.P.C., W.B.R. and R.D.V. wrote and edited the article.

**Competing interests**

The authors declare no competing interests.

**Publisher’s note**

Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
