
Accepted Manuscript

Hepatitis B virus: The challenge of an ancient virus with multiple faces and a remarkable replication strategy

Andrea Caballero, David Tabernero, Maria Buti, Francisco Rodríguez-Frías

PII: S0166-3542(17)30816-1  
DOI: 10.1016/j.antiviral.2018.07.019  
Reference: AVR 4340  

To appear in: Antiviral Research  

Received Date: 8 December 2017  
Revised Date: 24 July 2018  
Accepted Date: 26 July 2018  

Please cite this article as: Caballero, A., Tabernero, D., Buti, M., Rodríguez-Frías, F., Hepatitis B virus: The challenge of an ancient virus with multiple faces and a remarkable replication strategy, Antiviral Research (2018), doi: 10.1016/j.antiviral.2018.07.019.

This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.

Hepatitis B virus: the challenge of an ancient virus with multiple faces and a remarkable replication strategy

Andrea Caballero${}^{a}$, David Tabernero${}^{a,b,*}$, Maria Buti${}^{b,c}$, and Francisco Rodríguez-Frías${}^{a,b}$

${}^{a}$Liver Pathology Unit, Departments of Biochemistry and Microbiology, Hospital Universitari Vall d'Hebron and Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona (UAB). 119-129 Passeig Vall, d’Hebron, Clinical Laboratories, 08035 Barcelona, Spain  
ancaballero@vhebron.net, david.tabernero@ciberehd.org, frarodri@vhebron.net  

${}^{b}$Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Hepáticas y Digestivas (CIBERehd), Instituto de Salud Carlos III, 3-5 Avenida Monforte de Lemos, pavilion 11, 28029 Madrid, Spain  

${}^{c}$Liver Unit, Department of Internal Medicine, Hospital Universitari Vall d'Hebron and Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona (UAB), 119-129 Passeig Vall d’Hebron, General Hospital, Internal Medicine 2, 08035 Barcelona, Spain  
mbuti@vhebron.net  

*Corresponding author at: Hospital Universitari Vall d’Hebrón, 119-129 Passeig Vall d’Hebron, Clinical Laboratories, 2${}^{\text{nd}}$ floor, Department of Microbiology, Liver Pathology Unit, 08035 Barcelona, Spain.  
E-mail address: david.tabernero@ciberehd.org  

Declarations of interest: none

Abstract

The hepatitis B virus (HBV) is the prototype member of the *Hepadnaviridae*, an ancient family of hepatotropic DNA viruses, which may have originated from 360 to 430 million years ago and with evidence of endogenization in reptilian genomes >200 million years ago. The virus is currently estimated to infect more than 250 million humans. The extremely successful spread of this pathogen among the human population is explained by its multiple particulate forms, effective transmission strategies (particularly perinatal transmission), long induction period and low associated mortality. These characteristics confer selective advantages, enabling the virus to persist in small, disperse populations and spread worldwide, with high prevalence rates in many countries. The HBV replication strategy is remarkably complex and includes a multiplicity of particulate structures. In addition to the common virions containing DNA in a relaxed circular (rcDNA) or double-stranded linear (dslDNA) forms, the viral population includes virion-like particles containing RNA or “empty” (viral envelopes and capsids without genomes), subviral particles (only an envelope) and even naked capsids. Consequently, several forms of the genome coexist in a single infection: (i) the “traveler” forms found in serum, including rcDNA and dslDNA, which originate from retrotranscription of a messenger RNA (the pregenomic RNA, another form of the viral genome itself) and (ii) forms confined to the host cell nucleus, including covalently closed circular DNA (cccDNA), which leads to a minichromosome form associated with histones and viral proteins, and double-stranded DNA integrated into the host genome. This complex composition lends HBV a kind of “multiple personality”. Are these additional particles and genomic forms simple intermediaries/artifacts or do they play a role in the viral life cycle?

Keywords: Hepatitis B virus; chronic hepatitis B; *Hepadnaviridae*; vertical transmission; viral life cycle

Abbreviations$^1$

---

$^1$ Abbreviations: 22-kDa core-related protein (p22cr); anti hepatitis B core protein antibodies (anti-HBc); apoptosis linked gene II interacting protein X (Alix); arginine-rich domain (ARD); chronic hepatitis B (CHB); covalently closed circular HBV DNA (cccDNA); double-stranded DNA (dsDNA); double-stranded linear DNA (dslDNA); endosomal sorting complexes (ESCRT); HBV X gene (HBX); HBV-related endogenous viral sequences (eHBV); heparan sulfate proteoglycans (HSPGs); hepatitis B core antigen (HBcAg); hepatitis B core related antigens (HBcrAg); hepatitis B e antigen (HBeAg); hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg); hepatitis B virus (HBV); hepatitis B X protein (HBx); hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC); hepatocyte growth factor-regulated tyrosine kinase substrate (HGS); natural killer cells (NK); nuclear localization signal (NLS); nucleoside/nucleotide analogs (NAs); open reading frames (ORFs); pregenomic RNA (pgRNA); Quasispeceis (QS); relaxed, circular DNA (rcDNA); sodium-taurocholate co-transporting polypeptide (NTCP).

# 1. INTRODUCTION

The biochemical structure known as hepatitis B virus (HBV) is the prototype member of the Hepadnaviridae family, which include reverse-transcribing double-stranded DNA (dsDNA) viruses that cause liver infection in several avian and mammalian species. Among the circulating viral particles, the HBV genome is classically described as a small (3.2 kb), partially double-stranded DNA molecule with a complete negative strand and a positive strand of variable length (resembling an unfinished task) that adopts a relaxed, circular DNA (rcDNA) conformation. The genome has four highly overlapping (up to 67%) open reading frames (ORFs) (Torres et al., 2013). These include P, which encodes a polyprotein that collaborates in virion formation, synthesizes new rcDNA genomes, and degrades pregenomic RNA (pgRNA), a messenger RNA used by this polyprotein as a template; S, a polycistronic region that encodes the three envelope (surface) proteins (large, middle and small) which form the hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg); C, a polycistronic region that encodes the capsid proteins, hepatitis B core antigen (HBcAg), and the immunomodulatory e antigen, HBeAg; and X, which encodes the multifunctional, regulatory X protein (HBx) (Bouchard and Schneider, 2004; Suh et al., 2013), located in the cytoplasm and nucleus (Günther et al., 1996; Tang et al., 2006). In addition to these typical locations, this regulatory protein has also been detected in sera of patients with chronic hepatitis B (CHB) (Feitelson et al., 1990; Feitelson and Clayton, 1990; Pál et al., 2006).

Since its identification by Blumberg, Alter and Visnich in 1965 (Blumberg et al., 1965), a large body of research has been dedicated to HBV, leading to the development of effective vaccines and antiviral treatments. Nonetheless, CHB is still a great global health problem, with more than two billion people ever having been infected, some 257 million currently living with the infection (defined as persistently positive HBsAg), and an estimated 887,000 related deaths in 2015 (MacLachlan and Cowie, 2015; World Health Organization, 2017). HBV is also associated with more than 50% of all cases of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) worldwide (Venook et al., 2010). Even HBsAg carriers showing no evidence of active viral replication and inflammation are at a higher risk of developing liver cancer than the general population (Ahn et al., 2005). In fact, the infection is essentially incurable due to the persistence of covalently
closed circular DNA (cccDNA) within the hepatocyte nucleus (Terrault et al., 2016), which will be discussed later.

To date, HBV has been phylogenetically classified into nine well-characterized genotypes (A-I) and a tenth putative genotype (J), separated by >7.5% divergence in the entire genomic sequence. In addition, the genotypes can be further subdivided into at least 35 subgenotypes separated by >4% divergence (Kramvis, 2014). The worldwide geographic distribution of genotypes and subgenotypes has been well characterized and is associated with the ethnic origin of the populations involved (Osiowy et al., 2011; Thedja et al., 2011). The distribution may be explained by the transmission and pathogenesis of the virus. In contrast to the transient nature of most viral infections in humans, HBV can persist in small groups of people and survive in isolated populations. Thus, efficient vertical transmission and establishment of persistent infection well beyond reproductive age allow the virus to be maintained in small isolated human populations, which explains the high prevalence of CHB in remote populations such as Australian aborigines or Alaskan natives (McMahon et al., 1989; Patterson et al., 1993). Therefore, the virus is likely to have infected our distant ancestors at a time when the number of humans was too small and populations too disperse to support other diseases such as measles or smallpox. Sedentarization of human populations has been associated with an increased risk of infectious diseases (Page et al., 2016), and although papilloma viruses, herpes viruses and retroviruses are old companions of humankind, as humans have lived in large groups for only approximately the past 5000 years most current viral diseases are new, having been transmitted from animals and adapted to survive in humans. This is the case of infection by members of families such as Arenaviridae, Caliciviridae, Orthomyxoviridae, and Paramyxoviridae (Van Blerkom, 2003).

In contrast, it has been estimated that HBV jumped into humans around 34,000 years ago, coinciding with the origin of modern non-African humans (Paraskevis et al., 2015, 2013), thus most likely infecting groups of hunter-gatherers in Neolithic times. Other studies seem to indicate that the virus infected primates millions of years ago in their earliest history, as is suggested by recent paleovirological findings of endogenous hepadnaviruses inserted in animal
chromosomes (Cui and Holmes, 2012; Gilbert and Feschotte, 2010; Suh et al., 2013) and phylogenetic analysis (Lauber et al., 2017). The lengthy induction period and low associated mortality of CHB help to explain the ancient nature of this pathogen in humans. Until one to two hundred years ago, the median lifespan of humans was less than 40 years (Angel, 1984), and HBV infection during the perinatal period or infancy results in persistent, decades-long infection, with overt illness developing only in the terminal phase. Furthermore, the virus can be effectively transmitted from one host to another vertically or horizontally (sexually, bloodborne, or interfamilially), which suggests that it may have caused extensive epidemics in the past. Another factor that enables the successful spread and maintenance of the virus in humans is its ability to rapidly evolve. HBV replicates at high rates, with a viral polymerase which lacks proofreading capacity during reverse transcription (Park et al., 2003; Zeuzem et al., 1997). Thus, viral infection is comprised by a spectrum of mutants known as quasispecies (QS). These mutants possess different replication fitness in different environments, allowing HBV to adapt to the impact of exogenous and endogenous selection pressures on its replication, such as the immune system and medical interventions (especially in the last decades with antiviral treatments, vaccination, among others), by adapting the composition of the QS to these multiple selection pressures. Taking this into account, it seems reasonable to think that the possible presence of HBV variants associated with low sensitivity to antivirals or vaccines (such as that located in envelope/polymerase region) would be more frequent in human populations who have benefited from these medical interventions than in those in whom they were not available. However, up to now, this possibility has not been confirmed by specific deep-sequencing studies. In addition, HBV QS with genetically heterogeneous variants are thought to play a role in the progression of HBV infection and its associated liver diseases (Homs et al., 2014; Yang et al., 2015).

Finally, HBV is classified as a DNA virus, as the name of the family, *Hepadnaviridae* denotes, but nevertheless its replication strategy is remarkably complex, including a reverse transcription step and a multiplicity of particulate structures. In addition to the common DNA-containing particles, the viral population includes RNA, and “empty” (without genomes) virion-like particles, and subviral particles (only a viral envelope). While two “traveler” forms of viral

genomes (DNA and RNA in “virions”) can be found in serum (Hu and Liu, 2017), viral genomes can be present in an episomic version in the nucleus of host cells: cccDNA, associated with histones and viral proteins, a viral minichromosome; and viral DNA integrated in the host genome. Are these additional particles and genomic forms simple intermediaries/artifacts or do they play a role in the viral life cycle?

The aim of this article is to describe the multiparticulate nature of HBV, which along with effective transmission strategies (especially perinatal), and the course of infection (with long induction periods and low associated mortality), is part of an extremely successful overall strategy that has enabled the virus to replicate and persist in infecting humans for millennia. We begin by examining theories regarding the origin of human HBV and recent data about the remarkable antiquity of the hepadnaviruses. We then review viral transmission mechanisms (with particular emphasis on vertical transmission), go on to discuss the multiple forms of viral particles in depth and speculate on the relationship between the complex replication cycle and multiple forms of HBV and the remarkable success of this virus in humans.

## 2. ORIGIN OF THE HEPATITIS B VIRUS

### 2.1 Theories of the origin of HBV infection in humans

Numerous conflicting hypotheses have been put forward concerning the origin of HBV in humans. For example, the New World origin theory suggests that the virus originated in the Americas and was brought to the Old World over the last 400 years, following contact with Europeans. However, some data contradict this theory, such as identification of ancient HBV DNA in dry parenchymatous tissue recovered from a Korean mummy dating from the 16th century (Littlejohn et al., 2016; Simmonds, 2001). A second theory suggests cospeciation of Hepadnaviridae in parallel with specific primate species over the past 10 to 35 million years. This theory is supported by fossil-based evidence (MacDonald et al., 2000), but is rejected by the high level of similarity between viral genome sequences from gorillas and chimpanzees (Littlejohn et al., 2016). In this sense, according to a recent study (Lauber et al., 2017) human HBV genotypes (including isolates from apes) started to diversify up to 30 million years ago

along with the radiation of early hominoids (i.e. apes). These authors suggested that the virus might have been freely floating within and between hominoids (including humans) as “variants” of the same “host superspecies”, whenever they came into local contact with each other during their complex evolutionary history since the late Oligocene epoch.

Another theory suggests that human HBV has co-evolved with anatomically modern humans since their migration out of Africa, which explains the current geographical spread of the different genotypes. Paraskevis et al. (Paraskevis et al., 2013) reported a high congruence between branching points in HBV genealogy and those of isolated human populations. The median times to the most recent common ancestors of genotypes A, B, D and F ranged from 8,900 to 12,700 years ago, and since then they have diverged into different subgenotypes with spatial separation due to migrations of ancient human populations. On the other hand, the more recent genotypes E, H, and G (appearing 700 to 6,000 years ago) have not diverged into subgenotypes. Some aspects such as the prevalence of genotypes F and H infections in Amerindians and their absence in northeast-Asians (genetically their closest relatives) and the close genetic relationships observed between primate and human HBV, are challenging to explain with the human-HBV co-evolution theory. Nevertheless, the first “paradox” could be explained by an accelerated substitution rate, probably driven by positive selection of the most divergent genotypes F and H from Amerindians (Paraskevis et al., 2015), and the second by cross-species transmission of HBV from humans to primates (Paraskevis et al., 2013). This possibility is supported by the existence of an endogenous HBV with a sequence 99% identical to clinical isolates of genotype D circulating in a geographically isolated cynomolgus macaque (*Macaca fascicularis*) population on the island of Mauritius. The high sequence homology is probably related to the introduction of a few animals approximately 300 years ago which may had been infected at the time of capture and importation from Java to Mauritius island by the Portuguese who may have been infected by HBV genotype D (Dupinay et al., 2013). Finally, a bat-origin theory was recently proposed following the detection of hepadnaviruses in several bat species (Felix et al., 2013). Regrettably however, the evolution of HBV cannot be explained by

any single theory, but rather its origin probably involves co-species evolution within birds, rodents, and bats, followed by a series of cross-species transmission events.

### 2.2 Paleovirological studies

Results from recent paleovirological studies have suggested that current theories of hepadnaviral origins should be reevaluated. These studies support the attribution of extraordinary antiquity to the Hepadnaviridae family, with recent evidence having demonstrated their existence at least 200 million years ago (Gilbert and Feschotte, 2010; Paraskevis et al., 2013; Suh et al., 2014; Zehender et al., 2014), even before dinosaurs inhabited our planet. The discovery of HBV-related endogenous viral sequences (eHBV) has suggested that birds and hepadnaviruses have coexisted for 70 million years (Mesozoic to Cenozoic eras) and that HBV endogenizations date from 82 to 12.1 million years ago (Suh et al., 2013). New eHBVs have been reported in crocodile, snake, and turtle genomes, with endogenization occurring even before that of birds; for example, turtle eHBV endogenized >200 million years ago (Suh et al., 2014). Of course, 200 million years provides a long enough period to evolve and develop hugely sophisticated strategies to survive the host immune system and produce multiple additional challenges for treatment. However, hepadnaviruses are probably even older, as was reported in a very recent study which indicated that their origin from simpler viral progenitors can be reliably dated to have happened between 360 and 430 million years ago (Lauber et al., 2017). This study described the discovery of “nakednaviruses” a diversified HBV-related family of teleost fish viruses, which lack the envelope protein gene and exhibit key characteristics of HBV such as genome replication via protein primed reverse-transcription. Phylogenetic analysis reveals that hepadnaviruses and nakednaviruses separated >400 million years ago, before the rise of tetrapods. Therefore, the study of HBV can divulge some fascinating revelations.

### 3. TRANSMISSION MECHANISMS

HBV is mainly transmitted by percutaneous or mucosal contact with infected blood or other body fluids due to the presence of high titers of the virus in acute and chronically infected people (Araujo et al., 2011). The predominant modes of transmission vary according to the prevalence of the infection. In highly endemic areas (prevalence of chronic infection >8%) the virus is mainly transmitted vertically from infected mothers to neonates at birth. Horizontal transmission through close contact between children or between children and people cohabitating with them, occurs in areas with high and intermediate prevalence (2%-8%). In contrast, in low-endemicity areas (≤2%) the infection is mainly acquired during adolescence and early adulthood in relation to high-risk behavior (unprotected sex and intravenous drug use) (Papastergiou et al., 2015). In addition, the existence of a closely human-related HBV infection in the geographically isolated population of *Macaca fascicularis* on the island of Mauritius (Dupinay et al., 2013) referred to in section 2.1 might be a reservoir, and therefore, a potential source of infection transmission to humans. This hypothesis is speculative and the precise risk remains to be assessed. Macaques are immunologically close to humans, and expression of the human sodium-taurocholate co-transporting polypeptide (hNTCP), the HBV entry receptor, on their primary hepatocytes facilitates viral infection *in vitro* with all replicative intermediates (including cccDNA) being detected (Burwitz et al., 2017). This makes these small simians valuable models to study human HBV infection and test new antiviral therapies. Following acute infection, the risk of progression to chronicity is inversely proportional to the age at which infection occurs. Indeed, whereas more than 90% of neonates become chronically infected, 25% to 35% of infants and children under the age of 5 years, 6% of children between 5 to 15 years, and <5% of adults develop chronic infection (Papastergiou et al., 2015).

Hence, the widespread distribution of HBV throughout the world has resulted from highly efficient dissemination through various transmission routes, among which direct maternal transmission seems to be the most effective, as it is the most common in highly endemic areas. This factor, as well as several intrinsic characteristics of the infection, such as long-term persistence, low frequency of symptoms, a long incubation period, and viral resistance in the external environment (World Health Organization, 2017) contribute to its

spread and the maintenance of high prevalence rates in many countries (Araujo et al., 2011; MacDonald et al., 2000; Tong and Revill, 2016).

In addition, it has been suggested that vertical transmission may enable the spread of more virulent strains, which are more prone to progress to chronicity and cause cirrhosis and liver cancer, the major causes of death in CHB (Araujo et al., 2011). The persistence of virulent strains could be promoted by the lack of immediate damage to the host, likely due to the immature immune system of the fetus or infant, leading to the development of immune tolerance as a result of exposure to HBeAg, the only viral antigen that seems to be able to cross the placenta (Kramvis, 2016). Further studies are needed to investigate the possibility of other factors, which may be associated with the HBV multiparticulate structure, also having an effect on the immune tolerance status of a newborn.

## 4. MULTIPLE FORMS OF HEPATITIS B VIRUS

As shown in Figure 1, HBV infection harbors a multiplicity of particle structures and genomic states. In addition to viral particles containing rcDNA, typical DNA-containing virions, viral RNA-containing and “empty” (with no genome) virion-like particles, and even naked capsids are observed. Subviral particles, comprised solely of viral envelopes, are also found in serum of HBV-infected patients (Hu and Liu, 2017; Prange, 2012). Furthermore, cccDNA is present in the host cell nucleus as a viral episome and gives rise to a minichromosome when associated with histones and viral proteins (Belloni et al., 2009; Bock et al., 2001). Finally, an alternative mechanism of replication known as *in situ* priming generates another different HBV genomic form, that is dsDNA (Staprans et al., 1991; Yang and Summers, 1995). This amazing diversity of particles and states of the viral genome confers HBV a kind of “multiple personality.”

### 4.1 The life cycle in detail: Five coexisting types of genomes

After viral particles specifically attach to differentiated hepatocytes and undergo endocytosis, the envelope is removed, the core particle is actively transported to the nuclear

pore, and rcDNA is released to the nucleoplasm, where it is converted to cccDNA by cellular repair machinery factors (Sohn et al., 2009). There it remains as an episomal minichromosome associated with host histones and viral proteins (core and indirectly, HBx), forming nucleosomes with the typical “beads-on-a-string” structure (Belloni et al., 2009; Bock et al., 2001) in the host cell nucleus for its entire life (Terrault et al., 2016). The minichromosome is the template for cellular RNA polymerase II, which generates pgRNA, preCore, and subgenomic mRNAs (Nassal, 2008).

pgRNA is longer than the HBV genome itself, and it has key roles in the replication cycle. First, it acts as a template for translation of core proteins (components of HBcAg) and the DNA polymerase. The core protein subunits assemble pgRNA and the viral DNA polymerase to form immature core particles. Once encapsidated, pgRNA is retrotranscribed by the polymerase, a common feature in all hepadnaviruses even though they are DNA viruses (Gust et al., 1986). Reverse transcription starts at a specific secondary structure of pgRNA called the epsilon stem-loop, where the polymerase uses a hydroxyl group from a tyrosine residue in its terminal protein domain to prime the first (minus) DNA strand. After completion of the minus strand and pgRNA degradation by the polymerase RNase H domain, the capped 5′ terminal RNA remnants must be translocated to an identical sequence at the other end of the minus strand where they act as a conventional nucleic acid primer for synthesis of the second (plus) strand. The synthesis of the minus DNA strand in the interior of the capsid is associated with the appearance of an essential signal for nucleocapsid envelopment (Gerelsaikhan et al., 1996), thus mature rcDNA-containing virions are able to be enveloped and released from the infected hepatocytes.

According to Gerelsaikhan et al., the immature nucleocapsids containing pgRNA are incompetent for envelopment, but recent studies have reported the existence of virion-like particles containing this form of the HBV genome (Lam et al., 2017; J. Wang et al., 2016), and even empty (enveloped capsids with no genome) (Luckenbaugh, Kitrinos, Delaney, & Hu, 2015; Ning et al., 2011) as will be discussed below (section 4.2). Alternatively to nucleocapsid envelopment, the rcDNA-containing capsids can re-enter the nucleus through what is known as the recycling path. In this way, the rcDNA molecule within the capsid becomes a new cccDNA

molecule, thereby increasing the viral chromosome pool in the same cell where the molecule was synthesized (Tuttleman et al., 1986; Wu et al., 1990).

So far, we have seen that the HBV genome enters host cells as rcDNA, the precursor of cccDNA, which then persists in the nucleus as a viral minichromosome. This minichromosome is the template for the transcription of pgRNA, which is encapsidated together with the viral polymerase and retrotranscribed to rcDNA once again. Retrotranscription of pgRNA to rcDNA is a peculiar, complex process, involving several switches from one end to the other of the corresponding template, and during which errors can occur. In this line, if translocation of the capped 5' terminal remnants of pgRNA does not occur after synthesis of the minus strand, plus-strand initiation and elongation can still take place from the original site of pgRNA primer binding at the 3' end of the minus strand (Nassal, 2008). This process is called *in situ* priming, and gives rise to dsDNA (Staprans et al., 1991; Yang and Summers, 1995). This form of the genome constitutes about 5% to 10% of virion DNA, and as occurs with rcDNA, it can also be enveloped or alternatively re-infect the nucleus by the recycling path. Once it is in the nucleus, dsDNA can give rise to defective cccDNA by non-homologous recombination near the ends of the linear molecules. However, the dsDNA genomic form is also the preferred substrate for a new, unexpected event in the HBV viral life cycle: integration into host DNA. This event occurs in approximately 1 in \(10^3\)–\(10^4\) infected cells in animal models (Summers et al., 2003; Yang and Summers, 1999). A high percentage of HBV genome breakpoints are located around the nucleotide 1,800, where the Enhancer 2, and X and core ORFs are located (Sung et al., 2012). This structural arrangement necessarily affects the expression of all viral ORFs except the surface ORF which can remain intact and correctly located under its own promoter. In addition, Enhancer 1 remains active and is able to produce X ORF transcripts, which are likely to have their stop codons deleted, giving raise to HBV-host fusion transcripts, probably related to progression of HCC (Tu et al., 2017). In addition, most transcripts in integrated HBV DNA are missing their natural poly-adenylation signal, especially in HBeAg negative cases, and may rely on the cellular poly-adenylation sequences, being an additional source of HBV-host fusion transcripts (Wooddell et al., 2017). Although the actual roles of integration of HBV are

unknown, it is probably important in HBV persistence, for example as a stable source of HBsAg production (Wooddell et al., 2017). In addition, the association of integration levels with disease progression has been reported (Zhao et al., 2016).

Therefore, five coexisting types of viral genomes can be found in the lifecycle of HBV: rcDNA and dsDNA in normal virions, cccDNA in the nucleus of host cells as viral minichromosomes, pgRNA in capsids during replication, and integrated viral dsDNA in the host DNA, mainly promoted by dsDNA.

### 4.2 Additional DNA-negative particles: subviral particles, empty and RNA virion-like particles. Naked capsids

In addition to complete virions, which contain rcDNA, infected cells secrete 3 classes of DNA-negative particles. The first are subviral particles, which appear as spheres or filaments and are composed of only host lipids and viral envelope proteins (HBsAg) but lack a viral capsid (Bruss, 2007). The composition of envelope proteins determines the shape (Heermann et al., 1984) and secretion pathway (Jiang et al., 2015) of subviral and viral particles: on one hand, spheres are essentially composed of small and middle surface (envelope) proteins, and are thought to be secreted via the constitutive secretory pathway of the host cell; on the other hand, filaments have a higher percentage of large surface proteins and are secreted via the host cell endosomal sorting complexes (ESCRT), cytosolic protein complexes that catalyze a membrane remodeling event that results in budding away from the cytosol, which allows biogenesis of multivesicular bodies, viral budding, etc. (Hurley and Hanson, 2010). Subviral particles are highly over-expressed relative to virions, reaching a 10,000-fold higher concentration in serum.

Why is there this huge excess of subviral particles? Possibly because they act as decoys to modulate the host immune response (Bruss, 2007). Another explanation could be that they may prevent non-productive binding of virions to heparan sulfate proteoglycans (HSPGs), which is essential for virus entry into hepatocytes (Leistner et al., 2008; Schulze et al., 2007) prior to specific interaction with the NTCP. The HSPGs are ubiquitously present in many cell types, and virions need to avoid interactions with them in some situations in order to be successfully

transmitted. For example, they need to prevent immediate re-attachment to hepatocytes for leaving the liver and to avoid docking to endothelial cells in the organs’ capillary system. In addition, to infect new individuals, virions must avoid being retained in the lumen of glands which secrete infectious fluids and while crossing skin or mucosa barriers. For this reason, they are released from cells with preS hidden in the interior and subsequently develop receptor binding competence by translocating preS across the envelope onto their surface. The excess subviral particles might act as HSPG-blocking agents providing a synergistic second line defense (Seitz et al., 2016).

The second type of DNA-negative particles is the “empty” virion-like particles containing the viral envelope and capsid proteins but no genome. Unexpectedly, these empty virion-like particles predominate in serum. Previous *in vivo* and *in vitro* studies found that over 90% of HBV circulating viral particles contained no DNA at all (Luckenbaugh, Kitrinos, Delaney, & Hu, 2015; Ning et al., 2011). Again, we have the same question: Why is there this huge excess of empty virion-like particles? The answer is not known, but it is believed that they may contribute to the maintenance of infection. In this sense, speculative roles have been suggested. For instance, according to Wang et al. (J. Wang et al., 2016) in relation to RNA containing virion-like particles, empty virion-like particles may be able to interact with the NTCP cell receptor since, theoretically, they have a normal envelope, and could infect new hepatocytes. If this were possible, empty virion-like particles could represent a source of HBcAg, which would be especially interesting in the initial stage of infection before cccDNA transcription and translation of new HBcAg proteins, contributing to the initial cccDNA chromatinization and regulation or host innate immunity (Hu and Liu, 2017). However, to accept this possible role of empty particles, several questions should first be answered; one is whether these particles are actually infective. Moreover, it should be kept in mind that the production of empty particles seems to be related to phosphorylation of the HBcAg carboxy-terminal domain, which is initially phosphorylated at multiple sites to facilitate viral RNA packaging into immature nucleocapsids (Jung et al., 2014). A recent study reported that while the HBcAg carboxy-terminal arginine-rich domain (ARD) was dephosphorylated in association

with nucleocapsid maturation of DNA-containing virions, in enveloped empty capsids with no RNA or DNA, it was found to be phosphorylated (Ning et al., 2017). In fact, empty capsids without RNA encapsidation can be generated by hyper-phosphorylation in serine residues located in ARD (Su et al., 2016) due to electrostatic repulsion between phosphorus atoms in the serines of HBcAg and those of nucleic acid. Therefore, this hyper-phosphorylation of HBcAg in empty virion-like particles might preclude its interaction with cccDNA.

According to a report by Kimura et al. (Kimura et al., 2005) empty virion-like particles contain a 22-kDa core-related protein (p22cr) which is the result of partial post-translational processing of the 25-kDa product of the first ATG in the C ORF (known as the precore protein). While complete amino- and carboxy-terminal post-translational processing of the 25-kDa protein results in a 17-kDa secretory protein, the immunoregulating HBeAg, p22cr contains an uncleaved amino-terminal signal sequence and lacks a carboxy-terminal ARD (Kimura et al., 2005; Scaglioni et al., 1997). With these characteristics, p22cr could maintain the capacity to form capsids, but lacks the capacity to interact with nucleic acids. Although these characteristics seem to justify the results reported by Kimura et al., more recent studies have shown that empty virion-like particles only contain HBcAg capsids and not the p22cr protein (Luckenbaugh et al., 2015; Ning et al., 2017, 2011). Assays are now available to detect and quantify all products of the C ORF, known as hepatitis B core-related antigens (HBcrAg) (Rokuhara et al., 2003; Song et al., 2017), using antibodies against common epitopes in the three proteins. Serum HBcrAg levels have been found to correlate with intrahepatic cccDNA levels and could be a more accurate surrogate marker of the intrahepatic viral status than serum HBV DNA (Rokuhara et al., 2003; Song et al., 2017).

The third type of virion-like particle is an RNA-containing particle. The nature of HBV RNA in serum remains to be fully clarified. Some *in vitro* studies and in patient sera showed that extracellular viral RNA consist in pgRNA and spliced pgRNA variants with internal deletion(s) which still retain the sequences at both the 5′ and 3′ ends (Lam et al., 2017; J. Wang et al., 2016). Interestingly, in the study by Lam et al., the majority of the spliced variants retained the HBV X gene (HBX), which coincided with the transcriptome sequencing data from

another recent report, which detected HBX RNA in cell culture-derived virus preparations and CHB patient plasma (Niu et al., 2017). Thus, the authors suggested that a robust RNA sequencing technology would be useful to further decipher the heterogeneity of secreted HBV RNA. Unexpectedly, virion-like particles containing viral RNA can reach ratios from 1:100 to 1:10 relative to rcDNA-containing virions in untreated patients (Butler et al., 2018; van Bömmel et al., 2015). These high proportions of RNA-containing virion-like particles seem to imply that pgRNA reverse transcription is relatively inefficient since, as previously commented, at least part of these particles contain pgRNA or a spliced form of it. Serum HBV RNA levels are suggested to be useful markers to predict the response to antiviral treatment with pegylated interferon and/or nucleoside/nucleotide analogs (NAs) (Hatakeyama et al., 2007; Huang et al., 2015; Jansen et al., 2016; Rokuhara et al., 2006; van Bömmel et al., 2015), and to guide safe discontinuation of NA treatment (Tsuge et al., 2013; J. Wang et al., 2016). Interestingly, blocking reverse transcription (e.g. during NA treatment) led to increases in HBV pgRNA virions in *in vitro* and *in vivo* experiments and in CHB patients (J. Wang et al., 2016), clearly showing that cccDNA transcription remains quite active even though DNA virions are not produced. In addition, it was recently shown that serum pgRNA levels correlate well with intrahepatic cccDNA levels (Giersch et al., 2017), thus indicating the potential usefulness of pgRNA not only as a proof of the presence and active transcription of cccDNA, but also as a surrogate marker for measuring intrahepatic cccDNA levels.

A virus can be classified as a DNA or RNA virus based on the nucleic acid composition of the genome, and in this sense, HBV has been classified as a DNA virus. However, HBV RNA virion-like particles could be too abundant (1%-10% of rcDNA-containing virions in untreated patients) (Butler et al., 2018; van Bömmel et al., 2015) to be simple artifacts. Considering that most or all of these viral particles contain pgRNA, it has been suggested that HBV has another natural virion form in which the nucleic acid is comprised of pgRNA (J. Wang et al., 2016). In the same study, it was noted that despite the general belief that HBV DNA synthesis is required for capsid maturation and envelopment (Gerelsaikhan et al., 1996; Roseman et al., 2005), encapsidated pgRNA could be enveloped and released into serum of

CHB patients without initiation of reverse transcription. It can be speculated that under naive conditions, envelopment of mature DNA-containing capsids would be much more effective (faster) than that of immature pgRNA-containing capsids, although they would not be completely incompetent for envelopment as reported by Gerelsaikhan et al. (Gerelsaikhan et al., 1996). With the inhibition of reverse transcription under NA treatment, the concentration of DNA-containing capsids would drop drastically, while its RNA-containing precursors would accumulate to high levels in the cytoplasm, resulting in an exceptional increase in the efficiency of RNA containing capsids envelopment and release into the serum, thereby increasing the level of HBV RNA virion-like particles, and thereby explaining recent observations (van Bömmel et al., 2015; J. Wang et al., 2016). Further studies are needed to clarify the mechanisms leading to the envelopment of pgRNA capsids.

An important question to resolve is whether pgRNA and other HBV RNA virion-like particles are infectious. In this regard, it has been postulated that pgRNA particles could be infectious in a manner similar to hepatitis D virus, which infects hepatocytes by using an HBV envelope (J. Wang et al., 2016). Furthermore, as pgRNA virion-like particles contain both the P protein and pgRNA, the rcDNA could theoretically be reversely transcribed from capsid pgRNA in cytoplasm in a kind of “resumption of an interrupted task” as proposed by Wang et al. (J. Wang et al., 2016). However, the same authors discarded this possibility in a recent report, in which they showed that RNA virion-like particles produced under NA treatment are mainly replication-deficient (Wang et al., 2017). In keeping with the report by Lam et al. (Lam et al., 2017) the authors observed full length and splicing pgRNA and/or forms with irreversible 3'-terminal truncations induced by NA treatments, both *in vitro* and in the serum of HBV-infected individuals with or without NA treatment. The latter forms were associated with major contributions to the replication deficiency of progeny virus produced under NA treatment. In addition to the authors’ hypothesis, the lack of replication of the RNA-containing virion-like particles emerging under NA-treatment may also be explained by the association of the pgRNA with an initiated short stretch of minus strand DNA, which does not become elongated because of chain-termination due to incorporation of a NA molecule. Thus, these particles could still

enter a new host cell, but completion of DNA synthesis would be unlikely.

Additional hypothetical functions can be proposed for pgRNA virions. As stated above, HBcAg proteins are necessary for chromatinization and regulation or host innate immunity (Hu and Liu, 2017). A potential source of these proteins at the initial stage of infection, before cccDNA transcription, could be the HBcAg which constitutes empty virion-like particles. However, the ability to infect and hyper-phosphorylate HBcAg in empty virion-like particles raises doubts about this potential role. On the other hand, it could be that HBV pgRNA virions represent an exogenous contribution of core transcripts that would help to build the viral minichromosome in de novo-infected hepatocytes. This hypothesis seems to be supported by the strong overexpression of HBcAg proteins relative to the amount needed for progeny virus synthesis. Apparently, these proteins have a nuclear transport capacity through their nuclear localization signal (NLS), which is not hidden as long as the proteins are not assembled into particles (Kann et al., 2007). Therefore, HBV pgRNA virions may provide the HBcAg required to form the minichromosome even in the absence of cccDNA transcription. Of course, in order to confirm this hypothesis, it is necessary to clearly demonstrate infectivity of RNA containing virion-like particles, and also the capacity of the viral RNA contained in them to be translated into proteins.

As indicated above, it has recently been described that HBX mRNA can also be found in the plasma of CHB patients and in cell culture-derived virus preparations (Niu et al., 2017). In the same study, HBX RNA was detected in primary human hepatocytes very early after infection, prior to transcription of the other HBV genes, suggesting that the HBx protein may initially be expressed by delivery of extracellular HBX RNA into HBV-infected cells. Similar to what has been suggested for pgRNA, this initial delivery of HBx mRNA into de novo-infected hepatocytes would be needed to start viral replication in these cells (Belloni et al., 2009; Feitelson et al., 2014; Lucifora et al., 2011) by preventing restriction of newly formed cccDNA by Smc5/6, a cellular DNA-binding complex that restricts transcription from cccDNA and is targeted for degradation by HBx (Decorsière et al., 2016; Murphy et al., 2016; Niu et al., 2017).

In addition to enveloped virions and virion-like particles and subviral particles, HBV-

replicating cells release non-enveloped (“naked”) capsids, both empty or containing the viral genome (nucleocapsids) (Prange, 2012). The sole expression of the HBcAg is sufficient to render naked capsid release by a non-lytic mechanism (Bardens et al., 2011). Unlike virions or virion-like particles, this release mechanism seems to be regulated by the apoptosis linked gene II interacting protein X (Alix), a multifunctional protein with key roles in membrane biology, which is not required for HBV capsid assembly or membrane association or for HBV release (Bardens et al., 2011). Interestingly, the hepatocyte growth factor-regulated tyrosine kinase substrate (HGS), a factor of the ESCRT-0 component of the ESCRT machinery, could boost the release of naked capsids, irrespective of their genomic or empty content, while concurrently reducing the enveloped and subviral particles. This factor can be associated and co-localized with HBcAg (Chou et al., 2015).

Naked capsids were initially observed in HBV-replicating liver cell lines (Watanabe et al., 2007; Wittkop et al., 2010), and their origin has frequently been attributed to efficient HBV replication *in vitro*, thereby being released by default and/or from damaged cells. In contrast, these particles are absent or present only in minute amounts in the blood of infected patients or chimpanzees (Possehl et al., 1992). A possible explanation for this lack of detection *in vivo*, is the very rapid clearance of highly immunogenic naked capsids by the potent and long-lasting anti hepatitis B core protein antibodies (anti-HBc) in the blood circulation of most HBV-infected patients (Milich et al., 1997). It is also possible that naked capsids could be rapidly retired from extracellular medium by binding to the ubiquitous cell surface-exposed HSPGs that trigger their clathrin-dependent uptake (Cooper and Shaul, 2006; Vanlandschoot et al., 2005). In addition, upon protein transfection of HBV-derived nucleocapsids into cell lines, the capsids have shown to be able to initiate productive infection, indicating that they are ‘infectious’ if delivered into cells (Rabe et al., 2006), thus, it has been suggested that naked nucleocapsid release could be instrumental in spreading infection (Bardens et al., 2011). If naked capsids were able to enter into hepatocytes, one could speculate that they contribute to the establishment of infection early after transmission and before anti-HBc immune response, and even to the establishment of non-liver reservoirs for this virus, which have been found in peripheral blood

mononuclear cells, lymph nodes, spleen, bone marrow and cerebrospinal fluid (Joshi and Coffin, 2018).

# 5. FACTS AND SPECULATION ABOUT A REMARKABLE VIRUS

In the study of chronic hepatitis B, we are faced with an extremely ancient virus phylogenetically related to the recently described teleost fish viruses nakednaviruses, which separated from hepadnaviruses >400 million years ago (Lauber et al., 2017). Moreover, the endogenous hepadnaviruses reported in reptile genomes (Suh et al., 2014, 2013) allow the localization of the lower age boundary of this viruses family >200 million years ago. These data seem to suggest that HBV has existed and hence evolved during hundreds of millions years, maintaining an extremely efficient genomic structure and an apparently unique replication strategy, enabling its survival. This extraordinary infectious agent has persisted in humans through millenniums, causing ever more relevant and widespread infection, even though transmission is restricted from humans to humans, and groups of humans were small and disperse before the explosion of urban societies, which began only 5,000 years ago.

As noted in section 3, among the multiple blood-borne transmission strategies of this virus, vertical transmission (mother to newborn) is the most prevalent. Obviously, vertical transmission would be optimal for the infection and viral persistence since individuals infected at birth would provide the virus with a new host regardless of the person's life expectancy: around 30 years in Neolithic humans (Angel, 1984) and under 60 years in some highly endemic regions today (United Nations, 2015). In addition, the high rate of CHB infection associated with perinatal transmission would result in a large percentage of viremic individuals acting as “viral reservoirs”, even in small groups of humans, thereby enhancing the probability of transmission by additional bloodborne or sexual pathways. Furthermore, vertical transmission is associated with the immune tolerance phenomenon, due to *in utero* transmission of HBeAg (Kramvis, 2016), in which there is little immediate liver damage, and therefore, a lower probability of HBV-related death in individuals younger than 40 years (Szpakowski and Tucker, 2013). This situation provides the virus with an extended time to “jump” to a new host through

new pregnancies or other bloodborne or sexual transmission mechanisms, either in the same
population or in others by occasional contact (e.g., war or commercial exchange). All these
factors suggest the importance of perinatal transmission for enhancing HBV persistence over
time and probably explain the successful spread of the virus to an enormous number of humans.

However, the high infectivity and chronicity rates associated with infection in early
childhood require examination of mechanisms other than the immune tolerance phenomenon,
and the complex replication strategy and multiparticulate nature of HBV could be implicated in
these mechanisms. The livers of newborns have a higher rate of mitosis than adult livers,
however, to date, the distribution of cccDNA between daughter cells after mitosis (lost,
asymmetrical or symmetrical) is controversial. Several studies have postulated that attack by the
immune system and natural hepatocyte turnover might be important for eliminating cccDNA
from the infected liver. The loss of hepatocytes may be accompanied by cell division to
regenerate the liver (Addison et al., 2002; Allweiss and Dandri, 2017), and in vitro studies have
indicated that episomal DNA molecules are mitotically unstable because of the action of
cytosolic nucleases (Lechardeur et al., 1999). Other studies have shown that during cell division
the minichromosome might be asymmetrically distributed or even lost (Lechardeur et al., 1999;
X. Wang et al., 2016), resulting in a kind of “cccDNA dilution” in daughter cells (Mason et al.,
2009, 2005). Along this line, Allweiss et al. recently reported that in vivo proliferation of HBV-
infected primary human hepatocytes leads to a marked reduction of cccDNA in the liver of
human chimeric mice (Allweiss et al., 2018). In contrast, a recent study (Li et al., 2018)
determined the distribution of cccDNA under conditions mimicking chronic infections with
antiviral therapy in different established cell lines expressing duck HBV and HBV, and showed
that the cccDNA loss or asymmetrical distribution between daughter cells could be rejected. In
the first case, complete loss of nuclear DNA after cell division should have resulted in a much
more rapid decline of duck HBV cccDNA and nuclear HBV DNA as was observed. In the
second case, skewness in the cccDNA distribution could have resulted in a significantly larger
fraction of nuclei lacking cccDNA than was observed. Therefore, the authors concluded that
antiviral therapy leads to a reduction in nuclear DNA in a manner consistent with symmetrical

distribution of viral DNA to daughter cells. Indeed, this would be in accordance with the relatively slow loss of cccDNA, consistent with the fact that current NA-based antiviral therapies are not curative. In any case, establishing the model of cccDNA distribution between daughter cells could help to clarify the mechanisms of the extremely successful chronification of HBV infection after vertical transmission, taking into account the elevated hepatocyte proliferation in the liver of newborns.

It has been suggested that HBV infection may hinder cell division (Wu et al., 2006). The exact mechanism is still unknown, but some viral proteins with regulatory roles, such as HBx (whole or truncated), and preS1/preS2 (perhaps also in truncated forms) may be involved. The HBx protein is reported to exert strong growth arrest on hepatocytes in transgenic mice (Wu et al., 2006). However, in primary infection of a newborn with a high hepatocyte proliferation rate, the virus would not have time to organize an adequate regulatory environment to persist. But, would it be possible to obtain these regulatory viral factors from the chronically infected mother? In section 3, we speculated about the possibility that in addition to maternal rcDNA virions and HBeAg, the newborn could receive additional HBV particulate forms present in the infective population as “empty” virion-like particles. These particles are much more abundant than rcDNA virions, and hypothetically, could contain viral factors or even host factors (e.g., miRNAs) trapped during capsid formation in the mother’s cell. In this sense, some studies have reported that HBV capsids can package heterologous RNA as efficiently as their own HBV RNA (Porterfield et al., 2010). Interestingly, as noted above HBx, which has an intracellular location and function (Günther et al., 1996; Tang et al., 2006), has been detected in the serum of some HBV-infected patients (Feitelson et al., 1990; Feitelson and Clayton, 1990; Pál et al., 2006). The HBx physicochemical characteristics likely make it difficult for this protein to circulate free in serum like HBeAg, due to its poor solubility in physiological conditions (Urban et al., 1997). Thus the question would be: Is it possible that HBx circulates packaged in HBV capsids? In this regard, the study by Lucifora et al. (Lucifora et al., 2011) concluded that this protein is not present in HBV complete virions. Nevertheless, HBx could be present in other HBV-related particles like empty virion-like particles, the capsids of which

have different physicochemical properties than complete virion capsids, as mentioned in section 4.2 [i.e. hyper-phosphorylated in empty particles (Ning et al., 2017)]. Therefore, taking into account the different situation of these genome-free particles it cannot be discarded that they could be able to package HBx. A possible mechanism for including HBx into capsids could be as HBcAg-HBx fusion proteins, which existence was suggested in previous studies (Feitelson, 1986; Kim et al., 1994). However, further studies are needed to investigate the molecular mechanisms by which this protein can be synthesized, and to confirm its presence in the serum of CHB patients. Of course, the presence of HBx in HBV particles must be experimentally confirmed. This finding would support the concept that empty virion-like particles (with no genome but containing other molecules such as HBx) could act as a kind of liver-specific exosome particles.

A recent *in vitro* study found that exosomes present in the serum of CHB patients contained both viral nucleic acids and proteins, and actively transferred HBV to naive human hepatocytes. In addition, the exosomes transferred viral components into natural killer (NK) cells (major cytolytic effector in peripheral blood mononuclear cells in the absence of previous stimulation), resulting in NK cell dysfunction (Yang et al., 2017). As suggested in section 4.2, another potential “transporter particle” which may deliver viral genomes or other factors from an infected cell to another could be naked capsids. *In vivo*, empty virion-like particles could, at least theoretically, reach uninfected hepatocytes much more efficiently and specifically than exosomes or naked capsids, because they carry viral envelopes that include myristoylated preS1 sequences, the key for entering into liver cells through attachment to NCTP receptors. By this mechanism, empty virion-like particles could transport additional factors (e.g. HBx) from the infected mother’s liver to the newborn’s liver cells. In this sense, HBx could have an important role, as it is essential for transcription of the viral cccDNA minichromosome (Belloni et al., 2009; Feitelson et al., 2014; Lucifora et al., 2011) and could additionally provoke growth arrest of *de novo* infected hepatocytes in the newborn. This would facilitate stability of episomic cccDNA, which seems very stable in non-dividing hepatocytes and unstable in dividing hepatocytes (Allweiss and Dandri, 2017). However, the model of cccDNA distribution in

dividing hepatocytes needs to be well-established (as mentioned above) before accepting the possibility that growth arrest of hepatocytes could facilitate cccDNA stability.

To support the involvement of empty virions in this exchange of viral or host factors between the mother and newborn, the presence of these factors in these mysterious particles must be proven. However, even if they are found, another question arises: why do adults infected by a previous chronic carrier and also in contact with these alternative particles have a significantly lower probability of becoming chronically infected than newborns? Another important matter of study would be the impact of exogenous and endogenous selection pressures on HBV replication (immune system, medical interventions...) on the different subviral or virion-like particles (i.e. containing RNA and empty). Some examples of this have been mentioned in section 4.2, as is the case of the relationship between the excess of subviral particles and immune escape, or the increases in HBV pgRNA virions by blocking reverse transcription with NA treatment. Nevertheless, while the association between the HBV QS and the response to antiviral treatment and/or immune escape has been clearly established, their association with HBV particles should be studied more in depth. In any case, there must be some biological reason(s) for these puzzling multiple forms of HBV, as “Nature should not be called into question, but instead, interrogated”. As a result of this interrogation and the answers obtained by relentless research, we are closer to defeating this exceptional enemy, which persisted even among our most remote ancestors and has sharpened over countless years. The greater the knowledge acquired regarding HBV replication, the better the therapies that can be designed. This approach resembles the recommendation of the Chinese strategist Sun Tzu more than 25 centuries ago in The Art of War: “By acquiring maximum knowledge, one has a greater probability of victory” (Sun Tzu, 2015).

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The authors thank Celine Cavallo and Donna Pringle for English language support.

This work was supported by the Instituto de Salud Carlos III (grant number PI15/00856), co-
financed by the European Regional Development Fund (ERDF). The funder had no involvement
in the writing and decision to submit the article for publication.

REFERENCES

Addison, W.R., Walters, K., Wong, W.W.S., Wilson, J.S., Madej, D., Jewell, L.D., Tyrrell, D.L.J., 2002. Half-Life of the Duck Hepatitis B Virus Covalently Closed Circular DNA Pool In Vivo following Inhibition of Viral Replication. J. Virol. 76, 6356–6363. doi:10.1128/JVI.76.12.6356

Ahn, S.H., Park, Y.N., Park, J.Y., Chang, H.-Y., Lee, J.M., Shin, J.E., Han, K.-H., Park, C., Moon, Y.M., Chon, C.Y., 2005. Long-term clinical and histological outcomes in patients with spontaneous hepatitis B surface antigen seroclearance. J. Hepatol. 42, 188–94. doi:10.1016/j.jhep.2004.10.026

Allweiss, L., Dandri, M., 2017. The Role of cccDNA in HBV Maintenance. Viruses 9, E156. doi:10.3390/v9060156

Allweiss, L., Volz, T., Giersch, K., Kah, J., Raffa, G., Petersen, J., Lohse, A.W., Beninati, C., Pollicino, T., Urban, S., Lütgehetmann, M., Dandri, M., 2018. Proliferation of primary human hepatocytes and prevention of hepatitis B virus reinfection efficiently deplete nuclear cccDNA in vivo. Gut 67, 542–552. doi:10.1136/gutjnl-2016-312162

Angel, L.J., 1984. Health as a crucial factor in the changes from hunting to developed farming in the eastern Mediterranean, in: Cohen, M.N., Armelagos, G.J. (Eds.), Paleopathology at the Origins of Agriculture. Academic Press, Orlando, Orlando, FL, USA, pp. 51–74.

Araujo, N.M., Waizbort, R., Kay, A., 2011. Hepatitis B virus infection from an evolutionary point of view: how viral, host, and environmental factors shape genotypes and subgenotypes. Infect. Genet. Evol. 11, 1199–1207. doi:10.1016/j.meegid.2011.04.017

Bardens, A., Döring, T., Stieler, J., Prange, R., 2011. Alix regulates egress of hepatitis B virus naked capsid particles in an ESCRT-independent manner. Cell. Microbiol. 13, 602–19. doi:10.1111/j.1462-5822.2010.01557.x

Belloni, L., Pollicino, T., De Nicola, F., Guerrieri, F., Raffa, G., Fanciulli, M., Raimondo, G., Levrero, M., 2009. Nuclear HBx binds the HBV minichromosome and modifies the epigenetic regulation of cccDNA function. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 106, 19975–19979. doi:10.1073/pnas.0908365106

Blumberg, B., Alter, H., Visnich, S., 1965. A “New” Antigen in Leukemia Sera. JAMA J. Am. Med. Assoc. 191, 541–546.

Bock, C.T., Schwinn, S., Locarnini, S., Fyfe, J., Manns, M.P., Trautwein, C., Zentgraf, H., 2001. Structural organization of the hepatitis B virus minichromosome. J Mol Biol 307, 183–196. doi:10.1006/jmbi.2001.4481

Bouchard, M.J., Schneider, R.J., 2004. The enigmatic X gene of hepatitis B virus. J. Virol. 78, 12725–12734. doi:10.1128/JVI.78.23.12725

Bruss, V., 2007. Hepatitis B virus morphogenesis. World J. Gastroenterol. 13, 65–73. doi:10.3748/wjg.v13.i1.65

Burwitz, B.J., Wettengel, J.M., Mück-Häusl, M.A., Ringelhan, M., Ko, C., Festag, M.M., Hammond, K.B., Northrup, M., Bimber, B.N., Jacob, T., Reed, J.S., Norris, R., Park, B., Moller-Tank, S., Esser, K., Greene, J.M., Wu, H.L., Abdulhaqq, S., Webb, G., Sutton, W.F., Klug, A., Swanson, T., Legasse, A.W., Vu, T.Q., Asokan, A., Haigwood, N.L., Protzer, U., Sacha, J.B., 2017. Hepatocytic expression of human sodium-taurocholate cotransporting polypeptide enables hepatitis B virus infection of macaques. Nat. Commun. 8, 2146. doi:10.1038/s41467-017-01953-y

Butler, E., Gersch, J., Mcnamara, A., Kuhns, M., Cloherty, G., 2018. Serum hepatitis B virus DNA and pregenomic RNA levels and kinetics in nucleos(t)ide analogue treated and untreated subjects. J. Hepatol. 68, S524.

Chou, S.F., Tsai, M.L., Huang, J.Y., Chang, Y.S., Shih, C., 2015. The Dual Role of an ESCRT-0 Component HGS in HBV Transcription and Naked Capsid Secretion. PLoS Pathog. 11, 1–28. doi:10.1371/journal.ppat.1005123

Cooper, A., Shaul, Y., 2006. Clathrin-mediated endocytosis and lysosomal cleavage of hepatitis B virus capsid-like core particles. J. Biol. Chem. 281, 16563–9. doi:10.1074/jbc.M601418200

Cui, J., Holmes, E.C., 2012. Endogenous Hepadnaviruses in the Genome of the Budgerigar (Melopsittacus undulatus) and the Evolution of Avian Hepadnaviruses. J Virol 86, 7688–7691. doi:10.1128/JVI.00769-12

Decorsière, A., Mueller, H., van Breugel, P.C., Abdul, F., Gerossier, L., Beran, R.K., Livingston, C.M., Niu, C., Fletcher, S.P., Hantz, O., Strubin, M., 2016. Hepatitis B virus X protein identifies the Smc5/6 complex as a host restriction factor. Nature 531, 386–389. doi:10.1038/nature17170

Dupinay, T., Gheit, T., Roques, P., Cova, L., Chevallier-Queyron, P., Tasahsu, S.i., Le Grand, R., Simon, F., Cordier, G., Wakrim, L., Benjelloun, S., Trépo, C., Chemin, I., 2013. Discovery of naturally occurring transmissible chronic hepatitis B virus infection among macaca fascicularis from mauritius island. Hepatology 58, 1610–1620. doi:10.1002/hep.26428

Feitelson, M.a, Bonamassa, B., Arzumanyan, A., 2014. The roles of hepatitis B virus-encoded X protein in virus replication and the pathogenesis of chronic liver disease. Expert Opin. Ther. Targets 18, 293–306. doi:10.1517/14728222.2014.867947

Feitelson, M.A., 1986. Products of the "X" gene in hepatitis B and related viruses. Hepatology 6, 191–198.

Feitelson, M.A., Clayton, M.M., 1990. X antigen polypeptides in the sera of hepatitis B virus-infected patients. Virology 177, 367–71.

Feitelson, M.A., Clayton, M.M., Blumberg, B.S., 1990. X antigen/antibody markers in hepadnavirus infections. Presence and significance of hepadnavirus X gene product(s) in serum. Gastroenterology 98, 1071–8.

Felix, J., Geipel, A., König, A., Corman, V.M., Riel, D. Van, Leijten, L.M., Bremer, C.M., Rasche, A., Cottontail, V.M., Maganga, G.D., Schlegel, M., 2013. Bats carry pathogenic hepadnaviruses antigenically related to hepatitis B virus and capable of infecting human hepatocytes. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 16151–16156. doi:10.1073/pnas.1308049110

Gerelsaikhan, T., Tavis, J.E., Bruss, V., 1996. Hepatitis B virus nucleocapsid envelopment does not occur without genomic DNA synthesis. J. Virol. 70, 4269–4274.

Giersch, K., Allweiss, L., Volz, T., Dandri, M., Lütgehetmann, M., 2017. Serum HBV pgRNA as a clinical marker for cccDNA activity. J. Hepatol. 66, 460–462. doi:10.1016/j.jhep.2016.09.028

Gilbert, C., Feschotte, C., 2010. Genomic fossils calibrate the long-term evolution of hepadnaviruses. PLoS Biol. 8, e1000495. doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.1000495

Günther, S., Piwon, N., Iwanska, A., Schilling, R., Meisel, H., Will, H., 1996. Type, prevalence, and significance of core promoter/enhancer II mutations in hepatitis B viruses from immunosuppressed patients with severe liver disease. J. Virol. 70, 8318–8331.

Gust, I., Burrell, C., Coulepis, A., 1986. Taxonomic classification of human hepatitis B virus. Intervirology 25, 14–29.

Hatakeyama, T., Noguchi, C., Hiraga, N., Mori, N., Tsuge, M., Imamura, M., Takahashi, S., Kawakami, Y., Fujimoto, Y., Ochi, H., Abe, H., Maekawa, T., Kawakami, H., Yatsuji, H., Aisaka, Y., Kohno, H., Aimitsu, S., Chayama, K., 2007. Serum HBV RNA is a predictor of early emergence of the YMDD mutant in patients treated with lamivudine. Hepatology 45, 1179–1186. doi:10.1002/hep.21581

Heermann, K.H., Goldmann, U., Schwartz, W., Seyffarth, T., Baumgarten, H., Gerlich, W.H., 1984. Large surface proteins of hepatitis B virus containing the pre-s sequence. J. Virol. 52, 396–402.

Homs, M., Caballero, A., Gregori, J., Tabernero, D., Quer, J., Nieto, L., Esteban, R., Buti, M., Rodriguez-Frias, F., 2014. Clinical application of estimating hepatitis B virus quasispecies complexity by massive sequencing: correlation between natural evolution and on-treatment evolution. PLoS One 9, e112306. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0112306

Hu, J., Liu, K., 2017. Complete and Incomplete Hepatitis B Virus Particles: Formation, Function, and Application. Viruses 9, E56. doi:10.3390/v9030056

Huang, Y., Takahashi, S., Tsuge, M., Chen, C.-L., Wang, T., Abe, H., Hu, J., Chen, D., Yang, S., Chayama, K., Kao, J.-H., 2015. On-treatment low serum HBV RNA level predicts initial virological response in chronic hepatitis B patients receiving nucleoside analogue therapy. Antivir. Ther. 20, 369–375. doi:10.3851/IMP2777

Hurley, J.H., Hanson, P.I., 2010. Membrane budding and scission by the ESCRT machinery: it's all in the neck. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 11, 556–566. doi:10.1038/nrm2937

Jansen, L., Kootstra, N.A., van Dort, K.A., Takkenberg, R.B., Reesink, H.W., Zaaijer, H.L.,

2016. Hepatitis B Virus Pregenomic RNA Is Present in Virions in Plasma and Is  
Associated With a Response to Pegylated Interferon Alfa-2a and Nucleos(t)ide Analogues.  
J. Infect. Dis. 213, 224–232. doi:10.1093/infdis/jiv397  

Jiang, B., Himmelsbach, K., Ren, H., Boller, K., Hildt, E., 2015. Subviral Hepatitis B Virus  
Filaments, like Infectious Viral Particles, Are Released via Multivesicular Bodies. J. Virol.  
90, 3330–3341. doi:10.1128/JVI.03109-15  

Joshi, S.S., Coffin, C.S., 2018. Hepatitis B virus lymphotropism: emerging details and  
challenges. Biotechnol. Genet. Eng. Rev. 34, 139–151.  
doi:10.1080/02648725.2018.1474324  

Jung, J., Hwang, S.G., Chwae, Y.-J., Park, S., Shin, H.-J., Kim, K., 2014. Phosphoacceptors  
threonine 162 and serines 170 and 178 within the carboxyl-terminal RRRS/T motif of the  
hepatitis B virus core protein make multiple contributions to hepatitis B virus replication.  
J. Virol. 88, 8754–67. doi:10.1128/JVI.01343-14  

Kann, M., Schmitz, A., Rabe, B., 2007. Intracellular transport of hepatitis B virus. World J.  
Gastroenterol. 13, 39–47.  

Kim, S.K., Jang, S.K., Rho, H.M., 1994. Effect of frameshift mutation in the pre-C region of  
hepatitis B virus on the X and C genes. J. Gen. Virol. 75 (Pt 4), 917–23.  
doi:10.1099/0022-1317-75-4-917  

Kimura, T., Ohno, N., Terada, N., Rokuhara, A., Matsumoto, A., Yagi, S., Tanaka, E.,  
Kiyosawa, K., Ohno, S., Maki, N., 2005. Hepatitis B virus DNA-negative dane particles  
lack core protein but contain a 22-kDa precore protein without C-terminal arginine-rich  
domain. J. Biol. Chem. 280, 21713–21719. doi:10.1074/jbc.M501564200  

Kramvis, A., 2016. The clinical implications of hepatitis B virus genotypes and HBeAg in  
pediatrics. Rev. Med. Virol. 26, 285–303. doi:10.1002/rmv.1885  

Kramvis, A., 2014. Genotypes and genetic variability of hepatitis B virus. Intervirology 57,  
141–150. doi:10.1159/000360947  

Lam, A.M., Ren, S., Espiritu, C., Kelly, M., Lau, V., Zheng, L., Hartman, G.D., Flores, O.A.,  

Klumpp, K., 2017. Hepatitis B Virus Capsid Assembly Modulators, but Not Nucleoside  


Anlogs, Inhibit the Production of Extracellular Pregenomic RNA and Spliced RNA Variants. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 61, 1–14. doi:10.1128/AAC.00680-17

Lauber, C., Seitz, S., Mattei, S., Suh, A., Beck, J., Herstein, J., Börold, J., Salzburger, W., Kaderali, L., Briggs, J.A.G., Bartenschlager, R., 2017. Deciphering the Origin and Evolution of Hepatitis B Viruses by Means of a Family of Non-enveloped Fish Viruses. Cell Host Microbe 22, 387–399.e6. doi:10.1016/j.chom.2017.07.019

Lechardeur, D., Sohn, K., Haardt, M., Joshi, P.B., Monck, M., Graham, R.W., Beatty, B., Squire, J., 1999. Metabolic instability of plasmid DNA in the cytosol: a potential barrier to gene transfer. Gene Ther. 6, 482–497.

Leistner, C.M., Gruen-Bernhard, S., Glebe, D., 2008. Role of glycosaminoglycans for binding and infection of hepatitis B virus. Cell. Microbiol. 10, 122–133. doi:10.1111/j.1462-5822.2007.01023.x

Li, M., Sohn, J.A., Seeger, C., 2018. Distribution of Hepatitis B Virus Nuclear DNA. J. Virol. 92, JVI.01391-17. doi:10.1128/JVI.01391-17

Littlejohn, M., Locarnini, S., Yuen, L., 2016. Origins and Evolution of Hepatitis B Virus and Hepatitis D Virus. Cold Spring Harb. Perspect. Med. 6, a021360. doi:10.1101/cshperspect.a021360

Lucifora, J., Arzberger, S., Durantel, D., Belloni, L., Strubin, M., Levrero, M., Zoulim, F., Hantz, O., Protzer, U., 2011. Hepatitis B virus X protein is essential to initiate and maintain virus replication after infection. J. Hepatol. 55, 996–1003. doi:10.1016/j.jhep.2011.02.015

Luckenbaugh, L., Kitrinos, K.M., Delaney, W.E., Hu, J., 2015. Genome-free hepatitis B virion levels in patient sera as a potential marker to monitor response to antiviral therapy. J. Viral Hepat. 22, 561–570. doi:10.1111/jvh.12361

MacDonald, D., Holmes, E., Lewis, J., Simmonds, P., 2000. Detection of Hepatitis B Virus Infection in Wild-Born Chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes verus): Phylogenetic Relationships with Human and Other Primate Genotypes. J Virol 74, 4253–4257.

MacLachlan, J.H., Cowie, B.C., 2015. Hepatitis B virus epidemiology. Cold Spring Harb.

Perspect. Med. 5, a021410. doi:10.1101/cshperspect.a021410

Mason, W.S., Gilbert, A.R., Summers, J., 2005. Clonal expansion of hepatocytes during chronic woodchuck hepatitis virus infection. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 102, 1139–1144. doi:10.1073/pnas.0409332102

Mason, W.S., Low, H., Xu, C., Aldrich, C.E., Scougall, C.A., Grosse, A., Clouston, A., Chavez, D., Litwin, S., Peri, S., Gilbert, A.R., Lanford, R.E., 2009. Detection of Clonally Expanded Hepatocytes in Chimpanzees with Chronic Hepatitis B Virus Infection. J. Virol. 83, 8396–8408. doi:10.1128/JVI.00700-09

McMahon, B.J., Heyward, W.L., Templin, D.W., Clement, D., Lanier, A.P., 1989. Hepatitis B-associated polyarteritis nodosa in alaskan eskimos: Clinical and epidemiologic features and long-term follow-up. Hepatology 9, 97–101. doi:10.1002/hep.1840090116

Milich, D.R., Chen, M., Schödel, F., Peterson, D.L., Jones, J.E., Hughes, J.L., 1997. Role of B cells in antigen presentation of the hepatitis B core. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 94, 14648–53.

Murphy, C.M., Xu, Y., Li, F., Nio, K., Reszka-Blanco, N., Li, X., Wu, Y., Yu, Y., Xiong, Y., Su, L., 2016. Hepatitis B Virus X Protein Promotes Degradation of SMC5/6 to Enhance HBV Replication. Cell Rep. 16, 2846–2854. doi:10.1016/j.celrep.2016.08.026

Nassal, M., 2008. Hepatitis B viruses: Reverse transcription a different way. Virus Res. 134, 235–249.

Ning, X., Basagoudanavar, S.H., Liu, K., Luckenbaugh, L., Wei, D., Wang, C., Wei, B., Zhao, Y., Yan, T., Delaney, W., Hu, J., 2017. Capsid Phosphorylation State and Hepadnavirus Virion Secretion. J. Virol. 91, e00092-17. doi:10.1128/JVI.00092-17

Ning, X., Nguyen, D., Mentzer, L., Adams, C., Lee, H., Ashley, R., Hafenstein, S., Hu, J., 2011. Secretion of genome-free hepatitis B virus--single strand blocking model for virion morphogenesis of para-retrovirus. PLoS Pathog. 7, e1002255. doi:10.1371/journal.ppat.1002255

Niu, C., Livingston, C.M., Li, L., Beran, R.K., Daffis, S., Ramakrishnan, D., Burdette, D., Peiser, L., Salas, E., Ramos, H., Yu, M., Cheng, G., Strubin, M., Delaney, W.E., Fletcher,

S.P., 2017. The Smc5/6 Complex Restricts HBV when Localized to ND10 without Inducing an Innate Immune Response and Is Counteracted by the HBV X Protein Shortly after Infection. PLoS One 12, e0169648. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0169648

Osiowy, C., Larke, B., Giles, E., 2011. Distinct geographical and demographic distribution of hepatitis B virus genotypes in the Canadian Arctic as revealed through an extensive molecular epidemiological survey. J. Viral Hepat. 18, e11-9. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2893.2010.01356.x

Page, A.E., Viguier, S., Dyble, M., Smith, D., Chaudhary, N., Salali, G.D., Thompson, J., Vinicius, L., Mace, R., Migliano, A.B., 2016. Reproductive trade-offs in extant hunter-gatherers suggest adaptive mechanism for the Neolithic expansion. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 113, 4694–4699. doi:10.1073/pnas.1524031113

Pál, J., Nyárády, Z., Marczinovits, I., Pár, A., Ali, Y.S., Berencsi, G., Kvell, K., Németh, P., 2006. Comprehensive regression analysis of hepatitis B virus X antigen level and anti-HBx antibody titer in the sera of patients with HBV infection. Pathol. Oncol. Res. 12, 34–40. doi:PAOR.2006.12.1.0034

Papastergiou, V., Lombardi, R., MacDonald, D., Tsochatzis, E.A., 2015. Global Epidemiology of Hepatitis B Virus (HBV) Infection. Curr. Hepatol. Reports 14, 171–178. doi:10.1007/s11901-015-0269-3

Paraskevis, D., Angelis, K., Magiorkinis, G., Kostaki, E., Ho, S.Y.W., Hatzakis, A., 2015. Dating the origin of hepatitis B virus reveals higher substitution rate and adaptation on the branch leading to F/H genotypes. Mol. Phylogenet. Evol. 93, 44–54. doi:10.1016/j.ympev.2015.07.010

Paraskevis, D., Magiorkinis, G., Magiorkinis, E., Ho, S.Y.W., Belshaw, R., Allain, J.-P., Hatzakis, A., 2013. Dating the origin and dispersal of hepatitis B virus infection in humans and primates. Hepatology 57, 908–916. doi:10.1002/hep.26079

Park, S.G., Kim, Y., Park, E., Ryu, H.M., Jung, G., 2003. Fidelity of hepatitis B virus polymerase. Eur. J. Biochem. 270, 2929–2936. doi:10.1046/j.1432-1033.2003.03650.x

Patterson, F., Bumak, J., Batey, R., 1993. Changing prevalence of hepatitis B virus in urbanized

Australian aborigines. J Gastroenterol Hepatol 8, 410–413.

Porterfield, J.Z., Dhason, M.S., Loeb, D.D., Nassal, M., Stray, S.J., Zlotnick, A., 2010. Full-length hepatitis B virus core protein packages viral and heterologous RNA with similarly high levels of cooperativity. J. Virol. 84, 7174–7184. doi:10.1128/JVI.00586-10

Possehl, C., Repp, R., Heermann, K.H., Korec, E., Uy, A., Gerlich, W.H., 1992. Absence of free core antigen in anti-HBc negative viremic hepatitis B carriers. Arch. Virol. Suppl. 4, 39–41.

Prange, R., 2012. Host factors involved in hepatitis B virus maturation, assembly, and egress. Med. Microbiol. Immunol. 201, 449–61. doi:10.1007/s00430-012-0267-9

Rabe, B., Glebe, D., Kann, M., 2006. Lipid-mediated introduction of hepatitis B virus capsids into nonsusceptible cells allows highly efficient replication and facilitates the study of early infection events. J. Virol. 80, 5465–73. doi:10.1128/JVI.02303-05

Rokuhara, A., Matsumoto, A., Tanaka, E., Umemura, T., Yoshizawa, K., Kimura, T., Maki, N., Kiyosawa, K., 2006. Hepatitis B virus RNA is measurable in serum and can be a new marker for monitoring lamivudine therapy. J. Gastroenterol. 41, 785–790. doi:10.1007/s00535-006-1856-4

Rokuhara, A., Tanaka, E., Matsumoto, A., Kimura, T., Yamaura, T., Orii, K., Sun, X., Yagi, S., Maki, N., Kiyosawa, K., 2003. Clinical evaluation of a new enzyme immunoassay for hepatitis B virus core-related antigen; a marker distinct from viral DNA for monitoring lamivudine treatment. J. Viral Hepat. 10, 324–330.

Roseman, A.M., Berriman, J.a, Wynne, S.a, Butler, P.J.G., Crowther, R.A., 2005. A structural model for maturation of the hepatitis B virus core. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 102, 15821–15826. doi:10.1073/pnas.0504874102

Scaglioni, P.P., Melegari, M., Wands, J.R., 1997. Posttranscriptional regulation of hepatitis B virus replication by the precore protein. J Virol 71, 345–353.

Schulze, A., Gripon, P., Urban, S., 2007. Hepatitis B virus infection initiates with a large surface protein-dependent binding to heparan sulfate proteoglycans. Hepatology 46, 1759–1768. doi:10.1002/hep.21896

Seitz, S., Iancu, C., Volz, T., Mier, W., Dandri, M., Urban, S., Bartenschlager, R., 2016. A Slow Maturation Process Renders Hepatitis B Virus Infectious. Cell Host Microbe 20, 25–35. doi:10.1016/j.chom.2016.05.013

Simmonds, P., 2001. Reconstructing the origins of human hepatitis viruses. Phil. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B 1013–1026. doi:10.1098/rstb.2001.0890

Sohn, J.A., Litwin, S., Seeger, C., 2009. Mechanism for CCC DNA synthesis in hepadnaviruses. PLoS One 4, e8093. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0008093

Song, G., Yang, R., Rao, H., Feng, B., Ma, H., Jin, Q., Wei, L., 2017. Serum HBV Core Related Antigen Is a Good Predictor for Spontaneous HBeAg Seroconversion in Chronic Hepatitis B Patient. J. Med. Virol. 89, 463–468. doi:10.1002/jmv.24657

Staprans, S., Loeb, D.D., Ganem, D., 1991. Mutations affecting hepadnavirus plus-strand DNA synthesis dissociate primer cleavage from translocation and reveal the origin of linear viral DNA. J. Virol. 65, 1255–1262.

Su, P.Y., Yang, C.J., Chu, T.H., Chang, C.H., Chiang, C., Tang, F.M., Lee, C.Y., Shih, C., 2016. HBV maintains electrostatic homeostasis by modulating negative charges from phosphoserine and encapsidated nucleic acids. Sci. Rep. 6, 1–19. doi:10.1038/srep38959

Suh, A., Brosius, J., Schmitz, J., Kriegs, J.O., 2013. The genome of a Mesozoic paleovirus reveals the evolution of hepatitis B viruses. Nat. Commun. 4, 1–7. doi:10.1038/ncomms2798

Suh, A., Weber, C.C., Kehlmaier, C., Braun, E.L., Green, R.E., Fritz, U., Ray, D.A., Ellegren, H., 2014. Early mesozoic coexistence of amniotes and hepadnaviridae. PLoS Genet. 10, e1004559. doi:10.1371/journal.pgen.1004559

Summers, J., Gilbert, A.R., Yang, W., Aldrich, C.E., Saputelli, J., Litwin, S., Toll, E., Mason, W.S., 2003. Hepatocyte turnover during resolution of a transient hepadnaviral infection. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 100, 11652–11659. doi:10.1073/pnas.1635109100

Sun Tzu, 2015. The art of war. First ed. Pluton, Barberà del Vallès.

Sung, W.K., Zheng, H., Li, S., Chen, R., Liu, X., Li, Y., Lee, N.P., Lee, W.H., Ariyaratne, P.N., Tennakoon, C., Mulawadi, F.H., Wong, K.F., Liu, A.M., Poon, R.T., Fan, S.T., Chan,

K.L., Gong, Z., Hu, Y., Lin, Z., Wang, G., Zhang, Q., Barber, T.D., Chou, W.C., Aggarwal, A., Hao, K., Zhou, W., Zhang, C., Hardwick, J., Buser, C., Xu, J., Kan, Z., Dai, H., Mao, M., Reinhard, C., Wang, J., Luk, J.M., 2012. Genome-wide survey of recurrent HBV integration in hepatocellular carcinoma. Nat. Genet. 44, 765–769. doi:10.1038/ng.2295

Szpakowski, J.-L., Tucker, L.-Y., 2013. Causes of death in patients with hepatitis B: a natural history cohort study in the United States. Hepatology 58, 21–30. doi:10.1002/hep.26110

Tang, H., Oishi, N., Kaneko, S., Murakami, S., 2006. Molecular functions and biological roles of hepatitis B virus x protein. Cancer Sci. 97, 977–983. doi:10.1111/j.1349-7006.2006.00299.x

Terrault, N.A., Bzowej, N.H., Chang, K.-M., Hwang, J.P., Jonas, M.M., Murad, M.H., 2016. AASLD guidelines for treatment of chronic hepatitis B. Hepatology 63, 261–283. doi:10.1002/hep.28156

Thedja, M.D., Muljono, D.H., Nurainy, N., Sukowati, C.H.C., Verhoef, J., Marzuki, S., 2011. Ethnogeographical structure of hepatitis B virus genotype distribution in Indonesia and discovery of a new subgenotype, B9. Arch. Virol. 156, 855–868. doi:10.1007/s00705-011-0926-y

Tong, S., Revill, P., 2016. Overview of hepatitis B viral replication and genetic variability. J. Hepatol. 64, S4-16. doi:10.1016/j.jhep.2016.01.027

Torres, C., Fernández, M.D.B., Flichman, D.M., Campos, R.H., Mbayed, V.A., 2013. Influence of overlapping genes on the evolution of human hepatitis B virus. Virology 441, 40–8. doi:10.1016/j.virol.2013.02.027

Tsuge, M., Murakami, E., Imamura, M., Abe, H., Miki, D., Hiraga, N., Takahashi, S., Ochi, H., Nelson Hayes, C., Ginba, H., Matsuyama, K., Kawakami, H., Chayama, K., 2013. Serum HBV RNA and HBeAg are useful markers for the safe discontinuation of nucleotide analogue treatments in chronic hepatitis B patients. J. Gastroenterol. 48, 1188–1204. doi:10.1007/s00535-012-0737-2

Tu, T., Budzinska, M.A., Shackel, N.A., Urban, S., 2017. HBV DNA Integration: Molecular

Mechanisms and Clinical Implications. Viruses 9, E75. doi:10.3390/v9040075

Tuttleman, J.S., Pourcel, C., Summers, J., 1986. Formation of the pool of covalently closed circular viral DNA in hepadnavirus-infected cells. Cell 47, 451–460. doi:10.1016/0092-8674(86)90602-1

United Nations, 2015. Volume I: Comprehensive Tables (ST/ESA/SER.A/379), World Population Prospects The 2015 Revision. United Nations, New York.

Urban, S., Hildt, E., Eckerskorn, C., Sirma, H., Kekulé, A., Hofsneider, P.H., 1997. Isolation and molecular characterization of hepatitis B virus X-protein from a baculovirus expression system. Hepatology 26, 1045–1053. doi:10.1002/hep.510260437

Van Blerkom, L.M., 2003. Role of Viruses in Human Evolution. Am. J. Phys. Anthropol. 122, 14–46. doi:10.1002/ajpa.10384

van Bömmel, F., Bartens, A., Mysickova, A., Hofmann, J., Krüger, D.H., Berg, T., Edelmann, A., 2015. Serum hepatitis B virus RNA levels as an early predictor of hepatitis B envelope antigen seroconversion during treatment with polymerase inhibitors. Hepatology 61, 66–76. doi:10.1002/hep.27381

Vanlandschoot, P., Van Houtte, F., Serruys, B., Leroux-Roels, G., 2005. The arginine-rich carboxy-terminal domain of the hepatitis B virus core protein mediates attachment of nucleocapsids to cell-surface-expressed heparan sulfate. J. Gen. Virol. 86, 75–84. doi:10.1099/vir.0.80580-0

Venook, A.P., Papandreou, C., Furuse, J., Ladrón De Guevara, L., 2010. The Incidence and Epidemiology of Hepatocellular Carcinoma: A Global and Regional Perspective. Oncologist 15, 5–13. doi:10.1634/theoncolo-gist.2010-S4-05

Wang, J., Shen, T., Huang, X., Kumar, G.R., Chen, X., Zeng, Z., Zhang, R., Chen, R., Li, T., Zhang, T., Yuan, Q., Li, P.C., Huang, Q., Colonna, R., Jia, J., Hou, J., McCrae, M.A., Gao, Z., Ren, H., Xia, N., Zhuang, H., Lu, F., 2016. Serum hepatitis B virus RNA is encapsidated pregenome RNA that may be associated with persistence of viral infection and rebound. J. Hepatol. 65, 700–710. doi:10.1016/j.jhep.2016.05.029

Wang, J., Sheng, Q., Ding, Y., Chen, R., Sun, X., Chen, X., Dou, X., Lu, F., 2017. HBV RNA

virion-like particles produced under nucleos(t)ide analogues treatment are mainly replication-deficient. J. Hepatol. 68, 847–849. doi:10.1016/j.jhep.2017.10.030

Wang, X., Le, N., Denoth-Lippuner, A., Barral, Y., Kroschewski, R., 2016. Asymmetric partitioning of transfected DNA during mammalian cell division. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 113, 7177–7182. doi:10.1073/pnas.1606091113

Watanabe, T., Sorensen, E.M., Naito, A., Schott, M., Kim, S., Ahlquist, P., 2007. Involvement of host cellular multivesicular body functions in hepatitis B virus budding. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 104, 10205–10. doi:10.1073/pnas.0704000104

Wittkop, L., Schwarz, A., Cassany, A., Grün-Bernhard, S., Delaleau, M., Rabe, B., Cazenave, C., Gerlich, W., Glebe, D., Kann, M., 2010. Inhibition of protein kinase C phosphorylation of hepatitis B virus capsids inhibits virion formation and causes intracellular capsid accumulation. Cell. Microbiol. 12, 962–975. doi:10.1111/j.1462-5822.2010.01444.x

Wooddell, C.I., Yuen, M.F., Chan, H.L.Y., Gish, R.G., Locarnini, S.A., Chavez, D., Ferrari, C., Given, B.D., Hamilton, J., Kanner, S.B., Lai, C.L., Lau, J.Y.N., Schluep, T., Xu, Z., Lanford, R.E., Lewis, D.L., 2017. Rnai-based treatment of chronically infected patients and chimpanzees reveals that integrated hepatitis b virus DNA is a source of hbsag. Sci. Transl. Med. 9, 1–12. doi:10.1126/scitranslmed.aan0241

World Health Organization, 2017. Hepatitis B [WWW Document]. URL http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs204/en/ (accessed 10.22.17).

Wu, B., Li, C., Chen, H., Chang, J., Jeng, K., Chou, C., Hsu, M., Tsai, T., 2006. Blocking of G1/S transition and cell death in the regenerating liver of Hepatitis B virus X protein transgenic mice. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 340, 916–928. doi:10.1016/j.bbrc.2005.12.089

Wu, T.T., Coates, L., Aldrich, C.E., Summers, J., Mason, W.S., 1990. In hepatocytes infected with duck hepatitis B virus, the template for viral RNA synthesis is amplified by an intracellular pathway. Virology 175, 255–261.

Yang, W., Summers, J., 1999. Integration of hepadnavirus DNA in infected liver: evidence for a linear precursor. J. Virol. 73, 9710–9717.

Yang, W., Summers, J., 1995. Illegitimate replication of linear hepadnavirus DNA through nonhomologous recombination. J. Virol. 69, 4029–4036.

Yang, Y., Han, Q., Hou, Z., Zhang, C., Tian, Z., Zhang, J., 2017. Exosomes mediate hepatitis B virus (HBV) transmission and NK-cell dysfunction. Cell. Mol. Immunol. 14, 465–475. doi:10.1038/cmi.2016.24

Yang, Z., Huang, S., Chen, L., Liu, F., Cai, X., Guo, Y., Wang, M., Han, Y., Yu, D.-M., Jiang, J.-H., Zhang, D.-H., Gong, Q.-M., Zhang, G.-Q., Zang, G.-Q., Lu, Z.-H., Huang, L.-H., Zhang, X.-X., 2015. Characterization of Full-Length Genomes of Hepatitis B Virus Quasispecies in Sera of Patients at Different Phases of Infection. J. Clin. Microbiol. 53, 2203–2214. doi:10.1128/JCM.00068-15

Zehender, G., Ebranati, E., Gabanelli, E., Sorrentino, C., Lo Presti, A., Tanzi, E., Ciccozzi, M., Galli, M., 2014. Enigmatic origin of hepatitis B virus: an ancient travelling companion or a recent encounter? World J. Gastroenterol. 20, 7622–7634. doi:10.3748/wjg.v20.i24.7622

Zeuzem, S., de Man, R.A., Honkoop, P., Roth, W.K., Schalm, S.W., Schmidt, J.M., 1997. Dynamics of hepatitis B virus infection in vivo. J. Hepatol. 27, 431–6.

Zhao, X.-L., Yang, J.-R., Lin, S.-Z., Ma, H., Guo, F., Yang, R.-F., Zhang, H.-H., Han, J.-C., Wei, L., Pan, X.-B., 2016. Serum viral duplex-linear DNA proportion increases with the progression of liver disease in patients infected with HBV. Gut 65, 502–11. doi:10.1136/gutjnl-2014-308989

Fig. 1. The hepatitis B virus replication cycle, showing the various particles and genome forms involved. The arrows depict major (solid lines) or secondary (dashed lines) routes taken by virion/virion-like/subviral particles, genomes, RNAs, or proteins entering the hepatocyte or its nucleus (red), moving through the nucleoplasm or cytoplasm (black), or secreted (green).

The replication cycle begins with non-specific attachment of DNA-containing virions to surface-exposed heparan sulfate proteoglycans (HSPGs), followed by specific attachment of infective relaxed circular (rcDNA) or double-stranded linear (dslDNA) DNA-containing virions to their specific receptor, sodium-taurocholate co-transporting polypeptide (NTCP) (upper right-hand corner). At the time of writing, it is unknown whether virion-like particles and naked capsids are able to enter the hepatocytes.

After entry into the hepatocyte, the core particle is actively transported to nuclear pores via microtubules and viral DNA is released into the nucleoplasm, where it may be converted into covalently closed circular DNA (cccDNA), mainly from rcDNA or integrated into the host genome, mainly from dslDNA. cccDNA then forms a viral minichromosome (bottom right of the nucleus, in an adaptation of the model by Belloni et al. [(Belloni et al., 2009)]), by association with host proteins, such as histones (acetylated, blue circles; deacetylated, black circles), chromatin-modifying enzymes, transcription factors, etc. (green rectangles), and with viral proteins, such as hepatitis B core antigen (HBcAg, white circles), and indirectly with the hepatitis B X protein (HBx, light blue forms). From this minichromosome, genomic and subgenomic viral RNAs are transcribed, and are then translated into viral proteins in the cytoplasm: p21 (core proteins), which constitute HBcAg, and the polymerase from pregenomic RNA (pgRNA). The precore protein (p25) is translated from preCore RNA and is the precursor of the hepatitis B e antigen (p17 or HBeAg) and the 22-kDa core-related protein (p22cr) (the question mark indicates that the existence and function of this last protein are controversial).

The large envelope or surface proteins (LHBs) are translated from preS1 RNA, whereas the middle (MHBs) and small (SHBs) proteins are translated from preS2/S RNA. The HBx protein is translated from X RNA. HBcAg can assemble into capsids around the ribonucleoproteic complex constituted by pgRNA and the polymerase, and also assemble into empty capsids.
After reverse transcription of encapsidated pgRNA, rcDNA or dsDNA are synthesized by in situ priming. Both types of DNA-containing capsids can be directed to multivesicular bodies to be enveloped with LHBs, MHBs, and SHBs and released as new infective DNA-containing virions, or alternatively re-enter the nucleus of the host hepatocyte following the recycling path. In addition, some pgRNA-polymerase ribonucleoproteic complexes and other encapsidated viral RNAs (eg, X RNA) can also be enveloped with surface proteins and secreted.

These RNA virions are likely to be directed to the multivesicular bodies for secretion, in a manner similar or identical to that of DNA virions. However, secretion of these particles has not yet been characterized, as is indicated by the asterisk in multivesicular bodies. Empty capsids are also directed to multivesicular bodies to be enveloped and secreted. In addition to virions, filamentous subviral particles are also secreted from multivesicular bodies, whereas spherical subviral particles and HBeAg are secreted by the cellular constitutive secretory pathway.

Finally, naked capsids both empty or containing the viral genome (nucleocapsids) can also be released without being enveloped by a mechanism that seems to be regulated by the apoptosis linked gene II interacting protein X (Alix).

Particles outside the host hepatocyte are schematically depicted with their approximate proportions. Regarding RNA virion-like particles, only pgRNA are represented; the double asterisk indicates that other viral RNAs, such as spliced forms of pgRNA or X RNA can be found encapsidated in RNA virions. The naked (nucleo)capsids were initially observed in HBV-replicating liver cell lines. The triple asterisk indicates that they are absent or present only in minute amounts in the blood of infected patients or chimpanzees.
Empty virion-like particles
rcDNA virions
dsIDNA virions
RNA virion-like particles
Naked Capsids***
Infective DNA-containing virions
Virion-like particles? Naked capsids?***

>90% of HBV circulating viral particles
5-10% of rcDNA virions
10 - 100 fold less than rcDNA virions

Multivesicular Bodies*
envelopment with LHBs, MHBs and SHBs

HBeAg
Constitutive secretory pathway
p17 (HBeAg)
p22cr(?)

HBsAg
Up to 10,000 fold virion concentration
Subviral particles (filaments or spheres)

LHBs
Constitutive secretory pathway
SHBs
MHBs

p25
p21 (HBcAg)
pgRNA
preCore
preS1
preS2/S
AAA
AAA
AAA
X
AAA

POLYMERASE

Empty Capsids
pgRNA
dsIDNA

Reverse transcription
In situ priming

Empty or nucleo capsids
dsIDNA
rcDNA

Recycling path

Endocytosis, viral envelope removal
Alix, Naked capsid release
Non-specific attachment to HSPGs
Specific attachment to NTCP

DNA released to the nucleoplasm
Active transport to nuclear pore (Microtubules)

cccDNA
Integration into host genome
Association with host and viral proteins

Viral RNAs transcription by host RNA pol II
Subgenomic viral mRNAs
Viral minichromosome

HIGHLIGHTS:

- Hepatitis B virus (HBV), from the *Hepadnaviridae* family, is an ancient human pathogen.
- The transmission routes of HBV vary with the prevalence of the virus, with vertical transmission being the most efficient.
- The HBV replication strategy is complex and includes a multiplicity of particles and genome states.
- Enveloped or naked HBV particles can be empty or contain DNA or RNA; subviral particles are composed by lipids and HBsAg.
- The HBV genome is found as traveler DNA and RNA, and as nuclear covalently closed circular and host genome-integrated DNA.
