
Review

The molecular details of cytokine signalling via the JAK/STAT pathway

Rhiannon Morris, Nadia J. Kershaw and Jeffrey J. Babon*

Walter and Eliza Hall Institute, 1G Royal Parade, Parkville, 3052, VIC, Australia

The University of Melbourne, Royal Parade, Parkville, 3050, VIC, Australia

*Correspondence: Email: babon@wehi.edu.au,  
Tel +61 3 93452960;  
Fax +61 3 93470852

List of Abbreviations. Note that a full list of the abbreviations for all cytokines are given in Table 1. Receptors for each cytokine are denoted by the cytokine abbreviation followed by “R”. For example, TpoR = Tpo Receptor

| AKT | Protein kinase B |
| --- | --- |
| AML | Acute myeloid leukemia |
| APS | SH2B adaptor protein 2 |
| ATP | Adenosine triphosphate |
| B-ALL | B cell lymphocytic leukemia |
| CBP | CREB-binding protein |
| CD45 | Cluster of differentiation 45 |
| CHR | Cytokine receptor homology region |
| Elk | ETS domain containing protein |
| ER | Endoplasmic reticulum |
| FERM | Band 4.1, ezrin, radixin, moesin |
| FnIII | Fibronectin type III |
| FRET | Fluorescence resonance energy transfer |
| Gp130 | Glycoprotein 130 |
| Grb2 | Growth factor receptor-bound protein 2 |
| HP1 | Heterochromatin protein 1 |
| Ig | Immunoglobulin |
| IRF9 | Interferon response factor 9 |
| ISGF3 | IFN-stimulated gene factor 3 |
| JAK | Janus Kinase |
| JH | JAK homology domain |
| LNK | Lymphocyte adaptor protein or SH2B adaptor protein 3 |
| MAM | Meprin, A-5 protein, and receptor protein phosphatase mu |
| MAPK | Mitogen-activated protein kinases |
| mTOR | Mammalian target of rapamycin |
| NK | Natural killer |

This article has been accepted for publication and undergone full peer review but has not been through the copyediting, typesetting, pagination and proofreading process which may lead to differences between this version and the Version of Record. Please cite this article as

doi: 10.1002/pro.3519

© 2018 The Protein Society

Received: Aug 27, 2018; Revised: Sep 24, 2018; Accepted: Sep 24, 2018

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

P300          | E1A binding protein p300
PH             | Pleckstrin homology
PI(3)K        | Phosphatidylinositol-4,5-bisphosphate 3 kinase
PTP            | Protein tyrosine phosphatase
PTP-RT         | Protein tyrosine phosphatase, receptor type
PTP1b          | Protein tyrosine phosphatase 1B
pTyr           | Phosphotyrosine
SH2            | Src homology 2
SH2B           | SH2B adaptor protein 1
SHP1           | Src homology region 2 domain-containing phosphatase 1
SHP2           | Src homology region 2 domain-containing phosphatase 1
SOCS           | Suppressor of cytokine signalling
STAT           | Signal transducer and activator of transcription
TC-PTP         | T cell protein tyrosine phosphatase
TM             | Transmembrane
TYK            | Tyrosine kinase
βc             | Beta common
γc             | Gamma common

Abstract

More than 50 cytokines signal via the JAK/STAT pathway to orchestrate haematopoiesis, induce inflammation and control the immune response. Cytokines are secreted glycoproteins that act as intercellular messengers, inducing proliferation, differentiation, growth or apoptosis of their target cells. They act by binding to specific receptors on the surface of target cells and switching on a phosphotyrosine-based intracellular signalling cascade initiated by kinases then propagated and effected by SH2 domain-containing transcription factors. As cytokine signalling is proliferative and often inflammatory it is tightly regulated in terms of both amplitude and duration. Here we review molecular details of the cytokine-induced signalling cascade and describe the architectures of the proteins involved, including the receptors, kinases and transcription factors that initiate and propagate signalling and the regulatory proteins that control it.

Introduction

Cytokines are secreted glycoproteins that act as intercellular messengers to control the haematopoietic and immune systems and the inflammatory response. The term “cytokine” arises from the Greek κύτος and κίνησις (cell and movement) consistent with their ability to mobilise cells to sites of infection and inflammation. Historically, the plethora of different cytokines have been divided into five groups: (A) TNF-alpha and related molecules, (B) IL-1 family members, (C) TGF-Betas, (D) factors that signal through receptor tyrosine kinases such as M-CSF, (D) chemokines and (E) cytokines that signal through the JAK/STAT pathway (Fig. 1). The latter group is perhaps the largest and comprises both haematopoietic growth factors such as EPO as well as immunomodulatory cytokines such as IL-2 and inflammatory cytokines such as interferon gamma (Table 1). This review will focus entirely
on this class and henceforth we use the term cytokine to describe only those that signal via the JAK/STAT cascade.

### JAK/STAT signaling: from the cell-surface to the nucleus

The molecular details of the JAK/STAT pathway were largely uncovered in a series of ground breaking studies from the laboratories of James Darnell, George Stark and Ian Kerr more than two decades ago.¹ It is an elegantly simple signalling cascade in which the cytokine requires only three components (receptor, kinase, transcription factor) to elicit a response (Fig. 2). Each cytokine binds to a specific receptor on the surface of its target cell. These receptors contain intracellular domains which are constitutively associated with members of the JAK (Janus Kinase) family of tyrosine kinases.²⁻⁶ JAKs are inactive prior to cytokine exposure however binding of cytokine to its receptor induces their auto-activation by transphosphorylation.⁷ Once activated, JAKs phosphorylate the intracellular tails of the receptors on specific tyrosines which in turn act as docking sites for members of the Signal Transducers and Activators of Transcription (STAT) family of transcription factors (Fig. 2).⁸ Receptor-localised STATs are then phosphorylated by JAK⁹,¹⁰ which leads to their disassociation from the receptor and translocation to the nucleus, where they drive the expression of cytokine-responsive genes,¹¹ often leading to proliferation and/or differentiation. To ensure that signalling is switched off appropriately, a number of proteins act to attenuate cytokine signalling at multiple levels of the pathway. Notably, the SOCS (Suppressors of Cytokine Signalling) family are negative feedback inhibitors of the signalling cascade.¹²,¹³ Although there are exceptions, a general rule of cytokine signalling is that each cytokine binds to a specific receptor, this induces activation of specific JAK(s) and STAT(s) and signalling is switched off by a particular SOCS protein (Fig. 3).

Evolutionarily, the JAK/STAT pathway first arose in Bilateria; *Drosophila* for example contains the complete set of pathway components (Cytokine, Receptor, JAK, STAT).
Although the simplicity of the system’s architecture has been maintained there has been a large expansion in the numbers of each of the components throughout the course of evolution. For example, *Drosophila* has three cytokine-like molecules (*unpaired*, *unpaired-2*, *unpaired-3*), a single receptor (*domeless*), one JAK (*hopscotch*), one STAT (*marelle/STAT92E*) and three SOCS. In contrast, the human genome encodes >50 cytokines, a roughly equivalent number of receptor chains, four JAKs, seven STATs and eight SOCS (Table II) and these numbers are not dramatically different in any vertebrates so far examined.¹⁴

## Cytokines and their Receptors

Most cytokines are small helical-bundle proteins usually ca. 150–200 amino acids in length. They are divided into two classes based on motifs found in their receptors (see below). Class I cytokines consist of four α-helices in a characteristic up-up-down-down configuration. Some of these, such as IL-5 exist as dimers but the topology is conserved. The unusual up-up-down-down configuration necessitates two long loops to connect the up-up and down-down pairs. In class II cytokines one or both of these loops is replaced by an extra α-helix resulting in 5–6 helices in total arranged in an anti-parallel fashion. Again, some (such as IFNγ and IL-10) function as dimers, where the two C-terminal helices of one molecule are domain-swapped into a second.

Cytokine receptors consist of multiple (usually two) protein chains. These receptor chains are type I single-pass transmembrane proteins with conserved intracellular and extracellular features. The extracellular domains contain a region termed the haemopoietin domain or cytokine receptor homology region (CHR),¹⁵ formed by a pair of Fibronectin type III (FnIII) domains oriented at nearly right angles to one-another (Fig. 4). FnIII domains are small ca. 100 residue domains that form a β sandwich comprised of a three- and a four-stranded β-

sheet. The principal binding site for cytokines is at the junction between the two FnIII domains within the CHR, and flexible, variable loops from each domain determine specificity at this binding site.^[16,17]

The CHRs of the receptors for Class I cytokines contain four conserved cysteines arranged in a CX-(9–10)-CXWX-(26–32)-CX-(10–15)-C sequence within the first FnIII domain (forming two intra-domain disulphide bonds) and a “WSXWS motif” in the second FnIII domain.^[18] The CHRs of class II receptors do not have the WSXWS motif and although they too share conserved cysteines, they are arranged differently. Intracellularly, both Class I and Class II receptors share sequences that allow for recruitment of JAKs and STATs.

## Class I Cytokine Receptors

Class I receptors represent the largest group, with 34 class I receptor chains encoded in the human genome.^[19] All Class I receptors contain a CHR but many also contain additional extracellular domains such as Ig domains, extra FnIII domains or even a second CHR. Class I receptors bind to a broad array of interleukins, haematopoietins and growth factors whilst Class II receptors are more restricted, recognizing only interferons and IL-10 family cytokines (Fig. 3).

As shown in Figure 3, there are three major shared chains utilised by class I cytokines. These are gp130, beta common and gamma common, utilised by IL-6, IL-3 and IL-2 family cytokines, respectively. In addition to these there are two other shared chains used by cytokines in the IL4/13 and IL-12/23 subgroups. Finally, there are the homodimeric receptors, consisting of two identical chains such as those used by EPO, TPO, GH, PRL, Leptin and G-CSF. Within each of these classes the cytokine IL-12Rβ2 receptor stoichiometry and organisation can differ. A common theme within the non-homodimeric receptors is that there will be a cytokine-specific chain (nominally the “alpha” chain) that

recognises cytokine with high affinity, and the resulting dimer will then recruit a “shared” chain in order to initiate signalling. The alpha-chain may or may not contain the intracellular motifs required to recruit a JAK kinase. Although there are differences in the number of individual chains that comprise a class I receptor, receptors usually contain precisely two signalling chains (those whose cytoplasmic domain binds to a JAK family member to initiate signalling).

**Homodimeric receptors**

The homodimeric cytokine receptors are a family of structurally diverse receptors that are categorised by their use of two identical receptor chains. Some, like EPOR,$^{20}$ GHR$^{16}$ and PRLR$^{21}$ are the most simple of all receptors in terms of architecture, the ectodomain of each receptor chain consisting only of a single CHR unit. Studies on EPOR and GHR in particular have formed the basis of the general paradigm for cytokine signalling. These three receptors, alongside the larger TPOR (which contains two CHRs per ectodomain chain), bind a single molecule of cytokine to form a signalling-competent ternary complex.

Although these complexes are by nature asymmetric, it is the hinge regions between the two FnIII domains of the CHRs on both chains that participate in cytokine binding. One chain binds to the cytokine with high-affinity, and the other chain binds to a lower-affinity site on the cytokine. This phenomenon is observed for all classes of cytokine receptor.

The Leptin and G-CSF receptors are also homodimeric but structurally have more in common with the IL-6 receptor family (see below and Fig. 3). They are referred to as “tall receptors” as they contain “legs”, comprised of two or three FnIII domains that link their cytokine- binding region to the membrane. This places the cytokine binding region of these receptors as far as 120 Å from the cell-surface. The leptin receptor is the largest of all cytokine receptors, consisting of (from N- to C-terminus): Ig-CHR-Ig-CHR-FnIII-FnIII. Both the leptin and G-

CSF receptors bind two molecules of cytokine, forming signalling competent tetramers with a similar architecture to that seen in many IL-6 family receptors²² (Fig. 3, 4).

### IL-6 family cytokine Receptors

The IL-6 family of cytokines includes IL-6, IL-11, IL-27, LIF, OSM, CNTF, CT-1 and CLC.

The majority of these cytokines act via receptors that include the common gp130 chain. Like the G-CSF and Leptin receptors, gp130 is also a tall receptor chain. Its extracellular domain consists of an Ig domain, a CHR, followed by three FnIII domains that form the legs. Within the IL-6 family are two other tall receptor chains which are shared between cytokines on a more limited basis, these are LIFRβ and OSMR.

The signalling competent complex between IL-6 or IL-11 and their receptors are hexamers. These consist of two molecules each of cytokine, gp130 and a cytokine-specific alpha chain (IL-6Ra or IL-11Ra).²³⁻²⁵ Two copies of gp130 are required because the intracellular domain of the cytokine-specific alpha chains of these receptors do not bind JAK. Signal transduction is therefore achieved by transactivation of two JAK molecules bound to the two gp130 receptor chains.

Whilst the IL-6 and IL-11 signalling complexes are similar in structure and composition, other gp130 cytokines signal via different topological assemblies. For example, the complexes between CNTF, CLC or CT-1 and their receptors are tetramers. These cytokine/receptor complexes are not built around two gp130 chains but instead are built around a heterodimer between gp130 and another JAK-binding tall receptor called LIFRβ.²⁶,²⁷ As is the case for IL-6, these cytokines first bind to cytokine-specific non-signalling alpha receptor chains and the resulting complexes then recruit gp130 or LIFRβ.

Finally, LIF, OSM and IL-31 signal via trimeric complexes with the receptor being a heterodimer of two tall chains without the requirement for an alpha chain.

### IL-12/23 Receptors

IL-12 and IL-23 also signal via tall receptors. Although there is no structure of the full receptors for these cytokines they are likely to be of similar architecture to the LIF receptor<sup>28,29</sup> (Fig. 4). IL-12 and IL-23 are unusual cytokines as they are both comprised of two disulphide-linked subunits that arise from different genes.<sup>30</sup> The first of these subunits (IL-12p35 and IL-23p19) are classic four-helix bundle cytokines. The second subunit (IL-12p40, which is shared by both IL-12 and IL-23) is more like a receptor in structure, consisting of a CHR, replete with WSXWS motif, and an N-terminal Ig domain, but lacking a transmembrane domain. Indeed, the p40 receptor-like subunit associates with the 4-helix bundle subunit in a classic receptor-like manner, using the hinge region between the two FnIII domains of the CHR.<sup>31,32</sup> The receptors for IL-12 and IL-23 are also heterodimers which share a common chain, the interleukin-12 receptor subunit β1 (IL-12Rβ1). The other monomer in each receptor is a cytokine-specific alpha chain (IL-12Rβ2 or IL-23R). As one would expect, the common receptor subunit recognises the p40 subunit whilst the specific alpha chains recognise the classic 4-helix bundle moieties within each cytokine heterodimer.<sup>33</sup>

### IL-3 family cytokines

The IL-3 family (IL-3,-5, GMCSF) all signal via receptors that contain the common beta chain (Beta-common, βc).<sup>34</sup> The extracellular region of βc is comprised of two CHRs (i.e four FnIII domains). βc has no measurable affinity for any of the three cytokines alone, instead each of the three cytokines within this family has a specific alpha-chain that facilitates a high affinity interaction with βc.<sup>35</sup> The primary site of interaction with the alpha-chain is the usual hinge region between the two FnIII domains of the CHR however these alpha-chains also contain a N-terminal Ig domain which wedges over the top of the cytokine, providing extra affinity. It is this binary complex which associates with βc with high affinity.

βc forms a closely associated dimer with the individual FnIII domains of each monomer drawn out like beads on a string, allowing the dimer to associate in an almost domain-swapped fashion.³⁶ The two cytokine binding sites on the βc dimer are thus formed at the spatial junction between an FnIII domain from both monomers. The structure of the signalling competent GM-CSF/Receptor complex shows the most surprising stoichiometry of all, forming dodecamers consisting of four cytokines, four βcs and four alpha receptors.³⁶ This dodecameric structure is the minimum structure that can allow juxtaposition of the intracellular JAKs, leading to transactivation and downstream signalling.

### IL-2 family cytokines

Finally, the IL-2 family cytokines (IL-2, -4, -7, -9, -15, -21) all signal via receptors that contain the common gamma chain (Gamma common, γc), a JAK3-associated receptor subunit. The extracellular region of γc is much smaller than that of gp130 or βc, consisting of just a single CHR. Most members of this family of cytokines signal via heterodimeric receptors (γc plus a specific alpha receptor), thus forming ternary signalling complexes upon the addition of cytokine. IL-4, IL-7, IL-9 and IL-21 all signal in this manner. The general paradigm for signalling by these cytokines is that γc (like gp130 or βc) has little affinity for the cytokines alone but binds strongly to a complex between the cytokine and the alpha receptor chain.

Despite being the defining family member of this group of cytokines, IL-2 itself, along with IL-15, are unusual in that they also require a third receptor subunit called IL2Rβ. IL-2Rβ is a JAK1-associated receptor subunit and is essential for signalling. The alpha receptors for IL-2 and IL-15 are non-signalling chains distinct from other cytokine receptors as they consist of sushi domains (another beta-sandwich fold) rather than a CHR. The full IL-2 receptor is found on activated T- and NK-cells, and binds IL-2 with extremely high affinity (10pM). IL-

15 signals similarly to IL-2 but IL-15Ra usually presents IL-15 from a different cell (i.e in trans) thus IL-15 requires cell-cell contact in order for signalling to occur.³⁷

Just as is seen for the gp130 family, the common gamma receptor family also contain chains that are shared on a more limited basis. For example, IL-7Rα can either heterodimerize with γc to form the IL-7 receptor or with TSLPR to form the receptor for TSLP. Likewise, IL-4Ra can heterodimerize with γc to form the Type I IL4R (found on haematopoietic cells) however it can also heterodimerise with IL-13Ra1 to form the Type II IL4R (found on non-haematopoietic cells). Both IL-4 and IL-13 can signal via this complex and this is one of only a few examples of different class I cytokines signalling via the same receptor, a phenomenon that is common for class II cytokines as we shall now discuss.

## Class II cytokine receptors

The Type II family cytokines encompass the interferons (IFN α,β,γ,λ,ε,κ,ω) and IL-10 family cytokines.³⁸ Signalling via class II cytokine receptors (unlike class I) adheres to a more common set of rules regarding stoichiometry and receptor assembly. Each class II receptor is a heterodimer and each of these receptors associate with one molecule of cytokine to initiate signalling. The only exceptions to this rule are IL-10 (and possibly IL-26) and IFNγ which are dimeric cytokines and the stoichiometry of the entire signalling complex is therefore doubled (Fig. 3, 4). All type II cytokine receptor chains bind to JAK, unlike many type I receptor alpha chains. Finally, the ectodomain architecture of all class II receptors consist of just a single CHR (with the sole exception of IFNαR1 which has two) and are not decorated by extra Ig or FnIII domains.

Similarly to Class I, the Class II receptor family consists of both shared chains and cytokine-specific chains. However a characteristic of class II cytokine signalling is the plasticity seen

within the system, in many cases a single receptor can bind multiple cytokines and a single
cytokine can in some cases bind multiple receptors.

**The Type I interferon receptor (IFNα/β receptor)**

The type I interferon receptor is a heterodimer consisting of IFNαR1 and IFNαR2. IFNαR1
has a large extracellular domain that consists of two CHRs whilst IFNαR2, similarly to all
other Class II cytokine receptors has only a single CHR. IFNαR2 is the high affinity chain,
interacting with ligand with sub-nanomolar affinity whilst IFNαR1 binds with an affinity
approximately two orders of magnitude lower.^[39]

There is a vast array of type I IFNs, including IFN-α (which itself has at least 13 different
subtypes), IFN-β, IFN-ε, IFN-κ, and IFN-ω. Other interferons are found in different
mammalian species. Remarkably these all bind to the same receptor, even though the
downstream consequences elicited by each Type I interferon differs. Structural studies have
shown that each ligand binds the receptor at the same position however the stability of the
resultant complexes differ.^[40] Thus the half-life of the cytokine/receptor complex appears to
determine the downstream signalling outcomes.

**The Type II interferon receptor (IFNγ receptor).**

The interferon gamma receptor does not consist of any shared receptor chains and interacts
only with a single ligand, interferon gamma. Likewise, IFNγ does not bind any other
receptors. IFNγ acts as a homodimer and binds two copies of IFNγR1 with sub-nanomolar
affinity. The active signalling complex is then formed by recruiting two copies of IFNγR2,^[41]
making the signalling complex hexameric.

**The Type III interferon receptor (IFNλ receptor).**

The type III cytokines IFN-λ1, -λ2 and -λ3 (also known as IL-29, IL-28A and IL-28B,
respectively) signal via a single receptor. This type III receptor consists of two chains, IL-
28R and IL-10Rβ, the latter of which is shared with receptors for the IL-10 family. The

structure of IFNλ bound to its receptor is reminiscent of the GH:GHR complex structure with the ligand occupying a spatially similar position albeit with a very different angle of occupation.⁴² The IL-28R chain binds cytokine with high affinity and this binary complex then recruits IL10Rβ.

### IL-10 family receptors

IL-10 family cytokines (IL-10, IL-19, IL-20, IL-22, IL-24, and IL-26) can be subdivided into two classes. Those that use the shared IL10Rβ chain (IL-10, 22, 26) and those that use the shared IL20Rβ chain (IL-19, 20, 24).

Like IFNγ, IL-10 (and probably IL-26) are homodimeric cytokines and their receptors likewise contain two copies of each of the two individual chains. The shared chain for these two receptors is IL10Rβ and the cytokine-specific chains are IL-10Ra and IL-20Ra, respectively. In each case the cytokine-specific chains bind with high affinity to ligand (sub-nanomolar), while IL-10Rβ is the lower affinity (high micromolar-mM) receptor.⁴³,⁴⁴ IL10Rβ also forms half of the receptor for IL-22, a monomeric cytokine.⁴⁴ The cytokine specific chain can be IL22Ra1, or alternatively it can recruit a soluble receptor (IL22BP) that can mediate its biological effects.

The remaining IL-10 family cytokines (IL-19, 20, 24) bind to two distinct receptors. The so-called type II IL-20 receptor consists of a shared IL20Rβ and a cytokine specific subunit IL22R. The type I receptor contains the same shared IL20Rβ chain along with the IL20Ra subunit. IL-20 and IL-24 can signal via both receptors whereas IL-19 binds to the type I receptor only. In the type I receptor IL20Rβ is the high affinity subunit.⁴⁵ Overall the structure of the cytokine:receptor complex is similar to that of IFNλ. Modelling of the type II receptor suggests a similar overall architecture.⁴⁶

### Cytokine receptor cytoplasmic domains

Both class I and II cytokine receptors are complexes of single pass transmembrane-domain containing proteins. Many cytokine-specific alpha receptor chains contain a short cytoplasmic region with no known function, but each functional receptor complex always consists of at least two (most often precisely two) individual receptor chains with long intracellular regions (several hundred amino acids in length) that are the scaffolds upon which signalling is initiated. These unstructured<sup>28,29</sup> cytoplasmic domains exist to provide sequence-specific docking sites for JAKs and STATs. The JAK-binding regions are known historically as the Box I and Box II motifs and are membrane proximal whilst the STAT binding motifs are located towards the C-terminus, distal to the membrane. In some cases, in between these two motifs are additional binding sites for negative-regulators such as the SOCS proteins.

### The JAK binding motif: BoxI/II

Mutagenesis studies first identified two regions on the cytoplasmic tail of receptors, termed Box1 and Box2, critical for the association of JAKs with receptor.<sup>47</sup> Box1 is proline rich and is located approximately 10 residues from the C-terminus of the transmembrane region of the receptor, whilst Box2 is about 10–50 residues further downstream and is rich in hydrophobic residues. Apart from these features, these regions share low sequence homology between different receptors. Moving the Box1/2 motif further from the membrane abolishes the ability of JAK to associate<sup>48</sup> suggesting that membrane proximity is important for cytokine inducible activation. Specific receptors bind to specific JAKs, although some receptors (most notably the G-CSF and IL-6 family of receptors) can bind multiple JAKs.<sup>49</sup> It is sequence differences within the Box1 and Box2 motifs of different receptors that determine which JAK (JAK1, JAK2, TYK2 or JAK3) is bound. For example, structural studies identified a PxxLxF sequence in JAK1-binding Class II receptors as the key motif required for JAK1 interaction.<sup>50</sup>

No obvious motifs have yet been defined for other receptors. Very recently, it has been

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

shown for two homodimeric receptors (EPOR and LeptinR) that the small region between the membrane and the BoxI motif coordinates JAK homodimerisation and is necessary for efficient signalling.¹ It may be assumed (but has not yet been shown) that the same region of other receptors may mediate JAK dimerisation as well.

### STAT binding motifs

Once JAKs are activated (see below) they phosphorylate distal tyrosines on the receptor intracellular domains and these sites act as docking sites for the Signal Transducer and Activator of Transcription (STAT) transcription factors. Thus all receptors contain conserved tyrosines that fulfil this function. Just as different receptors bind different JAKs, so they also bind different STATs.² The ability of a certain cytokine to induce activation of a particular STAT is driven purely by the STAT-binding sites contained within its receptor. STAT- binding sites from one receptor can be replaced with binding sites for different STATs from other receptors and thereby activate non-physiological STATs.³⁴ In many cases a single pTyr can recruit multiple members of the STAT family, albeit with differing affinity.⁵ It is likely that the affinity for one STAT over another is purely a function of the sequence immediately surrounding the phosphotyrosine, for example pYxxP,⁶ pYxxQ,⁴ pYxxL⁷ and pYxxF⁸ sequences are associated with recruitment of STAT1, STAT3, STAT5 and STAT6 respectively.

Some receptors contain multiple STAT binding sites, for example the IL-6 receptor signalling chain (gp130) contains four STAT3 binding motifs⁹ and EPOR contains four STAT5 binding motifs on each chain.⁷ In other cases, such as in IFNγR, only a single STAT binding site is found.⁶

### Other stimulatory sites

In addition to stimulating signalling by STATs, many cytokines also induce additional signalling pathways via the same receptors,¹⁰¹¹ such as the MAPK and PI(3)K pathways. For

example, IL-6 family cytokines stimulate both these pathways. Although the mechanism of PI(3)K stimulation is unclear, the MAPK pathway is activated via the phosphatase SHP2:⁶²

SHP2 binds to phosphotyrosine 759 on the gp130 subunit of the IL-6 receptor; cytokine exposure activates SHP2; and this leads to Ras/Raf signalling which stimulates the MAPK cascade and ultimately transcriptional activators such as Elk.

### Negative-regulatory sites

In addition to stimulatory sites on the intracellular domains of cytokine receptors, there are often sites for regulatory proteins that inhibit signalling. In general, these inhibitory proteins interact with phosphotyrosine motifs on the receptors via SH2 (Src-homology 2) domains (as do the STATs) and hence they are only recruited once the receptors are phosphorylated. The SOCS proteins are a family of negative-regulatory proteins that all contain SH2 domains and many bind to specific receptor sites to inhibit signalling.⁶³ Particularly well-characterized sites are found on the IL-6 and GCSF receptors (for SOCS3) and the GHR (for SOCS2). In all cases these SOCS binding sites are located C-terminal to the JAK-binding region of the receptor.

### Janus Kinases (JAKs)

There are four members of the JAK family found in all vertebrates: JAK1, JAK2, JAK3 and TYK2³⁻⁵,⁶⁴ (see Table II). Each JAK is ca. 1000 residues in length and consists of four distinct domains: An N-terminal FERM (band 4.1, Ezrin, Radixin, Moesin) domain followed by an SH2 domain and two kinase domains (Fig. 5). The first of these kinase domains is catalytically-inactive and is therefore a pseudokinase domain (also termed the JAK Homology 2 or JH2 domain). The C-terminal kinase domain is the catalytic domain in each JAK, historically termed the JH1 domain.

### FERM/SH2 domains
The FERM and SH2 domains together are responsible for binding to the receptor. This provides the specificity required to target a particular JAK to a particular receptor chain. With a few exceptions, a receptor chain only binds to a single, specific member of the JAK family.

The FERM and SH2 domains are closely associated and form a single structural unit. Together they provide the binding site for the Box I and Box II motifs found in all cytokine receptors. The FERM domain is a three-lobed structure consisting of an F1 lobe (ubiquitin-like), an F2 lobe (acyl-CoA-binding protein-like), and an F3 lobe (pleckstrin homology domain). The F2 lobe is primarily responsible for binding the membrane-proximal Box I motif on the receptor and in addition contains a large surface with significant positive charge that probably interacts with the cell membrane. The SH2 domain interacts with the Box II motif. Interestingly, it coordinates a glutamate in the same way that other SH2 domains coordinate phosphotyrosine. Together, the boxI and boxII motifs form a long (85 Å), largely extended epitope that buries over 3000 Å² of JAK. The relevant contributions of Box I and II toward overall affinity differ between receptors. For example, in the IFNλ receptor, Box I provides most of the affinity whilst the addition of Box II adds a further 10-fold increase. In contrast, TYK2 binding to the IFNα receptor appears to be dominated by Box II.

### Pseudokinase domain

The pseudokinase domain, critical for modulating the activity of the C-terminal tyrosine kinase domain, is the most enigmatic of the JAK domains. Although it adopts a typical kinase fold, it is catalytically defective. The pseudokinase domain of JAK2 shows some residual activity that may be responsible for autophosphorylation *in cis* on two auto-inhibitory phosphorylation sites, Ser523 and Tyr570 however it is likely to be completely inactive in other members of the JAK family, despite maintaining the ability to bind ATP.

An emerging idea is that ATP binding by pseudokinase domains functions as a “molecular switch”, however this remains to be established for the JAK family.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.The ability of the pseudokinase domain to regulate the activity of the kinase domain has been recognised for some time, since the observation that a mutation in the pseudokinase domain of the *Drosophila* JAK homolog, hop, resulted in hyperactive kinase activity and a leukaemia-like disease.⁸⁰ Importantly, deletion of the pseudokinase domain increases the basal level of kinase activity but prevents a further increase in activity in response to cytokine.⁶⁸,⁶⁹ The importance of the pseudokinase domain was further highlighted in 2006 when it was discovered that a V617F point mutation in human JAK2 was causative of a range of myeloproliferative neoplasms.⁸¹⁻⁸³ This group of diseases, which includes Polycythemia Vera, Essential Thrombocythemia and the more severe Primary Myelofibrosis display aberrantly high levels of myeloid cells such as erythrocytes and platelets. The V617F mutation leads to an increased basal activity of JAK2 and cytokine-independent signalling through the EPO and TPO receptors. The analogous mutation in other JAK family members has also been shown to cause aberrant signalling.⁷⁴ Further mutations in the linker between the SH2 and pseudokinase domains, the so-called exon 12 mutations, have since been discovered to lead to the same diseases.⁸⁴,⁸⁵ Given that the pseudokinase domain plays a role in both switching on the kinase domain and controlling its maximal activity and that mutations within this domain cause disease there have been many efforts to understand this at a molecular level. To date there is only a single experimentally-determined structure of the tandem pseudokinase-kinase domains (from Tyk2).⁷³ This structure showed that the two domains adopt a back-to-back orientation, and activating mutations cluster together at the interface between these domains indicating that a physical interaction between the pseudokinase and kinase domains is required for correct regulation of JAK activation. Although equivalent structures of other JAKs have not been forthcoming, sophisticated modelling of the analogous construct from JAK2 gave a near identical prediction of the overall structure⁸⁶ even prior to the TYK2 structure being solved.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
# Kinase domain

The kinase domain of JAK is the domain required for phosphorylation of receptor and subsequently the STAT transcription factors. All JAKs are tyrosine kinases and their kinase domains display a typical fold.⁸⁷⁻⁹¹ Tyrosine kinases catalyze the transfer of a phosphate from ATP to a tyrosine-containing protein. The general organisation of a kinase includes two lobes: an N-terminal lobe consisting mostly of β-strands and a larger, mostly α-helical C-terminal lobe. The ATP-binding site (and thus the active site) exists between these lobes. The conserved residues for ATP-binding lie mainly on the N-terminal lobe whilst the motifs for tyrosine binding, phosphotransfer and Mg²⁺-binding are found mostly on the C-terminal lobe.

Magnesium is an essential factor for kinases, aiding the co-ordination of ATP. A number of important motifs are characteristic of all kinases and these include: (i) the VAIK motif of the β3 strand in the N-lobe, in which the lysine anchors and orients the α- and β-phosphates of ATP; (ii) an aspartic acid in a HRD motif of the catalytic loop (β6-β7) which provides the catalytic base; (iii) an aspartic acid in the DFG motif within the activation loop (β8-β9) that binds the Mg²⁺ coordinating the β- and γ-phosphates of ATP⁹² and (iv) a glycine-rich loop (G-loop; GXGXXG) between the β1 and β2 strands of the N-lobe. The latter is a key factor in binding ATP through hydrogen-bond formation between the backbone of the loop and the ATP γ-phosphate.⁹³ In addition to these, two hydrophobic regulatory “spines” determine whether a kinase is capable of enzymatic activity, the Regulatory-spine and the Catalytic-spine.⁹⁴,⁹⁵

Another important motif is the activation loop. This loop contains two consecutive tyrosines and the phosphorylation-state of the first of these determines whether the enzyme is active or inactive. JAKs phosphorylate one-another at this position *in trans* upon cytokine stimulation.⁷

Although many structures have been solved of JAK kinases domains with their activation
loop in the phosphorylated (active) conformation<sup>87-91</sup> the inactive conformation has not been observed structurally but can be inferred from studies on other tyrosine kinases, in particular the insulin and IGF receptor kinases, in work led by Stevan Hubbard.<sup>96-99</sup> In the inactive conformation the activation loop forces the N- and C-lobes apart and blocks the ATP binding site. In addition the substrate-binding site (which is partly formed by residues within the loop) is not present and the orientation of the DFG motif does not allow magnesium binding.<sup>96</sup> Phosphorylation results in reorientation of the activation loop such that it swings out of the ATP-binding site and lies flat against the solvent exposed surface of the C-lobe. This allows ATP and substrate to bind and catalysis to occur.<sup>99</sup> Structurally trapping a tyrosine kinase in the process of auto-activation (in trans) has only been successfully performed for the IGF1 receptor and the activation loop in this conformation is highly extended, allowing the first tyrosine to access the active site of a second kinase molecule and become phosphorylated.<sup>98</sup> The second tyrosine within the activation loop has been found fully or partially phosphorylated in a number of JAK structures<sup>88-91</sup> however its importance in terms of catalytic activity is unclear. In our studies on JAK2 we observe no difference in the activity of the kinase domain when this residue is mutated to phenylalanine (unpublished data).

The final motif of interest in the JAK kinase domains is the JAK insertion loop that is peculiar to this family.<sup>89</sup> This loop links the αH and αI helices in the C-lobe of the kinases and in JAK1, JAK2 and TYK2 is capped by a “GQM” motif that allows them to bind to SOCS1 and SOCS3, two regulatory proteins that can inhibit the catalytic activity of these kinases. JAK3 does not contain a GQM motif in its JAK insertion loop and is therefore immune to SOCS-mediated inhibition.<sup>100</sup>

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
# Signal Transducer and Activator of Transcription (STAT) proteins

The STATs are a family of proteins named for their dual roles of (1) transducing signals from cytokines and (2) promoting transcription of specific genes. The STATs predominantly reside in the cytoplasm as inactive dimers but are rapidly activated upon initiation of cytokine signalling and translocate into the nucleus.¹⁰¹⁻¹⁰³ There are seven mammalian STATs (STAT1-4, STAT5a, STAT5b and STAT6)¹⁰⁴⁻¹⁰⁶ and each contains several conserved features; an N-terminal region followed by a coiled-coil domain, a DNA binding domain, a linker region, an SH2 domain, and a C-terminal transactivation domain (Fig. 6). Located between the SH2 domain and the transactivation domain is a single conserved tyrosine residue which is the site at which the STAT proteins are phosphorylated by the JAKs and is essential for their activation.¹⁰⁷ STATs exist as dimers both in their active and inactive forms, but the structural arrangement of the two dimeric species is very different. Most STATs function primarily as homodimers, however heterodimeric complexes do occur and are particularly important for STAT2, which only acts as a heterodimer. STAT2 acts downstream of Type I and III interferons but it does so as part of a complex called ISGF3 (IFN-stimulated gene factor 3). ISGF3 is a three-protein complex that contains STAT2, STAT1 and a third transcription factor called IRF9 which binds the STAT2 coiled-coil domain.¹⁰⁸ Figure 3 highlights the dominant STAT family members activated in response to individual cytokines however it should be noted that there is often low-level activation of additional STATs.

## N terminal region

The N-terminal domain of the STATs is largely conserved between all seven proteins and forms a bundle of alpha-helices oriented roughly at right angles to one-another.¹⁰⁹,¹¹⁰ Generation of chimeric STAT molecules where the N-terminal domain of STAT1 was replaced with that of STAT2 or STAT5 revealed a role for the N-terminal region in nuclear

translocation and deactivation.¹¹¹ The N-terminal domain of the STAT proteins also plays a role in cooperative DNA binding¹¹² between STAT dimers in regions of DNA where there are clusters of STAT binding sites, perhaps accounting for some of the specificity of cellular response to different cytokines.¹⁰⁹

### Coiled-coil domain

The coiled-coil domain of the STAT proteins is a region of approximately 180 amino acids immediately following the N-terminal domain. It comprises four antiparallel alpha-helices which form a bundle in a down-up-down-up topology that is a major site of dimerization in the inactive form but then projects outwards from the core of the protein after activation. Allowing DNA binding and providing a surface for other proteins such as transcription factors to bind.¹¹³

### DNA binding domain

The DNA binding domain allows STATs to function as transcription factors and targets specific DNA sequences.¹¹⁴ All STATs recognize palindromic DNA sequences with a TTCN₂₋₄GAA motif.¹¹⁵ While all STATs bind this motif, their sequence preferences differ. STAT1 and STAT5 show preference for sites with a 3 base pair spacer between the C and G (N3), with STAT1 also displaying preference for binding sites with a C at the -7 position, relative to the palindrome centre.¹¹⁶ STAT6, unlike the other STAT proteins, binds to sites with a 4 base pair spacer (N4),¹¹⁶,¹¹⁷ however STAT5¹¹⁸,¹¹⁹ has also been shown to bind weakly to N4 sequences.¹¹⁶ STAT4 prefers the palindromic sequence (T/A)TTCC(C/G)GGAA(T/A) where the first and last T/A sites outside of the usual motif are also necessary for binding.¹²⁰

### Linker and SH2 domain

Immediately downstream of the DNA-binding domain are the linker and SH2 domains. SH2 domains are modules that bind phosphotyrosine (pTyr) when it is embedded in a particular amino acid sequence motif. Each SH2 domain will have its own preferred sequence surrounding the pTyr, usually dictated by residues in the +1 and +3 positions (relative to the pTyr). Once JAK is activated it immediately phosphorylates tyrosine residues in the receptor to which it is bound and the presence of an SH2 domain allows STATs to bind to those phosphorylated cytokine receptors. Thus which STATs will be activated by a particular cytokine depends upon which receptor(s) their SH2 domain will bind. Different STATs can bind to the same sequence with different affinities which accounts for some of the pleiotropy of the STAT family and redundancy of biological outcomes.

### STAT activation and transcription

Prior to activation, the STATs are found as inactive dimers in the cytoplasm. The DNA-binding and coiled-coil domains of two STAT monomers interact to form a reciprocal dimer (Fig. 6). STATs are activated by JAK-catalysed phosphorylation of a specific tyrosine between the SH2 and transactivation domain. Instead of binding the phosphorylated receptor, the SH2 domain of each STAT monomer now binds the newly created pTyr in the other monomer resulting in dissociation from the receptor and re-orientation to form the active conformation with an exposed DNA-binding domain. These dimers then translocate into the nucleus and induce transcription of genes whose promoters contain the appropriate STAT binding sites. The STATs form a scissor-like structure around the DNA (stabilized by the reciprocal interactions between the SH2 domain of one monomer and the pTyr of the other) and transcription is facilitated by the recruitment of transcriptional co-activators such as CBP/P300. Determining the complete set of genes upregulated by each of the STAT proteins has been difficult due to activation of other transcription factors by pathway crosstalk.

however several hundred to several thousand genes appear to be activated by each activated STAT<sup>127-130</sup> as well as a number of genes being downregulated.<sup>131</sup>

The dephosphorylation of STAT by phosphatases in the nucleus allows them to shuttle back into the cytoplasm for further rounds of activation.<sup>132-134</sup> Whilst STATs are known to be active transcription factors in their phosphorylated state, there are some cases where unphosphorylated STATs also appear to play a role in gene transcription.<sup>135,136</sup> It has also been suggested that unphosphorylated STATs are important for maintaining heterochromatin stability by associating with HP1, a heterochromatin protein necessary for heterochromatin formation.<sup>137,138</sup> Unphosphorylated STAT5 has an important role as a transcriptional repressor in megakaryocytes where it blocks differentiation.<sup>139</sup>

## Negative regulation of JAK-STAT signalling

### SOCS proteins

Signalling via the JAK-STAT signalling pathway is a dynamic process that involves the rapid transmission of signal from the cell membrane to the nucleus followed by a highly organized response and subsequent controlled downregulation and attenuation of the initial signal.<sup>107,140</sup> SOCS proteins are the primary drivers of signal attenuation; they are induced by cytokine exposure (via STAT) and then act as negative-feedback inhibitors to switch off the signalling cascade.<sup>13,63,141,142</sup> There are eight SOCS proteins encoded in the human genome, SOCS1-7 and CIS.<sup>13,141-144</sup> All eight contain N-terminal domains of various length and often unknown function but are defined by the presence of a central SH2 domain and a short, C-terminal domain called the SOCS box.<sup>144</sup> CIS and SOCS1/2/3 are the members of the family associated with inhibiting signalling by JAK/STAT-inducing cytokines whilst other SOCS proteins appear to regulate signalling by factors such as EGF and insulin.
Although induced by many cytokines, ${}^{142}$ and potent inhibitors of many cytokine signalling pathways when artificially overexpressed, knockout studies have shown that each SOCS protein is specific for only a subset of cytokines. ${}^{145,146}$ For example SOCS3 is induced by IL-2, IL-3, IL-4, IL-6, IL-7, IL-9, IL-10, IL-11, IL-12, IL-13, IL-21, IL-22, G-CSF, GM-CSF, LIF, PRL, IFN$\alpha$, IFN$\gamma$, GH, EPO, TPO, OSM, CT1, CNTF, and leptin, ${}^{142,147-158}$ however knockout studies have shown that only IL-6 family cytokines, ${}^{145}$ GCSF ${}^{146}$ and Leptin ${}^{159}$ are aberrantly regulated in its absence. This specificity is provided by the SH2 domains of SOCS proteins which in general bind to phosphotyrosine-containing motifs in specific cytokine receptors and therefore only inhibit signalling by cytokines that act via those receptors. For example the SH2 domains of CIS, SOCS2 and SOCS3 bind to motifs in the IL-2, ${}^{160}$ GH ${}^{161}$ and IL-6 ${}^{61,162,163}$ receptors, respectively.

Once bound to cytokine receptors, SOCS proteins induce their ubiquitination and degradation through the activity of their SOCS box domain. The SOCS box is structurally similar to a domain first described in VHL ${}^{164}$ and has two distinct binding properties. The first is a short motif that allows it to bind to elonginBC, ${}^{165,166}$ an adapter complex that is also recruited by VHL. Once the ternary SOCS/elonginBC complex has formed the second motif can then recruit Cullin5, a 100 kDa E3 ligase scaffold. ${}^{167}$ This differs from VHL which uses its SOCS box-like domain to recruit Cullin2. ${}^{168}$ Cullin 5 is constitutively associated with a RING domain protein, Rbx2, ${}^{168,169}$ and this provides the E3 ubiquitin ligase activity by recruiting E2 ubiquitin conjugating enzymes to catalyse the ubiquitination of protein substrates. Therefore, SOCS proteins act as the substrate recruitment modules for Cullin5-based E3 ligases and proteins bound by the SOCS SH2 domains (usually receptors) are ubiquitinated and subsequently degraded by the proteasome.

## SOCS1 and SOCS3

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
SOCS1 and SOCS3 are unique amongst the SOCS family in containing a short motif called the Kinase Inhibitory Region (KIR).<sup>170,171</sup> This allows these two SOCS proteins to bind directly to the JAK kinase domain and inhibit its catalytic activity. The KIR is unstructured in the absence of JAK<sup>172,173</sup> but upon binding adopts an extended conformation that sits in the substrate binding groove of the kinase.<sup>174</sup> This occludes the substrate-binding site and prevents JAK from phosphorylating downstream substrates. SOCS1 and SOCS3 inhibit JAK1, JAK2 and TYK2 but not JAK3 due to the absence of a “GQM” sequence in the latter kinase.<sup>100</sup> SOCS1 is approximately 10-fold more potent than SOCS3 at inhibiting JAK, mainly due to sequence differences in the KIR.<sup>100,175</sup>

In vivo, SOCS3 is a specific inhibitor of IL-6 family cytokines,<sup>176–179</sup> G-CSF<sup>145,146</sup> and leptin<sup>159</sup> as these cytokines all signal via receptors that contain binding sites for the SOCS3 SH2 domain.<sup>180</sup> SOCS3 engages the receptor with its SH2 and simultaneously inhibits the JAK1, JAK2 or TYK2 associated with that receptor.<sup>174</sup> SOCS1 on the other hand is a potent inhibitor of interferon, IL-12/23, IL-4/13 and IL-2 family cytokine signalling<sup>181–191</sup> however does not target the receptors for those cytokines with its SH2 domain. The target of the SOCS1 SH2 domain is unclear, it binds tightly to the activation loop sequence of all four JAKs when they are synthesized as synthetic peptides *in vitro* however appears to be sterically hindered from doing so when the activation loop is part of an intact kinase domain.<sup>175</sup> Further work is needed to clarify to this issue.

### Phosphatases

Association of cytokine with the appropriate receptor triggers a cascade of intracellular tyrosine phosphorylation: JAKs are auto-phosphorylated *in trans*, receptors are then phosphorylated by these activated JAKs and finally the STATs are phosphorylated allowing them to adopt their active conformation. Therefore it is no surprise that phosphotyrosine

phosphatases (PTPs) play a crucial role in regulating these signalling pathways.¹⁹²,¹⁹³ Six phosphotyrosine phosphatases in particular have been shown to regulate JAK/STAT signalling: the receptor tyrosine phosphatases CD45 and PTP-RT, two related cytoplasmic phosphatases PTP1b and TC-PTP, and the SH2 domain containing phosphatases SHP1 and SHP2.¹⁹⁴ These phosphatases are constitutively expressed and are therefore not feedback-inhibitors. As such, they tend to restrain the amplitude of the signalling cascade rather than controlling its duration. It is the balance between the action of these phosphatases and the activity of the JAKs that determines the flux through the pathway. Determining the true targets of these phosphatases (JAKs, STATs or receptors) has been difficult and at times contentious.

## The receptor phosphatases CD45 and PTPRT

CD45 and PTPRT are both receptor phosphatases comprising an extracellular receptor-like region, a transmembrane domain and two intracellular tandem phosphatase domains. For both CD45 and PTPRT the first phosphatase domain is the catalytically active domain, whereas the second is a catalytically dead pseudophosphatase domain that is thought to have regulatory roles in both proteins. Full length CD45 is ~140 kDa however alternative splicing gives rise to several different sized isoforms. The extracellular region of CD45 is comprised of three FnIII domains (Fig. 7). CD45 is highly expressed in haematopoietic cells and thought to dephosphorylate all four JAK proteins.¹⁹⁵,¹⁹⁶ Cells deficient in CD45 display extended signalling in response to IL-7, EPO and interferon stimulation. PTPRT is a large protein containing an N-terminal MAM domain followed by an Ig domain, four FnIII domains, a transmembrane domain and two tandem PTP domains. PTPRT directly interacts with and dephosphorylates the critical tyrosine residue in STAT3, pY705.¹⁹⁷

## The SH2 domain containing phosphatases SHP1 and SHP2

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
SHP1 and SHP2 are cytoplasmic SH2 domain containing phosphatases. They are approximately 70 kDa, and comprised of two SH2 domains and a single PTP domain that is negatively regulated by interactions with the SH2 domains.

The expression of SHP1 is limited to the haematopoietic lineage, where it regulates IL-3, EPO, IFNα and potentially other cytokine-induced signalling by dephosphorylating JAK1, JAK2 and TYK2. ${}^{198-202}$ SHP2 is ubiquitously expressed, but also plays an essential role in the regulation of haematopoiesis. Knockout of shp2 leads to increased JAK1 autophosphorylation and upregulation of interferon signalling ${}^{201,203}$ implying a role as a negative regulator. However, SHP2 is better characterised as a positive regulator of cytokine signalling. For example, it binds to pY759 on gp130 and activates the MAPK signalling cascade in response to IL-6 and LIF. In fact, SHP2 was the first tyrosine phosphatase to be identified as a proto-oncogene and somatic activating mutations of SHP2 have been identified in acute myeloid leukemia (AML) and B cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (BALL).

### The cytoplasmic phosphatases PTP1B and TC-PTP

PTP1B and TC-PTP are two highly related, ~40 kDa phosphatases that are tethered to the cytoplasmic face of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). ${}^{204-206}$ Substrate-trapping mutants of PTP1B have been shown to interact directly with the activation loop of JAK2 and TYK2 suggesting these as the targets for its catalytic activity however it may also directly dephosphorylate STAT3. ${}^{207-210}$ PTP1B is a powerful regulator of leptin signalling and knockout mice show increased JAK2 phosphorylation in response to that cytokine. ${}^{209}$ TC-PTP is also tethered to the ER however a different isoform which lacks the ER-targeting motif is found in the nucleus and can dephosphorylate STAT3. Both JAK1 and JAK3 are dephosphorylated by TC-PTP and its knockout leads to increased IL-2, IFNα and IFNγ signalling. ${}^{211,212}$

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
The adaptor protein, LNK

The lymphocyte adaptor protein, LNK, also known as SH2B3, is a member of the SH2 domain containing adaptor protein family which also comprises APS (SH2B1) and SH2B (SH2B2). This family of proteins contains three distinct domains: a dimerization domain (phenylalanine zipper) which allows homo-dimerization, a Pleckstrin Homology (PH) domain and an SH2 domain.²¹³ While APS and SH2B appear to activate cytokine signalling, LNK is a negative regulator of cytokines that signal via JAK2, particularly EPO and TPO.²¹⁴,²¹⁵ LNK knockout mice have enhanced numbers of haematopoietic stem cells and are hyperresponsive to EPO and TPO and over-expression of LNK inhibits megakaryocyte development. Consistent with its suppressive role, inactivation mutations in LNK are found in ca. 5% of MPNs and also in rare cases of idiopathic erythrocytosis. The SH2 domain of LNK binds directly to JAK2 (at pTyr813, located between the kinase and pseudokinase domains)²¹⁶ however it is unclear how this regulates signalling.

Case study: IL-6 signalling

IL-6 represents perhaps the archetypal cytokine, it being the closest homologue to cytokines present in extant insect species. IL-6 (and related family members, Fig. 3) are all highly pleiotropic with roles in haematopoiesis, the acute phase response, development and both pro and anti-inflammatory processes.²¹⁷-²¹⁹ Here we provide a summary of the molecular events involved in IL-6 signalling.

IL-6 production can be induced by a variety of stimuli and by many different cell types. The receptor for IL-6, as discussed above, consists of the gp130 shared signalling chain and the non-signalling cytokine-specific IL-6Rα chain. Although gp130 is found ubiquitously expressed, IL-6Rα is found only on hepatocytes and some leukocytes.²²⁰ However soluble IL-
6Ra is released from the liver and this allows IL-6 to signal to many different cell-types in a process called trans-signalling.²²¹ Although IL-6 on its own has little affinity for gp130, it binds tightly to IL-6Ra (either membrane bound or soluble). This dimeric complex can then bind with high affinity to gp130, using regions on both the cytokine and the alpha chain. The resulting ternary complex then dimerises to form the signalling hexamer.²³,²²² Thus, the formation of the signalling competent IL-6 receptor complex is an ordered process. The molecular details of IL-6 binding to its receptor were first described by Boulanger *et al.*, who solved the structure of IL-6 bound to the CHR of IL6Ra and the first three domains of gp130.²³ Combined with the full structure of gp130²²³ these studies allow a full model of the IL-6/IL-6 receptor complex to be constructed (Fig. 8).²²³

Once IL-6 has bound to its receptor, bringing together the two JAK-associated gp130 chains, this allows transactivation of the associated JAKs. JAK1, JAK2 and TYK2 can all be found associated with gp130 although knockout studies suggest JAK1 may be dominant.²²⁴ The ability of gp130 to associate with different members of the JAK family is unusual (Fig. 3).

Upon activation, these JAKs then phosphorylate five tyrosine residues in the gp130 cytoplasmic domain.⁵⁹ The four distal sites (Y767, Y814, Y905 and Y915) are motifs targeted by the STAT3 (and to a lesser extent, STAT1) SH2 domain whilst the proximal phosphotyrosine (Y759) binds the negative regulatory protein SOCS3 and the phosphatase SHP2. STAT3 exists as a pre-formed dimer however once it is docked onto the receptor it is phosphorylated by JAK on Y705 and pY705 is then bound by the SH2 domain of the opposing monomers. This results in a re-orientation of STAT3 from an anti-parallel to a parallel dimer (Fig. 6) and subsequent translocation to the nucleus where it induces the transcription of target genes.¹¹ Activated STAT3 is observed within 15 mins of IL-6 exposure and STAT3 target genes are observed almost immediately after²²⁵ highlighting a rapid transcriptional response. Importantly, STAT1 is also activated alongside STAT3.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.A well characterised activity of IL-6 is its ability to induce the differentiation of monocytes into macrophages. An important component of this activity is the ability of IL-6 to induce the master transcription factor PU.1 alongside hundreds of other genes (RM, unpublished data).

One of the most important of the early genes upregulated by IL-6 is SOCS3. ${}^{144}$ SOCS3 mRNA and protein is observed within 30 minutes of IL-6 exposure and it is one of the most highly expressed early response genes (RM, unpublished data). SOCS3 protein binds to pY759 on gp130 via its SH2 domain and then uses its kinase inhibitory region to inhibit the associated JAK1 (or JAK2, TYK2). This switches JAK off and prevents any further STAT3 phosphorylation. STAT3 is dephosphorylated in the nucleus by TC45, the nuclear isoform of the T-cell protein tyrosine phosphatase (TC-PTP) ${}^{226}$ and is then shuttled into the cytoplasm by exportin-1 to allow for subsequent activation cycles. ${}^{227}$ SOCS3 inhibits the signalling cascade as described above but may also play a role in shaping the cellular response. Genetic deletion of SOCS3 leads to a wider transcriptional response after IL-6 exposure, in particular there is increased expression of a number of genes associated with IFNγ (STAT1) signalling. Under normal conditions therefore, SOCS3 appears responsible for dampening STAT1 transcriptional programs and allowing STAT3 to dominate ${}^{228}$ whilst eventually inhibiting both pathways.

Alongside activation of STAT3 (and STAT1), IL-6 stimulates two other signalling cascades: the MAPK and PI(3)K pathways. The phosphatase, SHP2 binds to pY759 on gp130 and promotes activation of the MAPK cascade via a mechanism that is not completely understood but may involve Grb2. ${}^{229}$ SOCS3 also binds to this site and can thereby inhibit both STAT3 and MAPK induced transcriptional responses. How IL-6 induces the PI(3)-kinase pathway is less clear but the end result is activation of the serine/threonine kinase AKT (protein kinase B) at the cell membrane and stimulation of downstream signalling including mTOR.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
## Unanswered Questions

The most important unanswered question in the field is how the activation of JAK (by trans-phosphorylation) is induced by cytokine binding and how this process goes awry in the presence of the activating mutations seen in the pseudokinase domain in human myeloproliferative diseases. The classical explanation given for the process of JAK activation was that simple dimerization of the receptor chains (by cytokine) brought the JAKs into close-enough proximity for their kinase domains to phosphorylate one-another. However it is now clear that many receptors exist as pre-formed dimers even in the absence of cytokine²³⁰ and that it is rather a re-orientation of these chains that allows JAK auto-phosphorylation. In fact, in 2014, Brooks et al. performed a series of FRET-based analyses to show that Growth Hormone induced a *separation* of the intracellular receptor domains and this led to a geometry where the kinase domains of the two JAK molecules were juxtaposed.²³¹ Such a model supported their earlier analyses which showed that the GHR could be activated by tuning the relative orientation of the TM and juxtamembrane regions even in the absence of cytokine.²³²

This model suggests that prior to cytokine stimulation the pseudokinase domain from one JAK interacts with (and inhibits) the kinase domain from the other. After cytokine stimulation this inhibition is released. The importance of the pseudokinase domain in regulating the kinase domain is of course well-established as described above and by the existence of activating mutations within this domain. The important structure of the TYK2 pseudokinase-kinase domain pair highlighted that activating mutations tend to cluster near the interacting surface between the two domains however did not provide a molecular mechanism for what the pseudokinase domain was actually doing. The only structural information available for transphosphorylation of a tyrosine kinase was provided by crystallographic studies from the Hubbard laboratory of the IGF1 receptor kinase⁹⁸ however

as far as JAK kinases are concerned we have no picture of what allows their kinase domains  
to adopt this position and what prevents them from doing so in the first place. It seems clear  
that only structures of complete JAK proteins (with and without bound receptor) will provide  
a full molecular description of how JAK is activated and why this process goes awry upon  
mutation in human disease.

Acknowledgements  
This work was supported by the Cancer Council Victoria (Grant-in-aid 1065180) and the  
National Health and Medical Research Council (NHMRC) Australia (Project grant  
#1122999, Program grant #1113577), an NHMRC IRIISS grant 9000220, and a Victorian  
State Government Operational Infrastructure Scheme grant. JJB is supported by an NHMRC  
fellowship.

Conflict of Interest  
The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

References

1. Stark GR, Darnell JE Jr (2012) The JAK-STAT pathway at twenty. Immunity 36:503-514.
2. Velazquez L, Fellous M, Stark GR, Pellegrini S (1992) A protein tyrosine kinase in the interferon-alpha/beta signaling pathway. Cell 70:313-322.
3. Wilks AF (1989) Two putative protein-tyrosine kinases identified by application of the polymerase chain reaction. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 86:1603-1607.
4. Wilks AF, Harpur AG, Kurban RR, Ralph SJ, Zurcher G, Ziemiecki A (1991) Two novel protein-tyrosine kinases, each with a second phosphotransferase-related catalytic domain, define a new class of protein kinase. Mol Cell Biol 11:2057-2065.
5. Firmbach-Kraft I, Byers M, Shows T, Dalla-Favera R, Krolewski JJ (1990) tyk2, prototype of a novel class of non-receptor tyrosine kinase genes. Oncogene 5:1329-1336.
6. Kawamura M, McVicar DW, Johnston JA, Blake TB, Chen YQ, Lal BK, Lloyd AR, Kelvin DJ, Staples JE, Oraldo JR (1994) Molecular cloning of L-JAK, a Janus family protein-tyrosine kinase expressed in natural killer cells and activated leukocytes. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 91:6374-6378.
7. Feng J, Witthuhn BA, Matsuda T, Kohlhuber F, Kerr IM, Ihle JN (1997) Activation of Jak2 catalytic activity requires phosphorylation of Y1007 in the kinase activation loop. Mol Cell Biol 17:2497-2501.
8. Argetsinger LS, Campbell GS, Yang X, Withuhn BA, Silvennoinen O, Ihle JN, Carter-Su C (1993) Identification of JAK2 as a growth hormone receptor-associated tyrosine kinase. Cell 74:237-244.
9. Schindler C, Shuai K, Prezioso VR, Darnell JE (1992) Interferon-dependent tyrosine phosphorylation of a latent cytoplasmic transcription factor. Science 257:809-813.
10. Shuai K, Schindler C, Prezioso VR, Darnell JE (1992) Activation of transcription by Ifn-gamma-tyrosine phosphorylation of a 91-Kd DNA-binding protein. Science 258:1808-1812.
11. Schindler C, Darnell J Jr (1995) Transcriptional responses to polypeptide ligands: the JAK-STAT pathway. Ann Rev Biochem 64:621-652.
12. Yoshimura A, Ohkubo T, Kiguchi T, Jenkins NA, Gilbert DJ, Copeland NG, Hara T, Miyajima A (1995) A novel cytokine-inducible gene CIS encodes an SH2-containing protein that binds to tyrosine-phosphorylated interleukin 3 and erythropoietin receptors. EMBO J 14:2816-2826.
13. Endo TA, Masuhara M, Yokouchi M, Suzuki R, Sakamoto H, Mitsui K, Matsumoto A, Tanimura S, Ohtsubo M, Misawa H, Miyazaki T, Leonor N, Taniguchi T, Fujita T, Kanakura Y, Komiya S, Yoshimura A (1997) A new protein containing an SH2 domain that inhibits JAK kinases. Nature 387:921-924.
14. Liongue C, Sertori R, Ward AC (2016) Evolution of cytokine receptor signaling. J Immunol 197:11-18.
15. Bazan JF (1990) Structural design and molecular evolution of a cytokine receptor superfamily. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 87:6934-6938.
16. de Vos AM, Ultsch M, Kossiakoff AA (1992) Human growth hormone and extracellular domain of its receptor: crystal structure of the complex. Science 255:306-312.
17. Yawata H, Yasukawa K, Natsuka S, Murakami M, Yamasaki K, Hibi M, Taga T, Kishimoto T (1993) Structure-function analysis of human IL-6 receptor: dissociation of amino acid residues required for IL-6-binding and for IL-6 signal transduction through gp130. EMBO J 12:1705-1712.

18. Bazan JF (1990) Shared architecture of hormone binding domains in type I and II interferon receptors. Cell 61:753-754.
19. Boulay JL, O'Shea JJ, Paul WE (2003) Molecular phylogeny within type I cytokines and their cognate receptors. Immunity 19:159-163.
20. Syed RS, Reid SW, Li CW, Cheetham JC, Aoki KH, Liu BS, Zhan HJ, Osslund TD, Chirino AJ, Zhang JD, Finer-Moore J, Elliott S, Sitney K, Katz BA, Matthews DJ, Wendoloski JJ, Egrie J, Stroud RM (1998) Efficiency of signalling through cytokine receptors depends critically on receptor orientation. Nature 395:511-516.
21. Elkins PA, Christinger HW, Sandowski Y, Sakal E, Gertler A, de Vos AM, Kossiakoff AA (2000) Ternary complex between placental lactogen and the extracellular domain of the prolactin receptor. Nat Struct Biol 7:808-815.
22. Tamada T, Honjo E, Maeda Y, Okamoto T, Ishibashi M, Tokunaga M, Kuroki R (2006) Homodimeric cross-over structure of the human granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (GCSF) receptor signaling complex. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 103:3135-3140.
23. Boulanger MJ, Chow DC, Brevnova EE, Garcia KC (2003) Hexameric structure and assembly of the interleukin-6/IL-6 alpha-receptor/gp130 complex. Science 300:2101-2104.
24. Chow D, Ho J, Nguyen Pham TL, Rose-John S, Garcia KC (2001) In vitro reconstitution of recognition and activation complexes between interleukin-6 and gp130. Biochemistry 40:7593-7603.
25. Matadeen R, Hon WC, Heath JK, Jones EY, Fuller S (2007) The dynamics of signal triggering in a gp130-receptor complex. Structure 15:441-448.
26. Huyton T, Zhang JG, Luo CS, Lou MZ, Hilton DJ, Nicola NA, Garrett TP (2007) An unusual cytokine: Ig-domain interaction revealed in the crystal structure of leukemia inhibitory factor (LIF) in complex with the LIF receptor. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 104:12737-12742.
27. Gearing DP, Thut CJ, VandeBos T, Gimpel SD, Delaney PB, King J, Price V, Cosman D, Beckmann MP (1991) Leukemia inhibitory factor receptor is structurally related to the IL-6 signal transducer, gp130. EMBO J 10:2839-2848.
28. Skiniotis G, Lupardus PJ, Martick M, Walz T, Garcia KC (2008) Structural organization of a full-length gp130/LIF-R cytokine receptor transmembrane complex. Mol Cell 31:737-748.
29. Lupardus PJ, Skiniotis G, Rice AJ, Thomas C, Fischer S, Walz T, Garcia KC (2011) Structural snapshots of full-length Jak1, a transmembrane gp130/IL-6/IL-6Ra cytokine receptor complex, and the receptor-Jak1 holocomplex. Structure 19:45-55.
30. Oppmann B, Lesley R, Blom B, Timans JC, Xu YM, Hunte B, Vega F, Yu N, Wang J, Singh K, Zonin F, Vaisberg E, Churakova T, Liu MR, Gorman D, Wagner J, Zurawski S, Liu YJ, Abrams JS, Moore KW, Rennick D, de Waal-Malefyt R, Hannum C, Bazan JF, Kastelein RA (2000) Novel p19 protein engages IL-12p40 to form a cytokine, IL-23, with biological activities similar as well as distinct from IL-12. Immunity 13:715-725.
31. Lupardus PJ, Garcia KC (2008) The structure of interleukin-23 reveals the molecular basis of p40 subunit sharing with interleukin-12. J Mol Biol 382:931-941.
32. Yoon C, Johnston SC, Tang J, Stahl M, Tobin JF, Somers WS (2000) Charged residues dominate a unique interlocking topography in the heterodimeric cytokine interleukin-12. EMBO J 19:3530-3541.
33. Bloch Y, Bouchareychas L, Merceron R, Skladanowska K, Van den Bossche L, Detry S, Govindarajan S, Elewaut D, Haerynck F, Dullaers M, Adamopoulos IE, Savvides SN (2018) Structural activation of pro-inflammatory human cytokine IL-23 by

cognate IL-23 receptor enables recruitment of the shared receptor IL-12Rbeta1. Immunity 48:45-58.

34. Kitamura T, Sato N, Arai K, Miyajima A (1991) Expression cloning of the human IL-3 receptor cDNA reveals a shared beta subunit for the human IL-3 and GM-CSF receptors. Cell 66:1165-1174.

35. Hayashida K, Kitamura T, Gorman DM, Arai K, Yokota T, Miyajima A (1990) Molecular cloning of a second subunit of the receptor for human granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF): reconstitution of a high-affinity GM-CSF receptor. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 87:9655-9659.

36. Hansen G, Hercus TR, McClure BJ, Stomski FC, Dottore M, Powell J, Ramshaw H, Woodcock JM, Xu Y, Guthridge M, McKinstry WJ, Lopez AF, Parker MW (2008) The structure of the GM-CSF receptor complex reveals a distinct mode of cytokine receptor activation. Cell 134:496-507.

37. Dubois S, Mariner J, Waldmann TA, Tagaya Y (2002) IL-15Ralpha recycles and presents IL-15 In trans to neighboring cells. Immunity 17:537-547.

38. Spangler JB, Moraga I, Mendoza JL, Garcia KC (2015) Insights into cytokine-receptor interactions from cytokine engineering. Annu Rev Immunol 33:139-167.

39. Kalie E, Jaitin DA, Podoplelova Y, Piehler J, Schreiber G (2008) The stability of the ternary interferon-receptor complex rather than the affinity to the individual subunits dictates differential biological activities. J Biol Chem 283:32925-32936.

40. Thomas C, Moraga I, Levin D, Krutzik PO, Podoplelova Y, Trejo A, Lee C, Yarden G, Vleck SE, Glenn JS, Nolan GP, Piehler J, Schreiber G, Garcia KC (2011) Structural linkage between ligand discrimination and receptor activation by Type I interferons. Cell 146:621-632.

41. Bach EA, Tanner JW, Marsters S, Ashkenazi A, Aguet M, Shaw AS, Schreiber RD (1996) Ligand-induced assembly and activation of the gamma interferon receptor in intact cells. Mol Cell Biol 16:3214-3221.

42. Mendoza JL, Schneider WM, Hoffmann HH, Vercauteren K, Jude KM, Xiong A, Moraga I, Horton TM, Glenn JS, de Jong YP, Rice CM, Garcia KC (2017) The IFN-lambda-IFN-lambdaR1-IL-10Rbeta complex reveals structural features underlying Type III IFN functional plasticity. Immunity 46:379-392.

43. Logsdon NJ, Jones BC, Josephson K, Cook J, Walter MR (2002) Comparison of interleukin-22 and interleukin-10 soluble receptor complexes. J Interferon Cytokine Res 22:1099-1112.

44. Jones BC, Logsdon NJ, Walter MR (2008) Structure of IL-22 bound to its high-affinity IL-22R1 chain. Structure 16:1333-1344.

45. Logsdon NJ, Deshpande A, Harris BD, Rajashankar KR, Walter MR (2012) Structural basis for receptor sharing and activation by interleukin-20 receptor-2 (IL-20R2) binding cytokines. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 109:12704-12709.

46. Bleicher L, de Moura PR, Watanabe L, Colau D, Dumoutier L, Renauld JC, Polikarpov I (2008) Crystal structure of the IL-22/IL-22R1 complex and its implications for the IL-22 signaling mechanism. FEBS Lett 582:2985-2992.

47. Murakami M, Narazaki M, Hibi M, Yawata H, Yasukawa K, Hamaguchi M, Taga T, Kishimoto T (1991) Critical cytoplasmic region of the interleukin 6 signal transducer gp130 is conserved in the cytokine receptor family. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 88:11349-11353.

48. Greiser JS, Stross C, Heinrich PC, Behrmann I, Hermanns HM (2002) Orientational constraints of the gp130 intracellular juxtamembrane domain for signaling. J Biol Chem 277:26959-26965.

49. Stahl N, Boulton TG, Farruggella T, Ip NY, Davis S, Witthuhn BA, Quelle FW, Silvennoinen O, Barbieri G, Pellegrini S (1994) Association and activation of Jak-Tyk kinases by CNTF-LIF-OSM-IL-6 beta receptor components. Science 263:92-95.

50. Ferrao R, Wallweber HJ, Ho H, Tam C, Franke Y, Quinn J, Lupardus PJ (2016) The structural basis for class II cytokine receptor recognition by JAK1. Structure 24:897-905.

51. Ferrao RD, Wallweber HJ, Lupardus PJ (2018) Receptor-mediated dimerization of JAK2 FERM domains is required for JAK2 activation. Elife 7:e38089.

52. Murray PJ (2007) The JAK-STAT signaling pathway: input and output integration. J Immunol 178:2623-2629.

53. Woldman I, Varinou L, Ramsauer K, Rapp B, Decker T (2001) The Stat1 binding motif of the interferon-gamma receptor is sufficient to mediate Stat5 activation and its repression by SOCS3. J Biol Chem 276:45722-45728.

54. Stahl N, Farruggella TJ, Boulton TG, Zhong Z, Darnell JE Jr, Yancopoulos GD (1995) Choice of STATs and other substrates specified by modular tyrosine-based motifs in cytokine receptors. Science 267:1349-1353.

55. Demoulin JB, Uyttenhove C, VanRoost E, deLestre B, Donckers D, Van Snick J, Renauld JC (1996) A single tyrosine of the interleukin-9 (IL-9) receptor is required for STAT activation, antiapoptotic activity, and growth regulation by IL-9. Mol Cell Biol 16:4710-4716.

56. Greenland AC, Farrar MA, Viviano BL, Schreiber RD (1994) Ligand-induced IFN gamma receptor tyrosine phosphorylation couples the receptor to its signal transduction system (p91). EMBO J 13:1591-1600.

57. Klingmuller U, Bergelson S, Hsiao JG, Lodish HF (1996) Multiple tyrosine residues in the cytosolic domain of the erythropoietin receptor promote activation of STAT5. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 93:8324-8328.

58. Hou J, Schindler U, Henzel WJ, Ho TC, Brasseur M, McKnight SL (1994) An interleukin-4-induced transcription factor: IL-4 Stat. Science 265:1701-1706.

59. Haan S, Hemmann U, Hassiepen U, Schaper F, Schneider-Mergener J, Wollmer A, Heinrich PC, Grotzinger J (1999) Characterization and binding specificity of the monomeric STAT3-SH2 domain. J Biol Chem 274:1342-1348.

60. Bone H, Dechert U, Jirik F, Schrader JW, Welham MJ (1997) SHP1 and SHP2 protein-tyrosine phosphatases associate with betac after interleukin-3-induced receptor tyrosine phosphorylation. Identification of potential binding sites and substrates. J Biol Chem 272:14470-14476.

61. Lehmann U, Schmitz J, Weissenbach M, Sobota RM, Hortner M, Friederichs K, Behrmann I, Tsiaris W, Sasaki A, Schneider-Mergener J, Yoshimura A, Neel BG, Heinrich PC, Schaper F (2003) SHP2 and SOCS3 contribute to Tyr-759-dependent attenuation of interleukin-6 signaling through gp130. J Biol Chem 278:661-671.

62. Anhuf D, Weissenbach M, Schmitz J, Sobota R, Hermanns HM, Radtke S, Linnemann S, Behrmann I, Heinrich PC, Schaper F (2000) Signal transduction of IL-6, leukemia-inhibitory factor, and oncostatin M: structural receptor requirements for signal attenuation. J Immunol 165:2535-2543.

63. Kershaw NJ, Murphy JM, Lucet IS, Nicola NA, Babon JJ (2013) Regulation of Janus kinases by SOCS proteins. Biochem Soc Trans 41:1042-1047.

64. Harpur AG, Andres AC, Ziemiecki A, Aston RR, Wilks AF (1992) JAK2, a third member of the JAK family of protein tyrosine kinases. Oncogene 7:1347-1353.

65. Wallweber HJ, Tam C, Franke Y, Starovasnik MA, Lupardus PJ (2014) Structural basis of recognition of interferon-alpha receptor by tyrosine kinase 2. Nat Struct Mol Biol 21:443-448.

66. Zhang D, Wlodawer A, Lubkowski J (2016) Crystal structure of a complex of the intracellular domain of interferon lambda receptor 1 (IFNLR1) and the FERM/SH2 domains of human JAK1. J Mol Biol 428:4651-4668.
67. Wallweber HJ, Tam C, Franke Y, Starovasnik MA, Lupardus PJ (2014) Structural basis of recognition of interferon-alpha receptor by tyrosine kinase 2. Nat Struct Mol Biol 21:443-448.
68. Saharinen P, Takaluoma K, Silvennoinen O (2000) Regulation of the Jak2 tyrosine kinase by its pseudokinase domain. Mol Cell Biol 20:3387-3395.
69. Saharinen P, Silvennoinen O (2002) The pseudokinase domain is required for suppression of basal activity of Jak2 and Jak3 tyrosine kinases and for cytokine-inducible activation of signal transduction. J Biol Chem 277:47954-47963.
70. Ungureanu D, Wu J, Pekkala T, Niranjan Y, Young C, Jensen ON, Xu CF, Neubert TA, Skoda RC, Hubbard SR, Silvennoinen O (2011) The pseudokinase domain of JAK2 is a dual-specificity protein kinase that negatively regulates cytokine signaling. Nat Struct Mol Biol 18:971-976..
71. Ungureanu D, Wu J, Pekkala T, Niranjan Y, Young C, Jensen ON, Xu CF, Neubert TA, Skoda RC, Hubbard SR, Silvennoinen O (2011) The pseudokinase domain of JAK2 is a dual-specificity protein kinase that negatively regulates cytokine signaling. Nat Struct Mol Biol 18:971-976.
72. Silvennoinen O, Ungureanu D, Niranjan Y, Hammaren H, Bandaranayake R, Hubbard SR (2013) New insights into the structure and function of the pseudokinase domain in JAK2. Biochem Soc Trans 41:1002-1007.
73. Lupardus PJ, Ultsch M, Wallweber H, Bir Kohli P, Johnson AR, Eigenbrot C (2014) Structure of the pseudokinase-kinase domains from protein kinase TYK2 reveals a mechanism for Janus kinase (JAK) autoinhibition. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 111:8025-8030.
74. Toms AV, Deshpande A, McNally R, Jeong Y, Rogers JM, Kim CU, Gruner SM, Ficarro SB, Marto JA, Sattler M, Griffin JD, Eck MJ (2013) Structure of a pseudokinase-domain switch that controls oncogenic activation of Jak kinases. Nat Struct Mol Biol 20:1221-1223.
75. Tokarski JS, Zupa-Fernandez A, Tredup JA, Pike K, Chang C, Xie D, Cheng L, Pedicord D, Muckelbauer J, Johnson SR, Wu S, Edavettal SC, Hong Y, Witmer MR, Elkin LL, Blat Y, Pitts WJ, Weinstein DS, Burke JR (2015) Tyrosine kinase 2-mediated signal transduction in T lymphocytes is blocked by pharmacological stabilization of its pseudokinase domain. J Biol Chem 290:11061-11074.
76. Bandaranayake RM, Ungureanu D (2012) Crystal structures of the JAK2 pseudokinase domain and the pathogenic mutant V617F. Nat Struct Mol Biol 19:754-759.
77. Min X, Ungureanu D, Maxwell S, Hammaren H, Thibault S, Hillert EK, Ayres M, Greenfield B, Eksterowicz J, Gabel C, Walker N, Silvennoinen O, Wang Z (2015) Structural and functional characterization of the JH2 pseudokinase domain of JAK family tyrosine kinase 2 (TYK2). J Biol Chem 290:27261-27270.
78. Toms AV, Deshpande A, McNally R, Jeong Y, Rogers JM, Kim CU, Gruner SM, Ficarro SB, Marto JA, Sattler M, Griffin JD, Eck MJ (2013) Structure of a pseudokinase-domain switch that controls oncogenic activation of Jak kinases. Nat Struct Mol Biol 20:1221-1223.
79. Murphy JM, Zhang Q, Young SN, Reese ML, Bailey FP, Eyers PA, Ungureanu D, Hammaren H, Silvennoinen O, Varghese LN, Chen K, Tripaydonis A, Jura N, Fukuda K, Qin J, Nimchuk Z, Mudgett MB, Elowe S, Gee CL, Liu L, Daly RJ, Manning G,

Babon JJ, Lucet IS (2014) A robust methodology to subclassify pseudokinases based on their nucleotide-binding properties. Biochem J 457:323-334.

Luo H, Rose P, Barber D, Hanratty WP, Lee S, Roberts TM, D'Andrea AD, Dearolf CR (1997) Mutation in the Jak kinase JH2 domain hyperactivates Drosophila and mammalian Jak-Stat pathways. Mol Cell Biol 17:1562-1571.

Kralovics R, Passamonti F, Buser AS, Teo SS, Tiedt R, Passweg JR, Tichelli A, Cazzola M, Skoda RC (2005) A gain-of-function mutation of JAK2 in myeloproliferative disorders. N Engl J Med 352:1779-1790.

Levine RL, Wadleigh M, Cools J, Ebert BL, Wernig G, Huntly BJ, Boggon TJ, Wlodarska I, Clark JJ, Moore S, Adelsperger J, Koo S, Lee JC, Gabriel S, Mercher T, D'Andrea A, Frohling S, Dohner K, Marynen P, Vandenberghe P, Mesa RA, Tefferi A, Griffin JD, Eck MJ, Sellers WR, Meyerson M, Golub TR, Lee SJ, Gilliland DG (2005) Activating mutation in the tyrosine kinase JAK2 in polycythemia vera, essential thrombocythemia, and myeloid metaplasia with myelofibrosis. Cancer Cell 7:387-397.

James C, Ugo V, Le Couedic JP, Staerk J, Delhommeau F, Lacout C, Garcon L, Raslova H, Berger R, Bennaceur-Griscelli A, Villeval JL, Constantinescu SN, Casadevall N, Vainchenker W (2005) A unique clonal JAK2 mutation leading to constitutive signalling causes polycythaemia vera. Nature 434:1144-1148.

Scott LM, Tong W, Levine RL, Scott MA, Beer PA, Stratton MR, Futreal PA, Erber WN, McMullin MF, Harrison CN, Warren AJ, Gilliland DG, Lodish HF, Green AR (2007) JAK2 exon 12 mutations in polycythemia vera and idiopathic erythrocytosis. N Engl J Med 356:459-468.

Pietra D, Li S, Brisci A, Passamonti F, Rumi E, Theocharides A, Ferrari M, Gisslinger H, Kralovics R, Cremonesi L, Skoda R, Cazzola M (2008) Somatic mutations of JAK2 exon 12 in patients with JAK2 (V617F)-negative myeloproliferative disorders. Blood 111:1686-1689.

Shan Y, Gnanasambandan K, Ungureanu D, Kim ET, Hammaren H, Yamashita K, Silvennoinen O, Shaw DE, Hubbard SR (2014) Molecular basis for pseudokinase-dependent autoinhibition of JAK2 tyrosine kinase. Nat Struct Mol Biol 21:579-584.

Knighton DR, Zheng JH, Ten Eyck LF, Ashford VA, Xuong NH, Taylor SS, Sowadski JM (1991) Crystal structure of the catalytic subunit of cyclic adenosine monophosphate-dependent protein kinase. Science 253:407-414.

Williams NK, Bamert RS, Patel O, Wang C, Walden PM, Wilks AF, Fantino E, Rossjohn J, Lucet IS (2009) Dissecting specificity in the Janus kinases: the structures of JAK-specific inhibitors complexed to the JAK1 and JAK2 protein tyrosine kinase domains. J Mol Biol 387:219-232.

Lucet IS, Fantino E, Styles M, Bamert R, Patel O, Broughton SE, Walter M, Burns CJ, Treutlein H, Wilks AF, Rossjohn J (2006) The structural basis of Janus kinase 2 inhibition by a potent and specific pan-Janus kinase inhibitor. Blood 107:176-183.

Boggon TJ, Li Y, Manley PW, Eck MJ (2005) Crystal structure of the Jak3 kinase domain in complex with a staurosporine analog. Blood 106:996-1002.

Chrencik JE, Patny A, Leung IK, Korniski B, Emmons TL, Hall T, Weinberg RA, Gormley JA, Williams JM, Day JE, Hirsch JL, Kiefer JR, Leone JW, Fischer HD, Sommers CD, Huang HC, Jacobsen EJ, Tenbrink RE, Tomasselli AG, Benson TE (2010) Structural and thermodynamic characterization of the TYK2 and JAK3 kinase domains in complex with CP-690550 and CMP-6. J Mol Biol 400:413-433.

Hanks SK, Quinn AM, Hunter T (1988) The protein kinase family: conserved features and deduced phylogeny of the catalytic domains. Science 241:42-52.

93. Scheeff ED, Eswaran J, Bunkoczi G, Knapp S, Manning G (2009) Structure of the pseudokinase VRK3 reveals a degraded catalytic site, a highly conserved kinase fold, and a putative regulatory binding site. Struct Fold Des 17:128-138.
94. Kornev AP, Haste NM, Taylor SS, Eyck LF (2006) Surface comparison of active and inactive protein kinases identifies a conserved activation mechanism. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 103:17783-17788.
95. Kornev AP, Taylor SS, Ten Eyck LF (2008) A helix scaffold for the assembly of active protein kinases. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 105:14377-14382.
96. Hubbard SR, Wei L, Ellis L, Hendrickson WA (1994) Crystal structure of the tyrosine kinase domain of the human insulin receptor. Nature 372:746-754.
97. Wei L, Hubbard SR, Hendrickson WA, Ellis L (1995) Expression, characterization, and crystallization of the catalytic core of the human insulin receptor protein-tyrosine kinase domain. J Biol Chem 270:8122-8130.
98. Wu J, Li W, Craddock BP, Foreman KW, Mulvihill MJ, Ji QS, Miller WT, Hubbard SR (2008) Small-molecule inhibition and activation-loop trans-phosphorylation of the IGF1 receptor. EMBO J 27:1985-1994.
99. Hubbard SR (1997) Crystal structure of the activated insulin receptor tyrosine kinase in complex with peptide substrate and ATP analog. EMBO J 16:5572-5581.
100. Babon JJ, Kershaw NJ, Murphy JM, Varghese LN, Laktyushin A, Young SN, Lucet IS, Norton RS, Nicola NA (2012) Suppression of cytokine signaling by SOCS3: characterization of the mode of inhibition and the basis of its specificity. Immunity 36:239-250.
101. Darnell JE (1997) STATs and gene regulation. Science 277:1630-1635.
102. Shuai K, Schindler C, Prezioso VR, Darnell JE Jr (1992) Activation of transcription by IFN-: tyrosine phosphorylation of a 91-kD DNA binding protein. Science 258:1812.
103. Darnell JE Jr, Kerr IM, Stark GR (1994) Jak-STAT pathways and transcriptional activation in response to IFNs and other extracellular signaling proteins. Science 264:1415-1420.
104. Zhong Z, Wen Z, Darnell JE (1994) Stat3 and Stat4: members of the family of signal transducers and activators of transcription. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 91:4806-4810.
105. Shuai K, Stark GR, Kerr IM, Darnell JE (1993) A single phosphotyrosine residue of Stat91 required for gene activation by interferon-gamma. Science 261:1744-1746.
106. Copeland NG, Gilbert DJ, Schindler C, Zhong Z, Wen Z, Darnell JE, Mui AL-F, Miyajima A, Quelle FW, Ihle JN (1995) Distribution of the mammalian Stat gene family in mouse chromosomes. Genomics 29:225-228.
107. Shuai K, Stark GR, Kerr IM, Darnell JE Jr (1993) A single phosphotyrosine residue of Stat91 required for gene activation by interferon. Science 261:1744-1746.
108. Rengachari S, Groiss S, Devos JM, Caron E, Grandvaux N, Panne D (2018) Structural basis of STAT2 recognition by IRF9 reveals molecular insights into ISGF3 function. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 115:E601-E609.
109. Vinkemeier U, Moarefi I, Darnell JE, Kuriyan J (1998) Structure of the amino-terminal protein interaction domain of STAT-4. Science 279:1048-1052.
110. Hu T, Yeh JE, Pinello L, Jacob J, Chakravarthy S, Yuan G-C, Chopra R, Frank DA (2015) Impact of the N-terminal domain of STAT3 in STAT3-dependent transcriptional activity. Mol Cell Biol 35:3284-3300.
111. Strehlow I, Schindler C (1998) Amino-terminal signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT) domains regulate nuclear translocation and STAT deactivation. J Biol Chem 273:28049-28056.

112. Xu X, Sun Y-L, Hoey T (1996) Cooperative DNA binding and sequence-selective recognition conferred by the STAT amino-terminal domain. Science 273:794-797.
113. Chen X, Vinkemeier U, Zhao Y, Jeruzalmi D, Darnell JE Jr, Kuriyan J (1998) Crystal structure of a tyrosine phosphorylated STAT-1 dimer bound to DNA. Cell 93:827-839.
114. Horvath CM, Wen Z, Darnell JE (1995) A STAT protein domain that determines DNA sequence recognition suggests a novel DNA-binding domain. Genes Dev 9:984-994.
115. Decker T, Kovarik P, Meinke A (1997) GAS elements: a few nucleotides with a major impact on cytokine-induced gene expression. J Interfer Cytokine Res 17:121-134.
116. Ehret GB, Reichenbach P, Schindler U, Horvath CM, Fritz S, Nabholz M, Bucher P (2001) DNA binding specificity of different STAT proteins: comparison of in vitro specificity with natural target sites. J Biol Chem 276:6675-6688..
117. Li J, Rodriguez JP, Niu F, Pu M, Wang J, Hung L-W, Shao Q, Zhu Y, Ding W, Liu Y (2016) Structural basis for DNA recognition by STAT6. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 113:13015-13020.
118. Gupta S, Yan H, Wong LH, Ralph S, Krolewski J, Schindler C (1996) The SH2 domains of Stat1 and Stat2 mediate multiple interactions in the transduction of IFN-alpha signals. EMBO J 15:1075-1084.
119. Yan H, Krishnan K, Greenlund A, Gupta S, Lim J, Schreiber R, Schindler C, Krolewski J (1996) Phosphorylated interferon-alpha receptor 1 subunit (IFNaR1) acts as a docking site for the latent form of the 113 kDa STAT2 protein. EMBO J 15:1064-1074.
120. Yamamoto K, Miura O, Hirosawa S, Miyasaka N (1997) Binding sequence of STAT4: STAT4 complex recognizes the IFN-gamma activation site (GAS) -like sequence (T/A) TTCC (C/G) GGAA (T/A). Biochem Biophys Res Commun 233:126-132.
121. Heim MH, Kerr IM, Stark GR, Darnell JE (1995) Contribution of STAT SH2 groups to specific interferon signaling by the Jak-STAT pathway. Science 267:1347-1349.
122. Shuai K, Horvath CM, Huang LHT, Qureshi SA, Cowburn D, Darnell JE Jr (1994) Interferon activation of the transcription factor Stat1 involves dimerization through SH2-phosphotyrosyl peptide interactions. Cell 76:821-828.
123. Lin J-X, Migone T-S, Tseng M, Friedmann M, Weatherbee JA, Zhou L, Yamauchi A, Bloom ET, Mietz J, John S (1995) The role of shared receptor motifs and common Stat proteins in the generation of cytokine pleiotropy and redundancy by IL-2, IL-4, IL-7, IL-13, and IL-15. Immunity 2:331-339.
124. Ren Z, Mao X, Mertens C, Krishnaraj R, Qin J, Mandal PK, Romanowski MJ, McMurray JS, Chen X (2008) Crystal structure of unphosphorylated STAT3 core fragment. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 374:1-5.
125. Neculai D, Neculai AM, Verrier S, Straub K, Klumpp K, Pfitzner E, Becker S (2005) Structure of the unphosphorylated STAT5a dimer. J Biol Chem 280:40782-40787.
126. Mao X, Ren Z, Parker GN, Sondermann H, Pastorello MA, Wang W, McMurray JS, Demeler B, Darnell JE Jr, Chen X (2005) Structural bases of unphosphorylated STAT1 association and receptor binding. Mol Cell 17:761-771.
127. Good SR, Thieu VT, Mathur AN, Yu Q, Stritesky GL, Yeh N, O'Malley JT, Perumal NB, Kaplan MH (2009) Temporal induction pattern of STAT4 target genes defines potential for Th1 lineage-specific programming. J Immunol 183:3839-3847.
128. Satoh J-i, Tabunoki H (2013) A comprehensive profile of ChIP-Seq-based STAT1 target genes suggests the complexity of STAT1-mediated gene regulatory mechanisms. Gene Regul Syst Biol 7:S11433.


This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
129. Alvarez JV, Frank DA (2004) Genome-wide analysis of STAT target genes: elucidating the mechanism of STAT-mediated oncogenesis. Cancer Biol Ther 3:1045-1050.
130. Tripathi SK, Chen Z, Larjo A, Kanduri K, Nousiainen K, Aijo T, Ricaño-Ponce I, Hrdlickova B, Tuomela S, Laajala E (2017) Genome-wide analysis of STAT3-mediated transcription during early human Th17 cell differentiation. Cell Rep 19:1888-1901.
131. Villarino AV, Sciumè G, Davis FP, Iwata S, Zitti B, Robinson GW, Hennighausen L, Kanno Y, O'Shea JJ (2017) Subset-and tissue-defined STAT5 thresholds control homeostasis and function of innate lymphoid cells. J Exper Med 214:2999-3014.
132. Yamamoto T, Sekine Y, Kashima K, Kubota A, Sato N, Aoki N, Matsuda T (2002) The nuclear isoform of protein-tyrosine phosphatase TC-PTP regulates interleukin-6-mediated signaling pathway through STAT3 dephosphorylation. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 297:811-817.
133. Haspel RL, Darnell JE (1999) A nuclear protein tyrosine phosphatase is required for the inactivation of Stat1. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 96:10188-10193.
134. ten Hoeve J, de Jesus Ibarra-Sanchez M, Fu Y, Zhu W, Tremblay M, David M, Shuai K (2002) Identification of a nuclear Stat1 protein tyrosine phosphatase. Mol Cell Biol 22:5662-5668.
135. Chatterjee-Kishore M, Wright KL, Ting JPY, Stark GR (2000) How Stat1 mediates constitutive gene expression: a complex of unphosphorylated Stat1 and IRF1 supports transcription of the LMP2 gene. EMBO J 19:4111-4122.
136. Yang J, Liao X, Agarwal MK, Barnes L, Auron PE, Stark GR (2007) Unphosphorylated STAT3 accumulates in response to IL-6 and activates transcription by binding to NFκB. Genes Dev 21:1396-1408.
137. Yan S-J, Lim SJ, Shi S, Dutta P, Li WX (2011) Unphosphorylated STAT and heterochromatin protect genome stability. FASEB J 25:232-241.
138. Shi S, Larson K, Guo D, Lim SJ, Dutta P, Yan S-J, Li WX (2008) Drosophila STAT is required for directly maintaining HP1 localization and heterochromatin stability. Nat Cell Biol 10:489.
139. Park HJ, Li J, Hannah R, Biddie S, Leal-Cervantes AI, Kirschner K, Flores Santa Cruz D, Sexl V, Gottgens B, Green AR (2016) Cytokine-induced megakaryocytic differentiation is regulated by genome-wide loss of a uSTAT transcriptional program. EMBO J 35:580-594.
140. Shuai K, Ziemicki A, Wilks AF, Harpur AG, Sadowski HB, Gilman MZ, Darnell JE (1993) Polypeptide signalling to the nucleus through tyrosine phosphorylation of Jak and Stat proteins. Nature 366:580-583.
141. Naka T, Narazaki M, Hirata M, Matsumoto T, Minamoto S, Aono A, Nishimoto N, Kajita T, Taga T, Yoshizaki K, Akira S, Kishimoto T (1997) Structure and function of a new STAT-induced STAT inhibitor. Nature 387:924-929.
142. Starr R, Willson TA, Viney EM, Murray LJ, Rayner JR, Jenkins BJ, Gonda TJ, Alexander WS, Metcalf D, Nicola NA, Hilton DJ (1997) A family of cytokine-inducible inhibitors of signalling. Nature 387:917-921.
143. Hilton DJ, Richardson RT, Alexander WS, Viney EM, Willson TA, Sprigg NS, Starr R, Nicholson SE, Metcalf D, Nicola NA (1998) Twenty proteins containing a C-terminal SOCS box form five structural classes. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 95:114-119.
144. Hilton DJ, Richardson RT, Alexander WS, Viney EM, Willson TA, Sprigg NS, Starr R, Nicholson SE, Metcalf D, Nicola NA (1998) Twenty proteins containing a C-terminal SOCS box form five structural classes. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 95:114-119.

145. Croker BA, Krebs DL, Zhang JG, Wormald S, Willson TA, Stanley EG, Robb L, Greenhalgh CJ, Forster I, Clausen BE, Nicola NA, Metcalf D, Hilton DJ, Roberts AW, Alexander WS (2003) SOCS 3 negatively regulates IL-6 signaling in vivo. Nat Immunol 4:540-545.
146. Croker BA, Metcalf D, Robb L, Wei W, Mifsud S, DiRago L, Cluse LA, Sutherland KD, Hartley L, Williams E, Zhang JG, Hilton DJ, Nicola NA, Alexander WS, Roberts AW (2004) SOCS 3 is a critical physiological negative regulator of G-CSF signaling and emergency granulopoiesis. Immunity 20:153-165.
147. Hamanaka I, Saito Y, Yasukawa H, Kishimoto I, Kuwahara K, Miyamoto Y, Harada M, Ogawa E, Kajiyama N, Takahashi N, Izumi T, Kawakami R, Masuda I, Yoshimura A, Nakao K (2001) Induction of JAB/SOCS-1/SSI-1 and CIS 3/SOCS-3/SSI-3 is involved in gp130 resistance in cardiovascular system in rat treated with cardiotoxin-1 in vivo. Circ Res 88:727-732.
148. Bjorbaek C, Elmquist JK, El-Haschimi K, Kelly J, Ahima RS, Hileman S, Flier JS (1999) Activation of SOCS-3 messenger ribonucleic acid in the hypothalamus by ciliary neurotrophic factor. Endocrinology 140:2035-2043.
149. Magrangeas F, Boisteau O, Denis S, Jacques Y, Minvielle S (2001) Negative regulation of onconstatin M signaling by suppressor of cytokine signaling (SOCS-3). Eur Cytokine Netw 12:309-315.
150. Adams TE, Hansen JA, Starr R, Nicola NA, Hilton DJ, Billestrup N (1998) Growth hormone preferentially induces the rapid, transient expression of SOCS-3, a novel inhibitor of cytokine receptor signaling. J Biol Chem 273:1285-1287.
151. Kotenko SV, Izotova LS, Mirochnichenko OV, Esterova E, Dickensheet H, Donnelly RP, Pestka S (2001) Identification, cloning, and characterization of a novel soluble receptor that binds IL-22 and neutralizes its activity. J Immunol 166:7096-7103.
152. Strengell M, Lehtonen A, Matikainen S, Julkunen I (2006) IL-21 enhances SOCS gene expression and inhibits LPS-induced cytokine production in human monocyte-derived dendritic cells. J Leukoc Biol 79:1279-1285.
153. Auernhammer CJ, Melmed S (1999) Interleukin-11 stimulates proopiomelanocortin gene expression and adrenocorticotropic secretion in corticotroph cells: evidence for a redundant cytokine network in the hypothalamo-pituitary-adrenal axis. Endocrinology 140:1559-1566.
154. Shen X, Hong F, Nguyen VA, Gao B (2000) IL-10 attenuates IFN-alpha-activated STAT1 in the liver: involvement of SOCS2 and SOCS3. FEBS Lett 480:132-136.
155. Lejeune D, Demoulin JB, Renauld JC (2001) Interleukin 9 induces expression of three cytokine signal inhibitors: cytokine-inducible SH2-containing protein, suppressor of cytokine signalling (SOCS)-2 and SOCS-3, but only SOCS-3 overexpression suppresses interleukin 9 signalling. Biochem J 353:109-116.
156. Bjorbaek C, Elmquist JK, Frantz JD, Shoelson SE, Flier JS (1998) Identification of SOCS-3 as a potential mediator of central leptin resistance. Mol Cell 1:619-625.
157. Pezet A, Favre H, Kelly PA, Edery M (1999) Inhibition and restoration of prolactin signal transduction by suppressors of cytokine signaling. J Biol Chem 274:24497-24502.
158. Zimmerer JM, Lesinski GB, Kondadasula SV, Karpa VI, Lehman A, Raychaudhury A, Becknell B, Carson WE 3rd (2007) IFN-alpha-induced signal transduction, gene expression, and antitumor activity of immune effector cells are negatively regulated by suppressor of cytokine signaling proteins. J Immunol 178:4832-4845.
159. Mori H, Hanada R, Hanada T, Aki D, Mashima R, Nishinakamura H, Torisu T, Chien KR, Yasukawa H, Yoshimura A (2004) Socs 3 deficiency in the brain elevates leptin sensitivity and confers resistance to diet-induced obesity. Nat Med 10:739-743.

160. Delconte RB, Kolesnik TB, Dagley LF, Rautela J, Shi W, Putz EM, Stannard K, Zhang JG, Teh C, Firth M, Ushiki T, Andoniou CE, Degli-Esposti MA, Sharp PP, Sanvitale CE, Infusini G, Liau NP, Linossi EM, Burns CJ, Carotta S, Gray DH, Seillet C, Hutchinson DS, Belz GT, Webb AI, Alexander WS, Li SS, Bullock AN, Babon JJ, Smyth MJ, Nicholson SE, Huntington ND (2016) CIS is a potent checkpoint in NK cell-mediated tumor immunity. Nat Immunol 17:816-824.

161. Greenhalgh CJ, Rico-Bautista E, Lorentzon M, Thaus AL, Morgan PO, Willson TA, Zervoudakis P, Metcalf D, Street I, Nicola NA, Nash AD, Fabri LJ, Norstedt G, Ohlsson C, Flores-Morales A, Alexander WS, Hilton DJ (2005) SOCS 2 negatively regulates growth hormone action in vitro and in vivo. J Clin Invest 115:397-406.

162. Fairlie WD, De Souza D, Nicola NA, Baca M (2003) Negative regulation of gp130 signalling mediated through tyrosine-757 is not dependent on the recruitment of SHP2. Biochem J 372:495-502.

163. Schmitz J, Weissenbach M, Haan S, Heinrich PC, Schaper F (2000) SOCS 3 exerts its inhibitory function on interleukin-6 signal transduction through the SHP2 recruitment site of gp130. J Biol Chem 275:12848-12856.

164. Stebbins CE, Kaelin WG Jr, Pavletich NP (1999) Structure of the VHL-ElonginC-ElonginB complex: implications for VHL tumor suppressor function. Science 284:455-461.

165. Zhang JG, Farley A, Nicholson SE, Willson TA, Zugaro LM, Simpson RJ, Moritz RL, Cary D, Richardson R, Hausmann G, Kile BJ, Kent SB, Alexander WS, Metcalf D, Hilton DJ, Nicola NA, Baca M (1999) The conserved SOCS box motif in suppressors of cytokine signaling binds to elongins B and C and may couple bound proteins to proteasomal degradation. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 96:2071-2076.

166. Babon JJ, Sabo JK, Soetopo A, Yao S, Bailey MF, Zhang JG, Nicola NA, Norton RS (2008) The SOCS box domain of SOCS3: structure and interaction with the elonginBC-cullin 5 ubiquitin ligase. J Mol Biol 381:928-940.

167. Babon JJ, Sabo JK, Zhang JG, Nicola NA, Norton RS (2009) The SOCS box encodes a hierarchy of affinities for Cullin 5: Implications for ubiquitin ligase formation and cytokine signalling suppression. J Mol Biol 387:162-174.

168. Kamura T, Maenaka K, Kotoshiba S, Matsumoto M, Kohda D, Conaway RC, Conaway JW, Nakayama KI (2004) VHL-box and SOCS-box domains determine binding specificity for Cul2-Rbx1 and Cul5-Rbx2 modules of ubiquitin ligases. Genes Dev 18:3055-3065.

169. Mahroun N, Redwine WB, Florens L, Swanson SK, Martin-Brown S, Bradford WD, Staehling-Hampton K, Washburn MP, Conaway RC, Conaway JW (2008) Characterization of Cullin-box sequences that direct recruitment of Cul2-Rbx1 and Cul5-Rbx2 modules to Elongin BC-based ubiquitin ligases. J Biol Chem 283:8005-8013.

170. Sasaki A, Yasukawa H, Suzuki A, Kamizono S, Syoda T, Kinjyo I, Sasaki M, Johnston JA, Yoshimura A (1999) Cytokine-inducible SH2 protein-3 (CIS3/SOCS3) inhibits Janus tyrosine kinase by binding through the N-terminal kinase inhibitory region as well as SH2 domain. Genes Cells 4:339-351.

171. Yasukawa H, Misawa H, Sakamoto H, Masuhara M, Sasaki A, Wakioka T, Ohtsuka S, Imaizumi T, Matsuda T, Ihle JN, Yoshimura A (1999) The JAK-binding protein JAB inhibits Janus tyrosine kinase activity through binding in the activation loop. EMBO J 18:1309-1320.

172. Babon JJ, Yao S, DeSouza DP, Harrison CF, Fabri LJ, Liepinsh E, Scrofani SD, Baca M, Norton RS (20005) Secondary structure assignment of mouse SOCS3 by NMR

defines the domain boundaries and identifies an unstructured insertion in the SH2 domain.FEBS J 272:6120-6130.

173. Babon JJ, McManus EJ, Yao S, DeSouza DP, Mielke LA, Sprigg NS, Willson TA, Hilton DJ, Nicola NA, Baca M, Nicholson SE, Norton RS (2006) The structure of SOCS 3 reveals the basis of the extended SH2 domain function and identifies an unstructured insertion that regulates stability.Mol Cell 22:205-216.

174. Kershaw NJ, Murphy JM, Liau NP, Varghese LN, Laktyushin A, Whitlock EL, Lucet IS, Nicola NA, Babon JJ (2013) SOCS 3 binds specific receptor-JAK complexes to control cytokine signaling by direct kinase inhibition.Nat Struct Mol Biol 20:469-476.

175. Liau NPD, Laktyushin A, Lucet IS, Murphy JM, Yao S, Whitlock E, Callaghan K, Nicola NA, Kershaw NJ, Babon JJ (2018) The molecular basis of JAK/STAT inhibition by SOCS 1.Nat Commun 9:1558.

176. Roberts AW, Robb L, Rakar S, Hartley L, Cluse L, Nicola NA, Metcalf D, Hilton DJ, Alexander WS (2001) Placental defects and embryonic lethality in mice lacking suppressor of cytokine signaling 3.Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 98:9324-9329.

177. Yasukawa H, Ohishi M, Mori H, Murakami M, Chinen T, Aki D, Hanada T, Takeda K, Akira S, Hoshijima M, Hirano T, Chien KR, Yoshimura A (2003) .IL-6 induces an anti-inflammatory response in the absence of SOCS 3 in macrophages.Nat Immunol 4:551-556.

178. Kinjyo I, Inoue H, Hamano S, Fukuyama S, Yoshimura T, Koga K, Takaki H, Himeno K, Takaesu G, Kobayashi T, Yoshimura A (2006) Loss of SOCS 3 in T helper cells resulted in reduced immune responses and hyperproduction of interleukin 10 and transforming growth factor-beta 1.J Exper Med 203:1021-1031.

179. Ogata H, Chinen T, Yoshida T, Kinjyo I, Takaesu G, Shiraishi H, Iida M, Kobayashi T, Yoshimura A (2006) Loss of SOCS 3 in the liver promotes fibrosis by enhancing STAT3-mediated TGF-beta 1 production.Oncogene 25:2520-2530.

180. Babon JJ, Nicola NA (2013) The biology and mechanism of action of suppressor of cytokine signaling 3.Growth Factors 30:207-219.

181. Alexander WS, Starr R, Fenner JE, Scott CL, Handman E, Sprigg NS, Corbin JE, Cornish AL, Darwiche R, Owczarek CM, Kay TW, Nicola NA, Hertzog PJ, Metcalf D, Hilton DJ (1999) SOCS 1 is a critical inhibitor of interferon gamma signaling and prevents the potentially fatal neonatal actions of this cytokine.Cell 98:597-608.

182. Bullen DV, Darwiche R, Metcalf D, Handman E, Alexander WS (2001) Neutralization of interferon-gamma in neonatal SOCS 1-/- mice prevents fatty degeneration of the liver but not subsequent fatal inflammatory disease.Immunology 104:92-98.

183. Sporri B, Kovanen PE, Sasaki A, Yoshimura A, Leonard WJ (2001) JAB/SOCS1/SSI-1 is an interleukin-2-induced inhibitor of IL-2 signaling.Blood 97:221-226.

184. Starr R, Metcalf D, Elefanty AG, Brysha M, Willson TA, Nicola NA, Hilton DJ, Alexander WS (1998) Liver degeneration and lymphoid deficiencies in mice lacking suppressor of cytokine signaling-1.Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 95:14395-14399.

185. Naka T, Matsumoto T, Narazaki M, Fujimoto M, Morita Y, Ohsawa Y, Saito H, Nagasawa T, Uchiyama Y, Kishimoto T (1998) Accelerated apoptosis of lymphocytes by augmented induction of Bax in SSI-1 (STAT-induced STAT inhibitor-1) deficient mice.Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 95:15577-15582.

186. Marine JC, Topham DJ, McKay C, Wang D, Parganas E, Stravopodis D, Yoshimura A, Ihle JN (1999) SOCS 1 deficiency causes a lymphocyte-dependent perinatal lethality.Cell 98:609-616.

187. Alexander WS, Starr R, Metcalf D, Nicholson SE, Farley A, Elefanty AG, Brysha M, Kile BT, Richardson R, Baca M, Zhang JG, Willson TA, Viney EM, Sprigg NS, Rakar S, Corbin J, Mifsud S, DiRago L, Cary D, Nicola NA, Hilton DJ (1999) Suppressors of cytokine signaling (SOCS): negative regulators of signal transduction. J Leukoc Biol 66:588-592.

188. Gingras S, Parganas E, de Pauw A, Ihle JN, Murray PJ (2004) Re-examination of the role of suppressor of cytokine signaling 1 (SOCS1) in the regulation of toll-like receptor signaling. J Biol Chem 279:54702-54707.

189. Eyles JL, Metcalf D, Grusby MJ, Hilton DJ, Starr R (2002) Negative regulation of interleukin-12 signaling by suppressor of cytokine signaling-1. J Biol Chem 277:43735-43740.

190. Naka T, Tsutsui H, Fujimoto M, Kawazoe Y, Kohzaki H, Morita Y, Nakagawa R, Narazaki M, Adachi K, Yoshimoto T, Nakanishi K, Kishimoto T (2001) SOCS-1/SSI-1-deficient NKT cells participate in severe hepatitis through dysregulated cross-talk inhibition of IFN-gamma and IL-4 signaling in vivo. Immunity 14:535-545.

191. Davey GM, Starr R, Cornish AL, Burghardt JT, Alexander WS, Carbone FR, Surh CD, Heath WR (2005) SOCS-1 regulates IL-15-driven homeostatic proliferation of antigen-naive CD8T cells, limiting their autoimmune potential. J Exp Med 202:1099-1108.

192. Tonks NK, Neel BG (2001) Combinatorial control of the specificity of protein tyrosine phosphatases. Curr Opin Cell Biol 13:182-195.

193. Hunter T (1995) Protein kinases and phosphatases: the yin and yang of protein phosphorylation and signaling. Cell 80:225-236.

194. Neel BG (1993) Structure and function of SH2-domain containing tyrosine phosphatases. Sem Cell Biol 4:419-432.

195. Irie-Sasaki J, Sasaki T, Matsumoto W, Opavsky A, Cheng M, Welstead G, Griffiths E, Krawczyk C, Richardson CD, Aitken K (2001) CD45 is a JAK phosphatase and negatively regulates cytokine receptor signalling. Nature 409:349-354.

196. Endo TA, Masuhara M, Yokouchi M, Suzuki R, Sakamoto H, Mitsui K, Matsumoto A, Tanimura S, Ohtsubo M, Misawa H (1997) A new protein containing an SH2 domain that inhibits JAK kinases. Nature 387:921-924.

197. Zhang X, Guo A, Yu J, Possemato A, Chen Y, Zheng W, Polakiewicz RD, Kinzler KW, Vogelstein B, Velculescu VE (2007) Identification of STAT3 as a substrate of receptor protein tyrosine phosphatase T. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 104:4060-4064.

198. Frank DA, Mahajan S, Ritz J (1997) B lymphocytes from patients with chronic lymphocytic leukemia contain signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT) 1 and STAT3 constitutively phosphorylated on serine residues. J Clin Invest 100:3140.

199. David M, Chen HE, Goelz S, Larner AC, Neel BG (1995) Differential regulation of the alpha/beta interferon-stimulated Jak/Stat pathway by the SH2 domain-containing tyrosine phosphatase SHPTP1. Mol Cell Biol 15:7050-7058.

200. Yetter A, Uddin S, Krolewski JJ, Jiao H, Yi T, Platanias LC (1995) Association of the interferon-dependent tyrosine kinase Tyk-2 with the hematopoietic cell phosphatase. J Biol Chem 270:18179-18182.

201. Bone H, Dechert U, Jirik F, Schrader JW, Welham MJ (1997) SHP1 and SHP2 protein-tyrosine phosphatases associate with βc after interleukin-3-induced receptor tyrosine phosphorylation. Identification of potential binding sites and substrates. J Biol Chem 272:14470-14476.

202. Chim C-S, Fung T-K, Cheung W-C, Liang R, Kwong Y-L (2004) SOCS1 and SHP1 hypermethylation in multiple myeloma: implications for epigenetic activation of the Jak/STAT pathway. Blood 103:4630-4635.
203. Hayakawa F, Towatari M, Iida H, Wakao H, Kiyoi H, Naoe T, Saito H (1998) Differential constitutive activation between STAT-related proteins and MAP kinase in primary acute myelogenous leukaemia. Brit J Haematol 101:521-528.
204. Guan K, Haun RS, Watson SJ, Geahlen RL, Dixon JE (1990) Cloning and expression of a protein-tyrosine-phosphatase. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 87:1501-1505.
205. Brown-Shimer S, Johnson KA, Lawrence JB, Johnson C, Bruskin A, Green NR, Hill DE (1990) Molecular cloning and chromosome mapping of the human gene encoding protein phosphotyrosyl phosphatase 1B. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 87:5148-5152.
206. Frangioni JV, Beahm PH, Shifrin V, Jost CA, Neel BG (1992) The nontransmembrane tyrosine phosphatase PTP-1B localizes to the endoplasmic reticulum via its 35 amino acid C-terminal sequence. Cell 68:545-560.
207. Takemoto S, Mulloy JC, Cereseto A, Migone T-S, Patel BK, Matsuoka M, Yamaguchi K, Takatsuki K, Kamihira S, White JD (1997) Proliferation of adult T cell leukemia/lymphoma cells is associated with the constitutive activation of JAK/STAT proteins. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 94:13897-13902.
208. Salmeen A, Andersen JN, Myers MP, Tonks NK, Barford D (2000) Molecular basis for the dephosphorylation of the activation segment of the insulin receptor by protein tyrosine phosphatase 1B. Mol Cell 6:1401-1412.
209. Zabolotny JM, Bence-Hanulec KK, Stricker-Krongrad A, Haj F, Wang Y, Minokoshi Y, Kim Y-B, Elmquist JK, Tartaglia LA, Kahn BB (2002) PTP1B regulates leptin signal transduction in vivo. Dev Cell 2:489-495.
210. Myers MP, Andersen JN, Cheng A, Tremblay ML, Horvath CM, Parisien J-P, Salmeen A, Barford D, Tonks NK (2001) TYK2 and JAK2 are substrates of protein-tyrosine phosphatase 1B. J Biol Chem 276:47771-47774.
211. Kleppe M, Soulier J, Asnafi V, Mentens N, Hornakova T, Knoops L, Constantinescu S, Sigaux F, Meijerink JP, Vandenberghe P (2011) PTPN2 negatively regulates oncogenic JAK1 in T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Blood 117:7090-7098.
212. Simoncic PD, Lee-Loy A, Barber DL, Tremblay ML, McGlade CJ (2002) The T cell protein tyrosine phosphatase is a negative regulator of janus family kinases 1 and 3. Curr Biol 12:446-453.
213. Dhe-Paganon S, Werner ED, Nishi M, Hansen L, Chi Y-I, Shoelson SE (2004) A phenylalanine zipper mediates APS dimerization. Nat Struct Mol Biol 11:968-974.
214. Tong W, Lodish HF (2004) Lnk inhibits Tpo-mpl signaling and Tpo-mediated megakaryocytopenies. J Exper Med 200:569-580.
215. Tong W, Zhang J, Lodish HF (2005) Lnk inhibits erythropoiesis and Epo-dependent JAK2 activation and downstream signaling pathways. Blood 105:4604-4612.
216. Bersenev A, Wu C, Balcerek J, Tong W (2008) Lnk controls mouse hematopoietic stem cell self-renewal and quiescence through direct interactions with JAK2. J Clin Invest 118:2832.
217. Chomarat P, Bachereau J, Davoust J, Palucka AK (2000) IL-6 switches the differentiation of monocytes from dendritic cells to macrophages. Nat Immunol 1:510.
218. McLoughlin RM, Jenkins BJ, Grail D, Williams AS, Fielding CA, Parker CR, Ernst M, Topley N, Jones SA (2005) IL-6 trans-signaling via STAT3 directs T cell infiltration in acute inflammation. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 102:9589-9594.


This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
219. Kopf M, Baumann H, Freer G, Freudenberg M, Lamers M, Kishimoto T, Zinkernagel R, Bluethmann H, Köhler G (1994) Impaired immune and acute-phase responses in interleukin-6-deficient mice. Nature 368:339.
220. Scheller J, Chalaris A, Schmidt-Arras D, Rose-John S (2011) The pro-and anti-inflammatory properties of the cytokine interleukin-6. Biochim Biophys Acta 1813:878-888.
221. Waetzig GH, Rose-John S (2012) Hitting a complex target: an update on interleukin-6 trans-signalling. Expert Opin Therapeut Targets 16:225-236.
222. Boulanger MJ, Bankovich AJ, Kortemme T, Baker D, Garcia KC (2003) Convergent mechanisms for recognition of divergent cytokines by the shared signaling receptor gp130. Mol Cell 12:577-589.
223. Xu Y, Kershaw NJ, Luo CS, Soo P, Pocock MJ, Czabotar PE, Hilton DJ, Nicola NA, Garrett TP, Zhang JG (2010) Crystal structure of the entire ectodomain of gp130: insights into the molecular assembly of the tall cytokine receptor complexes. J Biol Chem 285:21214-21218.
224. Rodig SJ, Meraz MA, White JM, Lampe PA, Riley JK, Arthur CD, King KL, Sheehan KC, Yin L, Pennica D, Johnson EM Jr, Schreiber RD (1998) Disruption of the Jak1 gene demonstrates obligatory and nonredundant roles of the Jaks in cytokine-induced biologic responses. Cell 93:373-383.
225. Wormald S, Zhang JG, Krebes DL, Mielke LA, Silver J, Alexander WS, Speed TP, Nicola NA, Hilton DJ (2006) The comparative roles of suppressor of cytokine signaling-1 and -3 in the inhibition and desensitization of cytokine signaling. J Biol Chem 281:11135-11143.
226. ten Hoeve J, de Jesus Ibarra-Sanchez M, Fu Y, Zhu W, Tremblay M, David M, Shuai K (2002) Identification of a nuclear Stat1 protein tyrosine phosphatase. Mol Cell Biol 22:5662-5668.
227. Herrmann A, Vogt M, Monnigmann M, Clalsen T, Sommer U, Haan S, Poli V, Heinrich PC, Muller-Newen G (2007) Nucleocytoplasmic shuttling of persistently activated STAT3. J Cell Sci 120:3249-3261.
228. Lang R, Pauleau AL, Parganas E, Takahashi Y, Mages J, Ihle JN, Rutschman R, Murray PJ (2003) SOCS3 regulates the plasticity of gp130 signaling. Nat Immunol 4:546-550.
229. Neel BG, Gu H, Pao L (2003) The 'Shp'ing news: SH2 domain-containing tyrosine phosphatases in cell signaling. Trends Biochem Sci 28:284-293.
230. Livnah O, Stura EA, Middleton SA, Johnson DL, Jolliffe LK, Wilson LA (1999) Crystallographic evidence for preformed dimers of erythropoietin receptor before ligand activation. Science 283:987-990.
231. Brooks AJ, Dai W, O'Mara ML, Abankwa D, Chhabra Y, Pelekanos RA, Gardon O, Tunny KA, Blucher KM, Morton CJ, Parker MW, Sierecki E, Gambin Y, Gomez GA, Alexandrov K, Wilson IA, Doxastakis M, Mark AE, Waters MJ (2014) Mechanism of activation of protein kinase JAK2 by the growth hormone receptor. Science 344:1249783.
232. Brown RJ, Adams JJ, Pelekanos RA, Wan Y, McKinstry WJ, Palethorpe K, Seeber RM, Monks TA, Eidne KA, Parker MW, Waters MJ (2005) Model for growth hormone receptor activation based on subunit rotation within a receptor dimer. Nat Struct Mol Biol 12:814-821.
233. Neubauer H, Cumano A, Muller M, Wu H, Huffstadt U, Pfeffer K (1998) Jak2 deficiency defines an essential developmental checkpoint in definitive hematopoiesis. Cell 93:397-409.

234. Parganas E, Wang D, Stravopodis D, Topham DJ, Marine JC, Teglund S, Vanin EF, Bodner S, Colamonici OR, van Deursen JM, Grosveld G, Ihle JN (1998) Jak2 is essential for signaling through a variety of cytokine receptors. Cell 93:385-395.
235. Krempler A, Qi Y, Triplett AA, Zhu J, Rui H, Wagner KU (2004) Generation of a conditional knockout allele for the Janus kinase 2 (Jak2) gene in mice. Genesis 40:52-57.
236. Wagner KU, Krempler A, Triplett AA, Qi Y, George NM, Zhu J, Rui H (2004) Impaired alveologenesis and maintenance of secretory mammary epithelial cells in Jak2 conditional knockout mice. Mol Cell Biol 24:5510-5520.
237. Nosaka T, van Deursen JM, Tripp RA, Thierfelder WE, Witthuhn BA, McMickle AP, Doherty PC, Grosveld GC, Ihle JN (1995) Defective lymphoid development in mice lacking Jak3. Science 270:800-802.
238. Thomis DC, Gurniak CB, Tivol E, Sharpe AH, Berg LJ (1995) Defects in B lymphocyte maturation and T lymphocyte activation in mice lacking Jak3. Science 270:794-797.
239. Park SY, Saijo K, Takahashi T, Osawa M, Arase H, Hirayama N, Miyake K, Nakauchi H, Shirasawa T, Saito T (1995) Developmental defects of lymphoid cells in Jak3 kinase-deficient mice. Immunity 3:771-782.
240. Shimoda K, Kato K, Aoki K, Matsuda T, Miyamoto A, Shibamori M, Yamashita M, Numata A, Takase K, Kobayashi S, Shibata S, Asano Y, Gondo H, Sekiguchi K, Nakayama K, Nakayama T, Okamura T, Okamura S, Niho Y, Nakayama K (2000) Tyk2 plays a restricted role in IFN alpha signaling, although it is required for IL-12-mediated T cell function. Immunity 13:561-571.
241. Karaghiosoff M, Neubauer H, Lassnig C, Kovarik P, Schindler H, Pircher H, McCoy B, Bogdan C, Decker T, Brem G, Pfeffer K, Muller M (2000) Partial impairment of cytokine responses in Tyk2-deficient mice. Immunity 13:549-560.
242. Karaghiosoff M, Steinborn R, Kovarik P, Kriegshauser G, Baccarini M, Donabauer B, Reichart U, Kolbe T, Bogdan C, Leanderson T, Levy D, Decker T, Muller M (2003) Central role for type I interferons and Tyk2 in lipopolysaccharide-induced endotoxin shock. Nat Immunol 4:471-477.
243. Durbin JE, Hackenmiller R, Simon MC, Levy DE (1996) Targeted disruption of the mouse Stat1 gene results in compromised innate immunity to viral disease. Cell 84:443-450.
244. Park C, Li S, Cha E, Schindler C (2000) Immune response in Stat2 knockout mice. Immunity 13:795-804.
245. Takeda K, Noguchi K, Shi W, Tanaka T, Matsumoto M, Yoshida N, Kishimoto T, Akira S (1997) Targeted disruption of the mouse Stat3 gene leads to early embryonic lethality. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 94:3801-3804.
246. Thierfelder WE, van Deursen JM, Yamamoto K, Tripp RA, Sarawar SR, Carson RT, Sangster MY, Vignali DA, Doherty PC, Grosveld GC, Ihle JN (1996) Requirement for Stat4 in interleukin-12-mediated responses of natural killer and T cells. Nature 382:171-174.
247. Liu XW, Robinson GW, Wagner KU, Garrett L, WynshawBoris A, Hennighausen L (1997) Stat5a is mandatory for adult mammary gland development and lactogenesis. Genes Dev 11:179-186.
248. Teglund S, McKay C, Schuetz E, van Deursen JM, Stravopodis D, Wang DM, Brown M, Bodner S, Grosveld G, Ihle JN (1998) Stat5a and Stat5b proteins have essential and nonessential, or redundant, roles in cytokine responses. Cell 93:841-850.
249. Akimoto T, Numata F, Tamura M, Takata Y, Higashida N, Takashi T, Takeda K, Akira S (1998) Abrogation of bronchial eosinophilic inflammation and airway

hyperreactivity in signal transducers and activators of transcription (STAT)6-deficient mice. J Exp Med 187:1537-1542.

250. Yang XO, Zhang H, Kim BS, Niu X, Peng J, Chen Y, Kerketta R, Lee YH, Chang SH, Corry DB, Wang D, Watowich SS, Dong C (2013) The signaling suppressor CIS controls proallergic T cell development and allergic airway inflammation. Nat Immunol 14:732-740.

251. Metcalf D, Greenhalgh CJ, Viney E, Willson TA, Starr R, Nicola NA, Hilton DJ, Alexander WS (2000) Gigantism in mice lacking suppressor of cytokine signalling-2. Nature 405:1069-1073.

252. Roberts AW, Robb L, Rakar S, Hartley L, Cluse L, Nicola NA, Metcalf D, Hilton DJ, Alexander WS (2001) Placental defects and embryonic lethality in mice lacking suppressor of cytokine signaling 3. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 98:9324-9329.

253. Takahashi Y, Carpino N, Cross JC, Torres M, Parganas E, Ihle JN (2003) SOCS3: an essential regulator of LIF receptor signaling in trophoblast giant cell differentiation. EMBO J 22:372-384.

254. Mao X, Ren Z, Parker GN, Sondermann H, Pastorello MA, Wang W, McMurray JS, Demeler B, Darnell JE Jr, Chen X (2005) Structural bases of unphosphorylated STAT1 association and receptor binding. Mol Cell 17:761-71.

255. Chen X, Vinkemeier U, Zhao Y, Jeruzalmi D, Darnell JE Jr, Kuriyan J (1998) Crystal structure of a tyrosine phosphorylated STAT-1 dimer bound to DNA. Cell 93:827-839.

| Abbreviation | Name | Major Functions |
|-------------|------|-----------------|
| Class I cytokines |  |  |
| IL-2 family |  |  |
| IL-2 | Interleukin-2 | Immune response, T-cell differentiation |
| IL-4 | Interleukin-4 | T_H 2 differentiation |
| IL-7 | Interleukin-7 | T-, B-cell growth factor |
| IL-9 | Interleukin-9 | Pleiotropic, Stimulates, T-, B-and NK cells |
| IL-15 | Interleukin-15 | Stimulates T-and NK-cells |
| IL-21 | Interleukin-21 | Stimulates, T-, B-and NK cells |
| IL-3 family |  |  |
| IL-3 | Interleukin-3 | Multi-lineage haematopoietic growth factor |
| IL-5 | Interleukin-5 | B-cell development, eosinophils |
| GM-CSF | Granulocyte/Macrophage Colony Stimulating Factor | Multi-lineage haematopoietic growth factor, especially monocytes, neutrophils, eosinophils and basophils |
| IL-6 family |  |  |
| IL-6 | Interleukin-6 | Pleiotropic, haematopoiesis, acute phase response, lymphoid differentiation |
| LIF | Leukemia Inhibitory Factor | Pleiotropic, blastocyst implantation, bone remodeling, CNS |
| CNTF | Ciliary NeuroTrophic growth Factor | Neuronal growth factor |
| CT1 | Cardiotrophin 1 | Cardiac myocytes growth factor |
| CLC | Cardiotrophin-like cytokine | Neurological growth factor |
| OSM | Oncostatin M | Pleiotropic, bone formation |
| IL-31 | Interleukin-31 | Inflammatory, cell-mediated immunity |
| NP | Neuropoietin | Neural growth factor |
| Homodimeric |  |  |
| G-CSF | Granulocyte Colony Stimulating Factor | Stimulates granulocyte production, mobilises stem cells |
| EPO | Erythropoietin | Stimulates formation of erythrocytes |
| TPO | Thrombopoietin | Stimulates formation of megakaryocytes/platelets |
| GH | Growth Hormone | Growth |
| PRL | Prolactin | Milk production |
| LEP | Leptin | Regulates appetite |
| Others |  |  |
| IL-12 | Interleukin-12 | Stimulates T-and NK-cells |
| IL-13 | Interleukin-13 | Pleiotropic, airway epithelia, allergic response |
| IL-23 | Interleukin-23 | Inflammation |
| TSLP | Thymic Stromal LymphoPoietin | Inflammatory, stimulates T-and B-cells |
|  |  |  |
| Class II cytokines |  |  |
| Type I |  |  |

| interferon |  |  |
| --- | --- | --- |
| IFNa | Interferon alpha (23 subtypes) | Anti-viral, secreted by lymphocytes, fibroblasts and monocytes |
| IFNb | Interferon beta | Anti-viral, ubiquitously expressed |
| IFNe | Interferon epsilon | Anti-viral, expressed in female reproductive tract |
| IFNk | Interferon kappa | Anti-viral, expressed by keratinocytes |
| IFNo | Interferon omega | Anti-viral, secreted by leukocytes |
| Type II interferon |  |  |
| IFNy | Interferon gamma | Pro-inflammatory, Secreted by T-and NK-cells, activates macrophages/monocytes |
| Type III interferon |  |  |
| IFNx1 | Interferon lambda1 | Anti-viral, similar to type I but acts on fewer cell-types |
| IFNx2 | Interferon lambda2 | Anti-viral, similar to type I but acts on fewer cell-types |
| IFNx3 | Interferon lambda3 | Anti-viral, similar to type I but acts on fewer cell-types |
| IL-10 family |  |  |
| IL-10 | Interleukin-10 | Anti-inflammatory, inhibits macrophage activation |
| IL-19 | Interleukin-19 | Inflammatory, acts on dermal cells |
| IL-20 | Interleukin-20 | Inflammatory, acts on dermal cells |
| IL-22 | Interleukin-22 | Inflammatory, Secreted by Th1 cells, acts on dermal cells |
| IL-24 | Interleukin-24 | Inflammatory, acts on dermal cells |
| IL-26 | Interleukin-26 | Antimicrobial, Th17 cytokine |

| Gene    | Knockout mouse phenotype                                                                 | Cytokines dysregulated                                                                                   | Reference |
|---------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------|
| Jak1    | Early post-natal lethality, neurological defects; SCID                                 | IL-2, IL-6 family cytokines, IFNs                                                                      | 224       |
| Jak2    | Embryonic lethal, failure of definitive erythropoiesis.                                | EPO, TPO, GH, PRL, IL-3, IL-5, GM-CSF and IFNγ                                                        | 233-236   |
| Jak3    | SCID                                                                                   | IL-2 family cytokines                                                                                  | 237-239   |
| Tyk2    | Resistance to LPS, reduced IL-12 response                                               | IL-12                                                                                                  | 240-242   |
|         |                                                                                        |                                                                                                       |           |
| Stat1   | Impaired antiviral response                                                            | Type I/II/III interferons                                                                              | 243       |
| Stat2   | Impaired antiviral response                                                            | Type I/III interferon                                                                                 | 244       |
| Stat3   | Embryonic lethal                                                                       | IL-6, IL-10 family cytokines, GCSF                                                                      | 245       |
| Stat4   | Impaired Th1 development                                                               | IL-12                                                                                                  | 246       |
| Stat5a/b| Impaired mammary gland development, infertility, no NK cells                           | GH, PRL, IL-3 family cytokines                                                                          | 247,248   |
| Stat6   | Impaired Th2 development                                                               | IL-4/13                                                                                               | 249       |
|         |                                                                                        |                                                                                                       |           |
| Cish    | Increased susceptibility to allergic asthma. Increased tumour immunity                  | IL-2, IL-4, IL-15                                                                                      | 160,250   |
| Socs1   | Neonatal lethality                                                                     | IFNγ/α/βIL-12/23, IL4/13 IL-2 family cytokines                                                          | 184-191   |
| Socs2   | Gigantism                                                                              | GH                                                                                                    | 251       |
| Socs3   | Embryonic lethality; placental defects.                                                | IL-6 family cytokines, GCSF, Leptin                                                                    | 252,253   |

FIGURE LEGENDS

Figure 1. Cytokines. Structures of members of the TNFα-family, TGFβ-family, IL-1-like cytokines, chemokines (CXCL8), cytokines that signal through receptor tyrosine-kinases (M-CSF) or the JAK/STAT pathway (IL-6) are shown on the left. JAK/STAT cytokines are helical bundle cytokines and can be divided into two classes. Examples of these two classes are shown on the right.

Figure 2. The JAK/STAT pathway. Schematic of the signalling cascade induced by cytokines that signal via the JAK/STAT pathway. Cytokine binds to a specific receptor and allows transactivation of the associated Janus Kinases (JAKs). Activated JAKs then phosphorylate tyrosines on the intracellular domains of the receptor which recruit the STAT (Signal Transducers and Activators of Transcription) transcription factors. STATs are translocated into the nucleus and upregulate the transcription of cytokine-responsive genes. SOCS proteins are direct targets of STAT and act as negative-feedback inhibitors to switch off the signalling cascade.

Figure 3. Class I and Class II cytokines. Families of cytokines and the receptors they bind to are shown above the JAK-, STAT- and SOCS-family members they signal through.

Figure 4. The Cytokine Homology Region (CHR) forms the basis of all cytokine receptors. (A) The CHR from a Class I receptor (Growth Hormone Receptor) is shown with the two FnIII domains, disulphide bonds and WSXWS motif highlighted. All receptors contain a CHR however many receptors, especially those that recognise Class I cytokines, have additional FnIII and Ig domains and this results in a large variety of receptor architectures and stoichiometries. (B) Structures and models of a diverse range of cytokine:receptor complexes.

Figure 5. Janus Kinases (JAKs). There are four members of the JAK family (JAK1, JAK2, JAK3, TYK2) and all share similar domain architecture (top). The FERM and SH2 domains tether JAK to the receptor, binding Box I and Box II respectively (structure shown on the right, PDB ID: 5L04). The pseudokinase (ψkinase) regulates the activity of the catalytically active kinase domain (bottom, PDB ID: 4OLI) via a mechanism that is unclear. There is no structure of a full-length JAK protein and hence the relative orientation of the N- and C-terminal halves of the protein is unknown (indicated schematically on the left).

Figure 6. STATs. The Signal Tranducers and Activators of Transcription (STATs) are a family of latent transcription factors that are activated by phosphorylation following cytokine exposure. The same domain architecture is shared by all STAT proteins and is shown schematically above. Unphosphorylated STAT (uSTAT) exists as an antiparallel dimer in the cytoplasm (upper). The SH2 domain (red) of uSTAT binds to phosphotyrosines in cytokine receptors which allows JAK to phosphorylate a specific tyrosine located between the SH2 and transactivation domain (TAD). This phosphotyrosine is then targeted by the SH2 domain of the other monomer inducing a large rotation between the two subunits of the dimer and allowing phosphorylated STAT (pSTAT) to occupy its DNA-binding competent dimeric structure (lower). The structures shown here are of STAT1 (PDB ID: 1YVL, 254 1BF5 255) with
the colours matching the schematic representation above. The N-terminal domain of STAT does not appear to form a stable interaction with the rest of the molecule and is not shown here. The transactivation domain (TAD) is unstructured but allows binding of accessory factors.

Figure 7. Regulation of Cytokine Signalling. (A) Schematic diagram showing regulators of cytokine signalling and where they act. (B) Domain architecture of the proteins indicated in A. (C) The primary negative feedback regulators of cytokine signalling are a subset of the SOCS (Suppressors of Cytokine Signalling) family, CIS, SOCS1, SOCS2, SOCS3. These proteins function as the substrate recruitment modules of an E3 ubiquitin ligase (model structure shown in surface representation) and promote the ubiquitination and degradation of cytokine receptors and potentially other substrates. Substrates bind to the SH2 domain of SOCS proteins (red) and ubiquitin is transferred via an E2 ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme that docks onto the RING-domain protein Rbx2 (white). SOCS1 and SOCS3 (right) can also directly inhibit the JAK kinase domain by using their kinase inhibitory region (KIR) to block the substrate binding site of the kinase (model of a substrate overlay shown inset). (D) Six tyrosine phosphatases have been shown to be important regulators of cytokine-pathway activity, acting by dephosphorylating JAKs, STATs or receptors. The structure of one of these, SHP1, has been solved in complex with the JAK activation loop of JAK2 (PDB ID:4GSO).

Figure 8. IL-6 signalling. IL-6 signals via a 2:2:2 complex between itself, gp130 and either membrane-bound IL-6Rα (classic signalling) or soluble IL-6Rα (trans-signalling). JAK1, JAK2 and TYK2 can all bind the intracellular domain of gp130 however JAK1 appears to be the dominant kinase. The structure of JAK1 bound to the gp130 cytoplasmic domain is a model based on the structures of JAK1/IFN□R (PDB ID: 5L04) and the JAK2/EPOR dimeric structure (coordinates kindly provided by R. Ferrao and P. Lupardus). JAK is activated by trans-phosphorylation and then phosphorylates five tyrosine residues on the receptor intracellular domain. The four distal tyrosines are docking sites for STAT3 and to a lesser degree STAT1. Activated STAT3 is then phosphorylated by JAK and translocates into the nucleus to drive the biological response. The MAPK pathway is also stimulated by IL-6 via SHP2 which binds to pY759 using its SH2 domain. The PI(3)K pathway is also activated in response to IL-6. SOCS3 is a direct STAT3 target gene and binds to the SHP2-binding site on the receptor via its SH2 domain. This inhibits MAPK signalling via displacement of SHP2 and also inhibits further STAT3 activation by direct inhibition of JAK catalytic activity.
TNF$\alpha$

TGF$\beta$

M-CSF

IL-1

IL-6

CXCL8

JAK/STAT cytokines

Class I (IL-6)

Class II (IFN$\alpha$)

$\alpha2$

$\alpha3$

$\alpha4$

$\alpha1$

$\alpha5$

$\alpha6$

$\alpha2$

$\alpha3$

$\alpha4$

$\alpha1$

$\alpha5$

$\alpha6$

up-up-down-down

up-down-up-down-up-down

Cytokine
Receptor
Extracellular
Cytoplasm
JAK
JAK
STAT
SOCS
STAT
STAT
Nucleus
SOCS
STAT
STAT
Cytokine inducible genes
Transcription
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

Class I cytokine signalling

| homodimeric (short) | homodimeric (tall) | IL-12/23 | IL-6 family | IL-3 family | IL-2 family |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |
| EPOR:EPOR<br>GHR:GHR<br>PRLR:PRLR | TPOR:TPOR | LEPR:LEPR GCSFR:GCSFR | IL12Rβ1:IL12Rβ2:IL12p40<br>IL12Rβ1:IL23R:IL12p40 | gp130:LIFRβ<br>gp130:OSMR<br>IL3Ra:OSMR | βc:IL-3Ra<br>βc:IL-5Ra<br>βc:GM-CSFRα | γc:IL2Rβ:IL-2Ra<br>γc:IL2Rβ:IL-15Ra<br>γc:IL-7Ra | γc:IL-21Ra<br>IL-7Ra:TSLPR |
| JAK2/JAK2 | JAK2/JAK2 JAK1* | TYK2/JAK2 | JAK1* | JAK2/JAK2 | JAK3/JAK1 JAK1/TYK2 |
| STAT5 | STAT5 STAT3 | STAT4 (IL-12)<br>STAT3 (IL-23) | STAT3 | STAT5 | STAT5 STAT6 |
| SOCS2 (GH)<br>????? (others) | SOCS3 SOCS3 | SOCS1 | SOCS3 | ????? | SOCS1 CIS | SOCS1 |

Class II cytokine signalling

| Type I interferons | Type II interferon | Type III interferon | IL-10 family cytokines |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| IFNα<br>IFNβ<br>IFNε<br>IFNκ | IFNγ | IFNλ1<br>IFNλ2<br>IFNλ3 | IL-10<br>IL-26<br>IL-22<br>IL-20<br>IL-19<br>IL-20<br>IL-24 |
| IFNAR2:IFNAR1 | IFNGR1:IFNGR2 | IL10Rβ:IL28R | IL10Rβ:IL10Ra IL10Rβ:IL20Ra IL10Rβ:IL22R IL20Rβ:IL22R IL20Rβ:IL20Ra |
| JAK1/TYK2 | JAK1/JAK2 | TYK2/JAK1 | TYK2/JAK1 |
| STAT1-<br>STAT2-IRF9 | STAT1 | STAT1-<br>STAT2-IRF9 | STAT3 |
| SOCS1 | SOCS1 | SOCS1 | ????? |

Key

- ☐ cytokine
- ☐ shared chain
- ☐ cytokine specific chain<br>(or high-affinity chain)
- ☐ other (co-shared or low affinity chain)

Cytokine Homology Region (CHR)<br>(two FnIII domains)

FnIII domain

Ig domain

Sushi domain

signalling chain

non-signalling chain

Although JAK1 is dominant, these receptors also bind JAK2 and TYK2

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

A

Cytokine Homology  
Region  

disulphides  
75Å  
WSXWS  

FnIII (1)  
cytokine  
binding  

FnIII (2)  

B  

Class I Receptors  

350Å  

EPOR  
IL-6R  
GM-CSFR  
IL-2R  

Class II Receptors  

170Å  

IFNαR  
IFNγR (model)  
IFNλR  
IL-10R (model)  
Type I IL-20R  

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

JAK

FERM SH2 ψKinase Kinase

JAK1
JAK2
JAK3
TYK2

Cell Membrane
BOX I
FERM
F2
F1
BOX II
SH2
pY
binding
pocket
ATP
binding
site
nucleotide
binding
site
ψKinase
Kinase
Cytokine
Receptor
positively
charged
surface
F3

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

NTD
coil-coil
DNA-binding
linker
SH2
TAD
STAT1
STAT2
STAT3
STAT4
STAT5a
STAT5b
STAT6

uSTAT

pSTAT

phosphorylation

DNA

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

IL-6

IL-6Rα
gp130
IL-6Rα
gp130

Cell Membrane

FERM/SH2
JAK1
γKinase
Domain
SOCS3
SHP-2
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT3/1
STAT