
Molecular and Cellular Neuroscience 101 (2019) 103414

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Molecular and Cellular Neuroscience

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/ymcne

Role of GPCR signaling and calcium dysregulation in Alzheimer's disease

Sushma, Amal Chandra Mondal*

Laboratory of Cellular and Molecular Neurobiology, School of Life Sciences, Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi, Delhi, India

ARTICLE INFO

Keywords:
Alzheimer's disease
GPCRs
Calcium channels
Receptors

ABSTRACT

Alzheimer's disease (AD), a late onset neurodegenerative disorder is characterized by the loss of memory, disordered cognitive function, caused by accumulation of amyloid-β (Aβ) peptide and neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs) in the neocortex and hippocampal brain area. Extensive research has been done on the findings of the disease etiology or pathological causes of aggregation of Aβ and hyperphosphorylation of tau protein without much promising results. Recently, calcium dysregulation has been reported to play an important role in the pathophysiology of AD. Calcium ion acts as one of the major secondary messengers, regulates many signaling pathways involved in cell survival, proliferation, differentiation, transcription and apoptosis. Calcium signaling is one of the major signaling pathways involved in the formation of memory, generation of energy and other physiological functions. It also can modulate function of many proteins upon binding. Dysregulation in calcium homeostasis leads to many physiological changes leading to neurodegenerative diseases including AD. In AD, GPCRs generate secondary messengers which regulate calcium homeostasis inside the cell and is reported to be disturbed in the pathological condition. Calcium channels and receptors present on the plasma membrane and intracellular organelle maintain calcium homeostasis through different signaling mechanisms. In this review, we have summarized the different calcium channels and receptors involved in calcium dysregulation which in turn play a critical role in the pathogenesis of AD. Understanding the role of calcium channels and GPCRs to maintain calcium homeostasis is an attempt to develop effective AD treatments.

1. Introduction

AD is a chronic progressive neurodegenerative disease and the most common cause of dementia. It is characterized by the loss of memory, impaired cognitive activity, and social inappropriateness (Brookmeyer et al., 2007). Statistical data have shown that around 46.8 million people had dementia Worldwide in 2015 which increased to 50 million in 2017 and is expected to increase by double in every 20 years (Association, A.s., 2018). Two types of abnormalities observed in the brain of AD patients are neuritic plaques and NFTs (Selkoe, 2001). The FDA approved drugs available for the treatment of AD are acetylcholine esterase (AChE) inhibitors and N-methyl D-aspartate receptor (NMDAR) blocker but they pose various side effects (Cacabelos, 2007; Birks and Evans, 2015; Olin and Schneider, 2002).

Molecular mechanisms underlying pathogenesis of AD involve formation of neuritic plaque of Aβ peptide, hyperphosphorylated tau protein formed by NFTs, mitochondrial dysfunction, oxidative stress, neuro-inflammation, excitotoxicity and calcium dysregulation which cause neurodegeneration by different molecular pathways (Wang et al., 2014; Supnet and Bezprozvanny, 2010; Heneka et al., 2015; Chong et al., 2018). Many hypotheses have been proposed to explain AD pathophysiology; a few of them are “amyloid-cascade”, “tau pathology” and “calcium dysregulation”. Despite extensive research and therapeutic approach, effective treatment is not available. Recently, “calcium dysregulation” have been studied extensively to explain the mechanism of neurodegeneration caused by disturbed calcium signaling in the cells (Pchitskaya et al., 2018).

Ca²⁺ is a cation that regulates the function of various enzymes and proteins. It acts as a secondary messenger for various signaling pathways involved in cell survival, proliferation, differentiation and apoptosis (Clapham, 2007). It also plays a crucial role in signal transduction between the neurons and it is required for fusion of synaptic vesicles. It activates calmodulin (CaM) by changing its conformation upon binding. This CaM activates calcineurin (CaN), Ca²⁺/calmodulin dependent protein kinase II (CaMKII) and Ca²⁺/calmodulin dependent protein kinase IV (CamKIV). CaMKII plays an important role in synaptic strengthening (Lisman et al., 2002). CaN activates nuclear factor of activated T-cells (NFAT) which regulates the transcription of genes, involved in generation of immune response (Crabtree, 2001). CaMKIV regulates the transcription of cAMP response element binding protein (CREB), involved in the memory formation (Kang et al., 2001). Calcium modulates the function of protein kinase C (PKC) that regulates

* Corresponding author at: Cellular and Molecular Neurobiology Laboratory, School of Life Sciences, Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi 110067, Delhi, India.
E-mail address: acmondal@mail.jnu.ac.in (A.C. Mondal).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mcn.2019.103414

Received 17 July 2019; Received in revised form 17 September 2019; Accepted 24 September 2019
Available online 23 October 2019
1044-7431/ © 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

downstream pathway of cell survival and cell division (Clapham, 2007). G-protein coupled receptors (GPCRs) produce secondary messenger, inositol 1,4,5-triphosphate (IP3) which binds to inositol triphosphate receptor (IP3R) on endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and efflux the calcium into cytoplasm. Together with IP3R, ryanodine receptor (RyR) also regulates ER calcium efflux. Calcium is involved in the energy production in mitochondria and maintains its homeostasis (Bronner, 2001).

Ca²⁺ is present in very low concentrations in cytoplasm (50 nM–300 nM) as compared to intracellular organelle endoplasmic reticulum (ER) (100-800 μM) and extracellular region (1–2 mM) (Burgoyne et al., 2019). These levels are regulated in a precise manner in different cellular compartments due to its ability to modulate the function of proteins. Ca²⁺ homeostasis is regulated by the various receptors, calcium channels and calcium pumps (Fig. 1). In the plasma membrane, calcium channels including voltage gated calcium channel (VGCC), NMDAR, α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid receptor (AMPAR) and transient receptor potential cation channels (TRPC) regulate the Ca²⁺ flux from extracellular to intracellular space via various signaling mechanisms (Wang et al., 2017). Ca²⁺ is stored in ER and its flux within the cell is regulated by RyR and IP3R calcium channel via releasing stored Ca²⁺ into the cytoplasm upon activation (Krebs et al., 2015). When there is a depletion in the level of Ca²⁺ in the ER, store operated channel (SOC) pathway is activated that sequesters Ca²⁺ from the extracellular region. Further, sarcoplasmic reticulum calcium transport ATPase (SERCA) pumps, present on the surface of ER, takes up the Ca²⁺ from cytoplasm to ER (Prakriya and Lewis, 2015). In mitochondria, Ca²⁺ transport is regulated by mitochondrial calcium uniporter (MCU), Na⁺/Ca²⁺ exchanger (NCX), voltage-dependent anion selective channel protein (VDAC), mitochondrial permeability transition pore (mPTP) (Bronner, 2001).

Calcium dysregulation is often implicated in the pathogenesis of AD (Bezprozvanny, 2009). Intracellular Ca²⁺ levels are found to be elevated in the AD affected regions (Foster, 2007). Excessive intracellular calcium enhances CaN activity that leads to activation of phosphatases including PP1, involved in induction of long-term depression (LTD) (Reese and Taglialatela, n.d.). Ca²⁺/CaM complex, activates the CaMKII, plays an important role in memory formation and synaptic plasticity. CaMKII auto-phosphorylation at T286 is important for its independent function and late long-term potentiation (LTP) induction found to be disturbed in AD, resulting into memory deficits (Ghosh and Giese, n.d.; Jiang et al., n.d.). It has been observed in various studies that Ca²⁺ level increase in ER causing more leakage of Ca²⁺ into cytoplasmic compartment affecting the mitochondrial calcium homeostasis (Bezprozvanny, 2009; Supnet and Bezprozvanny, n.d.). This disturbance in mitochondrial calcium regulation affects the energy production and oxidative stress resulting into mitochondrial dysfunction. Changes in the mitochondrial membrane potential causes release of cytochrome c into cytoplasm, leads to cell death (Görlach et al., 2015). Aβ aggregation increases intracellular calcium levels by activating NMDA receptor and promotes its endocytosis (Bezprozvanny and Hiesinger, 2013). Extrasynaptic activation of NMDAR receptor leads to calcium dysregulation and the receptor is majorly consists of GluN2 subunit. Synaptic activation of NMDAR is crucial for the memory formation and GluN1 subunit is present in abundance, found to be down-regulated in AD (Nomura et al., 2005). In addition, studies have shown that PS1 (FAD) mutations cause increase in intracellular calcium via different mechanisms, stimulates pathological changes in AD (Stutzmann et al., 2007). Ca²⁺ also activates GSK-3β (glycogen synthase kinase-3β), involved in reduction in neurogenesis by down-regulating BDNF (Brain derived neurotrophic factor) and phosphorylates tau protein that helps its aggregation to form NFTs (Yu et al., 2009). Therefore, intracellular calcium dysregulation leads to impairment of memory, induction of oxidative stress, apoptosis and neurodegeneration.

that leads to neurodegeneration. There are many molecular mechanisms responsible for its dysregulation. In this review, we have elucidated different signaling mechanisms and receptors involved in calcium dysregulation in AD and possible therapeutic approaches for better treatment (Table 1).

### 2. GPCRs mediated calcium dysregulation in AD

GPCRs are the signaling receptor present on the plasma membrane of cell and are associated with the heteromeric G-protein at the cytoplasmic region (Du et al., 2019). They generate secondary messengers, regulate calcium homeostasis as cAMP activates PKA, responsible for calcium channel activity and PLC; IP3 regulates kinase and IP3R activities respectively. Their physiological activity plays an important role in calcium regulation and any functional disturbance can be responsible for the pathological changes for many diseases including AD (Weis and Kobilka, 2018; Zündorf and Reiser, 2011).

In AD, many GPCRs such as acetylcholine receptor (AChR), β adrenergic receptor (β-AR), purinergic receptor, metabotropic glutamate receptor (mGluR) and chemokine receptors have been reported to be involved in calcium dysregulation (Thathiah and De Strooper, 2011; Day and Greenfield, 2003; Jiang et al., 2014; Rosenbaum et al., 2009; Liu et al., 2016; Hakim et al., 2019). β-arrestin regulates the activity of GPCRs and plays a key role in AD pathogenesis (Jiang et al., 2013a). Therefore, we have described the functional mechanisms underlying AD pathophysiology involving these GPCRs.

#### 2.1. Cholinergic disturbance and involvement of AChR in AD pathophysiology

Two types of AChRs, mAChR (muscarinic acetylcholine receptor) and nAChR (nicotinic acetylcholine receptor) are present in the CNS. mAChR receptor a metabotropic GPCRs, regulates signaling pathways and nAChR receptor is anionotropic receptor, involved in the transport of cations like Ca²⁺, Na⁺ and K⁺ (Libri et al., 1997). Recently, nAChR is found to be associated with the G-protein and their activity is found to be altered in AD (Dang et al., 2016; Kabbani et al., 2013; King et al., 2015).

AD is also characterized by decrease in acetylcholine (ACh) neurotransmitter which is brought about by an increase in AChE (acetylcholine esterase) activity, degrades ACh in synaptic cleft thus making it unable for subsequent neuronal activation (Giacobini, 2003; Herholz, 2008). In a recent in vitro study, it was observed that AChE activates α7nAChR even at low concentration, leads to calcium influx through NMDAR receptor because activation of nAChR removes Mg²⁺ blockage of NMDAR. α7nAChR activates L-type VGCC resulting into high calcium influx into the cell. This excessive intracellular calcium leads to apoptosis via calcium dependent signaling pathways (Day and Greenfield, 2003; Shen and Yakel, 2009). Various studies have shown that Aβ binds to α7nAChR and activates it. Acute exposure of Aβ1-42 induces the Akt phosphorylation in mouse primary neuronal culture. This is induced via activation of α7nAChR and NMDA receptor as preincubation with their respective antagonists reduced Akt phosphorylation (Abbott et al., 2008). In the same study, prolonged treatment of Aβ1-42 reduced the Akt phosphorylation and similar outcomes were also observed in 13 months old TSA10 transgenic mouse which indicates its inhibitory effects on the cell survival (Abbott et al., 2008). Gomez-Ramos et al. (2008) demonstrated that extracellular tau increases intracellular calcium levels via M1 and M3 AChR activation in SHSY-5Y human neuroblastoma cells. Although, M1 mAChR and α7AChR increase calcium influx into the cell, on the contrary, activation of these receptors have shown positive effects in AD treatment (Jiang et al., 2014; Picciotto and Zoli, 2008). Activation of M1 mAChR has shown reduction in Aβ load and also decreased tau hyperphosphorylation with amelioration of memory deficits which could be due to other GPCR related signaling pathways (Jiang et al., 2014).

Sushma and A.C. Mondal

Molecular and Cellular Neuroscience 101 (2019) 103414

Fig. 1. Calcium signaling is regulated by GPCRs which produce secondary messengers by different subunits of G-proteins (Gs, Gq and Gi). It produces secondary messenger IP3, regulates the calcium efflux through IP3R from ER to cytoplasm. RyR also regulates ER calcium efflux by binding to Ca²⁺. VGCC and NMDAR regulate calcium influx from extracellular region to cytoplasm. VGCC is activated by change in membrane potential and NMDAR, a high affinity calcium channel is activated by glutamate binding. In mitochondria, Ca²⁺ is required for the energy production and is precisely maintained by MCU, NCX, VDAC and mPTP present on the outer and inner mitochondrial membrane. PMCA, is an ATPase pump and transports the cytoplasmic calcium to outside the cell. SOCs pathway is activated upon depletion of ER calcium and refills ER calcium by taking from extracellular region. Intracellular calcium regulates many signaling pathways. It activates CaM which further activates CaMKII, CaMKIV and CaN. CaMKII is involved in synaptic strengthening. CaMKIV regulates the transcription of CREB mediated genes, involved in memory formation. Calcium also activates PKC and regulates its downstream pathways involved in cell survival and division. Abbreviations: GPCRs- G-protein coupled receptors, VGCC- voltage gated calcium channel, NMDAR- N-methyl, D-aspartate receptor, RyR- Ryanodine receptor, IP3R- Inositol triphosphate receptor, ER- endoplasmic reticulum, MCU- mitochondrial calcium uniporter, NCX- Na⁺/Ca²⁺ exchanger, VDAC- voltage-dependent anion –selective channel protein, mPTP- mitochondrial permeability transition pore, CaM- calmodulin, CaN- calcineurin, CaMKII- Ca²⁺/calmodulin dependent protein kinase II, CREB- cAMP response element binding protein, NFAT- Nuclear factor of activated T-cells.

Interestingly, activation of α7AChR also induces anti-inflammatory pathway, can be a reason for its beneficiary effect in AD ([Hoskin et al., 2018](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2018.05.003)). Various agonist studies have been done on these receptors which have produced some positive therapeutic effect on the disease pathology ([Jiang et al., 2014](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jneuroim.2014.01.001); [Picciotto and Zoli, 2008](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2008.01.001)). As described above, AChRs are involved in the pathophysiology of AD and calcium dysregulation. Several studies have implicated the possible therapeutic modalities for the treatment of the disease but further research is required to elucidate the molecular mechanism of the cholinergic receptors in AD.

### 2.2. β₂ adrenergic receptor (β₂AR) mediated calcium dysregulation in AD

Adrenergic receptors, the GPCRs are abundantly present in the locus ceruleus (LC) region of brain. Such receptors are regulated by the ligands epinephrine and nor-epinephrine and are involved in brain functions like attention, sleep, arousal, mood regulation, learning, and generation of memory ([Rasmussen et al., 2011](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2011.01.001); [Johnson, 2006](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2006.01.001)). It has been reported that neurodegeneration in LC region occurs at the initial stage in AD and is responsible for the pathophysiology of disease ([Heneka et al., 2010](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2010.01.001)).

β₂AR is a kind of adrenergic receptor that regulates the calcium homeostasis by activating PKA via cAMP generation ([Rosenbaum et al., 2009](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2009.01.001)). Initial studies have shown the beneficiary effect of inhibiting β₂AR activity for prevention of memory deficits in animal models of AD ([de Quervain et al., 2007](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2007.01.001)). It is found to be involved in the production of Aβ by modulating the function of γ-secretase in HEK293 cell line. In this study, β₂AR agonist isoproterenol increased the production of Aβ40 and Aβ42 which is ameliorated by treatment with ICI antagonist of β₂AR ([Ni et al., 2006a](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2006.01.001)). It is further confirmed by Yu, N.-N., et al., that acute stress together with β₂AR agonist clenbuterol increased the production of Aβ which is ameliorated by its antagonist ICI treatment indicating the role of β₂AR in generation of amyloid plaque burden ([Yu et al., 2010](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2010.01.001)). Functional modulation of RyR receptor due to post-translational remodeling, including nitrosylation and phosphorylation observed in AD transgenic mice. Post-translational remodeling is regulated by PKA which is activated by β₂AR induced memory deficits ([Lacampagne et al., 2017](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2017.01.001)). Lacampagne et al. (2017) and Bussiere et al. (2017) reported that Aβ induces the activation of β₂AR that leads to leaking of RyR, which in turn increases cytoplasmic calcium in APPswe-expressing SH-SY5Ycellular and transgenic mice model of AD. This ER calcium leakage was prevented by β₂AR and PKA inhibitor ICI and H-89 respectively ([Lacampagne et al., 2017](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2017.01.001)). In addition, it was reported in AD mice model that ICI increased the dendritic ramification indicating its possible molecular role in synaptic connection and memory formation ([Wu et al., 2017](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2017.01.001)). These studies indicate the role of β₂AR in the

pathogenesis of AD, involved in the production of Aβ and calcium dysregulation via affecting γ-secretase activity and functional modulation of RyR. Hence, β₂AR could be a therapeutic target for AD.

### 2.3. Purine metabolism disturbance and its role in calcium dysregulation

Purinergic receptors are present on the plasma membrane and are activated by binding of nucleotide isoforms (ATP, ADP, AMP, UDP, UTP, and Adenosine). These receptors regulate metabolic activity, signal transduction, cell proliferation, and differentiation (Cieślak and Wojtczak, 2018). There are two types of purinergic receptors present in the CNS, namely P1 and P2. P1, the GPCRs and P2 is ionotropic and metabotropic ATP-gated cation channels, both regulating calcium influx into the cell (Lemos et al., 2018; Ferrari et al., 2016; Oliveira et al., 2016).

It has been reported that deregulation of purine metabolism occurs in AD which is responsible for the pathogenesis of the disease (Ansoleaga et al., 2015). Purinergic receptors are also involved in inflammation and ROS production in AD (Thomas et al., 2015). Transgenic AD mice model and in vitro studies have shown that the activation of adenosine receptors (P1 type) are involved in Aβ production and increasing the blood brain permeability, as blocking these receptors activity ameliorated the effect (Burnstock et al., 2011; Carman et al., 2011). Various studies have reported that calcium overload in mitochondria disturbs ATP generation, causing leakage of ATP into extracellular matrix in AD (Celis-Muñoz et al., 2016). Liu, J., et al., observed that there is an increase in the intracellular calcium influx upon activation with high concentration of ATP in peripheral blood mononuclear cells. Furthermore, it is confirmed by the study in mouse model of AD (3xTgAD) that there is calcium influx along with alteration in electrical dynamics upon activation with the P2Y agonist (Liu et al., 2016; Hakim et al., 2019). Activation of P2X7 receptor induces neuroinflammation and release of proinflammatory cytokines like IL1-β, IL-18, IL-6, IL1-α, INF-γ, and TNF-α in submandibular gland (SMG) cells isolated from mice indicating its role in neuroinflammation, being one of the major causes of neurodegeneration in AD (Woods et al., 2012). Other P2-type receptors (P2Y) are found to be up-regulated in AD and increase the intracellular calcium via activation of PLC through IP3 induced calcium release from ER (Weisman et al., 2012). From above studies, it is elucidated that inhibition of purinergic receptors decrease the calcium levels and cytotoxicity inside the cell which could serve as a possible therapeutic target for AD.

### 2.4. Involvement of mGluR in calcium dysregulation in AD

Metabotropic glutamate receptor (mGluR) is a GPCR which activates PLC and modulates adenyl cyclase activity to regulate calcium influx upon binding to its ligand glutamate. They are abundant in post synaptic density and play an important role in glutamate mediated activation of neuron and formation of memory and learning skills (Lüscher and Huber, 2010; Zhao et al., 2018).

In AD, excitotoxicity is caused by glutamate as a result of excitatory signaling of the glutamate binding to its receptor (mGluR, NMDA and AMPA) (Hynd et al., 2004; Sattler and Tymianski, 2001). Glutamate binding to mGluR also increases calcium influx into the cell from extracellular regions in primary hippocampal neurons (Hilton et al., 2006; Chakroborty and Stutzmann, 2011). In post synaptic density, prion protein (PrPc) and Src tyrosine kinase (fyn) are present abundantly and involved in the post-synaptic neuronal activation and memory formation together with NMDA receptor activation (Um and Strittmatter, 2013; Larson et al., 2012). It was observed in a study on primary cortical neurons that PrPc and fyn complex requires mGluR5, conducts calcium influx upon activation (Um et al., 2012). Few studies involving AD mice model and xenopus oocyte reported that Aβ oligomers binds to PrPcmGluR5 complex and increase calcium influx into the cell, leads to loss of dendritic spines (Haas and Strittmatter, 2016; Um et al.,

Molecular and Cellular Neuroscience 101 (2019) 103414

2013). Thus, under pathological conditions, mGluR5 induces calcium influx, loss of dendritic spine and excitotoxicity in AD. Therefore, targeting this receptor may ameliorate the Aβ induced toxicity and calcium signaling mediated pathological changes.

### 2.5. Role of chemokine receptor in neuroinflammation and calcium disturbance in AD pathology

Chemokine receptors (CXCR) are the seven transmembrane spanning GPCR family receptors (Qin et al., 2015). There are seven chemokine receptors identified till now (CXCR1-CXCR7) which regulate different cellular functions (Kufareva et al., 2015). They are mainly present on the leukocytes and also found on neuronal and glia cells (Luo et al., 2016; Merino et al., 2015).

CXCR4 upon binding to CXCL-12 regulates the formation of memory and learning skill via GPCRs mediated Erk1/2 pathway as reported in neonatal OPCs isolated from rats (Tian et al., 2018). Various in vitro and animal studies have shown that inhibition of this receptor decreases the formation of memory and is reported to be down-regulated in AD (Ota et al., 2013). Other cytokine signaling also plays an important role in calcium dysregulation, e.g., CXCL-10 upon binding to its receptor CXCR3 increases intracellular calcium. Enhanced calcium levels further release cytochrome c from mitochondrial membrane leading to apoptosis in primary mouse cortical neurons (Xia et al., 2000). These studies suggest that chemokine receptors CXCR3 involved in the calcium dysregulation but CXCR4 is involved in the formation of memory which is down regulated in AD pathology. Therefore, it may serve as a therapeutic target for AD. However, further molecular analysis is required to evaluate its therapeutic benefits.

### 2.6. Role of β-arrestin in regulation of GPCRs activity

GPCRs activity is inhibited by G-protein coupled receptor kinase (GRKs) which phosphorylates the C-terminal domain of GPCRs leading to their inactivation and increases its affinity towards β-arrestin, resulting into their desensitization and internalization (Luttrell and Lefkowitz, 2002; Peterson and Luttrell, 2017). There are four isoforms of arrestin present in the brain. Arrestin 1 and arrestin 4 are present in retinal rods and cones, arrestin 2 and 3 (β-arrestin1 and β-arrestin2, respectively) are present in different brain areas (Jiang et al., 2013b).

In AD patients, both β-arrestin-1 and 2 levels are found to be elevated (Potter et al., 2018). Liu et al. (2013) showed in an in vitro study that β-arrestin1 binds to γ-secretase complex's Aph1 domain and alters its activity leading to increase production of Aβ (Liu et al., 2013). Similarly, β-arrestin 2 has shown its modulatory effect on γ-secretase complex as it is involved in the generation of Aβ (Thathiah et al., 2013). Genetic ablation and inhibition of both β-arrestins reduced the production of Aβ in AD transgenic mice indicating their potential role in AD pathogenesis (Liu et al., 2013; Thathiah et al., 2013). Further, Nelson et al. showed that β-arrestin 2 regulates the activity of GPR3 scaffolding protein in HEK293 cells which was found to be associated with γ-secretase and being involved in the production of Aβ (Nelson and Sheng, 2013). Molecular mechanisms describing the role of β-arrestin in AD pathogenesis and its therapeutic benefits is yet to be discovered and further analysis of the regulation of GPCRs function on calcium dysregulation is required.

### 3. Calcium channels and receptor mediated calcium dysregulation in AD

Along with the GPCRs, other receptors and calcium channels also regulate the homeostasis of calcium in the cell. These are membrane receptors NMDA, VGCC, PMCA and SOCs calcium channels, involved in transmembrane transduction of calcium (Wang et al., 2017). ER receptor channels RyR, IP3R and SERCA regulate the ER calcium levels (Krebs et al., 2015; Prakriya and Lewis, 2015). In mitochondria, MCU,
Sushma and A.C. Mondal

Molecular and Cellular Neuroscience 101 (2019) 103414

NXC and mPTP regulate calcium concentration for the mitochondrial physiological function inside the cells (Vance, 1990; Mendes et al., 2005; Williams et al., 2013; Kirichok et al., 2004; Baumgartner et al., 2009). Secretases (β and γ secretase) are involved in the cleavage of APP, alters the calcium homeostasis (Mattson et al., 2001; Chan et al., 2000; Hayrapetyan et al., 2008; Cole and Vassar, 2007). Here, we have described pathophysiological changes caused by calcium dyshomeostasis involving secretases, calcium receptor and channels.

### 3.1. Role of plasma membrane receptors and channels in calcium dysregulation underlying AD progression

#### 3.1.1. NMDA receptor

NMDA receptor is an ionotropic glutamatergic receptor and conducts calcium currents along with Na⁺ and K⁺ from extracellular matrix into the cell (Zhang et al., 2016; Carvajal et al., 2016). The activity of NMDA receptor is also required for the synaptic strengthening as it induces LTP, important for memory formation (Lüscher and Malenka, 2012).

NMDAR is a calcium channel which transports calcium from extracellular region to intracellular cytoplasm and its over-activation induces calcium dysregulation (Wang and Reddy, 2017). This leads to a shift from LTP to LTD which decreases memory formation in various cellular and animal studies, the main pathological hallmark of AD (Temido-Ferreira et al., 2018; Styr and Slutsky, 2018). Extra-synaptic activation of NMDA receptor has been found to be one of the possible mechanism in induction of LTD and pathological changes in cellular and animal models of AD (Bading, n.d.). Along with it, tau expression is found to be increased in mouse primary cortical neurons via extra-synaptic activation of NMDAR that suppresses phosphorylation of ERKs (extracellular signal-regulated kinases) (Hayrapetyan et al., 2008). Receptor subunits play a different role as GluN2 subunit mainly present in extra synaptic receptor subunit has been found to induce LTD. On the other hand, GluN1 present in synaptic receptor has been shown protective effects in memory formation (Zhu et al., 2015; Daniels and Brown, 2001; Barria, 2007; Thomas et al., 2006). In a recent study, it was observed that Aβ aggregate interacts with PrPc and activate Fyn as described earlier (Um and Strittmatter, 2013; Larson et al., 2012). This assembly along with the mGluR5 leads to GluN2 phosphorylation mediated activation. Increase in the activity of GluN2 leads to LTD generation and calcium dyshomeostasis in cultured hippocampal neurons (Thomas et al., 2006; Kam et al., 2014; Cline et al., 2018). In vitro studies have suggested that knockdown of Jacob, a CREB regulator, ameliorate the extrasynaptic NMDAR mediated effects. Administration of Aβ impairs the induction of LTP via NMDAR activation and also localizes the Jacob into the nucleus altering gene transcription (Dieterich et al., 2008). An in vivo study suggests that ephrin type-B receptor 2 (EphB2) binds to NMDAR subunits and regulates its synaptic localization by calcium dependent desensitization of NR2B-containing NMDARs. Aβ oligomers inhibits EphB2 mediated synaptic localization of NMDAR and this effect is ameliorated by enhancing the Eph2 expression, suggesting a possible mechanism for modulation of NMDAR activity (Nolt et al., 2011; Hu et al., 2017). Memantine, a NMDA blocker which inhibits only activated NMDA receptor, is found to be the most effective drug till now but it manifests various side effects (Johnson and Kotermanski, 2006). Further, more efficient therapeutic approach for the treatment of AD with lesser side effects is the need of the hour.

#### 3.1.2. VGCC

Voltage gated calcium channels are activated by change in membrane potential and plays crucial role in cellular repolarization and signal transduction via conducting calcium currents inside the cell (Davila, 1999; Buraei and Yang, 2013).

VGCC, especially L-type receptor channels have been found to be up-regulated in ageing and AD (Anekonda et al., 2011; Wang et al., 2004). These channels increase intracellular calcium due to sustained hyperpolarization that could be due to activation of NMDAR and lead to calcium influx into the cytoplasm (Demuro et al., 2005). This increase in calcium currents affects many signaling pathways like CaMKII and CaN, results in induction of LTD and memory deficits in AD (Egorova et al., 2015). Inhibition of L-type VGCC ameliorated the memory deficits and calcium dyshomeostasis in AD models and patients with dementia (Anekonda and Quinn, 2011). Recent studies have indicated that up-regulation of α-subunit of Cav1.2 subunit of L-type VGCC in transgenic AD mice in age dependent manner and is responsible for receptor functional modulation (Hu et al., 2017). In a recent study, it is demonstrated that blockade of L-type of VGCC with isradipine or nimodipine ameliorated memory deficits, behavioral changes and electrophysiological changes in Aβ induced animal model of AD, suggest the involvement of calcium channels in AD pathogenesis (Pourbadie et al., 2015).

### 3.2. Disturbance in ER mediated calcium homeostasis in AD

#### 3.2.1. RyR (Ryanodine receptor)

RyR is a calcium channel present on the ER membrane (Fill and Copello, 2002). It is mainly calcium mediated calcium channel i.e., activated upon binding of calcium (Berridge et al., 2003). In previous studies, it has been shown that reduced inhibition of RyR channels lead to leakage of calcium into cell in AD models (Del Prete et al., 2014). This increased calcium leads to many pathological changes like synaptic dysfunction, oxidative stress and apoptosis (Berridge et al., 2003; Green and LaFerla, 2008). Besides this, RyR expression is found to be elevated in transgenic mouse model of AD and similar effects are seen in vitro primary cortical neurons with the treatment of Aβ (Supnet et al., 2006). In a recent study, it was observed that RyR binds to N-terminal domain of PS1 and enhances Aβ production. This RyR-PS1 complex increases the intracellular calcium which is ameliorated with the mutation in the N-terminal domain of PS1. This indicates that PS1 negatively regulates RyR activity on binding to it (Payne et al., 2013). Calcium influx via RyR and IP3 receptor channels inhibits the STIM-SOCE pathway leads to impairment of neuronal activity and neurodegeneration (Leissring et al., 2000; Popugaeva and Bezprozvanny, 2013). As described above, post-translational modifications of RyR affect its activity, regulated by β₂AR receptor and are involved in the generation of Aβ (Yu et al., 2010; Ni et al., 2006b). These studies suggest the role of RyR receptor in calcium dysregulation and inhibition of the receptor can serve as a therapeutic target.

#### 3.2.2. Inositol phosphate 3 receptor (IP3R)

IP3R is an ER calcium channels (Nakata and Nakamura, 2007), activated by binding of IP3 that releases PIP2 by the action of GPCRs. Upon activation, IP3R induces efflux of calcium ion from ER to cytoplasm (Bolotina, 2004). It plays a key role in increasing intracellular calcium required for calcium signaling. RyR, a calcium sensitive receptor induces calcium efflux from ER (Stutzmann, 2005; Demuro et al., 2010). Treatment with Aβ activates GPCRs which further increases intracellular calcium from IP3R in xenopus oocyte. Similarly, PS1 (M146 V) knock-in AD mice have shown that PS1 mutation also activates IP3R and increases the cytoplasmic calcium (Demuro and Parker, 2013; Stutzmann et al., 2004). Mutation in PS1 exerts gain in the function of IP3R, which regulates the calcium release from RyR by calcium dependent calcium release, as reported in human cellular and mouse model of AD (Cheung et al., 2010). In another study showed treatment with Aβ25-35 induces calcium liberation from ER and results in apoptosis in murine astrocyte. This apoptotic induction was found to be IP3R dependent as treatment with xestospongin C, an IP3R inhibitor abolished the response (Oseki et al., 2014). This indicates that inhibition of IP3R can be beneficial for targeting calcium dysregulation.
Sushma and A.C. Mondal

Molecular and Cellular Neuroscience 101 (2019) 103414

### 3.2.3. SERCA pumps

SERCA pumps are the calcium pumps present on the ER membrane. They are involved in calcium influx from cytoplasm to ER which is important for maintenance of cytoplasmic calcium levels and ER calcium stores (Periasamy and Kalyanasundaram, 2007).

Studies have shown that Aβ increases calcium influx even without extracellular calcium and impairs SERCA pumps activity. As SERCA pumps are required to fill up ER calcium levels, so it causes very high calcium concentration in cytoplasm upon depletion, leading to cytotoxicity (Green and LaFerla, 2008; Green et al., 2008). PS1, found in the membrane of ER is also involved in the functioning of SERCA pumps. PS1 knockout in fibroblast disturbs SERCA activity and mutation in PS1 disturbs the calcium refilling of ER (Green et al., 2008). In addition, over-expression of SERCA pumps increases Aβ production indicating functional modulation of PS1 (Green and LaFerla, 2008; Kapogiannis and Mattson, 2011). Any discrepancies in the activity of this channel can dysregulate calcium homeostasis in the cell and could play an important role in AD pathophysiology.

Targeting these ER receptors using RyR antagonists dantrolene, carvedilol, and RyCals have reduced calcium leakage from ER and Aβ production in both the in vivo and in vitro models (Liu et al., 2012; Wang et al., 2011). Inhibiting IP3R and SERCA pumps by xestospongin and thapsigargin have reduced the cytoplasmic calcium and shown protective effect in memory deficits in cellular and animal models of AD (Green et al., 2008; Nakagawa et al., 2000; Ferreiro et al., 2004).

### 3.3. Mitochondrial calcium dysregulation and its involvement in AD progression

Mitochondria, a double membranous organelle are primarily involved in energy production (Balaban et al., 2005). It requires calcium for the production of ATP as it extrudes H⁺ ions from the mitochondria and activates electron transport chain (Brookes et al., 2004). Calcium homeostasis is maintained by the mitochondrial membrane receptor VDAC, MCU, NA⁺/Ca²⁺ exchanger and mPTP (Vance, 1990; Mendes et al., 2005; Williams et al., 2013; Kirichok et al., 2004; Baumgartner et al., 2009).

Due to mutation in PS1, there is an increase in the calcium efflux in AD via RyR and IP3R which causes uptake of calcium into the mitochondria through mitochondrial membrane channels VDAC and MCU (Rasola and Bernardi, 2011; Celsi et al., 2009). It has been observed in several studies that Aβ treatment also elevates mitochondrial calcium levels (Celsi et al., 2009). Therefore, this increased calcium inside the mitochondria decreases ATP production, increases ROS generation and promotes the opening of mPTP, as evident in astrocyte culture and in vivo model of AD (Panel et al., 2018). In addition, mitochondrial dysfunction caused by calcium dysregulation also leads to release of cytochrome c into the cytoplasm resulting in apoptosis and cell death (Görlach et al., 2015). These studies indicate that mitochondrial dysfunction caused by calcium dysregulation plays an important role in AD pathogenesis. Thus, targeting calcium dysregulation in mitochondria can also prove to be beneficial in AD treatment.

### 3.4. Role of secretases in calcium dysregulation and effect on GPCRs activity

In the brain, different secretases (α, β and γ) cleave APP at their specific sites to generate sAPPα, C99 and amyloid-β (40 or 42 amino acid long) respectively. β- and γ-secretases are involved in the generation of toxic amyloid fragment. Their activity is found to be increased in AD that leads to generation of amyloid-plaque load (Cole and Vassar, 2007; Wolfe, 2006).

In AD, the activity of BACE1 (β-secretase) is increased. Cho et al. (2008) demonstrated in a study that intracellular calcium dysregulation increased the BACE1 expression and activity via NFAT1 signaling in vitro and transgenic mice model of AD. It is further confirmed by in vivo study that showed the direct interaction of calcium with BACE1, being responsible for its enhanced activity (Hayley et al., 2009). In another recent study, it was found that calmodulin also increased the BACE 1 activity via physical interaction (Reese and Tagliatela, n.d.). Various studies have shown that activation of M1 and M3 mAChR increase the BACE 1 activity in SH-SY5Y neuroblastoma cells (Jiang et al., 2012), while M2 mAChR activation is found to down regulate the BACE1 (Zuchner et al., 2004). In contrary, these results are challenged by other studies which have shown the opposite effect. Therefore, further analysis is required to validate the same (Caccamo et al., 2006). On the other hand, adenosine receptor A1 activation decreases the BACE1 activity and the production of toxic Aβ (Arendash et al., 2006; Arendash et al., 2009). These studies suggest the role of calcium dysregulation in the production of Aβ by enhancing BACE1 activity, involved in AD pathogenesis.

γ-secretase is a complex of multi proteins including PS1(Presenilin 1), nicastrin, Aph1(anterior pharynx-defective) and PS2 (Presenilin 2) (Wolfe, 2006). Various mutations in PS1 and PS2 are responsible for FAD (familial Alzheimer's disease) (Tomita et al., 1997; Citron et al., 1997). In previous studies, it has been found that PS1 mutation increases calcium influx into the cell and also impairs autophagy flux (Mattson et al., 2001). It also affects the function and expression of RyR and IP3R receptors (Chan et al., 2000; Hayrapetyan et al., 2008). In transgenic mice studies, it was observed that there is increase in the cytoplasmic calcium efflux of stored calcium by RyR and IP3R (Cheung et al., 2008; McCombs et al., 2010). Mutation in PS1 exerts gain in the functional mutation of IP3R which regulates the calcium release from RyR by calcium dependent calcium release mechanism (Cheung et al., 2010). In a recent study, it is found that PS itself induces calcium leakage from ER and the mutation impairs this function leading to ER calcium overload (Tu et al., 2006). PS1 mutation acts via many different mechanisms and increases Aβ production via promoting γ-secretase activity and impairs STIM/SOCs pathway (Sun et al., 2014). Being one of the major factors in AD pathogenesis is over producing Aβ plaque burden and γ-secretase dysregulates the calcium homeostasis.

### 4. Therapeutic approach for the calcium dysregulation in AD

### 5. Discussion and conclusion

Prevalence of AD is increasing drastically which could be a result of changing lifestyles, unhealthy food habits and increased life expectancy. Occurrence of AD is supposed to increase by double in every twenty years. Treatment modalities available for the disease show a plethora of side effects and more efficient, novel therapeutic strategies are necessary in the present time. In the previous studies, it is observed that Aβ induces many pathological changes which are responsible for memory deficits and neurodegeneration e.g. excitotoxicity, tau hyperphosphorylation, apoptosis, oxidative stress and calcium dysregulation. Calcium dysregulation is found to play a central role in the AD pathogenesis as it is involved in many signaling pathways that regulate mitochondrial function, oxidative stress, tau phosphorylation and memory formation, described in the review. Dysregulation of calcium signaling leads to physiological changes responsible for the disease.

As described in Fig. 2, GPCRs regulate calcium homeostasis by different molecular mechanisms. Acetylcholine signaling is majorly affected in AD and its receptors are involved in disturbance of calcium homeostasis. Other GPCRs like β₂AR is involved in the production of Aβ and calcium dysregulation by affecting γ-secretase activity and functional modulation of RyR. In addition to that, purinergic receptors increase calcium influx inside the cells. mGluR induces excitotoxicity and calcium dysregulation by glutamate binding and chemokine receptors causing inflammation in disease conditions. Targeting these signaling pathways could serve as a promising therapeutic approach for AD.

| Molecular target | Drugs | Molecular mechanism | Effect on Ca²⁺ homeostasis | Current status | References |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| AChE | Donepezil, rivastigmine, galantamine | Inhibits AChE and reduces Aβ aggregation | Reduces Aβ and calcium influx into cell | FDA approved drug for the treatment of AD but shows side effects. | (Cacabelos, 2007; Birks and Evans, 2015; Olin and Schneider, 2002) |
| mAChR | Carbachol AF267B AF102B | Agonists | Reduces Aβ production | In preclinical testing | (Jiang et al., 2014) |
| nAChR | Nicotine | Agonist | Reduces Aβ production and plaque formation | Preclinical testing | (Ni et al., 2006b; Jiang et al., 2014) |
| β2AR | ICI | Antagonist | Decreases ER calcium leakage | Preclinical testing | (Hamilton et al., 2016; Kumar et al., 2015) |
| mGluR | Genetic inhibition of mGluR5 | Inhibition | Ameliorates memory dysfunction and reduces Aβ load | Preclinical testing | (Diaz-Hernandez et al., 2012; Martin et al., 2019) |
| Purinergic receptor | Genetic down regulation and inhibition | Inhibition | Decreases Aβ production | Preclinical testing | (Parachikova and Cotman, 2007) |
| CXCR | Genetic inhibition of CXCR4 | Inhibition | Decreases memory formation | Preclinical testing | (Xia et al., 2000) |
| NMDA | Activation of CXCR3 Memantine | Antagonist | Induces inflammation Prevents excessive calcium leakage and inhibits LTD | FDA approved drug for the treatment of AD | (Blanchard et al., 2008; Bullock, 2006) |
| L-type VGCC | Nimodipine, Isradipine, Diltiazem, MEM 1003, Nifedipine, Nilvadipine | Antagonist | Reduces the production of Aβ and transports of extracellular calcium into intracellular region | Others are FDA approved calcium blockers and used for treatment of hypertension. | (Ueda et al., 1997; Pierrot et al., 2004; Anekonda et al., 2011; Nakajima et al., 2001; Rose et al., 2007; Yagami et al., 2004; Hanyu, 2007) |
| RyR | Dantrolene, Carvedilol, RyCals Xestospogin Thapsigargin | Antagonists | Inhibits excessive calcium leakage from ER | Nimodipine-Phase I trial. Nilvadipine-phase -II Carvedilol-Phase 4 trial. RyCals- Preclinical testing Preclinical testing Preclinical testing | (Liu et al., 2012; Wang et al., 2011) (Nakagawa et al., 2000; Ferreiro et al., 2004) (Ferreiro et al., 2004) |
| IP3R | DS16570511 | Antagonist | Inhibits excessive calcium leakage from ER | Preclinical testing | (Kon et al., 2017a; Kon et al., 2017b) |
| SERCA | DS44170716 | Antagonist | Inhibits the activity of SERCA which reduces calcium levels in cell | Preclinical testing |  |
| Mitochondrial channels |  |  | Inhibits calcium transport via MCU and also reduces mPTP opening | Preclinical testing |  |

Sushma and A.C. Mondal

Molecular and Cellular Neuroscience 101 (2019) 103414

Fig. 2. As described in this review, GPCRs and calcium channels are involved in the calcium dysregulation in AD pathogenesis. This figure depicts that mAChR, mGluR and CXCR4, bound to Gq G-protein induce calcium influx into the cytoplasm via generating IP3. β₂AR activates RyR by activating PKA. P2X7, NMDAR and VGCC involved in calcium influx from extracellular region to cytoplasm. Mitochondrial calcium is disturbed due to increase in cytoplasmic and ER calcium and leads to release of cytochrome c from the membrane which induces oxidative stress and apoptosis. This increase in cytoplasmic calcium activates GSK-3β, reduces expression of BDNF and leads to induction of LTD. Reduction in LTP and induction of LTD is responsible for memory deficits in AD. GSK-3β also phosphorylates tau, detaches it from microtubule and forms aggregates in cell. Apoptosis and oxidative stress are major causes of neurodegeneration.

Other signaling cross-talks along with GPCR signaling also plays major role in calcium homeostasis. NMDAR, a high affinity calcium channels involved in calcium signaling and memory formation had been very important target for AD. Memantine, a FDA approved drug has shown positive effects in AD treatment but induced many side effects. Other receptors like RyR, IP3R, SERCA, Mitochondrial calcium channels and VGCC are involved in calcium regulation in the cell. Their function is extremely important in calcium homeostasis in AD and their functional disturbances cause pathological changes in the cell leading to neurodegeneration. RyR, IP3R and SERCA channels maintain the calcium levels in ER stores and in cytoplasm. In AD, their functions are disturbed which leads to calcium dysregulation (Fig. 2). Mitochondrial calcium channels are involved in regulation of calcium levels in mitochondria, necessary for energy production. These signaling pathways are crucial for the regulation of cellular homeostasis and function. From the above studies, we conclude that calcium dysregulation is one of the major causes of AD and targeting this could be one of the promising therapeutic modalities for the treatment of the disease.

### Abbreviations

| AD | Alzheimer's disease |
| --- | --- |
| Aβ | amyloid-β |
| NFTs | Neurofibrillary tangles |
| GPCRs | G-protein coupled receptors |
| FDA | food and drug administration |
| NMDAR | N-methyl D-aspartate receptor |
| VGCC | voltage gated calcium channel |
| AMPAR | α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid receptor |

| TRPC | transient receptor potential cation channels |
| --- | --- |
| ER | endoplasmic reticulum |
| RyR | ryanodine receptor |
| IP3R | Inositol triphosphate receptor |
| SERCA | sarcoendoplasmic reticulum calcium transport ATPase |
| CaN | calcineurin |
| CaMKII | Ca²⁺/calmodulin dependent protein kinase II |
| GSK-3β | glycogen synthase kinase -3β |
| BDNF | brain derived neurotrophic factor |
| PS | presenilin |
| LTP | long term potentiation |
| LTD | long term depression |
| ACh | acetylcholine |
| AChR | acetylcholine receptor |
| mAChR | muscarinic acetylcholine receptor |
| nAChR | nicotinic acetylcholine receptor |
| AChE | acetylcholine esterase |
| PKA | protein kinase A |
| PLC | phospholipase C |
| CXCR | Chemokine receptors |
| VDAC | voltage-dependent anion -selective channel protein |
| MCU | mitochondrial calcium uniporter |
| NCX | NA⁺/Ca²⁺ exchanger |
| mPTP | mitochondrial permeability transition pore |

### Declaration of competing interest

The authors do not have conflict of interest.

Sushma and A.C. Mondal

Molecular and Cellular Neuroscience 101 (2019) 103414

# Acknowledgements

We highly acknowledge the partial financial supports from DBT NER (BT/PR16164/NER/95/88/2015), DST PURSE- (Phase-II) (PAC-JNU-DST-PURSE-462), UGC RNW, UGC SAP at the level of DRS-II, and UPE-II, JNU (Project Id No. 247) to Dr. A. C. Mondal, School of Life Sciences, Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi, India and UGC-JRF to Ms. Sushma [UGC Ref No. 652/(SC) (CSIR-UGC NET DEC.2016)].

# References

Abbott, J.J., et al., 2008. Aβ1–42 modulation of Akt phosphorylation via α7 nAChR and NMDA receptors. Neurobiol. Aging 29 (7), 992–1001.

Anekonda, T.S., Quinn, J.F., 2011. Calcium channel blocking as a therapeutic strategy for Alzheimer's disease: the case for isradipine. Biochimica Et Biophysica Acta (BBA)-Molecular Basis of Disease 1812 (12), 1584–1590.

Anekonda, T.S., et al., 2011. L-type voltage-gated calcium channel blockade with isradipine as a therapeutic strategy for Alzheimer’s disease. Neurobiol. Dis. 41 (1), 62–70.

Ansoleaga, B., et al., 2015. Deregulation of purine metabolism in Alzheimer’s disease. Neurobiol. Aging 36 (1), 68–80.

Arendash, G.W., et al., 2006. Caffeine protects Alzheimer’s mice against cognitive impairment and reduces brain beta-amyloid production. Neuroscience 142 (4), 941–952.

Arendash, G.W., et al., 2009. Caffeine reverses cognitive impairment and decreases brain amyloid-beta levels in aged Alzheimer’s disease mice. J. Alzheimers Dis. 17 (3), 661–680.

Association, A.s., 2018. Alzheimer’s disease facts and figures. Alzheimers Dement. 14 (3), 367–429 2018.

Bading, H., Therapeutic targeting of the pathological triad of extrasynaptic NMDA receptor signaling in neurodegenerations. J. Exp. Med.. 214(3): p. 569-578.

Balaban, R.S., Nemoto, S., Finkel, T., 2005. Mitochondria, oxidants, and aging. cell 120 (4), 483–495.

Barria, A., 2007. Subunit-specific NMDA receptor trafficking to synapses. In: Protein Trafficking in Neurons. Elsevier, pp. 203–221.

Baumgartner, H.K., et al., 2009. Calcium elevation in mitochondria is the main Ca2+ requirement for mitochondrial permeability transition pore (mPTP) opening. J. Biol. Chem. 284 (31), 20796–20803.

Berridge, M.J., Bootman, M.D., Roderick, H.L., 2003. Calcium: calcium signalling: dynamics, homeostasis and remodelling. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 4 (7), 517.

Bezprozvanny, I., 2009. Calcium signaling and neurodegenerative diseases. Trends Mol. Med. 15 (3), 89–100.

Bezprozvanny, I., Hiesinger, P.R., 2013. The synaptic maintenance problem: membrane recycling, Ca 2+ homeostasis and late onset degeneration. Mol. Neurodegener. 8 (1), 23.

Birks, J.S., Evans, J.G., 2015. Rivastigmine for Alzheimer’s disease. Cochrane Database Syst. Rev. 4.

Blanchard, A., Guillemette, G., Boulay, G., 2008. Memantine potentiates agonist-induced Ca2+ responses in HEK 293 cells. Cell. Physiol. Biochem. 22 (1–4), 205–214.

Bolotina, V.M., 2004. Store-operated channels: diversity and activation mechanisms. Sci. Signal. 2004 (243), pe34.

Bronner, F., 2001. Extracellular and intracellular regulation of calcium homeostasis. Sci. World J. 1, 919–925.

Brookes, P.S., et al., 2004. Calcium, ATP, and ROS: a mitochondrial love-hate triangle. Am. J. Phys. Cell Phys. 287 (4), C817–C833.

Brookmeyer, R., et al., 2007. Forecasting the global burden of Alzheimer’s disease. Alzheimers Dement. 3 (3), 186–191.

Bullock, R., 2006. Efficacy and safety of memantine in moderate-to-severe Alzheimer disease: the evidence to date. Alzheimer Dis. Assoc. Disord. 20 (1), 23–29.

Buraei, Z., Yang, J., 2013. Structure and function of the β subunit of voltage-gated Ca2+ channels. Biochimica et Biophysica Acta (BBA)-Biomembranes 1828 (7), 1530–1540.

Burgoyne, R.D., et al., 2019. Calcium sensors in neuronal function and dysfunction. Cold Spring Harb. Perspect. Biol. a035154.

Burnstock, G., et al., 2011. Purinergic signalling: from normal behaviour to pathological brain function. Prog. Neurobiol. 95 (2), 229–274.

Bussiere, R., et al., 2017. Amyloid β production is regulated by β2-adrenergic signaling-mediated post-translational modifications of the ryanodine receptor. J. Biol. Chem. 292 (24), 10153–10168.

Cacabelos, R., 2007. Donepezil in Alzheimer’s disease: from conventional trials to pharmacogenetics. Neuropsychiatr. Dis. Treat. 3 (3), 303.

Caccamo, A., et al., 2006. M1 receptors play a central role in modulating AD-like pathology in transgenic mice. Neuron 49 (5), 671–682.

Carman, A.J., et al., 2011. Adenosine receptor signaling modulates permeability of the blood–brain barrier. J. Neurosci. 31 (37), 13272–13280.

Carvajal, F.J., Mattison, H.A., Cerpa, W., 2016. Role of NMDA receptor-mediated glutamatergic signaling in chronic and acute neuropathologies. Neural plasticity 2016.

Celis-Muñoz, T., et al., 2016. Impact of Mitochondrial Dysfunction on Neurodegenerative Diseases: A Key Step on Alzheimer’s Disease.

Celsi, F., et al., 2009. Mitochondria, calcium and cell death: a deadly triad in neurodegeneration. Biochimica et Biophysica Acta (BBA)-Bioenergetics 1787 (5), 335–344.

Chakroborty, S., Stutzmann, G.E., 2011. Early calcium dysregulation in Alzheimer’s disease: setting the stage for synaptic dysfunction. Sci. China Life Sci. 54 (8), 752–762.

Chan, S.L., et al., 2000. Presenilin-1 mutations increase levels of ryanodine receptors and calcium release in PC12 cells and cortical neurons. J. Biol. Chem. 275 (24), 18195–18200.

Cheung, K.-H., et al., 2008. Mechanism of Ca2+ disruption in Alzheimer's disease by presenilin regulation of InsP3 receptor channel gating. Neuron 58 (6), 871–883.

Cheung, K.-H., et al., 2010. Gain-of-function enhancement of IP3 receptor modal gating by familial Alzheimer’s disease–linked presenilin mutants in human cells and mouse neurons. Sci. Signal. 3 (114), ra22.

Cho, H.J., et al., 2008. Disrupted intracellular calcium regulates BACE1 gene expression via nuclear factor of activated T cells 1 (NFAT 1) signaling. Aging Cell 7 (2), 137–147.

Chong, F.P., et al., 2018. Tau proteins and tauopathies in Alzheimer’s disease. Cell. Mol. Neurobiol. 38 (5), 965–980.

Cieślak, M., Wojtczak, A., 2018. Role of purinergic receptors in the Alzheimer’s disease. Purinergic signalling 14 (4), 331–344.

Citron, M., et al., 1997. Mutant presenilins of Alzheimer’s disease increase production of 42-residue amyloid β-protein in both transfected cells and transgenic mice. Nat. Med. 3 (1), 67.

Clapham, D.E., 2007. Calcium signaling. Cell 131 (6), 1047–1058.

Cline, E.N., et al., 2018. The amyloid-β oligomer hypothesis: beginning of the third decade. J. Alzheimers Dis. 1–43 (Preprint).

Cole, S.L., Vassar, R., 2007. The Alzheimer’s disease beta-secretase enzyme, BACE1. Mol. Neurodegener. 2, 22.

Crabtree, G.R., 2001. Calcium, calcineurin, and the control of transcription. J. Biol. Chem. 276 (4), 2313–2316.

Dang, N., Meng, X., Song, H., 2016. Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors and cancer. Biomedical reports 4 (5), 515.

Daniels, M., Brown, D.R., 2001. Astrocytes regulate N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor subunit composition increasing neuronal sensitivity to excitotoxicity. J. Biol. Chem. 276 (25), 22446–22452.

Davila, H.M., 1999. Molecular and functional diversity of voltage-gated calcium channels. Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. 868 (1), 102–117.

Day, T., Greenfield, S., 2003. A peptide derived from acetylcholinesterase induces neuronal cell death: characterisation of possible mechanisms. Exp. Brain Res. 153 (3), 334–342.

Del Prete, D., Checler, F., Chami, M., 2014. Ryanodine receptors: physiological function and deregulation in Alzheimer disease. Mol. Neurodegener. 9 (1), 21.

Demuro, A., Parker, I., 2013. Cytotoxicity of intracellular aβ42 amyloid oligomers involves Ca2+ release from the endoplasmic reticulum by stimulated production of inositol trisphosphate. J. Neurosci. 33 (9), 3824–3833.

Demuro, A., et al., 2005. Calcium dysregulation and membrane disruption as a ubiquitous neurotoxic mechanism of soluble amyloid oligomers. J. Biol. Chem. 280 (17), 17294–17300.

Demuro, A., Parker, I., Stutzmann, G.E., 2010. Calcium signaling and amyloid toxicity in Alzheimer disease. J. Biol. Chem. 285 (17), 12463–12468.

Diaz-Hernandez, J.I., et al., 2012. In vivo P2X7 inhibition reduces amyloid plaques in Alzheimer’s disease through GSK3β and secretases. Neurobiol. Aging 33 (8), 1816–1828.

Dieterich, D.C., et al., 2008. Caldendrin–Jacob: a protein liaison that couples NMDA receptor signalling to the nucleus. PLoS Biol. 6 (2), e34.

Du, Y., et al., 2019. Assembly of a GPCR-G protein complex. Cell 177, 1232–1242.

Egorova, P., Popugaeva, E., Bezprozvanny, I., 2015. Disturbed calcium signaling in spinocerebellar ataxias and Alzheimer’s disease. In: Seminars in Cell &amp; Developmental Biology. Elsevier.

Ferrari, D., et al., 2016. Purinergic signaling during immune cell trafficking. Trends Immunol. 37 (6), 399–411.

Ferreiro, E., Oliveira, C.R., Pereira, C., 2004. Involvement of endoplasmic reticulum Ca2+ release through ryanodine and inositol 1, 4, 5-triphosphate receptors in the neurotoxic effects induced by the amyloid-β peptide. J. Neurosci. Res. 76 (6), 872–880.

Fill, M., Copello, J.A., 2002. Ryanodine receptor calcium release channels. Physiol. Rev. 82 (4), 893–922.

Foster, T.C., 2007. Calcium homeostasis and modulation of synaptic plasticity in the aged brain. Aging Cell 6 (3), 319–325.

Ghosh, A. and K.P. Giese, Calcium/calmodulin-dependent kinase II and Alzheimerâ€™s disease. Molecular brain. 8(1): p. 78.

Giacobini, E., 2003. Cholinergic function and Alzheimer’s disease. International journal of geriatric psychiatry 18 (S1), S1–S5.

Gomez-Ramos, A., et al., 2008. Extracellular tau promotes intracellular calcium increase through M1 and M3 muscarinic receptors in neuronal cells. Mol. Cell. Neurosci. 37 (4), 673–681.

Görlach, A., et al., 2015. Calcium and ROS: a mutual interplay. Redox Biol. 6, 260–271.

Green, K.N., LaFerla, F.M., 2008. Linking calcium to Aβ and Alzheimer's disease. Neuron 59 (2), 190–194.

Green, K.N., et al., 2008. SERCA pump activity is physiologically regulated by presenilin and regulates amyloid β production. J. Cell Biol. 181 (7), 1107–1116.

Haas, L.T., Strittmatter, S.M., 2016. Oligomers of amyloid β prevent physiological activation of the cellular prion protein-metabotropic glutamate receptor 5 complex by glutamate in Alzheimer disease. J. Biol. Chem. 291 (33), 17112–17121.

Hakim, M.A., Buchholz, J.N., Behringer, E.J., 2019. Alteration of calcium and electrical dynamics in cerebral vascular endothelium during development of Alzheimer’s disease. FASEB J. 33 (1_supplement), 518.5.

Hamilton, A., et al., 2016. Chronic pharmacological mGluR5 inhibition prevents cognitive impairment and reduces pathogenesis in an Alzheimer disease mouse model. Cell Rep. 15 (9), 1859–1865.

Hanyu, H., 2007. Nilvadipine prevents cognitive decline in patients with mild cognitive impairment. Intl J Geriatr Psychiatry 22, 1264–1266.

Sushma and A.C. Mondal

Hayley, M., et al., 2009. Calcium enhances the proteolytic activity of BACE1: an in vitro biophysical and biochemical characterization of the BACE1-calcium interaction. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1788 (9), 1933–1938.

Hayrapetyan, V., et al., 2008. The N-terminus of presenilin-2 increases single channel activity of brain ryanodine receptors through direct protein–protein interaction. Cell Calcium 44 (5), 507–518.

Heneka, M.T., et al., 2010. Locus ceruleus controls Alzheimer’s disease pathology by modulating microglial functions through norepinephrine. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 107 (13), 6058–6063.

Heneka, M.T., et al., 2015. Neuroinflammation in Alzheimer's disease. The Lancet Neurol. 14 (4), 388–405.

Herholz, K., 2008. Acetylcholine esterase activity in mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer’s disease. Eur. J. Nucl. Med. Mol. Imaging 35 (1), 25–29.

Hilton, G.D., et al., 2006. Glutamate-mediated excitotoxicity in neonatal hippocampal neurons is mediated by mGluR-induced release of Ca ++ from intracellular stores and is prevented by estradiol. Eur. J. Neurosci. 24 (11), 3008–3016.

Hoskin, J.L., Al-Hasan, Y., Sabbagh, M.N., 2018. Nicotinic acetylcholine receptor agonists for the treatment of Alzheimer’s dementia: an update. Nicotine Tob. Res. 21 (3), 370–376.

Hu, R., et al., 2017. Overexpression of EphB2 in hippocampus rescues impaired NMDA receptors trafficking and cognitive dysfunction in Alzheimer model. Cell Death Dis. 8 (3), e2717.

Hynd, M.R., Scott, H.L., Dodd, P.R., 2004. Glutamate-mediated excitotoxicity and neurodegeneration in Alzheimer’s disease. Neurochem. Int. 45 (5), 583–595.

Jiang, S., et al., 2012. M1 muscarinic acetylcholine receptor interacts with BACE1 and regulates its proteosomal degradation. Neurosci. Lett. 515 (2), 125–130.

Jiang, T., et al., 2013a. β-Arrestins as potential therapeutic targets for Alzheimer’s disease. Mol. Neurobiol. 48 (3), 812–818.

Jiang, D., et al., 2013b. β-Arrestins in the immune system. In: Progress in Molecular Biology and Translational Science. Elsevier, pp. 359–393.

Jiang, S., et al., 2014. M1 muscarinic acetylcholine receptor in Alzheimer’s disease. Neurosci. Bull. 30 (2), 295–307.

Jiang, X., et al., Spatial training preserves associative memory capacity with augmentation of dendrite ramification and spine generation in Tg2576 mice. Sci. Rep.. 5: p. 9488.

Johnson, M., 2006. Molecular mechanisms of β2-adrenergic receptor function, response, and regulation. J. Allergy Clin. Immunol. 117 (1), 18–24.

Johnson, J.W., Kotermanski, S.E., 2006. Mechanism of action of memantine. Curr. Opin. Pharmacol. 6 (1), 61–67.

Kabbani, N., et al., 2013. Are nicotinic acetylcholine receptors coupled to G proteins? Bioessays 35 (12), 1025–1034.

Kam, T.-I., Gwon, Y., Jung, Y.-K., 2014. Amyloid beta receptors responsible for neurotoxicity and cellular defects in Alzheimer’s disease. Cell. Mol. Life Sci. 71 (24), 4803–4813.

Kang, H., et al., 2001. An important role of neural activity-dependent CaMKIV signaling in the consolidation of long-term memory. Cell 106 (6), 771–783.

Kapogiannis, D., Mattson, M.P., 2011. Disrupted energy metabolism and neuronal circuit dysfunction in cognitive impairment and Alzheimer's disease. The Lancet Neurology 10 (2), 187–198.

King, J.R., et al., 2015. Identification and characterization of a G protein-binding cluster in α7 nicotinic acetylcholine receptors. J. Biol. Chem. 290 (33), 20060–20070.

Kirichok, Y., Krapivinsky, G., Clapham, D.E., 2004. The mitochondrial calcium uniporter is a highly selective ion channel. Nature 427 (6972), 360.

Kon, N., et al., 2017a. DS16570511 is a small-molecule inhibitor of the mitochondrial calcium uniporter. Cell death discovery 3, 17045.

Kon, N., Satoh, A., Miyoshi, N., 2017b. A small-molecule DS44170716 inhibits Ca 2+-induced mitochondrial permeability transition. Sci. Rep. 7 (1), 3864.

Krebs, J., Agellon, L.B., Michalak, M., 2015. Ca2 + homeostasis and endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress: an integrated view of calcium signaling. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 460 (1), 114–121.

Kufareva, I., Salanga, C.L., Handel, T.M., 2015. Chemokine and chemokine receptor structure and interactions: implications for therapeutic strategies. Immunol. Cell Biol. 93 (4), 372–383.

Kumar, A., Dhull, D.K., Mishra, P.S., 2015. Therapeutic potential of mGluR5 targeting in Alzheimer’s disease. Front. Neurosci. 9, 215.

Lacampagne, A., et al., 2017. Post-translational remodeling of ryanodine receptor induces calcium leak leading to Alzheimer’s disease-like pathologies and cognitive deficits. Acta Neuropathol. 134 (5), 749–767.

Larson, M., et al., 2012. The complex PrPc-Fyn couples human oligomeric Aβ with pathological Tau changes in Alzheimer’s disease. J. Neurosci. 32 (47), 16857–16871.

Leissring, M.A., et al., 2000. Capacitative calcium entry deficits and elevated luminal calcium content in mutant presenilin-1 knockin mice. J. Cell Biol. 149 (4), 793–798.

Lemos, J.R., Custer, E.E., Ortiz-Miranda, S., 2018. Purinergic receptor types in the hypothalamic-neurohypophyseal system. J. Neuroendocrinol. 30 (8), e12588.

Libri, V., et al., 1997. Metabotropic glutamate receptor subtypes mediating slow inward tail current (IADP) induction and inhibition of synaptic transmission in olfactory cortical neurones. Br. J. Pharmacol. 120 (6), 1083–1095.

Lisman, J., Schulman, H., Cline, H., 2002. The molecular basis of CaMKII function in synaptic and behavioural memory. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 3 (3), 175.

Liu, X., et al., 2012. Role of leaky neuronal ryanodine receptors in stress-induced cognitive dysfunction. Cell 150 (5), 1055–1067.

Liu, X., et al., 2013. β-arrestin1 regulates γ-secretase complex assembly and modulates amyloid-β pathology. Cell Res. 23 (3), 351.

Liu, J., et al., 2016. Down-regulation of purinergic P2X7 receptor expression and intracellular calcium dysregulation in peripheral blood mononuclear cells of patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Neurosci. Lett. 630, 77–83.


Molecular and Cellular Neuroscience 101 (2019) 103414

Luo, X., et al., 2016. CXCL12/CXCR4 axis: an emerging neuromodulator in pathological pain. Rev. Neurosci. 27 (1), 83–92.

Lüscher, C., Huber, K.M., 2010. Group 1 mGluR-dependent synaptic long-term depression: mechanisms and implications for circuitry and disease. Neuron 65 (4), 445–459.

Lüscher, C., Malenka, R.C., 2012. NMDA receptor-dependent long-term potentiation and long-term depression (LTP/LTD). Cold Spring Harb. Perspect. Biol. 4 (6), a005710.

Luttrel, L.M., Lefkowitz, R.J., 2002. The role of β-arrestins in the termination and transduction of G-protein-coupled receptor signals. J. Cell Sci. 115 (3), 455–465.

Martin, E., et al., 2019. New role of P2X7 receptor in an Alzheimer’s disease mouse model. Mol. Psychiatry 24 (1), 108.

Mattson, M.P., Chan, S.L., Camandola, S., 2001. Presenilin mutations and calcium signaling defects in the nervous and immune systems. Bioessays 23 (8), 733–744.

McCombs, J.E., Gibson, E.A., Palmer, A.E., 2010. Using a genetically targeted sensor to investigate the role of presenilin-1 in ER Ca 2+ levels and dynamics. Mol. BioSyst. 6 (9), 1640–1649.

Mendes, C.C., et al., 2005. The type III inositol 1, 4, 5-trisphosphate receptor preferentially transmits apoptotic Ca2 + signals into mitochondria. J. Biol. Chem. 280 (49), 40892–40900.

Merino, J.J., et al., 2015. CXCR4/CXCR7 molecular involvement in neuronal and neural progenitor migration: focus in CNS repair. J. Cell. Physiol. 230 (1), 27–42.

Nakagawa, T., et al., 2000. Caspase-12 mediates endoplasmic-reticulum-specific apoptosis and cytotoxicity by amyloid-β. Nature 403 (6765), 98.

Nakajima, M., et al., 2001. Deficiency of presenilin-1 increases calcium-dependent vulnerability of neurons to oxidative stress in vitro. J. Neurochem. 78 (4), 807–814.

Nakata, H., Nakamura, S., 2007. Brain-derived neurotrophic factor regulates AMPA receptor trafficking to post-synaptic densities via IP3R and TRPC calcium signaling. FEBS Lett. 581 (10), 2047–2054.

Nelson, C.D., Sheng, M., 2013. Gpr3 stimulates Aβ production via interactions with APP and β-arrestin2. PLoS One 8 (9), e74680.

Ni, Y., et al., 2006a. Activation of Î² 2-adrenergic receptor stimulates Î³ -secretase activity and accelerates amyloid plaque formation. Nat. Med. 12 (12), 1390.

Ni, Y., et al., 2006b. Activation of β 2-adrenergic receptor stimulates γ -secretase activity and accelerates amyloid plaque formation. Nat. Med. 12 (12), 1390.

Nolt, M.J., et al., 2011. EphB controls NMDA receptor function and synaptic targeting in a subunit-specific manner. J. Neurosci. 31 (14), 5353–5364.

Nomura, I., et al., 2005. Mechanism of impairment of long-term potentiation by amyloid β is independent of NMDA receptors or voltage-dependent calcium channels in hippocampal CA1 pyramidal neurons. Neurosci. Lett. 391 (1–2), 1–6.

Olin, J.T., Schneider, L., 2002. Galantamine for Alzheimer’s disease. Cochrane Database Syst. Rev.(3).

Oliveira, A., Illes, P., Ulrich, H., 2016. Purinergic receptors in embryonic and adult neurogenesis. Neuropsychopharmacology 104, 272–281.

Oseki, K., et al., 2014. Apoptosis induced by Aβ25–35 peptide is Ca2 + -IP 3 signaling-dependent in murine astrocytes. Eur. J. Neurosci. 40 (3), 2471–2478.

Ota, Y., Zanetti, A.T., Hallock, R.M., 2013. The role of astrocytes in the regulation of synaptic plasticity and memory formation. Neural plasticity 2013.

Panel, M., Ghaleh, B., Morin, D., 2018. Mitochondria and aging: a role for the mitochondrial transition pore? Aging Cell 17 (4), e12793.

Parachikova, A., Cotman, C., 2007. Reduced CXCL12/CXCR4 results in impaired learning and is downregulated in a mouse model of Alzheimer disease. Neurobiol. Dis. 28 (2), 143–153.

Payne, A.J., et al., 2013. Presenilins regulate the cellular activity of ryanodine receptors differentially through isotype-specific N-terminal cysteines. Exp. Neurol. 250, 143–150.

Pchitskaya, E., Popugaeva, E., Bezprozvanny, I., 2018. Calcium signaling and molecular mechanisms underlying neurodegenerative diseases. Cell Calcium 70, 87–94.

Periasamy, M., Kalyanasundaram, A., 2007. SERCA pump isoforms: their role in calcium transport and disease. Muscle & Nerve: Official Journal of the American Association of Electrodiagnostic Medicine 35 (4), 430–442.

Peterson, Y.K., Luttrel, L.M., 2017. The diverse roles of arrestin scaffolds in G protein–coupled receptor signaling. Pharmacol. Rev. 69 (3), 256–297.

Picciotto, M.R., Zoli, M., 2008. Neuroprotection via nAChRs: the role of nAChRs in neurodegenerative disorders such as Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s disease. Front. Biosci. 13 (2), 492–504.

Pierrot, N., et al., 2004. Intraneuronal amyloid-β1-42 production triggered by sustained increase of cytosolic calcium concentration induces neuronal death. J. Neurochem. 88 (5), 1140–1150.

Popugaeva, E., Bezprozvanny, I., 2013. Role of endoplasmic reticulum Ca2 + signaling in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer disease. Front. Mol. Neurosci. 6, 29.

Potter, P., et al., 2018. Decreased levels of Beta-Arrestin 1 in brains of patients with Alzheimer’s disease. FASEB J. 32 (1_supplement), 552.3.

Pourbadie, H.G., et al., 2015. Preventing effect of L-type calcium channel blockade on electrophysiological alterations in dentate gyrus granule cells induced by entorhinal amyloid pathology. PLoS One 10 (2), e0117555.

Prakriya, M., Lewis, R.S., 2015. Store-operated calcium channels. Physiol. Rev. 95 (4), 1383–1436.

Qin, L., et al., 2015. Crystal structure of the chemokine receptor CXCR4 in complex with a viral chemokine. Science 347 (6226), 1117–1122.

de Quervain, D.J.F., Aerni, A., Roozendaal, B., 2007. Preventive effect of Î²-adrenoceptor blockade on glucocorticoid-induced memory retrieval deficits. Am. J. Psychiatr. 164 (6), 967–969.

Rasmussen, S.G., et al., 2011. Crystal structure of the β 2 adrenergic receptor–Gs protein complex. Nature 477 (7366), 549.

Rasola, A., Bernardi, P., 2011. Mitochondrial permeability transition in Ca2 + -dependent apoptosis and necrosis. Cell Calcium 50 (3), 222–233.

LC. Reese and G. Taglialatela, A role for calcineurin in Alzheimer's disease. Curr.

Neuropharmacol.. 9(4): p. 685-692.

Rose, G.M., Ong, V.S., Woodruff-Pak, D.S., 2007. Efficacy of MEM 1003, a novel calcium channel blocker, in delay and trace eyeblink conditioning in older rabbits. Neurobiol. Aging 28 (5), 766–773.

Rosenbaum, D.M., Rasmussen, S.G., Kobilka, B.K., 2009. The structure and function of G-protein-coupled receptors. Nature 459 (7245), 356.

Sattler, R., Tymianski, M., 2001. Molecular mechanisms of glutamate receptor-mediated excitotoxic neuronal cell death. Mol. Neurobiol. 24 (1–3), 107–129.

Selkoe, D.J., 2001. Alzheimer’s disease: genes, proteins, and therapy. Physiol. Rev. 81 (2), 741–766.

Shen, J., Yakel, J.L., 2009. Nicotinic acetylcholine receptor-mediated calcium signaling in the nervous system. Acta Pharmacol. Sin. 30 (6), 673.

Stutzmann, G.E., 2005. Calcium dysregulation, IP3 signaling, and Alzheimer’s disease. Neuroscientist 11 (2), 110–115.

Stutzmann, G.E., et al., 2004. Dysregulated IP3 signaling in cortical neurons of knock-in mice expressing an Alzheimer’s-linked mutation in presenilin1 results in exaggerated Ca2+ signals and altered membrane excitability. J. Neurosci. 24 (2), 508–513.

Stutzmann, G.E., et al., 2007. Enhanced ryanodine-mediated calcium release in mutant PS1-expressing Alzheimer’s mouse models. Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. 1097 (1), 265–277.

Styr, B., Slutsky, I., 2018. Imbalance between firing homeostasis and synaptic plasticity drives early-phase Alzheimer’s disease. Nat. Neurosci. 21 (4), 463.

Sun, S., et al., 2014. Reduced synaptic STIM2 expression and impaired store-operated calcium entry cause destabilization of mature spines in mutant presenilin mice. Neuron 82 (1), 79–93.

Supnet, C., Bezprozvanny, I., 2010. The dysregulation of intracellular calcium in Alzheimer disease. Cell Calcium 47 (2), 183–189.

Supnet, C. and I. Bezprozvanny, Neuronal calcium signaling, mitochondrial dysfunction, and Alzheimer's disease. J. Alzheimers Dis.. 20(s2): p. S487-S498.

Supnet, C., et al., 2006. Amyloid-β-(1-42) increases ryanodine receptor-3 expression and function in neurons of TgCRND8 mice. J. Biol. Chem. 281 (50), 38440–38447.

Temido-Ferreira, M., et al., 2018. Age-related shift in LTD is dependent on neuronal adenosine A 2A receptors interplay with mGluR5 and NMDA receptors. Mol. Psychiatry 1.

Thathiah, A., De Strooper, B., 2011. The role of G protein-coupled receptors in the pathology of Alzheimer’s disease. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 12 (2), 73.

Thathiah, A., et al., 2013. β-Arrestin 2 regulates Aβ generation and γ-secretase activity in Alzheimer’s disease. Nat. Med. 19 (1), 43.

Thomas, C.G., Miller, A.J., Westbrook, G.L., 2006. Synaptic and extrasynaptic NMDA receptor NR2 subunits in cultured hippocampal neurons. J. Neurophysiol. 95 (3), 1727–1734.

Thomas, S., et al., 2015. Brain metabolism and Alzheimer’s disease: the prospect of a metabolite-based therapy. J. Nutr. Health Aging 19 (1), 58–63.

Tian, Y., et al., 2018. CXCL12 induces migration of oligodendrocyte precursor cells through the CXCR4-activated MEK/ERK and PI3K/AKT pathways. Mol. Med. Rep. 18 (5), 4374–4380.

Tomita, T., et al., 1997. The presenilin 2 mutation (N141I) linked to familial Alzheimer disease (Volga German families) increases the secretion of amyloid β protein ending at the 42nd (or 43rd) residue. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 94 (5), 2025–2030.

Tu, H., et al., 2006. Presenilins form ER Ca2+ leak channels, a function disrupted by familial Alzheimer's disease-linked mutations. Cell 126 (5), 981–993.

Ueda, K., et al., 1997. Amyloid β protein potentiates Ca2+ influx through L-type voltage-sensitive Ca2+ channels: a possible involvement of free radicals. J. Neurochem. 68 (1), 265–271.

Um, J.W., Strittmatter, S.M., 2013. Amyloid-β induced signaling by cellular prion protein and Fyn kinase in Alzheimer disease. Prion 7 (1), 37–41.

Um, J.W., et al., 2012. Alzheimer amyloid-β oligomer bound to postsynaptic prion protein activates Fyn to impair neurons. Nat. Neurosci. 15 (9), 1227.

Um, J.W., et al., 2013. Metabotropic glutamate receptor 5 is a coreceptor for Alzheimer aβ oligomer bound to cellular prion protein. Neuron 79 (5), 887–902.

Vance, J.E., 1990. Phospholipid synthesis in a membrane fraction associated with mitochondria. J. Biol. Chem. 265 (13), 7248–7256.

Wang, R., Reddy, P.H., 2017. Role of glutamate and NMDA receptors in Alzheimer’s disease. J. Alzheimers Dis. 57 (4), 1041–1048.

Wang, M.-C., Dolphin, A., Kitmitto, A., 2004. L-type voltage-gated calcium channels: understanding function through structure. FEBS Lett. 564 (3), 245–250.

Wang, J., et al., 2011. Carvedilol as a potential novel agent for the treatment of Alzheimer’s disease. Neurobiol. Aging 32 (12), 2321 (e1-2321. e12).

Wang, X., et al., 2014. Oxidative stress and mitochondrial dysfunction in Alzheimer's disease. Biochimica et Biophysica Acta (BBA)-Molecular Basis of Disease 1842 (8), 1240–1247.

Wang, Y., Shi, Y., Wei, H., 2017. Calcium dysregulation in Alzheimer’s disease: a target for new drug development. Journal of Alzheimer’s disease & Parkinsonism 7 (5).

Weis, W.I., Kobilka, B.K., 2018. The molecular basis of G protein–coupled receptor activation. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 87, 897–919.

Weisman, G.A., et al., 2012. Neuroprotective roles of the P2Y 2 receptor. Purinergic signalling 8 (3), 559–578.

Williams, G.S., et al., 2013. Mitochondrial calcium uptake. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 110 (26), 10479–10486.

Wolfe, M.S., 2006. The γ-secretase complex: membrane-embedded proteolytic ensemble. Biochemistry 45 (26), 7931–7939.

Woods, L.T., et al., 2012. P2X7 receptor activation induces inflammatory responses in salivary gland epithelium. Am. J. Phys. Cell Phys. 303 (7), C790–C801.

Wu, Q., et al., 2017. Blocking beta 2-adrenergic receptor inhibits dendrite ramification in a mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease. Neural Regen. Res. 12 (9), 1499.

Xia, M.Q., et al., 2000. Expression of the chemokine receptor CXCR3 on neurons and the elevated expression of its ligand IP-10 in reactive astrocytes: in vitro ERK1/2 activation and role in Alzheimer’s disease. J. Neuroimmunol. 108 (1–2), 227–235.

Yagami, T., et al., 2004. Protective effects of a selective L-type voltage-sensitive calcium channel blocker, S-312-d, on neuronal cell death. Biochem. Pharmacol. 67 (6), 1153–1165.

Yu, J.-T., Chang, R.C.-C., Tan, L., 2009. Calcium dysregulation in Alzheimer’s disease: from mechanisms to therapeutic opportunities. Prog. Neurobiol. 89 (3), 240–255.

Yu, N.-N., et al., 2010. Blocking β2-adrenergic receptor attenuates acute stress-induced amyloid β peptides production. Brain Res. 1317, 305–310.

Zhang, Y., et al., 2016. Dysfunction of NMDA receptors in Alzheimer’s disease. Neurol. Sci. 37 (7), 1039–1047.

Zhao, J., et al., 2018. Soluble Aβ oligomers impair dipolar heterodendritic plasticity by activation of mGluR in the Hippocampal CA1 region. iScience 6, 138–150.

Zhu, X., et al., 2015. NMDA receptor NR2B subunits contribute to PTZ-kindling-induced hippocampal astrogliosis and oxidative stress. Brain Res. Bull. 114, 70–78.

Zuchner, T., Perez-Polo, J.R., Schliebs, R., 2004. Beta-secretase BACE1 is differentially controlled through muscarinic acetylcholine receptor signaling. J. Neurosci. Res. 77 (2), 250–257.

Zündorf, G., Reiser, G., 2011. Calcium dysregulation and homeostasis of neural calcium in the molecular mechanisms of neurodegenerative diseases provide multiple targets for neuroprotection. Antioxid. Redox Signal. 14 (7), 1275–1288.
