
# Structure of severe fever with thrombocytopenia syndrome virus L protein elucidates the mechanisms of viral transcription initiation

Panpan Wang${}^{1,2,10}$, Lu Liu${}^{1,2,10}$, Aijun Liu${}^{1,2,10}$, Liming Yan${}^{1}$, Yong He${}^{3,4}$, Shu Shen${}^{5}$, Mingxu Hu${}^{2}$, Yu Guo${}^{3,4}$, Haiguang Liu${}^{6}$, Chuang Liu${}^{7}$, Yinying Lu${}^{8}$, Peiyi Wang${}^{7}$, Fei Deng${}^{4,5}$, Zihe Rao${}^{1,2,3,4,9}$ and Zhiyong Lou${}^{1}$

Segmented negative-sense RNA viruses (sNSRVs) encode a single-polypeptide polymerase (L protein) or a heterotrimeric polymerase complex to cannibalize host messenger RNA cap structures serving as primers of transcription, and catalyse RNA synthesis. Here, we report the full-length structure of the severe fever with thrombocytopenia syndrome virus (SFTSV) L protein, as determined by cryogenic electron microscopy at 3.4 Å, leading to an atomic model harbouring three functional parts (an endonuclease, an RNA-dependent RNA polymerase and a cap-binding domain) and two structural domains (an arm domain with a blocker motif and a carboxy-terminal lariat domain). The SFTSV L protein has a compact architecture in which its cap-binding pocket is surprisingly occupied by an Arg finger of the blocker motif, and the endonuclease active centre faces back towards the cap-binding pocket, suggesting that domain rearrangements are necessary to acquire the pre-initiation state of the active site. Our results provide insight into the complete architecture of sNSRV-encoded L protein and further the understanding of sNSRV transcription initiation.

N**egative-sense RNA viruses (NSRVs) encode a large RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp) with multiple enzymatic functions to facilitate virus transcription and replication** ${}^{1}$. The architecture and function of non-segmented NSRV (nsNSRV) (filovirus, rhabdovirus, paramyxovirus and bornavirus) and segmented NSRV (sNSRV) (arenavirus, bunyavirus and orthomyxovirus) RdRp—particularly the mechanism of generating a messenger RNA (mRNA) cap to prime transcription—differ substantially ${}^{1}$. The nsNSRVs self-synthesize the mRNA cap structures by employing a polyribonucleotidyl transferase (PRNTase) in their large polymerase (L protein) to transfer nascent RNA onto a GDP acceptor to form a GpppN structure ${}^{2,3}$, which is subsequently modified by a methyltransferase in the L protein to add both 2′-O and guanine-N7 modifications to form the 7mGpppNpmNp cap structure ${}^{4}$. In contrast, sNSRVs feature a cap-snatching mechanism that forms the cap structure, whereby short 5′ capped RNA fragments are cleaved from host cell mRNA by an endonuclease (endoN) in the L protein to prime the synthesis of viral mRNA sequences ${}^{1,5-8}$. Consequently, the sNSRV-encoded L protein possesses three functional domains: the endoN domain, the RdRp domain and the cap-binding domain (CBD) ${}^{1}$. In the Bunyavirales order ${}^{9}$, the L proteins are a monomeric single polypeptide, whereas in orthomyxovirus, a heterotrimeric complex functions as the polymerase ${}^{1,10,11}$.

The structures of vesicular stomatitis virus L protein, as well as human respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) and human metapneumovirus PRNTase–RdRp, reveal the architecture of nsNSRV polymerase and its interaction with the cofactor ${}^{12-14}$. The PA, PB1 and PB2 structures of influenza viruses dissect the mechanism by which three subunits form the polymerase complex, synthesize the RNA and channel the capped primer to the polymerase active cavity ${}^{15-20}$. Furthermore, the structure of La Crosse virus (LACV), covering residues 1–1,750, presents the details of how an sNSRV-encoded RdRp binds the template viral RNA (vRNA) ${}^{21}$. However, the complete architecture of the full-length sNSRV-encoded L protein remains unclear, hindering our understanding of the mechanism of cap snatching correlating with RNA synthesis and the initiation of transcription.

The severe fever with thrombocytopenia syndrome virus (SFTSV) is the causative agent of an emerging tickborne severe fever with thrombocytopenia syndrome and belongs to the Phenuiviridae family within the Bunyavirales order, together with Rift Valley fever virus (RVFV) and Uukuniemi virus ${}^{22-27}$. The World Health Organization has included SFTSV in the list of priority target pathogens requiring urgent attention ${}^{28}$. The atomic structure of the full-length SFTSV L protein (SFTSV-L) reported here provides structural insight into the complete architecture of an sNSRV-encoded L protein and contributes information to our understanding of the cap-snatching mechanism.

## Results

### Overall architecture of SFTSV-L

The full-length SFTSV-L was purified and a cryogenic electron microscopy (cryo-EM) dataset

---

1 MOE Key Laboratory of Protein Science and Collaborative Innovation Center of Biotherapy, School of Medicine, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China.  
2 School of Life Sciences, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China.  
3 State Key Laboratory of Medicinal Chemical Biology, College of Life Science, Nankai University, Tianjin, China.  
4 Drug Discovery Center for Infectious Disease, College of Pharmacy, Nankai University, Tianjin, China.  
5 State Key Laboratory of Virology and National Virus Resource Center, Wuhan Institute of Virology, Center for Biosafety Mega-Science, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Hubei, China.  
6 Complex Systems Division, Beijing Computational Science Research Center, Beijing, China.  
7 Department of Biology, Southern University of Science and Technology, Shenzhen, China.  
8 302 Hospital, Peking University, Beijing, China.  
9 National Laboratory of Macromolecules, Institute of Biophysics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.  
10 These authors contributed equally: Panpan Wang, Lu Liu, Aijun Liu.  
e-mail: df@wh.iov.cn; raozh@tsinghua.edu.cn; louzy@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn

[NATURE MICROBIOLOGY](https://www.nature.com/naturemicrobiology)

ARTICLES

NATURE MICROBIOLOGY

a
RdRp
N—endoN—I—PA-C-L—RdRp core—PB2-N-L—C
Arm CBD b arm Lariat

b
RdRp
core
Linker
PA-C-like
PB2-N-like
90°
endoN
Lariat
Blocker
Arm
CBD
RdRp
core
Linker
PB2-N-like
endoN
C-shaped structure
RdRp region
O-shaped structure

c
PA-C-like RdRp
endoN AC
Lariat CBD
Arm
PA-C-like RdRp
endoN AC
PB2-N-
like
SFTSV-L
LACV-L 1750
(5AMR)
FluA PA–PB1–PB2
(4WSB)
FluB1 PA–PB1–PB2
(4WSA)
FluB PA–PB1–PB2
(5EPI)
FluC PA–PB1–PB2
(5D98)

Fig. 1 | Structure of SFTSV-L. **a**, Domain organization of SFTSV-L. The endoN domain, linker region (I), PA-C-like domain (PA-C-L), RdRp core, PB2-N-like domain (PB2-N-L), arm domain, blocker motif (b), CBD and C-terminal lariat domain are shown in forest green, teal, bright cyan, pale cyan, grey, violet, blue, pale yellow and red, respectively. The interdomain borders are labelled with residue numbers. The residues in the N and C termini, and in the region linking the PB2-N-like domain and the arm domain, with invisible density, are not included in the assignment. **b**, Ribbon diagrams of the SFTSV-L A cation bound near the RdRp catalytic centre is shown as a red sphere. **c**, Comparison of SFTSV-L, LACV-L 1750, FluA (in complex with vRNA), FluB1 (in complex with vRNA), FluB (in complex with complementary RNA) and FluC (apo) PA-PB1-PB2 complexes. Six structures are aligned according to their RdRp core and are covered by molecular surfaces. The colours for the domains in SFTSV-L and their structural or positional equivalents in the LACV-L 1750, FluA, FluB1, FluB and FluC PA-PB1-PB2 complexes are as in **a**. The Protein Data Bank (PDB) codes used to generate this figure are labelled in parentheses. ‘AC’ refers to the active centre of the endoN domain, as shown in orange, and ‘CP’ refers to the cap-binding pocket in FluA and FluB1 polymerase. Note that the cap-binding pockets in FluA and FluB1 cannot be directly visualized from the views shown here; therefore, the arrows indicate their approximate positions. **d**, Comparison of the projection of the final map and selected class averages. The class averages of SFTSV-L in the compact structure are similar to those in the final structure, but the endoN domain is missing; these are shown in the O-shaped structure panel. Representative C-shaped classes and classes referring to the individual RdRp domain are also shown. The edge of each square is 238 Å.

was collected to result in a 3.4-Å map for model building (Extended Data Fig. 1 and Supplementary Table 1). We assigned residues to SFTSV-L domains as follows (Fig. 1a and Extended Data Fig. 2): residues 25–205 belong to the endoN domain; a linker region spans residues 206–295; residues 296–762 belong to an influenza PA-C-like domain; residues 763–1,345 belong to the RdRp core; residues 1,346–1,571 belong to an influenza PB2-N-like domain; residues 1,615–1,696 and 1,811–1,932 belong to an arm domain in which the blocker motif spans residues 1,811–1,852; residues 1,697–1,810 belong to the CBD; and the C-terminal residues 1,933–2,049 compose a lariat domain. Because residues 296–762 and 1,346–1,571 were structurally analogous to the influenza PA-C and PB2-N domains [15–20], we named them ‘PA-C-like domain’ and a ‘PB2-N-like domain’, respectively.

SFTSV-L displays a compact architecture with a large globular core connected to a protruding carboxy (C)-terminal part through its amino (N)-terminal part (Fig. 1b). The large globular core comprises the RdRp region, including the linker region, PA-C-like domain, RdRp core and PB2-N-like domain. The C-terminal part includes the arm domain containing a blocker motif and the CBD. The N-terminal part is mainly formed by the endoN domain. The lariat domain constitutes a large circle and hooks the large globular core and the C terminal to stabilize the compact structure of SFTSV-L (Extended Data Fig. 3).

The endoN domain, which is connected to the PA-C-like domain via the linker region analogous to the FluA PA-linker, is enclosed in a central cave formed by other domains (the RdRp core, PB2-N-like domain, arm domain and blocker motif, CBD and

NATURE MICROBIOLOGY | www.nature.com/naturemicrobiology

(Fig. 2a–c). In the CBD structures of RVFV-L and FluA PB2 in complex with cap analogues, a hydrophobic pocket is composed of aromatic amino acid side chains to anchor the cap analogues<sup>6,29</sup>. These aromatic amino acids include F1713 and Y1728 in RVFV-L, and F323, H357 and F404 in FluA PB2. In the SFTSV-L CBD, F1703 and Y1709 constitute a conserved cap-binding pocket.

In SFTSV-L, an interesting observation is that the blocker motif tightly contacts the CBD and invades the cap-binding pocket (Fig. 2a). The loop region spanning Q1840–R1843 in the blocker motif surrounds the side chain of Y1719. The side chain of R1843, named the Arg finger, deeply inserts into the cap-binding pocket and is clamped by the hydrophobic side chains of F1703 and Y1719. The positively charged guanidyl group of R1843 forms additional hydrogen bonds with N1745 to stabilize its conformation. We hypothesize that the occupancy of the cap-binding pocket by the Arg finger blocks the interaction with the cap in this compact SFTSV-L structure, and an interdomain conformational shift should occur to release the pocket for subsequent cap recognition.

In the structure of SFTSV-L, the CBD contacts the lid subdomain of the PB2-N-like domain to maintain the overall architecture (Fig. 2d). In this area, residues K1794–P1797 in the CBD form interdomain interactions with residues R1510–V1517 of the PB2-N-like domain (Fig. 2e). We assume that mutations of an interacting residue pair with the closest distance to cysteine residues in SFTSV-L (that is, P1797 in the CBD and V1517 in the PB2-N-like domain) would introduce a disulfide bond to lock SFTSV-L in this compact architecture (Fig. 2f), in which the cap-binding pocket is occupied by the blocker motif to prohibit binding with the cap. Consistent with our assumption, the SFTSV-L V1517C–P1797C mutant obviously abolished binding of the m<sup>7</sup>G cap analogue in the in vitro cap-binding analysis assay (Fig. 2g,h), indicating that binding with the cap structure of host mRNA cannot happen in the compact architecture. Furthermore, we mutated the Arg finger (R1843) to an alanine residue in the SFTSV-L V1517C–P1797C mutant to release the cap-binding pocket in the compact conformation locked by the disulfide bond, and found that the cap binding ability was rescued (Fig. 2i).

FluA PB2 also folds a three-stranded motif (PB2 cap-627 linker)<sup>15</sup>, which is structurally analogous to the SFTSV-L blocker motif (Extended Data Fig. 5). However, the PB2 cap-627 linker is attached at the back surface of the FluA CBD opposite its cap-binding pocket, leaving the cap-binding pocket in a free state (Extended Data Fig. 5). Remarkably, the PB2 cap-627 linker presents significant structural variations. Upon binding with complementary RNA and/or vRNA, the cap-binding pocket in the PB2 subunit is either fully exposed to solvent<sup>15</sup> or partially shielded by the PB2 cap-627 linker<sup>16,18,30</sup>. The structure in which the PB2 cap-627 linker occupies the cap-binding pocket is considered as a pre-activation state<sup>19</sup>, and other structures are proposed as different states during replication and transcription<sup>15,16,18,30</sup>. We deduce that the blocker motif may have an analogous function to the influenza virus PB2 cap-627 linker, and its conformation is likely to adopt significant variations during different stages of virus replication and transcription. The structure of SFTSV-L reported here represents a closed, pre-activation state.

Structure of endoN. Similar to other reported sNSRV endonucleases, the SFTSV-L endoN domain has the structural characteristic of the PD-(D/E)XK nuclease superfamily with a highly conserved motif (H....PD...D/E...K)<sup>7,8,31</sup> (Fig. 3). The catalytic residues in the conserved motif of the SFTSV-L endoN domain include H80, P111, D112, D126 and K145, and are conserved in the Phenuiviridae family (Supplementary Fig. 1). The SFTSV-L endoN domain has the same core, cation-binding fold as is found in FluA PA, LACV-L and the Lassa fever virus L protein<sup>7,8,32,33</sup>. However, the metal ions could not be found in this dense core, possibly because no additional

An Arg finger occupies the cap-binding pocket of the CBD. The SFTSV-L arm domain is composed of eight α-helices with a three-stranded blocker motif on the right end, and the CBD consists of a β-sheet formed by seven β-strands surrounding a long α-helix (Fig. 1 and Extended Data Fig. 2). The overall fold of the SFTSV-L CBD is structurally analogous to the RVFV-L and FluA PB2 CBDs

Domain reorganization. The cryo-EM class averages illustrate the potential for large-scale domain reorganization of SFTSV-L (Fig. 1d). Apart from the classes used to generate the final structure of SFTSV-L, we observed O-shaped hollow patterns in the class averages, in which the density corresponding to the endoN domain enclosed in the central part of the SFTSV-L was obviously missing. Moreover, C-shaped classes were observed in the cryo-EM classification. In the C-shaped classes, in addition to the endoN domain being missing, the CBD was distant from the PB2-N-like domain. In addition, we found doughnut fragments, which corresponded to the RdRp region, indicating that the linker connecting the RdRp region and the arm domains was broken.

ARTICLES

NATURE MICROBIOLOGY

a SFTSV-L  
(1,697–1,810)

b RVFV-L (6QHG)  
(1,706–1,822)

c FluA PB2 (2VQZ)  
(313–480)

N1745  
Y1719  
F1703  
Arg finger  
R1843  

P1755  
Y1728  
m⁷GTP  

F404  
H357  
F323  
m⁷GTP  
424-loop  

d RdRp  
PA-C like  
PB2-N like  
endoN  
Lariat  
Arm  
Blocker  
CBD  

e C1511  
R1510  
K1794 K1796 P1797  

f C1511  
R1510  
Val→Cys  
K1794 K1796 Pro→Cys  

g Resonance units  
25  
20  
15  
10  
5  
0  
K<sub>d</sub> = 1.75 µM  
Time (s)  

h Resonance units  
25  
20  
15  
10  
5  
0  
K<sub>d</sub> = 0.26 µM  
Time (s)  

i Resonance units  
35  
30  
25  
20  
15  
10  
5  
0  
Time (s)  

Fig. 2 | The SFTSV-L cap-binding pocket is occupied by the Arg finger. **a–c**, Comparison of the CBDs (shown in yellow) in SFTSV-L (**a**), RVFV-L (**b**; PDB: 6QHG)<sup>6</sup> and FluA PB2 (**c**; PDB: 2VQZ)<sup>29</sup>, which are aligned. The blocker motif in SFTSV-L is shown in blue, and the CBD-interacting residues, including the Arg finger at R1843, are displayed as coloured sticks. The cap analogues bound to the RVFV-L and FluA PB2 CBDs are also represented as coloured sticks. The residues constituting the cap-binding pockets in the three structures are shown as coloured sticks with labels. **d–f**, Schematics of the interaction between the CBD and PB2-N-like domain of SFTSV-L. The entire structure of SFTSV-L is shown in **d**, with a box outlining the interacting region. The interacting residues are highlighted in red. The interacting regions in wild-type SFTSV-L and the V1517C-P1797C mutant are enlarged in **e** and **f**, respectively. **g–i**, Graphs of the binding of wild-type (**g**), V1517C-P1797C mutated (**h**) and V1517C-P1797C-R1843A tri-mutated SFTSV-L (**i**) with the ribo m⁷G cap analogue, as measured by surface plasmon resonance. Each experiment was repeated independently three times with similar results. The representative curves are shown.

cation was supplied in the buffers for purification and cryo-EM sampling.

Conserved features of the RdRp region. The SFTSV-L RdRp region is subdivided into three domains (the PA-C-like domain, RdRp core and PB2-N-like domain) with an additional linker region to connect the endoN domain (Fig. 4 and Extended Data Fig. 6). The PA-C-like domain has two lobes. The larger core lobe is a helical lobe and interacts with the finger, palm and thumb subdomains of the RdRp core. The smaller lobe is equivalent to the vRNA-binding lobe of LACV-L<sup>21</sup>. The polypeptide belonging to residues 420–450, which is equivalent to the arch in LACV-L and FluA PA that binds the 5′ end of vRNA, is largely untraceable in SFTSV-L, indicating a flexible structure that probably resulted from the lack of the interaction with vRNA.

The SFTSV-L RdRp core (residues 763–1,345) has a featured right-hand fingers–palm–thumb polymerase core structure. The catalytic site is on the palm subdomain in a deep cavity between the fingers and thumb subdomains, connected to the exterior by four channels (for template entrance, template exit, transcript exit and NTP entry)<sup>34</sup>. LACV-L has specific α-ribbon and finger node motifs composed of α-helices in the finger subdomain, which correspond to the FluA PB1 β-ribbon and β-hairpin, respectively, and play a central role in sequence-specific binding of the vRNA 5′ end<sup>21</sup>. The similar α-ribbon and finger node motifs are also

a SFTV-L  

b LACV-L  
(5AMR)  

c FluA PA  
(2W69)  

d LASV-L  
(2XI7)  

D112 H80  
P111 E126  
K145  

D79 H84  
P78 D92  
K94  

D108 H41  
P107 E119  
K134  

D89 E51  
P88 K122  
E102  

Fig. 3 | The endoN domain. **a–d**, Ribbon diagrams showing alignment of the structures of SFTSV-L (**a**), LACV-L (**b**), FluA PA (**c**) and the Lassa fever virus L protein (LASV-L) endoN domains (**d**) in the same orientation. The polypeptides of the endoN domains are shown in forest green. The side chains of the key residues that constitute the active centre are displayed as red sticks. The cations are represented as grey spheres. The PDB codes used to generate this figure are labelled in parentheses.

NATURE MICROBIOLOGY ARTICLES

a

| PA-C-like | Polymerase core | PB2-N-like |
| --- | --- | --- |
| N |  | C |
|  | Clamp | Finger |
|  | Arch | α-Ribbon |
|  | vRBL | Palm |
|  | Core lobe | Finger node |
|  |  | Thumb |
|  |  | Priming loop |
|  |  | Bridge |
|  |  | Thumb ring |
|  |  | Lid |
|  |  |  |
|  |  | SFTSV-L |
| N |  | C |
|  | Lobe 2 | Finger |
|  | Arch | α-Ribbon |
|  | VRBL | Palm |
|  | Core lobe | Finger node |
|  |  | Thumb |
|  |  | Priming loop |
|  |  | Bridge |
|  |  | Thumb ring |
|  |  | Lid |
|  |  |  |
|  |  | LACV-L |
| N |  | C |
|  | Lobe 2 | Finger |
|  | Arch | α-Ribbon |
|  | VRBL | Palm |
|  | Core lobe | Finger node |
|  |  | Thumb |
|  |  | Priming loop |
|  |  | Bridge |
|  |  | Thumb ring |
|  |  | Lid |
|  |  |  |
|  |  | FluA PA-PB1-PB2 |

PA  
PB1  
PB2  

b

Finger node  
Bridge  
α-Ribbon  
Clamp  
Lid  
Thumb ring  
Fingers  
Palm  
SFTSV-L  

Finger node  
Bridge  
α-Ribbon  
Arch  
Clamp  
Lid  
Thumb ring  
Fingers  
Palm  
LACV-L (5AMR)  

β-Ribbon  
PB2-Nter  
Arch  
Clamp  
Lid  
Thumb  
Fingers  
Palm  
FluA (4WSB)  

Fig. 4 | The RdRp region. a, Schematic of the organization of the RdRp regions of SFTSV-L (top), LACV-L (middle) and FluA (bottom). Structurally or functionally equivalent domains are shown in the same colour. The regions not involved in the comparison are shown in white. b, Structural comparison of the RdRp regions of SFTSV-L (left), LACV-L (middle) and FluA polymerase (right). The three structures are aligned and displayed in the same orientation. The subdomains and motifs are coloured as in a. vRBL, vRNA binding lobe. Detailed comparisons of separated subdomains are also shown in Extended Data Fig. 6.

presented in SFTSV-L, but the ten-amino acid α-ribbon is much smaller than that in LACV-L (58 amino acids) (Extended Data Fig. 6). A thumb ring subdomain also exists in SFTSV-L, which is structurally homologous to the FluA PB2 N1 and N2 subdomains, surrounding the thumb subdomain, together with the core lobe of the PA-C-like domain. The putative priming loop (residues 1,331–1,346) is located at the C-terminal end of the thumb subdomain and is in a well-ordered structure similar to that of FluA PB1 (ref. 15) (Extended Data Fig. 7a–d). Moreover, the priming loop of FluA PB1 deeply inserts into the RdRp core close to the catalytic centre, whereas the priming loops of SFTSV-L and LACV-L are closed to the molecular surface (Extended Data Fig. 7a–d).

The structural homologies of the bridge, thumb ring and lid subdomains, which have been defined in LACV-L 21, are also found in the SFTSV-L PB2-N-like domain. This bridge subdomain formed by a helical bundle is on the top of the finger subdomain, and its connection with the thumb ring subdomain participates in formation of the template entry channel. A lid subdomain (residues 1,483–1,552), which is inserted in the thumb ring subdomain, is analogous to the lid in FluA PB2 and borders the exit channel.

Active site cavity and its entrance and exit tunnels. The active site chamber of the SFTSV-L RdRp core is formed by the conserved polymerase motifs A–F in the palm domain and configured like other RNA polymerases, notably the sNSRV (influenza and LACV) polymerase 15,21 (Fig. 5a). Motif A covers residues 985–DAKKWN–990 with a conserved divalent cation-binding residue D985. Motif B is in 1,080–QGILHFTSSL–1,089, and a histidine residue (H1084) replaces the position of the conserved asparagine residue. The catalytic motif C (1,125–SDD–1,127) is in the turn between the two β-strands. Motif D is assigned as 1,166–YSSEKST–1,172. Motif E (1,179–VEYNSEFH–1,186) forms the tight loop. Motif F (912–KKNQHGGLRE–921) forms an ordered loop despite no vRNA being bound with SFTSV-L (Extended Data Fig. 7e). In contrast, motif F of LACV-L 1750 is only in an ordered structure when it binds with the 5′vRNA 21. Two sNSRV specifically

ARTICLES

NATURE MICROBIOLOGY

Fig. 5 | The active site and entrance and exit tunnels of SFTSV-L RdRp. **a**, Arrangement of the RdRp motifs of SFTSV-L. The six conserved polymerase motifs (motifs A–F) in the SFTSV-L RdRp core are coloured yellow, teal, green, red, brown and blue, respectively. The two sNSRV polymerase-specific motifs (motifs G and H) are coloured violet and light brown. Superposition of the polio virus elongation complex structure (PDB codes: 3OLB and 3OL8) shows the positions of the catalytic manganese ions (black spheres), priming nucleotide (N+1), incoming NTP (N+2) and template strand. **b–d**, Template entry (violet), NTP entry (red), product exit (orange) and template exit tunnels (green) in SFTSV-L (**b**), LACV-L 1750 (**c**) and FluA PA-PB1-PB2 (**d**). The structures are shown in the same orientation with the same colour scheme as in Fig. 1. The tunnels were calculated using MOLE 2.0 (ref.).

conserved motifs —motif G (667–RYTQ–670) and motif H (1,023–RKKMM–1,027)—can also be found in SFTSV-L. Motif G is in the core lobe of the PA-C-like domain that contains a conserved arginine, which is positioned to interact with the priming NTP. Motif H forms a β-strand to stabilize the motif B backbone conformation.

A strong density is found to link the side chain of D1127 (in motif C) with the main chain atoms of N984 (in motif A) and E1180 (in motif E), indicating a cation-binding position (Extended Data Fig. 8a,b). However, this position is distinct from the positions of two catalytic manganese ions in the poliovirus elongation complex. We assume this density might belong to a magnesium ion acquired from expression host cells, and further changes to the cation binding would occur during the RdRp catalytic reaction.

Four positively charged solvent accessible tunnels converge into a central cavity where the RdRp motifs mediate template-directed RNA synthesis in SFTSV-L (Fig. 5b and Extended Data Fig. 8c). The configurations of the template entry channel, NTP entry channel and nascent strand exit channel are similar to those described for LACV-L and the influenza polymerase (Fig. 5b–d). The NTP entry channel is formed by a set of hydrophilic residues, including E661 and K689 in the PA-C-like domain, K772 and K773 in the fingers subdomain, and D985, K987, K988, E1169 and K1170 in the palm subdomain (Extended Data Fig. 8d). The template entrance channel is defined by the vRNA-binding lobe and the core lobe in the PA-C-like domain, fingers and bridge subdomains (Extended Data Fig. 8e). In the complex structure of LACV-L 1750 with vRNA, the α-ribbon participates in the formation of the template entrance, but the α-ribbon in SFTSV-L is distant from the template entrance, suggesting that a conformation of this motif would have shifted upon vRNA binding to modulate template access. The product exit tunnel is surrounded by the lid and the thumb ring subdomains mainly by the extended joining linkers and by the fingers and palm on the opposite side of the NTP entry channel (Extended Data Fig. 9). Notably, the endoN domain and residues 206–218 in the linker region also participate in the formation of this product exit tunnel in the compact structure of SFTSV-L but significantly narrow the tunnel access to the solvent (Extended Data Fig. 9c).

Compared with the tunnels in the LACV-L 1750 and influenza polymerase, the NTP and template entry tunnels of SFTSV-L

NATURE MICROBIOLOGY | www.nature.com/naturemicrobiology

NATURE MICROBIOLOGY | ARTICLES

present similar configurations, but the tunnels for the template and product exit are obviously shorter and smaller. The exit of the template exit tunnel has a narrow pathway accessing the molecular surface. The accession of the product exit tunnel in SFTSV-L is also impeded by the endoN domain. In contrast, the exits of the product exit tunnels in LACV-L and influenza polymerase are fully exposed to have sufficient space to allow product release. If the coordinate of the endoN domain is removed from the full-length SFTSV-L structure, the product exit tunnel of the SFTSV-L becomes larger and more accessible to the solvent (Extended Data Fig. 9d). These features suggest that rearrangement of the endoN domain would also be helpful for product release.

### Discussion

A cap-snatching event initiates sNSRV transcription, requiring cleavage of the cap structure from the host mRNA and priming of the subsequent RNA synthesis at the catalytic centre of the RdRp core. Combining our results with previously reported structures of sNSRV-encoded polymerases, we interpret our structure reported here as an early pre-initiation state, representing the SFTSV-L that is present immediately after translation or in ribonucleoproteins ready for transcription, and propose a model for the initiation of SFTSV transcription in cooperation with domain reorganization (Extended Data Fig. 10a).

A distinct conformational change of the polymerase domains was also observed in influenza virus polymerase [15,16]. The CBD of the FluB1 PB2 structure presents an in situ rotation compared with that in the FluA PB2 structure, suggesting a mechanism to channel the capped primer into the RdRp catalytic cavity by the PB2 424-loop in the CBD and PB2 lid helix; however, the orientations of the other domains (in particular the conformation of the endoN domain) are remarkably similar. In the context that SFTSV-L and RVFV-L do not share structural homology with the influenza PB2 424-loop, and the conformations of the endoN domains have significant variations in bunyavirus-encoded L proteins, sNSRV would employ distinct mechanisms to initiate transcription, among which: (1) the single-polypeptide L protein (bunyavirus and arenavirus) employs conformational shifting of the endoN domain; or (2) a heterotrimeric polymerase complex (orthomyxovirus) utilizes in situ rotation of the CBD.

Virus polymerases typically require binding cofactors to achieve efficient replication and transcription. For example, the viruses in the Mononegavirales order employ a phosphoprotein to interact with and regulate the function of viral protein [1]. Some bunyaviruses (including orthobunyavirus and phlebovirus) use an ambisense strategy to encode the non-structural proteins NSs (using the S segment) and NSm (using the M segment) to regulate RNA synthesis [10]. A recent study reported the complex structure of RSV PRNTase-RdRp in complex with phosphoprotein, in which four phosphoproteins bind at the RdRp core of RSV-L [13]. When the RdRp cores of SFTSV-L and RSV-L are aligned with the highest structural homology, the cofactor-binding site of RSV-L is mapped to the region where the linker and the lariat domain interact with the RdRp core in SFTSV-L (Extended Data Fig. 10b). This result indicates that the virally encoded cofactor may regulate RNA synthesis by affecting the conformational shifting of bunyavirus and arenavirus L proteins, as was suggested in the RSV-L–phosphoprotein complex [12]. Future studies on bunyavirus or arenavirus L proteins and their complexes with potential cofactors would be warranted to clarify these evolutionary relationships among all NSRVs.

In conclusion, the atomic structure of the full-length SFTSV-L reported here provides structural insight into the complete architecture of the sNSRV-encoded L protein, suggesting a mechanism for sNSRV transcription implemented by domain rearrangement. This structure will increase the understanding of the evolutionary relationship of sNSRV and the development of antiviral therapeutics.

---

### Methods

#### Protein production and purification.
SFTSV-L (Phlebovirus WCH/97/HN/ China/2011) with an N-terminal 6× His-tag was expressed in Sf9 insect cells using pFastBac HTB transfer vector (Invitrogen). The Sf9 cells expressing the polymerase were lysed by sonication in buffer A containing 50 mM NaH₂PO₄ (pH 8.0), 300 mM NaCl, 10% (v/v) glycerol, 4 mM MgCl₂, 0.2% NP-40 supplemented with phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride and 1 U ml⁻¹ benzonase (Millipore). After clarification by high-speed centrifugation, the cell lysate was loaded onto an Ni-NTA column (GenScript). After washing three times with buffer A to remove non-specifically bound protein, the target protein was subsequently eluted in buffer B containing 50 mM NaH₂PO₄ (pH 8.0), 300 mM NaCl, 10% (v/v) glycerol, 4 mM MgCl₂ and 250 mM imidazole. The eluted L protein was pooled and further purified using a heparin column (GE Healthcare) in 20 mM HEPES (pH 7.5) and 2 mM dithiothreitol. The L protein was eluted from the heparin column using an NaCl gradient to a final concentration of 600 mM. The fractions near the maximum height of the peak were combined, concentrated with an Amicon Ultra Centrifugal Filter (Millipore), flash frozen and stored at −80°C.

#### Cryo-EM sample preparation and data collection.
An aliquot of 3 μl of sample at 0.5 mg ml⁻¹ was loaded onto a glow-discharged Quantifoil R1.2/1.3 Au grid (400 mesh). The grid was then blotted for 3.5 s with a blot force of 0 in 100% relative humidity and plunge frozen in liquid ethane using a Vitrobot Mark IV (FEI). Cryo-EM data were collected with a 300-kV Titan Krios electron microscope (FEI) and a K2 Summit direct electron detector (Gatan). A series of micrographs were recorded as videos (32 frames; 5.76 s) under super-resolution counting mode at a calibrated magnification of 130,000×, resulting in a pixel size of 0.54 Å per pixel. Raw images of SFTSV-L particles in vitreous ice were recorded at −1.5 to −2.5 μm defocus. Statistics for data collection and refinement are summarized in Supplementary Table 1.

#### Cryo-EM image processing.
Individual frames from each micrograph video were aligned and averaged using MotionCor2 (ref. [36]) to produce drift-corrected 2× binned images. Particles were picked and selected in RELION 3.0 (ref. [37]) from dose-weighted micrographs with a box size of 220 pixels, and the contrast transfer function parameters were estimated using CTFFIND4 (ref. [38]). Subsequent steps for particle picking and two- and three-dimensional classification, and for reconstruction of the final selected particles, were performed with THUNDER [39]. A total of 147,344 particles (out of 1,656,484) remained, and homogeneous three-dimensional refinement of this particle stack resulted in a 3.4-Å map to identify the main chain tracing. The final resolution was assessed using the gold-standard Fourier shell correlation (FSC = 0.143) with RELION 3.0 (ref. [37]). The data quality and particle distribution was also analysed by 3DFSC [40] and cryo-EF [41].

#### Model building and refinement.
To solve the structure of the SFTSV-L protein, the structure of the RdRp region of LACV-L 1750 (ref. [21]) was manually placed and rigid-body fitted into the cryo-EM density map using UCSF Chimera [42]. The structures of the RVFV-L CBD and Toscana virus endoN domain [43] were also manually aligned and rigid-body fitted into the cryo-EM density. Other parts of the model were manually built in Coot [44] with the guidance of the cryo-EM density, except for several loops and the most N- or C-terminal regions (residues 1–24, 58–72, 392–398, 428–449, 1,038–1,045, 1,314–1,320, 1,484–1,489, 1,572–1,615, 1,658–1,669, 1,680–1,686, 1,889–1,896, 1,991–2,002, 2,020–2,027, 2,035–2,038 and 2,050–2,084) that could not be traced due to the lack of interpretable densities. Manual model building was subsequently performed using Coot in combination with real space refinement with Phenix [45] to replace the corresponding amino acids in the model with those from SFTSV-L. The density maps were kept constant during the entire fitting process and only the atomic coordinates were subjected to refinement. The data validation statistics are shown in Supplementary Table 1.

#### Surface plasmon resonance.
Surface plasmon resonance analyses were carried out using a Biacore T200 (GE Healthcare) with a flow rate of 30 μl min⁻¹ at 25°C in phosphate-buffered saline. SFTSV-L and mutated proteins suspended in sodium acetate buffer (pH 4.0) were immobilized on a CM5 sensor chip by amide coupling. Different concentrations (indicated in Fig. 2g,h) of ribo m⁷G cap analogue (Promega) flowed over the chip. The binding affinity was determined and curves were generated by BIAevaluation software (GE Healthcare).

#### Reporting Summary.
Further information on research design is available in the Nature Research Reporting Summary linked to this article.

---

### Data availability
The cryo-EM density maps and structures were deposited in the Electron Microscopy Data Bank and Protein Data Bank with the accession codes **0828** and **6L42**, respectively. The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author upon request.

---

Received: 25 November 2019; Accepted: 19 March 2020; Published online: 27 April 2020

NATURE MICROBIOLOGY | www.nature.com/naturemicrobiology

References

1. Morin, B., Kranzusch, P. J., Rahmeh, A. A. & Whelan, S. P. The polymerase of negative-stranded RNA viruses. *Curr. Opin. Virol.* **3**, 103–110 (2013).
2. Li, J., Rahmeh, A., Morelli, M. & Whelan, S. P. A conserved motif in region V of the large polymerase proteins of nonsegmented negative-sense RNA viruses that is essential for mRNA capping. *J. Virol.* **82**, 775–784 (2008).
3. Ogino, T. & Banerjee, A. K. Unconventional mechanism of mRNA capping by the RNA-dependent RNA polymerase of vesicular stomatitis virus. *Mol. Cell* **25**, 85–97 (2007).
4. Li, J., Wang, J. T. & Whelan, S. P. A unique strategy for mRNA cap methylation used by vesicular stomatitis virus. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **103**, 8493–8498 (2006).
5. Morin, B. et al. The N-terminal domain of the arenavirus L protein is an RNA endonuclease essential in mRNA transcription. *PLoS Pathog.* **6**, e1001038 (2010).
6. Gogrefe, N., Reindl, S., Gunther, S. & Rosenthal, M. Structure of a functional cap-binding domain in Rift Valley fever virus L protein. *PLoS Pathog.* **15**, e1007829 (2019).
7. Yuan, P. et al. Crystal structure of an avian influenza polymerase PA~N~ reveals an endonuclease active site. *Nature* **458**, 909–913 (2009).
8. Dias, A. et al. The cap-snatching endonuclease of influenza virus polymerase resides in the PA subunit. *Nature* **458**, 914–918 (2009).
9. Abudurexiti, A. et al. Taxonomy of the order Bunyavirales: update 2019. *Arch. Virol.* **164**, 1949–1965 (2019).
10. Guu, T. S., Zheng, W. & Tao, Y. J. Bunyavirus: structure and replication. *Adv. Exp. Biol.* **726**, 245–266 (2012).
11. Fodor, E. The RNA polymerase of influenza A virus: mechanisms of viral transcription and replication. *Acta Virol.* **57**, 113–122 (2013).
12. Liang, B. et al. Structure of the L protein of vesicular stomatitis virus from electron cryomicroscopy. *Cell* **162**, 314–327 (2015).
13. Gilman, M. S. A. et al. Structure of the respiratory syncytial virus polymerase complex. *Cell* **179**, 193–204 (2019).
14. Pan, J. et al. Structure of the human metapneumovirus polymerase phosphoprotein complex. *Nature* **577**, 275–279 (2020).
15. Pflug, A., Guilligay, D., Reich, S. & Cusack, S. Structure of influenza A polymerase bound to the viral RNA promoter. *Nature* **516**, 355–360 (2014).
16. Reich, S. et al. Structural insight into cap-snatching and RNA synthesis by influenza polymerase. *Nature* **516**, 361–366 (2014).
17. Chang, S. et al. Cryo-EM structure of influenza virus RNA polymerase complex at 4.3 Å resolution. *Mol. Cell* **57**, 925–935 (2015).
18. Fan, H. et al. Structures of influenza A virus RNA polymerase offer insight into viral genome replication. *Nature* **573**, 287–290 (2019).
19. Hengrung, N. et al. Crystal structure of the RNA-dependent RNA polymerase from influenza C virus. *Nature* **527**, 114–117 (2015).
20. Peng, Q. et al. Structural insight into RNA synthesis by influenza D polymerase. *Nat. Microbiol.* **4**, 1750–1759 (2019).
21. Gerlach, P., Malet, H., Cusack, S. & Reguera, J. Structural insights into bunyavirus replication and its regulation by the vRNA promoter. *Cell* **161**, 1267–1279 (2015).
22. Yu, X. J. et al. Fever with thrombocytopenia associated with a novel bunyavirus in China. *N. Engl. J. Med.* **364**, 1523–1532 (2011).
23. Jiao, L. et al. Structure of severe fever with thrombocytopenia syndrome virus nucleocapsid protein in complex with suramin reveals therapeutic potentials. *J. Virol.* **87**, 6829–6839 (2013).
24. Zhou, H., Sun, Y., Guo, Y. & Lou, Z. Structural perspective on the formation of ribonucleoprotein complex in negative-sense single-stranded RNA viruses. *Trends Microbiol.* **21**, 475–484 (2013).
25. Zhou, H. et al. The nucleoprotein of severe fever with thrombocytopenia syndrome virus processes an oligomeric ring to facilitate RNA encapsidation. *Protein Cell* **4**, 445–455 (2013).
26. Halldorsson, S. et al. Structure of a phleboviral envelope glycoprotein reveals a consolidated model of membrane fusion. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **113**, 7154–7159 (2016).
27. Wu, Y. et al. Structures of phlebovirus glycoprotein Gn and identification of a neutralizing antibody epitope. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **114**, E7564–E7573 (2017).
28. *2018 Annual Review of Diseases Prioritized Under the Research and Development Blueprint* (World Health Organization, 2018); http://www.who.int/emergencies/diseases/2018prioritization-report.pdf
29. Guilligay, D. et al. The structural basis for cap binding by influenza virus polymerase subunit PB2. *Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol.* **15**, 500–506 (2008).
30. Thierry, E. et al. Influenza polymerase can adopt an alternative configuration involving a radical repacking of PB2 domains. *Mol. Cell* **61**, 125–137 (2016).

31. Knizewski, L., Kinch, L. N., Grishin, N. V., Rychlewski, L. & Ginalski, K. Realm of PD-(D/E)XK nuclease superfamily revisited: detection of novel families with modified transitive meta profile searches. *BMC Struct. Biol.* **7**, 40 (2007).
32. Reguera, J., Weber, F. & Cusack, S. Bunyaviridae RNA polymerases (L-protein) have an N-terminal, influenza-like endonuclease domain, essential for viral cap-dependent transcription. *PLoS Pathog.* **6**, e1001101 (2010).
33. Wallat, G. D. et al. High-resolution structure of the N-terminal endonuclease domain of the Lassa virus L polymerase in complex with magnesium ions. *PLoS ONE* **9**, e87577 (2014).
34. Tao, Y., Farsetta, D. L., Nibert, M. L. & Harrison, S. C. RNA synthesis in a cage—structural studies of reovirus polymerase λ3. *Cell* **111**, 733–745 (2002).
35. Gong, P. & Peersen, O. B. Structural basis for active site closure by the poliovirus RNA-dependent RNA polymerase. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **107**, 22505–22510 (2010).
36. Zheng, S. Q. et al. MotionCor2: anisotropic correction of beam-induced motion for improved cryo-electron microscopy. *Nat. Methods* **14**, 331–332 (2017).
37. Scheres, S. H. RELION: implementation of a Bayesian approach to cryo-EM structure determination. *J. Struct. Biol.* **180**, 519–530 (2012).
38. Rohou, A. & Grigorieff, N. CTFFIND4: fast and accurate defocus estimation from electron micrographs. *J. Struct. Biol.* **192**, 216–221 (2015).
39. Hu, M. et al. A particle-filter framework for robust cryo-EM 3D reconstruction. *Nat. Methods* **15**, 1083–1089 (2018).
40. Tan, Y. Z. et al. Addressing preferred specimen orientation in single-particle cryo-EM through tilting. *Nat. Methods* **14**, 793–796 (2017).
41. Naydenova, K. & Russo, C. J. Measuring the effects of particle orientation to improve the efficiency of electron cryomicroscopy. *Nat. Commun.* **8**, 629 (2017).
42. Pettersen, E. F. et al. UCSF Chimera—a visualization system for exploratory research and analysis. *J. Comput. Chem.* **25**, 1605–1612 (2004).
43. Jones, R. et al. Structure and function of the Toscana virus cap-snatching endonuclease. *Nucleic Acids Res.* **47**, 10914–10930 (2019).
44. Emsley, P., Lohkamp, B., Scott, W. G. & Cowtan, K. Features and development of Coot. *Acta Crystallogr. D Biol. Crystallogr.* **66**, 486–501 (2010).
45. Afonine, P. V. et al. Towards automated crystallographic structure refinement with phenix.refine. *Acta Crystallogr. D Biol. Crystallogr.* **68**, 352–367 (2012).
46. Sehnal, D. et al. MOLE 2.0: advanced approach for analysis of biomacromolecular channels. *J. Cheminformatics* **5**, 39 (2013).


Acknowledgements

We thank the Computing and Cryo-EM platforms of the Tsinghua University Branch of the National Center for Protein Sciences (Beijing) for cryo-EM sample preparation and screening. We acknowledge computational support from Beijing Computational Science Research Center (CSRC) and Beijing Three Axis Space Technology Co. Ltd. This work was supported by the National Program on Key Research Project of China (grant nos. 2020YFA0707500, 2017YFC0840300, 2018YFA0507200 and 2018YFE0200402), National Natural Science Foundation of China (31971126, 31770309, 81520108019 and 31670731) and Nature Science Foundation of Hubei Province (2019CFB790).


Author contributions

Z.L., Z.R. and F.D. conceived of the project and designed the experiments. Panpan Wang, L.L., L.Y., Y.H., S.S. and Y.G. expressed and purified the proteins. Panpan Wang, L.L. and A.L. prepared the cryo-EM sample. Panpan Wang, A.L., M.H., H.L., C.L. and Peiyi Wang collected and processed the cryo-EM data and built the model. Panpan Wang and Y.L. performed the surface plasmon resonance experiments. Z.L. wrote the manuscript. All authors discussed the experiments and read and approved the manuscript.


Competing interests

The authors declare no competing interests.


Additional information

Extended data is available for this paper at [https://doi.org/10.1038/s41564-020-0712-2](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41564-020-0712-2). Supplementary information is available for this paper at [https://doi.org/10.1038/s41564-020-0712-2](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41564-020-0712-2). Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to F.D., Z.R. or Z.L. Reprints and permissions information is available at [www.nature.com/reprints](http://www.nature.com/reprints). Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations. © The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Limited 2020

NATURE MICROBIOLOGY

ARTICLES

a  
100 nm  

b  
3 Å  

c  

d  

W1198  
A1200  
H1203  
C1225  
Y1221  
Y1218  

e  
Fourier Shell Correlation  
--- FSC Corrected --- FSC Unmasked --- Map vs Model  
--- FSC Masked --- Phase Randomized Masked  

FSC = 0.500  
FSC = 0.143  

Resolution (angstrom)  

f  

g  
Histogram and Directional FSC Plot for sfl-3DFSC  
Sphericity = 0.950 out of 1. Global resolution = 3.39 Å.  

--- Histogram of Directional FSC --- Global FSC  
--- ±1 S.D. from Mean of Directional FSC  

h  
5,875 Micrographs  
↓  
autopicking  
1,656,484 particles  
↓  
manually removing  
bad images/particles  
1,365,425 particles  
↓  
multiple rounds of  
2D classification  
893,256 particles  
↓  
initial model  

3D classification  

202,958 particles  
337,164 particles  
227,136 particles  
125,998 bad particles  

37,956 particles  
164,297 particles  
24,883 particles  

C-shaped  
O-shaped  
final map  
for model  

88,840 particles  
115,985 particles  
147,344 particles  

Extended Data Fig. 1 | See next page for caption.

NATURE MICROBIOLOGY | www.nature.com/naturemicrobiology

ARTICLES

Extended Data Fig. 1 | Cryo-EM reconstruction. **a**, Raw image of SFTSV-L particles in vitreous ice recorded at defocus values of -1.5 to -2.5 μm. Scale bar, 100 nm. **b**, Power spectrum of the image shown in (**a**), with plot of the rotationally averaged intensity versus resolution. White circle indicates the spatial frequency corresponding to 3.0 Å resolution. **c**, Representative class averages. The edge of each square is 238 Å. **d**, Overview of SFTSV-L reconstruction is shown in the left panel. The close-up view of a representative region in the RdRp region is shown in the right panel. Density is shown as gray mesh; the polypeptide of the refined model is displayed as colored sticks (carbons, green; nitrogen, blue; oxygen, red). **e**, Fourier shell correlation (FSC) of the final 3D reconstruction following gold standard refinement. FSC curves are plotted before (red) and after (green) masking in addition to post-correction (blue), accounting for the effect of the mask using phase randomization. **f**, Local resolution estimation was performed with Relion 2.1. **g**, The 3DFSC sphericity was analyzed with 3DFSC². **h**, The data processing scheme used to obtain the final map.

NATURE MICROBIOLOGY | ARTICLES

RdRp

endoN
N

lariat
C
arm

blocker

CBD

Extended Data Fig. 2 | Secondary structure diagram of SFTSV-L. Secondary structure elements along the SFTSV-L sequence are shown as cylinders and arrows for α-helices and β-strands, respectively. Domains are colored as in Fig. 1.

ARTICLES                                                                 NATURE MICROBIOLOGY

a PA-C-like                                                                 b RdRp
RdRp                                                                         PA-C-like
core                                                                         core
linker                                                                       linker
PB2-N-like                                                                   PB2-N-like
endoN                                                                        endoN
CBD                                                                          CBD
lariat                                                                       lariat
arm                                                                          arm
blocker

c                                                                            d
PA-C-like                                                                    L1971
RdRp                                                                         G1984
core                                                                         T1950
linker                                                                       E1942
lariat                                                                       L2034
PB2-N-like                                                                   R2049
endoN
arm
blocker
CBD

Extended Data Fig. 3 | The lariat domain. a–c The lariat domain is represented as a cartoon diagram in red covered by cryo-EM density in three views. Other domains of SFTSV-L are covered by molecular surface with the same color as in Fig. 1. d, A close-up view of the lariat domain covered by the cryo-EM density. Residues for tracing the direction of the polypeptide are indicated by dots with labels.

NATURE MICROBIOLOGY ARTICLES

a  
RdRp  
PA-C-like  
core  

linker  

endoN  

lariat  
arm  
blocker  

180°  

PB2-N-like  

90°  

CBD  

b  
■ SFTSV endoN  
■ LACV ednoN  

RdRp  

~180°  

~80 Å  

~90°  

CBD  

cap-binding  
pocket  

Extended Data Fig. 4 | See next page for caption.

NATURE MICROBIOLOGY | www.nature.com/naturemicrobiology

ARTICLES

Extended Data Fig. 4 | The endoN domain. **a**, The contacts between SFTSV-L endoN domain and other domains. The structure of SFTSV-L is displayed with the same color scheme in Fig. 1. The endoN domain is covered by a molecular surface, and other domains are shown as cartoon diagrams. The back view and the side view of the endoN domain are shown in the right panels. The interdomain interfaces on the endoN domain are indicated by the same color as each of the interacting domains, including the RdRp core, the PB2-N-like domain, the arm domain and the blocker motif, the CBD domain and the lariat domain. **b**, The orientation of the endoN domains in SFTSV-L and LACV-L. The structures of SFTSV-L and LACV-L 1750 are aligned according to their RdRp domains. The endoN domains of SFTSV-L and LACV-L are covered by molecular surface in forest green and smudge green, respectively. The active residues of each endoN domain are highlighted in orange. The polypeptide of other domains in SFTSV-L was represented as cartoon diagram. The cap-binding pocket in the CBD domain is highlighted by a red dotted circle. The distance from the cap-binding pocket to the position of the active center of LACV-L endoN domain is approximately 80 Å.

NATURE MICROBIOLOGY ARTICLES

a
b
c

arm
CBD
Mid

arm
blocker
Arg-finger
CBD
cap-binding
pocket
PB2 cap-627
linker

CBD
cap-binding
pocket
Mid

CBD
cap-binding
pocket
Mid
PB2 cap-627
linker

SFTSV
FluA-vRNA (4WSB)
FluB1-vRNA (4WSA)

d
e

90°
90°

CBD
Mid
PB2 cap-627
linker

CBD
cap-binding
pocket
Mid

CBD
cap-binding
pocket
PB2 cap-627
linker

FluB-cRNA (5EPI)
FluC-apo (5D98)

Extended Data Fig. 5 | See next page for caption.

NATURE MICROBIOLOGY | www.nature.com/naturemicrobiology

ARTICLES

Extended Data Fig. 5 | Orientation of the CBD domain and the blocker motif. This figure is related to Fig. 2. The structures of SFTSV-L a, FluA-vRNA PA-PB1-PB2 complex b, FluB1-vRNA PA-PB1-PB2 complex c, FluB-cRNA PA-PB1-PB2 complex d, and apo FluC PA-PB1-PB2 complex e, are aligned according to their CBD domains and are shown in the same orientation in the upper panels. Because the CBD domains from these structures are located different site from their own RdRp cores, other domains of these structures are in significantly distinct positions. In the lower panels, the CBD domain and its interacting fragments in these structures are shown in detail. The CBD domains are covered by molecular surface, and the other fragments are shown as cartoon diagrams. The residues constituting the cap-binding pockets are highlighted in red and the PB2 cap-627 linker³ is in blue. Note, the orientation of the detailed illustrations for FluB1 (c), FluB (d) and FluC (e) has a ~90° clockwise rotation for clear presentation. The residues occupy the cap-binding pockets of SFTSV-L and apo FluC PA-PB1-PB2 complex are displayed as spheres.

NATURE MICROBIOLOGY                                                                 ARTICLES

PB2-N-like                                      RdRp core                                       PA-C-like

Bridge                                          α-ribbon                                       priming
                                              Finger node                                     loop
Lid                                             Fingers                                        Clamp
Thumb ring                                      Thumb                                         vRBL
                                              Palm                                           core
                                                                                              lobe

SFTSV

Bridge                                          α-ribbon                                       priming
                                              Finger node                                     loop
Lid                                             Fingers                                        Clamp
Thumb ring                                      Thumb                                         vRBL
                                              Palm                                           core
                                                                                              lobe

LACV (5AMR)

PB2-Nter                                        β-ribbon                                       priming
                                              β-hairpin                                      loop
Lid                                             Thumb                                         Arch
PB2-N                                           Fingers                                        lobe 2
                                              Palm                                           lobe 1

FLUA (4WSB)

Extended Data Fig. 6 | Comparison of subdomains in the RdRp region. The structures of the RdRp region from SFTSV-L, LACV-L and IAV PA-PB1-PB2 complex are in the same orientation and color scheme as in Fig. 4b. The PA-C-like (or PA-C) domain, the RdRp core, and the PB2-N-like (or PB2-N) domain are shown separately in the right, middle and left panels.

NATURE MICROBIOLOGY | www.nature.com/naturemicrobiology

ARTICLES

Extended Data Fig. 7 | Comparison of the priming loop. a-d. The subdomains of the RdRp core and the PA-C-like domain of SFTSV-L (a), LACV-L (PDB code: 5AMR) (c) and FluA PA-PB1-PB2 (PDB code: 4WSB) (d) are covered by a molecular surface with the same color scheme as that in Fig. 4b. The priming loops in three structures are shown as white cartoons. The priming loop in SFTSV-L is enlarged and is covered with cryo-EM density in (b). The RdRp catalytic centers of the three polymerases are highlighted by the white circles. e, Density of motif F. The RdRp motifs A, B, D, F, H of SFTSV-L are shown as cartoon diagram with the same color scheme as that of Fig. 5a. Motif F is covered by the cryo-EM density.

NATURE MICROBIOLOGY | ARTICLES

Extended Data Fig. 8 | The active site of the RdRp domain. **a**, The details of the RdRp motifs of SFTSV-L. This figure is generally the same as Fig. 5a, with one exception that the cation, assumed to be a magnesium ion, is shown as a red sphere. In contrast, two catalytic manganese ions from the polio virus elongation complex structure⁴ are shown as black spheres. **b**, The bound cation and surrounding residues are covered by cryo-EM densities. The bonds formed between SFTSV-L polypeptide and the cation are labeled with distance. **c**, The electrostatic surface potential of SFTSV-L RdRp tunnels. The positive surface is colored blue, the negative surface, red, with limits ±70 kbT/ec. The regions belong to the NTP entry, template entry, template exit and product exit tunnels are indicated out by dashed lines. **d**, The entrance of NTP entry tunnel, and **e**, the entrance of template entry tunnel. Colors are as in Fig. 4. Superposition of LACV-L 1750 (5AMR) structure shows the position of the 5' vRNA (gray cartoon) in (**b**). The approximate positions of NTP and template entry tunnels are bordered by dashed lines.

ARTICLES                                                                 NATURE MICROBIOLOGY

a
NTP
ENTRY
↓
TEMPLATE
ENTRY
↓
TEMPLATE
EXIT
→
PRODUCT
EXIT

b
NTP
ENTRY
↓
TEMPLATE
ENTRY
↓
TEMPLATE
EXIT
→
PRODUCT
EXIT
←

c
linker
RdRp
PRODUCT
EXIT
PB2-N-like
endoU

d
linker
RdRp
PRODUCT
EXIT
PB2-N-like

Extended Data Fig. 9 | Impact of the endoN domain on the product exit tunnel. This figure is related to Fig. 5b. a, Same as Fig. 5b, the tunnels for template entry, NTP entry, product exit, and template exit of SFVSV-L are indicated with violet, salmon red, orange and green labels in (a). b, A model without the endoN domain and residues 206-217 in the linker region was generated, and its tunnels were calculated and shown as the same color scheme in (a). The bottom views of the product exit tunnel in SFTSV-L c, or the model without the endoN domain and linker residues d, is shown.

NATURE MICROBIOLOGY ARTICLES

a

RdRp
catalytic center

endoU

lariat
arm blocker

CBD

1

2

3

4

viral mRNA

b

PA-C like
linker
arm
endoN
lariat
SFTSV-L

RdRp
Ps
PB2-N like
CBD

RdRp
PRNTase
RSV-L-P (6PZK)

Extended Data Fig. 10 | See next page for caption.

NATURE MICROBIOLOGY | www.nature.com/naturemicrobiology

ARTICLES

Extended Data Fig. 10 | Proposed models for transcription initiation and co-factor binding. **a**, A proposed speculative model of SFTSV transcription initiation. SFTSV-L is schematically represented, with the cap-binding pocket (red hollow stars) in the CBD domain, the RdRp catalytic center (deep red dots) and the active center of the endoN domain (orange stars) as marked. (1) During the early event of the cap-snatching process, the lariat domain loses its interaction with the RdRp domain to allow the L protein to transform into a fully open state. Meanwhile, the endoN domain is pulled out from the central position of the SFTSV-L, and the arm domain shifts to induce the removal of the Arg-finger in the block motif from the cap-binding pocket of the CBD domain. (2) After the host mRNA is captured, the endoN domain employs an ~180° rotation along its long axis, thus causing its active center to face the nucleotide chain of host mRNA, and cleaves it by using two cations as cofactors chelated by the conserved H...PD...D/E...K motif. If the structures of LACV-L 1750 and SFTSV-L are aligned using their RdRp cores as the reference, the cap-binding pocket in the SFTSV-L CBD domain will have a distance of ~80 Å relative to the position of the LACV-L endoN domain active center (Supplementary Fig. 5). We reason the lack of C-terminal parts in the structure of LACV-L 1750 abolishes the extensive interdomain interactions to maintain the compact structure and allow its endoN domain to be in a fully open state. (3) Then, the CBD anchors the snatched cap structure with additional nucleotides and transfers the 3' end nucleotide chain to the RdRp catalytic cavity. (4) The transcription of virus mRNA is thus elongated with the guidance by vRNA as the template, and the products will be released from the product exit tunnel. In this stage, the endoN domain is likely to stay out of the center of the L protein, allowing the product exit tunnel to be in a fully open state. Meanwhile, the lariat motif will go back to its initial state. **b**, The structures of SFTSV-L and RSV-L-P complex<sup>5</sup> are aligned by their RdRp core and shown in the same orientation. The colors for SFTSV-L domains are the same as those in Fig. 1. The RdRp and the PRNTase domains of RSV-L are shown in pale cyan and cyan, respectively. The P proteins bound to RSV-L is shown as cartoon diagram, and its structurally equivalent position in SFTSV-L is framed out.

# Reporting Summary

Nature Research wishes to improve the reproducibility of the work that we publish. This form provides structure for consistency and transparency in reporting. For further information on Nature Research policies, see [Authors & Referees](https://www.nature.com/nature-research/editorial-policies/authors-referees) and the [Editorial Policy Checklist](https://www.nature.com/nature-research/editorial-policies/editorial-policy-checklist).

## Statistics

For all statistical analyses, confirm that the following items are present in the figure legend, table legend, main text, or Methods section.

- [ ] The exact sample size ($n$) for each experimental group/condition, given as a discrete number and unit of measurement
- [ ] A statement on whether measurements were taken from distinct samples or whether the same sample was measured repeatedly
- [ ] The statistical test(s) used AND whether they are one- or two-sided
  - Only common tests should be described solely by name; describe more complex techniques in the Methods section.
- [ ] A description of all covariates tested
- [ ] A description of any assumptions or corrections, such as tests of normality and adjustment for multiple comparisons
- [ ] A full description of the statistical parameters including central tendency (e.g., means) or other basic estimates (e.g., regression coefficient)
  - AND variation (e.g., standard deviation) or associated estimates of uncertainty (e.g., confidence intervals)
- [ ] For null hypothesis testing, the test statistic (e.g., $F$, $t$, $r$) with confidence intervals, effect sizes, degrees of freedom, and $P$ value noted
  - Give $P$ values as exact values whenever suitable.
- [ ] For Bayesian analysis, information on the choice of priors and Markov chain Monte Carlo settings
- [ ] For hierarchical and complex designs, identification of the appropriate level for tests and full reporting of outcomes
- [ ] Estimates of effect sizes (e.g., Cohen's $d$, Pearson's $r$), indicating how they were calculated

Our web collection on [statistics for biologists](https://www.nature.com/collections/qghlrg) contains articles on many of the points above.

## Software and code

Policy information about [availability of computer code](https://www.nature.com/nature-research/editorial-policies/software-code)

### Data collection

1. Serial EM
2. BiacoreT200

### Data analysis

1. BiacoreT200
2. MotionCor2
3. RELION 3.0
4. CTFFIND4
5. THUNDER
6. UCSF Chimera
7. Coot
8. Phenix

For manuscripts utilizing custom algorithms or software that are central to the research but not yet described in published literature, software must be made available to editors/reviewers. We strongly encourage code deposition in a community repository (e.g., GitHub). See the Nature Research [guidelines for submitting code & software](https://www.nature.com/nature-research/editorial-policies/software-code) for further information.

## Data

Policy information about [availability of data](https://www.nature.com/nature-research/editorial-policies/data-availability)

All manuscripts must include a **data availability statement**. This statement should provide the following information, where applicable:

- Accession codes, unique identifiers, or web links for publicly available datasets
- A list of figures that have associated raw data
- A description of any restrictions on data availability

web links for publicly available datasets: PDB, NCBI, pubmed  
Accession codes: The cryo-EM density maps and the structures were deposited into the Electron Microscopy Data Bank (EMDB) and Protein Data Bank (PDB) with the following accession numbers: EMD-0828, PDB ID 6L42;  
Figures with raw data: 1. Supplementary Figure 1 has raw data of image 2. Figure 3 has raw data of SPR (surface plasma resonance)

# Field-specific reporting

Please select the one below that is the best fit for your research. If you are not sure, read the appropriate sections before making your selection.

- ☑ Life sciences
- ☐ Behavioural & social sciences
- ☐ Ecological, evolutionary & environmental sciences

For a reference copy of the document with all sections, see [nature.com/documents/nr-reporting-summary-flat.pdf](https://nature.com/documents/nr-reporting-summary-flat.pdf)

## Life sciences study design

All studies must disclose on these points even when the disclosure is negative.

| Sample size | 1. predict the molecular weight of sample by calculating using ExPASy  
2. run SDS-PAGE to confirm the size of sample compared to protein marker  
3. measure the diameter of sample using negative staining |
| --- | --- |
| Data exclusions | None |
| Replication | use RELION 3.0 and THUNDER to refine the electronic density map of the final structure repeatedly to make sure the accuracy and reproducibility of the result |
| Randomization | 1. The protein purification, cell culture, the preparation of cryo-EM sample and data collection were performed following the standard procedure.  
2. use random point to pick particles from images to avoid artificial tendency |
| Blinding | The investigators were acknowledged the samples when they collected cryo-EM data and performed validation. Because we didn't select and exclude data manually for further analyses, this is not relevant with our study and conclusion. |

## Reporting for specific materials, systems and methods

We require information from authors about some types of materials, experimental systems and methods used in many studies. Here, indicate whether each material, system or method listed is relevant to your study. If you are not sure if a list item applies to your research, read the appropriate section before selecting a response.

### Materials & experimental systems

| n/a | Involved in the study |
| --- | --- |
| ☑ | Antibodies |
| ☑ | Eukaryotic cell lines |
| ☑ | Palaeontology |
| ☑ | Animals and other organisms |
| ☑ | Human research participants |
| ☑ | Clinical data |

### Methods

| n/a | Involved in the study |
| --- | --- |
| ☒ | ChIP-seq |
| ☒ | Flow cytometry |
| ☒ | MRI-based neuroimaging |

## Eukaryotic cell lines

Policy information about [cell lines](https://cell-lines)

| Cell line source(s) | sf9 insect cell line |
| --- | --- |
| Authentication | sf9 insect cell line used in this work in kept in our lab. |
| Mycoplasma contamination | using PCR to make sure that the sf9 insect cell line is without Mycoplasma contamination |
| Commonly misidentified lines (See [ICLAC](https://iclac.org/) register) | None |
