
The Emerging Threat of (Micro) Thrombosis in COVID-19 and Its Therapeutic Implications

James D McFadyen${}^{1,2,3*}$; Hannah Stevens${}^{1,2,3*}$, Karlheinz Peter${}^{1,3,4}$

${}^{1}$Atherothrombosis and Vascular Biology Program, Baker Heart and Diabetes Institute;  
${}^{2}$Clinical Hematology Department, Alfred Hospital; ${}^{3}$Department of Medicine, Monash University, and;  
${}^{4}$Department of Cardiology, Alfred Hospital, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia 3004.

*These authors contributed equally to this work

Running title: Thrombosis in COVID-19

Circulation Research

Subject Terms:
Inflammation
Ischemic Stroke
Mechanisms
Thrombosis
Vascular Biology

Address correspondence to:
Dr. Karlheinz Peter
Atherothrombosis & Vascular Biology Program
Baker Heart & Diabetes Institute
75 Commercial Road
PO Box 6492
Melbourne VIC 3004 Australia
Tel.: +61 3 8532 1490
karlheinz.peter@baker.edu.au

DOI: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.120.317447

ABSTRACT

The recent emergence of SARS-CoV-2 and the ensuing global pandemic has presented a health emergency of unprecedented magnitude. Recent clinical data has highlighted that COVID-19 is associated with a significant risk of thrombotic complications ranging from microvascular thrombosis, venous thromboembolic disease and stroke. Importantly, thrombotic complications are markers of severe COVID-19 and are associated with multi-organ failure and increased mortality. The evidence to date supports the concept that the thrombotic manifestations of severe COVID-19 is due to the ability of SARS-CoV-2 to invade endothelial cells via angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2), which is expressed on the endothelial cell surface. However, in patients with COVID-19 the subsequent endothelial inflammation, complement activation, thrombin generation, platelet and leukocyte recruitment, and the initiation of innate and adaptive immune responses culminate in immunothrombosis, ultimately causing (micro)thrombotic complications such as deep vein thrombosis, pulmonary embolism and stroke. Accordingly, the activation of coagulation (e.g. as measured with plasma D-dimer) and thrombocytopenia have emerged as prognostic markers in COVID-19. Given thrombotic complications are central determinants of the high mortality rate in COVID-19, strategies to prevent thrombosis are of critical importance. A number of antithrombotic drugs have been proposed as potential therapies to prevent COVID-19-associated thrombosis, including, heparin, FXII inhibitors, fibrinolytic drugs, nafamostat and dipyridamole, many of which also possess pleiotropic anti-inflammatory or anti-viral effects. The growing awareness and mechanistic understanding of the prothrombotic state of COVID-19 patients is driving efforts to more stringent diagnostic screening for thrombotic complications and to the early institution of antithrombotic drugs, for both the prevention and therapy of thrombotic complications. The shifting paradigm of diagnostic and treatment strategies holds significant promise to reduce the burden of thrombotic complications and ultimately improve the prognosis for patients with COVID-19.

Keywords: Thrombosis, antithrombotic, antiplatelet, anticoagulation, virus, COVID-19, SARS-CoV-2, stroke, deep vein thrombosis, coagulopathy.

Nonstandard Abbreviations and Acronyms:
- acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS)
- receptor binding domain (RBD)
- activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT)
- venous thromboembolism (VTE)
- Pattern recognition receptors (PRR)
- toll-like receptors (TLR)
- pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs)
- danger-associated molecular patterns (DAMPs)
- tissue factor pathway inhibitor (TFPI)
- disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC)

DOI: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.120.317447 2

INTRODUCTION

The rapidly evolving COVID-19 global pandemic is one of the greatest public health challenges since the Spanish flu pandemic over 100 years ago. Since the discovery of the SARS-CoV-2, which causes COVID-19, millions of cases have been diagnosed worldwide resulting in hundreds of thousands of deaths. With no current effective therapy or vaccine for COVID-19, the enormous number of cases and deaths due to COVID-19 is likely to continue to increase. In this regard, although the adverse effects of COVID-19 were initially considered to primarily affect the respiratory tract by causing pneumonia and acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS), it has now become apparent that COVID-19 is associated with a prothrombotic state, which can manifest as microvascular thrombosis, venous or arterial thrombosis, the presence of which usually portends an adverse prognosis. Thus, there is an urgent need to understand how SARS-CoV-2 induces a prothrombotic state in order to develop effective therapeutic approaches for COVID-19-associated thrombosis. This review will detail the significant emerging clinical findings of the prothrombotic status of patients suffering from COVID-19. We then provide an overview of the inherent links between the immune response and thrombosis, and how these mechanisms may help explain the prothrombotic effects of SARS-CoV-2. Finally, we will use this data to explore available therapeutic approaches for the prevention and treatment of COVID-19-associated thrombosis. Given the relative lack of data to date demonstrating the precise mechanisms of the link between SARS-CoV-2 infection, thrombosis and clinical outcomes, we also highlight experimental data from other viral infections and thromboinflammatory disorders that are likely relevant to SARS-CoV-2 infection. Further research is urgently required to clearly define how SARS-CoV-2 infection results in thrombotic complications and how this impacts the disease course and severity. Therefore, this review will hopefully spark further interest and research, and importantly raise awareness of the importance of anticoagulation in patients with COVID-19 for both the prevention and treatment of thrombosis.

Coronaviruses causing human disease.

Since the beginning of the 21st century, three betacoronaviruses have been found to cause severe respiratory illness in humans, including SARS-CoV, MERS-CoV and now SARS-CoV-2. Coronaviruses reside in many animal hosts and can adapt to different species including humans. The proximal origin of SARS-CoV and SARS-CoV-2 is thought to be bats, while the reservoir host for MERS-CoV is the dromedary camel. Previous data suggests that in order for coronaviruses to exhibit efficient zoonotic transmission, the virus must undergo natural selection in an animal host (ie, intermediary species) such that it acquires features affording tropism to human tissue. To date, the intermediate host for SARS-CoV-2 is not known, however a closely related coronavirus to SARS-CoV-2 has been identified in Malayan pangolins. Moreover, it remains to be established whether SARS-CoV-2 has acquired genomic changes within an intermediate animal host before the occurrence of human transmission, or whether a SARS-CoV-2 progenitor may have undergone genomic changes during undetected human-to-human transmission, ultimately resulting in the current pandemic.

In humans, these coronaviruses gain entry into host cells by way of their transmembrane spike (S) glycoprotein, which comprises an S1 and S2 subunit (Figure 1). The S1 subunit is responsible for binding to the host cell receptor, and the S2 subunit assists with viral and host cell fusion. While the MERS-CoV S glycoprotein binds to DPP4 expressed on epithelial tissue, both SARS-CoV-2 and SARS-CoV bind to human cells via the angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE2) receptor. In addition to having different amino acid residues within the receptor binding domain (RBD) of the S protein compared to SARS-CoV, another novel structural feature of SARS-CoV-2, is the presence of a polybasic furin cleavage site, at the junction of S1 and S2. Cleavage of the S protein by cellular proteases including furin and transmembrane protease serine 2 (TMPRSS2), is speculated to play an important role in the infectivity and host range of SARS-CoV-2, although its functional significance regarding how this feature may mediate SAR-CoV-2 transmissibility and pathogenicity is yet to be fully elucidated. In the context of COVID-19-associated

thrombosis, understanding how these structural differences of SARS-CoV-2 may relate to the prothrombotic phenotype of COVID-19 is likely to be of fundamental importance given the significantly higher rates of thrombosis observed in SARS-CoV-2, compared to SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV infections.

## SARS-CoV-2 and its impact on coagulation.

An emerging threat of the COVID-19 pandemic is the propensity of SARS-CoV-2 to cause microvascular, venous and arterial thrombosis, and thereby exacerbating organ injury. Patients with severe COVID-19 appear to have a hyperinflammatory response, which is linked to the development of ARDS and multiorgan failure. However, it is now well appreciated that the innate immune response and thrombotic response are closely linked (Figure 2) and accordingly in patients with severe COVID-19 there is a correlation with elevated acute phase reactants, such as fibrinogen and C-reactive protein (CRP), which may contribute to COVID-associated hypercoagulability. Moreover, these biomarkers and acute phase reactants are associated with adverse clinical outcomes and increased severity of infection. In addition, abnormal coagulation parameters, including prolonged prothrombin time (PT) and activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT), are found to be associated with a higher mortality from COVID-19, demonstrating the significance of coagulation abnormalities in this population.

Plasma D-dimer measurement is emerging as a direct prognostic marker in COVID-19. In this regard, D-dimer, a fibrin degradation product released when plasmin cleaves cross-linked fibrin, appears to be higher in patients with severe COVID-19 when compared with non-severe disease. Subsequently, further studies have highlighted that patients who do not survive COVID-19 have an elevated D-dimer level, and D-dimer continues to increase during admission prior to death.

## Interplay between ethnicity, coagulation and thrombosis.

Epidemiological data has demonstrated that race and ethnicity influence the risk of developing venous thromboembolism (VTE), with African Americans found to have the highest rate of incident VTE when compared with other ethnic groups, and Asians and Pacific Islanders having a lower rate of VTE than Caucasians. The underlying mechanisms for these racial differences are likely complex and to date remain to be fully understood. Previous data has suggested that higher Factor VIII levels, von Willebrand Factor (vWF) levels and lower Protein C levels observed in African populations may account for some of the racial differences in thrombotic risk. In addition, recent data has highlighted important racial differences in platelet reactivity to thrombin, with platelets from African American patients commonly exhibiting polymorphisms in the protease activated receptor (PAR)4 that are associated with a markedly enhanced aggregation response to thrombin.

Interestingly, however, studies evaluating Chinese and Caucasian populations have demonstrated that abnormal coagulation parameters is associated with severe infection and poor prognosis from COVID-19 regardless of ethnicity. Additionally, as discussed below, rates of thrombosis in COVID-19 appear increased regardless of the ethnic group studied, but the recognized and striking differences between racial groups are important to consider in the context of the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic.

## COVID-19 and venous thrombosis.

Current research has highlighted that rates of VTE in patients with COVID-19 appear markedly increased. Indeed, the cumulative incidence of VTE is reported to be between 25–49% of patients with severe COVID-19 with pulmonary embolism (PE) being the most common thrombotic complication. Importantly, even with the use of VTE thromboprophylaxis, the risk of VTE appears to remain elevated. Interestingly, when compared with non-COVID ARDS, patients with COVID-19 ARDS have a substantially increased rate of PE diagnosis (2.1% versus 11.7%, respectively, p=0.008) and patients

DOI: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.120.317447
diagnosed with a thrombotic complication have more than a five-fold increase in all-cause mortality.²⁵,²⁷

Recently, two autopsy series have revealed that, in patients with COVID-19 who were not clinically suspected to have VTE ante mortem, deep vein thrombosis (DVT) or PE was a common finding at autopsy (reported in 7/12 [58%] and 11/11 [100%], respectively).²⁸,²⁹ Furthermore, a small study found massive PE to be the direct cause of death in over 30% of patients, highlighting the important interplay between COVID-19 and venous thrombosis.²⁹

## COVID-19 and arterial thrombosis.

In addition to VTE, there are emerging reports that the rate of arterial thromboembolism is increased in patients with COVID-19. Indeed, several groups have now reported rates of acute ischemic stroke of between 3–5% in patients admitted to hospital with COVID-19 and, in addition, preliminary reports suggest that these ischemic strokes are affecting younger people without traditional cardiovascular risk factors.²⁴,³⁰,³¹

Furthermore, acute myocardial injury commonly complicates the clinical course of severe COVID-19 and is reported in up to 20% of hospital presentations with an adverse impact on mortality.³² The underlying cause of myocardial injury is not yet evident, but it is speculated that in addition to potential damage from hypoxia or severe sepsis, SARS-CoV-2 may directly damage myocardial tissue by way of ACE2 signalling, which is discussed further below.³³ As such, controlling for underlying cardiovascular risk factors in patients with COVID-19 remains a priority due to the association with increased severity of disease, in addition to a 5-fold increase in mortality in patients with underlying cardiovascular disease.³⁴,³⁵

## COVID-19 and microvascular thrombosis.

In addition to macrovascular complications, there is a strong association of COVID-19 with microvascular thrombosis. Pulmonary microvascular thrombosis has been previously described in autopsies as a complication of severe ARDS and has subsequently been reported to complicate ARDS during outbreaks of other coronaviruses including SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV.³⁶⁻⁴¹ However, this feature appears more pronounced in severe SARS-CoV-2 infection, with histology from patients with COVID-19-associated respiratory failure demonstrating a 9-fold increase in the prevalence of alveolar capillary microthrombi when compared to patients with influenza.⁴² In this regard, autopsy findings have shown that, in addition to the expected features of diffuse alveolar damage found in ARDS, platelet-fibrin thrombi are a common microscopic finding in the small pulmonary vasculature, occurring in 80–100% of lungs examined at autopsy.⁴³⁻⁴⁵ In combination with other reported thrombotic events, the emerging microvascular thrombotic complications indicate a strong interaction between the SARS-CoV-2 and coagulation. Below, we review the underlying known mechanisms for thrombosis and the growing body of work that implicates SARS-CoV-2 as a key player driving many molecular processes underpinning pathological thrombosis.

## COVID-19 and the endothelium – hijacking the guardian of vascular integrity.

The primary site of human infection with SARS-CoV-2 is the lung, where S1 attaches with high affinity to ACE2 expressed on lung alveolar type II epithelial cells (Figure 1).¹,²,⁵ The replication and release of virus from infected cells results in pyroptosis, a highly inflammatory form of cell death that is a common feature among many cytopathic viruses. Pattern recognition receptors (PRR), such as toll-like receptors (TLR), subsequently detect the release of pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs), and intracellular danger-associated molecular patterns (DAMPs), such as ATP and deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA), which evoke an intense inflammatory reaction and triggers the release of proinflammatory chemokines and cytokines from neighbouring cells (Figure 1).⁴⁶ Strikingly, SARS-CoV-2 has been found to contain multiple single-stranded ribonucleic acid (RNA) fragments that can be recognized by TLR7 and

DOI: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.120.317447 5
TLR 8, similar in numbers to MERS-CoV but more than SARS-CoV.⁴⁷ The recognition of SARS-CoV-2 by these receptors may contribute to innate immune hyperactivation and the cytokine storm often seen in severe COVID-19.

In the setting of SARS-CoV-2 infection, the vascular endothelium appears to be targeted directly by the virus as well as the milieu of proinflammatory cytokines elicited by the immune response.⁴⁸ ACE2 is also expressed widely in extrapulmonary sites including blood vessels, heart, kidney and intestine.⁴⁹,⁵⁰ Accordingly, viral RNA has been detected in urine and stool samples from patients with COVID-19.⁵¹,⁵² In this regard, it is currently hypothesised that viral entry via endothelial-expressed ACE2 represents a mechanism by which the virus can enter and infect other tissues. Recent experimental data has highlighted the ability of COVID-19 to infect human endothelial cells. Indeed, human blood vessel organoids, which closely resemble human capillaries, contain viral RNA after exposure to COVID-19 *in vitro*.⁵³ Strikingly, the application of human recombinant soluble ACE2 markedly inhibited viral infection in human capillary organoids, pointing to a direct role for endothelial ACE2 in viral uptake in blood vessels. Intriguingly, the uptake of SARS-CoV-2 into cells is associated with the downregulation of ACE2 expression.⁵⁴,⁵⁵ This appears to play an important role in promoting a proinflammatory and prothrombotic milieu since ACE2 plays a pivotal role in regulating the renin-angiotensin system (RAS), by degrading angiotensin II to angiotensin 1-7. Whilst angiotensin II induces vasoconstriction and promotes a proinflammatory/prothrombotic phenotype, angiotensin 1-7 opposes these effects via binding to the MAS receptor, which is widely expressed including on endothelial cells and platelets.⁵⁵

Interestingly, patients with SARS-CoV-2 have been demonstrated to have increased levels of interleukin (IL)-6, IL-1β, IFNγ, monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 (MCP-1), macrophage inflammatory protein (MIP) and IP10 (CXCL10).¹¹ These proinflammatory cytokines can disrupt endothelial function and integrity leading to the release of vWF, upregulation of adhesion molecules such as intercellular adhesion molecule (ICAM)-1, integrin αvβ₃, P- and E-selectin and the production of endothelial cytokines and chemokines.⁵⁶,⁵⁷ Thus, the endothelium adopts a proinflammatory and procoagulant phenotype that supports the recruitment of platelets and leukocytes.⁵⁸,⁵⁹ Further, these changes are associated with the downregulation of the natural anticoagulants and corresponding upregulation of endothelial tissue factor (TF, CD142).⁵⁷ Moreover, a common finding in patients with COVID-19 is profound hypoxia. Although not formally tested in the context of SARS-CoV-2 infection, hypoxia is also likely to induce a prothrombotic endothelial phenotype since vascular hypoxia induces the activation of hypoxia inducible transcription factors (HIFs) that have been demonstrated to upregulate endothelial TF expression whilst downregulating the natural anticoagulants, Protein S and tissue factor pathway inhibitor (TFPI), thus imparting a procoagulant endothelial phenotype.⁶⁰

A recent case series of autopsy sections from patients with COVID-19 aligns with these experimental findings described above and highlight the ability of COVID-19 to infect endothelial cells and cause endothelial injury. Sections of lung, kidney and intestine from patients with COVID-19 demonstrate evidence of viral inclusion within endothelial cells, in addition to histological evidence of endothelial inflammation and cell death.⁴⁸ These data point to a direct role of COVID-19 in promoting systemic microvascular dysfunction which potentially promotes a prothrombotic state.⁶¹

Platelets - first responders in innate immunity.

Platelets are the second most abundant cell in the circulation with more than 1 trillion patrolling the vasculature at any one time. Therefore, in addition to their well appreciated role in mediating hemostasis, they serve important immune functions.⁶²,⁶³ Platelets are equipped with a number of receptors and granular proteins affording them important roles in the immune response. Indeed, activated platelets release a number of chemokines from their alpha and dense granules that facilitate leukocyte recruitment to sites of vascular injury/inflammation. These include CXCL1, platelet factor 4 (PF4/CXCL4), CXCL5,
NAP-2 (CXCL7), and CCL3, RANTES (CCL5) and CCL7.⁶⁴ The release of these chemokines by platelets enhances leukocyte recruitment and adhesion to platelet thrombi and also serves to modulate leukocyte functional responses. Moreover, whilst lacking a nucleus, platelets express IL-1β mRNA that can be translated and secreted as mature IL-1β by activated platelets.⁶⁵ Further supporting the recruitment of leukocytes, platelets express a range of receptors that facilitate leukocyte adhesion. Activated platelets express P-selectin which allows leukocyte tethering via leukocyte expressed P-selectin glycoprotein ligand 1 (PSGL-1), whilst glycoprotein (GP)-Ib facilitates stable adhesion via binding to the leukocyte integrin Mac-1.⁶⁶,⁶⁷ More recently, platelets have been observed to have the unique ability to migrate, scavenge and bundle bacteria up, thereby presenting them to neutrophils for phagocytosis and triggering the release of neutrophil extracellular traps (NETs), which can be induced by the P-selectin/PSGL-1 interaction as well as the recently described platelet GPIIb/IIIa (αIIbβ3, CD41/CD61) interaction with SLC44A2 (CTL-2) on neutrophils.⁶⁸⁻⁷⁰ Activated platelets further support coagulation by the release of inorganic polyphosphate (PolyP) from platelet dense granules which drives intravascular thrombin formation due to its ability to activate FXII.⁷¹ Lastly, activated platelets release microvesicles (MV), small particles ranging in size from 100-1000nm, that are enriched in lipid and can carry a range of ‘cargo’ including cytokines and chemokines, such as IL-1β, CXCL4, CXCL7 and CCL5, growth factors, microRNA and mitochondria.⁷² Moreover, CRP has recently been demonstrated to bind platelet MVs and activate complement via binding Clq.⁷³ Thus, the release of platelet MVs can regulate immune responses by mediating a range of target cells, particularly leukocytes and endothelial cells.

### COVID-19 and platelets – sentinels of viral infection and modulators of adaptive immunity

The most well studied effect of SARS-CoV-2 on platelets pertains to its effect on platelet number. Thrombocytopenia has been reported as a common finding in severe COVID-19 with a recent meta-analysis demonstrating that thrombocytopenia was associated with a fivefold increased risk of severe disease.⁷⁴,⁷⁵ The degree of thrombocytopenia in severe COVID-19 is usually mild, and does not appear to be a common feature in non-severe COVID-19.⁷⁴ Whether thrombocytopenia is a direct effect of SARS-CoV-2 or multifactorial in the setting of severe illness remains to be elucidated.

To date, there is a relative paucity of data regarding how SARS-CoV-2 may influence platelet function and potentially contribute to the prothrombotic phenotype observed in patients with COVID-19. However, there is now a large body of evidence demonstrating that viruses can directly interact with platelets thus potentially modulating their thrombotic and inflammatory function.⁷⁶,⁷⁷ Indeed, platelets are endowed with a large repertoire of adhesion receptors and immune receptors such as TLRs, FcγRIIa and CXC/CCL receptors in addition to possessing the ability to engulf virions. Influenza, like SARS-CoV-2, is a single stranded RNA virus which has been demonstrated to activate platelets via TLR7 and the FcγRIIa receptor. The activation of platelet TLR7 by viral RNA can evoke a range of functional responses which support thrombus formation, including platelet degranulation, the formation of platelet-leukocyte aggregates and platelet C3 release which in turn stimulates NETosis.⁷⁶⁻⁷⁹ In addition, previous work focusing on platelet activation by viruses has demonstrated that herpes simplex virus-1 (HSV-1) can induce thrombi via FcγRIIa on platelets and that the influenza strain H1N1 can activate platelets, both in a FcγRIIa-and thrombin-dependent fashion, thus leading to platelet GPIIb/IIIa activation, arachidonic acid metabolism and platelet MV release.⁸⁰,⁸¹ Corresponding mouse studies have emphasised an important role of platelets in H1N1 infection since mice infected with sublethal doses of H1N1 demonstrated large numbers of activated platelets in their lung tissue in addition to platelet-leukocyte aggregates and microvascular thrombosis.⁸² Interestingly, inhibition of the major platelet adhesion receptor, GPIIb/IIIa, resulted in a protection from fatal influenza and a reduction in lung inflammation and microvascular thrombosis.⁸² Moreover, recent studies have demonstrated that platelets from patients with influenza contain virus particles, whilst human platelets appear to have the ability to internalise the influenza virus.⁷⁸ Thus, a key outstanding area of research regarding the effects of SARS-CoV-2 and thrombosis pertains to how this

DOI: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.120.317447 7
virus interacts with platelets to mediate platelet number and function. In this regard, understanding if SARS-CoV-2 can be internalised and activate platelet TLR 7 and whether the ACE2 receptor is expressed on platelets remain core unanswered questions. This is likely to be critical to understanding the link between COVID-19 and the prothrombotic phenotype given the key role of platelets in co-ordinating the thromboinflammatory response.

A prominent clinical feature of severe COVID-19 is the occurrence of respiratory decompensation typically one week after initial symptom onset.⁸³ This clinical trajectory appears to correlate with the time course of the adaptive immune response to SARS-CoV-2, with T and B cell responses to SARS-CoV-2 being detected approximately one week after symptom onset.⁴⁶ Given it is postulated that this respiratory decompensation is driven by pulmonary microvascular thrombosis, understanding the intersection between thrombosis and the adaptive immune response to SARS-CoV-2 is of significant interest. These interactions are likely important since platelets have previously been demonstrated to be key modulators of adaptive immunity in the context of a range of inflammatory disorders. Platelets play an important role in regulating T cell trafficking by facilitating the recruitment of T lymphocytes to sites of vascular injury or infection.⁸⁴ Moreover, platelets enhance T cell functional responses via multiple mechanisms. For example, platelets express major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class 1 molecules and can therefore directly activate T cells in an MHC class 1 dependent manner,⁸⁵ while platelet-derived PF4 and serotonin can regulate Th17 expansion⁸⁶ and naïve T cell activation and proliferation,⁸⁷ respectively. The importance of platelets in mediating T cell recruitment and trafficking is underscored by data demonstrating that platelets play a fundamental role in the accumulation of cytotoxic T cells, and virus-induced organ damage, in a murine model of acute viral hepatitis.⁸⁸ Akin to the bidirectional relationship between platelets and other leukocyte subsets, the activation of T cells amplifies platelet aggregation with more recent data highlighting an important role for T cells recruited to sites of venous thrombosis in orchestrating the inflammatory response and subsequent thrombus resolution.⁸⁹,⁹⁰

In addition to mediating T cell functions, platelets can increase B cell immunoglobulin (Ig) G1, IgG2 and IgG3 production.⁹¹ This is potentially significant in the setting of COVID-19, since the development of antiphospholipid antibodies, such as anti β2 glycoprotein IgG antibodies, have been described in association with thrombosis in patients with COVID-19.⁹² In addition, a cohort study from France describes a large percentage of patients with severe COVID-19 demonstrate a detectable lupus anticoagulant.⁹³ However, whether the presence of antiphospholipid antibodies in COVID-19 plays a role in COVID-19-associated thrombosis or represents merely an association remains to be established. Nevertheless, delineating how platelets modulate the adaptive immune response to SARS-CoV-2 and the role adaptive immunity plays in mediating thrombosis and organ injury will be crucial in uncovering novel therapeutic strategies.

## Leukocytes - innate immune cells as actors in thrombosis.

The recruitment of leukocytes to a thrombus not only aids the immune response, but also serves to facilitate platelet activation and coagulation.⁹⁴ Activated platelets facilitate neutrophils to release NETs, which are a matrix of DNA decorated with neutrophils granule proteins such as myeloperoxidase (MPO), cathepsin G and neutrophil elastase.⁹⁵,⁹⁶ NETs appear to be a primary defence mechanism to invading pathogens and as such, have been demonstrated to trap and kill bacteria and fungi in addition to sequestering viruses.⁹⁵,⁹⁶ However, NETs have also been implicated in the pathogenesis of arterial and venous thrombosis in addition to a range of pathologies including disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC), sepsis, pre-eclampsia, vasculitis and systemic lupus erythematosus.⁹⁷,⁹⁸ In the context of thrombosis, the release of the highly negatively charged NETs can trap erythrocytes and activate platelets.⁹⁹ Moreover, NETs serve as a scaffold and potent activator of coagulation via multiple mechanisms. Indeed, neutrophil elastase associated with NETs degrades the anticoagulant protein, TFPI, thereby enhancing TF activity and thrombin generation.⁹⁷ Histones activate platelets via TLR2 and TLR4 and enhance fibrin formation, whilst
the contact activation system, via FXII activation, is initiated by negatively charged DNA.⁹⁷,¹⁰⁰ The activation of FXII not only initiates coagulation, but also has important proinflammatory properties by way of its ability to liberate the generation of bradykinin, upregulate neutrophil function and the generation of monocyte-derived proinflammatory cytokines.¹⁰¹

Activated leukocytes, principally monocytes and neutrophils, upregulate TF in response to proinflammatory cytokines, predominantly IL-6, and subsequently act to enhance coagulation.¹⁰²,¹⁰³ Additionally, monocytes provide a major source of intravascular TF by way of monocyte-derived, TF-bearing MVs.¹⁰⁴,¹⁰⁵ The major DAMP, high mobility group box protein (HMGB)1 released by platelets during inflammation has also been shown to be modified by leukocytes, thus facilitating its ability to coordinate thrombosis.¹⁰⁶ Indeed, platelet-derived HMGB1 is oxidized by activated monocyte-derived reactive oxygen species (ROS), thereby imparting HMGB1's prothrombotic potential acting in a paracrine fashion to enhance platelet activation, monocyte TF expression and NET formation, and ultimately thrombin generation.¹⁰⁶ Interestingly, it has been highlighted that type 1 interferons, a key family of widely expressed cytokines required for the coordinated innate immune response to bacterial and viral pathogens, enhance the release of HMBG1 thus enhancing the procoagulant activity of TF.¹⁰⁷

### COVID-19 and leukocytes—adding fuel to the thromboinflammatory fire.

The formation of NETs from activated neutrophils represents an innate immune response that aims to corral and kill invading pathogens. However, whilst having an important immune function, the Janus face of NETosis is the exacerbation of tissue injury, inflammation and intravascular thrombosis. In the context of respiratory viruses, H1N1 infection has been linked to the excessive formation NETs in a mouse model of viral pneumonia.⁹⁶ Moreover, the infiltration of neutrophils at sites of infection and the risk of ARDS development has been demonstrated in a range of other pandemic respiratory viruses, such as H1N1, SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV.¹⁰⁸,¹⁰⁹ There is now data demonstrating that patients with COVID-19 exhibit elevated levels of NETs in serum as measured by cell free DNA, MPO-DNA and citrullinated histone H3. The levels of MPO-DNA and citrullinated histone H3 were higher in patients receiving mechanical ventilation compared to those not requiring any supplemental oxygen suggesting that levels of NETs correlate with disease severity.¹¹⁰ Interestingly, the finding that the level of NETs correlated with elevations in D-dimer and sera from COVID-19 patients could induce NETosis in purified neutrophils suggests that NETs, by way of their ability to generate thrombin, via activation of FXII, and activate platelets, may play an important role in mediating the prothrombotic phenotype observed in COVID-19.

One of the striking observations in severe COVID-19 is the correlation between inflammatory markers such as CRP, ferritin and IL-6 and a raised D-dimer, the latter reporting on an activated coagulation pathway. Although a full discussion regarding the pathological hyperinflammatory response observed in severe COVID-19 is beyond the scope of this review, there is mounting evidence that monocytes/macrophages play a central role in this process.¹⁰⁵ This is perhaps best highlighted by the observation that patients with severe COVID-19 in ICU exhibit a significant expansion of CD14⁺CD16⁺ monocytes producing IL-6 compared to non-hospitalized patients with COVID-19. As discussed above, this is particularly relevant in the context of thrombosis given the bidirectional relationship between monocytes and coagulation. Firstly, activated platelets form heterotypic aggregates with monocytes in the setting of infection and inflammation. Platelet-monocyte aggregates may play a role in ‘mechanical’ occlusion of the microvasculature in addition to altering platelet and monocyte functional responses.¹¹¹,¹¹² In this regard, platelets induce monocyte nuclear factor kappa-light-chain-enhancer of activated B cells (NFκB) signaling and thereby modulate monocyte effector functions and induce the synthesis of the proinflammatory cytokines IL-8 and MCP-1.¹¹³ Moreover, platelet P-selectin induces monocyte TF expression and upregulates the expression of monocyte Mac-1 (αMβ2, CD11b/CD18).¹¹⁴,¹¹⁵ The platelet-derived chemokines, PF4 and CXCL-12, enhance monocyte survival and facilitate differentiation into macrophages,¹¹⁶,¹¹⁷ while activated platelets also enhance the phagocytic activity of macrophages.¹¹⁸ A

DOI: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.120.317447 9
consistent feature of COVID-19 is the finding that patients with existing cardiovascular risk factors are at an increased risk of severe COVID-19 and have higher fatality rates from the disease.³⁴, ³⁵ It is noteworthy that oxidized phospholipids (oxPLs), which are strongly associated with atherosclerosis, have been detected in the lungs of patients with SARS-CoV.¹¹⁹, ¹²⁰ OxPLs are generated by ROS and play important roles in regulating inflammation given their demonstrated roles in promoting monocyte TF production, monocyte activation and endothelial cell activation.¹⁰⁵ The oxPL, oxPAPC, has been demonstrated to play a central role in the pathogenesis of a murine model of SARS-induced acute lung injury in a process linked to monocyte/macrophage activation via the TLR4-TRIF-TRAF6-NFκB pathway.¹²⁰

### COVID-19 and complement – connecting innate immunity and thrombosis.

The complement cascade is another important arm of the innate immune system that has been implicated in COVID-19-associated thrombosis. Activation of the complement system, and vascular deposition of complement components, is linked to a range of thrombotic microangiopathies including antiphospholipid syndrome and atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome.¹²¹ Recent histological findings from biopsies obtained from patients with severe COVID-19 has demonstrated the extensive deposition of the terminal complement components, C5b-9 (membrane attack complex) and C4d, in addition to the mannose binding lectin associate serine protease (MASP2) within the microvasculature.¹²² Strikingly, these vessels largely exhibited microvascular thrombi and, furthermore, the SARS-CoV2 spike glycoprotein co-localised with C5b-9 and C4d in a subset of cases.¹²² These findings appear consistent with a recent Chinese study where lung sections from patients with severe COVID-19 all revealed strong complement staining, whilst patients with severe COVID-19 have also been described to have elevated serum C5a levels.²³ Mechanistically, it has been suggested that the nucleocapsid (N) protein of SARS-Cov2 binds to MASP2 thereby triggering complement activation and amplifying tissue injury. The activation of the complement pathway leads to enhanced production of endothelial cytokines such as IL-1, IL-8, RANTES, IL-6 and MCP-1, and also upregulates the expression of important endothelial adhesion molecules such as P-selectin and vWF.¹²¹, ¹²⁴ Moreover, the anaphylatoxins C5a and C3a, act to facilitate the recruitment and activation of monocytes and neutrophils. Complement activation also directly induces a prothrombotic phenotype via C5a induction of neutrophil TF expression, C5b-7 monocyte TF expression and C5b-8/C5b-9 mediated platelet activation.¹²⁵, ¹²⁶ Furthermore, CRP has been described as a complement pathway activator and the correlation of its plasma level with COVID-19 severity highlights another potential link between immune and complement system.⁷³ These observations have attracted major interest in exploring the role of complement directed therapies in COVID-19 patients, in particular in COVID-19 mediated thrombosis.¹²⁷

### Thrombin – at the intersection of thrombosis and inflammation.

The canonical role of thrombin is the enzymatic cleavage of fibrinogen to fibrin to ensure efficient hemostasis. However, thrombin also exerts pleiotropic proinflammatory effects on endothelial cells, platelets and leukocytes (Figure 3). In the context of viral infection, the coagulation cascade is activated as a host defence mechanism in order to try and limit pathogen spread. Indeed, a number of viruses have been demonstrated to directly activate coagulation, including human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), Ebola, Coxsackie virus and Dengue.¹²⁸ Previous data has highlighted that a major mechanism by which viral infection can induce a procoagulant phenotype pertains to the upregulation of TF expression by virus infected endothelial cells and endothelial TLR3 signalling in response to virus derived PAMPs.¹²⁹, ¹³⁰ However, excessive activation of coagulation and thrombin generation can result in deleterious consequences. Thrombin also signals via the PARs, which are widely distributed on a broad range of cells including platelets, epithelial cells, immune cells, astrocytes and neurons.¹³¹ There are 4 members of the PAR receptors, PAR 1-4, all of which are G protein coupled receptors. Thrombin efficiently cleaves and activates PAR1, 3 and 4.¹³², ¹³³ Thus, in addition to being a potent platelet agonist, thrombin also activates immune effector and endothelial cells.¹³⁴, ¹³⁵ Indeed, thrombin induced activation of leukocytes results in the production of several cytokines and growth factors whilst also upregulating leukocyte adhesive

function. Thrombin induced endothelial activation, via PAR1, induces the production of a range of proinflammatory cytokines and chemokines, including IL-6, IL-8, PAF and MCP-1, whilst also triggering the expression of the pro-adhesive molecules ICAM-1, E- and P-selectin.¹³⁴⁻¹³⁶ Accordingly, PAR signalling has been demonstrated to modulate the immune response to a number of viruses.¹²⁸ In this regard, the inhibition of coagulation with a FVIIa/TF nematode anticoagulant protein in a model of Ebola virus reduced D-dimer levels, intravascular thrombosis, IL-6 and MCP-1 concentrations and improved survival in treated animals.¹³⁷ Therefore, the disruption of the normal regulatory mechanisms governing thrombin production and activity occurs in the face of viral sepsis and the ensuing thromboinflammatory response. Thus, given the raised D-dimer levels observed in patients with severe COVID-19, it is likely that dysregulation of the thrombin production is a feature of the prothrombotic phenotype associated with SARS-CoV-2 infection.

## Targeting thrombosis for the treatment of COVID-19.

The high rates of thrombotic complications observed in patients with severe COVID-19, combined with the current lack of an effective therapy for SARS-CoV-2, has led to significant interest regarding the use of antithrombotics for patients with COVID-19. In this regard, antithrombotic drugs which possess anti-inflammatory and/or anti-viral properties have already entered clinical trials and will be discussed below (Figure 4).

### Anticoagulation.

The strikingly increased prevalence of thrombotic complications has led to many hospitals instituting the routine administration of strict VTE prophylaxis with either low molecular weight heparin (LMWH) or unfractionated heparin (UFH), and also resulting in several groups using intermediate or full-dose anticoagulation to prevent these thromboembolic phenomena.¹³⁸, ¹³⁹ Preliminary reports have suggested that LMWH treatment reduces mortality in COVID-19 patients with an elevated D-dimer or elevated sepsis-induced coagulopathy score.¹⁴⁰ The heparins are widely used anticoagulants which inhibit coagulation by the antithrombin mediated inhibition of FXa or thrombin. However, aside from their effects on anticoagulation, the heparins appear to have pleiotropic effects that may provide unique advantages in the context of viral infection, including anti-inflammatory effects by way of their ability to bind to DAMPs, such as HMGB1, and proinflammatory cytokines.¹⁴¹, ¹⁴² UFH has a similar structure as heparan sulfate, the sulfated polysaccharide present on cell surfaces and extracellular matrix, with repeating dissacharide units. In contrast, LMWH is a modified heparin with shorter polysaccharide chains. Intriguingly, heparan sulfate has previously implicated as a docking site for a number of viruses, thus facilitating cellular attachment of the virus and subsequent viral infection.¹⁴³, ¹⁴⁴ Indeed, heparin, acting as a decoy receptor for naturally expressed heparan sulfate, has been shown to inhibit the binding of the SARS coronavirus to cells *in vitro*.¹⁴⁵ Whilst ACE2 is the major receptor that mediates viral entry into cells, heparan sulfate has previously been demonstrated to play an important role in facilitating coronavirus entry into cells by functioning as an adhesion receptor for the virus on the cell surface thereby allowing the increased density of viral particles on the cell surface which then facilitates ACE2-mediated cell entry.¹⁴⁶ Recent studies have directly investigated the link between heparin and SARS-CoV-2, and suggests that heparin can directly bind with the spike protein of the SARS-CoV-2 virus and therefore may have antiviral properties.¹⁴⁷

Another interesting aspect of how the SARS-CoV-2 virus may be influenced by the use of heparin as anticoagulant is the previous observation that FXa can cleave the spike protein of SARS-CoV to render it more efficient in invading cells.¹⁴⁸ However, to date, this aspect remains to be investigated with SARS-CoV-2. These data have led some groups to propose specifically engineered heparins for the treatment of COVID-19, whilst clinical trials are underway to investigate the effects of low dose, and full dose, anticoagulation with heparin on clinical outcomes for patients with COVID-19 (NCT04344756, NCT04345848).¹⁴³ It is important to note, that given the potential for heparin therapeutics to cause heparin-
induced thrombocytopenia (HIT), but reassuringly, despite both thrombocytopenia and thrombosis being common complications of COVID-19, the development of HIT appears limited to individual case reports.¹⁴⁹

### Inhibition of the contact factor activation pathway.

The inhibition of FXII as means to inhibit the thromboinflammatory response incited by severe COVID-19 appears an attractive and rational therapeutic target. Activation of the contact pathway is initiated by FXII activation by negatively charged molecules such as NETs, which are increased in severe COVID-19 patients, and platelet-derived PolyP.¹⁰¹ This leads to the generation of thrombin and the activation of bradykinin, of which the latter in particular results in downstream complement activation and the production of inflammatory cytokines.¹⁵⁰ Importantly, therapeutic inhibition of FXIIa demonstrates protection from occlusive thrombus formation in animal models of thrombosis without impeding hemostasis.¹⁵¹ Treatment with an inhibitory FXIIa antibody in animal models of systemic inflammatory response syndrome (SIRS), using a lethal *E. coli* challenge, have shown that FXIIa inhibition improves survival and decreases a number of inflammatory markers including complement activation, neutrophil degranulation and IL-6.¹⁵²⁻¹⁵⁴ Importantly, the potential safety of FXII inhibitors is highlighted by the fact that FXII-deficient individuals display no bleeding phenotype and there is no known effect on immune function.¹⁵⁵ A FXIIa inhibitory antibody has recently entered clinical trials for the treatment of hereditary angioedema and therefore represents a promising novel combination of antithrombotic and anti-inflammatory drugs (NCT03712228).

### Fibrinolysis as a novel therapy in COVID-19.

Other therapies targeting coagulation are being examined regarding their potential therapeutic utility in COVID-19, including fibrinolytic agents such as tissue plasminogen activator (tPA). tPA converts the inactive enzyme plasminogen to plasmin leading to the subsequent breakdown of cross-linked fibrin. The interest in tPA has emerged from the concept that ARDS is characterised by significant local inflammatory reaction in addition to a hypofibrinolytic state. As discussed previously, severe COVID-19 can result in ARDS, which promotes mass upregulation of inflammatory cytokines and leukocytes, and can result in extensive thrombin generation, fibrin formation and microvascular thrombosis.¹⁵⁶

The use of systemic tPA in preclinical and human models of ARDS demonstrates improved oxygenation, and a case report of tPA use in severe COVID-19 showed an initial improvement in oxygenation during tPA infusion but this effect was lost after tPA therapy ceased.¹⁵⁷⁻¹⁵⁹ However, the benefits of tPA may be offset by the considerable risk of major bleeding seen in non-stroke clinical trials,¹⁶⁰ which has led to the consideration of nebulised therapy to increase local concentrations and reduce systemic coagulation effects. Recent clinical trial data suggest that, in severe ARDS, nebulised fibrinolytic therapy is associated with improved oxygenation and ventilatory parameters, which may be another plausible treatment option in COVID-19.¹⁵⁶

### Antiplatelet agents as potential therapeutics for COVID-19.

A recent meta-analysis has demonstrated that anti-platelet therapy is associated with improved mortality from sepsis.¹⁶¹ Interestingly, the majority of data linking anti-platelet therapy with these improved clinical outcomes relates to aspirin.¹⁶² In this regard, recent experimental data has highlighted that targeting platelets with aspirin prevents intravascular coagulation and neutrophil mediated microvascular thrombosis in a mouse model of bacterial sepsis.¹⁶³ However, to date, the effect of aspirin in COVID-19 remains to be established. Several other therapies with antiplatelet effects, including dipyridamole, and nafamostat, are currently being evaluated for their potential role in reducing the severity of COVID-19. The antiplatelet agent dipyridamole has recently been reported to suppress SARS-CoV-2 replication in vitro, with some early data suggesting that use of adjunct dipyridamole may improve the clinical course in severe COVID-
19.¹⁶⁴ Finally, the role of nafamostat, a serine protease inhibitor which has anti-platelet effects and is currently marketed in Asia for the treatment of DIC and pancreatitis, is being evaluated.¹⁶⁵ Nafamostat is known to inhibit TMPRSS2, and in preclinical studies, serine protease inhibitors are able to block SARS-CoV-2 infection of lung cells. Prior studies of nafamostat demonstrated that the drug has potential in blocking MERS-CoV infection *in vitro*, suggesting a potential role for this drug in reducing the burden of severe COVID-19.¹⁶ ¹⁶⁶ The RACONA trial ([NCT04352400](https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT04352400)) is a randomised, double-blind trial set to evaluate the efficacy of this agent in severe COVID-19. Nonetheless, it remains to be seen if any of these investigational therapies by virtue of their anti-platelet or anti-viral effects will play a substantial role in the treatment of COVID-19.

## Summary and conclusions

The emergence of the SARS-CoV-2 virus and the ensuing global pandemic has presented unprecedented healthcare and economic challenges. A key clinical feature of severe COVID-19 appears to be a highly prothrombotic state, which is linked to excess rates of arterial, venous and microvascular thrombosis, and adverse clinical outcomes. Emerging evidence suggests that SARS-CoV-2 can infect endothelial cells with the associated immune response and ensuing activation of inflammatory pathways resulting in dysregulation of the endothelium, leukocyte activation, NET generation, complement deposition and platelet consumption. These pathways can conspire to unleash a prothrombotic state (immunothrombosis), which may result in significant thrombotic complications. Accordingly, there remains much interest, and an urgent clinical need, to precisely delineate the mechanisms by which SARS-CoV-2 infection causes thrombotic complications in the hope that new insights into this process will yield novel therapeutic approaches. This is especially pressing in the absence of an effective therapy or vaccine for SARS-CoV-2. Thus, in the context of COVID-19 the intersection of innate and adaptive immunity, inflammation and thrombosis has been thrust into the global spotlight, and the challenge is now to urgently find therapeutic concepts to disrupt this unholy trinity in the face of a global pandemic. The growing awareness and understanding of thrombotic complications in patients with SARS-CoV-2 infection will contribute to a more rigorous diagnostic approach resulting in the earlier detection of thrombotic events. Importantly, the shift towards the early institution of antithrombotic therapy for the prevention and treatment of COVID-19-associated thrombosis will hopefully translate into improved outcomes for patients with COVID-19.

## SOURCES OF FUNDING

JDM is supported by a National Health and Medical Research Council (NHMRC) and Heart Foundation Early Career Fellowship. HS is supported by Monash University RTP Scholarship, Wheaton Family Scholarship and HSANZ New Investigator Scholarship. KP is supported by a NHMRC Senior Principal Research Fellowship.

## DISCLOSURES

None.

REFERENCES

1. Walls AC, Park YJ, Tortorici MA, Wall A, McGuire AT, Veesler D. Structure, function, and antigenicity of the sars-cov-2 spike glycoprotein. Cell. 2020; 181:281-292.e286
2. Zhou P, Yang XL, Wang XG, Hu B, Zhang L, Zhang W, Si HR, Zhu Y, Li B, Huang CL, Chen HD, Chen J, Luo Y, Guo H, Jiang RD, Liu MQ, Chen Y, Shen XR, Wang X, Zheng XS, Zhao K, Chen QJ, Deng F, Liu LL, Yan B, Zhan FX, Wang YY, Xiao GF, Shi ZL. A pneumonia outbreak associated with a new coronavirus of probable bat origin. Nature. 2020; 579:270-273
3. Andersen KG, Rambaut A, Lipkin WI, Holmes EC, Garry RF. The proximal origin of sars-cov-2. Nat Med. 2020; 26:450-452
4. Lam TT, Jia N, Zhang YW, Shum MH, Jiang JF, Zhu HC, Tong YG, Shi YX, Ni XB, Liao YS, Li WJ, Jiang BG, Wei W, Yuan TT, Zheng K, Cui XM, Li J, Pei GQ, Qiang X, Cheung WY, Li LF, Sun FF, Qin S, Huang JC, Leung GM, Holmes EC, Hu YL, Guan Y, Cao WC. Identifying sars-cov-2-related coronaviruses in malayan pangolins. Nature. 2020
5. Hoffmann M, Kleine-Weber H, Schroeder S, Kruger N, Herrler T, Erichsen S, Schiergens TS, Herrler G, Wu NH, Nitsche A, Muller MA, Drosten C, Pohlmann S. Sars-cov-2 cell entry depends on ace2 and tmprss2 and is blocked by a clinically proven protease inhibitor. Cell. 2020; 181:271-280e278
6. Jose RJ, Manuel A. Covid-19 cytokine storm: The interplay between inflammation and coagulation. Lancet Respir Med. 2020; 8:e46-e47
7. Liu F, Li L, Xu M, Wu J, Luo D, Zhu Y, Li B, Song X, Zhou X. Prognostic value of interleukin-6, c-reactive protein, and procalcitonin in patients with covid-19. J Clin Virol. 2020; 127:104370
8. Maier CL, Truong AD, Auld SC, Polly DM, Tanksley CL, Duncan A. Covid-19-associated hyperviscosity: A link between inflammation and thrombophilia? Lancet. 2020; 395:1758-1759
9. Giamarellos-Bourboulis EJ, Netea MG, Rovina N, Akinosoglou K, Antoniadou A, Antonakos N, Damoraki G, Gkavogianni T, Adami ME, Katsaounou P, Ntaganou M, Kyriakopoulou M, Dimopoulos G, Koutsodimitropoulos I, Velissaris D, Koufargyris P, Karageorgos A, Katrini K, Lekakis V, Lupse M, Kotsaki A, Renieris G, Theodoulou D, Panou V, Koukaki E, Koulouris N, Gogos C, Koutsoukou A. Complex immune dysregulation in covid-19 patients with severe respiratory failure. Cell Host Microbe. 2020; 27:992-1000 e1003
10. Tang N, Li D, Wang X, Sun Z. Abnormal coagulation parameters are associated with poor prognosis in patients with novel coronavirus pneumonia. J Thromb Haemost. 2020; 18:844-847
11. Huang C, Wang Y, Li X, Ren L, Zhao J, Hu Y, Zhang L, Fan G, Xu J, Gu X, Cheng Z, Yu T, Xia J, Wei Y, Wu W, Xie X, Yin W, Li H, Liu M, Xiao Y, Gao H, Guo L, Xie J, Wang G, Jiang R, Gao Z, Jin Q, Wang J, Cao B. Clinical features of patients infected with 2019 novel coronavirus in wuhan, china. Lancet. 2020; 395:497-506
12. Wang D, Hu B, Hu C, Zhu F, Liu X, Zhang J, Wang B, Xiang H, Cheng Z, Xiong Y, Zhao Y, Li Y, Wang X, Peng Z. Clinical characteristics of 138 hospitalized patients with 2019 novel coronavirus-infected pneumonia in wuhan, china. JAMA. 2020
13. Zhang JJ, Dong X, Cao YY, Yuan YD, Yang YB, Yan YQ, Akdis CA, Gao YD. Clinical characteristics of 140 patients infected with sars-cov-2 in wuhan, china. Allergy. 2020
14. Guan WJ, Ni ZY, Hu Y, Liang WH, Ou CQ, He JX, Liu L, Shan H, Lei CL, Hui DSC, Du B, Li LJ, Zeng G, Yuen KY, Chen RC, Tang CL, Wang T, Chen PY, Xiang J, Li SY, Wang JL, Liang ZJ, Peng YX, Wei L, Liu Y, Hu YH, Peng P, Wang JM, Liu JY, Chen Z, Li G, Zheng ZJ, Qiu SQ, Luo J, Ye CJ, Zhu SY, Zhong NS, China Medical Treatment Expert Group for C. Clinical characteristics of coronavirus disease 2019 in china. N Engl J Med. 2020; 382:1708-1720
15. Lippi G, Favaloro EJ. D-dimer is associated with severity of coronavirus disease 2019: A pooled analysis. Thromb Haemost. 2020; 120:876-878
16. Zhou F, Yu T, Du R, Fan G, Liu Y, Liu Z, Xiang J, Wang Y, Song B, Gu X, Guan L, Wei Y, Li H, Wu X, Xu J, Tu S, Zhang Y, Chen H, Cao B. Clinical course and risk factors for mortality of adult

inpatients with covid-19 in wuhan, china: A retrospective cohort study. Lancet. 2020;395:1054-1062

17. Zhang L, Yan X, Fan Q, Liu H, Liu X, Liu Z, Zhang Z. D-dimer levels on admission to predict in-hospital mortality in patients with covid-19. J Thromb Haemost. 2020;18:1324-1329

18. Liao S, Woulfe T, Hyder S, Merriman E, Simpson D, Chunilal S. Incidence of venous thromboembolism in different ethnic groups: A regional direct comparison study. J Thromb Haemost. 2014;12:214-219

19. White RH, Keenan CR. Effects of race and ethnicity on the incidence of venous thromboembolism. Thromb Res. 2009; 123 Suppl 4:S11-17

20. Zakai NA, McClure LA. Racial differences in venous thromboembolism. J Thromb Haemost. 2011;9:1877-1882

21. Edelstein LC, Simon LM, Montoya RT, Holinstat M, Chen ES, Bergeron A, Kong X, Nagalla S, Mohandas N, Cohen DE, Dong JF, Shaw C, Bray PF. Racial differences in human platelet par4 reactivity reflect expression of pctp and mir-376c. Nat Med. 2013; 19:1609-1616

22. Fogarty H, Townsend L, Ni Cheallaigh C, Bergin C, Martin-Loeches I, Browne P, Bacon CL, Gaule R, Gillett A, Byrne M, Ryan K, O'Connell N, O'Sullivan JM, Conlon N, O'Donnell JS. Covid 19 coagulopathy in caucasian patients. Br J Haematol. 2020; 189:1044-1049

23. Cui S, Chen S, Li X, Liu S, Wang F. Prevalence of venous thromboembolism in patients with severe novel coronavirus pneumonia. J Thromb Haemost. 2020; 18:1421-1424

24. Klok FA, Kruip M, van der Meer NJM, Arbous MS, Gommers D, Kant KM, Kaptein FHJ, van Paassen J, Stals MAM, Huisman MV, Endeman H. Incidence of thrombotic complications in critically ill icu patients with covid-19. Thromb Res. 2020; 191:145-147

25. Klok FA, Kruip M, van der Meer NJM, Arbous MS, Gommers D, Kant KM, Kaptein FHJ, van Paassen J, Stals MAM, Huisman MV, Endeman H. Confirmation of the high cumulative incidence of thrombotic complications in critically ill icu patients with covid-19: An updated analysis. Thromb Res. 2020; 191:148-150

26. Middeldorp S, Coppens M, van Haaps TF, Foppen M, Vlaar AP, Muller MCA, Bouman CCS, Beenen LFM, Koottie RS, Heijmans J, Smits LP, Bonta PI, van Es N. Incidence of venous thromboembolism in hospitalized patients with covid-19. J Thromb Haemost. 2020

27. Helms J, Tacquard C, Severac F, Leonard-Lorant I, Ohana M, Delabranche X, Merdji H, Clere-Jehl R, Schenck M, Fagot Gandet F, Fafi-Kremer S, Castelain V, Schneider F, Grunebaum L, Angles-Cano E, Sattler L, Mertes PM, Meziani F, Group CT. High risk of thrombosis in patients with severe sars-cov-2 infection: A multicenter prospective cohort study. Intensive Care Med. 2020;46:1089-1098

28. Lax SF, Skok K, Zechner P, Kessler H, Kaufmann N, Koelblinger C, Vander K, Bargfrieder U, Trauner M. Pulmonary arterial thrombosis in covid-19 with fatal outcome: Results from a prospective, single-center, clinicopathologic case series. Annals of Internal Medicine. 2020

29. Wichmann D, Sperhake JP, Lutgehetmann M, Steurer S, Edler C, Heinemann A, Heinrich F, Mushumba H, Kniep I, Schroder AS, Burdelski C, de Heer G, Nierhaus A, Frings D, Pfefferle S, Becker H, Bredereke-Wiedling H, de Weerth A, Paschen HR, Sheikhzadeh-Eggers S, Stang A, Schmiedel S, Bokemeyer C, Addo MM, Aepfelbacher M, Puschel K, Kluge S. Autopsy findings and venous thromboembolism in patients with covid-19: A prospective cohort study. Ann Intern Med. 2020

30. Mao L, Jin H, Wang M, Hu Y, Chen S, He Q, Chang J, Hong C, Zhou Y, Wang D, Miao X, Li Y, Hu B. Neurologic manifestations of hospitalized patients with coronavirus disease 2019 in wuhan, china. JAMA Neurology. 2020

31. Oxley TJ, Mocco J, Majidi S, Kellner CP, Shoirah H, Singh IP, De Leacy RA, Shigematsu T, Ladner TR, Yaeger KA, Skliut M, Weinberger J, Dangayach NS, Bederson JB, Tuhrim S, Fifi JT. Large-vessel stroke as a presenting feature of covid-19 in the young. N Engl J Med. 2020; 382:e60

32. Shi S, Qin M, Shen B, Cai Y, Liu T, Yang F, Gong W, Liu X, Liang J, Zhao Q, Huang H, Yang B, Huang C. Association of cardiac injury with mortality in hospitalized patients with covid-19 in wuhan, china. JAMA Cardiol. 2020
33. Zheng YY, Ma YT, Zhang JY, Xie X. Covid-19 and the cardiovascular system. Nat Rev Cardiol. 2020;17:259-260
34. Yang J, Zheng Y, Gou X, Pu K, Chen Z, Guo Q, Ji R, Wang H, Wang Y, Zhou Y. Prevalence of comorbidities and its effects in patients infected with sars-cov-2: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Int J Infect Dis. 2020; 94:91-95
35. Wu Z, McGoggan JM. Characteristics of and important lessons from the coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) outbreak in china: Summary of a report of 72314 cases from the chinese center for disease control and prevention. JAMA. 2020
36. Lang ZW, Zhang LJ, Zhang SJ, Meng X, Li JQ, Song CZ, Sun L, Zhou YS, Dwyer DE. A clinicopathological study of three cases of severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars). Pathology. 2003;35:526-531
37. Ding Y, Wang H, Shen H, Li Z, Geng J, Han H, Cai J, Li X, Kang W, Weng D, Lu Y, Wu D, He L, Yao K. The clinical pathology of severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars): A report from china. J Pathol. 2003; 200:282-289
38. Hwang DM, Chamberlain DW, Poutanen SM, Low DE, Asa SL, Butany J. Pulmonary pathology of severe acute respiratory syndrome in toronto. Mod Pathol. 2005; 18:1-10
39. Franks TJ, Chong PY, Chui P, Galvin JR, Lourens RM, Reid AH, Selbs E, McEvoy CP, Hayden CD, Fukuoka J, Taubenberger JK, Travis WD. Lung pathology of severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars): A study of 8 autopsy cases from singapore. Hum Pathol. 2003; 34:743-748
40. Li K, Wohlford-Lenane C, Perlman S, Zhao J, Jewell AK, Reznikov LR, Gibson-Corley KN, Meyerholz DK, McCray PB, Jr. Middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus causes multiple organ damage and lethal disease in mice transgenic for human dipeptidyl peptidase 4. J Infect Dis. 2016;213:712-722
41. Tomashefski JF, Jr., Davies P, Boggis C, Greene R, Zapol WM, Reid LM. The pulmonary vascular lesions of the adult respiratory distress syndrome. Am J Pathol. 1983; 112:112-126
42. Ackermann M, Verleden SE, Kuehnel M, Haverich A, Welte T, Laenger F, Vanstapel A, Werlein C, Stark H, Tzankov A, Li WW, Li VW, Mentzer SJ, Jonigk D. Pulmonary vascular endothelialitis, thrombosis, and angiogenesis in covid-19. N Engl J Med. 2020
43. Fox SE, Akmatbekov A, Harbert JL, Li G, Quincy Brown J, Vander Heide RS. Pulmonary and cardiac pathology in african american patients with covid-19: An autopsy series from new orleans. Lancet Respir Med. 2020
44. Carsana L, Sonzogni A, Nasr A, Rossi RS, Pellegrinelli A, Zerbi P, Rech R, Colombo R, Antinori S, Corbellino M, Galli M, Catena E, Tosoni A, Gianatti A, Nebuloni M. Pulmonary post-mortem findings in a series of covid-19 cases from northern italy: A two-centre descriptive study. Lancet Infect Dis. 2020
45. Dolhnikoff M, Duarte-Neto AN, de Almeida Monteiro RA, da Silva LFF, de Oliveira EP, Saldiva PHN, Mauad T, Negri EM. Pathological evidence of pulmonary thrombotic phenomena in severe covid-19. J Thromb Haemost. 2020; 18:1517-1519
46. Tay MZ, Poh CM, Renia L, MacAry PA, Ng LFP. The trinity of covid-19: Immunity, inflammation and intervention. Nat Rev Immunol. 2020; 20:363-374
47. Moreno-Eutimio MA, Lopez-Macias C, Pastelin-Palacios R. Bioinformatic analysis and identification of single-stranded rna sequences recognized by tlr 7/8 in the sars-cov-2, sars-cov, and mers-cov genomes. Microbes Infect. 2020
48. Varga Z, Flammer AJ, Steiger P, Haberecker M, Andermatt R, Zinkernagel AS, Mehra MR, Schuepbach RA, Ruschitzka F, Moch H. Endothelial cell infection and endotheliitis in covid-19. Lancet. 2020; 395:1417-1418
49. Crackower MA, Sarao R, Oudit GY, Yagil C, Kozierezeki I, Scanga SE, Oliveira-dos-Santos AJ, da Costa J, Zhang L, Pei Y, Scholey J, Ferrario CM, Manoukian AS, Chappell MC, Backx PH,
DOI:10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.120.317447 16

Yagil Y, Penninger JM. Angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 is an essential regulator of heart function. Nature. 2002;417:822-828

50. Danilczyk U, Penninger JM. Angiotensin-converting enzyme ii in the heart and the kidney. Circulation research. 2006;98:463-471

51. Chen Y, Chen L, Deng Q, Zhang G, Wu K, Ni L, Yang Y, Liu B, Wang W, Wei C, Yang J, Ye G, Cheng Z. The presence of sars-cov-2rna in the feces of covid-19 patients. Journal of medical virology. 2020;92:833-840

52. Peng L, Liu J, Xu W, Luo Q, Chen D, Lei Z, Huang Z, Li X, Deng K, Lin B, Gao Z. Sars-cov-2 can be detected in urine, blood, anal swabs, and oropharyngeal swabs specimens. Journal of medical virology. 2020

53. Monteil V, Kwon H, Prado P, Hagelkruys A, Wimmer RA, Stahl M, Leopoldi A, Garreta E, Hurtado Del Pozo C, Prosper F, Romero JP, Wirnsberger G, Zhang H, Slutsky AS, Conder R, Montserrat N, Mirazimi A, Penninger JM. Inhibition of sars-cov-2 infections in engineered human tissues using clinical-grade soluble human ace 2. Cell. 2020;181:905-913 e907

54. Zhang H, Penninger JM, Li Y, Zhong N, Slutsky AS. Angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace 2) as a sars-cov-2 receptor: Molecular mechanisms and potential therapeutic target. Intensive Care Med. 2020;46:586-590

55. Verdecchia P, Cavallini C, Spanevello A, Angeli F. The pivotal link between ace 2 deficiency and sars-cov-2 infection. European journal of internal medicine. 2020

56. Kayal S, Jais JP, Aguin N, Chaudiere J, Labrousse J. Elevated circulating e-selectin, intercellular adhesion molecule 1, and von willebrand factor in patients with severe infection. American journal of respiratory and critical care medicine. 1998;157:776-784

57. Aird WC. The role of the endothelium in severe sepsis and multiple organ dysfunction syndrome. Blood. 2003;101:3765-3777

58. Massberg S, Enders G, Leiderer R, Eisenmenger S, Vestweber D, Krombach F, Messmer K. Platelet-endothelial cell interactions during ischemia/reperfusion: The role of p-selectin. Blood. 1998;92:507-515

59. Springer TA. Traffic signals for lymphocyte recirculation and leukocyte emigration: The multistep paradigm. Cell. 1994;76:301-314

60. Gupta N, Zhao YY, Evans CE. The stimulation of thrombosis by hypoxia. Thromb Res. 2019;181:77-83

61. Monteil V, Kwon H, Prado P, Hagelkruys A, Wimmer RA, Stahl M, Leopoldi A, Garreta E, Hurtado Del Pozo C, Prosper F, Romero JP, Wirnsberger G, Zhang H, Slutsky AS, Conder R, Montserrat N, Mirazimi A, Penninger JM. Inhibition of sars-cov-2 infections in engineered human tissues using clinical-grade soluble human ace 2. Cell. 2020

62. Semple JW, Italiano JE, Jr., Freedman J. Platelets and the immune continuum. Nature reviews. Immunology. 2011;11:264-274

63. McFadyen JD, Kaplan ZS. Platelets are not just for clots. Transfusion medicine reviews. 2015;29:110-119

64. Engelmann B, Massberg S. Thrombosis as an intravascular effector of innate immunity. Nature reviews. Immunology. 2013;13:34-45

65. Lindemann S, Tolley ND, Dixon DA, McIntyre TM, Prescott SM, Zimmerman GA, Weyrich AS. Activated platelets mediate inflammatory signaling by regulated interleukin 1 beta synthesis. The Journal of cell biology. 2001;154:485-490

66. Palabrica T, Lobb R, Furie BC, Aronovitz M, Benjamin C, Hsu YM, Sajer SA, Furie B. Leukocyte accumulation promoting fibrin deposition is mediated in vivo by p-selectin on adherent platelets. Nature. 1992;359:848-851

67. Simon DI, Chen Z, Xu H, Li CQ, Dong J, McIntire LV, Ballantyne CM, Zhang L, Furman MI, Berndt MC, Lopez JA. Platelet glycoprotein ibalpha is a counterreceptor for the leukocyte integrin mac-1 (cd11b/cd18). J Exp Med. 2000;192:193-204

68. Gaertner F, Ahmad Z, Rosenberger G, Fan S, Nicolai L, Busch B, Yavuz G, Luckner M, Ishikawa-Ankerhold H, Henne l R, Benechet A, Lorenz M, Chandraratne S, Schubert I, Helmer S, Striednig B, Stark K, Janko M, Bottcher RT, Verschoor A, Leon C, Gachet C, Gudermann T, Mederos YSM, Pincus Z, Iannacone M, Haas R, Wanner G, Lauber K, Sixt M, Massberg S. Migrating platelets are mechano-scavengers that collect and bundle bacteria. *Cell*. 2017; 171: 1368-1382.e1323

69. Etulain J, Martinod K, Wong SL, Cifuni SM, Schattner M, Wagner DD. P-selectin promotes neutrophil extracellular trap formation in mice. *Blood*. 2015; 126: 242-246

70. Constantinescu-Bercu A, Grassi L, Frontini M, Salles C, II, Woollard K, Crawley JT. Activated alphaIIbbeta 3 on platelets mediates flow-dependent netosis via slc44a2. *Elife*. 2020; 9

71. Muller F, Mutch NJ, Schenk WA, Smith SA, Esterl L, Spronk HM, Schmidbauer S, Gahl WA, Morrissey JH, Renne T. Platelet polyphosphates are proinflammatory and procoagulant mediators in vivo. *Cell*. 2009; 139: 1143-1156

72. Zaldivia MTK, McFadyen JD, Lim B, Wang X, Peter K. Platelet-derived microvesicles in cardiovascular diseases. *Frontiers in cardiovascular medicine*. 2017; 4: 74

73. Braig D, Nero TL, Koch HG, Kaiser B, Wang X, Thiele JR, Morton CJ, Zeller J, Kiefer J, Potempa LA, Mellett NA, Miles LA, Du XJ, Meikle PJ, Huber-Lang M, Stark GB, Parker MW, Peter K, Eisenhardt SU. Transitional changes in the crp structure lead to the exposure of proinflammatory binding sites. *Nature communications*. 2017; 8: 14188

74. Lippi G, Plebani M, Henry BM. Thrombocytopenia is associated with severe coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) infections: A meta-analysis. *Clin Chim Acta*. 2020; 506: 145-148

75. Yang X, Yang Q, Wang Y, Wu Y, Xu J, Yu Y, Shang Y. Thrombocytopenia and its association with mortality in patients with covid-19. *J Thromb Haemost*. 2020; 18: 1469-1472

76. Koupenova M, Clancy L, Corkrey HA, Freedman JE. Circulating platelets as mediators of immunity, inflammation, and thrombosis. *Circulation research*. 2018; 122: 337-351

77. Assinger A. Platelets and infection - an emerging role of platelets in viral infection. *Front Immunol*. 2014; 5: 649

78. Koupenova M, Corkrey HA, Vitseva O, Manni G, Pang CJ, Clancy L, Yao C, Rade J, Levy D, Wang JP, Finberg RW, Kurt-Jones EA, Freedman JE. The role of platelets in mediating a response to human influenza infection. *Nat Commun*. 2019; 10: 1780

79. Koupenova M, Vitseva O, MacKay CR, Beaulieu LM, Benjamin EJ, Mick E, Kurt-Jones EA, Ravid K, Freedman JE. Platelet-tlr7 mediates host survival and platelet count during viral infection in the absence of platelet-dependent thrombosis. *Blood*. 2014; 124: 791-802

80. Boilard E, Pare G, Rousseau M, Cloutier N, Dubuc I, Levesque T, Borgeat P, Flamand L. Influenza virus h1n1 activates platelets through fcgammaria signaling and thrombin generation. *Blood*. 2014; 123: 2854-2863

81. Cloutier N, Allaeys I, Marcoux G, Machlus KR, Mailhot B, Zufferey A, Levesque T, Becker Y, Tessandier N, Melki I, Zhi H, Poirier G, Rondina MT, Italiano JE, Flamand L, McKenzie SE, Cote F, Nieswandt B, Khan WI, Flick MJ, Newman PJ, Lacroix S, Fortin PR, Boilard E. Platelets release pathogenic serotonin and return to circulation after immune complex-mediated sequestration. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA*. 2018; 115: E1550-E1559

82. Le VB, Schneider JG, Boergeling Y, Berri F, Ducatez M, Guerin JL, Adrian I, Errazuriz-Cerda E, Frasquilho S, Antunes L, Lina B, Bordet JC, Jandrot-Perrus M, Ludwig S, Riteau B. Platelet activation and aggregation promote lung inflammation and influenza virus pathogenesis. *American journal of respiratory and critical care medicine*. 2015; 191: 804-819

83. Berlin DA, Gulick RM, Martinez FJ. Severe covid-19. *N Engl J Med*. 2020

84. Hu H, Zhu L, Huang Z, Ji Q, Chatterjee M, Zhang W, Li N. Platelets enhance lymphocyte adhesion and infiltration into arterial thrombus. *Thromb Haemost*. 2010; 104: 1184-1192

85. Chapman LM, Aggrey AA, Field DJ, Srivastava K, Ture S, Yui K, Topham DJ, Baldwin WM, 3rd, Morrell CN. Platelets present antigen in the context of mhc class i. *J Immunol*. 2012; 189: 916-923

86. Shi G, Field DJ, Ko KA, Ture S, Srivastava K, Levy S, Kowalska MA, Poncz M, Fowell DJ, Morrell CN. Platelet factor 4 limits th17 differentiation and cardiac allograft rejection. J Clin Invest. 2014;124:543-552

87. Leon-Ponte M, Ahern GP, O'Connell PJ. Serotonin provides an accessory signal to enhance t-cell activation by signaling through the 5-ht7 receptor. Blood. 2007;109:3139-3146

88. Iannacone M, Sitia G, Isogawa M, Marchese P, Castro MG, Lowenstein PR, Chisari FV, Ruggeri ZM, Guidotti LG. Platelets mediate cytotoxic t lymphocyte-induced liver damage. Nat Med. 2005;11:1167-1169

89. Li N, Ji Q, Hjemdahl P. Platelet-lymphocyte conjugation differs between lymphocyte subpopulations. J Thromb Haemost. 2006;4:874-881

90. Luther N, Shahneh F, Brahler M, Krebs F, Jackel S, Subramaniam S, Stanger C, Schonfelder T, Kleis-Fischer B, Reinhardt C, Probst HC, Wenzel P, Schafer K, Becker C. Innate effector-memory t-cell activation regulates post-thrombotic vein wall inflammation and thrombus resolution. Circ Res. 2016;119:1286-1295

91. Cognasse F, Hamzeh-Cognasse H, Lafarge S, Chavarin P, Cogne M, Richard Y, Garraud O. Human platelets can activate peripheral blood b cells and increase production of immunoglobulins. Exp Hematol. 2007;35:1376-1387

92. Zhang Y, Xiao M, Zhang S, Xia P, Cao W, Jiang W, Chen H, Ding X, Zhao H, Zhang H, Wang C, Zhao J, Sun X, Tian R, Wu W, Wu D, Ma J, Chen Y, Zhang D, Xie J, Yan X, Zhou X, Liu Z, Wang J, Du B, Qin Y, Gao P, Qin X, Xu Y, Zhang W, Li T, Zhang F, Zhao Y, Li Y, Zhang S. Coagulopathy and antiphospholipid antibodies in patients with covid-19. N Engl J Med. 2020;382:e38

93. Swystun LL, Liaw PC. The role of leukocytes in thrombosis. Blood. 2016;128:753-762

94. Clark SR, Ma AC, Tavener SA, McDonald B, Goodarzi Z, Kelly MM, Patel KD, Chakrabarti S, McAvoy E, Sinclair GD, Keys EM, Allen-Vercoe E, Devinney R, Doig CJ, Green FH, Kubes P. Platelet tlr4 activates neutrophil extracellular traps to ensnare bacteria in septic blood. Nature medicine. 2007;13:463-469

95. Brinkmann V, Reichard U, Goosmann C, Fauler B, Uhlemann Y, Weiss DS, Weinrauch Y, Zychlinsky A. Neutrophil extracellular traps kill bacteria. Science (New York, N.Y.). 2004;303:1532-1535

96. Narasaraju T, Yang E, Samy RP, Ng HH, Poh WP, Liew AA, Phoon MC, van Rooijen N, Chow VT. Excessive neutrophils and neutrophil extracellular traps contribute to acute lung injury of influenza pneumonia. Am J Pathol. 2011;179:199-210

97. Massberg S, Grahl L, von Bruehl ML, Manukyan D, Pfeiler S, Goosmann C, Brinkmann V, Lorenz M, Bidzhakov K, Khandagale AB, Konrad I, Kennerknecht E, Reges K, Holdenrieder S, Braun S, Reinhardt C, Spannagl M, Preissner KT, Engelmann B. Reciprocal coupling of coagulation and innate immunity via neutrophil serine proteases. Nat Med. 2010;16:887-896

98. Martinod K, Wagner DD. Thrombosis: Tangled up in nets. Blood. 2014;123:2768-2776

99. Fuchs TA, Brill A, Duerschmied D, Schatzberg D, Monestier M, Myers DD, Jr., Wrobleski SK, Wakefield TW, Hartwig JH, Wagner DD. Extracellular DNA traps promote thrombosis. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America. 2010;107:15880-15885

100. Semeraro F, Ammollo CT, Morrissey JH, Dale GL, Friese P, Esmon NL, Esmon CT. Extracellular histones promote thrombin generation through platelet-dependent mechanisms: Involvement of platelet tlr2 and tlr4. Blood. 2011;118:1952-1961

101. Maas C, Renne T. Coagulation factor xii in thrombosis and inflammation. Blood. 2018;131:1903-1909

102. Muller I, Klocke A, Alex M, Kotzsch M, Luther T, Morgenstern E, Zieseniss S, Zahler S, Preissner K, Engelmann B. Intravascular tissue factor initiates coagulation via circulating microvesicles and platelets. Fasebj. 2003;17:476-478

103. Giesen PL, Rauch U, Bohrmann B, Kling D, Roque M, Fallon JT, Badimon JJ, Himber J, Riederer MA, Nemerson Y. Blood-borne tissue factor: Another view of thrombosis. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 1999;96:2311-2315
104. Owens AP, 3rd, Mackman N. Microparticles in hemostasis and thrombosis. Circ Res. 2011;108:1284-1297
105. Merad M, Martin JC. Pathological inflammation in patients with covid-19: A key role for monocytes and macrophages. Nat Rev Immunol. 2020;20:355-362
106. Stark K, Philipp V, Stockhausen S, Busse J, Antonelli A, Miller M, Schubert I, Hoseinpour P, Chandraratne S, von Bruhl ML, Gaertner F, Lorenz M, Agresti A, Coletti R, Antoine DJ, Heermann R, Jung K, Reese S, Laitinen I, Schwaiger M, Walch A, Sperandio M, Nawroth PP, Reinhardt C, Jackel S, Bianchi ME, Massberg S. Disulfide hmgbl derived from platelets coordinates venous thrombosis in mice. Blood. 2016;128:2435-2449
107. Yang X, Cheng X, Tang Y, Qiu X, Wang Z, Fu G, Wu J, Kang H, Wang J, Wang H, Chen F, Xiao X, Billiar TR, Lu B. The role of type 1 interferons in coagulation induced by gram-negative bacteria. Blood. 2020;135:1087-1100
108. Perlman S, Dandekar AA. Immunopathogenesis of coronavirus infections: Implications for sars. Nature reviews. Immunology. 2005;5:917-927
109. Blondonnet R, Constantin JM, Sapin V, Jabaudon M. A pathophysiologic approach to biomarkers in acute respiratory distress syndrome. Disease markers. 2016;2016:3501373
110. Zuo Y, Yalavarthi S, Shi H, Gockman K, Zuo M, Madison JA, Blair C, Weber A, Barnes BJ, Egeblad M, Woods RJ, Kanthi Y, Knight JS. Neutrophil extracellular traps in covid-19. JCI Insight. 2020;5
111. Freedman JE, Loscalzo J. Platelet-monocyte aggregates: Bridging thrombosis and inflammation. Circulation. 2002;105:2130-2132
112. Bozza FA, Shah AM, Weyrich AS, Zimmerman GA. Amicus or adversary: Platelets in lung biology, acute injury, and inflammation. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2009;40:123-134
113. Dale DC, Boxer L, Liles WC. The phagocytes: Neutrophils and monocytes. Blood. 2008;112:935-945
114. Celi A, Pellegrini G, Lorenzet R, De Blasi A, Ready N, Furie BC, Furie B. P-selectin induces the expression of tissue factor on monocytes. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 1994;91:8767-8771
115. Neumann FJ, Zohlhofer D, Fakhoury L, Ott I, Gawaz M, Schomig A. Effect of glycoprotein iib/iiia receptor blockade on platelet-leukocyte interaction and surface expression of the leukocyte integrin mac-1 in acute myocardial infarction. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1999;34:1420-1426
116. Chatterjee M, von Ungern-Sternberg SN, Seizer P, Schlegel F, Butcher M, Sindhu NA, Muller S, Mack A, Gawaz M. Platelet-derived cxcl 12 regulates monocyte function, survival, differentiation into macrophages and foam cells through differential involvement of cxcr4-cxcr7. Cell Death Dis. 2015;6:e1989
117. Scheuerer B, Ernst M, Durrbaum-Landmann I, Fleischer J, Grage-Griebenow E, Brandt E, Flad HD, Petersen F. The cxc-chemokine platelet factor 4 promotes monocyte survival and induces monocyte differentiation into macrophages. Blood. 2000;95:1158-1166
118. Ali RA, Wuescher LM, Dona KR, Worth RG. Platelets mediate host defense against staphylococcus aureus through direct bactericidal activity and by enhancing macrophage activities. J Immunol. 2017;198:344-351
119. Tsimikas S, Brilakis ES, Miller ER, McConnell JP, Lennon RJ, Kornman KS, Witztum JL, Berger PB. Oxidized phospholipids, lp(a) lipoprotein, and coronary artery disease. N Engl J Med. 2005;353:46-57
120. Imai Y, Kuba K, Neely GG, Yaghoubian-Malhami R, Perkmann T, van Loo G, Ermolaeva M, Veldhuizen R, Leung YH, Wang H, Liu H, Sun Y, Pasparakis M, Kopf M, Mech C, Bavari S, Peiris JS, Slutsky AS, Akira S, Hultqvist M, Holmdahl R, Nicholls J, Jiang C, Binder CJ, Penninger JM. Identification of oxidative stress and toll-like receptor 4 signaling as a key pathway of acute lung injury. Cell. 2008;133:235-249


**DOI: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.120.317447**
121. Foley JH, Conway EM. Cross talk pathways between coagulation and inflammation. Circ Res. 2016;118:1392-1408
122. Magro C, Mulvey JJ, Berlin D, Nuovo G, Salvatore S, Harp J, Baxter-Stoltzfus A, Laurence J. Complement associated microvascular injury and thrombosis in the pathogenesis of severe covid-19 infection: A report of five cases. Transl Res. 2020;220:1-13
123. Gao T, Hu M, Zhang X, Li H, Zhu L, Liu H, Dong Q, Zhang Z, Wang Z, Hu Y, Fu Y, Jin Y, Li K, Zhao S, Xiao Y, Luo S, Li L, Zhao L, Liu J, Zhao H, Liu Y, Yang W, Peng J, Chen X, Li P, Liu Y, Xie Y, Song J, Zhang L, Ma Q, Bian X, Chen W, Liu X, Mao Q, Cao C. Highly pathogenic coronavirus n protein aggravates lung injury by masp-2-mediated complement over-activation. medRxiv. 2020:2020.2003.2029.20041962
124. Foreman KE, Vaporciyan AA, Bonish BK, Jones ML, Johnson KJ, Glovsky MM, Eddy SM, Ward PA. C5a-induced expression of p-selectin in endothelial cells. J Clin Invest. 1994;94:1147-1155
125. Ritis K, Doumas M, Mastellos D, Micheli A, Giaglis S, Magotti P, Rafail S, Kartalis G, Sideras P, Lambris JD. A novel c5a receptor-tissue factor cross-talk in neutrophils links innate immunity to coagulation pathways. Journal of immunology (Baltimore, Md.: 1950). 2006;177:4794-4802
126. Wiedmer T, Esmon CT, Sims PJ. Complement proteins c5b-9 stimulate procoagulant activity through platelet prothrombinase. Blood. 1986;68:875-880
127. Campbell CM, Kahwash R. Will complement inhibition be the new target in treating covid-19-related systemic thrombosis? Circulation. 2020;141:1739-1741
128. Antoniak S, Mackman N. Multiple roles of the coagulation protease cascade during virus infection. Blood. 2014;123:2605-2613
129. Key NS, Vercellotti GM, Winkelmann JC, Moldow CF, Goodman JL, Esmon NL, Esmon CT, Jacob HS. Infection of vascular endothelial cells with herpes simplex virus enhances tissue factor activity and reduces thrombomodulin expression. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 1990;87:7095-7099
130. Shibamiya A, Hersemeyer K, Schmidt Woll T, Sedding D, Daniel JM, Bauer S, Koyama T, Preissner KT, Kanse SM. A key role for toll-like receptor-3 in disrupting the hemostasis balance on endothelial cells. Blood. 2009;113:714-722
131. Coughlin SR. Thrombin signalling and protease-activated receptors. Nature. 2000;407:258-264
132. Camerer E, Huang W, Coughlin SR. Tissue factor-and factor x-dependent activation of protease-activated receptor 2 by factor viia. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America. 2000;97:5255-5260
133. Coughlin SR, Camerer E. Participation in inflammation. The Journal of clinical investigation. 2003;111:25-27
134. Chen D, Carpenter A, Abrahams J, Chambers RC, Lechler RI, McVey JH, Dorling A. Protease-activated receptor 1 activation is necessary for monocyte chemoattractant protein 1-dependent leukocyte recruitment in vivo. J Exp Med. 2008;205:1739-1746
135. Sugama Y, Tiruppathi C, offakidevi K, Andersen TT, Fenton JW, 2nd, Malik AB. Thrombin-induced expression of endothelial p-selectin and intercellular adhesion molecule-1: A mechanism for stabilizing neutrophil adhesion. J Cell Biol. 1992;119:935-944
136. Kaplanski G, Marin V, Fabrigoule M, Boulay V, Benoliel AM, Bongrand P, Kaplanski S, Farnarier C. Thrombin-activated human endothelial cells support monocyte adhesion in vitro following expression of intercellular adhesion molecule-1 (icam-1; cd54) and vascular cell adhesion molecule-1 (vcam-1; cd106). Blood. 1998;92:1259-1267
137. Geisbert TW, Hensley LE, Jahrling PB, Larsen T, Geisbert JB, Paragas J, Young HA, Fredeking TM, Rote WE, Vlasuk GP. Treatment of ebola virus infection with a recombinant inhibitor of factor viia/tissue factor: A study in rhesus monkeys. Lancet. 2003;362:1953-1958
138. Bikdeli B, Madhavan MV, Jimenez D, Chuich T, Dreyfus I, Driggin E, Nigoghossian C, Ageno W, Madjid M, Guo Y, Tang LV, Hu Y, Giri J, Cushman M, Quere I, Dimakakos EP, Gibson CM, Lippi G, Favaloro EJ, Fareed J, Caprini JA, Tafur AJ, Burton JR, Francese DP, Wang EY, Falanga A, McLintock C, Hunt BJ, Spyropoulos AC, Barnes GD, Eikelboom JW, Weinberg I, Schulman S, Carrier M, Piazza G, Beckman JA, Steg PG, Stone GW, Rosenkranz S, Goldhaber SZ, Parikh SA,

Monreal M, Krumholz HM, Konstantinides SV, Weitz JI, Lip GYH, Global Covid-19 Thrombosis Collaborative Group EbtINE, the Iua SbtESCWGoPC, Right Ventricular F. Covid-19 and thrombotic or thromboembolic disease: Implications for prevention, antithrombotic therapy, and follow-up: Jacc state-of-the-art review. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2020;75:2950-2973

139. Connors JM, Levy JH. Covid-19 and its implications for thrombosis and anticoagulation. Blood. 2020;135:2033-2040

140. Tang N, Bai H, Chen X, Gong J, Li D, Sun Z. Anticoagulant treatment is associated with decreased mortality in severe coronavirus disease 2019 patients with coagulopathy. J Thromb Haemost. 2020;18:1094-1099

141. Arnold K, Xu Y, Sparkenbaugh EM, Li M, Han X, Zhang X, Xia K, Piegore M, Zhang F, Zhang X, Henderson M, Pagadala V, Su G, Tan L, Park PW, Stravitz RT, Key NS, Linhardt RJ, Pawlinski R, Xu D, Liu J. Design of anti-inflammatory heparan sulfate to protect against acetaminophen-induced acute liver failure. Science translational medicine. 2020;12

142. Poterucha TJ, Libby P, Goldhaber SZ. More than an anticoagulant: Do heparins have direct anti-inflammatory effects? Thromb Haemost. 2017;117:437-444

143. Liu J, Thorp SC. Cell surface heparan sulfate and its roles in assisting viral infections. Medicinal research reviews. 2002;22:1-25

144. Shukla D, Spear PG. Herpesviruses and heparan sulfate: An intimate relationship in aid of viral entry. The Journal of clinical investigation. 2001;108:503-510

145. Lang J, Yang N, Deng J, Liu K, Yang P, Zhang G, Jiang C. Inhibition of sars pseudovirus cell entry by lactoferrin binding to heparan sulfate proteoglycans. PLoS One. 2011;6:e23710

146. Milewska A, Zarebski M, Nowak P, Stozek K, Potempa J, Pyrc K. Human coronavirus nl63 utilizes heparan sulfate proteoglycans for attachment to target cells. Journal of virology. 2014;88:13221-13230

147. Mycroft-West C, Su D, Elli S, Guimond S, Miller G, Turnbull J, Yates E, Guerrini M, Fernig D, Lima M, Skidmore M. The 2019 coronavirus (sars-cov-2) surface protein (spike) s1 receptor binding domain undergoes conformational change upon heparin binding. bioRxiv. 2020:2020.2002.2029.971093

148. Belouzard S, Chu VC, Whittaker GR. Activation of the sars coronavirus spike protein via sequential proteolytic cleavage at two distinct sites. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America. 2009;106:5871-5876

149. Riker RR, May TL, Fraser GL, Gagnon DJ, Bandara M, Zemrak W, Seder DB. Heparin-induced thrombocytopenia with thrombosis in covid-19 adult respiratory distress syndrome. Research and Practice in Thrombosis and Haemostasis.n/a

150. Renne T, Stavrou EX. Roles of factor xii in innate immunity. Front Immunol. 2019;10:2011

151. Larsson M, Rayzman V, Nolte MW, Nickel KF, Bjorkqvist J, Jamsa A, Hardy MP, Fries M, Schmidbauer S, Hedenvist P, Broome M, Pragst I, Dickneite G, Wilson MJ, Nash AD, Panousis C, Renne T. A factor xiiia inhibitory antibody provides thromboprotection in extracorporeal circulation without increasing bleeding risk. Science translational medicine. 2014;6:222ra217

152. Pixley RA, De La Cadena R, Page JD, Kaufman N, Wyshock EG, Chang A, Taylor FB, Jr., Colman RW. The contact system contributes to hypotension but not disseminated intravascular coagulation in lethal bacteremia. In vivo use of a monoclonal anti-factor xii antibody to block contact activation in baboons. The Journal of clinical investigation. 1993;91:61-68

153. Shatzel J, DeLoughery E, Lorentz C, Tucker E, Aslan J, Hinds M, Gailani D, Weitz J, McCarty O, Gruber A. The contact activation system as a potential therapeutic target in patients with covid-19. Research and Practice in Thrombosis and Haemostasis.n/a

154. Jansen PM, Pixley RA, Brouwer M, de Jong IW, Chang AC, Hack CE, Taylor FB, Jr., Colman RW. Inhibition of factor xii in septic baboons attenuates the activation of complement and fibrinolytic systems and reduces the release of interleukin-6 and neutrophil elastase. Blood. 1996;87:2337-2344

155. Renne T, Schmaier AH, Nickel KF, Blomback M, Maas C. In vivo roles of factor xii. Blood. 2012;120:4296-4303
156. Whyte CS, Morrow GB, Mitchell JL, Chowdary P, Mutch NJ. Fibrinolytic abnormalities in acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards) and versatility of thrombolytic drugs to treat covid-19. J Thromb Haemost. 2020
157. Wang J, Hajizadeh N, Moore EE, McIntyre RC, Moore PK, Veress LA, Yaffe MB, Moore HB, Barrett CD. Tissue plasminogen activator (tpa) treatment for covid-19 associated acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards): A case series. J Thromb Haemost. 2020
158. Liu C, Ma Y, Su Z, Zhao R, Zhao X, Nie HG, Xu P, Zhu L, Zhang M, Li X, Zhang X, Matthay MA, Ji HL. Meta-analysis of preclinical studies of fibrinolytic therapy for acute lung injury. Front Immunol. 2018;9:1898
159. Hardaway RM, Harke H, Tyroch AH, Williams CH, Vazquez Y, Krause GF. Treatment of severe acute respiratory distress syndrome: A final report on a phase i study. Am Surg. 2001;67:377-382
160. Meyer G, Vicaut E, Danays T, Agnelli G, Becattini C, Beyer-Westendorf J, Bluhmki E, Bouvaist H, Brenner B, Couturaud F, Dellas C, Empen K, Franca A, Galie N, Geibel A, Goldhaber SZ, Jimenez D, Kozak M, Kupatt C, Kucher N, Lang IM, Lankeit M, Meneveau N, Pacouret G, Palazzini M, Petris A, Pruszczynk P, Rugolotto M, Salvi A, Schellong S, Sebbane M, Sobkowicz B, Stefanovic BS, Thiele H, Torbicki A, Verschuren F, Konstantinides SV, Investigators P. Fibrinolysis for patients with intermediate-risk pulmonary embolism. N Engl J Med. 2014;370:1402-1411
161. Wang L, Li H, Gu X, Wang Z, Liu S, Chen L. Effect of antiplatelet therapy on acute respiratory distress syndrome and mortality in critically ill patients: A meta-analysis. PLoS One. 2016;11:e0154754
162. Ouyang Y, Wang Y, Liu B, Ma X, Ding R. Effects of antiplatelet therapy on the mortality rate of patients with sepsis: A meta-analysis. Journal of critical care. 2019;50:162-168
163. Carestia A, Davis RP, Grosjean H, Lau MW, Jenne CN. Acetylsalicylic acid inhibits intravascular coagulation during staphylococcus aureus-induced sepsis in mice. Blood. 2020;135:1281-1286
164. Liu X, Li Z, Liu S, Sun J, Chen Z, Jiang M, Zhang Q, Wei Y, Wang X, Huang YY, Shi Y, Xu Y, Xian H, Bai F, Ou C, Xiong B, Lew AM, Cui J, Fang R, Huang H, Zhao J, Hong X, Zhang Y, Zhou F, Luo HB. Potential therapeutic effects of dipyridamole in the severely ill patients with covid-19. Acta Pharm Sin B. 2020
165. Asakura H, Ogawa H. Potential of heparin and nafamostat combination therapy for covid-19. J Thromb Haemost. 2020;18:1521-1522
166. Yamamoto M, Matsuyama S, Li X, Takeda M, Kawaguchi Y, Inoue JI, Matsuda Z. Identification of nafamostat as a potent inhibitor of middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus s protein-mediated membrane fusion using the split-protein-based cell-cell fusion assay. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2016;60:6532-6539

FIGURE LEGENDS

Figure 1: Proposed mechanisms of SARS-CoV-2 transmission, and COVID-19-associated thrombosis. Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) gains entry to host lung epithelial cells by the binding of the transmembrane spike (S) glycoprotein to angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2). The S1 subunit of the S protein binds to ACE2 and mediates viral attachment. Proteolytic cleavage of the S protein at the S1/2 junction by the proteases, furin and transmembrane protease, serine 2 (TMPRSS2), facilitates viral entry. SARS-CoV-2 can also directly invade endothelial expressed ACE2. Infected cells undergo pyroptosis leading to the release of danger-associated molecular patterns (DAMPs) and triggering the release of pro-inflammatory cytokines and chemokines. The activated endothelium upregulates the expression of von Willebrand factor (vWF) and adhesion molecules including intercellular adhesion molecule (ICAM)-1, α<sub>v</sub>β<sub>3</sub>, P-selectin and E-selectin leading to recruitment of platelets and leukocytes and complement activation. Neutrophils release neutrophil extracellular traps (NETs), causing direct activation of the contact pathway. Complement activation potentiates these mechanisms by increasing endothelial and monocyte tissue factor (TF), further platelet activation and amplifies endothelial inflammation, which increases production of pro-inflammatory cytokines from the endothelium including IL-1, IL-8, RANTES, IL-6 and MCP-1. The hypoxic environment can induce hypoxia-inducible factors (HIFs) which upregulates endothelial TF expression. These mechanisms ultimately lead to the unchecked generation of thrombin, resulting in thrombus formation. The fibrin degradation product, D-dimer, which is a marker of coagulation activation, appears to be a strong prognostic marker associated with high mortality in patients with COVID-19.

Figure 2: Mechanisms regulating immunothrombosis. In vascular homeostasis, the endothelium possesses anti-inflammatory and anti-thrombotic properties due to the expression of CD39, nitric oxide (NO), and prostacyclin in addition to the natural anticoagulants, tissue factor pathway inhibitor (TFPI), activated protein C and thrombomodulin. In the setting of infection or inflammation, endothelial cells upregulate the expression of von Willebrand factor (vWF) and adhesion molecules such as intercellular adhesion molecule (ICAM)-1, α<sub>v</sub>β<sub>3</sub>, P-selectin and E-selectin, promoting the adhesion of leukocytes and platelets. Activated platelets release chemokines CXCL1, PF4, CXCL5, CXCL7, CCL3, RANTES and CCL7 to enhance leukocyte recruitment. Leukocytes interact with platelets via several receptor/ligand pairs. These include platelet P-selectin binding to its cognate receptor P-selectin glycoprotein (PSGL)-1 on leukocytes, GPIb on platelets interacting with Mac-1 on monocytes and neutrophils, and GPIIb/IIIa binding to SLC44A2/CTL-2 on neutrophils. Activated platelets release polyphosphate (polyP), which activates the contact pathway, and high mobility group box (HMGB1), which enhances monocyte recruitment and monocyte tissue factor (TF) expression, thereby amplifying thrombin generation by way of the TF pathway of coagulation. Neutrophils release neutrophil extracellular traps (NETs) which promote thrombosis via activation of the contact pathway and the binding and activation of platelets. Finally, complement activation leads to the recruitment of leukocytes and upregulates TF expression, amplifies platelet activation and upregulates endothelial expression of pro-inflammatory cytokines including interleukin (IL)-1, IL-6, IL-8, and MCP-1. These mechanisms result in excess thrombin generation, which potentiates the activation of platelets, leukocytes and endothelium via protease activated receptors (PARs) and culminates in a fibrin clot.

Figure 3: Proposed role of thrombin in COVID-19-associated immunothrombosis. Infection of endothelial cells by SARS-CoV-2 and liberation of viral DAMPs results in endothelial activation with the upregulation of tissue factor (TF) and adhesion molecule expression in addition to endothelial cytokine production. This leads to the recruitment and activation of leukocytes and platelets. Activated leukocytes release neutrophil extracellular traps (NETs) and monocyte-derived, TF-bearing microvesicles (MV). Activated platelets release polyP from dense granules. This initiates intravascular thrombin generation via the TF and contact pathways of coagulation. Thrombin exerts its thrombotic effect by activating platelets through the platelet protease-activated receptor (PAR) 1/4 in addition to mediating
the cleavage of fibrinogen to fibrin. Furthermore, thrombin possesses proinflammatory functions due to its ability to activate endothelial cells and leukocytes. Thrombin activates endothelial cells via the endothelial PAR1 receptor, leading to upregulation of IL-6, IL-8, PAF and MCP-1 in addition to the adhesion molecules P-selectin, E-selectin and ICAM-1, all of which serve to increase leukocyte recruitment and activation. Similarly, monocyte and T-cell functions are enhanced by thrombin activation of monocyte and T cell expressed PAR1 and PAR3. The resultant endothelial cell, platelet and leukocyte interactions establish a positive feedback loop, which further promulgates ongoing thrombin generation leading to immunothrombosis. This thrombotic phenotype likely results in the clinical manifestations seen in COVID-19, including pulmonary embolism (PE), microvascular thrombosis, ischemic stroke and deep vein thrombosis (DVT).

**Figure 4: Treatments for targeting COVID-19-associated thrombosis**

Heparins, including unfractionated heparin (UFH) and low molecular weight heparin (LMWH), bind antithrombin (AT), and potentiate the inhibitory effect of AT on coagulation factors Xa and thrombin. Furthermore, UFH may have antiviral effects by having the ability to bind the receptor binding domain of the S protein of SARS-CoV-2 in addition to potentially acting as a decoy for naturally expressed heparan sulfate thus reducing the ability of the virus to bind to and invade cells. The putative anti-inflammatory effects of UFH is related to its ability to bind DAMPs. Inhibitors of FXII block the contact factor pathway of coagulation, initiated by NETs, and also appear to have pleiotropic anti-inflammatory effects. Anti-platelet agents, such as dipyridamole, nafamostat and aspirin inhibit platelet activation, which can inhibit NETosis and the release of platelet-derived DAMPs such as HMGB1. Nafamostat may inhibit the transmembrane protease, serine 2 (TMPRSS2) and therefore impede viral entry. Fibrinolytics, such as tPA, degrade cross-linked fibrin.

Circulation Research

DOI: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.120.317447 25
FIGURE 1

SARS-CoV-2
Pulmonary
alveolus
S protein
S1/S2 cleavage
Furin
TMPRSS2
ACE2
Cell pyroptosis
DAMPs
Normal endothelium
Activated endothelium
HIFs
· P- & E-selectin
· ICAM-1
· αvβ3
TF pathway
SARS-CoV-2
Complement
activation
ACE2
GPIb
vWF
Activated
platelet
↑ IL-1
↑ IL-8
↑ RANTES
↑ IL-6
↑ MCP-1
Neutrophil
Monocyte
NETosis
Histones
Platelet
Contact
pathway
Tissue factor
Fibrin clot
Fibrin
Detection of
elevated D-dimer

Normal endothelium                      Activated endothelium

Nitric oxide
CD39
· TFP1
· Activated
  protein C
· Thrombomodulin
vWF
Poly P
GPIb
PAR1
· CXCL1
· PF4
· CXCL5
· CXCL7
· CCL3
· RANTES
· CCL7
P-selectin
PSGL1
TF
TF-bearing
MVs
Contact
pathway
Thrombin
generation
NETosis
Histones
HMGB1
TF
Activated
platelet
Neutrophil
Platelet
GPIb
Mac-1
PSGL1
P-selectin
Monocyte
Fibrin clot
Propagating
thrombus
C5b-9
Complement
C3
C3b
C5a
C5b
· IL-6 · PAF
· IL-8 · MCP-1
Activated
platelet
Fibrin
PAR1

Activated endothelium

Platelet  
PolyP  

Neutrophil  

Monocyte  

TF-bearing  
MVs  

SARS-CoV-2  

PAR1  

Contact  
pathway  

NETosis  

TF  

Thrombin  
generation  

PAR1/2/3  

Monocyte  

PAR2  

Neutrophil  

Fibrinogen → Fibrin  

PAR1/4  

Tissue factor  
pathway  

Activated  
platelet  

↑IL-6  
↑IL-8  

↑PAF  
↑MCP-1  

↑P- & E-selectin  
↑ICAM-1  

T-cell  

PE Microvascular  
thrombosis  

Ischemic stroke  

DVT

FIGURE 4

Pulmonary alveolus

SARS-CoV-2
TMPRSS2
ACE2

Nafamostat

Factor XII inhibitor
Aspirin
Nafamostat
Dipyridamole

Neutrophil
NETosis
TPA
Contact pathway

Activated platelet
HMGB1
Fibrin clot

FXa (or Thrombin)
Fibrin

UFH
LMWH
ATIII
Thrombin (or Xa)
