
JBC Papers in Press. Published on July 13, 2020 as Manuscript REV120.013930  
The latest version is at [https://www.jbc.org/cgi/doi/10.1074/jbc.REV120.013930](https://www.jbc.org/cgi/doi/10.1074/jbc.REV120.013930)

# The molecular virology of Coronaviruses

Ella Hartenian¹#, Divya Nandakumar²#, Azra Lari², Michael Ly¹, Jessica M. Tucker² and Britt A. Glaunsinger¹,²,³,*  

1 Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of California Berkeley, CA, USA  
2 Department of Plant and Microbial Biology, University of California Berkeley, CA, USA  
3 Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of California Berkeley, CA, USA  

* Corresponding author: Britt Glaunsinger  
E-mail: glaunsinger@berkeley.edu  
# Equal contribution  

Email: [glaunsinger@berkeley.edu](mailto:glaunsinger@berkeley.edu)  

Running title: The molecular virology of Coronaviruses  

Keywords: Plus-stranded RNA virus, virology, coronavirus, innate immunity, viral replication, virus entry, endoplasmic reticulum (ER)

Abstract

Few human pathogens have been the focus of as much concentrated worldwide attention as Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), the cause of COVID-19. Its emergence into the human population and ensuing pandemic came on the heels of Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus (SARS-CoV) and Middle East Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus (MERS-CoV), two other highly pathogenic coronavirus spillovers, which collectively have reshaped our view of a virus family previously associated primarily with the common cold. It has placed intense pressure on the collective scientific community to develop therapeutics and vaccines, whose engineering relies on a detailed understanding of coronavirus biology. Here, we present the molecular virology of coronavirus infection, including its entry into cells, its remarkably sophisticated gene expression and replication mechanisms, its extensive remodeling of the intracellular environment and its multi-faceted immune evasion strategies. We highlight aspects of the viral lifecycle that may be amenable to antiviral targeting as well as key features of its biology that await discovery.

Introduction

The Coronaviridae family of viruses are enveloped, single-stranded positive-sense RNA viruses grouped into four genera (alphacoronavirus, betacoronavirus, gammacoronavirus, and deltacoronavirus) that primarily infect birds and mammals, including humans and bats. The seven coronaviruses known to infect humans fall within the alpha- and betacoronavirus genera, while gamma- and deltacoronaviruses primarily infect birds. Coronaviruses have been studied for decades using the model betacoronavirus, murine hepatitis virus (MHV), and the human alphacoronavirus HCoV-229E. In humans, the circulating coronaviruses HCoV-229E, HCoV-NL63, HCoV-OC43, and HCoV-HKU1 generally cause mild upper respiratory illness and collectively are associated with 10-30% of the common cold cases (1). However, within the past two decades, three highly pathogenic coronaviruses have emerged into the human population as the result of spillover events from wildlife that can cause severe respiratory illness: Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus (SARS-CoV) emerged in 2002, Middle East Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus (MERS-CoV) emerged in 2011, and most recently, Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) emerged in 2019. These outbreaks, together with estimates suggesting that hundreds to thousands of additional coronaviruses may reside in bats alone (2), highlight the potential for future coronavirus zoonotic transmission.

In this article, we provide an overview of the coronavirus lifecycle with an eye towards its notable molecular features and potential targets for therapeutic interventions (Figure 1). Much of the information presented is derived from studies of the betacoronaviruses MHV, SARS-CoV, and MERS-CoV, with a rapidly expanding number of reports on SARS-CoV-2. The first portion of the review focuses on the molecular basis of coronavirus entry and its replication cycle. We highlight several remarkable properties, such as the sophisticated viral gene expression and replication strategies that enable maintenance of a remarkably large, single stranded, positive sense (+) RNA genome and the extensive remodeling of cellular membranes to form specialized viral replication and assembly compartments. The second portion explores the mechanisms by which these viruses manipulate the host cell environment during infection. These include diverse alterations to host gene expression and immune response pathways. This article is intended as a more in-depth companion piece to our online ‘Coronavirus 101’ lecture (https://youtu.be/8_bOhZd6ieM).

Part I: The viral lifecycle

Viral entry

Coronavirus particles consist of a ~30 kilobase (kb) strand of positive sense RNA that forms the genome; this genome is coated with nucleocapsid (N) protein and enclosed in a lipid bilayer containing three membrane proteins: spike (S), membrane (M), and envelope (E) (3). For all studied coronaviruses, the M protein is critical for

incorporating essential viral components into new virions during morphogenesis, and N protein associates with the viral genome and M to direct genome packaging into new viral particles. The E protein forms an ion channel in the viral membrane and participates in viral assembly. The S protein is required for viral entry, as it binds to the target cell and initiates fusion with the host cell membrane (reviewed in (4)). S is homotrimeric, with each subunit consisting of two domains, S1 and S2. S1 contains the receptor-binding domain (RBD) and engages with the host receptor, while S2 mediates subsequent membrane fusion to enable the virus to enter the host cytoplasm. Activation of the S protein fusion activity requires prior proteolytic cleavage at two sites. The first cleavage site is at the S1/S2 boundary, leading to structural changes in the S2 domain that places it in a prefusion conformation. This cleavage event also separates S2 from S1, although the two domains remain non-covalently associated. The second cleavage site is at S2', which drives fusion of the viral and cellular membranes to enable release of the N-coated RNA genome into the cytoplasm.

While coronaviruses use the above general strategy to enter target cells, the receptors and proteases used as well as subcellular sites of S cleavage differ depending on the virus (reviewed in (5)). The S protein of both SARS-CoV and SARS-CoV2 use host ACE2 as their receptor (6-8) (Figure 2). ACE2 is a cell-surface peptidase that hydrolyzes angiotensin II and is expressed in most organs, with particularly high expression in the epithelia of lung and small intestine (9). After ACE2 receptor binding, SARS-CoV and -CoV2 S proteins are subsequently cleaved and activated by the host cell surface protease TMPRSS2 at the S1/S2 and S2' sites, leading to membrane fusion (6, 10-12). Some coronavirus S proteins are pre-cleaved at the S1/S2 site by the cellular protease furin during their biosynthesis in the producer cell, as has been shown for both MHV and MERS-CoV (13-15), priming them for entry upon receptor binding on the target cell. MERS-CoV S protein uses DPP4 as its receptor (16, 17), and multiple cellular proteases including TMPRSS2, endosomal cathepsins, and furin have been implicated in the subsequent cleavage at the S2' site (16, 18, 19). The MHV S protein uses host CEACAM1a as its receptor and is

subsequently cleaved at S2' by lysosomal proteases (20, 21).

The extent to which specific coronaviruses fuse at the plasma membrane versus during endocytosis remains incompletely resolved. In the cases of SARS-CoV, MERS-CoV and MHV, the involvement of endosomal and lysosomal proteases in cleavage of their S proteins suggests that entry can occur during endocytosis. MHV enters predominantly through clathrin-mediated endocytosis and fusion with lysosomal membranes, as lysosomal proteases activate the S protein (22, 23). For SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV, both the endocytic and direct membrane fusion pathways may be used for entry. Studies in which components of endocytosis and endosomal proteases have been blocked demonstrate that SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV can exploit the endocytic pathway in order to enter target cells (24-27). For these viruses, it is likely that the producer and target cell type influence which pathway they use for viral entry. For instance, when MERS-CoV S is pre-cleaved in the producer cell, it gets activated by cell-surface proteases and enters the target cell by direct membrane fusion (28). In contrast, when MERS-CoV S is uncleaved in the producer cell, it enters the target cell through endocytosis and is instead activated by endosomal cathepsins. MERS-CoV with S that has not been pre-cleaved during morphogenesis is incapable of infecting target cell types that have low expression of cathepsins. There are reports demonstrating that inhibition of endosomal cathepsins reduces the efficiency of SARS-CoV2 entry, suggesting that this virus also exploits endocytosis as another route of entry in addition to direct membrane fusion (6, 29, 30).

There has already been considerable research on the SARS-CoV2 S protein, given the crucial role it plays during viral entry (reviewed in (31)). Comparing the SARS-CoV2 S protein sequence to that of closely related SARS-CoV-like viruses revealed that almost all the residues important for ACE2 engagement are not conserved in SARS-CoV2 (32), although the SARS-CoV2 S RBD has a 10-to-20-fold higher binding affinity to ACE2 than SARS-CoV S RBD (33). The mechanistic basis behind the enhanced binding affinity is not entirely

clear, as ACE2 engagement is structurally similar between SARS-CoV S and SARS-CoV2 S (34). However, there is a unique salt-bridge interaction present between SARS-CoV2 S and ACE2, and this may contribute to the enhanced binding affinity. Furthermore, the S1/S2 site in SARS-CoV2 S contains an insertion of polybasic residues (35, 36). The stretch of polybasic residues contains a furin recognition motif, and recent data suggest that furin can cleave at the S1/S2 site on SARS-CoV2 S, but not SARS-CoV S, in producer cells (29, 37). This pre-cleavage event is analogous to the processing of MERS-CoV S and MHV S, both of which also contain a furin cleavage site at S1/S2. A pre-cleavage event at the S1/S2 site implies that SARS-CoV2 S may only require cleavage at the S2' site on the target cell surface, which would potentiate the membrane fusion process. Notably, acquisition of polybasic cleavage sites occurs during experimental selection for increased transmissibility and expanded tropism in other viruses, suggesting it may have played a role in the bat-to-human spillover of SARS-CoV2 (38-42). Further investigation into the properties of S protein from SARS-CoV2 and other closely related viruses may provide insight into the origin of SARS-CoV2 as well as the mechanism behind its high transmissibility.

Numerous therapeutic strategies are being explored to inhibit SARS-CoV2 entry, including blocking ACE2 engagement, inactivating host proteases, and inhibiting S2-mediated membrane fusion. Neutralizing antibodies against SARS-CoV S display moderate efficacy in blocking SARS-CoV2 infection due to significant differences in the epitope region (6, 35, 43, 44). A recent study isolated neutralizing antibodies capable of blocking the interaction between S and ACE2 from convalescent SARS-CoV2 patients and demonstrated that they effectively reduce viral load in a mouse model, garnering optimism about the possible use of neutralizing antibodies for treatment (45). Other strategies include development of lipopeptides that block S2-mediated membrane fusion (46) and use of a clinically tested TMPRSS2 inhibitor (6). Not surprisingly, generating protective immunity against the S protein has been the major focus of SARS-CoV2 vaccine efforts. S protein-directed vaccine platforms under

development include production of recombinant S protein, use of non-pathogenic viral vectors to direct expression of S, and nucleic acid-based vaccines in which sequence encoding the S protein is delivered as a messenger RNA (mRNA) or on a DNA backbone (47). The viral vector and nucleic acid vaccine strategies rely on host ribosomes to translate the S sequence into protein, which would then be subsequently processed and presented to the immune system.

Genome organization, polyprotein synthesis and proteolysis

Coronaviruses have one of the largest known genomes among RNA viruses, ranging from 27 kb to 32 kb in length, more than double the length of the average RNA virus genome, and encode for approximately 22-29 proteins (48, 49). Given the constraints of eukaryotic translation which generally allow one protein to be translated per mRNA with ribosome scanning beginning near the 5' end, it is worth pausing to consider how this number of viral proteins can be synthesized from the genome with a single ribosome entry site. Coronaviruses achieve this feat through the use of large, multi-protein fusions (termed polyproteins, described below) that are subsequently processed into individual proteins (50), as well as through synthesis of sub-genome length mRNAs using an unusual transcription mechanism (discussed in the subsequent section).

All of the viral nonstructural proteins (nsps) are encoded in two open reading frames (ORF1a and b) that encompass roughly the first two-thirds of the viral genome (Figure 3). ORF1a/b is translated from the 5' capped RNA genome by cap-dependent translation to produce a shorter polyprotein (the ~440-500 kDa pp1a, which includes nsps 1-11) or a longer polyprotein (the ~740-810 kDa pp1ab, which includes nsps 1-16), depending on whether the stop codon at the end of ORF1a is recognized or bypassed. Bypassing the ORF1a stop codon occurs through a -1 ribosomal frameshift in the overlapping region between ORFs 1a and 1b just upstream of the stop codon, enabling production of the larger pp1ab polyprotein. Frameshifting occurs with ~20-50% efficiency (51), and is triggered by the presence of a slippery sequence 'UUUAAAC'
followed by an RNA pseudoknot structure (52), the disruption of which affects frameshifting efficiency (53). While nsps 1-11 from ORF1a are involved in a broad range of functions from blocking the initial immune response to functioning as cofactors for replication and transcription proteins, the core components of the replication and transcription machinery such as the RNA dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp), helicase and other RNA modifying enzymes are present in the ORF1b portion of pplab. This frameshifting-based translational control strategy helps the virus maintain a stoichiometry of ppla and pplab proteins that is optimal for infectivity and replication (54, 55). Due to this requirement of precise ratios of ppla and pplab, frameshifting has been explored as a novel drug target (56, 57) similar to such efforts in HIV (58). These drugs typically prevent frameshifting by binding to RNA structures that are required for frameshifting (56, 57).

To liberate the individual nsps, ppla and pplab are proteolytically processed in cis and in trans by two viral proteases that reside in nsp3 and nsp5. Nsp3 contains one or two papain like proteases (PLpro1 and PLpro2) and nsp5 contains a chymotrypsin like cysteine protease (3CLpro) (reviewed in (59)). The 3CLpro catalyzes the proteolytic cleavage of all nsps downstream of nsp4 and is thus referred to as the main protease. Inhibitors of 3CLpro and PLpro have long been considered as potential drug targets, as their cleavage recognition sequences are distinct from other human proteases and they are essential to viral replication (60-62). Although PLpro is responsible for fewer cleavage events in ppla, it additionally functions as a deubiquitinase and deISGylating (removal of conjugated Interferon Stimulated Gene 15 from cellular proteins) enzyme (63, 64), activities that contribute to evasion of the initial anti-viral response (64). It is therefore possible that targeting PLpro would inhibit viral replication as well as prevent dysregulation of cellular signaling pathways that could lead to cell death in surrounding cells (65).

### Replication & gene expression

A subset of nsps generated by proteolytic cleavage of the polyproteins come together to form the replication and transcription complexes (RTCs)

that copy and transcribe the genome. RTCs reside in convoluted membrane structures (discussed in detail below) derived from rough endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and are anchored in place by viral transmembrane proteins nsp3, nsp4 and nsp6 (66-69). Similar to other positive strand RNA viruses, replication of coronaviruses involves synthesis of the complementary full-length negative strand RNA, which serves as a template for generation of positive strand progeny genomes (70). The negative strand templates get turned over via unknown mechanisms (71) and the positive strand genomes are packaged into virions. Several cis-acting RNA elements in the 5′ and 3′ end of the genome are important for replication and transcription (reviewed in (72) and (73)). These include conserved stem loop structures within ~500 nucleotides (nt) of the 5′ end of the genome, structural elements in the 3′ UTR that are partially conserved across the different coronaviruses and the 3′ poly A tail. Negative strand synthesis is facilitated by the N protein interacting with both the poly A tail and the 5′ end of the genome to bring these termini in proximity (74).

In addition to genomic replication, the RTCs also carry out synthesis of sub-genomic mRNAs (sg mRNAs), which encode for the ORFs located in the 3′-proximal one-third of the genome. All sg mRNAs are co-terminal and contain a common 5′ leader sequence that is derived from the 5′ end of the viral genome (75). Placement of the common leader sequence at the 5′ end of all sg mRNAs involves an unusual and complex mechanism of discontinuous transcription (Figure 4) (reviewed in (76)). During negative strand synthesis, the RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp) complex terminates or pauses at specific sites along the genome called Transcription Regulatory Sequences (TRS). The TRS are present downstream of the common leader sequence at the 5′ end of the genome (TRS-L) and 5′ of every viral ORF along the body of the viral genome (TRS-B) except ORFs 1a and 1b. Complementarity between sequences in TRS-B on the newly synthesized negative sense RNA and TRS-L allows for the transcription complex to switch templates—effectively jumping from a given TRS-B to the TRS-L at the 5′ end of the genome. Transcription then continues, copying the leader sequence to complete the negative strand
sgRNA (77, 78). The negative strand sgRNAs subsequently serve as templates to generate large numbers of sg mRNAs; the positive strand RNAs far outnumber the negative strand RNAs (79). Secondary structure analysis of the TRS-L region has shown that the context of the sequence and associated structures are important for ensuring that only the TRS-L and not other TRS-B sequences acts as the template for strand switching by the RdRp (81). The purpose of the 5' leader sequence in all sg mRNAs, other than to potentially prime sg mRNA synthesis, is not completely understood. One study with SARS-CoV suggested that the 5' leader sequence could be important for protection against cleavage by viral nsp1 (80) although the mechanism by which protection is rendered is unclear. The efficiency with which the template switch occurs is an important determinant of the levels of the different sg mRNAs and the ratio of sg mRNAs to genome length RNA, as failed template switching leads to read through at the TRS and increases the probability of producing genome length RNA (reviewed in (81)). Most of what is known about this regulation is from studies on arteriviruses, which belong to the same order (Nidovirales) as coronaviruses and synthesize sg mRNAs by a similar mechanism. The levels of several sg mRNAs are correlated with the stability (ΔG) of the duplex between TRS-L and TRS-B (77) and hence duplex stability was thought to be an important regulator of this process. However, a recent sequencing study with an arterivirus showed that some TRS-B sequences with 100% similarity to TRS-L core sequences were not used as switching points for the transcription complex, suggesting that while duplex stability is necessary, it is not sufficient to dictate template switching (82). Regulation of the levels of some sg mRNAs such as the N protein sg mRNA in coronaviruses was shown to be mediated by short- and long-range RNA-RNA interactions (83, 84).

Several proteins have also been implicated in regulating the levels of sg mRNAs and the switch between full-length negative strand synthesis and sg RNA synthesis, although a clear picture of features that favor transcription or replication has not emerged. For example, the viral N protein (85) and the cellular kinase GSK-3 and helicase DDX1 (86) have been shown to be important for producing full

length negative strand gRNA and long sgRNAs, suggesting a role in read-through of TRS sequences. However, the N protein also has helicase-like activity (87), promotes template switching and appears dispensable for replication but required for efficient sg mRNA transcription (88). It is also possible that the transcription complex that carries out negative strand synthesis is distinct from the version that carries out positive strand synthesis (89).

Composition of the replication/transcription complex

Coronavirus replication, discontinuous transcription and RNA processing are orchestrated by a remarkably sophisticated replicase complex (Figure 5). Unlike other RNA viruses where replication is primarily dependent on the RdRp and a small number of cofactors, coronaviruses appear to use a multi-protein complex including the RdRp (nsp12), processivity factors (nsp7-8), a helicase (nsp13), single-strand binding protein (nsp9), a proofreading exonuclease (nsp14), other cofactors (e.g., nsp10) and capping enzymes (e.g., nsp16). This is more reminiscent of replisomes from DNA-based organisms and is potentially a consequence of their unusually large genomes (90).

In vitro studies showed that while the SARS-CoV RdRp nsp12 has some minimal activity on its own, its activity and processivity are greatly stimulated in the presence of nsp7-nsp8 cofactors (91). Cryo-EM structures of the SARS-CoV and SARS-CoV 2 nsp12-nsp7-nsp8 tripartite complex revealed that nsp8 binds nsp12 as both a heterodimer (nsp7-nsp8) and by itself to stabilize the regions of nsp12 involved in RNA binding (92, 93). Whether the RdRp is capable of de novo initiation or requires a primer-template substrate remains heavily debated (94, 95). Coronavirus RdRps also have a conserved N-terminal domain that has nucleotidylation activity (NiRAN domain) which is essential for coronavirus replication (96). Structural homology analysis of the NiRAN domain suggest that it shares significant homology with the nucleotide binding site of protein kinases (92), although how it might mediate nucleotidytransferase or the function of this domain is not known.
In addition to its role as a processivity factor for the RdRp, nsp8 was first thought to function as a primase during replication (97, 98). However, while nsp8 has polyadenylation activity that is stimulated by the presence of a poly U stretch on the template strand, it is unable to incorporate other nucleotides on heteropolymeric templates (99), suggesting that it might not be a primase. Additionally, the cryo EM structure with nsp7 and nsp12 does not suggest a mechanism for nucleotide incorporation by nsp8. It has been proposed that the presence of poly-U sequences at the 5' end of the negative strand viral RNA could promote polyadenylation of the viral positive strand RNAs by nsp8, but this remains to be experimentally validated. The poly A tail length also varies during infection (100), and it would be interesting to explore if nsp8 has a role in this process. discontinuous negative strand synthesis in coronaviruses.

Another key component of the RTC is nsp13, a super family 1 (SF1) 5'->3' helicase (105), that interacts with nsp12 (106) and several other components of the RTC. The functional role of helicases in replication of RNA viruses is largely unknown although they are one of the most conserved proteins encoded by coronaviruses (reviewed in (107)). Helicases use the energy from nucleotide hydrolysis to translocate on nucleic acids. In addition to its (d)NTPase activity, nsp13 also has a 5' triphosphatase activity suggesting a role for it in RNA capping (108). The helicase domain of MERS and SARS-CoV nsp13 show remarkable similarity to the cellular Upf1 helicase, a protein involved in the nonsense-mediated decay (NMD) pathway. Based on this observation, it has been proposed that nsp13 could also play a role in quality control of RNAs (109).

One of the central outstanding questions about the role of helicases in RNA viruses is whether they function similar to replicative helicases or if they are involved in unwinding local structures and removing obstacles for the polymerase. Replicative helicases typically work together with the polymerase to unwind the double-stranded nucleic acid ahead of the polymerase. The 5'->3' directionality of the helicase is reminiscent of prokaryotic replisomes, where the helicase and

One of the interacting partners of nsp8 in the RTC is nsp9, a single strand (ss) nucleic acid binding protein (101, 102) with no obvious sequence specificity or function. It binds ssDNA and ssRNA with equal affinity, although ssRNA is the presumed substrate during infection. Structural studies have shown that it dimerizes and this is important for viral replication but dispensable for RNA binding (103). It is possible that nsp9 binds to single stranded regions of the viral genome and protects them from nucleases, akin to the role played by ssDNA binding proteins in DNA replication systems. Indeed, other ss nucleic acid binding proteins are also known to play roles in recombination and homologous base pairing (104), processes which occur during

polymerase translocate on different strands and the helicase helps in unwinding the duplex ahead of the polymerase. Thus, during the synthesis of full-length progeny genomes using the negative strand RNA as a template, nsp13 could be bound to the positive strand RNA and assist the RdRp as it copies the negative strand (Figure 5). Cooperativity between the replicative helicase and polymerase is a conserved feature of DNA replisomes. The RdRp stimulates the activity of the helicase (106) but whether the helicase has a reciprocal effect on RdRp activity, similar to DNA replisomes, would be interesting to test. A non-mutually exclusive possibility is that the helicase facilitates RdRp template switching during discontinuous transcription by releasing sub-genomic RNAs at TRS sites during negative strand synthesis, similar to a role played by some other SF1 helicases in recombination (110).

Mechanisms underlying high fidelity replication

RNA viruses typically have high mutation rates due to lack of RdRp proofreading activity, which promotes viral genetic diversity and increases their adaptive potential. However, the potential for accumulation of deleterious mutations leading to collapse of the viral population through error catastrophe caps the size of most RNA virus genomes to ~15 kb (reviewed in (90)). The ~30 kb coronavirus genome far exceeds this threshold,indicating that they must have specialized mechanisms to counteract this mutational burden. In this regard, they are one of the few RNA viruses apart from toroviruses and roniviruses (which are also exceptionally large) that have an exonuclease activity and associated high-fidelity replication (111). The discovery of this exonuclease (nsp14-ExoN) in the coronavirus genome (112) showed for the first time the potential for proofreading activity in RNA viruses and explained how coronaviruses maintain their genome integrity. Indeed, the mutation rates of coronaviruses are an order of magnitude lower (10-6-10-7) than that of most RNA viruses, and mutating the SARS-CoV or MHV ExoN gene causes the error frequency to jump to that observed in many other RNA viruses (103–105) (113-115).

Active site mutants that abolish the exonuclease activity of ExoN are lethal for HCoV-229E and Transmissible Gastroenteritis Virus (TGEV), and cause impaired growth for MHV and SARS-CoV (112), suggesting that ExoN is important but may not be essential under all conditions. Why MHV and SARS-CoV but not HCoV-229E and TGEV can tolerate ExoN mutants is unclear, although it is possible that ExoN is essential only in alpha-coronaviruses (HCoV and TGEV) but not in beta-coronaviruses (MHV and SARS-CoV). It is also possible that the active site mutation in SARS and MHV did not fully deactivate the enzyme or that other proteins in the replicase can compensate for the absence of an active ExoN. For example, nsp10 stimulates the catalytic activity of nsp14-ExoN to remove a mismatched nucleotide at the 3' end of the RNA by >35-fold (116) and the high replication fidelity depends on the nsp10-nsp14 interaction (117). ExoN (nsp14) also interacts with the nsp12-nsp8-nsp7 tripartite complex (91) providing biochemical evidence for its role in proofreading during transcription/replication. Nsp10 also interacts with nsp16 (a potential RNA modifying enzyme) and it has been proposed that all these proteins could come together to form a larger complex during replication similar to DNA replisome complexes. In vitro biochemical studies comparing the activity of ExoN from MHV and SARS-CoV and HCoV-229E together with the accessory proteins could shed mechanistic light on

these phenotypic differences between the ExoN mutants.

Replication fidelity is inherently tied to viral fitness and, in most cases, changes to replication fidelity decrease fitness (reviewed in (90)). This suggests that mutants with altered replication fidelity (such as the ExoN mutant) have potential therapeutic value as live attenuated vaccines (118). Indeed, the SARS-CoV ExoN mutant had decreased pathogenesis and did not revert to virulence even after persistent infection in vivo (118). The ExoN mutation did not revert to WT even over 250 viral passages, although it accumulated a variety of mutations that partially compensated for the replication defect and decreased the population sensitivity to mutagens (119). Several components of the replicase complex, including nsp8, nsp9, nsp12 and nsp13 had mutations in the coding region, underscoring the complexity and interdependency of the RTC and how that helps the virus circumvent the consequences of decreased fidelity. A better understanding of the mechanism of replication fidelity will also allow for the exploration of mutants that increase replication fidelity and thereby reduce diversity and potentially fitness of the population, as has been shown for polioviruses (120).

Recombination, which is generally high in RNA viruses and is linked to their virulence and pathogenicity (121), may also influence coronavirus diversity. In coronaviruses, recombination occurs as an inherent part of the replication cycle during the synthesis of sgRNAs and is tied to the ability of the RdRp to switch templates from the TRS-B sequence to the TRS-L sequence to copy the leader sequence from the 5' end of the genome. Such recombination events can also occur between co-infecting coronaviruses with different genotypes (reviewed in (122)). Recombination can lead to defective copies of RNA that can no longer be replicated (123), or recombinants with new properties such as the ability to replicate in a new host (122) leading to new outbreaks. Mutational reversion and recombination driven processes can pose significant challenges to the use of live-attenuated vaccines (120) emphasizing the need to engineer recombination-resistant strains (124). A recentstudy suggests the involvement of nsp14-ExoN in mediating recombination frequency and junction site selection in several coronaviruses (125), opening up an exciting avenue of exploration for nsp14 in vaccine development.

### Viral RNA processing

Capping the 5' end of the viral mRNA is important for viral mRNA stability, translation initiation and escaping the cellular innate immune system (126). Capping typically occurs co-transcriptionally in the nucleus, so RNA viruses that replicate in the cytoplasm encode their own enzymes or incorporate other strategies such as cap snatching (as in bunyaviruses) (127) to protect the 5' end of their RNAs. The coronavirus capping mechanism is not completely understood, although it appears to follow the canonical capping pathway. Capping begins with hydrolysis of the γ phosphate of the 5' end nucleotide; although not yet directly shown, this is thought to be mediated by the nucleotide triphosphatase activity of nsp13-helicase (128). This is followed by the addition of a guanosine monophosphate to the diphosphate RNA by a guanylyl transferase that has remained elusive in coronaviruses, although the NiRAN domain of nsp12 could be involved in this process (96). The guanosine is then methylated at the N7 position, likely by N7-methyltransferase (MTase) activity that resides in the C-terminal part of ExoN (nsp14) (129). Finally, nsp16 is thought to methylate the first and second nucleotides at the 2'-O position (130). This activity requires interaction with nsp10 which appears to improve substrate and RNA binding by nsp16 (131). The 2'-O methylation is important for evasion of the type-I interferon (IFN) response (which is discussed below) (132). Of the enzymes involved in capping, the N7-MTase of nsp14 is an attractive antiviral target as this domain exhibits a non-canonical MTase fold different from cellular MTases (129).

The 3' end of coronavirus mRNAs is polyadenylated, the length of which regulates translation efficiency of the mRNAs (100) and is essential for negative strand synthesis (133). While polyadenylation related elements such as a AGUAAA hexamer and the polyA tail work in concert to ensure polyadenylation of the genome

(134), the precise mechanism by which this occurs is not known. It is also unclear if the RdRp carries out the polyadenylation or if cellular poly(A) polymerases are recruited for this process.

Given that translation of coronavirus mRNAs rely on host cap-dependent translation machinery, a number of cellular cap binding complex factors are candidates for therapeutic targeting (135, 136). Systematic mapping of the interaction between SARS-CoV2 proteins and the host proteome has revealed interactions between viral proteins and host translation machinery, and an inhibitor of cap-dependent translation initiation reduced viral infectivity in cell culture (137). These data point to the possible effectiveness of a host-directed antiviral therapeutic strategy in treating COVID-19.

### Replication/transcription complex proteins as drug targets

While the complexity of the coronavirus replicosome may have enabled the virus to expand its genome, it also presents numerous targets for the development of antivirals (138). Most prominent is the RdRp, as it is essential for the virus and lacks homologs in the host. Nucleoside analogs, which are NTP mimics, are commonly used RdRp inhibitors (139). However, designing nucleoside analogs as inhibitors is particularly challenging for coronaviruses due to the presence of the exonuclease activity that is capable of excising the incorporated analog and thus providing resistance. An exception to this has been the adenosine analog remdesivir, which is currently in phase 3 clinical trials for treating coronavirus infections (140). A recent in vitro study with purified RdRp-nsp8 complex from several coronaviruses showed that remdesivir incorporation blocks chain elongation 3 nt downstream of its incorporation site, which potentially protects it from ExoN cleavage (141, 142). Additionally, remdesivir is selectively incorporated by the RdRp over the natural substrate ATP. Better in vitro reconstitution systems incorporating the other components of the RTC (nsp7, nsp13 and nsp14-exonuclease) will further help to elucidate the mechanism of inhibition.It may also be of interest to develop non-nucleoside RdRp inhibitors, as have been developed for other RNA viruses such as hepatitis C virus (143). Non-nucleoside inhibitors typically function allosterically and hence are potentially immune to the resistance conferred by the exonuclease activity of ExoN. Combining compounds that inhibit ExoN together with nucleoside analogs to inhibit the RdRp, or using small molecules that increase the mutation load of the virus by other mechanisms which are not sensitive to the exonuclease are other viable options (144). Finally, other components of the RTC such as the helicase (145), exonuclease (115) and capping machinery (131, 146) have also been considered as potential druggable targets.

Coronavirus replication occurs within heavily modified membranes

A defining feature of many positive-strand RNA viruses, including CoVs, is their ability to hijack and reform intracellular membranes to create a cellular niche for the replication of their RNA genome. Ultrastructural characterization of mainly MHV- and SARS-CoV-infected cells has revealed the membranes that anchor RTCs in CoV-infected cells to be quite striking, consisting of double membrane vesicles (DMVs) among other intricate convoluted membrane structures that isolate CoV RNA from the rest of the cellular environment (Figure 6) (147-150). Conceptually, RTC formation leads to the concentration of viral replication machinery, spatially separating the sites of viral RNA replication from downstream virion assembly in the ERGIC. Additionally, RTCs likely prevent detection of viral double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) replication products from innate immune sensors.

The DMVs and convoluted membranes in CoV-infected cells form at the nuclear periphery, and are derived from host ER membrane (66). The majority of the membrane manipulation is carried out by three nonstructural proteins with integral transmembrane domains: nsp3, nsp4 and nsp6 (67). Though biochemical characterization of these proteins is hindered by their hydrophobic nature, protein-protein interaction studies performed in cells suggest that nsp3, nsp4 and nsp6 can oligomerize and form complexes through their luminal loops (67-69). Expression of these RTC proteins individually in uninfected cells is sufficient to cause membrane proliferation and various perturbations of membrane morphology (69). Co-expression of nsp3 and nsp4 leads to their colocalization in perinuclear foci by fluorescence microscopy and the formation of membrane structures with increased curvature by electron microscopy (67). Because the specific interaction of nsp3 and nsp4 is required for these structures to form, it is hypothesized that nsp3 and nsp4 rearrange membranes and introduce curvature by a “zipper” mechanism, essentially bringing ER membranes together through nsp3/4 interactions (69) (Figure 6). The nsp3/4 interaction also recruits other proteins including nsp6 to anchor RTCs. Finally, triple transfection of nsp3, nsp4 and nsp6 together results in the formation of DMVs in uninfected cells (67). Due to the importance of membrane modification during viral replication, CoV transmembrane proteins may be attractive drug targets. In fact, a small molecule screen for antiviral activity yielded a compound that targets the transmembrane protein nsp6 and essentially blocks viral RNA replication and DMV formation (151).

During CoV infection, the inner membrane of the DMV is sealed while the outer membrane of the DMVs forms a contiguous network with the convoluted membranes and modified ER membranes (Figure 6). When this network is isolated from cells, it is capable of producing both genomic and subgenomic RNAs in vitro even in the presence of RNases and proteases, but not detergent, thus implicating the membrane network in shielding viral RNA replication (152). The anchored RTC complexes consist of viral proteins nsp2-10, nsp12-16 and N protein, which have diverse enzymatic functions required for RNA replication as discussed above (150, 153, 154). The RTC microenvironment also includes numerous host proteins that participate in CoV biology, such as proteins involved in vesicular trafficking and translation initiation factors, the latter of which are suggestive of active translation near sites of viral RNA replication (154). The site of RNA replication inside this membrane network is currently unknown. While viral RTC proteins labeled by immuno-EM primarily localize to convoluted membranes between DMVs, dsRNA (presumed tobe of viral origin) labeled by the J2 antibody localizes inside the DMVs (Figure 6). However, there is no experimental evidence demonstrating whether dsRNAs inside the DMV represent nascent viral transcripts, viral RNA replication byproducts, or even host dsRNAs. Recently, nascent viral RNA was visualized by metabolic labeling and quantitative electron microscopy (EM) autoradiography, revealing that viral transcription does in fact occur in association with the DMVs rather than convoluted membranes (155). The spatial resolution of this technique, while clearly demonstrating viral transcription within the vicinity of the DMVs, was not sufficient to pinpoint the localization of nascent viral RNA within DMVs and/or in association with DMV membranes. Because no visible pores or openings in the inner membrane of the DMV have been detected with conventional electron microscopy techniques, viral RNA synthesis regardless of locale would rely on a yet unidentified transport mechanism capable of moving viral proteins and/or RNA in and out of the DMV inner membrane (66, 155).

### Viral packaging and egress

The assembly of an infectious CoV virion requires that its nucleocapsid, consisting of the viral RNA genome coated with N protein, and viral envelope coalesce into the same intracellular space. Viral glycoproteins that are incorporated into the envelope (M, E, S proteins) are translated in the ER and retained at the site of budding in the endoplasmic reticulum-Golgi intermediate compartment or ERGIC (Figure 1). The ERGIC budding site is distinct from the site of viral genome synthesis in the RTC. The nucleocapsid core of the virion traffics from the RTC to ultimately bud into ERGIC membranes, which are decorated with M, E, and S protein and become the lipid envelope of the virion. The most abundant envelope component is the M protein, which plays a central role in viral egress. Outside of the context of infection, M protein expression alone is not sufficient to cause budding of virus-like particles, but co-expression with E (or N in the case of SARS-CoV) can result in viral-like particle formation in the absence of infection (156-158). During infection, the M protein nucleates virion components within the ERGIC budding compartment, as M directly interacts with the virion proteins E, N, S and the CoV genomic RNA (159-162). The E protein, while not highly abundant in the envelope, is critical for viral envelope curvature and maturation and can form membrane ion channels, although the significance of this latter activity is not yet appreciated (163, 164). S protein assembly into virions is enhanced by C-terminal dilysine, dibasic, or tyrosine-based endoplasmic reticulum retention signals (165-167). Though the retention signals are quite divergent among CoVs, all serve to maintain S near the ERGIC-localized M protein, ensuring M-S interaction at the site of virion assembly. Following budding of the nucleocapsid core into the M, E, and S-containing ERGIC membranes, the newly enveloped virion then leaves the cell through the exocytic pathway.

Though CoV replication produces an abundance of unique viral RNAs in the cell (positive strand genomic RNAs, positive strand sg mRNAs, and negative strand RNAs), purified CoV virions house mainly full genome-length RNA (159, 168, 169). Conceptually, this specificity is thought to be driven by a packaging signal unique to the genome-length RNA. In MHV, a packaging signal has been mapped to ORF1b within the nsp15 gene (a region absent in sgRNAs), and is predicted to form a bulged stem-loop structure with repeating AGC/GUAAU motifs (170, 171). This packaging signal specifically binds both the N and M proteins, but the order in which these interactions occur is not clear (reviewed in (172)). N protein must have broad RNA binding activity, as it ultimately coats the length of the viral genome to form the nucleocapsid component of the virion, and additionally forms complexes with sgRNAs (160, 173, 174). Thus, an additional role of M in recognizing the packaging signal and selecting full-length genomic RNA is an attractive model for genome packaging specificity, at least in the context of MHV infection (175). In contrast, the packaging signal identified in MHV is absent from other lineages of β-coronaviruses, including SARS-CoV and MERS (reviewed in (172)), leaving us with little understanding of how other CoVs selectively package genome-length RNAs.

### Part II: Viral manipulation of the host
Viruses depend on host processes to complete their life cycle. In addition to employing cellular machines like the ribosome to translate their proteins and manipulating cellular membranes during RNA synthesis and viral morphogenesis, several coronavirus proteins modify the cellular environment in ways that may influence viral pathogenesis and replication in vivo. In this section we discuss the roles of coronavirus proteins in altering the cellular signaling landscape, as well as the ability of the virus to modulate host gene expression and its interactions with and counteraction of the host immune response.

### Accessory proteins and viral pathogenicity

Coronavirus genomes contain a number of genes concentrated in the 3′ region of the genome that encode for accessory proteins that are largely dispensable for viral replication and growth in vitro (176–182). The SARS-CoV genome encodes for eight accessory proteins, (3a, 3b, 6, 7a, 7b, 8a, 8b, and 9b), which are the most well-studied set of accessory proteins among β-coronaviruses (183, 184). Accessory proteins are genus specific and exhibit little homology across coronaviruses; as such, this set of eight proteins are specific to human and animal isolates of SARS-CoV (185). Additionally, no significant amino acid sequence similarity is shared between SARS-CoV accessory proteins and other known viral or cellular proteins, providing little insight to predict functional roles (186). Despite being non-essential for viral replication in cultured cells, the accessory proteins presumably modulate viral-host interactions that are important during in vivo infection, including cell proliferation, programmed cell death, pro-inflammatory cytokine production, and IFN signaling (see Table 1) (186, 187). Many SARS-CoV accessory proteins can also be incorporated into virions or virus-like particles (VLPs) during infection, potentially suggesting minor structural roles (187).

Given the variability of accessory genes between coronaviruses, they may be linked to virus-specific pathogenicity. That said, annotation of the SARS-CoV-2 genome has identified a similar set of accessory genes as SARS-CoV (ORF3a, ORF3b, ORF6, ORF7a, ORF7b, ORF8, and ORF9b), albeit

with some notable differences among the putative type-I IFN signaling antagonists (188, 189). These include a premature stop codon in ORF3b resulting in a truncated and likely non-functional 20 amino acid protein, and relatively lower (69%) amino acid similarity of the ORF6 protein. This may suggest differences in the susceptibility of SARS-CoV and SARS-CoV-2 to host IFN responses (190).

The ORF8 region of the SARS-CoV genome, encoding for ORF8a and ORF8b proteins, displays major variation among human and animal isolates of SARS-CoV (191). Animal isolates contain a single ORF8 gene, while this region forms two separate genes in human isolates. However, SARS-CoV and SARS-CoV-2 isolated from patients during early phases of outbreaks closely resemble animal isolates with a single ORF8 gene, likely representing the first zoonotic transmission (192, 193). It remains unclear whether these variances arise from genomic instability or if there is adaptive evolutionary pressure for these changes which may be related to the functional role of ORF8 proteins.

Functional roles have yet to be established for the majority accessory proteins of other alpha- or gammacoronaviruses. Moreover, much of our understanding of these proteins in the betacoronaviruses derives from transfection or overexpression systems rather than during infection of cultured cells or in vivo. Further development of animal models is paramount to advancing our mechanistic understanding in this area. Nonetheless, the propensity for these genes to be maintained in coronavirus genomes suggests underlying functional importance.

#### Host shutoff

Numerous RNA and DNA viruses inhibit cellular gene expression by directly targeting mRNAs in order to redirect resources towards viral gene expression and dampen innate immune responses (194). In coronaviruses, this ‘host shutoff’ activity is best characterized for nsp1, which uses an unusual two-part mechanism to restrict translation of mRNA that involves translational repression by 40S binding as well as mRNA cleavage (195, 196). Nsp1 itself does not have detectable ribonuclease (RNase) activity, but its expression causes cleavage
of mRNAs such as IFN-β near the 5' end of
transcripts, perhaps by recruitment of a host
endonuclease (195). Viral RNAs as well as some
highly structured 5' UTRs including certain IRES
sequences are resistant to cleavage, though still
susceptible to translational repression (80). The 5'
common leader sequence is necessary and
sufficient to confer protection to viral and reporter
RNAs from nsp1-induced endonucleolytic
cleavage (80, 197). While nsp1 specifically targets
RNA polymerase II-transcribed RNAs in cells
(195), the spectrum of mRNAs that are cleaved in
response to nsp1 is unclear. However, if it functions
analogously to mRNA-targeting host shutoff
factors in other viruses, host transcripts may be
broadly downregulated (198-200).

Mutations in SARS-CoV nsp1 that block its
interaction with the 40S ribosome inhibit both the
translational repression and RNA cleavage
functions, but an RNA cleavage deficient mutant
retains the translational repression activity (201-
204). Thus, nsp1-induced RNA cleavage may occur
subsequent to translational repression. Unlike
SARS-CoV and SARS-CoV2 nsp1, MERS nsp1
does not contain the region of the protein that
mediates interaction with the 40S although it still
represses host translation. Instead, it targets
translationally competent transcripts of nuclear
origin and spares viral-like reporter RNAs that are
introduced directly into the cytoplasm (203).

The accessory protein ORF7a has also been shown
to participate in SARS-CoV host shutoff by
reducing total protein synthesis (205). Additional
studies are needed to clarify the relative
contribution of ORF7a and nsp1 to the translational
repression seen during infection, as well as to
decipher the mechanisms underlying translational
repression and mRNA cleavage.

Immune Antagonism

Coronavirus-induced dampening of host antiviral
responses and an over-exuberant pro-inflammatory
host response (e.g. cytokine storm) have been
linked to the disease pathology associated with
infection (206-210). Infection with the circulating
human coronaviruses (HCoV-229E, HCoV-NL63,
HCoV-OC43, and HCoV-HKU1) rarely causes
severe disease and that which occurs is largely
associated with comorbidities (211). However, the
highly pathogenic human coronaviruses SARS-
CoV, MERS-CoV and SARS-CoV2 can cause
significant acute respiratory disease syndrome
(ARDS) (212). Samples from SARS, MERS, and
COVID-19 patients show limited induction of
antiviral interferon (IFN) cell signaling pathways
(206, 213-216). Additionally, SARS patients
exhibiting high initial virus titers and increased
inflammatory monocyte-macrophages (IMMs) and
neutrophil accumulation in the lungs were
associated with marked elevation of pro-
inflammatory cytokines and chemokines (217,
218). Pro-inflammatory cytokines and chemokines
recruit inflammatory cells to the sites of infection.
Subsequently, neutrophils and cytotoxic T cells,
along with these cytokines, induce severe lung
tissue damage including vascular leakage and
stimulate pulmonary fibrosis (219). Recent work
analyzing pro-inflammatory profiles among
COVID-19 patients identified a similar subset of
cytokines and chemokines to be markedly
upregulated (220, 221).

Coronaviruses engage and counteract the immune
system in a variety of ways (Figure 7), which
collectively are hypothesized to underlie the disease
pathology. SARS-CoV in particular encodes
multiple factors that directly antagonize pattern
recognition receptors (PRR) and simultaneously
target the expression of IFN signaling molecules
induced by viral recognition. Many of these factors
also further stimulate pro-inflammatory cellular
responses. These multifaceted interactions with the
immune system presumably contribute to the
highly restricted induction of type I IFNs during
coronavirus infection, while stimulating production
of pro-inflammatory molecules. Below we
summarize how individual coronavirus proteins
modulate the host innate, inflammatory, and
adaptive immune responses.

i. Modulation of the host innate immune response

In contrast to viruses like Sendai and influenza A,
all assayed coronaviruses have shown limited
induction of IFN-β and other type I IFNs in tissue
culture models, in mice and in patient samples,
including MERS-CoV, HCoV-229E, SARS-CoV and SARS-CoV2 (206, 214-216, 222). Type I IFNs remain suppressed even during co-infection of Sendai virus and SARS-CoV, highlighting the ability of coronaviruses to actively silence immune effector expression (201). Suppression by MERS-CoV is particularly robust, as it downregulates IFN-β ~60-fold more than SARS-CoV and 300-fold more than HCoV229E, indicating that differences in viral gene sequences between the coronaviruses influence this response (184).

The strong downregulation of type I IFN during CoV infection suggests that these viruses are highly sensitive to the presence of IFN, and administration of IFNs has been proposed as a therapeutic for SARS-CoV and SARS-CoV2. IFN-β dramatically (5x10⁴-fold) reduces SARS-CoV RNA copies in cell culture and IFN-α reduced viral titer in macaques by 1x10⁴ fold. In cell culture, pretreatment with either IFN-α or IFN-β followed by SARS-CoV infection or post treatment with IFN-β decreased viral replication (223, 224). Similar results showing antiviral effects of type I IFN treatment were recently described in tissue culture models with SARS-CoV-2 (190, 225), highlighting the potential for the rational design of a live attenuated vaccine with mutations in key immune agonist genes, discussed below.

Replication intermediates produced during RNA virus infection can be recognized by two PRRs: RIG-I and MDA5. RIG-I preferentially recognizes short dsRNA with 5′ di- and tri-phosphates while MDA5 preferentially recognizes long dsRNA, which is formed as an intermediate during RNA copying (226, 227). MHV is primarily recognized by MDA5, as MDA5 but not RIG-I knockout cells show strong IFN-β induction following infection (228). Interestingly, no coronavirus inhibitor of MDA5 has yet to be identified, which is notable given CoV targeting of many other arms of the innate immune response.

Multiple SARS-CoV proteins antagonize the host innate immune response, including ORF3b, ORF6, nsp1, N, M and PLpro (Figure 7). For example, N protein inhibits TRIM25 ubiquitylation, thereby limiting activation of the RIG-I PRR that recognizes viral double stranded RNA (dsRNA)

with a 5′ di- or tri-phosphate (229). Downstream of PRR activation, IFN-β and other type I IFNs are transcriptionally induced by the phosphorylation and dimerization of IRF3 and 7, which then traffic to the nucleus to initiate transcription. PLpro, nsp1, ORF3b and N all inhibit IRF3 phosphorylation, blocking its nuclear entry and type I IFN transcription (63, 201, 230-232). Nsp1 further inhibits IRF7 activation and reduces cJun expression and phosphorylation (201). Type I IFNs can also be turned on by NFκB, but NFκB responsive promoter activation is inhibited by both the viral M and nsp1 proteins (233). Once type I IFNs are produced, they then signal through the JAK/STAT pathway to induce interferon stimulated genes (ISGs) in an autocrine and paracrine fashion. Coronaviruses target this pathway as well; nsp1 induces degradation of IFN-β RNA during host shutoff, ORF6 inhibits STAT1 translocation to the nucleus and nsp1 inhibits STAT1 phosphorylation, inhibiting downstream induction of ISGs (195, 234).

Experiments with viral deletion mutants using reverse genetics have begun to parse out the overlapping contributions of each of these viral proteins. Consistent with its role as an essential virulence factor, deletion of nsp1 severely attenuates infection in in vivo mouse models with MHV and renders mice immune to a subsequent challenge with wild type virus (235). Although viruses lacking ORF3b or ORF6 do not exhibit reduced viral replication in tissue culture or in mouse models of SARS-CoV, this may be due to functional redundancy with other IFN antagonists, which could contribute to the pathogenicity of SARS-CoV (178). In this regard, expression of SARS-CoV ORF6 (but not other SARS-CoV accessory proteins) during infection with an attenuated version of MHV leads to increased viral replication in cell culture and increased virulence in mice (236).

DsRNA produced during RNA virus replication can also trigger host translation shutoff through induction of the antiviral 2′-5′ oligoadenylate synthetase (OAS) and RNase L. OAS synthesizes RNAs with unique 2′-5′ linkages that activate RNase L, which broadly antagonizes translation by cleaving host and viral RNAs including ribosomal

RNAs, restricting viral replication. MERS Ns4b and MHV ns2 are 2',5' phosphodiesterases that directly cleave the 2'-5' RNA that activates RNase L, thereby inhibiting cellular detection of viral replication intermediates. Deletion of the MHV ns2 protein or mutation of its catalytic residues results in increased IFN-γ in the liver of infected mice (237-240). MHV nsp15 (EndoU) also targets the production of dsRNA by endonucleolytically degrading stretches of polyU RNA made during copying of the viral poly(A) tail, and mutation of nsp15 results in a 200-fold increase in IFN-β induction over wildtype (241). In addition to the above mechanisms of immune antagonism, coronaviruses appear to also reduce the immunogenicity of the dsRNA they produce by sequestering them in the DMVs (147, 242).

Work in animal models using a mouse adapted strain of SARS-CoV, which resembles human disease, has further bolstered the connection between a dysregulated innate immune response and disease pathology (209). Genetic knockout of the IFN-αβ receptor (IFNAR) or IMM depletion during infection protected SARS-CoV infected mice, demonstrating the role of a vigorous pro-inflammatory response in lethal SARS-CoV infection and identifying these pathways as potential therapeutic targets in patients infected with a highly pathogenic coronavirus.

ii. Modulation of host pro-inflammatory response & programmed cell death pathways

A number of SARS-CoV proteins have been implicated in modulating pro-inflammatory immune responses, likely contributing to the cytokine storm detected in infected patients. Mitogen activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathways are critical in relaying environmental stress to host cellular stress responses to elicit appropriate physiological responses such as cellular proliferation, differentiation, inflammatory responses, and apoptosis (243). There are three major MAPK pathways in mammals—the extracellular signal regulated kinase (ERK), p38MAPK, and the stress activated protein kinase/c-JUN N-terminal kinase (SAPK/JNK), which are all targeted during SARS-CoV infection (244). Phosphorylation of ERK and JNK has been observed in SARS-CoV infected cells, and increased levels of phosphorylated p38MAPK has been found in both cell culture studies and in the leukocytes of SARS patients and has been linked to abnormal interleukin 6 (IL-6) and interleukin 8 (IL-8) cytokine profiles in these patients (244, 245). COVID-19 patients also exhibit a similar pattern of immune dysregulation with elevated levels of IL-6 in particular, which correlates with severe disease pathology and mortality (221, 246). Work in murine models have shown that elevated IL-6 levels play a major role in driving acute lung injury (ALI) akin to that observed in both SARS and COVID-19 patients, and loss of IL-6 alleviates the severity of ALI (247).

In cell culture experiments, overexpression of SARS-CoV structural (S, M, N, E) and various accessory proteins (ORF3a, ORF3b, ORF7a) have been associated with the activation or interference of MAPK and NF-κB signaling pathways, correlating with dramatic expression changes at cytokine and chemokine promoters such as CCL2, IL-8 and RANTES (summarized in Table 1) (248-254). However, interference with host NF-κB activity occurs with some cell type variability and varying degrees of effects on cytokine induction (250-252, 255). Nonetheless, this likely contributes to the upregulation of cytokines and chemokines associated with ARDS, asthma, and pulmonary fibrosis, which is consistent with pro-inflammatory profiles observed during SARS-CoV infection and accounts for patient deaths (256).

Another trigger of pro-inflammatory responses during infection with highly pathogenic coronaviruses is activation of host programmed cell death pathways. Necroptosis and pyroptosis are forms of highly inflammatory cell death that are observed during infection with cytopathic viruses, and likely contribute to the molecular mechanisms underlying the severe lung pathology associated with SARS, MERS, and COVID-19 (257). Cell death through these mechanisms leads to a wave of local inflammation involving increased secretion of pro-inflammatory cytokines and chemokines leading to further tissue damage. SARS-CoV 2 infected patients exhibit elevated levels of the cytokine IL-1β, which is associated with pyroptosis (220). In particular, expression of the SARS-CoV

ORF3a protein induces caspase-independent necrotic cell death, and also initiates an inflammatory cascade through activation of the NLRP3 inflammasome contributing to pyroptosis (258). The SARS-CoV ORF3b protein has also been shown to induce necrosis (259). Notably, the ORF3b protein is truncated to 20aa in SARS-CoV 2 and is likely nonfunctional, suggesting differences in the underlying mechanisms driving virally induced necrotic cell death in SARS and COVID-19 patients (188).

While non-inflammatory apoptosis often serves as a host antiviral response during infection (260), infection-induced activation or modulation of host apoptotic machinery may also induce death of particular cell types that enhance viral egress and pathogenesis (261). During human coronavirus infection, virally induced apoptosis can occur in a variety of cell types beyond those of the respiratory tract, including immune cells such as macrophages, monocytes, T lymphocytes, and dendritic cells (262-266). A molecular understanding of the pro-apoptotic roles for coronavirus proteins largely comes from the study of SARS-CoV or homologous MHV proteins, which include the pro-apoptotic roles of its structural proteins and unique accessory proteins (summarized in Table 1). Expression of S, N, E, M, ORF3a, ORF3b, ORF7a, OR8a, or ORF9b proteins in various cell lines have all been shown to trigger apoptosis mediated through various pathways including the PERK pathway through the unfolded protein response, cytochrome-c release, and caspase-dependent apoptosis pathways (259, 264, 267-276). At present, it remains unclear whether SARS-CoV-induced cell death functions as an immune evasion tactic, an exit strategy to enhance viral spread, or an indirect consequence of viral replication.

iii. Neutralizing antibodies and memory B cell response

Protective immunity requires pre-existing antibodies, memory B cells, and memory T cell responses. B and T cell responses can be detected within 1 week following onset of symptoms in both SARS and COVID-19 patients (277, 278). Following infection with SARS-CoV in particular, neutralizing antibodies develop within 2-3 weeks,

likely against the S protein (279, 280). In contrast, COVID-19 patients may develop an antibody response earlier due to viral titers peaking earlier (281-284). The primary target of neutralizing antibodies in SARS-CoV is the receptor binding domain (RBD) of the S protein, a region of the protein that is significantly different in SARS-CoV2 (285, 286). As such, only a small number of previously identified monoclonal antibodies to SAR-CoV bind and neutralize SARS-CoV2 (287, 288). A number of strategies are being employed to develop therapeutic monoclonal antibodies against SARS-CoV2, including mouse immunization and hybridoma isolation and cloning of B cell sequences from convalescent human patients—which has been previously successful in treating SARS patients (44, 289-291).

Importantly, neutralizing antibody titers and the memory B cell responses, while robust against SARS-CoV (and likely for SARS-CoV2), are relatively short-lived in recovered patients. Neutralizing antibody titers consistently decline over time and cannot be detected in most SARS recovered patients 6 years following the onset of symptoms, and memory B cell responses cannot be detected as early as 3.5 years post-infection (292). These responses may also be short-lived for at least a subset of COVID-19 patients (44). In contrast, memory T cell responses persist up to 6 years post infection in a large subset of SARS-recovered patients (292). While T cell responses are critical for controlling infection and memory T cells are present in higher numbers and often elicit faster responses post-infection than memory B cells, memory T cells alone likely cannot provide adequate long-term protective immunity (293). Importantly, vaccinated animal models have also shown increased immunopathology associated with detrimental T cell responses; thus further investigation is critical in understanding coronavirus-specific T-cell responses, particularly in the context of vaccine development (294).

Waning protective immunity among previously infected individuals opens up the questions regarding the susceptibility of reinfection. Future studies defining immune correlates of protection following SARS-CoV2 infection are critical and

will inform both vaccine strategies and disease
management.

### Conclusions

Coronavirus spillovers have provoked three
epidemics in the last 20 years, and our ability to
counteract future emergent viruses will be
influenced by how deeply we understand the
mechanistic details of coronavirus replication and
the virus-host interaction. Despite immense
progress, significant questions still exist. For
example, much remains to be learned about the
mechanisms by which the multi-component
replicase complex executes its sophisticated
genome replication, transcription and RNA
processing functions. The membrane
reorganization necessary to form viral replication
and transcription compartments is also a central
facet of coronavirus biology, yet how the various
stages of the viral replication cycle are coordinated
and organized within these vesicles and the
mechanism of double stranded RNA sequestration
in the DMVs are largely unknown. Virus-host
interactions that influence the innate and adaptive
immune response are of obvious importance, as
they presumably underlie aspects of coronavirus
pathogenesis that can differ markedly between viral
strains and are central to vaccine development.
Many viral accessory proteins appear to antagonize
the innate immune system, yet their relative
contribution and roles during infection is not clear.
Despite these significant unknowns, the current
pace of SARS-CoV-2 research is truly remarkable
and a testament to the power of cooperative and
collaborative science. As these new discoveries are
rapidly layered onto the existing foundational work
by the coronavirus field, our understanding of this
fascinating group of viruses will surely be refined
and reshaped more rapidly than for any pathogen in
human history.

### Acknowledgements

We apologize to those who conducted the
significant amount of research we were unable to
cite herein and acknowledge that the current pace
of the coronavirus field means that many new
findings will have emerged by the time this
manuscript is published. This work was supported
by NIH grant CA136367 and a COVID-19
Excellence in Research Award from the Laboratory
for Genomics Research to B.A.G., who is also an
investigator of the Howard Hughes Medical
Institute. J.M.T. is supported by American Cancer
Society Postdoctoral Award 131370-PF-17-245-
01-MPC, and M.L. is supported by a predoctoral
award (PGSD3 - 516787 – 2018) from the Natural
Sciences and Engineering Research Council of
Canada (NSERC). All figures were designed in
collaboration with BioRender, and are available as
editable templates at BioRender.com

### References

1. Paules, C. I., Marston, H. D., Jama, A. F., 2020 Coronavirus infections—more than just the
   common cold. *jamanetwork.com*. 10.1001/jama.2020.1097
2. He, B., Zhang, Y., Xu, L., Yang, W., Yang, F., Feng, Y., Xia, L., Zhou, J., Zhen, W., Feng,
   Y., Guo, H., Zhang, H., and Tu, C. (2014) Identification of diverse alphacoronaviruses and
   genomic characterization of a novel severe acute respiratory syndrome-like coronavirus
   from bats in China. *Journal of Virology*. **88**, 7070–7082
3. Siu, Y. L., Teoh, K. T., Lo, J., Chan, C. M., Kien, F., Escriou, N., Tsao, S. W., Nicholls, J.
   M., Altmeyer, R., Peiris, J. S. M., Bruzzone, R., and Nal, B. (2008) The M, E, and N
   structural proteins of the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus are required for
   efficient assembly, trafficking, and release of virus-like particles. *Journal of Virology*. **82**,
   11318–11330
4. Li, F. (2016) Structure, Function, and Evolution of Coronavirus Spike Proteins. *Annu. Rev.*
   *Virol.* **3**, 237–261

5. Millet, J. K., and Whittaker, G. R. (2015) Host cell proteases: Critical determinants of coronavirus tropism and pathogenesis. *Virus Research*. **202**, 120–134

6. Hoffmann, M., Kleine-Weber, H., Schroeder, S., Krüger, N., Herrler, T., Erichsen, S., Schiergens, T. S., Herrler, G., Wu, N.-H., Nitsche, A., Müller, M. A., Drosten, C., and Pöhlmann, S. (2020) SARS-CoV-2 Cell Entry Depends on ACE2 and TMPRSS2 and Is Blocked by a Clinically Proven Protease Inhibitor. *Cell*. **181**, 271–280.e8

7. Zhou, P., Yang, X.-L., Wang, X.-G., Hu, B., Zhang, L., Zhang, W., Si, H.-R., Zhu, Y., Li, B., Huang, C.-L., Chen, H.-D., Chen, J., Luo, Y., Guo, H., Jiang, R.-D., Liu, M.-Q., Chen, Y., Shen, X.-R., Wang, X., Zheng, X.-S., Zhao, K., Chen, Q.-J., Deng, F., Liu, L.-L., Yan, B., Zhan, F.-X., Wang, Y.-Y., Xiao, G.-F., and Shi, Z.-L. (2020) A pneumonia outbreak associated with a new coronavirus of probable bat origin. *Nature*. **579**, 270–273

8. Li, W. H., Moore, M. J., Vasilieva, N., Sui, J. H., Wong, S. K., Berne, M. A., Somasundaran, M., Sullivan, J. L., Luzuriaga, K., Greenough, T. C., Choe, H., and Farzan, M. (2003) Angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 is a functional receptor for the SARS coronavirus. *Nature*. **426**, 450–454

9. Hamming, I., Timens, W., Bulthuis, M. L. C., Lely, A. T., Navis, G. J., and van Goor, H. (2004) Tissue distribution of ACE2 protein, the functional receptor for SARS coronavirus. A first step in understanding SARS pathogenesis. *J. Pathol.* **203**, 631–637

10. Glowacka, I., Bertram, S., Müller, M. A., Allen, P., Soilleux, E., Pfefferle, S., Steffen, I., Tsegaye, T. S., He, Y., Gniirss, K., Niemeyer, D., Schneider, H., Drosten, C., and Pöhlmann, S. (2011) Evidence that TMPRSS2 activates the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus spike protein for membrane fusion and reduces viral control by the humoral immune response. *Journal of Virology*. **85**, 4122–4134

11. Matsuyama, S., Nagata, N., Shirato, K., Kawase, M., Takeda, M., and Taguchi, F. (2010) Efficient activation of the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus spike protein by the transmembrane protease TMPRSS2. *Journal of Virology*. **84**, 12658–12664

12. Shulla, A., Heald-Sargent, T., Subramanya, G., Zhao, J., Perlman, S., and Gallagher, T. (2011) A transmembrane serine protease is linked to the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus receptor and activates virus entry. *Journal of Virology*. **85**, 873–882

13. Millet, J. K., and Whittaker, G. R. (2014) Host cell entry of Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus after two-step, furin-mediated activation of the spike protein. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.* **111**, 15214–15219

14. Frana, M. F., BEHNKE, J. N., STURMAN, L. S., and Holmes, K. V. (1985) Proteolytic Cleavage of the E2-Glycoprotein of Murine Coronavirus - Host-Dependent Differences in Proteolytic Cleavage and Cell-Fusion. *Journal of Virology*. **56**, 912–920

15. de Haan, C. A. M., Stadler, K., Godeke, G.-J., Bosch, B. J., and Rottier, P. J. M. (2004) Cleavage inhibition of the murine coronavirus spike protein by a furin-like enzyme affects cell-cell but not virus-cell fusion. *Journal of Virology*. **78**, 6048–6054

16. Qian, Z., Dominguez, S. R., and Holmes, K. V. (2013) Role of the spike glycoprotein of human Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV) in virus entry and syncytia formation. *PLoS ONE*. **8**, e76469

17. Wang, N., Shi, X., Jiang, L., Zhang, S., Wang, D., Tong, P., Guo, D., Fu, L., Cui, Y., Liu, X., Arledge, K. C., Chen, Y.-H., Zhang, L., and Wang, X. (2013) Structure of MERS-CoV spike receptor-binding domain complexed with human receptor DPP4. *Cell Research*. **23**, 986–993

18. Gierer, S., Bertram, S., Kaup, F., Wrensch, F., Heurich, A., Krämer-Kühl, A., Welsch, K., Winkler, M., Meyer, B., Drosten, C., Dittmer, U., Hahn, von, T., Simmons, G., Hofmann, H., and Pöhlmann, S. (2013) The spike protein of the emerging betacoronavirus EMC uses a novel coronavirus receptor for entry, can be activated by TMPRSS2, and is targeted by neutralizing antibodies. *Journal of Virology*. **87**, 5502–5511

19. Shirato, K., Kawase, M., and Matsuyama, S. (2013) Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus infection mediated by the transmembrane serine protease TMPRSS2. *Journal of Virology*. 87, 12552–12561

20. Blau, D. M., Turbide, C., Tremblay, M., Olson, M., Létourneau, S., Michaliszyn, E., Jothy, S., Holmes, K. V., and Beauchemin, N. (2001) Targeted disruption of the Ceacam1 (MHVR) gene leads to reduced susceptibility of mice to mouse hepatitis virus infection. *Journal of Virology*. 75, 8173–8186

21. Tan, K., Zelus, B. D., Meijers, R., Liu, J.-H., Bergelson, J. M., Duke, N., Zhang, R., Joachimiak, A., Holmes, K. V., and Wang, J.-H. (2002) Crystal structure of murine sCEACAM1a[1,4]: a coronavirus receptor in the CEA family. *EMBO J.* 21, 2076–2086

22. Burkard, C., Verheije, M. H., Wicht, O., van Kasteren, S. I., van Kuppeveld, F. J., Haagmans, B. L., Pelkmans, L., Rottier, P. J. M., Bosch, B. J., and de Haan, C. A. M. (2014) Coronavirus cell entry occurs through the endo-/lysosomal pathway in a proteolysis-dependent manner. *PLoS Pathog.* 10, e1004502

23. Eifart, P., Ludwig, K., Böttcher, C., de Haan, C. A. M., Rottier, P. J. M., Korte, T., and Herrmann, A. (2007) Role of endocytosis and low pH in murine hepatitis virus strain A59 cell entry. *Journal of Virology*. 81, 10758–10768

24. Simmons, G., Gosalía, D. N., Rennekamp, A. J., Reeves, J. D., Diamond, S. L., and Bates, P. (2005) Inhibitors of cathepsin L prevent severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus entry. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA*. 102, 11876–11881

25. Wang, H., Yang, P., Liu, K., Guo, F., Zhang, Y., Zhang, G., and Jiang, C. (2008) SARS coronavirus entry into host cells through a novel clathrin- and caveolae-independent endocytic pathway. *Cell Research*. 18, 290–301

26. Inoue, Y., Tanaka, N., Tanaka, Y., Inoue, S., Morita, K., Zhuang, M., Hattori, T., and Sugamura, K. (2007) Clathrin-dependent entry of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus into target cells expressing ACE2 with the cytoplasmic tail deleted. *Journal of Virology*. 81, 8722–8729

27. Zhou, N., Pan, T., Zhang, J., Li, Q., Zhang, X., Bai, C., Huang, F., Peng, T., Zhang, J., Liu, C., Tao, L., and Zhang, H. (2016) Glycopeptide Antibiotics Potently Inhibit Cathepsin L in the Late Endosome/Lysosome and Block the Entry of Ebola Virus, Middle East Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus (MERS-CoV), and Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus (SARS-CoV). *J. Biol. Chem.* 291, 9218–9232

28. Park, J.-E., Li, K., Barlan, A., Fehr, A. R., Perlman, S., McCray, P. B., and Gallagher, T. (2016) Proteolytic processing of Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus spikes expands virus tropism. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.* 113, 12262–12267

29. Shang, J., Wan, Y., Luo, C., Ye, G., Geng, Q., Auerbach, A., and Li, F. (2020) Cell entry mechanisms of SARS-CoV-2. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.* 10.1073/pnas.2003138117

30. Wang, M., Cao, R., Zhang, L., Yang, X., Liu, J., Xu, M., Shi, Z., Hu, Z., Zhong, W., and Xiao, G. (2020) Remdesivir and chloroquine effectively inhibit the recently emerged novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV) in vitro. *Cell Research*. 30, 269–271

31. Andersen, K. G., Rambaut, A., Lipkin, W. I., Holmes, E. C., and Garry, R. F. (2020) The proximal origin of SARS-CoV-2. *Nat Med.* 26, 450–452

32. Wan, Y., Shang, J., Graham, R., Baric, R. S., and Li, F. (2020) Receptor Recognition by the Novel Coronavirus from Wuhan: an Analysis Based on Decade-Long Structural Studies of SARS Coronavirus. *Journal of Virology*. 10.1128/JVI.00127-20

33. Wrapp, D., Wang, N., Corbett, K. S., Goldsmith, J. A., Hsieh, C.-L., Abiona, O., Graham, B. S., and McLellan, J. S. (2020) Cryo-EM structure of the 2019-nCoV spike in the prefusion conformation. *Science*. 367, 1260–1263

34. Lan, J., Ge, J., Yu, J., Shan, S., Zhou, H., Fan, S., Zhang, Q., Shi, X., Wang, Q., Zhang, L., and Wang, X. (2020) Structure of the SARS-CoV-2 spike receptor-binding domain bound to the ACE2 receptor. *Nature*. **581**, 215–220

35. Walls, A. C., Park, Y.-J., Tortorici, M. A., Wall, A., McGuire, A. T., and Veesler, D. (2020) Structure, Function, and Antigenicity of the SARS-CoV-2 Spike Glycoprotein. *Cell*. **181**, 281–292.e6

36. Coutard, B., Valle, C., de Lamballerie, X., Canard, B., Seidah, N. G., and Decroly, E. (2020) The spike glycoprotein of the new coronavirus 2019-nCoV contains a furin-like cleavage site absent in CoV of the same clade. *Antiviral Research*. **176**, 104742

37. Hoffmann, M., Kleine-Weber, H., and Pöhlmann, S. (2020) A Multibasic Cleavage Site in the Spike Protein of SARS-CoV-2 Is Essential for Infection of Human Lung Cells. *Molecular Cell*. **78**, 779–784.e5

38. Cheng, J., Zhao, Y., Xu, G., Zhang, K., Jia, W., Sun, Y., Zhao, J., Xue, J., Hu, Y., and Zhang, G. (2019) The S2 Subunit of QX-type Infectious Bronchitis Coronavirus Spike Protein Is an Essential Determinant of Neurotropism. *Viruses*. 10.3390/v11100972

39. Follis, K. E., York, J., and Nunberg, J. H. (2006) Furin cleavage of the SARS coronavirus spike glycoprotein enhances cell-cell fusion but does not affect virion entry. *Virology*. **350**, 358–369

40. Menachery, V. D., Dinnon, K. H., Yount, B. L., McAnarney, E. T., Gralinski, L. E., Hale, A., Graham, R. L., Scobey, T., Anthony, S. J., Wang, L., Graham, B., Randell, S. H., Lipkin, W. I., and Baric, R. S. (2020) Trypsin Treatment Unlocks Barrier for Zoonotic Bat Coronavirus Infection. *Journal of Virology*. 10.1128/JVI.01774-19

41. Alexander, D. J., and Brown, I. H. (2009) History of highly pathogenic avian influenza. *Rev. Off. Epizoot.* **28**, 19–38

42. Ito, T., Goto, H., Yamamoto, E., Tanaka, H., Takeuchi, M., Kuwayama, M., Kawaoka, Y., and Otsuki, K. (2001) Generation of a highly pathogenic avian influenza A virus from an avirulent field isolate by passaging in chickens. *Journal of Virology*. **75**, 4439–4443

43. Ou, X., Liu, Y., Lei, X., Li, P., Mi, D., Ren, L., Guo, L., Guo, R., Chen, T., Hu, J., Xiang, Z., Mu, Z., Chen, X., Chen, J., Hu, K., Jin, Q., Wang, J., and Qian, Z. (2020) Characterization of spike glycoprotein of SARS-CoV-2 on virus entry and its immune cross-reactivity with SARS-CoV. *Nature Communications*. **11**, 1620

44. Tay, M. Z., Poh, C. M., Rénia, L., MacAry, P. A., and Ng, L. F. P. (2020) The trinity of COVID-19: immunity, inflammation and intervention. *Nat Rev Immunol*. **1282**, 1

45. Wu, Y., Wang, F., Shen, C., Peng, W., Li, D., Zhao, C., Li, Z., Li, S., Bi, Y., Yang, Y., Gong, Y., Xiao, H., Fan, Z., Tan, S., Wu, G., Tan, W., Lu, X., Fan, C., Wang, Q., Liu, Y., Zhang, C., Qi, J., Gao, G. F., Gao, F., and Liu, L. (2020) A noncompeting pair of human neutralizing antibodies block COVID-19 virus binding to its receptor ACE2. *Science*. 10.1126/science.abc2241

46. Xia, S., Liu, M., Wang, C., Xu, W., Lan, Q., Feng, S., Qi, F., Bao, L., Du, L., Liu, S., Qin, C., Sun, F., Shi, Z., Zhu, Y., Jiang, S., and Lu, L. (2020) Inhibition of SARS-CoV-2 (previously 2019-nCoV) infection by a highly potent pan-coronavirus fusion inhibitor targeting its spike protein that harbors a high capacity to mediate membrane fusion. *Cell Research*. **30**, 343–355

47. Corey, B. L., Mascola, J. R., Fauci, A. S., and Collins, F. S. (2020) A strategic approach to COVID-19 vaccine R&D. *Science*. 10.1126/science.abc5312

48. Kim, D., Lee, J.-Y., Yang, J.-S., Kim, J. W., Kim, V. N., and Chang, H. (2020) The architecture of SARS-CoV-2 transcriptome. **38**, 661–23

49. Gorbalenya, A. E., Enjuanes, L., Ziebuhr, J., and Snijder, E. J. (2006) Nidovirales: evolving the largest RNA virus genome. *Virus Research*. **117**, 17–37

50. Brian, D. A., and Baric, R. S. (2005) Coronavirus genome structure and replication. *Curr. Top. Microbiol. Immunol.* 287, 1–30

51. Irigoyen, N., Firth, A. E., Jones, J. D., Chung, B. Y. W., Siddell, S. G., and Brierley, I. (2016) High-Resolution Analysis of Coronavirus Gene Expression by RNA Sequencing and Ribosome Profiling. *PLoS Pathog.* 12, e1005473

52. Bredenbeek, P. J., Pachuk, C. J., Noten, A. F., Charité, J., Luytjes, W., Weiss, S. R., and Spaan, W. J. (1990) The primary structure and expression of the second open reading frame of the polymerase gene of the coronavirus MHV-A59; a highly conserved polymerase is expressed by an efficient ribosomal frameshifting mechanism. *Nucleic Acids Res.* 18, 1825–1832

53. Plant, E. P., Sims, A. C., Baric, R. S., Dinman, J. D., and Taylor, D. R. (2013) Altering SARS coronavirus frameshift efficiency affects genomic and subgenomic RNA production. *Viruses.* 5, 279–294

54. Plant, E. P., Rakauskaitė, R., Taylor, D. R., and Dinman, J. D. (2010) Achieving a golden mean: mechanisms by which coronaviruses ensure synthesis of the correct stoichiometric ratios of viral proteins. *Journal of Virology.* 84, 4330–4340

55. Plant, E. P., and Dinman, J. D. (2008) The role of programmed-1 ribosomal frameshifting in coronavirus propagation. *Front. Biosci.* 13, 4873–4881

56. Park, S.-J., Kim, Y.-G., and Park, H.-J. (2011) Identification of RNA pseudoknot-binding ligand that inhibits the -1 ribosomal frameshifting of SARS-coronavirus by structure-based virtual screening. *J. Am. Chem. Soc.* 133, 10094–10100

57. Ahn, D.-G., Lee, W., Choi, J.-K., Kim, S.-J., Plant, E. P., Almazán, F., Taylor, D. R., Enjuanes, L., and Oh, J.-W. (2011) Interference of ribosomal frameshifting by antisense peptide nucleic acids suppresses SARS coronavirus replication. *Antiviral Research.* 91, 1–10

58. Brakier-Gingras, L., Charbonneau, J., and Butcher, S. E. (2012) Targeting frameshifting in the human immunodeficiency virus. *Expert Opin. Ther. Targets.* 16, 249–258

59. Ziebuhr, J., Snijder, E. J., and Gorbalenya, A. E. (2000) Virus-encoded proteinases and proteolytic processing in the Nidovirales. *Journal of General Virology.* 81, 853–879

60. Zhang, L., Lin, D., Sun, X., Curth, U., Drosten, C., Sauerhering, L., Becker, S., Rox, K., and Hilgenfeld, R. (2020) Crystal structure of SARS-CoV-2 main protease provides a basis for design of improved α-ketoamide inhibitors. *Science.* 368, 409–412

61. Kumar, V., Shin, J. S., Shie, J.-J., Ku, K. B., Kim, C., Go, Y. Y., Huang, K.-F., Kim, M., and Liang, P.-H. (2017) Identification and evaluation of potent Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV) 3CLPro inhibitors. *Antiviral Research.* 141, 101–106

62. Anand, K., Ziebuhr, J., Wadhwa, P., Mesters, J. R., and Hilgenfeld, R. (2003) Coronavirus main proteinase (3CLpro) structure: basis for design of anti-SARS drugs. *Science.* 300, 1763–1767

63. Clementz, M. A., Chen, Z., Banach, B. S., Wang, Y., Sun, L., Ratia, K., Baez-Santos, Y. M., Wang, J., Takayama, J., Ghosh, A. K., Li, K., Mesecar, A. D., and Baker, S. C. (2010) Deubiquitinating and interferon antagonism activities of coronavirus papain-like proteases. *Journal of Virology.* 84, 4619–4629

64. Mielech, A. M., Kilianski, A., Baez-Santos, Y. M., Mesecar, A. D., and Baker, S. C. (2014) MERS-CoV papain-like protease has deISGylating and deubiquitinating activities. *Virology.* 450-451, 64–70

65. Baez-Santos, Y. M., St John, S. E., and Mesecar, A. D. (2015) The SARS-coronavirus papain-like protease: structure, function and inhibition by designed antiviral compounds. *Antiviral Research.* 115, 21–38

66. Knoops, K., Kikkert, M., Worm, S. H. E. V. D., Zevenhoven-Dobbe, J. C., van der Meer, Y., Koster, A. J., Mommaas, A. M., and Snijder, E. J. (2008) SARS-coronavirus replication

is supported by a reticulovesicular network of modified endoplasmic reticulum. *PLoS Biol.* 6, e226

67. Angelini, M. M., Akhlaghpour, M., Neuman, B. W., and Buchmeier, M. J. (2013) Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus nonstructural proteins 3, 4, and 6 induce double-membrane vesicles. *mBio*. 10.1128/mBio.00524-13

68. Hagemeijer, M. C., Ulasli, M., Vonk, A. M., Reggiori, F., Rottier, P. J. M., and de Haan, C. A. M. (2011) Mobility and interactions of coronavirus nonstructural protein 4. *Journal of Virology*. 85, 4572–4577

69. Hagemeijer, M. C., Monastyrska, I., Griffith, J., van der Sluijs, P., Voortman, J., van Bergen en Henegouwen, P. M., Vonk, A. M., Rottier, P. J. M., Reggiori, F., and de Haan, C. A. M. (2014) Membrane rearrangements mediated by coronavirus nonstructural proteins 3 and 4. *Virology*. 458-459, 125–135

70. Sawicki, S. G., and Sawicki, D. L. (2005) Coronavirus transcription: a perspective. *Curr. Top. Microbiol. Immunol.* 287, 31–55

71. Wang, T., and Sawicki, S. G. (2001) Mouse hepatitis virus minus-strand templates are unstable and turnover during viral replication. *Adv. Exp. Med. Biol.* 494, 491–497

72. Sola, I., Mateos-Gómez, P. A., Almazán, F., Zúñiga, S., and Enjuanes, L. (2011) RNA-RNA and RNA-protein interactions in coronavirus replication and transcription. *RNA Biology*. 8, 237–248

73. Madhugiri, R., Fricke, M., Marz, M., and Ziebuhr, J. (2016) Coronavirus cis-Acting RNA Elements. *Adv. Virus Res.* 96, 127–163

74. Lo, C. Y., Tsai, T. L., Lin, C. N., Lin, C. H., and Wu, H. Y. (2019) Interaction of coronavirus nucleocapsid protein with the 5′- and 3′-ends of the coronavirus genome is involved in genome circularization and negative-strand RNA synthesis. *FEBS J.* 286, 3222–3239

75. Lai, M. M., Patton, C. D., and Stohlman, S. A. (1982) Further characterization of mRNA“s of mouse hepatitis virus: presence of common 5′-end nucleotides. *Journal of Virology*. 41, 557–565

76. Sola, I., Almazán, F., Zúñiga, S., and Enjuanes, L. (2015) Continuous and Discontinuous RNA Synthesis in Coronaviruses. *Annu. Rev. Virol.* 2, 265–288

77. Sola, I., Moreno, J. L., Zúñiga, S., Alonso, S., and Enjuanes, L. (2005) Role of nucleotides immediately flanking the transcription-regulating sequence core in coronavirus subgenomic mRNA synthesis. *Journal of Virology*. 79, 2506–2516

78. Zúñiga, S., Sola, I., Alonso, S., and Enjuanes, L. (2004) Sequence motifs involved in the regulation of discontinuous coronavirus subgenomic RNA synthesis. *Journal of Virology*. 78, 980–994

79. Sawicki, S. G., Sawicki, D. L., and Siddell, S. G. (2007) A contemporary view of coronavirus transcription. *Journal of Virology*. 81, 20–29

80. Huang, C., Lokugamage, K. G., Rozovics, J. M., Narayanan, K., Semler, B. L., and Makino, S. (2011) SARS coronavirus nsp1 protein induces template-dependent endonucleolytic cleavage of mRNAs: viral mRNAs are resistant to nsp1-induced RNA cleavage. *PLoS Pathog.* 7, e1002433

81. Di, H., McIntyre, A. A., and Brinton, M. A. (2018) New insights about the regulation of Nidovirus subgenomic mRNA synthesis. *Virology*. 517, 38–43

82. Di, H., Madden, J. C., Morantz, E. K., Tang, H.-Y., Graham, R. L., Baric, R. S., and Brinton, M. A. (2017) Expanded subgenomic mRNA transcriptome and coding capacity of a nidovirus. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.* 114, E8895–E8904

83. Moreno, J. L., Zúñiga, S., Enjuanes, L., and Sola, I. (2008) Identification of a coronavirus transcription enhancer. *Journal of Virology*. 82, 3882–3893

84. Mateos-Gómez, P. A., Morales, L., Zúñiga, S., Enjuanes, L., and Sola, I. (2013) Long-distance RNA-RNA interactions in the coronavirus genome form high-order structures promoting discontinuous RNA synthesis during transcription. *Journal of Virology*. **87**, 177–186

85. Schelle, B., Karl, N., Ludewig, B., Siddell, S. G., and Thiel, V. (2005) Selective replication of coronavirus genomes that express nucleocapsid protein. *Journal of Virology*. **79**, 6620–6630

86. Wu, C.-H., Chen, P.-J., and Yeh, S.-H. (2014) Nucleocapsid phosphorylation and RNA helicase DDX1 recruitment enables coronavirus transition from discontinuous to continuous transcription. *Cell Host Microbe*. **16**, 462–472

87. Grossoehme, N. E., Li, L., Keane, S. C., Liu, P., Dann, C. E., Leibowitz, J. L., and Giedroc, D. P. (2009) Coronavirus N protein N-terminal domain (NTD) specifically binds the transcriptional regulatory sequence (TRS) and melts TRS-cTRS RNA duplexes. *Journal of Molecular Biology*. **394**, 544–557

88. Zúñiga, S., Cruz, J. L. G., Sola, I., Mateos-Gómez, P. A., Palacio, L., and Enjuanes, L. (2010) Coronavirus nucleocapsid protein facilitates template switching and is required for efficient transcription. *Journal of Virology*. **84**, 2169–2175

89. Sawicki, S. G., and Sawicki, D. L. (1986) Coronavirus minus-strand RNA synthesis and effect of cycloheximide on coronavirus RNA synthesis. *Journal of Virology*. **57**, 328–334

90. Smith, E. C., Sexton, N. R., and Denison, M. R. (2014) Thinking Outside the Triangle: Replication Fidelity of the Largest RNA Viruses. *Annu. Rev. Virol.* **1**, 111–132

91. Subissi, L., Posthuma, C. C., Collet, A., Zevenhoven-Dobbe, J. C., Gorbelenya, A. E., Decroly, E., Snijder, E. J., Canard, B., and Imbert, I. (2014) One severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus protein complex integrates processive RNA polymerase and exonuclease activities. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.* **111**, E3900–9

92. Kirchdoerfer, R. N., and Ward, A. B. (2019) Structure of the SARS-CoV nsp12 polymerase bound to nsp7 and nsp8 co-factors. *Nature Communications*. **10**, 2342

93. Gao, Y., Yan, L., Huang, Y., Liu, F., Zhao, Y., Cao, L., Wang, T., Sun, Q., Ming, Z., Zhang, L., Ge, J., Zheng, L., Zhang, Y., Wang, H., Zhu, Y., Zhu, C., Hu, T., Hua, T., Zhang, B., Yang, X., Li, J., Yang, H., Liu, Z., Xu, W., Guddat, L. W., Wang, Q., Lou, Z., and Rao, Z. (2020) Structure of the RNA-dependent RNA polymerase from COVID-19 virus. *Science*. 10.1126/science.abb7498

94. Velthuis, te, A. J. W., Arnold, J. J., Cameron, C. E., van den Worm, S. H. E., and Snijder, E. J. (2010) The RNA polymerase activity of SARS-coronavirus nsp12 is primer dependent. *Nucleic Acids Research*. **38**, 203–214

95. Ahn, D.-G., Choi, J.-K., Taylor, D. R., and Oh, J.-W. (2012) Biochemical characterization of a recombinant SARS coronavirus nsp12 RNA-dependent RNA polymerase capable of copying viral RNA templates. *Arch. Virol.* **157**, 2095–2104

96. Lehmann, K. C., Gulyaeva, A., Zevenhoven-Dobbe, J. C., Janssen, G. M. C., Ruben, M., Overkleef, H. S., van Veelen, P. A., Samborskiy, D. V., Kravchenko, A. A., Leontovich, A. M., Sidorov, I. A., Snijder, E. J., Posthuma, C. C., and Gorbelenya, A. E. (2015) Discovery of an essential nucleotidylating activity associated with a newly delineated conserved domain in the RNA polymerase-containing protein of all nidoviruses. *Nucleic Acids Research*. **43**, 8416–8434

97. Imbert, I., Guillemot, J.-C., Bourhis, J.-M., Bussetta, C., Coutard, B., Egloff, M.-P., Ferron, F., Gorbelenya, A. E., and Canard, B. (2006) A second, non-canonical RNA-dependent RNA polymerase in SARS coronavirus. *EMBO J.* **25**, 4933–4942

98. Velthuis, te, A. J. W., van den Worm, S. H. E., and Snijder, E. J. (2012) The SARS-coronavirus nsp7+nsp8 complex is a unique multimeric RNA polymerase capable of both de novo initiation and primer extension. *Nucleic Acids Research*. **40**, 1737–1747

99. Tvarogová, J., Madhugiri, R., Bylapudi, G., Ferguson, L. J., Karl, N., and Ziebuhr, J. (2019) Identification and Characterization of a Human Coronavirus 229E Nonstructural Protein 8-Associated RNA 3'-Terminal Adenylyltransferase Activity. *Journal of Virology*. 10.1128/JVI.00291-19

100. Wu, H. Y., Ke, T.-Y., Liao, W.-Y., and Chang, N.-Y. (2013) Regulation of coronaviral poly(A) tail length during infection. *PLoS ONE*. **8**, e70548

101. Egloff, M.-P., Ferron, F., Campanacci, V., Longhi, S., Rancurel, C., Dutartre, H., Snijder, E. J., Gorbelenya, A. E., Cambillau, C., and Canard, B. (2004) The severe acute respiratory syndrome-coronavirus replicative protein nsp9 is a single-stranded RNA-binding subunit unique in the RNA virus world. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA*. **101**, 3792–3796

102. Sutton, G., Fry, E., Carter, L., Sainsbury, S., Walter, T., Nettleship, J., Berrow, N., Owens, R., Gilbert, R., Davidson, A., Siddell, S., Poon, L. L. M., Diprose, J., Alderton, D., Walsh, M., Grimes, J. M., and Stuart, D. I. (2004) The nsp9 replicase protein of SARS-coronavirus, structure and functional insights. *Structure*. **12**, 341–353

103. Miknis, Z. J., Donaldson, E. F., Umland, T. C., Rimmer, R. A., Baric, R. S., and Schultz, L. W. (2009) Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus nsp9 dimerization is essential for efficient viral growth. *Journal of Virology*. **83**, 3007–3018

104. Marceau, A. H. (2012) Functions of single-strand DNA-binding proteins in DNA replication, recombination, and repair. *Methods Mol. Biol.* **922**, 1–21

105. Adedeji, A. O., Marchand, B., Velthuis, te, A. J. W., Snijder, E. J., Weiss, S., Eoff, R. L., Singh, K., and Sarafianos, S. G. (2012) Mechanism of nucleic acid unwinding by SARS-CoV helicase. *PLoS ONE*. **7**, e36521

106. Jia, Z., Yan, L., Ren, Z., Wu, L., Wang, J., Guo, J., Zheng, L., Ming, Z., Zhang, L., Lou, Z., and Rao, Z. (2019) Delicate structural coordination of the Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome coronavirus Nsp13 upon ATP hydrolysis. *Nucleic Acids Research*. **47**, 6538–6550

107. Lehmann, K. C., Snijder, E. J., Posthuma, C. C., and Gorbelenya, A. E. (2015) What we know but do not understand about nidovirus helicases. *Virus Research*. **202**, 12–32

108. Ivanov, K. A., Thiel, V., Dobbe, J. C., van der Meer, Y., Snijder, E. J., and Ziebuhr, J. (2004) Multiple enzymatic activities associated with severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus helicase. *Journal of Virology*. **78**, 5619–5632

109. Hao, W., Wojdyla, J. A., Zhao, R., Han, R., Das, R., Zlatev, I., Manoharan, M., Wang, M., and Cui, S. (2017) Crystal structure of Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus helicase. *PLoS Pathog*. **13**, e1006474

110. Raney, K. D., Byrd, A. K., and Aarattuthodiyl, S. (2013) Structure and Mechanisms of SF1 DNA Helicases. *Adv. Exp. Biol*. **767**, 17–46

111. Smith, E. C., and Denison, M. R. (2013) Coronaviruses as DNA wannabes: a new model for the regulation of RNA virus replication fidelity. *PLoS Pathog*. **9**, e1003760

112. Minskaia, E., Hertzig, T., Gorbelenya, A. E., Campanacci, V., Cambillau, C., Canard, B., and Ziebuhr, J. (2006) Discovery of an RNA virus 3“->5” exoribonuclease that is critically involved in coronavirus RNA synthesis. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA*. **103**, 5108–5113

113. Eckerle, L. D., Lu, X., Sperry, S. M., Choi, L., and Denison, M. R. (2007) High fidelity of murine hepatitis virus replication is decreased in nsp14 exoribonuclease mutants. *Journal of Virology*. **81**, 12135–12144

114. Eckerle, L. D., Becker, M. M., Halpin, R. A., Li, K., Venter, E., Lu, X., Scherbakova, S., Graham, R. L., Baric, R. S., Stockwell, T. B., Spiro, D. J., and Denison, M. R. (2010) Infidelity of SARS-CoV Nsp14-exonuclease mutant virus replication is revealed by complete genome sequencing. *PLoS Pathog*. **6**, e1000896

115. Smith, E. C., Blanc, H., Surdel, M. C., Vignuzzi, M., and Denison, M. R. (2013) Coronaviruses lacking exoribonuclease activity are susceptible to lethal mutagenesis: evidence for proofreading and potential therapeutics. *PLoS Pathog.* 9, e1003565

116. Bouvet, M., Imbert, I., Subissi, L., Gluais, L., Canard, B., and Decroly, E. (2012) RNA 3'-end mismatch excision by the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus nonstructural protein nsp10/nsp14 exoribonuclease complex. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.* 109, 9372–9377

117. Smith, E. C., Case, J. B., Blanc, H., Isakov, O., Shomron, N., Vignuzzi, M., and Denison, M. R. (2015) Mutations in coronavirus nonstructural protein 10 decrease virus replication fidelity. *Journal of Virology.* 89, 6418–6426

118. Graham, R. L., Becker, M. M., Eckerle, L. D., Bolles, M., Denison, M. R., and Baric, R. S. (2012) A live, impaired-fidelity coronavirus vaccine protects in an aged, immunocompromised mouse model of lethal disease. *Nat Med.* 18, 1820–1826

119. Graepel, K. W., Lu, X., Case, J. B., Sexton, N. R., Smith, E. C., and Denison, M. R. (2017) Proofreading-Deficient Coronaviruses Adapt for Increased Fitness over Long-Term Passage without Reversion of Exoribonuclease-Inactivating Mutations. *mBio.* 10.1128/mBio.01503-17

120. Vignuzzi, M., Wendt, E., and Andino, R. (2008) Engineering attenuated virus vaccines by controlling replication fidelity. *Nat Med.* 14, 154–161

121. Xiao, Y., Rouzine, I. M., Bianco, S., Acevedo, A., Goldstein, E. F., Farkov, M., Brodsky, L., and Andino, R. (2017) RNA Recombination Enhances Adaptability and Is Required for Virus Spread and Virulence. *Cell Host Microbe.* 22, 420

122. Su, S., Wong, G., Shi, W., Liu, J., Lai, A. C. K., Zhou, J., Liu, W., Bi, Y., and Gao, G. F. (2016) Epidemiology, Genetic Recombination, and Pathogenesis of Coronaviruses. *Trends Microbiol.* 24, 490–502

123. Nagy, P. D., and Simon, A. E. (1997) New insights into the mechanisms of RNA recombination. *Virology.* 235, 1–9

124. Graham, R. L., Deming, D. J., Deming, M. E., Yount, B. L., and Baric, R. S. (2018) Evaluation of a recombination-resistant coronavirus as a broadly applicable, rapidly implementable vaccine platform. *Commun Biol.* 1, 179–10

125. Gribble, J., Pruijssers, A. J., Agostini, M. L., Anderson-Daniels, J., Chappell, J. D., Lu, X., Stevens, L. J., Routh, A. L., and Denison, M. R. (2020) The coronavirus proofreading exoribonuclease mediates extensive viral recombination. 92, e01531–46

126. Hyde, J. L., and Diamond, M. S. (2015) Innate immune restriction and antagonism of viral RNA lacking 2′-O methylation. *Virology.* 479-480, 66–74

127. Cheng, E., and Mir, M. A. (2012) Signatures of host mRNA 5' terminus for efficient hantavirus cap snatching. *Journal of Virology.* 86, 10173–10185

128. Ivanov, K. A., and Ziebuhr, J. (2004) Human coronavirus 229E nonstructural protein 13: characterization of duplex-unwinding, nucleoside triphosphatase, and RNA 5'-triphosphatase activities. *Journal of Virology.* 78, 7833–7838

129. Chen, Y., Cai, H., Pan, J., Xiang, N., Tien, P., Ahola, T., and Guo, D. (2009) Functional screen reveals SARS coronavirus nonstructural protein nsp14 as a novel cap N7 methyltransferase. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.* 106, 3484–3489

130. Bouvet, M., Debarnot, C., Imbert, I., Selisko, B., Snijder, E. J., Canard, B., and Decroly, E. (2010) In vitro reconstitution of SARS-coronavirus mRNA cap methylation. *PLoS Pathog.* 6, e1000863

131. Decroly, E., Debarnot, C., Ferron, F., Bouvet, M., Coutard, B., Imbert, I., Gluais, L., Papageorgiou, N., Sharff, A., Bricogne, G., Ortiz-Lombardia, M., Lescar, J., and Canard, B. (2011) Crystal structure and functional analysis of the SARS-coronavirus RNA cap 2′-O-methyltransferase nsp10/nsp16 complex. *PLoS Pathog.* 7, e1002059

132. Züst, R., Cervantes-Barragán, L., Habjan, M., Maier, R., Neuman, B. W., Ziebuhr, J., Szretter, K. J., Baker, S. C., Barchet, W., Diamond, M. S., Siddell, S. G., Ludewig, B., and Thiel, V. (2011) Ribose 2'-O-methylation provides a molecular signature for the distinction of self and non-self mRNA dependent on the RNA sensor Mda5. *Nat Immunol.* **12**, 137–143

133. Lin, Y. J., Liao, C. L., and Lai, M. M. (1994) Identification of the cis-acting signal for minus-strand RNA synthesis of a murine coronavirus: implications for the role of minus-strand RNA in RNA replication and transcription. *Journal of Virology.* **68**, 8131–8140

134. Peng, Y.-H., Lin, C.-H., Lin, C. N., Lo, C. Y., Tsai, T. L., and Wu, H. Y. (2016) Characterization of the Role of Hexamer AGUAAA and Poly(A) Tail in Coronavirus Polyadenylation. *PLoS ONE.* **11**, e0165077

135. Müller, C., Schulte, F. W., Lange-Grünweller, K., Obermann, W., Madhugiri, R., Pleschka, S., Ziebuhr, J., Hartmann, R. K., and Grünweller, A. (2018) Broad-spectrum antiviral activity of the eIF4A inhibitor silvestrol against corona- and picornaviruses. *Antiviral Research.* **150**, 123–129

136. Cencic, R., Desforges, M., Hall, D. R., Kozakov, D., Du, Y., Min, J., Dingledine, R., Fu, H., Vajda, S., Talbot, P. J., and Pelletier, J. (2011) Blocking eIF4E-eIF4G interaction as a strategy to impair coronavirus replication. *Journal of Virology.* **85**, 6381–6389

137. Gordon, D. E., Jang, G. M., Bouhaddou, M., Xu, J., Obernier, K., White, K. M., O'Meara, M. J., Rezelj, V. V., Guo, J. Z., Swaney, D. L., Tummino, T. A., Huettenhain, R., Kaake, R. M., Richards, A. L., Tutuncuoglu, B., Foussard, H., Batra, J., Haas, K., Modak, M., Kim, M., Haas, P., Polacco, B. J., Braberg, H., Fabius, J. M., Eckhardt, M., Soucheray, M., Bennett, M. J., Cakir, M., McGregor, M. J., Li, Q., Meyer, B., Roesch, F., Vallet, T., MacKain, A., Miorin, L., Moreno, E., Naing, Z. Z. C., Zhou, Y., Peng, S., Shi, Y., Zhang, Z., Shen, W., Kirby, I. T., Melnyk, J. E., Chorba, J. S., Lou, K., Dai, S. A., Barrio-Hernandez, I., Memon, D., Hernandez-Armenta, C., Lyu, J., Mathy, C. J. P., Perica, T., Pilla, K. B., Ganesan, S. J., Saltzberg, D. J., Rakesh, R., Liu, X., Rosenthal, S. B., Calviello, L., Venkataramanan, S., Liboy-Lugo, J., Lin, Y., Huang, X.-P., Liu, Y., Wankowicz, S. A., Bohn, M., Safari, M., Ugur, F. S., Koh, C., Savar, N. S., Tran, Q. D., Shengjuler, D., Fletcher, S. J., O'Neal, M. C., Cai, Y., Chang, J. C. J., Broadhurst, D. J., Klippsten, S., Sharp, P. P., Wenzell, N. A., Kuzuoglu, D., Wang, H.-Y., Trenker, R., Young, J. M., Cavero, D. A., Hiatt, J., Roth, T. L., Rathore, U., Subramanian, A., Noack, J., Hubert, M., Stroud, R. M., Frankel, A. D., Rosenberg, O. S., Verba, K. A., Agard, D. A., Ott, M., Emerman, M., Jura, N., Zastrow, von, M., Verdin, E., Ashworth, A., Schwartz, O., d'Enfert, C., Mukherjee, S., Jacobson, M., Malik, H. S., Fujimori, D. G., Ideker, T., Craik, C. S., Floor, S. N., Fraser, J. S., Gross, J. D., Sali, A., Roth, B. L., Ruggero, D., Taunton, J., Kortemme, T., Beltrao, P., Vignuzzi, M., García-Sastre, A., Shokat, K. M., Shoichet, B. K., and Krogan, N. J. (2020) A SARS-CoV-2 protein interaction map reveals targets for drug repurposing. *Nature.* 10.1038/s41586-020-2286-9

138. Subissi, L., Imbert, I., Ferron, F., Collet, A., Coutard, B., Decroly, E., and Canard, B. (2014) SARS-CoV ORF1b-encoded nonstructural proteins 12-16: replicative enzymes as antiviral targets. *Antiviral Research.* **101**, 122–130

139. Pruijssers, A. J., and Denison, M. R. (2019) Nucleoside analogues for the treatment of coronavirus infections. *Curr Opin Virol.* **35**, 57–62

140. Agostini, M. L., Andres, E. L., Sims, A. C., Graham, R. L., Sheahan, T. P., Lu, X., Smith, E. C., Case, J. B., Feng, J. Y., Jordan, R., Ray, A. S., Cihlar, T., Siegel, D., Mackman, R. L., Clarke, M. O., Baric, R. S., and Denison, M. R. (2018) Coronavirus Susceptibility to the Antiviral Remdesivir (GS-5734) Is Mediated by the Viral Polymerase and the Proofreading Exoribonuclease. *mBio.* 10.1128/mBio.00221-18

141. Gordon, C. J., Tchesnokov, E. P., Feng, J. Y., Porter, D. P., and Gotte, M. (2020) The antiviral compound remdesivir potently inhibits RNA-dependent RNA polymerase from Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus. *J. Biol. Chem.* 295, 4773–4779

142. Gordon, C. J., Tchesnokov, E. P., Woolner, E., Perry, J. K., Feng, J. Y., Porter, D. P., and Gotte, M. (2020) Remdesivir is a direct-acting antiviral that inhibits RNA-dependent RNA polymerase from severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 with high potency. *J. Biol. Chem.* 10.1074/jbc.RA120.013679

143. Cannalire, R., Tarantino, D., Astolfi, A., Barreca, M. L., Sabatini, S., Massari, S., Tabarrini, O., Milani, M., Querat, G., Mastrangelo, E., Manfroni, G., and Cecchetti, V. (2018) Functionalized 2,1-benzothiazine 2,2-dioxides as new inhibitors of Dengue NS5 RNA-dependent RNA polymerase. *Eur J Med Chem.* 143, 1667–1676

144. Agostini, M. L., Pruijssers, A. J., Chappell, J. D., Gribble, J., Lu, X., Andres, E. L., Bluemling, G. R., Lockwood, M. A., Sheahan, T. P., Sims, A. C., Natchus, M. G., Saindane, M., Kolykhalov, A. A., Painter, G. R., Baric, R. S., and Denison, M. R. (2019) Small-Molecule Antiviral β-d-N4-Hydroxycytidine Inhibits a Proofreading-Intact Coronavirus with a High Genetic Barrier to Resistance. *Journal of Virology.* 10.1128/JVI.01348-19

145. Adedeji, A. O., Singh, K., Calcaterra, N. E., DeDiego, M. L., Enjuanes, L., Weiss, S., and Sarafianos, S. G. (2012) Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus replication inhibitor that interferes with the nucleic acid unwinding of the viral helicase. *Antimicrob. Agents Chemother.* 56, 4718–4728

146. Ferron, F., Decroly, E., Selisko, B., and Canard, B. (2012) The viral RNA capping machinery as a target for antiviral drugs. *Antiviral Research.* 96, 21–31

147. Gosert, R., Kanjanahaluethai, A., Egger, D., Bienz, K., and Baker, S. C. (2002) RNA replication of mouse hepatitis virus takes place at double-membrane vesicles. *Journal of Virology.* 76, 3697–3708

148. Goldsmith, C. S., Tatti, K. M., Ksiazek, T. G., Rollin, P. E., Comer, J. A., Lee, W. W., Rota, P. A., Bankamp, B., Bellini, W. J., and Zaki, S. R. (2004) Ultrastructural characterization of SARS coronavirus. *Emerging Infect. Dis.* 10, 320–326

149. Snijder, E. J., van der Meer, Y., Zevenhoven-Dobbe, J., Onderwater, J. J. M., van der Meulen, J., Koerten, H. K., and Mommaas, A. M. (2006) Ultrastructure and origin of membrane vesicles associated with the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus replication complex. *Journal of Virology.* 80, 5927–5940

150. Ulasli, M., Verheije, M. H., de Haan, C. A. M., and Reggiori, F. (2010) Qualitative and quantitative ultrastructural analysis of the membrane rearrangements induced by coronavirus. *Cell. Microbiol.* 12, 844–861

151. Lundin, A., Dijkman, R., Bergström, T., Kann, N., Adamiak, B., Hannoun, C., Kindler, E., Jónsdóttir, H. R., Muth, D., Kint, J., Forlenza, M., Müller, M. A., Drosten, C., Thiel, V., and Trybala, E. (2014) Targeting membrane-bound viral RNA synthesis reveals potent inhibition of diverse coronaviruses including the middle East respiratory syndrome virus. *PLoS Pathog.* 10, e1004166

152. van Hemert, M. J., van den Worm, S. H. E., Knoops, K., Mommaas, A. M., Gorbalenya, A. E., and Snijder, E. J. (2008) SARS-coronavirus replication/transcription complexes are membrane-protected and need a host factor for activity in vitro. *PLoS Pathog.* 4, e1000054

153. Denison, M. R., Spaan, W. J., van der Meer, Y., Gibson, C. A., Sims, A. C., Prentice, E., and Lu, X. T. (1999) The putative helicase of the coronavirus mouse hepatitis virus is processed from the replicase gene polyprotein and localizes in complexes that are active in viral RNA synthesis. *Journal of Virology.* 73, 6862–6871

154. V'kovski, P., Gerber, M., Kelly, J., Pfaender, S., Ebert, N., Braga Lagache, S., Simillion, C., Portmann, J., Stalder, H., Gaschen, V., Bruggmann, R., Stoffel, M. H., Heller, M., Dijkman,

155. R., and Thiel, V. (2019) Determination of host proteins composing the microenvironment of coronavirus replicase complexes by proximity-labeling. *Elife*. 8, 25

156. Snijder, E. J., Limpens, R. W. A. L., de Wilde, A. H., de Jong, A. W. M., Zevenhoven-Dobbe, J. C., Maier, H. J., Faas, F. F. G. A., Koster, A. J., and Bárcena, M. (2020) A unifying structural and functional model of the coronavirus replication organelle: Tracking down RNA synthesis. *PLoS Biol.* 18, e3000715

157. Bos, E. C., Luytjes, W., van der Meulen, H. V., Koerten, H. K., and Spaan, W. J. (1996) The production of recombinant infectious DI-particles of a murine coronavirus in the absence of helper virus. *Virology*. 218, 52–60

158. Vennema, H., Godeke, G. J., Rossen, J. W., Voorhout, W. F., Horzinek, M. C., Opstelten, D. J., and Rottier, P. J. (1996) Nucleocapsid-independent assembly of coronavirus-like particles by co-expression of viral envelope protein genes. *EMBO J.* 15, 2020–2028

159. Huang, Y., Yang, Z.-Y., Kong, W.-P., and Nabel, G. J. (2004) Generation of synthetic severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus pseudoparticles: implications for assembly and vaccine production. *Journal of Virology*. 78, 12557–12565

160. Kuo, L., and Masters, P. S. (2013) Functional analysis of the murine coronavirus genomic RNA packaging signal. *Journal of Virology*. 87, 5182–5192

161. Narayanan, K., Maeda, A., Maeda, J., and Makino, S. (2000) Characterization of the coronavirus M protein and nucleocapsid interaction in infected cells. *Journal of Virology*. 74, 8127–8134

162. Nguyen, V. P., and Hogue, B. G. (1997) Protein interactions during coronavirus assembly. *Journal of Virology*. 71, 9278–9284

163. Opstelten, D. J., Raamsman, M. J., Wolfs, K., Horzinek, M. C., and Rottier, P. J. (1995) Envelope glycoprotein interactions in coronavirus assembly. *The Journal of Cell Biology*. 131, 339–349

164. Wilson, L., Mckinlay, C., Gage, P., and Ewart, G. (2004) SARS coronavirus E protein forms cation-selective ion channels. *Virology*. 330, 322–331

165. Venkatagopalan, P., Daskalova, S. M., Lopez, L. A., Dolezal, K. A., and Hogue, B. G. (2015) Coronavirus envelope (E) protein remains at the site of assembly. *Virology*. 478, 75–85

166. Lontok, E., Corse, E., and Machamer, C. E. (2004) Intracellular targeting signals contribute to localization of coronavirus spike proteins near the virus assembly site. *Journal of Virology*. 78, 5913–5922

167. Schwegmann-Wessels, C., Al-Falah, M., Escors, D., Wang, Z., Zimmer, G., Deng, H., Enjuanes, L., Naim, H. Y., and Herrler, G. (2004) A novel sorting signal for intracellular localization is present in the S protein of a porcine coronavirus but absent from severe acute respiratory syndrome-associated coronavirus. *Journal of Biological Chemistry*. 279, 43661–43666

168. McBride, C. E., Li, J., and Machamer, C. E. (2007) The cytoplasmic tail of the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus spike protein contains a novel endoplasmic reticulum retrieval signal that binds COPI and promotes interaction with membrane protein. *Journal of Virology*. 81, 2418–2428

169. Makino, S., Yokomori, K., and Lai, M. M. (1990) Analysis of efficiently packaged defective interfering RNAs of murine coronavirus: localization of a possible RNA-packaging signal. *Journal of Virology*. 64, 6045–6053

170. Escors, D., Izeta, A., Capiscol, C., and Enjuanes, L. (2003) Transmissible gastroenteritis coronavirus packaging signal is located at the 5' end of the virus genome. *Journal of Virology*. 77, 7890–7902

171. Fosmire, J. A., Hwang, K., and Makino, S. (1992) Identification and characterization of a coronavirus packaging signal. *Journal of Virology*. 66, 3522–3530

171. Chen, S.-C., van den Born, E., van den Worm, S. H. E., Pleij, C. W. A., Snijder, E. J., and Olsthoorn, R. C. L. (2007) New structure model for the packaging signal in the genome of group Iia coronaviruses. *Journal of Virology*. **81**, 6771–6774

172. Masters, P. S. (2019) Coronavirus genomic RNA packaging. *Virology*. **537**, 198–207

173. Baric, R. S., Nelson, G. W., Fleming, J. O., Deans, R. J., Keck, J. G., Casteel, N., and Stohlman, S. A. (1988) Interactions between coronavirus nucleocapsid protein and viral RNAs: implications for viral transcription. *Journal of Virology*. **62**, 4280–4287

174. Cologna, R., Spagnolo, J. F., and Hogue, B. G. (2000) Identification of nucleocapsid binding sites within coronavirus-defective genomes. *Virology*. **277**, 235–249

175. Narayanan, K., Chen, C.-J., Maeda, J., and Makino, S. (2003) Nucleocapsid-independent specific viral RNA packaging via viral envelope protein and viral RNA signal. *Journal of Virology*. **77**, 2922–2927

176. de Haan, C. A. M., Masters, P. S., Shen, X., Weiss, S., and Rottier, P. J. M. (2002) The group-specific murine coronavirus genes are not essential, but their deletion, by reverse genetics, is attenuating in the natural host. *Virology*. **296**, 177–189

177. Haijema, B. J., Volders, H., and Rottier, P. J. M. (2004) Live, attenuated coronavirus vaccines through the directed deletion of group-specific genes provide protection against feline infectious peritonitis. *Journal of Virology*. **78**, 3863–3871

178. Yount, B., Roberts, R. S., Sims, A. C., Deming, D., Frieman, M. B., Sparks, J., Denison, M. R., Davis, N., and Baric, R. S. (2005) Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus group-specific open reading frames encode nonessential functions for replication in cell cultures and mice. *Journal of Virology*. **79**, 14909–14922

179. Ontiveros, E., Kuo, L., Masters, P., and Perlman, S. (2001) Analysis of nonessential gene function in recombinant MHV-JHM. Gene 4 knockout recombinant virus. *Adv. Exp. Med. Biol.* **494**, 83–89

180. Shen, S., Wen, Z. L., and Liu, D. X. (2003) Emergence of a coronavirus infectious bronchitis virus mutant with a truncated 3b gene: functional characterization of the 3b protein in pathogenesis and replication. *Virology*. **311**, 16–27

181. Hodgson, T., Britton, P., and Cavanagh, D. (2006) Neither the RNA nor the proteins of open reading frames 3a and 3b of the coronavirus infectious bronchitis virus are essential for replication. *Journal of Virology*. **80**, 296–305

182. Casais, R., Davies, M., Cavanagh, D., and Britton, P. (2005) Gene 5 of the avian coronavirus infectious bronchitis virus is not essential for replication. *Journal of Virology*. **79**, 8065–8078

183. Marra, M. A., Jones, S. J. M., Astell, C. R., Holt, R. A., Brooks-Wilson, A., Butterfield, Y. S. N., Khattra, J., Asano, J. K., Barber, S. A., Chan, S. Y., Cloutier, A., Coughlin, S. M., Freeman, D., Girn, N., Griffith, O. L., Leach, S. R., Mayo, M., McDonald, H., Montgomery, S. B., Pandoh, P. K., Petrescu, A. S., Robertson, A. G., Schein, J. E., Siddiqui, A., Smailus, D. E., Stott, J. M., Yang, G. S., Plummer, F., Andonov, A., Artsob, H., Bastien, N., Bernard, K., Booth, T. F., Bowness, D., Czub, M., Drebot, M., Fernando, L., Flick, R., Garbutt, M., Gray, M., Grolla, A., Jones, S., Feldmann, H., Meyers, A., Kabani, A., Li, Y., Normand, S., Stroher, U., Tipples, G. A., Tyler, S., Vogrig, R., Ward, D., Watson, B., Brunham, R. C., Krajden, M., Petric, M., Skowronski, D. M., Upton, C., and Roper, R. L. (2003) The Genome sequence of the SARS-associated coronavirus. *Science*. **300**, 1399–1404

184. Rota, P. A., Oberste, M. S., Monroe, S. S., Nix, W. A., Campagnoli, R., Icenogle, J. P., Peñaranda, S., Bankamp, B., Maher, K., Chen, M.-H., Tong, S., Tamin, A., Lowe, L., Frace, M., DeRisi, J. L., Chen, Q., Wang, D., Erdman, D. D., Peret, T. C. T., Burns, C., Ksiazek, T. G., Rollin, P. E., Sanchez, A., Liffick, S., Holloway, B., Limor, J., McCaustland, K., Olsen-Rasmussen, M., Fouchier, R., Günther, S., Osterhaus, A. D. M. E., Drosten, C., Pallansch,

185. M. A., Anderson, L. J., and Bellini, W. J. (2003) Characterization of a novel coronavirus associated with severe acute respiratory syndrome. *Science*. **300**, 1394–1399

186. Lai, M. M., and Cavanagh, D. (1997) The molecular biology of coronaviruses. *Adv. Virus Res.* **48**, 1–100

187. Liu, D. X., Fung, T. S., Chong, K. K.-L., Shukla, A., and Hilgenfeld, R. (2014) Accessory proteins of SARS-CoV and other coronaviruses. *Antiviral Research*. **109**, 97–109

188. Narayanan, K., Huang, C., and Makino, S. (2008) SARS coronavirus accessory proteins. *Virus Research*. **133**, 113–121

189. Wu, F., Zhao, S., Yu, B., Chen, Y.-M., Wang, W., Song, Z.-G., Hu, Y., Tao, Z.-W., Tian, J.-H., Pei, Y.-Y., Yuan, M.-L., Zhang, Y.-L., Dai, F.-H., Liu, Y., Wang, Q.-M., Zheng, J.-J., Xu, L., Holmes, E. C., and Zhang, Y.-Z. (2020) A new coronavirus associated with human respiratory disease in China. *Nature*. **579**, 265–269

190. Wu, A., Peng, Y., Huang, B., Ding, X., Wang, X., Niu, P., Meng, J., Zhu, Z., Zhang, Z., Wang, J., Sheng, J., Quan, L., Xia, Z., Tan, W., Cheng, G., and Jiang, T. (2020) Genome Composition and Divergence of the Novel Coronavirus (2019-nCoV) Originating in China. *Cell Host Microbe*. **27**, 325–328

191. Lokugamage, K. G., Hage, A., Schindewolf, C., Rajsbbaum, R., and Menachery, V. D. (2020) SARS-CoV-2 is sensitive to type I interferon pretreatment. *bioRxiv*. **42**, 2020.03.07.982264

192. Satija, N., and Lal, S. K. (2007) The molecular biology of SARS coronavirus. *Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci.* **1102**, 26–38

193. Chinese SARS Molecular Epidemiology Consortium (2004) Molecular evolution of the SARS coronavirus during the course of the SARS epidemic in China. *Science*. **303**, 1666–1669

194. Su, Y. C., Anderson, D. E., Young, B. E., Zhu, F., Linster, M., Kalimuddin, S., Low, J. G., Yan, Z., Jayakumar, J., Sun, L., Yan, G. Z., Mendenhall, I. H., Leo, Y.-S., Lye, D. C., Wang, L.-F., and Smith, G. J. (2020) Discovery of a 382-nt deletion during the early evolution of SARS-CoV-2. **8**, 15177–23

195. Abernathy, E., and Glaunsinger, B. (2015) Emerging roles for RNA degradation in viral replication and antiviral defense. *Virology*. **479-480**, 600–608

196. Kamitani, W., Narayanan, K., Huang, C., Lokugamage, K., Ikegami, T., Ito, N., Kubo, H., and Makino, S. (2006) Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus nsp1 protein suppresses host gene expression by promoting host mRNA degradation. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA*. **103**, 12885–12890

197. Narayanan, K., Huang, C., Lokugamage, K., Kamitani, W., Ikegami, T., Tseng, C.-T. K., and Makino, S. (2008) Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus nsp1 suppresses host gene expression, including that of type I interferon, in infected cells. *Journal of Virology*. **82**, 4471–4479

198. Tanaka, T., Kamitani, W., DeDiego, M. L., Enjuanes, L., and Matsuura, Y. (2012) Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus nsp1 facilitates efficient propagation in cells through a specific translational shutoff of host mRNA. *Journal of Virology*. **86**, 11128–11137

199. Clyde, K., and Glaunsinger, B. A. (2011) Deep Sequencing Reveals Direct Targets of Gammaherpesvirus-Induced mRNA Decay and Suggests That Multiple Mechanisms Govern Cellular Transcript Escape. *PLoS ONE*. **6**, e19655–12

200. Rodriguez, W., Srivastav, K., and Muller, M. (2019) C19ORF66 Broadly Escapes Virus-Induced Endonuclease Cleavage and Restricts Kaposi's Sarcoma-Associated Herpesvirus. *Journal of Virology*. **93**, 9527–12

200. Gaucherand, L., Porter, B. K., Levene, R. E., Price, E. L., Schmaling, S. K., Rycroft, C. H., Kevorkian, Y., McCormick, C., Khaperskyy, D. A., and Gaglia, M. M. (2019) The

201. Influenza A Virus Endoribonuclease PA-X Usurps Host mRNA Processing Machinery to Limit Host Gene Expression. *Cell Rep.* 27, 776–791.e8

202. Wathelet, M. G., Orr, M., Frieman, M. B., and Baric, R. S. (2007) Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus evades antiviral signaling: role of nsp1 and rational design of an attenuated strain. *Journal of Virology.* 81, 11620–11633

203. Lokugamage, K. G., Narayanan, K., Huang, C., and Makino, S. (2012) Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus protein nsp1 is a novel eukaryotic translation inhibitor that represses multiple steps of translation initiation. *Journal of Virology.* 86, 13598–13608

204. Lokugamage, K. G., Narayanan, K., Nakagawa, K., Terasaki, K., Ramirez, S. I., Tseng, C.-T. K., and Makino, S. (2015) Middle East Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus nsp1 Inhibits Host Gene Expression by Selectively Targeting mRNAs Transcribed in the Nucleus while Sparing mRNAs of Cytoplasmic Origin. *Journal of Virology.* 89, 10970–10981

205. Kamitani, W., Huang, C., Narayanan, K., Lokugamage, K. G., and Makino, S. (2009) A two-pronged strategy to suppress host protein synthesis by SARS coronavirus Nsp1 protein. *Nature Structural & Molecular Biology.* 16, 1134–1140

206. Kopecky-Bromberg, S. A., Martínez-Sobrido, L., and Palese, P. (2006) 7a protein of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus inhibits cellular protein synthesis and activates p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase. *Journal of Virology.* 80, 785–793

207. Law, H. K. W., Cheung, C. Y., Ng, H. Y., Sia, S. F., Chan, Y. O., Luk, W., Nicholls, J. M., Peiris, J. S. M., and Lau, Y. L. (2005) Chemokine up-regulation in SARS-coronavirus-infected, monocyte-derived human dendritic cells. *Blood.* 106, 2366–2374

208. Spiegel, M., Schneider, K., Weber, F., Weidmann, M., and Hufert, F. T. (2006) Interaction of severe acute respiratory syndrome-associated coronavirus with dendritic cells. *Journal of General Virology.* 87, 1953–1960

209. Yen, Y.-T., Liao, F., Hsiao, C.-H., Kao, C.-L., Chen, Y.-C., and Wu-Hsieh, B. A. (2006) Modeling the early events of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus infection in vitro. *Journal of Virology.* 80, 2684–2693

210. Channappanavar, R., Fehr, A. R., Vijay, R., Mack, M., Zhao, J., Meyerholz, D. K., and Perlman, S. (2016) Dysregulated Type I Interferon and Inflammatory Monocyte-Macrophage Responses Cause Lethal Pneumonia in SARS-CoV-Infected Mice. *Cell Host Microbe.* 19, 181–193

211. Menachery, V. D., Eisfeld, A. J., Schäfer, A., Josset, L., Sims, A. C., Proll, S., Fan, S., Li, C., Neumann, G., Tilton, S. C., Chang, J., Gralinski, L. E., Long, C., Green, R., Williams, C. M., Weiss, J., Matzke, M. M., Webb-Robertson, B.-J., Schepmoes, A. A., Shukla, A. K., Metz, T. O., Smith, R. D., Waters, K. M., Katze, M. G., Kawaoka, Y., and Baric, R. S. (2014) Pathogenic influenza viruses and coronaviruses utilize similar and contrasting approaches to control interferon-stimulated gene responses. *mBio.* 5, e01174–14

212. Cabeça, T. K., Granato, C., and Bellei, N. (2013) Epidemiological and clinical features of human coronavirus infections among different subsets of patients. *Influenza Other Respir Viruses.* 7, 1040–1047

213. Gralinski, L. E., and Baric, R. S. (2015) Molecular pathology of emerging coronavirus infections. *J. Pathol.* 235, 185–195

214. McCray, P. B., Pewe, L., Wohlford-Lenane, C., Hickey, M., Manzel, L., Shi, L., Netland, J., Jia, H. P., Halabi, C., Sigmund, C. D., Meyerholz, D. K., Kirby, P., Look, D. C., and Perlman, S. (2007) Lethal infection of K18-hACE2 mice infected with severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus. *Journal of Virology.* 81, 813–821

215. Spiegel, M., Pichlmair, A., Martínez-Sobrido, L., Cros, J., García-Sastre, A., Haller, O., and Weber, F. (2005) Inhibition of Beta interferon induction by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus suggests a two-step model for activation of interferon regulatory factor 3. *Journal of Virology.* 79, 2079–2086

215. Ireland, D. D. C., Stohlman, S. A., Hinton, D. R., Atkinson, R., and Bergmann, C. C. (2008) Type I interferons are essential in controlling neurotropic coronavirus infection irrespective of functional CD8 T cells. *Journal of Virology*. **82**, 300–310

216. Funk, C. J., Wang, J., Ito, Y., Travanty, E. A., Voelker, D. R., Holmes, K. V., and Mason, R. J. (2012) Infection of human alveolar macrophages by human coronavirus strain 229E. *J. Gen. Virol.* **93**, 494–503

217. Franks, T. J., Chong, P. Y., Chui, P., Galvin, J. R., Lourens, R. M., Reid, A. H., Selbs, E., Mcevoy, C. P. L., Hayden, C. D. L., Fukuoka, J., Taubenberger, J. K., and Travis, W. D. (2003) Lung pathology of severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS): a study of 8 autopsy cases from Singapore. *Hum. Pathol.* **34**, 743–748

218. Nicholls, J. M., Poon, L. L. M., Lee, K. C., Ng, W. F., Lai, S. T., Leung, C. Y., Chu, C. M., Hui, P. K., Mak, K. L., Lim, W., Yan, K. W., Chan, K. H., Tsang, N. C., Guan, Y., Yuen, K. Y., and Peiris, J. S. M. (2003) Lung pathology of fatal severe acute respiratory syndrome. *The Lancet*. **361**, 1773–1778

219. Ludwicka-Bradley, A., Silver, R. M., and Bogatkevich, G. S. (2011) Coagulation and autoimmunity in scleroderma interstitial lung disease. *Semin. Arthritis Rheum.* **41**, 212–222

220. Huang, C., Wang, Y., Li, X., Ren, L., Zhao, J., Hu, Y., Zhang, L., Fan, G., Xu, J., Gu, X., Cheng, Z., Yu, T., Xia, J., Wei, Y., Wu, W., Xie, X., Yin, W., Li, H., Liu, M., Xiao, Y., Gao, H., Guo, L., Xie, J., Wang, G., Jiang, R., Gao, Z., Jin, Q., Wang, J., and Cao, B. (2020) Clinical features of patients infected with 2019 novel coronavirus in Wuhan, China. *Lancet*. **395**, 497–506

221. Zhou, F., Yu, T., Du, R., Fan, G., Liu, Y., Liu, Z., Xiang, J., Wang, Y., Song, B., Gu, X., Guan, L., Wei, Y., Li, H., Wu, X., Xu, J., Tu, S., Zhang, Y., Chen, H., and Cao, B. (2020) Clinical course and risk factors for mortality of adult inpatients with COVID-19 in Wuhan, China: a retrospective cohort study. *Lancet*. **395**, 1054–1062

222. Blanco-Melo, D., Nilsson-Payant, B. E., Liu, W.-C., Uhl, S., Hoagland, D., Möller, R., Jordan, T. X., Oishi, K., Panis, M., Sachs, D., Wang, T. T., Schwartz, R. E., Lim, J. K., Albrecht, R. A., and tenOever, B. R. (2020) Imbalanced Host Response to SARS-CoV-2 Drives Development of COVID-19. *Cell*. 10.1016/j.cell.2020.04.026

223. Cinatl, J., Morgenstern, B., Bauer, G., Chandra, P., Rabenau, H., and Doerr, H. W. (2003) Treatment of SARS with human interferons. *Lancet*. **362**, 293–294

224. Haagmans, B. L., Kuiken, T., Martina, B. E., Fouchier, R. A. M., Rimmelzwaan, G. F., van Amerongen, G., van Riel, D., de Jong, T., Itamura, S., Chan, K.-H., Tashiro, M., and Osterhaus, A. D. M. E. (2004) Pegylated interferon-alpha protects type 1 pneumocytes against SARS coronavirus infection in macaques. *Nat Med.* **10**, 290–293

225. Mantlo, E., Bukreyeva, N., Maruyama, J., Paessler, S., and Huang, C. (2020) Antiviral activities of type I interferons to SARS-CoV-2 infection. *Antiviral Research*. **179**, 104811

226. Schmidt, A., Schwerd, T., Hamm, W., Hellmuth, J. C., Cui, S., Wenzel, M., Hoffmann, F. S., Michallet, M.-C., Besch, R., Hopfner, K.-P., Endres, S., and Rothenfusser, S. (2009) 5'-triphosphate RNA requires base-paired structures to activate antiviral signaling via RIG-I. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.* **106**, 12067–12072

227. Kato, H., Takeuchi, O., Mikamo-Satoh, E., Hirai, R., Kawai, T., Matsushita, K., Hiiragi, A., Dermody, T. S., Fujita, T., and Akira, S. (2008) Length-dependent recognition of double-stranded ribonucleic acids by retinoic acid-inducible gene-I and melanoma differentiation-associated gene 5. *Journal of Experimental Medicine*. **205**, 1601–1610

228. Roth-Cross, J. K., Bender, S. J., and Weiss, S. R. (2008) Murine coronavirus mouse hepatitis virus is recognized by MDA5 and induces type I interferon in brain macrophages/microglia. *Journal of Virology*. **82**, 9829–9838

229. Hu, Y., Li, W., Gao, T., Cui, Y., Jin, Y., Li, P., Ma, Q., Liu, X., and Cao, C. (2017) The Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus Nucleocapsid Inhibits Type I Interferon

230. Production by Interfering with TRIM25-Mediated RIG-I Ubiquitination. *Journal of Virology*. 10.1128/JVI.02143-16

Devaraj, S. G., Wang, N., Chen, Z., Chen, Z., Tseng, M., Barretto, N., Lin, R., Peters, C. J., Tseng, C.-T. K., Baker, S. C., and Li, K. (2007) Regulation of IRF-3-dependent innate immunity by the papain-like protease domain of the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus. *Journal of Biological Chemistry*. **282**, 32208–32221

231. Zhou, P., Li, H., Wang, H., Wang, L.-F., and Shi, Z. (2012) Bat severe acute respiratory syndrome-like coronavirus ORF3b homologues display different interferon antagonist activities. *J. Gen. Virol.* **93**, 275–281

232. Kopecky-Bromberg, S. A., Martínez-Sobrido, L., Frieman, M., Baric, R. A., and Palese, P. (2007) Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus open reading frame (ORF) 3b, ORF 6, and nucleocapsid proteins function as interferon antagonists. *Journal of Virology*. **81**, 548–557

233. Siu, K.-L., Kok, K.-H., Ng, M.-H. J., Poon, V. K. M., Yuen, K.-Y., Zheng, B.-J., and Jin, D.-Y. (2009) Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus M Protein Inhibits Type I Interferon Production by Impeding the Formation of TRAF3·TANK·TBK1/IKKε Complex. *Journal of Biological Chemistry*. **284**, 16202–16209

234. Frieman, M., Yount, B., Heise, M., Kopecky-Bromberg, S. A., Palese, P., and Baric, R. S. (2007) Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus ORF6 antagonizes STAT1 function by sequestering nuclear import factors on the rough endoplasmic reticulum/Golgi membrane. *Journal of Virology*. **81**, 9812–9824

235. Züst, R., Cervantes-Barragán, L., Kuri, T., Blakqori, G., Weber, F., Ludewig, B., and Thiel, V. (2007) Coronavirus non-structural protein 1 is a major pathogenicity factor: implications for the rational design of coronavirus vaccines. *PLoS Pathog.* **3**, e109

236. Pewe, L., Zhou, H., Netland, J., Tangudu, C., Olivares, H., Shi, L., Look, D., Gallagher, T., and Perlman, S. (2005) A severe acute respiratory syndrome-associated coronavirus-specific protein enhances virulence of an attenuated murine coronavirus. *Journal of Virology*. **79**, 11335–11342

237. Thornbrough, J. M., Jha, B. K., Yount, B., Goldstein, S. A., Li, Y., Elliott, R., Sims, A. C., Baric, R. S., Silverman, R. H., and Weiss, S. R. (2016) Middle East Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus NS4b Protein Inhibits Host RNase L Activation. *mBio*. **7**, e00258–12

238. Roth-Cross, J. K., Stokes, H., Chang, G., Chua, M. M., Thiel, V., Weiss, S. R., Gorbelenya, A. E., and Siddell, S. G. (2009) Organ-specific attenuation of murine hepatitis virus strain A59 by replacement of catalytic residues in the putative viral cyclic phosphodiesterase ns2. *Journal of Virology*. **83**, 3743–3753

239. Zhao, L., Jha, B. K., Wu, A., Elliott, R., Ziebuhr, J., Gorbelenya, A. E., Silverman, R. H., and Weiss, S. R. (2012) Antagonism of the interferon-induced OAS-RNase L pathway by murine coronavirus ns2 protein is required for virus replication and liver pathology. *Cell Host Microbe*. **11**, 607–616

240. Comar, C. E., Goldstein, S. A., Li, Y., Yount, B., Baric, R. S., and Weiss, S. R. (2019) Antagonism of dsRNA-Induced Innate Immune Pathways by NS4a and NS4b Accessory Proteins during MERS Coronavirus Infection. *mBio*. **10**, 1814–16

241. Hackbart, M., Deng, X., and Baker, S. C. (2020) Coronavirus endoribonuclease targets viral polyuridine sequences to evade activating host sensors. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.* **117**, 8094–8103

242. Versteeg, G. A., Bredenbeek, P. J., van den Worm, S. H. E., and Spaan, W. J. M. (2007) Group 2 coronaviruses prevent immediate early interferon induction by protection of viral RNA from host cell recognition. *Virology*. **361**, 18–26

243. Morrison, D. K. (2012) MAP kinase pathways. *Cold Spring Harbor Perspectives in Biology*. **4**, a011254–a011254

244. Lim, Y. X., Ng, Y. L., Tam, J. P., and Liu, D. X. (2016) Human Coronaviruses: A Review of Virus-Host Interactions. *Diseases*. 10.3390/diseases4030026

245. Wang, W.-K., Chen, S.-Y., Liu, I.-J., Kao, C.-L., Chen, H.-L., Chiang, B.-L., Wang, J.-T., Sheng, W.-H., Hsueh, P.-R., Yang, C.-F., Yang, P.-C., Chang, S.-C., Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Research Group of the National Taiwan University College of Medicine/NTU Hospital (2004) Temporal relationship of viral load, ribavirin, interleukin (IL)-6, IL-8, and clinical progression in patients with severe acute respiratory syndrome. *Clin. Infect. Dis.* 39, 1071–1075

246. Giamarellos-Bourboulis, E. J., Netea, M. G., Rovina, N., Akinosoglou, K., Antoniadou, A., Antonakos, N., Damoraki, G., Gkavogianni, T., Adami, M.-E., Katsaounou, P., Ntaganou, M., Kyriakopoulou, M., Dimopoulos, G., Koutsodimitropoulos, I., Velissaris, D., Koufargyris, P., Karageorgos, A., Katrini, K., Lekakis, V., Lupse, M., Kotsaki, A., Renieris, G., Theodoulou, D., Panou, V., Koukaki, E., Koulouris, N., Gogos, C., and Koutsoukou, A. (2020) Complex Immune Dysregulation in COVID-19 Patients with Severe Respiratory Failure. *Cell Host Microbe.* 27, 992–1000.e3

247. Goldman, J. L., Sammani, S., Kempf, C., Saadat, L., Letsiou, E., Wang, T., Moreno-Vinasco, L., Rizzo, A. N., Fortman, J. D., and Garcia, J. G. N. (2014) Pleiotropic effects of interleukin-6 in a “two-hit” murine model of acute respiratory distress syndrome. *Pulm Circ.* 4, 280–288

248. Liu, M., Yang, Y., Gu, C., Yue, Y., Wu, K. K., Wu, J., and Zhu, Y. (2007) Spike protein of SARS-CoV stimulates cyclooxygenase-2 expression via both calcium-dependent and calcium-independent protein kinase C pathways. *FASEB J.* 21, 1586–1596

249. Varshney, B., and Lal, S. K. (2011) SARS-CoV accessory protein 3b induces AP-1 transcriptional activity through activation of JNK and ERK pathways. *Biochemistry.* 50, 5419–5425

250. Kanzawa, N., Nishigaki, K., Hayashi, T., Ishii, Y., Furukawa, S., Niiro, A., Yasui, F., Kohara, M., Morita, K., Matsushima, K., Le, M. Q., Masuda, T., and Kannagi, M. (2006) Augmentation of chemokine production by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 3a/X1 and 7a/X4 proteins through NF-kappaB activation. *FEBS Letters.* 580, 6807–6812

251. Dosch, S. F., Mahajan, S. D., and Collins, A. R. (2009) SARS coronavirus spike protein-induced innate immune response occurs via activation of the NF-kappaB pathway in human monocyte macrophages in vitro. *Virus Research.* 142, 19–27

252. He, R., Leeson, A., Andonov, A., Li, Y., Bastien, N., Cao, J., Osiowy, C., Dobie, F., Cutts, T., Ballantine, M., and Li, X. (2003) Activation of AP-1 signal transduction pathway by SARS coronavirus nucleocapsid protein. *Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communications.* 311, 870–876

253. Jiménez-Guardeño, J. M., Nieto-Torres, J. L., DeDiego, M. L., Regla-Nava, J. A., Fernandez-Delgado, R., Castaño-Rodriguez, C., and Enjuanes, L. (2014) The PDZ-binding motif of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus envelope protein is a determinant of viral pathogenesis. *PLoS Pathog.* 10, e1004320

254. Surjit, M., LIU, B., Jameel, S., CHOW, V. T. K., and Lal, S. K. (2004) The SARS coronavirus nucleocapsid protein induces actin reorganization and apoptosis in COS-1 cells in the absence of growth factors. *Biochem. J.* 383, 13–18

255. DeDiego, M. L., Nieto-Torres, J. L., Regla-Nava, J. A., Jiménez-Guardeño, J. M., Fernandez-Delgado, R., Fett, C., Castaño-Rodriguez, C., Perlman, S., and Enjuanes, L. (2014) Inhibition of NF-kB-mediated inflammation in severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus-infected mice increases survival. *Journal of Virology.* 88, 913–924

256. Chen, I.-Y., Chang, S. C., Wu, H. Y., Yu, T.-C., Wei, W.-C., Lin, S., Chien, C.-L., and Chang, M.-F. (2010) Upregulation of the chemokine (C-C motif) ligand 2 via a severe acute

respiratory syndrome coronavirus spike-ACE2 signaling pathway. *Journal of Virology*. **84**, 7703–7712

257. Fink, S. L., and Cookson, B. T. (2005) Apoptosis, pyroptosis, and necrosis: mechanistic description of dead and dying eukaryotic cells. *Infection and Immunity*. **73**, 1907–1916

258. Yue, Y., Nabar, N. R., Shi, C.-S., Kamenyeva, O., Xiao, X., Hwang, I.-Y., Wang, M., and Kehrl, J. H. (2018) SARS-Coronavirus Open Reading Frame-3a drives multimodal necrotic cell death. *Cell Death Dis.* **9**, 904

259. Khan, S., Fielding, B. C., Tan, T. H. P., Chou, C.-F., Shen, S., Lim, S. G., Hong, W., and Tan, Y.-J. (2006) Over-expression of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 3b protein induces both apoptosis and necrosis in Vero E6 cells. *Virus Research*. **122**, 20–27

260. Benedict, C. A., Norris, P. S., and Ware, C. F. (2002) To kill or be killed: viral evasion of apoptosis. *Nat Immunol.* **3**, 1013–1018

261. Amara, A., and Mercer, J. (2015) Viral apoptotic mimicry. *Nat Rev Micro*. **13**, 461–469

262. Gu, J., and Korteweg, C. (2007) Pathology and pathogenesis of severe acute respiratory syndrome. *The American Journal of Pathology*. **170**, 1136–1147

263. Collins, A. R. (2002) In vitro detection of apoptosis in monocytes/macrophages infected with human coronavirus. *Clin. Diagn. Lab. Immunol.* **9**, 1392–1395

264. Yang, Y., Xiong, Z., Zhang, S., Yan, Y., Nguyen, J., Ng, B., Lu, H., Brendese, J., Yang, F., Wang, H., and Yang, X.-F. (2005) Bcl-xL inhibits T-cell apoptosis induced by expression of SARS coronavirus E protein in the absence of growth factors. *Biochem. J.* **392**, 135–143

265. Ying, T., Li, W., and Dimitrov, D. S. (2016) Discovery of T-Cell Infection and Apoptosis by Middle East Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus. *The Journal of Infectious Diseases*. **213**, 877–879

266. Chu, H., Zhou, J., Wong, B. H.-Y., Li, C., Chan, J. F.-W., Cheng, Z.-S., Yang, D., Wang, D., Lee, A. C.-Y., Li, C., Yeung, M.-L., Cai, J.-P., Chan, I. H.-Y., Ho, W.-K., To, K. K.-W., Zheng, B.-J., Yao, Y., Qin, C., and Yuen, K.-Y. (2016) Middle East Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus Efficiently Infects Human Primary T Lymphocytes and Activates the Extrinsic and Intrinsic Apoptosis Pathways. *The Journal of Infectious Diseases*. **213**, 904–914

267. Chow, K. Y. C., Yeung, Y. S., Hon, C. C., Zeng, F., Law, K. M., and Leung, F. C. C. (2005) Adenovirus-mediated expression of the C-terminal domain of SARS-CoV spike protein is sufficient to induce apoptosis in Vero E6 cells. *FEBS Letters*. **579**, 6699–6704

268. Tsoi, H., Li, L., Chen, Z. S., Lau, K.-F., Tsui, S. K. W., and Chan, H. Y. E. (2014) The SARS-coronavirus membrane protein induces apoptosis via interfering with PDK1-PKB/Akt signalling. *Biochem. J.* **464**, 439–447

269. DeDiego, M. L., Nieto-Torres, J. L., Jiménez-Guardeño, J. M., Regla-Nava, J. A., Álvarez, E., Oliveros, J. C., Zhao, J., Fett, C., Perlman, S., and Enjuanes, L. (2011) Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus envelope protein regulates cell stress response and apoptosis. *PLoS Pathog.* **7**, e1002315

270. Liao, Y., Fung, T. S., Huang, M., Fang, S. G., Zhong, Y., and Liu, D. X. (2013) Upregulation of CHOP/GADD153 during coronavirus infectious bronchitis virus infection modulates apoptosis by restricting activation of the extracellular signal-regulated kinase pathway. *Journal of Virology*. **87**, 8124–8134

271. Padhan, K., Minakshi, R., Towheed, M. A. B., and Jameel, S. (2008) Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 3a protein activates the mitochondrial death pathway through p38 MAP kinase activation. *Journal of General Virology*. **89**, 1960–1969

272. Tan, Y.-J., Teng, E., Shen, S., Tan, T. H. P., Goh, P.-Y., Fielding, B. C., Ooi, E. E., Tan, H. C., Lim, S. G., and Hong, W. (2004) A novel severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus protein, U274, is transported to the cell surface and undergoes endocytosis. *Journal of Virology*. **78**, 6723–6734

273. Tan, Y.-X., Tan, T. H. P., Lee, M. J. R., Tham, P.-Y., Gunalan, V., Druce, J., Birch, C., Catton, M., Fu, N. Y., Yu, V. C., and Tan, Y.-J. (2007) Induction of apoptosis by the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 7a protein is dependent on its interaction with the Bcl-XL protein. *Journal of Virology*. **81**, 6346–6355

274. Schaecher, S. R., Touchette, E., Schriewer, J., Buller, R. M., and Pekosz, A. (2007) Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus gene 7 products contribute to virus-induced apoptosis. *Journal of Virology*. **81**, 11054–11068

275. Chen, C.-Y., Ping, Y.-H., Lee, H.-C., Chen, K.-H., Lee, Y.-M., Chan, Y.-J., Lien, T.-C., Jap, T.-S., Lin, C.-H., Kao, L.-S., and Chen, Y.-M. A. (2007) Open reading frame 8a of the human severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus not only promotes viral replication but also induces apoptosis. *The Journal of Infectious Diseases*. **196**, 405–415

276. Sharma, K., Åkerström, S., Sharma, A. K., CHOW, V. T. K., Teow, S., Abrenica, B., Booth, S. A., Booth, T. F., Mirazimi, A., and Lal, S. K. (2011) SARS-CoV 9b protein diffuses into nucleus, undergoes active Crm1 mediated nucleocytoplasmic export and triggers apoptosis when retained in the nucleus. *PLoS ONE*. **6**, e19436

277. Tan, Y.-J., Goh, P.-Y., Fielding, B. C., Shen, S., Chou, C.-F., Fu, J.-L., Leong, H. N., Leo, Y.-S., Ooi, E. E., Ling, A. E., Lim, S. G., and Hong, W. (2004) Profiles of antibody responses against severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus recombinant proteins and their potential use as diagnostic markers. *Clin. Diagn. Lab. Immunol.* **11**, 362–371

278. Thevarajan, I., Nguyen, T. H. O., Koutsakos, M., Druce, J., Caly, L., van de Sandt, C. E., Jia, X., Nicholson, S., Catton, M., Cowie, B., Tong, S. Y. C., Lewin, S. R., and Kedzierska, K. (2020) Breadth of concomitant immune responses prior to patient recovery: a case report of non-severe COVID-19. *Nat Med*. **26**, 453–455

279. Nie, Y., Wang, G., Shi, X., Zhang, H., Qiu, Y., He, Z., Wang, W., Lian, G., Yin, X., Du, L., Ren, L., Wang, J., He, X., Li, T., Deng, H., and Ding, M. (2004) Neutralizing antibodies in patients with severe acute respiratory syndrome-associated coronavirus infection. *The Journal of Infectious Diseases*. **190**, 1119–1126

280. Temperton, N. J., Chan, P. K., Simmons, G., Zambon, M. C., Tedder, R. S., Takeuchi, Y., and Weiss, R. A. (2005) Longitudinally profiling neutralizing antibody response to SARS coronavirus with pseudotypes. *Emerging Infect. Dis.* **11**, 411–416

281. Pan, Y., Zhang, D., Yang, P., Poon, L. L. M., and Wang, Q. (2020) Viral load of SARS-CoV-2 in clinical samples. *Lancet Infect Dis.* **20**, 411–412

282. Kim, J. Y., Ko, J.-H., Kim, Y., Kim, Y.-J., Kim, J.-M., Chung, Y.-S., Kim, H. M., Han, M.-G., Kim, S. Y., and Chin, B. S. (2020) Viral Load Kinetics of SARS-CoV-2 Infection in First Two Patients in Korea. *J. Korean Med. Sci.* **35**, e86

283. Zou, L., Ruan, F., Huang, M., Liang, L., Huang, H., Hong, Z., Yu, J., Kang, M., Song, Y., Xia, J., Guo, Q., Song, T., He, J., Yen, H.-L., Peiris, M., and Wu, J. (2020) SARS-CoV-2 Viral Load in Upper Respiratory Specimens of Infected Patients. *N. Engl. J. Med.* **382**, 1177–1179

284. Peiris, J. S. M., Chu, C. M., Cheng, V. C. C., Chan, K. S., Hung, I. F. N., Poon, L. L. M., Law, K. I., Tang, B. S. F., Hon, T. Y. W., Chan, C. S., Chan, K. H., Ng, J. S. C., Zheng, B. J., Ng, W. L., Lai, R. W. M., Guan, Y., Yuen, K. Y., HKU/UCH SARS Study Group (2003) Clinical progression and viral load in a community outbreak of coronavirus-associated SARS pneumonia: a prospective study. *The Lancet*. **361**, 1767–1772

285. Zhu, Z., Chakraborti, S., He, Y., Roberts, A., Sheahan, T., Xiao, X., Hensley, L. E., Prabakaran, P., Rockx, B., Sidorov, I. A., Corti, D., Vogel, L., Feng, Y., Kim, J.-O., Wang, L.-F., Baric, R., Lanzavecchia, A., Curtis, K. M., Nabel, G. J., Subbarao, K., Jiang, S., and Dimitrov, D. S. (2007) Potent cross-reactive neutralization of SARS coronavirus isolates by human monoclonal antibodies. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA*. **104**, 12123–12128

286. Li, F., Li, W., Farzan, M., and Harrison, S. C. (2005) Structure of SARS coronavirus spike receptor-binding domain complexed with receptor. *Science*. **309**, 1864–1868

287. Tian, X., Li, C., Huang, A., Xia, S., Lu, S., Shi, Z., Lu, L., Jiang, S., Yang, Z., Wu, Y., and Ying, T. (2020) Potent binding of 2019 novel coronavirus spike protein by a SARS coronavirus-specific human monoclonal antibody. *Emerg Microbes Infect.* **9**, 382–385

288. Wang, C., Li, W., Drabek, D., Okba, N. M. A., van Haperen, R., Osterhaus, A. D. M. E., van Kuppeveld, F. J. M., Haagmans, B. L., Grosveld, F., and Bosch, B. J. (2020) A human monoclonal antibody blocking SARS-CoV-2 infection. *Nature Communications*. **11**, 2251–6

289. Cheng, Y., Wong, R., Soo, Y. O. Y., Wong, W. S., Lee, C. K., Ng, M. H. L., Chan, P., Wong, K. C., Leung, C. B., and Cheng, G. (2005) Use of convalescent plasma therapy in SARS patients in Hong Kong. *Eur. J. Clin. Microbiol. Infect. Dis.* **24**, 44–46

290. Soo, Y. O. Y., Cheng, Y., Wong, R., Hui, D. S., Lee, C. K., Tsang, K. K. S., Ng, M. H. L., Chan, P., Cheng, G., and Sung, J. J. Y. (2004) Retrospective comparison of convalescent plasma with continuing high-dose methylprednisolone treatment in SARS patients. *Clin. Microbiol. Infect.* **10**, 676–678

291. Yeh, K.-M., Chiueh, T.-S., Siu, L. K., Lin, J.-C., Chan, P. K. S., Peng, M.-Y., Wan, H.-L., Chen, J.-H., Hu, B.-S., Perng, C.-L., Lu, J.-J., and Chang, F.-Y. (2005) Experience of using convalescent plasma for severe acute respiratory syndrome among healthcare workers in a Taiwan hospital. *J. Antimicrob. Chemother.* **56**, 919–922

292. Tang, F., Quan, Y., Xin, Z.-T., Wrammert, J., Ma, M.-J., Lv, H., Wang, T.-B., Yang, H., Richardus, J. H., Liu, W., and Cao, W.-C. (2011) Lack of peripheral memory B cell responses in recovered patients with severe acute respiratory syndrome: a six-year follow-up study. *J. Immunol.* **186**, 7264–7268

293. Kalia, V., Sarkar, S., Gourley, T. S., Rouse, B. T., and Ahmed, R. (2006) Differentiation of memory B and T cells. *Curr. Opin. Immunol.* **18**, 255–264

294. Bolles, M., Deming, D., Long, K., Agnihothram, S., Whitmore, A., Ferris, M., Funkhouser, W., Gralinski, L., Totura, A., Heise, M., and Baric, R. S. (2011) A double-inactivated severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus vaccine provides incomplete protection in mice and induces increased eosinophilic proinflammatory pulmonary response upon challenge. *Journal of Virology*. **85**, 12201–12215

295. Brunn, von, A., Teepe, C., Simpson, J. C., Pepperkok, R., Friedel, C. C., Zimmer, R., Roberts, R., Baric, R., and Haas, J. (2007) Analysis of Intraviral Protein-Protein Interactions of the SARS Coronavirus ORFeome. *PLoS ONE*. **2**, e459–11

296. Pan, J., Peng, X., Gao, Y., Li, Z., Lu, X., Chen, Y., Ishaq, M., Liu, D., DeDiego, M. L., Enjuanes, L., and Guo, D. (2008) Genome-Wide Analysis of Protein-Protein Interactions and Involvement of Viral Proteins in SARS-CoV Replication. *PLoS ONE*. **3**, e3299–11

297. Imbert, I., Snijder, E. J., Dimitrova, M., Guillemot, J.-C., Lécine, P., and Canard, B. (2008) The SARS-Coronavirus PLnc domain of nsp3 as a replication/transcription scaffolding protein. *Virus Research*. **133**, 136–148

298. Snijder, E. J., Decroly, E., and Ziebuhr, J. (2016) *The Nonstructural Proteins Directing Coronavirus RNA Synthesis and Processing*, 1st Ed., Elsevier Inc., **96**, 59–126

299. Delmas, B., and Laude, H. (1990) Assembly of coronavirus spike protein into trimers and its role in epitope expression. *Journal of Virology*. **64**, 5367–5375

300. Beniac, D. R., Andonov, A., Grudeski, E., and Booth, T. F. (2006) Architecture of the SARS coronavirus prefusion spike. *Nat Struct Mol Biol*. **13**, 751–752

301. Nieto-Torres, J. L., DeDiego, M. L., Álvarez, E., Jiménez-Guardeño, J. M., Regla-Nava, J. A., Llorente, M., Kremer, L., Shuo, S., and Enjuanes, L. (2011) Subcellular location and topology of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus envelope protein. *Virology*. **415**, 69–82

302. DeDiego, M. L., Álvarez, E., Almazán, F., Rejas, M. T., Lamirande, E., Roberts, A., Shieh, W.-J., Zaki, S. R., Subbarao, K., and Enjuanes, L. (2007) A severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus that lacks the E gene is attenuated in vitro and in vivo. *Journal of Virology*. 81, 1701–1713

303. Kuo, L., and Masters, P. S. (2003) The Small Envelope Protein E Is Not Essential for Murine Coronavirus Replication. *Journal of Virology*. 77, 4597–4608

304. Neuman, B. W., Kiss, G., Kunding, A. H., Bhella, D., Baksh, M. F., Connelly, S., Ben Droese, Klaus, J. P., Makino, S., Sawicki, S. G., Siddell, S. G., Stamou, D. G., Wilson, I. A., Kuhn, P., and Buchmeier, M. J. (2011) A structural analysis of M protein in coronavirus assembly and morphology. *Journal of Structural Biology*. 174, 11–22

305. Nal, B., Chan, C., Kien, F., Siu, L., Tse, J., Chu, K., Kam, J., Staropoli, I., Crescenzo-Chaigne, B., Escriou, N., van der Werf, S., Yuen, K.-Y., and Aitlmeyer, R. (2005) Differential maturation and subcellular localization of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus surface proteins S, M and E. *Journal of General Virology*. 86, 1423–1434

306. Chang, C.-K., Sue, S.-C., Yu, T.-H., Hsieh, C.-M., Tsai, C.-K., Chiang, Y.-C., Lee, S.-J., Hsiao, H.-H., Wu, W.-J., Chang, W.-L., Lin, C.-H., and Huang, T.-H. (2005) Modular organization of SARS coronavirus nucleocapsid protein. *J Biomed Sci*. 13, 59–72

307. Cui, L., Wang, H., Ji, Y., Yang, J., Xu, S., Huang, X., Wang, Z., Qin, L., Tien, P., Zhou, X., Guo, D., and Chen, Y. (2015) The Nucleocapsid Protein of Coronaviruses Acts as a Viral Suppressor of RNA Silencing in Mammalian Cells. *Journal of Virology*. 89, 9029–9043

308. Hurst, K. R., Koetzner, C. A., and Masters, P. S. (2009) Identification of In Vivo-Interacting Domains of the Murine Coronavirus Nucleocapsid Protein. *Journal of Virology*. 83, 7221–7234

309. Lei, J., Kusov, Y., and Hilgenfeld, R. (2018) Nsp3 of coronaviruses: Structures and functions of a large multi-domain protein. *Antiviral Research*. 149, 58–74

310. Serrano, P., Johnson, M. A., Chatterjee, A., Neuman, B. W., Joseph, J. S., Buchmeier, M. J., Kuhn, P., and Wüthrich, K. (2009) Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Structure of the Nucleic Acid-Binding Domain of Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus Nonstructural Protein 3. *Journal of Virology*. 83, 12998–13008

311. Gadlage, M. J., Sparks, J. S., Beachboard, D. C., Cox, R. G., Doyle, J. D., Stobart, C. C., and Denison, M. R. (2010) Murine hepatitis virus nonstructural protein 4 regulates virus-induced membrane modifications and replication complex function. *Journal of Virology*. 84, 280–290

312. Beachboard, D. C., Anderson-Daniels, J. M., and Denison, M. R. (2015) Mutations across Murine Hepatitis Virus nsp4 Alter Virus Fitness and Membrane Modifications. *Journal of Virology*. 89, 2080–2089

313. Stobart, C. C., Sexton, N. R., Munjal, H., Lu, X., Molland, K. L., Tomar, S., Mesecar, A. D., and Denison, M. R. (2013) Chimeric Exchange of Coronavirus nsp5 Proteases (3CLpro) Identifies Common and Divergent Regulatory Determinants of Protease Activity. *Journal of Virology*. 87, 12611–12618

314. Zhu, X., Wang, D., Zhou, J., Pan, T., Chen, J., Yang, Y., Lv, M., Ye, X., Peng, G., Fang, L., and Xiao, S. (2017) Porcine Deltacoronavirus nsp5 Antagonizes Type I Interferon Signaling by Cleaving STAT2. *Journal of Virology*. 91, 51–14

315. Cottam, E. M., Whelband, M. C., and Wileman, T. (2014) Coronavirus NSP6 restricts autophagosome expansion. *Autophagy*. 10, 1426–1441

316. Bhardwaj, K., Sun, J., Holzenburg, A., Guarino, L. A., and Kao, C. C. (2006) RNA Recognition and Cleavage by the SARS Coronavirus Endoribonuclease. *Journal of Molecular Biology*. 361, 243–256

317. Deng, X., Hackbart, M., Mettelman, R. C., O'Brien, A., Mielech, A. M., Yi, G., Kao, C. C., and Baker, S. C. (2017) Coronavirus nonstructural protein 15 mediates evasion of dsRNA sensors and limits apoptosis in macrophages. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA*. **114**, E4251–E4260

318. Zhang, L., Li, L., Yan, L., Ming, Z., Jia, Z., Lou, Z., and Rao, Z. (2018) Structural and Biochemical Characterization of Endoribonuclease Nsp15 Encoded by Middle East Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus. *Journal of Virology*. **92**, 286–16

319. Chen, Y., Su, C., Ke, M., Jin, X., Xu, L., Zhang, Z., Wu, A., Sun, Y., Yang, Z., Tien, P., Ahola, T., Liang, Y., Liu, X., and Guo, D. (2011) Biochemical and Structural Insights into the Mechanisms of SARS Coronavirus RNA Ribose 2′-O-Methylation by nsp16/nsp10 Protein Complex. *PLoS Pathog.* **7**, e1002294–14

320. Shi, P., Su, Y., Li, R., Liang, Z., Dong, S., and Huang, J. (2019) PEDV nsp16 negatively regulates innate immunity to promote viral proliferation. *Virus Research*. **265**, 57–66

321. Freundt, E. C., Yu, L., Park, E., Lenardo, M. J., and Xu, X.-N. (2009) Molecular Determinants for Subcellular Localization of the Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus Open Reading Frame 3b Protein. *Journal of Virology*. **83**, 6631–6640

322. Hussain, S., and Gallagher, T. (2010) SARS-coronavirus protein 6 conformations required to impede protein import into the nucleus. *Virus Research*. **153**, 299–304

323. Zhao, J., Falcón, A., Zhou, H., Netland, J., Enjuanes, L., Pérez Breña, P., and Perlman, S. (2009) Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus Protein 6 Is Required for Optimal Replication. *Journal of Virology*. **83**, 2368–2373

324. Hussain, S., Perlman, S., and Gallagher, T. M. (2008) Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus Protein 6 Accelerates Murine Hepatitis Virus Infections by More than One Mechanism. *Journal of Virology*. **82**, 7212–7222

325. Sung, S.-C., Chao, C.-Y., Jeng, K.-S., Yang, J.-Y., and Lai, M. M. C. (2009) The 8ab protein of SARS-CoV is a luminal ER membrane-associated protein and induces the activation of ATF6. *Virology*. **387**, 402–413

326. Law, P. Y. P., Liu, Y.-M., Geng, H., Kwan, K. H., Waye, M. M.-Y., and Ho, Y.-Y. (2006) Expression and functional characterization of the putative protein 8b of the severe acute respiratory syndrome-associated coronavirus. *FEBS Letters*. **580**, 3643–3648

Table 1. SARS-CoV proteins and their functions with SARS-CoV-2 variations

I. Structural Proteins

| Name: | Functions: | SARS-CoV-2 variations: | References: |
|-------|------------|------------------------|--------------|
| S     | Spike protein, host cell receptor binding for viral entry, JNK↑, ERK↑, CCL2↑ | 27aa substitutions (6inRBD, 6inSD, and 4 in known peptide antigen for SARS-CoV) No aa substitutions in CoV-2 polybasic cleavage site compared to CoV consensus sequence. Cleavage site is absent in SARS-CoV | 256, 299, 300 |
| E     | Envelope protein, viral assembly & release, p38MAP kinase↑ | | 164, 253, 301-303 |
| M     | Membrane protein, virion shape, membrane curvature | | 304, 305 |
| N     | Nucleocapsid protein, binding to RNA genome, genome tethering to RTCs, type I IFN production and signaling inhibition, viral suppressor of RNA silencing, AP-1↑, JNK↑, p38MAP kinase↑ | 5aa substitutions | 252, 254, 306-308 |

| Name: | Functions: | SARS-CoV 2 variations: | References: |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Nsp1 | Cellular mRNA degradation and translation inhibition, type I IFN inhibition | 7aa substitutions | 80, 195, 196, 201 |
| Nsp2 | Unknown | 61aa substitutions |  |
| Nsp3 | PLP, polypeptide cleaving, type I IFN production and signaling inhibition, IL-6↑ | 102aa substitutions | 309, 310 |
| Nsp4 | DMV formation | 36aa substitutions | 311, 312 |
| Nsp5 | 3CLpro, polypeptides cleaving, type I IFN signaling inhibition | 5aa substitutions | 313, 314 |
| Nsp6 | Restricting autophagosome expansion, DMV formation | 21aa substitutions | 67, 315 |
| Nsp7 | Processivity factor for RdRp, cofactor with nsp8 and nsp12 |  | 91-93 |
| Nsp8 | Processivity factor for RdRp, cofactor with nsp7 and nsp12 | 4aa substitutions | 91-93, 97, 98 |
| Nsp9 | Single strand nucleic acid binding protein | 1aa substitution | 101, 102 |
| Nsp10 | Catalytic activity of Nsp14-ExoN↑, scaffold protein for nsp14 and nsp16 | 2aa substitutions | 91, 116, 117 |
| Nsp11 | Unknown |  |  |
| Nsp12 | RdRp | 17aa substitutions | 92, 94, 95 |
| Nsp13 | Superfamily 1 (SF1) 5' to 3'RNA helicase, 5'triphosphatase activity |  | 105, 108 |
| Nsp14 | Proofreading exonuclease, N7-methyltransferase | 15aa substitutions | 112, 114, 116, 129 |

| Nsp 15 | Endoribonuclease, evasion of dsRNA sensors | 17aa substitutions | 316-318 |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Nsp 16 | 2'-O-Methyltransferase, down-regulates the activities of RIG-I and MDA 5 (MHV) | 12aa substitutions | 319, 320 |

### III. Accessory Proteins

| Name: | Functions: | SARS-CoV 2 variations: | References: |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| 3a | NF-kB↑, JNK↑, IL-8↑, RANTES↑, ion-channel activity, necrosis, pyroptosis, and apoptosis induction, and cell cycle arrest | 16aa substitutions | 250, 258 |
| 3b | Type I IFN production and signaling inhibition, JNK↑, ERK↑, apoptosis and necrosis induction, and cell cycle arrest. | Truncated to 22aa, with 6aa substitutions (154aa in SARS-CoV) | 249, 259, 321 |
| 6 | Type I IFN production and signaling inhibition, and cellular DNA synthesis↑ | No aa substitutions compared to CoV consensus sequence, but only 69% aa identity with SARS-CoV | 190, 234, 322-324 |
| 7a | NF-kB↑, JNK↑, p38MAP kinase↑, host translation inhibition, apoptosis induction and cell cycle arrest. | 5aa substitutions | 205, 250 |
| 7b | Unknown | 4aa substitutions |  |
| 8a | Caspase dependent apoptosis induction | Encoded by single ORF8 gene(121aa) | 275 |
| 8b | Cellular DNA synthesis↑, ATF 6 branch of UPR↑ |  | 325, 326 |
| 9b | Caspase dependent apoptosis induction | 1aa substitution | 276 |

Color coding of table rows denotes general functional categories for SARS-CoV proteins:
- -viral entry
- -host shutoff
- -unknown
- -immune antagonist
- -DMV formation
- -replication and transcription
- -apoptosis induction
- -other accessory protein function

Abbreviations/symbols: aa, amino acid; RBD, receptor binding domain; SD, subdomain; RTC, replication-transcription complex; IFN, interferon; PLP, papain like protease; DMV, double membrane vesicle; 3CLpro, chymotrypsin like cysteine protease; RdRp, RNA dependent RNA polymerase; ExoN, exonuclease; ↑, upregulation/activation. Amino acid divergence from (189) relative to the consensus sequence of SARS-CoV and SARS-like CoVs.

Figure 1: The coronavirus life cycle

(1) Coronavirus engages with a host cell-surface receptor and deposits its RNA genome into the host cytoplasm through endocytosis or direct membrane fusion. (2) The positive sense RNA genome is translated by the host translation machinery to make polyproteins that are (3) co-translationally cleaved by proteases encoded in the polyprotein to generate components of RdRp complex. (4) The RdRp complex uses the genome as a template to generate negative sense subgenome and genome length RNAs, (5) which are in turn used as templates for synthesis of positive sense full length progeny genomes and subgenomic mRNAs. Transcription and replication occur in convoluted membranes (CM) adjacent to double membrane vesicles (DMVs) that are both derived from rough endoplasmic reticulum (See Figure 6 for more details). (6) The subgenomic mRNAs are translated into structural and accessory proteins. (7) The positive sense genomic RNA is bound by nucleocapsid and buds into the ER-Golgi Intermediate Compartment (ERGIC) that is decorated with structural proteins, S, E, and M translated from +sense subgenomic RNAs (steps 6,7). The enveloped virion is then exported from the cell by exocytosis (steps 8,9).

Figure 2: Mechanism of SARS-CoV2 viral entry

The SARS-CoV2 S engages with the host ACE2 receptor and is subsequently cleaved at S1/S2 and S2' sites by TMPRSS2 protease. This leads to activation of the S2 domain and drives fusion of the viral and host membranes. See text for details.

Nonstructural proteins (nsps)                       Structural and accessory proteins
5′—L—ORF1a—Ribosome frameshifting site—ORF1b—S—3a—3b—E—M—6—7a—7b—8a—8b—9b—N—3′

nsp
pp1a | 1 | 2 | 3 | 4 | 5 | 6 | 7 | 8 | 9 | 10 | 11 |

nsp
pp1ab | 1 | 2 | 3 | 4 | 5 | 6 | 7 | 8 | 9 | 10 | 12 | 13 | 14 | 15 | 16 |

Figure 3: Genome organization of SARS-CoV

The RNA genome encodes two categories of proteins: nonstructural proteins (nsp) and structural and accessory proteins. The nonstructural proteins are encoded in ORF1a and ORF1b. Cap-dependent translation begins at ORF1a and produces pp1a, encompassing nsp1-11, or pp1ab, a longer polypeptide that includes nsp12-16. The production of either polypeptide depends on whether the stop codon at ORF1a is recognized by the ribosome or is bypassed through a change in the reading frame by the ribosome frameshifting site. The structural and accessory proteins are synthesized by translation of their respective subgenomic mRNAs (see Figure 4). The proteins have been color coded by functional categories for SARS-CoV (see Table 1).

Figure 4: Discontinuous transcription

(1) The RdRp complex initiates transcription at the 3' end of the positive sense genome. (2) Upon copying the TRS-B sequences present at specific sites along the genome body, (3) the RdRp complex may 'jump' to the TRS-L sequence owing to complementarity between the TRS-B sequence on the nascent sgRNA and TRS-L sequence on the genome. Transcription is resumed on the new template and the leader sequence (shown in red) is copied to complete the negative strand sgRNA. The RdRp complex does not always switch templates at TRS-B sequences resulting in the synthesis of genome length negative strand RNA. The negative strand RNAs serve as templates for the synthesis of genome length positive strand RNAs or sg mRNAs.

Figure 5: Model of putative coronavirus replisome

A model of how the different proteins in the coronavirus replisome come together on the viral negative strand during synthesis of the positive strand RNA. The core replicase is predicted to consist of the RdRp (nsp12), processivity factors (nsp7-8) and Exonuclease (ExoN (nsp14), nsp10). The helicase is shown to be unwinding the dsRNA ahead of the replisome and the SSB (nsp9) is shown as a dimer protecting single stranded regions of the RNA. Additionally, the 2'-O-MTase (nsp16) which is predicted to be involved in RNA capping is also indicated. The model is based on known structures and interactions between the proteins (92, 106, 295-297)and references within (298).

Figure 6: Diagram of convoluted membranes/double membrane vesicles

Coronavirus infection leads to endoplasmic reticulum (ER) membrane modification as replication-transcription complexes (RTCs) are formed. nsp3 and nsp4 are co-translationally embedded in the ER membrane and interact via their luminal loops. This leads to (1) “zippering” of ER membranes and induced curvature. These interactions yield a complex array of (2) convoluted membranes (CM) and double membrane vesicles (DMVs) that are contiguous with the rough ER. The protein components of RTCs are mainly localized to the CM. The DMVs contain double stranded RNA, thought to be sequestered replication intermediates. The DMV inner membrane is absent of ribosomes and has no connections to the cytoplasm or the rest of the network. The mechanism of DMV formation and the exact site of CoV RNA replication within this membrane network are currently unknown. See text for references.

IFN-β / IFNAR interaction  
can occur in an autocrine  
and paracrine fashion  

Type I IFN  
receptor  

JAK  
STAT  

DMV with  
viral RNA  

TRIM25  

RIG-I  

MAVS  

Traf6 complex  

PLPro  

nsp1  

ORF3b  

N  

IRF3  

IRF7  

cJun  

M  

nsp1  

NFκB  

ISGs  

ISRE  

Figure 7: Innate Immune Antagonism by SARS-CoV  

SARS-CoV inhibits multiple arms of the Type I interferon (IFN) response resulting in strongly dampened  
IFN-β production during infection. The N protein inhibits recognition of the foreign viral RNA by inhibiting  
TRIM25 activation of RIG-I and also inhibiting IRF3 phosphorylation. PLPro, nsp1 and ORF3b also inhibit  
IRF3 phosphorylation, and ORF3b and N further inhibit IRF3 translocation to the nucleus. Nsp1  
additionally targets IRF7 and cJun phosphorylation. M inhibits assembly of the Traf6 complex, thereby  
reducing NFκB import into the nucleus. Together, these activities result in reduced Type I IFN production  
(IFN-β). IFN-β signals in an autocrine and paracrine fashion to activate interferon stimulated genes (ISGs)  
through JAK/STAT signaling. Nsp1 inhibits STAT1 phosphorylation and ORF6 inhibits STAT1  
translocation to the nucleus, further dampening ISG production.
