
TIMI 1811 No. of Pages 13

ARTICLE IN PRESS

Trends in Microbiology

Review

Structure and Energy-Conversion Mechanism  
of the Bacterial Na⁺-Driven Flagellar Motor

Norihiro Takekawa,$^{1}$ Katsumi Imada,$^{1}$ and Michio Homma$^{2,*}$

Many bacteria swim by means of flagella that are rotated by a nanoscale motor embedded in the cell membrane. Torque is generated by the interaction between ion-conducting membrane proteins that comprise the stator and ring-shaped structures that form the rotor. Although the structure and function of the motor have been extensively studied, many mysteries remain, including the force-generation mechanism, the path of ion flow through the stator, the activation mechanism of the stator, and the mechanism of switching between clockwise (CW) and counterclockwise (CCW) rotation. We summarize recent knowledge of the Na⁺-driven flagellar motor, especially the *Vibrio* polar motor that rotates much faster than the H⁺-driven motor and provides a useful model system for examining comparative aspects of flagellar function.

### The Bacterial Rotary Motor

In the biological world, there are three types of ion-driven rotational machinery. One comprises the F/V-type ATPases that are present in the membrane of eukaryotic organelles (mitochondrion, chloroplast, vacuole, etc.) or the prokaryote cell membrane. These enzymes synthesize ATP by coupling ion flow across the membrane with phosphorylation of ADP, or conversely generate ion gradients by ATP hydrolysis. These reactions accompany rotation of the central stalk subunit [1]. The second is a gliding motility organ in Flavobacteria, that has recently been discovered to rotate using proton motive force [2]. The third is the bacterial flagellar motor, that is embedded in the cell membrane at the base of the flagellum. The motor uses energy obtained from ion flow to rotate the flagellar filament and enable bacteria to move in liquid environments or on surfaces such as animal skins [3]. The rotation of the central stalk in F/V-type ATPases is a phenomenon incidental to the enzymatic reaction process, whereas the rotation of the flagellar motor, and its attached filament, is the physiologically relevant outcome of the conversion of ion motive force into torque. We can say that the flagellar motor is the smallest ion-driven rotational engine in the world.

The flagellum is a membrane-embedded complex formed from about two dozen different types of proteins that are joined by a flexible hook to a helical filament, often ≥10 µm in length, that extends from the cell and functions as propeller. Using the flagellum, bacteria move toward environments favorable for survival, or away from unfavorable ones. The flagellar motor contains a stator, a rotor, a drive shaft, and a bearing (*Figure* 1A), in these ways resembling the macroscopic electric motors produced by human engineering. Notably, however, the flagellar motor is a truly nanoscale device, having a diameter of ~50 nm. It self-assembles from its numerous protein components and is driven by ion flow across the cell membrane. The stator consists of up to 16 or more complexes that surround the rotor and work independently [4,5]. Each stator complex contains ion channel(s) and functions to couple ion flow to conformational changes in a cytoplasmic region that engages the rotor to generate torque. Most flagellar motors are driven by proton (H⁺) or sodium ion (Na⁺). For example, *Escherichia coli* and *Salmonella* have H⁺-utilizing stators, whereas *Vibrio* and *Bacillus subtilis* have Na⁺-driven stators [3,6]. The motors of some species

**Highlights**

- The rotation of the bacterial flagellar motor is generated by the interaction between two parts in the motor, the rotor and the stator. The rotor is composed of a central rod and surrounding rings, and the stator is a unit that works as an energy converter to couple ion influx to rotation of the rotor.
- The Na⁺-driven flagellar motor in *Vibrio alginolyticus*, whose rotation speed is faster than that of any H⁺-driven motor, contains PomA/PomB as stator proteins and some additional ring-like structures, the T-, H-, and O-rings, that are not found in H⁺-driven motors.
- Assembly of the PomA/PomB stators into the motor depends on the environmental Na⁺ concentration. In the presence of sodium, the periplasmic region of the stator changes its conformation to an activated form that binds to peptidoglycan, and charged residues in the cytoplasmic region interact with charged residues in the rotor protein FliG to generate rotational force.
- FliG dynamically changes its conformation to switch the rotational direction of the motor in response to the chemotactic signal transferred from the other rotor component, FliM, that binds to the chemotaxis response regulator protein CheY.

$^{1}$Department of Macromolecular Science, Graduate School of Science, Osaka University, 1-1 Machikaneyama-cho, Toyonaka, Osaka 560-0043, Japan  
$^{2}$Division of Biological Science, Graduate School of Science, Nagoya University, Furo-cho, Chikusa-ku, Nagoya 464-8602, Japan  

*Correspondence:*  
g44416a@cc.nagoya-u.ac.jp  
(M. Homma)

Trends in Microbiology, Month 2020, Vol. xx, No. xx  
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tim.2020.03.010  
© 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

Trends in Microbiology

(A)  
(B)  
(C)

(D)

Figure 1. The Bacterial Flagellar Motor. (A) The schematics of the bacterial cell, flagellum, and the motor located at the base of the flagellum. The motor is composed of the stator (yellow), rotor (pink), and the bearing (green). (B) Cross-section schematic of the H⁺-driven motor of Escherichia coli and Salmonella, which has L-, P-, MS-, and C-rings. (C) Cross-section schematic of the Na⁺-driven motor of Vibrio alginolyticus, which has additional ring structures, the H-, T-, and O-rings. (D) In situ structure of the flagellar motor in V. alginolyticus observed by cryo-electron tomography [92]. There are C- (blue), T- (green), H- (red), and O- (yellow) rings. Abbreviations: IM, inner membrane; OM, outer membrane; PG, peptidoglycan layer.

appear to be driven by other ions: the stator of Bacillus alcalophilus can use both Na⁺ and potassium ions (K⁺), and some Paenibacillus species utilize divalent cations such as Ca²⁺ and Mg²⁺ [7].

The typical H⁺-driven motor of E. coli rotates at a speed of 300 revolutions per second, and the direction of rotation can be switched very rapidly [8]. Numerous genetic, biochemical, physical, and structural studies have been conducted to understand the mechanism of the flagellar motor. Many questions remain, however. The torque generation mechanisms, as well as some aspects of motor assembly, remain unclear. How is the ion flow through the stator controlled? What is the mechanism of motor construction, including the assembly of the stators around the rotor? How does the motor change its rotational direction? The Na⁺-driven motor provides several advantages for understanding the mechanism, and the most important is that sodium ions are easier to detect and manipulate than H⁺. Interestingly, the Na⁺-driven motor of Vibrio rotates about sixfold faster than the H⁺-driven motor (~1700 Hz vs ~300 Hz for the H⁺-driven motor). In this review, we summarize recent studies and current understanding of the flagellar motor, with a focus primarily on the Na⁺-driven flagellar motor.

### The Flagellar Basal Body, the Bearing, and the Rotor

The membrane-embedded structure at the flagellar base is called the basal body. The basal body consists of the rotor, the bearing, and a central drive shaft termed the rod. The rod traverses the peptidoglycan (PG) layer and outer membrane by passing through the bearing, which consists of two ring structures, the L-ring and the P-ring. The L-ring is formed from the protein FlgH and is embedded in the outer membrane. The P-ring is formed from subunits of Flgl and is located below the L-ring in the PG layer (Figure 1B) [9–12]. Gram-positive bacteria, however, do not have the L- and P-rings, and the rod simply penetrates the thick PG layer. The marine Vibrio

2 Trends in Microbiology, Month 2020, Vol. xx, No. xx
(V. alginolyticus) has extra ring structures, the H- and T-rings, around the bearing (Figure 1C) [13,14]. These extra structures are believed to be important for high-speed rotation of the Vibrio motor. *Borrelia burgdorferi*, a spirochete, has another additional structure in the periplasm, called the 'collar' [15].

The rotor is composed of the MS-ring embedded in the cytoplasmic membrane and the cytoplasmic C-ring. The MS-ring is an assembly of a single protein, FliF, and functions as an assembly base for the rod and the C-ring. The C-ring is important for torque generation and consists of three proteins, FliG, FliM, and FliN. The G-ring of the Salmonella motor is composed of >30 subunits of FliG and of FliM, respectively, and three copies of FliN interact with one copy of FliM [16,17]. FliG is the rotor protein most important for the generation of torque. The C-ring component proteins are involved in the switching between CCW and CW rotation [18].

### The Stator

The stator is a heteromultimer of two different membrane proteins [19–21]. The stator contains the ion pathway, and therefore determines the coupling ion used for flagellar rotation (Figure 2 and Table 1). *E. coli* and *Salmonella* have peritrichous flagella driven by the H⁺-type stator composed of MotA and MotB [22]. PomA and PomB, which were discovered in *V. alginolyticus* [23], form a Na⁺-energized stator. MotP and MotS are Na⁺-driven stator proteins identified in *Bacillus* [24]. In addition to their Na⁺-energized polar flagella, *V. alginolyticus* and *V. parahaemolyticus* can also form lateral flagella driven by the H⁺-type MotA/B stator [25,26]. *V. cholerae* has only the polar flagellum driven by the PomA/B stator [27,28]. *Shewanella oneidensis* has a polar flagellum driven by two different types of stators, the H⁺-type MotA/B stator and the Na⁺-type PomA/B stator [29]. *Bacillus subtilis* has peritrichous flagella driven by two different types of stators, the H⁺-type MotA/B stator and the Na⁺-type MotP/S stator [30,31]. *Bacillus alcalophilus* has peritrichous flagella driven by only a MotP/S stator that can utilize both Na⁺ and K⁺ [24]. *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* has a polar flagellum driven by two types of stators, the MotA/B stator and the MotC/D stator, that both use H⁺ [32,33]. PomA/MotP/MotC show sequence homology to MotA, and PomB/MotS/MotD are homologous to MotB. Therefore, we hereafter call MotA/PomA/MotP/MotC the A subunit, and MotB/PomB/MotS/MotD the B subunit.

The A subunit is a four-transmembrane (TM) protein with a long cytoplasmic loop between the second and third TM regions (loop₂₋₃) (Figure 2A) [23,34]. A set of conserved charged residues in loop₂₋₃ are thought to be important for interacting with the C-terminal region of FliG (FliGc) to generate torque [35,36]. The B subunit is composed of a single N-terminal TM helix and a large C-terminal periplasmic region (Figure 2A) [23]. The periplasmic region contains a conserved PG-binding motif that is responsible for anchoring the stator to the PG layer. A considerable body of evidence suggests that each stator unit is a heterohexamer of four A subunits and two B subunits (A₄B₂) [19–21]. However, recent structural studies have shown that ExbB/ExbD, a motor complex of the TonB-dependent transporters, is a heteroheptamer of five ExbB and two ExbD [37,38]. Because the flagellar A subunit and B subunit share sequence similarity with ExbB and ExbD, respectively, in their TM regions (but not in their cytoplasmic and periplasmic regions), it is possible that the flagellar A subunit and B subunit also generate an A₅B₂ heteroheptamer.

Some protein domains in the stator are exchangeable among different species. A well-characterized example is the PomA/PotB stator, which is a chimeric stator in which the periplasmic region of PomB of *V. alginolyticus* is replaced by the corresponding part of MotB from *E. coli*. The PomA/PotB stator can function in *E. coli* cells lacking *motA/B* [39,40], and it uses Na⁺ ions. The PomA/PotB stator expressed in *E. coli* has thus been useful for analyzing the Na⁺-driven motor.
Trends in Microbiology

(A)                                                                 (B)
PG binding motif
PG
PomA                                                                 PomB
Plug
IM 1 2 3 4
N
C
Na+
(C)
D24
IM
A4
A3
T186
T158
Sliding
motion
B
PomA_c
Interaction
FliG
Na+
Torque
generation
Sliding
motion

Figure 2. The Stator Proteins, PomA and PomB. (A) Schematic of PomA and PomB. Four PomA and two PomB molecules make a single stator unit. (B) Model for the ion-influx channel of PomA/PomB. The transmembrane (TM) region of PomB and the third and fourth TM regions of PomA form an ion channel. The conserved Asp residue (D24) serves as the ion-binding site. (C) A mechanochemical model for energy conversion by PomA/B [65]. Interaction of the cytoplasmic region in PomA with FliG induces sliding motions of the third and fourth TMs in PomA (A3 and A4) that move toward the cytoplasmic side (left). This rearrangement shifts T158 in A3 toward D24 in TM in PomB and forms an Na⁺-binding pocket (middle). After release of Na⁺ to the cytoplasmic side, A3 and A4 return to their original positions. This re-sliding motion induces a conformational change in the PomA cytoplasmic region to produce torque at the interaction interface with FliG (right). Abbreviations: C, C terminus; IM, inner membrane; N, N terminus; PG, peptidoglycan layer.

and steps in motor rotation were first observed using this construct [41]. The number of stator complexes in a given motor depends on environmental conditions such as the external load and ion concentration [42–44]. Sensing of external load requires both the cytoplasmic and periplasmic regions of the stator [45,46]. Bacteria that have dual stator systems, such as *B. subtilis* and *S. oneidensis*, change the stator number and composition in a more complex manner. The *B. subtilis* motor accommodates about a dozen MotA/B stators in the absence of Na⁺, whereas a few MotA/B stators are exchanged with MotP/S stators in the presence of Na⁺ [47]. The *S. oneidensis* motor accommodates around five MotA/B stators and about six PomA/B stators in the absence of Na⁺, replacing a few of the MotA/B stators with PomA/B stators in the presence of Na⁺ [48]. Interestingly, the exchange rate of MotA/B depends on the environmental Na⁺ concentration, whereas that of PomA/B does not, indicating that incorporation of MotA/B stators is

4 Trends in Microbiology, Month 2020, Vol. xx, No. xx

Trends in Microbiology

Table 1. Summary of Stator Proteins and Their Coupling Ions in Various Bacteria

| Organisms         | Type of flagella | Stator protein name       | Coupling ions |
|--------------------|------------------|---------------------------|---------------|
|                    |                  | A subunit                 | B subunit     |               |
| E. coli            | Peritrichous      | MotA                      | MotB          | H⁺           |
| S. Typhimurium     | Peritrichous      | MotA                      | MotB          | H⁺           |
| V. algolyticus     | Polar             | PomA                      | PomB          | Na⁺          |
|                    | Lateral           | MotA (LafT)               | MotB (LafU)   | H⁺           |
| V. cholerae        | Polar             | PomA                      | PomB          | Na⁺          |
| S. oneidensis      | Polar             | PomA                      | PomB          | Na⁺          |
|                    |                   | MotA                      | MotB          | H⁺           |
| B. subtilis        | Peritrichous      | MotA                      | MotB          | H⁺           |
|                    |                   | MotP                      | MotS          | Na⁺          |
| B. alcalophilus    | Peritrichous      | MotP                      | MotS          | Na⁺, K⁺      |
| P. aeruginosa      | Polar             | MotA                      | MotB          | H⁺           |
|                    |                   | MotC                      | MotD          |               |
| A. aeolicus        | Polar             | MotA                      | MotB₁, MotB₂  | Na⁺          |

regulated by Na⁺, and this seems to be inconsistent with the case of PomA/B stators in V. algolyticus because PomA/B in V. algolyticus change their assembly to the motor with or without MotA/B [42].

## The Stator Ion Channel

The stator contains ion channel(s) formed from the TM region of the B subunit and the third and fourth TM regions of the A subunit (Figure 2B) [49–52]. A conserved aspartic acid residue (D24 in V. algolyticus PomB) in the TM region of the B subunit was identified as an ion binding site [35,52,53]. When the Asp residue is replaced by other amino acids except for glutamic acid, the rotation of the flagellar motor is completely inhibited, presumably because ion flux is prevented [54]. A phenylalanine residue (F22 in V. algolyticus PomB) two residues before the Asp residue and a serine residue (S26 in V. algolyticus PomB) after the Asp residue are conserved in the TM region of the B subunit of the Na⁺-driven motor. In V. algolyticus PomB, F22 is important for efficient release of Na⁺ from the ion-binding pocket [55] and is also involved in the binding of phenamil, a Na⁺ channel inhibitor [56]. In V. cholerae, the corresponding serine (S26) was found to be essential for high-speed rotation [57].

A segment following the TM region of the B-subunit, termed the ‘plug’ (Figures 2A and 3A), is predicted to form an amphipathic helix and was found to play an important role in inactivating the stator to prevent ion inflow when the stator unit is not assembled around the rotor [58–61]. Overexpression of mutant stators lacking the plug region inhibited bacterial growth because of excess ion influx into the cell [59–61]. The Na⁺-driven motor requires Na⁺ not only for rotation but also for the stator assembly around the rotor [42]. Specific mutations in the C-terminal domain of FliG (FliGc) prevent assembly of the stator complexes, suggesting that the interaction between FliGc and the cytoplasmic domain of PomA is important for the assembly of the stator as well as for torque generation [62]. The interaction between the rotor and the cytoplasmic region of the stator is believed to induce a structural change in the periplasmic region that opens the PomB plug to allow ion influx as well as binding to the PG layer [62,63]. The rotor-stator interaction is also important for stator assembly in the H⁺-driven motor: conserved charged residues (Arg

Trends in Microbiology

(A)                                                                 (B)

PG

α1                                                                 α1
H⁺
Na⁺
IM
A subunit ×4 or 5
B subunit ×2
FliG
FliM
FliN

PomA
N
R88
K89
E96/97/
99
D128
L131
T132
H136
R135
R207
R215
D220
C
D309
K300
R301
R317
K284
D308
FLiG

Trends in Microbiology

Figure 3. Mechanisms of Stator Assembly and Stator–Rotor Interaction. (A) Model of incorporation of the stator into the motor. The stator forms a closed structure when it dissociates from the motor, and the plug region close the gate of the ion-influx channel (left). The stator elongates its structure when it assembles around the rotor, and then binds to T-ring and removes the plug to allow Na⁺ to flow (right). Thorn-like protrusions are shown by black arrowheads. (B) Schematic model of the interaction surface between the stator and the rotor as proposed in a previous study [76]. In the Na⁺-driven motor of the V. alginolyticus, a larger number of charged amino acid residues contribute to the torque generation than in the H⁺-driven motor. Abbreviations: C, C terminus; IM, inner membrane; N, N terminus; PG, peptidoglycan layer.

and Glu) in the cytoplasmic loop of MotA, that are believed to interact with FliGc, are necessary for stator assembly around the rotor [36,64].

The ion permeability of the stator can be assessed using plugless stator mutants. Overexpression of the plugless stator (PomA/PomBΔL) in E. coli cells increased the intracellular Na⁺ concentration to about threefold that of native cells. This increase was suppressed by mutation of the conserved residue D24 (D24N) in PomB. The increase in intracellular Na⁺ concentration was highly correlated with cellular growth inhibition [54]. Thus, the ion permeability of stator mutants can be simply evaluated by introducing the mutation into the plugless stator and observing the growth of the mutant bacteria. Using this method, motor mutations that affect ion influx can easily be identified. Interestingly, some mutations in the stator cytoplasmic region involved in stator assembly also affected stator channel activity, although the region is far from the stator channel [54], suggesting a strong functional connection between ion permeability and stator assembly.

Recent advances have allowed the PomA/B stator complex to be purified in substantial quantities. This enabled detection of the binding of Na⁺ to the stator complex using Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR), and two threonine residues (T158 and T186) in the transmembrane region of PomA were newly identified as Na⁺ binding sites (Figure 2C) [65].

### Mechanism of Torque Generation

Measurement of the torque–speed curve is important to describe the properties of the flagellar motor and to understand the mechanism [66]. The typical torque–speed curve of the H⁺-driven motor shows two distinct regions, a constant-torque plateau region in the low-speed range and a region of reducing torque in the high-speed range. Although the extent of the plateau torque region depends on bacterial species, the overall profile of the torque–speed curve is similar
between the H⁺-driven motor and the Na⁺-driven motor, suggesting that both motors share the same basic mechanism of torque generation [67, 68]. A recent extensive study using torque-speed curve analysis revealed that torque and speed are proportional to ion motive force and the number of stator units regardless of load [69].

The interaction between the stator and the rotor is essential for torque generation, and several models for the mechanism of torque generation have been proposed. Mutational analyses of the *E. coli* H⁺-driven motor have suggested that electrostatic interactions between the conserved charged residues in the cytoplasmic loop₂₋₃ of MotA and those in FliG<sub>c</sub> (e.g., MotA-R90 vs FliG-D289 and MotA-E98 vs FliG-R281) are important for torque generation [70]. However, the Na⁺-driven motor of *V. alginolyticus* still functioned when the conserved charged residues corresponding to those in the H⁺-driven motor (PomA-R88, -K89, -E96, -E97, or -E99; and FliG-K284, -R301, -D308, -D309, or -R317) were replaced with an uncharged residue or an oppositely charged residue [71, 72]. On the other hand, the conserved charged residues are important for the rotation of a Na⁺-driven chimeric motor composed of the *E. coli* rotor and the PomA/PotB stator in *E. coli* [73]. These results suggest that residues other than the known conserved residues contribute to the rotor-stator interaction in the Na⁺-driven motor of *V. alginolyticus*. The *Vibrio* Na⁺-driven motor may use more residues in the rotor-stator interaction than the H⁺-driven motor (Figure 3B).

In *V. alginolyticus*, mutations at L131, T132, R135, and H136 in cytoplasmic loop₂₋₃ of PomA confer temperature-sensitive or reduced-motility phenotypes [74], and mutations in the C-terminal cytoplasmic region (R207E, R215E, D220K) confer a non-motile phenotype [75]. In addition, several mutations of the conserved charged residues in FliG<sub>c</sub> reduced stator assembly around the rotor as well as flagellar motor function [62]. These regions thus appear to be involved in the PomA–FliG interaction that is important for torque generation in the Na⁺-driven motor. Mutational analyses of the charged residues in PomA and FliG identified seven PomA residues and six FliG residues that are involved in torque generation, and in particular the interaction between PomA-E97 and FliG-K284 is the most important interaction in the Na⁺-driven motor [76]. Interestingly, mutations in K284 or R317 in FliG significantly decrease the rotational speed only for CCW rotation, whereas the wild-type and other charged-residue mutants in PomA show the same rotational speed in both directions [77]. These residues might contribute to the rotor-stator interaction only for CCW rotation.

### Stator Structure and Activation Mechanism

Until recently the molecular structure of the stator complex was not fully clarified because of difficulties in preparing purified stator complexes. MotA from *Aquifex aeolicus*, a hyperthermophilic bacterium, was recently purified as a stable homomultimer (putative tetramer) in the absence of MotB. The low-resolution structure of the MotA tetramer was determined by single-particle analysis of an electron microscopic images of negatively stained samples, and the TM region covered with detergent and an arched cytoplasmic region with thorn-like protrusions were clearly visualized (Figure 3A) [78].

The stators must be firmly fixed around the rotor to resist the considerable rotational forces produced by interaction with the rotor. The periplasmic domain of the B subunit contains a common PG-binding motif [63, 79, 80], and the stator is thought to be anchored to the PG layer through the B subunit. However, recent *in vivo* cryo-electron tomographic analysis of the Na⁺-driven *Vibrio* motor revealed that the periplasmic domain of PomB binds to the T-ring through the putative PG binding site, suggesting that the Na⁺-driven PomA/B stator is also anchored to the bearing of the basal body [81].The distance from the inner membrane to the PG layer is ~10 nm, and to the T-ring is ~8 nm. However, X-ray crystallography and electron microscopy of purified proteins have shown that the periplasmic region of the B subunit adopts a compact conformation insufficient to span these distances [63,79,80]. Therefore, the periplasmic region of the B subunit must presumably change its structure to reach the PG layer or the T-ring. The periplasmic domain of the B subunit consists of a long N-terminal α-helix (α1) and a conserved PG-binding domain [63,80]. The long helix is proposed to be responsible for the structural change. The predicted structural change was confirmed by X-ray crystallography, nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) analysis, and disulfide-crosslinking experiments [80,82]. The structural change of the B subunit has been directly observed by high-speed atomic force microscopy (HS-AFM) using the Na⁺-driven MotP/S stator from *Bacillus subtilis* [47]. The periplasmic region of MotS adopts an unfolded conformation in the absence of Na⁺, but folds into an elongated structure in the presence of Na⁺. This transition occurred even in a stator mutated at the conserved Asp residue in the B subunit (MotS-D30A), suggesting that the transition is triggered by Na⁺-binding not to the TM region but to the periplasmic region of MotS. However, it is unclear whether this mechanism is shared by other Na⁺-driven stators.

Although stator complexes can dynamically assemble around and disassemble from the rotor, functioning stator complexes in the motor must presumably be firmly anchored to the PG layer. To explain these contradictory functions, the B subunit is believed to form a compact structure in the membrane pool and to change into a stretched conformation around the rotor. This conformational change may trigger opening of the ion channel(s) of the stator unit without any specific energy consumption. Therefore, the plug stops ion flow in the membrane pool and works only around the rotor. The L119P substitution in the long helix of the periplasmic domain of *Salmonella* MotB causes the stator to be more easily incorporated into the motor, and also allows ion flow even in the membrane pool [63]. Activation of ion flow thus appears to be closely coupled to the conformational change of the B-subunit that occurs when it is anchored around the rotor.

### Switching Mechanism of the Direction of Rotation

The wild-type motor rotates in the CCW direction in the smooth-swimming mode, and switches to CW in the tumbling mode. Switching of rotation direction is regulated by association and dissociation of the CheY protein to the C-ring. In *E. coli*, *Salmonella*, and *Vibrio* the motor rotates CCW in its default state, but CW upon binding of sufficient numbers of phosphorylated CheY proteins to FliM. Because torque is generated by the interaction between FliG and the stator, the FliG structure should be changed by the CheY-triggered switch to CW rotation. Although many models have been proposed to explain the switching, it is still not known precisely what structural changes occur [83].

FliG is composed of an N-terminal domain (FliG~N~), a middle domain (FliG~M~), and a C-terminal domain (FliG~C~) (Figure 4B). NMR and molecular dynamics (MD) simulation analyses of FliG~C~ of *V. alginolyticus* indicated that FliG~C~ adopts three types of conformational states and dynamically transitions between them (Figure 4C) [84]. The A282T mutation in FliG~C~ inhibits the transition and confers a CW-biased rotation phenotype. FliG~C~ can be subdivided into a C1 domain (FliG~C1~) containing three α helices, and a C2 domain (FliG~C2~) containing six α helices. The relative orientation of the two domains in FliG~C~ can vary considerably owing to the presence of a hinge between the domains, located adjacent to helix α1. This structural change in FliG~C~ may have a role in the directional switch of flagellar rotation (Figure 4D). Furthermore, the G214S and G215A mutants show CCW- and CW-biased rotation, respectively, and the E144D mutant frequently switches rotation direction [85,86]. G214 and G215 are located at C-terminal end of the MC helix, which connects FliG~M~ to FliG~C~ and forms a hinge. Similar phenotypes had been produced in the *E. coli* H⁺-driven

8 Trends in Microbiology, Month 2020, Vol. xx, No. xx
Trends in Microbiology

Figure 4. Conformational Changes in Rotor Protein FliG.
(A) Schematic of the Na⁺-driven flagellar motor in V. alginolyticus with atomic models of FliG. (B) The atomic structure of FliG drawn as a Cα cartoon model. FliG consists of three domains (FliG<sub>N</sub>, FliG<sub>M</sub>, and FliG<sub>C</sub>), and FliG<sub>C</sub> is divided into FliG<sub>C1</sub> and FliG<sub>C2</sub>. The first α helix (α1) in FliG<sub>C2</sub> is shown as a broken cyan-filled circle (pink circle in panel C), and the mutation sites that affect the rotational direction of the motor are shown as magenta dots. (C) A partial ring model of FliG, FliM and CheY. FliG<sub>M</sub> interacts with FliM. CheY, a chemotaxis signal protein, binds to FliM, and binding induces the conformational change in FliG. (D) Three different structural states in FliG<sub>C</sub>. The α1 helix works like a flexible hinge. (E) An atomic model of the C-ring in the Vibrio polar flagellar motor. Abbreviations: CCW, counterclockwise; CW, clockwise; IM, inner membrane; OM, outer membrane; PG, peptidoglycan layer.

motor by corresponding G194S and G195A mutations [87]. The NMR and MD simulation analyses showed that the structural flexibility of FliG is restricted by the G214S and G215A mutations. It seems that the hinge of these two adjacent glycine residues in FliG plays a general role in determining the CCW or CW structural state (Figure 4D). In situ cryo-electron tomography revealed that the G214S and G215A mutant motors show significant differences in C-ring structure (M.H. et al., unpublished data). These results suggest that the intrinsic dynamic structural properties of FliG enable the rapid and precise switching of rotational direction of the motor. On the other hand, the C-ring structure of the E144D mutant is similar to that of the wild-type. The E144D mutant confers an abnormal response to chemotactic signals. E144 is involved in the binding surface for FliM (Figure 4C), where mutations might interfere with the normal transmission of signals from FliM to FliG.

### Unique Components in the Na⁺-Driven Motor of Vibrio Spp.

The Na⁺-driven flagellum of V. alginolyticus has characteristic structures that are not present in the H⁺-driven flagellum. The H- and the T-rings are located outside the L-ring and below the P-ring, respectively, and are believed to contribute to the high-speed rotation of Na⁺-driven motors [13,88]. The T-ring consists of two proteins, MotX and MotY, and contributes to proper assembly of the stator into the motor. MotY binds to the basal body P-ring and MotX binds to MotY. An X-ray crystal structure revealed that MotY is composed of an N-terminal and a C-terminal domain (MotY<sub>N</sub> and MotY<sub>C</sub>). MotY<sub>N</sub> interacts with the basal body and with MotX, and MotY<sub>C</sub> has a putative PG-binding motif (Figure 5) [89]. MotY is also present in the lateral flagellum of Vibrio and in the polar flagellum of P. aeruginosa, but MotX is not present in either of these motors. MotY is essential for the function of both flagellar systems, and in P. aeruginosa forms a ring-like structure resembling the T-ring [90,91]. Recent in situ structural observation of

Trends in Microbiology

(A)  
OM  
PG  
IM  
Stator  
(PomA/B)  

(B)  

Figure 5. Assembly Mechanism of the H-Ring, T-Ring, and FliL in the Na⁺-Driven Flagellar Motor of *V. alginolyticus*. (A) In the absence of the T-ring, the PomA/B stator can no longer assemble into the motor. FlgT assembles around the L- and P-rings, and the other H-ring (FlgO and FlgP) and T-ring (MotX and MotY) components assemble around FlgT. (B) The stator binds to the T-ring to assemble around the motor. Ten FliL molecules surround the single stator, and FliL supports higher torque generation by the stator. Abbreviations: IM, inner membrane; OM, outer membrane; PG, peptidoglycan layer.

the *V. alginolyticus* motor revealed that the T-ring consists of 26 protrusions composed of a MotX–MotY heterodimer [81]. Moreover, it was found that a pair of T-ring protrusions bind to the periplasmic domain of the PomB dimer in a stator unit. Although the periplasmic domain of PomB contains a putative PG-binding motif as in the other B subunits, it is unknown whether PomB binds to only the T-ring or to both of the T-ring and the PG layer for torque generation.

The H-ring is composed of three proteins, FlgT, FlgO, and FlgP [81,92]. X-ray crystallography revealed that FlgT consists of three domains: the N-terminal, the middle, and the C-terminal domains (FlgTₙ, FlgTₘ, and FlgTₒ) (Figure 5). FlgTₘ binds to the basal body and provides a platform for assembly of the T-ring. FlgTₙ contributes to H-ring formation, and FlgTₒ stabilizes the T- and H-ring structures. The *Vibrio* polar flagellar filament is covered with a lipid membrane, called the ‘sheath’, that extends from the outer membrane. Recently, a new ring structure, called the O-ring, was observed on the outside of the sheath at the base of the filament in *V. alginolyticus*. The structural components of the O-ring remain unknown [92]. The *Vibrio* motor is relatively large and can accommodate more stator units than the H⁺-driven motors, and its output should accordingly be higher than that of the *Salmonella* or *E. coli* motors. Therefore, the T-, H-, and O-rings may be necessary to reinforce the bearing and to firmly fix the stator units.

### FliL: A Common Structure with Eukaryotic Sensor Proteins

The flagellar motor detects the load and adjusts motor output by changing the number of stators in a single motor. FliL is a flagellar motor component that is necessary for high-power rotation of the *Vibrio* motor. In the absence of FliL, many cells lose motility in a high-viscosity environment [93–95]. FliL is a single-transmembrane protein and directly interacts with the stator to assist stator function [96]. The structure of the periplasmic region of *Vibrio* FliL was recently determined by X-ray crystallography [46]. FliL forms a decameric ring structure in the crystals. Two conserved valine residues (V74 and V165) located on the inner wall of the FliL ring are involved in the interaction with the stator and control stator activity, suggesting that the stator is accommodated within the FliL ring to form a FliL–stator complex (Figure 5).

Interestingly, FliL has structural features in common with stomatin-like proteins. Stomatin-like proteins belong to TM or membrane-associated protein families in eukaryotes and prokaryotes and are involved in sensing external signals, such as mechanical and acid stimuli, or in activity control of various membrane proteins [97,98]. FliL is a novel stomatin-like protein that is found

in the flagellar system in prokaryotes. The structural similarity implies that FliL regulates the stator by a mechanism similar to that of the other stomatin-like proteins.

### Evolution of the Flagellar Motor

A big question concerns how bacteria acquired the flagellar system for motility. It is known that the injectosome, that is involved in bacterial pathogenicity to transfer effectors into animal or plant cells, has a very similar structure to the flagellar motor, but the injectosome does not have a stator for energy conversion [99]. Phylogenomic and comparative analyses between injectosomes and flagellar motors indicate that the injectosome evolved from the bacterial flagellum [100]. It has been proposed that the flagellar stator complex has the same topology and is homologous with the ExbB/ExbD/TonB protein complex that serves to energize the transport of some solutes across the outer membrane of the bacterial cell [37, 101]. The stator complex might thus have evolved from an ancestral ion-coupled membrane transporter.

The flagellar motor has been well studied in several bacteria including *Bacillus*, *E. coli*, *Salmonella*, and *Vibrio*. For a broader analysis of motor structure and function, characterization of motors derived from diverse species is necessary. Bacteria of the Aquificae phylum, which live in the vicinity of hot springs and submarine volcanoes, are believed from the analysis of 16S ribosomal RNA to be a very early-diverging lineage of bacteria [102, 103]. *Aquifex aeolicus* is a typical *Aquifex* genus bacterium, and is hyperthermophilic with a viable temperature range of 67–95°C (its optimal growth temperature is 85°C). The complete genome sequence of *A. aeolicus* has already been reported [104], and its recombinant proteins are often used in X-ray crystallography (566 protein structures derived from *A. aeolicus* are registered in Protein Data Bank as of 2020). *A. aeolicus* usually has a single flagellum at the cell pole. *A. aeolicus* swims rapidly at 85°C but only slowly at room temperature. When a chimeric stator derived from *A. aeolicus* and *E. coli* was expressed in *E. coli*, rotation was dependent on the Na⁺ concentration, indicating that the flagellar motor of *A. aeolicus* uses Na⁺ [105]. This suggests that, in the ancestral state, the motor probably used Na⁺, and the energy conversion mechanism for flagellar motor rotation therefore appears to have been conserved.

### Concluding Remarks

Thirty years have passed since research on the *Vibrio* motor began. The genetic study of *Salmonella* flagellar genes was started ~60 years ago by Prof. Tetsuo Iino, and many researchers entered the flagellar field by way of genetics. 'When we understand the flagellum is when we understand life' was a remark of Prof. Iino who studied flagella from the viewpoint of 'rotating life'. In flagellar research, we have come to the point where it is possible to analyze the structure of this protein-based, nanoscale device at the atomic level. We anticipate that the structure and function of a biological machine that converts ion flow into rotational energy will soon be elucidated (see Outstanding Questions).

### Acknowledgments

We thank David Blair for critically reading the manuscript before submission.

### References

1. von Ballmoos, C. *et al.* (2009) Essentials for ATP synthesis by F₁F₀ ATP synthases. *Annu. Rev. Biochem.* 78, 649–672
2. Shrivastava, A. *et al.* (2015) A rotary motor drives *Flavobacterium* gliding. *Curr. Biol.* 25, 338–341
3. Terashima, H. *et al.* (2008) Flagellar motility in bacteria structure and function of flagellar motor. *Int. Rev. Cell Mol. Biol.* 270, 39–85
4. Leake, M.C. *et al.* (2006) Stoichiometry and turnover in single functioning membrane protein complexes. *Nature* 443, 355–358
5. Reid, S.W. *et al.* (2006) The maximum number of torque-generating units in the flagellar motor of *Escherichia coli* is at least 11. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.* 103, 8066–8071
6. Li, N. *et al.* (2011) Sodium-driven motor of the polar flagellum in marine bacteria *Vibrio*. *Genes Cells* 16, 985–999
7. Ito, M. and Takahashi, Y. (2017) Nonconventional cation-coupled flagellar motors derived from the alkaliphilic *Bacillus* and *Paenibacillus* species. *Extremophiles* 21, 3–14

Outstanding Questions

How is the coupling ion specificity of the stator channel determined? What is the detailed structure of the stator, and how is the change in stator conformation coupled to ion influx?

How do the rotor and the stator interact to generate the rotational force? What is the conformational change of the rotor that is responsible for switching the direction of rotational?

How does the motor sense viscosity and mechanical stimuli?

8. Wang, F. *et al.* (2014) Switching dynamics of the bacterial flagellar motor near zero load. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.* 111, 15752–15755
9. Homma, M. *et al.* (1987) Identification of the M-ring protein of the flagellar motor of *Salmonella typhimurium*. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.* 84, 7483–7487
10. Ueno, T. *et al.* (1992) M-ring, S-ring and proximal rod of the flagellar basal body of *Salmonella typhimurium* are composed of subunits of a single protein, FliF. *J. Mol. Biol.* 227, 672–677
11. Francis, N.R. *et al.* (1992) Localization of the *Salmonella typhimurium* flagellar switch protein FliG to the cytoplasmic M-ring face of the basal body. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.* 89, 6304–6308
12. Schoenhals, G.J. and Macnab, R.M. (1996) Physiological and biochemical analyses of FlgH, a lipoprotein forming the outer membrane L ring of the flagellar basal body of *Salmonella typhimurium*. *J. Bacteriol.* 178, 4200–4207
13. Terashima, H. *et al.* (2006) The *Vibrio* motor proteins, MotX and MotY, are associated with the basal body of Na-driven flagella and required for stator formation. *Mol. Microbiol.* 62, 1170–1180
14. Terashima, H. *et al.* (2010) The flagellar basal body-associated protein FlgT is essential for a novel ring structure in the sodium-driven *Vibrio* motor. *J. Bacteriol.* 192, 5609–5615
15. Zhao, X. *et al.* (2013) Cryoelectron tomography reveals the sequential assembly of bacterial flagella in *Borrelia burgdorferi*. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.* 110, 14390–14395
16. McDowell, M.A. *et al.* (2016) Characterization of *Shigella* Spa33 and *Thermotoga* FliM/N reveals a new model for C-ring assembly in T3SS. *Mol. Microbiol.* 99, 749–766
17. Suzuki, H. *et al.* (2004) Structure of the rotor of the bacterial flagellar motor revealed by electron cryomicroscopy and single-particle image analysis. *J. Mol. Biol.* 337, 105–113
18. Yamaguchi, S. *et al.* (1986) Genetic evidence for a switching and energy-transducing complex in the flagellar motor of *Salmonella typhimurium*. *J. Bacteriol.* 168, 1172–1179
19. Sato, K. and Homma, M. (2000) Multimeric structure of PomA, the Na⁺-driven polar flagellar motor component of *Vibrio algynolyticus*. *J. Biol. Chem.* 275, 20223–20228
20. Yorimitsu, T. *et al.* (2004) Multimeric structure of the PomA/PomB channel complex in the Na⁺-driven flagellar motor of *Vibrio algynolyticus*. *J. Biochem.* 135, 43–51
21. Kojima, S. and Blair, D.F. (2004) Solubilization and purification of the MotA/MotB complex of *Escherichia coli*. *Biochemistry* 43, 26–34
22. Blair, D.F. (2003) Flagellar movement driven by proton translocation. *FEBS Lett.* 545, 86–95
23. Asai, Y. *et al.* (1997) Putative channel components for the fast-rotating sodium-driven flagellar motor of a marine bacterium. *J. Bacteriol.* 179, 5104–5110
24. Ito, M. *et al.* (2004) MotPS is the stator-force generator for motility of alkaliphilic *Bacillus*, and its homologue is a second functional Mot in *Bacillus subtilis*. *Mol. Microbiol.* 53, 1035–1049
25. Atsumi, T. *et al.* (1992) Polar and lateral flagellar motors of marine *Vibrio* are driven by different ion-motive forces. *Nature* 355, 182–184
26. Kojima, S. *et al.* (1999) The polar flagella motor of *Vibrio cholerae* is driven by an Na⁺ motive force. *J. Bacteriol.* 181, 1927–1930
27. Gardel, C.L. and Mekalanos, J.J. (1996) Alterations in *Vibrio cholerae* motility phenotypes correlate with changes in virulence factor expression. *Infect. Immun.* 64, 2246–2255
28. Häse, C.C. and Mekalanos, J.J. (1999) Effects of changes in membrane sodium flux on virulence gene expression in *Vibrio cholerae*. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.* 96, 3183–3187
29. Paulick, A. *et al.* (2009) Two different stator systems drive a single polar flagellum in *Shewanella oneidensis* MR-1. *Mol. Microbiol.* 71, 836–850
30. Terahara, N. *et al.* (2008) Mutations alter the sodium versus proton use of a *Bacillus clausii* flagellar motor and confer dual ion use on *Bacillus subtilis* motors. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.* 105, 14359–14364
31. Terahara, N. *et al.* (2012) A *Bacillus* flagellar motor that can use both Na⁺ and K⁺ as a coupling ion is converted by a single mutation to use only Na⁺. *PLoS One* 7, e46248

32. Doyle, T.B. *et al.* (2004) The complex flagellar torque generator of *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*. *J. Bacteriol.* 186, 6341–6350
33. Toutain, C.M. *et al.* (2005) Evidence for two flagellar stators and their role in the motility of *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*. *J. Bacteriol.* 187, 771–777
34. Zhou, J.D. *et al.* (1995) Membrane topology of the MotA protein of *Escherichia coli*. *J. Mol. Biol.* 251, 237–242
35. Zhou, J. *et al.* (1998) Function of protonatable residues in the flagellar motor of *Escherichia coli*: a critical role for Asp 32 of MotB. *J. Bacteriol.* 180, 2729–2735
36. Morimoto, Y.V. *et al.* (2013) Distinct roles of highly conserved charged residues at the MotA–FliG interface in bacterial flagellar motor rotation. *J. Bacteriol.* 195, 474–481
37. Celia, H. *et al.* (2020) Structure and stoichiometry of the Ton molecular motor. *Int. J. Mol. Sci.* 21, E375
38. Celia, H. *et al.* (2019) Cryo-EM structure of the bacterial Ton motor subcomplex ExbB-ExbD provides information on structure and stoichiometry. *Commun. Biol.* 2, 358
39. Asai, Y. *et al.* (2000) Coupling ion specificity of chimeras between H⁺- and Na⁺-driven motor proteins, MotB and PomB, in *Vibrio* polar flagella. *EMBO J.* 19, 3639–3648
40. Asai, Y. *et al.* (2003) Ion-coupling determinants of Na⁺-driven and H⁺-driven flagellar motors. *J. Mol. Biol.* 327, 453–463
41. Sowa, Y. *et al.* (2005) Direct observation of steps in rotation of the bacterial flagellar motor. *Nature* 437, 916–919
42. Fukuoka, H. *et al.* (2009) Sodium-dependent dynamic assembly of membrane complexes in sodium-driven flagellar motors. *Mol. Microbiol.* 71, 825–835
43. Lele, P.P. *et al.* (2013) Dynamics of mechanosensing in the bacterial flagellar motor. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.* 110, 11839–11844
44. Tipping, M.J. *et al.* (2013) Load-dependent assembly of the bacterial flagellar motor. *MBio* 4, e00551–13
45. Pourjafari, S.N.S. *et al.* (2017) The role of a cytoplasmic loop of MotA in load-dependent assembly and disassembly dynamics of the MotA/B stator complex in the bacterial flagellar motor. *Mol. Microbiol.* 106, 646–658
46. Takekawa, N. *et al.* (2019) Structure of *Vibrio* FliL, a new stomatin-like protein that assists the bacterial flagellar motor function. *MBio* 10, e00292–19
47. Terahara, N. *et al.* (2017) Na⁺-induced structural transition of MotPS for stator assembly of the *Bacillus* flagellar motor. *Sci. Adv.* 3, eaao4119
48. Paulick, A. *et al.* (2015) Dual stator dynamics in the *Shewanella oneidensis* MR-1 flagellar motor. *Mol. Microbiol.* 96, 993–1001
49. Sharp, L.L. *et al.* (1995) Features of MotA proton channel structure revealed by tryptophan-scanning mutagenesis. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.* 92, 7946–7950
50. Braun, T.F. and Blair, D.F. (2001) Targeted disulfide cross-linking of the MotB protein of *Escherichia coli*: evidence for two H⁺ channels in the stator complex. *Biochemistry* 40, 13051–13059
51. Braun, T.F. *et al.* (2004) Arrangement of core membrane segments in the MotA/MotB proton-channel complex of *Escherichia coli*. *Biochemistry* 43, 35–45
52. Sudo, Y. *et al.* (2009) Interaction between Na⁺ ion and carboxylates of the PomA-PomB stator unit studied by ATR-FTIR spectroscopy. *Biochemistry* 48, 11699–11705
53. Terashima, H. *et al.* (2010) Functional transfer of an essential aspartate for the ion-binding site in the stator proteins of the bacterial flagellar motor. *J. Mol. Biol.* 397, 689–696
54. Takekawa, N. *et al.* (2013) Na⁺ conductivity of the Na⁺-driven flagellar motor complex composed of unplugged wild-type or mutant PomB with PomA. *J. Biochem.* 153, 441–451
55. Terauchi, T. *et al.* (2011) A conserved residue, PomB-F22, in the transmembrane segment of the flagellar stator complex, has a critical role in conducting ions and generating torque. *Microbiology* 157, 2422–2432
56. Ishida, T. *et al.* (2019) Sodium-powered stators of the bacterial flagellar motor can generate torque in the presence of phenamil with mutations near the peptidoglycan-binding region. *Mol. Microbiol.* 111, 1689–1699
57. Halang, P. *et al.* (2015) Serine 26 in the PomB subunit of the flagellar motor is essential for hypermotility of *Vibrio cholerae*. *PLoS One* 10, e0123518

58. Stolz, B. and Berg, H.C. (1991) Evidence for interactions between MotA and MotB, torque-generating elements of the flagellar motor of *Escherichia coli*. *J. Bacteriol.* 173, 7033–7037

59. Hosking, E.R. *et al.* (2006) The *Escherichia coli* MotAB proton channel unplugged. *J. Mol. Biol.* 364, 921–937

60. Morimoto, Y.V. *et al.* (2010) Proton-conductivity assay of plugged and unplugged MotA/B proton channel by cytoplasmic pHLuorin expressed in *Salmonella*. *FEBS Lett.* 584, 1268–1272

61. Li, N. *et al.* (2011) Characterization of the periplasmic region of PomB, a Na⁺-driven flagellar stator protein in *Vibrio alginolyticus*. *J. Bacteriol.* 193, 3773–3784

62. Kojima, S. *et al.* (2011) Mutations targeting the C-terminal domain of FliG can disrupt motor assembly in the Na⁺-driven flagella of *Vibrio alginolyticus*. *J. Mol. Biol.* 414, 62–74

63. Kojima, S. *et al.* (2009) Stator assembly and activation mechanism of the flagellar motor by the periplasmic region of MotB. *Mol. Microbiol.* 73, 710–718

64. Morimoto, Y.V. *et al.* (2010) Charged residues in the cytoplasmic loop of MotA are required for stator assembly into the bacterial flagellar motor. *Mol. Microbiol.* 78, 1117–1129

65. Onoue, Y. *et al.* (2019) Essential ion binding residues for Na⁺ flow in stator complex of the *Vibrio* flagellar motor. *Sci. Rep.* 9, 11216

66. Xing, J. *et al.* (2006) Torque-speed relationship of the bacterial flagellar motor. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.* 103, 1260–1265

67. Sowa, Y. *et al.* (2003) Torque-speed relationship of the Na⁺-driven flagellar motor of *Vibrio alginolyticus*. *J. Mol. Biol.* 327, 1043–1051

68. Inoue, Y. *et al.* (2008) Torque-speed relationships of Na⁺-driven chimeric flagellar motors in *Escherichia coli*. *J. Mol. Biol.* 376, 1251–1259

69. Nord, A.L. *et al.* (2017) Speed of the bacterial flagellar motor near zero load depends on the number of stator units. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.* 114, 11603–11608

70. Zhou, J.D. *et al.* (1998) Electrostatic interactions between rotor and stator in the bacterial flagellar motor. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.* 95, 6436–6441

71. Yorimitsu, T. *et al.* (2002) The systematic substitutions around the conserved charged residues of the cytoplasmic loop of Na⁺-driven flagellar motor component PomA. *J. Mol. Biol.* 320, 403–413

72. Yorimitsu, T. *et al.* (2003) The conserved charged residues of the C-terminal region of FliG, a rotor component of Na⁺-driven flagellar motor. *J. Mol. Biol.* 334, 567–583

73. Yakushi, T. *et al.* (2006) Roles of charged residues of rotor and stator in flagellar rotation: comparative study using H⁺-driven and Na⁺-driven motors in *Escherichia coli*. *J. Bacteriol.* 188, 1466–1472

74. Fukuoka, H. *et al.* (2004) Concerted effects of amino acid substitutions in conserved charged residues and other residues in the cytoplasmic domain of PomA, a stator component of Na⁺-driven flagella. *J. Bacteriol.* 186, 6749–6758

75. Obara, M. *et al.* (2008) Roles of charged residues in the C-terminal region of PomA, a stator component of the Na⁺-driven flagellar motor. *J. Bacteriol.* 190, 3565–3571

76. Takekawa, N. *et al.* (2014) Contribution of many charged residues at the stator-rotor interface of the Na⁺-driven flagellar motor to torque generation in *Vibrio alginolyticus*. *J. Bacteriol.* 196, 1377–1385

77. Onoue, Y. *et al.* (2018) The role of conserved charged residues in the bidirectional rotation of the bacterial flagellar motor. *Microbiologyopen* 7, e587

78. Takekawa, N. *et al.* (2016) The tetrameric MotA complex as the core of the flagellar motor stator from hyperthermophilic bacterium. *Sci. Rep.* 6, 31526

79. Roujienikova, A. (2008) Crystal structure of the cell wall anchor domain of MotB, a stator component of the bacterial flagellar motor: implications for peptidoglycan recognition. *Proc. Natl. Sci. U. S. A.* 105, 10348–10353

80. Zhu, S. *et al.* (2014) Conformational change in the periplasmic region of the flagellar stator coupled with the assembly around the rotor. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.* 111, 13523–13528

81. Zhu, S. *et al.* (2020) Cryo-electron tomography reveals the outer ring structure of flagellar motor and the stator binding site in *Vibrio* species. *J. Bacteriol.* 202, e00592–19

82. Kojima, S. *et al.* (2018) The helix rearrangement in the periplasmic domain of the flagellar stator B subunit activates peptidoglycan binding and ion influx. *Structure* 26, 590–598

83. Minamino, T. *et al.* (2019) Directional switching mechanism of the bacterial flagellar motor. *Comput. Struct. Biotechnol. J.* 17, 1075–1081

84. Miyanoiri, Y. *et al.* (2017) Structural and functional analysis of the C-terminal region of FliG, an essential motor component of *Vibrio* Na⁺-driven flagella. *Structure* 25, 1540–1548

85. Nishikino, T. *et al.* (2018) Rotational direction of flagellar motor from the conformation of FliG middle domain in marine *Vibrio*. *Sci. Rep.* 8, 17793

86. Nishikino, T. *et al.* (2016) Serine suppresses the motor function of a periplasmic PomB mutation in the *Vibrio* flagella stator. *Genes Cells* 21, 505–516

87. Van Way, S.M. *et al.* (2004) Rusty, jammed, and well-oiled hinges: Mutations affecting the interdomain region of FliG, a rotor element of the *Escherichia coli* flagellar motor. *J. Bacteriol.* 186, 3173–3181

88. Terashima, H. *et al.* (2013) Insight into the assembly mechanism in the supramolecular rings of the sodium-driven *Vibrio* flagellar motor from the structure of FlgT. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.* 110, 6133–6138

89. Kojima, S. *et al.* (2008) Insights into the stator assembly of the *Vibrio* flagellar motor from the crystal structure of MotY. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.* 105, 7696–7701

90. Stewart, B.J. and McCarter, L.L. (2003) Lateral flagellar gene system of *Vibrio parahaemolyticus*. *J. Bacteriol.* 185, 4508–4518

91. Zhu, S. *et al.* (2019) *In situ* structures of polar and lateral flagella revealed by cryo-electron tomography. *J. Bacteriol.* 201, e00117–e00119

92. Zhu, S. *et al.* (2017) Molecular architecture of the sheathed polar flagellum in *Vibrio alginolyticus*. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.* 114, 10966–10971

93. Attmannspacher, U. *et al.* (2008) FliL is essential for swarming: motor rotation in absence of FliL fractures the flagellar rod in swarmer cells of *Salmonella enterica*. *Mol. Microbiol.* 68, 328–341

94. Zhu, S. *et al.* (2015) FliL associates with the stator to support torque generation of the sodium-driven polar flagellar motor of *Vibrio*. *Mol. Microbiol.* 98, 101–110

95. Lin, T.S. *et al.* (2018) FliL association with flagellar stator in the sodium-driven *Vibrio* motor characterized by the fluorescent microscopy. *Sci. Rep.* 8, 11172

96. Kumar, A. *et al.* (2017) Biochemical characterization of the flagellar stator-associated inner membrane protein FliL from *Vibrio alginolyticus*. *J. Biochem.* 161, 331–337

97. Wetzel, C. *et al.* (2007) A stomatin-domain protein essential for touch sensation in the mouse. *Nature* 445, 206–209

98. Lapatsina, L. *et al.* (2012) Stomatin-domain proteins. *Eur. J. Cell Biol.* 91, 240–245

99. Diepold, A. and Armitage, J.P. (2015) Type III secretion systems: the bacterial flagellum and the injectosome. *Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B* 370, 20150020

100. Abby, S.S. and Rocha, E.P. (2012) The non-flagellar type III secretion system evolved from the bacterial flagellum and diversified into host-cell adapted systems. *PLoS Genet.* 8, e1002983

101. Zhai, Y.F. *et al.* (2003) Molecular modeling of the bacterial outer membrane receptor energizer, ExbBD/TonB, based on homology with the flagellar motor, MotAB. *Biochim. Biophys. Acta* 1614, 201–210

102. Burggraf, S. *et al.* (1992) A phylogenetic analysis of *Aquifex pyrophilus*. *Syst. Appl. Microbiol.* 15, 52–56

103. Pitulle, C. *et al.* (1994) Phylogenetic position of the genus *Hydrogenobacter*. *Int. J. Syst. Bacteriol.* 44, 620–626

104. Deckert, G. *et al.* (1998) The complete genome of the hyperthermophilic bacterium *Aquifex aeolicus*. *Nature* 392, 353–358

105. Takekawa, N. *et al.* (2015) Sodium-driven energy conversion for flagellar rotation of the earliest divergent hyperthermophilic bacterium. *Sci. Rep.* 5, 12711
