
ARCHIVES OF BIOCHEMISTRY AND BIOPHYSICS  
Vol. 238, No. 2, May 1, pp. 596–605, 1985  

Enzymatic Synthesis of Polymethylated Flavonols in Chrysosplenium  
americanum. I. Partial Purification and Some Properties of S-Adenosyl-L-  
methionine:Flavonol 3-, 6-, 7-, and 4′-O-Methyltransferases  

VINCENZO DE LUCA¹ AND RAGAI K. IBRAHIM²  

Chemistry Graduate Faculty and Department of Biology, Concordia University, 1455 de Maisonneuve  
Boulevard West, Montréal, Québec H3G 1M8, Canada  

Received September 18, 1984, and in revised form December 3, 1984  

Four novel flavonol O-methyltransferases (OMTs) were partially purified from  
Chrysosplenium americanum by precipitation with ammonium sulfate, successive  
chromatography on Sephadex S-200 and hydroxylapatite, and chromatofocusing on  
Polybuffer ion exchanger. They exhibited strict position specificity for positions 3 of  
quercetin, 7 of 3-methylquercetin, 4′ of 3,7-dimethylquercetin, and 6 of 3,7,3′-tri-  
methylquercetagetin. None of these enzymes reacted with phenylpropanoids, flavones,  
dihydroflavonols, or any of their glucosides. Except for the 7-OMT whose activity was  
lost during chromatofocusing, the other enzymes had apparent pI values of 4.8, 5.4,  
and 5.7 for the 3-, 4′-, and 6-OMTs, respectively. They had similar molecular weights  
(Mr 57,000) and their pH optima varied between 7.8 and 9.0, with a shift in optimal  
activity from lower to higher pH with increasing level of substrate methylation.  
Unlike the 3 and 4′ enzymes, the 6-OMT showed an absolute requirement for Mg²⁺  
whose activation was saturable and was inhibited by EDTA. The in vitro stepwise O-  
methylation of quercetin → 3-methylquercetin → 3,7-dimethylquercetin → 3,7,4′-tri-  
methylquercetin tends to suggest a coordinated sequence of methyl transfers in this  
tissue. © 1985 Academic Press, Inc.  

Flavonoid compounds are widely distributed in the plant kingdom and may  
be characterized by methyl ether substitution at various positions on the flavonoid  
ring system (1, 2). Enzymatic O-methylation, which is catalyzed by OMT³ (EC  
2.1.1.6), is believed to play a role in detoxification of reactive hydroxyl groups on  
the flavonoid ring. Several OMTs have been reported to mediate the transfer of  
methyl groups from SAM to different hydroxyls of flavonoid compounds (3–10).  

However, none of these enzymes has been shown to accept partially methylated  
compounds for further methylation.  

Recent work in this laboratory demonstrated the stepwise methylation of a  
number of flavonoid substrates, including quercetin, to various methylated derivatives  
by partially purified preparations of Calamondin orange (11, 12) and Chrysosplenium  
americanum tissues (13, 14). Furthermore, these enzyme preparations accepted partially  
methylated substrates and transformed them to the next higher order of methylation  
(11–14), thus indicating the involvement of several OMTs. More recently, we demonstrated  
the presence of three novel OMTs in C. americanum and established their role in the  
sequential methylation of flavonols in this tissue (15). The latter is known to synthesize  

¹ Present address: Plant Biotechnology Institute, National Research Council of Canada, Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, S7N 0W9, Canada.  
² To whom correspondence should be addressed.  
³ Abbreviations: OMT, O-methyltransferase; SAM, S-adenosyl-L-methionine.

size a number of tri-, tetra-, and penta-
methyl derivatives of 2′-hydroxyquercetin
and its 6-hydroxy analog (2′-hydroxyquer-
cetagetin), with methyl groups located at
positions 3, 6, 7, 2′, 4′, and/or 5′ and
glucosyl residues at the 2′ or 5′ positions
(13) (Fig. 1). The enzymatic synthesis of
these highly methylated flavonols is par-
ticularly interesting since early methyl-
ated intermediates do not accumulate in

this tissue and can only be synthesized *in*
*vitro* (13, 15).

In this report, we extend earlier obser-
vations (15) and describe the purification
of four *Chrysosplenium* OMTs, on a pre-
parative level, as well as some of their
properties. Because of the position speci-
ficity of these enzymes, the purification
procedure required assays with five key
flavonol substrates which were methylated
at different positions as shown below:

(a) SAM + quercetin $\xrightarrow{3-\text{OMT}}$ 3-methylquercetin + SAH

(b) SAM + 3-methylquercetin $\xrightarrow{7-\text{OMT}}$ 3,7-dimethylquercetin + SAH

(c) SAM + 3,7-dimethylquercetin $\xrightarrow{4^{\prime}-\text{OMT}}$ 3,7,4′-trimethylquercetin + SAH

(d) SAM + 3,7-dimethylquercetagetin $\xrightarrow{4^{\prime}-\text{OMT}}$ 3,7,4′-trimethylquercetagetin + SAH  
$\xrightarrow{6-\text{OMT}}$ 3,6,7-trimethylquercetagetin + SAH

(e) SAM + 3,7,3′-trimethylquercetagetin $\xrightarrow{6-\text{OMT}}$ 3,6,7′3′-tetramethylquercetagetin + SAH

---

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Plant material. *C. americanum* Schwein ex Hooker
(Saxifragaceae) was collected from Sutton Junction,
Province of Quebec, and was maintained under con-
trolled conditions of light, temperature, and hu-
midity.

Chemicals. S-Adenosyl-L-[methyl-¹⁴C]methionine (60
mCi/mmol) was purchased from Amersham (Oak-
ville, Ontario); cold SAM was obtained from Boeh-
ringer-Mannheim (Germany). Most commercially
unavailable flavonoid compounds were generous gifts
from Dr. M. Jay, University of Lyon, and Professor
E. Wollenweber, Darmstadt. Other flavonoid sub-
strates were purchased from Roth (Karlsruhe, Ger-
many) and Sarsyntex (Bordeaux, France) and were
further purified by recrystallization or preparative
TLC. Sephadryl S-200, Polybuffer ion exchanger
(PBE-94) and Polybuffer (PB-74) were from Phar-
macia Fine Chemicals (Uppsala, Sweden). Hydrox-
ylapatite (Bio-Gel HT) was from Bio-Rad (Richmond,
Calif.). Imidazole was recrystallized from ethyl ac-
etate. All other chemicals were of analytical grade.

Buffers. The following buffers were used: A, 0.1 M
potassium phosphate, pH 7.6, 5 mM EDTA, 10 mM
diethylammonium diethyldithiocarbamate, 14 mM 2-
mercaptoethanol; B, 25 mM imidazole-HCl, pH 7.4,
10% glycerol, 14 mM 2-mercaptoethanol, 0.5 M NaCl;
C, buffer B without NaCl; D, 0.2 M potassium phos-
phate, pH 8, 20% glycerol, 5 mM dithiothreitol.

Protein extraction. The procedure used for protein
extraction and enzyme purification was a modification
of that previously described (15). Unless stated oth-
erwise, all procedures were carried out at 2–4°C.
Young shoot tips (ca. 90 g) were frozen in liquid
nitrogen, mixed with Polyclar AT (10% w/w), and
homogenized in a blender with 500 ml buffer A. All
components in the buffer were required to obtain a
colorless protein extract and to preserve enzyme
activity. The slurry was filtered through nylon mesh
and the filtrate was centrifuged for 15 min at 20,000g.
The supernatant was stirred with Dowex 1 × 2 (10%
w/v) which had previously been equilibrated with
0.1 M phosphate, pH 7.6, and then filtered. The filtrate
was fractionated with solid ammonium sulfate and the
protein fraction which precipitated between 35
and 70% salt saturation was collected by centrifu-
gation.

Enzyme purification. The protein pellet was sus-
pended in 10 ml buffer B and chromatographed on
a Sephadryl S-200 column, pre-equilibrated with the
same buffer. The column was developed with buffer
B and 4-ml fractions were collected for OMT assay
against the five flavonol substrates. The active frac-
tions were applied onto a hydroxylapatite column
which had previously been equilibrated with buffer
C. Two peaks of enzyme activity were eluted after
applying a linear gradient of phosphate (0–100 mM)
in buffer C. Each of the latter peaks was then
subjected to chromatofocusing on Polybuffer ion

DE LUCA AND IBRAHIM

FIG. 1. Structural formulas of the partially $O$-methylated flavonol glucosides which accumulate in $C$. americanum (R = glucose). Note that mono- and dimethylated compounds do not accumulate in this tissue.

exchanger, preequilibrated with buffer C. Enzyme activity was eluted with Polybuffer:water (1:8, v/v), pH 4.0, 20% glycerol, 10 mM 2-mercaptoethanol. The latter generated a pH gradient between pH 7 and 4, so that each protein was recovered at its apparent isoelectric point ($pI$). In order to eliminate Polybuffer and concentrate the enzyme protein, the chromatofocused fractions were applied to hydroxylapatite and OMT activity was eluted batchwise with buffer D.

**O-Methyltransferase assay.** Standard enzyme assays were performed as described previously (13) using S-adenosyl-L-[methyl-$^{14}$C]methionine as methyl donor. The methylated products were extracted in a mixture of benzene:ethyl acetate (1:1, v/v), and an aliquot of the organic phase was counted for radioactivity in a toluene-based scintillation fluid. The remaining fraction was chromatographed on Polyamide-6 MN TLC plates in solvent systems A, toluene:ethyl formate:butyl acetate:formic acid (25:50:23:2); or B, benzene:methylethylketone:methanol (4:3:3). Identity of the methylated products was confirmed by chromatography with reference compounds, visualization in uv light (366 nm), and autoradiography on X-ray film.

**Molecular weight determination.** Each of the chromatofocused enzymes was applied to a Sephacryl S-200 column which had previously been calibrated with ribonuclease A, chymotripsinogen A, ovalbumin, albumin, and aldolase as reference proteins. The apparent molecular weight was estimated from the elution volume of each enzyme (16, 17).

**Protein estimation.** Protein concentration was determined according to the method of Bradford (18), using the Bio-Rad protein reagent and bovine serum albumin as standard protein.

---

**RESULTS**

**Purification of individual OMTs.** The purification procedure previously described (15) was modified in order to prepare large amounts of purified enzymes for property studies and kinetic analysis. Chromatography on Sephacryl S-200 resulted in the elution of all OMTs in a discrete peak (profile not shown) and elimination of chlorophyll contaminants. Hydroxylapatite chromatography gave two peaks of activity (Fig. 2). Peak 1 was variably active against all five substrates (Figs. 2B and C) whereas peak 2 was only active against quercetin, 3,7-dimethylquercetin and 3,7-dimethylquercetagetin. This purification step permitted the separation of the 6- and 7-OMTs from the majority of the 3 and 4' enzymes. When each hydroxylapatite peak was submitted to chromatofocusing, the 6-OMT was eluted at its apparent isoelectric point (pH 5.7) free from contaminating 3 or 4' activities (Fig. 3A). The 7-OMT activity was lost during chromatofocusing, possi-

(data not shown). The OMT focussing at pH 5.4, which was erroneously reported in an earlier publication as 3′-/5′-OMT (15), has now been unequivocally identified as 4′-OMT (see later and Fig. 4).

**Stability of enzymes.** Partially purified enzyme preparations (desalted ammonium sulfate pellets) lost 80% of their activity over a period of 4–6 weeks at 4°C. Purified enzymes were stable when stored at –15°C in buffer D for several months.

**Substrate specificity.** The substrate specificity of the four OMTs studied is summarized in Table II. The OMT, which focused at pH 4.8, was specific for the 3 position of flavonols with 3′,4′ (or 4′,5′) hydroxylation pattern such as quercetin (Fig. 4), but not quercetagetin, the 6-OH analog. Furthermore, the latter did not act as a substrate inhibitor when added at concentrations of up to 80 μM to enzyme assays (Fig. 5). Introduction of a methyl group at the 7 position of quercetin (as in rhamnetin) resulted in a 70% drop in

FIG. 2. Protein elution profile from a hydroxylapatite column. (A) The OMT activity from a Sephacryl S-200 column (in 0.5 mM KCl) was applied onto hydroxylapatite preequilibrated with buffer C. The protein was eluted with a linear gradient (0–100 mM) of phosphate in the same buffer. Note that the high conductivity observed in the applied sample was due to high salt present in the sample buffer. (B, C) Fractions were assayed against quercetin (Q) (□), 3-methyl-Q (Δ), 3,7-dimethyl-Q (■), 3,7-dimethylquercetagetin (Qg) (○), and 3,7,3′-trimethyl-Qg (●).

bly due to instability of the enzyme in the purified form or to the loss of some factor required for its activity. The 3- and 4′-OMTs were further separated on a second Polybuffer ion exchanger and eluted at pH 4.8 and 5.4, respectively (Fig. 3B). This procedure assured that the 6- and 4′-OMTs, whose apparent pI’s differed only by 0.3 pH units, were not cross-contaminated. The combined purification steps described above resulted in an increase in specific activity of the three focused enzymes of 85-, 92-, and 164-fold for the 3-, 6-, and 4′-OMTs, respectively, as compared with those of the crude enzyme preparation (Table I). The 7-OMT which copurified with the 6-OMT on hydroxylapatite showed a 6-fold increase in specific activity

FIG. 3. (A) Chromatofocusing of 6- and 7-OMTs on Polybuffer ion exchanger (PBE-94). Fractions 41–50 from the hydroxylapatite column were applied to PBE-94 preequilibrated with buffer C. The protein was eluted with Polybuffer-HCl (PB-74) which generated a linear gradient between pH 7 and 4. (B) Chromatofocusing of 3- and 4′-OMTs on PBE-94. Fractions 51–64 from the hydroxylapatite column were applied to and eluted form PBE-94 as described in (A). Fractions from both columns were assayed against quercetin (Q) (□), 3-methylquercetin (no activity), 3,7-dimethyl-Q (■), 3,7-dimethylquercetagetin (Qg) (○), and 3,7,3′-trimethyl-Qg (●).

DE LUCA AND IBRAHIM

TABLE I  
PURIFICATION OF *Chrysosplenium* O-METHYLTRANSFERASES${}^{a}$

| Purification step | Total protein (mg) | Specific activity (pkat/mg) | Total activity (pkat) | Purification (fold) | Recovery (%) |
|-------------------|--------------------|-----------------------------|-----------------------|---------------------|--------------|
| **3-O-Methyltransferase** |  |  |  |  |  |
| Crude extract${}^{b}$ | 103 | 0.62 | 64 |  | 100 |
| Ammonium sulfate${}^{c}$ | 80 | 0.55 | 44 | 0.9 | 69 |
| Sephacryl S-200 | 20 | 1.5 | 31 | 2.4 | 48 |
| Hydroxylapatite${}^{d}$ | 5 | 5.9 | 29 | 9.5 | 45 |
| PBE-94${}^{e}$ | 0.25 | 53 | 13.3 | 85 | 21 |
| **6-O-Methyltransferase** |  |  |  |  |  |
| Crude extract${}^{b}$ | 103 | 0.42 | 50 |  | 100 |
| Ammonium sulfate${}^{c}$ | 80 | 0.55 | 44 | 1.1 | 88 |
| Sephacryl S-200 | 20 | 1.66 | 33 | 3.4 | 66 |
| Hydroxylapatite${}^{f}$ | 5 | 3.1 | 15.5 | 6.4 | 31 |
| PBE-94${}^{g}$ | 0.25 | 44 | 11.1 | 92 | 22 |
| **4′-O-Methyltransferase** |  |  |  |  |  |
| Crude extract${}^{b}$ | 103 | 0.84 | 84 |  | 100 |
| Ammonium sulfate${}^{c}$ | 80 | 0.94 | 74 | 1.2 | 88 |
| Sephacryl S-200 | 20 | 1.06 | 53 | 1.3 | 63 |
| Hydroxylapatite${}^{d}$ | 5 | 6.1 | 31 | 7.6 | 37 |
| PBE-94${}^{e}$ | 0.25 | 120 | 30 | 164 | 38 |

${}^{a}$ Substrates for the 3-, 6-, and 4′-OMTs were quercetin, 3,7,3′-trimethylquercetagetin, and 3,7-dimethylquercetin, respectively. The purification process was performed with 90 g fresh material.

${}^{b}$ After treatment with Dowex 1X2 and desalting on Sephadex G-25.

${}^{c}$ 30–70% Salt saturation, then desalted on Sephadex G-25.

${}^{d}$ Peak 2 from hydroxyapatite column.

${}^{e}$ Chromatofocusing column no. 2.

${}^{f}$ Peak 1 from hydroxyapatite column.

${}^{g}$ Chromatofocusing column no. 1.

methyl derivatives at a ratio of 2:1. The fact that the 4′-OMT did not react with trimethyl substrates, such as 3,6,7-trimethylquercetagetin, suggests that 4′ methylation may precede that at position 6, thus establishing the third and fourth steps in the sequential methylation of these flavonols.

None of the four enzymes described here exhibited any activity with phenylpropanoids, flavones, dihydroflavonols, or any of their glucosides, thus indicating their specificity toward hydroxylated and partially methylated flavonols.

**pH optima.** The pH optima of the four OMTs ranged between 7.8 and 9.0 (Fig. 6). However, optimal activity shifted from lower to higher pH with increasing methylation of the substrate used, so that the 3- and 7-OMTs exhibited optimal activity between pH 7.8 and 8.2, as compared with pH 8.8 to 9.0 for the 6- and 4′-OMTs. These differences in pH optima may indicate the degree of dissociation of the specific hydroxyl groups to be methylated.

FIG. 4. Photograph of an autoradiogram of the chromatographed reaction products of quercetin, 3,7-dimethylquercetin, and 3,7-dimethyl- and 3,7,3′-trimethylquercetagetin using the chromatofocused enzymes 3-, 4′-, and 6-O-methyltransferases, respectively. The reaction product with 3-methylquercetin was obtained using the hydroxyapatite fraction (7-OMT). The numbers preceding the substrates or products indicate the methylated positions of quercetin (Q) and quercetagetin (Qg).

TABLE II

SUBSTRATE SPECIFICITY OF *Chrysosplenium* O-METHYLTRANSFERASES ${}^{a,b}$

| Substrate               | 3-OMT${}^{d}$ | 6-OMT | 7-OMT${}^{e}$ | 4′-OMT${}^{f}$ |
|-------------------------|---------------|-------|---------------|----------------|
| Quercetin (Q)           | 100           | 0     | 0             | 0              |
| Rhamnetin (7-MeQ)       | 30            | 0     | 0             | 0              |
| 3-Methyl-Q              | 0             | 0     | 100           | 0              |
| 8-Hydroxykaempferol     | 0             | 25    | 0             | 0              |
| Quercetagetin (Qg)      | 0             | 5     | 0             | 0              |
| 3,7-Dimethyl-Q          | 0             | 0     | 0             | 100            |
| 3,7-Dimethyl-Qg         | 0             | 100   | 0             | 95             |
| 3,7,3′-Trimethyl-Qg     | 0             | 40    | 0             | 0              |

${}^{a}$ Enzyme preparations were used after chromatofocusing (for 3-, 6-, and 4′-OMTs) or after hydroxyapatite (for 7-OMT).

${}^{b}$ The standard enzyme assay was used as described under Materials and Methods, with 0.1–1.0 μM of the indicated substrates.

${}^{c}$ Methylating activities (100%) amounted to 6500, 14000, 4500, and 9000 dpm/assay for the 3-, 6-, 7-, and 4′-OMTs, respectively.

${}^{d}$ Isorhamnetin (3′-MeQ) and tamarixetin (4′-MeQ) were not accepted as substrates.

${}^{e}$ Since this preparation was contaminated with 6-OMT, activities against 3,7-diMe-Qg and 3,7,3′-triMe-Qg were subtracted accordingly. The 7-OMT did not accept 3′-, 4′-, 3,3′-, 3,4′-, or 3,3′,4′-Me-Q as substrates.

${}^{f}$ 3,6,7-TriMe-Qg was not accepted as substrate.

DE LUCA AND IBRAHIM

of enzyme activity (Table III). The former was particularly effective at 1 mM in inhibiting the three OMTs, whereas the addition of 14 mM 2-mercaptoethanol partially prevented this inhibition. These data indicate that, whereas no reducing agent may be required for O-methylation, binding of SH-group inhibitors to the enzyme resulted in its inactivation.

Molecular weight. Both crude preparations as well as purified OMTs had the same elution volume, giving an approximate molecular weight of 57,000 (data not shown). This compares well with previous estimates of 65,000 on Sephadex G-100 (15).

DISCUSSION

The four OMTs described in this report confirm previous observations (15) and establish a preparative procedure for the complete separation of the 3-, 6-, and 4′-OMTs. However, the 7-OMT activity was lost during chromatofocusing. These enzymes together with other yet to be identified

Effect of divalent cations. Of the three purified enzymes studied, the 6-OMT showed an absolute requirement for Mg²⁺ (Table III). The latter could not be replaced by other cations tested. These results are in contrast with those reported earlier (15), which were obtained with crude enzyme preparations. Further investigation of the effect of Mg²⁺ indicated that its activation of 6-OMT was saturable (Fig. 7). Lineweaver-Burk plots (Fig. 7, inset) were linear, with 30 μM Mg²⁺ required for half-maximal saturation. When the effect of EDTA was investigated (Table III) it was found to inhibit the 6-OMT, whereas it had no effect on the activity of either 3- or 4′-OMT.

SH-group requirements. The addition of 14 mM 2-mercaptoethanol in the assay mixture did not increase any of the four enzyme activities, as compared with those of the controls. However, SH-group inhibitors such as p-chloromercuribenzoate or N-ethylmaleimide, were potent inhibitors

FIG. 5. Inhibition of 3-OMT by alternate substrate; 1/v versus 1/Q (quercetin) at various fixed concentrations of quercetagetin (Qg). Each incubation mixture contained 6 μg/ml enzyme protein, 10 mM MgCl₂, 10 mM 2-mercaptoethanol and 10% dimethyl sulfoxide (in 100 mM phosphate buffer, pH 8), and the reaction was carried out at 30°C for 30 min. Velocities were expressed as μM s⁻¹ mg protein⁻¹.

FIG. 6. pH optima of the different O-methylating activities using the hydroxylapatite fraction as an enzyme source. The substrates used were quercetin (3-OMT), 3-methylquercetin (7-OMT), 3,7-dimethylquercetin (4′-OMT), and 3,7-dimethylquercetagetin (upper curve) and 3,7,3′-trimethylquercetagetin (lower curve) for the 6-OMT.

Chrysosplenium FLAVONOL 3-, 6-, 7-, AND 4′-O-METHYLTRANSFERASES 603

TABLE III

EFFECT OF INORGANIC IONS AND OTHER REAGENTS ON O-METHYLTRANSFERASE ACTIVITY$^a$

| Additions           | Concentration (mM) | Relative activity (%) |
|---------------------|--------------------|-----------------------|
|                     |                    | 3-OMT                 | 6-OMT                 | 4′-OMT                |
| Mg²⁺ (control)      | 1                  | 100                   | 100                   | 100                   |
| Mg²⁺                | 0                  | 95                    | 5                     | 140                   |
| Mn²⁺                | 1                  | 110                   | 15                    | 150                   |
| Ca²⁺                | 1                  | 100                   | 5                     | 150                   |
| K⁺                  | 1                  | 115                   | 5                     | 140                   |
| EDTA                | 1                  | 100                   | 110                   | 150                   |
| EDTA                | 10                 | 100                   | 24                    | 150                   |
| 2-Mercaptoethanol   | 14                 | 105                   | 100                   | 100                   |
| PCMB (minus ME)     | 1                  | 33                    | 5                     | 15                    |
| PCMB + 14 mM ME     | 1                  | 90                    | 60                    | 75                    |
| N-Ethylmaleimide$^b$| 1                  | 48                    | 80                    | 45                    |
| Iodoacetamide$^b$   | 1                  | 105                   | 100                   | 100                   |

$a$ The chromatofocused enzyme preparations were used as described under Materials and Methods section with 0.5 μM each of quercetin, 3,7-dimethylquercetagetin, and 3,7-dimethylquercetin as substrates for the 3-, 6-, and 4′-OMTs, respectively.

$b$ In the absence of 2-mercaptoethanol.

tified OMTs (specific for 2′ and 5′ positions), constitute the enzyme complement involved in the sequential O-methylation of flavonols in this tissue (13).

Chrysosplenium OMTs are quite distinct from the much studied flavonoid enzymes which exhibited a wide range of specificity toward the 3′ position of flavones/flavonols or their glucosides (3, 5). The enzymes reported here mediated specific, position-oriented methylations which followed the orderly sequence: quercetin → 3-methylquercetin → 3,7-dimethylquercetin → 3,7,4′-trimethylquercetin (or 3,7-dimethylquercetagetin → 3,7,4′/3′-trimethylquercetagetin → 3,6,7,4′/3′-tetramethylquercetagetin, in the case of the quercetagetin series). Furthermore, neither phenylpropanoid compounds or other intermediates of flavonol biosynthesis were accepted by these OMTs, thus supporting the view that O-methylation of flavonoids occurs at the C₁₅ level in Chrysosplenium (19). It is not unexpected, therefore, that a polyhydroxyflavonol of common occurrence, such as quercetin, would be the natural methyl acceptor in the multiple sequence of methyl transfer. This is supported by the fact that 3-OMT exhibited its highest affinity and strict position specificity for this substrate. These results are in agreement with the findings of Brunet and Ibrahim (12), who demonstrated that a number of 3-hydroxyflavones displayed a high methyl acceptor ability which correlated with the highest nuclear electron density for the 3-hydroxyl group of flavonols.

FIG. 7. Mg²⁺ saturation curves for the 3 (▲)-, 4′ (■)-, and 6 (○)-OMT activities. A Lineweaver-Burk plot of the latter (inset) gave an activation constant of 30 μM.

Quercetagetin, the 6-hydroxy derivative of quercetin, was neither accepted for O-methylation nor did it act as a substrate inhibitor. This raises the question as to how do methylated derivatives of quercetagetin (Fig. 1) arise in this tissue. Two possible routes may be postulated. The first is that quercetin is methylated at position 3 with subsequent divergence of the pathway into partially methylated derivatives of quercetin or quercetagetin. Such a hypothesis implies the introduction of a hydroxyl group at position 6 of 3-methylquercetin or of a later methylated intermediate. The second possibility is that two specific 3-OMTs may be involved, one for quercetin and the other for quercetagetin. However, the latter enzyme has yet to be found in this tissue.

Very recently, a number of anthocyanin 3′/5′-OMTs from *Petunia hybrida* (9, 20) and a vitexin rhamnoside 7-OMT from *Avena sativa* (10) have been reported to accept only glycosylated substrates. This suggests that the order of methylation and glycosylation is determined by the specific tissue involved. Glucosylation in *C. americanum* has been shown to be a terminal step in flavonol biosynthesis (21).

Whereas the four enzymes studied had pH optima similar to those reported for other flavonoid OMTs (3–7, 9, 10), their molecular weights were intermediate between those of the flavone/flavonol (3, 5, 6) and the isoflavone (4) OMTs. The 3- and 4′-OMTs displayed no Mg²⁺ requirement and were not inhibited by EDTA. Similar results were reported for the isoflavone 4′-OMT of *Cicer arietinum* (4) and the vitexin rhamnoside 7-OMT (10). On the other hand, the 6-OMT showed an absolute requirement for Mg²⁺ and its activity was inhibited by EDTA. These results are similar to those reported for the flavone 3′-OMT (3) and the anthocyanin 3′/5′-OMTs (20). Recently, the stepwise methylation of phosphatidylethanolamine to phosphatidylcholine in rat liver microsomes was shown to be mediated by two distinct N-methyltransferases, the first of which was rate-limiting and required Mg²⁺ for activity (16). Whether the absolute requirement for Mg²⁺ by the 6-OMT has any significance in the regulation of O-methylation in *Chrysosplenium* remains to be established.

This report, as well as our previous publication (15), has shown that *Chrysosplenium* OMTs are particularly well suited to act in a coordinated fashion, with the product of one enzyme reaction being a substrate for the next enzyme in the pathway. Therefore, it was considered pertinent to investigate the kinetic characteristics of these enzymes. The effect of substrates and products on the 3-, 6-, and 4′-OMTs will be discussed in detail in the following paper.

### ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Financial support by the Natural Science and Engineering Research Council of Canada and the Department of Education, Government of Québec, is gratefully acknowledged. We thank Dr. M. Jay and Professor E. Wollenweber for generous gifts of some reference compounds. V.D.L. was the recipient of a Government of Québec postgraduate scholarship and a Concordia University fellowship.

### REFERENCES

1. HARBORNE, J. B., MABRY, T. J., AND MABRY, H. (1975) The Flavonoids, Academic Press, New York.
2. WOLLENWEBER, E., AND DIETZ, V. H. (1981) *Phytochemistry* 20, 869–932.
3. EBEL, J., HAHLBROCK, K., AND GRISEBACH, H. (1972) *Biochim. Biophys. Acta* 268, 313–326.
4. WENGENMAYER, H., EBEL, J., AND GRISEBACH, H. (1974) *Eur. J. Biochem.* 50, 135–143.
5. POULTON, J. E., HAHLBROCK, K., AND GRISEBACH, H. (1977) *Arch. Biochem. Biophys.* 180, 543–549.
6. SUTFELD, R., AND WIERMANN, R. (1978) *Biochem. Physiol. Pflanzen* 172, 111–123.
7. TSANG, T. F., AND IBRAHIM, R. K. (1979) *Phytochemistry* 18, 1131–1136.
8. AYABE, S., YOSHIKAWA, T., KOBAYASHI, M., AND FURUYA, T. (1980) *Phytochemistry* 19, 2331–2336.
9. JONSSON, L. M., AARSMAN, M. E., SCHRAM, A. W., AND BENNINK, G. J. (1982) *Phytochemistry* 21, 2457–2459.
10. KNOEGGE, W., AND WEISSENBOCK, G. (1984) *Eur. J. Biochem.* 140, 113–118.

Chrysosplenium FLAVONOL 3-, 6-, 7-, AND 4′-O-METHYLTRANSFERASES

11. BRUNET, G., SALEH, N. A. M., AND IBRAHIM, R. K. (1978) *Z. Naturforsch. C* 33, 786–788.

12. BRUNET, G., AND IBRAHIM, R. K. (1980) *Phytochemistry* 19, 741–746.

13. COLLINS, F. W., DE LUCA, V., IBRAHIM, R. K., VOIRIN, B., AND JAY, M. (1981) *Z. Naturforsch. C* 36, 730–736.

14. IBRAHIM, R. K., DE LUCA, V., JAY M., AND VOIRIN, B. (1982) *Naturwissenschaften* 69, 41–42.

15. DE LUCA, V., AND IBRAHIM, R. K. (1982) *Phytochemistry* 21, 1537–1540.

16. ANDREWS, P. (1964) *Biochem. J.* 91, 222–223.

17. ANDREWS, P. (1965) *Biochem. J.* 95, 595–606.

18. BRADFORD, M. M. (1976) *Anal. Biochem.* 72, 248–254.

19. POULTON, J. E. (1981) *in* The Biochemistry of Plants (Conn, E. E., ed.), Vol. 7, 667–723, Academic Press, New York.

20. JONSSON, L. M., AARSMAN, M. E., POULTON, J. E., AND SCHRAM, A. W. (1984) *Planta* 160, 174–179.

21. BAJAJ, K. L., DE LUCA, V., KHOURI, H., AND IBRAHIM, R. K. (1983) *Plant Physiol.* 72, 891–896.

22. SASTRY, B. V. R., STATHAM, C. N., AXELROD, J., AND HIRATA, F. (1981) *Arch. Biochem. Biophys.* 211, 762–773.
