
Mol Gen Genet (1995) 249:274–280

© Springer-Verlag 1995

**ORIGINAL PAPER**

Tomomi Hidaka · Masao Goda  
Tomohisa Kuzuyama · Naomi Takei  
Makoto Hidaka · Haruo Seto  

**Cloning and nucleotide sequence of fosfomycin biosynthetic genes of Streptomyces wedmorensis**

Received 13 February 1995 / Accepted: 11 July 1995

Abstract The biosynthetic pathway for production of the antibiotic fosfomycin by *Streptomyces wedmorensis* consists of four steps including the formation of a C–P bond and an epoxide. Fosfomycin production genes were cloned from genomic DNA using *S.* *wedmorensis* mutants blocked at different steps of the biosynthetic pathway. Four genes corresponding to each of the biosynthetic steps were found to be clustered in a DNA fragment of about 5 kb. Nucleotide sequencing of a large fragment revealed the presence of ten open reading frames, including the four biosynthetic genes and six genes with unknown functions.

Key words Fosfomycin · C–P bond

---

### Introduction

Fosfomycin (FM) is a clinically important antibiotic, which is produced by various species of *Streptomycetes* (Hendlin et al. 1969), *Pseudomonas syringae* (Shoji et al. 1986), and *P.* *viridiflava* (Katayama et al. 1990), and possesses a unique C–P bond and an epoxide. In *Streptomyces wedmorensis*, FM is synthesized from phosphoenolpyruvate (PEP) in four steps (Fig. 1; Imai et al. 1985; Seto et al. 1991; Hidaka et al. 1992a; Kuzuyama et al. 1992).

The first two steps of fosfomycin biosynthesis are common to all natural products with C–P bonds

(Hidaka et al. 1992a). Isomerization of PEP catalyzed by PEP phosphomutase generates phosphonopyruvic acid (PnPy). The enzyme has been isolated from organisms producing various phosphono-containing compounds, including *S.* *hygroscopicus* (bialaphos; Hidaka et al. 1989), *Tetrahymena pyriformis* (2-aminoethylphosphonic acid; Seidel et al. 1988) and *Pseudomonas gladioli* (2-hydroxyethylphosphonic acid; Nakashita et al. 1992). Decarboxylation of PnPy to generate phosphonoacetaldehyde (PnAA) (Fig. 1, step 2) is needed to prevent the strongly favoured reverse reaction of PEP phosphomutase and thus fix the C–P bond formed. In vitro enzyme analysis showed that the equilibrium between PEP and PnPy was far in favor of the cleavage of the C–P bond of PnPy (the ratio of PEP:PnPy is more than 100:1 in the case of the *S.* *hygroscopicus* enzyme; Hidaka et al. 1989). The mechanism of decarboxylation has not been elucidated.

The third reaction, the conversion of PnAA, is the first committed step leading to a wide variety of different C–P compounds. In fosfomycin biosynthesis, PnAA is methylated to provide 2-hydroxypropylphosphonic acid (HPP; Seto et al. 1991), which is converted into the final product. The reaction mechanism of the methylation step is interesting because PnAA is thought to be methylated by the nucleophilic attack of a methyl anion derived from methylcobalamine (Kuzumaya et al. 1992), in contrast to the usual S-adenosylmethionine-mediated methylation by a methyl cation. The mechanism by which the epoxide group is formed, via dehydrogenation of the secondary alcohol of HPP, has never been reported in the biosynthesis of any other natural products.

We have been interested in the genetics of fosfomycin production in *S.* *wedmorensis*, and have cloned a region containing the biosynthetic genes (Kuzuyama et al. 1993). A 5.9 kb DNA fragment comprising the *BamHI* insert of pFBG21 (Table 2, Fig. 2), which restored fosfomycin productivity in a mutant (NP-7) that was found to be defective in the second step (decarboxylation

Communicated by A. Kondorosi

T. Hidaka · M. Goda · T. Kuzuyama · N. Takei · H. Seto (✉)  
Institute of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences,  
The University of Tokyo, 1-1-1 Yayoi, Bunkyo-ku,  
Tokyo, 113 Japan  

M. Hidaka  
Department of Biotechnology, Division of Agriculture and Agricultural Life Sciences, The University of Tokyo,  
Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113, Japan

CH₂
||—O—PO₃H₂
| COOH
PEP

PO₃H₂
| CH₂
| C=O
(1) COOH
PnPy

CO₂
(2)
PO₃H₂
| CH₂
| C=O
| H
PnAA

PO₃H₂
| CH₂
| HC—OH
(3) CH₃
HPP

PO₃H₂
| HC
(4) O
| CH₃
FM

PO₃H₂
| CH₂
| CH₂
NH₂
AEP

Fig. 1 Biosynthetic pathway of fosfomycin. PEP, Phosphoenolpyruvate; PnPy, phosphonopyruvic acid; PnAA, phosphonoacetaldehyde; AEP, 2-aminoethylphosphonic acid; HPP, 2-hydroxypropylphosphonic acid

The double mutant NP-17, harboring mutations in both steps 2 and 3 of fosfomycin biosynthesis, was obtained after treatment of strain NP-7 protoplasts (defective in step 2; see Fig. 1) with N-methyl-N'-nitro-N-nitrosoguanidine (NTG). Protoplasts were incubated at 30°C for 30 min in 50 mM Tris-malate buffer, pH 9.0, containing 10.3% sucrose and nitrosoguanidine (final concentration of 1 mg/ml). The protoplasts were washed twice with P-medium (Hopwood et al. 1985) and plated onto R2YE medium. Mutants defective in both step 2 and step 3 were identified using the biotransformation test.

Transformation of S. wedmorensis and S. lividans

The method of Thompson et al. (1982) was used for transformation of S. lividans and S. wedmorensis protoplasts. S. wedmorensis protoplasts were prepared using mycelia grown in GPY medium containing 0.5% glycine.

Preparation of a genomic library of S. wedmorensis

Previously described techniques (Hopwood et al. 1985) were used to isolate plasmid DNA or genomic DNA from Streptomyces. Chromosomal DNA (500 μg) extracted from S. wedmorensis 144-91 was partially digested with BamHI and size-fractionated by agarose gel electrophoresis; 10- to 20-kb fragments were ligated to BamHI - and phosphatase-treated pIJ922.

Nucleotide sequence determination

Fragments were subcloned into pUC118 and pUC119 in E. coli JM109. These strains were infected with bacteriophage M13KO7 (Vieira and Messing 1987) to recover single-stranded DNAs for sequencing reactions. The nucleotide sequences of both strands were determined using an ABI model 373A DNA sequencer (Applied Biosystems). Sequencing reactions were made with a Dye Primer Taq sequencing kit (Applied Biosystems) using the standard -21M13 primer.

Computer programs

The nucleotide sequence data were analyzed with GENETYX programs (Software Development Japan). Protein sequence similarity searching of databases was performed with FASTA (Pearson and Lipman 1988). Amino acid sequence similarity scores were calculated with GENETYX programs.

Nucleotide sequence accession number

The nucleotide sequence reported in this paper has been deposited in the GSDB/DDBJ/EMBL/NCBI nucleotide sequence data bases under accession number D38561).

Materials and methods

Bacterial strains, cloning vectors, and growth media

S. wedmorensis 144-91, a strain producing high levels of fosfomycin, and its mutant derivative NP-7, defective in the step 2 reaction of the fosfomycin biosynthetic pathway, were obtained from Meiji Seika Kaisha Ltd. S. lividans strain 1326 and plasmids pIJ680, pIJ702, and pIJ922 (Hopwood et al. 1985) were provided by D. A. Hopwood, John Innes Centre, Norwich, U.K. The Escherichia coli plasmid host strains used were JM109 and HB101. The fosfomycin assay strain E. coli K12 HW8235 was obtained from Meiji Seika Kaisha Ltd.

Seed medium for liquid cultivation (GPY medium) and liquid production medium for fosfomycin have been described (Kuzuyama et al. 1992). R2YE agar plates (Hopwood et al. 1985) were used for protoplast regeneration. Thiostrepton was added at 5 μg/ml (liquid culture) or 10 μg/ml (solid culture) for vector selection in S. wedmorensis. E. coli was grown on LB plates or broth; ampicillin was added at 50 μg/ml as required.

Antibiotics

Fosfomycin was obtained from Meiji Seika Kaisha Ltd.; thiostrepton was a gift of Asahi Kasei Co. Ampicillin was purchased from Sigma Chemical Co.

Biotransformation

Biotransformation tests were done using the agar plug assay. Agar plugs of fosfomycin production medium containing 100 μg/ml of 2-aminoethylphosphonic acid (AEP; Sigma) or chemically synthesized HPP (Preis et al. 1955) were inoculated and incubated for 5 days at 27°C. The amount of fosfomycin produced was determined quantitatively using a bioassay against E. coli MB838.

Results

Isolation of fosfomycin non-producing mutants defective in step 3

In order to construct host strains for the cloning of the biosynthetic genes, we first isolated several fosfomycin

non-producing mutants by treating S. wedmorensis 144-91 with nitrosoguanidine, and checked their transformation efficiency using plasmid pIJ702. However, for unknown reasons, none of these mutants could be transformed. On the other hand, mutant NP-7 has proven to be a good host for gene cloning and was previously used for the cloning of a region containing the biosynthetic genes. This mutant is defective in step 2 and can convert the compound AEP, which is biologically equivalent to PnAA because it is easily transformed to PnAA by intracellular transaminase (Imai et al. 1985), to fosfomycin. Thus we treated protoplasts of strain NP-7 with NTG and screened for mutants which could not convert AEP to fosfomycin. Among 5000 colonies, one such mutant, NP-17, was isolated which could convert HPP, but not AEP, to fosfomycin (Table 1). Thus NP-17 was defective for both the step 3 and the step 2 reactions (original NP-7 mutation) and was easily transformed with pIJ702 or pIJ922.

DNA of S. wedmorensis was partially cleaved with BamHI (10–20 kb), ligated to BamHI-cleaved pIJ922 and introduced into mutant NP-7. Thiostrepton-resistant transformants were picked individually onto agar plugs of the production medium. After incubation at 27°C for 5 days, the plugs were transferred to agar plates containing E. coli K12 HW8235 to screen for fosfomycin production. Among 2000 transformants, two fosfomycin-producing clones were obtained. The restriction maps of these two recombinant plasmids, pFBG23 and pFBG24 are shown in Fig. 2a. They contain the same 21.0 kb BamHI fragment including the previously cloned region (Fig. 2, BamHI insert of pFBG21; Kuzuyama et al. 1993) which restored fosfomycin productivity to NP-7. Since both pFBG23 and pFBG24 could restore fosfomycin productivity to NP-17, it was concluded that the 21.0 kb BamHI fragment contained the gene for step 3 of fosfomycin biosynthesis.

Since we could not isolate a step 4 mutant of S. wedmorensis, S. lividans was used as the host for step 4 gene cloning. Plasmid pFBG23 was digested with BamHI and ligated to BglII- and phosphatase-treated pIJ702. The resulting plasmids were used to transform S. lividans. HPP had no detectable antimicrobial activity for S. lividans at concentrations of up to 500 μg/ml. Among 100 thiostrepton-resistant transformants, eight clones that could convert HPP to fosfomycin were identified. All of these transformants contained the same plasmid pFBG60 (Table 1, Fig. 2b).

Since pFBG60 also restored fosfomycin productivity to NP-17, subcloning experiments were done to clarify the localization of the step 3 and step 4 genes on pFBG60. Seven plasmids, pFBG51, 52, 53, 54, 55, 58, and 59 were constructed, as shown in Table 2 and Fig. 2b, and introduced into strain NP-17 or S. lividans. As shown in Table 2, only one plasmid, pFBG51, was able to restore productivity to NP-17.

Cloning of fosfomycin biosynthetic gene cluster

In order to isolate large DNA fragments containing the entire fosfomycin biosynthetic gene cluster, genomic

Table 1 Conversion of 2-aminoethylphosphonic acid (AEP) and 2-hydroxypropylphosphonic (HPP) acid to fosfomycin by blocked mutants

| Precursor (μg/ml) | Fosfomycin (μg/ml) produced by: |
| --- | --- |
|  | S. wedmorensis | S. lividans |
|  | NP-7 | NP-17 | pIJ702 | pFBG60 |
| None | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 |
| AEP 100 | 5.8 | 0 | 0 | 0 |
| HPP 100 | 8.4 | 2.2 | 0 | 1.5 |

Fig. 2 a Restriction fragments which restored productivity to mutant NP-7. Plasmids containing the fragments were used to transform mutant NP-7.
b Biosynthetic gene cluster of fosfomycin and subcloning of step 3 and step 4 genes. Open reading frames are indicated by thick arrows. Regions which encode enzymes catalyzing steps 1, 2, 3, and 4 were determined on the basis of the results in Table 2. Small arrows indicate the direction of transcription from the mel promoter of pIJ702 or from the aph promoter of pIJ680 with respect to the inserted fragments. Construction of each plasmid is described in Table 2

Table 2 Plasmids containing cloned fosfomycin biosynthetic genes

| Plasmid     | Vector            | Insert                | Host (blocked step) |
|-------------|-------------------|-----------------------|---------------------|
|             |                   |                       | E26                 | NP-7               | NP-17              | S. lividans         |
|             |                   |                       | (1)$^a$            | (2)                | (3)$^b$            | (4)$^c$            |
| pFBG21      | pIJ702/BglII      | 144-91/BamHI          | +                   | +                  | -                  | -                  |
| pFBG23      | pIJ922/BamHI      | 144-91/BamHI          | +                   | +                  | +                  | +                  |
| pFBG24      | pIJ922/BamHI      | 144-91/BamHI          | +                   | +                  | +                  | +                  |
| pFBG60      | pIJ702/BglII      | pFBG23/BamHI          | -                   | +                  | +                  | -                  |
| pFBG51      | pIJ680/PstI+BamHI | pFBG60/PstI+BamHI     | -                   | -                  | +                  | +                  |
| pFBG52      | pIJ702/BglII      | pFBG60/BclI           | -                   | -                  | -                  | -                  |
| pFBG53      | pIJ680/PstI+SacI  | pFBG60/PstI+SacI      | -                   | -                  | -                  | -                  |
| pFBG24      | pIJ702/BglII      | pFBG60/BglII+BclI     | -                   | -                  | -                  | -                  |
| pFBG55      | pIJ702/SacI       | pFBG60/SacI           | -                   | -                  | -                  | -                  |
| pFBG58      | pIJ702/SphI+BamHI | pFBG60/SphI+BamHI     | -                   | -                  | -                  | +                  |
| pFBG59      | pIJ702/SacI       | pFBG60/SacI           | -                   | -                  | -                  | -                  |

$^a$ S. hygroscopicus mutant defective in phosphoenolpyruvate (PEP) phosphomutase (Hidaka et al. 1989)

$^b$ Conversion of AEP to fosfomycin by NP-17 transformants was checked

$^c$ Conversion of HPP to fosfomycin by S. lividans transformants was checked

On the other hand, pFBG51 and pFBG58 conferred on S. lividans the ability to convert HPP to fosfomycin. This demonstrates that the step 4 enzyme (epoxidase) is encoded by a 1.3 kb SphI-BamHI fragment (pFBG58, Fig. 2b). Although pFBG58 lacked the mel promoter region of pIJ702, S. lividans cells harboring this plasmid could convert HPP to fosfomycin. Thus the step 4 gene may be expressed from another plasmid promoter or its own promoter may function in S. lividans.

Nucleotide sequence and structure of the fosfomycin biosynthetic gene cluster

A 12.1 kb BamHI region indicated in Fig. 2b was sub-cloned from pFBG23 and sequenced. Ten open reading frames (ORFs) were identified as shown in Fig. 2b. The initiation codons of the ten genes are preceded by putative Shine-Dalgano sequences.

Data from previous subcloning experiments (Kuzuyama et al. 1993) showed that ORF-1 encodes the step 1 gene (PEP phosphomutase gene, fom1). The molecular mass of the deduced protein was 48,300 Da. We previously reported the nucleotide sequence of the PEP phosphomutase gene of the bialaphos biosynthesis pathway of S. hygroscopicus (Hidaka et al. 1992b). A PEP phosphomutase gene was also cloned from Tetrahymena pyriformis, which produces 2-aminoethyl-phosphonic acid (Seidel et al. 1992). The deduced amino acid sequence of fom1 showed significant identity to both PEP phosphomutases (33.2% to that of S. hygroscopicus and 34.1% to that of T. pyriformis) and to carboxyphosphonoenolpyruvate phosphonomutase (26%, Hidaka et al. 1992c). The latter is another C-P bond forming enzyme, which catalyzes a reaction analogous to that of PEP phosphomutase in the bialaphos biosynthetic pathway (Fig. 3).

Considering our previous data (Kuzuyama et al. 1993), ORF-2 was deduced to be the step 2 gene of

FOM1 1 VLSEWGGKLVEIPYTPGISSTRLHSSVKEVGTTPNVRLSRLRLLDSKDIVRILEVHNGL
BA 1 MNATEQAANGDRGTTRSAGGRLRYLLHAPGACQLMGVHDGL
TH 1 MLANSLKSFFSSTRKTTQLKNMIQSKDLSFIMEAHNGL
CPEP 1 MAVTKARTFRELMNAPEILVVPSAYDAL
FOM1 61 TGLIIENSKVTVDNQAREFDGMWSSSLTDSLARGKPDEAVDVSSRLQMVNELFE-VTTK
BA 42 SA------RIAV----AEGFEALWASGLCMSTARGVARDSDEASWTELLTLVGTMDAVPGV
TH 39 SAAIVE---------ETGFKGIWGSGLSISAAMGVRDSNEASYTQVLEVCLEFMSDR-TK
CPEP 29 SAKVIQQ--AGF--PAVHMTG---SGTSASML-GLPDLGFTSVSEQAINLKNIVLTV-DV
FOM1 120 -PLVFDGDTG-GK-PEHFGFTVRSLERLGVSAVIVEDKEGLKRNSLFGTDVPQTQSSVED
BA 93 -PVLVDGDTGYGNFNTARRFAGRA-ERVGAAGVCFEDKVFPKMNSFFG--DGHQ LAPVAE
TH 90 IPILLDGDTGYGNYNNARRL-VKKLEQRSIAGVCLEDKIFPKRNSLLD-DGRQELAPINE
CPEP 81 -PVIMDADAGYGNA MSVWRA-TREFERVGIVGYHLEDQVNPKRCGHL---EGKRLISTEE
FOM1 177 FSERIRIGKRAQITDDFMVIARIESLILEKG MADAVHR AEAYVDAGADGIMIH SRQSDPA
BA 150 FCGKIRACKDAQRDPDFVVVARTEALISKLP MEEALDRAAAYEAEGADALFIHSRMNTPQ
TH 149 FVAKIKACKDTQQDADFQVVVARVEAFIAGWGLEEALKRAEAYRNAGADAILMH SKLKEPS
CPEP 138 MTGKIEAAVEAREDEDFTIIARTDA-RESFGLDEAIRRSREYVAAGADCIFLEAM---L
FOM1 237 EIFECRYFDKLPRRVPLVVVPTSYSSVRESELADAGVMVIYANHLMRA-VYPQVTKVV
BA 210 QIATF---MERWEGSTPVLIAPTTYHTPSVDDFAALGIAGCIWANHSMRA-AFAAMBDVC
TH 209 EIEAF---MKEWKNRSPVIIIVPTYHTVPDTFRKWGVNMVIWANHNMRACVSAMQETS
CPEP 193 DVEEMKVRVRDEIDAPLLANMVEGGKT PWLTTKELESIGYNLAIYPLSGWMAAASVLRKLF
FOM1 297 QSILQHGRAHEAESMLASIKDALSII PENAGX
BA 267 QRIRTD RGIYGIEDQVAPLKEIFGLFDYEGLEKDENCYTQAPDLAAVQG
TH 266 RIYEDESLVNVEPKVAKVKEVFRLQGEDELKQADKKYL
CPEP 253 TELREAGTTQKFWD DMGLKMSFAELFEVFEYSKI SELEARFVRDQD

Fig. 3 Homology between the amino acid sequences of three PEP phosphomutases and carboxyphosphonoenolpyruvate phosphonomutase. FOM1 PEP phosphomutase of Streptomyces wedmorensis, BA, PEP phosphomutase of S. hygroscopicus; TH, PEP phosphomutase of Tetrahymena pyriformis; CPEP, carboxyphosphonoenolpyruvate phosphonomutase of S. hygroscopicus. Conserved amino acids are indicated by asterisks. Numbers indicate the positions of the first amino acid in each line.

FOM3 61 GLGYIAAVLEKYGEVKILDVFAEGYYNAQPVDGDDQF---LRYGLSDDDIVKVMKEFGPDVVGISSIFS
RH 9 NYHSGGAEIAGNWPPSWPYLAGHLKKAGFDDIHFI DA---MTLVSHDELBKKFAELQIDLIGVTSITP
PME 56 SLVRNEGPDTDHAYTVSELPSLGTLVLVNYLEEHGHPADFVNSFSFEQDQLVKLLAD-NPASVAITTTFY

FOM3 128 NQADNVHHLLKLADLVTPEAVTAIGGAHARYFKACL-BDPNLDAAVFLGEGEMTFLWMHEHNGNVSDDE
RH 79 SIYE-AEETLKIAKEVVPNARVLGGVHATFMFRQVLSEAPWVDAIVRGEGE-EIMV---ELAKCVS---
PME 125 MMPAPVIEIIIRFIRRHNANVPPIIVGGPLVDNQCREG--RGDKLN-RFFDRVGADYYYW--ESQQEAALAA

FOM3 197 VHGIAWRDRDGKVQIKPELPLISSMRPEGPETGKSSPYLSMAGELDHIPFPAWHHYNMEKYFEIKAYQSP
RH 141 -EG-BW--PEDRASIK-------GLAFHDGTEIVATQAAPTVK-DIDSLK-PDWSLIDWKHYI----Y-IP
PME 190 VVGAI------VNGDAPTEVPNV-FLRSAATGEWRLTRKRPEANDLNAFSVR-W------NR-------FD-P

FOM3 267 YTVGSRVGQLYTSRGCTAHCTFCTTTHFWGQKLRRRSVQDVVDEVLRRLRDEYGIDEFHIQDDNITNDMDH
RH 194 --LGVRVAIPNMARGCPFTCSFCSQKWF-RDYRVRSPKAVVDEIEDLVNNYDVGFFILADEEPTINKKK
PME 241 TVLGPTLSTR-TARSCAFSCAFCDYPE-RAGALTADLSTVERELEEL-ADLGVKRAFIDDTFNVPMMR

FOM3 337 ARELFRAFKEV---GL-----PWA-TPQGTALWRMDEELLDLMAESGAYQVTFAIESGVQRVLKELIKKPLN
RH 261 FVEFCQEMIDR--GLNHKVKGINTRVTDIYR-DRDLLKFYREAGLVHISLGTEAAAQLKL-DLFNKETT
PME 308 FKDLCRMLVRRDFGI----EF-SYFRCGHAR-DPDVYDLMYDSGCRGVLLGIESGDDQVLLNMDKRA-T

FOM3 400 LERTSHLIKYARSLGMHVHGFFIIGMPPMCGNAGESIEE-MQASYDYAAEEAGFSSASFFAASPIVGSELL
RH 327 VAENKEAIRLLREADIFTEAQFIVGLDN---ETKETLEETFQMAWDW--QPDLANWSMYTPWPF--TPLF
PME 371 TAHYQNGIEQLKARGIFTHASFVVGFPGESPTVRNTIDFINSGPDTFAVNHWYMQSTPIHVRAPQFD

FOM3 469 RECIRQGFVDPEESLYRMTYKQGIINVPGWLWDGEEIAELAAKFNRDFNARRDRAYTPQKQ
RH 391 QE-LRDQVEVDFDSKY--NFVTPIMKPKALTRGELLDGVMKNYRB-FYMRKALFHYPWRG
PME 441 LT6NGH

Fig. 4 Homology between the amino acid sequences from FOM3, magnesium-protoporphyrin monomethylester oxidative cyclase (RH), and P-methylation enzyme (PME) of S. hygroscopicus, (Accession Number D37877) involved in bialaphos biosynthesis. Conserved amino acids are indicated by asterisks. Numbers indicate the positions of the first amino acid in each line.

fosfomycin biosynthesis (fom2). The predicted protein had a molecular mass of 39700 Da with no significant similarity to any other sequences in the Swiss-Prot database.

Since none of the plasmids pFBG52, 53, 54, 55, 58, and 59 could restore fosfomycin productivity to NP-17, it was suggested that ORF-3 (fom3) encoded the step 3 enzyme of fosfomycin biosynthesis. The molecular mass of the predicted protein was 60400 Da. A search of the Swiss-Prot protein sequence database indicated 24.8% amino acid identity between the deduced sequence of fom3 protein and magnesium-protoporphyrin monomethylester oxidative cyclase (Walker et al. 1988, Fig. 4).

From the subcloning experiments described above, the ORF-4 (fom4) product is concluded to be an enzyme of 21400 Da catalyzing epoxide formation (Fig. 1, step 4). The deduced protein showed approximately 23% identity to NADP-dependent alcohol dehydrogenase (Fig. 5; Peretz et al. 1989). Since epoxide formation proceeds formally by removal of two hydrogens, the similarity between alcohol dehydrogenase and the fom4 product seems reasonable.

In addition to ORFs-1 to -4, six ORFs (-A to -F) were found in the sequenced fragment. A database

ADH 1 MKGFAMLSIGKVGWIEKEKPAPGPFDAIVRPLAVAPCTSDIHTVFEGAIGERHN MILGHE
FOM4 1 MSNTKTASTGF
ADH 61 AVGEVVEVGSEVKDFKPGDRVVVPAITPDWRTSEVQRGYHQHSGGMLAGWKFSNVKDGVF
FOM4 12 AELLKDREQVKMDHAALASLLGETPETVAAWENG-EGGELTLTQLGRIAHVLGTSIGAL
ADH 121 GEFFHVNDADMNLAHLPKEIPLEAAVMIPDMMTTGFHGAELADI ELGATVAVLGIGPVGL

FOM4 71 TPPAGNDLDDGVIIQMPDERPILKGVRDNVDYYYYNCLVRTKRAPS LVPLVVDVLTDNPD
ADH 181 MAVAGAKLRGAGR II AVGSRPV---CVDAAKYYGATDIVNYKDGPIESQIMNLTEGKGVD

FOM4 131 DAKFNSGHAGNEFLFVLEGEIHMKWGDKENPKEALLPTGASMFE EHVPHAFTAAKGTGS
ADH 238 AAI IAGGNADIMATAVKIVKPGGTIANVNYFGEGEVLPVRLEWGCMAHKTIKGGLCPG

FOM4 191 AKLIAVNF
ADH 298 GRLRMERLIDLVFYKRVDPSKLVTHVFRGFDNIEKAFMLMKDKPKDLIKPVVILA

Fig. 5 Homology between the amino acid sequences of FOM4 and NADP-dependent alcohol dehydrogenase (ADH). Conserved amino acids are indicated by asterisks. Numbers indicate the positions of the first amino acid in each line

search revealed that the deduced products of ORF-C and ORF-F were similar to yeast alcohol dehydrogenase (28% identity) and a putative amino acid racemase (Popham and Setlow 1993; 24.8% identity), respectively (data not shown). ORFs-A, -B, -D, and -E showed no significant similarity to any other proteins in the database.

Discussion

In this study we have identified and mapped four genes responsible for fosfomycin biosynthesis in S. wedmorensis. For this purpose, we cloned an approximately 24 kb DNA fragment containing the previously cloned 5.9 kb region. Complementation analysis and subcloning experiments using blocked mutants of S. wedmorensis and S. lividans defined a 12.1 kb BamHI fragment, which harbors the genes for steps 1–4. However, S. lividans cells bearing the plasmid containing this region (pFBG23 or pFBG24) neither produced fosfomycin nor converted HPP to fosfomycin (data not shown). As described above, the step 4 gene cloned into pIJ702 could be expressed in S. lividans under the control of its own promoter. These results suggest that sufficient expression of the step 4 gene occurs only when it is cloned into high-copy-number plasmids such as pIJ702. On the other hand, S. lividans harboring pFBG60, which encodes both step 3 and step 4 genes on pIJ702, could not convert AEP or PnAA to fosfomycin, although it could transform HPP to fosfomycin. Thus the step 3 gene may not be expressed in S. lividans.

The nucleotide sequence of the 12.1 kb BamHI fragment revealed 10 ORFs: ORF-1 to -4 (fom1 to fom4) and ORF-A to -F. According to our previous results, fom1 and fom2 should code for PEP phosphomutase and the decarboxylation enzyme, respectively. These
two enzymes seem to be essential for the biosynthesis of all C–P compounds. The PEP phosphomutase gene of S. wedmorensis showed significant similarity to those of bialaphos-producing S. hygroscopicus and AEP-producing T. pyriformis, suggesting conservation of this enzyme in all organisms producing C–P compounds.

We recently succeeded in cloning the step 2 gene of bialaphos-producing S. hygroscopicus, which encodes the enzyme catalyzing decarboxylation of PnPy (PnPy decarboxylase; Nakashita et al. in preparation). Approximately 17% identity was observed between fom2 of S. wedmorensis and PnPy decarboxylase of S. hygroscopicus (data not shown; Accession Number D37809). This relatively low similarity suggests that the primary structures of PnPy decarboxylases may not be so highly conserved as those of PEP phosphomutases among organisms producing C–P compounds.

Previous experiments led us to propose that the direct methyl donor for methylation of PnAA to form HPP was methylcobalamine (Kuzuyama et al. 1992). A search of the Swiss-Prot protein sequence database indicated 24.8% amino acid identity between the deduced sequence of fom3 protein and magnesium-protoporphyrin monomethylester oxidative cyclase. This similarity probably reflects the structural similarity of protoporphyrin and methylcobalamine. In addition, the fom3 protein exhibited 19.0% identity to the P-methylation enzyme involved in bialaphos biosynthesis; the nucleotide sequence which was very recently determined (Fig. 4; Hidaka et al. 1995). We have proven that the methyl group of methylcobalamine is directly incorporated into the P-methyl group of bialaphos by this P-methylation enzyme (Kamigiri et al. 1992). Therefore, the similarity among those three proteins is reasonable.

Although we could not isolate blocked mutants defective in epoxide formation, we found that S. lividans harboring pFBG51 could convert HPP to fosfomycin. Thus it is assumed that the fom4 gene product is the enzyme (epoxidase) that catalyzes epoxide formation in fosfomycin. The well known mechanism of epoxide formation in natural compounds occurs via the addition of oxygen to the double bond. Surprisingly, the epoxide of fosfomycin is generated by the dehydrogenation of a secondary alcohol (Hammerschmidt et al. 1990; Hammerschmidt 1991). The only precedent for an analogous reaction is found in the biosynthesis of scopolamine, which is formed from 6β-hydroxyhyoscymine by epoxidation catalyzed by 6β-hydroxylase (Hashimoto and Yamada 1987; Hashimoto et al. 1991). Unlike the epoxidase involved in fosfomycin biosynthesis, this enzyme can catalyze the epoxidation in two different ways, i.e., by oxygen addition to the double bond and by dehydrogenation of a secondary alcohol. As expected from these different enzymatic properties, there was no similarity between the amino acid sequences of hyoscyamine 6-hydroxylase and the fom4 protein (Matsuda et al. 1991; Hashimoto et al. 1992).

The fom4 protein showed approximately 23% identity to NADP-dependent alcohol dehydrogenase. This may indicate that the reaction mechanism of the epoxidation (dehydrogenation) is somewhat similar to those of NADP-dependent alcohol dehydrogenases. Introduction of the step 4 gene into S. lividans resulted in the production of the enzyme catalyzing epoxide formation. The expression of this enzyme will facilitate detailed enzymatic studies of its unique reaction mechanism.

In this paper, we have defined the organization and function of the fosfomycin biosynthetic genes. In the sequenced fragments, four genes, fom1 to fom4, encoded all of the enzymes known to be involved in fosfomycin biosynthesis. Recently, we found that ORF-A and ORF-B confer high-level resistance to fosfomycin when cloned into E. coli (Hidaka et al., in preparation) suggesting that they may act as self-protecting genes. Although we could not determine the functions of ORFs-C to -F, gene disruption analysis should reveal any role they may have in fosfomycin biosynthesis.

Acknowledgements We thank Professor C. J. Thompson of Universität Basel for fruitful discussion and corrections to the English. This work was supported partly by a Grant-in-Aid for Scientific Research from the Ministry of Science and Culture, Japan (06660129 to T. H.).

---

### References

Hammerschmidt F (1991) Biosynthesis of natural products with a C–P bond. Part 8: On the origin of the oxirane oxygen atom of fosfomycin in Streptomyces fradiae. J Chem Soc Perkin Trans 1:1993–1996

Hammerschmidt F, Bovermann G, Bayer K (1990) Das Oxiran-Sauerstoff-Atom des fosfomycins entstammt nicht dem luft-sauerstoff. Liebigs Ann Chem 1055–1061

Hashimoto T, Yamada Y (1987) Purification and characterization of hyoscyamine 6β-hydroxylase from root cultures of Hyoscyamus niger L. Eur J Biochem 164:277–285

Hashimoto T, Yamada Y (1992) Biosynthesis of scopolamine and an application for genetic engineering of medical plant. Plant Tissue Culture and Gene Manipulation for Breeding and Formation of Phytochemicals, pp 255–259

Hashimoto T, Hayashi A, Amano Y, Kohno J, Iwanari H, Usuda S, Yamada Y (1991) Hyoscyamine 6β-hydroxylase, an enzyme involved in tropane alkaloid biosynthesis, is localized at the pericycle of the root. J Biol Chem 266:4648–4653

Hendlin D, Stapley EO, Jackson M, Wallick H, Miller AK, Wolf FJ, Miller TW, Chaiet L, Kahan FM, Foltz EL, Woodruff HB, Mata JM, Hernandez S, Mochales S (1969) Phosphonomycin, a new antibiotic produced by strains of Streptomyces. Science 166:122–123

Hidaka T, Mori M, Imai S, Hara O, Nagaoka K, Seto H (1989) Studies on the biosynthesis of bialaphos (SF-1293). 9. Biochemical mechanism of C–P bond formation in bialaphos: discovery of phosphoenolpyruvate phosphomutase which catalyzes the formation of phosphonopyruvate from phosphoenolpyruvate. J Antibiot 42:491–494

Hidaka T, Iwaskura H, Imai S, Seto H (1992a) Studies on the biosynthesis of fosfomycin. 3. Detection of phosphoenolpyruvate phosphomutase activity in a fosfomycin high-producing strain of Streptomyces wedmorensis and characterization of its blocked mutant NP-7. J Antibiot 45:1008–1010
Hidaka T, Hidaka M, Seto H (1992b) Studies on the biosynthesis of bialaphos (SF-1293). 14. Nucleotide sequence of phosphoenolpyruvate phosphomutase gene isolated from a bialaphos-producing organism, *Streptomyces hygroscopicus*, and its expression in *Streptomyces lividans*. J Antibiot 45:1977–1980

Hidaka T, Hidaka M, Uozumi T, Seto H (1992c) Nucleotide sequence of carboxyphosphonoenolpyruvate phosphomutase gene isolated from a bialaphos-producing organism, *Streptomyces hygroscopicus*, and its expression in *Streptomyces lividans*. Mol Gen Genet 233:476–478

Hidaka T, Hidaka M, Seto H (1995) Sequence of a P-methyltransferase-encoding gene isolated from a bialaphos-producing *Streptomyces hygroscopicus*. Gene, in press

Hopwood DA, Bibb MJ, Charter KF, Kieser T, Bruton CJ, Kieser HM, Lydiate DJ, Smith CP, Ward JM, Schrempf H (1985) Genetic manipulation of *Streptomyces*. A laboratory manual. The John Innes Foundation, Norwich, UK

Hori T, Horiguchi M, Hayashi A (1984) Biochemistry of natural C–P compounds. Japanese Association for Research on the Biosynthesis of C–P Compounds. Maruzen, Kyoto

Imai S, Seto H, Ogawa H, Satoh A, Otake N (1985) Studies on the biosynthesis of fosfomycin. Conversion of 2-hydroxyethylphosphonic acid and 2-aminoethylphosphonic acid to fosfomycin. Agric Biol Chem 49:873–874

Kamigiri K, Hidaka T, Imai S, Murakami K, Seto H (1992) Studies on the biosynthesis of bialaphos (SF-1293) 12. C–P bond formation mechanism of bialaphos: discovery of a P-methylation enzyme. J Antibiot 45:781–787

Katayama N, Thubotani S, Nozaki Y, Harada S, Ono H (1990) Fosfadecin and fosfocytocin, new nucleotide antibiotics produced by bacteria. J Antibiot 43:238–246

Kuzuyama T, Hidaka T, Kamigiri K, Imai S, Seto H (1992) Studies on the biosynthesis of fosfomycin. 4. The biosynthetic origin of the methyl group of fosfomycin. J Antibiot 45:1812–1814

Kuzuyama T, Hidaka T, Imai S, Seto H (1993) Studies on the biosynthesis of fosfomycin. 5. Cloning of genes for fosfomycin biosynthesis. J Antibiot 46:1478–1480

Matsuda J, Okabe S, Hashimoto T, Yamada Y (1991) Molecular cloning of hyoscyamine 6β-hydroxylase, a 2-oxoglutarate-dependent dioxygenase, from cultured roots of *Hyoscyamus niger*. J Biol Chem 266:9460–9464

Nakashita H, Shimazu A, Hidaka T, Seto H (1992) Purification and characterization of phosphoenolpyruvate phosphomutase from *Pseudomonas gladioli* B-1. J Bacteriol 174:6857–6861

Pearson WR, Lipman DJ (1988) Improved tools for biological sequence comparison. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 85:2444–2448

Peretz M, Burstein Y (1989) Amino acid sequence of alcohol dehydrogenase from the thermophilic bacterium *Thermoanaerobium brockii*. Biochemistry 28:6549–6555

Popham DL, Setlow P (1993) Cloning, nucleotide sequence, and regulation of the *Bacillus subtilis pbpE* operon, which codes for penicillin-binding protein and an apparent amino acid racemase. J Bacteriol 175:2917–2925

Preis S, Myers TC, Jense EV (1995) Phosphonic acids. III: Hydroxyl substituted propylphosphonic acids. J Am Chem Soc 77:6225–6227

Seidel HM, Freeman S, Seto H, Knowles JR (1988) Phosphonate biosynthesis: the isolation and characterization of phosphoenolpyruvate phosphomutase, the enzyme responsible for the formation of a carbon–phosphorus bond. Nature 335:457–458

Seidel HM, Pompliano DL, Knowles JR (1992) Phosphonate biosynthesis: molecular cloning of the gene for phosphoenolpyruvate mutase from *Tetrahymena pyriformis* and overexpression of the gene product in *Escherichia coli*. Biochemistry 31:2598–2608

Seto H, Hidaka T, Kuzuyama T, Shibahara S, Usui T, Sakanaka O, Imai S (1991) Studies on the biosynthesis of fosfomycin. 2: Conversion of 2-hydroxypropylphosphonic acid to fosfomycin by blocked mutants of *Streptomyces wedmorensis*. J Antibiot 44:1286–1288

Shoji J, Kato T, Hinoo H, Hattori T, Hirooka K, Matsumoto K, Tanimoto T, Kondo E (1986) Production of fosfomycin (phosphonomycin) by *Pseudomonas syringae*. J Antibiot 39:1011–1013

Thompson CJ, Ward JM, Hopwood DA (1982) Cloning of antibiotic resistance and nutritional genes in *Streptomyces*. J Bacteriol 151:668–677

Vieira J, Messing J (1987) Production of single-stranded plasmid DNA. Methods Enzymol 153:3–11

Walker CJ, Mansfield KE, Rezzano IN, Hanamoto CM, Smith KM, Castelfranco PA (1988) The magnesium-protoporphyrin IX (oxidative) cyclase system. Studies on the mechanism and specificity of the reaction sequence. Biochem J 255:685–692
