
JOURNAL OF BACTERIOLOGY, Aug. 1995, p. 4297–4302
0021-9193/95/$04.00+0
Copyright 1995, American Society for Microbiology

# Salmonella typhimurium *pgtB* Mutants Conferring Constitutive Expression of Phosphoglycerate Transporter *pgtP* Independent of *pgtC*

SIMIN NIU, SHU-QIN JIANG, AND JENSHIANG HONG*

Boston Biomedical Research Institute, Boston, Massachusetts 02114

Received 27 March 1995/Accepted 28 May 1995

PgtC is one of the three components of the atypical “two-component” *pgt* regulatory system. To investigate whether functional PgtC required for the induction of *pgtP* expression could be bypassed in the signal transduction process, we sought, and succeeded in isolating, intergenic suppressors arising in the low-copy mini-F plasmid, pSJ11, bearing the entire *pgt* system except for a 168-bp deletion near the end of the *pgtC* gene. By transport assays, these suppressors were found to confer constitutive *pgtP* expression. Intriguingly, all five mutations reside near the 5′ end of the *pgtB* gene, at codons 19 and 21. One mutation alters Arg-19 to Gln, two alter Ala-21 to Thr, one alters Ala-21 to Val, and one alters Ala-21 to Ile. Appropriate strains in which the *pgtP* promoter was fused to *lacZ* and which bore the *pgtB* mutations with and without mutations in *pgtC* and *pgtA* genes were constructed, and the epistatic relationships of the wild-type *pgtC* allele, a mutant *pgtA* allele, and an essentially total deletion of *pgtC* to the constitutive *pgtB* mutations were determined. In the mutant strains bearing the Ala-21→Ile and Ala-21→Val substitutions, the level of constitutive *pgtP-lacZ* reporter expression was not affected by the presence of the wild-type *pgtC* allele, nor was it affected by the total absence of PgtC in the case of the Ala-21→Val alteration examined; however, in the mutant strains bearing the Ala-21→Thr and the Arg-19→Gln substitutions, the extent of constitutive *pgtP-lacZ* reporter expression was markedly enhanced by the presence of wild-type *pgtC* allele and, in the case of the Arg-19→Gln change examined, by the total absence of PgtC as well. These results indicate that PgtC contains no domain necessary for the kinase activity; that PgtB can be activated in the absence of PgtC by mutational alterations of the protein itself; and that PgtB and PgtC interact in the signaling process, with PgtC functioning to activate and modulate the kinase activity of PgtB. In all strains, the replacement of the wild-type *pgtA* allele with a mutant *pgtA* allele completely abolished expression of the *pgtP-lacZ* reporter, indicating that functional *pgtA* is essential for the constitutivity. His-457 of PgtB, a potential site of autophosphorylation, is also required for the constitutivity because its change to Val drastically reduced *pgtP-lacZ* reporter expression. The structural basis for the activation of the altered PgtB is discussed in terms of a putative structure of PgtB in the membrane.

The *Salmonella typhimurium* phosphoglycerate transport system consists of four genes, *pgtABCP* (7, 30, 31). The *pgtP* gene encodes the transporter, and the *pgtABC* genes encode three regulatory proteins necessary for control of the expression of *pgtP* (14). The *pgt* system is probably a “two-component” regulatory system and is a member of the NtrC subfamily, since PgtA shares extensive sequence homology with response regulators such as NtrC, DctD, HydG, AdgA, and AlgB and PgtB shares homology with sensor kinases such as EnvZ, DctB, and PhoM (2, 4, 8, 21, 24). By analogy, it is reasonable to assume that PgtB functions as a sensor kinase and PgtA functions as a response regulator in the *pgt* signaling process.

Previous studies have indicated that PgtC is an integral part of the *pgt* signaling machinery, since it is required for the expression of *pgtP* (14). Recent findings have suggested that PgtB, in conjunction with PgtC, functions as a protein phosphatase and that PgtC possesses separate domains for the phosphatase and kinase activities (9). To better understand the role of PgtC in the signaling process, we undertook a study to determine whether PgtC could be bypassed in such a process by seeking intergenic suppressors that might arise in the absence of PgtC. This paper describes the isolation and characterization of such suppressors.

While the work described here was in progress, reexamination of our original sequencing data revealed a sequencing error consisting of an extraneous C residue at position 1640 of the sequence shown in Fig. 2 of the earlier paper (30). Deletion of that residue extended the *pgtB* reading frame toward the 5′ end by 75 codons, with the start of the gene at position 1191. The revised sequence contains two potential transmembrane segments at positions 20 to 37 and 338 to 357. The correctness of the revised *pgtB* coding region was confirmed by site-directed mutagenesis. The change of putative codons 7 and 13 to nonsense codons completely prevented *pgtP* expression in an in vivo coupled transcription-translation system (25), whereas a nonsense codon at position 271 gave a truncated product of the expected size (data not shown). The GenBank accession number for the revised *pgtB* sequence is M21279.

## MATERIALS AND METHODS

### Media and growth conditions
Strains were grown in YT or medium E (26) containing 1% glycerol. When required, amino acids were added to final concentrations of 30 to 50 μg/ml. Antibiotics were used at the following concentrations: ampicillin, 35 μg/ml; kanamycin, 50 μg/ml; tetracycline, 15 μg/ml; and chloramphenicol, 30 μg/ml.

### Strains
*Escherichia coli* XL1-Blue (*recA endA1 gyrA96 thi-1 hsdR17 supE44 relA1 lac/F′ proAB lacI<sup>q</sup> ZM15 zzf::Tn10*) (Stratagene, La Jolla, Calif.) was used for preparation of plasmid DNA, and *E. coli* BK9MDG (20) was used for the selection of mutants of pSJ11. *S. typhimurium* TH1017 bearing *lacZ* fused to the *pgtP* promoter but lacking the regulatory *pgtCBA* genes was used as the host strain into whose chromosome the plasmid-borne *pgt* system was integrated via homologous recombination; construction of this strain will be described elsewhere.

### DNA manipulations
Routine procedures for recombinant DNA manipulation

* Corresponding author. Mailing address: Boston Biomedical Research Institute, 20 Staniford St., Boston, MA 02114. Phone: (617) 742-2010 ext. 335. Fax: (617) 523-6649. Electronic mail address: HONG@BBRI.ERI.HARVARD.EDU.

4298 NIU ET AL.

J. BACTERIOL.

FIG. 1. Structure of plasmid pJH1096. The construction of this plasmid is described in Materials and Methods. Abbreviations: A, *pgtA*; B, *pgtB*; C, *pgtC*; Pp, the *pgtP* promoter region; *Z''*, the 1.8-kb 5' end of *lacZ* lacking the first 8 codons; amp, *bla* gene; ori, origin of replication; cam, chloramphenicol resistance. •, *PstI* site; ■, *MunI* site.

TABLE 1. 3-PG transport conferred by pSJ11 and the suppressor mutants derived from it

| Plasmid           | Uninduced | Induced |
|-------------------|-----------|---------|
| pJH66 (wild type) | 40        | 470     |
| pSJ11             | 40        | 50      |
| pSJ11R-15         | 480       | 360     |
| pSJ11R-21         | 450       | 340     |
| pSJ11R-22         | 380       | ND      |
| pSJ11R-24         | 470       | 300     |
| pSJ11R-25         | 470       | 250     |
| pSN66<sup>b</sup> | 340       | 380     |

<sup>a</sup> Transport assays were performed as described in Materials and Methods.  
ND, not determined.  
<sup>b</sup> Plasmid bears a wild-type *pgtC* allele.

can occur. In all transfers, at least three integrates were quantitatively assayed for expression of the *pgtP-lacZ* reporter by measurement of β-galactosidase activity.

3-PG transport assays. Strain BK9MDG harboring particular plasmids was grown at 37°C in minimal medium (medium E) (26) containing 0.5% succinate as a carbon source and supplemented with thiamine and the appropriate antibiotics. When growth reached exponential phase, cells were collected by centrifugation, washed twice with medium E, and suspended in medium E to an optical density at 660 nm of 3.0. When induction of the *pgt* transport system was required, 0.1% 3-phosphoglycerate (3-PG) was added to exponentially growing cells and the cells were harvested 2 h later. Transport assays were carried out as described by Jiang et al. (14) using \[^{14}C\]3-PG (2.3 mM; specific activity, 55 mCi/mM), a gift of H. Ron Kaback.

β-Galactosidase assays. Cells were grown in minimal medium (medium E) (26) containing 1% glycerol, biotin, histidine, and proline and 0.1% Casamino Acids (Difco) with or without 0.1% 3-PG. When growth reached exponential phase, cells were assayed for β-galactosidase activity as described by Miller (17).

RESULTS

Isolation of mutant plasmids capable of conferring ability to grow on 3-PG in the absence of PgtC. To seek mutants with mutations of the *pgt* signal transducing machinery that could be altered to function without PgtC, we transformed *E. coli* BK9MDG, which lacks the *pgt* transport system, with the mini-F plasmid pSJ11 harboring the complete *pgt* system except for a 168-bp *NsiI-BglII* deletion near the end of the *pgtC* gene (14). Because of the deletion, this plasmid is unable to confer on the *E. coli* cells the ability to transport phosphoglycerates and utilize them as a sole source of carbon and energy. By plating cells of BK9MDG carrying pSJ11 on minimal medium agar plates containing 0.5% 3-PG and 50 μg of chloramphenicol per ml and incubating them at 37°C for 48 h, we readily selected mutants capable of growth on 3-PG; these mutants rose spontaneously at a frequency of \(10^{-7}\). Plasmid DNA was prepared from several mutants, and all plasmids were shown to be capable of conferring on strain BK9MDG the ability to utilize 3-PG. Five independently isolated mutant plasmids were analyzed further. Table 1 shows the transport abilities conferred by these five mutants plasmids, pSJ1R-15, pSJ11R-21, pSJ11R-22, pSJ11R-24, and pSJ11R-25, as well as the parent of these mutant plasmids, pSJ11, and the wild-type plasmid harboring the complete *pgt* system, pJH66. In the absence of induction, each of the five mutant plasmids conferred a level of transport ability that was essentially identical to that conferred by wild-type plasmid pJH66 with induction. By contrast, very little transport ability was conferred by the wild-type plasmid without induction. With induction, each of the five mutant plasmids conferred a level of transport ability that was slightly lower than that observed without induction.

VOL. 177, 1995

CONSTITUTIVE *pgtB* MUTANTS 4299

**TABLE 2. Locations of mutations and resulting amino acid substitutions**$^{a}$

| Plasmid       | Nucleotide sequence from codon 19 to codon 21 | Corresponding amino acid sequence |
|---------------|---------------------------------------------|------------------------------------|
| pSJ11         | CGG GGC GCA                                 | Arg Gly Ala                        |
| pSJ11R-15     | CGG GGC ATA                                 | Arg Gly Ile                        |
| pSJ11R-21     | CGG GGC GTA                                 | Arg Gly Val                        |
| pSJ11R-22     | CAG GGC GCA                                 | Gln Gly Ala                        |
| pSJ11R-24     | CGG GGC ACA                                 | Arg Gly Thr                        |
| pSJ11R-25     | CGG GGC ACA                                 | Arg Gly Thr                        |

$a$ The mutational changes are underlined.

FIG. 2. Restriction maps of the inserts in plasmid pSJ11 (A) and pSN11 (B). The *pgt* genes are indicated by the arrowed bars. The restriction fragments exchanged between the wild type and the mutant are indicated by lines labeled $a$ (*ClaI-SnaBI*), $b$ (*ClaI-SacI*), and $c$ (*SalI-SalI*).

With or without induction, plasmid pSJ11, the parent of these mutants, conferred a very low level of transport ability.

Localization of the suppressor mutations by restriction fragment exchange. Since there was no evidence that the ability to utilize and transport 3-PG resulted from an increase in copy number of the mutant plasmids, which could potentially account for the constitutive phenotype (14), the mutations most probably reside in the *pgt* system itself. To localize the mutational sites to an approximate segment, restriction fragment exchanges were carried out between the parent, pSJ11, and mutant plasmids. Figure 2A shows the restriction map of the *pgt* insert in the parent, pSJ11. To obtain a sufficient amount of plasmid DNA for fragment exchanges, the 5.9-kb *BamHI-ClaI* fragments from pSJ11 and pSJ11R-21 were subcloned into pBR322 at the corresponding sites to construct the high-copy plasmids pSN11 and pSN11R-21, respectively. Figure 2B shows the restriction map of the insert of pSN11.

Three restriction fragments were exchanged between the parent plasmid, pSN11, and the mutant pSN11R-21. These were the 1.6-kb *SnaBI-ClaI* fragment (fragment $a$ in Fig. 2B), the 2.0-kb *SacI-ClaI* fragment (fragment $b$), and the 2.7-kb *SalI-SalI* fragment (fragment $c$). To reconstitute the complete *pgt* system and to retain the original deletion in the *pgtC* gene, the *ClaI-BamHI* hybrid regions of *pgt* DNA were excised from the high-copy plasmids and returned to the mini-F plasmid pSJ11. The six resulting reconstituted mini-F plasmids were examined for their ability to confer the ability to grow on 3-PG. Three plasmids were found to give a positive phenotype, and each contained a restriction segment located between *SalI* and *ClaI* that was derived from the mutant plasmid pSJ11R-21. It is therefore apparent that the mutation conferring growth and transport ability is located within the *SalI-ClaI* region. However, since the *SnaBI-ClaI* fragment is the shortest segment common among the three plasmids, we concluded that the mutations must be contained in this restriction segment.

Localization of mutational sites by sequencing. As it was unlikely that mutations within *pgtC* itself could restore activity to this partially deleted gene, we reasoned that the mutations in the suppressor plasmids most probably resided in the *pgtB* gene at a location upstream from the *SnaBI* site (Fig. 2). Accordingly, the 500-bp region immediately upstream from the *SnaBI* site was sequenced, and the results confirmed our reasoning. Table 2 shows the nucleotide changes found in the mutant plasmids in the region sequenced: in mutant pSJ11R-15, the change was GC→AT at positions 61 and 62 of the gene, converting GCA of codon 21 for Ala to ATA for Ile; in mutant pSJ11R-21, the change was C→T at position 62, converting GCA of codon 21 for Ala to GTA for Val; in the mutant pSJ11R-22, the change was G→A at position 56, converting CGG of codon 19 for Arg to CAG for Gln; and in the mutants pSJ11R-24 and pSJ11R-25, the alteration was G→A at position 61, converting GCA of codon 21 for Ala to ACA for Thr. No other base substitution except for those indicated above was observed to be present in these mutants in the region sequenced. Thus, it can be concluded that these nucleotide substitutions were most probably responsible for the constitutivity observed with the suppressor plasmids.

Generation of mutants by oligonucleotide-directed mutagenesis. To verify that the nucleotide changes in pSJ11R-15 were in fact responsible for the observed phenotype, we used the primer 5′-TTACGGGGGCATTTTTAAC to change GCA of codon 21 to ATA to construct plasmid pSN66. Unlike mutant pSJ11R-15, mutant pSN66 contained a wild-type *pgtC* allele. The data in Table 1 demonstrate that the GC-to-AT change in codon 21 is indeed responsible for the constitutive phenotype generated.

Effects of the constitutive mutations on the *pgtP-lacZ* transcriptional reporter at the chromosomal level. In order to assess the effect of the *pgtB* mutations on *pgtP* expression at the chromosomal level, we transferred the mutations into plasmid pJH1096 by appropriate restriction fragment substitutions and then integrated the resultant *pgt* system from the plasmids into the chromosome of strain TH1017 using the method of Yamada et al. (28). Strain TH1017 bearing *lacZY* fused to the *pgtP* promoter lacks the regulatory *pgtABC* genes and is therefore unable to activate the *pgtP-lacZ* reporter. Transfer of the altered *pgt* system from the plasmids bearing the constitutive *pgtB* mutations into TH1017 resulted in the constitutive expression of *pgtP-lacZ* reporter as determined by β-galactosidase assays, as shown in Table 3. In the absence of induction, the Ala-21→Ile and Ala-21→Val mutations in strains B1097 and B1098, respectively, each bearing the original mutant *pgtC* allele, caused the *pgtP-lacZ* reporter to be expressed at a level slightly higher than that observed with the induced wild type ($A^+B^+C^+$). This constitutive level of expression was slightly lower in the induced cells. In contrast, in the absence of induction, the Ala-21→Thr and Arg-19→Gln mutations in strains B1101 and B1099, respectively, each also bearing the original mutant *pgtC* allele, resulted in constitutive *pgtP-lacZ* reporter expression at a level about 20 to 30% that observed with the induced wild type. As for strains B1097 and B1098, this constitutive level of expression in B1101 and B1099 was also slightly lower in the induced cells. It is noteworthy that the significant difference observed between strains B1097 and

TABLE 3. Effects of constitutive $pgtB$ mutations on expression of the $pgtP-lacZ$ reporter at the chromosomal level and relationship of these effects with $pgtC$ and $pgtA$ mutations*

| $pgtB$ allele | Mutational alteration | $\beta$-Galactosidase activity in strains with alleles of: |
|---------------|-----------------------|----------------------------------------------------------|
|               |                       | $A^+C^-$ | $A^+C^+$ | $A^-C^+$ |
|               |                       | Without 3-PG | With 3-PG | Without 3-PG | With 3-PG | Without 3-PG | With 3-PG |
| Wild type     | None                  | 40         | 40       | 50         | 9,100      | 20         | 20        |
| B1097         | Ala-21→Ile            | 10,000     | 8,400    | 12,000     | 9,000      | 20         | 20        |
| B1098         | Ala-21→Val            | 13,000     | 9,000    | 8,300      | 7,500      | 20         | 20        |
| B1101         | Ala-21→Thr            | 2,000      | 1,400    | 7,800      | 7,300      | ND$^b$     | ND        |
| B1099         | Arg-19→Gln            | 3,000      | 2,000    | 8,300      | 6,700      | 20         | 20        |

*All $\beta$-galactosidase activities, in Miller units, were determined with cells grown in minimal glycerol medium with or without 0.1% 3-PG. Each value is the average of three determinations.

$^b$ND, not determined.

---

B1098 and strains B1101 and B1099 in the extent of the constitutivity as measured by $\beta$-galactosidase activity was not observed in the transport assays.

Effects of mutations in $pgtC$ and $pgtA$ on $pgtB$-conferred constitutivity. The constitutive mutant $pgtB[pgtB(\text{Con})]$ alleles were selected in the $pgtC$ mutant background. To determine whether the wild-type $pgtC$ allele exerted any effect on the extent of the constitutivity, the mutant $pgtC$ allele was replaced by the wild-type allele at the plasmid level and the $pgt$ system from the resultant plasmids was returned to the chromosome of TH1017. This replacing did not significantly affect the constitutive $pgtP-lacZ$ reporter expression in strains bearing the B1097 and B1098 mutations (Table 3), indicating that in these strains the activity of PgtC normally required for the induction of $pgtP$ expression is inconsequential to the constitutivity. In contrast, the presence of the $pgtC^+$ allele in mutant B1101 and mutant B1099 markedly enhanced the degree of constitutivity, by about 300% in B1101 and about 180% in B1099. These results indicate that PgtB and PgtC interact in the signaling process and suggest that the sensor kinase activity of PgtB is modulated by PgtC. As also shown in Table 3, replacing the wild-type $pgtA$ allele with a mutant allele bearing the stop codon TGA at codon 67 resulted in the nonexpression of the $pgtP-lacZ$ reporter in each of these strains, indicating that a functional $pgtA$ is absolutely required for $pgtB$ constitutivity.

Absence of effect of a large $pgtC$ deletion on $pgtB$-conferred constitutivity. Although the activity of PgtC required for the inducibility of $pgtP-lacZ$ reporter expression plays no role in the constitutivity conferred by the $pgtB(\text{Con})$ mutants bearing Ala-21→Val or Ala-21→Ile mutations and is stimulatory in the mutants bearing Ala-21→Thr or Arg-19→Gln mutations (Table 3), it was possible that PgtC played an unknown role in this constitutivity since in these mutants $pgtC$ was not totally deleted, only partially truncated. To examine this possibility, we constructed strain TH1377P in which a 1,098-bp stretch, from positions 37 to 1134, of $pgtC$ was deleted, leaving the gene with 93 bp. This essentially total deletion abolished the inducibility of $pgtP-lacZ$ reporter expression (Table 4). However, the presence of this deletion had very little effect on the constitutivity effected by the $pgtB(\text{Con})$ mutation leading to an Ala-21→Val alteration in strain TH1378P. The level of constitutivity was essentially identical to that observed in the presence of the wild-type $pgtC$ allele (Table 3), even though it was lower than that seen in the presence of the partially truncated $pgtC$. A similar absence of an effect by the deletion was also observed for the constitutivity conferred by the $pgtB(\text{Con})$ mutation resulting in an Arg-19→Gln change in strain TH1379P. The level of constitutivity was virtually identical to that seen to occur in the presence of the wild-type $pgtC$ allele (Table 3); however, it

---

TABLE 4. Absence of effect of a large $pgtC$ deletion on constitutivity effected in constitutive $pgtB$ mutants*

| Strain | Mutational alteration(s) | $\beta$-Galactosidase activity |
|--------|---------------------------|----------------------------------|
|        |                           | Without 3-PG | With 3-PG |
| TH1377P | $PgtC(\Delta 13-378)$     | 15          | 18        |
| TH1378P | $PgtC(\Delta 13-378)$, $PgtB(\text{Ala-21}\to\text{Val})$ | 7,900   | 7,400   |
| TH1379P | $PgtC(\Delta 13-378)$, $PgtB(\text{Arg-19}\to\text{Gln})$ | 8,100   | 7,500   |

*All $\beta$-galactosidase activities, in Miller units, were determined with cells grown in minimal glycerol medium with or without 0.1% 3-PG. Each value is the average of three determinations.

VOL. 177, 1995

TABLE 5. Requirement of His-457 of PgtB for constitutivity effected in constitutive *pgtB* mutants$^a$

| Strain | Mutational alteration(s) in PgtB | $\beta$-Galactosidase activity |
|--------|----------------------------------|-------------------------------|
|        |                                  | Without 3-PG | With 3-PG |
| TH1100 | None                             | 40          | 9,100     |
| TH1064 | His-457→Val                      | 170         | 300       |
| TH1373P| Ala-21→Val, His-457→Val          | 450         | 390       |
| TH1374P| Arg-19→Gln, His-457→Val          | 450         | 380       |

$^a$ All $\beta$-galactosidase activities, in Miller units, were determined with cells grown in minimal glycerol medium with or without 0.1% 3-PG. Each value is the average of three determinations.

such as NtrB and EnvZ (19, 29), is shown to be required for the constitutivity.

It is tempting to speculate on the structural basis of the activation of the altered PgtB based on a putative PgtB structure in the membrane. With two potential transmembrane segments, located at positions 20 to 38 and 338 to 357, PgtB is likely to assume a structure similar to that of EnvZ of *E. coli* (5), in which the hydrophilic N-terminal portion of the protein between the two transmembrane segments is periplasmically located and the C-terminal portion is cytoplasmically located. Studies of sensor kinases such as EnvZ, PhoM, PhoR, and VirA have suggested that the autophosphorylation and phosphotransfer functions of these sensor kinases reside in the C-terminal conserved domain, since their N-terminal nonconserved portions could be deleted without any effect on activity (1, 3, 6, 10, 11, 15, 16). This suggests that the input in signal transduction flows from the N terminus to the C terminus and that there must be interaction between these portions. Preliminary studies indicate that in PgtB, as in these sensor kinases, the autophosphorylation and phosphotransfer activities also reside in the C-terminal portion of the protein (9). On the basis of the putative structure of PgtB, the mutational sites, located adjacent to the putative transmembrane segment between positions 20 and 38, are on the cytoplasmic side of the membrane. One explanation for why the mutations cause autophosphorylation of PgtB is that these amino acid substitutions alter the conformation of the cytoplasmically located N-terminal polypeptide segment and thereby generate a “proper” interaction with the kinase domain in the C-terminal cytoplasmic portion of PgtB that is conducive to autophosphorylation. This activation can occur without PgtC and without the input from induction. With the unmutated N-terminal segment, however, such proper interaction with the C-terminal end of PgtB can presumably only be achieved with PgtC and with an input from induction. Alternatively, it is also possible that the transmembrane segment adjacent to the N terminus plays a pivotal role in transmission of the transmembrane signal and the changes introduced near the membrane-cytoplasm interface could affect the conformation of the protein in such a way that PgtB could be activated independently of PgtC.

Regardless of the structural basis for the activation in the mutated PgtB, the Ala-21→Val and Ala-21→Ile substitutions apparently generated a level of activation in the absence of a functional PgtC which cannot be further elevated by wild-type PgtC (Table 3) or, for the former substitution, by the total absence of PgtC (Table 4). In contrast, the Ala-21→Thr and Arg-19→Gln changes yielded an intermediate activation level without a functional PgtC which can still be further elevated by PgtC and, for the latter substitution, by the total absence of PgtC as well. This enhancement constitutes yet more evidence that PgtB and PgtC interact in the signaling process, with PgtC functioning primarily to activate and modulate the kinase activity of PgtB.

Like the *pgt* system, the glucose 6-phosphate transport system, *uhp*, also contains three regulatory components, with UhpB and UhpC as the sensor kinase and UhpA as the response regulator (12, 13, 27). Interestingly, UhpC shares a very high degree of similarity with UhpT, the transporter protein, and therefore most likely functions as a receptor in the signaling process. Island and Kadner have recently reported the isolation and characterization of mutants with insertion-generated constitutive *uhpB* and *uhpC* mutations (13). Epistatic studies showed that in all cases except one, a functional UhpC is necessary for the constitutivity effected by the *uhpB* insertion mutations (13). Although this property appears to differ from that for the constitutive *pgtB* mutations reported here, it is

DISCUSSION

In our framework for the signal transduction of the phosphoglycerate transport system, modeled in the context of the two-component regulatory systems, we envision PgtC as an integral part of the signaling machinery, playing a role in the activation of sensor kinase PgtB, in the protein phosphatase activity (9), and in the transfer of phosphate from phosphorylated PgtB to the response regulator PgtA. The present study has provided additional insights into the roles of PgtB and PgtC, as well as their relationship, in the signaling process.

The isolation of mutants capable of expressing the *pgtP* gene in the absence of functional *pgtC* shows that the PgtC activity normally required for the induction of *pgtP* expression can be bypassed in the signaling process. However, the mutational consequence is an altered signal transduction that is constitutively activated and essentially completely irresponsive to the presence of inducers in the media. This property suggests that PgtC contains no domain necessary for the kinase activity and that, in the normally inducible state, PgtC functions to activate and modulate the kinase activity of PgtB. The data in Table 4 support the contention that PgtC is not required for the constitutivity effected by the constitutive *pgtB* mutations.

The finding that the suppressor mutations are located in the *pgtB* gene suggests that sensor kinase PgtB can be functionally activated by mutational alterations of the protein itself. According to the currently held view of the activation mechanism of sensor kinases, autophosphorylation (2, 4, 21, 24), it seems most plausible that these mutational alterations caused conformational changes such that PgtB locks into an active conformation conducive to autophosphorylation independent of PgtC. Intriguingly, this locking into an active form appears to involve only a specific segment of PgtB, namely, the N-terminal segment, since all five independently isolated constitutive *pgtB* mutations are clustered within 9 bp between codon 19 and codon 21 of the gene. This clustering implies that this polypeptide region plays a pivotal role in the autophosphorylation of PgtB under normal induction conditions.

The data presented in Table 5 support the contention that autophosphorylation in the absence of induction is most probably the mechanism responsible for the constitutivity effected by the *pgtB*(Con) mutations, because His-457, a block H histidine serving as the site of phosphorylation in sensor kinases

important to point out that the *pgtB* mutations were selected to overcome the *pgtC* defect, whereas the *uhpB* insertions were not. Regardless, it is clear from these studies, as well as from those with the *pgt* system, that the *uhp* and *pgt* systems are unique two-component systems and the “third” regulatory components, UhpC and PgtC, play a vital role in signaling processes.

### ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We thank Ron Kaback for the generous gift of radioactive 3-PG. This work was supported in part by Public Health Service grant GM31836 from the National Institute of General Medical Sciences.

### REFERENCES

1. Aiba, H., T. Mizuno, and S. Mizushima. 1989. Evidence for the physiological importance of the phosphotransfer between the two regulatory components, EnvZ and OmpR, in *E. coli*. J. Biol. Chem. **264**:8563–8567.
2. Albright, L. M., E. Huala, and F. M. Ausubel. 1989. Prokaryotic signal transduction mediated by sensor and regulator protein pairs. Annu. Rev. Genet. **23**:311–336.
3. Amemura, M., K. Makino, H. Shinagawa, and A. Nakata. 1990. Cross talk to the phosphate regulon of *Escherichia coli* by PhoM protein: PhoM is a histidine protein kinase and catalyzes phosphorylation of PhoB and PhoM-open reading frame 2. J. Bacteriol. **172**:6300–6307.
4. Bourret, R. B., K. A. Borkovich, and M. I. Simon. 1991. Signal transduction pathways involving protein phosphorylation in prokaryotes. Annu. Rev. Biochem. **60**:401–441.
5. Forst, S., D. Comeau, S. Norioka, and M. Inouye. 1987. Localization and membrane topology of EnvZ, a protein involved in osmoregulation of OmpF and OmpC in *E. coli*. J. Biol. Chem. **262**:16433–16438.
6. Forst, S., J. Delgado, and M. Inouye. 1989. Phosphorylation of OmpR by the osmosensor EnvZ modulates expression of the *ompF* and *ompC* genes in *E. coli*. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA **86**:6052–6056.
7. Goldrick, D., G.-Q. Yu, S.-Q. Jiang, and J. Hong. 1988. Nucleotide sequence and transcription start point of the phosphoglycerate transporter gene of *Salmonella typhimurium*. J. Bacteriol. **170**:3421–3426.
8. Henikoff, S., J. C. Wallace, and J. P. Brown. 1990. Finding protein similarities with nucleotide sequence databases. Methods Enzymol. **183**:111–132.
9. Hong, J. Unpublished data.
10. Huang, T., P. Morel, B. Powell, and C. I. Kado. 1990. VirA, a coregulator of Ti-specified virulence genes, is phosphorylated in vitro. J. Bacteriol. **172**:1142–1144.
11. Igo, M. M., and T. J. Silhavy. 1988. EnvZ, a transmembrane environmental sensor in *E. coli* K-12, is phosphorylated in vitro. J. Bacteriol. **170**:5971–5973.
12. Island, M., B. Wei, and R. J. Kadner. 1992. Structure and function of the *uhp* genes for the sugar phosphate transport system in *E. coli* and *S. typhimurium*. J. Bacteriol. **174**:2754–2762.
13. Island, M. D., and R. J. Kadner. 1993. Interplay between the membrane-associated UhpB and UhpC regulatory proteins. J. Bacteriol. **175**:5028–5038.
14. Jiang, S.-Q., G.-Q. Yu, Z.-G. Li, and J. Hong. 1988. Genetic evidence for modulation of the activator by two regulatory proteins involved in the exogenous induction of phosphoglycerate transport in *S. typhimurium*. J. Bacteriol. **170**:4304–4308.
15. Jin, S., T. Roitsch, R. G. Ankenbauer, M. P. Gordon, and E. W. Nester. 1990. The VirA protein of *Agrobacterium tumefaciens* is autophosphorylated and is essential for *vir* gene regulation. J. Bacteriol. **172**:525–530.
16. Makino, K., H. Shinagawa, M. Amemura, M. Kawamoto, M. Yamada, and A. Nakata. 1989. Signal transduction in the phosphate regulon of *E. coli* involves phosphotransfer between PhoR and PhoB proteins. J. Mol. Biol. **210**:551–559.
17. Miller, J. 1972. Experiments in molecular genetics, p. 162–172. Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold Spring Harbor, N.Y.
18. Nakamaye, K. L., and F. Eckstein. 1986. Inhibition of restriction endonuclease NciI by phosphorothioate groups and its application to oligonucleotide-directed mutagenesis. Nucleic Acids Res. **14**:9679–9698.
19. Ninfa, A. J., and R. Bennett. 1991. Identification of the site of phosphorylation of the bacterial protein kinase/phosphatase NRII. J. Biol. Chem. **266**:6888–6893.
20. Nohno, T., T. Saito, and J. Hong. 1986. Cloning and complete nucleotide sequence of the *E. coli* glutamine permease operon (*glnHPQ*). Mol. Gen. Genet. **205**:260–269.
21. Parkinson, J. S., and E. C. Kofoid. 1992. Communication modules in bacterial signaling proteins. Annu. Rev. Genet. **26**:71–112.
22. Sambrook, J., E. F. Fritsch, and T. Maniatis. 1989. Molecular cloning: a laboratory manual, 2nd ed. Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold Spring Harbor, N.Y.
23. Sanger, F., S. Nicklen, and A. R. Coulson. 1977. DNA sequencing with chain-terminating inhibitors. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA **74**:5463–5467.
24. Stock, J. B., A. J. Ninfa, and A. M. Stock. 1989. Protein phosphorylation and regulation of adaptive responses in bacteria. Microbiol. Rev. **53**:450–490.
25. Tabor, S., and C. C. Richardson. 1985. A bacteriophage T7 RNA polymerase-promoter system for controlled exclusive expression of specific genes. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA **82**:1074–1078.
26. Vogel, H. J., and D. M. Bonner. 1965. Acetylornithinase of *Escherichia coli*: partial purification and some properties. J. Biol. Chem. **218**:97–102.
27. Weston, L. A., and R. J. Kadner. 1987. Identification of Uhp polypeptides and evidence for their role in exogenous induction of the sugar phosphate transport system of *E. coli*. J. Bacteriol. **169**:3546–3555.
28. Yamada, M., A. Hakura, T. Sofuni, and T. Nohmi. 1993. New method for gene disruption in *Salmonella typhimurium*: construction and characterization of an *ada*-deletion derivative of *Salmonella typhimurium* TA1535. J. Bacteriol. **175**:5539–5547.
29. Yang, Y., and M. Inouye. 1991. Intermolecular complementation between two defective mutant signal-transducing receptors of *E. coli*. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA **88**:11057–11061.
30. Yang, Y.-I., D. Goldrick, and J. Hong. 1988. Identification of the products and nucleotide sequences of two regulatory genes involved in the exogenous induction of phosphoglycerate transport in *Salmonella typhimurium*. J. Bacteriol. **170**:4299–4303.
31. Yu, G.-Q., and J. Hong. 1986. Identification and nucleotide sequence of the activator gene of the externally induced phosphoglycerate transport system of *S. typhimurium*. Gene **45**:51–57.
