
Eur. J. Biochem. 226, 1019–1027 (1994)
© FEBS 1994

# Identification and biosynthesis of $N^{1}, N^{9}$-bis(glutathionyl)aminopropylcadaverine (homotrypanothione) in *Trypanosoma cruzi*

Karl J. HUNTER, Sarah A. LE QUESNE and Alan H. FAIRLAMB

Parasite and Vector Biochemistry Unit, Department of Medical Parasitology, London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, England

(Received July 7/October 14, 1994) — EJB 94 1007/5

Radiolabelling studies using tritiated ornithine, arginine and lysine, together with the relevant amino acid decarboxylase enzyme assays, indicate that the epimastigote stage of *Trypanosoma cruzi* is unable to synthesise significant amounts of putrescine and cadaverine *de novo*, compared to the amounts of these diamines scavenged from the growth medium. Radiolabelled putrescine is readily incorporated into spermidine, spermine and the trypanosomatid-specific polyamine-glutathione conjugate trypanothione ($N^{1}, N^{8}$-bis(glutathionyl)spermidine). Likewise, radiolabelled cadaverine is incorporated into the analogous polyamines aminopropylcadaverine, bis(aminopropyl)cadaverine and another major unidentified component. Subsequent studies showed this major component to be a novel polyamine-thiol conjugate whose structure was confirmed by chemical synthesis to be $N^{1}, N^{9}$-bis(glutathionyl)aminopropylcadaverine (homotrypanothione). Kinetic analyses using recombinant *T. cruzi* trypanothione reductase demonstrated that homotrypanothione disulphide is readily reduced by this enzyme with kinetic parameters similar to trypanothione disulphide, suggesting that it is a physiological substrate *in vivo*. Thus the epimastigote form of *T. cruzi* differs significantly from the African trypanosomes and *Leishmania* in (a) being unable to synthesise significant amounts of diamines *de novo*, (b) converting significant amounts of putrescine and cadaverine to spermine and bis(aminopropyl)cadaverine, respectively and (c) the ability to synthesise homotrypanothione as well as trypanothione. The implications of these findings with respect to the prospective chemotherapy of Chagas’ disease are discussed.

The parasitic protozoan *Trypanosoma cruzi*, causative agent of Chagas’ disease, infects approximately 18 million people in Central and South America and is believed to be responsible for approximately 45000 deaths per year [1]. The principal target organs are cardiac muscle, smooth muscle of the digestive tract and the autonomic nerve ganglia, leading to heart failure or pathological enlargement of the oesophagus or colon (the ‘mega’ syndromes). The available chemotherapy with nifurtimox or benznidazole is poorly tolerated with a high incidence of side effects and is only effective in the early stages of the disease [2]. Although many thousands of experimental drugs have been tested against this parasite [3], none have proved sufficiently effective and inexpensive for general use.

The ornithine decarboxylase inhibitor DL-$\alpha$-difluoromethylornithine ($F_{2}$MeOrn, Eflornithine), has proved highly efficacious in the clinical treatment of West African trypanosomiasis [4] and in experimental models using the animal parasite *T. brucei* [5]. The immediate biochemical consequences of inhibition of ornithine decarboxylase include depletion of polyamines and trypanothione and accumulation of high levels of S-adenosyl-L-methionine and decarboxylated S-adenosyl-L-methionine [6], followed by cessation of growth [7] and other biochemical and morphological changes [8]. In contrast, $F_{2}$MeOrn does not reduce the infectivity of *T. cruzi* trypomastigotes *in vitro*, suggesting that invasion of mammalian cells is independent of the ornithine decarboxylase pathway in this non-dividing stage of the parasite life cycle [9]. However, further work by Kierszenbaum et al. [10, 11] has provided evidence that polyamines in *T. cruzi* trypomastigotes are synthesised to some extent via arginine decarboxylase, an enzyme found normally in bacteria and higher plants [12, 13]. Consistent with these data, a high concentration (50 mM) of the arginine decarboxylase inhibitor DL-$\alpha$-difluoromethylarginine ($F_{2}$MeArg) was reported to interfere with parasite infectivity and capacity to multiply as the intracellular amastigote form [10]. Subsequently, other workers have suggested that polyamines can be synthesised from arginine in the epimastigote stage of the life cycle as well, although in this case, some inhibition of epimastigote growth was reported with $F_{2}$MeOrn in addition to $F_{2}$MeArg [14]. Cadaverine and spermine, polyamines that are not synthesised by other trypanosomatids, have also been identified in epimastigotes grown in semi-defined media [14, 15].

---

Correspondence to A. H. Fairlamb, Department of Medical Parasitology, London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, Keppel St, London, WC1E 7HT, England

**Abbreviations.** $F_{2}$MeOrn, DL-$\alpha$-difluoromethylornithine; $F_{2}$MeArg, DL-$\alpha$-difluoromethylarginine; homotrypanothione, $N^{1}, N^{9}$-bis(glutathionyl)aminopropylcadaverine.

**Enzymes.** Ornithine decarboxylase (EC 4.1.1.17); arginine decarboxylase (EC 4.1.1.19), lysine decarboxylase (EC 4.1.1.18); trypanothione reductase (EC 1.6.4.8); arginase (EC 3.5.3.1); lipoamide dehydrogenase (EC 1.8.1.4).
These findings prompted us to make a detailed analysis of the biosynthetic pathway for polyamines and their subsequent conversion into $N^{1}, N^{8}$-bis(glutathionyl)spermidine (trypanothione), a unique metabolite to trypanosomatids which is attracting much attention as a chemotherapeutic target [16]. The epimastigote stage of *T. cruzi* was chosen because, unlike the amastigote form (an obligate intracellular parasite of mammalian cells) and the non-dividing trypomastigote form, it can be cultivated in cell-free medium containing low levels of polyamines and in quantities suitable for biochemical and enzymic analyses. We report here the discovery of a parallel polyamine biosynthetic pathway which uses cadaverine rather than putrescine as initial aminopropyl acceptor and the identification of a new analogue of trypanothione, $N^{1}, N^{9}$-bis(glutathionyl)aminopropylcadaverine (homotrypanothione) which does not appear to be present in African trypanosomes or *Leishmania*.

### MATERIALS AND METHODS

#### Cell culture
*T. cruzi* epimastigotes, line MHOM/BR/78/Silvio (clone X10/6), were seeded at a final concentration of $10^6$ cells $\cdot$ ml${}^{-1}$ and cultured at 28°C in the medium described by Gibson and Miles [17], designated RTH. This was produced as follows: to 500 ml RPMI 1640 (Life Technologies Ltd) was added 10 ml 1 M Hepes, 14 ml Trypticase (Becton Dickinson Microbiology Systems) at 0.175 g $\cdot$ ml${}^{-1}$, 60 ml heat-inactivated (30 min at 56°C) foetal calf serum (Life Technologies Ltd), 6 ml penicillin/streptomycin (5000 units $\cdot$ ml${}^{-1}$/5 mg $\cdot$ ml${}^{-1}$) (Life Technologies Ltd) and 4 ml haemin at 2.5 mg $\cdot$ ml${}^{-1}$. Cells were subcultured on reaching late-log phase (every 6 days). *Crithidia fasciculata* cells (clone HS6), seeded at $10^6$ cells $\cdot$ ml${}^{-1}$, were grown as previously described [18] but without shaking and subcultured every 2 days.

#### Metabolite analysis
Thiols were estimated by HPLC after derivatisation with monobromobimane as described previously [18], except that $2 \times 10^8$ cells were derivatised and filtered through 0.22-$\mu$m syringe filters (Supelco UK Ltd) before assay. For polyamine determination, suspensions containing $4 \times 10^8$ cells were centrifuged ($1800 \times g$, 10 min, 4°C) and washed twice by centrifugation in 0.9% (mass/vol.) NaCl. The cells were then lysed in 0.25 ml distilled water and the protein precipitated by the addition of 0.25 ml 20% (mass/vol.) trichloroacetic acid. 1,7-Diaminoheptane was added as an internal standard and the suspensions frozen awaiting analysis. The supernatants were extracted five times with water-saturated ethyl acetate and concentrated by lyophilisation. After redissolving in 10 mM HCl, the extracts were separated as detailed [19], but without the post-derivatisation clean-up procedure. HPLC peaks were assigned by comparison with authentic compounds used in the same experiment.

#### Radiolabelling experiments
*T. cruzi* or *C. fasciculata* cells were subcultured at $10^6 \cdot$ ml${}^{-1}$ into medium containing 37 kBq $\cdot$ ml${}^{-1}$ of either $[2,3-{^3}\mathrm{H}]$ornithine (1720.5 GBq $\cdot$ mmol${}^{-1}$, New England Nuclear), $[2,3,4,5-{^3}\mathrm{H}]$arginine (2254 GBq $\cdot$ mmol${}^{-1}$), L-$[4,5-{^3}\mathrm{H}]$lysine (3.18 TBq $\cdot$ mmol${}^{-1}$), $[1,4-{^3}\mathrm{H}]$putrescine (407 GBq $\cdot$ mmol${}^{-1}$, Amersham International plc) or $[1,5-{^3}\mathrm{H}]$cadaverine (666 GBq $\cdot$ mmol${}^{-1}$). F${}_2$MeOrn and F${}_2$MeArg were added as fivefold concentrated stock solutions in medium. Low arginine medium was prepared from a SelectAmine RPMI-1640 kit (Life Technologies Ltd) by omitting arginine in the preparation. These cultures were incubated for 6 days (*T. cruzi*) or 2 days (*C. fasciculata*), then analysed for polyamines as detailed above except that the HPLC separation method of Fairlamb et al. was used [5]. Fractions (1 min) were collected and the radioactivity determined in a LS 6000 LL scintillation counter (Beckman Instruments UK Ltd). The protein precipitates left after trichloroacetic acid treatment were washed once in water, heated in 0.4 ml 0.5 M KOH at 70°C for 2 h, made acid with 0.4 ml 0.5 M HCl and the radioactivity incorporation measured. Performic acid oxidation and acid hydrolysis were performed using published methods [20, 21].

#### Enzyme assays
For the glutathione and trypanothione reductase assays, approximately $6 \times 10^8$ cells were centrifuged at $1800 \times g$ for 10 min at 4°C and washed twice by centrifugation in 0.9% NaCl. The cells were resuspended in assay buffer (10 mM potassium phosphate pH 7.4, 1 mM EDTA) and freeze-thawed three times in liquid nitrogen to disrupt the cells. The debris was removed by centrifugation and the supernatant dialysed against assay buffer to remove low-molecular-mass thiols. Glutathione and trypanothione reductase activities and kinetic parameters with $N^{1}, N^{9}$-bis(glutathionyl)aminopropylcadaverine disulphide were determined as previously published [22, 23]. Protein content was determined by the Bradford assay using bovine serum albumin as standard [24].

#### Chemicals
Aminopropylcadaverine was kindly provided by Drs P. P. McCann and A. J. Bitonti of the Marion-Merrell-Dow Research Institute, Cincinnati, USA. Bis(aminopropyl)cadaverine was generously provided by Dr P. J. Rodrigues and Professor M. Israel (University of Tennessee College of Medicine, USA). Homotrypanothione disulphide was custom synthesised by Bachem Feinchemikalien AG (Switzerland). The disulphide (50 nmol) was reduced to the dithiol using 5 U recombinant *T. cruzi* trypanothione reductase [25] in 1 ml buffer (40 mM Hepps pH 8.0, 4 mM diethylenetriaminepentaacetic acid) containing 200 nmol NADPH. The absorbance at 340 nm was monitored until the reduction was complete, then the solution was derivatised using monobromobimane as detailed above. The sample was purified by extraction with ethyl acetate to remove excess reagent. $[1,5-{^3}\mathrm{H}]$Cadaverine was prepared from the diacetyl derivative (kindly provided by Dr M. H. Park, National Institutes of Health, USA) by the acid hydrolysis of 37 MBq of this derivative in a 20-fold excess of 6 M HCl at 115°C overnight. The remaining acid was removed by lyophilisation, the residue redissolved in water and purified by silica gel chromatography as described previously [26]. All other chemicals were of reagent grade and purchased from the Sigma Chemical Co.

#### Statistical analyses
Data points shown are arithmetical means ± standard error of mean (SEM). $K_{\mathrm{m}}$ and $k_{\mathrm{cat}}$ values (SEM < 10%) were
calculated by non-linear regression using the Enzfitter programme (Elsevier Biosoft, Cambridge, UK).

**RESULTS**

**Lack of *de novo* synthesis of putrescine in epimastigotes**

Preliminary unpublished experiments in our laboratory using *T. cruzi* X10/1 epimastigotes grown in 50 mM F₂MeOrn or F₂MeArg in a semi-defined medium [27, 28] showed that neither inhibitor had a marked effect on either cell division or intracellular polyamine levels (data not shown). Attempts to demonstrate ornithine and arginine decarboxylase activity in cell lysates also proved unsuccessful [<1 pmol · min⁻¹ · (mg protein)⁻¹], suggesting that *de novo* synthesis of putrescine was not a major pathway in epimastigotes. All our attempts to grow X10/1, X10/6 or Y strain epimastigotes in various polyamine-free media were also unsuccessful. However, slow growth of X10/1 cells was achieved in a catalase-based medium [27], which was subsequently found to contain cadaverine as a contaminant of the catalase component (0.78 nmol · mg⁻¹ protein). Cells were found to contain cadaverine [5.39 nmol · (10⁸ cells)⁻¹] and appeared to convert this to aminopropylcadaverine [1.77 nmol · (10⁸ cells)⁻¹] since this metabolite was not present in the medium. Based on this preliminary evidence for an unusual polyamine pathway in *T. cruzi*, we used X10/6 epimastigotes to determine polyamine interconversion and the formation of polyamine-glutathione conjugates, as this cloned cell line proved easier to cultivate than X10/1 in RTH medium containing low levels of polyamines.

To assess the biosynthesis of polyamines from amino acids in *T. cruzi* epimastigotes, X10/6 cells were grown in 37 kBq · ml⁻¹ [³H]ornithine or [³H]arginine for 6 days. The amounts of these amino acids taken into the cells were 2.3% (15.9 nmol · ml⁻¹) of the ornithine in the medium and 8.3% (23.9 nmol · ml⁻¹) of the arginine in the medium. In the case of arginine, the vast majority (90%) of the label taken up was incorporated into protein. Fig. 1 shows the chromatograms of the acid-soluble extracts of the cell. No conversion of either ornithine (Fig. 1A) or arginine (Fig. 1B) to polyamines was detected, even when cells were labelled with [³H]arginine in arginine-deficient medium (data not shown). The minor peak at 42 min (Fig. 1B) elutes between the retention times of putrescine and agmatine and is therefore not a polyamine metabolite. Growth of cells in RTH medium containing 50 mM F₂MeOrn or 50 mM F₂MeArg over 6 days was inhibited by 34% and 53%, respectively, in agreement with SchWARCZ de Tarlovsky et al. [14]. However, this effect is unlikely to be due to a depletion of polyamines through inhibition of decarboxylase activity as these cells are able to take up sufficient putrescine (see below). Moreover, treatment with F₂MeOrn did not change the pattern of ornithine metabolism, although F₂MeArg-treated cells showed a lower intracellular ornithine/arginine ratio than in the control culture (0.62 versus 2.41, respectively; data not shown). Control experiments showed that the large ornithine peak in arginine-labelled cells is due to the breakdown of [³H]arginine by arginase in the medium. We were unable to detect arginase activity in *T. cruzi*, in agreement with previous reports [29].

As cadaverine had been detected in preliminary experiments, X10/6 epimastigotes were grown in [³H]lysine. Of the label in the medium, 3% (5.61 nmol · ml⁻¹) was taken into the cells of which 84% was incorporated into protein. No labelled cadaverine could be detected (Fig. 1C) suggesting

Fig. 1. HPLC radiochromatograms of *T. cruzi* cells labelled with tritiated ornithine or arginine. Extracts were prepared as detailed in Materials and Methods. Percentages represent the amount of the label in each fraction compared to the total recovered from the column. Mean recovery of the label from the column was 95%. (A) [³H]Ornithine-labelled cells, (B) [³H]arginine-labelled cells, (C) [³H]lysine-labelled cells. Arrows show the positions of the amine standards. ORN = ornithine, ARG = arginine, LYS = lysine, PUT = putrescine, CAD = cadaverine, AGM = agmatine, SPD = spermidine, APC = aminopropylcadaverine, SPN = spermine, b(AP)C = bis(aminopropyl)cadaverine. A and B are unknown lysine metabolites.

the absence of lysine decarboxylase activity in cell extracts. Peak A (16%) eluted close to the retention time of aminopropylcadaverine and peak B (9%) to bis(aminopropyl)cadaverine; however, peak A is unstable to acid hydrolysis and is converted to peak B. Therefore, in conjunction with radiolabelling studies with cadaverine given below, this suggests that A or B are unknown lysine metabolites rather than polyamines.

Fig. 2. HPLC radiochromatograms of *T. cruzi* and *C. fasciculata* cells labelled with tritiated putrescine or cadaverine. Extracts were prepared as detailed in Materials and Methods. Percentages represent the amount of the label in each fraction compared to the total recovered from the column. Mean recovery of the label from the column was 74%. (A) \[^3H\]Putrescine-labelled *T. cruzi* cells, (B) \[^3H\]putrescine-labelled *T. cruzi* cells after performic acid oxidation, (C) \[^3H\]putrescine-labelled *T. cruzi* cells after acid hydrolysis, (D) \[^3H\]putrescine-labelled *C. fasciculata* cells, (E) \[^3H\]cadaverine-labelled *T. cruzi* cells, (F) \[^3H\]cadaverine-labelled *T. cruzi* cells after performic acid oxidation, (G) \[^3H\]cadaverine-labelled *T. cruzi* cells after acid hydrolysis, (H) \[^3H\]cadaverine-labelled *C. fasciculata* cells. PUT = putrescine, CAD = cadaverine, SPD = spermidine, APC = aminopropylcadaverine, SPN = spermine, GspdSH = glutathionylspermidine, (GspdS)\(_2\) = glutathionylspermidine disulphide, T(SH)\(_2\) = dihydrotrypanothione, T(S)\(_2\) = trypanothione disulphide, U5 = homotrypanothione disulphide, U7 = bis(aminopropyl)cadaverine. U5* are formed following performic acid oxidation of authentic homotrypanothione disulphide. The chemical identities of U4, U6 and U8 are not known. Chromatograms D and H (*C. fasciculata*) were run at a different time, using a different HPLC column, to the other chromatograms. See text for further details.

Uptake and metabolism of radiolabelled diamines

Since *T. cruzi* epimastigotes do not make the diamines putrescine and cadaverine *de novo*, X10/6 cells were cultured for 6 days in the presence of \[^3H\]putrescine and \[^3H\]cadaverine to determine the fate of each compound. These experiments showed that 75% of the putrescine in the medium (0.579 nmol · ml^−1^) was taken up by *T. cruzi*. Following HPLC separation, only 7% of the radioactivity taken up was recovered as putrescine. The majority was incorporated into spermidine (14%), spermine (37%) dihydrotropyanthione (<1%), trypanothione disulphide (9%) and four unidentified peaks, U1 (1%), U2 (4%), U3 (13%) and U4 (9%) (Fig. 2A). Performic acid oxidation and acid hydrolysis confirmed the sulphur and polyamine content of these compounds. Following performic acid oxidation, the radioactivity associated with dihydrotropyanthione, trypanothione disulphide and compounds U1–3 (27% of the total recovered) disappeared, with a corresponding formation of a number of radioactive peaks with retention times of less than 30 min (28% of the total recovered, Fig. 2B). Following acid hydrolysis, there is an increase in the spermidine peak from 14% to 23% of the recovered label, which correlates with the loss of the radioactivity associated with dihydrotropyanthione and trypanothione disulphide (9%). There is also an increase in the spermine peak from 37% to 64% of recovered label, suggesting that some of the unknown compounds may be conjugates of spermine with other cellular components (Fig. 2C). Subsequently, U2 was found to coelute with the mixed disulphide of glutathione and glutathionylspermidine, prepared by mixing glutathione and glutathionylspermidine in a molar ratio of 1:3 at pH 7.4 (data not shown). Compound U4 is stable to both performic acid oxidation and acid hydrolysis and its chemical identity remains to be determined. As a control, similar labelling experiments were carried out in the non-pathogenic trypanosomatid *C. fasciculata*. In \[^3H\]putrescine, 41% of the label was taken up and, although incorporation into spermidine and glutathionyl-spermidine conjugates was observed, no spermine or unidentified peaks were formed (Fig. 2D). Performic acid oxidation and acid hydrolysis confirmed that putrescine was converted only into spermidine, glutathionylspermidine and trypanothione (data not shown) in agreement with previous findings [30].

With \[^3H\]cadaverine, 79% (0.834 nmol · ml^−1^) of the diamine in the medium was incorporated into *T. cruzi*. After separation by HPLC, only 6% of the radioactivity taken up was recovered as cadaverine. The majority was converted to aminopropylcadaverine (24%) and four major unidentified peaks, U5 (40%), U6 (11%), U7 (3%) and U8 (3%) (Fig. 2E). Following performic acid oxidation, the radioactivity associated with peaks U5 and U6 disappeared (51% of the total recovered) and was associated with the appearance of two major new peaks eluting at less than 20 min (peaks U5*, Fig. 2F). The sum of U5* (fractions 2–20) represents 51% of the radioactivity recovered, suggesting that U5 and U6 were converted to U5* products by performic acid oxidation, indicating that U5 and U6 are probably sulphur-containing metabolites. In contrast, the amount of radioactivity recovered as cadaverine and aminopropylcadaverine was essentially unchanged by this treatment (6% versus 6% for cadaverine and 24% versus 20% for aminopropylcadaverine, respectively). Following acid hydrolysis, peaks U5 and U6 disappeared (Fig. 2G). The radioactivity associated with U5 and U6 (51%) could be accounted for by the increase in aminopropylcadaverine from 24% to 77%, suggesting that

these metabolites contained aminopropylcadaverine. Compounds U7 and U8 were stable to both performic acid oxidation and acid hydrolysis. U7 was tentatively identified as bis-(aminopropyl)cadaverine based on the fact that it coeluted with an authentic standard; the identity of U8 remains to be determined. In *C. fasciculata*, only 2% of the exogenous cadaverine was taken up (Fig. 2H) of which little was converted to aminopropylcadaverine (8%). Further metabolism was not observed.

The above experiments suggest that cells grown in exogenous cadaverine contained aminopropylcadaverine conjugated to a thiol. To test this, cells were derivatised with the thiol-specific reagent monobromobimane and analysed by HPLC (Fig. 3). In the absence of exogenous putrescine, a significant amount of glutathione was detected [2.90 nmol · (10^8^ cells)^−1^], but glutathionylspermidine and trypanothione could not be detected (<0.06 nmol · (10^8^ cells)^−1^ and <0.08 nmol · (10^8^ cells)^−1^, respectively; Fig. 3A). Addition of 5 μM putrescine caused the appearance of the above-mentioned polyamine-glutathione conjugates (Fig. 3B). However, cells grown in 5 μM cadaverine contained peaks eluting just after the retention times of glutathionylspermidine and trypanothione (X and Y, Fig. 3C). The relationship of peak Y to trypanothione can be better observed when cells are grown in both putrescine and cadaverine (Fig. 3D). As these thiols appeared only in the presence of aminopropylcadaverine and showed chromatographic properties similar to the spermidine-based thiols, they were tentatively identified as glutathionylaminopropylcadaverine and *N*^1^,*N*^9^-bis(glutathionyl)aminopropylcadaverine ('homotrypanothione'), respectively.

Detection and enzymic parameters of homotrypanothione

Attempts were made to synthesise glutathionylaminopropylcadaverine enzymically using glutathionylspermidine synthetase and trypanothione synthetase from *C. fasciculata* [31]. Following incubation with a partially purified preparation (approximately 16-fold) containing both enzymes with aminopropylcadaverine in place of spermidine, the mixture was derivatised with monobromobimane and analysed by HPLC. Two minor peaks were identified which eluted close to the retention time of compound X (possibly representing the *N*^1^- and *N*^9^-isomers of glutathionylaminopropylcadaverine). However, no peak eluting with compound Y was detected, possibly due to the low concentration of the small amount of glutathionylaminopropylcadaverine formed (data not shown). As it proved impossible to grow enough *T. cruzi* to extract sufficient amounts of compounds X and Y, based on the preceding evidence, *N*^1^,*N*^9^-bis(glutathionyl)aminopropylcadaverine disulphide was custom synthesised by Bachem Feinchemikalien AG. When reduced by recombinant *T. cruzi* trypanothione reductase and derivatised with monobromobimane, this compound coeluted with the peak assigned to compound Y (data not shown). Using the derivatised compound, peak U5 in Fig. 2E was identified as homotrypanothione disulphide. Peaks labelled U5* in Fig. 2F were found to coelute with homotrypanothione disulphide treated with performic acid under identical conditions. Presumably, two peaks are found due to incomplete oxidation to the bis(sulphonate) form.

These results enabled us to produce quantitative results for the polyamine and thiol content of X10/6 cells grown under different conditions (Table 1). For the polyamines, the method of Kabra et al. [19] was used as this gave better

Fig. 3. HPLC chromatograms of *T. cruzi* cell extracts. Extracts were prepared as detailed in Materials and Methods and derivatised for thiol detection. (A) Cells grown in RTH medium, (B) cells grown in medium with 5 μM putrescine, (C) cells grown in medium with 5 μM cadaverine and (D) cells grown in medium with 5 μM putrescine and 5 μM cadaverine. GSH = glutathione, GspdSH = glutathionylspermidine T(SH)₂ = dihydrotrypanothione, X = glutathionylaminopropylcadaverine, Y = homotrypanothione, R = major reagent peaks.

resolution between spermidine/aminopropylcadaverine and spermine/U3 at the expense of the polyamine-glutathione conjugates. Thiols were assayed as previously described [18]. Cells grown in medium supplemented with putrescine contained only glutathionylspermidine and trypanothione, whereas cells grown in cadaverine contained only glutathionylaminopropylcadaverine and homotrypanothione. Cells grown in both diamines contained all four glutathionyl-polyamine conjugates. The apparent increase in the spermine concentration when cells were grown in the presence of cadaverine is probably due to the production of bis(aminopropyl)cadaverine which coelutes with spermine on both our HPLC systems. The growth rate of control cells was not stimulated by the addition of putrescine or cadaverine, indicating that the small amounts of polyamines in RTH medium (0.68 μM putrescine, 1.00 μM cadaverine, 1.09 μM spermidine and 0.48 μM spermine) are sufficient to sustain normal growth in vitro. However, it remains to be determined whether the increased formation of polyamine-glutathione conjugates when polyamines are abundant confers some beneficial phenotype, such as an increased ability to cope with oxidant or chemical stress *in vivo* [16]. Alternatively, formation of these polyamine-glutathione conjugates may serve either to regulate intracellular polyamine levels or to act as a store as proposed for *C. fasciculata* [18].

Despite large amounts of glutathione in *T. cruzi* epimastigotes relative to undetectable levels of trypanothione [< 0.08 nmol · (10⁸ cells)⁻¹], only trypanothione reductase could be detected in these cells [0.25 U · (mg protein)⁻¹]; glutathione reductase activity, if any, is < 0.01 U · (mg protein)⁻¹]. Using homogeneous recombinant *T. cruzi* trypanothione reductase, kinetic parameters for homotrypanothione disulphide were found to be similar to those of trypanothione disulphide (Table 2), i.e. a slightly higher *K*ₘ (53 μM versus 37 μM) and a slightly higher *k*ₐₜ (214 versus 200 min⁻¹). The value for *k*ₐₜ/*K*ₘ for homotrypanothione disulphide

Table 1. Polyamine and thiol content of *T. cruzi* epimastigotes. Cells were cultured in RTH medium supplemented with 5 μM cadaverine, 5 μM putrescine or 5 μM of both diamines for 6 days before analysis of metabolites as described in the text. Values for putrescine were corrected for coeluting reagent peak. Spermine coelutes with bis(aminopropyl)cadaverine. Values are given ± SEM of three experiments except (a) where values are for two experiments.

| Component                     | Amount with addition of diamine |
|-------------------------------|---------------------------------|
|                               | none                           | cadaverine                    | putrescine                   | both                          |
| nmol · (10<sup>8</sup> cells)<sup>1</sup> |
| Putrescine                    | 0.80 ± 0.14                    | 0.57 ± 0.06                   | 0.68 ± 0.04                  | 0.97 ± 0.18                   |
| Cadaverine                    | <0.05                          | <0.05                         | <0.05                        | 0.46 ± 0.24                   |
| Spermidine                    | 0.02 ± 0.01                    | 0.09 ± 0.02                   | 0.36 ± 0.26                  | 0.67 ± 0.41                   |
| Aminopropylcadaverine         | 0.09 ± 0.05                    | 0.86 ± 0.14                   | 0.12 ± 0.01                  | 0.86 ± 0.19                   |
| Spermine                      | 0.18 ± 0.02                    | 0.45 ± 0.11                   | 1.37 ± 0.55                  | 1.57 ± 0.49                   |
| Glutathione                   | 2.90 ± 0.86                    | 2.19 ± 0.20                   | 2.77 ± 1.00<sup>a</sup>       | 1.84 ± 1.10<sup>a</sup>        |
| Glutathionylspermidine        | <0.06                          | <0.06                         | 0.13 ± 0.03                  | 0.12 ± 0.06                   |
| Trypanothione                 | <0.08                          | <0.08                         | 0.42 ± 0.22                  | 0.44 ± 0.17                   |
| Glutathionylaminopropylcadaverine | <0.06                          | 0.07 ± 0.04                   | <0.06                        | 0.06 ± 0.04                   |
| Homotrypanothione             | <0.08                          | 0.76 ± 0.08                   | <0.08                        | 0.61 ± 0.1                     |

Table 2. Kinetic parameters of recombinant *T. cruzi* trypanothione reductase with homotrypanothione. Details are described in the text.

| Substrate               | $K_{\text{m}}$ | $k_{\text{cat}}$ | $k_{\text{cat}} \cdot K_{\text{m}}^{-1}$ |
|-------------------------|-----------------|------------------|------------------------------------------|
| $\mu$M                  | s<sup>-1</sup>  | $\mu$M<sup>-1</sup> · s<sup>-1</sup> |
| Trypanothione           | 37 ± 3.6        | 200 ± 6          | 5.5 ± 0.31                                |
| Homotrypanothione       | 53 ± 4.0        | 214 ± 5          | 4.1 ± 0.31                                |

As the amounts of spermidine and aminopropylcadaverine formed in the presence of exogenous putrescine and cadaverine were of a similar order, this suggests that the affinity of the *T. cruzi* spermidine synthase for each diamine is similar, in contrast to that observed in other organisms [34–36]. However, the possibility that the parasite contains pairs of homologous enzymes, able to catalyse each step in these parallel pathways, cannot be discounted at present.

The present work used the epimastigote form of *T. cruzi*, which is normally resident in the mid- and hind-gut of the triatomid insect vector. Analysis of the polyamine content of the excreta of a Chagas' disease vector, *Rhodnius prolixus*, showed it to contain 4.5 μM putrescine, 1.1 μM cadaverine, 0.9 μM spermidine and 0.5 μM spermine. It is likely that the cadaverine is produced by a genus of eubacteria, *Actinomyces*, which reside in the insect gut and are needed for the successful development of the insect larvae [37, 38]. Hence, from a physiological perspective, the parasite could have adapted to metabolise cadaverine as well as putrescine for the production of polyamines and polyamine-glutathione conjugates, unlike other trypanosomatids. Whether a similar pattern of metabolism occurs in the mammalian host remains to be determined. However, it is worth noting that the intracellular amastigote stage of *T. cruzi* resides in the cytoplasm of the host cell and thus is likely to have access to polyamines derived from the host and therefore might not require the amino acid decarboxylases for the synthesis of putrescine or cadaverine at any stage of its life cycle involving cell growth and division.

The kinetic properties of *T. cruzi* trypanothione reductase indicate that homotrypanothione is a physiological substrate of this enzyme; this compound is an important mediator in the cellular response to chemical oxidative stress by diamide and other agents [16, 39]. Using a cell volume of 5.5 μl · (10<sup>8</sup> cells)<sup>-1</sup> (our unpublished results), the intracellular concentration of glutathione is found to be 527 μM, whereas both glutathionylspermidine and trypanothione are < 14 μM. In the absence of glutathione reductase in *T. cruzi* in control cells, the question that arises is how the epimastigote can keep glutathione in the reduced form. The most likely explanation is that trypanothione reductase together with catalytic amounts of the polyamine-glutathione conjugates (< 14 μM) are sufficient to reduce glutathione disulphide via non-en-

DISCUSSION

The lack of detectable conversion of ornithine, arginine or lysine to polyamines by *T. cruzi* epimastigotes suggests that decarboxylation of amino acids plays a negligible role in the production of polyamines in this stage of the life cycle. Moreover, trace amounts of diamines and polyamines were readily scavenged from the medium on inducible, high-affinity transport systems (Le Quesne and Fairlamb, unpublished data). However, it has been shown that the invasion of trypanomastigotes and their subsequent division as amastigotes can be partially blocked by F<sub>2</sub>MeArg and that this inhibition can be reversed by exogenous agmatine, suggesting a role for arginine decarboxylase in polyamine biosynthesis in this life cycle stage [10]. However, in the epimastigote, our radio-labelling experiments suggest that this is quantitatively insignificant when compared to the amount of putrescine and cadaverine scavenged from the medium. The de novo biosynthesis of spermine from putrescine is noteworthy because it is not observed in other trypanosomatids such as *Trypanosoma brucei*, *Crithidia fasciculata* or *Leptomonas* spp. [32], or in *Leishmania donovani* [33].

The data presented here indicates that *T. cruzi* epimastigotes are equally capable of scavenging either putrescine or cadaverine and converting them via analogous pathways to trypanothione or homotrypanothione, respectively (Fig. 4).

PUTRESCINE
CADAVERINE

Ado-S-Me     dAdoMet
SPERMINE ← SPERMIDINE
dAdoMet
Ado-S-Me
AMINOPROPYL
CADAVERINE
BIS(AMINOPROPYL)
CADAVERINE

GSH
GLUTATHIONYL
SPERMIDINE
GLUTATHIONYL
AMINOPROPYLCADAVERINE

TRYPANOTHIONE
HOMOTRYPANOTHIONE

Fig. 4. Proposed scheme of polyamine and polyamine-glutathione conjugate metabolism in *T. cruzi* epimastigotes. Ado-S-Met = S-adenosyl-L-methionine, dAdo-S-Met = decarboxylated S-adenosyl-L-methionine, GSH = glutathione.

zymic thiol-disulphide exchange reactions. However, it is possible that the reduction of lipoic acid residues by lipoamide dehydrogenase could also have a rôle to play in the reduction of glutathione disulphide [40].

The results presented in this paper are important with respect to prospective chemotherapy. It appears that *T. cruzi* can utilise a putrescine analogue, cadaverine, as a source of functional polyamines and polyamine-glutathione conjugates, unlike its human host. Therefore, this apparent lack of specificity could be exploited in chemotherapy by producing compounds which could be metabolised by the less discerning enzymes of the parasite, but not recognised by the host. Inhibitors of amino acid decarboxylases have little effect on *T. cruzi*, due to the absence of these enzymes from the epimastigote and the ability of the parasite to take up diamines from the environment. Thus, based on the evidence of polyamine metabolism in epimastigotes, inhibition of the aminopropyltransferases and polyamine-glutathione synthetases in *T. cruzi* could be an important target for the chemotherapy of Chagas' disease.

The authors thank Drs Peter McCann and Alan Bitonti (Marion-Merrell-Dow, Cincinnati, USA) for the provision of aminopropylcadaverine, Dr Patrick Rodrigues and Professor Mervyn Israel (Cancer Pharmacology Laboratories at the University of Tennessee College of Medicine) for provision of bis(aminopropyl)cadaverine, Dr Myung Hee Park (National Institutes of Health) for the provision of \[^{1,5-3}H\]cadaverine and Mark Ariyanayagam and Mark Cunningham for excellent technical assistance. The authors also thank Drs Keith Smith and Cyrus Bacchi for helpful discussions. This work was funded by the Medical Research Council and the Wellcome Trust.

**REFERENCES**

1. Moncayo, A. (1993) Chagas disease, in *Tropical disease research: progress 1991–92*, pp. 67–76, WHO, Geneva.
2. Gutteridge, W. E. (1987) New anti-protozoal agents, *Int. J. Parasitol.* 17, 121–129.
3. de Castro, S. L. (1993) The challenge of Chagas’ disease chemotherapy: an update of drugs assayed against *Trypanosoma cruzi*, *Acta Trop.* 53, 183–198.
4. Schechter, P. J. & Sjoerdsma, A. (1986) Difluoromethylornithine in the treatment of African trypanosomiasis, *Parasitol. Today* 2, 223–224.
5. Fairlamb, A. H., Henderson, G. B., Bacchi, C. J. & Cerami, A. (1987) *In vivo* effects of difluoromethylornithine on trypanothione and polyamine levels in bloodstream forms of *Trypanosoma brucei*, *Mol. Biochem. Parasitol.* 24, 185–191.
6. Byers, T. L., Bush, T. L., McCann, P. P. & Bitonti, A. J. (1991) Antitrypanosomal effects of polyamine biosynthesis inhibitors correlate with increases in *Trypanosoma brucei* S-adenosyl-L-methionine, *Biochem. J.* 274, 527–533.
7. Bacchi, C. J., Nathan, H. C., Hutner, S. H., McCann, P. P. & Sjoerdsma, A. (1980) Polyamine metabolism: a potential therapeutic target in trypanosomes, *Science* 210, 322–334.
8. Bacchi, C. J., Garofalo, J., Mockenhaupt, D., McCann, P. P., Diekma, K. A., Pegg, A. E., Nathan, H. C., Mullaney, E. A., Chunsoff, L., Sjoerdsma, A. & Hutner, S. H. (1983) In vitro effects of DL-α-difluoromethylornithine on the metabolism and morphology of *Trypanosoma brucei brucei*, *Mol. Biochem. Parasitol.* 7, 209–225.
9. Kierszenbaum, F., Wirth, J. J., McCann, P. P. & Sjoerdsma, A. (1987) Impairment of macrophage function by inhibitors of ornithine decarboxylase activity, *Infect. Immun.* 55, 2461–2464.
10. Kierszenbaum, F., Wirth, J. J., McCann, P. P. & Sjoerdsma, A. (1987) Arginine decarboxylase inhibitors reduce the capacity of *Trypanosoma cruzi* to infect and multiply in mammalian host cells, *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* 84, 4278–4282.
11. Majumder, S., Wirth, J. J., Bitonti, A. J., McCann, P. P. & Kierszenbaum, F. (1992) Biochemical evidence for the presence of arginine decarboxylase activity in *Trypanosoma cruzi*, *J. Parasitol.* 78, 371–374.
12. Morris, D. R. & Pardee, A. B. (1966) Multiple pathways of putrescine biosynthesis in *Escherichia coli*, *J. Biol. Chem.* 241, 3129–3135.
13. Smith, T. A. (1970) The biosynthesis and metabolism of putrescine in higher plants, *Ann. NY Acad. Sci.* 171, 988–1001.

14. Schwarcz de Tarlovsky, M. N., Hernandez, S. M., Bedoya, A. M., Lammel, E. M. & Isola, E. L. D. (1993) Polyamines in *Trypanosoma cruzi*, Biochem. Mol. Biol. Int. 30, 547–558.
15. Algranati, I. D., Sánchez, C. & González, N. S. (1989) Polyamines in *Trypanosoma cruzi* and *Leishmania mexicana*, in The biology and chemistry of polyamines, pp. 137–146, Oxford University Press, Oxford.
16. Fairlamb, A. H. & Cerami, A. (1992) Metabolism and functions of trypanothione in the Kinetoplastida, Annu. Rev. Microbiol. 46, 695–729.
17. Gibson, W. C. & Miles, M. A. (1986) The karyotype and ploidy of *Trypanosoma cruzi*, EMBO J. 5, 1299–1305.
18. Shim, H. & Fairlamb, A. H. (1988) Levels of polyamines, glutathione and glutathione-spermidine conjugates during growth of the insect trypanosomatid *Crithidia fasciculata*, J. Gen. Microbiol. 134, 807–817.
19. Kabra, P. M., Lee, H. K., Lubich, W. P. & Marton, L. J. (1986) Solid-phase extraction and determination of dansyl derivatives of unconjugated and acetylated polyamines by reversed-phase liquid chromatography: improved separation systems for polyamines in cerebrospinal fluid, urine and tissue, J. Chromatogr. Biomed. Appl. 380, 19–32.
20. Hirs, C. H. W. (1967) Performic acid oxidation, Methods Enzymol. 11, 197–199.
21. Westhall, F. & Hesser, H. (1974) Fifteen-minute acid hydrolysis of peptides, Anal. Biochem. 61, 610–613.
22. Shames, S. L., Fairlamb, A. H., Cerami, A. & Walsh, C. T. (1986) Purification and characterization of trypanothione reductase from *Crithidia fasciculata*, a newly discovered member of the family of disulphide-containing flavoprotein reductases, Biochemistry 25, 3519–3526.
23. El-Waer, A., Douglas, K. T., Smith, K. & Fairlamb, A. H. (1991) Synthesis of *N*-benzyloxycarbonyl-L-cysteinylglycine 3-dimethylaminopropylamide: a cheap and convenient new assay for trypanothione reductase, Anal. Biochem. 198, 212–216.
24. Bradford, M. M. (1976) A rapid and sensitive method for the quantitation of microgram quantities of protein utilizing the principle of protein-dye binding, Anal. Biochem. 72, 248–254.
25. Zhang, Y., Bailey, S., Naismith, J. H., Bond, C. S., Habash, J., McLaughlin, P., Papiz, M. Z., Borges, A., Cunningham, M., Fairlamb, A. H. & Hunter, W. N. (1993) *Trypanosoma cruzi* trypanothione reductase. Crystallization, unit cell dimensions and structural solution, J. Med. Biol. 233, 1217–1220.
26. Grettie, D. P., Bartos, D., Bartos, F., Smith, R. G. & Campbell, R. A. (1978) Purification of radiolabelled polyamines and isolation of polyamines from serum by silica gel chromatography, Adv. Polyamine Res. 2, 13–21.
27. Avila, J. L., Bretaña, A., Casanova, M. A., Avila, A. & Rodríguez, F. (1983) *Trypanosoma cruzi*: defined medium for continuous cultivation of virulent parasites, Exp. Parasitol. 48, 27–35.
28. O’Daly, J. A. & Rodriguez, M. B. (1987) Protein and nucleotide contamination of bovine liver catalase used in culture medium explains growth of *Trypanosoma cruzi*, Trans. Roy. Soc. Trop. Med. Hyg. 81, 1–2.
29. Camargo, E. P., Coelho, J. A., Moraes, G. & Figueiredo, E. N. (1978) *Trypanosoma* spp., *Leishmania* spp. and *Leptomonas* spp.: Enzymes of ornithine-arginine metabolism, Exp. Parasitol. 46, 141–144.
30. Fairlamb, A. H., Henderson, G. B. & Cerami, A. (1986) The biosynthesis of trypanothione and *N*¹-glutathionylspermidine in *Crithidia fasciculata*, Mol. Biochem. Parasitol. 21, 247–257.
31. Smith, K., Nadeau, K., Walsh, C. T. & Fairlamb, A. H. (1992) Purification of glutathionylspermidine and trypanothione synthetases from *Crithidia fasciculata*, Protein Sci. 1, 874–883.
32. Bacchi, C. J., Lipschik, G. Y. & Nathan, H. C. (1977). Polyamines in trypanosomatids, J. Bacteriol. 131, 657–661.
33. Kaur, K., Emmett, K., McCann, P. P., Sjoerdsma, A. & Ullman, B. J. (1986) Effects of DL-α-difluoromethylornithine on *Leishmania donovani* promastigotes, J. Protozool. 33, 518–521.
34. Igarashi, K., Kashiwagi, K., Hamasaki, H., Miura, A., Kakegawa, T., Hirose, S. & Matsuzaki, S. (1986) Formation of a compensatory polyamine by *Escherichia coli* polyamine-requiring mutants during growth in the absence of polyamines, J. Bacteriol. 166, 128–134.
35. Hamana, K., Matsuzaki, S., Hosaka, K. & Yamashita, S. (1989) Interconversion of polyamines in wild-type strains and mutants of yeasts and the effects of polyamines on their growth, FEMS Microbiol. Lett. 52, 231–236.
36. Alhonon-Hongisto, L. & Jäne, J. (1980) Polyamine depletion induces enhanced synthesis and accumulation of cadaverine in cultures Ehrlich ascites carcinoma cells, Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 93, 1005–1013.
37. Hamana, K. & Matsuzaki, S. (1987) Distribution of polyamines in actinomycetes, FEMS Microbiol. Lett. 41, 211–215.
38. Brecher, G. & Wigglesworth, V. B. (1944) The transmission of *Actinomyces rhodnii Erkison* in *Rhodnius prolixus* stal (hemiptera) and its influence on the growth of the host, Parasitology 35, 220–224.
39. Kelly, J. M., Taylor, M. C., Smith, K., Hunter, K. J. & Fairlamb, A. H. (1993) Phenotype of recombinant *Leishmania donovani* and *Trypanosoma cruzi* which overexpress trypanothione reductase: sensitivity towards agents that are thought to induce oxidative stress, Eur. J. Biochem. 218, 29–37.
40. Lohrer, H. & Krauth-Siegel, R. L. (1990) Purification and characterization of lipoamide dehydrogenase from *Trypanosoma cruzi*, Eur. J. Biochem. 194, 863–869.
