
Cell, Vol. 78, 725–728, September 9, 1994, Copyright © 1994 by Cell Press

# Smart Machines at the DNA Replication Fork

**Bruce Stillman**  
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory  
Cold Spring Harbor, New York 11724

The protein apparatus that functions to replicate DNA has been likened to an efficient machine that rapidly and accurately duplicates genetic information for the next generation. Recent studies on both Escherichia coli and bacteriophage T4 not only reinforce this idea, but demonstrate that the replication machinery can monitor progress, cope with different molecular situations, and detect problems.

## The Prokaryote Fork

The proteins that replicate the E. coli and bacteriophage T4 genomes have been identified and characterized in detail (see Table 1; Kornberg and Baker, 1992). It is not surprising that for such a fundamental process as replication of DNA, the functions of the individual proteins have been conserved, even in eukaryotes (see below). It is a little surprising, however, that in many cases, but not all, there is no obvious similarity between the amino acid sequences in proteins of the same functional class (Kong et al., 1992; O'Donnell et al., 1993). For example, the E. coli single-stranded DNA-binding protein (SSB), the phage T4 gene 32-encoded protein (32 protein), and the human replication protein A (RPA) are functionally similar, yet sequence unrelated. The same is true for the β subunit of polymerase III (pol III) from E. coli, the 45 protein from T4, and the human proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA).

At the prokaryote DNA replication fork, a DNA helicase (DnaB or 41 protein) precedes the DNA synthetic machinery and unwinds the duplex parental DNA in cooperation with the SSB (see Figure 1A). Because of the complementary and antiparallel nature of the DNA double helix, DNA replication of the two strands occurs in a fundamentally different manner (see Figure 1A). On one strand, the leading strand, replication occurs continuously in a 5′ to 3′ direction, whereas on the other strand, the lagging strand, DNA replication occurs discontinuously by synthesis and joining of short Okazaki fragments. The leading-strand replication apparatus consists of a DNA polymerase (pol III core or 43 protein), a “sliding clamp” (β or 45 protein), and “brace” proteins (γ.δδ′χψ [the γ complex] or 44/62 proteins). All these proteins cooperate to replicate DNA in a rapid and processive manner, as discussed below. For example, the polymerase holoenzymes can easily synthesize greater than 50,000 nucleotides at more than 500 nt per second from a single primer without dissociating from the DNA template.

The brace proteins load the sliding clamp and the DNA polymerase onto the primer, either the initial primer at the origin of DNA replication during initiation of leading-strand synthesis or each RNA primer for Okazaki fragment synthesis (Capson et al., 1991; Munn and Alberts, 1991; Stukenberg et al., 1991; Gogol et al., 1992; Kong et al., 1992). The brace proteins form an ATP-dependent, structure-specific DNA-binding protein complex that recognizes the primer-template junction (Figure 1B). The sliding clamp is then loaded onto the DNA adjacent to the brace proteins, forming a ring that encircles the duplex DNA behind the primer-template junction. A dimer of the β protein forms a ring around the DNA, whereas a trimer of the 45 protein forms a ring that is likely to be structurally very similar to the β dimer. The 45 monomer is two-thirds the mass of the β monomer, indicating how proteins with different primary sequences, mass, and multimeric state can nevertheless adopt similar tertiary structures and perform similar functions. The clamp stimulates the ATPase activity of the brace proteins. When bound to the primer-template, the brace and clamp load the DNA polymerase onto the DNA. Addition of all four dNTPs allows efficient and processive DNA synthesis for many thousands of nucleotides without displacement of the proteins from the template.

Interestingly, the lagging strand is synthesized by the same apparatus. Because the DNA is synthesized in a discontinuous manner, there is a constant need for primers to initiate the short (~1000 nt long) Okazaki fragments. Thus, an additional protein, the DNA primase (DnaG or 61 protein), is needed to form short RNA primers that are then elongated by the polymerase, aided by its brace and clamp.

### Table 1. Functions of DNA Replication Fork Proteins

| E. coli | Phage T4 | SV40/Human | Functions |
|---------|----------|-------------|-----------|
| DnaB    | 41       | T antigen   | DNA helicase; stimulates priming on single-stranded DNA |
| DnaC    | 59       | T antigen   | Allows loading of helicase and primase on to SSB-coated DNA (primosome assembly) |
| SSB     | 32       | RPA         | Single-stranded DNA binding; stimulates DNA polymerase; facilitates helicase loading |
| γ Complex (γδ.δ′χψ) | 44/62 | RFC | DNA-dependent ATPase; primer-template binding; stimulates DNA polymerase |
| τ       | 43       | ?           | Dimerization of holoenzyme |
| β       | 45       | PCNA        | Stimulates DNA polymerase; stimulates DNA-dependent ATPase |
| Pol III core (αθε) | 43          | Pol δ<sup>a</sup> | DNA polymerase; 3′→5′ exonuclease |
| DnaG    | 61       | Primase     | Primase |
| Ligase  | T4 ligase | Ligase 1    | Ligation of DNA |
| DNA pol 1 | 43      | FEN-1 or MF-1 | Nuclease for removal of RNA primers |
| RNase H | RNase H  | RNase H1    | Nuclease for removal of RNA primers |

<sup>a</sup> DNA polymerase δ has been shown to function in SV40 DNA replication; an essential DNA polymerase, DNA polymerase ε, has not yet been assigned a specific function in DNA replication.

<sup>b</sup> The human DNA polymerase α and primase activities function as a multiprotein complex to synthesize RNA-DNA primers.

Cell
726

**Figure 1. Proposed Generic Model for the Prokaryote and Eukaryote DNA Replication Fork**

(A) As suggested by B. Alberts, a dimeric DNA polymerase coordinately replicates the two DNA strands.

(B) Primer recognition by the brace and sliding clamp proteins. The brace proteins (γ complex of E. coli, 44/62 proteins from T4 phage, and RFC from eukaryotes) bind to the primer-template junction in an ATP-dependent manner. The sliding clamp (β protein from E. coli, 45 protein from T4, and PCNA from eukaryotes) binds to the brace and DNA in a ring-like structure. The brace-clamp complex then attracts the DNA polymerase.

clamp (Stukenberg et al., 1991, 1994 [this issue of *Cell*]; Hacker and Alberts, 1994a, 1994b). Both leading- and lagging-strand DNA replication occur coordinately, facilitated by dimerization of the two polymerase complexes. The E. coli τ protein mediates pol III dimerization, whereas the 43 polymerase probably exists as a dimer. Another difference between these machines is that the E. coli pol III holoenzyme (αεθ.γδδ′χψ.τ.β) forms a stable protein complex without DNA, whereas the T4 holoenzyme (43.44/62.45) is assembled on the template.

A paradox arises when considering how these machines perform highly processive and continuous DNA synthesis on the leading strand yet, in another context, cycle on and off the lagging strand during discontinuous synthesis of Okazaki fragments. Recent studies of the phage and bacterial machines have suggested a solution to this paradox by demonstrating that the polymerase machines are smart enough to detect the different modes of DNA replication (Hacker and Alberts, 1994a, 1994b; Stukenberg et al., 1994). Both groups have suggested that the polymerase recognizes a key difference between leading- and lagging-strand DNA replication; the polymerase synthesizing a nascent Okazaki fragment will encounter the 5′ end of the previous Okazaki fragment, whereas the leading-strand polymerase is free of such roadblocks.

Stukenberg et al. (1994) have studied the fate of individual proteins when the polymerase machine runs into duplex DNA, taking advantage of the availability of large amounts of the pol III components and the ability to label individual protein components specifically. Design of these experiments was aided by knowledge of the three-dimensional structure of the β clamp. The surface of the clamp that interacts with the polymerase core was modified by addition of a protein kinase recognition site. By following the rate of phosphorylation of this site by excess protein kinase, association and dissociation of the clamp from the polymerase core were measured. This technique of site-specific protein “footprinting” is one that should become popular in studies of protein-protein interaction. When the polymerase core and brace proteins (γ complex) were traveling along the SSB-coated single-stranded DNA template (mimicked by removing one of the four dNTPs and tricking the polymerase into believing it is productively replicating DNA), both were firmly attached to the β clamp and the template. When, on the other hand, the holoenzyme was moving along the template DNA and encountered a DNA duplex (as in the case of a downstream Okazaki fragment), the β clamp dissociated from the other components and remained associated with the newly synthesized DNA (Figure 2A). Dissociation of the polymerase and brace from the template DNA allowed the polymerase

**Figure 2. Steps in the Replication of the Lagging Strand**

See text for details. Adapted from Stukenberg et al. (1994) (A) and from Waga and Stillman (1994) (B). Step 7 in (B) is hypothetical, based on E. coli and phage T4 studies.
to cycle onto a different primer-template, facilitated by another clamp and brace attached to the new primer. These studies demonstrated that the holoenzyme has the capacity to detect a different molecular environment and modify its activity, depending on the nature of the template DNA.

Parallel conclusions can be drawn from the studies of Hacker and Alberts (1994a, 1994b). Based on their thorough understanding of the phage T4 replication enzymes, they skillfully engineered hairpin duplexes into the DNA templates downstream of the primer that acted as reversible barriers to the DNA polymerase. In these studies, the kinetics of the dissociation of the T4 holoenzyme was measured under two conditions. When the polymerase was traversing a 32 protein-coated single-stranded DNA template (again mimicked by omitting one dNTP), the replicating polymerase had a half-life on the template of about 150 s, enough time to synthesize more than 75,000 nucleotides (Hacker and Alberts, 1994b). In contrast, when the holoenzyme encountered a duplex DNA hairpin in the path of the moving polymerase, the half-life of the bound polymerase was only 1 s (Hacker and Alberts, 1994a). Thus, the polymerase was smart enough to recognize the new environment and respond appropriately. One would presume that a doltish polymerase would bang headlong into a duplex brick wall in much the same way as a steam locomotive would be unable to recognize a deadend track.

The E. coli pol III holoenzyme replicated the single-stranded template DNA right up to the 5′ end of the downstream duplex DNA located in its path, thereby providing a substrate for the DNA ligase to join the newly synthesized strand to the DNA strand that blocked progression of the polymerase. Normally, during replication of the lagging-strand DNA template, an RNA primer is removed either by an RNase H activity or by the 5′ to 3′ exonuclease activity of E. coli DNA pol I. If the pol III holoenzyme can load onto an RNA primer and replicate the lagging-strand template all the way to the 5′ end of the previously synthesized Okazaki fragment, then only one DNA polymerase molecule might be necessary for lagging-strand DNA replication (Figure 2A). This raises the question of how removal of the RNA primer is coordinated with replication and the role, if any, for DNA pol I and its 5′ to 3′ exonuclease activity in lagging-strand DNA replication. In the case of phage T4, the phage-encoded RNase H removes the primer RNA, and one suspects that the phage-encoded polymerase is the only polymerase required to replicate T4 DNA. The polymerase dissociation mechanism also raises the question of what determines the length of an Okazaki fragment. One strong possibility consistent with these results is that the frequency of initiation on RNA primers that are laid down by primase is the major determinant of Okazaki fragment size (Zechner et al., 1992).

The phage and bacterial DNA polymerase holoenzymes are likely to recognize additional traffic or road blocks. For example, the T4 holoenzyme can pass a transcribing RNA polymerase without dissociating itself or the RNA polymerase from the template (Liu et al., 1993). In another context, the replication machinery might recognize damaged DNA (perhaps bound by damage recognition proteins) and stall

or dissociate from the template until the damage is corrected by the DNA repair apparatus. If dissociation occurs, one attractive possibility is that the clamp protein that remains associated with the replicated DNA might itself act as a signal for the repair machinery.

**The Eukaryote Fork: Similarities and Differences**

An understanding of the protein machinery that functions at the replication fork during duplication of cellular DNA in eukaryotes has not been forthcoming owing to the lack of a suitable biochemical system. Studies on the replication of simian virus 40 (SV40) DNA, however, have provided valuable insight into the eukaryotic replication machine and have revealed many functional similarities and a few differences with the prokaryote machines.

One caveat to relying on SV40 to provide insight into the cellular machinery is that the virus-encoded T antigen performs many functions required for replicating the virus genome. First, it is an initiator protein that functions to begin DNA replication at the SV40 origin; second, it is a DNA helicase that unwinds the DNA ahead of the polymerizing machinery; third, it acts as a primosome-loading protein (Stillman, 1994). Nevertheless, SV40 must rely heavily on the cellular DNA replication apparatus for replication of its own DNA, and biochemical studies over the last 10 years have led to the identification and characterization of these proteins (see Table 1).

In eukaryotes, three DNA polymerases (α, δ, and ε) have been identified with catalytic subunits having primary amino acid sequence similarity to each other and to the T4 phage 43 protein (Kornberg and Baker, 1992). Unlike its prokaryote cousins, the eukaryotic DNA primase forms a permanent complex with a DNA polymerase (α). Contrary to what was thought for many years, the role of the polymerase α–primase complex appears to be solely for the purpose of providing RNA–DNA primers for initiation of leading-strand synthesis and for initiation of each Okazaki fragment synthesis during lagging-strand replication (Figure 2B) (Nethanel et al., 1988; Tsurimoto et al., 1990; Waga and Stillman, 1994).

PCNA and replication factor C (RFC) are essential subunits of DNA polymerase δ and, under certain conditions, also stimulate the activity of DNA polymerase ε (Lee et al., 1991; Podust and Hubscher, 1993; Waga and Stillman, 1994). In almost all respects, PCNA and RFC function in a very similar way to the β or 45 sliding clamp proteins and the γ complex or 44/62 brace proteins, respectively (Figure 1B) (Tsurimoto et al., 1990; Lee et al., 1991). There is a clear role for both proteins in the replication of the leading and lagging strands during SV40 DNA synthesis in vitro. For SV40 DNA replication in vitro, DNA polymerase δ is responsible for replication of the leading strand and for completion of the lagging strand (see Figure 2B; Waga and Stillman, 1994). Herein lies a significant difference between the prokaryote and eukaryote DNA replication mechanisms (Figure 2). It appears that a dimer of one polymerase replicates both strands at the prokaryotic fork, including the entire Okazaki fragment. In contrast, for SV40 DNA replication, there is a DNA polymerase switch from α to δ during initiation at the replication origin and for synthesis of each Okazaki fragment. Thus, polymerase
δ seems to play a role like the pol III and 43 protein, and it may well be that polymerase δ also cycles between PCNA clamps on the lagging strand, triggered by duplex DNA downstream of the polymerase.

Maturation of the Okazaki fragment in eukaryotes requires a 5′ to 3′ exonuclease (FEN-1 or MF-1) and RNase H1 to remove the RNA from the 5′ end of the Okazaki fragments and DNA ligase I to covalently join the DNA (Turchi et al., 1994; Waga and Stillman, 1994). If PCNA remains at the junction between adjacent Okazaki fragments like the β clamp of E. coli, then it is possible that PCNA may facilitate the activity of one or more of these maturation proteins.

DNA polymerase ε is essential for the viability of the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae, but a biochemical role for this polymerase has not been demonstrated in SV40 DNA replication in vitro or for cellular DNA replication. It has been suggested that polymerase ε either functions at the cellular DNA replication fork or, alternatively, plays a role in replication-linked DNA repair pathways that are essential for cell viability. Further work is needed to resolve the function of this enzyme.

**Control of Fork Movement**

A mechanism that alters the stability of the DNA polymerase holoenzyme on the DNA template could be useful for coordinating DNA replication with other cellular processes. I have already suggested that the holoenzyme may encounter DNA damage or damage-binding proteins and temporarily arrest while DNA repair occurs. Recent studies have demonstrated direct control of the DNA replication function of PCNA by the DNA damage-inducible, p53-regulated, cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor p21 (Waga et al., 1994). Perhaps the p21 protein, by binding to PCNA directly, tricks the polymerase δ–RFC–PCNA holoenzyme into a state that causes rapid dissociation of the elongating polymerase, thereby arresting DNA replication. If PCNA remained bound to the template, it might facilitate DNA repair at that site. Consistent with this hypothesis, it has been shown that PCNA (and, I suspect, RFC) participates in nucleotide excision repair of ultraviolet-damaged DNA. Thus, the sliding clamp may be a key link between DNA replication and repair.

Regulators such as p21 might be one mechanism to couple DNA metabolism to cell cycle controls. I suspect, however, that we are only at the beginning of a real understanding of the intricacies of these machines and how they are regulated.

---

**References**

Capson, T. L., Benkovic, S. J., and Nossal, N. G. (1991). Cell 65, 249–258.

Gogol, E. P., Young, M. C., Kubasek, W. L., Jarvis, T. C., and von Hippel, P. H. (1992). J. Mol. Biol. 224, 395–412.

Hacker, K., and Alberts, B. (1994a). J. Biol. Chem. 269, in press.

Hacker, K., and Alberts, B. (1994b). J. Biol. Chem. 269, in press.

Kong, X.-P., Onrust, R., O'Donnell, M., and Kuriyan, J. (1992). Cell 69, 425–437.

Kornberg, A., and Baker, T. A. (1992). DNA Replication, Second Edition (New York: W. H. Freeman and Company).

Lee, S.-H., Kwong, A. D., Pan, Z.-Q., and Hurwitz, J. (1991). J. Biol. Chem. 266, 594–602.

Liu, B., Wong, M. L., Tinker, R. L., Geiduschek, E. P., and Alberts, B. M. (1993). Nature 366, 33–39.

Munn, M. M., and Alberts, B. M. (1991). J. Biol. Chem. 266, 20034–20044.

Nethanel, T., Reisfeld, S., Dinter-Gottlieb, G., and Kaufmann, G. (1988). J. Virol. 6, 2867–2873.

O'Donnell, M., Onrust, R., Dean, F. B., Chen, M., and Hurwitz, J. (1993). Nucl. Acids Res. 21, 1–3.

Podust, V. N., and Hubscher, U. (1993). Nucl. Acids Res. 21, 841–846.

Stillman, B. (1994). J. Biol. Chem. 269, 7047–7050.

Stukenberg, P. T., Studwell-Vaughan, P. S., and O'Donnell, M. (1991). J. Biol. Chem. 266, 11328–11334.

Stukenberg, P. T., Turner, J., and O'Donnell, M. (1994). Cell 78, this issue

Tsurimoto, T., Melendy, T., and Stillman, B. (1990). Nature 346, 534–539.

Turchi, J. J., Huang, L., Murante, R. S., Kim, Y., and Bambara, R. A. (1994). Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 91, 9803–9807

Waga, S., and Stillman, B. (1994). Nature 369, 207–212.

Waga, S., Hannon, G. J., Beach, D., and Stillman, B. (1994). Nature 369, 574–578

Zechner, E. L., Wu, C. A., and Marians, K. J. (1992). J. Biol. Chem. 267, 4045–4053.
