
Gene, 141 (1994) 141–142

© 1994 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved. 0378-1119/94/$07.00

GENE 07737

# Sequences of the oxytetracycline polyketide synthase-encoding *otc* genes from *Streptomyces rimosus*

(Antibiotic biosynthesis; β-ketoacyl synthase; acyl carrier protein; amino-acid similarity)

Eung-Soo Kim${}^{a}$, Maureen J. Bibb${}^{b}$, Michael J. Butler${}^{c,**}$, David A. Hopwood${}^{b}$ and David H. Sherman${}^{a}$

${}^{a}$Department of Microbiology and Bioprocess Technology Institute, University of Minnesota, St. Paul, MN 55108, USA; ${}^{b}$John Innes Institutue, John Innes Centre, Norwich NR4 7UH, UK; and ${}^{c}$Pfizer Limited, Ramsgate Road, Sandwich, Kent CT13 9NJ, UK

Received by C.R. Hutchinson: 27 September 1993; Revised/Accepted: 11 November/15 November 1993; Received at publishers: 29 November 1993

## SUMMARY

The complete nucleotide sequences of the *Streptomyces rimosus* oxytetracycline (*oxyTc*) polyketide synthase (PKS)-encoding genes (*otcY*) has been determined, revealing three open reading frames. The deduced amino-acid sequences correspond to the presumed heterodimeric β-ketoacyl synthase and acyl carrier protein found in other type-II (multi-component) PKS systems that specify construction of acetate-derived polyketide antibiotics.

Oxytetracycline (*OxyTc*) is a commercially valuable broad-spectrum antibiotic produced by *Streptomyces rimosus* (Hochstein et al., 1953). Based on its biosynthesis, *oxyTc* belongs to the polyketide antibiotics, a large family of natural products which includes actinorhodin (Fernandez-Moreno et al., 1992), granaticin (Sherman et al., 1989) and tetracenomycin (Bibb et al., 1989). The early steps of *oxyTc* biosynthesis involve repetitive condensation of simple 2-carbon units in a process that is conceptually analogous to the biosynthesis of long-chain fatty acids (Hopwood and Sherman, 1990). A unique aspect of the *oxyTc* pathway is the use of a presumed malonylCoA starter unit and eight malonylCoA extender units for construction of the polyketide carbon skeleton. Previously, it was shown that the *oxyTc* biosynthetic genes (*otc*), including two resistance genes are clustered in the chromosome (Butler et al., 1989). Biosynthetic genes specifying early steps in the pathway were cloned and used to complement several *S. rimosus* mutants blocked in antibiotic production. Here, we present the nt sequence of *oxyTc* polyketide synthase genes (*otcY*) which specify carbon chain assembly of this important molecule.

Two subclones were constructed for sequencing from the region (pPFZ140) which was used previously to complement an *oxyTc* early blocked mutant (Fig. 1). These plasmids, pPFZ510 and pPFZ508, have a 2.1-kb *SacI*-BglII and 1.4-kb *BglII* insert, respectively. Both strands of each clone were sequenced using a 7-deaza-dGTP deoxynucleotide sequencing kit (US Biochemical, Cleveland, OH, USA).

Analysis of the nt sequence using the Geneworks package (IntelliGenetics, Mountain View, CA, USA) revealed three orfs, *otcY-orf1*, -2 and -3 (Fig. 1A). Based on complementarity to the 3′-end of the 16S ribosomal RNA (Bibb and Cohen, 1982), each *orf* has a potential

Correspondence to: Dr. D.H. Sherman, Department of Microbiology and Biological Process Technology Institute, University of Minnesota, 240 Gortner Laboratory, 1479 Gortner Avenue, St. Paul, MN 55108, USA. Tel. (1-612) 625-1901; Fax (1-612) 625-1700; e-mail: david-s@molbio.cbs.umn.edu

*On request, the authors will supply detailed experimental evidence for the conclusions reached in this Brief Note.*

**Current address: Cangene Corporation, 3403 American Drive, Mississauga, Ontario L4V 1T4, Canada. Tel. (1-416) 673-0200.**

Abbreviations: aa, amino acid(s); ACP, acyl carrier protein; *act*, gene locus encoding enzymes for the production of actinorhodin; bp, base pair(s); CoA, coenzyme A; FAS, fatty acid synthase; *gra*, gene locus encoding enzymes for the production of granaticin; kb, kilobase(s) or 1000 bp; nt, nucleotide(s); *orf*, open reading frame; *otc*, gene locus encoding enzymes for the production of *oxyTc*; *otcY*, genes encoding the *oxyTc* PKS; *oxyTc*, oxytetracycline; PKS, polyketide synthase; RBS, ribosome-binding site(s); *S.*, *Streptomyces*; *tcm*, gene locus encoding enzymes for the production of tetracenomycin; *whiE*, gene locus encoding enzymes for production of the *S. coelicolor* spore pigment.

Fig. 1. (A) Restriction map of the pPFZ140 (*otcY* region) of *S. rimosus*. S, *SacI*; B, *BglII*; K, *KpnI*. FRAME plot (Bibb et al., 1984) of the 3506-bp *otcY* region using a window of 50 codons. The arrows above the plot indicate three protein coding regions (*otcY-orf1*, -2 and -3). (B) Alignment of the putative active site for the β-ketoacyl synthase of *otcY-orf1* and ACP of *otcY-orf3* with those of other type-II PKSs [actinorhodin (*act*) (Fernandez-Moreno et al., 1992), granaticin (*gra*) (Sherman et al., 1989), tetracenomycin (*tcm*) (Bibb et al., 1989), and the *whiE*-encoded spore pigment (Davis and Chater, 1990) PKS gene clusters]. This nt sequence will appear in the GenBank database under accession No. Z25538.

RBS centered approx. 7–10-nt upstream from the putative translational start codon. The deduced aa sequences of *otcY-orf1*, -2 and -3 share significant overall similarity to corresponding components of type-II PKSs, listed in Fig. 1B. *otcY-orf1*, *otcY-orf2* and *otcY-orf3* have particularly high deduced aa sequence identities with *actI-orf1* (60%), *actI-orf2* (55%) and *actI-orf3* (37%), respectively. *otcY-orf1* and *otcY-orf3* have been found to be capable of functionally replacing *actI-orf1* (E.-S.K., D.A.H. and D.H.S., unpublished results) and *actI-orf3* (Khosla et al., 1993), respectively. The deduced aa sequences of *otcY-orf1* and 2, which have overlapping stop and start codons, show relatively high identity (27% and 20%, respectively) with the *E. coli* FabB (Kauppinen et al., 1988) condensing enzyme. However, a potential β-ketoacyl synthase active site Cys<sup>175</sup> of *otcY-orf1* (Fig. 1B) is absent from *otcY-orf2*. The deduced aa sequence of the *otcY-orf3* resembles type-II FAS acyl carrier proteins (ACPs) from bacteria and plants and ACP domains of animal type-I FASs, with a characteristic motif centered on a potential 4′-phosphopantetheine-binding Ser<sup>47</sup> (Fig. 1B) (Hopwood and Sherman, 1990).

These nt sequencing data show that polyketide carbon chain assembly in oxyTc biosynthesis is controlled by *otcY-orf1*, -2 and -3 via an ACP-mediated pathway, like that of other type-II PKS and FAS systems.

This work was supported by NIH grant GM-46884 (to D.H.S.), a Pfizer graduate fellowship (to E.-S.K.) and NIH grant GM-39784 (to D.A.H.).

**REFERENCES**

Bibb, M.J., Biro, S., Motamedi, H., Collins, J.F. and Hutchinson, C.R.: Analysis of the nucleotide sequence of the *Streptomyces glaucescens*

tcml genes provides key information about the enzymology of polyketide antibiotic biosynthesis. EMBO J. 8 (1989) 2727–2736.

Bibb, M.J. and Cohen, S.N.: Gene expression in *Streptomyces*: construction and application of promoter-probe plasmid vectors in *Streptomyces lividans*. Mol. Genet. 187 (1982) 265–277.

Bibb, M.J., Findlay, P.R. and Johnson, M.W.: The relationship between base composition and codon usage in bacterial genes and its use in the simple and reliable identification of protein-coding sequences. Gene 30 (1984) 157–166.

Butler, M.J., Friend, E.J., Hunter, I.S., Kaczmarek, F.S., Sugden, D.A. and Warren, M.: Molecular cloning of resistance genes and architecture of a linked gene cluster involved in biosynthesis of oxytetracycline by *Streptomyces rimosus*. Mol. Genet. 215 (1989) 231–238.

Davis, N.K. and Chater, K.F.: Spore colour in *Streptomyces coelicolor* A3(2) involves the developmentally regulated synthesis of a compound biosynthetically related to polyketide antibiotics. Mol. Microbiol. 4 (1990) 1679–1692.

Fernandez-Moreno, M.A., Martinez, E., Boto, L., Hopwood, D.A. and Malpartida, F.: Nucleotide sequence and deduced functions of a set of cotranscribed genes of *Streptomyces coelicolor* A3(2) including the polyketide synthase for the antibiotic actinorhodin. J. Biol. Chem. 267 (1992) 19278–19290.

Hochstein, F.A., Stephens, C.R., Conover, L.H., Regna, P.P., Pasternack, R., Gordon, P.N., Pilgrim, F.J., Brunings, K.J. and Woodward, R.B.: The structure of terramycin. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 75 (1953) 5455–5475.

Hopwood, D.A. and Sherman, D.H.: Molecular genetics of polyketides and its comparison to fatty acid biosynthesis. Annu. Rev. Genet. 24 (1990) 37–66.

Kauppinen, S., Siggaard-Andersen, M. and von Wettstein-Knowles, P.: β-ketoacyl-ACP synthase I of *Escherichia coli*: nucleotide sequence of the *fabB* gene and identification of the cerulenin binding residue. Carlsberg. Res. Commun. 53 (1988) 357–370.

Khosla, C., McDaniel, R., Ebert-Khosla, S., Torres, R., Sherman, D.H., Bibb, M.J. and Hopwood, D.A.: Genetic construction and functional analysis of hybrid polyketide synthases containing heterologous acyl carrier proteins. J. Bacteriol. 175 (1993) 2197–2204.

Sherman, D.H., Malpartida, F., Bibb, M.J., Kieser, H.M., Bibb, M.J. and Hopwood, D.A.: Structure and deduced function of the granaticin-producing polyketide synthase gene cluster of *Streptomyces violaceoruber* Tü22. EMBO J. 8 (1989) 2717–2725.
