
THE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGICAL CHEMISTRY
© 1994 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

**Identification of the Gene Encoding Lipoate-Protein Ligase A of Escherichia coli**

MOLECULAR CLONING AND CHARACTERIZATION OF THE *lplA* GENE AND GENE PRODUCT*

(Received for publication, January 21, 1994, and in revised form, April 1, 1994)

Timothy W. Morris†, Kelynne E. Reed‡§, and John E. Cronan, Jr.∥

From the Departments of †Microbiology and ‡Biochemistry, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, Illinois 61801

R(+)-Lipoic acid is a cofactor required for function of the α-keto acid dehydrogenase and glycine cleavage enzyme complexes. The naturally occurring form of lipoate is attached by amide linkage to the ε-amino group of a specific lysine residue within conserved lipoate-accepting protein domains. Lipoate-protein ligase(s) catalyze the formation of this amide bond between lipoyl groups and specific apoproteins. We report the isolation of the *lplA* gene which encodes an *Escherichia coli* lipoate-protein ligase. Strains with *lplA* null mutations transport lipoic acid normally but have severe defects in the incorporation and utilization of exogenously supplied lipoic acid and lipoic acid analogs. These strains are also highly resistant to selenolipoate (a growth-inhibiting lipoate analog) and contain no detectable lipoate-protein ligase activity in cell extracts. The *lplA* gene has been cloned, sequenced, and physically mapped to min 99.6 (4657 kilobases) of the *E. coli* chromosome. Upon overexpression, the 38-kDa *lplA* gene product was purified to homogeneity and shown to have a mass, N-terminal sequence and amino acid composition consistent with the deduced 337 residue primary sequence. Enzyme assays show that purified LplA catalyzes the ATP-dependent attachment of [³⁵S]lipoic acid to apoprotein, thus confirming that *lplA* encodes lipoate-protein ligase A. Analysis of *lplA* null mutants also indicates the existence of a second (*lplA*-independent) lipoyl-ligase enzyme in *E. coli*. This is the first identification of a lipoate ligase gene and the first analysis of a purified lipoate ligase enzyme.

only when covalently attached to the respective transacylase (*E2*) subunits of lipoate-dependent enzymes, thus serving as a classical “swinging arm” for shuttling reaction intermediates between different active sites within large multisubunit enzyme complexes (Perham, 1990). The free carboxyl group of lipoic acid is joined by amide linkage to the ε-amino group of a specific lysine residue within each lipoate-accepting protein domain. This specific attachment of a lipoyl group to only a single lysine of *E2* apoprotein domains is catalyzed by the lipoate-protein ligase(s). Reed et al. (1958) first described lipoate-protein ligases in *Streptococcus faecalis* as well as *E. coli* and postulated that lipoate is joined to protein in a two-step ATP-dependent reaction with lipoyl-AMP as an activated intermediate. This reaction sequence is analogous to that of the well characterized biotin-protein ligase of *E. coli* (Cronan, 1989; Abbott and Beckett, 1993). Further work in mung bean seedlings (Mitra and Burma, 1965) and bovine liver (Tsunoda and Yasunobu, 1967) indicated that a similar pathway operates in eukaryotes, although the composition and detailed enzymology of the ligase enzyme has not been fully described in any system. However, recent progress in the characterization of *E. coli* genes involved in lipoate synthesis (Reed and Cronan, 1993; Hayden et al., 1993; Vanden Boom et al., 1991) as well as the ready availability of plasmid clones for the overproduction of lipoate-accepting apoproteins have stimulated renewed biochemical studies of protein lipoylation in *E. coli* (Brookfield et al., 1991) and bovine mitochondria (Fujiwara et al., 1992). Despite this renewed interest, no gene encoding a known lipoyl ligase has been identified from any organism. Here, we have isolated an *E. coli* lipoate-protein ligase gene (*lplA*) by transposon mutagenesis and enrichment for mutants unable to utilize exogenous lipoate. Molecular cloning and overexpression of *lplA* resulted in the ready purification of its gene product, lipoate-protein ligase A. Unexpectedly, characterization of *lplA* null mutants also indicates that *E. coli* contains a separate lipoyl-ligase enzyme other than that encoded by the *lplA* gene.

EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES

Bacterial Strains and Media—The *E. coli* K-12 strains used in this work were derived from strain JK1(*rpsL*), a streptomycin-resistant prototrophic strain from the laboratory of J. Konisky. Strain constructions utilizing bacteriophage P1vir transductional crosses were carried out by conventional methods (Miller, 1972). Strains KER176 (*rpsL lipA::dKn*), KER296 (*rpsL lipA::dKn fadE*), and KER310 (*rpsL lipA::dKn lipB::dTc*) were described previously (Reed and Cronan, 1993). Strains 143, 144, 148, and 329 (*rpsL lipA::dKn lplA::dTc*) were isolated as tetracycline-resistant derivatives of KER176 by the negative enrichment procedure outlined below. The *lplA::dTc* alleles of strains 143, 144, 148, and 329 were then transduced into KER296 to give the *rpsL lipA::dKn lplA::dTc fadE* strains TM129 (*lplA143*), TM130 (*lplA144*), TM131 (*lplA148*), TM132 (*lplA329*), respectively. The tetracycline resistance markers of strains 148 and 329 were also transduced into JK1 to give the *rpsL lplA::dTc* strains TM134 (*lplA148*) and TM135 (*lplA329*), respectively. Strains KER176 and KER310 were each transformed with plasmids

* This work was supported in part by Grant AI 15650 from the National Institutes of Health. The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked “advertisement” in accordance with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.
* The nucleotide sequence(s) reported in this paper has been submitted to the GenBank™/EMBL Data Bank with accession number(s) L27665.
* § Present address: Dept. of Microbiology, University of Texas, Austin, TX 78712.
* ∥ To whom correspondence should be addressed. Tel.: 217-333-0425; Fax: 217-244-6697.

pKR56 (with selection for ampicillin resistance) and pMS421 (with selection for spectinomycin resistance) to form strains TM140 and TM178. Strain TM169 was constructed by transduction of JK1 with the linked tetracycline resistance and *lipA2* markers from KER56 (*zbd:: Tn10 lipA2*). A tetracycline-sensitive derivative of TM169 was isolated by fusaric acid selection (Maloy and Nunn, 1981) and saved as TM170. The tetracycline resistance element from TM134 was transduced into TM170 to give TM171 (*rpsL lipA2 lplA::dTc*). This strain was then transduced to kanamycin resistance by a P1 lysate of GP150 (T. Silhavy) to yield the recombination defective derivative TM172 (*rpsL lipA2 lplA::dTc recA::Kan*). Plasmids pTM61-4 and pserB59-1 were transformed into strain TM134 to form the ampicillin-resistant strains TM181 and TM183, whereas plasmids pET16b and pTM70 were transformed into the *E. coli* B strain BL21 λ DE3 (*ompT r_B^- m_B^- att::λ DE3*; Studier and Moffat, 1986) to form the ampicillin-resistant derivatives TM201 and TM202.

Culture media were rich broth (Davis et al., 1982) or minimal salts medium E (Davis et al., 1980) supplemented with 0.4% glucose and, as needed, 0.5–50,000 ng/ml α-lipoic acid (Sigma), 5 mm sodium acetate, 5 mm sodium succinate, 0.1% vitamin-free casein hydrolysate (Difco), 30 μg/ml streptomycin, 25 μg/ml kanamycin, 3–10 μg/ml tetracycline, 100 μg/ml ampicillin, 30 μg/ml spectinomycin, and 30 μg/ml chloramphenicol. Selenolipic acid (1,2-diselenolane-3-pentanoic acid) was synthesized as previously described (Reed et al., 1994) and added to minimal E glucose media at 10–4000 ng/ml. Solid media contained 1.5% agar. All cultures were grown aerobically at 37°C. Growth of liquid cultures was monitored with a Klett-Summerson colorimeter equipped with a green filter or by measuring the optical density at 600 nm.

Transposon Mutagenesis and Ampicillin/Cycloserine Enrichments—Strain KER176 (*lipA*) was mutagenized by transposition of a mini Tn10 element (Tn10dTc) into the bacterial chromosome from the bacteriophage λ suicide vector λNK1098 (Way et al., 1984). Cultures of KER176 (10 ml) in rich broth plus 5 mm acetate and 5 mm succinate were infected with λNK1098 particles during mid-logarithmic growth phase at a ratio of 0.3 λ particles/cell and transposition of the Tn10dTc element was induced upon infection by the addition of 1 mM IPTG. Cultures were then shaken for 90 min, residual λ particles were removed by washing cells twice in minimal E salts, and the cells were spread on minimal E glucose plates supplemented with acetate, succinate, and tetracycline (10 μg/ml) to select for recipients of the Tn10dTc element. After 3 days of incubation the 2000–4000 tetracycline-resistant colonies/plate were pooled, diluted to 2 × 10^7^ cells/ml into fresh minimal E glucose media supplemented with acetate, succinate, and tetracycline and shaken at 37°C until exponential growth was observed. Cells from these cultures were then washed twice, resuspended at 1 × 10^8^ cells/ml in prewarmed minimal E glucose media containing no supplements, and shaken until growth ceased due to starvation for acetate and succinate. After 2 h of starvation, cultures were diluted to 1 × 10^6^ cells/ml in 100 ml of fresh minimal E glucose media containing 5 ng/ml lipoic acid. This supplement restored the activity of the lipoate-dependent α-ketoacid dehydrogenases and thus eliminated the need for supplementation with acetate plus succinate. Following two generations of lipoate-stimulated growth, the rapidly dividing cells in these pooled cultures were selectively lysed by the addition of 1 mg/ml ampicillin plus 1 mM cycloserine (Miller, 1972). When the optical density of the ampicillin plus cycloserine-treated cultures had declined by approximately 50-fold, the remaining intact cells were collected by filtration, washed extensively to remove ampicillin and cycloserine, and plated on minimal E glucose tetracycline media supplemented with acetate plus succinate. Enrichments from four independent cultures yielded a total of approximately 5000 tetracycline-resistant colonies.

Assay of Lipoic Acid Transport by Whole Cells—Strains were grown to mid-logarithmic growth phase in minimal E glucose supplemented with vitamin-free casein hydrolysate and acetate plus succinate, washed twice in ice-cold starvation buffer (minimal E glucose plus 50 μg/ml chloramphenicol), resuspended to a constant optical density of 3.0 (OD~600~ nm) and held on ice. Cells were then prewarmed to 37°C for 1–5 min, and uptake reactions were initiated by the addition of 1/10th volume of [^35^S]lipoate (80 mCi/mmol) in prewarmed starvation buffer. The final concentration of lipoate in the assay was 750 nM. At indicated time points 0.2-ml samples were removed, filtered immediately through 25-mm GN-6 cellulose ester membranes (Gelman Sciences), and

washed four times with 2 ml of wash buffer (minimal E salts plus 50 μg/ml chloramphenicol and 1% Brij-58) to remove unincorporated lipoic acid. Dried membranes were counted in 4 ml of Biosafe Counting Scintillant (Amersham Corp.).

Radiolabeling of Cultures in [^35^S]Lipoate, [1-[^14^C]]Octanoate, or [^75^Se]Selenolipoate—Strains were cultured overnight in minimal E glucose medium with acetate plus succinate and diluted 1:100 into 1 ml of fresh media containing 0.03–0.7 μCi of [^35^S]lipoate (55–440 mCi/mmol), 3–5 μCi of [1-[^14^C]]octanoate (55 mCi/mmol), or 4.5 × 10^4^ counts/min of [^75^Se]selenolipoate (specific activity undetermined). After growth to saturation (6–18 h), cells were precipitated with 10% trichloroacetic acid, washed with 1% trichloroacetic acid or acetone, and the resulting samples were boiled in denaturing SDS buffer and separated on 10% acrylamide SDS gels. Specifically labeled [^35^S]lipoyl-proteins, [^14^C]octanoyl-proteins, and [^75^Se]selenolipoyl-proteins were visualized by fluoroautoradiography. [1-[^14^C]]Octanoate was purchased from American Radiolabeled Chemicals. [^35^S]Lipoate and [^75^Se]selenolipoate were synthesized and purified as described previously (Reed et al., 1994).

Lipoate Protein Ligase Assay—LPL activity was assayed by using [^35^S]lipoic acid as the substrate for incorporation into an artificially enriched preparation of lipoate-accepting ACP-E2p apoprotein. Complete LPL reactions included 0.018–500 μg of extracts or fractions to be assayed for LPL activity, heat-treated ACP-E2p apoprotein from 6.0 to 500 μg of extract, 0.75–6.0 μM [^35^S]lipoate (4–210 mCi/mmol), 1.5 mm Na₂ ATP, 1.5 mm MgCl₂, 0.3 mm dithiothreitol, and 25–100 mm sodium phosphate, pH 7.0, in a volume of 0.1 or 0.2 ml. Assays were initiated by the addition of [^35^S]lipoate to prewarmed reaction mixtures and allowed to proceed for up to 60 min at 37°C. Assays of crude material generally required 6–60 min incubations while assays of purified fractions proceeded for 2–6 min. During the initial development of the assay and characterization of the activity present in crude extracts, reaction samples were pipetted onto 25-mm Whatman 3MM filter discs presaturated with 10% trichloroacetic acid and 1 mm unlabeled lipoate. After drying, the filters were washed four times with a 3:6:1 (by volume) mixture of chloroform/methanol/acetic acid (5 ml/filter/wash) and two times with 95% ethanol to remove free unbound [^35^S]lipoate. The dried filters were then counted twice in 4 ml of counting scintillant. For subsequent assays, the procedure was modified by pipetting reaction samples directly into 4 ml of ethanol/acetic acid/Brij-58 (9 volumes:1 volume:1% by weight) standing above 25-mm GN-6 membranes. Samples were then immediately filtered through the membranes by vacuum pressure and washed four times under vacuum with 2-ml portions of the ethanol-acetic acid-Brij-58 mixture. Dried membranes were then counted as above. The reported values for LPL activities were corrected for background noncovalent binding of lipoate to denatured proteins trapped by the filters as well as for the 33% counting efficiency of filter-bound [^35^S]lipoyl-protein relative to soluble [^35^S]-labeled samples.

Strains to be assayed for LPL activity were cultured to mid-logarithmic growth phase in minimal E glucose media supplemented with vitamin-free casein hydrolysate and 5 ng/ml lipoate, washed twice in 0.1 culture volume of 50 mm sodium phosphate, pH 7.0, and resuspended in 0.01 culture volume of the same buffer plus 10% glycerol and 1 mm phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride. After two passages through a French press at 18,000 pounds/square inch, lysates were centrifuged at 100,000 × g for 1 h at 4°C. These cleared cell extracts were either held on ice for immediate assay of LPL activity or flash frozen at –70°C for subsequent assay. Control reactions demonstrated that extracts frozen immediately after preparation retained full LPL activity. Lipoate-accepting apoprotein substrate was provided by identically prepared extracts from strains that overexpressed the ACP-E2p recombinant fusion protein from plasmid pKR56. For assays of LPL activity in crude extracts, apoprotein was obtained from lysates of the overproducing strain TM140 which had been heat treated (70°C for 5–15 min) to inactivate endogenous LPL activity, centrifuged at 10,000 × g for 10 min to remove aggregated material, and then used immediately or stored at –70°C. For assays of purified LplA protein, ACP-E2p apoprotein was from strain TM178 (*lipA lipB*). Briefly, the 100,000 × g supernatant from a strain TM178 extract was fractionated by ammonium sulfate precipitation and the 40–80% ammonium sulfate pellet was resuspended in 20 mm Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, dialyzed against the same buffer, heat treated (70°C for 15 min), centrifuged at 10,000 × g for 10 min to remove denatured protein, and the heat-soluble 10,000 × g supernatant was concentrated by ultrafiltration to a final protein concentration of 9.4 mg/ml. This material was stored at –20°C and thawed just prior to use. Protein concentrations were determined by the microbiuret assay (Itzhaki and Gill, 1964) against a standard of bovine serum albumin.

Recombinant DNA Methods—Plasmid DNA was isolated and manipulated by standard procedures (Sambrook et al., 1989). Preparation

1 The abbreviations used are: IPTG, isopropyl β-thiogalactoside; PAGE, polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis; ACP, acyl carrier protein; E2p, lipoamide transacetylase subunit; E2o, lipoamide transsuccinylase subunit; Brij-58, polyoxyethylene 20 cetyl ether; LPL, lipoate-protein ligase; ORF, open reading frame; kb, kilobase(s); bp, base pair(s).

of bacterial chromosomal DNA was as described by Wilson (1987). DNA sequence was generated by the dideoxy chain terminating method of Tabor and Richardson (1987; 1989) using Sequenase 2.0 (U.S. Biochemical Corp.) and double-stranded plasmid templates. The plasmid subclones used for DNA sequencing are described in Fig. 5A. Chromosomal DNA from strain TM134 (*lplA*148::Tn10d*Tc*) was digested to completion with a variety of restriction enzymes, separated on 1% agarose gels, and transferred by capillary action to Nytran membranes (Schleicher and Schuell). Membranes were hybridized at 68 °C to a digoxigenin labeled *Nde*I-*Bgl*I restriction fragment of pCTV613 (Vanden Boom *et al.*, 1991) which carries a 1.45-kb portion of the Tn10d*Tc* transposon. Membranes were then washed and positive bands detected with the Genius/Lumi-Phos 530 system (Boehringer Mannheim). For direct mapping of the *lplA* gene to an ordered set of phage λ clones of the *E. coli* chromosome (Kohara *et al.*, 1987), the 5.1-kb *Bam*HI-*Kpn*I fragment of plasmid pTM56 (containing chromosomal DNA adjacent to the Tn10d*Tc* element 148) was labeled with digoxigenin (Boehringer Mannheim), hybridized at 68 °C to an ordered array of the Kohara λ miniset bound to nitrocel- lulose (Takara Biochemical), and positive clones were detected with Lumi-Phos 530.

Plasmids and Plasmid Constructions—Chromosomal DNA from strain TM134 was digested with *Bam*HI and gel-purified fragments of 8–10 kb were ligated into the *Bam*HI site of pSU19 (a derivative of plasmid pSU2719; Martinez *et al.*, 1988) and transformed into strain XL1-Blue (Bullock *et al.*, 1987) with selection for both 50 μg/ml chlor- amphenicol resistance (encoded by pSU19) and 3 μg/ml tetracycline resistance (encoded by the Tn10d*Tc* element within the desired chromosomal *Bam*HI fragment). The resultant plasmid contained an 8.3-kb *Bam*HI insert and was designated pTM55. Likewise, a 5.1-kb *Bam*HI-*Pvu*II chromosomal fragment also carrying the Tn10d*Tc* 148 element from strain TM134 was gel purified and inserted between the *Bam*HI and *Sma*I sites of pSU19 to form pTM56. The 2.3-kb *Eco*RI fragment containing the right half of the Tn10d*Tc* element was deleted from pTM56 to yield the chloramphenicol-resistant and tetracycline-sensi- tive plasmid pTM58. This plasmid was digested with *Pst*I and *Bam*HI and then treated with exonuclease III (Promega) to form a series of nested deletion plasmids for sequencing of the *lplA* gene. For further DNA sequencing, the 1.7-kb *Nru*I-*Eco*RI and 1.1-kb *Sal*I-*Nru*I frag- ments of pTM58 were deleted to give plasmids pTM21 and pTM24, respectively. Plasmid pserB59–1 (Roeder and Somerville, 1979) was provided by R. Somerville and carries the wild type *lplA* gene on a 5.2-kb *Bam*HI fragment of chromosomal DNA inserted into the *Bam*HI site of pBR322. This 5.2-kb *Bam*HI fragment from pserB59–1 was then inserted into the *Bam*HI site of pSU19 to form pTM59. A 1.25-kb *Hpa*I fragment from pTM59 which carried the entire *lplA* gene was ligated into the *Sma*I site of pKK223–3 (Brosius and Holy, 1984) to form plas- mids pTM61–1 and pTM61–4, which placed the *lplA* coding sequence under control of the *tac* promoter (pTM61–4) or in the opposite orienta- tion (pTM61–1) to allow constitutive low level expression of *lplA*. The 1.25-kb *Eco*RI-*Sal*I fragment from pTM69 was then ligated into pET16b (Novagen) to place the *lplA* gene under control of the powerful bacteriophage T7 promoter and ribosome binding sequences (Studier and Moffat, 1986) in the resulting plasmid pTM70. Plasmids pTM60, pTM65, and pTM68 were constructed *in vivo* by recombination of the Tn10d*Tc* elements from the chromosomes of strains TM129, TM130, and TM132, respectively, onto plasmid pTM59 using the method of Vanden Boom *et al.* (1991). Plasmid pKR56 was used to overexpress a recombinant lipoate-accepting fusion protein composed of the *E. coli* acyl carrier protein (ACP) and the lipoamide transacetylase (*E*2*p*) sub- unit of pyruvate dehydrogenase. The 217-bp *Eco*RI-*Cla*I fragment of a synthetic *acpP* gene from pMR16 (Rawlings and Cronan, 1988) was fused to the 684-bp *Xho*II-*Hind*III fragment of the *aceF* gene from pGS101 (Guest *et al.*, 1985) and placed downstream of the IPTG-induc- ible *tac* promoter in the expression vector pKK223–3. The expressed ACP-*E*2*p* fusion protein consisted of the first 69 residues of ACP fused to the first two lipoate-accepting domains (residues 19–249) of the *E*2*p* subunit. Plasmid pMS421 (Grana *et al.*, 1988) carried the *lacI*^q^ repres- sor gene and was used to regulate transcription of the *acp-aceF* fusion gene.

Overproduction, Purification, and Analysis of LplA Protein—Strains bearing plasmid subclones of the *lplA* gene were cultured to mid-loga- rithmic growth phase and (as needed) LplA overproduction was induced by the addition of 0.5 mM IPTG for 2.0–3.5 h and cleared extracts were prepared as described above. Extracts from strain TM202 (which over- expressed the *lplA* gene via the T7 expression system) were utilized as

an enriched source of LplA for the two purification schemes described below. For determination of the amino acid composition, LplA was pre- pared by precipitation in 20–40% ammonium sulfate and chromatogra- phy through a 1-ml Mono Q column (Pharmacia Biotech Inc.) in 10% glycerol 50 mm sodium phosphate, pH 8.0, with the LPL activity emerg- ing in the flow-through volume. This material was electrophoresed through a 10% polyacrylamide SDS gel and the predominant 38 kDa protein band was electroblotted to polyvinylidene fluoride membrane for amino acid composition analysis by the AminoQuant system (Hewlett Packard). In subsequent preparations, LplA was purified by a modified procedure. Briefly, a cleared extract in 1 mm phenylmethylsul- fonyl fluoride, 100 mm ammonium chloride, 10% glycerol, 20 mm Tris- HCl, pH 7.5, was loaded directly onto a 25-ml heparin-agarose (type II, Sigma) column and eluted with a linear gradient of 100–400 mm am- monium chloride. Fractions containing LplA (180–200 mm ammonium chloride) were desalted by ultrafiltration and applied to a Mono Q column run in 10% glycerol, 20 mm Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, and developed with a linear gradient of 0–400 mm ammonium chloride. The LplA protein (as well as the LPL activity) eluted from this column at 150 mm ammonium chloride. This purified material was concentrated and desalted by ul- trafiltration prior to amino acid microsequencing, mass spectroscopy, and analysis of the LPL reaction requirements. N-terminal sequencing was performed by automated Edman degradation in an Applied Biosys- tems 470ASequenator. Molecular weight determinations were by electro- spray ionization and matrix assisted laser desorption TOF mass spec- troscopy using VG Quattro and VG TofSpec mass spectrometers.

RESULTS

Isolation of Null Mutations in the *lplA* Gene—In order to identify the gene(s) required for protein lipoylation in *E. coli*, we reasoned that strains which lacked a functional lipoate- protein ligase would be unable to utilize lipoic acid provided in the culture medium. By mutagenesis of a strain that was un- able to synthesize lipoate due to a null mutation in the *lipA* gene, we sought to generate a doubly mutant strain which would grow only under conditions that bypassed any require- ment for the lipoate-dependent enzymes. (Although the *lipA* gene is required for the *de novo* synthesis of lipoate, *lipA* null mutants are proficient in the uptake and utilization of lipoic acid provided in the medium, Vanden Boom *et al.*, 1991) Ac- cordingly, the *lipA* strain KER176 was subjected to transposon mutagenesis, and the resulting pools of tetracycline-resistant mutants were passed through an enrichment scheme designed to remove cells able to utilize exogenously supplied lipoate. Survivors of this ampicillin/cycloserine enrichment were ini- tially propagated on minimal E glucose media supplemented with acetate plus succinate (to provide metabolic bypasses of the pyruvate and α-ketoglutarate dehydrogenases, respect- ively) and then screened for growth on minimal E glucose tetracycline plates supplemented with all possible combina- tions of lipoic acid (5 ng/ml), acetate, and succinate. This screen identified four candidates that grew only when supplemented with both acetate and succinate (regardless of the presence or absence of lipoic acid). These four isolates were designated strains 143, 144, 148, and 329 and retained for further study as putative lipoate-protein ligase deficient (*lplA*) mutants. Phage P1 lysates were prepared from the four candidates as well as the parent strain KER176. When all possible transductional crosses between these strains were performed, we found that only the lysate from the KER176 parental strain contained transducing particles that restored lipoate-dependent growth to the putative *lplA* isolates, suggesting that all four mutants fell into the same linkage group. Furthermore, P1-mediated transduction of the tetracycline resistance markers from strains 143, 144, 148, and 329 into a second *lipA* strain (KER296) yielded new strains (TM129 to TM132, respectively) with the same growth defects as the original isolates, indicat- ing that the lipoate utilization defect was conferred by the Tn10d*Tc* insertions. Growth studies further showed that in contrast to strains KER176 and KER296, strains TM129 to

16094 E. coli Gene Encoding Lipoate-Protein Ligase A

**TABLE I**

Lipoate related growth defects in *lipA* and *lipA lplA* null mutants

Strains were cultured in minimal E glucose media supplemented with acetate plus succinate and then dilute inocula were transferred to fresh media containing supplements as indicated. Growth phenotypes were scored as (++) for the rapid growth (~70 min doubling time) and high culture densities (*OD*~600~ ~ 3.3) observed for strains with functional lipoylated enzymes; (+) for the much slower growth (~200 min doubling time) and lower culture densities (*OD*~600~ ~ 2.2) observed when lipoate-deficient strains were supplemented with acetate and succinate; and (-) for no detectable growth. Supplements were: 5–50,000 ng/ml lipoate, 5 mm sodium acetate, 5 mm of sodium succinate, 3–8 μM 8-thiooctanoate, and 48–480 μm 6-thiooctanoate.

| Strains (genotype) | Defective functions | None | Acetate+ succinate | Lipoate | Lipoate, acetate+ succinate | 8-Thio- octanoate | 6-Thio- octanoate |
|--------------------|---------------------|-------|---------------------|----------|---------------------------|----------------|----------------|
| JK1                | None                | ++    | ++                  | ++       | ++                        | ++             | ++             |
|                    | (wild type)         |       |                     |          |                           |                |                |
| KER176             | Lipoate Synthesis   | -     | +                   | ++       | ++                        | ++             | ++             |
| KER296             | (*lipA*)            |       |                     |          |                           |                |                |
| TM131              | Lipoate Synthesis   | -     | +                   | -        | +                         | +              | -              |
| TM132              | & Lipoate utilization |      |                     |          |                           |                |                |

TM132 failed to utilize either of the lipoate analogs 6-thiooctanoic acid or 8-thiooctanoic acid as lipoic acid substitutes (Table I). When the *lplA* null alleles 148 and 329 were transduced into the otherwise wild type strain JK1, the resulting strains TM134 and TM135 were resistant to high concentrations (4000 ng/ml) of selenolipoic acid (1,3-diselenolane-3-pentanoic acid). In contrast, this selenium-containing lipoate analog was previously shown to inhibit growth of the parental strain JK1 at concentrations as low as 10 ng/ml (Reed et al., 1994). Thus, transposon insertions into the *lplA* gene resulted in defective incorporation of lipoate and lipoate analogs as well as in complete resistance to the growth inhibiting analog sel-enolipoate.

**Lipoic Acid Uptake by *lplA* Null Mutants—** The above data indicated that the *lplA* gene was required for lipoate utilization, but it was not clear in which metabolic step(s) this gene participated. The lipoate-dependent enzymes are located intracellularly and thus the growth defects of *lplA lipA* strains could have been due to defective lipoate transport into the cytoplasm. Therefore, we examined the kinetics of \[^{35}S\]lipoic acid uptake by the wild type strain JK1 and its isogenic *lplA::Tn10dTc* derivative TM134. As shown in Fig. 1, the rate and extent of lipoate transport were essentially identical in these strains. Both the wild type and *lplA* strains accumulated free (non-protein bound) lipoic acid to levels approximately 10-fold above the extracellular concentration. As assessed by the ability of wild type strains to subsequently ligate transported \[^{35}S\]lipoate to intracellular proteins (data not shown), this assay detected true uptake rather than nonspecific binding of lipoate to whole cells. Because biotin, a cofactor of similar physical properties, is known to enter the *E. coli* cytoplasm by simple diffusion when present at high concentrations (Barker and Campbell, 1980), we also tested *lplA lipA* double mutants for growth on very high levels of lipoate. We found that all four such strains we tested (TM129 to TM132) failed to grow even when supplemented with 50 μg/ml lipoic acid (a concentration 5 orders of magnitude above that required to fully restore growth to the parent strain KER296). These results strongly suggested that the *lplA* mutants were not defective in the transport of lipoate.

**In Vivo Radiolabeling of *lplA* Mutants—** We also examined *lplA* null mutants for the ability to ligate transported lipoic acid to the lipoate accepting E2 proteins of the α-ketoacid dehydrogenases. This was tested *in vivo* by culturing cells for five to six generations in minimal E glucose media supplemented with acetate and succinate plus \[^{35}S\]lipoate. Lysates of radiolabeled cultures were prepared and separated on 10% polyacrylamide

**FIG. 1.** Lipoate uptake by wild type and *lplA* strains. Uptake of \[^{35}S\]lipoic acid by whole cells was determined as described under “Experimental Procedures.” Each point is the average of three separate assays of strains JK1 (■, wild type) and TM134 (●, *lplA*).

SDS gels as described under “Experimental Procedures.” As evident in Fig. 2, the *lplA* null mutants all demonstrated a severe defect in the accumulation of \[^{35}S\]lipoyl-proteins when compared with otherwise isogenic parent strains. This defect was observed in both wild type and *lipA* genetic backgrounds. Since we had previously shown that *E. coli* K-12 strains efficiently incorporated the lipoate analogs octanoic acid and selenolipoic acid into E2 proteins (Reed et al., 1994), *lplA* mutants were also tested for the incorporation of these compounds. We found that *lplA lipA* double mutants were also severely defective for the incorporation of \[^{14}C\]octanoate from the medium (Fig. 3). Furthermore, the representative strain TM131 (*lplA lipA*) was directly compared with its parent strain KER296 (*lipA*) for the ability to incorporate radiolabeled lipoate, octanoate, or selenolipoate. As shown in in Fig. 4, the *lplA* strain accumulated almost no \[^{35}S\]lipoyl-proteins, \[^{14}C\]octanoyl-proteins, or \[^{75}Se\]selenolipoyl-proteins. Quantitation of this gel on a Molecular Dynamics PhosphorImager indicated that the *lplA* mutant incorporated 47-fold less lipoate, 14-fold less octanoate, and at least 65-fold less selenolipoate than the parental wild type strain.

**LPL Activity in Crude Cell Extracts—** Since the *in vivo* radiolabeling defects of *lplA* strains strongly suggested that the *lplA* gene product participated in the lipoate-protein ligase reaction(s), we sought to directly measure the level of LPL activity in wild type and *lplA* cell extracts. Accordingly, we developed an

E. coli Gene Encoding Lipoate-Protein Ligase A

**FIG. 2. In vivo radiolabeling of lplA mutants with \[^{35}S\]lipoic acid.** Strains 143, 144, 148, and 329 (with null mutations in *lplA* and *lipA*) and the isogenic *lipA* parent strain KER176 (*WT*, carrying the wild type *lplA* gene) were cultured in the presence of labeled lipoate and samples prepared as described under “Experimental Procedures.” All samples were normalized according to optical density of the labeled cultures and analyzed by SDS-PAGE. \[^{35}S\]Lipoyl-proteins are the lipamide transacetylase subunit of pyruvate dehydrogenase (*E2p*) and the lipamide transsuccinylase subunit of α-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase (*E2o*), indicated here as *E2p-Lip* and *E2o-Lip*, respectively.

**FIG. 3. In vivo radiolabeling of lplA mutants with \[^{14}C\]octanoic acid.** Strains TM129 to TM132 (carrying the *lplA* null alleles 143, 144, 148, and 329, respectively) and the parent strain KER296 (*WT*, carrying wild type *lplA* gene) were cultured in the presence of labeled octanoate, and radiolabeled samples were analyzed as in Fig. 2. Strain KER296 was also labeled with \[^{35}S\]lipoate and processed in parallel. All strains carried *lipA* and *fadE* mutations (*fadE* mutations limit the degradation and nonspecific incorporation of \[^{14}C\]octanoate via the β-oxidation pathway (Reed et al., 1994). Specifically radiolabeled proteins are the *E2* subunits of the pyruvate (*E2p*), and α-ketoglutarate (*E2o*) dehydrogenase complexes. The octanoylated and lipoylated forms of the *E2o* protein are indicated as *E2o-Oct* and *E2o-Lip*, respectively, whereas both forms of the pyruvate dehydrogenase protein are indicated simply as *E2p*.

**in vitro assay for this activity utilizing \[^{35}S\]lipoic acid and heat-treated extracts of TM140 as a source of lipoate accepting apoprotein** (see “Experimental Procedures”). Although background noncovalent binding of \[^{35}S\]lipoate to filters containing denatured protein was never eliminated, prewashing of filters and repeated washing of bound samples lowered this background sufficiently to allow reproducible detection of covalent attachment of \[^{35}S\]lipoate to apoprotein. When analyzed by SDS-PAGE (not shown), radiolabeled samples from *in vitro* LPL reactions comigrated with \[^{35}S\]lipoyl-proteins radiolabeled *in vivo*, thus confirming that the *in vitro* reactions produced covalently bound lipoyl-protein. We found that LPL activity required two critical components: an artificially enriched

**FIG. 4. Defective accumulation of \[^{35}S\]-lipoylproteins, \[^{14}C\]-octanoyl-proteins, and \[^{75}Se\]selenolipoyl proteins by an *lplA* null mutant.** Strains KER296 (*lipA fadE*) and TM131 (*lipA fadE lplA*) were diluted from minimal E glucose plus acetate and succinate media into fresh media containing either labeled lipoate, octanoate, or selenolipoate, and grown for five to six generations prior to analysis by SDS-PAGE. Radiolabeled species are as described in Fig. 3.

source of apoprotein, and extracts of wild type strains as a source of enzymatic activity. The enzymatic activity was sensitive to heat treatment (70 °C for 5 min), and the addition of excess unlabeled lipoate or EDTA severely decreased incorporation of \[^{35}S\]lipoate (Table II). Since the *E2* subunits of *E. coli* are normally fully lipoylated (Packman et al., 1991), extracts of wild type strains demonstrated little or no lipoylation activity unless a source of apoprotein substrate was provided by the addition of a heat inactivated extract from an *E2* apodomain-overproducing strain. Under these conditions, the LPL activity of wild type extracts was 20.5 pmol of lipoate incorporated/mg of total protein/min whereas extracts of *lplA* null strains contained ≤0.12 pmol/mg/min (the average of the lower limits of detection in six independent experiments). Thus, lipoate-specific LPL activity was severely (and possibly totally) defective in the *lplA* null mutant. Furthermore, the LPL activity of mixed wild type and *lplA* extracts was approximately half that of wild type extracts (Table II), indicating that the *lplA* extracts lacked LPL reaction inhibitors.

Physical Mapping and Cloning of the *lplA* Locus—The position of the *lplA* gene on the *E. coli* physical map was located by a combination of Southern blotting methods. First, a digoxigenin labeled 1.45-kb *NdeI-BglI* fragment of the Tn10dTc element was used as a probe for the detection of Tn10dTc-containing fragments in digests of chromosomal DNA from strain TM134 (*lplA148::Tn10dTc*). By comparing the observed sizes of Tn10dTc-containing chromosomal DNA fragments with the restriction map of Tn10dTc (Way et al., 1984), a low resolution restriction map was deduced for the region of the chromosome adjacent to the transposon in strain TM134. Alignment of this map with the chromosomal map of Kohara et al. (1987) suggested that the transposon had inserted into the bacterial chromosome at 4657 kb (min 99.6). This map position was confirmed by cloning the bacterial DNA adjacent to the Tn10dTc element as plasmids pTM55 and pTM56 (see “Experimental Procedures”) and using the 5.1-kb *BamHI-KpnI* fragment from pTM56 to directly probe the Kohara miniset of λ phage carrying ordered and overlapping regions of the chromosome. Hybridizations carried out at high stringency (68 °C) detected only two phage (λ 674 and λ 675) which carry overlapping fragments from the 4654–4661 kb (min 99.6–99.75) region of the chromosome. A search of the GenBank database revealed that this region

16096 E. coli Gene Encoding Lipoate-Protein Ligase A

TABLE II  
LPL activity requirements  

Assays of LPL activity were as described under “Experimental Procedures.” All values are the average of duplicate samples. Complete reactions included 0.1–0.2 mg of extracts containing enzyme to be tested, heat-treated ACP-E2p apoprotein from 0.4 mg of strain TM140 extract, 1.5 μM [³⁵S]lipoate, 1.5 mm ATP, 1.5 mm MgCl₂, and 0.3 mm dithiothreitol. In control reactions enzyme or apoprotein were omitted, or unlabeled lipoate (0.24 mm) or EDTA (100 mm) were added, or strain JK1 (lplA⁺) extract was heated (5 min at 70 °C) prior to the assay, or 0.1 mg of JK1 extract was mixed with 0.1 mg of TM134 (lplA⁻) extract. The lower limit of detection in this experiment was 0.3 pmoles of lipoate incorporation/mg extract/min. Reactions proceeded for 6 min at 37 °C. Assays of purified LplA included 0.3 μg of LplA, 280 μg of ACP-E2p apoprotein preparation from strain TM178, 6.0 μM [³⁵S]lipoate, 1.5 mm ATP, 1.5 mm MgCl₂, and 0.3 mm dithiothreitol. In control reactions, enzyme or apoprotein or ATP were omitted, or unlabeled lipoate (2.4 mm) or EDTA (10 mm) or EDTA plus excess MgCl₂ (30 mm) were added. The lower limit of detection in this experiment was 31 nmol of lipoate incorporation/mg enzyme/min. Reactions proceeded for 2 min at 37 °C.

| Activity in total cell extracts | Activity of purified LplA |
| --- | --- |
| Reaction | Specific activity | Relative activity | Reaction | Specific activity | Relative activity |
|  | pmol/mg/min | % |  | nmol/mg/min | % |
| lplA⁺ extract | 21.7 | 100 | Complete | 807 | 100 |
| No enzyme | <0.3 | <1.4 | No enzyme | <31 | <3.8 |
| No apoprotein | <0.3 | <1.4 | No apoprotein | <31 | <3.8 |
| + unlabeled | 0.6 | 2.8 | + unlabeled | <31 | <3.8 |
| lipoate |  |  | lipoate |  |  |
| heat treated enzyme | 1.0 | 4.6 | Heat-treated enzyme | <31 | <3.8 |
| + EDTA | 0.6 | 2.8 | + EDTA | <31 | <3.8 |
| lplA⁻ extract | <0.3 | <1.4 | + EDTA | 763 | 94.5 |
|  |  |  | + MgCl₂ |  |  |
| lplA⁺/lplA⁻ | 11.5 | 53 | No ATP | 34 | 4.2 |
| mixed extracts |  |  |  |  |  |

had previously been cloned (Roeder and Somerville, 1979) and partially sequenced during studies of the divergently transcribed *serB* and *smp* genes located at min 99.65 (Neuwald and Stauffer, 1985, 1989). Restriction mapping of the Tn10dTc 148 element carried by plasmid pTM56 indicated that this transposon was inserted immediately downstream of the *smp* gene within the 5′ end of a partially sequenced ORF of unknown function. This insertion point was confirmed by DNA sequence analysis of the junction between the transposon element and adjacent bacterial DNA in plasmids pTM57 and pTM58. A plasmid containing this region of the chromosome as a 5.2-kb *BamHI* insert (pserB59-1) was then obtained from R. Somerville. The chromosomal fragment from pserB59-1 was subcloned into pSU19, and the resulting plasmid pTM59 was used to recover the remaining *lplA::Tn10dTc* insertions from the chromosomes of strains TM129, TM130, and TM132 onto the plasmid by homologous recombination (Vanden Boom et al., 1991). The insertion points of Tn10dTc elements 329, 143, and 144 were then defined by restriction mapping, subcloning, and partial sequencing of the resultant transposon-containing plasmids (“Experimental Procedures”). We determined that Tn10dTc isolates 143 and 144 (which were both derived from the same enrichment culture) were identical and thus probably resulted from a single transposon insertion.

The mapping data above suggested that pserB59-1 carried an intact copy of the *lplA* gene. This was confirmed by complementation analysis in strain TM172 (*lplA lipA recA*). Introduction of pserB59-1 restored lipoate-dependent growth on minimal E glucose media to this recombination-deficient strain indicating that a functional *lplA* gene was expressed from the plasmid. Furthermore, *in vivo* labeling of strain TM131 bearing pserB59-1 demonstrated that the plasmid restored incorporation of both [³⁵S]lipoate and [⁷⁵Se]selenolipoate into the α-ketoacid dehydrogenase E2 proteins (not shown). Further complementation studies of plasmid subclones pTM59, pTM61-1, pTM61-4, pTM69, pTM70, and pTM74 demonstrated that a functional *lplA* gene was present within the 1.25-kb *HpaI* fragment common to these constructs (Fig. 5A).

DNA Sequence Analysis of the *lplA* Gene—The DNA sequence of the complementing *HpaI* fragment was determined by complete sequencing of both strands and is shown in Fig. 5B. The first 287 nucleotides of this sequence were identical to the corresponding sequence reported by Neuwald and Stauffer (1989). Sequencing outward from the Tn10dTc elements of plasmids pTM55, 60, 65, and 68 confirmed that these transposon insertions all disrupted a 1016-bp ORF which encoded a deduced protein of 338 amino acids (37,925.9 Da). We have designated this ORF *lplA*. The known specificity of *E. coli* N-terminal protease (Hirel et al., 1989) indicated that cleavage of the initiating methionine of the LplA polypeptide would occur, yielding a 337-residue protein with a molecular mass of 37,795.7 Da and a calculated isoelectric point of 5.88. The codon usage of *lplA* is consistent with that of moderately expressed *E. coli* genes (Gribskov et al., 1984).

Although Neuwald and Stauffer (1989) proposed that the ORF corresponding to *lplA* was transcribed from the upstream *smp* gene promoter, the ability of various *HpaI* fragment subclones (which lacked the *smp* promoter) to complement *lplA* null mutants indicated that this fragment carried a functional promoter as well. Analysis of the region immediately upstream of *lplA* by the MacTargsearch 2.0 program (Mulligan et al., 1984) identified a rather weak consensus promoter 21–61 bp upstream of the *lplA* start codon. A potential ribosome-binding site (Watson et al., 1987) as well as a potential Rho-independent transcriptional terminator (Carafa et al., 1990) were also identified just upstream and downstream of the *lplA* coding sequence, respectively (Fig. 5B).

Purification and Analysis of the Overproduced LplA Enzyme—Cleared cell extracts from strains bearing plasmid subclones of the *lplA* gene under control of its natural promoter (pserB59-1), the *tac* promoter (pTM61-4), or a T7 promoter (pTM70) were prepared and assayed for LPL activity as described above. These measurements indicated 20-, 57-, and 2434-fold increases in LPL activity relative to wild type (non-overproducing) strains. Pulse labeling of the strain expressing the T7 promoter construct revealed significant accumulation of a 38-kDa protein upon IPTG induction (not shown). A small sample of the 38-kDa protein was purified and transferred to polyvinylidene fluoride membrane for total amino acid analysis. The amino acid composition of this sample corresponded well to the composition deduced from the *lplA* gene sequence (data not shown). Larger samples of LplA were then prepared by an alternative method (“Experimental Procedures”) in which the LplA protein was purified from clarified cell extracts by sequential ammonium chloride elutions from heparin-agarose and Mono Q columns. The resulting preparations contained essen-

E. coli Gene Encoding Lipoate-Protein Ligase A 16097

A
4653.2 4654 4655 4656 4657 4658 4658.4 (kb)
99.45 99.7 (min)

Ba Nr Rv Ac Pv Hp Bs Nr St Hp Ba
sms serB smp lplA

pserB59, pTM59
pTM55
pTM60
pTM65,68
pTM56
pTM58
pTM57
pTM21
pTM24

FIG. 5. Plasmid clones and sequence of the *lplA* gene. A, restriction map and subclones of the 5.2-kb *BamHI* fragment carrying the *lplA* gene. The scale indicates the physical and genetic map location of this region as described by K. Rudd (EcoSeq Map 6.0). Restriction sites are *BamHI* (*Ba*), *NruI* (*Nr*), *EcoRV* (*Rv*), *AccI* (*Ac*), *PvuII* (*Pv*), *HpaI* (*Hp*), *BssHII* (*Bs*), *StuI* (*St*), and *XhoII*. Sequenced genes are *sms* (sensitivity to methylmethane sulfonate), *serB* (phosphoserine phosphatase), *smp* (*serB*-contraposed membrane protein), and *lplA* (lipoate-protein ligase A). Transposons insertions are indicated by inverted triangles. B, nucleotide sequence of the *lplA* gene and deduced amino acid sequence of the LplA protein. The entire sequence of the 1.25-kb *HpaI* fragment (A) is shown. Underlined amino acid residues indicate the region of LplA sequence confirmed by Edman degradation of the purified protein. The positions of putative -35 and -10 consensus promoter elements, a possible ribosome binding site (*RBS*), and a consensus Rho-independent terminator are indicated. Also shown are the insertion points of Tn10dTc transposon isolates 148, 329, 143, and 144.

B
GTAAACCGCCAGCAAACCCTGCCGGAAGCGAGAAAAAGCGAGAAAAAAGAGTGACCCATTACTACAAGAAAAGGAAATCG 80
-35?
-107?
RBS
TTATGTCACACATTAEGCCTGCTCATCTCTGACTTACGACCCGTGGTTAACCTGGCGGTGGAAGAGTGTATTTTTCGC 180
M S T L R L L I S D S Y D P W F N L A V E E C I F R
148
CAAAAGCCCGCACAGCGCGTTCTGTTTCTCTQGCCCAATGCCGACACGGTAGTAATYGTCGCGCGCAQAACCCGTG 240
Q M P A T O R V L F L W R N A D T V V I G R A Q N P W
GAAAGAGTGTAATACCCGGCGATGGAAGAAGATAACGTCCCCCTGGCGGGCGCAQTAGCGGTGCCCAGCGGTGTTCC 320
K E C N T R R M E E D N V R L A R R S S G G A Y F
ACGATCTCGGCAATACCTGCTTJACCTTTATGGCTGGCAAGCCGGAGTACGATAAAACTATCTCCACGTGATTTGTGCTC 400
H D L Q N T T C F T F M A G K P E Y D K T I S T S I Y L
329
AATGCCGCTGAACGGCCTCGGCTCAGCGCCGAAAGCTCCGGACCTAACGATCTGGTGGTAAAAACCTGCAAAGCGACC 480
N A L N A G V S A E A S G R N O L V V K T V E C D R
143/144
CAAAGTCTCAGGCTCGGCTATCGGCAAACCAAAGATCGGCGCTTCCACGGCACCTTGCTACTCAATGCGGACCTCA 560
K V S G S A Y R E T K D R G F H H G T L L L N A D L
GCCGCGCTGGCAAACACTATCTCAATCCGGATAAAAAAGAAACTGGCGGGCGAAAGCAATTACGTCGGTACGTTCCCGCGTGACC 640
S R L A N Y L N P D K K K L A A K G I T S V R S R Y T
AAECTCACCGAGCTGTTGCGGGGATCACCATGAGCAGGTTTGGCAGGCCCATAACCGAGGCCCCTTTTCGCCCAATTATGG 720
N L T E L L P G I T H E O V C E A I T E A F F A H Y G
CGAGCGCGTGGAAAGCGAAATCATCTCCCCGAAACAAAACGCGAGACTTGCCAAAACTTCGCCGAAACCTTTGCCCCGCAGA 800
E R V E A E I I S P N K T P D L P N F A E T F A R Q
GTAGCTCGGAATGGAACTTCGGTCAGGCTCCGGCATTTCTGCACTCTGGATGAACGCTTTACCTGGGCGGCGTGGAA 880
S S W E W N F G Q A P A F S H L L D E R F T W G G Y E
CTGCATTTTCGACCTTGGAAAAAGGCAATACACCCGGCCCAAGGTGTTTACCGACAGGCCTCAACCCCCGGCCGCTGGAAGC 960
L H F D V E K G H I T R A Q Y F T D S L N P A P L E A
CCTCGCCGAGCGACTGCAAGGCTGCGCTACCGCGCAGATATGCTGCAAACGGAGTGCGAAGCGCTGTTGACCTTCC 1040
L A G R L Q G C L Y R A D M L O Q Q E C E A L L V D F
CGGAAACAGGAAAAAGAGCTACGGGAGTTATCGGCATGGGCGGGGCTGTAAGGTAGTTACCCGCCCCATGCGGGCAAC 1120
P E Q E K E L R E L S A W M A G A V R
TERMINATOR
TTCTCTTTCGATTTTGGCCGAATTTTTTCCGGCATTTCTTGGCGCAATGTGGCGAAACGCCCTCGCTGATACGGGATCTCTGG 1200
-TERMINATOR-
CGACCGTTTGGCCAAGAACTCGTGCGCCAGCGGGATCGCCGTTAAC 1245

tially pure LplA protein as determined by SDS-PAGE, Edman sequencing, and mass spectroscopy. N-terminal sequencing demonstrated that the initiating methionine of LplA had been cleaved from the mature protein and gave 25 N-terminal residues that showed excellent agreement with the deduced sequence (the determined residues are underlined in Fig. 5B). The mass of LplA was measured by both electrospray ionization and matrix-assisted laser desorption mass spectroscopic techniques as 37,795 (± 3.79) Da and 37,791 Da, respectively, which agreed very well with the deduced molecular mass of 37,794.7 Da (Fig. 6). The laser desorption spectrum (Fig. 6B) also indicated that a small fraction of the protein had dimerized upon ionization (this is an artifact which has been observed previously with the laser ionization technique; Beavis and Chait, 1990).

The maximal LPL activity of the purified protein was measured at 1.6 μmol of \[^{35}S\]lipoate incorporated per mg of LplA/min at 37 °C. In further assays of the purified enzyme, LPL activity required apoprotein substrate (ACP-E2p fusion protein from an overproducing extract), lipoic acid, ATP, and MgCl₂ (Table II). As found earlier in assays of crude extracts, heat treatment, the addition of excess unlabeled lipoate, or EDTA addition severely decreased LPL activity (Table II). These data were thus consistent with the conclusion that the LplA protein functioned directly as an ATP-dependent lipoate-protein ligase.

DISCUSSION

*lplA* is the first lipoate-protein ligase gene isolated, and the LplA protein is the first such ligase purified to homogeneity.

16098 E. coli Gene Encoding Lipoate-Protein Ligase A

A 37795.05 ± 3.79

B 37790.8

18926.6

75775.1

FIG. 6. Mass spectra of the purified LplA protein. All samples were dissolved in 1% acetic acid prior to analysis. A, electrospray ionization spectrum. The molecular mass determined by this method is indicated as 37,795.05 Da. B, matrix-assisted laser desorption TOF spectrum. The indicated peaks are the doubly protonated (18,926.6 Da), singly protonated (37,790.8 Da), and dimerized (75,775.1 Da) species.

This work represents a significant advance in our understanding of the metabolism of a cofactor which performs essential conserved functions in the central biochemical pathways of nearly all organisms. We believe that *lplA* encodes the *E. coli* lipoylation activities previously described by Reed et al. (1958), Oh and Leach (1969), and Brookfield et al. (1991). If so, then the combined results of these studies suggest that LplA functions in protein modification in a manner strictly analogous to the biotin-protein ligase. Indeed, we have recently shown that both of the lipoylation activities described by Brookfield et al. are no longer detectable in extracts of *lplA* null mutants, suggesting that these two subtly different activities are isoforms of

LplA.² Moreover, assays with a fully purified apoprotein acceptor have demonstrated that purified LplA plus lipoate and Mg-ATP are sufficient to reconstitute lipoylation *in vitro*.² Thus we propose that LplA catalyzes both the ATP-dependent activation of lipoate to lipoyl-AMP as well as the transfer of this activated lipoyl species to apoprotein with the concomitant release of AMP. This conclusion is consistent with the findings of Reed et al. (1958) that the *E. coli* enzyme could not be fractionated into separable lipoate activation and lipoyl transfer components and of Mitra and Burma (1965) that the lipoyl-ligase enzyme from *Azotobacter vinlandii* catalyzed the reversible formation of lipoyl-AMP from lipoate and ATP with the simultaneous release of pyrophosphate.

The growth defects resulting from transposon insertions in the *lplA* gene also provide significant information about the manner in which *E. coli* utilizes extracellular lipoate. Our findings that *lplA lipA* double mutants failed to utilize lipoate, 8-thiooctanoate, or 6-thiooctanoate for growth on minimal media and that such strains were severely defective for the incorporation of radiolabeled lipoate, octanoate, and selenolipoate indicate a common vital role for LplA in the incorporation of extracellular compounds. This vital role does not involve transport (Fig. 1) and instead is at the level of activating and ligating these compounds to the appropriate acceptor proteins. Our results strongly suggest that *in vivo* the LplA enzyme is capable of utilizing lipoate and all four lipoate analogs as donors for the post-translational modification of E2 apoproteins. This rather broad substrate specificity *in vivo* matches the similarly broad substrate specificity observed *in vitro* by Brookfield et al. (1991). Moreover, we recently reported that spontaneous resistance to the growth inhibition caused by selenolipoate could be correlated with decreased accumulation of selenolipoylated (therefore nonfunctional) α-ketoacid dehydrogenases (Reed et al. 1994). We have confirmed this correlation here by showing that *lplA* null strains fail to accumulate any detectable selenolipoyl-proteins (Fig. 4) and are totally resistant to extremely high levels of the selenium compound.

Although searches of the GenBank protein and nucleic acid databases failed to identify any proteins of known function with significant similarities to LplA, we have identified a region of 21% amino acid identity between a 210-residue central section of the LplA and LipB protein sequences (not shown). The *lipB* gene and LipB protein were initially identified during studies designed to identify the genes required for lipoate synthesis. Strains with null mutations in *lipB* continue to synthesize lipoyl groups, however, and instead display a 10-fold reduction in the accumulation of lipoylated enzymes (Reed and Cronan, 1993). These data suggest that LipB plays a role in protein lipoylation rather than in lipoate synthesis. Indeed, we have recently found compelling evidence that *E. coli* possesses a second pathway for protein lipoylation which does not require the *lplA* gene.³ This alternative lipoylation pathway is dependent instead upon the *lipB* gene and apparently utilizes a different lipoyl donor than the LplA enzyme.³ The severely attenuated but still detectable accumulation of radiolabeled lipoyl-proteins and octanoyl-proteins by *lplA* null mutants (Figs. 4 and 5) also provides evidence of this second (LplA-independent) pathway.

Because LplA and BirA (the biotin-protein ligase of *E. coli*) catalyze strictly analogous reactions in the ligation of cofactors to apoprotein, we aligned their amino acid sequences (not shown). Although LplA and BirA were only 16% identical, this limited similarity extended throughout the two sequences, including the N-terminal regions of the two proteins. Interestingly, it is this portion of the BirA protein which comprises the DNA-binding regulatory domain of the biotin ligase enzyme (Wilson et al., 1992). We are currently exploring the possibility that LplA may also act as a regulatory element in the expression of the genes involved in lipoate metabolism in the same manner that BirA regulates expression of the *bio* (biotin biosynthesis) genes of *E. coli* (Cronan, 1989).

Here we have shown that the LplA enzyme catalyzes the complete lipoylation reaction, including both the activation and ligation of lipoyl groups to apoproteins. As such, LplA is clearly different than the partially characterized lipoylation enzymes of bovine mitochondria (Fujiwara et al., 1992) and *S. faecalis* (Reed et al., 1958) in that those systems contain separate lipoate activating and lipoyl transferase components. Therefore, despite the nearly universal occurrence of lipoylated enzymes in nature, at least two substantially different lipoylation enzymes have arisen. It will be of evolutionary interest to compare the genetic and protein elements of these two types of lipoylation systems as further information becomes available.

Acknowledgments—Electrospray ionization and matrix-assisted laser desorption mass spectra were obtained in the Mass Spectroscopy Laboratory, School of Chemical Sciences, University of Illinois. Amino acid analysis and N-terminal sequencing were performed at the Genetic Engineering Facility, Biotechnology Center, University of Illinois. Plasmid pserB59–1 was generously provided by R. Somerville. We are particularly indebted to Dawn Brookfield, Jeffrey Green, and John Guest for assistance and advice with the purification of LplA.

**REFERENCES**

Abbott, J., and Beckett, D. (1993) *Biochemistry* **32**, 9649–9656

Ali, S. T., Moir, A. G. J., Ashton, P. R., Engel, P. C., and Guest, J. R. (1990) *Mol. Microbiol.* **4**, 943–950

Barker, D. A., and Campbell, A. M. (1980) *J. Bacteriol.* **143**, 789–800

Beavis, R. C., and Chait, B. T. (1990) *Anal. Chem.* **62**, 1836–1840

Brookfield, D. E., Green, J., Ali, S. T., Machado, R. S., and Guest J. R. (1991) *FEBS Lett.* **295**, 13–16

Brosius, J., and Holy, A. (1984) *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.* **81**, 6929–6933

Bullock, W. O., Fernandez, J. M., and Short, J. M. (1987) *BioTechniques* **5**, 376–378

Carafa, Y., Brody, E., Thermes, C. (1990) *J. Mol. Biol.* **216**, 835–858

Chambers, S. P., Prior, S. E., Barstow, D. A., and Minton, N. P. (1988) *Gene (Amst.)* **68**, 139–149

Cronan, J. E., Jr. (1989) *Cell* **58**, 427–429

Davis, R. W., Botstein, D., And Roth, J. R. (1980) *Advanced Bacterial Genetics*, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold Spring Harbor, NY

Davis, T. N., Muller, E. D., and Cronan, J. E., Jr. (1982) *Virology* **120**, 287–306

Dupre, S., Spoto, G., Matarese, R. M., Orlando, M., and Cavallini, D. (1980) *Arch. Biochem. Biophys.* **202**, 361–365

Fujiwara, K., Okamura-Ikeda, K., and Motokawa, Y. (1992) *J. Biol. Chem.* **267**, 20011–20016

Grana, D., Gardella, T., and Susskind, M. M. (1988) *Genetics* **120**, 319–327

Gribskov, M., Devereux, J., and Burgess, R. R. (1984) *Nucleic Acids Res.* **12**, 539–549

Guest, J. R., Lewis, H. M., Graham, L. D., Packman, L. C., and Perham, R. N. (1985) *J. Mol. Biol.* **185**, 743–754

Hayden, M. A., Huang, I. Y., Iliopoulos, G., Orozco, M., and Ashley, G. W. (1993) *Biochemistry* **32**, 3778–3782

Herbert, A. A., and Guest, J. R. (1975) *Arch. Microbiol.* **106**, 259–266

Hipps, D. S., and Perham, R. N. (1992) *Biochem. J.* **283**, 665–671

Hirel, P.-H., Schmitter, J.-M., Dessen, P., Fayat, G., and Blanquet, S. (1989) *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.* **86**, 8247–8251

Itzhaki, R. F., and Gill, D. M. (1964) *Anal. Biochem.* **9**, 401–410

Kohara, Y., Akiyame, K., and Isono, K. (1987) *Cell* **50**, 495–508

Maloy, S. M., and Nunn, W. D. (1981) *J. Bacteriol.* **145**, 1110–1112

Martinez, E. B., Bartolome, B., and de la Cruz, F. (1988) *Gene (Amst.)* **68**, 159–162

Miller, J. H., (1972) *Experiments in Molecular Genetics*, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold Spring Harbor, NY

Mitra, S. K., and Burma, D. P. (1965) *J. Biol. Chem.* **240**, 4072–4080

Mulligan, M. E., Hawley, D. K., Entriken, R., and McClure, W. R. (1984) *Nucleic Acids Res.* **12**, 789–800

Neuwald, A. F. and Stauffer, G. V. (1985) *Nuceic Acids Res.* **13**, 7025–7039

Neuwald, A. F. and Stauffer, G. V. (1989) *Gene (Amst.)* **82**, 219–228

Noll, K. M., and Barber, T. S. (1988) *J. Bacteriol.* **170**, 4315–4321

Oh, Y. K., and Leach, F. R. (1969) *Can J. Microbiol.* **15**, 183–187

Packman, L. C., Green, B., and Perham, R. N. (1991) *Biochem. J.* **277**, 153–158

Perham, R. N. (1990) *Biochemistry* **30**, 8501–8511

Rawlings, M., and Cronan, J. E., Jr. (1988) *FASEB J.* **2**, A1559

Reed, K. E., and Cronan, J. E., Jr. (1993) *J. Bacteriol.* **175**, 1325–1336

Reed, K. E., Morris, T. W., and Cronan, J. E., Jr. (1994) *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.* **91**, 3720–3724

Reed, L. J., Leach, F. R., and Koike, M. (1958) *J. Biol. Chem.* **232**, 123–142

² T. W. Morris, D. E. Brookfield, J. R. Guest, and J. E. Cronan, Jr., unpublished results.

³ T. W. Morris, K. E. Reed, and J. E. Cronan, Jr., manuscript in preparation.

Roeder, R. W., and Somerville, R. L. (1979) Mol. Gen. Genet. 176, 361–368  
Sambrook, J., Fritsch, E. F., and Maniatis, T. (1989) Molecular Cloning: a Laboratory Manual, 2nd ed., Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold Spring Harbor, NY  
Studier, F. W., and Moffat, B. A. (1986) J. Mol. Biol. 189, 113–130  
Tabor, S., and Richardson, C. C. (1987) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 84, 4767–4771  
Tabor, S., and Richardson, C. C. (1989) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 86, 4076–4080  
Tsunoda, J. N., and Yasunobu, K. T. (1967) Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 118, 395–401  
Vanden Boom, T. J., and Cronan, J. E., Jr. (1990) Virology 177, 11–22  

Vanden Boom, T. J., Reed, K. E., and Cronan, J. E., Jr. (1991) J. Bacteriol. 173, 6411–6420  
Watson, J. D., Hopkins, N. H., Roberts, J. W., Steitz, J. A., and Weiner, A. M. (1987) Molecular Biology of the Gene, 4th ed., Benjamin-Cummings, Menlo Park, CA  
Way, J. C., Davis, M. A., Morisato, D., Roberts, D. E., and Kleckner, N. (1984) Gene (Amst.) 32, 369–379  
Wilson, K. (1987) in Current Protocols in Molecular Biology (Ausebel, F. M., Brent, R., Kingston, R. E., Moore, D. D., Sudman, J. G., Smith, J. A., and Struhl, K., eds) Vol. I, Wiley-Interscience, New York, NY  
Wilson, K. P., Shewchuk, L. M., Brennan, R. G., Otsuka, A. J., and Matthews, B. W. (1992) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 89, 9257–9261
