
JOURNAL OF BACTERIOLOGY, Jan. 1993, p. 190–199

0021-9193/93/010190-10$02.00/0

**Effects of Insertions and Deletions in *glnG* (*ntrC*) of Escherichia coli on Nitrogen Regulator I-Dependent DNA Binding and Transcriptional Activation**

SHENG-PING SHIAU, PO CHEN, AND LAWRENCE J. REITZER*

Program in Molecular and Cell Biology, The University of Texas at Dallas, P.O. Box 830688, Richardson, Texas 75083-0688

Received 12 May 1992/Accepted 6 November 1992

Phosphorylated nitrogen regulator I (NR<sub>I</sub>, also called NTRC), encoded by *glnG* (*ntrC*), stimulates transcription in *Escherichia coli* and other enteric bacteria from sites analogous to eukaryotic enhancers. We isolated 30 mutants, obtained without phenotypic selection, that have either a small insertion or deletion within *glnG*. Mutants were classified by the ability of NR<sub>I</sub> to repress the *glnAp<sub>1</sub>* and *glnL* promoters and to activate two versions of the nitrogen-regulated *glnAp<sub>2</sub>* promoter; each activity was measured in cells grown with three concentrations of NR<sub>I</sub>. The results were interpreted within the framework of the three-domain hypothesis of NR<sub>I</sub> structure. NR<sub>I</sub> is thought to contain a phosphorylated regulatory domain that controls binding of ATP, a central domain that hydrolyzes ATP and interacts with RNA polymerase, and a DNA-binding region of unknown extent. Our results suggest that the 70 amino acids from residue 400 to the carboxyl terminus constitute a DNA-binding domain that includes residues for specific contacts and dimerization. Our results also suggest that (i) transcription from *glnAp<sub>2</sub>* without specific NR<sub>I</sub>-binding sites requires binding to sites with some similarity to the specific sites, and (ii) if an NR<sub>I</sub> variant can stimulate transcription, then increasing the concentration of NR<sub>I</sub> diminishes *glnA* expression for all mutants but one.

The *glnALG* operon in enteric bacteria is essential for growth in a nitrogen-limited environment. The genes of *glnALG* code for glutamine synthetase, nitrogen regulator II (NR<sub>II</sub>; also called NTRB), and nitrogen regulator I (NR<sub>I</sub>; also called NTRC), respectively (reviewed in references 24 and 35). NR<sub>I</sub>-phosphate, together with RNA polymerase associated with σ<sup>54</sup>, stimulates transcription from the *glnAp<sub>2</sub>* promoter (15, 17, 21, 28, 29). NR<sub>II</sub> controls both the phosphorylation of NR<sub>I</sub> and the dephosphorylation of NR<sub>I</sub>-phosphate (19, 28). The activity of NR<sub>II</sub> is determined by two regulatory proteins, P<sub>II</sub> and the bifunctional uridylyltransferase/uridylyl-removing enzyme. During nitrogen-limited growth, NR<sub>II</sub> phosphorylates NR<sub>I</sub>. However, when nitrogen is abundant in the environment, NR<sub>II</sub>, in conjunction with P<sub>II</sub>, participates in the dephosphorylation of NR<sub>I</sub>-phosphate.

NR<sub>I</sub> binds to specific sequences upstream from the start site of transcription regardless of the degree of covalent phosphorylation—i.e., even when NR<sub>I</sub> is in its transcriptionally inactive conformation (15, 29, 42). However, phosphorylation does affect binding by enhancing cooperative interactions between adjacent molecules bound to DNA (50). Neither NR<sub>I</sub> nor NR<sub>I</sub>-phosphate facilitates the binding of RNA polymerase near the start site of transcription (9, 15, 29, 42). NR<sub>I</sub>-binding sites, like eukaryotic enhancers, can stimulate transcription from sites that are more than 1,400 bases upstream or downstream from the start site of transcription (29, 34). These sites can activate even when the RNA polymerase binding site is on a separate but topologically linked molecule (48). Several lines of evidence show that NR<sub>I</sub>-phosphate from these sites contacts RNA polymerase with looping out of the intervening DNA (36, 47, 48). This contact catalyzes the isomerization of closed promoter complexes to open complexes (29, 31). Isomerization also requires the binding and hydrolysis of ATP by NR<sub>I</sub>-phosphate (49).

This description of NR<sub>I</sub>-dependent activation is undoubtedly a simplification. The hydrolysis of ATP and transcription from *glnAp<sub>2</sub>* may require an interaction between two dimers of NR<sub>I</sub>-phosphate (49, 50). In addition, any model of activation must also consider two unusual features of regulation. Unlike other bacterial activators, NR<sub>I</sub>-phosphate can stimulate transcription from *glnAp<sub>2</sub>* after deletion of its specific binding sites (20, 34, 43). We refer to such a promoter as the minimal *glnAp<sub>2</sub>* promoter. Although the mechanism of this activation is not entirely understood, it appears to be important. Some *glnG* mutants fail to grow with either arginine or proline as a nitrogen source, and NR<sub>I</sub> from these mutants cannot stimulate transcription from the minimal promoter. In these mutant strains, transcription from the *glnAp<sub>2</sub>* promoter with the NR<sub>I</sub>-binding sites was normal (43). These observations suggest that promoters similar to the minimal *glnAp<sub>2</sub>* promoter are physiologically important. Another unusual feature of NR<sub>I</sub>-dependent regulation of *glnA* is the inhibitory effect of high levels of NR<sub>I</sub>-phosphate. This inhibition is a major determinant in establishing the steady-state level of glutamine synthetase for wild-type cells (45).

Comparison with proteins homologous to NR<sub>I</sub>, together with biochemical studies of NR<sub>I</sub> and genetic analysis of *glnG*, suggests that NR<sub>I</sub> contains three functional domains: a phosphorylatable amino-terminal regulatory domain (residues 1 to 120), a central domain (residues 140 to 380) that binds and hydrolyzes ATP and contacts RNA polymerase, and a putative DNA-binding helix-turn-helix structure near the carboxy terminus (residues 444 to 463) (6, 10–13, 16, 19, 38, 46, 49). Primary goals of this work were to determine the effect of disruptions in each region of NR<sub>I</sub> and to further delineate the DNA-binding domain. Another goal was to

* Corresponding author. Electronic mail address: REITZER@UTDALLAS.EDU.

analyze unusual aspects of regulation from *glnAp₂* by correlating partial loss of function with different activities of NR₁. To these ends, we have isolated and characterized 30 different mutants, obtained without phenotypic selection, that contain either small insertions or deletions within *glnG*. (This work was submitted in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of Ph.D. for P. Chen in the Molecular and Cell Biology Program at The University of Texas at Dallas, Richardson, Tex.)

**MATERIALS AND METHODS**

Strains. LR1 (*glnG10::Tn5 lacI<sup>q</sup> lacL8*) is a derivative of *Escherichia coli* K-12 strain W3110 (43). The *glnA* promoter region is intact in LR1 and all of its derivatives. Therefore, glutamine synthetase activity from nitrogen-limited cells is a measure of transcription from the wild-type *glnAp₂* promoter (with all of the NR₁-binding sites) on the chromosome. Reporter strains, used to monitor separate aspects of *glnAp₂* transcription, were derived from LR1 and contain derivatives of phage λ132 (43, 45). Phage λgln105 contains a fusion of the minimal *glnAp₂* promoter—i.e., *glnAp₂* without apparent NR₁-binding sites—to *lacZ*. Phage λgln107 contains a fusion of the NR₁-repressible *glnL* promoter to *lacZ*.

Cell growth and enzyme assays. The minimal medium (W salts) used for growth of cells, growth and harvesting of cells for enzymatic assays, and assays for glutamine synthetase and β-galactosidase have been described previously (25, 39). The minimal medium for nitrogen-limited growth contained W salts, 0.4% glucose, and 0.2% glutamine; the minimal medium for carbon-limited growth contained W salts, 0.4% glycerol, 0.2% (NH₄)<sub>2</sub>SO₄, and 0.2% glutamine. When applicable, β-galactosidase and glutamine synthetase were assayed from the same cell extract. Enzyme activities are expressed as units (micromoles per minute) per milligram of protein.

Plasmid constructions. The plasmids generated for this study are listed in Table 1 and are derivatives of pBLS1 (43), except pSP55, which is derived from pglu55 (see below). All plasmids contain a fusion of the *lacUV5* promoter to *glnG*. To construct the 26 mutants listed in the first part of Table 1, we employed a form of linker mutagenesis that generates in-frame insertions within NR₁ (4). The linkers were single-stranded hexameric oligonucleotides containing a sequence complementary to either a 2- or 4-base restriction site overhang. Linker insertion created a new restriction site from the combination of linker sequences and adjacent nucleotides at the insertion site. Insertion of the linkers resulted in the addition of two codons, except when indicated otherwise.

The mutant plasmids were generated as follows. Plasmid pBLS1 was digested with either *HinPI*, *HpaII*, or *TaqI*. These sites were chosen because there are 27 *HinPI*, 12 *HpaII*, and 7 *TaqI* sites within *glnG*. An empirically determined concentration of ethidium bromide was included in the digestion mixture to limit digestion to a single site (30). Linearized DNA was purified after electrophoresis in a low-melting-point agarose gel. Digestion with *HinPI*, *HpaII*, or *TaqI* results in a 5′ GC overhang. The plasmid DNA was then ligated to linkers, either CGGGCC or CGTCGA; the CG of the linker hybridizes to the GC overhang left by the restriction enzyme. Ligation of the linker to these sites created a unique restriction site, either *ApaI* or *SalI* (Table 1). To remove excess linkers, we treated the ligated DNA mixture with either *ApaI* or *SalI*. A gene coding for resistance to kanamycin, obtained from plasmid pUC4kapa

(Pharmacia) by digestion with either *ApaI* or *SalI*, was ligated to linker-containing DNA. Resistance to kanamycin was used to select the mutants. The marker gene was subsequently removed, and the plasmid was religated. Usually, the site of the insertion could be unambiguously located after digestion with a combination of restriction enzymes that cut the plasmids frequently. Ambiguities are noted in Table 1; when there are ambiguities, knowledge of the exact location of the insertions would not strengthen or detract from the conclusions of this work. We tested for two or more inserts by analyzing for a restriction site that would not be found in plasmids with a single insert. For example, tandem CGGGCC linkers would have created an *SmaI* site (CCCCGG).

Different methods were used to construct the seven mutants listed in the bottom part of Table 1. Plasmid pBLS7 is a deletion derivative of pBLS1. Plasmid pBLS1 is essentially pBR322, except that the *tet* gene between *EcoRI* and *PvuII* is replaced with a fusion of the *lacUV5* promoter to a promoterless *glnG*. The region between the *lac* promoter and *glnG* codes for the ribosome-binding site and the first six codons of *glnA*. This is followed by the last 42 codons of *glnL*, followed by the entire *glnG* gene. NR₁ from cells with pBLS1 is the same size as NR₁ from wild-type cells (44). A deletion between the *Asp* 718 and *EcoRV* sites of pBLS1 deletes the first 139 codons of *glnG* and creates a fusion of *glnA* to *glnG*. The sequence of this fusion protein before residue 140 of NR₁ is M-S-A-E-H-V-K-L-V-P.

Plasmid pCB12 contains a deletion of residues 143 to 398 of NR₁ and was constructed from pSP57 and pSP68. Both parental plasmids contain a unique *SalI* site at the insertion site. The *PstI-SalI* fragment of pSP68 containing the amino-terminal end of *glnG* and the carboxy-terminal half of *bla* was ligated to the *PstI-SalI* fragment of pSP57 that contained the carboxy-terminal end of *glnG* and the amino-terminal region of *bla*. The resulting plasmid, pCB12, has an intact *bla* gene and an *SalI* site in place of residues 143 to 398 of NR₁. Plasmid pCB30 contains a deletion of residues 23 to 398 of NR₁. The construction of pCB30 was identical to that of pCB12, except that the starting plasmids were pSP66 and pSP57.

Plasmids pSP4, pSP5, and pSP8 were constructed from pBLS1 with linkers inserted into one of three *MluI* sites within *glnG*. Linearized full-length DNA, which had been cut once with *MluI*, was blunt-ended, isolated, and ligated to an 8-bp *HindIII* linker. NR₁ from pSP4 acquired 4 amino acids (RKLA) between residues 348 and 349 of *glnG*. Both pSP5 and pSP8 have insertions that contain stop codons that result in deletion of a few residues near the extreme carboxyl terminus of NR₁. They were constructed like pSP4, except that the *HindIII* linker was inserted into the *MluI* site close to the end of *glnG* (at codon 460, which is left intact by this procedure). The plasmids were then digested with *HindIII* and blunted by the Klenow fragment; codons 461 and 462 of *glnG* were restored by this step. Plasmid pSP8 was created by adding a 12-bp *NheI* linker (CTAGCTAGCTAG) to the DNA with the filled-in *HindIII* linker. NR₁ from pSP8 is a 462-amino-acid polypeptide with a 6-amino-acid deletion from the carboxyl terminus. The construction of pSP5 was similar to that of pSP8 except that before insertion of the *NheI* linker, a second *HindIII* linker was added, cut with *HindIII*, and filled in. The introduction of the second *HindIII* linker restored codon 463. NR₁ from pSP5 contains 464 residues; the first 463 are identical to wild-type NR₁ (468 residues), but residue 464 is leucine instead of the glutamate present in wild-type NR₁.

TABLE 1. Plasmid list

| Mutant plasmid constructed by: | Amino acids added$^a$ or deleted$^b$ | Insertion site in $glnG$ | Oligonucleotide inserted |
|------------------------------|------------------------------------|--------------------------|-------------------------|
| Linker mutagenesis of $glnG$   |                                  |                          |                         |
| pSP6                          | 36::G-P                          | HinPI                    | CGGGCCC$^c$            |
| pSP7                          | 185/186::G-P$^d$                 |                          |                         |
| pSP15                         | 448::G-P                         |                          |                         |
| pSP17                         | 406::G-P                         |                          |                         |
| pSP19                         | 185::R-A                         |                          |                         |
| pSP20                         | 252::R-A                         |                          |                         |
| pSP23                         | 252::(R-A)$^e$                   |                          |                         |
| pSP27                         | 193::G-P                         |                          |                         |
| pSP37                         | 185/186::G-P$^d$                 |                          |                         |
| pSP40                         | 310::R-A                         |                          |                         |
| pSP59                         | 412::S-T                         | HinPI                    | CGTCGA$^f$             |
| pSP60                         | 406::S-T                         |                          |                         |
| pSP61                         | 36::V-D                          |                          |                         |
| pSP62                         | 64::S-T                          |                          |                         |
| pSP63                         | 116/117$^g$::R-R/V-D             |                          |                         |
| pSP64                         | 71::R-R                          |                          |                         |
| pSP66                         | 22::S-T                          |                          |                         |
| pSP67                         | 185/186/189/193$^g$::X-X         |                          |                         |
| pSP68                         | 142::S-T                         |                          |                         |
| pSP56                         | 341::S-T                         | HpaII                    | CGTCGA$^f$             |
| pSP56A                        | 341::(S-T)$^e$                   |                          |                         |
| pSP57                         | 398::S-T                         |                          |                         |
| pSP70                         | 9::V-D                           | TaqI                     | CGTCGA$^f$             |
| pSP71                         | Δ238-283; 237-V-D-284$^b$        |                          |                         |
| pSP72                         | 283::V-D                         |                          |                         |
| pSP73                         | 237::V-D                         |                          |                         |
| Other methods$^h$             |                                  |                          |                         |
| pBLS7$^i$                     | Δ1-139                           | NA$^j$                   | NA                      |
| pCB12                         | Δ143-398;142-S-T-399$^b$         | NA                       | NA                      |
| pCB30                         | Δ23-398;22-S-T-399$^b$           | NA                       | NA                      |
| pSP4                          | 348::R-K-L-A                     | MluI                     | CGCGCAAAGCTTG          |
| pSP5                          | Δ465-468;464E→L$^b$              |                          | CGCGCAAAGCTCAAGCTCTAGCTAGCTAGCTAG$^k$ |
| pSP8                          | Δ463-468$^b$                     |                          | CGCGCAAAGCTCTAGCTAGCTAGCTAG$^k$ |
| pSP55                         | 128::Q-A-S-L                     | FnuDII                   | CAAGCTAGCTTG           |

$a$ The residue before the insertion and the residues inserted are indicated. For example, for pSP6, glycine and proline have been inserted between codons 36 and 37 of NR$_I$.

$b$ The deleted codons (inclusive) and the residues that replace the deleted amino acids are indicated.

$c$ This linker creates an $ApaI$ site.

$d$ The possible site of insertion in pSP7 and pSP37 is either codon 185 or 186. These two plasmids are different because cells with either plasmid have a different phenotype (Table 3). In either case, G-P would be inserted. Knowing the exact site of insertion would not change our conclusions.

$e$ The insertion in this plasmid contains multiple linkers.

$f$ This linker creates an $SalI$ site.

$g$ The insertion sites in these plasmids could not be localized with certainty because there are two or more $HinPI$ sites within these regions.

$h$ Described in Materials and Methods.

$i$ A more complete description of this plasmid is provided in Materials and Methods.

$j$ NA, not applicable.

$k$ The underlined sequence is the stop codon.

TABLE 2. Activities of wild-type NR₁ in LR1/pBLS1<sup>a</sup>

| Measured parameter (assay method)                                                                 | Plasmid and genotype          | Effect of NR₁ concentration on NR₁-dependent activities (mU/mg of protein)<sup>b</sup> |
|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Activity from the wild-type *glnAp₂* promoter<sup>c</sup> (glutamine synthetase)                   | pBLS1(*lacUV5p-glnG*<sup>+</sup>) | Low: 5,150 (267) Intermediate: 1,890 (204) High: 911 (56)                      |
|                                                                                                  | pBR322(*glnG*)                | Low: 151 (12) Intermediate: 150 (11) High: 154 (14)                          |
| Activity from the minimal *glnAp₂* promoter<sup>d</sup> (*β*-galactosidase)                         | pBLS1(*lacUV5p-glnG*<sup>+</sup>) | Low: 479 (42) Intermediate: 1,494 (63) High: 1,820 (128)                     |
|                                                                                                  | pBR322(*glnG*)                | Low: 138 (14) Intermediate: 152 (15) High: 244 (30)                          |
| Repression: *glnLp* assay<sup>e</sup> (*β*-galactosidase)                                          | pBLS1(*lacUV5p-glnG*<sup>+</sup>) | Low: 147 (53) Intermediate: 188 (56) High: 245 (17)                         |
|                                                                                                  | pBR322(*glnG*)                | Low: 802 (14) Intermediate: 854 (20) High: 891 (69)                          |
| Repression: *glnAp₁* assay<sup>f</sup> (glutamine synthetase)                                      | pBLS1(*lacUV5p-glnG*<sup>+</sup>) | Low: 72 (6) Intermediate: 53 (11) High: 100 (23)                           |
|                                                                                                  | pBR322(*glnG*)                | Low: 217 (13) Intermediate: 198 (23) High: 217 (15)                         |

<sup>a</sup> The results are the average of 16 independent assays for wild-type *glnAp₂* promoter activity, 7 assays for minimal *glnAp₂* promoter activity, and 4 DNA-binding assays. Numbers in parentheses are the standard errors of the mean.

<sup>b</sup> The expression of NR₁ was induced by three different concentrations of IPTG, which result in low, intermediate, and high intracellular concentrations of NR₁ relative to levels found in wild-type cells. These concentrations are discussed in Results.

<sup>c</sup> Cells were grown in nitrogen-limited medium.

<sup>d</sup> Cells lysogenic for λ*gln105* were grown in nitrogen-limited medium. Phage λ*gln105* contains a minimal *glnAp₂* promoter (without NR₁-binding sites) fused to *lacZ*.

<sup>e</sup> Cells lysogenic for λ*gln107* were grown in nitrogen-limited medium. λ*gln107* contains the NR₁-repressible *glnL* promoter fused to *lacZ*.

<sup>f</sup> Cells were grown in carbon-limited medium; under this condition, *glnA* is expressed from the NR₁-repressible *glnAp₁* promoter.

---

**RESULTS**

Strategy. We generated mutations within *glnG* by insertion of small oligonucleotides (Materials and Methods) because the effects of such mutations can be relatively mild (4, 5). We mutagenized *glnG* in pBLS1, which contains a fusion of the *lacUV5* promoter to *glnG*. We screened for mutagenized plasmids in LR1, in which the transposon Tn5 disrupts the chromosomal *glnG*. The use of plasmid-borne *glnG* simplified mutagenesis and mutant screening and avoided the complications of autogenous regulation. An additional advantage of this overall strategy is that mutants could be isolated without phenotypic selection.

Classification of mutants. Three parameters were assayed from the mutants: measures of transcription from two types of *glnAp₂* promoters (wild-type and the minimal promoter) and an indirect measure of DNA binding by assessment of NR₁-dependent repression of transcription from *glnAp₁*. Each activity was measured from cells at three concentrations of NR₁. We manipulated the intracellular concentration of NR₁ by varying the concentration of isopropyl-β-D-thiogalactopyranoside (IPTG). We refer to the levels of NR₁ that result from the three concentrations of IPTG as low, intermediate, and high (45). A low concentration of NR₁ (in LR1/pBLS1 grown without IPTG) is a concentration lower than that found in nitrogen-limited wild-type cells; a high level of NR₁ (cells grown with 1 mM IPTG) is a level higher than that in wild-type cells. An intermediate concentration of IPTG is defined as the concentration that induces the level of glutamine synthetase found in nitrogen-limited wild-type cells. The level of glutamine synthetase is very sensitive to changes in the level of NR₁ (45). Therefore, we assumed that the concentration of NR₁ in LR1/pBLS1 that results in a wild-type level of glutamine synthetase is the same concentration of NR₁ found in nitrogen-limited wild-type cells. This assumption was verified by immunodetection of NR₁ (44).

Table 2 shows the levels of these three activities measured from LR1/pBLS1 (*glnG*<sup>+</sup>); Table 3 summarizes these activities for 30 mutants. Glutamine synthetase activity, a measure of transcription from the wild-type *glnAp₂* promoter on the chromosome, varied inversely with the concentration of NR₁, as observed previously (45). High concentrations of NR₁ inhibit transcription from *glnAp₂* by a mechanism that is not fully understood. Transcription from the minimal *glnAp₂* promoter (without specific NR₁-binding sites) on the chromosome was assessed by measuring *β*-galactosidase activity from λ*gln105* lysogens. Its activity rose with increasing NR₁ (43). These results were expected and have been analyzed elsewhere (43, 45).

Specific binding to DNA in vivo was generally assessed by one of two different methods, although sometimes both were used. For the first method, cells were grown in carbon-limited medium and then glutamine synthetase activity was determined. With this growth medium, *glnA* transcription initiates from the NR₁-repressible *glnAp₁* promoter (33). Therefore, in wild-type cells, as well as in plasmid-bearing LR1 cells, *glnA* expression (glutamine synthetase activity) is a measure of binding of unphosphorylated NR₁ to the two high-affinity sites that overlap *glnAp₁*. It is not known whether repression requires one or two molecules of NR₁; however, repression probably involves cooperative binding to DNA. The second method measures binding of NR₁-phosphate to DNA. λ*gln107* lysogens contain the NR₁-repressible *glnL* promoter fused to *lacZ* (45). Measurement of *β*-galactosidase activity in these lysogens allows in vivo assessment of the binding of NR₁-phosphate to a single high-affinity site when cells are nitrogen limited. Wild-type NR₁ at all concentrations repressed the *glnL* and *glnAp₁* promoters equally well, suggesting that either assay provides a qualitative assessment of binding to specific sites (Table 2). However, in one mutant, our assays suggested that a variant NR₁ repressed *glnAp₁* but not *glnLp*. Because this result suggests that the *glnAp₁* assay may be more sensitive than

TABLE 3. NR₁-dependent activities in mutants as a function of concentration of NR₁

| Group | Mutant plasmid | Lesion | DNA binding$^{a}$ | Wild-type $glnAp_{2}$ activity$^{b,c}$ | Minimal $glnAp_{2}$ promoter activity$^{b,d}$ |
|-------|----------------|--------|--------------------|-----------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------|
|       |                |        | Low                | Intermediate                           | High                                        | Low               | Intermediate                         | High                                      |
| 1     | pSP17          | 406::G-P | –                 | –                                      | –                                          | –                 | –                                     | –                                         |
|       | pSP60$^{e}$    | 406::S-T | –                 | –                                      | –                                          | –                 | –                                     | –                                         |
|       | pSP15$^{e}$    | 448::G-P | –                 | –                                      | –                                          | –                 | –                                     | –                                         |
|       | pSP8           | Δ463–468 | –                 | –                                      | –                                          | –                 | –                                     | –                                         |
| 2     | pSP6$^{e}$     | 36::G-P  | –                 | –                                      | +                                          | –                 | –                                     | –                                         |
|       | pSP55$^{e}$    | 128::Q-A-S-L | –             | –                                      | +                                          | –                 | –                                     | –                                         |
|       | pSP7$^{e}$     | 185/186::G-P | –            | –                                      | +                                          | –                 | –                                     | –                                         |
|       | pSP71          | Δ238–283 | –                 | –                                      | +                                          | –                 | –                                     | –                                         |
| 3     | pSP59          | 412::S-T | –                 | +$^{f}$                                | +$^{f}$                                    | –                 | –                                     | –                                         |
|       | pSP5           | Δ465–468 | –                 | +                                      | +                                          | +                 | +++                                   | +                                         |
| 4     | pSP70          | 9::V-D   | +                 | +                                      | +                                          | –                 | –                                     | –                                         |
|       | pSP68          | 142::S-T | +                 | +                                      | +                                          | –                 | –                                     | –                                         |
|       | pSP73          | 237::V-D | +                 | +                                      | +                                          | –                 | –                                     | –                                         |
|       | pSP20          | 252::R-A | +                 | +                                      | +                                          | –                 | –                                     | –                                         |
|       | pSP23          | 252::(R-A)n | +            | +                                      | +                                          | –                 | –                                     | –                                         |
|       | pSP56A         | 341::(S-T)n | +            | +                                      | +                                          | –                 | –                                     | –                                         |
|       | pSP4           | 348::R-K-L-A | +          | +                                      | +                                          | –                 | –                                     | –                                         |
| 5     | pSP40          | 310::R-A | +                 | +                                      | +                                          | ++                | +                                     | –                                         |
|       | pSP56          | 341::S-T | +                 | +                                      | +                                          | +                 | –                                     | –                                         |
| 6     | pSP63          | 116/117  | +                 | +                                      | +                                          | +                 | –                                     | +                                         |
|       | pSP72          | 283::V-D | +                 | +                                      | +                                          | +                 | +                                     | +                                         |
| 7     | pSP66          | 22::S-T  | +                 | +                                      | +                                          | +++               | +++                                   | +                                         |
|       | pSP61          | 36::V-D  | +                 | +                                      | +                                          | +++               | +++                                   | +                                         |
|       | pSP62          | 64::S-T  | +                 | +                                      | +                                          | ++                | ++                                    | +                                         |
|       | pSP64          | 71::R-R  | +                 | +                                      | +                                          | ++                | ++                                    | +                                         |
| 8     | pSP19          | 185::R-A | +                 | +                                      | +                                          | +++               | +++                                   | +                                         |
|       | pSP67          | 185/186/189/193::X-X | + | +                                      | +                                          | +++               | –                                     | ++                                        |
|       | pSP37          | 193::G-P | +                 | +                                      | +                                          | +++               | +++                                   | +++                                       |
|       | pSP27          | 398::S-T | +                 | +                                      | +                                          | +++               | +++                                   | +++                                       |
|       | pSP57          | 185/186::G-P | +          | +                                      | +                                          | +++               | +++                                   | ++                                        |

$a$ +, greater than 50% binding; –, less than 50% binding (also see Fig. 2). For all mutants, binding to specific sites was assessed by measuring glutamine synthetase expressed from the NR₁-repressible $glnAp_{1}$ promoter, which appears to be the more sensitive of the two assays for DNA binding. In addition, for about half of the mutants, binding was determined by $glnLp$ assay (discussed in Results, but also see Table 2). Both methods gave the same results, except for pSP59 (see footnote $e$).

$b$ +++, greater than 67%; ++, 34 to 67%; +, 10 to 33%; –, less than 10%.

$c$ Complete promoter activity was assessed by measuring glutamine synthetase from nitrogen-limited cells. Results with a high concentration of NR₁ are not given because of the inhibition by NR₁ at this concentration (see Table 2).

$d$ Activity of the minimal $glnAp_{2}$ promoter (without the NR₁-binding sites) was assessed by measuring β-galactosidase from cells lysogenic for λgln105.

$e$ NR₁ encoded by these plasmids was unstable (see Fig. 1).

$f$ Binding of NR₁ from pSP59 is detectable by the $glnAp_{1}$ assay but not the $glnLp$ assay.

FIG. 1. Immunological assay of NR₁ from mutants in which NR₁ had a detectable DNA-binding defect. NR₁ was detected in extracts from whole cells that contained the indicated plasmids. Cells were grown in nitrogen-limited medium with 1 mM IPTG to fully induce *glnG* expression. Plasmid pBLS1 contains wild-type (WT) *glnG* (lanes 1 and 11); cells with pBR322 (lane 2) do not contain NR₁. Forty micrograms of total protein was loaded into each lane, except lanes 5 and 12 (STD; standard). For lanes 5 and 12, 100 ng of purified NR₁ was applied. NR₁ from pSP71 is smaller than wild-type NR₁ because pSP71 contains a deletion.

deleted from the carboxyl terminus of NR₁ from pSP8, including 1 amino acid (residue 463) at the carboxyl end of the second helix. This mutant NR₁ failed to repress (Table 3, group 1; Fig. 2A). On the other hand, only 4 amino acids from the carboxyl terminus were deleted in plasmid pSP5, which belongs to group 3 in Table 3. NR₁ from this plasmid repressed *glnAp₁* at an intermediate or high concentration (Table 4) and probably has an intact helix-turn-helix structure. (Since LR1/pSP5 has a number of anomalous properties, Table 4 shows more data for this mutant.)

Not only did alterations within the proposed helix-turn-helix structure affect repression, so did two insertions between residues 406 and 444. NR₁ from plasmid pSP59 has a 2-amino-acid insertion between codons 412 and 413. This variant protein repressed transcription from *glnAp₁* but only for cells grown with intermediate or high concentrations of IPTG (Table 3, group 3). However, this mutant NR₁ could not repress transcription initiated from the *glnL* promoter, which contains only one high-affinity binding site (44). Plasmid pSP17 has an insertion that adds 2 amino acids between codons 406 and 407 (Table 3). The variant NR₁ from this plasmid failed to repress even at a high concentration (Table 3, group 1).

Alterations between residues 1 and 398, which contain the regulatory and central activation domains, had no effect on repression if the variant NR₁ was stable (Fig. 1 and 2A). Therefore, we examined repression by NR₁ variants with large deletions of the regulatory domain, the activation domain, or both (Table 5). NR₁(Δ143–398) from pCB12 repressed transcription from *glnAp₁* completely and from *glnLp* as well as did wild-type NR₁. Purified NR₁(Δ143–398) bound as well to *glnLp*-containing DNA in vitro as did wild-type NR₁ (8). This purified variant was a dimer (8). NR₁(Δ1–139) and NR₁(Δ23–398) also repressed expression from *glnLp* and *glnAp₁* in vivo, but not as well as did wild-type NR₁ (Table 5). Preliminary results with purified NR₁(Δ23–398) indicate that this variant also bound DNA, but wild-type NR₁ binds with greater affinity. Preliminary evidence suggests that purified NR₁(Δ23–398) is also dimeric (8).

In summary, the four stable variants with lesions between residue 406 and the carboxyl terminus repressed transcription from *glnAp₁* less well than did wild-type NR₁. In contrast, the 16 stable variants with insertions between the amino terminus and residue 398 repressed transcription as

FIG. 2. Repression activity of NR₁ variants versus the location of lesions. (A) Each point represents an NR₁ variant with a lesion in the indicated location. Cells were grown with three concentrations of IPTG that resulted in low, intermediate, or high levels of NR₁. Repression was measured by assay of the glutamine synthetase expressed from the NR₁-repressible *glnAp₁* promoter. The results are normalized to the activity of wild-type NR₁, which is defined as 100% (complete repression); 0% is the level observed in a strain without NR₁. Some results are expressed as negative values because the level of glutamine synthetase was slightly higher (i.e., no repression) than in cells without NR₁. (B) The three open boxes represent the domains of NR₁: a regulatory domain (residues 1 to 120), a central domain (residues 140 to 380), and a DNA-binding domain (residues 400 to 468). The P indicates the site of phosphorylation. The two solid boxes within the central domain represent regions with homology to other nucleotide-binding proteins. The solid box in the DNA-binding domain is the proposed helix-turn-helix structure.

TABLE 4. Activities of NR₁ in LR1/pSP5$^{a}$

| Measured parameter (assay method) | Plasmid | Effect of NR₁ concentration on NR₁-dependent activity (mU/mg of protein)$^{b}$ |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  |  | Low | Intermediate | High |
| Stimulation of transcription from the wild-type $glnAp_{2}$ promoter$^{c}$ (glutamine synthetase) | pBLS1($glnG^{+}$) | 5,380 (1,004) | 2,320 (218) | 840 (60) |
|  | pBR322($glnG$) | 187 (38) | 207 (39) | 214 (28) |
|  | pSP5 | 698 (118) | 5,400 (1,025) | 3,760 (191) |
| Repression: $glnLp$ assay$^{d}$ ($\beta$-galactosidase) | pBLS1($glnG^{+}$) | 138 (16) | 165 (24) | 234 (15) |
|  | pBR322($glnG$) | 742 (42) | 782 (24) | 790 (23) |
|  | pSP5 | 764 (57) | 269 (32) | 271 (20) |

$a$ Cells were grown in nitrogen-limited medium. Results are the average of four different assays for complete promoter activity and three assays for DNA binding. Numbers in parentheses are the standard errors of the mean.

$b$ See footnote $b$, Table 2.

$c$ See footnote $c$, Table 2.

$d$ See footnote $e$, Table 2.

---

NR₁-phosphate-dependent activation of transcription. Figure 3 summarizes the results of assays of NR₁-dependent transcription from $glnAp_{2}$ versus the location of the mutation. NR₁ from only three plasmids, pSP8, pSP17, pSP71, was stable but could not repress $glnAp_{1}$. These NR₁s presumably bind DNA poorly and also failed to stimulate transcription from either the wild-type or the minimal $glnAp_{2}$ promoter (Table 3, groups 1 and 2). Conversely, all mutant NR₁s that activated transcription from $glnAp_{2}$ also repressed well. These correlations imply that DNA binding is necessary, even for activation of the minimal $glnAp_{2}$ promoter, which has no apparent specific binding sites. Since our assays for DNA binding involve binding to specific high-affinity sites, our results suggest that activation from the minimal promoter requires binding to sites with some similarity to high-affinity NR₁-binding sites. There is only one apparent exception to these correlations. NR₁ from pSP5 at a low concentration did not detectably repress $glnAp_{1}$ but could stimulate transcription from the wild-type $glnAp_{2}$ promoter, albeit to only 13% of the reference level (Table 4). Our repression assays measure the binding of either one NR₁-phosphate to a single high-affinity site or two molecules of unphosphorylated NR₁ to adjacent sites. However, activation from the wild-type $glnAp_{2}$ promoter involves cooperative binding of two molecules of NR₁-phosphate to adjacent sites (50). Since our assays may fail to detect weak binding that is enhanced by cooperative interactions, we cannot conclude that this altered NR₁ does not bind DNA when this

---

TABLE 5. Repression by NR₁ variants with deletion of the regulatory domain, the central activation domain, or both$^{a}$

| Plasmid | Description | IPTG ($\mu$M) | Sp act (mU/mg of protein)$^{b}$ of: |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  |  |  | $\beta$-Galactosidase$^{c}$ | Glutamine synthetase$^{d}$ |
| pBLS1 | Wild-type NR₁ | 0 | 151 ± 20 | 4,730 ± 40 |
|  |  | 10 | 165 ± 2 | 1,008 ± 9 |
|  |  | 1,000 | 207 ± 4 | 610 ± 6 |
| pBR322 | No NR₁ | 0 | 661 ± 9 | 212 ± 4 |
|  |  | 10 | 713 ± 11 | 200 ± 5 |
|  |  | 1,000 | 700 ± 14 | 178 ± 2 |
| pBLS7 | Deletion of regulatory domain ($\Delta$ residue 1–139) | 0 | 713 ± 18 | 188 ± 3 |
|  |  | 10 | 319 ± 12 | 20 ± 2 |
|  |  | 1,000 | 306 ± 9 | 17 ± 3 |
| pCB12 | Deletion of activation domain ($\Delta$ residue 143–398) | 0 | 175 ± 5 | 4 ± 1 |
|  |  | 10 | 221 ± 16 | ND$^{e}$ |
|  |  | 1,000 | 244 ± 3 | ND |
| pCB30 | Deletion of regulatory activation domain ($\Delta$ residue 23–398) | 0 | 675 ± 14 | 193 ± 3 |
|  |  | 10 | 590 ± 13 | 171 ± 5 |
|  |  | 1,000 | 245 ± 11 | 11 ± 3 |

$a$ All plasmids were in LR1 ($\lambda gln107$). Cells were grown in nitrogen-limited medium.

$b$ All activities are the average of three determinations ± standard deviation.

$c$ $\beta$-Galactosidase activity is a measure of transcription from the NR₁-repressible $glnLp$.

$d$ Glutamine synthetase assesses $glnA$ transcription. When glutamine synthetase exceeds the level found in cells with no NR₁, transcription initiated from $glnAp_{2}$. When the level of glutamine synthetase was lower than that in cells without NR₁, glutamine synthetase can be used to assess NR₁-dependent repression of $glnAp_{1}$.

$e$ ND, not detectable (glutamine synthetase was less than 10 mU/mg of protein).

the wild-type $glnAp_2$ promoter, but transcription from the minimal $glnAp_2$ promoter was severely impaired (Table 3, group 7; Fig. 3). These mutants grew slowly with arginine as a nitrogen source compared with an isogenic $glnG^+$ strain (44). These strains and previously isolated mutants in which the primary defect appears to be diminished phosphorylation of NR$_1$ (43) have identical phenotypes. In contrast, two mutations in the regulatory domain (see pSP70 in group 4 and pSP63 in group 6, Table 3) virtually eliminated all transcription from $glnAp_2$, although NR$_1$ from these mutants repressed $glnAp_1$ well (Table 3; Fig. 2 and 3).

NR$_1$-dependent inhibition of transcription from $glnAp_2$. Transcription from the wild-type $glnAp_2$ promoter is inhibited by a high concentration of NR$_1$ (45). With only one exception, if NR$_1$ at a low or intermediate concentration stimulated transcription from the wild-type $glnAp_2$ promoter, then a higher level of NR$_1$ diminished expression (44). The mutation in pSP5 (the exception) decreased repression of $glnAp_1$ and therefore seemed to affect binding to DNA. At an intermediate concentration, this mutant NR$_1$ bound DNA (i.e., repressed transcription from either $glnAp_1$ or $glnLp$) and activated transcription from the wild-type $glnAp_2$ promoter (Table 4). However, a further increase in the concentration of NR$_1$ from pSP5 did not significantly diminish transcription from the wild-type $glnAp_2$ promoter (Table 4).

DISCUSSION

Our goals were to probe the effects of disruption of each domain of NR$_1$ and to analyze aspects of transcriptional activation. We have provided evidence for a larger DNA-binding domain than was previously suspected and have described the characteristic phenotypes of strains with mutations in each domain. Our results suggest that transcription from the minimal $glnAp_2$ promoter requires binding to DNA. We also report isolation of a mutant in which increasing NR$_1$ did not diminish $glnA$ expression.

DNA-binding domain. All lesions between residues 406 and 468 reduced repression of $glnAp_1$ and presumably affected binding to DNA. In contrast, 16 insertions between residues 1 and 398 that resulted in a stable variant (most variants were stable) had no effect on NR$_1$-dependent repression and presumably had little or no effect on DNA binding. Deletion of residues 143 to 398 had no effect on NR$_1$-dependent repression in vivo or DNA binding in vitro. Deletion of residues 1 to 139 or 22 to 398 diminished, but did not eliminate, NR$_1$-dependent repression or DNA binding. Preliminary results indicate that the purified NR$_1$(Δ23–398) is dimeric. From these results, we suggest that residues 406 to 468 comprise a structural DNA-binding domain that contains residues for dimerization. Future biochemical experiments with the truncated versions of NR$_1$ will resolve the following issues. Are all of the DNA-binding determinants in the proposed DNA-binding domain? What region of NR$_1$ is involved in cooperative interactions?

Central activation domain. Two lines of evidence suggest that the central domain of NR$_1$ binds and hydrolyzes ATP. First, it contains motifs found in many nucleotide binding proteins (14, 18, 37). One sequence motif between residues 167 and 173 (GXXGXGK) has been called a “phosphate gripper” (2). Structural evidence suggests that glycine-rich regions in other proteins form flexible loops that strongly bind the phosphates of nucleotides (22, 32). Alteration of this sequence in NR$_1$ abolishes the ability to stimulate transcription (3). Second, mutations that abolish ATP hydrolysis alter amino acids in the central region, and NR$_1$ from such

FIG. 3. Activation of the wild-type and minimal $glnAp_2$ promoters by NR$_1$ variants versus location of the lesion. (A) Activation of transcription from the wild-type $glnAp_2$ promoter. (B) Activity from the minimal $glnAp_2$ promoter. In each case, the activity found in cells with wild-type NR$_1$ is defined as 100%. The activity of the wild-type $glnAp_2$ promoter at a high concentration of NR$_1$ is not shown because of the NR$_1$-dependent inhibition (Table 2). The activity of the minimal $glnAp_2$ promoter is not shown for cells with a low concentration of NR$_1$ because there is little activation at this concentration (Table 2). (C) Proposed domain structure of NR$_1$ (see Fig. 2 for details).

variant is present at a low concentration. Nonetheless, it does seem to bind at higher concentrations.

Central activation domain (residues 140 to 380). Almost all alterations in the central domain produced strains with essentially the same phenotype. The mutant NR$_1$ repressed $glnAp_1$ normally (Table 3; Fig. 2) but generally did not stimulate or poorly stimulated transcription from the wild-type $glnAp_2$ promoter (Table 3, groups 4 to 6; Fig. 3A and B). NR$_1$s that failed to stimulate transcription from the wild-type $glnAp_2$ promoter also failed to activate expression from the minimal $glnAp_2$ promoter (Table 3; Fig. 3). However, some insertions within the central domain did not affect activation.

Amino-terminal regulatory domain (residues 1 to 120). Four of the six mutant NR$_1$s with alterations in the amino-terminal regulatory domain had only a minor defect in activity from

mutants fails to catalyze formation of open-promoter complexes (49).

The central domain of NR<sub>I</sub> (from residues 140 to 380) is homologous to similar regions in other transcriptional activators, such as NifA of *Rhizobium meliloti*, the activator for genes of nitrogen fixation (16). A high level of a truncated derivative of NifA, containing only this central region, can activate transcription of the *nifH* promoter (16). This region of NR<sub>I</sub> probably contains amino acids that contact σ<sup>54</sup>-RNA polymerase. Except for insertions between the two nucleotide-binding motifs, insertions within the central domain eliminated transcription from both the wild-type and minimal *glnAp<sub>2</sub>* promoters (Table 3, mutants of groups 4 to 6; Fig. 3). All insertions outside the nucleotide-binding motifs of the central domain eliminated transcriptional activation. It is tempting to speculate that this essential region is involved in the interaction with RNA polymerase.

**Amino-terminal regulatory domain.** The first 120 amino acids of NR<sub>I</sub> are homologous to a region found in the second component of all two-component regulatory systems. The site of NR<sub>I</sub> phosphorylation, Asp-54 (27, 41), is within this domain. An analogous aspartate is phosphorylated in other response regulators, such as CheY (7). Since phosphorylation is required for transcriptional activation, we expected some mutations in this region to eliminate *glnA* transcription. All transcription from *glnAp<sub>2</sub>* was abolished by the insertion in pSP70 (Table 3; Fig. 3). Some insertions within the regulatory domain should diminish, but not eliminate, the extent of phosphorylation of NR<sub>I</sub>. The phenotype of such mutants has been characterized previously (43). They cannot utilize arginine as a nitrogen source. NR<sub>I</sub> from these mutants fails to stimulate transcription from the minimal *glnAp<sub>2</sub>* promoter but activates transcription from the wild-type *glnAp<sub>2</sub>* promoter to a normal level (43). In fact, four of the mutations in the regulatory domain produced strains with this previously characterized phenotype (Table 3, group 7; Fig. 3). Our results extend the previous findings and show that the regulatory domain contains the lesions that result in this phenotype.

**Transcription from the minimal *glnAp<sub>2</sub>* promoter.** Activators of σ<sup>54</sup>-dependent promoters are unusual because they can stimulate transcription after deletion of the specific binding sites (20, 34). We have previously isolated mutants of NR<sub>I</sub> that can stimulate transcription from the wild-type *glnAp<sub>2</sub>* promoter but not from the minimal promoter. Such mutants fail to utilize a number of nitrogen sources (43). This result suggests that the promoters for some Ntr genes are like the minimal *glnAp<sub>2</sub>* promoter and are necessary for growth in some media. One such gene may be *argT* of *Salmonella typhimurium*, which lacks identifiable NR<sub>I</sub>-binding sites (1). We have previously shown that regulation of the minimal promoter differs significantly from that of the wild-type *glnAp<sub>2</sub>* promoter even though both have identical protein requirements (43). Nonetheless, insertions in the central domain eliminate transcription from both types of *glnAp<sub>2</sub>* promoters, suggesting that the mechanisms of activation are similar. In addition, we conclude that if NR<sub>I</sub> could activate transcription from the minimal promoter, it could bind to specific NR<sub>I</sub>-binding sites (Table 3; Fig. 2 and 3). This correlation suggests that specific DNA binding is necessary for activation of the minimal *glnAp<sub>2</sub>* promoter. In mutants where NR<sub>I</sub> is less easily phosphorylated, there was little or no transcription from the minimal promoter, but normal transcription from the wild-type *glnAp<sub>2</sub>* promoter (43) (Table 3, group 7). Therefore, it is reasonable to speculate that phosphorylation may stabilize the binding to DNA necessary for activating transcription from the minimal

*glnAp<sub>2</sub>* promoter. This speculation is consistent with the observation that NR<sub>I</sub> detectably binds some sites only after phosphorylation (26).

Inhibition of transcription from the wild-type *glnAp<sub>2</sub>* promoter. An important mechanism in determining the steady-state level of glutamine synthetase in a wild-type strain is the inhibitory effect of a high concentration of NR<sub>I</sub> on *glnA* expression (45) (Table 2). To account for this inhibition, we proposed that an interaction between two molecules of NR<sub>I</sub>-phosphate bound to adjacent sites hinders contact between NR<sub>I</sub>-phosphate and RNA polymerase (45). This hypothesis is too simple in light of emerging evidence that the ATPase activity of NR<sub>I</sub> and transcriptional activation may require two dimers of NR<sub>I</sub> (49, 50). Instead, to account for this inhibition, we propose that, depending on the number of phosphorylations or molecules of ATP or ADP bound, some complexes activate better than others. With one exception, inhibition by a high concentration of NR<sub>I</sub> was observed in all mutants in which NR<sub>I</sub> could activate transcription from the wild-type *glnAp<sub>2</sub>* promoter at a low or intermediate concentration. However, this inhibition was not observed in cells carrying plasmid pSP5 (Table 4). NR<sub>I</sub> from pSP5 may be crucial in the investigation, with purified components, of the mechanism of this inhibition.

### ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work was supported by Public Health Service research grant GM 38877 from the National Institute of General Medical Sciences to L.J.R.

We are grateful to Catherine Bailey for editorial assistance and preparation of the manuscript and figures. We acknowledge Barbara Schneider for the construction of pBLS7.

### REFERENCES

1. Ames, G. F.-L., and K. Nikaido. 1985. Nitrogen regulation in *Salmonella typhimurium*. Identification of an *ntrC* protein-binding site and definition of a consensus binding sequence. EMBO J. 4:539–547.
2. Atkins, W. M., P. S. Stayton, and J. J. Villafranca. 1991. Time-resolved fluorescence studies of genetically engineered *Escherichia coli* glutamine synthetase. Effects of ATP on the tryptophan-57 loop. Biochemistry 30:3406–3416.
3. Austin, S., C. Kundrot, and R. Dixon. 1991. Influence of a mutation in the putative nucleotide binding site of the nitrogen regulatory protein NTRC on its positive control function. Nucleic Acids Res. 19:2281–2287.
4. Barany, F. 1985. Two-codon insertion mutagenesis of plasmid genes by using single-stranded hexameric oligonucleotides. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 82:4202–4206.
5. Barany, F. 1985. Single-stranded hexameric linkers: a system for in-phase insertion mutagenesis and protein engineering. Gene 37:111–123.
6. Bourret, R. B., K. A. Borkovich, and M. I. Simon. 1991. Signal transduction pathways involving protein phosphorylation in prokaryotes. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 60:401–441.
7. Bourret, R. B., J. F. Hess, and M. I. Simon. 1990. Conserved aspartate residues and phosphorylation in signal transduction by the chemotaxis protein CheY. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 87:41–45.
8. Chen, P., and L. J. Reitzer. Unpublished observation.
9. Collado-Vides, J., B. Magasanik, and J. D. Gralla. 1991. Control site location and transcriptional regulation in *Escherichia coli*. Microbiol. Rev. 55:371–394.
10. Contreras, A., and M. Drummond. 1988. The effect on the function of the transcriptional activator NtrC from *Klebsiella pneumoniae* of mutations in the DNA-recognition helix. Nucleic Acids Res. 16:4025–4039.
11. Dixon, R., T. Eydmann, N. Henderson, and S. Austin. 1991. Substitutions at a single amino acid residue in the nitrogen-

regulated activator protein NTRC differentially influence its activity in response to phosphorylation. Mol. Microbiol. 5:1657–1667.

12. Drummond, M. H., A. Contreras, and A. Mitchell. 1990. The function of isolated domains and chimeric proteins constructed from the transcriptional activators NifA and NtrC of *Klebsiella pneumoniae*. Mol. Microbiol. 4:29–37.

13. Drummond, M., P. Whitty, and J. Wootton. 1986. Sequence and domain relationships of *ntrC* and *nifA* from *Klebsiella pneumoniae*: homologies to other regulatory proteins. EMBO J. 5:441–447.

14. Fry, D. C., S. A. Kuby, and A. S. Mildvan. 1986. ATP-binding site of adenylate kinase: mechanistic implications of its homology with *ras*-encoded p21, F₁-ATPase, and other nucleotide-binding proteins. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 83:907–911.

15. Hirschman, J., P.-K. Wong, K. Sei, J. Keener, and S. Kustu. 1985. Products of nitrogen regulatory genes *ntrA* and *ntrC* of enteric bacteria activate *glnA* transcription in vitro: evidence that the *ntrA* product is a σ factor. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 82:7525–7529.

16. Huala, E., and F. M. Ausubel. 1989. The central domain of *Rhizobium meliloti* NifA is sufficient to activate transcription from the *R. meliloti nifH* promoter. J. Bacteriol. 171:3354–3365.

17. Hunt, T. P., and B. Magasanik. 1985. Transcription of *glnA* by purified *Escherichia coli* components: core RNA polymerase and the products of *glnF*, *glnG*, and *glnL*. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 82:8453–8457.

18. Husain, I., B. V. Houten, D. C. Thomas, and A. Sancar. 1986. Sequence of *Escherichia coli uvrA* gene and protein reveal two potential ATP binding sites. J. Biol. Chem. 261:4895–4901.

19. Keener, J., and S. Kustu. 1988. Protein kinase and phosphoprotein phosphatase activities of nitrogen regulatory proteins NTRB and NTRC of enteric bacteria: roles of the conserved N-terminal domain of NTRC. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 85:4976–4980.

20. Keener, J., P. Wong, D. Popham, J. Wallis, and S. Kustu. 1987. A sigma factor and auxiliary proteins required for nitrogen-regulated transcription in enteric bacteria, p. 159–175. In W. R. Reznikoff, R. R. Burgess, J. E. Dahlberg, C. A. Gross, M. T. Record, and M. P. Wickens (ed.), RNA polymerase and the regulation of transcription. Elsevier/North-Holland Publishing Co., New York.

21. Kustu, S., E. Santero, J. Keener, D. Popham, and D. Weiss. 1989. Expression of σ⁵⁴-dependent genes is probably united by a common mechanism. Microbiol. Rev. 53:367–376.

22. Lowry, D. F., R. H. Cool, A. G. Redfield, and A. Parmeggiani. 1991. NMR study of the phosphate-binding elements of *Escherichia coli* elongation factor Tu catalytic domain. Biochemistry 30:10872–10877.

23. Lowry, O. H., N. J. Rosebrough, A. L. Farr, and R. J. Randall. 1951. Protein measurement with the Folin phenol reagent. J. Biol. Chem. 193:265–275.

24. Magasanik, B. 1988. Reversible phosphorylation of an enhancer binding protein regulates the transcription of bacterial nitrogen utilization genes. Trends Biochem. Sci. 13:475–479.

25. Miller, J. H. 1972. Experiments in molecular genetics, p. 355. Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold Spring Harbor, N.Y.

26. Minchin, S. D., S. Austin, and R. A. Dixon. 1988. The role of activator binding sites in transcriptional control of the divergently transcribed *nifF* and *nifLA* promoters from *Klebsiella pneumoniae*. Mol. Microbiol. 2:433–442.

27. Moore, J. B., and L. J. Reitzer. Unpublished observation.

28. Ninfa, A., and B. Magasanik. 1986. Covalent modification of the *glnG* product, NRⅠ, by the *glnL* product, NRⅡ, regulates transcription of the *glnALG* operon in *Escherichia coli*. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 83:5909–5913.

29. Ninfa, A. J., L. J. Reitzer, and B. Magasanik. 1987. Initiation of transcription at the bacterial *glnAp₂* promoter by purified *E. coli* components is facilitated by enhancers. Cell 50:1039–1046.

30. Parker, R. C., R. M. Watson, and J. Vinograd. 1977. Mapping of closed circular DNAs by cleavage with restriction endonucleases and calibration by agarose gel electrophoresis. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 74:851–855.

31. Popham, D. L., D. Szeto, J. Keener, and S. Kustu. 1989. Function of a bacterial activator protein that binds to transcriptional enhancers. Science 243:629–635.

32. Redfield, A. G., and M. Z. Papastatros. 1990. NMR study of the phosphoryl binding loop in purine nucleotide proteins: evidence for strong hydrogen bonding in human N-ras p21. Biochemistry 29:3509–3514.

33. Reitzer, L. J., and B. Magasanik. 1985. Expression of *glnA* in *Escherichia coli* is regulated at tandem promoters. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 82:1979–1983.

34. Reitzer, L. J., and B. Magasanik. 1986. Transcription of *glnA* in *E. coli* is stimulated by activator bound to sites far from the promoter. Cell 45:785–792.

35. Reitzer, L. J., and B. Magasanik. 1987. Ammonia assimilation and the biosynthesis of glutamine, glutamate, aspartate, asparagine, L-alanine, and D-alanine, p. 302–320. In F. C. Neidhardt, J. L. Ingraham, K. B. Low, B. Magasanik, M. Schaechter, and H. E. Umbarger (ed.), *Escherichia coli* and *Salmonella typhimurium*: cellular and molecular biology. American Society for Microbiology, Washington, D.C.

36. Reitzer, L. J., B. Movsas, and B. Magasanik. 1989. Activation of *glnA* transcription by nitrogen regulator I (NRⅠ)-phosphate in *Escherichia coli*: evidence for a long-range physical interaction between NRⅠ-phosphate and RNA polymerase. J. Bacteriol. 171:5512–5522.

37. Richet, E., and O. Raibaud. 1987. Purification and properties of the MalT protein, the transcription activator of *Escherichia coli* maltose regulon. J. Biol. Chem. 262:12647–12653.

38. Ronson, C. W., P. M. Astwood, B. T. Nixon, and F. M. Ausubel. 1987. Deduced products of C4-dicarboxylate transport regulatory genes of *Rhizobium leguminosarum* are homologous to nitrogen regulatory gene products. Nucleic Acids Res. 15:7921–7934.

39. Rothstein, D. M., G. Pahel, B. Tyler, and B. Magasanik. 1980. Regulation of expression from the *glnA* promoter of *Escherichia coli* in the absence of glutamine synthetase. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 77:7372–7376.

40. Sambrook, J., E. F. Fritsch, and T. Maniatis. 1989. Molecular cloning: a laboratory manual, 2nd ed., p. 18.60–18.74. Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold Spring Harbor, New York.

41. Sanders, D. A., B. L. Gillece-Castro, A. L. Burlingame, and D. E. Koshland. 1992. Phosphorylation site of NtrC, a protein phosphatase whose covalent intermediate activates transcription. J. Bacteriol. 174:5117–5122.

42. Sasse-Dwight, S., and J. D. Gralla. 1988. Probing the *E. coli glnALG* upstream activation mechanism in vivo. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 85:8934–8938.

43. Schneider, B. L., S.-P. Shiau, and L. J. Reitzer. 1991. Role of multiple environmental stimuli in control of transcription from a nitrogen-regulated promoter in *Escherichia coli* with weak or no activator-binding sites. J. Bacteriol. 173:6355–6363.

44. Shiau, S.-P., and L. J. Reitzer. Unpublished observation.

45. Shiau, S.-P., B. L. Schneider, W. Gu, and L. J. Reitzer. 1992. Role of nitrogen regulator I (NtrC), the transcriptional activator of *glnA* in enteric bacteria, in reducing expression of *glnA* during nitrogen-limited growth. J. Bacteriol. 174:179–185.

46. Stock, J. B., A. J. Ninfa, and A. M. Stock. 1989. Protein phosphorylation and regulation of adaptive responses in bacteria. Microbiol. Rev. 53:450–490.

47. Su, W., S. Porter, S. Kustu, and H. Echols. 1990. DNA-looping and enhancer activity: association between DNA-bound NtrC activator and RNA polymerase at the bacterial *glnA* promoter. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 87:5504–5508.

48. Wedel, A., D. S. Weiss, D. Popham, P. Droge, and S. Kustu. 1990. A bacterial enhancer functions to tether a transcriptional activator near a promoter. Science 248:486–490.

49. Weiss, D. S., J. Batut, K. E. Klose, J. Keener, and S. Kustu. 1991. The phosphorylated form of the enhancer-binding protein NTRC has an ATPase activity that is essential for activation of transcription. Cell 67:155–167.

50. Weiss, V., F. Claverie-Martin, and B. Magasanik. 1992. Phosphorylation of nitrogen regulator I of *Escherichia coli* induces strong cooperative binding to DNA essential for activation of transcription. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 89:5088–5092.
