
JOURNAL OF BACTERIOLOGY, Mar. 1993, p. 1412–1422

0021-9193/93/051412-11$02.00/0

Vol. 175, No. 5

# Molecular Analysis of the 3,6-Dideoxyhexose Pathway Genes  
of Yersinia pseudotuberculosis Serogroup IIA

ANNETTE C. KESSLER, ANTJE HAASE, AND PETER R. REEVES*

Department of Microbiology, The University of Sydney, Sydney, New South Wales 2006, Australia

Received 27 August 1992/Accepted 3 January 1993

Salmonella enterica and Yersinia pseudotuberculosis are the only examples in nature known to use a variety of 3,6-dideoxyhexose derivatives as O antigen constituents. To allow a comparison of the responsible biosynthetic genes of the two organisms, we have sequenced a section of the Y. pseudotuberculosis serogroup IIA *rfb* region that contained the genes for the abequose biosynthetic pathway. Comparison of the identified genes with the *rfb* region of *S*. enterica LT2 showed that the two dideoxyhexose pathway gene clusters are related. The arrangement of the genes was largely conserved, and the G+C compositions of the two DNA regions were strikingly similar; however, the degree of conservation of nucleotide and protein sequences suggested that the two gene clusters have been evolving independently for considerable time. Hybridization experiments showed that the dideoxyhexose pathway genes are widespread throughout the various serogroups of *Y*. pseudotuberculosis.

---

3,6-Dideoxyhexoses (DDH) are a group of unusual, highly immunodominant monosaccharides found almost exclusively within the O antigen component of lipopolysaccharide (LPS). Of eight possible derivatives, only five have so far been found to occur naturally: four of them (abequose, paratose, tyvelose, and colitose) within strains of Salmonella enterica, and all five (including ascarylose) within strains of Yersinia pseudotuberculosis. Isolated Escherichia coli and Citrobacter strains are also known to contain DDH, although in these cases the repertoire is limited to the formation of colitose or abequose, respectively. Only in one situation, in the parasitic *Parascaris* worm, has a DDH (in this case ascarylose) been found outside LPS (25). Within *Y*. pseudotuberculosis, DDH are particularly widespread as O antigen constituents. The antigenic typing scheme of *Y*. pseudotuberculosis has recently been revised (1), suggesting the division into seven major serogroups (I to VII). This division largely reflects the distribution of DDH derivatives throughout the species: group I and III strains possess paratose, group II strains possess abequose, group IV strains possess tyvelose, group VA strains possess ascarylose, and group VI and VII strains possess colitose (20, 35); group VI strains additionally incorporate yersiniose, a DDH-related sugar, into their LPS, while group VB strains contain 6-deoxy-L-altrose instead of a DDH. The assignment of strains containing similar DDH derivatives to different serogroups (e.g., I and III or VI and VII), as well as a further subdivision of some groups into subgroups (IA and -B; IIA, -B, and -C; IVA and -B; and VA and -B), is due to differences in sugar composition and arrangement of the remaining O unit (35).

In both *S*. enterica and *Y*. pseudotuberculosis, DDH are formed by the same biosynthetic-reaction sequences. Four DDH, abequose, tyvelose, paratose, and ascarylose, are synthesized by a common pathway proceeding from CDP-D-glucose (Fig. 1) (28); the fifth, colitose, is derived from GDP-D-mannose presumably via a similar reaction sequence (11). All enzymes involved in DDH biosynthesis in *S*. enterica are encoded within the *rfb* gene cluster, which is responsible for the formation of the O-specific subunit of the LPS (26).

The *rfb* gene clusters of several DDH-containing *S*. enterica strains have been cloned and sequenced (7, 8, 17, 24, 45, 50), and most of the DDH-related genes have been identified. In all cases investigated, the arrangement of the DDH pathway genes and their relative positions within the *rfb* region are conserved: immediately downstream of the rhamnose pathway genes, a block of four highly conserved genes is found, comprising *rfbF* and *rfbG* as well as two open reading frames (ORFs), *orf7.6* and *orf10.4*, which are thought to correspond to the postulated DDH pathway genes *rfbI* and *rfbH* (8). Abequose-forming strains of serogroups B and C2 (serovars typhimurium and muenchen, respectively) were shown to possess another gene, *rfbJ*, coding for abequose synthase, which is located adjacent to this highly conserved block; although secondary structure predictions indicated very similar proteins, DNA and amino acid sequences of the two *rfbJ* genes had only low levels of similarity (only 36% identity at the amino acid level [8]). In strains forming tyvelose and paratose (serovars typhi and paratyphi of serogroups D and A, respectively), the *rfbJ* gene was replaced by a paratose synthase gene, *rfbS*, and a tyvelose epimerase gene, *rfbE* (46). The tyvelose epimerase gene in the paratose-producing group A strain, however, was found to be inactive because of a single point mutation. While *rfbS* still showed a low degree of similarity to *rfbJ* at the DNA sequence level, no counterpart to *rfbE* was found in the *rfb* region of the abequose-producing strains of *S*. enterica. Sequence analysis revealed unusually low G+C contents for all *rfb* regions investigated, suggesting a relatively recent transfer of the gene cluster to *S*. enterica from a nonenterobacterial donor with a low G+C content (8, 17, 22, 48).

We have previously reported the cloning of the *Y*. pseudotuberculosis serogroup IIA *rfb* region (19). Hybridization studies of this abequose-producing strain (M85) had shown that at least some of the M85 *rfb* genes are related to DDH pathway genes (*rfbF* and *rfbG*) of *S*. enterica LT2. In this study, we present the sequence and detailed analysis of the DDH pathway gene region of this *Y*. pseudotuberculosis strain. Most of its DDH pathway genes were clearly related

* Corresponding author.

in the cosmid vector pPR691 (Fig. 2A) (19), was used as a DNA source for most subcloning procedures. Fragments for sequencing were cloned into either the plasmid vector pT7T3 19U (Pharmacia) or the phage vectors M13mp18 and M13mp19 (31). Helper phage M13KO7 was obtained from Pharmacia. DNA fragments to be used as hybridization probes were subcloned into pUC18 (51).

DNA techniques. Plasmid DNA preparation, single-stranded DNA preparation for clones in M13 vectors, agarose gel electrophoresis, radioactive labelling of DNA, autoradiography, ligation, and bacterial transformation using CaCl₂ were performed as described by Maniatis et al. (27). Transformation of *E. coli*-derived plasmid DNA into *S. enterica* M6 could not be carried out directly because of restriction systems in the *S. enterica* host. *E. coli*-derived plasmid DNA was, therefore, first transformed into the restriction-negative *S. enterica* P9121; the plasmid isolated from this strain could then easily be introduced into M6.

Propagation of M13KO7 and preparation of single-stranded DNA from pT7T3-derived deletion clones were carried out as described by the supplier, Pharmacia, or alternatively, by using the protocol of Blondel and Thillet (6). Hybridization conditions were those outlined by Howley et al. (16) for high stringency: the hybridization solution contained 50% (vol/vol) formamide, and hybridization was carried out at 37°C. The filter was washed three times for 5 min each time at room temperature in 2× SSC (1× SSC is 0.15 M NaCl plus 0.015 M sodium citrate)—0.1% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS), then for 1 h in 1× SSC—0.1% SDS at 56°C, and finally for 15 min in 0.1× SSC—0.1% SDS at 56°C.

Sequencing strategy. A 7-kb *PvuII* fragment covering the DNA region thought to contain most of the *Y. pseudotuberculosis* abequose pathway genes (as indicated by previous hybridization experiments [19]) was isolated from pPR1197 and ligated into the *HindIII* polylinker restriction site of pT7T3 19U. Plasmids pPR1224 and pPR1225 were isolated; they carried the desired fragment in opposite orientations with respect to the universal priming site to allow sequencing of both DNA strands. An overview of the subcloning and sequencing strategy is given in Fig. 2B. By using *BamHI* and *SacI* as the 5′ and 3′ restriction enzymes, respectively, nested sets of deletions were then created in each plasmid with exonuclease III according to the protocol of Henikoff (15); plasmid pT7T3 19U carries the IG (intergenic) region from phage fl which allows derivatives to be packaged as single-stranded DNA during superinfection with helper phage M13KO7 (47). Gaps in the assembled sequence were closed by subcloning suitable DNA restriction fragments into the sequencing vector M13mp18 or M13mp19 to yield the complete sequence from position 2.7 to position 9.7; the DNA sequence from position 1.75 to position 2.7 was also determined by subcloning into M13, while the area from 9.7 to 10.55 was sequenced by using DNA fragments subcloned into pUC18 as double-stranded templates. *E. coli* NM522 was used as the cloning host in all experiments involving pUC18- and pT7T3 19U-derived clones, while *E. coli* JM101 was used for all M13 clones. All DNA preparations were sequenced by the chain termination technique of Sanger et al. (37) by using fluorescent dye-labelled M13 universal or reverse primers and running the reaction mixture on an Applied Biosystems 370A sequencer.

Analysis of sequence data. Sequence data were analyzed by using the Australian National Genomic Information Service at Sydney University, which incorporates several sets of programs. Sequences were assembled by using the program SAP (40, 42); molecular weight and G+C content were

FIG. 1. Biosynthetic pathways for the formation of DDH. (A) Colitose pathway. (B) Pathway for formation of the derivatives abequose, ascarylose, paratose, and tyvelose. The *rfb* genes involved are indicated. They encode enzymes as follows: *rfbF*, glucose-1-P cytidylyltransferase; *rfbG*, CDP-D-glucose oxidoreductase; *rfbH*, CDP-4-keto-6-deoxy-D-glucose-3-dehydrase; *rfbI*, CDP-6-deoxy-Δ³⁴ glucoseen reductase; *rfbJ*, CDP-abequose synthase; *rfbS*, CDP-paratose synthase; *rfbE*, CDP-2-tyvelose epimerase (26). The enzymes and the biochemical reaction steps involved in the formation of ascarylose from the common intermediate CDP-4-keto-3,6-dideoxy-D-glucose have not yet been elucidated.

to counterparts in *S. enterica*. G+C contents and codon usage data for the *Y. pseudotuberculosis* DDH pathway genes were found to be very similar to those for *S. enterica*, while the DNA and amino acid sequences have diverged considerably and the *rfbJ* gene had only low levels of similarity with the *rfbJ* genes of *S. enterica* identified previously. Possible histories of the DDH pathway genes are discussed. Hybridization experiments using the M85 DDH pathway genes as probes demonstrated widespread distribution of these genes throughout *Y. pseudotuberculosis*.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Bacterial strains. *E. coli* K-12, *S. enterica*, and *Y. pseudotuberculosis* strains used are listed in Table 1. All strains were cultivated in NB broth as described by Maniatis et al. (27); *Y. pseudotuberculosis* was grown at 30°C, while all other strains were grown at 37°C.

Enzymes and chemicals. DNA polymerase I, RNase A, Klentow polymerase, exonuclease III, S1 nuclease, restriction enzymes, T4 DNA ligase, *Taq* polymerase, and deoxy- and dideoxynucleotide mixes were from Pharmacia LKB Biotechnology, Uppsala, Sweden, or Boehringer Mannheim Biochemicals, Indianapolis, Ind.; DNase I and other chemicals were from Sigma Chemical Co. and Ajax Chemicals, Sydney, Australia. Reinforced nitrocellulose membrane was from Schleicher & Schuell. An Applied Biosystems 370A DNA sequencer and dye-labelled M13 universal and reverse primers were from Applied Biosystems Inc. Radiochemicals ([α-³²P]dCTP) were from Bresatec Ltd., Adelaide, Australia.

Phages and plasmids. Plasmid pPR1197, containing the complete functional *rfb* region of *Y. pseudotuberculosis* M85

TABLE 1. Bacterial strains

| Strain                     | Laboratory stock no. | Characteristics       | Source or reference                                                                 |
|----------------------------|----------------------|-----------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Y. pseudotuberculosis      |                      |                       |                                                                                    |
| M85                        |                      | Serotype IIA          | D. Hughes, New South Wales Dairy Corporation laboratory                              |
| H102/88                    | M443                 | Serotype IA           | S. Aleksic, Institute for Hygiene, Hamburg, Germany                                 |
| H892/87                    | M444                 | Serotype IA           | S. Aleksic                                                                         |
| H749/89                    | M445                 | Serotype IB           | S. Aleksic                                                                         |
| H376/89                    | M446                 | Serotype IB           | S. Aleksic                                                                         |
| H165/891                   | M448                 | Serotype IIA          | S. Aleksic                                                                         |
| H1779                      | M449                 | Serotype IIB          | S. Aleksic                                                                         |
| H713/86                    | M451                 | Serotype III          | S. Aleksic                                                                         |
| H1091/90                   | M452                 | Serotype IVA          | S. Aleksic                                                                         |
| H1132/90                   | M453                 | Serotype IVA          | S. Aleksic                                                                         |
| H715/86                    | M454                 | Serotype IVB          | S. Aleksic                                                                         |
| H717/86                    | M455                 | Serotype IVB          | S. Aleksic                                                                         |
| H719/86                    | M456                 | Serotype VA           | S. Aleksic                                                                         |
| H1092/90                   | M457                 | Serotype VA           | S. Aleksic                                                                         |
| H450/86                    | M458                 | Serotype VB           | S. Aleksic                                                                         |
| H1117/90                   | M459                 | Serotype VB           | S. Aleksic                                                                         |
| H720/86                    | M460                 | Serotype VI           | S. Aleksic                                                                         |
| H1098/90                   | M461                 | Serotype VI           | S. Aleksic                                                                         |
| H455/86                    | M462                 | Serotype VII          | S. Aleksic                                                                         |
| H143/84                    | M463                 | Serotype IIA          | S. Aleksic                                                                         |
| H130/87S                   | M464                 | Serotype IIA          | S. Aleksic                                                                         |
| H125/87S                   | M465                 | Serotype IIB          | S. Aleksic                                                                         |
| H62/87S                    | M466                 | Serotype IIC          | S. Aleksic                                                                         |
| H172/87S                   | M467                 | Serotype IIC          | S. Aleksic                                                                         |
| H302/89                    | M468                 | Serotype III          | S. Aleksic                                                                         |
| H97/88                     | M469                 | Serotype III          | S. Aleksic                                                                         |
| H144/86                    | M470                 | Serotype VA           | S. Aleksic                                                                         |
| H2/87S                     | M471                 | Serotype VA           | S. Aleksic                                                                         |
| H14/87S                    | M472                 | Serotype VB           | S. Aleksic                                                                         |
| H132/87S                   | M473                 | Serotype VB           | S. Aleksic                                                                         |
| H207/87S                   | M474                 | Serotype VII          | S. Aleksic                                                                         |
| H721/86                    | M475                 | Serotype VII          | S. Aleksic                                                                         |
| E. coli                    |                      |                       |                                                                                    |
| JM101                      | P2398                |                       | 51                                                                                 |
| P4554                      |                      | JM109 carrying pPR1197 | 19                                                                                 |
| GB23152                    | P3898                | lacZ trpA kdgR recA1 rpsL25 hsdR trpR Δ(edd-zwf) 22 Δ(attA-rfbD) | 3                                                                                  |
| NM522                      | P4442                | Δhsd-5 Δ(lac-pro)     | Pharmacia                                                                         |
| P4580                      |                      | NM522 carrying pPR1224 | This study                                                                         |
| P4581                      |                      | NM522 carrying pPR1225 | This study                                                                         |
| S. enterica                |                      |                       |                                                                                    |
| P9029                      |                      | S. enterica LT2 Δ(his-rfb) 388 | 30                                                                              |
| LB5000                     | P9121                | S. enterica LT2 leu hsdL (r⁻ m⁺) trpD2 rpsL120 ilv-452 metE551 metA22 hsdA(r⁻ m⁺) hsdB(r⁻ m⁺) | 9                                                                                  |
| M6                         |                      | S. enterica serovar dublin | S. Dixon, Institute of Medical and Veterinary Science, Adelaide, Australia; 1983 |

determined by using the program NIP (41); and secondary protein structures, hydrophobicity, and charge distribution were calculated by the program CHOU (GCG package [10]). The RNY (purine:N-pyrimidine) preference method of Shepherd (39) was used to identify ORFs. To allow DNA and amino acid sequence alignments, the programs GAP, BESTFIT (GCG package [10]), and SEQ A (18) were used. Parameters for running BESTFIT were as follows: gap weight, 5.0; gap length weight, 0.3. Promoter search programs were generously provided by M. C. O'Neill. ALIGNIC 2 searched for promoters on the basis of information content (33).

MOLBVHI3 used the information content Berg-von Hippel function, and the program VONHIPIC was used to calculate the index for each potential promoter, as described by O'Neill (32). Y. pseudotuberculosis nucleotide sequence data available from the GenBank and EMBL DNA sequence collections were extracted, noncoding sequences were removed, and the G+C contents of the three codon positions were calculated as described by Sueoka (44). All genes of the two subspecies (Y. pseudotuberculosis subsp. pseudotuberculosis and Y. pseudotuberculosis subsp. pestis) available at

FIG. 2. (A) Restriction map of plasmid pPR1197, which contains the complete Y. pseudotuberculosis M85 rfb region (19). B, BamHI; S, SalI; Bg, BglII; E, EcoRI; H, HindIII; P, PstI; Pv, PvuII; X, XhoII. Numbers represent length in kilobases. (B) Sequencing strategy. The fragments are aligned with panel A. Some of the restriction sites used for subcloning of the smaller fragments were deduced from the DNA sequence and are not shown in panel A. A total of 8.8 kb (from positions 1.75 to 10.55) was sequenced. The PvuII-PvuII fragment (positions 2.7 to 9.7) was cloned into pT7T3 19U in both orientations with respect to the universal priming site; the two resulting plasmids were designated pPR1224 and pPR1225 and sequenced by using nested sets of deletions. Fragments 1 (SalI-PvuII; positions 0 to 2.7), 2 (SalI-HindIII; positions 0 to 2.45), 3 (HindIII-EcoRI; positions 2.45 to 4.05), and 4 (HindII-HindIII; positions 1.75 to 2.45) were cloned into M13mp18 or M13mp19 and sequenced by using single-stranded templates. Arrows denote the direction and the length of the sequence obtained from a clone; sections of the clones that have not been sequenced are indicated by thinner lines. Fragments 5 (PvuII-EcoRI; positions 9.7 to 11.2), 6 (HindII-EcoRI; positions 9.8 to 11.2), 7 (NdeI-EcoRI; positions 10.2 to 11.2), 8 (NsiI-PvuII; positions 10.55 to 9.7), 9 (NdeI-PvuII; positions 10.2 to 9.7), and 10 (HindII-PvuII; positions 9.8 to 9.7) were cloned into pUC18 and sequenced by using double-stranded templates to give the DNA sequence of the region from 9.7 to 10.55 kb. (C) Y. pseudotuberculosis M85 (serogroup IIA) DDH pathway genes. Areas related to the S. enterica LT2 rfb region are stippled. Areas related to S. enterica Ty2 only are hatched. DNA regions outside rfb are indicated in black. Previous mutagenesis data indicated that the left-hand end of the M85 rfb region was approximately between kilobase positions 35 and 37 of the original cosmid clone pPR981 (19), which corresponds to kilobase positions 0 to 2 in the DNA sequence. Sequence analysis showed extensive noncoding DNA sequences upstream of orf0.8, indicating that the M85 rfb cluster, in fact, begins with orf0.8. The scale (in kilobases) used in this figure is based on DNA sequence data, which do not include the DNA region from position 0 to position 1.75 of the plasmid map in panel A. (D) DNA fragments used as probes. All fragments were subcloned into pUC18, in most cases by using restriction sites identified from the DNA sequence. The plasmids are pPR1366 (PvuII-ScaI; 0.7 kb), pPR1367 (StyI-StyI; 0.7 kb), pPR1368 (DraI-DraI; 1 kb), pPR1369 (HindII-BalII; 1.3 kb), pPR1370 (NsiI-BalI; 0.9 kb), pPR1385 (HindII-ScaI; 0.8 kb), and pPR1386 (KpnI-PvuII; 0.6 kb). (E) The rfb region of S. enterica LT2 (group B). Areas related to the Y. pseudotuberculosis M85 rfb region are stippled. (F) The rfb region of S. enterica Ty2 (group D). Only areas differing from S. enterica LT2 rfb are shown; the rfbE gene homologous to the M85 orf6.3 is hatched.

the time of data preparation were used (kim-5, lcrD, lcrE, lcrF, lcrG, lcrH, lcrV, ompH, psaA, rplC, rplD, rplW, rplB, rpsS, yopA, yopE, yopH, and four unidentified ORFs). Accession codes of the DNA sequences are YEPKIM5A, YEPLCRD, YEPLCRGVHP, YEPOMPH, YEPORF, YEPPSAA, YEPRLDWB, YEPTPA, YEPVIPB1, YEPY-OPA, YEPYOP5, YEPYOPH, and PD1THRMRP.

Construction of gene-specific DNA probes. Suitable restriction enzyme sites identified by DNA sequencing were used to subclone part of each of the M85 DDH pathway genes into pUC18 to yield plasmids pPR1366 to -1370, pPR1385, and pPR1386 (Fig. 2D).

Immunological techniques. The presence of an antigenic epitope cross-reacting with O4 antiserum was determined by slide agglutination as described by Leinonen (23). O4-specific antiserum was supplied by Wellcome Diagnostics, Dartford, England.

Staining of 6-phosphogluconate dehydrogenase. Plasmids to be tested for the presence of the gnd gene were transformed into E. coli GB23152. Extracts of the transformants were prepared as described by Selander et al. (38); 15 μl of each extract was spotted on Whatman 3MM filter and stained with 3 ml of staining solution (composition as suggested by the same authors). A red dye was formed on spots containing a functional 6-phosphogluconate dehydrogenase.

Nucleotide sequence accession number. The DNA sequence reported here has been assigned the GenBank accession number LO1777.

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

Sequence of the Y. pseudotuberculosis M85 abequose pathway region and identification of ORFs. Both strands of the M85 rfb region from position 1.75 (HindII) to position 10.55

hemH
T P Y T D E T L K S L P S Q G V K H I Q L I C P G F S A D C L E T L E E I K E Q
GACACCTTATACCGATGAAAA CCTTAAAGTTAACCTTCTCAAGGCGTTAAGCATATT CAGCTTATTTGCCAAGTTTCTCTGGCATTGTCTGGAAA ACTCTGGAAAGAATAAAAGAGCA 120
N R E F F L H A G G E K F E Y I P A L N D D E G H I A L L E Q L I R H N I *
AAATCGAGAGTTTTTCTTG CATGGGGCGGAGAGAAGTTTGAATACATCCCAGCAT TGGAATGACGAGCGGGGCATATTGCCCTGT TAGAACAGTTAATTCGACATAATATATAATATCGCT 240
GCTAAACATTACATCTTTTGGTAGTTTATCACACTCAA AAATTTCAATCCAAATGAAAGAGTCAGTAAAAAATATAAAATAGTGGTAAAATGTTGTCGTGGTTAGTATTTGTTC 360
________-35________-10
ATTTTGATCTGATCTTTTATCAAATAGAACATGATGTC ATCACATCTCTTTGTAATATAGGATATAAGTAGCATTAT TAGCACGAAATTTTGGTTTTTATGTCATAGGGTGCTTA 480
ACTTAAC TTACATCTGTAATTT CGGAATGCTCCGACACCTGTTTTAGG TAAAAGCGCGTACCTTCAAGGCCCTGTTATGGTTGTAGACCTAAAGCTTCAATCACCAGTGCATTGGTAGC 600
TGTAAGCCAAGGGCGG TAGCGTGGGGGGGATAGA ACCCCAATAGTTGCCTTTTACTCTGGAAACGGCAGGAAAGACCTTCTACAATTTTTTACTTTTAGTGATTTTTAACCGTACTTCT 720
Start orf0.9
________-35________-10 M S L
TTATCAAAAATTATTTTGCTTTTTTGT TTCTATTTTAGTCACTGAATTTTTTGACTTAAGTTTGTAT TGGAGTACGTCTAATAAAACCTTACATAATATATATTTTGGACTTATTTTATGTCATT 840
N V K L H P S G I I F T S D G T S T I L D A A L D S N I H I E Y S C K D G T C G
AAATGTTAAGCTGCATCCATCAGGTATTATTTTACTTCCGATGGAACATCTACAATATTAGATGCGGCTCTGGATAGTAAATACATATTGAAATACAGCTGCAAAGATGGAACCTGTGG 960
S C K A I L I S G E V D S A E N T F L T E E D V A K G A I L T C C S K A K S D I
TTCTTGTAAGGCAATATTGATTCTCGGTGAAGTAGACGTGCGGAAAATACCTTTTAACTGAGGAAAGATGTTGCTAAAAGGTGCAATCCTCATTGTTGCTTAAGGCTAAATCTGATAT 1080
E L D V N Y Y P E L S H I Q K K T Y P C K L D S I E F I G E D I A I L S L R L P
TGAGTTAGATGTTAATTTATCCAGAGTTAAGTCATATACA AAAAAAACATTATCCTATGTTAATTAGATAGCATTGAATTATTGGTGAAGATATTGCCATTCTCCTTTACGTTTGGC 1200
P T A K I Q Y L A G Q Y I D L I I N G Q R R S Y S I A N A P G G N G N I E L H V
ACCAACGGCCAAAATACAGTATCTGGGGGCAAATACATTGATTAATTATAAGGACAGCGCGTAGTTACTCTATTTGCTAATGCTCCAGGTGTAATGGCAATATCGAATTACACGT 1320
R K V V N G V F S N I I F N E L K L Q Q L L R I I E G P Q G T F F V R E D N L P I
ACGTAAGTTGTTAATGGTG TATTCAGCAACATCATTTTTAATGAGTTAAAATACAGCAACTTTTACGAATTGAAAGTCCCTCAAGGGACCTTTTTCGTTCGTGAAGATAATCTCCCTAT 1440
V F L A G G T G F A P V K S M V E A L I N K N D Q R Q V H I Y W G M P A G H N F
TGTTTTTCTTGCTGGTGGAAACAGTTTTGCA CCAGTGAAATCAAGGTTGAGGCGTTGATCAATAAAAATGACCAACGGCAGGTTCATATCTATTTGGGAATGCCAGCGGGCATAATT 1560
Y S D I A N E W A I K H P N I H Y V P V V S G D D S T W T G A T G F V H Q A V L
CTATTCTGACATTGCAAATGAGTGGGC TATAAAAACCCCTAAACATTATGTG CCTTTGTATCAGGCGATAGTACTTTGGACC GGAGCCACTGGTTTTGTACATCAAGCGGTGCT 1680
E D I P D L S L F N V Y A C G S L A M I T A A R N D F I N H G L A E N K F F S D
TGAAAGATATA CCCGATCTCAGCTTATTTAATGTTTATG CCTGTGGTTCAATTAGCGATGATTACTGCTCGCTAATGATTTCATCAATCATGGATTAGCTGAAAATAATTTTCTCTGA 1800
A F V P ' S K *
Start rfbP
M E I Q V K A V I L A G G L G T R L S E E T V V
TGCCTTTGTGCCATCAAATAACTTTGAGGATCAAAGTAATACGTAATGGAGATTC AAGTGAAAGCAGTCATTTTGGCCCCGAGGCCTTGGAAACCGTCTTATGTAAGAGACC GTAGTAA 1920
K P K P M V E I G G K P I L W H I M K L Y S S Y G I N D F V I C C G Y K G Y V I
AACCAAAACCAATGGTAGAGATTTGGGGAAGCCTATTCTCTGGCATATTATGAA AACTTTACTCTTATATGGCATCAATGATTTCGTTATTTGCTGTGGTTATAAAGGCTATATGCTTA 2040
K E Y F A N Y F M H M S D I T F C M R D N E M I V H Q K R V E P W N V T L V D T
AAGAATATTTTGC AATTACTTTATGCAATGTGCGGATATTACCTCTGCA TGC GTGATAATGAAATGATAGTACACCAAAAGCGAGTCGAACCCCTGGAATGTCACGTTAGTAGACACC G 2160
G E D S M T G G R L R R V K D Y V K D D E A F C F T Y G D G V S D V N I A E L I
GCGAAGATTCTATGACCCGTGGCCGACTGAGGCGTGTAAAAGATTACGTCAAA AGACGATGAGGCCTTTCTGT TTCACCTATGGTGATGGTGTGAGTGACGTC AATATTGCTGAATTAATG 2280
E F H K S H G K Q A T L T A T Y P P G R F G A L D I K D K Q V R S F K E K P K G
AATTCCATAAGAGCCACGGCAAGCAAGCCACATTAACGGCAACCTATCCCCCC AGGCGTTTTGGTGC TGGATATTTAAAGATAAAACAAGTACGTAGTTTTAAAGAAAAACCAAAAAGGC G 2400
D G A L I N G G Y F V L S P K V I D L I D G D K S T W E Q E P L M T L A A Q G E
ATGGCGCATTGATCAACGGGGTTATTTTGTGTTTGTG GCC TAAAGTTATCGATCTGATCGATGGTGATAAATCTACTTTGGGAGCAGGAACCTTTAATGACATTAGCTGGCGAGGGGGGAGT 2520
Start rfbQ
M
L M A F E H A G F W Q P M D T L R D K I Y L H E L W E E G R A P W K V W E *
TGATGGCGTTTGAACATGCCGTTTCTGGCAGCCAATGGATACGTTGCGTGACAAGAATTATCTGCATGAACATATGGGAAAGAGGCAGGGCACCTTGGAAAGGTATGCGGATAAACA AATG 2640
I N N S F W Q G K R V F V T G H T G F K G G W L S L W L Q T M G A T V K G Y S L
ATTAATAATAGTTTCTGGCAAAGGTTAAGGGTTTTTGTAACGGCCATACTGGGTTTAAAGTGGGCTGGTTAGAGTTTATGGTTGCAAACCATGGGGGCAACGGTTAAAGGTTACTCTTG 2760
A P P T V P S L F E T A R V A D G M Q S E I G D I R D Q N K L L E A I R E F Q P
GCCCCCCCCACGGTGCC TAGCCTATTTGAGACCGCAGTTGCCGATGCAATCGGAAATCGGTGATATTCGTGATCAAAAACAAATTATGAAGCAATCCGCGAATTCCAACCA 2880
E I V F H M A A Q P L V R L S Y S E P V E T Y S T N V M G T V Y L L E A I R H V
GAAATTGTTTCCACATGGCTGCTCAGCCACTGGTCCGTATCCCTATTC CGAACCCTGAAACCTACTCGACGAATGTTATGGGTACC GTTTATTACTGGAAAGCTATTCGCCATGTT 3000
G G V K A V V N I T S D K C Y D N K E W I W G Y R E N E A M G G Y D P Y S N S K
GGTGGCGTCAAAGCGGTTGTC AATATCACCAGT GATAAATAGCTACGATAAAGAGTGGATCTGGGGCTATCGCGAAAATGAAAGGATGGGGGGGTATGATCCTTACTCCAACAGTAAA 3120
G C A E L V T S S Y R N S F F N P A N Y G Q H G T A V A T V R A G N V I G G G D
GGTTGTGCGGAATTAGTGACGTCATCCTACC GTAATTCTTCAATCCAGGAAACTATGGGCACTGGCCTAGCGACAGTGGTGGTAATGTCATCGGTGGGCGAT 3240
W A L D R I V P D I L R A F E Q S Q P V I I R N P H A I R P W Q H V L E P L S G
TGGGCATTGGATCGCATGTTCCAGATATTCTTGGGCGTTTGAACAGTCCCAACCAGTGA TTTCGCAACCCACATGCCCATGGCAGATGTGTTGGAGCCTTTTGCGGGGT 3360
Y L L L A Q K L Y T D G A E Y A E G W N F G P N D A A D A T P V K N I V E Q M V K
TATTTGCTGTTGGCACAGAAGTTTATATACTGACGGTGCTGAATATGCCGAAAGTTGGA ACTTTGGCTAAAGATGCTGATGCTACTCCAGTAAAAAAACATTGTTGAAACAAATGGTAAA 3480
Y W G E G A S W Q L D G N A H P H E A H Y L K L D C S K A K M Q L G W H P R W T
TATTTGGGAGAGGGTGCAAGCTGGCAATTAGATGGCAATGCTCACCCCTCATGAAGCTCATTATCTGGAAACTGGATTGTTCAAAAGCTAAAAATGCAACTTTGGCTATCCCTCGCTGGACC 3600
L N T T L E Y I V G W H K N W L S G T D M H E Y S I T E I N N Y M N T K *
TTGAATACTACGCTGGAATATATTGTGGGCTGGCAAAAGA ACTGGTTATCAGGCACAGATATGCTGAATACAGTATTACTGAAAATTAATACATGAACACTAAATGATTTGAGGTC
Start rfbR
M S Q E E L R Q Q I A E L V A Q Y A E T A M A P K P F E A G K S V V P P S
ATAGATAAATGAGTCAAAGA AATTAACGTC AACAGATTGCTGAGCTGTTGCTCAGTACGCTGAAACGGCATAGGCCCC TAAGCCATTTGAAAGCAGGTAAGAGTGCTGTTCCACCTCAG 3840
G K V I G T K E L Q L M V E A S L D G W L T T G R F N D A F E K K L G E Y L G V
GTAAAGTTATTGGTACCAAAGA ACTCCAGTTAATGGTTGAAGCTCTTTTAGACGGTTGGCTAACAACGGCGTTTAAATGACGCTTTTGGAGAAAAAAACTAGGCGAGTATTTGGCGTTC 3960
P Y V L T T T S G S S A N L L A L T A L T S P K L G V R A L K P G D E V I T V A
CTTATGTTCTGACTACA ACTTCTGGGCTTTCAGCTAACTTATGGGCTTTGACCGCGCTGACCTCACC TAAA TTAGGGGTACGGGCGTTGAA GCCAGGTGACGAA GTTATTACTGTTGGCG 4080
A G F P T T V N P T I Q N G L I P V F V D V D I P T Y N V N A S L I E A A V S D
CAGGTTTTTCCAACCACAGTAAAACCAACTATTCA GAATGGGTTAATTCCTGTCTTTTGTGATGTTGATATTCCTCA AATGTAATATGCTAGCCTGATTGAAAGCGGGGTTAGTGATA 4200
K T K A I M I A H T L G N L F D L A E V R R V A D K Y N L W L I E D C C D A L G
AAACCAAAGCTATTATGATTGCCCATACATTAGTAATCTATTCGATCTAGCTGCCC GAGTAGCTGATAAATATAACCTGTGTTAATTGAAAGACTGCTGCGATGCGTTGGGTT 4320
S T Y D G K M A G T F G D I G T V S F Y P A H H I T M G E G G A V F T Q S A E L
CCACCTACGATGGGAAAATGGCTGGTACATTGGGCGATATTTGGTACC GTTAGCCTCTATCCCGCTCATCATACACCATGGGGTGAAAGTGGGGGCGGTATTTACACAATCGGCGGA ACTGA 4440

FIG. 3. DNA and deduced amino acid sequences of the Y. pseudotuberculosis M85 *rfb* section from map position 1.75 to map position 10.55. Presumptive start codons are underlined, and putative SD sequences are shown in boldface letters.

K S I I E S F R D W G R D C Y C A P G C D N T C K K R F G Q Q L G S L P F G Y D
AGAGTATCATCGAATCTTTCCGTGATTTGGGTCGTGATTGTTATTGTGCTCCAGGCTGTGACAACACATGTA AAAAGGTTTCGGCCAGCAACTTGGCTCTTTACCATTCGGTTATGATC 4560
H K Y T Y S H L G Y N L K I T D M Q A A C G L A Q L E R I E E F V E K R K A N F
ATAAAATATACTTATTTCCCATTAGGCTATAACCTAAAAATCACAGATATGCAGGCTG CCTGTGGTTTGGCCA ACTAGAGCGCATAGAAGAGTTTGTTGAAAACGTA AAGCTAAACTTTA 4680
K Y L K D A L Q S C A D F L E L P E A T E N S D P S W F G F P I T L K E D S G V
AATA CCTTTAAAGAGCACTCCAACTTTGCGCTGACTTTCTTGAGTTACCAGAAGCGACTGAAAATTCA GATCCATCATGGTTTGGTTTCCCTATCACTCTGAAAAGAAGATAGCGGAGTTA 4800
S R I D L V K F L D E A K V G T R L L L F A G N L T R Q P Y F H D V K Y R V V G E
GCCGCATTGATCTGGTTAAATT CCTT TGATGAAGCTAAAGTGGGAACTCGGCTACTATT TGCCGGTAATTTAAC TCGCCAGCCGTATTTCCATGATGTGAAATACCGTGTTGTTGGTGAA T 4920
L T N T D R I M N Q T F W I G I Y P G L T H D H L D Y V V S K F E E F F G L N F
TGACAAAACCCGATAGAATTATGAATCAAAC TTCTGGATTTGGA TTTACCAGGCTGACACATGATCATTGGATTATGTTGAGTAA GAGTTGACCTTTGGTTTGAATTTTT possible start sites of rfbJ 5040
I L A N N K M R I V L T G G S G Y I G S S L T P V L I K K Y G R
AATCTAACATGGTTGGCAATGTA CTGGCTAATAATAAAATGGA AATAGTTCTGAC TGGAGGAAGGGCTATATCGG TAGCTCCCTCACACCTGTATTAATAAAAAAATATGGTCGAG 5160
V Y N I G R N T I S E V S I N G S K E Y C E F T Y E S L F D S L V E L S P D L V
TATATAATATGGCGAGAAAATACCATAAGTGAAGTATCAATAATGGTAGAAGGAATATTGTGAATTCA CGTATGAATCATTTGTGACTTTTAGTTGAACCTATCACCTGACCTTAGTTA 5280
I N L A A G Y Y N D S G A P D L N V I D G N L K I P F I I L E Y F K S C N Y G R
TTAATTGGCTGCTGGATATTTATAATGATAGGGTGCTCCAGACTTTAATGTGATTTGATGGGAATTTAAA AATACCTTTTATTTATATTTGAATATTTAAAAGTTGTAATTATGGGCGAT 5400
F I N I G S Y W E F S C S G R G V K G V N P Y G I I K S T V R R L L D Y Y S K Y
TCATTAACATTGTTAGTTTACTGGGAGTTTAGCTTTCTGGCAGAGGCGTTAAAGGTGTAATCCTTATGG AAATAAATCGACAGTTAGAAGGCTGTTAGATTATTATTCAAATATA 5520
N V I Y T N L I L Y G S Y G D N D H R G K I V D C I I D A V N S N E T L K L S P
ATGTGATATA CAAAATTAATATTATAGGTTCATATGGTGATAATGATCATCGAGGTTAAAATAGTTGACTG CATTA TAGATGCAGTTAACTCCAATGAAA ACTCTAAAGTTATCACCAG 5640
G E Q K L N L V Y I D D I I E A I L Y I V S S D N G Q Y D N E T L S I Y T P T E
GTGAGCAAAAAC TAAATCTAGTTTACATTGATGATAA TGGGCGATTTTTATACATAGTATCATCTGACAATGGACAATATGATAATGAAACATTATCA TTTCACCTCCACTGAAC 5760
H T V K E I V C F I N E I K D N N L S L G G G R Y R N D E V M A P D Y K Y R N I
ATACAGTAAAAGAGATTGTTTGT TTTATAAATGAAATCAAAAGATAA CAATCTATCATTAGGAGGTGAAAGGTATAGAAATGATGAGGTAATGGCTCCTGATTATAAATATAGAAA ATATT 5880
F H A K D K L K E Y I T S K I K K *
TTCATGCTAAAAGATAATTGAAAGAATATATCACCTCTAAAAATAAAAAATAATATTTTTTTGTGTTG AATTTTTTTTGTATTAAATATATTCTTGATGCATTTTACCCCAATGCC T 6000
AAGTATATAATAGGTGCAACCAGCACATGGGAATTAGCTGTTCA GTAGTTACCACAAACGTA CGCTAAGGTTTCTGGCTATGATCTCAGGCA GCTCCTGCTATAACC GTTCAATATG 6120
GTGACCTATGGCGAGTAAGTTATTTGATAAAATAAAAATAACAGGTTAACCCCTTAATCAGGGATGCT CCACAACTTTTATGGATAATGTAGTTATCAACAAATAAATGTTATGGT -35 -10
TCTTGCACACC GATATGTATTCTTAAGATGCTGCAATGTATTGATAAAATAAAGCTGAGTTTTTGCTGTTTCCGCAAAC GTAATAACTGGTGTA CTAGTGATAATATGCACAAAAGAGA hypothetical start of orf6.3
GTTCTACTCGTTGACTGTGTCACCTTGGTGAAGCACCAGATGGTGGTGACTGTAGGTTCTGGTCGGAG ATAGTTAAATGATCGTTTCTGATGATTTTCTC ACTATGAGATA 6480
ACCTAAAGTTATTACAATTATTCGGAGACTTTTTCATGTACATTATGATATTTTAATAGAAATGATGTT ACTAGACTAATTCGGAATTTAAGTCGATGACCTTTTCCATCTC ACTA 6600
GTTAAGTTGCAATGACGACATCTATTGATAATCCATCAAGTGGATTTCAACGTTAATGTCAGTGGGGA ATTAACTTCTCGAAGTAATACATGTATTTAATCTTGAATGTAGCTTTATT start of orf6.6
Q F P H R E T E R R Y E C I E M P D G F D E S T Q L T F H
TTTCTTCATAAATAGGTATATCAGGATTTATAACAGTTC CACATCGAGAAACCGAGAGGCGCTATGAGTGTATCGAAATGCCA GATGGATTGATGAGAGCAGCCAGCTA ACTTTCA 6840
S P Y G C S K G A A D Q Y M L D Y A R I Y G L K T V V F R H S S M Y G G R Q F S
TTCTCCTTATGGTTGCTCTAAAGGTGCTCGG GATCAGTATATGCTATGCATATATGGGCTCAAAACTGTTGTTTTT CGTCA TTCCCAATGTATGGCGTCAATTTTC 6960
T Y D Q G W V G W F C Q K A I E A S R G V N S P F T I S G N G K Q V R D V L H A
GACATATGATCAAGGCTGGGTTGGTTTTGTCA GAAAAGCTATAGAAGCGAGTCGAGGTTGTTAATAGCCCACTTCACTATTT CGGTAATGGGAAGCAAGTTCGAGATGTTTTACATGC 7080
E D I I S L Y F S T L S N L E R V K G N A F N I G G T I E H S L S L L E L F S L
GGAAGACATCATCTCACTTTATTCTCAACGCTATCTAACTTAGA ACGTGT TAAAAGTAATGCATTTAATTTGGTACAATTGAGCATAGCCCTATCTTTACTTGAGTTATTCTCTTT 7200
L E K Y T E L K Y T R I P V R E S D Q K V F V A N I N K I S E S T G W I P K
ACTAGAAAAATATACAGAAAACAGAGTTAAAATATACGAGAAATACCAGTAAGGAAAGTGACCAGAAA AGTATTTGTGGCAAATATAAAAATATCAGAGAGTACTGGTTGGATTC CAAA 7320
V S S E S G I K I M L D W V E T V *
Start of orf7.4
L R V P T H I I V A A
AGTGTCA TCTGAAAGTGGCATAAAAATTAGCTTTGATTTGGGTTGAAA ACTGTTTAAAATATAGTTCTTTTAGTGGASTTTAAAATTA TTGCGGGGTACCTACACATATAATAGTTGCAGCAA 7440
S A W G S R L V S I F I Q F Y S I K I L L D L L G T E G Y A V F T V I G S L V G
GTGCATGGGGGAGTCGTTTAGTATCTATTTTATCCAATTTTATAGTATAAAATTTTATTTGGATCTAT TGGTACCGGAAGGATATGCTGTTTTTACCGTTATTTGGTAGCCTAGTTGGTT 7560
W F L L A D F G L G N S L Q N Q I S Y R R A N H Q E Y Q D L V L S A V I A I I P
GGTTCCTGCTTGGGATTTTGGTCTCGGTAATAGCCTTCAGAATCAAATATCATATAGGAGAGCAAATC ATCAAGAATATCAGTTTTATCTGCAGTAATAGCTATAATACCTA 7680
I F I L F I I L I L T L S P Y I S E F L L L G G F D F L N N N Q R S N I F K V A S
TTTTTATT TTTATTCATAATTTTAATTAACACTGTCA CCTTATATCTGAGTTCCCTT TGGGATTTTTTAAACAAACAATCAGAGAAGCAATATATTTAAAGTGGCATCTT 7800
F I F L T T S I G N L A Y K I W F S E H K G W V S N I I P A L S S I V G L V F L
TTATTTTCTTA ACTACATCCATTGTAATTTAGCATATAAAATATGGTTTTCAGAGCATAAAAGGATGGGTTTCTAATATAATCCCCGCATTATCATCTATTGTTGGA CTCTGTTTTTTGA 7920
M R L P S D G S N I S E D I I F S I Y C F Y I P A A F F G V I S T L F K V I P Y
TGAGACTACCATCTGATGGAAGCAATATTAGTGAAAGATATTATTTTTCTATTTTATTCCAGCTGATTTTTTGGTAAATATCTACTTTATTTAAGTCATACCTTATT 8040
L K C K N F L N K L T L Y T L I K N G G G F F F L F S V L S A L V L Q V D Y I V M
TAAAATGTA AAAATTTTTTAAATAAGTTGACACTTTTATACTCTAAAAAAATGGAGGGGTTTTTTCCTATTTTAGTGTA CTATCGGCAC TTTGTACTTCAAGTTGACTACATGT TATGT 8160
S Q T L V E R D L V T Y N I M S K T F G L I N F I Y A A L L L Q S L W P V C A E A
CACAGACGTTAGTAGAAAGAGTTTAGTAACGTATAACATAATGAGTAAAACTTTTGGTTTAAATTAAC TCTCATATAGCGGCTTTATTGCAATC ACTTTGGCCTGTATGTGCGAGGCAA 8280
S S K L R F D N F Y K I E K K Y I S F G F I I V I A S S F V I F L L K D F I V N
GTTCAAAAC TAAAGTTTGATA TTTTTATAAAAAATATATATATCGTTTGGTTTTATTGT TATTTGCAAGTTCA TTTGTTTTTTTTTTAAAAAGACTTTAT TGTAAATA 8400
I L A P G K D F Y F P I S L I I L F S F Y Q V V R V W T D T Y A M F L M S I G K
TACTCGCACCTGGGAAAAGACTTCTATTTCCCTATTAGTTGATTATTTGTTTCCCTTATCAAGTGGT TGGA ACTGATACATAGCTATGTTTCTCATGAGTATTTG TAAAT 8520
L K P L W I S V P F Q A V L S G S L Q W V G A V N Y G L V G L L C G L I A S F L
TAAAACCACTCTGGATTAGTTTCCCTTTCAAGCTGTATTAAGTGGTTCACTTCAATGGGTTGGTCA GTAATATGGTTTGGTATTACTTTGTGGATTAATAGCATATCTTCT 8640
I T V S W W L P F S F R S T V D R I V K D K R L D E *
TTACCGTTTCA TGGTTTGGCCTTTCAGTTTTCGATCTACAGTAGATA GAATAGTTAAGGACA AACGTTTAGTGAGTAATATTTAAATATCATTTTG TATTCCTACGTATAATCGTTCT 8760
GAGTTATTATCAGAAACTAATTGAAAAGTATTTGTTCA CAATGTA AAAATAGAAATATGTATTTTCAGATAATGCAT 8845

FIG. 3—Continued.

(NsiI) relative to the pPR1197 restriction map (Fig. 2A) were
sequenced. The complete DNA sequence obtained is shown
in Fig. 3. Seven ORFs were found within this region; they
were provisionally named orf0.8, orf1.8, orf2.6, orf3.7,
orf5.1, orf6.8, and orf7.4 according to the position of the
respective start codon within the DNA segment sequenced.
Further DNA sequence analysis showed that orf6.8 is part of
a longer former ORF starting approximately at position 6.3
that has undergone frameshift mutations such that only part
of it is now recognizable as an ORF (see “Identification of

the Y. pseudotuberculosis M85 DDH pathway genes" below); it was, therefore, renamed orf6.3 and, as it is probably not functional, is not included in the following general discussion of ORFs. All ORFs found were transcribed in the same direction, from orf0.8 towards orf7.4. Presumptive ATG start codons were found for most ORFs, but the far less frequent initiation codon TTG was also observed (orf7.4). orf3.7 and orf7.4 were preceded by Shine-Dalgarno sequences (SD) located within reasonable distances (9 and 11 bp, respectively) from the respective presumptive start sites (Fig. 3). The DNA sequences preceding orf0.8, orf1.8, orf2.6, and orf5.1 showed only limited complementarity to the 3' end of the E. coli 16S rRNA; however, such sequences have been shown to be functional in some cases (43). The exact initiation site of orf5.1 was not obvious: the only nucleotide sequence resembling an SD-like signal upstream of the first ATG start codon (located at position 5082 of the DNA sequence [Fig. 3]) was too far away (19 bp) to be likely to function, and the large distance (17 bp) of this sequence from the preceding stop codon would probably not allow reinitiation of ribosomal translation. Alternatively, codons ATA and CTG, located further upstream (positions 5064 and 5067, respectively), could be possible, although unlikely, sites for initiation of translation, as these codons have been shown to be functional in some rare cases (12). Both codons are preceded by the same potential SD with optimal or near optimal spacing (9 and 12 bp, respectively [Fig. 3]). This putative SD also seems close enough (8 bp) to the stop codon of the preceding gene to allow ribosomal reinitiation. To facilitate gene and protein comparisons in this study, CTG was used arbitrarily as the initiation codon for orf5.1.

Apart from orf3.7, which terminates with a TGA codon, all complete ORFs were found to end with a TAA stop codon. There are extensive noncoding sequences preceding orf0.8 (597 bp) and orf6.3 (430 bp), possibly indicating regulatory independence of the two gene blocks thus separated (see also "Promoters" below). Shorter noncoding segments were found between all other genes (26 bp between orf0.8 and orf1.8, 4 bp between orf1.8 and orf2.6, 16 bp between orf2.6 and orf3.7, 24 bp between orf3.7 and orf5.1 [if CTG is the initiation codon]), and 31 bp between orf6.3 and orf7.4. Within the region comprising orf0.8 to orf5.1, SD signals and initiation codons are close enough to the preceding stop codons to allow ribosomal reinitiation; the 31-bp gap between orf6.3 and orf7.4, however, appears to be too large to permit this.

**Identification of the Y. pseudotuberculosis M85 DDH pathway genes.** The DNA sequences of several DDH pathway genes of S. enterica are known. These genes include *rfbF* (coding for CDP-glucose-1-phosphate cytidylyltransferase), *rfbG* (coding for CDP-glucose-4,6-dehydratase), *rfbJ* (encoding CDP-abequose synthase), *rfbE* (encoding CDP-tyvelose epimerase), and *rfbS* (coding for CDP-paratose synthase [17, 50]). These genes were found clustered in the central section of the S. enterica *rfb* region, together with two additional genes, orf7.6 and orf10.4, with so far unidentified functions (Fig. 2E and F). The presence of orf7.6 and orf10.4 exclusively in DDH-forming strains (8, 17, 22, 24, 48) strongly suggests their involvement in DDH formation, and they are, therefore, assumed to represent the so far unidentified genes *rfbI* (coding for CDP-6-deoxy-Δ<sup>3,4</sup>-glucoseen reductase) and *rfbH* (coding for CDP-4-keto-6-deoxy-D-glucose-3-dehydrase).

Comparison of the nucleotide sequences of the seven M85 ORFs with the S. enterica LT2 *rfb* gene cluster showed that the first block of five M85 ORFs, orf0.8, orf1.8, orf2.6,

---

**TABLE 2. DNA and amino acid similarities between S. enterica and Y. pseudotuberculosis M85 DDH pathway genes**

| Y. pseudotuberculosis gene | S. enterica gene<sup>a</sup> (serogroup) | DNA sequence identity (%) | Amino acid sequence similarity (%) | Amino acid sequence identity (%) |
|----------------------------|---------------------------------------|-----------------------------|------------------------------------|------------------------------------|
| orf0.8                     | orf7.6 (B)                           | 58.9                        | 68.8                              | 51.2                              |
| *rfbF*                     | *rfbF* (B)                           | 73.5                        | 89.9                              | 80.5                              |
| *rfbG*                     | *rfbG* (B)                           | 70.3                        | 82.6                              | 72.5                              |
| *rfbH*                     | orf10.4 (B)                          | 74.3                        | 92.9                              | 87.4                              |
| *rfbJ*                     | *rfbJ* (B)                           | 46.1                        | 48.4                              | 22.8                              |
| *rfbJ*                     | *rfbJ* (C2)                          | 42.5                        | 50.2                              | 25.6                              |
| *rfbJ*                     | *rfbS* (D)                           | 45.1                        | 50.9                              | 24.2                              |
| orf6.3<sup>b</sup>         | *rfbE* (D)                           | 63.0                        | 77.9                              | 64.2                              |
| orf7.4                     | orf12.8 (B)                          | 51.5                        | 62.3                              | 36.8                              |

<sup>a</sup> *rfbS* and *rfbE* were from S. enterica Ty2 (serogroup D); other genes were from S. enterica LT2 (serogroup B) and S. enterica muenchen (serogroup C2).

<sup>b</sup> For orf6.3 DNA sequence alignments, the DNA sequence between positions 6364 and 7403 was used; for protein sequence comparison, the translation of the rudimentary ORF between positions 6755 and 7373 was used.

orf3.7, and orf5.1, possessed significant similarity to the CDP-abequose pathway genes orf7.6, *rfbF*, *rfbG*, orf10.4, and *rfbJ*, respectively (Fig. 2E) (17); also, orf7.4 of M85 and orf12.8 of LT2 were related on the DNA sequence level. Only orf6.3 did not have a related equivalent within the LT2 *rfb* region; however, it was found to be similar to the *rfbE* gene of S. enterica Ty2 (DNA sequence identity values are given in Table 2). Because of the presence of this *rfbE*-like orf6.3 situated between orf5.1 and orf7.4, the overall arrangement of the sequenced M85 *rfb* genes resembles the situation observed with the tyvelose-forming S. enterica Ty2 more closely than that with the abequose-forming strain LT2 (Fig. 2C and F). Alignment of the deduced amino acid sequences of the Y. pseudotuberculosis M85 and S. enterica *rfb* genes showed similar or even stronger sequence conservation at the protein level than at the DNA level for orf0.8, orf1.8 (*rfbF*), orf2.6 (*rfbG*), orf3.7, and orf6.3; for orf5.1 and orf7.4, amino acid sequence identities to the respective S. enterica counterparts were considerably below the DNA sequence similarity levels (Table 2). For Y. pseudotuberculosis genes with clear structural or functional similarities to previously identified *rfb* genes of S. enterica, the terminology used for the S. enterica *rfb* cluster was adopted (Fig. 2C).

The possibility that the protein encoded by orf5.1 is an abequose synthase was supported by the identification of a motif within the amino acid sequence resembling an NAD-binding domain typical for abequose synthases (8, 50) and other NAD-linked dehydrogenases (34), which consists of a β-barrel of six β-sheets connecting α-helices. A functional test confirmed that the orf5.1 gene product exhibits abequate synthase activity: transformation of orf5.1 (as pPR1370 [Fig. 2D]) into a paratose-forming S. enterica serovar dublin strain (M6) resulted in the expression of the abequose-specific O4 antigen by the transformant, confirming that orf5.1 is the *rfbJ* gene of strain M85.

The N-terminal amino acid sequence of the *rfbH* gene product, CDP-4-keto-6-deoxy-D-glucose-3-dehydrase, from a Y. pseudotuberculosis serogroup VA strain (49) was compared with the deduced polypeptide sequences of the M85 ORFs. It was found to be identical to the N-terminal portion of the orf3.7 gene product, indicating that orf3.7 is the *rfbH* gene of strain M85. We can, therefore, conclude that orf10.4

VOL. 175, 1993 Y. PSEUDOTUBERCULOSIS IIA ABEQUOSE PATHWAY GENES 1419

TABLE 3. G+C contents and P1, P2, and P3 values of the *rfb* genes sequenced

| Gene         | G+C     | P1      | P2      | P3      |
|--------------|---------|---------|---------|---------|
| orf0.8       | 0.376   | 0.497   | 0.373   | 0.259   |
| LT2 orf7.6   | 0.405   | 0.525   | 0.380   | 0.304   |
| *rfbF*       | 0.436   | 0.564   | 0.354   | 0.394   |
| LT2 *rfbF*   | 0.473   | 0.592   | 0.373   | 0.322   |
| *rfbG*       | 0.460   | 0.565   | 0.402   | 0.403   |
| LT2 *rfbG*   | 0.437   | 0.579   | 0.382   | 0.338   |
| *rfbH*       | 0.425   | 0.552   | 0.399   | 0.325   |
| LT2 orf10.4  | 0.446   | 0.550   | 0.404   | 0.379   |
| *rfbJ*       | 0.302   | 0.386   | 0.323   | 0.206   |
| LT2 *rfbJ*   | 0.320   | 0.434   | 0.302   | 0.216   |
| orf6.3<sup>b</sup> | 0.375   | 0.489   | 0.391   | 0.308   |
| Ty2 *rfbE*   | 0.355   | 0.437   | 0.368   | 0.268   |
| orf7.4       | 0.308   | 0.391   | 0.325   | 0.242   |
| LT2 orf12.8  | 0.31    | 0.382   | 0.324   | 0.221   |

<sup>a</sup> Averages for *Y. pseudotuberculosis* are given in parentheses. Average codon frequencies were calculated as described by Sueoka et al. (44). G+C, overall GC content for the gene(s) analyzed; P1, P2, and P3, corrected GC contents for individual codon positions.

<sup>b</sup> Codon preferences for orf6.3 were calculated by using the rudimentary ORF between sequence positions 6755 and 7373 as a basis.

TABLE 4. Distribution of DDH pathway genes among Y. pseudotuberculosis serogroups

| Sero- | DDH | Hybridization with probe<sup>b</sup>: |
| --- | --- | --- |
| group<sup>a</sup> | derivative | orf0.8 | rfbF | rfbG | rfbH | rfbJ | orf6.3 | orf7.4 |
| IA | Paratose | + | + | + | + | – | – | – |
| IB | Paratose | + | + | + | – | – | – | – |
| IIA | Abequose | + | + | + | + | + | + | + |
| IIB | Abequose | + | + | + | + | + | + | + |
| IIC | Abequose | + | + | + | + | + | + | + |
| III | Paratose | + | + | + | + | – | – | – |
| IVA | Tyvelose | + | + | + | – | + | + | + |
| IVB | Tyvelose | + | + | + | – | + | + | + |
| VA | Ascarlose | + | + | + | + | – | – | – |
| VB | None<sup>c</sup> | + | – | – | – | – | – | – |
| VI | Colitose<sup>d</sup> | + | + | + | + | – | – | – |
| VII | Colitose | – | – | – | – | – | – | – |

<sup>a</sup> All *Y. pseudotuberculosis* strains listed in Table 1 were included.

<sup>b</sup> + and –, hybridization and no hybridization, respectively.

<sup>c</sup> Serogroup VB strains do not possess any DDH but contain 6-deoxy-L-altrose.

<sup>d</sup> Serogroup VI strains contain the octose yersiniose in addition to colitose.

serogroups VB and VII, were found to contain the complete set of genes for the common part of the DDH biosynthesis pathway (*rfbF*, *rfbG*, *rfbH*, and *orf0.8*, which is likely to be *rfbI*). Strains of serogroup VII produce colitose; the colitose pathway is not closely related to the abequose pathway, and, as expected, the group VII strains do not hybridize to the four genes of the common pathway. Strains of serogroup VI contain two 3,6-dideoxysugar derivatives in their O antigen, the hexose colitose and the octose yersiniose, a 3,6-dideoxy-4C-(1-hydroxyethyl)-D-xylo-hexose (13). It seems probable that the serogroup VI genes hybridizing to the M85 probes are involved in the formation of yersiniose; this would imply that yersiniose is formed via the same pathway as abequose, tyvelose, paratose, and ascarlose up to the common intermediate CDP-4-keto-3,6-dideoxy-D-glucose, from which the final product yersiniose could be made easily, e.g., by addition of pyruvate under decarboxylation.

Serogroup VB strains contained only *orf0.8* and *rfbF*-like genes; these strains possess 6-deoxy-L-altrose as an immunodominant sugar but no DDH. It is not known how 6-deoxy-L-altrose is formed in vivo; the roles of the two genes *orf0.8* and *rfbF*, if any, in the biosynthesis of this sugar therefore remain unknown.

*orf6.3* equivalents, the like of the *S. enterica* Ty2 gene *rfbE*, were found within all other serogroup II strains (subgroups IIA, IIB, and IIC) tested as well as all tyvelose-producing strains (serogroup IV), which necessarily possess a tyvelose epimerase gene, *rfbE*. The significant homology of *orf6.3* to group IV genes supports the idea that the nonfunctional *orf6.3* once encoded an epimerase; however, a tyvelose epimerase would be redundant in an abequose-producing strain. It remains speculative whether the inactive *orf6.3* gene in abequose-forming *Y. pseudotuberculosis* strains is a leftover of a tyvelose epimerase gene from times when DDH gene regions were assembled from various precursors and has since become superfluous in an abequose context or whether its functional ancestor was able to use CDP-abequose as a substrate to form a so far unreported sixth DDH derivative by epimerization at carbon 2.

No *rfbE* gene was found within any of the paratose-forming strains of *Y. pseudotuberculosis*, indicating that the formation of paratose in these strains is an original trait, not a secondary effect of mutational inactivation of the *rfbE* gene, as shown for paratose-forming strains of *S. enterica* (46). As in *S. enterica*, the final specificity for a particular DDH derivative appears to be based on the alternative presence of the respective synthase genes: only abequose-forming strains were found to possess the *rfbJ* gene.

Overall, the genes of the common part of the DDH pathway were found to be almost ubiquitous within *Y. pseudotuberculosis*. This widespread distribution supports the idea that the ability to form DDH is not a recently acquired trait for *Y. pseudotuberculosis* but has been present in the species from an early point onward in its evolution. Further weight to this argument is added by the fact that *Y. pseudotuberculosis* contains a variety of these rather unusual and rare sugars that is unsurpassed by that of any other organism.

Distribution of DDH pathway genes within *Y. pseudotuberculosis*. A set of probes (pPR1366 to -1370, pPR1385, and pPR1386 [Fig. 2D]) specific for the M85 DDH pathway genes was used to test chromosomal DNA preparations of strains representative of the serogroups of *Y. pseudotuberculosis*; the results are given in Table 4. All strains, except those of

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work was supported by a grant from the Australian Research Council.

We thank S. Aleksic for generously providing the *Y. pseudotuberculosis* strain collection.

REFERENCES

1. Aleksic, S., G. Suchan, J. Bockemühl, and V. Aleksic. 1991. An extended antigenic scheme for Yersinia pseudotuberculosis. Contrib. Microbiol. Immunol. 12:235–238.
2. Bachmann, B. J. 1990. Linkage map of Escherichia coli K-12, edition 8. Microbiol. Rev. 54:130–197.
3. Barcak, G. J., and R. E. Wolf, Jr. 1988. Growth-rate-dependent expression and cloning of *gnd* alleles from natural isolates of *Escherichia coli*. J. Bacteriol. 170:365–371.
4. Bastin, D. A., L. K. Romana, and P. R. Reeves. 1991. Molecular cloning and expression in *Escherichia coli* K-12 of the *rfb* gene cluster determining the O antigen of an *E. coli* O111 strain. Mol. Microbiol. 5:2223–2231.
5. Bercovier, H., H. H. Mollaret, J. M. Alonso, J. Brault, R. G. Fanning, A. G. Steigerwalt, and D. J. Brenner. 1980. Intra- and interspecies relatedness of *Yersinia pestis* by DNA hybridization and its relationship to *Yersinia pseudotuberculosis*. Curr. Microbiol. 4:225–229.
6. Blondel, A., and J. Thillet. 1991. A fast and convenient way to produce single stranded DNA from a phagemid. Nucleic Acids Res. 19:181.
7. Brown, P. K., L. K. Romana, and P. R. Reeves. 1991. Cloning of the *rfb* gene cluster of a group C2 *Salmonella*: comparison with the *rfb* regions of groups B and D. Mol. Microbiol. 5:1873–1881.
8. Brown, P. K., L. K. Romana, and P. R. Reeves. 1992. Molecular analysis of the *rfb* gene cluster of *Salmonella* serovar Muenchen (strain M67): genetic basis of the polymorphism between groups C2 and B. Mol. Microbiol. 6:1385–1394.
9. Bullas, L. R., and J.-I. Ryu. 1983. *Salmonella typhimurium* LT2 strains which are *r⁻ m⁺* for all three chromosomally located systems of DNA restriction and modification. J. Bacteriol. 156:471–474.
10. Devereux, J., P. Haeberli, and O. Smithies. 1984. A comprehensive set of sequence analysis programs for the VAX. Nucleic Acids Res. 12:387–395.
11. Elbein, A. D., and E. C. Heath. 1965. The biosynthesis of cell wall lipopolysaccharide in *Escherichia coli* II guanosine diphosphate 4-keto-6-deoxy-D-mannose, an intermediate in the biosynthesis of guanosine diphosphate colitose. J. Biol. Chem. 240:1926–1931.
12. Gold, L., and G. Stormo. 1987. Translational initiation, p. 1302–1307. In F. C. Neidhardt, J. L. Ingraham, K. B. Low, B. Magasanik, M. Schaechter, and H. E. Umbarger (ed.), *Escherichia coli and Salmonella typhimurium*: cellular and molecular biology, vol. 2. American Society for Microbiology, Washington, D.C.
13. Gorshkova, R. P., V. A. Zubkov, V. V. Isakov, and Y. S. Ovodov. 1983. Structural features of O-specific polysaccharide from lipopolysaccharide of *Yersinia pseudotuberculosis* VI serovar. Bioorg. Khim. 9:1068–1073.
14. Han, O., V. P. Miller, and H. Liu. 1990. Mechanistic studies of the biosynthesis of 3,6-dideoxyhexoses in *Yersinia pseudotuberculosis*. J. Biol. Chem. 265:8033–8041.
15. Henikoff, S. 1984. Unidirectional digestion with exonuclease III creates targeted breakpoints for DNA sequencing. Gene 28:351–359.
16. Howley, P. M., M. A. Israel, M. F. Law, and M. A. Martin. 1979. A rapid method for detecting and mapping homology between heterologous DNAs. J. Biol. Chem. 254:4876–4883.
17. Jiang, X. M., B. Neal, F. Santiago, S. J. Lee, L. K. Romana, and P. R. Reeves. 1991. Structure and sequence of the *rfb* (O antigen) gene cluster of *Salmonella* serovar typhimurium (strain LT2). Mol. Microbiol. 5:695–713.
18. Kanehisha, M. J. 1982. Los Alamos sequence analysis package for nucleic acids and proteins. Nucleic Acids Res. 10:183–196.
19. Kessler, A., L. K. Romana, and P. R. Reeves. 1991. Molecular cloning and genetic characterization of the *rfb* region from *Yersinia pseudotuberculosis* serovar IIA, which determines the formation of the 3,6 dideoxyhexose abequose. J. Gen. Microbiol. 137:2689–2695.
20. Komandrova, N. A., R. P. Gorshkova, V. A. Zubkov, and Y. S. Ovodov. 1989. The structure of the O-specific polysaccharide chain of the lipopolysaccharide of *Yersinia pseudotuberculosis*

serovar VII. Bioorg. Khim. 15:104–110.

21. Lee, S. J., L. K. Romana, and P. R. Reeves. 1992. Cloning and structure of group Cl O-antigen (*rfb* gene cluster) from *Salmonella enterica* serovar montevideo. J. Gen. Microbiol. 138:305–312.
22. Lee, S. J., L. K. Romana, and P. R. Reeves. 1992. Sequence and structural analysis of the *rfb* (O antigen) gene cluster from a group Cl *Salmonella enterica* strain. J. Gen. Microbiol. 138:1843–1855.
23. Leinonen, M. 1985. Serological methods for the study of bacterial surface antigens, p. 179–206. In T. K. Korhonen, E. A. Dawes, and P. H. Mäkelä (ed.), Enterobacterial surface antigens: methods for molecular characterisation. Elsevier Science Publishers, Amsterdam.
24. Liu, D., N. K. Verma, L. K. Romana, and P. R. Reeves. 1991. Relationships among the *rfb* regions of *Salmonella* serovars A, B, and D. J. Bacteriol. 173:4814–4819.
25. Lüderitz, O., O. Westphal, A. M. Staub, and H. Nikaido. 1971. Isolation and chemical and immunological characterization of bacterial lipopolysaccharides, p. 145–233. In G. Weinbaum, S. Kadis, and S. J. Ajl (ed.), Microbial toxins, vol. 4. Academic Press, Inc., New York.
26. Mäkelä, P. H., and B. A. D. Stocker. 1984. Genetics of lipopolysaccharide, p. 59–137. In E. T. Rietschel (ed.), Handbook of endotoxin, vol. I. Elsevier Science Publishers, Amsterdam.
27. Maniatis, T., E. F. Fritsch, and J. Sambrook. 1982. Molecular cloning: a laboratory manual. Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press, Cold Spring Harbor, N.Y.
28. Matsuhashi, S., M. Matsuhashi, and J. L. Strominger. 1966. Enzymatic synthesis of cytidine diphosphate 3,6 dideoxyhexoses. I. Overall reactions. J. Biol. Chem. 241:4267–4274.
29. Miyamoto, K., K. Nakahigashi, K. Nishimura, and H. Inokuchi. 1991. Isolation and characterization of visible light-sensitive mutants of *Escherichia coli* K12. J. Mol. Biol. 219:393–398.
30. Nikaido, H., M. Levinthal, K. Nikaido, and K. Nakane. 1967. Extended deletions in the histidine-rough-B region of the *Salmonella* chromosome. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 57:1825–1832.
31. Norrander, J., T. Kempe, and J. Messing. 1983. Construction of improved M13 vectors using oligonucleotide-directed mutagenesis. Gene 26:101–106.
32. O'Neill, M. C. 1989. Consensus methods for finding and ranking DNA binding sites—application to *Escherichia coli* promoters. J. Mol. Biol. 207:301–310.
33. O'Neill, M. C., and F. Chiafari. 1989. *Escherichia coli* promoters. II. A spacing class-dependent promoter search protocol. J. Biol. Chem. 264:5531–5534.
34. Rossman, M. G., A. Liljas, C. I. Brenden, and L. J. Banaszak. 1975. Evolutionary and structural relationships among dehydrogenases, p. 61–102. In P. D. Boyer (ed.), The enzymes, 3rd ed. Academic Press, Inc., New York.
35. Samuelsson, K., B. Lindberg, and R. R. Brubaker. 1974. Structure of O-specific side chains of lipopolysaccharides from *Yersinia pseudotuberculosis*. J. Bacteriol. 117:1010–1016.
36. Sanderson, K. E., and J. R. Roth. 1988. Linkage map of *Salmonella typhimurium*, edition VII. Microbiol. Rev. 52:485–532.
37. Sanger, F., S. Nicklen, and A. R. Coulson. 1977. DNA sequencing with chain-terminating inhibitors. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 74:5463–5467.
38. Selander, R. K., D. A. Caugant, H. Ochman, J. M. Musser, M. N. Gilmour, and T. S. Whittam. 1986. Methods of multilocus enzyme electrophoresis for bacterial population genetics and systematics. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 51:873–884.
39. Shepherd, J. C. W. 1981. Method to determine the reading frame of a protein from the purine/pyrimidine genome sequence and if possible evolutionary justification. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 78:1596–1600.
40. Staden, R. 1982. Automation of the computer handling of gel reading data produced by the shotgun method of DNA sequencing. Nucleic Acids Res. 10:4731–4751.
41. Staden, R. 1984. Computer methods to locate signals in nucleic acid sequences. Nucleic Acids Res. 12:505–519.

42. Staden, R. 1986. The current status and portability of our sequence handling software. Nucleic Acids Res. 14:217–231.
43. Stormo, G. D., T. D. Schneider, and L. Gold. 1982. Characterization of translational initiation sites in *E. coli*. Nucleic Acids Res. 10:2971–2996.
44. Sueoka, N. 1988. Directional mutation pressure and neutral molecular evolution. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 85:2653–2657.
45. Verma, N. K., N. B. Quigley, and P. R. Reeves. 1988. O-antigen variation in *Salmonella* spp.: *rfb* gene clusters of three strains. J. Bacteriol. 170:103–107.
46. Verma, N., and P. Reeves. 1989. Identification and sequence of *rfbS* and *rfbE*, which determine antigenic specificity of group A and group D salmonellae. J. Bacteriol. 171:5694–5701.
47. Vieira, J., and J. Messing. 1987. Production of single-stranded plasmid DNA. Methods Enzymol. 153:3–11.

48. Wang, L., L. K. Romana, and P. R. Reeves. 1992. Molecular analysis of a *Salmonella enterica* group E1 *rfb* gene cluster: O antigen and the genetic basis of the major polymorphism. Genetics 130:429–443.
49. Weigel, T. M., L. Liu, and H. Liu. 1992. Mechanistic studies of the biosynthesis of 3,6-dideoxyhexoses in *Yersinia pseudotuberculosis*: purification and characterization of CDP-4-keto-6-deoxy-D-glucose-3-dehydrase. Biochemistry 31:2129–2139.
50. Wyk, P., and P. Reeves. 1989. Identification and sequence of the gene for abequose synthase, which confers antigenic specificity on group B salmonellae: homology with galactose epimerase. J. Bacteriol. 171:5687–5693.
51. Yanisch-Perron, C., J. Vieira, and J. Messing. 1985. Improved M13 phage cloning vectors and host strains: nucleotide sequences of the M13mp18 and pUC19 vectors. Gene 33:103–119.
