
Mol Gen Genet (1993) 237:215–224

**Sequence analysis and interposon mutagenesis of a sensor-kinase (DctS) and response-regulator (DctR) controlling synthesis of the high-affinity C4-dicarboxylate transport system in *Rhodobacter capsulatus***

Mark J. Hamblin, Jonathan G. Shaw and David J. Kelly

Krebs and Robert Hill Institutes, Department of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, University of Sheffield, P.O. Box 594, Firth Court, Western Bank, Sheffield S10 2UH, U.K.

Received April 14, 1992 / Accepted August 21, 1992

Summary. A two-component sensor-regulator system has been identified in the purple photosynthetic bacterium *Rhodobacter capsulatus*, which controls the expression of high-affinity C4-dicarboxylate transport activity in these cells. Nucleotide sequencing has revealed the existence of two genes, *dctS* and *dctR*, which together form an operon linked to, but divergently transcribed from, the previously identified *dctP* gene, which encodes the periplasmic binding protein of the transport system. The DctS protein is predicted to be a membrane-bound sensor-kinase with two potential membrane-spanning sequences in the N-terminal region. DctR was found to have sequence similarity throughout its entire length with proteins in the FixJ subfamily of response-regulators, especially to FixJ itself (42% identical residues). Insertional inactivation of the *dctS* and *dctR* genes resulted in the inability of the resulting mutants to grow on or transport malate, succinate or fumarate under aerobic conditions in the dark, and such mutants did not express the DctP protein. The mutants were complemented in trans by plasmids containing intact copies of the *dctS* and *dctR* genes.

Key words: Sensor-kinase – Response-regulator – C4-dicarboxylates – Transport – *Rhodobacter capsulatus*

The DctP protein has been purified to homogeneity and its ligand binding properties characterised (Shaw et al. 1991; Walmsley et al. 1992). Inactivation of this high-affinity system by single Tn5 insertions at a locus designated *dct* (Hamblin et al. 1990) leads to the abolition of aerobic dicarboxylate transport and to a complete lack of aerobic growth on malate, succinate and fumarate. Interestingly, these *dct* mutants are still capable of slow photoheterotrophic growth on malate and succinate but not fumarate. This is due to the presence of at least one additional transport system of low-affinity, which is only active under anaerobic-light growth conditions (Kelly et al. 1990; Hamblin et al. 1990).

The transposon insertions at the *dct* locus were mapped within an 8.3 kb DNA fragment and were found to define at least three genes by complementation analysis (Hamblin et al. 1990). We have previously cloned and sequenced the *dctP* gene (Shaw et al. 1991) and in this paper we describe the identification of an operon comprising at least two genes, linked to, but divergently transcribed from, *dctP*, the deduced products of which show significant sequence similarity to the sensor and regulator protein families of bacterial two-component stimulus-response systems (Stock et al. 1989). The expression of these genes was found to be essential for high-affinity dicarboxylate transport in *Rb. capsulatus*.

---

**Introduction**

The C4-dicarboxylates D- and L-malate, succinate and fumarate are effective carbon sources for the growth of purple non-sulphur bacteria under both aerobic conditions in the dark and anaerobic conditions in the light (Stahl and Sojka 1973; Gibson 1975). In *Rhodobacter capsulatus*, aerobic dicarboxylate transport is mediated by a single high-affinity system which is dependent for activity on a periplasmic binding protein (Shaw and Kelly 1991). The binding protein (DctP) has been purified to homogeneity and its ligand binding properties characterised (Shaw et al. 1991; Walmsley et al. 1992). Inactivation of this high-affinity system by single Tn5 insertions at a locus designated *dct* (Hamblin et al. 1990) leads to the abolition of aerobic dicarboxylate transport and to a complete lack of aerobic growth on malate, succinate and fumarate. Interestingly, these *dct* mutants are still capable of slow photoheterotrophic growth on malate and succinate but not fumarate. This is due to the presence of at least one additional transport system of low-affinity, which is only active under anaerobic-light growth conditions (Kelly et al. 1990; Hamblin et al. 1990).

The transposon insertions at the *dct* locus were mapped within an 8.3 kb DNA fragment and were found to define at least three genes by complementation analysis (Hamblin et al. 1990). We have previously cloned and sequenced the *dctP* gene (Shaw et al. 1991) and in this paper we describe the identification of an operon comprising at least two genes, linked to, but divergently transcribed from, *dctP*, the deduced products of which show significant sequence similarity to the sensor and regulator protein families of bacterial two-component stimulus-response systems (Stock et al. 1989). The expression of these genes was found to be essential for high-affinity dicarboxylate transport in *Rb. capsulatus*.

---

**Materials and methods**

Bacterial strains, plasmids and growth conditions. Strains, vectors and recombinant plasmids used in this work are described in Table 1. *Rhodobacter capsulatus* was grown routinely in RCV-malate medium (Weaver et al. 1975; Hillmer and Gest 1977) at 30°C under aerobic conditions in the dark in shake-flasks. Photoheterotrophic growth rates were determined using cultures in completely filled test-tubes capped with Suba seals, which fitted into the sample compartment of a Corning model 254 photometer equipped with a 710 nm filter. The tubes were illuminated by a 100 W tungsten bulb at a distance

of 30 cm. Growth rates under chemoheterotrophic conditions were determined in 25 ml cultures contained in 250 ml shake-flasks with side-arms for turbidity measurements as above. The flasks were shaken at 250 rpm at 30°C in the dark. In all cases, inocula were 0.4% (v/v) and carbon sources 0.4% (w/v). *Escherichia coli* strains were grown aerobically at 37°C in LB media with the following concentrations of antibiotics: tetracycline, 10 μg/ml; ampicillin, 100 μg/ml; kanamycin, 25 μg/ml; spectinomycin, 25 μg/ml. For *Rb. capsulatus*, spectinomycin was used at 25 μg/ml and tetracycline at 1 μg/ml concentrations.

**DNA isolation and manipulation.** Standard techniques were used for the cloning, transformation, preparation and restriction analysis of plasmid DNA from *E. coli* (Sambrook et al. 1989). Southern hybridisations were performed after transfer of restriction fragments from 0.5% agarose gels to nitrocellulose filters, using a non-radioactive DNA labelling and detection kit (Boehringer Mannheim) under conditions specified by the manufacturer. Chromosomal DNA from *Rb. capsulatus* was isolated by lysozyme/sodium dodecyl sulphate treatment followed by CsCl gradient centrifugation.

**Nucleotide sequencing and analysis.** Restriction fragments from pDCT205 (Fig. 1 and Table 1) were cloned into pBluescript II SK(+) and KS(+) phagemid vectors and transformed into *E. coli* XL1-Blue (Stratagene, USA). Unidirectional deletions of the inserts in these phagemids were constructed using an exonuclease III deletion kit (Pharmacia) and selected deletion clones were transfected with the VCSM13 helper phage to produce ssDNA templates, which were sequenced by the dideoxy chain termination method using a combination of custom-made and universal oligonucleotide primers (Fig. 1) with a commercially available kit (Sequenase; United States Biochemicals). Compressions were resolved by using dITP in place of dGTP in the termination reactions. The DNA was sequenced completely on both strands and the strategy and coverage are detailed in Fig. 1. DNA sequences were compiled and analysed with the programs devised by Staden (1980, 1982). Probable coding regions were identified using a codon preference plot (Staden and McLachlan 1982) generated from the known codon usage of 16 previously sequenced genes from *Rb. capsulatus* (a total of 3979 codons) as compiled by Armstrong et al. (1989). Sequence similarities were searched for by a multiple alignment program designed by A. Bleasby (University of Leeds) using the OWL composite database (Akrigg et al. 1988; this includes all the entries in the NBRF-PIR, SWISSPROT and GENBANK databases) on the SEQNET facility of the SERC Daresbury laboratory (Warrington, UK). Hydrophathy profiles of amino acid sequences were constructed using the method of Kyte and Doolittle (1982).

**Interposon mutagenesis and complementation of mutations.** For the insertional inactivation of the *dctS* gene, the 4.0 kb EcoRI fragment from pDCT202 was subcloned into pSUP202 to give pJGS1. This plasmid was partially digested with 0.1 U of HindIII for 15 min and the resulting DNA (linearised at either the HindIII site within *dctS* or at a unique site within the vector) was isolated from a 0.6% agarose gel. pHP45Ω was completely digested with HindIII and the 2.0 kb Ω fragment (isolated by gel electrophoresis) ligated to a partial digest of pJGS1 DNA. Transformants were selected on LB-ampicillin-spectinomycin plates, and the desired recombinant plasmids (pJGS1Ω) with the interposon inserted at the HindIII site within *dctS* were screened for by restriction analysis. *E. coli* S17-1(pJGS1Ω) was mated with *Rb. capsulatus* PAS100 and the exconjugants selected on RCV-pyruvate plates containing spectinomycin. The final *dctS::Ω* strain selected was designated JGS52.

To insert the Ω fragment into the unique PstI site within the *dctR* gene, the 2.8 kb EcoRI-HindIII fragment from pDCT205 was first subcloned into pARO180, to give pDCT2131. The plasmid pUX-Ω was digested with PstI, the 2.0 kb Ω fragment separated and purified on an agarose gel and then ligated to PstI-cleaved pDCT2131 to give pDCT2131Ω. After transformation into *E. coli* XL1-Blue, followed by selection on LB-ampicillin-spectinomycin plates, clones were checked by restriction analysis and then mated triparentally with *Rb. capsulatus* PAS100 using pRK2013 as helper plasmid. Exconjugants were selected as above. The final *dctR::Ω* strain selected was designated MJH240. For complementation tests, pDCT202 and pDCT209 were transferred to JGS52 and MJH240 by diparental conjugation from *E. coli* S17-1 on nitrocellulose filter discs (0.45 μm pore size) placed on the surface of RCV plates containing sodium pyruvate (0.4% w/v) and yeast extract (0.05% w/v). After 6 h at 30°C, cells were washed from the filters, serially diluted and spread on RCV-D,L-malate and RCV-pyruvate plates containing tetracycline.

**L-malate transport assays.** For transport assays, wild-type and mutant cells were grown to late-exponential phase aerobically in the dark in shake-flasks in RCV medium with pyruvate (30 mM) and D,L-malate (1 mM) as carbon sources. After harvesting by centrifugation, cells were washed once in RCV medium lacking any carbon source (RCV-C), resuspended in the same medium at a concentration of 20–30 mg cell protein per ml and kept on ice for no longer than 4 h. Transport of 6 μM [¹⁴C]-L-malate (1.85–2.2 MBq/μmol) was measured by rapid filtration as described previously (Shaw and Kelly 1991) with samples taken every 10 s after addition of the radiolabelled substrate.

**Isolation and separation of periplasmic proteins.** Bacterial cells were subjected to osmotic shock as described by Shaw and Kelly (1991) and the crude shock fluid was adjusted to 60% ammonium sulphate saturation. The precipitate was removed by centrifugation and the dialysed and concentrated supernatant (containing all of the malate binding activity) was loaded onto a Mono-Q HR5/5 column connected to a Pharmacia FPLC system. The periplasmic proteins were eluted at 1 ml/min with a 0–0.35 M KCl gradient (20 ml) followed by a 0.35–1.0 M KCl gradient (6 ml). Fractions (1 ml) were assayed for

Table 1. Strains, vectors and recombinant plasmids used in this study

| Strain or plasmid | Genotype | Phenotype | Source or reference |
|------------------|----------|-----------|---------------------|
| Rhodobacter capsulatus |  |  |  |
| PAS100 | str-2 hsd-1 | Dct<sup>+</sup>, Sm<sup>r</sup> restriction-deficient parent of JGS52 and MJH240 | Taylor et al. (1983) |
| JGS52 | str-2 hsd-1 dctS::Ω | Dct<sup>-</sup>, Sp<sup>r</sup>, Sm<sup>r</sup> | This study |
| MJH240 | str-2 hsd-1 dctR::Ω | Dct<sup>-</sup>, Sp<sup>r</sup>, Sm<sup>r</sup> | This study |
| SB1003 | rif-10 | Rif<sup>r</sup> parent strain of D15-2 | R.G. Kranz |
| D15-2 | rif-10<br>nifR4::Km | Rif<sup>r</sup>, Nif<sup>-</sup>, Km<sup>r</sup> | R.G. Kranz |
| Escherichia coli |  |  |  |
| XL1-Blue | recA, endA1, gyrA96<br>thi-1, hsdR17, supE44<br>relA1, lac [F' proAB, lacI<sup>q</sup><br>ZΔM15, Tn10] | Tc<sup>r</sup> | Stratagene |
| S17-1 | hsdR, pro, recA<br>RP4-2 (Tc::Mu;<br>Km::Tn7) in chromosome | Tp<sup>r</sup>, Sp<sup>r</sup> | R. Simon |
| Plasmids |  |  |  |
| pHP45Ω | 2.0 kb Ω fragment in pHP45 | Ap<sup>r</sup>, Sp<sup>r</sup> | Prentki and Krisch (1984) |
| pUX-Ω | 2.0 kb Ω fragment in pUC18 | Ap<sup>r</sup>, Sp<sup>r</sup> | N. Hunter |
| pRK2013 |  | Km<sup>r</sup>, Mob<sup>+</sup>, Tra<sup>+</sup> | Ditta et al. (1980) |
| pBluescript II |  |  |  |
| KS (+) |  | Ap<sup>r</sup> | Stratagene |
| SK (+) |  | Ap<sup>r</sup> | Stratagene |
| pSUP202 | pBR325::mob | Ap<sup>r</sup>, Tc<sup>r</sup>, Cm<sup>r</sup> | R. Simon |
| pARO180 | pUC18 derivative containing mobilisation functions of pSUP202 | Ap<sup>r</sup> | Parke (1990) |
| pDCT202 | 4.0 kb EcoRI subclone containing dctS and dctR in pRK415 | Tc<sup>r</sup> | Hamblin et al. (1990) |
| pDCT205 | 8.3 kb EcoRI subclone of the entire dct locus in pRK415 | Tc<sup>r</sup> | Hamblin et al. (1990) |
| pDCT209 | 2.9 kb PstI subclone containing dctS in pRK415 | Tc<sup>r</sup> | Hamblin et al. (1990) |
| pDCT213 | 2.8 kb EcoRI-HindIII fragment from pDCT205 in pBLUESCRIPT II KS (+) | Ap<sup>r</sup> | This study |
| pDCT214 | 2.8 kb EcoRI-HindIII fragment from pDCT205 in pBLUESCRIPT II SK (+) | Ap<sup>r</sup> | This study |
| pDCT217 | 2.9 kb PstI fragment from pDCT205 in pBLUESCRIPT II SK (+) | Ap<sup>r</sup> | This study |
| pDCT218 | 2.9 kb PstI fragment from pDCT205 in pBLUESCRIPT II KS (+) | Ap<sup>r</sup> | This study |
| pDCT2131 | 2.8 kb EcoRI-HindIII fragment from pDCT205 in pARO180 | Ap<sup>r</sup> | This study |
| pDCT2131Ω | 2.0 kb Ω fragment inserted at the unique PstI site in pDCT2131 | Ap<sup>r</sup>, Sp<sup>r</sup> | This study |
| pJGS1 | 4.0 kb EcoRI fragment from pDCT202 in pSUP202 | Ap<sup>r</sup>, Tc<sup>r</sup> | This study |
| pJGS1Ω | 2.0 kb Ω fragment inserted at the HindIII site of dctS in pJGS1 | Ap<sup>r</sup>, Tc<sup>r</sup>, Sp<sup>r</sup> | This study |

Abbreviations of antibiotics; Ap, ampicillin; Cm, chloramphenicol; Km, kanamycin; Rif, rifampicin; Sm, streptomycin; Sp, spectinomycin; Tc, tetracycline; Tp, trimethoprim

Fig. 1. Restriction map, sequencing strategy, gene organisation and complementation analysis of the region of the *Rb. capsulatus dct* locus described in this study. DNA was sequenced to the extents shown by the single-headed arrows. In three cases (single-headed arrows with filled circles), custom-synthesised oligonucleotides were used as primers while for all other sequencing reactions a universal primer was used (see Materials and methods). The numbers above the expanded portion of the restriction map indicate the positions of Tn5 insertions in mutants MJH20, 22, 25, 28 and 40 (Hamblin et al. 1990). The positions of the Ω-interposon insertions in the mutants constructed in this study are also shown. E, EcoRI; P, PstI; B, BamHI; H, HindIII; S, SalI; St, StuI; Pv, PvuII; Ev, EcoRV.

Complementation refers to the ability of plasmids pDCT202 and pDCT209 to restore aerobic growth on D,L-malate, succinate or fumarate as sole carbon source to strains JGS52 and MJH240. As these strains are *recA⁺*, repair of the lesions by recombination could occur at a low frequency (Hamblin et al. 1990). Positive complementation in trans (+) was therefore recorded only if the frequency of Tc<sup>r</sup>, malate<sup>+</sup> colonies was similar to the frequency of Tc<sup>r</sup> colonies on pyruvate plates (i.e. the plasmid transfer frequency, which was about 10<sup>-3</sup> per recipient in each mating). Plasmid containing merodiploids were subsequently tested for growth on succinate and fumarate plates

absorbance at 280 nm and [¹⁴C]-L-malate binding activity as described by Shaw and Kelly (1991).

Results

Nucleotide sequence of the *dctS* and *dctR* genes

In Fig. 1, the positions of previously mapped chromosomal Tn5 insertions leading to a *Dct⁻* phenotype (Hamblin et al. 1990) are shown relative to the known gene organisation and restriction map of the region of the *dct* loci sequenced in this study, and in relation to the previously sequenced *dctP* gene (Shaw et al. 1991). The nucleotide and deduced amino acid sequences of this region are presented in Fig. 2.

Two complete open reading frames (ORFs) were identified (Fig. 2) on the basis of the known codon preference of previously sequenced genes from *Rb. capsulatus* (Armstrong et al. 1989). These ORFs were found to be located on the opposite strand to the *dctP* gene and thus oriented divergently to *dctP* with respect to the direction of transcription. Examination of the sequence at the 5′ end of the first ORF (*dctS*) suggested that a CTG codon was most likely to open the *dctS* reading frame, as there are no appropriately located in-frame ATG or GTG codons until well into the first predicted transmembrane helix of the deduced product (see below), making these unlikely candidates for initiation codons. A potential Shine-Dalgarno sequence with excellent complementarity to

the 3′ end of the *Rb. capsulatus* 16S rRNA is located 15 bp upstream of the putative CTG initiation codon (Fig. 2). On this basis, the *dctS* ORF would be 1971 nucleotides long and could encode a putative product of 657 amino acids with a predicted M<sub>r</sub> of 70124. The stop codon of the *dctS* ORF was found to overlap the start codon of the next ORF (*dctR*) in an ATGA motif with a –1 frameshift. This arrangement indicates that the two genes form part of an operon and that they are translationally coupled. The *dctR* gene is 591 nucleotides long and could encode a product of 197 amino acids with a predicted M<sub>r</sub> of 21249.

The *dctS-dctP* 5′ intergenic region was examined for sequences which might be characteristic of promoter elements. As Fig. 2 shows, two complex areas of extensive dyad symmetry are located in close proximity to each other in the central part of the intergenic region. Some sequences (5′ TTGCGC/g 3′) are repeated in both dyads and are present on both DNA strands.

Sequence similarities of *DctS* and *DctR* to two-component sensor and regulator proteins

A search of the OWL composite database revealed that the deduced *DctS* and *DctR* proteins shared sequence similarities with members of the conserved families of two-component bacterial signal transduction and response proteins. *DctS* was found to be most similar to three rhizobial sensor-kinases; FixL (31% identical re-

ATACGACGGGTCAACATGTGATTCTCCTCCGGTTCCCCGCTCTCCACGGCGGGCCCGGGCT
10 20 30 40 50 60
TATGCTGCCCAAGTTGTACACTAAGGAGGGCCAAGGGCGAGAGGTGCCCGCCGGCGCCA
R R T L M SD
← dctP
TTCATGCGCAAAGAATCTTGCGGAACGCTATTCGGGCTTTCCGCAATCGGAAGACATGTTA
70 80 90 100 110 120
AAGTACGCGTTCTTAGAACGCTTGCATAACGCCGAAAAGCGTTAGCCTTCTGTACAAT
SD → dctS
L R D T T G G P
TGACCAAAACGAAACGGGAGGAATGTGCCATTTCAAAGCTGCGCGGACACCACGGGCGGCCCT
130 140 150 160 170 180
A G A E V W T V P G L L L G A R K L D L L
GCGGGGGCCCGAGGTCTGGACGGTTCCGGGCCCCTTCTGGGGCGCGCAAGCTTGGACCTTCTG
190 200 210 220 230 240
TM1
A L I P L V A I V A L M T L V G A L L F
GCGCTGATCCCGCTGGTGGCGATCGTCGGCCTGATGACGCTGGTCGGCGGCTGCTCTTC
250 260 270 280 290 300
A V A Q S D A N R A R A K L A T D A L W
GCCGTCGCGGCAATCCGATGCCAACCGCGCCCCGGGCGAAACTGGCCACTGATGCCGCTTTGG
310 320 330 340 350 360
V E Q T L R F Q M A V D E D V L V R L A
GTCGAAACAGACGCTGCGTTTCAGATGGCGGTGGACGAGGTGTGCTGGTGCCTGGCG
370 380 390 400 410 420
L D A S A G A S Q Q A L S A R A R L H L
CTGGATGCCAGCGCCGGGGCCTCGCAAACGGCGCTCTCGGCCCCGGGCTGCATCTG
430 440 450 460 470 480
A A N P E T L G L R W Y D A T G R L I A
GCGGCGAAACCCGGAAACGCTGGGGCTGGGTATGATGCCGACCGGCCGTCTGATTGCC
490 500 510 520 530 540
A V P E G P G P A E A A L V R Q L L A S
GCCGTGCCCGAGGGCCCCGGCCCCGGAGGGCGGCTGGTCAGGCAGCTGCTCGCCCTCG
550 560 570 580 590 600
G A L P P R P V Y G P V R D G R V V L A
GGGGCGCTGCGCCGCGCCGGGTCTATGGGCGGTGCGGGACGGCCGGGTGGTCGGCG
610 620 630 640 650 660
E R V S A S G G V V V A T V S L P M M L
GAACGGGTCTCGGCCCCTCGGGGGGGGTGGTGGCGACGGTGTGCTGCGGATGATGCTC
670 680 690 700 710 720
E R H L P W W I A E Q Y G V R I S D T S
GAACGCCATCTGCCCCCTGGTGGATCGCGGAAACAATACGGGGTGCAGTTCCGACACCTCG
730 740 750 760 770 780
G V L A E R A R R P I A A A A P R H G I
GGGGTCTGGCCGAACGGCCCCGGCCCGATCGCCGCCCCGGGCACGGGCATC
790 800 810 820 830 840
S F D P P L A G T T L E I M A Y D A P D
AGCTTCGATCCGCGGCTGGGGGACGACGCTGGGAGATCATGGGCCTATGACGCCCCCGAT
850 860 870 880 890 900
TM2
A F G N A A L L A A I G A L S V F A V L
GCCTTTGGCAAATGCCGGCTTCTGGCGGATCGGGGCTTTGTGCGGTCTTTGCGGGTGCTG
910 920 930 940 950 960
A M V V L H R N A L R R R M A E D R L R
GCGATGGTTGGTGCTGCAACCGAAAACGCCCTTGCGCCGCGCATGGCCGAGGACCGGGCTGCGC
970 980 990 1000 1010 1020
A E M A F R R A M E E S L T V G M R A K
GCCGAAATGGCCTTTTCGCGCGCGGATGGAGGAAAAGCCTGACCGTGGGGATGCGGGCGAAG
1030 1040 1050 1060 1070 1080

D L S G R I L Y V N G A F C K L V G L A
GATCTGTCGGGGGCGCATCCTTTACGTCAACGGCGCCTTTTGCAAGCTGGTCGGGCTGGCG
1090 1100 1110 1120 1130 1140
A E D L V G R A Q P M P Y W A P D F L E
GCCGAGGATCTGGTCGGCCCGTGCCCAGCCGATGCCCTATTGGCGCCCAGACTT CCTGGAA
1150 1160 1170 1180 1190 1200
E T L A R Q R Q L I E G Q P V P Q A F E
GAGACCCCTCGCCCGGCA GCCGAATTGATCGAGGGGCGCCGTGCCGCA GGCCTTTGAA
1210 1220 1230 1240 1250 1260
T R F R R S D G S E I E V Q V F E A P L
ACCCGGTTCCGCGGCTCGGACGGGT CGGAAATCGAGGTGCAGGTCTTTGAAGCGCCGCTG
1270 1280 1290 1300 1310 1320
I D A G G R H R G W M G S V I D I T Q A
ATCGACGCGGGTGGCCGGCATCGCGGCTGGGATGGGCTCGGTGATCGACATCACCCAGGCG
1330 1340 1350 1360 1370 1380
Linker
K Q A A R L A R A Q D E S L A R T G R L
AAACAGGCGGACGGCTGGCGCGCGCAGGACGAAAGCCTGGCCCCGCACCGGGCGGCTG
1390 1400 1410 1420 1430 1440
V T L G E M A S T L A H E L N Q P L A A
GTGACTTTGGGCGGATGGCCTCGGACCCCTTGC GATGAGCTGAACCAGCCGCTGGCCGCC
1450 1460 1470 1480 1490 1500
I A S Y A A G G L N L F D Q P E P N L T
ATCGCCTCCTATGCGGCCCCGGGGGCTGAAACCTGTT CGATCAGCCC GAGCCGAACCTGACG
1510 1520 1530 1540 1550 1560
M L R Q A F E K M G A Q A R R A G L V I
ATGCTGCGGCAAGCCTTTGAAAAAGATGGGGGCGCAGGCGGCGGTGCGGGGCTGGTGATC
1570 1580 1590 1600 1610 1620
R R V Q D F V K K R T P Q L A A L D L S
CGCCGGGTGCAGGATTTTCGTGAAAGAAGCGCACGCGGCGCTGGCGGCCCTCGATCTGTCC
1630 1640 1650 1660 1670 1680
E V L A E A L S I T A P V A R E H R V K
GAGGTGCTGGCCGAGGCGCTCTCGATCACC GCCCCCCGTCGGCGGAGCATCGGGTG AAG
1690 1700 1710 1720 1730 1740
L A S L I E G R I P G V Q A D R I L I E
CTCGCCTCGCTGATCGAGGGGCGCATCCCCGGGGTCCAGGCGGACC GCATCCTCGATCGAA
1750 1760 1770 1780 1790 1800
Q V L V N L I R N G V E A M A E G P R T
CAGGTGCTGGTCAATCTGATCCGCAACGGTGT CGGAGGCGATGGGGGCCGCA CC
1810 1820 1830 1840 1850 1860
G D D L T V R L A R A G A A V T I E V M
GGCGACGACCTGACGGTGC GGCTGGCCCCGGCGGGGCGCCGTCACC ATCGAGGTGATG
1870 1880 1890 1900 1910 1920
○ ○ ○
D R G P G I S D A V A A S L F D P F T S
GACCGCGGGCCCCGGGCATTTCGATGCCGTCGGGCAAGCCTTTT TGACCCCCTTCACCTCG
1930 1940 1950 1960 1970 1980
T K S E G M G G L N I C R S I V E M H
ACCAAATCCGAGGGCATGGGGATGGGGCTGAACATCTGCCGCTCGATCGTGAGATGCAT
1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040
H G S L S H G P R A G G G T V F T V T L
CACGGCAGCCTGTGCGCACGGCCCCCGCGCGGGCGCCGACC GTCTTCACCGTCATATCGTGCATGACGAGG
2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100
P V P Q E G A P A *
CCC GTCCC CGCAGGAGGGGCCCCCGCATGAGTTTCA CC G T T CATATCGTGCATGACGAGG
2110 2120 2130 2140 2150 2160
dctR →

(Stock et al. 1989; Fig. 2). The N-terminal portion of sensor-kinases is believed to be the sensory domain but no N-terminal homology was apparent between DctS and DctB.

DctR was found to share sequence similarity with a number of proteins in the conserved family of prokaryotic response regulators which function as transcriptional activators. The greatest degree of similarity was found with the regulator counterparts of two of the three rhizobial systems discussed above, i.e. FixJ (42% identical residues over a 197 residue overlap) and NodW (38% identical residues over a 193 residue overlap). In addition, a substantial degree of sequence conservation was found with UhpA (30% identical residues over a 195 residue overlap), the *E. coli* hexose-phosphate transport regulator (Weston and Kadner 1988). DctR was also similar to DctD (28% identical residues over a 162 residue overlap). However, the similarity was confined to the N-terminal region; the central and C-terminal domains of DctD were not present in DctR. In contrast, it was clear that DctR could be aligned with FixJ over its entire length and similar results were obtained in NodW and UhpA alignments (not shown). The data indicate that DctR is a member of the FixJ-UhpA subfamily of response regulators and not of the NtrC-DctD subfamily. An important prediction from this result is that expression of the *dct* structural genes (i.e. the target for DctR) should be independent of NtrA, the major alternative sigma factor involved in the expression of diverse metabolic functions in bacterial cells (Ronson et al. 1987c) and which is required by proteins in the NtrC-DctD response-regulator subfamily (Stock et al. 1989). In *Rb. capsulatus*, an NtrA homologue which is thought to be a *nif*-specific sigma factor (NifR4) has been identified (Kranz and Haselkorn 1985; Jones and Haselkorn 1989), and it has been shown that the NifR4 protein can activate expression of the NtrA-dependent *R. leguminosarum dctA* gene in vivo (Foster-Hartnett and Kranz 1992). We measured the rate of transport of L-malate into chemoheterotrophically grown cells of the *nifR4* mutant D15-2 and its isogenic parent, SB1003. The uptake rates were 34 nmol/min per mg protein and 27 nmol/min per mg protein respectively. The growth rates of the two strains were also identical on all three C4-dicarboxylates (data not shown). These results show that NifR4 is not required for dicarboxylate transport in *Rb. capsulatus*.

Fig. 2. Nucleotide and deduced amino acid sequence of the *dctS* and *dctR* genes and of the *dctS-dctP* 5' intergenic region. The sequence of both strands is shown up to nucleotide 120 to illustrate the translation initiation region of the *dctP* gene and the two regions of dyad symmetry in the intergenic region (indicated by single-headed arrows). Repeated TTGCGc/g sequences in this region (see text) are highlighted by dotted lines. After nucleotide 120, only the sequence of the non-coding strand is shown. SD; putative Shine-Dalgarno ribosome binding site. TM1, TM2; hydrophobic sequences predicted to be transmembrane α-helices in DctS. Linker indicates the positions of putative inter-domain connecting sequences identified according to Wotton and Drummond (1989). The positions of the conserved histidine (filled circle), asparagine (filled square) and the glycine-rich region (open circles) in DctS are indicated (Stock et al. 1989). These sequence data have been submitted to the EMBL/GENBANK/DDJB databases under the accession number X64733

Structural features of DctS and DctR

A hydropathy analysis of DctS indicated the presence of two hydrophobic regions in a sequence of otherwise average hydropathy, which are of sufficient length and structure to be membrane-spanning segments (Fig. 2). The first hydrophobic segment is 25 residues long and is separated by 201 residues from the second hydrophobic segment, which is 21 residues long and followed by a run of three arginines (Fig. 2). It is therefore likely that the intervening residues between the two putative membrane-spanning regions comprise a folded periplasmic

DctR (Rc)  Q A R E A V [A A R] R [A S L S] A [R E] A E V M A L M L
FixJ (Rm)   D D [A] N [D I R A R] L Q T L S E R E R Q V L S A V V
FixJ (Bj)   A V [A] Q [D I A A R] V [A S L S] P [R E R Q V M] E G L I

DctR (Rc)  E [G L] M [N K] Q [I A] E R [L G] I A M [R T V E V H R] S R
FixJ (Rm)  A [G L] P [N K] S [I A] Y D L D I S P R T V E V H R A N
FixJ (Bj)  A [G L] S [N K] L [I A] R E Y D I S P R T [I E V Y] R A N

Helix —— Turn —— Helix

DctR (Rc)  [V L] [A K M] G [A] R N I A D [L A R M] T
FixJ (Rm)  [V M A K M] K [A] K [S L] P H [L V R M A] S A G [G] F G P S
FixJ (Bj)  [V M T K M] Q [A] N [S L] S E [L V R] [L A] M R A [G] M L N D

Fig. 3. Alignment of the C-terminal region of DctR from *Rb*. *capsulatus* (Rc) with FixJ from *R*. *meliloti* (Rm) and *Bradyrhizobium japonicum* (Bj). Aminoacyl residue numbers refer to positions in DctR. Identical residues are boxed. The Arg-Glu pair (asterisk) and the lysine residue (filled circle) identified by Khan and Ditta (1991) as being conserved in the FixJ subfamily and region 4 of bacterial sigma factors are indicated, as is the position of the predicted helix-turn-helix motif.

domain and that the remaining 384 residues at the C-terminus (including the conserved histidine kinase domain) are located in the cytoplasm. At the N-terminal boundary of the conserved C-terminal domain of DctS, a Q-linker interdomain sequence (Wotton and Drummond 1989) was identified (Fig. 2) which was relatively alanine rich and contained three glutamine residues. Q-linker sequences have been found in other two-component systems where they appear to connect together distinct protein domains. Using the weight matrix described by Wotton and Drummond (1989) the proposed DctS Q-linker had a score of 146, which compares favourably with that for some other sensors, e.g., CpxA from *E. coli* (96) and NtrB from *Rhizobium* (195). An alanine-rich linker-like sequence is also present at the beginning of the C-terminal domain of DctR (Fig. 2).

Both the DctD and FixJ subfamilies of response regulators are thought to contain a helix-turn-helix (HTH) motif at the C-terminus, which allows them to bind to their target promoters in response to N-terminal phosphorylation by the cognate sensor-kinase. An alignment of the C-terminal domain of DctR with that of FixJ from both *R*. *meliloti* and *Bradyrhizobium japonicum* allowed a putative HTH motif to be identified in DctR (Fig. 3). Using the method of Dodd and Eagan (1990) to predict HTH motifs, DctR had a score of 1144 (3.1 SD units above the mean) indicating a 50% probability for formation of an HTH structure. It should however be noted that few response regulators are included in the master set used for this method. A considerable degree of sequence conservation was apparent between the *R*. *meliloti* FixJ and *Rb*. *capsulatus* DctR HTH motifs, where 7 out of the 9 residues in the predicted DNA recognition helix were identical (Fig. 3).

Insertional inactivation of the *dctS* and *dctR* genes

In order to determine the role of the sensor and regulator genes identified by sequence analysis, we insertionally inactivated *dctS* and *dctR* separately, using the spectinomycin-resistant omega fragment or interposon (Prentki and Krisch 1984). For *dctS*, the interposon was inserted into a HindIII site at the extreme 5′ end of the gene and for *dctR*, a PstI site located in the centre of the coding region was used (Fig. 1). Plasmid constructs pJGS1Ω and pDCT2131Ω were conjugated into *Rb*. *capsulatus* PAS100 and the mating mixtures spread on RCV-pyruvate plates containing spectinomycin. Spectinomycin-resistant colonies arose at a frequency of about \(10^{-6}\) per recipient with both constructs. Most of these colonies were able to grow aerobically on malate-RCV plates and so probably resulted from single homologous crossovers. About 1% of the PAS100(pJGS1Ω) exconjugants and 0.5% of the PAS100(pDCT2131Ω) exconjugants were unable to grow aerobically on malate plates. One of each mutant type was purified and chromosomal DNA was isolated from them. Southern blots hybridised with an interposon probe showed the presence of the 2 kb interposon in the expected 4 kb EcoRI fragment in both mutants (data not shown). Importantly, no pSUP202 or pARO180 sequences were detected with the corresponding vector probes, indicating that the mutant phenotypes were the result of allele replacement events.

The growth characteristics of the *dctS::Ω* and *dctR::Ω* mutants are shown in Table 2. With both strains, no growth occurred aerobically on any of the C4-dicarboxylates tested, but slow growth on malate and succinate was observed under photosynthetic (anaerobic/light) conditions due to the additional low affinity uptake system present in the cells under these conditions (Hamblin et al. 1990). These results are consistent with those found previously for the Tn5 insertion mutants now known to map in *dctS*. The inability of the two interposon mutants to transport 6 μM L-malate is illustrated in Table 2, confirming their Dct⁻ phenotype. Clearly, due to the highly polar nature of the insertion mutations in the *dctS* and *dctR* genes, any additional, unidentified genes downstream of *dctR* in the same transcriptional unit will not be expressed and this could be responsible for the Dct⁻ phenotype observed. In order to investigate this possibility, the plasmids pDCT202 and pDCT209 (Fig. 1 and Table 1) were transferred to JGS52 and MJH240 by conjugation. pDCT202 contains the promoter region and intact copies of the *dctS* and *dctR* genes but no *Rb*. *capsulatus* DNA sequences beyond the EcoRI

Table 2. Growth and transport rates of wild-type and mutant cells

| Strain           | Growth rates (turbidity doubling time, h) | $[^{14}C]$-L-malate uptake rate$^b$ (nmol/min per mg protein) |
|------------------|------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------|
|                  | Chemoheterotrophic                      | Photoheterotrophic                                         |
|                  | Pyruvate | Malate | Succinate | Fumarate | Pyruvate | Malate | Succinate | Fumarate |                          |
| PAS100 $dct^+$   | 4          | 5       | 4         | 4        | 4        | 4      | 4        | 4        | 25                         |
| JGS52 $dctS::\Omega$ | 4          | -a      | -         | -        | 3.5      | 7      | 16       | -        | 0                          |
| MJH240 $dctR::\Omega$ | 3          | -       | -         | -        | 2        | 7.5    | 7.5      | -        | 0                          |

Growth conditions and the transport assay technique are described in Materials and methods  
$a$ No growth  

$b$ Measured under aerobic conditions in the dark with chemoheterotrophically grown cells

site < 300 bp 3' of the stop codon of $dctR$. Nevertheless, the JGS52(pDCT202) and MJH240(pDCT202) merodiploids were found to be able to grow normally on C4-dicarboxylates as sole carbon source (Fig. 1). These data show that polar effects on genes downstream of $dctR$ are not responsible for the observed mutant phenotypes. In contrast, JGS52(pDCT209) merodiploids were unable to grow on C4-dicarboxylates (Fig. 1). As pDCT209 contains an intact $dctS$ gene but only the 5' end of $dctR$, this demonstrates that the $dctS::\Omega$ mutation is indeed strongly polar on $dctR$ and confirms that the two genes are part of the same operon. The proposed in vivo role of the sensor-regulator pair in transcriptionally activating the $dctP$ operon was examined by assaying for the product of the $dctP$ gene is periplasmic fractions of the $dctS::\Omega$ and $dctR::\Omega$ mutants. In FPLC ion-exchange profiles of 60% ammonium sulphate fractionated periplasmic extracts, a sharp peak of malate binding activity was readily detected in wild-type cells but this activity and the corresponding protein peak were found to be completely absent in the mutants (data not shown), demonstrating that expression of the $dctSR$ operon is necessary for the synthesis of DctP.

Discussion

In this study, two genes capable of encoding proteins with significant sequence similarity to the sensor-kinase and response-regulator families of bacterial signal transduction proteins have been identified and characterised. Sequence analysis, insertional inactivation and complementation tests have shown that the $dctS$ and $dctR$ genes form an operon, the expression of which is essential for the synthesis of DctP, and thus for transport activity itself. Four transposon Tn5 insertions, which were isolated previously and which lead to a Dct$^-$ phenotype, clearly map within the $dctS$ gene (Fig. 1) and these would also be expected to have a polar mutagenic effect on $dctR$. However, previous complementation analyses (Hamblin et al. 1990) indicated that the insertion in MJH40 is non-polar on a downstream gene (i.e. $dctR$), probably as a result of weak promoter activity. Taken together, the transposon and interposon data indicate that both DctS and DctR are necessary for expression of the transport system. The $dctS$ and $dctR$ genes were found to have overlapping stop and start codons, respectively, a feature indicative of translational coupling of two proteins that interact functionally. An unusual, though not unique, feature of the $dctS$ gene is the proposed CTG initiation codon. CTG has been shown to function as an inferior initiation codon in other systems (Ambulos et al. 1990) and could result in weak expression of the $dctS$ and $dctR$ genes. This may be necessary in view of the likely membrane location of DctS. A similar role has been proposed for the CTG initiation codon of the $qacA$ gene on the Staphylococcus aureus plasmid pSK1 (Rouch et al. 1990) which encodes a membrane transport protein.

In Rhizobium, unlike Rb. capsulatus, active transport of C4-dicarboxylates is binding-protein independent and instead requires a single hydrophobic integral membrane protein (Engelke et al. 1989). The data presented here suggest a further difference between the dicarboxylate transport systems of these two genera, even though they are closely related phylogenetically (Woese 1987). Although both systems have a superficially similar genetic arrangement, with a sensor-regulator pair divergently transcribed from the structural gene(s), greater similarity was found between the rhizobial FixLJ system and DctSR than between the latter proteins and the rhizobial DctBD pair. DctB has been suggested to be a dicarboxylate sensor (Ronson et al. 1987a, b). If DctS and DctB are functionally analogous, one possible mechanism of signal reception could involve direct ligand binding to the periplasmic N-terminal sensory domain of these proteins. If this were the case, the periplasmic domains may be folded in a similar way in both proteins to form a dicarboxylate binding site which is not discernible in the primary sequence, as DctS is not homologous with DctB in the N-terminal region. It has, however, also been proposed that DctB could detect the conformational state of the transport protein, DctA, and may not interact with the ligand directly (Ronson et al. 1987a; Yarosh et al. 1989).

The response-regulator DctR is clearly a member of the FixJ-UhpA subfamily of proteins and not of that containing DctD and NtrC. This finding provides an explanation of the NtrA-independent nature of the expression of the Dct system in Rb. capsulatus, as demonstrated here and suggested previously by Kranz and Foster-Hartnett (1990). The putative HTH motifs of DctR and FixJ were also found to be very similar. There is evidence in the case of FixJ that transcriptional activation

tion at cognate promoters requires an RNA polymerase containing the predominant cellular sigma factor (σ⁷⁰ in *E. coli*; Batut et al. 1991). Although no clear consensus for *Rhodobacter Eσ⁷⁰* type promoter regions has been identified, several examples of *E. coli*-like –35, –10 sequences have been found (Armstrong et al. 1989; McGregor and Donohue 1991) in which there is an increased frequency of G or C bases in positions occupied by A in the *E. coli* consensus. The complex region of dyad symmetry located in the central portion of the *dctS-dctP* intergenic region could represent one or more promoter elements. Significantly, the sequence 5′ TTGCGC/g 3′ is repeated three times on one strand and twice on the other and resembles the type of –35 region identified by McGregor and Donohue (1991). However, no corresponding –10 sequence could be discerned. Regions of dyad symmetry are also known as binding sites for regulatory proteins and so this is the most likely candidate for the site of interaction with DctR. It is significant that the FixJ subfamily of response-regulators (including DctR; Fig. 3), are homologous in the C-terminal “module” to region 4 of bacterial sigma factors (Khan and Ditta 1991), which is also known to interact with the –35 region.

Acknowledgements. We gratefully acknowledge financial support from the U.K. Science and Engineering Research Council (SERC) in the form of a research grant to D.J.K. for M.J.H. and a Studentship for J.G.S. The Krebs Institute is a designated centre for molecular recognition studies and is supported by the SERC. We also thank Robert Barnsley for constructing Figure 3.

### References

Akrigg D, Bleasby AJ, Dix NIM, Findlay JBC, North ACT, Parry-Smith D, Wooton JC, Blundell TL, Gardner S, Hayes F, Islam S, Sternberg MJE, Thornton JM, Tickle IJ, Murray-Rust P (1988) A protein sequence/structure database. Nature 335:745–746

Ambulos NP Jr, Smith T, Mulbury W, Lovett PS (1990) CUG as a mutant start codon for cat-86 and xylE in *Bacillus subtilis*. Gene 94:125–128

Armstrong G, Alberti M, Leach F, Hearst JE (1989) Nucleotide sequence, organisation and nature of the protein products of the carotenoid biosynthesis gene cluster of *Rhodobacter capsulatus*. Mol Gen Genet 216:254–268

Batut J, Santero E, Kustu S (1991) In vitro activity of the nitrogen fixation regulatory protein FixJ from *Rhizobium meliloti*. J Bacteriol 173:5914–5917

David M, Daveran ML, Batut J, Dedieu A, Domergue O, Ghai J, Hertig C, Boistard P, Khan D (1988) Cascade regulation of *nif* gene expression in *Rhizobium meliloti*. Cell 54:671–683

Ditta G, Stanfield S, Corbin D, Helinski DR (1980) Broad host-range DNA cloning system for Gram-negative bacteria: construction of a gene bank of *Rhizobium meliloti*. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 77:7347–7351

Dodd IB, Eagan JB (1990) Improved detection of helix-turn-helix DNA binding motifs in protein sequences. Nucleic Acids Res 18:5019–5026

Engelke T, Jording D, Kapp D, Pühler A (1989) Identification and sequence analysis of the *Rhizobium meliloti dctA* gene encoding the C4-dicarboxylate carrier. J Bacteriol 171:5551–5560

Foster-Hartnett D, Kranz RG (1992) Analysis of the promoters and upstream sequences of *nifA1* and *nifA2* in *Rhodobacter capsulatus*: activation requires *ntrC* but not *rpoN*. Mol Microbiol 6:1049–1060

Gibson J (1975) Uptake of C4-dicarboxylates and pyruvate by *Rhodopseudomonas sphaeroides*. J Bacteriol 123:471–480

Gilles-Gonzalez MA, Ditta G, Helinski DR (1991) A haemoprotein with kinase activity encoded by the oxygen sensor of *Rhizobium meliloti*. Nature 350:170–172

Göttfert M, Grob P, Hennecke H (1990) Proposed regulatory pathway encoded by the *nodV* and *nodW* genes, determinants of host specificity in *Bradyrhizobium japonicum*. Proc Natl Acad Sci 87:2680–2684

Hamblin MJ, Shaw JG, Curson JP, Kelly DJ (1990) Mutagenesis, cloning and complementation analysis of C4-dicarboxylate transport genes from *Rhodobacter capsulatus*. Mol Microbiol 4:1567–1574

Hillmer P, Gest H (1977) H₂ metabolism in the photosynthetic bacterium *Rhodospseudomonas capsulata*: H₂ production by growing cultures. J Bacteriol 129:724–731

Jones R, Haselkorn R (1989) The DNA sequence of the *Rhodobacter capsulatus ntrA*, *ntrB* and *ntrC* gene analogues required for nitrogen fixation. Mol Gen Genet 215:507–516

Kelly DJ, Hamblin MJ, Shaw JG (1990) Physiology and genetics of C4-dicarboxylate transport in *Rhodobacter capsulatus*. In: Drews G, Dawes EA (eds) Molecular biology of membrane-bound complexes in phototrophic bacteria (FEMS Symposium 53). Plenum Press, pp 453–462

Khan D, Ditta G (1991) Modular structure of FixJ: homology of the transcriptional activator domain with the –35 domain of bacterial sigma factors. Mol Microbiol 5:987–997

Kranz RG, Haselkorn R (1985) Characterisation of *nif* regulatory genes in *Rhodospseudomonas capsulata* using *lac* gene fusions. Gene 40:203–215

Kranz RG, Foster-Hartnett D (1990) Transcriptional regulatory cascade of nitrogen-fixation genes in anoxygenic photosynthetic bacteria: oxygen and nitrogen-responsive factors. Mol Microbiol 4:1793–1800

Kyte J, Doolittle RF (1982) A simple method for displaying the hydrophathic character of a protein. J Mol Biol 157:105–132

MacGregor BJ, Donohue TJ (1991) Evidence for two promoters for the cytochrome *c₂* gene (*cycA*) of *Rhodobacter sphaeroides*. J Bacteriol 173:3949–3957

Parke D (1990) Construction of mobilizable vectors derived from plasmids RP4, pUC18 and pUC19. Gene 93:135–137

Prentki P, Krisch HM (1984) In vitro insertional mutagenesis with a selectable DNA fragment. Gene 29:303–313

Ronson CW, Astwood PM, Nixon BT, Ausubel FM (1987a) Deduced products of C4-dicarboxylate transport regulatory genes of *Rhizobium leguminosarum* are homologous to nitrogen regulatory gene products. Nucleic Acids Res 15:7921–7934

Ronson CW, Nixon BT, Ausubel FM (1987b) Conserved domains in bacterial regulatory proteins that respond to environmental stimuli. Cell 49:571–581

Ronson CW, Nixon BT, Albright LM, Ausubel FM (1987c) *Rhizobium meliloti ntrA* (*rpoN*) gene is required for diverse metabolic functions. J Bacteriol 169:2424–2431

Rouch DA, Cram DS, DiBerardino D, Littlejohn TG, Skurray RA (1990) Efflux-mediated antiseptic resistance gene *qacA* from *Staphylococcus aureus*: common ancestry with tetracycline- and sugar-transport proteins. Mol Microbiol 4:2051–2062

Sambrook J, Fritsch EF, Maniatis T (1989) Molecular cloning: A laboratory manual. Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press, Cold Spring Harbor, New York

Shaw JG, Kelly DJ (1991) Binding protein-dependent transport of C4-dicarboxylates in *Rhodobacter capsulatus*. Arch Microbiol 155:466–472

Shaw JG, Hamblin MJ, Kelly DJ (1991) Purification, characterization and nucleotide sequence of the periplasmic C4-dicarboxylate binding protein (DctP) from *Rhodobacter capsulatus*. Mol Microbiol 5:3055–3062

Staden R (1980) A new computer method for the storage and manipulation of DNA gel reading data. Nucleic Acids Res 8:3673–3694

Staden R (1982) An interactive graphics program for comparing and aligning nucleic acid and amino-acid sequences. Nucleic Acids Res 10:2951–2961

Staden R, McLachlan AD (1982) Codon preference and its use in identifying protein coding regions in long DNA stretches. Nucleic Acids Res 10:141–156

Stahl CL, Sojka GA (1973) Growth of *Rhodopseudomonas capsulata* on L- and D-malic acid. Biochim Biophys Acta 299:241–245

Stock JB, Ninfa AJ, Stock AM (1989) Protein phosphorylation and the regulation of adaptive responses in bacteria. Microbiol Rev 53:450–490

Taylor DP, Cohen SN, Clark WG, Marrs BL (1983) Alignment of the genetic and restriction maps of the photosynthesis regions of the *Rhodopseudomonas capsulata* chromosome by a conjugation-mediated marker rescue technique. J Bacteriol 154:580–590

Walmsley AR, Shaw JG, Kelly DJ (1992) The mechanism of ligand binding to the periplasmic C4-dicarboxylate binding protein

(DctP) from *Rhodobacter capsulatus*. J Biol Chem 267:8064–8072

Weaver PF, Wall JD, Gest H (1975) Characterisation of *Rhodopseudomonas capsulata*. Arch Microbiol 105:207–216

Weston LA, Kadner RJ (1988) Role of *uhp* genes in expression of the *Escherichia coli* sugar-phosphate transport system. J Bacteriol 170:3375–3383

Woese CR (1987) Bacterial evolution. Microbiol Rev 51:221–271

Wootton JC, Drummond MH (1989) The Q-linker: a class of interdomain sequences found in bacterial multidomain regulatory proteins. Protein Eng 2:535–543

Yarosh OK, Charles TC, Finan TM (1989) Analysis of C4-dicarboxylate transport genes in *Rhizobium meliloti*. Mol Microbiol 3:813–823

Communicated by J.W. Lengeler
