
JOURNAL OF BACTERIOLOGY, Feb. 1996, p. 611–618
0021-9193/96/$04.00+0
Copyright © 1996, American Society for Microbiology

# Identification and Molecular Characterization of a Putative Regulatory Locus That Affects Autolysis in *Staphylococcus aureus*

ERIC W. BRUNSKILL AND KENNETH W. BAYLES*
Program in Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Maryland,
Baltimore County, Baltimore, Maryland 21228

Received 17 August 1995/Accepted 16 November 1995

Previously in our laboratory, a PCR-based strategy was used to isolate potential sensor gene fragments from the *Staphylococcus aureus* genome. One DNA fragment was isolated that shared strong sequence similarity to genes encoding bacterial sensor proteins, indicating that it originated from within a potential staphylococcal sensor protein gene. In this study, the DNA surrounding the PCR product origin was cloned and sequenced. This analysis revealed the presence of two genes, termed *lytS* and *lytR*, whose deduced amino acid sequences were similar to those of members of the two-component regulatory system family of proteins. *S. aureus* cells containing an insertional disruption of *lytS* exhibited a marked propensity to form aggregates in liquid culture, suggesting that alterations in cell surface components exist in this strain. Transmission electron microscopic examination of these cells revealed that the cell surface was rough and diffuse and that a large proportion of the cell population had lysed. The *lytS* mutant also exhibited increased autolysis and an altered level of murein hydrolase activity produced compared with the parental strain, NCTC 8325-4. These data suggest that the *lytS* and *lytR* gene products control the rate of autolysis in *S. aureus* by affecting the intrinsic murein hydrolase activity associated with the cell.

Environmental stimuli have been shown to play an important role as cues that alter the expression of virulence genes during pathogenesis (30, 31). Genetic evidence and biochemical evidence have suggested that the detection of these environmental signals and the modulation of gene expression are commonly controlled through so-called two-component regulatory systems (1, 35, 36, 47, 48). For some pathogens, these systems are used to detect environmental signals such as MgSO₄, temperature, osmolarity, and pH (31). Although many insights have been gained into the molecular nature of these regulatory processes, the control of gene expression in response to environmental signals in *Staphylococcus aureus* is poorly defined. However, since *S. aureus* has the ability to cause many types of diseases in a variety of tissues (18), it undoubtedly responds to numerous environmental signals and therefore utilizes multiple regulatory mechanisms to coordinately control the expression of virulence genes during *S. aureus* infections.

One such virulence gene regulatory system in *S. aureus* is known as the *agr* locus (20, 22, 37, 39). This locus contains several components that are required for virulence in *S. aureus*. Two of the components, AgrA and AgrC, have sequence similarity to known response regulators and sensor proteins from bacterial two-component regulatory systems, respectively. Several studies have indicated that a number of *agr*-dependent genes respond to diverse environmental signals. For example, magnesium has been demonstrated to stimulate the production of staphylococcal enterotoxin B (21). Also, a number of environmental factors such as composition of the growth media, O₂, and pH are known to regulate the expression of toxic shock syndrome toxin 1 (43). Despite the central role that the *agr* locus plays in governing transcription of many virulence genes, it remains unclear how environmental signals are mediated through the *agr* locus to regulate various virulence factors.

As part of a study aimed at identifying and characterizing environmental sensing mechanisms of *S. aureus*, a PCR-based strategy was used to identify sensor-like genes from *S. aureus* (6). One of the PCR products demonstrated strong sequence similarity to genes encoding known sensor proteins. Here, we report the cloning and sequence analysis of a locus that encodes a potentially new two-component regulatory system in *S. aureus*. Analysis of this locus revealed that it affects the rate of autolysis in *S. aureus*.

## MATERIALS AND METHODS

### Strains, plasmids, and growth conditions.
The bacterial strains and plasmids used in this study are listed in Table 1. L broth was used for cultivation of *Escherichia coli* cells, while Trypticase soy broth (TSB) was used for cultivation of *S. aureus* strains. The antibiotics ampicillin (50 μg ml⁻¹) and erythromycin (2 μg ml⁻¹) were used as indicated for selection in *E. coli* and *S. aureus*, respectively.

### DNA manipulations.
DNA restriction digestions and ligations were performed as described by Sambrook et al. (41), using enzymes obtained from Promega. The *lytS* gene-specific probes (nucleotides [nt] 92 to 1843) and the *lytR* gene-specific probes (nt 1849 to 2575) were PCR amplified from *S. aureus* genomic DNA by using sequence-specific oligonucleotides and *Taq* polymerase (Promega). PCR products were gel purified by using β-agarase as described by the manufacturer (New England Biolabs) and radiolabeled with [α-³²P]ATP (41). Plasmid transformations into *E. coli* were carried out by the method of Inoue et al. (19). *E. coli* plasmid DNA was isolated by using the alkaline lysis method followed by CsCl-ethidium bromide density gradient centrifugation (41). Chromosomal DNA from *S. aureus* was isolated as described by Dyer and Iandolo (15), and plasmid DNA transformations of *S. aureus* were carried out by using a Bio-Rad Gene Pulser as described by Kraemer and Iandolo (23). Transduction in *S. aureus* strains was performed by using φ11 as described previously (44).

### Campbell integration.
The *lytS* gene disruption was created via Campbell integration by cloning an 89-nt PCR product originating from within the *lytS* gene (this product was originally designated *kinI* [6]) into the *BamHI-SmaI* site of the shuttle vector pER924 (Fig. 1A). The resulting plasmid, pER1, was introduced by electroporation into *S. aureus* RN4220 at the permissive temperature (30°C) to generate strain KB200. The plasmid was then brought by trans-

* Corresponding author. Mailing address: Center of Marine Biotechnology, Columbus Center, Suite 236, 701 E. Pratt St., Baltimore, MD 21202. Phone: (410) 234-8875. Fax: (410) 234-8899. Electronic mail address: bayles@mbimail.umd.edu.

TABLE 1. Bacterial strains and plasmids used

| Strain or plasmid | Relevant properties | Source or reference |
|-------------------|--------------------|---------------------|
| **Strains**       |                    |                     |
| $S$. aureus       |                    |                     |
| NCTC 8325-4       | Laboratory strain cured of prophages | 34 |
| RN4220            | NCTC 8325-4 r⁻     | 34 |
| KB200             | RN4220 (pER1)      | This study          |
| KB201             | 8325-4 (pER1)      | This study          |
| KB300             | 8325-4 lytS::pER1 integrant | This study          |
| $E$. coli DH5α    | F⁻ supE44 ΔlacU169 (φ80lacZΔM15) hsdR17 recA1 endA1 gyrA96 thi-1 | Bethesda Research Laboratories |
| **Plasmids**      |                    |                     |
| pER924            | Shuttle/integration vector | 8 |
| pER1              | pER924 containing 89-bp kin1 (6) PCR fragment | This study          |
| pKIN1P            | Plasmid rescue of 3.4-kb upstream lytS region | This study          |
| pKIN1E            | Plasmid rescue of 4.3-kb downstream lytS region | This study          |

duction, with bacteriophage φ11, into NCTC 8325-4, generating $S$. aureus KB201. An overnight culture of KB201, grown at the permissive temperature (30°C), was streaked on Trypticase soy agar containing 2 μg of erythromycin per ml and incubated overnight at the nonpermissive temperature (43°C). Since plasmid replication is inhibited at 43°C, only those cells that had undergone a Campbell-type integration event into the lytS gene were selected. After overnight growth, single colonies were restreaked and grown again at 43°C. Chromosomal DNA from single colonies was isolated, and a Southern analysis was used to confirm that the clones contained a lytS gene disruption (data not shown). One such clone was identified and designated KB300.

Cloning of the lytS region. To clone the lytS region, 5 μg of KB300 genomic DNA was digested with EcoRI or PstI, phenol-chloroform extracted, and ethanol precipitated. The DNA pellets were dissolved in 100 μl of 1× ligase buffer (Promega) and ligated overnight at room temperature. The ligated products were then used to transform $E$. coli, selecting for ampicillin-resistant colonies. Several plasmid clones resulting from the rescue of the upstream and downstream regions were obtained and designated pKIN1P and pKIN1E, respectively.

DNA sequencing and computer analysis. The nucleotide sequence of the lytS and lytR genes was determined by using the dideoxy-chain termination method of Sanger et al. (42) and the Sequenase DNA sequencing kit (United States Biochemical). Sequence-specific oligonucleotides primers were synthesized by using an Expedite 8909 nucleotide synthesizer and were utilized to sequence both strands of pKIN1P and pKIN1E. A computer analysis of the sequences generated was conducted by using the University of Wisconsin Genetics Computer Group package Unix-version 8.0 (13). Multiple amino acid sequence alignments were performed by using the Pileup and Bestfit sequence alignments.

Northern (RNA) blot analysis. Total RNA was isolated from $S$. aureus as described by Hart et al. (17). Equal amounts of RNA (10 μg) were separated in a 1.2% agarose gel (41) and then transferred to nitrocellulose by capillary blotting in 20× SSC (1× SSC is 0.15 M NaCl plus 0.015 M sodium citrate) buffer. After the transfer was complete, the filters were baked for 2 h at 80°C. Prehybridizations and hybridizations were carried out at 65°C for 4 h in 5 ml of hybridization buffer (2× SSC, 5× Denhardt's reagent, 0.01% sodium dodecyl sulfate [SDS], 100 μg of denatured salmon sperm DNA per ml) (41). After heat denaturation, gene-specific radioactive probes were added and the incubation was continued for 12 to 16 h. The filters were then washed in 2× SSC buffer for 30 min at 50°C and then in 1× SSC buffer–0.1% SDS at room temperature until the background levels of radioactivity were undetectable. Hybridizing transcripts were visualized with a Molecular Dynamics PhosphorImager.

Primer extension reactions. A primer extension analysis of the lytSR promoter region was conducted by using an oligonucleotide primer that was complementary to the 5′ end of the lytS gene (nt 121 to 148). The 28-base oligonucleotide (10 pmol) was end labeled by using 50 mCi of [γ-³²P]ATP (>3,000 Ci mmol⁻¹) and T4 polynucleotide kinase (Promega) (41). Total RNA, isolated 3 and 12 h postinoculation, was mixed with 0.2 pmol of labeled primer and then ethanol precipitated. The precipitate was dissolved in 25 μl of hybridization buffer (40 mM Tris-HCl [pH 8.3], 25 mM NaCl), denatured at 95°C for 2 min, and then allowed to anneal for 1 h at 42°C. The primer extension reaction was carried out by adding 21 μl of 2× extension buffer (100 mM Tris HCl [pH 8.3], 100 mM KCl, 2 mM deoxynucleoside triphosphates, 8 mM dithiothreitol, 16 mM MgCl₂, 50 mM NaCl, 160 mg of bovine serum albumin per ml, 50 μg of actinomycin D per ml, 2 U of RNasin [Promega Biotech] per ml) and 2 μl of avian myeloblastosis virus reverse transcriptase (4). Reaction mixtures were incubated at 45°C for 45 min, and reactions were stopped by adding 1 μl of 0.5 M EDTA (pH 8.0). The reaction mixture was then phenol-chloroform extracted and ethanol precipitated. The precipitated cDNA products were resuspended in 5 μl of Sequenase stop solution provided in the Sequenase kit (United States Biochemicals), and the sample was denatured at 95°C for 5 min. The extended products were resolved by electrophoresis in an 8% denaturing polyacrylamide gel and were visualized with a Molecular Dynamic PhosphorImager.

Transmission electron microscopy. TSB-grown NCTC 8325-4 and KB300 cells were resuspended in 2.5% glutaraldehyde in Dulbecco’s phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) overnight. The cells were collected and resuspended in 5 drops of PBS. The cells were then vortexed and incubated for 5 min at room temperature. Next, the cells were pelleted, resuspended in 1.5 ml of PBS containing 1% OsO₄, incubated for 30 min at room temperature, and then centrifuged for 5 min at 13,500 × g. The cell pellet was washed with 1.5 ml of PBS, dehydrated in a series of ethanol washes, fixed in propylene oxide-araldite 502 (1:1) for 30 min, and then treated with propylene oxide-araldite 502 (1:3) for 60 min. The pellets were

FIG. 1. Campbell-type integration and plasmid rescue of the lytS locus. (A) Disruption of the lytS gene was achieved by using plasmid pER1. This plasmid contains a temperature-sensitive gram-positive replicon (+) and an erythromycin resistance determinant (ery) for selection in $S$. aureus, a ColE1 replication origin (−), and an ampicillin resistance determinant (amp) for cloning in $E$. coli. pER1 also contains the 89-bp lytS PCR fragment (striped box) which is the site of a single homologous crossover event into lytS that resulted in the disruption of this gene. (B) DNA flanking the plasmid insertion was cloned by taking advantage of the integrated ColE1 origin, ampicillin resistance determinant, and known restriction endonuclease cleavage sites (P, PstI; H, HindIII; E, EcoRI). The resulting plasmids, pKIN1P and pKIN1E, represent a 5.8-kb upstream clone and a 11.5-kb downstream clone, respectively.

then embedded in polyethylene embedding capsules and spun in a clinical centrifuge on an embedding trench for 3 min. The pellets were incubated at 60°C for 18 h and cut on a Sorvall MT2B Ultramicrotome at a thickness of 60 nm. The thin sections were then stained with 1% uranyl acetate–lead acetate and viewed with a Zeiss 10-CA transmission electron microscope.

**Autolysis assays.** Autolysis assays were performed as described by Mani et al. (29). Cell samples of 50 ml were collected from exponentially growing TSB cultures (optical density at 580 nm of 0.7) containing 1 M NaCl, and the cells were pelleted by centrifugation. The cells were washed twice with 50 ml of ice-cold water and resuspended in 50 ml of 0.05 M Tris-HCl (pH 7.2) containing 0.05% (vol/vol) Triton X-100 (Sigma Chemical Co.). The cells were then incubated at 30°C with shaking, and the optical density at 580 nm was measured at 30-min intervals.

**Zymographic analysis.** LiCl extracts were prepared essentially as described by Qoronfleh and Wilkinson (38). Exponential-phase cells growing in TSB were collected and washed with ice-cold water. The pellets were resuspended in 5 ml of 3 M LiCl and stirred for 15 min at 100°C. The cells were removed by centrifugation, and the supernatant was dialyzed overnight against 0.01 M KPO₄ (pH 7.2). To isolate intracellular murein hydrolases, exponentially growing cells were pelleted, washed with ice-cold water, and homogenized with a Bead-Beater (Biospec Products). The cellular debris was removed by centrifugation at 25,000 × g for 20 min at 4°C, and the supernatant was collected. Finally, extracellular murein hydrolases were isolated by centrifugation of stationary-phase cultures and concentrating the culture supernatants with an Amicon YM-10 membrane. The protein concentration of each extract was determined by using Bio-Rad assays. Detection of lytic activity in SDS-polyacrylamide gels was performed as described by Mani et al. (29). Essentially, 15-mg aliquots of the protein extracts were separated in an SDS–12% polyacrylamide gel containing 1 mg of *Micrococcus luteus* cells (Sigma). After electrophoresis, the proteins were renatured and allowed to react by incubating the gel in 25 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0) buffer containing 1% Triton X-100 (Sigma) at 37°C. Zones of hydrolysis were visualized against a dark background.

**Nucleotide sequence accession number.** The nucleotide sequence of the *lytS-lytB* region has been deposited in the GenBank database (accession number L42945).

---

**RESULTS**

**Cloning of *lytS* and *lytR*.** In a previous study, a DNA fragment from the *S. aureus* chromosome was PCR amplified and shown to contain significant sequence similarity to known sensor protein genes (6). To determine if this fragment was derived from within a staphylococcal sensor gene, a plasmid was constructed (designated pER1; Fig. 1A and Table 1) such that this fragment would serve as a site of homology for Campbell integration into the *S. aureus* chromosome. Chromosomal DNA from the resulting mutant strain (designated KB300) was isolated, and sequences flanking the inserted plasmid were cloned in *E. coli* by using a plasmid rescue technique. This technique takes advantage of the presence of the integrated pER1 plasmid, which contains a ColE1 replicon and an ampicillin resistance determinant. As shown in Fig. 1B, digestion of chromosomal DNA from KB300 with *PstI* or *EcoRI* followed by ligation under conditions favoring intramolecular ligation yielded plasmids containing the upstream or downstream region of the pER1 insertion, respectively. The ligated products were then used to transform *E. coli*, selecting for ampicillin-resistant colonies. Plasmid clones resulting from the rescue of the upstream and downstream regions were obtained and designated pKIN1P and pKIN1E, respectively. As shown in Fig. 1B, pKIN1P contains a 3.4-kb *PstI* fragment and pKIN1E contains a 4.7-kb *EcoRI* fragment.

**Sequence analysis of the *lytS-lytR* region.** Sequence analysis of the 2.6 kb of DNA surrounding the inserted plasmid revealed that this region contains two open reading frames, which we designated *lytS* and *lytR* (Fig. 2). These open reading frames are preceded by consensus ribosome-binding sites and are oriented in the same direction (Fig. 2). The putative *lytS* gene initiates with a GTG start codon and potentially encodes a 64.9-kDa protein (termed LytS) containing 584 amino acids. The predicted amino acid sequence of LytS shares sequence similarity with all of the conserved regions in sensor proteins (Fig. 3A). The similarity in region I includes a conserved histidine residue at position 221, which by analogy to other sensor proteins is a potential site of autophosphorylation. A conserved asparagine at position 483 in region II is thought to be required for the kinase activity of these proteins. LytS also contains the glycine-rich domains (from which the original PCR product was derived; Fig. 2) found in regions II and III, which are thought to form an ATP-binding motif (36, 48). A hydropathy analysis of the putative LytS protein suggests that the N-terminal region of LytS contains several potential hydrophobic domains, indicating that LytS may be a membrane-associated protein (data not shown). GenBank database searches revealed that LytS has the strongest amino acid sequence similarity (32.1% identity and 56.8% similar residues) to YehU, a hypothetical protein whose structural gene, *yehU*, resides in the *metG-dldA* intragenic region of *E. coli*.

The *lytR* gene is located immediately downstream from *lytS* and encodes a putative 27.1-kDa protein (designated LytR) that is 246 amino acids in length. Alignment of the LytR sequence with sequences of several response regulators revealed that it has significant amino acid sequence similarity in the N-terminal region (Fig. 3B). Interestingly, LytR has 32.5% amino acid identity and 59.5% similarity to YehT, another hypothetical *E. coli* protein whose structural gene resides adjacent to *yehU*. Downstream of LytR is a hairpin-loop structure (∆G = –9.6 kcal [ca. –40.2 kJ]) that is a potential Rho-independent transcription terminator (52). The arrangement of *lytS* and *lytR* suggests that these genes form a dicistronic operon.

**Transcription analysis.** To investigate the transcription of *lytS* and *lytR*, RNA was isolated from NCTC 8325-4 and subjected to a Northern blot analysis using *lytS*- and *lytR*-specific probes (see Materials and Methods). As shown in Fig. 4, the *lytS*-specific probe hybridized to a single transcript of approximately 2.5 kb in RNA isolated from NCTC 8325-4 (lane 1) but did not hybridize to RNA isolated from strain KB300 (lane 2). Similarly, the *lytR*-specific probe revealed a single transcript of 2.5 kb in RNA isolated from NCTC 8325-4 (Fig. 4, lane 3) which, again, was absent in KB300 (Fig. 4, lane 4). These results are also consistent with the notion that *lytS* and *lytR* are cotranscribed, since the two genes have the capacity to encode a transcript of approximately 2,500 nt.

To localize the start site of the *lytSR* transcript, a primer extension analysis was used. In vitro extension of a synthetic oligonucleotide primer resulted in the synthesis of an 81-nt cDNA species that localizes the transcription start site to an adenine residue 25 nt upstream from the *lytS* start codon (Fig. 5). Analysis of the DNA sequence upstream from the start site revealed the presence of a putative σ^A^-like consensus sequence, ATGAATN₁₇GATAAA (Fig. 2). This sequence represents a total of 7 of 12 possible matches to the *Bacillus subtilis* σ^A^ consensus sequence (TTGACAN₁₇TATAAT [33]). In addition, this primer extension analysis indicated that the apparent transcription start site was the same in exponential- and stationary-phase cells (Fig. 5, lanes 1 and 2).

**Autolysis assays.** Our initial analysis of strain KB300 (*lytS*) revealed that it had a marked propensity to form aggregates of cells in liquid culture (data not shown), suggesting that the *lytS* mutation may have affected expression of cell surface components in this strain. Transmission electron microscopy revealed that 15 to 20% of cells grown in a liquid culture were lysed (Fig. 6B), while all of the parental cells appeared normal (Fig. 6A). Furthermore, higher magnification revealed that the cell surface had a rough and diffuse appearance, compared with a smooth cell surface found in the parental strain (Fig. 6A and B, insets). This rough appearance is characteristic of mutants defective in the expression of murein hydrolases (11, 28).

1 TAGTAGCGTTTTTTTTAATAATTATTTCATGAATTTTACATGCACTATTATGATAAAATAAACATAATTATAATTCACTGAGGTGCTATC -35 -10 RBS
92/1 GTG CTA TCG CTA ACA ATG TTA TTA CTT GAG CGT GTA GGT TTA ATT ATT TTG GCC TAT GTG TTG ATG M L S L T M L L E R V G L I I L A Y V L M
161/24 AAT ATT CCA TAT TTT AAA AAC TTA ATG AAT CGT CGA CGT ACA TGG AAA GCA CGT TGG CAA TTA TGT ATT N I P Y F K N L M N R R T W K A R W Q L C I
230/47 ATT TTC AGT TTG TTT GCC TTA ATG TCT AAT TTA ACT GGT ATC GTC ATC GAT CAT CAA CAT AGT TTG TCA I F S L F A L M S N L T G I V I D H Q H S L S
299/70 GGA AGT GTG TAC TTC CGT TTA GAT GAT GTA TCT TTA GCT AAC ACA CGT GTA TTA ACG ATA GGT GTC G S V Y F R L D D D V S L A N T R V L T I G V
368/93 GCA GGA TTA GTT GGT GGC CCT TTT GTA GGT CTA TTT GTT GGC GTT ATT TCA GGT ATT TTC AGA GTG TAT A G L V G G P F V G L F V G V I S G I F R V Y
437/116 ATG GGT GGG GCG GAT GCA CAA GTT TAT CTT ATC TCA TCT ATA TTT ATT GGT ATA ATT GCT GGT TAT TTT M G G A D A Q V Y L I S S I F I I A G Y F
506/139 GGC TTA CAA GCT CAA AGA CGC AAG CGT TAC CCG AGT ATT GCG AAA AGT GCC ATG ATT GGA ATT GTT ATG G L Q A Q R R K R Y P S I A K S A M I G I V M
575/162 GAA ATG ATT CAA ATG TTG AGC ATT TTA ACA TTT TCC CAC GAC AAA GCA TAT GCG GTT GAC CTC ATA TCA E M I Q M L S I L T F S H D K A Y A V D L I S
644/185 TTA ATT GCA CTA CCA ATG ATT ATT GTT AAT AGC GTT GGG CCG GCG ATT TTT ATG TCT ATT ATC ATT CCA L I A L P M I I V N S V G P A I F M S I I P
713/208 ACA TTA AAG CAA GAG GAC CAA ATG AAG CCT GTC CAA ACA CAT GAT GTC CTG CAA TTG ATG AAC CAG ACA T L K Q E D Q M K P V Q T H D V L Q M N Q T
782/231 TTC CCG TAT TTT AAA GAA GGA TTG AAT AGA GAA TCG GCA CAA CAA ATT GCG ATG ATT ATT AAA AAT TTA F P Y F K E G L N R E S A Q Q I A M I K N L
851/254 ATG AAA GTA TCT TCC GTA GCA ATT ACA AGC AAA AAT GAA ATC TTA TCG CAT GTA GGT GGA GGT AGT GAT M K V S S V A I T S K N E I L S H V G G S D
920/277 CAT CAC ATA CCA ACA AAT GAA ATA TTA ACA AGT CTG TCT AAA GAT GTA TTG AAA TCA GGA AAG TTG AAA H H I P T N E I L T S K D V L K S G K L K
989/300 GAA GTT CAT ACT AAA GAA GAG ATT GGT TGT AGT CAT CCG AAT TGC CCG CTT AGA GCA GCT ATC GTG ATA E V H T K E E I G C S H P N C P L R A I V I
1058/323 CCA CTT GAG ATG CAT GGT TCT ATC GTC GGT ACA TTG AAG ATG TAT TTT ACA AAC CCT AAT GAT TTA ACT P L E M H G S I V G T L K M Y F T N P N D L T
1127/346 TTT GTG GAA CGT CAA CTT GCA GAA GGA TTG GCA AAT ATT TTT AGT AGC CAA ATT GAA CTT GGT GAA GCC F V E R Q L A E G L A I F S S Q I E L G E A
1196/369 GAA ACG CAA AGT AAG TTA TTG AAA GAT GCT GAG ATT AAG TCA TTA CAG GCA CAA GTG AGT CCA CAT TTT E T Q S K L L K D A E I K S L Q A V S P H F
1265/392 TTC TTC AAT TCA ATT AAC CCG ATC TCA GCT TTA GTT AGA ATA AAT AGC GAA AAG GCC CGA GAG TTA CTA F F N S I N P I S A L V R I N S E K A R E L L
1334/415 TTA GAA TTG AGT TAT TTT TTC AGA GCG AAT TTA CAA GGC TCT AAG CAT ACG ATT ACT TTA GAT AAA L E L S Y F R A N L Q G S K Q H T I T L D K
1403/438 GAG TTA AGT CAA GTG CGT GCA TAC TTA TCA CTC GAA CAA GCA CGT TAT CCA GGA AGA TTT AAT ATC AAT E L S Q V R A Y L S L E Q A R Y P G R F N I N
1472/461 ATT AAT GTT GAA GAC AAA TAT CGC GAT GTG CTT GTA CCA CCA TTT TTA ATT CAA ATT TTA GTT GAA AAT I N V E D K Y R D V L V P P F L I Q I L V E N
1541/484 GCC ATC AAA CAT GCG TTT ACG AAT CGA AAG CAA GGT AAC GAT ATT GAC GTG TCA GTG ATT AAA GAA ACT A I K H A F T N R K Q G N D I D V S V I K E T
1610/507 GCA ACA CAT GTA CGT ATT ATT GTA CAA GAT AAT GGT CAG GGT ATT TCT AAA GAT AAA ATG CAT TTG TTG A T H V R I I V Q D N G Q G I S K D K M H L L
1679/530 GGA GAA ACA TCT GTA GAA TCA GAG TCT GGA ACT GGT ASH GGT TTA GAA AAT TTA AAC TTA CGC CTA AAA G E T S V E S G T G S A L E N L N R L K
1748/553 GGA TTA TTT GGA AAA TCC GCT GCA TTA CAA TTT GAA TCG ACA TCG AGC GGT ACC ACT TTT TGG TGT GTA G L F G K S A A L Q F E S T S G T T F W C V
1817/1 CTT CCT TAT GAA AGA CAA GAG GAG GAA TAA AT ATG AAA GCA TTA ATC ATA GAT GAG CCA TTA GCA L P Y E R Q E E * M K A L I I D D E P L A
1885/13 CGT AAT GAA TTA ACA TAT TTA TTA AAT GAA ATT GGT GGT TTT GAA GAA ATT AAT GAG GCA GAA AAT GTA R N E L T Y L N E I G G F E E I N E A E N V
1954/36 AAA GAA ACA TTG GAA GCA CTA CTG ATC AAT CAA TAT GAC ATT ATA TTT TTA GAT GTC AAT TTA ATG GAT K E T L L E I N Q Y D I I F L D V N L M D
2023/59 GAA AAT GGG ATC GAA GCT AAG ATT CAA AAG ATG AAA GAG CCA CCT GCG ATT ATT TTT GCA ACT E N G I E L G A K I Q K M K E P P A I I F A T
2092/82 GCA CAT GAC CAA TAC GCA GTA CAG GCA TTT GAA AAT GCG ACA GAC TAT ATT TTG AAA CCG TTT GGT A H D Q Y A V Q A F E L N A T D Y I L K P F G
2161/105 CAA AAA CGT ATT GAA CAA GCA GTC AAT AAA GTG CGT GCG ACT AAA GCC AAA GAT GAT AAT AAC GCA AGT Q K R I E Q A V N K V R A T K A D D N N A S
2230/128 GCA ATT GCG AAT GAT ATG TCG GCG AAT TTT GAT CAA AGC TTA CCT GTT GAA ATT GAC GAT AAA ATT CAC A I N D M S A N F D Q S L P V E I D D K I H
2299/151 ATG TTA AAG CAA CAA AAT ATT ATT GGG ATT GGC ACA CAT AAT GGT ATT ACA ACC ATA CAT ACA ACG AAT M L K Q N I I G I G T H N G I T T I H T T N
2368/174 CAT AAA TAC GAA ACA ACA GAG CCA TTG AAT CGT TAT GAA AAA CGA TTG AAT CCC ACT TAT TTT ATA CGT H K Y E T T E P L N R Y E K R L N P T Y F I R
2437/197 ATT CAT CGT TCA TAT ATT ATT AAC ACG AAA CAC ATT AAA GAA GTG CAA TGG TTT AAC TAT ACT TAT I H R S Y I I N T K H I K E V Q W F N Y T Y
2506/220 ATG GTA ATA TTG ACA AAT GGT GTC AAG ATG GGA CGT TCA TTT ATG AAA GAT TTT AAA GCG TCG M V I L T N G V K M Q V G R S F M K D F K A S
2575/243 ATA GGA TTA CTT TAA CAGTAATCCTTTTTTTATGCATTTTACCTATGATTTTTGTATTTTGGACTAAAAATCACGCAAATCGAA I G L L *
FIG. 2. Nucleotide sequence of lytS and lytR and their predicted protein products. The lytS (nt 92 to 1843) and lytR (nt 1849 to 2586) genes are separated by 5 nt and are followed by a potential Rho-independent terminator (arrows). The transcription start site, located at nt 67, is preceded by putative -10 and -35 promoter elements as indicated, and the ribosome-binding site (RBS) sequences of the lytS and lytR genes are underlined. The predicted amino acid sequence is given in single-amino acid code below the nucleotide sequence. The shaded region (nt 1631 to 1719) corresponds to the original 89-base PCR product described previously (6).
614

VOL. 178, 1996                                                                 REGULATION OF AUTOLYSIS IN S. AUREUS 615

A
Sa LytS [218] VQTHDVLQL [473] PPFLIQILVENAIKH [512] TIVQDNGQG [536] SESGTGSA
Sa AgrC [234] KFRHDYVNI [266] IVPMKDNLQMNAIKL [322] LNMIDLSTS [389] EGRGLGLS
Ec YehU [-] -------- [464] PAFTLQPIVENAIKH [502] LEIEDNAGL [514] VTNASGLG
Ec EnvZ [240] GVSBDLRTP [337] IKRAVANMVVNAARY [369] FQVEDDGPG [391] SGTGLGLA
Ec PhoR [210] NVSHDLRTP [318] LRSAISNLVYNAVNH [352] FSVEDNGPG [385] GGSGGLGLA
At VirA [471] GIAHEFNNI [576] LQQVLINICKNASQA [625] LSISDNGGG [654] GGTGLGLA
Cp VirS [251] RLYHDIKNH [335] CITIFSCIDNAIEA [-] -------- [397] FLHGIGLK
Bs ComP [572] RDLHDSVLQ [681] LYRIIQEFLSNAVKH [714] LHYEDDGVG [730] EHMSMGLS
Bs DegS [186] REIHDGPAQ [294] LFRLAQEAVSNALKH [327] LMIKDNGKG [345] KNKSFGLL


B
Sa LytR [3] ALITDDEPLAR [47] YDILELDVNLMDD-ENG [91] FELNATDYILKPFGQ
Ec YehT [9] VLIVDDEPLAR [53] PDVLELDIQMPR-ISGL [96] FEEHAFDYLLKPIDE
Sa AgrA [2] EFICEDDPKQR [53] IGCYFLDIQLSTDINGI [100] YKVAAMDFIKD-DP
Pa AlgR [3] VLIVDDEPLAR [48] PDIVLLDIRMPG-LDGL [92] FQVSAVGYLVKPVRS
Ec CheY [8] FLVVDDGSTMR [51] YGFVISDWNPND-MDGL [99] AQAGASGYVVRPFTA
Ec MrkE [60] VIIVEDFLAQ [104] VDAIFLDINIPS-LDG [149] FELEAFDYILKBYQE
Ec KdpE [4] VLIVEDEQAIR [46] PDLIILDGLLPD-GDG [91] LDAGADDYLSKPGFI
Ef VanR [5] ILIVDDEHEIA [47] IDLAILDIMLPG-TSGL [92] LTIGADDYITKBFPR
Bs OrfX17 [9] ILVVDDEARIR [51] YDLLILLDLMMPG-TDG [96] FEAGTDDYIVKPFSP
Bs ComA [4] LLVIDDHPAVM [49] YDLILMDLNLGGEVNGM [96] IRAGLHGAISKTESK
Bs DegU [6] IVIIDDHQLFR [51] -DVWIMDIMNPN-VNGV [96] LKTGARGYLLKEMDA
Ec EvgA [3] AIIIDDHPLAI [47] -DIVTIDVDIFPG-VNG [92] ADAGANGFVSKKEGM


FIG. 3. Amino acid sequence alignments of the putative LytS and LytR proteins. (A) Regions of sequence similarity in sensor proteins are indicated by shading, and boldfaced residues represent highly conserved amino acids. Numbers in brackets indicate positions in the amino acid sequence of the respective proteins. The protein sequences are from the sources indicated in parentheses: AgrC (GenBank [M32737]), YehU (GenBank [U00007]), EnvZ (M11202 [32]), PhoR (X04704 [27]), VirA (X05240 [25]), VirS (U04966 [26]), ComP (M22856 [51]), and DegS (M23649 [24]). The roles of AgrC and YehU as sensor proteins have not yet been demonstrated. Abbreviations of organism names: Sa, *S. aureus*; Ec, *E. coli*; Pa, *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*; Ef, *Enterococcus faecium*; Bs, *B. subtilis*; At, *A. tumefaciens*; Cp, *Clostridium perfringens*. The roles of YehT and OrfX17 as response regulators have not yet been demonstrated. (B) Amino acid sequence alignment of the N-terminal 105 amino acids of LytR with amino acids of other response regulators. Homologous regions are indicated by shading, and boldfaced residues represent highly conserved amino acids found in response regulators. Numbers in brackets indicate positions in the amino acid sequence of the respective proteins. The protein sequences are from the sources indicated in parentheses: YehT (GenBank [U00007]), AgrA (M32737 [37]), AlgR (M55912 [12]), CheY (M12131 [46]), MrkE (M55912 [2]), VanR (M68910 [3]), OrfX17 (L09228 [45]), ComA (M22856 [51]), and DegU (M23649 [24]).

demonstrated in Fig. 7, KB300 also exhibited a faster rate of autolysis compared with the parental strain. This analysis revealed that 50% of KB300 cells were lysed in 0.5 h, whereas 1.5 h was required for lysis of 50% of the parental cells.
Zymographic analysis. To examine whether the *lytS* mutation might have an effect on the activity of murein hydrolases, a zymographic analysis of cytoplasmic, extracellular, and cell wall proteins was performed. In all of the extracts examined, there was diminished activity of several murein hydrolases produced in the KB300 strain (Fig. 8, lanes 2, 4, and 6) compared with those in the parent strain (Fig. 8, lanes 1, 3, and 5). In addition, we observed a substantial increase in the activities of several high-molecular-weight cell wall-associated murein hydrolases in KB300 compared with the parental strain (Fig. 8, lanes 3 and 4). These data indicate that the *lytS* or *lytR* gene or both are required either for regulation of murein hydrolase gene expression or for modulation of murein hydrolase activity.


DISCUSSION

In this report, the cloning and initial characterization of two new *S. aureus* genes, termed *lytS* and *lytR*, are described. The *lytS* and *lytR* gene products (LytS and LytR, respectively) share sequence similarity with sensor and response regulator proteins from two-component regulatory systems. The

FIG. 4. Northern blot analysis of *lytS* and *lytR*. Total cellular NCTC 8325-4 (lanes 1 and 3) and KB300 (lanes 2 and 4) RNAs were separated in an agarose gel, transferred to nitrocellulose paper, and hybridized with *lytS*-specific (lanes 1 and 2) or *lytR*-specific (lanes 3 and 4) probes. Transcript size was determined by comparison with RNA size markers.

data presented here demonstrate that a mutation in the *lytS* gene results in *S. aureus* cells that have an increased rate of autolysis compared with the parental strain, NCTC 8325-4 (Fig. 7). This increased autolysis rate could be due to increased murein hydrolase activity associated with the cells (11, 28) or to an increased susceptibility of the cell wall to murein hydrolases (16). As shown in Fig. 8, the activities of several murein hydrolases found in the cytoplasmic, cell wall,

G A T C 1 2

FIG. 5. Primer extension analysis of the *S. aureus lytSR* transcript. Total cellular RNA (25 μg) was isolated from exponential-phase (lane 1) and stationary-phase (lane 2) cultures, yielding an 81-nt protected cDNA species. The sizes of the extended products were determined by comparison with a DNA sequencing ladder of the *lytSR* promoter region. The primer extension and sequencing reactions were performed with the same primer.

FIG. 6. Transmission electron micrographs of NCTC 8325-4 and KB300 cells. (A) ×8,000 magnification of NCTC 8325-4; (B) ×8,000 magnification of KB300. Insets in panels A and B represent ×31,500 magnification of representative NCTC 8325-4 and KB300 cells, respectively.

and extracellular fractions were affected in this strain. In all of the fractions, the activities of several murein hydrolases were significantly decreased. However, there are also significant increases in the levels of high-molecular-weight murein

hydrolase activities in the cell wall fraction of strain KB300 (Fig. 8, lane 4). These data demonstrate that the *lytS* mutation has both positive and negative effects on murein hydrolase activity. Therefore, it is possible that the observed increased

suggesting that, like most sensor proteins, it is embedded in the membrane. However, in contrast to most sensor proteins that contain two transmembrane domains (47, 48), the N terminus of the predicted LytS protein contains six potential transmembrane segments. The alternating hydrophobic and hydrophilic domains of LytS are similar to the N-terminal domains of a minority of sensor proteins, such as KinB (49), VirS (5), and SakB (26), and are also characteristic of most transport proteins (40). Lyristis et al. (26) have suggested that these multiple domains are involved in transduction of the environmental stimulus to the C-terminal domain by transport of an unknown compound across the cytoplasmic membrane. Support for this hypothesis comes from the finding that the sensor protein ChvG, from *Agrobacterium tumefaciens*, contains within the C terminus a Walker type A consensus nucleotide-binding motif (10) characteristic of ATP-dependent transport proteins (50). Interestingly, the PCR strategy used to identify the *lytS* gene also identified genes encoding transport proteins, further suggesting a link between these two protein families (6, 7). Whether this domain in LytS is involved in some form of environmental signaling mechanism involving transport is currently under investigation.

Finally, the importance of murein hydrolases in staphylococcal infections has been previously described. Mani et al. (29) have characterized autolysis-defective mutants in *S. aureus* that are attenuated in virulence in a rat model of endocarditis. Furthermore, it has been established that murein hydrolases from *Streptococcus pneumoniae* contribute to the virulence of this organism (9, 14). The data presented in this report suggest that autolysis may be a process that responds to signals encountered in the environment. These signals would play a major role in determining the physiology of *S. aureus* as it encounters host defenses. Therefore, the identification of a putative two-component regulatory system from *S. aureus* that is involved in murein hydrolase expression may be of importance not only from a physiological standpoint but also in relation to virulence.

### ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We thank Ron Yasbin, Hal Schreier, Kevin Winterling, and Tammy Domanski for critical reading and insightful comments on the manuscript.

This work was supported by USDA grant 9304112 and funds from the Maryland Agriculture Experimental Station.

### REFERENCES

1. Albright, L. M., E. Huala, and F. Ausubel. 1989. Prokaryotic signal transduction mediated by sensor and regulator protein pairs. Annu. Rev. Genet. 23:311–336.
2. Allen, B. L., G. F. Gerlach, and S. Clegg. 1991. Nucleotide sequence and functions of *mrk* determinants necessary for expression of type 3 fimbriae in *Klebsiella pneumoniae*. J. Bacteriol. 193:916–920.
3. Arthur, M., C. Molinas, and P. Courvalin. 1992. The VanR-VanS two-component regulatory system controls synthesis of depsipeptide precursors in *Enterococcus faecium* BM4147. J. Bacteriol. 174:2582–2591.
4. Ausubel, F. M., R. Brent, R. E. Kingston, D. D. Moore, J. G. Seidman, J. A. Smith, and K. Struhl (ed.). 1991. Current protocols in molecular biology. John Wiley & Sons, New York.
5. Axelsson, L., A. Holck, S. Birkeland, T. Aukrust, and H. Blom. 1993. Cloning and nucleotide sequence of a gene from *Lactobacillus sake* Lb706 necessary for sakacin A production and immunity. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 59:2869–2875.
6. Bayles, K. W. 1993. The use of degenerate, sensor gene-specific, oligodeoxyribonucleotide primers to amplify DNA fragments from *Staphylococcus aureus*. Gene 123:99–103.
7. Bayles, K. W. 1994. Environmental sensing mechanisms in *Staphylococcus aureus*. ASM News 60:597–599.
8. Bayles, K. W., E. W. Brunskill, L. L. Hruska, S. Huang, J. J. Iandolo, P. A. Pattee, B. K. Smiley, and R. E. Yasbin. 1994. A genetic and molecular characterization of the *recA* gene from *Staphylococcus aureus*. Gene 147:13–20.

9. Berry, A. M., J. C. Paton, and D. Hansman. 1992. Effect of insertional inactivation of the genes encoding pneumolysin and autolysin on the virulence of *Streptococcus pneumoniae* type 3. Microb. Pathog. **12**:87–93.

9a. Brunskill, E. W., and K. W. Bayles. Unpublished data.

10. Charles, T. C., and E. W. Nester. 1993. A chromosomally encoded two-component sensory transduction system is required for virulence of *Agrobacterium tumefaciens*. J. Bacteriol. **175**:6614–6625.

11. Chatterjee, A. N., W. Wong, F. E. Young, and R. W. Gilpin. 1976. Isolation and characterization of a mutant of *Staphylococcus aureus* deficient in autolytic activity. J. Bacteriol. **125**:961–967.

12. Deretic, V., R. Dikshit, W. M. Konyecsni, A. M. Chakrabarty, and T. K. Misra. 1989. The *algR* gene, which regulates mucoidy in *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*, belongs to a class of environment-responsive genes. J. Bacteriol. **171**:1278–1283.

13. Devereux, J., P. Haeberli, and O. Smithies. 1984. A comprehensive set of sequence analysis programs for the VAX. Nucleic Acids Res. **12**:387–395.

14. Diaz, E., R. Lopez, and J. L. Garcia. 1992. Role of the major pneumococcal autolysin in the atypical response of a clinical isolate of *Streptococcus pneumoniae*. J. Bacteriol. **174**:5508–5515.

15. Dyer, D. W., and J. J. Iandolo. 1983. Rapid isolation of DNA from *Staphylococcus aureus*. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. **46**:283–285.

16. Gustafson, J. E., B. Berger-Bachi, A. Strassle, and B. J. Wilkinson. 1992. Autolysis of methicillin-resistant and -susceptible *Staphylococcus aureus*. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. **36**:566–572.

17. Hart, M. E., M. S. Smeltzer, and J. J. Iandolo. 1993. The extracellular protein regulator (*xpr*) affects exoprotein and *agr* mRNA levels in *Staphylococcus aureus*. J. Bacteriol. **175**:7875–7879.

18. Iandolo, J. J. 1990. The genetics of staphylococcal toxins and virulence factors, p. 399–426. In B. H. Iglewski and V. L. Clark (ed.), Molecular basis of bacterial pathogenesis. Academic Press, Inc., New York.

19. Inoue, H., H. Nojima, and H. Okayama. 1990. High efficiency transformation of *Escherichia coli* with plasmids. Gene **96**:23–28.

20. Janzon, L., and S. Arvidson. 1990. The role of the delta-lysin gene (*hld*) in the regulation of virulence genes by the accessory gene regulator (*agr*) in *Staphylococcus aureus*. EMBO J. **9**:1391–1399.

21. Keller, G. M., R. S. Hanson, and M. S. Bergdoll. 1978. Effect of minerals on staphylococcal enterotoxin B production. Infect. Immun. **20**:158–160.

22. Kornblum, J., B. N. Kreiswirth, S. J. Projan, H. Ross, and R. P. Novick. 1990. Agr: a polycistronic locus regulating exoprotein synthesis in *Staphylococcus aureus*, p. 373–402. In R. P. Novick (ed.), Molecular biology of the staphylococci. VCH Publishers, Inc., New York.

23. Kraemer, G. R., and J. J. Iandolo. 1990. High-frequency transformation of *Staphylococcus aureus* by electroporation. Curr. Microbiol. **21**:373–376.

24. Kunst, F., M. Devarbouille, T. Msadek, M. Young, C. Mauel, D. Karamata, A. Klier, and G. Rapoport. 1988. Deduced polypeptides encoded by the *Bacillus subtilis sacU* locus share homology with two-component sensor-regulator systems. J. Bacteriol. **170**:5093–5101.

25. Leroux, B., M. F. Yanofsky, S. Winans, J. E. Ward, S. F. Ziegler, and E. W. Nester. 1987. Characterization of the *virA* of *Agrobacterium tumefaciens*: a transcriptional regulator and host range determinant. EMBO J. **6**:849–856.

26. Lyristis, M., A. E. Bryant, J. Sloan, M. M. Awad, I. T. Nisbet, D. L. Stevens, and J. I. Rood. 1994. Identification and molecular analysis of a locus that regulates extracellular toxin production in *Clostridium perfringens*. Mol. Microbiol. **12**:761–777.

27. Makino, K., H. Shinagawa, M. Amemura, and A. Nakata. 1986. Nucleotide sequence of the *phoR* gene, a regulatory gene for the phosphate regulon of *Escherichia coli*. J. Mol. Biol. **192**:549–556.

28. Mani, N., L. M. Baddour, D. Q. Offutt, U. Vijaranakul, M. J. Nadaka-vukaren, and R. K. Jayaswal. 1994. Autolysis-defective mutant of *Staphylococcus aureus*: pathological considerations, genetic mapping, and electron microscopic studies. Infect. Immun. **62**:1406–1409.

29. Mani, N., P. Tobin, and R. K. Jayaswal. 1993. Isolation and characterization of autolysis-defective mutants of *Staphylococcus aureus* created by Tn917-*lacZ* mutagenesis. J. Bacteriol. **175**:1493–1499.

30. Mekalanos, J. J. 1992. Environmental signals controlling expression of virulence determinants in bacteria. J. Bacteriol. **174**:1–7.

31. Miller, J. F., J. J. Mekalanos, and S. Falkow. 1989. Coordinate regulation and sensory transduction in the control of bacterial virulence. Science **243**:916–921.

32. Mizuno, T., E. T. Wurtzel, and M. Inouye. 1982. Cloning of the regulatory genes (*ompR* and *envZ*) for the matrix proteins of the *Escherichia coli* outer membrane. J. Bacteriol. **150**:1462–1466.

33. Moran, C. P. 1993. RNA polymerase and transcription factors, p. 653–667. In A. L. Sonenshein, J. A. Hoch, and R. Losick (ed.), *Bacillus subtilis* and other gram-positive bacteria. American Society for Microbiology, Washington, D.C.

34. Novick, R. P. 1990. The staphylococcus as a molecular genetic system, p. 1–37. In R. P. Novick (ed.), Molecular biology of the staphylococci. VCH Publishers, Inc., New York.

35. Parkinson, J. S. 1993. Signal transduction schemes of bacteria. Cell **73**:857–871.

36. Parkinson, J. S., and E. C. Kofoid. 1992. Communication modules in bacterial signalling proteins. Annu. Rev. Genet. **26**:71–112.

37. Peng, H. L., R. P. Novick, B. Kreiswirth, J. Kornblum, and P. Schlievert. 1988. Cloning, characterization, and sequencing of an accessory gene regulator (*agr*) in *Staphylococcus aureus*. J. Bacteriol. **170**:4365–4372.

38. Qoronfleh, M. W., and B. J. Wilkinson. 1986. Effects of growth of methicillin-resistant and -sensitive *Staphylococcus aureus* in the presence of β-lactams on peptidoglycan structure and susceptibility to lytic enzymes. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. **29**:250–257.

39. Recsei, P., B. Kreiswirth, M. O’Reilly, P. Schlievert, A. Gruss, and R. P. Novick. 1987. Regulation of exoprotein gene expression in *Staphylococcus aureus* by *agr*. Mol. Gen. Genet. **202**:58–61.

40. Saier, J. M. H. 1994. Convergence and divergence in the evolution of transport proteins. BioEssays **16**:23–29.

41. Sambrook, J., E. F. Fritsch, and T. Maniatis. 1989. Molecular cloning: a laboratory manual, 2nd ed. Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press, Cold Spring Harbor, N.Y.

42. Sanger, F., S. Nicklen, and A. R. Coulson. 1977. DNA sequencing with chain-terminating inhibitors. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA **74**:5463–5467.

43. Sarafian, S. K., and S. A. Morse. 1987. Environmental factors affecting toxic shock syndrome toxin-1 (TSST-1) synthesis. J. Med. Microbiol. **24**:75–81.

44. Shafer, M. W., and J. J. Iandolo. 1979. Genetics of staphylococcus enterotoxin B in methicillin-resistant isolates of *Staphylococcus aureus*. Infect. Immun. **25**:902–911.

45. Sorokin, A. V., E. Zumstein, V. Azevedo, S. D. Ehrlich, and P. Serror. 1993. The organization of the *Bacillus subtilis* 168 chromosome region between the *spoVA* and *serA* genetic loci, based on sequence data. Mol. Microbiol. **10**:385–395.

46. Stock, A., T. Chen, D. Welsh, and J. Stock. 1988. CheA protein, a control regulator of bacterial chemotaxis, belongs to a family of protein that control gene expression in response to changing environmental conditions. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA **85**:1403–1407.

47. Stock, J. B., A. J. Ninfa, and A. M. Stock. 1989. Protein phosphorylation and regulation of adaptive responses in bacteria. Mol. Microbiol. **3**:450–490.

48. Stock, J. B., A. M. Stock, and J. M. Mottonen. 1990. Signal transduction in bacteria. Nature (London) **344**:395–400.

49. Trach, K. A., and J. A. Hoch. 1993. Multisensory activation of the phosphorelay initiating sporulation in *Bacillus subtilis*: identification and sequence of the protein kinase of the alternate pathway. Mol. Microbiol. **8**:69–79.

50. Walker, J. E., M. Saraste, M. J. Runswick, and N. J. Gay. 1982. Distantly related sequences in the a- and b-subunits of ATP synthase, myosin, kinases, and other ATP-requiring enzymes and a common nucleotide binding fold. EMBO J. **1**:255–264.

51. Weinrauch, Y., N. Guillen, and D. A. Dubnau. 1989. Sequence and transcription mapping of *Bacillus subtilis* competence genes *comB* and *comA*, one of which is related to a family of bacterial regulatory determinants. J. Bacteriol. **171**:5362–5375.

52. Zuker, M., and P. Steigler. 1981. Optimal computer folding of large RNA sequences using thermodynamics and auxiliary information. Nucleic Acids Res. **9**:133–148.
