
THE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGICAL CHEMISTRY
© 1996 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

**The Biosynthetic Pathway of the Aminonucleoside Antibiotic Puromycin, as Deduced from the Molecular Analysis of the pur Cluster of Streptomyces alboniger**

(Received for publication, July 24, 1995, and in revised form, October 23, 1995)

José A. Tercero†, J. Carlos Espinosa‡, Rosa A. Lacalle§, and Antonio Jiménez¶

From the †Centro de Biología Molecular “Severo Ochoa”, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas and Universidad Autónoma, Cantoblanco, 28049 Madrid, Spain

---

The *pur* cluster which encodes the puromycin biosynthetic pathway from *Streptomyces alboniger* was subcloned as a 13-kilobase fragment in plasmid pIJ702 and expressed in an apparently regulated manner in the heterologous host *Streptomyces lividans*. The sequencing of a 9.1-kilobase DNA fragment completed the sequence of *pur*. This permitted identification of seven new open reading frames in the order: *napH*, *pur7*, *pur10*, *pur6*, *pur4*, *pur5*, and *pur3*. The latter is followed by the known *pac*, *dmpM*, and *pur8* genes. Nine open reading frames are transcribed rightward as a unit in opposite direction to that of the *pur8* gene which is expressed as a monocistronic transcript from the right-most end. *napH* encodes the known *N*-acetylpuromycin *N*-acylhydrolase. The deduced products from other open reading frames present similarities to: NTP pyrophosphohydrolases (*pur7*), several oxidoreductases (*pur10*), the putative LmbC protein of the lincomycin biosynthetic pathway from *Streptomyces lincolnensis* (*pur6*), S-adenosylmethionine-dependent methyltransferases (*pur5*), a variety of presumed aminotransferases (*pur4*), and several monophosphatases (*pur3*). According to these similarities and to previous biochemical work, a puromycin biosynthetic pathway has been deduced. No cluster-associated regulatory gene was found. However, both *pur10* and *pur6* genes contain a TTA codon, which suggests that they are translationally controlled by the *bldA* gene product, a specific tRNA<sup>Leu</sup>.

Nucleoside antibiotics constitute an important group of microbial secondary metabolites some of which are effective agents against plant and human diseases. Examples are ribavirin (antiviral), polyoxins (herbicides), and mildiomycin (plant antifungal antibiotic). Given the key role accomplished by nucleosides and nucleotides in biochemical processes, the nucleoside antibiotics have found a fundamental application as specific inhibitors of a high variety of biochemical reactions (for a review, see Ref. 1). These features rise up the question of how the producing organisms defend themselves against the toxic effects of their products and, in most cases, of the relevant biosynthetic precursors.

Puromycin is an aminoacyl nucleoside antibiotic produced by *Streptomyces alboniger*. It is a broad spectrum secondary metabolite active against Gram-positive bacteria, protozoans, and mammalian cells, including tumor cells. It has been a key compound in various cell-free systems directed to elucidate the mechanism of protein synthesis and the mode of action of other inhibitors of this process (2, 3). Concerning the biosynthetic pathway of puromycin, some data are available. Adenosine is known to be a direct precursor for the 3′-amino-3′-deoxyadenosine moiety of puromycin (4). Moreover, a commercial sample of puromycin was found to be contaminated by small amounts of *N*<sup>6</sup>,*N*<sup>6</sup>,*O*-tridemethylpuromycin, *N*<sup>6</sup>,*O*-didemethylpuromycin, and *O*-demethylpuromycin. This led to the proposal that puromycin biosynthesis probably proceeds through these intermediates and in that order (5). Three enzymes of the pathway, an *O*-demethylpuromycin *O*-methyltransferase (DmpM),<sup>1</sup> a puromycin *N*-acetyltransferase (Pac), and an *N*-acetylpuromycin *N*-acylhydrolase (NapH) have been characterized (6–8). Biochemical studies suggest that Pac inactivates the intermediate *N*<sup>6</sup>,*N*<sup>6</sup>,*O*-tridemethylpuromycin by acetylation, and that DmpM methylates *N*-acetyl-*O*-demethylpuromycin to form *N*-acetylpuromycin (7). The latter would be excluded from the cells and then hydrolyzed by the extracellular NapH activity (8) yielding the biologically active puromycin antibiotic. In addition to Pac, the putative transmembrane protein Pur8 was shown to confer resistance to puromycin in *Streptomyces lividans* and, consequently, in *S. alboniger*, possibly by promoting an active efflux energized by a proton-dependent electrochemical gradient (9). The complete set of genes (15 kb) encoding the puromycin biosynthetic pathway (*pur* cluster) from *S. alboniger* has been cloned in low-copy number cosmids and expressed in a regulated pattern in heterologous hosts, *S. lividans* and *Streptomyces griseofuscus* (10). Three genes of *pur* have been sequenced, *pac*, *dmpM*, and *pur8*, which encode Pac, DmpM, and Pur8, respectively (9, 11, 12). The three genes are contiguously located at the right end of the cluster and in this order. In addition, the *napH* gene, located at the left end of *pur*, was isolated and its product (NapH) characterized (8). Here, we report the completion of the nucleotide sequence of *pur*, an analysis of its transcriptional organization, and a novel proposal for the puromycin biosynthetic pathway.

---

* This work was supported by grants from the Comisión Interministerial de Ciencia y Tecnología, Spain (BIO93–1182), Comunidad Autónoma de Madrid (119/92), SmithKline Beecham-CDTI and EU BRIDGE (BIOT-CT0155), and by an institutional grant from the Fundación Ramón Areces to the Centro de Biología Molecular. The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked “advertisement” in accordance with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.
* The nucleotide sequence(s) reported in this paper has been submitted to the GenBank™/EMBL Data Bank with accession number(s) X92429.
* § Present address: Pharmacia Antibióticos-Farma S. A., Antonio López 109, 28026 Madrid, Spain.
* ¶ To whom correspondence should be addressed: Centro de Biología Molecular, Universidad Autónoma, Cantoblanco, 28049 Madrid, Spain. Tel.: 34-1-3978442; Fax: 34-1-3974799; E-mail: ajimenez@mvax.cbm.uam.es.

---

<sup>1</sup> The abbreviations used are: DmpM, *O*-demethylpuromycin *O*-methyltransferase; Pac, puromycin *N*-acetyltransferase; NapH, *N*-acetylpuromycin *N*-acylhydrolase; kb, kilobase pair(s); ORF, open reading frame; AdoMet, S-adenosylmethionine; bp, base pair(s).

1579

The Puromycin Biosynthetic Gene Cluster

FIG. 1. Restriction maps of the DNA inserts from several constructs, puromycin production phenotype of S. lividans transformants and organization of the ORFs of pur. A, the restriction maps of cosmids pPB5.13, pPB4.6, and pPB11.40 and plasmid pCXS were modified from (10). Plasmid pRCP11 was obtained by subcloning the 13-kb ClaI-EcoRI (labeled E* in other restriction maps as well) fragment from pCXS into Bluescript. From the resulting plasmid, this fragment was isolated as a KpnI-PstI piece, which was finally inserted in the KpnI-PstI replicon fragment of pIJ 702. + and – indicate production or no production of puromycin by the relevant S. lividans transformants, respectively. Enzymes: C, ClaI; E, EcoRI; K, KpnI; N, NcoI; P, PstI; S, SpeI; X, XhoI; Xb, XbaI.

B, ORFs and transcriptional organization of the pur cluster. The incomplete orfA and orf1 are interrupted by the ClaI and EcoRI sites, respectively. The gray region indicates the sequence obtained in this work. Only relevant restriction sites are indicated. Size of the ORFs is indicated by small arrows drawn immediately below. Lines a, b, c, and d indicate the DNA fragments used as probes in low resolution S1-protection assays. Above them, continuous arrows indicate the size and direction of clearly identified transcripts, whereas dotted arrows indicate possible transcripts.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Strains, Plasmids, Media, and DNA Methodology—S. alboniger ATCC12461, the puromycin producer (13), S. lividans 66 (1326) (14), and Escherichia coli strains DH5 (15), TG1 (16), and GM119 (17), are described in the indicated references. Streptomyces plasmid was pIJ 702 (18). E. coli vectors were “Bluescript” SK– (Stratagene), pUC19 (19), and M13 mp18/M13 mp19 (20). Plasmid DNA from Streptomyces and E. coli was prepared as described (14). Growth of Streptomyces on solid media was carried out on R5 (14). Liquid media for Streptomyces were YEME, containing 34% sucrose and 5 mM MgSO₄, or puromycin-producing S, containing starch as a carbon source (10, 14). Liquid and agar media for E. coli were LB and LB plus 2% agar, respectively (21). When required, thiostrepton was added to a final concentration of 25 and 10 μg/ml in liquid and agar medium, respectively. Apramycin was added at 25 μg/ml in liquid medium for Streptomyces. For E. coli, 100 μg of ampicillin was added per ml. Transformation of E. coli and Streptomyces was performed as described (14). Transfection of E. coli TG1 was performed as described (22).

DNA sequencing was by the dideoxy chain termination method (23) using Sequenase 2.0 (U.S. Biochemical Corp.) or Taq DNA polymerase (Promega Biotech) following the manufacturer’s protocols. 7-DeazadGTP was used instead of dGTP. 4, 5, and 6% polyacrylamide gels containing 7 M urea were used. Occasionally, to resolve band compressions, 6% polyacrylamide gels containing 40% formamide were used. Appropriate DNA restriction fragments were cloned previously in M13 mp18 and M13 mp19. Universal primer and custom-made oligonucleotides (Isogen Bioscience, Amsterdam, The Netherlands) were used as required.

Transcription Analysis—To perform S1 mapping experiments, S. alboniger was grown in S medium. RNA was isolated as described (24). RNA was annealed to DNA probes (labeled with [γ-³²P]ATP or [α-³²P]dCTP to determine transcription initiation and termination, respectively) and then digested with S1 nuclease as described elsewhere (12). The resulting products were developed on either 1% alkaline agarose gels (low resolution experiments) or on 4, 5, or 6% polyacrylamide gels containing 7 M urea for high-resolution determination of transcription initiation/termination sites. The sizes of the protected fragments were evaluated by comparing their mobilities with those of DNA markers or DNA fragments obtained by sequencing reactions.

Determination of Puromycin—Puromycin was extracted from culture filtrates as described elsewhere (10). It was identified by the Pac enzymic assay (7) and by TLC, using ethyl acetate:methanol (3:1) as solvent on cellulose F₂₅₄ (Merck, Darmstadt) (10). Quantification of puromycin

was achieved by the Pac assay (7).

Computer Analysis—DNA and protein sequences were analyzed with the University of Wisconsin Genetics Computer Group package version 8 (25). Comparisons of the amino acid sequences of Pur proteins with the sequence data bases were also performed using the BLAST program (26) at the NCBI server. The DNA Strider group of programs (27) was occasionally used for sequence analysis.

RESULTS

Boundaries of the pur Cluster—Prior to sequencing, we attempted to define, as precisely as possible, the ends of the pur cluster. By comparing the restriction maps of puromycin-producing and non-producing pKC505-derivative plasmids, we previously showed that pur was encoded by a single DNA fragment of approximately 15 kb (10; Fig. 1). Moreover, the napH and pur8 genes could mark the ends of the cluster (Fig. 1; Refs. 8 and 9). Therefore, the 13-kb ClaI-EcoRI (labeled E*, Fig. 1 and below) fragment from pCXS (Fig. 1) was subcloned in the high-copy number plasmid pIJ 702. The resulting construct (pRCP11; Fig. 1) was introduced into S. lividans. Puromycin was present in the fermentation broth of a relevant transformant, as determined by TLC and Pac assays (not shown), which indicates that all the structural genes for puromycin production are present in the 13-kb ClaI-E* fragment. Moreover, the amount of puromycin produced in S. lividans(pRCP11) was similar to that in a control S. lividans(pPB5.13) (Fig. 1 and data not shown). In transformants carrying pRCP11, puromycin production starts at the middle of the log-phase, similarly to S. lividans(pPB5.13) and S. alboniger (10). In the particular case of S. lividans(pRCP11) this cannot be attributed to a variation of plasmid copy number/structure, since these apparently remained unchanged during all stages of the growth curve (not shown). Therefore, it appears that in S. lividans expression of the pur cluster from pRCP11 is regulated in a similar manner than in S. alboniger or S. lividans(pPB5.13) (10).

Sequence of pur—Starting at the ClaI site (Fig. 1), a total of 9.12 kb were sequenced (Fig. 2). The sequence covered the

The Puromycin Biosynthetic Gene Cluster

1 ATCGATGAGCTGGGAGCTGGGCATCTGGCAGCCGGCAACGGAGTGGCGTGAGGGAGCACTATGTGGCCGCTGGCCGACTCCTCGGTCTCTCGCTCGCCTCTCGGGCGCG
I D E L R S C G I W Q P R N G V A S E W E H Y V G R L A D S F G L S L A F S G A

121 GCACTGAGCGATGAGCACCTCCTGGAAACACCTGTGGAGCCACGGCGAGATGGCGTGCCTGGCCGGGGCGGACGTCTCCTACGCCCTTCTCGCCGGGACATCAGGAGCATCCCCGCTCGTGAC
A L S D E H F L E H L W S H G E M A C L A G A D V S Y A F S P D I R S I P L V D

241 CCCACGCCGGTCTACC CGTGGTCGATGGTGGCGTGGCCAGGGGGGCCATCCGGCTCGGACCCGGCTGGGTCGGCCAAGGGTCGGCCGGGAGACTGGCTGACCCACGTGGCCCCGG
P T P V Y P W S M V W R R Q A G H P L V D R L V G L A K R S A G D W L T H V P G

BglII
361 GAGATCTGGCTGGCCGGCGCCGGACCCGGCCCTGCTGGCGCGGGGGGTGAGGTTGACGGGCGACGGGCGACGGGCGTCCGGGCTGAACCCGGCCATCATCAAAGAGGCGGACACGGCGCCTGGCGTGAAC
E I W L P A P D R A L L R G A G V D V D A V R G End

481 TTGATCGTTTGTGCGGCGCGGGCCGGGGTATCCGAGGGGCGCCGGTCCC GGTTGCGAGGCCCGGTAGTACGGGCCGTAAGTACGTTCCA AAAACGCCCATCGGATCACTGTGTC AAGCCCCA

601 GCTGAGACGTCCGGATTCCGGCGATACTTTTACGGTTTTTTGGGGCGCAAGAATTGCCCCGGGTAATGTGCTGGTCGTGTGATGCGAACTCACAGAAGCACCACTGGATATGGGGGAAACG
-35 -10 ▼ rbs naph → fm

BamHI*
721 TGCTTCACCGGATCCAGAGAAAAAGAGCGATGACCGCAGGCGGTTG GTGCTCTTTCTCGCGCAGCTTGTGATTAGTT CCTCTCGGCTGGGGGGGAATCCGAGGGTCACCCCG
L H R I Q R K R A M T A G A V G V L F L A O L V I S S S A A A G E S V T P P

841 CGCCGCTCTCCCA GGGATAGAAAAAGCATCTGACGGGTTCGAGCGCATTGGGACGCGCACGGCGGACCGTG CATCCGGCACGCAAGGATATGCGGAAATCGGTCGACTACACC G
P L S Q D R I E K H L T R F E R I A D A H G G D R A S G T Q G Y A E S V D Y T E

961 AAAAGCTGCTCAAAA AAGGGGATACTGAGCGCAGCGCCAGCAATTCCC TTTCCGCTACCCAGGACGCTGAGGAAAAGCTGGTCTGCGGGACGGCACA CCCGGAGTCGTGGTCA
K L L K K A G Y S T Q R Q Q F P F R Y T R T L E E K L V L R D G S T P G V V V S

SplI*
1081 GCGGCTACTCGCAGTCGACCCCCCGAGGGCCCTGACAGCCGGGTCGGGCGGGGACACCGAGCGGGCGAGGGCTGCGCGGCGCCGGCGGTACGACGGAGTGC GGCTGGCG
G Y S Q S T P R G G L T A R P T A V G G D T E R R Q G C R A G A Y D G V P A G G

NotI
1201 GGCGGATCGCGCTCGTGCA CGGCGGGGCTGCTGATGGACAGCAGGGGTGGCCGCGGCGGCGGCGGTAATCGTCGCCAACCCGGCCCCGGGA ACTGCACACCT
R I A L V D A G G C S M D D K Q R V A A D A G A A A V I V A N T G P G E L H T W

1321 GGCTGGCCGACCCC GAGGGCCCGGCATACCCCATCGGCGGCGTCA CCCAGGAGACGGGCGCCCTCGCCGCGGAGGCACGGGCCCAGCTCACCCTGCGCTCGCTCA
L A D P E A A R I P I G G V T Q E T G R L L A A E A R A G R T V Q L T L R S L T

1441 CCGAACGCGTACCCGAGAAACCTGATCGC CGTGGAGCCCCGGGCAACCCGAGCACCCGTGTCTCGGCGCCCACCTCGACTCCGTGCGGGGGCCCGCATCAACGACAACG
E R R T T E N L I A V S P R G N P E H T V V S G A H L D S V P E G P G I N D N G

NotI
1561 GTGTCGCCCGCCGCTACTGCTGAAAGCGCCCTGGCGGCCCAAGGACCACGGCACC CGGCGAGGCAAACCGGCTGGTGTTCGGCTTCTGGGGCGGAGGAGTTCCGGCCTGCTCG
V A A A V L L E S A L A A A K D H G T R A E D N R L V F G F W G A E E F G L L G

1681 GCTCGCAGCACTACGT CGACTGGTGA CCAGGAGGCGTGAGCGCACCGGGGCTGTACACTGGGCAGCCCAACTACGGTCTCTTCACGCTGGATTCCAAGGCA
S Q H Y V D S L T Q E E R E R T G L Y L N L E M I G S P N Y Y G L F T L D S K A T

1801 CCGACCCCGTCACAGGACAGCGCCGGCCCCCGGCTCGGAGAGATCGAGCGCGAGCTGACCGCGGTT CGCCGCCCAGGGCCGACCTCCCC TGCCGGGGACCCCGGACGGGGCCTCCG
D P V T G Q R P A P G S D E I E R E L T D A F A A A Q G R T S L P G P A D G R S D

1921 ACTACGTGGCGTT CCTGGGCGGGGCATCCCCACCGGCGGGCTCTACGGAGGCGCTCGTTCGAGGCCAAAGACCCCCGAGCAGGCGCTCTGTGGGGCGGCACC GCTGGCCGCTACGACC
Y V A F L G A G I P T G G L Y G G S F E A K T P E Q A A L W G G T A G R P Y D P

2041 CCTGCTACCCTGACGTGCGCAGGACGGCGAGGGCGAGCGCTGCA CCGGCGAGGGCGTTCCAGACGGTGCTCACC CACTACTCCCGGCA CCGGCTGGGAGAGGCAG
C Y H L T C D R T A Q Y S R E A A A T L H G Q A F Q T V L T H Y S R H R L G E A A

pur7→
NcoI
2161 CC GCCACCATGGGCTGACGGGACC GCGCCC AAGCTGGTGGGGTGGCGCTCATCAGCGATCCGGGCTCTCGTACAGCGCCGCTCGGACC GCTGTTC CCGCATGC
A H H G End

SphI.
482 1 fM A D G T A P K L V V G A L I S D P L G R I F V Q R R S A D R R L F P A C

2281 TGGGACGT CGTGGGCGGCGGTGGAGGACGGCGAGACCCACCGAGGGCCTGGCCGGGGGTGGCCGGGTGGCCCGGGTGGTGCAGAG
W D V V G G A V E D G E T H H E A L A R E I A E E T G W R L R R V L A R V V H E

XhoI
2401 AGCTGGAGCGGAGCGGCTACGGGACTACGT CGTGGAGGGGACCTGTGCTGAAACGGGACAACCGGAGTT CGCGTGGGGGGCCG
S W T A D G V R H L E S D Y V V E V D G D L S S P T L E R D K H P E F A W V G P

2521 CAGGACATCTCCCTGCTCGACGAGAAACGTCCGGCGGGCCGGCACC TTCA TCAAGGACACGGT CGCCGGGACAGCTGGCTCGCCGGATCCCGGCTGAGCCCCCTCCCGG
118 Q D I S L L D E N V R R G A G T F I K D T V A A G H D W L A G S T R R End

rbs pur10→
2641 GTCCTCAATACTTCGTTCTT CGT CATCGTCA CC GTCATCGG CAGAGGCAATCAGCGAGGGGGAAGTTCCGCA TGTCCACTTATTCA CAGAAGCGTGGCA ACCGGGGCTGCGGGG CCTG
fM S T Y S Q K R A Q P R L R A L

2761 ATGGTCGGA TTCGCAGGGCCACCAGGAAAGGAGTAC TTACCGGTCGTCCGGGAGTACGCAGACATCGT CGGGGGCGTGCATGTGCTGGCCGGGGCGCTCGCCGATGACTGGGA
17 M V G F A G H Q G K E Y L P V V R E Y A D I V G G V D V A P A A G A L A D D W G

NruI
2881 TTTCCGCGGTT CACCGGGGATCGGGGAGGCACTCAAGGGGT CGATTCGATGTCGGA TGGTCACGGTGCGCACAGGAACTTTCCC GCTGTGCAGAGAACTGCTGCTGCAGGCAAG
57 F P R F T G I G E A L K R V D F D V A M V T V P H S E H F P L C R E L L L H G K

3001 CACATCGTCAAGGAAAAGCCGTT CGCCGTCACC GAGGAAAGAGGCCCCGGACGTGATAGAGCTGGCCGAAAGGAGCGGACC GCGAGT TTACACGGCTCCTCAGCGCAATT TCAACCCGGTC
97 H I V K E K P F A V T E E E A R Q L I E L A E G A D R S V Y T L L L Q R N F N P V

3121 TTCCAGTT CGCGCGGGAAGAACCTGGCCCCGCATCGGCGATCCCC TACTGGTTCTCGTACGACTACCACTGGCGCAGCCGAGAGCGGTTGGCGCGCCTCCC GCAAACAGGCCCTC
137 F Q F A R K N L A R I G D P Y W F S Y D Y H F N L A Q P T S G W R A S R E Q A L

3241 GGCGGGGTGCTGCTCGACATGGGCTACCACCTCATCGAGTGCTCAGCGGAATGTTCCCCGAACC GAGCGCGGTGAACGCGGCTT CGTGCCTCACCACTACCGGAGATGCGCGACCGGCAC
177 G G V L L D M G Y H L I D V L S G M F P E P S R V N A A F V H H Y Q E M R D R H

3361 CTGGAGGACCTGGT CAGGCTGATGTGCGAGCTACCGGTGCGGACCCCTGTCCGGCTGCGCATCTCCGGCA CAACCA CGAGAAGTCCGAAACGCCTCTGGT CCTCGGCACCGGGGGG
217 L E D L V S L M C S Y P S P T L S G S L R I S R H N H E K S E R L C V L G T G G

FIG. 2

1582

The Puromycin Biosynthetic Gene Cluster

3481 GCGCTGAACGTGGAACCCCAAGGGGCCAACCCTGCACCTCCACCGGCGCCTCCTCGAACGCTTCACCCGGCCCCGGACCCAAGACCGACGGGTCCGCGCCATGATCGCCCACACTACCTC NotI
257 A L N V E P Q G A T L H S T G G R L L E R F T R P G P K T D A V R A M I A H Y L

3601 GGACACCTGGACGACGGGACGTACGTGAGGACCACTTCCGTGGCAAACTCACCCACGTGCGGTGATCGACGGGATCTACGGGAGCGGTCACGGGAGCGGAACGCTGCGGATCGG
297 G H L D D R D V R E D H F R R Q L T T V R V I D G I Y R E R S R E R N E L A D R

3721 TACAGCTGATCCTCACCGTCCCGAGGCACCTGGAGAGAAACGTGACGTTAAGCATCACTCTGACGCGCACACCGGGGGGAGTATCTCGCCGCGGCCCCTGGACCGCCCCGCAACCGCACCCG rbs pur6→
337 Y S End
1 FM T L S I T L T R T P G E Y L A A A L D R P A T A P A

3841 CCGCCGTCCCTGTGCTCGACCCCAACGGGCCCGCATGTGGCCCCGCCCATCGCCGCACGCCTCGGCCCTGCGGCTGACCCACGGCCCCACGACCCGGACCCGGCCCGCCCCGCGGCCG
28 A V P V L D P T G R H V W P R R I A A R L G L P L T T A H D P D R P A G P A A A

3961 CGGCCGGTGACGCCACCCGTGAGAAAGACGTCCCTCCCTGGGCGCCCTCACCGAGCTGCGCACCGGGAGGAGCATCTCGTGGCCCGTGCACCGGCGACACACGCCCTTCG
68 A G D A T R D E D V L L L G A A L T E L R T G R E E H L V V A V A H G D D H A F A

4081 CCCACCCGGGCGCCGTCTACGCCCTCGCAAAGCGCGCCCCTGCTGGCGGGAACGAGGACGACATCCACGGACCCTACGGGACACCGGCGCCCCGTTCCTGACCCCTCGTGGAC
108 H P A A V Y A L A K R A R L L S A A N E D D I H R T V R D T A P R F L T L V G P

4201 CCGCCCGGCTCCTCGACTTCGGCCTCGTACACGGATACGGGCCCCTCGACGTGGCTTCCCTCAAGGGGACGAGGCCCCCCGTGGCAACGGACAGCTGACCGTCTACCCGCGAGGACTGGTCAAGAGGC
148 A R L L D F G L V T R I R A R F P A L D V G V L Y A H S A A K L S E L V L K T L

4321 TCGTCTACCCCGAGGCCCCCGCCACCGCTGACGTGCTGATCGGCCCCGCTCCCTCAAGGGGACAGGACCCCTGGCAACGGACAGCTGACCGTCTACCCGCGAGGACTGGTCTTCTCAAGAGCC
188 V Y P E A P A T A D V L I A P L L K G D E P L R N G Q L T V Y P Q D A V D A A T

4441 CCTTCACACGGCCCCGGCCCCCGCCCGCTCGCCACCGCCGAACCGGGGATCCGGCCCAACGGCCCCGATGCACCGCCTGTTCAAGGTCATCACCCCACGGCAGCGAGGACTACCTGC
228 F T R P A P R P G V A T A E P R D P A E P A P M H R L F S V I T H G S E D Y L R

4561 GGCTCACCTCGCAGGACATCCTGTGGCCCTCACCCCCGCCCCGCAACGGCGGGCACGGGGAGTCACGCACCCCTGCCCTGCATGCGACGGGGCGACTGGTCTATCCCG SphI
268 L T S Q D I L C G L T P D P A E Q A A A R R E S R T L P A C M H G G D C V Y P D

4681 ACGCGGCGGCTGGGACCCGGCCATCCCCGCCCAGATCGTCTTGGCCAAACGGCTCACCCCTCAAACTCGGCACCCAGCTCTTGGCCAGCCACAACGGCTTCAACGTGCGCCCAGC
308 A R R W D P A G I P A Q I V F A N A A C L T L K L G T Q L F G S H N R F T V A Q R

4801 GCTTCCCTCGACTCCTGGGCAGGCACCTACATAGCCACCCGCTGCTCAAGGACGGCACCCCCGGGAGAAACTGCTTCCACTACCTGCTCGACGAGGGCGCCACCGTGGGGCGCGG
348 F L D S W A G T Y I A S P L L K D G T P G E N L L L F H Y L L D E G A T V G G A V

4921 TCCGCCAGGTCAACGACAGCCTGCGGGCGTGGGGCGTCAGCGCACCCGAAAGTGCTCGTCATCGGCGACCCCGGAGGGCCCGGCGAGGGCGGCGGGTGGCCGAGCGGGTGA
388 R Q V N D S L R R W G V D A P E V L V I G D P E A R Y A P A A R P V P D A V T

5041 CCTGCCAGGAGGCGGGCCGGCGGAGATCACCTTCGAGGGGAGGCTGCCCCGCTTCACCCGGTCCCTCTCAAGGACCCCCGACCTGCGCGAGGCCCCACCGGGGGACAACTGGCC
428 C Q E E P G R A E I T F E G R L P A F T R V P L K D P D L R E A H R G G Q L R L

5161 TCGTCCCCGCCAAGCGTTCGGGGCAAACTGCCCCCTCTACGGCACGTTCGGGGAAAACCGCCGACGGAGAACGGCCCGCGCTGGTCTTCCAGGAACGCGGCTCTCCGGCACCG
468 V P A K P F G G K L P L Y G T F G E T A D G E P A A L V F G F Q E R R L S G T E

5281 AGACCTCGCGCACCCCTCACCGGCGCCCCACGGGACCGGCGACCGCATCGTGGCGCCGTGGAGCGCTACGGAAACCTCGCCGCCCCTCGACATCAAGCTCGACAAGGACCCGGT
508 T S R T L T A A P R Q R T A A D R I V R A V E R Y E N L A A A L D I K L D K T R S

5401 CGGTGCTCACCGACACCGCCAACAGCCTGCCCCGCGTGGCCCGCAGGACCAAGGACCACATCGCGGACCTGACCCAGTCGGAGCCCGCTGACCGCGCCACCGAGGCATCCTTGCCA ACT
548 V L T D T A N S L P A V A R R T K D H I A D L T Q S E P L H R A T E R I L A N C

5521 GCGCCCGCTCGACCCGGCACCTGCTGCGGCCTCACCGAGACCCCGGAGTACCTCGTGGAGGCGTACCGGCCCACGTACGGGTCGAAGAGTCCGAGCCCGTACG
588 A R L D R H L L D T L L R L T E T R E Y H F V E A Y R P T Y A V E V R S P Y G

5641 GCGAGTGGGTACTGCGGCGAGGCCACCCAGCGCCCATGTGCTGCGCCCGTGTGGCCCTGCTGATCGCCCGCCCCGTGTGGCCACCCAGGACACCAGG
628 E C R Y C G E A T H R Y T S A H V L R P W L C R L L I S C P V C G A T Q D T E D

5761 ACGCCAGGTGCGGCATCGCAAAGGGGACGCGGCTCGCGCCCGGACAGCACGACCTCGCTGGGGCCCGGATCACAACGAGCGGAGACCAGGAACTCGACCTGCTCCCTGGGGCCC
688 A T V G I A I E G D A V L A P D S T T S L R A R I T N D G D Q E L D L L L G A R

5881 GCATCACCCGCGGCAAACCGCACGGCTTCCGGTTTCGCCCCCTGAGCCCCGGACCGGCTCCCGGCCCACCTCCCCACCTGACCATCACCCGGCCGGAGCTCCC
708 I T R G K P H G F R F A L S P D R L T V P A G G T A T S H L T I T T G R P T S L

6001 TGCA GCCATGCTGCTGGCGTTCTACGCCGTGGGCGCATCGACTTCGGGGCCCGGATCTGGGTTCCGGCTACCGCCCCACCGGAGCCACGGCCACTOCCC
748 H A M L L R F Y A V G L G R I D F A G R D L R F R End

6121 AC GCCAGGAAGGACCCATGACCAACCGCCGACAAGCTCGGCCCTCCTCGGAGGCACCC CGGCACTCGGCCCAGGACTGGCCCGGAGGACGGGACGAGGCGAACCTGCGCCACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCTGCGGACGACCT
The Puromycin Biosynthetic Gene Cluster

6961 CCGCAAGGAGGCCGGCACCGCTGTCTGGCCACATTCGGCGAGTTGCTTCGGAGGGTGGACTACCTGGAGCCCATCAGGGTCCCCGACCACGTCGACATGGGCCTGGTACGGCTACAA
276 R K E A R H R C L R H F G E L L R E V D Y L E P I T V P D H V D M G A W Y G Y K

7081 GCCCCTCTACCGGCCCGAGGGCGCTGGGCGGCTCCGGGCTCCGGTACTGATCGAGGCCCTCGGGGCGAGGGCATGGAGGTCGGCGGCGGTCCGGCCCCCGGCTGGCCAACCTGCGGCT
316 P L Y R P E A L G G V P R S V L I E A L R A E G M E V G A P S G P R L A T L P L

7201 GTACGCGCGGCGGAGAAACCCCCCTCTTCCCCGGCACCCCCAAGCGCGCCAGCGCACCGGAGCCCGGCTCGCAAGCCGCCCATGTCGAGCAGCACGCCCCTGTCCCTTGCCCACCTTCACCGA
356 Y A R P E N P L F P G T P K R A S A P E P G S Q A A H V E Q H A L S L P T F T D

7321 CTGGCCCGAGGACGTGGCGCTGATCGAGGCCCTACGCGGAGGGCCTTCCGCAAAGATCGGACGGCACCGGGAGGCGCTGGCCGCCCAAGCCGAGACCTCCCCGGTACCCCCGGCACCCCCG
396 W P E D V A L I E A Y A E A F R K I G R H R E A L A A H A A E T S R End

7441 ACAGCTTCCACGATCCCGTCACCCCTCACAGGAAAAGTCAACCATGACTGTCAAGGAATCCCCCGAGGCCCGCCCAAGTCCCTCGAGCCACGTGATGACGGGGGACACCTGCGGAGCAC
1 fM T V K E S P E A A A K V L E H V M T G D D L P D D

7561 TTCTCCCTGCTGGGCGGAGTGGACCCTGCGACCGGGCGTCTCCCCGGCACCTGACCGCGGCCACCAGGTCATGGCCTCGATCGTGCCTATCCCAAGGGCGGCTCCTTCTGAG
27 F S L L G R E W T L H R G V F P G T L T A A T E V M A S I V P Y P K G G S F L E

7681 GTCGGCTGCGGCACCGGCTCATCTCCGTGACCGCGGCTCCACGGCAGCGACTCACGGCGCTCGACATCAACGAGAAGGCGGTGGCGAACACCCCTCGCCAATGCCGAGCGGCACGGC
67 V G C G T G V I S V T A A L H G S D V T A L D I N E K A V A N T L A N A E R H G

7801 GTCGAGGACCGGTGCGGGTGCTGACAGGACCTGTACGGGCGCTCGAAACCCACCGAGGTTTCGAGCGGATCTTCTGGAACGTGCCCCTGGAGCTGGGAGGACGGCTTCCCGCTC
107 V E D R V R V L H S D L Y A A L E P T D R F D A I F W N V P W T Y V E D G F P L

7921 TCCAGCGACCTGCACTCCGCGGTCTTCGACCCCCGGTACCCGGGTTTCATCTCGGGGGCCCGGACCAACCTGGCCGGCCGGCTGCTGATCGGCAACGGCCGATCTG
147 S S D L H S A V F D P G Y Q G Q S R F I S G A R D H L A D G G R L L I G T A D L

8041 GGAGACCGCGAGCGGATCGAGCCTTCCGGCCGAGGCCGGGATGACCGTGGAGATGCTGGCCCGGTATCGGGTGGTCCGGGTATGGAGTACCACCTGCTCGAACTGGCC
187 G D R E R I D A F A A E A G M T V E M L R R V R R I E V V R V M E Y H L L E L R

8161 GCCAAGTGAGCCGGCCCGCCCCGGGCGCACTTCCCCCCGGCCCCGGGGGCCCCCGACCCCCGTGTCCCCGTGCGAGGAGGAGGCCACCTTCATGCCCACAGCAGGCCCACCTGGAACCTGG
227 A K End
1 fM P Q Q A D L E L A

8281 CCATGCGACTGCGGACACCGCCGACATCACCCCGCGCTTCCAGGCGCGGACTGGGATACGGAGGAAGCCCGACCCCGTCACCGAGCGGACACCACCGTCGAGG
11 M R L A D T A D R I T T R R F Q A R D C G Y A R K P D R T P V T D A D T T V E A

8401 CGGCCGTACGCGAGTCCGTGGGGCCCGCCCGACGACGACTTCGCGGGAGAGGAGACCGGCGGAGGTGACCGACGGCACCTGGATCGTCGACCCCCATCGACGGCACCAAAGA
51 A V R E S V R A A R P D D D F A G E E T G G E V T A G R T W I V D P I D G T K N

8521 ACTTCTGCGGGGAGTGCCGTCTGGGCCCACGCTGATCGCGCTCCTGGAGGACGGCCCACGTGCGGCTCGCCGCCCCCTGCGCAGCGGCTGGTGGGCGGCGGGC
91 F L R G V P V W A T L I A L L E D G R P T V G V V A A P A L R S R W W A A A G H

8641 ACGGGGCTGGCTGGGCGGGTCCGCGCCGAACCGCTGGGCTCTCCGGGTGTCGCCCAGCTAAACGCCCTATCTGTCCACCAACACCGTACCTGGGAGCGCCT
131 G A W L R R G S A G A E P L R L H V S G V A R L E N A Y L S T T N T R T W D A F

8761 TCCACTGCGCGCGGGGTATCTGCGACTCGCGGACGCGCTGCTGGGAGGACCGGCGCTTCCGAGACTGGTCGCGGAGGGTCGGACATCGCGGCGGAACCGG
171 H S R A A Y L R L A D A C W E D R A F G D F L Q H C M V A E G T V D I A A E P V

8881 TC GTG AGC CCC TGG GAC ATC GGC GCC CTC AGAT CCT CGT GG AGG AGG GCG GGT CTG CAC CG ACC TG CTG GCG GCC CCC AGC GCG GG ACG GGT GCC CTT GTG CCG CCA ACC CGG
211 V S P W D I A A L Q I L V E E A G G V C T D L L G G S P Q R G T G A L S A N P E

9001 AGCTGCACCGGCTCGCCGTGGAGGCCCTCGCCGCCCCCGGCGCCACGACCGGTGCGCCACCATCCCTGAcccacgccccctcaccaaggagacgacctccatgaccgag
251 L H R L A V E A L A A P A A A T T G A A T I P End fM T E

FIG. 2. Nucleotide sequence of a 9.12-kb DNA fragment from the pur cluster. The deduced gene products are indicated in the one-letter code under the DNA sequence. Possible ribosome binding sites (rbs) are indicated by dotted lines. Putative translation initiation codons are in bold letters. The start and direction of each of the ORFs are indicated by up arrows and named accordingly. A presumptive signal peptide of NapH is underlined and its putative cleavage site is indicated by a vertical arrow. A proposed motif for Pur10 and similar oxidoreductases is underlined. An inverted repeat located 3′ to pur5, which could form a stem-loop for transcription termination is indicated by horizontal arrows. Putative –10 and –35 regions of napH are indicated. Possible transcription initiation and termination sites are indicated by bold triangles and an open triangle, respectively. Restriction sites with an asterisk are not unique in the sequence DNA; they are referred to in the text. The 5′ region of the previously reported pac sequence (11), which has been revised in this work, is indicated by small letters.

unknown pur region and overlapped with the known sequence of pac (Ref. 11; Fig. 1). It contained seven complete and one incomplete ORFs (Figs. 1 and 2). All shared a codon usage and a G + C content at the third position typical of Streptomyces (28), with an exception made of the 5′-end of the napH coding sequence (see below). From left to right these ORFs were named/identified as: orfA, napH, pur7, pur10, pur6, pur4 (previously named prg1; Ref. 10), pur5 and pur3. The incomplete orfA probably did not pertain to the cluster, because its incompleteness did not prevent puromycin production from pRCP11 (Fig. 1). Therefore, the left end of the cluster should reside between orfA and napH. Similarly, in plasmids pPB11.40 and pRCP11 (Fig. 1), 5′ to pur8 there is another incomplete ORF (orf1) (Ref. 9; Fig. 1), which indicates that the right end of pur lies between these two ORFs. Several characteristics of the intact ORFs are indicated in Table I.

Previously, it was shown that the napH gene is part of a 2.5-kb SphI-NcoI fragment from the left end of pur (8). The single complete ORF of 1458 nucleotides found in this fragment (Fig. 2) was, therefore, attributed to napH. Its deduced product has 485 amino acids (Table I). Both upstream and downstream of the chosen initiator codon there are other putative initiator codons (Fig. 2). They were rejected as probable initiators because, for those located downstream, destruction of a BamHI site at position 730 (Figs. 1 and 2) prevented expression of NapH activity (8) and, for those located upstream, only the selected initiator codon was preceded by a good ribosomal binding site (Table I; Fig. 2). NapH is an extracellular enzyme (8) and, in agreement with this, its N-terminal region presents the characteristics of a signal peptide (29). Thus, it contains a positively charged leading region (MLHRIQRKR), followed by a hydrophobic central region (AMTAGAVGVLFLAQLVI) and a polar region (SSSSAAA). The putative signal peptide contains 33 residues, a value close to the mean size of 35 for the putative signal peptides from Streptomyces (30). The presence of this signal peptide also helps to select the corresponding DNA se-

The Puromycin Biosynthetic Gene Cluster

TABLE I  
Relevant features of the ORFs described in this paper

| ORF   | rbs$^a$               | Start/stop codons         | Amino acids/$M_r$ | pI  | Predicted/known functions       |
|-------|-----------------------|---------------------------|-------------------|-----|-------------------------------|
| $napH$ | 711 GGGGGA 716        | GTG$^{720}$ / TGA$^{777}$ | 485/51,36          | 6.41 | Hydrolase                    |
| $pur7$ | 2151 GGAGAGG 2157     | ATG$^{2170}$ / TGA$^{2628}$ | 152/16,82          | 5.35 | NTP-pyrophosphohydrolase      |
| $pur10$ | 2699 GGGGAA 2705     | ATG$^{2713}$ / TGA$^{3729}$ | 338/38,34          | 7.77 | Oxidoreductase                |
| $pur6$ | 3752 GGAGAG 3757      | GTG$^{3762}$ / TGA$^{6080}$ | 772/83,78          | 7.20 | Synthetase                    |
| $pur4$ | 6126 AGGAAGGA 6133    | ATG$^{6137}$ / TGA$^{7426}$ | 429/46,52          | 6.28 | Aminotransferase              |
| $pur5$ | 7469 AGGAAAAG 7475    | ATG$^{7483}$ / TGA$^{8169}$ | 228/24,90          | 4.86 | N-Methyltransferase           |
| $pur3$ | 8237 AGGAGGAGG 8245   | ATG$^{8253}$ / TGA$^{9074}$ | 273/29,07          | 4.98 | Monophosphatase               |

$a$ rbs indicates ribosomal binding site.

sequence as a coding region, despite the fact that its codon usage deviates from that typical of Streptomyces. Comparisons of the NapH sequence with those in data banks disclosed significant similarities (28.9% identity; 49.3% similarity) with the amidopeptidase Y from Saccharomyces cerevisiae (31).

The ORF corresponding to pur7 comprises 459 nucleotides, of which the first eight overlap with the 3' end of the napH coding sequence. A similar situation was previously found for other Streptomyces genes (32). pur7 encodes a hydrophilic protein (Pur7) of 152 residues (Table I; Fig. 2) which contains a highly conserved domain present in proteins from a wide variety of organisms. Besides this, no generally significant similarities are present in this group of proteins. This domain was defined by Koonin (33) as a region of approximately 40 residues, generally located at the N terminus. Its consensus sequence is GX$_5$EX$_4$-(STAGC)-(LIVMA)-XRE-(LIVMF)-XEE, where X represents any amino acid and residues in parentheses indicate the most frequent ones in those positions (Fig. 3). It has been proposed that this domain is the catalytic center of NTP-pyrophosphohydrolases which produce PP$_i$ and the relevant NMP. Indeed, such activity has been found in several of these proteins of which the most thoroughly studied are MutT from E. coli, which names the family (34–37), MutX from Streptococcus pneumoniae (38), MutT from Proteus vulgaris (39), and MutT from humans (40). MutT hydrolyses 8-oxo dGTP and, less efficiently, other nucleotides (41). Curiously, dATP is a better substrate for MutX, which presents the highest similarity to Pur7, than for other members of the MutT family (42). Moreover, Orf17 from E. coli (42), which does not complement the mutT mutation in E. coli, hydrolyses all dNTPs. These data suggest a nucleotide-pyrophosphohydrolase activity for Pur7.

The pur10 gene would encode a hydrophilic protein of 338 amino acids (Table I; Fig. 2). Curiously, a TTA codon is present at position 2797 of the ORF (Fig. 2). This is a very rare codon in Streptomyces. It encodes leucine 29. The matching tRNA$^{Leu}$ is encoded in the bldA gene, which has been implicated in translational regulation (43). Pur10 showed similarities, mainly at the N-terminal region, with proteins implicated in oxidoreduction activities, including the mammalian biliverdin reductase (22.6% identity; 50.5% similarity) (44); the glucose-fructose oxidoreductase from Zymomonas mobilis (20.5% identity; 43.2% similarity) (45); a galactose dehydrogenase from Pseudomonas fluorescens (22.8% identity; 50.2% similarity) (46); and LmbZ from S. lincolnensis (24% identity; 46.7% similarity), for which an oxidoreductase activity has been proposed in the lincomycin biosynthetic pathway (47). It is worth mentioning the presence of an invariant aspartic acid (residue 73 in Pur10) in all these proteins. Moreover, a highly conserved region localized between residues 95 and 107 could define a motif (GKH-(IVLM)-(IVLM)-XEKPX$_3$(TS)) which would represent these proteins (Fig. 2). Therefore, we propose an oxidoreductase activity for Pur10.

The pur6 gene would encode a hydrophilic protein of 772 amino acids (Table I; Fig. 2). Similarly to pur10, it possesses a TTA codon which encodes leucine 3 (Fig. 2). Sequence comparisons only showed certain similarities between the N-terminal halves of Pur6 and the LmbC deduced protein of the lincomycin biosynthetic pathway from S. lincolnensis. Thus, the first 300 amino acids of these two proteins share 24.6% identity and 48.1% similarity. The precise function of LmbC is still unknown. However, it presents significant similarities with members of the peptide synthetase family of enzymes as well as to a subfamily of aminoacyl adenylate-forming domains of aromatic amino acid-activating enzymes (47). LmbC has been proposed as an L-tyrosine-activating enzyme, besides other putative activating functions. All these proteins contain an AMP-binding domain, which could not be detected in Pur6. Given the low similarity of Pur6 with peptide synthetases, i.e. with TycA (tyrocidine synthetase from Bacillus subtilis, accession number P09095) the values are 19.6% identity and 40.2% similarity, it is difficult to assign an amino acid (i.e. tyrosine, a moiety of puromycin) activating activity for Pur6, although there are some hints to suggest that it might be implicated in the transfer of tyrosine to 3'-amino-3'-deoxyadenosine (see "Discussion").

The pur4 gene would determine a protein (Pur4) of 429 amino acids (Table I; Fig. 2). Although this structure is chiefly hydrophilic, it contains some hydrophobic stretches in its N-terminal half. A partial sequence of Pur4 was previously reported (10). It presented significant similarities with the deduced amino acid sequences of eryC1, from the erythromycin biosynthetic pathway of Saccharopolyspora erythraea (48), orf10.4 from the rfb cluster of Salmonella typhimurium (49), and the pleiotropic, putative regulatory gene degT of B. subtilis (50). Also, significant similarities of Pur4 were found with the products of the dnrJ, strS, tylB, and lmbS genes, which are implicated in the biosynthetic pathways of several antibiotics from Streptomyces (47, 51–53). Based on the clear similarities of these genes with the degT gene, a regulatory role in the relevant biosynthetic pathways was proposed for some of them (10, 51, 52). More recently, however, it was suggested that these genes including pur4 may encode aminotransferases (54–56). Indeed, all of them have a conserved lysine residue (lysine 204 in Pur4; Fig. 2) which could be used to bind the presumptive aminotransfer cofactor pyridoxal phosphate by forming a Schiff base. Moreover, this conserved lysine is located in a motif (GX$_3$DX$_7$AX$_8$EDX$_{14}$GX$_{13}$KX$_{4-5}$geGGX$_{19}$G; residues 153–229 in Pur4; Fig. 2) according to Piepersberg (56). Therefore, Pur4 may display an aminotransferase activity.

The pur5 gene encodes a protein (Pur5) of 228 amino acids (Table I; Fig. 2). This product is mainly hydrophilic with a hydrophobic stretch between residues 40 and 80. Sequence comparison of Pur5 with proteins from data banks detected a small glycine-rich region between amino acids 64 and 80 which is highly conserved, usually at the N-terminal region, in a variety of methyltransferases and other enzymes which use AdoMet as a cosubstrate (Fig. 4). This domain corresponds to region I as defined by Ingrosso et al. (57). Its consensus sequence was later slightly modified (58) as hhD/EhGXGXGX-hXXXhhΔ, where h is a hydrophobic amino acid, X is any amino acid, and Δ is generally a charged amino acid. The presence of

The Puromycin Biosynthetic Gene Cluster

MutT motif

| Pur7-S. alboniger | 31 | RRLFPAWDVVGGAVEDGETHHEALARETAEEETGWRLR |
| MutX-St. pneumoniae | 25 | NDVHEGKWIGVGGLERGETPQECAVREILEETGLKAK |
| MutT-E. coli | 26 | DAHMANKLEFPGGKIEMGETPEQAVVRELQEEVGITPO |
| MutT-Pr. vulgaris | 29 | KSHMGGFWEFPGGKLEDNETPEQALIRELQEEIGIDVT |
| MutT-H. sapiens | 25 | RGFGAGRWNGFGGKVQEGETIEDGARRELQEEESGLTVD |
| Orf17-E. coli | 25 | RRDDPDFWQSVTGGSVEEGETAPQAAMREVKEEVTIDWV |
| Orf257-E. coli | 147 | TRHRNGVHTVLAGFVEVGETLEQAVAREVMEESGIKVK |
| Orf154-S. ambofaciens | 36 | RRADNGTWELPGGVLELDTEPETGVAREVWEETGIRVE |
| InvA-Bar. bacilliformis | 40 | YAEVSKLWQFPQGGIDEGEEDPLDAARRELYEETGMRSV |
| D250-Asfv | 120 | KGSGTLLWEIPKGKPKEDESDLTCAIREFEETGITRE |

FIG. 3. Alignment of Pur7 with several proteins which contain the domain of the MutT family. The alignment corresponds to the different protein regions where the domain is localized and some of the relevant flanking amino acids. Identical residues in all proteins are in white letters with a black background. Residues which are identical in Pur7 and several of the other proteins, and conservative replacements are in bold letters. Orf257 is a NADH pyrophosphatase from E. coli (87). Accession numbers of Orf154 from Streptomyces ambofaciens, InvA from Bartonella bacilliformis and of D250R from porcine African swine fever virus (Asfv) are Z19590, L25276, and L07263, respectively. References of the other proteins are indicated in the text.

| Pur5 | 60 | KGSFLEVGCCTGVISVTAALHGSDVTALDI |
| UbiG | 56 | FGKKVLDVGGGTTLAESMAREGATVTGLDM |
| EryG | 81 | EGDEVLDVGFGLGAQDFFWLETRKPARIVGV |
| Erme | 61 | PDLPVLEAGPEGLLTRELADRARQVTSYEI |
| TehB | 30 | KPGKTLDLGCGNRNSLYLAANGYDVDAWKD |
| PRMA | 158 | TGKTVIDFGCGSGILAI AALKLGAAKAIGID |
| HNMT | 52 | SEIKILSIGGAGEIDLQILSKVQAQYPGVC |
| RdmB | 182 | AVRHVLDVGCGNGMLAAIALRAPHLRGTLV |
| PmtA | 38 | RGRVLEVGVELSLPLYSHRVAVTGIDF |
| LmbW | 139 | GARRVLDVGGGQLLVDACLRDPSLTGIGL |
| dnr-ORF5 | 44 | TGERVLDIGCGRGACLFPAAEKVGPOQRVHG |
| LmbG | 28 | RGATVADVGGGSGAYGFLVRAGWGHTESWLK |

FIG. 4. Alignment of Pur5 and several proteins which carry a methyltransferase domain. Alignment was performed as in Fig. 3. Asterisks represent glycine residues which could conform a turn at the center of the domain, according to the secondary structure prediction. Dots indicate the putative position of hydrophobic amino acids, according to Wu et al. (58). Aligned proteins are: UbiG (E. coli, M87509); EryG (Saccharopolyspora erythraea, X60379); Erme (S. erythraea, X51891); TehB (Klebsiella aerogenes, M74072); PRMA (E. coli, P28637); HNMT (human, U08092); RdmB (Streptomyces purpurascens, U10405); PmtA (Rhodobacter sphaeroides, L07247); LmbG and LmbW (S. lincolnensis, X79146); and dnr-ORF5 (S. peucetius, L35560), where figures in brackets represent the relevant accession number.

with other proteins of the family. As indicated by Neuwald et al. (60), most proteins carrying these two domains could be phosphatases. This activity could, therefore, be attributed to Pur3.

Transcript Mapping—Previous work showed that the pac and dmpM genes were transcribed in a single RNA which terminated 3′ to the second gene (12). The sequence reported here and elsewhere (11, 12) shows that nine ORFs of pur, closely linked to each other, share the same direction of transcription (Fig. 1). Moreover, an inverted repeat, which could form a strong stem-loop of ΔG = −35.2 kcal/mol (66), is located 3′ to pur5 (Fig. 2). It could act as a transcription termination structure similar to that found for other Streptomyces genes (67, 68). Other putative transcription termination structures were previously found 3′ to dmpM and pur8 (9, 12). To determine the transcriptional organization of the pur cluster, total RNA was isolated from a late log phase culture of S. alboniger, when puromycin was actively synthesized. Initially, a broad localization of possible transcription initiation sites was carried out by low resolution S1 protection assays with probes indicated in Fig. 1. The results suggested that a transcript, which started 5′ to napH and covered all nine ORFs with the same direction of transcription was present. In addition, transcription initiation between pur5 and pur3 was also detected (not shown). The clear lack of transcription initiation between pur3 and pac is in contrast to previous data, which indicated both promoter activity and transcription initiation 5′ to pac (11). However, these data were obtained from S. lividans transformants which contained the pac gene inserted in plasmid vectors and were grown in a different culture medium than the one used here. It is possible, therefore, that we have been unable to detect those events in S. alboniger.

A higher resolution study was also carried out using S1 protection experiments to confirm the existence of the transcription start points detected by low resolution nuclease-S1 assays. To locate the transcription initiation site 5′ to napH, we used a probe (Fig. 6) covering its 5′ coding region and the noncoding region between this gene and orfA. The nuclease assay showed a protected fragment of about 500 bp (Fig. 6), which indicated that napH transcription started around position 679, 41 bp upstream of the translational initiator GTG (Fig. 2). Possible −10 and −35 regions are indicated in Fig. 2. To identify a possible transcription initiation site 5′ of pur3, the probe used (Fig. 6), covered the 5′ end of this ORF and the region between pur5 and pur3. A protected fragment of approximately 290 bp (Fig. 6) suggested the presence of a transcription initiation signal around position 8210, 43-bp upstream of the pur3 initiator ATG (Fig. 2). No clear −10 and −35 regions were found. Transcription initiation upstream of pur8 was examined using a probe that covered the 5′ end of this ORF and all the noncoding region up to orf1 (9). A protected fragment of 124

this charged amino acid in the last position of the domain could be questioned, according to the alignment presented in Fig. 4. Two other regions (II and III), which were proposed elsewhere (57, 59) are not rigorously detected in several AdoMet-dependent methyltransferases including Pur5 (58; not shown). The presence of region I in Pur5 suggests that it may have a AdoMet-dependent methyltransferase activity.

Finally, the pur3 gene would encode a protein (Pur3) of 273 amino acids (Table I; Fig. 2). Although this product is mainly hydrophilic it contains two significant hydrophobic regions between residues 90–120 and 190–230. Pur3 has significant similarity with a family of proteins (60), which includes a variety of inositol monophosphatases and other proteins of different origins (Fig. 5), including the bovine IMP (28.3% identity and 44.8% similarity), a key enzyme of the inositol phosphate second messenger pathway (61). This enzyme hydrolyses D-inositol phosphates producing inositol. It is also significant the similarity of Pur3 with the Hal2 protein from S. cerevisiae (27.9% identity; 47.9% similarity), which is involved in salt tolerance and methionine biosynthesis (62), and CysQ from E. coli (27.7% identity; 48.3% similarity), which is required for cysteine biosynthesis and could help control the pool of 3′-phosphoadenosine 5′-phosphosulfate (63). All these proteins share two highly conserved domains (60), as well as certain identical residues mainly at the N-terminal half (Fig. 5). The tridimensional structure of IMP (64) indicates that these two domains participate in the binding of phosphate and Mg²⁺, which are essential for enzymic activity. The two domains are also present in the bovine inositol polyphosphate phosphatase (65), which has scarce similarity in other parts of the sequence

1586 The Puromycin Biosynthetic Gene Cluster

Pur3 1 ..... MPQQADLE.LAMRLADTADRIITRRFQAR ..... DCGYARKPDRTP...VTDATTVEAAAVRESVRAARP...DDDFAGBET...
IMP 1 ..... MADPWQECMDY.AVTLAGQAGEVVERALKN ..... EMNIMVKSS..PADLVATDQKVEKMLITSIKEYP...SHSFIGEES...
OutG 1 ..... MDCPIPQTELDEIYAFATDLARKAGQLLLERVMDRN ..... SEQVVAEKEN..AVDLVTQTDEDVESLIKTAIQTKYEP...AHKFLGEES...
Qa-X 1 ..... MTSRTTTATELDEITYFAVQLGKDAGNLLMEAARLRFSNNNANHDKESTTQEFTEKDS..AVDIVTQTDEDVEAFIKSAINTRYP...SHDFIGEET...
SuhB 1 ..... MHPMLNIAVRAARKAGNLIAKNYETP ..... DAVEASQGSN...DFVTNVDKAAEAVIIDTIRKSYP...QHTIITEES...
CysQ 1 ..... MLDQVCQLARNAGDAIMQVYDGT ..... KPMDVVSKADNSP...VTAADIAAHTVIMDGLRLLTP...DVPVLSEED...
Hal2 1 ..... MALERELLVATQAVRKASLLTKRIQSEVISI ..... KDSTTITKNDNSP...VTTGDYAAQTIINAIKSNFP...DDKVVGEEES...
Yhr046C 1 ..... MTIDLASIEKFLCELA TEKVGPIIKSKSG ..... TQKDYDLKTGSRSVDIVTAIDKQVEKLWESVKTQYP...TFKFIGEES...
IPP 1 ..... MSDILQELLRVSEKAANIARACRQQE ..... TLFQLLIEEKKEGEKNKKFAVDFKTLADVLVQEVIKENMENKFPGLGKKIFGEEESNELT

motif A

Pur3 71 ..... GGEVTAGR TWIV DEIDGJKNFLRGVPVWATLIALLEDGRPTVGV.
IMP 73 ..... VAAGEKSILTDNP T WIIIDEDIDGTNFVBGFFVAVSIGFVVNKKMEFGI.
OutG 81 ..... YAKGESREYLIDEQP TWC VDELDGTWNFTHA FPMFCVSIGFIVNHYPVIGV.
Qa-X 93 ..... YAKSSQSTRPYLVTH TPTWVVDELDGT VNYTHLFPMFCVSIAFLVDGTPVIGV.
SuhB 70 ..... GELE GTDQDVQWVIDPLDGTTNFKRLPHFAVSIAVRIKGREVA V.
CysQ 67 ..... PPGWEVRQHWQRYWL VDELDGTEFIKRNEFTVNIALIDHGKPILGV.
Hal2 75 ..... SSGLSDAFVSGILNEIKANDEVYNKKDDFLFTNDQFPLKSLEDVRQIIDFGNYEGGKRGRFWCLDPIDGTKGFLRG.EQFAVCLALIVDG VVQLGC.
Yhr046C 76 ..... YVKGETVITDDPTFIIIDPIDGTNFVHDFPFSC TSLGLTVNKEPVVGV.
IPP 86 ..... NDLGEKIIMRLGPTEEETVALLSKVLNGNKLA SEALAKVVHQDVFFSDPALDSVEINIPQDILGIWVDPIDS TYQYIKGSADITPNQGIFPSGLQC VTVL

Pur3 115 ..VAAPALRSRWAAAGHGAWLRRGSAGAEPLRLHVSGVARLENAYLSTTNTRTWDAFH SRAAYLRLADA ..... CWE
IMP 122 ..VYSCLEDKMYTGRKGKGAF CNGQKLQVSHQEDITKSLLVTELGSSRTPETVRIILSNIERLLCLP ..... IHG
OutG 132 ..IYAPMLNQLFSSCLNRGAWLNEMQQQLPLIRKPSTPPLPATAPSKCIFACEWGKDRRDIPDGTLQRKIESFVNMAAERGSRGGKGGM ..... VHG
Qa-X 147 ..ICAPMLGQLFTACKGRGAWLNETQRLPLVRQPMPKSAPGGCVFSC EWGKDRKDRPEGNLYKVESFVNMAAEVGGRGGKGM ..... VHG
SuhB 116 ..VYDPMRNE LFTATRGQGAQLNGYRLLL GSTARDLDGTILATGFPRFKAKQYATTYINIVGKLFNE ..... CAD
CysQ 115 ..VYAPVMNVMSAAEGKAWKEECGVRKQIVR DARPPLVVISRSHADAELKEYLQQLG ..... EHQ
Hal2 173 ..IGCP..NLVLSSYGAQDLKGHESFGYIFRAVRGLGAFYSPSSDAESWTKIHVRHLKDTKDMITLEGVEKGHSSHDEQTAIKNKLN I ..... SKS
Yhr046C 124 ..IYNPHINLLVSASKNGMRVNNKDYDYKSKLESMGSLILNKSVALQPGSAREGKNFQTKMATYEKLSCDYGF ..... VHG
IPP 186 IGVDIQTGVPLMGVINQP FVSQDLHTRRWKGQCYWGLSYLCTNIHSLLPVSTRNSEAQSQQTQNPSSEGSCRFSVVIS TSEKETIKGALSHVGERI

motif B

Pur3 186 DRAFG.DFLQHCMVAEG TVDIAAEPVV ..... SPWDIAALQILVEEAEGVC TDLLGGSPQRGTGALSANPELHRLAVEALAAPAAATTGAATIP*
IMP 190 IRGVGTAALNMCLVAAGAADAYYEMGI ..... HOWDVA GAGIIIVTEAGGVLLDTVGGPFDLMSR..RVIASSNKTLAERIAKEIQIPLQRDDED*
OutG 221 VRSLGSATMDLAYTAMGSVDIWWEGGC ..... NEWDVAAGIAILLEAGGLVTAANPPED.IEGPIEPVKLGSR LYLAIRPAGPSETETGRETQERTVRE
Qa-X 232 VRSLGSATLDLAYTAMGSFDIWWEGGC ..... NEWDVAAGIAILQEAGGLITSANPPEDWATAEIPDKLGSRLLYVVRPAGPSEGETAREGQERTIRE
SuhB 182 FRRTGSAALDLAYVAAGRVDGFFEIGL ..... REWDFAAGELLVREAEGIVSDFTGGHNYMLTG..NIVAGNPRVVKAMLANMRDELSDALKR*
CysQ 175 TTSIGS.SLKFC LVAEGQAHVYPRFGP ..... TNWDTAAGHAVAAAAEAHVHDWQGK.PLDYTPRESFLNPGFRVS IY*
Hal2 260 LHLD.SQA.KYCLLAIGLADVYRLPKLSYQEKIW DHAAGNVIVHEAGGIHTDAMEDVPLDFGNGRTLATKGVIASSGPRELHDLVVSTSCDVIQS RNA
Yhr046C 201 FRNLGSSAMTMAYIAMGYLDSYW DGGC ..... YSWDVCAGWCILKEVGGRVVGANPGE ..... WSIDVDNRTYLAVRGTINNESDEQTKYITDFWNC
IPP 286 FRAAG.AGYKSLCVILGLADIY ..... IFSEDTTFKWDSCAAHAILRAMGGMVDLKECLERNPDTGLDLPQLVYHVGNEGAAGVDQWANKGGLTAYRSEK

FIG. 5. Alignment of Pur3 with several proteins. The bovine brain inositol monophosphatase (IMP) was introduced as an example of proteins displaying this enzymic activity. QutG from *Aspergillus nidulans* (28.3% identity; 49.4% similarity; 88) and Qa-X from *Neurospora crassa* (27% identity; 49.6% similarity; 89) are implicated in the utilization of quinic acid in these organisms. SuhB from *E. coli* (30.6 identity; 50.6 similarity) is implicated in the regulation of a transcriptional σ-factor of genes encoding heat-shock proteins (90). Yhr046C is an ORF from *S. cerevisiae* which pertains to this family of proteins (25.5% identity; 47.4% similarity) (91). The values of identity and similarity refer to comparisons of the different proteins with Pur3. Alignments and features are as in Fig. 3. The final amino acids of several proteins are not presented.

bp (Fig. 6) indicated the existence of transcription initiation 59-bp upstream of the pur8 initiator ATG (9).

The stem-loop 3′ to pur5 referred to above suggested that transcription termination could take place at this region. To examine this possibility, a high resolution S1 protection experiment was performed using a probe (Fig. 6) that comprised all the DNA between pur5 and pur3, including the stem-loop (Fig. 2), plus a Bluescript tail. The results indicated the presence of major protected fragments of approximately 840 and 512 bp, and minor protected ones of 535–545 and 1080 bp sizes (Fig. 6). The 1080-bp fragment corresponds to probe/probe reannealing. The 840-bp fragment corresponds to full protection of the probe minus the non-homologous plasmid sequence, thus confirming the existence of a transcript that extends through the stem-loop into pur3. The protected band of approximately 512 bp may correspond to transcription termination close to the 5′ end of the stem-loop. The minor protected bands suggest that transcription termination occasionally occurs at the region close to or covering the loop located within the inverted repeat 3′ to pur5. However, since these protected fragments have not been found 3′ to the putative transcription terminator, it is questionable that these terminations really take place in vivo, and other possible roles for this stem-loop must be considered (see “Discussion”). Therefore, these studies and those reported elsewhere (12) show that the pur cluster is transcribed into at least two mRNA species: one of them is a polycistronic messenger that covers nine ORFs, and the other one is a monocistronic messenger transcribed in the opposite direction that corresponds to pur8. In addition, there may be two other transcripts that span napH through pur5 and pur3 through dmpM, respectively (Fig. 1).

DISCUSSION

Gene Organization of the pur Cluster—This paper shows that the genes of the pur cluster, which determines the puromycin biosynthetic pathway of *S. alboniger*, are located in a single DNA fragment of approximately 13 kb. It comprises 10 ORFs, nine of which are contiguous and have the same direction of transcription and only one (pur8), located at the right end of the cluster, is transcribed in the opposite direction. The different enzymic steps of this pathway should be assigned to these ORFs. In fact, the biochemical studies of some of the expressed proteins (5, 7, 8), together with the similarities of the deduced gene products with known proteins, have allowed the proteins to attribute specific functions to all the genes of the cluster. As suggested by others, the possibility that some unlinked structural gene(s) could play a role in the biosynthesis of this antibiotic should not be excluded (47, 69). If so, such gene(s) should also be present in *S. lividans*, since puromycin production was achieved in this organism carrying the 13-kb fragment. The analysis of the biosynthetic gene cluster for puromycin is of special interest since it is the first one to be isolated for a nucleoside antibiotic. It should serve as a model system for related clusters.

Transcription of the pur Cluster—The transcription analyses of the pur cluster described here and elsewhere (12) indicate the existence of a polycistronic transcript which starts 5′ to napH and terminates 3′ to dmpM and comprises all ORFs of pur, except pur8, which is transcribed in the opposite direction as a monocistronic transcript. The expression of most ORFs of pur as a polycistronic transcript is in agreement with several other clusters for antibiotic biosynthesis (69–71). As indicated elsewhere (71), these polycistronic transcripts should facilitate the regulation of antibiotic biosynthesis improving its efficiency. In addition, two other transcripts, comprising napH through pur5 and pur3 through dmpM, respectively, may be synthesized in the pur cluster. Nevertheless, as indicated above, the transcription terminator function of the stem-loop located between pur5 and pur3, which would explain the exist-

The Puromycin Biosynthetic Gene Cluster

FIG. 6. Transcription analysis. Total RNA used was isolated (14) from *S*. alboniger samples taken at 5.0 A<sub>660 nm</sub> (10), when puromycin was actively produced as shown by a Pac assay. RNA samples (50 μg) were hybridized to the <sup>32</sup>P-labeled probes described below. High resolution S1 mapping was performed as described (11). Lanes G, A, T, and C contain standards from sequencing reactions of known sequences from pur (*B*, *C*, and *D*), and a fragment from M13 mp18 (*A*). For *D*, φ29 digested with HindIII and labeled with <sup>32</sup>P was also used as size standard. Numbers on the left margins indicate the size (in nucleotides) of the standards and those on the right the size (in nucleotides) of the DNA fragments protected from the nuclease S1 digestion. Lines 1 and 2 represent S1 assays performed with *S*. alboniger RNA and yeast tRNA, respectively. Line 3 represents DNA probes. *A*, transcription initiation of *napH*. The 2.07-kb *Bg*II-*Xho*I fragment from pur (nucleotides 363-2429; Fig. 2) was cloned in Bluescript. From the resulting construct (pPS1.8), an 855-bp *Sp*I (internal site to the *napH* coding sequence, Fig. 2)-*SacI* (from the polylinker of the vector) fragment was isolated, labeled at the *Sp*I end and then used as a probe. *B*, transcription initiation of *pur3*. From plasmid pPS5.2 (5.5-kb *Xho*I-*Eco*RI fragment from pur, cloned in pUC19; *Xho*I, nucleotide 7523, Fig. 2. *Eco*RI, right end, Fig. 1), a 984-bp *Sal*I (internal site to the *pur3* coding sequence; Fig. 2)-*Pst*I (from the polylinker of the vector) fragment was isolated, labeled at the *Sal*I end and then used as a probe. *C*, transcription initiation of *pur8*. The 2-kb *Sal*I-*Eco*RI rightmost fragment of *pur* was cloned in Bluescript. From the resulting plasmid (pPS2.0; 9), a 743-bp *Bam*HI (internal site to the *pur8* sequence)-*Pst*I (from the polylinker of the vector) fragment was isolated, labeled at the *Bam*HI end, and then used as a probe. *D*, transcription termination of *pur5*. From plasmid pPS1.0 (984-bp *Sal*I-*Pst*I fragment described above, cloned in Bluescript), a 1.08-kb *Sty*I (internal site to *pur5* sequence; Fig. 2)-*Ssp*I (from the vector polylinker) fragment, was isolated, labeled at *Sty*I and used as a probe.

ence of these two transcripts, may be questioned. Therefore, transcription termination 3′ to *pur5* and transcription initiation 5′ to *pur3* may not occur *in vivo*. An alternative role for this stem-loop might be to confer variable stability to different segments of the polycistronic transcript (71). Finally, additional promoters active under certain physiological conditions and that could contribute to the regulation of *pur* expression should not be discarded.

The Puromycin Biosynthetic Pathway—Sequencing of a gene cluster provides an analysis of its molecular organization and an insight, by sequence comparison with data banks, into the functions of many of its putative gene products. Moreover, if additional biochemical data are available, this insight can be achieved with a high degree of certainty. The rationale to propose the initial steps of the puromycin biosynthetic pathway from *S*. alboniger takes into account the finding that [U-<sup>14</sup>C]-adenosine is a direct precursor of the 3′-amino-3′-deoxyadenosine moiety of puromycin (4). The 3′ addition of an amino group to the ribose moiety of adenosine should take place, similarly to other deoxysugars, through a 3′-keto intermediate (for a review, see Ref. 55). Therefore, in the puromycin pathway this intermediate should be 3′-keto-3′-deoxyadenosine, which by means of an aminotransferase would be converted to 3′-amino-3′-deoxyadenosine. However, in both Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria and in Ehrlich ascites tumor cells, 3′-amino-3′-deoxyadenosine is triphosphorylated by adenosine kinase, producing 3′-amino-3′-deoxy-ATP, a strong inhibitor of DNA-dependent RNA polymerase (72–74). Therefore, it seems likely that, if produced, 3′-keto-3′-deoxyadenosine would also be 5′-triphosphorylated. The resulting product, 3′-keto-3′-deoxy-ATP, could also be highly toxic. If so, *S*. alboniger should have a means to prevent the harmful effects of these putative intermediates. This could be either a resistant RNA polymerase or an adenosine kinase which does not recognize the 3′-derivatives. Moreover, it seems safe to assume that these mechanisms of autodefense are not present in *S*. lividans, where *pur* determines puromycin production. Therefore, the resistance system should most likely be encoded by this cluster. We propose Pur7 as the responsible enzyme conferring this resistance. Pur7 is a member of the MutT family of NTP-pyrophosphohydrolases, which play an important role in the detoxification of certain mutagenic/carcinogenic keto derivatives.

The Puromycin Biosynthetic Gene Cluster

FIG. 7. Proposed biosynthetic pathway of puromycin. Roman numerals indicate compounds referred to in the text.

tives of the NTPs. Thus, the MutT protein from *E. coli* and humans hydrolyses 8-oxo-dGTP producing PPi and an inactive 8-oxo-dGMP (41, 75). Therefore, 3′-keto-3′-deoxy-ATP could be inactivated by Pur7 producing a supposedly nontoxic 3′-keto-3′-deoxy-AMP and PPi. This proposal is also based on the finding that the mono- and diphosphorylated derivatives of 3′-amino-3′-deoxy-ATP lack biological activity (76, 77). Therefore, 3′-keto-3′-deoxy-AMP would then be the substrate for an aminotransferase to produce a non-toxic 3′-amino-3′-deoxy-AMP. In this way, the initial steps of the pathway could proceed through inactive intermediates. Because puromycin biosynthesis initiates when growth is still maintained (7), adenosine would preferentially be converted into ATP rather than into 3′-keto-3′-deoxyadenosine. Therefore, it seems plausible to propose that adenosine would enter the pathway via ATP (compound I; Fig. 7). If so, the latter would be converted by the putative oxidoreductase Pur10 (NAD⁺ could be its cofactor; Ref. 55) into 3′-keto-3′-deoxy-ATP (compound II; Fig. 7), which would be hydrolyzed by Pur7 to yield 3′-keto-3′-deoxy-AMP (compound III; Fig. 7). This intermediate would then be modified by the presumptive aminotransferase Pur4 to produce 3′-amino-3′-deoxy-AMP (compound IV; Fig. 7). As described for aminotransferases which are implicated in amino sugar biosynthesis in Gram-negative bacteria (78), Pur4 would be a pyridoxal phosphate/L-glutamate(L-glutamine)-dependent enzyme (54, 56). Assuming that the pathway proceeds in this manner, the 5′-phosphate group should be eliminated at some step. This hydrolysis could be carried out by Pur3, which presents significant similarities to a variety of monophosphatases (Fig. 5). However, it should not be at this stage of the pathway because the resulting intermediate would be phosphorylated back to 3′-amino-3′-deoxy-ATP. Therefore, Pur3 should act on a subsequent intermediate.

It has been proposed that tyrosine would be attached by its -COOH group to the 3′-NH₂ group of 3′-amino-3′-deoxyadenosine to produce N⁶,N⁶,O-tridemethylpuromycin (5, 7). According to our proposal, formation of this bond should take place on the 5′-phosphodervative (Fig. 7), thus removing it from the nucleotide pool to prevent any additional phosphorylation. This reaction would be equivalent to a peptide bond formation step, which would previously require an activation of tyrosine. Amino acid activation is performed by aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases, antibiotic peptide synthetases, the bacterial peptidoglycan precursor synthetases, and condensing enzymes

of the β-lactams antibiotics (79–82). Assuming that the relevant gene(s) is(are) not on a separate locus(loci), the only putative enzyme, by elimination, of the puromycin biosynthetic pathway to which this function could be attributed is Pur6. Although it presents low level similarities to these enzymes and apparently lacks any AMP binding domain, this might not be an impeding difficulty. Thus, LeuS, a leucyl-tRNA synthetase, has low similarities to members of the peptide antibiotic synthetases and lacks an apparent AMP binding site (83). The only ORF from data banks which presents a similarity to Pur6 is LmbC from the lincomycin biosynthetic gene cluster. This ORF appears to belong to the peptide synthetase family of proteins. It has been proposed to be an activating enzyme of either tyrosine, before conversion to L-dihydroxyphenylalanine, or propylproline (a tyrosine-derivative intermediate), prior to condensation at the -NH₂ group of the sugar moiety of lincomycin (47). In our case, the activation of tyrosine could be performed by a different enzyme (*i.e.* a tyrosyl-tRNA synthetase) and Pur6 might only catalyze its linkage to 3′-amino-3′-deoxy-AMP to produce N⁶,N⁶,O-tridemethylpuromycin-5′-phosphate (compound V; Fig. 7). Given the rarity of the linkage attributed to Pur6, a sequence deviation from peptide bond forming enzymes should not be surprising. Indeed, Pur6 could be a member of a variety of enzymes which are implicated in the biosynthetic pathways of certain nucleoside antibiotics of bacterial and fungal origin, like chrisandin, A201A, and the agricultural fungicides polyoxins, where a variety of polycarbon chains are attached to the amino-ribofuranosyl moieties by forming a peptide bond-like linkage (1).

It has been proposed that N⁶,N⁶,O-tridemethylpuromycin is dimethylated at N⁶ (5). However, the resulting intermediate inhibits protein synthesis (84), and to prevent it, a Pac-dependent inactivation by N-acetylation of the -NH₂ group of the tyrosyl moiety of tridemethylpuromycin has been suggested (7). According to our proposal, this acetylation should take place on compound V (Fig. 7). The resulting intermediate (compound VI; Fig. 7) would be N⁶-dimethylated by Pur5, which presents a typical motif of AdoMet-dependent N-methylases (Fig. 4). Curiously, AdoMet-dependent N⁶-methylation of either N⁶,N⁶,O-tridemethylpuromycin or N⁶,O-didemethylpuromycin with cell extracts from *S. alboniger* has not been detected. This result was attributed to the possible requirement of a precursor derivative such as a phosphate ester (5). Indeed, our proposal suggests that this modified precursor is

The Puromycin Biosynthetic Gene Cluster

compound VI (Fig. 7). The resulting N-acetyl-O-demethylpuromycin-5′-phosphate (compound VIII, via compound VII; Fig. 7) would be O-methylated by DmpM (5, 7). However, the affinity of DmpM for N-acetyl-O-demethylpuromycin (compound IX; Fig. 7) is very high (Km = 2.3 μM; 7), which suggests that this, instead of VIII, is the real substrate for this enzyme. Therefore, the 5′-phosphate group could be removed by Pur3 prior to O-methylation. If so, this removal could take place even at an earlier step (i.e. from compound V; Fig. 7). This sequence of reactions would produce N-acetylpuromycin (compound X; Fig. 7), which would be secreted to be N-hydrolyzed by NapH, the puromycin (compound XI; Fig. 7) activating enzyme (Ref. 8; Fig. 7).

**Regulation of the pur Cluster—**It has been surprising not to find evidence for a pathway-specific regulatory gene associated to the pur cluster. While this is also the case for the tcm biosynthetic pathway isolated from the tetracenomycin C producer, Streptomyces glaucescens (69), many antibiotic biosynthetic gene clusters have a transcriptional activator associated with them (85). Given that puromycin production is clearly temporally controlled, it is possible that some pleiotropic regulator is responsible for activating the pur cluster. A number of pleiotropic regulatory genes have been isolated from Streptomyces coelicolor which affect multiple antibiotic pathways, but are not pathway-associated (86). The observation that pur expression appears to be regulated in S. lividans(pRCP11) implies that such a putative pleiotropic regulator(s) is not specific to S. alboniger and, indeed may even be widespread among actinomycetes. The isolation and characterization of these genes may uncover novel regulatory mechanisms in secondary metabolite biosynthetic pathways within this important group of bacteria. In this context, the existence of TTA codons in the 5′ ends of the coding regions of both pur10 and pur6 may be of interest, since it suggests that both genes are controlled by the product of the bldA gene (43). Interestingly, according to our proposal for puromycin biosynthesis, Pur10 would catalyze the first step of the pathway, and it is tempting to speculate on the role of translational regulation in expression of the pur cluster.

**Acknowledgments—**We thank A. Martín for expert technical assistance and S. J. Lucania for the gift of thiostrepton.

---

**REFERENCES**

1. Isono, K. J. (1988) *J. Antibiot.* **41**, 1711–1739
2. Vázquez, D. (1979) *Inhibitors of Protein Biosynthesis*, Springer-Verlag, Berlin
3. Cundliffe, E. (1989) *Annu. Rev. Microbiol.* **43**, 207–233
4. Suhadolnik, R. J. (1981) in *Antibiotics: Biosynthesis of the nucleoside antibiotics* (Corcoran, J. W., ed) Vol. IV, pp. 353–370, Springer-Verlag, Berlin
5. Pattabiraman, T. N., and Pogell, B. M. (1969) *Biochim. Biophys. Acta* **182**, 245–247
6. Rao, M. M., Rebello, P. F., and Pogell, B. M. (1969) *J. Biol. Chem.* **244**, 112–118
7. Vara, J., Pérez-González, J. A., and Jiménez, A. (1985) *Biochemistry* **24**, 8074–8081
8. Lacalle, R. A., Tercero, J. A., Vara, J., and Jiménez, A. (1993) *J. Bacteriol.* **175**, 7474–7478
9. Tercero, J. A., Lacalle, R. A., and Jiménez, A. (1993) *Eur. J. Biochem.* **218**, 963–971
10. Lacalle, R. A., Tercero, J. A., and Jiménez, A. (1992) *EMBO J.* **11**, 785–792
11. Lacalle, R. A., Pulido, D., Vara, J., Zalacain, M., and Jiménez, A. (1989) *Gene (Amst.)* **79**, 375–380
12. Lacalle, R. A., Ruiz, D., and Jiménez, A. (1991) *Gene (Amst.)* **109**, 55–61
13. Porter, J. N., Hewitt, R. I., Hesseltine, C. W., Krupka, C. W., Lowery, J. A., Wallace, W. S., Bohonos, N., and Williams, J. H. (1952) *Antibiot. Chemother.* **2**, 409–415
14. Hopwood, D. A., Bibb, M. J., Chater, K. F., Kieser, T., Bruton, C. J., Kieser, H. M., Lydiate, D. J., Smith, C. P., and Ward, J. M. (1985) *Genetic Manipulation of Streptomyces: A Laboratory Manual*, The John Innes Foundation, Norwich, UK
15. Hanahan, D. (1985) in *DNA Cloning: A Practical Approach* (Glover, D. M., ed) pp. 109–136, IRL Press, Oxford, UK
16. Brown, T. A. (1991) *Molecular Biology*, Labfax. Blackwell Scientific Publications, Manchester, UK
17. Marinus, M. G., and Morris, N. R. (1973) *J. Bacteriol.* **114**, 1143–1150
18. Katz, E., Thompson, C. J., and Hopwood, D. A. (1983) *J. Gen. Microbiol.* **129**, 2703–2714
19. Vieira, J., and Messing, J. (1982) *Gene (Amst.)* **19**, 259–268
20. Yanisch-Perron, C., Vieira, J., and Messing, J. (1985) *Gene (Amst.)* **33**, 103–119
21. Miller, J. F. (1992) *A Short Course in Bacterial Genetics. A Laboratory Manual and Handbook for Escherichia coli and Related Bacteria*, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press, Cold Spring Harbor, NY
22. Sambrook, K. J., Fritsch, E. F., and Maniatis, T. (1989) *Molecular Cloning: A Laboratory Manual*, 2nd Ed., Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold Spring Harbor, NY
23. Sanger, F., Nicklen, S., and Coulson, A. R. (1977) *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.* **74**, 5463–5467
24. Hopwood, D. A., Malpartida, F., Kieser, H. M., Ikeda, H., Duncan, J., Fujii, I., Rudd, B. A. M., Floss, H. G., and Omura, S. (1985) *Nature* **314**, 642–644
25. Genetics Computer Group (1994) *Program Manual for the Wisconsin Package, Version 8*, Genetics Computer Group, Madison, WI
26. Altschul, S. F., Gisch, W., Miller, W., Myers, E. W., and Lipman, D. J. (1990) *J. Mol. Biol.* **215**, 403–410
27. Marck, C. (1991) *Strider*, Centre d’Etudes de Saclay, Gif-Sur-Yvette, Cedex, France
28. Bibb, M. J., Findlay, P. R., and Johnson, M. W. (1984) *Gene (Amst.)* **30**, 157–166
29. von Heijne, G. (1986) *Nucleic Acids Res.* **14**, 4683–4690
30. Mansouri, K., and Piepersberg, W. (1991) *Mol. Gen. Genet.* **228**, 459–469
31. Yasuhara, T., Nakai, T., and Ohashi, A. (1994) *J. Biol. Chem.* **269**, 13644–13650
32. Bergh, S., and Uhlen, M. (1992) *Gene (Amst.)* **117**, 131–136
33. Koonin, E. V. (1993) *Nucleic Acids Res.* **21**, 4847
34. Abeygunawardana, C., Weber, D. J., Frick, D. N., Bessman, M. J., and Mildvan, A. S. (1993) *Biochemistry* **32**, 13071–13080
35. Akiyama, M., Horiuchi, T., and Sekiguchi, M. (1987) *Mol. Gen. Genet.* **206**, 9–16
36. Bhatnagar, S. K., Bullions, L. C., and Bessman, M. J. (1991) *J. Biol. Chem.* **266**, 9050–9054
37. Weber, D. J., Abeygunawardana, C., Bessman, M. J., and Mildvan, A. S. (1993) *Biochemistry* **32**, 13081–13088
38. Mejean, V., Salles, C., Bullions, L. C., Bessman, M. J., and Claverys, J. P. (1994) *Mol. Microbiol.* **11**, 323–330
39. Kamath, A. V., and Yanofsky, C. (1993) *Gene (Amst.)* **134**, 99–102
40. Mo, J. Y., Maki, H., and Sekiguchi, M. (1992) *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.* **89**, 11021–11025
41. Maki, H., and Sekiguchi, M. (1992) *Nature* **355**, 273–275
42. Bullions, L. C., Mejean, V., Claverys, J. P., and Bessman, M. J. (1994) *J. Biol. Chem.* **269**, 12339–12344
43. Leskiw, B. K., Bibb, M. J., and Chater, K. F. (1991) *Mol. Microbiol.* **5**, 2861–2867
44. Fakhrai, H., and Maines, M. D. (1992) *J. Biol. Chem.* **267**, 4023–4029
45. Kanagasundaram, V., and Scopes, R. K. (1992) *J. Bacteriol.* **174**, 1439–1447
46. Sperka, S., Zehelein, E., Fiedler, S., Fischer, S., Sommer, R., and Buckel, P. (1989) *Nucleic Acids Res.* **17**, 5402
47. Peschke, U., Schmidt, H., Zhang, H.-Z., and Piepersberg, W. (1995) *Mol. Microbiol.* **16**, 1137–1156
48. Dhillon, N., Hale, R. S., Cortes, J., and Leadlay, P. F. (1989) *Mol. Microbiol.* **3**, 1405–1414
49. Jiang, X.-M., Neal, B., Santiago, F., Lee, S. J., Romana, L. K., and Reeves, P. R. (1991) *Mol. Microbiol.* **5**, 695–713
50. Takagi, M., Takada, H., and Imanaka, T. (1990) *J. Bacteriol.* **172**, 411–418
51. Stutzman-Engwall, K. J., Otten, S. H., and Hutchinson, C. R. (1992) *J. Bacteriol.* **174**, 144–154
52. Distler, J., Mansouri, K., Mayer, G., Stockmann, M., and Piepersberg, W. (1992) *Gene (Amst.)* **115**, 105–111
53. Merson-Davies, L. A., and Cundliffe, E. (1994) *Mol. Microbiol.* **13**, 349–355
54. Thorson, J. S., Lo, S. F., Liu, H.-W., and Hutchinson, C. R. (1993) *J. Am. Chem. Soc.* **115**, 6993–6994
55. Liu, H.-W., and Thorson, J. S. (1994) *Annu. Rev. Microbiol.* **48**, 223–256
56. Piepersberg, W. (1994) *Crit. Rev. Biotech.* **14**, 251–285
57. Ingrosso, D., Fowler, A. V., Bleibaum, J., and Clarke, S. (1989) *J. Biol. Chem.* **264**, 20131–20139
58. Wu, G., Williams, H. D., Zamanian, M., Gibson, F., and Poole, R. K. (1992) *J. Gen. Microbiol.* **138**, 2101–2112
59. Kagan, R. M., and Clarke, S. (1994) *Arch. Biochem. Biophys.* **310**, 417–427
60. Neuwald, A. F., York, J. D., and Majerus, P. W. (1991) *FEBS Lett.* **294**, 16–18
61. Diehl, R., Whiting, P., Potter, J., Gee, N., Ragan, C., Linemeyer, D., Schoepfer, R., Bennett, C., and Dixon, R. (1990) *J. Biol. Chem.* **265**, 5946–5949
62. Gläser, H.-U., Thomas, D., Gaxiola, R., Montrichard, F., Surdin-Kerjan, Y., and Serrano, R. (1993) *EMBO J.* **12**, 3105–3110
63. Neuwald, A. F., Krishnan, B. R., Brikun, I., Kulakauskas, S., Suziedelis, K., Tomcsanyi, T., Leyh, T. S., and Berg, D. E. (1992) *J. Bacteriol.* **174**, 415–425
64. Bone, R., Springer, J. P., and Atack, J. R. (1992) *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.* **89**, 10031–10035
65. York, J. D., and Majerus, P. W. (1990) *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.* **87**, 9548–9552
66. Turner, D. H., Sugimoto, N., Jaeger, J. A., Longfellow, C. E., Freier, S. M., and Kierzek, R. (1987) *Cold Spring Harbor Symp. Quant. Biol.* **52**, 123–133
67. Deng, Z., Kieser, T., and Hopwood, D. A. (1987) *Nucleic Acids Res.* **15**, 2665–2675
68. Pulido, D., and Jiménez, A. (1987) *Nucleic Acids Res.* **15**, 4227–4240
69. Decker, H., and Hutchinson, C. R. (1993) *J. Bacteriol.* **175**, 3887–3892
70. Madduri, K., and Hutchinson, C. R. (1995) *J. Bacteriol.* **177**, 1208–1215
71. Petrich, A. K., Leskiw, B. K., Paradkar, A. S., and Jensen, S. E. (1994) *Gene (Amst.)* **142**, 41–48
72. Shigeura, H. T., and Boxer, G. E. (1964) *Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun.* **17**, 758–763
73. Truman, J. T., and Klenow, H. (1968) *Mol. Pharmacol.* **4**, 77–86
74. Armstrong, V. W., and Eckstein, F. (1976) *Eur. J. Biochem.* **70**, 33–38
75. Hayakawa, H., Takekomi, A., Sakumi, K., Kuwano, M., and Sekiguchi, M.

1590

The Puromycin Biosynthetic Gene Cluster

(1995) *Biochemistry* 34, 89–95  
76. Shigeura, H. T., and Gordon, C. N. (1965) *J. Biol. Chem.* 240, 806–810  
77. Shigeura, H. T., Boxer, G. E., Meloni, M. L., and Sampson, S. D. (1966) *Biochemistry* 5, 994–1004  
78. Ohashi, H., Matsuhashi, M., and Matsuhashi, S. (1971) *J. Biol. Chem.* 246, 2325–2330  
79. Schimmel, P. R., and Söll, D. (1979) *Annu. Rev. Biochem.* 48, 601–648  
80. Von Döhren, H., Pfeifer, E., Van Liempt, H., Lee, Y.-O., Pavela-Vrancic, M., and Schwecke, T. (1993) in *Industrial Microorganisms: Basic and Applied Molecular Genetics* (Baltz, R. H., Hegeman, G. D., and Skatrud, P. L., eds) pp. 159–167, Washington, D.C.  
81. Heijenoort, J. V. (1994) in *Bacterial Cell Wall* (Ghuysen, J.-M., and Hakenbeck, R., eds) pp. 39–55, Elsevier Science B. V., Amsterdam  
82. Van Liempt, H., von Döhren, H., and Kleinkauf, H. (1989) *J. Biol. Chem.* 264, 3680–3684  
83. Haertlein, M., and Madern, D. (1987) *Nucleic Acids Res.* 15, 10199–10210  

84. Pérez-González, J. A., Vara, J., and Jiménez, A. (1985) *J. Gen. Microbiol.* 131, 2877–2883  
85. Fernández-Moreno, M. A., Caballero, J. L., Hopwood, D. A., and Malpartida, F. (1991) *Cell* 66, 769–780  
86. Fernández-Moreno, M. A., Martín-Triana, A. J., Martínez, E., Niemi, J., Kieser, H. M., Hopwood, D. A., and Malpartida, F. (1992) *J. Bacteriol.* 174, 2958–2967  
87. Frick, D. N., and Bessman, M. J. (1995) *J. Biol. Chem.* 270, 1529–1534  
88. Hawkins, A. R., Lamb, H. K., Smith, M., Keyte, J. W., and Roberts, C. F. (1988) *Mol. Gen. Genet.* 214, 224–231  
89. Geever, R. F., Huiet, L., Baum, J. A., Tyler, B. M., Patel, V. B., Rutledge, B. J., Case, M. E., and Giles, N. H. (1989) *J. Mol. Biol.* 207, 15–34  
90. Yano, R., Nagai, H., Shiba, K., and Yura, T. (1990) *J. Bacteriol.* 172, 2124–2130  
91. Johnston, M., Andrews, S., Brinkman, R., Cooper, J., Ding, H., Dover, J., Du, Z., Favello, A., Fulton, L., and Gattung, S. (1994) *Science* 265, 2077–2082

Nucleic Acids, Protein Synthesis, and Molecular Genetics:

The Biosynthetic Pathway of the Aminonucleoside Antibiotic Puromycin, as Deduced from the Molecular Analysis of the *pur* Cluster of *Streptomyces alboniger*

José A. Tercero, J. Carlos Espinosa, Rosa A. Lacalle and Antonio Jiménez

*J. Biol. Chem.* 1996, 271:1579-1590.  
doi: 10.1074/jbc.271.3.1579

---

Access the most updated version of this article at [http://www.jbc.org/content/271/3/1579](http://www.jbc.org/content/271/3/1579)

Find articles, minireviews, Reflections and Classics on similar topics on the [JBC Affinity Sites](https://www.jbc.org/affinity-sites).

Alerts:
- [When this article is cited](#)
- [When a correction for this article is posted](#)

Click [here](#) to choose from all of JBC's e-mail alerts

This article cites 81 references, 36 of which can be accessed free at [http://www.jbc.org/content/271/3/1579.full.html#ref-list-1](http://www.jbc.org/content/271/3/1579.full.html#ref-list-1)
