
European Journal of Clinical Investigation (1996) 26, 1–12

REVIEW

# The Jak-STAT pathway: specific signal transduction from the cell membrane to the nucleus

M. H. HEIM Medizinische Universitätsklinik, Kantonsspital Basel, Switzerland

Received 21 June 1995; accepted 17 July 1995

Abstract. The Jak-STAT pathway is a newly discovered intracellular signal transduction pathway that is used by a growing number of extracellular signalling proteins (ESPs) for transcriptional activation of target genes. Binding of ligands to their transmembrane receptors leads to activation of members of the Jak tyrosine kinase family. The activated receptor-kinase complexes recruit members of the STAT family and activate them by phosphorylation. As a consequence, the phosphorylated STAT proteins dimerize, translocate into the nucleus, bind response elements in the promoter of target genes and stimulate the transcription of these genes. Their dual role as signalling molecules and transcription factors is reflected in the name: STAT stands for signal transducers and activators of transcription. Different ligands specifically activate different members of the Jak and STAT families. Signal transduction through the Jak-STAT pathway contributes to the specificity and diversity of cellular responses to peptide hormones, growth factors, cytokines and interleukins.

Keywords. Jak kinetics, signal transduction, STAT proteins.

## Background

For the majority of proteins the rate of transcription of their genes is the most important regulatory step that determines their concentration in a cell. Not surprisingly therefore, one of the main effects of ESPs (hormones, growth factors, cytokines and interleukins) on their target cells is the transcriptional activation of quiescent genes. Different ESPs activate overlapping but distinct sets of genes [1–4] and thereby elicit different responses. Many ligands activate second messengers, for example cAMP, diacyl glycerol, phosphoinositides or Ca²⁺. It is difficult, however, to explain the specificity and diversity of responses to different ligands through the activation and actions of a soluble pool of a small number of second messengers. Over the last decade, research on the intracellular signal transduction of two ESPs that do not activate any of the known second messengers, namely interferon-α (IFN-α) and interferon-γ (IFN-γ), has led to discovery of a new intracellular signal transduction pathway, the Jak-STAT pathway [1].

The first step was the identification of genes that are transcriptionally induced in IFN-α or IFN-γ in the absence of protein synthesis [3, 5, 6]. Analysis of the promoters of these genes led to the identification of recognition sequences called interferon-stimulated response element (ISRE) in IFN-α-stimulated genes [7–9] and gamma-activated sequence (GAS) in the IFN-γ-stimulated genes [10]. Protein purification of the transcription factors that bind these two response elements allowed the cloning of the cDNAs for the first two members of the STAT family: Stat1 and Stat2 [11, 12]. Subsequent experiments showed that STAT proteins are present in a latent form in the cytoplasm and become phosphorylated on a single tyrosine within minutes after ligand binding. Phosphorylated STATs then dimerize and translocate into the nucleus [13, 14]. The original discovery of the Jak kinases was completely independent: Tyk2, Jak1 and Jak2, the first members of the Jak family of protein-tyrosine kinases, were described as a result of a homology search for kinases [15, 16]. Initially, no function was found for the new kinase family. But then a cell line defective in IFN-α signal transduction was shown to be rescued by a cDNA clone of Tyk2 [17]. Soon after, Jak1 and Jak2 were shown to be required for interferon signal transduction as well [18, 19].

Shortly after the discovery of the Jak-STAT pathway in interferon signal transduction it became evident that many additional ESPs also activate the Jak-STAT pathway [20–24]. With the recent purification and cloning of new members of the Jak kinase family [25, 26] and the STAT family [27–32], the fascinating prospect of a highly diverse and yet specific signal transduction system emerges.

Correspondence: Dr M. H. Heim, MUP, Kantonsspital Basel, Petersgraben 2, 4051 Basel, Switzerland.
© 1996 Blackwell Science Ltd

The receptors

The ESPs that have been shown to activate the Jak-STAT pathway bind members of various receptor families: single transmembrane receptors with an intracellular protein-tyrosine kinase domain (PTK receptors), single transmembrane receptors without kinase domains (non-PTK receptors) (Fig. 1) and seven transmembrane receptors (G-protein coupled receptors).

Non-PTK receptors

This large and heterogeneous group is also called the cytokine receptor family. The non-PTK receptors can be divided into four subtypes (classes I–IV) based on characteristic structural motifs in their extracellular binding domains [33–36]. The reader is referred to these references 33–36 for details. In regard to intracellular signal transduction, five features of these receptors stand out. First, some receptor chains consist solely of a transmembrane domain and an extracellular ligand-binding domain. They are often called α-chains, whereas receptor molecules with cytoplasmic domains that are important for signal transduction are designated β- or γ-chains. (This nomenclature is not valid for interferon receptors.) Second, no intracellular kinase domain is found in these signal-transducing receptor chains, hence the name non-PTK receptors. Instead, two conserved membrane-proximal motifs, often called box 1 and box 2, are present in many of these receptors and are believed to confer binding of Jaks kinases [37–39]. Third, intracellular tyrosines of receptors become phosphorylated, thereby providing docking sites for signaling molecules that contain phosphotyrosine-binding domains. Fourth, many cytokine receptors consist of two or more subunits that are brought together upon ligand binding. And fifth, such receptor subunits are often shared among different cytokine receptor complexes. Receptors that share components are classified in families.

Receptors

| α | β/γ | PTK |
|---|-----|-----|
|   |     | Box 1 |
|   |     | Box 2 |
|   |     | Y     |
|   |     | PTK   |
|   |     | Y     |

JAKs: 1100–1200 amino acids

| JH7 | JH6 | JH5 | JH4 | JH3 | KRD | PTK |

STATs: 750–850 amino acids

| DNA | SH2 | TAD |
|-----|-----|-----|

Figure 1. Receptors. Protein tyrosine kinase (PTK) receptor have an intrinsic kinase domain. Non-PTK receptors or cytokine receptors can be classified into non-signal-transducing α-chains and transducing β- and γ-chains. Conserved elements, e.g. box 1 and box 2, serve as binding domains for cytoplasmic kinases. Tyrosines (Y) become phosphorylated upon ligand binding and provide docking sites for SH2 domains containing signalling proteins. JAKs. Seven Jak homology (JH1–JH7) domains are found in Jak kinases. JH1 is the protein-tyrosine domain (PTK), JH2 the kinase-related domain (KRD). STATs. Known features of the STATs (signal transducers and activators of transcription) are a DNA-binding domain (DNA), a src homology 2 domain (SH2), a transactivation domain (TAD) and a tyrosine residue (Y) immediately carboxy terminal of the SH2 domain and a serine residue (S) in the transactivation domain.

gp130 family. The receptors for interleukin-6 (IL-6), IL-11, oncostatin M, leukaemia inhibitor factor (LIF) and ciliary neurotrophic factor (CNTF) all signal through a common β-chain called gp130. The IL-6 receptor consists of a non-signal-transducing, ligand-binding α-chain [40] and two gp130 chains [41]. The LIF receptor contains the signal-transducing LIFRβ chain and gp130 [42]. The CNTF receptor α-chain [43] associates with gp130 and LIFRβ chain [44]. IL-11 receptor α-chain requires gp130 for high-affinity binding and signal transduction [45, 46]. The structural and functional similarity of the IL-12 and the granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) receptors to gp130 suggests that they belong in this family [47, 48]. However, an association with gp130 has not been demonstrated.

IL-2 family. Members of this family all share some receptor components with the IL-2 receptor. The IL-2 receptor consists of a non-transducing α-chain (IL-2Ra) and two signal-transducing chains, the IL-2Rβ (β common or βc) [49] and the IL-2Rγ chain (γ common or γc) [50]. The IL-2 α-chain does not belong to the family of cytokine receptors and is also known as tac. The receptors for IL-4, IL-7 and IL-9 consist of individual α-chains, all members of the cytokine receptor family, and share the signal-transducing IL-2Rγ chain [51–54]. IL-15 signals through both the IL-2Rβ and the IL-2Rγ chain [55].

IL-3, IL-5 GM-CSF family. The receptors for IL-3, IL-5 and granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF) all have unique α-components and share the common β-component (gp140) [56–59]. Based on

structural motifs of their extracellular domains, the above-mentioned members of the gp130 family, the IL-2R family and the IL-3R family belong to class I of cytokine receptors. An other family of class I receptors is the growth hormone family.

**GH family.** The receptors for growth hormone (GH), prolactin (Pro), erythropoietin (EPO) and thrombopoietin (TPO) do not share receptor components. The common feature of the members of this family is the activation by homodimerization of two identical molecules [60–62].

**IFN family.** This is the only family of class II cytokine receptors known so far. Interferon-α/β and interferon-γ are unrelated cytokines, yet their receptors share many common structural features and are in the same class II receptor family. The IFN-α/βR and the IFN-γR each consists of at least two receptor chains. Some authors refer to them as α- and β-chains, e.g. IFN-αRα-, IFN-αRβ-, IFN-γRα- and IFN-γRβ-chain. Numbering of the receptor chains is preferable, however, since all of them are signal transducers, unlike the class I cytokine receptors, where α-chains are non-signal-transducing, ligand-binding chains. IFN-α binds and signals through the IFN-αR1 [63] and the IFN-αR2 (also called IFN-α/βR) [64]. The IFN-γR consists of at least the IFN-γR1 [65] and the IFN-γR2 (also called IFN-γRβ or accessory factor) [66, 67]. The IL-10 receptor is structurally related to the interferon receptors [68].

**PTK receptors**

The receptors for epidermal growth factor (EGF), platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF), colony-stimulating factor 1 (CSF-1) and c-Kit have intracellular protein-tyrosine kinase domains. They are also called receptor tyrosine kinases. In the case of EGF, ligand binding results in homo- or heterodimerization of members of the EGF receptor family that contains four members: ErbB1 (EGFR), ErbB2, ErbB3 and ErbB4 [69]. Two related PDGF receptors, PDGFRα and PDGFRβ, form homo- and heterodimers upon binding of the three dimeric PDGF ligands (AA, AB, BB). The AA ligand binds to αα receptor dimers, the AB ligand to αα and αβ receptor dimers and the BB ligand to all three possible receptor dimers [69]. EGF, PDGF, CSF-1 and c-Kit all activate Jak1 and Jak2. It is not known if the PTK receptors phosphorylate the STAT proteins directly through their own kinase domain or if they use the Jak kinases for this purpose. Intracellular receptor tyrosine residues that provide the docking site for the STATs have not been identified.

**Seven transmembrane receptors**

Catecholamines, acetylcholine, gonadotropins, parathyroid

hormone, glucagon, angiotensin and odorants bind to receptors that span the cell membrane seven times. Stimulation of these receptors activates a group of coupling proteins known as G-proteins (GTP-binding proteins). G-proteins regulate a variety of enzymes, e.g. adenylate cyclase, phospholipase C beta, phospholipase A2 and phosphoinositide 3-kinase [70], which in turn regulate concentrations of second messengers such as cAMP and inositol phosphate. G-proteins are also known to regulate ion channels, e.g. muscarinic K+ channels and CA2+ channels, and thereby cellular ionic composition [71]. So far only angiotensin II has been shown to activate the Jak-STAT pathway [72]. It will be interesting to determine if the other seven transmembrane receptors also signal through the Jak-STAT pathway.

**The Jak kinases**

The first members of the Jak kinase family were discovered by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) amplification of cDNAs from the murine haemopoietic cell line FDC-P1 with degenerate oligonucleotide probes corresponding to two invariant amino acid sequence motifs within the highly conserved kinase domain of known protein-tyrosine kinases [16, 73] and by low-stringency screening of human B- and T-cell cDNA libraries with a c-fms tyrosine kinase probe [15]. The unique feature of this family of protein-tyrosine kinases is the presence of two tandem tyrosine kinase domains, inspiring the name Janus kinases (Fig. 1). The carboxy-terminal domain contains all the hallmarks of a protein-tyrosine kinase domain [74]. The amino-terminal domain cannot be classified as either a serine/threonine or a tyrosine kinase. The function of this second domain is not clear. Sequence comparison between the Jaks shows seven conserved regions designated JH1 to JH7 (Jak homology) [18]. JH1 and JH2 are the protein-tyrosine and the kinase-related domain respectively. No function has been assigned to any of the remaining domains, JH3–JH7. Jaks are cytoplasmic non-transmembrane tyrosine kinases with a molecular weight between 125 kDa and

**Table 1. Association of Jak kinases with receptors**

| Receptor chain       | Jak1      | Jak2      | Jak3      | Tyk2      |
|----------------------|-----------|-----------|-----------|-----------|
| IFN-αR1 [63]         |           | +[76, 77] |           |           |
| IFN-γR1 [65]         | +[78]     |           |           |           |
| IFN-γR2 [66, 67]     | +[39]     | +[39]     |           |           |
| gp130 [79]           | +[39]     | +[39]     |           |           |
| G-CSF [48]           | +[80]     |           |           |           |
| IL-2Rβ [49]          | +[52]     |           |           |           |
| IL-2Rγ [50]          |           |           |           | +[52, 53] |
| IL-3Rβ (gp140) [59]  |           | +[81]     |           |           |
| EpoR [82]            |           | +[62]     |           |           |
| GHR [83]             |           | +[61]     |           |           |
| ProlactinR           |           | +[84]     |           |           |
| Angiotensin II AT₁   |           | +[72]     |           |           |

© 1996 Blackwell Science Ltd, *European Journal of Clinical Investigation*, **26**, 1–12

Table 2. Amino acid sequence similarity and identity of Jak kinases

| Jak1 | mJak2 | Jak3 | Tyk2 |
|------|-------|------|------|
| Jak1 | 100%  | 42·2% | 47·2% |
| mJak2 | 65·2% | 100%  | 42·4% |
| Jak3 | 61·8% | 69·0% | 100%  |
| Tyk2 | 67·5% | 59·6% | 100%  |

Pairwise comparison was carried out by the program BESTFIT of Genetics Computer Group, Wisconsin. Percent identity is above the 100% line, percent similarity below.

---

Table 3. Amino acid sequence similarity and identity of STATs

| Stat1 | Stat2 | mStat3 | mStat4 | sStat5 | Stat6 |
|-------|-------|--------|--------|--------|-------|
| Stat1 | 100%  | 44·1%  | 52·8%  | 53·5%  | 32·2%  | 31·5%  |
| Stat2 | 62·3% | 100%   | 41·0%  | 40·9%  | 28·3%  | 30·2%  |
| mStat3 | 70·9% | 61·3%  | 100%   | 47·3%  | 30·5%  | 28·2%  |
| mStat4 | 71·6% | 60·0%  | 70·0%  | 100%   | 32·8%  | 30·3%  |
| sStat5 | 55·2% | 50·0%  | 53·2%  | 53·9%  | 100%   | 39·5%  |
| Stat6 | 52·3% | 52·2%  | 50·7%  | 51·6%  | 59·6%  | 100%   |

Pairwise comparison was carried out by the program BESTFIT of Genetics Computer Group, Wisconsin. Percent identity is above the 100% line, percent similarity below.

---

135 kDa. In contrast to other soluble tyrosine kinases, they lack a SH2 or SH3 domain. SH2 (src homology 2) and SH3 (src homology 3) domains are modular protein domains that mediate specific protein-protein interactions [75]. The Jak kinases are specifically associated with receptors by yet unknown domains (Table 1) [53, 61, 62, 76, 78, 80, 81, 84]. Four mammalian family members are cloned: Jak1 [16], Jak2 [16, 25], Jak3 [26, 85, 86] and Tyk2 [15]. The overall sequence identity of the mammalian Jaks is shown in Table 2. With the exception of Jak3 they are expressed in many tissues. The expression of Jak3 seems to be restricted to cells of myelocytic and lymphocytic lineages [26]. In addition to the mammalian Jaks, Jak kinase homologues have been found in chicken, fish (carp) [87], frogs (Xenopus laevis) and flies (Drosophila melanogaster) [88].

The STATs

STAT proteins are transcription factors. They can bind to specific sequence elements in the promoters of genes, and stimulate the transcription of these genes by RNA polymerase II complex. The STATs are, however, not always found in the nucleus, but shuttle between cytoplasm, cell membrane and nucleus. In unstimulated cells they are predominantly localized in the cytoplasm. Ligand binding and activation of the receptor-kinase complex results in the activation of the STATs at the cell membrane. Activated STATs dimerize and translocate into the nucleus. Because of their dual role they were named signal transducers and activators of transcription (STAT).

So far six mammalian STAT proteins have been cloned: Stat1, Stat2 [11, 12], Stat3 (APRF, acute phase response factor) [27, 30], Stat4 [27, 29], Stat5 (MGF, mammary gland factor) [31] and Stat6 (IL-4 Stat) [32]. The overall amino acid sequence identity between STATs is 28–54% (Table 3). There are several better conserved domains dispersed over the 750–850 amino acids of STAT proteins (Fig. 1). For some of them, functions could be assigned through deletion, mutation and domain-swapping studies. STAT proteins bind with their SH2 domains to phosphorylated tyrosine residues of transmembrane receptors [89–91]. The SH2 domains are located between amino acids 600 and 700. Once STATs are bound to the receptors, the receptor-associated Jak kinases phosphorylate them on a single tyrosine residue located carboxy terminal of the SH2 domain [92]. Changing this tyrosine to phenylalanine results in STATs that are no longer functional [92]. Two STATs dimerize through specific reciprocal SH2-phosphotyrosine interaction [89, 93] and translocate to the nucleus by an unknown mechanism. STAT dimers can also form complexes with other DNA-binding proteins, as is the case in the IFN-α stimulated gene factor 3 (ISGF3). ISGF3 is a complex of a Stat1-Stat2 heterodimer with a 48-kD protein related to the interferon regulatory factor (IRF) and Myb families of DNA-binding proteins [11, 12, 94, 95]. The STAT domains that interact with the 48-kD protein complex are unknown. After translocation into the nucleus, STATs bind DNA response elements in promoters of target genes. The putative DNA-binding domain lies between amino acids 400 and 500 [96]. After DNA binding STATs interact directly or indirectly with yet unknown components of the RNA polymerase II complex. Carboxy-terminal deletion studies of Stat1 and Stat2 have identified a transactivation domain carboxy-terminal of the SH2 domain [94, 97, 98]. A serine residue in the last 100 amino acids of Stat1 and Stat3 is phosphorylated by a cellular serine/threonine kinase and enhances the transcriptional activity of the STATs [99]. STAT proteins are inactivated by an as yet unidentified phosphatase. The domains for interactions with the serine kinase and the phosphatase are not known.

With the exception of Stat4, which is expressed mainly in thymus and testes [27, 29], STAT proteins are ubiquitous.

STAT homologues have been isolated from cDNA libraries from humans, mice, sheep, frogs and flies (Drosophila melanogaster). (R. Yan & J. E. Darnell Jr., unpublished observation).

---

The response elements

The DNA sequence elements in the promoters of genes that bind STAT proteins can be classified in two groups (Table 4). The prototype of the first class is the interferon-stimulated response element (ISRE). It was

suggested by sequence comparison of promoters of about 10 different genes that are transcriptionally induced by interferon-α. [1]. It has the consensus sequence AGTTTCNNTTTCNC/T (where N is any nucleotide). Transient transfection assays with reporter genes and mutation analysis of the element confirmed that it is the binding site for ISGF3 (interferon-stimulated gene factor 3) [7, 100].

The second class comprises the GAS-like response elements. The IFN-γ activation site (GAS) was originally identified as the IFN-γ response element in the promoter of the GBP gene [10]. An ever-growing number of GAS-like sequences have been identified in the meantime in promoters of genes activated by many different ESTs. Stat1 homodimers, Stat1-Stat3 dimers, Stat3 homodimers, Stat4 homodimers, Stat5 homodimers and Stat6 homodimers have been shown to bind to at least one of the GAS-like elements [28–32, 101]. All these elements have the palindromic core sequence TTNNNNNAA, but differed in the five inner nucleotides (Table 4). Variations of the inner nucleotides between different elements have been shown to influence the binding affinity towards specific STAT dimers. A Stat1 homodimer binds to the GAS element found in the promoter of the FcγR1 gene, whereas a Stat3 homodimer does not [96]. The Stat3 homodimer however binds the SIE (sis-inducible element) element found in the promoter of the c-fos gene [21]. Another study found that the spacing between the conserved TTs and AAs influences the selectivity of STAT-DNA binding [115]. Selective and specific activation of genes by

different STAT dimers could therefore stem from differential binding affinities to slightly different response elements.

Signal transduction through the pathway

Based on the cited data, the following model for the operation of the Jak-STAT pathway can be proposed (Fig. 2): binding of ESPs aggregates two or more transmembrane receptor chains (Fig. 2a). Protein tyrosine kinases of the Jak kinase family are associated with the intracellular parts of the receptor molecules or associate upon ligand binding. In either case, two or more kinases come in close proximity, transphosphorylate each other and thereby stimulate their kinase activity. The kinases also phosphorylate one or more tyrosine residues of the receptors (Fig. 2b). STAT proteins bind, via their SH2 domains, to the receptor phosphotyrosine residues, and become phosphorylated on a tyrosine residue immediately carboxy terminal of the SH2 domains. Two STAT proteins dimerize by reciprocal phosphotyrosine-SH2 domain interactions and translocate into the nucleus (Fig. 2c). They either bind as dimers to GAS-like response elements or, as is the case after IFN-α stimulation of cells, associate with other DNA-binding proteins to form multimeric DNA-binding complexes. Once bound to response elements of promoters they interact with yet unknown parts of the RNA polymerase II complex. As a result, the transcription rate of the corresponding gene is enhanced. Some STAT proteins are phosphorylated on serine as well, possibly by a mitogen activated protein (MAP) kinase [99]. Serine phosphorylated STATs are stronger transcriptional activators in chloramphenicol acetyl transferase (CAT) assays after transient transfection in COS cells [99].

Diversity and specificity

Most cells are able to secrete many different soluble signalling molecules with potentially different effects on the target cells, which in turn usually express many different receptors on their surface. In this highly complex network of intercellular communication diversity and specificity become two important aspects. If two different ligands elicit different responses within the same cell, the intracellular signal transduction must be specific. The Jak-STAT pathway with its chain of protein-protein interactions and the lack of soluble second-messenger molecules has the potential for specific signal transduction from the cell membrane to the response elements in the promoters of genes. Give the number of different receptors, Jaks and STATs, the system is also very versatile. Tables 5 and 6 are current lists of Jak and STAT activation by different ESPs.

Two critical points of specificity are the selective activation of STATs by ligands and the specific binding of STATs to slightly different response elements.


Table 4. Response elements

| Gene                     | Nucleotide sequence     | Reference |
|--------------------------|-------------------------|-----------|
| IFN-α-stimulated response elements (ISRE)          |           |           |
| ISG54                    | AGTTTCACTTTCCC         | 7         |
| ISG15                    | AGTTTCGGTTTCCC         | 7         |
| 6-16                     | AGTTTCATTTTCCC         | 102       |
| 9-27                     | AGTTTCTATTTCCCT        | 103       |
| OAS                      | GGTTCGTTTCCCTC         | 104       |
| GBP                      | ACTTTCAGTTTCAT         | 10        |
| Consensus                | AGTTTCNNTTTCNC/T        |           |
| GAS-like elements        |                         |           |
| GBP                      | TTACTCTAA              | 10        |
| cFos-SIE                 | TTCGCGTCA              | 105       |
| M67-SIE                  | TTCGCGTAA              | 105       |
| Ly-6A/E                  | TTCCTGTAA              | 106       |
| FcγR1 (GRR)              | TTCGAGAA               | 107       |
| ICSPB                    | TTCTCGGAA              | 108       |
| IRF1                     | TTCGCGAA               | 109       |
| ICAM-1                   | TTCGCGAA               | 109       |
| IFP53                    | TTCTCAGAA              | 110       |
| MIG                      | TTACTATAA              | 111       |
| α2-Macroglobulin         | TTCGCGTAA              | 112       |
| Acid glycoprotein        | TTCGAGAA               | 112       |
| Rat β-casein gene        | TTCTTGGAA              | 113       |
| Bovine β-casein gene     | TTCTAGGAA              | 114       |
| Consensus                | TTNNNNNAA              |           |

© 1996 Blackwell Science Ltd, European Journal of Clinical Investigation, 26, 1–12

Stat1 can be precipitated with a tyrosine-phosphorylated peptide whose sequence is identical to the residues surrounding tyrosine 440 of the IFN-γ receptor but not by control peptides [91]. Domain-swapping experiments with cytokine receptors confirm these results; erythropoietin normally does not activate Stat3, but after grafting phosphotyrosine motifs from the gp130 and the LIF receptor molecule (known activators of Stat3) onto an erythropoietin receptor molecule, Stat3 was activated by erythropoietin [90]. The Jak kinases seem to be non-specific with regard to different STATs: Stat3 can be activated by any two of the three kinases Jak1, Jak2 and Tyk2 [0]. Tyrosine 690 of Stat2 can be phosphorylated by Jak1/Jak2 as well as by Jak1/Tyk2 once it is brought in contact with the kinases [89]. Given the similarity of the GAS-like response elements (Table 4), is it possible that different STATs distinguish between these elements and therefore specifically activate certain genes? As outlined above, at least for certain response elements bound by Stat1 and Stat3, the answer seems to be yes. Stat5 binds with clearly distinct affinities to a number of GAS-like response elements tested [126]. The biological consequences of these different binding affinities are much less clear. Do different STATs activate different genes? The best-known situation is the interferon-activated gene transcription: IFN-α activates Stat1, Stat2 and Stat3; IFN-γ activates Stat1 only. The two ligands transcriptionally stimulate an overlapping but distinct set of genes [3,4,6,128]. For most other ligands, a systematic search of the genes transcriptionally activated by them has not been reported. Much work has to be done to clarify this central issue of differential gene activation by different ligands, and more experiments have to be made to allow generalization of the principles that govern specificity of STAT activation and STAT-DNA interaction.

### Pathophysiological and clinical studies

The Jak-STAT pathway has been studied mainly in cell culture, and little is known about its role in physiology and pathophysiology in animals and humans. In mice it could be shown that Stat1, Stat3 and Stat5 are activated in liver cells minutes after intraperitoneal injection of EGF. In contrast, Stat1 but not Stat3 is activated minutes after intraperitoneal injection of IFN-γ and Stat3 but not Stat1 is activated 45 min after intraperitoneal injection of lipopolysaccharide (LPS) [22,127,129]. LPS injection mimics a bacterial peritonitis. LPS-stimulated peritoneal macrophages secrete IL-6, which is transported to the liver, where it stimulates the transcriptional activation of acute phase response genes, partly through activation of Stat3. In the above-cited studies, STAT activation *in vivo* is apparently highly specific: Stat1 and Stat3 can be activated separately. We will certainly learn much more about the role of the Jak-STAT pathway *in vivo* through future experiments with animals and through analysis of mice with genetic defects of various components of the Jak-STAT pathway. Several groups are presently trying to inactivate one

Figure 2. Ligand (L), Jak kinases (J), STATs (S), phosphate groups (P), IFN-γ-activated sequence (GAS). See ‘Signal transduction through the pathway’ for explanation.

Specificity during the activation process of the STATs at the receptor-kinase complex seems to come from highly specific interactions between the SH2 domains of the STATs and the phosphotyrosine residues on the receptors. An artificial construct consisting of a Stat2 molecule with the SH2 domain of Stat1 could be activated by IFN-γ, whereas the wild-type Stat2 is not (Table 6) [89].

Table 5. Activation of Jak kinases

| Ligand               | Jak1         | Jak2         | Jak3         | Tyk2         |
|----------------------|--------------|--------------|--------------|--------------|
| **Interferon family** |              |              |              |              |
| IFN-α                | +[18]        |              | +[17]        |              |
| IFG-γ                | +[18]        | +[19]        |              |              |
| IL-10                | +            | +            |              | +            |
|                      |              |              |              |              |
| **gp130 family**     |              |              |              |              |
| IL-6                 | +[116]       | +[116]       | +[116]       |              |
| IL-11                | +            |              |              |              |
| OnM                  | (+)[116]     | +[116]       | (+)[116]     |              |
| LIF                  | +[116]       | +[116]       |              |              |
| CNTF                 | +[116]       | +[116]       |              |              |
| G-CSF                | +[80]        | +            |              |              |
| IL-12                | +[117]       |              | +[117]       |              |
|                      |              |              |              |              |
| **IL-2 family**      |              |              |              |              |
| IL-2                 | +[85, 118]   | +[85, 118]   |              |              |
| IL-4                 | +[85]        | +[85]        |              |              |
| IL-7                 | +[53]        | +[54]        |              |              |
| IL-9                 | +[53]        | +[53]        |              |              |
| IL-13                | +            | -            |              |              |
| IL-15                | +            | +            |              |              |
|                      |              |              |              |              |
| **gp140 family**     |              |              |              |              |
| IL-3                 | +[25, 119]   |              |              |              |
| IL-5                 | +[120]       |              |              |              |
| GM-CSF               | +[81]        |              |              |              |
|                      |              |              |              |              |
| **GH family**        |              |              |              |              |
| Erythropoietin       | +[62]        |              |              |              |
| Growth hormone       | +[61]        |              |              |              |
| Prolactin            | +[84, 121]   |              |              |              |
| Thrombopoietin       | +[122]       |              |              |              |
|                      |              |              |              |              |
| **Receptor tyrosine kinases** |          |              |              |              |
| EGF                  | +[20]        | +            |              |              |
| PDGF                 | +            | +            |              |              |
| CSF-1                | +            | +            |              |              |
| cKit                 | +            | +            |              |              |
|                      |              |              |              |              |
| **G-protein-coupled receptors** |      |              |              |              |
| Angiotensin II       | +[72]        |              | +[72]        |              |

or the other gene for a STAT family member in mice by homologous recombination in embryonic stem cells.

In a clinical study published recently, synovial fluids from patients with inflammatory arthritis were shown to induce activation of Stat3 in monocytes [130]. Stat1 was not activated. This result helps to clarify the controversial role of IFN-γ in monocyte activation. IFN-γ activates Stat1 in all cell lines tested so far. Lack of activation of Stat1 by the synovial fluids makes a significant role for IFN-γ in monocyte activation in inflamed joints very unlikely. The study also enhances our understanding of the pathogenesis of inflammatory arthritis by identifying one of the intracellular signal pathways that become activated in inflammatory cells. One can speculate that drugs will be found in the future which specifically inhibit such signal transduction

pathways. Knowledge of the role the individual Jaks and STATs in pathogenic processes in humans is a prerequisite of rational testing of such drugs in patients.

Examples of a human disease caused by a defective signal transduction through the Jak-STAT pathway are X-linked combined immunodeficiency (XCID) and X-linked severe combined immunodeficiency (XSCID). In both diseases Jak3 activation is impaired by mutations of the IL-2Rγ chain. Carboxy-terminal truncations of this receptor chain completely prevent association with Jak3 and result in X-linked severe combined immunodeficiency (XSCID). A point mutation (leucine 271) of the receptor that impairs but not completely abolishes Jak3 association was found in patient with the less severe X-linked combined immunodeficiency (CID) [52, 53].

Table 6. Activation of STATs

| Ligand               | Stat1       | Stat2       | Stat3       | Stat4       | Stat5       | Stat6       |
|----------------------|-------------|-------------|-------------|-------------|-------------|-------------|
| **Interferon family** |             |             |             |             |             |             |
| IFN-α                | +[13]       | +[13]       | +[123]      |             |             |             |
| IFN-γ                | +[14]       |             |             |             |             |             |
| IL-10                | +[24]       |             |             |             |             |             |
| **gp130 family**     |             |             |             |             |             |             |
| IL-6                 | (+)         |             | +[28]       |             |             |             |
| IL-11                | (+)         |             |             |             |             |             |
| OnM                  | +/-         |             |             |             |             |             |
| LIF                  | +/-         |             |             |             |             |             |
| CNTF                 | +/- [124]   |             |             |             |             |             |
| G-CSF                | +/-         |             |             |             |             |             |
| IL-12                |             |             |             |             | +[101]      |             |
| **IL-2 family**      |             |             |             |             |             |             |
| IL-2                 | +[123]      | +[125]      |             |             |             | +[32]       |
| IL-4                 |             |             |             |             |             |             |
| IL-7                 |             | +           |             | +           |             |             |
| IL-15                |             | +           |             | +           |             |             |
| **gp140 family**     |             |             |             |             |             |             |
| IL-3                 |             |             | +[126]      |             | +[131]      |             |
| IL-5                 |             |             | +[126]      |             |             |             |
| GM-CSF               |             |             | +[126]      |             |             |             |
| **GH family**        |             |             |             |             |             |             |
| Erythropoietin       |             |             | +[132]      |             |             |             |
| Growth hormone       |             |             | +[132]      |             |             |             |
| Prolactin            |             |             | +[132]      |             |             |             |
| Thrombopoietin       |             |             | +[133]      |             |             |             |
| **Receptor tyrosine kinases** |             |             |             |             |             |             |
| EGF                  | +[20, 21, 23] | +[28]       |             | +[127]      |             |             |
| PDGF                 | +[23]       |             | +           |             |             |             |
| CSF-1                | +[23]       |             | +           |             |             |             |
| **G-protein-coupled** |             |             |             |             |             |             |
| Angiotensin II       | +[72]       | +[72]       |             |             |             |             |

---

### Conclusion

The Jak-STAT pathway is a recently discovered intracellular signal transduction pathway used by many hormones, growth factors, cytokines and interleukins for specific transcriptional activation of genes. In contrast to the known second-messenger systems, the Jak-STAT pathway consists of a chain of specific protein-protein interactions leading to a specific protein-DNA interaction in the nucleus. In a short time, many of the components of the Jak-STAT pathway and their basic interactions with each other have been described. Further advances in our understanding of the molecular basis of the specific protein-protein interactions that characterize this pathway will hopefully lead to the development of drugs that specifically inhibit or stimulate individual pathways. The possible control over gene expression in cells by such drugs could be an important tool in medicine, allowing therapeutic manipulation of cell behaviour.

and phenotype. The knowledge and the research tools (antibodies, gel-shift probes, cDNAs) generated by basic research enable the exploration of the role of the Jak-STAT pathway in physiology and in human disease.

### Acknowledgments

I would like to thank James E. Darnell Jr for generous advice and Radek C. Skoda for critical reading of the manuscript and helpful discussions. This study was supported by Schweizerische Stiftung für Medizinisch-Biologische Stipendien.

### References

1. Darnell Jr JE, Kerr IM, Stark GR. Jak-STAT pathways and transcriptional activation in response to IFNs and other extracellular signaling proteins. Science 1994; 264: 1415–21.

2 Levy D, Darnell Jr JE. Interferon-dependent transcriptional activation: signal transduction without second messenger involvement? New Biol 1990; 2:923–8.

3 Larner AC, Jonak G, Cheng YS, Korant B, Knight E, Darnell Jr JE. Transcriptional induction of two genes in human cells by beta interferon. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1984; 81:6733–7.

4 Kelly JM, Gilbert CS, Stark GR, Kerr IM. Differential regulation of interferon-induced mRNAs and c-myc mRNA by alpha- and gamma-interferons. Eur J Biochem 1985; 153:367–71.

5 Friedman RL, Stark GR. alpha-Interferon-induced transcription of HLA and metallothionein genes containing homologous upstream sequences. Natur 1985; 314:637–9.

6 Larner AC, Chaudhuri A, Darnell Jr JE. Transcriptional induction by interferon. New protein(s) determine the extent and length of the induction. J Biol Chem 1986; 261:453–9.

7 Reich N, Evans B, Levy D, Fahey D, Knight EJ, Darnell Jr JE. Interferon-induced transcription of a gene encoding a 15-kDa protein depends on an upstream enhancer element. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1987; 84:6394–8.

8 Levy D, Larner A, Chaudhuri A, Babiss LE, Darnell Jr JE. Interferon-stimulated transcription: isolation of an inducible gene and identification of its regulatory region. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1986; 83:8929–33.

9 Kessler, DS, Levey DE, Darnell Jr JE. Two interferon-induced nuclear factors bind a single promoter element in interferon-stimulated genes. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1988; 85:8521–5.

10 Lew DJ, Decker T, Strehlow I, Darnell Jr J. Overlapping elements in the guanylate-binding protein gene promoter mediate transcriptional induction by alpha and gamma interferons. Mol Cell Biol 1991; 11:182–91.

11 Schindler C, Fu XY, Improta T, Aebersold R, Darnell Jr JE. Proteins of transcription factor ISGF-3: one gene encodes the 91-and 84-kDa ISGF-3 proteins that are activated by interferon alpha. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1992; 89:7836–9.

12 Fu XY, Schindler C, Improta T, Aebersold R, Darnell Jr JE. The proteins of ISGF-3, the interferon alpha-induced transcriptional activator, define a gene family involved in signal transduction. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1992; 89:7840–3.

13 Schindler C, Shuai K, Prezioso VR, Darnell Jr JE. Interferon-dependent tyrosine phosphorylation of a latent cytoplasmic transcription factor. Science 1992; 257:809–13.

14 Shuai K, Schindler C, Prezioso VR, Darnell Jr JE. Activation of transcription by IFN-gamma: tyrosine phosphorylation of a 91-kD DNA binding protein. Science 1992; 258:1808–12.

15 Firmbach-Kraft I, Byers M, Shows T, Dalla-Favera R, Krolewski JJ. Tyk2, prototype of a novel class of non-receptor tyrosine kinase genes. Oncogene 1990; 5:1329–36.

16 Wilks AF, Harpur AG, Kurban RR, Ralph SJ, Zurcher G, Ziemiccki A. Two novel protein-tyrosine kinases, each with a second phosphotransferase-related catalytic domain, define a new class of protein kinase. Mol Cell Biol 1991; 11:2057–65.

17 Velazquez L, Fellous M, Stark GR, Pellegrini S. A protein tyrosine kinase in the interferon alpha/beta signaling pathway. Cell 1992; 70:313–22.

18 Muller M, Briscoe J, Laxton C, Guschin Det al. The protein tyrosine kinase Jak1 complements defects in interferon-alpha/ beta and -gamma signal transduction. Nature 1993; 366:129–35.

19 Watling D, Guschin D, Muller Met al. Complementation by the protein tyrosine kinase JAK2 of a mutant cell line defective in the interferon-gamma signal transduction pathway. Nature 1993; 366:166–70.

20 Shuai K, Ziemiccki A, Wilks AF et al. Polypeptide signalling to the nucleus through tyrosine phosphorylation of Jak and Stat proteins. Nature 1993; 366:580–3.

21 Sadowski HB, Shuai K, Darnell Jr JE, Gilman MZ. A common nuclear signal transduction pathway activated by growth factor and cytokine receptors. Science 1993; 261:1739–44.

22 Ruff-Jamison S, Chen K, Cohen S. Induction by EFG and interferon-gamma of tyrosine phosphorylated DNA binding proteins in mouse liver nuclei. Science 1993; 261:1733–6.

23 Silvennoinen O, Schindler C, Schlessinger J, Levy DE. Ras-independent growth factor signaling by transcription factor tyrosine phosphorylation. Science 1993; 261:1736–9.


24 Larner AC, David M, Feldman GM et al. Tyrosine phosphorylation of DNA binding proteins by multiple cytokines. Science 1993; 261:1730–3.

25 Silvennoinen O, Witthuhn BA, Quelle FW, Cleveland JL, Yi T, Ihle JN. Structure of the murine Jak2 protein-tyrosine kinase and its role in interleukin 3 signal transduction. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1993; 90:8429–33.

26 Kawamura M, McVicar DW, Johnston JA et al. Molecular cloning of L-JAK, a Janus family protein-tyrosine kinase expressed in natural killer cells and activated leukocytes. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1994; 91:6374–8.

27 Zhong Z, Wen Z, Darnell Jr JE. Stat3 and Stat4: members of the family of signal transducers and activators of transcription. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1994; 91:4806–10.

28 Zhong Z, Wen Z, Darnell Jr JE. Stat3: a STAT family member activated by tyrosine phosphorylation in response to epidermal growth factor and interleukin-6. Science 1994; 264:95–8.

29 Yamamoto K, Quelle FW, Thierfelder WE et al. Stat4, a novel gamma interferon activation site-binding protein expressed in early myeloid differentiation. Mol Cell Biol 1994; 14:4342–9.

30 Akira S, Nishio Y, Inoue Met al. Molecular cloning of APRF, a novel IFN-stimulated gene factor 3 p91-related transcription factor involved in the gp130-mediated signaling pathway. Cell 1994; 77:63–71.

31 Wakao H, Gouilleux F, Groner B. Mammary gland factor (MGF) is a novel member of the cytokine regulated transcription factor gene family and confers the prolactin response. EMBO J 1994; 13:2182–91.

32 Hou, J, Schindler U, Henzel WJ, Ho TC, Brassuer M, McKnight SL. An interleukin-4-induced transcription factor: IL-4 Stat. Science 1994; 265:1701–6.

33 Bazan JF. Structural design and molecular evolution of a cytokine receptor superfamily. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1990; 87: 6934–8.

34 Tanaguchi T. Cytokine signaling through nonreceptor protein tyrosine kinases. Science 1995; 268:251–5.

35 Cosman D. The hematopoietin receptor superfamily. Cytokine 1993; 5:95–106.

36 Kishimoto T, Taga T, Akira S. Cytokine signal transduction. Cell 1994; 76:253–62.

37 Murakami M, Narazaki M, Hibi Met al. Critical cytoplasmic region of the interleukin 6 signal transducer gp130 is conserved in the cytokine receptor family. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1991; 88:11349–53.

38 Ziegler SF, Bird TA, Morella KK, Mosley B, Gearing DP, Baumann H. Distinct regions of the human granulocyte-colony-stimulating factor receptor cytoplasmic domain are required for proliferation and gene induction. Mol Cell Biol 1993; 13:2384–90.

39 Tanner JW, Chen W, Young RL, Longmore GD, Shaw AS. The conserved box 1 motif of cytokine receptors is required for association with JAK kinases. J Biol Chem 1995; 270:6523–30.

40 Yamasaki K, Taga T, Hirata Yet al. Cloning and expression of the human interleukin-6 (BSF-2/IFN beta 2) receptor. Science 1988; 241:825–8.

41 Murakami M, Hibi M, Nakagawa Net al. IL-6-induced homo-dimerization of gp130 and associated activation of a tyrosine kinase. Science 1993; 260:1808–10.

42 Gearing DP, Thut CJ, VandeBos Tet al. Leukemia inhibitory factor receptor is structurally related to the IL-6 signal transducer, gp130. EMBO J 1991; 10:2839–48.

43 Davis S, Aldrich TH, Valenzuela DM et al. The receptor for ciliary neurotrophic factor. Science 1991; 253:59–63.

44 Davis S, Aldrich TH, Stahl Net al. LIFR beta and gp130 as heterodimerizing signal transducers of the tripartite CNTF receptor. Science 1993; 260:1805–8.

45 Yin T, Taga T, Tsang ML-S, Yasukawa K, Kishimoto T, Yang T-C. Involvement of IL-6 transducer gp130 in IL-11-mediated signal transduction. J Immunol 1993; 151:2555–61.

46 Hilton DJ, Hilton AA, Raicevic A et al. Cloning of murine IL-11 receptor alpha chain; requirement for gp130 for high affinity binding and signal transduction. EMBO J 1994; 13:4765–75.

47 Chua AO, Chizzonite R, Desai BB *et al.* Expression cloning of a human IL-12 receptor component. A new member of the cytokine receptor superfamily with strong homology to gp130. J Immunol 1994;153:128–36.

48 Fukunaga R, Ishizaka-Ikeda E, Seto Y, Nagata S. Expression cloning of a receptor for murine granulocyte colony-stimulating factor. Cell 1990;61:341–50.

49 Hatakeyama M, Tsudo M, Minamoto S *et al.* Interleukin-2 receptor beta chain gene: generation of three receptor forms by clone human alpha and beta cDNAs. Science 1989;244:551–6.

50 Takeshita T, Asao H, Ohtani K *et al.* Cloning of the gamma chain of the human IL-2 receptor. Science 1992;257:379–82.

51 Kondo M, Takeshita T, Higuchi M *et al.* Functional participation of the IL-2 receptor gamma chain in IL-7 receptor complexes. Science 1994;263:1453–4.

52 Miyazaki T, Kawahara A, Fujii H *et al.* Functional activation of Jak1 and Jak3 by selective association with IL-2 receptor subunits. Science 1994;266:1045–7.

53 Russell SM, Johnston JA, Noguchi M *et al.* Interaction of IL-2Rbeta and gamma c chains with Jak1 and Jak3: Implications for XSCID and XCID. Science 1994;266:1042–5.

54 Boussiotis VA, Barber DL, Nakarai T *et al.* Prevention of T cell anergy by signaling through the gamma c chain of the IL-2 receptor. Science 1994;266:1039–42.

55 Giri JG, Ahdieh M, Eisenman J *et al.* Utilization of the beta and gamma chains of the IL-2 receptor by the novel cytokine IL-15. EMBO J 1994;13:2822–30.

56 Itoh N, Yonehara S, Schreurs J *et al.* Cloning of an interleukin-3 receptor gene: a member of a distinct receptor gene family. Science 1990;247:324–7.

57 Murata Y, Takaki S, Migita M, Kikuchi Y, Tominaga A, Takatsu K. Molecular cloning and expression of the human interleukin 5 receptor. J Exp Med 1992;175:341–51.

58 Gearing DP, King JA, Gough NM, Nicola NA. Expression cloning of a receptor for human granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor. EMBO J 1989;8:3667–76.

59 Hayashida K, Kitamura T, Gorman DM, Arai K, Yokota T, Miyajima A. Molecular cloning of a second subunit of the receptor for human granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF): reconstitution of a high-affinity GM-CSF receptor. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1990;87:9655–9.

60 DeVos AM, Ultsch M, Kossiakoff AA. Human growth hormone and extracellular domain of its receptor: crystal structure of the complex. Science 1992;255:306–12.

61 Argetsinger LS, Campbell GS, Yang X *et al.* Identification of JAK2 as a growth hormone receptor-associated tyrosine kinase. Cell 1993;74:237–44.

62 Witthuhn BA, Quelle FW, Silvennoinen O *et al.* JAK2 associates with the erythropoietin receptor and is tyrosine phosphorylated and activated following stimulation with erythropoietin. Cell 1993;74:227–36.

63 Uze G, Lutfalla G, Gresser I. Genetic transfer of a functional human interferon alpha receptor into mouse cells: cloning and expression of its cDNA. Cell 1990;60:225–34.

64 Novick D, Cohen B, Rubinstein M. The human interferon alpha/beta receptor: characterization and molecular cloning. Cell 1994;77:391–400.

65 Aguet M, Dembic Z, Merlin G. Molecular cloning and expression of the human interferon-gamma receptor. Cell 1988;55:273–80.

66 Hemmi S, Bohni R, Stark G, DiMarco F, Aguet M. A novel member of the interferon receptor family complements functionality of the murine interferon gamma receptor in human cells. Cell 1994;76:803–10.

67 Soh J, Donnelly RJ, Kotenko S *et al.* Identification and sequence of an accessory factor required for activation of the human interferon gamma receptor. Cell 1994;76:793–802.

68 Ho AS, Liu Y, Khan TA, Hsu DH, Bazan JF, Moore KW. A receptor for interleukin 10 is related to interferon receptors. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1993;90:11267–71.

69 Lemmon MA, Schlessinger J. Regulation of signal transduction and signal diversity by receptor oligomerization. Trends Biochem Sci 1994;19:459–63.

70 Clapham DE, Neer EJ. New roles for G protein beta gamma dimers in transmembrane signaling. Nature 1993;365:403–6.

71 Neer EJ. Heterotrimeric G proteins: Organizers of transmembrane signals. Cell 1995;80:249–57.

72 Marrero MB, Schieffer B, Paxton WG *et al.* Direct stimulation of Jak/STAT pathway by the angiotensin II AT1 receptor. Nature 1995;375:247–50.

73 Wilks AF. Two putative protein-tyrosine kinases identified by application of the polymerase chain reaction. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1989;86:1603–7.

74 Hanks SK, Quinn AM, Hunter T. The protein kinase family: conserved features and deduced phylogeny of the catalytic domains. Science 1988;241:42–52.

75 Pawson T. Protein modules and signaling networks. Nature 1995;373:573–80.

76 Abramovich C, Shulman LM, Tatovitski E *et al.* Differential tyrosine phosphorylation of the IFNAR chain of the type I interferon receptor and of an associated surface protein in response to IFN-alpha and IFN-beta. EMBO J 1994;13:5871–7.

77 Colamonici OR, Uyttendaele H, Domanski P, Yan H, Krolewski JJ. p135tyk2, an interferon-alpha-activated tyrosine kinase, is physically associated with an interferon-alpha receptor. J Biol Chem 1994;269:3518–22.

78 Igarashi K, Garotta G, Ozmen L *et al.* Interferon-gamma induces tyrosine phosphorylation of interferon-gamma receptor and regulated association of protein tyrosine kinases, Jak1 and Jak2, with its receptor. J Biol Chem 1994;269:14333–6.

79 Hibi M, Murakami M, Saito M, Hirano T, Taga T, Kishimoto T. Molecular cloning and expression of an IL-6 signal transducer, gp130. Cell 1990;63:1149–57.

80 Nicholson SE, Oates AC, Harpur AG, Ziemiecki A, Wilks AF, Layton JE. Tyrosine kinase JAK1 is associated with the granulocyte-colony-stimulating factor receptor and both become tyrosine-phosphorylated after receptor activation. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1994;91:2985–8.

81 Quelle FW, Sato N, Witthuhn BA *et al.* JAK2 associates with the beta c chain of the receptor for granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor, and its activation requires the membrane-proximal region. Mol Cell Biol 1994;14:4335–41.

82 D'Andrea AD, Lodish HF, Wong GW. Expression cloning of the murine erythropoietin receptor. Cell 1989;57:277.

83 Leung DW, Spencer SA, Cachianes G *et al.* Growth hormone receptor and serum binding protein: purification, cloning and expression. Nature 1987;330:537–43.

84 Rui H, Kirken RA, Farrar WL. Activation of receptor-associated tyrosine kinase JAK2 by prolactin. J. Biol Chem 1994;269:5364–8.

85 Witthuhn BA, Silvennoinen O, Miura O *et al.* Involvement of the Jak-3 Janus kinase in signalling by interleukins 2 and 4 in lymphoid and myeloid cells. Nature 1994;370:153–7.

86 Rane SG, Reddy EP. Jak3: a novel Jak kinase associated with terminal differentiation of hematopoietic cells. Oncogene 1994;9:2415–23.

87 Chan M-S, Chang G-D, Huang F-L, Lo T-B. Molecular cloning and expression of carp jak1 which is the fifth member of the Jak family. Genbank Entry CYIFJAK 1993.

88 Binari R, Perrimon N. Stripe-specific regulation of pairrule genes by hopscotch, a putative Jak family tyrosine kinase in *Drosophila*. Genes Dev 1994;8:300–312.

89 Heim MH, Kerr IM, Stark GR, Darnell Jr JE. Contribution of STAT SH2 groups to specific interferon signaling by the Jak-STAT pathway. Science 1995;267:1347–9.

90 Stahl N, Farruggella TJ, Boulton TG, Zhong Z, Darnell Jr JE, Yancopoulos GD. Choice of STATs and other substrates specified by modular tyrosine-based motifs in cytokine receptors. Science 1995;267:1349–53.

91 Greenlund AC, Farrar MA, Viviano BL, Schreiber RD. Ligand-induced IFN gamma receptor tyrosine phosphorylation couples the receptor to its signal transduction system (p91). EMBO J 1994;13:1591–600.

92 Shuai K, Stark GR, Kerr IM, Darnell Jr JE. A single phosphotyrosine residue of Stat91 required for gene activation by interferon-gamma. Science 1993;261:1744–6.

93 Shuai K, Horvath CM, Huang LH, Qureshi SA, Cowburn D, Darnell Jr JE. Interferon activation of the transcription factor Stat91 involves dimerization through SH2-phosphotyrosyl peptide interactions. Cell 1994;76:821–8.

94 Veals SA, Schindler C, Leonard Det al. Subunit of an alpha-interferon-responsive transcription factor related to interferon regulatory factor and Myb families of DNA-binding proteins. Mol Cell Biol 1992;12:3315–24.

95 Qureshi S, Georgieff M, Darnell Jr JE. Tyrosine-phosphorylated Stat1 and Stat2 plus a 48-kDa protein all contact DNA in forming interferon-stimulated-gene factor 3. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1995;92:3829–33.

96 Horvath CM, Wen Z, Darnell Jr JE. A Stat protein domain that determines DNA sequence recognition suggests a novel DNA binding domain. Genes Dev 1995;9:984–94.

97 Muller M, Laxton C, Briscoe Jet al. Complementation of a mutant cell line: central role of the 91 kDa polypeptide of ISGF3 in the interferon-alpha and -gamma signal transduction pathways. EMBO J 1993;12:4221–8.

98 Qureshi SA, Leung S, Kerr IM, Stark GR, Darnell Jr JE. Function of Stat2 protein in transcriptional activation by IFN alpha. 1995; Mol Cell Biol.

99 Wen Z, Zhong Z, Darnell Jr JE. Maximal activation of transcription by Stat1 and Stat3 requires both tyrosine and serine phosphorylation. Cell 1995;82:241–50 (in press).

100 Levy DE, Kessler DS, Pine R, Reich N, Darnell Jr JE. Interferon-induced nuclear factors that bind a shared promoter element correlate with positive and negative transcriptional control. Genes Dev 1988;2:383–93.

101 Jacobson NG, Szabo SJ, Weber-Nordt RM et al. Interleukin 12 signaling in T helper type 1 (Th1) cells involves tyrosine phosphorylation of signal transducer and activator of transcription (Stat) 3 and Stat4. J Exp Med 1995;181:1755–62.

102 Porter AC, Chernajovsky Y, Dale TC, Gilbert CS, Stark GR, Kerr IM. Interferon response element of the human gene 6-16. EMBO J 1988;7:85–92.

103 Reid LE, Brasnett AH, Gilbert CS et al. A single DNA response element can confer inducibility by both alpha-and gamma-interferons. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1989;86:840–4.

104 Benech P, Vigneron M, Peretz D, Revel M, Chebath J. Interferon-responsive regulatory elements in the promoter of the human 2',5'-oligo(A) synthetase gene. Mol Cell Biol 1987;7:4498–504.

105 Wagner BJ, Hayes TE, Hoban CJ, Cochran BH. The SIF binding element confers sis/PDGF inducibility onto the c-fos promoter. EMBO J 1990;9:4477–84.

106 Khan KD, Shuai K, Lindwall G, Maher SE, Darnell Jr JE, Bothwell AL. Induction of the Ly-6A/E gene by interferon alpha/beta and gamma requires a DNA element to which a tyrosine-phosphorylated 91-kDa protein binds. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1993;90:6806–10.

107 Pearse NR, Feinman R, Ravetch JV. Characterization of the promoter of the human gene encoding the high-affinity IgG receptor: Transcriptional induction by gamma-interferon is mediated through common DNA response elements. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1991;88:11305–9.

108 Kanno Y, Kozak CA, Schindler C et al. The genomic structure of the murine ICSBP gene reveals the presence of the gamma interferon-responsive element, to which an ISGF3 alpha subunit (or similar) molecule binds. Mol Cell Biol 1993;13:3951–63.

109 Yuan J, Wegenka UM, Lutticken C et al. The signalling pathways for interleukin-6 and gamma interferon converge by the activation of different transcription factors which bind to common responsive DNA elements. Mol Cel Biol 1994;14:1657–68.

110 Strehlow I, Seegert D, Frick C et al. The gene encoding IFP 53/tryptophanyl-tRNA synthetase is regulated by the gamma-interferon activation factor. J Biol Chem 1993;268:16590–5.

111 Wong P, Severns CW, Guyer NB, Wright TM. A unique palindromic element mediates gamma interferon induction of mig gene expression. Mol Cell Biol 1994;14:914–22.

112 Wegenka UM, Buschmann J, Lutticken C, Heinrich PC, Horn F. Acute-phase response factor, a nuclear factor binding to acute-

phase response elements, is rapidly activated by interleukin-6 at the posttranslational level. Mol Cell Biol 1993;13:276–88.

113 Schmitt NM, Doppler W, Ball RK, Groner B. Beta-casein gene promoter activity is regulated by the hormone-mediated relief of transcriptional repression and a mammary-gland-specific nuclear factor. Mol Cell Biol 1991;11:3745–55.

114 Gorodetsky SI, Tkach TM, Kapelinskaia TV. Isolation and characterization of the Bos taurus beta-casein gene. Gene 1988;66:87–96.

115 Seidel HM, Milocco LH, Lamb P, Darnell Jr JE, Stein RB, Rosen J. Spacing of palindromic half sites as a determinant of selective Stat (signal transducers and activators of transcription) DNA binding and transcriptional activity. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1995;92:3041–5.

116 Stahl N, Boulton TG, Farruggella Tet al. Association and activation of Jak-Tyk kinases by CNTF-LIF-OSM-IL-6 beta receptor components. Science 1994;263:92–95.

117 Bacon CM, McVicar DW, Oraldo JR et al. Interleukin 12 (IL-12) induces tyrosine phosphorylation of Jak2 and Tyk2: differential use of Janus family tyrosine kinases by IL-2 and IL-12. J Exp Med 1995;181:399–404.

118 Johnston JA, Kawamura M, Kirken RA et al. Phosphorylation and activation of the Jak-3 Janus kinase in response to interleukin-2. Nature 1994;370:151–3.

119 Sato N, Sakamaki K, Terada N, Arai K, Miyajima A. Signal transduction by the high-affinity GM-CSF receptor: two distinct cytoplasmic regions of the common beta subunit responsible for different signaling. EMBO J 1993;12:4181–9.

120 Takaki S, Kanazawa H, Shiiba M, Takatsu K. A critical cytoplasmic domain of the interleukin-5 (IL-5) receptor alpha chain and its function in IL-5 mediated growth signal transduction. Mol Cell Biol 1994;14:7404–13.

121 Dusanter FI, Muller O, Ziemiecki A et al. Identification of JAK protein tyrosine kinases as signaling molecules for prolactin. Functional analysis of prolactin receptor and prolactin-erythropoietin receptor chimera expressed in lymphoid cells. EMBO J 1994;13:2583–91.

122 Drachman JG, Griffin JD, Kaushansky K. The c-Mpl ligand (thrombopoietin) stimulates tyrosine phosphorylation of Jak2, Shc and c-Mpl. J Biol Chem 1995;270:4979–82.

123 Beadling C, Guschin D, Witthuhn BA et al. Activation of JAK kinases and STAT proteins by interleukin-2 and interferon alpha, but not the T cell antigen receptor, in human T lymphocytes. EMBO J 1994;13:5603–15.

124 Bonni A, Frank DA, Schindler C, Greenberg ME. Characterization of a pathway for ciliary neurotrophic factor signaling to the nucleus. Science 1993;262:1575–9.

125 Nielsen M, Svejgaard A, Skov S, Odum N. Interleukin-2 induces tyrosine phosphorylation and nuclear translocation of Stat3 in human T lymphocytes. Eur J Immunol 1994;24:3082–6.

126 Mui ALF, Wakao H, O'Farrell AM, Harada N, Miyajima A. Interleukin-3, granulocyte-macrophage colony stimulating factor and interleukin-5 transduce signals through two Stat5 homologs. EMBO J 1995;14:1166–75.

127 Ruff-Jamison S, Chen K, Cohen S. Epidermal growth factor induces the tyrosine phosphorylation and nuclear translocation of Stat5 in mouse liver. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1995;92:4215–18.

128 John J, McKendry R, Pellegrini S, Flavell D, Kerr IM, Stark GR. Isolation and characterization of a new human cell line unresponsive to alpha and beta interferons. Mol Cell Biol 1991;11:4189–95.

129 Ruff-Jamison S, Zhong Z, Wen S, Chen K, Darnell Jr JE, Cohen S. Epidermal growth factor and lipopolysaccharide activate Stat3 transcription factor in mouse liver. J. Biol Chem 1994;269:21933–5.

130 Sengupta TK, Chen A, Zhong Z, Darnell Jr JE, Ivashkiv LB. Activation of monocyte effector genes and STAT family transcription factors by inflammatory synovial fluid is independent of interferon gamma. J Exp Med 1995;181:1015–25.

131 Quelle FW, Shimoda K, Thierfelder W et al. Cloning of murine Stat6 and human Stat6, Stat proteins that are tyrosine phosphorylated in response to IL-4 and IL-3 but are not required for mitogenesis. Mol Cell Biol 1995;15:3336–43.

12 M. H. HEIM

132 Gouilleux F, Pallard C, Dusanter-Fourt I *et al.* Prolactin, growth hormone, erythropoietin and granulocyte-macrophage colony stimulating factor induce MGF-Stat5 DNA binding activity. EMBO J 1995;14:2005–13.

133 Pallard C, Gouilleux F, Bénit L *et al.* Thrombopoietin activates a STAT5-like factor in hematopoietic cells. EMBO J 1995; 14:2847–56.
