
Molecular Microbiology (1996) 19(5), 977–984

# Erythromycin production in *Saccharopolyspora erythraea* does not require a functional propionyl-CoA carboxylase

Stefano Donadio,* Michael J. Staver and Leonard Katz  
Pharmaceutical Product Division, Abbott Laboratories,  
Abbott Park, Illinois 60064, USA.

## Summary

Using an oligonucleotide corresponding to the consensus sequence for the biotin-binding motif, two unlinked genetic loci, *bpl1* and *bpl2*, were cloned from the erythromycin producer *Saccharopolyspora erythraea* and the nucleotide sequences of a c. 4 kb segment from each determined. The two loci share a virtually identical segment of 1746 nucleotides, coinciding with most of the genes designated *bcpA1* and *bcpA2* present in *bpl1* and *bpl2*, respectively. The deduced sequences of these genes are highly similar to that of the α-chain of mammalian propionyl-CoA carboxylase. Upstream of *bcpA2* lies *pccB*, the gene encoding the β-chain of this enzyme. Mutant strains carrying frameshift mutations in *bcpA1* and *pccB* were constructed, but we failed to isolate insertional mutants in *bcpA2*. Propionyl-CoA carboxylase activity was undetectable in the *pccB* mutant, but was unaffected in the *bcpA1*-defective strain. These results indicate that *pccB* encodes the β-chain of propionyl-CoA carboxylases, and suggest that the α-chain of this enzyme, which is likely to be encoded by *bcpA2*, is shared with some other essential biotin-dependent enzyme. The *pccB* mutation had no impact on erythromycin production in complex medium.

## Introduction

Several clusters of genes involved in the formation of antibiotics and other secondary metabolites have been identified (Martín and Liras, 1989), leading to an increasingly good understanding of the genetic elements governing the biosynthesis of these compounds. However, very little information is available on the mechanisms that operate during the transition from primary to secondary metabolism to channel the required building blocks in the appropriate pathways. 6-Deoxy-erythronolide B (DEB), the polyketide-derived portion of the macrolide antibiotic erythromycin, produced by the actinomycete *Saccharopolyspora erythraea*, is synthesized through the successive condensation of one propionate starter to six methylmalonate units, by a mechanism similar to fatty acid formation (Katz and Donadio, 1993). Recent evidence has indicated that only the (2-S)-enantiomer of methylmalonyl-CoA (mmCoA) is recognized by the erythromycin polyketide synthase (Marsden et al., 1994). Several pathways leading to mmCoA have been documented in bacteria (Gottschalk, 1985): for example, the (2-R)-enantiomer is a product of valine catabolism, or can be derived from succinyl-CoA, while (2-S)-mmCoA can result from carboxylation of propionyl-CoA. The two enantiomers can be interconverted by a specific epimerase. The cellular origins of mmCoA in *S. erythraea* or in other actinomycetes have received little attention, however.

We have been interested in the genetics of erythromycin biosynthesis (Donadio et al., 1993b) and would like to establish which genes govern the various routes to mmCoA in *S. erythraea*, their roles in providing precursors for DEB synthesis, and how they are regulated. As a first step in this direction, we chose to characterize the genes encoding propionyl-CoA carboxylase (PCCase) since an enzyme capable of preferentially carboxylating propionyl-CoA over acetyl-CoA had been partially purified from *S. erythraea* and shown to consist of two chains, the larger of the two (α-chain) containing biotin (Hunaiti and Kolattukudy, 1982). In addition, the high sequence conservation around the lysine residue where biotin is covalently attached (Samols et al., 1988; Toh et al., 1993) enabled the use of a direct cloning strategy: we reasoned that the gene encoding the α-chain of PCCase (*pccA*) could be easily cloned by using an oligonucleotide derived from the consensus sequence for the biotin site, and that the gene encoding the β-chain (*pccB*) would be found linked to *pccA*. Here we report the successful use of this strategy and the characterization of the cloned *S. erythraea* genes. The construction of null mutants has also led to insights

Received 8 August, 1995; revised 12 October 1995; accepted 16 October 1995. *For correspondence (present address): Lepetit Research Centre, via R. Lepetit 34, 21040 Gerenzano (VA), Italy. E-mail: stefanodonadio@mmd.com; Tel. (392) 96474243; Fax (392) 96474400.*

© 1996 Blackwell Science Ltd

978 S. Donadio, M. J. Staver and L. Katz

A

B Pv E Pv G
E G Pv Pv B G Pv G G B/ G G B H
bpl1
L PP L BG B LS
1 2 3 4 5 6 9 10 11
hgtA bcpA1 ORF122

B

P Pv Pv BP PG G B P B Pv Pv
bpl2
G G Sm L BG B S Sm
2 3 4 5 6 7 8 11
pccB bcpA2 ORFX

Fig. 1. Restriction map of the segments of the S. erythraea chromosome harbouring bpl1 (A) and bpl2 (B). The target regions are enlarged and thick lines denote sequenced segments. The restriction maps of the two enlargements are not complete and only the relevant sites are shown and numbered. Restriction sites are abbreviated as: B, BamHI; E, EcoRI; G, BglII; H, HindIII; L, SalI; P, PstI; Pv, PvuII; S, SstI; Sm, Smal.

into the organization of genes encoding biotin-dependent enzymes in this organism.

Results

Cloning of bpl1 and bpl2

When single and double digests of S. erythraea genomic DNA were probed with an oligonucleotide based on the apparent consensus for the biotin-binding site VLEAMKME in Southern blots, two strongly hybridizing bands were observed in all digests, and a weaker band appeared in all but one digest (data not shown). As explained below, the two strongly hybridizing bands correspond to two distinct genes encoding the biotin-binding motif, and the corresponding portions of the S. erythraea chromosome are referred to as bpl1 (for biotin protein locus 1), and bpl2.

A 2.7 kb PstI–SstI fragment hybridizing to the oligonucleotide probe was isolated from a size-enriched library, and the target sequence was localized on a 1.7 kb SalI fragment. When this latter fragment was employed to screen the S. erythraea library previously described (Tuan et al., 1990), two sets of unlinked cosmids were isolated: one consisted of two overlapping cosmids spanning a total of 43 kb and contained the cloned PstI–SstI fragment (Fig. 1A); a single cosmid carrying a 32 kb insert belonged to the second set (Fig. 1B). Subsequent analysis indicated that these two regions correspond to bpl1 and bpl2. The segments from each locus hybridizing to the oligonucleotide exhibited a strikingly similar restriction map (Fig. 1), indicative of a high relatedness of the two target sequences, well in excess of the limited sequence predicted from the biotin-binding motif.

Analysis of the bpl1 and bpl2 sequences

The 4120 nucleotide (nt) SalI(2)–SstI(11) and the 4476 nt PstI(2) and SstI(11) segments were sequenced from bpl1 and bpl2, respectively (GenBank accession numbers X92556 and X92557). Likely coding sequences were identified through the typical codon bias of Streptomyces genes (Wright and Bibb, 1992). Three complete open reading frames (ORFs), proceeding in the same direction, were identified in bpl1 (Fig. 1A) and designated hgtA (for homologous to glutamate transporters), bcpA1 (for biotin carboxylase protein) and ORF122. Two complete ORFs, pccB and bcpA2, and the 3′ end of the converging ORFX were found in bpl2. (The original cosmid containing bpl2 had suffered a two-base deletion during library construction or propagation in Escherichia coli, which required an independent recloning of the segment, as described in the Experimental procedures.)

A notable difference between pccB and bcpA2 is the different distribution of GC content in the third codon positions: 97.1% and 87.1%, respectively, notwithstanding a very similar overall GC content (70.0% and 70.2%, respectively; data not shown). Most of the unusual codons found in bcpA2 end in T and there are only a few T-ending triplets

© 1996 Blackwell Science Ltd, Molecular Microbiology, 19, 977–984

Saccharopolyspora erythaea propionyl-CoA carboxylase genes 979

Fig. 2. Sequence comparisons, illustrated as the modified outputs of the programs COMPARE/DOTPLOT. Nucleotide sequences of *bpl1* and *bpl2* (A); protein sequences of BcpA2 and rat PccA (B); of PccB from rat and *S. erythraea* (C); and of the *Bacillus stearothermophilus* GltP and HgtA (D). Numbers on the axes represent sequence coordinates (in kb for (A), in aa for (B), (C) and (D)). The stringency and window size employed in each comparison are indicated by the top and bottom numbers, respectively, within each graph.

(GGT, GAT, TGT, TAT and CAT). These codons, which are frequently used also in *bcpA1* (see below), occur rarely in the two other closely linked genes, *pccB* and *hgtA*. In addition, a marked preference for G in the third position of most of the four codon families, and a high usage of TTG for Leu were observed in *bcpA2*, but not in the other *S. erythraea* genes examined. The codon usage observed in *pccB* and *hgtA* closely corresponds to that encountered in other characterized *S. erythraea* genes (S. Donadio, unpublished) and in *Streptomyces* species (Wright and Bibb, 1992).

Two pairs of inverted repeats (IRs), likely to act as transcriptional terminators, separate both *pccB* from *bcpA2*, and the latter from the converging ORFX (not shown). The longer of the two IRs between *pccB* and *bcpA2* consists of a perfect 34 nt palindrome interrupted by four bases, while the shorter one consists of an 18 nt perfect palindrome interrupted by three bases. The calculated ΔG of the corresponding RNAs (Tinoco *et al.*, 1973) for the longer and shorter repeats are −279 and −111 kJ mol⁻¹, respectively. There is partial overlap between the two IRs, so that formation of the second, weaker stem-loop would substantially reduce the stability of the first one.

When the *bpl1* and *bpl2* sequences were compared, a striking result was observed: regions of the two sequences are virtually identical, only eight mismatches being present in a 1746 bp common segment (Fig. 2A). Interestingly,

this region of quasi-identity corresponds to almost the entire *bcpA1* and *bcpA2* genes: it begins from the 17th and 11th codons and terminates 3 nt beyond their stop codons. As most of the differences occur in the third codon position, the two polypeptides share an identical 580-amino-acid segment, except for a single difference towards the C-terminus (Arg-587 in BcpA1 in place of Gln-584 in BcpA2). Both genes contain in their 3′ ends a segment encoding the signature motif VLEAMKME of biotinylated proteins. The translated sequence of either one of the two *bcpA* genes exhibits extensive similarity with other gene products consisting of the biotin carboxylase (BC) and the biotin carboxyl carrier protein (BCCP) components of biotin-dependent enzymes. The best matching sequence was the *Mycobacterium leprae accBC* gene product (Norman *et al.*, 1994), but end-to-end similarity was also seen with the α-chain of rat PCCase (Browner *et al.*, 1989), as illustrated in Fig. 2B. It should be noted that, among the BcpA-like sequences of established function found in the database, only the α-chain of PCCase contains closely linked BC and BCCP domains, suggesting that this polypeptide is encoded by either *bcpA1* or *bcpA2*.

The *pccB* gene product exhibits end-to-end similarity with the β-chain of rat PCCase (Kraus *et al.*, 1986; Fig. 2C). The best matching sequence in the database was an ORF from *M. leprae* (GenBank Accession Number

© 1996 Blackwell Science Ltd, *Molecular Microbiology*, **19**, 977–984

U00012) and lower scores were seen with the α-chain of  
the *Veillonella parvula* mmCoA decarboxylase (Huder  
and Dimroth, 1993), the 12S subunit of *Propionibacterium*  
*shermanii* transcarboxylase (Thornton et al., 1993) and a  
*Rhodococcus ORF* (Nagy et al., 1992), as well as with  
other carboxyltransferase (CT) components of biotin  
enzymes. Since the sequences with established biological  
roles most resembling the *S. erythraea* protein correspond  
to CTs recognizing propionyl-CoA or mmCoA, the  
PCCase β-chain is likely to be encoded by *pccB*.  

The translated sequence of *hgtA* is very similar to trans-  
membrane proteins involved in the transport of short  
carboxylic or acidic amino acids, such as the GltP family  
of glutamate transporters (e.g., Tolner et al., 1992; see  
Fig. 2D) and the DctA family of proteins involved in  
carboxylate transfer (e.g., Engelke et al., 1989). Multiple  
sequence alignments indicate a closer relationship of HgtA  
with the GltP proteins, although the *S. erythraea* sequence  
appears to form a separate branch (data not shown). The  
sequences deduced from ORF122 and from the 3′ end of  
ORFX did not resemble any sequence in the database.  

In summary, the polypeptides encoded by *bpl2* closely  
resemble the two chains of mammalian PCCase; in addition,  
the predicted *Mr* values for PccB (58.5 kDa) and  
BcpA1 or BcpA2 (63.1 and 62.2 kDa, respectively, after  
addition of biotin) are similar to those measured (61 and  
67 kDa) for the β- and α-chains of the *S. erythraea* carbox-  
ylase (Hunaiti and Kolattukudy, 1982). The three closely  
linked ORFs in *bpl1* encode a putative transmembrane  
protein similar to glutamate transporters, a polypeptide  
consisting of the BC and BCCP domains, and a small  
hydrophobic polypeptide. These findings proved the effec-  
tiveness of the oligonucleotide probe employed. However,  
the virtual identity between BcpA1 and BcpA2 prevented  
the tentative identification of the gene encoding the α-  
chain of PCCase on the basis of sequence similarity.  

**Isolation of S. erythraea mutant strains**  

Two different approaches directed at constructing *hgtA*  
mutants by gene disruption or gene replacement were  
unsuccessful, suggesting that this gene may be essential  
in *S. erythraea* (S. Donadio, unpublished results). We  
could, on the other hand, mutate *bcpA1*. A 262 bp deletion  
in *bcpA1* was introduced by removing the two adjacent  
*BamHI* fragments (segment 6–9 in Fig. 1A) from a  
*pWHM3* derivative carrying the 2.9 kb *PstI*(4)–*SstI*(11)  
*bpl1* segment. The resulting plasmid, pB3PS3B, readily  
yielded integrative transformants. Upon resolution of the  
plasmid from a randomly picked *bpl1::pB3PS3B* isolate,  
thiostrepton-sensitive (*Th<sup>S</sup>*) colonies carrying the deleted  
*bcpA1* allele are expected to contain a *SalI* band of 1.4 kb  
in place of the 1.7 kb wild-type band. Four isolates carrying  
the mutant allele were obtained upon analysis of 12 *Th<sup>S</sup>*  

segregants by Southern hybridization (data not shown). One of the isolates carrying a defective *bcpA1* was chosen  
for further studies and designated strain 2B32.  

A *pccB* mutant was constructed by gene replacement,  
according to the following scheme. A *pWHM3* subclone  
carrying the 5.2 kb *BamHI*(1)–*BamHI*(7) segment was  
deleted from the 42 bp *BgII*(3)–*BgII*(4) fragment (Fig.  
1B), followed by religation after end-filling. The resulting  
plasmid, pB2B5G, carries a 38 bp deletion in *pccB*. *S.* ery-  
*thraea* protoplasts were transformed with pB2B5G and,  
from one of the integrative transformants obtained, inde-  
pendent *Th<sup>S</sup>* segregants were isolated. These were then  
analysed for the products obtained after polymerase  
chain reaction (PCR) amplification of a 450 bp *pccB* seg-  
ment from genomic DNA: five of the eleven *Th<sup>S</sup>* isolates  
had retained the deleted allele, yielding a fragment consis-  
tent with the predicted size of 412 bp, whereas the parent  
strain and the remaining six *Th<sup>S</sup>* isolates gave the pre-  
dicted 450 bp wild-type fragment (data not shown). One  
of the isolates carrying the deleted allele was selected  
for further studies and designated strain 2B21.  

The existence of the two quasi-identical genes per-  
mitted the design of a single experiment aimed at inactivat-  
ing either *bcpA1* or *bcpA2*. To this end, plasmid pB2GL15,  
a *pWHM3* derivative carrying the *bpl2*-derived 0.7 kb  
*Sall*(6)–*BgII*(8) fragment (Fig. 1B), fully internal to *bcpA2*,  
was used for integrative transformation. As only one mis-  
match exists between the pB2GL15 insert and the corre-  
sponding region of *bcpA1*, integration of this plasmid  
was expected to occur with comparable frequency at  
either one of the two loci. The site of integration could be  
then distinguished by Southern hybridization, as illustrated  
in Fig. 3A. Integrative transformants were readily  
obtained; however, all of the 17 independent *Th<sup>R</sup>* isolates  
analysed exhibited the profile expected from integration at  
*bpl1*, i.e., lack of the *bpl1*-derived 3.3 kb *PstI* band with  
appearance of the 2.4 and 8.7 kb bands, whereas the  
*bpl2*-derived 6.8 kb was unaffected (11 such integrants  
are shown in Fig. 3B). If the two *bcpA* segments are  
equally recombinogenic, the finding of all 17 integrants at  
*bpl1*, notwithstanding the fact that the pB2GL15 insert  
was derived from *bpl2*, is predicted to occur randomly  
with a frequency of (0.5)<sup>17</sup>, or less than 1 × 10<sup>−5</sup>. As the  
integration event that led to *pccB* replacement indicates  
that single, reciprocal recombination can occur quite effi-  
ciently at *bpl2*, the exclusive integration of pB2GL15 at  
*bpl1* strongly suggests that *bcpA2* is essential for cell via-  
bility, at least under the conditions employed in these  
experiments.  

**PCCase and erythromycin formation**  

Crude extracts of the parent strain, the *pccB* mutant 2B21  
and the *bcpA1<sup>−</sup>* strain 2B32 were assayed for PCCase  

© 1996 Blackwell Science Ltd, *Molecular Microbiology*, **19**, 977–984

Saccharopolyspora erythraea propionyl-CoA carboxylase genes 981

Fig. 3. A. Results expected from disruption of $bcpA1$ or $bcpA2$. The structure of the wild-type strain, with the two unlinked $bpl$ regions and intact $bcpA1$ and $bcpA2$, is illustrated in the top portion, whereas parts labelled 1 and 2 (in bold) represent the structures expected from integration of pB2GL1 at $bpl1$ or $bpl2$, respectively. Broken lines indicate pWHM3 DNA, and shaded lines indicate DNA duplicated in the integrants. The sizes of the $PstI$ fragments expected upon hybridization to $bcpA$ are also indicated.

B. Analysis of pB2GL15 integrants. $PstI$-digested DNAs from 11 independent Th${}^R$ isolates obtained after transformation of NRRL 2338 with pB2GL15 were probed with the 1.7kb $SalI(5)-SalI(10)$ of Fig. 1A. Lane 1 contains NRRL 2338 DNA, and lanes 2–12 contain DNA from the integrants. Numbers on the left indicate selected molecular weights (in kb).

activity. Whereas NRRL 2338 and 2B32 had indistinguishable levels, comparable with the values reported previously (Hunaiti and Kolattukudy, 1982), strain 2B21 retained less than 5% of the enzymatic activity (Table 1). These results confirmed that $pccB$ is the gene for the $\beta$-chain of PCCase. On the other hand, as the $bcpA1$ mutation had no effect on PCCase levels and a $bcpA2^{-}$ strain could not be isolated, the identity of the gene encoding the $\alpha$-chain could not be positively established. No significant impact of the $pccB$ mutation on erythromycin formation was observed. The total amount of erythromycin produced ($c.$ 20 $\mu$g ml${}^{-1}$) and the time course of production were similar for the parent strain and its isogenic $pccB$ derivative in complex medium (data not shown). This result indicated that, under the conditions employed, PCCase does not contribute significantly to the intracellular pool of (2-S)-mmCoA.

Search for other genes encoding BC

We were intrigued by the finding of two virtually identical genes encoding BC and BCCP, only one of which is apparently essential. We then sought to establish whether S. erythraea contained additional elements encoding BC. The BC domain, established by sequence comparison, was found to span residues 18–455 and 12–449 in BcpA1 and BcpA2, respectively (not shown; refer to Li and Cronan (1992) and Toh et al. (1993) for similar analyses). Interestingly, the N-terminal end of the BC domain coincides with the N-terminal end of the segment shared by BcpA1 and BcpA2. This information allowed the generation of a BC-specific probe from $bcpA2$ (see the Experimental procedures).

Digests of S. erythraea DNA were probed with the BC-specific fragment. Under moderately stringent conditions (final wash: 0.5× SSC, 55°C), only the $bpl1$ and $bpl2$ bands were observed; lowering of the stringency (to 2× SSC, 55°C) resulted in the appearance of several additional weakly hybridizing bands in each digest (data not shown). Recently, several bacterial genes encoding BC have been sequenced, and their similarities to either one of the S. erythraea BC-encoding segments range, for the most conserved 650bp stretch, from 55% for the 48% GC $Anabaena$ fragment (Gornicki et al., 1993) to 68% for the 63% GC $M. leprae$ segment, with stretches of 100 bp or more reaching similarities as high as 62 and

Table 1. PCCase activity in mutant strains. Crude extracts were assayed for PCCase activity and their protein concentration determined.

| Strain | Genotype | Protein (mg ml${}^{-1}$) | Activity (c.p.m.) | S.A. |
|--------|----------|-------------------------|--------------------|------|
| 2338   | Wild type | 8.5                     | 510                | 1200 |
| 2B21   | $pccB$    | 9.5                     | 22                 | 46   |
| 2B32   | $bcpA1$   | 4.5                     | 367                | 1631 |

Results are reported as ${}^{14}$C counts per minute incorporated into acid non-volatile material

© 1996 Blackwell Science Ltd, Molecular Microbiology, 19, 977–984

77%, respectively (data not shown). If one tried to make any of these sequences more Streptomyces-like, by randomly changing the GC content in the third codon position (which ranges from 43 to 77%) to match the 87% value present in *bcpA1*, one would expect a third *S. erythraea* BC-encoding gene to be no less than 68% similar to the probe employed, with segments reaching at least 80%. Because the higher stringency conditions employed in the hybridization correspond to a theoretical homology of 67% (*Hopwood et al.*, 1985), it can be concluded that *S. erythraea* is unlikely to contain other DNA segments encoding a BC function. Only in *M. tuberculosis* have two unlinked BC-encoding genes been discovered thus far (GenBank Accession Number U00024; *Norman et al.*, 1994), although their functions have not been established. These two genes share significant stretches of 75% similarity in their BC-encoding segments.

### Discussion

The underlying hypothesis for our cloning strategy, that the gene encoding the α-chain of PCCase could be isolated through an oligonucleotide based on the consensus biotin-binding motif and that the gene encoding the β-chain would be found closely linked to it, led to the identification of *bpl2* as the likely candidate for encoding this enzyme in *S. erythraea*, since the corresponding gene products PccB and BcpA2 are highly similar to the β- and α-chains of mammalian PCCase. Consistently, a strain carrying a frameshift deletion in *pccB* lacks PCCase activity. However, we could not establish whether *bcpA2* or the highly related *bcpA1*, present in the unlinked *bpl1* region, actually encodes the α-chain. The apparent inviability of *bcpA2* mutants and the wild-type levels of PCCase activity observed in *bcpA1⁻* strains leave two possible alternatives: either *bcpA1* encodes the α-chain of PCCase, but BcpA2 can substitute for it in a *bcpA1* mutant, or *bcpA2* is the determinant for this polypeptide, but its gene product is also the constituent of some essential biotin enzyme.

That *pccB* and *bcpA2* may not simply encode the two subunits of a single enzyme is also suggested by their different codon usages, which may be indicative of different translation rates, and by the existence of a putative transcriptional terminator separating these two genes. These observations suggest some cellular mechanism to differentiate the expression level of *pccB* from that of *bcpA2*. The *pccB* and *bcpA* homologues found in *M. leprae* are arranged in the same relative orientation as in *S. erythraea*, but they are separated by a segment of 2.5 kb, which includes other genes (GenBank Accession Number U00012).

Our results strongly suggest that *bcpA2* is essential,

implying that an enzyme consisting of BC and BCCP, other than PCCase, is required for cell viability. Very little is known about the nature of distinct biotin-dependent enzymes that can occur within a single bacterial species, although multiple enzymes have been reported (*Fall*, 1979). Formation of the long-chain fatty acids essential for growth requires ACCase, which provides the extender unit malonyl-CoA. This enzyme consists of three distinct activities, BC, BCCP and CT, which may reside on a single protein, as in eukaryotes, or in four distinct polypeptides, as in *E. coli*. During their work on the *S. erythraea* PCCase, Hunaiti and Kolattukudi (1982) were unable to detect carboxylation of acetyl-CoA in fractions other than those containing PCCase and found that the partially purified enzyme could also carboxylate acetyl-CoA, albeit at a lower rate than propionyl-CoA, leading to the proposal that a single enzyme may be responsible for both carboxylations in this organism. The viability of a *pccB* mutant, however, implies that either other sources of malonyl-CoA exist in *S. erythraea* or that the CT component of ACCase is encoded by a gene distinct from *pccB*. Our failure to detect any *S. erythraea* band, other than *bcpA1* and *bcpA2*, corresponding to the BC domain suggests that *bcpA2* encodes the only essential BC present in the cell. Thus it is tempting to speculate that this essential biotin-dependent carboxylase is ACCase. Insofar as the existence and subunit composition of this enzyme in actinomycetes remain unknown, the *S. erythraea* enzyme may be composed of fewer subunits than the *E. coli* ACCase, and the entire biotinylated polypeptide, or the BC domain, may be shared with PCCase. It should be noted that attempts at complete replacement of the *Mycobacterium bovis accBC* gene were also unsuccessful (*Norman et al.*, 1995).

The *pccB* mutation had no effect on erythromycin production, indicating that, under our growth conditions, direct carboxylation of propionyl-CoA does not contribute significantly to the level of (2-S)-mmCoA required for DEB formation. This result is not surprising, given the low level of PCCase activity observed in *S. erythraea* crude extracts, which may correlate to a low *bcpA2* expression and to the possibility that BcpA2 may be shared with another biotin-dependent carboxylase. Recently, genetic studies in Streptomyces species producing 16-membered macrolide antibiotics have indicated that mutants defective in valine dehydrogenase produce lower levels of antibiotics (*Tang et al.*, 1994). In *S. erythraea*, a route leading to propionyl-CoA via decarboxylation of mmCoA has been discovered and found to be essential for erythromycin production in a resting cell system (*Hsieh and Kolattukudy*, 1994). These results suggest that multiple routes to mmCoA exist in actinomycetes. As more of these pathways will be characterized, it will be possible to understand the role they play in supplying the precursors for macrolide

© 1996 Blackwell Science Ltd, *Molecular Microbiology*, **19**, 977–984

biosynthesis.

### Experimental procedures

#### Bacterial strains and plasmids
The *S. erythraea* strain NRRL 2338 was cultivated as previously described (Donadio *et al.*, 1991). Plasmids of the pUC series (Vieira and Messing, 1982) were routinely employed for subcloning and pWHM3 (Vara *et al.*, 1989) was used for integrative transformation of *S. erythraea*. Conditions for isolation of genomic DNA, integrative transformation and gene replacement were as described (Donadio *et al.*, 1991).

#### DNA manipulations and sequence
The oligonucleotide GTICTIGAGGCIATGAAGATGGA (where I = deoxyinosine) was labelled and hybridized as previously described (Donadio *et al.*, 1990), with the hybridization stringency set at 50°C. The *pccB* segment (nt 331–780) was amplified from genomic DNA, with the annealing temperature set at 53°C. The *bpl2* segment (nt 2148–3416) was amplified from a pUC19 subclone, with the annealing temperature set at 60°C. Polymerase chain reaction amplification was carried out as described (Donadio *et al.*, 1993a), employing 20-mer oligonucleotides and adjusting the annealing temperature. The 1268 bp fragment amplified from *bpl2*, recovered from an agarose gel and labelled with [α-³²P]-dCTP, was hybridized to genomic DNA with a stringency set at 2× SSC and 55°C. Single-stranded templates, prepared using M13mp18 and -19 and isolated from *E. coli* JM109, and double-stranded templates were sequenced employing Sequenase 2 (US Biochemicals) and [α-³²P]-dCTP, replacing dGTP with 7-deaza-dGTP, according to the manufacturer’s instructions. DNA sequences were analysed using the University of Wisconsin GCG programs (Devereux *et al.*, 1984).

#### Cloning of *bpl1* and *bpl2*
For cloning *bpl1*, *S. erythraea* genomic DNA, digested with *PstI + SstI*, was resolved on an agarose gel and the region comprising the 2.5–3.0 kb range was excised, extracted and ligated to pUC19 digested with the same enzymes. Among about 300 of the resulting white colonies, two positives were identified after hybridization with the oligonucleotide and found to carry an identical 2.7 kb insert. For cloning of the *bpl2* dubious segment, a size-enriched library of 1.4–1.8 kb fragments obtained after *BgII + SstI* digestion was similarly constructed in pUC19, previously digested with *BamHI + SstI*. Among about 200 white colonies obtained from the ligation mixture, two positives were identified after hybridization with the 1.6 kb *BgII(7)–SstI(11)* fragment (Fig. 1B). Both colonies contained a plasmid, designated pGS9, carrying the desired *BgII–SstI* fragment. The nucleotide sequence of the *bpl2* portion spanning nt 3260–3600, determined from pGS9, showed the two extra bases (GA²⁰⁰²), which were missing from the cosmid-derived sequence. That the *BgII–SstI* fragment did originate from *bpl2* was confirmed by sequencing from its *SstI* end, which bore no relation to

---

Saccharopolyspora erythraea propionyl-CoA carboxylase genes 983

*bpl1*, but instead overlapped *bpl2*. Finally, the existence of these two extra base pairs in the genomic copy of *bpl2* was verified by Southern hybridization: their absence would create an *XcmI* site, which was indeed detected in the original cosmid and mapped to the *BgII(7)–SstI(11)* segment, but not in pGS9. The *XcmI* profile predicted from the revised sequence was observed when genomic DNA was probed with a *bcpA* fragment (data not shown).

#### PCCase assay
*S. erythraea* strains were grown in SCM medium for 72 h, a 5% inoculum was transferred into fresh medium, and mycelia were harvested after 39 h. Crude extracts were prepared by adapting published procedures (Andersen and Hutchinson, 1992). Cells were resuspended in three volumes of lysis buffer (0.1 M potassium phosphate, pH 7.3, 10% glycerol, 0.2 mM dithioerythrol, 5 mM Na₂EDTA, containing 2 mg ml⁻¹ lysozyme, 1 mg ml⁻¹ streptomycin sulphate, 0.1 mM benzamide, 0.7 μg ml⁻¹ pepstatin, and 0.5 μg ml⁻¹ leupeptin) and incubated with gentle agitation for 12–16 h at 4°C. Cell debris was removed by centrifugation and PCCase activity in the resulting crude extract was measured by following the incorporation of H¹⁴CO₃ into acid non-volatile material (Hunaiti and Kolattukudy, 1982; Gygax *et al.*, 1985). Briefly, to a 100 μl reaction (consisting of 0.2 M Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 5 mM ATP, 10 mM MgCl₂, 2 mM propionyl-CoA, 3 mg ml⁻¹ BSA, and 50 μl of crude extract) 1 μl of 0.1 mCi mmol⁻¹ NaH¹⁴CO₃ (50 μCi ml⁻¹, Amersham) was added and the mixture incubated for 20 min at 32°C. After addition of 200 μl of 6 N HCl, the solution was concentrated under vacuum to a final volume of c. 50 μl, which was then added to 5 ml of Aquasol-2 (DuPont) and counted in a LS3801 scintillation counter (Beckman).

### Acknowledgements
We are grateful to Tom Kavanaugh for oligonucleotide synthesis, and to Diane Stassi and Tom Vanden Boom for critical reading of the manuscript.

### References
- Andersen, J.F., and Hutchinson, C.R. (1992) Characterization of *Saccharopolyspora erythraea* cytochrome P-450 genes and enzymes, including 6-deoxyerythronolide B hydroxylase. *J. Bacteriol.* **174**: 725–735.
- Browner, M.F., Taroni, F., Stzul, E., and Rosenberg, L.E. (1989). Sequence analysis, biogenesis, and mitochondrial import of the α-subunit of rat liver propionyl-CoA carboxylase. *J. Biol. Chem.* **264**: 1280–1285.
- Devereux, J., Haeberli, P., and Smithies, O. (1984) A comprehensive set of sequence analysis programs for the VAX. *Nucl. Acids Res.* **12**: 387–395.
- Donadio, S., Shafiee, A., and Hutchinson, C.R. (1990). Disruption of a rhodaneselike gene results in cysteine auxotrophy in *Saccharopolyspora erythraea*. *J. Bacteriol.* **171**: 350–360.
- Donadio, S., Staver, M.J., McAlpine, J.B., Swanson, S.J., and Katz, L. (1991) Modular organization of genes required for complex polyketide biosynthesis. *Science* **252**: 675–

679.
Donadio, S., McAlpine, J.B., Sheldon, P.J., Jackson, M., and Katz, L. (1993a) An erythromycin analog produced by reprogramming polyketide synthesis. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA* **90**: 7119–7223.

Donadio, S., Stassi, D.L., Staver, M.J., McAlpine, J.B., Sheldon, P.J., Jackson, M., Swanson, S.J., Wendt-Pienkowski, E., Wang, Y.-G., Jarvis, B., Hutchinson, C.R., and Katz, L. (1993b) Recent developments in the genetics of erythromycin formation. In *Genetics and Molecular Biology of Industrial Microorganisms*. Baltz R.H., Ingolia T., and Hegeman G. (eds). Washington, DC: American Society for Microbiology, pp. 257–265.

Engelke, T., Jording, D., Kapp, D., and Pühler, A. (1989) Identification and sequence analysis of the *Rhizobium meliloti dctA* gene encoding the C₄-dicarboxylate carrier. *J Bacteriol* **171**: 5551–5560.

Fall, R.R. (1979) Analysis of microbial biotin proteins. *Meth Enzymol* **62**: 390–398.

Gornicki, P., Scappino, L.A., and Haselkorn, R. (1993) Genes for two subunits of acetyl coenzyme A carboxylase of *Anabaena* sp. strain PCC 7120: biotin carboxylase and biotin carboxyl carrier protein. *J Bacteriol* **175**: 5268–5272.

Gottschalk, G. (1985) *Bacterial Metabolism* 2nd edn. New York: Springer Verlag.

Gygax, D., Stalder, R., and Nüesch, J. (1984) Propionyl-CoA carboxylase in *Nocardia mediterranei*. *FEMS Microbiol Lett* **23**: 211–216.

Hopwood, D.A., Bibb, M.J., Chater, K.F., Kieser, T., Bruton, C.J., Kieser, H.M., Lydiate, D.J., Smith, C.P., Ward, J.M., and Schrempf, H. (1985) *Genetic Manipulation of Streptomyces. A Laboratory Manual*. Norwich: The John Innes Foundation.

Hsieh, Y.-J., and Kolattukudy, P.E. (1994) Inhibition of erythromycin synthesis by disruption of malonyl-coenzyme A decarboxylase gene *eryM* in *Saccharopolyspora erythraea*. *J Bacteriol* **176**: 714–724.

Huder, J.B., and Dimroth, P. (1993) Sequence of the sodium ion pump methylmalonyl-CoA decarboxylase from *Veillobella parvula*. *J Biol Chem* **268**: 24564–24571.

Hunaiti, A.R., and Kolattukudy, P.E. (1982) Isolation and characterization of an acyl-Coenzyme A carboxylase from an erythromycin-producing *Streptomyces erythreus*. *Arch Biochem Biophys* **216**: 362–371.

Katz, L., and Donadio, S. (1993) Polyketide synthesis: prospects for hybrid antibiotics. *Annu Rev Microbiol* **47**: 875–912.

Kraus, J.P., Figueira, F., Novotny, J., Kalousek, F., Williams, K.R., Williamson, C., Ohura, T., and Rosenberg, L.E. (1986) Coding sequence of the precursor of the beta-subunit of rat propionyl-CoA carboxylase. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA* **83**: 8049–8053.

Li, S.-J., and Cronan, Jr, J.E. (1992) The gene encoding the biotin carboxylase subunit of *Escherichia coli* acetyl-CoA carboxylase. *J Biol Chem* **267**: 855–863.

Marsden, A.F.A., Caffrey, P., Aparicio, J.F., Loughran, M.S., Staunton, J., and Leadlay, P.F. (1994) Stereospecific acyl transfers on the erythromycin-producing polyketide synthase. *Science* **263**: 378–380.

Martín, J.F., and Liras, P. (1989) Organization and expression of genes involved in the biosynthesis of antibiotics and other secondary metabolites. *Annu Rev Microbiol* **43**: 173–206.

Nagy, I., Schoofs, G., Vanderleyden, J., and De Mot, R. (1992) Sequence of a *Rhodococcus* gene encoding a protein with extensive homology to the mammalian propionyl-CoA carboxylase beta chain. *Gene* **122**: 199–202.

Norman, E., De Smet, K.A., Stoker, N.G., Ratledge, C., Wheeler, P.R., and Dale, J.W. (1994) Lipid synthesis in mycobacteria: characterization of the biotin carboxyl carrier protein genes from *Mycobacterium leprae* and *M. tuberculosis*. *J Bacteriol* **176**: 2525–2531.

Norman, E., Dellagostin, O.A., McFadden, J., and Dale, J.W. (1995) Gene replacement by homologous recombination in *Mycobacterium bovis* BCG. *Mol Microbiol* **16**: 755–760.

Samols, D., Thornton, C.G., Murtif, V.L., Kumar, G.K., Haase, F.C., and Wood, H.G. (1988) Evolutionary conservation among biotin enzymes. *J Biol Chem* **263**: 6462–6464.

Tang, L., Zhang, Y.-X., and Hutchinson, C.R. (1994) Amino acid catabolism and antibiotic synthesis: valine is a source of precursors for macrolide biosynthesis in *Streptomyces ambofaciens* and *Streptomyces fradiae*. *J Bacteriol* **176**: 6107–6119.

Thornton, C.G., Kumar, G.K., Haase, F.C., Phillips, N.F.B., Woo, S.B., Park, V.M., Magner, W.J., Shenoy, B.C., Wood, H.G., and Samols, D. (1993) Primary structure of the monomer of the 12S subunit of transcarboxylase as deduced from DNA and characterization of the product expressed in *Escherichia coli*. *J Bacteriol* **175**: 5301–5308.

Tinoco, Jr, I., Borer, P.N., Dengler, B., Levine, M.D., Uhlenbeck, O.C., Crothers, D.M., and Gralla, J. (1973) Improved estimation of secondary structure in ribonucleic acids. *Nature* **246**: 40–41.

Toh, H., Kondo, H., and Tanabe, T. (1993) Molecular evolution of biotin-dependent carboxylases. *Eur J Biochem* **215**: 687–696.

Tolner, B., Poolman, B., and Konings, W.N. (1992) Characterization and functional expression in *Escherichia coli* of the sodium-proton-glutamate symport proteins of *Bacillus stearothermophilus* and *Bacillus caldotenax*. *Mol Microbiol* **6**: 2845–2856

Tuan, J.S., Weber, J.M., Staver, M.J., Leung, J.O., Donadio, S., and Katz, L. (1990) Cloning of genes involved in erythromycin biosynthesis from *Saccharopolyspora erythraea* using a novel actinomycete-*Escherichia coli* cosmid. *Gene* **90**: 21–29.

Vara, J.A., Lewandoska-Skarbek, M., Wang, Y.-G., Donadio, S., and Hutchinson, C.R. (1989) Cloning of genes governing the deoxysugar portion of the erythromycin biosynthetic pathway in *Saccharopolyspora erythraea*
