
Molecular Microbiology (1996) 22(3), 481–495

# Molecular characterization of the Pseudomonas aeruginosa serotype O5 (PAO1) B-band lipopolysaccharide gene cluster

L. L. Burrows D. F. Charter† J. S. Lam*
Department of Microbiology, University of Guelph,
Guelph, Ontario, Canada N1G 2W1.

## Summary

Pseudomonas aeruginosa co-expresses A-band lipopolysaccharide (LPS), a homopolymer of rhamnose, and B-band LPS, a heteropolymer with a repeating unit of 2–5 sugars which is the serotype-specific antigen. The gene clusters for A- and B-band biosynthesis in *P. aeruginosa* O5 (strain PAO1) have been cloned previously. Here we report the DNA sequence and molecular analysis of the B-band O-antigen biosynthetic cluster. Sixteen open reading frames (ORFs) thought to be involved in synthesis of the O5 O antigen were identified, including *wzz* (*rol*), *wzy* (*rfc*), and *wbpA–wbpN*. A further 3 ORFs not thought to be involved with LPS synthesis were identified (*hisH*, *hisF*, and *uvrB*). Most of the *wbp* genes are found only in serotypes O2, O5, O16, O18, and O20, which form a chemically and structurally related O-antigen serogroup. In contrast, *wbpM* and *wbpN* are common to all 20 serotypes of *P. aeruginosa*. Although *wbpM* is not serogroup-specific, knockout mutations confirmed it is necessary for O5 O-antigen biosynthesis. A novel insertion sequence, IS1209, is present at the junction between the serogroup-specific and non-specific regions. We have predicted the functions of the proteins encoded in the *wbp* cluster based on their homologies to those in the databases, and provide a proposed pathway of *P. aeruginosa* O5 O-antigen biosynthesis.

## Introduction

Pseudomonas aeruginosa is a ubiquitous and versatile organism that remains a problem in opportunistic and nosocomial infections of immunocompromised individuals. Several virulence factors have been identified in the pathogenesis of *P. aeruginosa* infections, including exopolysaccharides such as alginate and lipopolysaccharide (LPS) (May et al., 1991; Cryz et al., 1984). The LPS of *P. aeruginosa* is typical of Gram-negative bacteria, having lipid A substituted with core oligosaccharide and O-antigen repeating units. *P. aeruginosa* can co-express two distinct forms of LPS, designated A-band and B-band LPS. A-band LPS, the common antigen, is expressed by several *P. aeruginosa* serotypes and is comprised of a trisaccharide repeating unit of α-D-rhamnose linked 1→2, 1→3, 1→3. B-band LPS is the serotype-specific, O-antigen-containing molecule, and is a heteropolymer composed of di- to pentasaccharide repeats.

The gene clusters for biosynthesis of both A- and B-band LPS have been cloned from *P. aeruginosa* serotype O5, and have been mapped to 11–13 min and 37 min, respectively, on the serotype O5 (strain PAO1) chromosome (Lightfoot and Lam, 1993). In keeping with recent revisions to the *rfb* nomenclature proposed by Reeves and colleagues (for examples, see Liu et al., 1996; Wang et al., 1996), the B-band LPS cluster has been designated *wbp*, with *wb** indicating O antigen biosynthetic genes, and *p* for *Pseudomonas*. Due to the renaming of the genes in the O5 B-band *wbp* cluster, the previously characterized *rfbA* gene (Dasgupta and Lam, 1995) is now called *wbpl*.

The *P. aeruginosa* O5 O antigen has a trisaccharide repeating unit of 2-acetamido-3-acetamidino-2,3-dideoxy-D-mannuronic acid (Man[2NAc3N]A), 2,3-diacetamido-D-mannuronic acid (2,3-diNAcManA), and 2-acetamido-2,6-dideoxy-D-galactose (*N*-acetyl fucosamine; Fuc2NAc) (Fig. 1). Serotypes O2, O16, O18, and O20 of *P. aeruginosa* have O antigens similar to serotype O5, varying in one linkage and/or one isomer (Knirel et al., 1988; Knirel and Kochetkov, 1994; Fig. 1). Immunochemical cross-reactions have also been demonstrated among LPSs of serotypes O2, O5 and O16 by the use of monoclonal antibodies (Lam et al., 1992). Two genes from the O5 gene cluster have previously been characterized: *wzy* (*rfc*; de Kievit et al., 1995) and *wbpl* (*rfbA*; Dasgupta and Lam, 1995). Both of these O5 genes have been shown to hybridize only with chromosomal DNA from the O5 serogroup (Fig. 1), and not with the remaining fifteen serotypes.

Received 1 July, 1996; revised 3 September, 1996; accepted 6 September, 1996.
†Formerly D. F. Macpherson.
*For correspondence. E-mail jlam@micro.uoguelph.ca; Tel. (519) 824 4120 ext. 3823; Fax (519) 8371802.

© 1996 Blackwell Science Ltd

482 L. L. Burrows, D. F. Charter and J. S. Lam

Serotype O2
\[
\rightarrow 4)-\beta-\text{D-Man}(2 \text{NAc}3 \text{N}) \text{A}-(1 \rightarrow 4)-\alpha-\text{L-Gul}(2 \text{NAc}3 \text{NAc}) \text{A}-(1 \rightarrow 3)-\beta-\text{D-FucNAc}-(1 \rightarrow
\]
\[
\begin{array}{c}
3 \\
\hline
\end{array}
\]
\[
\text{CH}_3 \text{C}=\text{NH}
\]

Serotype O5
\[
\rightarrow 4)-\beta-\text{D-Man}(2 \text{NAc}3 \text{N}) \text{A}-(1 \rightarrow 4)-\beta-\text{D-Man}(2 \text{NAc}3 \text{NAc}) \text{A}-(1 \rightarrow 3)-\alpha-\text{D-FucNAc}-(1 \rightarrow
\]
\[
\begin{array}{c}
3 \\
\hline
\end{array}
\]
\[
\text{CH}_3 \text{C}=\text{NH}
\]

Serotype O16
\[
\rightarrow 4)-\beta-\text{D-Man}(2 \text{NAc}3 \text{N}) \text{A}-(1 \rightarrow 4)-\beta-\text{D-Man}(2 \text{NAc}3 \text{NAc}) \text{A}-(1 \rightarrow 3)-\beta-\text{D-FucNAc}-(1-
\]
\[
\begin{array}{c}
3 \\
\hline
\end{array}
\]
\[
\text{CH}_3 \text{C}=\text{NH}
\]

Serotype O18
\[
\rightarrow 4)-\alpha-\text{L-Gul}(2 \text{NAc}3 \text{N}) \text{A}-(1 \rightarrow 4)-\beta-\text{D-Man}(2 \text{NAc}3 \text{NAc}) \text{A}-(1 \rightarrow 3)-\alpha-\text{D-FucNAc}-(1-
\]
\[
\begin{array}{c}
3 \\
\hline
\end{array}
\]
\[
\text{CH}_3 \text{C}=\text{NH}
\]

Serotype O20
\[
\rightarrow 4)-\alpha-\text{L-Gul}(2 \text{NAc}3 \text{N}) \text{A}-(1 \rightarrow 4)-\beta-\text{D-Man}(2 \text{NAc}3 \text{NAc}) \text{A}-(1 \rightarrow 3)-\alpha-\text{D-FucNAc}-(1-
\]
\[
\begin{array}{c}
3 \\
\hline
\end{array}
\]
\[
\text{CH}_3 \text{C}=\text{NH} \quad \sim 70\% \text{ and }
\]
\[
\text{OAc}
\]
\[
\rightarrow 4)-\beta-\text{D-Man}(2 \text{NAc}3 \text{N}) \text{A}-(1 \rightarrow 4)-\beta-\text{D-Man}(2 \text{NAc}3 \text{NAc}) \text{A}-(1 \rightarrow 3)-\alpha-\text{D-FucNAc}-(1-
\]
\[
\begin{array}{c}
3 \\
\hline
\end{array}
\]
\[
\text{CH}_3 \text{C}=\text{NH} \quad \sim 30\%
\]
\[
\text{OAc}
\]

O-antigen biosynthesis proceeds by either a Wzy (Rfc)-dependent or Wzy-independent pathway (Whitfield, 1995). Wzy is the O-antigen polymerase, and appears to be required for assembly of heteropolymeric O antigens (Mäkelä and Stocker, 1984). In contrast, homopolymeric O antigens appear to be assembled processively without an O-antigen polymerase (Whitfield, 1995). Wzy-dependent LPS synthesis has been shown to involve at least two other gene products which act in concert with Wzy, called Wzx (RfbX) and Wzz (Rol). Here, we describe the sequencing and characterization of the B-band O antigen biosynthetic gene cluster from *P. aeruginosa* O5. This cluster was previously shown to contain a *wzy* gene, and identification of homologues of the *wzx* and *wzz* genes typical of a Wzy-dependent system will be discussed. The size of the O5 B-band cluster, distribution of *wbp* genes among the 20 serotypes of *P. aeruginosa*, and

Fig. 1. Structures of the O antigens of *P. aeruginosa* serotypes O2, O5, O16, O18, and O20. The structures of the O antigens of the O5-related group are shown (adapted from Knirel et al., 1988; Knirel and Kochetkov, 1994). The structures are highly similar, varying only in the type of glycosidic linkage (i.e. $\alpha$-$\mathrm{D}$- versus $\beta$-$\mathrm{D}$-$N$-acetylfucosamine), isomer ($\beta$-$\mathrm{D}$-mannuronic versus $\alpha$-$\mathrm{L}$-guluronic), or presence of O-acetyl groups.

proposed biosynthetic pathways for the synthesis and assembly of the O antigen are outlined.

Results

Sequencing of the *wbp* gene cluster

Isolation of a cosmid clone, pFV100, containing the *wbp* gene cluster of *P. aeruginosa* O5 was previously described (Lightfoot and Lam, 1993). The sequence and characterization of the *wzy* and *wbpl* genes carried on pFV100 have previously been described (de Kievit et al., 1995; Dasgupta and Lam, 1995). Sequencing of the rest of the pFV100 insert was undertaken in order to identify other genes required for synthesis of the O5 O antigen. The 24417 bp insert of pFV100 contains a large number of open reading frames (ORFs) on both strands. A total of

© 1996 Blackwell Science Ltd, *Molecular Microbiology*, **22**, 481–495

Pseudomonas aeruginosa O-antigen genes 483

2 kbp

pFV100
X H B
HXSBX
Bg H Xb X
X H
Xb S NX
Ss X X
X XXB
Gm<sup>R</sup> Gm<sup>R</sup>

pFV162

Fig. 2. The wbp cluster of *P*. aeruginosa serotype O5 on pFV100. The genes of the wbp cluster are shown as arrows above the restriction map of the insert of cosmid pFV100. The *wzz* and *uvrB* genes were truncated during cloning. The previously characterized *wzy* and *wbpl* genes are shown in black; other genes thought to be involved in O-antigen biosynthesis are shown in grey; and non-O-antigen genes and the insertion sequence IS1209 are shown in white. The sites of gentamicin-resistance-cassette insertions into *wbpm* are shown as black triangles. B, *BamHI*; Bg, *BglII*; H, *HindIII*; N, *NruI*; S, *SpeI*; Ss, *SstI*; Xb, *Xbal*; X, *Xhol*.

16 ORFs thought to be involved in synthesis of the O5 O antigen were identified (Fig. 2, Table 1). These genes were designated *wzz*, *wzy*, and *wbpA–wbpN*. An additional three genes not thought to be involved with LPS synthesis were identified (*hisH*, *hisF*, *uvrB*; Fig. 2, Table 1). A novel insertion sequence, which we have named IS1209, is present between *wbpl* and *wbpm* (Fig. 2). No ORFs thought to be involved with LPS synthesis were identified on the opposite strand.

**Distribution of the wbp genes among the 20 serotypes of P. aeruginosa and identification of a serogroup-specific region**

Southern blot analysis of the 20 serotypes of *P*. aeruginosa using various *wbp* genes as probes revealed an interesting dichotomy. All of the probes tested that were prepared from DNA 5′ to the IS1209 element (Fig. 2) hybridized only with chromosomal DNA from serotypes O2, O5, O16, O18 and O20 (Table 1). These five serotypes form a serogroup owing to similarities in their O antigens (Fig. 1). Although the O5 O antigen is biochemically and serologically distinct from the others in this group, none of the *wbp* genes examined hybridized only to serotype O5 chromosomal DNA at high stringency.

In contrast, probes prepared from DNA 3′ to the IS1209 element hybridized with the chromosomal DNA from all 20 serotypes of *P*. aeruginosa (Table 1). The insertion sequence itself hybridized to all serotypes except serotype O12. Therefore, the insertion sequence is located at the junction between the portion of the pFV100 insert common only to O5 and related serotypes (hereinafter referred to as the ‘O5 serogroup-specific region’) and the remainder, which is common to all serotypes. Despite the fact that the DNA 3′ of the insertion element is found in all serotypes, based on homology to known genes, this region contains at least two ORFs (*wbpm* and *wbpN*) that could be involved in O5 LPS biosynthesis.

A 1.5 kb *Xhol–HindIII* probe from the extreme 5′ end of the insert of pFV100 (Fig. 2) hybridized only to the five related serotypes, indicating that the 5′ end of the O5 serogroup-specific region had not been cloned. This probe was used to isolate an overlapping cosmid, pFV400 (L. L. Burrows, D. Chow and J. S. Lam, unpublished). Using DNA from pFV400, the 5′ end of the O5 serogroup-specific region was localized to a 1.9 kb *SstI–Xhol* fragment located 1.1 kb upstream of the 5′ end of pFV100. Preliminary sequence analysis of this upstream fragment revealed no additional ORFs thought to be involved with LPS synthesis, and no insertion sequences (L. L. Burrows and J. S. Lam, unpublished). By localizing the 5′ end of the O5 serogroup-specific region to the 1.9 kb *SstI–Xhol* fragment, the total amount of DNA which is specific to O5 and related serotypes was determined to be ≈20 kb.

**Composition and chromosomal milieu of the O5 wbp cluster**

The percentage G+C content of the *P*. aeruginosa chromosome has been determined by various methods to be ≈65–67% (Palleroni, 1984; West and Iglewski, 1988). The percentage G+C content of the *P*. aeruginosa O5 *wbp* cluster within the O5 serogroup-specific region averages 51.1% overall, with individual genes ranging from a low of 44.5% (*wbpG*) to a high of 56.8% (*wbpk*) (Table 1). These results are consistent with those observed in other O-antigen gene clusters, averaging at least 10% below the chromosomal background (Schnaitman and Klena, 1993). The percentage G+C content of the *wbpm* and *wbpN* genes, which fall outside the O5 serogroup-specific region, averages 62.6%.

In enteric bacteria, the O-antigen genes are often linked to *gnd* (encoding 6-phosphogluconate dehydrogenase) and *his* on the chromosome. While sequence analysis revealed no homology to *gnd* in the regions flanking the

© 1996 Blackwell Science Ltd, *Molecular Microbiology*, **22**, 481–495

Table 1. P. aeruginosa serotype O5 wbp gene cluster.

| Locus   | Base positions    | %G+C | Protein encoded | AAs<sup>d</sup> | pI<sup>e</sup> | H.I.<sup>f</sup> | Distribution<sup>g</sup> |
|---------|------------------|------|-----------------|---------------|--------------|----------------|------------------------|
| wzz<sup>a</sup> | 1–479          | 49.5 | 38.6 kDa       | 158           | ND           | ND             | 2, 5, 16, 18, 20        |
| wbpA    | 1286–2596        | 54.5 | 48.2 kDa       | 436           | 5.36         | –0.08          | 2, 5, 16, 18, 20        |
| wbpB    | 2670–3620        | 52.8 | 35.8 kDa       | 316           | 6.40         | –0.27          | 2, 5, 16, 18, 20        |
| wbpC    | 3689–5578        | 53.1 | 69.9 kDa       | 629           | 9.06         | 0.48           | 2, 5, 16, 18, 20        |
| wbpD    | 5575–6066        | 53.9 | 17.4 kDa       | 163           | 8.25         | 0.19           | 2, 5, 16, 18, 20        |
| wbpE    | 6152–6982        | 52.8 | 29.9 kDa       | 276           | 5.26         | –0.01          | 2, 5, 16, 18, 20        |
| wzy<sup>b</sup> | 7236–8552      | 44.6 | 48.9 kDa       | 438           | 9.63         | 0.80           | 2, 5, 16, 18, 20        |
| wbpF    | 8549–9499        | 49.0 | 33.8 kDa       | 316           | 9.49         | 0.99           | 2, 5, 16, 18, 20        |
| hisH    | 9831–10388       | 49.3 | 20.9 kDa       | 185           | ND           | ND             | 2, 5, 16, 18, 20        |
| hisF    | 10388–11143      | 50.0 | 27.5 kDa       | 251           | ND           | ND             | 2, 5, 16, 18, 20        |
| wbpG    | 11281–12411      | 44.5 | 43.4 kDa       | 376           | 8.15         | –0.38          | 2, 5, 16, 18, 20        |
| wbpH    | 12427–13548      | 45.6 | 42.0 kDa       | 373           | 8.79         | –0.21          | 2, 5, 16, 18, 20        |
| wbpl    | 13545–14633      | 50.2 | 39.7 kDa       | 362           | 5.40         | 0.06           | 2, 5, 16, 18, 20        |
| wbpJ    | 14651–15892      | 54.5 | 45.3 kDa       | 413           | 6.54         | 0.10           | 2, 5, 16, 18, 20        |
| wbpK    | 15889–16851      | 56.8 | 34.4 kDa       | 320           | 9.03         | 0.14           | 2, 5, 16, 18, 20        |
| wbpL<sup>c</sup> | 16911–17822   | 55.5 | 32.9 kDa       | 303           | 9.08         | 0.84           | 2, 5, 16, 18, 20        |
| IS1209  | 17935–19144      | 59.3 | ND             | N/A           | N/A          | N/A            | 1–11, 13–20            |
| wbpM    | 19678–21675      | 61.9 | 74.5 kDa       | 665           | 9.33         | 0.09           | 1–20                   |
| wbpN    | 22302–23693      | 63.6 | 48.5 kDa       | 463           | 6.12         | –0.09          | 1–20                   |
| uvrB<sup>a</sup> | 23704–24417   | 61.2 | 26.7 kDa       | 238           | ND           | ND             | 1–20                   |

a. Truncated ORF.  
b. de Kievit et al. (1995).  
c. wbpL was originally named rfbA (Dasgupta and Lam, 1995).  
d. Number of amino acids.  
e. Isoelectric point of the protein, calculated using GENERUNNER for Windows (Hastings Software).  
f. Hydropathic index of the protein, calculated using DNASIS for Windows (Hitachi Software). Positive values indicate the protein is hydrophobic, while negative values indicate the protein is hydrophilic.  
g. Distribution of this gene among the 20 serotypes of P. aeruginosa, based on positive hybridization in high-stringency Southern blot analysis.  
ND, not determined.  
N/A, not applicable.

that can be linked to the lipid A-core in rough strains. ECA is composed of N-acetyl-β-glucosamine (GlcNAc), ManNAcA and 4-acetamido-4,6-dideoxy-β-galactose (Fuc4NAc) (Meier-Dieter *et al.*, 1992). CapL is involved in production of the type 1 capsular polysaccharide of Staphylococcus aureus, which is composed of taurine, and 2-acetamido-2,6-dideoxy-β-galactose (Fuc2NAc) and 2-acetamido-2-β-galacturonic acid (Gal2NAcA) (Lin *et al.*, 1994). Many dehydrogenases, epimerases and dehydratases contain a consensus nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD)-binding domain, thought to be important for activity (Wyk and Reeves, 1989). An alignment of bacterial proteins involved in exopolysaccharide biosynthesis with the consensus NAD-binding sequence (GxxGxxG; Macpherson *et al.*, 1994) is shown in Table 3.

WbpC and/or WbpD are probably involved in the acetylation of the mannuronic acid residues comprising two-thirds of the O5 repeat unit. WbpC is a large, hydrophobic protein of 629 amino acids that is similar, particularly in its amino terminus, to putative 3-O-acyltransferases (Table 2). Based on these similarities, WbpC, particularly the amino-terminal portion, may have acyltransferase activity. WbpD, like BplB, appears to be an acetyl transferase based on its homology to serine O-acetyl transferases (CysE) from a variety of bacteria as well as from the plant Arabidopsis thaliana (Table 2).

Several *wbp* genes were found to be similar to *bpl* genes from Bordetella pertussis (Allen and Maskell, 1996), suggesting a common ancestry. *B. pertussis* produces a lipo-oligosaccharide (LOS) with a terminal trisaccharide composed of GlcNAc, 2,3-diNAcManA, and N-acetyl-N-methyl fucosamine (FucNAcMe) (Allen and Maskell, 1996).

WbpE appears to be a member of the protein family comprised of BplC and DegT/DnrJ/ERYC1/SpsC (Table 2), which are thought to be involved in the biosynthesis of 2,3-, 2,4-, and 2,6-dideoxy sugars (Thorson *et al.*, 1993). The function of WbpE is probably analogous to that of BplC in *B. pertussis* (Allen and Maskell, 1996), catalysing amination of the two ManNAc residues to form ManNAcN.

Based on its homology to BplD (Table 2), WbpI is likely the UDP-N-acetylglucosamine (GlcNAc) to UDP-ManNAc epimerase catalysing the first step in the biosynthesis of both Man(2NAc3N)A and 2,3-diNAcManA.

---

The Fuc2NAc biosynthetic genes, *wbpB*, *wbpK*, and *wbpM*

WbpB is similar to putative oxido-reductases, and to BplA, a putative dehydrogenase (Table 2). The similarity between WbpB and BplA suggests that they could have similar functions. However, based on its similarity to exopolysaccharide dehydrogenases, WbpA is more likely than WbpB

Pseudomonas aeruginosa O-antigen genes 485

to be responsible for formation of Man(2NAc3N)A from Man2NAc3N in *P. aeruginosa*. Instead, WbpB may be an oxidoreductase, involved in the synthesis of Fuc2NAc. Unlike the other putative dehydrogenases and dehydratases encoded in the *wbp* cluster, WbpB does not contain a consensus NAD-binding domain, and may use an alternative acceptor.

WbpK is similar both to putative UDP-galactose-4-epimerases and dehydratases (Table 2). All of these proteins have a consensus NAD-binding domain near their N-termini (Table 3). RfbB and RffG are thought to be involved in the biosynthesis of Fuc4NAc (Meier-Dieter *et al.*, 1992). Based on these homologies, we suggest that WbpK is the dehydratase required for the biosynthesis of UDP-Fuc2NAc from UDP-N-acetylgalactosamine (UDP-GalNAc).

WbpM is similar to a range of proteins involved in exopolysaccharide synthesis (Table 2). *wbpM* is unusual in that, unlike other *wbp* genes described above, it hybridizes to chromosomal DNA from all 20 serotypes (Table 1). WbpM-knockout mutants were generated by insertion of a gentamicin-resistance cassette into either a unique *Nru*I or *Sst*I site within *wbpM* (Fig. 2), followed by homologous recombination into the wild-type O5 chromosome. The presence of the gentamicin-resistance cassette in the chromosomes of mutants was confirmed by Southern blot analysis (not shown). Interruption of *wbpM* at *Nru*I resulted in Gm<sup>R</sup> mutants which exhibited a B-band LPS-minus phenotype (Fig. 3). This result confirms the involvement of the *wbpM* gene product in LPS biosynthesis, despite the fact it lies outside of the O5 serogroup-specific region. Interestingly, interruption of *wbpM* at the *Sst*I site, which corresponds to loss of the C-terminal 116 amino acids of WbpM, did not appear to have any effect on B-band LPS production (Fig. 3). In contrast, loss of 98 amino acids from the C terminus of TrsG, the WbpM homologue from Yersinia enterocolitica O3, had a profound influence on core structure (Skurnik *et al.*, 1995).

The carboxy-terminal half of the WbpM protein is similar to GalE (UDP-GalNAc4-epimerase) from several bacterial species, suggesting that WbpM may have originated as a fusion protein. In support of this hypothesis, WbpM is similar to two adjacent ORFs (ORF10 and ORF11) in the O-antigen cluster of Vibrio cholerae O139 (Comstock *et al.*, 1996). The homologies to ORF10 and ORF11 lie in the amino-terminal and carboxy-terminal halves of WbpM, respectively (Table 2; Fig. 4), suggesting that two similar ORFs may have fused during the evolution of WbpM and the BplL/TrsG/CapD group. Two putative NAD-binding domains are present in WbpM, BplL and TrsG (Table 3), again suggesting fusion of two proteins containing NAD-binding domains.

The terminal trisaccharide of *B. pertussis* LOS, type 1

© 1996 Blackwell Science Ltd, *Molecular Microbiology*, **22**, 481–495

| P. aeruginosa protein | Similar proteins | Putative function | % identity (% similarity) | Database Accession Number |
|----------------------|-----------------|------------------|-------------------------|---------------------------|
| WbpA                 | EpsD-Burkholderia solanacearum | Dehydrogenase | 33.1 (50.6) | U17898 |
|                      | CapL-Staphylococcus aureus | Capsule synthesis | 31.6 (45.3) | U10927 |
|                      | VipA-Salmonella enterica serovar Typhi | Vi antigen synthesis | 30.8 (44.9) | D14156 |
|                      | RffD (o379)-Escherichia coli | UDP-ManNAc dehydrogenase | 30.2 (42.8) | M87049 |
| WbpB                 | LmbZ-Streptomyces lincolnensis | Oxidoreductase | 19.3 (28.2) | X79146 |
|                      | BplA-Bordetella pertussis | Dehydrogenase | 12.3 (17.0) | X90711 |
|                      | Pur10-Streptomyces alboniger | Oxidoreductase | 5.7 (12.0) | X92429 |
| WbpC                 | HI0392-Haemophilus influenzae | Unknown | 24.9 (37.2) | U00073 |
|                      | ExoZ-Rhizobium meliloti | O-acylase | 27.4 (40.3) | U50300 |
|                      | AcyA-Streptomyces thermotolerans | O-acylase | 24.9 (37.2) | X58126 |
|                      | Unknown-Caenorhabditis elegans | Unknown | 18.0 (26.7) | D30759 |
|                      | NodX-Rhizobium leguminosarum | O-acylase | 16.3 (23.1) | X07990 |
| WbpD                 | BplB-B. pertussis | Acetylase | 73.6 (83.4) | X90711 |
|                      | CysE-Buchnera aphidicola | Serine O-acetylase | 28.2 (45.4) | M90644 |
|                      | CysE-Arabidopsis thaliana | Serine O-acetylase | 30.7 (42.4) | L42212 |
|                      | CysE-H. influenzae | Serine O-acetylase | 28.2 (39.9) | U32689 |
|                      | CysE-E. coli | Serine O-acetylase | 28.8 (38.6) | M15745 |
| WbpE                 | BplC-B. pertussis | Aminase | 64.1 (75.7) | X90711 |
|                      | DegT-Bacillus subtilis | Dideoxy sugar biosynthesis | 51.1 (62.4) | M29002 |
|                      | ERYC1-Saccharopolyspora erythrae | Dideoxy sugar biosynthesis | 37.2 (48.2) | P14290 |
|                      | SpsC-B. subtilis | Dideoxy sugar biosynthesis | 37.3 (53.3) | P39623 |
|                      | DnrJ-Streptomyces peucetius | Dideoxy sugar biosynthesis | 34.1 (50.4) | P25048 |
| WbpF                 | ExoT-R. meliloti | Succinoglycan export | 20.3 (32.3) | Z22646 |
|                      | FeuC-B. subtilis | Iron uptake | 17.1 (28.8) | L19954 |
| WbpG                 | ORF2-Vibrio cholerae O139 | Unknown | 19.0 (23.7) | U47057 |
|                      | Pfk-Lactococcus lactis | Phosphofructokinase | 9.7 (14.4) | L07920 |
|                      | NrfB-H. influenzae | Formyl-dependent nitrate reductase | 5.8 (9.3) | U32733 |
| WbpH                 | RfaK-Neisseria meningitidis | Glycosyl transferase | 20.1 (28.9) | U35713 |
|                      | CapM-S. aureus | GalNAcA transferase | 17.4 (29.7) | U10927 |
|                      | IcsA-N. meningitidis | Glycosyl transferase | 17.1 (27.0) | U39810 |
|                      | BplH-B. pertussis | Glycosyl transferase | 16.6 (23.0) | X90711 |
|                      | BplE-B. pertussis | Glycosyl transferase | 15.8 (24.6) | X90711 |

capsule of S. aureus, and outer core of Y. enterocolitica O3 all contain either Fuc2NAc, Fuc4NAc, or FucNAcMe. Based on these similarities, WbpM could be involved in the biosynthesis of the Fuc2NAc residue of the O5 O-antigen, probably functioning as an epimerase or dehydrogenase.

The sugar transferase genes, wbpH, wbpJ, and wbpL

WbpH and WbpJ are similar to a number of glycosyl transferases (Table 2). WbpH is similar to BplE, while WbpJ is similar to both BplE and BplH (Table 2), which are glycosyl transferases involved in synthesis of the terminal trisaccharide of the LOS of B. pertussis. Because both WbpH and WbpJ are similar to BplE, they are probably the transferases responsible for the attachment of the two mannuronic acid residues during the formation of the O5O-antigen unit. Interestingly, although WbpH and WbpJ both appear to be ManNAcA transferases, they have little similarity to one another (14.5%). WbpJ has two putative membrane-spanning domains at the N-terminus, and may be anchored in the cytoplasmic membrane.

Identification of the wbpL (rfbA) gene has previously been reported (Dasgupta and Lam, 1995), but no function was ascribed to it. The similarity of WbpL to TrsF, a putative GalNAc transferase from Y. enterocolitica O3 (Table 2), and to Rfe, the GlcNAc transferase involved in the initiation of biosynthesis of ECA and some O antigens (Meier-Dieter et al., 1992; Schnaitman and Klena, 1993; Macpherson et al., 1994), suggests it is the initial transferase. WbpL also has similarity (data not shown) to the N-acetyl muramoyl pentapeptide transferases from B. subtilis, E. coli and Haemophilus influenzae (Henriques et al., 1992; Fujita et al., 1994; Fleischmann et al., 1995). These enzymes transfer the first muramic acid residue onto undecaprenol to initiate peptidoglycan biosynthesis. In light of the above similarities, we propose that WbpL initiates biosynthesis of individual O-antigen units by addition of Fuc2NAc to undecaprenol. Because the first

Pseudomonas aeruginosa O-antigen genes 487

Table 2. Continued.

| P. aeruginosa protein | Similar proteins | Putative function | % identity (% similarity) | Database Accession Number |
|----------------------|------------------|--------------------|--------------------------|---------------------------|
| WbpI                 | BplD-B. pertussis | GlcNAc to ManNAc epimerase | 56.6 (69.3) | X90711 |
|                      | EpsC-B. solanacearum | GalNAcA biosynthesis | 29.3 (42.3) | U17898 |
|                      | RffE(o 389)-E. coli | UDP-GlcNAc-2-epimerase | 12.9 (18.8) | M87049 |
|                      | YvyH-B. subtilis | Unknown | 12.3 (18.5) | P39131 |
|                      | RfbC-S. enterica serovar Borreze | UDP-GlcNAc-2-epimerase | 11.8 (18.2) | L39794 |
| WbpJ                 | BplE-B. pertussis | Glycosyl transferase | 39.5 (52.2) | X90711 |
|                      | TrsE-Yersinia enterocolitica O:3 | Galactosyl transferase | 15.7 (26.7) | Z47767 |
| WbpK                 | ORF 6-V. cholerae O139 | UDP-galactose-4-epimerase | 37.2 (53.8) | U47057 |
|                      | ExoB-R. meliloti | UDP-galactose-4-epimerase | 22.8 (32.8) | X58126 |
|                      | StrP-Streptomyces glaucescens | Dehydratase or epimerase | 22.5 (34.7) | X78974 |
|                      | RffG(o 355)-E. coli | TDP-glucose dehydratase | 25.5 (38.1) | M87049 |
|                      | GraE-Streptomyces violaceorubens | Unknown | 21.3 (29.7) | L37334 |
|                      | RfbB-N. meningitidis | TDP-glucose dehydratase | 21.9 (31.6) | L09189 |
|                      | RfbB-E. coli | TDP-glucose dehydratase | 18.8 (28.5) | U23775 |
| WbpL                 | TrsF-Y. enterocolitica O3 | UDP-GalNAc transferase | 54.5 (67.7) | Z47767 |
|                      | Rfe-Mycobacterium leprae | UDP-GlcNAc transferase | 28.7 (46.5) | U15186 |
|                      | Rfe-M. tuberculosis | UDP-GlcNAc transferase | 28.5 (46.6) | Z73419 |
|                      | Rfe-E. coli | UDP-GlcNAc transferase | 19.8 (30.3) | M76129 |
|                      | Rfe-H. influenzae | UDP-GlcNAc transferase | 19.1 (29.7) | U32791 |
| WbpM                 | BplL-B. pertussis | Dehydratase | 48.4 (59.6) | X90711 |
|                      | TrsG-Y. enterocolitica O3 | UDP-GalNAc biosynthesis | 48.1 (60.0) | Z47767 |
|                      | CapD-S. aureus | Unknown | 39.2 (53.9) | U10927 |
|                      | ORF 10-V. cholerae O139 | Unknown | 32.5 (52.4)b | U47057 |
|                      | ORF 11-V. cholerae O139 | Unknown | 52.7 (61.0)c | U47057 |
| WbpN                 | NifV-Rhodobacter sphaeroides | Homocitrate synthase | 19.2 (27.1) | Q01181 |

a. % similarity represents the sum of % identical amino acids and % conserved substitutions.
b. With the amino terminus of WbpM.
c. With the carboxy terminus of WbpM.

transferase in the biosynthesis of O antigen interacts with undecaprenol, it would be expected to be a hydrophobic protein. WbpL is the most hydrophobic (hydropathy index 0.84; Table 1) of the three putative transferases.

The wbpF, wbpG, and wbpN genes

The similarity of WbpF to the ExoT protein of Rhizobium meliloti (Table 2), which is thought to be involved in succinoglycan transport, and to FeuC of B. subtilis, which is required for iron uptake, suggests a role for WbpF in export. WbpF is the most hydrophobic protein encoded by the wbp cluster (hydropathy index 0.99; Table 1) and has 9–10 putative membrane-spanning domains. This secondary structure is reminiscent of that of Wzx, the putative flippase found in Wzy-dependent O-antigen clusters (Schnaitman and Klena, 1993). Recently, Liu et al. (1996) confirmed that Wzx mutants accumulate one O-antigen unit on undecaprenol on the cytoplasmic face of the inner membrane. WbpF-knockout mutants generated by insertion of a gentamicin-resistance cassette into wbpF are deficient in B-band LPS (L. L. Burrows and J. S. Lam, unpublished). We are investigating whether WbpF is the P. aeruginosa O5 equivalent of Wzx.

The functions of WbpG and WbpN are unclear at this time. Insertion of a gentamicin-resistance cassette into wbpG gives rise to B-band-deficient mutants (D. F. Charter and J. S. Lam, unpublished), confirming its involvement in O-antigen biosynthesis. Interestingly, the similarity of WbpG to NrfB (Table 2) centres around the metal-binding recognition site CXXCH, of which there are five in NrfB and one in WbpG (amino acids 24–28).

The hisH, hisF and uvrB genes

The histidine operon, containing genes required for the biosynthesis of the amino acid histidine, has previously been shown to lie adjacent to the O-antigen clusters of

© 1996 Blackwell Science Ltd, Molecular Microbiology, 22, 481–495

Table 3. Alignment of the consensus NAD-binding sites of bacterial proteins involved in exopolysaccharide biosynthesis.

| Protein | Source          | Amino acid position | NAD-binding domains                          | Accession number |
|---------|-----------------|--------------------|---------------------------------------------|------------------|
| WbpA    | P. aeruginosa   | 7–45               | LIGIVGL-GYVGLPIMLRYNAI----------GGDVLGID     | U50396           |
| WbpK    | P. aeruginosa   | 5–32               | AVMTGASGFVG SALCEL ART-----GYAVIAVVRVVVE     | U50396           |
| WbpM    | P. aeruginosa   | 300–330            | VVMVTGAGGSIGSEL CRQIMSC-------SPSVLILFE      | U50396           |
| WbpM    | P. aeruginosa   | 524–553            | LVIQAGSMGQGGDV FVLDMGPP--------VKILELAE      | U50396           |
| AlgD    | P. aeruginosa   | 2–30               | RISIFGL-GYVGAVCAGCLSAR--------GGEVIGVD       | Y00337           |
| BplL    | B. pertussis    | 287–317            | VVMVTGAGGSIGSEL CRQILAL------RPRKLVLFE      | X90711           |
| BplL    | B. pertussis    | 495–524            | LVLQAGAMGESGSVFVLDMGEP-------VLIRELAE       | X90711           |
| CapD    | S. aureus       | 283–316            | TILVTGAGGSIGSEICRQVSKF------DPQKIILLGHGE    | U10927           |
| CapI    | S. aureus       | 2–31               | KILITGTAGFIGSHLAKKL IKQ------GGYVIGVD      | U10927           |
| CapL    | S. aureus       | 4–32               | NIAVVGL-GYVGLPVAVTFGNK-------HKVIGFD         | U10927           |
| EpsD    | B. solanacearum | 11–39              | TISVVGL-GYIGLPTATVLASR------QRELIGVD        | U17898           |
| ExoB    | R. meliloti     | 5–34               | NILVVGGAGYIGSHTCLQLAAD------GYQPVVYD        | X58126           |
| GalE    | E. coli         | 2–31               | RVLVTGSSGVIGSKTCVQLLQN------GHDVIIILD       | U00278           |
| GraE    | S. violaceorubin | 2–37               | RLIVTGAAGFIGSHYVREILAG---SYESDDVHVTVVD      | L37334           |
| RffG    | E. coli         | 3–33               | KILITGGAGFIGSALVRYIINE-----TSDAVVVVD        | M87049           |
| ORF1    | Shigella sonnei | 9–36               | KIGIIGL-GYVGLPLAVEFGKK------VTTIGFD         | U34305           |
| ORF7    | E. coli         | 8–35               | KIAIIGL-GYVGLPLAAEFGKI------RQVVGFD         | Z21706           |
| ORF6    | V. cholerae     | 11–49              | SILLTGSTGFVGTNLVKSLTLKSDYIVKSAVRHAVNKD        | U47057           |
| ORF10   | V. cholerae     | 145–192            | VYLIYGA-GSAGRQLAIALRNS--ENYKEVIMGMQVHD       | U47057           |
| RfbB    | E. coli         | 2–32               | KILVTGGAGFIGSAVVRHIINN-----TQDSVVNVD        | U23775           |
| RffD    | E. coli         | 5–33               | TISVIGL-GYIGLPTAAAFASR------QKQVIGVD        | M87049           |
| StrP    | S. glaucescens  | 2–31               | RILLTGHQGYLGTVMAPVLTAA------GHQVTGLD         | X78974           |
| TrsG    | Y. enterocolitica | 280–310            | VVMVTGAGGSIGSEL CRQIIVE-----KPSLLILFD      | Z47767           |
| TrsG    | Y. enterocolitica | 490–516            | LVIQAGAMGQGGDV FVLDMGDP------VKIID         | Z47767           |
| UGD     | S. aureus       | 2–30               | RVAIFGT-GYVGLVTGTCLAEV------GHHVICVD        | U10927           |
| VipA    | S. enterica serovar typhi | 8–35 | KIAIIGL-GYVGLPLAVEFGKS------RQVVGFD         | D14156           |
| VipB    | S. enterica serovar typhi | 17–49 | RWLITGVAGFIGSGLLEELLFL------NQT VIGLD        | D14156           |

several enteric species (reviewed in Schnaitman and Klena, 1993). Since no his genes were found adjacent to either the A-band (11–13 min) or B-band (37 min) clusters (Lightfoot and Lam, 1993; Holloway et al., 1994), the identification of hisF and hisH situated between wbpF and wbpG (Fig. 2) was unexpected. While these his genes are transcribed in the same direction as the wbp genes, the direction of transcription of the his genes

Fig. 3. Analysis of knockout mutations in wbpM. The gene-replacement strategy of Schweizer and Hoang (1995) was used to create knockout mutations at two different sites within the wbpM gene (see Fig. 2). O5, P. aeruginosa O5 parent strain; wbpM–1.1 and 1.2, two separate isolates with the gentamicin-resistance cassette inserted at a unique SstI site; wbpM–2.1 and 2.2, two separate isolates with the gentamicin-resistance cassette inserted at a unique NruI site.
A. Silver-stained 12.5% SDS-PAGE gel.
B. Western immunoblot using mAbN1F10, specific for A-band LPS.
C. Western immunoblot using mAbMF15–4, specific for B-band LPS. The loss of WbpM does not affect the expression of A-band LPS.

WbpM MLDNLRIK--LLGLPRRYKRMLOVAADVTLVWLSLWLAFILVRLLGTEDMIS 48 WbpM
TrSG MFLVF----LLSLPRPVKRTIMLLLDTILLIALAYWGAFWVRL---DVDS 42 TrSG
Bp1L MTLPYAIRRLFVDLPRPFKQMLAIVLDAAVILLGAFHLALWLRFEL----- 45 Bp1L
CapD MT------SISAKLRFLLIIIDSEIVTFSVFLGYA----LEPYFK 37 CapD
ORF10 MARINF IWNLSRVNKRIISVLVDA---FFLIFSFSAYWWVGNVVEIHS 47 ORF11

WbpM PFSG-HAWLFIAAPLVAIPLE--IRFGMYRAVMRYLGNDALIAIAKAVTI 95 WbpM
TrSG PFTSIEQWVAIAA--IIPPTLFAYTKLGLYRTVLYRVSAAKIVSIVLVGVVL 91 TrSG
Bp1L FFLTDDQYLFLSLLACAGGIAALAAGVYLYILRYMSERVLAAILGGIVV 94 Bp1L
CapD GYSIDLLVLSSSVILLVSHHIFAYV-FNLYHRAWEYASVSELMSVLKAVTS 86 CapD
ORF10 -DSIPYLLATIVVTILSF----TRLGLYRAILRYLTFHAAAVSVGTLI 92 ORF11

WbpM SALVISLLVYMYRSPPAAVPRLSVFENYYWLSMLLIIGGLRLAMRQYFMGDW 145 WbpM
TrSG SSGLLVLVGSYFL----GVVLPRTVSVMFFESLVLICGSRLIFFRMLLN---- 135 TrSG
Bp1L SVMVVTAGNTFLQLAT---ISRGVLVLYAALALVGLIGVRLIARKLL---- 138 Bp1L
CapD SIVVTLLLVSLLISESPFLR---LYFITWMMHLLLIIGGSRLFMRVY---RR 131 CapD
ORF10 SAASVATAAFYFDAP----VPRSILPIYGTFCLLCGGGSRLIVRVLVSG-- 137 ORF11

WbpM YSAVQSVPFLNRQDGLRPRAIYGAGAAANQLVAAILRLGRAMR---PVAFID 193 WbpM
TrSG YGVRGQIP----VVYGAGASGRQLLPALMQASEYF---PIAFVD 173 TrSG
Bp1L DDKRHRLVVNG----DRPTPVLIYGAGGAGSQLAMARTGPHYR---PVAML D 181 Bp1L
CapD DDKNQQKMTITERVKVQGYV-EDIPELVKKFRIKKIIIAIPTLSQKRLINE 174 CapD
ORF10 NDKTLENTVLMGMQVHDVSRAA---YLVDKYDVTQILLA VPSASRALSSD 177 ORF11

WbpM ILLELEPFPLHVRSMPGFMDLTSGRVKVDDLQEVDDIALLGRDSVAPRKE 290 WbpM
TrSG VVNKLENLSCEVLSSIPGMSDLVEGRAQISSLKKSIEELLGRDPVPDEK 220 TrSG
Bp1L IVEAAEPYRLRILVPSMRELIDPTNGVR-LRDVQVEDLLGRDPVAPIDT 228 Bp1L
CapD INKCNIEGVELFKMPNIEDVLSGELEVNNLKKEVEDLLGRDPVELDMA 223 CapD
ORF11 MMLVVLLHTWLINTMLLPKFY----------------RELCRQIVRQKP KALVLFELSEGLYQID 222 ORF11

WbpM LLERCIRGQVMMVTGAGGSIGSELCRQIMSCSPSVLILFEHSEYNLYSIH 340 WbpM
TrSG LLANKITGKVVMVTGAGGSIGSELCRQIVVEKPSILLIFDISEFSILYSIE 320 TrSG
Bp1L LLGRCVTDVRVMMVTGAGGSIGSELCRQILALRPKLVLVFEIAEPALYAI E 327 Bp1L
CapD LISRELTNKTIILVTGAGGSIGSELCRQVSKFDPQKIILLGHGENSIYSIH 323 CapD
ORF11 -------------------------------RELCRQIVRQKP KALVLFELSEGLYQID 54 ORF11

QELERRIKRESLSVNLILPILGSVRNPERLVDVVMRTWKVNTVYHAAAAYKHV 390
NEMAICKKNKIETEFVALLGSVQSEKRLVQIMSNFHVNTVYHAAAAYKHV 370
QDLRQRIGERNIELA-GVLGSVRDAAHCLAQLQEHGVQTITYHAAAAYKHV 375
QELS KTYGNR----TEEV PVIA DVQNKTRILEVMNEFKPYAVYHAAAHKHV 370
RELKQLMEAEGLHVEIIPLLGSVQ RINRLJVVTMKSEFKVQVVYHAAAAYKHV 104

PIVEHNIAEGVLNNVIGTLHAVQAAVQVGVQN FVLISTDKAVRPTNV MGS 440
PLENNVTEGV RNNIEGTLYCAKA AIKSGVEKFVLISTDKAVRPTNTMGA 420
PIVEHHNVSEGIRTNAFGTLNMAETA IQAGVLD FVLISTDKAVRPTNV MGA 425
PLMEYNPHEAIRNNILGTKNVAESAKEGEVSKFVMISTDKAVNP SNVMGA 420
PLVE XNVVEGV RNNV GTYYAA AIEAGVESFVLISTDKAVRPTNV MGT 154

TKRLAEMVLQALSNESAPLLFGDRKVHVNKTRFTMVRFGNVLGSSGSV 490
TKRMAELVIQALISTEQ----NKTKEFCMVRFGNVLGSSGSV 456
SKR LAELI LQA-------HAQIQDKTFRFSMVRFGNVLGSSGSV 461
TKRJAEMVIQSLNEDNS-------KTSFVAVRFGNV LGSRGSV 456
TKR MAELGLQ ALAEQ---------ENLKAKGTRFCMVRFGNV LGSSGSV 194

IPLFREQIKRGGPVTVTHPSITRYFMTIPEAAQLVIQAGSMGQGDVFVL 540
VPLFKKQIAEGGPITLTHKD IIRYFMTIPEAAQLVIQAGAMGQGDVFVL 506
VPLFRRQILEGGPITLTHPEITRYFMTIPEAAQLV LQAGAMGEGSGSVFVL 511
IPLFKNQIESGGPVTVTHPEMTRYFMTIPEAASRLVLQAGALAQGGEVFVL 506
VPLFKRQIEAGGPITVTHPDILRYFMTIPEAAQLVIQAGAMGKGDDVFVL 244

LIGDNVNPTDHPMIMRANEHILSWEAAFKVVLEQLLAAVEKDDYSVRQ LL 640
LIGDSVQHTYHPRIMTATEIMLFWDDLNLNILNKIETACNDFNYECIRSLL 606
LIGEDSRETLLHPRIMRATEYSILPYETLIMGQLRMILD RSLOMCSPRQAELL 611
LNKNEIHPQ--------QVYEKIYRGKVDHYIKTEVD LI 581
LIGDNVQKTAHERIMTANERYLPLAEFEQHNL EDKACHAFNHERRELL 344

RETVSGYAPDGEIVDWIYRQ RR E----------P 665
LEAPTGFQPTDGICDVVWQKTHSEN AKNV----IVH 638
GQIVREYAS---------------------VTYA 624
VEDLIN NFS-------------KEKLL-KIANR 599
LEAPTD FNPTDGIGDLV-WQRTQDNQTQLEKQFV H 378

Fig. 4. Alignment of WbpM-and WbpM-like proteins. The alignment of WbpM and its homologues was performed using the PC/GENE CLUSTAL program (IntelliGenetics Inc.) using the default parameters. The proteins are: WbpM, P. aeruginosa O5 (this work); TrsG, Y. enterocolitica O3 (Skurnik et al., 1995); Bp1L, B. pertussis (Allen and Maskell, 1996); CapD, S. aureus (Lin et al., 1994); and ORF10 and ORF11 are in bold.


490 L. L. Burrows, D. F. Charter and J. S. Lam

have arisen via gene duplication. The gene order of hisHAF has been found in all other bacterial species characterized to date (Alifano et al., 1996). Amino acid homology comparisons showed that the HisF and HisH proteins encoded in the P. aeruginosa wbp cluster are not closely related to any of the HisF/HisH proteins characterized thus far (data not shown).

The last partial ORF present on pFV100 encodes the first 238 amino acids of a UvrB homologue, based on similarity to UvrB of E. coli (68.1% identity/76.9% similarity; Accession Number X03722) and Micrococcus luteus (51.3% identity/64.3% similarity; Accession Number X12578). UvrB is a subunit of the UvrABC DNA-excision-repair complex involved in removal of thymidine dimers.

IS1209

Following the wbpL gene is an insertion sequence that has 64.9% nucleotide sequence identity with the previously characterized IS407 element of Burkholderia cepacia (Accession Number M38378). Both elements are similar in size (1243 bp in B. cepacia and 1209 bp in P. aeruginosa O5) and have very similar 12 bp inverted repeats (IR). Based on its size in bp, we named this element IS1209. IS407 and IS1209 are similar to those from other soil-, water- and plant-associated bacteria, including ISR1 from R. meliloti (59.8%; Accession Number X06616), IS511 from Caulobacter crescentus (58.6%; Accession Number U39501), IS1222 from Enterobacter agglomerans (65.2%; Accession Number X78052), IS476 from Xanthomonas campestris (61.0%; Accession Number M28557), and IS911 from Shigella dysenteriae (58.3%; Accession Number X17613). There have been previous reports of IS elements in P. aeruginosa (Pritchard and Vasil, 1990; Sokol et al., 1994), but none exhibit homology to the above group; therefore, this is the first report of IS1209 in P. aeruginosa. Southern blot analysis using IS1209 as a probe showed that it is present in the reference strains of 19 out of 20 serotypes of P. aeruginosa (Table 1).

Discussion

Proposed pathway for biosynthesis of the O5 O-antigen unit

A proposed scheme for biosynthesis of the component sugars of the O5 O antigen showing the possible role of various proteins encoded by the wbp cluster is shown in Fig. 6. The precursor for both the N-acetylfucosamine and mannuronic acid residues is thought to be UDP-GlcNAc. We propose that both mannuronic acid residues follow a similar path of epimerization, amination, and dehydrogenation before branching at the final substitution stage. One branch leads to a further acetylation to

Fig. 5. In vitro protein expression of wbp-encoded HisH and HisF. An in vitro protein expression kit (E. coli S30 Extract System for Circular DNA; Promega) was used to examine the expression of proteins from the recombinant plasmid pFV162 (see Fig. 2). The insert of pFV162 was cloned in both orientations into pUCP26. pUCP26 is the vector control; pFV162(+) has the 3.2 kb insert cloned downstream of the lacZ promoter of pUCP26; and pFV162(-) has the insert cloned in the opposite orientation. Molecular mass standards in kilodaltons (kDa) are indicated on the left-hand side. Proteins with approximate molecular masses corresponding to the predicted sizes of HisH (20.9 kDa) and HisF (27.5 kDa) were detected (white arrowheads).

adjacent to previously characterized O-antigen clusters is opposite that of the rfb genes (Mäkelä and Stocker, 1984; Batchelor et al., 1992).

The sequence of hisH lacks an AUG initiation codon at the location predicted for the start of the protein based on amino acid homology. There are potential starts at three GUG codons located 51, 72, and 132 bp upstream of the first AUG, located at base 9831. In vitro protein-expression analysis of this region shows the products of the hisH and hisF genes are expressed in both orientations (Fig. 5), implying that a promoter region preceding the his genes can be recognized in E. coli. The size of the protein corresponding to the product of hisH is ≈21 kDa, indicating that it is probably translated from the AUG codon at base 9831 (predicted size 20.9 kDa). Although Pseudomonas promoters have not been extensively characterized, there appear to be some similarities with E. coli promoters (Deretic et al., 1989). A potential σ⁷⁰-like promoter sequence is located ≈200 bp upstream of the hisH initiation codon.

Although the products of the hisH and hisF genes have been shown to form a heterodimeric enzyme complex, the hisH and hisF genes are usually separated by a third gene, hisA (Rieder et al., 1994; Alifano et al., 1996). The hisA and hisH genes are highly related and are thought to

Pseudomonas aeruginosa O-antigen genes 491


UDP-Glc2NAc
↓ WbpM
epimerization
UDP-Gal2NAc
↓ WbpK
dehydration
UDP-Fuc2NAc
↓ WbpB
oxido-reduction
C₅₅P
WbpL
transfer
C₅₅P
FucNAc
↓ WbpJ
transfer
C₅₅P
FucNAc
Man(2NAc3N*)A
↓ WbpH
transfer
C₅₅P
FucNAc
Man(2NAc3N*)A
Man(2NAc3NAc)A



WbpI
epimerization
UDP-Man2NAc
↓ WbpE
amination
UDP-Man2NAc3N
↓ WbpA
dehydrogenation
UDP-Man(2NAc3N)A
*3N substitution
reaction(s)
↓ WbpC/D
acetylation
UDP-Man(2NAc3NAc)A


*The 3N group
is substituted
with CH₃C=NH

WbpF?
transport
Wzz, Wzy
polymerization

Fig. 6. Putative pathway for the biosynthesis of the P. aeruginosa O5 O antigen. The functions of the Wbp proteins were predicted based on their homologies to known biosynthetic proteins. UDP-GlcNAc is thought to be the common precursor for all three sugars in the O5 O antigen. The steps for the substitution of the second ManNAcA residue by CH₃C=NH are not known. No function could be predicted for either WbpG or WbpN.

produce 2,3-diNAcManA, while the other branch leads to substitution of Man(2NAc3N)A with CH₃C=NH at the 3N position. In the O5-related serotypes O2, O18, and O20, a further epimerization from mannuronic to guluronic acid takes place (Fig. 1).

While the biosynthetic pathway for Fuc4NAc is known, no biosynthetic pathway for Fuc2NAc has previously been described. The activated form has been shown to be UDP-Fuc2NAc (Shibaev, 1986). UDP-Fuc2NAc is thought to be formed through reduction of a UDP-2-acetamido-2,6-dideoxy-D-xylo-hexo-4-ulose precursor (Shibaev, 1986). Singh et al. (1990) showed that P. aeruginosa O3 produced UDP-GalNAc from UDP-GlcNAc in the presence of NADH, which corresponds to the first step towards the synthesis of UDP-Fuc2NAc. Druzhinina et al. (1988) reported the concurrent biosynthesis of UDP-GalNAc and UDP-Fuc2NAc from UDP-GlcNAc through a UDP-2-acetamido-2,6-dideoxyhexo-4-ulose intermediate in the presence of NADH. Our proposal for biosynthesis of the Fuc2NAc residue is shown in Fig. 6.

Organization of the wbp gene cluster in P. aeruginosa O5

O-antigen clusters of enteric bacteria are generally arranged such that genes necessary for sugar biosynthesis are grouped into discrete blocks located either 5' to

or flanking the transferases and other assembly genes such as wzx, wzy, and wzz (reviewed in Whitfield and Valvano, 1993; and Schnaitman and Klena, 1993). In P. aeruginosa O5, however, the O-antigen gene cluster appears to be less-clearly organized. Genes thought to encode proteins involved in the biosynthesis of Man(2NAc3N)A and 2,3-diNAcManA (wbpl, wbpE, wbpA, wbpC/D) are dispersed throughout the cluster, as are those involved in the biosynthesis of Fuc2NAc (wbpM, wbpB, wbpK; Fig. 2). The genes encoding transferases are located in the 3' region of the wbp cluster (wbpH, wbpJ, wbpL), but are separated from one another by one gene each. As in enteric O-antigen clusters, the transferase genes appear to be organized such that the gene encoding the putative first transferase, WbpL, is the most distal.

Recent results from detailed spectroscopic analysis by our laboratory showed that Fuc2NAc is the first sugar of the O-antigen unit, attached to the core oligosaccharide (I. Sadovskaya, E. Altman, J. C. Richards and J. S. Lam, in preparation). The hydrophobicity of WbpL and its homology to Rfe support the interpretation that it is the Fuc2NAc transferase. Therefore, based on their gene order and their relative hydropathic indices (-0.21 and 0.10), the wbpJ and wbpH gene products are thought to transfer Man(NAc)₂A and Man(2NAc3N)A, respectively. We are now attempting to confirm these activities biochemically.

© 1996 Blackwell Science Ltd, *Molecular Microbiology*, **22**, 481–495

492 L. L. Burrows, D. F. Charter and J. S. Lam

The O antigen of P. aeruginosa O5 is a  
Wzy-dependent heteropolymer  

The wbp cluster was previously shown to contain a wzy  
gene (de Kievit et al., 1995). At least two other gene  
products, Wzz and Wzx, are thought to be involved in  
Wzy-dependent synthesis of heteropolymeric O antigens  
(Whitfield, 1995). Here we report the identification of a  
wzz gene adjacent to the 5′ end of the wbp cluster, and  
WbpF appears to be the most likely candidate for an  
Wzx homologue, based on its hydrophathy index and  
profile.

Identification of his genes within the wbp gene  
cluster  

The identification of the hisH and hisF genes in the middle  
of the wbp cluster raises some interesting evolutionary  
questions. These two his genes are probably not native  
to P. aeruginosa, because they have a lower percentage  
G+C content than the chromosomal background (50%  
versus 67%) and they hybridize only to a limited number  
of serotypes within the O5 serogroup rather than to all  
20 serotypes. It is not uncommon for his operons to be  
located adjacent to O-antigen clusters, and it is likely  
that the his genes were acquired simultaneously with  
some or all of the wbp genes. Unfortunately, the lack of  
significant homology with any of the HisF and HisH pro-  
teins characterized to date precludes the use of these  
genes as evolutionary ‘luggage tags’.  

The positioning of the wbp cluster hisH and hisF genes  
adjacent to one another, without an intervening hisA gene,  
is unique to bacteria. It may be that the P. aeruginosa wbp-  
associated hisH gene was originally a hisA gene that  
diverged in order to be more similar to hisH than to hisA,  
or that the hisHF arrangement is ancestral to the dupli-  
cation event which resulted in the hisHAF gene order.  
Alternatively, the hisA gene may have been lost, leaving  
hisH and hisF adjacent to each other.

Dissemination of wbp genes among the 20 serotypes  
of P. aeruginosa  

The observation that no genes in the O5 wbp cluster were  
identified that hybridize only to chromosomal DNA from  
serotype O5, and not to other serotypes, was intriguing.  
The differences among the five serotypes of the O5 sero-  
group are confined to alterations in the glycosidic linkage  
of the Fuc2NAc residue (α versus β) or to the isomer pre-  
sent in the O antigen, either D-mannuronic or L-guluronic  
acid (Fig. 1). These changes could result from alterations  
in transferase activity or in epimerase activity, respec-  
tively. These small variations in the basic O-antigen struc-  
ture may be the result of lysogeny by transducing  
bacteriophages, which are able to change the apparent  

serotype of the host strain. Kuzio and Kropinski (1983)  
showed that P. aeruginosa O5 (PAO1) could be converted  
from serotype O5 to an O-acetylated form of serotype O16  
by bacteriophage D3. This bacteriophage changes the  
glycosidic linkage of the Fuc2NAc residue from α to β.  

The discovery of at least one gene (wbpM) that is speci-  
fically involved in O5 O antigen synthesis but is common to  
all 20 serotypes of P. aeruginosa is exciting. It will be inte-  
resting to elucidate the function(s) of the WbpM protein,  
and to ascertain whether it is functional in other serotypes  
of P. aeruginosa. The proposed function of WbpM as a  
GlcNAc to GalNAc epimerase is supported by the  
presence of either GalNAc and/or FucNAc in 18 out of  
the 19 known O-antigen structures of P. aeruginosa (the  
structure of O19 has not yet been determined; Knirel  
and Kochetkov, 1994). This gene may serve as an  
indicator of the ancestral location of O-antigen genes in  
P. aeruginosa, and may be useful as a marker for detec-  
tion of wbp clusters in other serotypes.

Experimental procedures  

Bacterial strains and plasmids  

Bacterial strains used in these studies are listed in Table 4.  
P. aeruginosa strains were cultured on either Luria broth or  
plates or on Pseudomonas Isolation Agar (PIA; Difco). E. coli  
strains were cultured on Luria broth or plates. Media were  
supplemented with the antibiotics ampicillin, carbenicillin, tet-  
racycline, or gentamicin, as required (for the antibiotic con-  
centrations used, see de Kievit et al., 1995).  

The cosmid pFV100 (isolated from a Xhol library; Lightfoot  
and Lam, 1993), containing the wbp cluster, was used as a  
source of insert DNA for sequencing. An overlapping  
cosmid from a Sau3AI library, pFV400, was used to clone  
the intact wzz gene on a 2.3 kb HindIII fragment in pBlue-  
script-II SK+ (pFV401; Table 3).

DNA methods  

Chromosomal DNA was isolated from P. aeruginosa using the  
method of Goldberg and Ohman (1984). Plasmid and cosmid  
DNA was isolated using the Qiagen midi-prep kit (Qiagen Inc.)  
as directed by the manufacturer. Restriction and modification  
enzymes (Gibco BRL; New England Biolabs; Boehringer  
Mannheim) were used as directed by the manufacturers.  

Plasmids were introduced into E. coli by CaCl₂ transforma-  
tion (Huff et al., 1990) and into P. aeruginosa by electropora-  
tion using a Bio-Rad Gene Pulser apparatus according to the  
manufacturer’s protocols. P. aeruginosa electrocompetent  
cells were prepared by washing early log-phase cells twice  
for 5 min each in sterile 15% room-temperature glycerol, fol-  
lowed by immediate resuspension in the same solution.  
Cells were either used immediately or frozen at –80°C for  
future use. Plasmids were also introduced into P. aeruginosa  
by biparental mating with E. coli SM10 carrying plasmids of  
interest (Simon et al., 1983).  

The DNA sequences of both strands of pFV100 were deter-  
mined by the MOBIX facility (McMaster University, Hamilton,  
© 1996 Blackwell Science Ltd, Molecular Microbiology, 22, 481–495

Pseudomonas aeruginosa O-antigen genes 493

control and template DNA was incubated with the S30 extract and [³⁵S]-methionine (Trans35-Label; ICN) according to the manufacturer's directions. The labelled proteins were then separated on standard discontinuous 12.5% SDS-PAGE with pre-stained low-molecular-weight markers, and visualized by exposure to ³⁵S-sensitive film.

Preparation and visualization of LPS

LPS from *P. aeruginosa* was prepared by the method of Hitchcock and Brown (1983). The LPS preparations were separated on standard discontinuous 12.5% SDS-PAGE gels and visualized by silver staining using the method of Dubray and Bezard (1982). Alternatively, LPS separated on SDS-PAGE gels was transferred to nitrocellulose and visualized by immunoblotting (Burnette, 1981). Nitrocellulose blots were blocked with 3% skimmed milk followed by overnight incubation with hybridoma-culture supernatants containing mAb MF15-4 (specific for O5 B-band LPS) or mAb N1F10 (specific for A-band LPS). The second antibody was a goat anti-mouse F(ab')₂-alkaline phosphatase conjugate. The blots were developed using a substrate containing 0.3 mg ml⁻¹ NBT (Nitro Blue Tetrazolium) and 0.15 mg ml⁻¹ BCIP (5-bromo-4-chloro-3-indolyl phosphate toluidine) in 0.1 M bicarbonate buffer (pH 9.8).

Creation of wbp-knockout mutants via gene replacement

The gene replacement strategy of Schweizer and Hoang (1995) was used for creation of knockout mutations in wbp genes as described previously (de Kievit et al., 1995; Dasgupta and Lam, 1995).

Acknowledgements

We thank our colleagues, especially C. Whitfield and T. de Kievit, for helpful discussions. This work was funded by the Canadian Bacterial Diseases Network of the Networks of Centres of Excellence, and by a Medical Research Council of Canada Grant #MT-12281 to J.S.L. D.F.C. is a recipient of a Canadian Cystic Fibrosis Foundation Fellowship.

References

Alifano, P., Fani, R., Liò, P., Lazcano, A., Bazzicalupo, M., Stella Carlomagno, M., and Bruni, C.B. (1996) Histidine biosynthetic pathway and genes: structure, regulation, and evolution. *Microbiol Rev* **60**: 44–69.

Allen, A., and Maskell, D. (1996) The identification, cloning and mutagenesis of a genetic locus required for lipopoly-saccharide biosynthesis in *Bordetella pertussis*. *Mol Microbiol* **19**: 37–52.

Altschul, S.E., Warren, G., Miller, W., Myers, E.U., and Lipman, D.J. (1990) Basic local alignment search tool. *J Mol Biol* **215**: 403–410.

Bastin, D.A., Stevenson, G., Brown, P.K., Haase, A., and Reeves, P.R. (1993) Repeat unit polysaccharides of bacteria: a model for polymerization resembling that of

Table 4. Bacterial strains and plasmids used in this work.

| Strain/Plasmid | Genotype, phenotype or properties | Reference/Source |
|----------------|------------------------------------|------------------|
| Strain         |                                    |                  |
| *P. aeruginosa* |                                    |                  |
| PAO1           | B⁺; serotype O5                    | Hancock and Carey (1979) |
| wbpM-1         | Serotype O5 with wbpM insertion mutation at SstI; B⁺ | This work |
| wbpM-2         | Serotype O5 with wbpM insertion mutation at NruI; B⁻ | This work |
| *E. coli*      |                                    |                  |
| JM109          | recA1 supE44 endA1 hsdR17 gyrA96 relA1 thi Δlac-proAB F'(traD36, proAB⁺, lacIq, lacZΔM15) | Yanisch-Perron et al. (1985) |
| SM10           | thi-1 thr leu tonA lacY supE recA RP4-2-Tc::Mu; Kmᴿ | Simon et al. (1983) |
| Plasmid        |                                    |                  |
| pFV100         | 24.4 kb Xhol fragment in cosmid pCP13; contains the wbp cluster | Lightfoot and Lam (1993) |
| pFV162         | 3.2 kb BamHI-BglII fragment in pUCP26 | This work |
| pCP13          | 23.5 kb RK2 derivative; Tcᴿ, Kmᴿ; cos⁺ Mob⁺ Tra⁻ | Darzins and Chakrabarty (1984) |
| pUCP26         | 4.9 kb pUC18-based broad-host-range vector; Tcᴿ | West et al. (1994) |
| pEX100T        | Gene-replacement vector; oriT⁺ sacB⁺ Apᴿ | Schweizer and Hoang (1995) |
| pUCPGM         | Source of gentamicin-resistance cassette; Apᴿ, Gmᴿ | Schweizer (1993) |

Ontario, Canada) using the Taq DyeDeoxy Terminator Cycle Sequencing Kit (Applied Biosystems) and an Ericomp Model TCX15 Thermal cycler. Oligonucleotide primers were synthesized on an Applied Biosystems model 391 DNA synthesizer and purified as directed by the manufacturer.

DNA sequences were collated and analysed using the software GENE RUNNER for Windows (Hastings Software), DNASIS for Windows (Hitachi Software), and PC/GENE (IntelliGenetics Inc.). DNA and protein database searches were performed using the NCBI BLAST network server (Altschul et al., 1990; Gish and States, 1993). The GenBank accession numbers for the DNA sequences of the wbp cluster and the wzz gene are U50396 and U50397, respectively.

Expression of HisH and HisF

An *E. coli* S30 in vitro protein-expression kit (*E. coli* S30 Extract System for Circular DNA Templates; Promega) was used to determine whether the *hisH* and *hisF* genes of the wbp cluster could be expressed in *E. coli*. Purified plasmid DNA of pFV162(+), containing the *his* genes downstream of the inducible *lacZ* promoter, and pFV162(−), containing the *his* genes in the opposite orientation, were used as templates. The vector pUCP26 was used as a negative control. The

© 1996 Blackwell Science Ltd, *Molecular Microbiology*, **22**, 481–495

494 L. L. Burrows, D. F. Charter and J. S. Lam

ribosomes and fatty acid synthetase, with a novel mechanism for determining chain length. Mol Microbiol 7: 725–734.

Batchelor, R.A., Alifano, P., Biffali, E., Hull, S.I., and Hull, R.A. (1992) Nucleotide sequences of the genes regulating O-polysaccharide antigen chain length (*rol*) from *Escherichia coli* and *Salmonella typhimurium*: protein homology and functional complementation. J Bacteriol 174: 5228–5236.

Burnette, W.N. (1981) ‘Western blotting’: electrophoretic transfer of proteins from sodium dodecyl sulphate-polyacrylamide gels to unmodified nitrocellulose and radiographic detection with antibody and radioiodinated protein A. Anal Biochem 112: 195–203.

Comstock, L.E., Johnson, J.A., Michalski, J.M., Morris, Jr, J.G., and Kaper, J.P. (1996) Cloning and sequence of a region encoding a surface polysaccharide of *Vibrio cholerae* O139 and characterization of the insertion site in the chromosome of *Vibrio cholerae* O1. Mol Microbiol 19: 815–826.

Cryz, Jr, S.J., Pitt, T.L., Furer, E., and Germanier, R. (1984) Role of lipopolysaccharide in virulence of *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*. Infect Immun 44: 508–513.

Darzins, A., and Chakrabarty, A.M. (1984) Cloning of genes controlling alginate synthesis from a mucoid cystic fibrosis isolate of *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*. J Bacteriol 159: 9–18.

Dasgupta, T., and Lam, J.S. (1995) Identification of *rfbA*, involved in B-band lipopolysaccharide biosynthesis in *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* serotype O5. Infect Immun 63: 1674–1680.

Deretic, V., Konyecsni, W.M., Mohr, C.D., Martin, D.W., and Hibler, N.S. (1989) Common denominators of promoter control in *Pseudomonas* and other bacteria. Biotechnology 7: 1249–1254.

Druzhinina, T.N., Goshadze, M.S., Streshenskaya, G.M., and Shibaev, V.N. (1988) Formation of uridine pyrophosphate derivatives of quinovosamine and fucosamine with an enzyme system from *Streptomyces chrysomallus* sp. 2. Bioorg Khim 14: 1690–1694.

Dubray, G., and Bezard, G. (1982) A highly sensitive periodic acid-silver stain for 1,2-diol groups of glycoproteins and polysaccharides in polyacrylamide gels. Anal Biochem 119: 325–329.

Fleischmann, R.D., Adams, M.D., White, O., Clayton, R.A., et al. (1995) Whole-genome random sequencing and assembly of *Haemophilus influenzae* Rd. Science 269: 496–512.

Fujita, N., Mori, H., Yura, T., and Ishihama, A. (1994) Systematic sequencing of the *Escherichia coli* genome: analysis of the 2.4–4.1 min (110, 917–193, 643 bp) region. Nucl Acids Res 22: 1637–1639.

Gish, W., and States, D.J. (1993) Identification of protein coding regions by database similarity search. Nature Genet 3: 266–272.

Goldberg, J.B., and Ohman, D.E. (1984) Cloning and expression in *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* of a gene involved with the production of alginate. J Bacteriol 158: 1115–1121.

Hancock, R.E.W., and Carey, A.M. (1979) Outer membrane of *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*: heat- and 2-mercaptoethanol-modifiable proteins. J Bacteriol 158: 1115–1121.

Henriques, A.O., de Lencastre, H., and Piggot, P.J. (1992) A

Bacillus subtilis morphogene cluster that includes *spoVE* is homologous to the *mra* region of *Escherichia coli*. Biochimie 74: 735–748.

Hitchcock, P.J., and Brown, T.M. (1983) Morphological heterogeneity among *Salmonella* lipopolysaccharide chemotypes in silver-stained polyacrylamide gels. J Bacteriol 154: 269–277.

Holloway, B.W., Römling, U., and Tümmler, B. (1994) Genomic mapping of *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* PAO. Microbiology 140: 2907–2929.

Huff, J.P., Grant, B.J., Penning, C.A., and Sullivan, K.F. (1990) Optimization of routine transformation of *Escherichia coli* with plasmid DNA. Biotechniques 9: 570–577.

de Kievit, T.R., Dasgupta, T., Schweizer, H., and Lam, J.S. (1995) Molecular cloning and characterization of the *rfc* gene of *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* (serotype O5). Mol Microbiol 16: 565–574.

Knirel, Y.A., and Kochetkov, N.K. (1994) The structure of lipopolysaccharides of Gram-negative bacteria. III. The structure of O-antigens: a review. Biochemistry 59: 1325–1383.

Knirel, Y.A., Vinogradov, E.V., Kocharova, N.A., Paramonov, N.A., Kochetkov, N.K., Dmitriev, B.A., Stanislavsky, E.S., and Lányi, B. (1988) The structure of O-specific polysaccharides and the serological classification of *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*. Acta Microbiol Immunol Hung 35: 3–24.

Kuzio, J., and Kropinski, A.M. (1983) O-antigen conversion in *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* PAO1 by bacteriophage D3. J Bacteriol 155: 203–212.

Lam, J.S., Handelsman, M.Y.C., Chivers, T.R., and MacDonald, L.A. (1992) Monoclonal antibodies as probes to examine serotype-specific and cross-reactive epitopes of lipopolysaccharides from serotypes O2, O5, and O16 of *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*. J Bacteriol 174: 2178–2184.

Lightfoot, J.L., and Lam, J.S. (1993) Chromosomal mapping, expression and synthesis of lipopolysaccharide in *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*: a role for guanosine diphosphate (GDP)-D-mannose. Mol Microbiol 8: 771–782.

Lin, W.S., Cunneen, T., and Lee, C.Y. (1994) Sequence analysis and molecular characterization of genes required for the biosynthesis of type 1 capsular polysaccharide in *Staphylococcus aureus*. J Bacteriol 176: 7005–7016.

Liu, D., Cole, R.A., and Reeves, P.R. (1996) An O-antigen processing function for Wzx (RfbX): a promising candidate for O-unit flippase. J Bacteriol 178: 2102–2107.

Macpherson, D.F., Manning, P.A., and Morona, R. (1994) Characterization of the dTDP rhamnose biosynthetic genes encoded in the *rfb* locus of *Shigella flexneri*. Mol Microbiol 11: 281–292.

Mäkelä, P.H., and Stocker, B.A.D. (1984) Genetics of lipopolysaccharide. In Handbook of Exotoxin. Vol. 1. Reitschel, E.T. (ed.). Amsterdam: Elsevier Science Publishers, pp. 59–137.

May, T.B., Shinabarger, D., Maharaj, R., Kato, J., Chu, L., DeVault, J.D., Roychoudhury, S., Zielinski, N.A., Berry, A., Rothmel, R.K., Misra, T.K., and Chakrabarty, A.M. (1991) Alginate synthesis by *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*: a key pathogenic factor in chronic pulmonary infections of cystic fibrosis patients. Clin Microbiol Rev 4: 191–206.

Meier-Dieter, U., Barr, K., Starman, R., Hatch, L., and

© 1996 Blackwell Science Ltd, Molecular Microbiology, 22, 481–495

Rick, P.D. (1992) Nucleotide sequence of the *Escherichia coli rfe* gene involved in the synthesis of enterobacterial common antigen: molecular cloning of the *rfe-rff* gene cluster. *J Biol Chem* 267: 746–753.

Morona, R., Mavris, M., Fallarino, A., and Manning, P.A. (1994) Characterization of the *rfc* region of *Shigella flexneri*. *J Bacteriol* 176: 733–747.

Morona, R., van den Bosch, L., and Manning, P.A. (1995) Molecular, genetic, and topological characterization of O-antigen chain length regulation in *Shigella flexneri*. *J Bacteriol* 177: 1059–1068.

Palleroni, N.J. (1984) *Pseudomonas*. In Bergey's Manual of Systematic Bacteriology. Vol. 1. Krieg, N.R., and Holt, J.G. (eds). Baltimore: Williams and Wilkins, pp. 141–198.

Pritchard, A.E., and Vasil, M.L. (1990) Possible insertion sequences in a mosaic genome organization upstream of the exotoxin A gene in *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*. *J Bacteriol* 172: 2020–2028.

Rieder, B., Merrick, M.J., Castorph, H., and Kleiner, D. (1994) Function of *hisF* and *hisH* gene products in histidine biosynthesis. *J Biol Chem* 269: 14386–14390.

Schnaitman, C.A., and Klena, J.D. (1993) Genetics of lipopolysaccharide biosynthesis in enteric bacteria. *Microbiol Rev* 57: 655–682.

Schweizer, H.P. (1993) Small broad-host-range gentamycin resistance gene cassettes for site-specific insertion and deletion mutagenesis. *Biotechniques* 15: 831–833.

Schweizer, H.P., and Hoang, T.T. (1995) An improved system for gene replacement and *xylE* fusion analysis in *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*. *Gene* 158: 15–22.

Shibaev, V.N. (1986) Biosynthesis of bacterial polysaccharide chains composed of repeating units. *Adv Carbohydr Chem Biochem* 44: 277–339.

Simon, R., Priefer, U., and Pühler, A. (1983) A broad-host-range mobilization system for *in vivo* genetic engineering: transposon mutagenesis in Gram-negative bacteria. *Biotechnology* 1: 784–791.

Singh, S., Singh, U., Hogan, S.E., and Feingold, D.S. (1990) Formation of UDP-2-acetamido-2-deoxy-L-galactose and

Pseudomonas aeruginosa O-antigen genes 495

UDP-2-acetamido-2-deoxy-L-galacturonic acid by *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*. *J Bacteriol* 172: 299–304.

Skurnik, M., Venho, R., Toivanen, P., and Alhendy, A. (1995) A novel locus of *Yersinia enterocolitica* serotype O: 3 involved in lipopolysaccharide outer core biosynthesis. *Mol Microbiol* 17: 575–594.

Sokol, P.A., Luan, M.Z., Storey, D.G., and Thirukkumaran, P. (1994) Genetic rearrangement associated with *in vivo* mucoid conversion of *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* PAO is due to insertion elements. *J Bacteriol* 176: 553–562.

Thorson, J.S., Lo, S.F., and Liu, H.-W. (1993) Biosynthesis of 3,6-dideoxyhexoses: new mechanistic reflections upon 2,6-dideoxy 4,6-dideoxy, and amino sugar construction. *J Am Chem Soc* 115: 6993–6994.

Wang, L., Liu, D., and Reeves, P.R. (1996) C-terminal half of *Salmonella enterica* WbaP (RfbP) is the galactosyl-1-phosphate transferase domain catalyzing the first step of O-antigen synthesis. *J Bacteriol* 178: 2598–2604.

West, S.E., and Iglewski, B.H. (1988) Codon usage in *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*. *Nucl Acids Res* 16: 9323–9335.

West, S.E.H., Schweizer, H.P., Dall, C., Sample, A.K., and Runyen-Janecky, L.J. (1994) Construction of improved *Escherichia-Pseudomonas* shuttle vectors derived from pUC18/19 and the sequence of the region required for their replication in *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*. *Gene* 128: 81–86.

Whitfield, C. (1995) Biosynthesis of lipopolysaccharide O-antigens. *Trends Microbiol* 3: 178–185.

Whitfield, C., and Valvano, M.A. (1993) Biosynthesis and expression of cell-surface polysaccharides in Gram-negative bacteria. *Adv Microb Physiol* 35: 135–246.

Wyk, P., and Reeves, P.R. (1989) Identification and sequence of the gene for abequose synthase which confers antigenic specificity on group B Salmonellae: homology with galactose epimerase. *J Bacteriol* 171: 5687–5693.

Yanisch-Perron, C., Vieira, J., and Messing, J. (1985) Improved M13 phage cloning vectors and host strains: nucleotide sequences of the M13mp18 and pUC19 vectors. *Gene* 33: 103–119.
