
THE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGICAL CHEMISTRY
© 1997 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

**Lipid Dependence and Basic Kinetics of the Purified**
**1,2-Diacylglycerol 3-Glucosyltransferase from Membranes**
**of Acholeplasma laidlawii**

(Received for publication, July 3, 1996, and in revised form, October 15, 1996)

Olof P. Karlsson†, Anders Dahlqvist, Susanne Vikström§, and Åke Wieslander

*From the Department of Biochemistry, Umeå University, S-901 87 Umeå, Sweden*

UDP-glucose: 1,2-diacylglycerol 3-glucosyltransferase (EC 2.4.1.157), catalyzes the transfer of glucose from UDP-glucose to diacylglycerol (DAG) to yield monoglu-cosyldiacylglycerol (MGlcDAG) and UDP. MGlcDAG is the first glucolipid along the glucolipid pathway, and a major (nonbilayer-prone) lipid in the single membrane of *Acholeplasma laidlawii*. MGlcDAG is further glucosylated to give the major diglucosyldiacylglycerol (DGlc-DAG). The bilayer fractions of these lipids are crucial for the metabolic maintenance of phase equilibria close to a potential bilayer-nonbilayer transition and a nearly constant spontaneous curvature. The glucolipid syntheses are also balanced against the phosphatidylglycerol pathway, competing for the common minor precursor phosphatidic acid, to retain a constant lipid surface charge density. The 1,2-diacylglycerol 3-glucosyltransferase was purified to homogeneity from detergent-solubilized *A. laidlawii* cells by three column chromatography methods (enrichment ≈9,000×), and identified as a minor 40-kDa protein by using SDS-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis. In CHAPS detergent, mixed micelles, a cooperative dependence on anionic lipids for activity was confirmed. Dependence of the enzyme on UDP-glucose followed Michaelis-Menten kinetics while the other hydrophobic substrate dioleoylglycerol stimulated the enzyme by an activating, potentially cooperative mechanism. Physiological concentrations of the activator lipid dioleoyl-phosphatidylglycerol influenced the turnover number of the enzyme but not the interaction with UDP-glucose, as inferred from variable and constant values of the apparent $V_{\text{max}}$ and $K_m$, respectively. Dipalmitoylglycerol was a better substrate than the oleoyl species, supporting earlier *in vivo* and crude enzyme data. The responses of the purified 1,2-diacylglycerol 3-glucosyltransferase indicated that (i) the regulatory features of the MGlcDAG synthesis is held by the catalytic enzyme itself, and (ii) this strongly corroborates the “homeostasis” model for lipid bilayer properties in *A. laidlawii* proposed earlier.

---

The glucolipid monoglucosyldiacylglycerol (MGlcDAG),¹ one of the major lipids in the cytoplasmic membrane of the cell wall-less bacterium *Acholeplasma laidlawii*, is synthesized by glucosylation of diacylglycerol (DAG), *i.e.* DAG + UDP-GLC → MGlcDAG + UDP (1, 2). This is catalyzed by the membrane-bound enzyme purified and basically characterized in this work, 1,2-diacylglycerol 3-glucosyltransferase (EC 2.4.1.157) (MGlcDAG synthase).

MGlcDAG is the first glucolipid in the glucolipid pathway, and is further glucosylated by another enzyme to give diglucosyldiacylglycerol (DGlcDAG) (1–3), the precursor for the syntheses of two (usually minor) phosphoglucolipids. Acylated variants of the two glucolipids are also made under some conditions. The hydrophobic substrate DAG for 1,2-diacylglycerol 3-glucosyltransferase is synthesized from phosphatidic acid (PA) by the enzyme phosphatidic acid phosphatase.² PA is also the precursor for the separate and competing pathway leading to the major (anionic) phosphatidylglycerol (PG).


CDP-DAG → PGP → PG
    ↗
   PA
    ↘
DAG → MGlcDAG → DGlcDAG → phosphoglucolipids


In *A. laidlawii*, these lipid syntheses are regulated in response to external or internal factors influencing the physical properties of the lipid bilayer to give a strongly varying but adapted lipid composition (4). The purpose is to maintain (i) phase equilibria close to a potential bilayer/nonbilayer transition (5), (ii) a nearly constant radius of spontaneous curvature (6), and (iii) a constant (anionic) surface charge density (7) for the membrane lipid bilayer mixture. Similar packing properties are also maintained in other bacteria by regulation especially at the acyl chain level, like *Escherichia coli* (8, 9), *Clostridium butyricum* (10), and *Bacillus megaterium* (11), the latter two also by some extent of polar head group changes.

The regulation of the packing properties is mainly accomplished by altering the relative proportions of MGlcDAG and DGlcDAG, forming essentially nonlamellar and lamellar phases (5, 12–14). *In vivo*, parameters giving more nonlamellar properties to the bilayer, like higher growth temperature and more of longer and unsaturated acyl chains, result in an increase of the DGlcDAG fraction and a decrease of the MGlc-

---

* This work was supported by the Swedish Natural Science Research Council, by the Knut and Alice Wallenberg Foundation, and by the J. C. Kempe Memorial Foundation. The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked “advertisement” in accordance with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.
* † To whom correspondence should be addressed: Dept. of Biochemistry, Umeå University, S-901 87 Umeå, Sweden. Tel.: 46-90-16 67 29; Fax: 46-90-16 76 61; E-mail: Olof.Karlsson@chem.umu.se.
* § Previously Nordström
* ¹ The abbreviations used are: MGlcDAG, 1,2-diacyl-3-O-(α-D-glucopyranosyl)-sn-glycerol (monoglucosyldiacylglycerol); DAG, 1,2-diacylglycerol; DGlcDAG, 1,2-diacyl-3-O-(α-D-glucopyranosyl)-(1→2)-O-α-D-glucopyranosyl)-sn-glycerol; DO, dioleoyl; DP, dipalmityl; DPG, sn-1,2-dipalmitylglycerol; DOG, sn-1,2-dioleoylglycerol; Glc, glucose; MGlcDAG-synthase, 1,2-diacylglycerol 3-glucosyltransferase; CDP-DAG, cytidinediphosphate-DAG; PA, phosphatidic acid; PC, phosphatidylcholine; PG, phosphatidylglycerol; PGP, phosphatidylglycerol 3-phosphate; CHAPS, 3-[3-cholamidopropyl]dimethylammonio]-1-propanesulfonate; IEC, ion exchange chromatography; HAC, hydroxyapatite chromatography; TLC, thin-layer chromatography; BSA, bovine serum albumin.
* ² S. Berg, and Å. Wieslander, manuscript in preparation.

This paper is available online at http://www.jbc.stanford.edu/jbc/

DAG fraction (14), as do the presence of various foreign, non-
bilayer-promoting molecules (15). This follows the rules for the
packing and phase equilibria of amphiphiles (16, 17). *In vitro*,
the activity of MGlcDAG synthase is critically dependent upon
a lipid environment where a substantial fraction of anionic
amphiphiles is present. The best activator seems to be 1,2-
dioleoyl-phosphatidylglycerol (DOPG), allowing the enzymatic
reaction and stimulating it in a cooperative fashion at increas-
ing mole fractions (18, 19). This dependence of the enzyme is
most likely involved in keeping the rate balance between the
PG and glucolipid pathways *in vivo*, maintaining a constant
surface charge density of the lipid membrane. The lamellar/
nonlamellar balance is more likely regulated by the consecutive
synthesis of DGlcDAG since the activity of this step is strongly
influenced by the presence of molecules increasing the bilayer
chain order or the spontaneous curvature, e.g. like certain
sterols, in a manner that correlates with the regulation *in vivo*
(19, 20).

A simplification of the crude systems used, and a purification
of the proteins involved, would give valuable information about
how a lipid-synthesizing enzyme is regulated by its amphipi-
lic environment. What properties of the environment, which
are strongly altered by the nonlamellar-prone enzyme product,
are sensed, and what are the regulatory responses of the en-
zyme. Are they in agreement with the regulation model ob-
served *in vivo* and with the details accomplished from coarse
experiments *in vitro*?

We report here the purification and identification of the
MGlcDAG synthesizing enzyme 1,2-diacylglycerol 3-glucosyl-
transferase from *A. laidlawii* membranes. Confirmation of the
regulatory properties of the enzyme, indicated from crude pro-
teins in a vesicular system (18, 19), and a characterization of its
dependence on the DAG and UDP-Glc substrates in a pure
micellar system, add knowledge to the regulation of lipid bi-
layer properties.

---

### MATERIALS AND METHODS

#### Strain and Growth Conditions—*A. laidlawii* strain A-EF22 was cul-
tivated in an oleic acid (C18:1)-supplemented medium and harvested,
and the protein content of cells and membranes was determined, as
described by Dahlqvist *et al.* (19).

#### Lipids Used in the Experiments—Synthetic rac-1,2-dioleoyl-diacyl-
glycerol (1,2-DOG) was purchased from Larodan (Sweden). Synthetic
sn-1,2-dioleoyl-diacylglycerol (sn-1,2-DOG), sn-1,2-dipalmitoyl-diacyl-
glycerol (sn-1,2-DPG), and bovine brain D-sphingosine (Sph) were pur-
chased from Sigma (USA). DOPG, 1,2-dioleoyl-phosphatidylcholine
(DOPC), 1,2-dioleoyl-phosphatidylserine (DOPS) were from Avanti Po-
lar Lipids (Alabaster, AL, USA). The MGlcDAG and DGlcDAG were
prepared from *A. laidlawii* grown in the presence of oleic acid, which
gives more than 90% (mol/mol) C18:1 lipid acyl chains according to the
procedure by Dahlqvist *et al.* (19).

#### Cell Solubilization—Harvested cell suspensions, ~25 mg of cell pro-
tein/ml, were mixed with a solubilization buffer to ~3 mg of protein/ml,
24 mM Tris maleate, pH 8, 30 mM CHAPS detergent, and 20% (v/v)
glycerol, conditions as optimized by Karlsson *et al.* (18). After 60 min on
ice, with gentle swirling every 15 min, an insoluble fraction containing
no significant MGlcDAG synthesis activity was removed by centrifuga-
tion at 20,000 × g for 30 min at 2 °C.

#### Ion Exchange Chromatography (IEC)—The NaCl concentration in
the solubilized cell preparation was raised to 0.4 M by adding 4 M
NaCl-solution (plus glycerol to keep 20% (v/v) glycerol). A Pharmacia
XK column packed with 30 ml of SP-Sepharose (Pharmacia) was equi-
librated with at least 150 ml of 20 mM NaH₂PO₄/Na₂HPO₄, pH 8,
followed by 60 ml of 20 mM NaH₂PO₄/Na₂HPO₄, pH 8, 20% (v/v) glyc-
erol, 1 mg/ml bovine serum albumin (BSA), and 0.4 M NaCl. BSA
increased the yield of enzyme, probably by blocking unspecific protein
binding. Excess BSA was rinsed out by 150 ml of buffer without BSA.
Prior to sample loading, the column was equilibrated with 45 ml of
IEC-buffer: 20 mM NaH₂PO₄/Na₂HPO₄, pH 8, 20% (v/v) glycerol, 20 mM
CHAPS, and 0.4 M NaCl. After loading of the solubilized cells, the
column was washed with 76 ml of IEC-buffer. The MGlcDAG synthe-
sizing enzyme (analyzed by activity) was eluted with a 150 ml (250 ml
preparative scale) gradient of 0.4 to 1.0 M NaCl in IEC-buffer. Finally,
the remaining proteins were eluted with 60 ml 1.0 M NaCl in IEC-
buffer. Fractions (5 ml) collected from the start of application were
analyzed for protein concentration and enzyme activity and stored at
−80 °C.

#### Gel Filtration—One of the fractions with the largest MGlcDAG syn-
thesis rate, from the ion exchange chromatography, were loaded on a
16-mm diameter column with 154 ml of Sephacryl S-100 HR (Pharma-
cia), which had been washed with degassed and temperature-equi-
brated elution buffer (100 mM KH₂PO₄/K₂HPO₄, pH 8, 20% (v/v) glyc-
erol, and 20 mM CHAPS). Proteins were eluted at 0.25 ml/min into 5-ml
fractions, which were stored at −80 °C and analyzed for protein con-
centration and enzyme activity. Since only one fraction at a time from
the ion exchange chromatography could be loaded on the gel filtration
column, the procedure was repeated for every one of the fractions that
contained substantial amounts of enzyme activity. In a preparative
version of the method, a larger column (95° mm long and 26 mm in
diameter) was used, which allowed 25 ml-loading volumes with re-
tained elution profiles as shown in Fig. 1B.

#### Hydroxyapatite Chromatography (HAC)—A column (16 mm in diam-
eter) packed with 6 ml of ceramic hydroxyapatite Macro-Prep (Bio-Rad)
was equilibrated with HAC-buffer: 100 mM KH₂PO₄/K₂HPO₄, pH 8,
20% (v/v) glycerol, and 20 mM CHAPS. Fractions eluted before the
major background protein peak in the gel filtration step were pooled
and loaded on the HAC column. After washing with 6 ml of HAC-buffer,
the enzyme was eluted with 50 ml of HAC-buffer consisting of a gradi-
ent of 200–408 mM KH₂PO₄/K₂HPO₄. Proteins remaining in the column
were then eluted with 38 ml of 465 mM KH₂PO₄/K₂HPO₄ in HAC-buffer.
Fractions of 2.5 ml were collected and analyzed with respect to protein
content and enzyme activity.

For some cell batches cultivated in the presence of a ³H-labeled
amino acid mixture (19), protein concentration in the column fractions
were determined by liquid scintillation counting. All solutions used
throughout the chromatography steps were temperature equilibrated
at 4 °C, and all the procedures were performed at 4 °C. The enzyme
preparations were stable for several months when stored in aliquots at
−80 °C. In the preparative version of the methods no ³H-labeling was
used; instead, the BCA kit (Pierce) was used for protein determination.
The protein composition in the various column fractions was analyzed
with SDS-polyacrylamide electrophoresis, as described by Nyström *et al.* (21).

#### Solubilization of Substrate and Matrix Lipids by CHAPS—Lipid
mixtures with 0.12 mM DOG, with or without 1.5 mM DOPG, DGlcDAG,
DOPC, or sphingosine in 100 mM HEPES, pH 8, 20 mM MgCl₂, and 0–30
mM CHAPS, were prepared as the assay micellar solutions (see below).
Solubilization was monitored as the decrease in absorbance at 350 nm
in a 10-mm path length quartz cuvette.

#### Assay for 1,2-Diacylglycerol 3-Glucosyltransferase Activity—Mixed-
micellar solutions were prepared by mixing lipids solubilized in 1,1,1-
trichloroethane to the final concentrations specified below. The solvent
was evaporated under a stream of N₂, and the lipids were dried under
reduced pressure for at least 1 h. Lipid mixtures were then solubilized
to homogeneity in CHAPS buffer (*cf.* above) by extensive vortexing,
overnight incubation at 4 °C, and bath sonication for 5 min. This caused
a significant isomerization of DAG between its different chain stereoi-
somers, as revealed by thin-layer chromatography (TLC) analyses. The
lipids were extracted from the micelle preparations into an equal vol-
ume of 1,1,1-trichloroethane and applied on Silica Gel 60 (Merck) TLC
plates, which were developed in chloroform/acetone, 24:1 (v/v). Stock
solutions of the diacylglycerols were used as references. Especially,
1,3-DAG was substantially isomerized into the sn-1,2 and sn-2,3 vari-
ants. Therefore, rac-1,2-DAG was used as substrate lipid in most ex-
periments. The activity obtained with rac-1,2-DAG was approximately
50% of the activity with sn-1,2-DAG, indicating that the sn-2,3-DAG
does not act as a substrate or as an inhibitor.

In the standard assay, 5 μl of enzyme solution (50 ng of protein) was
added to 85 μl of micellar solution. The mixtures were kept for 25 min
on ice and preincubated for 10 min at 28 °C. Reactions were started by
addition of 10 μl of UDP-[¹⁴C]glucose (37–74 GBq/mol) to give a con-
centration of 1 mM in a volume of 100 μl in 100 mM HEPES, pH 8, 20 mM
MgCl₂, and 20 mM CHAPS buffer. Standard lipid concentration was 10
mM (0.23 mM DAG substrate, plus activator DOPG and matrix lipid).
Activity from chromatography columns was analyzed in 50-μl samples
mixed with 40 μl of micellar solution to give final concentrations of 1
mM DOG, 9 mM DOPG, 110 mM Tris maleate, pH 8, 20 mM MgCl₂, and
20 mM CHAPS. Micellar solution preparation and assay were the same
as described above. After 5 min of incubation (or 30 min for chromato-
graphy fractions) at 28 °C, reactions were stopped with 375 μl of meth-

Lipid Dependence of Purified MGlcDAG Synthase

were most likely removed from the proteins by the excess of detergent present during the procedure. No lipid determination was performed, but the yellow color that is very characteristic for *A. laidlawii* lipid extracts was washed out of the column before the enzyme.

By gel filtration, the enzyme activity was eluted from a Sephadex S-100 column in two separate peaks, one before the major protein fractions and the other with them (Fig. 1B). The relative quantity of the two activity peaks varied substantially between runs, but the protein elution profiles were almost identical. This indicates an irregular behavior of the MGlcDAG synthase in this chromatography system, but there were no differences between the enzymes in the two peaks causing them to behave differently in the following hydroxyapatite chromatography procedure. However, only for enzyme from the first gel filtration peak was the specific activity improved, and these fractions, therefore, constituted the target for further purification. The activity-enrichment factor was 12, and the yield was 32% (Table I), but since the desalting and the change in buffer after the IEC gave a total yield of around 200% (for all fractions), it is likely that the actual enrichment of the enzyme by the gel filtration was lower.

The final step in the purification procedure was HAC. The best fractions from the gel filtration were pooled and directly loaded on the hydroxyapatite column. The enzyme bound firmly to the ceramic hydroxyapatite at 100 mM KH₂PO₄/K₂HPO₄, pH 8, and not until the concentration of KH₂PO₄/K₂HPO₄ was raised to ~340 mM in a gradient was the enzyme eluted from the column in a sharp, specific peak (Fig. 1C). The enrichment factor of 4.2 is probably correct since the total yield was near 100%. The achieved yield was 76% of the activity loaded on the column.

SDS-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis of proteins in the eluted fractions revealed the occurrence of a protein of ~40 kDa, the amounts of which correlated with the elution profile of the MGlcDAG-synthesis activity (as in Fig. 1C). The gel photo in Fig. 2 shows the single protein band from a high-activity HAC fraction. The N-terminal amino acid sequence of this protein was verified from two preparations (data not shown). An enrichment factor of ~9,000 is of similar magnitude as for several purified eukaryotic and *E. coli* lipid-synthesizing enzymes, (e.g., Refs. 23 and 24). These conditions strongly indicate that the 40-kDa protein is the 1,2-diacylglycerol 3-glucosyltransferase and that it was purified to near homogeneity.

**Stability and Dependence on Mg²⁺**—The purified MGlcDAG synthase was thermo-unstable. During storage in HAC buffer, the activity half-life of the enzyme at 4 °C was around 50 h, and at 20 °C, it was only 1.8 h. At –20 and –50 °C, the enzyme was stable for at least 48 days. Since chelating and reducing agents had only small effects on the stability of the impure enzyme, they were not tested with the purified. It has previously been shown that the MGlcDAG-synthesizing (crude) enzyme is dependent on the presence of ~20 mM Mg²⁺ (1). A strong dependence of Mg²⁺ was revealed for activity of the purified enzyme, with a maximum between 15 and 28 mM MgCl₂ added (data not shown). It is not possible to conclude if Mg²⁺ is a cofactor bound to the enzyme or if it acts by altering the charge distribution on the enzyme or the surrounding lipid surface.

**Properties of Micellar Environment**—It has been reported that CHAPS is poor in solubilizing (hydrophobic) lipids with small polar headgroups like DAG, requiring the presence of large headgroup lipids (preferentially anionic) in order to obtain homogeneous, mixed micelles (25). The different matrix and activator lipids were investigated for their ability to solubilize the DAG substrate in mixed CHAPS micelles. DOG (0.12 mM), applied as dry films on the tube wall, was hydrated as de-

FIG. 1. Purification of the 1,2-diacylglycerol 3-glucosyltransferase in three column chromatography steps. Protein (○) and MGlcDAG synthesis activity (●) were eluted in three different column chromatography steps as described under “Materials and Methods.” A, IEC on SP-Sephrose (Pharmacia), pH 8. The solid black line is the applied NaCl concentration. B, gel filtration on Sephacryl S-100 HR (Pharmacia); one of the four best fractions from the former IEC step. C, HAC on ceramic hydroxyapatite Macro-Prep (Bio-Rad), pH 8. The solid black line is the applied KH₂PO₄/K₂HPO₄ concentration. The MGlcDAG synthesis activity was assayed as described under “Materials and Methods” with 27 mM amphiphiles present (3.7 mol % DOG, 33 mol % DOPG, and 63 mol % CHAPS).

anol/chloroform, 2:1 (v/v), and the lipids, including newly synthesized MGlcDAG, were extracted and separated by TLC (18). MGlcDAG on the TLC plates was visualized and quantified by electronic autoradiography (Packard Instant Imager™). The MGlcDAG product migrated as a single spot with a unique *Rf*-value, corresponding to synthetic or structurally determined MGlcDAG in two different TLC solvent systems (12, 22). The synthesis rate for MGlcDAG (linear for at least 30 min) was expressed as nanomoles of lipid synthesized per hour, as calculated from the amount of radioactive glucose incorporated into MGlcDAG.

**RESULTS**

**Enzyme Purification**—Starting the enzyme purification by total solubilization of intact cells in 30 mM CHAPS by the method optimized by Karlsson et al. (18) (see “Materials and Methods”), instead of prepared membranes, substantially improved the final results and gain in activity. The stability of the enzyme was dependent on a high buffer concentration of glycerol (20% v/v) (cf. Ref. 18) and a low temperature (maximum of 4 °C) during the entire purification procedure. After removal of insoluble particles by centrifugation, the micelle solution was loaded directly on an IEC column (SP-Sephrose).

The MGlcDAG synthase did bind (at pH 8 and 0.4 M NaCl) and was essentially separated from the major peak of retained proteins by elution with a concentration gradient of NaCl (0.4–1.0 M) (Fig. 1A), giving a 190-fold enrichment. The total yield of MGlcDAG synthesis activity eluted was 47% of the activity loaded, but only 27% of the activity persisted in fractions usable for further purification (Table I). The endogenous lipids

Lipid Dependence of Purified MGlcDAG Synthase

TABLE I  
Purification of the 1,2-diacylglycerol 3-glucosyltransferase from solubilized cells of *Acholeplasma laidlawii*

Cell solubilization, column chromatography, and assays for enzyme activity and protein concentration were performed as described under "Materials and Methods."

| Purification step                | Protein<sup>a</sup> | Total activity<sup>a</sup> | Specific activity | Yield in step | Total yield | Enrichment in step | Total enrichment |
|----------------------------------|--------------------|---------------------------|--------------------|---------------|-------------|--------------------|------------------|
|                                  | μg                 | nmol/h                    | nmol/mg/h          | %             | %           |                    |                  |
| Cell solubilization              | 420,000            | 32,000                    | 79                 |               |             |                    |                  |
| Ion exchange chromatography      | 590                | 8,700                     | 15,000             | 27            | 27          | 190                | 190              |
| Gel filtration<sup>b</sup>        | 16                 | 2,800                     | 170,000            | 32            | 8.6         | 12                 | 2,200            |
| Hydroxyapatite chromatography    | 2.9                | 2,100                     | 720,000            | 76            | 6.5         | 4.2                | 9,100            |

<sup>a</sup> Figures for protein amounts and enzyme activity at each step are the amounts used in the next step.

<sup>b</sup> Figures are the sum of four separate and identical rounds of gel filtration chromatography.

FIG. 2. SDS-gel electrophoresis of purified proteins. Selected samples from the purification procedures stained with Coomassie Brilliant Blue: lane A, commercial reference mixture, molecular mass in kDa; lane B, solubilized whole-cell extract (3.3 μg of protein); lane C, high activity IEC fraction (8.7 μg of protein) (cf. Fig. 1A); lane D, high activity HAC fraction (cf. Fig. 1C); and lane E, like lane D, but visualized by sensitive silver staining. Gels were run (in the Bio-Rad Mini-Protean II), processed, and stained as described in Nyström et al. (21).

FIG. 3. Solubilization of diacylglycerol in CHAPS in the presence of different lipids. Mixed micellar solutions were prepared as described under “Materials and Methods,” and solubilization was measured as the decrease in absorbance at 350 nm. Lipids in the mixtures (0.12 mM DOG and 1.5 mM other lipids) were: DOG only (×), DOG and DOPG (□), DOG and DGlcDAG (○), DOG and DOPC (●), and DOG and sphingosine (■). At very low CHAPS concentrations, no stable reading of \( A_{350} \) could be obtained due to aggregation of the amphiphiles. The inset shows varying lipid concentrations in 20 mM CHAPS, with DOG and DOPG in molar ratios of 0.025 (○) and 0.081 (●), respectively.

was analyzed at different total amphiphile concentrations. A larger total DOPG fraction was needed for maximal activity at higher total amphiphile concentrations than at lower ones (Fig. 4), indicating that it was the DOPG fraction in the micelles that was important for activity rather than the bulk concentration. The critical micellar concentration of CHAPS is varying with different lipid compositions, going as high as 13.7 mM (25). If an estimated CHAPS water-phase monomer concentration of 5 mM is subtracted before calculating the estimated DOPG/CHAPS ratio (in the micelles) on the x-axis (Fig. 4), the two peaks will essentially coincide. Hence, the two curves in Fig. 4 both show the same dependence of the surface concentration of DOPG in the micelles. The decrease in activity at DOPG concentrations higher than the optima (Fig. 4) might be due to a transition from one kind of micellar structure to another (perhaps bilayer-like), caused by the high lipid to detergent ratio (see Ref. 26).

A DOPG/CHAPS ratio of 0.46 was set as standard in order to minimize the risk of exceeding the optimal fraction of DOPG at 30 mM total amphiphile. This amphiphile concentration should be safely higher than the CHAPS monomer concentration.

Activation by Anionic Lipids—Using the standard conditions (Figs. 3 and 4), the proportions of DOPG to other polar lipids in the CHAPS micelles were systematically varied. With the zwitterionic phospholipid DOPC as the other matrix lipid, the fraction of DOPG had to be above 0.3 before any activity was detectable, and with DOPG fractions higher than 0.6, the activity increased in a sigmoidal manner (Fig. 5). The endogenous, uncharged glucolipid DGlcDAG as matrix lipid yielded essentially the same results as for DOPC (Fig. 5).

Lipid Dependence of Purified MGlcDAG Synthase

FIG. 4. Variation of 1,2-diacylglycerol 3-glucosyltransferase activity with amphiphile and DOPG concentration. Purified enzyme was assayed as described under "Materials and Methods" with 15 (○) or 30 mM (●) total amphiphile concentration where DOPG was varied at the expense of the CHAPS fraction. The DOG fraction was kept constant at 0.025 (mol/mol amphiphile).

FIG. 5. Dependence of the 1,2-diacylglycerol 3-glucosyltransferase on anionic lipids. Enzyme activity was measured in mixed micelles with 20 mM (67 mol %) CHAPS, 0.75 mM (2.5 mol %) DOG, plus 9.3 mM (31 mol %) matrix lipid DOPC (●), DGlcDAG (○), sphingosine (■), or DOPS (□), respectively, which were stepwise replaced by DOPG. Curves are normalized relative to their common point at a DOPG fraction of 1 (31mol%).

The anionic phospholipid DOPS was able to activate the enzyme to the same extent as DOPG (Fig. 5), indicating that the anionic charge is more important than the specific polar head structure. However, when DOPG and DOPS were mixed in ratios between 0.8 and 0.9, an activity maximum appeared, which implies that the overall structure of the anionic charge distribution is influencing enzyme activity. It has been shown that the activation by anionic lipids can be substantially counteracted by the cationic lipid sphingosine as a matrix lipid (18). This was the case also for the pure enzyme in the micellar system, but the effect was quantitatively smaller. With sphingosine as the matrix, the activation did not start until the DOPG fraction was above 0.6, and the sigmoidal appearance was only evident at DOPG fractions over 0.7 (Fig. 5). All in all, these result with the pure enzyme corroborates previous findings gained from crude preparations regarding the activation of the MGlcDAG synthase by an anionic lipid environment.

Kinetic Characterization of the MGlcDAG Synthase—Activity of the enzyme correlated with the UDP-Glc substrate concentration in a hyperbolic manner when UDP-Glc was altered from 0 to 3.75 mM, with a sharp raise up to 0.8 mM (Fig. 6A). The data could be fitted to the Michaelis-Menten equation with high accuracy, and the parameters \( V_{\text{max}} \) and \( K_m \) could be calculated from the fitted curve (Table II). Hence, the enzyme follows Michaelis-Menten kinetics in its dependence on the soluble substrate UDP-Glc. The calculated \( V_{\text{max}} \) is only valid

FIG. 6. Variation of 1,2-diacylglycerol 3-glucosyltransferase activity with the concentration of its two substrates. Enzyme activity was analyzed as a function of the UDP-Glc (A) and DOG concentrations (B) in the presence of 31 (♦), 25 (Δ), and 20 mol % (●) of DOPG; in the latter two, DOPG was supplemented with 6 and 11 mol % DOPC, respectively. The amphiphile concentration was 30 mM with 9.3 mM DOPG/DOPC, plus 0.24 mM (0.8 mol %) DOG (A), and 1 mM UDP-Glc (B). The curves in A were calculated from the Michaelis-Menten equation fitted to the data points; parameters \( V_{\text{max}} \) and \( K_m \) (UDP-Glc) were calculated (Table II). Curves in B were calculated from the Hill-equation fitted to the data points. Since the data points are only covering a very small range of the calculated Hill curve, no estimation of kinetic parameters was given.

TABLE II  
\( V_{\text{max}} \) but not \( K_M \) for UDP-glucose is dependent on the mol fraction of DOPG in the mixed micelles  

Values are calculated from the Michaelis-Menten equation fitted to the data in Figure 6A. Errors represent one standard deviation from the calculated parameters.

| Concentration of DOPG | \( V_{\text{max}}^a \) | \( K_M \) |
|-----------------------|----------------------|-----------|
| \( \text{mol } \% \)   | \( \text{nmol/h} \)  | \( \text{mM} \) |
| 31                    | 3.18 ± 0.09          | 0.37 ± 0.04 |
| 25                    | 2.06 ± 0.09          | 0.44 ± 0.07 |
| 20                    | 0.55 ± 0.03          | 0.39 ± 0.06 |

\( ^a \) Apparent values determined at 0.8 mol% of DAG and hence only valid at this concentration.

for the concentration of DOG (0.8 mol %) used here, whereas the \( K_m \) remained unaltered at varying DOG concentrations. To get the absolute \( V_{\text{max}} \), one has to either saturate the enzyme with DOG or repeat the experiment at various DOG concentrations and calculate the absolute \( V_{\text{max}} \) by extrapolation. The former method is restricted by the solubility limit of DOG (cf. Fig. 7), and the latter method is only applicable if kinetics of both substrates can be described by known equations. Variation of experimental diacylglycerol concentration was complicated since several parameters were simultaneously altered. To keep the total amphiphile concentration constant, the activator/matrix lipid or the CHAPS concentration had to be lowered, both of which have substantial influence on the activity (Fig. 3 and 4) and alter the micellar structure. However, DOG concentrations between 0.25 and 5 mol % only shift the total amphiphile concentration from 29.3 to 30.8 mM, which has a

and 9.3 mM DOPG was exceeded. Such a breaking point also existed for DOG, but occurred first at 10 mol % (data not shown). Thus, for the activation of the enzyme by DAG, the upper accessible (experimental) concentration of the substrate has a limit that is far below the concentrations that should represent \( K_m \) or give \( V_{\text{max}} \) according to the calculated curves in Fig. 6B. The activity at the limiting concentration may be regarded as the absolute \( V_{\text{max}} \) in this particular experimental system, and the highest specific activity recorded for the MGlcDAG synthase in this system was 2 mmol/mg/h. Such a rate is, as estimated from the total yield of purified enzyme activity (Table I), in many-fold excess of what should be required for supplying fast-growing cells with enough MGlcDAG for the glucolipid pathway (given from Nyström *et al.* (21)).

These results are in agreement with results from the crude enzyme vesicular system where DPG was a better substrate at low concentration and DOG was the better one at high concentrations (19). Hence, the acyl chain preference for the DAG species is valid also for the purified MGlcDAG synthase.

## DISCUSSION

In order to maintain a functional membrane, *A. laidlawii* adapts the lipid composition to shifting environmental and nutritional conditions. A constant surface charge density, similar phase equilibria, and a constant spontaneous curvature are thereby kept by the concerted actions of the lipid-synthesizing enzymes. However, the properties of the lipid bilayer that are sensed by such enzymes is less well known (*e.g.*, Ref. 23). In *A. laidlawii* membranes, the major nonlamellar lipid MGlcDAG is synthesized by transfer of a glucose moiety from UDP-glucose to DAG, catalyzed by the enzyme 1,2-diacylglycerol 3-glucosyltransferase. MGlcDAG is also the first glucolipid in the glucolipid pathway. The variations in activity of this enzyme upon different properties of the amphiphilic environment is, therefore, of particular interest and has been studied earlier in crude cell preparations (2, 18, 19).

### Enzyme Purification

The purification method used here consists of three column chromatography steps in a CHAPS micellar environment. Basically, it relies on the first cationic exchange chromatography, leading to a 190-fold increase (relative to solubilized cells) in the specific activity (Fig. 1A and Table I). The identification of the enzyme in SDS-polyacrylamide gels as a minor 40-kDa protein was possible only after a several thousand-fold enrichment in activity and is mainly based on the correlation between protein gel-band intensity and enzyme activity in different fractions and by a single protein in the final high activity fractions. This is supported by a resistance against digestion by proteinase K for both the enzyme activity and this protein band. Resistance is dependent on the presence of anionic lipids like DOPG and PS, as is the enzyme activity,³ corroborating the identification.

### The CHAPS Micellar System

It was revealed that the activity of the purified MGlcDAG synthase required a certain fraction of DOPG in the CHAPS micelles (Fig. 4) as it does in the crude preparations (18). There seems to be a correlation between the packing properties of the lipids and their solubility in CHAPS. The hydrophobic, nonbilayer substrate lipid DAG, known to increase packing constraints and acyl chain order in lipid bilayers, had a poor solubility in CHAPS (Figs. 3 and 7) (see also Maréchal *et al.* (28)). However, if DAG were mixed with large mole fractions of lipids with larger polar headgroups, it could more easily be solubilized by CHAPS (Fig. 3). This was evident for all of the lipids used as activator or matrix lipids in this study. The slight differences between them in solubilization of DAG at low CHAPS concentrations (Fig. 3) did

³ L. Li, O. P. Karlsson, and Å. Wieslander, manuscript in preparation.
not affect the DAG solubility at assay conditions, as revealed by the similarity between the different curves in Fig. 5.

**Lipid Dependence of the Enzyme—** Many membrane-associated enzymes are dependent upon activator lipids, often anionic ones, for example the protein kinase C (29–32) and the phosphocholine cytidylyltransferase (33, 34). The MGlcDAG synthase seems to have a dependence on a critical fraction of anionic lipids (18, 19). The lipid best suited to fulfill this requirement was DOPG, the major endogenous anionic phospholipid in membranes of *A. laidlawii* (18).

None of the uncharged (DGlcDAG), neutral-charged (DOPC), or positive-charged (sphingosine) lipids could replace DOPG as activator for the purified MGlcDAG synthase (Fig. 5). On the other hand, the anionic phospholipid PS could fully substitute for DOPG; DOPG mixtures with small fractions of PS were even better. The surface (or $\zeta$) potential of the lipid aggregates must be efficiently quenched by the Mg²⁺ present, *cf.* McLaughlin (35). Together this indicates that it is the anionic-charged groups of the activator lipids that hold the activating property, as proposed earlier (18, 19).

These results essentially confirm the earlier findings from both crude vesicular and mixed micellar preparations and strengthens the hypothesis that the MGlcDAG synthase demands a critical fraction of anionic lipid charges in its amphiphilic environment in order to be active. The sigmoidal appearance of the activation curves was also evident, indicating that the enzyme is activated by the same mechanism in both crude and pure systems.

**Interpretation of the Kinetics and Comparison with Similar Systems—** The variation in activity of the MGlcDAG synthase with altering bulk DAG concentration at fixed CHAPS and DOPG concentrations followed a sigmoidal path (Fig. 6B), indicating an activating ability of DAG. This is according to “the dual phospholipid model” of Hendrickson and Dennis (36), a strong indication that the reaction involves more than one type of interaction with DAG where one is a binding step to the micellar surface. However, the MGlcDAG synthase is behaving as a protein anchored to the amphiphilic matrix by hydrophobic interactions (3), ${}^{4}$ but DAG may, as well, promote interactions (i) between (an external) catalytic domain and the lipid surface, or (ii) between enzyme monomer subunits. Both alternatives are also compatible with a cooperative mechanism. The Hill equation could be more accurately fitted to the data than could the equation suggested by Hendrickson and Dennis (36), but since the data only represented a very small range of the calculated curves, none of the equations can be ruled out and no parameters could be calculated with certainty. DAG might also function as a noncooperative activator, as it does for the *E. coli* diacylglycerol kinase in the absence of activating phospholipids (37). Although the enzyme product MGlcDAG is a potent nonbilayer-prone lipid, the activity data from the various lipid supplements and the DPG and DOG substrates argues against any (major) influence of the spontaneous curvature on activity (or activation) of the MGlcDAG synthase at physiological DOPG concentrations. This is in accordance with crude-enzyme results (18–20).

The dependence of the MGlcDAG synthase on its soluble substrate UDP-glucose was more easily interpreted since the data could be fitted to the Michaelis-Menten equation, and the concentration of UDP-Glc could be varied to give data points in all essential parts of the curve (Fig. 6A). A comparison of the apparent values of $V_{\text{max}}$ and $K_m$ at different concentrations of the activator DOPG (Table II) revealed that the $K_m$ was not altered. $V_{\text{max}}$, on the other hand, was changed in accordance

with the activation by DOPG, as shown in Fig. 5. The enzyme is thus following Michaelis-Menten kinetics with UDP-Glc, and the concentration of DOPG does not affect the interaction between the enzyme and UDP-Glc, but the turnover of the enzyme is substantially affected. The apparent $V_{\text{max}}$ was increased almost 6-fold by altering the DOPG fraction from 20 to 31 mol %, *i.e.* at physiological concentrations. An 11-mol % variation in DOPG at these conditions will only have minor effects on the charge density and the resulting surface ($\zeta$) potential, as deduced from several other studies (7, 35, 38, 39). This strongly indicates that the activation is not linearly dependent on the lipid surface charge concentration.

**Importance for the Regulation Model of *A. laidlawii—*** This study supports the regulation model for *A. laidlawii* lipid synthesis (3, 19) where the MGlcDAG synthesis is enhanced by the negative surface charge brought by DOPG and two (usually minor) phosphoglucolipids. Since MGlcDAG is the first glucolipid along the glucolipid metabolic pathway, the regulation will act to maintain a balance to the phospholipid (*i.e.* PG) pathway, competing for the same PA precursor. The model is in accordance with the ability of the purified MGlcDAG synthase to be activated by a critical fraction of anionic lipids in the micellar system (Fig. 5). Interestingly, a dependence on anionic lipids for the *in vivo* synthesis of the major nonlamellar-prone lipid in *E. coli* has recently been suggested (40).

The higher efficiency of DPG than of DOG as a substrate is also in accordance with both the regulation model and the crude vesicular system (19). The amounts of MGlcDAG increases strongly with short acyl chains *in vivo* (14, 41), and this must be governed by a substrate preference of the enzyme for such chains since the MGlcDAG synthase is only weakly regulated by properties affecting chain order and curvature (see above and Ref. 19).

From these observations on the purified MGlcDAG synthase, it can be concluded that the regulatory properties of the enzyme step are held by one single protein and are probably not part of a complex multiprotein regulatory mechanism. The interaction of this enzyme with its amphiphilic environment can now be investigated.

**Acknowledgments—** We acknowledge Viola Tegman, Stefan Berg, and Lu Li (Umeå) for indispensable assistance and valuable discussions and S. McLaughlin (SUNY, Stony Brook) for advice.

---

**REFERENCES**

1. Smith, P. F. (1969) *J. Bacteriol.* **99**, 480–486
2. Dahlqvist, A., Andersson, S., and Wieslander, Å. (1992) *Biochim. Biophys. Acta* **1105**, 131–140
3. Dahlqvist, A. (1995) *Regulation of the Membrane Glucolipid Synthesis in Acholeplasma laidlawii*. Ph. D. Thesis, Umeå University, Umeå, Sweden
4. Rilfors, L., Wieslander, Å., and Lindblom, G. (1993) in *Subcellular Biochemistry: Mycoplasma Cell Membranes* (Rottem, S., and Kahane, I., eds) Vol. 20, pp. 109–166, Plenum Press, New York
5. Lindblom, G., Brentel, I., Sjölund, M., Wikander, G., and Wieslander, Å. (1986) *Biochemistry* **25**, 7502–7510
6. Österberg, F., Rilfors, L., Wieslander, Å., Lindblom, G., and Gruner, S. M. (1995) *Biochim. Biophys. Acta* **1257**, 18–24
7. Christiansson, A., Eriksson, L. E. G., Westman, J., Demel, R., and Wieslander, Å. (1985) *J. Biol. Chem.* **260**, 3984–3990
8. Rietveld, A. G., Killian, J. A., Dowhan, W., and de Kruijff, B. (1993) *J. Biol. Chem.* **268**, 12427–12433
9. Morein, S., Andersson, A.-S., Rilfors, L., and Lindblom, G. (1996) *J. Biol. Chem.* **271**, 6801–6809
10. Goldfine, H. (1993) in *Genetics and Molecular Biology of Anaerobes* (Sebald, M., ed) pp. 354–362, Springer-Verlag New York Inc., New York
11. Rilfors, L., Hauksson, J., and Lindblom, G. (1994) *Biochemistry* **33**, 6110–6120
12. Mannock, D. A., Lewis, R. N. A. H., and McElhaney, R. N. (1990) *Biochemistry* **29**, 7790–7799
13. Foht, P. J., Tran, Q. M., Lewis, R. N. A. H., and McElhaney, R. N. (1995) *Biochemistry* **34**, 13811–13817
14. Wieslander, Å., Nordström, S., Dahlqvist, A., Rilfors, L., and Lindblom, G. (1995) *Eur. J. Biochem.* **227**, 734–744
15. Wieslander, Å., Rilfors, L., and Lindblom, G. (1986) *Biochemistry* **25**, 7511–7517
16. Israelachvili, J. (1991) *Intermolecular and Surface Forces*, pp. 366–394, 2nd Ed., Academic Press, London
17. Gruner, S. M. (1992) in *The Structure of Biological Membranes* (Yeagle, P., ed)

${}^{4}$ O. P. Karlsson, unpublished observation.
pp. 211–250, CRC Press, Inc., Ann Arbor, MI

**Lipid Dependence of Purified MGlcDAG Synthase**

18. Karlsson, O. P., Dahlqvist, A., and Wieslander, Å. (1994) *J. Biol. Chem.* **269**, 23484–23490

19. Dahlqvist, A., Nordström, S., Karlsson, O. P., Mannock, D. A., McElhaney, R. N., and Wieslander, Å. (1995) *Biochemistry* **34**, 13381–13389

20. Karlsson, O. P., Rytömaa, M., Dahlqvist, A., Kinnunen, P. K. J., and Wieslander, Å. (1996) *Biochemistry* **35**, 10094–10102

21. Nyström, S., Wallbrandt, P., and Wieslander, Å. (1992) *Eur. J. Biochem.* **204**, 231–240

22. Hauksson, J. B., Rilfors, L., Lindblom, G., and Arvidson, G. (1995) *Biochim. Biophys. Acta* **1258**, 1–9

23. Hjelmstad, R. H., and Bell, R. M. (1991) *Biochemistry* **30**, 1731–1740

24. Shibuya, I. (1992) *Prog. Lipid Res.* **31**, 245–299

25. Schürholz, T. (1996) *Biophys. Chem.* **58**, 87–96

26. Müller, K. (1981) *Biochemistry* **20**, 404–414

27. Small, D. M. (1986) in *Handbook of Lipid Research* (Hanahan, D. J., ed) Vol. 4, pp. 345–394, Plenum Press, New York

28. Maréchal, E., Block, M. A., Joyard, J., and Douce, R. (1994) *J. Biol. Chem.* **269**, 5788–5798

29. Epand, R. M., Epand, R. F., Leon, B. T.-C., Menger, F. M., and Kuo, J. F. (1991)

30. Goldberg, E. M., Lester, D. S., Borchardt, D. B., and Zidovetzki, R. (1994) *Biophys. J.* **66**, 382–393

31. Mosior, M., and Epand, R. M. (1993) *Biochemistry* **32**, 66–75

32. Slater, S. J., Kelly, M. B., Taddeo, F. J., Ho, C., Rubin, E., and Stubbs, C. D. (1994) *J. Biol. Chem.* **269**, 4866–4871

33. Cornell, R. B. (1991) *Biochemistry* **30**, 5873–5880

34. Cornell, R. B. (1991) *Biochemistry* **30**, 5881–5888

35. McLaughlin, S. (1989) *Annu. Rev. Biophys. Biophys. Chem.* **18**, 113–136

36. Hendrickson, H. S., and Dennis, E. A. (1984) *J. Biol. Chem.* **259**, 5734–5739

37. Walsh, J. P., and Bell, R. M. (1986) *J. Biol. Chem.* **261**, 15062–15069

38. Eisenberg, M., Gresalfi, T., Riccio, T., and McLaughlin, S. (1979) *Biochemistry* **18**, 5213–5223

39. McLaughlin, S., Mulrine, N., Gresalfi, T., Vaio, G., and McLaughlin, A. (1981) *J. Gen. Physiol.* **77**, 445–473

40. Saha, S. K., Nishijima, S., Matsuzaki, H., Shibuya, I., and Matsumoto, K. (1996) *Biosci. Biotechnol. Biochem.* **60**, 111–116

41. Thurmond, R. L., Niemi, A. R., Lindblom, G., Wieslander, Å., and Rilfors, L. (1994) *Biochemistry* **33**, 13178–13188

Membranes and Bioenergetics:
Lipid Dependence and Basic Kinetics of the
Purified 1,2-Diacylglycerol
3-Glucosyltransferase from Membranes of
Acholeplasma laidlawii

Olof P. Karlsson, Anders Dahlqvist, Susanne
Vikström and Åke Wieslander
J. Biol. Chem. 1997, 272:929-936.
doi: 10.1074/jbc.272.2.929

Access the most updated version of this article at [http://www.jbc.org/content/272/2/929](http://www.jbc.org/content/272/2/929)

Find articles, minireviews, Reflections and Classics on similar topics on the [JBC Affinity Sites](https://www.jbc.org/affinity-sites).

Alerts:
- When this article is cited
- When a correction for this article is posted

[Click here](https://www.jbc.org/alerts) to choose from all of JBC's e-mail alerts

This article cites 37 references, 11 of which can be accessed free at [http://www.jbc.org/content/272/2/929.full.html#ref-list-1](http://www.jbc.org/content/272/2/929.full.html#ref-list-1)
