
Journal of Neurochemistry  
Lippincott-Raven Publishers, Philadelphia  
© 1997 International Society for Neurochemistry  

# Short Review

## Cyclic GMP-Dependent Protein Kinase and Cellular Signaling in the Nervous System

### Xin Wang and Phillip J. Robinson

#### Endocrine Unit, John Hunter Hospital, Newcastle, New South Wales, Australia

**Abstract:** Nitric oxide (NO) and natriuretic peptide hormones play key roles in a surprising number of neuronal functions, including learning and memory. Most data suggest that they exert converging actions by elevation of intracellular cyclic GMP (cGMP) levels through activation of soluble and particulate guanylyl cyclases. However, cGMP is only the starting point for multiple signaling cascades, which are now beginning to be defined. A primary action of elevated cGMP levels is the stimulation of cGMP-dependent protein kinase (PKG), the major intracellular receptor protein for cGMP, which phosphorylates substrate proteins to exert its actions. It has become increasingly clear that PKG mediates some of the neuronal effects of cGMP, but how is not yet clear. One clear illustration of this pathway has been reported in striatonigral nerve terminals, where NO mediates phosphorylation of the protein phosphatase regulator dopamine- and cyclic AMP-regulated phosphoprotein having a molecular mass of 32,000 (DARPP-32) by PKG. There are remarkably few PKG substrates in brain whose identities are known. A survey of these proteins and those known from other tissues that might also be found in the nervous system reveals the key molecular sites where cGMP and PKG signaling is likely to be regulating neural function. These potential substrates are critically placed to have profound effects on the protein phosphorylation network through regulation of protein phosphatases, intracellular calcium levels, and the function of many ion channels and neurotransmitter receptors. The brain also contains a rich diversity of specific PKG substrates whose identities are not yet known. Their future identification will provide exciting new leads that will permit better understanding of the role of PKG signaling in both basic and higher orders of brain function. **Key Words:** Protein phosphorylation—Cyclic GMP—Cyclic GMP-dependent protein kinase—Brain—Neuron—Neurotransmitter release.

*J. Neurochem.* 68, 443–456 (1997).

The widespread biological importance of cyclic GMP (cGMP) signaling through cGMP-dependent protein kinase (PKG) has been slow to be appreciated. Despite an exciting flourish of activity in the late 1960s and early 1970s when both cGMP and PKG were discovered, research largely languished for many years and was focused in only a small number of laboratories. This was probably due to the difficulty in determining how this signaling system was activated, what biological processes it regulated, and what substrates of PKG might mediate its actions. PKG’s role in smooth muscle relaxation has been the most significant area of productive research. It was not until more recent years that it was discovered that two pathways lead to cGMP signaling, via natriuretic peptides such as atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP) and soluble gases such as nitric oxide (NO) and carbon monoxide, which elevate intracellular cGMP levels through activation of particulate (GC-P) and soluble (GC-S) guanylyl cyclases (Fig. 1). In the last few years there has been an explosion of interest in how these two signaling pathways may control neuronal function (both presynaptically and postsynaptically) generating an exciting array of neuronal functions for the cGMP signaling pathway (for reviews, see Garthwaite and Boulton, 1995; Jaffrey and Snyder, 1995). These functions include mediation or modulation of neurotransmitter release and uptake, neuronal differentiation and gene expression.

---

Address correspondence and reprint requests to Dr. X. Wang at Endocrine Unit, John Hunter Hospital, Locked Bag 1, Hunter Region Mail Centre, New South Wales 2310, Australia.

**Abbreviations used:** ANP, atrial natriuretic peptide; \([Ca^{2+}]\)_i_, intracellular \(Ca^{2+}\) concentration; cAMP, cyclic AMP; CFTR, cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator; cGMP, cyclic GMP; cGMP-B-PDE, cyclic GMP binding phosphodiesterase; CMPK, calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase; CNG, cyclic nucleotide-gated; CNPase, 2′,3′-cyclic nucleotide 3′-phosphodiesterase; 8-pCPT-cGMP, 8-(p-chlorophenylthio)cyclic GMP; DARPP-32, dopamine- and cyclic AMP-regulated phosphoprotein having a molecular mass of 32,000; GC, guanylyl cyclase; GC-P, particulate guanylyl cyclase; GC-S, soluble guanylyl cyclase; InsP_3_, inositol trisphosphate; LTD, long-term depression; LTP, long-term potentiation; NO, nitric oxide; NOS, nitric oxide synthase; PDE, phosphodiesterase; PKA, cyclic AMP-dependent protein kinase; PKC, protein kinase C; PKG, cyclic GMP-dependent protein kinase; RI, regulatory subunit type I of cyclic AMP-dependent protein kinase; VASP, vasodilator-stimulated phosphoprotein.

provided limited evidence for a neuronal localization of PKG in cells other than cerebellar Purkinje cells and neurons of the striatonigral pathway (Schlichter, 1982; Tsou et al., 1993). This leaves critical questions unanswered: (a) Is PKG present in nerve terminals in brain (apart from those of Purkinje cells)? (b) What are the specific physiological PKG substrates in nerve terminals that could mediate its actions? (c) How does PKG modulate intracellular Ca²⁺ concentration ([Ca²⁺]i) and ion channel activity?

Information on the “upstream elements” (i.e., factors contributing to the elevated cGMP levels in cells) of the cGMP signaling system in various cell types has progressed faster, and the recent advances in the upstream aspects of the cGMP system have been reviewed elsewhere (Garthwaite and Boulton, 1995; Jaffrey and Snyder, 1995). This review focuses on the more recent information that is emerging concerning the roles of cGMP and PKG in signal transduction in the nervous system with particular focus on the immediate “downstream elements”: PKG activation and phosphorylation of its potential substrates.

## NEURONAL cGMP AND ITS ROLES IN NEURAL FUNCTION

It has been recognized for many years that cGMP levels in neuronal tissues increase in response to depolarizing stimuli. It is now known that many hormones also raise neuronal cGMP levels. More recent evidence shows that cGMP is involved in the regulation of many neural functions, including neurotransmission, long-term potentiation (LTP), gene expression, and even neurotoxicity and neurodegeneration.

### Modulation of neurotransmitter release

Many studies have demonstrated effects of NO and cGMP on neurotransmitter release or on the release of various secretory hormones using different model systems (Montague et al., 1994; Kamisaki et al., 1995). Some of the reported effects are stimulatory, and some are inhibitory. This disparity may partly relate to cell-specific regulatory events, particularly in regard to studies using nerve terminals (synaptosomes), cultured neuronal cells, and brain slices. Effects on neurotransmitter release from nerve terminals are more clearly related to potentially direct actions of cGMP on the molecular machinery of vesicle traffic (Hirsch et al., 1993; Montague et al., 1994; Kamisaki et al., 1995) or neurotransmitter uptake mechanisms (Pogun et al., 1994). Effects in cultured neurons may be attributed to effects within single cells or local interactions between related cells (Hirsch et al., 1993; Meriney et al., 1994). However, effects in brain slices may relate to complex interactions between nerve cells and glia and cannot easily be attributed to the direct action of cGMP in nerve endings (Lonart et al., 1993; Zhuo et al., 1994). Therefore, direct molecular mechanisms of cGMP action may best be studied in single cell or subcellular models.

LTP and long-term depression (LTD)

cGMP has been directly implicated in LTP and LTD, which are proposed as models for learning and memory. More directly, cGMP infusion into the hippocampus directly reveals a role in early stages of memory consolidation (Bernabeu et al., 1996). LTP is primarily a postsynaptic event but may be maintained presynaptically by increasing the release of the neurotransmitter glutamate. This requires that the presynaptic cell receives a signal from the postsynaptic cell. NO is one possible candidate for this retrograde signal that increases neurotransmitter release in LTP. NO may act through the cGMP signaling system, because membrane-permeant analogues of cGMP partially reverse the inhibition of LTP normally observed with NO synthase (NOS) inhibitors (Haley et al., 1992). LTP in chick ciliary ganglia is mimicked by cGMP analogues at the initiation or maintenance phase of LTP (Lin and Bennett, 1994). Zhuo et al. (1994) have shown that a GC inhibitor blocks the induction of LTP in the CA1 region of hippocampal slices. Conversely, cGMP analogues produce long-lasting enhancement of the excitatory postsynaptic potential, associated with an increase in PKG activity. This was confirmed by producing NMDA receptor-dependent LTP at synapses between individual hippocampal pyramidal neurons in culture (Arancio et al., 1995). Inhibitors of GC or PKG block LTP, whereas injection of cGMP into the presynaptic neuron produced an activity-dependent long-lasting potentiation involving increased neurotransmitter release (Arancio et al., 1995). These results suggest that GC-S and PKG are involved in the induction of LTP and could serve as initial targets for retrograde messengers. Analogously, cGMP and PKG appear to be intermediate steps required to induce LTD in rat cerebellar slices (Hartell, 1996).

Other roles

There is growing evidence for a neuronal role of NO and GMP in the regulation of gene expression of microtubule-associated protein-2 and other proteins in neurons (Johnston and Morris, 1994). cGMP and NO also mediate the activation of immediate early gene expression in PC12 cells (Haby et al., 1994). In neurodegenerative diseases such as Alzheimer's and Huntington's diseases, the NOS-containing neurons are resistant to degeneration, whereas the surrounding neurons are destroyed. A secreted region of the Alzheimer's disease β-amyloid precursor protein mediates [Ca²⁺]i-lowering and excitoprotective effects on target neurons through increases in cGMP levels and activation of PKG (Barger et al., 1995; Furukawa et al., 1996). In addition, cGMP signaling may regulate brain convulsions, neurotoxicity, and seizure activity (Buisson et al., 1993; Garthwaite and Boulton, 1995).

The neuronal effects of NO or cGMP on nerve terminals, the site from which neurotransmitter release occurs, have not been well studied. However, several recent studies now suggest that there are important functional consequences of the cGMP signaling pathway in nerve terminals or synaptosomes. Most of the necessary elements of the pathway are present in at least some nerve terminals (Kanda et al., 1992; Tsou et al., 1993; Haver et al., 1995). In some of the earliest work with synaptosomes it was shown that cGMP stimulates phosphorylation of several proteins, implicating the presence of PKG (Boehme et al., 1978). The widespread presence of PKG in nerve terminals has yet to be demonstrated clearly. In rat brain synaptosomes ANP inhibits an amiloride-sensitive Na⁺/H⁺ exchanger by cGMP-mediated mechanisms (Fujii et al., 1987; Tsuyama et al., 1987), suggesting the presence of presynaptic ANP receptors, functionally coupled to intrasynaptosomal cGMP synthesis. Regulation of synaptosomal cGMP synthesis occurs via regulation of NOS activity as well (Mayer et al., 1992), indicating that the second pathway for nerve terminal cGMP synthesis is present. It has also been shown that cGMP analogues and NO donors reduce synaptosomal [Ca²⁺]i (Meffert et al., 1994), as they are now well known to do in cultured neurons (Desole et al., 1994; Meriney et al., 1994; Barger et al., 1995). Finally, in the specific case of the striatonigral nerve terminals in the substantia nigra the full signaling pathway from NO to phosphorylation of a PKG substrate, dopamine- and cyclic AMP (cAMP)-regulated phosphoprotein having a molecular mass of 32,000 (DARPP-32; see below), has been demonstrated. These nerve terminals contain GC-S, cGMP, PKG (Ariano, 1983), and a PKG substrate, and application of a NO donor (sodium nitroprusside) stimulates phosphorylation of DARPP-32 through PKG (Tsou et al., 1993). As in other models, however, the NO effects observed in synaptosomes appear contradictory in different studies. The reduction in [Ca²⁺]i commonly accompanying NO or cGMP action is in contrast to the well-known requirement of exocytosis for elevated [Ca²⁺]i. Some of this disparity may be accounted for by effects on neurotransmitter transporters in synaptosomes (Pogun et al., 1994) rather than on exocytosis. Some may be accounted for by the requirement for some as yet unidentified event, in addition to NO production, being required for exocytosis (Montague et al., 1994). Although it is clear that not all nerve terminals are alike, these studies combine to show that the cGMP–PKG signaling pathway may be functionally in place in many nerve terminals.

MOLECULAR MECHANISMS OF cGMP ACTION

The mechanisms whereby NO and cGMP modulate neuronal functions are not yet known. Yet, a few recent studies highlight a pivotal role for PKG-mediated protein phosphorylation as the signaling pathway in some of the processes. In cells where cGMP content is ele-

vated it is possible that multiple signaling pathways
are activated. This diversity of cellular action is mediated by three distinct families of cGMP receptors: cyclic nucleotide-gated (CNG) ion channels; cGMP-regulated PDEs that can degrade cAMP, cGMP, or both; and PKG (Fig. 1). The first two have been reviewed elsewhere (Lincoln and Cornwell, 1993; Conti et al., 1995; Finn et al., 1996), and the rest of this review will focus on PKG in the nervous system, a major intracellular receptor for cGMP.

**Role of PKG in neurotransmission**

Although PKG is present at low levels in brain and its cellular and subcellular localizations are rather poorly understood, several studies have provided definitive roles for PKG in certain neuronal events resulting from elevated cGMP levels. These studies have largely relied on intracellular application of PKG or make use of the newly developed PKG agonist 8-(p-chlorophenylthio)cGMP (8-pCPT-cGMP) or antagonist Rp-8-bromoguanosine 3′,5′-cyclic monophosphothioate, both of which are largely without effects on PDEs or cGMP-gated ion channels. These neuronal effects of PKG include direct roles in regulation of neuronal Ca²⁺ currents (Meriney et al., 1994), control of neuronal firing rates or neurotransmitter release (Woody et al., 1986; Branisteanu et al., 1988; Akamatsu et al., 1993; Pineda et al., 1996), as the presynaptic target for the retrograde messenger in LTP (Zhuo et al., 1994; Arancio et al., 1995), and in the activation of neuronal K⁺ channels (Furukawa et al., 1996). Other direct effects of PKG on cellular function have also been determined in nonneuronal cells that may be of relevance to the brain (for review, see Lincoln et al., 1994; also see below). Therefore, PKG plays a central role in regulating cGMP signaling in neurons.

**Dynamic regulation of PKG distribution in the nervous system**

Two forms of PKG, type I (PKG-I, which occurs as two splice variants, Iα and Iβ) and type II (PKG-II), occur in mammalian tissues (Hofmann et al., 1992; Butt et al., 1993; Francis and Corbin, 1994). The study of PKG in any tissue has been limited by the fact that the enzyme seems to be concentrated in substantial amounts in relatively few tissues. The presence or dynamic regulation of PKG in neurons or nerve terminals is one of the key elements of the molecular machinery of PKG signaling. However, not until recently have different isoforms of PKG been clearly demonstrated in brain regions other than the cerebellum, although PKG-I has been shown in the plasma membrane, Golgi structures, and endoplasmic reticulum and nucleus in various cells (Pryzwansky et al., 1995). PKG-I has been demonstrated in cerebrum, but at levels 20–40 times lower than in cerebellum (Schlichter, 1982). Therefore, even though PKG is distributed throughout the brain, there are such high concentrations in cerebellum that the low levels found in other regions have raised questions regarding the specificity of PKG localization outside the cerebellum. This is an important issue because fluorescence immunohistochemistry has shown that smooth muscle cells of the cerebral vasculature are highly positive for PKG-I, but no other neuronal element was found in that study to be immunoreactive, except Purkinje cells (Schlichter, 1982). Therefore, it has been suggested that most of the PKG found in brain regions other than cerebellum is derived from tissue vascularization (Schlichter, 1982). On closer examination, PKG has now been found in a few neuronal types in the brain (Ariano, 1983; Walaas et al., 1989; Lincoln and Cornwell, 1993; El-Husseini et al., 1995). For example, GC, PDE, and PKG have been detected in the cytoplasm and processes of ovoid and round neurons (15–25 μm in diameter) in rat caudate and occasionally in large neurons (>25 μm in diameter) (Ariano, 1983). PKG activity is present in hippocampal slices using an in vitro protein kinase assay by measuring phosphorylation of an exogenous PKG peptide substrate (Zhuo et al., 1994). Outside the brain, the only other neuronal tissue reported to contain PKG is the rabbit superior cervical ganglia (Takahashi et al., 1988). Most important is that initial cloning of PKG-II suggested highest mRNA levels were present in the brain (Uhler, 1993). Subsequent work revealed that the cerebellum (high in PKG-I) has much lower levels of PKG-II than cerebrum and that intestinal mucosa has considerably higher mRNA levels than either of these tissues (Jarchau et al., 1994). Within brain regions in situ hybridization has revealed highest levels in the thalamus, with high levels also in cortex, septum, amygdala, and olfactory bulb (El-Husseini et al., 1995). This study confirmed only very low levels were present in cerebellum and similarly low levels in striatum and hippocampus; an almost opposite distribution was observed for PKG-I, suggesting that each type of PKG may primarily act in different neurons. The potential consequences of the specific distribution of PKG-I and PKG-II in the brain need to be further explored. In addition, the subcellular distribution of PKG-I is known to be regulated by external signals in some cells (such as neutrophils) by association with the cytoskeleton (Pryzwansky et al., 1995). However, no study has demonstrated the potential regulation of the subcellular distribution of PKG in the brain, and it is not fully clear whether endogenous PKG might be localized to presynaptic nerve terminals in noncerebellar or non-substantia nigra brain regions.

**Substrate specificity of PKG**

The important features of the amino acid sequence of a substrate that determine the substrate specificity for PKG are not well understood. As PKG is most closely related to cAMP-dependent protein kinase (PKA), it is perhaps not surprising that they have overlapping substrate specificities. In this regard, the canonical phosphorylation site motif for PKA (RRXS, single letter amino acid code, where X is any amino acid; found in about half of the known PKA substrates)

serves as a recognition motif for PKG as well. However, further specificity determinants exist for PKG. Extensive earlier work has identified several primary sequence parameters that contribute to PKG specificity (Glass, 1990). A recent approach using peptide libraries on cellulose paper has revealed valuable new insights into the substrate specificity of PKG-I (Tegge et al., 1995). This revealed a minimal motif of RKXS/T for PKG-I and a broader motif of KRKKS/T for the best kinetics. In an attempt to understand the substrate specificity of PKG-I, some of the known phosphorylation sites in proteins phosphorylated by PKG-I are summarized in Table 1. The list shows that most PKA substrates are relatively poor PKG substrates. Only very few substrates of PKG are more specifically phosphorylated by PKG than by PKA. These are the 23-kDa G-substrate in the cerebellum (Schlichter, 1982), the 93-kDa bovine cGMP-binding PDE (cGMP-B-PDE) (Colbran et al., 1992), one phosphorylation site in vasodilator-stimulated phosphoprotein (VASP) (Butt et al., 1994), and the regulatory subunit type I of PKA (RI), all of which have ~10-fold selectivity relative to PKA. One determinant (phenylalanine) for PKG specificity appears to be a negative determinant for PKA, rather than a positive determinant for PKG (Colbran et al., 1992). Therefore, there is now some basis from the sequences obtained to date to attempt predictions of a specific PKG phosphorylation site motif. A common theme seems to be the amino acid motif RKK[ST]XXXF, where the amino acid positions C-terminal to the phosphorylated Ser or Thr are relatively flexible. However, this prediction will require considerable experimental evaluation.

The first insights into the substrate specificity of PKG-II have recently become available. Of five synthetic peptide substrates analyzed, three showed only minor differences in kinetics. However, a peptide from histone H2B showed 20-fold selectivity for PKG-II, whereas a phosphorylation site in the nuclear transcription factor cAMP response element binding protein showed twofold selectivity for PKG-II (Gamm et al., 1995). Similarly, a functional difference between types I and II has been found for activation of the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) (French et al., 1995). These results illustrate that although PKG-I and -II may considerably overlap in substrates, there may prove to be unique substrates present in brain for each gene form of the enzyme.

---

### **PKG SUBSTRATES AND ACTION**

Previous comprehensive studies report that the brain is largely devoid of endogenous PKG substrates (Walaas et al., 1983b), except DARPP-32, G-substrate, and the inositol 1,3,4-trisphosphate [Ins(1,4,5)P₃] receptor, and of these only G-substrate is relatively specific for PKG. This has represented a significant barrier to understanding mechanisms underlying cGMP modulation of neurotransmission. These earlier studies now appear to have been restricted by methodological constraints, and many uncharacterized PKG substrates have now been reported (Wang and Robinson, 1995). The clearest insights into PKG signaling are likely to come from studies of substrates that are relatively specific for PKG, especially in comparison with PKA. Much has been learned from the study of PKG substrates in nonneuronal tissues, most of which are also present or have isoforms in neurons and glia. These substrates are functionally known proteins, and they can be grouped into six major areas of function, relating to signal transduction: cyclic nucleotide action, protein phosphatase regulation, cytoskeletal dynamics, intracellular calcium homeostasis, ion channel regulation, and GTP-binding proteins (Table 1). This section will review these substrates and discuss how they are relevant to the brain.

#### **Cyclic nucleotide signaling**
There are several means by which PKG substrates or indeed PKG itself may modulate intracellular cAMP or cGMP signaling. The first is by the appreciation that cAMP may “cross-activate” PKG (or cGMP cross-activate PKA) when intracellular cyclic nucleotide concentrations are sufficiently high (Jiang et al., 1992). Second, large numbers of PKA substrates are relatively poor PKG substrates, but many proteins serve well as substrates for both enzymes, providing a mechanism for convergence as well as divergence in cGMP signaling. Third, specific proteins mediating cAMP or cGMP signaling may be phosphorylated by PKG. This is now known for five examples: RI, bovine cGMP-B-PDE, NOS, PKG autophosphorylation, and the α subunit of the inhibitory G protein (Gᵢα), which inhibits adenyl cyclase production of cAMP and which will be discussed in the calcium signaling section.

PKG-Iα, Iβ, and PKG-II autophosphorylate in vitro in the presence of Mg²⁺ and ATP (Francis and Corbin, 1994). Autophosphorylation is unaffected by the presence of substrate, suggesting it occurs in preference to phosphorylation of exogenous substrates. Autophosphorylation of PKG-Iα was shown to increase the rate of cGMP dissociation from the high-affinity cGMP binding site and increase the affinity of cAMP for this site, thus increasing the cAMP/cGMP selectivity and facilitating cross-activation (Landgraf et al., 1986; Butt et al., 1993). PKG-II (like PKG-Iβ) requires almost ninefold more cGMP for activation than PKG-Iα, suggesting higher in vivo levels of cGMP might be required for its activation (Gamm et al., 1995). Several cGMP analogues show up to 300-fold selectivity for activation of PKG-I, rather than PKG-II. Most notable is phenyl-1,N²-ethenoguanosine-cGMP, which can also be used in intact cell studies as it is membrane permeable. Only one, Sp-8-pCPT-cGMP, is relatively (fivefold) selective for PKG-II (Gamm et al., 1995), providing a relatively specific tool for future intact cell studies to distinguish between the roles of the two PKG

TABLE 1. Summary of some identified PKG substrates grouped according to functional roles

| Protein | Size (kDa) | Phosphorylation site sequences<sup>a</sup> | $K_{\mathrm{m}}$ ($\mu \mathrm{M}$) | Other protein kinases | Tissue distribution | References |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Cyclic nucleotide signaling |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| RI | 47 | — | 2.2 | PKG | Brain and others | Geahlen and Krebs (1980) |
| cGMP-B-PDE | 93 | — | 68 | PKA, PKC, CMPK | Lung and others | Thomas et al. (1990) |
| NOS | 150 | — | 320 | PKA, PKC, CMPK | Brain and others | Dinerman et al. (1994) |
| PKG 1$\alpha$ (autophosphorylation) | 78 | — | 578 | PKA, PKC, CMPK | Brain and others | Glass and Smith (1983) |
| PKG 1$\beta$ (autophosphorylation) | 78 | — | 943 | PKA, PKC, CMPK | Brain and others | Francis et al. (1993) |
| Cytoskeleton dynamics |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| VASP peptide 1 | 45–50 | LRKVSKQE | 94 | PKA, PKC, cdc2 | Platelets | Butt et al. (1994) |
| Vimentin | 57 | RKDSRP<sup>b</sup> | 1,395 | PKA, PKC, cdc2 | Neutrophils, glia | MacMillan-Crow and Lincoln (1994) |
| CNPase | 46 | RKDSRP<sup>b</sup> | 25 | PKA, PKC, cdc2 | Smooth muscle | Stricker et al. (1994) |
| Protein phosphatase regulation |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| G-substrate | 23 | RRKDTPALH | 0.21 | PKA | Cerebellum | Hemmings et al. (1984) |
| DARPP-32 | 32 | RRRRPTPAMLF | 5.4 | PKA, CK-I | Brain | Hemmings et al. (1984) |
| Inhibitor I | 23 | RRRRPTPATL | 25 | PKA | Sk muscle, brain | Hemmings et al. (1984) |
| Calcium signaling |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| InsP<sub>3</sub> receptor | 240 | GRRESLTSFG | 5.8 | PKA | Brain, muscle | Komalavilas and Lincoln (1994) |
| Ryanodine receptor | 400 | KKKTRKISQTAQTYD | 2.4 | PKA | Sk muscle, heart | Suko et al. (1993) |
| Phospholamban | 5 | TRSAIRRASTIEMP | 5.0 | PKA | Sm muscle, heart | Kemp and Pearson (1991) |
| Ca<sup>2+</sup> channel L-type |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| $\alpha$ subunit | 190–230 | RKRKMSSRGL<sup>b</sup> | 10 × faster than PKA | PKA, PKC | Brain, others | Hell et al. (1993) |
| $\beta$ subunit | 55 | — | — | PKA | Jahn et al. (1988) |
| Ca<sup>2+</sup> channel N-type |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| $\alpha$ subunit | 250 | — | — | PKA, PKC | Brain | Hell et al. (1994) |
| Ion channel regulation |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| GABA<sub>A</sub> |  | RRRASQLK | 15 | PKA, PKC, CMPK, tyrosine kinase | Brain, others | McDonald and Moss (1994) |
| CFTR | 169 | — | — | PKA, PKC, CMPK | Many tissues | Picciotto et al. (1992) |
| K<sup>+</sup> channel | 761–770 | IHRKTASTRKVSLA | 55 | PKA | Many tissues | Alioua et al. (1995) |
| Na<sup>+</sup> channel | 732–749 | LQARRRQSVL | 14 | PKA | Many tissues | Kanda et al. (1992) |
| GTP-binding proteins |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| Rap1B | 62 | LERRLSVPDSEQ | 50 | PKA | Many tissues | Miura et al. (1992) |
| G<sub>i$\alpha$</sub> | 21 | RKASTLE<sup>b</sup> | 8 | PKA | Many tissues | Pfeifer et al. (1995) |
|  | 40 | KARKKSSCQLL | 48 | PKA |  |  |
|  |  | LNKRKDTKE<sup>b</sup> | 50 | PKC |  |  |

For reviews of phosphorylation sites in other substrates from earlier studies, see Glass (1990) and Pearson and Kemp (1991). cdc2, cell division cycle kinase 2; CK1, casein kinase I; Sk, skeletal muscle; Sm, smooth muscle.

<sup>a</sup> Phosphorylation sites by PKG are underlined.

<sup>b</sup> Presumed phosphorylation site (not yet experimentally determined), based on predictions from sequences available in the SwissProt database using the "motif" described in the text.

types. RI was the first protein described to have a high degree of specificity for phosphorylation by PKG relative to PKA (Geahlen and Krebs, 1980). The significance of its phosphorylation remains unclear.

There are many types of PDE enzymes that degrade cellular cAMP or cGMP (or both) and thereby modulate cellular signaling (Beltman et al., 1993). cGMP-B-PDE type V preferentially hydrolyzes cGMP rather than cAMP. Purified bovine lung cGMP-B-PDE (a 93-kDa protein) was phosphorylated by PKG at a rate 10 times greater than by PKA (Thomas et al., 1990; Colbran et al., 1992). The phosphorylation site is Ser²², located near the N-terminus of the protein (McAllister-Lucas et al., 1993). Synthetic peptides made to the phosphorylation site (Table 1) proved to have excellent kinetics for phosphorylation by PKG and are among the most specific PKG substrates determined to date (Colbran et al., 1992). Unfortunately, it is not yet clear if the enzyme is present in the nervous system. Neuronal NOS is a substrate for multiple protein kinases, including PKA and PKG (Bredt et al., 1992; Dinerman et al., 1994). Phosphorylation decreases NOS activity, and phosphorylation has also been observed in intact cells (Dinerman et al., 1994). Phosphorylation by PKA or PKG may serve as feedback inhibitors of NOS signaling pathways (Fig. 1). Phosphorylated NOS is dephosphorylated by calcineurin (the calcium-dependent phosphatase 2B) in intact cells with an associated increase in enzyme activity (Dawson et al., 1993). Feedback inhibition of NOS activity by PKG, if it occurs in neurons, may be a means by which PKG in only a few neurons responding to NOS stimuli could have profound influence on many neighboring neurons.

Cytoskeletal dynamics

At least two substrates of PKG play roles that may regulate the cell cytoskeleton: VASP and vimentin. Gα also associates with the cytoskeleton (see below). VASP is a 46/50-kDa proline-rich protein that localizes to focal adhesions (Butt et al., 1994; Haffner et al., 1995). VASP is a major physiological substrate for both PKG and PKA in platelets and other cell types. Sequence analysis of the PKG-phosphorylated protein revealed three phosphorylation sites (Butt et al., 1994). Both PKG and PKA phosphorylate sites 2 and 3 slowly, whereas PKG phosphorylates Ser in site 1 more rapidly than PKA (Table 1). A synthetic peptide prepared from site 1 is one of the best in vitro substrates for PKG. VASP is phosphorylated in intact cells on the same three sites (Butt et al., 1994). The phosphorylation of VASP in intact platelets is stimulated by cGMP level-elevating agents (such as nitrovasodilators) or cAMP level-elevating agents, and this correlates well with the inhibition of platelet activation caused by these agents (Walter et al., 1993). Therefore, this protein represents the best-characterized PKG substrate observed in living cells. It is not yet known if VASP is present in neurons. Vimentin is an intermediate filament protein (57 kDa, or 114-kDa dimer). An important role for vimentin in the brain is likely as it is a prominent phosphoprotein in glial cells (Harrison and Mobley, 1991). Vimentin is also the first reported PKG binding protein, although many are now known for PKA. PKG phosphorylates vimentin only when the two proteins bind to each other, whereas catalytically active fragments of PKG do not phosphorylate the protein (MacMillan-Crow and Lincoln, 1994). Activation of PKG in intact neutrophils does not stimulate vimentin phosphorylation in vivo unless cells are stimulated, which causes PKG redistribution to the cytoskeleton. This indicates that specific protein interactions may play a role in determining PKG substrate specificity. These interactions may control some glial functions. Another cytoskeleton-related PKG substrate is 2′,3′-cyclic nucleotide 3′-phosphodiesterase (CNPase), an enzyme of unknown function highly abundant in myelin cells. CNPase (46 kDa) is an enzyme that hydrolyzes 2′,3′-cyclic nucleotides such as 2′,3′-cAMP or 2,3′-cGMP to produce 2′-nucleotides. The real cellular role of CNPase is not known, but it has been now widely used as a marker for myelin. CNPase is a PKG substrate (Stricker et al., 1994), but the consequences of this phosphorylation have not been explored.

Protein phosphatase regulation

There are various means through which PKG signaling can regulate cellular functions through the protein phosphorylation network, and one is through protein phosphatases. Two well-characterized PKG substrates are the phosphatase I inhibitors, G-substrate and DARPP-32, which are found in different neurons. G-substrate is a protein found almost exclusively in the Purkinje cells of the cerebellum (Detre et al., 1984) and was only the second specific PKG substrate to be found to be a functional protein (Schlichter, 1982). G-substrate is related to the protein inhibitor of protein phosphatase I, called inhibitor 1, but it is not clear how effective it is as an inhibitor of phosphatase I. DARPP-32 is another neuronal inhibitor of protein phosphatase I that is regulated by protein phosphorylation. DARPP-32 has properties even more closely related to those of inhibitor 1 than G-substrate. It was originally discovered as a PKA substrate exclusive to dopamine-receptive neurons in the striatum (Walaas et al., 1983a). It is highly enriched in the medium-sized spiny neurons of the striatum and in striatonigral nerve terminals in the substantia nigra (Walaas and Greengard, 1984). These neurons are the predominant neurons in the caudate-putamen to contain GC-S, cGMP, and PKG (Ariano, 1983). The kinetics of DARPP-32 for phosphorylation by PKA and PKG are almost identical, making it a good PKG substrate. It is phosphorylated in vivo in response to dopaminergic and other stimuli (Snyder et al., 1994). Of greatest interest is perhaps the finding that the NO/cGMP signaling pathway also regulates DARPP-32 phosphorylation in

slices of substantia nigra (Tsou et al., 1993) and in rat choroid plexus (Snyder et al., 1992). The substantia nigra slices are of further significance because their DARPP-32 complement is located in presynaptic nerve terminals. Also, ANP and cGMP increase the phosphorylation of inhibitor 1 and DARPP-32 in rat choroid plexus (Snyder et al., 1992). These studies were the first demonstration of ANP- or NO-mediated protein phosphorylation in the nervous system, although it is not yet known to occur in neurons outside the striatognal pathway.

### Calcium signaling

A general functional theme for cGMP action through PKG in cells is a lowering of \([Ca^{2+}]_i\). Several known mechanisms might contribute to this, and these could involve phosphorylation by PKG of some key proteins that regulate \([Ca^{2+}]_i\). It has become clear that PKG-I is both necessary and sufficient to account for the effects of cGMP on regulating \([Ca^{2+}]_i\) in different cell types (Hofmann et al., 1992; Lincoln and Cornwell, 1993; Schmidt et al., 1993). Direct introduction of PKG-I or its overexpression in several cells lowers \([Ca^{2+}]_i\) or prevents agonist-induced rises in \([Ca^{2+}]_i\) (Mery et al., 1991; Ruth et al., 1993). The known examples of PKG substrates that could mediate this are the Ins(1,4,5)P₃ receptor, calcium channels, and phospholamban (a regulator of endoplasmic reticulum Ca²⁺-ATPase). These proteins may also be regulated by PKG through further pathways, as illustrated below in the section on K⁺ channels. A new mechanism has also been reported where PKG may block the action of selected hormones that require Gᵢα as an early step in their signaling pathway, and Gᵢα was found to be a PKG substrate (Pfeifer et al., 1995).

PKG may lower \([Ca^{2+}]_i\) by direct effects on calcium channels. There are several types of voltage-gated calcium channels in excitable cells. Opening of the L-type (long-lasting) channel requires its phosphorylation (Bertolino and Llinás, 1992). The major subunit forming the ion channel itself is the α₁ subunit (190–230 kDa), and another key component is the intracellular β subunit (55 kDa). Both the α and the β subunits of the channel are substrates for PKA and PKG. Phosphorylation of the α subunit by PKA is activating, and PKG can also phosphorylate the same site with greatly reduced kinetics (Hell et al., 1993, 1994). The β subunit is phosphorylated 10–50 times faster by PKG than PKA (Jahn et al., 1988). There is strong evidence that PKG and cGMP regulate the activity of this channel in intact cells. In contrast to PKA, cGMP mediates channel inactivation in neurons and other cells (Nishimura et al., 1992; Meriney et al., 1994). This apparently general effect appears to be mediated by PKG, as demonstrated indirectly by its prevention with the PKG inhibitor KT-5823 and by intracellular perfusion with purified PKG (Mery et al., 1991). The target for the PKG could be a calcium channel subunit or a protein associated with it [such as a G protein (Meriney et al., 1994)]. Such effects in neurons would have important consequences for the generation of action potentials and on signal transduction. In addition to the L-type channel, the α₁ subunit (220–250 kDa) of the N-type calcium channel in neurons is phosphorylated by PKG, PKA, and protein kinase C (PKC) in vitro, but the functional consequences are not yet known (Hell et al., 1994). A potential modulation of the activity of the N-type channels by phosphorylation may regulate release of neurotransmitters from specific nerve terminals.

Phosphorylation of the Ins(1,4,5)P₃ receptor by PKA or PKG may contribute to the inhibition of \([Ca^{2+}]_i\) observed by cGMP in many cells. The Ins(1,4,5)P₃ receptor is found on the endoplasmic reticulum of most cells and mediates the action of the intracellular second messenger Ins(1,4,5)P₃ by releasing calcium from stores into the cell cytosol (Ferris and Snyder, 1992). The Ins(1,4,5)P₃ receptor from Purkinje cells of cerebellum and that from vascular smooth muscle are PKG substrates (Koga et al., 1994; Komalavilas and Lincoln, 1994). The phosphorylation site for PKA and PKG is Ser¹⁷⁵⁵. This site, when prepared as a synthetic peptide, was an excellent in vitro PKG substrate compared with PKA (Komalavilas and Lincoln, 1994). Phosphorylation of the receptor by PKA results in a diminished potency of Ins(1,4,5)P₃ to release calcium from cerebellar microsomes (Supatapone et al., 1988). In vascular smooth muscle cells where PKG levels are high, phosphorylation of the receptor by PKG occurs in intact cells (Komalavilas and Lincoln, 1994), but the biological significance of this is not yet fully known. PKG also phosphorylates the related ryanodine receptor from skeletal muscle or heart sarcoplasmic reticulum (Suko et al., 1993). There are other cGMP-regulated mechanisms for the lowering of \([Ca^{2+}]_i\). One is phosphorylation of phospholamban by PKG, resulting in its dissociation from a Ca²⁺-ATPase and activation of the ATPase (Sarcevic et al., 1989). The phosphorylation site on phospholamban for PKG is the same as for PKA, and this site has very similar kinetics for both protein kinases (Table 1) (Kemp and Pearson, 1991). PKC is a multifunctional protein kinase involved in intracellular signaling and that regulates many cellular functions. Purified rat brain PKC (comprising a mix of α, β, and γ isoforms) is phosphorylated by PKG, but not by PKA (Wang et al., 1995; Gatti et al., 1996). Most important is that PKG phosphorylation of PKC resulted in decreased activity of PKC toward the purified brain dynamin I, a known neuronal PKC substrate (Robinson et al., 1993). This may represent a point of cross-talk between Ca²⁺ and cGMP signaling that could occur when both signaling pathways are simultaneously activated.

In contrast to the above effects on reducing \([Ca^{2+}]_i\), cGMP and GC-S have been shown to elevate \([Ca^{2+}]_i\) in a small number of cell types, including neurons, probably by several mechanisms. In snail neurons, in-

intracellular injection of PKG produced an activation of Ca²⁺ current, consistent with activation of Ca²⁺ channels (or their regulators) by phosphorylation (Paupardin-Tritsch et al., 1986). This study provided the first and among the best direct evidence for a neuronal role for PKG. The [Ca²⁺]i elevation in retinal cone cells or pinealocytes is a result of Ca²⁺ entry through a cGMP-activated CNG ion channel (Rieke and Schwartz, 1994; Schaad et al., 1995). There are several other nonneural cell types in which cGMP mediates Ca²⁺ influx (Schaad et al., 1995). Recently, a CNG ion channel has been reported in hippocampal neurons, suggesting broader relevance of this function of cGMP (Leinders-Zufall et al., 1995).

### Ion channels

There are many forms of ion channel, and many are functionally regulated by cGMP and PKG signaling via intermediate proteins. The L- and N-type calcium channels were discussed above. Specific chloride, potassium, and sodium channels are considered here as they regulate neuronal function. Also, some neurotransmitter receptors are ligand-gated ion channels, including the nicotinic acetylcholine receptor, the GABA<sub>A</sub> receptor, glycine receptor, NMDA receptor, and α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methylisoxazole-4-propionate/kainate receptor. Most appear to be phosphorylated by PKA, PKC, calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II (CMPK-II), or tyrosine kinases (Leidenheimer et al., 1991; Raymond et al., 1993). The functional effects of phosphorylation of receptors include the regulation of desensitization rates and subunit assembly at the synapse (Raymond et al., 1993). PKG-mediated phosphorylation has now been demonstrated for the GABA<sub>A</sub> receptor (McDonald and Moss, 1994). GABA<sub>A</sub> plays a key role in controlling the excitability of neurons and in higher neural functions like learning, memory, and motor control. Many subunits contain consensus sites for phosphorylation, but all β subunits contain a conserved PKA site at Ser⁴⁰⁹. PKG-mediated phosphorylation has been demonstrated on Ser⁴⁰⁹ in the intracellular loop of β1 and β2 subunits (McDonald and Moss, 1994). The physiological role of this is not yet clear, but the function of the GABA<sub>A</sub> receptor in neurons is decreased by cGMP, suggesting a functional importance for phosphorylation by PKG (Bradshaw and Simmons, 1995). The CFTR is a chloride channel of ~169 kDa (Gadsby et al., 1995). Cystic fibrosis arises by point mutations in the CFTR channel gene. Phosphorylation of CFTR channels is a necessary step in channel opening. Activation of PKA opens the channel in normal human epithelia but cannot stimulate chloride conduction in cystic fibrosis-affected cells (Gadsby et al., 1995). The CFTR expressed in fibroblasts is an in vitro substrate for both PKG-Iα and PKG-II (Berger et al., 1993; French et al., 1995). Analysis of the kinetics of phosphorylation indicated that it is a very good substrate for PKG by comparison with DARPP-32 (Picciotto et al., 1992; French et al.,

1995). Most of the phosphorylation sites are kinetically 10 times better substrates for PKA; however, one peptide (containing both phosphorylation sites Thr⁷⁸⁸ and Ser⁷⁹⁵) shows equal kinetics for PKG-Iα and PKA (Table 1). It is interesting that PKG-Iα does not activate the chloride channel (in contrast to the previous study), whereas PKG-II activates it (French et al., 1995).

cGMP activation of PKG modulates Ca²⁺-activated K⁺ channels in different types of cells. These channels are the major means of regulating membrane potential, and the resulting K⁺ efflux causes hyperpolarization and inhibits voltage-gated calcium channels. This may be another general mechanism contributing to the reduction in [Ca²⁺]i produced by cGMP agonists in many cells. cGMP and PKG stimulate Ca²⁺-activated potassium channels in rat pituitary tumor cells (White et al., 1993). These effects are mimicked by ANP, are preceded by a rapid and potent stimulation of cGMP production, and require PKG activity. The phosphatase inhibitor okadaic acid blocks the effect of PKG, revealing a requirement for protein dephosphorylation. The PKG substrate mediating this action has been suggested to be phosphatase 2A itself or a regulator of this enzyme (White et al., 1993), a proposal yet to be directly tested. Regulation of Ca²⁺-activated K⁺ channels by PKG has also been shown in neurons. In the motor cortex of awake cats, pressure injection of PKG increases the input resistance of neurons (Woody et al., 1986). This mimics the effects of acetylcholine, which is known to elevate cGMP levels in these neurons. Similar results have been observed in hippocampal neurons where the Alzheimer's β-amyloid precursor protein activated a similar channel (Furukawa et al., 1996). The mechanism of action of this protein that led to intracellular cGMP remains unknown but may be related to those in other cells. Direct activation of the channel in tracheal smooth muscle by PKG-Iα has been correlated with phosphorylation of the 62-kDa α subunit of the channel itself (Alioua et al., 1995). Modulation of Ca²⁺-activated K⁺ channels may be a key target for cGMP and PKG signaling in the nervous system.

Sodium transport systems (including Na⁺ channels, the Na⁺/Ca²⁺ exchanger, the Na⁺/H⁺ exchanger, and Na⁺,K⁺-ATPase) are important in the control of intracellular osmolarity. The Na⁺/H⁺ exchanger and Na⁺,K⁺-ATPase have been reported to be regulated by the ANP–cGMP–PKG signaling system. ANP exerts a potent inhibitory effect on the active pumping of Na⁺ by renal tubular Na⁺,K⁺-ATPase (Scavone et al., 1995). The effect is associated with an increase in cGMP level and is mimicked by 8-bromo-cGMP and okadaic acid and is blocked by PKG inhibitors but not PKA inhibitors (Scavone et al., 1995). ANP exerts a potent inhibitory effect on the active pumping of Na⁺ by renal tubular Na⁺,K⁺-ATPase (Scavone et al., 1995). The action of ANP on the Na⁺ pump involves cGMP and PKG-mediated changes in protein phos-

phorylation. In kidney cells a Na⁺ channel is inhibited by ANP via cGMP, PKG, and the GTP-binding protein Gi, largely accounting for natriuresis by ANP (Stanton, 1991). In other studies this inhibition is directly mediated by PKG and by a G protein (Light et al., 1990). The amiloride-sensitive Na⁺ channel is inhibited by cGMP or ANP in several tissues, including synaptosomes (Kanda et al., 1992). The cGMP–PKG signaling system may therefore have important implications in regulating electrolyte balance in the brain.

**GTP-binding proteins**

GTP-binding proteins play critical roles in intracellular signaling. The three main families are the small GTP-binding proteins like ras, rab, or rho, the G proteins associated with receptor signaling (Gi, Go, etc.), or the large GTP-binding proteins like dynamin. One member from each of the first two families is now known to be a PKG substrate. It is important to note that PKG does not phosphorylate most GTP-binding proteins. A functional role for the phosphorylation of the α subunit of Gi, Giα, by PKG has been suggested by studies in Chinese hamster ovary cells stably transfected with PKG (Pfeifer et al., 1995). In these cells several hormone receptors are coupled to elevations in [Ca²⁺]i via phospholipase C or tyrosine kinases. Cholecystokinin activates [Ca²⁺]i via a pertussis toxin-insensitive pathway, whereas thrombin and insulin-like growth factors use pertussis toxin-sensitive pathways. PKG transfection does not attenuate the cholecystokinin-stimulated [Ca²⁺]i but suppresses calcium influx stimulated either by thrombin (Ruth et al., 1993) or by insulin-like growth factors (Pfeifer et al., 1995). Therefore, PKG may regulate [Ca²⁺]i by phosphorylating a pertussis toxin-sensitive G protein. PKG was shown to phosphorylate the three known isoforms of the α subunits of Gi, Giα1, Giα2, and Giα3, in vitro and does not appear to phosphorylate other G proteins. Giα is phosphorylated in situ in Chinese hamster ovary cells overexpressing PKG-Iα (Pfeifer et al., 1995). Giα has been linked to several different ion channels (Leprette et al., 1994) and to activation of the mitogen-activated protein kinase pathway leading to the nucleus (Crouch and Simson, 1994). Giα is also phosphorylated by other protein kinases, and the separation of Giα from the βγ subunits is inhibited by PKA phosphorylation (Imaizumi et al., 1991), providing a potential mechanism of action of phosphorylation of Giα. Thus, the critical role played by Giα in key cellular signaling events places cGMP and PKG regulation of this protein in a pivotal location for cellular control. The raps are small GTP-binding proteins highly related to the ras family but whose functions are not yet known. They consist of four forms: rap1A and B and rap2A and B. The highest expression of rap1B is in the brain, where it is enriched in neurons and nerve terminals. Rap1B is phosphorylated in intact platelets by PKA and also in response to NO donors and cGMP analogues (Altschuler et al., 1995; Grunberg et al.,

1995). Rap1B is also phosphorylated in a cell-free system by PKA and PKG at Ser¹⁷⁹ (Miura et al., 1992). This occurs with similar affinity values but 10-fold lower rates for PKG. When phosphorylated by PKA, rap1B becomes more sensitive to the ability of the GDP dissociation stimulator protein to form a protein complex. The complex then dissociates from the cell membrane and translocates to the cytoplasm where the inactive form of rap1B (GDP-bound) is then activated (GTP-bound). The effect of PKG phosphorylation is likely to be the same as that of PKA, as they phosphorylate the same site.

**Unidentified PKG substrates in brain**

In early studies the brain was not reported to be a major source of PKG substrates. In fact, many studies reported that brain is lacking in endogenous PKG substrates (Walaas et al., 1983b) with the exceptions discussed above. In synaptosomes, only one 60-kDa protein whose phosphorylation was stimulated by cGMP has been reported in human postmortem brain (Boehme et al., 1978), although it has not been further characterized. An advance has recently made in detection of brain PKG substrates. The reasons for the lack of endogenous substrates in other studies were apparently related to two technical factors. The endogenous level of PKG in most brain regions was insufficient to detect substrate phosphorylation, and the background activity of other protein kinases was too high, masking detection of potential PKG substrates. By overcoming this, >40 relatively specific PKG substrates were found in brain (Wang and Robinson, 1995). Perhaps the most striking observation was that among the substrates, many revealed a relatively high degree of specificity for PKG. The cellular location of these proteins was not defined, although at least 10 of them were also present in nerve terminals, indicating a neuronal localization. None has yet been identified. Therefore, there exists an exciting array of PKG substrates in brain, and many potential candidates are present for mediating specific signaling via intracellular cGMP.

**TOWARD A MODEL FOR cGMP AND PKG ACTION**

There is a large amount of literature on the nervous system where the biological end point is accumulation of NO or cGMP, without an understanding of how these molecules act. From this review it is apparent that cGMP sometimes acts via PKG in its signaling in neurons and nerve terminals. It is also important not to lose sight of the many actions of NO that are not mediated via cGMP and the two other intracellular actions of cGMP that are not mediated by PKG. However, it is possible to map out some of the PKG signaling mechanisms likely to operate in neurons and construct working models (Fig. 1). This cGMP–PKG signaling pathway probably does not operate in all neurons and in all nerve terminals but appears to be

widespread in the CNS. The study of known PKG substrates and proteins that are regulated by PKG, but that are not yet proven to be directly phosphorylated themselves, reveals a large family of potential neuronal modulators. Most of these proteins are recognized as PKG substrates from various other cells, and neuronal counterparts are likely to be similarly regulated (although this will need to be directly tested in each case). A few of the PKG substrates are specific to or are enriched in brain, although others are restricted to specific neurons (like Purkinje cells or striatal spiny neurons). Furthermore, PKG action is likely to be mediated via a much smaller number of specific substrates than other second messenger-activated protein kinases, because the substrate specificity of the enzyme is relatively limited. However, this limitation is what may allow PKG to serve as an important control center for neuronal function. By the phosphorylation of a “select” group of proteins PKG can have major consequences for the cell. These studies have opened new avenues of research that are already strongly impacting on our understanding of the role of PKG in the regulation of neurotransmission. The sequence of steps for further study is clearly to find substrates in intact neurons, to purify them, and to determine their functional roles; alternatively, studies must attempt to demonstrate whether many of the known PKG substrates reviewed here are also functionally regulated in neurons. To understand the way in which PKG may function in neuronal transmission, it will be important for future studies to identify PKG substrates in living neurons or nerve terminals that respond to cGMP level-elevating stimuli. Studies on the regional or subcellular distribution of different isoforms of PKG (particularly PKG-II) and the identification of some of the new PKG substrates by sequence analysis will facilitate our determination of the specific role of PKG and its substrates in neuronal responses mediated by cGMP.

---

**REFERENCES**

Akamatsu N., Inenaga K., and Yamashita H. (1993) Inhibitory effects of natriuretic peptides on vasopressin neurons mediated through cGMP and cGMP-dependent protein kinase *in vitro*. J. Neuroendocrinol. 5, 517–522.

Alioua A., Huggins J. P., and Rousseau E. (1995) PKG-Iα phosphorylates the α-subunit and upregulates reconstituted GKCa channels from tracheal smooth muscle. Am. J. Physiol. 268, L1057–L1063.

Altschuler D. L., Peterson S. N., Ostrowski M. C., and Lapetina E. G. (1995) Cyclic AMP-dependent activation of Rap1b. J. Biol. Chem. 270, 10373–10376.

Arancio O., Kandel E. R., and Hawkins R. D. (1995) Activity-dependent long-term enhancement of transmitter release by presynaptic 3′,5′-cyclic GMP in cultured hippocampal neurons. Nature 376, 74–80.

Ariano M. A. (1983) Distribution of components of the guanosine 3′,5′-phosphate system in rat caudate-putamen. Neuroscience 10, 707–723.

Barger S. W., Fiscus R. R., Ruth P., Hofmann F., and Mattson M. P. (1995) Role of cyclic GMP in the regulation of neuronal calcium and survival by secreted forms of β-amyloid precursor. J. Neurochem. 64, 2087–2096.

---

Beltman J., Sonnenburg W. K., and Beavo J. A. (1993) The role of protein phosphorylation in the regulation of cyclic nucleotide phosphodiesterases. Mol. Cell. Biochem. 127–128, 239–253.

Berger H. A., Travis S. M., and Welsh M. J. (1993) Regulation of the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator Cl⁻ channel by specific protein kinases and protein phosphatases. J. Biol. Chem. 268, 2037–2047.

Bernabeu R., Schmitz P., Faillace M. P., Izquierdo I., and Medina J. H. (1996) Hippocampal cGMP and cAMP are differentially involved in memory processing of inhibitory avoidance learning. Neuroreport 7, 585–588.

Bertolino M. and Llinás R. R. (1992) The central role of voltage-activated and receptor-operated calcium channels in neuronal cells. Annu. Rev. Pharmacol. Toxicol. 32, 399–421.

Boehme D. H., Kosecki R., and Marks N. (1978) Protein phosphorylation in human synaptosomal membranes: evidence for the presence of substrates for cyclic nucleotide guanosine 3′-5′-monophosphate dependent protein kinases. Brain Res. Bull. 3, 697–700.

Bradshaw D. J. and Simmons M. A. (1995) Gamma-aminobutyric acidA receptor function is modulated by cyclic GMP. Brain Res. Bull. 37, 67–72.

Branisteanu D. D., Popescu L. M., and Haulica I. D. (1988) Cyclic GMP and protein kinase G inhibit the quantal transmitter release induced by protein kinase C. Brain Res. 464, 263–266.

Bredt D. S., Ferris C. D., and Snyder S. H. (1992) Nitric oxide synthase regulatory sites. Phosphorylation by cyclic AMP-dependent protein kinase, protein kinase C, and calcium/calmodulin protein kinase; identification of flavin and calmodulin binding sites. J. Biol. Chem. 267, 10976–10981.

Buisson A., Lakhmeche N., Verrecchia C., Plotkine M., and Boulu R. G. (1993) Nitric oxide: an endogenous anticonvulsant substance. Neuroreport 4, 444–446.

Butt E., Geiger J., Jarchau T., Lohmann S. M., and Walter U. (1993) The cGMP-dependent protein kinase—gene, protein, and function. Neurochem. Res. 18, 27–42.

Butt E., Abel K., Krieger M., Palm D., Hoppe V., Hoppe J., and Walter U. (1994) cAMP- and cGMP-dependent protein kinase phosphorylation sites of the focal adhesion vasodilator-stimulated phosphoprotein (VASP) *in vitro* and in intact human platelets. J. Biol. Chem. 269, 14509–14517.

Colbran J. L., Francis S. H., Leach A. B., Thomas M. K., Jiang H., McAllister L. M., and Corbin J. D. (1992) A phenylalanine in peptide substrates provides for selectivity between cGMP- and cAMP-dependent protein kinases. J. Biol. Chem. 267, 9589–9594.

Conti M., Nemoz G., Sette C., and Vicini E. (1995) Recent progress in understanding the hormonal regulation of phosphodiesterases. Endocr. Rev. 16, 370–389.

Crouch M. F. and Simson L. (1994) The GTP-binding protein Gi alpha 2 is directly linked to and substrate of a serine kinase in Balb/c3T3 cells. Cell Signal. 6, 695–706.

Dawson T. M., Steiner J. P., Dawson V. L., Dinerman J. L., Uhl G. R., and Snyder S. H. (1993) Immunosuppressant FK506 enhances phosphorylation of nitric oxide synthase and protects against glutamate neurotoxicity. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 90, 9808–9812.

Desole M. S., Kim W.-K., Rabin R. A., and Laychock S. G. (1994) Nitric oxide reduces depolarization-induced calcium influx in PC12 cells by a cyclic GMP-mediated mechanism. Neuropsycharmacology 33, 193–198.

Detre J. A., Nairn A. C., Aswad D. W., and Greengard P. (1984) Localization in mammalian brain of G-substrate, a specific substrate for guanosine 3′,5′-cyclic monophosphate-dependent protein kinase. J. Neurosci. 4, 2843–2849.

Dinerman J. L., Steiner J. P., Dawson T. M., Dawson V., and Snyder S. H. (1994) Cyclic nucleotide dependent phosphorylation of neuronal nitric oxide synthase inhibits catalytic activity. Neuropharmacology 33, 1245–1251.

El-Husseini A. E.-D., Bladen C., and Vincent S. R. (1995) Molecular characterization of a type II cyclic GMP-dependent protein

J. Neurochem., Vol. 68, No. 2, 1997

kinase expressed in the rat brain. *J. Neurochem.* 64, 2814–2817.

Ferris C. D. and Snyder S. H. (1992) Inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate-activated calcium channels. *Annu. Rev. Physiol.* 54, 469–488.

Finn J. T., Grunwald M. E., and Yau K. W. (1996) Cyclic nucleotide-gated ion channels: an extended family with diverse functions. *Annu. Rev. Physiol.* 58, 395–426.

Francis S. H. and Corbin J. D. (1994) Progress in understanding the mechanism and function of cyclic GMP-dependent protein kinase. *Adv. Pharmacol.* 26, 115–170.

Francis S. H., Smith J., Walsh K. A., Kumar S., Colbran J. L., and Corbin J. D. (1993) Autophosphorylation of bovine aorta type Iβ cGMP-dependent protein kinase occurs at serine-63 in the inhibitory domain of the enzyme. (Abstr.) *FASEB J.* 7, A1123.

French P. J., Bijman J., Edixhoven M., Vaandrager A. B., Scholte B. J., Lohmann S. M., Nairn A. C., and De Jonge H. R. (1995) Isotype-specific activation of cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator-chloride channels by cGMP-dependent protein kinase II. *J. Biol. Chem.* 270, 26626–26631.

Fujii T., Asai H., Miyasaka Y., Suzuki T., and Kondo Y. (1987) Inhibition of adenosine triphosphatase activity in brain microtubule proteins by S100 protein. *Chem. Pharm. Bull. (Tokyo)* 35, 4324–4327.

Furukawa K., Barger S. W., Blalock E. M., and Mattson M. P. (1996) Activation of K⁺ channels and suppression of neuronal activity by secreted β-amyloid-precursor protein. *Nature* 379, 74–78.

Gadsby D. C., Nagel G., and Hwang T.-C. (1995) The CFTR chloride channel of mammalian heart. *Annu. Rev. Physiol.* 57, 387–416.

Gamm D. M., Francis S. H., Angelotti T. P., Corbin J. D., and Uhler M. D. (1995) The type II isoform of cGMP-dependent protein kinase is dimeric and possesses regulatory and catalytic properties distinct from the type I isoforms. *J. Biol. Chem.* 270, 27380–27388.

Garthwaite J. and Boulton C. L. (1995) Nitric oxide signalling in the central nervous system. *Annu. Rev. Physiol.* 57, 683–706.

Gatti A., Wang X., and Robinson P. J. (1996) Multiple phosphorylations of protein kinase C-α in response to phorbol ester stimulation of PC12 cells. *Biochim. Biophys. Acta* 1313, 111–118.

Geahlen R. L. and Krebs E. G. (1980) Regulatory subunit of the type I cAMP-dependent protein kinase as an inhibitor and substrate of the cGMP-dependent protein kinase. *J. Biol. Chem.* 255, 1164–1169.

Glass D. B. (1990) Substrate specificity of the cyclic GMP-dependent protein kinase, in *Peptides and Protein Phosphorylation* (Kemp B. E., ed), pp. 209–238. Uniscience CRC Press, Boca Raton, Florida.

Glass D. B. and Smith S. B. (1983) Phosphorylation by cyclic GMP-dependent protein kinase of a synthetic peptide corresponding to the autophosphorylation site in the enzyme. *J. Biol. Chem.* 258, 14797–14803.

Grunberg B., Kruse H.-J., Negrescu E. V., and Siess W. (1995) Platelet rap1B phosphorylation is a sensitive marker for the action of cyclic AMP- and cyclic GMP-increasing platelet inhibitors and vasodilators. *J. Cardiovasc. Pharmacol.* 25, 545–551.

Haby C., Lisovoski F., Aunis D., and Zwiller J. (1994) Stimulation of the cyclic GMP pathway by NO induces expression of the immediate early genes c-fos and junB in PC12 cells. *J. Neurochem.* 62, 496–501.

Haffner C., Jarchau T., Reinhard M., Hoppe J., Lohmann S. M., and Walter U. (1995) Molecular cloning, structural analysis and functional expression of the proline-rich focal adhesion and microfilament-associated protein VASP. *EMBO J.* 14, 19–27.

Haley J. E., Wilcox G. L., and Chapman P. F. (1992) The role of nitric oxide in hippocampal long-term potentiation. *Neuron* 8, 211–216.

Harrison B. C. and Mobley P. L. (1991) Phorbol myristate acetate and 8-bromo-cyclic AMP-induced phosphorylation of glial fibrillary acidic protein and vimentin in astrocytes: comparison of phosphorylation sites. *J. Neurochem.* 56, 1723–1730.


Hartell N. A. (1996) Inhibition of cGMP breakdown promotes the induction of cerebellar long-term depression. *J. Neurosci.* 16, 2881–2890.

Haver E., Lichtstein D., and Munson P. J. (1995) Multiple types of binding sites for atrial natriuretic peptide in rat olfactory bulb membranes and synaptosomes. *Brain Res.* 681, 75–83.

Hell J. W., Yokoyama C. T., Wong S. T., Warner C., Snutch T. P., and Catterall W. A. (1993) Differential phosphorylation of two size forms of the neuronal class C L-type calcium channel alpha 1 subunit. *J. Biol. Chem.* 268, 19451–19457.

Hell J. W., Appleyard S. M., Yokoyama C. T., Warner C., and Caterall W. A. (1994) Differential phosphorylation of two size forms of the N-type calcium channel α1 subunit which have different COOH termini. *J. Biol. Chem.* 269, 7390–7396.

Hemmings H. C., Nairn A. C., and Greengard P. (1984) DARPP-32, a dopamine and adenosine 3′:5′-monophosphate regulated neuronal phosphoprotein. II. Comparison of the kinetics of phosphorylation of DARPP-32 and phosphatase inhibitor 1. *J. Biol. Chem.* 259, 14491–14497.

Hirsch D. B., Steiner J. P., Dawson T. M., Mammen A., Hayek E., and Snyder S. H. (1993) Neurotransmitter release regulated by nitric oxide in PC-12 cells and brain synaptosomes. *Curr. Biol.* 3, 749–754.

Hofmann F., Dostmann W., Keilbach A., Landgraf W., and Ruth P. (1992) Structure and physiological role of cGMP-dependent protein kinase. *Biochim. Biophys. Acta Mol. Cell Res.* 1135, 51–60.

Imaizumi T., Watanabe Y., and Yoshida H. (1991) Phosphorylation of Gi protein by cyclic AMP-dependent protein kinase inhibits its dissociation into alpha-subunits and beta gamma-subunits by Mg²⁺ and GTP gamma S. *Eur. J. Pharmacol.* 207, 189–194.

Jaffrey S. R. and Snyder S. H. (1995) Nitric oxide: a neural messenger. *Annu. Rev. Cell Biol.* 11, 417–440.

Jahn H., Nastainczyk W., Rohrkasten A., Schneider T., and Hofmann F. (1988) Site-specific phosphorylation of the purified receptor for calcium-channel blockers by cAMP- and cGMP-dependent protein kinases, protein kinase C, calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II and casein kinase II. *Eur. J. Biochem.* 178, 535–542.

Jarchau T., Häusler C., Markert T., Pöhler D., Vandekerckhove J., De Jonge H. R., Lohmann S. M., and Walter U. (1994) Cloning, expression, and in situ localization of rat intestinal cGMP-dependent protein kinase II. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 91, 9426–9430.

Jiang H., Shabb J. B., and Corbin J. D. (1992) Cross-activation: overriding cAMP/cGMP selectivities of protein kinases in tissues. *Biochem. Cell Biol.* 70, 1283–1289.

Johnston H. M. and Morris B. J. (1994) NMDA and nitric oxide increase microtubule-associated protein 2 gene expression in hippocampal granule cells. *J. Neurochem.* 63, 379–382.

Kamisaki Y., Wada K., Nakamoto K., and Itoh T. (1995) Nitric oxide inhibition of the depolarization-evoked glutamate release from synaptosomes of rat cerebellum. *Neurosci. Lett.* 194, 5–8.

Kanda F., Sarnacki P., and Arieff A. I. (1992) Atrial natriuretic peptide inhibits amiloride-sensitive sodium uptake in rat brain. *Am. J. Physiol.* 263, R279–R283.

Kemp B. E. and Pearson R. B. (1991) Design and use of peptide substrates for protein kinases. *Methods Enzymol.* 200, 121–134.

Koga T., Yoshida Y., Cai J.-Q., Islam M. O., and Imai S. (1994) Purification and characterization of 240-kDa cGMP-dependent protein kinase substrate of vascular smooth muscle. Close resemblance to inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor. *J. Biol. Chem.* 269, 11640–11647.

Komalavilas P. and Lincoln T. M. (1994) Phosphorylation of the inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor by cyclic GMP-dependent protein kinase. *J. Biol. Chem.* 269, 8701–8707.

Landgraf W., Hullin R., and Hofmann F. (1986) Phosphorylation of cGMP-dependent protein kinase increases the affinity for cyclic AMP. *Eur. J. Biochem.* 154, 113–117.

Leidenheimer N. J., Browning M. D., and Harris R. A. (1991)

GABA<sub>A</sub> receptor phosphorylation: multiple sites, actions and artifacts. *Trends Pharmacol. Sci.* 12, 84–87.

Leinders-Zufall T., Rosenboom H., Barnstable C. J., Shepherd G. M., and Zufall F. (1995) A calcium-permeable cGMP-activated cation conductance in hippocampal neurons. *Neuroreport* 6, 1761–1765.

Lepretre N., Mironneau J., and Morel J. L. (1994) Both alpha 1A- and alpha 2A-adrenoreceptor subtypes stimulate voltage-operated L-type calcium channels in rat portal vein myocytes. Evidence for two distinct transduction pathways. *J. Biol. Chem.* 269, 29546–29552.

Light D. B., Corbin J. D., and Stanton B. A. (1990) Dual ion-channel regulation by cyclic GMP and cyclic GMP-dependent protein kinase. *Nature* 344, 336–339.

Lin Y.-Q. and Bennett M. R. (1994) Nitric oxide modulation of quantal secretion in chick ciliary ganglia. *J. Physiol. (Lond.)* 481, 385–394.

Lincoln T. M. and Cornwell T. L. (1993) Intracellular cyclic GMP receptor proteins. *FASEB J.* 7, 328–338.

Lincoln T. M., Komalavilas P., and Cornwell T. L. (1994) Pleiotropic regulation of vascular smooth muscle tone by cyclic GMP-dependent protein kinase. *Hypertension* 23, 1141–1147.

Lonart G., Cassels K. L., and Johnson K. M. (1993) Nitric oxide induces calcium-dependent <sup>3</sup>H]dopamine release from striatal slices. *J. Neurosci. Res.* 35, 192–198.

MacMillan-Crow L. A. and Lincoln T. M. (1994) High-affinity binding and localization of the cyclic GMP-dependent protein kinase with the intermediate filament protein vimentin. *Biochemistry* 33, 8035–8043.

Mayer B., Klatt P., Böhme E., and Schmidt K. (1992) Regulation of neuronal nitric oxide and cyclic GMP formation by Ca<sup>2+</sup>. *J. Neurochem.* 59, 2024–2029.

McAllister-Lucas L. M., Sonnenburg W. K., Kadlecak A., Seger D., Trong H. L., Colbran J. L., Thomas M. K., Walsh K. A., Francis S. H., Corbin J. D., and Beavo J. A. (1993) The structure of a bovine lung cGMP-binding, cGMP-specific phosphodiesterase deduced from a cDNA clone. *J. Biol. Chem.* 268, 22863–22873.

McDonald B. J. and Moss S. J. (1994) Differential phosphorylation of intracellular domains of gamma-aminobutyric acid type A receptor subunits by calcium/calmodulin type 2-dependent protein kinase and cGMP-dependent protein kinase. *J. Biol. Chem.* 269, 18111–18117.

Meffert M. K., Premack B. A., and Schulman H. (1994) Nitric oxide stimulates Ca(2+)-independent synaptic vesicle release. *Neuron* 12, 1235–1244.

Meriney S. D., Gray D. B., and Pilar G. R. (1994) Somatostatin-induced inhibition of neuronal Ca<sup>2+</sup> current modulated by cGMP-dependent protein kinase. *Nature* 369, 336–339.

Mery P.-F., Lohmann S. M., Walter U., and Fischmeister R. (1991) Ca<sup>2+</sup> current is regulated by cyclic GMP-dependent protein kinase in mammalian cardiac myocytes. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 88, 1197–1201.

Miura Y., Kaibuchi K., Itoh T., Corbin J. D., Francis S. H., and Takai Y. (1992) Phosphorylation of smg p21B/rap1B p21 by cyclic GMP-dependent protein kinase. *FEBS Lett.* 297, 171–174.

Montague P. R., Gancayco C. D., Winn M. J., Marchase R. B., and Friedlander M. J. (1994) Role of NO production in NMDA receptor-mediated neurotransmitter release in cerebral cortex. *Science* 263, 973–977.

Nishimura T., Akasu T., and Krier J. (1992) Guanosine 3′,5′-cyclic monophosphate regulates calcium channels in neurons of rabbit vesical pelvic ganglia. *J. Physiol. (Lond.)* 457, 559–574.

Paupardin-Tritsch D., Hammond C., Gerschenfeld H. M., Nairn A. C., and Greengard P. (1986) cGMP-dependent protein kinase enhances Ca<sup>2+</sup> current and potentiates the serotonin-induced Ca<sup>2+</sup> current increase in snail neurons. *Nature* 323, 812–814.

Pearson R. B. and Kemp B. E. (1991) Protein kinase phosphorylation site sequences and consensus specificity motifs: tabulations. *Methods Enzymol.* 200, 62–81.

Pfeifer A., Nuernberg B., Kamm S., Uhde M., Schultz G., Ruth P., and Hofmann F. (1995) Cyclic GMP-dependent protein kinase blocks pertussis toxin-sensitive hormone receptor signaling pathways in Chinese hamster ovary cells. *J. Biol. Chem.* 270, 9052–9059.

Picciotto M. R., Cohn J. A., Bertuzzi G., Greengard P., and Nairn A. C. (1992) Phosphorylation of the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator. *J. Biol. Chem.* 267, 12742–12752.

Pineda J., Kogan J. H., and Aghajanian G. K. (1996) Nitric oxide and carbon monoxide activate locus coeruleus neurons through a cGMP-dependent protein kinase: involvement of a nonselective cationic channel. *J. Neurosci.* 16, 1389–1399.

Pogun S., Dawson V., and Kuhar M. J. (1994) Nitric oxide inhibits <sup>3</sup>H-glutamate transport in synaptosomes. *Synapse* 18, 21–26.

Pryzwansky K. B., Wyatt T. A., and Lincoln T. M. (1995) Cyclic guanosine monophosphate-dependent protein kinase is targeted to intermediate filaments and phosphorylates vimentin in A23187-stimulated human neutrophils. *Blood* 85, 222–230.

Raymond L. A., Blackstone C. D., and Huganir R. L. (1993) Phosphorylation of amino acid neurotransmitter receptors in synaptic plasticity. *Trends Neurosci.* 16, 147–153.

Rieke F. and Schwartz E. A. (1994) A cGMP-gated current can control exocytosis at cone synapses. *Neuron* 13, 863–873.

Robinson P. J., Sontag J.-M., Liu J.-P., Fykse E. M., Slaughter C., McMahon H. T., and Südhof T. C. (1993) Dynamin GTPase regulated by protein kinase C phosphorylation in nerve terminals. *Nature* 365, 163–166.

Ruth P., Wang G. X., Boekhoff I., May B., Pfeifer A., Penner R., Korth M., Breer H., and Hofmann F. (1993) Transfected cGMP-dependent protein kinase suppresses calcium transients by inhibition of inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate production. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 90, 2623–2627.

Sarcevic B., Brookes V., Martin T. J., Kemp B. E., and Robinson P. J. (1989) Atrial natriuretic peptide-dependent phosphorylation of smooth muscle cell particulate fraction proteins is mediated by cGMP-dependent protein kinase. *J. Biol. Chem.* 264, 20648–20654.

Scavone C., Scanlon C., McKee M., and Nathanson J. A. (1995) Atrial natriuretic peptide modulates sodium and potassium-activated adenosine triphosphatase through a mechanism involving cyclic GMP and cyclic GMP-dependent protein kinase. *J. Pharmacol. Exp. Ther.* 272, 1036–1043.

Schaad N. C., Vanecek J., Rodriguez I. R., Klein D. C., Holtzclaw L., and Russell J. T. (1995) Vasoactive intestinal peptide elevates pinealocyte intracellular calcium concentrations by enhancing influx: evidence for involvement of a cyclic GMP-dependent mechanism. *Mol. Pharmacol.* 47, 923–933.

Schlichter D. J. (1982) Cyclic GMP-dependent protein phosphorylation in mammalian cerebellum. *Prog. Brain Res.* 56, 105–123.

Schmidt H. H. H. W., Lohmann S. M., and Walter U. (1993) The nitric oxide and cGMP signal transduction system: regulation and mechanism of action. *Biochim. Biophys. Acta Mol. Cell Res.* 1178, 153–175.

Snyder G. L., Girault J.-A., Chen J. Y., Czernik A. J., Kebabian J. W., Nathanson J. A., and Greengard P. (1992) Phosphorylation of DARPP-32 and protein phosphatase inhibitor-1 in rat choroid plexus: regulation by factors other than dopamine. *J. Neurosci.* 12, 3071–3083.

Snyder G. L., Fisone G., and Greengard P. (1994) Phosphorylation of DARPP-32 is regulated by GABA in rat striatum and substantia nigra. *J. Neurochem.* 63, 1766–1771.

Stanton B. A. (1991) Molecular mechanisms of ANP inhibition of renal sodium transport. *Can. J. Physiol. Pharmacol.* 69, 1546–1552.

Stricker R., Lottspeich F., and Reiser G. (1994) The myelin protein CNP (2′,3′-cyclic nucleotide 3′-phosphodiesterase): immunoaffinity purification of CNP from pig and rat brain using a monoclonal antibody and phosphorylation of CNP by cyclic nucleotide-dependent protein kinases. *Biol. Chem. Hoppe Seyler* 375, 205–209.

Suko J., Maurer-Fogy I., Plank B., Bertel O., Wyskovsky W., Hohenegger M., and Hellmann G. (1993) Phosphorylation of serine 2843 in ryanodine receptor-calcium release channel of skeletal

muscle by cAMP-, cGMP- and CaM-dependent protein kinase.
*Biochim. Biophys. Acta Mol. Cell Res.* **1175**, 193–206.

Supattapone S., Danoff S. K., Theibert A., Joseph S. K., Steiner J., and Snyder S. H. (1988) Cyclic AMP-dependent phosphorylation of a brain inositol trisphosphate receptor decreases its release of calcium. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* **85**, 8747–8750.

Takahashi S. Y., Mochida S., and Kobayashi H. (1988) Cyclic GMP-dependent protein kinase and phosphorylation of the endogenous substrate proteins in the rabbit superior cervical ganglion. *J. Neurochem.* **51**, 1300–1307.

Tegge W., Frank R., Hofmann F., and Dostmann W. R. G. (1995) Determination of cyclic nucleotide-dependent protein kinase substrate specificity by the use of peptide libraries on cellulose paper. *Biochemistry* **34**, 10569–10577.

Thomas M. K., Francis S. H., and Corbin J. D. (1990) Substrate- and kinase-directed regulation of phosphorylation of a cGMP-binding phosphodiesterase by cGMP. *J. Biol. Chem.* **265**, 14971–14978.

Tsou K., Snyder G. L., and Greengard P. (1993) Nitric oxide/cGMP pathway stimulates phosphorylation of DARPP-32, a dopamine- and cAMP-regulated phosphoprotein, in the substantia nigra. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* **90**, 3462–3465.

Tsuyama S., Terayama Y., and Matsuyama S. (1987) Numerous phosphates of microtubule-associated protein 2 in living rat brain. *J. Biol. Chem.* **262**, 10886–10892.

Uhler M. D. (1993) Cloning and expression of a novel cyclic GMP-dependent protein kinase from mouse brain. *J. Biol. Chem.* **268**, 13586–13591.

Walaas S. I. and Greengard P. (1984) DARPP-32, a dopamine and adenosine 3′:5′-monophosphate-regulated phosphoprotein en-

riched in dopamine innervated brain regions. I. Regional and cellular distribution in the rat brain. *Neuroscience* **4**, 84–98.

Walaas S. I., Aswad D. W., and Greengard P. (1983a) A dopamine and cyclic AMP regulated phosphoprotein enriched in dopamine innervated brain regions. *Nature* **301**, 69–71.

Walaas S. I., Nairn A. C., and Greengard P. (1983b) Regional distribution of calcium- and cyclic adenosine 3′:5′-monophosphate-dependent protein phosphorylation systems in mammalian brain. I. Particulate systems. *J. Neurosci.* **3**, 291–301.

Walaas S. I., Girault J.-A., and Greengard P. (1989) Localisation of cyclic GMP-dependent protein kinase in rat basal ganglia neurons. *J. Mol. Neurosci.* **1**, 243–250.

Walter U., Eigenthaler M., Geiger J., and Reinhard M. (1993) Role of cyclic nucleotide-dependent protein kinases and their common substrate VASP in the regulation of human platelets. *Adv. Exp. Med. Biol.* **344**, 237–249.

Wang X. and Robinson P. J. (1995) Cyclic GMP-dependent protein kinase substrates in rat brain. *J. Neurochem.* **65**, 595–604.

Wang X., Liu J.-P., and Robinson P. J. (1995) Phosphorylation of protein kinase C by cGMP-dependent protein kinase. (Abstr.) *Aust. Soc. Biochem. Mol. Biol.* **26**, POS 3–19.

White R. E., Lee A. B., Shcherbatko A. D., Lincoln T. M., Schonbrunn A., and Armstrong D. L. (1993) Potassium channel stimulation by natriuretic peptides through cGMP-dependent dephosphorylation. *Nature* **361**, 263–266.

Woody C. D., Bartfai T., Gruen E., and Nairn A. C. (1986) Intracellular injection of cGMP-dependent protein kinase results in increased input resistance in neurons of the mammalian motor cortex. *Brain Res.* **386**, 379–385.

Zhuo M., Hu Y., Schultz C., Kandel E. R., and Hawkins R. D. (1994) Role of guanylyl cyclase and cGMP-dependent protein kinase in long-term potentiation. *Nature* **368**, 635–639.
