
Vet Pathol 34:61–73 (1997)

# REVIEW

## Cell Adhesion Molecules—Update

### C. S. ELANGBAM, C. W. QUALLS, JR., AND R. R. DAHLGREN

Department of Pathology, WIL Research Laboratories,  
A Subsidiary of Great Lakes Chemical Corporation, Ashland, OH (CSE, RRD); and  
Department of Veterinary Pathology, College of Veterinary Medicine,  
Oklahoma State University, Stillwater, OK (CWQ)

**Abstract.** Cell adhesion molecules are glycoproteins expressed on the cell surface and play an important role in inflammatory as well as neoplastic diseases. There are four main groups: the integrin family, the immunoglobulin superfamily, selectins, and cadherins. The integrin family has eight subfamilies, designated as β₁ through β₈. The most widely studied subfamilies are β₁ (CD29, very late activation [VLA] members), β₂ (leukocyte integrins such as CD11a/CD18, CD11b/CD18, CD11c/CD18, and αdβ₂), β₃ (CD61, cytoadhesions), and β₇ (α₄β₇ and αEβ₇). The immunoglobulin superfamily includes leukocyte function antigen-2 (LFA-2 or CD2), leukocyte function antigen-3 (LFA-3 or CD58), intercellular adhesion molecules (ICAMs), vascular adhesion molecule-1 (VCAM-1), platelet–endothelial cell adhesion molecule-1 (PECAM-1), and mucosal addressin cell adhesion molecule-1 (MAdCAM-1). The selectin family includes E-selectin (CD62E), P-selectin (CD62P), and L-selectin (CD62L). Cadherins are major cell–cell adhesion molecules and include epithelial (E), placental (P), and neural (N) subclasses. The binding sites (ligands/receptors) are different for each of these cell adhesion molecules (e.g., ICAM binds to CD11/CD18; VCAM-1 binds to VLA-4). The specific cell adhesion molecules and their ligands that may be involved in pathologic conditions and potential therapeutic strategies by modulating the expression of these molecules will be discussed.

**Key words:** Cell adhesion molecules; inflammation; neoplasm.

Specific interactions between molecules expressed on the surface of leukocytes (receptors) and molecules on the surface of potential target cells (ligands) are important mechanisms in cell-to-cell communication. These surface molecules are collectively referred to as adhesion molecules. They are membrane glycoproteins and play a major role in inflammation as well as in neoplastic diseases. The pavementing of leukocytes on the endothelium or vascular basement membrane is critical for the recruitment of these circulating cells to sites of inflammation. This pavementing process is exaggerated as a result of increased expression of various cell adhesion molecules on leukocytes and endothelial cells. The cell adhesion molecules such as cadherins are directly involved in cell–cell adhesion. In addition, cell adhesion molecules have other functions; for example, they participate in antigen recognition, act as costimulatory signals in T cell activation, and stimulate effector mechanisms of activated lymphocytes such as T cell cytotoxicity and antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity. Four main groups of adhesion molecules are recognized: the integrin receptor family, the immunoglobulin superfamily, selectins, and cadherins.

### Integrin Receptor Family

Integrins play an important role in embryogenesis, wound healing, and immune response and the behavior of malignant cells. Integrins are involved in cell–cell or cell–matrix interactions. These interactions are important for the regulation of cell migration (e.g., recruitment of leukocytes into inflamed tissues). Integrins are large membrane glycoproteins consisting of two subunits, an α and a β chain. The α subunit provides information for ligand binding, and the β subunit provides a link to the cytoskeleton. There are at least 15 α subunits and 8 β subunits. Various combinations of α and β subunits are known to form at least 19 integrins. Presently, integrins are subclassified into eight subfamilies on the basis of structurally distinct β chains: β₁ through β₈. The most widely studied subfamilies are (a) β₁ (CD29) or very late activation (VLA) integrins, sharing the β₁ chain and participating mainly in cell–matrix interactions; (b) β₂ (CD18) or leukocyte integrins, sharing the β₂ chain and mainly participating in cell–cell interactions, (c) β₃ (CD61) or

Table 1. Cell adhesion molecules.*

| Adhesion Molecules | CD          | Family    | Ligand                                                                 | Distribution                                                                 | Function                          |
|--------------------|-------------|-----------|----------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------|
| VLA-1              | CD49a       | Integrin  | Collagen, laminin                                                    | ECs, monocytes, macrophages, activated T/B cells                              | Cell-matrix adhesion              |
| VLA-2              | CD49b       | Integrin  | Collagen, laminin                                                    | ECs, EPs, activated T cells                                                 | Cell-matrix adhesion              |
| VLA-3              | CD49c       | Integrin  | Fibronectin, collagen, laminin                                        | ECs, EPs                                                                   | Cell-matrix adhesion              |
| VLA-4              | CD49d       | Integrin  | Fibronectin, VCAM-1, ICAM-2                                           | Leukocytes                                                                | Cell-cell and cell-matrix adhesion |
| VLA-5              | CD49e       | Integrin  | Fibronectin, invasin                                                  | ECs, EPs, lymphocytes, monocytes, macrophages                                | Cell-matrix adhesion              |
| VLA-6              | CD49f       | Integrin  | Laminin                                                              | ECs, EPs, T lymphocytes, mast cells                                         | Cell-matrix adhesion              |
| LFA-1              | CD11a/CD18  | Integrin  | ICAM-1, ICAM-2, ICAM-3                                               | Leukocytes                                                                | Adhesion of leukocytes to ECs     |
| MAC-1              | CD11b/CD18  | Integrin  | C3bi, CD54, factor X, fibrinogen                                      | Monocytes, macrophages, granulocytes, Langerhans cells                       | Adhesion of leukocytes to ECs     |
| gp150,95           | CD11c/CD18  | Integrin  | C3bi                                                                | Monocytes, macrophages, granulocytes, Langerhans cells                       | Adhesion of leukocytes to ECs     |
| $\alpha_d\beta_2$  |             | Integrin  | ? (ICAM-3 in human beings)                                            | Macrophage (splenic red pulp, lymph node medulla, bone marrow), lymphocyte   |                                   |
|                    |             |           |                                                                     | (splenic red pulp and blood)                                                |                                   |
| $\alpha_4\beta_7$  | CD49d/$\beta_7$ | Integrin | MAdCAM-1                                                            | Lymphocytes (mucosal lymphoid nodules)                                      | Lymphocyte homing                 |
| $\alpha_E\beta_7$  | CD103       | Integrin  | E-cadherin                                                          | Intraepithelial lymphocytes (intestine and mammary gland), blood T cells    | Cell-cell interaction             |
| Vibronectin and    | CD41/CD61   | Integrin  | Fibronectin, fibrinogen, vitronectin, vWF                             | ECs, platelets                                                             | Cell-matrix adhesion              |
| gplIb/IIIa         |             |           |                                                                      |                                                                            |                                   |
| ICAM-1             | CD54        | IgG superfamily | CD11a/CD18, CD11b/CD18                                             | Monocytes, EPs, fibroblasts                                                 | Cell-cell adhesion                |
| ICAM-2             | CD102       | IgG superfamily | CD11a                                                              | ECs, leukocytes                                                            | Adhesion of leukocytes to ECs     |
| ICAM-3             | CD50        | IgG superfamily | CD11a                                                              | EC, leukocytes, Langerhans cells                                            | Adhesion of leukocytes to ECs     |
| VCAM-1             | CD106       | IgG superfamily | VLA-4                                                             | Activated ECs                                                              | Adhesion of leukocytes to ECs     |

Table 1. Continued.

| Adhesion Molecules | CD       | Family        | Ligand                                      | Distribution                     | Function                                                                 |
|-------------------|----------|---------------|--------------------------------------------|----------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| PECAM-1           | CD31     | IgG superfamily | CD31                                       | ECs, leukocytes                  | Initiation of EC–EC adhesion, platelet-monocyte/neutrophil–EC adhesion |
| MAdCAM-1          |          | IgG superfamily | L-selectin, α₄β₇ ECs                      |                                  | Adhesion of leukocytes to ECs                                           |
| E-selectin        | CD62E    | Selectin      | PSGL-1, CD15sECs                           |                                  | Adhesion of leukocytes to ECs; rolling phenomenon                       |
| P-selectin        | CD62P    | Selectin      | PSGL-1, CD15sPlatelets, ECs GlyCAM-1, CD34, MAdCAM-1 |                               | Adhesion of platelets to monocytes and neutrophils; adhesion of leukocytes to ECs; rolling phenomenon |
| L-selectin        | CD62L    | Selectin      | Cadherin                                   | Leukocytes EPs                   | Leukocyte–EC adhesion; lymphocyte homing; EP–EP adhesion                |

* Abbreviations: CD, cluster of differentiation; VLA, very late activation; ICAM, intercellular adhesion molecule; VCAM-1, vascular cell adhesion molecule-1; PECAM-1, platelet–endothelial cell adhesion molecule-1; MAdCAM-1, mucosal address in cell adhesion molecule-1; PSGL, P-selectin glycoprotein ligand-1; vWF, von Willebrand Factor; EC, endothelial cell; EP, epithelial cell.

cytoadhesion integrins, which share the β₃ chain and have various adhesive functions; and β₇ integrins, sharing the β₇ chain and participating in cell–cell interactions (α₄β₇ [CD49d] and αₑβ₇ [CD103]). The integrin expression profile determines the ability of cells to recognize different adhesive substrates and varies greatly among different cell types. The cells of most tissues express α₁β₁, α₂β₁, α₃β₁, and α₆β₁; these integrins are required for adhesion to collagen and laminin. Generally, leukocytes express integrins of the β₂ subfamily, along with α₄β₁, α₄β₇, α₅β₁, and α₆β₁. Different β integrins may recognize different peptide sequences within the same ligand protein. For example, α₄β₁ recognizes the Arg-Glu-Val (REDV) sequences of fibronectin, and α₅β₁ recognizes the Arg-Gly-Asp (RGD) sequence in this protein.

The β₁ integrins are known to function in a dual capacity as adhesion and signaling molecules, and are thought to be important in wound healing and cell migration during embryogenesis. The β₁ or VLA subfamily is comprised of six members: VLA-1 (CD49a), VLA-2 (CD49b), VLA-3 (CD49c), VLA-4 (CD49d), VLA-5 (CD49e), and VLA-6 (CD49f). These molecules are widely distributed among tissues and interact predominantly with extracellular matrix proteins, such as laminin, collagen, and fibronectin (Table 1). In kidney tissue, β₁ integrins are the most studied because their ligands such as collagen, laminin, and fibronectin are the major constituents of the glomerular extracellular matrix, and elevated expression of these

molecules is seen in many forms of glomerular and tubulointerstitial disease. For example, in the rat experimental model for membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis and glomerulosclerosis, glomerular expression of β₁ integrins increases with mesangial accumulation of laminin, collagen, and fibronectin. Activated platelets utilize VLA-2 for adhesion to collagen but interact with laminin through VLA-6. Endothelial cells also use VLA-2 for adhesion to collagen and laminin. VLA-4 is expressed on monocytes, T and B lymphocytes, basophils, and eosinophils but not neutrophils, possibly providing a mechanism for selective recruitment of granulocytes in different pathologic conditions. VLA-4 is a ligand for vascular cell adhesion molecule-1 (VCAM-1).

Members of the β₂ subfamily are also known as leukocyte integrins or leukointegrins (because these integrins are expressed only in leukocytes). This subfamily is composed of three distinct molecules, designated as leukocyte function antigen-1 (LFA-1), Mac-1, and gp150,95. The β₂ integrins have been classified according to their α and β subunits as CD11/CD18 molecules by the World Health Organization (WHO). They are composed of identical β subunits (CD18) and different α subunits (designated as CD11a [for LFA-1], CD11b [for Mac-1], and CD11c [for gp150,95]). Activation of phagocytes by chemotaxins (C5a, LTB4) and cytokines (TNF) increases the expression of β₂ integrins on the cell surface of phagocytes. Human beings with leukocyte adhesion deficiency, a genetic de-

fect affecting the β₂ integrins, cannot mount neutrophilic responses and usually succumb to recurrent bacterial infections.⁶ Bovine endothelial adhesion deficiency (β₂ integrin deficiency) is a disease of young Holstein calves characterized by recurrent pneumonia, ulcerative and granulomatous stomatitis, enteritis with bacterial overgrowth, periodontitis, delayed wound healing, persistent neutrophilia, and death at an early age.⁵⁴,⁷⁸,⁷⁹ Similarly, in Irish Setter dogs, CD11b/CD18 deficiency is characterized by delayed umbilical cord separation at birth, impaired wound healing, and recurrent bacterial soft tissue infections without obvious pus formation.³⁸,¹⁰⁹ The importance of β₂ integrins in adherence responses can also be demonstrated by treating phagocytes with antibodies to adherence glycoproteins CD11b/CD18 and CD11c/CD18, which impairs their adherence to endothelial cells and foreign surfaces following chemotactic factor stimulation.⁷⁹,¹⁰⁹ Thus, the expression of these integrins on phagocyte surfaces assists in the localization of circulating cells at sites of tissue injury and in the host defense against bacterial infection.⁷⁹,¹⁰⁹

Recently discovered canine leukointegrin, αdβ₂, is a heterodimer of 155 kd and 95 kd and is antigenically distinct from the three known CD11 molecules. This molecule is expressed on macrophages in splenic red pulp, lymph node medullary region and bone marrow, and minor subpopulation of red pulp lymphocytes (CD4−CD8−) and blood CD8+ T cells.²⁵ The human αd,⁴ homologous to canine αd, has been shown to bind preferentially to intercellular adhesion molecules (ICAM-3) over ICAM-1. Little is known about canine αdβ₂ but the potential functions in the context of interaction with ICAM-3 include cytotoxic lymphocyte function, lymphocyte-macrophage interaction in cell-mediated immunity, and macrophage function in hematopoiesis.

The β₃ or cytoadhesion subfamily has two members, designated as VNR (for vitronectin receptor) and platelet glycoprotein IIb/IIIa, which are expressed on endothelial cells and platelets, respectively. These molecules have similar ligands (laminin, collagen, and fibronectin) and functions to VLA molecules. Of the two members, the glycoprotein IIb/IIIa is a typical integrin and is composed of α and β subunits. The 136-kd α subunit consists of a heavy chain and a light chain. The 92-kd β subunit consists of polypeptide of 762 amino acids. The glycoprotein IIb/IIIa receptor is the most abundant integrin on the platelet surface, with approximately 50,000 copies per cell. More recently, the platelet glycoprotein IIb/IIIa receptor has been identified as the pivotal mediator of platelet aggregation and adhesion to subendothelial components.⁶⁶ Fibrinogen and other adhesive glycoproteins, including fibronectin, von Willebrand factor, and vitronectin bind to IIb/IIIa receptors. The interactions between these ligands and the receptors are mutually exclusive. Two peptide sequences have been identified as specific recognition sites of IIb/IIIa receptors: the RGD sequence located in fibronectin, fibrinogen, von Willebrand factor, and vitronectin, and the Lys-Gln-Ala-Gly-Asp-Val sequence, located at the carboxy terminus of the γ chain of fibrinogen. These two sequences interact with several sites within the glycoprotein IIb/IIIa receptor.

Of the remaining integrin subfamilies, two members of the β₇ subfamily have been shown to participate in cell–cell interactions in a tissue-specific manner. Integrin α₄β₇ (CD49d/β₇) is expressed on the surface of lymphocytes, particularly in the mucosal immune system. It is thought to be analogous to an integrin expressed on mouse mucosal lymphocytes called LPAM-1 (lymphocyte Peyer’s patch adhesion molecule-1 or α₄βp/₇). Because the ligand for α₄β₇, MAdCAM-1 (mucosal addressin cell adhesion molecule-1) is found on endothelial cells at mucosal sites, it is likely that α₄β₇ participates in lymphocyte homing.¹³,²⁰ Another member of the β₇ integrin subfamily, αEβ₇ (CD103), composed of β₇ chain in association with α subunit designated αE, is primarily expressed on the surface of intraepithelial lymphocytes in intestine and mammary gland, and minor subpopulation of peripheral blood T cells. The integrin αEβ₇ is the first integrin shown to recognize E-cadherin.²¹ Although the function of this integrin has not yet been defined, its tissue-specific expression in vivo suggested that it may be involved in cell–cell interactions between lymphocytes and epithelial cells.²⁰,²¹

### Immunoglobulin Superfamily

The immunoglobulin superfamily is characterized by immunoglobulin domains and comprises leukocyte function antigen-2 (LFA-2 or CD2), leukocyte function antigen-3 (LFA-3 or CD58), intercellular adhesion molecules (ICAMs), vascular cell adhesion molecule-1 (VCAM-1), platelet-endothelial cell adhesion molecule-1 (PE-CAM-1) and mucosal addressin cell adhesion molecule-1 (MAdCAM-1). The LFA-2 (CD2) is a 50-kd antigen/signaling molecule expressed on thymocytes, mature T cells, and natural killer (NK) cells.⁵⁹,¹²⁰ The binding of T lymphocytes to endothelial cells is mediated in part by the interaction of LFA-2 (a T-cell surface protein) and endothelial LFA-3.⁶⁰,⁶⁹,⁹⁸ An LFA-2/LFA-3 interaction may occur with or without prior antigen recognition.¹⁰

ICAMs help localize leukocytes to areas of tissue injury. Many cytokines, such as γ-interferon, IL-1, and TNF-α, induce expression of intracellular adhesion molecules on the surface of endothelial cells. These molecules facilitate the adherence of leukocytes expressing corresponding receptors such as β₂ integrins

Vet Pathol 34:1, 1997                                                                 Cell Adhesion Molecules

Endothelium

CD31    CD62P    CD62E    CD62P    GlyCAM-1    MAdCAM-1    CD34    CD31    CD62P    CD62E

NEUTROPHIL

CD31

CD15s

PSGL-1

CD11a/CD18

LYMPHOCYTE

CD11a/CD18

CD11b/CD18

ICAM-3    ICAM-2    ICAM-1    ICAM-2    ICAM-1    ICAM-2    ICAM-1    VCAM-1

MONOCYTE

CD31

PSGL-1

CD62L

CD11/CD18

VLA-4

Endothelium

Fig. 1. Adhesion molecules and their ligands on the surface of endothelial cells and inflammatory cells: leukocyte function antigen-1 (CD11a/CD18); Mac-1 (CD11b/CD18); p150,95 (CD11c/CD18); intercellular adhesion molecule (ICAM)-1 (CD54); ICAM-2 (CD102); ICAM-3 (CD50); very late activation (VLA)-4 (CD49d); vascular adhesion molecule (VCAM)-1 (CD106); platelet-endothelial cell adhesion molecule (PECAM)-1 (CD31); E-selectin (CD62E); P-selectin (CD62P); tetrasaccharide sialyl Lewis^x^ (CD15s); P-selectin glycoprotein ligand-1 (PSGL-1); L-selectin (CD62L); Gly-CAM-1; mucosal addressin cell adhesion molecule (MAdCAM)-1; and CD34.

(CD11/CD18). Presently, three members of ICAMs are recognized: ICAM-1 (CD54), ICAM-2 (CD102), and ICAM-3 (CD50) (Fig. 1). ICAM-1 is expressed on the cell surface of cytokine-stimulated cells (e.g., endothelial cells, leukocytes, dermal fibroblasts, melanocytes) and certain types of carcinomas. It binds to CD11a/CD18 and CD11b/CD18 present on the cell membranes of neutrophils, T cells, and macrophages. ICAM-1 is also an important receptor for rhinovirus. A second ICAM (ICAM-2) is constitutively expressed on endothelial cell surfaces and binds to CD11a/CD18. ICAM-2 plays a role in the initial localization of neutrophils to sites of tissue injury. Resting leukocytes express ICAM-3, which binds to CD11a/CD18. ICAM-3 is potentially the most important ligand for CD11a/CD18 in the initiation of the immune response because the expression of ICAM-1 on resting leukocytes is low. Therefore, ICAM-3 may mediate the adherence of leukocytes expressing CD11a/CD18. ICAM-3 is expressed on all leukocytes and is closely related to ICAM-1. ICAM-3 consists of five immunoglobulin domains and binds to CD11a/CD18. The highest ICAM-3 expression is on B cells and monocytes/macrophages (antigen-presenting cells). These ICAM/integrin interactions (i.e., ICAM-1 with CD11a and CD11b; ICAM-2 with CD11a; ICAM-3 with CD11a) provide a mechanism for selective recruitment of leukocytes in different pathologic situations.

Vascular cell adhesion molecule-1 (VCAM-1 or CD106), like ICAM-1, is a member of the immunoglobulin superfamily and is expressed on activated endothelial cells. It may contain either six or seven immunoglobulin domains of the H type and binds to VLA-4 (Fig. 1). VCAM-1 regulates adhesion of monocytes, lymphocytes, basophils, and eosinophils to endothelial cells activated by lipopolysaccharide, IL-1, or TNF. High expression of VCAM-1 is observed in numerous vessels in acute rejection in the heart and liver, and mucosal vascular endothelium of graft versus host disease, as well as in synovial tissue of patients with rheumatoid arthritis. Recently, increased expression of VCAM-1 was described in encephalitis induced by simian immunodeficiency virus. These findings underscore the potential relevance of VCAM-1 expression in the pathogenesis of various inflammatory conditions. Functionally active, soluble forms of ICAM-1 (cICAM-1) and VCAM-1 (cVCAM-1) have been described. Circulating ICAM-1 is present in normal human serum but is elevated in

graft rejection. Similarly, cVCAM-1 has been detected in the serum of patients with malignancies, autoimmune diseases, and allograft rejection.⁴,⁶²

Another adhesion molecule is platelet–endothelial cell adhesion molecule-1 (PE-CAM-1), also referred to as CD31. PE-CAM-1 is expressed in large amounts on endothelial cells at intercellular junctions and to a lesser extent on platelets and most leukocytes.¹¹,¹¹⁰ It is structurally related to ICAM-1 and VCAM-1 and is localized at surface borders of adjacent cells. PE-CAM-1 is involved in the CD18-independent transmigration of neutrophils across endothelium in vivo. It has been suggested that the mechanism of transendothelial migration involves homotypic binding between PE-CAM-1 on leukocytes and on endothelium.⁷⁶,¹¹⁰

The mucosal vascular addressin, MAdCAM-1, is a novel immunoglobulin family member. This multidomain receptor has several structural motifs: two amino-terminal domains with strong homology to ICAM-1 and VCAM-1, respectively; a third domain proximal to the cell membrane with homology to the third domain of IgA1; and a fourth intermediate, mucinlike region. MAdCAM-1 is expressed largely by endothelial cells at mucosal sites and is a receptor for both α₄β₇ and L-selectin.¹²,¹³ High levels of expression are found in Peyer’s patches and mesenteric lymph nodes, but MAdCAM-1 is absent from peripheral lymph nodes. In addition, it is expressed on small venules in the lamina propria of the gut, in the lactating mammary gland, and in the sinus lining cells in the marginal zone between red and white pulp of spleen.⁵⁸,⁸⁰ The interaction of α₄β₇ and MAdCAM-1 is thought to play an important role in lymphocyte traffic to mucosal sites.⁴²,⁴⁹ MAdCAM-1 is also found at particular sites of inflammation such as the inflammation of pancreas of nonobese diabetic (NOD) mice, where it is expressed on high endothelial venulelike vessels³⁴,⁴³ and in the brain vessels of animals with relapsing chronic experimental allergic encephalomyelitis.⁸⁴

### Selectins

Selectins, also known as lectin cell adhesion molecules (Lec-CAMs) comprise a class of cell adhesion molecules that are expressed on the surface of the endothelial cells, leukocytes, and platelets. These adhesion molecules influence the localization of circulating leukocytes on the endothelium at the site of inflammation. Selectins have three family members: E-selectin (CD62E, originally referred to as endothelial cell adhesion molecule-1 or ELAM-1), P-selectin (CD62P, originally referred to as granule membrane protein-140 or GMP-140), and L-selectin (CD62L, originally referred to as leukocyte adhesion molecule-1 or LAM-1).³⁶,¹⁰⁸ Selectin-carbohydrate mediated leukocyte adhesion is an early event in adhesion responses and promotes the attachment of nonactivated leukocytes to activated endothelium.⁸⁸ It is responsible for leukocyte “rolling,” which is a transient stage of leukocyte adhesion.⁴⁶ After rolling, firm adhesion of leukocytes to endothelium is most likely accomplished by endothelial proteins with immunoglobulin domains such as vascular adhesion molecule-1 (VCAM-1) and intercellular adhesion molecule-1 (ICAM-1).

E-selectin is the most important vascular addressin expressed in the first few hours of immune-inflammatory reactions. It mediates the adhesion of leukocytes (e.g., neutrophils) to endothelial cells activated by IL-1, TNFα, γ interferon, or lipopolysaccharide and may function as a tissue-specific homing factor for T cells.¹⁰⁸ E-selectin is synthesized de novo by cytokine-activated endothelial cells. Its natural ligand is a protein that contains sialic acid and fucosyl carbohydrate residues, which is expressed on the surface of human leukocytes.⁴⁵,⁴⁷,⁷² E-selectin binds to a 260,000-Mr glycoprotein on bovine γδT, whereas in mouse neutrophils it binds to a predominant 150,000-Mr glycoprotein (referred to as glycoprotein E-selectin ligand or ESL-1) and a minor 250,000-Mr protein.¹⁰⁵ A 200,000-Mr glycoprotein expressed on the lymphocytes may serve as a ligand for E-selectin on venular endothelium at sites of chronic cutaneous inflammation. E-selectin has also been shown to preferentially recruit memory T cells to the skin.⁸⁹ The expression of E-selectin is transient (2 to 8 hours) in vitro. The binding of memory T cells by E-selectin is not dependent on T cell activation, thus providing a mechanism for the endothelium to capture resting T cells from the blood.¹⁰⁰ In hypersensitivity reactions, E-selectin peaks within 24 hours¹¹⁶ but in chronic dermatoses such as psoriasis, E-selectin expression remains high. This explains the continued influx of lymphocytes into these tissues.

The interaction of P-selectin on endothelial cells leads to the rolling phenomenon and promotes the initial localization of leukocytes and platelets at sites of inflammation, whereas E-selectin enhances the subsequent recruitment of leukocytes.²⁸,³⁷,⁶⁵,⁷⁰ P-selectin is preformed and is stored within Weibel-Palade bodies of endothelial cells and α granules of platelets.⁷² Both P- and E-selectin bind a predominant 160,000-Mr glycoprotein (P-selectin glycoprotein ligand-1 or PSGL-1) on mouse myeloid cells.⁹⁶ PSGL-1 is expressed by all blood neutrophils, monocytes, and lymphocytes.⁷⁵ Within minutes of stimulation with histamine, thrombin, or specific inflammatory cytokines (e.g., γ interferon, TNF-α, IL-1), endothelial cells transport preformed P-selectin to the surface. P-selectin can be expressed on the surface of stimulated platelets, it binds to a glycoprotein on leukocyte surfaces,

and it participates in the interaction between platelets and neutrophils.³²

L-selectin (also referred to as Leu-8 differentiation antigen) was originally defined as the “homing receptor” on lymphocytes. This molecule regulates lymphocyte binding to high endothelial lymph node venules and thereby regulates their trafficking through the lymphoid tissue.⁶⁴ Mouse L-selectin binds specifically to three different glycosylated mucinlike proteins: GlyCAM-1, mucosal addressin cell adhesion molecule (MAdCAM)-1, and CD34. The endothelial ligand GlyCAM-1 is a recently described addressin in peripheral lymph nodes. Similarly, mucosal vascular addressin, MAdCAM-1, and CD34 can also function as a ligand for L-selectin. CD34 is constitutively expressed on most endothelial cells and hematopoietic stem cells. L-selectin mediates the rolling of leukocytes along the endothelial lining, whereas CD11/CD18 is essential for leukocyte adhesion and emigration.¹¹⁴,¹¹⁵ Chemotactic factors such as C5a and LTB4 stimulate the expression and release of L-selectin from the surface of neutrophils. Concomitant with the increase in L-selectin release from the cell surface is an increased expression of CD18 upon activation. The dependence of selectin function on a carbohydrate ligand has been further illustrated in patients with leukocyte adhesion deficiency syndrome II, an inherited inability to recruit neutrophils to the sites of inflammation.⁴⁴ In this disease, the inability to generate ligands for the endothelial selectins is attributed to a defect in fucose metabolism that results in failure to synthesize tetrasaccharide sialyl Lewisx (sLex, CD15s), a prototype ligand for both P- and E-selectins and related structures.

### Cadherins

The maintenance of adult tissue architecture largely depends on the structural and functional integrity of cadherins. The cadherins comprise a superfamily of Ca²⁺-dependent cell–cell adhesion molecules that are involved in establishing and maintaining intercellular connections (cell–cell association).¹¹ Three subclasses are recognized: epithelial (E)-cadherin or uvomorulin, placental (P)-cadherin, and neural (N)-cadherin.³ E- and P-cadherins, which are preferentially located at the adherens type of intercellular junctions, share a common basic structure but have different molecular masses, binding specificities, and tissue distribution. Immunohistochemical studies have demonstrated that E-cadherin is expressed in most epithelial cells whereas P-cadherin is primarily expressed in placenta and basal or lower layers of stratified epithelia, where it is frequently coexpressed with E-cadherin. N-cadherins are primarily localized to adult neural tissues, muscles, kidney, and lens of the eye. The N-cadherin subclass is also a major intercellular adhesion molecule in the

adult kidney, being present on the basal aspect of tubular cells along the entire length of the nephron of normal adult kidney. N-cadherin is also found along cell membranes at intercellular borders in cultured human renal cortical epithelial cells.⁹⁰ As mentioned previously, E-cadherin interacts with the lymphocyte integrin αEβ7. This interaction may serve as a fundamental mechanism for lymphocyte trafficking in a tissue-specific manner.²¹ Recent studies have suggested that the loss of E-cadherin-mediated cell–cell adhesion, either through a lack of expression or because of abnormalities in the cellular localization or function of the expressed product, leads to dedifferentiation and invasion of epithelial cells.³⁵,⁷¹ The failure of cadherin mediated cell–cell adhesion cascade is a common feature of breast cancer.⁹² Autoantibodies to a keratinocyte cadherin result in the loss of cell–cell adhesion. This explains the pathogenesis of epidermal blister formation in pemphigus vulgaris.⁵

#### Other Cell Adhesion Molecules

CD44 is expressed on the surface of T lymphocytes and regulates their adhesion to endothelial cells and monocytes, thus affecting the recruitment of T lymphocytes to sites of inflammation.³² The known ligands for CD44 are hyaluronate, fibronectin, and collagen.²⁶ CD36 (glycoprotein IV) is expressed on endothelial cells, platelets, and monocytes. It binds to the ligand (thrombospondin) and functions in platelet–monocyte adhesion.¹¹

GP330, recently named “megalin,” is a component of a renal cortical preparation (designated as FxIA) and occurs in complex form with a 44-kd protein. GP330 has cell adhesion properties, and antibodies directed against it interfere with the interaction between glomerular basement membrane and epithelial cells.⁹⁵ This complex (GP330/44-kd protein) is a major target antigen in Heymann nephritis.⁸⁵

#### Diagnostic and Therapeutic Implications

The development of monoclonal antibodies that react with adhesion molecules and the use of these antibodies for immunohistochemical studies has provided new insights into the pathogenesis of many inflammatory and neoplastic diseases. The results of these studies have potentially important diagnostic and therapeutic implications. The receptor/ligand interaction that has been investigated most extensively in immunohistologic studies is CD11a/CD18–intercellular adhesion molecule (ICAM)-1. The expression of ICAM-1 is increased on hepatocytes in various forms of hepatitis, such as acute and chronic viral hepatitis,¹¹³ and alcoholic hepatitis.¹⁷ Expression of ICAM-1 is also increased on hepatocytes, bile ducts, and vascular endothelium during liver allograft rejection.¹ Elevated

ICAM-1 expression has also been observed on keratinocytes in various inflammatory dermatoses,^{82} on renal tubular epithelium during renal allograft rejection,^{4,33} on cerebral vascular endothelium in viral encephalitis and multiple-sclerosis plaques,^{104} and on thyroid epithelial cells in autoimmune thyroiditis.^{118} In these studies, the distribution of ICAM-1 correlated topographically with areas of inflammatory damage. Infiltrating leukocytes in these lesions frequently expressed the receptor CD11a/CD18. P-selectin is involved in the pathogenesis of several conditions, such as acute and neurogenic inflammation,^{77,81,103} chronic rheumatoid arthritis,^{40} reperfusion injury,^{51} and possibly cancer metastasis.^{8,107} E-selectin is also found in joints with arthritis, in hearts and renal allografts undergoing rejection, and in cutaneous vessels in psoriasis, contact dermatitis, and delayed-type hypersensitivity reactions. These observations strongly suggest that adhesion molecules such as ICAM-1, CD11a/CD18, and P- and E-selectins play an important role in the mechanism of several inflammatory diseases. Furthermore, these studies also indicate that immunohistologic staining for adhesion molecules may be a useful adjunct to conventional histology in monitoring disease activity and response to treatment, and in predicting disease behavior.

Good experimental evidence exists to support the hypothesis that loss of cadherin expression or function is associated with increased invasiveness in transformed cells. For example, the expression of epithelial (E)-cadherin in well-differentiated epithelial tumors (as evidenced by immunofluorescence) was similar to that in normal epithelium. In contrast, moderately differentiated carcinomas expressed variable or intermediate amounts of E-cadherin, and poorly differentiated tumors did not express E-cadherin.^{99} These findings have diagnostic implications. For example, the presence or absence of surface membrane E-cadherin in carcinomas may aid in determining the stage and prognosis.

Interfering with adhesive interactions using monoclonal antibodies to adhesion molecules is a potential therapeutic modality. Anti-CD-2 monoclonal antibodies protect against autoimmune diabetes in BB/Wor rats by preventing the activation of diabetogenic effector cells, or by blocking CD-2/ligand interaction between effector and target cells.^{10} The use of anti-CD11/CD18 antibodies prevents the migration of leukocytes in many animal models of acute inflammation and ischemia-reperfusion injury.^{7} ICAM-1 antibodies have been used in the treatment of renal allograft rejection in monkeys.^{23} In a rabbit ear model of isolated tissue ischemia-reperfusion, prior treatment of rabbits with a monoclonal antibody directed against the CD18 neutrophil adhesion molecule greatly decreased tissue injury. This protective effect corresponded to inhibition of neutrophil adhesion to endothelium and diminished endothelial damage.^{45} Anti-adhesion treatment also has proved effective in a primate model of resuscitation from hemorrhagic shock. Control animals developed diffuse vascular injury and increased permeability, whereas animals treated with the anti-CD18 monoclonal antibody had less vascular fluid leakage and no deaths.^{74} Favorable effects for antibodies to CD11a/CD18 and ICAM-1 on graft-versus-host disease and asthma, respectively, have been reported in animal models.^{102,119} Inhibitors of glycoprotein IIb/IIIa receptors are likely to be used widely for the control of the final common pathway of platelet aggregation and adhesion that plays a key role in atherosclerosis, thrombosis, and acute coronary syndromes.^{50}

The role of selectins in directing leukocyte interactions with vascular endothelium makes these molecules extremely attractive targets for therapeutic agents.^{108} For example, blocking L-selectin function with a monoclonal antibody dramatically reduces ischemia and reperfusion injury in a rabbit ear model and reduces neutrophil accumulation in ischemic reperfused cat myocardium. A monoclonal antibody to E-selectin inhibits neutrophil accumulation in delayed-type hypersensitivity reactions in the skin of nonhuman primates. Similarly, neutralization of P-selectin protects feline heart and endothelium during myocardial ischemia and reperfusion injury and attenuates reperfusion injury to the rabbit ear.^{108}

A recent study in human beings has provided evidence of the expression of ICAM-1 and its ligand LFA-1 in the medullary carcinoma of breast, which is characterized by an intense lymphocytic infiltrate. It has been suggested that the upregulation of ICAM-1 and its ligand could restrict the ability of neoplastic cells to invade and metastasize.^{9} A decline in α₂β₁ integrin expression occurs more frequently in poorly differentiated endometrial adenocarcinomas in humans and the loss of this integrin may be associated with lymph node metastasis.^{67} These findings indicate that by altering the expression of cell adhesion molecules such as ICAM-1 and integrins, cancer metastasis may be prevented.

Despite the tremendous interest in anti-adhesion molecule therapy, practical applications are not simple. Most of the adhesion molecules bind to more than one ligand^{3,22,94,111} and contributions are likely to vary depending on the vascular bed under study and the underlying cause of the inflammatory response. As a further complication, more recent work has shown that certain integrin α subunits can combine with more than one β subunit: αᵥ can associate with β₁, β₃, and β₅ subunits and each complex binds to a different ligand (e.g., αᵥ/β₁ binds to fibronectin; αᵥ/β₃ binds to vitronectin).

nectin, fibronectin, thromboplastin, and von Willebrand Factor; α₅/β₁ binds to vitronectin). Because of the complexity of integrins and selectins, and their overlapping receptor-ligand interactions, inhibitory reagents directed against single integrins or selectins give only partial protection in some cases. However, it is highly likely that the present understanding of adhesion molecules, along with future discoveries, will foster the emergence of precision in therapeutic strategies for inflammatory and neoplastic diseases.

### Summary

Cell adhesion molecules are surface glycoproteins that play an important role in regulating cell-cell and cell-matrix adhesion (Table 1). The interaction between vascular endothelial cells and inflammatory cells present in the circulation, and migration of the inflammatory cells through endothelium and extracellular matrix, are prerequisites for the recruitment of cells to inflammatory sites. These molecules participate in the arrest and transmigration of inflammatory or malignant cells. At least four main groups of adhesion molecules are recognized: integrins, the immunoglobulin superfamily, selectins, and cadherins. Integrins participate in a wide range of functions, including localization of circulating cells at sites of injury, host defense against bacterial infection, cell migration during embryogenesis, wound healing, immune response, and behavior of malignant cells. Immunoglobulin superfamily molecules include intercellular adhesion molecules (ICAMs) ICAM-1, ICAM-2, ICAM-3; vascular adhesion molecule-1 (VCAM-1); platelet-endothelial cell adhesion molecule-1 (PE-CAM-1); and mucosal addressin cell adhesion molecule (MAdCAM)-1. ICAM-1, ICAM-2, and ICAM-3 interact with leukocyte integrins, CD11/CD18; whereas VCAM-1 binds with VLA-4. MAdCAM-1 interacts with L-selectin and α₄β₇ but the ligand for PE-CAM-1 is still unknown. Selectins are expressed on the surface of endothelial cells, leukocytes, and platelets. These adhesion molecules influence the localization of circulating leukocytes at the site of inflammation. Selectins are responsible for the rolling phenomenon, a transient stage of leukocyte adhesion; firm adhesion of leukocytes to endothelial cells is likely accomplished by VCAM-1 and ICAM-1 and their counter receptors. L-selectin also regulates lymphocyte binding to high endothelial lymph node venules and thereby regulates their trafficking through the lymphoid tissue. Cadherins are involved in establishing and maintaining intercellular connections (cell-cell association). This rapidly growing area of study of cell-cell and cell-matrix interactions may provide us important preventive and therapeutic tools for inflammatory or neoplastic diseases.

---

### References

1. Adams DH, Hubscher SG, Shaw J, Rothlein R, Neuberger JM: Intercellular adhesion molecule-1 on liver allografts during rejection. Lancet 11:1122–1125, 1989
2. Albelda SM: Endothelial and epithelial cell adhesion molecules. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol 4:195–203, 1991
3. Albelda SM: Role of integrins and other cell adhesion molecules in tumor progression and metastasis. Lab Invest 68:4–17, 1993
4. Alcalde G, Merino J, Sanz S, Zubimendi JA, Ruiz JC, Torrijos J, de Francisco ALM, Cotorruelo JG, Lopez-Hoyos M, Novo MJ, Arias M: Circulating adhesion molecules during kidney allograft rejection. Transplantation 59:1695–1699, 1995
5. Amagai M, Klaus-kovtun V, Stanley JR: Autoantibodies against a novel epithelial cadherin in pemphigus vulgaris, a disease of cell adhesion. Cell 67:869–877, 1991
6. Anderson DC, Springer TA: Leukocyte adhesion deficiency: an inherited defect in the Mac-1, LFA-1 and p150,95 glycoproteins. Ann Rev Med 38:175–194, 1987
7. Arnaout MA: Leukocyte adhesion molecule deficiency: its structural basis, pathophysiology and implications for modulating the inflammatory response. Immunol Rev 114:145–180, 1990
8. Aruffo A, Dietsch MT, Wan H, Hellstrom KE, Hellstrom I: Granule membrane protein 140 (GMP140) binds to carcinomas and carcinoma-derived cell lines. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 89:2292–2296, 1992
9. Bacus SS, Zelnick CR, Chin DM, Yarden Y, Kaminsky DB, Bennington J, Wen D, Marcus JN, Page DL: Medullary carcinoma is associated with expression of intercellular adhesion molecule-1, Implication to its morphology and its clinical behavior. Am J Pathol 145:1337–1348, 1994
10. Barlow AK, Like AA: Anti-CD2 monoclonal antibodies prevent spontaneous and adoptive transfer of diabetes in BB/Wor rat. Am J Pathol 141:1043–1051, 1992
11. Benditt EP, Schwartz SM: Blood vessels. In: Pathology, ed. Rubin E and Farber JL, pp. 454–501. JB Lippincott Co, Philadelphia, PA, 1994
12. Berg EL, McEvoy LM, Berlin C, Bargatze RF, Butcher EC: L-selectin mediated lymphocyte rolling on MAdCAM-1. Nature 366:695–698, 1993
13. Berlin C, Berg EL, Briskin MJ, Andrew DP, Kilshaw PJ, Holzmann B, Weissman IL, Hamann A, Butcher EC: α₄β₇ integrin mediates lymphocyte binding to the mucosal vascular addressin MAdCAM-1. Cell 74:185–195, 1993
14. Bochner BS, Luscinskas RW, Gimbrone MA Jr, Newman W, Sterbinsky SA, Derse-Anthony CP, Klunk D, Schleimer RP: Adhesion of human basophils, eosinophils, and neutrophils to interleukin 1-activated human vascular endothelial cells, contributions of endothelial cell adhesion molecules. J Exp Med 173:1553–1556, 1991
15. Breider MA: Endothelium and inflammation. J Am Vet Med Assoc 203:300–306, 1993

16 Bruijn JA, Heer De E: Adhesion molecules in renal diseases. Lab Invest 72:387–394, 1995

17 Burra P, Hubscher SC, Shaw J, Elias C, Adams DH: Is the ICAM/LFA-1 pathway of leukocyte adhesion involved in the hepatocyte damage of alcoholic hepatitis? Hepatology 12:394, 1990 [Abstract]

18 Carlos T, Gordon D, Fishbein D, Himes VE, Coday A, Ross R, Allen MD: Vascular cell adhesion molecule-1 is induced on endothelium during acute rejection in human cardiac allografts. J Heart Lung Transplant 11: 1103–1109, 1992

19 Carlos TM, Schwartz BR, Kovach NL, Yee E, Rosso M, Osborn L, Chi-Rosso G, Newman B, Lobb R, Harlan JM: Vascular cell adhesion molecule-1 mediates lymphocyte adherence to cytokine-activated cultured human endothelial cells. Blood 76:965–970, 1990

20 Cepek KL, Parker CM, Madara JL, Brenner MB: Integrin αEβ7 mediates adhesion of T lymphocytes to epithelial cells. J Immunol 150:3459–3470, 1993

21 Cepek KL, Shaw SK, Parker CM, Russell GJ, Morrow JS, Rimm DL, Brenner MB: Adhesion between epithelial cells and T lymphocytes mediated by E-cadherin and the αEβ7 integrin. Nature 372:190–193, 1994

22 Cheresh D, Smith J, Cooper H, Quaranta V: A novel vitronectin receptor integrin (αv/β3) is responsible for distinct adhesive properties of carcinoma cells. Cell 57: 59–69, 1989

23 Cosimi AB, Conti D, Delmonico FL, Preffer FL, Wee SL, Rothlein R, Faanes R, Colvin RB: In vivo effects of monoclonal antibody to ICAM-1 (CD54) in non-human primates with renal allografts. J Immunol 144: 4604–4612, 1990

24 Cosio FG: Cell-matrix adhesion receptors: relevance to glomerular pathology. Am J Kidney Dis 20:294–305, 1992

25 Danilenko DM, Rossitto PV, der Vieren MV, Trong HL, McDonough SP, Affolter VK, Moore PF: A novel canine leukointegrin, αdβ2, is expressed by specific macrophage subpopulations in tissue and a minor CD8+ lymphocyte subpopulation in peripheral blood. J Immunol 155:34–44, 1995

26 de Graaf JH, Tamminga RYJ, Kamps WA, Timens W: Expression of cellular adhesion molecules in Langerhans cell histiocytosis and normal Langerhans cells. Am J Pathol 147:1161–1171, 1995

27 Dobrina A, Menegazzi R, Carlos TM, Nardon E, Cramer R, Zacchi T, Harlan JM, Patriarca P: Mechanisms of eosinophil adherence to cultured vascular endothelial cells: eosinophils bind to the cytokine-induced endothelial ligand vascular cell adhesion molecule-1 via the very late activation antigen-4 integrin receptor. J Clin Invest 88:20–26, 1991

28 Dore M, Korthuis RJ, Granger DN, Entman ML, Smith CW: P-selectin mediates spontaneous leukocyte rolling in vivo. Blood 82:1308–1316, 1993

29 Dore M, Simon SI, Hughes BJ, Entman ML, Smith CW: P-selectin and CD18-mediated recruitment of canine neutrophils under conditions of shear stress. Vet Pathol 32:258–268, 1995

30 Dustin ML, Springer TA: T cell receptor cross linking

transiently stimulates adhesiveness through LFA-1. Nature 341:619–624, 1989

31 Elices MJ, Osborn L, Takada Y, Crouse C, Luhowskyj S, Hemler ME, Lobb RR: VCAM-1 on activated endothelium interacts with the leukocyte integrin VLA-4 at a site distinct from the VLA-4/fibronectin binding site. Cell 60:577–584, 1990

32 Fantone JC, Ward PA: Inflammation. In: Pathology, ed. Rubin E and Farber JL, pp. 33–66. JB Lippincott Co, Philadelphia, PA, 1994

33 Faull RJ, Russ GR: Tubular expression of intercellular adhesion molecule-1 during renal allograft rejection. Transplantation 48:226–230, 1989

34 Faveeuw C, Gagnerault MC, Lepault F: Expression of homing and adhesion molecules in infiltrated islets of Langerhans and salivary glands of nonobese diabetic mice. J Immunol 152:5969–5978, 1994

35 Fish EM, Molitoris BA: Alterations in epithelial polarity and the pathogenesis of disease states. N Engl J Med 330:1580–1588, 1994

36 Garcia-Barcina M, Lukomska B, Gawron W, Winnock M, Vidal-Vanaclocha F, Bioulac-Sage P, Balabaud C, Olszewski W: Expression of cell adhesion molecules on liver-associated lymphocytes and their ligands on sinusoidal lining cells in patients with benign or malignant liver disease. Am J Pathol 146:1406–1413, 1995

37 Geng J, Bevilacqua MP, Moore KL, McIntyre RM, Prescott SM, Kim JM, Bliss GA, Zimmerman GA, McEver RP: Rapid neutrophil adhesion to activated endothelium mediated by GMP-140. Nature 343:757–760, 1990

38 Giger U, Boxer LA, Simpson PJ, Lucchesi BR, Ill RFT: Deficiency of leukocyte surface glycoproteins Mol, LFA-1, and Leu M5 in a dog with recurrent bacterial infections: an animal model. Blood 69:1622–1630, 1987

39 Graber N, Gopal TV, Wilson D, Beall LD, Polte T, Newman W: T cells bind to cytokine-activated endothelial cells via a novel, inducible sialoglycoprotein and endothelial leukocyte adhesion molecule-1. J Immunol 145:819–830, 1990

40 Grober JS, Bowen BL, Ebling H, Athey B, Thompson CB, Fox DA, Stoolman LM: Monocyte endothelial adhesion in chronic rheumatoid arthritis. J Clin Invest 91: 2609–2619, 1993

41 Haapasalmi K, Makela M, Oksala O, Heino J, Yamada KM, Uitto V-J, Larjava H: Expression of epithelial adhesion proteins and integrins in chronic inflammation. Am J Pathol 147:193–206, 1995

42 Hamann A, Andrew DP, Jablonski-Westrich D, Holzmann B, Butcher EC: Role of α4-integrins in lymphocyte homing to mucosal tissues in vivo. J Immunol 152: 3282–3292, 1994

43 Hanninen A, Taylor C, Streeter PR, Stark LS, Sarte JM, Shizuru JA, Simell O, Michie S: Vascular addressins are induced on islet vessels during insulitis in NOD mice and are involved in lymphoid binding to islet endothelium. J Clin Invest 92:2509–2515, 1993

44 Harlan JM: Leukocyte adhesion deficiency syndrome: insights into the molecular basis of leukocyte emigra-

tion. Clin Immunol Immunopathol 67(Suppl 1):16–24, 1993

45 Harlan JM, Vedder NB, Winn RD, Rice CL: Mechanisms and consequences of leukocyte-endothelial interaction. West J Med 155:365–369, 1991

46 Harlan JM, Winn RD, Vedder NB, Doerschuk CM, Rice CL: In vivo models of leukocyte adherence to endothelium. *In*: Adhesion. Its Role in Inflammatory Disease, ed. Harlan JM and Liu DY, pp. 117–150. WH Freeman and Co, New York, NY, 1992

47 Haskard DO, Lee TH: The role of leukocyte-endothelium interactions in the accumulation of leukocytes in allergic inflammation. Am Rev Respir Dis 145(Suppl 1):10–13, 1992

48 Helmer ME: Adhesive protein receptors on hematopoietic cells. Immunol Today 9:109, 1988

49 Holzmann B, Weissman IL: Peyer’s patch specific lymphocyte homing receptors consist of a VLA-4 like α chain associated with either of two integrin β chains, one of which is novel. EMBO J 8:1735–1741, 1989

50 Jang Y, Lincoff AM, Plow EF, Topol EJ: Cell adhesion molecules in coronary artery disease. J Am Coll Cardiol 24:1591–1601, 1994

51 Jerome SN, Dore M, Paulson JC, Smith CW, Korthuis RJ: P-selectin and ICAM-1 dependent adherence reactions: role in the genesis of postischemic no-reflow. Am J Physiol 266:H1316–H1321, 1994

52 Johnson JP, Stade BG, Holzmann B, Schwable W, Riethmuller G: De novo expression of intercellular adhesion molecule 1 in melanoma correlates with increased risk of metastasis. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 86:641, 1989

53 Kavanaugh AF, Lightfoot E, Lipsky PE, Oppenheimer-Marks N: Role of CD11/CD18 in adhesion and transendothelial migration of T cells. Analysis utilizing CD18-deficient T cell clones. J Immunol 146:4149–4156, 1991

54 Kehrli ME Jr, Ackermann MR, Shuster DE, van der Maaten MJ, Schmalstieg FC, Anderson DC, Hughes BJ: Bovine leukocyte adhesion deficiency β₂ integrin deficiency in young Holstein cattle. Am J Pathol 140:1489–1492, 1992

55 Kirchhofer D, Languino LR, Ruoslahti E, Pierschbacher MD: α₂β₁ integrins from different cell types show different binding specificities. J Biol Chem 265:615–618, 1990

56 Kohl S, Springer TA, Schmalstieg FC, Loo LS, Anderson DC: Defective natural killer cytotoxicity and polymorphonuclear leukocyte antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity in patients with LFA-1 OKM-1 deficiency. J Immunol 133:2972–2978, 1984

57 Kovach NL, Carlos TM, Yee E, Harlan JM: A monoclonal antibody to β₁ integrin (CD29) stimulates VLA dependent adherence of leukocytes to human umbilical vein endothelial cells and matrix components. J Cell Biol 116:199–509, 1992

58 Kraal G, Schornagel K, Streeter PR, Holzmann B, Butcher EC: Expression of the mucosal vascular addressin, MAdCAM-1, on sinus-lining cells in the spleen. Am J Pathol 147:763–771, 1995

59 Krensky AM, Robbins E, Springer TA, Burakoff SI: LFA-1, LFA-2, LFA-3 antigens are involved in CTL-target conjugation. J Immunol 132:2180–2182, 1984

60 Krensky AM, Sanchez-Madrid F, Robbins E, Nagy J, Springer TA, Burakoff SJ: The functional significance, distribution, and structure of LFA-1, LFA-2, and LFA-3: Cell surface antigens associated with CTL-target interactions. J Immunol 131:611–616, 1983

61 Kriegsmann J, Keyszer GM, Geiler TG, Brauer R, Gay RE, Gay S: Expression of vascular cell adhesion molecule-1 mRNA and protein in rheumatoid synovium demonstrated by in situ hybridization and immunohistochemistry. Lab Invest 72:209–214, 1995

62 Lang T, Krams SM, Villanueva JC, Cox K, So S, Martinz OM: Differential patterns of circulating intercellular adhesion molecule-1 (cICAM-1) and vascular cell adhesion molecule-1 (cVCAM-1) during liver allograft rejection. Transplantation 59:584–589, 1995

63 Larson RS, Springer TA: Structure and function of leukocyte integrins. Immunol Rev 114:181–217, 1990

64 Lasky LA: The homing receptor (LECAM I/L selectin); a carbohydrate-binding mediator of adhesion in the immune system. *In*: Adhesion. Its Role in Inflammatory Disease, ed. Harlan JM and Liu DY, pp. 43–63. WH Freeman and Co, New York, NY, 1992

65 Lawrence MB, Smith CW, Eskin SG, McIntire LV: Effect of venous shear stress on CD18-mediated neutrophil adhesion to cultured endothelium. Blood 75:227–237, 1990

66 Lefkovits J, Plow EF, Topol EJ: Platelet glycoprotein IIa/IIIa receptors in cardiovascular medicine. N Engl J Med 332:1553–1559, 1995

67 Lessey BA, Albelda S, Buck CA, Castelbaum AJ, Yeh I, Kohler M, Berchuck A: Distribution of integrin cell adhesion molecules in endometrial cancer. Am J Pathol 146:717–726, 1995

68 Lobb RR: Integrin-immunoglobulin superfamily interactions in endothelial-leukocyte adhesion. *In*: Adhesion. Its Role in Inflammatory Disease, ed. Harlan JM and Liu DY, pp. 1–18. WH Freeman and Co, New York, NY, 1992

69 Makgoba K, Sanders ME, Shaw S: The CD2-LFA-3 and LFA-1-ICAM-1 pathways—relevance to T cell recognition. Immunol Today 10:417–422, 1989

70 Mayadas TN, Johnson RC, Reyburn H, Hynes RO, Wagner DD: Leukocyte rolling and extravasation are severely compromised in P selectin-deficient mice. Cell 74:541–554, 1993

71 Mayer B, Johnson JP, Leitl F, Jauch KW, Heiss MM, Schildberg FW: E-cadherin expression in primary and metastatic gastric cancer: down-regulation correlates with cellular dedifferentiation and glandular disintegration. Cancer Res 53:1690–1695, 1993

72 McEver RP: GMP-140, a receptor that mediates interactions of leukocytes with activated platelets and endothelium. Trends Cardiovasc Med 1:152–156, 1991

73 Mendrick DL, Kelly DM, DuMont SS, Sandstrom DJ: Glomerular epithelial and mesangial cells differently modulate the binding specificities of VLA-1 and VLA-2. Lab Invest 72:367–375, 1995

74 Mileski WJ, Winn RK, Vedder NB, Pohlman TH, Harlan JM, Rice CL: Inhibition of CD18-dependent neutrophil adherence reduces organ injury after hemorrhagic shock in primates. Surgery 108:206–212, 1990

75 Moore KL, Patel KD, Breuhl RE, Fugang I, Johnson DA, Lichenstein HS, Cummings RD, Bainton DF, McEver RP: P-selectin glycoprotein ligand-1 mediates rolling of human neutrophils on P-selectin. J Cell Biol 128:661–671, 1995

76 Muller WA, Weigl SA, Deng X, Phillips DM: PE-CAM-1 is required for transendothelial migration of leukocytes. J Exp Med 178:449–460, 1993

77 Mulligan MS, Polley MJ, Bayer RJ, Nunn MF, Paulson JC, Ward PA: Neutrophil-dependent acute lung injury. Requirement for P-selectin (GMP-140). J Clin Invest 90:1600–1607, 1992

78 Nagahata H, Kehrli ME, Murata H, Okada H, Noda H, Kociba GJ: Neutrophil function and pathological findings in Holstein calves with leukocyte adhesion deficiency. Am J Vet Res 55:40–48, 1994

79 Nagahata H, Nochi H, Tamoto K, Noda H, Kociba GJ: Expression and role of adhesion molecule CD18 on bovine neutrophils. Can J Vet Res 59:1–7, 1995

80 Nakache M, Berg EL, Streeter PR, Butcher EC: The mucosal vascular addressin is a tissue specific endothelial cell adhesion molecule for circulating lymphocytes. Nature 337:179–181, 1989

81 Nelson RM, Cecconi O, Roberts WG, Aruffo A, Linhardt RJ, Bevilacqua MP: Heparin oligosaccharides bind L- and P-selectin and inhibit acute inflammation. Blood 82:3253–3258, 1993

82 Nickoloff BJ, Griffiths CEM, Barker JNWN: The role of adhesion molecules, chemotactic factors and cytokines in inflammatory and neoplastic skin disease—1990 update. J Invest Dermatol 94:151S–157S, 1990

83 Norton J, Sloane JP, Al-Saffar N, Haskard DO: Expression of adhesion molecules in human intestinal graft-versus-host disease. Clin Exp Immunol 87:231–236, 1992

84 O'Neill JK, Butter C, Baker D, Gschmeissner SE, Kraal G, Butcher EC, Turk JL: Expression of vascular addressins and ICAM-1 by endothelial cells in the spinal cord during chronic relapsing experimental allergic encephalomyelitis in the Biozzi AB/H mouse. Immunology 72:520–525, 1991

85 Orlando RA, Kerjaschki D, Kurihara H, Biemesderfer D, Farquhar MG: Gp330 associates with a 44-kDa protein in the rat kidney to form the Heymann nephritis antigenic complex. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 89:6698–6702, 1992

86 Osborn L: Leukocyte adhesion to endothelium in inflammation. Cell 62:3–6, 1990

87 Osborn L, Hession C, Tizard R, Vassallo C, Luhowskyj S, Chi-Rosso G, Lobb R: Direct expression cloning of vascular cell adhesion molecule 1, a cytokine-induced endothelial protein that binds to lymphocytes. Cell 59:1203–1211, 1989

88 Paulsen JC: Selectin/carbohydrate-mediated adhesion of leukocyte. *In*: Adhesion. Its Role in Inflammatory

Disease, ed. Harlan JM and Liu DY, pp. 19–42. WH Freeman and Co, New York, NY, 1992

89 Picker LJ, Kishimoto TK, Smith CW, Warnock RA, Butcher EC: ELAM-1 is an adhesion molecule for skin homing T cells. Nature 349:796–799, 1991

90 Racusen LC: Alterations in tubular epithelial cell adhesion and mechanisms of acute renal failure. Lab Invest 67:158–165, 1992

91 Rice GE, Munro JM, Bevilacqua MP: Inducible cell adhesion molecule 110 (INCAM-110) is an endothelial receptor for lymphocytes a CD11/CD18-dependent adhesion mechanism. J Exp Med 171:1369–1374, 1990

92 Rimm DL, Sinard JH, Morow JS: Reduced α-catenin and E-cadherin expression in breast cancer. Lab Invest 72:506–512, 1995

93 Ruoslahti E, Noble NA, Kagami S, Border WA: Integrins. Kidney Int 45:17–22, 1994

94 Ruoslahti E, Pierschbacher MD: New perspectives in cell adhesion: RGD and integrins. Science 238:491–497, 1987

95 Saito A, Pietromonaco S, Kwor-chieh Loo A, Gist Farquhar M: Complete cloning and sequencing of rat gp330/“megalin”, a distinctive member of the low density lipoprotein receptor gene family. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 91:9725–9729, 1994

96 Sako D, Chang XJ, Barone KM, Vachino G, White HM, Shaw G, Veldman KM, Bean KM, Athen TJ, Furie B, Cumming DA, Larsen GR: Expression cloning of a functional glycoprotein ligand for P-selectin. Cell 75:1179–1186, 1993

97 Sasseville VG, Newman WA, Lackner AA, Smith MO, Lausen NCG, Beall D, Ringler DJ: Elevated vascular cell adhesion molecule-1 in AIDS encephalitis induced by Simian immunodeficiency virus. Am J Pathol 141:1021–1030, 1992

98 Savage COS, Hughes CCW, Pepinsky RB, Wallner BP, Freedman AS, Pober JS: Endothelial cells lymphocyte function-associated antigen-3 and an unidentified ligand act in concert to provide costimulation to human peripheral blood CD4+ T cells. Cell Immunol 137:150–163, 1991

99 Schipper JH, Frixen UH, Behrens J, Unger A, Jahnke K, Birchmeier W: E-cadherin expression in squamous cell carcinomas of head and neck: inverse correlation with tumor differentiation and lymph node metastasis. Cancer Res 51:6328–6337, 1991

100 Shimizu Y, Shaw S, Graber N, Gopal TV, Horgan KJ, Van Seventer GA, Newman W: Activation-independent binding of human memory T cells to adhesion molecule ELAM-1. Nature 349:799–802, 1991

101 Shimizu Y, Van Seventer GA, Horgan KJ, Shaw S: Role of adhesion molecules in T cell recognition—fundamental similarities between four integrins on resting human T cells (LFA-1, VLA-4, VLA-5, VLA-6) in expression, binding and costimulation. Immunol Rev 114:109–143, 1990

102 Shiohara T, Moriya N, Gotoh C, Saizawa KH, Nagashima M: Locally administered monoclonal antibodies to lymphocyte function associated antigen-1 and L3T4

prevent cutaneous graft versus host disease. J Immunol 141:2261–2267, 1988

103 Smith CH, Barker JNWN, Morris RW, MacDonald DM, Lee TH: Neuropeptides induce rapid expression of endothelial cell adhesion molecules and elicit granulocytic infiltration in human skin. J Immunol 151:3274–3282, 1993

104 Sobel RA, Mitchell ME, Fondren G: Intercellular adhesion molecule-1 in cellular immune reactions in the human central nervous system. Am J Pathol 136:1309–1316, 1990

105 Steegmaler M, Levinovitz A, Isenmann S, Borges E, Lenter M, Kocher HP, Kleuser B, Vestweber D: The E-selectin-ligand ESL-1 is a variant of a receptor for fibroblast growth factor. Nature 373:615–620, 1995

106 Steinhoff G, Behrend M, Schrader B, Duijvestijn AM, Wonigeit K: Expression patterns of leukocyte adhesion ligand molecules on human liver endothelia. Am J Pathol 42:481–488, 1993

107 Stone JP, Wagner DD: P-selectin mediates adhesion of platelets to neuroblastoma and small cell lung cancer. J Clin Invest 92:804–813, 1993

108 Tedder TF, Steeber DA, Chen A, Engel P: The selectins: vascular adhesion molecules. Fed Am Soc Exp Biol 9:866–873, 1995

109 Trowald-Wigh G, Hakansson L, Johannisson A: Leukocyte adhesion protein deficiency in Irish Setter dogs. Vet Immunol Immunopathol 32:261–280, 1992

110 Vaporciyan AA, DeLisser HM, Yan HC, Mendiguren II, Thom SR, Jones ML, Ward PA, Albelda SM: Involvement of platelet-endothelial cell adhesion molecule-1 in neutrophil recruitment in vivo. Science 262:1580–1582, 1993

111 Vogel B, Tarone G, Giancotti FG, Gailit J, Ruoslahti E: A novel fibronectin receptor with an unexpected subunit composition (αv/β1). J Biol Chem 265:2934–2937, 1990

112 Vogetseder W, Feichtinger H, Schulz TF, Schwaeble W,

Tabaczewski P, Mitterer M, Block G, March C, Dapunt O, Mikuz G, Dierch MP: Expression of 7F7 antigen, a human adhesion molecule identical to intercellular adhesion molecule-1 (ICAM-1) in human carcinomas and their stromal fibroblasts. Int J Cancer 43:763–773, 1989

113 Volpes R, Van Den Oord JJ, Desmet VJ: Immunohistochemical study of adhesion molecules in liver inflammation. Hepatology 12:59–65, 1990

114 von Andrian UH, Chamber JD, McEvoy LM, Bargatze RF, Arfors KE, Butcher EC: Two-step model of leukocyte-endothelial cell interaction in inflammation: distinct roles for LECAM-1 and leukocyte β2 integrins in vivo. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 88:7538–7542, 1991

115 von Andrian UH, Hansell P, Chambers JD, Berger EM, Torres-Filho I, Butcher EC, Arfors KE: L-selectin function is required for β2-integrin-mediated neutrophil adhesion at physiological shear rates in vivo. Am J Physiol 263:1034H–1044H, 1992

116 Waldorf HA, Walsh LJ, Schenter NM, Morphy GF: Early cellular events in evolving cutaneous delayed hypersensitivity in humans. Am J Pathol 138:477–486, 1991

117 Walsh LJ, Lavker RM, Murphy GF: Determinants of immune cell trafficking in the skin. Lab Invest 5:592–600, 1990

118 Weetman AP, Cohen S, Makgoba MW, Borysiewicz LK: Expression of an intercellular adhesion molecule, ICAM-1, by human thyroid cells. J Endocrinol 122:185–191, 1989

119 Wegner CD, Gundel RH, Reilly P, Hayenes N, Letts LG, Rothlein R: Intercellular adhesion molecule-1 (ICAM-1) in the pathogenesis of asthma. Science 247:456, 1990

120 Williams AF, Barclay AN, Clark SJ, Paterson DJ, Willis AC: Similarities in sequences and cellular expression between rat CD2 and CD4 antigens. J Exp Med 165:368–380, 1987

121 Yager JA: The skin as an immune organ. Adv Vet Dermatol 2:3–31, 1993

Request reprints from Dr. C. S. Elangbam, Department of Pathology, WIL Research Laboratories, Inc., A Subsidiary of Great Lakes Chemical Corporation, 1407 George Road, Ashland, OH 44805 (USA).
