
Hormone Research

Jérôme Bertherat  
Clinique des Maladies Endocriniennes et Métaboliques, Hôpital Cochin, Paris, France  

---

Horm Res 1997;47:245–250  

# Nuclear Effects of the cAMP Pathway Activation in Somatotrophs  

---

### Key Words  
- Cyclic adenosine  
- 3′,5′-monophosphate  
- cAMP-responsive element-binding protein  
- Protein kinase A  
- Somatotrophs  
- Pituitary adenomas  
- Transcription  

---

### Abstract  
Activation of the cAMP pathway from the cell surface to the nucleus plays a major role in somatotroph differentiation and growth. This pathway is regulated mainly by the antagonistic hypothalamic hormones GHRH and somatostatin. Several pituitary-specific, as well as ubiquitous, expressed genes are regulated by cAMP in GH-secreting cells. Among them are the GH, GHF-1/Pit-1, c-fos and GHRH-receptor genes. Protein kinase A phosphorylation of Ser133 of the transcription factor cAMP-responsive element binding protein (CREB), seems to play a pivotal role in the activation of the cAMP pathway in normal and tumoral somatotrophs. The oncogenic activating mutations of the G-protein α subunit stimulate transcription and CREB phosphorylation in somatotroph cells. The implications of the nuclear targets of cAMP in the differentiation and growth of somatotrophs are discussed in this review.

---

The antagonistic hypothalamic neurohormones GHRH and somatostatin control both somatotroph function and growth. They act by binding to their specific membrane receptors and thus controlling the cAMP pathway. Upon activation by its ligand, the seven-transmembrane GHRH receptor stimulates adenylate cyclase through coupling with a heterotrimeric Gs protein [1]. On the other hand, the seven transmembrane somatostatin receptors inhibit adenylate cyclase activity [2]. To date, five somatostatin receptors have been cloned and each of these receptors has the capacity to inhibit adenylate cyclase activity [2]. cAMP is known to stimulate both GH secretion and GH gene expression, to play an important role in somatotroph differentiation and to stimulate somatotroph proliferation. In most tissues, cAMP usually induces cell differentiation and does not stimulate (or even inhibits) cell proliferation. This cAMP proliferative effect is in fact quite restricted to a few tissues, such as the pituitary and thyroid [3]. Activation of the cAMP pathway has also been implicated in pituitary somatotroph adenoma formation. cAMP is known to stimulate the cAMP-dependent protein kinase A (PKA), which in turn phosphorylates numerous cytoplasmic and nuclear substrates. One of the best characterized PKA nuclear substrates is the transcription factor cAMP-responsive element-binding protein (CREB), which stimulates transcription of cAMP-responsive genes after its phosphorylation by PKA [4]. This review summarizes what is currently known about the activation of the cAMP pathway at the nuclear level in somatotrophs and its implications in the differentiation and growth of this cell type.

---

KARGER  
E-Mail karger@karger.ch  
Fax +41 61 306 12 34  
http://www.karger.ch  

© 1997 S. Karger AG, Basel  
0301-0163/97/0476-0245$12.00/0  
This article is also accessible online at:  
http://BioMedNet.com/karger  

Jérôme Bertherat  
Clinique des Maladies Endocriniennes et Métaboliques  
Hôpital Cochin, 27, rue du Fg-St-Jacques  
F-75014 Paris (France)  
Tel. 33 (1) 42 34 15 03, Fax 33 (1) 46 33 80 60, E-Mail bertherat@icgm.cochin.inserm.fr

of the transmembrane domains or the G-protein-binding site. The Glu72Stop mutation is close to the mutation observed in the little mice (Asp60Gly) and this region is highly conserved. The restriction pattern in family members showed that both patients were homozygous for the mutation and confirmed heterozygosity in the unaffected parents of the probands.

GHRH was first purified from a pancreatic tumor responsible for acromegaly [10, 11]. Acromegalic patients with GHRH-secreting tumors usually exhibit somatotroph hyperplasia, although documented somatotroph adenoma has been reported [12–14]. GHRH is also expressed in somatotroph adenomas and could play an autocrine role in these tumors [15, 16]. GHRH induces somatotroph proliferation by a cAMP-dependent mechanism which can be inhibited by SRIH in primary culture of the rat anterior pituitary [17]. The proliferative effects of GHRH could be mediated by the proto-oncogene c-fos which is stimulated at the transcriptional level by GHRH [18]. In transgenic mice, overexpression of GHRH, or pituitary targeted expression of the adenylate cyclase activator, cholera toxin, induces pituitary hyperplasia with GH hypersecretion and gigantism [19, 20]. A somatic point mutation of the Gs-protein α-subunit gene (which is coupled to the GHRH receptor) is present in about 40% of the somatotroph adenomas [21, 22]. The Gas mutation (termed Gsp) leads to constitutive adenylate cyclase activation with an increased intracellular level of cAMP [21, 22]. Targeted expression of the Gsp oncogene to the thyroid leads to hyperfunctioning thyroid adenomas [23].

Following activation of adenylate cyclase by GHRH, intracellular cAMP levels increase leading to stimulation of the cAMP-dependent PKA which in turn phosphorylates numerous cytoplasmic and nuclear substrates [24]. On the other hand, as already mentioned, SRIH decreases adenylate cyclase activity through seven transmembrane receptors coupled to a Gi protein, and inhibits the GHRH-dependent positive regulation of PKA activity [24]. After PKA activation, the catalytic subunits of PKA dissociate from the regulatory subunits and can therefore enter the nucleus. The nuclear entry of PKA is a major determinant of transcriptional activation by cAMP [25]. Transcriptional regulation is a major step of the cAMP control of gene expression in somatotrophs. Transcription of eukaryotic genes depends upon *cis* elements and *trans*-acting factors. These *trans*-acting factors are nuclear proteins (or transcription factors) that bind the *cis*-acting elements present in the promoter or enhancer of a given gene, therefore controlling the transcriptional activity of this gene. Transcriptional regulation by cAMP of numer-

Fig. 1. Control of the cAMP pathway by extracellular signals in somatotrophs. GHRH and somatostatin (SRIH) bind to their respective seven transmembrane receptors, leading to activation of an heterotrimeric (α, β and γ subunit) G protein (respectively, Gs and Gi for GHRH and SRIH). Activation of G protein leads to dissociation of its α subunit from the β,γ complex. In the case of Gs this leads to stimulation of adenylate cyclase (AC) activity and therefore cAMP production. On the other hand, in the case of Gi activation, an inhibition of AC activity is observed.

cAMP Pathway in Somatotrophs: From the GHRH Receptor to the Nucleus (fig. 1)

Activation of the cAMP pathway by GHRH is mandatory for normal somatotroph growth and function. GHRH positively regulates the level of GH mRNA by stimulation of the GH gene transcription [5]. Interestingly, the expression of GHRH and its receptor coincides with activation of the GH gene [1, 6]. The importance of GHRH in somatotroph function is best illustrated in the genetically transmitted dwarfism observed in the little (lit/lit) mice. The little mice present with anterior pituitary hypoplasia due to loss of GH-expressing cells. This phenotype is explained by an inactivating point mutation of the GHRH receptor (GHRH-R) gene [7, 8]. This point mutation alters a single amino acid (Asp 60 to Gly) in the putative extracellular N-terminal domain of the GHRH receptor, leading to a defective receptor unable to elicit a cAMP response to GHRH. More recently, the first cases of human GHRH-R mutation causing profound GH deficiency were reported [9]. This mutation was observed in 2 children, members of a consanguineous family, presenting with severe growth failure and complete GH deficiency. They did not have a GH response to clonidine, insulin hypoglycemia as well as acute or prolonged GHRH treatment. A G → T transition at position 265 was found in both patients, resulting in a nonsense mutation (Glu72Stop). This Glu72Stop mutation results in a severely truncated GHRH-R, lacking any

Bertherat

ous eukaryotic genes is mediated through a consensus sequence (TGACGTCA) present in the proximal part of their promoter (*cis* elements) and termed the cAMP- response element (CRE). Three transcription factors (trans-acting factors) that bind the CRE and are phosphorylated by PKA after activation of the cAMP signal transduction pathway have been very well characterized: CREB, CRE modulator (CREM) and activating transcription factor 1 (ATF-1). They belong to the bZIP protein superfamily of transcription factors. CREB and ATF-1 are considered as transcriptional activators. The CREM gene generates numerous proteins by alternative splicing, promoter usage and translation initiation. Some of the products of the CREM gene are activators while others are transcriptional repressors. The transcription factor CREB is to date the best characterized PKA nuclear substrate which stimulates transcription of cAMP-responsive genes after activation of the cAMP pathway by extracellular signals [4]. PKA phosphorylates CREB at Ser133. There is a close correlation between Ser133 phosphorylation of CREB and transcription stimulation in response to cAMP. Phosphorylation of CREB induces its binding to the nuclear protein CREB-binding protein (CBP). CBP is a coactivator involved in the transmission of the inductive signal of several origins [26, 27].

Transgenic mice overexpressing an inactive mutant (unphosphorylatable by PKA) of CREB targeted to the pituitary exhibit a selective depletion of GH-expressing cells with pituitary hypoplasia and dwarfism [28]. Despite this observation, it should be noted that in vivo deletion of the CREB gene in transgenic mice does not lead to pituitary hypoplasia, probably because upregulation of the related transcription factor CREM and of a novel CREB mRNA isoform in these animals rescues CREB deficiency [29, 30]. Taking these data together it is suggested that not only cAMP can stimulate somatotroph proliferation but also that an intact cAMP pathway from the cell surface (GHRH receptor) to the nucleus (CREBs) is necessary for somatotroph proliferation and/or survival.

### cAMP-Regulated Gene in Somatotrophs (fig. 2)

Cell culture studies and experiments with transgenic mice have shown that efficient pituitary-specific gene expression of GH is mediated by sequences within 235 and 289 basepairs upstream of the transcription start site of the rat (rGH) and human (hGH) GH genes, respectively [31]. This proximal part of the hGH and rGH promoters contains two *cis*-acting elements, important for tissue-

---

**Fig. 2.** Transduction from the cell surface to the nucleus of the GHRH signal-regulating somatotroph-specific gene expression. The diagram summarizes the cAMP pathway controlling somatotroph-specific gene expression known to be important for cell differentiation and proliferation. Intracellular cAMP stimulates the cAMP-dependent protein kinase A (PKA) leading to dissociation of its catalytic (C) subunits from the regulatory (R) subunits. The catalytic subunit after translocation to the nucleus phosphorylates the transcription factor cAMP response element binding protein (CREB) which in turn activates transcription. Two genes (*c-Fos* and *Pit-1*) exhibiting cAMP-response element (CRE) containing promoter and stimulated by CREB are shown. The transcription factor Pit-1 will in turn activate the expression of the GH and GHRH receptor (GHRH-R) genes and also stimulate the expression of its own gene.

specific expression, which bind the homeobox transcription factor Pit-1/GHF-1 [32, 33]. Pit-1/GHF-1 is a potent transactivator of the GH promoter. This mechanism of transcriptional regulation of GH is well conserved in vertebrate evolution since sequences homologous to the mammal Pit-1/GHF-1-binding sites are also present in the rainbow trout GHII gene promoter, and cloning of the rainbow trout Pit-1/GHF-1 gene revealed a high homology with its mammal counterparts [34, 35]. Transcriptional regulation by Pit-1/GHF-1 is crucial for GH expression. This is suggested by the temporal pattern of Pit-1/GHF-1 expression during pituitary ontogeny [32, 33]. Furthermore the Snell and Jackson dwarf mice which carry a recessive rearrangement (Jackson) or point mutation (Snell) of the Pit-1/GHF-1 gene dramatically altering its

---

**cAMP and Somatotrophs**

**Horm Res 1997;47:245–250**
function present with somatotroph deficiency [36]. These mice exhibit pituitary hypoplasia with impairment of GH, PRL and TSH expression. This alteration of three different pituitary cell types is linked to the fact that Pit-1/GHF-1 binding sites have also been identified in the PRL and β-TSH promoters (the activity of these promoters is stimulated by Pit-1/GHF-1). Deleterious mutations of the Pit-1/GHF-1 gene have also been reported in patients with similar combined GH, TSH and PRL pituitary deficiency with growth retardation [37–39]. It should be noted that Pit-1/GHF-1 can also bind its own promoter, leading to positive autoregulation as frequently observed for a transcription factor involved in terminal differentiation.

The expression of the Pit-1/GHF-1 gene is stimulated by cAMP at the transcriptional level. The proximal part of the rPit-1/GHF-1 gene contains two canonical CREs able to bind CREB [40]. These two CREs mediate the cAMP stimulation of Pit-1/GHF-1 expression. In turn, Pit-1 regulates the expression of the GHRH receptor [1]. GHRH stimulates the expression of its own receptor [41]. This stimulation might be mediated by cAMP. Therefore the cAMP pathway in somatotrophs might be autoregulated through a positive regulatory loop. This loop might implicate CREB-dependent expression of the Pit-1 and GHRH receptors at the nuclear level.

Expression of the GH gene is also positively regulated by cAMP at the transcriptional level. The stimulatory effect of cAMP on the rGH and GH genes are mediated by the proximal 5′-flanking region. This cAMP-responsive region has been mapped between –104 and +11 bp of the transcription start site in the rGH promoter and within 212 bp upstream of the transcription start site in the hGH promoter [42, 43]. Nevertheless, the canonical CRE (TGACGTCA) is not found in these regions. This proximal part of the promoter contains binding sites for Pit-1/GHF-1 and this transcription factor has been implicated in the positive cAMP regulation of the GH gene. This regulation could occur through the well-documented stimulation of Pit-1/GHF-1 transcription by cAMP mediated by two canonical CREs present in the rat Pit-1/GHF-1 promoter and/or by PKA posttranslational modification of Pit-1/GHF-1 [40]. Nevertheless, PKA phosphorylation of Pit-1 does not seem crucial for GH gene expression regulation by cAMP [44]. Although, Pit-1/GHF-1-binding sites are important, additional elements seem to be required for full cAMP stimulation of the GH promoter [42, 43]. In the hGH promoter, two partial CREs (CGTCA) located at nucleotides, –187/–183 and –99/–95, have been shown to mediate the cAMP stimulation of the hGH promoter in cooperation with a Pit-1/GHF-1-binding site located at –123/–112 [43]. These two partial CREs bind members of the CREB/ATF-1-related family of transcription factors known to play a central role in cAMP regulation of gene expression [45].

# Transcriptional Regulation by the Oncogene Gsp

Functional expression of the constitutively activated mutant of Gas, termed Gsp, in somatotroph cells in culture induced CREB phosphorylation at Ser133. Gsp also stimulates CRE activity and CREB-dependent transcription [46]. Mutation of the Ser133 of CREB abolishes the transcriptional activation by Gsp. Furthermore, expression of a dominant inhibitory mutant of PKA also blocks the stimulation of gene expression by Gsp [47]. This suggests that the nuclear response to Gsp is mediated by PKA phosphorylation of the Ser133 of CREB. It is noteworthy that overexpression of the wild-type Gas is also able to stimulate CREB-dependent transcription and could therefore also be a mechanism potentially involved in tumorigenesis [46].

Gsp stimulates the transcription of several pituitary-specific genes. For instance, the transcription from the GH, PRL and GHF-1/Pit-1 promoter is stimulated by Gsp [46–48]. The activity of the α-subunit promoter is also stimulated in transfection experiments performed in somatotroph cells. This is interesting as expression of the α-subunit is frequently observed in somatotroph tumors, while it is not in normal mature GH cells. Gsp also stimulates the expression of some ubiquitous genes such as the proto-oncogene, c-fos. The transcription factors Pit-1 and c-fos are known to stimulate cell proliferation in a cell-specific and ubiquitous manner, respectively. Stimulation of Pit-1 and c-fos expression through CREB activation by Gsp might therefore be involved in somatotroph tumor formation. The stimulation of the transcription of the GH and α-subunit genes might take part in the phenotype of the tumors harboring the Gsp mutation. In keeping with the pivotal role of CREB in Gsp nuclear action, an increased Ser133 phosphorylation of CREB is observed in GH-secreting adenomas compared to nonfunctioning adenomas [46]. Nevertheless, the phosphorylation status of CREB is similar in tumors harboring the Gsp mutant and tumors with the wild-type Gas. This suggests that mechanisms other than Gsp mutation might be involved in CREB activation in somatotroph tumors. Overexpression of the wild-type Gas might be one of these potential mechanisms.
# Conclusions

Activation of the cAMP pathway from the cell surface to the nucleus plays a major role in normal and tumoral somatotroph cells. Several pituitary-specific as well as ubiquitously expressed genes are regulated by the cAMP pathway in GH-secreting cells. Among these genes are the GH, GHF-1/Pit-1, c-fos and the GHRH-R genes. CREB-dependent transcription seems to play a pivotal role in gene expression regulation by the cAMP pathway in normal and tumoral somatotrophs. Along with activating mutation of the Gas gene, other mechanisms might activate CREB in somatotroph tumors.

Identification of the mechanisms involved in activation of the cAMP pathway and the cAMP-regulated genes in somatotroph adenomas will give new insights into the pathogenesis of endocrine tumors.

## References

1. Lin C, Lin SC, Chang CP, Rosenfeld MG: Pit-1-dependent expression of the receptor for growth hormone releasing factor mediates pituitary cell growth. Nature 1992;360:765–768.
2. Reisine T, Bell GI: Molecular biology of somatostatin receptors. Endocr Rev 1995;16:427–442.
3. Parma J, Duprez L, Van Sande J, et al: Somatic mutations in the thyrotropin receptor gene cause hyperfunctioning thyroid adenomas. Nature 1993;365:649–651.
4. Brindle PK, Montminy MR: The CREB family of transcription activators. Curr Opin Genet Dev 1992;2:199–204.
5. Barinaga M, Yamonoto G, Rivier C, Vale W, Evans R, Rosenfeld MG: Transcriptional regulation of growth hormone gene expression by growth hormone-releasing factor. Nature 1983;306:84–85.
6. Ishikawa K, Katakami H, Jansson JO, Frohman LA: Ontogenesis of growth hormone-releasing hormone neurons in the rat hypothalamus. Neuroendocrinology 1986;43:537–542.
7. Godfrey P, Rahal JO, Beamer WG, Copeland NG, Jenkins NA, Mayo KE: GHRH receptor of little mice contains a missense mutation in the extracellular domain that disrupts receptor function. Nature Genet 1993;4:227–232.
8. Lin SC, Lin CR, Gukovsky I, Lusis AJ, Sawchenko PE, Rosenfeld MG: Molecular basis of the little mouse phenotype and implications for cell type-specific growth. Nature 1993;364:208–213.
9. Wajnrajch MP, Gerntner JM, Harbison MD, Chua SC, Leibel RL: Nonsense mutation in human growth hormone-releasing hormone receptor causes growth failure analogous to the little (lit) mouse. Nature Genet 1996;12:88–90.
10. Rivier J, Spiess J, Thorner M, Vale W: Characterization of a growth hormone-releasing factor from a human pancreatic islet tumor. Nature 1982;300:276–278.
11. Guillemin R, Brazeau P, Böhlen P, et al: Growth hormone-releasing factor from a human pancreatic tumor that caused acromegaly. Science 1982;218:585–587.
12. Ezzat S, Asa SL, Stefaneanu L, et al: Somatotroph hyperplasia without pituitary adenoma associated with a long standing growth hormone-producing bronchial carcinoid. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1994;78:555–560.
13. Bertherat J, Turpin G, Rauch C, Li JY, Epelbaum J, Sassolas G, Schaison G: Presence of somatostatin receptors negatively coupled to adenylate cyclase in ectopic growth hormone-releasing hormone (GHRH)- and α-subunit-secreting tumors from acromegalic patients responsive to octreotide. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1994;79:1457–1464.
14. Zimmerman D, Young WF, Ebersold MJ, et al: Congenital gigantism due to growth hormone excess and pituitary hyperplasia with adenomatous transformation. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1993;76:216–222.
15. Joubert DB, Benlot C, Lagoguey A, et al: Normal and growth hormone (GH)-secreting adenomatous human pituitaries release somatostatin and GH-releasing hormone. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1989;68:572–577.
16. Levy A, Lightman SL: Growth hormone transcripts in human pituitary adenomas. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1992;74:1474–1476.
17. Bilestrup N, Swanson LW, Vale W: Growth hormone-releasing factor stimulates proliferation of somatotrophs in vitro. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1986;83:6854–6857.
18. Bilestrup N, Mitchell RL, Vale W, Verma IM: Growth hormone-releasing factor induces c-fos expression in cultured primary pituitary cells. Mol Endocrinol 1987;1:300–305.
19. Mayo KE, Hammer RE, Swanson LW, Brinster RL, Rosenfeld MG, Evans RM: Dramatic pituitary hyperplasia in transgenic mice expressing a human growth hormone-releasing factor gene. Mol Endocrinol 1988;2:606–612.
20. Burton FH, Hasel KW, Bloom FE, Sutcliffe JG: Pituitary hyperplasia and gigantism in mice caused by a cholera toxin transgene. Nature 1991;350:74–77.
21. Vallar L, Spada A, Giannattasio G: Altered Gs and adenylate cyclase activity in human GH-secreting pituitary adenomas. Nature 1987;330:566–568.
22. Landis CA, Masters SB, Spada A, Pace AM, Bourne HR, Vallar L: GTPase inhibiting mutations activate the alpha chain of Gs and stimulate adenyl cyclase in human pituitary tumors. Nature 1989;340:692–696.
23. Michiels FM, Caillou B, Talbot M, et al: Oncogenic potential of guanine nucleotide stimulatory factor α subunit in thyroid glands of transgenic mice. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1994;91:10488–10492.
24. Bilezikjian LM, Erlichman J, Fleischer N, Vale W: Differential activation of type I and type II 3′,5′-cyclic adenosine monophosphate-dependent protein kinases by growth hormone-releasing factor. Mol Endocrinol 1987;1:137–146.
25. Hagiwara M, Brindle P, Harootunian A, Armstrong R, Rivier J, Vale W, Tsien R, Montminy MR: Coupling of hormonal stimulation and transcription via cyclic AMP-responsive factor CREB is rate limited by the nuclear entry of protein kinase A. Mol Cell Biol 1993;13:4852–4859.
26. Arias J, Alberts AS, Brindle P, et al: Activation of cAMP responsive genes relies on a common nuclear factor. Nature 1994;370:226–229.
27. Kwok RPS, Lundblad JR, Chrivia JC, et al: Nuclear protein CBP is a coactivator for the transcription factor CREB. Nature 1994;370:223–226.
28. Struthers RS, Vale W, Arias C, Sawchenko PE, Montminy MR: Somatotroph hypoplasia and dwarfism in transgenic mice expressing a nonphosphorylatable CREB mutant. Nature 1991;350:622–624.
29. Hummler E, Cole TJ, Blendy JA, et al: Targeted mutation of the CREB gene: compensation within the CREB/ATF family of transcription factors. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1994;91:5647–5651.
30. Blendy JA, Kaestner KH, Schmid W, Gass P, Schütz G: Targeting of the CREB gene leads to up-regulation of a novel CREB mRNA isoform. EMBO J 1996;15:1098–1106.

31 Lira SA, Kalla KA, Glass CK, Drolet DW, Rosenfeld MG: Synergic interactions between Pit-1 and other elements are required for effective somatotroph rat growth hormone gene expression in transgenic mice. Mol Endocrinol 1993;7:694–701.

32 Simmons DM, Voss JW, Ingraham HA, et al: Pituitary cell phenotype involve cell-specific Pit-1 mRNA translation and synergistic interactions with other classes of transcription factors. Genes Dev 1990;4:695–711.

33 Dolle P, Castrillo JL, Theill LE, Deerinck T, Ellisman M, Karin M: Expression of GHF-1 protein in mouse pituitaries correlates both temporally and spatially with the onset of growth hormone gene activity. Cell 1990;9:809–820.

34 Yamada S, Hata J, Yamashita S: Molecular cloning of fish Pit-1 cDNA and its functional binding to promoter of gene expressed in the pituitary. J Biol Chem 1993;268:24361–24366.

35 Argenton F, Vianello S, Bernardini S, et al: The transcriptional regulation of the growth hormone gene is conserved in vertebrate evolution. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 1993;192:1360–1366.

36 Li S, Crenshaw EB, Rawson EJ, Simmons DM, Swanson LW, Rosenfeld MG: Dwarf locus mutants lacking three pituitary cell types result from mutations in the POU-domain gene pit-1. Nature 1990;347:528–533.

37 Tatumi K, Miyai K, Notomi T, et al: Cretinism with combined hormone deficiency caused by a mutation in the PIT1 gene. Nature Genet 1992;1:56–58.

38 Pfaffle RW, DiMattia GE, Parks JS, et al: Mutation of the POU-specific domain of Pit-1 and hypopituitarism with pituitary hypoplasia. Science 1992;257:1118–1121.

39 Ohta K, Nobukuni Y, Mitsubuchi H, et al: Mutations in the Pit-1 gene in children with combined pituitary hormone deficiency. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 1992;2:851–855.

40 McCormick A, Brady H, Theill LE, Karin M: Regulation of the pituitary-specific homeobox gene GHF1 by cell-autonomous and environmental cues. Nature 1990;345:829–832.

41 Horikawa R, Hellman P, Cella S, Day R, Müller EE, Thoner O: Growth hormone-releasing hormone (GHRH) regulates expression of its own receptor (abstract OR39-2). 10th Int Congr Endocrinol, San Francisco, June 1996, p 119.

42 Copp RP, Samuels HH: Identification of an adenosine 3′,5′-monophosphate (cAMP)-response region in the rat growth hormone gene: Evidence for independent and synergistic effects of cAMP and thyroid hormone on gene expression. Mol Endocrinol 1989;3:790–796.

43 Shepard AR, Zhang W, Eberhardt NL: Two CGTCA motifs and a GHF1/Pit1 binding site mediate cAMP-dependent protein kinase A regulation of human growth hormone gene expression in rat anterior pituitary GC cells. J Biol Chem 1994;269:1804–1814.

44 Guterierrez-Hartmann A: Insight. Pit-1/GHF1: A pituitary-specific transcription factor linking general signalling pathways to cell-specific gene expression. Mol Endocrinol 1994;8:1447–1449.

45 Lalli E, Sassone-Corsi P: Signal transduction and gene regulation: The nuclear response to cAMP. J Biol Chem 1994;269:17359–17362.

46 Bertherat J, Chanson P, Montminy MR: The cAMP-response element binding protein (CREB) is constitutively activated in GH-secreting adenomas. Mol Endocrinol 1995;9:777–783.

47 Gaiddon C, Mercken L, Bancroft C, Loeffler JP: Transcriptional effects in GH3 cells of Gsa mutants associated with human pituitary tumors: Stimulation of adenosine 3′,5′-monophosphate response element and growth hormone promoter activity via protein kinase A. Endocrinology 1995;136:4331–4338.

48 Tian J, Chen J, Bancroft C: Expression of constitutively active Gs α-subunits in GH3 pituitary cells stimulates prolactin promoter activity. J Biol Chem 1994;269:33–36.
