
J. Membrane Biol. 159, 99–111 (1997)

The Journal of  
Membrane  
Biology  
© Springer-Verlag New York Inc. 1997

---

**Topical Review**

**Signal Transduction and Activation of Acid Secretion in the Parietal Cell**

T. Urushidani${}^{1}$ John G. Forte${}^{2}$

${}^{1}$Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, The University of Tokyo, Hongo, Bunkyo, 113, Japan  

${}^{2}$Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of California, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA  

Received: 7 April 1997

---

### Introduction

Parietal Cells Secrete HCl by Translocation and Recruitment of the Gastric Proton Pump, H${}^{+}$,K${}^{+}$-ATPase

Gastric acid secretion has long fascinated physiologists, cell biologists and biochemists because of many attractive riddles in the field. Pure gastric juice, secreted by the parietal cell, contains highly concentrated hydrochloric acid, with pH as low as 0.8, that is, the established proton gradient is greater than 4 million times that in the blood stream. The origin and mechanism of how this gigantic electrochemical potential can be formed and maintained has been extensively studied. Also the hormonal and neural regulation of acid secretion, especially the role of histamine as a final common mediator, had been focus of much debate (Black, 1993). In this review we will concentrate on the intracellular events that couple the stimulus to activation of the parietal cell.

The parietal cell is considered to have at least three types of activating receptors on its basolateral membrane, i.e., histamine H${}_{2}$, acetylcholine M${}_{3}$, and gastrin CCK${}_{\mathrm{B}}$, although much of the action of acetylcholine or gastrin is mediated by the release of endogenous histamine. It is believed that the H${}_{2}$ receptor couples to Gs to activate adenylate cyclase (ACase) producing adenosine 3',5'-cyclic monophosphate (cAMP) and subsequent activation of cAMP-dependent protein kinase (PKA),

whereas both M${}_{3}$- and CCK${}_{\mathrm{B}}$-type receptors couple to non-Gs/Gi systems, probably Gq, to activate phospholipase C (PLC) producing inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate (IP${}_{3}$) and diacylglycerol, with the former releasing Ca${}^{2+}$ from intracellular stores, and the latter activating protein kinase C (PKC). This scheme is consistent with the knowledge obtained from many types of cells. The target of our interest, as unique events in the parietal cell, is focused in this brief review on the downstream reactions forming the PKA-, PKC-, or Ca${}^{2+}$-pathways of activation.

The final step of HCl production is operated by the gastric proton pump, the H${}^{+}$,K${}^{+}$-ATPase. This enzyme was first discovered by Forte, Forte & Saltman (1967) as a ouabain-resistant K${}^{+}$-stimulated phosphatase activity, and later shown as a K${}^{+}$-stimulated ATPase common to the vertebrate stomach (Forte et al., 1975). Recent progress in molecular biology has revealed that the enzyme consists of a catalytic α-subunit of approximately 100 kDa molecular size and a highly glycosylated β-subunit (Chow & Forte, 1995), and shows striking similarity to another P-type cation pump, the Na${}^{+}$,K${}^{+}$-ATPase. The gastric enzyme uses the energy of ATP for the electroneutral countertransport of H${}^{+}$ for K${}^{+}$, in contrast to the Na${}^{+}$,K${}^{+}$-ATPase which is obviously electrogenic. As shown in Fig. 1, the function of the gastric proton pump is under dual-restriction while the parietal cell is in the resting state, i.e., the enzyme is sequestered within a population of cytoplasmic vesicles called tubulovesicles spatially insulating them from the gastric lumen, and the low permeability of tubulovesicular membranes to KCl limits the turnover of the pump even through there is ample ATP around the enzyme. Activation of acid secretion is achieved by two concomitant functional changes, namely, (i) tubulovesicles fuse with the apical

---

Correspondence to: J.G. Forte

Key words: Parietal cell—Acid secretion—Signal transduction—Cytoskeleton—Protein phosphorylation—Membrane fusion

T. Urushidani and J.G. Forte: Parietal Cell Signal Transduction

Resting                                                                                     Stimulated

Fig. 1. Schematic representation of parietal cells at rest and under stimulation. In the resting state, H⁺,K⁺-ATPase is sequestered within cytoplasmic vesicles called tubulovesicles, and the low permeability of tubulovesicular membranes to KCl limits the turnover of the pump even though there is ample ATP around the enzyme (left). Activation of acid secretion is achieved by two concomitant functional changes, namely, tubulovesicles fuse with the apical secretory membrane thus recruiting functional pumps to the expanded microvillar surface and the apical membrane acquires a permeability to KCl (right).

the expanded microvillar surface (Forte, Machen & Forte, 1977) and (ii) the apical membrane acquires a permeability to KCl (Wolosin & Forte, 1984; Forte et al., 1990; Forte & Yao, 1996). In other words, the pump molecule itself is not activated during the activation of acid secretion. Although two potential phosphorylation sites for PKA exist in the α-subunit (Maeda, Ishizaki, & Futai, 1988), and both Tyr⁷ and Tyr¹⁰ are shown to be phosphorylated by an unidentified membrane-bound kinase (Togawa et al., 1995), their role in enzymatic activity is unclear at present. It is thus concluded that the intracellular signal transduction pathways should be connected to the machinery leading to the fusion of tubulovesicles with the apical membrane and to the activation of apical K⁺ and Cl⁻ transporters.

### Activation of PKA is the Main Pathway in the Secretory Cascade

There is a consensus that histamine, the main stimulant for the acid secretory cascade, stimulates H₂ receptors to activate Gs coupled with adenylate cyclase leading to the production of cAMP to PKA. Although some receptors other than H₂ have been shown to couple with Gs in the parietal cell (Yokotani et al., 1994; Ota et al., 1989; Schepp et al., 1992), they may have a minimal physiological role. There are two types of PKA: type I and II with different regulatory subunits, RI and RII, respectively, and it has been postulated that the former is predominantly cytosolic, whereas the latter associates with the cytoskeleton or membranes. Chew (1985) first reported that type I kinase was selectively activated by

postulated that histamine also could activate PLC to produce IP₃, especially in the highly purified rabbit parietal cell (Chew & Brown, 1987a), suggesting that the H₂ receptor couples to PLC as well as to ACase (DelValle et al., 1992b). However, this hypothesis cannot explain why phosphodiesterase inhibitors or forskolin induce increments of Ca²⁺ in the parietal cell (Chew, 1986; Chew & Brown, 1987a). An alternative explanation might assume putative PKA-activated Ca²⁺ channels and compartmentalization of the components. We recently observed that histamine and forskolin elicited H89-sensitive, [Ca²⁺]₀-dependent, increase of [Ca²⁺]ᵢ in rabbit parietal cells. Although dbcAMP failed to reproduce this phenomenon, the more powerful analogue, Sp-adenosine 3′,5′-cyclic monophosphothioate produced a late onset but large and long lasting Ca²⁺ influx (Urushidani, Muto, & Nagao, 1996). These data could be interpreted by a compartmentalization model in which the direct (forskolin) or indirect (H₂) activation of ACase could effectively raise the local concentration of cAMP in the vicinity of the putative Ca²⁺ influx channel to induce full phosphorylation and opening. In contrast, exogenously added cAMP analogues would only produce a uniform but slight increase in the level of cAMP throughout the cell. However, this issue seems to be more complex since a recent report suggests that the canine H₂ receptor, which does not induce a Ca²⁺-response, activated PLC via an unknown GTP-dependent mechanism (Wang, Gantz, & DelValle, 1996).

with low levels of agonist elicited a repetitive transient rise (oscillation) in [Ca]ᵢ (DelValle et al., 1992a). CCK-induced [Ca²⁺]ᵢ-oscillations have also been observed in the Chinese hamster ovary cells transfected with cloned human CCKB-receptor (Akagi, Nagao & Urushidani, 1997). It seems therefore that the ability to produce [Ca²⁺]ᵢ-oscillation is inherent to the CCKB receptor as also reported for the CCKA receptor (Yule et al., 1993), however, histamine at the maximal dose and carbachol at a threshold dose both elicited [Ca²⁺]ᵢ oscillations in cultured rabbit parietal cells (Ljungström & Chew, 1991). The mechanism as well as the physiological meaning of [Ca²⁺]ᵢ oscillation is considered to be an interesting target for future study.

There could be two possible modes of action for Ca²⁺, i.e., Ca²⁺ by itself and via the activation of calmodulin. There are at least seven calmodulin-dependent protein kinases, i.e., myosin light chain kinase (MLCK), phosphorylase kinase, and calmodulin kinases I to V (CaMKI-V). Pharmacological data have suggested that CaMKII is involved in the activation process via the M₃-receptor, since the CaMKII inhibitor KN62 preferentially inhibited carbachol-stimulated, but not histamine-simulated, aminopyrine accumulation in rabbit parietal cells (Tsunoda et al., 1992). We recently reported (Urushidani et al., 1997) the potential involvement of MLCK in the activation of acid secretion especially in the translocation of tubulovesicles which will be discussed later. Among the many potential targets other than calmodulin, calpain, a Ca²⁺-dependent neutral protease, might be involved in parietal cell function (Yao, Thibodeau, & Forte, 1993), especially through its preference to cytoskeletal components including ezrin, which will be discussed later. Another cytoskeleton-related protein, gelsolin, is known to sever filamentous actin (F-actin) in a Ca²⁺-dependent manner. A recent report has suggested the possible involvement of gelsolin in parietal cell function, especially in reorganization of the cytoskeleton during stimulation of the cell (Urushidani, Muto & Nagao, 1997). Beside the proteins with EF-hand structure, there is a protein family, the annexins, which show a common property of Ca²⁺-dependent binding to phospholipids (for review, Creutz, 1992). The most productive speculation is that annexins are involved in the fusion process of the tubulovesicles as in the case of chromaffin cells where annexin II (Regnouf et al., 1996), or VII (Caohuy, Srivastava & Pollard, 1996) mediate vesicular fusion in a Ca²⁺- and phosphorylation-dependent manner. Despite their predicted significance in the common secretory machinery, studies on the annexins in parietal cell biology are few (Urushidani & Nagao, 1997). Another Ca²⁺ and phospholipid-dependent enzyme, PKC, will be discussed in the next section.

PKC Has Both an Inhibitory and Facilitatory Role in Acid Secretion

There have been several controversial reports concerning the physiological role of PKC in the activation of acid secretion. Early studies reported that activation of PKC by phorbol esters exclusively showed inhibition of acid secretion (Muallem et al., 1986). In other studies, however, it was found that phorbol ester weakly stimulated acid secretion by itself, like carbachol (Chew, Zhou & Parente, 1997; Brown & Chew, 1986; Chiba et al., 1989), and it potentiated the stimulatory effect of dbcAMP (Brown & Chew, 1986). The bulk of evidence seems to favor the view that activation of PKC is inhibitory to stimulated secretion before PKA activation, e.g., activation of PKC by phorbol esters attenuated the responses to receptor-mediated agonists as well as to forskolin (Brown & Chew, 1986; Muallem et al., 1986), but not to dbcAMP (Brown & Chew, 1986; Nandi, Crockett, & Levine, 1994). On the other hand, acid secretion was augmented when PKC was inhibited, either directly by drugs such as H7 (Nandi, Crockett, & Levine, 1994; Urushidani & Nagao, 1996) and Ro31-8220 (Chew, Zhou & Parente, 1997), or indirectly by nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs (Nandi, Crockett, & Levine, 1994). Although there could be some involvement of somatostatin release from D cells (Chiba et al., 1987), receptor downregulation by PKC activation (Chiba et al., 1989) seems to be the most feasible mechanism for inhibition of the receptor-mediated route, and this has been supported by recent works describing that phosphorylation by PKC triggers receptor desensitization and downregulation (for review, Chuang et al., 1996). However, the fact that phorbol esters inhibit forskolin-induced acid secretion suggests there may be an additional site of action beyond adenylate cyclase. The regulation of adenylate cyclase activity by phosphorylation is complex (Sunahara, Dessauer, & Gilman, 1996). For example, phosphorylation of adenylate cyclase by PKC has been reported to be either inhibitory or stimulatory depending upon the subtype of the enzyme. It is also possible that the site of PKC action is beyond cAMP, since the cAMP-stimulated response was augmented by H7, an inhibitor of PKC (Nandi, Crockett, & Levine, 1994) and phorbol ester was found to inhibit the secretion stimulated by a phosphoprotein phosphatase inhibitor (Urushidani & Nagao, 1996). As the subtype of PKC in the parietal cell has recently been established (Chew, Zhou & Parente, 1997), the actual site of action of PKC will likely be elucidated in the near future.

Inhibitory Receptors Serve as Feedback Regulators of Acid Secretion

Receptors involving direct inhibition of acid secretion include somatostatin, prostaglandins (PGs), epidermal growth factor (EGF)/transforming growth factor (TGFα). Other endogenous antisecretory factors are considered to elicit their effects, directly or indirectly, on sites other than parietal cell, e.g., blood flow or alkaline secretion. Although it was shown that the activation of adenosine A1 receptors on the parietal cell led to an inhibition of acid secretion (Gerber & Payne, 1988), possibly via Gi, the physiological meaning of the receptor is presently unclear.

Somatostatin is considered to be one of the most important endogenous modulators of gastric acid secretion. Most of the inhibitory activity of somatostatin can be attributed to its wide inhibitory profile on the neuroendocrine system, although direct inhibition on the parietal cell also occurs. In an early report, somatostatin was shown to inhibit acid secretion stimulated by histamine, but not by dbcAMP, cholera toxin, or carbachol in rabbit gastric glands and parietal cells (Chew, 1983a). Inhibition of histamine-stimulated secretion by somatostatin was attenuated by pertussis toxin (Park, Chiba, & Yamada, 1987; Schepp et al., 1992), leading to the postulate that inhibition by somatostatin is on ACase via Gi. However, some additional mechanism might be necessary to interpret the results that somatostatin also inhibits dbcAMP-, carbachol- and gastrin-induced acid secretion in canine parietal cells (Park, Chiba, & Yamada, 1987), and this might be explained by multiple signals dependent on the receptor subtypes, 5 of which have been cloned and analyzed so far (Reisine, 1995).

In the case of PGs there appears to be a consensus that the inhibitory action, mainly PGE₂ (Seidler, Beinborn, & Sewing, 1989), is specific for histamine-stimulated secretion by inhibiting ACase via Gi (Chen, et al., 1988; Schepp et al., 1992). Among the 4 cloned PG-receptors, only EP3 is known to couple with Gi (Coleman, Smith, & Narumiya, 1994). It is therefore reasonable to postulate EP3 as the parietal cell subtype, and its mRNA was recently demonstrated to be dominant in murine parietal cells by in situ hybridization (Sugimoto et al., 1997).

For EGF/TGFα receptors, the situation is more complicated. It has been postulated that EGF and its homologue TGFα play important roles as endogenous modulators of gastric acid secretion as well as in the mitotic regulation of gastric epithelial cells (for review, Barnard et al., 1995). EGF/TGFα appears to modulate parietal cell functions in an autocrine-like manner, since it has been shown that mRNA for both TGFα and its receptor colocalize within the parietal cell (Beauchamp et al., 1989). Setting aside the observation that chronic treatment with EGF enhances acid production of cultured parietal cells (Chew, Nakamura, & Petropoulos, 1994), stimulation of EGF receptor has been consistently shown to inhibit histamine-stimulated acid secretion through Gi (Atwell & Hanson, 1988; Lewis et al., 1990; Chew, Na-

kamura, & Petropoulos, 1994). However, this does not explain the inhibitory action of EGF on carbachol-stimulated secretion, which might be mediated by the activation of tyrosine kinases (Tsunoda, Modlin, & Goldenring, 1993; Chew, Nakamura, & Petropoulos, 1994). A recent report (Wang et al., 1996) suggested that activation of PKC, possibly PKCα and β1 isoforms, by EGF was the main pathway of the inhibition. Therefore, this argument is to be joined with the above mentioned, controversial PKC story, in which PKC was postulated to be an inhibitory signal. If EGF is able to activate PKC via tyrosine kinase, the most feasible pathway is via activation of PLCγ producing IP₃ and diacylglycerol (Reynolds et al., 1993). However, this pathway generates messages quite similar to those mediated by the M₃ receptor (i.e., activation of PLCβ producing IP₃ and diacylglycerol), thus, EGF would be an expected agonist as effective as carbachol. Interestingly, EGF alone was shown to cause a transient stimulation of acid secretion as carbachol did (Lewis et al., 1990), while it did not affect the concentration of intracellular Ca²⁺ either in the resting parietal cell or those stimulated by carbachol (Lewis et al., 1990, Wang et al., 1996). Although the situation is chaotic at present, analysis of EGF effects appears to be an attractive area for continued work since it might provide some insight into the crosstalk within the parietal cell among PKA, PKC, tyrosine kinases and phosphatases (Tsunoda, Modlin, & Goldenring, 1993; Chew, Nakamura, & Petropoulos, 1994), and MAP-kinase (Nakamura et al., 1996) pathways.

From a different point of view, inhibitory signals could be mediated by the action of phosphoprotein phosphatases as the activation of acid secretion is ultimately mediated by serine/threonine kinases. Although it was suggested that phosphoprotein phosphatase I has a regulatory role in parietal cell activation (Goldenring et al., 1992; Urushidani & Nagao, 1996), there is no known mediator or direct activator of phosphatase, except for an early report suggesting that somatostatin may be a phosphatase activator (Reyl & Lewin, 1982).

activity in vitro due to its protonophoretic action and not due to the inhibition of kinase (Mamiya et al., 1993). We recently found that U73343, a negative control of PLC inhibitor, U73122, was also a protonophore (Muto, Nagao, & Urushidani, 1997). Screening of various drugs has revealed some protonophoretic action of the following agents near the respective ED50 for inhibiting the putative target: ML7 and ML9, MLCK inhibitors; ONO-RS-082, a PLA2 inhibitor; and H89, a PKA inhibitor. Furthermore, the following showed some inhibitory action on H⁺,K⁺-ATPase: neomycin, a PLC inhibitor; and ONO-RS-082, a PLA2 inhibitor (Sugita, Nagao, & Urushidani, preparation). This apparent widespread susceptibility to nonspecific effects demands that investigators be circumspect in using and interpreting results with inhibitors.

### The Search for Substrates of Parietal Cell Kinases

Activation of PKA, PKC, or calmodulin-dependent kinase(s) inevitably transduces its signal via the phosphorylation of some endogenous components, thus it is important to identify the substrate(s) for each kinase. Table 1 summarizes the candidate substrates for the kinases categorized into PKA and Ca²⁺/PKC. Most of the proteins in the table were identified on the basis of increased labeling of a spot or band on an electrophorogram from stimulated parietal cells labeled with radioactive phosphate, although a few cases, e.g., the Cl⁻ channel, were identified by functional analysis. Recently, a convenient and effective model using α-toxin permeabilized gastric glands was developed (Thibodeau, Yao & Forte, 1994). As this is the only permeabilized model that is directly responsive to second messenger-mediated stimulation, it should be a useful tool for detecting putative substrates for kinases (Yao et al., 1996). Most of the candidate substrates for the Ca²⁺/PKC pathway are phosphoproteins with no specified function, whereas many of those for the PKA pathway have been correlated with physiological functions. There has been some recent progress on the nature of KCl transporters involved in activating the acid secretory process. A chloride channel of 99 kDa, whose conductance was increased by PKA, has been cloned from a parietal cell cDNA library (Malinowska et al., 1995). Also, an 18 kDa substrate for PKA has reportedly endowed potassium conductance to isolated gastric microsomes (Sack, 1993), although this protein has not yet been purified or further characterized. For the stimulation-associated membrane transformations between cytoplasmic tubulovesicles and apical plasma membrane, the most feasible and likely candidates are cytoskeletal proteins and docking/fusing proteins. Among them, ezrin, a putative membrane-cytoskeletal linker phosphoprotein, is an attractive candidate as a downstream effector.

### Pharmacological Agents May Have Nonspecific Effects on Proton Pump and Leak

A large part of the argument supporting any signal transduction pathway is dependent on pharmacological studies using various inhibitors. Interpretation of these results is totally dependent on the specificity of the agent to its targeted component in the pathway. In the case of gastric acid secretion there are additional pitfalls in the possibility that the inhibitor might alter the measured proton gradient via some action as a protonophore, or by a direct effect on the proton pump. It was reported that KN-93, a CaMKII inhibitor, was a potent antisecretory

Table. Candidates of substrates for kinases in the parietal cell

| M.W. | Reference | Identification | Function |
|------|-----------|---------------|----------|
| 130K | Cuppoletti & Malinowska, 1988 | Vinculin | Regulation of cytoskeleton? |
| 120K | Urushidani, Hanzel, & Forte, 1987 | Not identified | Kinase? |
| 99K | Malinowska et al., 1995 | ClC family | PKA-activated Cl channel |
| 80K | Urushidani, Hanzel, & Forte, 1987 | Ezrin | Membrane-cytoskeletal linker, AKAP |
| 52K | Goldenring, et al., 1992 | PKA-RII | Dephosphorylation leads to stimulation |
| 40K | Chew & Brown, 1987b | Not identified | PKA substrate? |
| 30K | Oddsdottir et al., 1988 | Not identified | Identical to 27K? |
| 27K | Chew & Brown, 1987 | Not identified | Identical to 30K? |
| 18K | Sack, 1993 | Kayletin | K⁺-transporter? |

Ca²⁺/PKC

| M.W. | References | Identification | Function |
|------|------------|---------------|----------|
| 100K | Oddsdottir, et al., 1987<br>Mayer et al., 1994 | Not identified | CaMKIII substrate |
| 80K | Chew, Zhou, & Parente, 1997 | Ezrin | (PKC inhibitor sensitive) |
| 66K | Brown & Chew, 1989 | Not identified | PKC substrate, cytoskeletal localization |
| 50K | Mayer et al., 1994 | CaMKII α subunit |  |
| 40K | Urushidani & Nagao, 1997 | SuccinylCoA synthetase? |  |
| 36K | Brown & Chew, 1989 | Not identified | PKC substrate |
| 28K | Parente et al., 1996 | CSPP28 | (Ubiquitous distribution) |

Ezrin Serves as a Membrane-Cytoskeletal Linker in the Apical Pole of Parietal Cells

Ezrin was identified as an 80 kDa apical membrane protein whose phosphorylation was increased when parietal cells were stimulated via the PKA pathway (Urushidani, Hanzel, & Forte, 1986; 1989). Subsequently (Hanzel et al., 1991), the protein was found to be identical to ezrin, the microvillar core protein (Bretscher, 1983), which was also found to be a substrate for tyrosine kinase in A431 cells stimulated by EGF (Gould et al., 1986).

From the early stages of its identification, the physiological role of ezrin has been postulated to be related to the cytoskeleton. In the parietal cell, it was recovered in the cytoskeletal fraction by biochemical procedures (Urushidani, Hanzel & Forte, 1989) and found to be colocalized with F-actin by immunocytochemistry (Hanzel et al., 1989; 1991). Ezrin was also richly represented in a variety of microvilli and in the villial membrane rufflings of cultured cells (Gould et al., 1986; Pakkanen et al., 1987). Based on cDNA sequence homology ezrin is classified as a member of the ezrin/radixin/moesin/merlin (ERM) family of proteins, which all belong to the much larger band 4.1 superfamily of cytoskeletal-membrane linker proteins (Gould et al., 1989; Sato et al., 1992). This was further confirmed by recent expression studies. Algrain et al. (1993) showed that full length ezrin expressed in CV-1 cells colocalized with F-actin with partial solubility to detergent; whereas, expressed N-terminal ezrin behaved as membrane protein and ex-pressed C-terminal ezrin colocalized with F-actin with perfect resistance to detergent. Furthermore, Turunen, Wahlstrom and Vaheri (1994) showed that the actin binding domain existed within the C-terminal 34 amino acids.

Many investigators had observed that purified ezrin scarcely binds to F-actin in vitro, contradictory to the observations in vivo (Bretscher, 1983). Our own early studies found only weak binding capacity of ezrin to F-actin prepared from skeletal muscle, undermining the conclusion that ezrin was an actin-binding protein. More recent observations by Yao, Cheng, & Forte (1996) and by Shuster and Hermann (1995) demonstrated that the binding of ezrin to F-actin is actin-isotype-specific, that is, the affinity is much higher for cytoplasmic β-actin rather the α-skeletal muscle isoform. Interestingly, the phosphorylation of ezrin does not seem to be essential for binding to actin, but one study suggests that phosphorylation may augment the binding to the cytoskeleton (Hanzel, et al., 1991). This could explain how bundles of microfilaments within microvilli might be stabilized by phospho-ezrin and why the binding complex could not be formed in the early experiments using α-actin. An apparent contradiction to this ezrin-actin isotype specificity is that the C-terminal portion of bacterially expressed ezrin effectively binds to α-actin, whereas full length ezrin does not (Turunen, Wahlstrom, & Vaheri, 1994). It is conceivable that the N-terminus conveys structural and isotypic specificity to the C-terminal binding site. However, based on the interactive tendencies

T. Urushidani and J.G. Forte: Parietal Cell Signal Transduction

they observed for the C-terminal and N-terminal domains of ezrin and its family members, Gary and Bretscher (1995) have proposed an alternative explanation. They argue that ezrin readily forms head-to-tail homodimers preventing (or regulating) access of the actin-binding (C-terminal) or membrane-associating (N-terminal) sites, and further that ezrin monomer exists in a form in which the C-terminal interactive domain is masked by a folding that partially obscures the N-terminal interactive domain. Given these “stick” tendencies the key, of course, is how can ezrin be regulated to effect the appropriate cytoskeletal and membrane interactions in vivo. Phosphorylation is one possible modification to expose binding sites. Purified gastric ezrin contains multiple phospho-isoforms, even in the resting state, and phosphorylation is enhanced with stimulation (Urushidani, Hanzel & Forte, 1989; Yao et al., 1995; Chen, Cohn, & Mandel, 1995). An alternative explanation comes from Shuster & Herman (1995) who proposed that the preferential binding of ezrin to β-actin filaments is promoted by an intermediary protein, possibly a 73 kDa peptide they saw in the binding assay. Furthermore, they observed that the cleavage of ezrin by calpain abolishes the actin binding ability. It is clear that the mechanisms of ezrin-actin interaction and its regulation are complex and more information is necessary for a complete picture.

The membrane binding domain of ezrin is in the N-terminal region. Niggli et al. (1995) showed that the N-terminal portion, 1-309, interacted with liposomes, and that the interaction was most prominent to phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate (PIP₂). It was reported that the binding of ERM proteins to CD44, a putative binding partner, was strengthened by PIP₂, and a potential involvement of the small GTP-binding protein, Rho, in this system was suggested (Hirano et al., 1996). In analogy with other cytoskeletal proteins, it is possible that membrane recruitment in the parietal cell is regulated with phosphoinositide turnover through the linking of ezrin between the cytoskeleton and plasma membrane.

Ezrin has recently been reported to have activity as an A-kinase anchoring protein (AKAP). Using gels overlaid with RII regulatory subunit, Dransfield, Bradford, & Goldenring (1995) found two parietal cell proteins, 78 kDa and 120 kDa, with AKAP activity. Subsequently, the 78 kDa protein was found to be ezrin (Dransfield et al., 1997), and they postulated a putative RII binding site in ezrin, in the region of α-helix between 417 and 433, which is conserved in radixin and moesin. These authors also showed that RII was redistributed from cytosol to canalicular membrane when the parietal cell was stimulated. This is an interesting example of compartmentalization in which an important substrate binds its corresponding kinase on the cytoskeleton; the exact role for specific ezrin/RII association remains to be determined.


Also of interest is the recent finding of the potential involvement of MLCK in the role of ezrin. A new antiulcer drug, ME3407, with inhibitory activities on MLCK and PKA, was found to strongly inhibit the stimulation-associated translocation of tubulovesicles containing H⁺,K⁺-ATPase and to alter the distribution of ezrin (Urushidani et al., 1997). Possible involvement of MLCK was further supported by the observation that wortmannin, in the concentration range inhibitory to MLCK, produced results similar to ME3407 with respect to the effects on translocation of tubulovesicles and distribution of ezrin (Urushidani et al., 1997). Because of its strict substrate specificity, it is reasonable to suppose that inhibition of MLCK interferes with actomyosin interaction, e.g., cytoskeletal-membrane locomotion. Myosin I has been suggested as a motor for vesicles derived from the Golgi apparatus moving toward the apical membrane in chick intestinal cell (Fath & Burgess, 1993). As myosin-I has been identified in rabbit parietal cells (Yao & Forte, 1996), the role for myosin motors in the acid secretory process is an interesting issue.

### Phosphorylation of Ezrin is Correlated with Gastric Acid Secretion

Although the precise mechanism is still unknown, it appears that ezrin interacts with the cytoskeleton in a phosphorylation-dependent manner. For example, dephosphorylation of ezrin occurs during the destruction of microvilli induced by ischaemia in renal cells (Chen, Cohn, & Mandel, 1995). In the parietal cell, striking morphological changes, such as depicted in Fig. 1, and the phosphorylation of ezrin are both correlated with the stimulation of acid secretion via the PKA activation pathway. Recent work with inhibitors of phosphoprotein phosphatase serve to emphasize the functional importance of these correlations.

When rabbit gastric glands were treated with calyculin A, an inhibitor of protein phosphatase I and II, acid secretion was strongly stimulated, whereas okadaic acid, an inhibitor of phosphatase II, did not show such an effect (Urushidani & Nagao, 1996). It was thus suggested that phosphorylation by PKA might occur constitutively and that the resting state in the parietal cell is maintained by the dephosphorylation of ezrin via protein phosphatase I. For parietal cells maximally stimulated with histamine plus isobutylmethylxanthine the phosphorylation of immunoprecipitated ezrin was 3 times higher than that from resting cells, whereas for glands stimulated with calyculin A ezrin phosphorylation was increased more than 10 times, although the index of acid secretion was much less than those stimulated by histamine plus isobutylmethylxanthine. While there is an apparent lack of correlation between the extent of acid secretion and ezrin phosphorylation, the net effect of

calyculin A seems to be a model for the extreme phosphorylation of the protein. Close examination of the material that co-immunoprecipitated with anti-ezrin from the detergent-soluble fraction of calyculin A-treated glands revealed several proteins coprecipitating with ezrin, including β-actin, α-actinin, and α and β-fodrin (Urushidani et al., *in preparation*). Phosphorylation occurred exclusively on ezrin and β-fodrin. α-Actinin was found to bind PIP₂ as reported for fibroblasts (Fukami et al., 1994). In contrast to the above-mentioned study on liposomes (Niggli et al., 1995), ezrin itself did not bind PIP₂ in the immunoprecipitated fraction. Ankyrin, which was reported to be bound to tubulovesicles (Smith et al., 1993), was not found in the ezrin-immunoprecipitate. These results suggest that a detergent-resistant complex of cytoskeletal components was formed when ezrin or β-fodrin was phosphorylated.

These results imply several interesting and suggestive features. Ezrin contains a proline-rich domain whose function is presently unknown (Gould et al., 1989). Recent work suggests that SH3 domains exist in various kinds of proteins including cytoskeletal proteins and that they interact with proline-rich domains (Ren et al., 1993). Among the components of the above-mentioned complex, α-fodrin actually possesses an SH3 domain. An attractive, though tentative, hypothesis is that the phosphorylation of ezrin reveals not only an actin binding domain but also a proline-rich domain to interact with fodrin. Furthermore, in analogy with other cell systems (Fukami et al., 1994) where bound PIP₂ regulates the bundling effect of α-actinin on F-actin, PIP₂ and PLC might serve in the regulation and reorganization of the cytoskeleton in the parietal cell.

In A-431 cells stimulated by EGF, ezrin was phosphorylated at Tyr¹⁴⁵ and Tyr³⁵³ (Krieg & Hunter, 1992) in association with membrane surface remodeling (Bretscher, 1989). Bretscher’s observation (1989) that the EGF stimulation of A-431 cells also induced ezrin-phosphorylation on Ser residues reminds us of the above-mentioned effect of EGF to activate PKC. Several serines in ezrin have been pointed out as potential phosphorylation sites for PKC (Gould, 1989), and the possible phosphorylation of parietal cell ezrin by PKC was recently reported (Chew, Zhou & Parente, Jr., 1997). On the other hand, no detailed information is currently available on the PKA-phosphorylation sites of ezrin, which is considered to be the principal regulatory pathway and mode of ezrin phosphorylation in the parietal cell. Thus our perception of the role of ezrin in parietal cell activation is still evolving.

### Vesicular Docking and Fusion Proteins are Involved in Membrane Traffic

The highly selective mechanisms for the recruitment of transport proteins by exocytic fusion and retrieval by endocytosis represent an exciting area of current research. A growing body of evidence supports the notion that the general machinery governing the docking/fusion of membranes is highly conserved (Sollner et al., 1993; Rothman & Warren, 1994). In neurons, the so-called SNARE (Soluble N-ethylmaleimide-sensitive factor Attachment protein REceptor) hypothesis holds that vesicle targeting is mediated by the unique pairing between membrane proteins on the transport vesicle (known as v-SNARES) and the proteins on the target membrane (known as t-SNARES). The resulting SNARE complex provides the binding site for soluble cytoplasmic factors to catalyze subsequent vesicle-plasma membrane fusion events (Bennett & Scheller, 1994). Several of the specific proteins and their isoforms that function in synaptic vesicle docking/fusing reactions have been identified in parietal cells (Peng et al., 1997). These include syntaxin isoforms 1 through 4, VAMP (vesicle-associated membrane protein, also known as synaptobrevin) and SNAP-25 (synaptosome-associated protein of 25 kDa), all of which are especially enriched in parietal cells, compared to other gastric epithelial cells. Detection of syntaxin 1 and SNAP-25 in parietal cells was unusual since these proteins had been found only in neural or endocrine cells, where they have been localized to the plasma membrane as t-SNARES. Subcellular fractionation revealed that syntaxin 3 and VAMP copurified with H⁺,K⁺-ATPase rich tubulovesicles, thus fitting the general definition as v-SNARES; whereas, syntaxin 1 and SNAP-25 were found in membranes other than tubulovesicles. It is tempting to speculate that syntaxin 1 and SNAP-25 reside at the apical plasma membrane as docking targets for the VAMP-laden tubulovesicles. The unusual abundance of syntaxin 3 on tubulovesicles is of interest. It will be important to establish whether syntaxin 3 serves an exclusive role as a v-SNARE, namely, tubulovesicles target to the apical membrane (Mercier et al., 1989) or whether it acts as a t-SNARE to promote homotypic fusion of tubulovesicles constructing an interconnected tubular network. Whether the docking and fusion of tubulovesicles occurs exclusively with the apical membrane (heterotypic fusion) or whether there is a potential of recruitment in the form of tubulovesicle-tubulovesicle interaction (homotypic fusion) remains to be established. However, one preliminary report notes that Ca²⁺-triggered homotypic fusion of isolated tubulovesicles in vitro was dependent upon a small GTP-binding protein (G-protein; possibly Rab2) and phospholipase A₂ activity (Pereyra & Machen, 1994), and Ogata & Yamasaki (1993) have observed tubulovesicular interconnections in their deep-etched preparations of parietal cells in the early phase of activation.

Members of small G-proteins have been implicated as regulators of trafficking, targeting and fusion of membrane vesicles (*for review*, Wagner & Williams, 1994),

T. Urushidani and J.G. Forte: Parietal Cell Signal Transduction

Fig. 2. Model of receptor-mediated pathways and effector activation in gastric parietal cells. Receptors for histamine (H2), acetylcholine (ACh, M3), gastrin (CCKB) and EGF/TGFα (EGF) operate at the basolateral membrane through heterotrimeric G proteins, either stimulatory (Gs or Gq) or inhibitory (Gi). The major path for parietal cell stimulation is via H2-receptor-mediated adenylate cyclase (ACase) and elevation of cAMP to liberate active protein kinase A (PKA) from regulatory subunits (R). PKA phosphorylates key effector proteins, e.g., ezrin, apical Cl⁻-channels or putative K⁺-channels. Activation of PKA also occurs on its substrate ezrin, since these proteins are bound via type II regulatory subunits (RII). Ca²⁺ is clearly an auxiliary second messenger being liberated from intracellular stores by IP3, which in turn is the result M3- and CCKB-coupled activation of phospholipase (PLC). The resulting diglycerides activate protein kinase C (PKC) which may have both inhibitory and excitatory roles. Roles are proposed for elevated Ca²⁺ in several regulatory paths, including (i) activation of calmodulin-dependent (CaM) kinases that could promote vesicular motor activity, (ii) actin filament turnover, or (iii) to promote fusogenic interactions via annexin and SNARE proteins. As H⁺,K⁺-ATPase-rich (H/K) tubulovesicles migrate to and fuse with the apical membrane, surface remodeling occurs in the form of elongated microvilli that are coordinated by the β-actin-rich microfilaments and the actin-binding and actin-membrane linker proteins.

and among them, Rab family members have been identified in parietal cells apparently co-localizing with the H⁺,K⁺-ATPase (Tang et al., 1992; Goldenring et al., 1993, 1994). Both Rab2 and Rab11 were found to co-purify with H⁺,K⁺-ATPase-rich tubulovesicles in resting cells, and they were redistributed to the apical plasma membrane, along with the H⁺,K⁺-ATPase, when the cells were stimulated to secrete acid. Considering the predicted significance of the cytoskeleton in parietal cell function, another small G-protein, Rho, is also an interesting target, since it has been shown to be involved in cytoskeletal reorganization in various cell types (Takai et al., 1995; Hirano et al., 1996). Rho has been a suggested participant in CCKₐ/gastrin receptor mediated stress fiber formation in the transfected fibroblasts (Taniguchi et al., 1996), however, there is scant information available about the role of Rho in native parietal cells. Our own experience with the botulinum toxin C3, an inhibitor of Rho, have produced conflicting results. In a few experiments we have observed that C3 inhibited cAMP-mediated aminopyrine uptake by isolated gastric glands, but in many other tests no such inhibition was seen. Whether this variability represents a problem in the accessibility of inhibitor, or some other artifact, remains to be seen. In general, GTPγS, a nonhydrolyzable GTP analogue, stimulates secretion of various types of permeabilized cells (Wagner & Williams, 1994). However, Miller & Hersey (1996) showed completely opposite results.

results using α-toxin permeabilized gastric glands, i.e., GTPγS blocked parietal cell secretion beyond the heterotrimeric G-proteins, whereas it stimulated pepsinogen secretion by the chief cell in the same glands. This might suggest that the parietal cell has a dominant population of small G-protein mediating inhibitory signals which may be minor in other exocrine cell types, inasmuch as the effect of GTPγS is specific for small G-proteins in the system. One potential target is the ADP-ribosylation factor (ARF)-coat protein system, whereby GTPγS would inhibit membrane traffic from cis to medial Golgi cisternae because the dissociation of the coat proteins from the vesicles requires GTP hydrolysis by ARF (Serafini et al., 1991).

# Projecting Future Work

The recent progress in molecular biology has revealed the complete structures of H₂-, M₃-, and CCK_B-receptors, as well as α- and β-subunits of H⁺,K⁺-ATPase, namely, the entrance and exit of the parietal cell are now visible. However, the interior of the cell is still dark, although we have been turning on and off many possible switches to decipher the wiring diagram. It appears that many of the necessary parts are now in our hands as depicted in Fig. 2. Biochemical and immunocytochemical data have identified some of the potential characters; the challenge ahead is to define the physiological role of the cytoskeletal components, docking proteins and small G-proteins in mediating membrane turnover during the secretory cycle. The parietal cell model with all of its exaggerated responses may be a particularly useful system in which to probe for the distribution and nature of complexity of the component proteins in various secretory states.

## References

Algrain, M., Turunen, O., Vaheri, A., Louvard, D., Arpin, M. 1993. Ezrin contains cytoskeleton and membrane binding domains accounting for its proposed role as a membrane-cytoskeletal linker. *J. Cell. Biol.* **120**:129–139

Akagi, K., Nagao, T., Urushidani T. 1997. Calcium oscillations in single cultured Chinese hamster ovary cells stably transfected with a cloned human CCK-B receptor. *Jpn. J. Pharmacol.* (in press)

Atwell, M.M., Hanson, P.J. 1988. Effect of pertussis toxin on the inhibition of secretory activity by prostaglandin E2, somatostatin, epidermal growth factor and 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol 13-acetate in parietal cells from rat stomach. *Biochim. Biophys. Acta.* **971**: 282–288

Barnard, J.A., Beauchamp, R.D., Russell, W.E., Dubois, R.N., Coffey, R.J. Jr. 1995. Epidermal growth factor-related peptides and their relevance to gastrointestinal pathophysiology. *Gastroenterol.* **108**:564–580

Beauchamp, R.D., Barnard, J.A., McCutchen, C.M., Cherner, J.A., Coffey, R.J. Jr. 1989. Localization of transforming growth factor α and its receptor in gastric mucosal cells. *J. Clin. Invest.* **84**:1017–1023

T. Urushidani and J.G. Forte: Parietal Cell Signal Transduction

Bennett, M.K., Scheller, R.H. 1994. A molecular description of synaptic vesicle membrane trafficking. *Ann. Rev. Biochem.* **63**:63–100

Black, J. 1993. Reflections on the analytical pharmacology of histamine H2-receptor antagonists. *Gastroenterol.* **105**:963–968

Bretscher, A. 1983. Purification of an 80,000-dalton protein that is a component of the isolated microvillus cytoskeleton, and its localization in nonmuscle cells. *J. Cell Biol.* **97**:425–432

Bretscher, A. 1989. Rapid phosphorylation and reorganization of ezrin and spectrin accompany morphological changes induced in A-431 cells by epidermal growth factor. *J. Cell Biol.* **108**:921–930

Brown, M.R., Chew, C.S. 1986. Multiple effects of phorbol ester on secretory activity in rabbit gastric glands and parietal cells. *Can. J. Physiol. Pharmacol.* **65**:1840–1847

Brown, M.R., Chew, C.S. 1989. Carbachol induced protein phosphorylation in parietal cell: Regulation by [Ca²⁺]_i. *Am. J. Physiol.* **257**:G99–G110

Caohuy, H., Srivastava, M., Pallard, H.B. 1996. Membrane fusion protein synexin (annexin VII) as a Ca²⁺/GTP sensor in exocytic secretion. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* **93**:10797–10802

Chen, J., Cohn, J.A., Mandel, L.J. 1995. Dephosphorylation of ezrin as an early event in renal microvillar breakdown and anoxic injury. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* **92**:7495–7499

Chen, M.C., Amirian, D.A., Toomey, M., Sanders, M.J., Soll, A.H. 1988. Prostanoid inhibition of canine parietal cells: mediation by the inhibitory guanosine triphosphate-binding protein of adenylate cyclase. *Gastroenterol.* **94**:1121–9

Chew, C.S. 1983a. Inhibitory action of somatostatin on isolated gastric glands and parietal cells. *Am. J. Physiol.* **245**:C371–C380

Chew, C.S. 1983b. Forskolin stimulation of acid and pepsinogen secretion in isolated gastric glands. *Am. J. Physiol.* **245**:C371–C380

Chew, C.S. 1985. Parietal cell protein kinases: selective activation of the type I cAMP-dependent protein kinase by histamine. *J. Biol. Chem.* **260**:7540–7550

Chew, C.S. 1986. Cholecystokinin, carbachol, gastrin, histamine, and forskolin increase [Ca²⁺]_i in gastric glands. *Am. J. Physiol.* **250**:G814–823

Chew, C.S., Brown, M.R. 1987a. Release of intracellular calcium in parietal cells by the cAMP-dependent agonists, histamine and forskolin. *In:* Gastrointestinal and Hepatic Secretions: Mechanism and control. J.S. Davison and E.A. Shaffer, editors. p. 103–106 Univ. Calgary Press

Chew, C.S., Brown, M.R. 1987b. Histamine increases phosphorylation of 27 and 40 kDa parietal cell proteins. *Am. J. Physiol.* **253**:G823–G829

Chew, C.S., Hersey, S.J. 1982. Gastrin stimulation of isolated gastric glands. *Am. J. Physiol.* **242**:G504–G512

Chew, C.S., Nakamura, K., Petropolous, A.C. 1994. Multiple actions of epidermal growth factor and TGFα on rabbit gastric parietal cell function. *Am. J. Physiol.* **267**:G818–G826

Chew, C.S., Zhou, C.-J., Parente, J. 1997. Calcium-independent PKC isoforms may modulate parietal cell HCl secretion. *Am. J. Physiol.* *in press*

Chiba, T., Fisher, S.K., Agranoff, B.W., Yamada, T. 1989. Autoregulation of muscarinic and gastrin receptors on gastric parietal cells. *Am. J. Physiol.* **256**:G356–63

Chiba, T., Sugano, K., Park, J., Yamada, T. 1987. Potential mediation of somatostatin secretion from canine fundic D-cells by protein kinase C. *Am. J. Physiol.* **253**:G62–67

Chow, D.C., Forte, J.G. 1995. Functional significance of the beta-subunit for heterodimeric P-type ATPases. *J. Exp. Biol.* **198**:1–17

Chuang, T.T., Lacovelli, L., Sallesse, M., De Blasi, A. 1996. G-protein coupled receptors: heterologous desensitization and its implications. *TiPS* **17**:416–421

Coleman, R.A., Smith, W.L., Narumiya, S. 1994. International union of

T. Urushidani and J.G. Forte: Parietal Cell Signal Transduction

pharmacology classification of prostanoid receptors: properties, distribution, and structure of the receptors and their subtypes. *Pharmacol. Rev.* 46:205–229

Creutz, C.E. 1992. The annexins and exocytosis. *Science* 258:924–931

Cuppoletti, J., Malinowska, D.H. 1988. Cytoskeletal determinants of control of gastric-acid secretion. *Prog. Clin. Biol. Res.* 258:23–37

Dransfield, D.T., Bradford, A.J., Goldenring, J.R. 1995. Distribution of A-kinase anchoring proteins in parietal cells. *Biochim. Biophys. Acta* 1269:215–220

Dransfield, D.T., Bradford, A.J., Smith, J., Martin, M., Roy, C., Mangeat, P.H., Goldenring, J.R. 1997. Ezrin is a cyclic AMP-dependent protein kinase anchoring protein. *EMBO J.* 16:35–43

DelValle, J., Tsunoda, Y., Williams, J.A., Yamada, T. 1992a. Regulation of \([Ca^{2+}]_i\) by secretagogue stimulation of canine gastric parietal cells. *Am. J. Physiol.* 262:G420–426

DelValle, J., Wang, L., Ganz, I., Yamada, T. 1992b. Characterization of the H2-histamine receptor: linkage to both adenylate cyclase and \([Ca^{2+}]_i\) signaling systems. *Am. J. Physiol.* 263:G967–972

Fath, K.R., Brugess, D.R. 1993. Golgi-derived vesicles from developing epithelial cells bind actin filaments and possess myosin-I as a cytoplasmically oriented peripheral membrane protein. *J. Cell Biol.* 120:117–127

Forte, J.G., Forte, G.M., Saltman, P. 1967. \(K^+\)-stimulated phosphatase of microsomes from gastric mucosa. *J. Cell Physiol.* 69:293–304

Forte, J.G., Ganser, A., Beesley, R., Forte, T.M. 1975. Unique enzymes of purified microsomes from pig fundic mucosa. \(K^+\)-stimulated adenosine triphosphatase and \(K^+\)-stimulated pNPPase. *Gastroenterol.* 69:175–189

Forte, J.G., Hanzel, D.K., Okamoto, C., Chow, D., Urushidani, T. 1990. Membrane and protein recycling associated with gastric HCl secretion. Membrane and protein recycling associated with gastric HCl secretion. *J. Int. Med.* 228:17–26

Forte, T.M., Machen, T.E., Forte, J.G. 1977. Ultrastructural changes in oxyntic cells associated with secretory function: a membrane recycling hypothesis. *Gastroenterol.* 73:941–955

Forte, J.G., Yao, X. 1996. The membrane-recruitment and recycling hypothesis of gastric HCl secretion. *Trend Cell Biol.* 6:45–48

Fukami, K., Endo, T., Imamura, M., Takenawa, T. 1994. \(\alpha\)-actinin and vinculin are PIP2-binding proteins involved in signaling by tyrosine kinase. *J. Biol. Chem.* 269:1518–22

Gary, R., Bretschner, A. 1995. Ezrin self-association involves binding of an N-terminal domain to a normally masked C-terminal domain that includes the F-actin binding site. *Mol. Biol. Cell* 6:1061–1075

Gerber, J.G., Payne, N.A. 1988. Endogenous adenosine modulates gastric acid secretion to histamine in canine parietal cells. *J. Pharmacol. Exp. Ther.* 244:190–4

Goldenring, J.R., Asher, V.A., Barreuther, M.F., Lewis, J.J., Lohmann, S.M., Walter, U., Modlin, I.M. 1992. Dephosphorylation of cAMP-dependent protein kinase regulatory subunit in stimulated parietal cells. *Am. J. Physiol.* 262:G763–773

Goldenring, J.R., Shen, K.R., Vaughan, H.D., Modlin, I.M. 1993. A novel small GTP-binding protein, rab 25, is enriched in the gastrointestinal mucosa, kidney, and lung. *J. Biol. Chem.* 268:18419–18422

Goldenring, J.R., Soroka, C.J., Shen, K.R., Tang, L.H., Rodriguez, W., Vaughan, H.D., Stoch, S.A., Modlin, I.M. 1994. Enrichment of rab11, a small GTP-binding protein, in gastric parietal cells. *Am. J. Physiol.* 267:G187–194

Gould, K.L., Cooper, J.A., Bretschner, A., Hunter, T. 1986. The protein-tyrosine kinase substrate, p81, is homologous to a chicken microvillar core protein. *J. Cell Biol.* 102:660–669

Gould, K.L., Bretschner, A., Esch, F.S., Hunter, T. 1989. cDNA cloning

and sequencing of the protein-tyrosine kinase substrate, ezrin, reveals homology to band 4.1. *EMBO J.* 8:4133–4142

Hanzel, D.K., Reggio, H., Bretschner, A., Forte, J.G., Mangeat, P. 1991. The secretion-stimulated 80K phosphoprotein of parietal cell is ezrin, and has properties of a membrane cytoskeletal linker in the induced apical microvilli. *EMBO J.* 10:2363–2373

Hanzel, D.K., Urushidani, T., Usinger, U., Smolka, A., Forte, J.G. 1989. Immunological localization of an 80-kDa phosphoprotein to the apical membrane of gastric parietal cells. *Am. J. Physiol.* 256:G1082–1089

Hirano, M., Sato, N., Kondo, T., Yonemura, S., Monden, M., Sasaki, T., Takai, Y., Tsukita, S., Tsukita, S. 1996. Regulation mechanism of ERM (ezrin/radixin/moesin) protein/plasma membrane association: Possible involvement of phosphatidylinositol turnover and Rho-dependent signaling pathway. *J. Cell Biol.* 135:37–51

Hirschowitz, B.I., Keeling, D., Lewin, M., Okabe, S., Parsons, M., Sewing, K., Wallmark, B., Sachs, G. 1995. Pharmacological aspects of acid secretion. *Dig. Dis. Sci.* 40:3S–23S

Krieg, J., Hunter, T. 1992. Identification of the two major epidermal growth factor-induced tyrosine phosphorylation sites in the microvillar core protein ezrin. *J. Biol. Chem.* 267:19258–19265

Lewis, J.J., Goldenring, J.R., Asher, V.A., Modlin, I.M. 1990. Effects of epidermal growth factor on signal transduction in rabbit parietal cells. *Am. J. Physiol.* 258:G476–G483

Li, Z-Q., Cabero, J.L., Mardh, S. 1995. Gastrin and carbachol require cAMP to elicit aminopyrine accumulation in isolated pig and rat parietal cells. *Am. J. Physiol.* 268:G82–G89

Ljungström, M., Chew, C.S. 1991. Calcium oscillations and morphological transformations in single cultured gastric parietal cells. *Am. J. Physiol.* 260:C67–C78

Maeda, M., Ishizaki, J., Futai, M. 1988. cDNA cloning and sequence determination of pig gastric \((H^+ + K^+)\)-ATPase. *Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun.* 157:203–209

Malinowska, D.H., Kupert, E.Y., Bahinski, A., Sherry, A.M., Cupporetti, J. 1995. Cloning, functional expression, and characterization of a PKA-activated gastric \(\mathrm{Cl}^{-}\)channel. *Am. J. Physiol.* 268:C191–C200

Mamiya, N., Goldenring, J.R., Tsunoda, Y., Modlin, I.M., Yasui, K., Usuda, N., Ishikawa, T., Natsume, A., Hidaka, H. 1993. Inhibition of acid secretion in gastric parietal cells by the \(\mathrm{Ca}^{2+}\)/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II inhibitor KN-93. *Biochem. Biophys. Res. Comm.* 195:608–615

Mayer, P., Mohlig, M., Seidler, U., Rochlitz, H., Fahrmann, M., Schatz, H., Hidaka, H., Pfeiffer, A. 1994. Characterization of gamma- and delta-subunits of \(\mathrm{Ca}^{2+}\)/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II in rat gastric mucosal cell populations. *Biochem. J.* 297:157–162

Mercier, F., Reggio, H., Devilliers, G., Bataille, D., Mangeat, P. 1989. Membrane-cytoskeleton dynamics in rat parietal cells: Mobilization of actin and spectrin upon stimulation of gastric acid secretion. *J. Cell. Biol.* 108:441–453

Miller, M.D., Hersey, S.J. 1996. Differential effects of GTPγS on acid and pepsinogen secretion by permeable gastric glands. *Am. J. Physiol.* 270:C962–968

Muallem, S., Fimmel, C.J., Pandol, S.J., Sachs, G. 1986. Regulation of free cytosolic Ca in the peptic and parietal cells of the rabbit gastric gland. *J. Biol. Chem.* 261:2660–2667

Muto, Y., Nagao, T., Urushidani, T. 1997. The putative phospholipase C inhibitor, U73122, and its negative control, U73343, elicit unexpected effects on the rabbit parietal cell. *J. Pharm. Exp. Ther.* (in press)

Nakamura, K., Zhou, C.-J., Parente, J., Chew, C.S. 1996. Parietal cell

MAP kinases: multiple activation pathways. *Am. J. Physiol.* 271:G640–G649

Nandi, J., Crockett, J., Levine, R.A. 1994. A possible role of protein kinase C in augmenting H⁺ secretion by nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs. *J. Pharm. Exp. Ther.* 269:932–940

Negulescu, P.A., Reenstra, W.W., Machen, T.E. 1989. Intracellular Ca requirements for stimulus-secretion coupling in parietal cell. *Am. J. Physiol.* 256:C241–C251

Niggli, V., Andreoli, C.T., Roy, C., Mangeat, P. 1995. Identification of a phosphatidylinositol-4,5-bisphosphate-binding domain in the N-terminal region of ezrin. *FEBS Lett.* 376:172–176

Oddsdottir, M., Goldenring, J.R., Adrian, T.E., Zdon, M.J., Zucker, K.A., Modlin, I.M. 1988. Identification and characterization of a cytosolic 30 kDa histamine stimulated phosphoprotein in parietal cell cytosol. *Biochem. Biophys. Res. Comm.* 154:489–496, 1988

Oddsdottir, M., Modlin, I.M., Zucker, K.A., Zdon, M.J., Goldenring, J.R. 1987. A calmodulin dependent protein kinase in parietal cells. *Biochem. Biophys. Res. Comm.* 148:1390–1397

Ogata, T., Yamasaki, Y. 1993. Ultra-high-resolution scanning electron microscopic studies on the membrane system of the parietal cells of the rat in the resting state and shortly after stimulation. *Anat. Rec.* 237:208–219

Ota, S., Hiraishi, H., Terano, A., Mutoh, H., Kurachi, Y., Shimada, T., Ivey, K.J., Sugimoto, T. 1989. Effect of adenosine and adenosine analogs on \[^{14}C\]aminopyrine accumulation by rabbit parietal cells. *Dig. Dis. Sci.* 34:1882–9

Pakkanen, R., Hedman, K., Turunen, O., Wahlstrom, T., Vaheri, A. 1987. Microvillus-specific Mr 75,000 plasma membrane protein of human choriocarcinoma cells. *J. Histochem. Cytochem.* 135:809–816

Parente, J.A., Goldenring, J.R., Petropoulos, A.C., Hellman, U., Chew, C.S. 1996. Purification cloning, and expression of a novel, endogenous, calcium-sensitive 28 kDa phosphoprotein. *J. Biol. Chem.* 271:20096–20101

Park, J., Chiba, T., Yamada, T. 1987. Mechanisms for direct inhibition of canine gastric parietal cells by somatostatin. *J. Biol. Chem.* 262:14190–14196

Peng, X-R, Yao, X., Chow, D-C., Forte, J.G., Bennett, M.K. 1997. Association of syntaxin 3 and vesicle-associated membrane protein (VAMP) with H⁺/K⁺-ATPase-containing tubulovesicles in gastric parietal cells. *Molec. Biol. Cell* (in press)

Pereyra, K., Machen, T.E. 1994. *Mol. Biol. Cell* 5:(suppl.), 70a

Regnouf, F., Sagot, I., Delouche, B., Devilliers, G., Cartaud, J., Henry, J.P., Pradel, L.A. 1996. In vitro phosphorylation of annexin 2 heterotetramer by protein kinase C. Comparative properties of the unphosphorylated and phosphorylated annexin 2 on the aggregation and fusion of chromaffin granule membranes. *J. Biol. Chem.* 270:27143–27150

Reisine, T. 1995. Somatostatin receptors. *Am. J. Physiol.* 269:G813–820

Ren, R., Mayer, B.J., Cicchetti, P., Baltimore, D. 1993. Identification of a ten amino acid proline-rich SH3 binding site. *Science* 259:1157–61

Reyl, F.J., Lewin, M.J.M. 1982. Intracellular receptor for somatostatin in gastric mucosal cells: decomposition and reconstitution of somatostatin-stimulated phosphoprotein phosphatases. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 79:978–982

Reynolds, N.J., Talar, H.S., Baldassare, J.J., Henderson, P.A., Elder, J.T., Voorhees, J.J., Fisher, G.J. 1993. Differential induction of phosphatidylcholine hydrolysis, diacylglycerol formation and protein kinase C activation by epidermal growth factor and transforming growth factor-a in normal human skin fibroblasts and keratinocytes. *Biochem. J.* 294:535–544

Rothman, J.E., Warren, G. 1994. Implications of the SNARE hypoth-

T. Urushidani and J.G. Forte: Parietal Cell Signal Transduction

esis for intracellular membrane topology and dynamics. *Curr. Biol.* 4(3):220–33

Sack, J. 1993. Regulation of gastric H⁺-K⁺-ATPase by cAMP-dependent protein kinase. *J. Surg. Res.* 55:223–227

Sato, N., Funayama, N., Nagafuchi, A., Yonemura, S., Tsukita, S., Tsukita, S. 1992. A gene family consisting of ezrin, radixin and moesin. *J. Cell. Sci.* 103:131–143

Schepp, W., Schmidtler, J., Dehne, K., Schusdziarra, V., Classen, M. 1992. Pertussis toxin-sensitive and pertussis toxin-insensitive inhibition of parietal cell response to GLP-1 and histamine. *Am. J. Physiol.* 262:G660–668

Seidler, U., Beinborn, M., Sewing, K.F. 1989. Inhibition of acid formation in rabbit parietal cells by prostaglandins is mediated by the prostaglandin E2 receptor. *Gastroenterol.* 96(2 Pt 1):314–20

Serafini, T., Orci, L., Amherdt, M., Brunner, M., Kahn, R.A., Rothman, J.E. 1991. ADP-ribboxylation factor is a subunit of the coat of golgi-derived COP-coated vesicles: a novel role for a GTP-binding protein. *Cell* 67:239–253

Shuster, C.B., Herman, I.M. 1995. Indirect association of ezrin with F-actin: isoform specificity and calcium sensitivity. *J. Cell. Biol.* 128:837–848

Smith, P.R., Bradford, A.L., Joe, E.H., Angelides, K.J., Benos, D.J., Saccomani, G. 1993. Gastric parietal cell H⁺-K⁺-ATPase microsomes are associated with isoforms of ankyrin and spectrin. *Am. J. Physiol.* 264:C63–70

Soll, A.H. 1982. Potentiating interactions of gastric stimulants on \[^{14}C\]aminopyrine accumulation by isolated canine parietal cells. *Gastroenterol.* 83:216–223

Sollner, T., Bennett, M.K., Whiteheart, S.W., Scheller, R.H., Rothman, J.E. 1993. A protein assembly-disassembly pathway in vitro that may correspond to sequential steps of synaptic vesicle docking, activation, and fusion. *Cell* 75(3):409–18

Sugimoto, Y., Morimoto, K., Katsuyama, M., Tsuboi, K., Kishi, K., Kinoshita, Y., Negishi, M., Chiba, T., Narumiya, S., Ichikawa, A. 1997. Cellular localization of mRNAs for the prostaglandin E receptor subtypes in the mouse gastrointestinal tract. *Am. J. Physiol.* (in press)

Sunahara, R.K., Dessuer, C.W., Gilman, A.G. 1996. Complexity and diversity of mammalian adenyl cyclase. *Ann. Rev. Pharm. Toxicol.* 36:461–480

Takai, Y., Sasaki, T., Tanaka, K., Nakanishi, H. 1995. Rho as a regulator of the cytoskeleton trend. *Biochem. Sci.* 20:227–31

Tang, L.H., Stoch, S.A., Moldin, I.M., Goldenring, J.R. 1992. Identification of rab2 as a tubulovesicle-membrane-associated protein in rabbit gastric parietal cells. *Biochem. J.* 285:715–719

Taniguchi, T., Takaishi, K., Murayama, T., Ito, M., Iwata, N., Chihara, K., Sasaki, T., Takai, Y., Matsui, T. 1996. Cholecystokinin-B/gastrin receptors mediate rapid formation of actin stress fibers. *Oncogene* 12:1357–1360

Thibodeau, A., Yao, X., Forte, J.G. 1994. Acid secretion in alpha-toxin-permeabilized gastric glands. *Biochem. Cell. Biol.* 72:26–35

Togawa, K., Ishiguro, T., Kaya, S., Shimada, A., Imagawa, T., Taniguchi, K. 1995. Reversible phosphorylation of both Tyr7 and Tyr10 in the α-chain of pig stomach H⁺,K⁺-ATPase by a membrane-bound kinase and a phosphatase. *J. Biol. Chem.* 270:15475–15478

Tsunoda, Y., Funasaka, M., Modlin, I.M., Hidaka, H., Fox, L.M., Gold- enring, J.R. 1992. An inhibitor of Ca²⁺/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II, KN-62, inhibits cholinergic-stimulated parietal cell secretion. *Am. J. Physiol.* 262:G118–G122

Tsunoda, Y., Modlin, I.M., Goldenring, J.R. 1993. Tyrosine kinase activities in the modulation of stimulated parietal cell acid secretion. *Am. J. Physiol.* 264:G351–G356

Turunen, O., Wahlstrom, T., Vaheri, A. 1994. Ezrin has a COOH-

terminal actin-binding site that is conserved in the ezrin protein
family. *J. Cell. Biol.* 126:1445–1453

Urushidani, T., Hanzel, D.K., Forte, J.G. 1987. Protein phosphorylation
associated with stimulation of rabbit gastric glands. *Biochim. Bio-*
*phys. Acta* 930:209–219

Urushidani, T., Hanzel, D.K., Forte, J.G. 1989. Characterization of an
80-kDa phosphoprotein involved in parietal cell stimulation. *Am. J.*
*Physiol.* 256:G1070–G1081

Urushidani, T., Muto, Y., Nagao, T. 1996. Ca mobilization in the
parietal cell under stimulation of acid secretion. *Jpn. J. Pharmacol.*
71:Suppl. 1, 11P

Urushidani, T., Muto, Y., Nagao, T. 1997. Possible involvement of
gelsolin in the Ca²⁺-mediated activation of acid secretion in the
rabbit parietal cell. *Jpn. J. Pharmacol.* 73:Suppl.1, 114P

Urushidani, T., Muto, Y., Nagao, T., Yao, X., Forte, J.G. 1997.
ME3407, a new antilcer agent, inhibits acid secretion by interfer-
ing with redistribution of H⁺-K⁺-ATPase. *Am. J. Physiol.* 272:
G1122–G1134

Urushidani, T., Nagao, T. 1996. Calyculin A, a phosphoprotein phos-
phatase inhibitor, stimulates acid secretion in isolated gastric
glands. *Am. J. Physiol.* 270:G103–G112

Urushidani, T., Nagao, T. 1997. Ca²⁺-dependent membrane bound pro-
tein fraction from rabbit gastric mucosa contains a protein whose
histidyl residue is phosphorylated. *Biochim. Biophys. Acta.* 1356:
71–83

Wagner, A.C.C., Williams, J.A. 1994. Low molecular weight GTP-
binding proteins: molecular switches regulating diverse cellular
functions. *Am. J. Physiol.* 266:G1–14

Wang, L., Gantz, I., DelValle, J. 1996. Histamine H2 receptor activates

adenylate cyclase and PLC via separate GTP-dependent pathways. *Am. J. Physiol.* 271:G613–G620

Wang, L., Wilson, E.J., Osburn, J., DelValle, J. 1996. Epidermal
growth factor inhibits carbachol-stimulated canine parietal cell
function via protein kinase C. *Gastroenterol.* 110:469–77

Wolosin, J.M., Forte, J.G. 1984. Stimulation of oxyntic cell triggers K⁺
and Cl⁻ conductances in apical (H⁺ + K⁺)-ATPase membrane. *Am.*
*J. Physiol.* 246:C537–C545

Yao, X., Chaponnier, C., Gabbiani, G., Forte, J.G. 1995. Polarized
distribution of actin isoforms in gastric parietal cells. *Mol. Biol.*
*Cell* 6:541–557

Yao, X., Cheng, L., Forte, J.G. 1996. Biochemical characterization of
ezrin-actin interaction. *J. Biol. Chem.* 271:7224–7229

Yao, X., Forte, J.G. 1996. Membrane-Cytoskeleton Interaction in
Regulated Exocytosis and Apical Insertion of Vesicles in Epithelial
Cells. *In:* Current Topics in Membranes. vol. 43. Membrane Pro-
tein—Cytoskeletal Complexes. W.J. Nelson, editor. pp. 73–96.
Academic Press

Yao, X., Karam, S.M., Ramilo, M., Rong, Q., Thibodeau, A., Forte,
J.G. 1996. Stimulation of gastric acid secretion by cAMP in a novel
α-toxin-permeabilized gland model. *Am. J. Physiol.* 271:C61–C73

Yao, X., Thibodeau, A., Forte, J.G. 1993. Ezrin-calpain I interactions in
gastric parietal cells. *Am. J. Physiol.* 265:C36–C46

Yokotani, K., Park, J., DelValle, J., Yamada, T. 1994. Roles of adre-
noceptors in isolated canine parietal cells. *Digestion* 55(3):148–53

Yule, D.I., Tseng, M.J., Williams, J.A., Logdson, C.D. 1993. A cloned
CCK-A receptor transduces multiple signals in response to full and
partial agonists. *Am. J. Physiol.* 265:G999–G1004
