
Eur. J. Biochem. 248, 149–155 (1997)
© FEBS 1997

# Involvement of phosphatidylinositol 3′-kinase in stem-cell-factor-induced phospholipase D activation and arachidonic acid release

Osamu KOZAWA, Peter BLUME-JENSEN, Carl-Henrik HELDIN and Lars RÖNNSTRAND  
Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, Uppsala Branch, Biomedical Centre, Uppsala, Sweden  

(Received 13 May 1997) — EJB 97 0678/5

We have shown previously that the stem cell factor (SCF) receptor undergoes phosphorylation on serine residues following ligand stimulation, and that this phosphorylation is dependent mainly on the activity of protein kinase C (PKC). In the present study, we have further investigated the molecular mechanisms behind SCF-stimulated activation of PKC, and found that SCF does not activate phosphatidylinositol-specific phospholipase C. In contrast, phospholipase D (PLD) is activated in response to SCF in a dose-dependent manner. Activation of PLD was not inhibited by calphostin C, an inhibitor of PKC. On the other hand, inhibitors of phosphatidylinositol PtdIns 3′-kinase (PtdIns 3′-kinase), i.e. wortmannin and LY294002, inhibited SCF-induced PLD activation. Moreover, a mutant SCF receptor in which Tyr721, which is responsible for activation of PtdIns 3′-kinase, is mutated to a phenylalanine residue was unable to mediate activation of PLD. Thus, PtdIns 3′-kinase appears to be essential for SCF-induced PLD activation. Furthermore, we demonstrate that phosphatidic acid (PtdH), generated through the action of PLD in response to SCF, is metabolized to diacylglycerol by dephosphorylation. Diacylglycerol can then activate PKC, and, moreover, after deacylation by a diacylglycerol lipase, yield arachidonic acid, an important second messenger in cell signaling.

**Keywords:** arachidonic acid; *c-kit*; phospholipase D; phosphatidylinositol 3′-kinase; stem cell factor.

The *c-kit* proto-oncogene encodes a receptor protein-tyrosine kinase, which is structurally related to the receptors for platelet-derived growth factor and colony-stimulating factor-1 (Yarden et al., 1987). The *c-kit* gene is allelic with the murine dominant white spotting (*W*) locus, while its ligand, stem cell factor (SCF), is encoded by the murine steel (*Sl*) locus (Witte, 1990). A number of mutations in these loci have been described, and give rise to defects in migration, differentiation and proliferation of stem cells in the melanogenic, gametogenic and hematopoietic lineages (Besmer, 1991; Fleischmann, 1993). Binding of SCF to the Kit/SCF receptor (SCFR) induces dimerization and autophosphorylation of the receptor on tyrosine residues (Blume-Jensen et al., 1991; Herbst et al., 1991; Lev et al., 1991), thereby creating docking sites for cytoplasmic signaling molecules containing Src homology 2 (SH2) domains (Pawson, 1995). SH2 domains are found in many signal-transduction molecules and consist of a stretch of about 100 amino acids, which bind phosphorylated tyrosine residues in receptors and other molecules. It has been demonstrated that Tyr721 becomes phosphorylated in response to SCF (Serve et al., 1994), creating a binding site for phosphatidylinositol-3′-kinase (PtdIns 3′-kinase). PtdIns 3′-kinase is a heterodimeric enzyme composed of a 110-kDa catalytic subunit and an 85-kDa regulatory subunit, containing two SH2 domains and a Src homology 3 (SH3) domain (Hiles et al., 1992; Skolnik et al., 1991). Activation of PtdIns 3′-kinase leads to phosphorylation of inositol phospholipids in the D3 position (Kapeller and Cantley, 1994). We have shown previously that PtdIns 3′-kinase is involved in SCF-induced mitogenicity in porcine aortic endothelial (PAE) cells transfected with SCFR (Blume-Jensen et al., 1994). Moreover, Serve et al. (1995) showed a dependency of PtdIns 3′-kinase activity for SCFR-mediated cell adhesion, and it was reported recently that PtdIns 3′-kinase may have a function in SCF-mediated release of histamine in human mast cells (Nagai et al., 1995). However, the exact role of PtdIns 3′-kinase in SCFR signaling remains to be elucidated.

We have demonstrated previously that SCFR is mainly phosphorylated on serine residues in response to ligand stimulation, constituting approximately 90% of the total receptor phosphorylation (Blume-Jensen et al., 1993). The major part of this serine phosphorylation was shown to be mediated by protein kinase C (PKC). Diacylglycerol, the physiological activator of the classical PKC enzymes (Dekker and Parker, 1994), is produced through the action of PtdIns-specific phospholipase C (PLC). An alternative pathway for production of diacylglycerol is through the action of phosphatidylcholine(PtdCho)-specific phospholipase D (PtdCho-PLD), which hydrolyzes PtdCho, resulting in the production of phosphatidic acid (PtdH) and choline. PtdH phosphohydrolase can degrade PtdH to yield diacylglycerol (Bilah and Anthes, 1990; Exton, 1990). Several investigators have reported a lack of activation of PLC-γ in response to activation

**Correspondence to L. Rönnstrand, Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, Uppsala Branch, Biomedical Centre, S-751 24 Uppsala, Sweden**

**Abbreviations.** A<sub>4</sub>Ach, arachidonic acid; PtdH, phosphatidic acid; PAE, porcine aortic endothelial; PtdCho, phosphatidylcholine; PtdCho-PLD, phosphatidylcholine-specific phospholipase D; PtdIns 3′-kinase, phosphatidylinositol 3′-kinase; PKC, protein kinase C; PLA<sub>2</sub>, phospholipase A<sub>2</sub>; PLC, phospholipase C; PLD, phospholipase D; SCF, stem cell factor; SCFR, Kit/SCF receptor; SH2, Src homology 2.

**Enzymes.** Phospholipase D (EC 3.1.4.4); 1-phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (EC 2.7.1.137); protein kinase (EC 2.7.1.37); phospholipase A<sub>2</sub> (EC 3.1.1.4); phospholipase C (EC 3.1.4.3).

of the SCFR (Koike et al., 1993; Lev et al., 1991). In rat peritoneal mast cells, it was shown that SCF stimulated the activity of PLD, but not of PtdIns-specific PLC-γ (Koike et al., 1993). However, the exact mechanism of activation of protein kinase C in response to SCF has not been fully clarified.

In this study, we have investigated the mechanism of SCF-induced activation of PKC in PAE cells stably transfected with the SCFR. We show that SCF stimulates PtdCho-PLD activity, but not phosphatidylinositol-specific PLC. Furthermore, we demonstrate that the activation of PLD is dependent on the activity of Ptdlns 3′-kinase. Downstream of PLD, PtdH is further metabolized to yield diacylglycerol, which may activate PKC and, moreover, serve as a precursor for secreted form(s) of arachidonic acid (A₄Ach). We also show that phospholipase A₂ (PLA₂) can constitute another pathway for generation of A₄Ach in response to SCF.

### EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES

#### Materials. myo-[³H]inositol (90 Ci/mmol), [methyl-³H]choline chloride (85 Ci/mmol) and [5,6,8,9,11,12,14,15-³H]A₄Ach (212.1 Ci/mmol) were purchased from Amersham. Calphostin C and staurosporine were obtained from Calbiochem. Phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate was obtained from Sigma. DL-Propranolol hydrochloride and 1,6-bis(cyclohexyloximinocarbonylamino)-hexane (RHC-80267) were obtained from Funakoshi Pharmaceutical Co. LY294002 and quinacrine were obtained from Biomol, and geneticin (G418 sulfate) from Life Technologies, Inc.

#### Site-directed mutagenesis and plasmid constructs. Mutations were introduced using the Altered Sites in vitro mutagenesis system (Promega Corp.) according to the manufacturer’s instructions, essentially as described (Blume-Jensen et al., 1995). Single-stranded DNA was produced from a fragment of the human *c-kit* cDNA cloned into the phagemid vector pALTER™-1. To replace Tyr721 with Phe, the following oligonucleotide was used in the mutagenesis reaction (mutated base underlined): 5′-GTACTAATGAGTTCATGGAC-3′ (ON18). Colonies were screened for mutations by direct sequencing (Sequenase version 2.0 DNA dideoxynucleotide sequencing kit; U.S. Biochemical Corp.). The mutated fragment was subcloned into the full-length *c-kit* cDNA in the mammalian expression vector pSV7d (Truett et al., 1985). The mutated *c-kit* cDNA was cloned into pcDNA1/Neo, a cytomegalovirus-based expression vector.

#### Establishment of stable SCFR-expressing PAE cell line. PAE cells (Miyazono et al., 1985) were transfected with the vector containing the [Phe721]SCFR mutant construct by electroporation and clonally expanded in the presence of geneticin, as described (Blume-Jensen et al., 1995).

#### Measurement of production of inositol phosphates. Measurement of total inositol phosphates was performed essentially according to Berridge et al. (1983). Cultured cells were labeled with myo-[³H]inositol (1.5 μCi/ml) for 24 h in inositol-free Ham’s F-12 medium. The labeled cells were incubated for 10 min at 37°C with 1 ml 10 mM LiCl in 5 mM Hepes, pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 5 mM KCl, 5.5 mM glucose, 0.8 mM MgSO₄ and 1 mM CaCl₂ (buffer A) containing 0.01% BSA. The cells were stimulated with SCF or NaF for the indicated times periods. The reaction was terminated by addition of 1 ml 30% trichloroacetic acid. The acidic supernatants were treated with diethyl ether to remove the acid, neutralized with NaOH, and applied to 1-ml Dowex AG1-X8 columns (100–200 mesh, formate form; Biorad). After washing the columns with 5 mM sodium tetraborate, 60 mM sodium formate, the radioactive inositol phosphates were eluted with 8 ml 0.1 M formic acid, 1.0 M ammonium formate. Radioactivity was measured in a liquid scintillation counter. Each experiment was repeated twice with similar results.

#### Measurement of the production of phosphocholine and choline. Cultured cells were labeled with [methyl-³H]choline chloride (1 μCi/ml) for 24 h in choline-free Ham’s F-12 medium. The labeled cells were incubated for 20 min at 37°C in buffer A containing 0.01% BSA. The cells were stimulated with SCF or phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate for the indicated times. The reaction was terminated by addition of 0.75 ml ice-cold methanol and the dishes were placed on ice for 10 min. The contents were transferred to tubes, to which chloroform was added; samples were then placed on ice for 1 h. Chloroform (0.75 ml) and water (0.35 ml) were added to give a final ratio of chloroform/methanol/water of 1:1:0.9 (by vol.). The tubes were centrifuged at 14000×g for 5 min and the upper aqueous methanolic phase was aspirated for analysis of water-soluble choline-containing metabolites. Separation was conducted on 1-ml Dowex 50-WH columns (200–400 mesh; Bio-Rad), as described by Cook and Wakelam (1989), with minor modifications. The upper phase was diluted to 5 ml with water and applied to the column. Glycerophosphocholine was eluted with 4 ml water, and phosphocholine was eluted with another 10 ml of water. Cho was eluted with 10 ml 1 M HCl. Where indicated, cells were pretreated with calphostin C for 20 min prior to ligand stimulation. Each experiment was repeated at least twice with similar results.

#### Measurement of transphosphatidylation induced by SCF. PAE cells expressing SCFR were seeded in 24-well plates and grown in 10% foetal calf serum/Ham’s F-12 for 24 h. Medium was changed to 0.3% foetal calf serum/Ham’s F-12 containing 10 μCi/ml [³H]palmitate and incubated for 24 h at 37°C. Just prior to stimulation, cells were washed twice with 0.3% foetal calf serum/10 mM Hepes, pH 7.4/Ham’s F-12 and 225 μl medium containing 5.5 μM LY294002 or vehicle. 0.3% butan-1-ol was added to each well, and incubated for 10 min at 37°C. The cells were stimulated by addition of 25 μl 1.5 μg/ml SCF or vehicle for 10 min, after which the medium was aspirated and 0.5 ml ice-cold methanol was added. The cells were scraped off the plate and transferred into a polypropylene tubes. The wells were washed with 200 μl methanol, which was pooled with the lysate. To each tube was added 0.7 ml chloroform containing 20 μg phosphatidylbutanol as internal standard. The tubes were vortexed and incubated for 15 min at room temperature. To induce phase separation, 0.63 ml water was added to each tube, and after vortexing they were centrifuged for 5 min in a microfuge at maximum speed. The upper phase was discarded and the lower phase evaporated. The lipids were dissolved in 50 μl chloroform/methanol (19:1, by vol.), and a small aliquot was taken for counting of total lipid content, while the rest was applied to Whatman LK5DF plates (which had been activated by heating to 120°C for 30 min), and developed in the organic phase of 2,2,2-trimethylpentane/ethyl acetate/acetic acid/water (50:110:20:100, by vol.) under non-equilibrium conditions in an unlined chromatography tank. After chromatography, the plates were dried and stained by iodine vapors. The area corresponding to phosphatidylbutanol was scraped off into a scintillation vial. After addition of 0.2 ml of methanol, 4 ml scintillation fluid were added, and scintillation counting was performed.

#### Assay for release of A₄Ach. Cultured cells were labeled with [³H]A₄Ach (0.25 μCi/dish) for 24 h in Ham’s F-12 medium. The labeled cells were washed four times with 1 ml buffer A. Subsequently the cells were incubated with 1 ml buffer A containing 0.1% essentially fatty acid-free BSA for 20 min at 37°C, and stimulated with SCF or NaF for the indicated times. The reaction was terminated by collecting the medium, and the radioactivity determined by liquid scintillation counting. Where indicated,

Kozawa et al. (Eur. J. Biochem. 248)

Fig. 1. Effect of SCF on choline and phosphocholine formation in PAE/kit cells. Cells labeled with \([methyl-^{3}H]\)choline were stimulated with various doses of SCF for 60 min, and the formation of choline (●) and phosphocholine (○) were determined. Each value represents the mean ± SD of triplicate determinations.

Fig. 2. Effect of SCF on choline formation in PAE cells expressing [Phe721]SCFR. Cells labeled with \([methyl-^{3}H]\)choline were stimulated with \(150 \mathrm{ng} / \mathrm{ml}\) SCF or vehicle for 60 min. Each value represents the mean ± SD of triplicate determinations.

cated, the cells were treated with propranolol, RHC-80267, wortmannin or LY294002 for 20 min prior to ligand stimulation. Each experiment was repeated at least twice with similar results.

Measurement of diacylglycerol production. Cells were treated with propranolol for 20 min at \(37^{\circ} \mathrm{C}\) or unstimulated, followed by stimulation with \(150 \mathrm{ng} / \mathrm{ml}\) SCF for 20 min in buffer A. The reaction was terminated by adding \(0.75 \mathrm{ml}\) ice-cold methanol, and the lipids were extracted by the method of Bligh and Dyer (1959). Diacylglycerol was quantitated using the sn-1,2-diacylglycerol assay system, essentially according to the procedure of Preiss et al. (1986).

---

**RESULTS**

Effect of SCF on phosphatidylinositol-hydrolyzing PLC activity in PAE cells expressing wild-type SCFR. PtdIns-specific PLC hydrolyzes inositol phospholipids, resulting in formation of diacylglycerol and inositol trisphosphate. In some cell systems, PLC-γ has been claimed to be phosphorylated and activated in response to SCF (Herbst et al., 1991; Reith et al., 1991), whereas other groups have reported no effect on PLC-γ phosphorylation and activation after SCF stimulation of the SCFR (Lev et al., 1991). Therefore, we examined the effect of SCF on formation of inositol-phosphates in PAE cells expressing wild-type SCFR labeled with myo-\({ }^{[3} \mathrm{H}]\)inositol. We found that SCF had no effect on the formation of inositol phosphates (control, \(10144 \pm 367 \mathrm{cpm}\); \(150 \mathrm{ng} / \mathrm{ml}\) SCF, \(10712 \pm 286 \mathrm{cpm}\); \(40 \mathrm{mM} \mathrm{NaF}, 41850 \pm 1955 \mathrm{cpm}\); each value represent the mean ± SD of triplicate determinations, measured after 30 min stimulation). Consistent with previous findings that heterotrimeric GTP-binding proteins are involved in signaling between receptors and PtdIns-specific PLC (Gilman, 1987), NaF significantly stimulated the formation of inositol phosphates in the PAE/kit cells. These findings suggest that PtdIns-hydrolyzing PLC is not activated by SCF. Thus, other sources of diacylglycerol are likely to be responsible for activation of PKC in response to SCF in these cells.

Fig. 3. Effect of SCF on transphosphatidylation activity in PAE/kit cells. Cells labeled with \({ }^{[3} \mathrm{H}]\)palmitate were stimulated with SCF or vehicle, in the absence or presence of LY294002 for 10 min, and \(0.3 \%\) butan-1-ol. The lipids were extracted and the amount of \({ }^{[3} \mathrm{H}]\)phosphatidylbutanol formed was measured by means of TLC. Each value represents the mean ± SD of triplicate determinations.

Effects of SCF on PtdCho-specific PLC and PtdCho-PLD activity in PAE/kit cells. To explore the possibility that activation of PKC by SCF stimulation occurs by diacylglycerol derived from PtdCho rather than PtdIns, we examined the effect of SCF on PtdCho-specific PLC and PtdCho-PLD activities in PAE/kit cells. The formation of Cho was stimulated significantly by SCF in these cells, indicating activation of PtdCho-specific PLD (Fig. 1). The effect of SCF on Cho formation was dose dependent between \(1 \mathrm{ng} / \mathrm{ml}\) and \(1 \mu \mathrm{g} / \mathrm{ml}\), and reached a plateau by 60 min (data not shown). PtdCho is hydrolyzed by PtdCho-specific PLC to yield phosphocholine (Nishizuka, 1995). However, SCF did not affect the formation of phosphocholine in these cells (Fig. 1). Thus, these findings suggest that the increased formation of Cho in response to SCF is due to the activation of PtdCho-specific PLD. It has been reported that Tyr721 in SCFR becomes phosphorylated in response to SCF,

Fig. 4. The effect of propranolol on SCF-induced production of diacylglycerol in PAE/kit cells. Cells were preincubated with 300 μM propranolol for 20 min, followed by stimulation with 150 ng/ml SCF for 20 min. Lipids were extracted and the amount of diacylglycerol produced quantified. Each value represents the means ± SD of triplicate determinations.

Fig. 5. Effect of SCF on Δ<sub>4</sub>Ach release in PAE/kit cells. Cells labeled with [³H]Δ<sub>4</sub>Ach were stimulated with various doses of SCF for 30 min. Released Δ<sub>4</sub>Ach was quantified by scintillation counting. Each value represents the mean ± SD of triplicate determinations.

Effect of propranolol on diacylglycerol production after SCF treatment of PAE/kit cells. Propranolol, an inhibitor PtdH phosphohydrolase, was used to assess the importance of the PLD pathway in generating diacylglycerol after SCF stimulation of PAE/kit cells. It was shown that incubation of the cells with propranolol led to a strong inhibition of release of diacylglycerol after SCF stimulation (Fig. 4). Basal levels of diacylglycerol in the cells were unaffected by propranolol (data not shown). Thus, the majority of diacylglycerol released after stimulation of PAE/

Fig. 6. Effect of different inhibitors on SCF-induced Δ<sub>4</sub>Ach release in PAE/kit cells. Cells labeled with [³H]Δ<sub>4</sub>Ach were treated with 300 μM propranolol, 10 μM RHC-80267, 50 μM LY294002, 10 μM quinacrine or vehicle for 20 min, then stimulated with 150 ng/ml SCF or vehicle for 30 min. Released Δ<sub>4</sub>Ach was quantified by scintillation counting. Each value represents the mean ± SD of triplicate determinations.

kit cells with SCF occurred through dephosphorylation of PtdH, produced by the action of PLD.

Effect of SCF on Δ<sub>4</sub>Ach release in PAE/kit cells. PtdCho-PLD hydrolyzes PtdkCho to yield Cho and PtdH. Through dephosphorylation, PtdH is metabolized to yield diacylglycerol, an activator of PKC. Apart from being an activator of PKC, diacylglycerol serves as a source for Δ<sub>4</sub>Ach, a precursor in the synthesis of eicosanoids. Δ<sub>4</sub>Ach can be produced either through deacylation of phospholipids by PLA<sub>2</sub> or through the action of diacylglycerol lipase (Khan et al., 1995). We found that in PAE/kit cells, SCF significantly stimulated the release of Δ<sub>4</sub>Ach in a dose-dependent manner (Fig. 5).

Effect of different inhibitors on SCF-induced release of Δ<sub>4</sub>Ach in PAE/kit cells. We examined the effect of the PtdH phosphohydrolase inhibitor propranolol (Pappu and Hauser, 1983), on the SCF-induced release of Δ<sub>4</sub>Ach in these cells. Propranolol, which alone had little effect on Δ<sub>4</sub>Ach release, significantly suppressed SCF-induced Δ<sub>4</sub>Ach release in PAE/kit cells (Fig. 6). Since Δ<sub>4</sub>Ach can be produced by the action of either PLA<sub>2</sub> or diacylglycerol lipase, we examined the effect of RHC-80267, an inhibitor of diacylglycerol lipase (Sutherland and Amin, 1982), on SCF-induced release. RHC-80267, which alone did not affect basal Δ<sub>4</sub>Ach release, markedly inhibited the release of Δ<sub>4</sub>Ach stimulated by SCF, almost to the level of control (Fig. 6). However, by use of the inhibitor of PLA<sub>2</sub>, quinacrine (Schoene, 1978), we could show that a significant proportion of the Δ<sub>4</sub>Ach was produced through the action of PLA<sub>2</sub> (Fig. 6). The net increase of Δ<sub>4</sub>Ach release induced by SCF in the presence of quinacrine was 23% of the increase in the control. It has been reported that PtdIns 3'-kinase is activated after ligand binding to the SCFR (Serve et al., 1994). Thus, we examined the effect of LY294002, an inhibitor of PtdIns 3'-kinase activity (Vlahos et al., 1994), on SCF-induced Δ<sub>4</sub>Ach release in these cells. We found that LY294002 significantly suppressed SCF-induced Δ<sub>4</sub>Ach release in these cells (Fig. 6). Similarly another inhibitor of PtdIns 3'-kinase, wortmannin (Arcaro and Wymann, 1993), inhibited SCF-induced Δ<sub>4</sub>Ach release (data not shown).

DISCUSSION

We have shown previously that most of the phosphorylation of SCFR in intact cells occurs on serine residues, also after li-

gand stimulation (Blume-Jensen et al., 1993). Most serine phosphorylation is mediated through the action of PKC. One pathway for the formation of the PKC-activator diacylglycerol (Dekker and Parker, 1994; Nishizuka, 1986) is by hydrolysis of PtdInsP₂ by PLC-γ. In a previous study (Blume-Jensen et al., 1994), we showed that SCF induces only a weak phosphorylation of PLC-γ in PAE/kit cells. In the present study, we show that SCF has no effect on formation of inositol phosphates in PAE/kit cells. Thus, it is unlikely that SCF activates PKC through PtdIns-specific PLC in these cells, a conclusion which is in agreement with findings by Koike et al. (1993) using rat mast cells and by Lev et al. (1991) using NIH3T3 cells. An alternative pathway for generation of diacylglycerol is through the activation of PtdCho-PLD, which hydrolyzes PtdCho to produce Cho and PtdH; PtdH can then be further converted to diacylglycerol by PtdH phosphohydrolase. We found that in PAE/kit cells stimulation with SCF led to activation of PtdCho-PLD, but not of PtdCho-specific PLC. Furthermore, SCF stimulated the release of Δ₄Ach, and propranolol, an inhibitor of PtdH phosphohydrolase (Pappu and Hauser, 1983), significantly suppressed SCF-induced production of Δ₄Ach in PAE/kit cells. This suggests that the conversion of PtdH to diacylglycerol is involved in the SCF-induced Δ₄Ach release in these cells. There are at least two pathways for generation of Δ₄Ach: through the action of PLA₂ on phospholipids; or through the diacylglycerol lipase pathway. Recent reports have reported on the positive regulation of cytoplasmic PLA₂ by PKC (Millar and Rozengurt, 1990). In mast cells stimulated with compound 48/49, Δ₄Ach was reported to be liberated from diacylglycerol through the action of diacylglycerol lipase and monoacylglycerol lipase (Lin et al., 1992). By use of RHC-80267, a potent inhibitor of diacylglycerol lipase (Sutherland and Amin, 1982), we could demonstrate an almost complete inhibition of SCF-induced Δ₄Ach release in PAE/kit cells. However, quinacrine, an inhibitor of PLA₂ (Schoene, 1978), significantly reduced the release of Δ₄Ach following SCF stimulation. This is in agreement with findings by Koike et al. (1993), who demonstrated SCF-dependent PLD activation and subsequent liberation of Δ₄Ach through the action of diacylglycerol lipase in rat mast cells.

Δ₄Ach has been implicated as a second messenger in cellular signaling. Apart from being a precursor in the eicosanoid biosynthesis pathway, it has also been shown to regulate PKC activity, at least *in vitro* (Khan et al., 1991, 1995; Shinomura et al., 1991). Furthermore, Millar and Rozengurt (1990) demonstrated that addition of Δ₄Ach to vasopressin-treated Swiss 3T3 cells restored the ability of the cells to respond mitogenically to bombesin, suggesting a role of Δ₄Ach in mitogenic response in some systems.

It has been shown that activation of PLD by the platelet-derived-growth-factor-β receptor, which is closely related to the SCFR (Yarden et al., 1987), is dependent on the action of PKC (Lee et al., 1994; Yeo et al., 1994). However, we could not demonstrate any inhibition of SCF-induced PtdCho-PLD activity by use of the PKC inhibitor calphostin C (data not shown), an inhibitor of the classical PKC enzymes. The involvement of other PKC isoforms, however, cannot be excluded. Two lines of evidence indicate that PtdIns 3′-kinase is important for SCF-induced activation of PtdCho-specific PLD. Inhibitors of PtdIns 3′-kinase, wortmannin (Arcaro and Wymann, 1993) and LY294002 (Vlahos et al., 1994), were able to almost completely suppress SCF-stimulated release of Δ₄Ach. Moreover, SCF did not affect PtdCho-specific PLD activity in mutant cell lines lacking the PtdIns 3′-kinase binding site, Tyr721, suggesting that PtdIns 3′-kinase lies upstream of PLD in a pathway leading to release of Δ₄Ach. This potential pathway is summarized in Fig. 7. The exact mechanism whereby PtdIns 3′-kinase activates

---

**Fig. 7. Schematic illustration of a possible model for pathways leading to Δ₄Ach release in response to stimulation of SCFR. Activation of SCFR through binding of SCF causes activation of its intrinsic tyrosine-kinase activity, leading to autophosphorylation on a number of tyrosine residues. Binding of PtdIns 3′-kinase to phosphorylated Tyr721 on SCFR leads to its activation; among other effects in the cells, PtdIns 3′-kinase induces activation of PtdCho-PLD. Through the action of PtdCho-PLD, PtdCho is hydrolyzed to yield Cho and PtdH. Dephosphorylation of PtdH by PtdH phosphohydrolase leads to generation of diacylglycerol, which serves as an activator of PKC, leading to down-modulation of the kinase activity of SCFR, and as a precursor for Δ₄Ach. Diacylglycerol is hydrolyzed by diacylglycerol lipase to yield Δ₄Ach. An alternative pathway leading to production of Δ₄Ach goes through the activation of PLA₂, resulting in production of Δ₄Ach and lyso-PtdCho. Acyl₂Gro, diacylglycerol; acylGro, monoacylglycerol.**

PLD is not known. The activity of PtdIns 3′-kinase has been demonstrated to be important for activation of PLD in a number of systems (Bonser et al., 1991; Rivard et al., 1995), while in some cases inhibition of PtdIns 3′-kinase leads to increased PLD activation (Kanoh et al., 1992; Kiss and Tomono, 1995; Kozawa et al., 1995). Several studies have suggested an involvement of PtdIns 3′-kinase in the activation of certain isoforms of PKC. Thus, Toker et al. (1994) showed that, at least under certain conditions, phosphatidylinositol 3,4,5-trisphosphate, the product of PtdIns 3′-kinase, was able to activate PKC-ζ. Furthermore, Akimoto et al. (1996) demonstrated that activation of PKC-λ by the epidermal-growth-factor receptor or the platelet-derived growth-factor receptor is dependent on PtdIns 3′-kinase. Another isoform of PKC, PKC-ε, is dependent on PLC-γ or PtdIns 3′-kinase for its activation (Moriya et al., 1996). Whether atypical forms of PKC are involved downstream of PtdIns 3′-kinase in the pathway leading to activation of PtdCho-specific PLD remains to be elucidated.

In conclusion, our data suggest that SCF activates PtdCho-PLD through a PtdIns 3′-kinase-dependent pathway, leading to production of PtdH, which is metabolized to yield diacylglycerol. Diacylglycerol serves as an activator of PKC, and as a precursor to Δ₄Ach, which is released through the action of diacylglycerol lipase. An alternative route of Δ₄Ach release in

these cells is through the activation of PLA₂, although the signal-
transduction pathway(s) leading to SCF-induced activation of
PLA₂ is not known. The exact role of A₄Ach in SCF signaling
remains to be elucidated. One possibility is that it serves as a
precursor in the synthesis of eicosanoids, compounds that have
shown to have a number of effects on target cells.

We thank Drs Koutaro Yokote and Akira Ishizaki, for expert technical
assistance in the assay for release of A₄Ach, and Ingegärd Schiller,
for help in preparing this manuscript.

**REFERENCES**

Akimoto, K., Takahashi, R., Moriya, S., Nishioka, N., Takayanagi, J.,
Kimura, K., Fukui, Y., Osada, S., Mizuno, K., Hirai, S., Kazlauskas,
A. & Ohno, S. (1996) EGF or PDGF receptors activate atypical
PKCλ through phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase, *EMBO J.* 15, 788–
798.

Arcaro, A. & Wymann, M. P. (1993) Wortmannin is a potent phosphati-
dylinositol 3-kinase inhibitor: the role of phosphatidylinositol 3,4,5-
trisphosphate in neutrophil responses, *Biochem. J.* 296, 297–301.

Berridge, M. J., Dawson, R. M. C., Downes, C. P., Heslop, J. P. & Irvine, R. F. (1983) Changes in the levels of inositol phosphates after
agonist-dependent hydrolysis of membrane phosphoinositides, *Bio-
chem. J.* 212, 473–482.

Besmer, P. (1991) The kit ligand encoded at the murine Steel locus: a
pleiotropic growth and differentiation factor, *Curr. Opin. Cell Biol.*
3, 939–946.

Billah, M. M. & Anthes, J. C. (1990) The regulation and cellular func-
tions of phosphatidylcholine hydrolysis, *Biochem. J.* 269, 281–291.

Bligh, E. G. & Dyer, W. J. (1959) A rapid method of total lipid extraction
and purification, *Can. J. Biochem. Physiol.* 37, 911–917.

Blume-Jensen, P., Claesson-Welsh, L., Siegbahn, A., Zsebo, K. M.,
Westermark, B. & Heldin, C.-H. (1991) Activation of the human
c-kit product by ligand-induced dimerization mediates circular actin
reorganization and chemotaxis, *EMBO J.* 10, 4121–4128.

Blume-Jensen, P., Rönnsstrand, L., Gout, I., Waterfield, M. D. & Heldin,
C.-H. (1994) Modulation of Kit/stem cell factor receptor-induced
signaling by protein kinase C, *J. Biol. Chem.* 269, 21793–21802.

Blume-Jensen, P., Siegbahn, A., Stabel, S., Heldin, C.-H. & Rönnsstrand,
L. (1993) Increased Kit/SCF receptor induced mitogenicity but abolished
cell motility after inhibition of protein kinase C, *EMBO J.* 12,
4199–4209.

Blume-Jensen, P., Wernstedt, C., Heldin, C.-H. & Rönnsstrand, L. (1995)
Identification of the major phosphorylation sites for protein kinase
C in Kit/stem cell factor receptor in vitro and in intact cells, *J. Biol.
Chem.* 270, 14192–14200.

Bonser, R. W., Thompson, N. T., Randall, R. W., Tateson, J. E., Spacey,
G. D., Hodson, H. F. & Garland, L. G. (1991) Demethoxyviridin and
wortmannin block phospholipase C and D activation in the human
neutrophil, *Br. J. Pharmacol.* 103, 1237–1241.

Cook, S. J. & Wakelam, M. J. (1989) Analysis of the water-soluble
products of phosphatidylcholine breakdown by ion-exchange chroma-
tography. Bombesin and TPA (12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol 13-acetate)
stimulate choline generation in Swiss 3T3 cells by a common
mechanism, *Biochem. J.* 263, 581–587.

Dekker, L. V. & Parker, P. J. (1994) Protein kinase C — a question of
specificity, *Trends. Biochem. Sci.* 19, 73–77.

Exton, J. H. (1990) Signaling through phosphatidylcholine breakdown,
*J. Biol. Chem.* 265, 1–4.

Fleischman, R. A. (1993) From white spots to stem cells: the role of the
Kit receptor in mammalian development, *Trends Genet.* 9, 285–290.

Gilman, A. G. (1987) G proteins: transducers of receptor-generated signals, *Annu. Rev. Biochem.* 56, 615–649.

Herbst, R., Lammers, R., Schlessinger, J. & Ullrich, A. (1991) Substrate
phosphorylation specificity of the human c-kit receptor tyrosine ki-
nase, *J. Biol. Chem.* 266, 19908–19916.

Hiles, I. D., Otsu, M., Volinia, S., Fry, M. J., Gout, I., Dhand, R., Pana-
yotou, G., Ruiz-Larrea, F., Thompson, A., Totty, N. F., Hsuan, J. J.,
Courtneidge, S. A., Parker, P. J. & Waterfield, M. D. (1992) Phospha-
tidylinositol 3-kinase: Structure and expression of the 110 kd cata-
lytic subunit, *Cell* 70, 419–429.


Kanoh, H., Ohbayashi, H., Matsuda, Y., Nonomura, Y. & Nozawa, Y.
(1992) Enhancing effect of wortmannin on muscarinic stimulation
of phospholipase D in rat pheochromocytoma PC12 cells, *Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun.* 188, 510–515.

Kapeller, R. & Cantley, L. C. (1994) Phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase, *Bio-
essays* 16, 565–576.

Khan, W., el Touny, S. & Hannun, Y. A. (1991) Arachidonic and cis-
unsaturated fatty acids induce selective platelet substrate phosphory-
lation through activation of cytosolic protein kinase C, *FEBS Lett.*
292, 98–102.

Khan, W. A., Blobé, G. C. & Hannun, Y. A. (1995) Arachidonic acid
and free fatty acids as second messengers and the role of protein
kinase C, *Cell. Signalling* 7, 171–184.

Kiss, Z. & Tomono, M. (1995) Wortmannin has opposite effects on phor-
bol ester-induced DNA synthesis and phosphatidylcholine hydroly-
sis, *FEBS Lett.* 371, 185–187.

Koike, T., Hirai, K., Morita, Y. & Nozawa, Y. (1993) Stem cell factor-
induced signal transduction in rat mast cells. Activation of phospho-
lipase D but not phosphoinositide-specific phospholipase C in c-kit
receptor stimulation, *J. Immunol.* 151, 359–366.

Kozawa, O., Suzuki, A., Shinoda, J. & Oiso, Y. (1995) Genistein inhibits
potentiation by wortmannin of protein kinase C-activated phospholi-
pase D in osteoblast-like cells, *Cell. Signalling* 7, 219–223.

Lee, Y. H., Kim, H. S., Pai, J. K., Ryu, S. H. & Suh, P. G. (1994)
Activation of phospholipase D induced by platelet-derived growth
factor is dependent upon the level of phospholipase C-γ1, *J. Biol.
Chem.* 269, 26842–26847.

Lev, S., Givol, D. & Yarden, Y. (1991) A specific combination of sub-
strates is involved in signal transduction by the kit-encoded receptor,
*EMBO J.* 10, 647–654.

Lin, H. Y., Wang, X.-F., Ng-Eaton, E., Weinberg, R. A. & Lodish, H. F.
(1992) Expression cloning of the TGF-β type II receptor, a functional
transmembrane serine/threonine kinase, *Cell* 68, 775–785.

Millar, J. B. A. & Rozengurt, E. (1990) Arachidonic acid release by
bombesin. A novel postreceptor target for heterologous mitogenic
desensitization, *J. Biol. Chem.* 265, 19973–19979.

Miyazono, K., Okabe, T., Urabe, A., Yamanaha, M. & Takaku, F. (1985)
A platelet factor that stimulates the proliferation of vascular endothe-
lial cells, *Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun.* 126, 83–88.

Moriya, S., Kazlauskas, A., Akimoto, K., Hirai, S., Mizuno, K., Take-
nawa, T., Fukui, Y., Watanabe, Y., Ozaki, S. & Ohno, S. (1996) Plate-
let-derived growth factor activates protein kinase Cε through redun-
dant and independent signaling pathways involving phospholipase
Cy or phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase, *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* 93,
151–155.

Nagai, S., Kitani, S., Hirai, K., Takaishi, T., Nakajima, K., Kihara, H.,
Nonomura, Y., Ito, K. & Morita, Y. (1995) Pharmacological study
of stem-cell-factor-induced mast cell histamine release with kinase
inhibitors, *Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun.* 208, 576–581.

Nishizuka, Y. (1986) Studies and perspectives of protein kinase C, *Sci-
ence* 233, 305–312.

Nishizuka, Y. (1995) Protein kinase C and lipid signaling for sustained
cellular responses, *FASEB J.* 9, 484–496.

Pappu, A. S. & Hauser, G. (1983) Propranolol-induced inhibition of rat
brain cytoplasmic phosphatidate phosphohydrolase, *Neurochem. Res.*
8, 1565–1575.

Pawson, T. (1995) Protein modules and signalling networks, *Nature* 373,
573–580.

Preiss, J., Loomis, C. R., Bishop, W. R., Niedel, J. E. & Bell, R. M.
(1986) Quantitative measurement of sn-1,2-diacylglycerols present
in platelets, hepatocytes, and ras- and sis-transformed normal rat kidney cells, *J. Biol. Chem.* 261, 8597–8600.

Reith, A. D., Ellis, C., Lyman, S. D., Anderson, D. M., Williams, D. W.,
Bernstein, A. & Pawson, T. (1991) Signal transduction by normal
isoforms and W mutant variants of the Kit receptor tyrosine kinase,
*EMBO J.* 10, 2451–2459.

Rivard, N., Rydzewska, G., Lods, J. S. & Morisset, J. (1995) Novel
model of integration of signaling pathways in rat pancreatic acinar
cells, *Am. J. Physiol.* 269, G352–G362.

Schoene, N. W. (1978) Properties of platelet phospholipase A2, *Adv.
Prostaglandin Thromboxane Res.* 3, 121–126.

Serve, H., Hsu, Y. C. & Besmer, P. (1994) Tyrosine residue 719 of the
c-kit receptor is essential for binding of the P85 subunit of phosphati-

dylinositol (PI) 3-kinase and for c-kit-associated PI 3-kinase activity in COS-1 cells, *J. Biol. Chem.* 269, 6026–6030.

Serve, H., Yee, N. S., Stella, G., Sepp-Lorenzino, L., Tan, J. C. & Besmer, P. (1995) Differential roles of PI3-kinase and Kit tyrosine 821 in Kit receptor-mediated proliferation, survival and cell adhesion in mast cells, *EMBO J.* 14, 473–483.

Shinomura, T., Asaoka, Y., Oka, M., Yoshida, K. & Nishizuka, Y. (1991) Synergistic action of diacylglycerol and unsaturated fatty acid for protein kinase C activation: its possible implications, *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* 88, 5149–5153.

Skolnik, E. Y., Margolis, B., Mohammadi, M., Lowenstein, E., Fischer, R., Drepps, A., Ullrich, A. & Schlessinger, J. (1991) Cloning of PI3 kinase-associated p85 utilizing a novel method for expression/cloning of target proteins for receptor tyrosine kinases, *Cell* 65, 83–90.

Sutherland, C. A. & Amin, D. (1982) Relative activities of rat and dog platelet phospholipase A₂ and diglyceride lipase, *J. Biol. Chem.* 257, 14006–14010.

Toker, A., Meyer, M., Reddy, K. K., Falck, J. R., Aneja, R., Aneja, S., Parra, A., Burns, D. J., Ballas, L. M. & Cantley, L. C. (1994) Activation of protein kinase C family members by the novel polyphosphoinositides PtdIns-3,4-P2 and PtdIns-3,4,5-P3, *J. Biol. Chem.* 269, 32358–32367.

Truett, M. A., Blacher, R., Burke, R. L., Caput, D., Chu, C., Dina, D., Hartog, K., Kuo, C. H., Masiarz, F. R., Merryweather, J. P., Najarian, R., Pachl, C., Potter, S. J., Puma, J., Quiroga, M., Rall, L. B., Randolph, A., Urdea, M. S., Valenzuela, P., Dahl, H. H., Flavalaro, J., Hansen, J., Nordfang, O. & Ezban, M. (1985) Characterization of the polypeptide composition of human factor VIII:C and the nucleotide sequence and expression of human kidney cDNA, *DNA* 4, 333–349.

Vlahos, C. J., Matter, W. F., Hui, K. Y. & Brown, R. F. (1994) A specific inhibitor of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase, 2-(4-morpholinyl)-8-phenyl-4H-1-benzopyran-4-one (LY294002), *J. Biol. Chem.* 269, 5241–5248.

Witte, O. N. (1990) Steel locus defines new multipotent growth factor, *Cell* 63, 5–6.

Yarden, Y., Kuang, W.-J., Yang-Feng, T., Coussens, L., Munemitsu, S., Dull, T. J., Chen, E., Schlessinger, J., Francke, U. & Ullrich, A. (1987) Human proto-oncogene *c-kit*: a new cell surface receptor tyrosine kinase for an unidentified ligand, *EMBO J.* 6, 3341–3351.

Yeo, E. J., Kazlauskas, A. & Exton, J. H. (1994) Activation of phospholipase C-γ is necessary for stimulation of phospholipase D by platelet-derived growth factor, *J. Biol. Chem.* 269, 27823–27826.
