
J.P., ed.), pp. 1–66, Wiley-Liss
5 Davis, M. (1992) in *The Amygdala: Neurobiological Aspects of Emotion, Memory, and Mental Dysfunction* (Aggleton, J.P., ed.), pp. 255–305, Wiley-Liss
6 Kapp, B.S. *et al.* (1992) in *The Amygdala: Neurobiological Aspects of Emotion, Memory, and Mental Dysfunction* (Aggleton, J.P., ed.), pp. 229–
REVIEW
Y. Ben-Ari et al. – Developmentally regulated receptor activity

concentration probably resulting from developmental changes in \([Cl^-]_i\) homeostasis systems \(^{7,17-21}\).

The depolarizing effects of GABA result in unique interactions between \(GABA_A\) and voltage- and receptor-operated ionic channels. In contrast to their action on adult neurones, activation of \(GABA_A\) receptors depolarizes immature neurones and this depolarization reaches the threshold for \(Na^+\) action potential generation, meaning that GABA operates as an excitatory neurotransmitter
The importance of GABAergic excitation for the interactions between neurones in the immature network is reinforced by the fact that establishment of GABAergic synaptic connections precedes the appearance of glutamatergic synapses¹,⁵,⁴⁰,⁴¹ that in addition initially lack functional AMPA receptors, and thus are silent at resting membrane potential⁴¹⁻⁴⁴. Therefore, prior to glutamatergic innervation and at the time when AMPA receptors are relatively quiescent, GABAergic innervation provides an important source for the neuronal excitation.

### Sequential development of NMDA and
REVIEW
Y. Ben-Ari et al. – Developmentally regulated receptor activity

GABA<sub>A</sub> or NMDA receptors, suggesting that the synergistic excitatory actions of GABA<sub>A</sub> and NMDA receptors are required for the induction of this form of plasticity<sup>63</sup> (see Box 1). Therefore the Hebbian 'coincidence detector' role of NMDA receptors is not restricted to the modulation of the classical AMPA receptor-mediated excitatory transmission: early in development, NMDA receptors may control the efficacy of GABAergic transmission,
Box I. LTD and LTP of neonatal GABAergic synapses

Long term potentiation (LTP) and depression (LTD) are the two classical forms of activity-dependent synaptic plasticity at excitatory glutamatergic synapses. Electrical stimulation or other experimental paradigms that remove the voltage-dependent Mg²⁺ block from NMDA channels and increase [Ca²⁺]ᵢ generate long-term changes in synaptic efficacy that are expressed by AMPA receptors. It appeared recently that not only glutamatergic synapses but also GABAergic synapses are subject to short-term and long-term changes in which activation of
REVIEW
Y. Ben-Ari et al. – Developmentally regulated receptor activity

A
Pyramidal cell,  
whole cell  

Interneurone,  
cell-attached  

B
Whole cell  

C

Fig. 4. Giant Depolarizing Potentials are associated with synchronous \([Ca^{2+}]_{i}\) oscillations in CA3 pyramidal neurons of neonatal hippocampal slices. (A) Simultaneous recording of CA3 pyramidal neurone in whole-cell voltage-clamp configuration (upper trace) and stratum radiatum interneurone in cell-attached configuration (lower
References

1  Hebb, D.O. (1949) *The Organization of Behaviour* John Wiley and Sons  
2  Goodman, C.S. and Shatz, C.J. (1993) *Cell/Neuron* 72/10 (Suppl.), 77–98  
3  Constantine-Paton, M., Cline, H.T. and Debski, E. (1990) *Annu. Rev. Neurosci.* 13, 129–154  
4  Cherubini, E., Gaiars