
JOURNAL OF BACTERIOLOGY, Nov. 1997, p. 6994–7003
0021-9193/97/$04.00+0
Copyright © 1997, American Society for Microbiology

# General Secretion Pathway (eps) Genes Required for Toxin Secretion and Outer Membrane Biogenesis in Vibrio cholerae

MARIA SANDKVIST,${}^{1\dagger}$ LINDA OVERBYE MICHEL,${}^{2}$ LLOYD P. HOUGH,${}^{2}$ VICTOR M. MORALES,${}^{3}$ MIRA BAGDASARIAN,${}^{2}$ MICHAEL KOOMEY,${}^{4}$ VICTOR J. DIRITA,${}^{4}$ AND MICHAEL BAGDASARIAN${}^{2*}$

Department of Microbiology and NSF Center for Microbial Ecology, Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan 48824${}^{2}$; Oral Infection and Immunity Branch, National Institute of Dental Research, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892-4350${}^{1}$; Gastroenterology Division, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts 02115${}^{3}$; and Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109${}^{4}$

Received 10 June 1997/Accepted 16 September 1997

The general secretion pathway (GSP) of *Vibrio cholerae* is required for secretion of proteins including chitinase, enterotoxin, and protease through the outer membrane. In this study, we report the cloning and sequencing of a DNA fragment from *V. cholerae*, containing 12 open reading frames, *epsC* to -N, which are similar to GSP genes of *Aeromonas, Erwinia, Klebsiella, Pseudomonas*, and *Xanthomonas* spp. In addition to the two previously described genes, *epsE* and *epsM* (M. Sandkvist, V. Morales, and M. Bagdasarian, Gene 123: 81–86, 1993; L. J. Overbye, M. Sandkvist, and M. Bagdasarian, Gene 132:101–106, 1993), it is shown here that *epsC, epsF, epsG*, and *epsL* also encode proteins essential for GSP function. Mutations in the *eps* genes result in aberrant outer membrane protein profiles, which indicates that the GSP, or at least some of its components, is required not only for secretion of soluble proteins but also for proper outer membrane assembly. Several of the Eps proteins have been identified by use of the T7 polymerase-promoter system in *Escherichia coli*. One of them, a pilin-like protein, EpsG, was analyzed also in *V. cholerae* and found to migrate as two bands on polyacrylamide gels, suggesting that in this organism it might be processed or otherwise modified by a prepilin peptidase. We believe that TcpJ prepilin peptidase, which processes the subunit of the toxin-coregulated pilus, TcpA, is not involved in this event. This is supported by the observations that apparent processing of EpsG occurs in a *tcpJ* mutant of *V. cholerae* and that, when coexpressed in *E. coli*, TcpJ cannot process EpsG although the PilD peptidase from *Neisseria gonorrhoeae* can.

In *Vibrio cholerae*, the general secretion pathway (GSP) is required for extracellular secretion of several proteins including chitinase, cholera toxin (CT), and protease (51, 60). This pathway likely plays a significant role in the survival of *Vibrio* in different environments as well as in its pathogenicity. For instance, secreted chitinase and protease may assist in the detachment of *V. cholerae* from chitinous waterborne particles and from host epithelial cells, respectively, thus facilitating dissemination (14, 71). CT is the major component responsible for inducing the diarrheal disease cholera and is therefore also involved in the dissemination process (for a review, see reference 30).

*Escherichia coli* heat-labile enterotoxin (LT) is very similar to CT in its structure, biochemical function, and ability to translocate across the outer membrane of *V. cholerae* (66). It is a multimeric protein which consists of a single A subunit and a pentamer of identical B-subunit polypeptides (18, 64, 65). Its secretion from *V. cholerae* proceeds in two steps, similar to the secretion of CT. The first step is translocation of the individual subunit polypeptides across the cytoplasmic membrane. This is mediated by a pathway which is presumably similar to the *sec* system of *E. coli* (63). During this step, the signal peptides of the A and B precursor polypeptides are cleaved off (8, 25, 52) and the mature subunits are transported to the periplasm.

Here they undergo folding and assembly to form the holotoxin (13, 23, 61). The second step is the translocation of the holotoxin (or the B-subunit pentamer if the A subunits are not present) through the outer membrane (22, 56). This requires the function of the GSP and, as shown in this work, occurs with the assistance of several gene products. This process seems to be highly conserved: GSP genes have been identified in a variety of bacteria, including *Aeromonas* (25), *Erwinia* (6, 21, 38, 57), *Klebsiella* (9), *Pseudomonas* (73), and *Xanthomonas* (11, 27) spp.

We report here the cloning and sequencing of a cluster of genes which constitute part of the GSP of *V. cholerae*. These genes appear to play a role not only in the secretion of soluble proteins through the outer membrane but also in the assembly of the outer membrane itself.

## MATERIALS AND METHODS

### Bacterial strains and plasmids.
Bacterial strains and plasmids used are listed in Table 1 and Fig. 1.

### DNA sequence analyses.
Nucleotide sequence determination was performed by the dideoxy chain termination method (62) with the Sequenase kit (U.S. Biochemical Corp.) or by the Taq polymerase cycle methods (2,7-deaza-GTP kit; U.S. Biochemical Corp.) on single- or double-stranded DNA. Products were analyzed either manually or with an ABI 373A automatic sequencer at the MSU-DOE-PRL Plant Biochemistry Facility. The insertion point of Tn5 in the *V. cholerae* TRH7000 *epsC* mutant was determined by sequencing the PCR-amplified fragments containing the insertion sequence (IS) and the adjacent chromosomal DNA by the method of Thien (72).

### Construction of *eps* mutants.
A *StuI* DNA fragment carrying the *Km**r*** gene of Tn903 was inserted into the *epsF, epsG*, and *epsL* genes by in vitro manipulation and introduced into the chromosome of *V. cholerae* by homologous recombination as described previously (58). An *epsE-lacZ* operon fusion was constructed by cloning a PCR fragment containing a promoterless *lacZ* gene into the *epsE* gene. The resulting fusion was introduced into the chromosomal *epsE* gene by homol-

* Corresponding author. Mailing address: Department of Microbiology and NSF Center for Microbial Ecology, S-110 Plant Biology Building, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI 48824. Phone: (517) 353-8619. Fax: (517) 353-1926. E-mail: bagdasa3@pilot.msu.edu.
† Present address: Jerome H. Holland Laboratories, Department of Biochemistry, American Red Cross, Rockville, MD 20855.

TABLE 1. Strains and plasmids used in this study

| Strain or plasmid | Relevant characteristic(s) | Source or reference |
|-------------------|---------------------------|---------------------|
| Strains          |                           |                     |
| $V$. cholerae    |                           |                     |
| 0395             | wt classical strain       | 42                  |
| JJM 43           | 0395$\Delta$toxR43$\Delta$ctxA1 | 22                  |
| TRH7000          | El Tor thy Hg$\mathrm{r}$ $\Delta$(ctxA-ctxB) | 24                  |
| J71K-1           | 0395tcpJ::Tn5              | 31                  |
| $E$. coli        |                           |                     |
| MC1061           | F$^{-}$ araD139$\Delta$(ara-leu) 7697$\Delta$(lac) X74rpsLhsdR2mcrAmcrB1 | 4                   |
| BL21(DE3)        | F$^{-}$ ompTT7 gene 1 under lacp control on $\lambda$ prophage | 68                  |
| Plasmids         |                           |                     |
| E26              | Cosmid pLAFR5::epsC to-N   | This study          |
| pGP1-2           | Km$\mathrm{r}$ T7 gene 1 under $\lambda$pL control, cI857 | 70                  |
| pMMB67EH         | Ap$\mathrm{r}$ Ptac mob$\mathrm{+}$ | 17                  |
| pMMB68           | pMMB67EHetxB under Ptac control | 59                  |
| pMMB206          | Same as pMMB67EH but Cm$\mathrm{r}$ | 45                  |
| pMMB356          | pMMB67EH::SacI fragment epsF | This study          |
| pMMB531          | pT7-5, KpnI fragment epsH to-M | This study          |
| pMMB547          | pT7-5::EcoRI fragment epsE to-N | This study          |
| pMMB551          | pT7-5::EcoRI-BamHI fragment epsE to-J | This study          |
| pMMB560          | pT7-6::HindIII-EcoRI fragment epsC | This study          |
| pMMB564          | pT7-5::HindII-XmnI fragment coordinates 5808–6609, epsG | This study          |
| pMMB574          | pMMB206::HindII-XmnI fragment epsG | This study          |
| pMMB586          | pGP1-2 with Km$\mathrm{r}$ replaced by Cm$\mathrm{r}$ | This study          |
| pMMB608          | pT7-5::HindIII fragment Bal31 treated, epsE | This study          |
| pMS10            | pMMB67HE::HindIII-EcoRI fragment epsC | This study          |
| pMS13            | pMMB207::KpnI-EcoRI fragment region downstream of epsN | This study          |
| pMS14            | Same as pMS13, but fragment in reverse orientation | This study          |
| pMS19            | pT7-5::XbaI-BamHI, epsF to-J | This study          |
| pMS21            | pMMB207:::tcpJ             | This study          |
| pMS37            | pT7-5::EcoRV fragment epsH to-K | 58                  |
| pMS38            | pT7-6::BamHI-SspI, epsL     | 58                  |
| pMS44            | pMMB67HE::BamHI-SspI, epsL  | This study          |
| pT7-5/6          | Ap$\mathrm{r}$ T7$\phi$10 promoter | 70                  |
| pTKK4            | pT7-5::HpaI-SspIepsKL       | This study          |
| pTKK5            | pT7-6::BamHI-KpnIepsLM      | This study          |
| pWD615           | Tc$\mathrm{r}$ etxB         | 7                   |

TABLE 2. Location and characteristics of predicted Eps reading frames in the sequence of the epsC to -N gene cluster

| Protein | ORF | No. of residues | Predicted mol wt |
|---------|-----|-----------------|------------------|
| EpsC    | 213–1130 | 305 | 33,592 |
| EpsD    | 1176–3200 | 674 | 73,337 |
| EpsE<sup>a</sup> | 3197–4708 | 503 | 56,358 |
| EpsF<sup>a</sup> | 4708–5928 | 406 | 44,916 |
| EpsG    | 5969–6409 | 146 | 16,063 |
| EpsH    | 6443–7027 | 194 | 21,739 |
| EpsI<sup>a</sup> | 7017–7370 | 117 | 13,493 |
| EpsJ<sup>a</sup> | 7364–8022 | 210 | 23,757 |
| EpsK<sup>a</sup> | 8012–9022 | 336 | 37,599 |
| EpsL<sup>a</sup> | 8991–10202 | 403 | 45,343 |
| EpsM    | 10209–10709 | 166 | 18,521 |
| EpsN<sup>a</sup> | 10711–11466 | 251 | 27,322 |

<sup>a</sup> Initiation codon of ORF overlaps termination codon of preceding ORF or is separated by 2 nucleotides or less.

FIG. 1. Physical and genetic map of the eps gene cluster. The extent of DNA fragments inserted into pT7-5 or pT7-6 vectors and used for deletion mapping and visualization of gene products is indicated by horizontal lines. Restriction site abbreviations: B, BamHI; E, EcoRI; H, HindIII; K, KpnI; S, SmaI; X, XbaI.

TABLE 3. Comparison of Eps proteins with GSP proteins from other gram-negative bacteria$^a$

| Protein | EpsC | EpsD | EpsE | EpsF | EpsG | EpsH | EpsI | EpsJ | EpsK | EpsL | EpsM | EpsN |
|---------|------|------|------|------|------|------|------|------|------|------|------|------|
| Exe     | C(39) | D(55) | E(67) | F(61) | G(77) | H(32) | I(49) | J(44) | K(38) | L(37) | M(32) | N(40) |
| Out     | C(35) | D(49) | E(65) | F(52) | G(69) | H(26) | I(37) | J(38) | K(36) | L(29) | M(29) |       |
| Pul     | C(32) | D(50) | E(61) | F(52) | G(68) | H(29) | I(37) | J(36) | K(37) | L(25) | M(26) | N(32) |
| Xcp     | P(23) | Q(35) | R(63) | S(48) | T(60) | U(33) | V(38) | W(29) | X(31) | Y(26) | Z(27) |       |
| Tcp     |      | T(29) | E(19) |      |      |      |      |      |      |      |      |       |
| Pil     | Q(26) | B(44) | C(29) |      |      |      | W(18) |      | X(20) |      |      |       |

$^a$ Sequences from GenBank were compared. Values given for similar proteins refer to the percent identity as calculated by the program GAP of the GCG package (10). Exe proteins are from *A. hydrophila*, Out proteins are from *Erwinia chrysanthemi*, Pul proteins are from *K. oxytoca*, Xcp proteins are from *P. aeruginosa*, Gsp putative proteins are from *E. coli*, Tcp proteins are from *V. cholerae*, and Pil proteins are from *P. aeruginosa*. See text for references.

sequence 600 bp downstream of *epsN* did not reveal any ORFs with homology to known GSP genes but did identify a partial ORF, in the opposite orientation from *epsN*, with similarity to the *cysQ* gene of *E. coli* (46). This is in contrast to most other GSP operons, in which an additional gene, encoding a prepilin peptidase required for secretion, is present directly downstream of the *epsN* gene (3, 12, 55).

Expression of the *eps* genes by the T7 φ10 promoter-polymerase system. To identify the proteins encoded by the *eps* genes, we used the T7 promoter-polymerase system (70). Fragments of DNA containing different *eps* genes were placed under the control of the T7 φ10 promoter by inserting each into pT7-5 or pT7-6 vectors. The recombinant plasmids thus obtained were transformed into *E. coli* MC1061[pGP1-2] expressing the T7 polymerase gene. The cells were labeled with \[^{35}S\]Met under conditions in which only the genes transcribed from the φ10 promoter were expressed, and the gene products were visualized by SDS-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (PAGE) and autoradiography. DNA fragments inserted into pT7-5/6 are shown in Fig. 1, and the proteins specified by these fragments are shown in Fig. 2.

Only those plasmids in which the DNA fragments were inserted in the orientation presented in Fig. 1 produced detectable amounts of labeled proteins. Although different genes were expressed at different levels and no polypeptide band could be assigned to some of the ORFs, six, or possibly seven, bands were identified as corresponding to certain ORFs on the basis of their *M*~r~s and the expression by the appropriate DNA fragment (Fig. 1). Thus, the insert in plasmid pMMB560, which contains *epsC* and the 5′ portion of *epsD*, produces two bands, a 32-kDa band, likely the EpsC protein, which has a predicted molecular mass of 33.5 kDa, and a 23-kDa band, presumably the truncated EpsD. The bands of approximately 33 kDa, specified by plasmids pMMB547 (*epsE* to -N), pMMB551 (*epsE* to -J), and pMS19 (*epsF* to -J) (lanes 3, 4, and 5 in Fig. 2), which should not encode *epsC*, may represent an aberrantly migrating EpsF protein which has an expected molecular mass of 44 kDa. The insert in plasmid pMMB547, which contains the 3′ portion of *epsD* and the entire *epsE* through *epsN* genes, produced several bands. The band of 52 kDa corresponds to the EpsE protein (60). The 37.2-kDa protein is presumably EpsL. The predicted molecular mass of this protein is 45.3 kDa. The question of whether this discrepancy is due to the abnormal migration on the SDS gel or to a possible processing of the EpsL protein has not been resolved yet. The strongly expressed 17.9-kDa protein is likely EpsG, whose predicted molecular mass is 16.0 kDa. The 16-kDa protein, produced by the cells carrying plasmids pMMB547, pMMB531 (*epsH* to -M), and pTKK5 (*epsL* to -M) (lanes 3, 8, and 11 in Fig. 2), is most likely EpsM (51). The band running at 13 kDa in lane 10 of Fig. 2 is presumably a truncated EpsM. In these experiments, EpsG protein was synthesized in large

FIG. 2. Expression of *eps* genes under the control of the bacteriophage T7 φ10 promoter. Cells of *E. coli* MC1061 containing recombinant plasmids indicated in Fig. 1 were labeled, separated by SDS-PAGE, and subjected to autoradiography as described in Materials and Methods. The bands which correspond to the molecular masses expected for the Eps proteins (Table 2) encoded by the plasmids are indicated by the appropriate letters. Positions of molecular mass markers (in kilodaltons) are indicated on the left. Lanes: 1, pT7-5 vector (without insert); 2, pMMB560; 3, pMMB547; 4, pMMB551; 5, pMS19; 6, pMMB608; 7, pMS37; 8, pMMB531; 9, pTKK4; 10, pMS38; 11, pTKK5.

TABLE 4. Secretion of EtxB pentamers by eps mutants  
of V. cholerae  

| Strain (relevant chromosomal mutation) | Plasmid(s) | Gene(s) present on plasmid(s) | Secretion of LT B-subunit pentamers (%) |
|---------------------------------------|------------|-------------------------------|----------------------------------------|
|                                      |            |                               | Medium Cells                          |
| 0395(wt)                              | pMMB68     | etxB                         | 78                                    |
| J JM 43(toxR)                         | pMMB68     | etxB                         | 75                                    |
| 0395(epsE)                            | pMMB68     | etxB                         | 9                                     |
| J JM 43(toxR epsE)                    | pMMB68     | etxB                         | 8                                     |
| TRH7000(wt')                          | pWD615     | etxB                         | 79                                    |
| TRH7000(wt)                           | pMMB68     | etxB                         | 61                                    |
| PU6(epsC)                             | pWD615     | etxB                         | 13                                    |
| PU6(epsC)                             | pMMB68     | etxB                         | 4                                     |
| PU6(epsC)                             | pMMB68     | epsC to -N                   | 34                                    |
| PU6(epsC)                             | pWD615     | etxB                         | 1                                     |
| Mut6(epsF)                            | pWD615     | etxB                         | 9                                     |
| Mut6(epsF)                            | pWD615     | etxB                         | 78                                    |
| Mut5(epsG)                            | pWD615     | etxB                         | 12                                    |
| Mut5(epsG)                            | pMMB574    | epsG                         | 54                                    |
| Mut8(epsL)                            | pWD615     | etxB                         | 16                                    |
| Mut8(epsL)                            | pMS44      | epsL                         | 79                                    |

*LT B-subunit pentamers present in the growth medium and sonicated cells were determined by the GM1 enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (69).  
wt phenotype in regard to Eps function.*

proteins belong to a group that is specifically affected by the functions of eps genes, we have screened culture media of V. cholerae for the presence of other soluble proteins. We have found that whereas the activity of extracellular protease(s) was markedly reduced in the culture medium of eps mutants, the specific activity of extracellular DNase was not affected (Table

TABLE 5. DNase and protease activities in the culture medium of eps mutants  

| Mutant | DNase activity (μg/mg of protein/min) | Protease activity (pmol/mg of protein/min) |
|--------|---------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------|
| wt     | 230                                   | 126.8                                     |
| epsC   | 202                                   | 11.4                                      |
| epsE   | 311                                   | 3.9                                       |
| epsF   | 408                                   | 4.7                                       |
| epsG   | 424                                   | 8.2                                       |
| epsL   | 317                                   | 1.6                                       |
| epsM   | 317                                   | 28.0                                      |

VOL. 179, 1997

EXTRACELLULAR SECRETION IN V. CHOLERAE 6999

polypeptide, but the content of the putative OmpT protein as well as the amounts of the minor bands was dramatically lower, and the amount of the OmpS protein was visibly diminished. When the amount of OmpT was compared among different *eps* mutants, we found that the *epsE*, *epsF*, and *epsL* mutants did not contain any visible OmpT protein, whereas the *epsC*, *epsG*, and *epsM* mutants produced detectable levels of OmpT, albeit lower than those of the wt strain (Fig. 3B).

*V. cholerae* with a wt *toxR* gene typically produces the OmpU protein, which is under positive control by ToxR, and does not produce OmpT (10). As TRH7000 was considered to be wt for *toxR*, we were therefore surprised to find that it expressed OmpT, but not OmpU (compare lanes 1, 8, and 9 in Fig. 3B). Western blotting with anti-ToxR serum demonstrated that TRH7000 produces no detectable ToxR. The reason that TRH7000 does not produce ToxR is not known; however, this fact explains why it expresses OmpT and not OmpU.

In order to test whether the biogenesis of OmpU also requires an intact Eps apparatus, we analyzed the *toxR*+ strain, 0395, and an *epsE* mutant thereof. The amount of OmpU relative to that of other proteins detected in the outer membrane of the *epsE* mutant strain was lower than that in the wt strain, indicating that, as with OmpT in the *toxR* mutant background, the biogenesis of the mature OmpU is also dependent on a functioning Eps apparatus (Fig. 3B, lanes 8 and 10). The lower level of OmpU in the outer membrane of the mutant strain was not due to a difference in fractionation behavior due to a more fragile membrane, since the amount of OmpU detected by immunoblot analysis in total cell lysate of the *epsE* mutant was also considerably lower than that in the wt strain (Fig. 3B, lanes 12 and 14; for comparison, a sample from the *toxR* mutant strain JJM43 in lane 13 is also included). Analysis of *ompU* RNA by primer extension experiments demonstrated that the mutation in *epsE* does not affect the level of *ompU* mRNA (data not shown). We conclude, therefore, that the lower amount of OmpU detected in the mutant strain is most likely due to degradation of OmpU due to its inability to properly insert into the outer membrane. Alternatively, the *epsE* mutation may effect the translation of the OmpU protein.

Since the reason for the lack of ToxR production in TRH7000 is not known, the possibility exists that this strain carries other, unknown mutations. Therefore, we introduced a mutation into the *epsE* gene of a *toxR* mutant and confirmed that OmpT is dependent on the Eps machinery (Fig. 3B, lane 11), consistent with the results obtained with TRH7000.

ToxR does not regulate the secretion of toxin. Because biogenesis of the ToxR-regulated OmpU protein requires an intact Eps apparatus, we considered the possibility that ToxR may also be involved in regulating *eps* gene expression. To address this possibility, we assessed both the secretion of toxin subunits and the expression of an *epsE-lacZ* transcriptional fusion in wt and *toxR* mutant backgrounds.

For the secretion experiment, we used a plasmid (pMMB68) that expresses the B subunit of the *E. coli* LT, because the *toxR* mutant used in this experiment (JJM43) does not express CT. The amount of B subunit secreted by JJM43[pMMB68] was compared to that of wt strain 0395 containing the same plasmid, by using the monoclonal antibody 118-8, which is specific for LT B subunits (therefore, CT B subunits were not detected in this assay). The same amount of LT B subunits was produced and secreted from these strains (Table 4), suggesting that ToxR does not regulate the toxin secretion process.

To determine whether ToxR controls *eps* transcription, we constructed a chromosomal *epsE-lacZ* operon fusion as described in Materials and Methods. This strain is deficient for EpsE production, which was confirmed by immunoblotting

FIG. 4. Processing of EpsG protein in *V. cholerae*. (A) Cells of *E. coli* and *V.* *cholerae* strains containing plasmid pMMB586, expressing the T7 RNA polymerase, and plasmid pMMB564, expressing the *epsG* gene from the T7 φ10 promoter, were labeled as indicated in Materials and Methods. Total cell proteins were subjected to SDS-PAGE and autoradiography. Lanes: 1, *V.* *cholerae* TRH7000[pMMB564; pMMB586]; 2, *E. coli* MC1061[pMMB564; pMMB586]; 3, *V.* *cholerae tcpJ* mutant[pMMB564; pMMB586]. (B) Cells of *V.* *cholerae* 0395 *tcpJ::Tn5* containing plasmids pMMB586 and pMMB564 were pulse-labeled and chased as described in Materials and Methods. Lanes: 1, 0.5 min; 2, 1 min; 3, 2 min; 4, 5 min; 5, 10 min after the chase.

(not shown), due to the insertion of the fusion by homologous recombination. The *epsE-lacZ* strains were no longer able to secrete the B subunits to the extracellular environment, irrespective of the *toxR* status (Table 4). When these strains were analyzed for β-galactosidase production, they were found to produce similar amounts (approximately 600 and 800 Miller units for wt and *toxR* mutant strains, respectively), demonstrating that the expression of *epsE* is not regulated by ToxR.

Processing of EpsG in *V.* *cholerae*. As stated earlier, the predicted amino acid sequences of EpsG through EpsJ proteins contain hydrophobic regions which resemble the signal peptides of type IV pilin.

A gene encoding a prepilin peptidase with sequence similarities to genes such as *pulO* of *Klebsiella oxytoca* or *pilD* of *P.* *aeruginosa* has not been found in the *eps* gene cluster sequenced in this study. The available sequences upstream of the *epsC* gene and downstream of the *epsN* gene do not contain ORFs with any homology to the sequences for known prepilin peptidases.

In order to determine whether EpsG is processed in *V.* *cholerae*, the *epsG* gene was inserted downstream of the T7 φ10 promoter in pT7-5 to create pMMB564. This plasmid was introduced into *E. coli* MC1061 and *V.* *cholerae* TRH7000 expressing the T7 polymerase gene. The EpsG protein produced by the plasmid was labeled with \[^{35}S\]Met and visualized by SDS-PAGE and autoradiography (Fig. 4A). It was found that in *E. coli*, the EpsG protein was seen as a single band, whereas in *V.* *cholerae*, an additional band of lower *M*<sub>r</sub> was produced. This suggested that the second band was a processed form of EpsG. The inefficient processing of radiolabeled EpsG in *V.* *cholerae* was most likely due to the continuous labeling conditions, since in experiments in which proteins were pulse-labeled for only 30 s and then chased with unlabeled methionine most of the EpsG was present in the processed form at the end of the chase (Fig. 4B).

It could be imagined that the prepilin peptidase encoded by the *tcpJ* gene of *V.* *cholerae* (31) might be involved in the processing of the EpsG through EpsJ proteins. This would be

FIG. 5. Processing of EpsG by gonococcal prepilin peptidase PilD. Total membrane proteins from *E. coli* BL21(DE3), expressing the T7 RNA polymerase, grown in LB and induced with 0.1 mM isopropyl-β-d-thiogalactopyranoside for 2 h in the absence (lane 1) or presence (lanes 2 to 6) of plasmid pMS19 expressing preEpsG, were analyzed by SDS-PAGE and Coomassie blue staining. Samples in lanes 3 to 6 correspond to strains with the additional plasmids pMS13 (lane 3), pMS14 (lane 4), pMS21 (lane 5), and pPilD (lane 6). Numbers at left show molecular mass in kilodaltons.

analogous to the dual function of the prepilin peptidase PilD in *Pseudomonas*, in which PilD is responsible for the processing of both the type IV prepilin subunits and the pilin-like proteins XcpT to XcpW required for extracellular secretion (44, 62). However, the expression of *epsG* in a *tcpJ* mutant of *V.* *cholerae* resulted in a two-band pattern of EpsG similar to that in the wt *V.* *cholerae* strain (Fig. 4A). In addition, coexpression of the *tcpJ* and *epsG* genes in *E. coli* did not result in an alteration in the migration of the EpsG protein (Fig. 5, lane 5), indicating that EpsG is not a substrate for TcpJ. On the other hand, expression of the *N.* *gonorrhoeae* gene *pilD* in the same *E. coli* host as *epsG* resulted in the processing of EpsG to a smaller protein (Fig. 5, lane 6), demonstrating that EpsG can be the substrate for a prepilin peptidase. A slight degree of EpsG proteolytic processing detectable in *E. coli* in the absence of any exogenous genes (Fig. 5, lanes 2 to 5) is probably due to endogenous prepilin peptidase, since some strains have been demonstrated to express proteolytic activity analogous to that of prepilin peptidases (33). The K-12 genome has been reported to carry at least two genes which by all criteria encode homologs of the prepilin peptidases associated with the GSP and type IV pilus biogenesis systems (15). The failure to detect this endogenous processing in the T7 expression studies may reflect differences in strain backgrounds.

As noted earlier, no sequence homologous to other prepilin peptidase genes could be observed 600 bp downstream of the *epsN* gene. Since DNA of approximately 3.5 kb downstream of *epsN* was available, we tested this for the presence of a peptidase gene. The *KpnI-EcoRI* fragment containing DNA downstream of *epsN* was cloned in both orientations (Fig. 1) and was coexpressed with *epsG* in *E. coli*. No processing of EpsG could be observed in the presence of this insert, demonstrating that no prepilin peptidase able to process EpsG is encoded by DNA sequences adjacent to the *eps* gene cluster (Fig. 5, lanes 3 and 4).

VOL. 179, 1997

# DISCUSSION

CT is secreted via a two-step pathway that requires a specific set of genes, *eps*, for the outer membrane translocation. Here we report the cloning and sequencing of these genes. Mutations in the *epsC*, *epsE*, *epsF*, *epsG*, *epsL*, and *epsM* genes have been introduced, either through random transposon mutagenesis or through homologous recombination, and have resulted in the accumulation of assembled toxin in the periplasm. With the exception of the *epsC* mutation, in each case, the secretion defect could be complemented by the corresponding wt allele on a plasmid, indicating that each gene is essential for secretion and that the secretion defect obtained by introducing mutations in upstream genes is not due to polarity on downstream genes. Since several *eps* ORFs overlap each other, suggesting that they may be part of a single operon, it is likely that also *epsD*, -H, -I, -J, -K, and -N are required for secretion. Collmer and coworkers have demonstrated the requirement for secretion for all -C to -N genes, except for the -H homolog, in *Erwinia* (38, 39). Other genes, in addition to the *eps* genes identified in this study, are most likely also needed for the translocation of proteins through the outer membrane since expression of the *epsC* to -N genes in *E. coli* does not lead to extracellular secretion of LT or EtxB (results not shown). This is in contrast to the secretion of pullulanase, which can be obtained in *E. coli* in the presence of the complete *pul* gene cluster, *pulC* through *pulO*, and *pulS* (19, 53). It is likely, therefore, that *eps* genes homologous to *pulO* and *pulS* are essential for secretion in *V. cholerae* and that these are absent from the *epsC* to -N cluster. It is, however, also possible that the *eps* genes are not expressed properly in *E. coli*. A cluster of genes homologous to *eps*, with similar organization, has been detected in the *E. coli* chromosome, but at least two of these genes, *gspG* and *gspO*, appear not to be expressed under normal laboratory growth conditions (16).

In addition to defects in extracellular secretion, *eps* mutants also demonstrate altered outer membrane profiles. In particular, the biogenesis of two major outer membrane proteins, OmpU and OmpT, is severely affected. Defects in the outer membrane were previously observed in *exe* mutants of *Aeromonas* (26, 28). It seems likely, therefore, that the GSP functions are required not only for extracellular secretion of soluble proteins but also for proper assembly of the outer membrane in *V. cholerae*. They may be responsible for transport of the affected components, such as OmpU and OmpT, into the outer membrane or for the transport of other proteins required for proper assembly and anchoring of the affected proteins in the membrane. A correlation was observed between the amount of OmpT or OmpU detected in the various mutant strains and the severity of the growth defect: the less OmpT and OmpU protein produced, the greater the growth defect. The reason for this is not known. We speculate that since OmpT and OmpU are major outer membrane proteins in *V. cholerae*, they may have stabilizing effects on the membrane and, when they are missing, the integrity of the cell envelope might be altered, resulting in a growth defect. Consistent with this is that the outer membranes in some of the mutants are leaky. For instance, 25 to 30% of the periplasmic protein β-lactamase is found in the growth medium of certain mutants, whereas the level of this enzyme in medium from the wt strain is less than 5%.

Although the *eps* mutants appear to be defective in a number of different functions, the defect in extracellular secretion of toxin and protease is not simply a secondary result from a general defect in the outer membrane, since the secretion of yet another extracellular protein, DNase, is not affected. In addition, our findings demonstrate that at least two different pathways for extracellular secretion exist in *V. cholerae*. While CT and protease use the general secretion pathway, the secretion of DNase occurs by a different, as yet unidentified secretion mechanism. *V. cholerae* is known to secrete two different DNases into the extracellular environment (15, 47). In our assay for total DNase activity, we cannot determine whether we are detecting one or the other, or both DNases. However, our data suggest that the secretion of at least one of the DNases is not affected in our mutant strains.

No gene encoding a prepilin peptidase active in processing EpsG to EpsJ was identified adjacent to the *epsC*-to-*epsN* gene cluster. This is different from most other GSP operons, in which a prepilin peptidase gene is present directly downstream of the -N gene (3, 12, 55). However, it demonstrates the similarity of the *V. cholerae* GSP system to GSP systems in *P. aeruginosa* and *Aeromonas hydrophila*, in which the peptidase gene is found elsewhere on the chromosome. In contrast to *P. aeruginosa*, in which the prepilin peptidase PilD is required for the processing of both the type IV prepilin subunits and the EpsG-to-EpsJ homologs, XcpT to XcpW, it was demonstrated that in *V. cholerae* a prepilin peptidase different from TcpJ is able to cleave EpsG. On the other hand, prepilin peptidase PilD of *N. gonorrhoeae* is able to cleave EpsG of *V. cholerae*, demonstrating that this protein can be a substrate for a prepilin peptidase, thus suggesting that it is likely that processing of EpsG is required for its function. The signal sequence of EpsG more closely resembles the signal sequences of other type IV prepilins and other pilin-like proteins than the one in the *V. cholerae* type IV pilin, TcpA. The reason that TcpJ cannot process EpsG might be a shorter signal sequence and the presence of phenylalanine instead of methionine at position +1 in the mature portion of EpsG. Since the *tcpJ* gene does not seem to be involved in either the secretion of CT (31) or the processing of the EpsG protein, it is probable that a second gene, encoding a prepilin peptidase active in the GSP and with a specificity similar to that of the gonococcal PilD, exists in *V. cholerae*. In fact, prior evidence for a second prepilin peptidase in *V. cholerae* can be found in the observation that TcpA processing is not completely abolished in a *tcpJ* mutant (29). Moreover, the precedent for multiple prepilin peptidase genes has already been established in *E. coli* (15). Although our experiments do not show that the observed modification of the EpsG is required for its function in the GSP, they constitute an indication, making the search for a second prepilin peptidase in *V. cholerae* interesting and important.

## ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We thank Molly Brennan for technical assistance. We are grateful to Tapio Palva for the gift of anti-OmpS antibodies, Ron Taylor for the *tcpJ* mutant and clone, and Darren Higgins for a DNA fragment encoding a promoterless *lacZ* gene.

This work was supported by grants from the U.S. Department of Agriculture (92-37204-7839), the NSF Center for Microbial Ecology (BIR 9120006), and the Research Excellence Fund of the State of Michigan to M.B. and by Public Health Service grant AI-31645 to V.J.D. M.S. was an NRSA fellow of the Public Health Service under grant T32 AI-07360 to the University of Michigan. Sequence analysis was supported in part by grant MO1 RR00042 to the Clinical Research Center at the University of Michigan.

## REFERENCES

1. Alm, R. A., J. P. Hallinan, A. A. Watson, and J. S. Mattick. 1996. Fimbrial biogenesis genes of *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*: *pilW* and *pilX* increase the similarity of type 4 fimbriae to the GSP protein-secretion systems and *pulYI* encodes a gonococcal PilC homologue. Mol. Microbiol. **22**:161–173.
2. Bally, M., G. Ball, A. Badere, and A. Lazdunski. 1991. Protein secretion in *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*: the *xcpA* gene encodes an integral inner membrane

protein homologous to *Klebsiella pneumoniae* secretion function protein PulO. J. Bacteriol. 173:479–486.

3. Bally, M., A. Filloux, M. Akrim, G. Ball, A. Lazdunski, and J. Tommassen. 1992. Protein secretion in *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*: characterization of seven *xcp* genes and processing of secretory apparatus components by prepilin peptidase. Mol. Microbiol. 6:1121–1131.

4. Casadaban, M. C., and S. N. Cohen. 1980. Analysis of gene control signals by DNA fusion in *Escherichia coli*. J. Mol. Biol. 138:179–207.

5. Chakrabarti, S. R., K. Chaudhuri, K. Sen, and K. Das. 1996. Porins of *Vibrio cholerae*: purification and characterization of OmpU. J. Bacteriol. 178:524–530.

6. Condemine, G., C. Dorel, N. Hugovieux-Cotte-Pattat, and J. Robert-Baudouy. 1992. Some of the *out* genes involved in the secretion of pectate lyases in *Erwinia chrysanthemi* are regulated by *kdgR*. Mol. Microbiol. 6:3199–3211.

7. Dallas, W. S. 1983. Conformity between heat-labile toxin genes from human and porcine enterotoxigenic *Escherichia coli*. Infect. Immun. 40:647–652.

8. Dallas, W. S., D. M. Gill, and S. Falkow. 1979. Cistrons encoding *Escherichia coli* heat-labile toxin. J. Bacteriol. 139:850–858.

9. d'Enfert, C., A. Ryter, and A. P. Pugsley. 1987. Cloning and expression in *Escherichia coli* of the *Klebsiella pneumoniae* genes for production, surface localization and secretion of the lipoprotein pullulanase. EMBO J. 6:3531–3538.

10. Devereux, J., P. Haeberli, and O. Smithies. 1984. A comprehensive set of sequence analysis programs for the VAX. Nucleic Acids Res. 12:387–395.

11. Dums, F., G. M. Dow, and M. J. Daniels. 1991. Structural characterization of protein secretion genes of the bacterial phytopathogen *Xanthomonas campestris* pathovar *campestris*: relatedness to secretion systems of other gram-negative bacteria. Mol. Gen. Genet. 229:357–364.

12. Dupuy, B., and A. P. Pugsley. 1994. Type IV prepilin peptidase gene of *Neisseria gonorrhoeae* MS11: presence of a related gene in other pilated and nonpiliated *Neisseria* strains. J. Bacteriol. 176:1323–1331.

13. Findlay, G., J. Yu, and T. R. Hirst. 1993. Analysis of enterotoxin synthesis in a *Vibrio cholerae* strain lacking DsbA, a periplasmic enzyme involved in disulphide bond formation. Biochem. Soc. Trans. 21:212S.

14. Finkelstein, R. A., M. Boesman-Finkelstein, Y. Chang, and C. C. Häse. 1992. *Vibrio cholerae* hemagglutinin/protease, colonial variation, virulence, and detachment. Infect. Immun. 60:472–478.

15. Focareta, T., and P. A. Manning. 1991. Distinguishing between the extracellular DNases of *Vibrio cholerae* and development of a transformation system. Mol. Microbiol. 5:2547–2555.

16. Francetic, O., and A. P. Pugsley. 1996. The cryptic general secretory pathway (*gsp*) operon of *Escherichia coli* K-12 encodes functional proteins. J. Bacteriol. 178:3544–3549.

17. Fürste, J. P., W. Pansegrau, R. Frank, H. Blocker, P. Scholz, M. Bagdasarian, and E. Lanka. 1986. Molecular cloning of the plasmid RP4 primase region in a multi-host-range *tacP* expression vector. Gene 48:119–131.

18. Gill, D. M., J. D. Clements, D. C. Robertson, and R. A. Finkelstein. 1981. Subunit number and arrangement in *Escherichia coli* heat-labile enterotoxin. Infect. Immun. 33:677–682.

19. Hardie, K. R., S. Lory, and A. P. Pugsley. 1996. Insertion of an outer membrane protein in *Escherichia coli* requires a chaperon-like protein. EMBO J. 15:978–988.

20. Häse, C. C., M. E. Bauer, and R. A. Finkelstein. 1994. Genetic characterization of mannose-sensitive hemagglutinin (MSHA)-negative mutants of *Vibrio cholerae* derived by Tn5 mutagenesis. Gene 150:17–25.

21. He, S. Y., M. Lindeberg, A. K. Chatterjee, and A. Collmer. 1991. Cloned *Erwinia chrysanthemi out* genes enable *Escherichia coli* to selectively secrete a diverse family of heterologous proteins to its milieu. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 88:1079–1083.

22. Herrington, D. A., R. H. Hall, G. Losonsky, J. J. Mekalanos, R. K. Taylor, and M. M. Levine. 1988. Toxin, toxin-coregulated pili, and the ToxR regulon are essential for *Vibrio cholerae* pathogenesis in humans. J. Exp. Med. 168:1487–1492.

23. Hirst, T. R., and J. Holmgren. 1987. Conformation of protein secreted across bacterial outer membranes: a study of enterotoxin translocation from *Vibrio cholerae*. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 84:7418–7422.

24. Hirst, T. R., L. L. Randall, and S. J. S. Hardy. 1984. Cellular location of heat-labile enterotoxin in *Escherichia coli*. J. Bacteriol. 157:637–642.

25. Hofstra, H., and B. Witholt. 1984. Kinetics of synthesis, processing, and membrane transport of heat-labile enterotoxin, a periplasmic protein in *Escherichia coli*. J. Biol. Chem. 259:15182–15187.

26. Howard, P. S., J. Critch, and A. Bedi. 1993. Isolation and analysis of eight *exe* genes and their involvement in extracellular protein secretion and outer membrane assembly in *Aeromonas hydrophila*. J. Bacteriol. 175:6695–6703.

27. Hu, N.-T., M.-N. Hung, S.-J. Chiou, F. Tang, D.-C. Chiang, H.-Y. Huang, and C.-Y. Wu. 1992. Cloning and characterization of a gene required for the secretion of extracellular enzymes across the outer membrane by *Xanthomonas campestris* pv. *campestris*. J. Bacteriol. 174:2679–2687.

28. Jiang, B., and S. P. Howard. 1992. The *Aeromonas hydrophila exeE* gene, required both for protein secretion and normal outer membrane biogenesis, is a member of a general secretion pathway. Mol. Microbiol. 6:1351–1361.

29. Julius, D., A. Brake, L. Blair, R. Kunisawa, and J. Thorner. 1984. Isolation

of the putative structural gene for the lysine-arginine-cleaving endopeptidase required for processing of yeast prepro-α-factor. Cell 37:1075–1089.

30. Kaper, J. B., J. J. G. Morris, and M. M. Levine. 1995. Cholera. Clin. Microbiol. Rev. 8:48–86.

31. Kaufman, M. R., J. M. Seyer, and R. K. Taylor. 1991. Processing of TCP pilin by TcpJ typifies a common step intrinsic to a newly recognized pathway of extracellular protein secretion by Gram-negative bacteria. Genes Dev. 5:1834–1846.

32. Kaufman, M. R., C. E. Shaw, I. D. Jones, and R. K. Taylor. 1993. Biogenesis and regulation of the *Vibrio cholerae* toxin-coregulated pilus: analogies to other virulence factor secretory systems. Gene 126:43–49.

33. Koomey, M., S. Bergstrom, M. Blake, and J. Swanson. 1991. Pilin expression and processing in pilus mutants of *Neisseria gonorrhoeae*: critical role of Gly-1 in assembly. Mol. Microbiol. 5:279–287.

34. Kyte, J., and R. F. Doolittle. 1982. A simple method for displaying the hydropathic character of a protein. J. Mol. Biol. 157:105–132.

35. Laemmli, U. K. 1970. Cleavage of structural proteins during the assembly of the head of bacteriophage T4. Nature (London) 227:680–685.

36. Lång, H., and E. T. Palva. 1993. The *ompS* gene of *Vibrio cholerae* encodes a growth-phase dependent maltoporin. Mol. Microbiol. 10:891–901.

37. Lauer, P., N. H. Albertson, and M. Koomey. 1993. Conservation of genes encoding components of a type IV pilus assembly/two-step protein export pathway in *Neisseria gonorrhoeae*. Mol. Microbiol. 8:357–368.

38. Lindeberg, M., and A. Collmer. 1992. Analysis of eight *out* genes in a cluster required for pectic enzyme secretion by *Erwinia chrysanthemi*: sequence comparison with secretion genes from other gram-negative bacteria. J. Bacteriol. 174:7385–7397.

39. Lindeberg, M., G. Salmond, and A. Collmer. 1996. Complementation of deletion mutations in a cloned functional cluster of *Erwinia chrysanthemi out* genes with *Erwinia carotovora out* homologues revealed OutC and OutD as candidate gatekeepers of species-specific secretion of proteins via type II pathway. Mol. Microbiol. 20:175–190.

40. Linderoth, N. A., P. Model, and M. Russel. 1996. Essential role of a sodium dodecyl sulfate-resistant protein IV multimer in assembly-export of filamentous phage. J. Bacteriol. 178:1962–1970.

41. Marsh, J. W., D. Sun, and R. K. Taylor. 1996. Physical linkage of the *Vibrio cholerae* mannose-sensitive hemagglutinin secretory and structural subunit gene loci: identification of the *mshG* coding sequence. Infect. Immun. 64:460–465.

42. Mekalanos, J. J., D. J. Swartz, G. D. N. Pearson, N. Harford, F. Groyne, and M. de Wilde. 1983. Cholera toxin genes: nucleotide sequence, deletion analysis and vaccine development. Nature (London) 306:551–557.

43. Miller, J. H. 1972. Experiments in molecular genetics. Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press, Cold Spring Harbor, N.Y.

44. Miller, V. L., and J. J. Mekalanos. 1988. A novel suicide vector and its use in construction of insertion mutations: osmoregulation of outer membrane proteins and virulence determinants in *Vibrio cholerae* requires *toxR*. J. Bacteriol. 170:2575–2583.

45. Morales, V. M., A. Backman, and M. Bagdasarian. 1991. A series of wide-host-range low-copy-number vectors that allow direct screening for recombinants. Gene 97:39–47.

46. Neuwald, A. F., B. R. Krishnan, I. Brikun, S. Kulakauskas, K. Suziedelis, T. Tomcsanyi, T. S. Leyh, and D. E. Berg. 1992. *cysQ*, a gene needed for cysteine synthesis in *Escherichia coli* K-12 only during aerobic growth. J. Bacteriol. 174:415–425.

47. Newland, J. W., B. A. Green, J. Foulds, and R. K. Holmes. 1985. Cloning of extracellular DNase and construction of a DNase-negative strain of *Vibrio cholerae*. Infect. Immun. 47:691–696.

48. Nunn, D., and S. Lory. 1991. Product of the *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* gene *pilD* is a prepilin leader peptide. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 88:3281–3285.

49. Nunn, D., and S. Lory. 1993. Cleavage, methylation, and localization of the *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* export proteins XcpT, -U, -V, and -W. J. Bacteriol. 175:4375–4382.

50. Ogierman, M. A., S. Zabihi, L. Mourtzios, and P. A. Manning. 1993. Genetic organization and sequence of the promoter-distal region of the *tcp* gene cluster of *Vibrio cholerae*. Gene 126:51–60.

51. Overbye, L. J., M. Sandkvist, and M. Bagdasarian. 1993. Genes required for extracellular secretion of enterotoxin are clustered in *Vibrio cholerae*. Gene 132:101–106.

52. Palva, E. T., T. R. Hirst, S. J. S. Hardy, J. Holmgren, and L. L. Randall. 1981. Synthesis of a precursor to the B subunit of heat-labile enterotoxin in *Escherichia coli*. J. Bacteriol. 146:325–330.

53. Possot, O., C. d'Enfert, I. Reyss, and A. P. Pugsley. 1992. Pullulanase secretion in *Escherichia coli* K-12 requires a cytoplasmic protein and a putative polytopic cytoplasmic membrane protein. Mol. Microbiol. 6:95–105.

54. Pugsley, A. P. 1993. Processing and methylation of PulG, pilin-like component of the general secretory pathway of *Klebsiella oxytoca*. Mol. Microbiol. 9:295–308.

55. Pugsley, A. P., and B. Dupuy. 1992. An enzyme with type IV prepilin peptidase activity is required to process components of the general extracellular protein secretion pathway of *Klebsiella oxytoca*. Mol. Microbiol. 6:751–760.

56. Reeves, P. J., P. Douglas, and G. P. C. Salmond. 1994. Beta-lactamase

topology probe analysis of the OutO NMePhe peptidase, and six other Out protein components of the *Erwinia carotovora* general secretion pathway apparatus. Mol. Microbiol. 12:445–457.

57. Reeves, P. J., D. Whitcombe, S. Wharam, M. Gibson, G. Allison, N. Bunce, R. Barallon, P. Douglas, V. Mulholland, S. Stevens, D. Walker, and G. P. C. Salmond. 1993. Molecular cloning and characterization of 13 *out* genes from *Erwinia carotovora* subspecies *carotovora*: genes encoding members of a general secretion pathway (GSP) widespread in Gram-negative bacteria. Mol. Microbiol. 8:443–456.

58. Sandkvist, M., M. Bagdasarian, S. P. Howard, and V. J. DiRita. 1995. Interactions between the autokinase EpsE and EpsL in the cytoplasmic membrane is required for extracellular secretion in *Vibrio cholerae*. EMBO J. 14:1664–1673.

59. Sandkvist, M., T. R. Hirst, and M. Bagdasarian. 1987. Alterations at the carboxyl terminus change assembly and secretion properties of the B subunit of *Escherichia coli* heat-labile enterotoxin. J. Bacteriol. 169:4570–4576.

60. Sandkvist, M., V. Morales, and M. Bagdasarian. 1993. A protein required for secretion of cholera toxin through the outer membrane of *Vibrio cholerae*. Gene 123:81–86.

61. Sandkvist, M., L. J. Overbye, T. K. Sixma, W. G. J. Hol, and M. Bagdasarian. 1993. Assembly of *Escherichia coli* heat-labile enterotoxin and its secretion from *Vibrio cholerae*, p. 293–309. In C. Kado, J. Crossa, and L. Sequeira (ed.), Molecular mechanisms of bacterial virulence. Academic Publishers, Dordrecht, The Netherlands.

62. Sanger, F., S. Nicklen, and A. R. Coulson. 1977. DNA sequencing with chain-terminating inhibitors. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 74:5463–5467.

63. Schatz, P. J., and J. Beckwith. 1990. Genetic analysis of protein export in *Escherichia coli*. Annu. Rev. Genet. 24:215–248.

64. Sixma, T. K., K. H. Kalk, B. A. M. van Zanten, Z. Dauter, J. Kingma, B. Witholt, and W. G. J. Hol. 1993. Refined structure of *Escherichia coli* heat-

labile enterotoxin, a close relative of cholera toxin. J. Mol. Biol. 230:890–918.

65. Sixma, T. K., S. E. Pronk, K. H. Kalk, E. S. Wartna, B. A. M. Van Zanten, B. Witholt, and W. G. J. Hol. 1991. Crystal structure of a cholera toxin-related heat-labile enterotoxin from *E. coli*. Nature (London) 353:371–377.

66. Spangler, B. D. 1992. Structure and function of cholera toxin and the related *Escherichia coli* heat-labile enterotoxin. Microbiol. Rev. 56:622–647.

67. Strom, M. S., D. N. Nunn, and S. Lory. 1993. A single bifunctional enzyme, PilD, catalyzes cleavage and N-methylation of proteins belonging to the type IV pilin family. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 90:2404–2408.

68. Studier, F. W., A. H. Rosenberg, J. J. Dunn, and J. W. Dubendorf. 1990. Use of T7 RNA polymerase to direct expression of cloned genes. Methods Enzymol. 185:60–89.

69. Svennerholm, A.-M., and J. Holmgren. 1978. Identification of *Escherichia coli* heat-labile enterotoxin by means of a ganglioside immunosorbent assay (*G*~M1~-ELISA) procedure. Curr. Microbiol. 1:19–23.

70. Tabor, S., and C. C. Richardson. 1985. A bacteriophage T7 RNA polymerase/promoter system for controlled exclusive expression of specific genes. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 82:1074–1078.

71. Tamplin, M. L., A. L. Gauzens, A. Huq, D. A. Sack, and R. R. Colwell. 1990. Attachment of *Vibrio cholerae* serogroup O1 to zooplankton and phytoplankton of Bangladesh waters. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 56:1977–1980.

72. Thien, S. L. 1989. A simplified method of direct sequencing of PCR amplified DNA with Sequenase T7 DNA polymerase. USB Editorial Comments 16:8,18.

73. Tommassen, J., A. Filloux, M. Bally, M. Murgier, and A. Lazdunski. 1992. Protein secretion in *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*. FEMS Microbiol. Rev. 103:73–90.

74. von Heijne, G. 1986. A new method for predicting signal sequence cleavage sites. Nucleic Acids Res. 14:4683–4690.
