
RE VIEWS

45 Turner, J. and Dockrell, H.M. (1996) Immunology 87, 339–342  
46 Pfeifer, J.D. *et al.* (1993) Nature 361, 359–362  
47 Vordermeier, H.M. (1995) Eur. Respir. J. 20, S657–S667  
48 Modlin, R.L. (1994) J. Invest. Dermatol. 
REVIEW S

LPS
Outer membrane
Lipoprotein
Periplasm
Inner membrane
Cytoplasm

Fig. 1. Molecular organization of the envelope of Escherichia coli K-12. Ovals and rectangles represent sugar residues, as indicated, whereas circles represent the polar head groups of glycerophospholipids (dark gray ovals, glucosamine derivatives; blue ovals, N-acetylmuramic acid; yellow rectangles, L-rhamnose; orange ovals, D-galactofuranose; red circles, ethanolamine-phosphate; green circles, glycerol-ph
homotrimer, and the active site is probably located between the subunits<sup>15</sup>. The LpxA and LpxD proteins (Fig. 3) of other Gram-negative bacteria contain a similar number of hexad repeats.

Although LpxA is required for lipid A biosynthesis, the second enzyme of the pathway (a deacetylase encoded by *lpxC*) catalyzes the first irreversible reaction (Figs 2, 3)<sup>12</sup>. LpxC is thus the committed step and is a key site of regulation<sup>12</sup>. Onishi
Exterior

LPS

O antigen
polymer

Lipid A

Outer membrane

Periplasm

Polymerase
Rfc

Ligase
RfaL

Bactoprenol
1
RfbX?

2
MsbA?

Inner membrane

O antigen
oligosaccharide

Kdo
Outer core

Cytoplasm

Fig. 4. Possible scheme for the export of newly made lipopolysaccharide (LPS). Gray ovals represent glucosamine residues, and small white boxes represent Kdo (3-deoxy-D-manno-octulosonic acid)
REVIEW S

Escherichia coli

Putative lipid A
receptor

Direct binding
and activation

Macrophage

NF-κB translocation
into nucleus

I-κB

Dissociated
LPS

Serum LPS-binding
protein (LBP)

LBP-mediated LPS
transfer to CD14

LBP·LPS

NF-κB

Nucleus

MEF2C

p38

MKK3

Cytokine mRNA

Cytokine precursor
processing

CD14

Mature
cytokines

H₃C
Evaluating the role of lipid A in pathogenesis

Until recently, it was not possible to generate viable bacterial mutants with modified lipid A structures or to study the effects of lipid A modifications on the pathogenesis of Gram-negative bacterial infections. Three important discoveries have enabled these kinds of studies. First, the nonlethal *msbB* mutation allows the synthesis of pentaacylated lipid A (Ref. 9). Intact cells of *msbB* mutants are 10,000 times less active than wild-type *E. coli* in activating human macrophages. *Salmonella msbB* mutants