
P1: ARK/vks
P2: ARK/dat
QC: ARK
January 13, 1998
13:25
Annual Reviews
AR052-05

Annu. Rev. Immunol. 1998. 16:111–35
Copyright © 1998 by Annual Reviews. All rights reserved

# CD40 AND CD154 IN
## CELL-MEDIATED IMMUNITY

**Iqbal S. Grewal and Richard A. Flavell\***

*Howard Hughes Medical Institute, and Section of Immunobiology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut 06520;*

e-mail: Richard.Flavell@QM.yale.edu

KEYWORDS: CD40L, T cell activation, T cell priming, T cell effector functions, autoimmunity, parasitic infections

---

### ABSTRACT

CD40-CD154-mediated contact-dependent signals between B and T cells are required for the generation of thymus dependent (TD) humoral immune responses. CD40-CD154 interactions are however also important in many other cell systems. CD40 is expressed by a large variety of cell types other than B cells, and these include dendritic cells, follicular dendritic cells, monocytes, macrophages, mast cells, fibroblasts, and endothelial cells. CD40-and CD154-knockout mice and antibodies to CD40 and CD154 have helped to elucidate the role of the CD40-CD154 system in immune responses. Recently published studies indicate that CD40-CD154 interactions can influence T cell priming and T cell-mediated effector functions; they can also upregulate costimulatory molecules and activate macrophages, NK cells, and endothelia as well as participate in organ-specific autoimmune disease, graft rejection, and even atherosclerosis. This review focuses on the role of the CD40-CD154 system in the regulation of many newly discovered functions important in inflammation and cell-mediated immunity.

---

### INTRODUCTION

Cell-to-cell interactions play an important role in the regulation of the immune response. Significant advances have been made in the past few years in our understanding of some of the molecular mechanisms that underlie these interactions; several molecules that provide stable intercellular contacts and costimulatory or apoptotic signals have been identified. The use of antibodies that disrupt interactions between CD40-CD154 has shown that these molecules

mediate interaction between CD40 expressing B and CD154 expressing activated T cells; it has also established the role of this molecular interaction in TD humoral responses (1, 2). Humans that have a mutation in CD154 develop a severe form of immunodeficiency, hyper IgM syndrome (HIGM1), that is characterized by elevated levels of IgM in the majority of patients and low levels of IgA, IgG, and IgE, the absence of germinal centers, and the inability to mount TD humoral response (3, 4). As a result, HIGM1 patients suffer from recurrent pathogenic bacterial infections (5). Studies by means of antibodies in mice that block this interaction have also indicated a primary role of CD40-CD154 interactions in the regulation of B cell proliferation, production of immunoglobulins (Ig), Ig class switching, rescue of B cells from apoptotic death, germinal center formation, and generation of B cell memory (reviewed in 6, 7).

The role of CD40-CD154 in the regulation in B cell responses was recently confirmed in CD40- and CD154-deficient mice (8–10). In addition, a novel dual role for CD154 in both clonal expansion and deletion of B cells in vivo was recently demonstrated (11). CD154 expressed on activated T cells in concert with Fas ligand induces clonal expansion of B cells that specifically bind to foreign antigens; such CD154 expression also induces clonal deletion of B cells whose B cell receptors that have been desensitized by chronic stimulation with self-antigens or that have no antigens bound to their B cell receptors. The fact that CD40 is not expressed solely on B cells but is also expressed on all other antigen-presenting cells (APC) and other cell types as indicated in Table 1 (11a, 11b, 12) suggested that CD40-CD154 interactions may be important in T cell-mediated immune responses at both the initiation and effector phases as well as in the development of effector functions of other CD40-expressing cells. Recent studies also indicate expression of CD154 on many cell

Table 1 Expression of CD40

- Human and mouse B cells
- Human and mouse dendritic cells
- Mouse follicular dendritic cells
- Human and mouse monocytes
- Human and mouse macrophages
- Mouse thymic epithelium cells
- Human hemopoietic progenitor cells
- Human carcinomas
- Human and mouse endothelial cells
- Human and mouse mast cells
- Mouse fibroblasts
- Human smooth muscle cells

Table 2 Expression of CD154

- Activated CD4 T cells from spleen and blood from mice and humans
- Activated mouse Th1 and Th2 clones
- Antigen primed lymph node cells in mice
- Human PMA activated CD8 T cells
- Mouse CD8 T cell clones
- Mouse γδ TCR+ T cell clones
- Mouse NK cells
- Mouse and human monocytes
- Mouse fetal thymocytes
- Mouse small intestine
- Human basophils
- Human mast cells
- Human eosinophils
- Activated dendritic cells from humans
- Human B cells and B cell lines

types (see Table 2), suggesting CD40-CD154-mediated regulation of multiple cell types. Although earlier studies indicated a primary role for CD40-CD154 interactions in humoral immunity, recent work has suggested that these interactions play a much broader role in the immune response (reviewed in 12). Thus, a key role of this interaction has now been demonstrated in the priming and expansion of antigen-specific CD4 T cells, activation of APC to upregulate costimulatory activity and cytokine production, activation of macrophages, and activation of endothelia (11–16). The role of CD40-CD154 in humoral responses has been addressed in a recent excellent review by Clark, Foy & Noelle (6). Thus, the present chapter highlights developments in our understanding of the importance of CD40-CD154 interactions in non-B cell mediated cellular functions.

## REGULATION OF APC ACTIVITY

Contact-dependent interactions between T cells and APC are required for the initiation of a successful T cell-mediated immune response. A number of different cell types perform APC functions, including B cells, macrophages, and dendritic cells. The interactions between T cells and APC provide bidirectional stimulatory signals that are important in the activation of specific T cells and in the regulation of activation of self-reactive or unwanted bystander cells. The most popular model of T cell activation postulates the requirement of two distinct signals for T cell activation (18, 19). The first signal is believed to be the interaction of the T cell receptor (TCR) with MHC/peptide complex

on the surface of the APC, and the second signal comes from costimulatory  
molecules such as CD80 and CD86 on the surface of APC stimulating CD28  
on the surface of T cells. However, certain APC, such as resting B cells that  
express low-level costimulatory molecules constitutively, are not competent  
APC and require activation first in order to upregulate costimulatory activity  
and to become competent APC (20). Resting B cells express CD40 and can be  
activated by CD154-expressing T cells to progress through the cell cycle (21),  
to upregulate IL-2, IL-4, and IL-5 receptors (22) and costimulatory ligands, and  
to deliver costimulatory activity (24–27).

Evidence for a role of CD40-CD154 interactions in the regulation of costimulatory activity on B cells was provided by in vitro blocking of the T cell-induced  
upregulation of CD80 and CD86 molecules by anti-CD154 antibodies or by directly inducing these molecules by recombinant CD154 (24–26). This was  
confirmed by recent studies in which T cells lacking CD154 were unable to  
activate B cells to induce costimulatory molecules (27). The role of CD40-CD154 in regulation of B cell APC functions was further exemplified in an in vivo system, showing that combined administration in mice of anti-CD154 antibodies and allogeneic B cells elicited poor mixed lymphocytes and cytotoxic T cell responses (28). Similarly, when allogeneic B cells were transferred to CD154-deficient mice, as expected, a lack of allogeneic T cell responses was apparent, again suggesting a role of CD40-CD154 in transformation of resting B cells into competent APC (28). Because CD40-CD154 interactions regulate costimulatory molecules on APC, and LPS-activated B cells expressing high levels of B7 molecules could act as competent APC, it is likely that the diminished alloresponses in the above systems were due to the lack of upregulation of costimulatory activity on B cells. Thus, both in vitro and in vivo studies strongly indicate that CD40-CD154 regulate activation of APC functions on B cells.

Several recent reports suggest that CD40-CD154 interactions are also important in the induction of costimulatory activity on other types of APC such as dendritic cells and macrophages (11a, 12, 29). This was demonstrated by upregulation of CD58, CD80, and CD86 by human dendritic Langerhans cells, stimulating them through CD40 by CD154-transfected L-cells (30–33), and enhancing CD40-triggered APC functions of human peripheral blood dendritic cells to induce proliferation and IFN-$\gamma$ production by T cells (30). Furthermore, ligation of CD40 with CD154 on the surface of dendritic cells regulates production of certain cytokines such as IL-8, MIP-1$\alpha$, TNF$\alpha$, and IL-12 (30–33). Production of proinflammatory cytokines and chemokines by APC, such as dendritic cells, is important for the induction of inflammation; production of IL-12 by dendritic cells in particular is critical for activation of T cells and in the development of Th1-type T cell responses.

Although the data presented above illustrate that CD40-CD154 play an important part in the activation of APC functions in B cells and dendritic cells, little is known about the role of CD40-CD154 in activation of APC functions on macrophages or monocytes. However, one recent report suggested a role for CD40-CD154 in activation of human monocytes as APC (34). Stimulation of human peripheral monocytes with soluble CD154-CD8 chimeric protein induces upregulation of several molecules important for APC functions, including CD54, MHC class II, CD86, and CD40. In addition ligation of CD40 on monocytes enhances survival of monocytes. Taken together, these results suggest that CD40-CD154 interactions are important for the activation of all APC, and this interaction may be a critical step in T cell activation.

## ROLE OF CD40-CD154 INTERACTION IN T CELL PRIMING

Infections by opportunistic pathogens such as *Pneumocystis* and *Cryptosporidium* are typically associated with severe T cell immunodeficiency (e.g., in AIDS patients) (5). However, these pathogens infect HIGM1 patients, suggesting that T cell responses are defective in the absence of CD154. Since CD154 stimulates APC to deliver activating signals to T cells, this deficiency could lead to a failure of T cell responses. Recent studies have therefore addressed the role of CD40-CD154 interactions in CD4 T cell priming. We have used CD154-knockout mice to investigate the possible role of CD40-CD154 interactions in vivo T cell priming to protein antigens (13). Studies with these mice demonstrated defects in priming of CD4 T cells to protein antigens (13). T cells harvested from antigen-immunized CD154-deficient mice proliferated poorly and produced little to no IL-4 and IFNγ when challenged with priming antigen in vitro, compared to T cells from antigen-immunized wild-type mice. Because CD4 T cells from CD154-deficient mice had no intrinsic defects and they proliferated normally when challenged in vitro with polyclonal activators, a lack of efficient in vivo priming of T cells in CD154-deficient mice was suggested. This defect in in vivo T cell priming was corrected when purified CD4 T cells from wild-type mice were adoptively transferred to CD154-deficient mice prior to immunization with antigen, suggesting that the defect was at the level of the T cell. Studies using an adoptive transfer system suggested that the lack of in vivo T cell priming in CD154-deficient mice was due to the limited expansion of antigen-specific T cells. When cytochrome-c (cyt-c)-specific TCR-transgenic T cells that lacked CD154 were transferred to wild-type non-TCR transgenic recipients, no loss of transferred cells was apparent. Even when recipients were challenged with cyt-c, little expansion in T cell frequency was seen, and only a few TCR transgenic T cells entered the cell cycle. The studies suggest that

CD40-CD154 interactions play a rate-limiting role in antigen-specific CD4 T cell priming and clonal expansion in vivo.

A requirement for CD40 signaling in T cell priming to alloantigens was recently demonstrated by Noelle and co-workers (35), who showed a lack of graft-vs-host disease (GVHD) when T cells were transferred from CD154-deficient mice to F₁ recipients. However, when wild-type T cells were transferred to F₁ hosts, severe GVHD was evident, accompanied by profound reduction in splenic cellularity and resulting in death of over 95% of mice within 21 days. These studies suggest that CD40-CD154 interactions are also important in the priming of alloreactive T cells. Similarly, a lack of immune response to autologous tumors in CD154-deficient mice was also demonstrated, thus strongly reinforcing the central role of CD40-CD154 in T cell priming (discussed in 35). In addition, CD4 T cell priming following adenovirus infection was also tested in CD154-deficient mice (15). In contrast to control wild-type mice, T cells harvested from virally infected CD154-deficient mice exhibited reduced IL-4, IL-10, and IFNγ, again suggesting defects in CD4 T cell priming in these mice. Since costimulatory signals are important for activation of T cells, lack of priming and expansion of CD4 T cells to protein antigens and to alloantigens in the absence of CD154 may be explained by inability of the T cells to activate APC. As discussed above, professional APC such as dendritic cells that upregulate costimulatory activity and enhance cytokine production upon CD40 ligation (30, 31) are generally considered to be the key APC for initiation of in vivo antigen-specific T cell responses. Lack of activation of this type of APC may therefore explain defects seen in CD4 T cell priming in the above systems.

Although a role of CD40-CD154 in CD4 T cell priming is strongly suggested, whether this interaction is important in the priming of CD8 T cells is not yet clear. However, a limited number of studies have addressed this question by studying the priming of CD8 T cells in viral infection models in CD154-deficient mice (36–39). Results suggest strong activation of primary CD8 cytotoxic T cells (CTLs) following infection of CD154-deficient mice with lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus (LCMV), Pichinde virus (PV), or vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV), suggesting that priming of CD8 T cells is independent of CD40-CD154. Interestingly, however, antiviral CD8 CTL memory responses were defective in CD154-deficient mice (36), suggesting a requirement of CD154-mediated signal in the establishment or maintenance of CTL memory. Since CD154 is important in CD4 T cell priming as discussed above, a defect in the memory responses in CD154-deficient mice could be due to inefficient CD4 T cell help. Alternatively, since CD8 T cells also express CD154 after activation (40–42), interaction of CTLs with CD40 expressing APC or other cells may be important for generation of CTL memory. However, the precise role of CD154 in CTL memory still remains to be established.

CD40-CD154 AND CELL FUNCTIONS 117

# CD40-CD154 AND CD4 T CELL DIFFERENTIATION AND IMMUNE DEVIATION

Strongly polarized CD4 T cell responses can occur in vivo or in vitro, and this polarity is explained by the cytokines that are secreted by the respective T cells (43). Th1 cells produce IFNγ and TNFβ, and activate macrophages and potentiate the inflammatory response, whereas Th2 cells produce IL-4, IL-5, IL-6, IL-10, and IL-13, and they promote antibody production. Factors that influence the differentiation of Th cells into distinct Th1 or Th2 subsets have been reviewed recently (43), and the critical role of cytokines, antigen/MHC affinity, and type of APC have all been implicated in this process. In addition, selective expression of costimulatory molecules on APC and soluble cofactor production such as IL-6 and IL-12 were also suggested to contribute toward the development of Th subsets (45). Because the CD40-CD154 interaction regulates the activation of APC both to upregulate costimulatory activity and to produce cytokines, these interactions are likely important in the polarization of Th cells into subsets.

Studies presented in previous sections indicate that CD40-CD154 interactions regulate the production of IL-12 by dendritic cells and macrophages; IL-12 is required for the development of Th1 type response. The role of CD40-CD154 in the development of Th2 type response has not yet been studied in detail. However, anti-CD154 antibodies are beneficial in cardiac allotransplantation (44), prolongation of graft survival was accompanied by immune deviation toward Th2 cytokines IL-4 and IL-10. This deviation was also accompanied by specific downregulation of CD80 without any effect on CD86 expression. Similarly, Stüber et al (46) reported that anti-CD154 antibodies can prevent the Th1 cell type-mediated autoimmune disease, inflammatory colitis, by blocking IL-12 secretion and by slightly upregulating IL-4, although the levels of IL-4 seen were extremely low. A definitive role of CD40-CD154 interaction in immune deviation is yet to be established. However, a recent interesting report (47) proposed a role for CD154 in delivering direct signals to T cells in immune deviation. This study demonstrated that, in an APC-independent system, during costimulation of human T cells by anti-CD3 and anti-CD28, incremental stimulation with anti-CD154 was required for production of Th2 type cytokines IL-4 and IL-10, but not for IFN-γ (47). Recent studies from Gray's group (48) also suggest that T cells can be activated by triggering CD154 on T cells. This raises the interesting possibility that direct costimulation of T cells through CD154 can cause IL-4 synthesis and mediate Th2 responses as well as directly potentiate T-B collaboration and B cell growth and differentiation. However, this stimulus is unlikely to be absolutely required for Th2 cytokine synthesis. Moreover, the relative role of CD40-CD154-mediated direct signals

for T cell activation versus effects mediated through the induction of cytokines  
in antigen-specific systems has not been addressed. In addition, because lack  
of CD40-CD154 interaction may also lead to failure of production of IL-12  
from dendritic cells and macrophages, it is likely that development of Th2 cells  
in absence of CD154-mediated signals may actually be enhanced; however,  
experimental data is not yet available to definitely implicate the CD40-CD154  
system in immune deviation.

## CD40-CD154 AND MONOCYTE/MACROPHAGE EFFECTOR FUNCTIONS

Macrophages are central players in many T cell-mediated inflammatory processes: They act to promote the inflammatory response and function as effector cells that mediate tissue damage; they further function as APC to process and present antigens to T cells, as target cells for intracellular parasite replication, and as effector cells to eliminate intracellular parasites. Recently, a requirement for cell-to-cell contact between T cells and macrophages for the activation of macrophages has been reviewed (11a). Since pre-activation of T cells is required for the activation of macrophages, it was suggested that activation-induced T cell surface molecules may be involved in this event. Monocyte and macrophage activation occurs as a result of T cell-generated signals (11a, 49), and recently, these signals were determined to include ligation of CD40 on the surface of monocytes. Ligation of CD40 on monocytes is important in stimulating production of IL-1α, IL-1β, TNFα, IL-6, and IL-8, as well as in the rescue of circulating monocytes from apoptotic death (11a, 50–53). Thus, it is likely that CD40-CD154 interactions play a role in monocyte-mediated inflammatory processes by upregulating cytokine production by monocytes and promoting their rescue from death at sites of inflammation.

Signals derived from activated CD4 T cells are important for the activation of macrophages to produce IFNγ and nitrite (54, 55); consequently, a role for CD40-CD154 interactions was postulated in the activation of macrophages. Indeed, cell-to-cell contact via CD40-CD154 interactions is required for production of NO and IL-12 by macrophages (11a, 48, 54, 56, 57). Furthermore, studies with T cells from CD154-deficient mice also indicate the requirement of CD40-CD154 interaction in activation of macrophages to produce TNFα and nitric oxide (49). Since IL-12 is required for induction and maintenance of Th1 type cellular immune responses as well as NK cell activation, it is likely that events mediated by CD40-CD154 during macrophage activation could be important in Th1-mediated inflammatory immune response to intracellular parasites. On the other hand, production of active nitrogen mediators by macrophages may be important in delivering effector mechanisms against intracellular parasites.

CD40-CD154 AND CELL FUNCTIONS 119

# ACTIVATION OF NK CELLS VIA CD154 SIGNALS

In addition to their more well-known functions in killing a variety of tumors, virus-infected cells, and allogeneic targets (58–61), NK cells induce B cell maturation, immunoglobulin secretion, and isotype switching (62, 63)—the pathways normally regulated by CD40-CD154 interactions (6, 7). Recently, a role for CD40-CD154 in NK cell interactions with other cells was investigated (64). NK cell clones express CD154, and these NK cells were able to kill targets expressing CD40. Because lysis of targets was inhibited by anti-CD40 antibodies, it was suggested that the CD40-CD154 mediated pathway might be functionally involved in the induction of cytotoxicity activity in NK cells. While freshly isolated human NK cells were unable to lyse targets, when activated with rIL-2 they also killed CD40 transfected targets. Furthermore, pre-treatment of resistant targets that expressed FcR with anti-CD154 antibody also resulted in killing of these targets by NK cell clones, suggesting activation of NK cells via CD154 cross-linking. Finally, the effects of negative signals, such as expression of MHC class I on targets, were also investigated in this system. When targets expressing both CD40 and MHC class I were used, a complete inhibition of target lysis was noticed, indicating regulation of CD154-mediated killing by MHC class I. Whether activation of NK cells via CD154 has in vivo significance is not clear at present, but one possibility is that NK cells expressing CD154 may have immunoregulatory functions (64). Since expression of MHC class I on targets can downregulate CD40 triggered killing of NK cells, encounters of NK effector cells with APC might conceivably play a role in regulation of the immune response. Further, regulation of CD40 triggered cytotoxicity by MHC class I may prevent the inappropriate lysis of APC. On the other hand, under certain circumstances, aberrantly activated APC expressing CD40 but lacking MHC class I (for example as a consequence of infection) can be eliminated by NK cells. Thus, regulation of induction of cytotoxicity activity on NK cells may regulate the immune response.

## CD40-CD154 AND EXTRAVASATION OF LEUKOCYTES

CD40 is expressed on endothelial cells from many vascular locations including spleen, skin, thyroid gland, thymus, and lungs (65), and it can be further upregulated by cytokines (66–69). Thus, CD40-CD154 interactions have been implicated as playing a significant role in the activation of vascular endothelium. Indeed, triggering of CD40 with CD154 was shown to induce CD62E, CD106, and CD54 on human endothelial cells (66, 67). During an inflammatory response, extravasation of leukocytes, which is mediated by CD62E, CD54, CD106 (69–71), and by chemokines such as IL-8, MCP-1, and MIP-1α,

120 GREWAL & FLAVELL

takes place at sites of inflammation and in secondary lymphoid organs (11a). Since CD40-CD154 interactions mediate upregulation of adhesion molecules and chemokines in endothelial cells, it is possible that CD40-CD154 interactions play an important role in the promotion of extravasation and accumulation of activated T cells at the sites of inflammation. In addition, activated T cells could also activate vascular endothelia at sites of inflammation, which could be important in T cell-mediated inflammatory reactions. These functions can also be performed by inflammatory cytokines such as TNF, IFNγ, etc. The relative importance of the CD154 contact mediated mechanisms and cytokine mechanisms is not yet clear.

# CD40-CD154 AND ATHEROSCLEROSIS

Increasing evidence has suggested the involvement of activated T cells and macrophages in inflammatory atherosclerotic plaques, and many recent reports have highlighted a role for autoimmunity in atherogenesis (72–77). A significant number of actively proliferating CD4 and CD8 T cells are present in atherosclerotic plaques (72, 73). Interestingly, the majority of CD4 T cells are of the memory phenotype, indicating involvement of antigen-specific T cells in atherosclerosis plaques (reviewed in 73). In addition, a reduced incidence of atherosclerosis in IFNγ knockout mice and complete lack of disease in MHC class I knockout mice when crossed with an atherosclerosis-prone strain (Apolipoprotein-E knockout mice) again suggests an immunological component in atherosclerosis (78, 79). Endothelial cells (EC), smooth muscle cells (SMC), and macrophages participate in atherogenesis (72). Human EC are known to express CD40, and ligation of this molecule leads to upregulation of adhesion molecules (see above) (65–68). Since increased levels of adhesion molecules are detected on EC and SMC in atherosclerotic lesions, a role for CD40-CD154 in this disease was recently investigated (77). The results of these studies indicate that cells other than leukocytes expressed functional CD154 during atherogenesis. Furthermore, coexpression of CD154 and CD40 on vascular endothelium and SMC was revealed in atherosclerotic lesions. Thus, expression of CD40 on SMC and CD154 on EC, SMC, and macrophages may be involved in a novel signaling pathway causing cellular activation during atherogenesis (77). Thus, CD154 expressed in both the vascular wall and T cells resident within lesions could ligate CD40 on EC, SMC, or macrophages, which may result in the expression of cytokines, matrix-metalloproteinases, or adhesion molecules, all proteins normally present in human atheroma (72, 77, 80). Hence the CD40 signaling pathway may play two distinct roles during atherogenesis. The first may occur in the regulation of antigen-specific T cell responses. The second may be related to the presence of functional CD154 on non-T cells associated with atherosclerotic lesions, which suggests a novel

T cell–independent mechanism to induce the inflammatory response, an increasingly recognized component of atherogenesis.

# ROLE OF CD40-CD154 IN AUTOIMMUNITY

The role of contact-dependent signaling in the development of autoimmunity has been addressed using anti-CD154 antibodies in many recent reports. A role of CD40-CD154 interactions in many organ-specific T cell–mediated autoimmune diseases such as collagen-induced arthritis, experimental allergic encephalomyelitis (EAE), lupus nephritis, colitis, and oophoritis has been demonstrated in mouse models (46, 81–84). Treatment of mice with anti-CD154 antibodies blocks development of disease in all the above-mentioned animal models; the treatment was accompanied by a reduction or elimination of damage to target tissue or infiltration of leukocytes to target tissues. Although the prevention of development of autoimmunity can be explained by the blockade of priming of self-antigen-specific T cells by anti-CD154, downstream effects of CD154 on effector functions that mediate tissue damage may also be blocked by these antibodies. It is clear that CD154 controls both the initiation of CD4 T cell responses as well as the delivery of effector functions, such as the activation of macrophages. Alternatively, anti-CD154 antibodies may block humoral responses that are believed to play a significant part in some autoimmune disease such as arthritis and oophoritis.

A role for CD40-CD154 interactions in the development of EAE was also studied in CD154-deficient mice expressing a myelin basic protein specific (MBP)-TCR transgene, in which over 95% of T cells are specific for a N-terminal peptide fragment of MBP. Even these CD154-deficient transgenic mice do not develop EAE upon challenge with antigen, unlike wild-type MBP-TCR transgenic mice (14), again confirming the important role of CD40-CD154 interactions in the development of autoimmunity. Further studies with these mice indicated that CD4 T cells from autoantigen immunized TCR transgenic mice lacking CD154 were mostly unactivated, produced no effector cytokines, and did not infiltrate or cause damage to the CNS. These studies suggested that lack of development of EAE in CD154-deficient mice was due to a block in the activation rather than the migration of activated T cells to the CNS. EAE could be developed and T cell responses could be restored by adoptive transfer of CD80 expressing APC prior to immunization. These results show that the CD40-CD154 interaction is required for the initiation of a CD4 T cell–mediated autoimmune response at least in part by the up-regulation of costimulatory molecules on APC, and a likely candidate APC during a normal immune response may be a dendritic cell in the initiation of this autoimmune response (12, 16). Furthermore, a recent report by Yang & Wilson (15) showed the in vivo requirement for CD40-CD154 interactions

for activation of APC to upregulate costimulatory molecules for the priming  
of T cells. This mechanism is consistent with the demonstration that blockade  
of expression of CD80 prevents clinical relapse and chronicity of EAE  
(85–87).  

Although the above-mentioned studies with CD154-deficient mice indicate  
a requirement of CD40-CD154 interactions for upregulation of costimulatory  
activities for the induction of the anti-MBP-response in EAE, studies with  
anti-CD154 antibodies show that these interactions may also be required for  
the perpetuation of chronic EAE (83); administration of anti-CD154 antibodies  
during the course of EAE eliminates disease (83). The first possibility to explain  
this observation is that anti-CD154 antibody may have blocked the migration  
of autoreactive T cells to CNS. CD40-CD154 interactions are important in inflammatory responses—in regulation of adhesion molecules on epithelial cells,  
induction of inflammatory cytokines, chemokines, and IL-12 (11a, 14, 65, 66).  
Alternatively, treatment of mice with anti-CD154 antibody during the course  
of EAE could possibly block the priming of new T cells that are required for  
chronic EAE as the immune response spreads to new epitopes following initial  
damage of CNS tissue (88, 89). Finally, CD40-CD154 interactions may  
be important in the effector phase of the response; for example, activation of  
monocyte/macrophage or microglial cells by T cells could cause damage in the  
CNS, because, as discussed in previous sections, CD40-CD154 interactions are  
required for activation of cells of these lineages (90). CD40 is expressed in the  
brains of multiple sclerosis patients and in mice undergoing chronic EAE, again  
suggesting a possible role for CD40-CD154 interactions at the effector level  
(83). Taken together, it is probable that CD154 may regulate both the initiation  
and effector phases of T cell responses as well as transmigration of activated T  
cells to target tissues.  

## ROLE OF CD40-CD154 INTERACTIONS  
IN TRANSPLANTATION  

Because CD40-CD154 interactions are important in responses to alloantigens  
(7, 35), their role in transplantation has also been investigated. Parker et al  
(91) studied the role of CD40-mediated signals in islet transplantation. Mice  
that were made diabetic by chemical destruction of their own islets were given  
alloislet transplants. Results from these studies indicate that administration of  
anti-CD154 antibodies could prevent alloislet graft rejection in 40–50% of the  
mice. Although islet graft rejection was not completely prevented, these studies highlight the important role of CD40-CD154 interactions in transplantation.  
For complete prevention of nonvascularized organ allografts such as islets, a  
more rigorous regimen is required that includes sensitization with appropriate  
alloantigens along with anti-CD154 antibodies (35, 91). Recently, a role of  

CD40-CD154 interactions in vascularized organ allograft rejection was also demonstrated by Larsen et al (92), who found that both CD40 and CD154 transcripts were induced in acute cardiac rejection. However, when recipients were given anti-CD154 antibody before transplantation, prolonged survival of cardiac allografts occurred. Allografts from mice treated with anti-CD154 antibody also showed decreased expression of transcripts for the macrophage product, inducible nitric oxide synthetase. In addition, antibody responses were also inhibited, but transcripts for T cell–associated cytokines such as IL-2, IL-4, IL-10, and IFNγ were not significantly inhibited. These data suggest that in cardiac allograft rejection, CD40-CD154 interactions mediate effector functions of T cells such as macrophage activation that require cell-to-cell contacts. However, when anti-CD154 antibodies were administered to recipients in combination with CTLA-4-Ig at the time of transplantation, cardiac allografts survived in all recipients for prolonged periods of time. This treatment was accompanied by an inhibition of T cell–associated cytokine transcripts for IL-2, IL-4, IL-10, and IFNγ (93).

Because the CD40-CD154 pathway modulates costimulatory activity in vitro and in vivo (14, 25–27) and costimulatory molecules are important in graft rejection (94–98), it is likely that CD40-CD154 interactions also mediate their effects at least in part by regulating in vivo costimulatory activity. In this respect, Hancock et al (44) have addressed the role of the CD40-CD154 interaction in regulation of costimulatory activities in acute allograft rejection. First, they showed that a single injection of anti-CD154 antibodies along with donor-specific transfusion leads to prolonged survival of cardiac allograft in all recipient mice. In contrast to the results obtained by Larsen et al (92), this study showed a marked inhibition of IL-2, IL-12, TNFα, and IFNγ, but an increase in IL-4- and IL-10-expressing cells in sections from grafted tissues. In addition, treatment of recipients at the time of transplantation with anti-CD154 antibody completely abolished the expression of CD80, although the expression of CD86 was not significantly changed. The data presented above suggest that anti-CD154 antibodies prevent graft rejection by inhibiting the induction of CD80 on APC. Taken together, from the above studies and those of Larsen et al (44, 92, 93), it can be concluded that CD40-CD154 interactions affect both the activation of alloreactive T cells by inhibiting expression of costimulatory molecules on APC and at the effector phase by inhibiting the activation of macrophages and other effector cells.

## CD40-CD154 IN THE CONTROL OF INFECTION

CD40-CD154 interactions are required for a broad spectrum of anti-infective host immune responses induced following infection with bacteria, parasites, or viruses (reviewed in 99). The following section highlights the recent

124 GREWAL & FLAVELL

developments in our understanding of in vivo functions of CD40-CD154 interactions in cell-mediated immune responses that are important in anti-infective host defense.

# Extracellular Pathogens

Since CD4-CD154 interactions are critical for the development of humoral responses, infection with extracellular bacterial pathogens, which is resolved mainly by humoral immune mechanisms (100), may be more severe in the absence of CD40-CD154 interactions. The role of CD40-CD154 interactions was investigated by infecting CD154-deficient mice with *Borrelia burgdorferi*, the causative agent of Lyme disease. Susceptible C3H mice develop carditis and acute arthritis following infection with *Borrelia*, which ultimately resolves through an antibody-mediated mechanism (101). Infection of both control and CD154-deficient mice with *B. burgdorferi* resulted in clearance of pathogens and regression of arthritis, in a similar fashion (102). However, as expected, CD154-deficient mice were defective in humoral responses, but antibodies against *B. burgdorferi* were generated (including switched isotypes such as IgG2b) that were sufficient to resolve *B. burgdorferi* infections, even upon adoptive transfer to naive animals. CD40-independent class switching to IgG2b can therefore occur. A likely role of CD40-CD154 is still expected in anti-bacterial immune response when TD antibodies are important, as evident by increased susceptibility of HIGM1 patients to certain bacterial infections, but CD40-CD154 is non-essential when T cell–independent responses are sufficient as for *Borrelia*.

A role for CD40-CD154 interactions in the resolution of infection by multicellular extracellular pathogens that require both humoral and cell-mediated immune responses was investigated recently. The involvement of CD40-mediated signals in type 2 mucosal immune responses was examined by administering anti-CD154 antibodies to mice infected with *Heligmosomoides polygyrus*. Infection of mice with this parasite results in the development of a type 2 enteric immune response, characterized by elevation of IgG1 and IgE levels, blood eosinophils, intestinal mucosal mast cells, and cytokines such as IL-3, IL-4, IL-5, and IL-9. The data showed that administration of anti-CD154 antibody to mice inhibited *H. polygyrus*-induced elevation of IgG1 as well as elevation in blood eosinophils and mucosal mast cells (103). CD40-CD154 interactions may regulate proliferation and/or activation of effector cells such as mast cells and eosinophils. Interestingly, mast cells express CD154 and provide help for antibody production (104, 105), further emphasizing that CD154 regulates interaction between multiple cell types. Taken together, CD40-CD154 interactions play a significant role in host responses to extracellular pathogens when both cellular and TD humoral responses are involved but play a rather minimal

role where CD4 T cell–independent humoral responses are sufficient to contain infections.

A critical role for CD40-CD154 in extracellular protozoan infection is emphasized by the observation that HIGM1 patients are susceptible to *Pneumocystis carinii* infections (106). *P. carinii* is an opportunistic pathogen of the lungs, and both humoral and cell-mediated immune responses are required for the resolution of this infection. Recent studies have documented the use of anti-CD154 antibodies to determine the role of CD40-CD154 interactions in *Pneumocystis* infections, in a mouse model. SCID mice reconstituted with splenic cells from wild-type mice before infection with *P. carinii* completely recovered from *Pneumocystis* infection, and treatment of these mice with anti-CD154 antibodies completely blocked the recovery. Furthermore, SCID mice reconstituted only with purified CD4 T cells recovered from *Pneumocystis* infection, and this recovery was blocked by treatment of these mice with anti-CD154, suggesting CD40-CD154 interactions between non-B cells and T cells are important in containing this infection. Since CD40-mediated signals are required for the activation of macrophages to produce TNFα and monocytes to produce IL-1 (11a), and these cytokines are required for resolution of *Pneumocystis* infections (106), T cell–mediated activation of macrophages may be required for resolution of *Pneumocystis* infections (105).

## Intravesicular Pathogens

Pathogens such as *Leishmania* invade macrophages in vertebrates, and in humans they cause leishmaniasis, a significant cause of morbidity in several geographical areas (107). In murine models of leishmaniasis, resolution and progression of this disease is modulated by preferential activation of Th1 or Th2 CD4 T cell subsets, respectively. As discussed in previous sections, disruption of the CD40-CD154 interaction prevents the development of these effector T cell responses because CD40 signals are important in dendritic cells and macrophage activation and IL-12 production—functions required for the Th1 response. Studies in CD40- and CD154-deficient mice (108–110) demonstrate a critical role for CD40-CD154 interactions in the protective immune response to *Leishmania major* because control mice remained resistant to *L. major* promastigote challenge, whereas both CD40- and CD154-deficient mice were unable to control growth of the parasite and developed ulcerating lesions at the site of inoculation. When T cells from infected CD40- or CD154-deficient mice were examined, a lack of IFNγ production was apparent, suggesting that priming of Th1 type cells was impaired in these mice. In addition, when splenic cells from CD154-deficient mice were challenged with *Leishmania* antigens, IL-12 production by these cells was greatly reduced compared to control mice. A possibility that IL-12 may be critical for protective immunity against *L. major*

infection was demonstrated by partial rescue of protective phenotype in CD154-
deficient mice by administration of IL-12 (108). This result implies that T cells
in CD40- and CD154-deficient mice were defective in inducing IL-12 produc-
tion by macrophages. Indeed, IL-12 production by macrophages is dependent
on CD40 stimulation (111, J Suttles, R Stout, unpublished).

In parallel to these studies, infection of CD154-deficient mice with another
species, *Leishmania amazonensis* (109), was also investigated. Wild-type con-
trol mice are susceptible to infection with this strain, which results in the de-
velopment of progressive ulcerative lesions that fail to resolve. In contrast to
wild-type controls, CD154-deficient mice infected with *L. amazonensis* showed
a much higher incidence of progressive ulcerative lesions and tissue parasite
burden, accompanied by the complete absence of IFNγ and LT-TNFα pro-
duction by T cells. Furthermore, activation of macrophages to produce the
inflammatory mediator NO did not take place in CD154-deficient mice. As
discussed in previous sections, CD40-mediated signals are required for the
production of NO by macrophages (49, 54); taken together these results in-
dicate that CD40-CD154 interactions are required for priming of T cells, the
differentiation of Th1 effector cells via IL-12, and thus the production of cy-
tokines required for macrophage activation. Finally this system is required for
stimulation of macrophages through CD154 to activate the effector mechanisms
that kill intracellular pathogens such as NO.

## CD40-CD154 AND INTRACYTOPLASMIC PATHOGENS

### Role of CD40-CD154 in Host Defense Against Virus Infections

CD40-CD154 interactions are important in both humoral and CD4 T cell-
mediated immune responses. Thus it is anticipated that CD40-CD154 interac-
tions are important in viral infections where the CD4 T cell response or humoral
immune response are required, but probably not for virus infections where CD8
CTL responses are sufficient to control a given pathogen. The role of CD40-
CD154 interactions in anti-viral immune responses was determined by study-
ing infections of CD154-deficient mice with LCMV, PV, and LSV (36, 37, 39).
When CD154-deficient mice were infected with these viruses, they mounted
strong primary CTL responses and cleared virus with a time course similar
to that for control mice (36, 37, 39); these data indicate that antiviral CTL are
sufficient to control infection by these viruses. Such results are broadly consis-
tent with the fact that mice infected with LCMV develop antiviral CD4 T cell,
CTL, and antibody response, but only antiviral CTL responses are sufficient
for virus clearance (reviewed in 112). However, CD154-deficient mice were

defective in memory CTL response against these viruses, compared to control
animals (36), suggesting that CD40-CD154 interactions may be important in
CTL memory responses. In addition when CD154-deficient mice were exam-
ined for LCMV-specific humoral immune responses, severely impaired primary
responses were seen; however, low levels of anti-LCMV antibodies (IgG2a, 2b,
and 3, but not IgG1) were generated (36, 37). As expected, CD154-deficient
mice exhibited severely impaired TD immune responses, as indicated by lack
of germinal centers, short-lived serum titers of virus-specific antibody, and lack
of B cell memory (36, 37, 39). Similarly, a gross defect in TD humoral re-
sponses of CD154-deficient mice to PV and LSV was also apparent (36, 39).
Finally, a role for CD40-CD154 interactions in viral infections was studied by
infecting CD154-deficient mice with an adenoviral vector containing a lacZ
reporter gene (15, 38). This infection is controlled by both CTL and humoral
immune responses that are dependent on CD4T cell help (113). In contrast
to the LCMV infection, CD154-deficient mice infected with this viral vector
resulted in impairment in both anti-viral CTL and TD responses. Thus, CD154-
deficient mice were unable to mediate virus clearance and were susceptible to
superinfection with a second recombinant adenovirus (15, 38), suggesting that
CD40-CD154 interactions are of critical importance in this system as well.

Finally, limited data also suggest that CD154 may have direct antiviral ac-
tivity (114). This was demonstrated by rapid clearance of recombinant vac-
cinia viruses expressing CD154 from a variety of immune-deficient mice such
as athymic mice, sublethally irradiated SCID mice, IFN-$\gamma$ receptor knockout
mice, and TNF$\alpha$-receptor knockout mice. The mechanism of CD154-mediated
direct antiviral activity remains unclear; however, the above-mentioned studies
suggest that this antiviral activity is independent of other antiviral host defenses.

**CD40-CD154 in *Listeria monocytogenes***

The role of CD40-CD154 interactions in the defense against intracellular
bacterial infection was determined by infecting CD154-deficient mice with
*Listeria monocytogenes*, a Gram-positive intracellular bacterium that infects
the cytosol of macrophages and hepatocytes. Mice develop protective immu-
nity predominantly mediated by CTLs following infection with a sublethal dose
of virulent *L. monocytogenes* (115). Infection of CD154-deficient mice with
*L. monocytogenes* resulted in the development of early protective innate in-
flammatory responses, independent of T cells, similar to those of control mice
(99). In addition, when mice were immunized with a sublethal dose of *L.*
monocytogenes and rechallenged, CD154-deficient mice were equally effec-
tive at clearing the infectious challenge. Thus, CTL cell-mediated protective
immunity appears to develop normally in mice lacking CD154, suggesting no
role for CD40-CD154 interactions in this system. These results are broadly

consistent with the effective primary antiviral response of these mice discussed above.

## CD40-CD154 REGULATE THE IMMUNE RESPONSE AT MULTIPLE LEVELS

Cell-to-cell interactions involving a variety of cell types clearly are required for an effective immune response, and the experiments reviewed here suggest that CD40-CD154 interactions are critical for the development of the CD4T cell-dependent cell-mediated immune response at multiple levels (see Table 3). How does that happen? A likely scenario using three check points is the following: At the first check point, lack of the CD40-CD154 interaction results in greatly reduced activation of CD4T cells—inefficient priming and expansion of antigen specific T cells. This step could be mediated by a lack of induction of costimulatory activity on APC, a failure in the activation of APC

### Table 3 Regulation of cellular functions by CD40-CD154 interactions

| Interaction           | Pathway                                      | Putative major responses                          |
|-----------------------|----------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------|
| T cell-B cell         | B cell proliferation and differentiation     | Humoral responses                                 |
|                       | Immunoglobulin production/class switching    | Immune deviation                                  |
|                       | Antigen presentation                         |                                                  |
| T cell-monocyte/      | Antigen presentation                         | T cell priming                                   |
| macrophage            | Activation of monocyte/macrophage to produce effector molecules | Macrophage effector functions                    |
|                       |                                              | Parasite removal                                 |
|                       |                                              | Rescue of monocytes from apoptosis               |
| T cell-DC             | Induction of cytokines                      | T cell priming                                   |
|                       | Induction of costimulation                   | Immune deviation                                 |
|                       | Antigen presentation                         |                                                  |
| T cell-endothelial cell | Induction of adhesion molecules            | Extravasation of leukocytes                      |
|                       | Induction of cytokines                      |                                                  |
| T cell-SMC            | Proliferation of SMC?                       | Atherogenesis                                    |
|                       | Induction of adhesion molecules              |                                                  |
|                       | Induction of cytokines                      |                                                  |
| Mast cell-B cell      | Antibody production                          | Antibody production                              |
|                       | IL-4 production                             | Immune regulation                                |
| NK cell-Target        | Activation of NK cell                       | Immune regulation                                |
|                       | Cytolysis                                    | Tumor killing                                    |
|                       |                                              | Elimination of virally infected cells            |
| T cell-Fibroblast     | Proliferation                               | Inflammation                                     |

to produce cytokines such as IL-12, or both. In addition, polarization of the immune response toward Th2 could also result from a lack of CD40-CD154 interaction that normally yields IL-12. Thus, in this step, absence of CD40-CD154 interactions will lead to impairment of many T cell effector functions, such as help for B cells, activation of dendritic cells, activation of monocytes and macrophages to produce cytokines and to kill intracellular pathogens, and activation of autoreactive T cells to mount an autoimmune response.

At the second check point, the migration to secondary lymphoid organs as well as to target organs of the residual activated T cells could be blocked by regulation of adhesion molecules by CD40-CD154 interactions on endothelia. At the final check point, CD40-CD154 interactions may be important for the effector stage (for example, activation of inflammatory cells to secrete cytokines); at the site of inflammation, they could be important to upregulate costimulation to amplify the response; and finally they could be important for the secretion of inflammatory mediators. Taken together, the evidence reviewed supports all of the above possibilities and can provide satisfactory explanations as to why interruption of CD40-CD154 interactions by antibodies or by CD154 mutations in mice and humans lead to impaired antigen-specific CD4 T cell priming, failure to mount autoimmune responses, and an ability to contain infection and prevent graft rejection.

## CD40-CD154 AS A THERAPEUTIC TARGET

Because CD40-CD154 interactions regulate diverse pathways of the immune system, therapeutic strategies designed to modulate this interaction may provide useful additional means to treat autoimmune and cardiovascular diseases, and to prevent graft rejection. These strategies may include the use of anti-CD40 or anti-CD154 antibodies, development of small molecule antagonists, and chimeric soluble proteins that can bind CD40 or CD154. Alternatively, strategies could be targeted at the level of intracellular pathways of CD40-mediated signaling that include inactivation of recently identified proteins (discussed in 6 and 11b) associated with the CD40 cytoplasmic intracellular tail such as CRAF-1, CAP-1, TRAF1, and TRAF2. Although some of these approaches have been successful in experimental models, potential side effects must be weighed before they are applied to humans. Because CD40 expression is widespread and found notably on APC, targeting of the CD40-CD154 interaction may lead to reduced TD immune responses.

If a major contribution of direct signaling through CD154 in the modulation of Th1/Th2 responses is confirmed, then ligands could be developed to polarize the immune response to Th2, which may be beneficial in both autoimmune diseases and in graft rejections. Other approaches might include development of compounds to trigger CD40 on APC in order to upregulate costimulatory

activity and cytokine secretion, which may be important to fight tumor growth and contain infections.

# CONCLUSIONS

It is now evident that CD40-CD154 interactions regulate the activation as well as the differentiation of a number of different cell types into effector cells, but many questions remain unanswered. An as-yet-unexplored area is the role of CD40-CD154 interactions in chronic inflammatory cardiovascular disease. The preliminary evidence on the presence of CD40 and CD154 expressing cells present in atherosclerotic plaques is exciting, while the exact nature of the role of these molecules remains to be explored. Although some evidence supports a role of CD40-CD154 interaction in the polarization of response to Th1 cells, the extent to which this interaction plays a role in the development of Th2 effectors also remains to be further explored. Some interesting data suggest that CD154 may act as a receptor, but how these signals for T cell activation are transmitted is still unclear. CD40-CD154 interactions regulate the activation of endothelia in some cases, but the precise role of these interactions in the inflammatory process is not yet clear. Finally, a remaining puzzle of great interest is the poor CD8 memory T cell response seen in the absence of CD40-CD154 interaction. Since CD40-CD154 interactions regulate multiple phases of the immune response, it is likely to remain the subject of intense investigation, particularly in the development of beneficial therapeutic approaches.

# ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

ISG was an associate and RAF is an investigator of the Howard Hughes Medical Institute. ISG is the recipient of a fellowship from the Juvenile Diabetes International Foundation. We thank numerous colleagues for providing reprints and preprints of their work prior to publication.

Visit the Annual Reviews home page at  
http://www.AnnualReviews.org

## Literature Cited

1. Noelle RJ, Ledbetter JA, Aruffo A. 1992. CD40 and its ligand, an essential ligand-receptor pair for thymus-dependent B-cell activation. *Immunol. Today* 13:431–33
2. Foy TM, Shepherd DM, Durie FH, Aruffo A, Ledbetter JA, Noelle RJ. 1993. In vivo CD40-gp39 interactions are essential for thymus-dependent humoral immu-
3. Ramesh N, Fuleihan R, Geha R. 1994. Molecular pathology of X-linked immunoglobulin deficiency with normal or elevated IgM (HIGMX-1). *Immunol. Rev.* 138:87–104

4. Callard RE, Armitage RJ, Fanslow W, Spriggs MK. 1993. CD40 ligand and its role in X-linked hyper-IgM syndrome. *Immunol. Today* 14:559–64

5. Notarangelo LD, Duse M, Ugazio AG. 1992. Immunodeficiency with hyper-IgM (HIM). *Immunodefic. Rev.* 3:101–22

6. Clark LB, Foy TM, Noelle RJ. 1996. CD40 and its ligand. *Adv. Immunol.* 63:43–78

7. Foy TM, Aruffo A, Bajorath J, Buhlman JE, Neolle RJ. 1996. Immune regulation by CD40 and its ligand gp39. *Annu. Rev. Immunol.* 14:591–617

8. Xu J, Foy TM, Laman JD, Elliott EA, Dunn JJ, Waldschmidt TJ, Elsemore J, Noelle RJ, Flavell RA. 1994. Mice deficient for the CD40 ligand. *Immunity* 1:423–31

9. Renshaw BR, Fanslow WC, Armitage RJ, Campbell KA, Liggit D, Wright B, Davison BL, Maliszewski CR. 1994. Humoral immune responses in CD40 ligand-deficient mice. *J. Exp. Med.* 180:1889–900

10. Kawabe T, Naka T, Yoshida K, Tanaka T, Fujiwara H, Suematsu S, Yoshida N, Kishimoto T, Kikutani H. 1994. The immune responses in CD40-deficient mice: impaired immunoglobulin class switching and germinal center formation. *Immunity* 1:167–78

11. Rathmell JC, Townsend SE, Xu JC, Flavell RA, Goodnow CC. 1996. Expansion or elimination of B cells in vivo: dual roles for CD40- and Fas (CD95)-ligands modulated by the B cell antigen receptor. *Cell* 87:319–29

11a. Stout R, Suttles J. 1996. The many roles of CD40:CD40L interactions in cell-mediated inflammatory responses. *Immunol. Today* 17:487–92

11b. van Kooten C, Banchereau J. 1996. CD40-CD40 ligand: a multifunctional receptor-ligand pair. *Adv. Immunol.* 61:1–77

12. Grewal IS, Flavell RA. 1996. CD40-CD40L interactions in T cell activation. *Immunol. Rev.* 153:85–106

13. Grewal IS, Xu J, Flavell RA. 1995. Impairment of antigen-specific T-cell priming in mice lacking CD40 ligand. *Nature* 378:617–20

14. Grewal IS, Foellmer HG, Grewal KD, Xu J, Hardardottir F, Baron JL, Janeway CA Jr, Flavell RA. 1996. Requirement for CD40 ligand in costimulation induction, T cell activation, and experimental allergic encephalomyelitis. *Science* 273:1864–67

15. Yang Y, Wilson JM. 1996. CD40 ligand-dependent T cell activation: Requirement

of B7-CD28 signaling through CD40. *Science* 273:1862–64

16. Grewal IS, Flavell RA. 1996. A central role of CD40 ligand in the regulation of CD4 T cell responses. *Immunol. Today* 17:410–14

17. Deleted in proof

18. Janeway CA Jr, Bottomly K. 1994. Signals and signs for lymphocyte responses. *Cell* 76:275–85

19. Jenkins MK. 1994. The ups and downs of T cell costimulation. *Immunity* 1:443–46

20. Ho WY, Cooke MP, Goodnow CC, Davis MM. 1994. Resting and anergic B cells are defective in CD28-dependent costimulation of naive CD4+ T cells. *J. Exp. Med.* 179:1539–49

21. Banchereau J, de Paoli P, Valle A, Garcia E, Rousset F. 1991. Long-term human B cell lines dependent on interleukin-4 and antibody to CD40. *Science* 251:70–72

22. Grabstein KH, Maliszewski CR, Shanebeck K, Sato TA, Spriggs MK, Fanslow WC, Armitage RJ. 1993. The regulation of T cell-dependent antibody formation in vitro by CD40 ligand and IL-2. *J. Immunol.* 150:3141–47

23. Deleted in proof

24. Hathcock KS, Laszlo G, Pucillo C, Linsley P, Hodes RJ. 1994. Comparative analysis of B7–1 and B7–2 costimulatory ligands: expression and function. *J. Exp. Med.* 180:631–40

25. Ranheim EA, Kipps TJ. 1993. Activated T cells induce expression of B7/BB1 on normal or leukemic B cells through a CD40-dependent signal. *J. Exp. Med.* 177:925–35

26. Roy M, Aruffo A, Ledbetter J, Linsley P, Kehry M, Noelle R. 1995. Studies on the interdependence of gp39 and B7 expression and function during antigen-specific immune responses. *Eur. J. Immunol.* 25:596–603

27. Wu Y, Xu J, Shinde S, Grewal IS, Henderson T, Flavell RA, Liu Y. 1995. Rapid induction of a novel costimulatory activity on B cells by CD40 ligand. *Curr. Biol.* 5:1303–11

28. Buhlmann JE, Foy TM, Aruffo A, Crassi KM, Ledbetter JA, Green WR, Xu J, Shultz LD, Roopesian D, Flavell RA, Lorenan F, Noelle RJ, Durie FH. 1995. In the absence of a CD40 signal, B cells are tolerogenic. *Immunity* 2:645–53

29. Grewal IS, Flavell RA. 1997. The CD40 ligand. At the center of the immune universe? *Immunol. Res.* 16:59–70

30. Caux C, Massacrier C, Vanbervliet B, Dubois B, Van Kooten C, Durand I, Banchereau J. 1994. Activation of hu-

man dendritic cells through CD40 cross-
linking. *J. Exp. Med.* 180:1263–72

31. Peguet-Navarro J, Dalbiez-Gauthier C,
Rattis FM, Van Kooten C, Bachereau
J, Schmitt D. 1995. Functional expres-
sion of CD40 antigen on human epidermal
Langerhans cells. *J. Immunol.* 155:4241–
47

32. Cella M, Scheidegger D, Palmer-Lehman
K, Lane P, Lanzavecchia A, Alber G.
1996. Ligation of CD40 on dendritic
cells triggers production of high levels of
interleukin-12 and enhances T cell stim-
ulatory capacity: T-T help via APC acti-
vation. *J. Exp. Med.* 184:747–52

33. Koch F, Stanzl U, Jennewein P, Janke
K, Heufler C, Kampgen E, Romani N,
Schuler G. 1996. High level IL-12 pro-
duction by murine dendritic cells: up-
regulation via MHC class II and CD40
molecules and downregulation by IL-10.
*J. Exp. Med.* 184:741–46

34. Kiener PA, Moran-Davis P, Rankin BM,
Wahl AF, Aruffo A, Hollenbaugh D.
1995. Stimulation of CD40 with purified
soluble gp39 induces proinflammatory re-
sponses in human monocytes. *J. Immunol.*
155:4917–25

35. Noelle RJ, Foy T, Mackey M, Budlmann
J. 1996. The role of CD40 and its ligand
in peripheral T-cell tolerance. In *Immune
Tolerance*, ed. J Bachereau, D Dodet, R
Schwartz, E Trannoy, pp. 135–40. Paris:
Elsevier

36. Borrow P, Tishon A, Lee S, Xu J, Gre-
wal IS, Oldstone MB, Flavell RA. 1996.
CD40L-deficient mice show deficits in
antiviral immunity and have an impaired
memory CD8+ CTL response. *J. Exp.*
*Med.* 183:2129–42

37. Whitemire JK, Slifka MK, Grewal IS,
Flavell RA, Ahmed R. 1996. Primary
immune response to a viral infection
in CD40 ligand-deficient mice. *J. Virol.*
70:8375–81

38. Yang Y, Su Q, Grewal IS, Schilz R, Flavell
RA, Wilson JM. 1996. Transient subver-
sion of CD40 ligand function diminishes
immune responses to adenovirus vectors
in mouse liver and lung tissues. *J. Virol.*
70:6370–77

39. Oxenius A, Campbell KA, Maliszewski
CR, Kishimoto T, Kikutani H, Hengart-
ner H, Zinkernagel RM, Bachmann MF.
1996. CD40-CD40 ligand interactions are
critical in T-B cooperation but not for
other anti-viral CD4+ T cell functions.
*J. Exp. Med.* 183:2209–18

40. Roy M, Waldschmidt T, Aruffo A, Led-
better JA, Noelle RJ. 1993. The regulation
of the expression of gp39, the CD40 lig-

and, on normal and cloned CD4+ T cells.
*J. Immunol.* 151:2497–510

41. Lane P, Traunecker A, Hubele S, Inui S,
Lanzavecchia A, Gray D. 1992. Activated
human T cells express a ligand for the
human B cell-associated antigen CD40
which participates in T cell-dependent ac-
tivation of B lymphocytes. *Eur. J. Im-
munol.* 22:2573–78

42. Lederman S, Yellin MJ, Inghirami G,
Lee JJ, Knowles DM, Chess L. 1992.
Molecular interactions mediating T-B
lymphocyte collaboration in human lym-
phoid follicles. Roles of T cell-B-cell-
activating molecule (5c8 antigen) and
CD40 in contact-dependent help. *J. Im-
munol.* 149:3817–26

43. Costant SL, Bottomly K. 1997. Induction
of Th1 and Th2 CD4+ T cell responses:
the alternative approaches. *Annu. Rev. Im-
munol.* 15:297–322

44. Hancock WW, Sayegh MH, Zheng XG,
Peach R, Linsley PS, Turka LA. 1996.
Costimulatory function and expression of
CD40 ligand, CD80, and CD86 in vascu-
larized murine cardiac allograft rejection.
*Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 93:13967–
72

45. Rincon M, Anguita J, Nakamura T, Fikrig
E, Flavell RA. 1997. Interleukin (IL)-6 di-
rects the differentiation of IL-4-producing
CD4+ T cells. *J. Exp. Med.* 185:461–
69

46. Stüber E, Strober W, Neurath M. 1996.
Blocking the CD40L-CD40 interaction in
vivo specifically prevents the priming of
T helper 1 cells through the inhibition
of interleukin-12 secretion. *J. Exp. Med.*
183:693–98

47. Blotta MH, Marshall JD, DeKruyff RH,
Umetsu DT. 1996. Cross-linking of the
CD40 ligand on human CD4+ T lympho-
cytes generates a costimulatory signal that
up-regulates IL-4 synthesis. *J. Immunol.*
156:3133–40

48. van Essen D, Kikutani H, Gray D. 1995.
CD40 ligand-transduced co-stimulation
of T cells in the development of helper
function. *Nature* 378:620–23

49. Stout R, Suttles J, Xu J, Grewal I,
Flavell R. 1996. Impaired T cell-mediated
macrophage activation in CD40 ligand-
deficient mice. *J. Immunol.* 156:8–11

50. Wagner DH Jr, Stout RD, Suttles J. 1994.
Role of the CD40-CD40 ligand interac-
tion in CD4+ T cell contact-dependent
activation of monocyte interleukin-1 syn-
thesis. *Eur. J. Immunol.* 24:3148–54

51. Kiener PA, Moran-Davis P, Rankin BM,
Wahl AF, Aruffo A, Hollenbaugh D.
1995. Stimulation of CD40 with purified

soluble gp39 induces proinflammatory responses in human monocytes. *J. Immunol.* 155:4917–25

52. Suttles J, Evans M, Miller RW, Poe JC, Stout RD, Wahl LM. 1996. T cell rescue of monocytes from apoptosis: role of the CD40-CD40L interaction and requirement for CD40-mediated induction of protein tyrosine kinase activity. *J. Leukocyte Biol.* 60:651–57

53. Jonathan CP, Wagner DH Jr, Miller RW, Stout RD, Suttles J. 1997. IL-4 and IL-10 modulation of CD40-mediated signaling of monocyte IL-1beta synthesis and rescue from apoptosis. *J. Immunol.* 159:846–52

54. Tian L, Noelle RJ, Lawrence DA. 1995. Activated T cells enhance nitric oxide production by murine splenic macrophages through gp39 and LFA-1. *Eur. J. Immunol.* 25:306–9

55. Tao X, Stout RD. 1993. T cell-mediated cognate signaling of nitric oxide production by macrophages. Requirements for macrophage activation by plasma membranes isolated from T cells. *Eur. J. Immunol.* 23:2916–21

56. Stout RD. 1993. Macrophage activation by T cells: cognate and non-cognate signals. *Curr. Opin. Immunol.* 5:398–403

57. Shu U, Kiniwa M, Wu CY, Maliszewski C, Vezzio N, Hakimi J, Gately M. 1995. Delespesse G: Activated T cells induce interleukin-12 production by monocytes via CD40-CD40 ligand interaction. *Eur. J. Immunol.* 25:1125–28

58. Herberman RB. 1982. *NK Cells and Other Natural Effector Cells*. New York: Academic. 912 pp.

59. Borysiewicz LK, Rodgers B, Morris S, Graham S, Sissons JGP. 1985. Lysis of human cytomegalovirus infected lymphoblasts by natural killer cells: demonstration of an interferon-independent component requiring expression of early viral proteins and characterization of effector cells. *J. Immunol.* 134:2695–705

60. Murphy WJ, Kumar V, Bennett M. 1987. Acute rejection of murine bone marrow allograft by natural killer cells and T cells. *J. Exp. Med.* 166:1499–503

61. Ciccone E, Viale O, Pende D, Malnati M, Biassoni R, Melioli G, Moretta A, Long EO, Moretta L. 1988. Specific lysis of allogeneic cells after activation of CD3 lymphocytes in mixed lymphocyte culture. *J. Exp. Med.* 168:2403–7

62. Gray JD, Horwitz DA. 1995. Activated human NK cells can stimulate resting B cells to secrete immunoglobulins. *J. Immunol.* 154:5656–64

63. Snapper CM, Yamaguchi H, Moorman MA, Sneed R, Smoot D, Mond JJ. 1993. Natural killer cells induce activated murine B cells to secrete Ig. *J. Immunol.* 151:5251–60

64. Carbone E, Ruggiero G, Terrazzano G, Palomba C, Manzo C, Fontana S, Spits H, Kärre K, Zappacosta S. 1997. A new mechanism of NK cell cytotoxicity activation: the CD40-CD40 ligand interaction. *J. Exp. Med.* 185:2053–60

65. Yellin MJ, Brett J, Baum D, Matsushima A, Szabolcs M, Stern D, Chess L. 1995. Functional interactions of T cells with endothelial cells: the role of CD40L-CD40-mediated signals. *J. Exp. Med.* 182:1857–64

66. Karmann K, Hughes CC, Schechner J, Fanslow WC, Pober JS. 1995. CD40 on human endothelial cells: inducibility by cytokines and functional regulation of adhesion molecule expression. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 92:4342–46

67. Karmann K, Min W, Fanslow WC, Pober JS. 1996. Activation and homologous desensitization of human endothelial cells by CD40 ligand, tumor necrosis factor, and interleukin 1. *J. Exp. Med.* 184:173–82

68. Hollenbaugh D, Mischel-Petty N, Edwards CP, Simon JC, Denfeld RW, Kiener PA, Aruffo A. 1995. Expression of functional CD40 by vascular endothelial cells. *J. Exp. Med.* 182:33–40

69. Mantovani A, Bussolino F, Introna M. 1997. Cytokine regulation of endothelial cell function: from molecular level to the bedside. *Immunol. Today* 18:231–40

70. Stout RD, Suttles J. 1995. *T Cell Signaling of Macrophage Activation: Cell Contact-Dependent and Cytokine Signals*. Austin, TX: Landes. 185 pp.

71. Springer TA. 1994. Traffic signals for lymphocyte recirculation and leukocyte emigration: the multistep paradigm. *Cell* 76:301–14

72. Laman JD, de Smet BJ, Schoneveld A, van Meurs M. 1997. CD40-CD40L interactions in atherosclerosis. *Immunol. Today* 18:272–77

73. Wick G, Schett G, Amberger A, Kleindienst R, Xu Q. 1995. Is atherosclerosis an immunologically mediated disease? *Immunol. Today* 16:27–33

74. Zhou X, Stemme S, Hansson GK. 1996. Evidence for a local immune response in atherosclerosis. CD4+ T cells infiltrate lesions of apolipoprotein-E-deficient mice. *Am. J. Pathol.* 149:359–66

75. Emeson EE, Shen ML, Bell CG, Qureshi A. 1996. Inhibition of atherosclerosis

in CD4 T-cell-ablated and nude (nu/nu)  
C57BL/6 hyperlipidemic mice. *Am. J.*  
*Pathol.* 149:675–85  

76. Lichtman AH, Cybulsky M, Luscinskas  
FW. 1996. Immunology of atherosclerosis: the promise of mouse models. *Am. J.*  
*Pathol.* 149:351–57  

77. Mach F, Schonbeck U, Sukhova GK,  
Bourcier T, Bonnefoy JY, Pober JS,  
Libby P. 1997. Functional CD40 ligand is expressed on human vascular endothelial cells, smooth muscle cells, and macrophages: implications for CD40-CD40 ligand signaling in atherosclerosis. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 94:1931–36  

78. Fyfe AI, Qiao JH, Lusis AJ. 1994. Immune-deficient mice develop typical atherosclerotic fatty streaks when fed an atherogenic diet. *J. Clin. Invest.* 94:2516–20  

79. Gupta S, Pablo AM, Jiang X, Wang N, Tall AR, Schindler C. 1997. IFN-γ potentiates atherosclerosis in ApoE knock-out mice. *J. Clin. Invest.* 99:2752–61  

80. Malik N, Greenfield BW, Wahl AF,  
Kiener PA. 1996. Activation of human monocytes through CD40 induces matrix metalloproteinases. *J. Immunol.* 156:3952–60  

81. Durie FH, Fava RA, Foy TM, Aruffo A,  
Ledbetter JA, Noelle RJ. 1993. Prevention of collagen-induced arthritis with an antibody to gp39, the ligand for CD40. *Science* 261:1328–30  

82. Mohan C, Shi Y, Laman JD, Datta SK. 1995. Interaction between CD40 and its ligand gp39 in the development of murine lupus nephritis. *J. Immunol.* 154:1470–80  

83. Gerritse K, Laman JD, Noelle RJ, Aruffo A, Ledbetter JA, Boersma WJ, Claassen E. 1996. CD40-CD40 ligand interactions in experimental allergic encephalomyelitis and multiple sclerosis. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 93:2499–504  

84. Griggs ND, Agersborg SS, Noelle RJ,  
Ledbetter JA, Linsley PS, Tung KS. 1996. The relative contribution of the CD28 and gp39 costimulatory pathways in the clonal expansion and pathogenic acquisition of self-reactive T cells. *J. Exp. Med.* 183:801–10  

85. Bluestone JA. 1995. New perspectives of CD28-B7-mediated T cell costimulation. *Immunity* 2:555–59  

86. Miller SD, Vanderlugt CL, Lenschow DJ, Pope JG, Karandikar NJ, Dal Canto MC, Bluestone JA. 1995. Blockade of CD28/B7-1 interaction prevents epitope spreading and clinical relapses of murine EAE. *Immunity* 3:739–45  

87. Racke MK, Scott DE, Quigley L, Gray  



GS, Abe R, June CH, Perrin PJ. 1995. Distinct roles for B7–1 (CD-80) and B7–2 (CD-86) in the initiation of experimental allergic encephalomyelitis. *J. Clin. Invest.* 96:2195–203  

88. Lehmann PV, Forsthuber T, Miller A, Ser- carz EE. 1992. Spreading of T-cell autoimmunity to cryptic determinants of an autoantigen. *Nature* 358:155–57  

89. McRae BL, Vanderlugt CL, Dal Canto MC, Miller SD. 1995. Functional evidence for epitope spreading in the relapsing pathology of experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis. *J. Exp. Med.* 182:75–85  

90. Stout RD, Suttles J. 1997. T cell signaling of macrophage function in inflammatory disease. *Frontiers Biosci.* 2:197–206  

91. Parker DC, Greiner DL, Phillips NE, Appel MC, Steele AW, Durie FH, Noelle RJ, Mordes JP, Rossini AA. 1995. Survival of mouse pancreatic islet allografts in recipients treated with allogeneic small lymphocytes and antibody to CD40 ligand. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 92:9560–64  

92. Larsen CP, Alexander DZ, Hollenbaugh D, Elwood E, Ritchie SC, Aruffo A, Hendrix R, Pearson TC. 1996. CD40-gp39 interactions play a critical role during allo- graft rejection. Suppression of allograft rejection by blockade of the CD40-gp39 pathway. *Transplantation* 61:4–9  

93. Larsen CP, Elwood ET, Alexander DZ, Ritchie SC, Hendrix R, Tucker-Burden C, Cho HR, Aruffo A, Hollenbaugh D, Linsley PS, Winn KJ, Pearson TC. 1996. Long-term acceptance of skin and cardiac allografts after blocking CD40 and CD28 pathways. *Nature* 381:434–38  

94. Lenschow DJ, Zeng Y, Thistlethwaite JR, Montag A, Brady W, Gibson MG, Linsley PS, Bluestone JA. 1992. Long-term survival of xenogeneic pancreatic islet grafts induced by CTLA4Ig. *Science* 257:789–92  

95. Turka LA, Linsley PS, Lin H, Brady W, Leiden JM, Wei RQ, Gibson ML, Zheng XG, Myrdal S, Gordon D, Bailey T, Bolling SF, Thompson CB. 1992. T-cell activation by the CD28 ligand B7 is required for cardiac allograft rejection in vivo. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 89:11,102–5  

96. Lin H, Bolling SF, Linsley PS, Wei RQ, Gordon D, Thompson CB, Turka LA. 1993. Long-term acceptance of major histocompatibility complex mismatched cardiac allografts induced by CTLA4Ig plus donor-specific transfusion. *J. Exp. Med.* 178:1801–6  

97. Pearson TC, Alexander DZ, Winn KJ,

Linsley PS, Lowry RP, Larsen CP. 1994. Transplantation tolerance induced by CTLA4-Ig. *Transplantation* 57:1701–6

Tepper MA, Linsley PS, Tritschler D, Eselstyn JM. 1994. Tolerance induction by soluble CTLA4 in a mouse skin transplant model. *Transplant. Proc.* 26:3151–54

Grewal IS, Borrow P, Pamer EG, Oldstone MBA, Flavell RA. 1997. CD40-CD154 system in anti-infective host defense. *Curr. Opin. Immunol.* In press

Janeway CA Jr, Travers P. 1996. *Immunobiology: The Immune System in Health and Disease*. New York: Garland. 2nd ed.

Seiler KP, Weis JJ. 1996. Immunity to Lyme disease: protection, pathology and persistence. *Curr. Opin. Immunol.* 8:503–9

Fikrig E, Barthold SW, Chen M, Grewal IS, Craft J, Flavell RA. 1996. Protective antibodies in murine Lyme disease arise independently of CD40 ligand. *J. Immunol.* 157:1–3

Lu P, Urban JF, Zhou XD, Chen SJ, Madden K, Moorman M, Nguyen H, Morris SC, Finkelman FD, Gause WC. 1996. CD40-mediated stimulation contributes to lymphocyte proliferation, antibody production, eosinophilia, and mastocytosis during an in vivo type 2 response, but is not required for T cell IL-4 production. *J. Immunol.* 156:3327–33

Gauchat JF, Henchoz S, Mazzei G, Aubry JP, Brunner T, Blasey H, Life P, Talabot D, Flores-Romo L, Thompson J, Kishi K, Butterfield J, Dahinden C, Bonnefoy JY. 1993. Induction of human IgE synthesis in B cells by mast cells and basophils. *Nature* 365:340–43

Wiley JA, Harmsen AG. 1995. CD40 ligand is required for resolution of *Pneumocystis carinii* pneumonia in mice. *J. Immunol.* 155:3525–29

Cailliez JC, Seguy N, Denis CM, Aliouat EM, Mazars E, Polonelli L, Camus D, Dei-Cas E. 1996. *Pneumocystis carinii*: an atypical fungal micro-organism. *J. Med. Vet. Mycol.* 34:227–39

Reiner SL, Locksley RM. 1995. The regulation of immunity to *Leishmania major*. *Annu. Rev. Immunol.* 13:151–77

Soong L, Xu J, Grewal IS, Kima P, Sun J, Longley BJ Jr, Ruddle NH, McMahon-Pratt D, Flavell RA. 1996. Disruption of CD40-CD40 ligand interactions results in an enhanced susceptibility to *Leishmania amazonensis* infection. *Immunity* 4:263–73

Campbell KA, Ovendale PJ, Kennedy MK, Fanslow WC, Reed SG, Maliszewski CR. 1996. CD40 ligand is required for protective cell-mediated immunity to *Leishmania major*. *Immunity* 4:283–89

Kamanaka M, Yu P, Yasui T, Yoshida K, Kawabe T, Horii T, Kishimoto T, Kikutani H. 1996. Protective role of CD40 in *Leishmania major* infection at two distinct phases of cell-mediated immunity. *Immunity* 4:275–81

Shu U, Kiniwa M, Wu CY, Maliszewski C, Vezzio N, Hakimi J, Gately M. 1995. Delespesse G: Activated T cells induce interleukin-12 production by monocytes via CD40-CD40 ligand interaction. *Eur. J. Immunol.* 25:1125–28

Borrow P, Oldstone MBA. 1997. Lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus. In *Viral Pathogenesis*, ed. N Nathanson, pp. 593–72. Philadelphia: Lippincott-Raven

Yang Y, Trinchieri G, Wilson JM. 1995. Recombinant IL-12 prevents formation of blocking IgA antibodies to recombinant adenovirus and allows repeated gene therapy to mouse lung. *Nat. Med.* 1:890–93

Ruby J, Bluethmann H, Aguet M, Ramshaw IA. 1995. CD40 ligand has potent antiviral activity. *Nat. Med.* 1:437–41

Pamer EG. 1997. Immune response to *Listeria monocytogenes*. In *Host Response to Intracellular Infection*, ed. SHE Kaufmann, pp. 131–42. Austin, TX: Landes
