
Bacterial production of carbapenems and clavams: evolution of β-lactam antibiotic pathways

Simon J. McGowan, Barrie W. Bycroft and George P.C. Salmond

Despite clinical problems of increasing bacterial resistance, β-lactam antibiotics remain important and effective antibacterial therapy in most situations. The four different classes of β-lactams are defined by the composition of a five- or six-membered ring that is fused to a common, four-membered lactam ring (Fig. 1). Penicillins, cephalosporins and cephamycins each contain a sulphur atom in the
RE VIEWS

(a) Olivanic acid  
(b) Clavulanic acid  
(c) Thienamycin  

(d) Imipenem  
(e) Meropenem  
(f) Clavamycin A  

(g) Valclavam  
(h) 1-Carbapen-2-em-3-carboxylic acid  

Fig. 2. Examples of clavams (clavulanic acid, clavamycin A and valclavam) and carbapenems [olivanic acids, thienamycin, imipenem (a derivative of thienamycin, N
catalysing the last step of the clavulanic acid biosynthetic pathway (Fig. 3). There is disagreement, however, about the precise amino acid sequence of ClaR (possibly arising from frame shifts in one of the reported sequences) and about the requirement for this activator in the production of cephamycin²⁴,²⁵.

**Carbapenems**

Members of the carbapenem class of β-lactam were also initially discovered in the streptomycetes. In contrast to the clavams, which, to date, appear to be produced exclusively by streptomycetes, members
require re-interpretation. The associated sequence submission³³ describes a protein that has high homology with the extreme carboxyl terminus of δ-(L-α-aminoadipyl)-L-cysteinyl-D-valine synthetase (ACVS), the first enzyme of the penicillin and cephalosporin pathways. In addition, the DNA reported as lying upstream of the identified thienamycin cyclase gene also shows homology with ACVS when translated. As an enzyme of this type is likely to be involved in the biosynthesis of cephamycin C, which is known to be produced by S. c
(a)

One gene  
(sequence not  
reported)  

$\downarrow$  

$\beta$-lactam synthase  

(b)

carR carA carB carC carD carE carF carG carH  

$\downarrow$ $\downarrow$  

$\beta$-lactam synthase? Oxygenase?  

Fig. 5. Comparison between the genes of (a) the clavulanic acid biosynthetic pathway of Streptomyces clavuligerus and (b) the carbapenem biosynthetic pathway of Erwinia carotovora. Each bacterium contains two genes
carbapenem synthesis and extension of current biosynthetic studies on clavulanic acid will help to illuminate and test the notion that these biosynthetic pathways are evolutionarily related.

**Acknowledgements**

This work was funded by the BBSRC.

**References**

1. Martin, J.F. and Gutierrez, S. (1995) *Antonie van Leeuwenhoek Int. J. Gen. Mol. Microbiol.* 67, 181–200
2. Townsend, C.A. (1993) *Biochem. Soc. Trans.*