
THE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGICAL CHEMISTRY
© 1998 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

**Cloning and Characterization of the Two Enzymes Responsible for Trypanothione Biosynthesis in Crithidia fasciculata**

(Received for publication, February 4, 1998, and in revised form, May 5, 1998)

Emmanuel Tetaud‡, Faouzi Manai§, Michael P. Barrett¶, Kari Nadeau**, Christopher T. Walsh∥,  
and Alan H. Fairlamb‡ ‡

From the ‡Department of Biochemistry, Wellcome Trust Building, University of Dundee Dundee DD1 4HN, Scotland,  
United Kingdom and the ∥Department of Biological Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Harvard Medical School,  
Boston, Massachusetts 02115

Protozoa of the order Kinetoplastida differ from other organisms in their ability to conjugate glutathione (γ-Glu-Cys-Gly) and spermidine to form trypanothione (*N*¹,*N*⁸-bis(glutathionyl)spermidine), which is involved in maintaining intracellular thiol redox and in defense against oxidants. In this study, the genes from *Crithidia fasciculata*, *Cf-GSS* and *Cf-TRS*, which encode, respectively, glutathionylspermidine synthetase (EC 6.3.1.8) and trypanothione synthetase (EC 6.3.1.9) have been cloned and expressed. The deduced amino acid sequence of both *Cf-GSS* and *Cf-TRS* share 50% sequence similarity with the *Escherichia coli* glutathionylspermidine synthetase/amidase. Both genes are present as single copies in the *C. fasciculata* genome. When expressed in *E. coli* and *Saccharomyces cerevisiae*, neither protein was present in an active soluble form. However, thiol analysis of *S. cerevisiae* demonstrated that cells transformed with the *Cf-GSS* gene contained substantial amounts of glutathionylspermidine, whereas cells expressing both the *Cf-GSS* and *Cf-TRS* genes contained glutathionylspermidine and trypanothione, confirming that these genes encode the functional glutathionylspermidine and trypanothione synthetases from *C. fasciculata*. The translation products of *Cf-GSS* and *Cf-TRS* show significant homology to the amidase domain present in *E. coli* glutathionylspermidine synthetase, which can catalyze both synthesis and degradation of glutathionylspermidine. Glutathionylspermidine synthetase isolated from *C. fasciculata* was found to possess a similar amidase activity.

Several parasitic protozoa belonging to the order Kinetoplastida are human pathogens causing diseases such as sleeping sickness (*Trypanosoma brucei rhodesiense* and *Trypanosoma gambiense*); visceral, cutaneous, and mucocutaneous leishmaniasis (*Leishmania spp.*); and Chagas' disease (*Trypanosoma cruzi*). Currently, there are no entirely satisfactory drugs for use against these maladies, and no vaccines exist. Many of the currently available drugs suffer from poor efficacy, unacceptable host toxicity, or drug resistance. The mode of action of most trypanocidal drugs is unknown, and currently used compounds were derived empirically, except for the DL-*α*-difluoromethylornithine, which is a potent inhibitor of ornithine decarboxylase (1–3). To increase the chances of success, the development of new drugs should be aimed at those steps in a metabolic pathway that are either absent or differ from analogous steps in the host.

The polyamines and glutathione (*γ*-L-glutamyl-L-cysteinyl-glycine) are found in millimolar concentrations in most biological systems. Polyamines are thought to be essential for cell proliferation and differentiation in most organisms (4–7). Glutathione has a role in several important biochemical processes that include regulation of the intracellular thiol redox balance and defense against oxidant or other chemical-induced damage (8). Unlike most prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells, in which the major thiol component is glutathione, members of the order Kinetoplastida rely on a glutathione-spermidine conjugate called trypanothione (*N*¹,*N*⁸-bis(glutathionyl)spermidine) (9, 10). Trypanothione seems to be an essential redox intermediate in the regulation of the intracellular thiol redox, analogous to glutathione in other organisms, and also to play a role in defense against oxidative stress. In fact, these parasites lack typical catalase, glutathione peroxidase (11–13), and glutathione reductase (9), which function in oxidant defense in other organisms. The parasites utilize an analogous system involving trypanothione reductase, an enzyme similar to glutathione reductase, which uses trypanothione as a cofactor (14). On the basis of these observations, trypanothione metabolism represents an attractive candidate for rational drug design, since it is uniquely found in the Kinetoplastida (15).

Biosynthesis of trypanothione involves ATP-dependent conjugation of intact glutathione to the two terminal amino functions of spermidine (16). The original report (17) of a single enzyme from *Crithidia fasciculata* converting glutathione and spermidine into trypanothione, called trypanothione synthetase, has been superseded by the identification of two distinct ATP-dependent enzymes involved in the synthesis of trypanothione (18, 19), a glutathionylspermidine synthetase (GSS)¹ that forms both *N*¹- and *N*⁸-glutathionylspermidine and a

---

* This work was supported by the Wellcome Trust. The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked “advertisement” in accordance with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.
* The nucleotide sequence(s) reported in this paper has been submitted to the GenBank™/EBI Data Bank with accession number(s) U66520 (glutathionylspermidine synthetase) and AF006615 (trypanothione synthetase).
* § Present address: Procter and Gamble, Sulzbacher Str. 40, D-65824 Schwalbach, Germany.
* ¶ Present address: Division of Infection and Immunity, Institute of Biomedical and Life Sciences, Joseph Black Building, University of Glasgow, Glasgow G12 8QQ, Scotland, United Kingdom.
* ** Present address: Biogen Inc., 14 Cambridge Center, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02142.
* ‡ To whom correspondence should be addressed: Dept. of Biochemistry, Wellcome Trust Building, University of Dundee, Dundee DD1 4HN, Scotland, United Kingdom. Tel.: 44-0-1382-345-155; Fax: 44-0-1382-345-542; E-mail: ahfairlamb@bad.dundee.ac.uk.

---

1 The abbreviations used are: GSS, glutathionylspermidine synthetase; TRS, trypanothione synthetase; ORF, open reading frame; HPLC, high pressure liquid chromatography; PCR, polymerase chain reaction; bp, base pair(s); PAGE, polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis; bis-Tris, 2-[bis(2-hydroxyethyl)aminol]-2-(hydroxymethyl)-propane-1,3-diol.

19384 Trypanothione Biosynthesis in C. fasciculata

Glutathione (GSH)

$\begin{aligned} & \text { H }_{3} \mathrm{~N}^{+} \stackrel{\mathrm{CO}_{2}^{-}}{\longrightarrow} \mathrm{H} \\ & \mathrm{HS} \end{aligned}$

+

Spermidine

$\mathrm{H}_{3} \mathrm{~N}^{+} \stackrel{\mathrm{NH}_{2}^{+}}{\longrightarrow} \mathrm{NH}_{3}^{+}$

( $\mathrm{ATP} / \mathrm{Mg}^{2+}$ )

Glutathionylspermidine

synthetase (GSS)

$\gamma \mathrm{Glu}-\mathrm{Cys}-\mathrm{HN}-\mathrm{CONH}-\mathrm{NH}_{2}$

or

$\gamma \mathrm{Glu}-\mathrm{Cys}-\mathrm{HN}-\mathrm{CONH}-\mathrm{NH}_{2}$

$N^{1}$ or $N^{8}$ Glutathionylspermidine

(GspdSH)

Trypanothione

synthetase (TRS)

(T(SH)₂)

$\begin{aligned} & \mathrm{H}_{3} \mathrm{~N}^{+} \stackrel{\mathrm{CO}_{2}^{-}}{\longrightarrow} \mathrm{H} \\ & \mathrm{HS} \end{aligned}$

GSH

FIG. 1. Enzymatic steps involved in the biosynthesis of trypanothione.

trypanothione synthetase (TRS) that catalyzes the addition of a second glutathione to either of the preceding intermediates (Fig. 1). GSS and TRS co-purify as a functional complex but can be separated by hydrophobic chromatography (18) or by extraction in aqueous two-phase systems (19).

Glutathionylspermidine ($N^{1}$-($\gamma$-L-glutamyl-L-cysteinylglycyl)- spermidine) has also been identified in *Escherichia coli* (20, 21), where it accumulates in stationary phase cells (22). The function of this compound in *E. coli* is not known, although it has been suggested that it is involved in regulating the levels of the precursors (spermidine and glutathione). More recently, Bollinger et al. (23–25) reported the cloning and characterization of a bifunctional *E. coli* glutathionylspermidine synthetase/aminidase enzyme responsible for both the biosynthesis and degradation of glutathionylspermidine in *E. coli*.

We report here the cloning and characterization of the glutathionylspermidine (*Cf*-GSS) and trypanothione (*Cf*-TRS) synthetase genes from *C. fasciculata* and their overexpression in *E. coli* and *Saccharomyces cerevisiae*.

EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES

Organisms and Reagents—*C. fasciculata* clone HS6 (26) was used as source for DNA, RNA, and protein. Routine DNA manipulations were performed in *E. coli* strain JM109 and XL1-Blue. Overexpression in *E. coli* was performed in strain BL21(DE3), and overexpression in yeast was performed in *S. cerevisiae* ABYS106 strain. All chemicals were of the highest grade available and from Sigma or BDH. Restriction enzymes and DNA-modifying enzymes were from Promega.

Peptide Sequencing—*C. fasciculata* GSS and TRS were purified as described (18) and separated by SDS-PAGE. The bands were then transferred onto a nitrocellulose membrane and digested with trypsin, and the resulting peptides were separated by reverse phase HPLC essentially as described by Stone and Williams (27). The automated Edman degradation was performed using an ABI 477A protein sequencer with a 120A online PTH-AA analyzer by Dr. W. S. Lane (Harvard Microchemistry Facility).

Amplification of a Glutathionylspermidine Synthetase Gene Fragment by PCR—Two degenerate oligonucleotides were designed based on the sequence of two trypsin peptides from the 90-kDa band (GSS activity) (18) (FDFGYDG (named GSS1), 5′-TTY GAY TTY GGN TAY GAY GG-3′; and EPLWK (named DTC2), 5′-YTT CCA NAD NGG YTC-3′). PCR was performed in a 50-$\mu$l volume containing 0.2 mM each dNTP, 500 ng of each primer, 100 ng of *C. fasciculata* total genomic DNA, and 2.5 units of Taq DNA polymerase with buffer (Bioline). Before adding the enzyme, the PCR mixture was heated for 10 min at 95 °C and then cooled rapidly to 30 °C. Following centrifugation, the enzyme was added, and the reaction mixture was covered with oil and subjected to the following for 30 cycles: denaturation for 10 s at 95 °C, ramping at 2 °C s⁻¹ to 40 °C, annealing for 1 s at 40 °C, and elongation for 30 s at 72 °C. A final 10-min extension at 72 °C was included. A 561-bp DNA fragment was identified following agarose gel electrophoresis of the PCR products. The DNA fragment was cloned into the *SmaI* site of pUC18 (SureClone kit, Amersham Pharmacia Biotech), giving the plasmid pGSS, and sequenced with a T7 sequencing kit (Amersham Pharmacia Biotech).

Amplification of a Trypanothione Synthetase Gene Fragment by PCR—Two degenerate oligonucleotides were designed based on the sequence of two trypsin peptides from the 82-kDa band (TRS activity) (18) (DLNDPAEK (named TRS2), 5′-GAY YTN AAY GAY CCN GCN GAR AA-3′; and DGYYAIIG (named TRS4), 5′-CC DAT DAT NGC RTA NCC RTC-3′). PCR was performed as described above for the GSS gene. A 1089-bp DNA fragment was identified following agarose gel electrophoresis of the PCR products. The DNA fragment was cloned into the *SmaI* site of pUC18, giving the plasmid pTRS, and sequenced as above.

Genomic Libraries: Construction and Screening—Genomic DNA was isolated from *C. fasciculata* as described (28), digested with *PstI* or *SalI*, and subsequently separated by agarose gel electrophoresis. DNA in the size range 3–4 kb (*PstI*) and 1–1.5 and 3–3.5 kb (*SalI*) were isolated (QIAEX Extraction Kit, QIAGEN), ligated to pUC18 vector (digested with *PstI* or *SalI* and dephosphorylated, Appligen), and transformed in *E. coli* XL1-Blue. The *PstI* and *SalI* sublibraries each contained about 20,000 recombinant plasmids.

The cloned GSS1/DTC2 PCR fragment was isolated following digestion of pGSS with *EcoRI-PstI* and separation by agarose gel electrophoresis, labeled with [³²P]dCTP by the random primer method (Ready

Trypanothione Biosynthesis in C. fasciculata

A

BamHI  
KpnI, ClaI, HindIII, EcoRI  

Cf-GSS  

SpeI, XbaI, BstXI, SacII, SacI  

pRB1438-Cf-GSS  
(~7.80 kb)  

Amp  
Col E1  
CEN4 ARS1  
URA3  

B

BamHI  
KpnI, ClaI, HindIII, EcoRI  

Cf-TRS  

SpeI, XbaI, BstXI, SacII, SacI  

pRB1438-Cf-TRS  
(~7.50 kb)  

Amp  
Col E1  
CEN4 ARS1  
URA3  

C

EcoRI KpnI  
KpnI, ClaI, HindIII  

Cf-TRS  

EcoRI  
BamHI  

Cf-GSS  

BamHI  
SpeI, XbaI, BstXI, SacII, SacI  

pRB1438-Cf-GSS/Cf-TRS  
(~9.70 kb)  

Amp  
Col E1  
CEN4 ARS1  
URA3  

FIG. 2. Map of the yeast expression vectors. A, pRB1438-Cf-GSS; the gene Cf-GSS is under control of the GAL1 promoter. B, pRB1438-Cf-TRS; the gene Cf-TRS is under control of the GAL1 promoter. C, pRB1438-Cf-GSS/Cf-TRS; the gene Cf-GSS is under control of the GAL1 promoter and Cf-TRS GAL10 promoter. The expression is induced with 4% galactose. This plasmid carries the URA3 marker for selection in yeast cells and also contains elements for selection and propagation in *E. coli*.

Prime, Amersham Pharmacia Biotech), and used to screen approximately 10,000 clones from the *C. fasciculata* PstI sublibrary. Colonies were transferred to nylon membranes (Amersham Pharmacia Biotech) and hybridized to the labeled probe at high stringency (60 °C in 6× SSPE (1× SSPE: 150 mM NaCl, 10 mM NaH₂PO₄, 1 mM EDTA), 5× Denhardt’s solution, 0.1% (w/v) SDS, 0.1 mg ml⁻¹ salmon sperm DNA). Washing was carried out three times at room temperature in 2× SSPE, 0.1% SDS and two times at 60 °C in 0.2× SSPE, 0.1% SDS. Positive clones were isolated, and plasmids were subsequently amplified.

The cloned TRS2/TRS4 PCR fragment was isolated following digestion of pTRS with EcoRI–HindIII and separation by agarose gel electrophoresis, labeled with [³²P]dCTP by the random primer method, and used to screen approximately 10,000 clones from the *C. fasciculata* SalI sublibraries. Colonies were transferred to nylon membranes and hybridized to the labeled probe at high stringency as described for the PstI sublibrary. Positive clones were isolated and subsequently amplified.

Southern and Northern Blotting Analysis and DNA Sequencing—*C. fasciculata* genomic DNA (5 μg) and total RNA (10 μg) were electrophoresed on 1% agarose gel and then transferred to a nylon membrane (Hybond N⁺, Amersham Pharmacia Biotech). Blots were hybridized with DNA corresponding to the Cf-GSS or Cf-TRS coding sequence labeled with [³²P]dCTP and washed as described above for the screening of sublibraries. Sequencing of double-stranded DNA was accomplished by the dideoxynucleotide chain termination method (29) as described in the T7 sequencing kit from Amersham Pharmacia Biotech and confirmed by automated cycle sequencing using the dye terminator method (ABI PRISM dye terminator kit, Perkin-Elmer). DNA and amino acid sequences were analyzed with the Lasergene system (DNASTAR Inc.) program and the Pileup program from the Genetics Computer Group Wisconsin Sequence Analysis Software Package.

Expression of Glutathionylspermidine and Trypanothione Synthetases in *E. coli*—*E. coli* strain BL21(DE3) expressing the Cf-GSS gene was obtained by transformation with the gene cloned in the expression vector pET-3a (Novagen). The gene was obtained by PCR amplification of the *C. fasciculata* open reading frame in plasmid pTCf-GSS using oligonucleotide ExpGSS5′ (5′-CCA CAT ATG TCG CTG-3′) for the sense strand containing an NdeI cloning site (underlined) incorporating an initiation codon (ATG). For the antisense strand, oligonucleotide ExpGSS3′ (5′-CCG GGA TCC TTA TGT TTC-3′) was designed, which includes a stop codon with a BamHI restriction site (underlined) just downstream. The PCR product was blunt end-ligated into the SmaI site of pUC18 (SureClone kit from Amersham Pharmacia Biotech), giving the plasmid pUC18-Cf-GSS. The insert was removed from this subclone by digestion with NdeI–BamHI and ligated with the pET-3a vector, creating plasmid pET-Cf-GSS. *E. coli* strain BL21(DE3) expressing the Cf-TRS gene was obtained by transformation with the gene cloned in the expression vector pET-3a. The gene was obtained in a similar fashion to Cf-GSS with the following primers: ExpTRS5′ (5′-AAA GAA TTC CAT ATG GCG TCC GCT GAG-3′) for the sense strand and ExpTRS3′ (5′-CCC GGA TCC CTA CTC ATC CTC GGC-3′) for the antisense strand. The PCR product was blunt end-ligated into the SmaI site of pUC18 (SureClone kit from Amersham Pharmacia Biotech), giving the plasmid pUC18-Cf-TRS. The insert was removed from this subclone by digestion with NdeI–BamHI and ligated with the pET-3a vector, creating plasmid pET-Cf-TRS. BL21(DE3)/pET-Cf-GSS or BL21(DE3)/pET-Cf-TRS were grown at 37 °C with vigorous aeration in Luria-Bertani broth (LB) containing 100 μg ml⁻¹ ampicillin. When cultures reached an *A*₆₀₀ of ~0.6, isopropyl-β-D-thiogalactopyranoside was added to a concentration of 0.4 mM to induce expression of the recombinant Cf-GSS or Cf-TRS protein. Cultures were grown an additional 3–4 h and then harvested by centrifugation. Cells were lysed in 50 mM bis-Tris propane buffer (pH 6.8) by flash-freezing in liquid nitrogen, followed by rapid thawing and then sonication (six 45-s pulses interrupted with cooling on ice). Cell debris was separated by centrifugation at 15,000 × g.

Expression of Glutathionylspermidine and Trypanothione Synthetases in *S. cerevisiae*—A *S. cerevisiae* strain (ABYS106) expressing the Cf-GSS gene was obtained by transformation with the gene cloned in the expression vector pRB1438 under the control of the GAL1 promoter (kindly provided by Dr. P. Andrews, Department of Biochemistry, University of Dundee). The coding sequence was removed from the plasmid pUC18-Cf-GSS by digestion with BamHI and ligated with the pRB1438 vector, creating plasmid pRB1438-Cf-GSS (Fig. 2). The orientation of the gene was determined using the SacI restriction site.

A *S. cerevisiae* strain (ABYS106) expressing the Cf-TRS gene and one co-expressing both the Cf-GSS and Cf-TRS genes were obtained by transformation with the gene cloned in the expression vector pRB1438 under the control of the GAL1 and/or GAL10 promoters. The coding

19386

**Trypanothione Biosynthesis in C. fasciculata**

| Ec-GSS | MSKGTTSQDA PFGTLLGYAP GGVAIYSSDY SSLDPQEYED DAV...FRSY IDDE.......YMGHKWQCV EFARRFLFLN YGVVFTDVGM AWEIFS.LRF LREVVNDNIL | 99 |
| Cf-TRS | MASAERV PVSFNKPGRV PFGEVQGYAP GHIPAYSNKH DHFFSGE........RSI DDNV.......FCGFKYQCV EFARRWLLER KGLVLPDVNW ACHIFK.LKN VKDAATAEEV | 99 |
| Cf-GSS | MSSLPHNNHY ETHHRGTAEV PFDELIGVTP DGVPVTSGN EAHFSNLESI TAACLPLSSF ERKAPCKQPY RKMGVKWQCV EFVRRYLASR KAVWMSFLCT AEEVWREEKP LRRCAGCRPV | 120 |
|        | ++ + **+ * +* ++ * * **++++ **+++* ++ + + ++ + + | |

| Ec-GSS | PLQAFPN.GS PRAPVAGALL IWDKGGEFKD TGHVAIITQL HGNKVRIA EQ NVIHSPLPQG QQWTRELEMV VENGCYTLKD TFDDTTI...LGWMI..QTE DTEYSLPQPE TAGEL.LKIS | 212 |
| Cf-TRS | PVIAVRN.GT EAKPEPDTLI IY.PSSDVNT VGHGAITEV GDDYVCIA DQ NYRFHKWEAS ..YSYKLKLQ HKDGWWTIID DIDPNDVEIP LGWVTFPGYE NRPEGAAPPA LHPSLHFQPP | 215 |
| Cf-GSS | EVVRTPNKST GPAPAVADIV VWGEGPE.TP FGHVAIVTEV CASCVRVAEQ NQGFEKW PED VPFSREIAMR TTES.....G EVELLDEDPL LGWVTV...Q APFYNFDDGD LADSFRLVVG | 231 |
|        | + *++ * ++ ++ +++ ****+ +**+ * ++ ++++ + +++++ + + + + | |

| YjfC    | ........M LRH.NVPVRR DLDQIAADNG FDFHIT...D NEIWDE... .SRAYRFTLR QIEEQIEKPT AELHQMCLEV VDRAWKDEEI LTQLA....I PPLYWDVIAE SW.RARDPSL | 98 |
| YgiC    | ........M ERV.SITERP DWREKAHEYG FNFHTM...Y GBPYWCE... .DAYYKLLTA QV.EKLEEV AELHQMCLKV VEKVIASDEL MTKFR....I PKHTWSFVRQ SW.LTHQPSL | 97 |
| HI0929  | ........M KRVTGFPTRP DMVQQLLNVG FDYYNLPSSD GSHYWSD... .NVAYEFTLA EI.DRIEDTT NELHSMCLDF AADEIKKG DY.ENYH....F TELQKQLIET SW.RNQEPYL | 100 |
| Ec-GSS  | GARLENKGQF D....GKWL DEKDPLQNAY .....VQANG QVI.....NQ DPYHYYTITE SAEQELIKAT NELHMLYLA TDKVLKDDNL LALFD....I PKILWPRLRL SWQRRRHHMI | 313 |
| Cf-TRS  | EEPYLVRKTY EPTETKANWL DLNDPAEKLF .....VEEFG MDVSRSLLEE TTVNYYECDH EFHLRCIAYG TQLHDYFMEA TAQVINDDER LRIFK....I PEELWPRMRH SW.KYQQT YI | 325 |
| Cf-GSS  | QQQIL.RQPF .PKHVDVPWL NTGEECDTIL KHSLVVDGNM GEGAHAEEGD VPGAFYFLDY DMFCRLGRAA SSLHRIAMAA TAKVLEDPE S THLLEHYFGV PPEIQPLLRR SWEMTPP..M | 347 |
|         | + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + +
Trypanothione Biosynthesis in C. fasciculata

Procedures")) and subsequently cloned into pUC18, giving the plasmid pTRS. Sequence analysis verified that this DNA fragment encoded an open reading frame with sequence similarity to *E. coli* glutathionylspermidine synthetase/amidase (23) and pTCf-GSS.

*C. fasciculata* genomic DNA was digested with several restriction enzymes and probed with the labeled TRS2/TRS4 PCR fragment (see below). The probe hybridized to fragments of ~1.3 and ~3.5 kb when DNA was digested with *SalI*, suggesting that these fragments contained all of the coding sequence. The TRS2/TRS4 PCR fragment was labeled with \[^{32}P\]dCTP and used to screen the *C. fasciculata* genomic *SalI* sublibraries (see "Experimental Procedures"). Two different clones corresponding to the ~1.3- and ~3.5-kb fragments were isolated. Reconstruction of these two clones gave the plasmid pTCf-TRS, which contains an ORF encoding a protein of 652 amino acids with a predicted molecular mass of 74,516 Da (Fig. 3), again smaller than the apparent molecular mass (82 kDa) previously described (18). A PCR product overlapping the *SalI* restriction site was cloned to confirm the sequence at this site. Seven of the nine peptide sequences determined from the 82-kDa band (*underlined* in Fig. 3) were found in the predicted protein product.

### Amino Acid Sequence Analysis

The predicted translation products of Cf-GSS and Cf-TRS from *C. fasciculata* show significant homology to each other (47% similarity and 27% identity) and to the glutathionylspermidine synthetase/amidase from *E. coli* (50% similarity and 29% identity) (23). The deduced amino acid sequences of Cf-GSS and Cf-TRS also show significant similarity (~25%) in their C-terminal 500 amino acids with three hypothetical 45-kDa proteins, two from *E. coli* (YgiC (31) and YjfC (32)) and one from *Haemophilus influenzae* (HI0929 (33)) (Fig. 3).

Another interesting feature arising from the alignment of these different proteins is that the Cf-GSS amino acid sequence has five significant insertions (Cf-GSS amino acids 54–71, 241–269, 325–328, 466–479, and 590–629) (Fig. 3) when compared with the *E. coli* GSS and Cf-TRS, while the Cf-TRS protein has a size more similar to *E. coli* GSS. The significance of a large insertion in the C-terminal domain of the Cf-GSS protein, where the potential synthetase activity of the *E. coli* GSS is predicted to reside (23, 24), is unknown.

Significant homology was found in the N-terminal domain of Cf-GSS, Cf-TRS, and the *E. coli* GSS proteins. This domain is responsible for the amidase activity in *E. coli* GSS (23, 24), suggesting that both *Crithidia* proteins may also possess this activity. Indeed, amidase activity was present in GSS purified from *C. fasciculata* using glutathionylspermidine as a substrate (Fig. 4). As for the *E. coli* GSS (23), amidase activity was optimal at pH 7.5, while the synthetase activity was optimal at pH 6.5. Under identical conditions, no formation of glutathionylspermidine from trypanothione was detected (not shown).

### Genomic Organization and Expression

*C. fasciculata* genomic DNA was digested with several restriction enzymes and probed with the labeled Cf-GSS and Cf-TRS coding sequences.

The Cf-GSS probe hybridized to only a single band when DNA was cut with enzymes that do not cut within the coding sequence (*BamHI, HindIII, KpnI, XbaI,* and *PstI*), whereas the probe hybridized to two fragments when the DNA was cut with enzymes that cut at a single site within the coding sequence (*SacI, NotI,* and *EcoRV*) and five fragments (of which two are the same size) when the DNA was cut with *SalI*, which cut four times in the coding sequence (Fig. 5, A1 and B1).

Cf-TRS also gave a similar restriction profile when hybridized to genomic DNA digested with enzymes that do not have sites within the coding sequence (*BamHI, HindIII, EcoRV, KpnI,* and *XbaI*) or digested with enzymes that cut at a single site (*SacI, NotI,* and *SalI*) or two sites (*PstI*) within the coding sequence (Fig. 5, A2 and B2).

These results suggest that Cf-GSS and Cf-TRS are both single copy per haploid genome of *C. fasciculata*.

Northern blot analysis revealed that Cf-GSS RNA is not an abundant transcript (data not shown). Moreover, attempts to identify the 5′-miniexon splice acceptor site on the pre-mRNAs of Cf-GSS and Cf-TRS by reverse transcription PCR for both glutathionylspermidine and trypanothione synthetases were unsuccessful, probably due to the poor expression of these genes.

### Overexpression of Cf-GSS and Cf-TRS in E. coli

Cf-GSS was cloned into an expression vector (pET-3a) for overproduction of the protein in *E. coli*. Growth of BL21(DE3)/pET-Cf-GSS strain in the presence of isopropyl-β-D-thiogalactopyranoside resulted in overproduction of a protein that migrated with an apparent molecular mass of 90 kDa (Fig. 6). Thus, although the predicted molecular mass of Cf-GSS is 80 kDa, the migration of this protein in SDS-PAGE shows an apparent molecular mass of ~90 kDa, which is identical to the size described by Smith *et al.* (18), suggesting an aberrant migration in SDS-PAGE. Matrix-assisted laser desorption-ionization time-of-flight analysis on the native GSS from *C. fas-

19388 Trypanothione Biosynthesis in C. fasciculata

A1
B H P Sc N E S K X
12.2-
8.0-
6.1-
4.1-
3.0-
2.0-
1.6-
1.0-
0.5-

A2
B H P Sc N E S K X
12.2-
8.0-
6.1-
4.1-
3.0-
2.0-
1.6-
1.0-
0.5-

B1
Sc P
S Sc S
N
E S
P
Cf-GSS

B2
S N
P
S
Sc
K P
Cf-TRS
1 kb

FIG. 5. Southern blot analysis of C. fasciculata genomic DNA. A1 and A2, restriction endonuclease digestion products of C. fasciculata genomic DNA (5 μg) were separated, blotted, and hybridized as described under “Experimental Procedures.” B1 and B2, physical map of the Cf-GSS or Cf-TRS genes. The gray boxes indicate the coding sequence of the Cf-GSS and Cf-TRS genes. Restriction sites used in this study are marked. B, BamHI; H, HindIII; P, PstI; Sc, SacI; N, NotI; E, EcoRV; S, SalI; K, KpnI; X, XbaI.

E.coli
kDa 1 2 3 4 5 6 7
97
66
55
43
30

reason for the aberrant migrations of these proteins is not known.

Unfortunately, both proteins were found exclusively in the insoluble fraction (Fig. 6), and attempts to solubilize and renature the active enzymes from 6 M urea were unsuccessful. Expression using an *E. coli* strain overexpressing thioredoxin (34), expression as fusion proteins with glutathione S-transferase (pGEX, Amersham Pharmacia Biotech), and expression of fragments of the protein all failed to yield soluble or active protein. The co-expression of both Cf-GSS and Cf-TRS in *E. coli* did not solve the problem of insolubility either.

Overexpression of Cf-GSS and Cf-TRS in S. cerevisiae

Cf-GSS and Cf-TRS were cloned into a yeast expression vector (pRB1438) for overproduction of the synthetases in *S. cerevisiae* strain ABYS106. Analysis of SDS-PAGE gels of insoluble and soluble extracts of galactose-induced cultures of ABYS106/pRB1438-Cf-GSS cells, ABYS106/pRB1438-Cf-TRS cells, or ABYS106/pRB1438-Cf-GSS/Cf-TRS showed no overexpression of protein (data not shown), and no enzymatic activity could be detected in the soluble fraction, suggesting that both proteins were poorly expressed in yeast.

Thiol Analysis in S. cerevisiae Overexpressing Cf-GSS and Cf-TRS Proteins

Reduced thiols from galactose-induced ABYS106/pRB1438-Cf-GSS cells, ABYS106/pRB1438-Cf-TRS cells, and ABYS106/pRB1438-Cf-GSS/Cf-TRS cells were separated and quantified by HPLC after derivatization with monobromobimane. As expected, the majority of cellular thiol in yeast is glutathione

FIG. 6. SDS-PAGE analysis of recombinant C. fasciculata Cf-GSS and Cf-TRS in *E. coli*. 2 μg of protein were loaded in each lane. Lane 1, Cf-GSS insoluble fraction; lane 2, Cf-GSS soluble fraction; lane 3, Cf-TRS insoluble fraction; lane 4, Cf-TRS soluble fraction; lane 5, coexpression Cf-GSS/TRS insoluble fraction; lane 6, coexpression Cf-GSS/TRS soluble fraction; lane 7, GSS/TRS enzyme mixture from *C. fasciculata* (0.5 μg).

*ciculata* revealed a nominal molecular mass of 80,641 Da, which correlates well with the predicted nominal molecular mass (80,336 Da), confirming the aberrant migration of both the native and recombinant GSS.

*E. coli* strain BL21(DE3)/pET-Cf-TRS strain overproduced a protein that migrated with an apparent molecular mass of about 82 kDa (Fig. 6), which is also larger than the mass predicted from the primary amino acid sequence (74 kDa) but identical to that described by Smith et al. (18) for TRS. The

Trypanothione Biosynthesis in C. fasciculata

synthetase protein. No trypanothione was found in the cells expressing only the $C f-T R S$ gene (Fig. 7, $D$ and $E$), since $S$. cerevisiae cannot make glutathionylspermidine as a substrate for this enzyme and $C f-T R S$ cannot make glutathionylspermidine (18). These findings conclusively demonstrate the enzymatic function of each of the encoded proteins.

DISCUSSION

In contrast to most prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells, in which the major thiol component is glutathione, the Kinetoplastida possess a unique low molecular mass thiol, trypanothione (9, 10), which is synthesized from glutathione and spermidine via $N^{1}$- or $N^{8}$-glutathionylspermidine, involving two distinct ATP-dependent enzymes, GSS and TRS (18, 19). To date, only trypanosomatids have been found to contain trypanothione (15). However, $E$. coli can synthesize the metabolic intermediate $N^{1}$-glutathionylspermidine (21), but not trypanothione (22). The function of glutathionylspermidine in $E$. coli is unknown, but, since it only accumulates in stationary phase cells, it has been proposed that it might be involved in the regulation of intracellular levels of the precursors, spermidine and glutathione (21). Also, because of its net positive charge at physiological pH, glutathionylspermidine may be more effective at protecting DNA against radical- or oxidant-induced damage than negatively charged glutathione, as has been proposed for trypanothione (36). $E$. coli GSS has been shown to possess an amidase activity, permitting it to both synthesize and break down glutathionylspermidine (23). Amidase activity is also present in the $C$. fasciculata GSS (Fig. 4), and alignment of the N-terminal regions of $E$. coli GSS and of $C f-G S S$ with $C f-T R S$ suggests conservation of an amidase function in $C f-T R S$ as well (Fig. 3). Moreover, Cys-59 of $E$. coli GSS, which is implicated in the catalytic mechanism of the amidase activity (25), is conserved in both sequences (Fig. 3). Whether $C f-T R S$ is able to hydrolyze trypanothione and/or glutathionylspermidine is not known at present. However, such a bifunctional activity could regulate the level of glutathionylspermidine and trypanothione in the parasite, since both thiols vary in a reciprocal fashion during the growth phases of $C$. fasciculata (26). The mechanism by which these two opposing activities are regulated to avoid a futile cycle resulting in hydrolysis of ATP is not fully understood, although pH may be a factor (23).

Despite a considerable amount of effort, we have been unable to obtain functionally active recombinant $C f-G S S$ or $C f-T R S$ in $E$. coli. However, we have been able to conclusively demonstrate that the genes do encode the two different synthetases by expressing them in yeast. Cells transformed with $C f-G S S$ produced glutathionylspermidine, and those containing both this gene and $C f-T R S$ produced trypanothione. The fact that no glutathionylspermidine or trypanothione was found in cells transformed with $C f-T R S$ alone is consistent with our previous report that $C f-T R S$ is unable to make detectable glutathionylspermidine (18).

It is important to stress at this juncture that some of our findings are in conflict with a recent report by Koenig et al. (19). In our hands, GSS purified from $C$. fasciculata migrates anomalously on SDS-PAGE with an apparent molecular mass of 90 kDa, whereas the gene sequence predicts a protein with a molecular mass of 80.3 kDa. Mass spectrometry on the purified 90-kDa protein yields a nominal molecular mass of 80.6 kDa, which, allowing for the unknown N-terminal blocking group (18, 19), is in excellent agreement with the molecular mass predicted from the sequence of the gene. Expression of $C f-G S S$ in $E$. coli yields an inactive protein that migrates anomalously at 90 kDa. Thus, our results are internally consistent with our previous finding that GSS is associated with a 90-kDa peptide (18).

Trypanothione Biosynthesis in *C. fasciculata*

In light of these comments, it is difficult to explain why Koenig *et al.* (19) isolated a 78-kDa protein from the same clonal isolate of *C. fasciculata* possessing GSS activity but lacking glutathionylspermidine amidase or TRS activity. TRS activity is reported to be separated from GSS activity in the first step of their purification scheme, which involves aqueous two-phase extraction at room temperature in the absence of any protease inhibitors (19). Thus, it is curious that the sequences of all seven peptides from their 78-kDa protein with apparent GSS activity correspond exactly to our TRS sequence. The reason for this inconsistency is not at all clear. Partial proteolysis of both proteins in the N-terminal region may have fortuitously degraded both polypeptides so that they co-migrate at 78 kDa. Although this suggestion could explain the apparent absence of glutathionylspermidine amidase activity in their preparations, it would not be consistent with their failure to obtain any amino acid sequence on their 78-kDa protein, since partial proteolysis would have been expected to remove the N-terminal blocking group. Neither does it accord with their report that TRS activity was separated from GSS activity early on in their purification scheme. Since the purification schemes and the enzyme assay methods (spectrophotometric (18) versus HPLC (19)) are so different, additional work is required to clarify this anomaly.

The relationship of the TRS gene to the GSS gene would imply that it has probably evolved from it via mutation following duplication. In addition to significant homology to each other and to the *E. coli* GSS, three hypothetical proteins from *E. coli* (31, 32) and *H. influenzae* (33), present in the sequence data bases have significant homology to this protein family. Homology is confined to the carboxyl terminus, suggesting that these enzymes may possess only a synthetase activity (23, 24). The function of the three hypothetical proteins is hard to predict, since alignment of all of these proteins did not unambiguously identify sequence motifs involved in recognition of Mg²⁺, ATP, glutathione, or spermidine.

Both reactions depend on ATP and Mg²⁺, and the GSS reaction may proceed through the synthesis of a glutathionylphosphate intermediate as described previously for other amide bond-forming reactions such as D-alanine:D-alanine ligase (37), glutamine synthetase (38, 39), and glutathione synthetase (40). Phosphinate and phosphonate analogues (which are known to inhibit this class of enzymes) have been shown to inhibit GSS activity (41–44) and may form the basis for novel chemotherapeutic agents. We are currently isolating the corresponding genes from *Trypanosoma* and *Leishmania spp.* in order to evaluate the essential nature and biological roles of glutathionylspermidine and trypanothione in these tropical parasites by genetic manipulation.

Acknowledgments—We particularly thank M. R. Ariyanayagam for technical assistance with the HPLC experiments, Dr. P. Andrews and Dr. D. Stirling for advice on yeast manipulations, S. De Craecker for providing a small sample of purified native GSS from *C. fasciculata*, and Dr. A. Mehlert for performing the matrix-assisted laser desorption-ionization time-of-flight measurements. We also thank Prof. L. Flohé for useful discussions.

**REFERENCES**

1. Bey, P., Danzin, C., and Jung, M. (1987) in *Inhibition of Polyamine Metabolism, Biological Significance and Basis for New Therapies* (McCann, P. P., Pegg, A. E., and Sjoerdsma, A., ed) pp. 1–32, Academic Press, Inc., New York
2. Fairlamb, A. H., Henderson, G. B., Bacchi, C. J., and Cerami, A. (1987) *Mol. Biochem. Parasitol.* **24**, 185–191
3. McCann, P. P., and Pegg, A. E. (1992) *Pharmacol. Ther.* **54**, 195–215
4. Tabor, C. W., and Tabor, H. (1984) *Annu. Rev. Biochem.* **53**, 749–790
5. Pegg, A. E. (1986) *Biochem. J.* **234**, 249–262
6. Marton, L. J., and Pegg, A. E. (1995) *Annu. Rev. Pharmacol. Toxicol.* **35**, 55–91
7. Wang, C. C. (1995) *Annu. Rev. Pharmacol. Toxicol.* **35**, 93–127
8. Meister, A., and Anderson, M. E. (1983) *Annu. Rev. Biochem.* **52**, 711–760
9. Fairlamb, A. H., and Cerami, A. (1985) *Mol. Biochem. Parasitol.* **14**, 187–198
10. Fairlamb, A. H., Blackburn, P., Ulrich, P., Chait, B. T., and Cerami, A. (1985) *Science* **227**, 1485–1487
11. Boveris, A., and Stoppani, A. M. (1977) *Experientia* **33**, 1306–1308
12. Boveris, A., Sies, H., Martino, E. E., Docampo, R., Turrens, J. F., and Stoppani, A. M. (1980) *Biochem. J.* **188**, 643–648
13. Penketh, P. G., Kennedy, W. P. K., Patton, C. L., and Sartorelli, A. C. (1987) *FEBS Lett.* **221**, 427–431
14. Shames, S. L., Fairlamb, A. H., Cerami, A., and Walsh, C. T. (1986) *Biochemistry* **25**, 3519–3526
15. Fairlamb, A. H., and Cerami, A. (1992) *Annu. Rev. Microbiol.* **46**, 695–729
16. Fairlamb, A. H., Henderson, G. B., and Cerami, A. (1986) *Mol. Biochem. Parasitol.* **21**, 247–257
17. Henderson, G. B., Yamaguchi, M., Novoa, L., Fairlamb, A. H., and Cerami, A. (1990) *Biochemistry* **29**, 3924–3929
18. Smith, K., Nadeau, K., Bradley, M., Walsh, C. T., and Fairlamb, A. H. (1992) *Protein Sci.* **1**, 874–883
19. Koenig, K., Menge, U., Kiess, M., Wray, V., and Flohé, L. (1997) *J. Biol. Chem.* **272**, 11908–11915
20. Dubin, D. T. (1959) *Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun.* **1**, 262–265
21. Tabor, H., and Tabor, C. W. (1975) *J. Biol. Chem.* **250**, 2648–2654
22. Smith, K., Borges, A., Ariyanayagam, M. R., and Fairlamb, A. H. (1995) *Biochem. J.* **312**, 465–469
23. Bollinger, J. M., Kwon, D. S., Huisman, G. W., Kolter, R., and Walsh, C. T. (1995) *J. Biol. Chem.* **270**, 14031–14041
24. Kwon, D. S., Lin, C-H., Chen, S., Coward, J. K., Walsh, C. T., and Bollinger, J. M. (1997) *J. Biol. Chem.* **272**, 2429–2436
25. Lin, C-H., Kwon, D. S., Bollinger, J. M., and Walsh, C. T. (1997) *Biochemistry* **36**, 14930–14938
26. Shim, H., and Fairlamb, A. H. (1988) *J. Gen. Microbiol.* **134**, 807–817
27. Stone, K. L., and Williams, K. R. (1993) in *A Practical Guide to Protein and Peptide Purification for Microsequencing* (Matsudaira, P., ed) 2nd Ed., pp. 45–69, Academic Press, Inc., London
28. Bernards, A., Van der Ploeg, L. H. T., Frasch, C. A., Borst, P., Boothroyd, J. C., Coleman, S., and Cross, G. A. M. (1981) *Cell* **27**, 497–505
29. Sanger, F., Nicklen, S., and Coulson, A. R. (1977) *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.* **74**, 5463–5467
30. Strathern, J. N., Jones, E. W., and Broach, J. R. (1982) *The Molecular Biology of the Yeast Saccharomyces*, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold Spring Harbor, New York
31. Yang, T-P., and Depew, R. E. (1992) *Biochim. Biophys. Acta* **1130**, 227–228
32. Burland, V. D., Plunkett, G., Sofia, H. J., Daniels, D. L., and Blattner, F. R. (1995) *Nucleic Acids Res.* **23**, 2105–2119
33. Fleischmann, R. D., Adams, M. D., White, O., Clayton, R. A., Kirkness, E. F., Kerlavage, A. R., Bult, C. J., Tomb, J., Dougherty, B. A., Merrick, J. M., McKenney, K., Sutton, G., FitzHugh, W., Fields, C., Gocayne, J. D., Scott, J., Shirley, R., Liu, L., Glodek, A., Kelley, J. M., Weidman, J. F., Phillips, C. A., Spriggs, T., Hedblom, E., Cotton, M. D., Utterback, T. R., Hanna, M. C., Nguyen, D. T., Saudek, D. M., Brandon, R. C., Fine, L. D., Fritchman, J. L., Fuhrmann, J. L., Geoghagen, N. S. M., Gnehm, C. L., McDonald, L. A., Small, K. V., Fraser, C. M., Smith, H. O., and Venter, J. C. (1995) *Science* **269**, 496–512
34. Yasukawa, T., Kanei-Ishii, C., Maekawa, T., Fujimoto, J., Yamamoto, T., and Ishii, S. (1995) *J. Biol. Chem.* **270**, 25328–25331
35. Elskens, M. T., Jaspers, C. J., and Penninckx, M. J. (1991) *J. Gen. Microbiol.* **137**, 637–644
36. Awad, S., Henderson, G. B., Cerami, A., and Held, K. D. (1992) *Int. J. Radiat. Biol.* **62**, 401–407
37. Duncan, K., and Walsh, C. T. (1988) *Biochemistry* **27**, 3709–3714
38. Meister, A. (1974) in *The Enzymes* (Boyer, P. C., ed) Vol. 10, pp. 699–754, Academic Press, Inc., New York
39. Stadtman, E. R., and Ginsburg, A. (1974) in *The Enzymes* (Boyer, P. C., ed) Vol. 10, pp. 755–807, Academic Press, Inc., New York
40. Meister, A. (1974) in *The Enzymes* (Boyer, P. C., ed) Vol. 10, pp. 671–697, Academic Press, Inc., New York
41. Verbruggen, C., De Craecker, S., Rajan, P., Jiao, X-Y., Borloo, M., Smith, K., Fairlamb, A. H., and Haemers, A. (1996) *Bioorg. Med. Chem. Lett.* **6**, 253–258
42. Chen, S., Lin, C-H., Walsh, C. T., and Coward, J. K. (1997) *Bioorg. Med. Chem. Lett.* **7**, 505–510
43. Lin, C-H., Chen, S., Kwon, D. S., Coward, J. K., and Walsh, C. T. (1997) *Chem. Biol.* **4**, 859–866
44. Chen, S., Lin, C-H., Kwon, D. S., Walsh, C. T., and Coward, J. K. (1997) *J. Med. Chem.* **40**, 3842–3850

ENZYMOLOGY:

Cloning and Characterization of the Two Enzymes Responsible for Trypanothione Biosynthesis in *Crithidia fasciculata*

Emmanuel Tetaud, Faouzi Manai, Michael P. Barrett, Kari Nadeau, Christopher T. Walsh and Alan H. Fairlamb

*J. Biol. Chem.* 1998, 273:19383-19390.

doi: 10.1074/jbc.273.31.19383

Access the most updated version of this article at [http://www.jbc.org/content/273/31/19383](http://www.jbc.org/content/273/31/19383)

Find articles, minireviews, Reflections and Classics on similar topics on the [JBC Affinity Sites](https://www.jbc.org/site/affinity-sites).

Alerts:
- When this article is cited
- When a correction for this article is posted

[Click here](https://www.jbc.org/site/alerts) to choose from all of JBC's e-mail alerts

This article cites 41 references, 10 of which can be accessed free at [http://www.jbc.org/content/273/31/19383.full.html#ref-list-1](http://www.jbc.org/content/273/31/19383.full.html#ref-list-1)
