
RE VIEWS

9 Strauch, M.A. *et al.* (1989) EMBO J. 8, 1615–1621  
10 Strauch, M.A. *et al.* (1990) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 87,  
    1801–1805  
11 Perego, M., Spiegelman, G.B. and Hoch, J.A. (1988) Mol.  
    Microbiol. 2, 689–
transport across the outer membrane is subsequently mediated by a dedicated secretion apparatus composed of 13 or 14 different gene products³.

Type III secretion pathways have become an area of vigorous research. Each of these pathways comprises a complex apparatus of proteins that assembles into a highly regulated channel through both the inner and outer membranes⁴ (reviewed in Ref. 5). The type III system has been characterized in (among others) *Yersinia, Salmonella* (where most strains have two complete type III systems), *Shigella* and diarrheagenic *E. coli*. In several of these systems, the apparatus is designed
REVIEW S

Table 1. Autotransporters of Gram-negative bacteria

| Protein           | Microorganism                | Protease sites | RGD motifs | P-loop motif | Ref. |
|-------------------|------------------------------|----------------|------------|--------------|------|
| α-Proteobacteria  |                              |                |            |              |      |
| rOmpA             | Rickettsia spp.              | –              | –          | –            | 17   |
| rOmpB             | Rickettsia spp.              | –              | –          | –            | 18  
possess an even number of amphipathic β-sheets (between 10 and 18). However, for some autotransporters, an uneven number of antiparallel sheets has been predicted¹¹. Such predictions are inconsistent with a porin-type structure, as an even number of antiparallel transmembrane segments is required to place the first and last segments in opposite orientations and thus permit closure of the barrel. It should be noted, however, that although a β-barrel is predicted, it has not been demonstrated experimentally, and other structures are, at least theoretically, possible.

The majority of aut
RE VIEWS

Passenger domain
Cleaved by
sec system
Signal sequence
Active site motifs
Few cysteines
β-domain
ca. 14 amphipathic β-strands
...YSF
Proteolysis

External
Periplasm
NH₂
COOH

Fig. 2. Topology of an autotransporter. The polyprotein precursors of the autotransporters share some similarities. In most cases, the polyprotein possesses a signal sequence that could target the protein to the Sec inner membrane secretion system. The passenger domains possess functional motifs, including the serine prote
(a)
Ag43 MNRHLNTCYRLVWNHMTGAFVVASELAR ARGKR GGVAAVALFFAAVKSLP VLA<>ADIV
AIDA-I MNK AYSIIW SHSRQAW IVASELAR GHGFVLAK NTLLVLAVVSTIGN AFA<>VNIS
ShMu MNK VYSLKY CPVTGGL IAVSELAR RVIKKTCRR LTHILLAGIPAICLCYSQI SQA<>GIVR
SepA MNK IYYLKY CHITKSL IAVSELAR RVTCKSHR
REVIEW S

Table 2. Functional properties of the autotransporters

| Unknown function | Adhesins       | Proteases     | Toxins   | Invasins | Mediators of motility | Serum resistance |
|------------------|----------------|---------------|----------|----------|-----------------------|------------------|
| EspC             | AIDA-I         | Ssp           | VacA     | Hap      | IcsA                  | BrkA             |
| SepA             | Tsh            | Ssp-h1        | Pet      | –        | –                     | –                |
| Hia              |
display a high level of conservation among the auto-
transporter group, suggesting that they share a com-
mon ancestor and, as described above, are thought to
serve a common function. Many functions are attrib-
utable to the passenger domains (Table 2), but we
propose a simple nomenclature system to reflect the
phylogeny of these domains (Table 3). This classifi-
cation is based upon nucleotide and amino acid hom-
ologies, as well as homologous positions of active
site motifs. Members of the same family are presumed
to share a common ancestor; subfamilies are pro-
posed,
Conclusions

Notwithstanding the controversies regarding the specifics of structure and function, there is an overall unifying structure for the autotransporter molecules, which is intrinsically associated with their mode of biogenesis. The defining but still hypothetical characteristics are that the β-domain forms a β-barrel structure within the outer membrane and that the passenger protein is translocated to the cell surface via the autogenous pore. Further experimental analyses are required to clarify the mechanisms of secretion, structure-function requirements and the roles of the many passenger proteins (Box 1).

Acknowledgements

Work in the laboratory of J.P.N. is supported by Public Health Service grant AI-