
Cell, Vol. 95, 657–667, November 25, 1998, Copyright ©1998 by Cell Press

# PIF3, a Phytochrome-Interacting Factor Necessary for Normal Photoinduced Signal Transduction, Is a Novel Basic Helix-Loop-Helix Protein

Min Ni, James M. Tepperman, and Peter H. Quail*
Department of Plant and Microbial Biology
University of California
Berkeley, California 94720
USDA/ARS Plant Gene Expression Center
Albany, California 94710

## Summary

The mechanism by which the phytochrome (phy) photoreceptor family transduces informational light signals to photoresponsive genes is unknown. Using a yeast two-hybrid screen, we have identified a phytochrome-interacting factor, PIF3, a basic helix-loop-helix protein containing a PAS domain. PIF3 binds to wild-type C-terminal domains of both phyA and phyB, but less strongly to signaling-defective, missense mutant-containing domains. Expression of sense or antisense PIF3 sequences in transgenic *Arabidopsis* perturbs photoresponsiveness in a manner indicating that PIF3 functions in both phyA and phyB signaling pathways in vivo. PIF3 localized to the nucleus in transient transfection experiments, indicating a potential role in controlling gene expression. Together, the data suggest that phytochrome signaling to photoregulated genes includes a direct pathway involving physical interaction between the photoreceptor and a transcriptional regulator.

## Introduction

To track the status of their light environment, plants have evolved a set of informational photoreceptors that assess and relay the nature of the incident signals to the nuclear genes that control responses in growth and development appropriate to that environment (Kendrick and Kronenberg, 1994). Two major classes of such photoreceptors are known: the cryptochromes and other blue/UV light-absorbing receptors, and the phytochromes, responsible for monitoring the red (R) and far-red (FR) regions of the spectrum. Considerable progress has been made in recent years in the molecular cloning and characterization of the photoreceptors themselves (Ahmad and Cashmore, 1996a; Huala et al., 1997; Mathews and Sharrock, 1997; Guo et al., 1998), as well as some signaling pathway components such as HY5 and the COP/DET/FUS class of global repressors that appear to lie at or downstream of the convergence of the cryptochrome and phytochrome transduction pathways (Chory et al., 1996; Wei and Deng, 1996; Ang et al., 1998). However, little is known about early steps in the transduction process, including the identity of the factor(s) that interacts with each photoreceptor in the initial signal transfer reaction. Here we address this question in relation to the phytochromes.

*To whom correspondence should be addressed (e-mail: quail@nature.berkeley.edu).

The generic phytochrome molecule is a soluble, dimeric chromoprotein with each subunit consisting of a tetrapyrrole chromophore covalently linked to an ~120 kDa polypeptide (Quail, 1997a). The photosensory activity of the molecule resides in its unique capacity for reversible, light-induced interconversion between its R-absorbing Pr form and its FR-absorbing Pfr form. In the plant, light-triggered Pfr formation activates the signaling pathways that lead to the well-documented pleiotropic effects on gene expression and development that occur throughout the life cycle (Kendrick and Kronenberg, 1994; Tobin and Kehoe, 1994; Terzaghi and Cashmore, 1995).

In *Arabidopsis*, the phytochromes comprise a five-membered family, designated phyA to phyE (Mathews and Sharrock, 1997). Evidence primarily from mutants in the different phytochromes indicates that individual members of the family have differential, albeit sometimes overlapping, photosensory and/or physiological functions in controlling developmental responses (Quail et al., 1995; Smith and Whitelam, 1997; Whitelam and Devlin, 1997). This functional distinction is particularly striking between phyA and phyB in the control of seedling deetiolation, where the effects of continuous monochromatic FR (FRc) are mediated exclusively by phyA, and the effects of continuous monochromatic R (Rc) are mediated predominantly by phyB (Quail et al., 1995). Domain swap experiments indicate that the N-terminal domain determines this photosensory specificity, whereas the C-terminal domain is reciprocally interchangeable between phyA and phyB, suggesting a common molecular function (Wagner et al., 1996). Together with evidence that missense mutations affecting perceived signal transfer cluster in a 160-residue “core” region of the C-terminal domain of both photoreceptors, these data suggest that the C-terminal domain of the phytochrome molecule may be directly involved in signal transfer and that the signaling process involves determinants that are common to phyA and phyB (Quail et al., 1995).

On the other hand, genetic screens for *Arabidopsis* mutants selectively or specifically defective in either phyA or phyB signal transduction pathways have provided evidence for potentially separate signaling pathways. The mutants *fhy1*, *fhy3*, and *spa1* appear specific to phyA signaling (Whitelam et al., 1993; Hoecker et al., 1998), whereas *pef2*, *pef3*, and *red1* are potentially specific to phyB signaling (Ahmad and Cashmore, 1996b; Wagner et al., 1997). However, the molecular identities of these components are yet to be reported.

Here, we have used the yeast two-hybrid system to screen an *Arabidopsis* cDNA library for phytochrome-interacting factors (PIFs) and to evaluate the specificity of any interactions by molecular criteria. The functional relevance to phytochrome signaling of one such interactor, PIF3, has been investigated by examining transgenic *Arabidopsis* seedlings expressing sense or antisense *PIF3* constructs for perturbation of photoresponsiveness under Rc or FRc conditions, diagnostic for phyB and phyA activity, respectively. In addition, because the sequence of PIF3 indicates that it belongs to the basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) class of transcriptional regulators, we have examined the subcellular localization of PIF3 in a transient transfection assay.

Cell
658

**Figure 1. PIF3 cDNA Identification and Interaction with Both phyA and phyB C-Terminal Domains**

(A) Diagrammatic representation of the phyB molecule (top) and the Gal4 DNA-binding domain (GBD):Arabidopsis-phyB C-terminal domain fusion used as bait in the yeast two-hybrid screen (bottom). The locations of the chromophore (partitioned rectangle), the "core" region (core), PAS repeats (PAS1 and PAS2), and the histidine kinase-like domain (HKLD) are indicated on the phyB molecule.

(B) Specific interaction of PIF3 with phyB. Shown is the growth on nonselective (+His) and selective (-His) medium of yeast colonies (left) cotransformed with the combinations of bait and prey constructs indicated (right). Fusion proteins are depicted as partitioned rectangles with each component labeled. GBD, as defined in (A); A-phyB, Arabidopsis phyB C-terminal domain; VA3, murine p53 control bait domain; PIF3, phytochrome-interacting factor 3; GAD, Gal4 activation domain. Plate sectors cotransformed with the different bait-prey pairs are indicated in the center.

(C) PIF3 cross-reacts with Arabidopsis phyA and phyB and with rice phyB as determined by quantitative yeast two-hybrid interaction assay. Yeast cells were cotransformed with the bait and prey combinations depicted to the left and quantitatively assayed for β-galactosidase activity. R-phyB, rice phyB C-terminal domain; A-phyA, Arabidopsis phyA C-terminal domain; other designations as in (B).

(D) In vitro binding of PIF3 to Arabidopsis phyB. ³⁵S-labeled GAD, GAD:PIF3 fusion protein, and A-phyB C-terminal domain were synthesized in separate in vitro transcription/translation reactions. A-phyB was incubated with either GAD (-PIF3) or GAD:PIF3 (+PIF3) and immunoprecipitated with anti-GAD antibodies. Labeled proteins in pellet and supernatant (1/20th concentration) fractions were visualized by autoradiography after fractionation by SDS-PAGE.

---

**Results**

**Isolation of Phytochrome Interactive Proteins**

Based on the evidence that the C-terminal domain of the phytochromes may be directly involved in interactions with signaling partners (Quail et al., 1995), we used this domain of phyB as bait in the yeast two-hybrid system to screen an Arabidopsis cDNA library (Figure 1A). From \(6 \times 10^6\) colonies screened, 14 were isolated that were both His- and β-galactosidase-positive after rescue in *E. coli* and retransformation back into yeast. One, PIF3, was selected here for further study.

**Molecular Specificity of the Phytochrome-PIF3 Interaction**

Plate-growth assays on minus-His medium indicate that PIF3 interacts with the Arabidopsis phyB C-terminal domain in a selective manner, as no interaction was detected with the control protein VA3 (Figure 1B). On the other hand, PIF3 does cross-interact with the C-terminal domains of both rice phyB and Arabidopsis phyA (Figure

1C). Data from a pull-down experiment using phyB and PIF3 proteins synthesized by in vitro transcription/translation (Figure 1D) support the conclusion that PIF3 interacts directly with the photoreceptor molecules.

Because of the evidence that point mutations clustering in the "core" region of phyA and phyB disrupt signal transfer to downstream components in vivo (Quail et al., 1995), we tested whether a representative set of these mutations would interfere with the binding of PIF3 to the photoreceptor molecules. Figure 2 shows that each of the selected mutations substantially reduced the interaction of the three phytochromes tested in the quantitative yeast two-hybrid assay. Western blot analysis shows that this reduction is not due to reduced expression levels of the mutant proteins (Figure 2).

**PIF3 Is a Novel bHLH Protein**

The coding sequence of the original PIF3 cDNA isolated in the two-hybrid screen appeared to be incomplete at the 5′ end. However, several clones subsequently

Phytochrome-Interacting Factor 3
659

Figure 2. Missense Mutations in phyA and phyB Core Regions Impair Interaction with PIF3

(A) Diagrammatic representation depicting C-terminal domain amino acid substitutions that disrupt phyA (above) and phyB (below) signaling in vivo (Quail et al., 1995). Substitutions tested here for effects on interactions with PIF3 are marked in reverse contrast.

(B) Interaction of Arabidopsis phyB wild-type (A-phyB) and mutant (A-phyB/AV, A776/V; A-phyB/EK, E838/K) C-terminal domain sequences with PIF3.

(C) Interaction of rice phyB wild-type (R-phyB) and mutant (R-phyB/AV, A776/V; R-phyB/EK, E838/K) C-terminal domain sequences with PIF3.

(D) Interaction of Arabidopsis phyA wild-type (A-phyA) and mutant (A-phyA/AV, A776/V; A-phyA/GE, G788/E) C-terminal domain sequences with PIF3.

Yeast cells were cotransformed with the bait and prey combinations depicted to the left and quantitatively assayed for β-galactosidase activity. Expression of wild-type and mutant phyochrome fusions was monitored by Western blot analysis (right) using antibodies specific to either the GBD or GAD in the relevant fusion protein. Cells transformed with (+) or without (-) relevant antigen-encoding fusion construct.

isolated from a cDNA library appeared to contain a complete protein coding sequence and to be close to full length based on comparison to the single 1.6 kb transcript detected on Northern blots (data not shown). Southern blot analysis indicated that PIF3 is likely a single-copy gene (data not shown). We sequenced the PIF3 gene, determined its structure by comparison to the cDNA (Figure 3A), and mapped it to chromosome 1 near PHYA using an arrayed YAC library (Creusot et al., 1995). Subsequently, the sequence of a BAC designated F14J9 containing the PIF3 gene has been deposited in the databases. This BAC represents this same region of chromosome 1, thus verifying the location of PIF3.

The PIF3 protein contains a region of strong homology to the DNA-binding and dimerization domains of the bHLH protein superfamily (Atchley and Fitch, 1997) (Figures 3A and 3B). This sequence similarity is clear in alignments with sequences from a variety of organisms, including two known factors from Arabidopsis, RAP1 (de Pater et al., 1997) and rd22bp1 (Abe et al., 1997) (Figure 3B). PIF3 also contains a classical bipartite nuclear localization signal (NLS) motif (Figures 3A–3C).

Outside the bHLH domain, PIF3 has little sequence similarity to other known proteins, except for a region of limited similarity to a single PAS domain in the N-terminal half of the molecule (Figures 3A and 3D). It is of interest that the strongest similarities are with the PAS domains of the phytochromes and the PYP photoreceptor (Lagarias et al., 1995). A prominent subclass of bHLH proteins, including the clock proteins ARNT, SIM, and BMAL (Figure 3D), contain PAS domains (Kay, 1997; Dunlap, 1998), but the molecular architecture is different than that of PIF3.

Functional Involvement of PIF3 in Phytochrome-Regulated Morphogenesis

To test for PIF3 involvement in phytochrome signaling in vivo, we generated multiple, independent transgenic Arabidopsis lines expressing either sense or antisense PIF3 cDNA sequences driven by the CaMV 35S promoter and assayed for photoresponsiveness. Transgenic lines segregating for a single T-DNA locus, as determined by basta resistance, were selected for further analysis and

A

PIF3 GENE
ATG
TATA
300 bp
PROBE
127 184
340 393
PIF3 PROTEIN
1
PAS
NLS bHLH
524 aa

B
bHLH Domain

| PIF3 | (340) KR SRS AEV HNL SER RRR INE KMR ALQ BLIP NC ... NK . VDK ASML DEAI EY KS LQ LQ VQ (397) |
| --- | --- |
| E353192 | (194) KK CRK AEV HNL SEK RR RSRI NE KNKA LQS LIP NS ... NK . TDK ASML DEAI EY KQ LQL QVK (251) |
| E1289552 | (190) RR GQ ATDP HS IAE RL RR ER IAER MKS LQE LVP NG ... NK . TDK ASML DEIT ID Y VKF LRL QVK (247) |
| 2262147 | (144) RR GQ ATDP HS IAE RL RR ER IAER RA LQE LVE TV ... NK . TDR ANM IDEI VD Y VKF LRL QVK (201) |
| E353219 | (128) RR GE ATDR HS IAE RAR REKI SKMKC LQD IVPG C ... NK VTG KAG MLD EINI NY VQSL QQ VE (186) |
| 3193326 | (140) SG GG SQRL TMD TY DK RDD KIN QR MKTL QKL VPNS ... SK . TDK ASML DEV IN Y LKQ LQA QVS (197) |
| E1289567 | (175) RR GQ ATDS HS IAE RV RR EKI SER MKF LQD LVP GC ... DK ITG KAG MLDEI INY VQSL QR QE (233) |
| 2335192 | (399) HT RGK PG NHAL SEK RR REK IEN ERF MT LRS ITP SH ... SKT . DKV SILD DT IE Y LODL QKR VQ (456) |
| BPERU | (378) AQ ENG AKNHVM SER REKI EN MFL VLK SLV PST ... HKV . DKAST LAETI AY UKR LQ RR VQ (435) |
| 2673918 | (303) KR GC ATH PRS IAE VR RR TRIS ERR MK LQB LVPN ... DK QTNTSD MLD LAN DY IKDL QR QYK (361) |
| PG1 | (427) NG REEP LN HVE AER QR REKI NQ RFY ALRA VVPN ... SKM . DKAS LLGD AIS Y TE LKSKL Q (484) |
| RAP1 | (409) NG REEP LN HVE AER QR REKI NQ RFYS LR AVVPN ... SKM . DKAS ELGD AIS Y IS ELK SKL Q (466) |
| RD22BP1 | (445) NG REEP LN HVE AER QR REKI NQ RFY ALRA VVPN ... SKM . DKAS LGDAI AY INEL KSK MV (502) |
| BMAL1B | (69) RI KN AREAH SQIE KRR RDK MNS FDE LAS LVBTC NAMS RKLD KLTVYLR MA VQ HMRT LRG ATN (130) |
| 303378 | (135) SK KPTL SS QS IAR GR RR RIA EK THE LGK LFGG ... NKL . NTAE MFQ AA KY VKF LQS QVG (192) |
| AVIMYC | (344) EB NDK RR THNV LER QR RNEL KL RFF ALRD QJ BEV . ANNE KAP KVVT LKK ATE YVLS LQ SDEH (394) |
| CONSENSUS | kr a h laer RRe k inermr Lq l vPnv kv d kasml dea ieylk Lq qv |

BASIC
HELIX
LOOP
HELIX
BIPARTITE NLS

C
Bipartite NLS

| PIF3 | (340) KRSRSAEVHNLSERRRRDR (358) |
| --- | --- |
| GT-2N | (128) KKCEKFEN ..VHKYYKRTK (145) |
| GT-2C | (484) KRCKE WEN ..INKYFKKV (501) |
| OP-2C | (230) RKRKESNRE ..SARRSYRK (246) |
| VIRD2 | (396) KRPRDRHDG ..ELGGRKRAR (413) |
| GCN4 | (231) KKRARNTEA ....ARRSRARK (246) |
| C-FOS | (140) RRIRRERNKMMAAKCRNRR (159) |

D
PAS Domain

| PIF3 | (127) MAVNQTAFP LQRRKDGEN ESAPAASSSQYN CFQSHS LYGS DRARDLP SQQ TNPDFRTQ ~ (184) |
| --- | --- |
| MESPHYB1 | (635) RLLETATAPTILAVDSLGC VNGWNAKVSELTGLPVSEAMGKSIVKDLVQRESREAEVRV ~ (692) |
| PHYA-1 | (624) RLLETATVPILAVDSDGLVN GWNTKIAELTG LSVDEAITGKHFL.TLVEDSSVEIVKRM L (681) |
| PHYA-2 | (757) QNPNPLIPPIFGTDEFGWCT EWNPA MSKILT GLKREEVTDKMLLGGEVFGTQKSCCRLKN ~ (814) |
| PYP | (21) GQ LDGLAFGAIQLDGDENILQY NAAEGDITGRDEBKQVIGKNFFKDVA PCTDSPEFY GK ~ (78) |
| WC-1 | (580) MLLENA DDDVVHVLSLKGLFLYLS PACKKVLEYDASDLVGTSLSSICHPSD IVPVTR EL ~ (637) |
| WC-2 | (168) KYVEELQDWHEILDANGRTK HVSPSVEPLTGYKEPEITDLFLRDLIH PDGVGF TAEL ~ (225) |
| PER-1 | (233) ERVKEDSFCCVISMHDCIVLY TTTPSITDV LGYPRDMWLGRSFIDFVHLKDRATFA SQI ~ (290) |
| PER-2 | (383) ILSQKSPKFAIRHTATGIISH VDSA AVS ALGYLPQDLLCSRSMDFYHHEDLSVMK ETY ~ (440) |
| BMAL1B | (332) EIRVKSMEYVSRHAIDGKFVFVDQRATAILAYLPQELLGSTCYEYFHQQDIGHLAEC ~ (388) |
| SIM | (248) EIKLHQNMFMFRAKLDMKLIFF DARVSQLTG YEPODLIEKTLYQYIHAA DIMAM RCS ~ (304) |
| ARNT | (355) SNICQPTEFISRHNIEGIFTFVDHR CVATVGYQPQELLGKNIVEFCHPEDQQLLRDS ~ (411) |
| CONSENSUS | 1 dg v vs ltgy p ellgkslv l n d 1 |

Figure 3. The PIF3 Gene Encodes a Novel bHLH-PAS Protein

(A) Diagrammatic representation of the *PIF3* gene and the encoded PIF3 protein. The nucleotide sequence of the gene is identical to a segment of BAC F14J9 (accession number AC003970). The protein-coding region is indicated by solid black boxes, untranslated transcribed regions by open boxes, introns and flanking DNA by a line, and putative TATA boxes by thick vertical lines. Dashed lines indicate uncertainty of 5′ and 3′ boundaries of the transcribed region. Thick line below the gene delineates the cDNA sequence used as a hybridization probe in the quantitative RT-PCR analysis (dashed segments indicate intron sequences absent from the probe). Sequence motifs within the PIF3 protein are indicated with their coordinates: PAS, Per-Arnt-Sim-like domain; NLS, bipartite nuclear localization signal; bHLH, basic helix-loop-helix related sequence.

(B) Alignment of the bHLH-region amino acid sequence of PIF3 with other related proteins. Identical and similar residues in 50% or more of the sequences are shown in reverse contrast and shaded letters, respectively. The locations of the conserved basic region, the two helices, the loop, and the putative NLS are depicted below. The GenBank accession numbers of unnamed sequences (all from *Arabidopsis*) are listed to the left. Other accession numbers are BPERU (maize), X57276; PG1 (bean), U18348; RAP1 (*Arabidopsis*), X99548; RD22BP1 (*Arabidopsis*), AB000875; bMAL1B (human), AB000812; and AVI MYC (avian virus), V01173.

(C) Alignment of the putative bipartite NLS sequence of PIF3 with similar motifs in other proteins. The basic residue clusters at each end of the motif are shown in reverse contrast. Accession numbers: GT-2N and GT-2C (rice, GT-2 factor), X68261; OP2C (opaque2, maize), M29411; VIRD2 (Agrobacterium virulence gene), sp:P06668; GCN4 (yeast), 602376; and C-FOS (mammalian), sp:P01100.

(D) Alignment of the putative PAS region of PIF3 with similar sequences in other proteins. Identical and similar residues in 50% or more of the sequences are shown in reverse contrast and shaded letters, respectively. Asterisks indicate residues in PIF3 that are identical or similar to residues in two or more of the other sequences (i.e., 25% of sequences match). GenBank accession numbers are MESPHY1b, U31284; PHYA1 and PHYA2, X17341; PYP, sp:P16113; WC-1, X94300; WC-2, Y09119; PER-1 and PER-2, AF033029; bMAL1b, AB000812; SIM, sp:P075709; and ARNT, U10325.

Multiple sequence alignments in (B-D) were performed using a combination of PILEUP (GCG Wisconsin Package) and manual alignment. The boundary residue coordinates for each protein are listed in parentheses.

significant but less pronounced effect of FRc, primarily at lower fluence rates. The absence of any difference from wild type in dark-grown seedlings (Figure 4) establishes that these phenotypic differences are light dependent. Moreover, examination of segregating T1 populations of the S38 and A22 lines for photoresponsiveness, coupled with assay of individual seedlings from these populations by PCR for the presence of the transgene, established that these light-dependent phenotypes co-segregate with the T-DNA insertion (data not shown).

We examined several other independent transgenic lines homozygous for the transgene for consistency of the phenotypes observed for S38 and A22. All additional sense lines exhibited marginally enhanced sensitivity to Rc and FRc, similar to that of S38, albeit somewhat less pronounced (Figure 4B, left). All sense lines express substantially elevated levels of PIF3 mRNA relative to wild type (Figure 4C, left). Similarly, the additional antisense lines exhibited reduced Rc and FRc sensitivity, qualitatively similar to that of A22 (Figure 4B, right). The strength of the phenotype is roughly correlated with the extent of the reduction in PIF3 transcript levels in the antisense lines (Figure 4C, right). These data indicate that the phenotypes observed are unlikely to be due to inadvertent disruption of an endogenous gene by the T-DNA insert and are most likely due to increases or decreases in PIF3 levels generated by expression of the sense and antisense PIF3 sequences, respectively. Similarly, the absence of differences in phyA and phyB levels between the wild-type and transgenic lines (Figure 4D) indicates that the phenotypes are not due to indirect effects of the PIF3-sense or -antisense constructs on photoreceptor levels.

In addition to the long hypocotyl phenotype induced by PIF3-antisense expression, we also observed diminished rates of light-induced hook opening and cotyledon separation, reduced cotyledon expansion, and early flowering (data not shown).

**Antisense PIF3 Inhibits the Phytochrome Regulation of Photoresponsive Genes**

To determine whether the involvement of PIF3 in phytochrome signaling could be observed at the gene expression level, we selected three genes whose light-regulated expression has been well studied: two positively regulated genes, CAB and CHS, and one negatively regulated gene, PHYA (Quail, 1994; Terzaghi and Cashmore, 1995). Figure 5 shows that all three genes are regulated in the expected fashion in wild-type seedlings. CAB and CHS mRNA levels are strongly enhanced, and PHYA mRNA levels are reduced in both Rc and FRc, consistent with the involvement of both phyA and phyB in this regulation. By contrast, the photoresponsiveness of all three genes is altered to a greater or lesser extent in the PIF3-antisense A22 line (Figure 5). A clear reduction in the extent of CAB and CHS induction, as well as of PHYA repression, relative to wild type is observed in the A22 line in response to Rc. Similar but less pronounced reductions in the effectiveness of FRc on CAB and CHS induction are also apparent in the A22 line relative to wild type, while no detectable effects on PHYA repression are observed. Similar results were obtained in three separate experiments.

strongly localized to the nucleus (data not shown), indicating the absence of phytochrome-regulated control of localization in these cells.

## Discussion

The data presented here provide evidence that PIF3 functions in both phyA and phyB signal transduction and that it performs this function as a consequence of its capacity to interact directly with both photoreceptor molecules. The conclusion that PIF3 can operate as a direct signaling partner with both phyA and phyB has important implications for potential mechanisms underlying the differential photosensory and physiological functions of the two photoreceptors. Moreover, the identification of PIF3 as a bHLH protein suggests a novel, direct signaling pathway from the phytochromes to the photoresponsive nuclear genes that they regulate.

### PIF3 Has a Functional Role in Both phyA and phyB Signaling In Vivo

The observation that expression of sense and antisense PIF3 constructs affects light-treated, but not dark-grown, seedlings establishes that PIF3 has a specific function in light-induced developmental processes. Moreover, because photoresponsiveness is perturbed in both Rc and FRc, the data indicate that PIF3 is involved in both phyA and phyB signaling. The reduced photoresponsiveness caused by PIF3-antisense-imposed reductions in PIF3 mRNA levels indicates further that PIF3 is necessary for normal phyA and phyB signal transduction in the cell either as a direct signal-transfer intermediate or as a positive regulator of the pathway. This effect is most striking in Rc, indicating a major role in phyB signaling. The reason for the effects of antisense expression on responsiveness to FRc being most apparent at low, but not high, fluence rates is not clear. However, this could reflect PIF3 involvement in the so-called low- and very low-fluence responses mediated by phyA, but not in the so-called high irradiance responses (Mancinelli, 1994). Although PIF3 mRNA levels are strongly

---

**Figure 5. Reduced PIF3 Transcript Levels Reduce Photoresponsiveness of Both Positively and Negatively Regulated Genes**

Northern blot analysis of chlorophyll a/b binding protein (CAB3), chalcone synthase (CHS), and PHYA mRNA levels in wild-type (WT) and homozygous PIF3-antisense (A22) transgenic seedlings grown in darkness for 3 days and either retained in darkness (D) or transferred to Rc (20 μmol m⁻² s⁻¹) or FRc (0.85 μmol m⁻² s⁻¹) for an additional 18 hr. Five micrograms of total RNA were analyzed for each treatment. rRNA, cytoplasmic 18S rRNA.

| CAB3 | WT | A22 |
| --- | --- | --- |
| D | Rc | FRc | D | Rc | FRc |

| CHS |  |  |

| PHYA |  |  |

| rRNA |  |  |

---

**Subcellular Localization of PIF3**

Because of the sequence similarity of PIF3 to members of the nuclear-localized bHLH family and the presence of a putative bipartite NLS (Figure 3), we examined the subcellular localization of a PIF3:GUS fusion in a transient transfection assay using onion epidermal cells (Shieh et al., 1993). The data show that, under continuous white light, the PIF3:GUS protein is strongly localized to the nucleus in these cells, in contrast to the GUS protein alone (Figure 6). In other experiments involving a terminal FR pulse irradiation and dark incubation after bombardment, the PIF3:GUS fusion protein was also

---

**Figure 6. PIF3 Can Localize to the Nucleus**

Constructs encoding either the GUS reporter sequence alone (GUS) (A and C) or GUS fused to the PIF3 cDNA sequence (GUS:PIF3) (B and D), each driven by the CaMV 35S promoter, were introduced into onion epidermal cells by particle bombardment. After 24 hr incubation, the cells were stained for GUS activity and for DNA using DAPI to identify nuclei. Bar, 100 μm.

| 35S → GUS | 35S → GUS | PIF3 |
| --- | --- | --- |
| A | B |  |
| C | D |  |

increased in sense seedlings (Figure 4C), photoresponsiveness is enhanced to only marginal and barely detectable degrees in Rc and FRc, respectively. This observation could suggest that the level of endogenous PIF3 is almost saturating for the pathway. Alternatively, because the transgene-encoded PIF3 protein in these lines lacks 63 N-terminal residues due to cloning difficulties, it is possible that it is less than fully active.

Strong support for the functional importance of PIF3 in phytochrome signaling in vivo was provided recently by the molecular cloning of a T-DNA-tagged locus in a photomorphogenic mutant, *poc1*, in this laboratory (K. Halliday et al., unpublished). This mutant was selected in a genetic screen for *Arabidopsis* seedlings hypersensitive to Rc. The data from this study show that the T-DNA is inserted into the promoter region of the *PIF3* gene causing overexpression. The resultant Rc hypersensitivity in the *poc1* mutant is consistent with that observed here for the PIF3-sense-expressing transgenic seedlings (Figure 4A). We suggest that the convergence on the same factor of these two separate and independent approaches provides compelling reinforcement of the conclusion that PIF3 is a bona fide phytochrome signal transduction component.

### PIF3 Interacts Directly with Both phyA and phyB

The binding of PIF3 to both phyA and phyB, but not to a control protein or to missense mutant-containing phyA or phyB proteins, indicates that the interaction exhibits a significant degree of molecular specificity. Although we initially chose the C-terminal domain of the photoreceptor because of the evidence of its critical role in signal transfer to downstream components (Quail et al., 1995; Wagner et al., 1996), subsequently, we also attempted to use the yeast two-hybrid system to monitor PIF3 interactions with the full-length photoreceptors. However, this attempt was unsuccessful, apparently because of the inability of any of the Gal4:full-length-phytochrome fusion products produced to enter the nucleus (data not shown). We have not yet determined whether PIF3 interacts with full-length, photoactive phytochromes from other sources. Although this leaves open the question of whether PIF3 binds differentially to the Pr and Pfr forms of the photoreceptor, the disruption of PIF3 binding by single amino acid substitutions known to disrupt downstream transfer of perceived signals (Figure 2) provides strong correlative evidence that PIF3 binding to the C-terminal domain may be involved in signaling in vivo. Together with the reverse-genetic evidence showing PIF3 involvement in phyA and phyB signal transduction discussed above, these data support the conclusion that PIF3 is likely to be a direct recipient of signaling information from both phyA and phyB via physical interaction with both photoreceptor molecules.

### Separate or Common, Single or Multiple, Primary Phytochrome Signaling Pathways?

The discovery of a potential primary reaction partner shared by phyA and phyB implies the immediate convergence of the signaling pathways of these two phytochromes. Consistent with this possibility are the functional analyses of chimeric phytochrome constructs in

transgenic *Arabidopsis* indicating that the C-terminal domains of phyA and phyB are functionally interchangeable (Quail et al., 1995; Wagner et al., 1996). In addition, the evidence that reduced PIF3 expression levels disrupt both Rc and FRc regulation of positively and negatively photoresponsive genes (Figure 5) indicates that PIF3 acts very early in a signaling pathway common to both phyA and phyB. Also potentially consistent with this possibility are the photomorphogenic mutants *pef1* (Ahmad and Cashmore, 1996b) and *psi2* (Genoud et al., 1998), which display aberrant photoresponsiveness to both Rc and FRc, implying defects in both phyA and phyB signaling.

On the other hand, there is much genetic evidence from phytochrome-mutant studies that phyA and phyB have clearly differential, antagonistic photosensory activities in controlling seedling deetiolation (Quail et al., 1995), and there are a number of other photomorphogenic mutants that appear to be specifically defective in separate phyA and phyB pathways (Whitelam et al., 1993; Ahmad and Cashmore, 1996b; Wagner et al., 1997; Hoecker, et al., 1998).

How can these two sets of data be reconciled? At present, a minimum of two alternative formal models appear possible (Figure 7). In Model 1, two classes of signals emanate from each phytochrome type directly at the level of the photoreceptor molecule (Figure 7A). One class involves one or more shared phytochrome-interacting factors, such as PIF3, leading to immediate pathway convergence. Downstream factors (potentially *PEF1, PSI2*) are then signaling intermediates common to both pathways. The other class of signals involves both separate phytochrome-interacting factors and downstream signaling intermediates (*FHY1, FHY3, SPA1, PEF2, PEF3, RED1*) specific to either phyA or phyB (Figure 7A). In Model 2, signals emanate from each photoreceptor via one or more shared interacting factors, such as PIF3, but signal transmission is modulated by other factors specific to each phytochrome type to reflect the specificity of each type (Figure 7B).

These models are clearly oversimplified and highly speculative, and other formulations are probably equally compatible with the data. Nevertheless, the emerging pattern suggests the existence of a complexity of signaling transactions close to the level of the phytochrome molecules themselves, including the possibility of multiple reaction partners for each photoreceptor. A recent report of direct interaction between phyA and the blue light receptor CRY1 (Ahmad et al., 1998) is consistent with this proposal.

### Intracellular Path of Phytochrome Signaling

The discovery of a potential transcriptional regulator that interacts directly with phytochrome molecules opens a new window on the question of the path by which the photoreceptor conveys signals to photoresponsive genes. Based on the observation that PIF3 can localize to the nucleus and on the premise that the phytochrome molecule and PIF3 must at some point make physical contact in the cell for signal transfer to occur, there appear to be a minimum of four formal alternative possibilities: (1) phytochrome and PIF3 molecules are cytoplasmic in the dark, and Pfr formation induces PIF3

A Model 1.
FRc
Rc
PIF3
phyB
PIF3
FHY1
FHY3
SPA1
PEF1
PSI2
?
PEF2
PEF3
RED1
COP/DET/FUS
PHOTOMORPHOGENESIS

B Model 2.
FRc
Rc
SPA1
PIF3
phyB
PIF3
FHY1
FHY3
PEF1
PSI2
?
PEF2
PEF3
RED1
COP/DET/FUS
PHOTOMORPHOGENESIS

Figure 7. Alternative Formal Models Depicting Potential Early Steps in Phytochrome Signal Transduction

(A) Model 1 proposes two or more signaling pathways emanating from each of phyA and phyB in response to FRc and Rc excitation, respectively. One pathway is common to both photoreceptors, involving the shared primary transduction partner PIF3. This pathway leads to immediate convergence of phyA and phyB signaling, and downstream components, potentially including the genetically defined PEF1 and PSI2 gene products, are common to both pathways. The other pathway is separate and specific to each photoreceptor, involving genetically defined potential signaling components such as FHY1, FHY2, and SPA1 for phyA, and PEF2, PEF3, and RED1 for phyB. All pathways are then proposed to converge at or upstream of the COP/DET/FUS complex of regulators.

(B) Model 2 proposes a single, common pathway emanating from each of phyA and phyB via the shared primary transduction partner PIF3. Specificity between the two photoreceptor activities is then proposed to be imposed by factors specific to each phytochrome, such as SPA1, FHY1, and FHY3 for phyA, and PEF2, PEF3, and RED1 for phyB, modulating the output signal from each photoreceptor.

epidermal cells may not exhibit normal phytochrome control, alternatives 1 and 2 must remain open. More definitive data on PIF3 and phyA localization in Arabidopsis are needed to clarify this question.

Previous studies have provided evidence for phytochrome-induced translocation of a G box-binding factor to the nucleus (Harter et al., 1994). This could represent a pathway similar to that proposed above for PIF3 in alternatives 1 or 2. In addition, microinjection and pharmacological studies have suggested the involvement of G proteins, Ca/calmodulin, and cGMP in phyA and phyB signaling (Millar et al., 1994; Schäfer et al., 1997), presumably consistent with signals initiated by cytoplasmically localized phytochrome. In either case, the assembled data are potentially compatible with the proposal that multiple signaling pathways may emanate from each phytochrome (Figure 7A). However, the biochemical transactions underlying the transfer of perceived signals from photoactivated phytochromes to their primary reaction partners remain to be definitively identified (Quail, 1997b).

Potential PIF3 Target Genes

The identification of PIF3 as a bHLH protein not only implies an extremely short and direct pathway to transcriptional regulation by phyA and phyB, but also suggests classes of genes that are potential direct targets of such regulation. It is well established that the majority of bHLH proteins bind as dimers to DNA containing the E box motif with the core sequence CANNTG (Murre et al., 1994; Patikoglou and Burley, 1997). It is of interest to note that the palindromic G box motif CACGTG, common to many plant genes (Menkens et al., 1995), is a specific member of the E box family. Indeed, the plant bHLH factors PG1 and RAP-1 bind preferentially to the G box motif (Kawagoe and Murai, 1996; de Pater et al., 1997). This observation raises the possibility that many of the photoresponsive genes that are known to contain G boxes in their promoters and have been considered to be targets of the GBF bZIP class of factors (Menkens et al., 1995) may instead, or in addition, be targets of bHLH proteins, including PIF3. Equally tenable, and non-mutually exclusive, is the possibility that PIF3 targets one or more master-switch type genes that then control downstream gene-expression cascades.

The PAS domain in PIF3 might be expected to play a role in protein-protein interactions such as homo- or heterodimerization, as in other PAS-containing proteins (Kay, 1997; Dunlap, 1998). Alternatively, because PIF3 and the phytochromes both contain PAS domains, these could be involved in the interaction between the two molecules. The PAS domain in PIF3 could also suggest a possible role in circadian clock regulation. Recent data from *Drosophila*, *Neurospora*, and mammalian cells have provided exciting evidence of the role of bHLH-PAS proteins in the central clock mechanism (Kay, 1997; Dunlap, 1998). Because the phytochromes are well known to modulate the circadian clock (Anderson et al., 1997), PIF3 involvement would provide a potential direct link between the photoreceptor and the clock. However, PIF3 would be an atypical member of this bHLH-PAS class of factors if this link were true. This is because, whereas PIF3 has a single PAS domain on the N-terminal

translocation to the nucleus; (2) phytochrome and PIF3 are cytoplasmic in the dark, and Pfr formation induces cotranslocation of both molecules to the nucleus; (3) phytochrome is cytoplasmic and PIF3 is nuclear in the dark, and Pfr formation induces photoreceptor translocation to the nucleus, followed by interaction with PIF3; (4) both phytochrome and PIF3 are constitutively nuclear.

The constitutive nuclear localization of PIF3 detected here (Figure 6), coupled with recent evidence of photoinduced translocation of phyB from cytoplasm to nucleus (Sakamoto and Nagatani, 1996), would at face value appear to favor alternative 3. However, because established evidence has long indicated that phyA is constitutively cytoplasmic (Pratt, 1994), and because onion

side of the bHLH domain (Figure 3A), the established clock-related members of the family have a pair of PAS domains on the C-terminal side of the bHLH motif (Kay, 1997; Darlington et al., 1998). The availability of mutant and transgenic lines of *Arabidopsis* altered in PIF3 transcript levels will enable this possibility to be directly tested.

### Experimental Procedures

#### Yeast Two-Hybrid Screen and Quantitative Interaction Assay
The Matchmaker two-hybrid system (Clontech, CA) was used for the yeast two-hybrid screen in the presence of 20 mM 3-aminotriazole (3-AT). Yeast transformation, filter and liquid β-galactosidase activity assay, and plasmid pACT rescue into *E. coli* HB101 were according to the manufacturer's instructions. The λACT cDNA expression library was a gift from Drs. J. Kim and A. Theologis and was converted to a pACT library according to Durfee et al. (1993). For quantitative interaction assays, phyA and phyB C-terminal domains (residues 645 to 1210; Quail, 1997a) and the *PIF3* cDNA were amplified by PCR with primers containing restriction sites and cloned into pGBT9 or pGAD424. The point mutations in phyA or phyB molecules were made using a QuikChange site-directed mutagenesis kit (Stratagene, La Jolla, CA).

For β-galactosidase activity and Western blot assay (Wagner et al., 1996), yeast was grown overnight in SD selection medium, diluted 1 to 5 in YPD medium, and grown for an additional 3 to 4 hr at 30°C. Total protein was extracted by resuspending cells in 2 to 3 volumes of PBS buffer containing 1 mM PMSF, 2 mM EDTA, 0.1% 2-mercaptoethanol, 5 mM benzamidine, 0.5% Triton X-100 and vortexing for 2 min in the presence of an equal volume of acid-washed glass beads (425–600 μm, Sigma). The monoclonal antibodies against the Gal4 DNA-binding domain (GBD) or Gal4 activation domain (GAD) used to monitor fusion-protein expression in yeast were from Santa Cruz Biotechnology (Santa Cruz, CA).

#### In Vitro Binding Assay
The GAD template was made by ligation of the T7 promoter to PCR-amplified GAD DNA using a Lig’nScribe kit (Ambion, Austin, TX). The *Arabidopsis* phyB C-terminal domain (645–1210) (A-phyB) and the GAD:full-length PIF3 fusion protein (GAD:PIF3) templates were amplified by PCR using primers containing restriction sites and cloned into the NcoI-SalI or NdeI-BamHI sites, respectively, of pET15b or pET3b vectors (Novagen, Madison, WI). Each encoded protein was synthesized separately in vitro using ³⁵S-Met in the TNT in vitro transcription/translation system (Promega, Madison, WI). The binding reaction was conducted by mixing A-phyB (2.5 fmol) with either GAD (10 fmol) or GAD:PIF3 (10 fmol) and incubating at 4°C for 2 hr in 0.8 ml PBS buffer (pH 7.4) containing 0.1% NP-40, 0.1% BSA, 1 μg/ml aprotinin, 1 μg/ml leupeptin, 1 μg/ml pepstatin, 5 mM benzamidine, 1 mM PMSF, 1 μg monoclonal antibody against GAD, and 20 μl protein A/G plus agarose (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, CA). The beads were pelleted and washed six times with the above buffer without BSA and PMSF. The proteins from the pellet (entire fraction) and supernatant (1/20th of the volume) were resolved on a 13% SDS-PAGE gel and visualized by autoradiography.

#### Full-Length PIF3 cDNA Isolation
The original *PIF3* cDNA isolated in the yeast two-hybrid screen lacked the first 63 amino acids at the N terminus. Full-length cDNAs were isolated from the CD4-14 λZapII cDNA library (Kieber et al., 1993) using the GeneTrapper cDNA positive selection system (Life Technologies).

#### PIF3 Gene Sequence Determination
The *PIF3* genomic sequence was amplified by PCR with a 5′ primer complementary to a 21 bp sequence in the 5′ untranslated region of the *PIF3* cDNA, 84 bp upstream of the ATG codon, and with a 3′ primer complementary to a 21 bp sequence immediately upstream of the TGA codon. The amplified PCR products were sequenced using an ABI 373 sequencer. Flanking genomic sequence outside

the cDNA sequence was subsequently obtained from BACF14J 9 (GenBank accession number AC003970).

#### Arabidopsis Transformation
A binary vector, pKF111, modified from pBin19 to contain a basta-resistance, selectable-marker gene for plant transformation was a gift from Dr. K. Franke. PIF3-sense and -antisense cDNA constructs were made by PCR amplification with restriction site-containing primers and directionally cloned into the pFK111 vector, under the control of the 35S CaMV promoter and followed by a 35S CaMV terminator. The sense construct covered the PIF3 coding region from residue 64 to the stop codon because the full-length sequence appeared to be toxic to *E. coli* when cloned into the binary vector. The antisense construct covered the entire coding region from start to stop codons. The vectors were then electroporated into *Agrobacterium* strain GV3101 (MP90) and *Arabidopsis* was transformed by vacuum infiltration (Bechtold et al., 1993). Five milligrams/liter of glufosinate-ammonium (Riededel-de Haen, Germany) was used for transgenic plant selection.

#### Seedling Growth Conditions
Seeds were pretreated as described (Parks and Quail, 1993) and grown at 22°C on GM medium minus sucrose under the various light conditions specified in the figure legends. Rc and FRc light sources were as described (Parks and Quail, 1993), and fluence rates were monitored using a spectroradiometer (Model LI-1800; Li-Cor, Lincoln, NE). Hypocotyl lengths were measured using a Pixera professional digital camera (Pixera, Cupertino, CA) and NIH image software (public domain, Bethesda, MD).

#### Transgenic Plant Analysis
For RT-PCR analysis of transcript levels, total RNA was isolated using RNeasy plant mini kits (Qiagen, Valencia, CA) and treated with RQ1 RNase-free DNase (Promega, Madison, WI). Eight nanograms of RNA was used for PIF3-sense RT-PCR analysis and 16 ng for PIF3-antisense RT-PCR analysis using the primers 15F (5′-CGCAGGAACCCTAAATTACTA-3′), which anneals to the 5′ end of the probe indicated in Figure 3, and 15R (5′-CAGGCAAGGCCATTGCATAAG-3′), which anneals to the reverse orientation of the 3′ end of the probe indicated in Figure 3 and the access RT-PCR* system (Promega, Madison, WI). As a control, *PHYE*-specific primers E5 (CAGCTGCAA GCAACATGAAACCTC) and E3 (TCCTCCGGGAAGTGACTGCAGCC TAGA) were used to amplify a 624 bp sequence in an RT-PCR reaction. The resultant PCR products were separated on a 1.2% agarose gel, blotted, and hybridized with the probe described in Figure 3 for *PIF3* and with a PCR probe amplified using E5 and E3 primers for *PHYE*.

Protein extracts were prepared from seedlings according to Wagner et al. (1996), except the ethylene glycol was omitted from the extraction buffer. phyA and phyB were detected by Western blot using phyA- and phyB-specific monoclonal antibodies (Hirschfeld et al., 1998). For analysis of light-regulated genes, total RNA was isolated as above and subjected to Northern blot analysis (Ausubel et al., 1989). Hybridization probes for CAB, CHS, and 18S rRNA were made from purified DNA fragments as described by Deng et al. (1991). The hybridization probe for *PHYA* was made by PCR amplification of a *PHYA* cDNA clone (nt 1935 to 3630) (Sharrock and Quail, 1989). The probes were labeled with ³²P-dCTP using a multiprime DNA labeling system RPN 1600 (Amersham, IL).

#### Nuclear Localization Analysis
The plasmid pRTL2-GUS/NIAΔBam (Restrepo et al., 1990) was digested with BamHI and BglII to release the NIA coding region. The full-length PIF3 open reading frame was amplified by PCR with primers creating BamHI sites immediately 5′ to the ATG and 3′ to the TGA and cloned into pRTL2-GUS/NIAΔBam, creating the GUS:PIF3 fusion driven by the CaMV 35S promoter. Onion epidermal cells were transfected with either pRTL2-GUS (Restrepo et al., 1990) or GUS:PIF3 plasmids using a helium biolistic gun transformation system (DuPont, Wilmington, DE) as described (Shieh et al., 1993) and incubated in the light for 24 hr at 25°C. The location of β-glucuronidase activity was determined by using X-gluc, and nuclei were identified using the DNA-specific stain DAPI(1 μg/ml) (Shieh et al., 1993). The subcellular localization of the blue precipitate was visualized

using a Zeiss Axiophot microscope and compared to the DAPI staining in the same cells using fluorescence optics. Transfections were repeated three times, and a minimum of 30 cells for each construct were analyzed from each experiment.

Acknowledgments

We thank Drs. J. Kim and A. Theologis for the pACT two-hybrid library; Dr. K. Franke for the binary vector pKF111; Dr. K. Halliday for advice and help with fluence rate response experiments; Dr. N. Wei for the CAB, CHS, and 18S rRNA probes; Arabidopsis Biological Resources Center for the CD4-14 λZAP cDNA and CD4-21 CIC YAC libraries; D. Hantz for greenhouse plant care; Drs. J. Colasanti, C. Fairchild, U. Hoecker, M. Hudson, and E. Huq for comments on the manuscript; lab members for discussion and support; O. Barajas and J. Ryu for technical assistance; and R. Wells for help with the manuscript. Research was supported by grants from National Institutes of Health (GM47475); Department of Energy, Basic Energy Sciences (DE-FG03-87ER13742); and U.S. Department of Agriculture, Current Research Information Service (5335-21000-006-00D).

Received August 4, 1998; revised October 5, 1998.

References

Abe, H., Yamaguchi-Shinozaki, K., Urao, T., Iwasaki, T., Hosokawa, D., and Shinozaki, K. (1997). Role of Arabidopsis MYC and MYB homologs in drought- and abscisic acid-regulated gene expression. Plant Cell 9, 1859–1868.

Ahmad, M., and Cashmore, A.R. (1996a). Seeing blue: the discovery of cryptochrome. Plant Mol. Biol. 30, 851–861.

Ahmad, M., and Cashmore, A.R. (1996b). The *pef* mutants of *Arabidopsis thaliana* define lesions early in the phytochrome signaling pathway. Plant J. 10, 1103–1110.

Ahmad, M., Jarillo, J.A., Smirnova, O., and Cashmore, A.R. (1998). The CRY1 blue light photoreceptor of *Arabidopsis* interacts with phytochrome A in vitro. Mol. Cell 1, 939–948.

Anderson, S.L., Somers, D.E., Millar, A.J., Hanson, K., Chory, J., and Kay, S.A. (1997). Attenuation of phytochrome A and B signaling pathways by the Arabidopsis circadian clock. Plant Cell 9, 1727–1743.

Ang, L.-H., Chattopadhyay, S., Wei, N., Oyama, T., Okada, K., Batschauer, A., and Deng, X.-W. (1998). Molecular interaction between COP1 and HY5 defines a regulatory switch for light control of *Arabidopsis* development. Mol. Cell 1, 213–222.

Atchley, W.R., and Fitch, W.M. (1997). A natural classification of the basic helix-loop-helix class of transcription factors. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 94, 5172–5176.

Ausubel, F.M., Brent, R., Kingston, R.E., Moore, D.D., Seidman, J.G., Smith, J.A., and Struhl, K. (1989). Current Protocols in Molecular Biology, Volumes 1 and 2 (New York: Wiley).

Bechtold, N., Ellis, J., and Pelletier, G. (1993). In planta Agrobacterium mediated gene transfer by infiltration of adult *Arabidopsis thaliana* plants. C.R. Acad. Sci. 316, 1194–1199.

Chory, J., Chatterjee, M., Cook, R.K., Elich, T., Fankhauser, C., Li, J., Nagpal, P., Neff, M., Pepper, A., Poole, D., et al. (1996). From seed germination to flowering, light controls plant development via the pigment phytochrome. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 93, 12066–12071.

Creusot, F., Fouilloux, E., Dron, M., Lafleuriel, J., Picard, G., Billault, A., Le Paslier, D., Cohen, D., Chabouté, M.-E., Durr, A., et al. (1995). The CIC library: a large insert YAC library for genome mapping in *Arabidopsis thaliana*. Plant J. 8, 763–770.

Darlington, T.K., Wager-Smith, K., Ceriani, M.F., Staknis, D., Gerakis, N., Steeves, T.D.L., Weitz, C.J., Takahashi, J.S., and Kay, S.A. (1998). Closing the circadian loop: CLOCK-induced transcription of its own inhibitors *per* and *tim*. Science 280, 1599–1603.

de Pater, S., Pham, K., Memelin, J., and Kijne, J. (1997). RAP-1 is an *Arabidopsis* MYC-like R protein homologue, that binds to G-box sequence motifs. Plant Mol. Biol. 34, 169–174.

Deng, X.-W., Caspar, T., and Quail, P.H. (1991). *cop1*: a regulatory locus involved in light-controlled development and gene expression in *Arabidopsis*. Genes Dev. 5, 1172–1182.

Dunlap, J. (1998). An end in the beginning. Science 280, 1548–1549.

Durfee, T., Becherer, K., Chen, P.L., Yeh, S.H., Yang, Y., Kilburn, A.E., Lee, W.H., and Elledge, S.J. (1993). The retinoblastoma protein associates with the protein phosphatase type 1 catalytic subunit. Genes Dev. 7, 555–569.

Genoud, T., Millar, A.J., Nishizawa, N., Kay, S.A., Schäfer, E., Naga-tani, A., and Chua, N.-H. (1998). An *Arabidopsis* mutant hypersensitive to red and far-red light signals. Plant Cell 10, 889–904.

Guo, H., Yang, H., Mockler, T., and Lin, C. (1998). Regulation of flowering time by *Arabidopsis* photoreceptors. Science 279, 1360–1363.

Harter, K., Kircher, S., Frohnmeier, H., Krenz, M., Nagy, F., and Schäfer, E. (1994). Light-regulated modification and nuclear translocation of cytosolic G-box binding factors in parsley. Plant Cell 6, 545–559.

Hirschfeld, M., Tepperman, J.M., Clack, T., Quail, P.H., and Sharrock, R.A. (1998). Coordination of phytochrome levels in *phyB* mutants of *Arabidopsis* as revealed by apoprotein-specific monoclonal antibodies. Genetics 149, 523–535.

Hoecker, U., Xu, Y., and Quail, P.H. (1998). *SPA1*: a new genetic locus involved in phytochrome A-specific signal transduction. Plant Cell 10, 19–33.

Huala, E., Oeller, P.W., Liscum, E., Han, I.-S., Larsen, E., and Briggs, W.R. (1997). *Arabidopsis NPH1*: a protein kinase with a putative redox-sensing domain. Science 278, 2120–2123.

Kawagoe, Y., and Murai, N. (1996). A novel basic region/helix-loop-helix protein binds to a G-box motif CACGTG of the bean seed storage protein β-phaseolin gene. Plant Sci. 116, 47–57.

Kay, S.A. (1997). PAS, present and future: clues to the origins of circadian clocks. Science 276, 753–754.

Kendrick, R.E., and Kronenberg, G.H.M., eds. (1994). Photomorphogenesis in Plants, 2nd Edition (Dordrecht, Netherlands: Kluwer Academic Publishers).

Kieber, J.J., Rothenberg, M., Roman, G., Feldmann, K.A., and Ecker, J.R. (1993). *CTR1*, a negative regulator of the ethylene response pathway in *Arabidopsis*, encodes a member of the Raf family of protein kinases. Cell 72, 427–441.

Lagarias, D.M., Wu, S.-H., and Lagarias, J.C. (1995). Atypical phytochrome gene structure in the green alga *Mesotaenium caldarium*. Plant Mol. Biol. 29, 1127–1142.

Mancinelli, A.L. (1994). The physiology of phytochrome action. In Photomorphogenesis in Plants, 2nd Edition, Kendrick, R.E., and Kronenberg, G.H.M., eds. (Dordrecht, Netherlands: Kluwer Academic Publishers), pp. 211–269.

Mathews, S., and Sharrock, R.A. (1997). Phytochrome gene diversity. Plant Cell Environ. 20, 666–671.

Menkens, A.E., Schindler, U., and Cashmore, A.R. (1995). The G-box: a ubiquitous regulatory DNA element in plants bound by the GBF family of bZIP proteins. Trends Biochem. Sci. 20, 506–510.

Millar, A.J., McGrath, R.B., and Chua, N.-H. (1994). Phytochrome phototransduction pathways. Annu. Rev. Genet. 28, 325–349.

Murre, C., Bain, G., van Dijk, M.A., Engel, I., Furnari, B.A., Massari, M.E., Matthews, J.R., Quong, M.W., Rivera, R.R., and Stuiver, M.H. (1994). Structure and function of helix-loop-helix proteins. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1218, 129–135.

Parks, B.M., and Quail, P.H. (1993). *hy8*, a new class of *Arabidopsis* long hypocotyl mutants deficient in functional phytochrome A. Plant Cell 5, 39–48.

Patikoglou, G., and Burley, S.K. (1997). Eukaryotic transcription factor-DNA complexes. Annu. Rev. Biophys. Biomol. Struct. 26, 289–325.

Pratt, L.H. (1994). Distribution and localization of phytochrome within the plant. In Photomorphogenesis in Plants, 2nd Edition, Kendrick, R.E., and Kronenberg, G.H.M., eds. (Dordrecht, Netherlands: Kluwer Academic Publishers), pp. 163–185.

Quail, P.H. (1994). Phytochrome genes and their expression. In Photomorphogenesis in Plants, 2nd Edition, Kendrick, R.E., and Kronenberg, G.H.M., eds. (Dordrecht, Netherlands: Kluwer Academic Publishers), pp. 71–104.

Quail, P.H. (1997a). An emerging molecular map of the phytochromes. Plant Cell Environ. 20, 657–665.

Quail, P.H. (1997b). The phytochromes: a biochemical mechanism of signaling in site? Bioessays 19, 571–579.

Quail, P.H., Boylan, M.T., Parks, B.M., Short, T.W., Xu, Y., and Wagner, D. (1995). Phytochromes: photosensory perception and signal transduction. Science 268, 675–680.

Restrepo, M.A., Freed, D.D., and Carrington, J.C. (1990). Nuclear transport of plant potyviral proteins. Plant Cell 2, 987–998.

Sakamoto, K., and Nagatani, A. (1996). Nuclear localization activity of phytochrome B. Plant J. 10, 859–868.

Schäfer, E., Kunkel, T., and Frohnmeier, H. (1997). Signal transduction in the photocontrol of chalcone synthase gene expression. Plant Cell Environ. 20, 722–727.

Sharrock, R.A., and Quail, P.H. (1989). Novel phytochrome sequences in *Arabidopsis thaliana*: structure, evolution, and differential expression of a plant regulatory photoreceptor family. Genes Dev. 3, 1745–1757.

Shieh, M.W., Wessler, S.R., and Raikhel, N.V. (1993). Nuclear targeting of the maize R protein requires two nuclear localization sequences. Plant Physiol. 101, 353–361.

Smith, H., and Whitelam, G.C. (1997). The shade avoidance syndrome: multiple responses mediated by multiple phytochromes. Plant Cell Environ. 20, 840–844.

Terzaghi, W.B., and Cashmore, A.R. (1995). Light-regulated transcription. Annu. Rev. Plant Physiol. Plant Mol. Biol. 445–474.

Tobin, E., and Kehoe, D.M. (1994). Phytochrome regulated gene expression. Semin. Cell Biol. 5, 335–346.

Wagner, D., Fairchild, C.D., Kuhn, R.M., and Quail, P.H. (1996). Chromophore-bearing NH₂-terminal domains of phytochromes A and B determine their photosensory specificity and differential light lability. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 93, 4011–4015.

Wagner, D., Hoecker, E., and Quail, P.H. (1997). *RED1* is necessary for phytochrome B-mediated red light specific signal transduction in *Arabidopsis*. Plant Cell 9, 731–743.

Wei, N., and Deng, X.-W. (1996). The role of the *COP/DET/FUS* genes in light control of *Arabidopsis* seedling development. Plant Physiol. 112, 871–878.

Whitelam, G.C., and Devlin, P.F. (1997). Roles of different phytochromes in *Arabidopsis* photomorphogenesis. Plant Cell Environ. 20, 752–758.

Whitelam, G.C., Johnson, E., Peng, J., Carol, P., Anderson, M.L., Cowl, J.S., and Harberd, N.P. (1993). Phytochrome A null mutants of *Arabidopsis* display a wild-type phenotype in white light. Plant Cell 5, 757–768.

GenBank Accession Number

The GenBank accession number for the *PIF3* cDNA sequence reported here is AF100166. The *PIF3* gene sequence is present on BAC F14J 9 (accession number AC003970).
