
FRONTLINES

mediates post-segregational killing²⁷. Gerdes and co-workers²⁷ have shown that Sok (antisense) RNA binds to Hok (target) RNA and inhibits its translation, and that Sok does not initiate binding through loop-loop contact, but through its 5′ tail (T. Franch, pers. commun.). When the Sok stem-loop is swapped for one derived from the antisense RNA of a different killer system, Sok is not inactivated. Therefore, only the pairing of the 5′ tail is required.

As yet, no results from eukaryotic systems, natural or artificial
TIBS 23-DECEMBER 1998

Table I. Recognition of Avr proteins from diverse pathogens by nucleotide-binding leucine-rich-repeat (NB-LRR) proteins from several plant species

| Pathogen | Species | Avr protein | Plant | NB-LRR protein | Refs |
|----------|---------|-------------|-------|----------------|------|
| Aphid    | Macrosiphum euphorbiae | ? | Tomato | Mi-1 | 7 and P. Vos, pers. commun. |
| Nematodes | Meloidogyne sp. | ? | Tomato | Mi
FRONTLINES

TIBS 23 – DECEMBER 1998

How is a pathogen signal perceived by the LRR domain and transduced intramolecularly to activate defence signalling? So far, little is understood about the nature of the Avr proteins and their possible virulence function. We keenly anticipate the cloning of Avr proteins from insects, nematodes and fungi, and the identification of their direct host targets.

**Acknowledgements**

We thank Jane Parker for in-depth discussions and for critical comments on the manuscript. The Sainsbury Laboratory is supported by the Gatsby Foundation.

**References**

1