
# The acceptor substrate specificity of human β4-galactosyltransferase V indicates its potential function in O-glycosylation

**Irma van Die<sup>a,*</sup>, Angelique van Tetering<sup>a</sup>, Wietske E.C.M. Schiphorst<sup>a</sup>, Takeshi Sato<sup>b</sup>, Kiyoshi Furukawa<sup>b</sup>, Dirk H. van den Eijnden<sup>a</sup>**

* <sup>a</sup>Department of Medical Chemistry, Vrije Universiteit, Van der Boechorststraat 7, 1081 BT Amsterdam, The Netherlands  
* <sup>b</sup>Department of Biosignal Research, Tokyo Metropolitan Institute of Gerontology, Itabashi-ku, Tokyo 173-0015, Japan  

Received 22 March 1999

---

## Abstract

In order to assess the function of the different human UDP-Gal:GlcNAc β4-galactosyltransferases, the cDNAs of two of them, β4-GalT I and β4-GalT V, were expressed in the baculovirus/insect cell expression system. The soluble recombinant enzymes produced were purified from the medium and used to determine their in vitro substrate specificities. The specific activity of the recombinant β4-GalT V was more than 15 times lower than that of β4-GalT I, using GlcNAcβ-S-pNP as an acceptor. Whereas β4-GalT I efficiently acts on all substrates having a terminal β-linked GlcNAc, β4-GalT V appeared to be far more restricted in acceptor usage. β4-GalT V acts with high preference on acceptors that contain the GlcNAcβ1→6GalNAc structural element, as found in O-linked core 2-, 4- and 6-based glycans, but not on substrates related to N-linked or blood group I-active oligosaccharides. These results suggest that β4-GalT V may function in the synthesis of lacNAc units on O-linked chains, particularly in tissues which do not express β4-GalT I, such as brain.

© 1999 Federation of European Biochemical Societies.

**Key words:** Baculovirus; Insect cell; Glycosyltransferase; β4-Galactosyltransferase gene family

---

## 1. Introduction

UDP-Gal:GlcNAcβ-R β4-galactosyltransferase (β4-GalT) is an enzyme that functions in the biosynthesis of complex-type glycans by catalyzing the transfer of a galactose from UDP-Gal to an acceptor substrate carrying a terminal β-linked GlcNAc, resulting in the formation of a Galβ1→4GlcNAc (lacNAc) unit. In the lactating mammary gland, β4-GalT interacts with α-lactalbumin to form the lactose-synthase complex, which catalyzes the transfer of a galactose to free glucose, yielding lactose [1–3]. Targeted inactivation of the mouse β4-GalT I gene resulted in growth retardation and early death of the mice, indicating that this enzyme has an important function in embryonic development and further growth of the animals [4,5]. The β4-GalT I-deficient mice were unable to produce lactose; they showed, however, a low residual GalT activity.

Recently, many sequences related to the β4-GalT gene appeared in (EST) databases, indicating that the β4-GalT gene is part of a gene family, also including the related *Lymnaea stagnalis* β4-GlcNAcT gene that was cloned previously [6–9]. During the past years two chicken and three human homologs were cloned, and all appeared to be true β4-GalTs [8,10–12], which poses questions about their individual functions. In addition, a glucosylceramide-specific rat β4-GalT homolog has been cloned [13], revealing that the β4-GalT gene family contains enzymes with a wide variety of functions, including an enzyme with a different UDP-sugar specificity [6] as well as an enzyme using an acceptor deviant from those having a terminal β-linked GlcNAc [13].

In a previous study [11] we described the cloning of a novel human β4-GalT (GenBank accession number AB004550) that we named β4-GalT II, but later was referred to as β4-GalT IV [14], and β4-GalT V [12,15]. We showed in Northern blots that β4-GalT V, as we name it now, is widely expressed in human tissues [11]. Also β4-GalT I, β4-GalT II and β4-GalT III are expressed in a variety of tissues [8,9]. This indicates that in many tissues, and possibly in many cells, multiple β4-GalTs are expressed resulting in a mixture of enzymes, which makes it difficult to assign observed β4-GalT activity to individual enzymes. By a detailed study of the in vitro acceptor substrate specificity of the different β4-GalTs we aimed to get more insight into the in vivo function of the individual enzymes. In this study we investigate the acceptor substrate specificity and kinetic parameters of β4-GalT V and compare them with those of the well known β4-GalT I.

---

## 2. Materials and methods

### 2.1. Materials

The following persons kindly supplied us with compounds (numbers refer to the structures given in Table 1): 4 and 12, Dr. O. Hinds-gaul (University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alta, Canada); 13, Dr. M. Haraldsson (University of Stockholm, Sweden); 20, Dr. A. Veyrières (Université Paris-Sud, France); 21, Dr. M. Messer (University of Sidney, Australia). Compounds 1 and 5 were purchased from Sigma Chemical Co. (St. Louis, MO, USA), 2, 3, 6-11 were obtained from Toronto Research Chemicals (Toronto, Ont., Canada) and 18 from Glycolipid Biochemicals (Birmingham, AL, USA). Oligosaccharides 14, 16 and 17 were derived from α<sub>1</sub>-acid glycoprotein by desialylation (acid treatment), digestion with PNGase F, fractionation of the resulting oligosaccharides and digestion with jack bean β-galactosidase. Glycopeptide as/ag-GP-F2 (15) was prepared from asialo-fibrinogen by pronase digestion as described previously [16] followed by enzymatic degalactosylation. Glycolipid 19 was derived from paragloboside, isolated from bovine erythrocyte ghosts [17], by enzymatic degalactosylation. UDP-[<sup>3</sup>H]Gal (36 Ci/mmol) was purchased from New England Nuclear (Boston, MA, USA). The sugar nucleotide donor was diluted with unlabeled UDP-Gal (Sigma) to the desired specific radioactivity. All other chemicals were obtained from commercial sources and were of the best quality available.

### 2.2. Plasmids and recombinant DNA techniques

Plasmids were propagated in the Escherichia coli K-12 strain XL-Blue (Stratagene). Synthetic oligonucleotides were obtained from Isogen Bioscience, Maarssen, The Netherlands. pVTBac-His was obtained...

---

*Corresponding author. Fax: (31) (20) 4448144.  
E-mail: im.van_die.medchem@med.vu.nl*

0014-5793/99/$20.00 © 1999 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. All rights reserved.  
PII: S0014-5793(99)00462-7

I. van Die et al./FEBS Letters 450 (1999) 52–56

**Isolation of plasmid DNA** was carried out by a modification of the minilysatte method, as described by [19], or with the QIAprep Spin Miniprep kit (Qiagen). Dideoxynucleotide chain terminating sequencing reactions [20], were performed on double-stranded plasmid DNA, using the T7 sequencing kit (Pharmacia) and \([α-^{35}S]\) dATP (Amersham). PCR was performed using Ampli-taq DNA polymerase (Perkin-Elmer) by 25 cycles (1 min \(95^\circ\)C, 1 min \(63^\circ\)C, 1 min \(72^\circ\)C). Before cloning, amplified fragments were purified according to the QIAquick PCR purification protocol (Qiagen).

### 2.3. Construction of pVTBacHis-β4GalT expression plasmids

Human β4-GalT I cDNA [21] was partially digested with *PstI* and *EcoRI* and a 1.2 kb *PstI/EcoRI* fragment, starting at base 176 of the coding region, was ligated in *PstI/EcoRI*-digested pVTBac-His. A 5′ truncated β4-GalT V cDNA fragment was obtained by PCR of the complete cDNA [11] using the sense primer **AAAGAGCTCCCAAGGCATTCTGATCCGG** and the antisense primer **ATTGAATTCAGTACTCGTTCCACCTG**. The PCR fragment was purified, digested with *SacI* and *EcoRI*, and ligated into *SacI/EcoRI*-digested pVTBac-HisT. The resulting expression plasmids were sequenced.

### 2.4. Maintenance and infection of insect cells

Trichoplusia ni ('BTI-TN-5B1-4') and Spodoptera frugiperda pupal ovary tissue (Sf9) insect cells were obtained from Invitrogen (San Diego, CA, USA) and grown in Grace's Insect Medium (Invitrogen) supplemented with 10% fetal calf serum (Gibco-BRL), or High Five Serum-Free medium (Invitrogen), both containing 50 μg/ml gentamicin. Insect cells were grown as monolayers at \(27^\circ\)C. The Baculo-gold system (PharMingen) was used for construction of recombinant baculovirus and Sf9 cells were used to produce recombinant virus. To produce the recombinant enzymes, *T. ni* insect cells were seeded in High-Five serum-Free medium in T75 flasks. Baculovirus was added (multiplicity of infection of 6) when the cells showed 90–100% confluence, and after 3–5 days the medium was collected. The medium was centrifuged for 5 min at 1500 rpm in an Eppendorf centrifuge to remove detached cells.

### 2.5. Purification of the recombinant proteins and immunoblotting

Medium of recombinant baculovirus-infected *T. ni* insect cells was subjected to UDP-hexanolamine-Sepharose chromatography, essentially as described previously [22]. The protein concentration of the active eluted fractions was determined according to Peterson [23]. Proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE on a 10% polyacrylamide gel, using the Mini-Protean II system (Bio-Rad). For Western blotting [24] a monoclonal anti-polyhistidine antibody (Sigma Immunochemicals) was used as first antibody and goat anti-mouse peroxidase conjugate (TAGO Immunodiagnostic Reagents) as the second antibody.

### 2.6. Galactosyltransferase assays and kinetic parameters

GalT assays were performed for 60–120 min at \(37^\circ\)C essentially as described in [25] in a 50 μl reaction mixture containing 5 μmol sodium cacodylate buffer pH 7.0, 25 nmol UDP-[³H]Gal (1 Ci/mol), 1 μmol MnCl₂, 0.2 μmol ATP, 0.25 μl Triton X-100, 15 μl enzyme preparation and 50 nmol *p*-nitrophenyl-*N*-acetyl-1-thio-β-*d*-glucosaminide (GlcNAcβ-S-pNP) or acceptor substrate as indicated. Control assays lacking the acceptor substrate were carried out to correct for incorporation into endogenous acceptors. When mono- or oligosaccharides were used as acceptor, the labeled product was separated from unincorporated label by chromatography on a 1 ml column of Dowex 1-X8 (Cl⁻ form) [26]. When pNP substrates were used as the acceptor, the product was isolated using Sep-Pak C-18 cartridges (Waters) [27]. Kinetic parameters (\(K_m\) and \(V\)) were estimated from Eadie-Hofstee plots (acceptor substrate concentrations varied from 0.03 to 5 mM (100 mM for GlcNAc)).

---

### 3. Results

#### 3.1. Expression of soluble β4-GalT I and β4-GalT V cDNA in insect cells

To obtain expression of human β4-GalT I and β4-GalT V

---

**Fig. 1.** Western blot analysis of β4-GalT I and β4-GalT V produced in High Five cells. The proteins of UDP-hexanolamine-Sepharose-purified medium of High-Five cells producing β4-GalT I or β4-GalT V (both 5.5 μg) were separated on SDS-PAGE. Proteins were transferred to nitrocellulose by Western blotting, and stained by an anti-polyHis antibody.

In insect cells, 5′ truncated cDNA fragments encoding the putative stem region and catalytic domain of these β4-GalTs were inserted into baculovirus expression vectors downstream of the polyhedrin promoter, the cleavable mellitin signal sequence and a poly-histidine (His₆) tag. Expression of the recombinant baculoviruses in *T. ni* insect cells resulted in the secretion of soluble enzymes, carrying an amino-terminal poly-His₆ tag. No β4-GalT activity could be detected in the serum-free growth medium of insect cells infected with an unrelated recombinant baculovirus. The recombinant human β4-GalTs were purified from the medium. Western blotting with a His₆-specific monoclonal antibody revealed that similar amounts of protein were produced and purified for both recombinant enzymes (Fig. 1). The specific activity of the purified β4-GalT I (220 mU/mg protein), however, appeared to be more than 15 times higher than that of purified β4-GalT V (13.3 mU/mg protein).

#### 3.2. Acceptor specificity of the recombinant enzymes

The acceptor specificity of human β4-GalT V was compared with that of the well-known human β4-GalT I (Table 1). Whereas all substrates terminating with a terminal β-linked GlcNAc were efficient acceptors for β4-GalT I, β4-GalT V appeared to be very restricted in its acceptor specificity. GlcNAcβ-S-pNP, and oligosaccharides representing O-linked structures (acceptor substrates 9–11, Table 1) were good acceptor substrates for this enzyme. A hydrophobic aglycone generally improved the acceptor properties of the oligosaccharides. Optimal activity was found with acceptor substrates carrying a terminal GlcNAc β1→6 linked to an α-GalNAc residue (substrates 10 and 11). Substrates representing N-glycans (12–17) were all poor acceptors, regardless of the presence of a hydrophobic aglycone (substrate 12) or the GlcNAc linkage type. Also two acceptors related to blood group I-active structures (20 and 21) showed relatively low acceptor properties. Neither β4-GalT V nor β4-GalT I was active with the substrate glucosylceramide. In contrast to our previous results [11], the acceptor lacto-N-triaosylceramide (19) showed a low but distinct activity. Essentially no β4-GalT V activity
### Table 1: Acceptor specificity of recombinant β4-GalT I and β4-GalT V

| Acceptor (1 mM theoretical acceptor sites) | Relative enzyme activity (%) |
|-----------------------------------------|-----------------------------|
| **Simple oligosaccharide acceptors**     |                             |
| 1. GlcNAcβ-S-pNP                        | 100                         | 100 |
| 2. GlcNAcβ-O-pNP                        | 87                          | 18  |
| 3. GlcNAcα-O-pNP                        | 17                          | <1  |
| 4. GlcNAcβ-O-(CH₂)₈-COOCH₃               | 108                         | 99  |
| 5. GlcNAc                               | 43                          | 3.2 |
| 6. SO₄⁻-6GlcNAcβ-O-pNP                  | 11                          | <1  |
| 7. Xylβ-O-pNP                           | <1                          | 1.4 |
| 8. GlcNAcβ1-4GlcNAc                     | 85                          | 3.7 |
| **Acceptors related to O-linked glycans** |                             |
| 9. GlcNAcβ1-3GalNAcα-O-pNP (core 3)      | 85                          | 45  |
| 10. GlcNAcβ1-6GalNAcα-O-pNP (core 6)     | 117                         | 134 |
| 11. GlcNAcβ1-6Galβ1-3GalNAcα-O-pNP       | 84                          | 131 |
| **Acceptors related to N-linked glycans** |                             |
| 12. GlcNAcβ1-2Manα1-6Manβ-O-(CH₂)₈-COOCH₃ | 118                         | 13  |
|    GlcNAcβ1-2Manα1'                      |                             |     |
| 13. GlcNAcβ1-2Manα1-6Man                 | 52                          | 2.0 |
|    GlcNAcβ1-4Man                        |                             |     |
|    GlcNAcβ1-2Manα1'                      |                             |     |
| 14. GlcNAcβ1-2Manα1-6Manβ1-4GlcNAcβ1-4GlcNAc | 155                         | 7.8 |
|    GlcNAcβ1-2Manα1'                      |                             |     |
| 15. GlcNAcβ1-2Manα1-6Manβ1-4GlcNAcβ1-4GlcNAc-peptide* | 157                         | 6.0 |
|    GlcNAcβ1-2Manα1'                      |                             |     |
|    (As/ag-GP-F2)                         |                             |     |
| 16. GlcNAcβ1-2Manα1-6Manβ1-4GlcNAcβ1-4GlcNAc | 164                         | 12.5 |
|    GlcNAcβ1-2Manα1'                      |                             |     |
|    4                                    |                             |     |
|    GlcNAcβ1'                            |                             |     |
| 17. GlcNAcβ1-6GlcNAcβ1-2Manα1-6Manβ1-4GlcNAcβ1-4GlcNAc | 160                         | 13.6 |
|    GlcNAcβ1-2Manα1'                      |                             |     |
|    4                                    |                             |     |
|    GlcNAcβ1'                            |                             |     |
| **Glycolipid acceptors**                |                             |
| 18. Glcβ-ceramide                       | <1                          | <1  |
| 19. GlcNAcβ1-3Galβ1-4Glcβ-ceramide       | 28                          | 16.6 |
| **Acceptors related to blood group I-active structures** |                             |
| 20. GlcNAcβ1-6Gal                       | 176                         | 10.9 |
|    GlcNAcβ1'                            |                             |     |
| 21. GlcNAcβ1-6Galβ1-4Glc                | 178                         | 16.2 |
|    Galβ1'                               |                             |     |

*100% corresponds to an activity of 220 and 13.3 U/mg protein for the enzymes, respectively.*

*aThe peptide portion of the glycopeptide consists for >90% of Gly-Glu-Asn and Glu-Asn in a ratio of 3:2.*

---

### 3.3. Interaction of β4-GalT V with α-lactalbumin

In the mammary gland of mammals, β4-GalT I interacts with α-lactalbumin (α-LA) to produce lactose. In Table 2, the effect of α-LA on the interaction of the soluble recombinant β4-GalT V and β4-GalT I is shown using different acceptor monosaccharides. Like β4-GalT I, human β4-GalT V is inhibited by α-LA in its action on GlcNAc. However, while the first enzyme is induced by α-LA to act on Glc to yield lactose, β4-GalT V is indifferent in this regard and acts with low activity on Glc regardless of whether or not α-LA is present.

In previous studies, we had observed that α-LA is able, although with low efficiency, to induce β4-GalT I to act on xylose, yielding the disaccharide Galβ1-4Xyl (D.H. van den Eijnden and R. Staffhorst, unpublished results). By contrast, β4-GalT V acts with very low efficiency on Xyl in the absence of α-LA, and not at all in the presence of this modifier protein.

---

### 3.4. Kinetic properties of the recombinant β4-GalTs

To substantiate the differences in the observed acceptor substrate specificity of human β4-GalT I and β4-GalT V, the \(K_m\) and \(V\) values with four different substrates were estimated for both enzymes (Table 3). The affinity of β4-GalT I and β4-GalT V for GlcNAcβ-S-pNP and the O-linked core 2 structure (11) appeared to be of the same order, whereas the \(V\) values for β4-GalT V were much lower than those for β4-GalT I. This resulted in kinetic efficiencies for β4-GalT V that are 30–40 times lower than those for β4-GalT I. The kinetic efficiency with which β4-GalT V acts on the N-linked glycopeptide (15), however, appears to be much lower than that found with GlcNAcβ-S-pNP and the core 2 structure, due to both a lower affinity and lower \(V\). The low kinetic efficiency of β4-GalT V found with GlcNAc is mainly due to the low affinity of the enzyme for this substrate.

---

### 4. Discussion

Acceptor specificity studies with the soluble forms of β4-GalT V and β4-GalT I have shown that β4-GalT V displays a much more restricted acceptor specificity than β4-GalT I. In accord with previous studies, β4-GalT I acts on virtually any substrate that carries a β-GlcNAc residue at its non-reducing terminus at a relatively high intrinsic rate. By contrast, β4-GalT V clearly prefers substrates that contain the GlcNAcβ1-6GalNAcα structural element, suggesting that it might function in the formation of lacNAc units at the β6-.

---

### Table 2: Activity of β4-GalT I and β4-GalT V on GlcNAc, Glc, and Xyl in the presence (+) or absence (−) of 10 mg α-lactalbumin (α-LA) per ml

| Acceptor (5 mM) | Relative activity (%) of |
|------------------|--------------------------|
|                  | β4-GalT I                | β4-GalT V              |
|                  | −α-LA                   | +α-LA                  | −α-LA                   | +α-LA                  |
| GlcNAc           | 100                     | 5                      | 100                     | 15                     |
| Glc              | 0.1                     | 72                     | 9                       | 7                      |
| Xyl              | <0.1                    | 6                      | 10                      | <1                     |

*100% corresponds to an activity of 313 and 2.8 mU/mg protein for the enzymes, respectively.*

--- 

FEBS 21927 26-4-99
I. van Die et al./FEBS Letters 450 (1999) 52–56

**Table 3**  
Apparent kinetic parameters of recombinant human β4-GalT I and β4-GalT V for several acceptor substrates

| Acceptor                          | **β4-GalT I**       | **β4-GalT V**       |
|-----------------------------------|---------------------|---------------------|
|                                   | $K_m$              | $V$                | kinetic efficiency | $K_m$              | $V$                | kinetic efficiency |
|                                   | (mM)               | (mU·mg⁻¹ protein)   | ($V \cdot K_m^{-1}$) | (mM)               | (mU·mg⁻¹ protein)   | ($V \cdot K_m^{-1}$) |
| 5. GlcNAc                         | 5.2                 | 886                 | 170                 | 71                  | 25.7               | 0.36                |
| 1. GlcNAcβ-S-pNP                  | 0.58                | 526                 | 907                 | 0.96                | 21.8               | 22.7                |
| 11. GlcNAcβ1-6                    |                     |                     |                     |                     |                     |                     |
| Galβ1-3GalNAca-O-pNP              | 0.50                | 428                 | 856                 | 1.3                 | 33.2               | 25.5                |
| 15. As/ag-GP-F2                   | 3.4                 | 1544                | 454                 | 17.5                | 6.6                | 0.38                |

In the assays, the concentrations of the acceptor substrates were varied over a range of 0.03–5.0 mM (1–100 mM for GlcNAc with β4-GalT V) using otherwise standard incubation conditions.

linked GlcNAc of core 2-, 4-, or 6-based O-linked glycans. A role of β4-GalT V in the formation of lacNAc units on N-glycans is less likely as this enzyme acts with low efficiency on all substrates that form part of N-linked glycans. Also, acceptors that are related to blood group I-active substances (containing the GlcNAcβ1→6Gal element) are relatively poor substrates. Recently, a GlcNAc-6-O-sulfate-specific β4-GalT activity was demonstrated in human colorectal mucosa [28]. This activity, however, cannot be assigned to β4-GalT V as this enzyme is not active with this substrate. It thus appears that β4-GalT V is also not involved in the synthesis of 6-sulfated structures such as 6-sulfo-sialyl Lewisx which has been identified as a ligand for L-selectin [29].

The primary structure of β4-GalT V shows more resemblance to that of the glucosylceramide-specific β4-GalT [13] than to any other β4-GalT cloned so far. Yet the soluble β4-GalT V tested in this study showed no activity with glucosylceramide. By contrast, the full-length enzyme produced in insect Sf9 cells [14] showed a low but distinct activity with this glycolipid substrate (T. Sato and K. Furukawa, unpublished). Similarly, truncated, soluble forms of α3/4-fucosyltransferases show a diminished capability to act on glycolipids compared to the full-length enzymes [30]. These results suggest that the membrane-spanning domain of glycosyltransferases somehow is important for activity with glycolipids, perhaps by enabling a close and properly oriented association between enzyme and substrate in the membrane. On the other hand, the soluble form of β4-GalT V shows some activity with lacto-N-triaosylceramide (Lc₃Cer), while the chimeric β4-GalT V-protein A form of the enzyme was found to be inactive with this substrate [11]. These data indicate that glycosyltransferase activities with glycolipid substrates may be highly sensitive to the form (soluble, fusion protein, full-length) of the enzyme. In addition to β4-GalT V and β4-GalT I (this study), the soluble

forms of β4-GalT III [8] and β4-GalT IV [12] also are capable of acting on Lc₃Cer, leaving the question unanswered whether the synthesis of paragloboside (nLc₄Cer) in vivo is catalyzed by one or more β4-GalTs.

In contrast to β4-GalT I, β4-GalT V is not stimulated by α-LA to act more efficiently on Glc [11, 14] but shows a low intrinsic activity with this sugar. Its activity with GlcNAc, however, is strongly inhibited at an α-LA concentration of 10 mg/ml. Furthermore, β4-GalT I and β4-GalT V differ also in their relative activities with Xyl (the ancestor pentose of Glc) in the absence and presence of α-LA, but the activities of the other β4-GalTs with this acceptor have not been reported. It may be expected that the β4-GalT functioning in the synthesis of the GlcAβ1→3Galβ1→3Galβ1→4Xylβ-O-Ser core of proteoglycans (such as chondroitin sulfate and heparin sulfate) [31] is also a member of the β4-galactosyl-transferase family and that this enzyme displays a high specificity for xylosides. The properties of β4-GalT V do not meet this criterion and therefore this enzyme appears not to have this function.

Although the O-linked core 2 and the core 6 structures are the most efficient substrates for β4-GalT V, the kinetic efficiency with which this enzyme acts on the core 2 structure is about 30-fold lower than that shown by β4-GalT I. This implies that it is not likely that β4-GalT V is the only β4-GalT involved in the galactosylation of the core 2 oligosaccharide, in particular because β4-GalT I is prominently present in most tissues [9, 11]. However, in brain β4-GalT I transcripts are hardly detectable while β4-GalT V, β4-GalT III, and β4-GalT VI are well expressed in this tissue [8, 9, 11, 12]. This brain-specific expression pattern of β4-GalTs might explain the under-galactosylation of the N-linked glycans of certain brain glycoproteins [32, 33] as it is consistent with the poor activity β4-GalT V shows with acceptors that are related to

these glycans. In the absence of β4-GalT I, β4-GalT V might indeed have a specific function in the galactosylation of O-linked structures.

While our work was in progress, a study appeared favoring a specific role of β4-GalT IV rather than of β4-GalT I or β4-GalT V in the synthesis of polylactosamine chains on O-linked core 2 structures [15]. Although we did not test the acceptor specificity of β4-GalT IV, our results on β4-GalT I and β4-GalT V clearly contradict the conclusion drawn by these authors. Also, we did not encounter the severe substrate inhibition of β4-GalT I by the core 2 substrate which underlines the function of the latter enzyme in the galactosylation of both N- and O-linked glycans.

In this study, we compared the kinetic properties and the in vitro acceptor specificity of two human β4-GalTs. These data are important to better understand their role in the synthesis of lacNAc-based glycans. The in vivo function of these enzymes, however, will also depend on potential competition with other β4-galactosyltransferases and β4-N-acetylgalactosaminyl transferases [34], subcellular localization, and protein-directed effects.

**Acknowledgements:** We thank Drs. O. Hindsgaul, A. Veyrières, M. Haraldsson for their kind gifts of oligosaccharides, and Drs. M. Fukuda, D.H. Joziasse and T. de Vries for providing plasmids.

**References**

[1] Brodbeck, V., Denton, W.L., Tanahashi, N. and Ebner, K.E. (1967) J. Biol. Chem. 242, 1391–1397.

[2] Hill, R.L. and Brew, K. (1975) Adv. Enzymol. Relat. Areas Mol. Biol. 43, 411–490.

[3] Schachter, H. and Roseman, S. (1980) in: The Biochemistry of Glycoproteins and Proteoglycans (Lennarz, W.J., Ed.), pp. 85–160, Plenum Press, New York.

[4] Asano, M., Furukawa, K., Kido, M., Matsumoto, S., Umesaki, Y., Kochibe, N. and Iwakura, Y. (1997) EMBO J. 16, 1850–1857.

[5] Lu, Q., Hasty, P. and Shur, B.D. (1997) Dev. Biol. 181, 257–267.

[6] Bakker, H., Agterberg, M., Van Tetering, A., Koeleman, C.A.M., Van den Eijnden, D.H. and Van Die, I. (1994) J. Biol. Chem. 269, 30326–30333.

[7] Van Die, I., Bakker, H. and Van den Eijnden, D.H. (1997) Glycobiology 7, 5–9.

[8] Almeida, R., Amado, M., David, L., Levery, S.B., Holmes, E.H., Merkx, G., Van Kessel, A.G., Rygaard, E., Hassan, H., Bennett, E. and Clausen, H. (1997) J. Biol. Chem. 272, 31979–31991.

[9] Lo, N.W., Shaper, J.H., Pevsner, J. and Shaper, N.L. (1998) Glycobiology 8, 517–526.

[10] Shaper, N.L., Meurer, J.A., Joziasse, D.H., Chou, T.D.D., Smith, E.J., Schnaar, R.L. and Shaper, J.H. (1997) J. Biol. Chem. 272, 31389–31399.

[11] Sato, T., Furukawa, K., Bakker, H., Van den Eijnden, D.H. and Van Die, I. (1998) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 95, 472–477.

[12] Schwientek, T., Almeida, R., Levery, S.B., Holmes, E.H., Bennett, E. and Clausen, H. (1998) J. Biol. Chem. 273, 29331–29340.

[13] Nomura, T., Takizawa, M., Aoki, J., Arai, H., Inoue, K., Wakisaka, E., Yoshizuka, N., Imokawa, G., Dohmae, N., Takio, K., Ilattori, M. and Matsuo, N. (1998) J. Biol. Chem. 273, 13570–13577.

[14] Sato, T., Aoki, N., Matsuda, T. and Furukawa, K. (1998) Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 244, 637–641.

[15] Ujita, M., McAuliffe, J., Schwientek, T., Almeida, R., Hindsgaul, O., Clausen, H. and Fukuda, M. (1998) J. Biol. Chem. 273, 34843–34849.

[16] Nemansky, M. and Van den Eijnden, D.H. (1993) Glycoconj. J. 10, 99–108.

[17] Chien, J.L., Li, S.C. and Li, Y.T. (1978) in: Cell Surface Carbohydrate Chemistry (Harmon, R.E., Ed.), pp. 241–254, Academic Press, New York.

[18] De Vries, T., Palcic, M.P., Schoenmakers, P.S., Van den Eijnden, D.H. and Joziasse, D.H. (1997) Glycobiology 7, 921–927.

[19] Del Sal, G., Manfioletti, G. and Schneider, C. (1988) Nucleic Acids Res. 16, 9878–9878.

[20] Sanger, F., Nicklen, S. and Coulson, A. (1977) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 74, 5463–5467.

[21] Masri, K.A., Appert, H.E. and Fukuda, M.N. (1988) Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 157, 657–663.

[22] Bakker, H., Schoenmakers, P.S., Koeleman, C.A.M., Joziasse, D.H., Van Die, I. and Van den Eijnden, D.H. (1997) Glycobiology 7, 539–548.

[23] Peterson, G.L. (1977) Anal. Biochem. 83, 346–356.

[24] Agterberg, M., Van Die, I., Yang, H., Andriessen, J.A., Van Tetering, A., Van den Eijnden, D.H. and Ploegh, H.L. (1993) Eur. J. Biochem. 217, 241–246.

[25] Blanken, W.M., Hooghwinkel, G.J.M. and Van den Eijnden, D.H. (1982) Eur. J. Biochem. 127, 547–552.

[26] Easton, E.W., Blokland, I., Geldof, A.A., Rao, B.R. and Van den Eijnden, D.H. (1992) FEBS Lett. 308, 46–49.

[27] Palcic, M.M., Heerze, L.D., Pierce, M. and Hindsgaul, O. (1988) Glycoconj. J. 5, 49–63.

[28] Seko, A., Hara-Kuge, S., Yonezawa, S., Nagata, K. and Yamashita, K. (1998) FEBS Lett. 440, 307–310.

[29] Sanders, W.J., Katsumoto, T.R., Bertozzi, C.R., Rosen, S.D. and Kiessling, L.L. (1996) Biochemistry 35, 14862–14867.

[30] De Vries, T., Srnka, C.A., Palcic, M.M., Schwiedler, S.J., Van den Eijnden, D.H. and Macher, B.A. (1995) J. Biol. Chem. 270, 8712–8722.

[31] Schwartz, N.B. and Roden, L. (1975) J. Biol. Chem. 250, 5200–5207.

[32] Hoffmann, A., Nimtz, M., Wurster, U. and Conradt, H.S. (1994) J. Neurochem. 63, 2185–2196.

[33] Hoffmann, A., Nimtz, M., Getzlaff, R. and Conradt, H.S. (1995) FEBS Lett. 359, 164–168.

[34] Van den Nieuwenhof, I.M., Schiphorst, W.E.C.M., Van Die, I. and Van den Eijnden, D.H. (1999) Glycobiology 9, 115–123.
