
THE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGICAL CHEMISTRY
© 2000 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

**Cytochromes P-450 from Cassava (Manihot esculenta Crantz) Catalyzing the First Steps in the Biosynthesis of the Cyanogenic Glucosides Linamarin and Lotaustralin**

CLONING, FUNCTIONAL EXPRESSION IN PICHIA PASTORIS, AND SUBSTRATE SPECIFICITY OF THE ISOLATED RECOMBINANT ENZYMES*

(Received for publication, June 28, 1999, and in revised form, October 25, 1999)

Mette Dahl Andersen‡§, Peter Kamp Busk‡§, Ib Svendsen¶, and Birger Lindberg Møller‡§

From the ‡Plant Biochemistry Laboratory, Department of Plant Biology, Royal Veterinary and Agricultural University, the §Center for Molecular Plant Physiology (PlaCe), 40 Thorvaldsensvej, 1871 Frederiksberg C, Copenhagen, and the ¶Department of Chemistry, Carlsberg Laboratory, 10 Gamle Carlsberg Vej, 2500 Valby, Denmark

The first committed steps in the biosynthesis of the two cyanogenic glucosides linamarin and lotaustralin in cassava are the conversion of L-valine and L-isoleucine, respectively, to the corresponding oximes. Two full-length cDNA clones that encode cytochromes P-450 catalyzing these reactions have been isolated. The two cassava cytochromes P-450 are 85% identical, share 54% sequence identity to CYP79A1 from sorghum, and have been assigned CYP79D1 and CYP79D2. Functional expression has been achieved using the methylotrophic yeast, *Pichia pastoris*. The amount of CYP79D1 isolated from 1 liter of *P. pastoris* culture exceeds the amounts that putatively could be isolated from 22,000 grown-up cassava plants. Each cytochrome P-450 metabolizes L-valine as well as L-isoleucine consistent with the co-occurrence of linamarin and lotaustralin in cassava. CYP79D1 was isolated from *P. pastoris*. Reconstitution in lipid micelles showed that CYP79D1 has a higher $k_{c}$ value with L-valine as substrate than with L-isoleucine, which is consistent with linamarin being the major cyanogenic glucoside in cassava. Both CYP79D1 and CYP79D2 are present in the genome of cassava cultivar MCol22 in agreement with cassava being allotetraploid. CYP79D1 and CYP79D2 are actively transcribed, and production of acyanogenic cassava plants would therefore require down-regulation of both genes.

source to prevent or relieve famine during periods of adverse climate conditions and offers the possibility to obtain a harvest from eroded and otherwise abandoned fields. The crop is propagated vegetatively from stem cuttings. In periods of food shortage, the farmer is therefore not required to save a part of the edible cassava crop for replanting of the fields to obtain next year's crop. Major deficits of cassava are the low protein content in the tuberous roots, poor storability after harvest, and the high content of cyanogenic glucosides (3). Cassava contains the two cyanogenic glucosides linamarin and lotaustralin in all parts of the plant (4). Upon tissue disruption, the cyanogenic glucosides are degraded with concomitant release of hydrogen cyanide and ketones. The level of cyanide generated from the tubers differs from one variety to the other but ranges between 0.15 and 1.5 g/kg of tuber as calculated on a dry weight basis. Acyanogenic cassava plants are not known (3). Use of cassava products as a staple food thus requires careful processing to remove the cyanide. Inadequate processing may result in chronic cyanide intoxication and tropical ataxic neuropathy (5). Severe cases of cyanide intoxication have been correlated to outbreaks of the paralytic disease konzo (6–8). Typically, processing is labor intensive and time-consuming and results in a simultaneous loss of proteins, vitamins, and minerals (3). Attempts to increase the content of valuable nutrients (e.g. proteins) in cassava tubers by breeding will thus be in vain because the components most likely will be lost during processing. The presence of cyanogenic glucosides thus constitutes a major obstacle for food quality improvement in cassava. Attempts to eliminate the production of cyanogenic glucosides in cassava through traditional breeding have not been successful. An alternative approach would be to use antisense technology, which, however, requires knowledge of the biosynthetic pathway and the enzymes involved and identification of the relevant genes.

Cassava (*Manihot esculenta* Crantz) is the most important tropical root crop (1, 2). Its starchy tuberous roots are the major staple food for several hundred million people. The average annual per capita consumption of cassava is 347 kg in the Democratic Republic of Congo (1994–1996 numbers; Ref. 1). The importance of the cassava plant is increasing for a number of reasons. Cassava produces well on poor soils and can be grown with low input. It is very drought-resistant, and the tubers can be left in the soil for a couple of years. Accordingly, growth of cassava provides an important reserve carbohydrate

* This work was supported by the Danish National Research Foundation, the Danish Agricultural and Veterinary Research Council, and the Danish Biotechnology Program. The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked “advertisement” in accordance with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.
* The nucleotide sequence(s) reported in this paper has been submitted to the GenBank™/EBI Data Bank with accession number(s) AF140613 and AF140614.
* To whom correspondence should be addressed. Tel.: 45-3528-3352; Fax: 45-3528-3333; E-mail: blm@kvl.dk.

The biosynthesis of the L-tyrosine-derived cyanogenic glucoside dhurrin has been elucidated in sorghum (*Sorghum bicolor* (L.) Moench). The pathway involves an N-hydroxyamino acid, an N,N-dihydroxyamino acid, an E- and Z-oxime, a nitrile, and a cyanohydrin as intermediates (9–11). Studies carried out using microsomes prepared from etiolated cassava seedlings demonstrate the involvement of the same classes of intermediates (12) (Fig. 1). In sorghum, a multifunctional cytochrome P-450 (P-450)¹ enzyme (CYP79A1) catalyzes the conversion from amino acid to Z-oxime and a second multifunctional P-450

¹ The abbreviations used are: P-450, cytochrome P-450; TX-114, Tricine, (N-tris[hydroxymethyl]methylglycine; val-oxime,

This paper is available online at http://www.jbc.org

(CYP71E1) catalyzes the conversion from Z-oxime to cyanohydrin. Final conversion of the cyanohydrin to dhurrin is achieved by the action of a soluble uridine 5′-diphosphoglucose-glucosyl transferase (13). The multifunctional sorghum P-450s have been isolated, cloned, and expressed in *Escherichia coli* (14–18). In addition to cyanogenic glucosides, oximes are also intermediates in the biosynthesis of glucosinolates (mustard oil glucosides), a closely related group of natural products. In glucosinolate biosynthesis, the conversion of amino acids to their corresponding oximes has been reported to involve P-450 (19, 20) and flavin-containing monooxygenases (21) as well as peroxidases (22). Sweeping statements as to the involvement of different types of enzymes in different plants and in dependence of the precursor amino acid used are currently being made (23, 24).

In the present study, we have used a range of inhibitors to document that the initial steps in cyanogenic glucoside synthesis in cassava are catalyzed by P-450. Using PCR strategies, we have cloned two P-450 genes belonging to the CYP79 family. Southern blot analyses did not reveal additional gene copies. Heterologous expression in *Pichia pastoris* documented that both P-450s catalyze the conversion of L-valine as well as L-isoleucine to the corresponding oximes, i.e., the first committed steps in the biosynthesis of linamarin and lotaustralin. The enzyme was isolated from *P. pastoris* and characterized with respect to substrate specificity. The cloning of the two genes provides the necessary tools to construct acyanogenic cassava plants using antisense technology.

---

### EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES

#### Preparation of Cassava Microsomes and Characterization of the Enzyme System—Cassava (*M. esculenta* Crantz) was grown in a greenhouse at regimes of 14 h of light at 28 °C and 10 h of darkness at 25 °C. Microsomes were prepared from immature folded leaves and petioles of shoot tips by differential centrifugation (12). The resulting microsomal pellet was resuspended in homogenization buffer (250 mM sucrose, 100 mM Tricine, pH 7.9, 50 mM NaCl, 2 mM DTT, 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride) and stored at −80 °C. Immediately before use, microsomes were thawed on ice.

Biosynthetic activity of the cassava microsomes was determined in assay mixtures (total volume, 30 μl) containing 55 μg of microsomal protein, 1 mM NADPH, 0.35 μCi of [U-¹⁴C]L-valine (246 mCi/mmol, Amersham Pharmacia Biotech), 3.3 mM val-oxime, and 67 mM Tricine, pH 7.9. After incubation (30 min at 30 °C), each assay mixture was extracted with 60 μl of ethyl acetate. The ethyl acetate phase containing the val-oxime was applied to a TLC sheet (Silica Gel 60 F₂₅₄, Merck) and eluted in dichloromethane/ethyl acetate (85:15, v/v). ¹⁴C-Labeled val-oxime formed was detected and quantified using a STORM 840 PhosphorImager (Molecular Dynamics). Reactions were also performed in the presence of the P-450 inhibitors ABT or tetcyclasis and in the presence of the flavoprotein inhibitor DPI. The inhibitors were dissolved in dimethyl sulfoxide before inclusion in the reaction mixtures. The maximum content of dimethyl sulfoxide in the reaction mixtures was 6.7% and was shown in control experiments not to inhibit the biosynthetic activity. The direct effect of DPI and tetcyclasis on purified sorghum NADPH-P-450 oxidoreductase was measured (550 nm) as the inhibition of NADPH-P-450 oxidoreductase (0.01 unit)-catalyzed NADPH-dependent reduction of cytochrome c (25).

The metabolism of L- and D-amino acids by cassava microsomes was determined in assay mixtures (total volume, 200 μl) containing microsomal protein (20–100 μg), 6 mM substrate (L-Val, D-Val, L-Ile, or D-Ile), 1.5 mM NADPH, 50 mM Tricine, pH 7.9. The reaction mixtures were incubated in silicone septum-covered Eppendorf tubes for 30 min at 30 °C and stopped by injection of 40 μl of 6 M NaOH. The end product cyanide was determined colorimetrically as described previously (26).

#### PCR Amplification, Library Screening, and Sequencing of Genes Belonging to the CYP79 Family—First round PCR amplification reactions (total volume, 20 μl) were carried out in 10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 9, 50

2-methylpropanal oxime; ABT, 1-aminobenzotriazole; DPI, Diphenyleneiodonium chloride; PCR, polymerase chain reaction; DTT, dithiothreitol; PAGE, polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis.


**FIG. 1. Biosynthesis of the cyanogenic glucosides linamarin and lotaustralin in cassava.** Linamarin is synthesized from L-valine and lotaustralin from L-isoleucine. Two membrane-bound, multifunctional P-450s catalyze the synthesis of the aglycones that are converted to the cyanogenic glucosides by a soluble uridine 5′-diphosphoglucose-glucosyl transferase. In the absence of glucosyl transferase activity, the aglycones spontaneously dissociate and liberate cyanide.

mm KCl, 1.5 mm MgCl₂ using 0.5 unit of Taq DNA polymerase (Amersharm Pharmacia Biotech) 200 μM dATP, 200 μM dCTP, 200 μM dGTP, 200 μM dTTP, 500 nM of each of the primers 5′-GCGGAATTCARGIAAYCCITYCT and 5′-CGCGGATCCGGDATRTCIGAYTCYTG (where R = A or G; Y = C or T; I = inosine; and D = A, G or T), and 10

ng of plasmid DNA template. The plasmid DNA template was prepared from a unidirectional plasmid cDNA library in pcDNA2.1 (Invitrogen) made from immature folded leaves and petioles of shoot tips of cassava plants. Thermal cycling parameters were 95 °C for 2 min, 3× (95 °C for 5 s, 40 °C for 30 s, and 72 °C for 45 s), 32× (95 °C for 5 s, 50 °C for 5 s, and 72 °C for 45 s), and a final 72 °C for 5 min. A part of the band of the expected size (210 base pairs) was stabbed out with a Pasteur pipette and used for second round PCR amplifications in 50 μl of the same reaction mixture as above using 95 °C for 2 min, 20× (95 °C for 5 s, 50 °C for 5 s, and 72 °C for 45 s) and a final 72 °C for 5 min. The product was sequenced with the Thermo Sequenase radiolabeled terminator cycle sequencing kit (Amersham Pharmacia Biotech) and [α-33P]ddNTP (Amersham Pharmacia Biotech) according to the manufacturer.

The gene-specific fragment was labeled with digoxigenin-11-dUTP (Roche Molecular Biochemicals) by PCR amplification and used as probe to screen the cassava cDNA library using the DIG system (Roche Molecular Biochemicals). The probe was hybridized overnight at 68 °C in 5× SSC, 0.1% N-lauroylsarcosine, 0.02% SDS, 1% blocking reagent (Roche Molecular Biochemicals). Prior to detection, filters were washed with 0.1× SSC, 0.1% SDS at 65 °C. Sequencing was performed using Thermo Sequenase Fluorescent-labeled Primer cycle sequencing kit (7-deaza dGTP) (Amersham Pharmacia Biotech) and an ALF-Express sequenator (Amersham Pharmacia Biotech). Two full-length clones designated CYP79D1 and CYP79D2 were obtained. Sequence computer analysis was performed using the programs from the GCG Wisconsin Sequence Analysis Package.

**Isolation of Genomic DNA from Cassava and Southern Blotting—** Genomic DNA was purified (27) from leaves of cassava cultivar MCol22. The DNA was further purified on Genomic-tip 100/G (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany), digested with restriction enzymes and electrophoresed (10 μg of DNA/lane) on a 0.6% agarose gel in 1× TAE. The gel was blotted to a nylon membrane (Roche Molecular Biochemicals) and hybridized at 68 °C (28) with the radiolabeled CYP79D1 or CYP79D2 clone. After hybridization, the membrane was washed twice in 2× SSC, 0.1% SDS at room temperature and twice in 0.1× SSC, 0.1% SDS at 68 °C, and radiolabeled bands were visualized using a Storm 840 PhosphorImager (Molecular Dynamics). The probes for Southern hybridization were labeled with a Random Primed DNA Labeling Kit (Roche Molecular Biochemicals) using [α-32P]dCTP.

**Generation of Recombinant P. pastoris Containing CYP79D1 or CYP79D2—** The vector pPICZc (Invitrogen) containing the methanol-inducible AOX1 promoter for control of gene expression and encoding resistance against zeocin was used to achieve intracellular expression of heterologous genes in *P. pastoris* wild type strain X-33 (Invitrogen). *E. coli* strain TOP10F′ was used for transformation and propagation of recombinant plasmids.

An *XhoI* site was introduced immediately downstream of the CYP79D1 stop codon by PCR. The PCR product was restricted with *XhoI* and with *BsmBI*. The latter enzyme cuts 18 base pairs downstream of the start ATG codon. pPICZc was restricted with *BstBI* and *XhoI*. The vector and PCR product were ligated together using an adapter made from annealed oligos: 5′-CGAAACGATGGCTAT-GAACGTCTCT-3′ (sense direction) and 5′-TGGTAGAGACGGTT$\overline{\text{CAT}}$-AGCCATCGTT$\overline{\text{T}}$-3′. The adapter reconstructs the first 18 base pairs of $\overline{\text{CYP79D1}}$ (start codon underlined) introducing two silent mutations (double underlined) and reconstructs a short vector sequence removed by the *BstBI* restriction, thereby positioning the CYP79D1 start codon exactly as the start codon of the highly expressed *AOXI* gene product. CYP79D2 was cloned into pPICZc in a similar manner using the same adapter because the coding sequences of CYP79D1 and CYP79D2 genes are identical for the first 24 base pairs.

Transformation of *P. pastoris* was achieved by electroporation according to manual (EasySelect Pichia expression Kit Version A, Invitrogen). The presence of CYP79D1 or CYP79D2 in zeocin-resistant colonies was confirmed by PCR on the *P. pastoris* colonies.

**P. pastoris Cell Cultures and Preparation of Microsomes—** Single colonies of *P. pastoris* were grown (28 °C, 220 rpm) for approximately 22 h in 25 ml of BMGY (1% yeast extract, 2% peptone, 0.1 M KPi, pH 6.0, 1.34% yeast nitrogen base, 4 × 10−5% biotin, 1% glycerol, 100 μg/ml zeocin). Cells were harvested (1500 × g for 10 min at room temperature) and inoculated to OD 0.5 in 300 ml of inducing medium (BMGY with 1% methanol instead of glycerol) in a 2-liter baffled flask. The cultures were grown (28 °C, 300 rpm) for 28 h with addition of methanol to 0.5% after 26 h. Cells were pelleted (3000 × g for 10 min at 4 °C) and washed once in buffer A (50 mM KPi, pH 7.9, 1 mM EDTA, 5% glycerol, 2 mM DTT, 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride) before being resuspended to OD 130 in buffer A. An equal volume of acid-washed glass beads was added, and the cells were broken by vortexing (8 × 30 s at 4 °C with intermediate cooling on ice). The lysate was centrifuged (12,000 × g for 10 min at 4 °C) to remove cell debris, and the resulting supernatant was centrifuged (165,000 × g for 1 h at 4 °C) to recover a microsomal pellet. Microsomes were resuspended in buffer A, stored at −80 °C, and thawed on ice immediately before use.

**Isolation of CYP79D1 from P. pastoris Microsomes—** All steps were carried out at 4 °C unless otherwise stated. CYP79D1-containing fractions were identified by carbon monoxide difference spectroscopy, SDS-PAGE, and activity measurements.

Recombinant CYP79D1 was isolated using *P. pastoris* microsomes as the starting material and TX-114 phase partitioning (29, 30) as the first purification step. The phase partitioning mixture contained microsomal protein (4 mg/ml), 50 mM KPi, pH 7.9, 1 mM DTT, 30% glycerol, and 1% TX-114. After stirring (at 4 °C for 30 min), phase separation was achieved by temperature shift and centrifugation (24500 × g at 22 °C for 25 min with the brake off). The reddish TX-114-rich upper phase was collected, and the TX-114-poor lower phase was re-extracted with 1% TX-114. The rich phases were combined and diluted in buffer B (10 mM KPi, pH 7.9, 2 mM DTT) to a TX-114 concentration less than 0.2%. The TX-114-rich phase was applied (flow rate, 25 ml/h) to a column (2.6 × 2.8 cm) of DEAE-Sephrose FF (Amersham Pharmacia Biotech) connected in series to a column (1.6 × 3 cm) of Reactive Red 120 agarose (Sigma). Both columns were equilibrated in buffer C (10 mM KPi, pH 7.9, 10% glycerol, 0.2% TX-114, 2 mM DTT). After sample application, the columns were washed thoroughly overnight in buffer C. CYP79D1 does not bind to the ion exchange column under these conditions and was recovered from the Reactive Red 120 agarose by gradient elution (50 ml of 0–1.5 M KCl in buffer C). Fractions containing fairly pure CYP79D1 were combined, dialyzed overnight against buffer C, and applied to a column (1.6 × 2.2 cm) of Reactive Yellow 3A agarose (Sigma) equilibrated in buffer C. The column was washed using buffer C and CYP79D1 obtained by gradient elution (50 ml of 0–1.5 M KCl in buffer C). The fractions containing homogenous CYP79D1 were combined and dialyzed (2 h) against buffer D (10 mM KPi, pH 7.9, 10% glycerol, 50 mM NaCl, 2 mM DTT) to reduce the salt and detergent content. CYP79D1 was stored in aliquots at −80 °C.

**Isolation of NADPH-P-450 Oxidoreductase from Sorghum—** NADPH-P-450 oxidoreductase was purified from microsomes of etiolated sorghum (*S. bicolor* (L.) Moench) seedlings using DEAE and 2′,5′-ADP Sepharose 4B (Amersham Pharmacia Biotech) column chromatography (31, 32).

**N-terminal Sequencing—** CYP79D1 was subjected to SDS-PAGE and the protein transferred to ProBlott membranes (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA) as described previously (33). The Coomassie Brilliant Blue-stained proteins were excised from the membrane and subjected to sequencing on an Applied Biosystems model 470A sequenator equipped with an on-line model 120A phenylthiohydantoin amino acid analyzer. Asn glycosylation was detected as the lack of an Asn signal in the predicted Edman degradation cycle.

**Catalytic Activity of CYP79D1 and CYP79D2—** Isolated, recombinant CYP79D1 was reconstituted, and its catalytic activity was determined *in vitro* using reaction mixtures (total volume, 30 μl) containing 2.5 pmol of CYP79D1, 0.05 unit of NADPH P-450-oxidoreductase (25), 10.6 mM L-α-dioleoyl phosphatidylcholine, 0.35 μCi of U-14C-labeled L-amino acid (L-Val, -Ile, -Leu, -Tyr or -Phe; Amersham Pharmacia Biotech), 1 mM NADPH, 0.1 M NaCl, and 20 mM KPi, pH 7.9. In assays containing [14C]L-valine or [14C]L-isoleucine, different amounts of unlabeled L- and D-amino acids (0–6 mM) were added. After incubation (10 min at 30 °C), the products formed were extracted into ethyl acetate (60 μl) and separated on TLC sheets using *n*-pentane/diethyl ether (50:50, v/v) or toluene/ethyl acetate (5:1, v/v) as eluents for aliphatic compounds and aromatic compounds, respectively. 14C-Labeled oximes were visualized and quantified using a STORM 840 PhosphorImager (Molecular Dynamics). The activity of CYP79D1 was also measured in the presence of the inhibitors tetcyclasis, ABT and DPI, under the same conditions as described in the previous section.

For *in vivo* activity assays, *P. pastoris* cells (200 μl) were pelleted and resuspended in 100 μl of 50 mM Tricine, pH 7.9, and 0.35 μCi of [U-14C]L-valine or L-isoleucine. After incubation (30 min at 30 °C), the cells were extracted with ethyl acetate, and the products formed were analyzed as above.

**Additional Analytical Procedures—** SDS-PAGE was performed using high Tris linear 8–25% gradient gels (34). Total P-450 was quantified by carbon monoxide difference spectroscopy on a SLM Aminco DW-2000 TM spectrophotometer (Spectronic Instruments, Rochester, NY) using a molar extinction coefficient of 91 mM−1 cm−1 for the adduct between reduced P-450 and carbon monoxide (35). Substrate-binding spectra

Cyanogenic Glucoside Biosynthesis in Cassava

FIG. 2. Effects of cytochrome P-450 and NADPH-P-450 oxidoreductase inhibitors on L-valine metabolism using cassava microsomes and isolated CYP79D1. A, microsomes prepared from shoots from 4-month-old cassava plants were incubated with [U-¹⁴C]L-valine (lanes 1–8) and the P-450 inhibitors tetacyclasis (lanes 3 and 4) and ABT (lanes 5 and 6) or the NADPH-P-450 oxidoreductase inhibitor DPI (lanes 7 and 8) in concentrations as indicated. NADPH was omitted in lane 1. Excess of unlabeled val-oxime was added to avoid further conversion of labeled val-oxime to acetone (Fig. 1). The E- and Z-oximes (confirmed by NMR spectroscopy) are separated on the TLC and are present in approximately equilibrium ratio (12, 63). B, isolated CYP79D1 reconstituted in the presence of tetacyclasis, ABT, and DPI using the same conditions as in A but without the addition of unlabeled val-oxime to the incubation mixture.

were recorded according to the method of Jefcoate (36) in 50 mM KPi, pH 7.9, 50 mM NaCl.

RESULTS

P-450-dependent Biosynthetic Activity in Young Cassava Leaves—Microsomes prepared from immature folded leaves and petioles of shoot tips from 3–6-month-old cassava plants converted L-valine to val-oxime (Fig. 2A, lane 2). Microsomes prepared from mature cassava leaves showed barely detectable activity levels. The conversion of amino acids to oxime compounds has been suggested to involve three different enzyme systems: P-450s (19, 20), flavin-containing monooxygenases (21), and peroxidases (22). To determine which enzyme was involved in cassava, ABT and tetacyclasis were tested as inhibitors of P-450 enzymes, and DPI was tested as an inhibitor of the putative flavin-containing monooxygenase. A major argument for the involvement of a flavin-containing monooxygenase has been the observed inhibitory effect caused by the flavin protein inhibitor DPI (21). The production of val-oxime by the cassava microsomes was indeed completely inhibited by DPI (Fig. 2A, lanes 7 and 8). However, as an inhibitor of flavin-containing enzymes DPI may also inhibit the P-450-NADPH oxidoreductase. The inhibitory effect of DPI on NADPH-P-450 oxidoreductase was measured in a cytochrome c reductase assay (25) using NADPH-P-450 oxidoreductase purified from sorghum. The NADPH-P-450 oxidoreductase was found to be completely inhibited (data not shown), suggesting that DPI interferes with the L-valine to val-oxime conversion by inhibiting NADPH-P-450 oxidoreductase. The conversion of L-valine to val-oxime was inhibited by tetacyclasis, which strongly argues for the involvement of a P-450 enzyme (Fig. 2A, lanes 3 and 4). The NADPH-P-450 oxidoreductase was fully active in the presence of tetacyclasis (data not shown). ABT did not inhibit the reaction (Fig. 2A, lanes 5 and 6). ABT is not a universal P-450 inhibitor (37, 38), and the lack of inhibition is therefore not necessarily in conflict with a P-450 catalyzed reaction. The L-valine to val-oxime conversion is dependent on NADPH (Fig. 2A, lane 1) as required for a P-450 catalyzed reaction. The overall conclusion from the inhibitor studies is that the L-valine to val-oxime conversion in cassava is a P-450-catalyzed reaction.

CYP79D1 and CYP79D2—Based on the assumption that the P-450 catalyzing conversion of L-valine to val-oxime belongs to the CYP79 family, degenerate primers were designed toward areas showing sequence conservation in CYP79A1 (sorghum) (15), CYP79B1 (Sinapis alba) (20), and CYP79B2 (Arabidopsis thaliana) (20). Domains putatively involved in substrate recognition (39) were excluded for primer designation, because none of the known CYP79s utilize valine or isoleucine as substrate. PCR was performed with the degenerate primers on plasmid DNA from a cDNA library prepared from immature folded leaves and petioles from shoot tips of cassava plants. PCR using the conserved areas shown by arrows in Fig. 3 was successful and provided a cassava sequence with high sequence similarity to the CYP79 family. Using this probe, two equally abundant full-length clones were isolated from the cassava cDNA library. The clones have open reading frames encoding P-450s of 61.2 and 61.3 kDa. These P-450s have been assigned CYP79D1 and CYP79D2 as the first two members of a new CYP79D subfamily (Dr. Nelson, P-450 Nomenclature Committee; Ref. 40). The two cassava P-450s are 85% identical and both share 54% identity to CYP79A1. P-450s showing more than 40% but less than 55% sequence identity at the amino acid level are grouped in the same family but in different subfamilies (41). Fig. 3 shows an alignment of CYP79D1 and CYP79D2 with CYP79A1, the only member of the CYP79 family for which a function has been established, and with CYP79B1 and CYP79B2, which possibly are involved in glucosinolate biosynthesis.

The heme-binding motif in CYP79D1 and CYP79D2 is TFSTGRRGCVA (Fig. 3, residues 470–480 for CYP79D1) and contains three amino acid substitutions compared with the consensus sequence PFGXGRRXCXG for A-type P-450s (41). The substitutions underlined are also found in CYP79A1, whereas the initial Thr in the CYP79D1 and CYP79D2 heme-binding motif is a Ser in CYP79A1, CYP79B1, and CYP79B2. Thus, the previously proposed existence of a heme binding sequence domain unique to the CYP79 family (20) is contradicted. The other unique sequence domain PERH (Fig. 3, residues 450–453 for CYP79D1), where His is proposed to be specific for the CYP79 family (20), is also found in CYP79D1 and CYP79D2. The central region of helix I is suggested to be involved in the formation of the substrate binding pocket (42) and contains the consensus sequence (A/G)GX(D/E)T(T/S) (41). A replacement in CYP79A1 (Fig. 3, corresponding to residues 342–343 in CYP79D1) of the consensus Thr(Thr/Ser) with Asn-Pro was previously interpreted to be involved in defining tyrosine binding (15). However, NP residues are also present in CYP79D1 and CYP79D2, as well as in CYP79B1 and CYP79B2, suggesting that these residues are typical to the CYP79 family independent of the substrate used.

Copy Number of CYP79D1 and CYP79D2—To determine the copy number of CYP79D1 and CYP79D2, a Southern blot on

1970 Cyanogenic Glucoside Biosynthesis in Cassava

CYP79D1 1 ~MAMNSSTIGLLNATSFASSSI.NTVKILFVLFISIVSIIKKQKS........MA
CYP79D2 1 ~MAMNSST..ATTASFAESSMN.TAKILLIFISIVSVIKQKR........MS
CYP79B1 1 ~~~MNETSNSSDTSTTKQLFPSM..YLITQAFVIIMILKKVLVNDTNK...
CYP79B2 1 ~~~MNETSNSSDTTATESSFSL..YLLSQAFVIIIMILKK.LMTDPNK...
CYP79A1 1 MATMEVEAAAATVAAAPLLSSAILKL..LLEVVTLSYLRAERRPRKSTTKCSSTTCMS

CYP79D1 50 NKEGSKKLLEPPGPWPLGPMIRYPTFRWHOLMRDSTCLIREGRNFPP
CYP79D2 49 YKKASKNFLLEPPGPWPLGNEMIRYPTFRWHQLMXDNTBICLIKGKNP
CYP79B1 53 .....HLSLEPPGPGWPIGMVBTMFKSPVFRWLHSIMQITEI....GSITV
CYP79B2 52 .....HPYLEPPGPWGPIEGMBTMFKSPVFRWLHSIMQLTEI...KGTIV
CYP79A1 59 PPAGVGNPBLEPPGPWPVGNLDMILNKPAFRWHOMMREMGTDLQVKGGVS

CYP79D1 110 SCPVLARELLNDAlFSNRPKILSAKSMSGYLTIIVVRNQQKKMKRIISEISP
CYP79D2 109 SCPVJARELLHDAVFSNRPKILCAKTMSGYLTIIVVPNDQKKMKRNVSEISP
CYP79B1 108 CPKJAREVLQDALFASRMNYQNVLSNGYKTCITPFEBKKMKRVMTELVCP
CYP79B2 107 CPKJARELLQDALFARPLEYQNILSNGYKCITPFEBKKMKRVMTELVCP
CYP79A1 119 CPEJAREVLRNDANFIORPLSETFSGCYRNAVLSRNDQKKMRRVTEIPS

CYP79D1 170 RHKWLHKRFEDNVFIBHNQF...ANKNVNLRTAHRHYCGNMVFSKRF
CYP79D2 169 RHKWLHKREEDQLVINQYK...SNKNVNVRIAARHYCGNMVFSKRF
CYP79B1 168 RHRWLHQKRZENDHLAWANMVNNSD...SVBFERVHRHYCGNAIKKFGTRFSO
CYP79B2 167 RHRWLHQKRSZENDHLAWANMVNSG...SVDFRFMRHYCGNAIKKFGTRFSR
CYP79A1 179 RHAWLHKRTDEADNLRYLNLATKAATGDVAVRHVARYCGNIRNRFFEE

FIG. 3. Alignment of representative sequences from the CYP79 family. The alignment was generated using the GCG program Pileup and presented using Boxshade. Black boxes show conserved residues. Gray boxes show residues identical in at least three of the sequences: CYP79D1 and CYP79D2 from cassava aligned with CYP79B1 from S. alba, CYP79B2 from A. thaliana, and CYP79A1 involved in cyanogenic glucoside biosynthesis in sorghum. Arrows show sequence areas used for design of degenerate primers.

CYP79D1 226 GM.GGGPGPRLMHBAVERALKYGFCASDELPELLGLDLBGQEKFVLDNKTIIRD
CYP79D2 225 GM.GDGPGPRLMHVDAIEALKYRGFCASDELPELEGDLBGQEKLNLNKTIIRDL
CYP79B1 224 NTBNCGGPTARDLEHMEAMFELFTFSFCUSDLPILTGLDLNGHEKTMRDSSAIMDK
CYP79B2 223 NTBNCGGPTVDVNHMEAMELFTFAFCISDLPMLTGLDLNGHEKMRESSAIMDK
CYP79A1 239 PQ.BGGPGNMVLHDAVESLALFCVSDLPWLRGLDLBGHEKVKEANVAVNRL

CYP79D1 285 QNBLTDRQOWKSGERKMEMDLLDIJDSDGKPELLNPDETKNQAEAMIAIDNPA
CYP79D2 284 QNPLIEBRQOWRSGERKMEMDLLDIJDSDGKPELLNPDETKNQAEAMIAIDNPA
CYP79B1 284 BDIIDARKMWREGKTQIEDLDIISIKDEEGPLLAEKPTKLVMAEPDNPS
CYP79B2 283 WPIIDARKMWREGKTQIEDLDIISIDEQGNPLLAEKPTKLVMAEPDNPS
CYP79A1 298 HTVIBDRWRQWKSGERQMEDLLIINDAQGNPLLIEEVKAOSQDITFAAVDNP

CYP79D1 345 NAIEWAMGEILNQBEKKATEEDRVVGCRLVQESDIPNLDYVKAAREAFRLHPVAH
CYP79D2 344 NAIEWAMGELINQBELAKATEEDRVVGCRLVQESDIPNLYVKAAAREAFRLHPVAH
CYP79B1 344 NAIEWAMAEANKPELRKAMEEDRVVGCRLVQESDIPLYVKAILREAFRLHPVAA
CYP79B2 343 NAIEWAMAEANKPERRKAMEEDRVVGCRLVQESDIPLYVKAILREAFRLHPVAA
CYP79A1 358 NAIEWALENNPEVMAKAMEEDRVVGRRLVQESDIPKNYVKAITREAFRLHPVAP

CYP79D1 405 FNPHVAMEDGVGDYFPKGSWAVLSRGLGRNPWSPLKYDPHRHM..GVVLT
CYP79D2 404 FNPHVAMEDAVTGDYFPKGSWAILLSRGLGRNPWTBDPLKYDPHRHM..GVVLT
CYP79B1 404 FNLPHVAASDAVAGYHFPKGSQILLSRGLGRNPKWADPLSKPQRHMF.CSVTLT
CYP79B2 403 FNLPHVAASDUVACGYHFPKGSQILLSRGLGRNPKWADPLCKPQRHF.NCSVTLT
CYP79A1 418 FNPHVAADTQCYRVPKGSHILSRGLGRNPWDEPLRYPDRAATAADVALT

CYP79D1 463 EHHELREVTFSTGRRGCVASLLGSCMMMLMQCFTWTPPAVSKIDLAETLDELTPA
CYP79D2 462 EHGELREVTFSTGRRGCVAAALLGHTMMARMLOQCFTWTPPRNJHIDLSENDELTPA
CYP79B1 463 ENDLRETFSTGKRGCAAPALGLMRRMLQFTWKLENEETELMESHHMLA
CYP79B2 462 ENDLREFSTGKRGCIAAPALGLMRRMLQFTWKLENEETELMESHHMLA
CYP79A1 478 ENDLRETFSTGRRGCIASLGMSVMFGRLQFTWSKPAGVEAMBLSESKSPTMA

CYP79D1 523 PTSAFKERLAPHLYPSP~
CYP79D2 522 PITGFQERLAPHLYPSP~
CYP79B1 523 KPVMVGELRNHEHLYPVK~
CYP79B2 522 KPLVMVDLRLPEHLYPVK~
CYP79A1 538 PIVLHMERLAAHLYPSISI

genomic DNA from the cassava cultivar MCol22 was performed. The blot was hybridized with CYP79D1 and CYP79D2 cDNAs. The two probes hybridized to different bands on the Southern blot (Fig. 4), demonstrating that both genes are present in the MCol22 genome. The high similarity between the genes results in weak cross-hybridization, e.g. in Fig. 4A (lane BglII), where a weak band at the size corresponding to CYP79D2 is observed. Low stringency washing (0.5× SSC, 0.1% SDS at 55°C) did not reveal additional copies of the CYP79D genes (data not shown).

Functional Expression in *P. pastoris*—Expression of CYP79D1 and CYP79D2 in *E. coli* using constructs and conditions similar to those tested to achieve expression of sorghum CYP79A1 (16) was unsuccessful. Similarly, it has been reported that CYP79B1 is not expressed in *E. coli* (20). The methylotrophic yeast *P. pastoris* was explored as an alternative expression system. To optimize expression conditions, the 5′- and 3′-untranslated regions were removed from the cassava genes before insertion into the expression vector. The start ATG was positioned exactly as the start ATG of the highly expressed *AOX1P. pastoris* gene to obtain an optimal translation initiation context.

CYP79D1 and CYP79D2 were functionally expressed in *P. pastoris* as evidenced by the ability of recombinant yeast cells to convert L-valine to val-oxime (Fig. 5, lanes 2 and 3). No conversion took place using *P. pastoris* cells transformed with

A B
kb
-14
-4.7
-2.8
-1.9
-1.2

FIG. 4. Southern blot analysis of cassava. Genomic DNA from cassava cultivar MCol22 was restricted as indicated and hybridized with a full-length DNA probe of CYP79D1 (A) or CYP79D2 (B).

the vector only (Fig. 5, lane 1). The metabolic activity was measured in intact cells, demonstrating that the endogenous *P. pastoris* reductase system is able to support electron donation to these plant P-450s. SDS-PAGE of microsomes prepared from cells actively converting L-valine to val-oxime showed the presence of an additional polypeptide band migrating correspond-

Cyanogenic Glucoside Biosynthesis in Cassava

of microsomal CYP79D1 after 90 h of induction was 50% of that obtained after 24 h (data not shown).

**Purification of Recombinant CYP79D1—Recombinant CYP79D1** was isolated from *P. pastoris* microsomes by initial solubilization in TX-114 followed by TX-114 temperature-induced phase partitioning and centrifugation at room temperature to recover CYP79D1 in the reddish TX-114-rich upper phase. Re-extraction of the TX-114-poor phase to recover residual CYP79D1 provided quantitative extraction as estimated by CO difference spectroscopy (Fig. 6A, lane 3). The rich phases were combined and diluted to 0.2% TX-114 before application to a column of DEAE mounted in series with a column of Reactive Red 120 agarose. The DEAE column binds the majority of microsomal protein. CYP79D1 binds weakly to DEAE and was transferred to the red column upon washing with 10% glycerol. CYP79D1 was eluted as a nearly homogenous protein from the red column (Fig. 6A, lane 4) and was isolated on a column of Reactive Yellow 3A agarose (Fig. 6A, lane 5). The isolated CYP79D1 migrated with a molecular mass of 62 kDa. The overall yield of the isolation procedure was 17%, i.e., 1 nmol of CYP79D1 was obtained from each 260 ml of culture.

**CYP79D1 Expressed in P. pastoris Is Glycosylated—The fractions** that produced CO spectra and contained CYP79D1 activity always produced two distinct closely migrating polypeptide bands upon SDS-PAGE (Fig. 6A, lane 5). N-terminal amino acid sequencing identified both bands as derived from CYP79D1 (Fig. 6B). The initial methionine was removed by the yeast processing system. Sequencing of the first 15 residues of the upper band (D1-Gly, Gly) demonstrated glycosylation of both asparagines present, whereas the lower band (D1-Gly) only was glycosylated at the first asparagine. The different glycosylation pattern explains the presence of two bands. Glycosylation at the N-terminal part of CYP79D1 is in agreement with the localization of the N-terminal in the lumen of the endoplasmic reticulum accessible for the glycosylation machinery. It is unknown whether native CYP79D1 is glycosylated in cassava. However, CYP79A1 purified from sorghum seedlings was not glycosylated as documented by amino acid sequencing of the N-terminal fragment (15), and only few reports exist of microsomal P-450 glycosylation (43, 44). The observed glycosylation of recombinant CYP79D1 upon expression in *P. pastoris* is thought to reflect expression in a yeast system.

**Spectral Properties of Recombinant CYP79D1—Isolated CYP79D1** consistently produced an absorption maximum at 448 nm when subjected to CO difference spectroscopy (Fig. 7A). No maximum was observed at 420 nm using either isolated or crude fractions. This demonstrates that CYP79D1 is a fairly stable protein. Yeast cytochromes may interfere with the spectroscopy of crude extracts and hide a minor 420 nm peak, and *P. pastoris* cytochrome oxidase had previously been reported to prevent P-450 spectroscopy (45). In the present study, the expression level of CYP79D1 was high, and the CO difference spectrum produced by cytochrome oxidase (maximum at 430 nm, minimum at 445) (46) is visible as a shoulder on the 450 nm peak. The *P. pastoris* cytochrome oxidase binds to the DEAE column and accordingly was removed during P-450 isolation. Upon culturing *P. pastoris* for extended periods (90 h), the content of cytochrome oxidase decreased permitting readily detection of lower amounts of P-450 in microsomes. Finally, interfering cytochrome oxidase could be removed from P-450 by TX-114 phase partitioning performed in borate buffer (data not shown). Upon phase partitioning in borate, the P-450s partitioned to the TX-114-poor phase (47), whereas *P. pastoris* cytochrome oxidase partitioned to the rich phase. Isolated CYP79D1 formed a type I substrate binding spectrum in the

FIG. 5. Functional expression of CYP79D1 and CYP79D2 in *P. pastoris*. *P. pastoris* cells were incubated with [U-¹⁴C]L-valine and extracted with ethyl acetate. The ethyl acetate extracts were analyzed by TLC. Lane 1, *P. pastoris* transformed with expression vector pPICZc (control); lane 2, pPICZc containing CYP79D1; lane 3, pPICZc containing CYP79D2.

A

| P. pastoris microsomes | CYP79D1 microsomes |
| --- | --- |
| Rich phase | Red eluate |
|  | Yellow eluate |

| 1 | 2 | 3 | 4 | 5 |

| 94- |
| --- |
| 67- |
| 43- |
| 30- |
| 20.1- |
| 14.4- |

| Total P450 (nmol) |
| --- |
| 0 | 6 | 6 | 2.3 | 1 |

B

| Gly | Gly |
| --- | --- |
| D1-Gly, Gly: AMNVSTTIGLLNATS |  |
| Gly |  |
| D1-Gly: AMNVSTTIGLLNATS |  |

FIG. 6. Isolation of recombinant CYP79D1 and the glycosylation pattern of the N-terminal sequence. A, polypeptide profiles as analyzed by SDS-PAGE and staining with Coomassie Brilliant Blue. Lane 1, *P. pastoris* microsomes; lane 2, *P. pastoris* microsomes expressing CYP79D1; lane 3, TX-114-rich phase; lane 4, eluate from Reactive Red 120 agarose; lane 5, eluate from Reactive Yellow 3A agarose. Approximately the same amount (2.8 pmol) of P-450 was applied to lanes 2–5, and an assessment of total P-450 content in the individual fractions is given below each lane. The values of lanes 2 and 3 are semi-quantitative because of the presence of interfering cytochrome oxidase. The two protein bands observed in the red and yellow eluate fractions correspond to differential glycosylation of CYP79D1. B, the glycosylation pattern of the N-terminal sequence of recombinant CYP79D1. N-Gly, glycosylated Asn.

ing to a molecular mass of 62 kDa as expected from the CYP79D1 cDNA clone (Fig. 6A, compare lanes 1 and 2).

A number of different growth media and growth periods were tested to maximize the CYP79D1 activity in intact *P. pastoris* cells. The best results were obtained using growth in rich media and induction at OD 0.5 for 24–30 h, which produced 15–30 nmol of microsomal CYP79D1/liter of culture. The yield

1972 Cyanogenic Glucoside Biosynthesis in Cassava

**FIG. 7. Difference spectra of recombinant CYP79D1.** The cuvettes contained 18 nM CYP79D1 (scan speed, 1 nm/s). $A$, carbon monoxide binding spectrum. $B$, substrate binding spectrum in the presence of 8 mM L-valine.

presence of L-valine (Fig. 7$B$) corresponding to a 44% shift from low spin to high spin state upon substrate binding.

Substrate Specificity of CYP79D1—CYP79D1 was reconstituted with sorghum NADPH-P-450 oxidoreductase in the presence of high amounts of the lipid L-$\alpha$-dioleoyl phosphatidylcholine and 100 mM NaCl. The five protein amino acids used in plants as precursors for cyanogenic glucoside synthesis were tested as substrates for CYP79D1 (Fig. 8). The corresponding oximes were formed from L-valine or L-isoleucine. Using L-leucine, -phenylalanine, or -tyrosine as substrates, no metabolism was evident at a detection level equal to 0.8% of the metabolism observed with L-valine. The observed substrate specificity corresponds with the *in vivo* presence of only L-valine- and L-isoleucine-derived cyanogenic glucosides in cassava.

To examine the effect of inhibitors on isolated CYP79D1, reconstitutions were performed in the presence of tetcyclasis, ABT, and DPI (Fig. 2$B$) using the same conditions as for cassava microsomes (Fig. 2$A$). The same pattern as in cassava microsomes is observed using isolated CYP79D1. CYP79D1 is inhibited by tetcyclasis but not by ABT. Similar to the situation in cassava microsomes, DPI completely inhibits the val-oxime formation by inhibiting the NADPH-P-450 oxidoreductase.

The ability of cassava microsomes and reconstituted CYP79D1 to metabolize the D-isomers of valine and isoleucine was examined. When cassava microsomes were used, cyanide was produced with L-valine and L-isoleucine as substrates (Fig. 1), whereas no metabolism was observed using D-valine and D-isoleucine (Fig. 9$A$). A higher conversion rate is observed using L-valine compared with L-isoleucine similar to the data obtained using microsomes prepared from etiolated cassava seedlings (12). Isolated CYP79D1 produces ${}^{14}$C-labeled val-oxime from ${}^{14}$C-L-valine (Fig. 9$B$, lane 1). When the specific activity of the ${}^{14}$C-L-valine substrate is reduced 120 times by addition of unlabeled L-valine, a corresponding reduction of the amount of ${}^{14}$C-labeled val-oxime formed is observed (Fig. 9$B$, lane 2). However, addition of unlabeled D-valine to the incubation mixture does not result in a corresponding reduction in the amount of ${}^{14}$C-labeled val-oxime formed (Fig. 9$B$, lane 3). Thus, neither the cassava microsomes nor isolated CYP79D1 metabolize D-valine. The lack of competition of D-valine with L-valine indicates that D-valine does not bind with high affinity to the active site of CYP79D1. Similar results were obtained with ${}^{14}$C-L-isoleucine, L-isoleucine, and D-isoleucine (data not shown).

To further investigate the kinetics of L-valine and L-isoleucine metabolism by isolated CYP79D1, assays were performed over a broad range of substrate concentrations (Fig. 9$C$). Eadie-Hofstee plots (Fig. 9$D$) of the experiment shown provided the following parameters: $K_{m,\text{Val}} = 2.2 \, \text{mM}$; $K_{m,\text{Ile}} = 1.3 \, \text{mM}$; $k_{c,\text{Val}} = 9.7 \, \text{min}^{-1}$; $k_{c,\text{Ile}} = 6.2 \, \text{min}^{-1}$. The turnover rate of the detergent-purified CYP79D1 varied from one batch to the other, and reconstitution efficiency also varied between experiments. Therefore, these values should be considered semi-quantitative. Generally, we observe $K_m$ values of 1.2–2.2 mM and $k_c$ values of 4.3–9.7 min${}^{-1}$ for L-valine metabolism and $K_m$ values of 1.3–1.7 mM and $k_c$ values of 2.3–6.4 min${}^{-1}$ for L-isoleucine metabolism. Under saturating substrate conditions CYP79D1 has a higher conversion rate using L-valine as substrate. The conversion rate of L-isoleucine is approximately 60% of that observed for L-valine. This is consistent with higher accumulation of linamarin *in vivo* in cassava (4).

Characterization of CYP79D2—Assays based on intact cells as well as microsomes of *P. pastoris* demonstrated that CYP79D2 metabolized L-valine (Fig. 5, lane 3) and L-isoleucine (data not shown) to the corresponding oximes. Thus, both CYP79D1 and CYP79D2 are able to catalyze the first part of the biosynthesis of linamarin and lotaustralin in cassava.

*P. pastoris* cultures that produced CYP79D1 and CYP79D2 (28 h of induction) with similar rate of L-valine to val-oxime conversion afforded very different yields of P-450 in microsomal preparations. Whereas recovery of P-450 in microsomes of CYP79D1 was 15–30 nmol/liter culture, the amount of CYP79D2 in microsomes was too low to be detected because of cytochrome oxidase interference with the CO spectrum. CYP79D2 was only detectable after removal of the cytochrome oxidase by TX-114 phase partitioning in borate (47) (data not shown). The glass bead method used for breaking the *P. pastoris* cells is a harsh procedure and may have denatured CYP79D2.

Cyanogenic Glucoside Biosynthesis in Cassava

DISCUSSION

The first committed steps in the biosynthesis of linamarin and lotaustralin in cassava are the conversion of L-valine and L-isoleucine, respectively, to the corresponding oximes. Two full-length cDNA clones were isolated that encode P-450s catalyzing these reactions. The two P-450s showed 54% sequence identity to CYP79A1 from sorghum and were assigned CYP79D1 and CYP79D2 as the first two members of a new CYP79 subfamily. A member of the CYP79 family has been obtained from *S. alba* (20) and additional members are derived from the *A. thaliana* genome and expressed sequence tag sequencing programs. Unambiguous assignment of these CYP79s as amino acid to oxime converting enzymes in glucosinolate biosynthesis has not been possible because heterologous expression of these genes, as well as of CYP79D1 and CYP79D2 from cassava, in *E. coli* has so far not been successful (20). It thus remains to be documented whether all members of the CYP79 family catalyze amino acid to oxime conversions and are functionally conserved.

In the present study, functional expression of CYP79D1 and CYP79D2 from cassava was achieved in the methylotrophic yeast, *P. pastoris* (48, 49). A number of soluble proteins have been expressed in *P. pastoris* with expression levels in the range of g/liter (e.g. 50, 51). In contrast, reports on membrane protein expression in *P. pastoris* are few. Only two P-450s from spiny dogfish shark and spiny lobster have previously been expressed (45, 52) as evidenced by a new expected enzyme activity in the transformed cells. However, these recombinant P-450 proteins were neither characterized nor isolated. In *E. coli*, expression usually requires different types of bovine 17α modifications (53). CYP79D1 and CYP79D2 were functionally expressed in *P. pastoris* using the native sequences. The expression level was in the range of 15–30 nmol CYP79D1/liter of culture as measured by CYP79D1 recovered in the microsomal pellet. The actual amount of CYP79D1 in the intact cells is probably much higher because the procedure for cell disintegration is not efficient. The expression level is 125 pmol/mg microsomal protein, which is similar to the average levels obtained in *Saccharomyces cerevisiae* (54). The translation initiation context of the two cassava genes were optimized, which may explain the more than six times higher levels of expression obtained compared with the spiny dogfish shark and spiny lobster P-450s.

Recombinant CYP79D1 produces a typical CO spectrum and a type I substrate-binding spectrum in the presence of L-valine, indicating that the *P. pastoris* expression system produces a correctly folded P-450 protein. The N-glycosylations found in the N-terminal part of the protein documents that *P. pastoris* inserted the protein in the endoplasmic reticulum with the correct orientation. CYP79D1 is not expected to be glycosylated in cassava because previous reports of P-450 glycosylations are scarce (43, 44). The relative mobility of recombinant CYP79D1 on SDS-PAGE corresponds well to the mass predicted from the cDNA clone, and thus CYP79D1 is expected to have a simple glycosylation structure. Hyperglycosylations is generally observed as a disadvantage of *S. cerevisiae* expression systems. In contrast *P. pastoris* adds smaller sized oligosaccharides to the protein (8–14 mannose residues/side chain; Ref. 55).

As a yeast, *P. pastoris* contains endogenous P-450 proteins (40). However, under the experimental conditions used, these must be expressed in low amounts, because endogenous P-450s were never detectable by CO spectroscopy. This property renders *P. pastoris* suited for detection of heterologous P-450 expression by spectroscopy alone. Of greater concern is the cytochrome oxidase protein that forms a spectrum in the presence of CO, which interferes with P-450 spectroscopy. However, the

FIG. 9. Substrate specificity of CYP79D1. A, the conversion of L-valine (●), L-isoleucine (○), D-valine (×), and D-isoleucine (□) into cyanide was measured using cassava microsomes with 6 mM of the amino acid substrate. B, isolated CYP79D1 was reconstituted in the presence of 0.05 mM [U-¹⁴C]L-valine (lane 1), 0.05 mM [U-¹⁴C]L-valine and 6 mM unlabeled L-valine (lane 2), or 0.05 mM [U-¹⁴C]L-valine and 6 mM unlabeled D-valine (lane 3) as substrate. The products formed were extracted into ethyl acetate and analyzed by TLC. C, conversion of L-valine and L-isoleucine into the corresponding oximes by reconstituted CYP79D1 was measured over a range of substrate concentrations. Error bars on data points indicate standard deviation. D, Eadie-Hofstee plots of the activities measured in C from L-valine (left) and L-isoleucine (right).

cytochrome oxidase can easily be removed from the P-450s by Triton X-114 phase partitioning in borate buffer or by DEAE chromatography. In conclusion, we consider *P. pastoris* a very suitable organism for P-450 expression.

The conversion of the parent amino acid to the corresponding Z-oxime is the rate-limiting step in the biosynthetic pathway in sorghum (56) and cassava (12). In cassava, microsomes as well as CYP79D1 exhibited a higher $V_{\text{max}}$ value with L-valine compared with L-isoleucine. This is consistent with linamarin being the major cyanogenic glucoside in cassava (ratio linamarin/ lotaustralin 93:7; Ref. 4). The rate of L-isoleucine metabolism is higher than expected, indicating that the availability of the parent amino acids may be a limiting factor *in vivo*. In line with this suggestion, microsomes prepared from cassava cultivars known to contain low amounts of cyanogenic glucosides show higher biosynthetic activity compared with plants known to be highly cyanogenic (57, 58). Linamarin and lotaustralin almost always co-occur in plants (11). This is consistent with the findings of the present study, demonstrating that CYP79D1 and CYP79D2 each are able to metabolize L-valine as well as L-isoleucine. In white clover (*Trifolium repens* L.), lotaustralin predominates linamarin (59) and microsomes prepared from this plant preferentially metabolizes L-isoleucine (60). The substrate preference of the first committed enzyme in cyanogenic glucosides biosynthesis thus appears to be a major determinant of the ratio between accumulated cyanogenic glucosides. As previously discussed in Koch *et al.* (12), the kinetic constants observed for valine metabolism in cassava microsomes ($K_m$ 1.9 mM, $V_{\text{max}}$ 19 nmol/h/mg microsomal protein) was too poor to explain the *in vivo* level of cyanogenic glucosides observed. It was concluded that the enzyme system recovered in the cassava microsomes was labile (12). Similarly, isolated and reconstituted CYP79D1 exhibits high $K_m$ values above the expected *in vivo* substrate concentrations. Unless the free amino acids used for cyanogenic glucoside synthesis are compartmentalized, it may be speculated that it would not be advantageous for a plant to have a highly effective enzyme system depleting the general pool of free amino acids in the plant. However, the turnover rates of reconstituted CYP79D1 are also low. In this study, CYP79D1 has been reconstituted with NADPH-P-450 oxidoreductase isolated from *S. bicolor*. The electron transfer process might have been more effective using native cassava NADPH-P-450 oxidoreductase. The reconstituted, recombinant CYP79D1 enzyme isolated in the presence of detergents represents a potentially even more labile system than cassava microsomes (12). It can be expected that the actual *in vivo* synthesis rates are higher.

The CYP79D1 and CYP79D2 clones were obtained using PCR strategies based on sequence comparisons with other members of the CYP79 family. A parallel biochemical approach to isolate the proteins was unsuccessful. Young etiolated seedlings are biosynthetically active (12). However, residual parts of the seed coat remain firmly attached to the cotyledons and contain a potent inhibitor of the enzyme system. These remnants need to be removed manually from each seedling precluding work-up of a large number of seedlings. The biosynthetic activity detected in the root phelloderm is very low and difficult to recover because of large amounts of starch (57). Immature folded leaves and petioles from shoot tips of cassava plants turned out to be the most convenient tissue to work with because they possessed as much activity as etiolated seedlings. In contrast, biosynthetic activity is barely detected in mature leaves. The amount of CYP79D1 in 1 liter of *P. pastoris* culture corresponds roughly to the amount in 0.4 kg of immature folded leaves and petioles of cassava. Purification from plant material generally results in a very low yield because of pigments and

co-occurring phenolic compounds. Thus, CYP79A1 was purified from *E. coli* in 15% yield compared with a 1% yield from plant material (14, 16). Considering the different yields and recognizing that one cassava plant provides approximately 0.3 g of the immature folded leaves and petioles, a minimum number of 22,000 grown-up cassava plants would be necessary to provide the same amount of purified CYP79D1 as obtained from 1 liter of *P. pastoris* culture.

Both CYP79D1 and CYP79D2 are present in the genome of cassava cultivar MCol22. Southern blot analysis did not reveal additional gene copies. Preliminary data show the presence of transcripts of both genes in the cassava plant, e.g. in the young cassava petioles. This demonstrates that both genes could be responsible for cyanogenic glucoside production in cassava and should be targeted by the antisense constructs used in attempts to block or down-regulate cyanogenic glucoside synthesis in cassava. The presence of two homologous genes in the cassava genome each encoding a P-450 able to catalyze the initial steps in linamarin and lotaustralin biosynthesis is in agreement with cassava being allotetraploid. Recently, a genetic cassava map has been developed (61), and mapping of the CYP79D1 and CYP79D2 genes is in progress.

The types of intermediates formed in cyanogenic glucoside biosynthesis are highly unusual and not known to take part in other metabolic pathways in the same plants. Thus the plant is not expected to utilize these intermediates for other purposes, nor are the intermediates expected to be generated from other biosynthetic pathways. Down-regulation of the expression of the CYP79D1 and CYP79D2 genes by antisense techniques to obtain acyanogenic cassava plants would therefore appear possible without pleiotropic metabolic effects. Work along these lines is now in progress, taking advantage of the recently developed procedures for cassava transformation (62).

Acknowledgments—We thank Karina Juul Peitersen for help with the preparation of figures. Dr. Johanna Puonti-Kaerlas is thanked for kindly providing cassava cultivar MCol22. Dr. Barbara Ann Halkier is thanked for fruitful discussions.

---

**REFERENCES**

1. FAO homepages. FAOSTAT nutrition data, food supply statistics. http://apps.fao.org
2. Cock, J. H. (1982) Science **218**, 755–762
3. Bokanga, M., Essers, A. J. A., Poulter, N., Rosling, H., and Tewe, O. (eds) (1994) Acta Horticulturae **375**, 1–416
4. Nartey, F. (1968) Phytochemistry **7**, 1307–1312
5. Osuntokun, B. O. (1981) World Rev. Nut. Diet **26**, 141–173
6. Tylleskär, T., Banea, M., Bikangi, N., Cooke, R. D., Poulter, N. H., and Rosling, H. (1992) Lancet **339**, 208–211
7. Tylleskär, T., Banea, M., Bikangi, N., Nahimana, G., Persson, L. A., and Rosling, H. (1995) Int. J. Epidemiol. **24**, 949–956
8. Cliff, J., Nicala, D., Saute, F., Givragy, R., Azambuja, G., Taela, A., Chavane, L., and Howarth, J., (1997) Trop. Med. Int. Health **2**, 1068–1074
9. McFarlane, I. J., Lees, E. M., and Conn, E. E. (1975) J. Biol. Chem. **250**, 4708–4713
10. Conn, E. E. (1980) Annu. Rev. Plant Physiol. **31**, 433–451
11. Møller, B. L., and Seigler, D. S. (1999) in Plant Amino Acids Biochemistry and Biotechnology (Singh, B. J., ed) pp. 563–609, Marcel Dekker, Inc., New York
12. Koch, B., Nielsen, V. S., Halkier, B. A., Olsen, C. E., and Møller, B. L. (1992) Arch. Biochem. Biophys. **292**, 141–150
13. Jones, P. R., Møller, B. L., and Høj, P. B. (1999) J. Biol. Chem. **274**, 35483–35491
14. Sibbesen, O., Koch, B., Halkier, B. A., and Møller, B. L. (1994) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. **91**, 9740–9744
15. Koch, B. M., Sibbesen, O., Halkier, B. A., Svendsen, I., and Møller, B. L. (1995) Arch. Biochem. Biophys. **323**, 177–186
16. Halkier, B. A., Nielsen, H. L., Koch, B., and Møller, B. L. (1995) Arch. Biochem. Biophys. **322**, 369–377
17. Kahn, R. A., Bak, S., Svendsen, I., Halkier, B. A., and Møller, B. L. (1997) Plant Physiol. **115**, 1661–1670
18. Bak, S., Kahn, R. A., Nielsen, H. L., Møller, B. L., and Halkier, B. A. (1998) Plant Mol. Biol. **36**, 393–405
19. Du, L., Lykkesfeldt, J., Olsen, C. E., and Halkier, B. A. (1995) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. **92**, 12505–12509
20. Bak, S., Nielsen, H. L., and Halkier, B. A. (1998) Plant Mol. Biol. **38**, 725–734
21. Bennett, R. N., Kiddle, G., Hick, A. J., Dawson, G. W., and Wallsgrove, R. M. (1996) Plant Cell Environ. **19**, 801–812
22. Bennett, R., Ludwig-Müller, J., Kiddle, G., Hilgenberg, W., and Wallsgrove, R.

(1995) *Planta* **196**, 239–244

23. Wallsgrove, R. M., Bennett, R. N., and Doughty, K. (1999) in *Plant Amino Acids. Biochemistry and Biotechnology* (Singh, B. J., ed) pp. 523–561, Marcel Dekker, New York

24. Bennett, R. N., Kiddle, G., and Wallsgrove, R. M. (1997) *Plant Physiol.* **114**, 1283–1291

25. Benveniste, I., Gabriac, B., and Durst, F. (1986) *Biochem. J.* **235**, 365–373

26. Halkier, B. A., and Møller, B. L. (1989) *Plant Physiol.* **90**, 1552–1559

27. Chen, J., and Dellaporta, S., (1994) in *The Maize Handbook*. (Freeling, M., and Walbot, V., eds) Springer-Verlag New York Inc., New York

28. Sambrook, J., Fritsch, E. F., Maniatis, T. (1989) *Molecular Cloning: A Laboratory Manual*, 2nd Ed., pp. 9.31–9.62, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold Spring Harbor, NY

29. Bordier, C. (1981) *J. Biol. Chem.* **256**, 1604–1607

30. Werck-Reichhart, D., Benveniste, I., Teutsch, H., Durst, F., and Gabriac, B. (1991) *Anal. Biochem.* **197**, 125–131

31. Halkier, B. A., and Møller, B. L. (1991) *Plant Physiol.* **96**, 10–17

32. Sibbesen, O., Koch, B., Halkier, B. A., and Møller, B. L. (1995) *J. Biol. Chem.* **270**, 3506–3511

33. Kahn, R. A., Bak, S., Olsen, C. E., Svendsen, I., and Møller, B. L. (1996) *J. Biol. Chem.* **271**, 32944–32950

34. Fling, S. P., and Gregerson, D. S. (1986) *Anal. Biochem.* **155**, 83–88

35. Omura, T., and Sato, R. (1964) *J. Biol. Chem.* **239**, 2370–2378

36. Jefcoate, C. R. (1978) *Methods Enzymol.* **27**, 258–279

37. Xu, D., Voigt, J. M., Mico, B. A., Kominami, S., Takemori, S., and Colby, H. D. (1994) *Biochem. Pharmacol.* **48**, 1421–1426

38. Colby, H. D., Abbott, B., Cachovic, M., Debolt, K. M., and Mico, B. A. (1995) *Biochem. Pharmacol.* **49**, 1057–1062

39. Gotoh, O. (1992) *J. Biol. Chem.* **267**, 83–90

40. Nelson D. R., Koymans, L., Kamataki, T., Stegeman, F. F., Feyereisen, R., Waxman, D. F., Waterman, M. R., Gotoh, O., Coon, M. F., Estabrook, R.W., Gunsalüs, I. C., and Nebert, D. W. (1996). *Pharmacogenetics* **6**, 1–42

41. Durst, F., and Nelson, D. R. (1995) *Drug Metabol. Drug Interact.* **12**, 189–206

42. Poulos, T. L., Finzel, B. C., Gunsalus, I. C., Wagner, G. C., and Kraut, J. (1985) *J. Biol. Chem.* **260**, 16122–16130

43. Werck-Reichhart, D., Batard, Y., Kochs, G., Lesot, A., and Durst, F. (1993) *Plant Physiol.* **102**, 1291–1298

44. Shimozawa, O., Sakaguchi, M., Ogawa, H., Harada, N., Mihara, K., and Omura, T. (1993) *J. Biol. Chem.* **268**, 21399–21402

45. Trant, J. M. (1996) *Arch. Biochem. Biophys.* **326**, 8–14

46. Schunck, W.-H., Mauersberger, S., Kärgel, E., Huth, J., and Müller, H.-G. (1987) *Arch. Microbiol.* **147**, 245–248

47. Andersen, M. D., and Møller, B. L. (1998) *Protein Expression Purif.* **13**, 355–372

48. Cregg, J. M. Tschopp, J. F., Stilman, C., Siegel, R., Akong, M., Craig, W. S., Buckholz, R. G., Madden, K. R., Kellaris, P. A., Davis, G. R., Smiley, B. L., Cruze, J., Torregrossa, R., Velicelebi, G., and Thill, G. P. (1987) *Bio/Technology* **5**, 479–485

49. Cregg, J. M., Vedvick, T. S., and Raschke, W. C. (1993) *Bio/Technology* **11**, 905–910

50. Clare, J. J., Rayment, F. B., Ballantine, S. P., Sreekrishna, K., and Romanos, M. A. (1991) *Bio/Technology* **9**, 455–460

51. Romanos, M. A., Clare, J. J., Beesley, K. M., Rayment, F. B., Ballantine, S. P., Makoff, A. J., Dougan, G., Fairweather, N. F., and Charles, I. G. (1991) *Vaccine* **9**, 901–906

52. Boyle, S. M., Popp, M. P., Smith, W. C., Greenberg, R. M., and James, M. O. (1998) *Marine Environ. Res.* **46**, 25–28

53. Barnes, H. J., Arlotto, M. P., and Waterman, M. R. (1991) *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.* **88**, 5597–5601

54. Gonzalez, F. J., and Korzekwa, K. R. (1995) *Annu. Rev Pharmacol. Toxicol.* **35**, 369–390

55. Grinna, L. S., and Tschopp, J. F. (1989) *Yeast* **5**, 107–115

56. Møller, B. L., and Conn, E. E. (1979) *J. Biol. Chem.* **254**, 8575–8583

57. Du, L., Bokanga, M., Møller, B. L., and Halkier, B. A. (1995) * Phytochemistry* **39**, 323–326

58. Bokanga, M., Halkier, B., and Møller, B. L. (1992) *Proceedings of the First International Scientific Meeting of the Cassava Biotechnology Network, Cartagena, Columbia, August 25-28, 1992* (Roca, W. M., and Thro, A. M., eds) pp. 418–423, Centro Internacional de Agricultura Tropical (CIAT), Cali, Columbia

59. Collinge, D. B., and Hughes, M. A. (1982) *J. Exp. Bot.* **33**, 154–161

60. Collinge, D. B., and Hughes, M. A. (1982) *Arch. Biochem. Biophys.* **218**, 38–45

61. Fregene, M., Angel, F., Gomez, R., Rodriguez, F., Chavarriaga, P., Roca, W., Tohme, J., and Bonierbale, M. (1997) *Theor. Appl. Genet.* **95**, 431–441

62. Li, H.-Q., Sautter, C., Potrykus, I., and Puonti-Kaerlas, J. (1996) *Nature Bio/Technology* **14**, 736–740

63. Petrowitz, H.-F. (1967) *Dünnenschicht-Chromatographie: Ein Laboratoriums-handbuch,* (Stahl, E., ed) pp. 626–654, Springer-Verlag, Berlin

CELL BIOLOGY AND METABOLISM:
Cytochromes P-450 from Cassava (Manihot esculenta Crantz) Catalyzing the First Steps in the Biosynthesis of the Cyanogenic Glucosides Linamarin and Lotaustralin: CLONING, FUNCTIONAL EXPRESSION IN PICHIA PASTORIS, AND SUBSTRATE SPECIFICITY OF THE ISOLATED RECOMBINANT ENZYMES

Mette Dahl Andersen, Peter Kamp Busk, Ib Svendsen and Birger Lindberg Møller  
J. Biol. Chem. 2000, 275:1966-1975.  
doi: 10.1074/jbc.275.3.1966  

Access the most updated version of this article at [http://www.jbc.org/content/275/3/1966](http://www.jbc.org/content/275/3/1966)

Find articles, minireviews, Reflections and Classics on similar topics on the [JBC Affinity Sites](https://www.jbc.org/affinity-sites).

Alerts:
- When this article is cited
- When a correction for this article is posted

Click here to choose from all of JBC's e-mail alerts

This article cites 56 references, 21 of which can be accessed free at [http://www.jbc.org/content/275/3/1966.full.html#ref-list-1](http://www.jbc.org/content/275/3/1966.full.html#ref-list-1)
