
T.R. Soderling and V.A. Derkach – LTP: protein phosphorylation

**Postsynaptic protein phosphorylation and LTP**

Thomas R. Soderling and Victor A. Derkach

Prolonged changes in synaptic strength, such as those that occur in LTP and LTD, are thought to contribute to learning and memory processes. These complex phenomena occur in diverse brain structures and use multiple, temporally staged and spatially resolved mechanisms, such as changes in neurotransmitter release, modulation of transmitter receptors, alterations in synaptic structure, and regulation of gene expression and protein synthesis. In the CA1 region of the
REVIEW
T.R. Soderling and V.A. Derkach – LTP: protein phosphorylation

(a)
Weak afferent stimulation  
(basal transmission)

(b)
Strong afferent stimulation (LTP induction)

(c)
Weak stimulation  
(E-LTP expression)

Fig. 1. Postsynaptic protein phosphorylation mechanisms during LTP in the CA1 region of hippocampus. (a) Basal synaptic transmission via glutamate (triangles) is mediated largely by low-conductance state (~10pS) AMPA receptors that give rise to an EPSC. NMDA receptors are inactive because of
mechanism(s) as LTP. Although it is likely that multiple protein kinases are involved in the induction or expression of E-LTP, or both, current evidence implicates a key role for CaMKII (summarized in Ref. 24).

CaMKII, an oligomeric protein that consists of 10–12 subunits, is a major constituent of the PSD, and it has unusual biochemical properties that make it a unique transducer of Ca²⁺ signals (reviewed in Ref. 25). In its basal state, CaMKII is inactive, owing to the presence of an autoin
this latter study showed that LTP could increase phosphorylation of AMPA receptors in region CA1. This phosphorylation of the AMPA receptors is probably catalyzed by the Ca²⁺-independent form of CaMKII because: (1) the timecourse of AMPA-receptor phosphorylation correlates with the slow Ca²⁺-independent additional autophosphorylation (that is, on sites other than Thr286) of CaMKII itself; and (2) the phosphorylation of the AMPA receptor, as well as activation of CaMKII and induction of LTP itself, were blocked by a general CaMK
strongly suppress LTP with little or no effect on baseline synaptic transmission or NMDA receptors<sup>50</sup>. Infusion of SNAP enhances synaptic transmission, and this enhancement is blocked by prior induction of LTP. Furthermore, a complex formed between NSF, SNAP and GluR2 has been identified<sup>51</sup>, and disruption of this interaction causes partial rundown of AMPA-receptor-mediated synaptic current<sup>52,53</sup>. However, interaction between NSF and AMPA receptors is specific for the GluR2 subunit<sup>51–53</sup>, but basal
T.R. Soderling and V.A. Derkach – LTP: protein phosphorylation

---

32 Tan, S.E. *et al.* (1994) Phosphorylation of AMPA-type glutamate receptors by calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II and protein kinase C in cultured hippocampal neurons. *J. Neurosci.* 14, 1123–1129

33 Mammen, A.L. *et al.* (1997) Phosphorylation of the alpha-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methylisoxazole4