
THE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGICAL CHEMISTRY
© 2000 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

Cloning of Gb₃ Synthase, the Key Enzyme in Globo-series Glycosphingolipid Synthesis, Predicts a Family of α1,4-Glycosyltransferases Conserved in Plants, Insects, and Mammals*

Received for publication, March 28, 2000, and in revised form, June 13, 2000
Published, JBC Papers in Press, June 14, 2000, DOI 10.1074/jbc.M002630200

Jeremy J. Keusch‡§, Stephen M. Manzella‡¶, Kwame A. Nyame∥, Richard D. Cummings∥, and Jacques U. Baenziger‡

From the ‡Department of Pathology, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri, 63110 and the ∥Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma 73190

We have cloned Gb₃ synthase, the key α1,4-galactosyltransferase in globo-series glycosphingolipid (GSL) synthesis, via a phenotypic screen, which previously yielded iGb₃ synthase, the α1,3-galactosyltransferase required in isogloboseries GSL (Keusch, J. J., Manzella, S. M., Nyame, K. A., Cummings, R. D., and Baenziger, J. U. (2000) J. Biol. Chem. 33). Both transferases act on lactosylceramide, Galβ1,4Glcβ1Cer (LacCer), to produce Gb₃ (Galα1,4LacCer) or iGb₃ (Galα1,3LacCer), respectively. GalNAc can be added sequentially to either Gb₃ or iGb₃ yielding globoside and Forssman from Gb₃, and isogloboside and isoForssman from iGb₃. Gb₃ synthase is not homologous to iGb₃ synthase but shows 43% identity to a human α1,4GlcNAc transferase that transfers a UDP-sugar in an α1,4-linkage to a β-linked Gal found in mucin. Extensive homology (35% identity) is also present between Gb₃ synthase and genes in *Drosophila melanogaster* and *Arabidopsis thaliana*, supporting conserved expression of an α1,4-glycosyltransferase, possibly Gb₃ synthase, throughout evolution. The isolated Gb₃ synthase cDNA encodes a type II transmembrane glycosyltransferase of 360 amino acids. The highest tissue expression of Gb₃ synthase RNA is found in the kidney, mesenteric lymph node, spleen, and brain. Gb₃ glycolipid, also called Pᵏ antigen or CD77, is a known receptor for verotoxins. CHO cells that do not express Gb₃ and are resistant to verotoxin become susceptible to the toxin following transfection with Gb₃ synthase cDNA.

The glycosphingolipids (GSL)¹ form part of eukaryotic cell membranes. They consist of a hydrophilic carbohydrate moiety linked to a hydrophobic ceramide tail embedded within the lipid bilayer of the membrane. Lactosylceramide, Galβ1,4Glcβ1Cer (LacCer), is the common synthetic precursor to the majority of GSL found in vertebrates. Hundreds of different glycans are synthesized on LacCer with the major structures grouped into six series (1). One such series, globo-GSL, is initiated by the action of Gb₃ synthase on LacCer to produce Gb₃ (Galα1,4Galβ1,4Glcβ1Cer).

Gb₃ is the Pᵏ blood group antigen and has since acquired the designation CD77 (2, 3). Monoclonal antibodies (mAb) against Gb₃ are used as a marker for Burkitt’s B-cell lymphoma and are able to initiate apoptosis (4, 5). Gb₃ has also been localized to a subset of tonsillar B-cells in the germinal center, platelets, and uroepithelial cells (2, 6, 7). The B-subunit of Shiga toxins interacts specifically with Gb₃ on the cell surface, thus Gb₃ plays a direct role in toxin entry into the cell (8). The presence of Gb₃ in the endothelial cells of the kidney of pediatric patients accounts for the development of hemolytic uremic syndrome during bacterial infection with *Shigella* that produce verotoxin (7). Recently, Gb₃ has been implicated in the entry of HIV-1 into cells (9, 10).

In this paper we describe the cloning of Gb₃ synthase, an α1,4-galactosyltransferase, and identify significant homology with an α1,4-N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase that also transfers to a β-linked Gal (11). Thus, Gb₃ synthase is a member of an emerging family of α1,4-glycosyltransferases that utilizes UDP donors and transfers to a β-linked acceptor. Additional potential members of this family can be identified in plant, insect, and mammalian sequences submitted to GenBank™ indicate that this is a highly conserved family of α1,4-glycosyltransferases.

EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES

Expression Cloning of Gb₃ Synthase cDNA—We have described the phenotypic cloning procedure in detail elsewhere (see Keusch *et al.*, companion paper (39)). Briefly, a rat placental cDNA library, RPL18, in pCDM8 was cotransfected with large T-antigen cDNA (plasmid pPSVE1 PyE, a kind gift from Dr. Minoru Fukuda, The Burnham Institute) into CHO host recipient cells and surface expression of downstream products, Gb₄ and Gb₅, were detected using the mAb SMLDN1.1 via flow cytometry (FACS). CHO cells express relatively simple glycosphingolipids, mostly GlcCer, LacCer, and Gₘ₃. Moreover, CHO cells do not express Gb₃ synthase but do express endogenous Gb₄ synthase and Gb₅ synthase. We have previously used this phenotypic screen to clone the iGb₃ synthase (GenBank™ accession number AF248543, see Keusch *et al.*, companion paper (39)), and further analysis of clones from the iGb₃ FACS sort which were positive with the SMLDN1.1 mAb (12) yet negative for iGb₃ synthase cDNA revealed a clone capable of synthesizing chloride; TLC, thin layer chromatography; CHO, Chinese hamster ovary; FACS, fluorescence-activated cell sorting; RT-PCR, reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction; PBS, phosphate-buffered saline.

* This work was supported by National Institutes of Health Grant R01-DK 41738 (to J. U. B.). The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked “advertisement” in accordance with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.
* The nucleotide sequence(s) reported in this paper has been submitted to the GenBank™/EBI Data Bank with accession number(s) AF248544.
* § To whom correspondence should be addressed. 19714-6101: Tel.: 314-362-8733; Fax: 314-362-8888; E-mail: jkeusch@pathbox.wustl.edu.
* ¶ Current address: Dade-Behring Inc., Newark, DE 19714-6101.
* ¹ The abbreviations for the glycosphingolipids are in accordance with the 1997 recommendations of the IUPAC-IUB Joint Commission of Biochemical Nomenclature. The abbreviations used are: GSL, glycosphingolipid; LacCer, lactosylceramide (Galβ1,4Glcβ1Cer); Cer, ceramide; Gal, galactose; GalNAc, N-acetylgalactosamine; Glc, glucose; Gb₃, Pᵏ, CD77, or globotriaosylceramide (Galα1,4Galβ1,4Glcβ1Cer); iGb₃, isoglobotriaosylceramide (Galα1,3Galβ1,4Glcβ1Cer); Gb₄, globoside (GalNAcβ1,3Galα1,4Galβ1,4Glcβ1Cer); iGb₄, isogloboside (GalNAcβ1,3Galα1,4Galβ1,4Glcβ1Cer); Gb₅, Forssman (GalNAcα1,3GalNAcβ1,3Galα1,4Galβ1,4Glcβ1Cer); iGb₅, isoForssman (GalNAcα1,3GalNAcβ1,3Galα1,4Galβ1,4Glcβ1Cer); mAb, monoclonal antibody; PPPP, 1-phenyl-2-hexadecanoylamino-3-pyrrolidino-1-propanol, hydrochloride; TLC, thin layer chromatography; CHO, Chinese hamster ovary; FACS, fluorescence-activated cell sorting; RT-PCR, reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction; PBS, phosphate-buffered saline.

25316

**Expression Cloning of Gb₃ Synthase**

ing Gb₃. We refer to this latest clone as Gb₃ synthase (accession number AF248544).

**cDNA Sequencing—** Gb₃ synthase cDNA insert was fully sequenced in both directions using T7, a pCDM8 reverse primer and gene-specific primers, in a reaction mix containing ABI Big-Dye terminators with AmpliTaq DNA polymerase according to the manufacturer’s instructions (PE Applied Biosystems). GenBank™ data bases were searched for homologous sequences using the BLAST (NCBI) program. Membrane topology of Gb₃ synthase was modeled using the transmembrane prediction program TMHMM (13).

**Site-directed Mutagenesis—** The ¹⁹⁹DTD²⁰¹ sequence in the Gb₃ cDNA clone was mutated to ¹⁹⁹ATA²⁰¹ by inverse PCR using high fidelity KlenTaq LA-polymerase mix (Sigma), and completely overlapping primers containing the point mutations (underlined), in the forward direction are: 5′-GGTGGCATCTACTTG GCCACAGCCTTCATC-GTCCTCAAG-3′ and reverse direction: 5′-CTTGAGGACGATGAAGG- CTGTGGCCAAGTAGATGCCACC-3′ were used. Following thermocycling and digestion of parental DNA template with DpnI, MC1061/P3 cells were transformed and mini-preps sequenced to verify the desired mutations.

**FACS Analysis—** Transfected CHO cells were grown in Ham’s F-12 medium supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum ± 2 μM 1-phenyl-2-hexadecanoylamino-3-pyrrolidino-1-propanol, HCl) (DL-threo-PPPP, Calbiochem), an inhibitor of glucosylceramide synthase (14). Cells were harvested 60 h post-transfection using 0.02% EDTA and stained as described (39). Cell surface GalNAc was detected with the SMLDN1.1 mAb (12) and Gb₃ (Galα1,4Galβ1,4Glcβ1Cer) observed using anti-CD77 mAb clone 38-13 (Biodesign International). Rat mAb M1/22.21 (kindly provided by Dr. Haslam, Washington University, St. Louis, MO) was specific for the Forssman (Gb₅) glycolipid (GalNAca1,3GalNAcβ1,3Galα1,4Galβ1,4Glcβ1Cer).

**Assay of α1,4GalT Activity—** Cell extracts from transfected CHO cells were prepared and assayed as described previously for the iGb₃ synthase (39). Glycolipid acceptor substrates included GlcCer, GalCer, LacCer, and Gb₃ (Sigma). Radiolabeled reaction products were isolated on Sep-Pak C₁₈ columns, then separated via thin layer chromatography (TLC) and exposed to film as described (39).

**Metabolic Labeling of CHO Cells—** The day after transfection, CHO cells were labeled with either 35 μCi/ml [³H]Gal or [³H]GlcNAc (NEN Life Science Products), which can also incorporate into GalNAc and sialic acid, for a further 24–48 h. Cells were scraped off the culture plate, and glycolipids were extracted in chloroform/methanol as described (15).

**Glycolipid Digestion with Exoglycosidases—** Glycolipid extracts from transfected CHO cells (approximately 1–10 μg or 30,000 cpm) were digested overnight at 37 °C with exoglycosidases in the presence of 0.05% sodium taurodeoxycholate in a final volume of 10 μl as described (39).

**Shiga Toxin B-subunit in TLC Blots—** Glycolipids were extracted from CHO cells cotransfected with plasmid pPSVE1 PyE and either Gb₃ or iGb₃ synthase cDNA and separated by TLC as described (39). TLC plates were dried by evaporation and either sprayed with orcinol for total glycolipid detection or processed for immunostaining. TLC plates were blocked overnight in PBS/1% BSA. The B-subunit of Shiga toxin (B-Stx-1) was purified to homogeneity, biotinylated, dialyzed, and generously provided by Dr. Haslam, Washington University. The biotinylated B-Stx-1 was diluted 1:1000 in PBS/1% BSA and added for 1 h at room temperature. After washing with PBS, 3 × 10 min, streptavidin-peroxidase (Zymed Laboratories Inc.) diluted 1:20,000 in PBS/1% BSA was added for 30 min at room temperature. Blots were washed 6 × 10 min in PBS and developed using chemiluminescence (NEN Life Science Products) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.

**Verocytotoxity Assay—** Cell sensitivity to verotoxin was measured using an inhibition of protein synthesis assay via Tran³⁵S labeling. CHO cells were transiently cotransfected with plasmid pPSVE1 PyE and either Gb₃ or iGb₃ synthase cDNA or empty pCDM8 vector. Transfectants were harvested 48 h post-transfection using 0.02% EDTA, washed in culture media, and plated out in duplicate at 1 × 10⁶ cells/ml in 24-well plates in the presence of various concentrations of Shiga toxin-1 (Stx-1, kindly provided by Dr. Haslam) for 4 h at 37 °C. The Stx-1 was prepared from a filtered periplasmic extract of cultured bacteria cells containing pNAS13, which carries the Stx-1 operon. Verotoxin and media were washed out and cells incubated in cysteine-, methionine-, SO₄-free minimal essential medium (Earle’s) labeling media for 5 min. Fresh labeling media containing 20 μCi/ml Tran³⁵S (ICN) label was added for 30 min. Cells were washed several times in PBS and lysed in PBS/1% SDS/2 mM EDTA and precipitated with ice-cold trichloroacetic acid, final concentration 10%. Following centrifugation, the trichloroacetic acid pellets were solubilized using Protosol (NEN Life

Science Products), transferred to scintillation vials containing 3a70B scintillation mixture (Research Products International Corp.), mixed, and counted.

**Expression of Gb₃ Synthase in Rat Tissues Using RT-PCR—** The levels of Gb₃ synthase were determined as described (39).

---

### RESULTS

#### Isolation of a Rat Gb₃ Synthase cDNA via Expression Cloning—Using a phenotypic screen based on recognition of terminal GalNAc by the mAb SMLDN1.1, we identified two independent and nonhomologous α-galactosyltransferases that act on LacCer. Initially, iGb₃ synthase was cloned, an α1,3-galactosyltransferase that converts LacCer to Galα1,3LacCer (iGb₃) (39). Subsequent analysis of additional positive pools of clones revealed Gb₃ synthase, an α1,4-galactosyltransferase, that adds galactose onto LacCer to produce Galα1,4LacCer. The de novo synthesized products, iGb₃ and Gb₃, serve as acceptor substrates for endogenous Gb₄ and Gb₅ synthases that are present in the CHO recipient host cell line, thus accounting for the reactivity with the mAb SMLDN1.1 following transfection.

#### cDNA Sequence Analysis—DNA sequencing of the Gb₃ synthase clone reveals a 1494-base pair insert with a single open reading frame encoding a protein of 360 amino acids (Fig. 1). The TMHMM program (13) predicts an N-terminal transmembrane domain of 23 amino acids with a type II transmembrane topology that is characteristic of Golgi glycosyltransferases (16). The putative catalytic domain of Gb₃ synthase is oriented toward the Golgi, where it is able to interact with its substrate LacCer (17). This domain also contains two potential N-linked glycosylation sites and a ¹⁹⁹DXD²⁰¹ motif common to a number of glycosyltransferases (18).

#### Identification of a New α1,4-Glycosyltransferase Gene Family—A BLAST analysis of the Gb₃ synthase clone with sequences held in the GenBank™ data base, reveals a number of genes from a diverse number of species with extensive homology. The highest identity (80%) found is to a human expressed sequence tag clone found on chromosome 22 (accession number HSB33B7). We predict that this is the human homologue of the rat Gb₃ synthase. Furthermore, the Gb₃ synthase is 43% identical to a previously cloned human α1,4-N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase (Fig. 2), found on chromosome 3p14.3, that forms GlcNAca1,4Galβ1,4-R, a glycan found in class III mucin (11). Long stretches of identity are apparent in the putative catalytic domain, including five conserved cysteines (positions 103, 240, 269, 280, and 349 in rat Gb₃ synthase). Both transferases use a UDP-sugar donor to catalyze the transfer of the sugar in an α1,4-linkage to a β-linked Gal. Only limited sequence homology has been found between different families of glycosyltransferases, whereas within families there may be extensive homology. For example, the ABO blood group transferases, which now include both Forssman synthase (15) and the iGb₃ synthase (39), are highly homologous and all produce an α1,3-linkage to a β-linked Gal or GalNAc utilizing a UDP-nucleotide sugar donor. The extensive homology between Gb₃ synthase and a number of genes from diverse species, including insects, plants, and mammals is, therefore, notable (Fig. 2). Potential homologues from both *Drosophila melanogaster* and *Arabidopsis thaliana* show 35% identity (54% similarity) to Gb₃ synthase, including the location of four cysteine residues in *D. melanogaster* (equivalent to positions 240, 269, 280, and 349 in rat Gb₃ synthase). Another homologous gene in *D. melanogaster* (31%, AE003753) is also found that has these four conserved cysteines. Five additional genes with similar degrees of identity to the α1,4-glycosyltransferases are identified in *A. thaliana*. Two of these genes are clustered on chromosome 2, whereas the others are separated on each of the four remaining

Expression Cloning of Gb₃ Synthase

TAAAGCTCTAAAGGACTGCCCAAGGCTGACAAGTCAATCCTT

1 M G I S R S D L E E T M S K P P D C L P R M L R G T P R Q R V F T L F I I S F K 40
1 ATGGGCATCTCCCGTTCTGGATCTGGAGGAGACCATGTCCAAGCCCCCGACTGCCCTGGATGCTCAGGGGCACGCCCAAGACAGGGGTCTTCACCCCTCTTCAATTATCAGCTTCAAG
41 F T F L V S I L I Y W H T V G A P K D Q R R Q Y S L P V D F P C P Q L A F P R V 80
121 TTCACCTTCTTGGTCTCCATCCTGATCTACTGGCACACAGTGGGTGCACCAAGGACCAAAGACACAGTACAGCCTGCCAGTGGACTTCCCCTGCCCCAGCTGGCCTTTCCTTAGAGTC 240
81 S A P G N I F F L E T S D R T N P S F L F M C S S V E S A A R A H P E S Q V V L 120
241 TCTGCCCCAAGGCAACATCTTCTTCTAGAGACCTCCGACAGGACCAACCCAGCTTTCTGTTTATGTGTTCTGTGGAATCAGCTGCCAAGGCAACACCTGAGTCCCCAGGTGGTGGTCTC 360
121 M K G L P R D T T A W P R N L L G I S L L S C F P N V Q I R P L D L Q E L F E D T 160
361 ATGAAAAGGCTGCCTAGGGACACTACCGCATGGCCCCCGAACCTTGGCATCTCTCTCTGGAGCTGTTTCCCAATGTCCAGATACGCACCTTTGGACCTGCAAGAACTGTITTGAGGACAG 480
161 P L A A W Y L E A Q H R W E P Y L L P V L S D A S R I A L L W K F G G I Y L D T 200
481 CCACTGGCAGCCTGGTACTTGGAGGCACAGCACAGGTGGGAACCTACCTGCTGCCGGTGCTGCTGACGCTTCCAGGATTGCACTCCTCTGGGAAGTTGGTGGCATCTACTTGGACACA 600
201 D F I V L K N L T N M L L G I Q S R Y V L N G A F L L A F E R K H E F L A L C 240
601 GACTTCATCGTCCCTCAAGAACTTAGCAACCTGACCAACATGCTGGGCATCCAGTCCCCGCTACGTCCCTCAATGGCGCCTTCTAGAGGTAAGCAGAGTT CCTGGCACTGTGC 720
241 I R D F V A H Y N G W I W G H Q G P Q L L T R V F K K W C S I I H S L K E S R A C 280
721 ATACGTGACTTTGTGGCCCATTACAATGTTGGAITTGGGGCCACCAGGGCCCCCAACTGCTTACCCGAGTCTTCAAGAAGTGGTGTTCACACAGCCTGAAGGAGAGCCGAGCTTGC 840
281 R G V T A L P P E A F Y P I P W Q N W K K Y F E D V S P E E L L A Q L L N A T Y A 320
841 CGCGGGGTCACTGCCCTGGCCTCCGAGGCCCTTTTACCCCATCCCCCTGGCAGAAACTGGAAGAAATACTTTGAAGACGTCAGCCCCGAGGAGCTAGCCCAAGCTGCTCAATGCCACCTATGCT 960
321 V H V W N K K S Q G T H L E A T S R A L L A Q L H A R Y C P T T H R A M T M Y L 360
961 GTTCATGTGTGGAACAAGAAAAGTCAGGGTACACATCTAGAGGCCACATCCAGGGCTCTGGGCTCAGCTACATGCCCGCTACTGCCCTACGACGCACAGAGCCCATGACGATGTACTTG 1080

* 
1081 TGACGGCCCTCCAGGCACAAGTGATGTCATATCAACATTGTTACCAGAGAGGCAAGATGACGACCCAGGAAAAAGAGGGCCCTGAGATGCTTCTGTTGACCAGAGGAGACC GAGCTGGCCC 1200
1201 GGGGAACATGTGCCACTTCCACACCTGCCCCCTCCAGGCCCAGAGGGGACTGGTGGATACACTTTGTCCAGTTCTAGGCTGACCAGTGAATCCAGAATCACAGCATCTGGGACCTTCAC 1320
1321 GGGCTAGATCACAAAGAATGCCAAAGAGCTCAAGGTAGCTGGAAGACAGTTGGTTAGAGGTGGGGTCATTTTGTGATCTAGCCCCGTGAAGGTCCCAAGATGCTGTCTGGAATCCTT 1440
1441 TAGAGCTTTAG

FIG. 1. cDNA sequence analysis. Complete DNA sequence of the isolated rat Gb₃ synthase cDNA clone. The predicted translated protein of 360 amino acids based on the translation of the cDNA sequence is shown in the single-letter code. Underlined is the putative transmembrane signal. Boxed are the two potential N-linked glycosylation sites. The ¹⁹⁹DXD²⁰¹ motif is indicated by three black dots.

Rat  
1 M G I [S R] S [D L E E T M S] K P P D C L P R M L R G T P R Q R [V F T L F] [I S F K F T F L V] S I L I Y 50  

Human  
1 M R K [E L Q L S L S] - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
25318 Expression Cloning of Gb₃ Synthase

Anti-GalNAc Anti-Gb₃ Anti-Gb₅

Gb₃  
synthase  
cDNA  

pCDM8  

Gb₅  
synthase  
cDNA  

FIG. 3. Cell surface staining of globo-series GSL in CHO cells transfected with Gb₃ synthase cDNA is abolished by treatment with PPPP. CHO cells were transfected with Gb₃ synthase cDNA (top three plots), with empty pCDM8 vector (middle three plots), or with Gb₅ (Forssman) synthase cDNA (bottom two plots). Cells were cultured in the absence (thick line) or presence of PPPP (thin line) and probed for cell surface expression of: GalNAc using SMLDN1.1 mAb (left panels); Gb₃ (Galα1,4Galβ1,4Glcβ1Cer) using CD77 clone 38-13 mAb (middle panels); Gb₅ (GalNAcα1,3GalNAcβ1,3Galα1,4Galβ1,4Glcβ1Cer) using anti-Gb₅ (Forssman) antibody, M1/22.21 (right panels). Anti-IgM-FITC was used as the secondary reagent. Isotype control primary antibodies are shown as dotted lines.

bearing terminal GalNAc at the surface of CHO cells was not expected as these cells have not been reported to synthesize Gb₃, Gb₄, or Gb₅. FACS analysis shows strong GalNAc staining on the surface of CHO cells transfected with the Gb₃ synthase cDNA compared with mock-transfectants using SMLDN1.1 and anti-Forssman mAb (Fig. 3). Culture of transfected cells in the presence of PPPP, an inhibitor of glucosylceramide synthase (14), prevented the appearance of surface material reactive with any of these reagents indicating the products were confined to GSL. A major proportion of the surface GalNAc is due to Forssman glycolipid (Gb₅) expression, suggesting that conversion of Gb₃ to Gb₅ is an efficient process (Fig. 3). Note that CHO cells transfected with Forssman (Gb₅) synthase cDNA are unable to synthesize Gb₅ and do not express any terminal GalNAc (Fig. 3). Thus, the conversion of LacCer to Gb₃ is essential for the subsequent production of Gb₄ and Gb₅ by Gb₄ and Gb₅ synthases that are endogenous to the CHO cells. The conversion of Gb₃ to Gb₄ and Gb₅ is not complete, because surface expression of Gb₃ is detectable using anti-Gb₃ (CD77) mAb (Fig. 3).

Identification of GSL Synthesized in CHO Cells Transfected with Gb₃ Synthase cDNA—Parent CHO cells synthesize GlcCer, LacCer, and Gₘ₃ but no GSL containing terminal GalNAc (37). The GSL expressed by CHO cells transfected with Gb₃ synthase cDNA were characterized by metabolically labeling with [³H]Gal or [³H]GlcNAc. The glycolipid extracts were treated with exoglycosidases, isolated via Sep-Pak C₁₈, and analyzed by autoradiography after TLC. [³H]GalNAc-labeled doublets that migrate at the positions of Gb₄ and Gb₅ are seen in the CHO transfectants (Fig. 4, lane 1). In addition to the doublets migrating at the position of Gb₄ and Gb₅, doublets migrating at the positions of Gb₃, LacCer, and GalCer are seen when the GSL are metabolically labeled with [³H]Gal (Fig. 4, lane 3). Based on the relative intensities of the GSL labeled with [³H]Gal, the majority of the Gb₃ is converted to Gb₄ and Gb₅, consistent with the pattern of staining seen during FACS analysis (Fig. 3). Digestion of labeled GSL with α-N-acetyl-galactosaminidase increased the amount of [³H]Gal label migrating at the position of Gb₄ at the expense of the material migrating as Gb₅ (Fig. 4, lane 4). In contrast, digestion with

Expression Cloning of $G b_{3}$ Synthase

GalCer >  
LacCer >  
$G b_{3} >$  
$G b_{4} >$  
$G b_{5} >$

1 2 3  
4 5 6  

FIG. 4. Identification of globo-series GSL in CHO cells transfected with $G b_{3}$ synthase cDNA. CHO cells transfected with $G b_{3}$ synthase cDNA (lanes 1, 3–6) or mutant ${ }^{199} \mathrm{ATA}^{201} G b_{3}$ synthase cDNA (lane 2) were metabolically labeled with either ${ }^{[3]} \mathrm{H}] \mathrm{GlcNAc}$ (lane 1) or ${ }^{[3] \mathrm{H}} \mathrm{Gal}$ (lanes 2–6). Glycolipids were extracted and digested with exoglycosidases prior to separation by TLC and autoradiography. Lane 1, ${ }^{[3]} \mathrm{H}] \mathrm{GlcNAc}, G b_{3}$ synthase; lane 2, ${ }^{[3]} \mathrm{H}] \mathrm{Gal},{ }^{199} \mathrm{ATA}^{201}$ mutant; lane 3, ${ }^{[3]} \mathrm{H}] \mathrm{Gal}, G b_{3}$ synthase; lane 4, ${ }^{[3]} \mathrm{H}] \mathrm{Gal} G b_{3}$ synthase + $\alpha-N$-acetylgalactosaminidase; lane 5, ${ }^{[3]} \mathrm{H}] \mathrm{Gal} G b_{3}$ synthase + $\beta-N$-acetylhexosaminidase; lane 6, ${ }^{[3]} \mathrm{H}] \mathrm{Gal} G b_{3}$ synthase + $\alpha-N$-acetylgalactosaminidase + $\beta-N$-acetylhexosaminidase + $\alpha$-galactosidase. The square brackets ([, ]) indicate putative $G b_{5}, G b_{4}, G b_{3}$, and LacCer products. The asterisks indicate the location of the $G_{M 3}$ doublet. The angled brackets (<, >) show, in descending order, the location of authentic GalCer, LacCer, $G b_{3}, G b_{4}$, and $G b_{5}$ standards.

$\beta-N$-acetylhexosaminidase increases the material migrating as $G b_{3}$ at the expense of the material migrating as $G b_{4}$ (Fig. 4, lane 5). Digestion with a combination of $\alpha-N$-acetylgalactosaminidase, $\beta-N$-acetylhexosaminidase and $\alpha$-galactosidase converts all the labeled material to LacCer (Fig. 4, lane 6). The pattern of digestion is typical of that obtained with authentic $G b_{5}$, GalN $\mathrm{Aca} 1,3 \mathrm{GalNAc} \beta 1,3 \mathrm{Gal} \alpha 1,4 \mathrm{Gal} \beta 1,4 \mathrm{Glc} \beta 1 \mathrm{Cer}$ (19). The material remaining near the position of $G b_{5}$ (indicated with an asterisk in Fig. 4) is attributable to $G_{M 3}$, which is seen when CHO cells are transfected with the ${ }^{199} \mathrm{ATA}^{201}$ mutant of $G b_{3}$ synthase (Fig. 4, lane 2), and in nontransfected parent CHO cells (not shown). An interesting feature seen in the $G b_{3}$ synthase sequence is the presence of a DXD motif, previously identified as catalytically important in a number of different glycosyltransferases (18). Conversion of the ${ }^{199} \mathrm{DTD}^{201}$ of $G b_{3}$ synthase to ${ }^{199} \mathrm{ATA}^{201}$ by site-directed mutagenesis results in a loss of $G b_{3}$ activity manifested by a lack of globo-series glycolipid expression following transfection into CHO cells (Fig. 4, lane 2). Assuming that both the wild-type and ${ }^{199} \mathrm{ATA}^{201}$ mutant $G b_{3}$ synthase are expressed at similar levels, the mutant expresses a similar set of GSL as found in parent CHO cells. The results confirm that functional $G b_{3}$ synthase is required in CHO cells for the complete production of globo-series GSL.

In Vitro Enzyme Activity of $G b_{3}$ Synthase—Triton X-100 extracts of CHO cells transfected with $G b_{3}$ synthase cDNA transfer galactose from UDP-${ }^{[3]} \mathrm{H}]$galactose to exogenously added LacCer, whereas parent CHO cells do not (Fig. 5, lane 3, lower arrow). Following the enzyme reaction, radiolabeled glycolipid products were isolated via Sep-Pak $C_{18}$ and separated by TLC. Low, but detectable, levels of galactose are transferred to GalCer (Fig. 5, lane 2, upper arrow). No transfer to other GSL tested was detected (Fig. 5, lanes 1 and 4). Bands present near the origin of the TLC plate are found in assays using extracts from both the parent and $G b_{3}$ synthase transfected CHO cells and are therefore nonspecific.

Functional $G b_{3}$ Is Expressed by CHO Cells Transfected with $G b_{3}$ Synthase cDNA—The B-subunit of the verotoxin, Shiga toxin (B-Stx-1), which specifically recognizes $G b_{3}$, reacts with material migrating at the position of $G b_{3}$ when crude extracts from CHO cells transfected with $G b_{3}$ synthase but not i$G b_{3}$ synthase were examined (Fig. 6). $G b_{3}$ has been identified as the receptor for Shiga toxin, and is required for the transport of the

FIG. 5. $G b_{3}$ synthase activity from CHO cell extracts transfected with $G b_{3}$ synthase cDNA. Transfer of ${ }^{[3]} \mathrm{H}] \mathrm{Gal}$ from UDP-${ }^{[3]} \mathrm{H}] \mathrm{Gal}$ to different GSL acceptors was detected by autoradiography following separation by TLC. The enzyme source is from extracts of CHO cells transfected with $G b_{3}$ synthase cDNA. GSL acceptor substrates: GlcCer, lane 1; GalCer, lane 2; LacCer, lane 3; $G b_{3}$, lane 4. Arrows indicate the position of GSL standards, LacCer (upper arrow) and $G b_{3}$ (lower arrow).

FIG. 6. B-subunit of Shiga toxin (B-Stx-1) specifically detects $G b_{3}$ in GSL extracts from CHO cells transfected with $G b_{3}$ synthase cDNA. Crude GSL extracts from CHO cells transfected with either $G b_{3}$ synthase (lane 3) or i$G b_{3}$ synthase cDNA (lane 2) were separated by TLC. A biotinylated form of the purified B-Stx-1 was overlaid on the TLC followed by streptavidin-peroxidase. Blots were developed using chemiluminescence. Neutral GSL standards, which includes $G b_{3}$, are in lane 1.

toxin into the cell leading to cell death (8). Following transfection with $G b_{3}$ synthase cDNA, CHO cells become sensitive to killing by verotoxin. Approximately 65% of $G b_{3}$ synthase cDNA transfectants are killed compared with <15% of control transfectants (Fig. 7). Considering that a transfection efficiency of 65–70% is routinely achieved with CHO cells, the verotoxin is highly toxic to the transfected cells.

$G b_{3}$ Synthase RNA Expression in Rat Tissues—The tissue distribution of $G b_{3}$ synthase RNA was examined by RT-PCR using gene-specific primers. The expected product size of 500 base pairs is found in most tissues, however, the apparent levels of expression varies significantly (Fig. 8). Tissues with the highest expression include the brain, kidney, mesenteric lymph node, and spleen. Intermediate levels of $G b_{3}$ synthase RNA expression are seen in the adrenal gland, uterus, pituitary, and thymus. All other tissues tested show low/undetectable expression. The expression of glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase RNA is uniform in these samples.

DISCUSSION

We have cloned $G b_{3}$ synthase, an $\alpha 1,4$-galactosyltransferase that acts on LacCer to form $G b_{3}$ GSL, also known as CD77 or blood group P${ }^{\mathrm{k}}$ antigen (2, 4). $G b_{3}$ synthase initiates the synthesis of the globo-series GSL that includes $G b_{4}$ and $G b_{5}$, the two products that are detected in the expression cloning procedure. Thus, $G b_{3}$ (P${ }^{\mathrm{k}}$ antigen) is the precursor to $G b_{4}$, the P antigen, which can then be converted to $G b_{5}$ (Forssman, GalN $\mathrm{Aca} 1,3 G b_{4}$). $G b_{3}$ synthase activity toward LacCer is substantially higher than to another $\beta$-linked Gal substrate, GalCer, indicating that the correct underlying carbohydrate structure.

Expression Cloning of $G b_{3}$ Synthase

of each GSL pathway in different tissues and ultimately different cell types. A comparison of the $G b_{3}$ synthase and i$G b_{3}$ synthase expression in rat tissues revealed a broad distribution with varying levels. Six out of the 13 tissues examined show a preferential expression of one of the enzymes, almost to exclusivity, perhaps arguing for distinct functional roles, not only for $G b_{3}$ and i$G b_{3}$ but also for their downstream products. In contrast, the spleen and, to a lesser extent, the thymus show high expression of both $\alpha$-galactosyltransferases. GSL structures containing i$G b_{3}$ and $G b_{3}$ have been isolated from the spleen (23, 24). It is notable that the CHO cells transfected with i$G b_{3}$ synthase cDNA produced a greater amount of product compared with CHO cells transfected with $G b_{3}$ synthase cDNA in in vitro assays and by FACS analysis. At present, it is unclear what the molecular basis is for this difference, although it raises the possibility that these two enzymes differ in their catalytic efficiency.

The expression of $G b_{3}$ varies with $G b_{3}$ synthase activity in development and cellular differentiation (25, 26). Although it is unclear what signals these changes, $G b_{3}$ expression has been linked to various pathological events, including hemolytic uremic syndrome, HIV-1 cell fusion, lymphomas, and Fabry's disease (4, 9, 10, 27–29). The high expression of $G b_{3}$ synthase activity in the kidney correlates well with $G b_{3}$ expression (30). Children, in contrast to adults, express high levels of $G b_{3}$ in their kidney and as such are at risk to infection by the Shiga toxins (7, 27). We have shown that CHO cells become susceptible to verotoxin following expression of $G b_{3}$ on their cell surface. Hence, *de novo* synthesized $G b_{3}$, in contrast to exogenously added $G b_{3}$ (31), is functional in CHO cells. Shiga toxin binds specifically to $G b_{3}$ and not to the related i$G b_{3}$ GSL. The ability of i$G b_{3}$ synthase to out-compete any $G b_{3}$ synthase activity in the same cell may afford the animal protection against infection by bacterial toxins, adhesins, and viruses that interact with $G b_{3}$. Some bacterial pathogens recognize internal Gal$\alpha 1,4$Gal structures (iso-receptors) via their P-fimbriae as well as terminal epitopes (32, 33), so an alternative core (i$G b_{3}$ over $G b_{3}$) rather than simply capping terminal Gal$\alpha 1,4$Gal by $G b_{4}$ and/or $G b_{5}$ synthases would be required for resistance.

It is interesting to note that, although $G b_{3}$ synthase and i$G b_{3}$ synthase catalyze very similar reactions using the same acceptor substrate (LacCer), they are not homologous. i$G b_{3}$ synthase is found to have very high sequence identity to the existing ABO blood group glycosyltransferases, which all catalyze the transfer of a UDP-sugar in an $\alpha 1,3$-linkage to either a $\beta$-linked Gal or GalNAc (39). In contrast, $G b_{3}$ appears to be a member of a distinct family of glycosyltransferases. These transferases utilize UDP-sugars as the donor to add the sugar in $\alpha 1,4$-linkage to a $\beta$-linked sugar acceptor, most commonly a $\beta$-linked Gal. Other structures with this linkage have been described, such as the GSL P$^{1}$ blood group antigen (Gal$\alpha 1,4$Gal$\beta 1,3$GlcNAc$\beta 1$-R) (34), GlcNAc$\alpha 1,4$Gal$\beta 1$-R found in type III mucin in humans (11), and Gal$\alpha 1,4$Gal$\beta 1,3$GalNAc (35) and GalNAc$\alpha 1,4$GalNAc$\beta 1,4$GlcNAc$\beta 1$-R found in insects (36). The homologues in mammals and insects may thus represent the transferases responsible for the synthesis of these structures. All the homologues to $G b_{3}$ synthase contained the catalytically important DXD motif. Genes encoding sequences with 30–35% identity with $G b_{3}$ synthase can also be identified on the five chromosomes of the plant *Arabidopsis*, supporting the possibility that the transferases producing structures with $\alpha 1,4$-linked sugars have been highly conserved during evolution and are therefore of biological importance.

Acknowledgments—We thank Dr. D. Haslam for his helpful suggestions and generous gifts of the anti-Forssman ($G b_{5}$) mAb, B-Stx-1, and verotoxin. We are also indebted to Dr. P. Smith for providing the RPL18 cDNA library.

Addendum—While this manuscript was being reviewed, the following two independent groups reported the cloning of the human Gb₃ synthase (HSB33B7): Kojima, *et al.* (40) and Steffensen, *et al.* (41).

**REFERENCES**

1. Stults, C. L., Sweeley, C. C., and Macher, B. A. (1989) *Methods Enzymol.* **179**, 167–214
2. Marcus, D. M., Kundu, S. K., and Suzuki, A. (1981) *Semin. Hematol.* **18**, 63–71
3. Kishimoto, T., (ed) (1997) in *Leukocyte Typing VI*, pp.175–177, Garland Publishing Inc., London
4. Nudelman, E., Kannagi, R., Hakomori, S., Parsons, M., Lipinski, M., Wiels, J., Fellous, M., and Tursz, T. (1983) *Science* **220**, 509–511
5. Mangeney, M., Lingwood, C. A., Taga, S., Caillou, B., Tursz, T., and Wiels, J. (1993) *Cancer Res.* **53**, 5314–5319
6. Cooling, L. L., Walker, K. E., Gille, T., and Koerner, T. A. (1998) *Infect. Immun.* **66**, 4355–4366
7. Lingwood, C. A. (1994) *Nephron.* **66**, 21–28
8. Lindberg, A. A., Brown, J. E., Stromberg, N., Westling-Ryd, M., Schultz, J. E., and Karlsson, K. A. (1987) *J. Biol. Chem.* **262**, 1779–1785
9. Puri, A., Hug, P., Jernigan, K., Barchi, J., Kim, H. Y., Hamilton, J., Wiels, J., Murray, G. J., Brady, R. O., and Blumenthal, R. (1998) *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.* **95**, 14435–14440
10. Hammache, D., Yahi, N., Maresca, M., Pieroni, G., and Fantini, J. (1999) *J. Virol.* **73**, 5244–5248
11. Nakayama, J., Yeh, J. C., Misra, A. K., Ito, S., Katsuyama, T., and Fukuda, M. (1999) *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.* **96**, 8991–8996
12. Nyame, A. K., Leppanan, A. M., DeBose-Boyd, R., and Cummings, R. D. (1999) *Glycobiology* **9**, 1029–1035
13. Glasgow, J., Littlejohn, T., Major, F., Lathrop, R., Sankoff, D., and Sensen, C. (eds) (1998) in *Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Intelligent Systems for Molecular Biology*, pp. 175–182, AAAI Press, Menlo Park, CA
14. Abe, A., Radin, N. S., Shayman, J. A., Wotring, L. L., Zipkin, R. E., Sivakumar, R., Ruggieri, J. M., Carson, K. G., and Ganem, B. (1995) *J. Lipid Res.* **36**, 611–621
15. Haslam, D. B., and Baenziger, J. U. (1996) *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.* **93**, 10697–10702
16. Colley, K. J. (1997) *Glycobiology* **7**, 1–13
17. Lannert, H., Gorgas, K., Meissner, I., Wieland, F. T., and Jeckel, D. (1998) *J. Biol. Chem.* **273**, 2939–2946
18. Wiggins, C. A., and Munro, S. (1998) *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.* **95**, 7945–7950
19. Li, Y.-T., and Li, S.-C. (1999) *Anal. Biochem.* **273**, 1–11

20. Wiels, J., Taga, S., Tetaud, C., Cedergren, B., Nilsson, B., and Clausen, H. (1996) *Glycoconj. J.* **13**, 529–535
21. Bailly, P., Piller, F., Gillard, B., Veyrieres, A., Marcus, D., and Cartron, J. P. (1992) *Carbohydr. Res.* **228**, 277–287
22. Kannagi, R., Cochran, N. A., Ishigami, F., Hakomori, S., Andrews, P. W., Knowles, B. B., and Solter, D. (1983) *EMBO J.* **2**, 2355–2361
23. Stoffyn, P., Stoffyn, A., and Hauser, G. (1973) *Biochim. Biophys. Acta* **306**, 283–286
24. Makita, A., and Yamakawa, T. (1962) *J. Biochem. (Tokyo)* **51**, 124–133
25. Mobassaleh, M., Koul, O., Mishra, K., McCluer, R. H., and Keusch, G. T. (1994) *Am. J. Physiol.* **267**, G618–G624
26. Taga, S., Tetaud, C., Mangeney, M., Tursz, T., and Wiels, J. (1995) *Biochim. Biophys. Acta* **1254**, 56–65
27. Obrig, T. G., Louise, C. B., Lingwood, C. A., Boyd, B., Barley-Maloney, L., and Daniel, T. O. (1993) *J. Biol. Chem.* **268**, 15484–15488
28. Lingwood, C. A. (1999) *Biochim. Biophys. Acta* **1455**, 375–386
29. Kolter, T., and Sandhoff, K. (1998) *Brain Pathol.* **8**, 79–100
30. Makita, A. (1964) *J. Biochem. (Tokyo)* **55**, 269–276
31. Jacewicz, M. S., Mobassaleh, M., Gross, S. K., Balasubramanian, K. A., Daniel, P. F., Raghavan, S., McCluer, R. H., and Keusch, G. T. (1994) *J. Infect. Dis.* **169**, 538–546
32. Karlsson, K. A. (1995) *Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol.* **5**, 622–635
33. Roberts, J. A., Marklund, B. I., Ilver, D., Haslam, D., Kaack, M. B., Baskin, G., Louis, M., Mollby, R., Winberg, J., and Normark, S. (1994) *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.* **91**, 11889–11893
34. Yang, Z., Bergstrom, J., and Karlsson, K. A. (1994) *J. Biol. Chem.* **269**, 14620–14624
35. Lopez, M., Gazon, M., Juliant, S., Plancke, Y., Leroy, Y., Strecker, G., Cartron, J. P., Bailly, P., Cerutti, M., Verbert, A., and Delannoy, P. (1998) *J. Biol. Chem.* **273**, 33644–33651
36. Dennis, R. D., Geyer, R., Egge, H., Peter-Katalinic, J., Li, S.-C., Stirn, S., and Wiegandt, H. (1985) *J. Biol. Chem.* **260**, 5370–5375
37. Rosales Fritz, V. M., Daniotti, J. L., and Maccioni, H. J. (1997) *Biochim. Biophys. Acta* **1354**, 153–158
38. Gastinel, L. N., Cambillau, C., and Bourne, Y. (1999) *EMBO J.* **18**, 3546–3557
39. Keusch, J. J., Manzella, S. M., Nyame, K. A., Cummings, R. D., and Baenziger, J. U. (2000) *J. Biol. Chem.* **33**, 25308–25314
40. Kojima, Y., Fukumoto, S., Furukawa, K., Okajima, T., Wiels, J., Yokoyama, K., Suzuki, Y., Urano, T., Ohta, M., and Furukawa, K. (2000) *J. Biol. Chem.* **275**, 15152–15156.
41. Steffensen, R., Carier, K., Wiels, J., Levery, S. B., Stroud, M., Cedergren, B., Sojka, B. N., Bennett, E. P., Jersild, C., and Clausen, H. (2000) *J. Biol. Chem.* **275**, 16723–16729.

GLYCOBIOLOGY AND
EXTRACELLULAR MATRICES:
Cloning of Gb₃ Synthase, the Key Enzyme
in Globo-series Glycosphingolipid
Synthesis, Predicts a Family of α
1,4-Glycosyltransferases Conserved in
Plants, Insects, and Mammals

Jeremy J. Keusch, Stephen M. Manzella,
Kwame A. Nyame, Richard D. Cummings and
Jacques U. Baenziger
J. Biol. Chem. 2000, 275:25315-25321.
doi:10.1074/jbc.M002630200 originally published online June 14, 2000

Access the most updated version of this article at doi: 10.1074/jbc.M002630200

Find articles, minireviews, Reflections and Classics on similar topics on the JBC Affinity Sites.

Alerts:
- When this article is cited
- When a correction for this article is posted

Click here to choose from all of JBC's e-mail alerts

This article cites 39 references, 23 of which can be accessed free at
http://www.jbc.org/content/275/33/25315.full.html#ref-list-1
