
THE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGICAL CHEMISTRY
© 2000 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

**Novel β-Hydroxyacid Dehydrogenases in Escherichia coli and Haemophilus influenzae**

Received for publication, August 15, 2000, and in revised form, September 5, 2000  
Published, JBC Papers in Press, September 7, 2000, DOI 10.1074/jbc.M007432200

Reuben K. Njau, Carter A. Herndon, and John W. Hawes‡

*From the Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana 46202*

Our laboratory has previously reported a structurally and mechanistically related family of β-hydroxyacid dehydrogenases with significant homology to β-hydroxyisobutyrate dehydrogenase. A large number of the members of this family are hypothetical proteins of bacterial origin with unknown identity in terms of their substrate specificities and metabolic roles. The *Escherichia coli* β-hydroxyacid dehydrogenase homologue corresponding to the AE000157 locus was cloned and expressed with a 6-histidine tag for specific purification. The purified recombinant protein very specifically catalyzed the NAD⁺-dependent oxidation of D-glycerate and the NADH-dependent reduction of tartrate semialdehyde, identifying this protein as a tartrate semialdehyde reductase. Further evidence for identification as tartrate semialdehyde reductase is the observation that the coding region for this protein is directly preceded by genes coding for hydroxypyruvate isomerase and glyoxylate carboligase, two enzymes that synthesize tartrate semialdehyde, producing an operon clearly designed for D-glycerate biosynthesis from tartrate semialdehyde. The single β-hydroxyacid dehydrogenase homologue from *Haemophilus influenzae* was also cloned, expressed, and purified with a 6-histidine tag. This protein also catalyzed the NAD⁺-dependent oxidation of D-glycerate but was significantly more efficient in the oxidation of four-carbon β-hydroxyacids like D-hydroxybutyrate and D-threonine. This enzyme differs from all the presently known β-hydroxybutyrate dehydrogenases which are well established members of the short chain dehydrogenase/reductase superfamily.

hydrogenase (1, 2) and 6-phosphogluconate dehydrogenase (4). These include a highly conserved N-terminal domain that provides the bulk of the dinucleotide cofactor-binding site. This domain contains a sequence characteristic of the Rossman fold (5), but one with distinct differences from other Rossman fold sequences, including a completely conserved methionine residue (1). A highly conserved domain with a consensus sequence of DAPVSGG appears to be structurally and functionally important to β-hydroxyacid substrate binding in 6-phosphogluconate dehydrogenase (3) and most likely in other family members. A completely conserved lysine residue has been proposed as a critical catalytic residue in both β-hydroxyisobutyrate dehydrogenase and 6-phosphogluconate dehydrogenase based on site-directed mutagenesis studies and structural data (1–4).

The two most well characterized β-hydroxyacid dehydrogenases have distinct substrate specificities and metabolic roles. β-Hydroxyisobutyrate dehydrogenase is a requisite enzyme for valine catabolism. This enzyme has been purified and characterized from rabbit liver (6) and *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* (7). Rat β-hydroxyisobutyrate dehydrogenase has been cloned and characterized as a recombinant enzyme (1, 8). The rat enzyme is highly specific for S-β-hydroxyisobutyrate but is also active in the NAD⁺-dependent oxidation of L-glycerate, L-serine, and R-β-hydroxyisobutyrate, although with relatively high \(K_m\) values compared with S-β-hydroxyisobutyrate. 6-Phosphogluconate dehydrogenase is highly specific for NADP⁺-dependent oxidation of 6-phospho-gluconate and has well known metabolic roles as a part of the pentose phosphate pathway. Numerous β-hydroxyacid dehydrogenase homologues appear in the genomes of many fungi, plants, and of all bacterial species so far examined. Most bacterial genomes display multiple homologues ranging in number from two to five distinct homologues per species, suggesting that this class of enzymes may have unique metabolic roles specific to bacterial biology. Indeed we first hypothesized that one or more of these homologues may correspond to tartrate semialdehyde reductase, a β-hydroxyacid dehydrogenase type of reaction that functions specifically in bacterial biosynthesis of glycerate from glyoxylate through the action of glyoxylate carboligase (1). Nonetheless, the identity of the multiple bacterial β-hydroxyacid dehydrogenase, in terms of their substrate specificities and metabolic roles, is not known.

We report five distinct β-hydroxyacid dehydrogenase homologues in the *Escherichia coli* genome, including a single gene for 6-phosphogluconate dehydrogenase. In contrast, only one homologue is apparent in the complete genome of *Haemophilus influenzae* excluding also a single gene clearly coding for 6-phosphogluconate dehydrogenase. We have cloned and expressed the *E. coli* homologue corresponding to the AE157 locus, as well as the single homologue of *H. influenzae*. Each of these recombinant proteins display distinct substrate specificities widely differing from those of the previously characterized

* This work was supported by a grant from the American Heart Association (Midwest Affiliate). The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked “advertisement” in accordance with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.
‡ To whom correspondence should be addressed: Indiana University School of Medicine, Dept. of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, 635 Barnhill Dr., Indianapolis, IN 46202. Tel.: 317-274-6647; Fax: 317-274-4686; E-mail: jhawes@iupui.edu.
$\beta$-Hydroxyacid Dehydrogenases in *E. coli* and *H. influenzae*

midine, 100 $\mu$g/ml phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride (added from 10 mg/ml fresh stock in isopropanol, 20 $\mu$g/ml trypsin inhibitor) and lysed by passage through a French pressure cell. Lysates were centrifuged at 10,000 × g, and the supernatant was immediately loaded onto Ni$^{2+}$-nitrilotriacetic acid-agarose (Qiagen) previously equilibrated in the same lysis buffer. 10 ml of resin was used with 3–4 liters of culture. The extract was passed through the column, and the resin was washed with three bed volumes of column buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0, 0.5 M NaCl, 10 mM 2-mercaptoethanol) containing 20 mM imidazole. The resin was then washed successively 3 volumes of column buffer containing 40 mM imidazole and 6 volumes of column buffer containing 60 mM imidazole. Histidine-tagged protein was then eluted with column buffer containing 200 mM imidazole. Fractions containing eluted protein were combined. Glycerol was added to the combined fractions at a final concentration of 50% (v/v), and the enzyme was stored in aliquots at –70 °C. Prior to enzyme activity analysis aliquots of the enzyme were concentrated by centrifugation through Centricon membrane devices (Amicon).

**EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES**

*Methods—*Ni$^{2+}$-nitrilotriacetic acid-agarose was from Qiagen. Plasmid and PCR$^1$ DNA purification reagents were from Qiagen. All PCR reagents were from PerkinElmer Life Sciences. High molecular weight genomic DNA from *E. coli* strain W3110 was from Sigma. $R$- and $S$-$\beta$-hydroxyisobutyrate was prepared from the corresponding methyl esters as described previously (6). Tartronate semialdehyde was prepared according to the method of Kohn and Jakoby (9). Enzyme substrates, NAD$^+$, NADH, and NADP$^+$ were from Sigma. pTrcHisTOPO vector was from Invitrogen. Bacterial cell culture reagents were from Life Technologies, Inc. All other chemicals, unless otherwise stated were from Sigma. Oligonucleotides were synthesized by Life Technologies, Inc. Sequencing grade modified trypsin was from Roche Molecular Biochemicals.

*Data Base Searches and Amino Acid Sequence Alignment—*The entire amino acid sequence of rat $\beta$-hydroxyisobutyrate dehydrogenase was used to perform standard tBLASTn and gapped tBLASTn searches of various genome data bases through the NCBI Blast search engine. Complete and unfinished microbial genome data bases were accessed from the NCBI, National Institutes of Health microbial genomes data bases.

*Cloning and Vector Construction—*cDNA corresponding to the *E. coli* $\beta$-hydroxyacid dehydrogenase homologue represented at locus AE000157 was amplified from high molecular weight genomic DNA from *E. coli* strain W3110 (Sigma) using the following primers: AAAAAACATATGAAAAGTGGGATTATTGG, and AAAAAAGGATCCTCAGGCCAGTTTATGGTGAG. PCR reactions were performed in a PerkinElmer Life Sciences 9700 thermocycler using PerkinElmer Life Sciences Geneamp reagents and *Taq* polymerase. PCR product DNA was resolved by agarose gel electrophoresis and purified by gel extraction using QIAquick gel extraction reagents (Qiagen). Full-length PCR products were cloned into the pTrcHisTOPO vector (Invitrogen) exactly according to the manufacturer’s protocols. Subclones were analyzed by automated DNA sequencing to verify sequence and ensure the fidelity of the reading frame for expression from the pTrcHisTOPO vector. Both strands of each cDNA clone were analyzed using a series of primers spaced approximately 500 base pairs apart. Sequence analysis was performed in the Biochemistry Biotechnology Facility at Indiana University School of Medicine using a 377 DNA sequencer and PerkinElmer Life Sciences Big-Dye terminator chemistry. A full-length cDNA corresponding to the HI1010 gene of *H. influenzae* was amplified by nested PCR from two overlapping clones, GHICK65 and GHIJJ86, purchased from American Type Culture Collection. A 5′ segment of the HI1010 gene was amplified from the GHIJJ86 clone using the primers CATATGGAAAATCAAAATTATTCAGTC and CCAAGAGTTACCAGCTGCAT. An overlapping segment of the HI1010 gene containing the complete 3′ end was amplified from the GHICK65 clone using the primers CTCGAGCTACGCTCCTTTTTCGGTAA and GAGTTGTTCACACTGTCTTAG. These two primary PCR products were gel purified as described above and used together as template to amplify a full-length HI1010 cDNA using the primers CATATGGAAAATCAAAATTATTCAGTC and CTCGAGCTACGCTCCTTTTTCGGTAA. The full-length cDNA was ligated to the pTrcHisTOPO vector and analyzed by automated DNA sequencing as described above.

*Expression and Purification of Recombinant Enzymes—*Histidine-tagged clones derived from the pTrcHisTOPO vector were expressed in *E. coli* strain JM109 and XL1Blue. Cells were cotransfected with the histidine-tagged clones and the chloramphenicol-resistant pGroESL plasmid (10) encoding the *E. coli* chaperons GroEL and GroES under the control of their natural heat shock promoter. Cotransfected cells were cultured in TY medium at 37 °C until the culture reached an $A_{600}$ of 0.6–0.8 at which time isopropyl-$\beta$-D-thiogalactoside was added to a final concentration of 0.5 mM. Incubation at 37 °C was continued for 20–24 h, and the cells were harvested by centrifugation and stored at –70°C until used for purification. Expressed enzyme stored in these cell pellets was stable for up to 2 months. Thawed cell pellets were resuspended in lysis buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0, 0.5 M NaCl, 10 mM 2-mercaptoethanol, 5 mM imidazole, 0.5% Tween 20, 100 $\mu$g/ml benzamide, 100 $\mu$g/ml phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride (added from 10 mg/ml fresh stock in isopropanol, 20 $\mu$g/ml trypsin inhibitor) and lysed by passage through a French pressure cell. Lysates were centrifuged at 10,000 × g, and the supernatant was immediately loaded onto Ni$^{2+}$-nitrilotriacetic acid-agarose (Qiagen) previously equilibrated in the same lysis buffer. 10 ml of resin was used with 3–4 liters of culture. The extract was passed through the column, and the resin was washed with three bed volumes of column buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0, 0.5 M NaCl, 10 mM 2-mercaptoethanol) containing 20 mM imidazole. The resin was then washed successively 3 volumes of column buffer containing 40 mM imidazole and 6 volumes of column buffer containing 60 mM imidazole. Histidine-tagged protein was then eluted with column buffer containing 200 mM imidazole. Fractions containing eluted protein were combined. Glycerol was added to the combined fractions at a final concentration of 50% (v/v), and the enzyme was stored in aliquots at –70 °C. Prior to enzyme activity analysis aliquots of the enzyme were concentrated by centrifugation through Centricon membrane devices (Amicon).

*Enzyme Assays—*Dehydrogenase assays, unless otherwise stated, were performed spectrophotometrically, at 30 °C, in 1 ml reactions containing 50 mM glycine, pH 9.5, 100 $\mu$M $\beta$-NAD$^+$ or $\beta$-NADP$^+$, and 1–10 $\mu$g enzyme protein. Reactions were initiated by the addition of $\beta$-hydroxyacid substrate, and absorbance at 340 nm was monitored to measure the rate of NADH production. Spectrophotometric measurements were recorded on a Cary 1E spectrophotometer (Varian) and collected using Varian software. Kinetic parameters were calculated exactly as described previously (1, 8).

*ESI Mass Spectrometry—*The identity of purified proteins was confirmed by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry analysis of trypsin-digested samples using a Finnigan (Thermoquest) LCQ mass spectrometer. Aliquots of 100 $\mu$g of purified protein were denatured in 4 M urea at 55 °C for 30 min in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer, pH 8.5. Samples were then diluted 4-fold with HPLC grade water and 1 $\mu$g sequencing grade, modified trypsin was added. Trypsin digests were incubated for approximately 18 h and then stopped by addition of trifluoroacetic acid to a final concentration of 0.1% (v/v). Aliquots of the digests were chromatographed on 500 micron capillaries packed with standard C18 resins (Vydac) using a PerkinElmer Life Sciences 140D solvent delivery system and a standard acetonitrile gradient containing 0.01% trifluoroacetic acid and 0.1% acetic acid. Peptides were eluted directly into the electrospray ionization source of the LCQ mass spectrometer. Three types of scans were continuously collected including a broad range mass scan from $m/z$ 200 to 2000, a higher resolution scan with a 2 $m/z$ window, and a collision-induced dissociation scan with the fragmentation energy set at 35. Mass spectral data were collected by the Biochemistry Biotechnology Facility at Indiana University School of Medicine. Masses and fragmentation patterns for each observed peptide were compared with those for expected peptides using the Protein Prospector software package.

*Size Exclusion Chromatography—*Protein sizes were analyzed by size exclusion HPLC using a Varian Hydropore SEC5U column and a PerkinElmer Life Sciences 250 analytical HPLC system. Concentrated aliquots of protein purified by Ni$^{2+}$-nitrilotriacetic acid, as described above, were loaded onto the column and chromatographed at 200 $\mu$L/min in a buffer containing 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0, 250 mM NaCl, 10 mM $\beta$-mercaptoethanol, and 10% ethylene glycol (v/v). Peak elution times and peak areas were recorded using a Hewlett Packard 3390A strip chart attenuator. Size exclusion chromatography standards (Sigma) were chromatographed under identical conditions. Standards proteins were repeatedly chromatographed on each day that enzyme samples were analyzed.

*Protein Analysis—*SDS-PAGE was performed according to the method of Laemmli (11). Native gel electrophoresis was performed exactly as for SDS-PAGE except with the omission of SDS. Purified yeast alcohol dehydrogenase and horse liver alcohol dehydrogenase (Sigma) were used as standards for native gel electrophoresis. Protein concentration was measured by the Bio-Rad assay method exactly according to the manufacturer’s protocol using bovin serum albumin as standard.

**RESULTS AND DISCUSSION**

*Structural Homology among E. coli and H. influenzae β-Hydroxyacid Dehydrogenases—*6-Phosphogluconate dehydrogenase and $\beta$-hydroxyisobutyrate dehydrogenase are the most well known members of the $\beta$-hydroxyacid dehydrogenase enzyme family and clearly share a common structural framework defined by specific, conserved domains of amino acid sequence (1).

1 The abbreviations used are: PCR, polymerase chain reaction; GIP, glyoxylate induced protein; PAGE, polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis; HPLC, high pressure liquid chromatography; SDR, short chain dehydrogenase/reductase; MES, 4-morpholineethanesulfonic acid; Bicine, $N,N$-bis(2-hydroxyethyl)glycine.
38782 β-Hydroxyacid Dehydrogenases in E. coli and H. influenzae

| HIBADH(Rat) | ASKTPVGFIGLGNMGNPMAKNLIKHGYPILILYDVFPDVCKEFKEAGEQVASSPADVAEKADRIITMLPSSMNSIEV--- | 76 |
| HI1010 | MENQNYSVAVIGLGSMGMGAAVSCINAGLTTYGIDLNPVALEKLKAAGAKAVAANGYDFAHELDAVVILVNAAQANAV--- | 78 |
| AE000357 | KTGSEFHVGIVGLGSMGMGAALSYVRAGLSTWGADLNSNACATLKEAGACGVSDNAATFAEKLDALLVLVVNAAQVKV--- | 78 |
| AE000464 | AAIAFIGLGGQMGSPMASNLLQQGHQLRVFDVNAEAVRHLVDKGATPAANPAQAAKDAEFITTMLPNGDLVRNV--- | 73 |
| AE000394 | IDMTMKVGFIIGLGIMGKPMSKNLLKAGYSLVVADRNPEGIADVIAAGAETASTAKAIAEQCDVIITMLPNSPHVKEV--- | 77 |
| AE000157 | KLGFITGLGIMGTPMAINLARAGHQLHVTTIGPVA-DELLSLGAVSVETARQVTEASDIIFIMVPDTPQVEEV--- | 71 |
| PGDH(E.coli) | SKQQIGVVMGAVMGRNLALNIESRGYTVSIFNRSREKTEEVIA-ENPGKKLPYYTVKEFVESLETPRRILLMVKAGA | 77 |

| HIBADH(Rat) | --YSGANGILKKVKKGSLLIDSSTIDPSVSKELAKEVEKMGAVFM | 155 |
| HI1010 | --LFGENGIAKKLKAGTAVMVSTMAAQDAQIISQKLTELGLIMLDAPVSGGAAKALKGEMTMVASGSKQAFELLQPVLDA | 157 |
| AE000357 | --LFGETGVAQHLKPGTAVMVSTIASADAQEIATALAGFDLEMLDAPVSGGAVKAANGEMTMVASGSDIAFERLAPVLEA | 157 |
| AE000464 | --LFGENGVCEGLSTDALVIDMSTIHPLQTDKLIADMQAKGFSMDVPVGRTSANAITGTLLLLAGGTAEQVERATPILMA | 152 |
| AE000394 | --ALGENGIIEGAKPGTVLIDMSSTIAPLASREISEALKAGIDMLDAPVSGGEPKAIDGTLSMVGGDKAIFDKYYDLMKA | 156 |
| AE000157 | --LFGENGCTKASLKGTKIVDMSSIPIETKRFARQVNELGGDYLDAPVSGGEIGAREGTLSIMVGGDEAVFERVKPLFEL | 150 |
| PGDH(E.coli) | GTDAAIDSLKPYLDKGDIIDGGNTFFQDTIRRNRELSAEGFNFIGTGVSGGEEGALKGP-SIMPGGQKEAYELVAPILTK | 157 |

| HIBADH(Rat) | -------MGSNVLYCGAVGSGQSAKICNMLLAISMIGTAEAMNLGIRSGLDPKLLAKILNMSSGRCWSSDTYNPVPGVMD | 229 |
| HI1010 | -------TAAKVYНИGЕЕIГLGATVKIVHQLLAGVHIAAGAEAMALASKAGIPLDVMYDVVTNAAGNSWMFENRMKHVVEGD | 232 |
| AE000357 | -------VAGKVYRIGAEПGLGSTVKIIHQLLAGVHIAAGAEAMALAARAGIPLDVMYDVVTNAAGNSWMFENRMRHVVDGD | 232 |
| AE000464 | -------MGSELINAГGPГMGIRVKLINNYMSIALNALSAЕAA AVLCEALNLPFDVAVKVMSGTAAGKHFTTSWPNKVLSG | 226 |
| AE000394 | -------MAGSVVHTGEIGAGNVTKLANQVIVALNIAAMSEALTLATKAGVNPDЛVYQAIRGGLAGSTVLDAKAPMVMDRN | 230 |
| AE000157 | -------LGKNITLVGGNGDGQTCKVANQIIVALNIEAVSEALLFASKAGADPVRVRQALMGGFASSRILEVHGERMIKRT | 224 |
| PGDH(E.coli) | IAAVAEDGEPCVTYIGADGAGHYVKMVHNGIEYGDMQLIAEAYSLЛКGGLNLTNEELAQTFEWNNGELSSYLIDITKDIF | 238 |

| HIBADH(Rat) | GVPSSNNYQGGFGTTLMAKDLGLAQD-SATSTKTPILLGSVAHQIYRMMCSKGYSKKDFS SVFQYLREEETF | 300 |
| HI1010 | -------YTPLSMVDIFVKDLGLVND-TAKSLHFPLHLASTAYSMFTEASNAGYKEDDSAVIKIFSGVSLPKKA | 300 |
| AE000357 | -------YTPHSAVDIFVKDLGLVAD-TAKALHFPLPLASTALNMFTSASNAGYKEDDSAVIKIFSGITLPGAKS | 300 |
| AE000464 | -------DLSPAFMIDLAHKDLGIALD-VANQLHVPМPLGAASREVYSQARAAGRGRQDWSAILEQVRVSAGMTAKVKM | 297 |
| AE000394 | -------FKPGFRIDLHIKDLANALD-TSHGVGAQLPLTAАVMEMMQALRADGLGTADHSALACYYEKLAKVEVTR | 298 |
| AE000157 | -------FNPGFKIALHQKDLNLALQ-SAKALALNLNPNTATCQELFNTCAANGGSQLDHSALVQALELMANHKLA | 291 |
| PGDH(E.coli) | -DEDGNYLVDVILDEAANKGTGKWTSQSALDLGEPLSLITESVFARYISSLKDQRVAASKVLSGPQAQPAGDKAEFIE | 315 |

FIG. 1. Amino acid sequence homology of β-hydroxyacid dehydrogenase homologues from *E. coli* and *H. influenzae*. Hypothetical protein sequences from genomic data bases were aligned by the tBLASTn method using rat β-hydroxyisobutyrate dehydrogenase amino acid sequence for pair-wise alignment. *HIBADH*, β-hydroxy-isobutyrate dehydrogenase; *PGDH*, 6-phosphogluconate dehydrogenase. *HI1010* refers to the *H. influenzae* HI1010 gene. AE000357, AE000454, AE000394, and AE000157 refer to the *E. coli* loci containing the given β-hydroxyacid dehydrogenase homologues.

---

FIG. 2. pH profile of reactions catalyzed by the purified, recombinant *E. coli* AE000157 β-hydroxyacid dehydrogenase. ■, NADH-dependent reduction of chemically synthesized tartronate semialdehyde; ▲, NAD⁺-dependent oxidation of D-glycerate. Rates were plotted as percentages of the rate at the apparent pH optima. Reactions were measured spectrophotometrically as described under “Experimental Procedures” in a mixed buffer containing 50 mM MES, 50 mM HEPES, and 50 mM Bicine at the given pH values with equal protein concentrations and saturating concentrations of both substrate and dinucleotide cofactor. Each data point is the average of three determinations.

Using the tBLASTn search method with the full-length amino acid sequence of rat β-hydroxyisobutyrate dehydrogenase, we found that most bacterial species display multiple β-hydroxyacid dehydrogenase homologues with the same characteristic conserved domains. The completed genome of *E. coli* contains five homologues including a single isoform of 6-phosphogluconate dehydrogenase (Fig. 1). The completed genomes of *Bacillus subtilis* and *Mycobacterium tuberculosis* displayed four homologues each, including single isoforms of 6-phosphogluconate dehydrogenase (data not shown). In contrast, the completed genome of *hemeophilis influenzae* displays only one homologue, as well as one isoform of 6-phosphogluconate dehydrogenase. Most of the conserved amino acids segregate into distinct domains (Fig. 1). Several of these domains have either known or proposed functions as determined by site-directed mutagenesis with β-hydroxyisobutyrate dehydrogenase (1, 2) and by examination of the published x-ray crystal structures of mammalian 6-phosphogluconate dehydrogenase

(3). The most highly conserved domain is an N-terminal dinucleotide cofactor-binding domain with a consensus sequence of GXXGXGXMGXXXAXNXXXXG. Residues surrounding the first three conserved glycines in this domain (annotated with X) are semiconserved hydrophobic residues. The final conserved glycine in this consensus sequence is also followed by a stretch of 6 hydrophobic residues and either an aspartate or arginine residue that plays a role in cofactor specificity (1, 2). The majority of family members contain an aspartate at this position and are therefore likely to be specific for $\beta$-NAD⁺ as in the case of $\beta$-hydroxyisobutyrate dehydrogenase (1). Another highly conserved stretch of amino acids is perhaps the most distinctive structural hallmark of the $\beta$-hydroxyacid dehydrogenases, with a consensus sequence of MLDAPVSGGXXXAXXG. In this consensus sequence the serine residue, as well as each of the glycine residues, are the most conserved among all family members. The x-ray crystal structure of 6-phosphogluconate dehydrogenase with bound substrate indicates that the conserved serine in this domain is essential to 6-phosphogluconate binding through contact with oxygen atoms in the carboxyl group (3). Because of the extreme level of conservation, this serine likely plays this role in substrate binding for other $\beta$-hydroxyacid dehydrogenases. A highly conserved catalytic domain consists of the consensus sequence GXXGXGXXXKXXX(N/Q). The conserved lysine residue was proposed as a key catalytic residue based on its hydrogen bond contact with the 3-hydroxyl group of 6-phosphogluconate in the crystal structure with bound substrate (3) and based on site-directed mutagenesis studies with both 6-phosphogluconate dehydrogenase and $\beta$-hydroxyisobutyrate dehydrogenase (1, 4).

Overall, the bacterial homologues share a higher level of sequence homology with $\beta$-hydroxyisobutyrate dehydrogenase than with 6-phosphogluconate dehydrogenase; however, all share a similar level of homology (approximately 38%). When the amino acid sequences of apparent $\beta$-hydroxyacid dehydrogenases from many bacterial species are compared, a similar level of homology is observed, and no sequences segregate into any distinct subclasses. Therefore, for the bacterial members of this enzyme family, it is difficult if not impossible to predict the exact identity in terms of reactions catalyzed or substrate specificities on sequence homology alone.

**Identification of the AE000157 Homologue as Tartrate Semialdehyde Reductase—To confirm the identity of the cloned *E. coli* homologue as a $\beta$-hydroxyacid dehydrogenase, the cDNA was expressed, and the recombinant enzyme was purified utilizing the plasmid-encoded 6-histidine tag. The purified recombinant protein was over 95% pure as determined by SDS-PAGE and Coomassie Blue staining (data not shown). The predicted amino acid sequence of the purified protein was confirmed by the masses and fragmentation patterns of tryptic peptides analyzed by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry with approximately 80% of the peptides recovered, including both the N and C termini (data not shown). The purified protein displayed enzymatic activities in the NAD⁺-dependent oxidation of D-glycerate as well as the NADH-dependent reduction of tartrate semialdehyde (Fig. 2), with pH profiles characteristic of the known $\beta$-hydroxyacid dehydrogenases (6, 8) as

---

**TABLE I**

Kinetic parameters for purified *E. coli* and *H. influenzae* $\beta$-hydroxyacid dehydrogenases

| Substrate$^a$ | $K_m$ | $V_{\text{max}}$ |
|---------------|-------|------------------|
|               |       | $\mu mol/min/mg$ |
| *E. coli* (000157) |       |                  |
| D-Glycerate   | $278 \pm 17 \, \mu M$ | $11.6 \pm 1.3$ |
| L-Glycerate   | $4.2 \pm 0.3 \, \text{mM}$ | $11.0 \pm 1.5$ |
| $\beta$ NAD⁺ | $28 \pm 5 \, \mu M$ |                  |
| *H. influenzae* (HI1010) |       |                  |
| R-$\beta$-Hydroxybutyrate | $48 \pm 3 \, \mu M$ | $10.3 \pm 0.9$ |
| D-Threonine   | $61 \pm 5 \, \mu M$ | $9.8 \pm 0.7$ |
| D-Glycerate   | $3.7 \pm 0.2 \, \text{mM}$ | $4.1 \pm 0.5$ |
| S-$\beta$-Hydroxybutyrate | $15 \pm 0.7 \, \text{mM}$ | $9.0 \pm 0.8$ |
| $\beta$-NAD⁺ | $25 \pm 4 \, \mu M$ |                  |

$a$ $K_m$ values for each substrate were determined with six concentrations of substrate and six concentrations of cofactor. $K_m$ NAD⁺ for the *E. coli* enzyme is that calculated from reactions using D-glycerate as substrate. $K_m$ NAD⁺ for the HI1010 protein is that calculated from reactions using R-$\beta$-hydroxybutyrate as substrate.

---

**FIG. 3. Metabolic role of tartrate semialdehyde in bacterial biosynthesis of D-glycerate and comparison of reactions catalyzed by tartrate semialdehyde reductase (A) and $\beta$-hydroxyisobutyrate dehydrogenase (B).**

(A)


COO-
  |
C=O
  |
H


Glyoxylate


HO-C-H
    |
    H


Hydroxypyruvate Isomerase (GIP)


COO-
  |
C-OH
  |
H


Tartrate Semialdehyde Reductase (TSR)


COO-
  |
C=O
  |
H


D-Glycerate

(B)


CH₃-C-H
    |
    O


Methylmalonate Semialdehyde

$\beta$-Hydroxyisobutyrate Dehydrogenase


CH₃-C-H
    |
    OH


S-$\beta$-Hydroxyisobutyrate

38784 β-Hydroxyacid Dehydrogenases in E. coli and H. influenzae

FIG. 4. Size exclusion HPLC analysis of purified recombinant enzymes. HPLC was performed with a Varian Hydroapore SE column as described under "Experimental Procedures." The peak elution points are shown for standard proteins including human carbonic anhydrase (29 kDa), bovine serum albumin (66 kDa), yeast alcohol dehydrogenase (150 kDa), and β-amylase (200 kDa). The arrow indicates the elution points for both the HI1010 and E. coli (AE000157) recombinant proteins that were equivalent to that of yeast alcohol dehydrogenase.

Elution point for  
HI1010, AE000157,  
and yeast ADH.

Log Molecular Weight

FIG. 5. Comparison of substrate specificities of β-hydroxybutyrate dehydrogenases from H. influenzae, P. lemoignei, and R. spheroides. Enzyme activity was measured spectrophotometrically in 50 mM glycine buffer, pH 9.5, exactly as described under "Experimental Procedures." Activities were plotted for each enzyme as percentages of activity with R-β-hydroxybutyrate. Each value is the average of three determinations. Each substrate was present at saturating concentrations as determined by replicate assays at increased substrate concentrations. Values shown are for 500 μM R-β-hydroxybutyrate, 500 μM D-threonine, and 25 mM D-glycerate.

well as those reported for purified, native tartrone semialdehyde reductase from *Pseudomonas putida* (12). The enzyme was highly specific for NAD⁺ rather than NADP⁺ and was inactive with many analogous β-hydroxyacid substrates including R- and S-β-hydroxyisobutyrate, D- and L-serine, D-phenylserine, D-threonine, D-allothreonine, R-hydroxybutyrate, D- and L-malate, and D/L-mevalonate. The \(K_m\) for D-glycerate was 278 μM, and the \(K_m\) for β-NAD⁺ was 28 μM (Table I). These reaction characteristics identify this enzyme as a specific tartrone semialdehyde reductase. The reaction catalyzed by tartrone semialdehyde reductase plays a metabolic role specific to bacteria in the biosynthesis of D-glycerate from glyoxylate and other compounds such as hydroxypyruvate (Fig. 3). Furthermore, except for enantiomeric specificity, the reaction catalyzed by tartrone semialdehyde reductase is very similar to that catalyzed by β-hydroxyisobutyrate dehydrogenase, with

substrates differing only in the substituents present on the alpha carbon (Fig. 3). The quaternary structure of the purified enzyme was analyzed by size exclusion chromatography. The enzyme eluted as a single peak at the same position as yeast alcohol dehydrogenase indicating a native size of approximately 150,000 (Fig. 4). The monomer molecular weight was approximately 35,000 as determined by denaturing SDS-PAGE (data not shown). Therefore, the native protein appears to be a homotetramer. The purified enzyme also migrated at a position equivalent to yeast alcohol dehydrogenase on native gel electrophoresis in the absence of SDS further suggesting a tetrameric structure. The native tartrone semialdehyde reductase from *P. putida* was reported to be a tetramer of similarly sized monomers based on hydrodynamic data (12). These data demonstrate a common catalytic chemistry, as well as the observed, common structural framework between rat β-hy-

$\beta$-Hydroxyacid Dehydrogenases in E. coli and H. influenzae

Locus AE000157

| 20–55 | 75 | 1856 | 1869 | 2645 | 2702–2728 | 2745 | 3623 |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Promoter<br>Sigma 70<br>Sigma 32 | Glyoxylate<br>Carboligase | GIP<br>(Hydroxypyruvate<br>Isomerase) | Promoter<br>Sigma 70 | Putative Hydroxyacid<br>Dehydrogenase/TSR |

Locus AE000357

| 7159 | 8064 | 8067 | 9230 | 9268 | 9319 | 9322 | 9960 | 9965 | 10741 |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Putative Hydroxyacid<br>Dehydrogenase/TSR | Hypothetical Protein | Promoter<br>Sigma 70 | Putative<br>Epimerase/Aldolase | GIP<br>(Hydroxypyruvate<br>Isomerase) |

FIG. 6. Open reading frames and putative promoter sites surrounding putative tartronate semialdehyde reductase (TSR)/$\beta$-hydroxyacid dehydrogenase genes present in the E. coli AE000157 and AE000357 loci.

TABLE II  
Open reading frames surrounding the HI1010 gene

| Gene${}^{a}$ | Location${}^{b}$ | Strand | PID${}^{c}$ | Product |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| HI1008 | 1073118–1073456 | + | 1574038 | Conserved hypothetical protein |
| HI1009 | 1073504–1074274 | – | 1574039 | Glycerol-3-phosphate regulon repressor |
| HI1010 | 1074433–1075338 | + | 1574042 | $\beta$-hydroxybutyrate dehydrogenase |
| HI1011 | 1075341–1076582 | + | 1574043 | Conserved hypothetical protein |
| HI1012 | 1076579–1077211 | + | 1574044 | Sugar isomerase, putative |
| HI1013 | 1077214–1077990 | + | 1574045 | Hydroxypyruvate isomerase, putative |
| HI1014 | 1078046–1078993 | + | 1574046 | Conserved hypothetical protein |
| HI1015 | 1079002–1080468 | + | 1574047 | Gluconate permease (gntP) |
| HI1016 | 1080488–1080916 | + | 1574051 | Predicted coding region |
| HI1017 | 1081154–1081795 | + | 3212209 | Glycerol uptake facilitator protein (glpF) |
| HI1019 | 1082773–1083771 | + | 1574048 | Thiamin ABC transporter (tbpA) |
| HI1020 | 1083776–1085392 | + | 1574049 | Thiamin ABC transporter, permease |
| HI1021 | 1085376–1086023 | + | 1574050 | Thiamin ABC transporter, ATP-binding |
| HI1022 | 1086136–1087137 | + | 1574054 | Biotin synthetase (bioB) |
| HI1023 | 1087262–1089259 | – | 1574055 | Transketolase 1 (tktA) |
| HI1024 | 1089388–1090065 | – | 1574056 | Hexulose-6-phosphate synthase, putative |
| HI1025 | 1090115–1090810 | – | 1574057 | L-Ribulose-5-phosphate 4-epimerase |
| HI1026 | 1090804–1091664 | – | 1574058 | Hexulose-6-phosphate isomerase, putative |
| HI1027 | 1091678–1093135 | – | 1574059 | L-xylulose kinase (lyx) |

${}^{a}$ Genes listed in the H. influenzae genome, accession number NC 000907.  
${}^{b}$ Location refers to the nucleotide position in the H. influenzae genome.  
${}^{c}$ PID, protein identification number.

droxyisobutyrate dehydrogenase and the specific E. coli homologue corresponding to the AE000157 locus. It is possible other E. coli $\beta$-hydroxyacid dehydrogenase homologues (shown in Fig. 1) may correspond to other isoforms of tartronate semialdehyde reductase with differences in kinetic properties or substrate specificity.

Identification of the HI1010 Homologue as a Novel $\beta$-Hydroxybutyrate Dehydrogenase—To confirm the identity of the cloned H. influenzae homologue (HI1010 gene product) as a $\beta$-hydroxyacid dehydrogenase, this cDNA was also expressed and purified utilizing the plasmid-encoded 6-histidine tag. The purified recombinant protein was over 95% pure as determined by SDS-PAGE, and the predicted amino acid sequence of the purified protein was also confirmed by the masses and fragmentation patterns of tryptic peptides as described above for the E. coli enzyme (data not shown). Like the E. coli tartronate semialdehyde reductase, the H. influenzae $\beta$-hydroxybutyrate dehydrogenase displayed a size of approximately 150,000 when analyzed by size exclusion chromatography (Fig. 4), indicating a tetrameric structure. Also like the E. coli tartronate semialdehyde reductase, this purified protein displayed enzymatic activities in the NAD${}^{+}$-dependent oxidation of D-glycerate and NADH-dependent reduction of tartronate semialdehyde and was highly specific for $\beta$-NAD${}^{+}$ as the dinucleotide cofactor. However, this enzyme was considerably more efficient in the oxidation of four-carbon substrates including $R$-$\beta$-hydroxybutyrate and D-threonine. The $K_{m}$ for D-glycerate (3.7 mM) was about 14-fold higher than that with the E. coli enzyme (Table I). In contrast, the $K_{m}$ values for $R$-$\beta$-hydroxybutyrate and D-threonine were 48 and 61 $\mu$M, respectively, and the $V_{\text{max}}$ for each of these two substrates was approximately 2.5-fold higher than that with D-glycerate (Table I). The enzyme was inactive

with many analogous $\beta$-hydroxyacid substrates including L-glycerate, $R$- and $S$-$\beta$-hydroxyisobutyrate, D- and L-serine, D-phenylserine, L-threonine, D-allothreonine, D- and L-malate, and D/L-mevalonate. This enzyme was, however, active in the oxidation of $S$-$\beta$-hydroxybutyrate although with a $K_{m}$ value (15 mm) over 300-fold higher than that for the R-enantiomer (Table I). Nevertheless, the $V_{\text{max}}$ with this substrate was only slightly lower than that with $R$-$\beta$-hydroxybutyrate. Therefore, the HI1010 gene appears to code for a novel $\beta$-hydroxybutyrate dehydrogenase with extremely different substrate specificity compared with the known $\beta$-hydroxybutyrate dehydrogenases from both prokaryotic and eukaryotic species. All of the currently known $\beta$-hydroxybutyrate dehydrogenases that have been cloned or structurally characterized are members of the well established short chain dehydrogenase/reductase (SDR) enzyme family. This family of enzymes includes a number of secondary alcohol and steroid metabolizing enzymes (13) as well as a large number of as yet unidentified, hypothetical proteins and shares a distinct structural framework and catalytic mechanism quite different from that of the $\beta$-hydroxyacid dehydrogenase family (12–15). The $\beta$-hydroxybutyrate dehydrogenases from Pseudomonas lemoignei and Rhodopseudomonas spheroides have been thoroughly characterized and are now widely used as reagents for the measurement of ketone bodies in various biological samples (16, 17). However, when compared with the H. influenzae (HI1010) enzyme, the purified $\beta$-hydroxybutyrate dehydrogenases from both P. lemoignei and R. spheroides were highly specific for $R$-$\beta$-hydroxybutyrate and were virtually inactive with either D-threonine and D-glycerate (Fig. 5). These data clearly demonstrate very different catalytic and structural characteristics between what can now be considered two forms of $R$-$\beta$-hydroxybutyrate dehydrogenase in

bacterial species. *H. influenzae*, as well as *E. coli*, may also express an SDR type β-hydroxybutyrate dehydrogenase, and it is likely that multiple genes coding for this enzyme activity have evolved to fulfill different metabolic roles with differences in gene expression and regulation. BLAST searches with known amino acid sequences of the SDR type β-hydroxybutyrate dehydrogenases reveal such possible candidate genes (data not shown) in both *E. coli* and *H. influenzae*. However, the prevalence of SDR family members with widely varying substrate specificities makes it difficult to unambiguously predict the exact identity of these homologues based on sequence homology alone.

**Organization of Genes Surrounding *E. coli* and *H. Influenzae* β-Hydroxyacid Dehydrogenases: Possible Distinct Metabolic Roles for Bacterial β-Hydroxyacid Dehydrogenases—**The presence of multiple β-hydroxyacid dehydrogenase homologues in many species of bacteria suggests that this family of enzymes may serve metabolic roles specific to bacterial biology. As shown above, tartrate semialdehyde fits this paradigm with a crucial role in D-glycerate biosynthesis from the two-carbon precursor, glyoxylate. Examination of the open reading frames in the AE000157 locus, flanking the tartrate semialdehyde gene, also supports this hypothesis. The genes coding for both glyoxylate carboligase and GIP, or glyoxylate-induced-protein, directly precede the tartrate semialdehyde coding sequence (Fig. 6). The GIP gene was recently identified as a specific hydroxypyruvate isomerase that catalyzes the synthesis of tartrate semialdehyde (18), as does glyoxylate carboligase, although with different mechanisms and precursors. The glyoxylate carboligase gene is directly preceded by a promoter sequence containing two separate sigma factor sites (Fig. 6). Although the tartrate semialdehyde reductase and GIP coding sequences are separated by a second putative sigma factor site, these three genes clearly form part of a gene cluster that would function, in part, in the biosynthesis of D-glycerate with tartrate semialdehyde reduction as a central feature. Furthermore, when we cultured DH5α *E. coli* cells in M9 minimal medium with either 0.5% (w/v) glucose or glyoxylate as the sole carbon source, the activity of tartrate semialdehyde reductase was induced over 100-fold with growth on glyoxylate as compared with that with glucose, when assayed either for NAD⁺-dependent oxidation of D-glycerate or NADH-dependent reduction of synthetic tartrate semialdehyde.

The gene structures surrounding the other three putative *E. coli* β-hydroxyacid dehydrogenases do not suggest clear or obvious functional roles. However, the homologue present at the AE000357 locus is also present in a cluster of genes containing a putative GIP or hydroxypyruvate isomerase coding sequence (Fig. 6), raising the question of identity for this gene as a second isoform of tartrate semialdehyde reductase linked to a second isoform of hydroxypyruvate isomerase with possible differences in gene expression or regulation. The open reading frames surrounding the HI1010 gene also do not suggest a single, obvious metabolic function but include a wide array of

genes related to various carbohydrate metabolism pathways (Table II). It is noteworthy that the HI1010 gene also lies upstream of a putative GIP or hydroxypyruvate isomerase gene, the HI 1013 gene (Table II), revealing the same apparent genetic link in two widely differing bacterial species that may reflect common aspects of biological function in glycerate biosynthesis.

It is also possible, although speculative, that the novel β-hydroxybutyrate dehydrogenase represented by HI1010 may play a role in utilization of polyhydroxybutyrates as an energy source. It is well established that most prokaryotes synthesize various forms of polyhydroxybutyrates under different conditions of nutrient deprivation (19, 20). It is likely that a specific β-hydroxybutyrate dehydrogenase may be induced as part of the machinery for utilization of polyhydroxybutyrates as an energy storage form. Indeed, when the SDR type β-hydroxybutyrate dehydrogenase of *Rhizobium (Sinorhizobium) meliloti* was genetically deleted, the knockout strain produced showed no changes in the turnover of polyhydroxybutyrates, suggesting that perhaps another enzyme may have been present to fill this role (21). Further genetic or metabolic studies will be required to define the true role of specific bacterial types of β-hydroxybutyrate dehydrogenases in this or any other metabolic pathway.

Acknowledgments—We thank Dr. Robert A. Harris, Dr. Edwin T. Harper, Dr. Thomas D. Hurley, and Dr. Ronald C. Wek for much helpful discussion.

**REFERENCES**

1. Hawes, J. W., Harper, E. T., Crabb, D. W., and Harris, R. A. (1996) FEBS Lett. **389**, 263–267
2. Hawes, J. W., Harper, E. T., Crabb, D. W., and Harris, R. A., (1996) Enzymology and Molecular Biology of Carbonyl Metabolism, pp. 395–402, Plenum Press, New York
3. Adams M. J., Ellis G. H., Gover S., Naylor C. E., and Phillips C. (1994) Structure **2**, 651–668
4. Zhang L., Chooback L., and Cook P. F. (1999) Biochemistry **38**, 11231–11238
5. Mirny L. A., and Shakhnovich E. I. (1999) J. Mol. Biol. **291**, 177–196
6. Rougraff P. M., Paxton R., Kuntz M. J., Crabb D. W., and Harris R. A. (1988) J. Biol. Chem. **263**, 327–331
7. Steele M. I., Lorenz D., Hatter K., Park A., Sokatch J. R. (1992) J. Biol. Chem. **267**, 13585–13592
8. Hawes, J. W., Crabb, D. W., Chan, R. M., Rougraff, P., and Harris, R. A. (1995) Biochemistry **34**, 4231–4237
9. Kohn, L., and Jakoby, W. B. (1967) J. Biol. Chem. **243**, 2465–2471
10. Zhao, Y., Hawes, J. W., Popov, K. P., Jaskiewicz, J., Shimomura, Y., Crabb, D. W., and Harris, R. A. (1994) J. Biol. Chem. **269**, 18583–18587
11. Laemmli, U. K. (1970) Nature **227**, 680–685
12. Kohn, L. (1968) J. Biol. Chem. **243**, 4426–4433
13. Jornvall, H., Persson, B., Krook, M., Atrian, S., Gonzalez-Duarte, R., Jeffery, J., Ghosh, D. (1995) Biochemistry **34**, 6003–6013
14. Gamble, M. V., Shang, E., Zott, R. P., Mertz, J. R., Wolgemuth, D. J., and Blaner W. S. (1999) J. Lipid Res. **40**, 2279–2292
15. Kruger, K., Lang, G., Weidner, T., and Engel, A. M. (1999) Appl. Microbiol. Bio/Technol. **52**, 666–669
16. Bergmeyer, H. U., Gawehn, K., Klotzsch, H., Krebs, H. A., and Williamson D. H. (1967) Biochem. J. **102**, 423–431
17. Williamson, D. H., and Mellanby, J. (1974) Methods of Enzymatic Analysis (Bergmeyer, H., ed) 2nd Ed., pp. 1836, Academic Press, Inc., New York
18. Ashiuchi, M., and Misono, H. (1999) Biochim. Biophys. Acta **1435**, 153–159
19. Anderson, A. J., and Dawes, E. A. (1990) Microbiol. Rev. **54**, 841–847
20. Jia, Y., Kappock, T. J., Frick, T., Sinskey, A. J., and Stubbe, J. (2000) Biochemistry **39**, 3927–3936
21. Aneja, P., and Charles, T. C. (1999) J. Bacteriol. **181**, 849–857

ENZYME CATALYSIS AND
REGULATION:
Novel β-Hydroxyacid Dehydrogenases in
Escherichia coli and Haemophilus
influenzae

Reuben K. Njau, Carter A. Herndon and John
W. Hawes
J. Biol. Chem. 2000, 275:38780-38786.
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M007432200 originally published online September 7, 2000

Access the most updated version of this article at doi: 10.1074/jbc.M007432200

Find articles, minireviews, Reflections and Classics on similar topics on the JBC Affinity Sites.

Alerts:
- When this article is cited
- When a correction for this article is posted

Click here to choose from all of JBC's e-mail alerts

This article cites 0 references, 0 of which can be accessed free at
http://www.jbc.org/content/275/49/38780.full.html#ref-list-1
