
Plant Cell Physiol. 42(1): 63–73 (2001)  
JSPP © 2001

# Mutational Analysis of Genes Involved in Pilus Structure, Motility and Transformation Competency in the Unicellular Motile Cyanobacterium Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803

Shizue Yoshihara${}^{1}$, Xiao Xing Geng${}^{1}$, Shinobu Okamoto${}^{1}$, Kei Yura${}^{2}$, Takashi Murata${}^{1}$, Mitiko Go${}^{2}$, Masayuki Ohmori${}^{1}$ and Masahiko Ikeuchi${}^{1,3}$

${}^{1}$ Department of Life Sciences (Biology), University of Tokyo, Komaba 3-8-1, Meguro, Tokyo, 153-8902 Japan  
${}^{2}$ Department of Biological Science, Graduate School of Science, Nagoya University, Furo-cho, Chikusa, Nagoya, 464-8602 Japan  

The relevance of pilus-related genes to motility, pilus structure on the cell surface and competency of natural transformation was studied by gene disruption analysis in the unicellular motile cyanobacterium *Synechocystis* sp. PCC 6803. The genes disrupted in this study were chosen as related to the *pil* genes for biogenesis of the type IV pili in a Gram-negative bacterium *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*. It was found that motility of *Synechocystis* cells was lost in the mutants of *slr0063*, *slr1274*, *slr1275*, *slr1276*, *slr1277* and *sll1694* together with a simultaneous loss of the thick pili on the cell surface. Competency of the natural transformation was lost in the mutants listed above and *slr0197*-disruptant. The gene *slr0197* was previously predicted as a competence gene by a search with sequence-independent DNA-binding structure [Yura et al. (1999) *DNA Res.* 6: 75]. It was suggested that both DNA uptake for natural transformation and motility are mediated by a specific type IV-like pilus structure, while a putative DNA-binding protein encoded by *slr0197* is additionally required for the DNA uptake. Based on the homology with the *pil* genes in *P. aeruginosa*, *slr0063*, *slr1274*, *slr1275*, *slr1276*, *slr1277* and *sll1694* were designated *pilB1*, *pilM*, *pilN*, *pilO*, *pilQ* and *pilA1*, respectively. The gene *slr0197* was designated *comA*.

Key words: Cyanobacterium — Motility — Pilus structure — *Synechocystis* sp. PCC 6803 — Transformation — Type IV pili.

Abbreviation: ORF, open reading frame.

---

## Introduction

Cyanobacteria are the most ancient organisms to perform oxygenic photosynthesis and are believed to be ancestors of chloroplasts in plants. Not all but many cyanobacteria show motility in a form of gliding, twitching or swimming, although none of them employ flagella which is in contrast to many other bacteria (Diehn et al. 1979, Hader 1987, Waterbury et al. 1985). The molecular mechanism of such motility has been poorly understood even though physiology of motility has been extensively studied by using filamentous cyanobacteria for many decades. However, to date only a few genes have been shown to be responsible for motility in unicellular cyanobacteria. In marine *Synechococcus* which shows swimming motility (Waterbury et al. 1985), *swmA* encoding a cell-surface-associated protein of 130 kDa was shown to be essential for translocation of cells in liquid (Brahamsha 1996). On the other hand, the transformable cyanobacterium *Synechocystis* sp. PCC 6803, of which the complete genome was determined (Kaneko et al. 1996), shows sporadic motility of twitching (Stanier et al. 1971). Among over 3000 ORFs in the genome, Bhaya et al. (1999) reported that an alternative sigma factor, *sigF*, and putative pilus subunit genes, *sll1694* and *sll1695*, are essential for motility. Okamoto and Ohmori (1999) also reported that *slr0161* (*pilT*) gene product having ATPase activity is essential for motility in the same organism. These suggest that a kind of pili, which resemble the type IV pili in many Gram-negative bacteria (Mattick et al. 1996), may be the motility machinery at least in some cyanobacteria, although the pili themselves or genes for pilus biogenesis have not yet been characterized.

The type IV pili are widely distributed in many Gram-negative bacteria (Mattick et al. 1996). They are typical extracellular structures located at the pole of the cell and feature unique pilin subunits (Sastry et al. 1983). Each subunit is synthesized as a precursor and a unique leader sequence is cleaved off on the cytoplasmic side by a specific prepilin peptidase, which recognizes a region around the cleavage site including the mature N-terminal part (Nunn and Lory 1991). Accordingly, the N-terminal region of the mature pilin protein is highly conserved, while the leader sequence or C-terminal region of the protein is not conserved (Sastry et al. 1985). It is well known that the type IV pili are involved in various cellular functions such as motility, transformation, infection and adhesion (Strom and Lory 1993). In an opportunistic Gram-negative pathogen *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*, the type IV pilus has been shown to be responsible for the twitching motility (Darzins and Russell 1997, Mattick et al. 1996). In a soil bacterium *Myxococcus xanthus*, the social motility of the gliding cells requires a number of *pil* genes for the type IV pilus (Spormann 1999). In a pathogenic bacterium *Neisseria gonorr*

${}^{3}$ Corresponding author: E-mail, mikeuchi@ims.u-tokyo.ac.jp; Fax, +81-3-5454-4337.

Table 1 Primers and positions of the insertional disruption for the pil-related genes

| Disrupted gene (Mutant strain) | Forward primer | Reverse primer | Position of insertional disruption/ amplified DNA (bp) |
|------------------------------|----------------|----------------|-----------------------------------------------------|
| sll1694 (Msll1694)            | 5-AGCGGGAAGAATCCGCAT-3 | 5-AAATGAGTTGAACCTTGGG-3 | 518/2277 |
| sll1695 (Msll1695)            | 5-AGCGGGAAGAATCCGCAT-3 | 5-AAATGAGTTGAACCTTGGG-3 | 882/2277 |
| slr0063 (Mslr0063)            | 5-CATATGACATCTTCCTCCTCT-3 | 5-CTCCGCAATGTCCATGTC-3 | 404/903 |
| slr0079 (Mslr0079)            | 5-CATATGGTCTTTTCCCTCCGATT-3 | 5-GGATTCCTGGGCTAATCT-3 | 711/1143 |
| slr1274 (Mslr1274)            | 5-GGATGTTAGCCTCTCGGCAA-3 | 5-CTCTTCGCTGTAGCTGGTCA-3 | 1517/3140 |
| slr1275 (Mslr1275)            | 5-GGATGTTAGCCTCTCGGCAA-3 | 5-CTCTTCGCTGTAGCTGGTCA-3 | 2527/3140 |
| slr1276 (Mslr1276)            | 5-TTGAGGCAAAAACGGCGG-3 | 5-AATTACCCTTTAGGGGGC-3 | 772/1463 |
| slr1277 (Mslr1277)            | 5-GCCAAGTGGCAGTAAACG-3 | 5-TAACTATGGGCTGAGCCTG-3 | 475/1091 |
| slr0197 (Mslr0197)            | 5-CATATGGGAAAACTAAACAGAGG-3 | 5-GATTGCTCGGCGATCGGG-3 | 362/903 |

Note that the same sets of primers were used for disruption of sll1694/sll1695 and slr1274/slr1275. This was because the neighboring ORFs in the same DNA fragment were insertionally interrupted at different positions.

rhoeae, the type IV pilus is involved in both twitching motility, competence for natural transformation and infection to human cells (Fussenegger et al. 1997, Wolfgang et al. 1998). Thus, it is suggested that the type IV pili are the common apparatus for the twitching or gliding motility in many Gram-negative bacteria. However, the molecular mechanism of motility or its regulatory processes is still totally unknown in contrast to the well-characterized swimming motility by flagella.

Based on the complete genome sequence of the unicellular cyanobacterium Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803, we have been studying physiological roles of a number of genes by directed gene disruption. It was found that a putative protein phosphatase gene, slr2031, is required for motility, although its target phosphoprotein is yet to be determined (Kamei et al. 1998). We also found that many regulatory components such as transcription factor, sensor histidine kinase, eukaryotic-type serine/threonine protein kinase and photoreceptor are also required for normal motility (Kamei et al. 2001, Yoshihara et al. 2000). For thorough understanding, it is a prerequisite to characterize the apparatus for motility as a target of those regulatory components. To end this, we created mutants of the ORFs which are homologous to the genes involved in biogenesis of the pilus structure in *P. aeruginosa* and examined the phenotype. It was found that a specific type IV-like pilus structure supported by a certain set of pil genes is indispensable for motility and transformation competency.

Materials and Methods

Culture and growth condition
The motile strain of the unicellular cyanobacterium Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803 was obtained from Pasteur Culture Collection and a clone showing vigorous motility with positive phototaxis (substrain PCC-P) was selected as a parent strain for gene disruption. Cells were grown in liquid BG11 medium (Stanier et al. 1971) bubbled with air containing 1% (v/v) CO₂ at 31°C at light intensity of 50 μE m⁻²s⁻¹.

Kanamycin was included at 20 μg ml⁻¹ when mutants were screened and maintained.

Insertional mutagenesis
The protein database derived from the genome of Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803 was searched for homology using the BLAST program (Altschul et al. 1997) with deduced amino acid sequences of the known pil genes from the γ-proteobacterium, *P. aeruginosa* (Mattick et al. 1996). To inactivate each pil-like gene thus highlighted, a DNA harboring the gene was amplified with primers (Table 1) with AmpliTaq DNA polymerase (PE Applied Biosystems, Foster City, U.S.A.) under the conditions recommended. DNA was cloned into pT7Blue-T vector (Novagen, Madison, U.S.A.) and then a Tn5-derived kanamycin resistant cassette, in which transcription was not terminated (a read-through type), was inserted at a unique restriction site into the target gene (Table 1). The DNA, thus constructed, was introduced into the motile substrate PCC-P of Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803 as described previously (Hihara and Ikeuchi 1997). Complete segregation of the mutation was confirmed by polymerase chain reaction using the same primers as used for cloning. Mutant strain names were abbreviated as in Table 1; e.g., Msll1694 for the disruptant of sll1694.

Motility assay
Motility was estimated by colony morphology on 0.8% (w/v) agar (Bacto-Agar, Difco, Detroit, U.S.A.) (Bradley 1980). Cells grown in liquid at late log-phase (A₇₃₀ = 0.8–1.0) were spread on BG11 solid medium containing 0.8% (w/v) agar and 0.3% (w/v) sodium thiosulfate and cultivated at 31°C under white fluorescent lamp of light intensity at 50 μE m⁻²s⁻¹ for 4d.

Detection of pili by electron microscopy
Cells of each strain growing on agar plates were gently suspended in BG11 medium and examined after staining with 0.8% (w/v) phosphotungstic acid (pH 7.0) by transmission electron microscope (model 1200EX, JEOL, Tokyo, Japan) basically according to Vaara and Vaara (1988).

Transformation competency assay
Competency of each mutant was estimated by transformation efficiency with a test DNA, in which Synechocystis genomic DNA of 3.1 kbp carrying pmgA was interrupted with a spectinomycin-resistant cassette in pUC18 plasmid (Hihara and Ikeuchi 1997). 10⁸ cells of

Table 2 List of possible pil-related genes in the genome of Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803

| Gene ID | Original annotation | Assignment in this work$^a$ | References$^b$ | $pil$ genes | Proposed function | References$^b$ |
|---------|---------------------|----------------------------|---------------|--------------|--------------------|---------------|
| sll1694 | hofG                | $pilA1$                    | 1, this work   | $pilA$       | prepilin (pilus subunit) | 3, 4         |
| sll1695 | hofG                | ($pilA2$)                  | 1, this work   | $pilA$       | prepilin (pilus subunit) | 3, 4         |
| slr1046 | hypothetical        | ($pilA3$)                  | this work      | $pilA$       | prepilin (pilus subunit) | 3, 4         |
| slr1456 | gspD                | ($pilA4$)                  | 1, this work   | $pilA$       | prepilin (pilus subunit) | 3, 4         |
| slr1928 | hypothetical        | ($pilA5$)                  | this work      | $pilA$       | prepilin (pilus subunit) | 3, 4         |
| slr1929 | hypothetical        | ($pilA6$)                  | 1, this work   | $pilA$       | prepilin (pilus subunit) | 3, 4         |
| slr1930 | hypothetical        | ($pilA7$)                  | 1, this work   | $pilA$       | prepilin (pilus subunit) | 3, 4         |
| slr1931 | hypothetical        | ($pilA8$)                  | this work      | $pilA$       | prepilin (pilus subunit) | 3, 4         |
| slr0063 | gspE                | $pilB1$                    | this work      | $pilB$       | pilus assembly     | 5             |
| slr0079 | gspE                | ($pilB2$)                  | this work      | $pilB$       | pilus assembly     | 5             |
| slr1274 | pilM                | $pilM$                     | this work      | $pilM$       | unknown            | 6             |
| slr1275 | hypothetical        | $pilN$                     | this work      | $pilN$       | unknown            | 6             |
| slr1276 | hypothetical        | $pilO$                     | this work      | $pilO$       | unknown            | 6             |
| slr1277 | gspG                | $pilQ$                     | this work      | $pilQ$       | pore at the outer membrane | 7           |
| slr1120 | tapD                | $pilD$                     | this work      | $pilD$       | prepilin peptidase | 8, 9          |
| slr0197 | comE ORF1           | $comA$                     | 2, this work   | —            | —                  | —             |

$a$ Gene names in parentheses are tentative.

$b$ 1, Bhaya et al. 1999; 2, Yura et al. 1999; 3, Pasloske and Paranchych 1988; 4, Sastry et al. 1985; 5, Nunn et al. 1990; 6, Martin et al. 1995; 7, Martin et al. 1993; 8, Nunn and Lory 1991; 9, Strom and Lory 1993.

Genes for motility in *Synechocystis*

Fig. 1 Colony morphology of wild type and mutants on the agar plate. Cells were grown on 0.8% agar plate for 4 d under illumination at 50 μE m⁻² s⁻¹. A, wild type (PCC-P); B, Msl1695; C, Mslr0079; D, Msl11694; E, Mslr0063; F, Mslr1274; G, Mslr1275; H, Mslr1276; I, Mslr1277. Bars show 0.2 mm in A–C and 0.1 mm in D–I, respectively.

intrinsic promoter. Thus, we concluded that all of them were required for motility in *Synechocystis*.

Bhaya et al. (1999) reported that the double mutant of *sll1694* and *sll1695* lost motility. We disrupted them separately and also created the similar double mutant. It was found that Msl11694 and the double mutant but not Msl11695 lost motility

and thus formed domed colonies (Fig. 1). Cells in colonies of Msl11694 and the double mutant appeared to be more tightly aggregated than the parent PCC-P and it was difficult to collect those cells from agar plates with a loop. When grown in liquid BG11 medium, cells of Msl11694 and the double mutant tended to form a large clump. These properties were not

Genes for motility in *Synechocystis*

Fig. 2 Electron micrographs of negatively stained cells of wild type. Panel A, typical image with many thick pili, thin pili and a few bundles of the thin pili on the surface of the cell; B, a portion of panel A was enlarged three times; C and D, enlarged images of wild-type cells to show the thin pili, the bundle of the thin pili and detached thick pili. A bar in panel A shows 1 μm, while bars in panels B, C and D show 0.2 μm. Long arrows, arrowheads, short arrows and white arrows indicate the thick pili projected from the cell, the thick pili detached from the cell, the thin pili and the bundles of the thin pili, respectively.

observed in PCC-P or the other non-motile mutants. We also disrupted other pilin-like genes (*slr1046*, *slr1456*, *slr1928*, *slr1929*, *slr1930* and *slr1931*). All of them did not show any defects in motility as judged by colony morphology (not shown).

Although the *slr1120* mutant retained genome DNA of wild type under the selective conditions and did not segregate, it showed minute domed colonies (not shown). This indicates

Genes for motility in *Synechocystis*

Fig. 3 Electron micrographs of negatively stained images of wild type and mutants. Panel A, wild type (PCC-P); B, Msl11695; C, Mslr0079; D, Msl11694; E, Mslr0063; F, Mslr1274; G, Mslr1275; H, Mslr1276; I, Mslr1277. Bars show 1 μm.

Genes for motility in Synechocystis

Table 3 Transformation efficiencies of wild type and mutants

| Strain                     | Transformation efficiency (%) $^{a}$ |
|----------------------------|-------------------------------------|
| wild type (PCC-P)           | 100                                 |
| MslI 1694 (pilA1)           | $0^{b}$                             |
| MslI 1695 (pilA2)           | 52                                  |
| Mslr 0063 (pilB1)           | 0                                   |
| Mslr 0079 (pilB2)           | 37                                  |
| Mslr 1274 (pilM)            | 0                                   |
| Mslr 1275 (pilN)            | 0                                   |
| Mslr 1276 (pilO)            | 0                                   |
| Mslr 1277 (pilQ)            | 0                                   |
| Mslr 0197 (comA)            | 0                                   |

$^{a}$ Value (%) represents the frequency of transformation relative to wild type.

$^{b}$ Zero means below the detection limit (0.1%).

the bundles of the thin filaments. On the other hand, the thick pili were present in the motile mutants such as MslI 1695 and Mslr 0079 (Fig. 3B, C). The number of the thick pili in MslI 1695 was much more than in PCC-P (Fig. 3A), although we could not detect a marked difference in motility between PCC-P and MslI 1695. These results strongly suggest that the thick pili are responsible for motility and their assembly or formation strictly depends on the genes, sll 1694, slr 0063, slr 1274, slr 1275, slr 1276, and slr 1277.

Transformation competency of the mutants

It is well known that Synechocystis cells are naturally transformable to uptake extracellular DNA (Grigorieva and Shestakov 1982). The incorporated DNA is usually integrated by homologous recombination with double crossing over in this cyanobacterium. Thus, we estimated transformation competency of the mutants as well as the parent PCC-P by using a gene disruption construct with the different antibiotic resistant gene (aadA) (Table 3). Under the experimental conditions we employed, PCC-P gave about 600–850 transformants out of 10⁸ recipient cells, while the non-motile mutants of sll 1694, slr 0063, slr 1274, slr 1275, slr 1276 and slr 1277 gave no transformants reproducibly. On the other hand, the motile mutants of sll 1695 and slr 0079 retained competency, although the efficiency was lower than PCC-P. No spontaneous spectinomycin-resistant colonies emerged without addition of DNA. This strongly suggests that the thick pili are essential for transformation competency as well as motility.

Competence-specific gene

Yura et al. (1999) detected an ORF in the Synechocystis genome by a search with novel algorithms for sequence-independent DNA-binding proteins. Slr 0197, thus obtained, has hybrid features of two known proteins: the N-terminal part was a tandem repeat of a domain homologous to endonuclease/car-diolipin synthetase, while the C-terminal part was homologous to DNA-binding competence protein of bacteria. To test whether slr 0197 is involved in motility or competence, we created a disruption mutant. Complete segregation of the mutant genome was confirmed by polymerase chain reaction (not shown). Mslr 0197 showed normal motility on the agar plate (Fig. 4A), whereas it lost transformation competency completely (Table 3). Electron microscopic examination of the negatively stained cells revealed the presence of both thick and thin pili, although the number of the thick pili seemed to be slightly fewer than PCC-P (Fig. 4B). This suggests that Slr 0197 is specifically involved in the transformation process, but not in the motility process.

Discussion

By examination of the mutant phenotype of pil-like genes, we have demonstrated that slr 0063, slr 1274, slr 1275, slr 1276, slr 1277 and sll 1694 are required for assembly of the thick pili.

Genes for motility in *Synechocystis*

Fig. 4 Colony morphology (A) and electron micrograph of negatively stained image (B) of Mslr0197 mutant. Bars show 0.1 mm in panel A and 1 μm in panel B, respectively.

together with motility and transformation competency. Based on homology with the gene designation in *P. aeruginosa*, we designated *slr0063*, *slr1274*, *slr1275*, *slr1276*, *slr1277* and *sll1694* as *pilB1*, *pilM*, *pilN*, *pilO*, *pilQ* and *pilA1*, respectively. We also propose to name *slr1120 pilD*, although the phenotype of the *slr1120* mutant was only partially studied due to incomplete segregation. Combined with the observation that a gene cluster of *pilT/pilC* is essential for motility and transformation competency (Okamoto and Ohmori 1999), almost whole set of the *pil* genes, which are essential for the biogenesis of the type IV-like thick pilus structure, were now established in the unicellular cyanobacterium *Synechocystis* sp. PCC 6803. On the other hand, the thin pili may be composed of PilA1 (*Sll1694*), although they are not supported by the other *pil* genes. If so, the thin pili should be categorized into the type IV, too. Thus, “type IV pilus structure” may be too broad to classify the thick and thin pilus structures in *Synechocystis* sp. PCC 6803. We would like to reserve the conclusive classification of pili for future work.

It is well known that the general secretion system (also called the type II protein secretion system) in Gram-negative bacteria consists of a set of *gsp* genes, which resemble, in essence, the *pil* genes for the type IV pili (Russel 1998). In those, *gspE* and *pilB* encode a putative ATPase, while *gspD* and *pilQ* encode proteins belonging to a large secretin family, which form pores on the outer membrane in Gram-negative bacteria (Bitter et al. 1998). They are related to each other but

they play distinct roles in the same organism such as *P. aeruginosa* (Martin et al. 1993, Akrim et al. 1993). In this report, we unambiguously demonstrated that *slr0063* and *slr1277* are required for formation of the thick pili, cell motility and transformation competency. This indicates that they are categorized as the *pil* genes but not *gsp* genes. On the other hand, *slr0079* may be a homolog of *gspE* as already annotated in the genome (Kaneko et al. 1996), although we tentatively designated it *pilB2*. We could not find any homolog of *gspD* other than *slr1277* (*pilQ*) in the *Synechocystis* genome. It should be noted that the thin pili, which often form bundles, were able to be assembled in the absence of Slr1277 (*PilQ*). This may indicate that Mslr1277 still assemble a kind of pore, from which the thin pili could be projected. There are many unidentified genes in the *Synechocystis* genome, which are seemingly targeted into the outer membrane as judged from the sequence homology. Some of them may be involved in the assembly of the thin pili.

There is a characteristic difference in gene arrangement of *pilB*, *pilC* and *pilT* between cyanobacteria and *P. aeruginosa*. *pilT* and its homologs are unique to the type IV pili in many bacteria but not known in the general secretion system. PilB and PilT are homologous to each other, having the ATP-binding “Walker” motif of GXXGXGKT (Walker et al. 1982). In *P. aeruginosa*, *pilT* mutant was featured by no twitching motility and hyper-piliation (Wall and Kaiser 1999, Whitchurch et al. 1991), while *pilB* mutant did not assemble the pili (Nunn et al. 1990). The same results were obtained in *slr0161* (*pilT*) mutant

Genes for motility in Synechocystis

| PilA[P.aeruginosa]: | MKAQKG | FTLIEEMIVVAITGILAAIAIPOYQDYTARTQVTRAVSEVSALKTAE. | 154 |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Slll1694 (PilA1): | ..LSQLSKKRAEGG | FTLIEELLVVVIICVLAAIALPNLLGQVGKARESEAKSTIGALNRAQQ. | 168 |
| Slll1695 (PilA2): | ..NCRHFNGTRORG | FTLIEELLVVVIIIGVLGAMTLPNLFSQIGKAREAEAKQILSAIGQAQQ. | 170 |
| Slr1046 (PilA3): | ..PLTAPNPMNIFG | IGLPELGLIFVALLVFPGKKLPEVGRSLGKALRGFQEASKEFETELK. | 126 |
| Slr1456 (PilA4): | ..FLRRHALACSTG | FTLLEILVVIVIGTLCATAVPNLLAQVDKARYSEAKTOMSCMAKELT. | 175 |
| Slr1928 (PilA5): | ..LLESVRHSAOQS | ETMFEVLIALMISFLFLTGLNAMVMATVMRVKAEREEAQAGYWIKEDL. | 194 |
| Slr1929 (PilA6): | ..VFNPHPSTSSQG | WTLTEIGVVTVIVGTLAAMAFPSLAGIQARNOVRSRMIEVRAAVQEAQ. | 183 |
| Slr1930 (PilA7): | ..KLCLFTQKSTSG | WTLLEIGVVTTIVGILASVAFBSLMGIKAKMDTRGEFSEVVQTLRQAQ. | 186 |
| Slr1931 (PilA8): | ..LWYLMTRNSSKG | FTLLELLLASIMTFFVVSATGYAILVMIRENISSDVSSDLRFNTDRAT. | 305 |

putative PilD cleavage site

Fig. 5 Sequence alignment of pilA-like gene products of Synechocystis with PilA of P. aeruginosa. Residues identical to *Pseudomonas* PilA are shown in reverse type letters. N-terminal and C-terminal sequences, which are not shown in this figures are indicated by dots. Asterisks represent the special residues recognized by PilD peptidase in *P. aeruginosa*. An arrow shows the possible cleavage sites by the PilD peptidase.

(Okamoto and Ohmori 1999) and *slr0063 (pilB1)* mutant (this work). Furthermore, two ORFs, *slr0162* and *slr0163*, at downstream of *slr0161* was found to be derived from a frameshift mutation of a single gene, which is homologous to *pilC* in *P. aeruginosa* (Okamoto, S. and Ohmori, M. unpublished results). Thus, *pilC* is clustered with *pilT (slr0161)* but not with *pilB1 (slr0063)* in Synechocystis, whereas *pilC* is located just downstream of *pilB* but far from *pilT* in *P. aeruginosa* (Mattick et al. 1996). Homologs of *pilB1 (slr0063)*, *pilC*, *pilT (slr0161)* were also detected in the genome of a filamentous cyanobacterium *Anabaena* sp. PCC 7120 (http://www.kazusa.or.jp/cyano/anabaena/). Interestingly, ORF 670 (*pilB*), ORF 370 (*pilT*) and ORF 407 (*pilC*) are clustered together in this order in the *Anabaena* genome. Taking into consideration that many gene clusters are more preserved in *Anabaena* genome than in *Synechocystis*, the original cluster of *pilB/pilT/pilC* in *Anabaena* was probably split into the two, *pilB1* and *pilT/pilC* in *Synechocystis*. In any case, these gene arrangement in cyanobacteria is distinctly different from *pilB/pilC* and *pilT* in *P. aeruginosa*.

Although the homology of *Slr1274*, *Slr1275* and *Slr1276* to *PilM*, *PilN* and *PilO* of *P. aeruginosa* is weak, our observation that those mutants of *Synechocystis* completely lost the thick pili strongly supported the idea that they are distant homologs of the *Pseudomonas* genes. Strangely, we could not find in the *Synechocystis* genome an ORF homologous to *pilP*, despite that *pilP* is located in the *pilM* cluster and essential for the biogenesis of the type IV pili in *P. aeruginosa* (*γ*-proteobacteria) or *Neisseria gonorrhoeae* (*β*-proteobacteria) (Martin et al. 1995, Drake et al. 1997). *PilP* protein is assumed to be a lipoprotein located in the periplasm and play an important role in functioning of *PilQ*, the outer membrane pore protein in *N. gonorrhoeae* (Drake et al. 1997). The apparent absence of *pilP* in *Synechocystis* genome suggests that the cell surface structure of *Synechocystis* is somewhat different from that of the proteobacteria.

Bhaya et al. (1999) reported that a double deletion mutant of the tandemly arranged *sll1694* and *sll1695* lost most of pili and was non-motile. We disrupted them separately and found that only *sll1694 (pilA1)* was responsible for the thick pilus structure, motility and transformation competency. In *Msll1694*, the thin pili still remained but in a greatly reduced quantity. This may suggest that not only the thick pili but also the thin pili consist of pilin subunit of *Sll1694* in common. On the other hand, we could not know the role of *sll1695*, although it is highly expressed as shown by DNA microarray analysis (Kamei, A., Hihara, Y. and Ikeuchi, M. unpublished results). In the *Synechocystis* genome, we could detect more than 8 genes including *sll1694* and *sll1695* for possible prepilin-like genes based on the conserved features of the prepilin genes (Fig. 5). Namely, the N-terminal hydrophobic regions of the mature proteins are highly conserved, while the leader sequences or C-terminal parts were not conserved. In addition, Gly residue at position -1 and Glu residue at position +5 of the mature proteins are totally conserved and Phe residue at +1 is also highly conserved. These fit well with the substrate specificity of PilD peptidase (Pasloske and Paranchych 1988, Strom and Lory 1991). We disrupted them separately by insertional mutagenesis but all of them except *sll1694* retained motility. Such genes may be a component of the thin pili or the general secretion system, although the latter has not yet been proved experimentally. We are currently trying to create double mutants by introduction of *slr0063*-disruption in each mutant of the prepilin-like gene. Examination of the thin pili in these mutants would clarify the complex structure on the cell surface in cyanobacteria.

We demonstrated that *slr0197* was essential for transformation competency but not for motility. This agrees with the prediction that *slr0197* codes for a hybrid protein of endonuclease/cardiolipin synthetase and DNA-binding competence protein (Yura et al. 1999). The natural transformation is widely distributed in Gram-positive as well as Gram-negative bacteria. In *Bacillus subtilis*, it is known that exogenous DNA binds to ComEA on the cell surface, undergoes limited fragmentation by a certain nuclease, and then one strand is incorporated into the cell (Provvedi and Dubnau 1999). ComEA is a small

DNA-binding protein, which shows homology to the C-terminal part of Slr0197. On the other hand, the hypothetical nuclease has not yet been identified in *B. subtilis* or in other bacteria. The predicted hybrid structure of Slr0197 suggests that the nuclease-like domain may digest the double strand DNA on the cell surface of *Synechocystis* (Yura et al. 1999). Taking these into consideration, we propose to designate *slr0197comA* in *Synechocystis* sp. PCC 6803. Homology search of the *Synechocystis* genome with other *com* genes in *B. subtilis* revealed the presence of *comEC*-like ORF (*sll1929*). To extend our hypothesis, we tried to disrupt this ORF but could not achieve the complete segregation of the mutant genome till now (not shown).

It is of note that the apparatus for DNA uptake in Gram-positive *B. subtilis* shows limited homology to the type IV pilus, which is widely distributed in Gram-negative bacteria. For example, a number of pilin-like genes and their specific peptidase are encoded by *comGC/comGD/comGE/comGG* and *comC* in *B. subtilis*, respectively (Dubnau 1997). However, the apparatus for DNA uptake or pilus structure cannot be detected on the *Bacillus* cells by electron microscopy. On the other hand, the Gram-negative bacterium *N. gonorrhoeae* shows the close relationship between the natural transformation competence and the type IV pilus structure (Fussenegger et al. 1997). However, *slr0197(comA)*-like gene has not yet been identified in this organism. Thus, *Synechocystis* may provide a unique experimental model to study the complex pili system in relation to motility and natural competence.

### Acknowledgements

This work was supported by Grants-in-Aid for Scientific Research on Priority Areas C “Genome Biology” (12206002) (to M.I.) and for Scientific Research (08836002, 11554035, 09NP1501) (to M.I.) from the Ministry of Education, Science and Culture, Japan and by a grant for Scientific Research from the Human Frontier Science Program (to M.I.).

### References

Akrim, M., Bally, M., Ball, G., Lazdunski, A. and Tommassen, J. (1993) Xcp-mediated protein secretion in *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*: identification of two additional genes and evidence for regulation of *xcp* gene expression. *Mol. Microbiol.* 10: 431–443.

Altschul, S.F., Madden, T.L., Schaffer, A.A., Zhang, J., Zhang, Z., Miller, W. and Lipman, D.J. (1997) Gapped BLAST and PSI-BLAST: a new generation of protein database search programs. *Nucl. Acids Res.* 25: 3389–3402.

Bhaya, D., Watanabe, N., Ogawa, T. and Grossman, A.R. (1999) The role of an alternative sigma factor in motility and pilus formation in the cyanobacterium *Synechocystis* sp. PCC 6803. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 96: 3188–3193.

Bitter, W., Koster, M., Latijnhouwers, M., de Cock, H. and Tommassen, J. (1998) Formation of oligomeric rings by XcpQ and PilQ, which are involved in protein transport across the outer membrane of *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*. *Mol. Microbiol.* 27: 209–219.

Bradley, D.E. (1980) A function of *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* PAO polar pili: twitching motility. *Can. J. Bot.* 26: 146–154.

Brahamsa, B. (1996) An abundant cell-surface polypeptide is required for swimming by the nonflagellated marine cyanobacterium *Synechococcus*. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 93: 6504–6509.

Darzins, A. and Russell, M.A. (1997) Molecular genetic analysis of type-4 pilus biogenesis and twitching motility using *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* as a model system—a review. *Gene* 192: 109–115.

Diehn, B., Feinleib, M.E., Haupt, W., Hildebrand, E., Lenci, F. and Nultchh, W. (1979) Terminology of behavioral responses of motile microorganisms. *Photochem. Photobiol.* 26: 559–560.

Drake, S.L., Sandstedt, S.A. and Koomey, M. (1997) PilP, a pilus biogenesis lipoprotein in *Neisseria gonorrhoeae*, affects expression of PilQ as a high-molecular-mass multimer. *Mol. Microbiol.* 23: 657–668.

Dubnau, D. (1997) Binding and transport of transforming DNA by *Bacillus subtilis*: the role of type-IV pilin-like proteins—a review. *Gene* 192: 191–198.

Fussenegger, M., Rudel, T., Barten, R., Ryll, R. and Meyer, T.F. (1997) Transformation competence and type-4 pilus biogenesis in *Neisseria gonorrhoeae*—a review. *Gene* 192: 125–134.

Grigor'eva, G. and Shestakov, S. (1982) Transformation in the cyanobacterium *Synechocystis* sp. 6803. *FEMS Microbiol. Lett.* 13: 367–370.

Häder, D.P. (1987) Photosensory behavior in prokaryotes. *Microbiol. Rev.* 51: 1–21.

Hihara, Y. and Ikeuchi, M. (1997) Mutation in a novel gene required for photoautotrophic growth leads to enhanced photoautotrophic growth of *Synechocystis* sp. PCC 6803. *Photosynth. Res.* 53: 129–139.

Ishimoto, K.S. and Lory, S. (1992) Identification of *pilR*, which encodes a transcriptional activator of the *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* pilin gene. *J. Bacteriol.* 174: 3514–3521.

Kamei, A., Ogawa, T. and Ikeuchi, M. (1998) Identification of a novel gene (*slr2031*) involved in high-light resistance in the cyanobacterium *Synechocystis* sp. PCC 6803. *In* Photosynthesis: Mechanism and Effects. Edited by Garab, G. pp. 2901–2905. Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht.

Kamei, A., Yuasa, T., Orikawa, K., Geng, X.X. and Ikeuchi, M. (2001) A eukaryotic-type protein kinase SpKA is required for the normal motility of the unicellular cyanobacterium, *Synechocystis* sp. PCC 6803. *J. Bacteriol.* (in press).

Kaneko, T., Sato, S., Kotani, H., Tanaka, A., Asamizu, E., Nakamura, T., Miyajima, N., Hirosawa, M., Sugiura, M., Sasamoto, S., Kimura, T., Hosouchi, T., Matsuno, A., Muraki, A., Nakazaki, N., Naruo, K., Okumura, S., Shimo, S., Takeuchi, C., Wada, T., Watanabe, A., Yamada, M., Yasuda, M. and Tabata, S. (1996) Sequence analysis of the genome of the unicellular cyanobacterium *Synechocystis* sp. strain PCC 6803. II. Sequence determination of the entire genome and assignment of potential protein-coding regions. *DNA Res.* 3: 109–136.

Martin, P.R., Hobbs, M., Free, P.D., Jeske, Y. and Mattick, J.S. (1993) Characterization of *pilQ*, new gene required for the biogenesis of type IV fimbriae in *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*. *Mol. Microbiol.* 9: 857–868.

Martin, P.R., Watson, A.A., McCaul, T.F. and Mattick, J.S. (1995) Characterization of a five-gene cluster required for the biogenesis of type 4 fimbriae in *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*. *Mol. Microbiol.* 16: 497–508.

Mattick, J.S., Whitchurch, C.B. and Alm, R.A. (1996) The molecular genetics of type-4 fimbriae in *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*—a review. *Gene* 179: 147–155.

Nunn, D., Bergman, S. and Lory, S. (1990) Products of three accessory genes, *pilB, pilC* and *pilD*, are required for biogenesis of *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* pili. *J. Bacteriol.* 172: 2911–2919.

Nunn, D. and Lory, S. (1991) Product of the *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* gene *pilD* is a prepilin leader peptidase. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 88: 3281–3285.

Nunn, D.N. and Lory, S. (1992) Components of the protein-excretion apparatus of *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* are processed by the type IV prepilin peptidase. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 89: 47–51.

Okamoto, S. and Ohmori, M. (1999) Analysis of cyanobacterial motility in *Synechocystis* sp. PCC 6803. *Plant Cell Physiol. Suppl.* 40: 135.

Pasloske, B.L. and Paranchych, W. (1988) The expression of mutants pilins in *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*: fifth position glutamate affects pilin methylation. *Mol. Microbiol.* 2: 489–495.

Provvedi, R. and Dubnau, D. (1999) ComEA is a DNA receptor for transformation of competent *Bacillus subtilis*. *Mol. Microbiol.* 31: 271–280.

Russel, M. (1998) Macromolecular assembly and secretion across the bacterial cell envelope: Type II protein secretion systems. *J. Mol. Biol.* 279: 485–499.

Sastry, P.A., Pearlstone, J.R., Smillie, L.B. and Paranchych, W. (1983) Amino acid sequence of pilin isolated from *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* PAK. *FEBS Lett.* 151: 253–256.

Sastry, P.A., Finlay, B.B., Pasloske, B.L., Paranchych, W., Pearlstone, J.R. and Smillie, L.B. (1985) Comparative studies of the amino acid and nucleotide

sequences of pilin derived from *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* PAK and PAO. *J. Bacteriol.* 164: 571–577.

Spormann, A.M. (1999) Gliding motility in bacteria: Insights from studies of *Myxococcus xanthus*. *Microbiol. Rev.* 63: 621–641.

Stanier, R.Y., Kunisawa, R., Mandel, M. and Cohen-Bazire, G. (1971) Purification and properties of unicellular blue-green algae (order Chroococcales). *Bacteriol. Rev.* 35: 171–205.

Strom, M.S. and Lory, S. (1991) Amino acid substitutions in Pilin of *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*: Effect of leader peptide cleavage, amino-terminal methylation, and pilus assembly. *J. Biol. Chem.* 266: 1656–1664.

Strom, M.S. and Lory, S. (1993) Structure-function and biogenesis of the type IV pili. *Annu. Rev. Microbiol.* 47: 565–596.

Vaara, T. and Vaara, M. (1988) Cyanobacterial fimbriae. *Methods Enzymol.* 167: 189–195.

Walker, J.E., Saraste, M., Runswick, M.J. and Gay, N.J. (1982) Distantly related sequences in the alpha- and beta-subunits of ATP synthase, myosin, kinase and other ATP-requiring enzymes and a common nucleotide binding fold. *EMBO J.* 1: 945–951.

Wall, D. and Kaiser, D. (1999) Type IV pili and cell motility. *Mol. Microbiol.* 32: 1–10.

Waterbury, J.B., Willey, J.M., Franks, D.G., Valois, F.W. and Watson, S.W. (1985) A cyanobacterium capable of swimming motility. *Science* 230: 74–76.

Whitchurch, C.B., Hobbs, M., Livingston, S.P., Krishnapillai, V. and Mattick, J.S. (1991) Characterization of a *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* twitching motility gene and evidence for a specialized protein export system widespread in eubacteria. *Gene* 101: 33–44.

Wolfgang, M., Lauer, P., Park, H.S., Brossay, L., Hébert, J. and Koomey, M. (1998) PilT mutations lead to simultaneous defects in competence for natural transformation and twitching motility in pilated *Neisseria gonorrhoeae*. *Mol. Microbiol.* 29: 321–330.

Yoshihara, S., Suzuki, F., Fujita, H., Geng, X.X. and Ikeuchi, M. (2000) Novel putative photoreceptor and regulatory genes required for the positive phototactic movement of the unicellular motile cyanobacterium *Synechocystis* sp. PCC 6803. *Plant Cell Physiol.* 41: 1299–1304.

Yura, K., Toh, H. and Go, M. (1999) Putative mechanism of natural transformation as deduced from genome data. *DNA Res.* 6: 75–82.

(Received August 23, 2000; Accepted October 25, 2000)
