
GLIOMAGENESIS: GENETIC ALTERATIONS AND MOUSE MODELS

**Eric C. Holland**

Glioblastoma multiforme is the most malignant of the primary brain tumours and is almost always fatal. The treatment strategies for this disease have not changed appreciably for many years and most are based on a limited understanding of the biology of the disease. However, in the past decade, characteristic genetic alterations have been identified in gliomas that might underlie the initiation or progression of the disease. Recent modelling experiments in mice are helping to delineate the molecular aetiology of this disease and are providing systems to identify and test novel and rational therapeutic strategies.

The gliomas are a large collection of primary brain tumours that have morphology and gene-expression characteristics similar to GLIA, ASTROCYTES and OLIGODENDROCYTES (and their precursors), which together support the functions of neurons in the brain. Because these tumours arise in the central nervous system (CNS) and affect surrounding brain structures, patients with gliomas commonly develop symptoms that include headaches and seizures, or focal neurological alterations that cause weakness of one limb or language disturbance. Gliomas are usually detected by computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scans. Most gliomas arise sporadically and are not inherited within families; however, patients with gliomas frequently have a family history of diverse cancer types. About 30,000 patients in the United States are newly diagnosed with a glioma each year.

Grossly, glioblastoma multiformes (GBMs) are heterogeneous intraparenchymal masses that show evidence of necrosis and haemorrhage. Microscopically, they consist of several cell types: the glioma cells proper, hyperproliferative endothelial cells, macrophages and trapped cells of the normal brain structures that are overrun by the invading glioma. Several histological characteristics are used to grade and define gliomas (BOX 1). These include regions of necrosis, which are surrounded by densely packed tumour cell nuclei and are referred to as being 'pseudopalisading'. In addition, the blood vessels both within and adjacent to the tumour are hypertrophied. Furthermore, the nuclei of tumour cells are extremely variable in size and shape, a characteristic called 'nuclear pleomorphism'. Tumour cells characteristically invade the adjacent normal brain parenchyma, migrating through the white matter tracts to collect around blood vessels, neurons and at the edge of the BRAIN PARENCHYMA in the SUBPIAL region. These structures

**Box 1 | Glioma grade and prognosis**

Gliomas are the most common primary tumours in the brain and are divided into four clinical grades on the basis of their histology and prognosis. Patients with the most malignant grade 4 gliomas, or glioblastoma multiforme (GBM), have a mean survival of about 1 year, whereas patients with grade 3 or ANAPLASTIC gliomas survive for 2–3 years, and those with grade 2 gliomas can survive for as long as 10–15 years. Grade 1 gliomas, also known as pilocytic astrocytomas, are curable by surgery and might represent a separate disease from the gliomas of other grades. GBMs either arise de novo or progress from lower grade to higher grade over time; the tumours of patients originally diagnosed with a lower grade lesion will often progress to a GBM before their death. Glioma histology correlates with grade and survival, and includes increased cell density and varied nuclear appearance in the lower grade gliomas, and further vascular proliferation and regional necrosis in the anaplastic gliomas and GBMs.

Box 2 | Genetic alterations in gliomas

Several gene expression alterations and chromosomal abnormalities are commonly found in gliomas, and in some cases these mutations correlate with clinical grade. In the lower grade gliomas, several growth factors such as platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF), fibroblast growth factor 2 (FGF2) and ciliary neurotrophic growth factor (CNTF), and their receptors, are commonly overexpressed, and p53 is often mutated. The grade 3 (anaplastic) gliomas additionally show an increased occurrence of disrupted cell-cycle arrest pathways because of the deletion of INK4A, amplification of cyclin-dependent kinase 4 (CDK4), or loss of retinoblastoma (RB). In addition to the above mutations, the grade 4 gliomas, or GBMs, show frequent loss of 10q22-25, a chromosomal region that carries several tumour suppressors, notably PTEN (for phosphatase and tensin homologue). Loss of PTEN expression leads to elevated AKT activity. Amplification and activating mutations in the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) gene are also seen. Almost all these mutations lead to the disruption of cell-cycle arrest. None of these specific mutations is found in all gliomas of a given grade, but their frequent occurrence and correlation with tumour grade highlights the importance of specific pathways in gliomagenesis. The sum effect of these alterations contributes to the biology of these tumours.

were originally described by Scherer over 60 years ago and are referred to as the secondary structures of Scherer³. The extent to which these tumours invade adjacent structures is variable; at its extreme, large portions of the brain are diffusely infiltrated by individual tumour cells with no clear focus of tumour *per se*.

Low-grade gliomas are divided into two histological variants: astrocytomas, which consist of cells with large amounts of cytoplasm and which express the astrocyte-specific marker gene *GFAP* (which encodes GLIAL FIBRILLARY ACIDIC PROTEIN), and oligodendrogliomas, which have small round nuclei, a minimal cytoplasm and which do not express *GFAP*. Very commonly, these tumours contain mixtures of both cell types; a tumour with greater than 25–30% of each cell type is described as a 'mixed glioma'. The frequent occurrence of a mixed glioma morphology suggests that some similarities exist between glioma cells and bipotential glial progenitors that can differentiate into either oligodendrocytes or astrocytes. Many glioma studies do not distinguish the exact pathological diagnosis of many of these tumours or take in to account their mixed character. Therefore, correlating specific molecular abnormalities with the regional histological appearance of these tumours is difficult. Low-grade gliomas will often acquire the histological and clinical characteristics of high-grade gliomas over time. This shift in malignancy probably occurs through the acquisition of further mutations.

One characteristic of gliomas is significant: an increase in gene and chromosomal deletion and amplification often correlates with increasing clinical grade (BOX 2). Many of the biological pathways involved in gliomagenesis have been recognized by the identification of genes affected by these mutations. The genetic alterations found in gliomas mostly fall into two functional categories. As discussed below, one group of alterations activates the signal-transduction pathways downstream of the tyrosine kinase receptors. The second group of mutations disrupts the cell-cycle arrest pathways that maintain cells in G1 arrest. Both of these groups affect signalling pathways that are altered in many cancers and are therefore not glioma specific. The

type of tumour that arises might be a result of both the activity of specific pathways and the cell-of-origin in which these alterations occur.

Glioma biology is complex, and a full description of all the tumorigenic processes that occur are beyond the scope of this article. Excellent reviews on glioma angiogenesis and invasion have been previously published⁴,⁵. In this review, I focus on the effects that genetic alterations in gliomas have on pathways that are involved in signalling during normal CNS cell development. The differentiation status of the cell-of-origin for these tumours might affect the outcome of such alterations in signalling. Distinguishing between those alterations that cause the formation of these tumours and those that are epiphenomena of the tumour progression process requires the technology to transfer these alterations to the appropriate cell types *in vivo*. Various mouse modelling strategies are being used at present to identify which of these alterations are capable of inducing the formation of gliomas and the role they have in the process.

**Glioma cell-of-origin**

Many cancer types, including gliomas, resemble undifferentiated cells in their gene expression and phenotypic characteristics. Some of the signalling pathways that affect the differentiation and proliferation of glial progenitors are altered in gliomas. Therefore, a better understanding of the roles that these pathways have in glial cell development might provide insight into glioma biology, their relationship to glial cell development and potential therapeutic strategies for this disease. Glioma cells most frequently resemble immature astrocytes, immature oligodendrocytes, or mixtures of the two cell types, in their morphology and gene-expression characteristics. The cell type that gives rise to gliomas is not known, although there has been a significant amount of speculation on this point. It is a common, although unproven, idea that astrocytomas arise from astrocyte precursors, whereas the oligodendrogliomas arise from oligodendrocyte precursors, and that mixed gliomas arise from progenitors of both astrocytes and oligodendrocytes.

The CNS stem cell gives rise to neuronal and glial progenitors, which subsequently give rise to the mature cell types found in the brain, including neurons, oligodendrocytes and astrocytes⁶⁻⁹. The stages in these lineages have been defined by cell morphology and by the expression of specific markers (FIG. 1). Specific signal-transduction pathways have been shown to control the differentiation of precursor cells into mature glia. In cell culture, PLATELET-DERIVED GROWTH FACTOR (*PDGF*) causes the oligodendroglial progenitor population to proliferate¹⁰, and cooperates with FIBROBLAST GROWTH FACTOR 2 (*FGF2*) to prevent that population's further differentiation into mature oligodendrocytes¹¹,¹². Epidermal growth factor (*EGF*) and CILIARY NEUROTROPHIC FACTOR (*CNTF*) force glial progenitors towards astrocytic and oligodendrocytic differentiation¹³,¹⁴. Although the effects of these growth factors on glial development are well documented, as are the signalling pathways downstream of their receptors, our understanding of how these pathways control cell fate and proliferation in glial development is still incomplete.

abnormally active in glial tumours, have a critical role in gliomagenesis. In the most malignant gliomas — GBMs — activating mutations have been found in the EGFR gene, which encodes the EGF receptor. Between 30 and 50% of GBMs show amplification or activating mutation of this gene to produce a constitutively active receptor in the absence of EGF ligand<sup>20</sup>. The pathways that the **EGFR** specifically activates to promote growth of GBMs are not known at present.

Cell-culture experiments using several tumour cell types, including glioma cell lines, have shown that these growth-factor receptors activate several common signalling pathways, including those that lead to the RAS and AKT pathways (see below)<sup>21</sup>. It follows that at least some of the pathways activated by these receptors, whether singly or in combination, might be required for the induction or progression of these glial tumours.

The RAS pathway is one of the best-studied signal-transduction pathways. RAS is indirectly activated by tyrosine kinase receptors and is active when bound to GTP but inactive when the GTP is hydrolysed to GDP. In its GTP-bound form, RAS activates many pathways, most notably the RAL, RAC and RAF pathways, which lead to the mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs) **ERK**, Jun kinase (**JNK**) and **p38** (FIG. 2a)<sup>22</sup>. The net effect of these pathways is to enhance proliferation, progression through the cell cycle and inhibition of apoptosis. RAS-GTPase activator proteins such as neurofibromatosis (**NF1**) inactivate RAS by hydrolysing GTP<sup>23</sup>. Loss of such proteins leads to chronically elevated RAS activity.

Which, if any, of these effects of RAS are involved in the formation of gliomas *in vivo* remains unclear, as there is conflicting evidence regarding the importance of its activity in glioma formation. On the one hand, RAS activity was elevated in all 20 GBMs analysed in one study<sup>24</sup>. On the other hand, unlike other cancer types, activating mutations in RAS do not occur in gliomas. However, mutations in a gene are not the only mechanism for pathologically elevated activity of the corresponding gene product. The level of RAS activity is likely to be controlled by a summation of upstream stimuli and could be a pivotal criterion for transformation. The experiments that would either prove or disprove this possibility have yet to be done.

A second pathway activated by tyrosine kinase receptors that is known to be involved in glial differentiation is the AKT pathway, which is activated through phosphatidylinositol-3-OH kinase (**PI(3)K**) and is modulated by the tumour suppressor protein **PTEN**<sup>25</sup> (FIG. 2b). In its active form, AKT (called **AKT1** in humans) has multiple effects, including enhancing metabolism by activating GLYCOGEN SYNTHASE KINASE 3 (**GSK3**) and altering translation by activating the kinase called MAMMALIAN TARGET OF RAPAMYCIN (**mTOR**). In addition, AKT inhibits apoptosis by inactivating BAD (an inhibitor of BCL2), causing CASPASE activation to be inhibited, and by inactivating the transcription factor FORKHEAD (**FKHR**), which promotes cell death<sup>26</sup>. Which of these multiple activities of AKT are involved in oncogenesis remains to be shown. Many GBMs show muta-

Tyrosine kinase
receptor

Growth factor

Cell membrane

SOS GRB2 SHC

a

RAS

RAF

RAL

RAC

MEK

MKK

J NKK

J NK

ERK

p38

b PIP2

PIP3

PTEN

AKT

PDK

GSK3

FKHR

NF-κB

mTOR

BAD

Figure 2 | Signalling pathways altered by mutations in human gliomas. RAS and AKT signal-transduction pathways and their tyrosine kinase receptors. a | The binding of RAS to GTP is initiated by activated tyrosine kinase receptors and occurs through the effector and adaptor proteins SHC, GRB2 and SOS. When interacting with the cognate ligand, these receptors also activate phosphatidylinositol-3-OH kinase (PI(3)K), which converts phosphatidylinositol-4,5-bisphosphate (PIP2) to phosphatidylinositol-3,4,5-trisphosphate (PIP3). b | PIP3 localizes AKT to the cell membrane and is required for the activation of AKT by pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase 1 (PDK1) and PDK2. The tumour suppressor PTEN inhibits the activation of AKT by converting PIP3 back to PIP2, reducing the availability of this required lipid cofactor. Although many of the growth-factor receptors involved in glial cell development are reported to activate a similar set of pathways in certain cell types, the relative activation of these pathways in glial cells and gliomas by specific receptors is the subject of intense investigation. (BAD, BCL2-antagonist of cell death; FKHR, forkhead transcription factor; GSK3, glycogen synthase kinase 3; JNK, Jun kinase; mTOR, mammalian target of rapamycin; NF-κB, nuclear factor of kappa light polypeptide gene enhancer in B-cells.)

MAMMALIAN TARGET OF
RAPAMYCIN
(mTOR). A protein that is
activated by AKT and which
activates ribosomal protein S6
kinase. S6 kinase alters the ability
of the ribosome to translate
specific mRNAs.

BAD
BAD promotes apoptosis
by dimerizing with and
inhibiting BCL-2.

p16INK4A
CDK4
RB

p14ARF
MDM2
p53

Apoptosis

S
G1
Cell cycle
G2
M

Figure 3 | INK4A-initiated cell-cycle arrest pathways. p16INK4A and p14ARF control the activity of retinoblastoma (RB) and p53. RB promotes cell-cycle arrest in G1 and regulates entry into the S phase of the cell cycle through its effects on E2F. p53 has several effects, including causing G1 and G2 arrest and promoting apoptosis. Loss of p53 function also promotes genomic instability. Proteins encoded by genes that are frequently altered in human gliomas are highlighted in red.

REVIEW S

effects have been studied in experimental systems, and from such data their potential role in gliomagenesis has been inferred. However, the technologies that allow specific genetic alterations to be generated *in vivo* have only recently been developed, and experiments to show which, if any, of these alterations are actually involved in the aetiology of gliomas have only just begun.

Standard therapy and animal models
Current standard therapy for gliomas primarily uses DNA-damaging strategies such as radiation and alkylating agents (BOX 3). These are effective in a subset of glioma patients; however, their tumours eventually recur<sup>51</sup>. Despite their initial promise in animal studies, novel strategies such as immunotherapy or gene therapy<sup>52,53</sup> have not yet resulted in significant improvements in patient survival and therefore have not become the standard of care. The failure of these treatment strategies, which were optimized in animal models, to have a therapeutic benefit in humans is disappointing, and to some degree might be related to the animal models that have been used for this purpose.

The standard rodent models for gliomas used over the past 25 years to optimize therapy in humans consist of either XENOGRAFTS of human glioma cell lines implanted into athymic mice or ALLOGRAFTS of rodent glioma cell lines. These models have several characteristics that make them good test systems, including defined and reproducible location of tumour formation, rate of tumour growth and time to death. Unfortunately, the histology of these tumours does not replicate that found in the human disease, especially as far as the invasive characteristics of gliomas are concerned<sup>54</sup>. Furthermore, clonal cell lines maintained in culture have different selective pressures on them than do tumour cells that are proliferating in the brain, and therefore one would not expect genetic and gene-expression alterations to be similar between them. The use of implantation models is especially problematic for optimizing immunologically based therapies. Perhaps even more important is the fact that these models provide little insight into the aetiology and underlying biology of gliomas that could be used to design more rational therapies for this disease.

Figure 4 | Pathways to gliomagenesis. Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) formation is either *de novo* (primary GBMs) or due to the progression of a lower grade glioma to a higher grade one through the acquisition of additional mutations (secondary GBMs). The mutations listed are a subset of those found in these tumours that have some correlation with glioma grade and GBM type. Also listed are some biological effects of these mutations and changes in gene expression that might contribute to their roles in gliomagenesis<sup>1</sup>.

| BCL-2 | other mechanisms<sup>46,47</sup>. The correlation between p53 mutation and progression of low-grade gliomas to higher grade tumours might be partly due to genomic instability and to the acquisition of additional mutations associated with loss of p53. |
| --- | --- |
| BCL-2 inhibits apoptosis by inhibiting caspase activation. | It is noteworthy that the disruption of cell-cycle arrest pathways, ultimately by elevating the activity of E2F1 transcription factor and by losing p53 function, has been linked to the dedifferentiation of many cell types<sup>48,49</sup>. Additionally, elevated MYC activity, which occurs in human gliomas, is also related to loss of differentiation in cultured cells<sup>50</sup>. It is possible that, in addition to enhancing cell proliferation, these alterations might promote an undifferentiated phenotype that is more sensitive to the oncogenic effects of certain abnormally and chronically activated signal-transduction pathways. |
| CASPASE | These alterations in gliomas have been well documented over the past few years. Furthermore, their |
| One of a family of proteases that are activated specifically in apoptotic cells. |  |
| FORKHEAD TRANSCRIPTION FACTOR (FKHR). This protein activates cell death. It is inactivated by AKT-dependent phosphorylation, which relocates it from the nucleus to the cytoplasm. |  |

Box 3 | Glioma standard of care
The standard treatment for patients with gliomas has remained unchanged for many years. Once a patient is identified as having a lesion that resembles a glioma on a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan, the tumour is either biopsied or surgically removed for diagnostic and histological examination. Not all patients with lower grade gliomas receive radiation therapy. However, all patients with malignant gliomas receive radiation therapy regardless of the extent to which the visible tumour has been removed. Following radiation, the patients receive chemotherapy, usually with drugs that cause DNA alkylation such as carmustine (BCNU), the triple combination of procarbazine, cisplatin and vincristine (PCV), or the newly available temozolomide. When a glioma recurs, surgery might be carried out if the risk and benefits of such an operation are favourable based on the location and character of the recurrent glioma. At this point, further radiation is not usually an option, and additional chemotherapy can be given with other drugs such as *cis*-retinoic acid (CRA), which promotes tumour cell differentiation, or with either interleukin-2 (IL-2) or interferon, which enhance the immune response against the tumour. Despite these efforts, 50% of GBM patients die within the first year of diagnosis, and only 20% survive for more than 2 years.

Genetic-modification strategies. Because of the limitations of xenograft models for gliomas, several laboratories have developed genetically and histologically accurate models of glioma formation by gain-of-function transgenic approaches and targeted-deletion strategies. Transgenic mice express the gene of interest in all cells that use the promoter that drives a construct's expression<sup>55</sup>, whereas knockout mice lose expression of the targeted gene in all cells that would normally express it<sup>56</sup>. In both cases, large numbers of cells of a specific cell type are modified by these strategies. In germline-modification models, the tissue with the gene-expression alteration is frequently developmentally normal. Tumours are often initiated and develop in this cell population from secondary, usually unknown, genetic events. These strategies are ideal for demonstrating components that contribute to the

124 | FEBRUARY 2001 | VOLUME 2
© 2001 Macmillan Magazines Ltd
www.nature.com/reviews/genetics

Table 1 | Mouse models of glioma and their construction

| Glioma type   | Signal-transduction abnormality       | Cell-cycle arrest disruption | Somatic or germline | Cell of origin/ affected cells         | Reference |
|---------------|-------------------------------------|-----------------------------|--------------------|----------------------------------------|-----------|
| Oligo         |                                     | p19<sup>ARF</sup> deletion   | g                  | All cells                             | 67        |
| Oligo-astro   | MTA                                |                             | s                  | Gfap-expressing astrocyte              | 58        |
| Astro         | v-Src                              |                             | g                  | Gfap-expressing astrocyte              | 62        |
| GBM           | K-ras and Akt                      |                             | s                  | Nestin-expressing progenitor           | 29        |
| GBM           | Nf1 (Ras activity)                 | p53 deletion                | g                  | All cells                             | 64        |
| Mixed         | Pdgf                               |                             | s                  | Mixed population                      | 63        |

Glioma models that have histological characteristics similar to: oligodendroglioma (oligo), astrocytoma (astro), mixed oligodendroglioma and astrocytoma (oligo-astro), glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) and a mixture of multiple brain tumour types, including GBM (mixed). Signal-transduction pathways are experimentally activated by expression of the indicated genes. Cell-cycle arrest pathways are experimentally disrupted by the indicated genetic alterations. The strategies used to modify gene expression are germline integration of a transgene or targeted deletion (g), and somatic-cell gene-transfer with retroviral vectors (s). The cell of origin indicates the cell type that is genetically altered by the strategy used in the model. (GFAP, glial fibrillary acidic protein; MTA, polyoma virus middle T antigen; PDGF, platelet-derived growth factor.)

induction and progression of tumorigenesis. Furthermore, breeding can be used to combine both transgenes and targeted deletions. Most studies to model cancer in mice use these germline-modification strategies at present. However, because extensive breeding is required to combine multiple mutations, the analysis of large numbers of permutations of genetic alterations is expensive and time consuming.

A second and complementary method for genetic alteration is the somatic-cell gene-transfer strategy<sup>57</sup>, in which combinations of mutations are transferred by retroviral infection to specific cell types postnatally. The analysis of permutations of multiple mutations with such systems is faster and less labour intensive than with germline strategies. Because the number of cells that are infected initially is small, secondary events required for tumour initiation are unlikely to occur. However, if a tumour forms, the introduced alterations were probably sufficient to induce tumour formation. This point is striking in cases where abnormally elevated expression of a single gene, such as that encoding the POLYOMAVIRUS MIDDLET ANTIGEN, in a few hundred astrocytes induces the formation of gliomas at high frequency<sup>58</sup>.

Both germline and somatic-cell gene-transfer strategies have advantages and disadvantages, and comparing results from each can be informative. Somatic-cell gene-transfer strategies have the disadvantage that because secondary events are less likely to occur, essential mutations must be experimentally provided to induce tumour formation. In germline strategies, mutations that contribute to, but are insufficient for, oncogenesis will give rise to tumours by the acquisition of other mutations, which can then be identified. In somatic-cell gene-transfer strategies, insufficient combinations are unlikely to score positively for tumour formation, and therefore might be missed. Furthermore, causing retroviral infection by direct injection into the brain generates injury and inflammation that disrupts the local environment and alters gene expression in potential target cells. The contribution that these local effects have on tumour formation in such models is not clear. By contrast, germline strategies do not produce local injury.

Additional mutations and alterations in gene expression are likely to occur during tumour progression regardless of the strategy for tumour induction. However, in some cases the majority of tumour cells might evolve so as to continue to depend on the initiating mutations. There are reports of reversible oncogenesis in mice using tetracycline-induced H-RAS expression to produce melanomas<sup>59</sup> and that of *Myc* to generate lymphomas<sup>60</sup> and skin tumours<sup>61</sup>. Despite genomic instability in these tumours, they completely regress with the removal of the initiating genetic alteration. Whether any of the gliomas are initiated by a single event or a by summation of many contributing factors is unknown. However, identifying the pathways that have the potential to initiate glioma formation is an important step towards rational therapeutic approaches for this disease.

Induction and activated signal transduction

Mouse models have been used to answer several specific questions regarding the role that elevated signal transduction has in the formation of gliomas. For example, can the chronic activation of the signal-transduction pathways that function during normal glial cell development induce the formation of gliomas in mice? There are many such examples. These include viral oncogenes that activate signal-transduction pathways to cause glioma formation, such as V-SRC<sup>62</sup>, V-ERBB (W. Weiss, unpublished observations), V-SIS<sup>63</sup>, and the polyoma virus middle T antigen<sup>58</sup> gene. Also, activated forms of downstream components, such as *Ras*<sup>29</sup> (A. Guha, unpublished observations) and *Akt*<sup>29</sup>, have been used. In addition, targeted deletions of genes that encode tumour suppressors, such as *Nf1*, that normally inhibit specific signal-transduction pathways have also been shown to contribute to gliomagenesis<sup>64</sup>. Current mouse models of glioma formation and how they were generated are summarized in TABLE 1.

One specific question addressed by these models is whether autocrine stimulation by one of the growth

human gliomas, even in all cells in the mouse, alone does not induce gliomas at high frequency. Although mice with targeted disruption of genes that encode components of the cell-cycle arrest pathways do not develop gliomas, they often develop other tumour types, implying that glia might be generally less sensitive to such alterations than other cell types.

For example, the $Ink4a$ locus has been knocked out in mice by targeted disruption ${ }^{65}$. $Ink4a^{-/-}$ astrocytes in culture are immortal, grow rapidly, and maintain a pseudodiploid chromosomal status ${ }^{66}$. Mice with homozygous deletion of $Ink4a$ do not produce either p16 ${ }^{Ink4a}$ or p19 ${ }^{Arf}$ (the equivalent of the human p14 ${ }^{ARF}$) in any cell. Nonetheless, these mice develop normally and breed effectively. Furthermore, despite the deletion of $Ink4a$ in every cell, gliomas have never been observed in these mice. These mice develop lymphomas and sarcomas between 4 and 6 months of life ${ }^{65}$. Interestingly, mice with specific targeted deletion of the $Ink4a$ exon 1B, which results in the specific loss of $p19^{Arf}$ expression, develop gliomas at low frequency. In one series of 39 such mice, 3 developed tumours that have the histological characteristics of oligodendrogliomas by 18–20 weeks of life ${ }^{67}$. The reason for this discrepancy is unclear, but might be due to strain differences between the two knockout lines.

In addition, mice with targeted deletions of $p53$ have also been generated ${ }^{68}$. Cultured astrocytes derived from these $p53^{-/-}$ mice also grow rapidly as immortalized populations and show significant chromosomal instability with rapid development of aneuploidy and chromosomal rearrangements ${ }^{69}$. Despite these dramatic effects in vitro, mice with homozygous targeted deletions of $p53$ develop and breed normally. They develop lymphomas and sarcomas in the first 3–6 months of life, but they only rarely develop gliomas, even though no cells in the CNS produce $p53$ (REF. 68). If these $p53^{-/-}$ mice were to survive longer without the formation of early cancers, they might develop gliomas in later life. Testing such a hypothesis requires the tissue-specific deletion of $p53$ by using the cre/lox system, with cre driven from brain-specific promoters. Such experiments are in progress in several laboratories.

Because loss of $Rb$ causes embryonic lethality ${ }^{70}$, chimeric mice that contain a mosaic of $Rb^{-/-}$ and $Rb^{+/+}$ cells have been constructed that do survive past birth. The analysis of these mice indicates that their $Rb^{-/-}$ cells do not give rise to tumours. In fact, the $Rb^{-/-}$ cells in the brain seem to enter the cell cycle abnormally and to apoptose ${ }^{71}$. Given these findings with targeted deletions of $Rb$, $p53$ and $Ink4a$, it is not surprising that forced overexpression of $Cdk4$ in astrocytes causes neither tumours nor detectable proliferation of these cells relative to the surrounding normal brain tissue ${ }^{66}$.

### Combined pathways to gliomagenesis

Although disrupting the cell-cycle arrest pathways is itself insufficient to induce gliomas, such mutations can enhance the oncogenic capacity of certain signalling pathways. One example that demonstrates cooperation

---

**Figure 5 | Mouse glioma histology.**  
**a** | Gross appearance of bilateral mouse glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) induced by combined Ras and Akt signalling (left) compared with normal mouse brain ${ }^{29}$.  
**b,c** | Histological characteristics that define GBM in humans, as seen in this mouse model.  
**b** | Pseudopalisading necrosis (arrow) and **c** | microvascular proliferation (arrow).

---

factors involved in glial development can contribute to gliomagenesis. This question has been answered by somatic-cell gene-transfer of $Pdgfb$ in vivo using a mouse retroviral vector. Mice infected with vectors that encode $Pdgfb$ frequently develop highly invasive gliomas with a varied histology ${ }^{63}$. The mouse retroviral vectors used in these experiments can infect many cell types, which might contribute to the variable histology of the resultant gliomas. Cell-type-specific transfer of $Pdgfb$ to astrocytes or glial progenitors might allow the cell-of-origin to be correlated with a specific glioma histology. These data further emphasize the connection between glial differentiation and gliomagenesis.

A second specific question that can be addressed by these models regards identifying cooperation between the pathways that lie downstream of tyrosine kinase receptors in gliomagenesis. Cooperative effects between Akt and Ras signalling in the formation of malignant gliomas have been shown with somatic-cell gene transfer. In this system, transfer of either an activated form of K-RAS or Akt alone to neural progenitors is insufficient to form gliomas in vivo. However, the combination of activated Akt and Ras in these cells generates malignant gliomas in mice (FIG. 5) with microvascular proliferation and pseudopalisading necrosis similar to that found in human GBMs ${ }^{29}$. Further dissection of these signal-transduction pathways with glioma formation as a read-out is possible with mouse modelling systems.

### Cell-cycle, genomic instability and gliomagenesis

Mouse modelling also allows us to determine the relative efficiency of mutations that disrupt the cell-cycle arrest pathways at causing oncogenesis. In contrast to the efficient glioma formation induced by activation of certain signal-transduction pathways, alterations in cell-cycle arrest pathways are much less effective at inducing gliomas in mice. It seems that disruption of cell-cycle arrest pathways by mutations found in

---

**K-RAS**  
Kirsten Ras. Activated Ras allele initially isolated from Kirsten mouse leukaemia virus.

Box 4 | Outstanding questions

Several questions regarding basic glioma biology and therapeutic strategies for the disease remain outstanding. In some cases, animal modelling has raised these questions and, in others cases, only animal modelling can answer them.

- Is the chromosomal instability seen in gliomas the cause or effect of tumour initiation or progression?
- Are any of the gliomas initiated by a single genetic event or does this occur through a summation of multiple abnormalities?
- For the gliomas that might arise from a single event, do they evolve during tumour progression so as to continue to require the initiating event to maintain a neoplastic phenotype?
- How many parallel pathways exist for each of the required elements of transformation, and would it be possible to block a multi-parallel network if it existed?
- Does the differentiation status of a cell affect the ability of oncogenic signals to initiate glioma formation or progression? Could therapeutic intervention to force a differentiated status on glioma cells make them less sensitive to known oncogenic pathways?

between signal-transduction and cell-cycle arrest pathways in gliomagenesis is mice in which the loss of Nf1 and p53 has been combined. Nf1 loss alone does not elevate Ras activity sufficiently to induce gliomas. However, in a p53−/− background, Nf1−/− mice frequently develop high-grade gliomas64. Whether the oncogenic effect of p53 loss is due to effects on G1 arrest, apoptosis or to genomic instability that leads to other cooperating mutations is not yet known.

Ink4a loss alone does not result in the formation of gliomas as discussed above; however, several experiments using both transgenic and somatic-cell gene-transfer strategies have demonstrated a contributory role for the loss of this tumour suppressor in the generation of gliomas. Gene transfer of a constitutively active form of *Egfr* alone does not induce the formation of gliomas in mice. However, in an Ink4a-deficient background, or combined with p53 loss and *Cdk4* overexpression, the *Egfr* constitutively active mutation causes glioma-like lesions to form72. These data, as well as unpublished work from several laboratories, indicate that, in some cases, cell-cycle arrest alterations promote a more malignant phenotype and might give a selective advantage *in vivo* to cells in which they occur. These findings might partly explain the prevalence of these mutations in human gliomas.

By using somatic-cell gene-transfer systems, the interaction between cell-of-origin and signal-transduction pathways can be addressed. Undifferentiated glial progenitor cells seem more sensitive than differentiated astrocytes to the oncogenic effects of combined Ras and Akt signalling and give rise to GBM formation29. It is possible that mutations found in gliomas that promote an undifferentiated glial cell phenotype might have oncogenic effects partly for that reason.

In addition to addressing relationships between cell-of-origin and the oncogenic potential of specific signal-transduction pathways, mouse modelling can also correlate the cell-of-origin with the tumour type that forms. One example is illustrated by gene transfer of the polyoma virus middle T antigen to mouse *Gfap*-expressing astrocytes *in vivo*. Middle T antigen activates many of the same signalling pathways as the PDGF receptor, and gene transfer to *Gfap*-expressing cells effectively activates these signalling pathways in astrocytes. Tumours are generated in these mice that have the histology of mixed oligodendrogliomas and astrocytomas58. These data imply that astrocytes, if appropriately stimulated, can be the cell-of-origin for either tumour type *in vivo*, and the pathways activated by middle T antigen are sufficient to achieve that effect.

Applications of glioma mouse models

Over the past 15 years, experiments to identify the differences in gene expression between glioma cells and normal brain tissue have provided essential insight into the biology of this disease. New techniques, such as serial analysis of gene expression (SAGE) and microarray analysis, are further identifying thousands of genes that are differentially expressed in these tumours, which might contribute to the neoplastic phenotype73. It is not possible to test all genes identified in such screens in animal models. However, distinguishing those alterations that are the epiphenomena of tumour progression from those that act as the aetiology of the disease requires these alterations to be modelled *in vivo*. Without animal modelling, it would not be possible to determine the relative importance of causative pathways to glioma formation or to identify the essential targets for therapy.

In addition to unravelling the biology of these gliomas, these mouse models are likely to provide reagents for translational and applied investigations. Once the molecular aetiology for initiation and maintenance of gliomas has been clarified (SEE BOX 4), important targets for glioma therapy in humans can be developed. Furthermore, such animal models provide excellent opportunities to test drug combinations aimed at specific targets *in vivo*. Given the information we now have, rational therapies might include combinations of RAS and AKT signalling-pathway inhibitors, along with CDK inhibitors and agents that force a differentiated phenotype on glioma cells. Farnysyltransferase inhibitors that block RAS activity, and inhibitors of mTOR (which is downstream of AKT), are already in clinical trials; CDK inhibitors are being developed by several companies. Retinoic-acid derivatives and histone-deacetylase inhibitors promote

differentiation in several cell types and might eventually contribute to glioma therapy. In addition to these therapies, which target pathways downstream of tyrosine kinase receptors, there are also several drugs in clinical trials that target specific tyrosine kinase receptors, such as PDGFR, EGFR and VEGFR. Drug combinations that produce positive responses in current glioma mouse models, although not guaranteed to work in humans, will hopefully be more likely to work than previous strategies optimized in implantation glioma models.

The history of glioma therapy has been stagnant and bleak, with little improvement in treatment strategies or patient outcomes for many decades. However, with the advances of modern molecular genetics, there has been a shift in our thinking about what this disease is and how it works. This shift has illuminated rational treatment options that, although not yet realized, might be the light at the end of a long and dark tunnel.

### Links

DATABASE LINKS GFAP | PDGF | FGF2 | EGF | CNTF | EGFR | ERK | JNK | p38 | NF1 | PI(3)K | PTEN | AKT1 | GSK3 | mTOR | FHKR | RB | INK4A | p53 | CDK4 | CDK6 | cyclin D1 | MDM2 | MYC | Myc | Akt | Nf1 | Pdgfb | Ink4a | p53 | Rb | Egfr | Cdk4 | Gfap | PDGFR | VEGFR

FURTHER INFORMATION Massachusetts General Hospital Brain Tumour Center | Clinical trials information for brain tumours

ENCYCLOPEDIA OF LIFE SCIENCES Brain cancers | Brain imaging

---

1. Kleihues, P. & Cavenee, W. Pathology and genetics of tumors of the nervous system. (IARC Press, Lyon, 2000). An excellent overview of the molecular and histological characteristics of brain tumours.
2. Russel, D. S. & Rubenstein, L. J. Pathology of tumors of the nervous system. (Williams & Wilkins, Baltimore, 1989). Classic in-depth text on tumour pathology in the central nervous system.
3. Scherer, H. J. Structural development in gliomas. *Am. J. Cancer* **34**, 333–351 (1938).
4. Jensen, R. Growth factor-mediated angiogenesis in the malignant progression of glial tumors: a review. *Surg. Neurol.* **49**, 189–195 (1998).
5. Uhm, J. H., Dooley, N. P., Villemure, J. G. & Yong, V. W. Mechanisms of glioma invasion: role of matrix-metalloproteinases. *Can. J. Neurol. Sci.* **24**, 3–15 (1997).
6. Gage, F. H. Mammalian neural stem cells. *Science* **287**, 1433–1438 (2000). Review of cell lineage specification in the central nervous system during development and in adulthood.
7. Lee, J. C., Mayer-Proschel, M. & Rao, M. S. Gliogenesis in the central nervous system. *Glia* **30**, 105–121 (2000).
8. Mi, H. & Barres, B. Purification and characterization of astrocyte precursor cells in the developing rat optic nerve. *J. Neurosci.* **19**, 1049–1061 (1999).
9. Cameron, H. A., Hazel, T. G. & McKay, R. D. Regulation of neurogenesis by growth factors and transmitters. *J. Neurobiol.* **36**, 287–309 (1998).
10. McKinnon, R. D., Matsui, T., Dubois-Dalcq, M. & Aaronson, S. A. FGF modulates the PDGF-driven pathway of oligodendrocyte development. *Neuron* **5**, 603–614 (1990).
11. Mayer, M., Bogler, O. & Nobel, M. The inhibition of oligodendrocytic differentiation of O2A progenitors caused by basic fibroblast growth factor is overridden by astrocytes. *Glia* **8**, 12–19 (1993).
12. Bogler, O., Wren, D., Barnett, S., Land, H. & Nobel, M. Cooperation between two growth factors promotes extended self-renewal and inhibits differentiation of oligodendrocyte-type 2 astrocyte (O2A) progenitor cells. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **87**, 6368–6372 (1990).
13. Mayer, M., Bhakoo, K. & Nobel, M. Ciliary neurotrophic factor and leukemia inhibitory factor promote the generation, maturation and survival of oligodendrocytes *in vitro*. *Development* **120**, 143–153 (1994).
14. Rajan, P. & McKay, R. D. Multiple routes to astrocytic differentiation in the CNS. *J. Neurosci.* **18**, 3620–3629 (1998).
15. Nobel, M. & Mayer-Proschel, M. Growth factors, glia and gliomas. *J. Neurooncol.* **35**, 193–209 (1997). Review of the connections between glial cell differentiation and gliomagenesis.
16. Takahashi, J. *et al.* Correlation of basic fibroblast growth factor expression levels with the degree of malignancy and vascularity in human gliomas. *J. Neurosurg.* **76**, 792–798 (1992).
17. Ekstrand, A. J. *et al.* Genes for epidermal growth factor receptor, transforming growth factor α, and epidermal growth factor and their expression in human gliomas *in vivo*. *Cancer Res.* **51**, 2164–2172 (1991).

18. Weis, J. *et al.* CNTF and its receptor subunits in human gliomas. *J. Neurooncol.* **44**, 243–253 (1999).
19. Guha, A., Dashner, K., Black, P. M., Wagner, J. A. & Stiles, C. D. Expression of PDGF and PDGF receptors in human astrocytoma operation specimens supports the existence of an autocrine loop. *Int. J. Cancer* **60**, 168–173 (1995).
20. Wong, A. J. *et al.* Structural alterations of the epidermal growth factor receptor gene in human gliomas. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **89**, 2965–2969 (1992).
21. Hunter, T. Protein kinases and phosphatases: the yin and yang of protein phosphorylation and signaling. *Cell* **80**, 225–236 (1995).
22. Martin-Blanco, E. p38 MAPK signalling cascades: ancient roles and new functions. *Bioessays* **22**, 637–645 (2000).
23. Xu, G. F. The catalytic domain of the neurofibromatosis type 1 gene product stimulates ras GTPase and complements *ira* mutants of *S. cerevisiae*. *Cell* **63**, 835–841 (1990).
24. Guha, A., Feldkamp, M. M., Lau, N., Boss, G. & Pawson, A. Proliferation of human malignant astrocytomas is dependent on Ras activation. *Oncogene* **15**, 2755–2765 (1997).
25. Jiang, B. H., Aoki, M., Zheng, J. Z., Li, J. & Vogt, P. K. Myogenic signaling of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase requires the serine-threonine kinase Akt/protein kinase B. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **96**, 2077–2081 (1999).
26. Thomas, G. & Hall, M. N. TOR signaling and control of cell growth. *Curr. Opin. Cell Biol.* **9**, 782–787 (1997).
27. Fujisawa, H. *et al.* Acquisition of the glioblastoma phenotype during astrocytoma progression is associated with loss of heterozygosity on 10q25-qter. *Am. J. Pathol.* **155**, 387–394 (1999).
28. Sano, T. *et al.* Differential expression of MMAC/PTEN in glioblastoma multiforme: relationship to localization and prognosis. *Cancer Res.* **59**, 1820–1824 (1999).
29. Holland, E. C. *et al.* Combined activation of Ras and Akt in neural progenitors induces glioblastoma formation in mice. *Nature Genet.* **12**, 55–57 (2000). This study demonstrated the cooperation between the Ras and Akt signalling pathways in the formation of GBMs in a mouse model.
30. Ichimura, K., Schmidt, E. E., Goike, H. M. & Collins, V. P. Human glioblastomas with no alterations of the CDKN2A (p16INK4A, MTS1) and CDK4 genes have frequent mutations of the retinoblastoma gene. *Oncogene* **13**, 1065–1072 (1996). A large series of gliomas were analysed for mutations in this study, illustrating the importance of cell-cycle arrest pathways in GBM formation.
31. Jen, J. *et al.* Deletion of p16 and p15 genes in brain tumors. *Cancer Res.* **54**, 6353–6358 (1994).
32. Serrano, M., Hannon, G. J. & Beach, D. A new regulatory motif in cell-cycle control causing specific inhibition of cyclin D/CDK4. *Nature* **366**, 704–707 (1993).
33. Kamijo, T. *et al.* Tumor suppression at the mouse *INK4a* locus mediated by the alternative reading frame product p19Arf. *Cell* **91**, 649–659 (1993).
34. Pomerantz, J. *et al.* The *Ink4a* tumor suppressor gene product, p19Arf, interacts with MDM2 and neutralizes MDM2's inhibition of p53. *Cell* **92**, 713–723 (1998).
35. Haber, D. A. Splicing into senescence: the curious case of p16 and p19ARF. *Cell* **91**, 555–558 (1997).

36. Sherr, C. J. & Weber, J. D. The ARF/p53 pathway. *Curr. Opin. Genet. Dev.* **10**, 94–99 (2000).
37. Liggett, W. H. Jr & Sidransky, D. Role of the p16 tumor suppressor gene in cancer. *J. Clin. Oncol.* **16**, 1197–1206 (1998).
38. Fulci, G. *et al.* p53 gene mutation and *ink4a-arf* deletion appear to be two mutually exclusive events in human glioblastoma. *Oncogene* **19**, 3816–3822 (2000).
39. Louis, D. N. The p53 gene and protein in human brain tumors. *J. Neuropath. Exp. Neurol.* **53**, 11–21 (1994).
40. Costello, J. F. *et al.* Cyclin-dependent kinase 6 (CDK6) amplification in human gliomas identified using two-dimensional separation of genomic DNA. *Cancer Res.* **57**, 1250–1254 (1997).
41. He, J., Reifenberger, G., Liu, L., Collins, V. P. & James, C. D. Analysis of glioma cell lines for amplification and overexpression of MDM2. *Genes Chromosomes Cancer* **11**, 91–96 (1994).
42. von Deimling, A. *et al.* Subsets of glioblastoma multiforme defined by molecular genetic analysis. *Brain Path.* **3**, 19–23 (1993).
43. van Meyel, D. J. *et al.* p53 mutation, expression, and DNA ploidy in evolving gliomas: evidence for two pathways of progression. *J. Natl Cancer Inst.* **86**, 1011–1017 (1994).
44. Marutani, M. *et al.* Dominant-negative mutations of the tumor suppressor p53 relating to early onset of glioblastomamultiforme. *Cancer Res.* **59**, 4765–4769 (1999).
45. Watanabe, K. *et al.* Overexpression of the EGF receptor and p53 mutations are mutually exclusive in the evolution of primary and secondary glioblastomas. *Brain Pathol.* **6**, 217–223 (1996).
46. Li, J. *et al.* PTEN, a putative protein tyrosine phosphatase gene mutated in human brain, breast, and prostate cancer. *Science* **257**, 1943–1947 (1997).
47. Teng, D. H. *et al.* MMAC1/PTEN mutations in primary tumor specimens and tumor cell lines. *Cancer Res.* **57**, 5221–5225 (1997).
48. Paramio, J. M., Segrelles, C., Casanova, M. L. & Jorcano, J. L. Opposite functions for E2F1 and E2F4 in human epidermal keratinocyte differentiation. *J. Biol. Chem.* **275**, 41219–41226 (2000).
49. Hass, R. Retrodifferentiation and cell death. *Crit. Rev. Oncol.* **5**, 359–371 (1994).
50. Hoshimar, M., Ray, J., Sah, D. W. & Gage, F. H. Dedifferentiation of the immortalized adult neuronal progenitor cell line HC2S2 into neurons by regulatable suppression of the v-myc oncogene. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **93**, 1518–1523 (1996).
51. Prados, M. D. & Levin, V. Biology and treatment of malignant glioma. *Semin. Oncol.* **27**, S1–S10 (2000).
52. Castro, M. G. *et al.* Gene therapy strategies for intracranial tumours: glioma and pituitary adenomas. *Histopathol.* **15**, 1233–1252 (2000).
53. Pollack, I. F., Okada, H. & Chambers, W. H. Exploitation of immune mechanisms in the treatment of central nervous system cancer. *Semin. Pediatr. Neurol.* **7**, 131–143 (2000).
54. Finkelstein, S. D. *et al.* Histological characteristics and expression of acidic and basic fibroblast growth factor genes in intracerebral xenogeneic transplants of human

55. Aguzzi, A., Brandner, S., Isenmann, S., Steoinbach, J. P. & Sure, U. Transgenic and gene disruption techniques in the study of neurocarcinogenesis. *Glia* **15**, 348–364 (1995).

56. Macleod, K. F. & Jacks, T. Insights into cancer from transgenic mouse models. *J. Pathol.* **187**, 43–60 (1999). A review of the uses of germline-modification strategies in mice for studying human cancers.

57. Fisher, G. H. *et al.* Development of a flexible and specific gene delivery system for production of murine tumor models. *Oncogene* **18**, 5253–5260 (1999). A review of the somatic-cell gene-transfer approach to modelling cancer in mice.

58. Holland, E. C. *et al.* Astrocytes can give rise to oligodendrocytomas and astrocytomas after transfer of middle T antigen in mice. *Am. J. Pathol.* **157**, 1031–1037 (2000).

59. Chin, L. *et al.* Essential role for oncogenic Ras in tumour maintenance. *Nature* **400**, 468–472 (1999).

60. Felsher, D. W. & Bishop, J. M. Reversible tumorigenesis by MYC in hematopoietic lineages. *Mol. Cell* **4**, 199–207 (1999).

61. Pelengaris, S., Littlewood, T., Khan, M., Elia, G. & Evan, G. Reversible activation of c-Myc in skin: induction of a complex neoplastic phenotype by a single oncogenic lesion.

62. Wessenberger, J. *et al.* Development and malignant progression of astrocytomas in GFAP-v-src transgenic mice. *Oncogene* **14**, 2005–2013 (1997).

63. Uhrbom, L., Hesselager, G., Nister, M. & Westermark, B. Induction of brain tumors in mice using a recombinant platelet-derived growth factor B-chain retrovirus. *Cancer Res.* **58**, 5275–5279 (1998).

64. Reilly, K. M., Loisel, D. A., Bronson, R. T., McLaughlin, M. E. & Jacks, T. *Nf1; Trp53* mutant mice develop glioblastoma with evidence of strain-specific effects. *Nature Genet.* **26**, 109–113 (2000). This paper reported cooperation between signalling pathways and cell-cycle arrest pathways in the formation of gliomas in a mouse model.

65. Serrano, M. *et al.* Role of the INK4a locus in tumor suppression and cell mortality. *Cell* **85**, 27–37 (1996).

66. Holland, E. C., Hively, W.P., Gallo, V. & Varmus, H. E. Overexpression of *cdk4* but not loss of *INK4a-ARF* induces hyperploidy in cultured mouse astrocytes, modeling mutations in the G1 arrest pathway in human gliomas. *Genes Dev.* **12**, 3644–3649 (1998).

67. Kamijo, T., Bodner, S., van de Kamp, E., Randle, D. H. & Sher, C. J. Tumor spectrum in ARF-deficient mice. *Cancer Res.* **59**, 2217–2222 (1999).

68. Donehower, L. A. *et al.* Mice deficient for p53 are developmentally normal but susceptible to spontaneous tumours. *Nature* **356**, 215–221 (1992).

69. Yahanda, A. M., Bruner, J. M., Donehower, L. A. & Morrison, R. S. Astrocytes derived from p53-deficient mice provide a multistep *in vitro* model for development of malignant gliomas. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* **15**, 4249–5259 (1995).

70. Jacks, T. *et al.* Effects of an Rb mutation in the mouse. *Nature* **359**, 295–300 (1992).

71. Williams, B. O. *et al.* Extensive contribution of Rb-deficient cells to adult chimeric mice with limited histopathological consequences. *EMBO J.* **13**, 4251–4259 (1994).

72. Holland, E. C., Hively, W. P., DePinho, R. A. & Aarmus, H. E. A constitutively active epidermal growth factor receptor cooperates with disruption of G1 cell cycle arrest pathways to induce gliomas in mice. *Genes Dev.* **12**, 3675–3685 (1998).

73. Lal, A. *et al.* A public database for gene expression in human cancers. *Cancer Res.* **59**, 5403–5407 (1999).

Acknowledgements

I would like to thank Greg Fuller and Joseph Celestino for help with the pathology, Chengkai Dai for help with the cell-lineage discussion, and V. K. Rajasekhar for help with the signal-transduction discussion.
