
THYROID  
Volume 11, Number 5, 2001  
Mary Ann Liebert, Inc.

# Iodine and Thyroid Autoimmune Disease in Animal Models

C. Ruwhof and H.A. Drexhage

Thyroid autoimmune diseases are complex, polygenic afflictions the penetrance of which is heavily dependent on various environmental influences. In their pathogenesis, an afferent stage (enhanced autoantigen presentation), a central stage (excessive expansion and maturation of autoreactive T and B cells), and an efferent stage (effects of autoreactive T cells and B cells on their targets) can be discerned. At each stage, a plethora of inborn, endogenous or exogenous factors is able to elicit the abnormalities characteristic of that stage, thus opening the gateway to thyroid autoimmunity. Iodine is an important exogenous modulating factor of the process. In general, iodine deficiency attenuates, while iodine excess accelerates autoimmune thyroiditis in autoimmune prone individuals. In nonautoimmune prone individuals, the effects of iodine are different. Here iodine deficiency precipitates a mild (physiological) form of thyroid autoimmune reactivity. Iodine excess stimulates thymus development. Iodine probably exerts these effects via interference in the various stages of the autoimmune process. In the afferent and efferent stage, iodine-induced alterations in thyrocyte metabolism and even necrosis most likely play a role. By contrast, in the central phase, iodine has direct effects on thymus development, the development and function of various immune cells (T cells, B cells macrophages and dendritic cells) and the antigenicity of thyroglobulin.

## Introduction

ONE OF THE IMPORTANT FUNCTIONS of the immune system is the discrimination between “self” and “nonself,” or perhaps better between “danger” and “nondanger.” Currently, such distinctions are thought to be made through a series of complicated and multistep interactions between various cells and components of the immune system. Immune cells sometimes erroneously establish an immune reaction toward self antigens during conditions of apparent “nondanger.” If such immune reactions are so aberrantly and vigorously self-directed, they may inflict pathological damage on tissues. So-called “autoimmune diseases” are the consequence.

Autoimmune diseases can be divided into two main categories: the organ-specific and the systemic autoimmune diseases. In the organ-specific autoimmune diseases, the immune attack is confined to one organ or organ system, while in the systemic autoimmune diseases the damage is widespread and often the consequence of immune complex destruction. In the majority of organ-specific autoimmune diseases, target tissues are of neuroendocrine character. One of these target tissues is the thyroid. The presently accepted thyroid autoimmune diseases are listed in Table 1, and include thyroid disorders such as Hashimoto’s thyroiditis, primary hypothyroidism, and Graves’ disease.

### Multifactorial Nature of Organ-Specific Autoimmune Disease

There are logical restrictions to the study of the etiology and the pathogenesis of the thyroid autoimmune diseases. These autoimmune diseases often have long nonclinical prodromal phases, which are difficult to study because clinical signs and symptoms remain absent. Over the past 30 years, various inbred animal models of spontaneously occurring thyroid autoimmune diseases have become available (table I). One of the oldest models is the obese strain (OS) chicken, which suffers from atrophic lymphocytic thyroiditis after a phase of goitrous lymphocytic thyroiditis, with a rapid onset of hypothyroidism (1). The biobreeding diabetes-prone (BB-DP) rat model for autoimmune diabetes has a form of focal lymphocytic thyroiditis that, under normal conditions, does not lead to hypothyroidism (2). The nonobese diabetes (NOD) mouse in general only suffers from autoimmune diabetes and rarely from autoimmune thyroiditis (3), except for the NOD-H2<sup>h4</sup>, which has under normal dietary conditions a prevalence of approximately 5% of thyroiditis (4). These animal models have greatly contributed to the knowledge concerning the etiology and the pathogenesis of thyroid autoimmune disease, most notably on the events occurring in the very early prodromal phases.

Collectively, studies over the past 20 years have culminated in a better understanding of the multifactorial nature of organ-specific autoimmune diseases.

Department of Immunology, Erasmus University, Rotterdam.

| Disease | Major autoantigens | Effector mechanisms Result autoantibodies/T cells | Clinical symptoms | Animal models Spontaneous Antigen | Experimental (allergic) |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Hashimoto's thyroiditis | Thyroperoxidase (TPO) Thyroglobulin (Tg) Na⁺/I⁻ symporter (NIS) | ADCC and TH₁-mediated thyrocyte destruction | Goiter, followed by thyroid failure | Normal rats and rabbits Tg in FCA BB rat NOD mouse OS chicken |  |
| Primary hypothyroidism | TSH-receptor (TSH-R) | Antibodies blocking the TSH-R | Hypothyroidism and thyroid atrophy | TSH-R ECD NOD mouse AKR/N mouse |  |
| Graves' disease | TSH-R | Antibodies stimulating the TSH-R | Goiter and hyperthyroidism | TSH-R +, MHC class II+ fibroblasts TSH-R ECD Balb-C mouse |  |

FCA, Freund complete adjuvants; ADCC, antibody-dependent cell mediated cytotoxicity; ECD, extracellular domain; TSH, thyrotropin.

IODINE AND THYROID AUTOIMMUNE DISEASE

nated in an awareness that the thyroid autoimmune diseases must be regarded as polygenic diseases, in which penetrance is strongly influenced by environmental factors. Multiple genes determine part of the aberrant immune response toward self. The most important genes are those in the MHC region (5,6). However, other genes are also involved, including those with a role in regulation of the metabolism and susceptibility of the target tissue (7), and genes involved in a general regulation of the immune system, e.g., the CTLA-4 gene (8). However, genetic polymorphisms are certainly not the whole story. Monozygotic twin studies, for example, have shown a concordance rate ranging from 80% for thyroid autoantibody positivity (9) and to 20% for Graves' disease (10). This demonstrates the important role of environmental eliciting factors, e.g., environmental agents altering the target tissue and/or the immune system. Iodine plays an important role here.

### The Development of Autoimmune Thyroiditis

The pathogenesis of autoimmune thyroiditis has been studied in detail in the animal models that spontaneously develop autoimmune thyroiditis. A synopsis of the outcomes of these studies is given here. A word of caution is necessary when trying to extrapolate data obtained in these animal models to the human situation. The animal models clearly show caricatural, homogenous, and extreme forms of autoimmune thyroiditis, which differ between the various models, let alone from patients. Hence, general conclusions drawn from studies in one of the animal models should always be verified in the other animal models and in patients.

The studies of the animal models have shown that the pathogenesis of the autoimmune failure of the thyroid is a multistep process, requiring several genetic and environmental abnormalities (or variants) to converge before full-blown disease develops. Hence, thyroid autoimmune diseases are the outcome of an unfortunate combination of various genetic traits and environmental circumstances that by themselves do not need to be harmful, and may even be advantageous.

When concentrating on the early phases of the disease, two immune processes can be distinguished:

1. A first afferent phase in which the autoantigens are transported and presented to the lymphocytes is characterized by an accumulation of antigen-presenting cells (APC), particularly of dendritic cells (DCs) and subclasses of macrophages (Mφ) in the thyroid (Fig. 1).
2. As a consequence, a central phase in which the lymphocytes react to the presented autoantigens is characterized by an apparently uncontrolled production of autoreactive CD4⁺ T cells, CD8⁺ cytotoxic T cells and of autoantibodies of the immunoglobulin G (IgG) class (Fig. 1). Initially this production of autoreactive cells and autoantibodies takes place in the draining lymph nodes. Later, however, lymphoid tissue often develops locally in the thyroid itself, e.g., the focal thyroiditis in the thyroid gland of the BB-DP rat. This local lymphoid tissue has a high degree of histologic architecture, with clearly distinguishable T-cell areas, B-cell follicles with germinal centers, and areas and cords of plasma cells in the periphery of the lymphoid tissue radiating in between the thyroid follicles. The plasma cells produce antithyroglobulin (anti-Tg) antibodies. The lymphoid tissue is generally nondestructive and shows a peaceful coexistence with adjacent thyrocytes. In fact, the adjacent thyrocytes often show signs of metabolic and proliferative stimulation.

In a final, efferent phase, in Hashimoto's thyroiditis the autoreactive T cells diffusely accumulate in large numbers and infiltrate the thyroid parenchyma.

In such destructive phases, it has been shown in the BB-DP rat model that T<sub>H1</sub> type mechanisms (interleukin (IL)-12 p40 tumor necrosis factor-α [TNF-α], IL-2, and interferon-γ [IFN-γ]) play a major role, rather than T<sub>H2</sub> type mechanisms (IL-4, IL-10) (11). The infiltration of activated scavenger macrophages into the thyroid follicles destroying the thyroid follicles is compatible with such view (12). Fas and FasL expression was also higher in rats with lymphocytic thyroiditis, indicating a role of these apoptotic molecules in thyrocyte death (13). In primary hypothyroidism and Graves' disease, thyrotropin (TSH)-receptor antibodies play a prominent role in the effector phase. These autoreactive receptor antibodies (and perhaps other immune components) induce an excessive growth/metabolic blockade or stimulation of the target tissue, respectively.

#### Abnormalities in the Thyroid Inducing the Afferent Phase of the Autoimmune Response

The afferent phase is characterized by an intrathyroid accumulation of DC and Mφ. Blood monocytes are an important precursor population of these cells and able to mature into various subsets of Mφ as well as into various subsets of DC (14). DC are the antigen-presenting cells (APC) par excellence, and essential for stimulation of naive T cells, leading to sensitization and clonal expansion of the latter (15). Mφ have various functions, ranging from the phagocytosis and degradation of unwanted material, via the regulation of immune responses, to the production of factors for wound healing and remodeling of bone (16). Increased numbers of major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class II-positive DC and specific subsets of Mφ have been found both inside and outside lymphocytic accumulations in the thyroids of patients with Graves' disease or Hashimoto's goiter (17), and in the thyroids of the animal models (3,18). In the animal models, the first sign of a developing autoimmune reaction is in fact an increase in the number of DC and Mφ in the thyroid, as well as a local homotypic clustering of these cells (12,19). The fate of DC accumulated in tissues is to enter the lymphatics to travel to the draining lymph nodes while transporting antigens. Homotypic interactions play a role in activation and further maturation of DC (20).

What attracts these DC and Mφ to the thyroid in these prodromal phases? First, attraction signals may simply be inflammatory in nature. Early aspecific necrosis of thyrocytes due to toxins (e.g., iodine, see below) and perhaps viral or bacterial infection, with the concomitant release of proinflammatory factors and self antigens has been described as an eliciting factor (Fig. 1).

Second, DC and Mφ may accumulate not to exert an function in defense or in removal of cell debris, but to regulate growth and function of neighboring thyrocytes. It is relevant to note that DC and Mφ are normal constituents of the thyroid.

| phase site | TIME → | afferent phase → | central phase → | effector phase |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| thyroid |  |  |  |  |
| lymph node |  |  |  |  |
| combination of conditions generating autoimmune thyroiditis | APC influx induced by: | aberrant regulation of immune response: | pathological effects on thyroid cells |
|  | 1. enhanced metabolism or growth of endocrine cells (iodine deficiency) | 1. defects in T cell deletion | excessive accumulation of lymphoid cells and their products in the thyroid, generating: a. receptor abs b. ADCC c. blocking/toxic effects of cytokines d. toxic effects mφ-derived radicals |
|  | 2. necrosis of thyrocytes due to deficient APC function (virus, toxic effect of excess iodine) | 2. defects in intrathymic generation of Tr cells |  |
|  |  | 3. defects in Tr circuits |  |
|  |  | 4. TH1 : TH2 dysbalance |  |

FIG. 1. A scheme of the immunopathogenic events that take place during the development of autoimmune thyroiditis. These events ultimately lead to autoimmune thyroid failure. In a first afferent phase, antigen-presenting cells (APC), probably mostly monocyte derived, accumulate in the thyroid. The APC influx can be induced by aspecific inflammatory stimuli, such as a necrosis of target cells by toxins or viruses. Also an altered metabolism or growth of the thyrocytes may be an induction factor for APC accumulation (see text). The accumulated APC take up relevant autoantigens and leave the thyroid to travel to the draining lymph nodes. In a second central phase, the APC seek contact with T cells and B cells in the draining lymph nodes. Apparently, an aberrant immune response results. Instead of reinforcing tolerance the APC generate an autoimmune reaction. The figure lists the various abnormalities found in animal models underlying this aberrant regulation of the autoimmune response. In a final afferent phase, the generated autoreactive T cells, B cells and antibodies have their effect on the thyrocytes after having gained access to the thyroid (see text for various mechanisms). mo, monocyte; EC, endothelial cell; Aag, ▲ autoantigen; cy, cytokines; T, thyroid cell; Mφ, macrophage; ADCC, antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity; P, plasma cell, T_H1, T helper 1 cell; T_H2, T helper 2 cell; Tr, T regulator cell; B, B cell; Aabs, autoantibodies. + = stimulation, - = suppression, → = traffic

roid, and that the cells have been proven to regulate the growth and function of thyrocytes *in vitro* (21) via IL-1 and IL-6 (22). Moreover, DCs are responsive to TSH (because they express the TSH-receptor) and to thyroid hormones, and particularly produce proinflammatory cytokines such as IL-1β and IL-12 under such conditions (23–25). In other tissues, DC and Mφ are involved in homeostasis during regeneration processes such as wound healing.

The recognition that monocyte-derived cells constitute a recruitable cellular force that, on the one hand, is capable of regulating tissue homeostasis, but on the other hand is also capable of initiating immune responses, has implications for our understanding of the induction phase of autoimmune thyroiditis. Alterations in the structure, growth and function of tissues may therefore necessitate an influx of DC and Mφ to regulate tissue homeostasis. This noninflammatory influx

IODINE AND THYROID AUTOIMMUNE DISEASE

may, however, be a first step on the way to thyroid autoimmunity. There is an argument for such a view: Very early (and even fetal) abnormalities in the proliferative capability and hormone production of thyrocytes have been described in the OS chicken (1) and the BB-DP rat (21).

The early DC and Mφ influx does however not suffice for a full development of autoimmune thyroiditis. In addition, defects in DC/Mφ and lymphocytes are required to initiate the inappropriate, excessive immune response toward self antigens.

### Defects in the Immune System in the Central Phase of Thyroid Autoimmune Reactivity

In autoimmune thyroiditis the initial phase of the accumulation of DC and Mφ in the thyroid is followed by a phase of clonal expansion and maturation of autoreactive T and B cells in the draining lymph nodes. In the BB-DP rat, the NOD mouse, and the OS-chicken, there are strong indications that genetically determined immune defects lead to intolerance toward presented self antigens, explaining the apparently uncontrolled clonal expansion of the autoreactive lymphocytes. These immune defects are partly associated with the presence of particular MHC class II haplotypes, but other immune genes are also involved (e.g., the CTLA-4 gene).

The exact mechanisms for maintaining tolerance in nonautoimmune-prone individuals are far from clear. There exist mechanisms of central tolerance induction (e.g., T-cell deletion in the thymus), mechanisms of peripheral tolerance induction (e.g., activation-induced T-cell death and the suppressor activity of regulatory T cells), and mechanisms of anergy induction (e.g., the expression of MHC-class II on nonprofessional APC). Defects in these mechanisms have been described in the animal models.

The BB-DP rat lacks a particular subpopulation of T cells, the so-called RT6⁺ T cells, which form a regulator (suppressor) population (26). Also, the DC of the BB-DP rat are abnormal; the cells show difficulties in maturation to become fully active DC. Interestingly, these immature BB-DP DC are particularly defective in the sustenance of RT6⁺ T cells (taken from nonautoimmune animals) (27). Thymic abnormalities are also evident in the BB-DP rat, suggesting deviations at the level of central tolerance as well (28). The OS strain of chickens also has defects in its regulatory T-cell system (7). The NOD mouse has clear defects in T-cell apoptosis, leading to a decreased ability of the cells to undergo activation-induced cell death, a major mechanism in both central and peripheral tolerance induction (29). Moreover, NOD mice are characterized by an abnormal thymic architecture (30, 31).

Whether there are similar inborn defects of the various immune cells of thyroiditis patients needs to be investigated. There are, however, numerous reports of human studies showing both numerical and functional deficits in T cells with a suppressive function (32–34). Also, monocyte and DC defects have been described among patients with autoimmune thyroiditis (35–37).

#### Iodine deficiency in nonautoimmune-prone animal models and humans

In addition to goiter formation and hypothyroidism, iodine deficiency may lead to triggering of the thyroid autoimmune reaction. We have previously described (38) an accumulation of DC in the thyroids of iodine-deficient female Wistar rats. This accumulation was followed by an intrathyroidal increase in T cells and a raised production of anticolloid antibodies in the animals (see also Table 2). These observations of a heightened thyroid autoimmune response in the Wistar rat during iodine depletion are in agreement with observations made in human iodine-deficient populations. Here a low dietary iodine intake not only leads to goiter formation/hypothyroidism, but also to increased numbers of intrathyroidal aggregations of dendritic cells, epitheloid cells and giant macrophages (39). Iodine-deficient individuals may also show an increased incidence of anti-Tg antibodies and of other thyroid reactive antibodies (40).

We explain the intrathyroidal accumulation of DC during iodine deficiency as serving a physiological function. We assume that the cells are involved in the regulation of the growth and function of the iodine-deprived hypermetabolic and growing thyrocytes. The anticolloid antibodies and the intrathyroidal T cells also occurring in the iodine-deficient state may play a physiological role as well. A “physiological” role for Tg autoantibodies in the clearance of waste Tg in situations of overproduction of this thyroidal product has been described as early as 1959 by Grabar et al. (41). Furthermore, high titers of monoclonal anti-Tg antibodies in mice have been reported to result in the hypofunction of thyroid glands without inflammatory leukocyte inflammation (42). With regard to T cell infiltration, cytokines produced by thyroid infiltrating T cells (such as IFN-γ) are capable of altering the hormone production and growth of stimulated thyrocytes (43).

#### Iodine deficiency in autoimmune-prone animal models

Not every individual, however, shows such “physiological” reactivity to iodine deficiency. In our hands females of a strain of rats other than the Wistar rat, i.e., the autoimmune-prone BB-DP rat, showed a different response to iodine deficiency in comparison to the normal Wistar rat:

1. Immunologically, under mild iodine-deficient conditions, the autoimmune-prone BB-DP rat shows, similar to the Wistar rat, a more rapid and higher influx of DC in the thyroid. This leads to a more rapid development of the autoimmune thyroiditis normally occurring in this rat (12). Under conditions of severe iodine deficiency the BB-DP rat has less severe lymphocytic thyroiditis and produces fewer anti-colloid antibodies (44,45) (Table 2). This is generally ascribed to a lowering of thyroid autoimmunity. The state of severe iodine deficiency itself namely leads to an immunodeficient state in general, hampering the autoreactive T-cell generation and the autoantibody production normally seen in iodine-sufficient BB-DP rats. Also a lower degree of Tg iodination makes this molecule less antigenic (46,47).

2. Endocrinologically, the BB-DP rat is better capable than the Wistar rat of compensating for mild dietary iodine deficiency by a more rapid and increased goiter formation.

### Dietary Iodine Changes and Thyroid Autoimmunity

Both iodine deficiency as well as iodine excess may lead to thyroid autoimmunity, albeit in genetically different individuals.

TABLE 2. THE EFFECTS OF SEVERAL IODINE REGIMENTS ON THYROID ENDOCRINE REACTIONS, THYROID AUTOIMMUNE REACTIONS, AND THE IMMUNE SYSTEM

| **Iodine deficiency** | **Thyroid** | **Reaction of the immune system in general** |
|-----------------------|-------------|--------------------------------------------|
| Mild                  | Goiter +    | DC ↑, T cells ↓                            | Acceleration of AI =                        |
|                       |             | Abs ↑ (TGAbs, colloid)                      | thyroiditis                                  |
| Severe                | Goiter ++   | DC ↑↑, T cells ↑↑                          | Lowering of AI                              |
|                       |             | Abs ↑↑ (TGAbs, colloid)                     | thyroiditis                                  |

| **Iodine excess**     | **Thyroid** | **Reaction of the immune system in general** |
|-----------------------|-------------|--------------------------------------------|
| Mild chronic          | Euthyroid   | Ectopic thymus                             | Strong acceleration =                       |
|                       |             | Abs ↓ (colloid)                            | of AI thyroiditis                           |
|                       |             | DC ↓, T cells ↓                            |                                              |
| Severe acute on       | Hyperthyroidism followed by hypothyroidism (transient outburst of thyroiditis) | Outburst of thyroiditis, transient inflammation among which DC and thyroid AID | Induction of thyroid AID |
| hyperplastic goitre   |             |                                             | Mφ                                           |

Reference point normal Wistar rat of our colony on a normal iodine diet (urinary iodine excretion 7 μg/d).

↑, increase; ↓, decrease; =, no difference; ND, not done; AI, autoimmunity; Abs, antibodies; TGAbs, thyroid growth-stimulating antibodies; DC, dendritic cells; AID, autoimmune disease.

After 9 weeks on an iodine-deficient diet full euthyroidism was restored in the BB-DP rat in contrast to the Wistar rat (44). On the one hand, it is possible that the more rapid goiter formation of the BB-DP rat reflects an intrinsic high growth rate of BB-DP thyrocytes (see earlier; 22). On the other hand, the rapid and excessive goiter formation may be due to the effects of the infiltrated lymphoid cells. During iodine deficiency, BB-DP goiters show increased numbers of intrathyroidal DC and T cells compared to goiters of BB-DP rats maintained on a normal iodine diet (unpublished data). Our observation that this rat strain with a clear genetically determined predisposition to thyroid autoimmunity is capable of coping with mild iodine deficiency may shed light on the heterogeneous response to iodine deficiency observed in random human populations. There might be individuals with a “BB-DP likeness (autoimmune-proneness)” who remain euthyroid under conditions of moderately low dietary iodine intake, at the expense of a heightened thyroid autoimmune reaction.

### Iodine excess in nonautoimmune-prone animal models

Iodine excess results in a complex modulation of thyroid autoimmune responsiveness in the various animal models. In the nonautoimmune-prone Wistar rat thyroid autoimmune reactivity is depressed (48), while in the autoimmune-prone BB-DP rat (12) and NOD-H2h4 mouse (4), thyroid autoimmune reactivity is accelerated.

In the early phases of chronic iodine excess, a large proportion of Wistar rats develop thyroid-associated ectopic thymic tissue. We have previously speculated that such tissue is related to tolerance induction since its development in iodine excess Wistar rats is associated with an extremely low intrathyroidal infiltration by lymphoid cells and an extremely low production of anticolloid antibodies (48). Thyroid function in these rats is unaltered. The relatively high dietary iodine intake seems, therefore, optimal for Wistar rats to keep thyroid autoreactivity at a minimum.

### Iodine excess in autoimmune-prone animal models and humans

In the BB-DP rat, a high chronic dietary iodine intake does not lead to a lowering of thyroid autoreactivity, but to an acceleration of the intrathyroidal development of the thyroid-associated lymphoid tissue that normally occurs in 50% of BB-DP rats older than 18 to 22 weeks of age (12,45). Also the production of anticolloid antibodies is heightened.

In the NOD mouse model, excessive iodine has varying effects depending on the genetic background of the animal and the state of the thyroid prior to iodine excess. Chronic iodine excess in the regular NOD mouse does not lead to autoimmune thyroiditis (3). Yet in the NOD-H2h4 chronic iodine excess leads to aggravation of the thyroiditis normally developing in about 5% of animals (4). The NOD-H2h4 differs from the normal NOD in its MHC-class II haplotype (IAk), and CD4+ and CD8+ T cells are effective in thyrocyte destruction (49). Preliminary observations also show an early influx of CD11c+ DC in the first weeks after the introduction of the excessive iodine diet.

When an acute large dose of iodine is given to regular NOD mice, this does not result in a heightened autoimmune reaction. However, when these mice have a hyperplastic goiter, acute high doses of iodine are toxic to thyrocytes (see also below). The dying thyrocytes induce a nonspecific inflammation with granulocytes, lymphocytes, Mφ, and DC. Against the NOD background (genetically determined immunodysregulations) this nonspecific inflammation with an enhanced release of autoantigens in the context of more local APCs forms the impetus for a thyroid autoimmune reaction (3).

In the autoimmune-prone OS chicken iodine is also a clear modulator of the spontaneously occurring thyroid autoimmune response. Again, a low iodine intake leads to a low incidence of thyroiditis, whereas a high iodine intake accelerates autoimmune thyroiditis (1).

Our observations concerning the immunomodulatory effects of a high dietary iodine intake in rats and mice are in agreement with observations in human populations. In areas with a relatively high iodine intake such as Japan (50), the incidence of classic Hashimoto’s thyroiditis is higher compared to areas with a normal or relatively low iodine intake. The observations in the autoimmune-prone BB-DP rat and the NOD-H2h4 mouse suggest that individuals already genetically prone to thyroid autoimmunity easily develop thyroid autoimmune disease under the influence of a high-iodine diet, depending on the previous state of the thyroid. Those individuals without such a tendency to autoimmunity may even be protected by a high iodine intake (Table 2).

#### The Mechanisms by which Dietary Iodine Modulates Thyroid Autoimmune Reactivity

##### Toxicity for thyrocytes

One of the mechanisms by which iodine precipitates thyroid autoimmune reactivity is best demonstrated in experiments (3) in which large doses of iodine are administered to iodine-deficient goitrous mice and hamsters. Thyrocytes of such hyperplastic goiters are metabolically highly active and therefore vulnerable to iodine damage. Excessive amounts of the iodide ion are rapidly oxidized in the hyperplastic thyrocytes by the enzyme thyroperoxidase (TPO), thereby generating excessive amounts of the reactive intermediates of TPO catalyzed oxidation of iodine, i.e., hypoiodous acid and oxygen radicals. These oxidative elements damage thyroid cell membranes by oxidation of membrane lipids or proteins. In cases of selenium deficiency these oxidative effects of iodine are aggravated, because selenium is an important component of the selenocysteine-containing proteins, among which are the important natural antioxidants of the glutathione peroxidase family (51). A large iodine dose coupled with selenium deficiency and iodine deficiency leads to severe thyrocyte necrosis, an enhanced Mφ infiltration with increased transforming growth factor-β (TGF-β) production and thyroid fibrosis/atrophy (52).

There are also indications that chronic iodine excess has toxic effects on thyrocytes in autoimmune-prone individuals. Iodine-treated BB-DP rats exhibited marked signs of subcellular disruption: accumulation of secondary lysosomes and lipid droplets, swollen and disrupted mitochondria and extreme dilation of RER (53). There is also some indirect evidence that oxidative damage is an early event in the development of the spontaneous thyroiditis in the OS chicken, even under normal iodine conditions. Treating the OS

chicken from the time of hatching with antioxidants reduced the intrathyroidal lymphocytic infiltration and anti-Tg antibody synthesis. The drugs were ineffective after disease initiation (54).

**Raised immunogenicity of highly iodinated Tg**

The creation of immunogenic epitopes in the Tg molecule by ingestion of excess iodine may also explain the acceleration of the above-described iodine-induced thyroid autoimmune phenomena. It has been demonstrated that highly iodinated Tg is a better immunogen than Tg of low iodine content, both *in vitro* and *in vivo* (46, 55–57). There are also indications that Tg with a low iodination grade is a good tolerogen, at least in the OS chicken (56).

**Direct stimulating effects of iodine and iodinated compounds on cells of the immune system, in particular on DC**

Direct stimulating effects of iodine on immune cells, such as macrophages (58), T cells (59), dendritic cells (59), and B cells (60) have been reported to play a role in the development of thyroid autoimmune reactivity. We previously reported that metrizamide, iodinated tyrosines, and highly iodinated Tg enhance the transition from monocytes to veiled/dendritic cells (23). These VC/DC have increased their T-cell stimulatory potential over that of the original monocytes. Whether processes of oxidation play a role in this transition needs further investigation.

**References**

1. Sundick RS, Bagchi N, Brown TR 1996 The obese strain chicken as a model for human Hashimoto's thyroiditis (review). Exp Clin Endocrinol Diabetes 104(suppl 3): 4–6.
2. Sternthal E, Like AA, Sarantis K, Braverman LE 1981 Lymphocytic thyroiditis and diabetes in the BB/W rat (a new model of autoimmune endocrinopathy). Diabetes 30: 1058–1061.
3. Many M-C, Maniratunga S, Varis I, Dardenne M, Drexhage HA, Denef J-F 1995 Two step development of a Hashimoto-like thyroiditis in genetically autoimmune prone non obese diabetic (NOD) mice. Effects of iodine-induced cell necrosis. J Endocrinol 147: 311–320.
4. Rasooly L, Burek CL, Rose NR 1996 Iodine-induced autoimmune thyroiditis in NOD-H2<sup>h4</sup> mice. Clin Immunol Immunopathol 81: 287–292.
5. Tamai H, Uno H, Hirota Y, Matsubayashi S, Kuma K, Matsumoto H, Kumagai LF, Sasazuki T, Nagataki S 1985 Immunogenetics of Hashimoto's and Graves' disease. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 60: 62–66.
6. Kong YM, David CS, Lomo LC, Fuller BE, Motte RW, Giraldo AA 1997 Role of mouse and human class II transgenes in susceptibility to and protection against mouse autoimmune thyroiditis. Immunogenetics 46: 312–317.
7. Wick G, Brezinschek HP, Hala K, Dietrich H, Wolf H, and Kroemer G 1989 The obese strain of chickens: An animal model with spontaneous autoimmune thyroiditis (review). Adv Immunol 47: 433–500.
8. Kotsa K, Watson PF, Weetman AP 1997 A CTLA-4 gene polymorphism is associated with both Graves disease and autoimmune hypothyroidism. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf) 46: 551–554.
9. Brix TH, Kyvik KO, Hegedüs L 2000 A population-based study of chronic autoimmune hypothyroidism in Danish twins. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 85: 536–539.
10. Brix TH, Christensen K, Holm NV, Harvald B, Hegedüs L 1998 A population-based study of Graves' disease in Danish twins. Clin Endocrinol 48: 397–400.
11. Blüher H, Krohn K, Wallaschofski H, Braverman LE, Paschke R 1999 Cytokine gene expression in autoimmune thyroiditis in BioBreeding/Worcester rats. Thyroid 9: 1049–1055.
12. Mooij P, de Wit HJ, Drexhage HA 1993 An excess of dietary iodine accelerates the development of a thyroid-associated lymphoid tissue in autoimmune prone BB rats. Clin Immunol Immunopathol 69: 189–198.
13. Blüher H, Krohn K, Wallaschofski H, Braverman LE, Paschke R 1999 Fas and Fas ligand gene expression in autoimmune thyroiditis in BB/W rats. Eur J Endocrinol 141: 506–511.
14. Peters JH, Gieseler R, Thiele B, Steinbach F 1996 Dendritic cells: From ontogenetic orphans to myelomonocytic descendants. Immunol Today 17: 273–278.
15. Drexhage HA, Delemarre FGA, Radoševic K, Leenen PJM 1999 Dendritic cells in autoimmunity. In: Lotze MT, Thomson AW (eds) Dendritic Cells. Biology and Clin Appl. Academic Press, San Diego, California, pp 361–401.
16. Leenen PJM, Campbell PA 1993 Heterogeneity of mononuclear phagocytes. An interpretive review. In: Horon MH (ed) Blood Cell Biochemistry 5. Plenum Press, New York, pp 29–84.
17. Kabel PJ, Voorbij HAM, de Haan M, van der Gaag RD, Drexhage HA 1988 Intrathyroidal dendritic cells. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 66: 199–207.
18. Hala K, Malin G, Dietrich H, Loesch U, Boeck G, Wolf H, Kaspers B, Geryk J, Falk M, Boyd RL 1996 Analysis of the initiation period of spontaneous autoimmune thyroiditis (SLT) in obese strain (OS) of chicken. J Autoimmun 9: 129–138.
19. Voorbij HAM, Kabel PJ, de Haan M, Jeucken PHM, van der Gaag RD, de Baets MH, Drexhage HA 1990 Dendritic cells and class II MHC expression on thyrocytes during the autoimmune thyroid disease of the BB rat. Clin Immunol Immunopathol 55: 9–22.
20. Delemarre FGA, Hoogeven PG, de Haan-Meulman, M Simmons PJ, Drexhage HA 2001 Homotypic cluster formation of dendritic cells: A close correlate of their state of maturation. Defects in the biobreeding diabetes-prone rat. J Leukoc Biol 69: 373–380.
21. Simons PJ, Delemarre FGA, Jeucken PHM, Drexhage HA 1998 Pre-autoimmune thyroid abnormalities in the bio-breeding diabetes-prone (BB-DP) rat: A possible relation with the intrathyroid accumulation of dendritic cells and the initiations of the thyroid autoimmune response. J Endocrinol 157: 43–51.
22. Simons PJ, Delemarre FG, Drexhage HA 1998 Antigen-presenting dendritic cells as regulators of the growth of thyrocytes: A role for interleukin-1 beta and interleukin-6. Endocrinology 139: 3148–3156.
23. Mooij P, Simons PJ, de Haan-Meulman M, de Wit HJ, Drexhage HA 1994 Effect of thyroid hormones and other iodinated compounds on the transition of monocytes into veiled/dendritic cells: Role of GM-CSF, TNF-α and IL-6. J Endocrinol 140: 503–512.
24. Tamaru M, Matsuura B, Onji M 1999 Increased levels of serum interleukin-12 in Graves' disease. Eur J Endocrinol 141: 111–116.

IODINE AND THYROID AUTOIMMUNE DISEASE 435

25. Bağriacık EU, Klein JR 2000 The thyrotropin (thyroid-stimulating hormone) receptor is expressed on murine dendritic cells and on a subset of CD45RBhigh lymph node T cells: Functional role for thyroid-stimulating hormone during immune activation. J Immunol 164:6158–6165.

26. Greiner DL, Handler ES, Nakano K, Mordes JP, Rossini AA 1986 Absence of the RT-6 T cells subset in diabetes-prone BB/W rats. J Immunol 136:148–151.

27. Delemarre FGA, Simons PJ, de Heer HJ, Drexhage HA 1999 Signs of immaturity of splenic dendritic cells from the autoimmune prone biobreeding rat: Consequences for the in vitro expansion of regulator and effector T cells. J Immunol 162:1795–1801.

28. Georgiou HM, Bellgrau D 1989 Thymus transplantation and disease prevention in the diabetes-prone bio-breeding rat. J Immunol 142:3400–3405.

29. Radošević K, Casteels KM, Mathieu C, van Ewijk W, Drexhage HA, Leenen PJM 1999 Splenic dendritic cells from the non-obese diabetic mouse induce a prolonged proliferation of syngeneic T cells. A role for an impaired apoptosis of NOD T cells? J Autoimmun 13:373–382.

30. Savino W, Carnaud C, Luan JJ, Bach JF, Dardenne M 1993 Characterization of the extracellular matrix-containing giant perivascular spaces in the NOD mouse thymus. Diabetes 42:134–140.

31. Colomb E, Savino W, Wicker L, Peterson L, Dardenne M, Carnaud C 1996 Genetic control of giant perivascular space formation in the thymus of NOD mice. Diabetes 45:1535–1540.

32. Resetkova E, Arreara G, Yoshikawa N, Morita T, Kim H, Carayon P, Volpe R 1993 Study of induction of activation of human peripheral blood mononuclear cells with a non-activating form of anti-CD3 MoAb in autoimmune thyroid disease (AITD). Clin Exp Immunol 91:397–403.

33. Ludgate ME, McGregor AM, Weetman AP, Ratanachaiyavong S, Lazarus JH, Hall R, Middleton GW 1984 Analysis of T cell subsets in Graves’ disease: Alterations associated with carbimazole. Br Med J 288:526–530.

34. Ueki Y, Eguchi K, Fukuda T, Otsubo T, Kawabe Y, Shimomura C, Matsunaga M, Tezaka H, Ishikawa N, Ito K, et al 1987 Dysfunction of suppressor T cells in thyroid glands from patients with Graves’ disease. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 65:922–928.

35. Tas M, de Haan-Meulman M, Kabel PJ, Drexhage HA 1991 Defects in monocyte polarization and dendritic cell clustering in patients with Graves’ disease. A putative role for a non-specific immunoregulatory factor related to retroviral p15E. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf) 34:441–448.

36. Wagner R, Hayatghebi S, Rosenkranz M, Reinwein D 1993 Increased serum neopterin levels in patients with Graves’ disease. Exp Clin Endocrinol 101:249–254.

37. Lopez-Moratalla N, Calleja A, Gonzalez A, Perez-Mediavilla LA, Aymerick MS, Burrel MA, Santiago E 1996 Inducible nitric oxide synthase in monocytes from patients with Graves’ disease. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 226:723–729.

38. Mooij P, de Wit HJ, Bloot AM, Wilders-Truschnig MM, Drexhage HA 1993 b) Iodine deficiency induces thyroid autoimmune reactivity in Wistar rats. Endocrinology 1331197–1204.

39. Wilders-Truschnig MM, Kabel PJ, Drexhage HA, Beham A, Leb G, Eber O, Hebenstreit J, Loidolt D, Dohr G, Lanzer G, Krejs GJ 1989 Intrathyroidal dendritic cells, epitheloid cells, and giant cells in iodine deficient goiter. Am J Pathol 135:219–225.

40. Fenzi GF, Giani C, Ceccarelli P, Bartalena L, Macchia E, Agh-

ini-Lombardi F, Vitti P, Lari R, Ceccarelli C, Baschieri L, Pinchera A 1986 Role of autoimmune and familial factors in goiter prevalence. Studies performed in a moderately endemic area. J Endocrinol Invest 9:161–164.

41. Grabar P, Miescher P (eds) Immunopathology, 1st International Symposium 1959, Schnaabe B, and Co, Verlag, Basel/Stuttgart.

42. Yokochi T, Inoue Y, Fukada M, Kawai M, Yoshikawa K, Suzuki Y, Kato N 1991 Histological and functional changes in the thyroid glands of mice implanted with hybridomas secreting monoclonal autoantibody against mouse thyroglobulin. Autoimmunity 10:125–131.

43. Bendtzen K 1989 Immune hormones (cytokines); pathogenic role in autoimmune rheumatic and endocrine diseases [review]. Autoimmunity 2:177–189.

44. Mooij P 1993 The Thyroid, Iodine and Autoimmunity [thesis]. Erasmus University, Rotterdam.

45. Allen EM, Appel MC, Braverman LE 1986 The effect of iodine ingestion on the development of spontaneous lymphocytic thyroiditis in the diabetes-prone BB/W rat. Endocrinology 118:1977–1981.

46. Ebner SA, Lueprasitsakul W, Alex S, Fang SL, Appel MC, Braverman LE 1992 Iodine content of rat thyroglobulin affects its antigenicity in inducing lymphocytic thyroiditis in the BB/Wor rat. Autoimmunity 13:209–214.

47. Sundick RS, Herdegen DM, Brown TR, Bagchi N 1987 The incorporation of dietary iodine into thyroglobulin increases its immunogenicity. Endocrinology 120:2078–2084.

48. Mooij P, de Wit HJ, Drexhage HA 1994 A high iodine intake in Wistar rats results in the development of a thyroid-associated ectopic thymic tissue and is accompanied by a low thyroid autoimmune reactivity. Immunology 81:309–316.

49. Hutchings PR, Verma S, Phillips JM, Harach SZ, Howlett S, Cooke A 1999 Both CD4+ T cells and CD8+ T cells are required for iodine accelerated thyroiditis in NOD mice. Cell Immunol 192:113–121.

50. Konno N, Makita H, Yuri K, Izuka N, Kawasaki K 1994 Association between dietary iodine intake and prevalence of subclinical hypothyroidism in the coastal regions of Japan. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 78:393–397.

51. Kohrle J 1999 The trace element selenium and the thyroid gland [review]. Biochimie 81:527–533.

52. Contempre B, Le Moine O, Dumont JE, Denef J-F, Many MC 1996 Selenium deficiency and thyroid fibrosis. A key role for macrophages and transforming growth factor β (TGF-β). Mol Cell Endocrinol 124:7–15.

53. Li M, Boyages SC 1994 Iodide induced lymphocytic thyroiditis in the BB/W rat: Evidence of direct toxic effects of iodide on thyroid subcellular structure. Autoimmunity 18:31–40.

54. Bagchi N, Brown TR, Sundick RS 1995 Thyroid cell injury is an initial event in the induction of autoimmune thyroiditis by iodine in obese strain chickens. Endocrinology 136:5054–5060.

55. Champion BR, Rayner DC, Byfield PG, Page KR, Chan CT, Roitt IM 1987 Critical role of iodination for T cell recognition of thyroglobulin in experimental murine thyroid autoimmunity. J Immunol 139:3665–3670.

56. Bagchi N, Sundick RS, Hu LH, Cummings GD, Brown TR 1996 Distinct regions of thyroglobulin control the proliferation and suppression of thyroid-specific lymphocytes in obese strain chickens. Endocrinology 137:3286–3290.

57. Rasooly L, Rose NR, Saboori A.M, Ladenson PW, Burek CL 1998 Iodine is essential for human T cell recognition of human thyroglobulin. Autoimmunity 27:213–219.

436

58. Toussaint-Demylle D, Many MC, Theisen H, Kraal G, Denef JF 1990 Effects of iodide on class II-MHC antigen expression in iodine deficient hyperplastic thyroid glands. Autoimmunity 7:51–62.

59. Li M, Eastman CJ, Boyages SC 1993 Iodine induced lymphocytic thyroiditis in the BB/W rat: early and late immune phenomena. Autoimmunity 14:181–187.

60. Paschke R, Vogg M, Winter J, Wawschinek O, Eber O, Usadel KH 1994 The influence of iodine on the intensity of the intrathyroidal autoimmunity process in Graves' disease. Autoimmunity 17:319–325.

RUWHOF AND DREXHAGE

Address reprint requests to:

H.A. Drexhage  
Department of Immunology, Room Ee 838  
Erasmus University Rotterdam  
Dr. Molewaterplein 50  
3000 DR  
Rotterdam  

E-mail: drexhage@immu.fgg.eur.nl
