
letters to nature

How widespread is the phenomenology we have been able to demonstrate? The reduction and even extinction of populations by a combination of biotic and physical mortality factors should be quite common. Indeed, we suggested this general mechanism for the extinction of spider species on smaller islands of the same archipelago, but we had no direct evidence²⁰. Physical disturbance that is catastrophic, such as that resulting from hurricanes, is itself less common of course, so co-action with a biotic factor such as predation would perforce be even less common; the spider example just given involves more frequent, less catastrophic storms. The unanticipated nature of hurricanes makes even rarer the observations necessary to record their effects; a measure of serendipity is required²¹. But this may change: the gradual increase in sea surface temperatures, perhaps related to climate change²²,²³, appears to be contributing to the increase in hurricane frequency. In fact, five of the last six years have had a greater than average number of Category III or more severe hurricanes (see http://weather.unisys.com/hurricane/atlantic/index.html); one must go back to 1969 to accumulate another five years that are above average. Thus, the direct effects of climatic catastrophes as well as interactive effects with biotic factors, some producing extinctions, may be on the rise. Conservation biology might profit from consideration of both kinds of effects in analysing extinction risk.

### Methods

#### Study site and subject species
The study islands ranged in vegetated area from 137 to 270 m² ($\bar{x} = 191.0$). All were covered with fairly closely spaced shrubs and trees seldom exceeding 2 m. All were located in an approximately $7 \times 2$ km area that encompassed several protected ‘creek’ waterways fanning out from Buckaroo bay and Snake cay, Great Abaco, the Bahamas.

The manipulated species was the lizard *Leiocephalus carinatus armouri*, a subspecies native to the Little Bahama bank²⁴; it is one of the larger forms of the species¹⁴ (maximum snout–vent length: male, 107 mm; female, 97 mm). The subject lizard species *A. sagrei* is substantially smaller (maximum snout–vent length: male, 57 mm; female, 44 mm). *Leiocephalus carinatus* prefers substantially lower perches than does *A. sagrei*²⁵, and it is most frequently found on the ground. Although it is thus more arboreal than *L. carinatus*, *A. sagrei* in more diverse lizard communities perches lower than other *Anolis* lizards²⁶

#### Experimental protocol
To select islands for introductions, we first (in 1996) stratified the 12 islands with populations of *A. sagrei* into six pairs according to area, vegetation structure and number of *A. sagrei*. One of the islands was naturally colonized in the ensuing year (see above); we randomly chose one of each of the remaining five pairs of islands for the introduction of *L. carinatus*. Throughout the experiment, we attempted to maintain each *L. carinatus* population at five or more individuals by further introductions when necessary. After 1.5 yr, the populations stabilized on all islands and we did not have to add more.

#### Lizard censuses
Lizard numbers were estimated using the multiway-contingency-table procedure²⁷,²⁸; three censuses are done on each of three different days, during which lizards are marked with a census-specific colour of water-soluble latex paint administered with Indico long-distance spraying devices. We used a multivariate-contingency-table method to fit the data to each of eight models, distinguished by which interactions (associations between the three censuses), if any, are included. The simplest of the models fitting the data adequately was selected and the estimate provided by that model was used. A Pascal program doing the fits was kindly provided by J. Roughgarden. Occasionally the program ran no model on the data; then we used the average of the possible pairwise Lincoln estimates (further details in ref. 11). We performed Fisher exact and median tests with SAS software; and used the Wilcoxon–Mann–Whitney test from ref. 29.

Received 2 March; accepted 10 May 2001.

1. Pace, M. L., Cole, J. J., Carpenter, S. R. & Kitchell, J. F. Trophic cascades revealed in diverse ecosystems. *Trends Ecol. Evol.* **14**, 483–488 (1999).
2. Schmitz, O. J., Hambuck, P. A. & Beckerman, A. P. Trophic cascades in terrestrial systems: a review of the effects of carnivore removals on plants. *Am. Nat.* **155**, 141–153 (2000).
3. Sousa, W. P. The role of disturbance in natural communities. *Annu. Rev. Ecol. Syst.* **15**, 353–392 (1984).
4. Pickett, S. T. A. & White, P. S. *The Ecology of Natural Disturbance and Patch Dynamics* (Academic, New York, 1985).
5. Dunson, W. A. & Travis, J. The role of abiotic factors in community organization. *Am. Nat.* **101**, 97–107 (1991).
6. Power, M. E., Parker, M. S. & Wootton, J. T. in *Food Webs* (eds Polis, G. A. & Winemiller, K. O.) 286–297 (Chapman and Hall, London/New York, 1996).
7. Sih, A., Crowley, P., McPeek, M., Petranka, J. & Strohmeier, K. Predation, competition, and prey communities: a review of field experiments. *Annu. Rev. Ecol. Syst.* **16**, 269–311 (1985).

8. Abrams, P. A. Implications of dynamically variable traits for identifying, classifying, and measuring indirect effects in ecological communities. *Am. Nat.* **146**, 112–134 (1996).
9. Schmitz, O. J., Beckerman, A. P. & O’Brien, K. M. Behaviourally-mediated trophic cascades: the effects of predation risk on food web interactions. *Ecology* **78**, 1388–1399 (1997).
10. Schoener, T. W., Slade, J. B. & Stinson, C. H. Diet and sexual dimorphism in the very catholic lizard genus *Leiocephalus* of the Bahamas. *Oecologia* **53**, 160–169 (1982).
11. Schoener, T. W., Spiller, D. A. & Losos, J. B. Predation upon a devastating predator: can the latter’s food-web effects be reversed? *Ecol. Monogr.* (submitted).
12. Gerber, S. P. & Echternacht, A. C. Evidence for asymmetrical intraguild predation between native and introduced *Anolis* lizards. *Oecologia* **124**, 599–607 (2000).
13. Andrewartha, H. G. & Birch, L. C. *Distribution and Abundance of Animals* (Univ. Chicago Press, Chicago, 1954).
14. Menge, B. A. & Sutherland, J. P. Species diversity gradients: synthesis of the role of predation, competition and temporal heterogeneity. *Am. Nat.* **110**, 351–369 (1976).
15. Schoener, T. W. in *Community and Evolutionary Ecology of North American Stream Fishes* (eds Matthews, W. J. & Heins, D. C.) 8–16 (Univ. Oklahoma Press, Norman, 1987).
16. Wiens, J. A. On competition and variable environments. *Am. Sci.* **65**, 590–597 (1977).
17. Diamond, J. & Case, T. J. *Community Ecology* (Harper & Row, New York, 1986).
18. Evans, E. W. Influence of weather on predator/prey relations: stinkbugs and tent caterpillars. *J. NY Entomol. Soc.* **90**, 241–246 (1982).
19. Holt, R. & Lawton, J. H. The ecological consequences of shared natural enemies. *Annu. Rev. Ecol. Syst.* **25**, 495–520 (1994).
20. Schoener, T. W. & Spiller, D. A. Devastation of prey diversity by experimentally introduced predators in the field. *Nature* **381**, 691–694 (1996).
21. Spiller, D. A., Losos, J. B. & Schoener, T. W. Impact of a catastrophic hurricane on island populations. *Science* **281**, 695–697 (1998).
22. Ackerman, J. New eyes on the ocean. *Nat. Geogr. Mag.* Oct. 86–114 (2000).
23. Kareiva, P. M., Kingsolver, J. G. & Huey, R. B. (eds) *Biotic Interactions and Global Change* (Sinauer, Sunderland, Massachusetts, 1993).
24. Schwartz, A. & Henderson, R. W. *Amphibians and Reptiles of the West Indies* **424** (Univ. Florida Press, Gainesville, 1991).
25. Schoener, T. W. Presence and absence of habitat shift in some widespread lizard species. *Ecol. Monogr.* **45**, 233–258 (1975).
26. Schoener, T. W. The *Anolis* lizards of Bimini: resource partitioning in a complex fauna. *Ecology* **49**, 704–726 (1968).
27. Heckel, D. G. & Roughgarden, J. A technique for estimating the size of lizard populations. *Ecology* **60**, 966–975 (1979).
28. Fienberg, S. E. The multiple-recapture census. *Biometrika* **45**, 591–603 (1972).
29. Siegel, S. & Castellan, N. J. Jr *Nonparametric Statistics for the Behavioral Sciences* 128–137 (McGraw-Hill, New York, 1988).

### Acknowledgements
We thank the NSF for support.

Correspondence and requests for reprints should be addressed to T.W.S.  
(e-mail: twschoener@ucdavis.edu).

---

Essential role for Gab2  
in the allergic response  

Haihua Gu*, Kan Saito†, Lori D. Klaman*, Junqing Shen*, Tony Fleming†, YongPing Wang*, Joanne C. Pratt‡, Guosheng Lin*, Bing Lim*, Jean-Pierre Kinet† & Benjamin G. Neel*

* Cancer Biology Program, Division of Hematology and Oncology; and † Division of Experimental Pathology, Department of Medicine, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center and Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02215, USA  
‡ Franklin W. Olin College of Engineering, 1753 Great Plain Avenue, Needham, Massachusetts 02492, USA  

Dos/Gab family scaffolding adapters (Dos, Gab1, Gab2) bind several signal relay molecules, including the protein-tyrosine phosphatase Shp-2 and phosphatidylinositol-3-OH kinase (PI(3)K); they are also implicated in growth factor, cytokine and antigen receptor signal transduction¹. Mice lacking Gab1 die during embryogenesis and show defective responses to several stimuli²,³. Here we report that Gab2⁻/⁻ mice are viable and generally healthy; however, the response (for example, degranulation and cytokine gene expression) of Gab2⁻/⁻ mast cells to stimulation of the high affinity immunoglobulin-ε (IgE) receptor FceRI is defective. Accordingly, allergic reactions such as passive

cutaneous and systemic anaphylaxis are markedly impaired in Gab2⁻/⁻ mice. Biochemical analyses reveal that signalling pathways dependent on PI(3)K, a critical component of FceRI signalling, are defective in Gab2⁻/⁻ mast cells. Our data identify Gab2 as the principal activator of PI(3)K in response to FceRI activation, thereby providing genetic evidence that Dos/Gab family scaffolds regulate the PI(3)K pathway *in vivo*. Gab2 and/or its associated signalling molecules may be new targets for developing drugs to treat allergy.

FceR1 mediates the allergic response by inducing the release of vasoactive agents, including histamine and serotonin, from preformed granules (degranulation), as well as the synthesis and release of cytokines. Similar to lymphocyte antigen receptors and Fcy receptors on phagocytes, FceR1 is a multi-chain immune recognition receptor (MIRR), which signals by activating receptor-associated Src and Syk family protein-tyrosine kinases (PTKs). On crosslinking of FceR1α subunits, the Src family PTK Lyn phosphorylates the associated FceR1β and -γ signalling chains. This leads to the recruitment of Syk, which phosphorylates several signal relay molecules including LAT (linker for activation of T cells)⁴, and activates downstream signalling cascades⁵. An important intermediate is PI(3)K, which catalyses phosphatidylinositol-3,4,-bisphosphate and phosphatidylinositol-3,4,5-trisphosphate (PtdIns(3,4,5)P₃) synthesis. These phospholipids recruit molecules containing Pleckstrin homology (PH) domains, including Tec PTKs⁶, the serine kinase Akt⁷ and phospholipase Cγ1 (PLCγ1)⁸⁹. PI(3)K inhibitors abrogate the mast cell calcium response required for degranulation¹⁰⁻¹² and impair the activation of mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs) needed for cytokine gene induction¹³,¹⁴. However, the mechanism of PI(3)K activation in FceR1 signalling has remained unclear. Here we show that Gab2 is the missing link between FceR1 engagement and PI3K activation, and is essential for FceR1-evoked degranulation, cytokine synthesis and anaphylaxis.

Gab2, like its relatives *Drosophila* DOS and mammalian Gab1, contains an amino-terminal PH domain and several binding sites for signal relay molecules, including Grb2, Shc, Shp-2 and the p85 subunit of PI(3)K. DOS and Gab1 are required for several pathways in embryogenesis²,³,¹⁵. Like Gab1, Gab2 is expressed widely¹⁶. Although studies using cultured cells implicate it in growth factor, cytokine and antigen receptor signalling¹⁶⁻¹⁹, the physiological function of Gab2 is unclear.

To address this issue we generated Gab2⁻/⁻ mice that were born at the expected mendelian frequency (Supplementary Information Fig. 1a, b, c) and remained viable and apparently healthy for up to 15 months. Notably, Gab2 protein was undetectable in several Gab2⁻/⁻ tissues assayed (Supplementary Information Fig. 1d). Histology of several organs (carried out on several mice within 6 months of age), B- and T-cell development (as assessed by flow cytometry), bone marrow cellularity, and peripheral blood counts were grossly normal in Gab2⁻/⁻ mice. Thus, Gab2 seems dispensable for lymphocyte development and steady-state haematopoiesis (data not shown).

Previous studies suggested that Gab2 is important for PI(3)K activation in response to cytokines that use the interleukin 3 (IL-3) receptor beta chain¹⁸. To test this in primary cells, we cultured bone-marrow-derived mast cells (BMMCs) from wild type and Gab2⁻/⁻ mice. IL-3-induced Akt activation was substantially diminished in the Gab2⁻/⁻ BMMCs (data not shown).

As biochemical data implicates Gab2 in MIRR signalling¹⁶,¹⁷,¹⁹, we investigated whether Gab2 has a function in FceR1 responses. Wild-type BMMCs were sensitized with anti-dinitrophenol (DNP) IgE and stimulated with DNP. Gab2 became tyrosyl phosphorylated and associated with p85 and Shp-2 (Fig. 1a). Therefore, we compared degranulation in wild-type and Gab2⁻/⁻ BMMCs. FceR1-evoked serotonin release was markedly inhibited in Gab2⁻/⁻ BMMCs (Fig. 1b). Similar defects were observed in Gab2⁻/⁻ mice derived from two embryonic stem cell clones and in mice on hybrid and Sv129 backgrounds (data not shown). 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate (TPA) plus ionomycin-induced degranulation was comparable in wild-type and Gab2⁻/⁻ BMMCs (Fig. 1c). Therefore, the secretion machinery is intact in Gab2⁻/⁻ BMMCs and defective signalling must be responsible for decreased FceR1-evoked degranulation. FceR1-evoked tumour-necrosis factor-α (TNF-α) and IL-6 messenger RNA synthesis were decreased by 50–65% in Gab2⁻/⁻ BMMCs (Fig. 1d, e). These defects cause a diminished allergic response in the whole animal: passive cutaneous (Fig. 1f) and passive systemic (Fig. 1g) anaphylaxis were reduced significantly in Gab2⁻/⁻ mice.


**Figure 1** Gab2 is essential for FceR1-evoked biological responses in BMMCs. **a**, Gab2 is tyrosyl phosphorylated and associates with p85 and Shp-2 on FceR1 activation. Wild-type (+/+) BMMCs were sensitized with anti-DNP-IgE and stimulated with DNP (10 ng ml⁻¹). Anti-Gab2 immunoprecipitates were immunoblotted with the indicated antibodies. **b, c,** FceR1-mediated degranulation is impaired in Gab2⁻/⁻ BMMCs. BMMCs were sensitized as in **a**, labelled with ³H-serotonin and stimulated with DNP (**b**) or TPA plus ionomycin (**c**). Serotonin in the media and the cell pellet was quantified by scintillation counting. Data are expressed as the percentage of total counts (medium plus pellet) released and are the average of triplicate samples. A representative experiment (of four) is shown. **d, e,** FceR1-induced cytokine gene expression is impaired in Gab2⁻/⁻ BMMCs. Sensitized BMMCs were stimulated with DNP (10 ng ml⁻¹) for 1 h or left unstimulated, and TNF-α (**d**) and IL-6 (**e**) transcripts were quantified by Real Time PCR. **f,** Decreased passive cutaneous anaphylaxis (PCA) in Gab2⁻/⁻ mice. A representative result (3 male mice per genotype) from two independent experiments. For unclear reasons, which may be related to hormonal effects on vascular tone, we observed variably high backgrounds in PCA assays carried out on female mice. **g,** Decreased passive systemic anaphylaxis in Gab2⁻/⁻ mice. Wild-type and Gab2⁻/⁻ mice were sensitized with anti-DNP-IgE and either challenged (+) with DNP (*n* = 7 and 6 for wild-type and Gab2⁻/⁻ mice, respectively) or left untreated (-) (*n* = 3 and 5 for wild-type and Gab2⁻/⁻ mice, respectively). Histamine release from Gab2⁻/⁻ mice is significantly less than release from wild-type mice (*P* < 0.01 by unpaired two-tailed *t*-test).

letters to nature

a

b

c

d

e

f

g

h

i

Figure 2 PI(3)K-dependent signalling is impaired in Gab2⁻/⁻ BMMCs. **a**, Surface expression of FceRI is normal in Gab2⁻/⁻ BMMCs. **b–d**, FceRI-induced total cellular (**b**), Syk (**c**) and LAT (**d**) tyrosyl phosphorylation are normal in Gab2⁻/⁻ BMMCs. BMMCs were sensitized with anti-DNP-IgE and stimulated with 10 ng ml⁻¹ DNP. Lysates were loaded directly (**b**) or immunoprecipitated with anti-Syk (**c**) or anti-LAT antibodies (**d**) and subjected to anti-phosphotyrosine immunoblotting (pTyr). In **b** the membrane was reprobed with anti-Akt antibodies; in **c** the blot was reprobed with anti-Syk antibodies. Experiments in **d** used equal, total protein and were repeated several times. **e**, FceRI-induced PtdIns(3,4,5)P₃ production is decreased in Gab2⁻/⁻ BMMCs. Lipids were extracted from sensitized BMMCs labelled with ³²P-orthophosphate and stimulated with DNP or left unstimulated and separated by thin-layer chromatography. The relative intensity of each PtdIns(3,4,5)P₃ spot (quantified by densitometry) is shown. There was no significant FceR1-stimulated PtdIns(3,4,5)P₃ production in Gab2⁻/⁻ BMMCs. In other experiments small increases were observed. **f**, FceRI-induced PLCγ1 phosphorylation is impaired in Gab2⁻/⁻ BMMCs. **g**, FceRI-evoked IP3 production is impaired in Gab2⁻/⁻ BMMCs. Sensitized BMMCs were stimulated with DNP (30 or 60 ng ml⁻¹) and IP3 production was measured. **h**, FceRI-evoked calcium mobilization is defective in Gab2⁻/⁻ BMMCs. Sensitized BMMCs were loaded with Fura-2/AM and stimulated with DNP (30 and 60 ng ml⁻¹) or ionomycin (2 μM). Calcium flux was monitored by spectrofluorimetry. **i**, FceRI-induced Akt, JNK and p38 activation are impaired in Gab2⁻/⁻ BMMCs. Lysates were immunoblotted with phospho-specific antibodies for Akt (S473), JNK, p38 and Erk, followed by reprobing with anti-Akt antibodies to control for loading.

We next monitored FceR1-evoked signalling events. FceR1 expression (Fig. 2a) and total cellular, Syk and LAT tyrosyl phosphorylation (Fig. 2b, c, d) were normal in Gab2⁻/⁻ BMMCs. Thus, Gab2 must function downstream of, or parallel to, LAT phosphorylation. As PI(3)K binds to Gab2 (Fig. 1a; see also ref. 18), we asked whether Gab2 is important for PI(3)K lipid product generation. FceR1-evoked PtdIns(3,4,5)P₃ levels were reduced by over 80% in Gab2⁻/⁻ BMMCs (Fig. 2e), establishing Gab2 as a critical regulator of PI(3)K in the FceR1 pathway. PLCγ1 tyrosyl phosphorylation was also reduced in Gab2⁻/⁻ BMMCs (Fig. 2f). PI(3)K lipid products are important for optimal recruitment of PLCγ to cell membranes⁸,⁹,²⁰, as well as for the recruitment and activation of Tec family PTKs, implicated in PLCγ phosphorylation⁶. Tyrosyl-phosphorylated PLCγ1 catalyses the generation of diacylglycerol (DAG) and inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate (IP3), and IP3 is required for calcium release from internal stores. Accordingly, FceR1-evoked IP3 production (Fig. 2g) and calcium release were impaired in Gab2⁻/⁻ BMMCs (Fig. 2h). PI(3)K is implicated in the activation of several serine kinase cascades downstream from FceR1. Consistent with their decreased PtdIns(3,4,5)P₃ levels, Akt activation was markedly diminished in Gab2⁻/⁻ BMMCs (Fig. 2i). JNK and to a lesser extent p38 activation were also reduced in Gab2⁻/⁻ BMMCs, whereas Erk activation was largely unaffected.

Sections stained with Toluidine blue revealed similar numbers of mast cells in the ear skins of wild-type and Gab2⁻/⁻ mice, but mast cell numbers in back and thigh skins were reduced by 30–50%, whereas peritoneal mast cells were undetectable in Gab2⁻/⁻ mice (data not shown). Gab2 may therefore have an additional function in mast cell ontogeny, probably in the stem-cell factor (SCF)/c-Kit pathway²¹. To exclude the possibility that the functional defects were indirect consequences of defective mast cell development, we stably reconstituted Gab2 expression in Gab2⁻/⁻ BMMCs by using a retroviral vector. Re-expression of Gab2 rescued the defect in FceR1-evoked degranulation in Gab2⁻/⁻ BMMCs (Fig. 2a). Compared with cells infected with a control virus, Gab2-reconstituted BMMCs showed markedly increased Akt, JNK and p38 activation in response to FceRI engagement (Fig. 3b). Importantly, the ability of Gab2 to rescue FceR1-evoked Akt activation required intact Gab2 binding sites for the p85 subunit of PI(3)K, indicating that FceR1-evoked PI(3)K activation requires direct recruitment of PI(3)K by Gab2 (Fig. 3c).

FceR1-evoked responses and signalling events are not eliminated totally in Gab2⁻/⁻ BMMCs. Although we detected no Gab2 protein in several tissues (Supplementary Information Fig. 1d; and data not shown), Gab2⁻/⁻ BMMCs expressed small (~15% of wild type) amounts of a truncated form of Gab2 (Fig. 3d). Preliminary data suggest that this protein is encoded by a transcript arising from a cryptic promoter in the first intron of the Gab2 gene. The truncated

letters to nature

Figure 3 Restoring Gab2 expression rescues FceRI-evoked degranulation and signalling defects in Gab2⁻/⁻ BMMCs. Gab2⁻/⁻ BMMCs were infected with a retroviral vector co-expressing Gab2 and GFP (wild type, WT) or with Vector alone, and infected cells isolated by FACS. **a**, Re-expression of Gab2 wild type in Gab2⁻/⁻ BMMCs rescues defective degranulation. **b**, Re-expression of Gab2 wild type in Gab2⁻/⁻ BMMCs rescues defective signalling. Cells were stimulated through FceR1 or left unstimulated; activation of the indicated kinases was assessed as in Fig. 2i. **c**, p85 binding to Gab2 is required for FceR1-evoked Akt activation. Gab2⁻/⁻ BMMCs were transiently co-transfected with Myc-Akt and Gab2 wild type or Gab2 3YF expression vectors, or empty vector. Transfected cells were stimulated as in Fig. 2i. Myc-Akt immunoprecipitates were subjected to in vitro kinase assays using GST-GSK3. Reprobing with anti-Akt antibodies shows comparable recovery Myc-Akt. Expression of the transfected (haemagglutinin (HA)-tagged) Gab2 wild type and Gab2 3YF in Gab2⁻/⁻ BMMCs is shown by Gab2 immunoprecipitation/immunoblotting. **d**, Gab2⁻/⁻ BMMCs express small amounts of truncated Gab2. Lysates were immunoblotted with anti-Gab2 antibodies. Gab2⁻/⁻ BMMCs express a truncated (Δ) Gab2 protein at about 15% the level of full-length Gab2 protein in wild-type BMMCs.

protein should lack the first 39 amino acids of the Gab2 PH domain, including the β1-β2 loop, important for binding phosphatidylinositol lipids²². Experiments similar to those in Fig. 3c show that the truncated protein retains some ability to promote FceR1-evoked Akt activation, but only when expressed at levels roughly 50-fold above that of the truncated endogenous protein produced in Gab2⁻/⁻ BMMCs (data not shown). Although we cannot exclude the possibility that truncated Gab2 contributes to residual FceR1 function in Gab2⁻/⁻ BMMCs, this is unlikely. The low expression of the truncation mutant also argues against significant dominant negative effects or gratuitous actions on other signalling pathways. More likely, other, less effective pathways to PI(3)K activation may exist. Such a pathway(s) could emanate from Cbl²³, CD19 (ref. 24) or an as-yet-undiscovered Gab family member (or other scaffolding adapter) expressed at lower levels in BMMCs. Notably, we cannot detect Gab1 in BMMCs (data not shown).

Our results show conclusively that Gab2 is an essential, cell autonomous signalling molecule in FceRI signal transduction (Fig. 4). A central function of Gab2 is to activate PI(3)K by binding its p85 subunit and recruiting it to its substrate lipids. Decreased JNK and p38 activity might reflect impaired recruitment of guanine nucleotide exchange proteins containing PH domains (for example Vav) for small G proteins (such as Rac2); Rac2⁻/⁻ (ref. 25) BMMCs also have impaired FceR1 responses. Defective cytokine gene

Figure 4 Model of Gab2 action in FceR1 signalling. On FceR1 stimulation, Gab2 becomes tyrosyl phosphorylated, probably by Syk or Lyn. Phosphorylated Gab2 binds PI(3)K through p85, as well as other signal relay molecules, such as Shp-2. Gab-2/PI(3)K complexes account for most Ptdlns(3,4,5)P₃ generation on FceR1 stimulation. Ptdlns(3,4,5)P₃ is required for Tec family kinase activation, and subsequent phosphorylation and activation of PLCγ1, as well as for activation of Akt, JNK and to a lesser extent, p38. The role of other signalling molecules that bind Gab2 remains to be defined.

induction with normal Erk activation in Gab2⁻/⁻ BMMCs (Fig. 1c, d) is reminiscent of our previous studies of Gab2 in cytokine signalling, in which Gab2 by means of Shp-2 functions in a pathway required for immediate-early gene induction, but not Erk activation¹⁶ (Fig. 2c, d). Decreased JNK and p38 activation may also contribute to lower cytokine gene transcription. Reconstitution studies using other phosphorylation site mutants of Gab2 should resolve such questions. Gab1⁻/⁻ fibroblasts demonstrate defective Erk activation in response to several growth factors and cytokines. These data, along with the markedly different phenotypes of Gab1⁻/⁻ (refs 2, 3) and Gab2⁻/⁻ mice, indicate that the two mammalian Gab proteins have distinct functions.

Identification of Gab2 as the central mediator of PI(3)K activation from FceR1 has more general implications. For example, the mechanism by which other MIRR (such as FcyR and T-cell antigen receptor) activate PI(3)K has not been established clearly. Our data indicate that Gab family proteins are possible intermediates. The highly selective inhibition of immediate and delayed responses to IgE receptor triggering in Gab2⁻/⁻ BMMCs raises the possibility that strategies to lower Gab2 levels might have therapeutic benefits in atopic individuals.

### Methods

#### Generation of Gab2⁻/⁻ mice

We generated Gab2⁻/⁻ mice by targeting exon 1 using a standard replacement strategy. (See Supplementary Information for details of generation and characterization of these mice.)

#### Antibodies and reagents

Monoclonal fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC)-anti-mouse IgE was provided by H. Katz. Monoclonal anti-DNP mouse IgE, SPE-7 and DNP-HSA were from Sigma. Polyclonal anti-Gab2 and anti-p85 antibodies were described previously¹⁶. Anti-PLCγ1, anti-Akt and anti-Shp-2 were purchased from Santa Cruz. Monoclonal anti-phosphotyrosine antibody 4G10 was from UBI, and anti-phospho-p44/p42, anti-phospho-JNK, anti-phospho-p38 and anti-phospho-Akt (Ser 473) were from Cell Signaling. Anti-Syk antibodies were provided by J. Cambier.

#### Mast cell cultures and functional assays

Murine bone marrow was cultured in IMDM containing 10% FCS and 2–4 ng ml⁻¹ recombinant murine IL-3 (Intergen). We used BMMCs cultured for 4–7 weeks for all studies. FceR1 surface expression was quantified by flow cytometry as described²⁶. We measured degranulation by serotonin release as described⁴. To determine cytokine mRNA levels, BMMCs were sensitized with IgE (2 μg ml⁻¹ for 4 h), washed, resuspended in Tyrode’s buffer, and left unstimulated or stimulated with DNP (10 ng ml⁻¹) for 1 h. Total

letters to nature

RNA was isolated using TRIzol (GIBCO). First-strand complementary DNA synthesized from total RNA using Superscript reverse transcriptase (GIBCO) was subjected to Real Time PCR using a Taqman instrument (Perkin–Elmer). The relative levels of cytokine mRNAs in each sample were normalized to GAPDH levels. We performed passive cutaneous anaphylaxis²⁷ and passive systemic anaphylaxis (PCA and PSA, respectively) assays essentially as described⁴. We used 2.5–3-month-old mice for these experiments.

### Biochemical analyses

Lysis, immunoprecipitation and immunoblotting were carried out as described¹⁶, except that 1% Triton was used in place of NP-40. PtdIns(3,4,5)P₃ levels were measured by thin-layer chromatography as described⁶. IP3 concentration was assayed using a kit from NEN.

### BMMC calcium responses

BMMCs were sensitized with anti-IgE (2 μg ml⁻¹) for 4 h, loaded with 2 μM Fura-2/AM (Molecular Probes) in buffer also containing 0.25 mM sulphinpyrazone at 37 °C for 25 min, washed, and stimulated with DNP at the indicated concentrations. Intracellular calcium measurements were performed using a Deltascan spectrofluorimeter as described⁶.

### BMMC reconstitution assays

Full-length Gab2 cDNA was cloned into the EcoR1 site of the retroviral vector MSCV– IRES–green fluorescent protein (GFP), generating MSCV–IRES–GFP–Gab2. Viral supernatants were produced as described²⁸, and used to infect three-week-old BMMC cultures containing polybrene (4 μg ml⁻¹) by spin infection (800 g, room temperature for 90 min). Seven days after infection, GFP-positive cells were purified by FACS and cultured for 10 d before analysis. For transient reconstitutions, BMMCs (1.5 × 10⁷) were electro- porated with 3 μg Myc-Akt plasmid and 18 μg pEBB, pEBB Gab2 wild type or pEBB Gab2 3YF at 380 V and 960 μFD using a Bio-Rad GenePulser. Twenty-four hours after electroporation, cells were sensitized and stimulated with DNP. Myc-Akt immunopreci- pitates were subjected to *in vitro* kinase assays using glutathione S-transferase (GST) – GSK3 as the substrate²⁹.

Received 20 March; accepted 15 May 2001.

1. Hibi, M. & Hirano, T. Gab-family adapter molecules in signal transduction of cytokine and growth factor receptors, and T and B cell antigen receptors. *Leuk. Lymphoma* **37**, 299–307 (2000).
2. Itoh, M. *et al.* Role of Gab1 in heart, placenta, and skin development and growth factor- and cytokine- induced extracellular signal-regulated kinase mitogen-activated protein kinase activation. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* **20**, 3695–3704 (2000).
3. Sachs, M. *et al.* Essential role of Gab1 for signaling by the c-Met receptor *in vivo*. *J. Cell Biol.* **150**, 1375– 1384 (2000).
4. Saitoh, S. *et al.* LAT is essential for Fc(e)RI-mediated mast cell activation. *Immunity* **12**, 525–535 (2000).
5. Turner, H. & Kinet, J. P. Signalling through the high-affinity IgE receptor FceRI. *Nature* **402**, B24–30 (1999).
6. Scharenberg, A. M. *et al.* Phosphatidylinositol-3,4,5-trisphosphate (PtdIns-3,4,5-P3)/Tec kinase- dependent calcium signaling pathway: a target for SHIP-mediated inhibitory signals. *EMBO J.* **17**, 1961–1972 (1998).
7. Franke, T. F., Kaplan, D. R., Cantley, L. C. & Toker, A. Direct regulation of the Akt proto-oncogene product by phosphatidylinositol-3,4-biphosphate. *Science* **275**, 665–668 (1997).
8. Falasca, M. *et al.* Activation of phospholipase Cγ by PI 3-kinase-induced PH domain-mediated membrane targeting. *EMBO J.* **17**, 414–422 (1998).
9. Bae, Y. S. *et al.* Activation of phospholipase C-γ by phosphatidylinositol 3,4,5-trisphosphate. *J. Biol. Chem.* **273**, 4465–4469 (1998).
10. Nakanishi, S., Yano, H. & Matsuda, Y. Novel functions of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase in terminally differentiated cells. *Cell Signal* **7**, 545–557 (1995).
11. Barker, S. A. *et al.* Wortmannin blocks lipid and protein kinase activities associated with PI 3-kinase and inhibits a subset of responses induced by FceR1 cross-linking. *Mol. Biol. Cell* **6**, 1145–1158 (1995).
12. Barker, S. A., Lujan, D. & Wilson, B. S. Multiple roles for PI 3-kinase in the regulation of PLCγ activity and Ca2⁺ mobilization in antigen-stimulated mast cells. *J. Leukoc. Biol.* **65**, 321–329 (1999).
13. Kawakami, Y., Hartman, S. E., Holland, P. M., Cooper, J. A. & Kawakami, T. Multiple signalling pathways for the activation of JNK in mast cells: involvement of Bruton’s tyrosine kinase, protein kinase C, and JNK kinases, SEK1 and MKK7. *J. Immunol.* **161**, 1795–1802 (1998).
14. Ishizuka, T. *et al.* Mitogen-activated protein kinase activation through Fce receptor I and stem cell factor receptor is differentially regulated by phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase and calcineurin in mouse bone marrow-derived mast cells. *J. Immunol.* **162**, 2087–2094 (1999).
15. Raabe, T. *et al.* DOS, a novel pleckstrin homology domain-containing protein required for signal transduction between sevenless and Ras1 in *Drosophila*. *Cell* **85**, 911–920 (1996).
16. Gu, H., Pratt, J. C., Burakoff, S. J. & Neel, B. G. Cloning of p97/Gab2, the major SHP-2 binding protein in hematopoietic cells, reveals a novel pathway for cytokine-induced gene activation. *Mol. Cell* **2**, 729– 740 (1998).
17. Nishida, K. *et al.* Gab-family adapter proteins act downstream of cytokine and growth factor receptors and T- and B-cell antigen receptors. *Blood* **93**, 1809–1816 (1999).
18. Gu, H. *et al.* New role for Shc in activation of the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase/Akt pathway. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* **20**, 7109–7120 (2000).
19. Pratt, J. C. *et al.* Cutting edge: gab2 mediates an inhibitory phosphatidylinositol 3'-kinase pathway in T cell antigen receptor signaling. *J. Immunol.* **165**, 4158–4163 (2000).
20. Rameh, L. E. *et al.* Phosphoinositide 3-kinase regulates phospholipase Cγ-mediated calcium signaling. *J. Biol. Chem.* **273**, 23750–23757 (1998).
21. Galli, S. J. Mast cells and basophils. *Curr. Opin. Hematol.* **7**, 32–39 (2000).
22. Rameh, L. E. *et al.* A comparative analysis of the phosphoinositide binding specificity of pleckstrin homology domains. *J. Biol. Chem.* **272**, 22059–22066 (1997).

23. Liu, Y. C. & Altman, A. Cbl: complex formation and functional implications. *Cell Signal* **10**, 377–385 (1998).
24. Gommerman, J. L. *et al.* A role for CD21/CD35 and CD19 in responses to acute septic peritonitis: a potential mechanism for mast cell activation. *J. Immunol.* **165**, 6915–6921 (2000).
25. Yang, F. C. *et al.* Rac2 stimulates Akt activation affecting BAD/Bcl-XL expression while mediating survival and actin function in primary mast cells. *Immunity* **12**, 557–568 (2000).
26. Lu-Kuo, J. M., Fruman, D. A., Joyal, D. M., Cantley, L. C. & Katz, H. R. Impaired kit- but not FceRI- initiated mast cell activation in the absence of phosphoinositide 3-kinase p85α gene products. *J. Biol. Chem.* **275**, 6022–6029 (2000).
27. Dombrowicz, D. *et al.* Absence of FceRI alpha chain results in upregulation of FcyRIII-dependent mast cell degranulation and anaphylaxis. Evidence of competition between FceRI and FcyRIII for limiting amounts of FcR beta and gamma chains. *J. Clin. Invest.* **99**, 915–925 (1997).
28. Schwalller, J. *et al.* Transformation of hematopoietic cell lines to growth-factor independence and induction of a fatal myelo- and lymphoproliferative disease in mice by retrovirally transduced TEL/ JAK2 fusion genes. *EMBO J.* **17**, 5321–5333 (1998).
29. Craddock, B. L., Orchiston, E. A., Hinton, H. J. & Welham, M. J. Dissociation of apoptosis from proliferation, protein kinase B activation, and BAD phosphorylation in interleukin-3-mediated phosphoinositide 3-kinase signaling. *J. Biol. Chem.* **274**, 10633–10640 (1999).

Supplementary information is available on Nature's World-Wide Web site (http://www.nature.com) or as paper copy from the London editorial office of Nature.

### Acknowledgements

We thank J. Lawitts for blastocyst injections; V. Petkova for help with Real Time PCR analysis; D. P. Liu for technical assistance; and L. C. Cantley and C. Carpenter for comments. This work was supported by grants from the N.I.H. (B.G.N, J.-P.K. and B.L.). H.G. was supported by fellowships from the N.I.H. and the American Association for Cancer Research. J.C.P. was supported by grants from the Cancer League of Colorado and the Association for International Cancer Research.

Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to H.G. (e-mail: hgu@caregroup.harvard.edu).

---

The heparin-binding haemagglutinin of *M. tuberculosis* is required for extrapulmonary dissemination

Kevin Pethe*, Sylvie Alonso*, Franck Biet*, Giovanni Delogu†, Michael J. Brennan†, Camille Locht* & Franco D. Menozzi*

* Unité INSERM U447, Institut Pasteur de Lille, 1 rue du Prof. Calmette, F-59019 Lille Cedex, France  
† Laboratory of Mycobacterial Diseases, Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research, Food and Drug Administration, 29 Lincoln Drive, Building 29, Room 502, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA  

Tuberculosis remains the world’s leading cause of death due to a single infectious agent, *Mycobacterium tuberculosis*, with 3 million deaths and 10 million new cases per year¹. The infection initiates in the lungs and can then spread rapidly to other tissues². The availability of the entire *M. tuberculosis* genome sequence³ and advances in gene disruption technologies⁴ have led to the identification of several mycobacterial determinants involved in virulence⁵⁻⁸. However, no virulence factor specifically involved in the extrapulmonary dissemination of *M. tuberculosis* has been identified to date. Here we show that the disruption of the *M. tuberculosis* or *Mycobacterium bovis* Bacille Calmette-Guérin (BCG) *hbhA* gene encoding the heparin-binding haemagglutinin adhesin (HBHA) markedly affects mycobacterial interactions with epithelial cells, but not with macrophage-like cells. When nasally administered to mice, the mutant strains were severely impaired in spleen colonization, but not in lung colonization. Coating wild-type mycobacteria with anti-HBHA antibodies also impaired dissemination after intranasal infection. These results provide evidence that adhesins such as HBHA are required for extrapulmonary dissemination, and that interactions with non-phagocytic cells have an important role in the pathogenesis of
