
Plant Cell Physiol. 42(7): 677–685 (2001)
JSPP © 2001

**Rapid Paper**

# Identification of Plant Cytokinin Biosynthetic Enzymes as Dimethylallyl Diphosphate:ATP/ADP Isopentenyltransferases

**Tatsuo Kakimoto**¹  
*Department of Biology, Graduate School of Science, Osaka University, and Recognition and Formation, PRESTO, JST, Osaka, 560-0043 Japan*

It has been believed that the key step in cytokinin biosynthesis is the addition of a 5-carbon chain to the N⁶ of AMP. To identify cytokinin biosynthesis enzymes that catalyze the formation of the isopentenyl side chain of cytokinins, the Arabidopsis genomic sequence was searched for genes that could code for isopentenyltransferases. This resulted in the identification of nine putative genes for isopentenyltransferases. One of these, *AtIPT4*, was subjected to detailed analysis. Overexpression of *AtIPT4* caused cytokinin-independent shoot formation on calli. As shoot formation on calli normally occurs only when cytokinins are applied, it suggested that this gene product catalyzed cytokinin biosynthesis in plants. Recombinant *AtIPT4* catalyzed the transfer of an isopentenyl group from dimethylallyl diphosphate to the N⁶ of ATP and ADP, but not to that of AMP. *AtIPT4* did not exhibit the DMAPP:tRNA isopentenyltransferase activity. These results indicate that cytokinins are, at least in part, synthesized from ATP and ADP in plants.

Key words: Adenosine diphosphate — Adenosine triphosphate — Arabidopsis thaliana — Cytokinin — Dimethylallyl diphosphate:ATP/ADP isopentenyltransferase.

Abbreviations: DMAPP, dimethylallyl diphosphate; CIAP, calf intestine alkaline phosphatase; iPA, isopentenyladenosine; iPDP, isopentenyladenosine-5′-diphosphate; iPMP, isopentenyladenosine-5′-monophosphate; IPTG, isopropyl-β-D-thiogalactopyranoside; iTP, isopentenyladenosine-5′-triphosphate; RT, reverse transcription; WS, Wassilewskija; ZDP, trans-zeatin-riboside diphosphate; ZMP, trans-zeatin riboside monophosphate; ZTP, trans-zeatin-riboside triphosphate.

The nucleotide sequences of *AtIPT1, AtIPT3, AtIPT4, AtIPT5, AtIPT6, AtIPT7,* and *AtIPT8* of Arabidopsis (strain, WS) have been submitted to DDBJ under accession numbers of AB061400, AB061401, AB061402, AB061403, AB061404, AB061405, and AB061406, respectively.

---

## Introduction

Cytokinins are a class of plant hormones that play a pivotal role in plant development. They induce cell division in the presence of auxins, and induce shoot formation on calli (Skoog and Miller 1957). They also release axillary buds from apical dominance, increase sink strength, and delay senescence (Mok 1994).

Two biosynthetic pathways of cytokinins, the tRNA pathway and the AMP pathway, have been proposed. In the first pathway, tRNA has been speculated to be a possible source of cytokinins, because an adenine residue in a subset of tRNAs is isopentenylated. However, this pathway is not considered to be the main route, if at all (Chen 1997, McGaw and Burch 1995). In the AMP pathway, the isopentenyl group is transferred from dimethylallyl diphosphate (DMAPP) to the N⁶ of AMP, resulting in the production of isopentenyladenosine-5′-monophosphate (iPMP). This reaction is thought to be catalyzed by DMAPP:AMP isopentenyltransferases. Several gall-forming phytopathogenic bacteria possess genes for this class of enzymes, e.g., *tzs* and *ipt* (same as *tmr*) of *Agrobacterium tumefaciens* (Barry et al. 1984, Akiyoshi et al. 1984, Morris et al. 1993), *ptz* of *Pseudomonas savastanoi* (Powell and Morris 1986), *ipt* of *Rhodococcus fasciens* (Crespi et al. 1992), and *ipt* (same as *etz*) of *Erwinia herbicola* (Lichter et al. 1995). The expression of *tzs* in *A. tumefaciens* results in secretion of cytokinins, whereas *ipt* in *A. tumefaciens* is integrated into plant genomes to force the host plants to produce cytokinins and form tumors. This activity has also been found in crude extracts from cytokinin-autotrophic tobacco callus (Chen and Melitz 1979) and from immature maize kernels (Blackwell and Horgan 1994), but the corresponding enzymes have not been purified to homogeneity. Recently, the presence of another pathway was demonstrated in *Arabidopsis thaliana*, although the reactions that constitute this pathway have not been identified yet. In this pathway, trans-zeatin-riboside monophosphate (ZMP) is synthesized independently of iPMP (Astot et al. 2000). In the present study, a search of Arabidopsis genome sequences for proteins that could code for isopentenyltransferases resulted in the identification of nine putative genes for isopentenyltransferases. The same set of genes were also identified by Takei et al. (2001), who demonstrated that crude extracts of *E. coli* expressing these genes and purified *AtIPT1* had DMAPP:AMP isopentenyltransferase activity. Here I report that one of these genes, *AtIPT4*, has unique DMAPP:ATP/ADP isopentenyltransferase activity in its purified form.

New cytokinin biosynthetic route

fied form, and is functional in plants. We propose that one of the key steps, or perhaps the key step, in cytokinin biosynthesis is the isopentenylation of ATP and/or ADP.

Materials and Methods

### Identification of genes for isopentenyltransferases

A reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) was used to confirm the expression and isolation of cDNA sequences. DNase-treated RNA samples from various organs of *A. thaliana* var. Wassilewskija (WS) were used as templates. Primers were designed to amplify regions encompassing the entire coding regions for putative isopentenyltransferases, and the amplified regions were sequenced.

### Plasmid construction

The coding region of *AtIPT4*, which has no intron, was PCR-amplified from genomic DNA of Arabidopsis (WS strain) by using primers No. 421 (5′-AAAATGAAGTGTAATGACAAAATGGTTGTG-3′) and No. 407 (5′-GTCCAAACTAGTTAAGACTTAAAAATC-3′). The amplified fragment was blunt-end cloned under the cauliflower mosaic virus 35S promoter of a plant expression binary vector, pTK015 (Kakimoto unpublished), resulting in 35S::AtIPT4. The coding region of *AtIPT2* was amplified from an Arabidopsis (WS) cDNA library by using primers No. 398 (5′-TCCCCCGGGCGATGATGAT-GTTAACCTAGC-3′) and No. 399 (5′-TCCCCCGGGTCAATTACTTCTGCTTGAACTTC-3′). The amplified fragment was digested with *Sma*I and cloned under the 35S promoter of pTK015, resulting in 35S::AtIPT2. A DNA fragment corresponding to the coding region of *AtIPT4*, amplified with the use of primers No. 480 (5′-GGAATCCCATATGAAGTGTAATGACAAAATGGTTG-3′) and No. 481 (5′-GAAGATCTGTCCAAACTAGTTAAGACTTAAAAATC-3′), was digested with *Nde*I and *Bgl*II and cloned between the *Nde*I and *Bam*HI sites of pET16b (Novagen, Madison, WI, U.S.A.), which was used to express *AtIPT4* as a polyhistidine fusion protein in *E. coli*. The coding region of *AtIPT4* was also amplified with the use of primers No. 483 (5′-AAGTGTAATGACAAAATGGTTGTGATCATG-3′) and No. 481, and the amplified fragment was digested with *Nco*I and *Bgl*II and cloned between the *Nco*I and *Bam*HI sites of pET32b (Novagen), producing pET32-AtIPT4. The coding region of *AtIPT2* was amplified from 35S::AtIPT2 with the use of primers No. 550 (5′-GATCCCCGGCATATGATGATGTTAAACCCTAGC-3′) and No. 551 (5′-ACGGTACCCATATGTCAATTACTTCTGCTTCTTGAAC-3′), and the amplified fragment was digested with *Nde*I and cloned into the *Nde*I site of pET16b. The *miaA* gene of *E. coli* was PCR-amplified from whole *E. coli* cells (DH10B) with the use of primers No. 485 (5′-GAAGATCTTCCAGCCTGCGATAGCACCAACAA-3′) and No. 484 (5′-GGAATCCCATATGAGTGATATCAGTAAAGGCGAG-3′). The amplified fragment was digested with *Nde*I and *Bgl*II, and then cloned between the *Nde*I and *Bam*HI sites of pET16b. The *tzs* gene of *Agrobacterium* was PCR-amplified from whole *A. tumefaciens* cells (GV3101) with the use of primers No. 486 (5′-GGAATTCATATGT-

TACTCCATCTCATCTACGGA-3′) and No. 487 (5′-CGGGATCCT-CACCGAATTCGCGTCAGCGT-3′). The amplified fragment was digested with *Nde*I and *Bam*HI, and cloned between the *Nde*I and *Bam*HI sites of pER16b. All regions produced by PCR were confirmed by sequencing.

### Transformation of calli

Calli of Arabidopsis were transformed according to the method of Kakimoto (1998). Selection for transformants was made at 50 μg ml⁻¹ kanamycin sulfate.

### Expression and purification of recombinant proteins

The *E. coli* strain AD494(DE3)pLysS (Novagen), harboring an expression plasmid, was cultured overnight at 20°C in the presence of 1 mM isopropyl-β-D-thiogalactopyranoside (IPTG), harvested, and resuspended in buffer [25 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5; 50 mM KCl; 5 mM 2-mercaptoethanol; 0.5 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride (PMSF); 10 μg ml⁻¹ leupeptin] at a cell density of 100 OD₆₀₀. This *E. coli* suspension was frozen and thawed to disrupt the cells, and then centrifuged at 300,000 × g for 10 min, and the supernatant was collected. Supernatants (referred to as crude extracts in this paper) were either used for assay of isopentenyltransferase activity, or subjected to affinity purification of enzymes by Ni-NTA agarose (Qiagen, Tokyo, Japan). Ni-NTA agarose was suspended in 4× binding buffer (20 mM Na-phosphate buffer, pH 8.0; 1.2 M NaCl; 40 mM imidazole, pH 8.0; 5 mM 2-mercaptoethanol) at a 50% bed volume. This suspension was mixed with three volumes of *E. coli* extracts, and incubated at 4°C for 1 h with gentle mixing. It was then centrifuged to separate the supernatant (unbound fractions) from the Ni-NTA agarose pellets. The Ni-NTA agarose pellets were washed thoroughly with wash buffer (20 mM Na-phosphate, pH 8.0; 10 mM imidazole, pH 8.0; 0.3 M NaCl; 5 mM 2-mercaptoethanol; 10 μg ml⁻¹ leupeptin; 0.3 mM PMSF). Recombinant proteins were eluted with elution buffer (20 mM Na-phosphate buffer, pH 8.0; 0.3 M imidazole, pH 8.0; 0.3 M NaCl; 5 mM 2-mercaptoethanol; 10 μg ml⁻¹ leupeptin), and concentrated by using the ultrafiltration membrane UFV5BCC 25 (Millipore Co., Bedford, MA, U.S.A.), with replacing the elution buffer by another buffer (25 mM Tris·HCl, pH 7.5; 50 mM KCl; 5 mM 2-mercaptoethanol; 10 μg ml⁻¹ leupeptin). Recombinant proteins were stored in liquid nitrogen.

### Assay for DMAPP:ATP (or ADP or AMP) isopentenyltransferase activity

DMAPP:ATP (or ADP or AMP) isopentenyltransferase activity was measured by the method described by Blackwell and Horgan (1991), with some modifications. The samples to be assayed were crude extracts and purified proteins of *E. coli* harboring the pET16b derivatives. Purified proteins were diluted to the concentrations indicated in Table 1 and Table 2 with dilution buffer (25 mM Tris·HCl, pH 7.5; 5 mM 2-mercaptoethanol; 0.2 mg ml⁻¹ bovine serum albumin). Isopentenylation reactions were started by mixing samples with an equal volume of 2× assay mixture containing 25 mM Tris·HCl (pH 7.5),

Fig. 1 (A) Alignment of a conserved region of isopentenyltransferases. The horizontal bar indicates an ATP/GTP binding motif. Numbers in parentheses indicate the numbers of amino acid residues present before and after the conserved region of each gene product. Identical amino acid residues conserved in more than 50% of the gene products are shaded with dark gray, and similar amino acid residues conserved in more than 50% of the gene products are shaded with light gray. (B) A phylogenetic tree for the conserved region of isopentenyltransferases. The tree was made with the ClustalW program (http://www.ddbj.nig.ac.jp/E-mail/clustalw-e.html), with bootstrapping. Bar, 0.1 amino acid substitutions per site. For (A) and (B), the gene products are colored as described below. Plant gene products are shown in pink (putative cytokinin biosynthetic isopentenyltransferases) or in orange (putative DMAPP:tRNA isopentenyltransferases). Non-plant eukaryotic DMAPP:tRNA isopentenyltransferases are dark blue, and bacterial DMAPP:tRNA isopentenyltransferases are light blue. Cytokinin biosynthetic isopentenyltransferases of gall-forming phytopathogenic bacteria are green.

New cytokinin biosynthetic route

10 mM MgCl₂, 5 mM 2-mercaptoethanol, 60 μM DMAPP, and 2 μM [2,8-³H]ATP (120 GBq mmol⁻¹), [2,8-³H]ADP (118 GBq mmol⁻¹), [2-³H]AMP (72 GBq mmol⁻¹), or [2,8-³H]adenosine (143 GBq mmol⁻¹). After incubation for the time indicated in the tables, 1/2 volume of calf intestine alkaline phosphatase (CIAP) mix [0.5 M Tris-HCl (pH 9.0), 10 mM MgCl₂, and 1,000 units ml⁻¹ of CIAP (Takara Shuzo Co. Ltd., Otsu, Shiga, Japan)] was added and the mixtures were incubated at 37°C for 30 min. Then, 700 μl of ethyl acetate was added and the mix-

tures were vortexed. After centrifugation at 17,000×g for 2 min, the organic phase was recovered and washed twice with water. The organic phase was mixed with ten volumes of scintillant, ACSII (Amersham Pharmacia Biotech, Tokyo, Japan), and radioactivity levels were measured with a liquid scintillation counter. Recovery of [2,8-³H] isopentenyladenosine (iPA) was measured, and were used to calculate the amounts of the products formed. The [2,8-³H]iPA had been synthesized through isopentenylation of ATP by using purified AtIPT4, followed by CIAP treatment as described above. All assays were performed in duplicate, and mean values were used for calculation.

To determine the \( K_m \) for ATP, purified protein (2 ng ml⁻¹ in dilution buffer) was mixed with the same volume of a 2× assay mixture containing 25 mM Tris·HCl (pH 7.5), 10 mM MgCl₂, 5 mM 2-mercaptoethanol, 0.4 mM DMAPP, and ATP (2–502 μM [2,8-³H]ATP, 1.22 MBq ml⁻¹). To determine the \( K_m \) for DMAPP, purified protein (2 ng ml⁻¹) was mixed with the same volume of a 2× assay mixture containing 25 mM Tris·HCl (pH 7.5), 10 mM MgCl₂, 5 mM 2-mercaptoethanol, 0.25–200 μM DMAPP, and 200 μM [2,8-³H]ATP (7.07 GBq mmol⁻¹). After the mixture had been incubated at 24°C for 0 min or 4 min, the reaction mixtures were treated with CIAP, and then extracted with ethyl acetate as described above. Values obtained at 0 min were subtracted from those at 4 min, and the resulting differences were taken as enzyme activity.

Assay for DMAPP:tRNA isopentenyltransferase activity

Undermodified tRNA was prepared by permanganate-treatment of yeast tRNA (type X, Sigma-Aldrich Japan, Tokyo, Japan) according to the method of Kline et al. (1969). Twenty microliters of purified protein samples (20 ng (protein ml⁻¹) in dilution buffer was mixed with the same volume of 2× tRNA isopentenyltransferase assay mixture (25 mM Tris·HCl, pH 7.5; 10 mM MgCl₂, 5 mM 2-mercaptoethanol; 0.67 μM [1-³H]DMAPP, 555 GBq mmol⁻¹; and 567 A₂₆₀ units ml⁻¹ undermodified tRNA), and incubated at 25°C for 30 min. After 160 μl of 0.4 M sodium acetate and 500 μl of ethanol was added and allowed to settle on ice for 10 min, the tRNA precipitates were recovered by centrifugation (17,000×g for 20 min), washed with 80% ethanol, and dissolved in 30 μl of distilled water. These were mixed with ten volumes of ACSII, and radioactivity levels were measured. Assays were performed in triplicate and mean values were used for calculation.

Analysis of product by HPLC and mass spectrometry

Crude extract prepared from IPTG-induced *E. coli* harboring pET32-AtIPT4 was incubated with Ni-NTA agarose beads. After the beads had been washed thoroughly, they were re-suspended in a solution containing 25 mM Tris·HCl (pH 7.5), 100 mM KCl, and 5 mM 2-mercaptoethanol. The bead pellets were mixed with an equal volume of a 2× assay mixture that contained 1 mM unlabeled ATP and 1 mM DMAPP, and incubated at 25°C for 1 h with shaking. After a brief spin, the supernatant was recovered and separated into two portions, and one portion was treated with CIAP as described before. The supernatant with or without treatment with CIAP was mixed with three volumes of acetone. The mixture was incubated at –80°C for 30 min and centrifuged at 17,000×g for 30 min to remove the proteins. The supernatants were dried under vacuum, and the residues were dissolved in methanol. Aliquots were separated by HPLC with a Chemcobond ODS-W column (Chemco, Osaka, Japan), by using the following program: 20 mM KH₂PO₄ for 15 min, followed by linear gradient of 0% acetonitrile and 20 mM KH₂PO₄ to 80% acetonitrile and 4 mM KH₂PO₄ over 30 min. The fractions were collected and dried under vacuum, and the residues were resuspended in ethanol. After centrifugation to remove any possible salt precipitates, the solutions were subjected to fast atom bombardment mass spectrometry (JMS-SX102 or

Fig. 2 Effect of overexpression of AtIPT4 in Arabidopsis calli. Calli were co-cultivated with Agrobacterium harboring the control vector (top) or 35S::AtIPT4 (bottom) for 2 d and then cultured on plates containing 0.3 μg ml⁻¹ of the auxin indolebutyric acid (IBA) (left) or 0.3 μg ml⁻¹ IBA and 1 μg ml⁻¹ trans-zeatin (right) for 20 d.

JEOL M Station, JEOL DATUM LTD., Tokyo, Japan). Data obtained with JEOL M Station are shown.

Results

Search for putative isopentenyltransferase genes

As the first step to identify genes coding for enzymes that catalyze isopentenylation of adenine nucleotides, the amino acid sequences of the bacterial DMAPP:AMP isopentenyltransferases, IPT (accession number, AJ237588.1) and TZS (S03122) of *A. tumefaciens*; PTZ (CAA34418) of *Pseudomonas syringae*; and IPT(CAA86510) of *Pantoea agglomerans*; as well as the DMAPP:tRNA isopentenyltransferases MiaA (B373178) of *E. coli* and MOD5 (g1419759) of *S. cerevisiae* were analyzed. For the sequence analysis, Val, Leu and Ile were regarded to be exchangeable each other. Sequence analysis revealed a consensus pattern of GxTxxGK[ST]xxxxx [VLI]xxxxxx[VLI]xxDxxQx{57,60}[VLI][VLI]xGG [ST], where x denotes any amino acid residue, [] any one of the amino acid residues in [], and x{m,n} m to n amino acid residues in number.

A pattern-matching search (http://www.arabidopsis.org/cgi-bin/patmatch/nph-patmatch.pl#syntax) identified a number of genes that matched the pattern. During this study, the number of homologous genes in the database increased to nine with the progression of the Arabidopsis genome project. During the course of this study, I knew that another research group

Table 1 Apparent AMP:DMAPP isopentenyltransferase activity

| Test sample | % of AMP that accepted the isopentenyl moiety$^{a}$ |
|-------------|--------------------------------------------------|
| Crude extract$^{b}$ | 64.3 |
| Purified AtIPT4$^{c}$+2× binding buffer$^{d}$ | 0.1 |
| Unbound fraction$^{e}$+dilution buffer$^{f}$ | 5.2 |
| Purified AtIPT4$^{c}$+unbound fraction$^{e}$ | 27.6 |

$a$ Percentage of AMP that were converted to iPA through isopentenyl-transfer reaction followed by phosphatase treatment (this will be 100% if all AMP in the reaction mixture is isopentenylated).

$b$ 30 μl of crude extract of E.coli expressing AtIPT4, $^{c}$ 15 μl of AtIPT4 (0.4 μg) with $^{d}$ 15 μl of 2× binding buffer, $^{e}$ 15 μl of unbound fraction with $^{f}$ dilution buffer, or $^{c}$ 15 μl of purified AtIPT4 with $^{e}$ 15 μl of unbound fraction was mixed with 30 μl of a 2× assay mixture containing 2 μM [2-$^{3}$H]AMP, and incubated for 1 h at 25°C. After CIAP treatment and ethyl acetate-extraction, radioactivity was measured.

Fig. 3 SDS-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis of recombinant MiaA, TZS and AtIPT4. MW marker: molecular weight marker.

was working on the same set of genes, so we reached an agreement to use the same nomenclature, AtIPT1-9 (Takei et al. 2001, AtIPT9 was excluded in their report), for these genes (Fig. 1). Of the nine genes, AtIPT6 seems a pseudogene of the WS strain, because there is a nucleotide deletion that would cause a frameshift, and no expression of AtIPT6 was detected by RT-PCR (data not shown). Messages of AtIPT1-5, 7, 8 were detected. The cDNA sequence for AtIPT9 has been registered in the database with the accession number AAK25918 indicating that it is expressed at least in the Columbia strain. Expression of AtIPT9 was not tested in the WS strain in this study.

Most of the AtIPT genes had been annotated as tRNA isopentenyltransferases in the Arabidopsis genome project. However, detailed sequence analysis revealed new features. An amino acid sequence alignment (Fig. 1A) revealed that Arabidopsis isopentenyltransferases, bacterial cytokinin biosynthetic isopentenyltransferases and tRNA isopentenyltransferases exhibited significant sequence similarity in their amino-terminal regions. An ATP/GTP binding motif GxxxxGK[TS] (Saraste et al. 1990) was present in this region (Fig. 1A). The phylogenetic tree (Fig. 1B) indicates that AtIPT1, 3-8 form a branch. AtIPT2 and AtIPT9 are distantly related to the AtIPT1, 3-8 group and resemble DMAPP:tRNA isopentenyltransferases. There are subgroups in the AtIPT1, 3-8 group, one consisting of AtIPT1, 4, 6, 8 and another of AtIPT3, 5, 7. Hypothetical rice homologues were also identified in the Monsanto rice genome database (http://www.rice-research.org/), and other plant homologues were identified from the expressed sequence tag database (Fig. 1B).

Effect of over-expression of AtIPT genes

It is known that cytokinins applied exogenously (Skoog and Miller 1957) or endogenously through expressing the ipt of Agrobacterium (Ebinuma et al. 1997, Kunkel et al. 1999) induce cell division and shoot formation on calli. In order to examine the function of AtIPT genes, AtIPT2 and AtIPT4 were first selected and introduced into Arabidopsis calli under the control of the 35S-promoter. Calli transformed with the control vector exhibited normal hormone responses: root formation in the presence of only an auxin, and shoot formation in the pres-

Table 2 Substrate-specificity of isopentenyl transferases

| Enzyme | DMAPP:tRNA isopentenyltransferase activity$^{a}$ | DMAPP:ATP isopentenyltransferase activity$^{b}$ | DMAPP:ADP isopentenyltransferase activity$^{c}$ | DMAPP:AMP isopentenyltransferase activity$^{d}$ | DMAPP:adenosine isopentenyltransferase activity$^{e}$ |
|--------|---------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------|
| MiaA$^{f}$ | 71.4 | 0.1 | 0.1 | 0.0 | 0.2 |
| AtIPT4$^{f}$ | 1.5 | 75.7 | 61.7 | 0.1 | 0.2 |
| AtIPT4$^{g}$ | not tested | 44.8 | 33.1 | 0.2 | 0.5 |
| TZS$^{f}$ | 1.0 | 0.1 | 0.3 | 90.0 | 0.3 |
| No enzyme | 1.0 | 0.1 | 0.1 | 0.0 | 0.3 |

$a$ Percentage of [$^{3}$H]DMAPP (0.67 μM of initial concentration) that transferred the isopentenyl moiety to tRNA.

$b$, $c$, $d$, $e$ Percentage of $^{b}$ATP, $^{c}$ADP, $^{d}$AMP, or $^{e}$adenosine (1 μM of initial concentration) that accepted the isopentenyl moiety from DMAPP.

$f$, $g$ Protein concentrations of enzymes were $^{f}$10 μg ml$^{-1}$ and $^{g}$1 μg ml$^{-1}$ and reactions were for 10 min.

New cytokinin biosynthetic route

**Fig. 4** Enzymatic properties of AtIPT4 as a DMAPP:ATP isopentenyltransferase. Reaction velocities were plotted against ATP levels (A) and against DMAPP levels (B). Lineweaver-Burk plots are shown as an inset.

ence of a cytokinin and an auxin. By contrast, calli transformed with 35S::IPT4 regenerated shoots even in the absence of exogenously applied cytokinins (Fig. 2). However, there were no appreciable differences between calli transformed with 35S::IPT2 and calli transformed with the control vector (data not shown). These results indicated that AtIPT4, and its closely related gene products, but not AtIPT2, were strong candidates for cytokinin biosynthetic enzymes.

**In vitro isopentenyltransferase activity**

To identify enzyme activity of AtIPTs, crude extracts of *E. coli* expressing *AtIPT2* (data not shown), *AtIPT4* or *AtIPT5* (data not shown) were first examined for DMAPP:AMP isopentenyltransferase activity. Crude extracts of AtIPT4 and AtIPT5 possessed this activity, but that of AtIPT2 did not. However, AtIPT4, which was selected for detailed analysis, lost this activity after purification (Table 1). All attempts aimed at retaining the activity during purification were unsuccessful. However, there was a possibility that *E. coli* factors that were not retained on the affinity-purification resin were required for AtIPT4 to exert the isopentenyltransferase activity. A mixture of the purified AtIPT4 and the fraction unbound to the affinity resin possessed high activity, whereas either fraction alone had no or weak activity. The results indicated that factors that did not bind to the affinity resin were also required for the purified AtIPT4 to exert the activity. Possible *E. coli*-derived factors are adenylate kinase and ATP, which are present in all organisms, the former of which catalyzes a reaction: AMP + ATP ↔ ADP. Because *E. coli* extract should contain both ATP and adenylate kinase, the radiolabeled AMP included in the assay mixtures could have formed radiolabeled ATP and ADP, which

were candidate substrates.

As shown in Table 2, ATP and ADP acted as substrates of the affinity-purified AtIPT4, which had been purified to near homogeneity (Fig. 3), but AMP did not at all. The result explicitly revealed that AtIPT4 was DMAPP:ATP/ADP isopentenyltransferase, and had no activity of DMAPP:AMP isopentenyltransferase. In contrast, TZS used AMP as a sole acceptor of the isopentenyl moiety, as was already reported by Morris et al. (1993). AtIPT4 also resembles DMAPP:tRNA isopentenyltransferase in its sequence. MiaA of *E. coli* used tRNA as the sole acceptor of the isopentenyl moiety in the present assay, and is indeed a DMAPP:tRNA isopentenyltransferase. AtIPT4 and TZS never used tRNA as the acceptor.

The $K_{\mathrm{m}}$ values of AtIPT4 for ATP and DMAPP were estimated to be 18 $\mu$M and 6.5 $\mu$M, respectively, and the maximum reaction velocity was 0.22 $\mu$mol (mg protein)$^{-1}$ min$^{-1}$ (Fig. 4), when ATP was used as the isopentenyl acceptor. The DMAPP:ATP isopentenyltransferase activity required magnesium.

**Table 3** Effect of Mg$^{2+}$ on the DMAPP:ATP isopentenyltransferase activity of AtIPT4

| Mg$^{2+}$ | % of ATP that was isopentenylated $^a$ |
|-----------|---------------------------------------|
| + $^b$    | 11.2%                                 |
| – $^c$    | 0.7%                                  |

$a$ Percentages of 1$\mu$M ATP that accepted the isopentenyl moiety during 4 min incubation.  
$b$ Reactions contained 5 mM MgCl$_2$.  
$c$ Reactions contained 2.5 mM EDTA in place of MgCl$_2$. The concentration of AtIPT4 in reactions was 1 $\mu$g (protein ml$^{-1}$).

chromatographed on an octadecyl column, two major peaks were identified. One of these peaks corresponded to the retention time of ATP, but the other did not correspond to the retention times of ATP, adenosine, or iPA (Fig. 5A). However, after treatment of the reaction products with CIAP, two major peaks appeared at different retention times (Fig. 5B, peaks 3 and 4). The retention times of peaks 3 and 4 were the same as those for adenosine and iPA, respectively. This is consistent with the hypothesis that peak 2 (Fig. 5A) was isopentenyl ATP (iPTP) and peak 1 was unreacted ATP.

The identity of possible iPTP was further confirmed by mass spectrometry. Because the product without phosphatase treatment did not give a specific peak on mass spectrometry, probably due to interference of the triphosphate group to ionization, dephosphorylated product (Fig. 5B, peak 4) was analyzed. This provided an [M + H]<sup>+</sup> peak of m/z 336, corresponding to the peak of protonated iPA (Imbault et al. 1993). The observed m/z value of 204 corresponds to a fragmentation ion peak of iPA (Imbault et al. 1993).

### Discussion

It has been thought that an important step of cytokinin biosynthesis is the transfer of the isopentenyl group to AMP (Chen 1997, McGaw and Burch 1995). Despite extensive studies to identify cytokinin biosynthetic isopentenyltransferases of plants, none has been explicitly identified and characterized. Through database searches, Takei et al. (2001) and we have independently identified nine potential isopentenyltransferase sequences (AtIPT1-9) in Arabidopsis. Out of the nine candidate sequences, seven gene products, AtIPT1 and AtIPT3-8, have similar sequences and comprise a branch of the phylogenetic tree. They showed that a crude extract of *E. coli* expressing these genes had DMAPP:AMP isopentenyltransferase activity. Overexpression of *AtIPT4* in Arabidopsis induced cytokinin responses in callus culture in the absence of added cytokinins. However, recombinant AtIPT2 did not exhibit isopentenyltransferase activity when either of ATP, ADP, AMP, or adenosine was used as the acceptor of the isopentenyl moiety (data not shown). Moreover, 35S-linked *ATIPT2* did not induce cytokinin responses in calli in the absence of cytokinins. The results of Takei et al. (2001) and results of the present study indicate that AtIPT1 and AtIPT3-8 are cytokinin synthases of Arabidopsis.

Takei et al. (2001) reported that the purified AtIPT1 had DMAPP:AMP isopentenyltransferase activity. The *K*<sub>m</sub> values of AtIPT1 for AMP and DMAPP were 185 and 50 μM, respectively, which seems to be rather high. Furthermore, the ATP/AMP ratio in eukaryotic cells under non-stressed conditions is estimated to be ~100 (Hardie et al. 1998). Therefore, a question arises as to whether DMAPP:AMP isopentenyltransferase activity of AtIPT1 plays a major role in cytokinin biosynthesis in Arabidopsis. In this paper, the reaction catalyzed by AtIPT4 was characterized in detail, and it was revealed that AtIPT4

### Mass spectrometric analysis of the product

To confirm that AtIPT4 catalyzed the transfer of the isopentenyl moiety to ATP, the reaction products were analyzed by HPLC and mass spectrometry. When the products were

New cytokinin biosynthetic route

ATP
DMAPP:ATP/ADP
isopentenyltransferase
(AtIPTs)

isopentenylATP
(IPTP)
↓
zeatin triphosphate?
(ZTP)

isopentenylADP
(iPDP)
↓
zeatin diphosphate?
(ZDP)

AMP
HO OH

DMAPP

iPMP
HO OH

IPA
HO OH

isopentenyladenine
(IP)

ZMP
HO OH

ZR
HO OH

t-zeatin

Fig. 6 A model for the cytokinin biosynthetic pathways in plants. In this model, cytokinin biosynthesis is initiated mainly by the addition of iso-pentenyl side chain to ATP and ADP.

was DMAPP:ATP/ADP isopentenyltransferase, a novel enzyme not reported so far. The \(K_m\) values of AtIPT4 for ATP (18 μM) and DMAPP (6.5 μM) are comparable to those of TZS (11.1 μM for AMP and 8.2 mM for DMAPP, Morris et al. 1993). A preliminary experiment showed that AtIPT1 also transferred efficiently the isopentenyl group to ATP and ADP (data not shown). These results indicated that the major function of AtIPT4, and probably that of AtIPT1, in plant cells are isopentenylation of ATP and ADP.

A direct proof of the reaction products, iPTP or isopentenyl ADP (iPDP), has been unsuccessful because of the unavailability of authentic iPTP and iPDP for comparison in HPLC and possible interference of the phosphate group to ionization in mass-spectrometry. However, a compound which produced iPA after phosphatase treatment was produced by the reaction of AtIPT4 with ATP and DMAPP. The result indicates that the reaction products are phosphorylated iPA. It is highly likely iPTP and iPDP were produced, when ATP and ADP, respectively, were used as isopentenyl acceptor.

The presence of iPMP-independent pathway to produce zeatin-type cytokinins was recently demonstrated in Arabidopsis (Astot et al. 2000). If one of methyl groups of iPTP and iPDP are hydroxylated to produce ZPT and ZDP, respectively,

followed by dephosphorylation, the ATP/ADP-derived pathway described here could be an iPMP-independent pathway reported by Astot et al. However, it is still possible that there may be another iPMP-independent pathway, in which hydroxylation of the side chain occurs prior to be transferred to the N⁶ of the adenine structure.

Although Takei et al. (2001) showed that an *E. coli* extract expressing any one of *AtIPT1* and *AtIPT3-8* exhibited DMAPP:AMP isopentenyltransferase activity, substrate specificity of this class of enzymes can only be determined with purified enzymes, as was revealed in this study. To establish the framework of the cytokinin biosynthetic pathways (Fig. 6) in plants, it is important to determine the substrate specificity of all isopentenyltransferases of Arabidopsis in purified form, and to develop methods to identify and quantify iPTP and iPDP in plants.

Acknowledgements

I thank Hiroshi Adachi of Osaka University and Yoshiaki Sakurai of the Technology Research Institute of Osaka Prefecture for mass spectrometry, Miho Matsumoto for technical assistance, Satoru Kawamura for allowing me to use a HPLC facility, and A. Takisawa and M. Hasebe for valuable discussions. This work was supported in part by

JST and grants from the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology (grant numbers 09440267, 12142207, and 13073-2125-14).

**References**

Akiyoshi, D.E., Klee, H., Amasino, R.M., Nester, E.W. and Gordon, M.P. (1984) T-DNA of *Agrobacterium tumefaciens* encodes an enzyme of cytokinin biosynthesis. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 81: 5994–5998.

Astot, C., Dolezal, K., Nordstrom, A., Wang, Q., Kunkel, T., Moritz, T., Chua, N.H. and Sandberg, G. (2000) An alternative cytokinin biosynthesis pathway. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 97: 14778–14783.

Barry, G.F., Rogers, S.G., Fraley, R.T. and Brand, L. (1984) Identification of a cloned cytokinin biosynthetic gene. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 81: 4776–4780.

Blackwell, J.R. and Horgan, R. (1991) A novel strategy for production of a highly expressed recombinant protein in an active form. *FEBS Lett.* 16: 10–12.

Blackwell, J.R. and Horgan, R. (1994) Cytokinin biosynthesis by extracts of *Zea mays*. *Phytochemistry* 35: 339–342.

Chen, C.M. (1997) Cytokinin biosynthesis and interconversion. *Physiol. Plant.* 101: 665–673.

Chen, C.M. and Melitz, D.K. (1979) Cytokinin biosynthesis in a cell-free system from cytokinin-autotrophic tissue cultures. *FEBS Lett.* 107: 15–25.

Crespi, M., Messens, E., Caplan, A.B., van Montagu, M. and Desomer, J. (1992) Fasciation induction by the phytopathogen *Rhodococcus fascians* depends upon a linear plasmid encoding acytokinin synthase gene. *EMBO J.* 11: 795–804.

Ebinuma, H., Sugita, K., Matsunaga, E. and Yamakado, M. (1997) Selection of marker-free transgenic plants using the isopentenyl transferase gene. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 94: 2117–2121.

Hardie, D.G., Carling, D. and Carlson, M. (1998) The AMP-activated/SNF1 protein kinase subfamily: metabolic sensors of the eukaryotic cell? *Annu. Rev. Biochem.* 67: 821–855.

Imbault, N., Moritz, T., Nilsson, O., Chen, H.-J., Bollmark, M. and Sandberg, G. (1993) Separation and identification of cytokinins using combined capillary liquid chromatography/mass spectrometry. *Biol. Mass Spectrom.* 22: 201–210.

Kakimoto, T. (1998) Genes involved in cytokinin signal transduction. *J. Plant Res.* 111: 261–265.

Kline, L.K., Fittler, F. and Hall, R.H. (1969) N6-(Δ2-Isopentenyl)adenosine Biosynthesis in transfer ribonucleic acid in vitro. *Biochemistry* 8: 4361–4371.

Kunkel, T., Niu, Q.W., Chan, Y.S. and Chua, N.H. (1999) Inducible isopentenyl transferase as a high-efficiency marker for plant transformation. *Nat. Biotechnol.* 17: 916–919.

Lichter, A., Barash, I., Valinsky, L. and Manulis, S. (1995) The genes involved in cytokinin biosynthesis in *Erwinia herbicola* pv. *gypsophilae*: characterization and role in gall formation. *J. Bacteriol.* 177: 4457–4465.

McGaw, B.A. and Burch, L.R. (1995) Cytokinin biosynthesis and metabolism. In *Plant Hormones, Physiology, Biochemistry and Molecular Biology*. Edited by Davies, P.J. pp. 98–117. Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht.

Mok, M.C. (1994) Cytokinins and plant development—An overview. In *Cytokinins*. Edited by Mok, D.W.S. and Mok, M.C. pp. 155–166. CRC Press, Boca Raton, Florida.

Morris, R.O., Blevins, D.G., Dietrich, J.T., Durley, R.C., Gelvin, S.B., Gray, J., Hommes, N.G., Kaminek, M., Mathews, L.J., Meilan, R., Reinbott, T.M. and Sayavedra-Sato, L. (1993) Cytokinins in plant pathogenic bacteria and developing cereal grains. *Aust. J. Plant Physiol.* 20: 621–637.

Powell, G.K. and Morris, R.O. (1986) Nucleotide sequence and expression of a *Pseudomonas savastanoi* cytokinin biosynthetic gene: homology with *Agrobacterium tumefaciens tmr* and *tzs* loci. *Nucl. Acids Res.* 14: 2555–2565.

Saraste, M., Sibbald, P.R. and Wittinghofer, A. (1990) The P-loop—a common motif in ATP- and GTP-binding proteins. *Trends Biochem. Sci.* 15: 430–434.

Skoog, F. and Miller, C.O. (1957) Chemical regulation of growth and organ formation in plant tissues cultured in vitro. *Symp. Soc. Exp. Biol.* 11: 118–131.

Takei, K., Sakakibara, H. and Sugiyama, T. (2001) Identification of genes encoding adenylate isopentenyltransferase, a cytokinin biosynthesis enzyme, in *Arabidopsis thaliana*. *J. Biol. Chem.* (in press).

(Received May 16, 2001; Accepted June 8, 2001)
