
Plant Molecular Biology 46: 749–760, 2001.
© 2001 Kluwer Academic Publishers. Printed in the Netherlands.

# β-Cyanoalanine synthase and cysteine synthase from potato: molecular cloning, biochemical characterization, and spatial and hormonal regulation

Akiko Maruyama${}^{1,3}$, Kazuki Saito${}^{1,*}$ and Kimiharu Ishizawa${}^{2}$

${}^{1}$Department of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Chiba University, Yayoi-cho 1-33, Inage-ku, Chiba 263-8522, Japan (*author for correspondence; e-mail ksaito@p.chiba-u.ac.jp); ${}^{2}$Development Biology and Neuroscience, Graduate School of Life Science, Tohoku University, Sendai 980-8578, Japan; ${}^{3}$present address: RIKEN Plant Science Center, 2-1, Hirosawa, Wako-shi, Saitama, 351-0198, Japan

Received 20 November 2000; accepted in revised form 30 May 2001

**Keywords:** β-cyanoalanine synthase, cysteine synthase, cyanide metabolism, ethylene, wounding, potato, *Solanum tuberosum*

## Abstract

β-Cyanoalanine synthase (CAS, L-3-cyanoalanine synthase; EC 4.4.1.9) is the most important enzyme in cyanide metabolism. In addition to CAS, cysteine synthase (CS, EC 4.2.99.8) possesses CAS activity. To explore the physiological significance of cyanide metabolism, we isolated the cDNA clones corresponding to purified CAS (designated PCAS-1 and PCAS-2) and CS (designated PCS-1 and PCS-2) from potato using the information of these amino acid sequences. The recombinant proteins of PCS-1, PCS-2 and PCAS-1 catalyzed both CAS and CS reactions, although the ratios between CAS and CS activity were remarkably different. PCAS-1 preferred the substrates for the CAS reaction to the substrates for the CS reaction. From the kinetic characters and homology of amino acid sequences with known CS-like proteins, PCS-1, PCS-2 and PCAS-1 were identified as cytosolic CS, plastidic CS and mitochondrial CAS, respectively. The highest level of CAS activity, CAS protein and its mRNA were detected in potato buds. Stimulation of CAS activity and protein accumulation by ethylene without the concomitant increase of its mRNA suggested that ethylene induces CAS protein accumulation at the post-transcriptional level.

## Introduction

β-Cyanoalanine synthase (CAS; EC 4.4.1.9) catalyzes the conversion of cyanide and cysteine to β-cyanoalanine and sulfide. CAS is widely distributed in higher plants and plays a crucial role in cyanide metabolism (Miller and Conn, 1980). Because of its exclusive localization in mitochondria, the main physiological role of CAS has been considered to be the detoxification of toxic cyanide produced in plant tissues (Hendrickson and Conn, 1969; Akopyan et al., 1975; Wurtele et al., 1985; Manning, 1988; Tittle et al. 1990). Cyanide is known to be produced from two main sources in higher plants, for example, the degradation of cyanogenic compounds (Poulton, 1990) and the oxidation of 1-aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylic acid (ACC) in ethylene biosynthesis (Yip and Yang, 1988). A large-scale degradation of cyanogenic compounds is usually prevented in intact plants by the separate compartmentalization of cyanogenic compounds and the degradation enzymes on both tissue and subcellular levels (Poulton, 1990). In some cyanogenic plants such as *Hevea* and black cherry, cyanogenic compounds are accumulated in the seeds and hydrolyzed through germination without cyanide ema-

The nucleotide sequence data reported will appear in the GenBank, EMBL and DDBJ Nucleotide Sequence Databases under the accession numbers AB027000 (PCAS-1 cDNA), AB029338 (PCAS-2 cDNA), AB029511 (PCS-1 cDNA) and AB029512 (PCS-2 cDNA).

nation (Selmar *et al.*, 1988; Selmar 1993; Swain and Poulton, 1994; Niedzwiedz-Siegien, 1998), suggesting that cyanogenesis is regulated developmentally. From these observations, cyanide metabolism is presumed to be involved in nitrogen supply during the germination periods (Selmar *et al.*, 1988; Swain and Poulton, 1994; Maruyama *et al.*, 1997; Vetter, 2000). Cyanide produced with ethylene also does not accumulate in tissues, even when plants produce high levels of ethylene, because of CAS activity (Yip and Yang, 1988). In this case, CAS activity is stimulated by ethylene, which is accompanied with CAS protein synthesis (Manning, 1988; Tittle *et al.*, 1990; Hasegawa *et al.*, 1994, 1995).

In addition to CAS, cysteine synthase (CS; EC 4.2.99.8), which catalyzes cysteine formation from O-acetyl-L-serine (OAS) and sulfide, possesses CAS activity in plants (Hendrickson and Conn, 1969; Ikegami and Murakoshi, 1994; Maruyama *et al.*, 1998, 2000; Warrilow and Hawkesford, 1998). Vice versa, purified CAS also shows CS activity (Hendrickson and Conn, 1969; Ikegami and Murakoshi, 1994; Warrilow and Hawkesford, 1998; Maruyama *et al.*, 2000). CS activity is distributed in cytosol, chloroplasts and mitochondria (Lunn *et al.*, 1990), and each corresponding cDNA clone has been isolated from a variety of plants (Saito, 1999, 2000). Cytosolic CS is the origin of cytosolic CAS activity in cocklebur seeds (Maruyama *et al.*, 1998). Since the cytosolic CAS activity was about 10 times higher than that of the mitochondrial CAS activity in cocklebur cotyledons and potato tubers (Maruyama *et al.*, 1998, 2000), CS in cytosol may also be involved in cyanide metabolism in plant tissues.

The molecular information regarding CAS has been provided very recently. We purified CAS and CSs from potato tubers and determined the partial amino acid sequences (Maruyama *et al.*, 2000). The partial amino acid sequences of the CAS matched well with those of the mitochondrial isozyme of CS from spinach and *Arabidopsis*, which strongly suggested that the two enzymes are the identical. In addition, the N-terminal amino acid sequence of CAS purified from spinach matched with the deduced sequence of the mitochondrial CS isozyme from spinach (Warrilow and Hawkesford, 1998, 2000). The hypothesis of identity of CAS with mitochondrial CS-like protein has been confirmed by the biochemical studies using the recombinant CS-like proteins from *A. thaliana* and spinach expressed in *Escherichia coli* (Hatzfeld *et al.*, 2000; Yamaguchi *et al.*, 2000). From the structural and functional characters, the family including CS and CAS has been proposed to be designated as α-substituted alanine synthase (Bsas) family (Hatzfeld *et al.*, 2000).

In this study, we isolated the corresponding cDNAs of CAS and CS from potato buds, using the information of their amino acid sequences (Maruyama *et al.*, 2000). We investigated their kinetic properties of the recombinant proteins, tissue distribution of CAS and CS activities, their proteins and mRNAs, and the response to ethylene and wounding.

## Materials and methods

### Plant material and treatments

Potato tubers (*Solanum tuberosum* cv. Danshaku) were purchased from a local grocery and stored at 4 °C until used. Germination was induced by leaving the tubers at room temperature. The sprouting tubers were planted in plant pots and grown at 22 °C under a 16 h light/8 h dark cycle.

Ethylene treatment was performed as described before (Maruyama *et al.*, 1998). In brief, peeled tubers cut into quarters (unwounded) or 5 mm cubes (wounded) were put on 2 disks of filter paper in an 8 cm plastic plate. The plastic plates were placed in a 2 liter desiccator with or without 10 μl/l of ethylene, and incubated in the dark at 25 °C for 24 h.

For enzymatic analysis and immunoblot analysis, potato tissues were homogenized with a homogenizer (Biomixer, Nihon Seiki, Japan) in 5 volumes of an extraction buffer composed of 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.5 containing 1 mM EDTA, 0.05% w/v 2-mercaptoethanol and 5% w/v insoluble polyvinylpyrrolidone. The homogenate was centrifuged at 25,000 × g for 15 min and the resultant supernatant was used for assay. Extraction was performed at 4 °C.

### cDNA cloning and analysis

Total RNA was extracted from potato buds by a phenol/SDS method and precipitated by LiCl following the standard protocol (Ausubel *et al.*, 1994). For 3′ RACE, reverse transcription was carried out at 42 °C in a 10 liter solution containing 1 g of total RNA, 25 pmol of Oligo(dT)18-M13M4 primer (Takara), 5 nmol of dNTP, 0.1 mol of DTT and 100 unit of Superscript II RT (Gibco-BRL). For 5′ RACE, 10 pmol of SMART cDNA synthesis primer
(Clontech) and 5 pmol of CapSwitch II oligonucleotide (Clontech) were added instead of 25 pmol of Oligo(dT)18-M13M4 primer.

A partial sequence of CAS cDNA was amplified by PCR from the first-strand cDNA with oligonucleotide primer (5′-TTYGCNATGATHAAYGAYGC-3′) designed from the amino acid sequences of purified CAS (Maruyama *et al.*, 2000) and M13M4 primer (Takara). After the amplified fragments were cloned into pGEM-T Easy Vectors (Promega) and sequenced by the dideoxynucleotide chain termination method using the Thermo Sequenase II dye terminator cycle sequencing kit (Amersham Pharmacia), 5′ RACE was performed with Universal Primer (Clontech) and the gene-specific primer designed from the partial cDNA sequences (5′-GTTTTCCCAGTCACGAC-3′). As the amplified fragments divided into two types, two gene-specific primers (5′-AGTGATTTACAACCTTCTACAATGGCG TCCT-3′ for PCAS-1 and 5′-GGTACACAAAAAAAAA GAAGCTCAATTGC-3′ for PCAS-2) were designed and 3′ RACE was performed with M13M4 primer.

A partial sequence of CS cDNA was amplified by PCR from the first-strand cDNA with oligonucleotide primers (5′-CARCARTTYGARAAAYCCNGC-3′ and 5′-TTNACRTTNGGRTTYTGYTC-3′) designed from the amino acid sequences of purified CS (Maruyama *et al.*, 2000). Gene-specific CS primer (5′-AAYCCYGCYAACCMAAGATAC-3′) was designed from this partial sequence and 3′ RACE was performed with M13M4. Then two CS cDNA (PCS-1 and PCS-2) were isolated by 5′ RACE using gene-specific primers (5′-TGCTTTCATCGGAAGCCCACTTTGCGAC-3′ for PCS-1 and 5′-CTCGCATTCYTCWCGKATTGA CTGGAAA-3′ for PCS-2) and Universal Primer.

The PCR mixture contained 0.2 l of first-strand cDNA, 1 buffer, 250 M dNTP mix, 0.4 M primers, 1 unit of ExTaq DNA polymerase (Takara) in a final volume of 20 μl. The standard conditions were primary 94 °C for 1 min, 55 °C for 1 min, and 72 °C for 2 min, 30 cycles with PTC-100 (Funakoshi). Sequence analysis was performed using the GENETYX-Mac Ver 8.0. Multiple alignment was performed with ClustalX (Thompson *et al.*, 1997).

### Protein expression in E. coli

The coding regions of isolated cDNA clones were amplified by PCR to introduce NcoI and EcoRI sites with oligonucleotide primers as follows: 5′-CAAACCTTCTACCATGGCGTCCTTACTAAGGAG-

3′ and 5′-CTTTTTGTACTGAATTCACAGCTATCACT-3′ for PCAS-1, 5′-GACAATTCATCCATGGCAACTTTAAGCAG-3′ and 5′-TTCTTGCTGAGAATTCGATTTTAATCGACT-3′ for PCAS-2, 5′-TAACCTGATCCATGGGGGGAAAAAGATT-3′ and 5′-GCTTTCATCGGAATTCCACTTTGCGACTATG-3′ for PCS-1, 5′-AGCAAAGCAACCATGGCATCTTTCATCAACA-3′ and 5′-GTGGCAGCTAGAATTTCCAGATAGCATTATT-3′ for PCS-2. The amplified fragments were cloned into the NcoI/EcoRI site of pTV118N (Takara). The resultant plasmids were introduced into the *E. coli* cysteine auxotroph NK3 (trpE5 leu-6 thi hsdR hsdM+ cysK cysM).

The transformed *E. coli* was grown in liquid Luria-Bertani broth containing 100 mg/l ampicillin. After the overnight preculture, the cells were diluted 100 times in the broth and grown at 37 °C for 5 h under agitation. The cultures were grown for 9 h more at 37 °C after the addition of isopropyl-D-thiogalactoside to a concentration of 1 mM. Cells were collected by centrifugation at 1000 × g for 10 min, resuspended in 50 mM Tris-HCl buffer pH 8.5 and burst by sonication. After centrifugation at 25000 × g for 20 min, the resultant supernatant was used as crude protein extract.

### Enzymatic activity assays

CAS activity was assayed according to the method of Hasegawa *et al.* (1994) in the reaction mixture containing 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.5, 5 mM KCN and 5 mM L-cysteine. The formation of H₂S, one of the reaction products, was determined colorimetrically by its conversion to methylene blue as the absorption at 745 nm. CAS activity was expressed as the amount (μmol) of H₂S produced by 1 mg protein in 1 min (μmol min⁻¹ mg⁻¹).

CS activity was assayed according to the method of Lunn *et al.* (1990) in the reaction mixture containing 50 mM sodium phosphate pH 7.5, 2.5 mM Na₂S and 5 mM O-acetyl-L-serine. CS activity was expressed as the amount (μmol) of cysteine produced by 1 mg protein per minute (μmol min⁻¹ mg⁻¹).

Protein content was determined with a BioRad protein assay kit according to the method described by Bradford (1976). Bovine serum albumin was used as a standard protein.

### Immunoblot analysis

Protein extracts were subjected to SDS-PAGE on a 10% gel according to the method of Laemmli (1970)
and then electroblotted onto a PVDF membrane using  
a semidry system. An LMW calibration kit (Amers-  
ham Pharmacia) was used as standard molecular  
weight marker.  

For immunodetection, the polyclonal antibodies  
against CAS (anti-PotatoCAS) and CS (anti-  
PotatoCS) purified from potato tubers (Maruyama  
*et al.*, 2000) were used at 1:200 and 1:400 dilu-  
tion, respectively. Alkaline phosphatase-conjugated  
goat anti-mouse immunoglobulin G (Biosource Inter-  
national, USA) was used as a secondary antibody  
at 1:500 dilution. The polyclonal antibody against  
CAS (anti-SpinachCAS) purified from spinach leaves  
(Hatzfeld *et al.*, 2000) was used at 1:400 dilution and  
goat anti-rabbit immunoglobulin G conjugated with al-  
kaline phosphatase (Kirkegaard & Perry Laboratories,  
USA) was used as a secondary antibody at 1:1000  
dilution.  

**RT-PCR Southern blot analysis**  

Extraction of total RNA and reverse transcription  
were carried out using CapFinder PCR cDNA Syn-  
thesis Kit (Clontech) as described above for the meth-  
ods of cDNA cloning. First-strand cDNA derived  
from 10 ng of total RNA was used for each PCR  
amplification. PCR was performed by ExTaq DNA  
polymerase (Takara), using gene-specific primers  
for cDNA clones and actin (Moniz and Drouin,  
1996): 5′-TACAATGGCGTCCTACTAAGG-3′ and  
5′-GGCTCGATTAGTGTTGTTTCC-3′ for PCAS-  
1, 5′-CTAGCAACAGATTGTTCTCACAC-3′ and  
5′-GGCTCAATCAACGTGCTTTT-3′ for PCAS-  
2, 5′-GCTGTATGGCGTGGAACCAGTT-3′ and 5′-  
GTTCTCTGCTTCTCGTCTGACA-3′ for PCS-1, TG  
GAAACACAGGCATTGGGCTT-3′ and 5′-GTTTGC  
CCCCTGATAGAACGTT-3′ for PCS-2, 5′-CGTGTT  
GCTCCAGAGGAACA-3′ and 5′-TCTCGTTTCAGCA  
GTGGTGGT-3′ for actin. Primers were designed to  
yield 300–400 bp fragments. PCR was carried out  
20 cycles where the cDNAs were exponentially am-  
plified. Southern blotting and hybridization were per-  
formed as described by Takahashi *et al.* (2000). The  
amplified fragments of actin were probed with actin  
cDNA isolated from *Perilla frutescens* (Gong *et al.*,  
1997). Experiments were performed four or five times  
with each sample and the representative data were  
presented in Figure 6.  

**Results**  

**Isolation of cDNA clones**  

Two CS cDNA clones, *PCS-1* and *PCS-2*, were iso-  
lated by PCR-based methods with oligonucleotide  
primers designed from the amino acid sequences  
of purified CS (Maruyama *et al.*, 2000). For CAS  
cloning, cDNA clones, *PCAS-1* and *PCAS-2*, were  
isolated with the primers designed from the amino  
acid sequences of purified CAS (Maruyama *et al.*,  
2000). These four cDNAs, *PCS-1*, *PCS-2*, *PCAS-  
1* and *PCAS-2*, consisted of 1357, 1385, 1162 and  
1221 nucleotides, respectively. They had open reading  
frames encoding polypeptides of 325, 386, 351 and  
347 amino acids for molecular masses of 34.3, 40.9,  
38.2 and 37.6 kDa, respectively (Figure 1).  

The amino acid sequences of three peptides de-  
rived from purified CS showed higher identity (93.8–  
100%) with the predicted sequence of *PCS-1* than that  
of *PCS-2* (63.6–91.7%), suggesting the identity of  
*PCS-1* with the previously purified CS protein. Sim-  
ilarity of nucleotide sequences between *PCS-1* and  
*PCS-2* and of amino acid sequences between *PCS-1*  
and *PCS-2* were 63.2% and 73.5%, respectively. In  
the predicted sequence of *PCS-2*, there is an 61 amino  
acid extension at the N-terminus. From the analysis  
using PSORT program (Nakai and Horton, 1999) and  
the homology with the CSs isolated from other plants,  
*PCS-2* is presumed to be localized in plastids, whereas  
*PCS-1* is a cytosolic protein. The predicted amino  
acid sequences of cytosolic and plastidic CS cDNAs  
isolated from potato (Hesse and Hoefgen, 1998) had  
about 98% identity with *PCS-1* and *PCS-2*. These  
slight differences could be due to the difference of the  
variety and the tetraploidy of potato.  

On the other hand, the predicted sequence of  
*PCAS-1* showed 94.1% and 100% identity with those  
of two peptides derived from purified CAS; whereas  
that of *PCAS-2* had 82.3% and 88.9% identity, indi-  
cating that *PCAS-1* and *PCAS-2* are cDNAs encoding  
CAS. Similarity between *PCAS-1* and *PCAS-2* and be-  
tween *PCAS-1* and *PCAS-2* were 80.1% and 84.3%,  
respectively. Both *PCAS-1* and *PCAS-2* exhibited the  
highest similarity with CAS (Bsas3) of *Arabidopsis*  
(79.6% and 78.6%; Hatzfeld *et al.*, 2000; Yamaguchi  
*et al.*, 2000) and spinach (81.7% and 80.4%; Saito  
*et al.*, 1994). Mitochondrial translocation was pre-  
dicted for both *PCAS-1* and *PCAS-2* by the PSORT  
program. Similarity of amino acid sequences between  
PCSs and PCASs were 58–61%. All proteins possess

PCS-1 : 60
PCS-2 1:MASFINNPLTSLCNTKSEANNLFKISPLRAQSLGFSKLNGSRKVAFPSVVCKAVSVPTKS: 60
PCAS-1 1:MASLLRRRFYSSESSFAQLRDL: 23
PCAS-2 1:MATLSRFLKKRSLASNRLF: 19

PCS-1 1:.MAGEKIGIAKDVTELIGNTPVYLNNVDGCVARVAARLESMEPCSSVKDRIGYSMITD: 59
PCS-2 61:STEIEGLNIAEDVTQLIGNTPMVYLNTIAKGCVANIAAKLEIMEPCCSVKDRIGFSMIVD: 120
PCAS-1 24:PKYLPGTNIKTQVSOLIGKTPVYLNKVSEGCAYIAVKQEMMQPTSSIKDRAFAMIND: 83
PCAS-2 20:STQLPHTNIKSEVSOLIGKTPMVYLKKVTEGCGAYIAVKQEMFQPTSSIKDRAALAMIND: 79

A
PCS-1 60:AEEKGLIKPGESVLIEPTSGNTGVGLAFMAAAKGYKLIITMPSSMSLERRIIILRAFGAEL: 119
PCS-2 121:AEEKGLISPGTKVLVEPTSGNTGIGLAFIAASRGYKDIILTMPASMSLERRVILKAFGAEL: 180
PCAS-1 84:AEEKGLITPGKTTLIEPTSGNMGISMAFMAAMKGYKMILTMPSYTLSLERRVTMRAFGADL: 143
PCAS-2 80:AEEKGLISPEKTTLIEPTSGNMGISMAFMAAMKGYKMVLTMPSSYTSMERVRTMRAFGADL: 139

KTPNSYILQQFENPANPKIHYETTGPEIWK KIDAL
PCS-1 120:VLTDPAKGMKGAISKAEIKAKIPNSYILLQQFENPANPKIHYETTGPEIWKGSGKVDAL: 179
PCS-2 181:VLTDPAKGMAVASKAEBILNNTPDAYILLQQFDNPANPKIHYETTGPEIEWDTKGKIDIL: 240
PCAS-1 144:VITDPTKGMGGTIKKAYNLLESTPNAYMLOOFSNPANTQAHEETTGPEIEWDTQGNVDIF: 203
PCAS-2 140:ILTDPTKGMSGTVKKAYELLTESTPNAFMLQQFSNPANTQVHFDTTGP EIEWEETLGNV DIF: 199

VSGIGTGGTIT KYLREQNPNVK
PCS-1 180:VSGIGTGGTITGSGKYLREQNPNVKLYGVEPVESAILSGGKPGPHKTQGIGAGFIPGVLE: 239
PCS-2 241:VAGIGTGGTITGTGRFLKEQNPNKIHGVEPTESNVLSGGKPGPHKIQGIGAGFIPGNLD: 300
PCAS-1 204:VMGIGSGGTVSGVGQYLKSKNPNVKIYGIEPTESNVLNGGKPGPHEITGNGVGFKPDTILD: 263
PCAS-2 200:VMGIGSGGTVTGVGLYLKSKNPNVKIYGLEPTESNILNGGKPGPHEITGNGVGSKPDIVD: 259

KLIVTIWP
PCS-1 240:VNLIDDVVQVSSEESIEMAKLLALKEGLVGISSGAAAAAIKVAKR PENAGKLIVVTFP: 299
PCS-2 301:QDVMDDEVIEISSDEAVEATAKQLALQEGLLVGISSGAAALAAIQVGKR PENAGKLIGVVFP: 360
PCAS-1 264:VDVMEEVLMVSSEESVNMARELALKEGLMVGISSGAN TVAALRLANRPENKGKLIVTTHP: 323
PCAS-2 260:MDLMEEVLMVSSEDAVNMARELAVKEGLMVGISSGAN TVAALRLAQKENKGKLIVTVHA: 319

SFGERYLSS
PCS-1 300:SFGERYLSSVLFETVREAE NM TVEP..: 325
PCS-2 361:SFGERYLSSILFQSIRECEKM KPEL..: 386
PCAS-1 324:SFGERYLSSVYEDIRKEAONMQPVSVD: 351
PCAS-2 320:SFGERYLSSVYODLRKEAENMQPVSVD: 347

Figure 1. Predicted amino acid sequences of PCS-1, PCS-2, PCAS-1 and PCAS-2. The predicted amino acid sequences of PCS-1, PCS-2, PCAS-1 and PCAS-2 were aligned with the multiple alignment program ClustalX. Gaps have been introduced to obtain maximum similarity. White letters in a black box indicate conserved amino acids, and a gray background indicates a 60% similar amino acid. The partial amino acid sequences of CAS and CS purified from potato (Maruyama et al., 2000) are indicated as double-underlined sequences and single-underlined sequences, respectively. The conserved pyridoxal 5'-phosphate binding site (PXXSV/IKDR) is indicated with a black bar. The predicted molecular mass for PCS-1, PCS-2, PCAS-1 and PCAS-2 was 34.3, 40.9, 38.2 and 37.6 kDa, respectively.

the consensus PLP-binding domain (PXXSV/IKDR; Figure 1; Saito et al., 1993) given the catalytic activity of CS and CAS. Phylogenetic analysis (Figure 2) indicated that PCS-1, PCS-2 and two PCASs belonged to the Bsas1 (cytosolic CS), Bsas2 (plastidic CS) and Bsas3 (CAS) families proposed previously (Hatzfeld et al., 2000).

Functional characterization of PCS-1, PCS-2, PCAS-1 and PCAS-2

The recombinant proteins PCS-1, PCS-2, PCAS-1 and PCAS-2 were expressed in the E. coli NK3 mutant lacking both CS and CAS activity. Crude extracts of transformed E. coli were prepared and used for immunodetection and enzymatic activity assays. Four recombinant proteins were detected with antibodies prepared against purified CS and CAS (Figure 3). Anti-potato CAS, which was raised against CAS purified from potato tubers, recognized PCAS-1 (38.2 kDa)

and PCAS-2 (37.6 kDa), but not PCS-1 (34.3 kDa) and PCS-2 (40.9 kDa). Anti-potato CS, which was raised against CS purified from potato tubers, recognized only PCS-1, indicating that this antibody recognized only cytosolic CS. Anti-spinach CAS raised against CAS purified from spinach leaves was used to detect PCS-2 because this antibody detected both CS isozymes of Arabidopsis and spinach (Hatzfeld et al., 2000). As expected, all of the 4 proteins were recognized by anti-spinach CAS.

The recombinant proteins of PCS-1, PCS-2 and PCAS-1 catalyzed both CAS and CS reactions (Table 1). PCS-1 and PCS-2 exhibited higher CS activity than their CAS activity with a CS-to-CAS ratio of 7.67 and 21.1, respectively, whereas PCAS-1 showed high CAS activity with a CAS-to-CS ratio of 1.34. PCAS-2 showed very low activity of CAS as well as CS, though PCAS-2 is structurally similar to PCAS-1 (Figures 1 and 3).

Figure 2. Phylogenetic tree of PCS-1, PCS-2, PCAS-1, PCAS-2 and β-substituted alanine synthase (Bsas) family proteins reported in plants. Predicted amino acid sequences were aligned using GENETYX Mac (Ver. 8.0). The phylogenetic tree was calculated by the UPGMA method and then drawn using the same software. At, Arabidopsis thaliana; Bj, Brassica juncea (Indian mustard); Can, Capsicum annuum (pepper); Car, Cicer arietinum (chickpea); Cv, Citrullus vulgaris (watermelon); Os, Oryza sativa (rice); So, Spinacia oleracea (spinach); St, Solanum tuberosum (potato); Ta, Triticum aestivum (wheat); Zm, Zea mays (maize).

Anti-PotatoCAS          Anti-PotatoCS           Anti-SpinachCAS
$PCS_{-1}$ $PCS_{-2}$ $PCAS_{-1}$ $PCAS_{-2}$ $PCS_{-1}$ $PCS_{-2}$ $PCAS_{-1}$ $PCAS_{-2}$ $PCS_{-1}$ $PCS_{-2}$ $PCAS_{-1}$ $PCAS_{-2}$
$\leftarrow$ PCS-2  
$\leftarrow$ PCAS-1, PCAS-2  
$\leftarrow$ PCS-1  

Figure 3. Immunodetection of crude protein extracts of NK3 expressing PCS-1, PCS-2, PCAS-1 and PCAS-2. Crude proteins (20 μg) extracted from NK3 expressing PCS-1, PCS-2, PCAS-1 and PCAS-2 were separated in SDS-PAGE with 10% acrylamide gel. Two antibodies against CAS (anti-potato CAS) and CS (anti-potato CS) purified from potato tubers and an antibody against CAS purified from spinach (anti-spinach CAS) were used for western blot analysis.

Table 1. CAS and CS activities of PCS-1, PCS-2, PCAS-1 and PCAS-2.

| Enzyme | CAS activity (μmol H₂S per mg protein per minute) | CS activity (μmol cysteine per mg protein per minute) | CAS/CS | CS/CAS |
|--------|--------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------|---------|---------|
| PCS-1  | 2.63 ± 0.0467                                    | 13.5 ± 1.05                                          | 0.130   | 7.67    |
| PCS-2  | 4.24 ± 0.0731                                    | 89.4 ± 7.44                                          | 0.0474  | 21.1    |
| PCAS-1 | 66.2 ± 4.07                                      | 49.5 ± 4.07                                          | 1.34    | 0.747   |
| PCAS-2 | 0.251 ± 0.0187                                   | 0.433 ± 0.0109                                       | 0.579   | 1.73    |

Data are presented as the average of a triplicate assay standard error.

The $K_m$ values of the recombinant proteins for the substrates of CS and CAS reactions are summarized in Table 2. Four enzyme proteins had similar $K_m$ values for OAS and sulfide in the CS reaction, which were comparable to those reported for CSs from other plants (Droux et al., 1992; Ikegami and Murakoshi, 1994; Maruyama et al., 1998, 2000; Warrilow and Hawkesford, 1998, 2000; Hatzfeld et al., 2000). In contrast, there were remarkable differences between $K_m$ values of PCSs and PCAS-1 for the substrates of CAS activity. PCAS-1 showed the $K_m$ values for cysteine to be 50 times higher than PCS-1 and PCS-2, and those for cyanide more than 100 times lower than PCS-1 and PCS-2, indicating that PCAS-1 exhibited high affinity to cyanide and low affinity to cysteine compared to PCSs. The $K_m$ values of PCAS-1 were similar to those of CASs isolated from other plants (Hendrickson and Conn, 1969; Akopyan et al., 1975; Ikegami and Murakoshi, 1994; Warrilow and Hawkesford, 1998, 2000; Hatzfeld et al., 2000). These results indicate that PCAS-1 corresponds to CAS purified previously (Maruyama et al., 2000), and PCS-1 and PCS-2 correspond to the purified cytosolic and plastidic CS, respectively.

Tissue distribution of CS and CAS proteins and mRNA, and the effects of ethylene and wounding on the expression of CS and CAS

Enzymatic activity of CAS and CS and the amount of their protein and mRNA were examined in potato tubers, buds and leaves (Figures 4A, 5A and 6). CAS and CS activities in these tissues were positively correlated with their protein level detected by the antibodies. CAS activity in buds was 6.2 and 2.5 times higher than that in tubers and leaves, respectively (Figure 4A). The CAS protein and $PCAS-1$ transcript level were also highest in bud (Figures 5A and 6). In contrast, the highest CS activity was detected in leaf, being 1.6 times those in tubers and buds (Figure 4A). The transcript level of $PCS-2$ was highest in leaves, while those of $PCS-1$ and $PCAS-2$ were almost similar in all tissues examined (Figure 6).

A major physiological role of CAS activity is considered to be the detoxification of cyanide produced in tissues accompanied with ethylene biosynthesis or the degradation of cyanogenic compounds. Since ethylene is known to stimulate CAS activity and the tissue damage is known to cause the degradation of cyanogenic compounds, effects of ethylene and wounding on the expression of CAS and CS were examined (Figures 4B, 5B and 6). CAS activity was greatly stim-

Figure 4. CAS and CS activities in potato tissues. A. CAS and CS activities in a tuber, bud and leaf of potato. B. Effects of ethylene and wounding on CAS and CS activities in potato tubers. Potato tubers cut into a quarter (unwounded) or 0.5 mm cubes (wounded) were incubated with (+C₂H₄) or without (−C₂H₄) 10 μl/l ethylene at 25 °C in the dark for 24 h. Data are presented as the average of a triplicate assay with standard error.

A)
Anti-PotatoCAS
Anti-PotatoCS
Anti-SpinachCAS

B)
Anti-PotatoCAS
Anti-PotatoCS
Anti-SpinachCAS
unwounded
wounded
unwounded
wounded
unwounded
wounded
+C₂H₄
+C₂H₄
+C₂H₄
+C₂H₄
+C₂H₄
+C₂H₄
−C₂H₄
−C₂H₄
−C₂H₄
−C₂H₄
−C₂H₄
−C₂H₄

Figure 5. Immunodetection of CAS and CS in potato tissues. Proteins (15 μg) prepared as described for Figure 4 were separated in SDS-PAGE with 10% acrylamide gel. Immunodetection was performed with the three antibodies described in Figure 3. A. Expression of CAS and CS proteins in a tuber, bud and leaf of potato. B. Expression of CAS and CS proteins responding to ethylene and wounding in potato tubers.

Table 2. Kinetic parameters of CAS and CS activities for PCS-1, PCS-2, PCAS-1 and PCAS-2.

| Enzyme   | CAS reaction          | CS reaction         |
|----------|-----------------------|---------------------|
|          | $K_{\text{m}}$ for Cys (mM)$^{a}$ | $K_{\text{m}}$ for CN (mM)$^{b}$ | $K_{\text{m}}$ for OAS (mM)$^{c}$ | $K_{\text{m}}$ for Na₂S (mM)$^{d}$ |
| PCS-1    | 0.0512 ± 0.00419      | 14.2 ± 0.287        | 2.99 ± 0.387                    | 1.57 ± 0.193                      |
| PCS-2    | 0.0384 ± 0.00287      | 15.1 ± 0.253        | 1.83 ± 0.204                    | 0.998 ± 0.127                     |
| PCAS-1   | 2.76 ± 0.253          | 0.134 ± 0.0121      | 2.77 ± 0.289                    | 0.746 ± 0.104                     |
| PCAS-2   | n.d.                 | n.d.                | 2.14 ± 0.301                    | 1.52 ± 0.162                      |

CAS and CS activities were measured in crude protein extracts of NK3. The kinetic parameters were obtained by varying the substrate concentration. Data are presented as the average of duplicate assays standard error.

$a$: The concentration of cysteine was 5 mM.  
$b$: The concentration of KCN was 5 mM.  
$c$: The concentration of O-acetyl-L-serine (OAS) was 10 mM.  
$d$: The concentration of Na₂S was 2.5 mM.

Analysis of the activity, protein and mRNA expression of CS and CAS clearly showed that the expression of CS and CAS were differentially regulated and provided some new insights into the regulatory mechanism of their expression as follows (Figures 4, 5 and 6). First, the levels of CAS protein and mRNA was highest in buds whereas those of CS were highest in leaves. In some cyanogenic plants, the degradation of cyanogenic compounds occur with growth and is accompanied by the increase of CAS activity (Swain and Poulton, 1994; Niedzwiedz-Siegien, 1998). Taken together, we can speculate that cyanide is actively metabolized in potato buds. Since cyanide itself does not stimulate CAS activity in tissues (data not shown), there should be any mechanism to increase CAS protein and mRNA with the degradation of cyanogenic compounds. In spinach cell culture, CAS mRNA was enhanced by nitrogen-deficient conditions (Takahashi and Saito, 1996). Second, ethylene is known to stimulate CAS activity in a few plant tissues, which is inhibited by cycloheximide (Manning, 1988; Tittle *et al.*, 1990; Hasegawa *et al.*, 1995). In the case of potato plants, ethylene stimulated CAS activity (Figure 4B) and the amount of CAS proteins (Figure 5B), but had no effect on the amount of CAS mRNA (Figure 6). These results suggest that ethylene increases CAS protein by enhancing its translation. Third, wounding did not increase the transcriptional and translational level of CAS and CS (Figures 4B, 5B and 6). Besides, the mRNA accumulation of *PCAS-1* was strongly inhibited by methyl jasmonate which is regarded as a signal molecule of wounding (Farmer *et al.*, 1998). Thus wounding does not stimulate cyanide fixation, whereas it induces cyanide emanation (Poulton, 1990).

**Acknowledgements**

We would like to thank Dr Ahlert Schmidt (Universität Hannover) for providing the antibody raised against spinach CAS. This work was supported, in part, by Grants-in-Aid for Scientific Research and the Japan Society for Promotion of Science (JSPS), by the Ministry of Education, Science, Sports and Culture, Japan (Monbusho), and by CREST of JST (Japan Science & Technology). A.M. is supported by a Research Fellowship from the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science for Young Scientists (Nos 1839 and 6340).

References

Akopyan, T., Braunstein, A. and Goryachenkova, E. 1975. Beta-cyanoalanine synthase: purification and characterization. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 72: 1617–1621.

Ausubel, F.M., Brent, R., Kingston, R.E., Moore, D.D., Seidman, J.G., Smith, J.A. and Struhl, K. 1994. Current Protocols in Molecular Biology. John Wiley, New York.

Bradford, M. 1976. A rapid and sensitive method for the quantification of microgram quantities of protein utilizing the principle of dye-binding. Anal. Biochem. 72: 248–254.

Droux, M., Martin, J., Sajus, P., and Douce, R. 1992. Purification and characterization of O-acetylserine(thiol)lyase from spinach chloroplasts. Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 295: 379–390.

Farmer, E.E., Weber, H. and Vollenweider, S. 1998. Fatty acid signaling in *Arabidopsis*. Planta 206: 167–174.

Gong, Z., Yamazaki, M., Sugiyama, M., Tanaka, Y. and Saito, K. 1997. Cloning and molecular analysis of structural genes involved in anthocyanin biosynthesis and expressed in a form-specific manner in *Perilla frutescens*. Plant Mol. Biol. 35: 915–927.

Hasegawa, R., Tada, T., Torii, Y. and Esashi, Y. 1994. The presence of β-cyanoalanine synthase in unimbibed dry seeds and its activation by ethylene during pre-germination periods. Physiol. Plant. 91: 141–146.

Hasegawa, R., Maruyama, A., Nakaya, M., Tsuda, S., and Esashi, Y. 1995. The presence of two types of β-cyanoalanine synthase in germinating seeds and their responses to ethylene. Physiol. Plant. 93: 713–718.

Hatzfeld, Y., Maruyama, A., Schmidt, A., Noji, M., Ishizawa, K. and Saito, K. 2000. β-Cyanoalanine synthase is a mitochondrial cysteine synthase-like protein in spinach and *Arabidopsis*. Plant Physiol. 123: 1163–1171.

Hendrickson, H.R. and Conn, E.E. 1969. Cyanide metabolism in higher plants. 4. Purification and properties of the β-cyanoalanine synthase of blue lupine. J. Biol. Chem. 244: 2632–2640.

Hesse, H. and Hoefgen, R. 1998. Isolation of cDNAs encoding cytosolic and plastidic cysteine synthase isoforms from *Solanum tuberosum*. Plant Physiol. 116: 1604.

Ikegami, F. and Murakoshi, I. 1994. Enzymic synthesis of non-protein β-substituted alanines and some higher homologues in plants. Phytochemistry 35: 1089–1104.

Laemmli, U. 1970. Cleavage of structural proteins during the assembly of the head of bacteriophage. Nature 227: 680–685.

Lunn, J., Droux, M., Martin, J. and Douce, R. 1990. Localization of ATP sulfurylase and O-acetylserine(thiol)lyase in spinach leaves. Plant Physiol. 94: 1345–1352.

Manning, K. 1988. Detoxification of cyanide by plants and hormone action. In: D. Evered and S. Harnett (Eds.) Cyanide in Biology, John Wiley, Chichester, UK, pp. 92–110.

Maruyama, A., Yoshiyama, M., Adachi, Y., Nanba, H., Hasegawa, R. and Esashi, Y. 1997. Possible participation of β-cyanoalanine synthase in increasing the amino acid pool of cocklebur seeds in response to ethylene during the pre-germination period. Aust. J. Plant Physiol. 24: 751–757.

Maruyama, A., Ishizawa, K., Takagi, T. and Esashi, Y. 1998. Cytosolic β-cyanoalanine synthase activity attributed to cysteine synthases in cocklebur seeds. Purification and characterization of cytosolic cysteine synthases. Plant Cell Physiol. 39: 671–680.

Maruyama, A., Ishizawa, K. and Takagi, T. 2000. Purification and characterization of β-cyanoalanine synthase and cysteine synthases from potato tubers: are β-cyanoalanine synthase and mitochondrial cysteine synthase the same enzyme? Plant Cell Physiol. 41: 200–208.

Miller, J.M. and Conn, E.E. 1980. Metabolism of hydrogen cyanide by higher plants. Plant Physiol. 65: 1199–1202.

Moniz de Sa, M. and Drouin, G. 1996. Phylogeny and substitution rates of angiosperm actin genes. Mol. Biol. Evol. 13: 1198–1212.

Nakai, K. and Horton, P. 1999. PSORT: a program for detecting the sorting signals of proteins and predicting their subcellular localization. Trends Biochem. Sci. 24: 34–35.

Nakamura, T., Yamaguchi, Y. and Sano, H. 1999. Four rice genes encoding cysteine synthase: isolation and differential responses to sulfur, nitrogen and light. Gene 229: 155–161.

Niedzwiedz-Siegien, I. 1998. Cyanogenic glucosides in *Linum usitatissimum*. Phytochemistry 49: 59–63.

Poulton, J. E. 1990. Cyanogenesis in plants. Plant Physiol. 94: 401–405.

Saito, K., Kurosawa, M. and Murakoshi, I. 1993. Determination of a functional lysine residue of a plant cysteine synthase by site-directed mutagenesis, and the molecular evolutionary implications. FEBS Lett. 328: 111–114.

Saito, K., Tatsuguchi, K., Takagi, Y. and Murakoshi, I. 1994. Isolation and characterization of cDNA that encodes a putative mitochondrion-localizing isoform of cysteine synthase (*O*-acetylserine(thiol)lyase) from *Spinacia oleracea*. J. Biol. Chem. 269: 28187–28192.

Saito, K. 1999. Biosynthesis of cysteine. In: B.K. Singh (Ed.) Plant Amino Acids, Marcel Dekker, New York, pp. 267–291.

Saito, K. 2000. Regulation of sulfate transport and synthesis of sulfur-containing amino acids. Curr. Opin. Plant Biol. 3: 188–195.

Selmar, D., Lieberei, R. and Biehl, B. 1988. Mobilization and utilization of cyanogenic glycosides. The linustatin pathway. Plant Physiol. 86: 711–716.

Selmar, D. 1993. Transport of cyanogenic glucosides: linustatin uptake by *Hevea cotyledons*. Planta 191: 191–199.

Swain, E. and Poulton, J.E. 1994. Utilization of amygdalin during seedling development of *Prunus serotina*. Plant Physiol. 106: 437–445.

Takahashi, H. and Saito, K. 1996. Subcellular localization of spinach cysteine synthase isoforms and regulation of their gene expression by nitrogen and sulfur. Plant Physiol. 112: 273–280.

Takahashi, H., Watanabe-Takahashi, A., Smith, F.W., Blake-Kalff, M., Hawkesford, M.J. and Saito, K. 2000. The roles of three functional sulfate transporters involved in uptake and translocation of sulfate in *Arabidopsis thaliana*. Plant J. 23: 171–182.

Thompson, J.D., Gibson, T.J., Plewniak, F., Jeanmougin, F. and Higgins, D.G. 1997. The ClustalX windows interface: flexible strategies for multiple sequence alignment aided by quality analysis tools. Nucl. Acids Res. 24: 4876–4882.

Tittle, F.L., Goudey, J.S. and Spencer, M.S. 1990. Effect of 2,4-dichlorophenoxy-acetic acid on endogenous cyanide, β-cyanoalanine synthase activity, and ethylene evolution in seedlings of soybean and barley. Plant Physiol. 94: 1143–1148.

Vetter, J. 2000. Plant cyanogenic glycosides. Toxicon 38: 11-36.

Warrilow, A. and Hawkesford, M. 1998. Separation, subcellular location and influence of sulphur nutrition on isoforms of cysteine synthase in spinach. J. Exp. Bot. 49: 1625–1636.

Warrilow, A. and Hawkesford, M. 2000. Cysteine synthase (*O*-acetyl-serine(thiol)lyase) substrate specificities classify the mitochondrial isoform as a cyanoalanine synthase. J. Exp. Bot. 51: 985–993.

Wurtele, E.S., Nikolau, B.J. and Conn, E.E. 1985. Subcellular and developmental distribution of β-cyanoalanine synthase in barley *Hordeum vulgare* leaves. Plant Physiol. 78: 285–290.

Yamaguchi, Y., Nakamura, T., Kusano, T. and Sano, H. 2000. Three *Arabidopsis* genes encoding proteins with differential activities for cysteine synthase and $\beta$-cyanoalanine synthase. Plant Cell Physiol. 41: 465–476.

Yip, W.K. and Yang, S.F. 1988. Cyanide metabolism in relation to ethylene production in plant tissues. Plant Physiol. 88: 473–476.
