
THE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGICAL CHEMISTRY
© 2002 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

**Molecular Cloning and Characterization of a Novel UDP-GlcNAc: GalNAc-peptide β1,3-N-Acetylgalactosaminyltransferase (β3Gn-T6), an Enzyme Synthesizing the Core 3 Structure of O-Glycans**

Received for publication, December 29, 2001, and in revised form, January 30, 2002  
Published, JBC Papers in Press, January 30, 2002, DOI 10.1074/jbc.M112457200

Toshie Iwai‡§, Niro Inaba‡§∥, Andreas Naundorf‡∥, Yan Zhang‡, Masanori Gotoh‡**, Hiroko Iwasaki‡**, Takashi Kudo‡, Akira Togayachi‡, Yasuko Ishizuka‡, Hiroshi Nakanishi‡, and Hisashi Narimatsu‡§§

From the ‡Laboratory of Gene Function Analysis, Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology (AIST), Open Space Laboratory, C-2, 1-1-1 Umezono, the §Molecular Recognition Team, Biological Information Research Center, AIST, C-6, 1-1 Higashi, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8568, ∥JGS Japan Genome Solutions, Inc., 51 Komiyacho, Hachioji, Tokyo 192-0031, ||Mitsui Chemicals, Inc., 2-5, Kasumigaseki 3-chome, Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo 100-6070, and **Amersham Biosciences KK, Sanken Building, 3-25-1 Hyakunincho, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo 169-0073, Japan

The core 3 structure of the O-glycan, GlcNAcβ1–3GalNAcα1-serine/threonine, an important precursor in the biosynthesis of mucin-type glycoproteins, is synthesized by UDP-N-acetylglucosamine:GalNAc-peptide β1,3-N-acetylgalactosaminyltransferase (β3Gn-T; core 3 synthase). The core 3 structure is restricted in its occurrence to mucins from specific tissues such as the stomach, small intestine, and colon. A partial sequence encoding a novel member of the human β3Gn-T family was found in one of the data bases. We cloned a complementary DNA of this gene and named it β3Gn-T6. The putative amino acid sequence of β3Gn-T6 retains the β3Gn-T motifs and is predicted to comprise a typical type II membrane protein. The soluble form of β3Gn-T6 expressed in insect cells showed β3Gn-T activity toward GalNAca-p-nitrophenyl and GalNAca1-serine/threonine. The β1,3-linkage between GlcNAc and GalNAc of the enzyme reaction product was confirmed by high performance liquid chromatography and NMR analyses. β3Gn-T6 effectively transferred a GlcNAc to the GalNAc residue on MUC1 mucin, resulting in the synthesis of a core 3 structure. Real time PCR analysis revealed that the β3Gn-T6 transcript was restricted in its distribution, mainly to the stomach, colon, and small intestine. We concluded that β3Gn-T6 is the most logical candidate for the core 3 synthase, which plays an important role in the synthesis of mucin-type O-glycans in digestive organs.

Mucins constitute a heterogeneous group of glycoproteins having O-linked carbohydrate chains. Some are membrane-associated glycoproteins in epithelial cells, others are secreted from these cells (1, 2). Mucins have been suggested to play an important role in protecting the epithelial surface from chemical and physical injury (3) and from invasion by microbial pathogens (4). They may also be involved in cell adhesion, signaling, inflammation, and cancer metastasis (5–12). Mucin-type glycoproteins have clusters of a multitude of O-glycans whose synthesis is initiated by various UDP-GalNAc:polypeptide GalNAc-transferases (polypeptide-GalNAc-Ts¹). After the addition of a GalNAc residue to a serine and/or threonine residue by polypeptide-GalNAc-T, sugar residues are sequentially transferred to the GalNAc on the peptide to form O-glycans. O-Glycans can be classified into several different groups according to their core structure. As illustrated in Fig. 1, there are at least eight core types. Core 1, Galβ1–3GalNAcα1-serine/threonine, is the major constituent of O-glycans in many cells. Core 2 is formed from core 1 by the addition of GlcNAc to GalNAc with a β1,6-linkage. Core 3, GlcNAcβ1–3GalNAca-serine/threonine, is restricted in its occurrence to mucins from specialized tissues such as the colon. Core 4 is formed from core 3 by the addition of GlcNAc to GalNAc with a β1,6-linkage. Each core structure is expressed differentially in conjunction with the differentiation and malignant transformation of various cells and tissues (13–17). In normal colonic tissue, the core 3 structure is the major form among O-glycans (18, 19). It has been reported, however, that expression of the core 3 structure is down-regulated in colon cancer tissues and colon cancer cell lines, and the expression of core 1 and core 2 structures is up-regulated (12, 20). The many enzymes involved in synthesizing the core structure of O-glycan may compete with each other for the GalNAc-residue on mucins as substrate. The loss of the core 3 structure in cancerous tissues and cancer cell lines may be caused by down-regulation of the expression of the core 3 synthase.

* This work was performed as a part of the R&D Project of Industrial Science and Technology Frontier Program (R&D for Establishment and Utilization of a Technical Infrastructure for Japanese Industry) supported by the New Energy and Industrial Technology Development Organization. The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked “advertisement” in accordance with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.
* The nucleotide sequence(s) reported in this paper has been submitted to the GenBank™/EBI Data Bank with accession number(s) AB073740.
* These authors contributed equally to this work.
* To whom correspondence should be addressed. Tel.: 81-298-61-3200; Fax: 81-298-61-3201; E-mail: h.narimatsu@aist.go.jp.

¹ The abbreviations used are: GalNAc-T(s), GalNAc transferase(s); β3GalNAc-T, β1,3-N-acetylgalactosaminyltransferase; β3Gal-T, β1,3-galactosyltransferase; β3Gn-T, β1,3-N-acetylgalactosaminyltransferase; β3GT, β1,3-glycosyltransferase; core 1 (T antigen), Galβ1–3GalNAca1-serine/threonine; core 2, Galβ1–3(GlcNAcβ1–6)GalNAca1-serine/threonine; core 3, GlcNAcβ1–3GalNAca1-serine/threonine; core 4, GlcNAcβ1–6GalNAca1-serine/threonine; FITC, fluorescein isothiocyanate; GAPDH, glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase; HPLC, high performance liquid chromatography; HPTLC, high performance thin layer chromatography; Le<sup>x</sup>, Lewis x; MALDI-TOF, matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight; NeuAc, neuraminic acid (sialic acid); ORF, open reading frame; pNP, p-nitrophenyl; sLe<sup>x</sup>, sialyl Lewis x (NeuAca2–3Galβ1–4(Fucα1–3)GlcNAc); sTn antigen, NeuAca2–6GalNAca1-serine/threonine; Tn antigen, GalNAca1-serine/threonine; BSM, bovine submaxillary gland mucin.

Molecular Cloning of Core 3 Synthase

FIG. 1. Biosynthetic pathways for the core structures of mucin type O-glycans. Cancer-associated antigens are shown in parentheses.

Core 3 activity was detected in normal colonic tissue; however, the enzyme responsible for synthesizing the core 3 structure has not been purified. We have been studying the molecular cloning of each member of the β1,3-galactosyltransferase (β3Gal-T) and β1,3-N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase (β3Gn-T) families (21–24). To date, four members of the human β3Gn-T family, β3Gn-T2, -T3, -T4, and -T5, have been identified (25, 26). The first member, originally named β3Gn-T1 (27), was recently identified not to be a β3Gn-T at all, but a member of the β3Gal-T family, catalyzing a Gal to Gal transfer with a β1,3-linkage for the synthesis of the linkage structure of glycosaminoglycans (28). It was subsequently renamed β3Gal-T6. β3Gal-T3, which had originally been classified into the β3Gal-T family, was also found to be a β3GalNAc-T, based on its activity for globoside synthesis (29). We found that all members of the β3Gal-T, β3Gn-T, and β3GalNAc-T families share amino acid motifs in three regions of the catalytic domain (24). Although each member differs in its specificity for the donor and acceptor substrate, all exhibit transferring activity, which is consistent with a β1,3-linkage. They could be collected together in a group named the β1,3-glycosyltransferase (β3GT) family.

We expected the core 3 synthase to be a member of the β3GT family because it catalyzes the synthesis of GlcNAcβ1-3GalNAc. None of the β3GT, which we isolated, showed apparent activity to produce core 3. Therefore, we searched the data bases to find novel genes having the β3GT motifs, and cloned and characterized a sixth member of family (β3Gn-T6). We identified β3Gn-T6 as the most logical candidate for the core 3 synthase.

EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES

Isolation of Human β3Gn-T6 cDNA—We performed a BLAST search of the expressed sequence tag data bases and identified two cDNAs (AW182889 and AW192172), homologous in amino acid sequence to the open reading frame (ORF) of β3Gn-T3 (25). On searching the human genomic DNA data base, we found that the two cDNAs mapped in the immediate vicinity of each other in a single contig (AP00752), having only a 26-bp gap. However, the 5′-region of this novel gene, which should be homologous to that of β3Gn-T3, was not present in the contig. To obtain this sequence, the 5′-rapid amplification of cDNA ends method was employed using a Marathon-Ready™ cDNA Amplification Kit (CLONTECH, Palo Alto, CA). Two reverse primers were designed for the first PCR, 5′-CTCCAGACACATGCCCATGTAGGC-3′, and for the nested PCR, 5′-GCCAGTCGAGCAAGTGCGAGG-3′. A DNA fragment obtained by the 5′-rapid amplification of cDNA ends method was sequenced using an ABI PRISM BigDye™ Terminator Cycle Sequencing Ready Reaction Kit (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA). The sequenced DNA fragment contained a part of the 5′-primer sequence of the cDNA (AW182889), a putative initiation codon, and a transmembrane domain. Finally, a cDNA encoding the full-length ORF of a novel family member was obtained by PCR using the Marathon-Ready™ cDNA of human stomach tissue (CLONTECH) as a template and subcloned into pDONR™201 vector (Invitrogen).

Construction and Purification of β3Gn-T Proteins Fused with FLAG

TABLE I  
Substrate specificity of β3Gn-T6  

Acceptor substrates were purchased from $^{a}$ Calbiochem, $^{b}$ Sigma, $^{c}$ TaKaRa, and $^{d}$ Toronto Research Chemicals, Inc. ND, not detected; LacCer, lactosylceramide (Galβ1–4Glcβ1–1 ceramide); lyso, sphingosine; GM2, GalNAcβ1–4(NeuAca2–3)Galβ1–4Glcβ1–1 ceramide; lactoside, Galβ1–4Glc; Bz, benzyl; ManNAc, N-acetylmannosamine; GalCer type I, galactocerebroside type I (Galβ1–1ceramide); globoside, globotetraosylceramide (GalNAcβ1–3Galα1–4Galβ1–4Glcβ1–1 ceramide).

| Acceptor substrate                          | Relative activity |
|---------------------------------------------|-------------------|
| 1. GalNacα-pNP$^{a}$                        | 100               |
| 2. GalNAcβ-pNP$^{b}$                        | 15                |
| 3. GalNAca1–3(Fucα1–2)Gal (blood group A)$^{a}$ | ND                |
| 4. Asialo-GM2$^{b}$                         | ND                |
| 5. GM2$^{b}$                                | ND                |
| 6. Lyso-GM2$^{c}$                           | ND                |
| 7. Gala-pNP$^{a}$                           | ND                |
| 8. Galβ-oNP$^{a}$                           | ND                |
| 9. Glca-pNP$^{a}$                           | ND                |
| 10. Glcβ-pNP$^{a}$                          | ND                |
| 11. GlcNAca-pNP$^{a}$                       | ND                |
| 12. GlcNAcβ-pNP$^{a}$                       | ND                |
| 13. Fucα-pNP$^{a}$                          | ND                |
| 14. Manα-Bz$^{d}$                           | ND                |
| 15. ManNAca-Bz$^{d}$                        | ND                |
| 16. Xyla-pNP$^{d}$                          | ND                |
| 17. Xylβ-oNP$^{b}$                          | ND                |
| 18. Galβ1–4GlcNAca-pNP$^{d}$                | 2.4               |
| 19. Galβ1–3GalNAca-pNP (core 1)$^{d}$       | ND                |
| 20. GlcNAcβ1–6(Galβ1–3)GalNAca-pNP (core 2)$^{d}$ | ND                |
| 21. GlcNAcβ1–3GalNAca-pNP (core 3)$^{d}$    | ND                |
| 22. GlcNAcβ1–6GalNAca-pNP (core 6)$^{d}$    | ND                |
| 23. LacCer$^{d}$                            | ND                |
| 24. GalCer type I$^{b}$                     | ND                |
| 25. Lactoside-β-Bz$^{b}$                    | ND                |
| 26. Globoside$^{b}$                         | ND                |

Peptide—The putative catalytic domain of β3Gn-T6 was expressed as a secreted protein fused with a FLAG peptide in insect cells according to the instruction manual of GATEWAY™ Cloning Technology (Invitrogen). An ~1.0-kb DNA fragment encoding the putative catalytic domain of β3Gn-T6 (amino acids 44–384) was amplified by PCR using the Marathon-Ready™ cDNA of human stomach tissue (CLONTECH) as a template. The PCR was performed with a LA PCR™ Kit (TaKaRa, Shiga, Japan), according to the manual supplied. The forward and reverse primer sequences were flanked with attB1 and attB2 sequences, respectively, to create the recombination sites. The forward primer was 5′-GGGGACAAGTTTGTACAAAAAAGCAGGCTTCCAGGAGGAGAC GCCAGAGGG-3′, and the reverse primer, 5′-GGGGACCACTTTGTACAAGAAAGCTGGGTTCTGGCCTCAGGAGACCCGGGTG-3′. The amplified fragment was inserted between the attP1 and attP2 sites of the pDONR™201 vector using the BP CLONASE Enzyme Mix (Invitrogen). Subsequently, the insert was transferred between the attR1 and attR2 sites of pFBIF linearized by NcoI using the LR CLONASE Enzyme Mix (Invitrogen). pFBIF is an expression vector derived from pFastBac1 (Invitrogen) and contains a fragment encoding a signal peptide of human immunoglobulin κ (MHFQVQIFSFLLLISASVIMSRG), the FLAG peptide (DYKDDDDK), and a conversion site for the GATEWAY system. DH10BAC competent cells (Invitrogen) were transformed with the pFBIF containing the β3Gn-T6 catalytic domain, and then bacmid DNA was prepared from the cells. Sf21 insect cells (BD PharMingen, San Diego) were transfected with the prepared bacmid DNA. Recombinant virus was prepared according to the instruction manual of BAC-TO-BAC Baculovirus Expression Systems (Invitrogen). Recombinant viruses of the other β3Gn-Ts were also prepared as described previously (25, 26). Sf21 insect cells were infected with each recombinant virus and incubated at 27°C until the survival rate was less than 50% to yield secreted recombinant β3Gn-T proteins fused with the FLAG peptide. The culture media were mixed with anti-FLAG M1 antibody resin (Sigma). The protein-resin mixtures were washed twice with 50 mM Tris-buffered saline (50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl) containing 1 mM CaCl₂. Then the recombinant protein was eluted with 50 mM Tris-buffered saline buffer, pH 7.4, containing 1 mM EDTA.

Five recombinant β3Gn-Ts, β3Gn-T2, -T3, -T4, -T5, and -T6, were purified and subjected to 10% SDS-PAGE for Western blot analysis using a Hybond™-P membrane (Amersham Biosciences). The mem-

12804

Molecular Cloning of Core 3 Synthase

---

$\beta 3 \mathrm{Gn}-\mathrm{T} 6$  
$\beta 3 \mathrm{Gn}-\mathrm{T} 2$  
$\beta 3 \mathrm{Gn}-\mathrm{T} 3$  
$\beta 3 \mathrm{Gn}-\mathrm{T} 4$  
$\beta 3 \mathrm{Gn}-\mathrm{T} 5$

MAFPCRRSL--TAKTLACLLVG-VSFLALQOWFLQAPRSPEE  
MSVGRRIKLLGILMMANVFIYFIMEVSKSSSQEKNGKEVIIPKEFKWISTPPEAYWN  
MKYLRRH--RPNATLILAAIG-AFTLLLFSLLVSPPTCKVQE  
MLPPQPSAAHQG-RGGRSGLLPKG-PAMLCRLCWLVSYSLAVILL  
MRMLVSG----RRVKKWQLIIOQLFATCF  

RSPQEETPEGPTDAPAADEPP---SELVPGPP-CVANASANAT---ADFEQLPARIQDFL  
REQEKLNRQYNPILSMLTNQTGEAGRLSNISHLNYCEPDLRVTSVVTFGNLLPDRFKDFL  
Q------PPAIPEALAWTPPP---TRPAPAP--CHANTSMVTH---PDFATQPQHVQNFL  
GCLLFLRKAAKPAGDPTAHQP---FWAPPTRPHSRCPPNHTVS---SASLSLPSRHRLF  
L---------ASLMFFWEP-------IDNHIVSHMKSYSYRY------LINSYDFVNDTL  

$\beta 3 \mathrm{Gn}-\mathrm{T} 6$  
$\beta 3 \mathrm{Gn}-\mathrm{T} 2$  
$\beta 3 \mathrm{Gn}-\mathrm{T} 3$  
$\beta 3 \mathrm{Gn}-\mathrm{T} 4$  
$\beta 3 \mathrm{Gn}-\mathrm{T} 5$

RYRHCRH---FPLLWDAP-AKCGGRGVFLLLAVKSAPEHYERRE  
LYLRERN---YSLLIDQP-DKCAKK--PFLLLAIKSLTPHFARRQ  
LYRHCRH---FPLLQDVPPSKCAQP--VFLLLVIKSSPSNYVRRE  
TYRHCRN---FSILLEPS--GCSKD--TFLLLAIKSQPGHVERRA  
SLKHTSAGPRYQYLINHK-EKCQAQD-VLLLLFVKTAPENYDRRS  

-GRPVRRLLFLLGTPGPEDEARLAELVALEAREHGVDVLQWAFADTFLNLTLKHLHLLD  
-NQTVVRFVLLGQTPPEDNHP--DLSDMLKFESEKHQDILMWNYRDTFFNLSLKEVLLR  
-GLQLRLLFLVGTASNPEAR--KVNRILLELEAQTHGDILQWDFHDSFFNLTTLKQVLFQ  
-GRQLKLVFLLGVAGSAPPAQ------LLAYESREFDDILQWDFTEDFFNLTTLKELHLQR  
LNANIKTLFALGTPNPLEGEE---LQRKLAWEDQRYNIDIQQDFVDSFYNLTLKLLMQFS  

WLAARCPHARFLLSGDDDVFVHTANVVRFLQAQ--PPGRHLFSGQLMEGSVIPIRDSWSKY  
WVSTSCPDTBFVFKGBDDDVFVNTHHILNYLNSLSKTKAKDLFIGDVIIHNAGPHRDKKLKY  
WQETRCANASFVLNGDDDVFHAHTDNMVFYLQDH--DPGRHLFVGQLIQNVGPIRAFSKY  
WVAACPQAHFMLKGDDDVFVHVPNVLEFLDGW--DPAQDLLVGDIVRQALPNRNTKVKY  
WANTYCPHAKFLMTABDDDIIFHMPNLIEYLQSLEQIGVQDFWIGRVHRGAPPIRDKSSKY  

FVPPQLFPGSAYPYCSGGGFLLSGPTARALARAAARHT-PLFF  
YIPEVVYSG-LYPPYAGGGFLYGHLALRLYHITDQV-HLYP  
YVPEVVTQNERYPYCGGGGFLLSRFTAAALRAAHVL-DIFF  
FIPPSMYRATHYPPYAGGGGYVMSRATVRLRQAIMEDA-ELFF  
YVSYEMYQWPAYPDYTAGAAYVISGDVAAKVYEASQTLNSSLY  

SGHEGIRPFGVQLPGAQQSSFDPCCMYRELLLVHRFAPYEMLLMWKALHSP--------  
EKHKGFRTFDIEEK----NKNNICSSYVDMLVHSRKPQEMIDIWSQLQSA--------  
ASHSGIRTSGVRAPSQHLSSFDPCFYRDLLLHVHRLFPYEMLLMWDALNQP--------  
MHHAGFKTFGIRR----LDPLDPCLYRGLLLVHRLSPELWTMWALVTDE--------  
QDHV---FFSGEGK----TPYHPCIYEKMMTSHG-HLEDLQDLWKATDPKVKTISKGFF  

$\beta 3 \mathrm{Gn}-\mathrm{T} 6$  
$\beta 3 \mathrm{Gn}-\mathrm{T} 2$  
$\beta 3 \mathrm{Gn}-\mathrm{T} 3$  
$\beta 3 \mathrm{Gn}-\mathrm{T} 4$  
$\beta 3 \mathrm{Gn}-\mathrm{T} 5$

ALSCDRGHRVS--------  
HLKC-------------  
NLTCGNQTQIY--------  
GLKCAAGPIPQR-------  
GQIYCRLMKIILLCKISYVDTYPCRAAFI  

---

FIG. 2. ClustalW alignment for comparison of $\beta 3 \mathrm{Gn}-\mathrm{T} 6$ with the other four $\beta 3 \mathrm{Gn}-\mathrm{T}$ s. Introduced gaps are shown with hyphens. The three $\beta 3 \mathrm{Gn}-\mathrm{T}$ motifs are boxed. The putative transmembrane domains are underlined. Asterisks indicate the amino acids identical among all proteins. Conserved amino acids are shown by dots. Triplets of aspartic acid residues, DDD, are indicated by white letters. Cysteine residues conserved in the five $\beta 3 \mathrm{Gn}-\mathrm{T}$ s, $\beta 3 \mathrm{Gn}-\mathrm{T} 2$, -T3, -T4, -T5, and -T6, are indicated by open arrows. Possible N-glycosylation sites in the $\beta 3 \mathrm{Gn}-\mathrm{T} 6$ sequence are double underlined. A possible N-glycosylation site conserved in all proteins is indicated by a closed arrow.

brane was probed with anti-FLAG M2 monoclonal antibody-conjugated peroxidase and stained with the Konica Immunostaining HRP-1000 (Konica, Tokyo, Japan). Each purified $\beta 3 \mathrm{Gn}-\mathrm{T}$ was adjusted to the same amount according to the result of Western blotting.

Assay Conditions for Gn-T Activity—The basic reaction mixture for assaying Gn-T activity contained $50 \mathrm{mM}$ sodium cacodylate buffer, pH 7.2, an appropriate concentration of UDP-GlcNAc, $10 \mathrm{mM} \mathrm{MnCl}_{2}, 0.4 \%$ Triton CF-54, a suitable amount of acceptor substrate, and the purified enzyme. After incubation at $37^{\circ} \mathrm{C}$ for $16 \mathrm{~h}$, the product was analyzed by various techniques.

Assay of Gn-T Activity Using High Performance Thin Layer Chromatography (HPTLC)—The Gn-T activity was assayed by HPTLC in $25 \mu \mathrm{l}$ of a basic reaction mixture, containing $500 \mu \mathrm{M}$ UDP-GlcNAc (Sigma), $24 \mathrm{mM}(175 \mathrm{nCi})$ UDP-$\left[{ }^{14} \mathrm{C}\right]$ GlcNAc (Amersham Biosciences), and $400 \mu \mathrm{M}$ acceptor substrate. The acceptor substrates, summarized in Table I, were purchased from Calbiochem, Toronto Research Chemicals Inc. (Ontario, Canada), TaKaRa, and Sigma. Radioactive products were separated from the free UDP-$\left[{ }^{14} \mathrm{C}\right]$ GlcNAc using a Sep-Pak Plus $\mathrm{C}_{18}$ cartridge (Waters, Milford, MA) as described below. The cartridge was activated by washing with $10 \mathrm{ml}$ of $100 \%$ methanol and then washed twice with $10 \mathrm{ml}$ of water. The enzyme reaction was terminated by the addition of $200 \mu \mathrm{l}$ of water, and then the reaction mixture was applied to the equilibrated cartridge and washed twice with $10 \mathrm{ml}$ of water. Elution of the radioactive product was achieved using $1 \mathrm{ml}$ of $100 \%$ methanol. Eluted products were dried with a $\mathrm{N}_{2}$ evaporator and dissolved in $20 \mu \mathrm{l}$ of $100 \%$ methanol. They were separated on a HPTLC plate (Merck) with a solvent system of chloroform, methanol, and $0.2 \% \mathrm{CaCl}_{2}(55: 45: 10, \mathrm{v} / \mathrm{v} / \mathrm{v})$. The radioactive intensities of the bands were measured with a FLA-3000 Imaging Analyzer (Fujifilm, Tokyo).

Determination of a $\beta 1,3$-Linkage in the Enzyme Reaction Product by HPLC and NMR—$1 \mathrm{mM}$ GalNAca-pNP was incubated with $\beta 3 \mathrm{Gn}-\mathrm{T} 6$ in $20 \mu \mathrm{l}$ of a basic reaction mixture containing $2 \mathrm{mM}$ UDP-GlcNAc to

---

TABLE II  
Relative activity of $\beta 3 \mathrm{Gn}-\mathrm{T}$ s toward GalNAca-pNP

| Enzyme   | Relative activity |
|----------|-------------------|
| $\beta 3 \mathrm{Gn}-\mathrm{T} 2$ | $2.9 \%$         |
| $\beta 3 \mathrm{Gn}-\mathrm{T} 3$ | ND$^{a}$         |
| $\beta 3 \mathrm{Gn}-\mathrm{T} 4$ | ND               |
| $\beta 3 \mathrm{Gn}-\mathrm{T} 5$ | ND               |
| $\beta 3 \mathrm{Gn}-\mathrm{T} 6$ | $100 \%$         |

$a$ ND, not detected.

produce the reaction product. A $10-\mu \mathrm{l}$ aliquot of supernatant was subjected to HPLC on an ODS-80Ts QA column $(4.6 \times 250 \mathrm{~mm}$; Tosoh, Tokyo). The reaction products were eluted with $30 \mathrm{ml}$ of $12 \%$ acetonitrile containing $0.1 \%$ trifluoroacetic acid and $\mathrm{H}_{2} \mathrm{O}$ at a flow rate of $1.0 \mathrm{ml} / \mathrm{min}$ at $50^{\circ} \mathrm{C}$ and monitored with an ultraviolet spectrophotometer (absorbance at $210 \mathrm{~nm}$ ), SPD-10A$_{\mathrm{VP}}$ (Shimadzu, Kyoto, Japan).

Glycosylation of GalNAca1-(N-trifluoroacetyl)-L-threonine methyl ester was performed in $200 \mu \mathrm{l}$ of a basic reaction mixture containing $10 \mathrm{mM}$ UDP-GlcNAc and $5 \mathrm{mM}$ threonine derivative. The enzyme reaction product was separated by HPLC as described above, the deuterium exchanged by subsequent lyophilization from $\mathrm{D}_{2} \mathrm{O}$ and dissolved again in $0.5 \mathrm{ml}$ of $\mathrm{D}_{2} \mathrm{O}$ for NMR analysis. One-dimensional ${ }^{1} \mathrm{H}$ and ${ }^{13} \mathrm{C}$ NMR as well as two-dimensional ${ }^{1} \mathrm{H}-{ }^{1} \mathrm{H}$ COSY, ${ }^{1} \mathrm{H}-{ }^{1} \mathrm{H}$ TOCSY, ${ }^{1} \mathrm{H}$ NOESY, and ${ }^{1} \mathrm{H}-{ }^{13} \mathrm{C}$ HMQC NMR experiments were performed at $298 \mathrm{~K}$ on a Bruker DMX-500, DMX-750, and JEOL ECP800 spectrometer. Chemical shifts are referenced to internal acetone ($2.04 \mathrm{ppm}$ for ${ }^{1} \mathrm{H}$ and $29.8 \mathrm{ppm}$ for ${ }^{13} \mathrm{C}$ ).

Transfer of GlcNAc by $\beta 3 \mathrm{Gn}-\mathrm{T} 6$ on GalNAc-peptide and Native Glycoproteins—A fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC)-labeled oligopeptide,

FITC-AHGVTSA PDT R, prepared commercially was purchased from Sawady Co., Ltd. (Tokyo). The peptide sequence was identical to that of Mucla' used as acceptor substrate for polypeptide-GalNAc-Ts (30). In the present study, we cloned polypeptide-GalNAc-T6, one of the polypeptide-GalNAc-Ts, which had been reported previously (31), by reverse transcriptase PCR. We expressed it in the baculovirus expression system, as described in the previous section, to obtain a recombinant form. Mucla' was glycosylated by use of GalNAc-T6, and the glycosylated peptide was isolated by HPLC (Waters 5C<sub>18</sub>-AR; 4.6 × 250 mm; 1.0 ml/min; gradient 0–50% acetonitrile in water containing 0.05% trifluoroacetic acid; fluorescence detection ex 492 nm, em 520 nm). The isolated fractions were subjected to MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry using Reflex™ III (Bruker Daltonics, Tsukuba, Japan) and protein sequencing analysis (Protein Sequencer PPSQ-23A, Shimadzu). Mass spectra were calibrated externally unless otherwise stated. The samples were dissolved in 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid to a concentration of 2 pmol/µl and prepared by mixing 1 µl of sample solution with 1 µl of matrix solution (2,5-dihydroxybenzoic acid, 10 mg/ml in 30% acetonitrile containing 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid) directly on the target.

The glycosylated peptide was determined to have a GalNAc residue and the sequence of FITC-AHGVT(-GalNAc) SAPDTR. This GalNAc-glycosylated peptide was used as an acceptor for β3Gn-T6. Quantitative conversion of the glycopeptide was achieved after a 16-h incubation with β3Gn-T6 at 37°C in 750 µl of a basic reaction mixture containing 5 mM UDP-GlcNAc and 170 nM acceptor.

The transfer of GlcNAc by β3Gn-T6 to glycoproteins was performed in 20 µl of a basic reaction mixture containing 500 µM UDP-GlcNAc, 24 mM (175 nCi) UDP-[<sup>14</sup>C]GlcNAc, and 0.5 µg of bovine submaxillary gland mucin (BSM), 5 µg of fetuin, or 5 µg of asialofetuin. After incubation at 37°C for 16 h, each 10 µl of the reaction mixture was subjected to 10% SDS-PAGE. The radioactive intensities of the bands were measured with a FLA-3000 Imaging Analyzer (Fujifilm).

Quantitative Analysis of the β3Gn-T6 Transcript in Human Tissues by Real Time PCR—In the preliminary Northern blot analysis using commercially available human 12-Lane MNN™ Blot and human MTN® Blot III membranes (CLONTECH), we could not detect any positive bands. Therefore, we employed the real time PCR method, as described in detail previously (32, 33), for quantification of the β3Gn-T6 transcripts because the amount of the transcripts was found to be very small even in mRNAs derived from stomach and colon. Marathon Ready® cDNAs of various human tissues were purchased from CLONTECH. Standard curves for the β3Gn-T6 cDNA and the human glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH) cDNA, as an endogenous control, were generated by serial dilution of a pDONR™201 vector DNA containing the β3Gn-T6 gene encoding the putative catalytic domain (amino acids 44–384), and a pCR2.1(Invitrogen) DNA containing the GAPDH gene. The primer set and probe for β3Gn-T6 were as follows: the forward primer, 5′-CCTGCATGTACCGCGAGTT-3′; the reverse primer, 5′-CCACATGAGCAGCATCTCGT-3′; and the probe, 5′-TGCT-AGTGCA CCGCT-3′. For GAPDH, we used Pre-Developed TaqMan® Assay Reagents Endogenous Human GAPDH (Applied Biosystems). Primers, probes, and cDNAs were added to the TaqMan Universal PCR Master Mix (Applied Biosystems) which contained all reagents for PCR. The PCR conditions included 1 cycle at 50°C for 2 min, 1 cycle at 95°C for 10 min, 50 cycles at 95°C for 15 s, and 60°C for 1 min. PCR products were measured continuously with an ABI PRISM 7700 Sequence Detection System (Applied Biosystems). The relative amount of β3Gn-T6 transcript was normalized to the amount of GAPDH transcript in the same cDNA.

---

**RESULTS**

Isolation of a New β3Gn-T—We obtained a cDNA of a new member of the β3GT family as described under “Experimental Procedures” and named it β3Gn-T6. An alignment of the amino acid sequences of five β3Gn-Ts made using ClustalW is shown in Fig. 2. The 1155-bp (384 amino acids) ORF of β3Gn-T6 encoded a typical type II membrane protein, the same as in other β3Gn-Ts, consisting of an N-terminal cytoplasmic domain of 12 residues, a transmembrane segment of 19 residues, and a stem region and catalytic domain of 353 residues (Fig. 2). β3Gn-T6 showed 41, 54, 42, and 35% identity to β3Gn-T2, β3Gn-T3, β3Gn-T4, and β3Gn-T5, respectively, and the sequence similarity was limited to the putative catalytic domains. The three motifs shared by the members of the β3GT family (24) were present in the predicted positions in the putative amino acid sequence of β3Gn-T6. The five cysteines residues were conserved in the five β3Gn-Ts, indicating that some would be essential for maintaining the tertiary structure. A triplet of aspartic acid residues, DDD, which may be a divalent cation binding site as proposed in a crystallization study of other glycosyltransferases (34), was also conserved. Three possible N-glycosylation sites were found in the primary sequence of β3Gn-T6. One of them was conserved in all β3Gn-Ts.

The β3Gn-T6 gene was found to be localized to a draft genome sequence (GenBank accession no. AP00752) which was

---

**FIG. 3.** HPLC analysis of the product derived from GalNAca-pNP. HPLC analyses of the standards (panel A) and the reaction mixture of β3Gn-T6 with GalNAca-pNP as an acceptor (panel B) were performed using an ODS-80Ts QA column. The standards are core 3α-pNP (a), core 6α-pNP (b), and GalNAca-pNP (c). The reaction product synthesized by the enzymatic reaction is indicated by d.

---

**FIG. 4.** One-dimensional <sup>1</sup>H NMR spectrum of the β3Gn-T6 product. Shown is a <sup>1</sup>H NMR spectrum between 3.33 and 4.86 ppm of the reaction product purified from the β3Gn-T6 reaction mixture with GalNAca1-threonine by HPLC (data not shown), using an ECP800 spectrometer.

mapped to 11q14 on the human chromosome, and its ORF was composed of a single exon.

Substrate Specificity of β3Gn-T6—The calculated molecular mass of the FLAG-tagged recombinant β3Gn-T6, is 43 kDa; however, a major band of 46.6 kDa was observed, but no band was detected around 43 kDa on Western blot analysis. This result suggested that the recombinant protein would be glycosylated in insect cells. The glycosyltransferase activities of β3Gn-T6 were examined by a HPTLC analysis of Gn-T and Gal-T activities and HPLC analysis of GalNAc-T activity. No Gal-T or GalNAc-T activity toward any acceptor substrate was observed (data not shown). The substrate specificities of β3Gn-T6 are summarized in Table I. The activity toward GalNACA-pNP was the strongest. Thus, the activity of β3Gn-T6 for GalNAca-pNP is presented as 100%, and all other activities are given as relative values in Table I. β3Gn-T6 exhibited 15% activity toward GalNAcβ-pNP; 2.4% activity for Galβ1-4GlcNAca-pNP; and no activity toward the other acceptors. β3Gn-T6 preferred GalNAca-pNP over GalNAcβ-pNP as an acceptor. This result is consistent with that of a previous study (35). β3Gn-T6 exhibited no activity toward the α-GalNAc residue of blood group A and the core 6 substrates (substrates 3 and 22 in Table I). It also showed no activity toward the β-GalNAc residue of gangliosides, asialo-GM2, GM2, and lyso-GM2 (substrates 4, 5, and 6 in Table I).

The amounts of each of the five β3Gn-Ts were made equal for assaying the relative activity to transfer GlcNAc to GalNACA-pNP (Table II). The β3Gn-T6 activity is presented as 100%. All other activities are given as relative values. The Gn-T activities of β3Gn-T6 and -T2 were detectable, but those of the others were not. Although β3Gn-T2 transferred GlcNAc to GalNACA-pNP, its relative activity was only 2.4%. In our previous study (25), β3Gn-T2 showed the strongest activity for the transfer of GlcNAc to the βGal residue of poly-lactosamine. In the present study, β3Gn-T2 exhibited the strongest activity to transfer GlcNAc to Galβ1-4GlcNAca-pNP at more than 500 times that to GalNACA-pNP (data not shown).

Using equal amounts of β3Gn-T6 and -T2, HPLC analyses were carried out to measure Gn-T activity for Cy5-labeled GalNACA1-serine. A new product was created by β3Gn-T6 and was eluted before the acceptor substrate (data not shown). In contrast, β3Gn-T2 did not create any new products. β3Gn-T6 also transferred GlcNAc to Cy5-labeled GalNACA1-threonine to an equal or greater extent than to Cy5-labeled GalNACA1-serine (data not shown).

Linkage Analysis of the Product Formed by β3Gn-T6—Two linkages between GlcNAc and GalNAc are known to occur in GlcNAc:GalNACA1-serine/threonine in roots of mucin-type glycoproteins. They are GlcNAcβ1-3GalNAc (core 3) and GlcNAcβ1-6GalNAc (core 6). To estimate the linkage structure synthesized by β3Gn-T6, the reaction product of β3Gn-T6 obtained using GalNACA-pNP as an acceptor was subjected to HPLC analysis (Fig. 3). Two commercially available compounds, GlcNAcβ1-3GalNACA-pNP (core 3-pNP) and GlcNAcβ1-6GalNACA-pNP (core 6-pNP), were used as standards as seen in Fig. 3A. The peak of enzyme product apparently shifted from the original peak of substrate (peak c in Fig. 3) to the position of core 3-pNP (peaks a and d in Fig. 3). This result suggested that β3Gn-T6 synthesizes the core 3 structure from GalNACA-pNP.

Characterization of the Core 3 Product by NMR Spectroscopy—To characterize the structure generated by β3Gn-T6 more precisely, ¹H NMR spectroscopy was performed.

The reaction product of β3Gn-T6 with UDP-GlcNAc and GalNACA1-(N-trifluoroacetyl)-L-threonine methyl ester was isolated by HPLC, and the newly formed glycosidic linkage was

FIG. 5. Two-dimensional ¹H-¹H NMR spectrum of the β3Gn-T6 product. Shown is a ¹H-¹H NMR spectrum of the same reaction product analyzed in Fig. 4 obtained in the ¹H-¹H NOESY NMR experiment using a DMX-500 spectrometer.

characterized by ¹H and ¹³C NMR spectroscopy. All ¹H resonances could be differentiated and assigned by their coupling constants in their one-dimensional ¹H NMR spectrum, as well as two-dimensional ¹H-¹H COSY, ¹H-¹H TOCSY, and ¹H-¹³C HMQC NMR experiments. For the ¹³C resonances, data were compared with those published previously for the corresponding pNP glycosides (36). Additional resonances showed the successful transfer of GlcNAc to the acceptor substrate. Among those additional peaks, the β-1 resonance (4.513 ppm) with a coupling constant (*J*₁₂ = 8.4 Hz) showed a typical value for 1,2-trans biaxial coupling or β-gluco-configurated pyranosides (Fig. 4). Comparison of the ¹³C NMR spectra of the GalNAc-specific resonances of the product with the spectrum of the acceptor substrate showed a shift of the α-3 resonance from 68.18 to 76.77 ppm. Thus the NMR spectra unambiguously confirmed the formation of a β-(1→3)-linkage and supported that the putative ORF encodes for a glycosyltransferase of the β3-family. We also performed a ¹H-NOESY NMR experiment (Fig. 5), as it allows one to monitor nuclear Overhauser effect or NOE contacts between ¹H nuclear spins, which are at close distance (Ångstrom range) but not necessarily chemically linked. Of special interest is the contact between different moieties of the molecules, for example that between α-3 and β-1, which allows us to predict that both sugar planes show the same orientation. Other O-glycans show a free rotation along the glycopeptide linkage and therefore show no specific contact between the peptide and sugar moieties. In contrast, GalNAcα-threonine can form a hydrogen bond between 2-acetamido of GalNAc and the carbonyl of threonine. This hydrogen bond results in a fixed conformation like in the DTR motif of MUC1 or AAT repeat of AFGP. Our hydrophilic protected threonine derivative displayed a similar fixed conformation, and we observed NOE contact between the threonine-γ methyl group and protons α-1 and α-5 of GalNAc.

Core 3 Synthesizing Activity for GalNAc-peptide and O-Glycosylated Proteins—The FITC-labeled GalNAc-Mucla' peptide was used as a substrate for assaying the β3Gn-T6 activity for core 3 synthesis. As seen in Fig. 6, β3Gn-T6 produced a new peak of product (peak c in Fig. 6A) which shifted to a position with a shorter retention time than that of the substrate (peak b in Fig. 6A). Three peaks of FITC-Mucla', FITC-GalNAc-Mucla', and the reaction product were isolated and subjected to measurements of molecular weight by MALDI-TOF mass

Molecular Cloning of Core 3 Synthase

FIG. 6. HPLC and MALDI-TOF mass analysis of the reaction product derived from FITC-GalNAc-Muc1a' peptide. Panel A shows the elution position of FITC-labeled Muc1a' peptide (FITC-Muc1a') (a), FITC-labeled GalNAc-Muc1a' peptide (FITC-AHGVT(-GalNAc)SAPDTR) (b), and the reaction product directed by β3Gn-T6 (c) on HPLC. Each peak in panel A was isolated and subjected to MALDI-TOF mass analysis (panel B).

spectrometry. The molecular weight of the product was determined to be 1877, which matched that expected of the FITC-labeled GlcNAc-GalNAc-Muc1a' peptide.

To determine the activity of β3Gn-T6 to transfer GlcNAc to O-glycosylated protein, BSM, fetuin, and asialofetuin were used as acceptor substrates. As shown in Fig. 7, β3Gn-T6 effectively transferred GlcNAc to BSM and asialofetuin, but not to fetuin.

Distribution of β3Gn-T6 Transcripts in Human Tissues—The level of β3Gn-T6 transcripts expressed in various human tissues was determined by the real time PCR method. As summarized in Fig. 8, the expression level of the β3Gn-T6 transcripts was highest in the stomach, followed by the colon and small intestine. Skeletal muscle and testis expressed the β3Gn-T6 transcript at a relatively low level. The expression levels in the remaining tissues were very low or undetectable.

DISCUSSION

Core 3 synthase is an important enzyme in the synthesis of mucin-type O-glycans in digestive organs. The core 3 structure was first identified in O-glycans derived from stomach and colon, where core 3 synthase activity was also very strong (35, 37). In the present study, we have cloned, expressed, and characterized a novel β3Gn-T, which can create the core 3 structure on GalNAc-peptide.

As demonstrated in the present study, β3Gn-T3, -T4, and -T5 are not the core 3 synthase. Although β3Gn-T2, which is involved in the initiation and elongation of poly-N-acetyllactosamine synthesis (25, 26), exhibited weak activity for core 3 synthesis, its expression is ubiquitous, whereas the core 3 structure and core 3 synthase activity have been found in specific tissues. In addition, β3Gn-T2 did not transfer GlcNAc to GalNAca1-serine. Therefore, β3Gn-T2 is probably not responsible for the synthesis of core 3 in vivo. Furthermore, the synthase activity is detected strongly in normal colon tissue but is almost undetectable in colon cancer cell lines (35); however, the transcript level of β3Gn-T2 in Colo205 cells was higher than that in normal colon tissue (25). These findings also suggested that β3Gn-T2 is not the core 3 synthase. β3Gn-T6 transferred GlcNAc not only to GalNAca-pNP but also to GalNAcb-pNP and Galβ1–4GlcNAca-pNP. The activity in the latter two cases was very weak compared with that in the former, so it may not reflect the physiological activity of β3Gn-T6 in vivo. In addition to GalNAca-pNP, GalNAca1-serine and GalNAca1-threonine were also good acceptors for β3Gn-T6.

The HPLC analysis (Fig. 3) strongly suggested that the reaction product of β3Gn-T6 is the core 3-pNP. We confirmed by NMR analysis that the reaction product derived from GalNAca1-threonine by β3Gn-T6 formed a β1,3-linkage. Finally, the core 3 synthesizing activity on proteins was confirmed using FITC-GalNAc-Muc1a' and native glycoproteins as acceptors. β3Gn-T6 effectively transferred GlcNAc to BSM and asialofetuin but not to fetuin. This suggested that it transferred GlcNAc to GalNAc of the Tn epitopes on asialofetuin but not to fetuin because the Tn epitopes are already masked by sialylation. This is of interest because it indicates that the synthesis of core 3 probably competes with that of sialyl-Tn (sTn). In a previous study, we cloned and characterized ST6GalNAc I (sTn synthase) (38). It effectively trans-

preliminary experiment, we measured the amount of $\beta 3 \mathrm{Gn}-\mathrm{T} 6$ transcript in colonic cancer tissues and many colonic cancer cell lines and found a dramatic down-regulation of $\beta 3 \mathrm{Gn}-\mathrm{T} 6$ transcription. These findings also support that $\beta 3 \mathrm{Gn}-\mathrm{T} 6$ is the most logical candidate for the core 3 synthase.

---

**REFERENCES**

1. Williams, S. J., McGuckin, M. A., Gotley, D. C., Eyre, H. J., Sutherland, G. R., and Antalis, T. M. (1999) *Cancer Res.* **59**, 4083–4089
2. Porchet, N., Buisine, M. P., Desseye, J. L., Moniaux, N., Nollet, S., Degand, P., Pigny, P., Van Seuningen, I., Laine, A., and Aubert, J. P. (1999) *J. Soc. Biol.* **193**, 85–99
3. Snyder, J. D., and Walker, W. A. (1987) *Int. Arch. Allergy Appl. Immunol.* **82**, 351–356
4. Lillehoj, E. P., Hyun, S. W., Kim, B. T., Zhang, X. G., Lee, D. I., Rowland, S., and Kim, K. C. (2001) *Am. J. Physiol.* **280**, L181–L187
5. Prakobphol, A., Thomsson, K. A., Hansson, G. C., Rosen, S. D., Singer, M. S., Phillips, N. J., Medzihradszky, K. F., Burlingame, A. L., Leffler, H., and Fisher, S. J. (1998) *Biochemistry* **37**, 4916–4927
6. Prakobphol, A., Tangemann, K., Rosen, S. D., Hoover, C. I., Leffler, H., and Fisher, S. J. (1999) *Biochemistry* **38**, 6817–6825
7. Phillips, T. E., Stanley, C. M., and Wilson, J. (1993) *Prostaglandins Leukotrienes Essent. Fatty Acids* **48**, 423–428
8. Sreejayan, N., Wittig, B. M., von Stillfried, N., Hennicke, M. S., Meyer, G., Stieber, P., Lamerz, R., and von Ritter, C. (2001) *Am. J. Physiol.* **280**, G1043–G1048
9. Mack, D. R., Gaginella, T. S., and Sherman, P. M. (1992) *Gastroenterology* **102**, 1199–1211
10. Capon, C., Maes, E., Michalski, J. C., Leffler, H., and Kim, Y. S. (2001) *Biochem. J.* **358**, 657–664
11. Bresalier, R. S., Ho, S. B., Schoeppner, H. L., Kim, Y. S., Sleisenger, M. H., Brodt, P., and Byrd, J. C. (1996) *Gastroenterology* **110**, 1354–1367
12. Kim, Y. S. (1998) *Keio J. Med.* **47**, 10–18
13. Piller, F., Piller, V., Fox, R. I., and Fukuda, M. (1988) *J. Biol. Chem.* **263**, 15146–15150
14. Yang, J. M., Byrd, J. C., Siddiki, B. B., Chung, Y. S., Okuno, M., Sowa, M., Kim, Y. S., Matta, K. L., and Brockhausen, I. (1994) *Glycobiology* **4**, 873–884
15. Yousefi, S., Higgins, E., Daoling, Z., Pollex-Kruger, A., Hindsgaul, O., and Dennis, J. W. (1991) *J. Biol. Chem.* **266**, 1772–1782
16. Fukuda, M. (1996) *Cancer Res.* **56**, 2237–2244
17. Brockhausen, I., Yang, J. M., Burchell, J., Whitehouse, C., and Taylor-Papadimitriou, J. (1995) *Eur. J. Biochem.* **233**, 607–617
18. Slomiany, B. L., Zdebska, E., and Slomiany, A. (1984) *J. Biol. Chem.* **259**, 2863–2869
19. Slomiany, A., Zdebska, E., and Slomiany, B. L. (1984) *J. Biol. Chem.* **259**, 14743–14749
20. Brockhausen, I. (1999) *Biochim. Biophys. Acta* **1473**, 67–95
21. Sasaki, K., Watanabe, E., Kawashima, K., Sekine, S., Dohi, T., Oshima, M., Hanai, N., Nishi, T., and Hasegawa, M. (1993) *J. Biol. Chem.* **268**, 22782–22787
22. Kolbinger, F., Streiff, M. B., and Katopodis, A. G. (1998) *J. Biol. Chem.* **273**, 433–440
23. Amado, M., Almeida, R., Carneiro, F., Levery, S. B., Holmes, E. H., Nomoto, M., Hollingsworth, M. A., Hassan, H., Schwientek, T., Nielsen, P. A., Bennett, E. P., and Clausen, H. (1998) *J. Biol. Chem.* **273**, 12770–12778
24. Isshiki, S., Togayachi, A., Kudo, T., Nishihara, S., Watanabe, M., Kubota, T., Kitajima, M., Shiraishi, N., Sasaki, K., Andoh, T., and Narimatsu, H. (1999) *J. Biol. Chem.* **274**, 12499–12507
25. Shiraishi, N., Natsume, A., Togayachi, A., Endo, T., Akashima, T., Yamada, Y., Imai, N., Nakagawa, S., Koizumi, S., Sekine, S., Narimatsu, H., and Sasaki, K. (2001) *J. Biol. Chem.* **276**, 3498–3507
26. Togayachi, A., Akashima, T., Ookubo, R., Kudo, T., Nishihara, S., Iwasaki, H., Natsume, A., Mio, H., Inokuchi, J., Irimura, T., Sasaki, K., and Narimatsu, H. (2001) *J. Biol. Chem.* **276**, 22032–22040
27. Zhou, D., Dinter, A., Gutierrez Gallego, R., Kamerling, J. P., Vliegenthart, J. F., Berger, E. G., and Henne, T. (1999) *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.* **96**, 406–411
28. Bai, X., Zhou, D., Brown, J. R., Crawford, B. E., Henne, T., and Esko, J. D. (2001) *J. Biol. Chem.* **276**, 48189–48195
29. Okajima, T., Nakamura, Y., Uchikawa, M., Haslam, D. B., Numata, S. I., Furukawa, K., and Urano, T. (2000) *J. Biol. Chem.* **275**, 40498–40503
30. Wandall, H. H., Hassan, H., Mirgorodskaya, E., Kristensen, A. K., Roepstorff, P., Bennett, E. P., Nielsen, P. A., Hollingsworth, M. A., Burchell, J., Taylor-Papadimitriou, J., and Clausen, H. (1997) *J. Biol. Chem.* **272**, 23503–23514
31. Bennett, E. P., Hassan, H., Mandel, U., Hollingsworth, M. A., Akisawa, N., Ikematsu, Y., Merkx, G., van Kessel, A. G., Olofsson, S., and Clausen, H. (1999) *J. Biol. Chem.* **274**, 25362–25370
32. Gibson, U. E., Heid, C. A., and Williams, P. M. (1996) *Genome Res.* **6**, 995–1001
33. Heid, C. A., Stevens, J., Livak, K. J., and Williams, P. M. (1996) *Genome Res.* **6**, 986–994
34. Gastinel, L. N., Cambillau, C., and Bourne, Y. (1999) *EMBO J.* **18**, 3546–3557
35. Vavasseur, F., Yang, J. M., Dole, K., Paulsen, H., and Brockhausen, I. (1995) *Glycobiology* **5**, 351–357
36. Schwientek, T., Nomoto, M., Levery, S. B., Merkx, G., van Kessel, A. G., Bennett, E. P., Hollingsworth, M. A., and Clausen, H. (1999) *J. Biol. Chem.* **274**, 4504–4512
37. Brockhausen, I., Matta, K. L., Orr, J., and Schachter, H. (1985) *Biochemistry* **24**, 1866–1874
38. Ikehara, Y., Kojima, N., Kurosawa, N., Kudo, T., Kono, M., Nishihara, S., Issiki, S., Morozumi, K., Itzkowitz, S., Tsuda, T., Nishimura, S. I., Tsuji, S.,

and Narimatsu, H. (1999) *Glycobiology* **9**, 1213–1224

39. Ju, T., Cummings, R. D., and Canfield, W. M. (2002) *J. Biol. Chem.* **277**, 169–177

40. Ju, T., Brewer, K., D'Souza, A., Cummings, R. D., and Canfield, W. M. (2002) *J. Biol. Chem.* **277**, 178–186

41. Fukushima, K., Hirota, M., Terasaki, P. I., Wakisaka, A., Togashi, H., Chia, D., Suyama, N., Fukushi, Y., Nudelman, E., and Hakomori, S. (1984) *Cancer Res.* **44**, 5279–5285

42. Nakamori, S., Kameyama, M., Imaoka, S., Furukawa, H., Ishikawa, O., Sasaki, Y., Izumi, Y., and Irimura, T. (1997) *Dis. Colon Rectum* **40**, 420–431

43. Capon, C., Wieruszesi, J. M., Lemoine, J., Byrd, J. C., Leffler, H., and Kim, Y. S. (1997) *J. Biol. Chem.* **272**, 31957–31968

44. Bistrup, A., Bhakta, S., Lee, J. K., Belov, Y. Y., Gunn, M. D., Zuo, F. R., Huang, C. C., Kannagi, R., Rosen, S. D., and Hemmerich, S. (1999) *J. Cell Biol.* **145**, 899–910

45. Hiraoka, N., Petryniak, B., Nakayama, J., Tsuboi, S., Suzuki, M., Yeh, J. C., Izawa, D., Tanaka, T., Miyasaka, M., Lowe, J. B., and Fukuda, M. (1999) *Immunity* **11**, 79–89

46. White, T., Bennett, E. P., Takio, K., Sorensen, T., Bonding, N., and Clausen, H. (1995) *J. Biol. Chem.* **270**, 24156–24165

47. Sorensen, T., White, T., Wandall, H. H., Kristensen, A. K., Roepstorff, P., and Clausen, H. (1995) *J. Biol. Chem.* **270**, 24166–24173

48. Bennett, E. P., Hassan, H., and Clausen, H. (1996) *J. Biol. Chem.* **271**, 17006–17012

49. Bennett, E. P., Hassan, H., Mandel, U., Mirgorodskaya, E., Roepstorff, P., Burchell, J., Taylor-Papadimitriou, J., Hollingsworth, M. A., Merkx, G., van Kessel, A. G., Eiberg, H., Steffensen, R., and Clausen, H. (1998) *J. Biol. Chem.* **273**, 30472–30481

50. Bennett, E. P., Hassan, H., Hollingsworth, M. A., and Clausen, H. (1999) *FEBS Lett.* **460**, 226–230

51. Vavasseur, F., Dole, K., Yang, J., Matta, K. L., Myerscough, N., Corfield, A., Paraskeva, C., and Brockhausen, I. (1994) *Eur. J. Biochem.* **222**, 415–424

GLYCOBIOLOGY AND
EXTRACELLULAR MATRICES:
Molecular Cloning and Characterization of
a Novel UDP-GlcNAc:GalNAc-peptide $\beta$
1,3-N-Acetylglucosaminyltransferase ($\beta$
3Gn-T6), an Enzyme Synthesizing the Core
3 Structure of O-Glycans

Toshie Iwai, Niro Inaba, Andreas Naundorf,
Yan Zhang, Masanori Gotoh, Hiroko Iwasaki,
Takashi Kudo, Akira Togayachi, Yasuko
Ishizuka, Hiroshi Nakanishi and Hisashi
Narimatsu
J. Biol. Chem. 2002, 277:12802-12809.

Access the most updated version of this article at http://www.jbc.org/content/277/15/12802

Find articles, minireviews, Reflections and Classics on similar topics on the JBC Affinity Sites.

Alerts:
- When this article is cited
- When a correction for this article is posted

Click here to choose from all of JBC's e-mail alerts

This article cites 51 references, 33 of which can be accessed free at
http://www.jbc.org/content/277/15/12802.full.html#ref-list-1
