
THE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGICAL CHEMISTRY
© 2002 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

**Bacillus subtilis CheD Is a Chemoreceptor Modification Enzyme Required for Chemotaxis**

Received for publication, February 8, 2002, and in revised form, May 8, 2002
Published, JBC Papers in Press, May 13, 2002, DOI 10.1074/jbc.M201334200

Christopher J. Kristich and George W. Ordal‡

*From the Department of Biochemistry, Colleges of Medicine and Liberal Arts and Sciences, University of Illinois, Urbana, Illinois 61801*

The chemotaxis machinery of *Bacillus subtilis* is similar to that of the well characterized system of *Escherichia coli*. However, *B. subtilis* contains several chemotaxis genes not found in the *E. coli* genome, such as *cheC* and *cheD*, indicating that the *B. subtilis* chemotactic system is more complex. In *B. subtilis*, CheD is required for chemotaxis; the *cheD* mutant displays a tumbling phenotype, has abnormally methylated chemoreceptors, and responds poorly to most chemical stimuli. Homologs of *B. subtilis* CheD have been found in chemotaxis-like operons of a large number of bacteria and archaea, suggesting that CheD plays an important role in chemotactic sensory transduction for many organisms. However, the molecular function of CheD has remained unknown. In this study, we show that CheD catalyzes amide hydrolysis of specific glutamyl side chains of the *B. subtilis* chemoreceptor McpA. In addition, we present evidence that CheD deamidates other *B. subtilis* chemoreceptors including McpB and McpC. Previously, deamidation of *B. subtilis* receptors was thought to be catalyzed by the CheB methylesterase, as is the case for *E. coli* receptors. Because *cheD* mutant cells do not respond to most chemoattractants, we conclude that deamidation by CheD is required for *B. subtilis* chemoreceptors to effectively transduce signals to the CheA kinase.

these glutamyl methyl esters, releasing methanol and regenerating a Glu (10). CheR and CheB are the only known chemoreceptor modification enzymes.

Chemoreceptor modification occurs at specific, cytoplasmic Glu residues located within a well defined consensus sequence originally determined using methylated receptors derived from *E. coli* (11, 12). This consensus sequence has been successfully used to identify methylation sites on receptors of the distantly related organism *Bacillus subtilis* (13, 14). The consensus exhibits some slight variability; receptors are often, but not exclusively, synthesized with Glu at the site of modification. In some instances, the modified site is encoded as Gln rather than Glu in the corresponding receptor gene. When this situation occurs on an *E. coli* receptor, the CheB methylesterase first acts as a deaminase; amide hydrolysis of Gln residues produces Glu at the corresponding position in the mature protein. These Glu residues are then subject to cycles of reversible methylation (15). Because the *B. subtilis* methylesterase complemented an *E. coli cheB* strain in swarm assays (16), it has been assumed that the *B. subtilis* methylesterase possesses an equivalent glutaminase activity.

Modification (methylation, demethylation, or deamidation) of the *E. coli* chemoreceptors has substantial effects on the electrophoretic mobility of the molecules during SDS-PAGE. Incorporation of methyl groups via CheR causes the receptor to migrate more rapidly through the acrylamide matrix (or at a lower apparent $M_{r}$), whereas demethylation or deamidation via CheB causes the receptor to migrate more slowly through the acrylamide matrix (or at a higher apparent $M_{r}$) (15, 17–20).

*B. subtilis* utilizes a similar complement of proteins for chemotaxis, including homologs of the transmembrane chemoreceptors, CheW coupler, CheA kinase, CheY regulator, and CheR/CheB receptor-modification enzymes (21, 22). However, chemotaxis by *B. subtilis* deviates from the *E. coli* paradigm in many ways. For example, *B. subtilis* lacks a homolog of the CheZ phosphatase present in *E. coli* and other closely related γ-proteobacteria. Moreover, *B. subtilis* possesses several chemotaxis genes that have no counterparts in *E. coli*, including *cheC*, *cheD*, and *cheV*. The roles of CheC, CheD, and CheV in *B. subtilis* chemotaxis have not been well characterized. Recent work suggests roles for CheV and CheC during adaptation to chemotactic stimuli (21, 23), although their mechanism of action remains elusive; less is known about the function of CheD. *cheD* mutant cells exhibit poorly methylated receptors, clockwise flagellar rotational bias (cells are tumbling), and decreased sensitivity to attractants (21, 24). Additionally, a recent report noted the unexpected observation that one *B. subtilis* chemoreceptor, McpA, appeared to be absent in a *cheD* mutant (21). No link connecting these disparate phenotypes has been established. The apparent nonspecific nature of the chemotactic defects of the *cheD* mutant has precluded assignment of a specific biochemical function to CheD. Furthermore, its func-

* This study was supported by Grant GM54365 from the National Institutes of Health (to G. W. O.). The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked “advertisement” in accordance with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.
* ‡ To whom correspondence should be addressed. Tel.: 217-333-9098 or 217-333-0268; Fax: 217-333-8868; E-mail: g-ordal@uiuc.edu.

TABLE I  
Strains and plasmids used in this study  

| Strain or plasmid | Relevant genotype or description | Reference |
|-------------------|---------------------------------|-----------|
| OI2836            | cheB8::cat                      | 16        |
| OI2934            | cheD1::cat                      | 24        |
| OI3545            | Δ10mcpche+                     | 26        |
| OI3920            | Δ10mcpcheR3::cat                | This work |
| OI3628            | Δ10mcpcheD1::cat                | This work |
| OI3922            | Δ10mcpcheR3::catcheD1::cat      | This work |
| OI3635            | Δ10mcpcheR3::catcheB8::cat      | This work |
| OI3921            | OI3545amyE5720::mcpA            | This work |
| OI3923            | OI3628amyE5720::mcpA            | This work |
| OI3924            | OI3922amyE5720::mcpA            | This work |
| OI3925            | OI3920amyE5720::mcpA            | This work |
| OI3926            | OI3635amyE5720::mcpA            | This work |
| OI3927            | OI3920amyE5720::mcpAQ593EQ594E   | This work |
| OI3928            | OI3922amyE5720::mcpAQ593EQ594E   | This work |
| OI3929            | OI3920amyE5720::mcpAQ593AQ594A   | This work |
| OI3930            | OI3922amyE5720::mcpAQ593AQ594A   | This work |
| OI3664            | OI3920amyE5720::mcpB            | This work |
| OI3932            | OI3922amyE5720::mcpB            | This work |
| OI3663            | OI3920amyE5720::mcpC            | This work |
| OI3931            | OI3922amyE5720::mcpC            | This work |
| RP3098            | E.coli Δ(flhD-flhB) 4, che      | J.S. Parkinson |
| TG-1              | E.coli cloning host             | Amersham  |
| pSE380            | E.coli expression vector        | Invitrogen |
| pSK               | Cloning vector; Amp<sup>R</sup> | Stratagene |
| pEB112            | B.subtilis-E.coli shuttle vector; Amp<sup>R</sup>, Kan<sup>R</sup> | 30 |
| pWN5              | pEB112 containing cheD; Amp<sup>R</sup>, Kan<sup>R</sup> | 24 |
| pGXOB             | GST-CheD fusion expression vector; Amp<sup>R</sup> | 31 |
| pUSH1             | B.subtilis-E.coli shuttle vector for constructing His<sub>6</sub>-tagged fusion proteins; Cm<sup>R</sup>, Kan<sup>R</sup> | 32 |
| pAIN620           | pUSH1 expressing His<sub>6</sub>-tagged-McpA cytoplasmic domain | This work |
| pAIN150           | pWN5 containing consensus RBS upstream of cheD | This work |
| pAIN151           | 0.8-kb HindIII/EcoRI fragment of pAIN150 cloned in pSK | This work |
| pAIN152           | 1.2-kb EcoRI/NotI fragment of pAIN620 cloned in pAIN151 | This work |
| pAIN153           | vector for co-expression of cheD and mcpA cytoplasmic fragment; Amp<sup>R</sup>, Kan<sup>R</sup> | This work |
| pDG1730           | B.subtilis amyE integration vector; Amp<sup>R</sup>, Spc<sup>R</sup> | 33 |
| pAIN750           | 253-bp BamHI/HindIII fragment of pSE380 cloned into BamHI/HindIII sites of pDG1730; Amp<sup>R</sup>, Spc<sup>R</sup> | This work |
| pAIN750mcpA       | amyE integration vector containing mcpA | This work |
| pAIN750mcpB       | amyE integration vector containing mcpB | 13 |
| pAIN750mcpC       | amyE integration vector containing mcpC | This work |
| pAIN750mcpAQQ-EE  | amyE integration vector containing mcpAQ593EQ594E | This work |
| pAIN750mcpAQQ-AA  | amyE integration vector containing mcpAQ593AQ594A | This work |

tion cannot be inferred from sequence comparisons because all CheD homologs in the publicly available database are putative proteins for which no function has been described. Although CheD function has remained a mystery, the discovery of CheD homologs within chemotaxis-like operons of a large number of bacterial and archaeal species (21) suggests that CheD plays an important role in chemoreceptor-mediated sensory transduction for many organisms.

This report presents the first evidence identifying a specific molecular function for the CheD protein. We demonstrate that B.subtilis CheD catalyzes amide hydrolysis of specific glutamyl side chains of the B.subtilis chemoreceptor McpA. CheD can thus be classified as a chemoreceptor glutamine deamidase (E.C. 3.5.1.44). Because the cheD mutant exhibits a considerable clockwise prestimulus flagellar rotational bias (similar to a B.subtilis CheA null mutant) and cheD cells do not respond to most chemoattractants, we conclude that CheD-mediated receptor deamidation is required for productive communication of the conformational signals of the receptors to the CheA kinase.

EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES

Bacterial Strains, Plasmids, and Growth Media—Bacterial strains and plasmids used in this study are listed in Table I. DNA manipulations were performed according to standard protocols. Plasmids pAIN750mcpA and pAIN750mcpC were constructed by first amplifying the corresponding mcp gene and its promoter from B.subtilis chromosomal DNA via PCR using Pfu polymerase (Stratagene). The amplification products were cloned into pAIN750 using primer-encoded EcoRI and BamHI restriction sites for mcpA or EcoRI and NotI restriction

sites for mcpC. Site-specific mutations in mcpA were created as described (13) using pAIN750mcpA as template. For use in an independent line of investigation, both pAIN750mcpA and pAIN750mcpC had a BglII restriction site incorporated into the region coding for the receptor c-terminal domain using a previously described method (13). These nucleotide sequence alterations were phenotypically “silent”; that is, they did not result in any change of the amino acid sequence of the receptors.

A plasmid (pAIN620) designed to express a His<sub>6</sub>-tagged McpA cytoplasmic fragment (c-fragment)<sup>1</sup> was constructed by amplifying the C-terminal domain of McpA from pAIN750mcpA using Pfu polymerase and cloning the amplification product into the BamHI site of pUSH1 to create pAIN620. The amplification primers encoded BamHI sites and were designed to generate an in-frame N-terminal His-tagged fusion of the entire McpA cytoplasmic sequence beginning with McpA Arg-303. A second plasmid designed to co-express cheD with the c-fragment (pAIN153) was constructed via a multistep process as follows. Because the wild-type ribosome binding site (RBS) for cheD is a poor match for the B.subtilis consensus RBS (25), resulting in low expression levels, site-specific mutations were introduced into pWN5 as described (13) to create a consensus RBS upstream of the cheD coding sequence (pAIN150). This procedure concomitantly introduced an adjacent HindIII site. The 0.8-kb HindIII/EcoRI fragment of pAIN150 containing cheD, and its RBS was subcloned into the HindIII/EcoRI sites of pSK, generating pAIN151. A 1.2-kb EcoRI/NotI fragment of pAIN620 containing the gene for the c-fragment, and its RBS was subcloned into the EcoRI/NotI sites of pAIN151, generating pAIN152. Finally, a 2.1-kb SalI fragment of pAIN152 containing cheD and the c-fragment was

<sup>1</sup>The abbreviations used are: C-fragment, His<sub>6</sub>-tagged McpA cytoplasmic fragment; RBS, ribosome binding site; GST, glutathione S-transferase.

subcloned into the *SalI* site of pEB112, creating pAIN153.

Strains carrying *cheD1::cat* or *cheB8::cat* alleles in combination with the 10 *mcp* mutations were constructed as described for OI3545 (26) using OI2934 (*cheD*) or OI2836 (*cheB*) as host strains. The *cheR3::cat* allele was introduced into relevant strains via PBS1 co-transduction with the nearby *trpF⁺* marker. Chemoreceptors were expressed in *B. subtilis* strains by integration into the *amyE* locus as described (13). LB is 1% tryptone, 0.5% yeast extract, 0.5% NaCl.

**Immunoblot Analysis—** Bacteria were diluted 1:100 into LB from saturated overnight cultures and incubated at 37 °C with agitation (250 rpm) until they reached early stationary phase. Cells were pelleted, resuspended in protoplast buffer (20% sucrose, 25 mM potassium phosphate, 10 mM MgCl₂, 30 mM sodium lactate, 1 mM EDTA, pH 7 (27)) plus 5 mg/ml lysozyme at *A*₆₀₀ of 1.0, and incubated at 37 °C as before for 35 min. 1-ml protoplast samples were pelleted and resuspended in 0.1 ml of 4× SDS sample-loading buffer (28). Electrophoresis and electroblotting were performed as described (21) using 10-cm polyacrylamide gels run at 25 mA (constant current) for 3 h. Where indicated, 25-cm gels were used and run at 350 V (constant voltage) for 15 h. When analyzing c-fragments, 10-cm gels were run at 250 V (constant voltage) for 2 h. Anti-McpB antibody (to detect McpA, c-fragment, and McpB) and anti-McpC antibody (to detect McpC) were used as described (21).

**Protein Purification and in Vitro Reactions—** C-fragments were purified under denaturing conditions using nickel-nitrilotriacetic acid agarose (Qiagen), essentially according to the manufacturer’s instructions. A 1-liter culture of LB plus antibiotic (10 μg/ml chloramphenicol or 100 μg/ml ampicillin) was inoculated 1:100 with an overnight culture of RP3098 harboring pAIN620 (for the unmodified c-fragment) or pAIN153 (for the CheD-modified c-fragment) and grown at 37 °C with agitation (250 rpm) to an *A*₆₀₀ of 0.8. IPTG was added to 1 mM; incubation was continued as before, and cells were harvested by centrifugation (5000 × *g*, 5 min) after 3 h. Cell pellets were frozen at −70 °C. Thawed cell pellets were resuspended in Buffer B (8 M urea, 0.1 M NaH₂PO₄, 0.01 M Tris, pH 8) and incubated at room temperature for 1 h with mixing. The supernatants were clarified by two serial centrifugations (5000 × *g*, 5 min; 20,000 × *g*, 40 min) and incubated with nickel-nitrilotriacetic acid agarose resin (pre-equilibrated in Buffer B) at room temperature for 1 h with mixing. The resin was batch-washed twice with Buffer B and twice with Buffer C (Buffer B with pH adjusted to 6.3) and then applied to a gravity flow column and washed with 10 column volumes of Buffer C. Elution was performed in 20 ml of Buffer E (Buffer B with pH adjusted to 4.5). The eluates were concentrated to ~1 ml using a cellulose ultrafiltration membrane (Millipore) in an Amicon ultrafiltration cell. These samples were dialyzed against three changes of 25 mM NH₄HCO₃ at 4 °C, and aliquots were frozen at −70 °C.

For purification of glutathione S-transferase-CheD fusion protein (GST-CheD), a saturated overnight culture of pGXOB was diluted 1:100 into 1 liter of LB plus 100 μg/ml ampicillin and grown at 37 °C (250 rpm) to *A*₆₀₀ of 0.8. IPTG was added to 1 mM, and the culture was incubated (200 rpm) overnight at room temperature. Cells were pelleted and frozen as above. Thawed cell pellets were resuspended in phosphate-buffered saline (150 mM NaCl, 16 mM Na₂HPO₄, 4 mM NaH₂PO₄, pH 7.3) and disrupted by sonication. The supernatant was clarified as above and applied to a 2-ml gravity flow glutathione-Sepharose 4B column (Amersham Biosciences). The column was washed with 15 column volumes of phosphate-buffered saline, and elution was performed using 10 ml of elution buffer (50 mM Tris, 5 mM glutathione, pH 8). The eluate was concentrated as above. The sample was dialyzed against three changes of 50 mM Tris (pH 8), 10% glycerol at 4 °C, and aliquots were frozen at −70 °C.

For *in vitro* reactions, 1 μM c-fragment was incubated with the indicated amounts of GST-CheD at room temperature in reaction buffer (50 mM Tris, pH 7.5, 0.1 mM dithiothreitol, 1 mM MgCl₂, 0.5 mM EDTA). At the indicated times, samples (10 μl) were removed and mixed with 10 μl of 2× SDS loading buffer. Immunoblotting was performed as described above.

**Protein Analysis—** CNBr digestion was performed essentially as described (29). Aliquots of purified c-fragments (0.5–1 nmol) were dried under vacuum using a SpeedVac and resuspended in 0.1 M HCl. A small, unweighed crystal of CNBr was added; the reaction was vortexed to dissolve the crystal and incubated overnight at room temperature in the dark. 4 volumes of water were added, and the reaction was dried as before. Cleavage products were resuspended in 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid. Peptide separation and automated Edman degradation were performed at the UIUC Protein Sciences Facility.

**FIG. 1.** Immunoblot analysis of McpA in genetic backgrounds harboring various *che* mutations. The location and size (in kDa) of Bio-Rad prestained broad range SDS-PAGE standards are shown at the left. Lane 1, Δ10*mcp che*⁺ expressing *mcpA*. Lane 2, Δ10*mcp cheD* expressing *mcpA*. Lane 3, Δ10*mcp cheR* expressing *mcpA*. Lane 4, Δ10*mcp cheR cheD* expressing *mcpA*. Lane 5, Δ10*mcp cheR cheB* expressing *mcpA*.

**RESULTS**

**Electrophoretic mobility of a *B. subtilis* chemoreceptor is dependent on the *cheD* gene product—** Previous work to characterize several *B. subtilis* chemoreceptors demonstrated that the *mcpB* gene product fractionated near its expected *M*ᵣ (71,800) during SDS-PAGE (14). Despite being encoded with a nearly identical *M*ᵣ as McpB, the *mcpA* gene product (*M*ᵣ-72,400) fractionated as several distinct bands at a significantly higher apparent *M*ᵣ (~95,000). Recently, however, immunoblot analysis revealed the unexpected absence of McpA-specific cross-reacting material in the lysate of a *cheD* mutant (21). In an attempt to elucidate the biochemical role of the *cheD* gene product, we investigated the apparent absence of McpA.

One possibility to explain the absence of McpA is that the synthesis or stability of McpA is impaired in the *cheD* mutant. We found this possibility unlikely since two other *B. subtilis* receptors (McpB and McpC) were detected at wild-type levels in the *cheD* lysate (21). However, the antibody used for detection of McpA also cross-reacts with McpB (21); therefore, if McpA and McpB co-fractionated, they would be indistinguishable. We hypothesized that the *cheD* mutation affected the electrophoretic mobility of McpA such that it co-fractionated with McpB. To test this hypothesis, we expressed a single receptor gene (*mcpA* or *mcpB*) in two backgrounds containing mutations in the 10 known receptor genes (Δ10*mcp*); one was *che*⁺, and the other was a *cheD* mutant derivative. We assessed the electrophoretic mobility of each receptor during SDS-PAGE (Fig. 1). McpB exhibited no mobility changes due to the *cheD* mutation under these conditions (not shown, but see below). In contrast, McpA displayed a substantial difference in mobility due to the *cheD* mutation (Fig. 1, compare lanes 1 and 2). The *cheD* mutation resulted in an McpA protein that did not fractionate as several bands at the previously described relatively high apparent *M*ᵣ; instead, it fractionated as a single band closer to its expected *M*ᵣ. Thus, CheD is required for an elec-

trophoretic mobility shift of McpA to a higher apparent \( M_r \).

**CheD-dependent Electrophoretic Mobility Shift of McpA Is Independent of Known Receptor Modification Enzymes—Chemoreceptors of *E. coli* are known to undergo electrophoretic mobility shifts due to changes in the extent of their modification (methylation, demethylation, or deamidation) catalyzed by the CheR methyltransferase and the CheB methylesterase (17, 18). To test the possibility that CheD-dependent mobility shifts of McpA were due to analogous changes in the level of its modification catalyzed by the *B. subtilis* methyltransferase or methylesterase, we expressed *mcpA* in Δ10*mcp* strains harboring *cheR* (methyltransferase) or *cheR cheB* (methyltransferase and methylesterase) mutations. Immunoblot analysis of McpA reveals that the mobility shift to a higher apparent \( M_r \) occurs normally in both backgrounds and is dependent on CheD (Fig. 1, compare lanes 3–5). Thus, neither of the two enzymes shown previously to modify bacterial chemoreceptors is required for the CheD-dependent mobility shift of McpA to a higher apparent \( M_r \), implying that CheD is itself involved in chemoreceptor modification.

Although neither of the two previously known chemoreceptor modification enzymes is required for the CheD-dependent mobility shift of McpA, it is apparent from Fig. 1 that methylation of McpA substantially affects its mobility independently of the CheD-dependent modification. Unmethylated McpA (derived from the *cheR* host) fractionates as a single band of a relatively high apparent \( M_r \) (lanes 3 and 5), whereas the presence of CheR results in several forms of McpA that fractionate at a lower apparent \( M_r \) (lane 1), presumably as a result of methylation at one or more methylatable sites. Under these conditions, we were able to resolve a total of four bands in the wild-type background (lane 1); the two bands of intermediate \( M_r \) appear to “smear” together, but shorter exposures of the same blot clearly reveal distinct bands (not shown). In addition, the presence of CheR also causes McpA to fractionate at a lower apparent \( M_r \) in the absence of CheD, again presumably as a result of methylation (compare lanes 2 and 4). This effect of methylation on chemoreceptor mobility has been well documented for chemoreceptors of *E. coli* (17, 18) and is consistent with the observation of Hanlon and Ordal (14) that the *mcpA* gene product accounts for several distinct methylated bands in extracts of wild-type *B. subtilis*.

**Deamidation of McpA Is Necessary and Sufficient to Account for the CheD-dependent Mobility Shift—In contrast to the effect of methylation on chemoreceptor mobility, *E. coli* receptors that are deamidated migrate more slowly through acrylamide gels (19, 20). The DNA-encoded amino acid sequence of *B. subtilis* McpA contains five predicted methylation sites, one of which is encoded as a Gln (Gln-594) (11). Therefore, by analogy to the *E. coli* receptors, deamidation of this site on McpA would be expected to produce a mobility shift. Although no methylesterase-dependent mobility shifts could be observed for McpA (Fig. 1, compare lanes 3 and 5), the CheD-dependent mobility shift of McpA mimics the effect of deamidation. In light of this observation, we hypothesized that the CheD-dependent modification of McpA was deamidation of Gln-593, Gln-594, or both. To test this hypothesis, we constructed mutant alleles of *mcpA* in which we substituted the pair of wild-type Gln codons at positions 593 and 594 with Glu codons (to mimic deamidation) or Ala codons (to prevent deamidation). Substitution of Gln by Glu at these sites should produce receptors that are synthesized in their CheD-processed form and therefore fractionate at the CheD-modified position (high relative \( M_r \)) even in the absence of modification by CheD. Conversely, substitution of Gln by Ala should produce receptors that are unable to be processed and therefore unable to fractionate at the CheD-**

**FIG. 2.** Immunoblot analysis of McpA mutants in genetic backgrounds harboring various *che* mutations. Lane 1, Δ10*mcp cheR* expressing wild-type *mcpA*. Lane 2, Δ10*mcp cheR cheD* expressing wild-type *mcpA*. Lane 3, Δ10*mcp cheR cheD* expressing *mcpA Q593E/Q594E*. Lane 4, Δ10*mcp cheR* expressing *mcpA Q593E/Q594E*. Lane 5, Δ10*mcp cheR cheD* expressing *mcpA Q593A/Q594A*. Lane 6, Δ10*mcp cheR* expressing *mcpA Q593A/Q594A*.

modified position even in the presence of CheD. Consequently, the Ala-substituted receptors would be expected to always fractionate at the unmodified position (low relative \( M_r \)). Because we had shown that the *cheR* methyltransferase was not required for CheD modification to take place (Fig. 1), we compared fractionation of the site-directed McpA mutant proteins in the Δ10*mcp cheR* and Δ10*mcp cheR cheD* genetic backgrounds. The *cheR* mutation simplified interpretation of the data inasmuch as the wild-type McpA derived from this background fractionated in a CheD-dependent manner at one of only two locations: (i) unmodified (low relative \( M_r \)) or (ii) unmethylated but CheD-modified (high relative \( M_r \)). In contrast, the presence of the methyltransferase resulted in a variety of methylated forms that obscured the effect of CheD modification (Fig. 1, lane 1).

Immunoblot analysis of the McpA mutants is presented in Fig. 2. Lanes 1 and 2 contain wild-type McpA from Δ10*mcp cheR* and Δ10*mcp cheR cheD* backgrounds, respectively, for comparison. In the absence of CheD, substitution of Glu for Gln-593 and Gln-594 results in a mobility shift of McpA to a higher apparent \( M_r \), demonstrating that deamidation is sufficient to account for such a mobility shift (compare lanes 2 and 3). However, McpA<sup>Q593E/Q594E</sup> does not fractionate at the wild-type CheD-modified position. Rather, it fractionates at an intermediate position between unmodified and CheD-modified wild-type McpA, indicating that McpA<sup>Q593E/Q594E</sup> is not equivalent to the fully CheD-modified, wild-type McpA. Furthermore, co-expression of *cheD* with McpA<sup>Q593E/Q594E</sup> results in an additional mobility shift, producing a form that co-fractionates with CheD-modified, wild-type McpA (lane 4). This additional, CheD-dependent mobility shift suggests that a second modification is occurring elsewhere on McpA<sup>Q593E/Q594E</sup> to generate an McpA protein equivalent to the CheD-modified, wild-type McpA.

Substitution of Ala for Gln-593 and Gln-594 prevents McpA<sup>Q593A/Q594A</sup> from fractionating at the wild-type CheD-modified position when co-expressed with *cheD*, indicating that modification of these residues is necessary to produce the fully modified McpA protein (lane 6). Furthermore, a CheD-dependent mobility shift occurs with the McpA<sup>Q593A/Q594A</sup> mutant to produce an intermediate form, indicating that CheD modification is occurring at a second position on McpA<sup>Q593A/Q594A</sup> (compare lanes 5 and 6). Because mutations that mimic deamidation produce McpA mobility shifts that mimic the CheD-dependent mobility shift and because mutations that prevent deamidation prevent the CheD-dependent mobility shift, we conclude that deamidation of McpA is necessary and sufficient to account for the CheD-dependent mobility shift of wild-type McpA. Additionally, the production of intermediate forms of McpA suggests that an unidentified second site of CheD-dependent deamidation exists on McpA (see “Discussion”).

**CheD-dependent Modification Is Deamidation—The genetic evidence presented above supports the hypothesis of CheD-dependent deamidation of McpA. This hypothesis predicts Gln to**

25360

**CheD Catalyzes Chemoreceptor Deamidation**

A  
---  

B Position: 588 589 590 591 592 593 594 595  
DNA: M S A T V Q Q L  
Unmodified: - - T V Q Q L  
CheD-modified: S A T V E E L  

FIG. 3. Analysis of His<sub>6</sub>-tagged McpA cytoplasmic fragments. A, immunoblot analysis of *E. coli* crude lysates. Lane 1, the unmodified c-fragment (RP3098/pAIN620). Lane 2, the CheD-modified c-fragment (RP3098/pAIN153). B, comparison of the c-fragment protein sequences. Position indicates the residue number in full-length McpA. DNA represents the protein sequence inferred from the *mcpA* DNA sequence. Unmodified indicates the protein sequence obtained via Edman degradation of the appropriate peptide from the unmodified c-fragment (*lane 1*). The identity of the residues released during the first two cycles of sequencing could not be unambiguously assigned due to high background during these cycles. Only residues that could be unambiguously assigned are reported here. CheD-modified indicates the protein sequence obtained via Edman degradation of the appropriate peptide from the CheD-modified c-fragment (*lane 2*). The sequenced peptides were derived from intact, purified c-fragments by CNBr cleavage after Met-588.

Glu amino acid substitutions in the CheD-modified form of McpA; therefore, as an additional test, we determined the protein sequence at residues 593 and 594 of unmodified McpA and compared it with that of CheD-modified McpA. This analysis was facilitated by the presence of Met-588 just upstream of the target region (Fig. 3B) because CNBr cleavage liberates a peptide suitable for Edman degradation in the region of interest. To obtain protein for analysis, we expressed a His<sub>6</sub>-tagged cytoplasmic fragment of McpA (c-fragment) in an *E. coli* strain deleted for all chemotaxis genes (RP3098); immunoblot analysis demonstrated that it fractionated during SDS-PAGE as a single band when derived from this host (Fig. 3A, *lane 1*). When co-expressed with *B. subtilis* CheD, the c-fragment was subject to a mobility shift analogous to that of full-length McpA (Fig. 3A, *lane 2*). Thus, the isolated McpA cytoplasmic fragment is able to serve as a substrate for CheD modification in a heterologous host bacterium. We independently purified both forms of the c-fragment (unmodified and CheD-modified) from RP3098 and cleaved them with CNBr. The peptides were fractionated via high pressure liquid chromatography, and the target peptide from each C-fragment was sequenced by automated Edman degradation. The protein sequence obtained from this analysis is shown in Fig. 3B along with the DNA-encoded amino acid sequence in the region. The amino acid sequence determined for the unmodified c-fragment corresponds exactly to the DNA-encoded McpA sequence, indicating that CNBr treatment had no adverse effects on the Gln residues in this peptide. The amino acid sequence determined for the CheD-modified c-fragment unequivocally demonstrates that CheD modification of McpA results in deamidation of Gln-593 and Gln-594.

Deamidation Is Catalyzed by CheD—CheD-dependent deamidation of McpA occurs in a heterologous host whose genome contains no *cheD* homolog (Fig. 3), suggesting that the CheD protein itself possesses amidase activity. To test this hypothesis, we purified a recombinant fusion protein in which CheD was fused to the C terminus of glutathione S-transferase. We incubated this fusion protein *in vitro* with the purified c-fragment and analyzed the reactions via immunoblotting (Fig. 4). The results show that GST-CheD specifically produced an electrophoretic mobility shift of the unmodified c-fragment (*lanes 3–8*), generating a c-fragment form whose mobility corresponds to that of the purified, CheD-modified c-fragment (*top band*). No mobility change was observed when buffer alone was added to the c-fragment (*lane 1*) nor when GST-CheD was added to the purified, CheD-modified c-fragment (not shown). Based on these results, we conclude that the CheD protein enzymatically

Time (min): 60 0.5 5 30 60 0.5 5 30  
CheD (µM): 0 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.2 1 1 1  

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8  

FIG. 4. Immunoblot analysis of *in vitro* c-fragment modification. All reactions contained 1 µM c-fragment and the indicated amount of GST-CheD fusion. Samples were removed at the indicated time points, and the reactions were stopped by addition to SDS sample loading buffer.

deamidates McpA. As a control to ensure that the GST component of the fusion exhibited no activity toward the c-fragment, GST was co-expressed with the c-fragment in strain RP3098. Co-expression of GST resulted in no mobility shifts for the c-fragment, indicating that GST itself was not able to act on the receptor (not shown).

CheD Modifies Other Receptors—In previous work, a *B. subtilis cheD* mutant exhibited impaired taxis toward all attractants tested, including attractants known to be sensed exclusively via receptors other than McpA (24). These attractants included asparagine, an McpB-mediated effector, and proline, an McpC-mediated effector (14). Because CheD is required for effective taxis mediated by McpB and McpC, we hypothesized that these receptors are also deamidated by CheD. To test for CheD modification, we expressed either *mcpB* or *mcpC* in Δ10*mcp cheR* and Δ10*mcp cheR cheD* genetic backgrounds and analyzed the receptor fractionation pattern. However, using our standard electrophoretic conditions (10-cm gel), we could not observe a CheD-dependent mobility shift for either of these receptors (not shown). To test the possibility that electrophoresis may have been performed at insufficient resolution to distinguish between the unmodified and CheD-modified receptor forms, we repeated the analysis, using a 25-cm gel, and extended the electrophoresis time by 5-fold. Under these conditions, CheD-dependent mobility shifts could be observed for both McpB and McpC (Fig. 5, *lanes 1 versus 2* for McpB; *lanes 3 versus 4* for McpC), suggesting that these receptors are also deamidated by CheD.

DISCUSSION

We have established a function for the CheD protein of bacterial chemotaxis. First, we identified a CheD-dependent electrophoretic mobility shift for the *B. subtilis* chemoreceptor McpA (Fig. 1). Then, we demonstrated that deamidation of McpA was necessary and sufficient to account for a mobility shift to a higher apparent *M<sub>r</sub>* (Fig. 2) and subsequently, that CheD-modified McpA was deamidated at residues Gln-593 and Gln-594 (Fig. 3). Finally, we showed that a purified CheD fusion is capable of generating an identical McpA mobility shift *in vitro* (Fig. 4). Therefore, we conclude that *B. subtilis* CheD functions as a glutaminase, catalyzing amide hydrolysis of McpA Gln-593 and Gln-594 to yield an McpA protein that migrates more slowly through acrylamide gels.

In the chemotaxis system of *E. coli*, receptor deamidation has long been known to be performed by the CheB methylesterase (15). Consequently, it was thought previously that the *B. subtilis* CheB methylesterase possessed such an activity. Our results show that it is no longer necessary to attribute such a function to *B. subtilis* CheB as deamidation can be accomplished by CheD. Furthermore, the observation that the presence of CheB (without CheD) does not result in the higher apparent *M<sub>r</sub>* (deamidated) form of McpA (Fig. 1, *lanes 2 and 4*) suggests that *B. subtilis* CheB may not be capable of catalyzing deamidation; CheB may therefore be dedicated exclusively to

CheD Catalyzes Chemoreceptor Deamidation

cheD: - + - +

---

FIG. 5. Immunoblot analysis of McpB or McpC in genetic backgrounds harboring various *che* mutations (25-cm gel). Lane 1, Δ10mcp *cheR cheD* expressing *mcpB*. Lane 2, Δ10mcp *cheR* expressing *mcpB*. Lane 3, Δ10mcp *cheR cheD* expressing *mcpC*. Lane 4, Δ10mcp *cheR* expressing *mcpC*.

CheD modification (the McpA<sup>Q593E/Q594E</sup> mutant) results in a mobility shift to a higher apparent *M<sub>r</sub>*, independently of CheD, because this substitution mimics CheD processing at this location. However, McpA<sup>Q593E/Q594E</sup> does not co-fractionate with fully modified wild-type McpA because a second CheD modification site remains unprocessed. Therefore, McpA<sup>Q593E/Q594E</sup> mimics a partially modified wild-type McpA and exhibits a partial mobility shift. (ii) As shown in lane 4, co-expression of *cheD* with McpA<sup>Q593E/Q594E</sup> results in processing of the second modification site; thus, McpA<sup>Q593E/Q594E</sup> is now indistinguishable from the fully modified wild-type McpA and co-fractionates with it. (iii) As shown in lane 6, for McpA<sup>Q593A/Q594A</sup>, the Ala substitutions prevent CheD modification at that site; thus, McpA<sup>Q593A/Q594A</sup> cannot co-fractionate with the fully modified wild-type McpA. However, CheD modification can occur at the unidentified second site of CheD modification on McpA<sup>Q593A/Q594A</sup>, producing a partially modified form that exhibits a partial mobility shift.

The existence of a second site of CheD modification is supported by the results of *in vitro* modification of the c-fragment where an intermediate form of the c-fragment can be observed under conditions in which the reaction is not complete (Fig. 4). Furthermore, this intermediate form of the c-fragment was observed *in vivo* when the c-fragment was expressed in *B. subtilis* (not shown). We note that, unlike Gln-593/Gln-594, the second site of CheD modification must occur at a position on McpA, that does not satisfy the conserved methylation consensus sequence because all putative sites of methylation on McpA, other than Gln-594, are encoded as Glu-Glu pairs (11). Consequently, additional sites of CheD modification cannot yet be predicted on the basis of sequence alone.

Physiological Role of CheD Deamidation—Deamidation of *E. coli* receptors is known to influence the kinase-activating ability of the receptors (39). In the *E. coli* system, deamidation (and demethylation) produces receptors that inhibit kinase activity, resulting in suppression of phosphotransfer to the CheY response regulator. In contrast, deamidation of *B. subtilis* receptors by CheD appears to promote kinase activity. Kinase activity produces CheY-P, which, in *B. subtilis*, results in counterclockwise flagellar rotation. Because the prestimulus flagellar rotational bias of *cheD* cells is very low (clockwise) (21, 24), it appears that receptor deamidation is required for basal kinase activity.

However, the role of CheD-mediated deamidation seems to extend beyond that of promoting basal kinase activity insofar as it also appears to be required for ligand-induced kinase activation. For example, tethered-cell analysis of the *cheD* mutant revealed that only about 50% of the cells examined responded behaviorally to asparagine stimulation; none of the cells examined responded to proline stimulation (21). Therefore, CheD deamidation of McpB and McpC appears to affect the sensitivity of *B. subtilis* cells to chemoeffectors recognized by these receptors. Unfortunately, we have not been able to assess the functional requirement for CheD-mediated deamidation of McpA during signal transduction because a cognate ligand for McpA has not yet been identified. However, based on the phenotypes of the *cheD* mutant, we propose that CheD-mediated deamidation is required for productive communication of all conformational signals generated by the receptors to the CheA kinase.

We imagine several possible mechanisms to account for these observations. (i) Unprocessed receptors cannot participate in assembly of a properly formed ternary complex with the coupling proteins and/or CheA kinase; therefore, these receptors can neither stimulate basal kinase activity nor communicate an environmental signal to the kinase. (ii) Unprocessed receptors can form ternary complexes, but these complexes exist in a

Existence of Multiple Sites of CheD Modification on McpA—During the course of our experiments to analyze fractionation of mutant McpA proteins, we unexpectedly observed the presence of intermediate forms of McpA (Fig. 2). We propose that the production of these forms reflects the presence of a second, unidentified site of CheD modification on McpA. The fractionation patterns observed in Fig. 2 can be explained as follows. (i) As shown in lane 3, substitution of Glu for Gln at one site of

conformation that strongly inhibits the kinase irrespective of
the ligand occupancy state of the receptor. (iii) Unprocessed
receptors cannot efficiently form higher order arrays, thought
to be necessary for receptors to function as an ensemble to
regulate the associated CheA kinase pool (40).

These possibilities are not necessarily mutually exclusive.
For example, perturbations in ternary complex formation will
likely affect receptor interactions required for ensemble forma-
tion and function. A formal alternative to the above possibili-
ties is that the CheD protein itself (rather than its enzymatic
activity) may play a structural role in formation or mainte-
nance of receptor/kinase complexes. However, at this time, we
have no direct evidence to support such a role. Additional work
is required to understand the role of CheD-mediated receptor
deamidation during chemotactic sensory transduction.

Acknowledgments—We are indebted to John Kirby for valuable dis-
cussions and critical commentary on the manuscript. We thank Michael
Bunn for providing a plasmid clone of *mcpA* and for helpful suggestions
during this work. We also thank members of the Ordal laboratory, past
and present, for comments on the manuscript.

REFERENCES

1. Stock, J. B. & Surette, M. G. (1996) in *Escherichia coli and Salmonella: Cellular and Molecular Biology*, (Neidhardt, F. C., Curtiss, R., III, Ingraham, J. L., Lin, E. C. C., Low, K. B., Magasanik, B., Reznikoff, W. S., Riley, M., Schaechter, M., Umbarger, H. E. eds), pp. 1103–1129, American Society for Microbiology Press, Washington D. C.
2. Armitage, J. P. (1999) *Adv. Microb. Physiol.* **41**, 229–289
3. Hess, J. F., Oosawa, K., Kaplan, N. & Simon, M. I. (1988) *Cell* **53**, 79–87
4. Liu, J. D. & Parkinson, J. S. (1989) *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.* **86**, 8703–8707
5. Borkovich, K. A. & Simon, M. I. (1990) *Cell* **63**, 1339–1348
6. Blat, Y. & Eisenbach, M. (1996) *J. Biol. Chem.* **271**, 1232–1236
7. Wang, H. & Matsumura, P. (1996) *Mol. Microbiol.* **19**, 695–703
8. Springer, W. R. & Koshland, D. E., Jr. (1977) *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.* **74**, 533–537
9. Blair, D. F. (1995) *Annu. Rev. Microbiol.* **49**, 489–522
10. Stock, J. B. & Koshland, D. E., Jr. (1978) *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.* **75**, 3659–3663
11. Le Moual, H. & Koshland, D. E., Jr. (1996) *J. Mol. Biol.* **261**, 568–585
12. Terwilliger, T. C., Wang, J. Y. & Koshland, D. E., Jr. (1986) *J. Biol. Chem.* **261**, 10814–10820
13. Zimmer, M. A., Tiu, J., Collins, M. A. & Ordal, G. W. (2000) *J. Biol. Chem.* **275**, 24264–24272
14. Hanlon, D. W. & Ordal, G. W. (1994) *J. Biol. Chem.* **269**, 14038–14046
15. Kehry, M. R., Bond, M. W., Hunkapiller, M. W. & Dahlquist, F. W. (1983) *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.* **80**, 3599–3603
16. Kirsch, M. L., Peters, P. D., Hanlon, D. W., Kirby, J. R. & Ordal, G. W. (1993) *J. Biol. Chem.* **268**, 18610–18616
17. Boyd, A. & Simon, M. I. (1980) *J. Bacteriol.* **143**, 809–815
18. Chelsky, D. & Dahlquist, F. W. (1980) *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.* **77**, 2434–2438
19. Rollins, C. & Dahlquist, F. W. (1981) *Cell* **25**, 333–340
20. Kehry, M. R. & Dahlquist, F. W. (1982) *Cell* **29**, 761–770
21. Kirby, J. R., Kristich, C. J., Saulmon, M. M., Zimmer, M. A., Garrity, L. F., Zhulin, I. B. & Ordal, G. W. (2001) *Mol. Microbiol.* **42**, 573–585
22. Garrity, L. G. & Ordal, G. W. (1995) *Pharmacol. Ther.* **68**, 87–104
23. Karatan, E., Saulmon, M. M., Bunn, M. W. & Ordal, G. W. (2001) *J. Biol. Chem.* **276**, 43618–43626
24. Rosario, M. M. R., Kirby, J. R., Bochar, D. A. & Ordal, G. W. (1995) *Biochemistry* **34**, 3823–3831
25. Mountain, A. (1989) in *Bacillus,* (Harwood, C. R., ed), pp. 73–114, Plenum Publishing Corp., New York
26. Hou, S., Larsen, R. W., Boudko, D., Riley, C. W., Karatan, E., Zimmer, M., Ordal, G. W. & Alam, M. (2000) *Nature* **403**, 540–544
27. Ullah, A. H. J. & Ordal, G. W. (1981) *J. Bacteriol.* **145**, 958–965
28. Sambrook, J., Fritsch, E. F. & Maniatis, T. (1989) *Molecular Cloning, A Laboratory Manual*, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press, Cold Spring Harbor, NY
29. Sun, Y., Bauer, M. D., Keough, T. W. & Lacey, M. P. (1996) in *Protein and Peptide Analysis by Mass Spectrometry* (Chapman, J. R., ed), pp. 185–210, Humana Press, New Jersey
30. Leonhardt, H. & Alonso, J. C. (1988) *J. Gen. Microbiol.* **134**, 605–609
31. Rosario, M. M. R. & Ordal, G. W. (1996) *Mol. Microbiol.* **21**, 511–518
32. Schön, U. & Schumann, W. (1994) *Gene (Amst.)* **147**, 91–94
33. Guerout-Fleury, A. M., Frandsen, N. & Stragier, P. (1996) *Gene (Amst.)* **180**, 57–61
34. Wolfe, A. J. & Berg, H. C. (1989) *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.* **86**, 6973–6977
35. Ames, P., Yu, Y. A. & Parkinson, J. S. (1996) *Mol. Microbiol.* **19**, 737–746
36. Sockett, H., Yamaguchi, S., Kihara, M., Irikura, V. M. & Macnab, R. M. (1992) *J. Bacteriol.* **174**, 793–806
37. Warrick, H. M., Taylor, B. L. & Koshland, D. E., Jr. (1977) *J. Bacteriol.* **130**, 223–231
38. Parkinson, J. S. (1977) *Annu. Rev. Genet.* **11**, 397–414
39. Borkovich, K. A., Alex, L. A. & Simon, M. I. (1992) *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.* **89**, 6756–6760
40. Bray, D., Levin, M. D. & Morton-Firth, C. J. (1998) *Nature* **393**, 85–88

PROTEIN SYNTHESIS
POST-TRANSLATION MODIFICATION
AND DEGRADATION:
*Bacillus subtilis* CheD Is a Chemoreceptor
Modification Enzyme Required for
Chemotaxis

Christopher J. Kristich and George W. Ordal
J. Biol. Chem. 2002, 277:25356-25362.
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M201334200 originally published online May 13, 2002

Access the most updated version of this article at doi: [10.1074/jbc.M201334200](10.1074/jbc.M201334200)

Find articles, minireviews, Reflections and Classics on similar topics on the [JBC Affinity Sites](JBC Affinity Sites).

Alerts:
- When this article is cited
- When a correction for this article is posted

[Click here to choose from all of JBC's e-mail alerts](Click here to choose from all of JBC's e-mail alerts)

This article cites 36 references, 18 of which can be accessed free at
[http://www.jbc.org/content/277/28/25356.full.html#ref-list-1](http://www.jbc.org/content/277/28/25356.full.html#ref-list-1)
