
Opinion

TRENDS in Plant Science Vol.7 No.7 July 2002

18 Blazquez, M.A. and Weigel, D. (2000) Integration of floral inductive signals in Arabidopsis. Nature 404, 889–892

19 Blazquez, M.A. *et al.* (1997) LEAFY expression and flower initiation in Arabidopsis. Development 124, 3835–3844

20 Parcy, F. *et al.* (1998) A genetic framework for floral patterning. Nature 395, 561–566

21 Lohmann, J.U. *et al.* (2001) A molecular link between stem cell regulation and floral patterning in Arabidopsis. Cell 105, 793–803

22 Weigel, D. *et al.* (1992) LEAFY controls floral meristem identity in Arabidopsis. Cell 69, 843–859

23 Himi, S. *et al.* (2001) Evolution of MADS-box gene induction by FLO/LFY genes. *J. Mol. Evol.* 53, 387–393

24 Mouradov, A. *et al.* (1998) NEEDLY, a *Pinus radiata* ortholog of FLORICAULA/LEAFY genes, expressed in both reproductive and vegetative meristems. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.* 95, 6537–6542

25 Mellerowicz, E.J. *et al.* (1998) PRFLL–a *Pinus radiata* homologue of FLORICAULA and LEAFY is expressed in buds containing vegetative shoot and undifferentiated male cone primordia. Planta 206, 619–629

26 Helariutta, Y. *et al.* (1996) Duplication and functional divergence in the chalcone synthase gene family of Asteraceae: evolution with

substrate change and catalytic simplification. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.* 93, 9033–9038

27 Nowak, M.A. *et al.* (1997) Evolution of genetic redundancy. Nature 388, 167–171

28 Lynch, M. *et al.* (2001) The probability of preservation of a newly arisen gene duplicate. Genetics 159, 1789–1804

29 Wagner, G.P. and Altenberg, L. (1996) Complex adaptations and the evolution of evolvability. Evolution 50, 967–976

30 Coen, E.S. and Meyerowitz, E.M. (1991) The war of the whorls: genetic interactions controlling flower development. Nature 353, 31–37

31 Albert, V.A. *et al.* (1998) Ontogenetic systematics, molecular developmental genetics, and the angiosperm petal. In *Molecular Systematics of Plants II: DNA Sequencing* (Soltis, D.E. *et al.*, eds), pp. 349–374, Kluwer Academic Publishers

32 Endress, P.K. (1996) Structure and function of female and bisexual organ complexes in Gnetales. *Int. J. Plant Sci.* 157, S113–S125

33 Norstog, K.J. and Nicholls, T.J. (1997) The Biology of the Cycads, Cornell University Press

34 Shindo, S. *et al.* (2001) Characterization of a FLORICAULA/LEAFY homologue of *Gnetum parvifolium* and its implications for the evolution of reproductive organs in seed plants. *Int. J. Plant Sci.* 162, 1199–1209

35 Krakauer, D.C. and Plotkin, J.B. (2002)

of genomes. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.* 99, 1405–1409

36 Shu, G. *et al.* (2000) LEAFY and the evolution of rosette flowering in violet cress (*Jonopsidium acaule*, Brassicaceae). *Am. J. Bot.* 87, 634–641

37 Ahearn, K.P. *et al.* (2001) *NFL1*, a *Nicotiana tabacum* LEAFY-like gene, controls meristem initiation and floral structure. *Plant Cell Physiol.* 42, 1130–1139

38 Gourlay, C.W. *et al.* (2000) Pea compound leaf architecture is regulated by interactions among the genes UNIFOLIATA, COCHLEATA, AFILA, and TENDRIL-LESS. *Plant Cell* 12, 1279–1294

39 Kyozuka, J. *et al.* (1998) Down-regulation of *RFL*, the *FLO/LFY* homolog of rice, accompanied with panicle branch initiation. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.* 95, 1979–1982

40 Gocal, G.F.W. *et al.* (2001) Evolution of floral meristem identity genes. Analysis of *Lolium temulentum* genes related to *APETALA1* and LEAFY of Arabidopsis. *Plant Physiol.* 125, 1788–1801

41 Soltis, D.E. *et al.* (2001) Missing links: the genetic architecture of flowers and floral diversification. *Trends Plant Sci.* 7, 22–31

42 Nixon, K.C. (1999) *Winclada (BETA) ver. 0.9.9,* Published by the author, Ithaca, New York

43 Krakauer, D.C. and Nowak, M.A. (1999) Evolutionary preservation of redundant duplicated genes. *Semin. Cell Dev. Biol.* 10, 555–559

---

Mitogen-activated protein kinase cascades in plants: a new nomenclature

MAPK Group (Kazuya Ichimura *et al.*)

Mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) cascades are universal signal transduction modules in eukaryotes, including yeasts, animals and plants. These protein phosphorylation cascades link extracellular stimuli to a wide range of cellular responses. In plants, MAPK cascades are involved in responses to various biotic and abiotic stresses, hormones, cell division and developmental processes. Completion of the *Arabidopsis* genome-sequencing project has revealed the existence of 20 MAPKs, 10 MAPK kinases and 60 MAPK kinase kinases. Here, we propose a simplified nomenclature for *Arabidopsis* MAPKs and MAPK kinases that might also serve as a basis for standard annotation of these gene families in all plants.

Published online: 13 June 2002

Mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK; see Glossary) cascades are universal modules of signal transduction in eukaryotes. These protein phosphorylation cascades mediate the intracellular transmission and amplification of extracellular stimuli, resulting in the induction of appropriate biochemical and physiological cellular responses [1–4]. MAPKs form the terminal components of the prototypical sequential cascades, and are activated by MAPK kinases (MAPKKs or MEKs) via dual phosphorylation of conserved threonine and tyrosine residues in the motif TxY located in the activation loop (T-loop) between kinase subdomains VII and VIII. MAPKKs are themselves activated by MAPKK kinases (MAPKKKs or MEKKs) through phosphorylation of conserved serine and/or threonine residues in their T-loop [1–4].

In plants, MAPK cascades are associated with various physiological, developmental and hormonal responses. Molecular and biochemical studies using specific antibodies to particular MAPKs have revealed that MAPK activation correlates with stimulatory treatments such as pathogen infection, wounding, low temperature, drought, hyper- and hypo-osmolarity, high salinity, touch, and reactive oxygen species [5–8]. Genetic studies of the *Arabidopsis* mutants *constitutive triple response 1 (ctr1)* and *enhanced disease resistance 1 (edr1)*, which exhibit altered responses to ethylene and pathogens, respectively, show that their wild-type alleles encode MAPKKKs related to the RAF protein kinase [9, 10]. Reverse genetic analysis of the *Arabidopsis mpk4* knockout mutant revealed its importance in regulating systemic acquired resistance, including the ability to accumulate salicylic acid [11]. A gain-of-function study

http://plants.trends.com 1360-1385/02/$-see front matter © 2002 Elsevier Science Ltd. All rights reserved. PII: S1360-1385(02)02302-6

Glossary

| ANP | MEK | Ran |
| --- | --- | --- |
| *Arabidopsis* NPK1 homolog | MAPK/ERK kinase; another name for a MAPKK | ras-related nuclear protein |
| AtMRK1 | MEKK | SAMK |
| *Arabidopsis thaliana* MLK/Raf-related protein kinase 1 | MAPK/ERK kinase kinase; another name for a MAPKKK | Stress-activated MAPK |
| BWMK1 | MHK | SIMK |
| Blast-and wound-induced MAP kinase 1 | Mak-homologous kinase | Salt-stress-inducible MAPK |
| Bck1 | MKK | SIMK kinase |
| Bypass of C kinase 1 | Another name for a MAPKK | SIPK |
| CD domain | MMK | Salicylic-acid-induced protein kinase |
| Common docking domain | JNK | Ste11 |
| c-Jun amino(NH2)-terminal kinase | Medicago MAPK | Sterile 11 |
| LRR | MPK | TDY |
| Leucine-rich repeat | Mitogen-activated protein kinase | Putative activation motif in MAPK |
| MAP3K | NB-ARC | gene TDY1 |
| Mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase | Nucleotide-binding adaptor shared by APAF-1, certain R-gene products and CED-4 | Toll-and interleukin-1-receptor domain |
| MAPK | NPK1 | WIPK |
| Mitogen-activated protein kinase | Wound-induced protein kinase | WRKY |
| MAPKK | Nucleus-and phragmoplast-localized protein kinase (renamed from *Nicotiana* protein kinase 1) | Zinc-finger-type transcription factor |
| MAPKKK | RAF | WRKY domain |
| Mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase | Transforming gene | 60-amino-acid motif that binds to the W-box domain |

showed that ectopic expression of a constitutively active mutant form of tobacco (*Nicotiana tabacum*) NtMEK2 induced the activation of downstream MAPK, the expression of defense genes and hypersensitive-response-like cell death [12]. Recently, an *Arabidopsis* MAPK cascade (MEKK1–MKK4-5–MPK6) and WRKY transcription factors were shown to be involved in innate immunity and function downstream of the flagellin receptor FLS2 [13].

In this article, we describe the complete sets of *Arabidopsis* MAPKs and MAPKKs, and a proposed set of MAPKKKs, and analyze them by phylogenetic methods, together with other plant MAPKs, MAPKKs and MAPKKKs (for supplementary information see Online Tables 1–6; http://archive.bmn.com/supp/plants/plants0707a.pdf).

Our analysis allows us to derive a systematic nomenclature for *Arabidopsis* MAPKs (for which we have adopted the gene name *MPK*) and MAPKKs (for which we have adopted the gene name *MKK*). In this nomenclature, the *Arabidopsis* MPKs and MKKs are classified on the basis of structural features and identified by simple numbering. The architecture of this system should allow it to be extended to MAPKs in other plant species, as demonstrated by integrating the predicted structures of all known plant MPK, MKK and putative MAPKKK proteins, and comparing their domains and relationships. We also include a short summary of what is known about the functions of plant MPKs, MKKs and MAPKKKs.

We are not proposing a definitive nomenclature of plant MAPKKKs at this time because it has yet to be shown that the RAF-related MAPKKKs (EDR1 and CTR1) actually function as MAPKKKs. We therefore recommend that members of this class retain their original names until the putative

RAF-like MAPKKKs have been investigated biochemically. Within the proposed plant MPK and MKK nomenclature, we respect the established rules for plant gene naming and numbering, both for consistency and to avoid implying possible functions for specific MPKs and MKKs. In keeping with the TAIR suggestions for naming *Arabidopsis* genes (http://www.arabidopsis.org/info/guidelines.html), we have also not incorporated an ‘At’ prefix into the formal gene name in this species. Although this is appropriate within *Arabidopsis*, we also recognize the informational value of a taxonomic prefix for situations in which homologous genes from different plant species are under discussion. In the interests of clarity, it is sometimes desirable to use an informal prefix nomenclature that allows the reader to discern the taxonomic origin of each homolog.

Completion of the *Arabidopsis* genome has made it possible to define for the first time the full complement of MAPK family members in a single plant species. Although other species will have variations on this pattern, we feel that the timely introduction of systematic naming of all the *Arabidopsis* MPKs, MKKs and MAPKKKs should provide an important baseline. Applied consistently, it should help to guide the encyclopedic annotation of the other protein kinases involved in plant MAPK cascades as these are identified through future genome sequencing and gene discovery efforts.

MAPKs

In the completed *Arabidopsis* genome sequence [14], we identified 20 genes encoding possible MPKs (Online Table 1; http://archive.bmn.com/supp/plants/plants0707a.pdf). These MPKs can be divided into at least four groups (A–D) (Fig. 1). Sequence

comparison of the conserved amino acid motif

TxY, which is phosphorylated by MAPKKs, clearly

classified Arabidopsis MPKs into two subtypes: those

containing the amino acid motif TEY (TEY subtype)

at the phosphorylation site and those with the amino

acid motif TDY (TDY subtype). The TEY subtype can

be classified into three Groups, A, B and C, whereas

the TDY subtype forms a more distant Group D. Major

clades within each subgroup have been assigned

arbitrary numbers (Fig. 1).

Group A MPKs have been most frequently

found to be involved in environmental and hormonal

responses. MPK6 and its apparent orthologs in other

species are activated by many environmental

stresses [15–19]. Tobacco SIPK, initially identified as a

salicylic-acid-induced protein kinase, has since

been shown to be activated during both biotic and

abiotic stress responses [6]. Alfalfa SIMK is also

involved in stress responses [20]. Expression of the

MPK3 gene is readily induced by environmental

stress [21], and the MPK3 protein is also activated

by oxidative stress [15]. Tobacco WIPK shares high

sequence similarity with MPK3 and is involved in

wound-signal transduction [22]. The closely related

alfalfa SAMK is also involved in biotic-and abiotic-stress

responses [23].

Group B MPKs have been less well studied but

appear to be involved in both environmental stress

responses and cell division. For example, disruption

of the MPK4 gene by transposon insertion created a

constitutive systemic-acquired-resistance phenotype

[11]. In the wild-type background, biochemical

analysis using a MPK4-specific antibody revealed

both biotic-and abiotic-stress-induced activation of

MPK4 [17, 18]. By contrast, alfalfa MMK3 and tobacco

Ntf6, which (with MPK13) form a distinct cluster (B2)

within Group B, are activated in a cell-cycle-dependent

manner and specifically localized in the phragmoplast

during telophase [24, 25]. Information on the Group C

MPKs is limited, although microarray analysis detected

circadian-rhythm-regulated expression of MPK7 [26].

Group D MPKs, which include eight members of

the Arabidopsis MPKs, are notable for the TDY motif

in their T-loop and their extended C-terminal region

relative to Groups A, B and C. Group D MPKs also

lack the C-terminal CD DOMAIN, which is consistently

found in members of the other MPK groups.

MPK8, MPK9 and MPK15 contain short extensions

(~60–80 amino acids) in their N-termini, and MPK8 and

MPK9 possess a serine-rich and a glutamic-acid-rich

region, respectively, in their N-terminal regions.

Two reported Group D genes, rice BWMK1 and alfalfa

TDY1, are induced by blast fungus and wounding

[27, 28], respectively. It is worth noting that no plant

MAPK homolog is known to possess the TGY motif

that is found in the budding yeast Hog1p and the

mammalian p38MAPKs, or the TPY motif of

mammalian JNK MAPKs.

MPKs belonging to Groups A and B possess an

evolutionarily conserved CD domain [29] in their

MAPKKs

There are ten putative MKKs encoded in the Arabidopsis genome (Online Table 3; http://www.archive.bmn.com/supp/plants/plants0707a.pdf), which is only half as many as there are MPKs. This suggests that MKKs are likely to activate multiple MPKs, and that cross-talk between various signal-transduction pathways might be concentrated at this level in plant MAPK cascades.

To date, 21 plant MAPKKs have been identified.

The sequence of the phosphorylation site of plant MKKs is different from that in the mammalian kinases. Plant MKKs have the consensus sequence S/TxxxxS/T, whereas mammalian enzymes have S/TxxxS/T.

This consensus sequence is not found in Arabidopsis MKK10 because of the deletion of three amino acid residues in this region. Sequence alignment placed the plant MKKs into four groups (A–D) (Fig. 2).

Clades within each subgroup are numbered sequentially. The Arabidopsis C-and D-group MKK genes do not have introns. The N-terminal extension of plant MKKs shows a putative MAPK docking site [K/R][K/R][K/R]x(1–5)[L/I]x[L/I] similar to that found in animal MAPKKs [31] (Fig. 2). The putative MAPK docking site is characterized by a cluster of basic residues (R and K) N-terminal to hydrophobic residues (L and I).

The Group A MKKs Arabidopsis MKK1 (renamed from MEK1) and MKK2 are thought to be upstream factors for MPK4, based on in vitro kinase assays, yeast two-hybrid analysis and complementation of yeast MAPK cascade mutants [32–35]. Analysis of MKK1 using a specific antibody revealed that multiple abiotic stresses activated MKK1 [35].

Alfalfa PRKK (pathogen-responsive MAPKK) is also classified in Group A and transmits elicitor signaling to downstream MAPKs [36]. Arabidopsis MKK6 is similar to NtMEK1, which has been shown to be involved in cell division and in activation of the tobacco MPK, Ntf6 [37].

Arabidopsis MKK3 and tobacco NPK2 in Group B have an unusual structural feature consisting of a nuclear transport factor 2 (NTF2) domain in the extended C-terminus region. NTF2 is a small protein that mediates the nuclear import of RAN-GDP and

Fig. 3. (right) Phylogenetic tree and domain structure of putative plant mitogen-activated protein kinase kinases (MAPKKs). The kinase catalytic domains of MEKK-like and RAF-related kinases were used for alignment. Arabidopsis MAPKKs are listed using their AGI (Arabidopsis Genome Initiative) names, and the protein names of those Arabidopsis MAPKKs that have already been identified are shown in red. The neighbor-joining phylogenetic tree (shown as a dendrogram) was created using ClustalW [57] on the DNA DataBank of Japan and DendroMaker. The organization of the functional domains and motifs is shown in cartoon format on the right. Scanning of the protein sequences for the presence of known motifs and domains was performed at the website PlantsP (http://plantsp.sdsc.edu/) [58]. Scalebar = 100 amino acids. To identify the species of origin for each MAPKK, a species acronym is included before the protein name: Ah, Arachis hypogaea; At, Arabidopsis thaliana; Bn, Brassica napus; Cm, Cucumis melo; Fs, Fagus sylvatica; Gm, Glycine max; Hv, Hordeum vulgare; Le, Lycopersicon esculentum; Nt, Nicotiana tabacum; Os, Oryza sativa; Rhc, Rosa hybrid cultivar; Ta, Triticum aestivum.

Subgroup

- At4g08500: AtMEKK1
- At4g08480: AtMEKK2
- BnMAP3KB1
- At4g08470: AtMEKK3
- At4g12020: AtMEKK4

A1

- At1g53570: AtMAP3Kα
- BnMAP3Ka1
- OsDUPR11.3
- At1g63700
- At5g66850: AtMAP3Ky

A2

- At1g09000: ANP1
- At1g54960: ANP2
- At3g06030: ANP3
- NtNPK1

A3

- At3g07980: AtMAP3Ke2
- At3g13530: AtMAP3Ke1
- BnMAP3Ke1

A4

- At2g31000+At2g31010: AtMAP3K01
- At3g58640

B1

- At2g42630+At2g42640: AtMAP3K02
- At4g23050: AtMAP3K04
- At1g67890
- At5g49470: AtMAP3Kn3
- At3g06620
- At3g06630
- At3g06640

B2

- At1g08720: EDR1/AtMAP3K03
- LeTCTR2
- RhcCTR2
- HvEDR1
- OsEDR1
- At5g11850: AtMAP3K01
- At1g18160
- At1g73660

B3

- At4g24480: AtMAP3K05
- At5g03730: CTR1
- RhcCTR1
- CmCTR1
- LeTCTR1

- At1g16270
- At1g79570
- At2g35050
- At1g04700
- At3g24715+At3g24720
- At3g46920
- At5g57610
- OsJNBa0090

B4

- At1g14000
- At3g59830
- At2g43850
- At2g31800
- At4g18950
- At3g58760

C1

- At2g17700
- At4g35780
- At4g38470

C2

- At3g27560: ATN1
- At5g40540
- At5g50180
- At5g01850

C3

- At3g50720
- At3g50730: ATN1-like
- At5g66710

C4

- At3g46930
- At5g58950
- FsPK1
- FsPKF1
- GmPK6
- OsP0481E12.7
- At1g62400
- OsP0005A05

C5

- At2g24360
- At4g31170
- AhSTYPK
- TaSTPK

C6

- At3g01490
- At5g50000
- At3g22750
- At4g14780
- At3g63260: AtMRK1
- OsOJ1124_H03.28

C7

Kinase domain
Bipartite nuclear
localization signal
Glycine-rich region
Paired amphipathic
helix repeat
WRKY DNA binding
domain
TIR domain
NB-ARC domain
Leucine-rich repeat
PAS domain
PAC domain
Alanine-rich region
ATP/GTP binding
site motif
Ankyrin repeat
ACT domain
Serine-rich region
Lysine-rich region
H100aa
TRENDS in Plant Science

binds to both Ran-GDP and FxFG-repeat-containing
nucleoporins [38]. Characterized MKKs in Group C
include stress-responsive upstream factors of Group A
MPKs. Transient expression of alfalfa SIMKK and
SIMK in parsley protoplasts results in the activation
of SIMK [39]. Unlike PRKK, SIMKK conducts both
salt-and elicitor-induced signals with different
substrate specificities [36]. Dexamethasone-induced
transient overproduction of a constitutively active
form of tobacco NtMEK2 in tobacco leaves caused
not only activation of SIPK and WIPK but also
hypersensitive cell death [12]. Moreover, stable
transformation with Arabidopsis MKK4 and MKK5,
putative orthologs of tobacco NtMEK2, showed
similar effects [40]. There is no information on the
function and production of Group D MKKs.

MAPKKKs
Compared with MPKs and MKKs, the MAPKKK
family has many more members and greater variety
in primary structures and domain composition
(Fig. 3). Relationship analysis based on the amino
acid sequences of the protein kinase catalytic domain
shows that Arabidopsis MAPKKKs fall into two main
classes: MEKKs such as MEKK1/STE11/BCK1 and
RAF-like (Fig. 3). Group A comprises MAPKKKs
whose kinase domains have significant similarity
to typical MAPKKKs, such as MEKK/STE11/BCK1.
Group A can be further divided into five subgroups.
Subgroup A1 comprises four protein kinases
(AtMEKK1–4). AtMEKK1 expression is enhanced
by drought, high salinity and touch [21]. Functional
analyses using yeast two-hybrid and complementation
of yeast mutants suggested a role for AtMEKK1
upstream of MPK4, MKK1 and MKK2 [33, 34].
AtMEKK2–AtMEKK4 were isolated as partial cDNA
clones by low-stringency hybridization using AtMEKK1
as a probe (T. Mizoguchi et al., unpublished).
AtMEKK1–AtMEKK4 and BnMEKK1 (from
Brassica napus) possess common motifs in their
N-terminal regions, which vary in organization [41].
However, AtMEKK4 has a unique structure, with
several functional domains in its N-terminus
[glycine-rich region, paired-amphipathic-helix
repeat, WRKY DOMAIN, TIR DOMAIN, NB-ARC domain,
LEUCINE-RICH REPEAT (LRR) and protein kinase
domain]. The WRKY domain is likely to confer
direct DNA-binding capacity. WRKY proteins are
plant-specific zinc-finger transcription factors that are
transcriptionally activated during some plant defense
responses [42]. In addition, the extended AtMEKK4
N-terminal region contains sequences similar to the
class-I TIR-NB-LRR resistance-gene structure [43],
which might suggest a further connection to plant
defense-response signaling. The unusual structure
of the AtMEKK4 gene might have arisen through
recombination between a disease resistance gene and
a MAPKKK gene of the MEKK type because several
class-I TIR-NB-LRR resistance genes are located in
the neighboring chromosomal region near AtMEKK4.

Subgroup A3 comprises ANP1, ANP2 and ANP3,
whose cDNAs were isolated using tobacco NPK1 as a
probe [44]. ANP1–ANP3 have a putative regulatory
region in their C-terminus. Tobacco NPK1, an
apparent tobacco ortholog of ANP1–ANP3, is involved
in cytokinesis [45]. NPK1 interacts and localizes
with its activators NACK1 and NACK2, kinesin-like
proteins, during M phase, which is required for the
intracellular events that lead to cytokinesis [46].
Moreover, a reverse-genetic approach using
multiple-knockout mutants of the ANP genes revealed
their function as a positive regulator for cytokinesis
and a possible negative regulator for stress responses
[47]. In addition, ANPs and NPK1 function in
oxidative-stress-response signaling and as negative
regulators of the auxin-response pathway [15, 48].

Subgroup A4 comprises AtMAP3KE1 and AtMAP3KE2,
which are also involved in cell division [49]. They are
functional homologs of fission yeast Cdc7, which is
involved in cell division control. However, Cdc7 is
not a MAPKKK, which suggests that AtMAP3KE1 and
AtMAP3KE2 also might not function as MAPKKKs.
Functions for the MAPKKKs of subgroup A2 remain to
be determined.

AtMAPKKKs classified into Groups B and C are
related to the RAF kinases, whose sequences differ
from those of MEKK/Ste11/Bck1 [50]. All Group B,
RAF-related AtMAPKKKs have extended N-terminal
domains. Among them, CTR1 [9] and EDR1 [10] are
involved in ethylene and disease resistance signaling,
respectively. Interestingly, the AtMAPKKKs in
RAF-related subgroup B2 contain Per, Arnt and Sim
(PAS) domains and PAS-associated C-terminal (PAC)
domains in their N-termini; the PAS domain functions
as a signal sensory domain in many signaling pathways
[51]. Two MAPKKKs of subgroup B3, At1g18160 and
At1g73660, also have central alanine-rich regions.

Group C members of the AtMAPKKKs are related to
RAF protein kinases and to Dictyostelium discoideum
developmentally regulated protein-tyrosine kinase 1
(DPYK1) [52]. Only two Arabidopsis protein kinases,
ATN1 and ATMRK1, have been described in this
subgroup [53, 54], most of which are known only from
genomic sequence analysis. The biological functions of
Group C RAF-related MAPKKKs thus remain largely
unknown. Six Cl members have ankyrin repeats in
their N-terminal region, a motif that is known to
play a role in protein-protein interaction [55]. Three
subgroup-C2 RAF-related sequences have an
aspartokinase, chorismate mutase and TyrA (ACT)
domain, which is known to play a role in the regulation
of a wide range of metabolic enzymes by responding
to amino acid concentration [56]. Three RAF-related
genes from subgroup C4, as well as At5g58950,
contain a lysine-rich region in their C-terminus and
a serine-rich region in their N-terminus.

Conclusion
Plant MAPK cascades are thought to play an
important role in biotic- and abiotic-stress responses,


hormone responses, cell division, and development. In the Arabidopsis genome, genes for 20 MAPKs, 10 MAPKKs, 12 MEKK-like MAPKKKs and 48 RAF-related MAPKKKs have been discovered. The ‘pre-genomics’ nature of MAPK discovery in plants has led to a nonsystematic and confusing nomenclature. The adoption of a rigorous phylogeny and naming system, as presented here, will help to rationalize the functional analysis of these genes and proteins in Arabidopsis, where the full array is known. However, this proposed nomenclature should also provide a basis for systematic naming of the elements of plant MAPK cascades in other plant species for which genome sequencing projects are in progress. At the same time, it must be emphasized that sequence-based phylogenetic clustering of orthologs cannot reliably predict *in vivo* functions. These must be established experimentally, on a case-by-case basis.

Both biochemical and genetic evidence indicate that MPKs, MKKs and MAPKKKs in plants include complex multigene families, which points to the possibility of extensive functional redundancy. This question is being explored from various directions, including the development of T-DNA and transposon insertion lines for specific genes, systematic reverse- genetics analysis using post-transcriptional gene silencing, creation and analysis of multiple mutants derived from appropriate crosses, and the use of transient expression systems such as protoplasts and agroinfiltration [12, 13, 15, 36, 39, 40, 48]. Combining these approaches with profiling technologies such as microarray and proteomics analysis should allow the community to make rapid progress in defining the individual and collective functions of these important plant signaling components.

### References

1. Lewis, T.S. *et al.* (1998) Signal transduction through MAP kinase cascades. *Adv. Cancer Res.* 74, 49–139
2. Madhani, H.D. and Fink, G.R. (1998) The riddle of MAP kinase signaling specificity. *Trends Genet.* 14, 151–155
3. Schaeffer, H.J. and Weber, M.J. (1999) Mitogen-activated protein kinases: specific messages from ubiquitous messengers. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* 19, 2435–2444
4. Widmann, C. *et al.* (1999) Mitogen-activated protein kinase: conservation of a three-kinase module from yeast to human. *Physiol. Rev.* 79, 143–180
5. Tena, G. *et al.* (2001) Plant mitogen-activated protein kinase signaling cascades. *Curr. Opin. Plant Biol.* 4, 392–400
6. Zhang, S. and Klessig, D.F. (2001) MAPK cascades in plant defense signaling. *Trends Plant Sci.* 6, 520–527
7. Romeis, T. (2001) Protein kinases in the plant defence response. *Curr. Opin. Plant Biol.* 4, 407–414
8. Morris, P.C. (2001) MAP kinase signal transduction pathways in plants. *New Phytol.* 151, 67–89
9. Kieber, J.J. *et al.* (1993) CTR1, a negative regulator of the ethylene response pathway in Arabidopsis, encodes a member of the Raff family of protein kinases. *Cell* 72, 427–441
10. Frye, C.A. *et al.* (2001) Negative regulation of defense responses in plants by a conserved MAPKK kinase. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.* 98, 373–378
11. Petersen, M. *et al.* (2000) Arabidopsis MAP kinase 4 negatively regulates systemic acquired resistance. *Cell* 103, 1111–1120
12. Yang, K.Y. *et al.* (2001) Activation of a mitogen-activated protein kinase pathway is involved in disease resistance in tobacco. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.* 98, 741–746
13. Asai, T. *et al.* (2002) MAP kinase signalling cascade in Arabidopsis innate immunity. *Nature* 415, 977–983
14. The Arabidopsis Genome Initiative (2000) Analysis of the genome sequence of the flowering plant Arabidopsis thaliana. *Nature* 408, 796–815

15 Kovtun, Y. *et al.* (2000) Functional analysis of oxidative stress-activated mitogen-activated protein kinase cascade in plants. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.* 97, 2940–2945
16 Nühse, T.S. *et al.* (2000) Microbial elicitors induce activation and dual phosphorylation of the Arabidopsis thaliana MAPK 6. *J. Biol. Chem.* 275, 7521–7526
17 Ichimura, K. *et al.* (2000) Various abiotic stresses rapidly activate Arabidopsis MAP kinases AtMPK4 and AtMPK6. *Plant J.* 24, 655–665
18 Desikan, R. *et al.* (2001) Harpin induces activation of the Arabidopsis mitogen-activated protein kinases AtMPK4 and AtMPK6. *Plant Physiol.* 126, 1579–1587
19 Yuasa, T. *et al.* (2001) Oxidative stress activates AtMPK6, an Arabidopsis homologue of MAP kinase. *Plant Cell Physiol.* 42, 1012–1016
20 Munnik, T. *et al.* (1999) Distinct osmo-sensing protein kinase pathways are involved in signalling moderate and severe hyper-osmotic stress. *Plant J.* 20, 381–388
21 Mizoguchi, T. *et al.* (1996) A gene encoding a mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase is induced simultaneously with genes for a mitogen-activated protein kinase and an S6 ribosomal protein kinase by touch, cold, and water stress in Arabidopsis thaliana. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.* 93, 765–769
22 Seo, S. *et al.* (1995) Tobacco MAP kinase: a possible mediator in wound signal transduction pathways. *Science* 270, 1988–1992
23 Zwerger, K. and Hirt, H. (2001) Recent advances in plant MAP kinase signalling. *Biol. Chem.* 382, 1123–1131
24 Calderini, O. *et al.* (1998) A cell cycle regulated MAP kinase with a possible role in cytokinesis in tobacco cells. *J. Cell Sci.* 111, 3091–3100
25 Bögre, L. *et al.* (1999) A MAP kinase is activated late in plant mitosis and becomes localized to the plane of cell division. *Plant Cell* 11, 101–113
26 Schaffer, R. *et al.* (2001) Microarray analysis of diurnal and circadian-regulated genes in Arabidopsis. *Plant Cell* 13, 113–123
27 He, C. *et al.* (1999) BWMK1, a novel MAP kinase induced by fungal infection and mechanical wounding in rice. *Mol. Plant-Microbe Interact.* 12, 1064–1073

28 Schoenbeck, M.A. *et al.* (1999) The alfalfa (*Medicago sativa*) TDY1 gene encodes a mitogen-activated protein kinase homolog. *Mol. Plant-Microbe Interact.* 12, 882–893
29 Tanoue, T. *et al.* (2000) A conserved docking motif in MAP kinases common to substrates, activators and regulators. *Nat. Cell Biol.* 2, 110–116
30 Moran, T.V. and Walker, J.C. (1993) Molecular cloning of two novel protein kinase genes from *Arabidopsis thaliana*. *Biochim. Biophys. Acta* 1216, 9–14
31 Bardwell, L. and Thorner, J. (1996) A conserved motif at the amino termini of MEKs might mediate high-affinity interaction with the cognate MAPKs. *Trends Biochem. Sci.* 21, 373–374
32 Huang, Y. *et al.* (2000) AtMPK4, an Arabidopsis homolog of mitogen-activated protein kinase, is activated *in vitro* by AtMEK1 through threonine phosphorylation. *Plant Physiol.* 122, 1301–1310
33 Ichimura, K. *et al.* (1998) Isolation of AtMEKK1 (a MAP kinase kinase) – interacting proteins and analysis of a MAP kinase cascade in *Arabidopsis*. *Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun.* 253, 532–543
34 Mizoguchi, T. *et al.* (1998) Identification of a possible MAP kinase cascade in *Arabidopsis thaliana* based on pairwise yeast two-hybrid analysis and functional complementation tests of yeast mutants. *FEBS Lett.* 437, 56–60
35 Matsuoka, D. *et al.* (2002) Activation of AtMEK1, an Arabidopsis mitogen-activated protein kinase, *in vitro* and *in vivo*: analysis of active mutants expressed in *E. coli* and generation of the active form in stress response in seedlings. *Plant J.* 29, 637–647
36 Cardinale, F. *et al.* (2002) Convergence and divergence of stress-induced mitogen-activated protein kinase signaling pathways at the level of two distinct mitogen-activated protein kinase kinases. *Plant Cell* 14, 703–711
37 Calderini, O. *et al.* (2001) A novel tobacco mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase kinase, NtMEK1, activates the cell cycle-regulated p43Ntf6 MAP kinase. *J. Biol. Chem.* 276, 18139–18145
38 Quimby, B.B. *et al.* (2000) The interaction between Ran and NTF2 is required for cell cycle progression. *Mol. Biol. Cell* 11, 2617–2629

39 Kiegerl, S. *et al.* (2000) SIMKK, a mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) kinase, is a specific activator of the salt stress-induced MAPK, SIMK. *Plant Cell* 12, 2247–2258

40 Ren, D. *et al.* (2002) Cell death mediated by MAPK is associated with hydrogen peroxide production in *Arabidopsis*. *J. Biol. Chem.* 277, 559–565

41 Jouannic, S. *et al.* (1999) Characterisation of novel plant genes encoding MEKK/STE11 and RAF-related protein kinases. *Gene* 229, 171–181

42 Eulgem, T. *et al.* (2000) The WRKY superfamily of plant transcription factors. *Trends Plant Sci.* 5, 199–206

43 Meyers, B.C. *et al.* (1999) Plant disease resistance genes encode members of an ancient and diverse protein family within the nucleotide-binding superfamily. *Plant J.* 20, 317–332

44 Nishihama, R. *et al.* (1997) Possible involvement of differential splicing in regulation of the activity of *Arabidopsis* ANP1 that is related to mitogen-activated protein kinase kinases (MAPKKKs). *Plant J.* 12, 39–48

45 Nishihama, R. *et al.* (2001) The NPK1 mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase is a regulator of cell-plate formation in plant cytokinesis. *Genes Dev.* 15, 352–363

46 Nishihama, R. *et al.* (2002) Expansion of the cell plate in plant cytokinesis requires a kinesin-like protein/MAPKKK complex. *Cell* 109, 87–99

47 Krysan, A. *et al.* (2002) An *Arabidopsis* mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase gene family encodes essential positive regulators of cytokinesis. *Plant Cell* 10.1105/tpc.001164 (http://www.plantcell.org/)

48 Kovtun, Y. *et al.* (1998) Suppression of auxin signal transduction by a MAPK cascade in higher plants. *Nature* 395, 716–720

49 Jouannic, S. *et al.* (2001) The protein kinases AtMAP3Kε1 and BnMAP3Kε1 are functional homologues of *S. pombe* Cdc7p and may be involved in cell division. *Plant J.* 26, 637–649

50 Jouannic, S. *et al.* (1999) Plant MAP kinase kinase kinases structure, classification and evolution. *Gene* 233, 1–11

51 Zhulin, I.B. *et al.* (1997) PAS domain S-boxes in Archaea, Bacteria and sensors for oxygen and redox. *Trends Biochem. Sci.* 22, 331–333

52 Tan, J.L. and Spudich, J. (1990) Developmentally regulated protein-tyrosine kinase genes in *Dictyostelium discoideum*. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* 10, 3578–3583

53 Tregear, J.W. *et al.* (1996) An unusual protein kinase displaying characteristics of both the serine/threonine and tyrosine families is encoded by the *Arabidopsis thaliana* gene *Atn1*. *Plant Sci.* 117, 107–119

54 Ichimura, K. *et al.* (1997) AtMRK1, an *Arabidopsis* protein kinase related to mammal mixed-lineage kinases and Raf protein kinases. *Plant Sci.* 130, 171–179

55 Gorina, S. and Pavletich, N.P. (1996) Structure of the p53 tumor suppressor bound to the ankyrin and SH3 domains of 53BP2. *Science* 274, 1001–1005

56 Aravind, L. and Koonin, E.V. (1999) Gleaning non-trivial structural, functional and evolutionary information about proteins by iterative database searches. *J. Mol. Biol.* 287, 1023–1040

57 Thompson, J.D. *et al.* (1994) CLUSTAL W: improving the sensitivity of progressive multiple sequence alignment through sequence weighting, position-specific gap penalties and weight matrix choice. *Nucleic Acids Res.* 22, 4673–4680

58 Gribskov, M. *et al.* (2001) PlantsP: a functional genomics database for plant phosphorylation. *Nucleic Acids Res.* 29, 111–113

---

**Trends in Plant Science online**

**Making the most of your personal subscription**

- High quality printouts (from PDF files)
- Links to other articles, other journals and cited software and databases

**All you have to do is:**

- Obtain your subscription key from the address label of your print subscription
- Then go to [http://www.trends.com/free_access.html](http://www.trends.com/free_access.html)
- Click on the large ‘Click Here’ button at the bottom of the page
- You will see one of the following:
  - (1) A BioMedNet login screen. If you see this, please enter your BioMedNet username and password. If you are not already a member please click on the ‘Join Now’ button and register. Once registered you will go straight to (2) below.
  - (2) A box to enter a subscription key. Please enter your subscription key here and click on the ‘Enter’ button.
- Once confirmed, go to [http://plants.trends.com](http://plants.trends.com) and view the full text of *Trends in Plant Science*

If you get an error message please contact Customer Services (info@current-trends.com) stating your subscription key and BioMedNet username and password. Please note that you do not need to re-enter your subscription key for *Trends in Plant Science*, BioMedNet ‘remembers’ your subscription. Institutional online access is available at a premium.

If your institute is interested in subscribing to print and online please ask them to contact ct.subs@rbi.co.uk

[http://plants.trends.com](http://plants.trends.com)
