
# Uncovering new complexities in mast cell signaling

**MONICA J. S. NADLER AND JEAN-PIERRE KINET**

The high-affinity receptor for immunoglobulin E (IgE), FcεRI, initiates a signaling cascade that culminates in cellular immunological effector functions, including degranulation and the synthesis and secretion of cytokines. These events, which underlie a central component of the allergic immune response—immediate hypersensitivity—have been the focus of much study in the mast cell signal-transduction field. The Src family protein tyrosine kinase (PTK) Lyn has been identified as the earliest kinase activated after FcεRI cross-linking¹. Lyn, which associates with the β chain, phosphorylates the immunoreceptor tyrosine-based activation motifs within the β and γ chains of the receptor complex². The PTK Syk then binds via its SH2 domains to the phosphorylated γ chain and is further activated by Lyn. Subsequent early events involve the recruitment of linker of activation of T cells (LAT) and the phosphorylation and activation of SLP-76, the Tec family kinase Bruton’s tyrosine kinase (Btk), and phospholipases Cγ1 and Cγ2. The initiation of these early events ultimately leads to calcium flux, cytokine production and cellular degranulation². Thus, a linear signaling model, initiated by Lyn kinase, has emerged as the paradigm for upstream events after FcεRI engagement².

However, in this issue of *Nature Immunology*, Parravicini et al. provide unequivocal evidence that another Src family PTK, Fyn, plays a fundamental role in FcεRI signal transduction³. They show that Fyn is responsible for complementary signals that are essential for mast cell degranulation. Their work, which provides a more comprehensive account of early FcεRI signaling events, raises several interesting issues regarding the independence, as well as the interdependence, of Lyn and Fyn function within this pathway.

A second indication that Lyn was not the sole Src family PTK required for FcεRI signaling came from the study of Gab2 function in mast cells. This scaffolding adaptor protein participates in early signaling events as a positive effector of phosphatidylinositol 3 kinase (PI3K) activity in the FcεRI pathway⁸. Given that Gab2 is required for FcεRI-mediated mast cell degranulation and cytokine production⁸, it was reasoned by Parravicini et al. that upstream PTKs that regulate Gab2 function would likely regulate these specific events³. Interestingly, they determined that Fyn, not Lyn, positively controls Gab2 phosphorylation and function³. In addition, their results show that Fyn is essential for mast cell degranulation. Taken together, these data demonstrate the independent functions of Lyn and Fyn kinases within the FcεRI pathway (Fig. 1a). Whereas Lyn is required for immediate events leading to calcium flux, Fyn controls those events that lead to calcium release and negatively influences the phosphorylation of calcium-independent PKC-δ. In contrast, Fyn-initiated events are required for efficient PKC-δ phosphorylation, which independently influences degranulation.

---

### Figure 1. Comparison of Lyn- and Fyn-mediated signals in the FcεRI pathway.
**(a)** Schematic of Lyn- and Fyn-dependent events after FcεRI engagement. Note that Lyn-initiated signals have a negative influence on Gab2 phosphorylation and that Fyn phosphorylates Gab2. Also, potential points of cross-talk include the β and γ chains of FcεRI, Syk and Tec kinases.  
**(b)** Schematic shows that both calcium release and PKC activation are required for degranulation. Lyn initiates and is required for the events that lead to calcium release and negatively influences the phosphorylation of calcium-independent PKC-δ. In contrast, Fyn-initiated events are required for efficient PKC-δ phosphorylation, which independently influences degranulation.

---

**http://immunol.nature.com** • **august 2002** • **volume 3 no 8** • **nature immunology** • **707**

lead to Gab2 phosphorylation, the serine kinase Akt activation, mast cell degranulation and cytokine production.

The study by Parravicini *et al.*, coupled with prior observations, suggests cross-talk between Lyn-mediated and Fyn-initiated events occurs³. Previous gene ablation studies have established that key signaling components of the FcεRI-mediated signaling cascade are required for mast cell degranulation, namely Syk, SLP-76 and LAT⁶,⁷,⁹,¹⁰. However, Parravicini *et al.* have established that Gab2 phosphorylation requires Fyn, but that Lyn and LAT appear to be dispensable³. Because Gab2 and Fyn are also required for degranulation, this indicates that points of cross-talk between Lyn- and Fyn-mediated signals probably exist. Distinct possibilities for key points of cross-talk include Syk kinase, Tec kinases and Gab2.

What is the position of Fyn-mediated signals where Syk is concerned? As shown in the study by Parravicini *et al.*, the peak of total Syk phosphorylation occurs earlier and is reduced faster in Fyn-deficient mast cells after FcεRI engagement compared to wild-type cells³. This is in direct contrast to the function of Lyn that is required for Syk phosphorylation and activation. Thus, the independent functions of Lyn and Fyn are visualized at one of the earliest points in the FcεRI pathway. However, because the kinetics of Syk activation are different in Fyn-deficient cells, the question remains as to whether Fyn alters the activation of Syk in a manner that affects downstream mediators. In addition, if Fyn does not directly phosphorylate Syk, then does it contribute to phosphorylation of the β and γ FcεRI chains that, in turn, recruit signaling molecules including Syk? These questions relate to the larger issue of the mechanism of Fyn activation. Based on the results presented in this study, Fyn appears to be engaged after FcεRI cross-linking, but possibly not *via* its SH2 domain. Is Fyn peripherally associated with the FcεRI complex or directly associated with the β subunit? Exploration of Fyn's activation mechanism could yield insights into its distinct function within the FcεRI pathway.

As noted by Parravicini *et al.*, FcεRI-mediated degranulation is enhanced in Lyn-deficient cells, whereas cells doubly deficient in Lyn and Btk have a severely impaired degranulation response⁵. In addition, Parravicini *et al.* show that phosphoinositol(3,4,5)trisphosphate (PIP₃) production is enhanced in Lyn-deficient cells³. Taken together, these results suggest that Fyn-mediated signals may affect Lyn-mediated signals at the point of Btk recruitment. Fyn may activate PI3K through the Fyn-Gab2-PI3K signaling complex, which leads to membrane targeting and activation of Btk *via* Lyn. In such a scenario, full activation of Btk would require phosphorylation by Lyn, providing a link to Fyn- and Lyn-mediated signals. However, other Tec kinase family members should also be considered, as Btk is essential for calcium flux and loss of Fyn only has a minor impact on calcium flux. Thus, another Tec kinase could possibly play a more vital role in Fyn-mediated signals being similarly recruited and modulated by Lyn. Although speculative, the issue of cross-talk between additional Src family and Tec family PTKs is timely because Parravicini *et al.* establish that Fyn-mediated signals activate PI3K through the Fyn-Gab2-PI3K complex³.

This work also shows that Gab2 forms a point of interdependence between Lyn-mediated and Fyn-mediated signals³. In Lyn-deficient cells, Gab2 phosphorylation is substantially increased. This appears to be independent of Syk and correlates with increased Akt activation and PIP₃ production. Therefore, Lyn-mediated signals negatively regulate Gab2 function. Conversely, the study by Parravicini *et al.* establishes that Fyn positively regulates Gab2 phosphorylation, leading to PIP₃ production and Akt activation. Given that Gab2 is a central mediator of PI3K activation with a primary impact on degranulation⁸, the increased degranulation observed in Lyn-deficient cells is likely a direct consequence of Gab2 hyperphosphorylation. Therefore, a model can be envisioned in which Lyn-mediated signals set the threshold for mast cell degranulation whereas Fyn-mediated signals are required for degranulation. Such a working model provides a basis for determining the functional role played by other signaling components that participate in Fyn- versus Lyn-mediated signals within the FcεRI pathway.

Finally, Parravicini *et al.* address the functional interdependence of Lyn- and Fyn-mediated signals³. Both calcium flux and PKC activation are required for mast cell degranulation¹¹. In Lyn-deficient cells mast cells, calcium flux is severely diminished, but degranulation is enhanced⁴,⁵. This suggests that activation of a PKC isoform may compensate for the loss of calcium flux. Of the two isoforms of PKC that are capable of eliciting degranulation, PKC-β and PKC-δ, Parravicini *et al.* show the calcium-independent PKC-δ isoform itself has enhanced constitutive basal phosphorylation in Lyn-deficient mast cells that is not altered by FcεRI stimulation. Conversely, PKC-δ phosphorylation is significantly reduced in Fyn-deficient cells³. Taken together, these results suggest that PKC-δ activity is responsible for mast cell degranulation in Lyn-deficient mast cells through an enhanced Fyn-Gab2-PI3K interaction that compensates for the lowered calcium response. Interestingly, this suggests PKC-δ functions as a point of convergence for Lyn- and Fyn-mediated upstream signals, which lead to degranulation (Fig. 1b).

It is obvious that the linear paradigm for FcεRI signaling no longer accurately describes FcεRI-induced events and must be amended to now accommodate Fyn. This leads onto an even larger issue. Why is there a second set of independent, yet complementary, signals within the FcεRI pathway? The answer may lie in the mast cell’s central function in innate immunity. For example, it is possible that Fyn may also be used by other surface receptors that respond either directly or indirectly to bacteria or parasites. Such signals could preferentially influence the mast cell’s propensity to generate cytokines and undergo degranulation. Importantly, these signals would have the ability to affect FcεRI-generated signals at various points of cross-talk. This would provide the mast cell with increased flexibility to mount an appropriate response.

1. Eiseman, E. & Bolen, J. B. *Nature* **355**, 78–80 (1992).
2. Nadler, M. J., Matthews, S.A., Turner, H. & Kinet, J. P. *Adv. Immunol.* **76**, 325–355 (2000).
3. Parravicini, V. *et al.* *Nature Immunol.* **3**, 741–748 (2002).
4. Nishizumi, H. & Yamamoto, T. *J. Immunol.* **158**, 2350–2355 (1997).
5. Kawakami, Y. *et al.* *J. Immunol.* **165**, 1210–1219 (2000).
6. Costello, P. S. *et al.* *Oncogene* **13**, 2595–2605 (1996).
7. Zhang, J., Berenstein, E. H., Evans, R. L. & Siraganian, R. P. *J. Exp. Med.* **184**, 71–79 (1996).
8. Gu, H. *et al.* *Nature* **412**, 186–190 (2001).
9. Pivniouk, V.I., *et al.* *J. Clin. Invest.* **103**, 1737–1743 (1999).
10. Saitoh, S. *et al.* *Immunity* **12**, 525–535 (2000).
11. Ozawa, K. *et al.* *J. Biol. Chem.* **268**, 1749–1756 (1993).

Harvard Medical School and Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Boston, MA 02215, USA  
(mnadler@caregroup.harvard.edu)
