
PATHOGENESIS AND TREATMENT OF  
GRAFT-VERSUS-HOST DISEASE AFTER  
BONE MARROW TRANSPLANT  

Georgia B. Vogelsang, Linda Lee, and Debra M.  
Bensen-Kennedy  

The Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center at Johns Hopkins, Bunting Blaustein  
Cancer Research Building, 1650 Orleans Street, Baltimore, Maryland 21231;  
e-mail: vogelge@jhmi.edu, lleel2@jhmi.edu, Kennede@jhmi.edu  

Key Words stem cell transplantation, prednisone, donor lymphocyte infusion,  
sclerodermatous  

■ Abstract Stem cell transplantation is being used to treat a number of hematologic malignancies as well as hematologic and immune deficiency states. The ages of patients being offered this therapy and the donor marrow sources have been expanded. One persistent problem has been graft-versus-host disease (GVHD). This article reviews the basic biology of GVHD, clinical manifestations of acute and chronic GVHD, prophylaxis and treatment of acute GVHD, and treatment of chronic GVHD.  

INTRODUCTION  

Graft-versus-host disease (GVHD) is an immunologically mediated disease that is a major barrier to successful allogeneic stem cell transplantation (SCT). Despite progress in understanding the mediators involved in GVHD, treatment has remained very frustrating; most patients who develop the severe manifestations of GVHD succumb to it or to complications of its treatment.  

The first description of GVHD came from rodent experiments documenting hematopoietic reconstitution after marrow lethal radiation. Animals that received syngeneic stem cell grafts recovered from the radiation toxicity (primary disease) and appeared to be normal. Animals that received their stem cells from different strains (i.e., with major histocompatibility or MHC loci differences) recovered from their primary disease but developed “secondary disease,” which we now know as GVHD. These animals developed erythema, diarrhea, liver disease, and severe wasting that ultimately resulted in death. Remarkably, these same investigators described a graft-versus-leukemia effect in the animals. Animals receiving allogeneic marrow and leukemia cleared the leukemia after

transplant, whereas animals receiving syngeneic marrow did not (1). In the Harvey lectures in 1966, Billingham (2) outlined the requirements for the induction of GVHD. First, the graft must contain immunologically competent cells. Second, the host must appear foreign to the graft and therefore be capable of stimulating the donor cells. Finally, the host immune system must be incapable of generating an immune response (i.e., unable to reject the donor graft), at least long enough for the graft to become sensitized and mount an immunologic assault on the host. Antigenic differences stimulate the donor lymphocytes to primarily attack epithelial cells and mucous membranes in the skin, intestinal tract, and biliary ducts.

Although Billingham developed this model to account for the observations seen after allogeneic SCT, it also accounts for several uncommon presentations of GVHD. Immuno-incompetent hosts, such as patients who have had intensive, aplasia-producing chemotherapy or infants born with immunodeficiency disorders, have developed GVHD after receiving red cell transfusions contaminated with viable lymphocytes. These patients cannot mount a sufficient immunologic response to reject these lymphocytes and may develop GVHD. Likewise, a patient who receives a blood transfusion from a donor who is homozygous for one shared haplotype with the patient, is incapable of rejecting the donor lymphocytes. The donor lymphocytes, however, recognize the second haplotype (A4, B5, DR6 in Figure 1) in the patient and mount an immunologic attack on the patient. This type of transfusion GVHD is most commonly seen in directed blood donations from family members or in populations with a restricted number of haplotypes in their genetic pool, such as Japan. Transfusion GVHD differs from GVHD following allogeneic SCT in one significant aspect. Transfusion GVHD causes marrow aplasia, and many of these patients present not only with rashes, diarrhea, and elevated liver function but also with pancytopenia. Transfusion GVHD can be prevented by removing or killing the passenger lymphocytes through irradiation, elutriation, or filtration.

Homozygous Donor          Heterozygous Recipient
A1                        A1                       A1                      A4
B2                        B2                       B2                      B5
DR3                       DR3                      DR3                     DR6

Figure 1 A heterozygous patient who receives blood containing viable lymphocytes from an HLA homozygous donor, with whom the patient shares a haplotype, is incapable of rejecting the donor lymphocytes. The donor lymphocytes “see” a foreign haplotype (A4, B5, DR6) and attack the patient. Transfusion GVHD results.

PATHOPHYSIOLOGY OF GVHD

For many years, our understanding of GVHD did not advance much beyond the basic tenets proposed by Billingham. However, advances in immunogenetics and basic immunology have resulted in an expanded paradigm for GVHD.

### Genetic Basis

To understand the current approach to SCT and the consequent GVHD, a basic understanding of the major histocompatibility complex (MHC) is helpful (3). Matching of the MHC antigens speeds engraftment and reduces the severity of GVHD. The MHC contains the genes that encode tissue antigens used for tissue typing and are involved in many of the steps leading to T cell activation. These genes were first identified functionally in rodents as transplantation antigens responsible for rejection of tissue grafts between unmatched (i.e., different strain) animals. In humans, this MHC region lies on the short arm of chromosome 6, and is called the HLA (human leukocyte antigen) region. The HLA region includes many genes, not all of which are involved in immune activation. It has been divided into two classes, each containing numerous gene loci, which may encode a large number of polymorphic alleles. Class I and class II antigens are each composed of two chains. MHC class I molecules are involved in the presentation of peptides to CD8⁺T cells, and class II molecules present peptides to CD4⁺T cells.

Class I antigens are made up of a heavy chain, which contains the polymorphic regions, and the nonpolymorphic light chain, beta-2 microglobulin (from chromosome 15). The class I HLA antigens include HLA A, B, and C antigens. These are expressed on almost all cells of the body at varying densities. C antigens were thought to be immunologically insignificant until unrelated-donor SCT showed that matching of this region decreases the incidence of GVHD (4). Other class I HLA antigens have also been identified, but these genes generally have more restricted expression and their significance is not clear.

The two chains of class II antigens are encoded in the MHC. The class II antigens are further divided into DR, DQ, and DP antigens. Class II antigens are expressed on B cells and monocytes and can be induced on many other cell types following inflammation or injury. The DQ and DP antigens each have polymorphic alpha and beta chains, which can dimerize in various combinations. DR dimers all share an essentially invariant alpha chain, whereas the beta chain is extremely polymorphic, with new polymorphisms being found all the time.

Determination of HLA types has become much more accurate as typing has become molecularly based, replacing the earlier serologic or cellular techniques. The naming of antigens used in typing reflects the methodology employed, resulting in confusing nomenclature. Seemingly disparate typing may in fact be identical with the differences accounted for by the typing nomenclature (serologic versus molecular terminology) or splits (subdivisions) of large serologic groups by more refined typing. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) technology is a rapid method of

HLA typing based on the exact nucleotide sequences of individual alleles. Most systems use PCR amplification of the test DNA, followed by probing with labeled short-sequence-specific oligonucleotide probes. Because of the complexity and number of allelic sequences, reactivities to various probes are compared to identify the allele.

The millions of potential haplotypes would suggest that finding an HLA identical unrelated donor is impossible. Fortunately, HLA antigens have been evolutionarily selected and inherited. This observation, termed linkage disequilibrium, accounts for identification of certain haplotypes far more commonly than would be expected by chance alone. The reason for this inheritance is unknown. However, known factors do account for high frequencies of restricted haplotypes within certain racial groups. Japan was isolated from much of the rest of the world until the twentieth century. Because Japan is an island, the genetic diversity of the Japanese is much lower than that of many other racial groups. On the whole, GVHD following SCT is less prevalent in such relatively homogeneous populations. Contrasting with Japan is Africa, whose population includes many more polymorphisms than other racial groups. Even with equal numbers of donors available, patients of African descent will have greater difficulty finding an HLA-identical donor than patients of a more genetically homogeneous race. In patients whose background involves extensive mixing of racial groups, the mixing of the genetic material decreases the chances of identifying a donor (5).

Despite HLA identity between a patient and donor, substantial numbers of patients still develop GVHD. This has been ascribed to minor histocompatibility antigen differences. The existence of segregating non-HLA antigen systems has been shown in multiple animal models. However, these antigens have not been precisely identified in humans (6). Most minor antigens are expressed on the cell surface as degraded peptides bound to specific HLA molecules. Although further elucidation of these minor antigens is a fascinating challenge, the implications for donor selection within a family are limited. In the United States, the current average family size makes the identification of more than one HLA-identical sibling uncommon. The average patient has only a 20% to 30% chance of having an HLA match within his immediate family. The chances are even lower for young children, whose families may not have reached their maximum size. Patients who lack an HLA-identical donor must seek unrelated donor volunteers or cord blood donations. Another reason for interest in minor antigens is the potential use of cloned minor-antigen-reactive T cells as antitumor effector cells.

THREE-PHASE MODEL OF ACUTE GVHD

Phase I: Conditioning Regimen

Full allogeneic SCT is preceded by a preparative regimen, which has several purposes. First, it is a method of dose intensification for patients receiving transplants
as therapy for hematologic malignancies. Many chemotherapeutic regimens can induce remission of, but not cure, the tumor. These regimens are often limited in dose by the toxic effects to the marrow. The preparative regimen allows for dose intensification with a “clean” allogeneic marrow rescue given after the therapy. The preparative regimen also ablates immune responses so that stem cell grafts (particularly lymphocyte-depleted grafts) are accepted. Finally, some investigators believe that the regimen makes “space” for the donor cells, although this concept remains controversial.

Unfortunately, the high-dose therapy of the preparative regimen is toxic to many tissues, particularly the gastrointestinal (GI) tract. Injury to the gut is important in the initiation of the clinical syndrome of GVHD (8) (Figure 2). Irradiation and cyclophosphamide have been shown to increase intestinal permeability (9). The increase in permeability may be further augmented by the release of inflammatory (mainly Th-1) cytokines, such as tumor necrosis factor–α (TNFα) and interleukin (IL)-12, from host tissues. TNF-α contributes to intestinal injury by at least two mechanisms. It directly affects the integrity of the gut mucosa, and it increases MHC antigen expression on host tissues, thereby potentiating injury by contributing to the activation of donor T cells. TNF-α may directly impair the integrity of the colonic epithelial tight junction, increasing intestinal permeability and loss of water and ions into the intestinal lumen (10). In other inflammatory intestinal disorders, this effect of TNF-α has been shown to result from its induction of prostaglandin E synthesis produced by subepithelial cells (11). Cross linking the T cell receptor activates T cells and increases TNF-α levels; the increase in TNF-α alters cholinergic muscle contraction and increases intestinal electrolyte transport (12). Increased intestinal permeability allows the translocation of bacteria-derived products, such as lipopolysaccharide (LPS), into the circulation. LPS plays a critical role in the pathogenesis of GVHD by stimulating host macrophages and other tissues to produce excessive amounts of inflammatory cytokines (most notably TNF-α). Administration of a synthetic lipid-A analog that inhibits LPS-mediated NF-κB activation produced less TNF-α and resulted in reduced intestinal injury in GVHD murine models (13). Two unique factors that protect the intestines, keratinocyte growth factor and IL-11, have been shown in experimental models to decrease GI toxicity and reduce acute GVHD but still maintain T cell antitumor responses (14–16). Unfortunately, IL-11 has proved very toxic, leading to closure of a randomized, placebo-controlled trial (17).

Intervention in cytokine production is an obvious approach to blocking the induction of GVHD. Because cytokines have complex and varying effects, this may result in untoward consequences. Use of antibodies or agents that antagonize TNF-α function reduce GI injury. TNF-α neutralization inhibits gamma interferon and interferon-dependent upregulation of Fas, a vital pathway leading to apoptosis. Cytokines such as IL-10, IL-6, and IL-4 are not inhibited. In animals receiving TNF-α blockade during their transplants, a lupus-like autoimmune state of chronic GVHD is induced (18). Blocking TNF-α has also been demonstrated to block the graft-versus-leukemia (GVL) effect, in which donor T cells reacting to tumor cells
decrease the relapse rate (19). In animal models, the GVL effect is mediated by the perforin/granzyme B pathway rather than Fas/FasL, both of which are involved in GVHD-induced apoptosis (20). Future therapy may allow the segregation of these mechanisms by preserving the activity of the perforin/granzyme B pathway.

# Phase II: Donor T Cell Activation and Expansion

When the donor graft is infused after the preparative regimen, creating an inflammatory cytokine milieu, donor T cells recognize foreign host (transplant recipient) antigens presented by antigen-presenting cells (APCs). The APCs digest large proteins into smaller peptides (allopeptides). The peptides bind to MHC molecules and are presented on the surface of APCs to donor T cells. The greater the disparity between donor and recipient MHC, the greater the T cell response. Even single-antigen differences between donor and recipient result in significantly more GVHD than in HLA-identical pairs. In identical pairs, the donor T cells recognize minor antigen differences. Th-1 cells are stimulated to produce IL-2 and increase expression of the IL-2 receptor.

Under the influence of IL-2 and other immune mediators, alloreactive T cells expand clonally and differentiate into effector cells. Adhesion molecules on the vascular endothelium are important in maximizing the T cell response. To become activated, donor T cells require two signals. The first signal comes from the allopeptide, MHC, and donor T cell receptor binding. The second costimulatory signal is provided by the APCs and requires cell-to-cell contact. When the second signal is delivered, T cells become activated. If the second signal is not delivered, anergy (tolerance) to the allo-antigen develops.

There are multiple potential costimulatory molecules, including the recently described inducible costimulator (ICOS), herpesvirus entry mediator L/TNFSF14 (known as LIGHT), the CD40/CD40L receptor ligand pair, and the CD80, CD86, and B7 antigens (21, 22). In the most completely characterized interaction, B7 ligands bind to T cell surface receptors CD28 and CTLA-4. CD28 provides a positive signal, and if it is absent, anergy develops. Conversely, CTLA-4 is a negative regulator; if it is absent, T cell activation occurs with cytokine production and T cell proliferation. CTLA4-Ig blocks T cell costimulation through the B7-CD28 pathway (23). In animal models of GVHD, blocking of the B7-CD28 interaction inhibited both acute and chronic GVHD, whereas blocking ICOS stimulated acute but inhibited chronic GVHD (22). Similarly, selective blockage of CTLA-4:B7 in an animal model of donor lymphocyte infusion (discussed below) preserved the GVL effect without significant GVHD (24).

Although acute GVHD has been described as a Th-1-mediated disease, as immune responses are teased apart the situation appears to be more complex. For example, IL-18 induces gamma interferon, especially in the presence of IL-12 (25, 26). IL-18 has the capacity to effect both Th-1 and Th-2 mediated responses. IL-18 was found to be elevated in acute GVHD, but surprisingly, blockade of IL-18 accelerated acute GVHD mortality in animal models, whereas administration of

IL-18 reduced GVHD mortality by inducing enhanced Fas-mediated apoptosis of donor T cells soon after bone marrow transplant (26). Moreover, in a murine model, IL-18 prevented the development of GVHD, previously described as a Th-2–mediated disease (27). Equally surprising are the effects of IL-12 blockade. Antibodies that neutralize IL-12 prevented acute GVHD in mice, but the animals did develop chronic GVHD. Clearly, more detailed understanding of the interaction of these cytokines and their effects on GVHD is needed, but many do show the potential for treating or preventing GVHD (28, 29).

## Phase III: The Effector Phase

Once donor T cells are activated and proliferate, they are directly or indirectly responsible for the tissue damage in GVHD. The inflammatory cytokines produced by activated T cells and by tissue damaged during the preparative regimen also activate mononuclear phagocytes and natural killer (NK) cells. These cells, along with the T cells, secrete cytokines that both damage tissues and continue the cellular stimulation. The induction of apoptosis in target tissues releases further mediators, which also perpetuate the damage. Both Fas/FasL-dependent and perforin/granzyme-dependent killing are important in GVHD-induced damage. The absence of GVHD toxicity in other organs indicates that the damage is more than just cytokine-mediated. However, the exact mechanisms by which the skin, liver, and GI tract are targeted are not clear.

## ACUTE GVHD

### Clinical and Histologic Manifestations

Table 1 summarizes the clinical and histologic manifestations of acute GVHD.

**SKIN** The organ most commonly affected by GVHD is the skin. In a comprehensive review of 740 patients receiving therapy for acute GVHD, Martin et al. (30) found that 81% had skin involvement, 54% had GI involvement, and 50% had liver involvement at the initiation of therapy. In patients receiving conventional grafts, the skin is usually the first organ involved, and GVHD often coincides with engraftment. (In patients who develop GVHD after nonmyeloablative transplants or donor lymphocyte infusion, the presentation has been more varied, with initial GI or liver disease more common.) The maculopapular rash initially involves the face, ears, palms, soles, and upper trunk. If the GVHD advances, the rash will spread to the rest of the body, generally sparing the scalp. The rash is described as feeling like a sunburn, tight or pruritic. In patients with severe disease, the skin may blister and become intensely painful like a burn. Histologic confirmation is important because many things (drug reactions, viral infections, etc.) may cause rashes. Although there is no definitive pathologic finding that differentiates GVHD from other eruptions, apoptosis at the base of dermal crypts is the characteristic finding. Other features include dyskeratosis, exocytosis of lymphocytes, satellite

TABLE 1 Clinical manifestations and staging of acute GVHD

| Organ         | Clinical manifestations                                                                 | Differential                                                                 | Histology                                                                 | Staging                                                                 |
|---------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Skin          | Erythematous, maculopapular rash often involving palms and soles. May become confluent. Severe disease: bullae described as tender, like a sunburn, pruritic | Chemo/radiotherapy effect, drug allergy, viral exanthem, infection       | Basal vacuolopathy, dyskeratosis, exocytosis of lymphocytes, edema, dermal-epidermal separation | Stage 1: <25% rash Stage 2: 25%-50% rash Stage 3: generalized erythroderma Stage 4: bullae |
| Liver         | Painless jaundice with conjugated hyperbilirubinemia and increased alkaline phosphatase   | Veno-occlusive disease, drug toxicity, viral infection, sepsis           | Lymphocytic infiltration of bile ducts, bile duct damage with epithelial cell dropout | Stage 1: bili 2-3 mg/dL Stage 2: bili 3.1-6 mg/dL Stage 3: bili 6.1-15 mg/dL Stage 4: bili >15 mg/dL |
| Gastrointestinal (GI) tract | Upper: nausea, vomiting, anorexia. Lower: diarrhea, crampy abdominal pain, distention, ileus, GI bleeding | Infection (bacterial, viral, C.Diff), toxicity from conditioning regimen | Crypt cell necrosis and dropout. Mucosal separation and sloughing        | Stage 1: diarrhea >500 mL/day Stage 2: diarrhea >1000 mL/day Stage 3: diarrhea >1500 mL/day Stage 4: ileus, bleeding |

lymphocytes adjacent to dyskeratotic epidermal keratinocytes, and dermal perivascular lymphocytic infiltration. In patients with blistering disease, dermal-epidermal separation is seen.

GASTROINTESTINAL TRACT GI GVHD usually parallels the development of skin and liver GVHD. GVHD of the gut is a pan-intestinal process, often with differences in severity between the upper and lower GI tracts. GVHD may present with nausea, vomiting, anorexia, diarrhea, and/or abdominal pain. Gastric involvement gives rise to postprandial vomiting that is not always preceded by nausea. Although gastroparesis is seen after bone marrow transplant, it is usually not associated with gastric GVHD; thus, the pathogenesis of the vomiting associated with gastric GVHD remains unclear. GVHD diarrhea is secretory and may have a stringy appearance due to the sloughing of intestinal mucosa that occurs in severe cases. Only slightly more is known about the pathogenesis of the diarrhea associated with GVHD. The diarrhea may be mediated by TNF-α, which induces Cl⁻ and K⁺ secretion in human distal colon driven by prostaglandin E2 (11). TNF-α also alters cholinergic muscle contraction. Significant GI blood loss may result from mucosal ulceration associated with GVHD and is associated with a poor prognosis (31). In advanced disease, diffuse, severe abdominal pain and distention may be accompanied by voluminous diarrhea (>2 liters/day). The diarrhea results from water and protein exudation across a severely injured mucosa. Acute GVHD is graded by several clinical criteria, one of which is the volume of diarrhea. Significant GI bleeding may originate from the small intestine in which the mucosa is ulcerated or sloughed. Radiologic findings include luminal dilatation with thickening of the wall of the small bowel and air/fluid levels suggestive of an ileus.
on abdominal flat plates or small bowel series. Abdominal computed tomography may show the “ribbon” sign, which indicates diffuse thickening of the small bowel wall.

The diagnosis of GI GVHD must be made by mucosal biopsy, since little correlation exists between the extent of disease and the endoscopic appearance. The only possible exception is when mucosal sloughing occurs; this endoscopic appearance is almost pathognomonic for severe disease. Mucosal sloughing of the esophagus, duodenum, and colon have been described, but a more typical finding is a gastric, intestinal, or colonic mucosa that appear deceptively normal or have nonspecific erythema or edema (32). Therefore, histologic analysis of tissue is imperative for the diagnosis. The histology of GI GVHD is characterized by the presence of apoptotic bodies in the base of crypts, sometimes accompanied by an acute or chronic inflammatory infiltrate (33). Crypt abscess, flattening of the surface epithelium, and loss of crypts are also common features. Such histologic findings may be confounded by mucosal damage due to the preparative regimen, if biopsies are taken prior to day 20. Acute GVHD is a diffuse process that affects the entire gut, such that diagnostic biopsies can be obtained from either the upper or lower GI tracts. Gastric biopsies have been touted as superior to those obtained from the rectum (34). Studies have shown that antral biopsies correlate well with the severity of GVHD in the duodenum and the colon even if the presenting symptom is diarrhea (32). However, endoscopic evaluation should be directed by the patient’s principal GI symptoms and the need to rule out infections and obstructing lesions.

LIVER Serum liver function test abnormalities are common following bone marrow transplant (35). Other problems that may affect post-transplant hepatic function include veno-occlusive disease, drug toxicity, viral infection, sepsis, iron overload, and extrahepatic biliary obstruction. Because many patients are not biopsied, the exact incidence of hepatic GVHD is unknown, but it probably occurs in around half of patients with GVHD. The development of jaundice or an increase in the alkaline phosphatase and bilirubin provide the initial clues that GVHD has occurred and reflect injury to the biliary epithelium, a characteristic feature of this disorder.

One of the earliest histologic features of hepatic GVHD is the attachment of lymphocytes to vascular endothelial cells, producing the so-called endothelialitis. After lymphocytic infiltration of the portal areas, pericholangitis occurs and ultimately leads to bile duct destruction (36). The inflammatory infiltrate is comprised of donor CD3⁺, CD4⁺, and CD8⁺ T cells (37). T cell–mediated liver injury occurs through the Fas/Fas ligand pathway (38). When T cells from Fas ligand (FasL)-defective mutant donor mice are transplanted into lethally irradiated MHC-matched allogeneic recipient mice, they exhibit only minimal signs of hepatic GVHD (39). Neutralizing anti-FasL antibody and Fas inhibitor protein decreases liver GVHD (40).

More recently, a variant hepatic GVHD has been reported. In contrast to the cholestasis described above, patients developed hepatitis as a result of GVHD. Their serum transaminase levels sometimes exceeded 1000 U/L. In these cases,
liver biopsies showed the typical lymphocytic infiltration of the portal triads and bile duct loss but also included loss of the limiting plate with marked lymphocytic infiltration of the hepatic lobule and pericentral necrosis (41).

# Staging of Acute GVHD

GVHD is staged within each organ system involved (42). These evaluations are then combined to give an overall clinical stage, ranging from 0 to IV. Within the skin, GVHD is staged by the percentage of the body involved and the presence of blisters. GI disease is gauged by the amount of diarrhea. Liver disease is measured by the bilirubin elevation. Although there have been several attempts to devise a system that will provide more prognostic information, the simplicity of the original staging system has resulted in its continued use (see Table 2).

# Prophylaxis of Acute GVHD

Given the complex mechanisms by which effector cells may become and remain activated in GVHD, most of the emphasis in transplantation has been on GVHD prophylaxis. The two basic strategies are lymphocyte depletion of the donor graft and pharmacologic therapy. The most commonly administered drugs are shown in Table 3.

Lymphocyte depletion of the graft is a very direct way of reducing or eliminating GVHD. If the mature lymphocytes responsible for initiation of GVHD are removed, the stem cells repopulating the lymphoid compartment will be tolerant. [This topic was covered in a recent comprehensive review (43).] So far, the potential of this approach has not been achieved because of several major flaws. First, most of the techniques used to remove lymphocytes, including mechanical and density-gradient separation, selective depletion with lectins, incubation with monoclonal antibodies, and incubation with pharmacologic agents, result in loss of stem cells. This is particularly problematic in that increased numbers of stem

## TABLE 2 Glucksberg criteria for staging of acute GVHD${}^{a}$

| Overall grade | Skin | Liver | Gut |
|----------------|------|-------|-----|
| I              | 1-2  | 0     | 0   |
| II             | 1-3  | 1     | and/or | 1 |
| III            | 2-3  | 2-4   | and/or | 2-3 |
| IV             | 2-4  | 2-4   | and/or | 2-4 |

*See Table 1 for individual organ staging. Traditionally, individual organs are staged without regard to attribution. The overall grade of GVHD, however, reflects the actual extent of GVHD. To achieve each overall grade, skin disease plus liver and/or gut involvement are required.

| Drug | Mechanism | Dosing | Excretion/ Metabolism | Adverse effects |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Corticosteroids | Direct lymphocyte toxicity; suppress pro-inflammatory cytokines (TNF-alpha) | IV/PO; dosed early after transplant; usually tapered by day 180 | Predominantly hepatic tissues | Hyperglycemia; acute psychosis; severe myopathy; neuropathy; osteoporosis; cataract development |
| Methotrexate (MTX) | Antimetabolite; aids in inducing tolerance after BMT; may downregulate T lymphocytes by inhibiting proliferation | IV; dosed soon after transplant, before day 14; often combined with other immunosuppressants | Hepatic and renal | Significant renal, hepatic, and gastrointestinal toxicities |
| Cyclosporine A (CSA) | IL-2 suppressor; blocks calcium-dependent signal transduction distal to engagement of T cell receptor | IV/PO; usually dosed prior to graft infusion; often combined with other immunosuppressants | Hepatic and renal | Renal and hepatic insufficiency; hypertension; hyperglycemia; headache; nausea and vomiting; hirsutism; gum hypertrophy; seizure with severe toxicity |
| Tacrolimus (FK506) | IL-2 receptor; blocks calcium-dependent signal transduction distal to engagement of T cell receptor | Similar to CSA | Predominantly hepatic | Similar to CSA |
| Mycophenolate mofetil (MMF) | Inhibits de novo purine synthesis; lymphocytes are highly dependent on de novo synthesis | PO | Hepatic and renal | Body aches; abdominal pain; nausea and vomiting; diarrhea; neutropenia |
| Antithymocyte globulin (ATG) | Polyclonal immunoglobulin capable of destroying human T cells | IV; most often used in preparative regimen | Plasma half-life 2–3 days | Anaphylaxis; serum sickness |

cells are needed to overcome residual host defenses that are normally addressed by the graft lymphocytes. Failure of engraftment is usually a fatal complication. Second, relapse rates are higher following lymphocyte-depleted grafts. Third, many trials have been complicated by higher rates of infection. Finally, large-scale separation of grafts that target more specific effector cells (such as Th-1 cells) so far has not been possible. Thus, most groups adopt this approach only for extremely high-risk cases (e.g., mismatched transplants), or they utilize add-back techniques (e.g., adjustment of the graft to a particular lymphocyte count or administration of lymphocytes after the patient has recovered from the preparative regimen toxicity) to try to restore limited immunologic potency to the grafts.

Although there are minor variations on the pharmacologic approach, the overwhelming majority of patients now receive cyclosporine and methotrexate for GVHD prophylaxis. The initial trial compared this combination to cyclosporine alone in patients with acute myelogenous leukemia in first remission and chronic-phase chronic myelogenous leukemia, but the results have been confirmed in a large number of studies by multiple groups (44). A large randomized trial found that the addition of steroids offered no advantage (45). Tacrolimus (FK506) has a mechanism of action that is very similar to cyclosporine and may be better tolerated. It appears that the combination of FK506 and methotrexate offer similar results to cyclosporine plus methotrexate (46). Three other drugs are being used for GVHD prophylaxis: CAMPATH, an anti-CD52 monoclonal used both in vitro and in vivo; anti-thymocyte globulin (ATG), which is used commonly in mismatched and unrelated transplants; and mycophenolate mofetil (MMF), which is being explored as a new alternative agent (47–49).

## Therapy for Acute GVHD

Glucocorticoid steroids are used as initial therapy for acute GVHD. The mechanisms by which steroids work are multifactorial; they act as lympholytic agents and inhibit the release of inflammatory cytokines such as IL-1, IL-2, IL-6, gamma interferon, and TNF. Because of the availability of an intravenous form, methylprednisolone is the steroid most commonly given for acute GVHD. Various dosing regimens have been used, none of which is clearly superior. High-bolus doses (10–20 mg/kg or 500 mg/m²) have higher initial response rates, but flares on tapering and opportunistic infections are common. Both the Seattle and Minnesota transplant groups have reviewed their experiences with initial therapy for acute GVHD (30, 50, 51). Many of the patients included in these reviews were treated before cyclosporine was available, which may skew the results. However, both groups found that treatment with steroids was as effective as, or more effective than, other therapies or combination of therapies, with 20%–40% of patients having durable long-term responses. Long-term salvage rates for patients who failed steroids were 20% or less; most patients eventually succumbed to infection, acute GVHD, and/or

chronic GVHD. Only patients who flared with GVHD at the low doses of steroid, or after a steroid taper, appeared to respond again to steroids and do relatively well.

Considering the model of acute GVHD proposed above, the poor survival once GVHD occurs is hardly surprising. The damage caused by the GVHD activates more T cells, causing more tissue damage, which activates more cells. This vicious cycle is hard to disrupt once started, since many accessory pathways can keep the reaction going. Although ATG has been used in the past for GVHD salvage, most centers now offer these patients experimental therapy using new monoclonals (e.g., the anti-TNF monoclonal infliximab, particularly for GI GVHD; the anti-IL-2 receptor monoclonal; a humanized anti-CD3; and ABX-CBL, an antibody to CD147, which recognizes activated T and B cells), extracorporeal photopheresis, and drugs (e.g., pentostatin, rapamycin, MMF) (52–57). The goal of these studies is to determine how to utilize these medications in initial treatment or prophylaxis of GVHD. Salvage of patients with extensive multiorgan GVHD is not a realistic goal at this point.

A major thrust in transplantation has been the use of nonmyeloablative transplants. These transplants have significantly less tissue damage associated with the reduced preparative regimens that are given. Much of the benefit of allogeneic SCT is the GVL effect mediated by the donor cells. The GVL effect accounts for the much higher rate of relapse after syngeneic than allogeneic transplants for the same malignant disease (58). The GVL effect is also responsible for the efficacy of donor lymphocyte infusions, which enable patients (especially those with CML) who relapsed after allogeneic transplant to achieve long-term remissions (59, 60). The GVL effect relies on immunologic (usually minor antigen) differences between the donor and host, and it does not necessarily require a myeloablative preparative regimen for total donor chimerism. Using nonmyeloablative regimens (so-called mini or lite transplants), it is possible to achieve mixed hematopoietic chimerism, in which both donor and recipient hematopoietic cells are present (as opposed to complete donor chimerism, in which only donor cells are detected after a myeloablative transplant). This development has allowed the exploration of the GVL effect as the major therapy for the tumor. This approach, which relies on donor cellular immune effects instead of the cytotoxic effects of the preparative regimen to control the underlying disease, has been successful in animal models of transplantation. In humans, the initial trials have been in patients who otherwise would not be transplant candidates owing to age, extensive pretreatment, or comorbid diseases. For many genetic disorders, a state of mixed donor-host chimerism is sufficient to provide the patient with the needed enzyme or cell population. From a GVHD standpoint, the use of a much less intensive preparative regimen decreases the tissue toxicity and subsequent release of cytokines. Patients generally tolerate the initial peritransplant period with little or no GVHD, although many develop GVHD later, especially after donor lymphocyte infusions. In fact, the rates of GVHD are often higher than with conventional transplants, and the GVHD accounts for much of the GVL effect (61).

CHRONIC GVHD

Approximately 40%–60% of long-term survivors of SCT will develop chronic GVHD. The incidence of chronic GVHD is currently increasing because of the older age of patients being transplanted, the use of peripheral blood stem cells for the graft source, the use of donor lymphocyte transfusions, and the use of mismatched and unrelated donors.

Less is understood about the pathophysiology of chronic GVHD than is known about acute GVH. The development of allogeneic animal models is difficult and time-consuming because the animals must survive acute GVHD and develop chronic GVHD. The major model of chronic GVHD currently being utilized is a parent-into-F1-hybrid murine model in which the animals are incapable of rejecting the homozygous donor cells, as in transfusion GVHD. Unfortunately, many of the clinical characteristics of this disorder, such as nephritis and elimination of host B cells, are not seen in chronic GVHD, so the application of the findings to chronic GVHD is questionable.

There are two basic theories as to the mechanism of chronic GVHD. Chronic GVHD may be simply end-stage alloreactivity, in which the T cells have evolved to approach a Th2 phenotype (62). The other theory postulates that chronic GVHD is poor/dysfunctional immunologic recovery, similar to autologous GVHD. Autologous GVHD can be induced by administration of cyclosporine after an autologous transplant. Extensive laboratory evaluation of autologous GVHD has shown it to be a T cell-mediated, autoreactive disorder, dependent on thymic damage for its expression. Animals that develop autologous GVHD initially show erythroderma, followed by alopecia and scleroderma-like chronic GVHD. The same limited-repertoire T cell expansion, consisting of V beta 8.5 and V beta 8.10 cells, seen in spontaneously occurring rodent autoimmune disorders, appears in animals with autologous GVHD as well as in animals with experimental chronic GVHD (63). Class II-specific donor/anti-donor autoreactive T cells have been demonstrated in humans as well as mice with chronic GVHD. Because of decreased negative selection, reduced extrathymic generation, and/or acceleration of the normal thymic aging process in chronic GVHD, patients have an increase in peripheral autoreactive T lymphocytes (64, 65). These autoreactive T lymphocytes act with gamma interferon to produce the increased collagen deposition seen histopathologically in chronic GVHD (66, 67).

The usual symptoms of chronic GVHD resemble those of many spontaneously occurring autoimmune disorders. Although the clinical findings in chronic GVHD may be impressive, the main effect of chronic GVHD is on immune function. Infections account for the majority of deaths in these patients (65, 66, 68). Unlike acute GVHD, chronic GVHD can involve almost any organ, although the skin, liver, and mouth are the most frequent targets. The diagnosis of chronic GVHD is traditionally made after day 100 post-transplant, although patients may present with classic features of chronic GVHD before the artificial day-100 separation of acute and chronic. The median time of diagnosis is day 201 after HLA-identical

sibling transplant, day 159 after mismatched related-donor transplant, and day 133 after unrelated-donor transplant (71).

# Clinical Manifestations of Chronic GVHD

**IMMUNE SYSTEM** Both chronic GVHD and its therapies result in profound immunosuppression. In fact, most chronic GVHD deaths are attributable to infection. Functional asplenia with an increased susceptibility to encapsulated bacteria is common, and circulating Howell-Jolly bodies may be seen on peripheral blood smear. Patients are also at risk for invasive fungal infections and *Pneumocystis carinii* pneumonia (PCP). Routine prophylaxis against PCP should continue for six months after resolution of GVHD, and patients should receive pneumococcal prophylaxis for life (72). Immunoglobulin levels should be monitored, and patients with levels below 500 mg/dl should be supplemented with intravenous immunoglobulin. Vaccinations, including Prevnar, should be delayed for six months after resolution of GVHD and discontinuation of immunosuppressive medications.

**SKIN** Lichenoid chronic GVHD presents as an erythematous, papular rash that resembles lichen planus with no typical distribution pattern. Sclerodermatous GVHD may involve the dermis and/or the muscular fascia and clinically resembles systemic sclerosis. The skin is thickened, tight, and fragile, with very poor wound healing. Alteration in pigmentation, either hypo- or hyperpigmentation, may occur. In severe cases, the skin may become blistered from poor lymphatic drainage or may ulcerate. In isolated fascial scleroderma, the skin appears normal, but its mobility is decreased; the skin is fixed to the fascia below. Careful examination of the skin is critical in making the diagnosis.

**DERMAL APPENDAGES** Fingernails and toenails may be affected by chronic GVHD. Nails develop vertical ridges and cracking and are very fragile. Nail problems may persist even after skin changes have resolved. Hair loss in areas of affected skin may also persist after treatment, although recovery of hair is frequently a sign of recovery from the disorder. Brittle hair often proceeds alopecia. Premature graying of hair and eyebrows, even in children, is often associated with chronic GVHD; its mechanism is not clear. Sweat glands may be destroyed in sclerodermatous disease, and the resulting inability to sweat in warm temperatures may cause serious hyperthermia.

**MUSCULOSKELETAL SYSTEM** Fascial involvement in sclerodermatous GVHD is usually associated with skin changes; however, it may develop with normal-appearing, but fixed, overlying skin. Fascitis in joint areas may limit range of motion. Muscle cramps are a common complaint in patients with chronic GVHD, although the pathophysiology is not understood. Myositis, with tender muscles and elevated muscle enzymes, is rare and does not explain the frequent complaints of severe cramps.

Because many patients with chronic GVHD have received steroid therapy, and almost all have low sex hormone levels as a result of the transplant, osteopenia and osteoporosis are frequent complications. Avascular necrosis often requires joint replacement, which is a very difficult prospect both because of the poor wound healing and because of the increased risk of postoperative infections due to the concomitant administration of immunosuppression and underlying immunodeficiency. Regular bone density evaluation and the use of bisphosphonates to treat and/or prevent further degenerative changes are recommended, as they may minimize the long-term crippling effects of bone damage.

EYES Ocular GVHD usually presents with irritated or dry eyes. Irreversible destruction of the lacrimal glands results in dryness, photophobia, and burning. Local therapy involves preservative-free tears and ointment as well as the placement of punctal plugs by an experienced ophthalmologist. Conjunctival GVHD, a rare manifestation of severe chronic GVHD, has a poor prognosis.

MOUTH Oral GVHD causes xerostomia and/or food sensitivity. More advanced disease may cause odynophagia due to extension of damage down the throat, although rarely patients will have esophageal involvement without oral disease. Physical exam in mild disease reveals only erythema with a few white plaques that may prompt a misdiagnosis of thrush or herpetic infections. Lichenoid changes in more advanced disease cause more extensive plaques. Secondary infections with viruses (especially herpes simplex) and yeasts are almost universal.

GASTROINTESTINAL TRACT Patients with chronic GVHD have GI complaints that are often not caused by their chronic GVHD. These symptoms are often attributable to other disease states, including acute GVHD, infection, dysmotility, lactose intolerance, pancreatic insufficiency, and drug-related side effects. Because many of these problems are easily correctable, full evaluation of GI symptoms is important (73). In a retrospective review of the intestinal biopsies of 40 patients at Johns Hopkins Hospital with chronic GVHD and persistent GI symptoms, only 11 patients showed histopathologic evidence of chronic GVHD. The majority of these patients had evidence of both acute and chronic GVHD, and only 3 patients (7%) were found to have isolated chronic GVHD. This study illustrated that although chronic GVHD alone may involve the GI tract, it may be difficult to diagnose and is seldom seen without concurrent acute GVHD.

LIVER Hepatic disease typically presents as cholestasis, with evaluation revealing elevated alkaline phosphatase and elevated serum bilirubin. Isolated hepatic chronic GVHD is becoming more common with the increasing use of donor lymphocyte infusion (35). Liver biopsy is required to confirm the diagnosis and is especially important in patients with no other symptoms of chronic GVHD, since viral infection and drug toxicity may mimic GVHD.

RESPIRATORY TRACT Bronchiolitis obliterans is usually a late and serious manifestation of chronic GVHD. Patients typically present with a cough or dyspnea (74). Again, because many things may cause these symptoms (infection, reactive airway disease, fluid overload, cardiac disease, etc.), the symptoms should be fully evaluated before a diagnosis of bronchiolitis obliterans is made. For example, patients with severe sclerotic chest wall disease may have similar symptoms with no intrinsic pulmonary disease. Their problem is due to the inability of the lung to expand normally. Complete pulmonary function tests are needed to diagnose the problem. Chest computed tomography results may be normal or may show hyperinflation. Overall, patients with bronchiolitis obliterans have minimal response to therapy and a very poor prognosis.

Patients with chronic GVHD are also at risk for chronic sinopulmonary disease, chronic cough, and bronchospasm. Sinus infections are more common in patients with GVHD, and symptoms may be minimal (75).

HEMATOPOIETIC SYSTEM Cytopenias are common in chronic GVHD patients. This may be a result of stromal damage, but autoimmune neutropenia, anemia, and/or thrombocytopenia are also seen. Thrombocytopenia at the time of chronic GVHD diagnosis has been associated with a poor prognosis (76, 77). However, thrombocytopenia post-transplant may be a poor prognostic factor, independent of GVHD (78). Eosinophilia is occasionally seen with chronic GVHD. The exact etiology is unknown, but the eosinophilia usually resolves with adequate systemic treatment of GVHD.

# Classification of Chronic GVHD

Chronic GVHD can be classified according to the type of onset, the clinical manifestations, or the extent of disease.

Most patients with chronic GVHD have had prior acute GVHD. Their disease may evolve directly from acute GVHD (progressive) which has a grim prognosis, or may follow a period of recovery (quiescent) GVHD, with an intermediate prognosis. Patients who develop de novo chronic GVHD, i.e., with no history of prior acute GVHD, have a relatively good prognosis. A fourth type of onset, explosive GVHD, is characterized by the abrupt onset of multisystem involvement and manifestations of both acute and chronic GVHD. Explosive GVHD is a very aggressive disease with a poor prognosis.

Patients may also be classified by their skin manifestations into lichenoid or sclerodermatous-disease categories. The lichenoid form occurs earlier after SCT and may evolve into sclerodermatous GVHD. The most commonly used staging system identifies patients as having limited or extensive disease based on the outcome of 20 patients (79). Localized skin involvement, with or without hepatic dysfunction, is classified as limited disease and does not require treatment. Generalized skin involvement, or limited skin involvement combined with eye involvement, mouth involvement, liver dysfunction with abnormal histology, or

involvement of any other target organ, is considered extensive disease, which needs therapy. Although this staging system is highly reproducible, it provides little information about prognosis and is of limited clinical utility.

One proposed grading system for chronic GVHD stratifies patients into risk categories according to clinical characteristics at diagnosis (77). Multivariate analysis of a data base of 151 patients with chronic GVHD found three variables that are risk factors for shortened survival: extensive skin GVHD involving >50% of the body surface area, platelet count of <100,000/μl, and progressive onset. This model was validated using data from 1108 patients from the International Bone Marrow Transplant Registry (n = 711), Fred Hutchinson Cancer Center (n = 188), University of Nebraska (n = 60), and University of Minnesota (n = 149). Despite the significant heterogeneity of the data, the proposed grading system identified three prognostic groups, each with different survival outcomes. Because this grading system is highly predictive of outcome, it may help to improve clinical management, trial design, and communication among transplant centers.

# Therapy for Chronic GVHD

The most commonly used first-line therapy for chronic GVHD is cyclosporine A (CSA) and prednisone, administered on alternating days. The first patients with chronic GVHD were largely treated with steroids. Sullivan et al. (76) reported that prednisone alone is superior to prednisone plus azathioprine for primary treatment of patients with chronic GVHD. However, in patients classified as high-risk on the basis of platelet counts below 100,000/μl, treatment with prednisone alone resulted in only 26% five-year survival. When a similar group of patients was treated with alternating-day CSA and prednisone, five-year survival exceeded 50% (80). The regimen initially uses prednisone at 1 mg/kg per day and CSA at 10 mg/kg per day divided b.i.d. CSA dosing is based on the lower of actual and ideal body weight. If disease is nonprogressive after two weeks, prednisone is tapered by 25% per week to a target dose of 1 mg/kg every other day. After successful completion of this steroid taper, CSA is reduced by 25% per week to alternate-day dosing of 10 mg/kg per day divided b.i.d. The original re-evaluation of response to therapy took place at 9 months. However, other groups have found that 90% of all responders have responded by 3 months (81). If the disease has completely resolved, patients are slowly weaned from both medications, with dose reductions approximately every two weeks.

Although this regimen of alternating CSA and prednisone is widely used for the treatment of standard-risk (platelet count >100,000/μl) extensive GVHD, it had only been studied in high-risk patients until recently (P. Martin, personal communication). Prednisone alone has been compared to prednisone plus CSA in patients with platelet counts >100,000/μl. A randomized study of 287 patients with extensive GVHD found no statistically significant difference in non-relapse death at five years or in cumulative incidence of secondary therapy at five years. When patients were observed over the entire length of follow-up, however, a trend
suggesting a lower probability of survival without relapse emerged in the CSA- plus-prednisone arm (RR = 0.70, $p = 0.06$). Patients treated with prednisone alone had a higher incidence of avascular necrosis.

For chronic GVHD that recurs or fails to respond to initial therapy, there is no standard treatment. Experimental therapies currently under evaluation include psoralen plus ultraviolet light A, MMF, thalidomide, total lymphoid irradiation, plaquenil, extracorporeal photopheresis, pentostatin, and acetretin (72, 82–88).

# DIRECTIONS FOR FUTURE RESEARCH

It is hoped that advances in our understanding of the basic immunology of GVHD will translate into advances in clinical care. The mediators involved in GVHD are being more carefully defined and should result in more selective immunosuppression—preventing GVHD without loss of the GVL effect. Keratinocyte growth factor is an obvious choice as a cytokine shield that would maintain a GVL effect. IL-7 may hasten thymic immune recovery after transplantation, thereby decreasing chronic GVHD. Other growth factors may help control the extent of end organ damage and/or promote recovery. Hepatocyte growth factor ameliorates acute GVHD and promotes hepatopoietic function in animal models (89). As our understanding of the various factors involved in GVHD advances and as more of these modulators become available for clinical use, real progress will be made in combating this disease.

The Annual Review of Medicine is online at http://med.annualreviews.org

## LITERATURE CITED

1. Barnes DWH, Corp MJ, Loutit JF, Neal FE. 1956. Treatment of murine leukemia with X-rays and homologous bone marrow. *BMJ* 2:626–27
2. Billingham RE. 1966. The biology of graft-versus-host reactions. *Harvey Lect.* 62:21–78
3. Erlich HA, Opelz G, Hansen J. 2001. HLA DNA typing and transplantation. *Immunity* 14:347–56
4. Petersdorf EW, Hansen JA, Martin PJ, et al. 2001. Major-histocompatibility-complex class I alleles and antigens in hematopoietic-cell transplantation. *N. Engl. J. Med.* 345:1794–800
5. Mori M, Beatty PG, Graves M, et al. 1997. HLA gene and haplotype frequencies in the North American population: the National Marrow Donor Program Donor Registry. *Transplantation* 64:1017–27
6. Goulmy E, Schipper R, Pool J, et al. 1996. Mismatches of minor histocompatibility antigens between HLA-identical donors and recipients and the development of graft-versus-host disease after bone marrow transplantation. *N. Engl. J. Med.* 334:281–85
7. Tiberghien P. 2001. Use of suicide gene-expressing donor T-cells to control alloreactivity after haematopoietic stem cell transplantation. *J. Intern. Med.* 249:369–77
8. Hill GR, Ferrara JL. 2000. The primacy of the gastrointestinal tract as a target organ of acute graft-versus-host disease: rationale for the use of cytokine shields in
allogeneic bone marrow transplantation.
*Blood 95:2754–59*

9. Johansson JE, Brune M, Ekman T. 2001. The gut mucosa barrier is preserved during allogeneic, haemopoietic stem cell transplantation with reduced intensity conditioning. *Bone Marrow Transplant.* 28:737–42

10. Schmitz H, Fromm M, Bentzel CJ, et al. 1999. Tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha) regulates the epithelial barrier in the human intestinal cell line HT-29/B6. *J. Cell Sci.* 112(Pt. 1):137–46

11. Schmitz H, Fromm M, Bode H, et al. 1996. Tumor necrosis factor-alpha induces Cl⁻ and K⁺ secretion in human distal colon driven by prostaglandin E2. *Am J. Physiol. Gastrointest. Liver Physiol.* 271:G669–G674

12. Radojevic N, McKay DM, Merger M, et al. 1999. Characterization of enteric functional changes evoked by in vivo anti-CD3 T cell activation. *Am J. Physiol. Integr. Comp. Physiol.* 276:R715–R723

13. Cooke KR, Gerbitz A, Crawford JM, et al. 2001. LPS antagonism reduces graft-versus-host disease and preserves graft-versus-leukemia activity after experimental bone marrow transplantation. *J. Clin. Invest.* 107:1581–89

14. Hill GR, Cooke KR, Teshima T, et al. 1998. Interleukin-11 promotes T cell polarization and prevents acute graft-versus-host disease after allogeneic bone marrow transplantation. *J. Clin. Invest.* 102:115–23

15. Krijanovski OI, Hill GR, Cooke KR, et al. 1999. Keratinocyte growth factor separates graft-versus-leukemia effects from graft-versus-host disease. *Blood* 94:825–31

16. Panoskaltsis-Mortari A, Lacey DL, Vallera DA, Blazar BR. 1998. Keratinocyte growth factor administered before conditioning ameliorates graft-versus-host disease after allogeneic bone marrow transplantation in mice. *Blood* 92:3960–67

17. Antin JH, Lee SJ, Neuberg D, et al. 2002. A phase I/II double-blind, placebo-controlled

study of recombinant human interleukin-11 for mucositis and acute GVHD prevention in allogeneic stem cell transplantation. *Bone Marrow Transplant.* 29:373–77

18. Via CS, Shustov A, Rus V, et al. 2001. In vivo neutralization of TNF-alpha promotes humoral autoimmunity by preventing the induction of CTL. *J. Immunol.* 167:6821–26

19. Hill GR, Teshima T, Gerbitz A, et al. 1999. Differential roles of IL-1 and TNF-alpha on graft-versus-host disease and graft versus leukemia. *J. Clin. Invest.* 104:459–67

20. Tsukada N, Kobata T, Aizawa Y, et al. 1999. Graft-versus-leukemia effect and graft-versus-host disease can be differentiated by cytotoxic mechanisms in a murine model of allogeneic bone marrow transplantation. *Blood* 93:2738–47

21. Tamada K, Shimozaki K, Chapoval AI, et al. 2000. LIGHT, a TNF-like molecule, costimulates T cell proliferation and is required for dendritic cell-mediated allogenic T cell response. *J. Immunol.* 164:4105–10

22. Ogawa S, Nagamatsu G, Watanabe M, et al. 2001. Opposing effects of anti-activation-inducible lymphocyte-immunomodulatory molecule/inducible costimulator antibody on the development of acute versus chronic graft-versus-host disease. *J. Immunol.* 167:5741–48

23. Solomon B, Bluestone JA. 2001. Complexities of CD28/B7:CTLA-4 costimulatory pathways in autoimmunity and transplantation. *Annu. Rev. Immunol.* 19:225–52

24. Blazar BR, Taylor PA, Panoskaltsis-Mortari A, et al. 1999. Opposing roles of CD28:B7 and CTLA-4:B7 pathways in regulating in vivo alloresponses in murine recipients of MHC disparate T cells. *J. Immunol.* 162:6368–77

25. Okamura H, Tsutsi H, Komatsu T, et al. 1995. Cloning of a new cytokine that induces IFN-gamma production by T cells. *Nature* 378:88–91

26. Reddy P, Teshima T, Kukuruga M, et al. 2001. Interleukin-18 regulates acute

graft-versus-host disease by enhancing
Fas-mediated donor T cell apoptosis. *J. Exp. Med.* 194:1433–40

27. Okamoto I, Kohno K, Tanimoto T, et al. 2000. IL-18 prevents the development of chronic graft-versus-host disease in mice. *J. Immunol.* 164:6067–74

28. Williamson E, Garside P, Bradley JA, et al. 1997. Neutralizing IL-12 during induction of murine acute graft-versus-host disease polarizes the cytokine profile toward a Th2-type alloimmune response and confers long term protection from disease. *J. Immunol.* 159:1208–15

29. Garside P, Reid S, Steel M, Mowat AM. 1994. Differential cytokine production associated with distinct phases of murine graft-versus-host reaction. *Immunology* 82:211–14

30. Martin PJ, Schoch G, Fisher L, et al. 1990. A retrospective analysis of therapy for acute graft-versus-host disease: initial treatment. *Blood* 76:1464–72

31. Nevo S, Enger C, Swan V, et al. 1999. Acute bleeding after allogeneic bone marrow transplantation: association with graft versus host disease and effect on survival. *Transplantation* 67:681–89

32. Ponec RJ, Hackman RC, McDonald GB. 1999. Endoscopic and histologic diagnosis of intestinal graft-versus-host disease after marrow transplantation. *Gastrointest. Endosc.* 49:612–21

33. Iqbal N, Salzman D, Lazenby AJ, Wilcox CM. 2000. Diagnosis of gastrointestinal graft-versus-host disease. *Am. J. Gastroenterol.* 95:3034–38

34. Snover DC, Weisdorf SA, Vercellotti GM, et al. 1985. A histopathologic study of gastric and small intestinal graft-versus-host disease following allogeneic bone marrow transplantation. *Hum. Pathol.* 16:387–92

35. Arai S, Lee L, Vogelsang G. 2002. A systematic approach to hepatic complications in hematopoietic stem cell transplantation. *J. Hematother. Stem Cell Res.* 11:215–30

36. Snover DC, Weisdorf SA, Ramsay NK, et al. 1984. Hepatic graft versus host disease: a study of the predictive value of liver biopsy in diagnosis. *Hepatology* 4:123–30

37. Howell CD, De Victor D, Li J, et al. 1995. Liver T cell subsets and adhesion molecules in murine graft-versus-host disease. *Bone Marrow Transplant.* 16:139–45

38. Bobe P, Bonardelle D, Reynes M, et al. 1997. Fas-mediated liver damage in MRL hemopoietic chimeras undergoing lpr-mediated graft-versus-host disease. *J. Immunol.* 159:4197–204

39. Baker MB, Altman NH, Podack ER, Levy RB. 1996. The role of cell-mediated cytotoxicity in acute GVHD after MHC-matched allogeneic bone marrow transplantation in mice. *J. Exp. Med.* 183:2645–56

40. Hattori K, Hirano T, Miyajima H, et al. 1998. Differential effects of anti-Fas ligand and anti-tumor necrosis factor alpha antibodies on acute graft-versus-host disease pathologies. *Blood* 91:4051–55

41. Fujii N, Takenaka K, Shinagawa K, et al. 2001. Hepatic graft-versus-host disease presenting as an acute hepatitis after allogeneic peripheral blood stem cell transplantation. *Bone Marrow Transplant.* 27:1007–10

42. Glucksberg H, Storb R, Fefer A, et al. 1974. Clinical manifestations of graft-versus-host disease in human recipients of marrow from HL-A-matched sibling donors. *Transplantation* 18:295–304

43. Ho VT, Soiffer RJ. 2001. The history and future of T-cell depletion as graft-versus-host disease prophylaxis for allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation. *Blood* 98:3192–204

44. Storb R, Deeg HJ, Whitehead J, et al. 1986. Methotrexate and cyclosporine compared with cyclosporine alone for prophylaxis of acute graft versus host disease after marrow transplantation for leukemia. *N. Engl. J. Med.* 314:729–35

45. Chao NJ, Snyder DS, Jain M, et al. 2000.

50 VOGELSANG ■ LEE ■ BENSEN-KENNEDY

Equivalence of 2 effective graft-versus-host disease prophylaxis regimens: results of a prospective double-blind randomized trial. *Biol. Blood Marrow Transplant.* 6:254–61

46. Nash RA, Antin JH, Karanes C, et al. 2000. Phase 3 study comparing methotrexate and tacrolimus with methotrexate and cyclosporine for prophylaxis of acute graft-versus-host disease after marrow transplantation from unrelated donors. *Blood* 96:2062–68

47. Hale G, Zhang MJ, Bunjes D, et al. 1998. Improving the outcome of bone marrow transplantation by using CD52 monoclonal antibodies to prevent graft-versus-host disease and graft rejection. *Blood* 92:4581–90

48. Bacigalupo A, Lamparelli T, Bruzzi P, et al. 2001. Antithymocyte globulin for graft-versus-host disease prophylaxis in transplants from unrelated donors: 2 randomized studies from Gruppo Italiano Trapianti Midollo Osseo (GITMO). *Blood* 98:2942–47

49. Basara N, Gunzelmann S, Willenbacher W, et al. 2001. New immunosuppressants in BMT/GVHD. *Transplant. Proc.* 33:2220–22

50. Weisdorf D, Haake R, Blazar B, et al. 1990. Treatment of moderate/severe acute graft-versus-host disease after allogeneic bone marrow transplantation: an analysis of clinical risk features and outcome. *Blood* 75:1024–30

51. Martin PJ, Schoch G, Fisher L, et al. 1991. A retrospective analysis of therapy for acute graft-versus-host disease: secondary treatment. *Blood* 77:1821–28

52. Alcindor T, Gorgun G, Miller KB, et al. 2001. Immunomodulatory effects of extracorporeal photochemotherapy in patients with extensive chronic graft-versus-host disease. *Blood* 98:1622–25

53. Carpenter PA, Appelbaum FR, Corey L, et al. 2002. A humanized non-FcR-binding anti-CD3 antibody, visilizumab, for treatment of steroid-refractory acute

graft-versus-host disease. *Blood* 99:2712–19

54. Deeg HJ, Blazar BR, Bolwell BJ, et al. 2001. Treatment of steroid-refractory acute graft-versus-host disease with anti-CD147 monoclonal antibody ABX-CBL. *Blood* 98:2052–58

55. Kobbe G, Schneider P, Rohr U, et al. 2001. Treatment of severe steroid refractory acute graft-versus-host disease with infliximab, a chimeric human/mouse anti-TNF-alpha antibody. *Bone Marrow Transplant.* 28:47–49

56. Margolis J, Vogelsang G. 2000. An old drug for a new disease: pentostatin (Nipent) in acute graft-versus-host disease. *Semin. Oncol.* 27:72–77

57. Przepiorka D, Kernan NA, Ippoliti C, et al. 2000. Daclizumab, a humanized anti-interleukin-2 receptor alpha chain antibody, for treatment of acute graft-versus-host disease. *Blood* 95:83–89

58. Fefer A, Sullivan KM, Weiden P, et al. 1987. Graft versus leukemia effect in man: the relapse rate of acute leukemia is lower after allogeneic than after syngeneic marrow transplantation. *Prog. Clin. Biol. Res.* 244:401–8

59. Roush KS, Hillyer CD. 2002. Donor lymphocyte infusion therapy. *Transfus. Med. Rev.* 16:161–76

60. Collins RH Jr, Shpilberg O, Droby ski WR, et al. 1997. Donor leukocyte infusions in 140 patients with relapsed malignancy after allogeneic bone marrow transplantation. *J. Clin. Oncol.* 15:433–44

61. Shimoni A, Nagler A. 2002. Non-myeloablative hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (NST) in the treatment of human malignancies: from animal models to clinical practice. *Cancer Treat. Res.* 110:113–36

62. Kataoka Y, Iwasaki T, Kuroiwa T, et al. 2001. The role of donor T cells for target organ injuries in acute and chronic graft-versus-host disease. *Immunology* 103:310–18

63. Hess A, Thoburn C, Chen W, Horwitz

L. 2001. Autoreactive T-cell subsets in acute and chronic syngeneic graft-versus-host disease. *Transplant. Proc.* 33:1754–56

64. Weinberg K, Blazar BR, Wagner JE, et al. 2001. Factors affecting thymic function after allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation. *Blood* 97:1458–66

65. Weinberg K, Annett G, Kashyap A, et al. 1995. The effect of thymic function on immunocompetence following bone marrow transplantation. *Biol. Blood Marrow Transplant.* 1:18–23

66. Parkman R. 1993. Is chronic graft versus host disease an autoimmune disease? *Curr. Opin. Immunol.* 5:800–3

67. Parkman R. 1998. Chronic graft-versus-host disease. *Curr. Opin. Hematol.* 5:22–25

68. Weinberg K, Blazar BR, Wagner JE, et al. 2001. Factors affecting thymic function after allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation. *Blood* 97:1458–66

69. Deleted in proof

70. Deleted in proof

71. Sullivan KM, Agura E, Anasetti C, et al. 1991. Chronic graft-versus-host disease and other late complications of bone marrow transplantation. *Semin. Hematol.* 28:250–59

72. Vogelsang GB. 2001. How I treat chronic graft-versus-host disease. *Blood* 97:1196–201

73. Jacobsohn DA, Montross S, Anders V, Vogelsang GB. 2001. Clinical importance of confirming or excluding the diagnosis of chronic graft-versus-host disease. *Bone Marrow Transplant.* 28:1047–51

74. Ratanatharathorn V, Ayash L, Lazarus HM, et al. 2001. Chronic graft-versus-host disease: clinical manifestation and therapy. *Bone Marrow Transplant.* 28:121–29

75. Thompson AM, Couch M, Zahurak ML, et al. 2002. Risk factors for post-stem cell transplant sinusitis. *Bone Marrow Transplant.* 29:257–61

76. Sullivan KM, Witherspoon RP, Storb R, et al. 1988. Prednisone and azathioprine compared with prednisone and placebo for treatment of chronic graft-v-host disease: prognostic influence of prolonged thrombocytopenia after allogeneic marrow transplantation. *Blood* 72:546–54

77. Akpek G, Zahurak ML, Piantadosi S, et al. 2001. Development of a prognostic model for grading chronic graft-versus-host disease. *Blood* 97:1219–26

78. Nevo S, Enger C, Hartley E, et al. 2001. Acute bleeding and thrombocytopenia after bone marrow transplantation. *Bone Marrow Transplant.* 27:65–72

79. Shulman HM, Sale GE, Lerner KG, et al. 1978. Chronic cutaneous graft-versus-host disease in man. *Am. J. Pathol.* 91:545–70

80. Sullivan KM, Witherspoon RP, Storb R, et al. 1988. Alternating-day cyclosporine and prednisone for treatment of high-risk chronic graft-v-host disease. *Blood* 72:555–61

81. Wingard JR, Piantadosi S, Vogelsang GB, et al. 1989. Predictors of death from chronic graft-versus-host disease after bone marrow transplantation. *Blood* 74:1428–35

82. Arai S, Vogelsang GB. 2000. Management of graft-versus-host disease. *Blood Rev.* 14:190–204

83. Margolis J, Vogelsang G. 2000. Chronic graft-versus-host disease. *J. Hematother. Stem Cell Res.* 9:339–46

84. Mookerjee B, Altomonte V, Vogelsang G. 1999. Salvage therapy for refractory chronic graft-versus-host disease with mycophenolate mofetil and tacrolimus. *Bone Marrow Transplant.* 24:517–20

85. Marcellus DC, Altomonte VL, Farmer ER, et al. 1999. Etretinate therapy for refractory sclerodermatous chronic graft-versus-host disease. *Blood* 93:66–70

86. Vogelsang GB, Wolff D, Altomonte V, et al. 1996. Treatment of chronic graft-versus-host disease with ultraviolet irradiation and psoralen (PUVA). *Bone Marrow Transplant.* 17:1061–67

52 VOGELSANG ■ LEE ■ BENSEN-KENNEDY

87. Vogelsang GB, Farmer ER, Hess AD, et al. 1992. Thalidomide for the treatment of chronic graft-versus-host disease. *N. Engl. J. Med.* 326:1055–58

88. Gilman AL, Chan KW, Mogul A, et al. 2000. Hydroxychloroquine for the treatment of chronic graft-versus-host disease.

89. Kuroiwa T, Kakishita E, Hamano T, et al. 2001. Hepatocyte growth factor ameliorates acute graft-versus-host disease and promotes hematopoietic function. *J. Clin. Invest.* 107:1365–73

Donor T cell activation

- Fas
- TCR
- MHC
- Th1 cytokines
- APC
- Costimulatory molecules
- Th2 cells
- Cytokines

Damage from conditioning regimen

- Inflammatory cytokines
  - IFN-γ, TNF

Donor T cell expansion

Effect phase

- Monocyte
- NK
- PMN
- Chemokines
- Cytokines
- Perforin, Fas/FasL, TNF

Host tissue

Graft versus tumor effect

Figure 2 Three-phase model of graft-versus-host disease (GVHD). Preparative regimen damage causes secretion of cytokines that can affect all phases of GVHD induction. T cells become sensitized to antigenic differences between the donor and host. The T cells then expand and, with other end-stage effectors, cause tissue damage in the skin, liver, and gut. This damage produces more cytokines, which keep the cycle going.

# CONTENTS

TECHNOLOGY-DRIVEN TRIAGE OF ABDOMINAL TRAUMA: THE  
EMERGING ERA OF NONOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT, D. Demetriades  
and G. Velma hos  
1  

ANGIOGENESIS IN ISCHEMIC AND NEOPLASTIC DISORDERS,  
Gregg L. Semenza  
17  

PATHOGENESIS AND TREATMENT OF GRAFT-VERSUS-HOST DISEASE  
AFTER BONE MARROW TRANSPLANT, Georgia B. Vogelsang,  
Linda Lee, and Debra M. Bensen-Kennedy  
29  

UPDATE IN PALLIATIVE MEDICINE AND END-OF-LIFE CARE,  
Janet L. Abrahm  
53  

MOLECULAR GENETICS OF LUNG CANCER, Yoshitaka Sekido,  
Kwun M. Fong, and John D. Minna  
73  

PATHOPHYSIOLOGICAL-BASED APPROACHES TO TREATMENT OF  
SICKLE CELL DISEASE, Martin H. Steinberg and Carlo Brugnara  
89  

NEW CONCEPTS IN CHRONIC OBSTRUCTIVE PULMONARY DISEASE,  
Peter J. Barnes  
113  

CALORIE RESTRICTION, AGING, AND CANCER PREVENTION:  
MECHANISMS OF ACTION AND APPLICABILITY TO HUMANS,  
Stephen D. Hursting, Jackie A. Lavigne, David Berrigan, Susan N. Perkins,  
and J. Carl Barrett  
131  

ERECTILE DYSFUNCTION, Ridwan Shabsigh and Aristotelis G. Anastasiadis  
153  

THE HYPEREOSINOPHILIC SYNDROME REVISITED, Florence Roufosse,  
Elie Cogan, and Michel Goldman  
169  

STANDARDS OF CARE IN GERIATRIC PRACTICE, Robert J. Luchi,  
Julie K. Gammack, Victor J. Narcisse, III, and C. Porter Storey, Jr.  
185  

NEW CONCEPTS IN THE TREATMENT OF RHEUMATOID ARTHRITIS,  
Raphaela Goldbach-Mansky and Peter E. Lipsky  
197  

STUDYING CANCER FAMILIES TO IDENTIFY KIDNEY CANCER GENES,  
Berton Zbar, Richard Klausner, and W. Marston Linehan  
217  

THE AUTOMATED EXTERNAL DEFIBRILLATOR: CRITICAL LINK IN THE  
CHAIN OF SURVIVAL, Karthik Ramaswamy and Richard L. Page  
235

vi CONTENTS

THE BIOMEDICAL CHALLENGES OF SPACE FLIGHT, David R. Williams 245
GENETICS AND ARRHYTHMIAS, Robert Roberts and Ramon Brugada 257
OPEN SURGICAL REPAIR VERSUS ENDOVASCULAR THERAPY FOR 269
CHRONIC LOWER-EXTREMITY OCCLUSIVE DISEASE,
Marc L. Schermerhorn, Jack L. Cronenwett, and John C. Baldwin
AIDS-RELATED MALIGNANCIES, David T. Scadden 285
DIAGNOSIS AND PREVENTION OF BOVINE SPONGIFORM 305
ENCEPHALOPATHY AND VARIANT CREUTZFELDT-JAKOB DISEASE,
David N. Irani and Richard T. Johnson
ATHEROPROTECTIVE EFFECTS OF HIGH-DENSITY LIPOPROTEINS, 321
Gerd Assmann and Jerzy-Roch Nofer
MONOCLONAL ANTIBODY THERAPY FOR CANCER, Margaret von 343
Mehren, Gregory P. Adams, and Louis M. Weiner
FUNCTIONAL GENOMICS OF THE PARAOXONASE (PON1) 371
POLYMORPHISMS: EFFECTS ON PESTICIDE SENSITIVITY,
CARDIOVASCULAR DISEASE, AND DRUG METABOLISM,
Lucio G. Costa, Toby B. Cole, Gail P. Jarvik, and Clement E. Furlong
GENETIC PRIVACY, Pamela Sankar 393
THE ANTIPHOSPHOLIPID SYNDROME, Jacob H. Rand 409
ANTI-INTEGRIN THERAPY, Christian W. Hamm 425
PHARMACOGENETICS IN CANCER TREATMENT, R. Nagasubramanian, 437
F. Innocenti, and M.J. Ratain
GENETICS AND PATHOPHYSIOLOGY OF HUMAN OBESITY, 453
David E. Cummings and Michael W. Schwartz
MOLECULAR GENETIC RISK SCREENING, Wayne W. Grody 473
THE CURRENT STATUS OF HEMATOPOIETIC CELL TRANSPLANTATION, 491
Frederick R. Appelbaum
GROWTH HORMONE THERAPY IN ADULTS, David E. Cummings 513
and George R. Merriam
THE INFLUENCE OF HLA GENOTYPE ON AIDS, Mary Carrington 535
and Stephen J. O'Brien

INDEXES
Subject Index 553
Cumulative Index of Contributing Authors, Volumes 50–54 585
Cumulative Index of Chapter Titles, Volumes 50–54 589

ERRATA
An online log of corrections to Annual Review of Medicine
chapters may be found at http://med.annualreviews.org/errata.shtml
