
Glycobiology vol. 13 no. 5 pp. 387–400, 2003  
DOI: 10.1093/glycob/cwg044  

**Purification and cDNA cloning of UDP-GlcNAc:GlcNAcβ1-3Galβ1-4Glc(NAc)-R [GlcNAc to Gal]β1,6N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase from rat small intestine: a major carrier of dIGnT activity in rat small intestine**

Hiroaki Korekane³, Tomohiko Taguchi³,⁴, Yoshihiro Sakamoto³, Koichi Honke³, Naoshi Dohmae⁵, Heidi Salminen⁶, Suvi Toivonen⁶, Jari Helin⁶, Koji Takio¹,⁵, Ossi Renkonen⁶, and Naoyuki Taniguchi²,³

³Department of Biochemistry, Osaka University Medical School/Graduate School of Medicine, 2-2 Yamadaoka, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan; ⁴Department of Cell Biology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06520, USA; ⁵Biomolecular Characterization Division, RIKEN, Wako, Saitama 351-0198, Japan; ⁶The Institute of Biotechnology, University of Helsinki, FIN-00014 Helsinki, Finland

Received on November 28, 2002; revised on December 25, 2002; accepted on January 5, 2003

A rat intestinal β1,6N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase (β1-6GnT) responsible for the formation of the β1,6-branched poly-N-acetyllactosamine structure has been purified to apparent homogeneity by successive column chromatographic procedures using an assay wherein pyridylaminated lacto-N-triose II (GlcNAcβ1-3Galβ1-4Glc-PA) was used as an acceptor substrate and the reaction product was GlcNAcβ1-3(GlcNAcβ1-6)Galβ1-4Glc-PA. The purified enzyme catalyzed the conversion of the polylactosamine acceptor GlcNAcβ1-3′LacNAc into GlcNAcβ1-3′(GlcNAcβ1-6)LacNAc (dIGnT activity), but it could not transfer GlcNAc to LacNAcβ1-3′LacNAc (cIGnT activity). This enzyme could also convert mucin core 1 and core 3 analogs, Galβ1-3GalNAcα1-O-paranitrophenyl (pNP) and GlcNAcβ1-3GalNAcα1-O-pNP, into Galβ1-3(GlcNAcβ1-6)GalNAcα1-O-pNP (C2GnT activity) and GlcNAcβ1-3(GlcNAcβ1-6)GalNAcα1-O-pNP (C4GnT activity), respectively. Based on the partial amino acid sequences of the purified protein, the cDNA encoding this enzyme was cloned. The COS-1 cells transiently transfected with this cDNA had high dI/C2/C4GnT activities in a ratio of 0.34:1.00:0.90, compared with non- or mock-transfected cells. The primary structure shows a significant homology with human and viral mucin-type core 2 β1-6GnTs (C2GnT-Ms), indicating that this enzyme is the rat ortholog of human and viral C2GnT-Ms. This is the first identification and purification of this enzyme as a major carrier of dIGnT activity in the small intestine. This rat ortholog should mostly be responsible for making distal I-branch structures on poly-N-acetyllactosamine sequences in this tissue, as well as making mucin core 2 and core 4 structures, given that it also has high C2/C4GnT activities.

Key words: β1,6N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase/I antigen/mucin core 2 structure/mucin core 4 structure/poly-N-acetyllactosamine

---

### Introduction

Linear and branched poly-N-acetyllactosamine chains, which consist of repeating N-acetyllactosamine units, are present in glycoproteins, glycolipids, and proteoglycans. In the case of linear poly-N-acetyllactosamine chains, the N-acetyllactosamine units are linked via β1,3 linkages. In branched glycans, some of the 3-O-substituted Gal residues in the primary chains are also substituted at position 6 by additional N-acetyllactosamine units. Linear and branched poly-N-acetyllactosamino-glycan backbones correspond to the blood group i and I antigens, respectively (Kemler *et al.*, 1977; Niemann *et al.*, 1978; Watanabe *et al.*, 1979), the expression of which is known to be regulated in the development of fetal to adult erythrocytes (Fukuda *et al.*, 1979, 1984a,b), in the course of murine embryonic development (Kapadia *et al.*, 1981), and in embryonal carcinoma cells (Muramatsu *et al.*, 1978).

It is known that two types of β1,6N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase (β1-6GnT) activities act on linear poly-N-acetyllactosamine chains, leading to the generation of the blood group I antigen structure. The first type of enzyme activity acts at the (growing) ends of poly-N-acetyllactosamine chains, converting GlcNAcβ1-3Galβ1-4GlcNAcβ1-R to GlcNAcβ1-3(GlcNAcβ1-6)Galβ1-4GlcNAcβ1-R (Brockhausen *et al.*, 1986; Gu *et al.*, 1992; Helin *et al.*, 1997; Koenderman *et al.*, 1987; Piller *et al.*, 1984; Ropp *et al.*, 1991; Vanderplasschen *et al.*, 2000; Yeh *et al.*, 1999). We refer to this enzyme activity as distally acting I-branching β1,6N-acetylglucoaminyltransferase (dIGnT) activity to emphasize the *distal* site of its action (Leppänen *et al.*, 1998). The second type of enzyme activity acts at the midchain positions of the (completed or growing) poly-N-acetyllactosamine chains, converting Galβ1-4GlcNAcβ1-3Galβ1-4GlcNAcβ1-R to Galβ1-4GlcNAcβ1-3(GlcNAcβ1-6)Galβ1-4GlcNAcβ1-R (Bierhuizen *et al.*, 1993; Chen *et al.*, 2000; Gu *et al.*, 1992; Leppänen *et al.*, 1991, 1997b; Mattila *et al.*, 1998; Sakamoto *et al.*, 1998; Ujita *et al.*, 1999). Accordingly, we refer to this enzyme activity as centrally acting I-branching β1,6N-acetylglucoaminyltransferase (cIGnT) activity to emphasize the *central* site of its action (Leppänen *et al.*, 1998). None of

---

¹ Present address: High Throughput Factory, RIKEN Harima Institute 1-1-1, Kouto, Mikazuki-cho, Sayo-gun, Hyogo 679-5148, Japan  
² To whom correspondence should be addressed; e-mail: profftani@biochem.med.osaka-u.ac.jp

Glycobiology vol. 13 no. 5 © Oxford University Press 2003; all rights reserved.
H. Korekane *et al.*

the cIGnTs purified or cloned to date have been found to have substantial dIGnT activity (Chen *et al.*, 2000; Mattila *et al.*, 1998; Sakamoto *et al.*, 1998; Ujita *et al.*, 1999).

Thus far, several reports (Ropp *et al.*, 1991; Schwientek *et al.*, 1999; Vanderplasschen *et al.*, 2000; Yeh *et al.*, 1999) have appeared concerning the nature of proteins that have dIGnT activity. The purification of dIGnT was carried out from bovine trachea, but the scarcity of the purified material hampered its cDNA cloning (Ropp *et al.*, 1991). Apart from that study, two groups recently reported on the cDNA cloning of a protein with dIGnT activity (Schwientek *et al.*, 1999; Yeh *et al.*, 1999). They found that the human homolog of leukocyte-type core 2 β1-6GnT (C2GnT-L; Bierhuizen and Fukuda, 1992) possesses dIGnT activity, as well as core 4 β1-6GnT activity (Schwientek *et al.*, 1999; Yeh *et al.*, 1999). The original C2GnT-L was shown to have neither dIGnT nor core 4 β1-6GnT activity (C4GnT; Bierhuizen and Fukuda, 1992; Yeh *et al.*, 1999). This newly identified homolog was named mucin-type core 2 β1-6GnT (C2GnT-M) because it is mainly expressed in mucin-producing tissues at the mRNA level (Yeh *et al.*, 1999). An ortholog of C2GnT-M was identified in bovine herpes virus type 4, which was also shown to have dIGnT and C4GnT activities (Vanderplasschen *et al.*, 2000).

In this article we describe the purification and cloning of dIGnT protein with the aim of revealing what dIGnT protein actually functions in tissues. Rat small intestine was chosen, instead of bovine trachea (Ropp *et al.*, 1991) in terms of the stability of this enzyme, which is a crucial factor in protein purification. The enzyme was purified to apparent homogeneity by successive column chromatographic procedures using Q-Sepharose FF, Ni²⁺-chelating Sepharose FF, Zn²⁺-chelating Sepharose FF, UDP-hexanolamine-agarose, and lacto-N-triose II-aminocellulofine. Based on the partial amino acid sequences of the purified protein, the cDNA encoding this enzyme was cloned. The predicted protein sequence showed a significant homology with those of human and viral C2GnT-Ms, indicating that this enzyme is the rat ortholog of human and viral C2GnT-Ms.

after solubilization with Triton X-100, is only associated with an extremely high molecular weight fraction, and none of the column chromatographies were useful for its purification.

Like other GnTs, the rat small intestinal dIGnT was concentrated in the microsome fraction. At least 80% of the activity was associated with the microsome fraction. The dIGnT activity from the microsome fraction was solubilized by Triton X-100 more effectively at pH 7.4 than at pH 9.0 (Gu *et al.*, 1992). The majority of proteins were separated from the dIGnT activity by Q-Sepharose FF, Ni²⁺-chelating Sepharose FF, and Zn²⁺-chelating Sepharose FF column chromatographies (Figure 1A, B, and C).

After the Ni²⁺-chelating Sepharose FF column chromatography (step 4), dIGnT activity was more stable than in steps 2 and 3. Almost all of the cIGnT activity was separated from the dIGnT activity by the Zn²⁺-chelating Sepharose FF column chromatography. The use of an affinity column (step 6, Figure 1D) packed with an analog of the common donor substrate for GnTs (UDP-hexanolamine) as a ligand was the most effective. This affinity column has been proven to be very effective for the purification of GnTs and was first used for the purification of GnT I by Oppenheimer and Hill (1981). dIGnT activity was completely bound to the UDP-hexanolamine-agarose column and was sharply eluted by UDP as a competitive ligand. Different from cIGnT and GnT VI (Sakamoto *et al.*, 1998; Taguchi *et al.*, 2000), the addition of dithiothreitol (0.5 mM) was not effective in preserving dIGnT activity in this affinity column chromatography. The eluted enzyme fraction (after step 6) still contained several proteins of various molecular weights, as evidenced by silver staining. Neither cation exchange-, dye affinity-, gel filtration-, lectin-, nor UDP-GlcNAc-5-propylamine column chromatography was effective in the further purification of the enzyme fraction after step 6.

The final purification was achieved by a second affinity column chromatography (step 7, Figure 1E), using an acceptor substrate (lacto-N-triose II) as an affinity ligand. More than half of the dIGnT activity was bound to the lacto-N-triose II-aminocellulofine column and was eluted with the buffer containing NaCl. When the flow-through fraction was reapplied to the regenerated affinity column, no further binding was observed (data not shown), indicating that the column was not overloaded. The enzyme fractions eluted in step 7 were analyzed by sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) under nonreducing conditions, followed by silver staining (Figure 1F). The protein band with a molecular weight of 66,000 was correlated exactly with the enzyme activity, indicating that this protein was dIGnT. The enzyme fraction eluted with 0.1 M NaCl was used for the enzyme characterization described below. No GnT III, IV, V, cIGnT, or iGnT (β1-3GnT) activity was detected in this fraction. The protein concentration in this fraction (Step 7) could not be determined due to its low concentration, below the detection limit of the protein assay kit. Table I summarizes the purification of dIGnT, which was purified 45,000-fold in 0.6% yield by steps 1 through 6.

### Results

#### Purification of dIGnT

The activity of dIGnT was assayed using lacto-N-triose II-2-aminopyridine (PA) as an acceptor substrate, basically according to the method of Gu *et al.* (1992). Bovine serum albumin (BSA) (2 mg/ml) was found to be effective in preserving enzyme activity at 37°C, especially for the highly purified enzyme fractions (steps 6 and 7). The activity of these purified fractions was 30-fold higher than that under the assay conditions in the absence of BSA. As a result, BSA was routinely included in the standard assay mixture.

Rat small intestine was chosen as an enzyme source for the following reasons. First, a survey of various rat and hog tissues revealed that rat small intestine and hog gastric mucosa contained high levels of dIGnT activity per tissue protein. Second, dIGnT activity from hog gastric mucosa,
Rat intestinal dI/C2/C4 β1,6N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase

Fig. 1. Elution patterns for the chromatographic steps used in the purification of dIGnT. (A) Q-Sepharose FF column chromatography (step 3); (B) Ni²⁺-chelating Sepharose FF column chromatography (step 4); (C) Zn²⁺-chelating Sepharose FF column chromatography (step 5). (D) UDP-hexanolamine-agarose column chromatography (step 6); (E) Lacto-N-triose II-aminocellulofine column chromatography (step 7); (F) SDS-PAGE (8.5% gel) of the fractions eluted from the lacto-N-triose II-aminocellulofine column under nonreducing conditions, followed by silver staining. Fractions indicated by bars were pooled.

### pH optimum of the purified rat dIGnT
The purified rat dIGnT was most active between pH 7.0 and 8.5 with a pH optimum between 7.75 and 8.0.

### Effect of divalent cations on the purified rat dIGnT
The activity of the purified rat dIGnT was not dependent on divalent cations. MnCl₂, FeCl₂, CoCl₂, CuCl₂, NiCl₂, and ZnCl₂ inhibited enzyme activity, whereas CaCl₂ and MgCl₂ had no substantial inhibitory effects on enzyme activity.

### Amino acid sequence analysis
To determine the partial amino acid sequence of the purified rat dIGnT, large-scale purification was carried out as described in the Materials and methods. The purified enzyme was subjected to SDS-PAGE under reducing

H. Korekane et al.

Table I. Purification of dIGnT from rat small intestine

| Step | Total protein (mg) | Total activity (nmol/h) | Specific activity (pmol/h/mg protein) | Yield (%) | Purification (-fold) |
|------|--------------------|-------------------------|---------------------------------------|-----------|----------------------|
| 1. Homogenate | 7930 | 895 | 113 | 100 | 1 |
| 2. Triton extract | 1490 | 94.8 | 63.6 | 11 | 0.6 |
| 3. Q-Sepharose FF | 241 | 42.7 | 177 | 4.8 | 1.6 |
| 4. Ni²⁺-chelating Sepharose FF | 25.8 | 6.87 | 266 | 0.8 | 2.4 |
| 5. Zn²⁺-chelating Sepharose FF | 2.53 | 10.4 | 4111 | 1.2 | 36.4 |
| 6. UDP-hexanolamine-agarose | 0.001 | 5.03 | 5,030,000 | 0.6 | 45,000 |

Isolation of cDNA encoding rat dIGnT

To clone the rat dIGnT cDNA, we utilized the sequence of the clone AK008234. We synthesized sense and antisense primers against both ends of a predicted catalytic domain region of this clone. Using these primers, a corresponding rat cDNA fragment (1188 bp) was successfully amplified by reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) on rat small intestinal total RNA. Based on the sequence of the amplified cDNA fragment, 5′-and 3′-rapid amplification of cDNA ends (RACE) were performed on rat small intestinal total RNA to obtain the full coding sequence of the rat cDNA. As shown in Figure 3, the cDNA consisted of 1992 nucleotides having an open reading frame corresponding to 437 amino acid residues with a molecular weight of 50,639. The deduced amino acid sequence included all peptides obtained by amino acid sequencing of the purified rat dIGnT. Two potential N-linked glycosylation sites were included in the deduced amino acid sequence. A Kyte and Doolittle (1983) hydropathy analysis revealed a potential transmembrane domain comprised of 19 amino acids in the amino-terminal region, predicting that this protein has a type II transmembrane topology, as has been the case for the majority of glycosyltransferases cloned to date.

A homology search revealed a 77% and 74% homology with human C2GnT-M and pBORFF 3-4, respectively (Figure 4), indicating that the rat dIGnT is the rat ortholog of human and viral C2GnT-Ms.

Acceptor substrate specificity of rat dIGnT

The acceptor substrate specificity of rat dIGnT was examined using four different types of acceptor substrates, lacto-N-triose II-PA, lacto-N-neotetraose-PA, mucin core 1α-paranitrophenyl (pNP), and mucin core 3α-pNP by assay method II as described in Materials and methods, because human and viral C2GnT-Ms are known to have broad acceptor substrate specificity (Schwientek et al., 1999; Vanderplasschen et al., 2000; Yeh et al., 1999). The cloned cDNA was inserted into a mammalian expression vector, pSVK3, and overexpressed in COS-1 cells. As shown in Table II, COS-1 cells transfected with the pSV-r-dIGnT showed high activities when lacto-N-triose II-PA, core 1α-pNP, and core 3α-pNP were used as acceptor substrates, compared with COS-1 cells transfected with no or control plasmid. This enzyme activity for core 1α-pNP and core 3α-pNP was identified to be C2GnT and C4GnT activity by

Rat intestinal dI/C2/C4 β1,6N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase

-204 CATAGGTCTAACAGGAGCGTTGAGGCTCCTGGAGTCTGGGAGGTAAGAAGGCAAAGTGTTAATTTGTACCTCGTAGAACCAAAACTAACCTTCACTCCACAGA -103
-102 CTACAACGTTGGAGAGAACTCCCCCTAAGCAGCCAAGAAGGTATCAAAGAGAGCCCACCAACTCCTCTGGGCGAGGCTTGA TGGTCCCA CCTGTGAAG 102
1 ATGGTTTCATGGAGGAGGTTCTTGGCACTATCATGGGTGGACCTTGGGCTGCATGCTGCTGGCTATCATGGCCCTGAAA ACTGTCCCTCAGATTGAAG
M V S W R R F C W H Y H G W T L G C Y M L L A I I A L K L S L R L K 34
103 TGTGATTTTCGATGTCATGGATCTGGACTCAAAGAATTTCAAGCCAGTACTGCAGGGACCCTCCTGTACAAGACCCCTGGAGCTGCCAGCAAAGAGTTCCATC
35 C D F D V M D L D S K E F Q S Q Y C R D L L Y K T L E L P A K S S I 68
205 AACTGTTCAAGGGTCATCCGAGGGGAACAGAAAGCGGTGACCCAGGCTCTGGCTGAATAACCTGGAACTTAAGAGGAAGCGGCAGTCCCTCACAGAGGCTGAC
69 N C S G V I R G E Q K A V T Q A L L N N L E L K K R K R Q S F T E A D 102
* 
307 TACCTTAGCATGACGGCAGACTGTGAGCACTTCAAGACCCAGAGGAAGTTTTATACAGGTCCCACTGAGCAAAGAGAGGCCAACTTCCCCATTGCGTACTCC
103 Y L S M T A D C E H F K T Q R K F I Q V P L S K E E A N F P I A Y S 136
409 ATGGTGATTCATGAGAAGATTGGAACTTTGAAAGGCTGCGCAGCTGTGTACACCCCTCAGAACATATACTGTGTCCATGTGGACCAGAAGTCTTCAGAA
137 M V I H E K I E N F E R L L R A V Y T P Q N I Y C V H V D Q K S S E 170
511 ACTTTTCAGCAGGCAGTCAGGGCCATTGTGTCATGCTTCCCCAATGTCTTCATAGCTAATAAGCTGGTTGTCAGTGGTCTATG CCTCCTGGTCCAGAGTGCAG
171 T F Q Q A V R A I V S C F P N V F I A N K L V S V V Y A S W S R V Q 204
613 GCTGATCTGAACTGCATGGAAAGACTTGCTCCAGAGCCCCGTGCCGGGAGTACCTCCTGAACACCTGTGGGACAGACTTCCCCATCAAAACCAATGCCGAG
205 A D L N C M E D L L Q S P V P W E Y L L N T C G T D F P I K T N A E 238
715 ATGGTCAAGGCCCTCAAGCTACTGAATGGGCAGAACAGCATGGAGTCAGAGGTACCACCTCCACATAAAACGTTCCGGTTGGAATACCACATATGAGGTGGCC
239 M V K A L K L N G Q N S M E S E V P P P H K T F R W K Y H Y E V A 272
817 GACACACTATACAGAAACCAGCAAAGGAGAAGACCCCGCCCCCTAAACACATAACCATGTTCACTGGCAATGGCTACATGGGTGCTCTCGAGACTTCATTGAA
273 D T L Y R T S K E K T P P P N N I T M F T G N A Y M V A S R D F I E 306
* 
919 CATGTATTAAGTAACTCAAAAGCCCGGCAACTGATCGAATGGGTTAAAAGACACTTACAGTCCTGATGAGCACCTTTGGGCCACCTCCAGCGTGCCCTCATGG
307 H V L S N S K A R Q L I E W V K D T Y S P D E H L W A T L Q R A S W 340
1021 ATGCCTGGATCAGATCCCTTGCACCC CAAATTTGACCTATCAGACATGAGATCCATTGCAAGACTAACAGTGGCAGGACCATGAGGGAGACATTGAGAAT
341 M P G S D P L H P K F D L S D M R S I A R L T K W Q D H E G D I E N 374
1123 GGGGCGCCTTATACGTCTTGCTCAGGAATCCACCAGGGGCTATCTGTGTTTACGGGTCAGGGGACCTGCACTGGATAC TTCAGAACCATCACCTCTTGGCC
375 G A P Y T S C S G I H Q R A I C V Y G S G D L H W I L Q N H H L L A 408
1225 ACAAGTTTGATCCAAAGTGGATGCAAATGTCTTCA GTGTCTAGAAGAATATTTTACGTCACAAAGCCATCTATGGGACC GAGTTATGAGACTCATGCAA
409 N K F D P K V D D N V L Q C L E E Y L R H K A I Y G T E L end 437
1327 GATGATTGTTACCTGTGTGGCAGGAAAAATGCCAGGACCTACTGGGGCAATGTGGGGTAGGCAGCTGGGGCTCAAGACTCCATGTGTCCCTCAGGATGAGGGG 1428
1429 CTGCAATGGACAGTGGGTAAGTAGACCTCTGCCCCCTTGTGAGCTTTGCTGGTGAATGTGGCCTTCCAGTTTTCCCAACAGGCTTTCTTTAGCTT 1530
1531 CCTCACAGAGCCTAGAAAAAGAAATACTGTTA CTTGGGAAAGTGACGGGGGACATGTGGCCAGGGACTCTGGATTCTGGGCTGAAGGCTTCCGTCA GGTTC 1632
1633 TTCA CAGAGACCTTTGTTTCAAATCCCCCTGGCTT AGTCTTTGGAGGGGAACTTTAGT GCAAAGAACCCCTCCTTTTGTATTGTTAATTTAAATAAA TAGC 1734
1735 TTCTAAACAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAA 1774

Fig. 3. Nucleotide and deduced amino acid sequences of rat dIGnT. The predicted amino acid sequence is shown in single-letter code. The positions of the three peptide sequences obtained by digestion of the purified rat dIGnT are single-underscored. Asterisks indicate potential N-glycosylation sites. The putative transmembrane hydrophobic domain is double-underscored. A potential polyadenylation signal is indicated in bold.

structural elucidation of these products (described in the following section). The ratio of these activities for the pSV-r-dIGnT transfec tant was 0.34 (dIGnT), 1.00 (C2GnT), and 0.90 (C4GnT). The purified enzyme preparation also showed almost the same acceptor specificity (Table II), indicating that the cloned enzyme clearly corresponds to the purified rat dIGnT.
The acceptor specificity of dIGnT in the flow-through fraction of lacto-N-triose II-aminocellulofine column chromatography (Figure 1E) was also examined. The result was almost the same as those of the purified and the cloned dIGnTs.

Identification of the enzymatic products
Reactions of the purified dIGnT with mucin core 1 and core 3 analogs. The purified dIGnT effectively catalyzed reactions in which the mucin core 1 and core 3 analogs served as acceptors. Desalted reaction mixtures revealed two characteristic UV-absorbing components in gel filtration experiments (Figures 5B and D), whereas the acceptors revealed only one component (Figures 5A and C). Electrospray ionization (ESI) mass spectrometry (MS) experiments showed that both products had one extra GlcNAc residue compared to the corresponding acceptors (spectrum not shown). The

identification of the isolated products was performed by one-dimensional proton nuclear magnetic resonance (^1H NMR) spectroscopy (Figure 6 and Table III). The J_1,2 coupling constants of the H-1s of the new GlcNAc units in both compounds were around 8.5 Hz, indicating attachment through β-linkages. A direct comparison of the chemical shifts with data reported for the mucin core 2α-pNP glycoside (Schwientek et al., 2000) and mucin core 4α-pNP glycoside (Ropp et al., 1991; Schwientek et al., 1999) established that the purified dIGnT generated the mucin core 2 and core 4 sequences from core 1 and core 3 analogs, respectively.

Reactions of the purified dIGnT with polylacto-samines. The enzymatic products derived from reaction of the purified rat dIGnT with two different oligosaccharides of the polylactosamine type, that is, GlcNAcβ1-3'LacNAc and LacNAcβ1-3'LacNAc, were characterized. Under the conditions of the standard reaction described in Materials and methods, the enzyme catalyzed the transfer of substantial amounts of [^14C]GlcNAc to GlcNAcβ1-3'LacNAc. After removal of the surplus donor and other acidic molecules by filtration through a bed of ion exchange resins, the neutral oligosaccharides in the reaction mixture

H. Korekane *et al.*

| 1 | M | - | - | V | S | W | R | R | - | F | C | W | H | Y | H | G | W | T | L | G | C | Y | M | L | L | A | I | I | A | L | K | L | S | L | R | L | K | C | D | F | r-dIGnT |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| 1 | M | - | - | V | Q | W | K | R | - | L | C | Q | L | H | Y | L | W | A | L | G | C | Y | M | L | L | A | T | V | A | L | K | L | S | F | R | L | K | C | D | S | h-C2GnT-M |
| 1 | M | K | M | A | G | W | K | K | L | C | P | G | H | H | L | W | A | L | G | C | Y | M | L | L | A | V | V | S | L | R | L | S | L | R | F | K | C | D | V | pBORFF3-4 |
| 1 | M | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | - | AK008234 |

| 38 | D | V | M | D | L | D | S | K | E | F | Q | S | Q | Y | C | R | D | L | L | Y | K | T | L | E | L | P | A | K | S | S | I | N | C | S | G | V | I | R | G | E | r-dIGnT |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| 38 | D | H | L | G | L | E | S | R | E | S | Q | S | Q | Y | C | R | N | I | L | Y | N | F | L | K | L | P | A | K | R | S | I | N | C | S | G | V | T | R | G | D | h-C2GnT-M |
| 41 | D | S | L | D | L | E | S | R | D | F | Q | S | Q | H | C | R | D | M | L | Y | N | S | L | K | L | P | A | K | R | S | I | N | C | S | G | I | T | R | G | D | pBORFF3-4 |
| 2 | - | - | - | D | L | D | S | E | E | F | Q | S | Q | Y | C | R | D | L | L | Y | K | T | L | K | L | P | A | K | S | S | I | N | C | S | G | V | I | R | G | E | AK008234 |

| 78 | Q | K | A | V | T | Q | A | L | L | N | N | L | E | L | K | R | K | R | Q | S | F | T | E | A | D | Y | L | S | M | T | A | D | C | E | H | F | K | T | Q | R | r-dIGnT |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| 78 | Q | E | A | V | L | Q | A | I | L | N | N | L | E | V | K | K | K | R | E | P | F | T | D | T | H | Y | L | S | L | T | R | D | C | E | H | F | K | A | E | R | h-C2GnT-M |
| 81 | Q | E | A | V | V | Q | A | L | L | D | N | L | E | V | K | K | K | R | P | P | L | T | D | T | Y | Y | L | N | I | T | R | D | C | E | R | F | K | A | Q | R | pvORFF3-4 |
| 39 | Q | K | A | V | T | Q | A | L | L | N | N | L | E | I | K | K | K | Q | Q | L | F | T | E | A | D | Y | L | R | M | T | A | D | C | E | H | F | K | T | K | R | AK008234 |

| 118 | K | F | I | Q | V | P | L | S | K | E | E | A | N | F | P | I | A | Y | S | M | V | I | H | E | K | I | E | N | F | E | R | L | L | R | A | V | Y | T | P | Q | r-dIGnT |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| 118 | K | F | I | Q | F | P | L | S | K | E | E | V | E | F | P | I | A | Y | S | M | V | I | H | E | K | I | E | N | F | E | R | L | L | R | A | V | Y | A | P | Q | h-C2GnT-M |
| 121 | K | F | I | Q | F | P | L | S | K | E | E | L | D | F | P | I | A | Y | S | M | V | V | H | E | K | I | E | N | F | E | R | L | L | R | A | V | Y | A | P | Q | pBORFF3-4 |
| 79 | K | F | I | Q | V | P | L | S | K | E | E | A | S | F | P | I | A | Y | S | M | V | V | H | E | K | I | E | N | F | E | R | L | L | R | A | V | Y | T | P | Q | AK008234 |

| 158 | N | I | Y | C | V | H | V | D | Q | K | S | S | E | T | F | Q | Q | A | V | R | A | I | V | S | C | F | P | N | V | F | I | A | N | K | L | V | S | V | V | Y | r-dIGnT |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| 158 | N | I | Y | C | V | H | V | D | E | K | S | P | E | T | F | K | E | A | V | K | A | I | I | S | C | F | P | N | V | F | I | A | S | K | L | V | R | V | V | Y | h-C2GnT-M |
| 161 | N | I | Y | C | V | H | V | D | V | K | S | P | E | T | F | K | E | A | V | K | A | I | I | S | C | F | P | N | V | F | M | A | S | K | L | V | P | V | V | Y | pBORFF3-4 |
| 119 | N | V | Y | C | V | H | M | D | Q | K | S | S | E | P | F | K | Q | A | V | R | A | I | V | S | C | F | P | N | V | F | I | A | S | K | L | V | S | V | V | Y | AK008234 |

| 198 | A | S | W | S | R | V | Q | A | D | L | N | C | M | E | D | L | L | L | Q | S | P | V | P | W | E | Y | L | L | N | T | C | G | T | D | F | P | I | K | T | N | A | r-dIGnT |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| 198 | A | S | W | S | R | V | Q | A | D | L | N | C | M | E | D | L | L | L | Q | S | S | V | P | W | K | Y | F | L | N | T | C | G | T | D | F | P | I | K | T | N | A | h-C2GnT-M |
| 201 | A | S | W | S | R | V | Q | A | D | L | N | C | M | E | D | L | L | L | Q | S | S | V | S | W | K | Y | L | L | N | T | C | G | T | D | F | P | I | K | T | N | A | pBORFF3-4 |
| 159 | A | S | W | S | R | V | Q | A | D | L | N | C | M | E | D | L | L | L | Q | S | P | V | P | W | K | Y | L | L | N | T | C | G | T | D | F | P | I | K | T | N | A | AK008234 |

| 238 | E | M | V | K | A | L | K | L | L | N | G | Q | N | S | M | E | S | E | V | P | P | P | H | K | T | F | R | W | K | Y | H | Y | E | V | A | - | D | T | L | Y | r-dIGnT |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| 238 | E | M | V | Q | A | L | K | M | L | N | G | R | N | S | M | E | S | E | V | P | P | K | H | K | E | T | R | W | K | Y | H | F | E | V | V | R | D | T | L | H | h-C2GnT-M |
| 241 | E | M | V | L | A | L | K | M | L | K | G | K | N | S | M | E | S | E | V | P | S | E | S | K | K | N | R | W | K | Y | R | Y | E | V | T | - | D | T | L | Y | pBORFF3-4 |
| 199 | E | M | V | K | A | L | K | L | L | K | G | Q | N | S | M | E | S | E | V | P | P | P | H | K | K | S | R | W | K | Y | H | Y | E | V | T | - | D | T | L | H | AK008234 |

| 277 | R | T | S | K | E | K | T | P | P | P | N | N | I | T | M | F | T | G | N | A | Y | M | V | A | S | R | D | F | I | E | H | V | L | S | N | S | K | A | R | Q | r-dIGnT |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| 278 | L | T | N | K | K | K | D | P | P | P | Y | N | L | T | M | F | T | G | N | A | Y | I | V | A | S | R | D | F | V | Q | H | V | L | K | N | P | K | S | Q | Q | h-C2GnT-M |
| 280 | P | T | S | K | I | K | D | P | P | P | D | N | L | P | M | F | T | G | N | A | Y | F | V | A | S | R | A | F | V | Q | H | V | L | D | N | P | K | S | Q | I | pBORFF3-4 |
| 238 | M | T | S | K | R | K | T | P | P | P | N | N | L | T | M | F | T | G | N | A | Y | M | V | A | S | R | D | F | I | E | H | V | F | S | N | S | K | A | R | Q | AK008234 |

| 317 | L | I | E | W | V | K | D | T | Y | S | P | D | E | H | L | W | A | T | L | Q | R | A | S | W | M | P | G | S | D | P | L | H | P | K | F | D | L | S | D | M | r-dIGnT |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| 318 | L | I | E | W | V | K | D | T | Y | S | P | D | E | H | L | W | A | T | L | Q | R | A | R | W | M | P | G | S | V | P | N | H | P | K | Y | D | I | S | D | M | h-C2GnT-M |
| 320 | L | V | E | W | V | K | D | T | Y | S | P | D | E | H | L | W | A | T | L | Q | R | A | P | W | M | P | G | S | V | P | S | H | P | K | Y | H | I | S | D | M | pBORFF3-4 |
| 278 | L | I | E | W | V | K | D | T | Y | S | P | D | E | H | L | W | A | T | L | Q | R | A | S | W | M | P | G | S | D | P | L | H | R | K | F | D | M | S | D | M | AK008234 |

| 357 | R | S | I | A | R | L | T | K | W | Q | D | H | E | G | D | I | E | N | G | A | P | Y | T | S | C | S | G | I | H | Q | R | A | I | C | V | Y | G | S | G | D | r-dIGnT |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| 358 | T | S | I | A | R | L | V | K | W | Q | G | H | E | G | D | I | D | K | G | A | P | Y | A | P | C | S | G | I | H | Q | R | A | I | C | V | Y | G | A | G | D | h-C2GnT-M |
| 360 | T | A | I | A | R | L | V | K | W | Q | Y | H | E | G | D | I | V | S | M | G | A | P | Y | A | P | C | S | G | I | H | R | R | A | I | C | I | Y | G | A | G | D | pBORFF3-4 |
| 318 | R | A | I | A | R | L | T | K | W | Y | D | H | E | G | D | I | E | N | G | A | P | Y | T | S | C | S | G | I | H | Q | R | A | V | C | V | Y | G | S | G | D | AK008234 |

| 397 | L | H | W | I | L | Q | N | H | H | L | L | A | N | K | F | D | P | K | V | D | D | N | V | L | Q | C | L | E | E | Y | L | R | Y | K | A | I | Y | G | T | E | r-dIGnT |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| 398 | L | N | W | M | L | Q | N | H | H | L | L | A | N | K | F | D | P | K | V | D | D | N | V | L | Q | C | L | E | E | Y | L | R | H | K | A | I | Y | G | T | E | h-C2GnT-M |
| 400 | L | Y | W | I | L | Q | N | H | H | L | L | A | N | K | F | D | P | R | V | D | D | N | V | L | Q | C | L | E | E | Y | L | R | H | K | A | I | Y | G | T | E | pBORFF3-4 |
| 358 | L | H | W | I | L | Q | N | H | H | L | L | A | N | K | F | D | P | K | V | D | D | N | V | L | Q | C | L | E | E | Y | L | R | H | K | A | I | Y | G | T | E | AK008234 |

| 437 | L | r-dIGnT |
| --- | --- | --- |
| 438 | L | h-C2GnT-M |
| 440 | L | pBORFF3-4 |
| 398 | L | AK008234 |

Fig. 4. Alignment of the predicted amino acid sequences of rat dIGnT (r-dIGnT), human C2GnT-M (h-C2GnT-M), viral C2GnT-M (pBORFF3-4), and a putative mouse C2GnT-M (AK008234). Sequence alignment was carried out using a Clustal program. Introduced gaps are shown as hyphens, and aligned identical residues are boxed (black).

were subjected to matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization and time-of-flight mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF MS), which revealed the presence of molecular ions of the product (GlcNAc)₂-LacNAc and the acceptor GlcNAc-LacNAc in a molar ratio of 10:90. The product was purified by gel filtration chromatography and then subjected to one-dimensional ¹H-NMR spectroscopy. The spectrum (not shown) established that the product was the tetrasaccharide GlcNAcβ1-3′(GlcNAcβ1-6′)LacNAc. In particular, the presence of a doublet of one equivalent at 4.585 ppm (J₁,₂ = 8.5Hz) is a highly characteristic resonance of the H1 of a GlcNAc, when it is linked to galactose via a β1,6-linkage. All the other reporter groups of the product tetrasaccharide gave signals that were identical to those reported

previously for this tetrasaccharide (Koenderman *et al.*, 1987; Renkonen *et al.*, 1991a).

A parallel transferase experiment with the tetrasaccharide LacNAcβ1-3′LacNAc as the acceptor generated no measurable net radioactivity to the resulting fraction of neutral oligosaccharides. In addition, MALDI-TOF MS of this fraction failed to reveal the presence of the pentasaccharide product LacNAcβ1-3′(GlcNAcβ1-6′)LacNAc (M + Na⁺ calculated *m/z* 974.4); only the molecular ions (M + Na)⁺ and (M + K)⁺ of the acceptor LacNAcβ1-3′LacNAc were observed in the molecular ion range of the spectrum (data not shown). These data suggest that the purified dIG
Rat intestinal dI/C2/C4 β1,6N-acetylgalactosaminyltransferase

Table II. Acceptor substrate specificity of rat dIGnT

| Sample                     | Activity          | Lacto-N-triose II-PA | Lacto-N-neotetraose-PA | Core 1α-pNP | Core 3α-pNP |
|----------------------------|-------------------|---------------------|------------------------|-------------|-------------|
| COS-1 cells (nmol/h/mg protein) |                 |                     |                        |             |             |
| No plasmid                | n.d.              | n.d.                | 3.1                    | n.d.        |             |
| Vector pSVK3              | n.d.              | n.d.                | 2.1                    | n.d.        |             |
| pSV-r-dIGnT               | 25.1              | n.d.                | 76.6                   | 66.9        |             |
| Purified rat dIGnT (nmol/h/ml) | 18.2            | n.d.                | 47.1                   | 46.4        |             |

Activities were assayed by method II as described in *Materials and methods*. Acceptor substrates used were lacto-N-triose II-PA, lacto-N-neotetraose-PA, core 1α-pNP, and core 3α-pNP for dIGnT, cIGnT, C2GnT, and C4GnT activities, respectively. n.d., not detected.

Fig. 5. Gel filtration experiments in a Superdex Peptide column with water elution at a flow rate of 0.5 ml/min. (A) Core 1α-pNP; (B) oligosaccharide mixture resulting from incubation of the purified rat dIGnT with core 1α-pNP and UDP-[¹⁴C]GlcNAc; (C) core 3α-pNP; (D) oligosaccharide mixture resulting from incubation of the purified rat dIGnT with core 3α-pNP and UDP-[¹⁴C]GlcNAc.

Fig. 6. Sections of ¹H NMR spectra of the core 2 and core 4 analogs formed in the reactions catalyzed by the purified rat dIGnT. (A) Core 2 analog, Galβ1-3(GlcNAcβ1-6)GalNAcα-pNP; (B) Core 4 analog, GlcNAcβ1-3(GlcNAcβ1-6)GalNAcα-pNP. Residue designations are as follows: 1, GalNAc; 2, Galβ1-3 or GlcNAcβ1-3; and 3, GlcNAcβ1-6.

Discussion

β1-6GnTs are a family of enzymes that are capable of generating four different GlcNAcβ1,6 linkages (in bold):  
GlcNAcβ1-3(GlcNAcβ1-6)Gal (blood group I-type structure), Galβ1-3(GlcNAcβ1-6)GalNAc (mucin core 2 structure), GlcNAcβ1-3(GlcNAcβ1-6)GalNAc (mucin core 4 structure), and GlcNAcβ1-2(GlcNAcβ1-6)Man (2,6-branched N-linked core structure) (Bierhuizen and Fukuda, 1994; van den Eijnden and Joziasse, 1993). Thus, β1-6GnTs can be classified into four major groups dependent on their acceptor specificities: blood group I GnT, C2GnT, C4GnT, and GnT V. All the β1-6GnTs that have been characterized to date have no requirement for the Mn²⁺ ion, in contrast to other GnTs, which require divalent metal ions for full activity. Among the IGnTs, two types of

H. Korekane *et al.*

Table III. ${ }^{1} \mathrm{H}$ chemical shifts of monosaccharide reporter groups in pNP-glycosides at $23^{\circ} \mathrm{C}$

| Residue$^{a}$ | Reporter group | Core 1-$\alpha$-pNP | Core 2-$\alpha$-pNP | Core 3-$\alpha$-pNP | Core 4-$\alpha$-pNP |
|---------------|----------------|--------------------|--------------------|--------------------|--------------------|
| 1             | H-1            | 5.832              | 5.802              | 5.787              | 5.756              |
|               | H-2            | 4.582              | 4.566              | 4.500              | 4.485              |
|               | H-3            | 4.305              | 4.297              | 4.238              | 4.227              |
|               | H-4            | 4.317              | 4.308              | 4.290              | 4.285              |
|               | H-5            | 4.024              | 4.181              | 4.002              | 4.165              |
|               | H-6S           | n.d.               | 4.016              | n.d.               | 4.013              |
| 2             | H-1            | 4.547              | 4.540              | 4.650              | 4.642              |
|               | H-4            | 3.932              | 3.931              | n.d.               | n.d.               |
|               | H-6S           | n.d.               | n.d.               | 3.917              | 3.920              |
| 3             | H-1            | —                  | 4.455${ }^{b}$     | —                  | 4.452${ }^{b}$     |
|               | H-6S           | —                  | 3.849              | —                  | 3.851              |

$^{a}$ Numbering of the residues is as follows: 1, GalNAc; 2, Gal$\beta 1-3$ or GlcNAc$\beta 1-3$; 3, GlcNAc$\beta 1-6$.

$^{b}$ J$_{1,2}=8.5 \mathrm{~Hz}$. n.d., not determined. —, not appropriate.

Rat intestinal dI/C2/C4β1,6N-acetylgalactosaminyltransferase

Table IV. Summary of acceptor substrate specificity for rat dIGnT and other known C2GnTs

| Enzyme           | Relative activity |
|------------------|-------------------|
|                  | dIGnT             | C2GnT            | C4GnT            | cIGnT            | Reference        |
| Rat dIGnT        | 0.34              | 1.00             | 0.90             | n.d.             | This study       |
| Bovine dIGnT     | ~0.39             | 1.00             | ~1.00            | n.a.             | Ropp et al. (1991) |
| Human C2GnT-M    | 0.07              | 1.00             | 0.34             | 0.03             | Yeh et al. (1999) |
| pBORFF 3-4       | ~0.25             | 1.00             | ~0.45            | ~0.04            | Vanderplasschen et al. (2000) |
| Human C2GnT-L    | <0.01             | 1.00             | 0.01             | <0.01            | Yeh et al. (1999) |

The values are taken from the indicated references. n.d., not detected. n.a., not available.

comparable amount of C4GnT activity (0.90) to C2GnT activity (1.00). This difference in acceptor substrate specificity might be attributable to a species-specific difference. Some of the unconserved amino acid residues among the three orthologous enzymes in a putative catalytic domain could contribute to their various substrate specificities. We found that a putative mouse ortholog of C2GnT-M (AK008234) has the highest sequence similarity to the rat dIGnT (Figure 4). It would be the case that the mouse enzyme shows acceptor substrate specificity similar to rat dIGnT. Because purified bovine tracheal dIGnT shows almost the same acceptor substrate specificity (Ropp et al., 1991; Table IV) as rat dIGnT, it is also likely that this bovine enzyme is an orthologous gene product of rat dIGnT.

We could not detect cIGnT activity in the rat dIGnT (Table II), although human and viral C2GnT-Ms are reported to have marginal but detectable cIGnT activity (around 3% compared to C2GnT activity) (Table IV). Currently, it is not certain if it is attributable to a species-specific difference, or if our assay is not sensitive enough to detect such a very minor activity.

In summary, the present data indicate this dIGnT purified from rat small intestine is the orthologous gene product of human and viral C2GnT-Ms. Because there is no any other protein band visible except this protein in the fraction which contains highly concentrated dIGnT activity (see Figure 1E and F, fraction number 18), it should mostly be responsible for making distal I-branch structures on poly-N-acetyllactosamine sequences in this tissue. Mucin core 2 and core 4 structures in rat small intestine could also be mainly formed by the function of this enzyme, given the fact that this enzyme has strong C2 and C4GnT activities compared with dIGnT activity. To confirm this possibility, an assay for C2/C4GnT activities throughout our purification process would be necessary.

Materials and methods

Materials were obtained from the following suppliers: UDP-GlcNAc, UDP-hexanolamine-agarose (ligand concentration: 2.1 μmol/ml), and bovine testis β-galactosidase from Sigma (St. Louis, MO); Q-Sepharose FF, chelating Sepharose FF, Superdex Peptide HR 10/30, and UDP-[¹⁴C]GlcNAc from Amersham Pharmacia Biotech

(Uppsala, Sweden); aminocellulofine, lacto-N-tetraose, lacto-N-neotetraose, and lacto-N-hexaose from Seikagaku (Tokyo); Dowex AG1, Dowex AG50, and Bio-Gel P-4 from Bio-Rad Laboratories (Hercules, CA); Galβ1-3GalNAcα1-O-pNP (mucin core 1 analog) and GlcNAcβ1-3GalNAcα1-O-pNP (mucin core 3 analog) from Toronto Research Chemicals (North York, ON). The purity of these core 1 and 3 analogs were verified by their ESI mass spectra, showing major signals having the expected m/z values (not shown). Relevant NMR data are shown in Table III. Other common chemicals were obtained from Wako Pure Chemicals (Osaka, Japan) or Nacalai Tesque (Kyoto, Japan).

Preparation of pyridylaminated substrates and the authentic product

Galβ1-4GlcNAcβ1-3Galβ1-4Glc-PA (lacto-N-neotetraose-PA), Galβ1-3GlcNAcβ1-3Galβ1-4Glc-PA (lacto-N-tetraose-PA), and Galβ1-3GlcNAcβ1-3(Galβ1-4GlcNAcβ1-6)Galβ1-4Glc-PA (lacto-N-hexaose-PA) were prepared by the pyridylation of lacto-N-neotetraose, lacto-N-tetraose, and lacto-N-hexaose, respectively, using GlycoTAG (Takara, Shiga, Japan), a commercially available pyridylation apparatus. GlcNAcβ1-3Galβ1-4Glc-PA (lacto-N-triose II-PA) and GlcNAcβ1-3(GlcNAcβ1-6)Galβ1-4Glc-PA were prepared by digestion of lacto-N-tetraose-PA and of lacto-N-hexaose-PA, respectively, with bovine testis β-galactosidase.

Preparation of polylactosamine substrates

GlcNAcβ1-3Galβ1-4GlcNAc was synthesized as described previously (Seppö et al., 1990). The MALDI-TOF mass spectrum of this product revealed a major signal in the range of the molecular ions at m/z 609.2; it was assigned to (M+Na)+ for GlcNAcβ1-3Galβ1-4GlcNAc (calculated m/z 609.2). The NMR spectrum was in agreement with previously reported data (Koenderman et al., 1987), except that the H-1 doublet of the nonreducing end GlcNAc in our sample appeared at 4.684 ppm in the α-form of the saccharide and at 4.680 ppm in the β-form, whereas the corresponding values in the reference (Koenderman et al., 1987) were reported to be 4.689 and 4.684 ppm, respectively. No resonances were observed in our spectrum in the 4.58–4.59 ppm region, corresponding to the area of H-1 signals of β1,6-bonded GlcNAc residues (Helin et al., 1997; Leppänen et al., 1997b).

H. Korekane *et al.*

Galβ1-4GlcNAcβ1-3Galβ1-4GlcNAc was synthesized enzymatically by β4-galactosylating GlcNAcβ1-3Galβ1-4GlcNAc as described previously (Renkonen *et al.*, 1991b). The MALDI-TOF mass spectrum of the sample revealed a major signal in the range of molecular ions at *m/z* 771.3; it was assigned to (M+Na)<sup>+</sup> of Galβ1-4GlcNAcβ1-3Galβ1-4GlcNAc (calculated *m/z* 771.3). The <sup>1</sup>H-NMR spectrum was identical to that of Galβ1-4GlcNAcβ1-3Galβ1-4GlcNAc reported previously (Maaheimo *et al.*, 1997).

**Preparation of lacto-*N*-triose II-aminocellulofine resin**

Lacto-*N*-tetraose (7 μmol) was digested with 100 mU of bovine testis β-galactosidase for 48 h at 37°C in 2.7 ml of 5 mM citrate phosphate buffer (pH 4.0). After boiling for 3 min, followed by centrifugation at 15,000 rpm for 15 min, 0.9-ml aliquots of the supernatant were loaded on a Toyopearl HW-40F column (1 × 25 cm; Tosoh, Tokyo), which had been equilibrated with 5% ethanol. This column chromatographic procedure was repeated three times. The eluent was monitored by MALDI-TOF MS, and the fractions containing lacto-*N*-triose II were combined and lyophilized. Lacto-*N*-triose II-aminocellulofine was prepared by coupling lacto-*N*-triose II (about 6 μmol) and aminocellulofine (0.6 ml) in the presence of NaBH<sub>3</sub>CN according to the manufacturer's instructions. Nonreacted amino groups were blocked by *N*-acetylation with acetic anhydride.

**Determination of dIGnT activity**

**Method I.** dIGnT activity was assayed according to the method of Gu *et al.* (1992) with minor modifications. The standard assay mixtures contained the following components in a total volume of 10 μl: 50 mM 3-(N-morpholino)-propanesulfonic acid (MOPS) buffer (pH 7.0), 5 mM ethylenediamine tetra-acetic acid (EDTA), 0.5% Triton X-100, 10 mM UDP-GlcNAc, 10 μM lacto-*N*-triose II-PA, 20 mM GlcNAc, 2 mg/ml BSA, and enzyme fraction (3 μl). After incubation at 37°C for 1–4 h, 40 μl water was added, and the enzyme reaction was terminated by boiling for 1 min. After centrifugation at 12,000 rpm for 5 min, 10 μl of the supernatant from the reaction mixture was applied to two coupled TSK-gel ODS-80TM columns (4.6 × 250 mm; Tosoh). The elution was performed at 50°C using 20 mM ammonium acetate (pH 4.0) as the eluent, at a flow rate of 1.2 ml/min. Fluorescence was monitored using excitation and emission wavelengths of 320 and 400 nm, respectively. The specific activity of the enzyme was expressed as pmol of product per h per mg protein.

cIGnT activity was assayed at the same conditions as for dIGnT except that the acceptor substrate used was lacto-*N*-neotetraose-PA.

**Method II.** Transferase activities were assayed in reaction mixtures that contained the following components in a total volume of 24 μl: 50 mM MOPS buffer (pH 7.0), 10 mM EDTA, 0.5% Triton X-100, 1 mM UDP-[<sup>14</sup>C]GlcNAc (5200 cpm/nmol), 0.5 mM acceptor substrate, 100 mM GlcNAc, 2 mg/ml BSA, and enzyme source (7.5 μl). After incubation at 37°C for 1 h, the reaction was terminated by dilution with 0.5 ml ice-cold water. The reaction mixture was then passed through a column of AG1-X8 (AcO<sup>-</sup> form, 0.5 ml) to remove unreacted UDP-[<sup>14</sup>C]GlcNAc. The column was washed with 2.5 ml of water, and the amount of [<sup>14</sup>C]GlcNAc incorporated into the acceptor was determined by counting aliquots of the effluent with a liquid scintillation counter. Background radioactivity (derived from the incubation mixtures without acceptor substrate) was subtracted. The specific activity of the enzyme was expressed as nanomoles of product per h per mg of protein. The protein concentration was determined with a BCA kit (Pierce, Rockford, IL) or a Bio-Rad Protein assay reagent using BSA as the standard.

**Buffers used in purification of dIGnT**

The buffers used in this study were as follows, with the pH measured at 4°C: buffer A, 0.25 M sucrose, 20 μM (*p*-amidinophenyl)methanesulfonyl fluoride hydrochloride, 10 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.4); buffer B, 20% glycerol, 20 μM (*p*-amidinophenyl)methanesulfonyl fluoride hydrochloride, 1% Triton X-100, 10 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.4); buffer C, 20% glycerol, 0.1% Triton X-100, 20 mM triethanolamine (pH 7.8); buffer D, 20% glycerol, 0.1% Triton X-100, 0.5 M NaCl, 20 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0); buffer E, 20% glycerol, 0.1% Triton X-100, 10 mM EDTA, 0.1 M NaCl, 20 mM MOPS (pH 7.0); buffer F, 20% glycerol, 0.1% Triton X-100, 10 mM EDTA, 50 mM NaCl, 20 mM MOPS (pH 7.0); and buffer G, 20% glycerol, 0.1% Triton X-100, 50 mM NaCl, 20 mM MOPS (pH 7.0).

**Homogenization and preparation of the microsome fraction (step 1)**

All purification steps were carried out at 4°C. Small intestines of 20 retired Sprague Dawley rats (140 g) were homogenized with a Waring blender in three volumes of buffer A. After centrifugation at 8000 rpm for 10 min, the supernatants were pooled, and the pellet was subjected to two more extractions, after which all the supernatants (1300 ml) were combined. After centrifugation at 78,000 × *g* for 2 h, the microsomal fraction (about 30 g) was obtained as a precipitate.

**Solubilization of dIGnT (step 2)**

The microsomal fraction was suspended in 150 ml of buffer B, gently stirred for 1 h, and then centrifuged at 105,000 × *g* for 1 h. The supernatant fraction was collected, and the residual pellet was subjected to a second extraction and ultracentrifugation. The first and the second Triton X-100 extracts were combined and used for further enzyme purification.

**Q-Sepharose FF column chromatography (step 3)**

Two volumes of buffer C were added to the Triton X-100 extracts and then applied to a column of Q-Sepharose FF (10 × 3.8 cm), which had been equilibrated with buffer C. Fractions of 50 ml were collected during this column chromatography. The column was washed with buffer C until the protein concentration was reduced to 0.2 mg/ml. The elution was carried out with a linear gradient established between 900 ml buffer C and 900 ml 0.8 M NaCl/buffer C. Fractions containing dIGnT activity were combined.

Ni²⁺-chelating Sepharose FF column chromatography (step 4)

An equal volume of Buffer D was added to the pooled enzyme fraction from Step 3 and then applied to a column of Ni²⁺-chelating Sepharose FF (2.5 × 6 cm), which had been equilibrated with Buffer D. Ni²⁺-chelating Sepharose FF resin was layered on the chelating Sepharose FF resin without metal ions (2.5 × 3.5 cm), to avoid any possible leakage of Ni²⁺ into the enzyme fractions. Fractions of 6.5 ml were collected during this column chromatography. After washing the column with Buffer D until the protein concentration was reduced to 0.1 mg/ml, dIGnT activity was eluted with a linear gradient established between 200 ml of Buffer D and 200 ml of 0.2 M glycine/Buffer D. Fractions containing dIGnT activity were combined, and then concentrated to 12 ml with an Amicon Diaflow Ultrafiltrater (Millipore, Bedford, MA) using a YM 30 membrane (Millipore).

Zn²⁺-chelating Sepharose FF column chromatography (step 5)

The concentrated enzyme fraction from step 4 was diluted 10-fold with buffer D and then applied to a Zn²⁺-chelating Sepharose FF column (1.5 × 6.8 cm), which had been equilibrated with buffer D. Zn²⁺-chelating Sepharose FF resin was layered on the chelating Sepharose FF resin without metal ions (1.5 × 4 cm) to avoid any possible leakage of Zn²⁺ into the enzyme fractions. Fractions of 3.5 ml were collected during this column chromatography. The column was washed with 100 ml buffer D, and then dIGnT activity was eluted with a linear gradient established between 100 ml buffer D and 100 ml 0.2 M glycine/buffer D. Fractions containing dIGnT activity were combined, and the buffer in this fraction was replaced by buffer E by means of an Amicon Diaflow Ultrafiltrater using a YM 30 membrane.

UDP-hexanolamine-agarose column chromatography (step 6)

After the previous step, the column was siliconized with Sigmacote (Sigma), and siliconized tubes (Assist, Tokyo) were used in the fractionation procedures. The concentrated enzyme fraction from step 5 was applied to a column of UDP-hexanolamine-agarose (1 × 13 cm), which had been equilibrated with buffer E. Fractions of 1 ml were collected during this column chromatography. After washing with 50 ml buffer E and 30 ml buffer F, dIGnT activity was eluted with a linear gradient established between 30 ml buffer F and 30 ml 2.5 mM UDP/buffer F. Fractions containing dIGnT activity were combined.

Lacto-N-triose II-aminocellulofine column chromatography (step 7)

The pooled enzyme fraction from step 6 was applied directly to a lacto-N-triose II-aminocellulofine column (0.8 × 1.2 cm), which had been equilibrated with buffer F. Fractions of 0.6 ml were collected during this column chromatography. After washing with 3 ml buffer F and 3 ml buffer G, dIGnT activity was eluted with 3.6 ml 0.1 M NaCl/buffer G, 3 ml 0.2 M NaCl/buffer G, and 3 ml 0.4 M NaCl/buffer G. The purified enzyme fractions eluted

with 0.1 M NaCl/buffer G were pooled and used in the enzyme characterization.

Large scale preparation of the purified rat dIGnT

For a large-scale preparation of the purified rat dIGnT, the purification procedure described was scaled up about twofold, using 260 g of small intestines of 50 young 8-week-old Sprague Dawley rats at one time. This entire purification procedure was repeated three times, and all fractions that contained enzyme activity were pooled. The pooled enzyme fraction was concentrated to about 0.05 ml with a small column of Ni²⁺-chelating Sepharose FF (7 × 5.5 mm) and a Centricon YM-30 (Millipore). Finally, about 1.5 μg of purified rat dIGnT was obtained from 780 g of rat small intestine in 0.5% yield.

Gel electrophoresis

SDS-PAGE was performed by the method of Laemmli (1970) using 8.5% gels. Molecular markers (Amersham Pharmacia Biotech) were used for size standards. Proteins in the gels were stained by means of a silver staining kit (2D silver stain II “DAIICHI”; Daiichi Pure Chemicals, Tokyo).

Amino acid sequencing of peptides derived from purified rat dIGnT

About 0.9 μg of purified rat dIGnT was subjected to SDS-PAGE under reducing conditions followed by staining with Coomassie brilliant blue R-250. Two bands corresponding to 52 K and 61 K were detected. Each of the two bands was excised and treated with 0.1 μg of Achromobacter protease I (lysylendopeptidase) (Masaki et al., 1981) (a gift from Dr. T. Masaki, Ibaraki University, Ibaraki, Japan) at 37°C overnight in 0.1 M Tris-HCl (pH 9.0) containing 0.1% SDS and 1 mM EDTA. The generated peptides were extracted from the gel and separated on columns of DEAE-5PW (1 × 20 mm; Tosoh) and Mightysil RP-18 (1 × 50 mm; Kanto Chemicals, Tokyo) connected in series with a model 1100 (Hewlett Packard) liquid chromatography system. The peptides were eluted at a flow rate of 20 μl/min using an elution program of 1–12.5–50% solvent B in 0–10–70 min, where solvents A and B were 0.085% (v/v) aqueous trifluoroacetic acid and 0.075% trifluoroacetic acid in 80% (v/v) acetonitrile, respectively. Selected peptides were subjected to Edman degradation using a model Procise 494 cLC sequencer (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA) and to MALDI-TOF MS (Bruker-Franzen Analytic, Breman, Germany) in the linear mode using 2-mercaptobenzothiazol (Xu et al., 1997) as the matrix.

Isolation of cDNA encoding rat dIGnT

Through BLASTp analysis of the obtained partial amino acid sequences of the purified enzyme, AK008234, a clone of the RIKEN full-length enriched mouse cDNA library (a putative mouse ortholog of human and viral C2GnT-Ms; Yeh et al., 1999; Vanderplasschen et al., 2000) was identified. We utilized the sequence of the clone AK008234 to obtain rat dIGnT cDNA. We synthesized oligonucleotide primers, the sense primer RHS1 (5′-ACTCTGAG-GAATTTCAAAGC-3′), and the antisense primer RHA2

H. Korekane *et al.*

(5′-CTCATAGTTCAGTCCCATAG-3′) against both ends of a predicted catalytic domain region of this clone. Using these primer sets, the corresponding rat cDNA fragment was amplified by RT-PCR (30 cycles at 95°C for 30 s; 50°C for 30 s; 72°C for 1 min 15 s) on rat small intestinal total RNA. The RT-PCR product (1188 bp) was subcloned into the pGEM-T Easy vector (Promega, Madison, WI).

Based on the sequence of the RT-PCR product, 5′-and 3′-RACE were performed to obtain the full coding sequence of the rat cDNA. Concerning 5′-RACE, rat small intestinal total RNA was reverse-transcribed with the antisense primer RHA8 (5′-AAGGTGCTCATCAGGAC-3′), and a poly(dA) tail was added with a terminal deoxynucleotidyl-transferase (Life Technologies, Grand Island, NY). The primary amplification was performed by PCR (25 cycles at 95°C for 30 s, 50°C for 30 s, 72°C for 1 min 30 s) using the adapter primer (Life Technology) and the antisense primer RHA3 (5′-AGTCTTCCATGCAGTTC-3′). In the secondary amplification, PCR (25 cycles at 95°C for 30 s, 60°C for 30 s, 72°C for 1 min) was performed using the abridged universal amplification primer (Life Technology) and the nested antisense primer RHA6 (5′-CAGCCTCTG-TGAAGGACTGC-3′). Concerning 3′-RACE, rat small intestinal total RNA was reverse-transcribed with adapter primer, and PCR (25 cycles at 95°C for 30 s, 58°C for 30 s, 72°C for 1 min) was performed using the sense primer RHS4 (5′-GAGGGAGACATTGAGAATGG-3′) and the abridged universal amplification primer. The 5′-and 3′-RACE products were subcloned into the pGEM-T Easy vector.

Based on the obtained sequence, cDNA encoding the rat dIGnT was amplified by RT-PCR (30 cycles at 95°C for 30 s, 50°C for 30 s, 72°C for 3 min) on rat small intestinal total RNA using a Pfu DNA polymerase (Promega) with the sense primer RHS6 (5′-GATGGTTCCCCACCTGTGA-AG-3′) and the antisense primer RHA10 (5′-ATCATCT-TGCAGTGAGTCTC-3′). The cDNA obtained by RT-PCR was subcloned into EcoRV site of the pBluescript II SK vector (Stratagene, La Jolla, CA) (termed pBS-r-dIGnT).

**DNA sequencing**

The subcloned cDNAs were sequenced by the dideoxy chain termination method (Big Dye Terminator cycle sequencing kit, Applied Biosystems) using an ABI PRISM model 3100 DNA sequencer (Applied Biosystems).

**Expression of cDNA encoding rat dIGnT in COS-1 cells**

pBS-r-dIGnT was digested with EcoRI and SalI, and the inserted DNA was ligated between the EcoRI and SalI sites of the expression vector pSVK3 (Amersham Pharmacia Biotech) (termed pSV-r-dIGnT). COS-1 cells (5 × 10⁶) suspended in 0.8 ml transfection buffer, pH 7.4, 30 mM NaCl, 120 mM KCl, 5 mM MgCl₂, 8 mM Na₂HPO₄, 1.5 mM KH₂PO₄, were transiently transfected with 20 μg plasmid DNA by electroporation (220 V, 960 μF). Two days after transfection, the cells were harvested and sonicated with 0.1 ml of ice-cold phosphate-buffered saline. Enzyme activity was assayed using this cell lysate as the enzyme source.

---

**Large preparation of the enzymatic products**

The acceptors (100 nmol) and donors, representing a mixture of UDP-GlcNAc (250 nmol) and UDP-[¹⁴C]GlcNAc (500,000 cpm), were incubated with the purified rat dIGnT fraction (12.5 μl) at 37°C for 25 h in a total volume of 25 μl containing 50 mM MOPS (pH 7.5), 5 mM EDTA, 75 mM NaCl, 20 mM GlcNAc, 20 mM Gal, 8 mM NaN₃, 0.5% Triton X-100, 10% glycerol, and 2 mg/ml BSA. The reactions were terminated by heating in a boiling water bath for 5 min. Control reactions were performed without exogenous acceptors. The transferase reaction mixtures were then passed in water through a mixed bed of Dowex AG1 (AcO⁻) and Dowex AG50 (H⁺) to remove salts and unreacted UDP-[¹⁴C]GlcNAc. The amounts of [¹⁴C]GlcNAc incorporated into the acceptors were then determined from aliquots of the filtrate by liquid scintillation counting as described previously (Leppänen *et al.*, 1997a).

Further purification of the products was achieved by gel permeation chromatography on a single or two coupled Superdex Peptide HR 10/30 columns (equilibrated with water, flow rate of 0.5 or 1.0 ml/min; the runs of oligo-N-acetyl-lactosamines were monitored at 214 nm and those of para-nitrophenyl glycosides at 270 nm) or on a Bio-Gel P-4 column (200–400 mesh, 1 × 145 cm, equilibrated with water, monitored by UV absorption at 205 nm and by liquid scintillation counting).

---

**NMR spectroscopy**

One-dimensional ¹H NMR spectra of the acceptor saccharides were recorded at 23°C in 600 μl of D₂O at 500 MHz on a Varian Unity 500 spectrometer (Palo Alto, CA), as described previously (Leppänen *et al.*, 1997b). ¹H NMR spectra of the product saccharides were obtained by dissolving the samples in 39.5 μl of D₂O and recording the spectra at 23°C at 500 MHz on a Varian Unity 500 spectrometer equipped with a microcoil probe.

---

**MALDI-TOF and ESI MS of enzymatic products**

MALDI-TOF MS was performed in the positive-ion delayed extraction mode with a BIFLEXTM mass spectrometer (Bruker-Franzen Analytik), using a 337 nm nitrogen laser. One microliter of aqueous sample solution (20 pmol) and 1.0 μl of 2,5-dihydroxybenzoic acid matrix (10 mg/ml in water) were mixed on the target plate and dried under a gentle stream of air. Maltohexaose and N-acetylgalactosaminodecamer were used for external calibration.

ESI mass spectra were collected in the positive ion mode using a Q-TOF hybrid quadrupole-orthogonal acceleration time-of-flight mass spectrometer (Micromass, U.K.). Samples were dissolved in 0.5 mM aqueous NaOH/acetonitrile (1:1, by volume), and injected into the mass spectrometer with a nanoelectrospray ion source.

---

**Acknowledgments**

This work was supported in part by Grant-in-Aid for Scientific Research (S) no. 13854010 from the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science. We thank Dr. Ritva Niemelä for

an early MALDI-TOF MS contribution and Olli Aitio for assistance in NMR spectroscopy. We thank Dr. Milton S. Feather (Scientific Editorial Services) for correcting this manuscript. The nucleotide sequence reported in this paper has been submitted to the DDBJ/GenBank/EBI Data Bank with accession number AB098520.

### Abbreviations

BSA, bovine serum albumin; IGnT, I-branching β1, 6N-acetylglucoaminyltransferase; C2GnT, core 2 β1, 6N-acetylglucoaminyltransferase; C4GnT, core 4 β1,6N-acetylglucoaminyltransferase; EDTA, ethylenediamine tetra-acetic acid; ESI, electrospray ionization; GnT, N-acetylglucoaminyltransferase; ¹H NMR, proton nuclear magnetic resonance; MALDI-TOF MS, matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry; MOPS, 3-(N-morpholino)propanesulfonic acid; PA, 2-aminopyridine; PCR, polymerase chain reaction; pNP, paranitrophenyl; RACE, rapid amplification of cDNA ends; RT, reverse transcription; SDS-PAGE, sodium dodecyl sulfate–polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis.

### References

Bierhuizen, M.F.A. and Fukuda, M. (1992) Expression cloning of a cDNA encoding UDP-GlcNAc:Galβ1-3-GalNAc-R (GlcNAc to GalNAc) β1-6GlcNAc transferase by gene transfer into CHO cells expressing polyoma large tumor antigen. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA*, **89**, 9326–9330.

Bierhuizen, M.F.A. and Fukuda, M. (1994) β1,6N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase: enzymes critically involved in oligosaccharide branching. *Trends Glycosci. Glycotech.*, **6**, 17–28.

Bierhuizen, M.F.A., Mattei, M.-G., and Fukuda, M. (1993) Expression of the developmental I antigen by a cloned human cDNA encoding a member of a β-1,6-N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase gene family. *Genes Dev.*, **7**, 468–478.

Brockhausen, I., Matta, K.L., Orr, J., Schachter, H., Koenderman, A.H.L., and van den Eijnden, D.H. (1986) Mucin synthesis. Conversion of R₁-β1-3Gal-R₂ to R₁-β1-3(GlcNAcβ1-6)Gal-R₂ and of R₁-β1-3Gal-NAc-R₂ to R₁-β1-3(GlcNAcβ1-6)GalNAc-R₂ by a β6-N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase in pig gastric mucosa. *Eur. J. Biochem.*, **157**, 463–474.

Chen, G.-Y., Kurosawa, N., and Muramatsu, T. (2000) A novel variant form of murine β-1,6-N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase forming branches in poly-N-acetyllactosamines. *Glycobiology*, **10**, 1001–1011.

Fukuda, M., Fukuda, M.N., and Hakomori, S. (1979) Developmental change and genetic defect in the carbohydrate structure of band 3 glycoprotein of human erythrocyte membrane. *J. Biol. Chem.*, **254**, 3700–3703.

Fukuda, M., Dell, A., Oates, J.E., and Fukuda, M.N. (1984a) Structure of branched lactosaminoglycan, the carbohydrate moiety of band 3 isolated from adult human erythrocytes. *J. Biol. Chem.*, **259**, 8260–8273.

Fukuda, M., Dell, A., and Fukuda, M.N. (1984b) Structure of fetal lactosaminoglycan. The carbohydrate moiety of band 3 isolated from human umbilical cord erythrocytes. *J. Biol. Chem.*, **259**, 4782–4791.

Gu, J., Nishikawa, A., Fujii, S., Gasa, S., and Taniguchi, N. (1992) Biosynthesis of blood group I and i antigens in rat tissues. Identification of a novel β1-6-N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase. *J. Biol. Chem.*, **267**, 2994–2999.

Helin, J., Penttilä, L., Leppänen, A., Maaheimo, H., Lauri, S., Costello, C.E., and Renkonen, O. (1997) The β1,6-GlcNAc transferase activity present in hog gastric mucosal microsomes catalyzes site-specific branch formation on a long polylactosamine backbone. *FEBS Lett.*, **412**, 637–642.

Kapadia, A., Feizi, T., and Evans, M.J. (1981) Changes in the expression and polarization of blood group I and i antigens in post-implantation embryos and teratocarcinomas of mouse associated with cell differentiation. *Exp. Cell. Res.*, **131**, 185–195.

Kemler, R., Babinet, C., Eisen, H., and Jacob, F. (1977) Surface antigen in early differentiation. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA*, **74**, 4449–4452.

Koenderman, A.H.L., Koppen, P.L., and van den Eijnden, D.H. (1987) Biosynthesis of polylactosaminoglycans. Novikoff ascites tumor cells contain two UDP-GlcNAc:β-galactoside β1 → 6-N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase activities. *Eur. J. Biochem.*, **166**, 199–208.

Kyte, J. and Doolittle, R.F. (1982) A simple method for displaying the hydrophobic character of a protein. *J. Mol. Biol.*, **157**, 105–132.

Laemmli, U.K. (1970) Cleavage of structural proteins during the assembly of the head of bacteriophage T4. *Nature*, **227**, 680–685.

Leppänen, A., Penttilä, L., Niemelä, R., Helin, J., Seppo, A., Lusa, S., and Renkonen, O. (1991) Human serum contains a novel β1,6-N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase activity that is involved in midchain branching of oligo(N-acetyllactosaminoglycans). *Biochemistry*, **30**, 9287–9296.

Leppänen, A., Niemelä, R., and Renkonen, O. (1997a) Enzymatic midchain branching of polylactosamine backbones is restricted in a site-specific manner in α1,3-fucosylated chains. *Biochemistry*, **36**, 13729–13735.

Leppänen, A., Salminen, H., Zhu, Y., Maaheimo, H., Helin, J., Costello, C.E., and Renkonen, O. (1997b) In vitro biosynthesis of a decasaccharide prototype of multiply branched polylactosaminoglycan backbones. *Biochemistry*, **36**, 7026–7036.

Leppänen, A., Zhu, Y., Maaheimo, H., Helin, J., Lehtonen, E., and Renkonen, O. (1998) Biosynthesis of branched polylactosaminoglycans. Embryonal carcinoma cells express midchain β1,6-N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase activity that generates branches to preformed linear backbones. *J. Biol. Chem.*, **273**, 17399–17405.

Maaheimo, H., Räbinä, J., and Renkonen, O. (1997) ¹H and ¹³C NMR analysis of the pentasaccharide Galβ(1 → 4)GlcNAcβ(1 → 3)-[GlcNAcβ(1 → 6)]Galβ(1 → 4)GlcNAc synthesized by the mid-chain β-(1 → 6)-D-N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase of rat serum. *Carbohydr. Res.*, **297**, 145–151.

Masaki, T., Tanabe, M., Nakamura, K., and Soejima, M. (1981) Studies on a new proteolytic enzyme from *Achromobacter lyticus* M497-1.1. Purification and some enzymatic properties. *Biochim. Biophys. Acta*, **660**, 44–50.

Mattila, P., Salminen, H., Hirvas, L., Niittymäki, J., Salo, H., Niemelä, R., Fukuda, M., Renkonen, O., and Renkonen, R. (1998) The centrally acting β1,6N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase (GlcNAc to Gal). Functional expression, purification, and acceptor specificity of a human enzyme involved in midchain branching of linear poly-N-acetyllactosamines. *J. Biol. Chem.*, **273**, 27633–27639.

Muramatsu, T., Gachelin, G., Nicolas, J.F., Condamine, H., Jakob, H., and Jacob, F. (1978) Carbohydrate structure and cell differentiation: unique properties of fucosyl-glycopeptides isolated from embryonal carcinoma cells. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA*, **75**, 2315–2319.

Niemann, H., Watanabe, K., Hakomori, S., Childs, R.A., and Feizi, T. (1978) Blood group i and I activities of “Lacto-N-norHexaoseceramide” and its analogues: the structural requirements for i-specificities. *Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun.*, **81**, 1286–1293.

Oppenheimer, C.L. and Hill, R.L. (1981) Purification and characterization of a rabbit liver α1 → 3mannoside β1 → 2N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase. *J. Biol. Chem.*, **256**, 799–804.

Piller, F., Cartron, J.P., Maranduba, A., Veyrières, A., Leroy, Y., and Fournet, B. (1984) Biosynthesis of blood group I antigens. Identification of a UDP-GlcNAc:GlcNAcβ1-3Gal(-R)β1-6(GlcNAc to Gal) N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase in hog gastric mucosa. *J. Biol. Chem.*, **259**, 13385–13390.

Renkonen, O., Niemelä, R., Leppänen, A., Maaheimo, H., Seppo, A., Penttilä, L., and Vilkman, A. (1991a) Construction of linear GlcNAcβ1-6Galβ1-OR type oligosaccharides by partial cleavage of GlcNAcβ1-3(GlcNAcβ1-6)Galβ1-OR sequences with jack bean β-N-acetylhexosaminidase. *Glycoconj. J.*, **8**, 368–375.

Renkonen, O., Penttilä, L., Niemelä, R., and Leppänen, A. (1991b) Single mid-chain GlcNAcβ1-6Galβ1-4R sequences of linear oligosaccharides are resistant to endo-β-galactosidase of *Bacteroides fragilis*. *Glycoconj. J.*, **8**, 376–380.

H. Korekane *et al.*

Ropp, P.A., Little, M.R., and Cheng, P.-W. (1991) Mucin biosynthesis: purification and characterization of a mucin β6N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase. *J. Biol. Chem.*, 266, 23863–23871.

Sakamoto, Y., Taguchi, T., Tano, Y., Ogawa, T., Leppänen, A., Kinnunen, M., Aitio, O., Parmanne, P., Renkonen, O., and Taniguchi, N. (1998) Purification and characterization of UDP-GlcNAc:Galβ1-4GlcNAcβ1-3*Galβ1-4Glc(NAc)-R(GlcNAc to *Gal)β1,6N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase from hog small intestine. *J. Biol. Chem.*, 273, 27625–27632.

Schwientek, T., Nomoto, M., Levery, S.B., Merkx, G., van Kessel, A.G., Bennet, E.P., Hollingsworth, M.A., and Clausen, H. (1999) Control of O-glycan branch formation. Molecular cloning of human cDNA encoding a novel β1,6-N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase forming core 2 and core 4. *J. Biol. Chem.*, 274, 4504–4512.

Schwientek, T., Yeh, J.-C., Levery, S.B., Keck, B., Merkx, G., van Kessel, A.G., Fukuda, M., and Clausen, H. (2000) Control of O-glycan branch formation. Molecular cloning and characterization of a novel thymus-associated core 2 β1,6-N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase. *J. Biol. Chem.*, 275, 11106–11113.

Seppo, A., Penttilä, L., Makkonen, A., Leppänen, A., Niemelä, R., Jäntti, J., Helin, J., and Renkonen, O. (1990) Wheat germ agglutinin chromatography of GlcNAcβ1-3(GlcNAcβ1-6)Gal and GlcNAcβ1-3(GlcNAcβ1-6)Galβ1-4GlcNAc, obtained by in vitro synthesis and by partial cleavage of teratocarcinoma poly-N-acetyllactosaminoglycans. *Biochem. Cell Biol.*, 68, 44–53.

Taguchi, T., Ogawa, T., Inoue, S., Inoue, Y., Sakamoto, Y., Korekane, H., and Taniguchi, N. (2000) Purification and characterization of UDP-

GlcNAc:GlcNAcβ1-6(GlcNAcβ1-2)Manα1-R [GlcNAc to Man]-β1,4-N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase VI from hen oviduct. *J. Biol. Chem.*, 275, 32598–32602.

Ujita, M., McAuliffe, J., Suzuki, M., Hindsgaul, O., Clausen, H., Fukuda, M.N., and Fukuda, M. (1999) Regulation of I-branched poly-N-acetyllactosamine synthesis: concerted actions by i-extension enzyme, I-branching enzyme, and β1,4-galactosyltransferase I. *J. Biol. Chem.*, 274, 9296–9304.

van den Eijnden, D.H. and Joziasse, D.H. (1993) Enzymes associated with glycosylation. *Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol.*, 3, 711–721.

Vanderplasschen, A., Markine-Goriaynoff, N., Lomonte, P., Suzuki, M., Hiraoka, N., Yeh, J.-C., Bureau, F., Willems, L., Thiry, E., Fukuda, M., and Pastoret, P.-P. (2000) A multipotential β-1,6-N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase is encoded by bovine herpesvirus type 4. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA*, 97, 5756–5761.

Watanabe, K., Hakomori, S., Childs, R.A., and Feizi, T. (1979) Characterization of a blood group I-active ganglioside. Structural requirements for I and i specificities. *J. Biol. Chem.*, 254, 3221–3228.

Xu, N., Huang, Z.H., Watson, J.T., and Gage, D.A. (1997) Mercapto-benzothiazoles: a new class of matrices for laser desorption ionization mass spectrometry. *J. Am. Soc. Mass Spectrom.*, 8, 116–124.

Yeh, J.-C., Ong, E., and Fukuda, M. (1999) Molecular cloning and expression of a novel β-1,6-N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase that forms core 2, core 4, and I branches. *J. Biol. Chem.*, 274, 3215–3221.
