
THE CIRCADIAN CLOCK:  
PACEMAKER AND TUMOUR  
SUPPRESSOR  

Loning Fu and Cheng Chi Lee  

The circadian rhythms are daily oscillations in various biological processes that are regulated by an endogenous clock. Disruption of these rhythms has been associated with cancer in humans. One of the cellular processes that is regulated by circadian rhythm is cell proliferation, which often shows asynchrony between normal and malignant tissues. This asynchrony highlights the importance of the circadian clock in tumour suppression *in vivo* and is one of the theoretical foundations for cancer chronotherapy. Investigation of the mechanisms by which the circadian clock controls cell proliferation and other cellular functions might lead to new therapeutic targets.

The word 'circadian' is derived from a Latin phrase meaning 'about a day'. Daily oscillation of physiological and behavioural processes in plants and animals have been reported since the time of Alexander Great, in the fourth century BC. However, it wasn't until the middle of the last century that such oscillating rhythms were found to be driven by an internal timing machine — the 'circadian clock' — which can maintain biological rhythms of about 24 hours in the absence of external cues¹.

Mutagenic studies in fruitfly were the first to indicate that the circadian clock could be regulated genetically². The first circadian gene, *Period*, was cloned from fruitflies in the mid-1980s (REFS 3,4). Since then, the rapid advances in the field of circadian biology research have revealed that these clocks are operated by numerous gene products that function in interacting feedback loops in all species studied. Circadian genes have been discovered in all species studied, although they might have developed following independent evolutionary pathways in different kingdoms⁵. Clocks provide organisms with a survival advantage, by organizing their behaviour and physiology around cyclic changes in the environment.

Circadian rhythms regulate hundreds of functions in the human body, including sleep and wakefulness, body temperature, blood pressure, hormone production, digestive secretion and immune activity. Disruption of these rhythms can have a profound influence on our health. For example, disruption of circadian rhythms has been linked to insomnia, jet lag, stomach ailments, coronary heart attacks and depression⁶, and is commonly observed among cancer patients⁷,⁸.

There has been a long history of research seeking a link between circadian clocks and tumour suppression. Studies of animal models and human tumour samples have revealed that the disruption of circadian rhythms is an important endogenous factor that contributes to mammalian cancer development⁹⁻¹². CANCER CHRONOTHERAPY is based on the asynchrony that exists in cell proliferation and drug metabolism between normal and malignant tissues. Administration of cancer therapy based on circadian timing has shown encouraging results, but still lacks a strong mechanistic foundation¹³. Further investigations into the molecular link between the circadian clock and growth regulation will generate novel therapeutic strategies for improving the efficacy of cancer treatment. What is our current understanding of the role of the circadian clock in growth control, and how does it affect tumour suppression and cancer treatment?

### Circadian clockwork

Eight core circadian genes have been identified so far. They are *Clock*¹⁴, *casein kinase Iε* (*CKIε*)¹⁵,¹⁶, *cryptochrome 1* (*Cry1*) and *cryptochrome 2* (*Cry2*)¹⁷⁻¹⁹,

Summary

- The circadian clock is the internal timing machine that can sustain rhythms of about 24 hours in the absence of external cues. The circadian clock is operated by the feedback loops of the circadian genes in the mammalian central pacemaker, as well as in most peripheral tissues.
- The mammalian central pacemaker is located in the suprachiasmatic nuclei (SCN) of the brain and controls the activity of peripheral clocks through the neuroendocrine and autonomic nervous systems. The circadian clock regulates hundreds of functions in the human body.
- Disruption of circadian rhythms has been linked to mammalian tumorigenesis and tumour progression, and has been used as an independent prognostic factor of survival time for patients with certain metastatic cancers.
- Normal and malignant tissues often show asynchronies in cell proliferation and metabolic rhythms. Based on these observations, cancer chronotherapy has been developed to improve the efficacy in cancer treatment and the quality of patients' life.
- The circadian clock functions *in vivo* as a tumour suppressor at the systemic, cellular and molecular levels. The central clock is capable of generating 24-hour cell-proliferation rhythms in peripheral tissues through the activity of the neuroendocrine and autonomic nervous systems.
- Molecular clocks in peripheral tissues control cell-proliferation rhythms by regulating the expression of cell-cycle genes. The core circadian genes are also involved in regulating cell proliferation. The circadian clock in peripheral tissues responds directly to DNA damage and could be important in the control of the cell cycle and apoptosis.
- The molecular clockworks and cell-cycle clocks in peripheral tissues can be regulated simultaneously by the central clock, through interacting signalling pathways. Further study of the mechanism of the circadian clock in tumour suppression and the DNA-damage response has important implications for cancer therapy.

Period1 (*Per1*), Period2 (*Per2*) and Period3 (*Per3*)²⁰⁻²⁴, and *Bmal1* (REFS 25, 26). The three *Per* genes encode PER-ARNT-SIM (PAS)-domain proteins that function

Table 1 | Mammalian circadian regulators

| Circadian regulators | Role in mammalian circadian clock | Direct and indirect targets in growth regulation | References |
|-----------------------|-----------------------------------|------------------------------------------------|------------|
| Period 1 (*Per1*)     | Involved in circadian phase resetting in SCN and in peripheral tissues; mutations shorten circadian period in rodents | - | 20-22,57,123, 131-133,136,141 |
| Period 2 (*Per2*)     | Mutation alters behaviour rhythmicity, results in neoplastic growth phase and deficient DNA-damage response in rodents, and causes advanced sleep disorder in humans; stimulates *Bmal1* expression | c-Myc, cyclin D1, p53, Mdm2, cyclin A, Gadd45α | 11,22,24,60,197 |
| Period 3 (*Per3*)     | Mutations do not affect behaviour rhythmicity in rodents | - | 23 |
| Casein kinase Iε (CKIε) | Phosphorylates Per to control Per stability and nuclear localization; mutations alter behaviour rhythmicity in rodents | β-Catenin | 15,16,173-175 |
| Clock                 | Physically associates with Bmal1; binds to E-box sequences to stimulate *Per* and *Cry* transcription; mutations alter behaviour rhythmicity in rodents | c-Myc? | 14,31,140 |
| Bmal1                 | Physically associates with Clock; binds to E-box sequences to stimulate *Per* and *Cry* transcription; mutations alter behaviour rhythmicity in rodents | c-Myc | 11,25,26,30,31 123,140 |
| Cry1 and Cry2        | Physically associate with and stabilize Per; mutations alter behaviour rhythmicity in rodents; might also be important in photoreception; suppress Bmal1/Clock transcription activity | c-Myc | 11,17-19,31 |

NATURE REVIEWS | CANCER
© 2003 Nature Publishing Group
VOLUME 3 | MAY 2003 | 351

However, the phases of circadian gene expression in peripheral tissues are delayed by a few hours, relative to those of SCN, and ablation of SCN abolishes circadian gene oscillation in peripheral tissues^{49,50}. So, the peripheral clocks are either driven or synchronized by the SCN pacemaker. Under certain conditions, however, such as when food supply is restricted at resting phase, the peripheral clocks can be completely uncoupled from the SCN central clock, and take their phasing cues from the feeding time rather than from the SCN^{51,52}.

**Clock control.** Recently, it was shown that the transcription feedback loops of circadian genes can be regulated by intracellular redox pathways^{53}. This indicates that peripheral clock timing can be affected by the intracellular metabolic rate, which is independent of the SCN pacemaker^{54}. The phase resetting in peripheral tissues by restricted feeding is a relatively slow process that can be quickly reversed when food is provided with a normal feeding schedule. The phase reversal of the peripheral clock seems to be under the control of hormones of the neuroendocrine system. Hormones such as glucocorticoids inhibit the uncoupling of peripheral clocks from the central pacemaker^{55}.

The SCN central clock and peripheral tissue clocks both regulate cell functions by controlling the expression of clock-controlled genes. These genes are not, however, required for clock function. Whereas some clock-controlled genes are regulated indirectly by the molecular clock, some are regulated directly, such as by the Bmal1-Clock heterodimer, which binds to E-box sequences in gene promoters^{11,27}. Recent studies indicate that 2–10% of all mammalian genes are clock-controlled genes^{55-61}. Most of these show tissue/organ-specific expression patterns and are involved in organ function. Only a small set of clock-controlled genes are expressed in multiple organs. Among them are genes that encode key regulators of cell-cycle progression^{11,56-59}.

**Loss of circadian rhythm and tumorigenesis**

The finding that disruption of circadian rhythms led to increased mammary tumour development was first reported in the 1960s (REFS 62,63). These studies indicated that disruption of circadian endocrine rhythms—either through constant light exposure or by pinealectomy—accelerates breast epithelial stem-cell proliferation, induces mammary-gland development and increases the formation of spontaneous mammary tumours in rodents^{64,65}. In addition, light-induced circadian-clock suppression also increases carcinogenesis in rodents^{66,67}.

Several epidemiological studies have revealed a role for the circadian clock in human **breast cancer** development^{9,10,68,69}. They showed that disruption of circadian cycles, such as in people that work predominantly at night, is a risk factor for breast cancer development. The breast cancer risk increased with the number of years, or number of hours per week, that individuals spent working at night. These studies were carefully

**Figure 1 | Mammalian core circadian gene feedback loops.** Circadian rhythms are generated by the feedback loops of the core circadian genes. In the SCN neurons, the intracellular levels of Clock remain steady throughout the 24-hour period, whereas Bmal1 expression levels are high at the beginning of a subjective day and low at the beginning of a subjective night. The high level of Bmal1 promotes the formation of Bmal1-Clock heterodimers. These bind to E-box sequences in the promoters of the Cry, Per and Rev-Erba genes to activate transcription at the beginning of a circadian day. The Bmal1-Clock heterodimer can also inhibit Bmal1 transcription. After transcription and translation, the Rev-Erba protein enters the nucleus to suppress the transcription of Bmal1 and Cry genes. As the Per proteins, such as Per2, accumulate in the cytoplasm, they become phosphorylated (P) by CKIε. The phosphorylated forms of Per are unstable and are degraded by ubiquitylation. Late in the subjective day, however, Cry accumulates in the cytoplasm, promoting the formation of stable CKIε/Per/Cry complexes, which enter the nucleus at the beginning of a subjective night. Once in the nucleus, Cry1 disrupts the Clock/Bmal1-associated transcriptional complex, resulting in the inhibition of Cry, Per and Rev-Erba transcription, and derepression of Bmal1 transcription^{193,194}. It is not clear whether Per and Cry must dissociate from the CKIε/Per/Cry complex to inhibit the activity of Clock/Bmal1 heterodimer and to stimulate Bmal1 transcription in the nucleus. The interacting positive and negative feedback loops of circadian genes ensure low levels of Per and Cry, and a high level of Bmal1 at the beginning of a new circadian day^{5,27-29}. Solid lines indicate direct regulation, and dashed lines indicate indirect regulation.

**SUPRACHIASMATIC NUCLEI (SCN).** The mammalian master circadian clock. The SCN are small bilateral structures located next to the third ventricle and just above the optic chiasm in mammalian brain. Each SCN nucleus contains about 10,000 neurons that are synchronized to generate coordinated circadian outputs *in vivo*.

**PHASE SHIFT**  
The displacement of waveform in time. When a waveform is displaced by a complete wavelength, it is described as having a phase shift of 360 degrees. When a waveform is displaced by a half a wavelength, it is described as having a phase shift of 180 degrees.

**Peripheral clocks.** Circadian rhythms are regulated in peripheral tissues by similar interacting loops of core circadian gene products. These ‘peripheral clocks’ are regulated by the SCN pacemaker, through both the autonomic nervous system (ANS) and neuroendocrine systems^{44-46} (BOX 1). The rhythmic expression of core circadian genes is observed in most peripheral tissues^{47,48}, and can be induced in cultured fibroblasts^{49}.

Similar observations have been made in cancer patients. When circadian rhythms — determined by levels of salivary cortisol — were measured in patients with metastatic breast cancer, early mortality was observed more frequently in patients who had lost normal diurnal salivary cortisol variation. After adjusting for other factors that might affect survival time, the circadian rhythm of salivary cortisol remained as a statistically significant predictor of survival time for patients with breast cancer<sup>72</sup>. The circadian rhythm of rest/activity was also monitored in patients with metastatic colorectal cancer<sup>73</sup>. The 2-year study showed that patients with clearly defined rest and activity rhythms had a five-fold higher survival rate and experienced significantly less fatigue than patients who had lost rest/activity rhythm. So, the rest/activity rhythms provide a novel independent prognostic factor for survival and tumour response of patients with metastatic colorectal cancer<sup>74</sup>.

**Chronotherapy**

Most conventional cancer therapeutic strategies are aimed primarily at maximizing cytotoxicity and avoiding acquired drug resistance, whereas the ability of the host biological system to cooperate with the therapy has not been taken into full consideration. Anticancer drugs usually act selectively on proliferating cells or at a specific phase of the cell cycle. These drugs not only target cancer cells, but also normal host tissues that are engaged in active cell proliferation. So, the balance between the level of damage to normal tissues and the targeting efficiency to tumours, or the ‘therapeutic index’, is not always favourable. Chronotherapy has been developed in an attempt to improve the efficacy of cancer treatment and the quality of patients’ life.

The principle of chronotherapy in oncology is to take advantage of the asynchronies in cell proliferation and drug metabolic rhythms between normal and malignant tissues by administering therapy at a specific time of the day. This could potentially minimize the damage to host tissues and maximize drug toxicity to tumours<sup>75,76</sup>. The efficiency of anticancer drugs *in vivo* is determined by their absorption, distribution, intracellular metabolism and elimination. All these processes show circadian variation *in vivo*<sup>77</sup>. Some of them, such as the rhythm of tumour blood flow, can be distinct from that of normal tissue<sup>78</sup>. Once inside the cell, the effect of a cytotoxic drug is mainly determined by the circadian phase of that cell’s proliferation cycle<sup>79,80,81</sup>.

Circadian variation of mitotic activity in normal human tissues was first described in 1938 (REF. 82). It is now well known that cell proliferation in rapidly renewing mammalian tissues follows daily oscillation patterns *in vivo*<sup>83,84,85</sup>. The mitotic rhythms of mammalian cancers have been studied since 1940 (REF. 86). So far, accumulated evidence indicates that mammalian tumours, even at advanced stages, are not temporally disorganized masses. The proliferation of tumour cells can be stably entrained to the host circadian rhythm or follow a tumour-specific rhythm, *in vivo*. The coupling of proliferating rhythm between host and tumour cells is usually observed in

Figure 2 | Circadian regulation of hormones, urine and the immune system. The circadian oscillation of hundreds of biological processes enables a human body to adapt to 24-hour light/dark cycles. **a** | The serum levels of cortisol and aldosterone, and urine volume<sup>195</sup>, oscillate in circadian cycles in humans. The cortisol level peaks in healthy individuals at early morning and reach their lowest levels before bedtime. Disruption of cortisol circadian rhythm can result in fatigue and restlessness, weight loss, insomnia and coronary heart disease. Aldosterone is a steroid hormone that is secreted by the cortex of the adrenal gland and regulates the body’s electrolyte balance. The level of aldosterone is normally low during the day and high during sleep in humans. Disruption of aldosterone rhythms result in sodium and water retention, increased blood pressure and coronary heart disease. Urine volumes have inverted circadian oscillating patterns, compared to that of aldosterone, in healthy humans. **b** | The circadian oscillation of lymphocyte, monocyte, platelet and eosinophil levels in healthy young adults. The activity of the immune system, usually represented by the number of lymphocytes, peaks in the late evening and is lowest in the early morning. Disruption in this circadian rhythm could lead to immune suppression. Adapted from REF. 113.

---

MELANOPSIN-EXPRESSING  
RETINAL GANGLION CELLS  
A small subset of retinal ganglion cells that are intrinsically photosensitive and express the opsin-like protein melanopsin. These neurons project directly to the suprachiasmatic nucleus of the mammalian central circadian clock, as well as to the intergeniculate leaflet and the olivary pretectal nucleus in the brain. Mice that are deficient in melanopsin show attenuated responses to light stimuli.

PINEALECTOMY  
Ablation of the pineal gland. The pineal gland is a cone-shaped gland that is located at the posterior end of the third ventricle in the brain. The pineal gland produces melatonin, a hormone that is important for regulating circadian rhythmicity in humans. The level of melatonin rises at night and falls during the day.

Box 1 | The mammalian central clock and how it controls peripheral tissues

Circadian rhythms are generated by a small subset of neurons that are located in the suprachiasmatic nuclei (SCN), which is located in the anterior hypothalamus in the brain ${}^{30,31}$. The longitudinal view of mouse brain (a) illustrates the direct light input pathway from the eye to the SCN, and the direct targets of SCN fibres. Light signals are received by a small group of melanopsin-expressing retinal ganglion cells in the eye and transmitted to the SCN neurons directly through the retinohypothalamic tract (RHT) ${}^{39-42}$. The retinal ganglion cells also project to the intergeniculate leaflet (IGL) and the olivary pretectal nucleus in the brain, which transmit light signals indirectly to the SCN ${}^{40}$ (not shown). The SCN central pacemaker controls physiological and behavioural rhythms through diffusible molecules that are produced by the SCN neurons ${}^{188-190}$, as well as by targeting other regions of the brain directly. Four different targets of SCN fibres have been identified in rodent brain. Three of them are confined within the medial hypothalamus. They are the endocrine neurons that produce corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH), thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH) and gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH); the autonomic paraventricular neurons (aPVN); and the intermediate neurons. Intermediate neurons include the neurons in the subparaventricular nucleus of the hypothalamus (sPVN), the neurons of the dorsomedial nucleus of the hypothalamus (DMH), and the neurons of the medial preoptic nucleus (MPN, not shown). Outside of the hypothalamus, the SCN neurons project to the paraventricular nucleus of the thalamus (PVT) and the IGL ${}^{191}$. A cross-section of mouse brain (b) shows the location of the SCN nuclei. The SCN are small bilateral structures located aside the third ventricle (3V) and just above the optic chiasm. Each SCN nucleus contains about 10,000 neurons that are synchronized to generate coordinated circadian outputs *in vivo* ${}^{32,33}$. The SCN controls the circadian rhythmicity of plasma corticosterone production through the neuroendocrine and autonomic nervous systems in mice (c). The SCN controls the activity of the autonomic nervous system through the autonomic neurons of the paraventricular nucleus (aPVN). These neurons project from the hypothalamus to preganglionic parasympathetic and sympathetic neurons in brainstem nuclei, such as the dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus (DMV) and in the intermediolateral cell columns (IML) of the spinal cord ${}^{44}$. The SCN indirectly controls the secretion of adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) from the pituitary gland, through the CRH-producing endocrine neurons in the hypothalamus ${}^{192}$. Circadian variations in the activity of the autonomic nervous system and in ACTH production result in rhythmic release of corticosterone from the adrenal gland into the blood. So, plasma levels of corticosterone undergo a 24-hour circadian variation *in vivo*. See REFS 44 and 99 for indepth reviews on the neuroanatomy output pathways of SCN to peripheral tissues. Part a is modified from REF. 99.

treatment with these rhythms<sup>90–94</sup>. The results of the animal model studies have been extrapolated to randomized clinic trials of patients undergoing treatment for advanced-stage cancers<sup>74,95–97</sup>. Some of these clinical trials involve more than 2,000 patients, mostly with metastatic colorectal cancer<sup>97</sup>. The results of these studies indicate that chronotherapy reduced drug toxicity and improved patients' performance. Chronotherapy was two- to eightfold more effective than conventional therapy — patients showed improvement in tumour response rate and the duration of the response, and decreased frequency of tumour metastasis<sup>74</sup>, although it did not increase the long-term survival of patients with metastatic colorectal or breast cancer. Chronotherapy has, however, been shown to significantly increase the survival time of children with **acute lymphoblastic leukaemia** (ALL) — this approach increased survival time by 4.2-fold in an 8-year study, and by 2.6-fold in a 15-year disease-free survival analysis<sup>98</sup>.

Circadian clocks as tumour suppressors

So what is the mechanism by which the circadian clock affects tumour growth? The circadian clock has been shown to function as a tumour suppressor at the systemic, cellular and molecular levels *in vivo*.

At the systemic level. The SCN central clock regulates cell proliferation and apoptosis in peripheral tissues through the ANS and neuroendocrine systems, such as the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) and hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal (HPG) axes<sup>44–46,99</sup> (FIG. 3). In vivo, the ANS innervates all peripheral tissues, except skeletal muscle. It also controls cell proliferation and death in innervated tissues and organs in a tissue- or cell-type-specific manner through G-protein-coupled transmembrane-receptor-mediated pathways<sup>100–106</sup>. Hormones produced by the HPA and HPG axes, such as oestrogen and glucocorticoids, are widely known to control cell proliferation and apoptosis in peripheral tissues<sup>107–111</sup>. The activity of the ANS and neuroendocrine systems is regulated by the SCN clock, and shows a 24-hour rhythmic activity *in vivo*<sup>45</sup>, providing an explanation for the circadian-coordinated cell-proliferation rhythm in peripheral tissues. Disruption of ANS and neuroendocrine rhythms could lead to deregulation of cell-proliferation rhythm in peripheral tissues and promote oncogenesis<sup>112</sup>.

The ANS and neuroendocrine system also function at the systemic level to suppress tumour development through immunomodulation (FIG. 3). Both ANS and hormones of the HPA axis, such as glucocorticoids, have been shown to control cytokine production, leukocyte distribution, proliferation and apoptosis. This means that the immune response is also regulated by the central circadian clock<sup>113</sup>. Disruption of circadian rhythms could therefore lead to immune suppression, which could disrupt cancer immunosurveillance and promote tumour development<sup>12,71,102–104,111–115</sup>. Immune products such as cytokines can also act to modulate the activity of the SCN clock and the HPA and HPG axes, providing an

slow-growing tumours, although, in these cases, DNA synthesis and mitotic indices are often considerably higher in tumour cells throughout the 24-hour period<sup>83–85</sup>. The altered circadian rhythms, or ultradian rhythms (less than 24-hour oscillation), in cell proliferation are often observed in fast-growing or advanced-stage tumours<sup>85–89</sup>. So, cancer treatment can be optimized by exploring the cytokinetic asynchrony between tumour and host tissues, and applying anticancer drugs at a time of the day that is associated with maximal tumour susceptibility and host tolerability<sup>74</sup>.

The efficacy of chronotherapy with various anticancer drugs was first tested in animal models. These studies indicated that both *in vivo* host tolerability and drug efficacy were affected by circadian rhythms, and the best therapeutic index was achieved by coupling

immune-regulatory, circadian-paced feedback loop<sup>116–118</sup>. So, by anticipating and adapting to external and internal cues, the SCN clock controls overt rhythmicity in cell proliferation in peripheral tissues *in vivo*.

**At the cellular and molecular level.** In cells of peripheral tissues, the SCN’s clock controls cell proliferation and apoptosis by regulating the expression of circadian-controlled genes. Recent studies have shown that about 7% of all clock-controlled genes that have been identified in rodents regulate either cell proliferation or apoptosis<sup>56–59</sup>. These clock-controlled genes include *c-Myc* and *Mdm2*, the tumour-suppressor genes *Trp53* and *Gadd45α*, as well as genes that encode the caspases, cyclins, transcription factors, and ubiquitin-associated factors that are involved in regulating the cell cycle and apoptosis<sup>11,56–59</sup>. The rhythmic expression of several cyclins, as well as that of the tumour suppressor p53, is also observed in human oral mucosa. These expression patterns are synchronized with the circadian oscillation patterns of *Per1* and *Bmal1* expression in the same tissue<sup>119,120</sup>.

Apart from controlling the expression of cell-cycle genes and tumour-suppressor genes at the transcriptional and post-transcriptional levels, the core circadian genes are also involved directly in modulating the intracellular signalling pathways that regulate cell proliferation. Recently, it has been shown that the core circadian regulator CKIε also functions in promoting cell proliferation by stabilizing β-catenin. Overexpression of CKIε mimics the effect of WNT signalling, resulting in cytoplasmic accumulation of β-catenin and its subsequent nuclear localization<sup>121–123</sup>. β-Catenin interacts with transcription factors of the T-cell-specific transcription factor/lymphoid enhancer factor-1 (TCF/LEF) family to regulate transcription<sup>124</sup> and promote tumorigenesis<sup>125</sup>. Genes activated by β-catenin/TCF/LEF include members of the AP1 transcription family, *c-Jun* and *Fra1* (REFS 126,127), and *c-Myc* and *Ccncl* (which encodes cyclin D1) (REFS 128–130). It is not known whether the role of CKIε in cell proliferation is independent of its role in circadian-clock function.

Interestingly, β-catenin is destabilized by glycogen synthase kinase-3β (*Gsk3β*) in the absence of WNT signalling<sup>124</sup>. *Gsk3β* is a functional homologue of the core circadian gene *Shaggy* in fruitfly<sup>131</sup>. Although direct molecular evidence for the role of *Gsk3β* in mammalian circadian-clock function has not been shown, by antagonizing CKIε’s ability to promote β-catenin stability, Gsk3β could also be involved in circadian control of cell-cycle progression. Therefore, as the molecular clockworks regulate the cell cycle and apoptosis in cells of peripheral tissues, mutations in circadian genes could conceivably result in deregulation of these processes and tumour development.

**Per2 regulation of p53 and c-Myc.** Mice with disruptions in the core circadian gene *Per2* have recently been shown to display salivary-gland hyperplasia and develop spontaneous lymphoma<sup>11</sup>. It is likely that deregulation

of multiple molecular pathways contribute to the cancer-prone phenotype of the *Per2*-mutant mice. Deregulation of the Myc-mediated growth-regulatory pathway is one possible mechanism by which disruption of the circadian clock could promote tumour formation. The expression pattern of *c-Myc* mRNA shows a low-amplitude circadian oscillation in all mouse tissues studied, but expression is significantly increased throughout the 24-hour period in *Per2* mutants. In addition, the *c-Myc* P1 promoter is suppressed directly by the core circadian regulators, indicating that *c-Myc* is a clock-controlled gene. The expression of Myc-target genes *Ccnsl* and *Ccna1/2* also show circadian oscillation patterns *in vivo*, and this oscillation is significantly altered following *Per2* mutation<sup>11</sup>.

*Per2*-mutant mice are more susceptible to lymphoma after exposure to γ-radiation. This observation might be explained by the fact that loss of *Per2* activates the Myc signalling pathways (FIG. 4) that induce cell proliferation and apoptosis. Induction of cell-cycle entry by c-Myc also sensitizes cells to apoptosis. Suppression of c-Myc-induced apoptosis, such as by co-expression of *Bcl-x<sub>L</sub>*, is sufficient to promote tumour progression without additional oncogenic mutations<sup>132</sup>. One of the key mediators in c-Myc-induced apoptosis is the tumour suppressor p53 (REF. 133). Loss of p53 activity is necessary and sufficient for c-Myc-accelerated lymphomagenesis in mice<sup>134,135</sup>. The *Per2*-mutant thymocytes are also deficient in p53-mediated apoptosis in response to γ-radiation. So, deregulation of c-Myc and deficiency in p53-mediated apoptosis are likely to underlie the high incidence of radiation-induced lymphoma in *Per2*-mutant mice<sup>11</sup> (FIG. 4). As the core circadian genes show coordinated expression *in vivo*, the model in which a c-Myc signalling pathway mediates circadian control of cell proliferation needs to be tested in additional animal models, such as in mice that are deficient in other core circadian genes.

There has been a long debate about whether the circadian clock and the cell-cycle clock are connected *in vivo*. In our experiments, γ-radiation-induced apoptosis is circadian time-dependent in both wild-type and *Per2*-mutant thymocytes. When irradiated at the early stage of active phase or at the early stage of resting phase, *Per2*-mutant thymocytes show a G2/M-specific resistance to radiation-induced apoptosis<sup>11</sup>. So, the circadian clock not only regulates the expression of cell-cycle genes — it could also be involved in controlling cell-cycle checkpoint function.

**In DNA-damage response.** The core circadian genes respond directly to γ-radiation. Disruption of *Per2* abolishes the response of all core circadian genes to γ-radiation. So, the molecular clock itself can be modulated by genotoxic stress in peripheral tissues. The ability of circadian genes to mediate the DNA-damage response seems to be cell autonomous, as *Per2*-mutant thymocytes have attenuated p53 induction in response to γ-radiation *in vitro*<sup>11</sup>. It has been shown recently that the clock genes also respond to low levels of ultraviolet (UV) irradiation in cultured human keratinocytes<sup>136</sup>.

at the beginning of a subjective night results in the release of intracellular Ca²⁺ in SCN neurons, which, in turn, activates signalling pathways, such as the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK)/extracellular-signal-regulated kinase (ERK) pathway, and the calcium/calmodulin and c-AMP-protein kinase A (PKA) pathways (FIG. 5). Light exposure at the end of a subjective night activates nitric oxide (NO) and c-GMP pathways¹⁴⁸–¹⁵⁰. The activation of these pathways leads to phosphorylation of c-AMP/calcium-responsive element-binding protein and subsequent activation of Per1 via a c-AMP-responsive element in the promoter of the Per1 gene. Activation of Per1 is involved in the light-induced phase resetting in the SCN clock⁴⁷,¹⁴⁸–¹⁵².

Mammalian peripheral clocks do not respond directly to light stimuli, but are instead regulated by cyclic changes in the levels of neurotransmitters, growth factors, and hormones such as glucocorticoids and retinoids⁵⁵,¹⁵³,¹⁵⁴. These control expression of the core circadian genes Per1, Per2 and Cry1 throughout the 24-hour period¹⁵³. Retinoids interact with nuclear receptors, such as retinoid X receptor-α (RXRα) and retinoic-acid receptor-α (RARα), to regulate the transcriptional activity of Clock/Bmal1 (REF. 154). Glucocorticoids interact with glucocorticoid receptors (GRs), and localize to the nucleus to regulate the expression of genes that contain glucocorticoid-responsive elements (GREs)¹⁵⁵. The Per1 gene contains two almost-perfect GREs — one in its 5′ promoter and another in its first intron¹⁵⁶.

A phase shift in the expression patterns of the core circadian genes Per1, Per2 and Cry1 can be induced by restricting nutrient supply⁵⁵,¹⁵³. Oscillations in circadian gene expression can also be induced in cultured rat fibroblasts and NIH3T3 cells by serum shock, or by treatment with dexamethasone or tetradecanoylphorbol 13-acetate (TPA). This induction does not require de novo protein synthesis, but is mediated directly through various signalling pathways, such as the c-AMP, protein kinase C (PKC), Ca²⁺ and MAPK pathways¹⁵⁷,¹⁵⁸ (FIG. 5). The Ras–MAPK signalling pathway has been shown to control circadian output pathways in fly and chick¹⁵⁹,¹⁶⁰. It is likely that similar pathways are involved in maintaining peripheral clock control in mammals.

The c-AMP–PKA, PKC and MAPK pathways are well known for their roles in regulating cell proliferation. The MAPK family contains three well-characterized subfamilies of kinases. They are the ERKs, the c-JUN amino-terminal kinases (JNKs) and the p38 MAPKs¹⁶¹. Among these three subfamilies, the ERK signalling pathway controls cell proliferation and apoptosis in response to diverse stimuli, such as growth factors, cytokines and carcinogens. It also responds to polypeptide hormones and neurotransmitters through interactions with the c-AMP signalling pathway¹⁰⁶,¹⁶¹–¹⁶⁴ (FIG. 5).

Deregulation of ERK pathways is commonly observed in human cancer cells, and inhibitors of these pathways have been tested as anticancer agents in clinical trials¹⁶⁵–¹⁶⁸. ERK signalling leads to the activation of AP1 transcription factors, which are dimeric basic leucine zipper proteins from the Jun and Fos families¹⁶⁹. The AP1 transcription factors regulate a

Figure 4 | A model for the role of Per2 in tumour suppression. Core circadian gene products regulate a number of oncogenes, such as c-Myc. Overexpression of c-Myc has been shown to lead to DNA damage, hyperplasia and tumorigenesis. Heterodimeric circadian regulators such as Bmal1-Clock and Bmal1-Npas2 negatively regulate c-Myc expression at the transcriptional level. Loss of Per2 function reduces Bmal1 expression throughout 24-hour light/dark cycles, leading to decreased intracellular levels of Bmal1-Npas2 or Bmal1-Clock, and derepression of c-Myc. Following γ-irradiation, the loss of Per2 function partially impairs p53-mediated apoptosis, leading to genomic instability and accumulation of damaged cells. These cells can still progress through the cell cycle in the presence of genomic DNA damage, due to the high level of c-Myc expression, resulting in tumour formation after γ-radiation. Solid lines indicate the pathways that have been demonstrated by recent studies. The dashed line indicates a regulatory pathway(s) that is still not fully understood¹¹.

The molecular pathways by which the circadian clock controls the DNA-damage response in peripheral tissues remain unclear. It has recently been shown that casein kinase II (CKII) is involved in controlling circadian rhythms in Arabidopsis, Neurospora and Drosophila¹³⁷–¹⁴⁰. In fruitflies, CKIIα directly phosphorylates PER, which regulates its ability to enter the nucleus¹⁴⁰ (FIG. 1). In mammals, CKII regulates cell-cycle progression by phosphorylating and activating c-Myc. The interaction of CKII and c-Myc has been associated with various mammalian cancers¹⁴¹–¹⁴³. CKII also phosphorylates p53 in response to UV irradiation¹⁴⁴. It is important to determine whether CKII functions in the mammalian circadian clock, and whether it is involved in the circadian-clock-controlled DNA-damage response in vivo.

Peripheral clock control

A brief light pulse at the beginning of a subjective night activates a cascade of events in the SCN neurons, such as activation of expression of the immediate-early genes c-Fos and JunB, as well as the circadian genes Per1 and Per2 (REFS 145–147). Light exposure at the end of a subjective night, however, only induces Per1 (REF. 47). So, the response of the SCN central clock to light stimuli is circadian time-dependent. Light stimuli

wide range of cellular processes, including cell proliferation, apoptosis and differentiation. Genes that are directly or indirectly controlled by AP1 include Ccnd1, Trp53, Cdkn1a and Cdkn2a (REFS 170–173). Persistent activation of AP1 leads to abnormal cell-cycle progression and transformation<sup>169</sup>.

It is unlikely that AP1 controls circadian gene expression in peripheral tissues, however, as the induction of c-Fos and Per1 occur at about the same time in SCN, and mice deficient in c-Fos show normal Per1 induction by light<sup>146,174</sup>. It is most likely that induction of the circadian genes Per1 and Per2, along with the immediate early-response genes c-Fos and c-Jun, is regulated simultaneously through interacting signalling pathways in peripheral tissues.

In addition to controlling circadian rhythm in peripheral tissues, retinoids and glucocorticoids also regulate cell proliferation. These factors are therefore used as cancer therapeutics. The retinoid-acid receptors RARα, RARβ and RXR induce G1 cell-cycle arrest by suppressing Ccnd1 expression<sup>175–177</sup>, and disruptions in RARα are associated with acute promyelocytic leukaemia<sup>178</sup>. GR signalling activates genes that inhibit components of the ERK pathway<sup>179</sup>. The GR also interacts directly with AP-1, which blocks the ability of AP-1 to activate transcription<sup>180</sup>. Glucocorticoids can also modulate c-AMP and MAPK signalling through non-genomic mechanisms<sup>181–184</sup>. Glucocorticoids inhibit cell proliferation in many types of cells by promoting apoptosis and cell-cycle arrest, which are often correlated with the downregulation of c-Myc and cyclin D3 (REFS 185–187).

Together, this evidence indicates that molecular clockworks and cell-cycle clocks in peripheral tissue are regulated by a complex interaction of pathways that include glucocorticoids, retinoids, c-AMP, PKC, WNT, Ca<sup>2+</sup> and MAPK signalling<sup>153,154,157,158,161–164,175–177,179,181</sup> (FIG. 5). In vivo, production of extracellular signals — such as growth factors, cytokines, neurotransmitters and hormones — are controlled by the SCN central clock<sup>45,99,102,104,113</sup> (FIG. 3). The SCN therefore controls the 24-hour rhythmic activities in peripheral tissues, by controlling intracellular signalling (FIG. 5). The peripheral clocks, synchronized by the central clock and operating in their own local environments, respond to these signals to regulate the genes that control cell-cycle progression, such as c-Myc, Ccnd1 and Trp53 (REFS 11,119,120). However, under certain conditions, such as in the case of DNA damage, the peripheral clocks respond immediately to the damage, and could then operate independently of the central pacemaker, to control local cell-cycle checkpoints, activate apoptosis and suppress malignant growth<sup>11</sup>.

## Future directions

A large amount of in vivo evidence has shown that the circadian clock is involved in tumour suppression, and that cancer should no longer be treated as a local disorder. However, the ability of the biological clock to suppress malignant growth and to cooperate with cancer treatment has not been fully explored.
Future research should be focused on studying the mechanisms by which the circadian clock controls cell proliferation, apoptosis and responses to genotoxic stress. Advanced cancers are often autonomic in cell-proliferation rhythm. It will be important, therefore, to study how tumour-cell proliferation escapes the control of the central pacemaker, and whether somatic mutations in clock genes or deregulation of entraining pathways for peripheral clocks are involved. This information is particularly needed to improve the efficacy of current chronotherapy. In addition, as slow-growing tumours can fall under the control of the host circadian clock, it will be important to study whether manipulating patients' circadian clocks — such as through light therapy, restriction of meal time, melatonin administration or glucocorticoid administration — can improve cancer treatment and slow tumour progression.

The challenge and the excitement of biomedical research in the new millennium are to integrate knowledge from different fields of biological research and apply them to solve important problems related to human health at the systemic level. The circadian clock provides a unique system for studying the mechanisms of cancer *in vivo* and for developing novel therapeutic strategies for cancer.

---

1. Pittendrigh, C. S. On temperature independence in the clock system controlling emergence time in *Drosophila*. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **40**, 1018–1029 (1954).
2. Pittendrigh, C. S. Circadian systems. I The driving oscillation and its assay in *Drosophila pseudoobscura*. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **58**, 1762–1767 (1967).
3. Bargielle, T. A., Jackson, F. R. & Young, M. W. Restoration of circadian behavioral rhythms by gene transfer in *Drosophila*. *Nature* **312**, 752–754 (1984).
4. Reddy, P. *et al.* Molecular analysis of the *Period* locus in *Drosophila melanogaster* and identification of a transcript involved in biological rhythms. *Cell* **38**, 701–710 (1984).
5. Young, M. W. & Kay, S. A. Time zones: a comparative genetics of circadian clocks. *Nature Rev. Genet.* **2**, 702–715 (2001).
6. Touitou, Y. & Haus, E. *Biologic Rhythms in Clinical and Laboratory Medicine* (eds Touitou Y. & Haus, E.) 188–207 (Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1992).
7. Mormont, M. C. & Levi, F. Circadian-system alterations during cancer processes: a review. *Int. J. Cancer* **70**, 241–247 (1997).
8. Roenneberg, T. & Lucas, R. J. Light, endocrine systems, and cancer — a view from circadian biologists. *Neuroendocrinol. Lett.* **23** (Suppl. 2), 82–83 (2002).
9. Schemhammer, E. S. *et al.* Rotating night shifts and risk of breast cancer in women participating in the nurses’ health study. *J. Natl Cancer Inst.* **93**, 1563–1568 (2001). Shows that disruption of circadian rhythm is involved in human cancer development.
10. Hansen, J. Increased breast cancer risk among women who work predominantly at night. *Epidemiology* **12**, 74–77 (2001).
11. Fu, L., Pellicano, H., Liu, J., Hang, P. & Lee C. C. The circadian gene *Period2* plays an important role in tumour suppression and DNA damage response *in vivo*. *Cell* **111**, 41–50 (2002). First demonstration that loss of function in a mammalian circadian gene results in neoplastic growth and deficiencies in DNA-damage response.
12. Filipski, E. *et al.* Host circadian clock as a control point in tumour progression. *J. Natl Cancer Inst.* **94**, 690–697 (2002).
13. Levi, F. From circadian rhythms to cancer chronotherapeutics. *Chronobiol. Int.* **19**, 1–19 (2002).
14. King, D. P. *et al.* Positional cloning of the mouse circadian clock gene. *Cell* **89**, 641–653 (1997).
15. Ralph, M. R. & Menaker, M. A mutation of the circadian system in golden hamsters. *Science* **241**, 1225–1227 (1998).
16. Takano, A. *et al.* Cloning and characterization of rat casein kinase 1ε. *FEBS Lett.* **477**, 106–112 (2000).
17. Hsu, D. S. *et al.* Putative human blue-light photoreceptors hCRY1 and hCRY2 are flavoproteins. *Biochemistry* **35**, 13871–13877 (1996).
18. van der Spek, P. J. *et al.* Cloning, tissue expression, and mapping of a human photolyase homolog with similarity to plant blue-light receptors. *Genomics* **37**, 177–182 (1996).
19. Thresher, R. J. *et al.* Role of mouse cryptochrome blue-light photoreceptor in circadian photoresponses. *Science* **282**, 1490–1494 (1998.)
20. Tei, H. *et al.* Circadian oscillation of a mammalian homologue of the *Drosophila period* gene. *Nature* **389**, 512–516 (1997).
21. Sun, Z. S. *et al.* Rigui, a putative mammalian ortholog of the *Drosophila period* gene. *Cell* **90**, 1003–1011 (1997). References 20 and 21 describe the identification of mammalian *Period1* gene.
22. Shearman, L. P., Zylka, M. J., Weaver, D. R., Kolakowski, L. F. Jr & Reppert, S. M. Two period homologs: circadian expression and photo regulation in the suprachiasmatic nuclei. *Neuron* **19**, 1261–1269 (1997).
23. Takumi, T. *et al.* A light-independent oscillatory gene *mPer3* in mouse SCN and OVLT. *EMBO J.* **17**, 4753–4759 (1998).
24. Albrecht, U., Sun, Z. S., Eichele, G. & Lee, C. C. A differential response of two putative mammalian circadian regulators, mPer1 and mPer2 to light. *Cell* **91**, 1055–1064 (1997).
25. Hogenesch, J. B., Gu, Y. Z., Jain, S. & Bradfield, C. A. The basic-helix-loop-helix-PAS orphan MOP3 forms transcriptionally active complexes with circadian and hypoxia factors. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **95**, 5474–5479 (1998).
26. Honma, S. *et al.* Circadian oscillation of BMAL1, a partner of a mammalian clock gene *Clock*, in rat suprachiasmatic nucleus. *Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun.* **250**, 83–87 (1998).
27. Reppert, S. M. & Weaver, D. R. Molecular analysis of mammalian circadian rhythms. *Ann. Rev. Physiol.* **63**, 647–676 (2001).
28. Reppert, S. M. & Weaver, D. R. Coordination of circadian timing in mammals. *Nature* **418**, 935–941 (2002).
29. Panda, S., Hogenesch, J. B. & Kay, S. A. Circadian rhythms from flies to human. *Nature* **417**, 329–335 (2002). References 27–29 summarize the current understanding of the mammalian circadian clock.
30. Moore, R. Y. & Eichler, V. B. Loss of a circadian adrenal corticosterone rhythm following suprachiasmatic lesion in rat. *Brain Res.* **42**, 201–206 (1972).
31. Stephan, F. K. & Zucker, I. Circadian rhythm in drinking behavior and locomotor activity of rats are eliminated by hypothalamic lesion. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **69**, 1583–1586 (1972). References 30 and 31 show that the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN) in the brain is the master circadian clock in mammals.
32. Welsh, D. K., Logothetis, D. E., Meister, M. & Reppert, S. M. Individual neurons dissociated from rat suprachiasmatic nucleus express independently phase circadian firing rhythms. *Neuron* **14**, 697–706 (1995).
33. Liu, C., Weaver, D. R., Stogatz, S. H. & Reppert, S. M. Cellular construction of a circadian clock: period determination in the suprachiasmatic nucleus. *Cell* **91**, 855–860 (1997).
34. Wright, K. P. Jr & Czeisler, C. A. Absence of circadian phase resetting in response to bright light behind the knee. *Science* **297**, 571 (2002).
35. Lucas, R. *et al.* Identifying the photoreceptive inputs to the mammalian circadian system using transgenic and retinally degenerate mice. *Behav. Brain Res.* **125**, 97–102 (2001).
36. Freedman, M. S. *et al.* Regulation of mammalian circadian behavior by non-rod, non-cone, ocular photoreceptors. *Science* **284**, 502–504 (1999).
37. Lucas, R. J., Freedman, M. S., Munoz, M., Garcia-Fernandez, J. M. & Foster, R. G. Regulation of the mammalian pineal by non-rod, non-cone, ocular photoreceptors. *Science* **284**, 505–507 (1999).
38. Czeisler, C. A. *et al.* Suppression of melatonin secretion in some blind patients by exposure to bright light. *N. Engl. J. Med.* **332**, 6–11 (1995).
39. Gooley, J. J., Lu, J., Chou, T. C., Scammell, T. E. & Saper, C. B. Melanopsin in cells of origin of the retinohypothalamic tract. *Nature Neurosci.* **4**, 1165 (2001).
40. Hattar, S., Liao, H. W., Takao, M., Berson, D. M. & Yau, K. W. Melanopsin-containing retinal ganglion cells: architecture, projections, and intrinsic photosensitivity. *Science* **295**, 1065–1070 (2002).
41. Ruby, N. F. *et al.* Role of melanopsin in circadian responses to light. *Science* **298**, 2211–2213 (2002).
42. Panda, S. *et al.* Melanopsin (Opn4) requirement for normal light-induced circadian phase shifting. *Science* **298**, 2213–2216 (2002).
43. Van Gelder, R. N., Wee, R., Lee, J. A. & Tu, D. C. Reduced pupillary light responses in mice lacking cryptochromes. *Science* **299**, 222 (2002).
44. Bartness, T. J., Song, C. K. & Demas, G. E. SCN efferents to peripheral tissues: implications for biological rhythms. *J. Biol. Rhythms* **16**, 196–204 (2001).
45. Kalsbeek, A. & Buijs, R. M. Output pathways of the mammalian suprachiasmatic nucleus: coding circadian time by transmitter selection and specific targeting. *Cell Tissue Res.* **309**, 109–118 (2002).
46. Buijs, R. M. *et al.* Anatomical and functional demonstration of a multisynaptic suprachiasmatic nucleus adrenal (cortex) pathway. *Eur. J. Neurosci.* **11**, 1535–1544 (1999).
47. Zylka, M. J., Shearman, L. P., Weaver, D. R. & Reppert, S. M. Three period homologs in mammals: differential light responses in the suprachiasmatic circadian clock and oscillating transcripts outside of brain. *Neuron* **20**, 1103–1110 (1998).
48. Morse, D., Cermakian, N., Brancorsini, S., Parvinen, M. & Sassone-Corsi, P. No circadian rhythms in testis: Period1 expression is clock independent and developmentally regulated in the mouse. *Mol. Endocrinol.* **17**, 141–151 (2003).
49. Balsalobre, A., Damiola, F. & Schibler, U. A serum shock induces circadian gene expression in mammalian tissue culture cells. *Cell* **93**, 929–937 (1998).
50. Sakamoto, K. *et al.* Multitissue circadian expression of rat period homolog (rPer2) mRNA is governed by the mammalian circadian clock, the suprachiasmatic nucleus in the brain. *J. Biol. Chem.* **273**, 27039–27042 (1998).
51. Damiola, F. *et al.* Restricted feeding uncouples circadian oscillators in peripheral tissues from the central pacemaker in the suprachiasmatic nucleus. *Genes Dev.* **14**, 2950–2961 (2000).
52. Stokkan, K. A., Yamazaki, S., Tei, H., Sakaki, Y. & Menaker, M. Entrainment of the circadian clock in the liver by feeding. References 51 and 52 show that the peripheral clocks can be entrained by non-photo stimuli, such as restricted feeding.
53. Rutter, J., Reick, M., Wu, L. C. & McKnight, S. L. Regulation of clock and NPAS2 DNA binding by the redox state of NAD cofactors. *Science* **293**, 510–514 (2001).
54. Rutter, J., Reick, M. & McKnight, S. L. Metabolism and the control of circadian rhythms. *Annu. Rev. Biochem.* **71**, 307–331 (2002).
55. Le Minh, N., Damiola, F., Tronche, F., Schutz, G. & Schibler, U. Glucocorticoid hormones inhibit food-induced phase-shifting of peripheral circadian oscillators. *EMBO J.* **20**, 7128–2136 (
59. Akhtar, R. A. *et al.* Circadian cycling of the mouse liver transcriptome, as revealed by cDNA microarray, is driven by the suprachiasmatic nucleus. *Curr. Biol.* **12**, 540–550 (2002).

60. Kita, Y. *et al.* Implications of circadian gene expression in kidney, liver and the effects of fasting on pharmacogenomic studies. *Pharmacogenetics* **12**, 55–65 (2002).

61. Storch, K. F. *et al.* Extensive and divergent circadian gene expression in liver and heart. *Nature* **417**, 78–83 (2002).

62. Jochle, W. Trends in photophysiologic concept. *Ann. NY Acad. Sci.* **117**, 88–104 (1964).

63. Hamilton, T. Influence of environmental light and melatonin upon mammary tumour induction. *Br. J. Surg.* **56**, 764–766 (1969).

64. Aubert, C., Janiaud, P. & Lecalvez, J. Effect of pinealectomy and melatonining on mammary tumour growth in Sprague Dawley rats under different conditions of lighting. *J. Neural Trans.* **47**, 121–130 (1980).

65. Mhatre, M. C., Shan, P. N. & Juneja, H. S. Effect of varying photoperiods on mammary morphology, DNA synthesis, and hormone profile in female rats. *J. Natl Cancer Inst.* **72**, 1411–1416 (1984).

66. Shah, P. N., Mhatre, M. C. & Kothari, L. S. Effect of melatonin on mammary carcinogenesis in intact and pinealectomized rats in varying photoperiods. *Cancer Res.* **44**, 3403–3407 (1984).

67. Van den Heiligenberg, S. *et al.* The tumour promoting effect of constant light exposure on diethyl nitrosamine-induced hepatocarcinogenesis in rats. *Life Sci.* **64**, 2523–2334 (1999).

68. Davis, S., Mirick, D. K. & Stevens, R. G. Night shift work, light at night and risk of breast cancer. *J. Natl Cancer Inst.* **93**, 1513–1515 (2001).

69. Rafneon, V., Tulinius, H., Jonasson, J. G. & Hrafnkelsson, J. Risk of breast cancer in female flight attendants: a population-based study (Iceland). *Cancer Causes Control* **12**, 95–101 (2001).

70. Keith, L. G., Oleszczuk, J. J. & Laguens, M. Circadian rhythm chaos: a new breast cancer marker. *Int. J. Fertil. Womens Med.* **46**, 238–247 (2001).

71. Li, J. C. & Xu, F. Influence of light-dark shifting on immune system, tumour growth and life span of rats, mice and fruit flies as well as on the concentration of melatonin. *Biol. Signals* **6**, 77–89 (1997).

72. Sephton, S. E., Sapolsky, R. M., Kraemer, H. C. & Spiegel, D. Diurnal cortisol rhythm as a predictor of breast cancer survival. *J. Natl Cancer Inst.* **92**, 994–1000 (2000).

73. Mormont, M. C. *et al.* Marked 24-h rest/activity rhythms are associated with better quality of life, better response, and longer survival in patients with metastatic colorectal cancer and good performance status. *Clin. Cancer Res.* **6**, 3038–3045 (2000).

74. Wood, P. A. & Hrushesky, W. J. M. Circadian rhythms and cancer chemotherapy. *Crit. Rev. Eukaryot. Gene Expr.* **6**, 299–343 (1996).

**Summary of chronotherapy for human cancer patients.**

75. Bruguerolle, B. Chronopharmacokinetics: current status. *Clin. Pharmacokinet.* **35**, 83–94 (1998).

76. Hori, K., Zhang, Q. H., Li, H. C., Saito, S. & Sato, Y. Timing of cancer chemotherapy based on circadian variations in tumour tissue blood flow. *Int. J. Cancer.* **65**, 360–364 (1996).

77. Smaaland, R. *et al.* DNA synthesis in human bone marrow is circadian stage dependent. *Blood* **77**, 2603–2611 (1991).

78. Bjarnason, G. A. & Jordan, R. Circadian variation of cell proliferation and cell cycle protein expression in man: clinical implications. *Prog. Cell Cycle Res.* **4**, 193–206 (2000).

79. Cooper, Z. K. & Schiff, A. Mitotic rhythm in human epidermis. *Proc. Soc. Exp. Biol. Med.* **39**, 323–352 (1938).

80. Buchi, K. N. *et al.* Circadian rhythm of cellular proliferation in the human rectal mucosa. *Gastroenterol.* **101**, 410–415 (1991).

81. Smaaland, R. Circadian rhythm of cell division. *Prog. Cell Cycle Res.* **2**, 241–266 (1996).

82. Dublin, W. B., Gregg, R. O. & Broders, A. C. Mitosis in specimens removed during day and night from carcinoma of large intestine. *Arch. Pathol.* **30**, 893–911 (1940).

83. Hrushesky, W. J. M., Lannin, D. & Haus, E. Evidence from an ontogenetic basis for circadian coordination of cancer proliferation. *J. Natl Cancer Inst.* **90**, 1480–1484 (1998).

84. Izquierdo, J. N. Increased cell proliferation with persistence of circadian rhythms in hamster cheek pouch neoplasms. *Cell Tissue Kinet.* **10**, 313–322 (1977).

85. Echave Llanos, J. M. & Nash, R. E. Mitotic circadian rhythm in a fast-growing and a slow-growing hepatoma: mitotic rhythm in hepatomas. *J. Natl Cancer Inst.* **44**, 581–584 (1970).

86. Klevecz, R. R., Shymko, R. M., Blumenfeld, D. & Braly, P. S. Circadian gating of S phase in human ovarian cancer. *Cancer Res.* **47**, 6267–6271 (1987).

87. Klevecz, R. R. & Braley, P. S. Circadian and ultradian cytokinetic rhythms of spontaneous human cancer. *Ann. NY Acad. Sci.* **618**, 257–276 (1991).

88. Tahti, E. Studies of the effect of X-radiation on 24-hour variations in the mitotic activity in human malignant tumours. *Acta Pathol. Microbiol. Scand.* **117** (Suppl.), 1–61 (1956).

89. Smaaland, R., Lote, K., Sotteen, R. B. & Laerum, O. O. DNA synthesis and ploidy in non-Hodgkin's lymphomas demonstrate intrapatient variation depending on circadian stage of cell sampling. *Cancer Res.* **53**, 3129–3138 (1993).

90. Granda, T. G. & Levi, F. Tumour-based rhythms of anticancer efficacy in experimental models. *Chronobiol. Int.* **19**, 21–41 (2002).

**Summary of chronotherapy studies using animal models.**

91. Haus, E. *et al.* Increased tolerance of leukemic mice to arabinosylcytosine with schedule-adjusted to circadian system. *Science* **177**, 80–82 (1972).

92. Halberg, F. *et al.* Toward a chronotherapy of neoplasia: tolerance of treatment depends upon host rhythms. *Experientia* **29**, 909–934 (1973).

93. Boughattas, N. *et al.* Circadian rhythm in toxicities and tissue uptake of 1,2-diamminocyclohexane(trans-1)oxalatoplatinum (II) in mice. *Cancer Res.* **49**, 3362–2268 (1989).

94. Ohdo, S. *et al.* Cell cycle-dependent chronotoxicity of irinotecan hydrochloride in mice. *J. Pharmacol. Exp. Ther.* **283**, 1383–1388 (1997).

95. Focan, C. Pharmaco-economic comparative evaluation of combination chronotherapy vs. standard chemotherapy for colorectal cancer. *Chronobiol. Int.* **19**, 289–297 (2002).

96. Rich, T. A., Shelton, C. H., Kirichenko, A. & Straume, M. Chronomodulated chemotherapy and irradiation: an idea whose time has come? *Chronobiol. Int.* **19**, 191–205 (2002).

97. Mormont, M. C. *et al.* Marker rhythms of circadian system function: a study of patients with metastatic colorectal cancer and good performance status. *Chronobiol. Int.* **19**, 141–155 (2002).

98. Rivard, G. C., Infante-Rivard, C., Dress, M. F., Leclerc, J. M. & Champagne, J. Circadian time-dependent response of childhood lymphoblastic leukemia to chemotherapy: a long-term follow-up study of survival. *Chronobiol. Int.* **10**, 201–204 (1993).

99. Bujs, R. M. & Kalsbeek, A. Hypothalamic integration of central and peripheral clocks. *Nature Rev. Neurosci.* **2**, 521–526 (2001).

100. Costa, L. G. *et al.* Modulation of DNA synthesis by muscarinic cholinergic receptors. *Growth Factors* **18**, 227–236 (2001).

101. Jones, M. A. & Marfurt, C. F. Sympathetic stimulation of corneal epithelial proliferation in wounded and nonwounded rat eyes. *Invest. Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci.* **37**, 2535–2547 (1996).

102. Suzuki, S. *et al.* Circadian rhythm of leukocytes and lymphocyte subsets and its possible correlation with the function of autonomic nervous system. *Clin. Exp. Immunol.* **110**, 500–508 (1997).

103. Okamoto, S., Ibaraki, K., Hayashi, S. & Saito, M. Ventromedial hypothalamus suppresses splenic lymphocyte activity through sympathetic innervation. *Brain Res.* **739**, 308–313 (1996).

104. Maestroni, G. J. *et al.* Neural and endogenous catecholamines in bone marrow. Circadian association of norepinephrine with hematopoiesis? *Exp. Hematol.* **26**, 1172–1177 (1998).

105. Kiba, T. The role of the autonomic nervous system in liver regeneration and apoptosis — recent developments. *Digestion* **66**, 79–88 (2002).

106. Lavoie, C. *et al.* β1/β2-adrenergic receptor heterodimerization regulates β2-adrenergic receptor internalization and ERK signaling efficacy. *J. Biol. Chem.* **277**, 35402–35410 (2002).

107. Moverara, S., Lindberg, M. K., Faergemann, J., Gustafsson, J. A. & Ohlsson, C. Estrogen receptor alpha, but not estrogen recepotr beta, is involved in the regulation of the hair follicle cycling as well as the thickness of epidermis in male mice. *J. Invest. Dermatol.* **119**, 1053–1058 (2002).

108. Song, R. X. & Santen, R. J. Apoptotic action of estrogen. *Apoptosis* **8**, 55–60 (2003).

109. Clarke, R., Dickson, R. B. & Lippman, M. E. Hormonal aspects of breast cancer. *Crit. Rev. Oncol. Hematol.* **12**, 1–23 (1992).

110. Yamamoto, T. *et al.* Inhibition of murine osteosarcoma cell proliferation by glucocorticoid. *Anticancer* **22**, 4151–4156 (2002).

111. Latta, K., Krieg, R. J., Carbajo-Perez, E., Carbajo, S. & Chan, J. C. Effects of deflazacort and cortisone on cellular proliferation in the rat thymus. *Life Sci.* **71**, 1951–1960 (2002).

112. Abo, T. & Kawamura, T. Immunomodulation by the autonomic nervous system: therapeutic approach for cancer, collagen disease, and inflammatory bowel disease. *Therap. Apheresis* **6**, 348–357 (2002).

113. Haus, E. & Smolensky, M. H. Biologic rhythms in the immune system. *Chronobiol. Int.* **16**, 581–622 (1999).

114. Dunn, G. P., Bruce, A. T., Ikeda, H., Old, L. J. & Schreiber, R. D. Cancer immunediting: from immunosurveillance to tumour escape. *Nature Immunol.* **3**, 991–998 (2002).

115. Roberts, J. E. Light and immunomodulation. *Ann. NY Acad. Sci.* **917**, 435–445 (2000).

116. Ohdo, S., Koyanagi, S., Suyama, H., Higuchi, S. & Aramaki, H. Changing the dosing schedule minimizes the disruptive effects of interferon on clock function. *Nature Med.* **7**, 356–360 (2001).

117. Miller, D. B. & O'Callaghan, J. P. Neuroendocrine aspects of the response to stress. *Metabolism* **51**, 5–10 (2002).

118. Besedovsky, H., Rey, A. D., Sorkin, E. & Dinarello, C. A. Immunoregulatory feedback between interleukin-1 and glucocorticoid hormones. *Science* **233**, 652–654 (1986).

119. Bj
rhythms in *Arabidopsis*. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 96, 12362–12366 (1999).

139. Yang, Y., Cheng, P. & Liu, Y. Regulation of the *Neurospora* circadian clock by casein kinase II. *Genes Dev.* 16, 994–1006 (2002).

140. Lin, J. M. *et al.* A role for casein kinase 2alpha in the *Drosophila* circadian clock. *Nature* 420, 816–820 (2002). Shows that casein kinase 2 is involved in *Drosophila* circadian-clock control.

141. Pulverer, B. J. *et al.* Site-specific modulation of c-Myc cotransformation by residues phosphorylated *in vivo*. *Oncogene* 9, 59–70 (1994).

142. Channavajhala, P. & Seldin, D. C. Functional interaction of protein kinase CK2 and c-Myc in lymphomagenesis. *Oncogene* 21, 5280–5288 (2002).

143. Landesman-Bollag, E. *et al.* Protein kinase CK2: signaling and tumourigenesis in the mammary gland. *Mol. Cell. Biochem.* 227, 153–165 (2001).

144. Keller, D. M. *et al.* A DNA damage-induced p53 serine 392 kinase complex contains CK2, hSpt16, and SSRP1. *Mol. Cell* 7, 283–292 (2001).

145. Field, M. D. *et al.* Analysis of clock proteins in mouse SCN demonstrates phylogenetic divergence of the circadian clockwork and resetting mechanisms. *Neuron* 25, 437–447 (2000).

146. Shigeyoshi, Y. *et al.* Light-induced resetting of a mammalian circadian clock is associated with rapid induction of the mPer1 transcript. *Cell* 91, 1043–1053 (1997). Shows that light-induced *Per1* expression is associated with phase resetting in the mammalian central clock.

147. Takeuchi, J., Shannon, W., Aronin, N. & Schwartz, W. J. Compositional changes of AP-1 DNA-binding proteins are regulated by light in a mammalian circadian clock. *Neuron* 11, 825–836 (1993).

148. Obrietan, K., Impey, S. & Storm, D. R. Light and circadian rhythmicity regulate MAP kinase activation in the suprachiasmatic nuclei. *Nature Neurosci.* 1, 693–700 (1998).

149. Ding, J. M., Faiman, L. E., Hurst, W. J., Kuriashkina, L. R. & Gillette, M. U. Resetting the biological clock: mediation of nocturnal CREB phosphorylation via light, glutamate, and nitric oxide. *J. Neurosci.* 17, 667–675 (1997).

150. Weber, E. T., Gannon, R. L., Michel, A. M., Gillette, M. U. & Rea, M. A. Nitric oxide synthase inhibitor blocks light-induced phase shifts of the circadian activity rhythm, but not c-fos expression in the suprachiasmatic nucleus of the Syrian hamster. *Brain Res.* 692, 137–142 (1995).

151. Ginty, D. D. *et al.* Regulation of CREB phosphorylation in the suprachiasmatic nucleus by light and a circadian clock. *Science* 260, 238–241 (1993).

152. Hurst, W. J., Mitchell, J. W. & Gillette, M. U. Synchronization and phase-resetting by glutamate of an immortalized SCN cell line. *Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun.* 298, 133–143 (2002).

153. Balsalobre, A. *et al.* Resetting of circadian time in peripheral tissues by glucocorticoid signaling. *Science* 289, 2344–2347 (2000). Shows that the mammalian peripheral clocks are controlled by hormonal signals throughout the 24-hour period.

154. McNamara, P. *et al.* Regulation of CLOCK and MOP4 by nuclear hormone receptors in the vasculature: a humoral mechanism to reset a peripheral clock. *Cell* 105, 877–889 (2001).

155. Yamamoto, K. R. Steroid receptor regulated transcription of specific genes and gene networks. *Ann. Rev. Genet.* 19, 209–252 (1985).

156. Hida, A. *et al.* The human and mouse *Period1* genes: five well-conserved E-box additively contribute to the enhancement of mPer1 transcription. *Genomics* 65, 224–233 (2000).

157. Akashi, M. & Nishida, E. Involvement of the MAP kinase cascade in resetting of the mammalian circadian clock. *Genes Dev.* 14, 645–649 (2000).

158. Balsalobre, A., Marcacci, L. & Schibler, U. Multiple signaling pathways elicit circadian gene expression in cultured Rat-1 fibroblasts. *Curr. Biol.* 10, 1291–1294 (2000).

References 157 and 158 show that mammalian peripheral clocks are regulated by multiple signalling pathways.

159. Williams, J. A., Su, H., Bernards, A., Field J. & Sehgal, A. A circadian output mediated by NF1 and the Ras/MAPK pathway. *Science* 293, 2251–2256 (2001).

160. Ko, G. Y.-P., Ko, M. L. & Dryer, S. E. Circadian regulation of CGMP-gated cationic channels of chick retinal cones: Erk MAP kinase and Ca²⁺/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II. *Neuron* 29, 255–266 (2001).

161. Johnson, G. L. & Lapadat, R. Mitogen-activated protein kinase pathways mediated by ERK, JNK, and p38 protein kinases. *Science* 298, 1911–1912 (2002).

162. Stork, P. J. & Schmitt, J. M. Crosstalk between cAMP and MAP kinase signaling in regulation of cell proliferation. *Trends Cell Biol.* 12, 258–266 (2002).

163. Vaudry, D., Stork, P. J., Lazarovici, P. & Eiden, L. E. Signaling pathways for PC12 cell differentiation: making the right connections. *Science* 296, 1648–1649 (2002).

164. Neves, S. R., Ram, P. T. & Iyengar, R. G protein pathways. *Science* 296, 1636–1639 (2002).

165. Brunton, V. G. *et al.* The protrusive phase and full development of integrin-dependent adhesions in colon epithelial cells require FAK- and ERK-mediated actin spike formation: deregulation in cancer cells. *Neoplasia* 3, 215–226 (2001).

166. Friburgo, A. F., Knudsen, K. E., Strobeck, M. W., Lindhorst, C. M. & Knudsen, E. S. Differential requirements for Ras and the retinoblastoma tumour suppressor protein in the androgen dependence of prostatic adenocarcinoma cells. *Cell Growth Differ.* 11, 361–372 (2000).

167. Aguirre Ghiso, J. A. *et al.* Deregulation of the signaling pathways controlling urokinase production. Its relationship with the invasive phenotype. *Eur. J. Biochem.* 263, 295–304 (1999).

168. De Bono, J. S. & Rowinsky, E. K. Therapeutics targeting signal transduction for patients with colorectal carcinoma. *Br. Med. Bull.* 64, 227–254 (2002).

169. Shaulian, E. & Karin, M. AP-1 as a regulator of cell life and death. *Nature Cell Biol.* 4, E131–E136 (2002).

170. Brown, J. R. *et al.* Fos family members induce cell cycle entry by activating cyclin D1. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* 18, 5609–5619 (1998).

171. Schreiber, M. *et al.* Control of cell cycle progression by c-Jun is p53 dependent. *13*, 607–619 (1999).

172. Shaulian, E. *et al.* The mammalian UV response: c-Jun induction is required for exit from p53-imposed growth arrest. *Cell* 103, 897–907 (2000).

173. Passegue, E. & Wagner, E. F. JunB suppresses cell proliferation by transcriptional activation of p16 (INK4a) expression. *EMBO J.* 19, 2969–2979 (2000).

174. Honrado, G. I. *et al.* The circadian system of c-fos deficient mice. *J. Comp. Physiol.* 178, 563–570 (1996).

175. Wang, J. *et al.* Retinoid-induced G1 arrest and differentiation activation are associated with a switch to cyclin-dependent kinase-activating kinase hypophosphorylation of retinoic acid receptor alpha. *J. Biol. Chem.* 277, 43369–43376 (2002).

176. Toyota, M. *et al.* Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma reduces the growth rate of pancreatic cancer cells through the reduction of cyclin D1. *Life Sci.* 70, 1565–1575 (2002).

177. Spinella, M. J. *et al.* Retinoic acid promotes ubiquitination and proteolysis of cyclin D1 during induced tumour cell differentiation. *J. Biol. Chem.* 274, 22013–2208 (1999).

178. Lin, R. J., Sternsdorf, T., Tini, M. & Evans, R. M. Transcriptional regulation in acute promyelocytic leukemia. *Oncogene* 20, 7204–7215 (2001).

179. Ayroldi, E. *et al.* Glucocorticoid-induced leucine zipper inhibits the Raf-extracellular signal-regulated kinase pathway by binding to Raf-1. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* 22, 7929–7941 (2002).

180. Herrlich, P. Cross-talk between glucocorticoid receptor and AP-1. *Oncogene* 20, 2465–2475 (2001).

181. Liu, J. L., Papachristou, D. N. & Patel, Y. C. Glucocorticoids activate somatostatin gene transcription through co-operative interaction with the cyclic AMP signaling pathway. *Biochem. J.* 301, 863–869 (1994).

182. Qiu, J. *et al.* Rapid activation of ERK1/2 mitogen-activated protein kinase by corticosterone in PC12 cells. *Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun.* 287, 1017–1021 (2001).

183. Rider, L. G., Hirasawa, N., Santini, F. & Beaven, M. A. Activation of the mitogen-activated protein kinase cascade is suppressed by low concentrations of dexamethasone in mast cells. *J. Immunol.* 157, 2374–2380 (1996).

184. Gonzalez, M. V. *et al.* Glucocorticoids antagonize AP-1 by inhibiting the activation/phosphorylation of JNK without affecting its subcellular distribution. *J. Cell Biol.* 150, 1199–1208 (2000).

185. Cidlowski, J. A. *et al.* The biochemistry and molecular biology of glucocorticoid-induced apoptosis in the immune system. *Recent Prog. Horm. Res.* 51, 457–490 (1996).

186. Eastman-Reks, S. B. & Vedeckis, W. V. Glucocorticoid inhibition of c-Myc, c-Myb and c-Ki-ras expression in a mouse lymphoma cell line. *Cancer Res.* 46, 2457–2462 (1986).

187. Rhee, K., Bresnahan, W., Hirai, A., Hirai, M. & Thompson, E. A. c-Myc and cyclin D3 (CcnD3) genes are independent targets for glucocorticoid inhibition of lymphoid cell proliferation. *Cancer Res.* 55, 4188–4195 (1995).

188. Silver, R. *et al.* A diffusible coupling signal from the transplanted suprachiasmatic nucleus controlling circadian locomotor rhythms. *Nature* 382, 810–813 (1996).

189. Lehman, M. N. *et al.* Circadian rhythmicity restored by neural transplant. Immunocytochemical characterization of the graft and its integration with host brain. *J. Neurosci.* 7, 1626–1638 (1987).

190. Meyer-Bernstein, E. L. *et al.* Effects of suprachiasmatic transplants on circadian rhythms of neuroendocrine function in golden hamsters. *Endocrinology* 140, 207–218 (1999).

191. Van Esseveldt, K. E., Lehman, M. N. & Boer, G. J. The suprachiasmatic nucleus and the circadian time-keeping stsem revisited. *Brain Res. Brain Res. Rev.* 33, 34–77 (2000).

192. Kalsbeek, A., Buijs, R. M., Van Heerikhuize, J. J., Arts, M. & Van Der Woude, T. P. Vasopressin-containing neurons of the suprachiasmatic nuclei inhibit corticosterone release. *Brain Res.* 580, 62–67 (1992).

193. Preitner, N. *et al.* The orphan nuclear receptor REV-ERBa controls circadian transcription within the positive limb of the mammalian circadian oscillator. *Cell* 110, 251–260 (2002).

194. Etch