
THE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGICAL CHEMISTRY
© 2003 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

**Structure/Function Relationships Responsible for Coenzyme Specificity and the Isomerase Activity of Human Type 1 3β-Hydroxysteroid Dehydrogenase/Isomerase**

Received for publication, May 7, 2003, and in revised form, June 16, 2003  
Published, JBC Papers in Press, June 27, 2003, DOI 10.1074/jbc.M304752200

James L. Thomas‡§∥, William L. Duax||**, Anthony Addlagatta‡‡, Stacey Brandt‡, Robert R. Fuller§, and Wendy Norris‡

From the ‡Division of Basic Medical Sciences and §Department of Obstetrics-Gynecology, Mercer University School of Medicine, Macon, Georgia 31207, ||Hauptman-Woodward Medical Research Institute, Buffalo, New York 14203, **State University of New York, Buffalo, New York 14203, and the ‡‡Institute of Molecular Biology, Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Department of Physics, University of Oregon, Eugene, Oregon 97403

Human type 1 3β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase/isomerase (3β-HSD/isomerase) catalyzes the two sequential enzyme reactions on a single protein that converts dehydroepiandrosterone or pregnenolone to androstenedione or progesterone, respectively, in placenta, mammary gland, breast tumors, prostate, prostate tumors, and other peripheral tissues. Our earlier studies show that the two enzyme reactions are linked by the coenzyme product, NADH, of the 3β-HSD activity. NADH activates the isomerase activity by inducing a time-dependent conformational change in the enzyme protein. The current study tested the hypothesis that the 3β-HSD and isomerase activities shared a common coenzyme domain, and it characterized key amino acids that participated in coenzyme binding and the isomerase reaction. Homology modeling with UDP-galactose-4-epimerase predicts that Asp³⁶ is responsible for the NAD(H) specificity of human 3β-HSD/isomerase and identifies the Rossmann-fold coenzyme domain at the amino terminus. The D36A/K37R mutant in the potential coenzyme domain and the D241N, D257L, D258L, and D265N mutants in the potential isomerase domain (previously identified by affinity labeling) were created, expressed, and purified. The D36A/K37R mutant shifts the cofactor preference of both 3β-HSD and isomerase from NAD(H) to NADP(H), which shows that the two activities utilize a common coenzyme domain. The D257L and D258L mutations eliminate isomerase activity, whereas the D241N and D265N mutants have nearly full isomerase activity. Kinetic analyses and pH dependence studies showed that either Asp²⁵⁷ or Asp²⁵⁸ plays a catalytic role in the isomerization reaction. These observations further characterize the structure/function relationships of human 3β-HSD/isomerase and bring us closer to the goal of selectively inhibiting the type 1 enzyme in placenta (to control the timing of labor) or in hormone-sensitive breast tumors (to slow their growth).

---

The type 1 (placenta, skin, mammary gland, prostate, endometrium) and type 2 (gonads, adrenals) isoforms of 3β-hydroxy-

* This work was supported by National Institutes of Health Grants HD20055 (to J. L. T.) and DK26546 (to W. L. D.). The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked “advertisement” in accordance with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.
∥ To whom correspondence should be addressed: Mercer University School of Medicine, 1550 College St., Macon, GA 31207. Tel.: 478-301-4177; Fax: 478-301-5489; E-mail: Thomas_J@Mercer.edu.

This paper is available on line at http://www.jbc.org

Δ⁵-steroid dehydrogenase (EC 1.1.1.145)/3-oxosteroid Δ⁵-Δ⁴-isomerase (EC 5.3.3.1) (3β-HSD¹/isomerase) are encoded by two distinct genes, which are expressed in a tissue-specific pattern in humans (1). In human placenta, type 1 3β-HSD/isomerase catalyzes the conversion of 3β-hydroxy-5-ene steroids (dehydroepiandrosterone, pregnenolone) to 3-oxo-4-ene steroids (androstenedione, progesterone) on a single, dimeric protein containing both enzyme activities (2). Androstenedione is converted by placental aromatase and 17β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase (17β-HSD) to estradiol, which participates in the cascade of events that initiates labor in humans (3, 4). In addition to placenta and other human peripheral tissues, the type 1 enzyme is selectively expressed in breast tumors (5), prostate tumors (6), and choriocarcinomas (7), where it catalyzes the first step in the conversion of circulating dehydroepiandrosterone to estradiol or testosterone to promote tumor growth. In human adrenals, type 2 3β-HSD/isomerase is a key enzyme required for the production of cortisol and aldosterone (3). Determination of the structure/function relationships of the type 1 enzyme may lead to the development of specific inhibitors of type 1 3β-HSD/isomerase that can help control the timing of labor and slow the growth of hormone-sensitive tumors without compromising the essential functions of the adrenal enzyme.

The two-step reaction of 3β-HSD/isomerase using dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA) as substrate is shown in Fig. 1. This reaction scheme shows the reduction of NAD⁺ to NADH by the rate-limiting 3β-HSD activity and the requirement of this NADH for the activation of isomerase on the same enzyme protein (2, 8). According to our stopped-flow fluorescence spectroscopy study, NADH induces a time-dependent conformational change in the enzyme structure as the isomerase activity reaches a maximum over 1 min after the addition of the coenzyme (9). The intermediate steroid, 5-androstene-3,17-dione, remains bound during the reaction sequence (2, 9). This model suggests that the 3β-HSD and isomerase domains of the enzyme are linked by a shared coenzyme domain that functions both as the binding site for NAD⁺ during the 3β-HSD reaction and as the coenzyme domain for the allosteric activation of isomerase. Human type 1 (placental) 3β-HSD/isomerase has a strict preference for NAD⁺ as the 3β-HSD cofactor and for NADH as the activator of isomerase. Substitution of NADP(H) for NAD(H) abolishes both enzyme activities in the native placental enzyme (2).

---

¹ The abbreviations used are: HSD, hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase; DHEA, dehydroepiandrosterone.

35484

**Human 3β-Hydroxysteroid Dehydrogenase**

FIG. 1. 3β-HSD/isomerase catalyzes two sequential reactions on a single enzyme protein. The human type 1 3β- HSD and isomerase activities are represented using DHEA as substrate.

Dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA)  
![Chemical Structure 1]

5-Androstene-3,17-dione  
![Chemical Structure 2]

Androstenedione  
![Chemical Structure 3]

CYP19, 17β-HSD  
17β-Estradiol  

17β-HSD  
Testosterone  

The importance of Asp and Arg residues for the NADP(H) specificity of human type 1 (10) and type 3 (11) 17β-HSD have been demonstrated. In addition, Asp functions as the proton acceptor in the Δ⁵-isomerase activity of *Pseudomonas testosteroni* (12). The targeting of Asp residues for our current study is based on our homology modeling of human 3β-HSD/isomerase with other members of the short chain oxidoreductase family of proteins as well as on our previous affinity radiolabeled peptide and mutagenesis studies that identified critical amino acids in the putative isomerase domain of the enzyme (13, 14). Characterization of the mutant enzymes with the D36A/K37R substitutions in the coenzyme domain and with the D241N, D257L, D258L, or D265N mutations in the isomerase region has been correlated with our homology data to produce the first three-dimensional model of human 3β-HSD/ isomerase that elucidates key structure/function relationships.

It has been shown that if the sequence of a protein of uncertain three-dimensional structure has 30% identity with the sequence of a protein for which the three-dimensional structure has been determined by x-ray crystallographic analysis, the unknown protein will have a similar fold. The fold will be similar enough that energy minimization of a model of the unknown protein based upon the crystallographically determined protein will produce a three-dimensional model useful for interpreting biochemical data, proposing and testing mechanisms of action, and designing enzyme inhibitors (15–17).

---

### EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES

#### Materials—Dehydroepiandrosterone and pyridine nucleotides were purchased from Sigma and 5-androstene-3,17-dione from Steraloids Inc. (Newport, RI). Reagent grade salts, chemicals, and analytical grade solvents are from Fisher. Glass-distilled deionized water was used for all aqueous solutions.

#### Site-directed Mutagenesis—Using the Advantage cDNA PCR kit (BD Biosciences) and pGEM-3βHSD1 as a template (14), double-stranded PCR-based mutagenesis was performed with the primers in Table I to create the cDNA encoding the D36A/K37R, D241N, D257L, D258L, and D265N mutant enzymes. The presence of the mutated codon and integrity of the entire mutant 3β-HSD cDNA were verified by automated dideoxynucleotide DNA sequencing using the Big Dye terminator cycle sequencing ready reaction kit (PE Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA). Chou-Fasman and Garnier-Osguthorpe-Robson analysis of each mutant enzyme was used to choose amino acid substitutions that produced no apparent changes in the secondary structure of the protein (Protalyze program, Scientific and Educational Software, State Line, PA). The adjacent Asp²⁵⁷ and Asp²⁵⁸ residues required substitution by Leu to avoid predicted changes in secondary structure, whereas the standard Asn substitution (12, 18) for the Asp²⁴¹ and Asp²⁶⁵ residues produces no apparent modification of secondary protein structure.

#### Expression and Purification of the Mutant and Wild-type Enzymes—The mutant 3β-HSD cDNA was introduced into baculovirus as described previously (14). Recombinant baculovirus was added to 1.5 × 10⁹ Sf9 cells (1 liter) at a multiplicity of infection of 10 for expression of each mutant enzyme. The expressed mutant and wild-type enzymes were separated by SDS-polyacrylamide (12%) gel electrophoresis, probed with our anti-3β-HSD polyclonal antibody, and detected using the ECL Western blotting system with antirabbit, a peroxidase-linked secondary antibody (Amersham Biosciences). Each expressed enzyme was purified from the 100,000 × g pellet of the Sf9 cells (2 liters) by our published method (2, 8) using Igepal CO 720 (Rhodia, Inc., Cranbury, NJ) instead of the discontinued Emulgen 913 detergent (Kao Corp., Tokyo, Japan). Each expressed purified mutant and wild-type enzyme produced a single major protein band (42 kDa) on SDS-polyacrylamide (12%) gel electrophoresis that co-migrated with the human wild-type 1 control enzyme. Protein concentrations were determined by the Bradford method using bovine serum albumin as the standard (19).

#### Kinetic Studies—Michaelis-Menten kinetic constants for the 3β-HSD substrate were determined for the purified mutant and wild-type enzymes in incubations containing dehydroepiandrosterone (2–100 μM) plus NAD⁺ or NADP⁺ (0.1 mM) and purified enzyme (0.03 mg) at 27°C. The slope of the initial linear increase in absorbance at 340 nm/min (due to NADH production) was used to determine 3β-HSD activity. Kinetic constants for the isomerase substrate were determined at 27°C in incubations of 5-androstene-3,17-dione (17–150 μM), NADH or NADPH (0.05 mM), and purified enzyme (0.01 mg) in 0.02 M potassium phosphate buffer, pH 7.4. Isomerase activity was measured by the initial absorbance increase at 241 nm (due to androstenedione formation) as a function of time. Blank assays (zero-enzyme, zero-substrate) ensured that specific isomerase activity was measured as opposed to nonenzymatic “spontaneous” isomerization (8). In addition, isomerase incubations without added coenzyme (NADH, NADPH) were used to measure any basal (zero-coenzyme) isomerase activity in the mutants, and this basal activity was subtracted as a blank and reported in the kinetic table legends. Changes in absorbance were measured with a Varian (Sugar Land, TX) Cary 219 recording spectrophotometer. The Michaelis-Menten constants (*K*ₘ, *V*ₘₐₓ) were calculated from Lineweaver-Burke (1/*S* versus 1/*V*) plots and verified by Hanes-Woolf (*S* versus *S*/*V*) plots (20). *K*ₐₜ values (min⁻¹) were calculated from the *V*ₘₐₓ values (nmol/min/mg) and represent the maximal turnover rate (nmol of product formed/min/nmol of enzyme dimer).

Kinetic constants for the 3β-HSD cofactor were determined for the purified mutant and wild-type enzymes in incubations containing NAD⁺ or NADP⁺ (20–100 μM), dehydroepiandrosterone (100 μM), and purified enzyme (0.03 mg) in 0.02 M potassium phosphate, pH 7.4, at 27°C using the spectrophotometric assay at 340 nm. Kinetic constants for the isomerase cofactor were determined in incubations of NADH or NADPH (2–50 μM), 5-androstene-3,17-dione (100 μM), and purified enzyme (0.01 mg) in 0.02 M potassium phosphate buffer, pH 7.4, at 27°C using the spectrophotometric assay at 241 nm. Zero-coenzyme blanks were used as described above for the substrate kinetics.

#### pH Dependence Studies—The pH profiles of the isomerase activities of the wild-type control, D241N, D257L, D258L, and D265N mutant enzymes were measured by the isomerase assay in incubations containing 5-androstene-3,17-dione (50 μM), NADH (50 μM), and purified en-


This OCR output includes the text content from the image, formatted in Markdown. The chemical structures and figures are represented with placeholders (`![Chemical Structure 1]`, etc.) where images would typically be inserted.
Human 3β-Hydroxysteroid Dehydrogenase

TABLE II  
Comparison of the fingerprint residues in UDP-galactose 4-epimerase (1A9Z) and human 3β-HSD1

| 1A9Z | %ID$^a$ | Notes$^b$ | 3β-HSD$^c$ | 1A9Z | %ID$^a$ | Notes$^b$ | 3β-HSD$^c$ | 1A9Z | %ID$^a$ | Notes$^b$ | 3β-HSD$^c$ |
|------|---------|-----------|------------|------|---------|-----------|------------|------|---------|-----------|------------|
| 4    | L       | 96        | L7$^i$     | 120  | V       | 69        | I121$^s$   | 227  | G       | 99        | D259       |
| 5    | V       | 83        | V8$^i$     | 121  | F       | 81        | Y122$^s$   | 228  | T       | 79        | T60$^i$    |
| 6    | T       | 82        | T9$^i$     | 122  | S       | 80        | 1          | T123$^s$   | 232  | D       | 97        | S264       |
| 7    | G       | 100       | 1,3        | G10$^i$     | 123  | S       | 99        | 3,4      | S124$^i$   | 233  | Y       | 85        | 3          | Y265$^i$    |
| 8    | G       | 91        |            | A11$^s$     | 125  | A       | 74        | 2          | I126$^s$   | 234  | I       | 83        |            | D266       |
| 9    | A       | 76        |            | G12$^s$     | 127  | V       | 71        | 3          | V128$^i$   | 235  | H       | 80        |            | N267       |
| 10   | G       | 99        | 3          | G13$^i$     | 128  | V       | 92        |          | A129       | 236  | V       | 88        |            | N269       |
| 11   | Y       | 69        | 1          | F14$^s$     | 129  | G       | 97        | 3          | G130$^i$   | 238  | D       | 97        |            | T271       |
| 12   | I       | 86        | 1          | L15$^s$     | 135  | P       | 93        |          | E136       | 239  | L       | 84        | 3          | L272$^i$    |
| 13   | G       | 100       | 1,3        | G16$^i$     | 138  | E       | 90        | 3          | E143$^i$   | 240  | A       | 76        |            | S273       |
| 14   | S       | 93        |            | Q17         | 148  | P       | 96        | 3          | P153$^i$   | 243  | H       | 88        |            | F276       |
| 15   | H       | 81        |            | R18         | 149  | Y       | 98        | 3,4        | Y154$^i$   | 246  | A       | 87        |            | R279       |
| 20   | L       | 86        | 3          | L23$^i$     | 150  | G       | 85        |          | P155       | 260  | N       | 100       |            | W93        |
| 24   | G       | 77        |            | K27         | 153  | K       | 100       | 1,3,4      | K158$^i$   | 261  | L       | 69        |            | I294$^s$   |
| 31   | D       | 94        | 1,3        | D36$^i$     | 157  | E       | 86        | 3          | E163       | 262  | G       | 97        | 3          | G295$^i$    |
| 32   | N       | 78        | 1          | K37         | 175  | L       | 89        |          | G177       | 264  | G       | 84        |            | E299       |
| 33   | L       | 82        |            | A38         | 176  | R       | 95        |          | G178       | 266  | G       | 78        |            | V301       |
| 54   | F       | 81        |            | V58         | 177  | Y       | 90        | 1,2        | T179       | 268  | S       | 78        |            | F303       |
| 58   | D       | 91        | 1,3        | D62$^i$     | 178  | F       | 90        | 2          | L180       | 269  | V       | 81        |            | L304$^s$   |
| 61   | D       | 79        |            | D65$^i$     | 179  | N       | 92        | 2          | Y181       | 281  | G       | 80        |            | --         |
| 77   | V       | 85        |            | I79$^s$     | 182  | G       | 96        |          | A184$^s$   | 291  | R       | 80        |            | L322       |
| 79   | H       | 98        | 1,3        | H81$^i$     | 183  | A       | 78        |          | L185       | 292  | R       | 96        | 2          | A323       |
| 80   | F       | 80        | 1          | T82         | 187  | G       | 77        |          | Y189       | 294  | G       | 95        |            | --         |
| 81   | A       | 91        | 1,3        | A83$^i$     | 190  | G       | 83        | 3          | G191$^i$   | 295  | D       | 93        | 2          | --         |
| 86   | V       | 99        |            | F89         | 191  | E       | 71        | 1,3        | E192$^i$   | 301  | A       | 75        |            | F329       |
| 88   | E       | 77        |            | V91         | 200  | L       | 80        | 2          | I222$^s$   | 306  | A       | 71        | 3          | A334$^i$    |
| 89   | S       | 97        |            | T92$^s$     | 202  | P       | 75        |          | S213       | 310  | L       | 81        | 3          | L338$^i$    |
| 93   | P       | 94        |            | -           | 208  | A       | 88        |          | S219       | 312  | W       | 86        |            | Y340$^s$   |
| 96   | Y       | 75        |            | I97         | 210  | G       | 77        | 3          | G227$^i$   | 318  | L       | 71        |            | W346       |
| 100  | N       | 96        | 3          | N101$^i$    | 219  | G       | 99        | 3          | G251$^i$   | 326  | W       | 78        |            | V354       |
| 103  | G       | 76        | 3          | G104$^i$    | 221  | D       | 92        |          | F253       | 328  | W       | 89        | 3          | W356$^i$    |
| 104  | T       | 73        | 3          | T105$^i$    | 222  | Y       | 90        | 3          | Y254$^i$   | 333  | P       | 81        |            | V361       |
| 107  | L       | 86        | 3          | L108$^i$    | 224  | T       | 94        |          | I256       | 335  | G       | 84        |            | R363       |
| 116  | V       | 71        | 3          | V117$^i$    | 226  | D       | 97        | 3          | D258$^i$   | 336  | Y       | 80        |            | H364       |

$a$ Percent conserved identity (%ID) in 124 proteins aligned with 1A9Z by the ClustalX program.

$b$ Notes: 1, NAD contacts; 2, substrate contacts; 3, residues conserved between 1A9Z and 3β-HSD1; 4, catalytic residues in 1A9Z.

$c$ Identity of the 3β-HSD residue (boldface) that aligns with the fingerprint residue of 1A9Z (superscript $i$ = identical; superscript $s$ = similar).

Human 3β-Hydroxysteroid Dehydrogenase

1 T G W S C L V T G A G G F L G Q R I I R L L V K E K E L K E I R V L D K A F G P E L R E E
36 37
F S K L Q N K T K L T V L E G D I L D E P F L K R A C Q D V S V I I H T A C I I D V F G V
T H R E S I M N V N V K G T Q L L L E A C V Q A S V P V F I Y T S S I E V A G P N S Y K E I
I Q N G H E E E P L E N T W P A P Y P H S K K L A E K A V L A A N G W N L K N G G T L Y T C
A L R P M Y I Y G E G S R F L S A S I N E A L N N N G I L S S V G K F S T V N P V Y V G N V
241 250 253 257 258 265
A W A H I L A L R A L Q D P K K A P S I R G N F T Y Y I S D D T P H Q S Y D N L N Y T L
S K E F G L R L D S R W S F P L S L M Y W I G F L L E I V S F L L R P I Y T Y R P P F N R H
I T L S N S V F T F S Y K K A Q R D L A Y K P L Y S W E E A K Q K T V E W V G S L V D R H K
372
E T L K S K T Q

FIG. 2. Amino acid sequence of the human type 1 3β-HSD/isomerase. Single letter abbreviations for amino acids in the 42.0-kDa monomer of the homodimer are shown. The key amino acids discussed in this report are labeled with position numbers.

TABLE III  
Comparison of NAD(H) and NADP(H) cofactor kinetics for the  
3β-HSD and isomerase activities of the purified D36A/K37R  
and wild-type enzymes  

| Cofactor | Activity       | Wild-type 1     | D36A/K37R      |
|----------|----------------|-----------------|----------------|
|          |                | $K_m$           | $K_m$          |
|          |                | $\mu M$         | $\mu M$        |
| NAD⁺     | 3β-HSD$^a$    | 34.1            | ND             |
|          |                | $K_{cat}$       | $K_{cat}$      |
|          |                | $min^{-1}$      | $min^{-1}$     |
|          |                | 3.9             | No activity    |
| NADP⁺    | 3β-HSD        | ND              | 20.6           |
|          |                | No activity     | 1.3            |
| NADH     | Isomerase$^b$ | 2.4             | ND             |
|          |                | 34.9            | No activity    |
| NADPH    | Isomerase      | ND              | 4.3            |
|          |                | No activity     | 11.3$^c$       |

$a$ Kinetic constants for the 3β-HSD cofactor were determined in incubations containing NAD⁺ (20–100 $\mu$M), dehydroepiandrosterone (100 $\mu$M), and purified enzyme (0.03 mg) in 0.02 M potassium phosphate, pH 7.4, 27 °C. Each $K_m$ and $K_{cat}$ value represents the mean of triplicate measurements with a S.D. ≤ 6%. ND, not determined.

$b$ Kinetic constants for the isomerase cofactor were determined in incubations of NADH (2–50 $\mu$M), 5-androstene-3,17-dione (100 $\mu$M), and purified enzyme (0.01 mg) in 0.02 M potassium phosphate buffer, pH 7.4, 27 °C.

$c$ For D36A/K37R, there was a basal isomerase activity (1.0 nmol/min/ nmol enzyme) without stimulation by coenzyme that was subtracted as a blank.

D36A/K37R mutant of the wild-type 1 enzyme has no measurable 3β-HSD activity with NAD⁺ as the cofactor and now utilizes NADP⁺ as the cofactor. In fact, D36A/K37R has a lower $K_m$ value for NADP⁺ than that measured for utilization of NAD⁺ by the wild-type 1 enzyme. Similarly, NADPH activates the D36A/K37R mutant, and NADH specificity of the wild-type 1 isomerase is completely lost.

Analogous shifts in cofactor specificity from NAD(H) to NADP(H) are shown in the substrate kinetic profiles of the 3β-HSD and isomerase activities of D36A/K37R compared with those of the wild-type 1 enzyme (Table IV). The D36A/K37R mutant exhibits the same 3-fold lower turnover rate ($K_{cat}$) compared with the wild-type enzyme for the utilization of both substrate and coenzymes by both the 3β-HSD and isomerase activities. Unlike wild-type isomerase that has no basal activity in the absence of NADH, the D36A/K37R mutant enzyme exhibits a basal isomerase activity in the absence of coenzyme that is 10% of the NADPH-stimulated activity (Tables III and IV, footnotes c).

Human 3β-Hydroxysteroid Dehydrogenase

**TABLE IV**

Comparison of the substrate kinetics of the purified D36A/K37R and wild-type 3β-HSD and isomerase activities using NAD(H) and NADP(H) as cofactor

| Substrate | Cofactor | Activity | Wild-type 1 | D36A/K37R |
|-----------|----------|----------|-------------|------------|
|           |          |          | $K$         | $K_m$      |
|           |          |          | $\mu M$     | $\mu M$    |
|           |          |          | $K_{cat}$   | $K_{cat}$  |
|           |          |          | $min^{-1}$  | $min^{-1}$ |
| DHEA      | NAD⁺     | 3β-HSD$^a$ | 3.7         | ND         |
|           |          |          |             | No activity |
| DHEA      | NADP⁺    | 3β-HSD   | ND          | 4.8        |
|           |          |          | No activity | 1.1        |
| 5-AND     | NADH     | Isomerase$^b$ | 26.8       | ND         |
|           |          |          | 33.4        | No activity |
| 5-AND     | NADPH    | Isomerase | ND          | 30.4       |
|           |          |          | No activity | 10.6$^c$   |

$a$ Kinetic constants for the 3β-HSD substrate were determined in incubations containing DHEA (2–100 μM), NAD⁺ (0.1 mM), NADP⁺ (0.1 mM), and purified enzyme (0.03 mg) in 0.02 M potassium phosphate, pH 7.4, 27°C. Each $K_m$ and $K_{cat}$ value represents the mean of triplicate measurements with a S.D. ≤ 6%. ND, not determined.

$b$ Kinetic constants for the isomerase substrate were determined in incubations of 5-androstene-3,17-dione (5-AND, 15–100 μM), NADH or NADPH (0.05 mM), and purified enzyme (0.01 mg) in 0.02 M potassium phosphate buffer, pH 7.4, 27°C.

$c$ For D36A/K37R, there was a measurable basal isomerase activity without stimulation by coenzyme at each substrate concentration that was subtracted as a blank.

---

**Kinetic Analyses of the D241N, D257L, D258L, and D265N Mutants—Based on the known reaction mechanism of the Δ⁵-isomerase activity of P. testosteroni (12), Asp may function as the proton acceptor in the Δ⁵-isomerase activity of human 3β-HSD/isomerase. Our affinity labeling (13) and mutagenesis (14) studies identified the Gly²⁵⁰ tryptic peptide as part of the isomerase domain and Tyr²⁵³ as a critical residue (possible proton donor) for the isomerase activity (30). The substrate kinetics of the purified D241N, D257L, D258L, and D265N mutants of human type 1 3β-HSD/isomerase (Table V) show that the D257L and D258L mutations almost abolish the isomerase activity. In contrast, the D241N and D265N mutations have little effect on the $K_m$ and $K_{cat}$ values for the isomerase substrate compared with those of the wild-type 1 activity. The substantial decrease in 3β-HSD activity for D241N, D257L, D258L, and D265N suggests that substitution of any Asp residue in this domain disrupts the 3β-HSD conformation of the enzyme.

The cofactor kinetic profiles mirror the substrate kinetics with respect to the lack of activity of the D257L and D258L mutants (Table VI). NADP⁺ and NADPH were tested as coenzymes for the D241N, D257L, D258L, and D265N mutants, but the 3β-HSD and isomerase activities of these mutants retain a strict preference for NAD⁺ and NADH, respectively. In addition, the D241N mutant has a basal isomerase activity in the absence of coenzyme that is 10% of the NADH-stimulated $K_{cat}$ value (Table VI, footnote c). The wild-type 1, D257L, D258L, and D265N isomerases completely lack activity in the absence of coenzyme.

**Dependence of the Mutant and Wild-type Isomerase Activities on pH—For a pH-dependent enzyme activity (if the mutant enzyme bearing a substitution for a potentially catalytic residue retains residual pH-dependent activity), the substituted amino acid must not be catalytic, because the residual activity has to be due to a different amino acid in the enzyme. Conversely, a catalytic role for the substituted amino acid is supported by the absence of pH dependence for the residual activity of the mutant enzyme (31). The extremely low residual isomerase activities of D257L and D258L (0.8 nmol/min/nmol of enzyme) exhibit little change over the pH 6.5–8.0 range (Fig. 5), which supports a catalytic role for Asp²⁵⁷ or Asp²⁵⁸ in the isomerization reaction. Similar to native human type 1 3β-HSD in placenta (2), the isomerase activities of the wild-type 1, D241N, and D265N enzymes vary with pH and exhibit an optimum value at pH 7.5 (Fig. 5).

---

**DISCUSSION**

Human type 1 3β-HSD/isomerase is expressed in a tissue-specific manner in peripheral tissues (placenta, mammary gland, prostate), whereas human type 2 3β-HSD/isomerase is

**TABLE V**

Substrate kinetics for the 3β-HSD and isomerase activities of the purified D241N, D257L, D2578L, D265N, and wild-type enzymes

| Purified enzyme | 3β-HSD$^a$ | Isomerase$^b$ |
|------------------|-------------|---------------|
|                  | $K_m$       | $K_m$         |
|                  | $\mu M$     | $\mu M$       |
|                  | $K_{cat}$   | $K_{cat}$     |
|                  | $min^{-1}$  | $min^{-1}$    |
| Wild-type 1      | 3.7         | 26.3          |
|                  | 3.3         | 33.4          |
| D241N            | 11.8        | 23.3          |
|                  | 1.3         | 28.9$^c$      |
| D257L            | ND          | ND$^a$        |
|                  | ND          | ND$^b$        |
| D258L            | ND          | ND$^a$        |
|                  | ND          | ND$^b$        |
| D265N            | 10.6        | 48.3          |
|                  | 0.4         | 17.7          |

$a$ Kinetic constants for the 3β-HSD substrate were determined in incubations containing DHEA (2–100 μM), NAD⁺ (0.1 mM), and purified enzyme (0.03 mg) in 0.02 M potassium phosphate, pH 7.4, 27°C. D257L and D258L 3β-HSD activities were 0.1 nmol/min/nmol enzyme at 100 μM DHEA. Each $K_m$ and $K_{cat}$ value represents the mean of triplicate measurements with a S.D. ≤ 4%. ND, not determined.

$b$ Kinetic constants for the isomerase substrate were determined in incubations of 5-androstene-3,17-dione (15–100 μM), NADH (0.05 mM), and purified enzyme (0.01 mg) in 0.02 M potassium phosphate buffer, pH 7.4, 27°C. D257L and D258L isomerase activities were 0.8 nmol/min/nmol enzyme at 100 μM 5-androstene-3,17-dione.

$c$ For D241N, there was a measurable basal isomerase activity in the absence of stimulation by coenzyme at each substrate concentration that was subtracted as a blank.

expressed in endocrine glands (adrenals, gonads) (1, 5, 6, 7). In our recent structure/function study (32), the catalytic residues for human type 1 3β-HSD activity were identified as Tyr¹⁵⁴ and Lys¹⁵⁸ (Fig. 2). The presence of His¹⁵⁶ in human type 1 3β-HSD versus Tyr¹⁵⁶ in type 2 3β-HSD was also shown to be responsible for the 14–17-fold greater affinity of the type 1 enzyme for 3β-HSD substrate steroids and inhibitors compared with the type 2 enzyme (32). In this report, we have further characterized human type 1 3β-HSD/isomerase by homology modeling and mutagenesis to determine the structure/function relationships responsible for coenzyme specificity, localized the coenzyme domain for 3β-HSD/isomerase, identified critical residues for the isomerase activity, and refined our model of the sequential 3β-HSD and isomerase reaction mechanism. A more complete understanding of the structure/function of human type 1 3β-HSD/isomerase may lead to the selective inhibition of steroid biosynthesis in human placenta and breast tumors in a clinical setting. The onset of labor in human pregnancy could be delayed by selectively inhibiting the activity of placental type 1 3β-HSD near term to decrease estradiol production from fetal DHEA (4) without interfering with cortisol or aldosterone production by type 2 3β-HSD in the maternal adrenal gland. In post-menopausal women with a breast tumor, the high levels of circulating DHEA (3) could be blocked from conversion to estradiol by the selective inhibition of type 1 3β-HSD in the tumor and the surrounding mammary gland tissue (5).

35488

# Human 3β-Hydroxysteroid Dehydrogenase

## TABLE VI
**Cofactor kinetics for the 3β-HSD and isomerase activities of the purified D241N, D257L, D258L, D265N, and wild-type enzymes**

| Purified enzyme | 3β-HSD NAD⁺$^{a}$ | Isomerase NADH$^{b}$ |
|-----------------|-------------------|----------------------|
|                 | $K_{m}$           | $K_{cat}$            | $K_{m}$           | $K_{cat}$          |
|                 | $\mu M$           | $min^{-1}$           | $\mu M$           | $min^{-1}$         |
| Wild-type 1     | 34.1              | 3.9                  | 2.4               | 34.9               |
| D241N           | 22.3              | 1.0                  | 3.3               | 26.5$^{c}$         |
| D257L           | ND                | ND$^{a}$             | ND                | ND$^{b}$           |
| D258L           | ND                | ND$^{a}$             | ND                | ND$^{b}$           |
| D265N           | 33.7              | 0.4                  | 4.4               | 14.5               |

$a$ Kinetic constants for the 3β-HSD cofactor were determined in incubations containing NAD⁺ (20–100 μM), DHEA (100 μM), and purified enzyme (0.03 mg) in 0.02 M potassium phosphate, pH 7.4, 27 °C. D257L and D258L 3β-HSD activities were 0.1 nmol/min/nmol enzyme at 100 μM NAD⁺. Each $K_{m}$ and $K_{cat}$ value represents the mean of triplicate measurements with a S.D. ≤ 5%. ND, not determined.

$b$ Kinetic constants for the isomerase cofactor were determined in incubations of NADH (2–50 μM), 5-androstene-3,17-dione (100 μM), and purified enzyme (0.01 mg) in 0.02 M potassium phosphate buffer, pH 7.4, 27 °C. D257L and D258L isomerase activities were 0.8 nmol/min/ nmol enzyme at 50 μM NADH.

$c$ For D241N, there was a measurable basal isomerase activity (2.7 nmol/min/nmol enzyme) in the absence of stimulation by coenzyme that was subtracted as a blank.

---

### FIG. 5. pH profiles of the isomerase activities of the wild-type and mutant enzymes.
The purified wild-type 1 (○), D241N (□), D257L (▲), D258L (●), or D265N mutant (∇) enzymes (0.03 mg) were incubated with 5-androstene-3,17-dione (100 μM) and NADH (50 μM) in 0.05 M sodium phosphate pyrophosphate buffer, pH 6.5–8.0, at 27 °C. Each point represents the mean of triplicate determinations. Error bars represent standard deviations.

---

### FIG. 6. Interactions of the Asp³⁶ and Arg³⁷ residues with NAD and NADP.
$A$, the carboxylate R-group of Asp³⁶ in wild-type 1 3β-HSD/ isomerase hydrogen bonds to the 2′,3′-hydroxyl groups of the adenosyl ribose group of NAD. $B$, the guanidinium R-group of Arg³⁷ in the D36A/K37R mutant enzyme hydrogen-bonds to the 2′-phosphate group of NADP. For both panels $A$ and $B$, the oxygen atoms are orange, nitrogen atoms are purple, carbon atoms are gray, and phosphorus atoms are lavender.

---

The question of whether the 3β-HSD and isomerase activities share the same coenzyme domain on the enzyme protein is central to our hypothesis for the mechanism of the sequential enzyme reactions. According to our model, NADH formed by the 3β-HSD reaction induces the enzyme protein to assume the active isomerase conformation so that a single coenzyme domain serves both activities. Our previous studies have supported this model by reporting physical evidence for the NADH-induced time-dependent conformational change (9). In our current study, homology modeling has identified the Rossmann-fold coenzyme domain in 3β-HSD/isomerase and targeted Asp³⁶ as the amino acid that may be responsible for the strict NAD⁺ specificity of the enzyme. This specificity may be because of hydrogen bonds between the carboxylate R-group of Asp and the 2′,3′-hydroxyl groups of the adenosyl ribose of NAD⁺ (Fig. 6A). The D36A/K37R mutation removes Asp and introduces an Arg residue with guanidinium group nitrogens that hydrogen-bond and neutralize the 2′-phosphate group of NADP⁺ (Fig. 6B). This 2′-phosphate group is repelled by Asp³⁶ (10) and appears to be the reason for the strict preference of human 3β-HSD/isomerase for NAD(H). Because the D36A/

shift cofactor preference from NAD(H) to NADP(H) as described above. Because UDP-galactose-4-epimerase utilizes Tyr<sup>149</sup> and Lys<sup>153</sup> for epimerase catalysis (29) just as the Tyr<sup>154</sup> and Lys<sup>158</sup> residues are used in 3β-HSD catalysis (32), the 3β-HSD substrate steroid (DHEA) could also be added to the model. In the ribbon structure (Fig. 7), the Asp<sup>36</sup> residue hydrogen-bonds with the 2′,3′-hydroxy groups of NAD<sup>+</sup>, the nicotinamide group of NAD<sup>+</sup> is positioned correctly with the 3β-hydroxyl group of DHEA as well as with the catalytic Tyr<sup>154</sup> and Lys<sup>158</sup> residues, and Asp<sup>241</sup> bridges the coenzyme domain with the isomerase domain (Asp<sup>257</sup>-Tyr<sup>253</sup>). The distance between the isomerase and coenzyme domain (Rossmann-fold) is exaggerated somewhat in the model because UDP-galactose is a larger molecule than the steroid substrate.

Because our hypothesis for the sequential 3β-HSD/isomerase activity centers on an NADH-induced conformational change that activates isomerase, the basal isomerase activities of the purified wild-type 1, D36A/K37R, D241N, D257L, D258L, and D265N enzymes without stimulation by NADH were measured. Only the D36A/K37R and D241N mutants exhibited isomerase activity in the absence of coenzyme (both 10% of coenzyme-activated activity). This finding and the positions of these residues in the ribbon model suggest a function for Asp<sup>241</sup> in maintaining the 3β-HSD conformation by electrostatic repulsion of Asp<sup>36</sup> plus other negatively charged residues in the Rossmann-fold domain and possibly by electrostatic attraction to the positively charged nicotinamide group of NAD<sup>+</sup>.

The ribbon structure in Fig. 7 shows the enzyme in the 3β-HSD conformation. After NADH is produced from the 3β-HSD reaction, we hypothesize that the Tyr<sup>253</sup> and Asp<sup>257</sup> (or Asp<sup>258</sup>, not shown) residues are brought by the well documented conformational change (9) of the enzyme into contact with the 4β-proton of the bound intermediate steroid, 5-androstene-3,17-dione, to catalyze isomerization (12, 18) to 4-androstene-3,17-dione (androstenedione). The ribbon diagram represents the first three-dimensional model of 3β-HSD/isomerase based on homology analysis and tested by mutagenesis. Efforts are underway using our genetically engineered soluble form of human type 1 3β-HSD/isomerase (33) to grow enzyme crystals that will ultimately test the model using x-ray diffraction.

FIG. 7. Ribbon structure of human type 1 3β-HSD/isomerase based on homology modeling with key amino acids identified. The primary sequences of 3β-HSD/isomerase (green) and UDP-galactose-4-epimerase (yellow) were aligned as described under “Experimental Procedures.” The NAD and DHEA structures are included. The key Asp<sup>36</sup> residue is shown hydrogen-binding (gray dotted lines) to the 2′,3′-hydroxy groups of the adenosyl ribose group of NAD. The catalytic Tyr<sup>154</sup> and Lys<sup>158</sup> residues for human type 1 3β-HSD activity (32), the catalytic Tyr<sup>253</sup> (30) and Asp<sup>257</sup> residues for isomerase activity, and the Asp<sup>241</sup> residue that bridges the upper isomerase domain with the lower coenzyme domain are also shown. This ribbon model represents the 3β-HSD/isomerase structure in the 3β-HSD conformation. The oxygen atoms are orange, nitrogen atoms are purple, carbon atoms are gray, and phosphorus atoms are lavender.

than a nonspecific conformational event because of the different effects of the four mutations on the isomerase activity. If a nonspecific conformational change because of the substitution of a negatively charged Asp residue in this domain had been responsible for the loss of isomerase activity, the D241N and D265N as well as the D257L and D258L mutations should have drastically reduced isomerase activity. However, the D241N and D265N mutations produced little change in the substrate or cofactor kinetics for isomerase. As described under “Experimental Procedures,” analyses using the Protylze program predicted no changes in secondary protein structure by these mutations. However, the substantial loss of 3β-HSD activity by all four of the D241N, D257L, D258L, and D265N mutants suggests that a nonspecific effect caused by the substitution of any Asp residue in this region may disrupt the ability of the enzyme to maintain the active 3β-HSD tertiary conformation.

The results of this mutagenesis study suggest key roles for Asp<sup>36</sup> in the cofactor preference of both activities and for Asp<sup>257</sup> or Asp<sup>258</sup> in isomerase catalysis. Based on the homology data obtained for human type 1 3β-HSD/isomerase and UDP-galactose-4-epimerase, a three-dimensional ribbon model has been constructed (Fig. 7). The highly homologous Rossmann-fold coenzyme domains of the two proteins allow the localization of coenzyme (NAD<sup>+</sup>) in the model. The validity of this model has been strongly supported by using the D36A/K37R mutant to

REFERENCES

1. Rheaume, E., Lachance, Y., Zhao, H.-F., Breton, N., Dumont, M., de Launoit, Y., Trudel, C., Luu-The, V., Simard, J., and Labrie, F. (1991) *Mol. Endocrinol.* **5**, 1147–1157

2. Thomas, J. L., Myers, R. P., and Strickler, R. C. (1989) *J. Steroid Biochem.* **33**, 209–217

3. Rainey, W. E., Carr, B. R., Sasano, H., Suzuki, T., and Mason, J. I. (2002) *Trends Endocrinol. Metab.* **13**, 234–239

4. Kacsoh, B. (2000) *Endocrine Physiology*, pp. 566–567, McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc., New York

5. Gingras, S., Moriggi, R., Groner, B., and Simard, J. (1999) *Mol. Endocrinol.* **13**, 66–81

6. Geldof, A. A., Dijkstra, I., Newling, D. W., and Rao, B. R. (1995) *Anticancer Res.* **15**, 1349–1354

7. Gingras, S., and Simard, J. (1999) *Endocrinology* **140**, 4573–4584

8. Thomas, J. L., Berko, E. A., Faustino, A., Myers, R. P., and Strickler, R. C. (1988) *J. Steroid Biochem.* **31**, 785–793

9. Thomas, J. L., Frieden, C., Nash, W. E., and Strickler, R. C. (1995) *J. Biol. Chem.* **270**, 21003–21008

10. Huang, Y. W., Pineau, I., Chang, H. J., Azzi, A., Bellemare, V., Laberge, S., and Lin, S. X. (2001) *Mol. Endocrinol.* **15**, 2010–2020

11. McKeever, B. M., Hawkins, B. K., Geissler, W. M., Wu, L., Sheridan, R. P., Mosley, R. T., and Andersson, S. (2002) *Biochim. Biophys. Acta* **1601**, 29–37

12. Xue, L., Kuliopulos, A., Mildvan, A. S., and Talalay, P. (1991) *Biochemistry* **30**, 4991–4997

13. Thomas, J. L., Evans, B. W., and Strickler, R. C. (1997) *Biochemistry* **36**, 9029–9034

14. Thomas, J. L., Evans, B. W., Blanco, G., Mercer, R. W., Mason, J. I., Adler, S., Nash, W. E., Isenberg, K. E., and Strickler, R. C. (1998) *J. Steroid Biochem. Mol. Biol.* **66**, 327–334

15. Borman, S. (2000) *Chem. Eng. News* **78**, 31–37

16. Sali, A. (2002) *Nat. Struct. Biol.* **8**, 482–484

17. Vitkup, D., Melamud, E., Moult J., and Sander, C. (2001) *Nat. Struct. Biol.* **8**, 559–565

18. Kulipulos, A., Talalay, P., and Mildvan, A. S. (1990) *Biochemistry* **29**,

19. Bradford, M. M. (1976) *Anal. Biochem.* **72**, 248–254
20. Segel, I. H. (1975) *Enzyme Kinetics*, pp. 109–111, John Wiley and Sons, New York
21. Bairoch A., and Apweiler R. (2000) *Nucleic Acids Res.* **28**, 45–48
22. Berman, H. M., Westbrook, J., Feng, Z., Gilliland, G., Bhat, T. N., Weissig, H., Shindyalov, I. N., and Bourne, P. E. (2000) *Nucleic Acids Res.* **28**, 235–242
23. Thompson, J. D., Gibson, T. J., Plewniak, F., Jeanmougin, F., and Higgins, D. G. (1997) *Nucleic Acids Res.* **24**, 4876–4882
24. Thoden, J. B., Frey, P. A., and Holden, H. M. (1996) *Biochemistry* **35**, 2557–2566
25. Lund, O., Frimand, K., Gorodkin, J., Bohr, H., Bohr, J., Hansen, J., and Brunak, S. (1997) *Protein Eng.* **10**, 1241–1248
26. Carson, M. (1997) *Methods Enzymol.* **277**, pp. 493–505

27. Duax, W. L., Pletnev, V., Addlagatta, A., Bruenn, J., and Weeks, C. M. (2003) *Proteins Struct. Funct. Genet.*, in press
28. Nayar, S., and Bhattacharyya, D. (2001) *Indian J. Biochem. Biophys.* **38**, 353–360
29. Gerratana, B., Cleland, W. W., and Frey, P. A. (2001) *Biochemistry* **40**, 9187–9195
30. Mason, J. I., Naville, D., Evans, B. W., and Thomas, J. L. (1998) *Endocr. Res.* **24**, 549–557
31. Schlegel, B. P., Jez, J. M., and Penning, T. M. (1998) *Biochemistry* **37**, 3538–3548
32. Thomas, J. L., Mason, J. I., Brandt, S., Spencer, B. R., and Norris, W. (2002) *J. Biol. Chem.* **277**, 42795–42801
33. Thomas, J. L., Mason, J. I., Blanco, G., and Veisaga, M. L. (2001) *J. Mol. Endocrinol.* **27**, 77–83

Enzyme Catalysis and Regulation:  
Structure/Function Relationships  
Responsible for Coenzyme Specificity and  
the Isomerase Activity of Human Type 1 3β  
-Hydroxysteroid Dehydrogenase/Isomerase  

James L. Thomas, William L. Duax, Anthony  
Addlagatta, Stacey Brandt, Robert R. Fuller  
and Wendy Norris  
J. Biol. Chem. 2003, 278:35483-35490.  
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M304752200 originally published online June 27, 2003  

Access the most updated version of this article at doi: [10.1074/jbc.M304752200](http://dx.doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M304752200)  

Find articles, minireviews, Reflections and Classics on similar topics on the [JBC Affinity Sites](https://www.jbc.org/site/affinitysites).  

Alerts:  
- [When this article is cited](#)  
- [When a correction for this article is posted](#)  

[Click here](#) to choose from all of JBC's e-mail alerts  

This article cites 30 references, 6 of which can be accessed free at  
[http://www.jbc.org/content/278/37/35483.full.html#ref-list-1](http://www.jbc.org/content/278/37/35483.full.html#ref-list-1)
