
APPLIED AND ENVIRONMENTAL MICROBIOLOGY, Feb. 2004, p. 686–692  
0099-2240/04/$08.00+0 DOI: 10.1128/AEM.70.2.686–692.2004  
Copyright © 2004, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

**Genes Coding for Hepatotoxic Heptapeptides (Microcystins) in the Cyanobacterium Anabaena Strain 90**

Leo Rouhiainen,$^{1}$ Tanja Vakkilainen,$^{1}$ Berit Lumbye Siemer,$^{1\dagger}$ William Buikema,$^{2}$ Robert Haselkorn,$^{2}$ and Kaarina Sivonen$^{1*}$

Department of Applied Chemistry and Microbiology, Viikki Biocenter, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland,$^{1}$ and Department of Molecular Genetics and Cell Biology, The University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois 60637$^{2}$

Received 17 July 2003/Accepted 22 October 2003

The cluster of microcystin synthetase genes from *Anabaena* strain 90 was sequenced and characterized. The total size of the region is 55.4 kb, and the genes are organized in three putative operons. The first operon (*mcyA-mcyB-mcyC*) is transcribed in the opposite direction from the second operon (*mcyG-mcyD-mcyJ-mcyE-mcyF-mcyI*) and the third operon (*mcyH*). The genes *mcyA*, *mcyB*, and *mcyC* encode nonribosomal peptide synthetases (NRPS), while *mcyD* codes for a polyketide synthase (PKS), and *mcyG* and *mcyE* are mixed NRPS-PKS genes. The genes *mcyJ*, *mcyF*, and *mcyI* are similar to genes coding for a methyltransferase, an aspartate racemase, and a D-3-phosphoglycerate dehydrogenase, respectively. The region in the first module of *mcyB* coding for the adenylation domain was found to be 96% identical with the corresponding part of *mcyC*, suggesting a recent duplication of this fragment and a replacement in *mcyB*. In *Anabaena* strain 90, the order of the domains encoded by the genes in the two sets (from *mcyG* to *mcyI* and from *mcyA* to *mcyC*) is colinear with the hypothetical order of the enzymatic reactions for microcystin biosynthesis. The order of the microcystin synthetase genes in *Anabaena* strain 90 differs from the arrangement found in two other cyanobacterial species, *Microcystis aeruginosa* and *Planktothrix agardhii*. The average sequence match between the microcystin synthetase genes of *Anabaena* strain 90 and the corresponding genes of the other species is 74%. The identity of the individual proteins varies from 67 to 81%. The genes of microcystin biosynthesis from three major producers of this toxin are now known. This makes it possible to design probes and primers to identify the toxin producers in the environment.

---

Cyanobacteria produce a wide variety of bioactive compounds. Many of these are potent toxins, which cause health problems for animals and humans when producer organisms occur in masses in lakes and water reservoirs (26). Cyanobacteria are also found to be a rich source of pharmaceutical compounds (17). Most well known of the cyanobacterial toxins are the hepatotoxic heptapeptides known as microcystins. The general structure of microcystins is cyclo(-d-Ala-X-d-MeAsp-Z-Adda-d-Glu-Mdha-), where X and Z are variable L-amino acids, d-MeAsp is d-erythro-β-methylaspartic acid, Mdha is N-methyldehydroalanine, and Adda is 3-amino-9-methoxy-2,6,8-trimethyl-10-phenyldeca-4,6-dienoic acid. More than 65 structurally different microcystins are known (26). The most common variant has L-leucine and L-arginine in the positions of X and Z, respectively. Demethylated microcystins are also frequently found. Toxicity of microcystins is caused by the inhibition of protein phosphatases 1 and 2A (13). The level of inhibition varies depending on the structure, but the Adda and d-Glu moieties, which are almost invariant in microcystins, are essential for the inhibition (7) and hence for the toxicity. This activity makes the microcystins powerful tools for cell biological investigations.

Microcystins have been found principally in cyanobacteria of three planktonic, bloom-forming genera, *Anabaena*, *Microcystis*, and *Planktothrix* (26). All members of these genera do not make microcystins, and both toxic and nontoxic strains occur in the same species. Toxic and nontoxic strains of *Anabaena*, *Microcystis*, or *Planktothrix* cannot be separated based on the classical morphological taxonomy or ribosomal gene sequences (12). On the other hand, one strain may produce different microcystins and also other peptides simultaneously (5, 6, 25). Thus, the sequences of the microcystin synthetase genes are important for the recognition of toxic cyanobacteria by molecular methods. Recently, the gene clusters encoding microcystin synthetase were sequenced and characterized from the unicellular *Microcystis aeruginosa* (18, 29) and from the filamentous *Planktothrix agardhii* (2). It was demonstrated that the biosynthesis requires a combination of polyketide and nonribosomal peptide synthesis (18, 29).

The bioactive peptides produced by *Anabaena* strain 90 have been characterized: three microcystins (MCYST-LR, MCYST-RR, and d-Asp-MCYST-LR) (25), two seven-residue depsipeptides (anabaenopeptide 90A and 90B), and three six-residue peptides having a ureido linkage (anabaenopeptins A, B, and C) (6). Previously we have described the biosynthetic genes of the depsipeptides, anabenopeptides 90A and 90 B, and constructed a mutant that lacks these anbaenopeptides but still makes other peptides (21). Here we report an analysis of the complete microcystin synthetase gene cluster from *Anabaena* strain 90, show a comparison with the corresponding genes from other cyanobacteria, present a genetic basis for the production of variable microcystins, and propose a model for microcystin biosynthesis in *Anabaena* strain 90.

* Corresponding author. Mailing address: University of Helsinki, Department of Applied Chemistry and Microbiology, P.O. Box 56, Viikki Biocenter, 00014 Helsinki University, Finland. Phone: 358-9-19159270. Fax: 358-9-19159322. E-mail: kaarina.sivonen@helsinki.fi.
† Present address: Danish Veterinary Laboratory, DK-1790 Copenhagen V, Denmark.

VOL. 70, 2004 MICROCYSTIN SYNTHETASE GENES IN ANABAENA SP. STRAIN 90 687

| 0 | 10 | 20 | 30 | 40 | 50 | 55 kb |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| $m c y H$ | $m c y F$ |  |  |  |  |  |
| $m c y I$ | $m c y E$ | $m c y J$ | $m c y D$ | $m c y G$ | $m c y A$ | $m c y B$ | $m c y C$ |

FIG. 1. Microcystin synthetase gene cluster of *Anabaena* strain 90, a linear model for the assembly and the structure of microcystin-LR. Abbreviations for domains: A, adenylation; C, condensation; T, thiolation; NMT, *N*-methyltransferase; EP, epimerase; TE, thioesterase; KR, β-ketoacyl reductase. Adda is 3-amino-9-methoxy-2,6,8-trimethyl-10-phenyldeca-4,6-dienoic acid, Mdha is *N*-methyldehydroalanine, and D-Me-Asp is D-erythro-β-methylaspartic acid. The thick arrows point to three methyl groups, which are putatively introduced by the CM domains. The way of cyclization of the microcystin precursor is shown with an arrow on the right of the picture.

---

### MATERIALS AND METHODS

**Bacterial strains and culture conditions.** The cyanobacterial strain *Anabaena* strain 90 was isolated from Lake Vesijärvi, Finland, and purified axenic (20, 25). It was shown to produce three microcystins (MCYST-LR, MCYST-RR, and D-Asp-MCYST-LR) (25). *Anabaena* strain 90 was grown in Z8 medium (11) without nitrate at ~22°C with continuous illumination of 20 to 25 μmol m⁻² s⁻¹. *Escherichia coli* strain DH5α, which was used as a host for DNA cloning and sequencing, was cultured in Luria broth at 37°C.

**DNA manipulations, screening, mapping, and sequencing of cosmids.** Extraction of cyanobacterial DNA and the preparation of genomic library has been described earlier (21). The genomic library was screened by colony hybridization (22). The probe labeled with [³²P]dCTP was a 2.5-kb fragment from *mcyA* of *M. aeruginosa* provided by Elke Dittmann (Humboldt University, Berlin, Germany). A total of about 6,000 colonies were tested. The insert DNA of 29 positive cosmid clones was mapped with *HindIII*, *EcoRI*, and *SpeI*. The ends of 18 inserts were sequenced with SP6 and T7 primers, and the cosmid clones for sequencing the microcystin synthetase genes were selected. DNA of the cosmid clones was digested with restriction enzymes *BstEII*, *HindIII*, *EcoRI*, *ScaI*, *SpeI*, or *XbaI* and ligated to pBluescript SK(+). Nested deletions and other DNA manipulations were performed according to the method of Sambrook et al. (22). Sequencing was carried out mainly by the University of Chicago Cancer Research Center DNA Sequencing Facility. Gaps were filled, and the verifications were done by amplifying chromosomal DNA in PCR with DyNAzyme EXT Polymerase (Finnzymes), the sequencing reactions were done with the BigDye Terminator Cycle Sequencing kit (Applied Biosystems) and analyzed on the ABI 310 Genetic Analyzer. The standard T3 and T7 primers and oligonucleotides derived from already determined sequences were employed.

**Sequence analysis.** Analysis and comparisons of sequences were performed with the Sequence analysis software package (version 8.0; University of Wisconsin Genetics Computer Group) and with EMBOSS (European Molecular Biology Open Software Suite). The CAP program (http://bioweb.pasteur.fr/seqanal/interfaces/cap.html) was used for sequence assembly. Sequence similarity searches in databases were done with Blast through the Web site of the National Center for Biotechnology Information (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/BLAST). Searches for conserved domains and motifs were accomplished with the CD-Search program (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Structure/cdd/cdd.shtml) and with the Motif Scan program (http://hits.isb-sib.ch/cgi-bin/PFSCAN?). Clustal W was applied for multiple sequence alignments (http://npsa-pbil.ibcp.fr/cgi-bin/npsa_automat.pl?page=/NPSA/npsa_clustalw.html).

Nucleotide sequence accession number. The sequences reported in this paper have been deposited in the EMBL data bank under the accession number AJ536156.

---

### RESULTS

#### Organization of the microcystin synthetase genes. Microcystin synthetase genes in *Anabaena* strain 90 (*mcyABCDEFGH*) are organized in three putative operons (Fig. 1) with a total size of 55.4 kb. The first operon (*mcyA-mcyB-mcyC*) is transcribed in the opposite direction from the second (*mcyG-mcyD-mcyJ-mcyE-mcyF-mcyI*) and the third operon (*mcyH*). Putative promoter regions were identified in front of *mcyA*, *mcyG*, and *mcyH*. Transcriptional starts prior to *mcyD* (93 bp from *mcyG*), *mcyE* (37 or 95 bp from *mcyJ*), *mcyF* (42 bp from *mcyE*), and before *mcyI* (51 bp from *mcyF*) cannot be ruled out, although no transcription stop loops were identified following the preceding genes, and no Pribnow box could be identified in front of *mcyD*.

#### Characterization of the peptide synthetase genes. In the first operon there are three open reading frames (ORFs) named *mcyA*, *mcyB*, and *mcyC*. The translations of *mcyA*, *mcyB* and *mcyC* start with ATG codons, and potential ribosome binding sites were recognized preceding the ORFs. *mcyB* is separated by 17 bp from the previous stop codon and overlaps *mcyC* with 1 bp. The lengths of *mcyA*, *mcyB*, and *mcyC* are 8364, 6399, and 3852 bp, and they encode polypeptides with predicted masses of 315,663, 243,072, and 146,877 Da, respectively.

TABLE 1. Comparison of microcystin synthetase genes and polypeptides from *Anabaena* strain 90 with those sequenced from other cyanobacteria$^a$

| Strain                     | A       | B       | C       | D       | E       | F       | G       | H       | I       | J       |
|----------------------------|---------|---------|---------|---------|---------|---------|---------|---------|---------|---------|
| *M. aeruginosa* PCC 7806   | 69/68 (41) | 72/69 (39) | 74/73 (37) | 72/69 (40) | 75/74 (39) | 71/65 (38) | 74/71 (38) | 74/70 (35) | 74/71 (40) | 79/80 (39) |
| *M. aeruginosa* K-139      | 69/68 (41) | 71/69 (39) | 74/73 (37) | 72/69 (40) | 75/75 (39) | 71/65 (37) | 74/71 (38) | 74/70 (36) | 74/72 (39) |             |
| *M. aeruginosa* UV027      | 69/68 (41) | 73/71 (39) | 74/73 (37) |           |           |           |           |           |           |             |
| *P. agardhii* CYA 126/8    | 67/66 (45) | 72/70 (39) | 80/79 (35) | 77/73 (38) | 78/77 (38) |          | 77/74 (38) | 78/75 (35) |           | 81/82 (37) |
| *Anabaena* strain 90       | 41      | 38      | 37      | 40      | 38      | 34      | 39      | 36      | 38      | 39      |
| (mol% G+C)                 |         |         |         |         |         |         |         |         |         |         |

$^a$ References for the sequences: *Microcystis aeruginosa* PCC 7806, 29; *M. aeruginosa* K-139, 18; *M. aeruginosa* UV027, Raps et al., unpublished data (AF458094); *P. agardhii* CYA 126/8, 2.

TABLE 2. Specificity-conferring amino acids (signature sequences) of adenylation domains in the microcystin synthetases from different cyanobacterial strains

| Module | Strain                     | Signature sequence$^a$ | Precedent SS     | Activated amino acid | Reference template$^b$ |
|--------|----------------------------|-------------------------|-------------------|-----------------------|--------------------------|
| McyA   | Anabaena sp. strain 90     | DVWHISLID               | DVWHLSLID         | Ser                   | SyrE(1)                  |
|        | M. aeruginosa 7806          | DVWHFSLID               | DVWHFSLVD         | Ser                   | EntF, MycC(1, 2)         |
|        | M. aeruginosa K-139         | DVWHFSLID               |                   | Ser                   |                          |
|        | M. aeruginosa UV 027        | DVWHFSLID               |                   | Ser                   |                          |
|        | P. agardhii CYA 126/8       | DVWHISLID               |                   | Ser                   |                          |
| McyA 2 | Anabaena sp. strain 90     | DLFNNALTY               |                   | Ala                   |                          |
|        | M. aeruginosa 7806          | DLFNNALTY               |                   | Ala                   | BlmIX, MxA(3, 4)         |
|        | M. aeruginosa K-139         | DLFNNALTY               | DLFNNALTY         | Ala                   |                          |
|        | M. aeruginosa UV 027        | DLFNNALTY               |                   | Ala                   |                          |
|        | P. agardhii CYA 126/8       | DLFNNALSY               |                   | Ala                   |                          |
| McyB 1 | Anabaena sp. strain 90     | DVWFFGLVD               |                   | (Leu/Arg)             | BacA, LicA, LicB, SrFA(1) |
|        | M. aeruginosa 7806          | DAWFLGNVV               | DAWFLGNVV         | Leu                   |                          |
|        | M. aeruginosa K-139         | DAWFLGNVV               |                   | Leu                   |                          |
|        | M. aeruginosa UV 027        | DVWTIGAVE               |                   | (Arg)                 |                          |
|        | P. agardhii CYA 126/8       | DALFFGLVD               |                   | (Leu/Arg)             |                          |
| McyB 2 | Anabaena sp. strain 90     | DARHVGIFV               |                   | (Asp/MeAsp)           |                          |
|        | M. aeruginosa 7806          | DARHVGIFV               |                   | (Asp/MeAsp)           |                          |
|        | M. aeruginosa K-139         | DARHVGIFV               | None              | (Asp/MeAsp)           |                          |
|        | M. aeruginosa UV 027        | DARHVGIFV               |                   | (Asp/MeAsp)           |                          |
|        | P. agardhii CYA 126/8       | DPRHVGIFI               |                   | (Asp/MeAsp)           |                          |
| McyC   | Anabaena sp. strain 90     | DVWCFGVLVD              |                   | (Arg)                 |                          |
|        | M. aeruginosa 7806          | DVWTIGAVD               |                   | (Arg)                 |                          |
|        | M. aeruginosa K-139         | DVWTIGAVE               | None              | (Arg)                 |                          |
|        | M. aeruginosa UV 027        | DVWTIGAVD               |                   | (Arg)                 |                          |
|        | P. agardhii CYA 126/8       | DPWGFGVLVD              |                   | (Arg)                 |                          |
| McyG   | Anabaena sp. strain 90     | GAFWVAASG               |                   |                       |                          |
|        | M. aeruginosa 7806          | GAFWVAASG               | None              |                       |                          |
|        | M. aeruginosa K-139         | GAFWVAASG               |                   |                       |                          |
|        | P. agardhii CYA 126/8       | GAFWVAASG               |                   |                       |                          |
| McyE   | Anabaena sp. strain 90     | DPRHSGVVG               |                   | (Glu)                 |                          |
|        | M. aeruginosa 7806          | DPRHSGVVG               | None              | (Glu)                 |                          |
|        | M. aeruginosa K-139         | DPRHSGVVG               |                   | (Glu)                 |                          |
|        | P. agardhii CYA 126/8       | DPRHSGVVG               |                   | (Glu)                 |                          |

$^a$ Nine variable amino acids of the signature sequences determined as described by Stachelhaus et al. (27). Letters in boldface type indicate the residues identical with the amino acids of the signature sequence from *Anabaena* sp. strain 90.

$^b$ 1, data from reference 27; 2, data from reference 4; 3, data from reference 3; 4, data from reference 24.

1
AMcyGCM RILEIGAGTGATTHQILQACA-SRQINYTFTDISPFFLETAKDTFA-HSFIEYKVLDIEK
AMcyDCM RILEIGGGTGSSSTAAILPHLP-PEQIEYTFTDISSSFLTRAKENFSNYPFIKYQTLDIEK
AMcyECM QILEVGGGTGATSEAIVNNLN-LNHTTYFFTELSPVLLNKARQKFKNRHKFNFNQLDIEK
EpoE SILEIGAGTGATTAAVLPVLL-PDRTEYHFTDVSPFLFLARAEQRFRDHPFLKYGILDIDQ
HMWP1 RILEVGGGTGGTTAWLLPELNGVPALEYHFTDISALFTRRAQQKFADYDFVKYSELDLEK
EcUbiE TVLDLAGGGTGDLTAKFSRLVG--ETGKVVLADINESMLKMGREKLARNIGVIG-NVEYVQA
***: * *** * :* **::*

2 3
AMcyGCM DPEIQGFLPGSYDLIIAANVLHSTRDLQGETLPHIRGILLRPGGHLLILELT
AMcyDCM APISQGFLPSYFDIIIAANVLHATADIN-ETLNNVRSLLAPNAIILILLEST
AMcyECM SPVSQGLTAHSYHIVVAANVLHSTRNIT-ETLNNIRELLIPGGYLVLLETV
EpoE EPAGQGYAHQKFDVIVAAANVIHATRDIR-ATAKRLLSLLAPGGLLLVVEGT
HMWP1 EAQSQGFQAQSYDLIVAANVIHATRHIG-RTLDNLRLILLKPGGRLLMREIT
EcUbiE NAEALPFPDNTFDCITISFGLRNVTDKD-KALRSMYRVLKPGGRLLVLEFS
** :* *****:* * ** :** **** *:: *

FIG. 2. Comparison of the putative CM domains in McyG, McyD, and McyE of Anabaena strain 90 with three bacterial CM domains in the region of the conserved motifs: 1, (VIL)(LV)(DE)(VI)G(GC)G(TP)G; 2, (PG)(QT)(FYA)DA(IVY)(FI)(CVL); and 3, LL(RK)PGG(RIL)(LI) (LFIV)(IL) (9). EpoE is the PKS in epothilone biosynthesis of Sorangium cellulosum (AF217189); HMWP1 is the high-molecular-weight-protein in yersiniabactin biosynthesis encoded by irp1 of Yersinia enterocolitica (Y12527); and ECUbiE is E. coli CM, UbiE (P27851). Residues in boldface type (in the boxed areas) are identical to the consensus amino acids of the motifs. Amino acids, which are identical in at least five of the six sequences, are marked with the asterisks. Strongly similar amino acids are pointed out by two dots.

quences are different depending on the specificity for either malonyl-CoA or methylmalonyl-CoA (8). By analyzing the sequences of the acyltransferase domains (Fig. 3) and comparing them with the AT domains of soraphen and rapamycin synthases, which utilize malonyl subunits, we conclude that all the AT domains of microcystin synthetase load malonyl units. The methyltranferase domains of McyG, McyD, and McyE would then carry out three methylations (Fig. 1).

Ketosynthase and ACP domains. The active-site cysteine and the two histidine residues, which are present in PKSs (1), were identified in the KS domains of McyG, McyD, and McyE. The active sites of the single ACP domain of McyG and the first ACP domain of McyD have the sequence MGXDS, where methionine replaces the commonly identified leucine residue. There is also variation in this position of rifamycin synthase (28). The ACP domain in the second module of McyD has the

At1 AMcyG GQGSQY TSYTQPALFVVEVALAQLW GHSL SHA FH WIQHL
MMcyG GQGSQY TAYTQPALFLIEVALAQLW GHSL AHAFH WLQHL
PMcyG GQGSQY TSYTQPALFIIEVALAQLW GHSL SHA FH WLQHL

AT2 AMcyD GEVRVN PLYVHPTLFALQYALCELW GNGL WQEFH WVDAI
MMcyD GEAQSH SLSVQPPLFAYQYALCELW GSQL WEAFH WINSG
PMcyD GEAQSN PLSVQPILFAFYALCELW GSQL WKGFH WITSV

AT3 AMcyD GQGSQY TQITQPALFSLEYALAKLW GHS I SHA FH WLRHL
MMcyD GQGSQY TQITQPVIFSLEYALAKLW GHS I SHA FH WVAHL
PMcyD GQGSQY TQITQPVLFSFEYALAKLW GHS I SHA FH WVNHL

AT4 AMcyE GQGACY TAYAQPAIFALEYSLAMLW GHSV NGA FH WRQQS
MMcyE GQGACY TAYAQPAIFALEYSTMLW GHSV TQA FH WSKQC
PMcyE GQGACY TAYAQPAIFALEYAVAMLW GHSV TQA FH WRQQC

H FT E L
Malonyl GQGXQR TXYAQXXXXXQXALXXXX GHS I XXAFH WXXXX
Methymalonyl GQGXQW VDVVQXXXXXMXSLAXXW GHS Q DYASH WXXNL
A *

FIG. 3. Comparison of the AT domains of the microcystin synthetases with the consensus sequences of malonyl and methylmalonyl loading AT domains described by Ikeda et al. (8). AT domains (AT1 to AT4) are from Anabaena strain 90 (AMcyG, AMcyD, and AmcyE), from M. aeruginosa (AF183408) (MMcyG, MMcyD, and MMcyE), and from P. agardhii (AJ441056) (PMcyG, PMcyD, and PmcyE). Letters in boldface type indicate the amino acids which are significantly specific to malonyl loading domains, and underlined letters in boldface type point out the residues, which are specific to methylmalonyl loading domains. Serines of the active site are marked with an asterisk.

of McyG, McyD, and McyE (Fig. 1 and 2) are the obvious candidates to introduce three methyl groups into the carbon frame of Adda. It was recently verified with a knockout mutant (2) that the incorporation of the fourth methyl, which is seen in the methoxy group of Adda, is catalyzed by McyJ. The AMT domain of McyE most likely adds the amino group, which participates in the final peptide bond with the arginine residue.

There are two condensation domains of peptide synthetases in McyE. The first one logically catalyzes the peptide bond between Adda and glutamate, which is activated by the adenylation domain of McyE. The signature sequence, which was also determined as DPRHSGVVG for McyE of both *M. aeruginosa* and *P. agardhii*, has no precedents in the databases (Table 2). The synthetases of other peptides, which contain glutamyl residues, are known for bacitracin, fengycin, and surfactin (accession numbers AF007865, AF023464, AF087452, and D13262). In these compounds the standard α-carboxyl of glutamate is part of the peptide bond, while in microcystins it is the γ-carboxyl. This is analogous to the activation of aspartate/methylaspartate by the second adenylation domain of McyB, which results in the β-carboxyl of aspartate/methylaspartate instead of the α-carboxyl being engaged in the peptide bond. This difference must have an impact on the compositions of the glutamate and aspartate/methylaspartate binding pockets in the adenylation domains. McyA has two adenylation domains for the activation of serine and alanine, respectively. The signature sequences of these domains have models in the databases and are almost identical in *Anabaena* strain 90, *M. aeruginosa*, and *P. agardhii* (Table 2). The dehydration of serine supposedly takes place after the activation by adenylation and is probably catalyzed by McyI, which is similar to phosphoglycerate dehydrogenases. There is only one, internal, condensation domain in McyA, which most likely links dehydroserine and D-alanine. The C-terminal condensation domain of McyE putatively catalyzes the bond between glutamate and dehydroserine. There is a methyltransferase domain in the first module of McyA for N-methylation of dehydroserine. The epimerase domain at the C terminus of McyA converts L-alanine to the D form.

Two modules of McyB and one module of McyC logically activate and then add three residues to the nascent peptide chain: L-leucine or L-arginine, methylaspartate or aspartate, and L-arginine, respectively (Fig. 1). The amino acids activated by the adenylation domains of McyC and by the first module of McyB (McyB-1) vary most frequently in microcystins. *M. aeruginosa* PCC7806 and *M. aeruginosa* K-139 produce mainly MCYST-LR, and the substrate specificity conferring sequences in McyB-1 of these strains are identical with the signature sequence for leucine (Table 2). *M. aeruginosa* UV027 and *P. agardhii* CYA126 produce mostly MCYST-RR, which is also produced by *Anabaena* strain 90 together with MCYST-LR. Their signature sequences in McyB-1 are different and have no precedents in the databases (Table 2). In *M. aeruginosa* UV027 the specificity codes of McyB-1 and McyC are almost identical [DVWTIGAV(E/D)WTIGAVD] and match with the codes of McyC from *M. aeruginosa* K-139 and *M. aeruginosa* PCC7806, respectively (Table 2). Accordingly McyB-1 of *M. aeruginosa* UV027 and McyC activate arginine.

There is no epimerase domain in McyB of *Anabaena* strain 90 or in the other sequenced versions of McyB, though in microcystins, the aspartyl or methylaspartyl moiety is in the D

FIG. 4. Comparison of *Anabaena* (A), *Microcystis* (B), and *Planktothrix* (C) microcystin synthetase gene clusters. Letters refer to the corresponding *mcy* genes. Figure (not to scale) shows the order of genes and direction of the gene transcription.

form. The epimerization in this position and in the glutamyl residue is putatively catalyzed by McyF, which is similar to aspartate racemases, and was shown by Nishizawa et al. (19) to complement a D-glutamate-deficient mutant of *E. coli*. The C-terminal thioesterase domain of McyC, as generally in bacterial nonribosomal peptide synthesis (10), catalyzes the final step in microcystin biosynthesis, the cyclization of the linear peptide (Fig. 1). McyH is probably not needed for the synthesis of microcystins but it may participate in the transport.

The first module of *mcyB* from *Anabaena* strain 90 contains a 1,617-bp fragment, which is almost identical to the corresponding part in *mcyC*. This similarity suggests a duplication of the part of *mcyC*, which codes for the adenylation domain, and the replacement of the corresponding section in *mcyB*. The adenylation domain mainly determines the substrate specificity in NRPSs (27). This substitution would explain why *Anabaena* strain 90 produces the arginine variant of microcystin, MCYST-RR. Because *Anabaena* strain 90 also produces MCYST-LR, the first module of *mcyB* has a somewhat-relaxed specificity, while *mcyC* is specific to arginine.

The genes coding for the microcystin synthesis in three major producers, *Anabaena*, *Microcystis*, and *Planktothrix* have been sequenced. There were several differences between the microcystin synthetase genes of these three producers: (i) gene order was different (Fig. 4), (ii) certain genes were lacking from some producers (Fig. 4), and (iii) the gene identities were rather low (Table 1). This all shows that it was necessary to characterize these genes from each organism. This research has now made it possible to design primers and probes to specifically detect and identify the toxin-producing species in natural samples even when the quantities are low (31). These early warning methods might become effective monitoring systems and valuable tools for protecting water users.

### ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This study was supported by Research Center of Excellence funding, grants of the Academy of Finland (40978 and 46812), and grants from the European Union (CYANOTOX grant ENV4-CT98-0802 and TOPIC grant FMRX-CT98-0246) to K.S.

### REFERENCES

1. Aparicio, J. F., I. Molnár, T. Schewecke, A. König, S. F. Haydock, L. E. Khaw, J. Staunton, and P. F. Leadlay. 1996. Organization of the biosynthetic gene cluster for rapamycin in *Streptomyces hygroscopicus*: analysis of the enzymatic domains in the modular polyketide synthase. Gene **169**:9–16.
2. Christiansen, G., J. Fastner, M. Erhard, T. Börner, and E. Dittmann. 2003. Microcystin biosynthesis in *Planktothrix*: genes, evolution, and manipulation. J. Bacteriol. **185**:564–572.
3. Du, L., C. Sanchez, M. Chen, D. J. Edwards, and B. Shen. 2000. The biosynthetic gene cluster for the antitumor drug bleomycin from *Streptomyces verticillus* ATCC15003 supporting functional interactions between nonribosomal peptide synthesis and a polyketide synthase. Chem. Biol. **7**:623–642.
4. Duitman, E. H., L. W. Hamoen, M. Rembold, G. Venema, H. Seitz, W. Saenger, F. Bernhard, R. Reinhardt, M. Schmidt, C. Ullrich, T. Stein, F. Leenders, and J. Vater. 1999. The mycosubtilin synthetase of *Bacillus subtilis* ATCC6633: a multifunctional hybrid between a peptide synthetase, an amino transferase, and a fatty acid synthase. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA **96**:13294–13299.
5. Fastner, J., M. Erhard, and H. von Döhren. 2001. Determination of oligopeptide diversity within a natural population of *Microcystis* spp. (cyanobacteria) by typing single colonies by matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization-time of flight mass spectrometry. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. **67**:5069–5076.
6. Fujii, K., K.-I. Harada, M. Suzuki, F. Kondo, Y. Ikai, H. Oka, W. W. Carmichael, and K. Sivonen. 1996. Occurrence of novel cyclic peptides together with microcystins from toxic cyanobacteria, *Anabaena* species, p. 559–562 *In T. Yasumoto, Y. Oshima, and Y. Fukuyo* (ed.), Harmful and toxic algal blooms. Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission of UNESCO, Paris, France.
7. Goldberg, J., H. B. Huang, Y. G. Kwon, P. Greengard, A. C. Nairn, and J. Kuriyan. 1995. Three-dimensional structure of the catalytic subunit of protein serine/threonine phosphatase-1. Nature **376**:745–753.
8. Ikeda, H., T. Nonomiya, M. Usami, T. Ohta, and S. Omura. 1999. Organization of the biosynthetic gene cluster for the polyketide anthelmintic macrolide avermectin in *Streptomyces avermitilis*. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA **96**:9509–9514.
9. Kagan, R. M., and S. Clarke. 1994. Widespread occurrence of three sequence motifs in diverse S-adenosylmethionine-dependent methyltransferases suggests a common structure for these enzymes. Arch. Biochem. Biophys. **310**:417–427.
10. Kohli, R. M., J. W. Trauger, D. Schwarzer, M. A. Marahiel, and C. T. Walsh. 2001. Generality of peptide cyclization catalyzed by isolated thioesterase domains of nonribosomal peptide. Biochemistry **40**:7099–7108.
11. Kotai, J. 1972. Instructions for preparation of modified nutrient solution Z8 for algae, publication B-11/69, Norwegian Institute for Water Research. Blindern, Oslo, Norway.
12. Lyra, C., S. Suomalainen, M. Gugger, C. Vezie, P. Sundman, L. Paulin, and K. Sivonen. 2001. Molecular characterization of planktic cyanobacteria of *Anabaena, Aphanizomenon, Microcystis* and *Planktothrix* genera. Int. J. Syst. Evol. Microbiol. **51**:513–526.
13. MacKintosh, C., K. A. Beattie, S. Klumpp, P. Cohen, and G. A. Codd. 1990. Cyanobacterial microcystin-LR is a potent and specific inhibitor of protein phosphatase 1 and 2A from both mammals and higher plants. FEBS Lett. **264**:187–192.
14. Marahiel, M. A., T. Stachelhaus, and H. D. Mootz. 1997. Modular peptide synthetases involved in nonribosomal peptide synthesis. Chem. Rev. **97**:2651–2673.
15. Moore, R. E., J. L. Chen, B. S. Moore, G. M. L. Patterson, and W. W. Charmichael. 1991. Biosynthesis of microcystin-LR. Origin of the carbons in the Adda and Masp units. J. Am. Chem. Soc. **113**:5083–5084.
16. Mootz, H. D., D. Schwarzer, and M. A. Marahiel. 2002. Ways of assembling complex natural products on modular nonribosomal peptide synthetases. ChemBioChem **3**:490–504.
17. Namikoshi, M., and K. L. Rinehart. 1996. Bioactive compounds produced by cyanobacteria. J. Ind. Microbiol. **17**:373–384.
18. Nishizawa, T., A. Ueda, M. Asayama, K. Fujii, K.-I. Harada, K. Ochi, and M. Shirai. 2000. Polyketide synthase gene coupled to the peptide synthetase module involved in the biosynthesis of the cyclic heptapeptide microcystin. J. Biochem. **127**:779–789.
19. Nishizawa, T., M. Asayama, and M. Shirai. 2001. Cyclic heptapeptide microcystin biosynthesis requires the glutamate racemase gene. Microbiology **147**:1235–1241.
20. Rouhiainen, L., K. Sivonen, W. J. Buikema, and R. Haselkorn. 1995. Characterization of toxin-producing cyanobacteria by using an oligonucleotide probe containing a tandemly repeated heptamer. J. Bacteriol. **177**:6021–6026.
21. Rouhiainen, L., L. Paulin, S. Suomalainen, H. Hyytiäinen, W. Buikema, R. Haselkorn, and K. Sivonen. 2000. Genes encoding synthetases of cyclic depsipeptides, anabaenopeptilides, in *Anabaena* strain 90. Mol. Microbiol. **37**:156–167.
22. Sambrook, J., E. F. Fritsch, and T. Maniatis. 1989. Molecular cloning: a laboratory manual, 2nd ed. Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press, Plainview, N.Y.
23. Scrutton, N. S., A. Berry, and R. N. Perham. 1990. Redesign of the coenzyme specificity of a dehydrogenase by protein engineering. Nature **343**:38–43.
24. Silakowski, B., G. Nordsiek, B. Kunze, H. Blöcker, and R. Müller. 2001. Novel features in a combined polyketide synthase/non-ribosomal peptide synthetase: the myxalamid biosynthetic gene cluster of the myxobacterium *Stigmatella aurantiaca* Sga 15. Chem. Biol. **8**:59–69.
25. Sivonen, K., M. Namikoshi, W. R. Evans, W. W. Carmichael, F. Sun, L. Rouhiainen, R. Luukkainen, and K. L. Rinehart. 1992. Isolation and characterization of a variety of microcystins from seven strains of the cyanobacterial genus *Anabaena*. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. **58**:2495–2500.
26. Sivonen, K., and G. Jones. 1999. Cyanobacterial toxins, p. 41–111. *In I. Chorus and J. Bartram* (ed.), Toxic cyanobacteria in water: a guide to their public health consequences, monitoring and management. E. & F. N. Spon, London, United Kingdom.
27. Stachelhaus, T., H. D. Mootz, and M. A. Marahiel. 1999. The specificity-conferring code of adenylation domains in nonribosomal peptide synthetases. Chem. Biol. **6**:493–505.
28. Tang, L., Y. J. Yoon, C.-Y. Choi, and C. R. Hutchinson. 1998. Characterization of the enzymatic domains in the modular polyketide synthase involved in rifamycin B biosynthesis by *Amycolatopsis mediterranei*. Gene **216**:255–265.
29. Tillett, D., E. Dittmann, M. Erhard, H. von Döhren, T. Börner, and B. A. Neilan. 2000. Structural organization of microcystin biosynthesis in *Microcystis aeruginosa* PCC7806: an integrated peptide-polyketide synthetase system. Chem. Biol. **7**:753–764.
30. Tsuge, K., T. Akiyama, and M. Shoda. 2001. Cloning, sequencing, and characterization of the iturin A operon. J. Bacteriol. **183**:6265–6273.
31. Vaitomaa, J., A. Rantala, K. Halinen, L. Rouhiainen, P. Tallberg, L. Mokelke, and K. Sivonen. 2003. Quantitative real-time PCR for determination of microcystin synthetase E copy numbers for *Microcystis* and *Anabaena* in lakes. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. **69**:7289–7297.
