
0090-9556/04/3207-727–733$20.00

DRUG METABOLISM AND DISPOSITION

Copyright © 2004 by The American Society for Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics

DMD 32:727–733, 2004

Vol. 32, No. 7

1343/1157675

Printed in U.S.A.

# THE EFFECT OF ISONIAZID ON CYP2E1- AND CYP4A-MEDIATED HYDROXYLATION OF ARACHIDONIC ACID IN THE RAT LIVER AND KIDNEY

Samuel M. Poloyac, Michael A. Tortorici, Danielle I. Przychodzin, Robert B. Reynolds, Wen Xie, Reginald F. Frye, and Michael A. Zemaitis

University of Pittsburgh School of Pharmacy, Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania (S.M.P., M.A.T., R.B.R., W.X., M.A.Z.); Shenandoah University, Bernard J. Dunn School of Pharmacy, Winchester, Virginia (D.I.P.); and University of Florida College of Pharmacy, Department of Pharmacy Practice, Gainesville, Florida (R.F.F.)

Received December 1, 2003; accepted March 26, 2004

This article is available online at http://dmd.aspetjournals.org

## ABSTRACT:

Cytochrome P450 (P450) bioactivation of arachidonic acid to hydroxyeicosatetraenoic acids (HETEs) has been reported to be isoform- and tissue-specific. To determine whether altered P450 expression affects the production of these metabolites, the formation of HETEs after isoniazid-mediated CYP2E1 induction was evaluated in the rat liver and kidney. Male Sprague-Dawley rats received isoniazid (200 mg/kg) or saline intraperitoneally once daily for 5 days. Chlorzoxazone, lauric acid, and arachidonic acid hydroxylation was measured in liver and kidney microsomes with and without preincubation with the specific CYP2E1 inhibitor, trans-1,2-dichloroethylene (DCE). P450 isoform content and tissue HETE metabolite concentrations were also determined. Isoniazid increased CYP2E1 protein, and the 6-hydroxychlorzoxazone formation rate was increased by 2.7 ± 0.3- and 2.2 ± 0.5-fold in liver and kidney, respectively. Formation of 19-HETE and 11-hydroxylauric acid was induced 2.3 ± 0.6-fold and 2.2 ± 0.4-fold in the liver, respectively, with no difference in the kidney. All of the induced activities were attenuated by DCE. An unanticipated decrease in liver CYP4A expression and in vitro 20-HETE formation rate was observed after isoniazid administration. Isoniazid decreased liver and kidney 20-HETE content to 34 ± 10% and 15.6 ± 5.3% of control, respectively, without significantly altering tissue 19-HETE concentration. Based on these findings, we conclude that under induced conditions, CYP2E1 is a primary enzyme involved in liver, but not kidney, formation of 19-HETE. In addition, formation of both CYP4A and 20-HETE is reduced in the liver by isoniazid. It was also demonstrated that tissue concentrations parallel in vitro inhibited formation rates for 20-HETE, but not the induced 19-HETE formation in the liver.

The cytochrome P450 (P450) enzyme superfamily metabolizes a wide array of exogenous and endogenous substrates. The importance of P450-mediated metabolism of xenobiotics is well known. P450 enzymes also have a less appreciated, but equally important role in the metabolism of endogenous substrates to bioactive intermediates involved in a wide variety of physiologic processes. One such P450-mediated bioactivation pathway is the monohydroxylation of arachidonic acid to produce hydroxyeicosatetraenoic acids (HETEs) and epoxidation to form epoxyeicosatrienoic acids (Capdevila et al., 1981; Schwartzman et al., 1985). Of the monohydroxylation pathways, P450 enzymes are primarily responsible for the ω-1- and ω-hydroxylation of arachidonic acid to form 19-HETE and 20-HETE, respectively (Carroll et al., 1991; Lasker et al., 2000). Other fatty acid substrates also undergo P450-dependent hydroxylation, including the formation of 11-hydroxy- and 12-hydroxylauric acid metabolites upon in vitro incubation with lauric acid, a CYP4A probe substrate (Hardwick et al., 1987).

This work was supported in part by grants from the American Heart Association (Grant 02654424U) (S.M.P.), the American Foundation for Pharmaceutical Education through the American Association of Colleges of Pharmacy New Investigators Program (S.M.P.), and the Merck Foundation (D.I.P.).

The monohydroxylation of arachidonic acid to form 19- and 20-HETE has been shown to produce multiple physiologic effects. 19-HETE stimulates the rat renal cortical Na⁺/K⁺ ATPase (Escalante et al., 1990), stimulates proximal tubule transport (Quigley et al., 2000), and vasodilates renal arcuate arteries (Ma et al., 1993). In contrast, the formation of 20-HETE is primarily associated with microvascular vasoconstriction in the rat renal (Ma et al., 1993), brain (Harder et al., 1994; Gebremedhin et al., 2000), and mesenteric arteries (Wang et al., 2001), which is mediated by decreasing calcium-dependent large-conductance potassium channel influx and increasing L-type calcium channel influx into vascular smooth muscle (Zou et al., 1996; Gebremedhin et al., 1998). Recently, 20-HETE has also been implicated as a second messenger that mediates vascular endothelial growth factor-dependent skeletal muscle angiogenesis after electrical stimulation (Amaral et al., 2003). Collectively, these data suggest that the regiospecific hydroxylation of arachidonic acid by specific cytochrome P450 isoforms may act as a mechanism to regulate the production of HETE metabolites and their associated physiologic effects.

Consistent with the theory of differential P450 isoform regulation

## ABBREVIATIONS: P450, cytochrome P450; 6OH-CZN, 6-hydroxychlorzoxazone; HETE, hydroxyeicosatetraenoic acid; DCE, trans-1,2-dichloroethylene; INH, isoniazid hydrazide.

altering HETE metabolite production are studies demonstrating that 19-HETE and 20-HETE are formed by different P450 isoforms. Both in vitro expression studies and inhibition studies have implicated isoforms of the CYP4 family in the production of 20-HETE. In the rat, CYP4A1, 4A2, 4A3, 4A8, 4F1, and 4F4 have all been shown to catalyze the formation of 20-HETE (Sundseth and Waxman, 1992; Nguyen et al., 1999; Xu et al., 2004). The formation of 19-HETE has been attributed to CYP2E1 (Laethem et al., 1993) and CYP4A isoforms (Nguyen et al., 1999) in the rat and CYP2C (Luo et al., 1998) and CYP2J9 (Qu et al., 2001) isoforms in the mouse. Interestingly, the involvement of individual P450 isoforms in the formation of these metabolites appears to be tissue-specific and dependent on the level of expression of a given P450 isoform within a given tissue. This tissue specificity has been most evident in studies that evaluated the role of CYP2E1 induction on the formation of HETE metabolites. In separate studies, Amet et al. (1994) showed that under induced conditions, CYP2E1 is responsible for the formation of 19-HETE in the liver (Amet et al., 1994), but not in the kidney (Amet et al., 1997). Although these studies did demonstrate the induction of 19-HETE formation with known CYP2E1 inducers, a study that systematically evaluates tissue-specific induction and inhibition at saturating concentrations of arachidonic acid has not been conducted. In addition, other fatty acids are known to undergo ω- and ω-1-hydroxylation by P450 enzymes. Most notable is the metabolism of lauric acid to its 11-hydroxy- and 12-hydroxylauric acid metabolites, which are used as index reactions to characterize CYP4A isoform activity in the rat (Hardwick et al., 1987; Hoch et al., 2000). Based on these previous data, it was the purpose of this study to determine the role of CYP2E1 in the hydroxylation of arachidonic acid and lauric acid in both the rat liver and kidney after CYP2E1 induction by isoniazid (Park et al.,

The effect of trans-1,2-dichloroethylene (DCE), a specific CYP2E1 inhibitor (Mathews et al., 1998), on CYP2E1-mediated fatty acid metabolism was also evaluated.

### Materials and Methods

#### Animals
Arachidonic acid, 20-HETE, and \[^{2}H_{8}\]15(S)-HETE metabolites were purchased from Cayman Chemical (Ann Arbor, MI). 12-Hydroxylauric acid was purchased from Fluka Chemical Corp. (Ronkonkoma, NY). Chloroxazone and 6-OH-chloroxazone were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO). P450 antibodies were purchased from BD Gentest (Woburn, MA). Organic solvents were ordered from Fisher Scientific Co. (Pittsburgh, PA) and all other chemicals were ordered from Sigma-Aldrich unless otherwise specified.

Male Sprague-Dawley rats (200–225 g; Hilltop Laboratory Animals, Inc., Scottdale, PA) were maintained in cages and fed a diet of pellets and water ad libitum. Rats received intraperitoneal (i.p.) injections of isoniazid in saline (isonicotinic acid hydrazide; Sigma-Aldrich) 200 mg/kg once daily for 5 days. Control animals were injected i.p. with sterile normal saline. Animals were sacrificed 3 h after the last injection, and liver and kidney tissue was excised. All animal procedures were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of the University of Pittsburgh.

#### Microsome Preparation
The liver and kidney tissues were collected and microsomes were prepared as previously described by Rockich and Blouin (1999), via differential centrifugation in a Beckman L8-70 ultracentrifuge (Beckman Coulter, Fullerton, CA). Total microsomal protein was determined and the quality of harvested liver microsomes was determined by spectral P450 analysis as described by Omura and Sato (1964).

#### Assay of CYP2E1 Activity
Microsomal incubations contained 400 μg of microsomal total protein, 400 μM chloroxazone, and 1 mM NADPH in a final volume of 1 ml and were incubated at 37°C for 20 min. The reaction was stopped with 50 μl of 42.5% o-phosphoric acid followed by the addition of the internal standard, umbelliferone. Samples and standards were then extracted in

---

**FIG. 1.** CYP2E1 activity and protein content in liver and kidney microsomes from control and isoniazid-treated animals. Panel A shows the kidney microsomal 6-hydroxychloroxazone formation rate as an index of CYP2E1 activity from saline vehicle control (0.047 ± 0.018 nmol/mg/min; \( n = 8 \)) and isoniazid (0.102 ± 0.023 nmol/mg/min; \( n = 8 \))-treated animals. Panel B shows the liver microsomal 6-hydroxychloroxazone formation rate from saline vehicle control (1.27 ± 0.30 nmol/mg/min; \( n = 8 \)) and isoniazid (3.46 ± 0.39 nmol/mg/min; \( n = 8 \))-treated animals. All data are presented as mean ± standard deviation for an \( n = 8 \) animals per treatment group. Significant differences are depicted by asterisks (\*\*), \( p < 0.01 \). Panel C shows the Western blot CYP2E1 immunoreactivity observed in kidney microsomes from vehicle control (lanes 1, 3, and 5) and isoniazid-treated animals (lanes 2, 4, and 6). Panel D shows the Western blot CYP2E1 immunoreactivity observed in liver microsomes from vehicle control (lanes 1, 3, and 5) and isoniazid-treated animals (lanes 2, 4, and 6).

INH EFFECTS ON CYP2E1 AND CYP4A HYDROXYLATION OF AA

**Figure 2. Formation rate of 19-HETE and 20-HETE in liver and kidney microsomes from control and isoniazid-treated animals presented as percentage of control. Panel A shows the 19-HETE formation rate in kidney and liver microsomes from saline vehicle control and isoniazid-treated animals. Panel B shows the 20-HETE formation rate in kidney and liver microsomes from saline vehicle control and isoniazid-treated animals. All data are presented as percentage of control mean ± standard deviation for \( n = 8 \) animals per treatment group. Significant differences are depicted by asterisks: \*, \( p < 0.05 \); \*\*, \( p < 0.01 \).**

containing cytosol and microsomal components was extracted using HLB solid phase extraction cartridges (Oasis; Waters) attached to a vacuum apparatus (Visiprep 24; Supelco, Bellefonte, PA). After an equilibration of each column with 1 ml of methanol and a rinse with 1 ml of deionized water, 1 ml of sample was added to respective cartridges. Cartridges were washed with distilled \(\mathrm{H}_{2} \mathrm{O}\) and eluted with methanol. Methanol extracts from microsomal incubates and tissue extractions were dried under nitrogen and reconstituted in 200 \(\mu\)l of 50:50 methanol/water. This tissue centrifugation and extraction method provides an assessment of free HETE concentrations. Separations were carried out at ambient temperature on a reversed-phase, BetaBasic C-18 column (5 \(\mu\)m, 2 × 150; Thermo Hypersil, Keystone Scientific Operations, Bellefonte, PA). Mobile phases consisted of 5 mM ammonium acetate (in deionized water), and methanol. Separation of HETE or hydroxylauric acid metabolites and \({ }^{[2]}\mathrm{H}_{8}\)15(S)-HETE in kidney and liver microsomal incubates was achieved with a linear gradient of 60 to 80% methanol over 16 min at a flow rate of 0.2 ml/min. All injection volumes were 20 \(\mu\)l on column. Hydroxyeicosatetraenoic and hydroxylauric acid metabolites were detected with an aQa single quadrupole mass spectrometer (Thermo Finnigan). The mass spectrometer was operated in negative electrospray ionization mode with a probe voltage of 3.0 kV and temperature of 225°C. Analysis was carried out in single ion mode, monitoring specific \( m/z \) 319.5 (19- and 20-HETE), 215.0 (hydroxylauric acid), and 327.5 (\({ }^{[2]}\mathrm{H}_{8}\)15(S)-HETE). Data acquisition and analysis were performed with Xcalibur software version 1.2 (Thermo Finnigan). The ratio of HETE metabolites to internal standard areas was determined and metabolite content was quantified from the linear standard curve for 20-HETE and 12-hydroxylauric acid. Absolute quantification of 19-HETE and 11-hydroxylauric acid formation rates was not possible due to lack of commercial availability of 19-HETE and 11-hydroxylauric acid standards. Percentage of control values for 19-HETE and 11-hydroxylauric acid were calculated from the metabolite area to internal standard ratio.

**DCE Inhibition Study.** Microsomes from saline-treated or isoniazid-treated animals (\( n = 6 \) per treatment group) were preincubated with DCE or vehicle as described by Mathews et al. (1998). Incubations containing 3000 \(\mu\)g of microsomal protein in 2 ml of buffer with and without DCE were initiated by the addition of 1 mM NADPH, and incubations were carried out for 30 min at \( 37^\circ \mathrm{C} \). Reactions were stopped by placing the sample tubes on ice. DCE- and vehicle-treated microsomes were re-isolated by centrifugation for 30 min at 100,000g with a Beckman L8-70 ultracentrifuge (Beckman Coulter). Re-isolated microsomes were pooled to yield three pools of microsomes per treatment group. Activity analysis using chlorzoxazone and arachidonic acid were completed as described above.

**Western Blot Analysis.** A 10% SDS-polyacrylamide gel was used to separate the microsomal proteins by electrophoresis. The gel was run at 200 V for 45 min. The proteins were transferred to nitrocellulose and blocked with 5% milk. The nitrocellulose was probed with goat anti-rat CYP2E1 or anti-rat CYP4A polyclonal antibody from BD Gentest. After washing, an alkaline phosphatase conjugate monoclonal anti-goat IgG was applied followed by CDP-Star with Nitroblock II substrate (Tropix, Bedford, MA) for enhanced chemiluminescence. Appropriate washing was completed between all blocking and antibody steps.

**Statistical Analysis.** Statistical significance was determined via a two-sample unpaired \( t \) test assuming equal variance. For the inhibition study, an analysis of variance with a Bonferroni correction was carried out assuming equal variance. The alpha level for significance was set in advance at \( p < 0.05 \).

## Results

### Effect of Isoniazid on CYP2E1 Protein and Enzymatic Function in Rat Liver and Kidney. Treatment of rats with isoniazid intraperitoneally daily for 5 days resulted in anticipated induction in CYP2E1 protein content and functional activity as assessed by 6-hydroxylation of chlorzoxazone in both the rat kidney and liver (Fig. 1). Comparable levels of induction of 6OH-CZN formation were observed in kidney and liver microsomes with 2.2 ± 0.5-fold induction observed in kidney microsomes and 2.7 ± 0.3-fold induction of 6OH-CZN formation in liver microsomes from isoniazid-treated animals. The induction in functional activity was

FIG. 3. Lauric acid hydroxylation and CYP4A content in liver and kidney microsomes from control and isoniazid-treated animals. Panel A shows the 11-hydroxylauric acid formation rate in kidney and liver microsomes from saline vehicle control and isoniazid-treated animals. Panel B shows the 12-hydroxylauric acid formation rate in kidney and liver microsomes from saline vehicle control and isoniazid-treated animals. All data are presented as percentage of control mean ± standard deviation for \( n = 8 \) animals per treatment group. Significant differences are depicted by asterisks (\*\*), \( p < 0.01 \). Panel C shows the Western blot CYP4A immunoreactivity observed in kidney microsomes from vehicle control (lanes 1, 3, and 5) and isoniazid-treated animals (lanes 2, 4, and 6). Panel D shows the Western blot CYP4A immunoreactivity observed in liver microsomes from vehicle control (lanes 1, 3, and 5) and isoniazid-treated animals (lanes 2, 4, and 6).

paralleled by an increase in CYP2E1 immunoreactivity in the kidney and liver of isoniazid-treated animals. In addition, the level of 6OH-CZN formation in the kidney microsomes was approximately 3 to 4% of liver formation rate, which is consistent with previous reports (Poloyac et al., 2000).

Effect of Isoniazid on Arachidonic Acid Hydroxylation in Rat Liver and Kidney. Induction of CYP2E1 by isoniazid exhibited clear tissue-specific effects on arachidonic acid hydroxylation. In the liver, the formation of 19-HETE was significantly increased 2.3 ± 0.6-fold in isoniazid-treated animals (Fig. 2A). In sharp contrast, no significant difference in 19-HETE formation was observed in kidney microsomes obtained from control and isoniazid-treated animals. In contrast to the observations with 19-HETE, the formation of 20-HETE was significantly reduced in both rat liver and kidney microsomes from isoniazid-treated animals (Fig. 2B). Control 20-HETE formation rates were 0.564 ± 0.184 nmol/mg/min and 0.910 ± 0.206 nmol/mg/min for kidney and liver, respectively.

Effect of Isoniazid on Lauric Acid Hydroxylation in Rat Liver and Kidney. The formation of 11-hydroxylauric acid was increased 2.2 ± 0.4-fold in the liver, but not in the kidney (Fig. 3A). This observed pattern of induction was similar to that observed for 19-HETE formation from arachidonic acid. In addition, the formation of 12-hydroxylauric acid paralleled the results observed with terminal hydroxylation of arachidonic acid by demonstrating a significant reduction to 48 ± 12% of control values in the liver microsomes from isoniazid-treated animals (Fig. 3B). The observed reduction in liver 12-OH-lauric acid formation and 20-HETE formation was paralleled by a reduction in the liver CYP4A immunoreactivity in isoniazid-treated animals as compared with control animals (Fig. 3D). A trend toward a reduction in CYP4A immunoreactivity was observed in the lower band from kidney microsomes with no apparent effect on the upper band's immunoreactivity (Fig. 3C).

Effect of DCE Preincubation on Hydroxylation of Chlorzoxazone and Arachidonic Acid in Microsomes from Isoniazid-Induced Animals. Microsomes were incubated with DCE and subsequently re-isolated by centrifugation. This method of microsomal incubation with DCE was used to provide maximal selectivity of inhibition for the CYP2E1 isoform as demonstrated by Mathews et al. (1998). Preincubation with DCE reversed the INH-induced formation of 6-hydroxychlorzoxazone in kidney and liver microsomes by 65 ± 18% and 70 ± 4%, respectively, in pooled DCE-pretreated microsomes (Fig. 4A). In addition, DCE inhibited formation of 19-HETE by 73 ± 22% in isoniazid-induced liver microsomes, whereas no significant alteration was observed in kidney microsomes (Fig. 4B). The formation rate of 20-HETE was not altered by DCE pretreatment (data not shown).

Effect of Isoniazid on Free, Endogenous 19-HETE and 20-HETE Tissue Concentrations. Based on the observed alterations in the microsomal formation of HETE metabolites in isoniazid-treated animals, liver and kidney tissue was extracted for determination of free endogenous HETE metabolite content. Liver tissue from isoniazid-treated animals demonstrated no significant alteration in the free 19-HETE content as estimated by the 19-HETE content to internal standard ratio normalized to gram tissue weight (Fig. 5A). Similar evaluation of 20-HETE content demonstrated a significant reduction to 34 ± 10% of control levels (Fig. 5B) in the liver extracts. The kidney demonstrated similar alterations with no significant alteration in the 19-HETE (Fig. 5A) content and a reduction in 20-HETE content to 15.6 ± 5.3% of control animals (Fig. 5B).

Discussion

The results of this research demonstrate that the inducibility of ω-1-hydroxylation of arachidonic and lauric acid is tissue-specific in isoniazid-treated animals. In addition, the divergent effects of isoniazid on ω- versus ω-1-hydroxylation of fatty acids in the liver demonstrate that differential regulation of P450 isoforms produces

INH EFFECTS ON CYP2E1 AND CYP4A HYDROXYLATION OF AA

FIG. 4. 6-Hydroxychlorzoxazone and 19-HETE formation rate in isoniazid-treated microsomes (n = 6 per treatment group) pretreated with the CYP2E1 inhibitor, DCE, or vehicle control. Microsomes from isoniazid-treated animals were incubated with vehicle or DCE in the presence of NADPH. After incubation, microsomes were re-isolated to produce specific CYP2E1 inhibition. Re-isolated microsomes were pooled (n = 3 pooled microsomes per treatment group) and evaluated for 6-hydroxychlorzoxazone formation rate (panel A) and 19-HETE formation rate (panel B). Data are presented as percentage of saline vehicle control microsomes. These data demonstrate that the inducible formation of 6-hydroxychlorzoxazone was attenuated by DCE in both kidney and liver microsomes. The inducible formation of 19-HETE in liver microsomes was similarly attenuated by DCE with no alterations in the kidney formation rate. All data are presented as mean ± standard deviation for n = 3 pooled microsomes per treatment group. Significant differences are depicted by an asterisk (*), p < 0.05.

alterations in the production of hydroxylated fatty acid metabolites in vivo and in vitro. This study also demonstrated that in vivo liver tissue concentrations of 20-HETE parallel in vitro reductions in microsomal formation rate, whereas inducibility of 19-HETE observed under saturable incubation conditions was not paralleled by in vivo free tissue concentrations.

Different P450 isoforms have been shown to favor production of certain monohydroxylated products, specifically, ω- or ω-1-hydroxylation. Consistent with the results in the present study are several studies suggesting a role for CYP2E1 in fatty acid hydroxylation. Laethem et al. (1993) reported an increase in 19-HETE formation in the liver after induction of CYP2E1 by acetone exposure. Amet et al. (1994) reported that induction of CYP2E1 with either pyridine, pyrazole, ethanol, or acetone produced an increase in 11-OH (ω-1-hydroxylation) lauric acid formation in the liver. Although these studies suggest a role for CYP2E1 in the ω-1-hydroxylation of fatty acids, many of the inducers used have been shown to induce multiple P450 isoforms. Acetone has been reported to induce multiple P450 isoforms, including 1A, 2B, and 2E (Chen and Ueng, 1997). Similarly, pyridine has been shown to induce 1A1 (Iba et al., 2002) and 2B1/2B2 (Kim et al., 1993), as well as CYP2E1. Pyrazole has been reported to induce 2C, 2E, and 2J, along with other isoforms (Park et al., 1993; Robottom-Ferreira et al., 2003). Ethanol has been shown to induce CYP2E1 and 3A4 (Sinclair et al., 1998). The data in the present study

FIG. 5. 19-HETE and 20-HETE content per gram of liver or kidney tissue from vehicle control and isoniazid-treated animals presented as percentage of control. Based on the observed alterations in the in vitro formation of HETE metabolites, the 19-HETE and 20-HETE tissue content was evaluated via solid phase tissue extraction. No significant differences in 19-HETE content were observed in liver or kidney tissue from vehicle control versus isoniazid-treated animals. In contrast, kidney and liver tissue 20-HETE content was significantly reduced in isoniazid-treated animals as compared with vehicle control. All data are presented as mean ± standard deviation for n = 6 animals per treatment group. Significant differences are depicted by asterisks: **, p < 0.01; ***, p < 0.001.

provide additional evidence for the role of CYP2E1 in the formation of 19-HETE in the liver, based on the specific induction of CYP2E1 by isoniazid coupled with the results of DCE inhibition.

To confirm the role of CYP2E1 in the isoniazid-induced formation of 19-HETE, microsomal inhibitions were conducted using DCE. Previous studies demonstrated that DCE is a specific CYP2E1 mechanism-based inhibitor (Lilly et al., 1998). The metabolism of DCE is required for interaction with the P450 heme type II binding site (Costa and Ivanetich, 1982). In addition, DCE is thought to competitively inhibit other P450 isoforms; however, the nonspecific inhibition is avoided by preincubation and re-isolation of microsomal fractions as demonstrated by Mathews et al. (1998). In the study by Mathews et al. (1998), the selectivity of this inhibition was demonstrated against probe substrates for CYP2E1, 1A2, 2A1, 2C6, 2C11, 2D1, and 3A isoforms, with significant inhibition occurring with only CYP2E1-mediated hydroxylation of p-nitrophenol (>80% inhibition as compared with control). The present study demonstrated significant inhibition of 6-hydroxychlorzoxazone and 19-HETE formation without significant alterations in 20-HETE formation after re-isolation of rat liver microsomes preincubated with DCE. The in vitro attenuation of the induced 6OH-CZN and 19-HETE formation rates in microsomes from isoniazid-treated animals by DCE strongly suggests that induced CYP2E1 is responsible for the hepatic induction of 19-HETE formation.

The observations in kidney microsomes in the present study are

consistent with the results from Amet et al. (1997), who reported that fatty acid ω-1-hydroxylation (arachidonic acid and lauric acid) was not altered by CYP2E1 induction in the kidney. In the study by Amet et al. (1997), arachidonic acid metabolism was measured by incubation with nonsaturating concentrations of ¹⁴C-arachidonic acid substrate. In the current study, an liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry method was used to assess enzymatic formation rates at saturable concentration; therefore, enzymatic formation was dictated by alterations in P450 enzyme levels in the tissues evaluated. The most probable cause for the lack of induction of 19-HETE formation in the rat kidney is the low basal expression levels of CYP2E1 in the kidney. Kidney CYP2E1 activity has been reported to be <10% of liver activity. Even after ~2-fold induction of CYP2E1 protein and functional activity in kidney microsomes, the levels of this isoform are relatively low as compared with total kidney P450 content. It is likely that other P450s present in the kidney at higher levels are primarily responsible for the formation of 19-HETE in the rat kidney. It is also possible that the increase in CYP2E1 in the kidney, coupled with a reduction in the CYP4A isoforms in the kidney, resulted in no significant change in 19-HETE; however, further studies are necessary to determine the effect of specific isoforms in kidney microsomes.

An unanticipated reduction in CYP4A expression and ω-hydroxylation of both lauric and arachidonic acid was observed in rat liver. A previous study by Okita et al. (1997) demonstrated that CYP4A2 is the predominant Western blot band in Sprague-Dawley liver and kidney microsomes using the same antibody used in these studies. It is likely that the lower bands in both the liver and kidney blots represent the CYP4A2 isoform. It is important to note that the alterations in fatty acid metabolism may not be only due to alterations in CYP4A, but also may be due to other P450 isoforms such as CYP4F that are known to catalyze fatty acid hydroxylation (Xu et al., 2004). Further studies are necessary to determine the mechanism(s) by which isoniazid alters fatty acid terminal hydroxylation.

The observed alteration in the in vitro formation rate of 20-HETE was paralleled by decreased free tissue 20-HETE concentration in isoniazid-treated animals, whereas the free liver 19-HETE concentration was not different despite induced microsomal formation of 19-HETE in vitro. The most likely explanation for this observation relates to the availability of arachidonic acid substrate in liver tissue and/or the absence of secondary metabolism pathways in the in vitro incubations. The basal concentration of arachidonic acid (~30 μM) is below the 100 μM saturating substrate concentration for the formation of HETE metabolites by P450 enzymes (Bolcato et al., 2003); therefore, tissue substrate availability may limit the formation during P450 enzyme induction. Alternatively, 19-HETE may undergo secondary metabolism by cyclooxygenase enzymes (Carroll et al., 1992) or may be incorporated into plasma phospholipids for storage (Carroll et al., 1997), thereby potentially increasing these downstream mediators without significantly altering the basal 19-HETE free tissue concentrations. The current data suggest that the level of P450 isoform expression in liver and kidney tissue will control basal level production of 20-HETE when inhibited; however, substrate or secondary metabolism may produce differences in the observed in vitro versus in vivo formation of 19-HETE. Collectively, these data aid in defining the use of microsomal systems to determine alterations in the endogenous tissue production of HETE metabolites.

In summary, the present study demonstrates that CYP2E1 is responsible for the formation of 19-HETE in the rat liver after isoniazid induction and that the activity of the induced enzyme can be decreased with the specific CYP2E1 inhibitor, DCE. In addition, it was demonstrated that the terminal hydroxylation of arachidonic acid to form

20-HETE and CYP4A protein was decreased in isoniazid-treated animals. These differences were tissue-specific and were paralleled by alterations in lauric acid ω- and ω-1-hydroxylation. Finally, this study demonstrated that free tissue concentrations of ω-hydroxylated arachidonic acid metabolites can be estimated by the in vitro assessment of activity in liver tissue, whereas the free tissue concentrations of ω-1-hydroxylated arachidonic acid were not paralleled by in vitro formation rates. Evaluation of the regulatory mechanisms of these alterations and/or the vascular functional consequences of altered arachidonic acid metabolism in the liver requires further study.

Acknowledgments. We acknowledge Cheryl Galloway for technical assistance with the high-performance liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry analysis of 6-hydroxychlorzoxazone.

### References

Amaral SL, Maier KG, Schippers DN, Roman RJ, and Greene AS (2003) CYP4A metabolites of arachidonic acid and VEGF are mediators of skeletal muscle angiogenesis. *Am J Physiol* **284**:H1528–H1535.

Amet Y, Berthou F, Goasduff T, Salaun JP, Le Breton L, and Menez JF (1994) Evidence that cytochrome P450 2E1 is involved in the (omega-1)-hydroxylation of lauric acid in rat liver microsomes. *Biochem Biophys Res Commun* **203**:1168–1174.

Amet Y, Zerilli A, Goasduff T, Dreano Y, and Berthou F (1997) Noninvolvement of CYP2E1 in the (omega-1)-hydroxylation of fatty acids in rat kidney microsomes. *Biochem Pharmacol* **54**:947–952.

Bolcato CA, Frye RF, Zemaitis MA, and Poloyac SM (2003) Determination of 20-hydroxyeicosatetraenoic acid in microsomal incubates using high-performance liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (HPLC-MS). *J Chromatogr B Analyt Technol Biomed Life Sci* **794**:363–372.

Capdevila J, Chacos N, Werringloer J, Prough RA, and Estabrook RW (1981) Liver microsomal cytochrome P-450 and the oxidative metabolism of arachidonic acid. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA* **78**:5362–5366.

Carroll MA, Balazy M, Huang DD, Rybalova S, Falck JR, and McGiff JC (1997) Cytochrome P450-derived renal HETEs: storage and release. *Kidney Int* **51**:1696–1702.

Carroll MA, Garcia MP, Falck JR, and McGiff JC (1992) Cyclooxygenase dependency of the renovascular actions of cytochrome P450-derived arachidonate metabolites. *J Pharmacol Exp Ther* **260**:104–109.

Carroll MA, Sala A, Dunn CE, McGiff JC, and Murphy RC (1991) Structural identification of cytochrome P450-dependent arachidonate metabolites formed by rabbit medullary thick ascending limb cells. *J Biol Chem* **266**:12306–12312.

Chen RM and Ueng TH (1997) Induction of cytochromes P450 1A, 2B and 2E in hamster tissues by acetone. *Arch Toxicol* **71**:489–495.

Costa AK and Ivanetich KM (1982) The 1,2-dichloroethylenes: their metabolism by hepatic cytochrome p-450 in vitro. *Biochem Pharmacol* **31**:2093–2102.

Escalante B, Sessa WC, Falck JR, Yadagiri P, and Schwartzman ML (1990) Cytochrome P450-dependent arachidonic acid metabolites, 19- and 20-hydroxyeicosatetraenoic acids, enhance sodium-potassium ATPase activity in vascular smooth muscle. *J Cardiovasc Pharmacol* **16**:438–443.

Gebremedhin D, Lange AR, Lowry TF, Taheri MR, Birks EK, Hudetz AG, Narayanan J, Falck JR, Okamoto H, Roman RJ, et al. (2000) Production of 20-HETE and its role in autoregulation of cerebral blood flow. *Circ Res* **87**:60–65.

Gebremedhin D, Lange AR, Narayanan J, Aeby MR, Jacobs ER, and Harder DR (1998) Cat cerebral arterial smooth muscle cells express cytochrome P450 4A2 enzyme and produce the vasoconstrictor 20-HETE which enhances L-type Ca2+ current. *J Physiol* **507** (Pt 3):771–781.

Harder DR, Gebremedhin D, Narayanan J, Jefcoat C, Falck JR, Campbell WB, and Roman RJ (1994) Formation and action of a P-450 4A metabolite of arachidonic acid in cat cerebral microvessels. *Am J Physiol* **266**:H2098–H2107.

Hardwick JP, Song BJ, Huberman E, and Gonzalez FJ (1987) Isolation, complementary DNA sequence and regulation of rat hepatic lauric acid omega-hydroxylase (cytochrome P-450LA omega). Identification of a new cytochrome P-450 gene family. *J Biol Chem* **262**:801–810.

Hoch U, Zhang Z, Kroetz DL, and Ortiz de Montellano PR (2000) Structural determination of the substrate specificities and regioselectivities of the rat and human fatty acid omega-hydroxylases. *Arch Biochem Biophys* **373**:63–71.

Iba MM, Nguyen T, and Fung J (2002) CYP1A1 induction by pyridine and its metabolites in HepG2 cells. *Arch Biochem Biophys* **404**:326–334.

Jayyosi Z, Knoble D, Muc M, Erick J, Thomas PE, and Kelley M (1995) Cytochrome P450 2E1 is not the sole catalyst of chlorzoxazone hydroxylation in rat liver microsomes. *J Pharmacol Exp Ther* **273**:1156–1161.

Kim H, Putt D, Reddy S, Hollenberg PF, and Novak RF (1993) Enhanced expression of rat hepatic CYP2B1/2B2 and 2E1 by pyridine: differential induction kinetics and molecular basis of expression. *J Pharmacol Exp Ther* **267**:927–936.

Laethem RM, Balazy M, Falck JR, Laethem CL, and Koop DR (1993) Formation of 19(S), 19(R) and 18(R)-hydroxyeicosatetraenoic acids by alcohol inducible P450 2E1. *J Biol Chem* **268**:12912–12918.

Lasker JM, Chen WB, Wolf I, Bloswick BP, Wilson PD, and Powell PK (2000) Formation of 20-hydroxyeicosatetraenoic acid, a vasoactive and natriuretic eicosanoid, in human kidney. Role of Cyp4F2 and Cyp4A11. *J Biol Chem* **275**:4118–4126.

Lilly PD, Thornton-Manning JR, Gargas ML, Clewell HJ, and Andersen ME (1998) Kinetic characterization of CYP2E1 inhibition in vivo and in vitro by the chloroethylenes. *Arch Toxicol* **72**:609–621.

Luo G, Zeldin DC, Blaisdell JA, Hodgson E, and Goldstein JA (1998) Cloning and expression of murine CYP2Cs and their ability to metabolize arachidonic acid. *Arch Biochem Biophys* **357**:45–57.

Ma YH, Gebremedhin D, Schwartzman ML, Falck JR, Clark JE, Masters BS, Harder DR, and Roman RJ (1993) 20-Hydroxyeicosatetraenoic acid is an endogenous vasoconstrictor of canine renal arcuate arteries. *Circ Res* **72**:126–136.

Mathews JM, Etheridge AS, Raymer JH, Black SR, Pulliam DW Jr, and Bucher JR (1998) Selective inhibition of cytochrome P450 2E1 *in vivo* and *in vitro* with trans-1,2-dichloroethylene. *Chem Res Toxicol* **11**:778–785.

Nguyen X, Wang MH, Reddy KM, Falck JR, and Schwartzman ML (1999) Kinetic profile of the rat CYP4A isoforms: arachidonic acid metabolism and isoform-specific inhibitors. *Am J Physiol* **276**:R1691–R1700.

Okita JR, Johnson SB, Castle PJ, Dezellem SC, and Okita RT (1997) Improved separation and immunodetection of rat cytochrome p450 4a forms in liver and kidney. *Drug Metab Dispos* **25**:1008–1012.

Omura T and Sato R (1964) The carbon monoxide binding pigment of liver microsomes. II. Solubilization, purification and properties. *J Biol Chem* **239**:2379–2385.

Park KS, Sohn DH, Veech RL, and Song BJ (1993) Translational activation of ethanol-inducible cytochrome P450 (CYP2E1) by isoniazid. *Eur J Pharmacol* **248**:7–14.

Polyac SM, Perez A, and Blouin RA (2000) Tissue specific alterations in the 6-hydroxylation of chlorzoxazone following traumatic brain injury in the rat. *Drug Metab Dispos* **29**:296–298.

Qu W, Bradbury JA, Tsao CC, Maronpot R, Harry GJ, Parker CE, Davis LS, Breyer MD, Waalkes MP, Falck JR, et al. (2001) Cytochrome P450 CYP2J9, a new mouse arachidonic acid omega-1 hydroxylase predominately expressed in brain. *J Biol Chem* **276**:25467–25479.

Quigley R, Baum M, Reddy KM, Griener JC, and Falck JR (2000) Effects of 20-HETE and 19(S)-HETE on rabbit proximal straight tubule volume transport. *Am J Physiol* **278**:F949–F953.

Robottom-Ferreira AB, Aquino SR, Queiroga R, Albano RM, and Ribeiro Pinto LF (2003) Expression of CYP2A3 mRNA and its regulation by 3-methylcholanganthrene, pyrazole and beta-ionone in rat tissues. *Braz J Med Biol Res* **36**:839–844.

Rockich KT and Blouin RA (1999) The effect of the acute phase response on the pharmacokinetics of chlorzoxazone and CYP2E1 *in vitro* activity in rats. *Drug Metab Dispos* **27**:1074–1077.

Schwartzman M, Carroll MA, Ibrahim NG, Ferreri NR, Songu-Mize E, and McGiff JC (1985) Renal arachidonic acid metabolism. The third pathway. *Hypertension* **7**:I136–I144.

Sinclair J, Jeffery E, Wrighton S, Kostrubsky V, Szakacs J, Wood S, and Sinclair P (1998) Alcohol-mediated increases in acetaminophen hepatotoxicity: role of CYP2E and CYP3A. *Biochem Pharmacol* **55**:1557–1565.

Sundseth SS and Waxman DJ (1992) Sex-dependent expression and clofibrate inducibility of cytochrome P450 4A fatty acid omega-hydroxylases. Male specificity of liver and kidney CYP4A2 mRNA and tissue-specific regulation by growth hormone and testosterone. *J Biol Chem* **267**:3915–3921.

Wang MH, Zhang F, Marji J, Zand BA, Nasjletti A, and Laniado-Schwartzman M (2001) CYP4A1 antisense oligonucleotide reduces mesenteric vascular reactivity and blood pressure in SHR. *Am J Physiol* **280**:R255–R261.

Xu F, Falck JR, Ortiz De Montellano PR, and Kroetz DL (2004) Catalytic activity and isoform specific inhibition of rat CYP4F isoforms. *J Pharmacol Exp Ther* **308**:887–895.

Zou AP, Fleming JT, Falck JR, Jacobs ER, Gebremedhin D, Harder DR, and Roman RJ (1996) 20-HETE is an endogenous inhibitor of the large-conductance Ca(2+)-activated K+ channel in renal arterioles. *Am J Physiol* **270**:R228–R237.

---

**Address correspondence to:** Dr. Samuel M. Polyac, Assistant Professor, 808A Salk Hall, School of Pharmacy, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15261. E-mail: poloyac@pitt.edu
