
Full text provided by www.sciencedirect.com

ELSEVIER

**Cargo recognition during clathrin-mediated endocytosis:**
a team effort

Alexander Sorkin

Transmembrane proteins destined to endosomes are selectively accumulated in clathrin-coated pits at the plasma membrane and rapidly internalized in clathrin-coated vesicles. The recognition of specific sequence motifs in transmembrane cargo by coated-pit proteins confers specificity on the endocytic process. Interaction of membrane cargo with the clathrin adaptor protein complex AP-2 is the major mechanism of cargo sorting into coated pits in mammalian cells. Recent studies have revealed a variety of alternative mechanisms of cargo recruitment involving additional adaptor proteins. These alternative mechanisms appear to be particularly important during clathrin-mediated endocytosis of signaling receptors.

Addresses  
Department of Pharmacology, University of Colorado Health Sciences Center, Denver, Colorado, 80262 USA  
e-mail: alexander.sorkin@uchsc.edu

---

Current Opinion in Cell Biology 2004, 16:392–399  

This review comes from a themed issue on Membranes and organelles  
Edited by Judith Klumperman and Gillian Griffiths  

Available online 19th June 2004  
0955-0674/$ – see front matter  
© 2004 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.  

DOI 10.1016/j.ceb.2004.06.001

---

Abbreviations  
AAK     adapter-associated kinase  
ARH     autosomal recessive hypercholesterolemia  
CME     clathrin-mediated endocytosis  
Dab2    Disabled-2  
EGFR    epidermal growth factor receptor  
GPCR    G-protein-coupled receptor  
LDL     low-density lipoprotein  
RNAi    RNA interference  
RTK     receptor tyrosine kinase  
SH      Src homology  
siRNA   small interfering RNA  
TGF     transforming growth factor  
UBA     ubiquitin-associated  
UIM     ubiquitin interacting motifs  

---

Introduction  
By facilitating fast and selective internalization of receptors, channels, transporters and other integral membrane proteins, clathrin-mediated endocytosis (CME) regulates the cell-surface expression and function of these proteins. The cycle of coated vesicle formation consists of several steps [1,2]. First, clathrin triskelia assemble into polyhedral lattices on the cytoplasmic surface of the plasma membrane. Binding of clathrin to the membrane is mediated by ‘adaptor’ proteins that possess phospholipid-interacting motifs and may also bind transmembrane proteins. The major clathrin adaptor protein functioning at the plasma membrane is the AP-2 complex, although several other proteins are capable of linking clathrin to the membrane bilayer. The clathrin lattice serves as a binding scaffold for several stoichiometrically minor components that assist or regulate coated vesicle budding. For example, at the early stages, generation of membrane curvature and formation of a coated pit requires proteins such as epsin, while later events are thought to be monitored by endophilin and amphiphysin, which associate with the clathrin lattice and can produce and/or sense deformation of the lipid bilayer.

The selective recruitment of transmembrane proteins (cargo) into coated pits occurs by binding of specific sequences in the cytoplasmic domains of cargo proteins to AP-2 and possibly-other coat-associated proteins. Several lines of evidence suggest that coated pits can form independently of AP-2 interaction with cargo [3,4] and that cargo is recruited into pre-existing coated pits [5,6]. However, it is also possible that recruitment of some cargo proteins is coordinated with and necessary for the efficient coat assembly.

The process of coat invagination continues during the third stage, leading to the formation of deeply invaginated pits and the scission of a nascent endocytic vesicle. The latter step requires the cytoplasmic GTPase dynamin, which is proposed to function either directly as a GTP-dependent ‘pinchase’ or as a regulator of a distinct mechanochemical enzyme. Finally, uncoating of the vesicle is accomplished with the participation of the coat-associated 5-phosphoinositide phosphatase synaptojanin 1 and a chaperone complex consisting of auxilin and Hsc70.

It is generally thought that the late stages of endocytosis — formation of curved coats and vesicle budding — can occur independently of what type of cargo is present in the coated pit. Thus, cargo recruitment to the clathrin-containing lattice structure is the key sorting step defining the specificity of the internalization process. Hence, this review will focus on progress in understanding the cargo recognition phase of CME in mammalian cells.

Cargo recognition during clathrin-mediated endocytosis Sorkin 393

Figure 1

Mechanisms of cargo recruitment into clathrin coated pits. Possible interactions of adaptor proteins with cargo, clathrin and AP-2 are shown by broken lines. Arrows show enzymatic reactions of protein ubiquitination and phosphorylation. Question mark indicates that the mechanism of the recruitment of endophilin-CIN85 complex into coated pits is unclear. P, phosphorylated tyrosine, serine or threonine residues; Ub, monoubiquitin; x, variable residue; Θ, bulky hydrophobic residue.

---

Recruitment of cargo containing tyrosine-based and di-leucine motifs

The best-understood mechanism of cargo recruitment is the direct interaction of AP-2 with a YxxΘ motif (where Θ is a bulky hydrophobic residue and x is a variable residue) present in the cytoplasmic tail of the cargo protein (Figure 1). AP-2 is a stable heterotetramer consisting of four subunits: α and β2 adaptins, μ2 and σ2 [7]. High-resolution atomic structures of several parts of AP-2 and, more recently, of an entire ‘core’ domain of AP-2 have been solved [7,8**]. The structure of the C-terminal domain of the μ2 subunit revealed that YxxΘ-containing peptides, present in an extended conformation, can fit into a hydrophobic pocket of μ2 [9]. However, this YxxΘ-binding pocket was found to be inaccessible in the structure of the AP-2 core [8**]. It was then hypothesized that a conformational change occurs within the core of AP-2 to expose the cargo-binding domain of μ2, and that phosphorylation of μ2 may enable such a change. This model is supported by the observa-

tion that phosphorylation of AP-2 significantly increases the affinity of AP-2 for internalization signals *in vitro* [10]. The critical evidence for the role of μ2 phosphorylation in endocytosis was obtained in experiments where overexpression of a μ2 mutant in which the major phosphorylation site Thr156 was replaced by alanine inhibited transferrin endocytosis [4].

The protein kinases AAK1 (adaptor-associated kinase 1) and GAK (cyclin-G-associated protein kinase/auxilin 2) have been proposed to phosphorylate μ2 *in vivo* [11,12]. Both kinases are capable of binding to clathrin and AP-2 [12–14]. Interestingly, binding of AAK1 to AP-2 and to clathrin triskelia elevates its kinase activity and increases μ2 phosphorylation [14,15]. This may allow preferential interaction of cargo with AP-2 assembled into clathrin coats at the plasma membrane rather than with AP-2 that is not bound to clathrin. However, functional experiments in cells, such as overexpression of kinase-negative AAK1 and depletion of AAK1 by small interfering RNA

www.sciencedirect.com Current Opinion in Cell Biology 2004, 16:392–399
(siRNA), have not confirmed that AAK1 plays an essential role in endocytosis, possibly because of the presence of other μ2 kinases [16].

While the idea that phosphorylation plays such a role in regulating the cargo-AP interaction is appealing, this seems to be an expensive way to control the high level of constitutive (i.e. ligand-independent) endocytosis, and it is possible that there are additional ways to generate the conformational change in μ2 upon AP-2 interaction with clathrin [17]. It would be interesting to test the role of μ2 phosphorylation in the endocytosis of cargoes other than the transferrin receptor to determine the universality of the phosphorylation-dependent mechanism of cargo recruitment. It is also important to identify a phosphatase that is responsible for μ2 dephosphorylation.

AP-2 has also been implicated in recognition of the FxNPxY motif, which was first identified as an internalization signal present in the cytoplasmic tail of the low-density lipoprotein (LDL) receptor. This motif has been shown to bind μ2 in *in vitro* assays [18]. The structural basis of this interaction is not known but it does not require the YxxΘ-binding pocket of μ2. Knock-down of AP-2 expression using siRNA inhibited transferrin uptake but did not affect internalization of a chimeric CD8 protein fused to the LDL receptor tail [19]. This suggests a role for additional protein(s) in coated-pit recruitment of FxNPxY-containing membrane cargo. Two proteins, ARH (autosomal recessive hypercholesterolemia) and Disabled-2 (Dab2) were found to be capable of direct interaction with FxNPxY sequences of LDL-family receptors (Figure 1) [20–22]. These proteins contain phosphotyrosine-binding (PTB) domains that bind to non-phosphorylated NPxY motifs. ARH and Dab2 can also interact with AP-2 and clathrin, and therefore link LDL receptors to coated pits [23].

Leucine-based motifs (DE)xxxLL(I) (where residues at position four and, less frequently, five from the first leucine are typically acidic, x is any amino acid and the second leucine can be replaced by isoleucine) serve as internalization signals in many single- and multi-spanning transmembrane proteins [24]. These signals can bind to the trunk domain of the β2 subunit of AP-2, as detected using photoactivatable cross-linking [25], and may also bind to the μ2 subunit, as suggested by *in vitro* affinity binding assays [26]. Recently, it was demonstrated using a yeast three-hybrid system that this type of internalization signal interacts with heterodimeric complexes of γ/σ1 and σ3/δ subunits of AP-1 and AP-3 adaptors, respectively [27]. However, a similar interaction with the analogous subcomplex derived from AP-2 was not detected.

As distinct classes of tyrosine-based (YxxΘ and FxNPxY) and di-leucine-containing signals do not compete with each other *in vivo* [28,29], it is likely, even if all three bind

to AP-2, that the molecular mechanisms of their recognition must be different. The characterization of the molecular determinants of AP-2 that are involved in the interactions with di-leucine and FxNPxY motifs is necessary to design the AP-2 mutants needed to carry out functional experiments.

### Recruitment of signaling receptors into coated pits during ligand-induced endocytosis

CME is a principal pathway for endocytosis of many receptors that trigger signal transduction events, for example receptors for growth factors and G-protein-coupled receptors (GPCR). Tyrosine-based and di-leucine motifs have been identified in several signaling receptors, and in a limited number of studies the interaction of signaling receptors with AP-2 was reported [30–33]. However, mutational analysis revealed that neither these motifs nor AP interactions played an important role in the CME of several receptors. This prompted the search for additional protein interactions, distinct from those involving AP-2, that recruit signaling receptors into coated pits.

A breakthrough came from the discovery that non-visual (β-) arrestins mediate internalization of some GPCRs by physically linking these receptors to coated pits [34,35]. The C terminus of β-arrestins contains distinct sequence motifs that can bind to the N-terminal domain of clathrin heavy chain and to the β appendage domain of AP-2 [36]. Upon agonist stimulation, β-arrestins bind to the phosphorylated GPCR, leading to recruitment of the β-arrestin/GPCR complex into coated pits [36] (Figure 1). It is proposed that binding of β-arrestin to the GPCR results in a conformational change in β-arrestin, allowing interaction of the C terminus of β-arrestin with clathrin or β-adaptin [37]. It has also been shown that β-arrestin interacts indirectly with the heptahelical Wnt5A receptor Frizzled 4 via the Frizzled 4-binding protein Dishevelled 2 [38]. A role for β-arrestins in mediating coated-pit recruitment of other (non-GPCR) membrane cargo is further suggested by a recent study of endocytosis of type-III transforming growth factor (TGF)β receptors [39]. In this case, β-arrestin 2 was shown to bind to the cytoplasmic tail of TGFβIII receptor upon the latter's heterodimerization with, and phosphorylation by, the type-II TGFβ receptor.

Important issues that remain to be resolved concern the exact role and relative importance of β-arrestin binding to clathrin and AP-2 during the process of recruitment of receptor/β-arrestin complex into coated pits, and the mechanisms that regulate β-arrestin dissociation from AP-2, clathrin and receptors after internalization.

The search for an adaptor like β-arrestin that can mediate clathrin-dependent internalization of receptor tyrosine
kinases (RTKs) has produced equivocal results. Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) has served as the prototypic model to study CME of RTKs and, in fact, is one of the most popular models to study general mechanisms of CME. This receptor is an example of a cargo that binds to AP-2 through a YxxΘ motif [31,40] and even phosphorylates AP-2 in intact cells [41], but functional experiments have not shown that these events play a significant role in CME [3]. Instead, receptor interaction with the Src homology (SH)2-domain-containing protein Grb2 has been demonstrated to be essential for CME of the EGFR [42]. How Grb2 regulates endocytosis of the EGFR remains to be elucidated. Two closely homologous Cbl proteins, c-Cbl and Cbl-b, that bind to SH3 domains of Grb2 have been implicated in internalization of several RTKs [43]. However, it is not yet known if Cbl plays an essential role in EGFR internalization. Cells derived from a c-Cbl knockout mouse, in which Cbl-b is also substantially down-regulated, displayed normal EGFR endocytosis [44]. Furthermore, EGFR mutants lacking Cbl as well as Grb2 binding sites are internalized normally in several types of cells [45]. These results suggest that other mechanisms of coated pit recruitment may function in CME of the EGFR, at least in the absence of Grb2:Cbl binding to the receptor.

Two scenarios of how Cbl may participate in EGFR internalization can be envisioned. One model suggests that Cbl can be linked to coated pits by CIN85 (also known as SETA or Ruk) protein, which, through its SH3 domains, binds to the PRxxP motif in the carboxyl-terminus of c-Cbl and Cbl-b [46]. CIN85 is associated with the SH3 domain of endophilin, a protein found in coated pits and vesicles (Figure 1) [47]. A similar mechanism has been proposed for c-Met receptor endocytosis [48]. However, functional experiments have not directly demonstrated a role for CIN85 in the CME pathway of these receptors. Furthermore, it is not apparent how endophilin can link an EGFR:Cbl:CIN85 complex to a clathrin coat if the SH3 domain of endophilin is engaged in an interaction with CIN85 and cannot, therefore, provide a means for endophilin targeting to coated pits.

Accumulating evidence supports a second model, whereby Cbl participates in EGFR endocytosis by mediating monoubiquitinylation of the EGFR. Firstly, overexpression of Cbl mutants defective in RING finger domain function inhibits CME of EGFR [49–51]. Secondly, EGFR and another RTK, platelet-derived growth factor receptor β, were shown to be multiply monoubiquitinated rather than polyubiquitinated [52]. Thirdly, a single monoubiquitin fused to an EGFR lacking a cytoplasmic domain is sufficient for receptor internalization, although such internalization progressed at half the speed of wild-type EGFR [52]. Whether endocytosis of the chimeric EGFR–monoubiquitin protein is clathrin-dependent remains to be tested. Monoubiquitinylation of EGFR at the multiple sites requires direct interaction of Cbl with the receptor [53]. However, mutation of the Cbl binding site in the EGFR did not significantly affect EGFR internalization despite causing a dramatic decrease in the extent of receptor ubiquitination [51,53]. This suggests that one or a small number of monoubiquitins may be sufficient to support CME of the EGFR.

Monoubiquitin is a principal internalization signal in yeast cells, where monoubiquitinated cargo appears to bind ubiquitin interacting motifs (UIMs) of Ent1/2p (epsin homologs) and, possibly, ubiquitin-associated (UBA) domains of Ede1p [54,55]. In higher eukaryotes, a large body of evidence suggests that monoubiquitin recognition is the key mechanism of cargo sorting at the early endosomes. However, direct proof for a role of cargo ubiquitinylation in its recognition by the clathrin-associated machinery is lacking. For instance, ubiquitinylation sites have not been mapped in EGFR and other RTKs. Therefore, mutational analysis could not be performed to test the functional importance of ubiquitinylation. In the case of mammalian GPCRs, mutational analysis showed that ubiquitinylation of these receptors is not necessary for ligand-induced endocytosis [56–58].

Proteins that contain ubiquitin recognition domains and are present in coated pits (Eps15, Eps15R and epsin) thus remain as candidates for being endocytic ‘adaptors’ for monoubiquitinated membrane cargo in mammalian cells. To date, no direct functional evidence is available that would suggest that the UIMs or UBAs of these proteins actually function in coat recruitment or CME of such cargoes [54]. It is, however, remarkable that many adaptor proteins, such as Eps15/R, epsin, β-arrestin, Cbl and CIN85, are subjected to monoubiquitinylation themselves (Figure 1). Although the role of this monoubiquitinylation is unknown, it is possible that the monoubiquitin-based interactions participate in the regulation of the dynamics of cargo–adaptor and adaptor–cargo interactions [59,60].

### RNAi attack

The development of cell-biologist-friendly methodologies allowing efficient depletion of proteins in cultured mammalian cells by siRNA-mediated RNA interference (RNAi) led to a plethora of studies utilizing this technique to test the function of coated-pit proteins including AP-2 and cargo-specific adaptors (see Table 1). These studies confirmed an essential role for AP-2 in the internalization of YxxΘ-containing cargo such as transferrin receptor [19,61,62] and for ‘intermediate’ adaptor proteins such as β-arrestins in the internalization of GPCRs [63]. As mentioned above, AP-2 depletion did not affect the internalization of chimeric proteins carrying FxNPxY signals despite causing a severe defect in coated pit

Table 1

Effects of siRNA depletion of coated pit proteins implicated in cargo recruitment during CME in mammalian cells.

| Protein depleted | Effect on transferrin endocytosis | Effect on EGF receptor endocytosis | Effect on GPCR | Effect on other cargoes |
|------------------|-----------------------------------|------------------------------------|----------------|--------------------------|
| AP-2 μ2          | Inhibition<sup>a</sup> [19*,61,62] | No effect                          | Inhibition [62] | CD8–LDL receptor chimera (NPxY motif): no effect [19*] |
| β2               | Partial inhibition [64]           | Partial inhibition [19*,61]         | Partial inhibition [64] | |
|                  |                                   | Partial inhibition [64]             | Partial inhibition [64] | |
| Eps15 and Eps15R | Partial inhibition [64]           | Partial inhibition [64]             |                  | |
| NUMB             | No effect [67]                   |                                    |                  | |
| HIP1R            | Weak inhibition [68]             |                                    |                  | |
| AAK.1            | No effect [16]                   |                                    |                  | |
| Epsin 1          | Weak inhibition [64]              | No significant effect [64]          | Inhibition [38*] | Type III TGFβ receptor: inhibition [39] |
| β-arrestins 1/2  |                                   |                                    |                  | LDL receptor: partial inhibition [69] |
|                  |                                   |                                    |                  | Frizzled 4<sup>b</sup>: inhibition [63] |
| Grb2             | No effect [42]                   | Inhibition [42]                    |                  | |

<sup>a</sup>Where possible the extent of inhibition is estimated based on the comparison with the effects of clathrin heavy chain (CHC) depletion (typically 70–90% reduction of the uptake). ‘Inhibition’ indicates that the internalization rate reduction is comparable to that in cells depleted of CHC. ‘Partial inhibition’ indicates that the endocytic rates are reduced by 40–60%. ‘Weak inhibition’ corresponds to a ~20–30% reduction of the internalization rate. <sup>b</sup>Whether Frizzled 4 belongs to the GPCR family remains controversial.
This is of particular importance for understanding the mechanisms of ligand- and stimulus-induced endocytosis. For example, accepting either one of these models will lead to conceptually different interpretations of many experiments and affect the design of new structure-function experiments. Furthermore, assuming that the model of pre-existing coats is correct, the fundamental question remains: is cargo recruitment into a coated pit required for that pit to become an endocytic vesicle? A combination of quantitative electron microscopy and multi-color live-cell light microscopy analysis that includes the simultaneous monitoring of cargo and adaptors may provide important clues to the mechanisms that coordinate vesicle budding with cargo recruitment.

### Acknowledgements

I am indebted to B Wendland, M Marsh and M von Zastrow for critical reading of the manuscript, and to P McPherson for communicating unpublished data. This work is supported by grants from NCI, NIDA, ACS and NSF.

### References and recommended reading

Papers of particular interest, published within the annual period of review, have been highlighted as:

- **•** of special interest
- **••** of outstanding interest

1. Brodsky FM, Chen CY, Knuehl C, Towler MC, Wakeham DE: Biological basket weaving: formation and function of clathrin-coated vesicles. *Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol* 2001, **17**:517-568.
2. Mousavi SA, Malerod L, Berg T, Kjeken R: Clathrin-dependent endocytosis. *Biochem J* 2004, **377**:1-16.
3. Nesterov A, Carter RE, Sorkina T, Gill GN, Sorkin A: Inhibition of the receptor-binding function of clathrin adaptor protein AP-2 by dominant-negative mutant mu2 subunit and its effects on endocytosis. *EMBO J* 1999, **18**:2489-2499.
4. Olusanya O, Andrews PD, Swedlow JR, Smythe E: Phosphorylation of threonine 156 of the mu2 subunit of the AP2 complex is essential for endocytosis in vitro and in vivo. *Curr Biol* 2001, **11**:896-900.
5. Scott MG, Benmerah A, Muntaner O, Marullo S: Recruitment of activated G-protein-coupled receptors to pre-existing clathrin-coated pits in living cells. *J Biol Chem* 2002, **277**:3552-3559.
6. Santini F, Gaidarov I, Keen JH: G protein-coupled receptor/arrestin 3 modulation of the endocytic machinery. *J Cell Biol* 2002, **156**:665-676.
7. Owen DJ: Linking endocytic cargo to clathrin: structural and functional insights into coated vesicle formation. *Biochem Soc Trans* 2004, **32**:1-14.
8. Collins BM, McCoy AJ, Kent HM, Evans PR, Owen DJ: Molecular architecture and functional model of the endocytic AP2 complex. *Cell* 2002, **109**:523-535. The first atomic structure of the core domain of AP-2 complex, uncovering the mechanisms of intermolecular interactions between AP-2 subunits and between AP-2 and polyphosphatidylinositides.
9. Owen DJ, Evans PR: A structural explanation for the recognition of tyrosine-based endocytic signals. *Science* 1998, **282**:1327-1332.
10. Ricotta D, Conner SD, Schmid SL, von Figura K, Honing S: Phosphorylation of the AP2 μ subunit by AAK1 mediates high affinity binding to membrane protein sorting signals. *J Cell Biol* 2002, **156**:791-795.
11. Korolchuk VI, Banting G: CK2 and GAK/auxilin2 are major protein kinases in clathrin-coated vesicles. *Traffic* 2002, **3**:428-439.

12. Conner SD, Schmid SL: Identification of an adaptor-associated kinase, AAK1, as a regulator of clathrin-mediated endocytosis. *J Cell Biol* 2002, **156**:921-929.
13. Umeda A, Meyerholz A, Ungewickell E: Identification of the universal cofactor (auxilin 2) in clathrin coat dissociation. *Eur J Cell Biol* 2000, **79**:336-342.
14. Conner SD, Schroter T, Schmid SL: AAK1-mediated μ2 phosphorylation is stimulated by assembled clathrin. *Traffic* 2003, **4**:885-890.
15. Jackson AP, Flett A, Smythe C, Hufton L, Wettey FR, Smythe E: Clathrin promotes incorporation of cargo into coated pits by activation of the AP2 adaptor μ2 kinase. *J Cell Biol* 2003, **163**:231-236.
16. Conner SD, Schmid SL: Differential requirements for AP-2 in clathrin-mediated endocytosis. *J Cell Biol* 2003, **162**:773-779.
17. Kirchhausen T: Clathrin adaptors really adapt. *Cell* 2002, **109**:413-416.
18. Boll W, Rapoport I, Brunner C, Modis Y, Prehn S, Kirchhausen T: The μ2 subunit of the clathrin adaptor AP-2 binds to FDNPVY and YppO sorting signals at distinct sites. *Traffic* 2002, **3**:590-600.
19. Motley A, Bright NA, Seaman MN, Robinson MS:
   - Clathrin-mediated endocytosis in AP-2-depleted cells. *J Cell Biol* 2003, **162**:909-918. This paper, together with [61,62], offers one of the first analyses of endocytosis in mammalian cells depleted of AP-2. SiRNA knock-down of AP-2 confirms the essential role of AP-2 in the formation of clathrin-coated pits and internalization of transferrin receptors, but unexpectedly reveals that AP-2 is not necessary for endocytosis of several other types of cargo proteins.
20. Mishra SK, Keyel PA, Hawryluk MJ, Agostinelli NR, Watkins SC, Traub LM: Disabled-2 exhibits the properties of a cargo-selective endocytic clathrin adaptor. *EMBO J* 2002, **21**:4915-4926.
21. He G, Gupta S, Yi M, Michaely P, Hobbs HH, Cohen JC: ARH is a modular adaptor protein that interacts with the LDL receptor, clathrin, and AP-2. *J Biol Chem* 2002, **277**:44044-44049.
22. Nagai M, Meerloo T, Takeda T, Farquhar MG: The adaptor protein ARH escorts megalin to and through endosomes. *Mol Biol Cell* 2003, **14**:4984-4996.
23. Traub LM: Sorting it out: AP-2 and alternate clathrin adaptors in endocytic cargo selection. *J Cell Biol* 2003, **163**:203-208.
24. Bonifacino JS, Traub LM: Signals for sorting of transmembrane proteins to endosomes and lysosomes. *Annu Rev Biochem* 2003, **72**:395-447. The most comprehensive review of sorting signals and mechanisms operating during endocytosis and endosomal trafficking.
25. Rapoport I, Chen YC, Cupers P, Shoelson SE, Kirchhausen T: Dileucine-based sorting signals bind to the β chain of AP-1 at a site distinct and regulated differently from the tyrosine-based motif-binding site. *EMBO J* 1998, **17**:2148-2155.
26. Rodionov DG, Bakke O: Medium chains of adaptor complexes AP-1 and AP-2 recognize leucine-based sorting signals from the invariant chain. *J Biol Chem* 1998, **273**:6005-6008.
27. Janvier K, Kato Y, Boehm M, Rose JR, Martina JA, Kim BY, Venkatesan S, Bonifacino JS: Recognition of dileucine-based sorting signals from HIV-1 Nef and LIMP-II by the AP-1 γo1 and AP-3 δε3 hemicomplexes. *J Cell Biol* 2003, **163**:1281-1290.
28. Marks MS, Woodruff L, Ohno H, Bonifacino JS: Protein targeting by tyrosine- and di-leucine-based signals: evidence for distinct saturable components. *J Cell Biol* 1996, **135**:341-354.
29. Warren RA, Green FA, Stenberg PE, Enns CA: Distinct saturable pathways for the endocytosis of different tyrosine motifs. *J Biol Chem* 1998, **273**:17056-17063.
30. Yao D, Ehrlich M, Henis YI, Leof EB: Transforming growth factor-β receptors interact with AP2 by direct binding to β2 subunit. *Mol Biol Cell* 2002, **13**:4001-4012.
398 Membranes and organelles

31. Sorkin A, Mazzotti M, Sorkina T, Scotto L, Beguinot L: Epidermal growth factor interaction with clathrin adaptors is mediated by the Tyr974-containing internalization motif. J Biol Chem 1996, 271:13377-13384.

32. Wu H, Windmiller DA, Wang L, Backer JM: YXXM motifs in the PDGF-β receptor serve dual roles as phosphoinositide 3-kinase binding motifs and tyrosine-based endocytic sorting signals. J Biol Chem 2003, 278:40425-40428.

33. Diviani D, Lattion AL, Abuin L, Staub O, Cotecchia S: The adaptor complex 2 directly interacts with the α1b-adrenergic receptor and plays a role in receptor endocytosis. J Biol Chem 2003, 278:19331-19340.

34. Goodman OB Jr, Krupnick JG, Santini F, Gurevich VV, Penn RB, Gagnon AW, Keen JH, Benovic JL: β-arrestin acts as a clathrin adaptor in endocytosis of the β2- adrenergic receptor. Nature 1996, 383:447-450.

35. Ferguson SSG, Downey WEr, Colapietro AM, Barak LS, Menard L, Caron MG: Role of β-arrestin in mediating agonist-promoted G protein-coupled receptor internalization. Science 1996, 271:363-366.

36. Claing A, Laporte SA, Caron MG, Lefkowitz RJ: Endocytosis of G-protein-coupled receptors: roles of G-protein-coupled receptor kinases and β-arrestin proteins. Prog Neurobiol 2002, 66:61-79.

37. Kim YM, Benovic JL: Differential roles of arrestin-2 interaction with clathrin and adaptor protein 2 in G-protein-coupled receptor trafficking. J Biol Chem 2002, 277:30760-30768.

38. Chen W, ten Berge D, Brown J, Ahn S, Hu LA, Miller WE, Caron MG, Barak LS, Nusse R, Lefkowitz RJ: Dishevelled 2 recruits β-arrestin 2 to mediate Wnt5A-stimulated endocytosis of Frizzled 4. Science 2003, 301:1391-1394.
This report and [39] describe surprising observations of the role of β-arrestins in endocytosis of non-GPCR cargo. The function of β-arrestin 2 in the endocytosis of Frizzled 4 is mediated by an indirect interaction of β-arrestin 2 with this receptor. β-arrestin binds directly to the cytoplasmic tail of TGFβ receptor cross-phosphorylated by the type-II TGFβ receptor.

39. Chen W, Kirkbride KC, How T, Nelson CD, Mo J, Frederick JP, Wang XF, Lefkowitz RJ, Blobel GC: β-arrestin 2 mediates endocytosis of type III TGF-β receptor and down-regulation of its signaling. Science 2003, 301:1394-1397.

40. Nesterov A, Kurten RC, Gill GN: Association of epidermal growth factor receptors with coated pit adaptins via a tyrosine-phosphorylation-regulated mechanism. J Biol Chem 1995, 270:6320-6327.

41. Huang F, Jiang X, Sorkin A: Tyrosine phosphorylation of the β2 subunit of clathrin adaptor complex AP-2 reveals the role of a di-leucine motif in the epidermal growth factor receptor trafficking. J Biol Chem 2003, 278:43411-43417.

42. Jiang X, Huang F, Marusyk A, Sorkin A: Grb2 regulates internalization of EGF receptors through clathrin-coated Pits. Mol Biol Cell 2003, 14:858-870.

43. Dikic I, Giordano S: Negative receptor signalling. Curr Opin Cell Biol 2003, 15:128-135.

44. Duan L, Miura Y, Dimri M, Majumder B, Dodge IL, Reddi AL, Ghosh A, Fernandes N, Zhou P, Mullane-Robinson K et al.: Cbl-mediated ubiquitinylation is required for lysosomal sorting of epidermal growth factor receptor but is dispensable for endocytosis. J Biol Chem 2003, 278:28950-28960.

45. Chen WS, Lazar CS, Lund KA, Welsh JB, Chang CP, Walton GM, Der CJ, Wiley HS, Gill GN, Rosenfeld MG: Functional independence of the epidermal growth factor receptor from a domain required for ligand-induced internalization and calcium regulation. Cell 1989, 59:33-43.

46. Kowanetz K, Szymkiewicz I, Haglund K, Kowanetz M, Husnjak K, Taylor JD, Soubeyran P, Engstrom U, Ladbury JE, Dikic I: Identification of a novel proline-arginine motif involved in CIN85-dependent clustering of Cbl and down-regulation of epidermal growth factor receptors. J Biol Chem 2003, 278:39735-39746.

47. Soubeyran P, Kowanetz K, Szymkiewicz I, Langdon WY, Dikic I: Cbl-CIN85-endophilin complex mediates ligand-induced downregulation of EGF receptors. Nature 2002, 416:183-187.
This paper and [48] provide evidence for a novel mechanism of endocytosis of receptor tyrosine kinases, which involves receptor interaction with the Cbl-CIN85-endophilin complex.

48. Petrelli A, Gilestro GF, Lanzardo S, Comoglio PM, Migone N, Giordano S: The endophilin-CIN85-Cbl complex mediates ligand-dependent downregulation of c-Met. Nature 2002, 416:187-190.

49. Levkowitz G, Waterman H, Ettenberg SA, Katz M, Tsygankov AY, Alroy I, Lavi S, Iwai K, Reiss Y, Ciechanover A et al.: Ubiquitin ligase activity and tyrosine phosphorylation underlie suppression of growth factor signaling by c-Cbl/Sli-1. Mol Cell 1999, 4:1029-1040.

50. Thien CB, Walker F, Langdon WY: RING finger mutations that abolish c-Cbl-directed polyubiquitination and downregulation of the EGF receptor are insufficient for cell transformation. Mol Cell 2001, 7:355-365.

51. Jiang X, Sorkin A: Epidermal growth factor receptor internalization through clathrin-coated pits requires Cbl RING finger and proline-rich domains but not receptor polyubiquitylation. Traffic 2003, 4:529-543.

52. Haglund K, Sigismund S, Polo S, Szymkiewicz I, Di Fiore PP, Dikic I: Multiple monoubiquitination of RTKs is sufficient for their endocytosis and degradation. Nat Cell Biol 2003, 5:461-466.

53. Waterman H, Katz M, Rubin C, Shtiegman K, Lavi S, Elson A, Jovin T, Yarden Y: A mutant EGF-receptor defective in ubiquitylation and endocytosis unveils a role for Grb2 in negative signaling. EMBO J 2002, 21:303-313.

54. Hicke L, Dunn R: Regulation of membrane protein transport by ubiquitin and ubiquitin-binding proteins. Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 2003, 19:141-172.

55. Aguilar RC, Watson HA, Wendland B: The yeast Epsin Ent1 is recruited to membranes through multiple independent interactions. J Biol Chem 2003, 278:10737-10743.

56. Marchese A, Benovic JL: Agonist-promoted ubiquitination of the G-protein-coupled receptor CXCR4 mediates lysosomal sorting. J Biol Chem 2001, 276:45509-45512.

57. Shenoy SK, McDonald PH, Kohout TA, Lefkowitz RJ: Regulation of receptor fate by ubiquitination of activated β2-adrenergic receptor and β-arrestin. Science 2001, 294:1307-1313.

58. Tanowitz M, Von Zastrow M: Ubiquitination-independent trafficking of G-protein-coupled receptors to lysosomes. J Biol Chem 2002, 277:50219-50222.

59. Polo S, Sigismund S, Faretta M, Guidi M, Capua MR, Bossi G, Chen H, De Camilli P, Di Fiore PP: A single motif responsible for ubiquitin recognition and monoubiquitination in endocytic proteins. Nature 2002, 416:451-455.

60. Shenoy SK, Lefkowitz RJ: Trafficking patterns of β-arrestin and G-protein-coupled receptors determined by the kinetics of β-arrestin deubiquitination. J Biol Chem 2003, 278:14498-14506.

61. Hinrichsen L, Harborth J, Andrees L, Weber K, Ungewickell EJ: Effect of clathrin heavy chain- and α-adaptin-specific small inhibitory RNAs on endocytic accessory proteins and receptor trafficking in HeLa cells. J Biol Chem 2003, 278:45160-45170.

62. Fraile-Ramos A, Kohout TA, Waldhoer M, Marsh M: Endocytosis of the viral chemokine receptor US28 does not require β-arrestins but is dependent on the clathrin-mediated pathway. Traffic 2003, 4:243-253.

63. Ahn S, Nelson CD, Garrison TR, Miller WE, Lefkowitz RJ: Desensitization, internalization, and signaling functions of β-arrestins demonstrated by RNA interference. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2003, 100:1740-1744.

64. Huang F, Khvorova A, Marshall W, Sorkin A: Analysis of clathrin-mediated internalization of EGF receptor by RNA interference. J Biol Chem 2004, 279:16657-16661.

65. Blondeau F, Ritter B, Allaire PD, Wasiak S, Girard M, Hussain NK, Angers A, Legendre-Guillemin V, Roy L, Boismenu D et al.:

Tandem mass spectrometry analysis of brain clathrin-
coated vesicles reveals their critical involvement in
synaptic vesicle recycling. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA* 2004,
101:3833-3838.

66. Cao TT, Mays RW, von Zastrow M: Regulated endocytosis of
G-protein-coupled receptors by a biochemically and
functionally distinct subpopulation of clathrin-coated pits.
*J Biol Chem* 1998, 273:24592-24602.

67. Nishimura T, Fukata Y, Kato K, Yamaguchi T, Matsuura Y,
Kamiguchi H, Kaibuchi K: CRMP-2 regulates polarized

Numb-mediated endocytosis for axon growth. *Nat Cell Biol*
2003, 5:819-826.

68. Engqvist-Goldstein AE, Zhang CX, Carreno S, Barroso C,
Heuser JE, Drubin DG: RNAi-mediated Hip1R silencing results
in stable association between the endocytic machinery and
the actin assembly machinery. *Mol Biol Cell* 2004.

69. Wu JH, Peppel K, Nelson CD, Lin FT, Kohout TA, Miller WE,
Exum ST, Freedman NJ: The adaptor protein β-arrestin2
enhances endocytosis of the low density lipoprotein receptor.
*J Biol Chem* 2003, 278:44238-44245.
