
Full text provided by www.sciencedirect.com

ELSEVIER

**Interaction of Helicobacter pylori with host cells: function of secreted and translocated molecules**

Gabriele Rieder, Wolfgang Fischer and Rainer Haas

Secreted proteins are of general interest from the perspective of bacteria–host interaction. The gastric bacterial pathogen *Helicobacter pylori* uses a set of secreted and translocated proteins — including outer membrane adhesins, secreted extracellular enzymes and translocated effector proteins — to adapt to its extraordinary habitat, the gastric mucosa. Two major virulence factors of *H. pylori* are the vacuolating cytotoxin (VacA) and the cag type-IV secretion system and its translocated effector protein, cytotoxin-associated antigen A (CagA). VacA targets not only epithelial cells, but also cells of the immune system and induces immunosuppression. CagA has been shown to interact with a growing set of eucaryotic signaling molecules in phosphorylation-dependent and -independent ways.

Addresses  
Max von Pettenkofer-Institut, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München,  
Pettenkoferstrasse 9a, 80336 München, Germany  

Corresponding author: Haas, Rainer  
(haas@m3401.mpk.med.uni-muenchen.de)

---

Current Opinion in Microbiology 2005, **8**:67–73  

This review comes from a themed issue on Host–microbe interactions: bacteria  
Edited by Pascale Cossart and Jorge Galán  

Available online 6th January 2005  
1369-5274/$ – see front matter  
© 2005 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.  
DOI 10.1016/j.mib.2004.12.004

---

*H. pylori* with host cells. These will cover aspects of mucus colonization as well as the role of secreted and translocated virulence factors in the pathogenicity of gastric diseases and their influence on signal transduction in infected host cells.

### Mucus colonization and adherence

In general, the gastric mucosa is well protected against bacterial infections. But *H. pylori* is highly adapted to its ecological niche, using a bundle of polar flagella, a potent urease and additional features that allow its oriented swimming and multiplication in the mucus, attachment to epithelial cells, evasion of the immune response, and persistent colonization and transmission. The mucus represents a dynamic net of glycoproteins (mucins), which seems to provide a shelter for *H. pylori*. As described recently by *in vivo* experiments on the opened stomach of Mongolian gerbils, *H. pylori* uses the gastric mucus pH gradient for precise spatial orientation within the mucus [4]. Continuous shedding of mucus results in a rapid turnover rate.

A subpopulation of *H. pylori* binds to surface mucous cells and their carbohydrate structures, such as the fucosylated Lewis b (*Le^b*) histo-blood group antigen and the sialyl Lewis x (*s-Le^x*) glycosphingolipid, which act as receptors for *H. pylori* adhesins BabA (blood group antigen-binding adhesin) [5] and SabA (sialic acid-binding adhesin) [6], respectively (Figure 1). This avoids bacterial shedding and enables *H. pylori* to efficiently use its secretion systems for delivery of their effector molecules to modulate the host. In addition to cell surface receptors, *H. pylori* also relies on binding to mucus components, such as MUC5AC [7] and the dimeric form of trefoil factor (TFF1) [8]. The localization of *H. pylori* on gastric mucus-secreting cells and in the overlying gastric mucus, but not deep in gastric glands, mirrors the expression of TFF1, indicating that the TFF1 interaction could explain the tropism of these bacteria for gastric tissue. Alternatively, Kawakubo *et al.* [9] demonstrated that unique O-glycans with terminal α1,4-linked N-acetylglucosamine, which are generally present in the deeper portions of the gastric mucosa, may function as natural antibiotics, protecting the host from *H. pylori* infection in this location [9].

### H. pylori invasion of epithelial cells?

Although *H. pylori* is considered to be an extracellular pathogen, data from *in vitro* infection experiments as well as from biopsy examinations suggested an occasional intracellular localization of *H. pylori*. In one *in vitro* study

www.sciencedirect.com

Box 1 Glossary

Epidermal growth factor receptor: The protein found on the surface of some cells and to which epidermal growth factor binds, causing the cells to divide. It is found at abnormally high levels on the surface of many types of cancer cells, so these cells may divide excessively in the presence of epidermal growth factor. Also known as ErbB1 or HER1.

Extracellular signal regulated protein kinase: A member of the mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase family. ERKs are activated by MAP/ERK kinases, which in turn are activated by MEK kinases.

Mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue: One of the major secondary lymphoid organs, along with the lymph nodes and spleen. It is distributed on the mucosal surface. The gastric MALT is induced by *H. pylori* infection.

MAP kinase kinase: A serine-threonine protein kinase family whose members are components in protein kinase cascades activated by diverse stimuli. These MAPK kinases phosphorylate mitogen-activated protein kinases and are themselves phosphorylated by MAP kinase kinase kinases.

Pathogenicity island: A genetic element within the genome of an organism that is responsible for its capacity to cause disease (its pathogenicity). The virulence of the organism is modulated by genes harbored on this island.

Type IV secretion system: Protein secretion machinery used by Gram-negative bacteria for two fundamental objectives related to pathogenesis – genetic exchange and the delivery of effector molecules to eukaryotic target cells.

Type V secretion system: Also called the Autotransporter pathway. The largest family of protein-translocating outer membrane porins in Gram-negative bacteria and the simplest secretion apparatus. Proteins are translocated across the outer membrane via a transmembrane pore formed by a self-encoded β-barrel.


the identification of 26 secreted proteins. Another approach, based on signature-tagged mutagenesis (STM), identified a set of 47 *H. pylori* genes that proved to be essential for colonization of the gastric mucosa in the *H. pylori* Mongolian gerbil model. These genes encode several previously unknown virulence factors, such as novel ABC transporters, VirB11-homologous transport ATPases, a VacA-paralogue and a secreted collagenase [13]. The latter enzyme degrades collagen — an extracellular-matrix protein of the gastric epithelium — to eventually supply the bacterium with essential amino acids and short peptides. During chronic *H. pylori* infection, collagenase could exacerbate ulcer development, since collagen is crucial for the process of ulcer healing. Another recently discovered and purified bacterial protein, the secreted γ-glutamyl transpeptidase (γ-GT), induces apoptosis in epithelial cells, as shown in an *in vitro* cell culture study [14]. The *in vivo* relevance of this enzyme in the multifactorial process of apoptosis has still to be demonstrated.


The vacuolating cytotoxin

VacA is secreted by the autotransporter or type-V secretion mechanism, as has been demonstrated experimentally [15]. VacA is usually found in the culture supernatant of *H. pylori*, but a portion of the mature toxin remains associated with the bacterial surface [16] (Figure 1). Surface-associated VacA is biologically active and spatially organized, and it was suggested that toxin clusters might be transferred to the host cell surface upon direct bacteria–host-cell contact. For binding to target cells, several receptors have been suggested, including the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR; see Box 1) and receptor protein tyrosine phosphatases (RPTP)-α [17] and RPTP-β (also named protein tyrosine phosphatase receptor zeta [Ptprz]) [18]. Interestingly enough, RPTP-β knockout (*ptprz*⁻/⁻) mice, but not wild-type mice, are resistant to gastric ulcer induction by VacA, strongly supporting a role of RPTP-β signal transduction in VacA-associated ulceration *in vivo*.

But VacA also binds to detergent-resistant microdomains (lipid rafts) and glycosylphosphatidylinositol-anchored proteins (GPI-APs) of the cell membrane; however, divergent results exist concerning the involvement of GPI-APs in internalisation of VacA via lipid rafts [19,20]. The N-terminal region of VacA forms an anion-selective chloride channel in lipid membranes [21,22]. After insertion into the plasma membrane, VacA channels are internalised. Endocytosis of the VacA channels occurs via an actin-dependent caveolae-like internalisation process [23]. The role of distinct receptors versus lipid rafts for binding, uptake and cellular trafficking of VacA, and the biological consequences of different routes of vacuolar trafficking, are still not well understood and await further investigation.


using the AGS gastric epithelial cell line [10], the entry process was characterized as a zipper-like mechanism involving protein kinase C and phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase. Some cell-adhering *H. pylori* enter cytoplasmic vacuoles of gastric and intestinal epithelial cell lines and polarized monolayers, remain viable and motile for at least three days and, within vacuoles, are able to survive lethal extracellular concentrations of gentamicin [11] (Figure 1). Interestingly, these viable *H. pylori* repopulated the extracellular environment, suggesting the release of bacteria from their intracellular niche. This strategy of *H. pylori* might point towards a survival mechanism within the human stomach, although several crucial questions still remain. Does invasion of *H. pylori* occur in the gastric epithelium? Are secreted or translocated effector molecules of *H. pylori* (besides cytotoxin-associated antigen A [CagA] or the vacuolating cytotoxin [VacA]) involved in this process? Does antibiotic treatment favour the survival of internalised *H. pylori*?


Protein secretion in *H. pylori*, modulation of signalling events and biological implications

Secreted proteins are of special interest, because they come into direct contact with host tissues and may mediate important pathogen-host interactions. By a proteome-based approach under *in vitro* growth conditions, Bumann *et al.* characterized a general set of secreted proteins of *H. pylori* (secretome analysis) [12], resulting in

Interaction of Helicobacter pylori with host cells Rieder, Fischer and Haas 69

Figure 1

(a)

(b)
γ-GT
VacA
homologues
Collagenase
VacA
BabA/
SabA
Cag-T4SS
Le<sup>b</sup>/s-Le<sup>x</sup>
CagA
Mucus layer
Phagosome
Vacuolation
Gastric epithelium
Submucosa
IL-8
VacA
CagA
?
B cell
Intraepithelial
T cell
Dendritic cell
T cell
MALT
lymphoma?
Antigen
presentation
Neutrophil
recruitment
Proliferation

(c)
c-Met
Src
PLC-γ
Grb2
Ras/Raf
MEK
ERK
Cortactin
SHP-2
Rac1
Cdc42
AP-1
NF-κB
Transcription
Proliferation
Cell elongation, motility
ZO-1/JAM

(d)

Schematic representation highlighting important steps during H. pylori interaction with its host in the gastric mucosa. (a) The preferred site of H. pylori is the mucus layer over the gastric epithelium. Some H. pylori bind to epithelial cells using, for example, BabA or SabA outer membrane adhesions; invasion into epithelial cells may occur. (b) Repertoire of secreted or surface-exposed H. pylori proteins. (c) Enlarged section of epithelial cell signal transduction cascades modulated by translocated CagA (green circles) or cag-PAI of H. pylori. (d) Possible effects of VacA on cells of the immune system, such as inhibition of T cell proliferation and antigen presentation of B cells (see also text for further details). BabA, blood group antigen-binding adhesin; γ-GT, γ-glutamyl transpeptidase; Grb2, growth factor receptor-binding protein 2; JAM, junctional adhesion molecule; PLC-γ, phospholipase Cγ; SabA, sialic acid-binding adhesin.

Immunomodulatory functions of secreted VacA

Besides diverse functions on epithelial cells, such as cellular vacuolation, induction of apoptosis [24], loosening of cellular junctions [25], and the formation of urea channels [26], VacA also has immunomodulatory activity (Figure 1). Thus, VacA inhibits the processing of antigenic peptides in B cells and their presentation to human CD4<sup>+</sup> T-cells [27]. Recently, VacA was also reported to alter T cell function by inhibiting T cell proliferation, suggesting a possible mechanism of how H. pylori might evade the adaptive immune response to establish a chronic infection.

Using Jurkat cells — a human T-cell line — two independent groups demonstrated a role of VacA in

www.sciencedirect.com
Current Opinion in Microbiology 2005, 8:67–73
suppressing the activation of nuclear factor of activated T cells (NFAT) [28**,29**], resulting in interference with the T cell receptor/interleukin-2 (IL-2) signalling pathway at the level of Ca²⁺-calmodulin-dependent phosphatase calcineurin [28**,29**]. In a subsequent study using primary human CD4⁺ T cells from peripheral blood, a VacA-dependent inhibition of cell proliferation was confirmed [30*], but in this particular subset of T cells, the NFAT pathway and IL-2 expression were apparently not targeted by VacA. In the future, rather than studying peripheral T cells, it will be important to investigate the relevant subset of T cells, which are located in the gastric lamina propria, or are present as gastric intraepithelial T cells (Figure 1). Such activated T cells, that interacted with antigen presenting cells, such as dendritic cells (DCs), might be equipped with a different set of surface receptors, important for appropriate VacA uptake and cellular trafficking, and might be more suitable to further investigate the role of VacA in the NFAT signalling pathway.

### Type IV secretion: structure of the cag secretion apparatus and functions of translocated protein CagA

A major virulence determinant of *H. pylori* is the *cag*-pathogenicity island (PAI)-encoded T4SS, present in type I *H. pylori* strains only. The *cag* T4SS mediates the translocation of the effector protein CagA, which is subsequently phosphorylated at one or more tyrosine phosphorylation motifs (EPIYA) by a Src kinase [31,32]. Interestingly, phosphorylated CagA inhibits the activity of Src kinase in a negative feedback loop [33**], which results in dephosphorylation of a set of host cell proteins, including the actin-binding protein cortactin [33**]. This mechanism may enable *cagA*-positive *H. pylori* to establish a chronic infection, avoiding excess CagA toxicity to the host. A systematic mutagenesis study of the *cag*-PAI revealed 18 out of 27 genes to be absolutely essential for CagA translocation into host cells and 14 for a *cag*-PAI-dependent induction of the chemokine IL-8 [34]. In addition to the *cag*-PAI, *H. pylori* harbours two further T4SSs, the *comB* system involved in uptake of DNA into *H. pylori* [35] and *tfs3*, a further putative T4SS, to which no function has been assigned yet [36].

Two recent intriguing studies [37*,38*] described the structural features of the *cag*-T4SS as a filamentous surface organelle protruding in a needle-like structure from the bacterial envelope. This organelle consists of a central needle, sheathed by the VirB10-homologous protein HP0527 [38*]. The translocated and phosphorylated CagA co-localized with HP0532 (VirB7), a protein of the secretion organelle base, indicating that translocated and phosphorylated CagA is recruited to the host cell membrane at the site of bacterial attachment [37*]. After *H. pylori* infection of Madin-Darby canine kidney (MDCK) cells forming a polarized cell monolayer,

*H. pylori* co-localized with the epithelial tight-junction scaffolding protein ZO-1 and the transmembrane protein junctional adhesion molecule (JAM) to sites of bacterial attachment, causing disruption of the epithelial barrier function and dysplastic alterations in epithelial cell morphology [39**] (Figure 1). ZO-1 co-localization was independent of CagA phosphorylation.

Phosphorylated CagA is recruited to the plasma membrane and interacts with the Src-homology 2 (SH2) domains of the protein tyrosine phosphatase SHP-2, thus stimulating its phosphatase activity [40]. The binding affinity of phosphorylated CagA to SHP-2 was found to be different for CagA proteins from Western versus East Asian *H. pylori* strains. The East-Asian CagA-specific sequence confers stronger SHP-2 binding activity than does the Western CagA-specific sequence [41] and SHP-2 binding depends on the number of EPIYA motifs in Western CagA [41].

Activated SHP-2 is able to induce MAP kinase / MEK (MAP kinase kinase) / ERK (extracellular signal regulated protein kinase) signalling through Ras/Raf-dependent and -independent mechanisms. Deregulation of this pathway by CagA may lead to abnormal proliferation and movement of gastric epithelial cells, represented by cell scattering (cell spreading) or the ‘hummingbird’ phenotype (cellular elongation). CagA also interacts with other signalling molecules, such as growth factor receptor-binding protein 2 (Grb2), hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) / scatter factor receptor c-Met, and phospholipase Cγ (PLC-γ) [42*,43*], also inducing host cell scattering and proliferation (Figure 1). Thus, different upstream activation cascades apparently result in a similar response of epithelial cells. In addition to CagA, the scatter phenotype has recently been proposed to be stimulated by other components of the *cag*-PAI [44], or even by factors independent of the *cag*-PAI [45]. Additional work is necessary to finally determine all the *H. pylori* factors involved in stimulation of scatter and hummingbird phenotypes of epithelial cells and to work out the signalling cascades involved.

Furthermore, *H. pylori* stimulates, dependent on an intact T4SS, but independent of CagA translocation, the Rho-family GTPases Rac1 and Cdc42 in gastric epithelial cells [46]. The GTPases are recruited to the membrane at sites of infection, leading to activation of p21-activated kinase (PAK1) and rearrangements of the cytoskeleton. The importance of the Rho GTPases as an early event in T4SS-dependent signal transduction was confirmed by a recent study using human cDNA microarrays [47]. Keates and co-workers [48] elucidated a further T4SS-dependent mechanism via activation of the receptor tyrosine kinase EGFR, regulating the ERK1/2 pathway via Ras phosphorylation. Cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2), a key enzyme of the arachidonic acid metabolism that contributes to the
pathogenesis of gastroduodenal ulcers and gastric cancer, is also induced by *H. pylori* via the MEK/ERK signalling pathway, but independently of the *cag*-T4SS. For that purpose a CRE/Ebox element within the *cox-2* promoter is activated by two transcription factors, CREB and USF1/-2 [49]. Furthermore CagA — independently of its tyrosine phosphorylation — inhibited cell proliferation of B-lymphocytes by suppressing the JAK-STAT signalling pathway [50]. As a consequence, CagA may diminish anti-*H. pylori* immune responses and play a role in the development of MALT lymphoma by impairing p53-dependent apoptosis.

### Conclusions

In the last three years significant progress has been made in understanding the interaction of *H. pylori* and its secreted proteins with host cells. The most important novel insights concern the function of the two major virulence factors of *H. pylori* — VacA and the *cag*T4SS with its effector protein CagA. VacA was found to target not only epithelial cells, but also cells of the immune system, and to induce immunosuppression. CagA seems to interact with several target molecules within eukaryotic cells and certain interactions are clearly dependent on phosphorylation, whereas others are not. In the future it will be important to analyse the novel activities observed *in vitro* also *in vivo* during chronic *H. pylori* infection in animal models or patients, to find out which of the activities are finally relevant.

### Acknowledgements

Critical reading of the manuscript by B Gebert and K Trülzsch is gratefully acknowledged. The work in the laboratory of the authors was supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (SFB 576, TP B1 to RH) and the Fonds der Chemischen Industrie.

### References and recommended reading

Papers of particular interest, published within the annual period of review, have been highlighted as:

- of special interest
- of outstanding interest

1. Suerbaum S, Michetti P: *Helicobacter pylori* infection. *N Engl J Med* 2002, **347**:1175-1186.
2. Peek RM, Blaser MJ: *Helicobacter pylori* and gastrointestinal tract adenocarcinomas. *Nat Rev Cancer* 2002, **2**:28-37.
3. Odenbreit S, Püls J, Sedlmaier B, Gerland E, Fischer W, Haas R: Translocation of *Helicobacter pylori* CagA into gastric epithelial cells by type IV secretion. *Science* 2000, **287**:1497-1500.
4. Schreiber S, Konradt M, Groll C, Scheid P, Hanauer G, Werling HO, Josenhans C, Suerbaum S: The spatial orientation of *Helicobacter pylori* in the gastric mucus. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA* 2004, **101**:5024-5029. This paper describes for the first time how *H. pylori* orients itself within the gastric mucus of the Mongolian gerbil *in situ*. Bacteria use the existing gastric pH gradient for orientation.
5. Ilver D, Arnqvist A, Ogren J, Frick IM, Kersulyte D, Incecik ET, Berg DE, Covacci A, Engstrand L, Borén T: *Helicobacter pylori* adhesin binding fucosylated histo-blood group antigens revealed by retagging. *Science* 1998, **279**:373-377.
6. Mahdavi J, Sonden B, Hurtig M, Olfat FO, Forsberg L, Roche N, Angstrom J, Larsson T, Teneberg S, Karlsson KA *et al.*:
7. Helicobacter pylori SabA adhesin in persistent infection and chronic inflammation. *Science* 2002, **297**:573-578. The authors identified the *H. pylori* sialic acid-binding adhesin (SabA) and its cognate receptor, sialyl-Lewis x glycosphingolipid. As sialylated glycoconjugates are expressed during chronic inflammation, SabA binding might thus contribute to virulence and the extraordinary chronicity of the *H. pylori* infection.
8. Linden S, Nordman H, Hedenbro J, Hurtig M, Borén T, Carlstedt I: Strain- and blood group-dependent binding of *Helicobacter pylori* to human gastric MUC5AC glycoforms. *Gastroenterology* 2002, **123**:1923-1930.
9. Clyne M, Dillon P, Daly S, O’Kennedy R, May FE, Westley BR, Drumm B: *Helicobacter pylori* interacts with the human single-domain trefoil protein TFF1. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA* 2004, **101**:7409-7414.
10. Kawakubo M, Ito Y, Okimura Y, Kobayashi M, Sakura K, Kasama S, Fukuda MN, Fukuda M, Katsuyama T, Nakayama J: Natural antibiotic function of a human gastric mucin against *Helicobacter pylori* infection. *Science* 2004, **305**:1003-1006.
11. Kwok T, Backert S, Schwarz H, Berger J, Meyer TF: Specific entry of *Helicobacter pylori* into cultured gastric epithelial cells via a zipper-like mechanism. *Infect Immun* 2002, **70**:2108-2120.
12. Amieva MR, Salama NR, Tompkins LS, Falkow S: *Helicobacter pylori* enter and survive within multivesicular vacuoles of epithelial cells. *Cell Microbiol* 2002, **4**:677-690.
13. Bumann D, Aksu S, Wendland M, Janek K, Zimny-Arndt U, Sabarth N, Meyer TF, Jungblut PR: Proteome analysis of secreted proteins of the gastric pathogen *Helicobacter pylori*. *Infect Immun* 2002, **70**:3396-3403.
14. Kavermann H, Burns BP, Angermüller K, Odenbreit S, Fischer W, Melchers K, Haas R: Identification and characterization of *Helicobacter pylori* genes essential for gastric colonization. *J Exp Med* 2003, **197**:813-822. In this paper the powerful method of signature-tagged mutagenesis was applied to *H. pylori* for the first time in a systematic approach to find genes essential for *H. pylori* colonization *in vivo*. From a set of 960 mutants, 47 genes were identified as being essential for gastric colonization of *H. pylori* in the Mongolian gerbil model.
15. Shibayama K, Kamachi K, Nagata N, Yagi T, Nada T, Doi Y, Shibata N, Yokoyama K, Yamane K, Kato H *et al.*: A novel apoptosis-inducing protein from *Helicobacter pylori*. *Mol Microbiol* 2003, **47**:443-451.
16. Fischer W, Buhrdorf R, Gerland E, Haas R: Outer membrane targeting of passenger proteins by the vacuolating cytotoxin autotransporter of *Helicobacter pylori*. *Infect Immun* 2001, **69**:6769-6775.
17. Ilver D, Barone S, Mercati D, Lupetti P, Telford JL: *Helicobacter pylori* toxin VacA is transferred to host cells via a novel contact-dependent mechanism. *Cell Microbiol* 2004, **6**:167-174.
18. Yahiro K, Wada A, Nakayama M, Kimura T, Ogushi KI, Niidome T, Aoyagi H, Yoshino KI, Yonezawa K, Moss J, Hirayama T: Protein-tyrosine phosphatase α, RPTPα, Is a *Helicobacter pylori* VacA receptor. *J Biol Chem* 2003, **278**:19183-19189.
19. Fujikawa A, Shirasaki D, Yamamoto S, Ota H, Yahiro K, Fukada M, Shintani T, Wada A, Aoyama N, Hirayama T *et al.*: Mice deficient in protein tyrosine phosphatase receptor type Z are resistant to gastric ulcer induction by VacA of *Helicobacter pylori*. *Nat Genet* 2003, **33**:375-381. In this elegant study mice deficient in the protein tyrosine phosphatase receptor zeta (also named RPTP-β) were shown to be resistant against gastric ulcer induction. VacA was demonstrated to be a ligand for RPTP-β. Binding of VacA to RPTP-β induced phosphorylation of the downstream target, the G-protein-coupled receptor kinase interactor 1 (GIT-1). This paper presents the first molecular mechanism to explain ulcerogenesis by *H. pylori*.
20. Kuo CH, Wang WC: Binding and internalization of *Helicobacter pylori* VacA via cellular lipid rafts in epithelial cells. *Biochem Biophys Res Commun* 2003, **303**:640-644.
21. Schraw W, Li Y, McClain MS, van der Goot FG, Cover TL: Association of *Helicobacter pylori* vacuolating toxin (VacA) with lipid rafts. *J Biol Chem* 2002, **277**:34642-34650.

21. Szabo I, Brutsche S, Tombola F, Moschioni M, Satin B, Telford JL, Rappuoli R, Montecucco C, Papini E, Zoratti M: Formation of anion-selective channels in the cell plasma membrane by the toxin VacA of Helicobacter pylori is required for its biological activity. EMBO J 1999, 18:5517-5527.

22. Kim S, Chamberlain AK, Bowie JU: Membrane channel structure of Helicobacter pylori vacuolating toxin: Role of multiple GXXXG motifs in cylindrical channels. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2004, 101:5988-5991.

23. Ricci V, Galmiche A, Doye A, Necchi V, Solcia E, Boquet P: High cell sensitivity to Helicobacter pylori VacA toxin depends on a GPI-anchored protein and is not blocked by inhibition of the clathrin-mediated pathway of endocytosis. Mol Biol Cell 2000, 11:3897-3909.

24. Willhite DC, Blanke SR: Helicobacter pylori vacuolating cytotoxin enters cells, localizes to the mitochondria, and induces mitochondrial membrane permeability changes correlated to toxin channel activity. Cell Microbiol 2004, 6:143-154.

25. Papini E, Satin B, Norais N, de Bernard M, Telford JL, Rappuoli R, Montecucco C: Selective increase of the permeability of polarized epithelial cell monolayers by Helicobacter pylori vacuolating toxin. J Clin Invest 1998, 102:813-820.

26. Tombola F, Morbiato L, Del Giudice G, Rappuoli R, Zoratti M, Papini E: The Helicobacter pylori VacA toxin is a urea permease that promotes urea diffusion across epithelia. J Clin Invest 2001, 108:929-937.

27. Molinari M, Salio M, Galli C, Norais N, Rappuoli R, Lanzavecchia A, Montecucco C: Selective inhibition of li-dependent antigen presentation by Helicobacter pylori toxin VacA. J Exp Med 1998, 187:135-140.

28. Gebert B, Fischer W, Weiss E, Hoffmann R, Haas R: Helicobacter pylori vacuolating cytotoxin inhibits T lymphocyte activation. Science 2003, 301:1099-1102.
   - Papers [28**,29**,30*] report similar approaches demonstrating for the first time that VacA is able to prevent proliferation of T cells by targeting the cell cycle. In [28**,29**], the signalling cascade of interleukin-2 (IL-2) secretion in Jurkat T cells targeted by VacA is described, involving the Ca²⁺-dependent phosphatase calcineurin and the transcription factor NFAT (nuclear factor of activated T cells). In [30*], an NFAT- and IL-2-independent mechanism of inhibition of T cell proliferation was suggested for primary peripheral blood CD4⁺ T cells.

29. Boncristiano M, Paccani SR, Barone S, Olivieri C, Patrussi L, Ilver D, Amedei A, D'Elios MM, Telford JL, Baldari CT: The Helicobacter pylori vacuolating toxin inhibits T cell activation by two independent mechanisms. J Exp Med 2003, 198:1887-1897.
   - See annotation to [28**].

30. Sundrud MS, Torres VJ, Unutmaz D, Cover TL: Inhibition of primary human T cell proliferation by Helicobacter pylori vacuolating toxin (VacA) is independent of VacA effects on IL-2 secretion. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2004, 101:7727-7732.
   - See annotation to [28**].

31. Stein M, Bagnoli F, Halenbeck R, Rappuoli R, Fantl WJ, Covacci A: c-Src/Lyn kinases activate Helicobacter pylori CagA through tyrosine phosphorylation of the EPIYA motifs. Mol Microbiol 2002, 43:971-980.

32. Selbach M, Moese S, Hauck CR, Meyer TF, Backert S: Src is the kinase of the Helicobacter pylori CagA protein in vitro and in vivo. J Biol Chem 2002, 277:6775-6778.

33. Selbach M, Moese S, Hurwitz R, Hauck CR, Meyer TF, Backert S:
   - The Helicobacter pylori CagA protein induces cortactin dephosphorylation and actin rearrangement by c-Src inactivation. EMBO J 2003, 22:515-528.
   - In this paper it is shown that phosphorylated cytotoxin-associated gene A (CagA) inhibits the catalytic activity of c-Src in vitro and in vivo, leading to tyrosine dephosphorylation of the actin-binding protein cortactin. In addition, c-Src inhibition down-regulates further CagA phosphorylation, inducing a negative feedback loop that probably inhibits an excessive CagA activation. This effect might have further important implications.

34. Fischer W, Püls J, Buhrdorf R, Gebert B, Odenbreit S, Haas R: Systematic mutagenesis of the Helicobacter pylori cag

pathogenicity island: essential genes for CagA translocation in host cells and induction of interleukin-8. Mol Microbiol 2001, 42:1337-1348.

35. Hofreuter D, Odenbreit S, Haas R: Natural transformation competence in Helicobacter pylori is mediated by the basic components of a type IV secretion system. Mol Microbiol 2001, 41:379-391.

36. Kersulyte D, Velapatino B, Mukhopadhyay AK, Cahuayme L, Bussalleu A, Combe J, Gilman RH, Berg DE: Cluster of type IV secretion genes in Helicobacter pylori's plasticity zone. J Bacteriol 2003, 185:3764-3772.

37. Tanaka J, Suzuki T, Mimuro H, Sasakawa C: Structural definition on the surface of Helicobacter pylori type IV secretion apparatus. Cell Microbiol 2003, 5:395-404.
   - These studies [37*,38*] are of special importance, since they demonstrate for the first time surface structures of the type-IV secretion apparatus of H. pylori in quite some detail.

38. Rohde M, Puls J, Buhrdorf R, Fischer W, Haas R: A novel sheathed surface organelle of the Helicobacter pylori cag type IV secretion system. Mol Microbiol 2003, 49:219-234.
   - See annotation to [37*].

39. Amieva MR, Vogelmann R, Covacci A, Tompkins LS, Nelson WJ, Falkow S: Disruption of the epithelial apical-junctional complex by Helicobacter pylori CagA. Science 2003, 300:1430-1434.
   - The first demonstration that cytotoxin-associated gene A (CagA) is able to disrupt cellular junctions. Thereby CagA might support the passage of VacA across the epithelial barrier to reach the submucosa to interact with cells of the immune system.

40. Higashi H, Tsutsumi R, Muto S, Sugiyama T, Azuma T, Asaka M, Hatakeyama M: SHP-2 tyrosine phosphatase as an intracellular target of Helicobacter pylori CagA protein. Science 2001, 295:683-686.

41. Higashi H, Tsutsumi R, Fujita A, Yamazaki S, Asaka M, Azuma T, Hatakeyama M: Biological activity of the Helicobacter pylori virulence factor CagA is determined by variation in the tyrosine phosphorylation sites. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2002, 99:14428-14433.

42. Mimuro H, Suzuki T, Tanaka J, Asahi M, Haas R, Sasakawa C: Grb2 is a key mediator of Helicobacter pylori CagA protein activities. Mol Cell 2002, 10:745-755.
   - These two papers [42*,43*] provide a detailed description of how translocated cytotoxin-associated antigen A (CagA) activates a downstream growth-factor-like response by stimulating the MAP kinase pathway. Mimuro and co-workers [42*] report on a direct binding and activation of Grb2 (growth factor receptor-binding protein 2), whereas Churin and co-workers [43*] suggest binding and activation of the c-met receptor and subsequent activation of the same signalling cascade.

43. Churin Y, Al Ghoul L, Kepp O, Meyer TF, Birchmeier W, Naumann M: Helicobacter pylori CagA protein targets the c-Met receptor and enhances the motogenic response. J Cell Biol 2003, 161:249-255.
   - See annotation to [42*].

44. Al-Ghoul L, Wessler S, Hundertmark T, Kruger S, Fischer W, Wunder C, Haas R, Roessner A, Naumann M: Analysis of the type IV secretion system-dependent cell motility of Helicobacter pylori-infected epithelial cells. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2004, 322:860-866.

45. Moese S, Selbach M, Kwok T, Brinkmann V, Konig W, Meyer TF, Backert S: Helicobacter pylori induces AGS cell motility and elongation via independent signaling pathways. Infect Immun 2004, 72:3646-3649.

46. Churin Y, Kardalinou E, Meyer TF, Naumann M: Pathogenicity island-dependent activation of Rho GTPases Rac1 and Cdc42 in Helicobacter pylori infection. Mol Microbiol 2001, 40:815-823.

47. Guillemin K, Salama NR, Tompkins LS, Falkow S: Cag pathogenicity island-specific responses of gastric epithelial cells to Helicobacter pylori infection. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2002, 99:15136-15141.

48. Keates S, Sougioultzis S, Keates AC, Zhao D, Peek RM, Shaw LM, Kelly CP: cag+ Helicobacter pylori induce transactivation of the

Interaction of Helicobacter pylori with host cells Rieder, Fischer and Haas 73

epidermal growth factor receptor in AGS gastric epithelial  
cells. J Biol Chem 2001, 276:48127-48134.

49. Jüttner S, Cramer T, Wessler S, Walduck A, Gao F, Schmitz F,  
Wunder C, Weber M, Fischer SM, Schmidt WE *et al.*: Helicobacter  
pylori stimulates host cyclooxygenase-2 gene transcription:  
critical importance of MEK/ERK-dependent activation of  

USF1/-2 and CREB transcription factors. Cell Microbiol 2003,  
5:821-834.

50. Umehara S, Higashi H, Ohnishi N, Asaka M, Hatakeyama M:  
Effects of Helicobacter pylori CagA protein on the growth and  
survival of B lymphocytes, the origin of MALT lymphoma.  
Oncogene 2003, 22:8337-8342.
