
THE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGICAL CHEMISTRY
© 2005 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.
Vol. 280, No. 18, Issue of May 6, pp. 17873–17879, 2005
Printed in U.S.A.

# The Last Reaction Producing Brassinolide Is Catalyzed by Cytochrome P-450s, CYP85A3 in Tomato and CYP85A2 in Arabidopsis*§

Received for publication, December 27, 2004, and in revised form, February 8, 2005  
Published, JBC Papers in Press, February 14, 2005, DOI 10.1074/jbc.M414592200

Takahito Nomura‡§, Tetsuo Kushiro‡, Takao Yokota¶, Yuji Kamiya‡, Gerard J. Bishop**, and Shinjiro Yamaguchi‡

From the ‡Plant Science Center, RIKEN, Institute of Physical and Chemical Research, Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama, Kanagawa 230-0045, Japan, the ¶Department of Biosciences, Teikyo University, Utsunomiya, Tochigi 320-8551, Japan, and the ||Institute of Biological Sciences, University of Wales Aberystwyth, Aberystwyth SY23 3DA, United Kingdom

Brassinosteroids are steroidal hormones essential for the growth and development of plants. Brassinolide, the most biologically active brassinosteroid, has a seven-membered lactone ring that is formed by a Baeyer-Villiger oxidation of its immediate precursor castasterone. Despite its potential key role in controlling plant development, brassinolide synthase has not been identified. Previous work has shown that the formation of castasterone from 6-deoxocastasterone is catalyzed by members of the CYP85A family of cytochrome P-450 monooxygenases. A null mutation in the tomato *Dwarf* (*CYP85A1*) gene, *extreme dwarf* (*dˣ*), causes severe dwarfism due to brassinosteroid deficiency, but the *dˣ* mutant still produces fruits. Here, we show that *dˣ* fruits contain brassinolide at a higher level than wild-type fruits and that a new CYP85A gene, CYP85A3, is preferentially expressed in tomato fruits. Tomato CYP85A3 catalyzed the Baeyer-Villiger oxidation to produce brassinolide from castasterone in yeast, in addition to the conversion of 6-deoxocastasterone to castasterone. We also show that Arabidopsis CYP85A2, which was initially characterized as castasterone synthase, also has brassinolide synthase activity. Exogenous application of castasterone and brassinolide to the Arabidopsis *cyp85a1/cyp85a2* double mutant suggests that castasterone can function as an active brassinosteroid but that its conversion into brassinolide is necessary for normal vegetative development in Arabidopsis. We postulate that castasterone is the major active brassinosteroid during vegetative growth in tomato, whereas brassinolide may play an organ-specific role in fruit development in this species.

---

Steroids act as hormones in various organisms. In animals, steroids are used as sex hormones, whereas ecdysteroids function as molting hormones in insects. Brassinosteroids (BRs)¹ are steroidal plant hormones that are critical for normal growth and development. Genetic evidence illustrates that BRs play a role in such diverse processes as stem elongation, leaf development, pollen tube growth, vascular differentiation, seed germination, photomorphogenesis, and stress tolerance (1, 2). Among BRs, brassinolide (BL) (see Fig. 1A) is the most biologically active form. Following the discovery of BL as a growth-promoting steroid from rape pollen (3), more than 50 analogs, including BL precursors, have been identified from plants (4). The biosynthesis pathway from campesterol to BL has been elucidated by feeding isotope-labeled intermediates to suspension cell cultures of *Catharanthus roseus* and identifying the metabolites by gas chromatography-mass spectrometry (GC-MS) (5). BR-deficient and -insensitive dwarf mutants from *Arabidopsis* (*Arabidopsis thaliana*), tomato (*Lycopersicon esculentum*), pea (*Pisum sativum*), and rice (*Oryza sativa*) have been crucial for the identification of BR biosynthesis enzymes and perception components (1, 6, 7). Studies using such BR-related mutants have shown that cytochrome P-450 monooxygenases (P450s) are involved in oxidation reactions at C-2, C-3, C-6, C-22, C-23, and C-26 of BRs (see Fig. 1A) (1, 2).

The C-6 oxidation is a likely rate-limiting step for the production of bioactive BRs because 6-deoxocastasterone (6-deoxoCS), an inactive precursor to be oxidized at C-6, commonly accumulates at relatively high levels in several plant species (8). The formation of castasterone (CS) from 6-deoxoCS via 6α-hydroxy intermediate is catalyzed by the CYP85A family of P450s (9, 10). CS is further converted to BL by a Baeyer-Villiger oxidation reaction at C-6, resulting in the formation of an unusual seven-membered lactone ring (see Fig. 1A) (11). Because this reaction increases the biological activity, BL synthase may play a critical role in the regulation of BR-mediated growth and development (12). Recently, a cell-free extract from *Phaseolus vulgaris* cultured cells suggested an involvement of P450 in the conversion of CS to BL (13). However, the identity of this enzyme was unknown.

The tomato *Dwarf* gene encodes CYP85A1 (14) that catalyzes the synthesis of CS from 6-deoxoCS (see Fig. 1A) (9). Using a reporter gene fusion, *Dwarf* has been shown to be expressed both in vegetative tissues and in fruits (15). A null allele, *extreme dwarf* (*dˣ*), shows severely reduced stem length and altered leaf morphology and contains no detectable CS and BL.

---

* The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked “advertisement” in accordance with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.
* The nucleotide sequence(s) reported in this paper has been submitted to the GenBank™/EBI Data Bank with accession number(s) AB190445.
* § The on-line version of this article (available at http://www.jbc.org) contains three supplementary figures and one supplementary table.
* § Supported by the Special Postdoctoral Researchers Program from RIKEN.
* ** Supported by the Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research Council and Human Frontier Science Program Organization. To whom correspondence should be addressed: Div. of Biology, Imperial College London, Wye Campus, Wye, Ashford, Kent, TN25 5AH, UK. Fax: 44-20-759-42919; E-mail: g.bishop@imperial.ac.uk.

---

¹ The abbreviations used are: BR, brassinosteroid; BL, brassinolide; P450, cytochrome P-450 monooxygenase; CS, castasterone; 6-deoxoCS, 6-deoxocastasterone; *dˣ*, extreme dwarf allele; GC-MS, gas chromatography-mass spectrometry; WT, wild-type.

This paper is available on line at http://www.jbc.org 17873

in vegetative tissues (9). Despite the severe BR-deficient phenotype during the vegetative growth, $d^{x}$ plants are able to produce fruits (see Fig. 1, B–D).

To better understand the physiological role of BRs in tomato development, we assessed the effect of the $d^{x}$ mutation on endogenous BR levels in fruits. We show that $d^{x}$ fruits contain CS, indicating the presence of another enzyme catalyzing the C-6 oxidation of 6-deoxoCS. Surprisingly, both wild-type (WT) and $d^{x}$ fruits were found to contain BL, indicating that BL can be synthesized without CYP85A1 activity. We identified another CYP85A gene (CYP85A3) from tomato, which can catalyze the conversion of 6-deoxoCS into BL via CS in yeast. Furthermore, we show that *Arabidopsis* CYP85A2 has the same enzymatic activity as CYP85A3. The Baeyer-Villiger oxidation producing the steroidal lactone ring has therefore been identified as the last reaction in consecutive oxidative conversions that are catalyzed by multifunctional P450s. Possible roles of CS and BL in plant development are discussed based on their effects on the growth of loss-of-function *Arabidopsis* mutants of the CYP85A genes.

---

### EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES

#### Plant Materials—Near isogenic tomato (*L. esculentum*) lines of Ailsa Craig carrying either *D* (GCR 358) or the $d^{x}$ (GCR 567) allele were originally obtained from J. Maxon Smith (Practical Plant Genetics, Littlehampton, UK). Tomato plants were grown either in a glasshouse under natural photoperiod or in a growth chamber under a 16-h light ($270 \mu$mol m${}^{-2}$s${}^{-1}$ at 25°C)/8-h-dark (at 18°C) cycle. *Arabidopsis* plants were grown in a growth chamber (continuous light/36 $\mu$mol m${}^{-2}$s${}^{-1}$ at 22°C).

#### Endogenous BR Analysis—Immature fruits were harvested from WT and $d^{x}$ plants in a glasshouse (~3 cm in diameter). Experimental pools are as follows: first experimental pools, WT, 104 g of fresh weight, and $d^{x}$ 88 g of fresh weight; second experimental pools, WT, 104 g of fresh weight, and $d^{x}$, 110 g of fresh weight. Endogenous BRs were quantified by GC-selected ion monitoring using deuterated BR internal standards as described previously (8).

#### Exogenous BR Application—Seedlings of the *cyp85a1/cyp85a2* double mutant and the *cpd* mutant were grown on 0.5× MS medium containing 2% (w/v) sucrose and 0.8% (w/v) Phytagar (Invitrogen) for 10 days and then transplanted onto medium containing either BL (Fuji Chemical, Japan) or CS (CIDtech Research, Canada) and grown for 4 days.

#### Cloning of New CYP85A Gene—Primer sequences used in this study are shown in Table S1 as supplemental data. Primers D-F1 and D-R1 were designed based on highly conserved nucleotide sequences of tomato CYP85A1 (*Dwarf*), *Arabidopsis* CYP85A1 and CYP85A2, and pea CYP85A1. PCR amplification was carried out on a GeneAmp PCR System 9700 (Applied Biosystems) with the Expand high fidelity PCR system (Roche Applied Science) using genomic DNA from $d^{x}$ plants. The resulting 2426-bp product was sequenced using ABI PRISM 3100 sequencer (Amersham Biosciences). Based on this sequence, gene-specific primers were designed to amplify the 5′- and 3′-end of tomato CYP85A3 gene. Primers D-R3, D-R7, and D-R5 were used sequentially for 5′-rapid amplification of cDNA ends reactions that finally produced a 571-bp product of the 5′-end. Primers D-F2 and D-F6 were used for 3′-rapid amplification of cDNA ends reactions that produced a 521-bp product of the 3′-end. Template DNA was from a single-strand cDNA library that was made from $d^{x}$ immature fruits (~2 cm in diameter). The resulting products were sequenced, and these fragments were assembled to construct a 1404-bp open reading frame. Primers ToD2-F1 (BglII site at the initiation codon) and ToD2-R1 (KpnI site at the stop codon) were used to amplify the full-length cDNA, and eight clones were sequenced to check the PCR errors. Sequence analysis was performed using MacVector software (Oxford Molecular Group). The phylogenetic tree was constructed by using a ClustalW program in the DDBJ homepage (www.ddbj.nig.ac.jp/Welcome-e.html).

#### Semiquantitative Reverse Transcriptase-PCR—Organ-specific expression of the CYP85A1 and CYP85A3 gene was examined. RNA was isolated from aerial tissue and roots excised from pools of 12 individuals of 20-day-old seedlings of WT and $d^{x}$ grown in a growth chamber. RNA was made from pools of 3–5 immature fruits (~0.5, 1, 2, and 3 cm in diameter) harvested from WT plants grown in a growth chamber and 3 immature fruits (~2 cm in diameter) harvested from $d^{x}$ plants grown in a glasshouse. Total RNA was extracted by using an RNAAqueous kit with Plant RNA Isolation Aid (Ambion). Single-strand cDNA was synthesized using 2.5 $\mu$g of total RNA, SuperScript II reverse transcriptase (Invitrogen), and oligo(dT) primer according to the manufacturer's instructions. PCR amplification was performed for a total of 35 cycles using the following primers at the given concentrations: 0.3 $\mu$M D-F7 and D-R8 (to amplify tomato CYP85A3); 0.3 $\mu$M DW52 and DW53 (to amplify tomato CYP85A1); and 0.1 $\mu$M TACT1 and TACT2 (to amplify actin as a control) (16). The products were sequenced to confirm the identity of the bands. Gels stained with ethidium bromide were photographed using a luminescent image analyzer LAS-3000 (Fujifilm).

#### Yeast Functional Assay—The CYP85A1 and CYP85A2 cDNAs of *Arabidopsis* were amplified from a single-strand cDNA library made from young siliques (~3 mm in length) of *Arabidopsis* using primer pairs: 85A1-F1 (BamHI site at the initiation codon) and 85A1-R1 (KpnI site at the stop codon) and 85A2-F1 (BamHI site at the initiation codon) and 85A2-R1 (KpnI site at the stop codon), respectively. These PCR products were cloned using TOPO TA Cloning (Invitrogen) and checked to ensure that no PCR errors were introduced. The plasmids containing tomato CYP85A3 (see above) and *Arabidopsis* CYP85As were cut with primer-specific restriction enzymes and then ligated to BamHI- and KpnI-cut plasmid YeDP60 (17). Tomato CYP85A3- and CYP85A1-pYeDP60 (pGB233A1) (9), *Arabidopsis* CYP85A1- and CYP85A2-pYeDP60, and pYeDP60 only for a control were transformed into yeast strain WAT11 using Frozen-EZ yeast transformation II (Zymo Research). Transformed colonies were inoculated into 10 ml of SGI medium (17) and were grown at 30°C for 1 day in a shaking incubator (200 rpm). The SGI-cultured yeast medium (1 ml) was inoculated into 10 ml of SLI medium (pH 5.4) (17) and grown at 28°C for 1 day until the cell density reached $4 \times 10^{7}$ cells ml${}^{-1}$. Cells were pelleted by a 500 × g spin and resuspended in fresh SLI medium to obtain $8 \times 10^{6}$ cells ml${}^{-1}$. Diluted yeast culture (5 ml) was incubated with 1 $\mu$g (0.4 $\mu$M) of a BR substrate at 28°C for 15 h until the cell density reached $6 \times 10^{7}$ cells ml${}^{-1}$.

To prepare microsomal proteins, yeast cells collected from 500 ml of SLI culture ($5 \times 10^{7}$ cells ml${}^{-1}$) were suspended in 0.1 M potassium phosphate buffer (pH 7.6) and passed through a French press (25 000 p.s.i.). The broken cells were centrifuged at 10,000 × g for 15 min, and the supernatant was centrifuged at 100,000 × g for 1 h. Microsomal fraction was suspended in 1 ml of 0.1 M potassium phosphate buffer (pH 7.6). 6-DeoxoCS (20 $\mu$M) was incubated with 75 $\mu$g (in a 50-$\mu$l volume) of microsomal protein containing NADPH (500 $\mu$M) at 25°C for 10 min to 4 h.

BRs were extracted with ethyl acetate and the extract was partitioned against 0.5 M dipotassium hydrogen phosphate (pH 9). The ethyl acetate phase was evaporated to dryness and partitioned between n-hexane and 80% methanol. The latter phase was evaporated to dryness and derivatized with pyridine containing methanboronic acid (2 mg ml${}^{-1}$) prior to GC-MS analysis using an Automass (JEOL) plus 6890N (Agilent Technologies) instrument equipped with a DB-1 column (J & W Scientific; 0.25 mm × 15 m; 0.25-$\mu$m film thickness) under the same conditions as Ref. 8.

---

### RESULTS

#### Brassinolide Is Accumulated in Tomato Fruits—The $d^{x}$ mutant is severely dwarfed due to BR deficiency (Fig. 1B) (9) but is able to produce fruits with smaller calyxes (Fig. 1, C and D). To examine the influence of the $d^{x}$ mutation on BR synthesis in fruits, endogenous BR levels were determined using GC-MS (Table I). Unexpectedly, BL was detected in both $d^{x}$ and WT fruits. In one of the experiments using $d^{x}$ fruits, a strikingly high level of BL was detected. CS was detectable in both fruits but was decreased in abundance in $d^{x}$ fruits relative to WT. In vegetative tissues, the level of 6-deoxoCS is increased in the $d^{x}$ mutant because its conversion into CS is blocked (9). However, the level of 6-deoxoCS in $d^{x}$ fruits was comparable with that in WT fruits. These results indicate that the $d^{x}$ mutation in fruits does not significantly block the C-6 oxidation of 6-deoxoCS. This finding, as well as the accumulation of BL in the $d^{x}$ fruits, implies the occurrence of a CYP85A1-independent synthesis pathway of BL.

#### Tomato CYP85A3 Gene—In $d^{x}$ fruits, BL is likely to be synthesized from 6-deoxoCS via CS, suggesting that the en-

Brassinolide Synthase

FIG. 1. Metabolic and phenotypic defects of the tomato $d^x$ mutant. A, the CYP85A1 function (step blocked by the $d^x$ mutation) and the CYP85A3 function of tomato in the BL biosynthesis pathway. B, 1-month-old WT and $d^x$ plants. C, 4-month-old $d^x$ plants. D, closeup of WT and $d^x$ fruits.

TABLE I  
Endogenous BR levels in tomato fruits  

The levels of BRs were determined by GC-MS using $^2$H-labeled internal standards. Data are expressed as ng per kg fresh weight in the first and second experiments. exp., experiment.

|         | WT       | $d^x$     |
|---------|----------|-----------|
|         | 1st exp. | 2nd exp.  | 1st exp. | 2nd exp. |
| BL      | 143      | 65        | 702      | 87       |
| CS      | 53       | 514       | 17       | 9        |
| 6-DeoxoCS | 1957    | 5123      | 1707     | 2984     |
| 6-Deoxotyosterol | ND$^a$   | 60        | ND$^a$   | 86       |
| 3-Dehydro-6-deoxoteasterone | 7       | 37        | 15       | 36       |
| 6-Deoxoteasterone | ND$^a$   | 62        | 10       | 76       |
| 6-Deoxocathasterone | 426     | 733       | 627      | 916      |

$a$ ND, not detected.

zyme responsible is expected to be in the CYP85A family. To identify this new gene, we designed oligonucleotide primers based on the conserved nucleotide sequences among the CYP85A genes of tomato, Arabidopsis, and pea. A DNA fragment that is closely related to tomato CYP85A1 was amplified by PCR from $d^x$ genomic DNA. The corresponding full-length cDNA was identified by 5'- and 3'-rapid amplification of cDNA ends using $d^x$ immature fruits as the source of mRNA templates. Sequence analysis revealed that the cDNA encodes a protein consisting of 467 amino acids that show 75% identity and 85% similarity with tomato CYP85A1 (see supplemental data, Fig. S1). A new CYP number, CYP85A3, was given to this sequence based on the deduced P450 domain (L. esculentum CYP85A3, accession number AB190445).

A phylogenetic tree among BR-related P450s was constructed using amino acid sequences of CYP85A, CYP90A (BR C-23 hydroxylation) (18), CYP90B (BR C-22 hydroxylation) (19), and CYP90D (BR C-3 dehydrogenation) (20) families (Fig. 2). Tomato CYP85A3 was placed on the same branch as the CYP85A family of tomato (9), Arabidopsis (10, 21), and rice (22, 23) and was closest to tomato CYP85A1. These observations suggest that the CYP85A genes duplicated independently in tomato and Arabidopsis.

Tomato CYP85A3 Is Preferentially Expressed in Fruits—Transcript abundance of tomato CYP85A1 and CYP85A3 genes in WT shoots, roots, and fruits was investigated by semiquantitative reverse transcriptase-PCR analysis (Fig. 3). The CYP85A1 transcript was detected in all WT samples examined, whereas the CYP85A3 mRNA accumulated in fruits, indicating that CYP85A3 was a strong candidate for C-6 oxidation in the synthesis of BL. The presence of CYP85A3 mRNA in fruits of the $d^x$ mutant corroborated this result.

FIG. 2. Phylogenetic relationships among tomato CYP85A3 and related P450s. The phylogenetic tree was constructed by the neighbor-joining method on a CLUSTAL W program using the deduced full-length protein sequences. The accession numbers are as follows: tomato (T), CYP85A3 (accession number AB190445), CYP85A1 (U54770), and CYP90A (BT014380); Arabidopsis (A), CYP85A1 (AB035868), CYP85A2 (AB087801), CYP90A1 (X87367), CYP90B1 (AF044216), CYP90C1 (AB008097), and CYP90D1 (AB066286); rice (R), CYP85A1 (AB084385), CYP90A3 (AK060257), CYP90B2 (AC104473), CYP90D2 (AP003244), and CYP90D3 (AC130732). Bootstrap mode (1000 replications) was used for estimating the confidence that can be assigned to particular nodes in the tree.

Tomato CYP85A3 Produces BL in Recombinant Yeast—To examine whether tomato CYP85A3 possesses BR C-6 oxidation activity, we carried out functional expression in yeast. Tomato CYP85A3 cDNA was cloned into plasmid YeDP60 that allows galactose-inducible expression of P450s in yeast (17). As a

positive control, we used pGB233A1 (CYP85A1 cDNA in pYeDP60) (9) that produces tomato CYP85A1 in yeast in response to galactose. A yeast strain WAT11 was used as the host because it is engineered to co-produce Arabidopsis NADPH P450 reductase 1 and is able to donate the electrons required for plant P450 activity (17). Induced cultures of the transformants were incubated with predicted substrates, and the products were analyzed by GC-MS (Fig. 4).

When \[^2H_6\]6-deoxoCS was incubated with the recombinant yeast producing tomato CYP85A3, a large fraction of the added substrate was metabolized to produce \[^2H_6\]CS, confirming that CYP85A3 has C-6 oxidation activity like previously characterized.

**FIG. 3. Transcript levels of CYP85A1 and CYP85A3 in tomato plants.** Ethidium bromide-stained agarose gels show the reverse transcriptase-PCR products from shoots (S), roots (R), and fruits (F; cm diameter) of WT and \(d^x\) plants. Primers for actin and either CYP85A1 or CYP85A3 were used in the same PCR.

| S | R | F0.5 | F1 | F2 | F3 | F2 |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Actin |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| CYP85A1 |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| Actin |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| CYP85A3 |  |  |  |  |  |  |

Arabidopsis CYP85A2 Produces BL in Recombinant Yeast—It has previously been reported that Arabidopsis CYP85A1 and CYP85A2 catalyze the conversion of 6-deoxoCS to CS (10, 21). Because tomato CYP85A3 catalyzes the conversion of 6-deoxoCS and CS to BL (Fig. 4) and is closely related to other members of the CYP85A family (Fig. 2), we re-examined the enzyme activity of Arabidopsis CYP85A1 and CYP85A2 (see supplemental data, Fig. S2). Consistent with the previous report (10), the recombinant yeast expressing Arabidopsis CYP85A1 catalyzed the formation of CS from 6-deoxoCS but did not produce BL. On the other hand, 6-deoxoCS was converted to both CS and BL in the recombinant yeast cells that contained Arabidopsis CYP85A2. These data indicate that Arabidopsis CYP85A1 is a C-6 oxidase involved in the production of CS from 6-deoxoCS, whereas Arabidopsis CYP85A2 contains an additional enzyme activity that converts CS into BL.

In an attempt to examine the in vitro kinetics of the enzymes, microsomal proteins were prepared from the recombinant yeast cells and were incubated with 6-deoxoCS. C-6 oxidation activity of microsomes from tomato CYP85A3 and Arabidopsis CYP85A2 was not sufficient to readily determine the \(K_m\) and \(V_{max}\) of these enzymes (data not shown). This is possibly due to reduced stability of the enzyme in a microsomal preparation as discussed for another plant P450 (24).

Loss-of-Function Mutations in the Arabidopsis CYP85A1 and CYP85A2 Genes—To assess the relative physiological roles of the two CYP85As in Arabidopsis, we examined the phenotype of T-DNA insertion lines. Two mutant alleles (cyp85a1–1 (SALK_068952) and cyp85a1–2 (SALK_101866)) containing T-DNA insertion in the coding region of the CYP85A1 gene grew similarly to WT plants throughout the life cycle (Fig. 5A). In contrast, three independent alleles (cyp85a2–1 (SALK_056270), cyp85a2–2 (SALK_129352), and cyp85a2–3 (SALK_068754)) having T-DNA insertions in the coding region of the CYP85A2 gene consistently exhibited a weak dwarf phenotype during early vegetative development

**TABLE II**

GC-MS identification of \[^2H_6\]BL and \[^2H_6\]CS converted from \[^2H_6\]6-deoxoCS in the recombinant yeast producing tomato CYP85A3

| Compound           | Retention time on GC (min) | Characteristic ions, \(m/z\) (relative intensity percentage) |
|--------------------|---------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------|
| \[^2H_6\]BL        | Standard                  | 534 \([M^+]\) (1), 374 (8), 345 (5), 338 (7), 177 (70), 161 (100) |
|                    | Metabolite                | 534 \([M^+]\) (1), 374 (9), 345 (6), 338 (7), 177 (70), 161 (100) |
| \[^2H_6\]CS        | Standard                  | 518 \([M^+]\) (16), 441 (2), 399 (2), 358 (6), 287 (7), 161 (100) |
|                    | Metabolite                | 518 \([M^+]\) (18), 441 (2), 399 (3), 358 (6), 287 (8), 161 (100) |

\(a\) Bismethaneboronate derivative.

(Fig. 5A) and a reduced fertility after bolting, although the final plant height appeared normal (data not shown). When the cyp85a1 and cyp85a2 mutants were crossed, the resulting digenic mutants grew as severe dwarfs that were reminiscent of the known strong BR-deficient mutants (Fig. 5B). These results suggest that CYP85A1 and CYP85A2 have overlapping functions but that CYP85A2 plays a more dominant role in both vegetative and reproductive development.

CS exhibits less activity than BL when applied exogenously to plants (12). However, it has been unclear whether CS is a bioactive hormone or whether this activity only occurs after the conversion into BL. To address this question, we examined the effect of exogenous CS and BL on seedling growth of the digenic cyp85a1/cyp85a2 mutant because this mutant will be defective in both the synthesis of CS and its conversion into BL. As illustrated in Fig. 5, C and D, the cyp85a1/cyp85a2 double mutant responded to exogenous CS. However, the double mutant was much more sensitive to BL than CS; BL treatment at 100 nM restored the double mutant phenotype nearly fully to WT, but CS at the same concentration rescued the phenotype only partially (Fig. 5D). In the Arabidopsis cpd mutant, an early step of the BL biosynthesis pathway is genetically blocked (18). Therefore, the cpd mutant is defective in bioactive BRs but is able to convert exogenously supplied CS into BL in plants. As shown in Fig. 5C, the cpd mutant responded to CS at a lower concentration than did the cyp85a1/cyp85a2 double mutant, whereas both mutants responded to exogenous BL with similar dose-response relationships.

---

### DISCUSSION

#### Identification of BL Synthase—Since the discovery of BL (3) as a bioactive plant steroid, it was a mystery as to how plants synthesized the unique lactone structure present in the B-ring (Fig. 1A). Using heterologous expression in yeast, we have demonstrated that at least one of the CYP85A family members in tomato and Arabidopsis is able to catalyze the Baeyer-Villiger type oxidation for the production of BL (Fig. 4). Our results show that CYP85A3 (tomato) and CYP85A2 (Arabidopsis) function as multifunctional enzymes that catalyze consecutive oxidation reactions at the C-6 of 6-deoxoCS: oxidation to yield a cyclic ketone (CS) and Baeyer-Villiger oxidation to generate a lactone (BL) (Fig. 1A). Thus, BL synthesis activity has now been identified as the last oxidative reaction by the multifunctional P450s. It has been proposed that P450s, such as CYP51 and CYP17, catalyze oxidative conversions of steroids by Baeyer-Villiger-type reactions (25–27). In such cases, however, the insertion of oxygen in a carbon-carbon bond via a ferric peroxy intermediate results in a deformylation. Some flavin-dependent monooxygenases, but not P450s, have so far been reported as enzymes that can catalyze the formation of lactone by oxygenation of cyclic ketone (28). Thus, the identification of CYP85A3 as BL synthase represents the first discovery of P450 to generate a lactone ring.

Heterologous expression of CYP85A genes in yeast was carried out to determine their enzyme activity. Two major lines of evidence support the idea that the activity detected in yeast is the same as that occurring *in planta*. First, tomato CYP85A3 and Arabidopsis CYP85A2 were able to produce BL from 6-deoxoCS in yeast cells in the absence of any exogenous CS (Fig. 4A). Therefore, tomato CYP85A3 and Arabidopsis CYP85A2

---

effects of BL and CS on the cyp85a1/cyp85a2 double mutant and the cpd mutant. Ten-day-old seedlings were treated on a medium containing either CS (striped bar) or BL (black bar). After 4 days of treatment, the diameters of the rosettes were measured (*n* = 12). *D*, the cyp85a1-2/cyp85a2-2 mutant treated on a medium containing 100 nM CS or 100 nM BL for 4 days and WT seedlings grown on the medium without BRs.

would function as BL synthase in plants. Secondly, the cyp85a1/cyp85a2 double mutant was less sensitive to exogenous CS than the cpd mutant (Fig. 5C). This result suggests that the conversion of CS to BL is impaired in the cyp85a1/cyp85a2 double mutant and supports the premise that Arabidopsis CYP85A2 functions as BL synthase *in planta*.

**Roles of Two CYP85A Genes in Tomato and Arabidopsis—** We initially discovered that the amount of BL in fruits of the \( d^x \) mutant was similar to or greater than that of WT (Table I). This result was unexpected because the \( d^x \) mutation would block the supply of CS. The identification of CYP85A3 as a gene encoding a CS/BL synthase and its expression in tomato fruits indicate why BL is still produced in the \( d^x \) fruits. In tomato vegetative tissue, the most available bioactive BR detected by GC-MS analysis has been CS and not BL (9, 16). This observation is also consistent with our finding that the CYP85A3 mRNA was not observed in shoots and roots of WT (Fig. 3) and could therefore not compensate for the lack of CYP85A1 activity in vegetative tissues in \( d^x \) mutants. This clearly shows the distinct developmental regulation patterns of CYP85A1 and CYP85A3 genes in tomato plants. Future investigations are necessary to verify the hypothetical role of CYP85A3 in tomato fruit development using a reverse genetic approach.

Previous studies have indicated that the homeostasis of active BR levels is maintained in part through negative regulation of BR biosynthesis genes (1, 12). Tomato CYP85A1 and Arabidopsis CYP85A1 and -A2 are subject to such negative feedback regulation, and their transcript levels are upregulated in BR-deficient or -insensitive mutant backgrounds (16, 29). In this context, it is interesting to note that the \( d^x \) mutant displays a severe BR-deficient dwarf phenotype despite having another gene (CYP85A3) for C-6 oxidation in the genome. In agreement with the severely dwarfed \( d^x \) phenotype, the CYP85A3 mRNA was not detectable in vegetative tissues (shoot and root) even in the \( d^x \) mutant background (see supplemental data, Fig. S3). On the other hand, in Arabidopsis, a single mutation at either CYP85A gene exhibited only weak or no BR-deficient phenotype (Fig. 5A). Therefore, the strong phenotype of the cyp85a1/cyp85a2 double mutant (Fig. 5B) suggests that CYP85A1 and CYP85A2 may play overlapping roles in WT Arabidopsis development. Expression analysis of CYP85A1 and CYP85A2 using reporter gene fusions and digital Northern analyses of array data indicate that these P450s have both unique and overlapping expression patterns, with CYP85A1 promoter activity/mRNA levels being much weaker than CYP85A2 (30). The weak or no impact of respective single mutations therefore indicates the ability of CYP85A1 and CYP85A2 to compensate for active BR synthesis through negative feedback regulation in Arabidopsis. In tomato, this level of compensation for gene function is not observed. Taken together, these observations suggest that a set of CYP85A family members contribute differently to growth and development of tomato and Arabidopsis as they are regulated differently in these two plant species. A phylogenetic relationship suggests that CS/BL synthases evolved independently following the divergence of the tomato and Arabidopsis lineages (Fig. 2).

**Is CS a Biological Active BR?—** It has not been entirely clear what are the bioactive BRs in plants. Among BRs, BL exhibits the strongest biological activity when applied exogenously, suggesting its role as a biologically active form (12). In plants that overexpress BRI1, a component of the BR receptor, BL bound to the membrane fraction *in vitro* in a BRI1-dependent manner at a physiological \( K_d \) value (31). CS also showed the BRI1-dependent binding to the Arabidopsis membrane fraction, albeit at a 4–5 times lower efficiency. To examine whether CS acts as a bioactive BR, its biological activity was tested using the cyp85a1/cyp85a2 double mutant of Arabidopsis, in which the synthesis of both CS and BL is blocked.

Upon application of CS at 100 nM or higher, the growth of the cyp85a1/cyp85a2 mutant was significantly accelerated (Fig. 5C), suggesting that CS is able to function as an active BR in Arabidopsis. This was consistent with the fact that the cyp85a2 single mutant, which is predicted to be BL-deficient, exhibited only limited dwarfism. However, the growth promotion effect of CS on the cyp85a1/cyp85a2 double mutant was significantly weaker than that of BL (Fig. 5, C and D). These observations were in contrast to the results from the cpd mutant of Arabidopsis, which are blocked at an earlier step in BR biosynthesis and respond to exogenous CS and BL nearly equally (18). In our experiments, the cpd mutant responded to exogenous CS at lower concentrations than the cyp85a1/cyp85a2 double mutant (Fig. 5C). Taken together, our results suggest that CS can function as an active BR but that the conversion of CS into BL by CYP85A2 increases the biological activity and is required for normal seedling development in Arabidopsis.

As discussed above, BL has been undetectable in vegetative organs of tomato even in the BR-insensitive mutant *curl3*, which accumulates a large amount of CS in the shoots (16). In addition, BL was not produced at a detectable level from 6-deoxoCS and CS by tomato CYP85A1 in the recombinant yeast (Fig. 4). All these data indicate that, in vegetative tomato tissues, BL is missing, or if at all present, at extremely low levels, suggesting that CS acts as the major active BR in such tissues.

**Acknowledgments—** We thank Kyomi Shibata and Yumiko Yamada (Teikyo University, Tochigi, Japan) for BR analysis and Taeko Morosawa (RIKEN, Kanagawa, Japan) for sequencing. We also thank Dr. Denis Pompon (CNRS, Gif-sur-Yvette, France) for providing pYeDP60 vector and yeast strain WAT11, Dr. Miklós Szekeres (Biological Research Center of the Hungarian Academy of Sciences, Szeged, Hungary) for providing cpd seed, and the Arabidopsis Biological Resource Center for providing knock-out Arabidopsis lines, and Dr. David Nelson (University of Tennessee, Knoxville, TN) for the CYP85A3 designation.

**REFERENCES**

1. Fujioka, S., and Yokota, T. (2003) *Annu. Rev. Plant Biol.* **54**, 137–164
2. Clouse, S. D., and Sasse, J. M. (1998) *Annu. Rev. Plant Physiol. Plant Mol. Biol.* **49**, 427–451
3. Grove, M. D., Spencer, G. F., Rohwedder, W. K., Mandava, N., Worley, J. F., Warthen, J. D., Steffens, G. L., F.-Anderson, J., and Cook, J. C., Jr. (1979) *Nature* **281**, 216–217
4. Bajgus, A., and Tretyak, A. (2003) *Phytochemistry* **62**, 1027–1046
5. Sakurai, A. (1999) *Plant Physiol. Biochem.* **37**, 351–361
6. Clouse, S. D. (2002) *Mol. Cell* **10**, 973–982
7. Peng, P., and Li, J. (2003) *J. Plant Growth Regul.* **22**, 298–312
8. Nomura, T., Sato, T., Bishop, G. J., Kamiya, Y., Takatsuto, S., and Yokota, T. (2001) *Phytochemistry* **57**, 171–178
9. Bishop, G. J., Nomura, T., Yokota, T., Harrison, K., Noguchi, T., Fujioka, S., Takatsuto, S., Jones, J. D. G., and Kamiya, Y. (1999) *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.* **96**, 1761–1766
10. Shimada, Y., Fujioka, S., Miyauichi, N., Kushiro, M., Takatsuto, S., Nomura, T., Yokota, T., Kamiya, Y., Bishop, G. J., and Yoshida, S. (2001) *Plant Physiol.* **126**, 770–779
11. Yokota, T., Ogino, Y., Takahashi, N., Saimoto, H., Fujioka, S., and Sakurai, A. (1990) *Agric. Biol. Chem.* **54**, 1107–1108
12. Yokota, T. (1999) in *Biochemistry and Molecular Biology of Plant Hormones* (Hooykaas, P. J. J., Hall, M. A., and Libbenga, K. R., eds) pp. 277–293, Elsevier Science Publishing Co., Inc., New York
13. Kim, T.-W., Chang, S. C., Lee, J. S., Hwang, B., Takatsuto, S., Yokota, T., and Kim, S.-K. (2004) *Phytochemistry* **65**, 679–689
14. Bishop, G. J., Harrison, K., and Jones, J. D. G. (1996) *Plant Cell* **8**, 959–969
15. Montoya, T., Nomura, T., Yokota, T., Farrar, K., Harrison, K., Jones, J. G. D., Kaneta, T., Kamiya, Y., Szekeres, M., and Bishop, G. J. (2005) *Plant J.*, 10.1111/j.1365-313X.2005.02376.x
16. Montoya, T., Nomura, T., Farrar, K., Kaneta, T., Yokota, T., and Bishop, G. J. (2002) *Plant Cell* **14**, 3163–3176
17. Pompon, D., Louerat, B., Bronine, A., and Urban, P. (1996) *Methods Enzymol.* **272**, 51–64
18. Szekeres, M., Nemeth, K., Kalman, Z. K., Mathur, J., Kauschmann, A., Altmann, T., Redei, G. P., Nagy, F., Schell, J., and Koncz, C. (1996) *Cell* **85**, 171–182

19. Choe, S., Dilkes, B. P., Fujioka, S., Takatsuto, S., Sakurai, A., and Feldmann, K. A. (1998) *Plant Cell* 10, 231–243
20. Hong, Z., U-Tanaka, M., Umemura, K., Uozu, S., Fujioka, S., Takatsuto, S., Yoshida, S., Ashikari, M., Kitano, H., and Matsuoka, M. (2003) *Plant Cell* 15, 2900–2910
21. Shimada, Y., Goda, H., Nakamura, A., Takatsuto, S., Fujioka, S., and Yoshida, S. (2003) *Plant Physiol.* 131, 287–297
22. Mori, M., Nomura, T., Ooka, H., Ishizaka, M., Yokota, T., Sugimoto, K., Okabe, K., Kajiwara, H., Satoh, K., Yamamoto, K., Hirochika, H., and Kikuchi, S. (2002) *Plant Physiol.* 130, 1152–1161
23. Hong, Z., U-Tanaka, M., S-Sato, S., Inukai, Y., Fujioka, S., Shimada, Y., Takatsuto, S., Agetsuma, M., Yoshida, S., Watanabe, Y., Uozu, S., Kitano, H., Ashikari, M., and Matsuoka, M. (2002) *Plant J.* 32, 495–508
24. Helliwell, C. A., Poole, A., Peacock, W. J., and Dennis, E. S. (1999) *Plant Physiol.* 119, 507–510
25. Fischer, R. T., Trzaskos, J. M., Magolda, R. L., Ko, S. S., Brosz, C. S., and Larsen, B. (1991) *J. Biol. Chem.* 266, 6124–6132
26. Mak, A. Y., and Swinney, D. C. (1992) *J. Am. Chem. Soc.* 114, 8309–8310
27. Akhtar, M., Njar, V. C. O., and Wright, J. N. (1993) *J. Steroid Biochem. Mol. Biol.* 44, 375–387
28. Mihovilovic, M. D., Müller, B., and Stanetty, P. (2002) *Eur. J. Org. Chem.* 3711–3730
29. Bancos, S., Nomura, T., Sato, T., Molnar, G., Bishop, G. J., Koncz, C., Yokota, T., Nagy, F., and Szekeres, M. (2002) *Plant Physiol.* 130, 504–513
30. Castle, J., Szekeres, M., Jenkins, G., and Bishop, G. J. (2005) *Plant Mol. Biol.*, 57, 129–140
31. Wang, Z.-Y., Seto, H., Fujioka, S., Yoshida, S., and Chory, J. (2001) *Nature* 410, 380–383

Metabolism and Bioenergetics:  
The Last Reaction Producing Brassinolide  
Is Catalyzed by Cytochrome P-450s,  
CYP85A3 in Tomato and CYP85A2 in  
Arabidopsis  

Takahito Nomura, Tetsuo Kushiro, Takao  
Yokota, Yuji Kamiya, Gerard J. Bishop and  
Shinjiro Yamaguchi  
*J. Biol. Chem.* 2005, 280:17873-17879.  
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M414592200 originally published online February 14, 2005  

Access the most updated version of this article at doi: [10.1074/jbc.M414592200](http://dx.doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M414592200)  

Find articles, minireviews, Reflections and Classics on similar topics on the [JBC Affinity Sites](https://www.jbc.org/site/affinity-sites).  

Alerts:  
- When this article is cited  
- When a correction for this article is posted  

Click [here](https://www.jbc.org/site/alerts) to choose from all of JBC's e-mail alerts  

Supplemental material:  
[http://www.jbc.org/content/suppl/2005/02/24/M414592200.DC1.html](http://www.jbc.org/content/suppl/2005/02/24/M414592200.DC1.html)  

This article cites 28 references, 11 of which can be accessed free at  
[http://www.jbc.org/content/280/18/17873.full.html#ref-list-1](http://www.jbc.org/content/280/18/17873.full.html#ref-list-1)
