
# Bone marrow transplantation and approaches to avoid graft-versus-host disease (GVHD)

**Bruce R. Blazar${}^{1,*}$ and William J. Murphy${}^{2}$**

${}^{1}$Division of Blood and Marrow Transplantation, Cancer Center and Department of Pediatrics, MMC 109, University of Minnesota, 420 Delaware St. SE, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA

${}^{2}$Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Nevada School of Medicine, Reno, NV 89557, USA

Haematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) offers promise for the treatment of haematological and immune disorders, solid tumours, and as a tolerance-inducing regimen for organ transplantation. Allogeneic HSCTs engraftment requires immunosuppression and the anti-tumour effects are dependent upon the immune effector cells that are contained within or generated from the donor graft. However, significant toxicities currently limit its efficacy. These problems include: (i) graft-versus-host disease (GVHD) in which donor T cells attack the recipient resulting in multi-organ attack and morbidity, (ii) a profound period of immune deficiency following HSCT, and (iii) donor graft rejection. Currently available methods to prevent or treat GVHD with systemic immunosuppression can lead to impaired immune recovery, increased opportunistic infections, and higher relapse rates. This review will provide an overview of GVHD pathophysiology and discuss the roles of various cells, pathways, and factors in the GVHD generation process and in the preservation of graft-versus-tumour effects. Variables that need to be taken into consideration in attempting to extrapolate preclinical results to the clinical paradigm will be highlighted.

**Keywords:** graft-versus-host disease; bone marrow transplantation; graft versus leukaemia; cytokines; allogeneic

---

Bone marrow transplantation (BMT), or perhaps more accurately, haematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT), offers great promise for the treatment of a variety of diseases ranging from cancer, autoimmunity, aplastic anaemia and other diseases of haematopoietic origin. BMT originated as a means to repopulate the haematopoietic stem cell compartment after myeloablative exposure to radiation as a means of ‘rescue’. It has evolved into a means to induce anti-tumour responses when used in cancer. HSCT can be either autologous (the transferred haematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) are obtained from the patient) or allogeneic (HSCs are from a donor that is, optimally, totally matched at the major histocompatibility complex (MHC) loci and is related to the patient). Classically, HSCT involves some means of cytoreductive conditioning the recipient either by irradiation and/or chemotherapy. Initially HSCs were provided exclusively by bone marrow cells (BMC). Subsequently, other sources that contain HSCs have shown efficacy for haematopoietic reconstitution including mobilized peripheral blood, and more recently, cord blood. The advent of non-myeloablative or reduced intensity conditioning has allowed HSCT3 to be performed in patients with advanced age due to lesser toxicities from the use of lower cytoreductive conditioning.

HSCTs engraftment requires immunosuppression and the anti-tumour effects are dependent upon the immune effector cells that are contained within or generated from the donor graft. The latter is supported by earlier observations that the relapse rates for allogeneic BMT were markedly lower than autologous BMT due to the occurrence of graft-versus-tumour (GVT) effects after the transplant. However, allogeneic HSCT is hampered by significant toxicities, which currently limit its efficacy. These problems include: (i) graft-versus-host disease (GVHD) in which donor T cells attack the recipient resulting in multi-organ attack and morbidity, (ii) a profound period of immune deficiency following BMT leaving the patient susceptible to opportunistic infections, and (iii) donor graft rejection. Unfortunately, common means to prevent or treat GVHD with systemic immunosuppression (i.e. by corticosteroids and use of cyclosporin A) can lead to impaired immune recovery, increased opportunistic infections, and higher relapse rates. This review will discuss current strategies in the prevention and treatment of GVHD. The review will begin with an overview on the biology of GVHD, then discuss the roles of various cells, pathways, and factors in the GVHD generation process along with providing an overview on the use of different animal models used to study GVHD and variables that need to be taken into consideration in attempting to extrapolate preclinical results to the clinical paradigm. The review will conclude with discussions on developing means to prevent and treat GVHD without hampering GVT.

*Author for correspondence (blaza001@umn.edu).*

One contribution of 16 to a Theme Issue ‘Immunoregulation: harnessing T cell biology for therapeutic benefit’.

1748 B. R. Blazar & W. J. Murphy Graft-versus-host disease

(a) conditioning  
regimen  

host  
tissue  

pro-inflammatory  
cytokines/chemokines  

(b) induction  

fas  
donor  
T cell  

cytokines  

costimulatory  
molecules:  
CD40/CD40L  
B7/CD28  

(c) T cell expansion  

donor  
T cell  

donor  
T cell  

donor  
T cell  

donor  
T cell  

(d) recruitment  
PMNs  
NK  
monocytes  

cytokines/chemokines  

monocyte  

NK  
cell  

PMN  

(e) effector stage  

skin → host tissue  
destruction  
lungs  
liver  
gut  

perforin  
FasL  
TNF  
IFNγ  
TRAIL  

Figure 1. Overview of GVHD pathophysiology.

### 1. GVHD

#### (a) GVHD pathophysiology

GVHD has a complex aetiology but ultimately is the result of donor T cell attack of an immunocompromised and genetically disparate recipient and is a significant cause of morbidity following allogeneic BMT. Unfortunately, these same donor T cells also mediate GVT effects following HSCT as evidenced by studies demonstrating that prior removal of T cells in the donor graft prevents GVHD occurrence but also can increase tumour relapse rates especially for patients with certain types of haematological malignancies.

GVHD has been postulated to occur in several stages. The first stage in GVHD induction revolves around the cytoreductive conditioning or immunosuppression used to allow for donor cell engraftment (figure 1). Particularly for conventional (fully myeloablative) BMT, the extensive cytoreductive conditioning results in the release of proinflammatory cytokines which affects host antigen presenting cells (APCs; by increasing their maturation and upregulation of costimulatory molecules/cytokines) and helps fuel the alloreactive donor T cell response. It has been shown in murine models that host APCs can play a particularly important role in acute GVHD induction (Shlomchik et al. 1999). This is followed by the 'induction phase' which involves classical T cell recognition involving cell surface events that result in T cell receptor (TCR) ligation (providing a first signal to the T cell) and engagement of one or more costimulatory molecules (providing a second signal to the T cell); both TCR ligation and costimulation must be delivered to achieve full T cell activation and subsequent expansion. Costimulation of donor T cells is typically provided by ligands expressed on the surface of host APCs. As the alloreactive T cells expand (expansion phase) they home to various GVHD target organs (skin, gut, liver, lung), a process controlled by adhesion molecules, integrins and chemokines. The production of chemokines in inflamed and injured tissue also results in the recruitment of other cell-types (neutrophils, natural killer (NK) cells, monocytes) to the GVHD target organ sites further contributing to GVHD pathology. The ‘effector phase’ is noted for the destruction of host tissue by immune effector molecules (e.g. fas ligand, perforin, granzymes, interferon-gamma (IFNγ), tumour necrosis factor (TNF)) and results in the continued production of proinflammatory cytokines which then continues to fuel the entire GVHD process (figure 1). This ‘cytokine storm’ during the recruitment and effector phases is particularly difficult to control. Thus, many attempts to arrest GVHD have focused on targeting early during the induction phase before the massive T cell expansion, homing/migration and cytolytic process has been fully developed.

Clinical GVHD occurs in ‘acute’ and ‘chronic’ forms. The designation was initially applied based on differences in time of onset clinically with acute GVHD occurring shortly after BMT and chronic GVHD being more delayed (after 100 days). It now is clear that these are two separate pathophysiological entities with different aetiologies, target organs, therapeutic

Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B (2005)

Graft-versus-host disease B.R. Blazar & W.J. Murphy 1749

Table 1. Variables in the study of experimental murine BMT.

| parameters                     | examples                                                                 |
|--------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| intensity of conditioning regimen | no conditioning                                                        |
|                                | sublethal conditioning without stem cell rescue                         |
|                                | myeloablative conditioning with stem cell rescue                        |
| strain disparity               | full major and minor MHC disparity                                     |
|                                | full or partial major MHC disparity                                    |
|                                | minor MHC disparity                                                    |
|                                | parent into F1                                                         |
| donor graft composition        | unfractionated splenocytes and/or lymph node cells                      |
|                                | purified T cells                                                       |
|                                | purified CD4+orCD8+T cells                                             |
| endogenous microbiota          | Helicobacter                                                           |
|                                | orphan parvoviruses                                                    |

responses and sequelae. However, there are incidences where they can overlap in time after transplantation and GVHD target organ involvement. Acute GVHD targets skin, gut, liver, and lung whereas chronic GVHD appears with primarily skin and mucosal manifestations, immune perturbations, and has many autoimmune characteristics. Predominant means of controlling GVHD, both acute and chronic, is through the prophylactic use of immunosuppression (i.e. corticosteroids and other agents) as GVHD is difficult to treat once ongoing.

(b) Animals models in the study of GVHD

Murine and canine models are the two predominant animal models used to study GVHD pathophysiology. Within the animal model studies for GVHD there are key variables to take into consideration prior to drawing conclusions regarding the results and attempting to correlate them to the clinical GVHD scenario (table 1). These factors include (but are not limited to): (i) the presence or absence of, and type, of cytoreductive conditioning used on the recipient, which can range from none to lethal. Lethal cytoreductive conditioning must then be followed by some form of HSC rescue. The conditioning regimen intensity is perhaps one of the most important variables in the different GVHD models. (ii) The strain combinations used is a key variable which can affect the kinetics and extent of GVHD lethality as well as the particular target organs involved. For example, in some strain combinations, CD4+T cells are the only, major, or are not involved at all in GVHD pathophysiology, whereas in others, CD8+T cells may be the dominant effectors. The MHC and/or minor histocompatibility (miH) antigens recognized could determine the frequency and quality of the immune response of donor T cells that respond to the host. Variations include donor-recipient pairs with semi-allogeneic (parent-into-F1), full mismatch MHC, multiple miH antigens, isolated MHC antigens, or combinations thereof. (iii) The type and number of the donor immune cells transferred. Many models use donor splenocytes to induce GVHD as the extent of contaminating T cells present in BMC preparations are usually inadequate to induce acute GVHD except in certain strain combinations. T cells from lymph node (LN), bone marrow (BM), or peripheral blood can also be used to supplement BMC preparations.

The homing and chemokine receptors expressed on T cells in these various locations are distinct and therefore the adoptive transfer of T cells from these sites may differentially affect GVHD. The donor T cells transferred can be purified based on CD3, CD4 or CD8 antigen expression. Contingent on these variables, different organ pathologies (sometimes selective attack occurs in which only the liver or gut is affected versus other models where haematopoietic attack or autoantibody production results) and kinetics of progression (ranging from days to months) results. The number of donor T cells infused and constituency of T cell subpopulations (TCR γ/δ cells; natural killer T (NK/T) cells; naïve versus memory cells; Th1 versus Th2 cells; regulatory T cells) may also influence the kinetics and pathophysiology of GVHD. (iv) The presence of endogenous microenvironmental pathogens. Another variable is the potential presence of environmental pathogens including those that might cause subclinical infections in the mouse colony where the studies are performed and conversely the use of non-absorbable or systemically administered prophylactic antibiotics to decrease intestinal pathogens. This may affect radiosensitivity, particularly in the gut. All of these issues are important, particularly when assessing potential roles of proinflammatory cytokines and chemokines in GVHD pathobiology. Therefore, care must be taken when correlating different murine studies with clinical GVHD paradigms.

(c) Donor alloreactive T cell homing to GVHD target organs

There has been much interest in altering GVHD progression by affecting T cell trafficking and preventing T cells from arriving at the GVHD target organs. T cell homing involves a complex and coordinated response mediated by chemokines and the appropriate adhesion molecules (Wysocki et al. 2005). Chemokines are a large family of small proteins which function primarily as chemoattractants (Rollins 1997; Moser et al. 2004). The family is subdivided based on the number and position of NH2-terminal cysteine (C) residues. The majority of chemokines fall into the CC (CCL1-28) and CXC (CXCL1-16) subfamilies, while the C family contains only two (XCL1 and XCL2), and CX3C only one member (CX3CL1; Murphy et al. 2000; Murphy 2002). It has been hypothesized that by

Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B (2005)

selectively targeting certain chemokines involved in T cell trafficking to particular GVHD organs (i.e. skin, gut, liver and lung), GVHD pathology could be blunted without significant impairment of GVT effects, particularly with leukaemia/lymphoma. Since intestinal LNs and specifically Peyer's patches (PP) have been proposed to be critical for the induction of acute GVHD, blocking cellular migration into these organs represents a potential target for GVHD control (Murai et al. 2003). Studies have indicated that alloreactive T cells first home to secondary lymphoid organs such as PP after BMT but the role of these organs in the induction of GVHD was unclear (reviewed in Wysocki et al. 2005). Studies performed by Murai et al. which analysed recipients that received either no conditioning or non-myeloablative conditioning without HSC rescue found that the absence of PP resulted in significant blunting of acute GVHD (Murai et al. 2003). This murine model involved the transfer of parental lymphocytes into F1 hybrid recipients and produced only donor-anti-host T cell reactions under non-inflammatory or low inflammatory conditions. However, recently we have found that intensively conditioned tumour necrosis factor (TNF) alpha knockout (KO) recipients, which totally lack PP, developed acute GVHD affecting both gut and liver pathology that was unimpaired in comparison to wild-type mice (Welniak et al. submitted). These seemingly contradictory data suggest that the induction of proinflammatory cytokines/chemokines after extensive cytoreductive conditioning can have a dramatic impact on the necessity of secondary organs and chemokines in GVHD induction/progression. This was further illustrated by GVHD studies assessing the role of CCR5, a chemokine receptor that was found in the Murai et al. report to be essential for recruitment of donor T cells to PP. Using a similar GVHD model in which no cytoreductive conditioning was applied to examine the role of CCR5 in GVHD, it was reported that use of blocking antibodies to CCR5 resulted in significant abrogation of liver GVHD (Murai et al. 1999). In striking contrast, using models in which lethal cytoreductive conditioning was applied, donor T cells from CCR5KO mice resulted in GVHD that was markedly increased as compared to wild-type donor mice (Welniak et al. 2004). In another study also reporting increased GVHD using cells from CCR5 KO mice, it was found that extensive cytoreductive conditioning could affect the homing of immune suppressor CD4+25+ regulatory T cells (Tregs) which could be correlated with the increased GVHD when CCR5 KO donor T cells were used (Wysocki et al. 2004). Thus, caution must be exercised in interpreting the various GVHD models, and factors such as cytoreductive conditioning, strain combinations used, and donor cells transferred all appear to dramatically affect GVHD induction and progression resulting in apparently contradictory results being reported.

Other chemokines have been examined for roles in GVHD pathophysiology. Fully allogeneic donor CXCR3 KO T cells infused into lethally irradiated recipients resulted in fewer donor T cells in the gut and liver, albeit more in the spleen, resulting in less overall GVHD lethality (Duffner et al. 2003). Chemokines also regulate the homing and migration into the lung which is a target of immune mediated injury during GVHD responses. Donor T cells from RANTES (CCL5) KO mice given to lethally irradiated semi-allogeneic recipients resulted in less severe GVHD-induced lung injury as compared to wild-type donor T cells (Hildebrandt et al. 2004). In another GVHD-induced lung injury model system, the transfer of donor T cells from MIP-1α (CCL3) KO mice infused into mice conditioned with both chemotherapy (cyclophosphamide) and lethal irradiation resulted in accelerated lung pathology (Panoskaltsis-Mortari et al. 2003). In a GVHD model involving CD4-only mediated responses where the recipient mice succumb to bone marrow aplasia, T cells from CCR2 KO donors resulted in increased GVHD suggesting that this pathway may suppress GVHD, much like CCR5 (Rao et al. 2003).

Adhesion molecules which play a role in T cell trafficking have been studied as a potential target in GVHD prevention (i.e. ICAM-1/LFA-1; Blazar et al. 1995a). Blocking L-selectin has been demonstrated to contribute to the inhibition of acute GVHD (Li et al. 2001, 2004), which is perhaps not surprising considering the critical role this molecule plays in T cell trafficking to lymphoid organs. In this study, fully MHC-mismatched splenocytes were incubated with monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) to L-selectin and alpha4-integrin and were then transferred into mice with severe combined immune deficiency that received no conditioning. This resulted in delayed GVHD induction by reducing homing to LNs (Li et al. 2001). This is supported by data using irradiated F1 hybrid recipients of parental donor grafts in which the in vivo administration of anti-alpha4-integrin mAbs resulted in protection from gastrointestinal GVHD pathology (Tanaka et al. 1995). Recently, intriguing data looking at lymphocyte PP adhesion molecule (LPAM or alpha_4 beta_7 integrin) has suggested that organ-specific effects may be achieved. LPAM is responsible for T cell homing in gut-associated lymphoid tissues through binding the mucosal addressin cellular adhesion molecule (MAdCAM). Using donor T cells which were selected based on LPAM expression, the transfer of LPAM^- cells resulted in significantly less gut GVHD compared to recipients receiving LPAM^+ T cells (Petrovic et al. 2004). Importantly, GVT responses were maintained with the use of the LPAM^- T cells. Thus, the potential of blocking T cell homing to particular GVHD target sites or adoptive transfer of T cells selected based on chemokine receptor or adhesion molecule expression offers great promise in the selective attack of this disease.

A pharmacological agent under investigation is FTY720, a sphingosine-1-phosphate receptor agonist which has been shown to be capable of trapping T cells in secondary lymphoid organs (Chiba et al. 1998). It has been recently shown that FTY720 administration can inhibit GVHD without compromising GVT in a murine BMT model. While GVHD organ pathology was blunted, anti-leukaemia effects were maintained (Kim et al. 2003). However, using a canine model, administration of FTY720, while offering some protection from GVHD, ultimately did not protect survival of

Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B (2005)

recipients (Lee *et al.* 2003). Thus, while promising, more work on the dosing, timing, and pharmacokinetics of FTY720 in conditioned allogeneic recipients must be performed to optimize its ability to inhibit GVHD and there may be significant species differences of the particular role of chemokines and cytokines in GVHD. Taken together, these studies would suggest that altering the homing of the donor T cells via targeting chemokines/adhesion molecules may provide a means to selectively affect GVHD reactions, in particular organs, thus allowing for preservation of GVT depending on the location of the cancer.

### 2. PREVENTION AND TREATMENT OF GVHD

#### (a) Targeting of intracellular signalling pathways as a means of preventing GVHD

Recently, through our increased understanding of the intracellular signalling pathways that regulate T cell responses and survival, targeting of such signalling pathways has been applied to inhibit T cell alloresponses, T cell survival and hence, target GVHD. Interestingly, several of the reagents were first evaluated for their ability to directly mediate anti-tumour effects, suggesting that not only preservation of GVT but also a direction induction of anti-tumour effects may be observed when this approach is applied with BMT. For example, histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDACs) have shown promise as anti-tumour agents. HDAC inhibitors increase the acetylation of histone lysine tails in chromatin and affect gene expression, both positively and negatively. One HDAC inhibitor, suberoylanide hydroxamic acid (SAHA), has been demonstrated to:  
(i) inhibit tumour cell growth (Butler *et al.* 2000; Almenara *et al.* 2002; Cohen *et al.* 2002b) and (ii) inhibit the production of proinflammatory cytokines (interleukin 1 (IL-1), TNF-α and interleukin 12 (IL-12)) *in vivo* (Leoni *et al.* 2002). Based upon these biological functions, Ferrara and colleagues evaluated the effects of SAHA on GVHD/GVT in a murine model. The administration of SAHA resulted in significant protection from GVHD in two different murine BMT models involving lethal conditioning. While a reduction of proinflammatory cytokines was observed, no direct inhibition of T cell responses was detected and GVT was spared (Reddy *et al.* 2004).

Another means to affect GVHD is by targeting the transcription factor nuclear factor kappa B (NFκB). As NFκB has long been known to play a critical role in T cell biology, particularly with respect to cytokine responses, it has been an attractive target but been hampered in finding reagents that have favourable pharmacokinetics resulting in systemic NFκB inhibition without toxicity. Recently, a new class of proteasome inhibitors have been developed which can be administered systemically without excessive toxicity. The proteasome plays a critical role in the degradation of inhibitory kappa B (IκB) which binds and inhibits NFκB activity. Thus proteasome inhibition results in suppression of NFκB although other cellular pathways are also affected. One inhibitor, bortezomib (Velcade; formerly PS-341), has been shown to have direct anti-tumour effects and has been recently approved in the treatment of multiple myeloma (Kane *et al.* 2003; Bross Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B (2005)

*et al.* 2004). We and others have found that bortezomib could also sensitize tumour cells to immune mediated killing (i.e. tumour necrosis factor related apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL); Sayers *et al.* 2003). We have recently demonstrated that bortezomib given immediately after allogeneic BMT in mice could prevent GVHD (Sun *et al.* 2004). Bortezomib could inhibit alloreactive T cell proliferation and directly induce alloreactive T cell apoptosis *in vitro* and *in vivo* (Sun *et al.* 2004), which was associated with protection from GVHD and decreased proinflammatory cytokine production. Importantly, GVT effects were still observed in advanced tumour-bearing recipients. Direct cytotoxic T lymphocyte (CTL)-mediated killing was also enhanced with leukaemia cells exposed to bortezomib indicating that the anti-tumour effects could be both direct (i.e. induction of apoptosis) and indirect (increasing tumour cell susceptibility to immune effector cell mediated death pathways). Clinical studies assessing efficacy of bortezomib with allogeneic BMT in multiple myeloma patients are currently underway.

With both of these intracellular signalling pathway targeted approaches, several issues must be taken into consideration. First, both agents have demonstrated direct anti-tumour effects, potentially adding to the anti-tumour effects of cytoreductive conditioning given prior to BMT. In addition, via effects on immune effector cells, these agents may aid in immune-mediated GVT responses. These anti-tumour effects could therefore be obtained at doses much less than if the agent was administered in the absence of BMT. GVHD was reduced but not eliminated; however, such reduction did not preclude GVT responses. While the mechanism(s) responsible for GVHD inhibition have not been fully elucidated, both agents affect multiple cell-types, including immune and parenchymal cells, and this may affect the overall effect on GVHD (figure 1). Finally, as with many studies on GVHD protection, the timing of administration may be critical. In the case of bortezomib, the timing of administration is particularly critical as it appears extremely effective in preventing GVHD early, during the induction phase. Markedly opposing effects were observed when it was administered later during active GVHD in which a lethal GVHD-dependent gut toxicity resulted (Sun *et al.* 2005). Thus, an agent that can increase death receptor expression on the tumour cell can also increase it on target tissue and subsequently, different effects may be observed contingent on the timing of administration. A recent clinical trial in which multiple myeloma patients who have relapsed after allogeneic BMT were given bortezomib demonstrated no adverse effects but some anti-tumour responses were observed (Giralt *et al.* 2004). What makes these agents attractive is that prolonged administration may not be required and augmented anti-tumour effects may still be observed.

Another means of suppressing T cell responses is through targeting intracellular signalling pathways. Janus kinase 3 (JAK3) has been demonstrated to play a pivotal role in cytokine signalling of T cells. An inhibitor of JAK3 (by the WHI-P131/JANEX-1 compound) was administered to mice after allogeneic BMT and significant increases in survival were

Table 2. Summary of cytokines and GVHD.

| cytokine/growth factor | effects on GVHD                          | mechanism                                                                 |
|-----------------------|-----------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| IL-2, IL-12, IFN-$\gamma$ | inhibits GVHD early                    | inhibits by activation-induced cell death of alloreactive T cells         |
|                       | promotes GVHD late                      | promotes by augmenting Th1 responses                                      |
| IL4, IL10             | predominantly inhibits GVHD             | promotes Th2 responses and inhibits Th1                                   |
| IL7                   | variable: no effect on or worsening of GVHD | augments T cell responses/thymopoiesis                                   |
| KGF                   | protects from GVHD                     | promotes tissue repair                                                   |
| TNF                   | promotes GVHD                          | increases tissue destruction and inflammatory responses                    |

observed (Uckun *et al.* 2002). Importantly, GVT effects were maintained even though the compound itself had no intrinsic anti-tumour properties. We have also observed that targeting JAK3 on T cells *ex vivo* using specific inhibitors can result in significant inhibition of allo-responses and subsequent GVHD induction (O'Shaughnessy *et al.* submitted).

(b) **Targeting cytokine responses as a means of preventing GVHD**

Given the pivotal role of cytokines in GVHD pathobiology, it is perhaps no surprise that approaches focused upon regulating cytokine production and function have also been studied as a strategy to prevent GVHD (table 2). Blocking cytokines that may participate in GVHD has been a subject of intense investigation. The historical dogma on the role of cytokines in GVHD pathophysiology is that Th1-type cytokines (IFN$\gamma$, IL-12) fuel GVHD generation. Interestingly, in several recent studies, it has been shown that Th1 cytokines can be protective if present in high amounts in the very early stage after allogeneic BMT. For example, recipients of donor T cells from IFN$\gamma$ KO mice were found to exhibit increased GVHD (Murphy *et al.* 1998). Interleukin 18 (IL-18) has also been shown to inhibit GVHD (Reddy *et al.* 2001, 2003) but recent studies suggest that this may be dependent on CD4 versus CD8-mediated responses (Min *et al.* 2004). One mechanism responsible for Th1 cytokine mediated GVHD protection has been the induction of fas-mediated activation-induced death of the donor alloreactive T cells (Sykes *et al.* 1990, 1995). At the other end of the spectrum, skewing donor T cells to Th2-type cytokine profile (interleukin-4 (IL4), interleukin-10 (IL-10)) responses has also been shown to be protective (Jung *et al.* 2003). However, the amount and timing of cytokines is likely to be critical to regulating GVHD; high doses of IL-10 can accelerate GVHD (Blazar *et al.* 1995b). Timing also is critical in influencing the outcome of Th1 cytokine effects on GVHD and long-term survival. For example, the timing of exogenous IL-12 administration in relation- ship to irradiation can either prevent GVHD or conversely result in rapid peri-BMT lethality (Sykes *et al.* 1999). Together, these data would suggest that cytokines may have effects, sometimes opposing, contingent on the phase of GVHD where they are applied and that caution must be exercised when attempting systemic administration or global blockade clinically.

Blocking TNF has shown to have efficacy in preclinical models (Wall & Sheehan 1994; Speiser Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B (2005)

Table 3. CD28 costimulatory receptor family.

| Receptor: | other names | function | expression | ligand: | by family | other names | expression |
|----------|-------------|----------|-----------|---------|------------|-------------|------------|
| CD28     | T44         | costimulation | T and NK cells | B7.1       | CD80        | activated APC |          |
|          |             |            |           | B7.2       | CD86        | APC (upregulated) |          |
| CTLA-4   | CD152       | inhibition | activated T cells | B7.2       | CD86        | APC (upregulated) |          |
| ICOS     | H4, CRP-1,  | costimulation | activated T cells | B7RP-1     | ICOSL, GL50, | APC |          |
|          | AILIM       |            |           | B7-H3      | B7-H2, B7h  | B, T and NK cells, macrophages, DCs |          |

IL-7 has been demonstrated to play a critical role in both thymopoiesis as well as peripheral T cell homeostasis (Alpdogan et al., 2001). Conversely, KGF administration has been shown to induce IL-7 mRNA expression in the thymus (Min et al., 2002). However, the role of IL-7 in GVHD has been conflicting with some reports demonstrating no effects and other showing increased GVHD in murine models (Alpdogan et al., 2001; Sinha et al., 2002; Gendelman et al., 2004).

(c) Targeting costimulatory pathway responses as a means of preventing GVHD

Allogeneic HCT provides a unique situation in which large numbers of donor immune cells are purposefully infused and exposed to allogeneic host MHC and miH antigens typically in the context of a conditioning-regimen induced tissue injury and inflammation which occurs throughout the body and requires several weeks to subside. Such inflammation results in the cell surface upregulation as well as the systemic release of alloantigens that are available for uptake by cells capable of supporting a T cell immune response such as DCs and macrophages. The net result of conditioning regimen injury is a rich environment in which donor T cells need not search far for alloantigen, cytokines or costimulation. Although pan-T cell depletion, if sufficiently rigorous, can prevent GVHD, the lack of mature T cells infused and the slow time to recovery of thymic-derived mature T cells renders the recipient susceptible to infections, tumour recurrence, and host anti-donor BM graft rejection responses. This section will focus on only those approaches that have been shown to affect acute GVHD mortality in lethally irradiated mice to best simulate the human myelo-ablative allogeneic BMT setting.

Given the important role of host DCs to acute GVHD induction (Teshima et al., 2002a; Zhang et al., 2002; Matte et al., 2004), one approach to GVHD prevention could target DCs for depletion. Since permanent donor and host DC depletion is not feasible yet, even in rodents, a preferred approach would be to block T cell-APC interaction or functions as can be accomplished via costimulatory pathway blockade. In solid organ graft rejection, costimulatory pathway blockade can be highly effective in preventing cardiac and to a lesser extent skin allografts rejection. In allogeneic BMT, positive results may be more difficult to achieve due to the extensive and widely distributed tissue injury caused by conditioning regimen injury.

Table 4. Members of the TNF receptor superfamily associated with GVHD.

| TNFR family | other names | function | expression | ligand: TNF family | other names | expression |
|-------------|-------------|----------|------------|-------------------|--------------|------------|
| CD27        | T14         | costimulation | T cells, B subset, NK | CD70          |            | activated B cells |
| CD30        | Ki-1        | costimulation, apoptosis | activated T, NK and B cells | CD153       | CD30L           | neutrophils, activated B and T cells |
| CD40        |             | activation | APC, T subset, endothelium, myocytes, fibroblasts | CD40L       | CD154, gp39      | activated T cells |
|             |             |            |            |                   | TRAP          |            |
| 4-1BB       | CD137       | costimulation | activated T cells | 4-1BBL         |            | activated B, DC, peritoneal cells |
| OX40        | CD134       | activation, differentiation, apoptosis | activated T cells | OX40L       |            | activated B cells, cardiac myocytes |
| Fas         | CD95, Apo-1 | activation, apoptosis | leukocytes | FasL          | CD95L, CD178 | activated T cells |

conditions and no biological effects are notable in models in which only CD8⁺ T cells are infused (Blazar et al. 1997). However, in situations in which CD4⁺ T cells are coinfused to drive CD8⁺ T cell expansion, signals delivered via this pathway to CD4⁺ T cells are needed to optimally support CD8⁺ T cell expansion and GVHD generation (Buhlmann et al. 1999). Recent evidence exists that the effects of CD154/CD40 pathway blockade, dependent upon the conditions, are mediated in part or in whole via Treg cell suppression of alloresponses. In vitro depletion of Tregs from the responding CD4⁺ T cell population in an allogeneic mixed lymphocyte reaction (MLR) culture precludes the induction of alloantigen hyporesponsiveness by CD154/CD40 pathway (and CD28/CTLA-4-B7 pathway) blockade (Taylor et al. 2001a). Similarly, the in vivo induction of hyporesponsiveness to alloantigen by CD154-CD40 pathway blockade combined with donor specific transfusion also can be dependent upon the presence of Tregs (Jarvinen et al. 2003). The clinical application of anti-CD154 mAb in allogeneic BMT will likely await results of anti-CD154 mAb studies in patients with autoimmunity and solid organ transplants.

CD134 is expressed on activated CD4⁺ and CD8⁺ T cells in rodents and humans (Mallett et al. 1990; Calderhead et al. 1993; Baum et al. 1994a,b; Latza et al. 1994; Birkeland et al. 1995). Nonetheless, much of the literature indicates that CD134-CD134 ligand (CD134L) interactions may play a more critical role in CD4⁺ T cell responses than in CD8⁺ T cell responses. CD134 receptor engagement promotes CD4⁺ T cells to proliferate, produce Th1 and Th2 cytokines and antiapoptotic proteins, to clonally expand, survive, and develop into memory cells (Flynn et al. 1998; Gramaglia et al. 1998, 2000; Ohshima et al. 1998; Weinberg 1998, 2002; Chen et al. 1999; Kopf et al. 1999; Pippig et al. 1999; Akiba et al. 2000; Murata et al. 2000; Rogers & Croft 2000; Weinberg et al. 2000; Bansal-Pakala et al. 2001; Evans et al. 2001; Rogers et al. 2001; Weatherill et al. 2001; De Smedt et al. 2002). CD134L is expressed on APCs that have been activated by known stimuli such as CD40 or proinflammatory mediators (Stuber et al.

Table 5. Inhibitory receptors of the B7 family.

| inhibitory | ligand: |
|-----------|---------|
| molecules | B7 family |
| other names | other names |
| function | expression |
| expression | |

| PD-1 | PD-L1 | B7-H1 | leukocytes |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| inhibition | PD-L2 | B7-DC | monocytes, macrophages, DC |
| activated T, B cells and macrophages | B7.1 | CD80 | activated APC |
| CTLA-4 | B7.2 | CD86 | APC (upregulated) activated T cells |
| CD152 | inhibition |  |  |
| activated T cells |  |  |  |

the CD137/CD137L pathway regulates acute GVHD caused by CD8⁺ T cells and CD4⁺ Th1 cell generation, whereas the effects of this pathway on CD4⁺ T cell mediated GVHD lethality may be dependent upon the particular donor-recipient strains tested and conditions used for acute GVHD generation.

Inducible costimulator (ICOS) is expressed on CD4⁺ and CD8⁺ T cells within 24–48 h after activation (Hutloff et al. 1999; Coyle et al. 2000; Kopf et al. 2000; Sperling & Bluestone 2001). The ligand for ICOS (ICOS-L is constitutively expressed by B cells, monocytes and some T cells; Swallow et al. 1999; Yoshinaga et al. 1999; Aicher et al. 2000; Ling et al. 2000; Wang et al. 2000; Gonzalo et al. 2001b; Ling et al. 2001; Sperling & Bluestone 2001). Much but not all of the literature indicate that ICOS/ICOS-L ligation has a preferential effect on inducing Th2 rather than Th1 cytokines (Hutloff et al. 1999; Yoshinaga et al. 1999, 2000; Coyle et al. 2000; McAdam et al. 2000; Coyle & Gutierrez-Ramos 2001; Dong et al. 2001; Gonzalo et al. 2001a; McAdam et al. 2001; Sperling & Bluestone 2001; Tafuri et al. 2001; Tamura et al. 2001; Tesciuba et al. 2001; Khayyamian et al. 2002). The inducible expression of ICOS shortly after T cell activation suggests that ICOS may be particularly important in providing costimulatory signals to activated T cells or memory cells (Hutloff et al. 1999; Yoshinaga et al. 1999; Coyle & Gutierrez-Ramos 2001). ICOS signaling does not appear to be required for naive cell responses with the exception of superantigen (Gonzalo et al. 2001a). ICOS-immunoglobulin (ICOS-Ig) infusion has more pronounced effects when given during induction of the secondary rather than primary immune responses in contrast to CTLA-immunoglobulin (CTLA4-Ig), a fusion protein that binds to B7 ligands thereby reducing or eliminating B7 ligand binding to their endogenous receptors (Coyle et al. 2000; Gonzalo et al. 2001b). ICOS/ICOS-L has been shown to reduce CD4⁺ and CD8⁺ T cell mediated GVHD under lethal irradiation conditions (Taylor et al. 2004a). Delaying ICOS blockade until day 5 post-BMT, a time in which T cells have upregulated ICOS expression and have dramatically expanded and gained effector function, improved outcome but did not prevent eventual GVHD-induced lethality. In contrast, anti-CD154 mAb, which is highly protective when initiated at time of BMT, had no effect when mAb infusion was given at that time. Survival was significantly improved by combining anti-ICOS and anti-CD154 mAbs. Thus, ICOS/ICOS-L blockade may be an especially attractive target for downregulating T cell responses once they have been initiated and for use in combined costimulatory pathway blockade.

CD30 is expressed on B cells and mitogen-stimulated T cells (Durkop et al. 1992; Shanebeck et al. 1995; Bowen et al. 1996). CD30 expression is induced on CD8⁺ and to a lesser extent on CD4⁺ T cells by alloantigen exposure (Bowen et al. 1996; Martinez et al. 1998; Chan et al. 2002). CD30 signalling regulates CTL generation and also renders T cells sensitive to cell death (Amakawa et al. 1996; Duckett & Thompson 1997; Telford et al. 1997; Chiarle et al. 1999; Kurts et al. 1999). CD30 ligand (CD30L, CD153) is expressed on macrophages, activated B cells and T cells, primarily CD4⁺ T cells of both Th1 and Th2 phenotype, and can provide signals for B cell growth and differentiation (Shanebeck et al. 1995; Bowen et al. 1996; Wiley et al. 1996; Shimozato et al. 1999). The CD30/CD153 pathway is a potent regulator of CD4⁺ but not CD8⁺ T cell-mediated GVHD. Although blocking CD30/CD153 interactions *in vivo* did not affect alloreactive CD4⁺ T cell proliferation or apoptosis, a substantial reduction in donor CD4⁺ T cell migration into the gastrointestinal tract, a GVHD target organ, was readily observed with lesser effects in other GVHD organs. Thus, blockade of the CD30/CD153 pathway represents a viable approach for preventing CD4⁺ but not CD8⁺ T cell-mediated GVHD.

Similar to CD152, programmed death-1 (PD-1) is a negative costimulatory pathway with two known ligands: PD-L1 and PD-L2 (table 5; Ishida et al. 1992; Shinohara et al. 1994; Agata et al. 1996; Nishimura et al. 1999; Freeman et al. 2000; Kingsbury et al. 2001; Latchman et al. 2001; Tseng et al. 2001). The expression of PD-1 is induced on mature peripheral T cells, B cells and myeloid cells upon activation (Ishida et al. 1992; Agata et al. 1996; Vibhakar et al. 1997) PD-1 and CD152 have structural similarities and PD-1 has an immunoreceptor tyrosine based inhibitory action suggesting an inhibitory function (Ishida et al. 1992; Shinohara et al. 1994; Vivier & Daeron 1997; Coyle & Gutierrez-Ramos 2001; Sharpe & Freeman 2002). PD-1 ligand, PD-L1, also termed B7-H1, is constitutively expressed on DCs, some activated CD3⁺ cells, and IFNγ stimulated monocytes and keratinocytes (Freeman et al. 2000) while PD-L2, also termed B7-DC, is constitutively expressed on resting monocytes (Latchman et al. 2001; Tseng et al. 2001). Some tissues (lung, liver, pancreas) express PD-L2 but not PD-L1, whereas others (heart, skeletal muscle) express both. Although investigators have reported that T cell proliferation is enhanced by the PD-1 pathway *in vitro* under some conditions, others have demonstrated that the dominant function of the PD-1/PD-L pathway is to inhibit T cell responses (Dong et al. 1999; Freeman et al. 2000; Latchman et al.

2001; Tseng *et al.* 2001). In lethally irradiated recipients of full MHC-disparate donor T cells, PD-1 infiltrating cells were found in increased frequency in GVHD target organs as compared to BMT controls (Blazar *et al.* 2002). Blockade of the PD-1/PD1-L pathway significantly augmented GVHD mortality. The combined administration of anti-CD152 and anti-PD-1 mAbs was significantly more potent than either alone in accelerating GVHD lethality, indicating that these pathways are not fully redundant. Reagents that may provide a signal to PD-1⁺ T cells may be of benefit in inhibiting GVHD.

It is important to point out several factors that must be considered before applying these principles to humans. An important consideration for *in vivo* costimulatory pathway blockade is that such an approach is likely to be added to conventional immune suppressive pharmacological agents. In order for costimulatory pathway blockade to be effective, donor T cells must receive sufficient TCR signalling. Calcineurin inhibitors such as cyclosporin A or tacrolimus (FK506) blunt effective TCR signalling which may interfere with tolerance induction by blocking T cell apoptosis whilst blocking T cell proliferation. In contrast, sirolimus (rapamycin) as a target interferes with cytokine responsiveness and not TCR signals. Studies in rodents have shown that sirolimus does not interfere with tolerance induction *in vivo* and in fact massively increases the proportion of proliferating cells destined for apoptosis thereby limiting the size of alloreactive T cells potentially below a threshold level required to cause GVHD (Li *et al.* 1999). One note of caution in extrapolating these studies from the solid organ grafting to the GVHD arena is that the level of TCR signalling and tissue destruction may not preclude the use of calcineurin inhibitors should T cell proliferation induced by these proinflammatory events proceed, albeit at a reduced level, if such inhibitors merely serve to dampen TCR signals to levels that still exceed a threshold response. Testing in the context of GVHD in rodents and in humans will be required before conclusions can be reached as to whether calcineurin inhibitors are contraindicated in such situations, especially considering that some but not all non-myeloablated BMT rodent models have shown that calcineurin inhibitors can be additive with costimulatory pathway blockade in promoting alloengraftment.

While anti-B7 mAbs have been tested *in vivo* in solid organ patients and *in vivo* CTLA4-Ig and anti-CD154 mAb in patients with autoimmune disorders, these reagents have not been tested *in vivo* in the context of allogeneic BMT and the status of clinical testing of reagents for the other pathways in patients undergoing BMT remains uncertain. The BMT setting poses additional challenges for costimulatory pathway blockade. For example, strategies that block GVHD but have detrimental effects on alloengraftment, GVT effects, or immune recovery must be carefully considered before use in allogeneic BMT patients. Factors found in rodents that may adversely affect the efficacy of mAbs or fusion proteins to block T cell costimulation early post-BMT in fully myeloablated recipients include: (i) the recent observations that profound lymphopenia, which induces homeostatic T cell proliferation to fill up the lymphoid compartment, may be a significant barrier to tolerance induction via costimulatory pathway blockade (Kreisel *et al.* 2002); (ii) heterologous immunity, a response to an infectious pathogen that can preclude tolerance induction (Williams *et al.* 2001). Since all fully myeloablated BMT patients have a period of profound lymphopenia and viral infection can occur early post-BMT, although typically significant viral infections do not occur in the first several weeks post-BMT, should the rodent data be translatable to the clinical arena, the potency of costimulatory pathway blockade may be more limited in humans than rodents. Nonetheless, blockade of T cell costimulation may prove to be an important new approach to specifically target those T cells that are alloreactive, especially when used early post-BMT when tumour and viral antigens may be present at far lower amounts than alloantigens.

(d) **GVHD prevention by ex vivo approaches**

The prior discussions have focused on *in vivo* mAbs or fusion proteins administration. An *ex vivo* tolerization approach involves the culturing of donor T cells with host alloantigen in the presence of mAbs or proteins that are capable of blocking T cell costimulation. An *ex vivo* tolerization procedure has several theoretical advantages over *in vivo* tolerization attempts. These include: higher likelihood of tolerance induction by ensuring costimulatory pathway blockade is delivered to the site of T cell-APC interactions; achieving tolerance induction before *in vivo* infusion into an inflammatory milieu which may diminish the likelihood of tolerance induction; capacity to monitor the depth of tolerance induction *in vitro*; avoidance of potential *in vivo* toxicities of mAbs or proteins.

We have described an *ex vivo* approach in which the blockade of the CD154/CD40 or CD28/CD152–B7 pathways added to a 7 to 10-day MLR culture of CD4⁺ T cells and irradiated MHC class II-disparate stimulators induces tolerance leading to complete GVHD prevention (Blazar *et al.* 1998; Taylor *et al.* 2000, 2001b, 2002a). Tolerant CD4⁺ T cells were hyporesponsive to initial alloantigen challenge and to restimulation *in vitro*. Tolerance was long-lived and not readily reversible *in vivo* (Blazar *et al.* 1998). Tolerance induction resulted in the generation of potent immunoregulatory CD4⁺25⁺ T cells that could inhibit both naive and primed alloresponses as assessed by *in vitro* and *in vivo* assays (Taylor *et al.* 2002a). With respect to the latter, the separate coinfusion of tolerized cells with an otherwise uniformly lethal dose of naïve CD4⁺ cells prevented GVHD mortality in 75% of mice. The generation of this regulatory capacity during tolerization may be of added benefit by the provision of a fail-safe mechanism to control alloreactive T cells that may escape tolerization. In a clinical trial, donor BM cocultured with irradiated recipient in the presence of CTLA4Ig (Guinan *et al.* 1999) resulted in a reduction in the frequency of T cells capable of recognizing host alloantigens. The incidence and severity of acute GVHD appeared to be reduced from what might be expected after taking into account the degree of HLA disparity and the number of mature T cells. In a
different ex vivo approach, we have shown that CD4<sup>+</sup> T cells can be rendered tolerant via exposure to immunoregulatory cytokines (e.g. IL-10 and transforming growth factor-beta, TGFβ; Zeller et al. 1999; Boussiotis et al. 2001; Chen et al. 2003). Tolerization leads to GVHD prevention in most recipients and to the induction of suppressor cells that inhibited naïve T cell mediated GVHD (Zeller et al. 1999; Chen et al. 2003). A clinical trial in humans is underway in a haploidentical BMT setting using exogenous IL-10 to tolerize donor T cells to host alloantigens *in vitro* before infusing these cells later post-BMT (Bacchetta et al. 2000).

Amongst other approaches that have been explored that show promise include the depletion of alloreactive T cells by affinity columns, magnetic beads, or toxins that bind to T cells expressing activation antigens (CD69; CD25; IFNγ; Montagna et al. 1999; Koh et al. 2002; Solomon et al. 2002; Amrolia et al. 2003). In a different approach, Chen et al. describe the application of a photoactive rhodamine derivative [4,5-dibromo-rhodamine 123 (TH9402)], that is selectively retained in the mitochondria of activated T cells added to MLR cultures (Chen et al. 2002). Upon exposure to visible light this depletes the TH9402-enriched activated host-reactive cells in the MLR culture. Treatment with photodynamic cell purging process inhibited anti-host CTL and IFNγ responses and importantly prevented GVHD lethality.

Recent data show that memory T cells in rodents have a markedly reduced capacity to cause GVHD lethality (Anderson et al. 2003). These studies have demonstrated that effector memory CD4 T cells (CD62L<sup>-</sup>, CD44<sup>+</sup>) induced less GVHD when compared with unfractionated or naïve CD4<sup>+</sup> T cells (Anderson et al. 2003). Importantly, engraftment occurred and generation of antigen-specific responses resulted. The observations that the CD62L<sup>-</sup> T cell infusion can result in markedly reduced GVHD lethality capacity in rodents has been confirmed by others (Chen et al. 2004), and extended into the human preclinical setting with data showing that human CD62L<sup>-</sup> T cells are less potent in producing MLR responses *in vitro* when compared to CD62L<sup>+</sup> T cells (Foster et al. 2004). These data are intriguing in that assessment of TCR usage showed limited diversity in the memory population. These data also would suggest that isolation and transfer of these cells could prevent GVHD and allow for GVT to be maintained should these data in human *in vitro* cultures be as reproducible as initial studies have been in rodents.

(e) **Cellular therapies to prevent GVHD (table 6)**

(i) **T regulatory cells (Tregs)**

A variety of murine cells that display regulatory function *in vitro* or *in vivo* have been described and a review of all types is outside the scope of this manuscript. Instead, we will focus upon CD4<sup>+</sup>25<sup>+</sup> Treg cells shown to have potent suppressor activity (Sakaguchi et al. 1995, 2001; Suri-Payer et al. 1998; Thornton & Shevach 1998; Baecher-Allan et al. 2001; Dieckmann et al. 2001; Jonuleit et al. 2001; Levings et al. 2001; Shevach 2001, 2002; Shevach et al. 2001; Jonuleit et al. 2002). In rodents, this population comprises 8–12% of lymph node CD4<sup>+</sup> T cells in most strains, whereas in humans, CD4<sup>+</sup>CD25<sup>bright</sup> cells are present in far lower frequencies (1–3% of peripheral blood). There has been agreement that donor or host Treg cell depletion accelerates GVHD and Treg cell add-back inhibits acute GVHD lethality (Cohen et al. 2002a; Hoffmann et al. 2002a,b; Taylor et al. 2002b, 2004b; Jones et al. 2003; Trenado et al. 2003). Whereas fresh Treg cell add-back has had biological effects in reducing GVHD, some studies have shown more striking anti-GVHD effects than others. In direct comparative studies, *ex vivo* expanded and hence activated Tregs are more effective on a cell-to-cell basis than fresh cells whether Tregs are expanded using polyclonal stimulators (anti-CD3 mAb) or recipient APCs to cross-link the TCR (Taylor et al. 2002b; Jones et al. 2003). These data are consistent with the findings that activated Tregs suppress more potently than resting Tregs (Thornton & Shevach 2000). The additional advantage of *ex vivo* expansion prior to infusion is to increase the number of Treg in human blood that would be available for infusion. While Tregs can be generated against specific antigens including alloantigens, once activated Tregs can suppress alloresponses in an antigen-non-specific fashion (Godfrey et al. 2005). Nonetheless, it is possible that recipient-specific Tregs may be advantageous as compared to polyclonal Tregs, at least on a per cell basis, if TCR ligation *in vivo* is required to sustain Treg persistence or increase suppressor cell function. In that event, anti-recipient specific Tregs may be reactivated by host cells *in vivo* although Treg cell persistence may not necessarily be desirable in patients if such persistence results in global immune suppression during the time of infectious challenge or early tumour recurrence eliminating GVT. Studies in rodents will be needed to address these issues first. In addition, acquiring non-malignant, non-infected host APCs will be needed and, in some instances, the potency of *in vitro* stimulation of Tregs against host alloantigens (e.g. in miH antigen alone) may be insufficient to permit full expansion or suppressor cell function (table 6).

Strategies have been developed to expand human peripheral blood or cord blood Tregs using a bead-based approach (Godfrey et al. 2004, 2005; Hoffmann et al. 2004). In the majority of these protocols, such purified Tregs will be polyclonally expanded and infused into recipients to prevent GVHD. It will be important to ensure that Treg cells are suppressive after expansion and to utilize available expansion approaches or develop new approaches that lead to the retention of appropriate homing receptors such as CD62L (L-selectin) that in rodents have been shown to improve GVHD prevention via trafficking of Treg cells to putative sites of GVHD initiation (Taylor et al. 2004b). Such trials should commence this year. Lastly, it is worth noting that in contrast to some other forms of GVHD prevention, Treg cell infusions have increased alloengraftment by suppressing host anti-donor interactions and, in most instances, have not eliminated the GVL effect of allogeneic BMT against haematopoietic tumours (Edinger et al. 2003; Jones et al. 2003; Trenado et al. 2003; Joffre et al. 2004; Taylor et al. Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B (2005)

Table 6. Cellular therapy in GVHD.

| cells                      | mechanism of suppression                                                                 |
|----------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Tregs                     | suppression of alloreactive T cells                                                   |
| NK cells                  | elimination of host DCs, production of TGF-β and IFN-γ                                 |
| NK/T cells                | IL4 production                                                                      |
| myeloid suppressor cells   | inhibition of alloreactive T cell responsiveness                                     |
| mesenchymal stem cells    | suppression of alloreactive T cells                                                  |
|                            | promotion of tissue repair?                                                         |

2004a,b; Hanash & Levy 2005). GVHD-induced immune suppression has been diminished by Treg cell infusion (Trenado et al. 2003), an approach that might also reduce the need for post-BMT immune suppressive drugs or T cell depletion.

(ii) NK and NK/T cells

Multiple other immunomodulating cell-types are being assessed for their ability to impede GVHD yet still allow for GVT effects. NK and NK/T cells have both been demonstrated to exert such effects. Donor-type NK cells have been demonstrated in preclinical models to inhibit GVHD and promote GVT (Asai et al. 1998). The mechanism underlying this protection is not definitively known. Studies have demonstrated that transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-β), an immunosuppressive cytokine, may be at least partially responsible for the suppression of alloreactivity in this model. Recent studies have also suggested that donor NK cells can attack host DCs which have been shown to play an important role in GVHD (Shlomchik et al. 1999; Zhang et al. 2002; Matte et al. 2004; Anderson et al. 2005). It is possible that all of these pathways may play a role. Interestingly, studies have suggested that the timing of NK cell transfer is also important, paralleling the studies with proteasome inhibition in that NK cell administration needs to be early after BMT. When donor-type NK cells were administered later during ongoing GVHD, increased GVHD mortality was observed (Asai et al. 1998). This is similar to reported results in earlier studies administering IL-2 and IL-12 which showed protection only when given early after BMT (Sykes et al. 1990, 1995).

The characterization of NK cell subsets bearing receptors for MHC and other determinants has revolutionized our understanding of their biology and also how to potentially exploit their clinical potential. NK cells bear inhibitory and activating receptors directed to MHC and other determinants (killing immunoglobulin-like receptors (KIR) in humans, Ly49 in mouse, and NKG2D in both), which significantly affects their responses. Clinical BMT studies using KIR ligand mismatch combinations demonstrated heightened anti-tumour effects without increased GVHD in acute myelocytic leukaemia (AML; Ruggeri et al. 2002). Some clinical BMT studies failed to confirm these results but significant differences in the conditioning and BMT protocols may have affected NK cell recovery and ultimate outcome (Davies et al. 2002). Recently, a clinical study examining adoptive transfer of donor-type NK cells after allogeneic BMT yielded encouraging results in which increased anti-tumour effects without increased GVHD (Koehl et al.

Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B (2005)

Graft-versus-host disease B. R. Blazar & W. J. Murphy 1759

αgal cer  
IL2  
T reg  
NK/T  
cell  
IL4  
T cell  
fas  
Th2  
cytokines  
HDAC inhibitor  
(SAHA)  
CD28  
TCR CD40L  
host  
APC  
MHC  
CD86  
CD40  
donor  
NK cell  
GVTD  
GVTD  
GVTD  

Figure 2. Current means to prevent GVHD.

Cytokines such as Flt3 ligand have also been given to recipients and shown to inhibit GVHD through the induction of CD8 alpha-positive DCs, again suggesting that exploiting the immunomodulatory properties of APC subsets may be of use in GVHD (Teshima et al. 2002b), although the post-BMT administration of Flt3 ligand can paradoxically increase acute GVHD in other models (Blazar et al. 2001b). Recent data suggests, at least for chronic GVHD, that both donor and host APCs may play a role, suggesting that both may need to be targeted and that clinically both may of import in acute GVHD as well (Anderson et al. 2005), thus donor APC depletion may be advantageous in GVHD prevention. In all of these studies, effects on GVHD must be balanced with potential adverse effects of GVT.

(iv) Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs)

Another promising cell therapy that may prevent or treat GVHD are derived from non-haematopoietic stem cells such as mesenchymal stem cells or stromal cells (MSCs) which are an adherent, CD45⁻ BM cell population that can differentiate into a wide-spectrum of cells.

An intriguing feature of MSCs is their potency in inhibiting T cell responses. MSCs can express intermediate levels of MHC class I which is inducible to high levels with IFNγ (Le Blanc et al. 2003) but do not express MHC class II (Di Nicola et al. 2002; Tse et al. 2003) and express low levels of B7 ligands and CD40 (Tse et al. 2003). All but Potian et al. (2003) have shown that irradiated MSCs do not elicit vigorous T cell proliferative responses when used as stimulators (Le Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B (2005)

Blanc et al. 2003; Tse et al. 2003; Meisel et al. 2004). Human MSCs (hMSCs) are poor allostimulators as has been observed even after differentiation in osteogenic, chondrogenic or adipogenic media (Le Blanc et al. 2003). Autologous and allogeneic human BM stromal cells suppressed both CD4⁺ and CD8⁺ T cell proliferation in MLR and mitogen assays. A multi-center non-randomized trial of donor MSC infusion given at the time of BMT has been initiated to inhibit GVHD (Urbano-Ispizua et al. 2002). Acute and chronic GVHD risk appeared significantly reduced compared to historical pair-matched controls. A single case report in the literature provides intriguing evidence that MSCs can be used to treat steroid-resistant GVHD. Given the immune suppressive capacity of MSCs, it may be possible to use third-party MSCs as a universal donor source to prevent or treat GVHD.

### 3. FUTURE DIRECTIONS

There has been considerable progress in our understanding of GVHD and development of means to overcome this BMT complication without sacrificing GVT. Major areas under intense investigation currently have focused on exploiting Treg transfer, molecular targeting of T cell and GVHD responses, understanding the homing of T cells in part through the use of innovative imaging technologies, use of NK cells, and attempting to understand potential organ-specific responses and effects of interventions (figure 2). As more is understood on basic GVHD processes, T cell biology, and disassociating GVHD with GVT, the likelihood for increased efficacy of BMT looms larger.

Supported in part by NIH grants R01 AI34495, 2R37 HL56067, R01HL63452, R01CA72669, RO1AG022661 and R01CA102282.

---

**REFERENCES**

Agata, Y., Kawasaki, A., Nishimura, H., Ishida, Y., Tsubata, T., Yagita, H. & Honjo, T. 1996 Expression of the PD-1 antigen on the surface of stimulated mouse T and B lymphocytes. *Int. Immunol.* 8, 765–772.

Aicher, A., Hayden-Ledbetter, M., Brady, W. A., Pezzutto, A., Richter, G., Magaletti, D., Buckwalter, S., Ledbetter, J. A. & Clark, E. A. 2000 Characterization of human inducible costimulator ligand expression and function. *J. Immunol.* 164, 4689–4696.

Akiba, H. *et al.* 2000 Critical contribution of OX40 ligand to T helper cell type 2 differentiation in experimental leishmaniasis. *J. Exp. Med.* 191, 375–380. ([doi:10.1084/jem.191.2.375](https://doi.org/10.1084/jem.191.2.375))

Albert, M. H., Yu, X. Z., Martin, P. J. & Anasetti, C. 2005 Prevention of lethal acute GVHD with an agonistic CD28 antibody and rapamycin. *Blood* 105, 1355–1361. ([doi:10.1182/blood-2004-08-3305](https://doi.org/10.1182/blood-2004-08-3305))

Alderson, M. R. *et al.* 1994 Molecular and biological characterization of human 4-1BB and its ligand. *Eur. J. Immunol.* 24, 2219–2227.

Almenara, J., Rosato, R. & Grant, S. 2002 Synergistic induction of mitochondrial damage and apoptosis in human leukemia cells by flavopiridol and the histone deacetylase inhibitor suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid (SAHA). *Leukemia* 16, 1331–1343. ([doi:10.1038/sj.leu.2402535](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.leu.2402535))

Alpdogan, O., Schmaltz, C., Muriglan, S. J., Kappel, B. J., Perales, M. A., Rotolo, J. A., Halm, J. A., Rich, B. E. & van den Brink, M. R. 2001 Administration of interleukin-7 after allogeneic bone marrow transplantation improves immune reconstitution without aggravating graft-versus-host disease. *Blood* 98, 2256–2265. ([doi:10.1182/blood.V98.7.2256](https://doi.org/10.1182/blood.V98.7.2256))

Amakawa, R. *et al.* 1996 Impaired negative selection of T cells in Hodgkin's disease antigen CD30-deficient mice. *Cell* 84, 551–562. ([doi:10.1016/S0092-8674(00)81031-4](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0092-8674(00)81031-4))

Amrolia, P. J. *et al.* 2003 Selective depletion of donor alloreactive T cells without loss of antiviral or antileukemic responses. *Blood* 102, 2292–2299. ([doi:10.1182/blood-2002-11-3516](https://doi.org/10.1182/blood-2002-11-3516))

Anderson, B. E., McNiff, J., Yan, J., Doyle, H., Mamula, M., Shlomchik, M. J. & Shlomchik, W. D. 2003 Memory CD4+ T cells do not induce graft-versus-host disease. *J. Clin. Invest.* 112, 101–108. ([doi:10.1172/JCI200317601](https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI200317601))

Anderson, B. E., McNiff, J. M., Jain, D., Blazar, B. R., Shlomchik, W. D. & Shlomchik, M. J. 2005 Distinct roles for donor- and host-derived antigen-presenting cells and costimulatory molecules in murine chronic graft-versus-host disease: requirements depend on target organ. *Blood* 105, 2227–2234. ([doi:10.1182/blood-2004-08-3032](https://doi.org/10.1182/blood-2004-08-3032))

Asai, O., Longo, D. L., Tian, Z. G., Hornung, R. L., Taub, D. D., Rusçetti, F. W. & Murphy, W. J. 1998 Suppression of graft-versus-host disease and amplification of graft-versus-tumor effects by activated natural killer cells after allogeneic bone marrow transplantation. *J. Clin. Invest.* 101, 1835–1842.

Bacchetta, R., Zappone, E., Zino, E., Fleischhauer, K., Blazar, B., Narula, S., Bordignon, C. & Roncarolo, M. G. 2000 Use of IL-10 anergized T cells in haploidentical bone marrow transplantation. *Blood* 96, 580a.

Baecher-Allan, C., Brown, J. A., Freeman, G. J. & Hafler, D. A. 2001 CD4+CD25high regulatory cells in human peripheral blood. *J. Immunol.* 167, 1245–1253.

Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B (2005)

---

Bansal-Pakala, P., Jember, A. G. & Croft, M. 2001 Signaling through OX40 (CD134) breaks peripheral T-cell tolerance. *Nat. Med.* 7, 907–912. ([doi:10.1038/90942](https://doi.org/10.1038/90942))

Baum, P. R. *et al.* 1994a Molecular characterization of murine and human OX40/OX40 ligand systems: identification of a human OX40 ligand as the HTLV-1-regulated protein gp34. *EMBO J.* 13, 3992–4001.

Baum, P. R. *et al.* 1994b Identification of OX40 ligand and preliminary characterization of its activities on OX40 receptor. *Circ. Shock* 44, 30–34.

Billiau, A. D., Fevery, S., Rutgeerts, O., Landuyt, W. & Waer, M. 2003 Transient expansion of Mac1+Ly6-G+Ly6-C+ early myeloid cells with suppressor activity in spleens of murine radiation marrow chimeras: possible implications for the graft-versus-host and graft-versus-leukemia reactivity of donor lymphocyte infusions. *Blood* 102, 740–748. ([doi:10.1182/blood-2002-06-1833](https://doi.org/10.1182/blood-2002-06-1833))

Birkeland, M. L., Copeland, N. G., Gilbert, D. J., Jenkins, N. A. & Barclay, A. N. 1995 Gene structure and chromosomal localization of the mouse homologue of rat OX40 protein. *Eur. J. Immunol.* 25, 926–930.

Blazar, B. R., Taylor, P. A., Linsley, P. S. & Vallera, D. A. 1994 In vivo blockade of CD28/CTLA4:B7/BB1 interaction with CTLA4-Ig reduces lethal murine graft-versus-host disease across the major histocompatibility complex barrier in mice. *Blood* 83, 3815–3825.

Blazar, B. R., Taylor, P. A., Panoskaltsis-Mortari, A., Gray, G. S. & Vallera, D. A. 1995a Coblockade of the LFA1:ICAM and CD28/CTLA4:B7 pathways is a highly effective means of preventing acute lethal graft-versus-host disease induced by fully major histocompatibility complex-disparate donor grafts. *Blood* 85, 2607–2618.

Blazar, B. R., Taylor, P. A., Smith, S. & Vallera, D. A. 1995b Interleukin-10 administration decreases survival in murine recipients of major histocompatibility complex disparate donor bone marrow grafts. *Blood* 85, 842–851.

Blazar, B. R., Sharpe, A. H., Taylor, P. A., Panoskaltsis-Mortari, A., Gray, G. S., Korngold, R. & Vallera, D. A. 1996 Infusion of anti-B7.1 (CD80) and anti-B7.2 (CD86) monoclonal antibodies inhibits murine graft-versus-host disease lethality in part via direct effects on CD4+ and CD8+ T cells. *J. Immunol.* 157, 3250–3259.

Blazar, B. R., Taylor, P. A., Panoskaltsis-Mortari, A., Buhlman, J., Xu, J., Flavell, R. A., Korngold, R., Noelle, R. & Vallera, D. A. 1997 Blockade of CD40 ligand-CD40 interaction impairs CD4+ T cell-mediated alloreactivity by inhibiting mature donor T cell expansion and function after bone marrow transplantation. *J. Immunol.* 158, 29–39.

Blazar, B. R., Taylor, P. A., Noelle, R. J. & Vallera, D. A. 1998 CD4(+) T cells tolerized ex vivo to host alloantigen by anti-CD40 ligand (CD40L:CD154) antibody lose their graft-versus-host disease lethality capacity but retain nominal antigen responses. *J. Clin. Invest.* 102, 473–482.

Blazar, B. R., Taylor, P. A., Panoskaltsis-Mortari, A., Sharpe, A. H. & Vallera, D. A. 1999 Opposing roles of CD28:B7 and CTLA-4:B7 pathways in regulating in vivo alloresponses in murine recipients of MHC disparate T cells. *J. Immunol.* 162, 6368–6377.

Blazar, B. R., Kwon, B. S., Panoskaltsis-Mortari, A., Kwak, K. B., Peschon, J. J. & Taylor, P. A. 2001a Ligation of 4-1BB (CDw137) regulates graft-versus-host disease, graft-versus-leukemia, and graft rejection in allogeneic bone marrow recipients. *J. Immunol.* 166, 3174–3183.

Blazar, B. R., McKenna, H. J., Panoskaltsis-Mortari, A. & Taylor, P. A. 2001b Flt3 ligand (FL) treatment of murine donors does not modify graft-versus-host disease (GVHD) but FL treatment of recipients post-bone marrow

transplantation accelerates GVHD lethality. *Biol. Blood Marrow Transplant.* 7, 197–207. (doi:10.1053/bbmt.2001.v7.pm11349806.)

Blazar, B. R., Carreno, B., Panoskaltsis-Mortari, A., Carter, L., Iwai, Y., Yagita, H., Nishimura, H. & Taylor, P. A. 2002 PD-1 engagement provides an inhibitory signal which downregulates T cell alloresponses *in vivo*. *Blood* 100, 72a. (doi:10.1182/blood.V100.1.72.)

Blazar, B. R., Sharpe, A. H., Chen, A. I., Panoskaltsis-Mortari, A., Lees, C., Akiba, H., Yagita, H., Killeen, N. & Taylor, P. A. 2003 Ligation of OX40 (CD134) regulates graft-versus-host disease (GVHD) and graft rejection in allogeneic bone marrow transplant recipients. *Blood* 101, 3741–3748. (doi:10.1182/blood-2002-10-3048.)

Boussiotis, V. A., Chen, Z. M., Zeller, J. C., Murphy, W. J., Berezovskaya, A., Narula, S., Roncarolo, M. G. & Blazar, B. R. 2001 Altered T-cell receptor+CD28-mediated signaling and blocked cell cycle progression in interleukin 10 and transforming growth factor-beta-treated alloreactive T cells that do not induce graft-versus-host disease. *Blood* 97, 565–571. (doi:10.1182/blood.V97.2.565.)

Bowen, M. A., Lee, R. K., Miragliotta, G., Nam, S. Y. & Podack, E. R. 1996 Structure and expression of murine CD30 and its role in cytokine production. *J. Immunol.* 156, 442–449.

Brocker, T., Gulbranson-Judge, A., Flynn, S., Riedinger, M., Raykundalia, C. & Lane, P. 1999 CD4 T cell traffic control: *in vivo* evidence that ligation of OX40 on CD4 T cells by OX40-ligand expressed on dendritic cells leads to the accumulation of CD4 T cells in B follicles. *Eur. J. Immunol.* 29, 1610–1616. (doi:10.1002/(SICI)1521-4141(199905)29:05<1610::AID-IMMU1610>3.0.CO;2-8.)

Bross, P. F. *et al.* 2004 Approval summary for bortezomib for injection in the treatment of multiple myeloma. *Clin. Cancer Res.* 10, 3954–3964.

Brown, G. R., Lee, E. & Thiele, D. L. 2002 TNF-TNFR2 interactions are critical for the development of intestinal graft-versus-host disease in MHC class II-disparate (C57BL/6J→C57BL/6J×bm12) F1 mice. *J. Immunol.* 168, 3065–3071.

Buhlmann, J. E., Gonzalez, M., Ginther, B., Panoskaltsis-Mortari, A., Blazar, B. R., Greiner, D. L., Rossini, A. A., Flavell, R. & Noelle, R. J. 1999 Cutting edge: sustained expansion of CD8+ T cells requires CD154 expression by Th cells in acute graft versus host disease. *J. Immunol.* 162, 4373–4376.

Butler, L. M. *et al.* 2000 Suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid, an inhibitor of histone deacetylase, suppresses the growth of prostate cancer cells *in vitro* and *in vivo*. *Cancer Res.* 60, 5165–5170.

Calderhead, D. M., Buhlmann, J. E., van den Eertwegh, A. J., Claassen, E., Noelle, R. J. & Fell, H. P. 1993 Cloning of mouse Ox40: a T cell activation marker that may mediate T-B cell interactions. *J. Immunol.* 151, 5261–5271.

Chan, K. W., Hopke, C. D., Krams, S. M. & Martinez, O. M. 2002 CD30 expression identifies the predominant proliferating T lymphocyte population in human alloimmune responses. *J. Immunol.* 169, 1784–1791.

Chen, A. I. *et al.* 1999 Ox40-ligand has a critical costimulatory role in dendritic cell:T cell interactions. *Immunity* 11, 689–698. (doi:10.1016/S1074-7613(00)80143-0.)

Chen, B. J., Cui, X., Liu, C. & Chao, N. J. 2002 Prevention of graft-versus-host disease while preserving graft-versus-leukemia effect after selective depletion of host-reactive T cells by photodynamic cell purging process. *Blood* 99, 3083–3088. (doi:10.1182/blood.V99.9.3083.)

Chen, Z. M., O'Shaughnessy, M. J., Gramaglia, I., Panoskaltsis-Mortari, A., Murphy, W. J., Narula, S., Roncarolo, M. G. & Blazar, B. R. 2003 IL-10 and

Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B (2005)

TGF-beta induce alloreactive CD4+CD25− T cells to acquire regulatory cell function. *Blood* 101, 5076–5083. (doi:10.1182/blood-2002-09-2798.)

Chen, B. J., Cui, X., Sempowski, G. D., Liu, C. & Chao, N. J. 2004 Transfer of allogeneic CD62L-memory T cells without graft-versus-host disease. *Blood* 103, 1534–1541. (doi:10.1182/blood-2003-08-2987.)

Chiarle, R., Podda, A., Prolla, G., Podack, E. R., Thorbecke, G. J. & Inghirami, G. 1999 CD30 overexpression enhances negative selection in the thymus and mediates programmed cell death via a Bcl-2-sensitive pathway. *J. Immunol.* 163, 194–205.

Chiba, K., Yanagawa, Y., Masubuchi, Y., Kataoka, H., Kawaguchi, T., Ohtsuki, M. & Hoshino, Y. 1998 FTY720, a novel immunosuppressant, induces sequestration of circulating mature lymphocytes by acceleration of lymphocyte homing in rats. I. FTY 720 selectively decreases the number of circulating mature lymphocytes by acceleration of lymphocyte homing. *J. Immunol.* 160, 5037–5044.

Cohen, J. L., Trenado, A., Vasey, D., Klatzmann, D. & Salomon, B. L. 2002a CD4(+)CD25(+) immunoregulatory T cells: new therapeutics for graft-versus-host disease. *J. Exp. Med.* 196, 401–406. (doi:10.1084/jem.20020090.)

Cohen, L. A., Marks, P. A., Rifkind, R. A., Amin, S., Desai, D., Pittman, B. & Richon, V. M. 2002b Suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid (SAHA), a histone deacetylase inhibitor, suppresses the growth of carcinogen-induced mammary tumors. *Anticancer Res.* 22, 1497–1504.

Coyle, A. J. & Gutierrez-Ramos, J. C. 2001 The expanding B7 superfamily: increasing complexity in costimulatory signals regulating T cell function. *Nat. Immunol.* 2, 203–209. (doi:10.1038/85251.)

Coyle, A. J. *et al.* 2000 The CD28-related molecule ICOS is required for effective T cell-dependent immune responses. *Immunity* 13, 95–105. (doi:10.1016/S1074-7613(00)00011-X.)

Davies, S. M., Ruggieri, L., DeFor, T., Wagner, J. E., Weisdorf, D. J., Miller, J. S., Velardi, A. & Blazar, B. R. 2002 Evaluation of KIR ligand incompatibility in mismatched unrelated donor hematopoietic transplants. Killer immunoglobulin-like receptor. *Blood* 100, 3825–3827. (doi:10.1182/blood-2002-04-1197.)

DeBenedette, M. A., Shahinian, A., Mak, T. W. & Watts, T. H. 1997 Costimulation of CD28− T lymphocytes by 4-1BB ligand. *J. Immunol.* 158, 551–559.

DeBenedette, M. A., Wen, T., Bachmann, M. F., Ohashi, P. S., Barber, B. H., Stocking, K. L., Peschon, J. J. & Watts, T. H. 1999 Analysis of 4-1BB ligand (4-1BBL)-deficient mice and of mice lacking both 4-1BBL and CD28 reveals a role for 4-1BBL in skin allograft rejection and in the cytotoxic T cell response to influenza virus. *J. Immunol.* 163, 4833–4841.

De Smedt, T., Smith, J., Baum, P., Fanslow, W., Butz, E. & Maliszewski, C. 2002 Ox40 costimulation enhances the development of T cell responses induced by dendritic cells *in vivo*. *J. Immunol.* 168, 661–670.

Dieckmann, D., Plottner, H., Berchtold, S., Berger, T. & Schuler, G. 2001 *Ex vivo* isolation and characterization of CD4(+)CD25(+) T cells with regulatory properties from human blood. *J. Exp. Med.* 193, 1303–1310. (doi:10.1084/jem.193.11.1303.)

Di Nicola, M., Carlo-Stella, C., Magni, M., Milanesi, M., Longoni, P. D., Matteucci, P., Grisanti, S. & Gianni, A. M. 2002 Human bone marrow stromal cells suppress T-lymphocyte proliferation induced by cellular or nonspecific mitogenic stimuli. *Blood* 99, 3838–3843. (doi:10.1182/blood.V99.10.3838.)

Dong, H., Zhu, G., Tamada, K. & Chen, L. 1999 B7-H1, a third member of the B7 family, co-stimulates T-cell proliferation and interleukin-10 secretion. *Nat. Med.* 5, 1365–1369. ([doi:10.1038/70932](https://doi.org/10.1038/70932))

Dong, C., Juedes, A. E., Temann, U. A., Shresta, S., Allison, J. P., Ruddle, N. H. & Flavell, R. A. 2001 ICOS co-stimulatory receptor is essential for T-cell activation and function. *Nature* 409, 97–101. ([doi:10.1038/35051100](https://doi.org/10.1038/35051100))

Duckett, C. S. & Thompson, C. B. 1997 CD30-dependent degradation of TRAF2: implications for negative regulation of TRAF signaling and the control of cell survival. *Genes Dev.* 11, 2810–2821.

Duffner, U. *et al.* 2003 Role of CXCR3-induced donor T-cell migration in acute GVHD. *Exp. Hematol.* 31, 897–902. ([doi:10.1016/S0301-472X(03)00198-X](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0301-472X(03)00198-X))

Durkop, H., Latza, U., Hummel, M., Eitelbach, F., Seed, B. & Stein, H. 1992 Molecular cloning and expression of a new member of the nerve growth factor receptor family that is characteristic for Hodgkin's disease. *Cell* 68, 421–427.

Edinger, M., Hoffman, P., Ermann, J., Drago, K., Fathman, C. G., Strober, S. S. & Negrin, R. S. 2003 CD4+CD25+ regulatory T cells preserve graft-versus-tumor activity while inhibiting graft-versus-host disease after bone marrow transplantation. *Nat. Med.* 9, 1144–1150. ([doi:10.1038/nm915](https://doi.org/10.1038/nm915))

Evans, D. E., Prell, R. A., Thalhofer, C. J., Hurwitz, A. A. & Weinberg, A. D. 2001 Engagement of OX40 enhances antigen-specific CD4(+) T cell mobilization/memory development and humoral immunity: comparison of alphaOX-40 with alphaCTLA-4. *J. Immunol.* 167, 6804–6811.

Flynn, S., Toellner, K. M., Raykundalia, C., Goodall, M. & Lane, P. 1998 CD4 T cell cytokine differentiation: the B cell activation molecule, OX40 ligand, instructs CD4 T cells to express interleukin 4 and upregulates expression of the chemokine receptor, Blr-1. *J. Exp. Med.* 188, 297–304. ([doi:10.1084/jem.188.2.297](https://doi.org/10.1084/jem.188.2.297))

Foster, A. E., Marangolo, M., Sartor, M. M., Alexander, S. I., Hu, M., Bradstock, K. F. & Gottlieb, D. J. 2004 Human CD62L− memory T cells are less responsive to alloantigen stimulation than CD62L+ naive T cells: potential for adoptive immunotherapy and allodepletion. *Blood* 104, 2403–2409. ([doi:10.1182/blood-2003-12-4431](https://doi.org/10.1182/blood-2003-12-4431))

Freeman, G. J. *et al.* 2000 Engagement of the PD-1 immunoinhibitory receptor by a novel B7 family member leads to negative regulation of lymphocyte activation. *J. Exp. Med.* 192, 1027–1034. ([doi:10.1084/jem.192.7.1027](https://doi.org/10.1084/jem.192.7.1027))

Gendelman, M., Hecht, T., Logan, B., Vodanovic-Jankovic, S., Komorowski, R. & Drobyski, W. R. 2004 Host conditioning is a primary determinant in modulating the effect of IL-7 on murine graft-versus-host disease. *J. Immunol.* 172, 3328–3336.

Ghansah, T. *et al.* 2004 Expansion of myeloid suppressor cells in SHIP-deficient mice represses allogeneic T cell responses. *J. Immunol.* 173, 7324–7330.

Giralt, S., Aleman, A., Lei, X., Davis, M., Mickler, K., Weber, D., Wang, M. & Champlin, R. 2004 Results of bortezomib (BTZ) therapy for myeloma (MM) patients relapsing after an allogeneic transplant. Preliminary results show efficacy without induction of GVHD. *Blood* 104, 459a.

Godfrey, W. R., Krampf, M. R., Taylor, P. A. & Blazar, B. R. 2004 *Ex vivo* depletion of alloreactive cells based on CFSE dye dilution, activation antigen selection, and dendritic cell stimulation. *Blood* 103, 1158–1165. ([doi:10.1182/blood-2003-04-1098](https://doi.org/10.1182/blood-2003-04-1098))

Godfrey, W. R., Spoden, D. J., Ge, Y. G., Baker, S. R., Liu, B., Levine, B. L., June, C. H., Blazar, B. R. & Porter, S. B. 2005 Cord blood CD4(+)CD25(+) derived T regulatory cell lines express FoxP3 protein and manifest potent suppressor function. *Blood* 105, 750–758. ([doi:10.1182/blood-2004-06-2467](https://doi.org/10.1182/blood-2004-06-2467))

Gonzalo, J. A., Delaney, T., Corcoran, J., Goodearl, A., Gutierrez-Ramos, J. C. & Coyle, A. J. 2001a Cutting edge: the related molecules CD28 and inducible costimulator deliver both unique and complementary signals required for optimal T cell activation. *J. Immunol.* 166, 1–5.

Gonzalo, J. A. *et al.* 2001b ICOS is critical for T helper cell-mediated lung mucosal inflammatory responses. *Nat. Immunol.* 2, 597–604. ([doi:10.1038/89739](https://doi.org/10.1038/89739))

Goodwin, R. G. *et al.* 1993 Molecular cloning of a ligand for the inducible T cell gene 4-1BB: a member of an emerging family of cytokines with homology to tumor necrosis factor. *Eur. J. Immunol.* 23, 2631–2641.

Gramaglia, I., Weinberg, A. D., Lemon, M. & Croft, M. 1998 Ox-40 ligand: a potent costimulatory molecule for sustaining primary CD4 T cell responses. *J. Immunol.* 161, 6510–6517.

Gramaglia, I., Jember, A., Pippig, S. D., Weinberg, A. D., Killeen, N. & Croft, M. 2000 The OX40 costimulatory receptor determines the development of CD4 memory by regulating primary clonal expansion. *J. Immunol.* 165, 3043–3050.

Guinan, E. C., Boussiotis, V. A., Neuberg, D., Brennan, L. L., Hirano, N., Nadler, L. M. & Gribben, J. G. 1999 Transplantation of anergic histoincompatible bone marrow allografts. *N. Engl. J. Med.* 340, 1704–1714. ([doi:10.1056/NEJM199906033402202](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJM199906033402202))

Hakim, F. T., Cepeda, R., Gray, G. S., June, C. H. & Abe, R. 1995 Acute graft-versus-host reaction can be aborted by blockade of costimulatory molecules. *J. Immunol.* 155, 1757–1766.

Hanash, A. M. & Levy, R. B. 2005 Donor CD4+CD25+ T cells promote engraftment and tolerance following MHC-mismatched hematopoietic cell transplantation. *Blood* 105, 1828–1836. ([doi:10.1182/blood-2004-08-3213](https://doi.org/10.1182/blood-2004-08-3213))

Hashimoto, D., Asakura, S., Miyake, S., Yamamura, T., Van Kaer, L., Liu, C., Tanimoto, M. & Teshima, T. 2005 Stimulation of host NKT cells by synthetic glycolipid regulates acute graft-versus-host disease by inducing Th2 polarization of donor T cells. *J. Immunol.* 174, 551–556.

Hildebrandt, G. C., Olkiewicz, K. M., Choi, S., Corrion, L. A., Clouthier, S. G., Liu, C., Serody, J. S. & Cooke, K. R. 2004 Donor T cell-production of RANTES significantly contributes to the development of Idiopathic Pneumonia Syndrome after allogeneic stem cell transplantation. *Blood* 105, 2249–2257. ([doi:10.1182/blood-2004-08-3320](https://doi.org/10.1182/blood-2004-08-3320))

Hoffmann, P., Ermann, J., Edinger, M., Fathman, C. G. & Strober, S. 2002a Donor-type CD4(+)CD25(+) regulatory T cells suppress lethal acute graft-versus-host disease after allogeneic bone marrow transplantation. *J. Exp. Med.* 196, 389–399. ([doi:10.1084/jem.20020399](https://doi.org/10.1084/jem.20020399))

Hoffman, P., Ermann, J., Edinger, M., Fathman, C. G. & Strober, S. 2002b Donor-type CD4(+)CD25(+) regulatory T cells suppress lethal acute graft-versus-host disease after allogeneic bone marrow trnasplantation. *J. Exp. Med.* 196, 389–399.

Hoffmann, P., Eder, R., Kunz-Schughart, L. A., Andresen, R. & Edinger, M. 2004 Large-scale *in vitro* expansion of polyclonal human CD4(+)CD25high regulatory T cells. *Blood* 104, 895–903. ([doi:10.1182/blood-2004-01-0086](https://doi.org/10.1182/blood-2004-01-0086))

Hurtado, J. C., Kim, S. H., Pollok, K. E., Lee, Z. H. & Kwon, B. S. 1995 Potential role of 4-1BB in T cell activation. Comparison with the costimulatory molecule CD28. *J. Immunol.* 155, 3360–3367.

Hurtado, J. C., Kim, Y. J. & Kwon, B. S. 1997 Signals through 4-1BB are costimulatory to previously activated splenic T cells and inhibit activation-induced cell death. *J. Immunol.* 158, 2600–2609.

Hutloff, A., Dittrich, A. M., Beier, K. C., Eljaschewitsch, B., Kraft, R., Anagnostopoulos, I. & Kroczek, R. A. 1999 ICOS is an inducible T-cell co-stimulator structurally and functionally related to CD28. *Nature* 397, 263–266. (doi:10.1038/16717.)

Imado, T., Iwasaki, T., Kataoka, Y., Kuroiwa, T., Hara, H., Fujimoto, J. & Sano, H. 2004 Hepatocyte growth factor preserves graft-versus-leukemia effect and T-cell reconstitution after marrow transplantation. *Blood* 104, 1542–1549. (doi:10.1182/blood-2003-12-4309.)

Ishida, Y., Agata, Y., Shibahara, K. & Honjo, T. 1992 Induced expression of PD-1, a novel member of the immunoglobulin gene superfamily, upon programmed cell death. *EMBO J.* 11, 3887–3895.

Jarvinen, L. Z., Blazar, B. R., Adeyi, O. A., Strom, T. B. & Noelle, R. J. 2003 CD154 on the surface of CD4+ CD25+ regulatory T cells contributes to skin transplant tolerance. *Transplantation* 76, 1375–1379. (doi:10.1097/01.TP.0000093462.16309.73.)

Joffre, O., Gorsse, N., Romagnoli, P. & van Meerwijk, J. P. 2004 Induction of antigen-specific tolerance to bone marrow allografts with CD4+CD25+ T lymphocytes. *Blood* 103, 4216–4221. (doi:10.1182/blood-2004-01-0005.)

Jones, S. C., Murphy, G. F. & Korngold, R. 2003 Post-hematopoietic cell transplantation control of graft-versus-host disease by donor CD425 T cells to allow an effective graft-versus-leukemia response. *Biol. Blood Marrow Transplant.* 9, 243–256. (doi:10.1053/bbmt.2003.50027.)

Jonuleit, H., Schmitt, E., Stassen, M., Tuettenberg, A., Knop, J. & Enk, A. H. 2001 Identification and functional characterization of human CD4(+)CD25(+)T cells with regulatory properties isolated from peripheral blood. *J. Exp. Med.* 193, 1285–1294. (doi:10.1084/jem.193.11.1285.)

Jonuleit, H., Schmitt, E., Kakirman, H., Stassen, M., Knop, J. & Enk, A. H. 2002 Infectious tolerance: human CD25(+) regulatory T cells convey suppressor activity to conventional CD4(+) T helper cells. *J. Exp. Med.* 196, 255–260. (doi:10.1084/jem.20020394.)

Jung, U., Foley, J. E., Erdmann, A. A., Eckhaus, M. A. & Fowler, D. H. 2003 CD3/CD28-costimulated T1 and T2 subsets: differential *in vivo* allosensitization generates distinct GVT and GVHD effects. *Blood* 102, 3439–3446. (doi:10.1182/blood-2002-12-3936.)

Kane, R. C., Bross, P. F., Farrell, A. T. & Pazdur, R. 2003 Velcade: U.S. FDA approval for the treatment of multiple myeloma progressing on prior therapy. *Oncologist* 8, 508–513. (doi:10.1634/theoncologist.8-6-508.)

Khayyamian, S., Hutloff, A., Buchner, K., Grafe, M., Henn, V., Kroczek, R. A. & Mages, H. W. 2002 ICOS-ligand, expressed on human endothelial cells, costimulates Th1 and Th2 cytokine secretion by memory CD4+ T cells. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* 99, 6198–6203. (doi:10.1073/pnas.092576699.)

Kim, Y. M., Sachs, T., Asavaroengchai, W., Bronson, R. & Sykes, M. 2003 Graft-versus-host disease can be separated from graft-versus-lymphoma effects by control of lymphocyte trafficking with FTY720. *J. Clin. Invest.* 111, 659–669. (doi:10.1172/JCI200316950.)

Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B (2005)

Kingsbury, G. A. *et al.* 2001 Cloning, expression, and function of BLAME, a novel member of the CD2 family. *J. Immunol.* 166, 5675–5680.

Koehl, U. *et al.* 2004 IL-2 activated NK cell immunotherapy of three children after haploidentical stem cell transplantation. *Blood Cells Mol. Dis.* 33, 261–266. (doi:10.1016/j.bcmd.2004.08.013.)

Koh, M. B., Prentice, H. G., Corbo, M., Morgan, M., Cotter, F. E. & Lowdell, M. W. 2002 Alloantigen-specific T-cell depletion in a major histocompatibility complex fully mismatched murine model provides effective graft-versus-host disease prophylaxis in the presence of lymphoid engraftment. *Br. J. Haematol.* 118, 108–116. (doi:10.1046/j.1365-2141.2002.03682.x.)

Kopf, M., Ruedl, C., Schmitz, N., Gallimore, A., Lefrang, K., Ecabert, B., Odermatt, B. & Bachmann, M. F. 1999 OX40-deficient mice are defective in Th cell proliferation but are competent in generating B cell and CTL Responses after virus infection. *Immunity* 11, 699–708. (doi:10.1016/S1074-7613(00)80144-2.)

Kopf, M., Coyle, A. J., Schmitz, N., Barner, M., Oxenius, A., Gallimore, A., Gutierrez-Ramos, J. C. & Bachmann, M. F. 2000 Inducible costimulator protein (ICOS) controls T helper cell subset polarization after virus and parasite infection. *J. Exp. Med.* 192, 53–61. (doi:10.1084/jem.192.1.53.)

Korngold, R., Marini, J. C., de Baca, M. E., Murphy, G. F. & Giles-Komar, J. 2003 Role of tumor necrosis factor-alpha in graft-versus-host disease and graft-versus-leukemia responses. *Biol. Blood Marrow Transplant.* 9, 292–303. (doi:10.1016/S1083-8791(03)00087-9.)

Kreisel, D. *et al.* 2002 Non-hematopoietic allograft cells directly activate CD8+ T cells and trigger acute rejection: an alternative mechanism of allorecognition. *Nat. Med.* 8, 233–239. (doi:10.1038/nm0302-233.)

Krijanovski, O. I., Hill, G. R., Cooke, K. R., Teshima, T., Crawford, J. M., Brinson, Y. S. & Ferrara, J. L. 1999 Keratinocyte growth factor separates graft-versus-leukemia effects from graft-versus-host disease. *Blood* 94, 825–831.

Kuroiwa, T. *et al.* 2001 Hepatocyte growth factor ameliorates acute graft-versus-host disease and promotes hematopoietic function. *J. Clin. Invest.* 107, 1365–1373.

Kurts, C., Carbone, F. R., Krummel, M. F., Koch, K. M., Miller, J. F. & Heath, W. R. 1999 Signalling through CD30 protects against autoimmune diabetes mediated by CD8 T cells. *Nature* 398, 341–344. (doi:10.1038/18692.)

Kwon, B. S. & Weissman, S. M. 1989 cDNA sequences of two inducible T-cell genes. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* 86, 1963–1967.

Latchman, Y. *et al.* 2001 PD-L2 is a second ligand for PD-1 and inhibits T cell activation. *Nat. Immunol.* 2, 261–268. (doi:10.1038/85330.)

Latza, U., Durkop, H., Schnittger, S., Ringeling, J., Eitelbach, F., Hummel, M., Fonatsch, C. & Stein, H. 1994 The human OX40 homolog: cDNA structure, expression and chromosomal assignment of the ACT35 antigen. *Eur. J. Immunol.* 24, 677–683.

Le Blanc, K., Tammik, C., Rosendahl, K., Zetterberg, E. & Ringden, O. 2003 HLA expression and immunologic properties of differentiated and undifferentiated mesenchymal stem cells. *Exp. Hematol.* 31, 890–896. (doi:10.1016/S0301-472X(03)00110-3.)

Lee, R. S., Kuhr, C. S., Sale, G. E., Zellmer, E., Hogan, W. J., Storb, R. & Little, M. T. 2003 FTY720 does not abrogate acute graft-versus-host disease in the dog leukocyte antigen-nonidentical unrelated canine model. *Transplantation* 76, 1155–1158. (doi:10.1097/01.TP.0000083891.14089.B8.)

Leoni, F. *et al.* 2002 The antitumor histone deacetylase inhibitor suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid exhibits antiinflammatory properties via suppression of cytokines. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* 99, 2995–3000. ([doi:10.1073/pnas.052702999](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.052702999))

Levings, M. K., Sangregorio, R. & Roncarolo, M. G. 2001 Human cd25(+)cd4(+) t regulatory cells suppress naive and memory T cell proliferation and can be expanded in vitro without loss of function. *J. Exp. Med.* 193, 1295–1302. ([doi:10.1084/jem.193.11.1295](https://doi.org/10.1084/jem.193.11.1295))

Li, Y., Li, X. C., Zheng, X. X., Wells, A. D., Turka, L. A. & Strom, T. B. 1999 Blocking both signal 1 and signal 2 of T-cell activation prevents apoptosis of alloreactive T cells and induction of peripheral allograft tolerance. *Nat. Med.* 5, 1298–1302. ([doi:10.1038/15256](https://doi.org/10.1038/15256))

Li, B., New, J. Y., Yap, E. H., Lu, J., Chan, S. H. & Hu, H. 2001 Blocking L-selectin and alpha4-integrin changes donor cell homing pattern and ameliorates murine acute graft versus host disease. *Eur. J. Immunol.* 31, 617–624. ([doi:10.1002/1521-4141(200102)31:2<617::AID-IMMU617>3.3.CO;2-4](https://doi.org/10.1002/1521-4141(200102)31:2<617::AID-IMMU617>3.3.CO;2-4))

Li, B., New, J. Y., Tay, Y. K., Goh, E., Yap, E. H., Chan, S. H. & Hu, H. Z. 2004 Delaying acute graft-versus-host disease in mouse bone marrow transplantation by treating donor cells with antibodies directed at l-selectin and alpha4-integrin prior to infusion. *Scand J. Immunol.* 59, 464–468. ([doi:10.1111/j.0300-9475.2004.01414.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.0300-9475.2004.01414.x))

Ling, V. *et al.* 2000 Cutting edge: identification of GL50, a novel B7-like protein that functionally binds to ICOS receptor. *J. Immunol.* 164, 1653–1657.

Ling, V., Wu, P. W., Miyashiro, J. S., Marusic, S., Finnerty, H. F. & Collins, M. 2001 Differential expression of inducible costimulator-ligand splice variants: lymphoid regulation of mouse GL50-B and human GL50 molecules. *J. Immunol.* 166, 7300–7308.

Mallett, S., Fossum, S. & Barclay, A. N. 1990 Characterization of the MRC OX40 antigen of activated CD4 positive T lymphocytes—a molecule related to nerve growth factor receptor. *EMBO J.* 9, 1063–1068.

Martinez, O. M., Villanueva, J., Abtahi, S., Beatty, P. R., Esquivel, C. O. & Krams, S. M. 1998 CD30 expression identifies a functional alloreactive human T-lymphocyte subset. *Transplantation* 65, 1240–1247. ([doi:10.1097/00007890-199805150-00016](https://doi.org/10.1097/00007890-199805150-00016))

Matte, C. C., Liu, J., Cormier, J., Anderson, B. E., Athanasiadis, I., Jain, D., McNiff, J. & Shlomchik, W. D. 2004 Donor APCs are required for maximal GVHD but not for GVL. *Nat. Med.* 10, 987–992. ([doi:10.1038/nm1089](https://doi.org/10.1038/nm1089))

McAdam, A. J. *et al.* 2000 Mouse inducible costimulatory molecule (ICOS) expression is enhanced by CD28 costimulation and regulates differentiation of CD4(+) T cells. *J. Immunol.* 165, 5035–5040.

McAdam, A. J., Greenwald, R. J., Levin, M. A., Chernova, T., Malenkovich, N., Ling, V., Freeman, G. J. & Sharpe, A. H. 2001 ICOS is critical for CD40-mediated antibody class switching. *Nature* 409, 102–105. ([doi:10.1038/35051107](https://doi.org/10.1038/35051107))

Meisel, R., Zibert, A., Laryea, M., Gobel, U., Daubener, W. & Dilloo, D. 2004 Human bone marrow stromal cells inhibit allogeneic T-cell responses by indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase-mediated tryptophan degradation. *Blood* 103, 4619–4621. ([doi:10.1182/blood-2003-11-3909](https://doi.org/10.1182/blood-2003-11-3909))

Melero, I., Johnston, J. V., Shufford, W. W., Mittler, R. S. & Chen, L. 1998 NK1.1 cells express 4-1BB (CDw137) costimulatory molecule and are required for tumor immunity elicited by anti-4-1BB monoclonal antibodies. *Cell Immunol.* 190, 167–172. ([doi:10.1006/cimm.1998.1396](https://doi.org/10.1006/cimm.1998.1396))

Merad, M. *et al.* 2004 Depletion of host Langerhans cells before transplantation of donor alloreactive T cells prevents skin graft-versus-host disease. *Nat. Med.* 10, 510–517. ([doi:10.1038/nm1038](https://doi.org/10.1038/nm1038))

Min, D., Taylor, P. A., Panoskaltsis-Mortari, A., Chung, B., Danilenko, D. M., Farrell, C., Lacey, D. L., Blazar, B. R. & Weinberg, K. I. 2002 Protection from thymic epithelial cell injury by keratinocyte growth factor: a new approach to improve thymic and peripheral T-cell reconstitution after bone marrow transplantation. *Blood* 99, 4592–4600. ([doi:10.1182/blood.V99.12.4592](https://doi.org/10.1182/blood.V99.12.4592))

Min, C. K., Maeda, Y., Lowler, K., Liu, C., Clouthier, S., Lofthus, D., Weisiger, E., Ferrara, J. L. & Reddy, P. 2004 Paradoxical effects of interleukin-18 on the severity of acute graft-versus-host disease mediated by CD4+ and CD8+ T-cell subsets after experimental allogeneic bone marrow transplantation. *Blood* 104, 3393–3399. ([doi:10.1182/blood-2004-02-0763](https://doi.org/10.1182/blood-2004-02-0763))

Montagna, D., Yvon, E., Calcaterra, V., Comoli, P., Locatelli, F., Maccario, R., Fisher, A. & Cavazzana-Calvo, M. 1999 Depletion of alloreactive T cells by a specific anti-interleukin-2 receptor p55 chain immunotoxin does not impair in vitro antileukemia and antiviral activity. *Blood* 93, 3550–3557.

Moser, B., Wolf, M., Walz, A. & Loetscher, P. 2004 Chemokines: multiple levels of leukocyte migration control. *Trends Immunol.* 25, 75–84. ([doi:10.1016/j.it.2003.12.005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.it.2003.12.005))

Murai, M., Yoneyama, H., Harada, A., Yi, Z., Vestergaard, C., Guo, B., Suzuki, K., Asakura, H. & Matsushima, K. 1999 Active participation of CCR5(+)CD8(+) T lymphocytes in the pathogenesis of liver injury in graft-versus-host disease. *J. Clin. Invest.* 104, 49–57.

Murai, M. *et al.* 2003 Peyer’s patch is the essential site in initiating murine acute and lethal graft-versus-host reaction. *Nat. Immunol.* 4, 154–160. ([doi:10.1038/ni879](https://doi.org/10.1038/ni879))

Murata, K., Ishii, N., Takano, H., Miura, S., Ndhlovu, L. C., Nose, M., Noda, T. & Sugamura, K. 2000 Impairment of antigen-presenting cell function in mice lacking expression of OX40 ligand. *J. Exp. Med.* 191, 365–374. ([doi:10.1084/jem.191.2.365](https://doi.org/10.1084/jem.191.2.365))

Murphy, P. M. 2002 International union of pharmacology. XXX. Update on chemokine receptor nomenclature. *Pharmacol. Rev.* 54, 227–229. ([doi:10.1124/pr.54.2.227](https://doi.org/10.1124/pr.54.2.227))

Murphy, W. J. *et al.* 1998 Differential effects of the absence of interferon-gamma and IL-4 in acute graft-versus-host disease after allogeneic bone marrow transplantation in mice. *J. Clin. Invest.* 102, 1742–1748.

Murphy, P. M., Baggiolini, M., Charo, I. F., Hebert, C. A., Horuk, R., Matsushima, K., Miller, L. H., Oppenheim, J. J. & Power, C. A. 2000 International union of pharmacology. XXII. Nomenclature for chemokine receptors. *Pharmacol. Rev.* 52, 145–176.

Nishimura, H., Nose, M., Hiai, H., Minato, N. & Honjo, T. 1999 Development of lupus-like autoimmune diseases by disruption of the PD-1 gene encoding an ITIM motif-carrying immunoreceptor. *Immunity* 11, 141–151. ([doi:10.1016/S1074-7613(00)80089-8](https://doi.org/10.1016/S1074-7613(00)80089-8))

Nozawa, K., Ohata, J., Sakurai, J., Hashimoto, H., Miyajima, H., Yagita, H., Okumura, K. & Azuma, M. 2001 Preferential blockade of CD8(+) T cell responses by administration of anti-CD137 ligand monoclonal antibody results in differential effect on development of murine acute and chronic graft-versus-host diseases. *J. Immunol.* 167, 4981–4986.

Ohshima, Y., Tanaka, Y., Tozawa, H., Takahashi, Y., Maliszewski, C. & Delespesse, G. 1997 Expression and function of OX40 ligand on human dendritic cells. *J. Immunol.* 159, 3838–3848.

Ohshima, Y., Yang, L. P., Uchiyama, T., Tanaka, Y., Baum, P., Sergerie, M., Hermann, P. & Delespesse, G. 1998 OX40 costimulation enhances interleukin-4 (IL-4) expression at priming and promotes the differentiation of naive human CD4(+) T cells into high IL-4-producing effectors. *Blood* 92, 3338–3345.

O'Shaughnessy, M. J., Chen, Z.-m., Panoskaltsis-Mortari, A., Taub, D., Palmer, E., Berg, L. A., Murphy, W. I. & Blazar, B. R. Submitted. *Ex vivo* blockade of the Janus kinase 3 pathway in alloreactive T Cells abolishes their capacity to induce murine graft versus host disease. *Blood.*

Panoskaltsis-Mortari, A., Taylor, P. A., Rubin, J. S., Uren, A., Welniak, L. A., Murphy, W. J., Farrell, C. L., Lacey, D. L. & Blazar, B. R. 2000 Keratinocyte growth factor facilitates alloengraftment and ameliorates graft-versus-host disease in mice by a mechanism independent of repair of conditioning-induced tissue injury. *Blood* 96, 4350–4356.

Panoskaltsis-Mortari, A., Hermanson, J. R., Taras, E., Wangensteen, O. D., Serody, J. S. & Blazar, B. R. 2003 Acceleration of idiopathic pneumonia syndrome (IPS) in the absence of donor MIP-1 alpha (CCL3) after allogeneic BMT in mice. *Blood* 101, 3714–3721. ([doi:10.1182/blood-2002-08-2465](https://doi.org/10.1182/blood-2002-08-2465))

Petrovic, A. *et al.* 2004 LPAM (alpha 4 beta 7 integrin) is an important homing integrin on alloreactive T cells in the development of intestinal graft-versus-host disease. *Blood* 103, 1542–1547. ([doi:10.1182/blood-2003-03-0957](https://doi.org/10.1182/blood-2003-03-0957))

Pippig, S. D. *et al.* 1999 Robust B cell immunity but impaired T cell proliferation in the absence of CD134 (OX40). *J. Immunol.* 163, 6520–6529.

Pollok, K. E., Kim, Y. J., Zhou, Z., Hurtado, J., Kim, K. K., Pickard, R. T. & Kwon, B. S. 1993 Inducible T cell antigen 4-1BB. Analysis of expression and function. *J. Immunol.* 150, 771–781.

Pollok, K. E., Kim, Y. J., Hurtado, J., Zhou, Z., Kim, K. K. & Kwon, B. S. 1994 4-1BB T-cell antigen binds to mature B cells and macrophages, and costimulates anti-mu-primed splenic B cells. *Eur. J. Immunol.* 24, 367–374.

Potian, J. A., Aviv, H., Ponzio, N. M., Harrison, J. S. & Rameshwar, P. 2003 Veto-like activity of mesenchymal stem cells: functional discrimination between cellular responses to alloantigens and recall antigens. *J. Immunol.* 171, 3426–3434.

Rao, A. R. *et al.* 2003 CC chemokine receptor 2 expression in donor cells serves an essential role in graft-versus-host-disease. *J. Immunol.* 171, 4875–4885.

Reddy, P., Teshima, T., Kukuruga, M., Ordemann, R., Liu, C., Lowler, K. & Ferrara, J. L. 2001 Interleukin-18 regulates acute graft-versus-host disease by enhancing Fas-mediated donor T cell apoptosis. *J. Exp. Med.* 194, 1433–1440. ([doi:10.1084/jem.194.10.1433](https://doi.org/10.1084/jem.194.10.1433))

Reddy, P., Teshima, T., Hildebrandt, G., Williams, D. L., Liu, C., Cooke, K. R. & Ferrara, J. L. 2003 Pretreatment of donors with interleukin-18 attenuates acute graft-versus-host disease via STAT6 and preserves graft-versus-leukemia effects. *Blood* 101, 2877–2885. ([doi:10.1182/blood-2002-08-2566](https://doi.org/10.1182/blood-2002-08-2566))

Reddy, P., Maeda, Y., Hotary, K., Liu, C., Reznikov, L. L., Dinarello, C. A. & Ferrara, J. L. 2004 Histone deacetylase inhibitor suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid reduces acute graft-versus-host disease and preserves graft-versus-leukemia effect. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* 101, 3921–3926. ([doi:10.1073/pnas.0400380101](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0400380101))

Rogers, P. R. & Croft, M. 2000 CD28, Ox-40, LFA-1, and CD4 modulation of Th1/Th2 differentiation is directly dependent on the dose of antigen. *J. Immunol.* 164, 2955–2963.

Rogers, P. R., Song, J., Gramaglia, I., Killeen, N. & Croft, M. 2001 OX40 promotes Bcl-xL and Bcl-2 expression and is essential for long-term survival of CD4 T cells. *Immunity* 15, 445–455. ([doi:10.1016/S1074-7613(01)00191-1](https://doi.org/10.1016/S1074-7613(01)00191-1))

Rollins, B. J. 1997 Chemokines. *Blood* 90, 909–928.

Rossi, S., Blazar, B. R., Farrell, C. L., Danilenko, D. M., Lacey, D. L., Weinberg, K. I., Krenger, W. & Hollander, G. A. 2002 Keratinocyte growth factor preserves normal thymopoiesis and thymic microenvironment during experimental graft-versus-host disease. *Blood* 100, 682–691. ([doi:10.1182/blood.V100.2.682](https://doi.org/10.1182/blood.V100.2.682))

Ruggeri, L. *et al.* 2002 Effectiveness of donor natural killer cell alloreactivity in mismatched hematopoietic transplants. *Science* 295, 2097–2100. ([doi:10.1126/science.1068440](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1068440))

Saito, K., Sakurai, J., Ohata, J., Kohsaka, T., Hashimoto, H., Okumura, K., Abe, R. & Azuma, M. 1998 Involvement of CD40 ligand-CD40 and CTLA 4-B7 pathways in murine acute graft-versus-host disease induced by allogeneic T cells lacking CD28. *J. Immunol.* 160, 4225–4231.

Sakaguchi, S., Sakaguchi, N., Asano, M., Itoh, M. & Toda, M. 1995 Immunologic self-tolerance maintained by activated T cells expressing IL-2 receptor alpha-chains (CD25). Breakdown of a single mechanism of self-tolerance causes various autoimmune diseases. *J. Immunol.* 155, 1151–1164.

Sakaguchi, S. *et al.* 2001 Immunologic tolerance maintained by CD25+ CD4+ regulatory T cells: their common role in controlling autoimmunity, tumor immunity, and transplantation tolerance. *Immunol. Rev.* 182, 18–32. ([doi:10.1034/j.1600-065X.2001.1820102.x](https://doi.org/10.1034/j.1600-065X.2001.1820102.x))

Salomon, B., Lenschow, D. J., Rhee, L., Ashourian, N., Singh, B., Sharpe, A. & Bluestone, J. A. 2000 B7/CD28 costimulation is essential for the homeostasis of the CD4+ CD25+ immunoregulatory T cells that control autoimmune diabetes. *Immunity* 12, 431–440. ([doi:10.1016/S1074-7613(00)80195-8](https://doi.org/10.1016/S1074-7613(00)80195-8))

Saoulli, K. *et al.* 1998 CD28-independent, TRAF2-dependent costimulation of resting T cells by 4-1BB ligand. *J. Exp. Med.* 187, 1849–1862. ([doi:10.1084/jem.187.11.1849](https://doi.org/10.1084/jem.187.11.1849))

Sayers, T. J. *et al.* 2003 The proteasome inhibitor PS-341 sensitizes neoplastic cells to TRAIL-mediated apoptosis by reducing levels of c-FLIP. *Blood* 102, 303–310. ([doi:10.1182/blood-2002-09-2975](https://doi.org/10.1182/blood-2002-09-2975))

Shanebeck, K. D., Maliszewski, C. R., Kennedy, M. K., Picha, K. S., Smith, C. A., Goodwin, R. G. & Grabstein, K. H. 1995 Regulation of murine B cell growth and differentiation by CD30 ligand. *Eur. J. Immunol.* 25, 2147–2153.

Sharpe, A. H. & Freeman, G. J. 2002 The B7-CD28 superfamily. *Nat. Rev. Immunol.* 2, 116–126. ([doi:10.1038/nri727](https://doi.org/10.1038/nri727))

Shevach, E. M. 2001 Certified professionals: CD4(+) CD25(+) suppressor T cells. *J. Exp. Med.* 193, F41–F46. ([doi:10.1084/jem.193.11.F41](https://doi.org/10.1084/jem.193.11.F41))

Shevach, E. M. 2002 CD4+ CD25+ suppressor T cells: more questions than answers. *Nat. Rev. Immunol.* 2, 389–400.

Shevach, E. M., McHugh, R. S., Piccirillo, C. A. & Thornton, A. M. 2001 Control of T-cell activation by CD4+ CD25+ suppressor T cells. *Immunol. Rev.* 182, 58–67. ([doi:10.1034/j.1600-065X.2001.1820104.x](https://doi.org/10.1034/j.1600-065X.2001.1820104.x))

Shimozato, O., Takeda, K., Yagita, H. & Okumura, K. 1999 Expression of CD30 ligand (CD153) on murine activated T cells. *Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun.* 256, 519–526. ([doi:10.1006/bbrc.1999.0336](https://doi.org/10.1006/bbrc.1999.0336))

Shinohara, T., Taniwaki, M., Ishida, Y., Kawaichi, M. & Honjo, T. 1994 Structure and chromosomal localization of the human PD-1 gene (PDCD1). *Genomics* 23, 704–706. ([doi:10.1006/geno.1994.1562](https://doi.org/10.1006/geno.1994.1562))

Shlomchik, W. D., Couzens, M. S., Tang, C. B., McNiff, J., Robert, M. E., Liu, J., Shlomchik, M. J. & Emerson, S. G. 1999 Prevention of graft versus host disease by inactivation of host antigen-presenting cells. *Science* 285, 412–415. ([doi:10.1126/science.285.5426.412](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.285.5426.412))

Shuford, W. W. *et al.* 1997 4-1BB costimulatory signals preferentially induce CD8+ T cell proliferation and lead to the amplification *in vivo* of cytotoxic T cell responses. *J. Exp. Med.* 186, 47–55. ([doi:10.1084/jem.186.1.47](https://doi.org/10.1084/jem.186.1.47))

Sinha, M. L., Fry, T. J., Fowler, D. H., Miller, G. & Mackall, C. L. 2002 Interleukin 7 worsens graft-versus-host disease. *Blood* 100, 2642–2649. ([doi:10.1182/blood-2002-04-1082](https://doi.org/10.1182/blood-2002-04-1082))

Solomon, S. R. *et al.* 2002 Optimized clinical-scale culture conditions for *ex vivo* selective depletion of host-reactive donor lymphocytes: a strategy for GvHD prophylaxis in allogeneic PBSC transplantation. *Cytotherapy* 4, 395–406. ([doi:10.1080/146532402320775982](https://doi.org/10.1080/146532402320775982))

Speiser, D., Bachmann, M., Frick, T., McKall-Faienza, K., Griffiths, E., Pfeffer, K., Mak, T. & Ohashi, P. 1997 TNF receptor p55 controls early acute graft-versus-host disease. *J. Immunol.* 158, 5185–5190.

Sperling, A. I. & Bluestone, J. A. 2001 ICOS costimulation: it’s not just for TH2 cells anymore. *Nat. Immunol.* 2, 573–574. ([doi:10.1038/89709](https://doi.org/10.1038/89709))

Spielberger, R. *et al.* 2004 Palifermin for oral mucositis after intensive therapy for hematologic cancers. *N. Engl. J. Med.* 351, 2590–2598. ([doi:10.1056/NEJMoa040125](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa040125))

Stuber, E., Neurath, M., Calderhead, D., Fell, H. P. & Strober, W. 1995 Cross-linking of OX40 ligand, a member of the TNF/NGF cytokine family, induces proliferation and differentiation in murine splenic B cells. *Immunity* 2, 507–521. ([doi:10.1016/1074-7613(95)90031-4](https://doi.org/10.1016/1074-7613(95)90031-4))

Sun, K. *et al.* 2004 Inhibition of acute graft-versus-host disease with retention of graft-versus-tumor effects by the proteasome inhibitor bortezomib. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* 101, 8120–8125. ([doi:10.1073/pnas.0401563101](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0401563101))

Sun, K., Wilkins, D. E., Anver, M. R., Sayers, T. J., Panoskaltsis-Mortari, A., Blazar, B. R., Welniak, L. A. & Murphy, W. J. 2005 Differential effects of proteasome inhibition by bortezomib on murine acute graft-versus-host disease (GHVD): delayed administration of bortezomib results in increased GVHD-dependent gastrointestinal toxicity. *Blood*. Published online 16 June 2005.

Suri-Payer, E., Amar, A. Z., Thornton, A. M. & Shevach, E. M. 1998 CD4+CD25+ T cells inhibit both the induction and effector function of autoreactive T cells and represent a unique lineage of immunoregulatory cells. *J. Immunol.* 160, 1212–1218.

Swallow, M. M., Wallin, J. J. & Sha, W. C. 1999 B7h, a novel costimulatory homolog of B7.1 and B7.2, is induced by TNFalpha. *Immunity* 11, 423–432. ([doi:10.1016/S1074-7613(00)80117-X](https://doi.org/10.1016/S1074-7613(00)80117-X))

Sykes, M., Romick, M. L. & Sachs, D. H. 1990 Interleukin 2 prevents graft-versus-host disease while preserving the graft-versus-leukemia effect of allogeneic T cells. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* 87, 5633–5637.

Sykes, M., Szot, G. L., Nguyen, P. L. & Pearson, D. A. 1995 Interleukin-12 inhibits murine graft-versus-host disease. *Blood* 86, 2429–2438.

Sykes, M., Pearson, D. A., Taylor, P. A., Szot, G. L., Goldman, S. J. & Blazar, B. R. 1999 Dose and timing of interleukin (IL)-12 and timing and type of total-body irradiation: effects on graft-vs.-host disease inhibition and

Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B (2005)

toxicity of exogenous IL-12 in murine bone marrow transplant recipients. *Biol. Blood Marrow Transplant.* 5, 277–284.

Tafuri, A. *et al.* 2001 ICOS is essential for effective T-helper-cell responses. *Nature* 409, 105–109. ([doi:10.1038/35051113](https://doi.org/10.1038/35051113))

Takahashi, C., Mittler, R. S. & Vella, A. T. 1999 Cutting edge: 4-1BB is a bona fide CD8 T cell survival signal. *J. Immunol.* 162, 5037–5040.

Tamura, H., Dong, H., Zhu, G., Sica, G. L., Flies, D. B., Tamada, K. & Chen, L. 2001 B7-H1 costimulation preferentially enhances CD28-independent T-helper cell function. *Blood* 97, 1809–1816. ([doi:10.1182/blood.V97.6.1809](https://doi.org/10.1182/blood.V97.6.1809))

Tan, J. T., Whitmire, J. K., Ahmed, R., Pearson, T. C. & Larsen, C. P. 1999 4-1BB ligand, a member of the TNF family, is important for the generation of antiviral CD8 T cell responses. *J. Immunol.* 163, 4859–4868.

Tan, J. T., Ha, J., Cho, H. R., Tucker-Burden, C., Hendrix, R. C., Mittler, R. S., Pearson, T. C. & Larsen, C. P. 2000 Analysis of expression and function of the costimulatory molecule 4-1BB in alloimmune responses. *Transplantation* 70, 175–183.

Tanaka, T., Ohtsuka, Y., Yagita, H., Shiratori, Y., Omata, M. & Okumura, K. 1995 Involvement of alpha 1 and alpha 4 integrins in gut mucosal injury of graft-versus-host disease. *Int. Immunol.* 7, 1183–1189.

Taylor, P. A., Panoskaltsis-Mortari, A., Noelle, R. J. & Blazar, B. R. 2000 Analysis of the requirements for the induction of CD4+ T cell alloantigen hyporesponsiveness by *ex vivo* anti-CD40 ligand antibody. *J. Immunol.* 164, 612–622.

Taylor, P. A., Lees, C. J., Allison, J. P., Fournier, S., Sharpe, A. H. & Blazar, B. R. 2001a B7 expression on T cells downregulates GVHD generation independent of CD4+CD25+ immune regulatory T cells. *Blood* 98, 776a.

Taylor, P. A., Noelle, R. J. & Blazar, B. R. 2001b CD4(+)CD25(+) immune regulatory cells are required for induction of tolerance to alloantigen via costimulatory blockade. *J. Exp. Med.* 193, 1311–1318. ([doi:10.1084/jem.193.11.1311](https://doi.org/10.1084/jem.193.11.1311))

Taylor, P. A., Friedman, T. M., Korngold, R., Noelle, R. J. & Blazar, B. R. 2002a Tolerance induction of alloreactive T cells via *ex vivo* blockade of the CD40:CD40L costimulatory pathway results in the generation of a potent immune regulatory cell. *Blood* 99, 4601–4609. ([doi:10.1182/blood.V99.12.4601](https://doi.org/10.1182/blood.V99.12.4601))

Taylor, P. A., Lees, C. J. & Blazar, B. R. 2002b The infusion of *ex vivo* activated and expanded CD4(+)CD25(+) immune regulatory cells inhibits graft-versus-host disease lethality. *Blood* 99, 3493–3499. ([doi:10.1182/blood.V99.10.3493](https://doi.org/10.1182/blood.V99.10.3493))

Taylor, P. A., Panoskaltsis-Mortari, A., Freeman, G. J., Sharpe, A. H., Noelle, R.J., Rudensky, A. Y., Mak, T.W., Serody, J.S. & Blazar, B. R. 2004a Targeting of inducible costimulator (ICOS) expressed on alloreactive T cells downregulates graft-versus-host disease (GVHD) and facilitates engraftment of allogeneic bone marrow (BM). *Blood* 105, 3372–3380. ([doi:10.1182/blood-2004-10-3869](https://doi.org/10.1182/blood-2004-10-3869))

Taylor, P. A., Panoskaltsis-Mortari, A., Swedin, J. M., Lucas, P. J., Gress, R. E., Levine, B. L., June, C. H., Serody, J. S. & Blazar, B. R. 2004b L-Selectin(hi) but not the L-selectin(lo) CD4+25+ T-regulatory cells are potent inhibitors of GVHD and BM graft rejection. *Blood* 104, 3804–3812. ([doi:10.1182/blood-2004-05-1850](https://doi.org/10.1182/blood-2004-05-1850))

Telford, W. G., Nam, S. Y., Podack, E. R. & Miller, R. A. 1997 CD30-regulated apoptosis in murine CD8 T cells after cessation of TCR signals. *Cell Immunol.* 182, 125–136. ([doi:10.1006/cimm.1997.1228](https://doi.org/10.1006/cimm.1997.1228))

Tesciuba, A. G. *et al.* 2001 Inducible costimulator regulates Th2-mediated inflammation, but not Th2 differentiation, in a model of allergic airway disease. *J. Immunol.* 167, 1996–2003.

Teshima, T., Ordemann, R., Reddy, P., Gagin, S., Liu, C., Cooke, K. R. & Ferrara, J. L. 2002a Acute graft-versus-host disease does not require alloantigen expression on host epithelium. *Nat. Med.* 8, 575–581. (doi:10.1038/nm0602-575.)

Teshima, T., Reddy, P., Lowler, K. P., KuKuruga, M. A., Liu, C., Cooke, K. R. & Ferrara, J. L. 2002b Flt3 ligand therapy for recipients of allogeneic bone marrow transplants expands host CD8 alpha(+) dendritic cells and reduces experimental acute graft-versus-host disease. *Blood* 99, 1825–1832. (doi:10.1182/blood.V99.5.1825.)

Thornton, A. M. & Shevach, E. M. 1998 CD4+CD25+ immunoregulatory T cells suppress polyclonal T cell activation *in vitro* by inhibiting interleukin 2 production. *J. Exp. Med.* 188, 287–296. (doi:10.1084/jem.188.2.287.)

Thornton, A. M. & Shevach, E. M. 2000 Suppressor effector function of CD4+CD25+ immunoregulatory T cells is antigen nonspecific. *J. Immunol.* 164, 183–190.

Trenado, A., Charlotte, F., Fisson, S., Yagello, M., Klatzmann, D., Salomon, B. L. & Cohen, J. L. 2003 Recipient-type specific CD4+CD25+ regulatory T cells favor immune reconstitution and control graft-versus-host disease while maintaining graft-versus-leukemia. *J. Clin. Invest.* 112, 1688–1696. (doi:10.1172/JCI200317702.)

Tse, W. T., Pendleton, J. D., Beyer, W. M., Egalka, M. C. & Guinan, E. C. 2003 Suppression of allogeneic T-cell proliferation by human marrow stromal cells: implications in transplantation. *Transplantation* 75, 389–397. (doi:10.1097/01.TP.0000045055.63901.A9.)

Tseng, S. Y. *et al.* 2001 B7-DC, a new dendritic cell molecule with potent costimulatory properties for T cells. *J. Exp. Med.* 193, 839–846. (doi:10.1084/jem.193.7.839.)

Tsukada, N., Akiba, H., Kobata, T., Aizawa, Y., Yagita, H. & Okumura, K. 2000 Blockade of CD134 (OX40)-CD134L interaction ameliorates lethal acute graft-versus-host disease in a murine model of allogeneic bone marrow transplantation. *Blood* 95, 2434–2439.

Uckun, F. M., Roers, B. A., Waurzyniak, B., Liu, X. P. & Cetkovic-Cvrlje, M. 2002 Janus kinase 3 inhibitor WHIP131/JANEX-1 prevents graft-versus-host disease but spares the graft-versus-leukemia function of the bone marrow allografts in a murine bone marrow transplantation model. *Blood* 99, 4192–4199. (doi:10.1182/blood.V99.11.4192.)

Urbano-Ispizua, A. *et al.* 2002 Allogeneic and autologous transplantation for haematological diseases, solid tumours and immune disorders: definitions and current practice in Europe. *Bone Marrow Transplant.* 29, 639–646. (doi:10.1038/sj.bmt.1703535.)

Vibhakar, R., Juan, G., Traganos, F., Darzynkiewicz, Z. & Finger, L. R. 1997 Activation-induced expression of human programmed death-1 gene in T-lymphocytes. *Exp. Cell Res.* 232, 25–28. (doi:10.1006/excr.1997.3493.)

Vivier, E. & Daeron, M. 1997 Immunoreceptor tyrosine-based inhibition motifs. *Immunol. Today* 18, 286–291. (doi:10.1016/S0167-5699(97)80025-4.)

Wall, D. & Sheehan, K. 1994 The role of tumor necrosis factor and interferon gamma in graft-versus-host disease and related immunodeficiency. *Transplantation* 57, 273–279.

Wang, S., Zhu, G., Chapoval, A. I., Dong, H., Tamada, K., Ni, J. & Chen, L. 2000 Costimulation of T cells by B7-H2, a B7-like molecule that binds ICOS. *Blood* 96, 2808–2813.

Wang, J. W., Howson, J. M., Ghansah, T., Desponts, C., Ninos, J. M., May, S. L., Nguyen, K. H., Toyama-Sorimachi, N. & Kerr, W. G. 2002 Influence of SHIP on Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B (2005)

the NK repertoire and allogeneic bone marrow transplantation. *Science* 295, 2094–2097. (doi:10.1126/science.1068438.)

Weatherill, A. R., Maxwell, J. R., Takahashi, C., Weinberg, A. D. & Vella, A. T. 2001 OX40 ligation enhances cell cycle turnover of Ag-activated CD4 T cells *in vivo*. *Cell Immunol.* 209, 63–75. (doi:10.1006/cimm.2001.1783.)

Weinberg, A. D. 1998 Antibodies to OX-40 (CD134) can identify and eliminate autoreactive T cells: implications for human autoimmune disease. *Mol. Med. Today* 4, 76–83. (doi:10.1016/S1357-4310(97)01181-7.)

Weinberg, A. D. 2002 OX40: targeted immunotherapy—implications for tempering autoimmunity and enhancing vaccines. *Trends Immunol.* 23, 102–109. (doi:10.1016/S1471-4906(01)02127-5.)

Weinberg, A. D. *et al.* 2000 Engagement of the OX-40 receptor *in vivo* enhances antitumor immunity. *J. Immunol.* 164, 2160–2169.

Welniak, L. A., Wang, Z., Sun, K., Kuziel, W., Anver, M. R., Blazar, B. R. & Murphy, W. J. 2004 An absence of CCR5 on donor cells results in acceleration of acute graft-vs-host disease. *Exp. Hematol.* 32, 318–324. (doi:10.1016/j.exphem.2003.12.003.)

Welniak *et al.* Submitted. Peyer’s patches are not required for acute graft-versus-host disease after murine allogeneic bone marrow transplantation. *Blood.*

Wiley, S. R., Goodwin, R. G. & Smith, C. A. 1996 Reverse signaling via CD30 ligand. *J. Immunol.* 157, 3635–3639.

Williams, M. A. *et al.* 2001 Characterization of virus-mediated inhibition of mixed chimerism and allospecific tolerance. *J. Immunol.* 167, 4987–4995.

Wysocki, C. A., Burkett, S. B., Panoskaltsis-Mortari, A., Kirby, S. L., Luster, A. D., McKinnon, K., Blazar, B. R. & Serody, J. S. 2004 Differential roles for CCR5 expression on donor T cells during graft-versus-host disease based on pretransplant conditioning. *J. Immunol.* 173, 845–854.

Wysocki, C. A., Panoskaltsis-Mortari, A., Blazar, B. R. & Serody, J. S. 2005 Leukocyte migration and graft-versus-host disease. *Blood* 105, 4191–4199. (doi:10.1182/blood-2004-12-4726.)

Yoshinaga, S. K. *et al.* 1999 T-cell co-stimulation through B7RP-1 and ICOS. *Nature* 402, 827–832. (doi:10.1038/45582.)

Yoshinaga, S. K. *et al.* 2000 Characterization of a new human B7-related protein: B7RP-1 is the ligand to the co-stimulatory protein ICOS. *Int. Immunol.* 12, 1439–1447. (doi:10.1093/intimm/12.10.1439.)

Yu, X. Z., Martin, P. J. & Anasetti, C. 1998 Role of CD28 in acute graft-versus-host disease. *Blood* 92, 2963–2970.

Yu, X. Z., Bidwell, S., Martin, P. J. & Anasetti, C. 1999 Visualization, fate, and pathogenicity of antigen-specific CD8+ T cells in the graft-versus-host reaction. *J. Immunol.* 163, 4780–4787.

Yu, X. Z., Bidwell, S. J., Martin, P. J. & Anasetti, C. 2000 CD28-specific antibody prevents graft-versus-host disease in mice. *J. Immunol.* 164, 4564–4568.

Zeller, J. C., Panoskaltsis-Mortari, A., Murphy, W. J., Ruscetti, F. W., Narula, S., Roncarolo, M. G. & Blazar, B. R. 1999 Induction of CD4+ T cell alloantigen-specific hyporesponsiveness by IL-10 and TGF-beta. *J. Immunol.* 163, 3684–3691.

Zhang, Y., Shlomchik, W. D., Joe, G., Louboutin, J. P., Zhu, J., Rivera, A., Giannola, D. & Emerson, S. G. 2002 APCs in the liver and spleen recruit activated allogeneic CD8+ T cells to elicit hepatic graft-versus-host disease. *J. Immunol.* 169, 7111–7118.

Zhou, D. *et al.* 2004 Lysosomal glycosphingolipid recognition by NKT cells. *Science* 306, 1786–1789. (doi:10.1126/science.1103440.)
