
J Plant Res (2005) 118:439–442
Digital Object Identifier (DOI) 10.1007/s10265-005-0237-z

© The Botanical Society of Japan and Springer-Verlag Tokyo 2005

**SHORT COMMUNICATION**

Nobuhiro Sasaki · Yutaka Abe · Katsuhiro Wada  
Takatoshi Koda · Yukihiro Goda · Taiji Adachi  
Yoshihiro Ozeki  

**Amaranthin in feather cockscombs is synthesized via glucuronidation at the cyclo-DOPA glucoside step in the betacyanin biosynthetic pathway**

Received: August 5, 2005 / Accepted: September 9, 2005 / Published online: October 25, 2005

Abstract Uridine 5′-diphosphate (UDP)-glucuronic acid: cyclo-DOPA 5-glucoside glucuronosyltransferase activity was detected in a crude extract prepared from the purple flowers of feather cockscombs. This suggests that the glucuronic acid moiety of amaranthin and its derivatives may be introduced at the cyclo-DOPA glucoside step, but not at the betanidin glucoside step.

Key words Amaranthin · Betacyanin · cyclo-DOPA glucoside · Feather cockscombs · Glucuronosyltransferase

Betalains are water-soluble pigments that classified into two groups: red-purple betacyanins and yellow betaxanthins. Only betacyanins, and not betaxanthins, have a glucose moiety, some of which are further modified with other molecules, e.g., glucuronic acid, malonylate, and caffeic acid (for a review, see Strack et al. 2003). Amaranthin (betanidin 5-O-β-glucuronosylglucoside) and its derivatives are a major betacyanin group in the Amaranthaceae (Schliemann et al. 2001). Many studies have reported the chemical structures and compositions of the betacyanins in various species of the order Caryophyllus. However, little is known about the pathway in which are synthesized the betacyanins modified by two or more moieties, such as amaranthin, phyllocactin (betanidin 5-O-[6′-O-malonyl]-β-glucoside), and their derivatives.

It has been postulated that betacyanins are synthesized via a pathway in which glucosylation occurs at the aglycone (betanidin) step, as in the anthocyanin biosynthetic pathway (Heuer and Strack 1992; Vogt et al. 1999). However, as we previously reported, a glucosyltransferase activity was detected that acts at the cyclo-DOPA (5,6-dihydroxyindoline-2-carboxylic acid) step, but not at the betanidin step, in crude extracts prepared from four o’clock, feather cockscombs, portulaca, pokeweed, bougainvillea, and Christmas cactus (Sasaki et al. 2004). We have isolated and identified cDNAs encoding uridine 5′-diphosphate (UDP)-glucose: cyclo-DOPA 5-O-glucosyltransferase (cDOPA5GT) activity from four o’clock and feather cockscombs (Sasaki et al. 2005). We also showed that the activity of cDOPA5GT and the expression of the cDOPA5GT gene are associated with the accumulation of betanin in four o’clock plants. These results suggest that betacyanins are synthesized via glucosylation at the intermediate cyclo-DOPA step, but not at the aglycone (betanidin) step.

Recent research has revealed that in the anthocyanin biosynthetic pathway, the glucuronic acid moiety is transferred from UDP-glucuronic acid to anthocyanidin glycoside, catalyzed by UDP-glucuronic-acid-dependent glucuronosyltransferase (Sawada et al. 2005), and that acyl moieties are conjugated by acyl-CoA-dependent acyltransferase (Yonekura-Sakakibara et al. 2000; Suzuki et al. 2001, 2004). In the betacyanin biosynthetic pathway, the acylation to betanin or amaranthin is catalyzed by acylglucoside-dependent acyltransferases (Bokern and Strack 1988; Bokern et al. 1992). However, there has been no report concerning the catalytic pathway or enzyme activity that conjugates glucuronic acid during betacyanin biosynthesis. Here, we report the detection of an enzyme activity in crude extract prepared from the purple flowers of feather cockscombs that conjugates glucuronic acid to cyclo-DOPA glucoside, but not to betanidin glucoside. This suggests that glucuronidation may not occur after the synthesis of the aglycone (Fig. 1, shown by thin arrows), as occurs in anthocyanin synthesis, but occurs at an intermediate step before

---

N. Sasaki · Y. Abe · Y. Ozeki (✉)  
Department of Biotechnology, Faculty of Technology, Tokyo  
University of Agriculture and Technology, 2-24-16 Naka-cho, Koganei,  
Tokyo 184-8588, Japan  
Tel. +81-42-3887239; Fax +81-42-3887239  
e-mail: ozeki@cc.tuat.ac.jp  

K. Wada · T. Koda  
San-Ei Gen F.F.I. Inc., 1-1-11 Sanwa-machi, Toyonaka, Osaka  
561-8588, Japan  

Y. Goda  
Division of Pharmacognosy, Phytochemistry and Narcotics, National  
Institute of Health Sciences, 1-18-1 Kamiyoga, Setagaya, Tokyo  
158-8501, Japan  

T. Adachi  
Venture Business Laboratory, Center for Advanced Science and  
Innovation, Osaka University, 2-1 Yamadaoka, Suita, Osaka 565-0871,  
Japan

Tyrosine

DOPA

Condensation with  
betalamic acid

cyclo-DOPA

glucosylation

Betanidin

Betanin

UDP-glucuronic acid

UDP

glucosylation

cyclo-DOPA glucoside

cyclo-DOPA glucuronosylglucoside

Amaranthin

Condensation with  
betalamic acid

Fig. 1. Scheme of the amaranthin biosynthetic pathway in feather cockscombs. *Thin lines* represent the pathway in which the modification by glucose and glucuronic acid occurs after the construction of the betacyanin aglycone. *Thick lines* represent the pathway proposed from the results presented here.

the condensation of cyclo-DOPA glucuronosylglucoside with betalamic acid (Fig. 1, shown by thick arrows).

Feather cockscombs (*Celosia cristata*) were purchased from a market. L-4,5-dihydroxyphenylalanine (L-DOPA) was purchased from Tokyo Kasei Kogyo (Tokyo, Japan). cyclo-DOPA was synthesized enzymatically (Schliemann et al. 1999). UDP-glucose, UDP-glucuronic acid, and betanin (red-beet extract) were purchased from Wako Pure Chemical Industries (Osaka, Japan). Betanin and isobetanin were purified from the extract described above using Dowex Marathon WBA (Sigma–Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA), followed by ODS (Wakogel 50C18; Wako Pure Chemical Industries) open-column chromatography. Betanidin and isobetanidin were obtained from betanin and isobetanin digested with β-glucosidase (Sigma–Aldrich). Betalamic acid was synthesized by the hydrolysis of betanin and isobetanin (Schliemann et al. 1999).

The purple petals of feather cockscombs were homogenized with a mortar and pestle in liquid nitrogen, and then the frozen powder was homogenized gently in extraction buffer [0.1 M potassium phosphate buffer (pH 7.5), 7 mM 2-mercaptoethanol]. The homogenate was filtered through a cloth and centrifuged to remove cell debris. An aliquot of the extract (200 μl) was added to 800 μl of 4.1 M (NH₄)₂SO₄ and the mixture was incubated on ice for 5 min followed by centrifugation. The precipitate was dissolved in extraction buffer and desalted with a MicroSpin G-25 column (Amersham Biosciences, Piscataway, NJ, USA). The protein was quantified using a Coomassie Plus Protein Assay Kit (Pierce Biotechnology, Lockford, IL, USA) with bovine serum albumin as the standard. The enzyme assay mixture for cyclo-DOPA glucoside glucuronosyltransferase was composed of 50 μl of enzymatically synthesized cyclo-DOPA, 10 μl of UDP-glucose (10 mM), 10 μl of UDP-glucuronic acid (10 mM), and 20 μl of the desalted crude extract (12 μg). The reaction mixture was incubated at 30°C for 30 min, and the reaction was terminated by the addition of 4.5 μl of 20% phosphoric acid. Then the betalamic acid (50 μl) synthesized above was added to the reaction mixture for the chemical condensation reaction.

The products were separated by reversed-phase high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) (Fig. 2). When only UDP-glucose was added to the reaction mixture and UDP-glucuronic acid was not added, betanin and isobetanin (Fig. 2b, corresponding to peaks 3 and 4 in Fig. 2a, respectively) were produced by cDOPA5GT activity, followed by their chemical reaction with betalamic acid, as previously reported (Sasaki et al. 2004, 2005). The products corresponding to these peaks were identified by co-chromatography with authentic betanin and isobetanin. However, when UDP-glucuronic acid was added to the reaction mixture together with UDP-glucose, two other peaks (Fig. 1a, peaks 1 and 2) were detected, apart from those for betanin, isobetanin, betanidin, and isobetanidin (Fig. 1a, peaks 3, 4, 5, and 6, respectively). We had no authentic amaranthin and isoamaranthin, but the crude pigment extract prepared from the purple petals of feather cockscombs with 80% methanol containing 50 mM ascorbic acid produced peaks with the same retention times (Fig. 2d) as peaks 1 and 2 (Fig. 2a) on HPLC chromatograms, suggesting that peaks 1 and 2 were amaranthin and isoamaranthin, respectively. The compounds corresponding to peaks 1 and 2 were subjected to HPLC-mass spectrometry (MS), with a MassLynx system (1525 binary HPLC pumps, 2767 sample manager, column fluidics organizer, 996 photo diode array detector, MicromassZQ; Waters Corp., Milford, MA, USA). The HPLC apparatus was equipped with a Develosil Combi-RP-5 column and the compounds were separated by linear-gradient elution from 22.5 to 45% methanol in 15 min, after which they were introduced into the MS. In the positive-ion mode, the [M+H]⁺ ions of both peaks 1 and 2 were observed at m/z 727, which corresponds to the molecular mass of amaran-

Fig. 2. HPLC elution profile of the reaction products of UDP-glucuronic acid: cyclo-DOPA 5-glucoside glucuronosyltransferase activity. Reaction mixtures containing both UDP-glucuronic acid and UDP-glucose (a), or containing either UDP-glucose (b) or UDP-glucuronic acid (c) were incubated at 30°C for 30 min. The reactions were terminated with the addition of phosphoric acid. After the chemical condensation reaction with betalamic acid, the products were analyzed by HPLC using the Beckman System Gold apparatus (128 diode array detector module, 126 pumps; Beckman Coulter, Fullerton, CA, USA). The HPLC apparatus was equipped with a Develosil Combi-RP-5 column (i.d. 4.6 × 250 mm; Nomura Chemical, Aichi, Japan). Betacyanins were separated by a linear elution gradient (0.8 ml/min) for 15 min from 25 to 50% solvent B (90% methanol in water) in solvent A (1% formic acid in water) with absorbance monitored at 535 nm. Betanin (3), isobetanin (4), betanidin (5), and isobetanidin (6) were identified by HPLC co-chromatography with authentic standards. d Elution profile of the crude pigment extract prepared from the purple petals of feather cockscombs with 80% methanol containing 50 mM ascorbic acid. The front and back peaks might be amaranthin and isoamaranthin, respectively, and their retention times are in accordance with peaks 1 and 2 in Fig. 2a, respectively

acceptors for glucuronic acid using UDP-glucuronic acid as the donor (Fig. 1, shown by thin arrows), a reaction mixture consisting of 0.1 M potassium phosphate (pH 7.5), 0.2 mM of either betanin or isobetanin, 1 mM UDP-glucuronic acid, and the crude extract was incubated at 30°C for 30 min. The reaction was terminated by the addition of 4.5 μl of 20% phosphoric acid and the products were analyzed by HPLC. No peaks corresponding to amaranthin or isoamaranthin were detectable in the HPLC chromatograms (data not shown).

When UDP-glucuronic acid was added as a single sugar donor, four peaks were detected in the reaction mixture after the condensation reaction with betalamic acid, each of which had the same retention time that corresponded to peaks 1–4 on the HPLC chromatogram (Fig. 2c). It was confirmed that peaks 1 and 2 were amaranthin and isoamaranthin, respectively, because both [M+H]⁺ ions in each peak were m/z 727 in the positive ion mode of the HPLC-MS analysis. In the same mode, both [M+H]⁺ ions in peaks 3 and 4 were observed at m/z 551, which corresponded to the molecular mass of betanin or isobetanin (betanidin or isobetanidin glucuronide). This result indicated that cyclo-DOPA 5-glucoside was produced in the enzyme reaction mixture in which only UDP-glucuronic acid was added as a single sugar donor. This might be caused by enzyme activity in the crude extract, which might catalyze UDP-glucuronic acid to UDP-glucose. As such, cyclo-DOPA 5-glucoside was produced by cDOPA5GT activity. After the production of cyclo-DOPA 5-glucoside, the glucuronosyltransferase in the extract might act on it as a sugar acceptor to produce cyclo-DOPA glucuronosylglucoside using the UDP-glucuronic acid remaining in the reaction mixture as a sugar donor.

It has been demonstrated by feeding experiments of betacyanin precursors to Celosia plumosa that cyclo-DOPA or its glucoside is a better precursor for amaranthin synthesis than betanidin or betanin (Sciuto et al. 1974), suggesting that the pathway for amaranthin biosynthesis contains a step at which cyclo-DOPA and its glucoside are modified and that neither betanidin nor betanin act as an intermediate.
ate in amaranthin biosynthesis. In this study, we detected an enzyme with UDP-glucuronic acid: cyclo-DOPA 5-glucoside glucuronosyltransferase activity, which catalyzes the second modification at the cyclo-DOPA step. In conclusion, we propose a biosynthetic pathway for amaranthin that acts via glucuronylation at the cyclo-DOPA glucoside step (Fig. 1, shown by thick arrows), and probably not at the betanin step (Fig. 1, shown by thin arrows), followed by condensation with betalamic acid, thus producing amaranthin. When a cDNA encoding this cyclo-DOPA 5-glucoside glucuronosyltransferase is identified and its recombinant and purified proteins prepared without any contamination of the enzyme activity to catalyze UDP-glucuronic acid to UDP-glucose, the biochemical properties, especially substrate specificity for sugar donors, will be elucidated. This will provide novel and important molecular biological information that will contribute to the elucidation of betacyanin biosynthesis.

Acknowledgments This work was supported by a Grant-in-Aid for Scientific Research from the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology of Japan (15657008) and by the National Institute of Floricultural Science (NIFS), the National Agricultural Research Organization (NARO), and the Japan Food Chemical Research Foundation.

---

### References

Bokern M, Heuer S, Strack D (1992) Hydroxycinnamic acid transferase in the biosynthesis of acylated betacyanins: purification and characterization from cell cultures of *Chenopodium rubrum* and occurrence in some other members of the Caryophyllales. Bot Acta 105:146–151

Bokern M, Strack D (1988) Synthesis of hydroxycinnamic acid esters of betacyanins via 1-O-acylglucosides of hydroxycinnamic acids by protein preparations from cell suspension cultures of *Chenopodium rubrum* and petals of *Lampranthus sociorum*. Planta 174:101–105

Heuer S, Strack D (1992) Synthesis of betanin from betanidin and UDP-glucose by a protein preparation from cell suspension cultures of *Dorotheanthus bellidiformis* (Burm. f.) N.E.Br. Planta 186:626–628

Sasaki N, Adachi T, Koda T, Ozeki Y (2004) Detection of UDP-glucose:cyclo-DOPA 5-O-glucosyltransferase activity in four o'clocks (*Mirabilis jalapa* L.). FEBS Lett 568:159–162

Sasaki N, Wada K, Koda T, Kasahara K, Adachi T, Ozeki Y (2005) Isolation and characterization of cDNAs encoding an enzyme with glucosyltransferase activity for cyclo-DOPA from four o'clock and feather cockscombs. Plant Cell Physiol 46:666–670

Sawada S, Suzuki H, Ichimaida F, Yamaguchi MA, Iwashita T, Fukui Y, Hemmi H, Nishino T, Nakayama T (2005) UDP-glucuronic acid: anthocyanin glucuronosyltransferase from red daisy (*Bellis perennis*) flowers. Enzymology and phylogenetics of a novel glucuronosyltransferase involved in flower pigment biosynthesis. J Biol Chem 280:899–906

Schliemann W, Cai Y, Degenkolb T, Schmidt J, Corke H (2001) Betalains of *Celosia argentea*. Phytochemistry 58:159–165

Schliemann W, Kobayashi N, Strack D (1999) The decisive step in betaxanthin biosynthesis is a spontaneous reaction. Plant Physiol 119:1217–1232

Sciuto S, Oriente G, Piattelli M, Impelizzeri G, Amico V (1974) Biosynthesis of amaranthin in *Celosia plumosa*. Phytochemistry 13:947–951

Strack D, Vogt T, Schliemann W (2003) Recent advances in betalain research. Phytochemistry 62:247–269

Suzuki H, Nakayama T, Yonekura-Sakakibara K, Fukui Y, Nakamura N, Nakao M, Tanaka Y, Yamaguchi MA, Kusumi T, Nishino T (2001) Malonyl-CoA: anthocyanin 5-O-glucoside-6″-O-malonyltransferase from scarlet sage (*Salvia splendens*) flowers. Enzyme purification, gene cloning, expression, and characterization. J Biol Chem 276:49013–49019

Suzuki H, Sawada S, Watanabe K, Nagae S, Yamaguchi MA, Nakayama T, Nishino T (2004) Identification and characterization of a novel anthocyanin malonyltransferase from scarlet sage (*Salvia splendens*) flowers: an enzyme that is phylogenetically separated from other anthocyanin acyltransferases. Plant J 38:994–1003

Vogt T, Grimm R, Strack D (1999) Cloning and expression of a cDNA encoding betanidin 5-O-glucosyltransferase, a betanidin- and flavonoid-specific enzyme with high homology to inducible glucosyltransferases from the Solanaceae. Plant J 19:509–519

Yonekura-Sakakibara K, Tanaka Y, Fukuchi-Mizutani M, Fujiwara H, Fukui Y, Ashikari T, Murakami Y, Yamaguchi M, Kusumi T (2000) Molecular and biochemical characterization of a novel hydroxycinamoyl-CoA: anthocyanin 3-O-glucoside-6″-O-acyltransferase from *Perilla frutescens*. Plant Cell Physiol 41:495–502