
# Assimilation, Dissimilation, and Detoxification of Formaldehyde, a Central Metabolic Intermediate of Methylotrophic Metabolism

**HIROYA YURIMOTO, NOBUO KATO, YASUYOSHI SAKAI**

Division of Applied Life Sciences, Graduate School of Agriculture, Kyoto University, Kitashirakawa-Oiwake, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8502, Japan

Received 8 June 2005; Revised 12 July 2005; Accepted 7 July 2005

**ABSTRACT:** Methanol is a valuable raw material used in the manufacture of useful chemicals as well as a potential source of energy to replace coal and petroleum. Biotechnological interest in the microbial utilization of methanol has increased because it is an ideal carbon source and can be produced from renewable biomass. Formaldehyde, a cytotoxic compound, is a central metabolic intermediate in methanol metabolism. Therefore, microorganisms utilizing methanol have adopted several metabolic strategies to cope with the toxicity of formaldehyde. Formaldehyde is initially detoxified through trapping by some cofactors, such as glutathione, mycothiol, tetrahydrofolate, and tetrahydromethanopterin, before being oxidized to CO₂. Alternatively, free formaldehyde can be trapped by sugar phosphates as the first reaction in the C₁ assimilation pathways: the xylulose monophosphate pathway for yeasts and the ribulose monophosphate (RuMP) pathway for bacteria. In yeasts, although formaldehyde generation and consumption takes place in the peroxisome, the cytosolic formaldehyde oxidation pathway also plays a role in formaldehyde detoxification as well as energy formation. The key enzymes of the RuMP pathway are found in a variety of microorganisms including bacteria and archaea. Regulation of the genes encoding these enzymes and their catalytic mechanisms depend on the physiological traits of these organisms during evolution. © 2005 The Japan Chemical Journal Forum and Wiley Periodicals, Inc. Chem Rec 5: 367–375; 2005: Published online in Wiley InterScience (www.interscience.wiley.com) DOI 10.1002/tcr.20056

Key words: archaea; bacteria; methylotroph; detoxification; formaldehyde; methanol; yeast

## Introduction

Carbon dioxide emissions must be greatly reduced to avoid global warming. One way to reduce the emission of CO₂ is by switching from petroleum to renewable biomass, which converts solar energy to chemical energy during photosynthesis.¹⁻³ Methanol is a liquid and transportable fuel, which can be produced from synthetic gas (syngas) via gasification of a variety of materials of biological origin.⁴⁻⁵ Syngas can be produced from an abundant natural resource, methane, which is a main component of natural gas and is also obtained from organic waste. Methanol is a promising feedstock for “green chemistry” including biotechnological and chemical processes, as well as a primary source of energy.³ A precise understanding of the microbial metabolism of methanol (i.e., the utilization of methanol through biochemical reactions) is required for explaining the production of useful compounds from renewable resources.

---

Correspondence to: Hiroya Yurimoto; e-mail: yury@kais.kyoto-u.ac.jp

The Chemical Record, Vol. 5, 367–375 (2005)

© 2005 The Japan Chemical Journal Forum and Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

Methane, a very potent greenhouse gas (some 20 to 30 times more potent than CO₂),<sup>6</sup> is released into the atmosphere from anaerobic environments. Microbial methane oxidation occurs in soil and aquatic environments, where it modulates the emission of methane into the atmosphere via a possible negative feedback mechanism.<sup>7,8</sup> The methane-utilizing micro-organisms therefore play an important role as a “biofilter” in modulating methane emissions. However, formaldehyde,

---

Hiroya Yurimoto was born in Kyoto, Japan in 1971 and graduated from Kyoto University in 1994. In 1996, he obtained his M.S. from Kyoto University and then a Ph.D. from Kyoto University in 2001 under the direction of Professor Nobuo Kato. He is an Assistant Professor at Kyoto University (1996–present). His research interests include regulation of the gene expression in methylotrophs, the formaldehyde detoxification mechanism in microorganisms, and production of useful proteins by methylotrophs.

---

Nobuo Kato was born in Tokyo, Japan in 1941, and received his Ph.D. from Kyoto University in 1973 in the field of applied microbiology under the guidance of Professor Koichi Ogata. Dr. Kato was appointed Assistant Professor at Kyoto University in 1969, Associate Professor at Tottori University in 1978, and then promoted to Professor in 1989. In 1993, he moved to the Department of Agricultural Chemistry, Kyoto University, as Professor. In 2005, he retired from the Graduate School of Applied Life Sciences, Kyoto University. He spent 15 months as a guest scientist in GBS Braunschweig, Germany, where he joined the group of Professor F. Wagner and Professor H. Sahm. In 2004, he received The Japan Bioscience, Biotechnology and Agrochemistry Society Senior Scientist Award. He is now working at Kyoto Gakuen University. His current research interests focus on the biochemical and genetic aspects of the microbial degradation of xenobiotics.

---

Yasuyoshi Sakai was born in Kobe, Japan in 1959 and graduated from Kyoto University in 1982. In 1984, he obtained his M.S. and then a Ph.D. from Kyoto University in 1988, under the supervision of Professor Yoshiki Tani and Professor Hideaki Yamada. He became an Assistant Professor at Kyoto University in 1988, and an Associate Professor in 1994 (–present). He also served as Adjunct Associate Professor at Nara Advanced Institute for Science and Technology (1999–2001) and is Adjunct Associate Professor at the National Institute for Basic Biology (2000–present). He worked with Professor Suresh Subramani at the University of California at San Diego (1996–1997) as a visiting scientist. He was the recipient of the Kumura Scholarship (1982–1987), Fellowships for Japanese Junior Scientists from JSPS (1988), Uehara Memorial Foundation (1996–1997), Encouragement Award for Young Scientists from the Japan Society for Bioscience, Biotechnology, and Agrochemistry (1998). His current interests focus on molecular and cellular biology of microorganisms and their application to biotechnology, e.g., the molecular mechanism of protein turnover (synthesis and degradation) and heterologous gene expression.

Formaldehyde Detoxification in Methylotrophic Metabolism

Fig. 1. Roles of methylotrophs, autotrophs, and methanogens in the C₁ carbon cycle of the biosphere. Methanogens reduce CO₂ to CH₄ using the redox potential of H₂. Autotrophic organisms, including green plants, synthesize organic compounds (−C–C−) using either light energy or redox potential that is formed through oxidation of inorganic compounds. Methylotrophs use various C₁ compounds and generate CO₂.

which is a cytotoxic compound and a central metabolic intermediate in the metabolism of C₁ compounds in methylotrophs,⁹ is a suspect carcinogen and a cause of “sick house syndrome.”¹⁰ Indeed, formaldehyde outgases from building materials, and is almost ubiquitous in indoor air.¹¹ Therefore, microbial utilization of these C₁ compounds has a significant impact on several environmental issues.

To achieve efficient industrial use of methanol by microorganisms, it is important to elucidate the molecular basis of how methylotrophs cope with the toxicity of formaldehyde. Recently, several biochemical and genetic approaches have established the molecular mechanisms by which the intracellular level of formaldehyde is regulated during microbial growth on C₁ compounds.¹²⁻¹⁴ In this review, we describe the metabolism and regulatory mechanism for the detoxification of formaldehyde in yeasts, bacteria, and archaea.

### Formaldehyde as a Central Metabolic Intermediate in Methylotrophic Metabolism

The principal flow of C₁ compounds in the biosphere is depicted in Figure 1. Carbon dioxide is reduced to methane by microorganisms (methanogens) in anaerobic environments. In addition, CO₂ is fixed into organic compounds by autotrophic microorganisms as well as by green plants under both aerobic and anaerobic conditions. Methylotrophs, which are microbes that can utilize C₁ compounds of a more reduced form than that of CO₂ as a sole source of energy and carbon, are situated between autotrophs and methanogens (Fig. 1).

Fig. 2. Outline of methylotrophic metabolism of C₁ compounds. HCHO generation, oxidation of several C₁ compounds to formaldehyde; HCHO oxidation, formaldehyde oxidation to CO₂; HCHO fixation, formaldehyde fixation (assimilation) pathways to C₃ compounds, which are common metabolic intermediates. A, the ribulose monophosphate pathway; B, the serine pathway; C, the xylulose monophosphate pathway; D, the cyclic oxidative ribulose monophosphate pathway. (Abbreviations: Ru5P, ribulose 5-phosphate; Hu6P, D-arabino-3-hexulose 6-phosphate; Xu5P, xylulose 5-phosphate; DHA, dihydroxyacetone; GAP, glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate.)

There is a diverse range of C₁ compounds, such as methane, methanol, formaldehyde, methylated amines, methylated sulfur compounds, and methyl halogenates, which are ubiquitous in nature and represent the principal compounds of the C₁ carbon cycle (methane cycle) in the biosphere. This is well illustrated by the fact that obligate methylotrophs are able to use only reduced C₁ compounds and are commonly found in nature.

The microbial metabolism of reduced C₁ compounds is outlined in Figure 2. The C₁ compounds are first oxidized to formaldehyde, which is situated at the branching point between further oxidation to CO₂ for energy formation and assimilation for biosynthesis. Thus, the fate of formaldehyde is considered central in understanding methylotrophic metabolism. In general, the type of reaction involved in the oxidation of the reduced C₁ compounds to formaldehyde depends on both the C₁ substrates and microbial species. For example, methanol is oxidized to formaldehyde by pyrroloquinoline quinone (PQQ)-dependent methanol dehydrogenase of Gram-negative bacteria,¹⁵,¹⁶ by NAD(P)-binding dehydrogenase of Gram-positive bacteria,¹⁷ NAD-linked alcohol dehydrogenase of the thermotolerant *Bacillus* sp.,¹⁸ and

FAD-containing alcohol oxidase of yeasts.¹² Oxidation of formaldehyde to CO₂ is a key step in formaldehyde detoxification and energy metabolism. Diverse pathways are known for formaldehyde oxidation: several linear cofactor-linked pathways (see below) and the cyclic oxidation pathway.¹³,¹⁹ In the fixation of formaldehyde, three pathways for the net synthesis of the C₂ or C₃ skeleton from formaldehyde are known, the serine pathway, the ribulose monophosphate (RuMP) pathway, and the xylulose monophosphate (XuMP) pathway.²⁰ The first two pathways are found in prokaryotes; the latter pathway is found in yeast.

Although formaldehyde is a crucial central metabolic intermediate in methylotrophic metabolism, it is highly toxic. The toxicity arises from the high level of nonspecific reactivity of formaldehyde with proteins and nucleic acids. All organisms produce a low concentration of formaldehyde as a result of demethylation reactions; formaldehyde was probably one of the most abundant organic chemicals in prebiotic times.²¹ Thus, in the course of evolution, all living organisms had to acquire the metabolic function for formaldehyde detoxification to adapt to environmental conditions. A principal question has arisen as to how the toxic metabolite is managed in the high-flux conditions of methylotrophic cells.

### Cofactors Involved in Formaldehyde Detoxification

Formaldehyde is initially detoxified through trapping by cofactors, such as glutathione, mycothiol, tetrahydrofolate, and tetrahydromethanopterin (Fig. 3). Condensation of formaldehyde and the respective C₁ carrier occurs spontaneously or is accelerated by formaldehyde-activating enzyme.¹³ The formaldehyde adducts formed by these processes can be used for oxidation to CO₂ for energy production or assimilation for biosynthesis. For example, a nontoxic thiohemiketal adduct of formaldehyde with glutathione (S-hydroxymethyl glutathione) is oxidized to CO₂ via NAD⁺-linked dehydrogenase reactions. This is the most common reaction for formaldehyde conversion in many nonmethylotrophic organisms including plants and mammals, as well as in methylotrophic bacteria and yeasts.²² Several Gram-positive bacteria do not contain glutathione but instead possess a “sugar thiol,” mycothiol.²³ Interestingly, these bacteria generate a thiohemiketal adduct of formaldehyde with mycothiol.²⁴ The C₁-unit bound to tetrahydrofolate (H₄F) is utilized for a variety of biosynthetic processes in methylotrophic and nonmethylotrophic organisms.²⁵ In some methylotrophic bacteria, formaldehyde nonenzymatically reacts with H₄F to generate methylene–H₄F, which can either enter the oxidation pathway or the serine pathway for biosynthesis.¹³ Reactions linked with tetrahy-

dromethanopterin (H₄MPT) are commonly found in obligate anaerobic archaea, methanogens and acetogens.²⁶ A condensation reaction of formaldehyde and H₄MPT was found in an aerobic methylotrophic bacterium, *Methylobacterium extorquens* AM1.²⁷ The bacterium contains H₄MPT in a dephosphorylated form which lacks the terminal α-hydroxyglutaryl phosphate unit.²⁷,²⁸ Methylene–H₄MPT is utilized in further oxidation reactions to detoxify formaldehyde and generate energy. The condensation of formaldehyde and H₄MPT occurs spontaneously, but is accelerated by a specific enzyme, formaldehyde-activating enzyme (Fae).²⁹ Analogous to the reaction catalyzed by Fae, condensation of formaldehyde and glutathione is accelerated by glutathione-dependent formaldehyde-activating enzyme (Gfa) in *Paracoccus denitrificans*.³⁰

#### Methanol Metabolism and Formaldehyde Detoxification in Yeasts

The metabolism of methanol in the methylotrophic yeast, *Candida boidinii*, is summarized in Figure 4.¹² Methanol is first oxidized to formaldehyde by alcohol oxidase (AOD). A portion of the formaldehyde is directly fixed with xylulose 5-phosphate to produce dihydroxyacetone and glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate by dihydroxyacetone synthase (DAS). This enzyme is a type of thiamine pyrophosphate-dependent transketolase, and uses xylulose 5-phosphate and formaldehyde as physiological substrates.³¹ The reaction products are used to synthesize cell constituents. Alternatively, formaldehyde reacts nonenzymatically with the reduced form of glutathione to generate S-hydroxymethyl glutathione. The product is then successively oxidized to CO₂ through the glutathione-dependent oxidation pathway, involving NAD⁺- and glutathione-dependent formaldehyde dehydrogenase (FLD), S-formylglutathione hydrolase (FGH), and NAD⁺-dependent formate dehydrogenase (FDH). This pathway is considered to have two physiological roles: formaldehyde detoxification and energy generation through NADH production.

We have studied the physiological role of the glutathione-dependent formaldehyde oxidation pathway by disrupting each gene on the pathway in *C. boidinii*.²²,³²,³³ Table 1 summarizes our results from methanol-limited chemostat culture experiments, in which formaldehyde toxicity was minimized. The *fld1Δ* strain was unable to grow on methanol even under chemostat conditions. However, the *fgh1Δ* and *fdh1Δ* strains were able to grow although the growth yields were only 10% and 25% of that of the wild-type strain, respectively. In the formaldehyde oxidation pathway, two moles of NADH were generated from one mole of dissimilated formaldehyde. While one mole of NADH could be generated in the *fgh1Δ* and *fdh1Δ* strains, no NADH was formed in the *fld1Δ* strain. From these

Formaldehyde Detoxification in Methylotrophic Metabolism

A

Glutathione (GSH)

Tetrahydrofolate (H₄F)

Mycothiol (MySH)

Dephospho tetrahydromethanopterin (H₄MPT)

B


$\begin{array}{ccc}
\text { GSH } & \rightarrow & \text { GS-CH₂OH } \\
& & \text { Oxidation } \\
\text { MySH } & \rightarrow & \text { MyS-CH₂OH } \\
& & \text { Oxidation } \\
\text { HCHO } & \rightarrow & \text { CH₂=H₄F } \\
& & \text { Oxidation } \\
\text { Seine pathway } \\
\text { H₄MPT } & \rightarrow & \text { CH₂=H₄MPT } \\
& & \text { Oxidation }
\end{array}$


Fig. 3. A: Structures of cofactors involved in formaldehyde conversion. B: Reactions of cofactor-dependent formaldehyde conversion. GS–CH₂OH (S-hydroxymethyl glutathione) is oxidized by formaldehyde dehydrogenase to S-formyl-glutathione, which is converted to CO₂ through S-formylglutathione hydrolase and formate dehydrogenase (see text). MyS–CH₂OH (S-hydroxymethyl mycothiol) is oxidized to S-formylmycothiol by mycothiol-dependent formaldehyde dehydrogenase. The thiol formate ester is thought to be converted into the corresponding carbonate ester.²⁴ CH₂═H₄F (N⁵, N¹⁰-methylene-tetrahydrofolate) is incorporated into the oxidation pathway to CO₂ and the serine pathway for synthesis of cell constituents.¹³ CH₂═H₄MPT (N⁵, N¹⁰-methylene-tetrahydromethanopterin) is formed by formaldehyde activating enzyme, and then oxidized to CO₂.¹³

results, one mole of NADH from one mole of dissimilated formaldehyde was considered sufficient to support suboptimal growth on methanol. Furthermore, our results indicate that the glutathione-dependent formaldehyde oxidation pathway plays dual physiological roles: detoxification of formaldehyde and energy generation through NADH production. FGH seems to play an important role in the regeneration of glutathione.

We also showed that the glutathione-independent formaldehyde oxidation pathway participates in formaldehyde detoxification in methylotrophic yeasts. We found that a significant amount of methyl formate accumulates during the growth of several methylotrophic yeast strains under normal physiological conditions. Furthermore, we discovered that methyl formate synthesis is catalyzed by alcohol dehydrogenases.³⁴ Methyl formate synthesis involves dehydration of the hydroxyl group in the hemiacetal that was formed nonenzymatically from formaldehyde and methanol. Although the contribution of the glutathione-independent formaldehyde oxidation pathway to methanol metabolism is less than that of the glutathione-dependent pathway, our results were the first to shed light on the poorly understood phenomenon of the involvement of alcohol dehydrogenases in the formaldehyde oxidation pathway in methylotrophic yeasts. It may be useful to point out that alcohol dehydrogenase and FLD, which are present in most yeast cells, have both evolved to play impor-

© 2005 The Japan Chemical Journal Forum and Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

THE CHEMICAL RECORD

Table 1. Growth yields of formaldehyde oxidation pathway gene-disrupted strains.

| Strain       | Relative cell yields [a] (%) | NADH (mol/1 mol dissimilated formaldehyde) |
|--------------|-----------------------------|-------------------------------------------|
| wild type    | 100                         | 2                                         |
| fld1Δ        | 0                           | 0                                         |
| fgh1Δ        | 10                          | 1                                         |
| fdh1Δ        | 25                          | 1                                         |

[a] Cell yields of the wild type, fld1Δ, fgh1Δ, and fdh1Δ strains on methanol-limited chemostat cultures are given relative to the cell yield of the wild-type strain.

Fig. 4. Outline of methanol metabolism in the methylotrophic yeast *Candida boidinii*. Enzymes: AOD, alcohol oxidase; CTA, catalase; DAS, dihydroxyacetone synthase; DAK, dihydroxyacetone kinase; FDH, formate dehydrogenase; FGH, S-formylglutathione hydrolase; FLD, formaldehyde dehydrogenase. (Abbreviations: DHA, dihydroxyacetone; DHAP, dihydroxyacetone phosphate; FBP, fructose 1,6-bisphosphate; GAP, glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate; GS-CH₂OH, S-hydroxymethyl glutathione; GS-CHO, S-formylglutathione.)

tant roles in formaldehyde detoxification during the methanol metabolism of methylotrophic yeasts.

Methanol-grown cells contain clusters of large, adherent organelles, peroxisomes.³⁵ Both AOD and DAS are major components of the peroxisomal matrix, suggesting that the generation and fixation of formaldehyde is primarily confined to this organelle. Compartmentalization of the formaldehyde conversion reactions in a membrane-bound organelle may be one cellular strategy to avoid formaldehyde toxicity. Furthermore, glutathione was also shown to be present in the peroxisome at a physiologically significant level,³⁶ indicating that the thiohemiketal adduct with glutathione is formed within the peroxisomes and then exported to the cytosol.²²,³³

An elegant mechanism for induction of AOD and DAS seems to prevent an excess accumulation of formaldehyde in the peroxisome during growth on methanol.¹² Induction of DAS preceded that of AOD during the early stages of methanol induction.³⁷ This timely fashioned induction of AOD and DAS helps to minimize the toxicity of formaldehyde in the peroxisome.

### Formaldehyde Fixation in Bacteria Via the RuMP Pathway

Methylotrophic bacteria are known to have either of two C₁ assimilation pathways: the serine pathway or the RuMP pathway.²⁰ In the RuMP pathway, formaldehyde is fixed with ribulose 5-phosphate to form D-arabino-3-hexulose 6-phosphate, which then isomerizes to fructose 6-phosphate

Formaldehyde Detoxification in Methylotrophic Metabolism

A

Cell  
constituents  

HCHO  
CH₂OH  
CO  
HCOH  
HCOH  
CH₂O-P  

Ru5P  
↑  
HOCH  
CO  
HCOH  
HCOH  
CH₂O-P  

HPS  
Hu6P  
↓  
HOCH  
CO  
HCOH  
HCOH  
CH₂O-P  

F6P  
↓  
HOCH  
CO  
HCOH  
HCOH  
CH₂O-P  

FBP  
↓  
CH₂OH  
CO  
CH₂O-P  

DHAP  
CHO  
HCOH  
CH₂O-P  

GAP  
↓  
Rearrangement reactions  

B  

Methylomonas aminofaciens 77a  
(obligate methylotroph)  

Pyrococcus horikoshii OT3  
(hyperthermophilic archaeon)  

hps  
IS10-R  
phi  

Down-regulation  
Up-regulation  

Mycobacterium gastri MB19  
(facultative methylotroph)  

Aeropyrum pernix K1  
(aerobic hyperthermophilic archaeon)  

rmpR  
phi  
hps  

rmp operon  

Bacillus brevis S1  
(facultative methylotroph)  

Methanosarcina mazei Goel1  
(methanogenic archaeon)  

g6pdh  
hps  
phi  

rmp operon  

fae  
hps  

hps  
mtf  

Bacillus subtilis  
(non-methylotroph)  

yckH  
hps  
phi  

rmp operon  

Fig. 5. A: Ribulose monophosphate pathway for formaldehyde fixation. HPS, 3-hexulose-6-phosphate synthase; PHI, 6-phospho-3-hexuloisomerase. (Abbreviations: Ru5P, ribulose 5-phosphate; Hu6P, D-arabino-3-hexulose 6-phosphate; F6P, fructose 6-phosphate; FBP, fructose 1.6-bisphosphate; DHAP, dihydroxyacetone phosphate; GAP, glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate.) B: Gene clusters for the ribulose monophosphate pathway in bacteria and archaea. Genes: IS10R, transposase; hps, HPS; phi, PHI; rmpR, regulator protein; g6pdh, glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase; yckH, regulator protein; fae, formaldehyde activating enzyme; mtf, methyl transferase.

demethylase reaction is metabolized via the RuMP pathway, and consequently detoxified.⁴⁶

Formaldehyde Conversion in Archaea

Archaeal strains differ in the gene organization of hps and phi from bacterial strains (Fig. 5B). Among them, the most interesting gene organization is found in the hyperthermophilic anaerobic strain, *Pyrococcus horikoshii* OT3, which contains an open reading frame (*PH1938*) encoding both *hps* and *phi* sequences.⁴¹ The fused HPS and PHI orthologs are also found in the genomes of *P. abyssi* and *P. furiosus*, suggesting that this fused gene is a genetic trait in *Pyrococcus*. *P. horikoshii* OT3 constitutively produced the HPS–PHI fused protein, which exhibited activity of HPS and PHI.⁴⁷ The full-length gene encoding the bifunctional enzyme and truncated versions of the gene corresponding to either the HPS region or the PHI

THE CHEMICAL RECORD

| Gene introduced into *E. coli* | Recombinant protein (subunit) | Catalyzed reaction | Half-lives of activity at $90^\circ$C (min) |
|-------------------------------|-----------------------------|--------------------|-------------------------------------------|
| $\text{hps}$ $\phi$ (PH1938)  | rHps-Phi (tetramer)         | HCHO → Ru5P → Hu6P → F6P | >90                                      |
| $\text{hps}$                  | rHps (monomer)              | HCHO → Ru5P → Hu6P      | 45                                        |
| $\phi$                        | rPhi (tetramer)             | Hu6P → F6P          | <5                                        |

Fig. 6. Characterization of recombinant proteins, rHps-Phi, rHps, and rPhi.

region were engineered for expression in *Escherichia coli*. All three recombinant enzymes (rHps-Phi, rHps, and rPhi) were found to be active (Fig. 6). In a comparison of molar activities of the bifunctional rHps-Phi protein with a mixture of rHps protein and rPhi protein on an equimolar subunit basis, the activity of the fused enzyme at $80^\circ$C was about 50 times greater than a mixture of the two separate enzymes. Fusion of two enzyme activities into a single polypeptide presumably increases the efficiency of the net reaction by significantly increasing the localized concentration of the first reaction product within the vicinity of the PHI component. The half-lives of rHps-Phi and rHps activities at $90^\circ$C were >90 min and 45 min, respectively. In contrast, the half-life of rPhi activity at $90^\circ$C was <5 min (Fig. 6). This suggests that the thermostability of the PHI moiety of the bifunctional protein resulted from fusion with HPS. rHps-Phi protein was highly active at normal growth temperatures ($80–90^\circ$C) for *P. horikoshii* OT3, and the maximum activity ($V_{\text{max}}$) of rHps-Phi protein for formaldehyde fixation (526 units per mg protein) is comparable to that of the thermotolerant methylotroph, *Bacillus* strain C1 (480 units per mg protein at $50^\circ$C). Judging from this evidence, the HPS-PHI bifunctional enzyme should play a significant physiological role in the organism under hyperthermophilic and anaerobic conditions. *P. horikoshii* OT3 was originally isolated from a marine hyperthermal vent. Although the presence of formaldehyde has not been demonstrated directly in these extreme environmental conditions, this would not be surprising given that C₁ compounds are known to be present at a variety of redox levels in marine hyperthermal vents (i.e., methane, CO, CO₂). Constitutive production of HPS-PHI fusion protein in *P. horikoshii* OT3 may indicate functional formaldehyde metabolism in such extreme environmental conditions.

Expression of HPS and PHI is inducible by formaldehyde in all methylotrophs and nonmethylotrophs that have been characterized. Constitutive production of HPS and PHI in

archaea implies that HPS and PHI may function in the fundamental metabolism of the cells. In this sense, the reverse reaction mediated by HPS and PHI (ribulose 5-phosphate formation from fructose 6-phosphate) might have an alternative physiological role in archaea. Recently, several reports suggested that the reverse RuMP pathway may be employed for pentose phosphate synthesis in some archaea that lack certain enzymes of the nonoxidative pentose phosphate pathway. The specific activity of the reverse reaction of rHps-Phi was approximately one-seventh that of the forward reaction. By comparison with the specific activities of other enzymes in the related metabolic pathways, however, the level of activities of the reverse reaction is estimated to be of physiological significance. To date, the fate of formaldehyde generated from the reverse reaction *in vivo* remains unknown. More detailed analyses for formaldehyde detoxification are required to elucidate the physiological function of HPS-PHI protein and the fate of formaldehyde in archaea.

## Conclusion and Prospects

Between the end of the 1970s and the mid-1980s, numerous microbial processes for manufacturing useful biological products (e.g., proteins, amino acids, and vitamins) were developed using methanol as the carbon source. However, few of these applications have reached commercial reality, mainly because of the high cost of the substrate and relatively low productivity compared with conventional processes. Nevertheless, methanol is a promising feedstock because it can be produced from renewable resources (i.e., biomass). Recently, our understanding of the genetics and metabolism of methylotrophic organisms, especially the conversion of the central metabolic intermediate, formaldehyde, has greatly increased. A variety of heterologous gene expression systems using methylotrophs have been established. Genetic engineering of methylotrophs has enabled us to introduce enzyme systems from other organisms for metabolic engineering. Thus, methylotrophs are an ideal host for the biotechnological production of useful compounds. Further research into this area will also establish the role played in nature by these organisms in the C₁ carbon cycle.

## REFERENCES

[1] Wahlund, B.; Yan, J.; Westermark, M. Biomass and Bioenergy 2004, 26, 531.

[2] Asadullah, M.; Miyazawa, T.; Ito, S.; Kunimori, K.; Tomishige, K. Appl Catal A: Gen 2003, 246, 103.

[3] Spath, P. L.; Dayton, D. C. NREL/TP-510-34929 2003, http://www.nrel.gov/docs/fy04osti/34929.pdf.

[4] Chmielniak, T.; Sciazko, M. Appl Energy 2003, 74, 393.

[5] Hamelinck, C. N.; Faaij, A. P. C. NWS-E-2001-49 2001, http://www.chem.uu.nl/nws/www/publica/e2001.

[6] Lelieveld, J.; Crutzem, P. J.; Bruhl, C. Chemosphere 1993, 26, 739.

[7] Reeburgh, W. S.; Whalen, S. C.; Alperin, M. J. In Microbial growth on C₁ compounds. J. C. Murrell, D. P. Kelly, Eds. Intercept Ltd.: Andover, 1993, p 1.

[8] Hanson, R.; Hanson, T. Microbiol Rev 1996, 60, 439.

[9] Attwood, M. M.; Quayle, J. R. In Microbial growth on C₁ compounds. R. S. Hanson, Ed. ASM: Washington DC, 1984, p 315.

[10] Teng, S.; Beard, K.; Pourahmad, J.; Moridani, M.; Easson, D.; Poon, R.; O’Brien, P. J. Chemico-Biol Interact 2001, 130, 285.

[11] Giese, M.; Bauer-Doranth, U.; Langebartels, C.; Sandermann, J. H. Plant Physiol 1994, 104, 1301.

[12] Yurimoto, H.; Sakai, Y.; Kato, N. In *Hansenula polymorpha—Biology and Applications*. G. Gellissen, Ed. Wiley-VCH: Weinheim, 2002, p 61.

[13] Vorholt, J. A. Arch Microbiol 2002, 178, 239.

[14] Marx, C. J.; Van Dien, S. J.; Lidstrom, M. E. PLoS Biol 2005, 3, 244.

[15] Anthony, C.; Gohsh, M. Progr Biophys Mol Biol 1998, 69, 1.

[16] Duine, J. A. J Biosci Bioeng 1999, 88, 231.

[17] van Ophem, P. W.; van Beeumen, J.; Duine, J. A. Eur J Biochem 1993, 212, 819.

[18] Arfman, N.; Dijkhuizen, L. Methods Enzymol 1990, 188, 223.

[19] Chistoserdova, L.; Gomelsky, L.; Vorholt, J. A.; Gomelsky, M.; Tsygankov, Y. D.; Lidstrom, M. E. Microbiology 2000, 146, 233.

[20] Murrell, J. C.; McDonald, I. R. In Encyclopedia of Microbiology, Vol. 3. J. Lederberg, Ed. Academic Press: London, 2000, p 245.

[21] Cooper, G.; Kimmich, N.; Belisle, W.; Sarinana, J.; Brabham, K.; Garrel, L. Nature 2001, 414, 879.

[22] Lee, B.; Yurimoto, H.; Sakai, Y.; Kato, N. Microbiology 2002, 148, 2697.

[23] Duine, J. A. BioFactors 1999, 10, 201.

[24] Newton, G. L.; Fahey, R. C. Arch Microbiol 2002, 178, 388.

[25] Maden, B. E. H. Biochem J 2000, 350, 609.

[26] Thauer, R. K. Microbiology 1998, 144, 2377.

[27] Chistoserdova, L.; Vorholt, J. A.; Thauer, R. K.; Lidstrom, M. E. Science 1998, 281, 99.

[28] Vorholt, J. A.; Chistoserdova, L.; Lidstrom, M. E.; Thauer, R. K. J. Bacteriol. 1998, 180, 5351.

[29] Vorholt, J. A.; Marx, C. J.; Lidstrom, M. E.; Thauer, R. K. J Bacteriol 2000, 182, 6645.

[30] Goenrich, M.; Bartoschek, S.; Hagemeier, C. H.; Griesinger, C.; Vorholt, J. A. J Biol Chem 2002, 277, 3069.

[31] Kato, N.; Higuchi, T.; Sakazawa, C.; Hishizawa, T.; Tani, Y.; Yamada, H. Biochim Biophys Acta 1982, 715, 143.

[32] Sakai, Y.; Muranoto, A. P.; Konishi, T.; Iwamatsu, A.; Kato, N. J Bacteriol 1997, 179, 4480.

[33] Yurimoto, H.; Lee, B.; Yano, T.; Sakai, Y.; Kato, N. Microbiology 2003, 149, 1971.

[34] Yurimoto, H.; Lee, B.; Yasuda, F.; Sakai, Y.; Kato, N. Yeast 2004, 21, 341.

[35] Veenhuis, M.; van Dijken, J. P.; Harder, W. Adv Microbial Physiol 1983, 24, 1.

[36] Horiguchi, H.; Yurimoto, H.; Kato, N.; Sakai, Y. J Biol Chem 2001, 276, 14279.

[37] Sakai, Y.; Saiganji, A.; Yurimoto, H.; Takabe, K.; Saiki, H.; Kato, N. J Cell Biol 1996, 134, 37.

[38] Kato, N. Methods Enzymol 1990, 188, 397.

[39] Yanase, H.; Ikeyama, K.; Mitsui, R.; Ra, S.; Kita, K.; Sakai, Y.; Kato, N. FEMS Microbiol Lett 1996, 135, 201.

[40] Yanase, H.; Sato, Y.; Kita, K.; Sato, Y.; Kato, N. Biosci Biotechnol Biochem 1993, 57, 308.

[41] Mitsui, R.; Sakai, Y.; Yasueda, H.; Kato, N. J Bacteriol 2000, 184, 944.

[42] Sakai, Y.; Mitsui, R.; Katayama, Y.; Yanase, H.; Kato, N. FEMS Microbiol Lett 1999, 176, 125.

[43] Yurimoto, H.; Hirai, R.; Yasueda, H.; Mitsui, R.; Sakai, Y.; Kato, N. FEMS Microbiol Lett 2002, 214, 189.

[44] Yasueda, H.; Kawahara, K.; Sugimoto, S. J Bacteriol 1999, 181, 7154.

[45] Yurimoto, H.; Hirai, R.; Matsuno, N.; Yasueda, H.; Kato, N.; Sakai, Y. Mol Microbiol 2005, 57, 511.

[46] Mitsui, R.; Kusano, Y.; Yurimoto, H.; Sakai, Y.; Kato, N.; Tanaka, M. Appl Environ Microbiol 2003, 69, 6128.

[47] Orita, I.; Yurimoto, H.; Hirai, R.; Kawarabayasi, Y.; Sakai, Y.; Katou, N. J Bacteriol 2005, 187, 3636.

[48] Arfman, N.; Bystrykh, L.; Govorukhina, N. I.; Dijkhuizen, L. Methods Enzymol 1990, 188, 391.

[49] Kawarabayasi, Y.; Sawada, M.; Horikawa, H.; Haikawa, Y.; Hino, Y.; Yamamoto, S.; Sekine, M.; Baba, S.; Kosugi, H.; Hosoyama, A.; Nagai, Y.; Sakai, N.; Ogura, K.; Otsuka, R.; Nakazawa, H.; Takamiya, M.; Ohfuku, Y.; Funahashi, T.; Tanaka, T.; Kudoh, Y.; Yamazaki, J.; Kushida, N.; Oguchi, A.; Aoki, K.; Yoshizawa, T.; Nakamura, Y.; Robb, F. T.; Horikoshi, K.; Masuchi, Y.; Shizuya, H.; Kikuchi, H. DNA Res 1998, 5, 55.

[50] Xavier, K. B.; Da Costa, M. S.; Santos, H. J Bacteriol 2000, 182, 4632.

[51] Verhees, C. H.; Kengen, W. M.; Tuninga, J. E.; Schut, G. J.; Adams, M. W. W.; de Vos, W. M.; van der Oost, J. Biochem J 2000, 375, 231.

[52] Soderberg, T. Archaea 2004, 1, 347.

[53] Goenrich, M.; Thauer, R. K.; Yurimoto, H.; Kato, N. Arch Microbiol 2005, in press.

[54] Kato, N.; Tani, Y.; Yamada, H. In Advances in Biotechnological Processes, Vol. 1. A. Mizrahi, A. L. van Wezel, Eds. Alan R. Liss, Inc.: New York, 1983, p 171.

[55] Leak, D. L. In Methane and Methanol Utilizers. J. C. Murrell, H. Dalton, Eds. Plenum Press: New York, 1992, p 245.

[56] Sakai, Y.; Tani, Y.; Kato, N. J Mol Catalysis B: Enzymatic 1999, 6, 161.

[57] Cereghino, J. L.; Cregg, J. M. FEMS Microbiol Rev 2000, 24, 45.

[58] Gellissen, G. Appl Environ Microbiol 2000, 54, 741.
