
Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

**SCIENCE DIRECT**

Research in Microbiology 157 (2006) 206–212

Mini-review

# The role of the Rcs phosphorelay in Enterobacteriaceae

Ya-Hui Huang, Lionel Ferrières, David J. Clarke*

Molecular Microbiology Laboratory, Department of Biology and Biochemistry, University of Bath, Bath BA2 7AY, UK

Received 26 October 2005; accepted 25 November 2005  
Available online 4 January 2006

---

## Abstract

The Rcs phosphorelay is composed of the sensor kinase, RcsC, the HPt-domain protein RcsD and the response regulator, RcsB. In this review we discuss the role of the Rcs phosphorelay in the *Enterobacteriaceae*, highlighting the observation that the Rcs phosphorelay appears to play a key role in the temporal regulation of biofilm formation and pathogenicity.

© 2006 Elsevier SAS. All rights reserved.

Keywords: Rcs; Phosphorelay; Enterobacteriaceae; Biofilm formation

---

## 1. Two-component pathways

Two-component pathways are sophisticated signalling systems used by microorganisms to sense and respond to changes in the environment. The prototypical pathway is composed of two signal transducers, the sensor histidine kinase (HK) and the response regulator (RR), which exchange a phosphoryl group. The transducer proteins are characterised by two conserved domains, called the transmitter domain (H1) and the receiver domain (D1). These domains contain well-conserved amino acid residues, histidine (His) and aspartate (Asp), respectively, that are involved in the transfer of the phosphoryl group from the HK to the RR. This phosphorelay between histidine and aspartate is the basis of all two-component pathways [55].

The availability of complete genome sequences has allowed the definitive assessment of the prevalence of two-component proteins in bacteria. In silico analysis reveals that two-component pathways are found in many bacteria, and there is a correlation between the genetic complexity and organism's life style [3]. Bacteria can have multiple two-component pathways that respond to the changing environment, for example in *Escherichia coli* there are 23 HKs and 32 RRs [43]. Moreover, some two-component pathways contain more than a single transmitter and receiver domain resulting in more complex phosphorelays. In this review we are focusing on recent work that has increased our understanding of the role of one of these complex phosphorelays, the Rcs phosphorelay, found in *E. coli* and other members of the *Enterobacteriaceae*.

---

## 2. The Rcs phosphorelay

The Rcs phosphorelay in *E. coli* was originally described as a regulator of the expression of the *cps* operon, encoding the proteins required for the production of capsular polysaccharide colanic acid [56]. The Rcs phosphorelay is unique in *E. coli* as it is composed of 3 separate proteins containing 4 signalling domains. The sensor kinase of this phosphorelay, RcsC, is a hybrid kinase, as the protein contains both a H1 and D1 domain [57]. The conserved histidine and aspartate residues in both domains have been shown to be involved in the phosphorelay [10]. RcsB is the response regulator of the Rcs phosphorelay and RcsB contains a conserved receiver domain (D2) [57]. In addition to RcsC and RcsB, a third protein, RcsD (previously called YojN), which contains a histidine phosphotransfer (HPt) domain, has been shown to be required for the Rcs phosphorelay [59]. After RcsC senses an environmental signal, the conserved His in H1 is phosphorylated by an autophosphorylation event and the phosphoryl group is transferred to the conserved Asp in the D1 domain of RcsC. The phosphoryl group is then transferred to the His residue in the HPt domain of RcsD and finally to the D2 domain of RcsB. Once phosphorylated, phospho-RcsB is able to bind DNA and to regulate the transcription of its target genes (see Fig. 1). For a more detailed review on the molecular genetics

* Corresponding author.
* E-mail address: bssdjc@bath.ac.uk (D.J. Clarke).

0923-2508/$ – see front matter © 2006 Elsevier SAS. All rights reserved.  
doi:10.1016/j.resmic.2005.11.005

localised protein called IgaA (YrfF) [7,13,62]. Homologues of IgaA (YrfF) are found in other bacteria that have the Rcs phosphorelay, e.g. mutations in *yrfF* also activate the Rcs phosphorelay in *E. coli*, suggesting IgaA/YrfF may be part of the Rcs signalling network [41].

## 3. The Rcs phosphorelay is widespread in the Enterobacteriaceae

The Rcs phosphorelay appears to be exclusive to the family Enterobacteriaceae and genes with homology to *rcsC, rcsB, rcsD, rcsA* and *rcsF* can be found in *E. coli, Shigella flexneri, S. enterica* serovar Typhi, *S. enterica* serovar Typhimurium, *Klebsiella pneumoniae, Photorhabdus luminescens, Proteus mirabilis, Yersinia* spp. and *Erwinia* spp. The *rcs* genes are not found in any of the enterobacterial endosymbiotic bacteria with reduced genome sizes, e.g. *Buchnera* spp., *Wigglesworthia* spp. Where genomic information is available it is apparent that the *rcsC, rcsD* and *rcsB* genes are located together and the gene arrangement within this locus appears to be conserved (see Fig. 2). The *rcsB* and *rcsC* genes are adjacent to each other, but are transcribed in opposite directions. In addition, *rcsD* is upstream of *rcsB* and these two genes are transcribed in the same direction, suggesting that they might be in the same operon. In *E. coli, ompC*, encoding the OmpC porin, is immediately upstream from the *rcs* locus and the occurrence of an *ompC*-like gene in the same position appears to be well conserved throughout the Enterobacteriaceae. In *E. coli* and *S. flexneri* it appears that some genomic expansion has occurred immediately downstream from the *rcsC* gene (see Fig. 2). Both *S. flexneri* and *E. coli* have acquired 9.4 kb of DNA that is highly similar (>98% identity) but is not predicted to encode the same proteins. In addition, strains of *E. coli* K-12, uropathogenic *E. coli* (UPEC) and enteropathogenic *E. coli* (EPEC), but not enterohaemorrhagic *E. coli* (EHEC), have acquired a further 7.3 kb of DNA containing 6 genes, *atoSCDAEB*, predicted to encode proteins involved in the metabolism of acetate. Therefore, the region of DNA immediately downstream from the *rcs* locus appears to be variable in the enterobacterial genomes sequenced to date.

Although the *rcs* locus is present in all sequenced *Yersinia* genomes it is noteworthy that, in contrast to *Y. pseudotuberculosis* and *Y. enterocolitica*, the *rcsD* gene in *Y. pestis* is predicted to be a pseudogene (Stewart Hinchcliffe, personal communication). The degeneration of the *rcsD* gene in *Y. pestis* may represent a specific adaptation by this bacterium to its life-cycle and raises the interesting possibility that the Rcs phosphorelay may have a different role in *Y. pestis*, a recently evolved clone of *Y. pseudotuberculosis*, compared to the other members of the *Yersinia* genus [1,71].

## 4. Activation of the Rcs phosphorelay

Signalling through the Rcs phosphorelay is largely dependent on the RcsC sensor kinase and environmental signals that activate the phosphorelay interact with RcsC in a manner that is either RcsF-dependent or RcsF-independent [38,39]. However,

Y.-H. Huang et al. / Research in Microbiology 157 (2006) 206–212

Fig. 2. Comparative analysis of the *rcs* locus in Enterobacteriaceae. The *rcs* loci from the various sequenced enterobacterial genomes available at ColiBase (http://colibase.bham.ac.uk) were collected and aligned using the MUMmer algorithm available at ColiBase. Sequences shown are *E. coli* K-12 MG1655, *E. coli* CFT073 (UPEC), *E. coli* E2348/69 (EPEC), *E. coli* O157:H7 EDL933 (EHEC), *Shigella flexneri* 2a 2457T, *S. enterica* serovar Typhimurium LT2, *Y. pestis* KIM and *P. luminescens* TT01. These sequences are representative of the other genomic sequences available in their genus, e.g. *Y. pestis* KIM has the same genomic arrangement as *Y. pestis* CO92. The *rcsBDC* genes are shaded in grey and ORFs encoding homologous proteins in the different genomes are given the same shading pattern. Interestingly, although not shown, the genome sequence of *E. coli* K-12 W3110 is predicted to contain an IS2 element inserted at the 3′-end of the *rcsC* gene. However, it has been shown that not all W3110 strains contain this IS2 insertion [53].

given the complex nature of the Rcs phosphorelay, it cannot be excluded that additional input signals may be sensed by other components of the phosphorelay, e.g. RcsD.

A variety of conditions have been described that activate the Rcs phosphorelay in an RcsC-dependent manner and these include the overproduction of DjlA, a membrane chaperone protein, and growth on a solid surface [9,22,33]. Other environmental conditions, such as osmotic shock, desiccation or a combination of growth at low temperature (20 °C) in the presence of glucose as a carbon source and high concentrations of zinc, also activate the Rcs phosphorelay, in an RcsC-dependent manner [29,47,54].

Various treatments that may alter the integrity of the cellular membranes activate the Rcs phosphorelay. The Rcs phosphorelay responds, and is required for adaptation, to the addition of chlorpromazine, a cationic drug that intercalates with the cytoplasmic membrane, to an exponentially growing culture of *E. coli* [12]. Moreover, various mutations that affect cell envelope integrity or composition also activate the Rcs phosphorelay, such as mutations in *tolQRA*, Δ*rfaI* (encompassing genes involved in the production of lipopolysaccharide (LPS)), *pgsA* and *mdoH* (involved in the production of membrane-derived oligosaccharides (MDO)) [11,19,48,53].

The accumulation of TDP-glucose (a precursor for O-antigen and enterobacterial common antigen (ECA) biosynthesis) also results in an *rcsC*-dependent increase in *cps* expression [21]. In addition, mutations in the TAT (twin arginine translocation) secretion system activated the expression of many genes also controlled by the Rcs phosphorelay [30]. Although this may not be surprising, considering that mutations in the TAT system have been shown to affect membrane integrity, the TAT-minus phenotype was largely due to the mis-localisation of two substrates of the TAT system, the AmiA and AmiC amidases [31]. These enzymes are responsible for aspects of peptidoglycan metabolism and suggest that the Rcs phosphorelay may be monitoring or responding to cellular peptidoglycan (PG). In support of this it has recently been shown that the Rcs phosphorelay responds to the presence of the peptidoglycan-targeting β-lactam antibiotics [32,52]. A recent study reported the expression profile of *E. coli* cells following treatment with bacteriocidal levels of ampicillin and we noted that approximately 80% of the genes identified as members of the ampicillin regulon were also regulated by the Rcs phosphorelay ([32] and our unpublished observations). Furthermore, we have shown that ampicillin-mediated induction of one of these genes (*yjbH*) is dependent on the Rcs phosphorelay (see Fig. 3). Therefore, it appears that there may be a link between peptidoglycan and the activity of the Rcs phosphorelay.

The Rcs phosphorelay responds to perturbations in the production of cellular extracellular polysaccharides (EPSs) such as MDO, LPS and PG. Although the biosynthesis of EPSs such as MDO and PG is initiated in the cytoplasm these molecules are transported across the membrane whilst bound to the lipid carrier undecaprenyl phosphate (Un-P). During EPS biosynthesis the undecaprenyl lipid carrier cycles between Un-P and undecaprenyl pyrophosphate (Un-PP) [50,51]. Therefore, it is possible that the Rcs phosphorelay could monitor polysaccharide production by sensing the level of Un-P and/or Un-PP in the membrane. In support of this it has recently been reported that the overproduction of UppP (undecaprenyl pyrophosphate phosphatase) activates the expression of the Rcs-regulated *cps* operon [20]. The overproduction of UppP results in an increased resistance to the antibiotic bacitracin compared to control cells. Bacitracin functions by sequestering Un-PP, resulting

Y.-H. Huang et al. / Research in Microbiology 157 (2006) 206–212

---

**Fig. 3.** The induction of $yjbH$ expression by ampicillin treatment is dependent on the Rcs phosphorelay. In *E. coli*, the $yjbH$ gene is part of the $yjbEFGH$ operon and is predicted to encode a lipoprotein. Expression of the $yjbH$ gene is positively regulated by the Rcs phosphorelay and by ampicillin treatment [22,32]. To determine if the induction of $yjbH$ expression observed after ampicillin treatment was mediated by the Rcs phosphorelay, cells were grown at $37^\circ \mathrm{C}$ with agitation until $\mathrm{OD}_{600} = 0.3$ when $100 \mu \mathrm{g} / \mathrm{ml}$ (final concentration) of ampicillin was added to the culture (+Amp). Strains used are derivatives of *E. coli* ZK2686 (WT) or BMM520 (ZK2686 $\Delta rcsC$) carrying the $yjbH-lacZ$ reporter fusion [22]. After 30 min, samples were taken and the $\beta$-galactosidase activity was assayed as described previously [22]. The data shown are the mean of 4 independent experiments and the error bars represent the standard deviation.

in the loss of cell wall integrity and cell lysis, and it is thought that overproduction of UppP will effectively lower the amount of Un-PP in the cytoplasmic membrane [20]. Therefore, the hypothesis currently being tested in our laboratory is that the Rcs phosphorelay is monitoring the state of Un-P(P) in the cytoplasmic membrane and changes in the level/ratio of Un-P(P) may be a signal controlling the activity of the phosphorelay.

## 5. The Rcs regulon

Expression profiling studies have shown that the Rcs phosphorelay affects the expression of many genes in *E. coli*. In one study, using a combination of low temperature, glucose as the sole carbon source and high concentrations of zinc as the activating signal, 32 genes were identified as members of the Rcs regulon [29]. In another study, using DjlA overproduction as the signal, over 150 genes were identified as being regulated by the Rcs phosphorelay [22]. In both studies many of the genes identified encoded proteins that were associated with membrane integrity or structure, suggesting that the Rcs phosphorelay contributes to the modification of the bacterial surface in response to the changes in the environment.

In addition to the regulation of colanic acid production in *E. coli*, the Rcs phosphorelay regulates the synthesis of type I capsular polysaccharides in other bacteria, including Vi antigen in *Salmonella typhi* and amylovoran in the plant pathogen, *Erwinia amylovora* [34,69]. The Rcs phosphorelay also participates in the regulation of the *Salmonella ugd* gene, a gene that is required for the production of L-aminoarabinose, an amino sugar that is added to the lipid A moiety of LPS to induce resistance to antimicrobial cationic peptides [28,45,46].

The Rcs phosphorelay has been shown to be involved in the regulation of a variety of cellular processes. It positively regulates the expression of the cell division genes $ftsA$ and $ftsZ$ in *E. coli* [8]. Interestingly, the Rcs phosphorelay also regulates flagella biosynthesis and motility in *E. coli*, *Salmonella enterica* and *P. mirabilis*, although not necessarily in the same way. The Rcs phosphorelay negatively regulates flagella synthesis and motility in *E. coli* K-12, by repressing the $flhDC$ operon, and in *P. mirabilis*. Indeed, insertions in $rcsD$ in *E. coli* and $rsbA$ (the homologue of $rcsD$) in *P. mirabilis* result in a precocious swarming phenotype [4,24,59]. On the other hand, the same mutation in *S. enterica* serovar Typhimurium results in a loss of swarming motility [64].

The Rcs phosphorelay also controls the synthesis of a small regulatory RNA, RprA, shown to post-transcriptionally regulate the level of $\sigma^s$ in *E. coli* [37,40]. This implies that the Rcs phosphorelay may also indirectly regulate gene expression and it is perhaps not surprising that some of the genes identified in the Rcs microarray studies are also regulated by $\sigma^s$, e.g. $osmB$, $osmC$ and $katE$ [6,17,22,60]. However, many of these genes appear to be regulated by both $\sigma^s$ and RcsB, suggesting that there may be some regulatory interaction between the Rcs phosphorelay and $\sigma^s$, although the significance of any such interaction is not yet understood [5,15].

## 6. The role of Rcs phosphorelay in biofilm formation in *E. coli*

The Rcs phosphorelay is required for normal biofilm development in *E. coli*, *S. enterica* serovar Typhimurium and *P. mirabilis* [22,36,42]. The biofilm formation process can be divided into several stages, from initial attachment to the surface to the maturation of the biofilm into a three-dimensional structure, and studies have revealed that genes involved in different stages of biofilm formation in *E. coli* are subject to reciprocal Rcs regulation. Therefore, genes encoding proteins involved in motility and attachment, such as flagella, antigen 43 and curli, have been shown to be repressed by the Rcs phosphorelay whilst the production of colanic acid, important for the maturation of biofilm, is positively regulated by the Rcs phosphorelay [14,22,49,68]. This leads to the exciting possibility that the Rcs phosphorelay is regulating the temporal development of biofilm formation by controlling the transition from attached cells to mature biofilm (see Fig. 4).

## 7. The Rcs phosphorelay in Salmonella pathogenicity

The Rcs phosphorelay is involved in the regulation of virulence in *S. enterica* serovar Typhi, the causative agent of human typhoid fever, and *S. enterica* serovar Typhimurium, the causative agent of either self-limited gastroenteritis or systemic infections in humans and other animal species [61]. Virulence-related genes shared by all salmonellae include the *Salmonella*

Rcs pathway

Attachment $\longrightarrow$ Maturation

Fig. 4. Model of the role of the Rcs phosphorelay in controlling the transition from attached cell to mature biofilm in *E. coli*. The Rcs phosphorelay is activated by an, as of yet, unidentified biofilm-associated signal at some point after the bacterial cells have attached to the surface (this point is indicated by the dashed line). Activation of the Rcs phosphorelay results in the repression of genes encoding surface structures required for bacterial attachment to a surface, e.g. flagella, curli and antigen 43 [22]. At the same time the activated Rcs phosphorelay induces the expression of the genes responsible for the production of the EPS colanic acid, required for biofilm maturation [14]. This Rcs-mediated reciprocal regulation of surface structures and EPS will drive the development of the biofilm from attachment towards maturation. Therefore, the Rcs phosphorelay is involved in the regulation of a temporally important developmental checkpoint during biofilm formation in *E. coli*.

pathogenicity islands-1 (SPI-1) and -2 (SPI-2), which encode type III secretion systems (TTSS). SPI-1 is essential for invasion and SPI-2 is required for intracellular survival and proliferation [27]. The expression of Sip proteins (encoded on SPI-1) and flagellin is reciprocally regulated with Vi antigen, a capsular polysaccharide in *S. enterica* serovar Typhi, by the Rcs phosphorelay [2]. It has also been shown that, in *S. enterica* serovar Typhimurium, the Rcs phosphorelay is activated under conditions that mimic those encountered by cells during intracellular growth and an *rcsC* mutant was attenuated for systemic infection [16]. Other studies carried out in *S. enterica* serovar Typhimurium have suggested that the Rcs phosphorelay must be tightly repressed during the early stages of infection, indicating that shutdown of the Rcs phosphorelay is a requisite for Salmonella virulence [18,44]. Therefore, it appears that the Rcs phosphorelay must be inactive during the early stages of infection but must be activated at some stage during infection to ensure cell survival during intracellular growth. This temporal response would be analogous to the proposed role of the Rcs phosphorelay during biofilm formation in *E. coli* where the Rcs phosphorelay is inactive during attachment but must be activated in order to facilitate biofilm maturation (see Fig. 4).

### 8. Type III secretion system and other virulence factors in Yersinia and EHEC

The role of the Rcs phosphorelay in EHEC was recently shown to regulate the expression of genes in the locus for enteroocyte effacement (LEE) in both a positive and negative manner [63]. The LEE locus encodes proteins that play a key role in the early stages of EHEC infections and it has been shown that RcsB can increase the expression of certain LEE-encoded genes through a positive effect on the transcriptional regulator, GrvA. However, a deletion of *rcsB* also increased the expression of *espB*, implying that RcsB has a negative effect on the expression of some LEE-encoded genes. Indeed, the negative effect of RcsB on expression from LEE was mediated through the expression of the transcriptional regulator, PchA. Therefore, the positive and negative effects of the Rcs phosphorelay on expression of LEE-encoded genes is mediated through the effect of RcsB on the expression of the EHEC-specific transcriptional regulators GrvA and PchA, respectively [63].

A type III secretion system of *Y. enterocolitica* biovar 1B is also subject to Rcs regulation [67]. In addition to the common virulence factors such as the plasmid-borne Ysc TTSS, invasion proteins and urease that are present in all *Y. enterocolitica* biovars, a biovar-restricted virulence factor encoded by the *Yersinia* secretion apparatus pathogenicity island (YSA PI) has been described in *Y. enterocolitica* biovar 1B [23]. The YSA PI encodes the Ysa TTSS, a secretion system distinct from the well-characterised Ysc TTSS, that secretes a set of proteins called *Yersinia*-secreted proteins (Ysp’s). A genetic analysis of *Y. enterocolitica* biovar 1B to identify genes involved in the secretion of Ysp’s identified RcsB as a positive regulator of Ysp secretion. Interestingly, the Ysa TTSS does not contribute to colonisation of deep tissues during systemic infection but has a role in the colonisation of the terminal ileum [67]. Thus, the Ysa TTSS, and presumably the Rcs phosphorelay, is important during the earliest stage of infection by *Y. enterocolitica* serovar 1B.

### 9. Conclusion

The Rcs phosphorelay controls a variety of important cellular processes, e.g. motility, cell division, biofilm formation and pathogenicity. The complex signalling mechanism and broad variety of target genes suggest that the Rcs phosphorelay acts as a global regulator controlling the remodelling of the cell surface of bacteria in response to the changing environment. Moreover, studies in *S. enterica* and *E. coli* have suggested that an important function of the Rcs phosphorelay is to temporally control the expression of key genes during biofilm formation and pathogenicity. Our future studies will concentrate on understanding the mechanisms by which the Rcs phosphorelay, in particular the RcsC sensor kinase, monitors the environment and how this integrates with the apparent temporal control of biofilm formation and pathogenicity in the *Enterobacteriaceae*.

### Acknowledgements

The authors would like to acknowledge the generous support of the Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research Council (grant reference number P16731). Y.H.H. was supported by a studentship from the Taiwanese Government. We would also like to thank the other members of the D.J.C. lab for their comments and suggestions.

References

[1] M. Achtman, K. Zurth, G. Morelli, G. Torrea, A. Guiyoule, E. Carniel, *Yersinia pestis*, the cause of plague, is a recently emerged clone of *Yersinia pseudotuberculosis*, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 96 (1999) 14043–14048.

[2] N. Arricau, D. Hermant, H. Waxin, C. Ecobichon, P.S. Duffey, M.Y. Popoff, The RcsB–RcsC regulatory system of *Salmonella typhi* differentially modulates the expression of invasion proteins, flagellin and Vi antigen in response to osmolarity, Mol. Microbiol. 29 (1998) 835–850.

[3] M.K. Ashby, Survey of the number of two-component response regulator genes in the complete and annotated genome sequences of prokaryotes, FEMS Microbiol. Lett. 231 (2004) 277–281.

[4] R. Belas, R. Schneider, M. Melch, Characterisation of *Proteus mirabilis* precocious swarming mutants: Identification of *rscA*, encoding a regulator of swarming behaviour, J. Bacteriol. 180 (1998) 6126–6139.

[5] A. Boulanger, A. Francez-Charlot, A. Conter, M.P. Castanie-Cornet, K. Cam, C. Gutierrez, Multistress regulation in *Escherichia coli*: Expression of *osmB* involves two independent promoters responding either to sigma S or to the RcsCDB His–Asp phosphorelay, J. Bacteriol. 187 (2005) 3282–3286.

[6] J. Bouvier, S. Gordia, G. Kampmann, R. Lange, R. Hengge-Aronis, C. Gutierrez, Interplay between global regulators of *Escherichia coli*: Effect of RpoS, Lrp and H-NS on transcription of the gene *osmC*, Mol. Microbiol. 28 (1998) 971–980.

[7] D.A. Cano, G. Dominguez-Bernal, A. Tierrez, F. Garcia-Del Portillo, J. Casadesus, Regulation of capsule synthesis and cell motility in *Salmonella enterica* by the essential gene *igaA*, Genetics 162 (2002) 1513–1523.

[8] F. Carballes, C. Bertrand, J.P. Bouche, K. Cam, Regulation of *Escherichia coli* cell division genes *ftsA* and *ftsZ* by the two-component system rcsC–rcsB, Mol. Microbiol. 34 (1999) 442–450.

[9] D.J. Clarke, I.B. Holland, A. Jacq, Point mutations in the transmembrane domain of DjlA, a membrane-linked DnaJ-like protein, abolish its function in promoting colanic acid production via the Rcs signal transduction pathway, Mol. Microbiol. 25 (1997) 933–944.

[10] D.J. Clarke, S.A. Joyce, C.M. Toutain, A. Jacq, I.B. Holland, Genetic analysis of the RcsC sensor kinase from *Escherichia coli* K-12, J. Bacteriol. 184 (2002) 1204–1208.

[11] T. Clavel, J.C. Lazzaroni, A. Vianney, R. Portalier, Expression of the *tolQRA* genes of *Escherichia coli* K-12 is controlled by the RcsC sensor protein involved in capsule synthesis, Mol. Microbiol. 19 (1996) 19–25.

[12] A. Conter, R. Surny, C. Gutierrez, K. Cam, The RcsCB His–Asp phosphorelay system is essential to overcome chlorpromazine-induced stress in *Escherichia coli*, J. Bacteriol. 184 (2002) 2850–2853.

[13] C.S. Costa, M.J. Pettinari, B.S. Mendez, D.N. Anton, Null mutations in the essential gene *yrfF* (*mucM*) are not lethal in *rcsB*, *yojN* or *rcsC* strains of *Salmonella enterica* serovar Typhimurium, FEMS Microbiol. Lett. 222 (2003) 25–32.

[14] P.N. Danese, L.A. Pratt, R. Kolter, Exopolysaccharide production is required for development of *Escherichia coli* K-12 biofilm architecture, J. Bacteriol. 182 (2000) 3593–3596.

[15] M. Davalos-Garcia, A. Conter, I. Toesca, C. Gutierrez, K. Cam, Regulation of *osmC* gene expression by the two-component system *rcsB–rcsC* in *Escherichia coli*, J. Bacteriol. 183 (2001) 5870–5876.

[16] C.S. Detweiler, D.M. Monack, I.E. Brodsky, H. Mathew, S. Falkow, *virK*, *somA* and *rcsC* are important for systemic *Salmonella enterica* serovar Typhimurium infection and cationic peptide resistance, Mol. Microbiol. 48 (2003) 385–400.

[17] Q. Ding, S. Kusano, M. Villarejo, A. Ishihama, Promoter selectivity control of *Escherichia coli* RNA polymerase by ionic strength: Differential recognition of osmoregulated promoters by E sigma D and E sigma S holoenzymes, Mol. Microbiol. 16 (1995) 649–656.

[18] G. Dominguez-Bernal, M.G. Pucciarelli, F. Ramos-Morales, M. Garcia-Quintanilla, D.A. Cano, J. Casadesus, F. Garcia-del Portillo, Repression of the RcsC–YojN–RcsB phosphorelay by the IgaA protein is a requisite for *Salmonella* virulence, Mol. Microbiol. 53 (2004) 1437–1449.

[19] W. Ebel, G.J. Vaughn, H.K. Peters 3rd, J.E. Trempy, Inactivation of *mdoH* leads to increased expression of colanic acid capsular polysaccharide in *Escherichia coli*, J. Bacteriol. 179 (1997) 6858–6861.

[20] M. El Ghachi, A. Bouhss, D. Blanot, D. Mengin-Lecreux, The *bacA* gene of *Escherichia coli* encodes an undecaprenyl pyrophosphate phosphatase activity, J. Biol. Chem. 279 (2004) 30106–30113.

[21] W. El-Kazzaz, T. Morita, H. Tagami, T. Inada, H. Aiba, Metabolic block at early stages of the glycolytic pathway activates the Rcs phosphorelay system via increased synthesis of dTDP-glucose in *Escherichia coli*, Mol. Microbiol. 51 (2004) 1117–1128.

[22] L. Ferrieres, D.J. Clarke, The RcsC sensor kinase is required for normal biofilm formation in *Escherichia coli* K-12 and controls the expression of a regulon in response to growth on a solid surface, Mol. Microbiol. 50 (2003) 1665–1682.

[23] B. Foultier, P. Troisfontaines, S. Muller, F.R. Opperdoes, G.R. Cornelis, Characterisation of the *ysa* pathogenicity locus in the chromosome of *Yersinia enterocolitica* and phylogeny analysis of type III secretion systems, J. Mol. Evol. 55 (2002) 37–51.

[24] A. Francez-Charlot, B. Laugel, A. Van Gemert, N. Dubarry, F. Wiorowski, M.P. Castanie-Cornet, C. Gutierrez, K. Cam, RcsCDB His–Asp phosphorelay system negatively regulates the *fihDC* operon in *Escherichia coli*, Mol. Microbiol. 49 (2003) 823–832.

[25] F.G. Gervais, G.R. Drapeau, Identification, cloning, and characterisation of *rcsF*, a new regulator gene for exopolysaccharide synthesis that suppresses the division mutation *ftsZ84* in *Escherichia coli* K-12, J. Bacteriol. 174 (1992) 8016–8022.

[26] S. Gottesman, P. Trisler, A. Torres-Cabassa, Regulation of capsular polysaccharide synthesis in *Escherichia coli* K-12: Characterisation of three regulatory genes, J. Bacteriol. 162 (1985) 1111–1119.

[27] D.G. Guiney, The role of host cell death in *Salmonella* infections, Curr. Top. Microbiol. Immunol. 289 (2005) 131–150.

[28] J.S. Gunn, K.B. Lim, J. Krueger, K. Kim, L. Guo, M. Hackett, S.I. Miller, PmrA–PmrB-regulated genes necessary for 4-aminoarabinose lipid A modification and polymyxin resistance, Mol. Microbiol. 27 (1998) 1171–1182.

[29] D. Hagiwara, M. Sugiura, T. Oshima, H. Mori, H. Aiba, T. Yamashino, T. Mizuno, Genome-wide analyses revealing a signalling network of the RcsC–YojN–RcsB phosphorelay system in *Escherichia coli*, J. Bacteriol. 185 (2003) 5735–5746.

[30] B. Ize, I. Porcelli, S. Lucchini, J.C. Hinton, B.C. Berks, T. Palmer, Novel phenotypes of *Escherichia coli tat* mutants revealed by global gene expression and phenotypic analysis, J. Biol. Chem. 279 (2004) 47543–47554.

[31] B. Ize, N.R. Stanley, G. Buchanan, T. Palmer, Role of the *Escherichia coli* Tat pathway in outer membrane integrity, Mol. Microbiol. 48 (2003) 1183–1193.

[32] N. Kaldalu, R. Mei, K. Lewis, Killing by ampicillin and ofloxacin induces overlapping changes in *Escherichia coli* transcription profile, Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 48 (2004) 890–896.

[33] W.L. Kelley, C. Georgopoulos, Positive control of the two-component RcsC/B signal transduction network by DjlA: A member of the DnaJ family of molecular chaperones in *Escherichia coli*, Mol. Microbiol. 25 (1997) 913–931.

[34] O. Kelm, C. Kiecker, K. Geider, F. Bernhard, Interaction of the regulator proteins RcsA and RcsB with the promoter of the operon for amylovoran biosynthesis in *Erwinia amylovora*, Mol. Gen. Genet. 256 (1997) 72–83.

[35] M.-S. Kuo, K.-P. Chen, W.F. Wu, Regulation of RcsA by the ClpYQ (HslUV) protease in *Escherichia coli*, Microbiology 150 (2004) 437–446.

[36] S.J. Liaw, H.C. Lai, W.B. Wang, Modulation of swarming and virulence by fatty acids through the RsbA protein in *Proteus mirabilis*, Infect. Immun. 72 (2004) 6836–6845.

[37] N. Majdalani, S. Chen, J. Murrow, K. St John, S. Gottesman, Regulation of RpoS by a novel small RNA: The characterisation of RprA, Mol. Microbiol. 39 (2001) 1382–1394.

[38] N. Majdalani, S. Gottesman, The Rcs phosphorelay: A complex signal transduction system, Annu. Rev. Microbiol. 59 (2005) 379–405.

[39] N. Majdalani, M. Heck, V. Stout, S. Gottesman, Role of RcsF in signalling to the Rcs phosphorelay pathway in *Escherichia coli*, J. Bacteriol. 187 (2005) 6770–6778.

[40] N. Majdalani, D. Hernandez, S. Gottesman, Regulation and mode of action of the second small RNA activator of RpoS translation, RprA, Mol. Microbiol. 46 (2002) 813–826.

[41] B.M. Meberg, F.C. Sailer, D.E. Nelson, K.D. Young, Reconstruction of *Escherichia coli mrcA* (PBP 1a) mutants lacking multiple combinations of penicillin binding proteins, J. Bacteriol. 183 (2001) 6148–6149.

[42] J.R. Mireles 2nd, A. Toguchi, R.M. Harshey, *Salmonella enterica* serovar Typhimurium swarming mutants with altered biofilm-forming abilities: Surfactin inhibits biofilm formation, J. Bacteriol. 183 (2001) 5848–5854.

[43] T. Mizuno, Compilation of all genes encoding two-component phospho- transfer signal transducers in the genome of *Escherichia coli*, DNA Res. 4 (1997) 161–168.

[44] C. Mouslim, M. Delgado, E.A. Groisman, Activation of the RcsC/ YojN/RcsB phosphorelay system attenuates *Salmonella* virulence, Mol. Microbiol. 54 (2004) 386–395.

[45] C. Mouslim, E.A. Groisman, Control of the *Salmonella ugd* gene by three two-component regulatory systems, Mol. Microbiol. 47 (2003) 335–344.

[46] C. Mouslim, T. Latifi, E.A. Groisman, Signal-dependent requirement for the co-activator protein RcsA in transcription of the RcsB-regulated *ugd* gene, J. Biol. Chem. 278 (2003) 50588–50595.

[47] T. Ophir, D. Gutnick, A role for exopolysaccharides in the protection of microorganisms from desiccation, Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 60 (1994) 740–745.

[48] C.T. Parker, A.W. Kloser, C.A. Schnaitman, M.A. Stein, S. Gottes- man, B.W. Gibson, Role of the *rfag* and *rfaP* genes in determin- ing the lipopolysaccharide core structure and cell surface properties of *Escherichia coli* K-12, J. Bacteriol. 174 (1992) 2525–2538.

[49] C. Prigent-Combaret, G. Prensier, T.T. Le Thi, O. Vidal, P. Lejeune, C. Dorel, Developmental pathway for biofilm formation in curli-producing *Escherichia coli* strains: Role of flagella, curli and colanic acid, Environ. Microbiol. 2 (2000) 450–464.

[50] C.R. Raetz, C. Whitfield, Lipopolysaccharide endotoxins, Annu. Rev. Biochem. 71 (2002) 635–700.

[51] P.D. Rick, R.P. Silver, in: F.C. Neidhardt, R.I. Curtis, J.L. Ingraham, E.C. Lin, K.B. Low, B. Magasanik, W.S. Reznikoff, M. Riley, M. Schaechter, H.E. Umbarger (Eds.), *Escherichia coli* and *Salmonella*: Cellular and Molecular Biology, American Society for Microbiology, Washington, DC, 1996, pp. 104–122.

[52] F.C. Sailer, B.M. Meberg, K.D. Young, Beta-lactam induction of colanic acid gene expression in *Escherichia coli*, FEMS Microbiol. Lett. 226 (2003) 245–249.

[53] Y. Shiba, Y. Yokoyama, Y. Aono, T. Kiuchi, J. Kusaka, K. Matsumoto, H. Hara, Activation of the Rcs signal transduction system is responsible for the thermosensitive growth defect of an *Escherichia coli* mutant lack- ing phosphatidylglycerol and cardiolipin, J. Bacteriol. 186 (2004) 6526– 6535.

[54] D.D. Sledjeski, S. Gottesman, Osmotic shock induction of capsule synthe- sis in *Escherichia coli* K-12, J. Bacteriol. 178 (1996) 1204–1206.

[55] A.M. Stock, V.L. Robinson, P.N. Goudreau, Two-component signal trans- duction, Annu. Rev. Biochem. 69 (2000) 183–215.

[56] V. Stout, Regulation of capsule synthesis includes interactions of the RcsC/RcsB regulatory pair, Res. Microbiol. 145 (1994) 389–392.

[57] V. Stout, S. Gottesman, RcsB and RcsC: A two-component regulator of capsule synthesis in *Escherichia coli*, J. Bacteriol. 172 (1990) 659–669.

[58] V. Stout, A. Torres-Cabassa, M.R. Maurizi, D. Gutnick, S. Gottesman, RcsA, an unstable positive regulator of capsular polysaccharide synthesis, J. Bacteriol. 173 (1991) 1738–1747.

[59] S. Takeda, Y. Fujisawa, M. Matsubara, H. Aiba, T. Mizuno, A novel fea- ture of the multistep phosphorelay in *Escherichia coli*: A revised model of the RcsC → YojN → RcsB signalling pathway implicated in capsular synthesis and swarming behaviour, Mol. Microbiol. 40 (2001) 440–450.

[60] K. Tanaka, K. Handel, P.C. Loewen, H. Takahashi, Identification and analysis of the *rpoS*-dependent promoter of *katE*, encoding catalase HPII in *Escherichia coli*, Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1352 (1997) 161–166.

[61] A. Tierrez, F. Garcia-del Portillo, New concepts in *Salmonella* virulence: The importance of reducing the intracellular growth rate in the host, Cell. Microbiol. 7 (2005) 901–909.

[62] A. Tierrez, F. Garcia-del Portillo, The *Salmonella* membrane protein IgaA modulates the activity of the RcsC–YojN–RcsB and PhoP–PhoQ regulons, J. Bacteriol. 186 (2004) 7481–7489.

[63] T. Tobe, H. Ando, H. Ishikawa, H. Abe, K. Tashiro, T. Hayashi, S. Kuhara, N. Sugimoto, Dual regulatory pathways integrating the RcsC–RcsD–RcsB signalling system control enterohaemorrhagic *Escherichia coli* patho- genicity, Mol. Microbiol. 58 (2005) 320–333.

[64] A. Toguchi, M. Siano, M. Burkart, R.M. Harshey, Genetics of swarm- ing motility in *Salmonella enterica* serovar Typhimurium: Critical role for lipopolysaccharide, J. Bacteriol. 182 (2000) 6308–6321.

[65] A.S. Torres-Cabassa, S. Gottesman, Capsule synthesis in *Escherichia coli* K-12 is regulated by proteolysis, J. Bacteriol. 169 (1987) 981–989.

[66] P. Trisler, S. Gottesman, *lon* transcriptional regulation of genes necessary for capsular polysaccharide synthesis in *Escherichia coli* K-12, J. Bacte- riol. 160 (1984) 184–191.

[67] K. Venecia, G.M. Young, Environmental regulation and virulence at- tributes of the Ysa type III secretion system of *Yersinia enterocolitica* biovar 1B, Infect. Immun. 73 (2005) 5961–5977.

[68] A. Vianney, G. Jubelin, S. Renault, C. Dorel, P. Lejeune, J.C. Lazzaroni, *Escherichia coli tol* and *rcs* genes participate in the complex network af- fecting curli synthesis, Microbiology 151 (2005) 2487–2497.

[69] I. Virlogeux, H. Waxin, C. Ecobichon, J.O. Lee, M.Y. Popoff, Characteri- sation of the *rcsA* and *rcsB* genes from *Salmonella typhi*: *rcsB* through *tviA* is involved in regulation of Vi antigen synthesis, J. Bacteriol. 178 (1996) 1691–1698.

[70] M. Wehland, C. Kiecker, D.L. Coplin, O. Kelm, W. Saenger, F. Bern- hard, Identification of an RcsA/RcsB recognition motif in the promoters of exopolysaccharide biosynthetic operons from *Erwinia amylovora* and *Pantoea stewartii* subspecies *stewartii*, J. Biol. Chem. 274 (1999) 3300– 3307.

[71] B.W. Wren, The yersiniae—a model genus to study the rapid evolution of bacterial pathogens, Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 1 (2003) 55–64.
