
Four gene products are required for the fungal synthesis of the indole-diterpene, paspaline

Sanjay Saikia${}^{a}$, Emily J. Parker${}^{b}$, Albert Koulman${}^{c}$, Barry Scott${}^{a,*}$

${}^{a}$ Institute of Molecular Biosciences, Massey University, Private Bag 11222, Palmerston North 5301, New Zealand  
${}^{b}$ Institute of Fundamental Sciences, Massey University, Private Bag 11222, Palmerston North 5301, New Zealand  
${}^{c}$ AgResearch Grasslands Research Centre, Tennent Drive, Private Bag 11008, Palmerston North 5301, New Zealand  

Received 9 December 2005; revised 7 February 2006; accepted 7 February 2006  

Available online 17 February 2006  

Edited by Ulf-Ingo Flügge  

---

**Abstract** Paspaline belongs to a large, structurally and functionally diverse group of indole-diterpenes synthesized by filamentous fungi. However, the identity of the gene products required for the biosynthesis of paspaline, a key intermediate for the synthesis of paxilline and other indole-diterpenes, is not known. Transfer of constructs containing different *pax* gene combinations into a paxilline negative deletion derivative of *Penicillium paxilli* demonstrated that just four proteins, PaxG, a geranylgeranyl diphosphate synthase, PaxM, a FAD-dependent monooxygenase, PaxB, a putative membrane protein, and PaxC, a prenyl transferase, are required for the biosynthesis of paspaline.

© 2006 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

**Keywords:** Indole-diterpenes; Paspaline; Paxilline; FAD-dependent monooxygenase; Prenyl transferase; *Penicillium paxilli*

---

### 1. Introduction

Indole-diterpenes are a large, structurally diverse group of natural products synthesized by filamentous fungi [1]. These natural products share a common core structure comprised of a cyclic diterpene skeleton derived from geranylgeranyl diphosphate (GGPP) and an indole moiety derived from tryptophan or a tryptophan precursor [2–6]. Further complexity of the basic indole-diterpene ring structure occurs by additional prenylations, different ring substitutions and ring stereochemistry. These metabolites have a number of biological activities including insect feeding deterrence, modulation of insect and mammalian ion channels and inhibition of specific enzymes [7,8]. The structural complexity and diverse biological activities of these compounds have attracted the attention of synthetic chemists resulting in both total and biomimetic syntheses of a number of paxilline-like indole-diterpenes [9–15]. The results of these studies suggest that 3-geranylgeranyllindole is a common intermediate, which undergoes epoxidation followed by cyclization to give indole-diterpenes. More recently, feeding experiments with deuterium labeled 3-geranylgeranyllindole demonstrated the incorporation of this compound into paxilline and emindole DA [16]. Although biosynthetic schemes have been proposed for paxilline-like compounds none of the enzymes responsible for catalyzing the proposed steps have been identified [6,17].

The cloning and characterization of a cluster of genes from *Penicillium paxilli* necessary for biosynthesis of the indole-diterpene, paxilline, has provided for the first time an insight into the gene products required for the synthesis of this important class of natural products and their biochemical function [18]. Systematic gene disruption and chemical complementation studies have shown that at least five enzymes are needed for paxilline biosynthesis [18,19]. *paxG* is proposed to encode a GGPP synthase that catalyzes the synthesis of GGPP, the determinant step in indole-diterpene biosynthesis. Deletion mutants of *paxM*, encoding a FAD-dependent monooxygenase (McMillan et al., unpublished results) and *paxC*, encoding a prenyl transferase (Young et al., unpublished results), lack the ability to synthesize any identifiable indole-diterpene indicating that these gene products catalyze early steps in paxilline biosynthesis. By contrast deletion of *paxP*, encoding a cytochrome P450 monooxygenase, resulted in a mutant strain that accumulates paspaline [19]. Taken together these results suggest that paspaline is the first stable indole-diterpene product, and that its synthesis requires the action of three enzymes viz. PaxG, PaxM and PaxC [20]. However, two additional genes, *paxA* and *paxB*, were recently identified within the core cluster of *paxG-paxM-paxC-paxP-paxQ* (Monahan et al., unpublished results). Sequence analysis of PaxA and PaxB suggests that these are polytopic membrane proteins containing seven transmembrane domains. Deletion derivatives of *paxA* and *paxB* were unable to synthesize any detectable indole-diterpenes. However, neither protein has any identifiable enzymatic function. The identification of these two new genes, the absence of detectable indole-diterpenes in *paxG*, *paxM* and *paxC* deletion mutants and accumulation of paspaline in the *paxP* deletion mutant suggests that up to five proteins PaxG, PaxA, PaxM, PaxB and PaxC are required for paspaline biosynthesis in *P. paxilli*. The objectives of this study were to define the minimum number of genes required for the synthesis of paspaline and to propose a biosynthetic scheme for the synthesis of this indole-diterpene. Our working hypothesis is that five gene products are required for paspaline biosynthesis.

---

*Corresponding author. Fax: +64 6 3505688.  
E-mail address: d.b.scott@massey.ac.nz (B. Scott).*

0014-5793/$32.00 © 2006 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.  
doi:10.1016/j.febslet.2006.02.008

2. Materials and methods

2.1. Bacterial strains and plasmids
Escherichia coli strain DH5α (Invitrogen) served as the host for routine cloning. The transformants of this host were grown on LB agar plates supplemented with ampicillin (100 μg/ml) for selection. pGEM®-T Easy (Promega) and pII99 plasmids were used for cloning.

2.2. Fungal strains and growth conditions
Cultures of wild-type *P. paxilli* Bainier (PN2013 = ATCC 26601) and CY2 (PN2250) mutant derivatives were routinely grown in *Aspergillus* complete medium (ACM) [2% (w/v) malt extract (Oxoid, Basingstoke, England), 1% (w/v) mycological peptone (Oxoid), 2% (w/v) glucose, 1.5% (w/v) agar] and ACM supplemented with 0.8 M sucrose (RG medium), at 22°C for 4–6 days. Liquid cultures were started using an inoculum of \(5 \times 10^6\) spores per 25 ml of CDYE medium [3.34% (w/v) Czapex-Dox (Oxoid), 0.5% (w/v) yeast extract] supplemented with 0.5% (v/v) trace element mix [in 0.6 N HCl: 0.05% (w/v) FeSO₄·7H₂O, 0.05% (w/v) ZnSO₄·7H₂O, 0.01% (w/v) MnSO₄·H₂O, 0.005% (w/v) CuSO₄·5H₂O, 0.004% (w/v) CoCl₂·6H₂O], and shaken at 200 rpm at 28°C for 7 days. Media were supplemented with geneticin (150 μg/ml), where necessary.

2.3. Molecular biology
Plasmid DNA was isolated and purified by alkaline lysis using either a Bio-Rad Quantum Prep® Plasmid Miniprep Kit (Bio-Rad Laboratories, CA, USA) or High Pure Plasmid Isolation Kit (Roche Diagnostics GmbH, Mannheim, Germany). Genomic DNA was isolated using a modification of the method of Yoder [21] as described previously [22]. Southern blotting and hybridization conditions were as described previously [22]. Genomic DNA for PCR screening was prepared from fungal spores. Spores from approximately 0.3 cm × 0.3 cm section of transformants on ACM were suspended in 1 ml TE (10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, 1 mM EDTA) with 0.01% (v/v) Triton X-100. 100 μl spore suspension was transferred into a 2 ml micro-tube PP (Sarstedt, Germany) containing sterile glass beads (425-600 μm). The spores were disrupted in a FastPrep® Cell Disrupter FP120 (Thermo Savant, NY, USA) for 20 s at 4 m/s and centrifuged at 13000 rpm for 10 min. The supernatant was collected and a 5 μl sample was used as the template for PCR. DNA fragments and PCR products were purified using QIAquick Gel Extraction and PCR Purification Kit (Qiagen). DNA fragments were sequenced by the dideoxynucleotide chain-termination method [23] using Big-Dye (Version 3) chemistry (Perkin-Elmer Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA) with oligonucleotide primers (Sigma Genosys). Products were separated on an ABI Prism 377 sequencer (Perkin-Elmer Applied Biosystems).

2.4. PCR conditions
PCR of *paxM* and *paxM-paxB* for cloning was carried out in 50 μl reaction volume containing 5 μl of 10× reaction buffer (Roche Diagnostics GmbH, Penzberg, Germany), 200 μM of each dNTP, 300 nM of each primer, 0.75 U of Expand High Fidelity Enzyme Mix (Roche) and 10 ng of plasmid. PCR of *paxA-paxM* for cloning was carried out in 50 μl reaction volume containing 5 μl of 10× reaction buffer (TripleMaster® PCR System, Eppendorf AG, Hamburg, Germany), 200 μM of each dNTP, 200 nM of each primer, 0.75 U of TripleMaster Polymerase Mix (Eppendorf) and 100 ng of genomic DNA. Genomic DNA, prepared from spores, was amplified in 50 μl reaction volume containing 5 μl of 10× reaction buffer (Roche Diagnostics GmbH), 100 μM of each dNTP, 200 nM of each primer and 2 U of Taq DNA polymerase (Roche).
The thermocycle conditions routinely used with Taq DNA polymerase and Expand High Fidelity Enzyme Mix were one cycle at 94°C for 2 min, 30 cycles at 94°C for 30 s, 55°C for 30 s and 72°C for 1 min (per kb) and one cycle at 72°C for 5 min, and with TripleMaster Polymerase Mix were one cycle at 94°C for 2 min, 30 cycles at 94°C for 20 s, 55°C for 20 s and 72°C for 1 min (per kb) and one cycle at 72°C for 3 min. Reactions were carried out in a PC-960, PC-960G (Corbett Research, Mortlake, Australia), or Mastercycler® gradient (Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany) thermocycler.

2.5. Construction of expression constructs
Plasmid pSS8 (*paxG-paxA-paxM-paxB-paxC*) was constructed by ligating into pII99 an 11 kb HindIII fragment containing *paxG-paxA-paxM-paxB-paxC* from λCY55.
Plasmid pSS16 (*paxG-paxM-paxC*) was constructed by ligating into SpeI digested pSS8 a 2.54 kb SpeI fragment containing *paxM*. The fragment was prepared by digesting the PCR product amplified with primer set paxMSpeF2 and paxMSpeR from plasmid pSS8. Both primers contained mismatches relative to the genomic sequences in order to introduce SpeI sites at both ends.
Plasmid pSS17 (*paxG-paxM-paxB-paxC*) was constructed by ligating into SpeI digested pSS8 a 3.4 kb SpeI fragment containing *paxM-paxB*. The fragment was prepared by digesting the PCR product amplified with primer set paxMSpeR and SS8 from plasmid pSS8. Primer SS8 contained a native SpeI site.
Plasmid pSS20 (*paxG-paxA-paxM-paxC*) was constructed by ligating into SpeI digested pSS8 a 3.94 kb SpeI fragment containing *paxA-paxM*. The fragment was prepared by digesting the PCR product amplified with primer set paxMSpeFl and SS9 from genomic DNA. Primer paxMSpeFl contained mismatches relative to the genomic sequence in order to introduce a SpeI site at one end. Primer SS9 contained a native SpeI site.

2.6. Penicillium paxilli transformations and screening
Protoplasts of PN2250 (CY2) were prepared and transformed with circular plasmids pSS8, pSS16, pSS17 and pSS20 as described previously [19], except that the RG medium used for plating protoplasts was ACM supplemented with 0.8 M sucrose (see above). Transformants were selected on RG medium supplemented with geneticin (150 μg/ml) (Roche). The resulting stable transformants were maintained on ACM medium.
Screening of transformants for integration of the expression construct was carried out using genomic DNA from fungal spores (see above) as template and primer sets (see below) within, and external to, the gene fragment, to be integrated. The PCR conditions used were the standard conditions for Taq DNA polymerase (see above).

2.7. Indole-diterpene analysis
Mycelia from liquid cultures of *P. paxilli* grown for 7 days in CDYE, supplemented with trace element mix, were washed and freeze dried. Indole-diterpenes were extracted in 2:1 chloroform-methanol mixture. For thin-layer chromatography (TLC) analysis extracts were concentrated and redissolved in chloroform-methanol (2:1) and fractionated on SIL G (Macherey-Nagel, Germany) TLC plates using 9:1 chloroform-acetone mixture. Indole-diterpenes were identified with Ehrlich’s reagent [2% (w/v) p-dimethylaminobenzaldehyde in 12% (v/v) HCl and 50% ethanol]. Analytical HPLC runs were performed on a Dionex Summit (Dionex Corporation, CA, USA) HPLC system equipped with a Luna (Phenomenex, CA, USA) C18 column (5 μm particle size, 4.6 × 250 mm). Indole-diterpenes were eluted with methanol-water (85:15) at a flow rate of 1.5 ml/min and UV detection at either 230 or 280 nm. LC-MSMS analysis was performed on a Thermo Finnigan Surveyor (Thermo Finnigan, CA, USA) HPLC system equipped with a Luna (Phenomenex) C18 column (5 μm particle size, 2 × 150 mm) at a flow rate of 200 μl/min with a solvent gradient starting with acetonitrile-water (60:40) in 0.1% formic acid and increasing to 95% acetonitrile over 30 min followed by a column wash at 99% acetonitrile. Mass spectra were determined with linear ion trap mass spectrometer (Thermo LTQ, Thermo Finnigan, CA, USA) using electro spray ionization (ESI) in positive mode. The spray voltage was 5.0 kV and the capillary temperature was 275°C. The flow rates of sheath gas, auxiliary gas and sweep gas were set to 20, 5 and 10 (arbitrary units), respectively. Other parameters were optimized automatically by infusing authentic paspaline in water-acetonitrile-formic acid (75:25:0.1 v:v:v) at a flow rate of 200 μl/min. Paspaline and derivatives were detected in single reaction monitoring (SRM) mode, selecting 422 m/z ±2, 35% collision energy followed by data-dependent fragmentation of the three most intense ions in the mass spectrum above a 1000 (arbitrary unit) threshold.

2.8. Sequence of primers used in this study
Expression construct primers (restriction sites used for cloning are underlined and mismatches introduced are shown in bold).

For $paxM$:
- paxMSpeF2: 5' GGACTAGTCCGCTTCTTAGGATCAAC 3'
- paxMSpeR: 5' GTACTAGTGTCAGAGTACCCCTCTGC 3'

For $paxM-paxB$:
- paxMSpeR: 5' GTACTAGTGTCAGAGTACCCCTCTGC 3'
- SS8: 5' AGACTAGTTTAGATCTTGCAGGATCTCC 3'

For $paxA-paxM$:
- paxMSpeF1: 5' TTACTAGTGATCGGCAGTTGAGGGGTG 3'
- SS9: 5' TGACTAGTCACAGGTCGTG 3'

**Primers for screening transformants:**
- pII99-3: 5' GGCTGGCTTAACTATGCG 3'
- pII99-4: 5' CCCAGAATGCACAGGTAC 3'
- pax64: 5' ACTGCATAGTTTGATATCTGC 3'
- pax122: 5' GCAGATAGTAGGTACTAC 3'
- pax127: 5' GGATTTGACCATGATGCG 3'

### 3. Results and discussion

Constructs containing all or different subsets of the five $pax$ genes, $paxG$, $paxA$, $paxM$, $paxB$, and $paxC$, were cloned into the geneticin resistant vector pII99 [24] and transformed into protoplasts of CY2, a paxilline negative deletion mutant (>100 kb deletion) that lacks the entire $pax$ gene cluster [22] (Fig. 1). Transformants were initially screened by PCR for the presence of the construct and then by Southern blot analysis to confirm integration of a complete copy of the construct in the recipient strain. The chemical phenotype of the positive transformants was determined by analyzing chloroform/methanol extracts by TLC and reverse-phase HPLC. A HindIII restriction fragment (11 kb) containing all 5 genes viz. $paxG$, $paxA$, $paxM$, $paxB$ and $paxC$ was sub-cloned from a lambda clone, $\lambda$CY55, into pII99, to generate pSS8. Protoplasts of CY2 were transformed with pSS8 and an arbitrary selection of Gen<sup>R</sup> transformants analyzed by TLC for the presence of indole-diterpenes. Four out of seven CY2/pSS8 transformants analyzed had a single green-staining compound with an $R_f$ value similar to that of authentic paspaline (data not shown). Reverse-phase HPLC analysis of these extracts confirmed that the compound accumulated had the same retention time ($R_t = 20.5 \, \text{min}$) as authentic paspaline (Fig. 2A). Thus, the introduction of pSS8 into CY2 restored to this strain the ability to synthesize paspaline. The inability of some of the transformants to produce paspaline, despite containing the five genes, could be due to differences in copy number and/or position of integration of the construct in the genome [25]. These results suggest that five proteins are sufficient for paspaline biosynthesis. However, the proposed function of the enzymes PaxG, PaxM and PaxC suggested that these three enzymes alone might be sufficient for paspaline biosynthesis. To test this hypothesis a plasmid construct pSS16, containing $paxG-paxM-paxC$, was prepared by replacing a SpeI fragment containing $paxA-paxM-paxB$ in pSS8 with a PCR amplified copy of $paxM$, and introduced into CY2. However, no detectable levels of any indole-diterpene were identified when extracts from nine of these CY2/pSS16 derivatives were analyzed by TLC (data not shown) or HPLC (Fig. 2B).

To test whether $paxA$ and/or $paxB$ are necessary for paspaline biosynthesis two additional constructs were prepared containing $paxG-paxM-paxC$ and either $paxB$ or $paxA$. Construct pSS20 ($paxG-paxA-paxM-paxC$) was prepared by ligating a PCR generated $paxA-paxM$ fragment into SpeI digested pSS8. However, no detectable levels of any indole-diterpene were identified when extracts from eight of these CY2/pSS20 derivatives were analyzed by TLC (data not shown) or HPLC (Fig. 2C).

Construct pSS17 ($paxG-paxM-paxB-paxC$) was prepared by ligating a PCR generated $paxM-paxB$ fragment into SpeI digested pSS8. Four out of ten CY2/pSS17 transformants analyzed produced a metabolite that eluted at the same retention time as authentic paspaline (Fig. 2D). In addition to paspaline ($R_t = 20.5 \, \text{min}$), a new more polar indole-diterpene ($R_t = 10.5 \, \text{min}$) was found to accumulate in the extracts of some of the CY2/pSS17 derivatives (Fig. 2D). This metabolite was not detected in extracts of wild-type *P. paxilli*. LC–MSMS analysis confirmed that two major indole-diterpenes were present in extracts from CY2/pSS17 transformant CY2.P17.3 (Fig. 3), both with $m/z$ values of 422. The compound eluting at 24.2 min (Fig. 3) has a fragmentation pattern consistent with authentic paspaline whereas that eluting at 15.8 min has a fragmentation pattern indicative of a partially cyclized indole-diterpene (Supplementary material). The accumulation of this novel indole-diterpene metabolite may be due to the absence of the complete paxilline biosynthetic machinery. Products of partial cyclization like emindoles and emeniveol have been isolated from *Emericella* species suggesting that alternative cyclization pathways of indole and diterpene moieties are possible without skeletal rearrangement [26–29].

Identification of the proteins required for paspaline production now allows elucidation of the individual biosynthetic steps involved in its formation. We have shown here that just four proteins PaxG, PaxM, PaxB and PaxC are required for

Fig. 2. Reverse-phase HPLC traces of CY2 derivatives containing: (A) pSS8 $(paxG-paxA-paxM-paxB-paxC)$, (B) pSS16 $(paxG-paxM-paxC)$, (C) pSS20 $(paxG-paxA-paxM-paxC)$ and (D) pSS17 $(paxG-paxM-paxB-paxC)$; CY2 — negative control; CY2.V — plII99 vector only control; P8 — pSS8; P16 — pSS16; P17 — pSS17; P20 — pSS20. The HPLC signal for wild-type is 6% of the original signal.

biosynthesis of paspaline. PaxG is proposed to catalyze a series of iterative condensations of IPP with DMAPP, GPP, then FPP, to form GGPP. Although the precise details of the mechanism of condensation of the GGPP and indole moiety, and subsequent epoxidation and cyclization events are not clear, our data implicate roles for PaxM and PaxC in these steps. We propose that PaxM, a FAD-dependent monooxygenase, catalyzes the epoxidation of the two terminal alkenes of the geranylgeranyl moiety (Fig. 4). Subsequently, PaxC, a prenyl transferase, catalyzes the cationic cyclization giving rise to paspaline. The condensation of indole-3-glycerol phosphate with GGPP may be catalyzed by either PaxG or PaxC.

Although our data clearly demonstrates that PaxB is required for paspaline biosynthesis, its role in paspaline biosynthesis is not clear. However, secondary structure analysis suggests that it may be a transporter. Unlike the major

ABC (ATP-binding cassette) and MFS (major facilitator superfamily) fungal transporters, PaxB contains seven transmembrane domains. Most ABC and MFS transporters associated with secondary metabolite gene clusters appear to have a role in self-protection of the producing organism from the toxic effects of the metabolite [30,31]. Given the novel structure of PaxB and the indole-diterpene negative phenotype of the $paxB$ mutant (Monahan et al., unpublished results), we propose that it is more likely to have a role in transporting substrate(s) to the vicinity of the biosynthetic enzyme complex, than a role in self-protection. Functional analysis of PaxM, PaxB and PaxC to confirm these predicted functions is currently underway as are reporter gene fusion experiments to localize these proteins in the cell.

In summary, we have successfully demonstrated that four proteins are required for paspaline biosynthesis. On the basis of this

S. Saikia et al. / FEBS Letters 580 (2006) 1625–1630

Fig. 3. Chromatogram of CY2/pSS17 (*paxG-paxM-paxB-paxC*) derivative, strain CY2.P17.3, showing the elution times for paspaline and a novel indole-diterpene metabolite. Top line: UV trace at 275 nm; Bottom line: LC-MSMS trace showing 422 ions containing 130 *m/z* fragments characteristic of indole moiety.

work, we predict that orthologues of these four genes will be common to other indole-diterpene biosynthetic gene clusters including those for aflatrein [32] and lolitrem [33] biosynthesis. We also propose that paspaline is the key intermediate for indole-diterpene biosynthesis, providing the core structural backbone for subsequent reactions that generate the chemical diversity within this important group of secondary metabolites.

Acknowledgements: The authors are grateful to Brendon Monahan for technical advice, and support from the Royal Society of New Zealand (Marsden Grant MAU010).

Appendix A. Supplementary data

Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at doi:10.1016/j.febslet.2006.02.008.

References

[1] Steyn, P.S. and Vleggaar, R. (1985) Tremorgenic mycotoxins. Prog. Chem. Org. Nat. Prod. 48, 1–80.

Fig. 4. Proposed scheme for paspaline biosynthesis in *P. paxilli*.

[2] Acklin, W., Weibel, F. and Arigoni, D. (1977) Zur biosynthese von paspalin und verwandten metaboliten aus *Claviceps paspali*. Chimia 31, 63.

[3] de Jesus, A.E., Gorst-Allman, C.P., Steyn, P.S., van Heerden, F.R., Vleggaar, R., Wessels, P.L. and Hull, W.E. (1983) Tremorganic mycotoxins from *Penicillium crustosum*. Biosynthesis of penitrem A. J. Chem. Soc., Perkin Trans. 1, 1863–1868.

[4] Laws, I. and Mantle, P.G. (1989) Experimental constraints in the study of the biosynthesis of indole alkaloids in fungi. J. Gen. Microbiol. 135, 2679–2692.

[5] Byrne, K.M., Smith, S.K. and Ondeyka, J.G. (2002) Biosynthesis of nodulisporic acid A: precursor studies. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 124, 7055–7060.

[6] Munday-Finch, S.C., Wilkins, A.L. and Miles, C.O. (1996) Isolation of paspaline B, an indole-diterpenoid from *Penicillium paxilli*. Phytochemistry 41, 327–332.

[7] Cole, R.J. and Cox, R.H. (1981) Handbook of Toxic Fungal Metabolites, Academic Press, London.

[8] Li, C., Gloer, J.B., Wicklow, D.T. and Dowd, P.F. (2002) Thiersines A and B: novel antiinsectan indole diterpenoids from a new fungicolous *Penicillium* species (NRRL 28147). Org. Lett. 4, 3095–3098.

[9] Smith III, A.B. and Mewshaw, R. (1985) Total synthesis of (−)-paspaline. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 107, 1769–1771.

[10] Smith III, A.B. and Leenay, T.L. (1989) Indole diterpene synthetic studies. 5. Development of a unified synthetic strategy; a stereocontrolled, second-generation synthesis of (−)-paspaline. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 111, 5761–5768.

[11] Smith III, A.B., Sunazuka, T., Leenay, T.L. and Kingery-Wood, J. (1990) Total syntheses of (+)-paspalicine and (+)-paspaline. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 112, 8197–8198.

[12] Smith III, A.B., Kanoh, N., Minakawa, N., Rainier, J.D., Blase, F.R. and Hartz, R.A. (1999) Tremorgenic indole alkaloids. Studies directed toward the assembly of the A, F, and I rings of penitrem D: observation of an unexpected stereochemical outcome. Org. Lett. 1, 1263–1266.

[13] Rainier, J.D. and Smith III, A.B. (2000) Polyene cyclizations to indole diterpenes. The first synthesis of (+)-emindole SA using a biomimetic approach. Tetrahedron Lett. 41, 9419–9423.

[14] Clark, J.S., Myatt, J., Wilson, C., Roberts, L. and Walsh, N. (2003) Exploration of the biomimetic synthesis of indole-diterpene mycotoxins: an unexpected cascade reaction during the attempted synthesis of emindole SB. Chem. Commun. (Camb.), 1546–1547.

[15] Xiong, Q., Zhu, X., Wilson, W.K., Ganesan, A. and Matsuda, S.P. (2003) Enzymatic synthesis of an indole diterpene by an oxidosqualene cyclase: mechanistic, biosynthetic, and phylogenetic implications. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 125, 9002–9003.

[16] Fueki, S., Tokiwano, T., Toshima, H. and Oikawa, H. (2004) Biosynthesis of indole diterpenes, emindole, and paxilline: involvement of a common intermediate. Org. Lett. 6, 2697–2700.

[17] Mantle, P.G. and Weedon, C.M. (1994) Biosynthesis and transformation of tremorgenic indole-diterpenoids by *Penicillium paxilli* and *Acremonium lolii*. Phytochemistry 36, 1209–1217.

[18] Young, C., McMillan, L., Telfer, E. and Scott, B. (2001) Molecular cloning and genetic analysis of an indole-diterpene gene cluster from *Penicillium paxilli*. Mol. Microbiol. 39, 754–764.

[19] McMillan, L.K., Carr, R.L., Young, C.A., Astin, J.W., Lowe, R.G., Parker, E.J., Jameson, G.B., Finch, S.C., Miles, C.O., McManus, O.B., Schmalhofer, W.A., Garcia, M.L., Kaczorowski, G.J., Goetz, M., Tkacz, J.S. and Scott, B. (2003) Molecular analysis of two cytochrome P450 monooxygenase genes required for paxilline biosynthesis in *Penicillium paxilli*, and effects of paxilline intermediates on mammalian maxi-K ion channels. Mol. Genet. Genom. 270, 9–23.

[20] Parker, E.J. and Scott, B. (2004) in: Handbook of Industrial Mycology (An, Z., Ed.), pp. 405–426, Marcel Dekker, New York.

[21] Yoder, O.C. (1988) *Cochliobolus heterostrophus* cause of southern corn leaf blight. Adv. Plant Pathol. 6, 93–112.

[22] Young, C., Itoh, Y., Johnson, R., Garthwaite, I., Miles, C.O., Munday-Finch, S.C. and Scott, B. (1998) Paxilline-negative mutants of *Penicillium paxilli* generated by heterologous and homologous plasmid integration. Curr. Genet. 33, 368–377.

[23] Sanger, F., Nicklen, S. and Coulson, A.R. (1977) DNA sequencing with chain-terminating inhibitors. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 74, 5463–5467.

[24] Namiki, F., Matsunaga, M., Okuda, M., Inoue, I., Nishi, K., Fujita, Y. and Tsuge, T. (2001) Mutation of an arginine biosynthesis gene causes reduced pathogenicity in *Fusarium oxysporum* f. sp. *melonis*. Mol. Plant Microb. Interact. 14, 580–584.

[25] Malonek, S., Rojas, M.C., Hedden, P., Gaskin, P., Hopkins, P. and Tudzynski, B. (2005) Functional characterization of two cytochrome P450 monooxygenase genes, *P450-1* and *P450-4*, of the gibberellic acid gene cluster in *Fusarium proliferatum* (*Gibberella fujikuroi* MP-D). Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 71, 1462–1472.

[26] Nozawa, K., Nakajima, S., Kawai, K. and Udagawa, S. (1988) Studies on fungal products. Part 17. Isolation and structures of novel indoloditerpenes, emindoles DA and DB, from *Emericella desertorum*: X-ray molecular structure of emindole DA acetate. J. Chem. Soc., Perkin Trans. 1, 1689–1694.

[27] Nozawa, K., Yuyama, M., Nakajima, S., Kawai, K. and Udagawa, S. (1988) Studies on fungal products. Part 19. Isolation and structure of a novel indoloditerpene, emindole SA, from *Emericella striata*. J. Chem. Soc., Perkin Trans. 1, 2155–2160.

[28] Nozawa, K., Nakajima, S., Kawai, K. and Udagawa, S. (1988) Isolation and structures of indoloditerpenes, possible biosynthetic intermediates to the tremorgenic mycotoxin, paxilline, from *Emericella striata*. J. Chem. Soc., Perkin Trans. 1, 2607–2610.

[29] Kimura, Y., Nishibe, M., Nakajima, H., Hamasaki, T., Shigemitsu, N., Sugawara, F., Stout, T.J. and Clardy, J. (1992) Emeniveol; A new pollen growth inhibitor from the fungus, *Emericella nivea*. Tetrahedron Lett. 33, 6987–6990.

[30] Del Sorbo, G., Schoonbeek, H. and De Waard, M.A. (2000) Fungal transporters involved in efflux of natural toxic compounds and fungicides. Fungal Genet. Biol. 30, 1–15.

[31] Gardiner, D.M., Jarvis, R.S. and Howlett, B.J. (2005) The ABC transporter gene in the sirodesmin biosynthetic gene cluster of *Leptosphaeria maculans* is not essential for sirodesmin production but facilitates self-protection. Fungal Genet. Biol. 42, 257–263.

[32] Zhang, S., Monahan, B.J., Tkacz, J.S. and Scott, B. (2004) Indole-diterpene gene cluster from *Aspergillus flavus*. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 70, 6875–6883.

[33] Young, C.A., Bryant, M.K., Christensen, M.J., Tapper, B.A., Bryan, G.T. and Scott, B. (2005) Molecular cloning and genetic analysis of a symbiosis-expressed gene cluster for lolitrem biosynthesis from a mutualistic endophyte of perennial ryegrass. Mol. Genet. Genom. 274, 13–29.
