
This article was downloaded by: [Florida State University]
On: 22 December 2014, At: 21:16
Publisher: Taylor&Francis
Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number: 1072954 Registered office: Mortimer House,
37-41 Mortimer Street, London W1T 3JH, UK

Cell Cycle
Publication details, including instructions for authors and subscription information:
http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/kccy20

Regulation of Hh/Gli Signaling by Dual Ubiquitin Pathways
Jin Jiang
Published online: 20Oct 2006.

To cite this article: Jin Jiang (2006) Regulation of Hh/Gli Signaling by Dual Ubiquitin Pathways, Cell Cycle, 5:21, 2457-2463, DOI:10.4161/cc.5.21.3406
To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.4161/cc.5.21.3406

PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE

Taylor & Francis makes every effort to ensure the accuracy of all the information (the "Content") contained in the publications on our platform. However, Taylor & Francis, our agents, and our licensors make no representations or warranties whatsoever as to the accuracy, completeness, or suitability for any purpose of the Content. Any opinions and views expressed in this publication are the opinions and views of the authors, and are not the views of or endorsed by Taylor & Francis. The accuracy of the Content should not be relied upon and should be independently verified with primary sources of information. Taylor and Francis shall not be liable for any losses, actions, claims, proceedings, demands, costs, expenses, damages, and other liabilities whatsoever or howsoever caused arising directly or indirectly in connection with, in relation to or arising out of the use of the Content.

This article may be used for research, teaching, and private study purposes. Any substantial or systematic reproduction, redistribution, reselling, loan, sub-licensing, systematic supply, or distribution in any form to anyone is expressly forbidden. Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://www.tandfonline.com/page/terms-and-conditions

[Cell Cycle 5:21, 2457-2463, 1 November 2006]; © 2006 Landes Bioscience

**Perspective**

**Regulation of Hh/Gli Signaling by Dual Ubiquitin Pathways**

---

**Jin Jiang**

Center for Developmental Biology and Department of Pharmacology; University  
of Texas Southwestern Medical Center at Dallas; Dallas, Texas USA  

*Correspondence to: Center for Developmental Biology and Department of  
Pharmacology; University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center at Dallas; Dallas,  
Texas 75390 USA; Tel.: 214.645.5914; Fax: 214.648.1960; Email: jin.jiang@  
utsouthwestern.edu*

Original manuscript submitted: 08/24/06  
Manuscript accepted: 09/14/06  

Previously published online as a Cell Cycle E-publication:  
http://www.landesbioscience.com/journals/cc/abstract.php?id=3406  

**KEY WORDS**  
Hedgehog signaling, Gli proteins, Ci, β-TRCP, HIB, ubiquitin, E3 ligase, SCF complex, Cul3, proteolysis  

**ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS**  
I thank Dr. Keith Wharton and members of my lab for comments. This work was supported by grants from NIH, Welch Foundation, and Leukemia and Lymphoma Society Scholar Program. J.J. is the Eugene McDermott Endowed Scholar in Biomedical Science at UT Southwestern Medical Center.

---

**ABSTRACT**  
The Hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway governs cell growth and patterning in animal development. Malfunction of several pathway components, including the key transcriptional effector Ci/Gli proteins, leads to a variety of human disorders including several malignancies. Ci/Gli activity is controlled by multi-layered regulatory mechanisms, the most prominent of which is the ubiquitin-mediated proteolysis. In the absence of Hh, Ci/Gli is proteolytically processed into a truncated form that functions as a transcriptional repressor of the Hh pathway. Ci processing is mediated by an SCF (Skip1/Cul1/F-box protein) ubiquitin ligase in which the F-box protein Slimb/β-TRCP bridges Ci to the ubiquitin ligase. Recent studies in *Drosophila* and mammalian cultured cells have demonstrated that sequential phosphorylation of Ci/Gli by PKA, GSK3, and CKI creates multiple docking sites that can recruit SCFSlimb/β-TRCP, which then promotes Ci/Gli ubiquitination followed by proteasome-mediated processing. Recently, an E3 ubiquitin ligase consisting of the BTB (Broad Complex, Tramtrack, and Bric a Brac) protein HIB (Hh induced MATH and BTB protein) and Cullin 3 (Cul3) has been identified that acts in a negative feedback loop to fine-tune Hh signaling responses by degrading full length Ci. In eye imaginal discs where Hh signals coordinate cell proliferation and differentiation, HIB is highly expressed in the differentiating cells to prevent aberrant Hh signaling activity and ensure normal eye development. Tissue- and developmental stage-specific expression of HIB and its homologs in vertebrates may provide a conserved mechanism for ensuring precision in spatial and temporal control of Hh signaling.

---

**INTRODUCTION**  
Protein modification by ubiquitination plays fundamental roles in diverse cellular processes including signal transduction, cell cycle progression, and metabolic pathways. The most common form of ubiquitination is polyubiquitination, in which sequential attachment of multiple ubiquitin (Ub) molecules through Lys<sub>48</sub> of Ub to a target protein results in the formation of a long Ub chain that often signals the target protein for degradation by the 26S proteasome. Attachment of Ub to a target protein involves ATP-dependent activation by an Ub-activating enzyme (E1) and subsequent transfer by an Ub-conjugating enzyme E2 (Fig. 1A). Typically, E2 associates with an Ub ligase (E3) that recruits the target protein. One large family of E3 ligases, which was initially identified as cell cycle regulators, consists of multi-subunit complexes organized by the Cullin (Cul) family of scaffolding proteins (Fig. 1B). The most prominent of this family of E3 ligases is the SCF subfamily that contains core components Skp1, Cul1, and Roc1/Rbx1, and a variable F-box protein that serves as the substrate recognition subunit. A common feature of the SCF class of E3 ligases is that substrates are recognized only after their phosphorylation; thus SCF E3 ligases link many kinase-mediated regulatory pathways to ubiquitin-mediated proteolysis. Another subfamily of modular E3 ligases is organized by Cul3 and contains variable BTB proteins that recognize substrates. BTB proteins bind Cul3 via their BTB domains and substrates via other protein interacting modules including MATH (meprin and TRAF homology) domains (Fig. 1B).

The Hh family of secreted proteins is one of the major families of signaling molecules that govern cell growth and patterning in a spectrum of developmental processes. Consequently, deregulation of Hh signaling activity has been linked to numerous human disorders including cancer. Hh binds its receptor Patched (Ptc), thereby relieving Ptc-mediated inhibition of the seven transmembrane protein Smoothened (Smo) that transduces Hh signals inside the cell. In *Drosophila*, Smo activation is mediated through phosphorylation of its carboxyl-terminal intracellular tail by protein kinases including

PKA and CKI.18-20 Smo transduces the Hh signal by interacting with cytoplasmic signaling complexes including the kinesin-like protein Costal 2 (Cos2) and the Ser/Thr kinase Fused (Fu), leading to the activation of the latent Gli family of Zn-finger transcription factors, Cubitus interruptus (Ci) (Fig. 2A).21-23

REGULATION OF CI/GLI PROCESSING BY SCFSLIMB/B-TRCP

Ci plays dual roles in Hh signaling depending on whether Hh is present or not. In wing discs, Ci represses a subset of Hh target genes such as *decapentaplegic* (*dpp*) in the absence of Hh whereas Ci activates other Hh target genes including *ptc* and *engrailed* (*en*) in the presence of Hh (Fig. 2A).24 These two opposing functions of Ci are executed by two distinct forms: a full-length activator form (Ci155) and a truncated repressor form (Ci75) derived from Ci155 by selective degradation of its C-terminus.24,25 In vertebrates, these dual transcriptional activities are mediated by two Gli proteins, Gli2 and Gli3, with Gli2 mainly contributing the activator activity and Gli3 the repressor activity.26 In corroboration with their biological functions, Gli3 is processed more effectively into a C-terminally truncated repressor than Gli2.27,28

Genetic studies in *Drosophila* have identified a number of factors that participate in Ci processing, including three Ser/Thr kinases (PKA, GSK3, and CKI) and components of an SCFE3 ligase (Slimb, Cul1, and Roc1a).29 Loss-of-function for any of these factors leads to a complete blockage of Ci processing.30-35 In vitro phosphorylation studies suggested that PKA directly phosphorylates multiple sites in the C-terminal half of Ci, priming for further phosphorylation by GSK3 and CKI at adjacent sites (Fig. 3).31-33 Secondary priming events may also occur. For example, PKA-primed phosphorylation by GSK3 at S852 promoted further phosphorylation by CKI at S855 in an in vitro kinase assay.33 The combined action of these three kinases generates hyperphosphorylated Ci with three clusters of phosphorylated residues (Fig. 3). Consistent with the in vitro studies, mutations in PKA, GSK3, or CKI sites that abolish Ci processing in vivo greatly reduce Slimb binding in vitro.33,40 To further demonstrate that Slimb binding suffices to stimulate Ci processing in vivo, both groups engineered Ci derivatives (CiDSG and CiSL) that contain a canonical Slimb/β-catenin recognition motif (DSGIHS) found in Armadillo/β-catenin. In these mutant Ci constructs, the PKA sites in the first and third phosphorylation clusters were mutated to alanine and the second cluster was replaced by DSGIHS controlled by PKA-primed GSK3 phosphorylation. As predicted, phosphorylation by PKA and GSK3 stimulated these Ci proteins to bind Slimb in vitro, whereas CKI phosphorylation was indispensable for the wild type Ci protein to bind Slimb.33,40 More importantly, both CiDSG and CiSL were processed in vivo to generate Ci75, albeit less efficiently than the wild type Ci, and processing of these Ci derivatives depended on PKA and Slimb but was independent of CKI.33,40 These observations strongly argue that PKA- and GSK3-primed phosphorylation of Ci by CKI promotes Ci processing by recruiting Slimb.

Two studies that investigated Gli3 processing have further strengthened the view that Slimb/β-TRCP regulates Ci/Gli3 processing by direct binding and pointed to a highly conserved mechanism for controlling the production of the Ci/Gli repressor. The conserved mechanism was suggested by earlier observations that Gli3 contains multiple phosphorylation clusters with PKA, GSK3, and CKI sites arranged in a configuration similar to those present in Ci, and that Gli3 processing required multiple PKA sites;28,31,32 however, direct evidence had been lacking until recently. Two groups have now reported that Gli3 processing requires GSK3, CKI and β-TRCP in addition to PKA.41,42 Wang and colleagues showed that PKA primed Gli3 phosphorylation by GSK3 and CKI in vitro and that mutations in GSK3 or CKI sites severely reduced Gli3 phosphorylation levels in vivo.41 Tempe and colleagues showed that increased PKA and GSK3 activities promoted, whereas pharmacological inhibition of GSK3 blocked, the production of Gli3 repressor (Gli3-83).42 Both groups demonstrated that mutations in GSK3 or CKI sites, like mutations in PKA sites, abolished Gli3 processing.41,42 In addition, Gli3

Several studies have provided new evidence that proteolytic processing of Ci as well as its vertebrate homolog Gli3 is mediated by direct binding of Slimb/β-TRCP.33,40-42 Using GST pull down assays, two groups have shown that hyperphosphorylation of Ci by

Ubiquitin Regulation of Hh Pathway

can act as ubiquitin acceptor sites. Indeed, mutating these lysine residues abolished β-TRCP-stimulated ubiquitination of a truncated Gli3.42

What structural features define a Slimb/β-TRCP binding site in Ci/Gli3? The canonical Slimb/β-TRCP recognition motif has been extended to the consensus: DSGX2-4S.7,8,43 In the three-dimensional structure of the β-TRCP-Skp1-β-catenin complex, D32, pS33, and pS37 from the β-catenin destruction box DSGIHS make specific contacts with residues in the WD 40 repeats of β-TRCP, and G34, an invariant destruction motif residue, snugly fits in a region with little space for residues larger than glycine.44 Although none of the phosphorylation clusters in Ci/Gli3 contains a canonical Slimb/β-TRCP recognition motif, they contain numerous related sequences of the consensus: (D/S)(S/T)X2-5(S/T) (Fig. 3).33,40-42 Because none of the Ci/Gli3 sequences has a critical glycine in the third position, and many have only two residues separating the two S/T residues whereas the optimal spacing contains three to five residues, it is possible that these sequences constitute suboptimal low-affinity binding sites for Slimb/β-TRCP, and that optimal binding is achieved by cooperativity among multiple low-affinity sites. This model could explain why impaired phosphorylation at any one of the phosphorylation clusters abolished Ci/Gli3 processing.24,33,38 A precedent for achieving optimal binding through cooperativity among multiple low-affinity sites has been demonstrated for the yeast cell cycle regulator Sic1, which binds SCF CDC4 through at least six low-affinity sites.45

The requirement for hyperphosphorylation in Ci processing may account for the necessity for the complex formation between Cos2 and multiple Ci kinases including PKA, GSK3, and CKI, which facilitates efficient Ci phosphorylation.46 Such a requirement also renders Ci/Gli3 processing highly sensitive to Hh dose, which could explain why low levels of Hh suffice to block Ci/Gli3 processing even though such levels may only cause partial reduction in Ci/Gli3 phosphorylation. Cooperativity among multiple low-affinity sites could create a sharp response in Ci/Gli3 processing to a graded Hh activity since a relatively small drop in the level of Ci/Gli3 phosphorylation might result in a dramatic reduction in Ci/Gli3 processing and hence the level of the Ci/Gli3 repressor. Finally, employing multiple phosphorylation events may also allow the levels of Ci/Gli3 phosphorylation to be fine-tuned by different thresholds of Hh, leading to differential regulation of Ci/Gli3 processing and activity, as phosphorylation of Ci by PKA not only promotes its processing but may also inhibit its activator activity independent of Ci processing.36

REGULATION OF THE ACTIVATOR FORMS OF CI/GLI BY A CUL3-BASED E3 UBIQUITIN LIGASE

Although Hh signaling inhibits Slimb-mediated Ci proteolysis, high levels of Hh appear to promote the degradation of Ci155 through a mechanism independent of Slimb.47 In wing discs, anterior compartment cells immediately adjacent to the A/P compartment boundary are exposed to the highest levels of Hh (Fig. 2B). In these cells, Ci155 is converted into a hyperactive transcription activator competent to activate ptc and en.47 Paradoxically, Hh also promotes Ci155 instability in these cells, but the underlying mechanism has remained elusive until recently. Two groups have now identified a

Figure 2. Hh signaling pathway in *Drosophila*. (A) Intracellular signaling events in the absence of Hh (left) or in the presence of low (middle) and high (right) levels of Hh. In the absence of Hh, Ptc inhibits Smo. Ci155 forms a large protein complex with Cos2, Fu, and Sufu, and is phosphorylated by PKA, GSK3, and CKI, which are recruited to Ci by Cos2. Hyperphosphorylation of Ci recruits SCFSlimb that mediates its partial degradation to generate a C-terminally truncated transcriptional repressor Ci75. Hh binding to Ptc activates Smo, which signals downstream to inhibit Ci phosphorylation by dissociating Cos2-kinase complexes. In these cells, Ci processing to Ci75 is blocked, leading to depression of dpp; however, the transcriptional activator activity of Ci155 is still suppressed by Sufu. High levels of Hh further stimulate the maturation of the latent transcriptional activator Ci155 into hyperactive forms by dissociating Sufu. Active Ci155 turns on ptc, en, as well as hib. HIB-Cul3 E3 ubiquitin ligase forms a negative feedback loop to targets Ci155 for complete degradation. (B) In wing disc, Hh proteins produced by posterior (P) compartment cells (blue) diffuse into anterior (A) compartment and induce neighboring A-compartment cells to express dpp, which encodes a TGF_/BMP family member of secreted protein. Dpp then diffuses into both A and P-compartments to control cell growth and patterning in the entire wing. Near the A/P boundary, Hh acts as a local morphogen to specify patterning by setting up different spatial limits of target gene expression. (C) In eye disc, Hh proteins produced posterior (P) to the morphogenetic furrow (MF) induce cells in the MF to express dpp, which is required for MF progression.

processing was enhanced by β-TRCP overexpression but blocked by RNAi knockdown of β-TRCP.41,42 Phosphorylation of Gli3 by PKA, GSK3, CKI promoted its binding to β-TRCP in vitro and mutations in PKA, GSK3 or CKI sites that abolished Gli3 processing also impeded Gli3/β-TRCP association in HEK293 cells.41 Like the fly studies, these results suggest that hyperphosphorylation of Gli3 by the sequential action of PKA, GSK3, and CKI promotes Gli3 processing by recruiting β-TRCP.

Studies in vertebrate system also provided the first evidence that Ci/Gli3 processing is regulated by Slimb/β-TRCP-mediated ubiquitination. Ubiquitinated forms of Gli3 were detected from HEK293 cells treated with the proteasome inhibitor MG115.41 Tempe et al. identified a cluster of four lysine residues located N-terminally to the phosphorylation region as crucial for Gli3 processing.42 Mutating three or more of these lysine residues abolished Gli3 processing, whereas mutating two or fewer residues did not cause any discernible change in Gli3 processing, suggesting that multiple lysine residues

Cul3-base E3 ubiquitin ligase that appears to participate in this process.⁴⁸,⁴⁹

An initial clue for the involvement of a Cul3-base E3 ubiquitin ligase in degrading Ci155 came from an earlier study of Cul3 in eye discs that give rise to the *Drosophila* compound eyes.³⁴ The eye disc is divided into anterior and posterior regions by an anteriorly-propagating line of indentation in the disc epithelium called the Morphogenetic furrow (MF). Cells anterior to the MF undergo proliferation whereas cells posterior to the MF enter differentiation programs after one round of synchronized division.⁵⁰ *hh* is expressed posterior to the MF as differentiation commences and is required for the anterior progression of the MF (Fig. 2C).⁵¹ Unlike the wing or leg disc where Ci is expressed only in Hh-responding cells, Ci is expressed uniformly in the eye disc; however, Ci protein level remains low posterior to the MF by Cul3-mediated degradation.³⁴ Although Cul3 is uniformly expressed in the eye disc, loss of Cul3 only stabilized Ci155 posterior to the MF,³⁴ suggesting that the Cul3-based E3 ubiquitin ligase activity toward Ci155 is restricted to the posterior region likely by other components in the ligase complex. A good candidate would be a member of the BTB family of proteins that can function as substrate recognition subunits for the Cul3-based modular ubiquitin ligases.⁹

By searching for BTB proteins that were specifically expressed posterior to the MF in the eye disc, Zhang and colleagues identified a BTB/MATH domain-containing protein they named HIB (Hh-induced MATH and BTB domain-containing protein) because *hib* is also transcriptionally activated by Hh signaling in wing, leg, and antenna discs.⁴⁸ Kent et al. independently identified this gene, which they named *roadkill* (*rdx*), from an enhancer trap line with embryonic expression pattern suggestive of Hh regulation.⁴⁹ To determine if HIB/Rdx (hereafter referred to as HIB) is a bona fide regulator of Ci, both groups carried out gain-and loss-of-function studies. Both groups showed that overexpression of HIB in wing discs prevented Ci155 accumulation and blocked Hh signaling in A-compartment cells near the A/P boundary. Kent and colleagues characterized several *rdx* alleles: one allele (*rdx*¹) harbored a P-element in the 5' UTR of *rdx* whereas others carried missense mutations either in coding exons (*rdx*⁵) or in splice junction (*rdx*⁶).⁴⁹ Mutant clones for the strong alleles, *rdx*⁵ and *rdx*⁶, resulted in Ci155 elevation near the A/P boundary in wing discs or posterior to the MF in eye discs, whereas *ci* transcription indicated by a *ci-lacZ* reporter was not affected.⁴⁹ *rdx* mutant clones did not exhibit any discernible change in the expression of Hh target genes including *en*, *ptc*, and *dpp*. However, Zhang and colleagues observed that removal of HIB by overexpressing multiple copies of a *hib* RNAi construct not only caused Ci155 elevation but also led to enhanced Hh pathway activity, as manifested by the enhanced expression of Hh target genes including *ptc* and *dpp*.⁴⁸ To confirm the phenotypes caused by *hib* RNAi, Zhang and colleagues generated a *hib* null allele (*hib*Δ⁶) that deleted the entire *hib* coding region through homologous recombination. They found that *hib*Δ⁶ mutant clones in wing discs situated in the anterior compartment near the A/P border exhibited increased

---

**Figure 3.** Multiple phosphorylation clusters are important for Ci/Gli3 processing. A schematic drawing of Ci with Zn finger DNA binding domain and coactivator dCBP binding domain depicted in blue and green boxes respectively. The three short vertical lines indicate the positions of PKA site 1, 2, and 3 in Ci155. Horizontal lines above the Ci drawing demarcate Slimb, HIB, and Sufu binding regions. Sequences surrounding the multiple phosphorylation clusters in Ci and Gli3 are shown with kinase phosphorylate sites color-coded. Red: PKA sites; Green: PKA-primed GSK3 sites; light green: CKI-primed GSK3 sites; Blue: PKA-primed CKI sites; light blue: GSK3-primed CKI sites; yellow: possible noncanonical CKI sites whose mutations affect Slimb binding.⁴⁰ Sequences related to the canonical Slimb/β-TRCP recognition motifs are underlined. Black lines: (D/S)SX₃₋₅(S/T); red lines: (D/S)(S/T)XX(S/T); dashed lines: SXXXS. Adapted from Smelkinson and Kalderon.⁴⁰

levels of Ci155 and enhanced expression of Hh target genes such as *dpp*.⁴⁸ The relatively weak phenotypes associated with the *rdx* alleles are likely because these alleles are hypomorphic and therefore retain partial function. Taken together, these results demonstrated that HIB is an inhibitory component of the Hh pathway. As Hh induces *hib* expression, HIB therefore forms a negative feedback loop to attenuate Hh pathway activity.

To explore the mechanism by which HIB regulates Ci155, Zhang et al. carried out extensive biochemical analyses. They have demonstrated that HIB links Ci155 and Cul3 through its MATH and BTB domains respectively.⁴⁸ Interestingly, both the N- and C-terminal regions of Ci155 can bind HIB and target Ci155 for degradation posterior to the MF in eye discs.⁴⁸ Using a cell-based ubiquitination assay, Zhang and colleagues showed that overexpression of HIB promoted Ci ubiquitination, which was enhanced by coexpression of a wild type Cul3 but inhibited by a dominant negative form of Cul3.⁴⁸ As expected, the ability of HIB to promote Ci ubiquitination and degradation depended on both its MATH and BTB domains. Collectively, these data suggest a model in which HIB functions as an adaptor for a Cul3-based E3 ubiquitin ligase that binds Ci155 and catalyzes its ubiquitination, followed by proteasome-mediated degradation. In further support of this model, Ci155 degradation caused by HIB overexpression was blocked in *cul3* mutant clones near the A/P boundary in wing discs, and by treatment with a proteasome inhibitor in cultured cells.⁴⁸

The HIB-Cul3 pathway appears to act only in Hh-responding cells. In wing discs, *hib/rdx* mutant clones situated in the anterior compartment distant from the A/P boundary did not affect Ci155 levels;⁴⁸,⁴⁹ however, misexpression of Hh in these cells rendered Ci155 susceptible to HIB-mediated regulation.⁴⁸ Three factors could account for the dependence of HIB action on the presence of Hh. First, Hh signaling activates *hib* transcription;⁴⁸,⁴⁹ therefore, Hh responding cells likely contain higher levels of HIB-Cul3 ubiquitin ligase activity. Second, HIB is largely localized to the

nucleus, 48 whereas Ci155 is sequestered in the cytoplasm in a large
protein complex in the absence of Hh.39,52,53 In Hh-responding
cells, Hh induces Ci155 nuclear import, likely making it more acces-
sible to HIB-mediated ubiquitination and degradation. Third, Ci155
is stabilized by Suppressor of Fused (Sufu), a negative regulator of
Ci155 activity.47 Interestingly, Sufu and HIB appear to bind the
same regions of Ci155, and Sufu and HIB competed for binding to
Ci155 in a cell-based assay (Fig. 3).48,54–56 In addition, overexpres-
sion of Sufu interfered with HIB-induced Ci155 degradation, 48
probably because Sufu-bound Ci155 is less accessible to HIB. In
Hh-responding cells, high levels of Hh stimulate Ci155 activity
likely by dissociating Sufu from Ci155, and Sufu-free active forms
of Ci155 become better targets for HIB, which may account for the
previous observation that active forms of Ci155 are short-lived.47

What is the biological function of the HIB-Cul3 pathway in
pattern formation? The HIB-Cul3 pathway may provide a mecha-
nism for fine-tuning of Hh signaling responses in a spatially and
perhaps temporally regulated manner. In wing discs, Hh-induced
HIB forms a negative feedback loop to attenuate Hh signaling
strength, which contributes to the final shape of Hh signaling activity
gradient.48,49 The HIB-Cul3 pathway could also provide a means to
terminate Hh signaling in certain tissues after Hh fulfills its normal
function, as illustrated by the experiments on *Drosophila* eye devel-
opment.48,49 Loss of HIB in eye discs results in morphological and
cellular defects in *Drosophila* eyes including misaligned pigment cells,
missing cone cells, and distorted ommatidial packing, phenotypes
that mimic over-activated Hh signaling posterior to the MF through
other means.49 The eye defect caused by loss of HIB is mild, but is
greatly enhanced when Ci is overexpressed posterior to the MF.48
While misexpression of wild type Ci posterior to the MF did not
cause discernible eye defects, misexpression of truncated forms of Ci
that can no longer be degraded by HIB resulted in severely rough-
ened eyes.48 These observations suggest that one purpose of HIB
production in cells undergoing differentiation is to prevent aberrant
Hh signaling by degrading Ci155, which is essential for normal eye
development.

Is the HIB-Cul3 based regulatory mechanism evolutionarily
conserved? Multiple HIB homologs exist in vertebrates. For example,
human has two HIB homologs, SPOP and LOC339745, which share
79% and 75% aa identity with HIB, respectively.48,49 Indeed, expres-
sion of SPOP in *Drosophila* eyes rescued *hib* mutant phenotypes.48
Furthermore, Gli2 and Gli3 were selectively degraded posterior to
the MF in eye discs in a HIB-dependent manner, 48 implying that
HIB/SPOP might play a conserved role in Ci/Gli degradation in the
Hh pathway. Further experiments are required to determine whether
Gli proteins are subject to SPOP-mediated regulation in vertebrate
development.

HIB/SPOP appears to have additional targets outside the Hh
pathway. Indeed, the majority of embryos lacking both the maternal
and zygotic function of HIB exhibited a complete failure of cellu-
larization and showed mitotic defects during early rounds of cell
cycle, 49 although the underlying molecular mechanisms remained
unknown. It has been shown that SPOP can target a multifunctional
protein Daxx for ubiquitination by Cul3-based ubiquitin ligase.57
Furthermore, the SPOP-Cul3 ubiquitin ligase has been implicated
in regulating the localization of the variant histone MACROH2A
during stable X-chromosome inactivation.58 Hence, like SCF<sup>Slimb</sup>/
β-TRCP, the HIB/SPOP-Cul3 ubiquitin ligase may have multiple
substrates involved in different cellular processes.


SELECTIVE VS. COMPLETE DEGRADATION OF CI BY THE
UBIQUITIN/PROTEASOME SYSTEM

The distinct outcomes of the proteolysis directed by Slimb and
HIB-mediated ubiquitination have raised an interesting question
of what determines partial vs. complete degradation. There are
only a few examples of partial degradation of a protein by the ubiqui-
tin/proteasome system, most notably, the processing of the NFκB
precursor proteins p105 to p50,59 and the processing of the yeast
transcription factor Spt23 and Mga2.60 A glycine-rich region (GRR)
near the cleavage site in p105 is required for p105 processing.61 In
addition, the highly folded IPT (Ig-like/plexins/transcription factor)
domain in the N-terminal region of p105 and Spt23 is also critical
for their processing as deletion of this domain from Spt23 or a point
mutation that destabilized it in p105 abolished processing of these
proteins.62,63 A recent study systematically investigated the require-
ment for ubiquitin/proteasome-mediated processing and identified
the minimal processing signal as a simple sequence followed by a
tightly folded domain in the direction of proteasome movement.63
The processing signal works better if the simple sequence has lower
complexity and the folded domain has higher stability. In addition,
the simple sequence has to be situated between the destruction
motif (degron) and the folded domain of the substrate in order for
processing by the proteasome. Furthermore, the spacing between the
simple sequence and the folded domain (or perhaps the destruction
box) appears to be critical. In an artificial substrate, moving the GRR
domain 35 residues or more away from the folded domain abolished
processing of the substrate.63 Exactly how the processing signal works
is not fully understood but one model suggests that the stably folded
domain could halt the proteasome progression while the simple
sequence might help dissociate the proteasome from the substrate.62
Alternatively, the simple sequence such as GRR may promote local
unfolding that directs an internal cleavage by the proteasome, which
then progresses bidirectionally to completely degrade the poorly
folded region but leave the tightly folded domain intact.64 Indeed,
an internal cleavage by the proteasome has been demonstrated during
the processing of Spt23.63

The processing of Ci/Gli3 by Slimb/β-TRCP-mediated ubiquiti-
nation may utilize a similar mechanism. An early study identified a
region (aa 611–760) between the cleavage site and the Slimb binding
domain as essential for Ci processing in vivo.24 Interestingly, replacing
this region with the GRR domain from p105 restored processing.63
This region appears to contain three stretches of simple sequences,
including a stretch rich in glutamine and asparagines (aa 626–642),
a serine-rich stretch (aa 655–670), and an aspartate-rich stretch (aa
689–712),62 although none of sequences has been directly tested.
The tightly folded Zn finger DNA binding domain is also essential
for Ci processing as point mutations that destabilized this domain
abolished Ci processing.62 These observations suggest that Ci and
perhaps Gli3 processing is also controlled by a processing signal
that consists of a simple sequence(s) preceding the highly folded
Zn finger domain. The orientation of the Slimb binding region, the
simple sequence(s), and the Zn finger domain favors processing by
proteasome. In contrast, HIB binds the N-terminal region of Ci, 48
and therefore HIB-mediated ubiquitination may direct proteasome
entry from Ci N-terminus. This would lead to a complete degrada-
tion of Ci, likely because there is no simple sequence preceding the
Zn finger domain.

FUTURE PERSPECTIVE

There are still a lot to be learned about the role of HIB/SPOP-Cul3-mediated Gli degradation in vertebrate development and perhaps in cancer formation. The relevant HIB substrate(s) involved in other processes such as mitosis also need to be determined. A recent study has demonstrated that Gli proteins possess two distinct destruction signals, the first one regulated by Slimb/β-TRCP and the second one by an unknown mechanism. The second destruction signal was mapped to an N-terminal domain of Gli1, which is highly conserved between Ci and all the three Gli proteins. 65 The corresponding region in Ci overlaps with the HIB binding domain; therefore, it would be tempting to speculate that the SPOP-Cul3E3 ligase might be responsible for degrading Gli proteins through the second destruction signal. Interestingly, inhibition of Gli degradation through unknown mechanisms appeared to greatly potentiate the ability of misexpressed Gli proteins to induce tumor formation in transgenic mouse models. 65 Similarly, hib mutations greatly enhanced the ability of an active form of Ci to induce tumor-like overgrowth on wing discs. 48 These observations have raised interesting possibility that SPOP and its paralogs may act as tumor suppressors whose loss of function could synergize with aberrant Gli activation to promote tumor formation, a hypothesis that surely will be investigated in the future. In this regard, it is particularly interesting to note that a BTB family protein encoded by REN(KCTD11), which is deleted in human medulloblastomas, functions as a repressor of Hh signaling pathway. 66,67 It would be interesting to determine whether REN also regulates the stability of Gli proteins and what is the relationship between REN and the vertebrate HIB homologs.

Reference

1. Hershko A, Ciechanover A. The ubiquitin system. Annu Rev Biochem 1998; 67:425-79.
2. Bai C, Sen P, Hofmann K, Ma L, Goebel M, Harper JW, Elledge SJ. SKP1 connects cell cycle regulators to the ubiquitin proteolysis machinery through a novel motif, the F-box. Cell 1996; 86:263-74.
3. Deshaies RJ. SCF and Cullin/Ring H2-based ubiquitin ligases. Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 1999; 15:435-67.
4. Feldman RM, Correll CC, Kaplan KB, Deshaies RJ. A complex of Cdc4p, Skp1p, and Cdc53p/cullin catalyzes ubiquitination of the phosphorylated CDK inhibitor Sic1p [see comments]. Cell 1997; 91:221-30.
5. Skowyra D, Craig KL, Tyers M, Elledge SJ, Harper JW. F-box proteins are receptors that recruit phosphorylated substrates to the SCF ubiquitin-ligase complex [see comments]. Cell 1997; 91:209-19.
6. Koepp DM, Schaefer LK, Ye X, Keyomarsi K, Chu C, Harper JW, Elledge SJ. Phosphorylation-dependent ubiquitination of cyclin E by the SCFFbw7 ubiquitin ligase. Science 2001; 294:173-7.
7. Spencer E, Jiang J, Chen ZJ. Signal-induced ubiquitination of IkappaBeta by the F-box protein Slimb/beta-TrCP. Genes Dev 1999; 13:284-94.
8. Winston JT, Strack P, Beer-Romero P, Chu CY, Elledge SJ, Harper JW. The SCFbeta-TRCP-ubiquitin ligase complex associates specifically with phosphorylated destruction motifs in IkappaBeta and beta-catenin and stimulates IkappaBeta ubiquitination in vitro. Genes Dev 1999; 13:270-83.
9. Pintard L, Willems A, Peter M. Cullin-based ubiquitin ligases: Cul3-BTB complexes join the family. Embo J 2004; 23:1681-7.
10. Pintard L, Willis JH, Willems A, Johnson JL, Srayko M, Kurz T, Glaser S, Mains PE, Tyers M, Bowerman B, Peter M. The BTB protein MEL-26 is a substrate-specific adaptor of the CUL-3 ubiquitin-ligase. Nature 2003; 425:311-6.
11. Xu L, Wei Y, Reboul J, Vaglio P, Shin TH, Vidal M, Elledge SJ, Harper JW. BTB proteins are substrate-specific adaptors in an SCF-like modular ubiquitin ligase containing CUL-3. Nature 2003; 425:316-21.
12. Furukawa M, He YJ, Borchers C, Xiong Y. Targeting of protein ubiquitination by BTB-Cullin 3-Roc1 ubiquitin ligases. Nat Cell Biol 2003; 5:1001-7.
13. Geyer R, Wee S, Anderson S, Yates J, Wolf DA. BTB/POZ domain proteins are putative substrate adaptors for cullin 3 ubiquitin ligases. Mol Cell 2003; 12:783-90.
14. Ingham PW, McMahon AP. Hedgehog signaling in animal development: Paradigms and principles. Genes Dev 2001; 15:3059-87.
15. Villavicencio EH, Walterhouse DO, Iannaccone PM. The sonic hedgehog-patched-gli pathway in human development and disease. Am J Hum Genet 2000; 67:1047-54.

16. Pasca di Magliano M, Hebrok M. Hedgehog signalling in cancer formation and maintenance. Nat Rev Cancer 2003; 3:903-11.
17. Heiser PW, Hebrok M. Development and cancer: Lessons learned in the pancreas. Cell Cycle 2004; 3:270-2.
18. Jia J, Tong C, Wang B, Luo L, Jiang J. Hedgehog signalling activity of smoothened requires phosphorylation by protein kinase A and casein kinase I. Nature 2004; 432:1045-1050.
19. Apionishev S, Katanayeva NM, Marks SA, Kalderon D, Tomlinson A. *Drosophila* Smoothened phosphorylation sites essential for Hedgehog signal transduction. Nat Cell Biol 2005; 7:86-92.
20. Zhang C, Williams EH, Guo Y, Lum L, Beachy PA. Extensive phosphorylation of Smoothened in Hedgehog pathway activation. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2004; 101:17900-7.
21. Lum L, Beachy PA. The Hedgehog response network: Sensors, switches, and routers. Science 2004; 304:1755-9.
22. Hooper JE, Scott MP. Communicating with hedgehogs. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2005; 6:306-17.
23. Jia J, Jiang J. Decoding the Hedgehog signal in animal development. Cell Mol Life Sci 2006; 63:1249-65.
24. Methot N, Basler K. Hedgehog controls limb development by regulating the activities of distinct transcriptional activator and repressor forms of Cubitus interruptus. Cell 1999; 96:819-31.
25. Aza-Blanc P, Ramirez-Weber F, Laget M, Schwartz C, Kornberg T. Proteolysis that is inhibited by Hedgehog targets Cubitus interruptus protein to the nucleus and converts it to a repressor. Cell 1997; 89:1043-53.
26. Jacob J, Briscoe J. Gli proteins and the control of spinal-cord patterning. EMBO Rep 2003; 4:761-5.
27. Ruiz i Altaba A. Gli proteins encode context-dependent positive and negative functions: Implications for development and disease. Development 1999; 126:3205-16.
28. Wang B, Fallon JF, Beachy PA. Hedgehog-regulated processing of Gli3 produces an anterior/posterior repressor gradient in the developing vertebrate limb. Cell 2000; 100:423-34.
29. Jiang J. Degrading Ci: Who is Cul-pable? Genes and Dev 2002; 16:2315-2321.
30. Jiang J, Struhl G. Regulation of the Hedgehog and Wingless signalling pathways by the F-box/WD 40-repeat protein Slimb. Nature 1998; 391:493-6.
31. Jia J, Amanai K, Wang G, Tang J, Wang B, Jiang J. Shaggy/GSK3 antagonizes Hedgehog signalling by regulating Cubitus interruptus. Nature 2002; 416:548-52.
32. Price MA, Kalderon D. Proteolysis of the Hedgehog signaling effector Cubitus interruptus requires phosphorylation by Glycogen Synthase Kinase 3 and Casein Kinase 1. Cell 2002; 108:823-35.
33. Jia J, Zhang L, Zhang Q, Tong C, Wang B, Hou F, Amanai K, Jiang J. Phosphorylation by double-time/CKIepsilon and CKIalpha targets cubitus interruptus for Slimb/beta-TRCP-mediated proteolytic processing. Dev Cell 2005; 9:819-30.
34. Ou CY, Lin YF, Chen YJ, Chien CT. Distinct protein degradation mechanisms mediated by Cul1 and Cul3 controlling Ci stability in *Drosophila* eye development. Genes Dev 2002; 16:2403-14.
35. Noureddine MA, Donaldson TD, Thacker SA, Duronio RJ. *Drosophila* Roc1a encodes a RING-H2 protein with a unique function in processing the Hh signal transducer Ci by the SCFE3 ubiquitin ligase. Dev Cell 2002; 2:757-70.
36. Wang G, Wang B, Jiang J. Protein kinase A antagonizes Hedgehog signaling by regulating both the activator and repressor forms of Cubitus interruptus. Genes and Dev 1999; 13:2828-37.
37. Price MA, Kalderon D. Proteolysis of cubitus interruptus in *Drosophila* requires phosphorylation by protein kinase A. Development 1999; 126:4331-9.
38. Chen Y, Cardinaux JR, Goodman RH, Smolik SM. Mutants of cubitus interruptus that are independent of PKA regulation are independent of hedgehog signaling. Development 1999; 126:3607-16.
39. Chen CH, von Kessler DP, Park W, Wang B, Ma Y, Beachy PA. Nuclear trafficking of Cubitus interruptus in the transcriptional regulation of Hedgehog target gene expression. Cell 1999; 98:305-16.
40. Smelkinson MG, Kalderon D. Processing of the *Drosophila* hedgehog signaling effector Ci-155 to the repressor Ci-75 is mediated by direct binding to the SCF component slimb. Curr Biol 2006; 16:110-6.
41. Wang B, Li Y. Evidence for the direct involvement of {beta} TrCP in Gli3 protein processing. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2006; 103:33-8.
42. Tempe D, Casas M, Karaz S, Blanchet-Tournier MF, Concordet JP. Multisite protein kinase A and glycogen synthase kinase 3beta phosphorylation leads to Gli3 ubiquitination by SCFbetaTrCP. Mol Cell Biol 2006; 26:4316-26.
43. Jin J, Shirogane T, Xu L, Nalepa G, Qin J, Elledge SJ, Harper JW. SCFbeta-TRCP links Chk1 signaling to degradation of the Cdc25A protein phosphatase. Genes Dev 2003; 17:3062-74.
44. Wu G, Xu G, Schulman BA, Jeffrey PD, Harper JW, Pavletich NP. Structure of a beta-TrCP1-Skp1-beta-catenin complex: Destruction motif binding and lysine specificity of the SCF(beta-TrCP1) ubiquitin ligase. Mol Cell 2003; 11:1445-56.
45. Nash P, Tang X, Orlicky S, Chen Q, Gertler FB, Mendenhall MD, Sicheri F, Pawson T, Tyers M. Multisite phosphorylation of a CDK inhibitor sets a threshold for the onset of DNA replication. Nature 2001; 414:514-21.
46. Zhang W, Zhao Y, Tong C, Wang G, Wang B, Jia J, Jiang J. Hedgehog-regulated costal 2-kinase complexes control phosphorylation and proteolytic processing of cubitus interruptus. Dev Cell 2005; 8:267-78.

47. Ohlmeyer JT, Kalderon D. Hedgehog stimulates maturation of Cubitus interruptus into a labile transcriptional activator. Nature 1998; 396:749-53.

48. Zhang Q, Zhang L, Wang B, Ou CY, Chien CT, Jiang J. A hedgehog-induced BTB protein modulates hedgehog signaling by degrading Ci/Gli transcription factor. Dev Cell 2006; 10:719-29.

49. Kent D, Bush EW, Hooper JE. Roadkill attenuates Hedgehog responses through degradation of Cubitus interruptus. Development 2006; 133:2001-10.

50. Treisman JE, Heberlein U. Eye development in *Drosophila*: Formation of the eye field and control of differentiation. Curr Top Dev Biol 1998; 39:119-58.

51. Ma C, Zhou Y, Beachy PA, Moses K. The segment polarity gene hedgehog is required for progression of the morphogenetic furrow in the developing *Drosophila* eye. Cell 1993; 75:927-38.

52. Wang G, Amanai K, Wang B, Jiang J. Interactions with Costal2 and suppressor of fused regulate nuclear translocation and activity of cubitus interruptus. Genes Dev 2000; 14:2893-905.

53. Wang QT, Holmgren RA. Nuclear import of cubitus interruptus is regulated by hedgehog via a mechanism distinct from Ci stabilization and Ci activation. Development 2000; 127:3131-9.

54. Croker JA, Ziegenhorn SL, Holmgren RA. Regulation of the *Drosophila* transcription factor, Cubitus interruptus, by two conserved domains. Dev Biol 2006; 291:368-81.

55. Monnier V, Dussillol F, Alves G, Lamour-Isnard C, Plessis A. Suppressor of fused links fused and Cubitus interruptus on the hedgehog signalling pathway. Curr Biol 1998; 8:583-6.

56. Methot N, Basler K. Suppressor of Fused opposes Hedgehog signal transduction by impeding nuclear accumulation of the activator form of Cubitus interruptus. Development 2000; 127:4001-4010.

57. Kwon JE, La M, Oh KH, Oh YM, Kim GR, Seol JH, Baek SH, Chiba T, Tanaka K, Bang OS, Joe CO, Chung CH. BTB domain-containing speckle-type POZ protein (SPOP) serves as an adaptor of Daxx for ubiquitination by Cul3-based ubiquitin ligase. J Biol Chem 2006; 281:12664-72.

58. Hernandez-Munoz I, Lund AH, van der Stoop P, Boutsma E, Mujrers I, Verhoeven E, Nusinow DA, Panning B, Marahrens Y, van Lohuizen M. Stable X chromosome inactivation involves the PRC1 Polycomb complex and requires histone MACROH2A1 and the CULLIN3/SPOP ubiquitin E3 ligase. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2005; 102:7635-40.

59. Palombella VJ, Rando OJ, Goldberg AL, Maniatis T. The ubiquitin-proteasome pathway is required for processing the NF-kappa B1 precursor protein and the activation of NF-kappa B. Cell 1994; 78:773-85.

60. Hoppe T, Matuschewski K, Rape M, Schlenker S, Ulrich HD, Jentsch S. Activation of a membrane-bound transcription factor by regulated ubiquitin/proteasome-dependent processing. Cell 2000; 102:577-86.

61. Lin L, Ghosh S. A glycine-rich region in NF-kappaB p105 functions as a processing signal for the generation of the p50 subunit. Mol Cell Biol 1996; 16:2248-54.

62. Tian L, Holmgren RA, Matouschek A. A conserved processing mechanism regulates the activity of transcription factors Cubitus interruptus and NF-kappaB. Nat Struct Mol Biol 2005; 12:1045-53.

63. Piwko W, Jentsch S. Proteasome-mediated protein processing by bidirectional degradation initiated from an internal site. Nat Struct Mol Biol 2006; 13:691-7.

64. Rape M, Jentsch S. Productive RUPture: Activation of transcription factors by proteasomal processing. Biochim Biophys Acta 2004; 1695:209-13.

65. Huntzicker EG, Estay IS, Zhen H, Lokteva LA, Jackson PK, Oro AE. Dual degradation signals control Gli protein stability and tumor formation. Genes Dev 2006; 20:276-281.

66. Di Marcotullio L, Ferretti E, De Smaele E, Argenti B, Mincione C, Zazzeroni F, Gallo R, Masuelli L, Napolitano M, Maroder M, Modesti A, Giangaspero F, Screpanti I, Alese E, Gulino A. REN(KCTD11) is a suppressor of Hedgehog signaling and is deleted in human medulloblastoma. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2004; 101:10833-8.

67. De Smaele E, Di Marcotullio L, Ferretti E, Screpanti I, Alese E, Gulino A. Chromosome 17p deletion in human medulloblastoma: A missing checkpoint in the Hedgehog pathway. Cell Cycle 2004; 3:1263-6.
