
Molecular Microbiology (2007) 63(3), 859–871

doi:10.1111/j.1365-2958.2006.05545.x

First published online 20 December 2006

# The small nucleoid protein Fis is involved in Vibrio cholerae quorum sensing

**Derrick H. Lenz**¹ and **Bonnie L. Bassler**¹,²*

¹ Department of Molecular Biology, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08544-1014, USA.

² Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Chevy Chase, MD 20815-6789, USA.

## Summary

Quorum sensing is a process of cell–cell communication that bacteria use to relay information to one another about the cell density and species composition of the bacterial community. Quorum sensing involves the production, secretion and population-wide detection of small signalling molecules called autoinducers. This process allows bacteria to synchronize group behaviours and act as multicellular units. The human pathogen, *Vibrio cholerae*, uses quorum sensing to co-ordinate such complex behaviours as pathogenicity and biofilm formation. The quorum-sensing circuit of *V. cholerae* consists of two autoinducer/sensor systems, CAI-1/CqsS and AI-2/LuxPQ, and the VarS/A-CsrA/BCD growth-phase regulatory system. Genetic analysis suggests that an additional regulatory arm involved in quorum sensing exists in *V. cholerae*. All of these systems channel information into the histidine phosphotransfer protein, LuxU, and/or the response regulator, LuxO. LuxO, when phosphorylated, activates the expression of four genes encoding the Qrr (quorum regulatory RNAs) small RNAs (sRNAs). The Qrr sRNAs destabilize the *hapR* transcript encoding the master regulator of quorum sensing, HapR. Here we identify the nucleoid protein Fis as playing a major role in the *V. cholerae* quorum-sensing circuit. Fis fulfils the predictions required to be the putative additional component that inputs information into the cascade: its expression is regulated in a growth phase-dependent manner; it requires LuxO but acts independently of LuxU, and it regulates all four *qrr* genes and, in turn, HapR by directly binding to the *qrr* gene promoters and modulating their expression.

---

## Introduction

Bacteria use quorum sensing to co-ordinate gene expression on a community-wide scale. This broadly used signalling paradigm involves the production of small signalling molecules termed autoinducers, their release into the extracellular environment, their subsequent detection by other bacterial cells in the community, and the synchronous response of the population to them. Quorum sensing is employed by both Gram-negative and Gram-positive bacteria to collectively regulate a variety of behaviours including pathogenicity, biofilm formation, sporulation, competence and bioluminescence (Waters and Bassler, 2005).

The human pathogen *V. cholerae* causes a severe diarrhoeal disease and is responsible for global pandemics (Faruque *et al.*, 1998). Using quorum sensing, *V. cholerae* controls virulence, biofilm formation, protease production and other traits (Miller *et al.*, 2002; Zhu *et al.*, 2002; Hammer and Bassler, 2003; Zhu and Mekalanos, 2003). The quorum-sensing system of *V. cholerae* is shown in Fig. 1. Information about cell density is communicated to cells via the CAI-1 and AI-2 autoinducers which are produced by the CqsA and LuxS autoinducer synthases respectively. CqsS, a two-component sensor kinase detects CAI-1, and LuxP, a periplasmic binding protein that functions in conjunction with the two-component sensor kinase LuxQ, detects AI-2. Information from the sensors flows in the form of phosphate to the histidine phosphotransfer protein, LuxU, and finally to the response regulator, LuxO.

The system functions as follows (Miller *et al.*, 2002; Zhu *et al.*, 2002; Lenz *et al.*, 2004; 2005; Waters and Bassler, 2005). At low cell density (Fig. 1A), when the concentration of autoinducers is low, CqsS and LuxQ act as kinases and transfer phosphate to LuxU. LuxU passes the phosphate to LuxO. Phospho-LuxO is active, and in a σ⁵⁴-dependent manner, activates the transcription of genes encoding four small RNAs (sRNAs), called Qrr sRNAs for quorum regulatory RNAs. The Qrr sRNAs are bound by the sRNA chaperone Hfq, and destabilize the mRNA encoding the master-regulator of quorum sensing in *V. cholerae*, HapR. The VarS/A-CsrA/BCD system is an additional signalling system that acts in parallel with the two quorum-sensing systems to input information into LuxO. At low cell density (Fig. 1A), the VarS two-

---

Accepted 23 November, 2006. *For correspondence. E-mail bbassler@princeton.edu; Tel. (+1) 609 258 2857; Fax (+1) 609 258 2957.

© 2006 The Authors  
Journal compilation © 2006 Blackwell Publishing Ltd

860 D. H. Lenz and B. L. Bassler

**A**

Low-Cell Density

VarSA/
CsrABCD
System

CAI-1/CqsS AI-2/LuxPQ
System System

OM

IM

VarS
H1
D1
H2

VarA
D2

CqsA

CqsS
H1
D1

LuxP

LuxQ
H1
D1

LuxS

LuxU
H2
P

LuxO
D2
P + σ⁵⁴ + Fis

Qrr1-4 + Hfq

HapR

virulence
biofilms
other genes

lux
protease
other genes

CsrA

---

**B**

High-Cell Density

VarSA/
CsrABCD
System

CAI-1/CqsS AI-2/LuxPQ
System System

OM

IM

VarS
H1
D1
H2

VarA
D2

CqsA

CqsS
H1
D1

LuxP

LuxQ
H1
D1

LuxS

LuxU
H2
P

LuxO
D2
P

σ⁵⁴

Hfq

CsrB, C, D

CsrA

HapR

virulence
biofilms
other genes

lux
protease
other genes

Fig. 1. The V. cholerae quorum-sensing circuit.

A. Low cell density: Fis functions in conjunction with the two quorum-sensing circuits (CAI-1/CqsS and AI-2/LuxPQ) and the VarS/VarA-CsrA/BCD global regulatory system to increase the amount and/or activity of LuxO-phosphate.

B. High cell density: Fis and VarS/A-CsrA/BCD are inactive and the two quorum-sensing systems drain phosphate from LuxO. Pentagons and triangles denote CAI-1 and AI-2 respectively. The lightning bolt represents the putative signal detected by VarS. Dotted lines denote hypothetical interactions. H and D denote the histidine and aspartate sites of phosphorylation respectively. OM and IM denote outer- and inner-membrane respectively.

component sensor kinase is inactive, and does not phosphorylate the response regulator, VarA. Unphosphorylated VarA is also inactive and does not activate the transcription of the genes encoding the CsrBCD sRNAs. As a consequence, CsrA, a post-transcriptional regulator, is free to activate LuxO, and in turn, the qrr genes, so repression of hapR occurs. The exact mechanism by which CsrA activates LuxO remains unknown but is proposed to depend on an additional regulatory factor (denoted X). HapR is an activator and a repressor. As the concentration of HapR protein is low at low cell density, target genes that are repressed by HapR (such as those encoding virulence factors and those required for biofilm production) are expressed, while genes that require HapR for activation (such as those encoding H/A protease and luciferase) are not expressed.

At high cell density, when the autoinducer concentrations reach their critical thresholds, they are bound by their cognate sensors (Fig. 1B). This event switches the sensors from kinases to phosphatases and reverses the flow of phosphate through the cascade. Phosphate is drained from LuxO via LuxU, the qrr genes are not expressed, and hapR is expressed. Also under this condition, VarS is active and phosphorylates VarA. Phosphorylated VarA activates the expression of the genes encoding the CsrBCD sRNAs. These sRNAs bind to CsrA, titrating it away from its targets. This leads to diminished LuxO activity, which in turn decreases qrr expression and enhances hapR expression. HapR protein is produced, and those target genes requiring it for activation (such as H/A protease and luciferase) are expressed, while target genes repressed by HapR (such as virulence factors and functions required for biofilm formation) are not.

In addition to the above quorum-sensing components, genetic analysis in V. cholerae revealed that another sensory system likely exists (Miller et al., 2002). Two lines of genetic evidence suggest that this putative system acts

© 2006 The Authors
Journal compilation © 2006 Blackwell Publishing Ltd, Molecular Microbiology, 63, 859–871
through LuxO but independently of LuxU. First, the phenotypes of *V. cholerae* *luxU* and *luxO* mutants differ. A Δ*luxU* mutant retains density-dependent gene expression while a Δ*luxO* mutant does not, suggesting that sensory information is channelled into the circuit in the absence of LuxU but not in the absence of LuxO (Miller *et al.*, 2002). Second, the CAI-1/CqsS, AI-2/LuxPQ and VarS/A-CsrA/BCD systems have each been shown to require LuxU to send information to LuxO (Miller *et al.*, 2002; Lenz *et al.*, 2005). In the simultaneous absence of all three of these systems, LuxO retains the ability to control gene expression in a density-dependent manner. This remains the case when the three sensory systems are inoperable and, additionally, *luxU* is inactivated (Lenz *et al.*, 2005). Again, these findings support the notion that an unidentified component of the circuit exists and relays information to LuxO but bypasses LuxU.

To identify functions relaying information to LuxO in the absence of the known quorum-sensing components, mutagenesis was carried out in a Δ*luxU* mutant followed by analysis of mutants with altered quorum-sensing target gene expression phenotypes. Fis, the small nucleoid protein was identified. Fis affects the expression of multiple genes by altering the conformation of DNA through bending as well as through contact with the α-subunit of RNA polymerase (Dorman and Deighan, 2003). For example, Fis is a key activator of exponential-phase genes and a repressor of stationary-phase genes (Ishihama, 1999). Our analysis of *fis* mutant phenotypes, *fis* regulation and Fis control of quorum-sensing genes demonstrates that it is the additional regulatory component predicted to exist in *V. cholerae*.

### Results

#### A screen to identify additional factors involved in *V. cholerae* quorum sensing

Our previous work suggested that an additional sensory channel existed in the *V. cholerae* quorum-sensing circuit (Miller *et al.*, 2002). However, we did not know if this putative channel relayed information into the circuit at low or at high cell density. Therefore, we devised a genetic screening strategy that would enable us to recognize mutants in this putative system irrespective of whether their wild-type activities promoted the low or the high cell density state. We performed random transposon mutagenesis in a Δ*luxU* mutant, which as discussed, exhibits density-dependent quorum-sensing gene expression. Subsequently, the *Vibrio harveyi luxCDABE* (luciferase) operon was introduced into pools of the transposon mutants, and the Lux phenotypes of the exconjugants were screened. The *V. harveyi luxCDABE* operon is regulated in a density-dependent manner in *V. cholerae*, and can therefore be used as a convenient readout of quorum sensing-controlled gene expression (Miller *et al.*, 2002). We hypothesized that insertions causing null mutations in genes encoding functions that promoted the low cell density (dark) state would yield cells with constitutive-bright Lux phenotypes. By contrast, insertions causing null mutations in genes encoding functions required for the high cell density (bright) state would produce cells exhibiting dark Lux phenotypes. Mutations in some known quorum-sensing components would also lead to these phenotypes. Specifically, mutants with dark phenotypes could possess insertions in *hapR* and mutants with constitutively bright phenotypes could have obtained transposon insertions in *luxO*, *rpoN* (encoding σ<sup>54</sup>), or *hfq*.

Sixteen transposon insertions in *hapR* were identified in the dark mutant category. Two additional dark mutants had insertions in the *ribA* gene, whose gene product, RibA, is responsible for riboflavin synthesis, a key substrate for the luciferase reaction. The *ribA* and *hapR* mutants were not analysed further. No other mutations conferring a dark phenotype were identified. In the constitutive bright category, no insertions in *luxO*, *hfq*, or *rpoN* itself were identified; however, one insertion upstream of *rpoN* was identified. Apparently a bias against mutants expressing increased bioluminescence exists in our screen. We attribute this to a significant growth advantage dark mutants have over mutants expressing high levels of luciferase. One additional constitutive-bright mutant was identified, and had a transposon insertion in VC0291. VC0291 is annotated as NifR3 in the *V. cholerae* genome (TIGR Database: http://www.tigr.org). NifR3 is a protein of unknown function reported to play a role in modifying tRNAs to decrease their stability in *Escherichia coli* (Bishop *et al.*, 2002).

The Lux phenotype of the VC0291::Tn5 insertion mutant is shown in Fig. 2A. Wild-type (closed squares) exhibits the typical ‘U’-shaped curve characteristic of density-dependent expression of bioluminescence. At the start of the assay, high cell density, wild-type cells express maximal bioluminescence due to the presence of autoinducers. The culture is diluted 1:1000 causing the autoinducer concentration to decrease below that required for detection, and light production declines precipitously. As the culture grows, endogenously produced autoinducers are released and accumulate. The bacteria respond to the signals, and commence producing light. The Δ*luxO* mutant (closed diamonds) is constitutively bright because no expression of the *qrr* genes occurs, so no repression of *hapR* can occur (Fig. 1). As mentioned, the Δ*luxU* mutant (closed circles) exhibits density-dependent bioluminescence expression, however, not to the extent of the wild type. The Δ*luxU*, VC0291::Tn5 mutant (open triangles) is constitutively bright, like the Δ*luxO* mutant. An in-frame deletion of

© 2006 The Authors  
Journal compilation © 2006 Blackwell Publishing Ltd, *Molecular Microbiology*, **63**, 859–871
Fig. 2. VC0291 and/or Fis are involved in V. cholerae quorum sensing. Density-dependent bioluminescence assays for V. cholerae strains.

A. MM227 (WT), MM349 (∆luxO), MM359 (∆luxU), DL2319 (∆VC0291), DL2149 (∆luxU, VC0291::Tn5) and DL2321 (∆luxU, ∆VC0291). Relative light units (indicated RLU) are counts min⁻¹ ml⁻¹/OD₆₀₀.

B. MM227 (WT), MM349 (∆luxO), MM359 (∆luxU), DL2317 (∆VC0379), DL2315 (∆luxU, ∆VC0379).

C. MM227 (WT), MM349 (∆luxO), MM359 (∆luxU), DL3709 (∆fis), DL3710 (∆luxU, ∆fis).

VC0291 was constructed in the wild type (open squares) and in the ∆luxU mutant (open circles). The ∆VC0291 mutant exhibits a bioluminescence profile virtually identical to that of wild type, whereas the VC0291 deletion, when combined with the luxU deletion, causes V. cholerae to become constitutively bright. These results suggest that the effect of disruption of VC0291 is masked when the two known quorum-sensing systems are operational.

Involvement of Fis in V. cholerae quorum sensing

Analysis of the V. cholerae genome shows that two nifR3 homologues exist. First, the nifR3 gene identified above
(VC0291) and also one annotated VC0379. To test if VC0379 plays a role in quorum sensing, an in-frame deletion of the VC0379 gene was constructed and analysed (Fig. 2B) in wild-type *V. cholerae* (open squares) and in the *V. cholerae ΔluxU* mutant (open circles). Deletion of VC0379 had no effect on *lux* expression in either case. We conclude that VC0379 plays no role in quorum sensing, and we refer to VC0291 as NifR3 from here forward.

The *nifR3* gene is located in an operon upstream of the *fis* gene, encoding a small, nucleoid protein present in numerous Gram-negative bacteria (Finkel and Johnson, 1992). We reasoned that both the Tn5 insertion in and the in-frame deletion of the *nifR3* gene could affect *fis* expression, and therefore, could be responsible for the constitutive bright phenotype of the *ΔluxU, ΔnifR3* mutants. To explore this possibility, an in-frame deletion of *fis* was constructed in the wild type and the *ΔluxU* mutant (Fig. 2C). The *Δfis* mutant (open squares) displays a density-dependent bioluminescence profile that is shallower than that of the wild type (closed squares), suggesting that mutation of *fis* has a stronger effect on bioluminescence expression than does mutation of *nifR3*. The *ΔluxU, Δfis* double mutant (open circles) is constitutively bright, similar to the *ΔluxO* mutant (closed diamonds). Thus, both NifR3 and Fis could be components of the additional sensory system or Fis could be the component, and the phenotype observed in the *nifR3* mutants could be due to polar effects on *fis* expression.

### Complementation of the *ΔnifR3* and *Δfis* mutants reveals that Fis is the component involved in *V. cholerae* quorum sensing

To analyse the individual roles of NifR3 and Fis in *V. cholerae* quorum sensing, the *ΔluxU, ΔnifR3* and the *ΔluxU, Δfis* double mutants were complemented with *nifR3* or *fis* or both *nifR3* and *fis* together (Fig. 3). Introduction of the vector into the *ΔluxU, ΔnifR3* (closed squares) and the *ΔluxU, Δfis* (closed circles) mutants does not alter their constitutive bright bioluminescence phenotypes. As predicted, introduction of *nifR3* and *fis* together to either of the double mutants restores density-dependent bioluminescence expression (Fig. 3A, open symbols). Complementation with the *nifR3* and the *fis* genes individually (Fig. 3B and C respectively) shows that *fis* can complement both the *ΔnifR3* and *Δfis* mutants, whereas *nifR3* cannot complement either mutant. The construct containing both *nifR3* and *fis* complemented the mutants better than the construct containing only *fis*. This is most likely due to the construct bearing the intact locus expressing higher levels of *fis* than the construct containing only *fis*. We

---

Fis is involved in Vibrio cholerae quorum sensing 863

conclude that Fis is the key player in *V. cholerae* quorum sensing, and that the effects observed in the *nifR3* mutants are due to polarity on *fis*. We do not understand why we observe such effects in the in-frame deletion of *nifR3*.

### Regulation of *fis* expression

One mechanism that could explain how Fis controls density-dependent gene regulation is if *fis* expression is itself controlled in a density-dependent manner. If so, its downstream targets would be as well. There is precedence for growth-phase control of *fis* expression in other bacteria (Ball et al., 1992). To examine this, we used real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR) to quantify the *fis* mRNA transcript over the growth curve. In the *ΔluxU* mutant, initially *fis* expression is low, it increases, peaks at an OD~600~ of ~0.1, and declines thereafter (Fig. 4, closed squares). This expression pattern is similar to that observed in other Gram-negative bacteria and shows that *fis* expression is indeed regulated by growth phase in *V. cholerae*. As controls we show that no *fis* mRNA is made in the *ΔluxU, Δfis* mutant (closed diamonds), and *fis* mRNA is drastically reduced throughout the growth curve in the *ΔluxU, ΔnifR3* strain (closed circles). This latter result is consistent with our above complementation analysis showing that the *ΔnifR3* mutation is polar on *fis* transcription. We also analysed *fis* expression in wild-type *V. cholerae*, the *Δfis* mutant and the *ΔnifR3* mutant (data not shown). In all cases, the *fis* expression patterns were identical to the corresponding *ΔluxU* strains.

### Fis functions upstream of LuxO in the *V. cholerae* quorum-sensing circuit

To determine where Fis is positioned in the quorum-sensing cascade, we performed genetic epistasis tests (Fig. 5). For these tests, we took advantage of an allele of *luxO, luxO D47E* that has a mutation that locks LuxO into a form mimicking the dark, low cell density, phospho-LuxO state. We reasoned that if Fis functions downstream of LuxO, then the bright, high cell density phenotype of the *Δfis* mutation would override the dark, low cell density phenotype of the *luxO D47E* mutation. By contrast, if Fis functions upstream of LuxO, then the dark *luxO D47E* phenotype would be epistatic to the *Δfis* phenotype. LuxO functions downstream of LuxU (Fig. 1) and, as a control, we show that the dark phenotype of the *luxO D47E* mutant is epistatic to the bright phenotype of the *ΔluxU* mutant. Similarly, we found that the bright phenotype of the *ΔluxU, Δfis* mutant is converted to a dark phenotype when this mutation is combined with the *luxO D47E* mutation. Therefore, Fis functions

© 2006 The Authors  
Journal compilation © 2006 Blackwell Publishing Ltd, *Molecular Microbiology*, **63**, 859–871
864 D. H. Lenz and B. L. Bassler

Fig. 3. Complementation of NifR3 and Fis reveals that Fis functions in V. cholerae quorum sensing. Density-dependent bioluminescence assays for V. cholerae strains.

A. DL3983 (ΔluxU, ΔnifR3/vector, closed squares), DL3986 (ΔluxU, Δfis/vector, closed circles), DL3994 (ΔluxU, ΔnifR3/pnifR3, fis, open squares), DL3995 (ΔluxU, Δfis/pnifR3, fis, open circles).

B. DL3983 (ΔluxU, ΔnifR3/vector, closed squares), DL3986 (ΔluxU, Δfis/vector, closed circles), DL3984 (ΔluxU, ΔnifR3/pnifR3, open squares), DL3979 (ΔluxU, Δfis/pnifR3, open circles).

C. DL3983 (ΔluxU, ΔnifR3/vector, closed squares), DL3986 (ΔluxU, Δfis/vector, closed circles), DL3886 (ΔluxU, ΔnifR3/pfis, open squares), DL3887 (ΔluxU, Δfis/pfis, open circles).

upstream of LuxO. This is consistent with its role in an additional sensory system that inputs information into the quorum-sensing circuit downstream of LuxU (Fig. 1). We address the exact placement of Fis in the V. cholerae quorum-sensing cascade in the Discussion.

Fis does not regulate the transcription of luxO

One way that Fis could impinge on the V. cholerae quorum-sensing circuit is if it regulated the transcription of the luxO gene. If so, Fis could directly affect the levels of LuxO/LuxO-phosphate. To investigate this possibility, a luxO-lux transcriptional reporter fusion was engineered and analysed in wild-type V. cholerae

Δfis mutant. Deletion of fis had no effect on luxO transcription, ruling out the possibility that Fis controls quorum-sensing genes through regulation of luxO expression (data not shown).

Fis positively regulates the four qrr genes

Because Fis functions upstream of LuxO, and because LuxO regulates qrr expression, we predict that Fis should also regulate qrr expression. To test this, we measured expression of qrr-lux transcriptional reporter fusions in wild type, ΔluxO and Δfis V. cholerae strains (Fig. 6). In each strain, all four qrr-lux fusions behave similarly. In the wild type (closed squares), following dilution, qrr

© 2006 The Authors
Journal compilation © 2006 Blackwell Publishing Ltd, Molecular Microbiology, 63, 859–871

Fis is involved in Vibrio cholerae quorum sensing 865

Fig. 4. The expression of *fis* is regulated in a growth phase-dependent manner. Real-time PCR analysis of *fis* expression throughout growth. *V*. *cholerae* strains: MM359 (Δ*luxU*, closed squares), DL3710 (Δ*luxU*, Δ*fis*, closed diamonds), DL2321 (Δ*luxU*, Δ*nifR3*, closed circles).

- —— Δ*luxU*
- —— Δ*luxU*, Δ*fis*
- —— Δ*luxU*, Δ*nifR3*

expression increases until mid-exponential growth and then it subsequently decreases. This pattern occurs in response to the autoinducer driven decrease in active LuxO-phosphate that occurs as cell density increases (Fig. 1). In the Δ*luxO* mutant (closed diamonds), *qrr* expression remains low throughout the entire growth curve. Expression of the *qrr* genes in the Δ*fis* mutant (closed triangles) is higher than in the Δ*luxO* mutant, but not as high as in the wild type. Although the shapes of the expression curves are similar, a noticeably different level of control over transcription of each *qrr* gene occurs in the Δ*fis* mutant. The order of strength of Fis regulation is *qrr4 > qrr2,3 > qrr1*. This order exactly matches the abundance of each Qrr sRNA shown previously (i.e. Qrr4 > Qrr2, Qrr3 > Qrr1) (Lenz et al., 2004). We address this further below.

Fis binds the *qrr* promoters

We know that *qrr* gene expression requires LuxO-phosphate and the alternative sigma factor σ⁵⁴. Two-component proteins like LuxO, that interact with σ⁵⁴, bind upstream of their respective promoters and cause the promoters to form an open-complex (Buck et al., 2000). Additionally, some σ⁵⁴-dependent two-component proteins require accessory factors to aid in bending the DNA to facilitate transcriptional activation (Xu and Hoover, 2001). Fis is an accessory factor that, when bound, can induce DNA bends of up to 90° (Pan et al., 1996a).

Fis-mediated DNA bending at the *qrr* promoters is one possible mechanism underlying the Fis effects we observe in *V*. *cholerae* quorum sensing. Fis binding to DNA generally depends on a degenerate consensus sequence (G-N-N-C/T-A/T-N-N-A/T-N-N-T/C-G/A-N-N-C) as well as the inherent curvature of the DNA itself (Bailly et al., 1995; Pan et al., 1996b). There is no obvious Fis consensus sequence upstream of the *qrr* genes; however, this is also the case at some sites that Fis is known to bind (Huo et al., 2006). Presumably in these cases, and possibly in the case of the *qrr* promoters, the inherent curvature of the DNA encoding the promoter overcomes the requirement for the consensus sequence.

To determine if Fis binds to the *qrr* promoters, gel electrophoretic mobility shift assays were performed with *qrr* promoter fragments and purified *V*. *cholerae* Fis protein. Figure 7 demonstrates that Fis indeed binds to each of the *qrr* promoters, albeit with different affinities (*qrr4 > qrr2,3 > qrr1*). As a control, we randomized the *qrr3* promoter fragment DNA sequence and tested Fis binding. Fis failed to bind to this fragment (Fig. 7). Thus, Fis binding to the *qrr* promoters is specific. The different Fis affinities for the *qrr* promoters prompted our further interpretation of

Fig. 5. Fis appears to function upstream of LuxO in the *V*. *cholerae* quorum-sensing circuit. High cell density bioluminescence expression from MM359 (Δ*luxU*), DL2553 (Δ*luxU*, *luxO* D47E), DL3710 (Δ*luxU*, Δ*fis*), DL3993 (Δ*luxU*, *luxO* D47E, Δ*fis*).

© 2006 The Authors  
Journal compilation © 2006 Blackwell Publishing Ltd, *Molecular Microbiology*, **63**, 859–871

866 D. H. Lenz and B. L. Bassler

Fig. 6. Fis regulates the transcription of the *qrr* genes in *V. cholerae*. Density-dependent bioluminescence assays for *V. cholerae* strains carrying the following transcriptional reporter fusions.

A. *qrr1-lux*: DL3945 (WT, closed squares), DL3950 (∆luxO, closed diamonds), DL3960 (∆fis, closed triangles).

B. *qrr2-lux*: DL3946 (WT, closed squares), DL3951 (∆luxO, closed diamonds), DL3961 (∆fis, closed triangles).

C. *qrr3-lux*: DL3947 (WT, closed squares), DL3952 (∆luxO, closed diamonds), DL3962 (∆fis, closed triangles).

D. *qrr4-lux*: DL3948 (WT, closed squares), DL3953 (∆luxO, closed diamonds), DL3963 (∆fis, closed triangles).

the *qrr* gene expression data in Fig. 6. As mentioned, the strength of Fis regulation of the *qrr* promoters is *qrr4 > qrr2,3 > qrr1*, an order that exactly matches the affinity of Fis for each *qrr* promoter (Fig. 7) and the abundance of each sRNA at steady-state at low cell density (Lenz et al., 2004). Thus, we suspect that the Qrr sRNAs are present at different levels in the cell because of the differential activity of Fis at each *qrr* promoter.

### Fis negatively regulates HapR production

The final prediction for Fis to be a component of the *V. cholerae* quorum-sensing circuit positioned upstream of LuxO is that it influences HapR production. To test this hypothesis, HapR production was examined at low cell density via Western blot (Fig. 8). The ∆luxO, ∆luxU, ∆fis single mutants and the ∆luxU, ∆fis double mutant were analysed. The low cell density condition was chosen so that differences in HapR production between strains displaying density-dependent gene expression (∆luxU and ∆fis single mutants) and those displaying constitutive quorum-sensing gene expression (∆luxO single mutant and ∆luxU, ∆fis double mutant) would be maximal. The ∆luxO mutant produces high levels of HapR protein because it is locked in the high cell density state in which *hapR* is derepressed (Fig. 8, and see Figs 1B and 2). Consistent with the ∆luxU and ∆fis single mutants exhibiting density-dependent gene expression, at low cell density, these mutants produce lower levels of HapR than does the ∆luxO mutant. The blot shows that the ∆luxU mutant produces slightly more HapR than the ∆fis mutant. We suggest this occurs because at the cell density at which the protein was harvested (*OD*~600~ = 0.1), *lux* expression, which correlates with HapR production, is higher in the ∆luxU mutant than in the ∆fis mutant (see Fig. 2C). The ∆luxU, ∆fis double mutant produces significantly more HapR than either of the single mutants. In fact, the ∆luxU, ∆fis double mutant produces roughly the same

© 2006 The Authors  
Journal compilation © 2006 Blackwell Publishing Ltd, *Molecular Microbiology*, **63**, 859–871

Concentration of Fis Protein

Fig. 7. Fis binds to the *qrr* promoters. Gel-shift assays with twofold dilutions of purified *V*. *cholerae* Fis protein (0 to 8192 nM protein) and the *qrr* promoter fragments (60 ng DNA).

amount of HapR as does the ΔluxO mutant, which is consistent with the ΔluxU, Δfis locked, high cell density phenotype (see Fig. 2C). Thus, Fis controls HapR, the master regulator of *V*. *cholerae* quorum sensing.

Discussion

Fis is a global regulator of gene expression in many Gram-negative bacteria (Ishihama, 1999). Fis bends DNA causing inversions and other changes in topology, Fis positively regulates transcription through contact with the α-subunit of RNA-polymerase, and Fis organizes the DNA content of bacteria (Schneider et al., 2001; Dorman and Deighan, 2003). Here we find that Fis is a component of the *V*. *cholerae* quorum-sensing machinery. This supposition is based on our results that a Δfis mutant is defective in quorum sensing-controlled gene expression and genetic tests showing that Fis acts upstream or at the level of LuxO to control *qrr* gene expression and HapR protein production. DNA binding assays demonstrate that Fis binds to the *qrr* promoters, so we suggest that maximal transcription of the *qrr* genes requires LuxO-phosphate, σ⁵⁴ and Fis.

Fis and other accessory DNA bending factors have previously been reported to aid in σ⁵⁴-mediated transcrip-

Fis is involved in Vibrio cholerae quorum sensing 867 tion. Three such examples are the *pu* promoter in Pseudomonas putida, the *nifA* promoter in Herbaspirillum seropedicae, and the *glnAp2* promoter in *E*. *coli* (Bertoni et al., 1998; Wassem et al., 2000; Huo et al., 2006). These three promoters are regulated by σ⁵⁴ and require transcriptional activation by the two component proteins XylR (*pu*) and NtrC (*nifA* and *glnAp2*). The *pu* and *nifA* promoters additionally require DNA bending by IHF, and the *glnAp2* promoter requires Fis to bend the DNA in the region between where NtrC and σ⁵⁴ bind. These accessory factors enable contact between the σ⁵⁴-dependent activators and σ⁵⁴, mediating transcriptional activation. In the case of the *glnAp2* promoter of *E*. *coli*, it has been shown that any DNA bend (mediated by Fis or by substitution of a heterologous CRP- or IHF-binding site) promotes transcriptional activation (Huo et al., 2006). In the case of the *pu* promoter, stationary-phase upregulation of IHF expression exerts an additional level of control over *pu* gene expression (Valls et al., 2002). Thus, it is reasonable that Fis operates in an analogous capacity in the regulation of the *qrr* genes, and hence, *V*. *cholerae* quorum sensing.

Fis plays roles in gene regulation in addition to DNA bending. Fis is a major component of bacterial chromatin during exponential growth, and in this mode, Fis is responsible for organizing the DNA content of the cell during logarithmic growth (Schneider et al., 2001). Fis is also responsible for adjusting cells to the onset of rapid growth conditions, and in this role, Fis directly operates at the promoters of numerous genes in *E*. *coli* to activate transcription (Nasser et al., 2001). In this capacity, Fis regulates all seven promoters specifying the rRNAs, the promoters upstream of the tRNA genes *leuV* and *tyrT*, the operon, *thrU* (*tufB*), encoding four different tRNAs and the elongation factor, EF-tuB, the *proP* P2 promoter and the *marRAB* promoter (Nilsson et al., 1990; Verbeek et al., 1991; Martin and Rosner, 1997; Xu and Johnson, 1997; Hirvonen et al., 2001; Opel et al., 2004). Fis also acts at the *virF* promoter of *Shigella flexneri* and enteroinvasive

ΔluxO
ΔluxU
Δfis
ΔluxU, Δfis

HapR

Loading Control

Fig. 8. Fis regulates HapR production. Western blot probed with antibody against HapR. *V*. *cholerae* strains: MM307 (ΔluxO), MM310 (ΔluxU), DL3568 (Δfis) and DL3569 (ΔluxU, Δfis). Protein was harvested at low cell density.

© 2006 The Authors  
Journal compilation © 2006 Blackwell Publishing Ltd, *Molecular Microbiology*, **63**, 859–871

868 D. H. Lenz and B. L. Bassler

E. coli to regulate pathogenesis (Falconi *et al.*, 2001). In these cases, the mechanism of activation by Fis is through direct contact with the RNA polymerase α-C-terminal domain (*rrnB* P1 and *proP* P2) (Aiyar *et al.*, 2002; McLeod *et al.*, 2002), or via changes in the conformation and super-helical state of the promoter DNA to which it binds (*leuV*) (Opel *et al.*, 2004). While we favour the possibility that Fis bends the DNA at the *qrr* promoters to mediate contact between σ<sup>54</sup> and phospho-LuxO based on earlier findings for other σ<sup>54</sup> two-component response regulator-controlled promoters (Huo *et al.*, 2006), another possibility is that Fis could regulate *qrr* expression through direct activation in a manner analogous to how it acts at the *rrnB*, *proP* or *leuV* promoters.

The expression of *fis* is regulated in a growth phase-dependent manner in numerous Gram-negative bacteria, including *E. coli*, *Serratia marcescens* and *Klebsiella pneumoniae* (Mallik *et al.*, 2004). Specifically, *fis* expression is induced at early exponential-phase and declines in stationary phase. This regulation is due to the sensitivity of the *fis* gene promoter to the levels of CTP (Walker *et al.*, 2004). Growth-phase regulation is proposed to be the central feature that controls Fis-dependent activation of exponential-phase genes and repression of stationary-phase genes. We find that regulation of *fis* expression in *V. cholerae* is identical to that reported in the literature. This regulation is consistent with the altered patterns of quorum-sensing gene expression we observe in the Δ*fis* mutants. Namely, *fis* is induced at early exponential phase, and therefore, a Δ*fis* mutant is incapable of repression/activation of quorum-sensing gene expression at low cell density. Because of this, deletion of *fis* locks its regulatory arm into high cell-density mode, and this is manifested by a constitutive bright phenotype in the context of the Δ*luxU* mutation.

Growth-phase regulation of *fis* expression is most likely responsible for the density-dependent control of quorum-sensing genes that occurs in the Δ*luxU* mutant. Despite the lack of input from the two known quorum-sensing systems, at low cell density, Fis levels are high, and consequently, Fis activates the expression of the *qrr* genes leading to reduced levels of HapR. We hypothesize that Fis binds directly to the *qrr* promoters, bends the DNA between the LuxO binding site and the σ<sup>54</sup>/RNA polymerase binding site, and this fosters σ<sup>54</sup>-dependent activation of *qrr* expression. At higher cell densities, Fis levels decrease, leading to a decrease in expression of the *qrr* genes and increased HapR levels.

A regulatory mechanism in which Fis binds at the *qrr* promoters is surprising given the *luxO* D47E and Δ*fis* epistasis results (Fig. 5). The epistasis tests point to a role for Fis functioning upstream of LuxO; however, our other data predict that Fis acts in parallel with LuxO-phosphate. Possibly, the gain of function *luxO* D47E mutation over-

rides the requirement for Fis because the LuxO-phosphate mimic saturates the quorum-sensing signalling circuit which would explain the epistasis results. Additional evidence supporting this notion comes from the Lux phenotype of the Δ*fis* mutant shown in Fig. 2C. At low cell density, the Δ*fis* mutant produces only 10-fold more light than the wild type showing that, indeed, LuxO-phosphate has the capacity to override the effects stemming from Fis. Taken together, our data strongly suggest that Fis functions in parallel to LuxO, not upstream of it, which underpins our reasoning for its placement in the model in Fig. 1A.

The quorum-sensing circuit of *V. cholerae* requires input from two autoinducer systems, the growth-phase regulated VarS/A-CsrA/BCD system, and Fis to properly control density-dependent gene expression. We speculate that this architecture ensures precision in the expression of the quorum-sensing regulon, which consists of upwards of 70 genes. Because in quorum sensing, the correct pattern and timing of expression of so many genes are at stake, we suppose their accurate control is crucial for *V. cholerae* fitness in the diverse niches it inhabits. This we believe necessitates a complex quorum-sensing cascade capable of integrating many different sensory stimuli.

## Experimental procedures

### Bacterial strains and media

*Vibrio cholerae* strains used in this study were engineered from C6706str2, an El Tor Biotype (Thelin and Taylor, 1996) (see figure legends). Unless otherwise noted, *V. cholerae* strains were grown with aeration at 30°C in SOC (Sambrook *et al.*, 1989) for bioluminescence assays. Luria–Bertani (LB) broth was used for all other experiments. Plasmids were maintained in *E. coli* S17-1-λ*pir* (de Lorenzo and Timmis, 1994) at 37°C in LB. The following antibiotic concentrations were used (µg ml<sup>−1</sup>): tetracycline 10; kanamycin 100; ampicillin 200; chloramphenicol 10 (for *V. cholerae* plasmid maintenance) and 25 (for *E. coli* plasmid maintenance). Streptomycin was used at 5 mg ml<sup>−1</sup> and polymyxin B at 50 units ml<sup>−1</sup>.

### DNA manipulations

DNA work was performed as described in Sambrook *et al.* (1989). *V. cholerae* in-frame deletions were made as described by Skorupski and Taylor (1996). PCR reactions were performed with PFU turbo polymerase (Stratagene) for cloning; all other PCR reactions were performed with Taq polymerase (Roche). dNTPs, restriction endonucleases and T4 ligase were purchased from New England Biolabs. QIAGEN methods were used for plasmid preparations and PCR cleanups. Sequences of primers are available by request. The vector control, *nifR3/fis*, *nifR3* and *fis* complementation vectors were constructed as follows: DNA fragments were cloned into the tetracycline resistance gene in pACYC184 using the BamHI and Aval sites and this method inactivates tetracycline resistance. The vector control is a

© 2006 The Authors
Journal compilation © 2006 Blackwell Publishing Ltd, *Molecular Microbiology*, **63**, 859–871

tetracycline-sensitive version of the vector in which gaps were filled. The *nifR3/fis*, *nifR3* and *fis* complementation constructs were constructed by PCR amplification and cloning of the intact *nifR3/fis* region, and the analogous regions from the Δ*fis* and Δ*nifR3* mutants respectively. The *qrr-lux* transcriptional fusion plasmids were constructed as described previously (Lenz et al., 2004). pBB1 and the *qrr-lux* fusions were introduced into *V. cholerae* by conjugation. Vectors used to complement the Δ*nifR3* and Δ*fis* mutants were introduced into *V. cholerae* by electroporation.

**Genetic screen to identify the nifR3/fis locus**

Mutagenesis of the *V. cholerae* Δ*luxU* mutant (MM310) was performed by delivery of a Tn5-kanamycin-resistant transposon via the pRL27c-Tn5 suicide vector (Larsen et al., 2002). Kanamycin resistant colonies were pooled, and cosmid pBB1, carrying the *V. harveyi luxCDABE* region, was introduced by conjugation. Exconjugants were selected on LB-agar plates containing kanamycin, streptomycin and tetracycline. Following growth at 30°C overnight in LB broth containing kanamycin and tetracycline, the mutants were screened for those with dark phenotypes. Mutants with Tn insertions in *hapR* were identified by failure to produce a PCR product with primers specific to *hapR*. The same pools of mutants were screened for constitutive bright phenotypes. For this analysis, overnight cultures were diluted 1:1000 in LB broth containing kanamycin and tetracycline. The cultures were incubated at 30°C for 4.5 h with aeration to reach the point at which the difference between density-dependent bioluminescence expression from the Δ*luxU* mutant and the constitutive bright phenotype of a Δ*luxO* mutant is maximal. Those mutants exhibiting Lux phenotypes more similar to the Δ*luxO* mutant than to the Δ*luxU* mutant were analysed. Mutants were tested for insertions in *luxO*, *rpoN* and *hfq* by PCR, and mutants with insertions in those genes were discarded. The transposon insertion junctions in the remaining dark and constitutively bright mutants were characterized as described (Miller et al., 2002).

**Bioluminescence assays**

*Vibrio cholerae* bioluminescence assays were performed as described (Lenz et al., 2004). Lux phenotypes of the ΔVC0291, ΔVC0379 and Δ*fis* mutants were performed in SOC broth containing tetracycline. Bioluminescence complementation assays were performed in SOC broth containing tetracycline and chloramphenicol. The *qrr-lux* transcriptional fusions were assayed in LB broth containing chloramphenicol. Single time point bioluminescence assays were performed at high cell density (*OD*~600~ ~2–3~) in triplicate. Relative light units are defined as counts min^−1^ ml^−1^/*OD*~600~.

**Real-time PCR analysis**

Overnight cultures of the Δ*luxU* mutant (MM359), the Δ*luxU*, Δ*nifR3* mutant (DL2321) and the Δ*luxU*, Δ*fis* mutant (DL3710) were diluted 1:1000 in fresh LB broth containing tetracycline. Aliquots were taken at various time points, and RNA was extracted (Lenz et al., 2005). Approximately 30 μg of RNA from each preparation was treated with DNase I (Invitrogen)

Fis is involved in Vibrio cholerae quorum sensing 869

in a 100 μl reaction that also included 16.8 μl of 25 mM MgCl₂ (Applied Biosystems), and 3.2 μl of a mixture containing a 1:5 dilution of 10 000 units ml⁻¹ DNasel, and a 1:10 dilution of 10X PCR buffer (Applied Biosystems). The reaction was incubated at 37°C for 1 h and 75°C for 10 min. The RNA was transcribed *in vitro* in a 100 μl reaction by adding 10 μg of RNA to a mixture containing 20 μl of 5X 1st strand buffer (Invitrogen), 10 μl of 0.1 M DTT (Invitrogen), 20 μl of 10 mM dNTPs (Applied Biosystems), 10 μl of 0.8 μg μl⁻¹ p(dN)₆ random primers (Roche) and 20 units of Superscript II RNaseH Reverse Transcriptase (Invitrogen) and incubating at 25°C for 10 min, 42°C for 50 min and 72°C for 10 min. The real-time PCR reaction was performed in an Applied Biosystems 7900 HT System with 10 μl of reactions containing 5 μl of 2X SYBR-green, 0.4 μl of cDNA and 2.5 μM primers (designed with PCR Now). Reactions were performed at 50°C for 2 min, 95°C for 10 min and 40 cycles of 95°C for 15 s and 60°C for 60 s. Fis gene expression is defined as the amount of *fis* mRNA relative to *hfq* mRNA via the relative quantification method.

**Purification of V. cholerae Fis and Fis-qrr promoter electrophoretic gel mobility shift assays**

The *V. cholerae* Fis protein was purified by 6x-His/Ni²⁺ chromatography. The *V. cholerae fis* gene was cloned into the Ndel/Xhol restriction sites of the pET28b vector (Novagen) to generate an N-terminal, 6x-His-Fis fusion protein. The protein was produced in *E. coli* BL21-AI cells (Invitrogen) by growing cells in LB-kanamycin for 4 h at 37°C, and subsequently inducing expression with 0.5 mM IPTG and 0.2% L-arabinose overnight at 16°C. Cells were collected by centrifugation, resuspended in 50 mM Tris, pH 8, 500 mM NaCl, 1 mM dithiothreitol and 1 mM EDTA, and lysed using a cell cracker. The soluble fraction was collected following centrifugation at 13 000 g. This fraction was loaded onto a 5 ml HiTrap column charged with NiSO₄ and the 6x-His-Fis protein was eluted with 300 mM imidazole. Protein was dialysed overnight in 30 mM Tris, pH 8, 300 mM NaCl, 1 mM dithiothreitol and 1 mM EDTA. The promoter of each *V. cholerae qrr* gene was amplified by PCR using fluorescein labelled primers. 60 ng of DNA were incubated with twofold serial dilutions of Fis protein ranging from none to 8192 nM in 80 mM Tris, pH 8, 80 mM NaCl, 1 mM dithiothreitol, 1 mM EDTA and 0.25 mg ml⁻¹ poly-dldC for 20 min at 30°C. Binding reactions were resolved on 5% TAE-polyacrylamide gels and visualized via short-wave UV.

**Western blot analysis**

Western blots to examine HapR production were performed as described previously (Lenz et al., 2005); however, the strains were grown to low cell density (*OD*~600~ = 0.1).

**Acknowledgements**

This work was supported by HHMI, NSF Grant MCB-0343821, NIH Grant 5RO1 G065859 and an HHMI Predoctoral Fellowship (D.H.L.). We thank members of the Bassler Lab and Dr T. Silhavy for insightful discussions. We are grateful to Todd Reichart for providing expertise with graphics.

© 2006 The Authors  
Journal compilation © 2006 Blackwell Publishing Ltd, *Molecular Microbiology*, **63**, 859–871

D. H. Lenz and B. L. Bassler

References

Aiyar, S.E., McLeod, S.M., Ross, W., Hirvonen, C.A., Thomas, M.S., Johnson, R.C., and Gourse, R.L. (2002) Architecture of Fis-activated transcription complexes at the Escherichia coli *rrnB* P1 and *rrnE* P1 promoters. *J Mol Biol* 316: 501–516.

Bailly, C., Waring, M.J., and Travers, A.A. (1995) Effects of base substitutions on the binding of a DNA-bending protein. *J Mol Biol* 253: 1–7.

Ball, C.A., Osuna, R., Ferguson, K.C., and Johnson, R.C. (1992) Dramatic changes in Fis levels upon nutrient upshift in *Escherichia coli*. *J Bacteriol* 174: 8043–8056.

Bertoni, G., Fujita, N., Ishihama, A., and de Lorenzo, V. (1998) Active recruitment of sigma54-RNA polymerase to the Pu promoter of *Pseudomonas putida*: role of IHF and alphaCTD. *EMBO J* 17: 5120–5128.

Bishop, A.C., Xu, J., Johnson, R.C., Schimmel, P., and de Crécy-Lagard, V. (2002) Identification of the tRNA-dihydrouridine synthase family. *J Biol Chem* 277: 25090–25095.

Buck, M., Gallegos, M.T., Studholme, D.J., Guo, Y., and Gralla, J.D. (2000) The bacterial enhancer-dependent sigma (54) (sigma (N) transcription factor. *J Bacteriol* 182: 4129–4136.

Dorman, C.J., and Deighan, P. (2003) Regulation of gene expression by histone-like proteins in bacteria. *Curr Opin Genet Dev* 13: 179–184.

Falconi, M., Prosseda, G., Giangrossi, M., Beghetto, E., and Colonna, B. (2001) Involvement of FIS in the H-NS-mediated regulation of *virF* gene of *Shigella* and enteroinvasive *Escherichia coli*. *Mol Microbiol* 42: 439–452.

Faruque, S.M., Albert, M.J., and Mekalanos, J.J. (1998) Epidemiology, genetics, and ecology of toxigenic *Vibrio cholerae*. *Microbiol Mol Biol Rev* 62: 1301–1314.

Finkel, S.E., and Johnson, R.C. (1992) The Fis protein: it’s not just for DNA inversion anymore. *Mol Microbiol* 6: 3257–3265.

Hammer, B.K., and Bassler, B.L. (2003) Quorum sensing controls biofilm formation in *Vibrio cholerae*. *Mol Microbiol* 50: 101–104.

Hirvonen, C.A., Ross, W., Wozniak, C.E., Marasco, E., Anthony, J.R., Aiyar, S.E., *et al.* (2001) Contributions of UP elements and the transcription factor FIS to expression from the seven *rrn* P1 promoters in *Escherichia coli*. *J Bacteriol* 183: 6305–6314.

Huo, Y.X., Nan, B.Y., You, C.H., Tian, Z.X., Kolb, A., and Wang, Y.P. (2006) FIS activates *glnAp2* in *Escherichia coli*: role of a DNA bend centered at –55, upstream of the transcription start site. *FEMS Microbiol Lett* 257: 99–105.

Ishihama, A. (1999) Modulation of the nucleoid, the transcription apparatus, and the translation machinery in bacteria for stationary phase survival. *Genes Cells* 4: 135–143.

Larsen, R.A., Wilson, M.M., Guss, A.M., and Metcalf, W.W. (2002) Genetic analysis of pigment biosynthesis in *Xanthobacter autotrophicus* Py2 using a new, highly efficient transposon mutagenesis system that is functional in a wide variety of bacteria. *Arch Microbiol* 178: 193–201.

Lenz, D.H., Mok, K.C., Lilley, B.N., Kulkarni, R.V., Wingreen, N.S., and Bassler, B.L. (2004) The small RNA chaperone Hfq and multiple small RNAs control quorum sensing in *Vibrio harveyi* and *Vibrio cholerae*. *Cell* 118: 69–82.

Lenz, D.H., Miller, M.B., Zhu, J., Kulkarni, R.V., and Bassler, B.L. (2005) CsrA and three redundant small RNAs regulate quorum sensing in *Vibrio cholerae*. *Mol Microbiol* 58: 1186–1202.

de Lorenzo, V., and Timmis, K.N. (1994) Analysis and construction of stable phenotypes in Gram-negative bacteria with Tn5- and Tn10-derived minitransposons. *Methods Enzymol* 235: 386–405.

McLeod, S.M., Aiyar, S.E., Gourse, R.L., and Johnson, R.C. (2002) The C-terminal domains of the RNA polymerase alpha subunits: contact site with Fis and localization during co-activation with CRP at the *Escherichia coli proP* P2 promoter. *J Mol Biol* 316: 517–529.

Mallik, P., Pratt, T.S., Beach, M.B., Bradley, M.D., Undamatla, J., and Osuna, R. (2004) Growth phase-dependent regulation and stringent control of fis are conserved processes in enteric bacteria and involve a single promoter (fis P) in *Escherichia coli*. *J Bacteriol* 186: 122–135.

Martin, R.G., and Rosner, J.L. (1997) Fis, an accessory factor for transcriptional activation of the *mar* (multiple antibiotic resistance) promoter of *Escherichia coli* in the presence of the activator MarA, SoxS, or Rob. *J Bacteriol* 179: 7410–7419.

Miller, M.B., Skorupski, K., Lenz, D.H., Taylor, R.K., and Bassler, B.L. (2002) Parallel quorum sensing systems converge to regulate virulence in *Vibrio cholerae*. *Cell* 110: 303–314.

Nasser, W., Schneider, R., Travers, A., and Muskhelishvili, G. (2001) CRP modulates fis transcription by alternate formation of activating and repressing nucleoprotein complexes. *J Biol Chem* 276: 17878–17886.

Nilsson, L., Vanet, A., Vijgenboom, E., and Bosch, L. (1990) The role of FIS in trans activation of stable RNA operons of *E. coli*. *EMBO J* 9: 727–734.

Opel, M.L., Aeling, K.A., Holmes, W.M., Johnson, R.C., Benham, C.J., and Hatfield, G.W. (2004) Activation of transcription initiation from a stable RNA promoter by a Fis protein-mediated DNA structural transmission mechanism. *Mol Microbiol* 53: 665–674.

Pan, C.Q., Finkel, S.E., Cramton, S.E., Feng, J.A., Sigman, D.S., and Johnson, R.C. (1996a) Variable structures of Fis-DNA complexes determined by flanking DNA-protein contacts. *J Mol Biol* 264: 675–695.

Pan, C.Q., Johnson, R.C., and Sigman, D.S. (1996b) Identification of new Fis binding sites by DNA scission with Fis-1,10-phenanthroline-copper (I) chimeras. *Biochemistry* 35: 4326–4333.

Sambrook, J., Fritsch, E.F., and Maniatis, T. (1989) *Molecular Cloning: A Laboratory Manual*. Cold Spring Harbor, NY: Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.

Schneider, R., Lurz, R., Luder, G., Tolksdorf, C., Travers, A., and Muskhelishvili, G. (2001) An architectural role of the *Escherichia coli* chromatin protein FIS in organising DNA. *Nucleic Acids Res* 29: 5107–5114.

Skorupski, K., and Taylor, R.K. (1996) Positive selection vectors for allelic exchange. *Gene* 169: 47–52.

Thelin, K.H., and Taylor, R.K. (1996) Toxin-coregulated pilus, but not mannose-sensitive hemagglutinin, is required for

colonization by *Vibrio cholerae* O1 El Tor biotype and O139 strains. *Infect Immun* **64**: 2853–2856.

Valls, M., Buckle, M., and de Lorenzo, V. (2002) In vivo UV laser footprinting of the *Pseudomonas putida* sigma 54Pu promoter reveals that integration host factor couples transcriptional activity to growth phase. *J Biol Chem* **277**: 2169–2175.

Verbeek, H., Nilsson, L., and Bosch, L. (1991) FIS-induced bending of a region upstream of the promoter activates transcription of the *E coli thrU (tufB)* operon. *Biochimie* **73**: 713–718.

Walker, K.A., Mallik, P., Pratt, T.S., and Osuna, R. (2004) The *Escherichia coli* Fis promoter is regulated by changes in the levels of its transcription initiation nucleotide CTP. *J Biol Chem* **279**: 50818–50828.

Wassem, R., De Souza, E.M., Yates, M.G., Pedrosa, F.D., and Buck, M. (2000) Two roles for integration host factor at

Fis is involved in *Vibrio cholerae* quorum sensing 871 an enhancer-dependent *nifA* promoter. *Mol Microbiol* **35**: 756–764.

Waters, C.M., and Bassler, B.L. (2005) Quorum sensing: cell-to-cell communication in bacteria. *Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol* **21**: 319–346.

Xu, H., and Hoover, T.R. (2001) Transcriptional regulation at a distance in bacteria. *Curr Opin Microbiol* **4**: 138–144.

Xu, J., and Johnson, R.C. (1997) Activation of RpoS-dependent *proP* P2 transcription by the Fis protein *in vitro*. *J Mol Biol* **270**: 346–359.

Zhu, J., and Mekalanos, J.J. (2003) Quorum sensing-dependent biofilms enhance colonization in *Vibrio cholerae*. *Dev Cell* **5**: 647–656.

Zhu, J., Miller, M.B., Vance, R.E., Dziejman, M., Bassler, B.L., and Mekalanos, J.J. (2002) Quorum-sensing regulators control virulence gene expression in *Vibrio cholerae*. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA* **99**: 3129–3134.

© 2006 The Authors  
Journal compilation © 2006 Blackwell Publishing Ltd, *Molecular Microbiology*, **63**, 859–871
