
J Plant Res (2007) 120:445–449  
DOI 10.1007/s10265-006-0067-7  

**SHORT COMMUNICATION**

**Anthocyaninless1 gene of Arabidopsis thaliana encodes a UDP-glucose:flavonoid-3-O-glucosyltransferase**

Hiroyoshi Kubo · Nobuaki Nawa · Simona Angheluta Lupsea

Received: 24 August 2006 / Accepted: 7 December 2006 / Published online: 3 February 2007  
© The Botanical Society of Japan and Springer 2007  

**Abstract** We isolated several mutants of *Arabidopsis thaliana* (L.) Heynh. that accumulated less anthocyanin in the plant tissues, but had seeds with a brown color similar to the wild-type. These mutants were allelic with the *anthocyaninless1* (*anl1*) mutant that has been mapped at 15.0 cM of chromosome 5. We performed fine mapping of the *anl1* locus and determined that *ANL1* is located between the nga106 marker and a marker corresponding to the MKP11 clone. About 70 genes are located between these two markers, including three UDP-glucose:flavonoid-3-O-glucosyltransferase-like genes and a glutathione transferase gene (*TT19*). A mutant of one of the glucosyltransferase genes (At5g17050) was unable to complement the *anl1* phenotype, showing that the *ANL1* gene encodes UDP-glucose:flavonoid-3-O-glucosyltransferase. *ANL1* was expressed in all tissues examined, including rosette leaves, stems, flower buds and roots. *ANL1* was not regulated by *TTG1*.

**Keywords** anl1 mutant · ANTHOCYANINLESS1 · Arabidopsis thaliana · UDP-glucose:flavonoid-3-O-glucosyltransferase

Anthocyanin is a plant pigment responsible for the color of flowers, fruits and autumn leaves. *Arabidopsis thaliana* (L.) Heynh. accumulates much anthocyanin in the leaves and stems especially under stressed conditions. However, most research on flavonoids in *A. thaliana* is focused on tannin accumulation in the seed coat. The seed color of *A. thaliana* is brown because of the accumulation of tannins in the seed coat. More than 20 mutants that produce yellow or pale brown seeds referred to as *transparent testa* (*tt*) mutants have been isolated (Winkel-Shirley 2001). Some *tt* mutants lack not only tannin but also anthocyanin because tannin and anthocyanin share a common pathway until leucoanthocyanidin. In *tt3*, *tt4*, *tt5*, *tt6* and *tt7*, which are defective in the genes encoding dihydroflavonol reductase (DFR), chalcone synthase (CHS), chalcone flavanone isomerase (CHI), flavanone-3-hydroxylase (F3H) and flavanone-3'-hydroxylase (F3'H), respectively, both seed color and anthocyanin accumulation are affected. On the other hand, in some mutants, such as *tt1*, *tt2* and *tt12*, only seed color is affected and anthocyanin levels in vegetative tissues are similar to that in wild-type plants (Koornneef 1990; Debeaujon et al. 2001). These mutants are defective in a tissue-specific regulatory gene or a gene required for a later step in tannin accumulation. Another *A. thaliana* mutant, *anthocyaninless* (*anl*), has a reduced anthocyanin content but a normal seed color. In this mutant, a gene involved in a late step of anthocyanin biosynthesis or a regulatory gene specific for anthocyanin accumulation is considered to be affected. Two *anl* loci, *ANL1* and *ANL2*, have been reported. *ANL2*, which is located at the top of chromosome 4, has been isolated by transposon tagging. *ANL2* encodes a homeobox gene and is considered to regulate tissue specificity of subepidermis of shoot and epidermis of root (Kubo et al. 1999). *ANL1*, which is located 15 cM from the top of chromosome 5, has not yet been identified. Here, we isolated several *anl1* alleles and determined that this gene encodes a UDP-glucose:flavonoid-3-O-glucosyltransferase.

H. Kubo (✉) · N. Nawa · S. A. Lupsea  
Department of Biology, Faculty of Science, Shinshu University, Asahi 3-1-1, Matsumoto 390-8621, Japan  
e-mail: hkubo77@gipac.shinshu-u.ac.jp

For isolation of *anl1* mutants, the M₂ population of fast neutron-irradiated Columbia seeds (Lehle Seeds, Tucson, AZ) was sown on agar medium containing half-strength nutrient solution (Somerville and Ogren 1982) and 1% (w/v) sucrose. They were grown for 1 week at 22°C, then at 4°C under strong light (20 W/m²). After 1–2 weeks, plants that accumulated less anthocyanin were selected. The *anl1-1* mutant was obtained from M. Koornneef (Wageningen University, Wageningen, The Netherlands). For fine mapping of the *anl1* gene, mutant plants were selected from the F₂ population of the *anl1-2* mutant backcrossed twice, then crossed with ecotype Ler. DNA was isolated by the method described by Liu et al. (1995). ASA1, nga249, nga151, nga106, and r89998 were used to map the *anl1* near the nga106 marker. For fine mapping, CAPS markers were designed by the Monsanto SNP database between Col and Ler (Jander et al. 2002). Table 1 shows the nucleotide sequences of these markers (MSH12, MUA22, MQK4, MPI7, F5E19, F2K13, and MKP11). For detection of polymorphism between Col and Ler, PCR products were digested with the restriction enzyme(s) shown in Table 1.

These genes were amplified using ExTaq (Takara Bio, Japan), and the PCR products were used for direct sequencing of mutant alleles. Table 1 shows the nucleotide sequences of the primers used for sequencing (AL1, AL2, and AL3). For RT-PCR, total RNA was isolated by the standard phenol method.

First strand cDNA was synthesized by M-MuLV reverse transcriptase (Takara) with an oligo-d(T)₁₅ primer. PCR was performed for 24, 27, and 30 cycles, and the product was loaded on an agarose gel, electrophoresed and stained with ethidium bromide. Table 1 shows the nucleotide sequences of the primers used for RT-PCR (AtCHS, AtDFR, AtTUB, and AL3).

Seedlings were extracted with 1 ml 0.5% HCl in methanol for 1 day at 4°C to determine the amount of anthocyanin. The absorbance was measured at 530 and 657 nm. A₅₃₀ – 0.25A₆₅₇ was used to compensate for the chlorophyll absorption at 530 nm (Mancinelli 1990).

Several plants with reduced anthocyanin content were isolated under stressed condition (4°C; 20 W/m²). Besides several *tt* mutants, we found several plants that produced brown seeds in spite of the reduced anthocyanin content. Some had a long hypocotyl and were considered to be phytochrome mutants. We searched for *anl* mutants defective only in anthocyanin phenotype and isolated three *anl* mutants. These mutants were allelic with the *anl1* that had previously been isolated from EMS-mutagenized Landsberg. We named the *anl1* with a Ler background *anl1-1* and those with a Col background *anl1-2*, *anl1-3*, and *anl1-4*. All the mutants had a normal phenotype except for the anthocyanin content.

In wild-type (WT) 4-day-old seedlings, anthocyanin accumulates in the cotyledons and the upper part of the hypocotyl (Fig. 1a, d). However, *anl1* mutants did

Table 1 Primer sequences used for mapping sequencing and RT-PCR

| MSH12 | Fwd | 5′-TACCTTCTGTATCACAACAAA-3′ | MboI |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  | Rev | 5′-CAATGGATACCAATTGTCAT-3′ |  |
| MUA22 | Fwd | 5′-TGCAAACACGAACTTTCTCT-3′ | MboI, TaqI |
|  | Rev | 5′-TACTTATCTCTTCTGGTTAG-3′ |  |
| MQK4 | Fwd | 5′-TGTTTCTTTGCATTGCGTT-3′ | ClaI, MboI |
|  | Rev | 5′-AAGCTTGTCCACATACTAT-3′ |  |
| MPI7 | Fwd | 5′-CCGTATCGTCTGATTACAAA-3′ | TaqI |
|  | Rev | 5′-TTGGGCATAGCATTTACAG-3′ |  |
| F5E19 | Fwd | 5′-CATTGGTATCCTTTCTTCT-3′ | MboI |
|  | Rev | 5′-AGACGTTTAATAAGCGGTAC-3′ |  |
| F2K13 | Fwd | 5′-ATGGTGCGAGTAATGAAGAA-3′ | MboI |
|  | Rev | 5′-CACCCTTTTTGCTAGTGTTA-3′ |  |
| MKP11 | Fwd | 5′-CTTGAAGGGTATAGGGTTAT-3′ | TaqI |
|  | Rev | 5′-GAGATGATGGCATATTGATC-3′ |  |
| AL1 | Fwd | 5′-GTTGTTTACTTGTATATAA-3′ |  |
|  | Rev | 5′-AGACAAAATCACAAAGTCGGA-3′ |  |
| AL2 | Fwd | 5′-CTTCTGGTTCTGTGGCGTAC-3′ |  |
|  | Rev | 5′-TCGATCCAACCCTTCTGCT-3′ |  |
| AL3 | Fwd | 5′-CTGCTCATCTCTACACAGAT-3′ |  |
|  | Rev | 5′-CATTTCACATTCAAATAATG-3′ |  |
| AtCHS | Fwd | 5′-ATGGTGATGGCTGGTGCTTC-3′ |  |
|  | Rev | 5′-AGCAGACAACGAGGACACGT-3′ |  |
| AtDFR | Fwd | 5′-GTGTTGTGAACCGGCGCTTC-3′ |  |
|  | Rev | 5′-TCCCTTGGGCGGCTGTTGTT-3′ |  |
| AtTUB | Fwd | 5′-ATCTCGAGCCTGGGTACTATG-3′ |  |
|  | Rev | 5′-CATT CCTCTCCTGTGTACC-3′ |  |

J Plant Res (2007) 120:445–449

Fig. 1a–o Phenotype of *anl1* mutants. Seedlings of Col (a), *anl1-2* (b), *anl1-4* (c), Ler (d), *anl1-1* (e), SALK_105779 (*tt19*) (f), SALK_049338 (g), F₁ of SALK_105779 (*tt19*) × *anl1-2* (h), F₁ of SALK_049338 × *anl1-2* (i). Seeds of Col (j), *anl1-2* (k), SALK_105779 (*tt19*) (l), Ler (m), *anl1-1* (n), and *ttgl* (o). Bars 1 mm

not accumulate any visible anthocyanin (Fig. 1b–e). A small amount of anthocyanin accumulated at the bottom of the flower stalk at room temperature (data not shown). When mutants were grown at 4°C under strong light, they accumulated a small amount of anthocyanin but much less than in WT plants (Fig. 2). On the other hand, the seed color of the *anl1* mutants was brown (Fig. 1k, n) while that of *tt* mutants was yellowish (Fig. 1l, o).

Mutants with an *anl* phenotype are considered to be defective in either a regulatory gene of the anthocyan-specific pathway or a synthetic gene in the late step of anthocyanin biosynthesis. To examine whether *ANL1* is a regulatory gene for anthocyanin biosynthesis, we examined expression of genes encoding phenylalanine ammonia lyase, CHS and DFR by semiquantitative RT-PCR. The expression of these genes was almost the same in WT and *anl1* (data not shown), suggesting that *ANL1* does not regulate these genes.

We used the F₂ population of *anl1-2* × Ler for mapping. F₂ progeny of *anl1-2* × Ler showed an approximately 3:1 (558:177) segregation of wild type:mutant phenotype, indicating that the mutation is recessive and occurs in a single nuclear gene. We mapped *anl1-2* with CAPS and SSLP markers and determined that *ANL1* is located near the nga106 marker. We designed additional CAPS markers near the nga106 marker and determined that *ANL1* is located between the nga106 marker (5.397 Mb) and a marker that was designed near the top of the MKP11 clone (5.679 Mb) (Fig. 3a). We screened more than 400 F₂ plants in an attempt to identify a plant in which recombination between these two markers had occurred, but without success.

About 70 genes were located between these two markers, including three tandem flavonoid 3-O-glucosyltransferase-like genes and a glutathione transferase gene (*TT19*), which were the most probable candidates for *ANL1* function. Plants mutated in

Table 2 Number of plants with or without anthocyanin

| Strain                | Anthocyanin | No visible anthocyanin |
|-----------------------|-------------|------------------------|
| Col                   | 19          | 0                      |
| anl1-2                | 0           | 23                     |
| anl1-3                | 0           | 25                     |
| anl1-4                | 0           | 37                     |
| anl1-1 × anl1-3       | 0           | 20                     |
| SALK 049338           | 0           | 32                     |
| SALK 105779 (tt19)    | 0           | 28                     |
| anl1-2 × SALK 049338  | 0           | 18                     |
| anl1-2 × SALK 105779 (tt19) | 21 | 0                      |
| anl1-3 × SALK 049338  | 0           | 13                     |
| anl1-3 × SALK 105779 (tt19) | 29 | 0                      |
| anl1-4 × SALK 049338  | 0           | 17                     |
| anl1-4 × SALK 105779 (tt19) | 22 | 0                      |

Fig. 2 Amount of anthocyanin in anl1 mutants Plants were grown for 1 week at room temperature, then at 4°C under strong light (20 W/m²). After 4 days, anthocyanin was extracted with 1 ml of 0.5% HCl in methanol and the absorbance was measured. Means with SD as vertical lines are shown. Asterisks indicates data from a single experiment

2004; Tohge et al. 2005). When these mutants were crossed with the anl1 mutant, SALK_105779 complemented the mutant phenotype but SALK_049338 did not (Fig. 1h, i; Table 2), showing that SALK_049338 is allelic to anl1.

To determine the mutation in the anl1-1, -2, -3 and -4 alleles, we sequenced these genes (Fig. 3b). In anl1-1, nucleotide 810G was changed to A. This nucleotide change resulted in a change of codon 270 from tryptophan to a stop codon. In anl1-2, anl1-3 and anl1-4, the nucleotide 958C is changed to T, resulting in the change of codon 320 from glutamine to a stop codon.

From these results, we conclude that the anl1 phenotype is caused by a mutation in the At5g17050 gene that encodes an anthocyanidin-3-O-glucosyltransferase. Our result corresponds with that reported by Tohge et al. (2005), who showed that At5g17050 encodes an UDP-glucose:flavonoid-3-O-glucosyltransferase, and that a mutation in the At5g17050 gene decreased the amount of anthocyanin.

Expression of ANL1 in different organs of *A. thaliana* was examined by semiquantitative RT-PCR. ANL1 was expressed in all organs examined, including leaves, stems, flower buds and roots (Fig. 4a). Transparent testa glabrous1 (TTG1) is known to regulate the genes such as DFR and anthocyanidin synthase (ANS), which are involved in the later steps of flavonoid biosynthesis (Winkel-Shirley et al. 1995; Pelletier et al. 1997). To determine whether ANL1 is regulated by TTG1, we examined expression of ANL1 in a ttgl background. Expression of DFR was reduced, but expression of ANL1 was similar to that in Ler (Fig. 4b).

UDP glycosyltransferases have a consensus sequence near the carboxy terminus that is thought to be involved in binding to the UDP moiety (Mackenzie et al. 1997). ANL1 has this consensus sequence in its

Fig. 3 a Fine map of ANL1 region. Arrows Sites for which primers were designed. The genotypes of No. 2 and No. 84, which are the closest recombinant to anl1-2, are shown. C Columbia. L Landsberg. b Schematic representation of ANL1 gene. The sites of point mutation and T-DNA insertion are shown. Shaded box Consensus sequence conserved among UDP glycosyltransferases

the flavonoid-3-O-glucosyltransferase-like genes (At5g17040 and At5g17050) and the glutathione transferase gene (At5g17220) were obtained from SALK T-DNA tag line (SALK_021216, SALK_049338 and SALK_105779, respectively). The SALK line in which T-DNA is inserted in At5g17040 accumulated normal amounts of anthocyanin (data not shown), indicating that this gene is not involved in glucosylation of anthocyanin. Both SALK_105779 and SALK_049338 accumulated less anthocyanin (Fig. 1f, g) as reported previously (Kitamura et al.

J Plant Res (2007) 120:445–449

**References**

Debeaujon I, Peeters AJM, Leon-Kloosterziel KM, Koornneef M (2001) The *transparent testa12* gene of *Arabidopsis* encodes a multidrug secondary transporter-like protein required for flavonoid sequestration in vacuole of the seed coat endothelium. Plant Cell 13:853–871

Jander G, Norris SR, Rounsley SD, Bush DF, Levin IM, Last RL (2002) *Arabidopsis* map-based cloning in the post-genome era. Plant Physiol 129:440–450

Jones P, Messner B, Nakajima J, Schaffner AR, Saito K (2003) UGT73C6 and UGT78D1, glycosyltransferases involved in flavonol glycoside biosynthesis in *Arabidopsis thaliana*. J Biol Chem 278:43910–43918

Kitamura S, Shikazono N, Tanaka A (2004) *Transparent testa 19* is involved in the accumulation of both anthocyanins and proanthocyanidins in *Arabidopsis*. Plant J 37:104–114

Koornneef M (1990) Mutations affecting the testa color in *Arabidopsis*. Arabidopsis Information Service 28:1–4

Kubo H, Peeters AJ, Aarts MG, Pereira A, Koornneef M (1999) *Anthocyaninless2*, a homeobox gene affecting anthocyanin distribution and root development in *Arabidopsis*. Plant Cell 11:1217–1226

Liu Y-G, Mitsukawa N, Oosumi T, Whittier RF (1995) Efficient isolation and mapping of *Arabidopsis thaliana* T-DNA insert junction by thermal asymmetric interlaced PCR. Plant J 8:457–463

Mackenzie PI, Owens IS, Burchell B, Bock KW, Bairoch A, Belanger A, Fournel-Gigleux S, Green M, Hum DW, Iyanagi T, Lancet D, Louisot P, Magdalou J, Chowdhury JR, Ritter JK, Schachter H, Tepply TR, Tipton KF, Nebert DW (1997) The UDP glycosyltransferase gene superfamily: recommended nomenclature update based on evolutionary divergence. Pharmacogenetics 7:255–269

Mancinelli AL (1990) Interaction between light quality and light quantity in the photoregulation of anthocyanin production. Plant Physiol 92:1191–1195

Pelletier MK, Murrell JR, Winkel-Shirley B (1997) Characterization of flavonol synthase and leucoanthocyanidin dioxygenase genes in *Arabidopsis*. Further evidence for differential regulation of “early” and “late” genes. Plant Physiol 113:1437–1445

Ross J, Li Y, Lim E-K, Bowles DJ (2001) Higher plant glycosyltransferases. Genome Biol 2:3004.1–3004.6

Somerville CR, Ogren WL (1982) Isolation of photorespiration mutants in *Arabidopsis thaliana*. In: Edelman HM, Hallick RB, Chua NH (eds) Methods in chloroplast biology. Elsevier, Amsterdam, pp 129–138

Tohge T, Nishiyama Y, Yokota-Hirai M, Yano M, Nakajima J, Awazuhara M, Inoue E, Takahashi H, Goodenowe DB, Kitayama M, Noji M, Yamazaki M, Saito K (2005) Functional genomics by integrated analysis of metabolome and transcriptome of *Arabidopsis* plants over-expressing an MYB transcription factor. Plant J 42:218–235

Winkel-Shirley B, Kubasek WL, Storz G, Bruggemann E, Koornneef M, Ausubel FM, Goodman HM (1995) Analysis of *Arabidopsis* mutants deficient in flavonoid biosynthesis. Plant J 8:659–671

Winkel-Shirley B (2001) Flavonoid biosynthesis. A colorful model for genetics, biochemistry, cell biology and biotechnology. Plant Physiol 126:485–493

**Fig. 4a,b** Expression of the *ANL1* gene as examined by semiquantitative RT-PCR. **a** Expression of *ANL1* gene in leaves (*L*), stems (*S*), buds (*B*), and roots (*R*). The number of PCR cycles was 30 for *ANL1* and 27 for tubulin (TUB). **b** Expression of *ANL1* gene in seedlings of Ler and the *ttgl* mutant. The number of PCR cycles was 24 (*n*), 27 (+3), 30 (+6) for *CHS* and tubulin (TUB), and 27 (*n*), 30 (+3), 33 (+6) for *DFR* and *ANL1*

carboxy terminal region (amino acid residues 338–381). All the *anll* alleles lack this conserved sequence because of the aberrant stop codon or T-DNA insertion. Therefore, these mutants are considered to be null mutants. However, all the *anll* mutants accumulated a trace amount of anthocyanin under strong light at low temperature, indicating that there is probably another gene that has very low anthocyanidin 3-*O*-glucosyltransferase activity. *A. thaliana* contains more than 100 UDP glycosyltransferases (Ross et al. 2001). There are three genes (At1g30530, At5g17030, At5g17040) that are quite similar to *ANL1*. At1g30530 has been shown to encode a UDP-rhamnose:flavonol-3-*O*-rhamnosyltransferase (Jones et al. 2003). At5g17030 and At5g17040 are located just upstream of *ANL1* and are obviously triplicated from an original gene but the function of the two former genes is unknown. Some of them may have a small effect, especially under stressed conditions.

**Acknowledgments** We thank Dr. Maarten Koornneef for the gift of *anll-1* seeds. We also thank ABRC and The Salk Institute Genomic Analysis Laboratory for providing the T-DNA insertion mutants.
