
Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

ScienceDirect

Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1770 (2007) 1053–1061

Selenocysteine β-lyase and methylselenol demethylase in the metabolism of Se-methylated selenocompounds into selenide

Kazuo T. Suzuki *, Kazuki Kurasaki, Noriyuki Suzuki

Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Chiba University, Chuo, Chiba 260-8675, Japan

Received 15 December 2006; received in revised form 15 February 2007; accepted 6 March 2007 Available online 23 March 2007

---

### Abstract

The lyase activity toward Se-methylated selenoamino acids and the demethylase activity toward methylselenol in the metabolism of selenium were characterized in vitro. The β- and γ-lyase activities toward selenomethionine (SeMet) and Se-methylselenocysteine (MeSeCys), respectively, were compared under exactly identical conditions by incubating $^{77}$Se-SeMet and $^{76}$Se-MeSeCys simultaneously in a liver supernatant, and then estimated by the decreases in the labeled starting selenoamino acids (MeSeCys and SeMet), and also by the increases in the labeled enzyme products (methylselenol and selenide) after oxidation to methylseleninic acid (MSA$^{\text{IV}}$) and selenite, respectively, by HPLC-inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometry (ICP-MS). Only $^{76}$Se-MeSeCys was decreased and only $^{76}$Se-selenite was produced, suggesting that conversion of MeSeCys to methylselenol by β-lyase followed by that of methylselenol to selenide by demethylase actively occurred in the liver supernatant. The demethylase activity was characterized by incubating $^{77}$Se-methylselenol produced *in situ* from $^{77}$Se-MSA$^{\text{IV}}$ and glutathione in a partially purified enzyme preparation. It was found that demethylation takes place directly through an attack by a hydroxide anion on the methyl group of methylselenol producing selenide and methanol, selenide being detected on HPLC-ICP-MS after oxidation to selenite, and methanol on GC-MS. It was concluded that β- but not γ-lyase activity could be detected in a liver supernatant, and that the resulting methylselenol product is demethylated through hydrolysis, with methanol and selenide being produced (MeSeCys → CH$_3$SeH → HSeH + CH$_3$OH).

© 2007 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

Keywords: Selenium; Methylselenol; Demethylase; β-lyase; Selenide; Methylselenocysteine; Methylseleninic acid; Selenomethionine; Speciation

---

### 1. Introduction

Selenium is an essential trace element required for the normal functioning of the body. Both inorganic and organic forms of selenium can be utilized as nutritional and supplemental selenium sources [1–4]; selenite and selenate are typical inorganic ones. On the other hand, organic selenium is present in general as selenoamino acids, which can be divided into several groups. Selenocysteine (SeCys) and selenomethionine (SeMet) residues are present as amino acid constituents in gene products, i.e., selenoproteins (selenoenzymes) and general proteins, respectively. Se-Methylated selenoamino acids SeMet and Se-methylselenocysteine (MeSeCys) are chemically less reactive forms compared with the corresponding non-Se-methylated selenoamino acids, and are accumulated in selenium-accumulators in the forms of SeMet bound to macromolecules such as grains, mushrooms and yeast [5,6], and in the form of free MeSeCys in garlic and onion [7,8]. In addition to these typical natural nutritional selenium sources, non-natural methylselenonic (CH$_3$Se(O)$_2$OH; MSA$^{\text{VI}}$) and methylseleninic acids (CH$_3$Se(O)OH; MSA$^{\text{IV}}$) have been shown to be incorporated into selenoproteins and excretion metabolites selenosugar and trimethylselenonium (TMSe), suggesting that MSA$^{\text{IV}}$ and MSA$^{\text{VI}}$ comprise a third group of nutritional and supplemental selenium sources [9,10] (Scheme 1).

As all inorganic and organic nutritional selenium sources have been utilized for the syntheses of selenoproteins for biological use and selenosugar for excretion, they have been deduced to be transformed into the common intermediate

---

Abbreviations: DMSel, dimethylselenide; DTT, dithiothreitol; GSH, glutathione; ICP-MS, inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometry; MSA$^{\text{IV}}$, methylseleninic acid; MeSeCys, Se-methylselenocysteine; SeMet, selenomethionine; TMSe, trimethylselenonium

* Corresponding author. Tel./fax: +81 43 226 2865.
E-mail address: ktsuzuki@p.chiba-u.ac.jp (K.T. Suzuki).

0304-4165/$ - see front matter © 2007 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.bbagen.2007.03.007

K.T. Suzuki et al. / Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1770 (2007) 1053–1061

Methylselenol is, thus, thought to be the key intermediate leading to selenide in the case of Se-methylated selenocompounds. At the same time, methylselenol is known to be an intermediate for further methylation metabolites, i.e., dimethylselenide (DMSe) and trimethylselenonium (TMSe) (CH₃SeH → (CH₃)₂Se → (CH₃)₃Se⁺), for the excretion of excessive selenium [1,4,12–15]. Our recent observations on the metabolism of Se-methylated selenocompounds (MeSeCys and MSA⁴) indicated that TMSe is detectable in the kidneys on the loading of MeSeCys and MSA⁴ but not on that of selenite, selenate or SeMet under selenium-deficient conditions, suggesting that selenocompounds that produce methylselenol as the intermediate in the metabolic pathway to selenoproteins and selenosugar are at the same time likely to produce TMSe (Scheme 1) [10,11]. This is because methylselenol is a closer proximate intermediate leading to TMSe than selenide (CH₃SeH → (CH₃)₂Se → (CH₃)₃Se⁺). As the production of TMSe from MeSeCys and MSA⁴ is organ-specific, i.e., it is detected in the kidneys but not in the liver, it is supposed either that the demethylation activity is high in the liver, and the assumed intermediate methylselenol is readily demethylated into selenide, or the demethylation activity is low in the kidneys, allowing further methylation of methylselenol [10,11].

Thus, methylselenol is produced on the metabolism of nutritional selenium, as anticipated from the production of TMSe from Se-methylated selenocompounds even under selenium-deficient conditions. However, it is hard to detect and identify methylselenol because of its high reactivity, as in the case of the assumed intermediate selenide. In the present study, the assumed intermediates methylselenol and selenide were detected in the forms of MSA⁴ and selenite, respectively, after oxidizing the assumed intermediates with hydrogen peroxide (Scheme 2).

Although β- and γ-lyases have been studied independently [16–18], their significance in the metabolism from their nutritional sources such as β-lyase activity toward SeCys and γ-lyase activity toward excessive SeMet has been examined little. It was supposed that the γ-lyase reaction occurs only with large excess doses of SeMet, and SeMet was supposed to be transformed into selenide from SeCys through the trans-selenation pathway [17,18]. In the present study, the β- and γ-lyase reactions were directly examined as the decreases in the starting substrates ⁷⁶Se-MeSeCys and ⁷⁷Se-SeMet, respectively, under exactly identical experimental conditions, i.e., the two substrates were incubated simultaneously in a reaction medium (rat liver supernatant). At the same time, the lyase product methylselenol was also directly detected by sequestering it through a complex formation with hemoglobin [9,19,20] and also by detecting it after oxidation to MSA⁴ by HPLC-inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometry (ICP-MS).

The demethylation reaction is assumed to occur actively in vivo in the metabolism of selenium, especially for Se-methylated selenoamino acids [9–11]. However, little study has been done on the demethylation reaction, and methylselenol demethylase, which catalyzes the conversion of methylselenol to selenide [CH₃SeH → H₂Se], has not been identified nor characterized. This is probably because it is not easy to con-

Scheme 1. Proposed metabolic pathway for selenium leading to and from the assumed intermediates with emphasis on the demethylation of methylselenol to selenide. All nutritional selenium is proposed to be transformed into the assumed intermediate selenide directly or through methylselenol. Namely, inorganic selenium (selenate and selenite) is reduced to selenide. SeCys liberated from selenoproteins is transformed to selenide by β-lyase. SeMet liberated from general proteins and of free SeMet sources is transformed into selenide either through methylselenol by γ-lyase followed by demethylation (SeMet → CH₃SeH → H₂Se), or through SeCys by β-lyase after the trans-selenation pathway (SeMet → SeCys → H₂Se). MeSeCys is transformed into methylselenol by β-lyase. MSA⁴ is reduced to methylselenol. Methylselenol is demethylated to selenide for further utilization for selenoprotein synthesis and/or for excretion in the form of selenosugar. At the same time, methylselenol is further methylated to dimethylselenide (DMSe) and trimethylselenonium (TMSe) for excretion. The equilibrium between selenide and methylselenol is dependent on the methylation and demethylation activities, and also on the removal of selenium in the forms of selenoproteins and selenosugar derived from selenide, and DMSe and TMSe derived from methylselenol. 1-Glutathionylseleno-N-acetyl-d-galactosamine (Se-sugar A) is assumed to be transformed into 1-methylseleno-N-acetyl-d-galactosamine (Se-sugar B) in the organs [35].

selenide, as schematically shown in Scheme 1 [1,3,4]. Namely, inorganic selenium is transformed reductively into selenide (Se(O)₂(OH)₂ → Se(O)(OH)₂ → H₂Se). On the other hand, selenoamino acids are transformed into selenide through the lyase reaction; SeCys liberated from selenoproteins is transformed into selenide through the β-lyase reaction (SeCys → H₂Se), whereas SeMet is transformed into selenide either through the trans-selenation pathway into SeCys followed by the β-lyase reaction (SeMet → SeCys → H₂Se) or directly through the γ-lyase reaction into methylselenol followed by the demethylation reaction (SeMet → CH₃SeH → H₂Se). A monomeric form of Se-methylated selenoamino acid, MeSeCys, is assumed to be transformed into selenide through the β-lyase reaction to produce methylselenol, and then into selenide through demethylation reaction (MeSeCys → CH₃SeH → H₂Se) [11]. In addition to these inorganic selenium and organic selenoamino acids, a third group of selenocompounds i.e., MSA⁴ and MSA⁶, has been proposed to be reduced to methylselenol, and then transformed through the demethylation reaction into selenide (CH₃Se(O)₂OH → CH₃Se(O)OH → CH₃SeH → H₂Se) [9,10]. Thus, Se-methylated selenocompounds (MeSeCys, MSA⁴/MSA⁶ and SeMet (in the case of the γ-lyase reaction)) that can produce methylselenol require the demethylation reaction (CH₃SeH → H₂Se) to produce the common intermediate selenide, as schematically shown in Scheme 1.

K.T. Suzuki et al. / Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1770 (2007) 1053–1061

Substrate selenoamino acids

$\begin{array}{ccc}
\beta- & \gamma \\
\text { SeCys } & \text { Trans- } & \beta- \\
H_{2} N-COOH & \text { selenation } & CH_{3} \\
& & \gamma \\
& & H_{2} N-COOH \\
& & \text { MeSeCys }
\end{array}$

$\begin{array}{ccc}
\beta-\text { lyase } & \gamma-\text { lyase } & \beta-\text { lyase } \\
\hline \text { Methylation } & \text { Enzyme products } & \text { Demethylation } \\
H^{77} \text { SeH } & \text { CH}_{3}^{77} \text { SeH } & \text { CH }_{3}^{76} \text { SeH } \\
\text { Demethylation } & & H^{76} \text { SeH }
\end{array}$

Oxidation with $H_{2} O_{2}$ for detection

$\begin{array}{cccc}
{ }^{77} \text { SeO(OH) }_{2} & \text { CH }_{3}^{77} \text { SeO(OH) } & \text { CH }_{3}^{76} \text { SeO(OH) } & { }^{76} \text { SeO(OH) }_{2} \\
\text { Selenite } & \text { MSA }^{IV} & \text { MSA }^{IV} & \text { Selenite }
\end{array}$

Detection as oxidation products of metabolites

---

Scheme 2. Proposed pathway for the metabolism of selenoamino acids leading to methylselenol and selenide, and a detection method for their metabolites. ${ }^{77} \mathrm{Se}-\mathrm{SeMet}$ is transformed either into SeCys through the trans-selenation pathway followed by $\beta$-lyase into selenide (detected as ${ }^{77} \mathrm{Se}$-selenite after oxidation) or directly into methylselenol by $\gamma$-lyase (detected as ${ }^{77} \mathrm{Se}-\mathrm{MSA}^{\mathrm{IV}}$ after oxidation). On the other hand, ${ }^{76} \mathrm{Se}-\mathrm{MeSeCys}$ is transformed into methylselenol directly by $\beta$-lyase (detected as ${ }^{76} \mathrm{Se}-\mathrm{MSA}^{\mathrm{IV}}$ after oxidation), and then demethylated to selenide (detected as ${ }^{76} \mathrm{Se}$-selenite after oxidation). Lyase activities toward SeMet and MeSeCys can be estimated as the decreases in the labeled starting substrates (${ }^{77} \mathrm{Se}-\mathrm{SeMet}$ and ${ }^{76} \mathrm{Se}-\mathrm{MeSeCys}$, respectively), and also as the increase in each lyase product after oxidation to $\mathrm{MSA}^{\mathrm{IV}}\left({ }^{77} \mathrm{Se}\right.$ - and ${ }^{76} \mathrm{Se}-\mathrm{MSA}^{\mathrm{IV}}$, respectively). Demethylation activity toward methylselenol can be estimated as the increase in each labeled selenite after oxidation (${ }^{77} \mathrm{Se}$- and ${ }^{76} \mathrm{Se}$-selenite, respectively).

---

struct an assay system for demethylase activity. In the present study, we constructed such an assay system (Scheme 3), and the demethylase activity was assayed not only as the decrease in the starting substrate methylselenol, but also as the increase in the enzyme product selenide (detected upon oxidation to selenite) by HPLC-ICP-MS. It was demonstrated that $\beta$-lyase, but not $\gamma$-lyase, and also demethylase are active in a rat liver supernatant. Furthermore, demethylation of methylselenol was shown to take place uniquely through hydrolysis of methylselenol to selenide and methanol ($\mathrm{CH}_{3} \mathrm{SeH} \rightarrow \mathrm{H}_{2} \mathrm{Se}+$ $\mathrm{CH}_{3} \mathrm{OH}$).

---

2. Materials and methods

2.1. Chemicals

The metallic forms of ${ }^{76} \mathrm{Se}(99.8 \%$ enriched) and ${ }^{77} \mathrm{Se}(99.9)$ were purchased from Isoflex USA, San Francisco, CA, USA. All reagents were of analytical grade or the highest grade available. Deionized water $(18.3 \mathrm{M} \Omega \mathrm{cm}^{-1})$ from Milli-Q SP (Millipore, Bedford, MA, USA) was used throughout. Trizma Base and $\mathrm{HCl}$ were purchased from Sigma (St. Louis, MO, USA). Methyl lithium dissolved in diethyl ether at a concentration of $1.0 \mathrm{~mol} / \mathrm{L}$ was purchased from Kanto Chemical Co., Inc. (Tokyo, Japan). A selenium standard solution $(1000 \mu \mathrm{g} / \mathrm{mL})$ for ICP-MS and trimethylselenonium (TMSe) iodide were purchased from SPEX CentiPrep (Metuchen, NJ, USA) and Tri Chemical Laboratories Inc. (Yamanashi, Japan), respectively.

2.2. Preparation of labeled selenocompounds ${ }^{76} \mathrm{Se}$-methylselenocysteine (MeSeCys), ${ }^{77} \mathrm{Se}$-selenomethionine (SeMet) and ${ }^{77} \mathrm{Se}$-methylseleninic acid ($\mathrm{MSA}^{\mathrm{IV}}$)

${ }^{76} \mathrm{Se}-\mathrm{MeSeCys}[11],{ }^{77} \mathrm{Se}-\mathrm{SeMet}[21]$, and ${ }^{77} \mathrm{Se}-\mathrm{MSA}^{\mathrm{IV}}[9,10]$ were synthesized as reported elsewhere from each labeled selenium powder. Their chemical and isotopic purities were confirmed by HPLC-ICP-MS.

2.3. Animal experiments, and preparation of liver homogenates and supernatants

All animal experiments were carried out according to the “Principles of Laboratory Animal Care” (NIH version, revised 1996) and the Guidelines of the Animal Investigation Committee, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Chiba University, Japan.

Male Wistar rats were purchased at 5 weeks of age from Clea Japan Co. (Tokyo). They were housed in our experimental animal room maintained at $25 \pm 2^{\circ} \mathrm{C}$ and $50 \pm 10 \%$ relative humidity with a 12 h light-dark cycle. The animals were fed a commercial diet (MF; Oriental Yeast Co., Ltd., Tokyo) and tap water ad libitum. Livers were excised from rats at 6 weeks of age under pentobarbital.

---

Scheme 3. Detection method to estimate demethylation activity in vitro. The starting substrate methylselenol ($\mathrm{CH}_{3} \mathrm{SeH}$) can be produced in situ by incubating labeled methylseleninic acid ($\mathrm{CH}_{3} \mathrm{Se}(\mathrm{O}) \mathrm{OH},{ }^{77} \mathrm{Se}-\mathrm{MSA}^{\mathrm{IV}}$) with glutathione (GSH), and the demethylation product (selenide) is detected as ${ }^{77} \mathrm{Se}$-selenite after oxidation with $H_{2} O_{2}$. The demethylation reaction can be estimated as the decrease in the starting substrate (methylselenol is detectable as ${ }^{77} \mathrm{Se}-\mathrm{MSA}^{\mathrm{IV}}$ after oxidation) and also as the increase in the reaction product (selenide as ${ }^{77} \mathrm{Se}$-selenite after oxidation) by HPLC-ICP-MS.

anesthesia after exsanguination, and a portion of the livers was homogenized in four volumes of 50 mM Tris–HNO₃ buffer (pH 7.4, 25 °C, after bubbling the buffer with nitrogen gas to purge dissolved oxygen) under an atmosphere of nitrogen, followed by centrifugation at 105,000×g for 60 min to obtain a supernatant.

### 2.4. HPLC-ICP-MS for speciation of selenium in an incubation solution of rat liver homogenates and supernatants

An Agilent 7500ce ICP MS (Yokogawa Analytical Systems, Hachioji, Japan) was coupled to an HPLC system as the detector. The HPLC system consisted of an on-line degasser, an HPLC pump (PU713; GL Science Co., Ltd., Tokyo), a Rheodyne six-port injector with a sample loop, and a column. Gel filtration columns, i.e., Shodex Asahipak GS-520 7G (7.5 i.d. × 500 mm, with a guard column, 7.5 i.d. × 75 mm; Showa Denko, Tokyo) for the separation of high molecular weight metabolites, and GS-320 HQ (7.5 i.d. × 300 mm, with a guard column, 7.5 i.d. × 75 mm; Showa Denko) for the separation of low molecular weight metabolites, were used. The former column was injected with a 200-μL aliquot and then eluted with 50 mM Tris–HCl, pH 7.4, at a flow rate of 1.0 mL/min, whereas the latter column was injected with a 20-μL aliquot and then eluted with 50 mM Tris–HNO₃ buffer, pH 7.4, at 0.6 mL/min. The eluate was introduced directly into the Babington nebulizer of an ICP-MS, which was equipped with an octopole reaction system (ORS) in the D₂ reaction mode [22].

For each chromatogram, the ⁷⁶Se and/or ⁷⁷Se counts of endogenous natural abundance origin were subtracted from the total ⁷⁶Se and/or ⁷⁷Se counts to give a profile of only labeled ⁷⁶Se and/or ⁷⁷Se origin.

### 2.5. GC-MS

GC-MS analyses were performed on a Shimadzu GCMS-QP5000 with a J & W Scientific DB-5MS (60 m) capillary column. The GC-MS conditions were as follows: carrier gas (flow rate), He (2.7 mL/min); injection volume, 0.5 μL; inlet temperature, 170 °C; column temperature, 40 °C; detection temperature, 250 °C; ionization mode, electron impact.

### 3. Results

The β and γ-Lyase activities toward Se-methylated selenoamino acids were examined in a 10% rat liver homogenate or supernatant by estimating the decreases in the starting substrates MeSeCys and SeMet, respectively, under exactly identical incubation, sample preparation, and detection conditions. Namely, ⁷⁶Se-labeled MeSeCys and ⁷⁷Se-labeled SeMet were incubated simultaneously at equivalent selenium concentrations in a liver homogenate or supernatant, and then the soluble fraction of the incubation medium was subjected to HPLC-ICP-MS analysis to estimate the decreases in the ⁷⁶Se-MeSeCys and ⁷⁷Se-SeMet peaks in the ⁷⁶Se and ⁷⁷Se profiles, respectively. The ⁷⁶Se-MeSeCys peak decreased with time, while that of ⁷⁷Se-SeMet did not, for a homogenate (data not shown) and also at the same efficiency for a supernatant, as shown in Fig. 1A, suggesting that β but not γ-lyase activity is present in a normal rat liver, and the activity can be reproduced under in vitro conditions and can be extracted in the soluble fraction. The time-course changes in Fig. 1B demonstrate the distinct differences between the β and γ-lyase activities in the liver for the two typical Se-methylated selenoamino acids.

The β and γ-lyase activities in the liver were further examined not only by estimating the decreases in the starting substrates but also by detecting the enzyme products. Namely,

as it is known that selenide and methylselenol are effectively bound to hemoglobin [9,19,20], ⁷⁶Se-MeSeCys and ⁷⁷Se-SeMet were incubated in a liver supernatant in the presence of hemoglobin, and the assumed enzyme product methylselenol was sequestered as a hemoglobin–selenium complex. The decrease in ⁷⁶Se-MeSeCys was accompanied by an increase in the ⁷⁶Se peak at the retention time corresponding to hemoglobin (detected as the corresponding iron peak), as shown in Fig. 2A. However, the ⁷⁷Se-SeMet peak did not decrease and the ⁷⁷Se peak at the retention time of hemoglobin was not detected, as shown in Fig. 2B. The assumed hemoglobin–methylselenol complex was oxidized further to confirm that the chemical form of selenium was methylseleninic acid (⁷⁶Se-MSAᴵⱽ), i.e., methylselenol bound to hemoglobin was oxidized by hydrogen peroxide, selenium being liberated in the form of MSAᴵⱽ. Experimentally, the incubated medium was heat-treated to denature existing catalase in the liver supernatant, and then the precipitated complex was oxidized with hydrogen peroxide. The oxidation product was not detected at the retention time of MSAᴵⱽ in the ⁷⁶Se profile but at the retention time of selenite, as shown in Fig. 2C, while no ⁷⁷Se peak was detected, suggesting that methylselenol produced by β-lyase from MeSeCys was readily and quantitatively transformed into selenide in the rat liver supernatant and bound to hemoglobin. Thus, it was suggested that MeSeCys is transformed into selenide in a liver supernatant through successive β-lyase and demethylase reactions. However, the γ-lyase reaction producing methylselenol from SeMet does not actively occur under the present conditions.

The demethylase activity specific to methylselenol in a liver supernatant was examined by incubating the substrate methylselenol and detecting the product selenide (CH₃SeH → H₂Se). As methylselenol is not easy to handle because of its high chemical reactivity, it was prepared *in situ* by reducing MSAᴵⱽ with glutathione (GSH). Thus, ⁷⁷Se-labeled MSAᴵⱽ was reduced to methylselenol with GSH, and then the methylselenol was incubated in a liver supernatant. The demethylation reaction was traced by detecting the decrease in methylselenol by HPLC-ICP-MS after oxidizing the product selenide to selenite (⁷⁷Se-selenite), the remaining starting substrate methylselenol being detected as MSAᴵⱽ (⁷⁷Se-MSAᴵⱽ) with this oxidation reaction, as schematically depicted in Scheme 3. Fig. 3A shows the time-related changes in the distributions of ⁷⁷Se in the incubation media detected after the oxidation. ⁷⁷Se-MSAᴵⱽ decreased with time, ⁷⁷Se-selenite increasing instead, suggesting that methylselenol was demethylated to selenide, as also reflected by the time-related increase in the relative ratio of ⁷⁷Se-selenite to the total selenium concentration in the medium in Fig. 3B.

Demethylase activity in a liver supernatant decreased on heat-treatment at higher than 55 °C for 5 min (data not shown), suggesting that the demethylation from methylselenol to selenide does not take place through a spontaneous nonenzymatic reaction. As selenide and methylselenol may be present in forms bound to thiol groups (−S–SeH or −S–Se–S– and −S–SeCH₃, respectively) and the presence of thiol reagents may influence the activity, the effects of GSH (1 and

K.T. Suzuki et al. / Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1770 (2007) 1053–1061

(A) $^{76}$Se  
(B) $^{77}$Se  

MeSeCys  
SeMet  

0 h  
1 h  
3 h  
12 h  

Retention time (min)  

(C)  

| % | MeSeCys | SeMet |
| --- | --- | --- |
| Relative activity |  |  |

Incubation time (hr)

Fig. 1. β- and γ-Lyase activities toward Se-methylated selenoamino acids detected as the decreases in the labeled substrate selenoamino acids. $\beta$ and $\gamma$-Lyase activities toward Se-methylated selenoamino acids, i.e., methylselenocysteine (MeSeCys) and selenomethionine (SeMet), respectively, were estimated by estimating the decreases in the substrates $^{76}$Se-MeSeCys and $^{77}$Se-SeMet in the reaction medium by HPLC-ICP-MS. $^{76}$Se-MeSeCys and $^{77}$Se-SeMet (final concentration, each 500 nM) were incubated in a 10% (w/v) fresh rat liver supernatant in the presence of 10 μM pyridoxal-5′-phosphate (total volume of each incubation medium, 300 μL) (volume of the incubation medium, 1.5 mL) for 0, 1, 3 and 12 h at 37 °C, and then the reaction medium was centrifuged to remove non-soluble particles at 3000×g for 5 min. The elution profiles of $^{76}$Se (A) and $^{77}$Se (B) in the incubated supernatants were determined simultaneously on a gel filtration GS 320 column by HPLC-ICP-MS, and the decreases in the $^{76}$Se-MeSeCys and $^{77}$Se-SeMet peaks were plotted against the incubation time, as shown in panel C ($n=3$, means±S.D.).

5 mM) and dithiothreitol (DTT) (0.1 and 1.0 mM) on the demethylation activity in a liver supernatant were examined. Reducing reagents, especially DTT, have been suggested to enhance the demethylation activity in a liver supernatant compared with controls without an additional reducing agent in our experiments (data not shown), suggesting that the activity can recover to the native level in the presence of a reducing agent. Demethylase precipitated depending on the concentration (55–60%) of ammonium sulfate (data not shown). These observations suggest that an enzyme that catalyzes the demethylation reaction from methylselenol to selenide is present in a liver supernatant, and that it can be separated by means of a combination of separation procedures by assaying the ability for demethylation of methylselenol to selenide as the decrease in the starting substrate and/or as the increase in the product selenide by HPLC-ICP-MS. The labeled substrate enhanced the detectability as to the reaction on HPLC-ICP-MS compared with a natural abundance stable isotope substrate.

To confirm the demethylation activity and to gain an insight into the mechanism underlying the unique enzyme reaction, the product derived from the methyl moiety of methylselenol with demethylase was subjected to GC-MS analysis, as shown in Fig. 4. The enzyme fraction was prepared by means of successive processes; protein in a 10% rat liver supernatant was precipitated with stepwise ammonium sulfate concentrations and the fraction precipitated between ammonium sulfate concentrations of 55–60% was dialyzed to obtain a crude demethylase preparation for the enzyme reaction. Methylselenol that had been prepared *in situ* by the reduction of MSA${}^{\mathrm{IV}}$ with DTT was incubated in the crude demethylase preparation, and then the product in the incubation medium was trapped and subjected to GC-MS analysis. The product was identified as methanol, as shown in Fig. 4. The enzyme product was eluted at the retention time of 3.083 min at $m/z = 31$ (Fig. 4A), the retention time and molecular mass being identical to those of authentic methanol (Fig. 4B), but not to those of the authentic formal-

K.T. Suzuki et al. / Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1770 (2007) 1053–1061

(A) MeSeCys (B) SeMet

Before incubation

After incubation

Retention time (min)

(C)

Selenite

MSA^{IV}

MSA^{VI}

Retention time (min)

Fig. 2. β and γ-Lyase activities toward Se-methylated selenoamino acids estimated as the production of methylselenol and selenide. β- and γ-Lyase activities toward ${}^{76}$Se-methylselenocysteine (MeSeCys) and ${}^{77}$Se-selenomethionine (SeMet), respectively, were estimated by detecting the products, ${}^{76}$Se-methylselenol for MeSeCys and ${}^{77}$Se-methylselenol for SeMet. ${}^{76}$Se-MeSeCys and ${}^{77}$Se-SeMet (final concentration, each 5.0 μM) were incubated in a 20% (w/v) rat liver supernatant in the presence of 10 μM pyridoxal-5′-phosphate and rat hemoglobin (to sequester the reaction products) (0.15 mg/mL) (volume of the incubation medium, 1.5 mL) for 3 h at 37 °C. The decrease in ${}^{76}$Se-MeSeCys and ${}^{77}$Se-SeMet peaks, and the increases in ${}^{76}$Se (A) and ${}^{77}$Se (B) bound to hemoglobin were estimated on a gel filtration GS 320 column. The labeled-hemoglobin complexes were precipitated by heat-treatment at 95 °C for 5 min and oxidized with 2% H₂O₂ to liberate the labeled selenium as MSA^{IV} or selenite, and then the products were quantified on an anion exchange PRPX-100 column (injection volume, 20 μL; eluted with 50 mM ammonium acetate, pH 6.5, at a flow rate of 0.6 mL/min) by HPLC-ICP-MS (C).

was suggested that the demethylation of methylselenol takes place through the production of selenide (Fig. 3) and methanol (Fig. 4).

### 4. Discussion

The assumed reactive intermediates selenide and methylselenol were not detected in our previous animal experiments [9–11], and their presence was assumed from the production of TMSe for methylselenol, and selenosugar and selenoproteins for selenide. In the present in vitro experimental conditions, further transformation reactions (from methylselenol to TMSe, and from selenide to selenosugar and selenoproteins) were not actively occurring probably because of the absence of cofactors such as transmethylation factors, and the source of the sugar moiety for selenosugar, and the translation factors, respectively. As a result, the β-lyase product derived from MeSeCys (methylselenol) and its demethylation product (selenide) accumulated in the incubation medium without being further transformed, and they were sequestered and detected as stable selenochemicals (MSA^{IV} and selenite) after oxidation of the reactive products (methylselenol and selenide). With this detection method, it was confirmed that MeSeCys can be transformed into methylselenol by β-lyase, and the resulting methylselenol is transformed into selenide by demethylase. Thus, β-lyase and demethylase reactions were confirmed for the first time by detecting each substrate and the products.

(A)

(B)

Fig. 3. Demethylase activity toward methylselenol to selenide in a liver supernatant. Demethylase activity toward methylselenol to selenide was estimated by incubating ${}^{77}$Se-methylseleninic acid (MSA^{IV}) (final concentration, 50 μM) and glutathione (GSH) in a 20% rat liver supernatant at 37 °C for 0, 15, 30, 60, 180 and 300 min. The incubated medium was heat-treated at 95 °C for 5 min, and the precipitates were washed with purified water. The label in the precipitates was oxidized with 5% H₂O₂, and then the soluble fraction was subjected to HPLC-ICP-MS analysis on an anion exchange PRPX-100 column (injection volume, 20 μL; eluted with 50 mM ammonium acetate, pH 6.5, at a flow rate of 0.6 mL/min). The enzyme reaction from ${}^{77}$Se-methylselenol to ${}^{77}$Se-selenide was monitored as the decreases in ${}^{77}$Se-MSA^{IV} and the increases in ${}^{77}$Se-selenite peak in panel A, and the data ($n=3$, means±S.D.) are plotted against the incubation time in panel B.

K.T. Suzuki et al. / Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1770 (2007) 1053–1061

(A) substrate + enzyme  
(B) CH₃OH standard  

![Image Description]  

(C) HCHO standard  

Fig. 4. Demethylation reaction to produce selenide and methanol. Methylselenol is supposed to be demethylated into selenide, whereby the methyl moiety is liberated either through oxidation of the methyl group to formaldehyde (CH₃SeH → HOCH₂SeH → HCHO + H₂Se) or through hydrolysis through a nucleophilic attack of a hydroxyl anion on the methyl group to methanol (CH₃SeH → CH₃OH + H₂Se). The reaction product as to the methyl moiety (formaldehyde or methanol) was identified by GC-MS. Non-labeled MSAⅣ (1.0 mM) was incubated in a demethylase preparation (the fraction of a 10% rat liver supernatant precipitated between 55 and 60% ammonium sulfate concentration was dialyzed to obtain a crude demethylase preparation for the demethylation reaction) in the presence of DTT (25 mM) at 37 °C for 5 h, and then the medium was subjected to GC-MS on a DB-5MS column in a GCMS-QP5000. (A) The substrate MSAⅣ was incubated in a demethylase preparation. (B) Standard formaldehyde solution (1 mM). (C) Standard methanol solution (1 mM).

Contrary to β-lyase, γ-lyase was shown not to function in a normal liver supernatant under identical conditions to those under which β-lyase functions. The present in vitro observations supported these in vivo observations; TMSe of SeMet origin was not detected, whereas selenosugar and selenoproteins of SeMet origin were detected in the organs of rats fed labeled SeMet [11]. These observations suggest that SeMet is also incorporated into selenoproteins and selenosugar through selenide but not through methylselenol by γ-lyase reaction. On the other hand, MeSeCys is only found in some accumulators [7,23], and cannot be a common selenium source compared with SeCys of selenoproteins origin and SeMet of general proteins origin. Therefore, it can be assumed that β-lyase is more specific to SeCys rather than to MeSeCys, and MeSeCys may be transformed into methylselenol by this SeCys-specific β-lyase, i.e., β-lyase may be flexible as to SeCys and MeSeCys. On the other hand, SeMet was not metabolized to methylselenol, suggesting a distinct difference between β- and γ-lyase activities in the metabolism of selenium. Although it has to be confirmed by further experiments, the present in vitro and previous in vivo experiments [9–11] suggest that as MeSeCys is likely to become methylselenol much more easily than SeMet, if the active form of selenium for anti-carcinogenic activity is methylselenol [24–27], MeSeCys seems to be a better selenium source than SeMet.

It has been suggested by animal experiments that methylselenol is either methylated to TMSe or demethylated to selenide for further transformation into selenosugar and selenoproteins [10,11]. Although further methylation reactions were not examined in the present experiments, methylselenol was shown to be demethylated to selenide. Namely, following the production of methylselenol from MeSeCys by β-lyase, it was shown for the first time that methylselenol is readily transformed into selenide, suggesting the occurrence of active demethylase activity in the normal rat liver, and the demethylase activity is effective even under in vitro conditions. This demethylation activity was confirmed separately by detecting the substrate and product of the transformation reaction from methylselenol into selenide, i.e., ⁷⁷Se-methylselenol prepared in situ by reduction of ⁷⁷Se-MSA with GSH was transformed

1) Hydrolytic demethylation


H+
R-S-Se-CH₃ → RSSeH + CH₃OH
OH-


2) Oxidative demethylation


R-S-Se-CH₃ (O) H⁺ R-S-Se-CH₂-O-H → RSSeH + HCHO


activity is so high. It may be so to remove reactive methylselenol arising in the metabolism of selenium. In fact, reactive methylselenol is assumed to be the proximate selenochemical for the anti-cancer activity of selenium [24–27,31–34].

A unique demethylation reaction was shown to take place through hydrolysis but not through oxidation (Fig. 4), as depicted in Scheme 4. Thus, the unique enzyme demethylase and its reaction mechanism were demonstrated for the first time in the present experiments and further isolation and identification for characterization of the enzyme, and its reaction mechanisms are required.

### Acknowledgments

The authors wish to thank Mr. S. Kogure, Research Institute of Police Science, Chiba prefecture, for kindly providing the GC-MS data. We wish to acknowledge the Grant-in-Aid from the Ministry of Education, Culture, Science, Sports and Technology, Japan (No. 16209004).

### References

[1] M. Birringer, S. Pilawa, L. Flohe, Trends in selenium biochemistry, Nat. Prod. Rep. 19 (2002) 693–718.

[2] J. Kohrle, Selenium in biology and medicine — further progress and increasing interest, J. Trace Elem. Med. Biol. 18 (2004) 61–63.

[3] P.D. Whanger, Selenocompounds in plants and animals and their biological significance, J. Am. Col. Nutr. 21 (2002) 223–232.

[4] K.T. Suzuki, Metabolomics of selenium: Se metabolites based on speciation studies, J. Health Sci. 51 (2005) 107–114.

[5] C. Ip, M. Birringer, E. Block, M. Kotrebai, J.F. Tyson, P.C. Uden, D.J. Lisk, Chemical speciation influences comparative activity of selenium-enriched garlic and yeast in mammary cancer prevention, J. Agric. Food Chem. 48 (2000) 2062–2070.

[6] Y. Ogra, K. Ishiwata, J.R. Encinar, R. Lobinski, K.T. Suzuki, Speciation of selenium in selenium-enriched shiitake mushroom, *Lentinula edodes*, Anal. Bioanal. Chem. 379 (2004) 861–866.

[7] Y. Ogra, K. Ishiwata, Y. Iwashita, K.T. Suzuki, Simultaneous speciation of selenium and sulfur species in selenized odorless garlic (*Allium sativum* L. Shiro) and shallots (*Allium ascalonicum*) by HPLC-inductively coupled plasma- (octopole reaction system)-mass spectrometry and electrospray ionization-tandem mass spectrometry, J. Chromatogr., A 1093 (2005) 118–125.

[8] I. Arnault, J. Augeer, Seleno-compounds in garlic and onion, J. Chromatogr., A 1112 (2006) 23–30.

[9] K.T. Suzuki, K. Kurasaki, K. Ogawa, N. Suzuki, Metabolic transformation of methylseleninic acid through key selenium intermediate selenide, Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 215 (2006) 189–197.

[10] K.T. Suzuki, Y. Ohta, N. Suzuki, Metabolism of $^{76}$Se-methylselenocysteine compared with that of $^{77}$Se-selenomethionine and $^{82}$Se-selenite, Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 217 (2006) 51–63.

[11] K.T. Suzuki, C. Doi, N. Suzuki, Availability and metabolism of $^{77}$Se-methylseleninic acid compared simultaneously with those of three related selenocompounds, Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 217 (2006) 185–195.

[12] H.E. Ganther, Enzymic synthesis of dimethyl selenide from sodium selenite in mouse liver extracts, Biochemistry 5 (1966) 1089–1098.

[13] H.S. Hsieh, H.E. Ganther, Biosynthesis of dimethyl selenide from sodium selenite in rat and liver and kidney cell-free systems, Biochim. Biophys. Acta 497 (1977) 205–217.

[14] N.M. Mozier, K.P. McConnell, J.H. Hoffman, Adenosyl-L-methionine: thioether S-methyltransferase, a new enzyme in sulfur and selenium metabolism, J. Biol. Chem. 263 (1988) 4527–4531.

[15] M. Itoh, K.T. Suzuki, Effects of dose on the methylation of selenium to monomethylselenol and trimethylselenonium ions in rats, Arch. Toxicol. 71 (1997) 461–466.

[16] N. Esaki, T. Nakamura, H. Tanaka, T. Suzuki, K. Soda, Selenocysteine lyase, a novel enzyme that specifically acts on selenocysteine, J. Biol. Chem. 257 (1982) 4386–4391.

[17] T. Okuno, T. Kubota, T. Kuroda, H. Ueno, K. Nakamuro, Contribution of enzymic α,γ-elimination reaction in detoxification pathway of selenomethionine in mouse liver, Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 176 (2001) 18–23.

[18] T. Okuno, T. Kubota, T. Kuroda, H. Ueno, K. Nakamuro, Purification and characterization of mouse hepatic enzyme that converts selenomethionine to methylselenol by its α,γ-elimination, Biol. Trace Elem. Res. 106 (2005) 77–94.

[19] K.T. Suzuki, Y. Shiobara, M. Itoh, M. Ohmichi, Selective uptake of selenite by red blood cells, Analyst 123 (1998) 63–67.

[20] M. Haratake, K. Fujimoto, M. Ono, M. Nakayama, Selenium binding to human hemoglobin via selenotrisulfide, Biochim. Biophys. Acta. 1723 (2005) 215–220.

[21] K.T. Suzuki, L. Somekawa, K. Kurasaki, N. Suzuki, Simultaneous tracing of ${}^{76}$Se-selenite and ${}^{77}$Se-selenomethionine by absolute labeling and speciation, Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 217 (2006) 43–50.

[22] Y. Ogra, K. Ishiwata, K.T. Suzuki, Effects of deuterium in octopole reaction and collision cell ICP-MS on detection of selenium in extracellular fluids, Anal. Chim. Acta 554 (2005) 123–129.

[23] P.D. Whanger, C. Ip, C.E. Polan, P.C. Uden, G. Welbaum, Tumorigenesis, metabolism, speciation, bioavailability, and tissue deposition of selenium in selenium-enriched ramps (*Allium tricoccum*), J. Agric. Food Chem. 48 (2000) 5723–5730.

[24] G.F. Combs Jr., An analysis of cancer prevention by selenium, Biofactors 14 (2001) 153–159.

[25] C. Ip, Lessons from basic research in selenium and cancer prevention, J. Nutr. 128 (1998) 1845–1854.

[26] C. Ip, H.J. Thompson, Z. Zhu, H.E. Ganther, In vitro and in vivo studies of methylseleninic acid: evidence that a monomethylated selenium metabolite is critical for cancer chemoprevention, Cancer Res. 60 (2000) 2882–2886.

[27] C. Ip, Y. Dong, H.E. Ganther, New concepts in selenium chemoprevention, Cancer Metastasis Rev. 21 (2002) 281–289.

[28] G.T. Miwa, J.S. Walsh, A.Y.H. Lu, Kinetic isotope effects on cytochrome P-450-catalyzed oxidation reactions, J. Biol. Chem. 259 (1984) 3000–3004.

[29] P. Ortiz de Montellano, Cytochrome P-450, Plenum, New York, 1986.

[30] M. Sono, M.P. Roach, E.D. Coulter, J.H. Dawson, Heme-containing oxygenases, Chem. Rev. 96 (1996) 2841–2887.

[31] S.D. Cho, C. Jiang, B. Malewicz, Y. Dong, C.Y.F. Young, K.-S. Kang, Y.-S. Lee, C. Ip, J. Lu, Methyl selenium metabolites decrease prostate-specific antigen expression by inducing protein degradation and suppressing androgen-stimulated transcription, Mol. Cancer Ther. 3 (2004) 605–612.

[32] H. Hu, C. Jiang, G. Li, C. Ip, Y.M. Rustum, J. Lu, Methylseleninic acid potentiates apoptosis induced by chemotherapeutic drugs in androgen-independent prostate cancer cells, Clin. Cancer Res. 11 (2005) 2379–2388.

[33] H. Hu, C. Jiang, G. Li, J. Lu, KB/AKT and ERK regulation of caspase-mediated apoptosis by methylseleninic acid in LNCaP prostate cancer cells, Carcinogenesis 26 (2005) 1374–1381.

[34] C. Ip, Y. Dong, H.E. Ganther, New concepts in selenium chemoprevention, Cancer Metastasis Rev. 21 (2002) 281–289.

[35] Y. Kobayashi, Y. Ogra, K. Ishiwata, H. Takayama, N. Aimi, K.T. Suzuki, Selenosugars are key and urinary metabolites for selenium excretion within the required to low-toxic range, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 99 (2002) 15932–15936.
