
3928–3944 Nucleic Acids Research, 2007, Vol. 35, No. 12
doi:10.1093/nar/gkm347

**Proteomic analysis of in vivo-assembled pre-mRNA splicing complexes expands the catalog of participating factors**

Yen-I G. Chen¹, Roger E. Moore², Helen Y. Ge², Mary K. Young², Terry D. Lee² and Scott W. Stevens¹,³,⁴,*

¹Graduate program in Microbiology, ²City of Hope Beckman Research Institute, Duarte, CA 91010, ³Section of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, University of Texas at Austin, ¹ University, Station #A4800, Austin, TX 78712 and ⁴Institute for Cellular and Molecular Biology, University of Texas at Austin, TX, USA

Received March 14, 2007; Revised April 19, 2007; Accepted April 20, 2007

---

**ABSTRACT**

Previous compositional studies of pre-mRNA processing complexes have been performed in vitro on synthetic pre-mRNAs containing a single intron. To provide a more comprehensive list of polypeptides associated with the pre-mRNA splicing apparatus, we have determined the composition of the bulk pre-mRNA processing machinery in living cells. We purified endogenous nuclear pre-mRNA processing complexes from human and chicken cells comprising the massive (>200S) suprasplicesome (a.k.a. polyspliceosomes). As expected, RNA components include a heterogeneous mixture of pre-mRNAs and the five spliceosomal snRNAs. In addition to known pre-mRNA splicing factors, 5′ end binding factors, 3′ end processing factors, mRNA export factors, hnRNPs and other RNA binding proteins, the protein components identified by mass spectrometry include RNA adenosine deaminases and several novel factors. Intriguingly, our purified supraspliceosomes also contain a number of structural proteins, nucleoporins, chromatin remodeling factors and several novel proteins that were absent from splicing complexes assembled in vitro. These in vivo analyses bring the total number of factors associated with pre-mRNA to well over 300, and represent the most comprehensive analysis of the pre-mRNA processing machinery to date.

---

**INTRODUCTION**

Eukaryotic RNA polymerase II (RNA Pol II) transcripts are matured through a highly coordinated program of processing steps prior to export from the nucleus to the cytoplasm where they are translated into protein by the ribosome (1–5). These pre-mRNA processing events include 5′ end modification by 7-methyl-guanosine cap addition and binding of the nuclear cap binding complex, intron removal by the spliceosome, 3′ end cleavage and poly-adenosine tail addition, transcript-specific modifications such as adenosine deamination and binding of specific protein factors to regulate and promote mature mRNA export from the nucleus. Coordination of these events involves interaction between the machineries involved in each process. For example, the RNA Pol II transcription complex communicates and interacts extensively with the 5′ end capping, pre-mRNA splicing and 3′ end processing machineries (1).

While native pre-mRNAs contain multiple, often extremely large introns, in vitro pre-mRNA splicing reactions are carried out using synthetic pre-mRNA fragments containing a single, efficiently spliced intron of a size compatible with acrylamide gel electrophoresis analysis. Although the core pre-mRNA processing machinery will likely be very similar between different transcripts as well as for the multiple introns contained within a single transcript, the bulk pre-mRNA processing machinery purified from its native context is likely to contain a more comprehensive sample of the polypeptides required for or participating in the splicing of pre-mRNA in vertebrate cells.

Several groups have purified and characterized spliceosomes formed on model vertebrate pre-mRNAs in vitro (6–8) and shown that they contain a remarkably large number of associated polypeptides. Nevertheless, as these synthetic precursors have generally been modified from their natural state by internal deletions within the intron and truncations of the exons, the pattern of associated proteins is inevitably less complex than on the full-length, generally multi-intronic precursors that exist in vivo. In addition, the spliceosomes purified from in vitro reactions were assembled on pre-mRNAs derived from either the adenovirus major late or β-globin loci. Thus, it is likely

*To whom correspondence should be addressed. Tel: +1-512-232-9303; Fax: +1-512-232-3432; Email: scott.stevens@mail.utexas.edu

© 2007 The Author(s)

This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/2.0/uk/) which permits unrestricted non-commercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

that there exist a number of factors that are required for or participate in pre-mRNA processing *in vivo*, yet are not present in previously purified splicing complexes because they are specific to one or more of the thousands of other pre-mRNAs present in metazoan cells. Finally, the pathway by which pre-mRNA processing complexes are assembled *in vitro* using salt-extracted nuclear fractions most likely bypasses many interactions relevant to this process *in vivo*. Thus spliceosomes purified following *in vivo* assembly are expected to contain additional components that reflect the native pathway, but are not required to effect model intron removal *in vitro*. Additionally, factors that assist in inter-spliceosome interactions in multi-intron substrates will be absent from mono-spliceosome purifications, and should be present in *in vivo*-purified complexes.

Consistent with this view, other investigators have shown that endogenous pre-mRNA is processed in extremely large ribonucleoprotein particles, called supra-spliceosomes (9–11) or polyspliceosomes (12). Biochemical and structural analyses of these complexes have demonstrated the presence of RNA Pol II transcripts (13,14) and the pre-mRNA splicing machinery components (15,16) as well as functional interactions that mirror those in active splicing complexes assembled *in vitro* (12). The higher order particles formed *in vivo* partly reflect the presence of multiple introns, an average of eight per pre-mRNA (17) with some transcripts possessing as many as 147 introns [Nebulin (18)], that need to be faithfully removed prior to nuclear export. In Figure 1, we present a schematic model of the pre-mRNA processing pathway *in vivo* that encompasses the concept of the supra/polyspliceosome. Whether the individual ‘spliceosome’ moieties are formed via stepwise snRNP assembly on individual introns (2) or via pre-formed penta-snRNPs (19) in vertebrates is still a matter of considerable debate, although recent chromatin immunoprecipitation experiments in human cells provide support for the penta-snRNP model (20).

With the goal of expanding our understanding of pre-mRNA splicing as it occurs in intact cells, we have purified the endogenous pre-mRNA processing machines from HeLa cells and from chicken DT40 pre-B cells (21) on a preparative scale and have defined their RNA and polypeptide compositions. We have chosen the chicken DT40 system to compare with the HeLa system for a number of reasons. First, we have shown that working with this rapidly growing cell type, which possesses high rates of homologous recombination, allows for downstream experimental flexibility in epitope-tagging of other genes (22). The evolutionary distance between human and chicken will also allow us to assess the evolutionary conservation of the machinery as well as validating novel co-purifying factors. We show that these pre-mRNA processing complexes contain spliced and unspliced mRNAs, all five spliceosomal snRNAs and polypeptides involved in all aspects of pre-mRNA processing from transcription to nuclear export.

Although our strategy may not be sensitive enough to identify very low abundance pre-mRNA-specific factors, it has allowed us to probe more deeply into the general pre-mRNA processing machinery present in vertebrate cells.


A

B

C

Polyspliceosome

Pre-mRNP

Export-ready mRNP

Spliceosomes
Exon junction complexes/
export factors
Exons
3′ End cleavage/
polyadenylation machinery
RNA transcription machinery
Capmodifiers/
cap binding proteins
Chromosomal DNA
RNA binding proteins
Poly-A binding factors

Figure 1. Model describing the role of vertebrate supraspliceosomes in gene expression. (A) Co-transcriptional assembly of spliceosomes, 5′ end modification machinery and other pre-mRNA binding factors on RNA polymerase II transcripts. (B) The released transcript is partially spliced and bound by numerous spliceosome moieties as well as the 5′ cap-binding complex and 3′ end processing factors. (C) The mature mRNA is associated in the nucleus with RNA binding proteins, 5′- and 3′-end stabilizing factors (the CBP heterodimer and poly(A)-binding protein), and proteins that promote export to the cytoplasm.

Indeed, when combined with the data from *in vitro*-assembled spliceosome characterization and known splicing factors not detected in any complexes previously purified, we show there are at least 305 polypeptides involved in or present during the processing of nuclear pre-mRNA.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Purification of HeLa supraspliceosomes

Ten liters of HeLa cells (purchased from the National Cell Culture Center) were processed essentially as described (11). Briefly, cells were washed in PBS (137mM NaCl, 2.7mM KCl, 10mM Na₂HPO₄, 2mM KH₂PO₄) and disrupted by mechanical breakage in a glass dounce

(20 strokes, pestle ‘B’) in a hypotonic solution (30mM Tris-Cl pH 7.5, 10mM KCl, 5mM MgCl₂, 10mM 2-mercaptoethanol) at 4°C. Nuclei were pelleted at 1000×g at 4°C for 5 min through the hypotonic buffer containing 25% glycerol. The nuclei were washed three times in the hypotonic buffer containing 0.5% Triton X-100 and once with detergent-free hypotonic buffer. Nuclei were re-suspended in a low-salt buffer (LS+; 10mM Tris-Cl pH 7.5, 100mM KCl, 2mM MgCl₂, 10mM 2-mercaptoethanol, 0.15mM spermine, 0.05mM spermidine) and sonicated twice for 20s at the maximum microtip setting. The resulting nuclear debris was pelleted at 14000×g for 10s, and the supernatant was layered onto a 15–45% glycerol gradient (11ml Beckman SW41) made isotonic to LS- buffer (LS buffer without polyamines) and sedimented at 40000×g for 90 min. Fractions (420µl) were collected from the top. Protein and nucleic acid were separated by phenol/chloroform extraction and precipitation with acetone (23) (protein) or ethanol (nucleic acid). Fractions corresponding to the supraspliceosomes were pooled from six velocity gradients run in parallel fashion, diluted to ~8% glycerol with LS-buffer and incubated with 20mg Y12 antibody which had been covalently attached to 1g CnBr-sepharose (GE Biosciences) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. After incubation with rotation for 2h at 4°C, the sepharose matrix was washed with 200ml LS- buffer by gravity flow in a column and supraspliceosome material was eluted with 0.2M glycine. Protein and nucleic acids were separated by phenol/chloroform extraction as described above.

### Purification of chicken supraspliceosomes

Six liters of SmD3-TAP DT40 cells (22) were grown in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle media supplemented with 5% chicken serum and 2.5% Fetalplex (Gemini Bio-Products) to a density of 7.5×10⁵ cells/ml for TAP purification. Cells were harvested by centrifugation (1000×g for 5min), washed twice with ice-cold PBS, allowed to swell in 10ml of TM buffer (10mM Tris-Cl pH 7.5, 3mM MgCl₂) with 0.2mM PMSF, 1µg/ml leupeptin, and 1µg/ml pepstatin for 10min ice, and lysed with 25 strokes of a Dounce homogenizer at 4°C. The nuclei were pelleted and washed twice with 10ml of TM buffer containing 0.1% NP40, re-suspended in 5ml of low salt buffer (30mM Tris-Cl, 125mM KCl, 5mM MgCl₂, 0.5% Triton-X100), and sonicated at the maximum output, twice for 20s on ice with 1min in ice between sonications. The sonicated mixture was centrifuged at 14000×g for 1min and the supernatant was used for TAP purification. TAP-tagged protein material for SmD3-TAP DT40 cells was affinity purified by the TAP procedure (24). The TEV eluate was layered onto glycerol gradients and fractionated as described above for the human supraspliceosomes.

### Immunoprecipitations

Polyclonal antisera directed against the carboxyl-terminal 15 amino acids of KIAA0332 and NP_035897 (NCBI accession numbers) were produced by Genemed Synthesis and the IgG fraction was partially purified by ammonium sulfate precipitation at 50% saturation. Antiserum or non-immune serum was incubated for 1h at 4°C with the sample(s) of interest prior to addition of 50µl Protein-A agarose beads. This mixture was incubated one further hour with rotation at 4°C prior to washing with 4×15ml IPP150. Proteins and nucleic acids were released from the matrix by incubation in IPP150 at 100°C for 5min. The supernatant was collected and phenol extracted as described above to harvest, separate and precipitate the nucleic acids and proteins.

### Northern blot analysis

Nucleic acids were transferred to Brightstar membranes (Ambion) and hybridized with snRNA probes consisting of antisense chicken snRNAs transcribed with α³²P-GTP using T7 RNA polymerase (U5) or SP6 RNA polymerase (U1, U2, U4, U6 snRNAs) from plasmids containing cDNA versions of the chicken snRNAs.

### Western blot analysis

Polypeptides were resolved in 10% polyacrylamide gels (25), transferred to nitrocellulose membranes (Biorad) and blotted with antiserum as described in the text. The secondary antibody used was horseradish peroxidase-conjugated goat anti-rabbit IgG (Rockland) and the signal was detected by enhanced chemiluminescence (Perkin Elmer).

### Mass spectrometry peptide identification

Pooled supraspliceosome protein fractions were separated by polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis and stained with Coomassie Blue G-250 (26). Discrete gel slices were dissected from the top of the gel lane to the bottom and all regions were subjected to trypsin digestion. Mass spectrometry and database searching was performed as previously described (27–29).

## RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

### Purification of endogenous human pre-mRNA processing complexes

We discovered that in gently sonicated nuclei treated with low salt (11), the majority of the snRNA, as judged by visual inspection of ethidium bromide stained gels (Figure 2A), was engaged in very large (>80S) ribonucleoprotein complexes that closely resemble supraspliceosomes in sedimentation values and other properties (9, 10, 30). These particles may also be related to the polyspliceosomes described in salt-extracted nuclei, which sedimented as complexes slightly smaller than our supraspolyspliceosome, likely reflecting salt-induced factor loss during nuclear extraction (12).

For purification of the human supraspliceosomes, we gently sonicated nuclei in a buffered low-salt solution and purified the material in the ~200S region (Figures 2A and 2B) as previously described (11). This material was immunopurified using the antibody Y12 on a solid matrix. Remarkably, this treatment nearly quantitatively retained the detectable material from this region of the glycerol gradient as judged by coomassie gel staining,

Nucleic Acids Research, 2007, Vol. 35, No. 12 3931

Figure 2. Human supraspliceosome-associated polypeptides and snRNAs. RNA (A) and protein (B) were extracted from preparative glycerol gradient fractions and electrophoretically resolved through urea-PAGE (A) or SDS-PAGE (B) gels stained with silver (RNA) or coomassie blue (protein). Bar below B represents the fractions of the material pooled for immunopurification with Y12 antibody. (C) Affinity-purified supraspliceosomal proteins run under two SDS-PAGE conditions to resolve either large or small polypeptides. Gels were aligned to show all polypeptides in the affinity-purified fractions and are delineated by the marking between them. The entire gel lanes shown from the two gels in (C) were dissected and each gel slice was subjected to mass spectrometry protein identification. The proteins identified are reported under the Hs PS column in Tables 1–3 and in Supplemental Table S1.

even after extensive washing, indicating that the majority of the nuclear contents of this size are Sm-antigen-containing complexes. The lack of polyribosomes in the rapidly sedimenting material (as judged by the absence of 5S and 5.8S rRNAs and ribosomal proteins by mass spectrometry) indicates that the nuclei we prepare are not contaminated with cytoplasm. The material purified on a preparative scale was separated by SDS-PAGE gels of two compositions to provide optimal resolution of the large number of polypeptides present (Figure 2C). To demonstrate the specificity of these purifications, gradient-separated supraspliceosomes were subjected to affinity chromatography using identical beads and identical washing and elution conditions, but lacking the Y12 antibody. In Figure S1, we show that from the mock purification, there is no detectable coomassie-stained material in the resulting protein gel (panel A) and no snRNAs present (panel B).

Purification of endogenous chicken pre-mRNA processing complexes

Using our recently developed CLEP tagging procedure (22), we tagged the SmD3 polypeptide in chicken DT40

Figure 3. Chicken supraspliceosome-associated polypeptides and snRNAs. Fractions corresponding to the CLEP-tag purified, glycerol gradient-sedimented chicken supraspliceosomes were separated into protein (A) and RNA (B) fractions and electrophoresed through SDS-PAGE (A) or urea-PAGE (B) gels and stained with coomassie blue (protein) or ethidium bromide (RNA). The identities of the snRNAs are indicated on the right of panel B. The entire gel lane from (A) was dissected and each gel slice was subjected to mass spectrometry for protein identification. The proteins identified are reported under the Gg PS column in Tables 1–3 and in Supplemental Table S1.

cells by introducing a TAP tag (24) at the native genomic locus. For each experiment, 6l of SmD3-TAP-DT40 cells were harvested and processed as described for purification of supraspliceosomes from HeLa cells. Affinity chromatography was performed according to the TAP procedure (24) and the TEV eluate was sedimented through a glycerol gradient. The material corresponding to the supraspliceosomes was isolated; proteins and nucleic acids are shown in Figures 3A and 3B, respectively. In Figure S1, we show the proteins (panel C) and RNA (panel D) resulting from an identical affinity purification procedure performed using extracts from untagged DT40 cells. The absence of proteins, beyond the contaminating TEV protease, and the absence of snRNAs indicates that the purification is specific and the proteins identified by mass spectrometry are likely to be *bona fide* supraspliceosome components. Additional confidence is provided in that there is size-selection as well as one or two steps of affinity chromatography.

RNA content of the supraspliceosomes

RNAs corresponding to the supraspliceosome fractions from human and chicken cells are shown in Figures 2B and 3B, respectively. Identities of the RNAs were confirmed by northern blotting (data not shown). The presence of all five spliceosomal snRNAs in this material

indicated that it contained a mixture of pre-mRNA splicing complexes in varying stages of assembly and activity, as both U1 and U4 snRNAs have been shown to be released from the spliceosome before the first catalytic step of the splicing reaction *in vitro* (31–33). Alternatively, the presence of both U1 and U4 may reflect functional differences between our preparations and the spliceosomes assembled *in vitro*; for example, it is possible that the U1 and U4 snRNAs do not completely dissociate in conjunction with catalytic activation *in vivo*, but are only destabilized and maintained locally. The presence of all five snRNAs in roughly equivalent amounts also lends experimental evidence to the participation of the penta-snRNP in these functional complexes (19).

### Mass spectrometry analysis of supraspliceosome-associated polypeptides

Polyacrylamide gel lanes from the entire human and chicken supraspliceosome fraction were dissected and the material analyzed by tandem mass spectrometry (27–29). Though a wide variety of polypeptides were identified, it is notable that we detected very little background contamination of factors known to be unrelated to gene expression. In Tables 1–4, we categorize the identified polypeptides according to function. Remarkably, we detected 222 distinct polypeptides in the chicken supraspliceosomes, and 177 distinct polypeptides in the HeLa supraspliceosomes. These numbers are significantly higher than the number of polypeptides detected in any one of the three previously published spliceosome purifications (6–8).

The polypeptides identified by mass spectrometry were validated by analyzing the percent-coverage for each protein (Supplemental Table 1). Although there is a distribution of coverage for the identified proteins, we note that while many snRNP-associated factors had a large percentage of their sequence identified, some snRNP-associated proteins had <10% coverage. Differences in coverage may reflect differences in abundance, a paucity of appropriately-sized trypsin fragments or to peculiarities in the mass spectrometry detection of a particular peptide. The low-coverage of some of the novel polypeptides that may reasonably be implied to function in pre-mRNA processing (i.e. contain RNA binding motifs) may reflect their association with a smaller subset of pre-mRNAs than a general RNA binding protein such as an hnRNP. In the case of one novel factor, ZFR, the percent-coverage was low (3.4% for chicken, 8% for human) but its association with the splicing machinery was verified independently (see below).

#### Known snRNP-associated polypeptides

By mass spectrometry, we identified nearly all of the known pre-mRNA splicing snRNP-associated polypeptides (Table 1). We were initially surprised by the apparent absence in our preparations of a subset of snRNP-associated proteins found in most or all of the previously purified spliceosomes. However, upon closer inspection, we observed that for each polypeptide not represented in our mass spectrometry results, the inability to be detected correlated with the presence of an abundant hnRNP protein of similar molecular weight. The coverage of the major spliceosomal snRNP proteins was more complete for the chicken supraspliceosomes. Indeed, the CLEP tagging and purification procedure was sensitive enough to detect the presence of two minor AT-AC spliceosome components, the U11/U12-65K and U11/U12-48K poly-peptides (34) in the chicken fractions, whereas no AT-AC specific splicing components were detected in the human complexes. The ability to detect all of the Sm proteins, but not all of the LSM proteins may reflect the difficulty in detecting all of these proteins in splicing complexes as shown previously (35,36), the 5-fold abundance differences of the two classes of proteins or perhaps due to the LSM proteins leaving the spliceosome during the process of pre-mRNA splicing (37).

By western blotting of chicken cell nuclear extracts with the Y12 monoclonal antibody, we determined that the Sm antigens in chicken cells were not reactive with the Y12 antibody (data not shown), eliminating the possibility of a direct comparison between Y12-immunopurified material from chicken and human cells.

#### snRNP biogenesis factors

Previous spliceosome purifications did not yield polypeptides known to be involved in snRNP biogenesis. We note in Table 1 that there are three of these present in the chicken supraspliceosomes (SIP1, SMNrp30 and Coilin). These factors, which are involved in the *de novo* assembly of snRNPs, are contained in Cajal bodies (CBs), nuclear organelles enriched for pre-mRNA splicing factors (38). We hypothesize that the CLEP tagging procedure may allow purification of a subset of snRNPs in the process of being re-targeted to the CBs. We did not detect this class of polypeptides in the HeLa supraspliceosomes. Other factors present in the chicken supraspliceosome but not those from HeLa cells were cyclophilins and chromatin remodeling proteins, which may be related to procedural differences in the purification methods.

#### Known spliceosome associated proteins (SAPs)

In the second half of Table 1, we compile a list of the 59 SAPs identified in one or more of the spliceosome purifications. The *in vivo*-assembled complexes contained pre-mRNA-interacting factors such as U2AF (39,40), PTB (41,42), and the cap binding complex proteins (43), which were present in some but not all of the *in vitro*-assembled spliceosomes. We detected the majority of PRP19-complex (NTC) related components as well, including homologues of Prp19p (44,45), Syflp (45), Syf2p (45), Syf3/Clf1p (45,46), Isyl1p (47), SKIP/Prp45p (48,49) and CDC5/Cef1p (50,51), which were also detected *in vitro*, and BCAS2/SPF27, which was only detected in supraspliceosomes assembled *in vivo*. Interestingly, our preparations included a number of polypeptides that are snRNP-associated in yeast but have not been identified in purified metazoan snRNPs or spliceosomes. Among these factors are putative orthologues of yeast Prp38p (52), Prp39p (53), Prp40p (54), Aar2p (55) and Luc7p (56).

| ENSEMBL accession #<sup>a</sup> | HGNC<sup>b</sup> | Polypeptide<sup>c</sup> | Gg PS<sup>d</sup> | Hs PS<sup>e</sup> | N<sup>f</sup> | R<sup>g</sup> | Z<sup>h</sup> |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| U1snRNP |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| ENSG 00000104852 | SNRP70 | U1-70K | ● | ● | ● | ● | ● |
| ENSG 00000077312 | SNRPA | U1A | ● | ● | ● | ● | ● |
| ENSG 00000124562 | SNRPC | U1-C | ● |  | ● | ● | ● |
| U2snRNP |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| ENSGALG 000000008038 | SF3B1 | SF3b155 | ● | ● | ● | ● | ● |
| ENSG 00000087365 | SF3B2 | SF3b145 | ● | ● | ● | ● | ● |
| ENSGALG 000000002531 | SF3B3 | SF3b130 | ● | ● | ● | ● | ● |
| ENSGALG 00000000581 | DDX42 | SF3b125 | ● | ● | ● | ● | ● |
| ENSGALG 000000007937 | SF3A1 | SF3a120 | ● | ● | ● | ● | ● |
| ENSGALG 000000021679 | SF3A2 | SF3a66 | ● | ● | ● | ● | ● |
| ENSGALG 00000001540 | SF3A3 | SF3a60 | ● | ● | ● | ● | ● |
| ENSGALG 000000013352 | SF3B4 | SF3b49 | ● | ● | ● | ● | ● |
| ENSGALG 000000008729 | SNRPB2 | U2B' | ● | ● | ● | ● | ● |
| ENSGALG 000000007170 | SNRPA1 | U2A' | ● | ● | ● | ● | ● |
| ENSGALG 000000016501 |  | SF3b14 | ● | ● | ● | ● | ● |
| ENSGALG 000000020000 | SF3B5 | SF3b10 | ● | ● | ● | ● | ● |
| U2-snRNP associated |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| ENSGALG 000000014395 | DHX15 | PRP43/DDX15 | ● | ● | ● | ● | ● |
| ENSGALG 000000002612 |  | SR140 | ● | ● | ● | ● | ● |
| ENSGALG 000000006332 | RBM17 | SPF45 | ● | ● | ● | ● | ● |
| ENSGALG 000000008561 | SMNDC1 | SPF30 | ● | ● | ● | ● | ● |
| ENSGALG 000000003824 | CHERP | CHERP | ● | ● | ● | ● | ● |
| U5, U4/U6&U4•U5snRNP |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| ENSGALG 000000002943 | PRPF8 | U5-220K | ● | ● | ● | ● | ● |
| ENSGALG 000000003477 | ASCC3L1 | U5-200K | ● | ● | ● | ● | ● |
| ENSGALG 00000000988 | EFTUD2 | U5-116K | ● | ● | ● | ● | ● |
| ENSG 00000175467 | SART1 | U4/U6•U5-110K | ● | ● | ● | ● | ● |
| ENSGALG 000000006001 | C20orf14 | U5-102K | ● | ● | ● | ● | ● |
| ENSG 00000174243 | DDX23 | U5-100K | ● | ● | ● | ● | ● |
| ENSGALG 00000000465 | PRPF3 | U4/U6-90K | ● | ● | ● | ● | ● |
| ENSG 00000168883 | USP39 | U4/U6•U5-65K | ● | ● | ● | ● | ● |
| ENSG 00000105618 | PRPF31 | U4/U6•U5-61K | ● | ● | ● | ● | ● |
| ENSGALG 000000008857 | PRPF4 | U4/U6-60K | ● | ● | ● | ● | ● |
| ENSGALG 000000004874 | PPIH | USA-CYP | ● | ● | ● | ● | ● |
| ENSGALG 00000000615 | WDR57 | U5-40K | ● | ● | ● | ● | ● |
| ENSGALG 000000011931 | NHP2L1 | U4/U6•U5-15.5k | ● | ● | ● | ● | ● |
| ENSGALG 000000017396 | TXNL4A | U5-15K | ● | ● | ● | ● | ● |
| AT/AC |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| ENSGALG 000000005162 | RNPC3 | U11/U12-65K | ● | ● | ● | ● | ● |
| ENSGALG 000000013005 | C6ORF151 | U11/U12-48K | ● | ● | ● | ● | ● |
| Sm/LSM |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| ENSGALG 000000007250 | SNRPB | SmB/B' | ● | ● | ● | ● | ● |
| ENSGALG 000000011842 | SNRPD1 | SmD1 | ● | ● | ● | ● | ● |
| ENSG 00000125743 | SNRPD2 | SmD2 | ● | ● | ● | ● | ● |
| ENSGALG 000000006596 | SNRPD3 | SmD3 | ● | ● | ● | ● | ● |
| ENSGALG 00000000137 | SNRPE | SmE | ● | ● | ● | ● | ● |
| ENSGALG 000000011409 | SNRPF | SmF | ● | ● | ● | ● | ● |
| ENSG 00000143977 | SNRPG | SmG | ● | ● | ● | ● | ● |
| ENSG 00000111987 | LSM2 | LSM2 | ● | ● | ● | ● | ● |
| ENSG 00000170860 | LSM3 | LSM3 | ● | ● | ● | ● | ● |
| ENSGALG 000000003385 | LSM4 | LSM4 | ● | ● | ● | ● | ● |
| ENSG 00000106355 | LSM5 | LSM5 | ● | ● | ● | ● | ● |
| ENSGALG 000000009985 | LSM6 | LSM6 | ● | ● | ● | ● | ● |
| ENSG 00000130332 | LSM7 | LSM7 | ● | ● | ● | ● | ● |
| ENSGALP 000000014820 | LSM8 | LSM8 | ● | ● | ● | ● | ● |
| snRNP biogenesis |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| ENSGALG 000000010154 | SIP1 | SIP1 | ● | ● | ● | ● | ● |
| ENSG 00000119953 | SMNDC1 | SMNrp30 | ● | ● | ● | ● | ● |
| ENSGALG 000000003158 | COIL | Coilin | ● | ● | ● | ● | ● |
| SAPs |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| ENSGALG 000000002514 | SFPQ | PSF | ● | ● | ● | ● | ● |

| ENSEMBL accession #<sup>a</sup> | HGNC<sup>b</sup> | Polypeptide<sup>c</sup> | GgPS<sup>d</sup> | HsPS<sup>e</sup> | N<sup>f</sup> | R<sup>g</sup> | Z<sup>h</sup> |
|--------------------------|--------------|---------------------|-------------|---------------|---------|-----------|---------|
| ENSGALG 000000002060     | FUS          | TLS/FUS            | •           | •             | •       | •         | •       |
| ENSGALG 00000012468      | PRPF39       | PRP39              | •           | •             | •       | •         | •       |
| ENSGALG 00000010501      | SNW1         | SKIP/PRP45         | •           | •             | •       | •         | •       |
| ENSGALG 00000016704      | CDC5L        | CDC5               | •           | •             | •       | •         | •       |
| ENSGALG 00000005012      | RAB43        | ISY1               | •           | •             | •       | •         | •       |
| ENSGALG 00000008429      | CRNKL1       | CRN1               | •           | •             | •       | •         | •       |
| ENSGALG 00000009257      | PRLG1        | Prp46/PRL1         | •           | •             | •       | •         | •       |
| ENSGALG 00000015061      | CDC40        | CDC40/PRP17        | •           | •             | •       | •         | •       |
| ENSGALG 00000002002      | BCAS2        | SPF27              | •           | •             | •       | •         | •       |
| ENSGALG 00000013919      | PRPF19       | PRP19              | •           | •             | •       | •         | •       |
| ENSGALG 00000010627      | PRPF38A      | PRP38              | •           | •             | •       | •         | •       |
| ENSGALG 00000005507      | NONO         | p54nrb             | •           | •             | •       | •         | •       |
| ENSGALG 00000004555      | RBM22        | ECM2/RBM22         | •           | •             | •       | •         | •       |
| ENSGALG 0000001247       | SYF2         | SYF2               | •           | •             | •       | •         | •       |
| ENSGALG 0000000726       | ELAVL1       | ELAV/Hu            | •           | •             | •       | •         | •       |
| ENSGALG 00000009001      | —            | CWC22              | •           | •             | •       | •         | •       |
| ENSGALG 00000008149      | EWSR1        | EWSR1(RBP)         | •           | •             | •       | •         | •       |
| ENSGALG 00000004705      | BUD31        | BUD31              | •           | •             | •       | •         | •       |
| ENSG00000076924          | XAB2         | SYF1               | •           | •             | •       | •         | •       |
| ENSGALG 00000001962      | PTBP1        | PTB                | •           | •             | •       | •         | •       |
| ENSGALG 00000011857      | LUC7L2       | LUC7/CROP          | •           | •             | •       | •         | •       |
| ENSG00000196504          | PRPF40A      | PRP40              | •           | •             | •       | •         | •       |
| ENSGALG 00000010167      | PNN          | Pinin              | •           | •             | •       | •         | •       |
| ENSGALG 00000012813      | PRPF4B       | Prp4K              | •           | •             | •       | •         | •       |
| ENSGALG 0000000833       | IK           | RED                | •           | •             | •       | •         | •       |
| ENSGALG 0000001500       | —            | SLU7               | •           | •             | •       | •         | •       |
| ENSG00000063244          | U2AF2        | U2AF65             | •           | •             | •       | •         | •       |
| ENSGALG 00000016198      | U2AF1        | U2AF35             | •           | •             | •       | •         | •       |
| ENSG00000168066          | SF1          | SF1                | •           | •             | •       | •         | •       |
| ENSGALG 00000001034      | C20ORF4      | AAR2               | •           | •             | •       | •         | •       |
| ENSGALG 00000005525      | SFRS1        | SF2/ASF            | •           | •             | •       | •         | •       |
| ENSG00000102241          | HTATSF1      | TAT-SF1            | •           | •             | •       | •         | •       |
| ENSGALG 00000002087      | NCBP1        | CBC80              | •           | •             | •       | •         | •       |
| ENSGALG 00000006843      | NCBP2        | CBC20              | •           | •             | •       | •         | •       |
| ENSG00000087087          | —            | ASR2B              | •           | •             | •       | •         | •       |
| ENSG00000100296          | THOC5        | KIAA0983           | •           | •             | •       | •         | •       |
| ENSG00000159086          | C21ORF66     | C21ORF66           | •           | •             | •       | •         | •       |
| ENSG00000126803          | HSPA2        | HSP70-2            | •           | •             | •       | •         | •       |
| ENSGALG 00000006512      | HSPA8        | HSP71              | •           | •             | •       | •         | •       |
| ENSGALG 00000009838      | AQR          | Aquarius           | •           | •             | •       | •         | •       |
| ENSGALG 00000002014      | SMU1         | SMU1               | •           | •             | •       | •         | •       |
| ENSGALG 00000005623      | TFIP11       | SPP382             | •           | •             | •       | •         | •       |
| ENSG00000137656          | —            | CWC26              | •           | •             | •       | •         | •       |
| ENSG00000126698          | DNAJC8       | SPF31              | •           | •             | •       | •         | •       |
| ENSG00000105705          | SF4          | SF4                | •           | •             | •       | •         | •       |
| ENSG00000113649          | TCERG1       | CA150              | •           | •             | •       | •         | •       |
| ENSGALG 00000004626      | RBM5         | E1B-AP5            | •           | •             | •       | •         | •       |
| ENSG00000100056          | DGCR14       | DGCR14             | •           | •             | •       | •         | •       |
| ENSG00000105298          | C19ORF29     | C19ORF29           | •           | •             | •       | •         | •       |
| ENSG00000109536          | FRG1         | FRG1               | •           | •             | •       | •         | •       |
| ENSG00000171824          | EXOSC10      | RRP6               | •           | •             | •       | •         | •       |
| ENSG00000160799          | CCDC12       | CCDC12/CWF18       | •           | •             | •       | •         | •       |
| ENSGALG 000000011678     | DNAJC13      | DnaJ               | •           | •             | •       | •         | •       |
| ENSG00000100813          | ACIN1        | Acinus             | •           | •             | •       | •         | •       |
| ENSG00000131051          | RNPC2        | HCC                | •           | •             | •       | •         | •       |
| ENSG00000084463          | WBP11        | WBP11              | •           | •             | •       | •         | •       |
| ENSG00000196419          | XRCC6        | Ku70               | •           | •             | •       | •         | •       |

a Data available at: http://www.ensembl.org.
b HUGO Gene Nomenclature Committee designation, a dash represents a polypeptide which has not yet been assigned a systematic name.
c Common name.
d Gallus gallus supraspliceosome.
e Homo sapiens (HeLa) supraspliceosome.
f Neubauer et al. spliceosome data (8).
g Rappsilber et al. spliceosome data (6).
h Zhou et al. spliceosome data (7).
f.g.h Were compiled from Jurica and Moore (104).

| ENSEMBL accession #<sup>a</sup> | HGN C<sup>b</sup> | Polypeptide<sup>c</sup> | Gg PS<sup>d</sup> | Hs PS<sup>e</sup> | N<sup>f</sup> | R<sup>g</sup> | Z<sup>h</sup> |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| RNA Helicase-like |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| ENSGALG 000000016461 | DDX1 | DDX1 | ● |  |  | ● | ● |
| ENSGALG 000000016231 | DDX3X | DDX3 | ● | ● |  | ● | ● |
| ENSGALG 00000003532 | DDX5 | DDX5/p68 | ● | ● | ● | ● | ● |
| ENSGALG 000000012247 | DDX17 | DDX17/p72 | ● | ● |  | ● | ● |
| ENSG 0000012147 | DDX18 | DDX18 | ● |  |  | ● | ● |
| ENSG 00000102786 | DDX26 | DDX26/HDB | ● |  |  |  |  |
| ENSGALG 00000006974 | DDX27 | DDX27 | ● |  |  | ● | ● |
| ENSGALG 00000003030 | DDX41 | DDX41/ABSTRAKT | ● | ● |  | ● | ● |
| ENSG 00000123136 | DDX39 | DDX39 | ● |  |  | ● | ● |
| ENSG 00000145833 | DDX46 | DDX46/PRP5 | ● | ● |  | ● | ● |
| ENSGALG 00000008530 | DDX48 | DDX48 | ● | ● |  | ● | ● |
| ENSGALG 00000004144 | DDX50 | DDX50/Gu-β | ● | ● |  | ● | ● |
| ENSGALG 00000001186 | DHX8 | DHX8/PRP22 | ● | ● |  | ● | ● |
| ENSG 00000135829 | DHX9 | DHX9/HELICASEA | ● | ● |  | ● | ● |
| ENSG 00000137333 | DHX16 | DHX16/PRP2 | ● |  |  | ● | ● |
| ENSGALG 00000005027 | DHX30 | DHX30 | ● |  |  | ● | ● |
| ENSGALG 00000003658 | DHX35 | DHX35 | ● |  |  | ● | ● |
| ENSG 00000174953 | DHX36 | DHX36 | ● |  |  |  |  |
| ENSGALG 000000014709 | SKIV2L2 | SKIV2L2 | ● | ● |  | ● | ● |
| ENSG 00000198563 | BAT1 | UAP56 | ● | ● |  | ● | ● |
| hnRNP |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| ENSGALG 00000006160 | HNRNPA0 | hnRNPA0 | ● | ● |  | ● | ● |
| ENSGALG 000000011036 | HNRNPA2B1 | hnRNPA2/B1 | ● | ● | ● | ● | ● |
| ENSG 00000135486 | HNRPA1 | hnRNPA1 | ● | ● | ● | ● | ● |
| ENSGALG 00000009250 | HNRNPA3 | hnRNPA3 | ● | ● |  | ● | ● |
| ENSGALG 000000014381 | HNRNPAB | hnRNPA B | ● | ● |  | ● | ● |
| ENSG 00000092199 | HNRPC | hnRNPC1/C2 | ● | ● | ● | ● | ● |
| ENSG 00000138668 | HNRNPD | hnRNPD0/AUF1 | ● |  |  | ● | ● |
| ENSGALG 000000011184 | HNRNPDL | hnRNPD0 | ● |  |  | ● | ● |
| ENSG 00000169813 | HNRPF | hnRNPF | ● |  |  | ● | ● |
| ENSGALG 00000006457 | RBMX | hnRNPG | ● |  |  | ● | ● |
| ENSGALG 00000005955 | HNRNPH1 | hnRNPH1 | ● | ● |  | ● | ● |
| ENSGALG 00000003947 | HNRNPH3 | hnRNPH3 | ● | ● |  | ● | ● |
| ENSGALG 000000012591 | HNRNPK | hnRNPK | ● | ● |  | ● | ● |
| ENSG 00000104824 | HNRNPL | hnRNPL | ● | ● |  | ● | ● |
| ENSGALG 00000000377 | HNRNPM | hnRNPM | ● | ● | ● | ● | ● |
| ENSGALG 000000015830 | SYNCRIP | hnRN PQ | ● | ● |  | ● | ● |
| ENSGALG 00000000814 | HNRNPR | hnRNPR | ● | ● |  | ● | ● |
| ENSGALG 000000010671 | HNRNPU | hnRNPU | ● |  |  | ● | ● |
| ENSGALG 000000018665 |  | hnRNP novel | ● |  |  | ● | ● |
| ENSG 00000126457 | HRMT1L2 | HRMT1L2 | ● |  |  |  |  |
| SR family |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| ENSG 00000133226 | SRRM1 | SRm160 | ● |  |  | ● | ● |
| ENSG 00000167978 | SRRM2 | SRm300 | ● |  |  | ● | ● |
| ENSGALG 00000005525 | SFRS1 | SF2p33 | ● |  |  | ● | ● |
| ENSG 00000161547 | SFRS2 | SC35 | ● |  |  | ● | ● |
| ENSGALG 00000000533 | SFRS3 | SFRS3SRp20 | ● | ● |  | ● | ● |
| ENSG 00000116350 | SFRS4 | SRp75 | ● |  |  | ● | ● |
| ENSGALG 00000009484 | SFRS5 | SRp40 | ● |  |  | ● | ● |
| ENSGALG 0000000990 | SFRS6 | SRp55 | ● |  |  | ● | ● |
| ENSGALG 000000013825 | SFRS7 | 9G8 | ● |  |  | ● | ● |
| ENSGALG 00000002487 | SFRS8 | SFRS8 | ● |  |  | ● | ● |
| ENSG 00000111786 | SFRS9 | SRp30 | ● |  |  | ● | ● |
| ENSGALG 00000006531 | SFRS10 | SFRS10 | ● |  |  | ● | ● |
| ENSG 00000116754 | SFRS11 | SRp54 | ● |  |  | ● | ● |
| ENSG 00000153914 | SFRS12 | SFRS12 | ● |  |  | ● | ● |
| ENSGALG 00000004133 | FUSIP1 | SRrp35 | ● |  |  | ● | ● |
| Cyclophilins |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| ENSGALG 000000013383 | PPIE | CYP-E | ● |  |  | ● | ● |
| ENSGALG 00000004874 | PPIH | USA-CYP | ● |  |  | ● | ● |
| ENSGALG 000000014747 | SDCCAG10 | CYP16 | ● |  |  | ● | ● |
| ENSG 00000137168 | PPIL1 | PPIL1/CWF27 | ● |  |  | ● | ● |
| ENSG 00000100023 | PPIL2 | PPIL2/CYP60 | ● |  |  | ● | ● |
| ENSG 00000115934 | PPIL3 | PPIL3B | ● |  |  | ● | ● |
| ENSG 00000113593 | PPWD1 | PPWD1 | ● |  |  | ● | ● |

| ENSEMBL accession #<sup>a</sup> | HGNC<sup>b</sup> | Polypeptide<sup>c</sup> | Gg PS<sup>d</sup> | Hs PS<sup>e</sup> | N<sup>f</sup> | R<sup>g</sup> | Z<sup>h</sup> |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| RBP |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| ENSG00000102317 | RBM3 | RBM3 | • |  |  |  |  |
| ENSGALG00000018992 | RBM4B | RBM4B/Lark | • |  |  |  |  |
| ENSGALG0000004626 | RBM5 | RBM5 | • |  |  |  |  |
| ENSGALG0000007017 | RBM7 | RBM7 | • |  |  |  |  |
| ENSG00000131795 | RBM8A | RBM8B | • |  |  |  |  |
| ENSGALG00000013411 | RBM14 | RBM14 | • |  |  |  |  |
| ENSG00000162775 | RBM15 | RBM15 | • |  |  | • |  |
| ENSGALG0000002372 | RBM15B | RBM15B | • |  |  |  |  |
| ENSG00000197676 | RBM16 | RBM16 | • |  |  |  |  |
| ENSGALG0000004555 | RBM22 | RBM22 | • |  |  |  |  |
| ENSG00000119707 | RBM25 | RBM25 | • |  |  |  |  |
| ENSG00000091009 | RBM27 | RBM27 | • |  |  |  |  |
| ENSGALG00000011038 | CBX3 | RNPS1 | • |  |  | • |  |
| ENSG00000033030 | ZCCHC8 | ZFP8 | • |  |  | • |  |
| ENSGALG0000006113 | ZNF326 | ZFP326 | • |  |  | • |  |
| ENSG00000179950 | — | PUF60 | • |  |  | • |  |
| ENSG00000197381 | ADARB1 | ADAR1 | • |  |  |  |  |
| ENSG00000160710 | ADAR | ADAR2 | • |  |  |  |  |
| ENSGALG00000010952 | — | Requiem | • |  |  |  |  |
| ENSGALG00000011570 | ILF2 | NFAT45 | • |  |  | • |  |
| ENSG00000129351 | ILF3 | NFAT90 | • |  |  | • |  |
| ENSG00000169564 | PCBP1 | Poly rCBP | • |  |  |  |  |
| ENSGALG00000012225 | CIRBP | CIRBP | • |  |  |  |  |
| ENSG00000056097 | ZFR | ZFR | • |  |  |  |  |
| ENSGALG0000009427 | TIAL1 | TIA1 | • |  |  |  |  |
| ENSGALG0000001187 | STRBP | STRBP | • |  |  |  |  |
| ENSG00000136231 | IGFBP3 | IMP3 | • |  |  | • |  |
| ENSG00000060138 | CSDA | CSDA | • |  |  | • |  |
| ENSG00000121774 | KHDRBS1 | SAM68 | • |  |  |  |  |
| ENSG00000126254 | — | Novel RRM | • |  |  |  |  |
| ENSG00000132773 | TOE1 | TOE1 | • |  |  |  |  |
| ENSG00000142864 | SERBP1 | SERBP1 | • |  |  |  |  |
| Export/transcription/NMD |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| ENSGALG00000014915 | THOC1 | THO1/HPR1 | • |  |  | • |  |
| ENSGALG0000008507 | THOC2 | THO2 | • |  |  | • |  |
| ENSG00000051596 | THOC3 | THO3/TEX1 | • |  |  |  |  |
| ENSGALG0000007237 | THOC4 | THO4/ALY | • |  |  | • |  |
| ENSGALG0000004571 | PPP1CA | GLC7/PPP1CA | • |  |  |  |  |
| ENSGALG0000002569 | RAN | Ran | • |  |  |  |  |
| ENSG00000119392 | GLE1L | GLE1L | • |  |  |  |  |
| ENSGALG0000007653 | RAE1 | GLE2/RAE1 | • |  |  |  |  |
| ENSGALG0000003220 | RENT1 | UPF1/RENT | • |  |  |  |  |
| ENSG00000131795 | RBM8A | Y14/RBM8A | • |  |  | • |  |
| ENSGALG0000002144 | THRAP3 | TRAP150 | • |  |  |  |  |
| ENSG00000172660 | TAF15 | TAF15/RBP56 | • |  |  |  |  |
| ENSG00000162231 | NXF1 | TAP | • |  |  |  |  |
| ENSG00000065978 | YBX1 | YBX1 | • |  |  | • |  |
| ENSGALG00000010689 | MAGOH | Mago nashi | • |  |  | • |  |
| 3'end proc. |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| ENSG00000071894 | CPSF1 | CPSF1 | • |  |  |  |  |
| ENSGALG00000010783 | CPSF2 | CPSF2 | • |  |  |  |  |
| ENSGALG00000016424 | CPSF3 | CPSF3 | • |  |  |  |  |
| ENSGALG0000004714 | CPSF4 | CPSF4 | • |  |  |  |  |
| ENSGALG0000003084 | CPSF5 | CPSF5 | • |  |  | • |  |
| ENSG00000111605 | CPSF6 | CPSF6 | • |  |  | • |  |
| ENSGALG00000011685 | CSTF3 | CSTF-77 | • |  |  |  |  |
| ENSGALG00000013943 | FIP1L1 | FIP1 | • |  |  |  |  |
| ENSG00000172239 | PAIP1 | PAIP1 | • |  |  |  |  |
| ENSG00000100836 | PABPN1 | PABPN1 | • |  |  | • |  |
| ENSGALG0000003800 | PABPC4 | PABPC4 | • |  |  |  |  |

*Data available at: http://www.ensembl.org.
bHUGO Gene Nomenclature Committee designation, a dash represents a polypeptide which has not yet been assigned a systematic name.
cCommon name.
dGallus gallus supraspliceosome;
eHomo sapiens (HeLa) supraspliceosome.
fNeubauer et al. spliceosome data (8).
gRappsilber et al. spliceosome data (6).
hZhou et al. spliceosome data (7).
f,g,h Were compiled from Jurica and Moore (104).


Table 3. Structural, nucleoporin and novel polypeptides present in the supraspliceosomes and *in vitro*-assembled splicing complexes

| ENSEMBL accession #<sup>a</sup> | HGNC<sup>b</sup> | Polypeptide<sup>c</sup> | GgPS<sup>d</sup> | HsPS<sup>e</sup> | N<sup>f</sup> | R<sup>g</sup> | Z<sup>h</sup> |
|-------------------------------|----------------|--------------------|----------------|----------------|-------------|-------------|-------------|
| **Structural**                |                |                    |                |                |             |             |             |
| ENSGALG 000000012533          | MYH9           | Myosin             | ●              |                |             |             |             |
| ENSGALG 00000009126           | TTN            | Titin              | ●              |                |             |             |             |
| ENSGALG 00000001381           | ACTG1          | Actin              | ●              |                |             |             |             |
| ENSGALG 00000002478           | MATR3          | MATRIN 3           | ●              |                |             |             |             |
| ENSGALG 00000008677           | VIM            | Vimentin           | ●              |                |             |             |             |
| ENSG 00000117245              | KIF17          | Kinesin KIF17      | ●              |                |             |             |             |
| ENSGALG 00000002197           | NPM1           | NUMATRIN           | ●              |                |             |             |             |
| ENSGALG 000000014692          | LMNB1          | Lamin B            | ●              |                |             |             |             |
| ENSGALG 000000013505          | SYNE1          | NuSpectrin         | ●              |                |             |             |             |
| ENSG 00000140259              | MFAP1          | MFAP1              | ●              |                |             |             |             |
| **Chromatin modification**    |                |                    |                |                |             |             |             |
| ENSGALG 000000000360          | ARID1A         | ARID1A-SWI/SNF     | ●              |                |             |             |             |
| ENSGALG 000000013683          | ARID1B         | ARID1B-SWI/SNF     | ●              |                |             |             |             |
| ENSGALG 000000010164          | SMARCA2        | SMARCA2            | ●              |                |             |             |             |
| ENSG 00000127616              | SMARCA4        | Brahma/SMARCA4     | ●              |                |             |             |             |
| ENSGALG 000000009913          | SMARCA5        | SMARCA5            | ●              |                |             |             |             |
| ENSGALG 000000005983          | SMARCB1        | SMARCB1            | ●              |                |             |             |             |
| ENSGALG 000000005048          | SMARCC2        | BRG1-SWI/SNF       | ●              |                |             |             |             |
| ENSGALG 000000005048          | SMARCC1        | SMARCC1            | ●              |                |             |             |             |
| ENSGALP 000000010010          | SMARCD1        | SMARCD1            | ●              |                |             |             |             |
| ENSGALG 000000000363          | SMARCD2        | SMARCD2            | ●              |                |             |             |             |
| ENSGALG 000000002100          | SMARCE1        | SMARCE1            | ●              |                |             |             |             |
| **Nucleoporins**              |                |                    |                |                |             |             |             |
| ENSGALG 000000005714          | PKD1           | PKD1 (NUP assoc)   | ●              |                |             |             |             |
| ENSGALG 000000003830          | NUP214         | NUP214             | ●              |                |             |             |             |
| ENSGALG 000000012720          | NUP153         | NUP153             | ●              |                |             |             |             |
| ENSGALG 000000005078          | NUP210         | NUP210             | ●              |                |             |             |             |
| ENSG 00000102900              | NUP93          | NUP93              | ●              |                |             |             |             |
| ENSG 00000108559              | NUP88          | NUP88              | ●              |                |             |             |             |
| ENSG 00000111581              | NUP107         | NUP107             | ●              |                |             |             |             |
| ENSG 00000110713              | NUP98          | NUP98              | ●              |                |             |             |             |
| ENSG 00000138750              | NUP54          | NUP54              | ●              |                |             |             |             |
| ENSG 00000163002              | NUP35          | NUP35              | ●              |                |             |             |             |
| ENSG 00000069248              | NUP133         | NUP133             | ●              |                |             |             |             |
| ENSG 00000155561              | NUP205         | NUP205             | ●              |                |             |             |             |
| **Novel or unknown to splicing** |                |                    |                |                |             |             |             |
| ENSGALG 000000011351          | HSP90AA1       | HSP90α             | ●              |                |             |             |             |
| ENSGALG 000000010175          | HSP90AA2       | HSP90β             | ●              |                |             |             |             |
| ENSGALG 000000012726          | HSP90B1        | HSP108             | ●              |                |             |             |             |
| ENSGALG 000000009967          | LRPPRC         | LRP130             | ●              |                |             |             |             |
| ENSGALG 00000003693           | MACF1          | Macrophin          | ●              |                |             |             |             |
| ENSGALG 00000007705           | NCL            | Nucleolin          | ●              |                |             |             |             |
| ENSGALG 000000015933          | C21ORF66       | GCRBF              | ●              |                |             |             |             |
| ENSGALG 000000008454          | —              | NOP58              | ●              |                |             |             |             |
| ENSGALG 000000009061          | ACTL6A         | BAF53A             | ●              |                |             |             |             |
| ENSGALG 00000007520           | SSRP1          | FACT80             | ●              |                |             |             |             |
| ENSGALG 000000015821          | CCT8           | TCP1-theta         | ●              |                |             |             |             |
| ENSGALG 000000014500          | NOL5A          | Nol5A/NOP56        | ●              |                |             |             |             |
| ENSGALG 000000005624          | MED12          | TRAP230            | ●              |                |             |             |             |
| ENSGALG 000000010973          | TRA2A          | TRA2α              | ●              |                |             |             |             |
| ENSGALG 000000008372          | XRN2           | RAT1               | ●              |                |             |             |             |
| ENSG 00000197157              | —              | SND1               | ●              |                |             |             |             |
| ENSGALG 000000001948          | SAFB2          | SAFB/HSP27         | ●              |                |             |             |             |
| ENSGALG 00000003177           | BRD8           | BRD8               | ●              |                |             |             |             |
| ENSGALG 000000010699          | —              | FOG                | ●              |                |             |             |             |
| ENSGALG 000000005177          | C9ORF10        | C9ORF10            | ●              |                |             |             |             |
| ENSGALG 000000002653          | —              | ELG                | ●              |                |             |             |             |
| ENSGALG 000000016949          | WBP4           | WBP4               | ●              |                |             |             |             |
| ENSGALG 00000004133           | FUSIP1         | FusIP              | ●              |                |             |             |             |
| ENSGALG 000000017384          | ERH            | ERH                | ●              |                |             |             |             |
| ENSG 00000079246              | XRCC5          | Ku80               | ●              |                |             |             |             |
| ENSG 00000182562              | ATAD3A         | ATAD3A (AAA ATPase) | ●              |                |             |             |             |
| ENSGALG 000000001515          | ATAD3B         | ATAD3B (AAA ATPase) | ●              |                |             |             |             |
| ENSG 00000108588              | CCDC47         | CCDC47             | ●              |                |             |             |             |

*Data available at: http://www.ensembl.org.*

<sup>b</sup>HUGO Gene Nomenclature Committee designation, a dash represents a polypeptide which has not yet been assigned a systematic name.

<sup>c</sup>Common name.

<sup>d</sup>Gallus gallus supraspliceosome.

<sup>e</sup>Homo sapiens (HeLa) supraspliceosome.

<sup>f</sup>Neubauer et al. spliceosome data (8).

<sup>g</sup>Rappsilber et al. spliceosome data (6).

<sup>h</sup>Zhou et al. spliceosome data (7).

<sup>f,g,h</sup>Were compiled from Jurica and Moore (104).

Table 4. Known pre-mRNA processing proteins not present in any purified splicing complex

| ENSEMBL accession #<sup>a</sup> | HGNC<sup>b</sup>    | Polypeptide<sup>c</sup> |
|-----------------------------|---------------------|------------------------|
| ENSG 000000095485           | CWF19L1             | CWF19                  |
| ENSG 000000152404           | CWF19L2             | CWF19                  |
| ENSG 000000165630           | PRPF18              | PRP18                  |
| ENSG 000000140829           | DHX38               | PRP16                  |
| ENSG 000000149532           | —                   | CFI-59K                |
| ENSG 000000165494           | PCF11               | PCF11                  |
| ENSG 000000172409           | CLP1                | CLP1                   |
| ENSG 000000111880           | HCAP1               | HCE/CEG1               |
| ENSG 000000146007           | ZMAT2               | SNU23                  |
| ENSG 000000108296           | CCDC49              | CWC25                  |
| ENSG 000000101138           | CSTF1               | CSTF-50                |
| ENSG 000000101811           | CSTF2               | CSTF-64                |
| ENSG 000000161981           | C16orf33            | U11/U12-25K            |
| ENSG 000000184209           | —                   | U11/U12-35K            |

<sup>a</sup>Data available at: http://www.ensembl.org.

<sup>b</sup>HUGO Gene Nomenclature Committee designation, a dash represents a polypeptide which has not yet been assigned a systematic name.

<sup>c</sup>Common name.

Nucleic Acids Research, 2007, Vol. 35, No. 12 3939

factors (CSPF, CSTF and poly-A binding proteins), a comprehensive set of proteins shown to be involved in mRNA export including the TREX complex (THO1/ HPR1, THO2, THO3/TEX1, UAP56 and ALY) (89), export factors such as TAP (90, 91), GLE1 (92), GLE2 (93) and GLC7 (94), and exon junction complex constituents including Y14 and Magoh. We also note that a single component of the nonsense-mediated decay (NMD) pathway (UPF1) (95) was identified in the chicken material. As NMD is likely to be active only in a very small subset of pre-mRNA processing complexes (96), we were surprised to observe even a single polypeptide implicated in this process.

### Nuclear matrix and filament proteins

Recent data from several laboratories suggest a functional interaction between the structural proteins of the nuclear matrix and the gene expression machinery (97). Consistent with this model, we detected a number of nuclear matrix proteins in our endogenously formed pre-mRNA splicing complex preparations including actin, spectrin, matrin 3, numatrin, lamin B and a matrix associated protein MAP1. Although we cannot confirm the functional relevance of these associations, we note that a few structural proteins also co-purified with in vitro-assembled spliceosomes. We also note that a number of hnRNPs and other known splicing factors such as Prp19p (98) were initially termed nuclear matrix-associated proteins, indicating an intimate relationship between the pre-mRNA processing machinery and the nuclear matrix. Indeed, it is an attractive hypothesis that pre-mRNA and mRNA are trafficked to the nuclear pore via the nuclear matrix.

### Nuclear pore complex proteins

A substantial number of nucleoporins (NUPs) are present in the purified supraspliceosome complexes from human cells but not in spliceosomes assembled in vitro, which may perhaps be due to our use of sonication to release complexes from the purified nuclei versus salt extraction for preparation of splicing extracts. In the chicken supraspliceosomes, we detected a smaller set of NUPs, which may be due to their release by the detergent NP40 present during purification of these complexes. NP40 was absent during the purification of the human complexes, which likely maintained the integrity of hydrophobic interactions believed to stabilize the interaction of export complexes with NUPs.

### Polypeptides novel to pre-mRNA splicing–SWI/SNF proteins and associated factors

A recent report from Muchardt and colleagues (99) has demonstrated that the SWI/SNF component Brahma/ SMARCA4 (Brm) associates with the splicing apparatus and its presence favors the inclusion of alternatively spliced exons. The Prp4 kinase, which is present in both the human and chicken supraspliceosomes, has been reported to phosphorylate both Brm and the splicing factor U5-102K/hPrp6 (100) providing further evidence that it functions in Pol II transcript maturation. In the purified chicken supraspliceosomes, Brahma/SMARCA4,

Non-spliceosomal pre-mRNA processing factors

Cap-binding proteins (CBC80 and CBC20) are present in both spliceosomes assembled in vitro and supraspliceosomes assembled in vivo (Table 1). In Table 2, we report the presence in our preparations of many 3′end processing

and a number of other SWI/SNF-related polypeptides were identified (Table 3), all with high degrees of confidence given the depth of the peptide identification. As our mass spectrometry data neither included structural proteins of chromatin—such as histones, nor the DNA replication machinery or other DNA binding proteins, Brahma and other polypeptides with chromatin-related functions must specifically associated with the pre-mRNA processing complexes.

### Novel polypeptides present in native supraspliceosomes

Our mass spectrometry peptide data revealed several novel and intriguing polypeptides in the supraspliceosome complexes (Table 3). We found chicken homologs of the yeast splicing factors Prp38p, Prp39p and Aar2p, previously unannotated in purified pre-mRNA splicing complexes. The other polypeptides of interest in the endogenous splicing complexes include the 5′ to 3′ exonuclease XRN2/Rat1p (101–103), which has been implicated in linking transcription termination with polyadenylation. XRN2/Rat1p was found in both the human and chicken preparations, as were two uncharacterized AAA ATPases, ATAD3A and ATAD3B. The identities of 25 additional novel polypeptides are reported in Table 3.

### Co-immunoprecipitation of spliceosomal components by antiserum directed against a novel polypeptide

To demonstrate the authenticity and functional relevance of a novel polypeptide that co-purified with endogenous spliceosomes, we generated antiserum against ZFR (Table 2) and used it to specifically immunopurify ZFR-associated components. In Figure 5A, we show that the ZFR polypeptide is present in very high molecular weight complexes that co-migrate with supraspliceosomal material. In Figure 5B, we show that the anti-ZFR antiserum, but not the pre-immune serum or the Protein-A beads, immunoprecipitates the U1, U2, U4, U5 and U6 snRNAs. As a positive control, we showed that antiserum directed against the known spliceosomal protein SR140, prepared and analyzed under identical conditions, also immunoprecipitated all of the snRNAs. We also tested for the presence of another pre-mRNA splicing factor, hPrp43 (DHX15), in the material immunopurified with anti-ZFR; Figure 5C shows that the specific antiserum, but not the pre-immune serum or the Protein-A beads, immunoprecipitates hPrp43p/DDX15. This demonstrates that the novel spliceosome-associated factor ZFR is indeed associated with spliceosomal snRNAs and other spliceosomal proteins.

We note that there are snRNA stoichiometry differences between the two immunoprecipitations. Although we cannot be certain of exactly why this is, it may be that the ZFR polypeptide is associated with a number of different complexes, as is almost certain from its distribution in the glycerol gradient. As the immunoprecipitations were performed using nuclear extracts, and not size-selected complexes, the snRNA representation reflects the ZFR-associated material from the entire nucleus and not solely from the polyspliceosomes.

---

**Figure 5.** The novel Zn finger protein ZFR is a *bona fide* spliceosomal component. (A) ZFR sediments with the 200S particle in glycerol gradients. HeLa nuclear extract was subjected to glycerol velocity gradient sedimentation analysis as in Figure 2. Proteins from the indicated fractions were electrophoresed through SDS-PAGE gels and subjected to western blot analysis using anti-ZFR antiserum. The bar below the gel denotes the 200S region. (B) ZFR is specifically associated with spliceosomal snRNAs. Equal amounts of HeLa nuclear extract were incubated with protein-A beads (beads), pre-immune serum and protein-A beads (pre-immune), anti-ZFR antiserum and protein-A beads (anti-SR140) according to the Materials and Methods. Recovered nucleic acids were subjected to northern blot analysis and probed with antisense probes to human snRNAs (identities noted to the right of the Figure). (C) ZFR is specifically associated with complexes containing spliceosomal proteins. Immunoprecipitation conditions and lanes are as described in (B). Proteins were subjected to western blot analysis using hPrp43 antiserum.

In this work, we report the composition of the endogenous pre-mRNA processing machinery from human and chicken cells and provide a comparison between native supraspliceosome complexes and spliceosomes assembled on a model single-intron substrate *in vitro* from salt-extracted nuclear material. These supraspliceosomes have recently been shown to be functional in add-back experiments using micrococcal nuclease-treated extracts for *in vitro* splicing by Sperling and colleagues (21), further enhancing the functional relevance of our findings. In addition to confirming the set of factors known to interact with Pol II transcripts during splicing, we discovered an extensive array of novel factors by purifying supraspliceosomes from two types of vertebrate cells. Many of these have been implicated in pre-mRNA maturation including a subset of the SWI/SNF chromatin remodeling complex proteins, recently shown to influence alternative splicing patterns and to co-purify with pre-mRNA splicing factors. The novel polypeptides discovered in the endogenous complexes will provide a rich source of new proteins to investigate, ultimately enhancing our understanding of this incredibly complex macromolecular machine.

### Comparison with *in vitro*-assembled spliceosomes

In Tables 1–3 we present a comparison of the polypeptides present in the supraspliceosomes purified in this work with those purified in previous *in vitro* spliceosome preparations. The core machinery (snRNPs, SAPs,

SR proteins, etc.) is well represented in the material derived from all of the purification schemes. However, a great many other factors are present in all of the preparations as well, highlighting the amazing number of proteins required to remove even the single intron used in the *in vitro* experiments. The methods used for the purification of all of the complexes represented in Tables 1–3 were operationally distinct and the *in vivo*-assembled spliceosomes contained a larger number of proteins than did the spliceosome preparations formed *in vitro*.

What is perhaps most remarkable about our results is the fact that, despite the operationally distinct purification strategies, the basal pre-mRNA processing machinery required to effect the removal of a single intron *in vitro* is not vastly different than that purified from complex mixtures of all of the pre-mRNAs in a vertebrate or human nucleus. The major differences in composition between the previous purifications and the one described herein involve (i) polypeptides predicted by sequence homology to interact with the pre-mRNA (ii) the depth of coverage for polypeptides involved in export and 3′ end processing and (iii) polypeptides that may require that the pre-mRNA in these complexes follow the path of RNA Pol II transcription and nuclear trafficking, such as the SWI/SNF complexes, structural proteins and NUPs.

### Pre-mRNA processing factors not present in any spliceosome purification

To complete the catalog of polypeptides that participate in the nuclear pre-mRNA processing pathway, we have compiled a list of factors known to function in processing of RNA Pol II transcripts, but not present in any of the five spliceosome preparations listed in Tables 1–3. In Table 4, we outline this relatively short list of 14 factors. Table 4 does not include factors implicated in yeast splicing, but for which no identifiable human or vertebrate homologue in the genomic databases. By adding together all of the polypeptides listed in Tables 1–4, we arrive at an estimate of at least 305 for the number of proteins that co-purify with endogenous pre-mRNA splicing complexes. This is by far the largest cataloging of factors potentially required for or participating in this process to date.

Two possible classes of polypeptides may exist that are not detected in our preparations. First are those that are underrepresented because they may interact with only a small number of pre-mRNAs, such as intron- or exon-specific binding proteins. Other classes of proteins which may participate in pre-mRNA splicing but as absent from our analyses might include tissue-type developmental stage-specific factors which would not be present in our bulk supraspliceosome preparations due to the use of only two cell types. To date, such factors have generally been elucidated via genetic or molecular strategies focused on individual pre-mRNAs. However, with the introduction of the CLEP tagging technology to more cell types (22), it may be possible to rapidly enumerate factors that function in regulated or alternative splicing.

Although we cannot completely eliminate the possibility that there may be contaminants present in our preparations, the basic strategy we adopted is validated by the presence proteins such as Brahma that were not detected in the previously characterized *in vitro*-assembled spliceosomes yet have clearly been implicated in splicing through other means. Our analyses in aggregate greatly expand our knowledge of the protein factors that function both in basal and regulated splicing in vertebrate cells.

---

### SUPPLEMENTARY DATA

Supplementary Data are available at NAR Online.

---

### ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

We would like to thank Jo Ann Wise for critically reviewing the manuscript, contributions of the other members of the Stevens Laboratory, Joan Steitz for the gift of Y12 antibodies, Cindy Will and Reinhard Lührmann for the hPrp43 antiserum, Phil Tucker and William Kuziel for thoughtful discussions, Hank Bose and the Bose laboratory members for advice on the DT40 system and use of their facilities and Gwen Gage for graphic art expertise. This work was supported by grants from the Welch Foundation (F-1564 to SWS), the National Science Foundation (MCB-0448556 to SWS), the American Cancer Society (RSG-05-137-01-MCB to SWS) and from the NIH (NIH P30 CA33572 to TDL). Funding to pay the Open Access publication charges for this article was provided by NSF (MCB-0448556 to SWS).

**Conflict of interest statement.** None declared.

---

### REFERENCES

1. Maniatis, T. and Reed, R. (2002) An extensive network of coupling among gene expression machines. *Nature*, **416**, 499–506.
2. Moore, M.J., Query, C.C. and Sharp, P.A. (1993) In Gesteland, R.F. and Atkins, J.F. (eds), *The RNA World*. Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press, Cold Spring Harbor, NY, pp. 303–357.
3. Shatkin, A.J. and Manley, J.L. (2000) The ends on the affair: Capping and polyadenylation. *Nat. Struct. Biol.*, **7**, 838–842.
4. Reed, R. and Magni, K. (2001) A new view of mRNA export: Separating the wheat from the chaff. *Nat. Cell Biol.*, **3**, E201–E204.
5. Tange, T.O., Nott, A. and Moore, M.J. (2004) The ever-increasing complexities of the exon junction complex. *Curr. Opin. Cell Biol.*, **16**, 279–284.
6. Rappsilber, J., Ryder, U., Lamond, A.I. and Mann, M. (2002) Large-scale proteomic analysis of the human spliceosome. *Genome Res.*, **12**, 1231–1245.
7. Zhou, Z., Licklider, L.J., Gygi, S.P. and Reed, R. (2002) Comprehensive analysis of the human spliceosome. *Nature*, **419**, 182–185.
8. Neubauer, G., King, A., Rappsilber, J., Calvio, C., Watson, M., Ajuh, P., Sleeman, J., Lamond, A. and Mann, M. (1998) Mass spectrometry and EST-database searching allows characterization of the multi-protein spliceosome complex. *Nat. Genet.*, **20**, 46–50.
9. Azubel, M., Wolf, S.G., Sperling, J. and Sperling, R. (2004) Three-dimensional structure of the native spliceosome by cryo-electron microscopy. *Mol. Cell*, **15**, 833–839.
10. Müller, S., Wolpensinger, B., Angenitzki, M., Engel, A., Sperling, J. and Sperling, R. (1998) A supraspliceosome model for large nuclear ribonucleoprotein particles based on mass determinations by scanning transmission electron microscopy. *J. Mol. Biol.*, **283**, 383–394.

11. Sperling, R., Sperling, J., Levine, A.D., Spann, P., Stark, G.R. and Kornberg, R.D. (1985) Abundant nuclear ribonucleoprotein form of CAD RNA. *Mol. Cell. Biol.*, **5**, 569–575.

12. Wassarman, D.A. and Steitz, J.A. (1993) A base-pairing interaction between U2 and U6 small nuclear RNAs occurs in >150s complexes in HeLa-cell extracts - implications for the spliceosome assembly pathway. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci., USA*, **90**, 7139–7143.

13. Sperling, R., Koster, A.J., MelamedBessudo, C., Rubinstein, A., Angenitzki, M., BerkovitchYellin, Z. and Sperling, J. (1997) Three-dimensional image reconstruction of large nuclear RNP (lnRNP) particles by automated electron tomography. *J. Mol. Biol.*, **267**, 570–583.

14. Spann, P., Feinerman, M., Sperling, J. and Sperling, R. (1989) Isolation and visualization of large compact ribonucleoprotein-particles of specific nuclear RNAs. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA*, **86**, 466–470.

15. Yitzhaki, S., Miriami, E., Sperling, R. and Sperling, J. (1996) Phosphorylated Ser/Arg-rich proteins: Limiting factors in the assembly of 200S large nuclear ribonucleoprotein particles. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA*, **93**, 8830–8835.

16. Raitskin, O., Cho, D.S.C., Sperling, J., Nishikura, K. and Sperling, R. (2001) RNA editing activity is associated with splicing factors in InRNP particles: The nuclear pre-mRNA processing machinery. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA*, **98**, 6571–6576.

17. Lander, E.S., Linton, L.M., Birren, B., Nusbaum, C., Zody, M.C., Baldwin, J., Devon, K., Dewar, K., Doyle, M. *et al.* (2001) Initial sequencing and analysis of the human genome. *Nature*, **409**, 860–921.

18. Sakharkar, M.K., Chow, V.T.K. and Kangueane, P. (2004) Distributions of exon and introns in the human genome. *In Silico Biol.*, **4**, 0032.

19. Stevens, S.W., Ryan, D.E., Ge, H.Y., Moore, R.E., Young, M.K., Lee, T.D. and Abelson, J. (2002) Composition and functional characterization of the yeast spliceosomal Penta-snRNP. *Mol. Cell*, **9**, 31–44.

20. Listerman, I., Sapra, A.K. and Neugebauer, K.M. (2006) Cotranscriptional coupling of splicing factor recruitment and precursor messenger RNA splicing in mammalian cells. *Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol.*, **13**, 815–822.

21. Buerstedde, J.M. and Takeda, S. (1991) Increased Ratio of Targeted to Random Integration after Transfection of Chicken B-Cell Lines. *Cell*, **67**, 179–188.

22. Chen, Y.-I.G., Maika, S.D. and Stevens, S.W. (2006) Epitope tagging of proteins at the native chromosomal loci of genes in mice and in cultured vertebrate cells. *J. Mol. Biol.*, **361**, 412–419.

23. Stevens, S.W. and Abelson, J. (2002) *Methods Enzymol.*, **351**, 200–220.

24. Puig, O., Caspary, F., Rigaut, G., Rutz, B., Bouveret, E., Bragado-Nilsson, E., Wilm, M. and Séraphin, B. (2001) The tandem affinity purification (TAP) method: a general procedure of protein complex purification. *Methods*, **24**, 218–229.

25. Graham, D.R.M., Garnham, C.P., Fu, Q., Robbins, J. and Van Eyk, J.E. (2005) Improvements in two-dimensional gel electrophoresis by utilizing a low cost “in-house” neutral pH sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis system. *Proteomics*, **5**, 2309–2314.

26. Neuhoff, V., Arold, N., Taube, D. and Ehrhardt, W. (1988) Improved staining of proteins in polyacrylamide gels including isoelectric focusing gels with clear background at nanogram sensitivity using Coomassie Brilliant Blue G-250 and R-250. *Electrophoresis*, **9**, 255–262.

27. Davis, M.T. and Lee, T.D. (1998) Rapid protein identification using a microscale electrospray LC/MS system on an ion trap mass spectrometer. *J. Am. Soc. Mass Sepctrom.*, **9**, 194–201.

28. Moore, R.E., Young, M.K. and Lee, T.D. (2000) Method for screening peptide fragment ion mass spectra prior to database searching. *J. Amer. Soc. Mass Spectrom.*, **11**, 422–426.

29. Eng, J.K., McCormack, A.L. and Yates, J.R. (1994) An approach to correlate tandem mass-spectral data of peptides with amino-acid sequences in a protein database. *J. Amer. Soc. Mass Spectrom.*, **5**, 876–989.

30. Azubel, M., Habib, N., Sperling, R. and Sperling, J. (2006) Native spliceosomes assemble with Pre-mRNA to form supraspliceosomes. *J. Mol. Biol.*, **356**, 955–966.

31. Yean, S.L. and Lin, R.J. (1991) U4 small nuclear RNA dissociates from a yeast spliceosome and does not participate in the subsequent splicing reaction. *Mol. Cell. Biol.*, **11**, 5571–5577.

32. Lamond, A.I., Konarska, M.M., Grabowski, P.J. and Sharp, P.A. (1988) Spliceosome assembly involves the binding and release of U4 small nuclear ribonucleoprotein. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA*, **85**, 411–415.

33. Konarska, M.M. and Sharp, P.A. (1986) Electrophoretic separation of complexes involved in the splicing of precursors to mRNAs. *Cell*, **46**, 845–855.

34. Will, C.L., Schneider, C., Hossbach, M., Urlaub, H., Rauhut, R., Elbashir, S., Tuschl, T. and Lührmann, R. (2004) The human 18S U11/U12 snRNP contains a set of novel proteins not found in the U2-dependent spliceosome. *RNA*, **10**, 929–941.

35. Gottschalk, A., Neubauer, G., Banroques, J., Mann, M., Lührmann, R. and Fabrizio, P. (1999) Identification by mass spectrometry and functional analysis of novel proteins of the yeast [U4/U6•U5] tri-snRNP. *EMBO J.*, **18**, 4535–4548.

36. Stevens, S.W. and Abelson, J. (1999) Purification of the yeast U4/U6•U5 small nuclear ribonucleoprotein particle and identification of its proteins. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA*, **96**, 7226–7231.

37. Chan, S.P., Kao, D.I., Tsai, W.Y. and Cheng, S.C. (2003) The Prp19p-associated complex in spliceosome activation. *Science*, **302**, 279–282.

38. Gall, J.G., Bellini, M., Wu, Z. and Murphy, C. (1999) Assembly of the nuclear transcription and processing machinery: Cajal bodies (coiled bodies) and transcriptosomes. *Mol. Biol. Cell*, **10**, 4385–4402.

39. Kramer, A. and Utans, U. (1991) 3 protein factors (SF1, SF3 and U2AF) function in pre-splicing complex-formation in addition to snRNPs. *EMBO J.*, **10**, 1503–1509.

40. Bennett, M., Michaud, S., Kingston, J. and Reed, R. (1992) Protein components specifically associated with prespliceosome and spliceosome complexes. *Genes Dev.*, **6**, 1986–2000.

41. Gil, A., Sharp, P.A., Jamison, S.F. and Garciablanco, M.A. (1991) Characterization Of cDNAs Encoding The Polypyrimidine Tract-Binding Protein. *Genes Dev.*, **5**, 1224–1236.

42. Patton, J.G., Mayer, S.A., Tempst, P. and Nadalginard, B. (1991) Characterization And Molecular-Cloning Of Polypyrimidine Tract-Binding Protein - A Component Of A Complex Necessary For Pre-Messenger-RNA Splicing. *Genes Dev.*, **5**, 1237–1251.

43. Lewis, J.D., Izaurralde, E., Jarmolowski, A., McGuigan, C. and Mattaj, I.W. (1996) A nuclear cap-binding complex facilitates association of U1 snRNP with the cap-proximal 5′ splice site. *Genes Dev.*, **10**, 1683–1698.

44. Cheng, S.C., Tarn, W.Y., Tsao, T.Y. and Abelson, J. (1993) Prp19 - a Novel Spliceosomal Component. *Mol. Cell. Biol.*, **13**, 1876–1882.

45. Russell, C.S., Ben-Yehuda, S., Dix, I., Kupiec, M. and Beggs, J.D. (2000) Functional analyses of interacting factors involved in both pre-mRNA splicing and cell cycle progression in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. *RNA*, **6**, 1565–1572.

46. Chung, S.Y., McLean, M.R. and Rymond, B.C. (1999) Yeast ortholog of the Drosophila crooked neck protein promotes spliceosome assembly through stable U4/U6.U5 snRNP addition. *RNA*, **5**, 1042–1054.

47. Dix, I., Russell, C., Ben Yehuda, S., Kupiec, M. and Beggs, J.D. (1999) The identification and characterization of a novel splicing protein, Isy1p, of *Saccharomyces cerevisiae*. *RNA*, **5**, 360–368.

48. Figueroa, J.D. and Hayman, M.J. (2004) The human Ski-interacting protein functionally substitutes for the yeast PRP45 gene. *Biochem. Biophys. Res. Comm.*, **319**, 1105–1109.

49. Albers, M., Diment, A., Muraru, M., Russell, C.S. and Beggs, J.D. (2003) Identification and characterization of Prp45p and Prp46p, essential pre-mRNA splicing factors. *RNA*, **9**, 138–150.

50. Tsai, W.Y., Chow, Y.T., Chen, H.R., Huang, K.T., Hong, R.I., Jan, S.P., Kuo, N.Y., Tsao, T.Y., Chen, C.H. *et al.* (1999) Cef1p is a component of the Prp19p-associated complex and essential for pre-mRNA splicing. *J. Biol. Chem.*, **274**, 9455–9462.

51. Ben-Yehuda, S., Dix, I., Russell, C.S., McGarvey, M., Beggs, J.D. and Kupiec, M. (2000) Genetic and physical interactions between factors involved in both cell cycle progression and pre-mRNA splicing in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. *Genetics*, **156**, 1503–1517.

52. Blanton, S., Srinivasan, A. and Rymond, B.C. (1992) Prp38 encodes a yeast protein required for pre-mRNA splicing and maintenance of stable U6 snRNA levels. *Mol. Cell. Biol.*, **12**, 3939–3947.

53. Lockhart, S.R. and Rymond, B.C. (1994) Commitment of yeast pre-messenger-RNA to the splicing pathway requires a novel U1 small nuclear ribonucleoprotein polypeptide, Prp39p. *Mol. Cell. Biol.*, 14, 3623–3633.

54. Kao, H.Y. and Siliciano, P.G. (1996) Identification of PRP40, a novel essential yeast splicing factor associated with the U1 small nuclear ribonucleoprotein particle. *Mol. Cell. Biol.*, 16, 960–967.

55. Gottschalk, A., Kastner, B., Luhrmann, R. and Fabrizio, P. (2001) The yeast U5 snRNP coisolated with the U1 snRNP has an unexpected protein composition and includes the splicing factor Aar2p. *RNA*, 7, 1554–1565.

56. Fortes, P., Bilbao-Cortes, D., Fornerod, M., Rigaut, G., Raymond, W., Séraphin, B. and Mattaj, I.W. (1999) Luc7p, a novel yeast U1 snRNP protein with role in 5′ splice site recognition. *Genes Dev.*, 13, 2425–2438.

57. Kameoka, S., Duque, P. and Konarska, M.M. (2004) P54(nrb) associates with the 5′ splice site within large transcription/splicing complexes. *EMBO J.*, 23, 1782–1791.

58. Wang, P., Lou, P.J., Leu, S. and Ouyang, P. (2002) Modulation of alternative pre-mRNA splicing in vivo by pinin. *Biochem. Biophys. Res. Comm.*, 294, 448–455.

59. Sakashita, E., Tatsumi, S, Werner, D., Endo, H. and Mayeda, A. (2004) Human RNPS1 and its associated factors: A versatile alternative pre-mRNA splicing regulator in vivo. *Mol. Cell. Biol.*, 24, 1174–1187.

60. Ohi, M.D., Link, A.J., Ren, L.P., Jennings, J.L., McDonald, W.H. and Gould, K.L. (2002) Proteomics analysis reveals stable multiprotein complexes in both fission and budding yeasts containing Myb-related Cdc5p/Cef1p, novel pre-mRNA splicing factors, and snRNAs. *Mol. Cell. Biol.*, 22, 2011–2024.

61. Berglund, J.A., Abovich, N. and Rosbash, M. (1998) A cooperative interaction between U2AF65 and mBBP/SF1 facilitates branchpoint region recognition. *Genes Dev.*, 12, 858–867.

62. Arenas, J.E. and Abelson, J.N. (1997) Prp43: An RNA helicase-like factor involved in spliceosome disassembly. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA*, 94, 11798–11802.

63. Martin, A., Schneider, S. and Schwer, B. (2002) Prp43 is an essential RNA-dependent ATPase required for release of lariat-intron from the spliceosome. *J. Biol. Chem.*, 277, 17743–17750.

64. Fouraux, M.A., Kolkman, M.J.M., van der Heijden, A., de Jong, A.S., van Venrooij, W.J. and Pruijn, G.J.M. (2002) The human La (SS-B) autoantigen interacts with DDX15/hPrp43, a putative DEAH-box RNA helicase. *RNA*, 8, 1428–1443.

65. Company, M., Arenas, J. and Abelson, J. (1991) Requirement of the RNA helicase-like protein PRP22 for release of messenger RNA from spliceosomes. *Nature*, 349, 487–493.

66. Wagner, J.D.O., Jankowsky, E., Company, M., Pyle, A.M. and Abelson, J.N. (1998) The DEAH-box protein PRP22 is an ATPase that mediates ATP-dependent mRNA release from the spliceosome and unwinds RNA duplexes. *EMBO J.*, 17, 2926–2937.

67. Schwer, B. and Gross, C.H. (1998) Prp22, a DExH-box RNA helicase, plays two distinct roles in yeast pre-mRNA splicing. *EMBO J.*, 17, 2086–2094.

68. Dalbadie-McFarland, G. and Abelson, J. (1990) PRP5: a helicase-like protein required for mRNA splicing in yeast. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA*, 87, 4236–4240.

69. O’Day, C.L., Dalbadie-McFarland, G. and Abelson, J. (1996) The Saccharomyces cerevisiae Prp5 protein has RNA-dependent ATPase activity with specificity for U2 small nuclear RNA. *J. Biol. Chem.*, 271, 33261–33267.

70. Will, C.L., Urlaub, H., Achsel, T., Gentzel, M., Wilm, M. and Luhrmann, R. (2002) Characterization of novel SF3b and 17S U2 snRNP proteins, including a human Prp5p homologue and an SF3b DEAD-box protein. *EMBO J.*, 21, 4978–4988.

71. Lin, C.R., Yang, L.Q., Yang, J.J., Huang, Y.L. and Liu, Z.R. (2005) ATPase/helicase activities of p68 RNA helicase are required for pre-mRNA splicing but not for assembly of the spliceosome. *Mol. Cell. Biol.*, 25, 7484–7493.

72. Kistler, A.L. and Guthrie, C. (2001) Deletion of MUD2, the yeast homolog of U2AF65, can bypass the requirement for Sub2, an essential spliceosomal ATPase. *Genes Dev.*, 15, 42–49.

73. Zhang, M. and Green, M.R. (2001) Identification and characterization of yUAP/Sub2p, a yeast homolog of the essential human pre-mRNA splicing factor hUAP56. *Genes Dev.*, 15, 30–35.

74. Libri, D., Graziani, N., Saguez, C. and Boulay, J. (2001) Multiple roles for the yeast SUB2/yUAP56 gene in splicing. *Genes Dev.*, 15, 36–41.

75. King, D.S. and Beggs, J.D. (1990) Interactions of PRP2 protein with pre-mRNA splicing complexes in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. *Nucleic Acids Res.*, 18, 6559–6564.

76. Teigelkamp, S., McGarvey, M., Plumpton, M. and Beggs, J.D. (1994) The splicing factor PRP2, a putative RNA helicase, interacts directly with pre-mRNA. *EMBO J.*, 13, 888–897.

77. Noble, S.M. and Guthrie, C. (1996) Identification of novel genes required for yeast pre-mRNA splicing by means of cold-sensitive mutations. *Genetics*, 143, 67–80.

78. Raghunathan, P.L. and Guthrie, C. (1998) RNA unwinding in U4/U6 snRNPs requires ATP hydrolysis and the DEIH-box splicing factor Brr2. *Curr. Biol.*, 8, 847–855.

79. Lauber, J., Fabrizio, P., Teigelkamp, S., Lane, W.S., Hartmann, E. and Lührmann, R. (1996) The HeLa 200 kDa U5 snRNP-specific protein and its homologue in Saccharomyces cerevisiae are members of the DEXH-box protein family of putative RNA helicases. *EMBO J.*, 15, 4001–4015.

80. Strauss, E.J. and Guthrie, C. (1991) A cold-sensitive mRNA splicing mutant is a member of the RNA helicase gene family. *Genes Dev.*, 5, 629–641.

81. Strauss, E.J. and Guthrie, C. (1994) PRP28, a ‘DEAD-box’ protein, is required for the first step of mRNA splicing in vitro. *Nucleic Acids Res.*, 22, 3187–3193.

82. Teigelkamp, S., Mundt, C., Achsel, T., Will, C.L. and Lührmann, R. (1997) The human U5 snRNP-specific 100-kD protein is an RS domain-containing, putative RNA helicase with significant homology to the yeast splicing factor Prp28p. *RNA*, 3, 1313–1326.

83. Bourgeois, C.F., Lejeune, F. and Stevenin, J. (2004) Broad specificity of SR (serine/arginine) proteins in the regulation of alternative splicing of pre-messenger RNA. *Prog. Nucleic Acids Res. Mol. Biol.*, 78, 37–88.

84. Horowitz, D.S., Kobayashi, R. and Krainer, A.R. (1997) A new cyclophilin and the human homologues of yeast Prp3 and Prp4 form a complex associated with U4/U6 snRNPs. *RNA*, 3, 1374–1387.

85. Teigelkamp, S., Achsel, T., Mundt, C., Gothel, S.F., Cronshagen, U., Lane, W.S., Marahiel, M. and Lührmann, R. (1998) The 20kD protein of human [U4/U6•U5] tri-snRNPs is a novel cyclophyllin that forms a complex with the U4/U6-specific 60kD and 90kD proteins. *RNA*, 4, 127–141.

86. Myer, V.E., Fan, X.H.C. and Steitz, J.A. (1997) Identification of HuR as a protein implicated in AUUUUA-mediated mRNA decay. *EMBO J.*, 16, 2130–2139.

87. Zhu, H., Hasman, R.A., Barron, V.A., Luo, G.B. and Lou, H. (2006) A nuclear function of Hu proteins as neuron-specific alternative RNA processing regulators. *Mol. Biol. Cell*, 17, 5105–5114.

88. Page-McCaw, P.S., Amonlirdviman, K. and Sharp, P.A. (1999) PUF60: a novel U2AF65-related splicing activity. *RNA*, 5, 1548–1560.

89. Strasser, K., Masuda, S., Mason, P., Pfannstiel, J., Oppizzi, M., Rodriguez-Navarro, S., Rondon, A.G., Andres, A.K., Struhl, K. *et al.* (2002) TREX is a conserved complex coupling transcription with messenger RNA export. *Nature*, 417, 304–308.

90. Kang, Y.B. and Cullen, B.R. (1999) The human Tap protein is a nuclear mRNA export factor that contains novel RNA-binding and nucleocytoplasmic transport sequences. *Genes Dev.*, 13, 1126–1139.

91. Gruter, P., Tabernero, C., von Kobbe, C., Schmitt, C., Saavedra, C., Bachi, A., Wilm, M., Felber, B.K. and Izaurralde, E. (1998) TAP, the human homolog of Mex67p, mediates CTE-dependent RNA export from the nucleus. *Mol. Cell*, 1, 649–659.

92. Murphy, R. and Wente, S.R. (1996) An RNA-export mediator with an essential nuclear export signal. *Nature*, 383, 357–360.

93. Blevins, M.B., Smith, A.M., Phillips, E.M. and Powers, M.A. (2003) Complex formation among the RNA export proteins Nup98, Rae1/Gle2, and TAP. *J. Biol. Chem.*, 278, 20979–20988.

94. Gilbert, W. and Guthrie, C. (2004) The Glc7p nuclear phosphatase promotes mRNA export by facilitating association of Mex67p with mRNA. *Mol. Cell*, 13, 201–212.

3944 Nucleic Acids Research, 2007, Vol. 35, No. 12

95. Mitchell, P. and Tollervey, D. (2003) An NMD pathway in yeast involving accelerated deadenylation and exosome-mediated 3′-> 5′ degradation. *Mol. Cell.*, **11**, 1405–1413.

96. Le Hir, H., Nott, A. and Moore, M.J. (2003) How introns influence and enhance eukaryotic gene expression. *Trends In Biochem. Sci.*, **28**, 215–220.

97. de Lanerolle, P., Johnson, T. and Hofmann, W.A. (2005) Actin and myosin I in the nucleus: what next? *Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol.*, **12**, 742–746.

98. Gotzmann, J., Gerner, C., Meissner, M., Holzmann, K., Grimm, R., Mikulits, W. and Sauermann, G. (2000) hNMP 200: A novel human common nuclear matrix protein combining structural and regulatory functions. *Exp. Cell Res.*, **261**, 166–179.

99. Batsche, E., Yaniv, M. and Muchardt, C. (2006) The human SWI/SNF subunit Brm is a regulator of alternative splicing. *Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol.*, **13**, 22–29.

100. Delaire, G., Makarov, E.M., Cowger, J.J.M., Longman, D., Sutherland, H.G.E., Luhrmann, R., Torchia, J. and Bickmore, W.A.

(2002) Mammalian PRP4 kinase copurifies and interacts with components of both the U5 snRNP and the N-CoR deacetylase complexes. *Mol. Cell. Biol.*, **22**, 5141–5156.

101. Amberg, D.C., Goldstein, A.L. and Cole, C.N. (1992) Isolation And Characterization Of Rat1 - An Essential Gene Of Saccharomyces-Cerevisiae Required For The Efficient Nucleocytoplasmic Trafficking Of Messenger-RNA. *Genes Dev.*, **6**, 1173–1189.

102. Johnson, A.W. (1997) Rat1p and Xrn1p are functionally interchangeable exoribonucleases that are restricted to and required in the nucleus and cytoplasm, respectively. *Mol. Cell. Biol.*, **17**, 6122–6130.

103. Kim, M., Krogan, N.J., Vasiljeva, L., Rando, O.J., Nedeau, E., Greenblatt, J.F. and Buratowski, S. (2004) The yeast Rat1 exonuclease promotes transcription termination by RNA polymerase II. *Nature*, **432**, 517–522.

104. Jurica, M.S. and Moore, M.J. (2003) Pre-mRNA splicing: Awash in a sea of proteins. *Mol. Cell*, **12**, 5–14.
