
Leading Edge
Previews

The Long and Short  
of Fatty Acid Synthesis  

Howard Riezman${}^{1,*}$  
${}^{1}$Department of Biochemistry, University of Geneva, CH-1211 Geneva 4, Switzerland  
*Correspondence: howard.riezman@biochem.unige.ch  
DOI 10.1016/j.cell.2007.08.008  

The multienzyme complex that synthesizes very long chain fatty acids is embedded in the membrane of the endoplasmic reticulum. In this issue, Denic and Weissman (2007) describe the reconstitution of this complex in liposomes and reveal how elongase proteins (Elops) determine the final length of the fatty acyl CoA chain.

The lipid composition of cellular membranes varies widely between organisms, among cell types, among organelles within the cell, and even between the inner and outer leaflets of the same lipid bilayer. The major components of membranes are sterols, glycerophospholipids, and sphingolipids. The latter two classes of lipids are heterogeneous. They differ in their backbones, have diverse head groups, and differ in acyl and sphingoid base chain length and degree of hydroxylation and saturation. Acyl chain branching also occurs in some species, such as the worm *Caenorhabditis elegans*, where it has a role in growth and development (Kniazeva et al., 2004). Determining how different lipid compositions and asymmetries are created and maintained will be important for appreciating the myriad functions of lipids.

Most of the enzymes involved in biosynthesis of sphingolipids and glycerophospholipids have now been identified, largely using genetic methods. In eukaryotes, fatty acid synthesis depends on a large soluble multienzyme complex that carries out the sequential enzymatic reactions required to build fatty acids. Structural determination of the fatty acid synthase has provided insights into how its multiple enzymatic activities work together to perform reiterative cycles of fatty acid synthesis (Jenni et al., 2006; Leibundgut et al., 2007). Fatty acid synthesis begins with the transfer of acetyl and malonyl groups from their CoA derivatives to a sulfhydryl group on the acyl carrier protein (ACP) domain of fatty acid synthase. An acetyl group from the malonyl-ACP is transferred to the acetyl-ACP to form an acetoacyl-ACP, which is reduced, dehydrated, and reduced again to saturate the growing acyl chains inside the cavity of the fatty acid synthase complex (Figure 1). This process is repeated until the fatty acids reach a length of 16 carbons. The growing hydrophobic acyl chains remain soluble because they are bound to the ACP domain, which delivers the substrate to the four different enzymatic domains of the reaction cycle. The exact mechanism that determines the final length of 16 carbons is not known, but another set of enzymes is required for further elongation to form very long chain fatty acids (VLCFAs; Oh et al., 1997). VLCFAs have important functions in the cell, including roles in protein trafficking, in stabilizing highly curved membranes, and as precursors for lipid second messengers. In this issue,

**Figure 1. Two Enzyme Complexes for Fatty Acid Synthesis**

Fatty acids are synthesized in the cytoplasm on a soluble fatty acid synthase that uses acetyl-CoA and 7 malonyl-CoA molecules to make one palmitoyl-CoA. Fatty acid synthesis is accomplished with the fatty acyl substrate covalently attached to a sulfhydryl group of the acyl carrier protein of the fatty acid synthase complex. Synthesis requires a reiterative series of four reactions performed by a β-ketoacyl synthase, a β-ketoacyl reductase, a β-hydroxyacyl dehydratase, and an enoyl reductase, leading to a fully saturated acyl-ACP. The synthase that produces very long chain fatty acids (VLCFAs) is found in the endoplasmic reticulum and also performs a similar reiterative cycle of fatty acid synthesis (called elongation) using malonyl-CoA and acyl-CoA as substrates. In contrast to fatty acid synthase, VLCFA synthase does not need an acyl carrier protein. The respective enzymes in the two complexes perform similar reactions, but have very little sequence homology. The different β-ketoacyl synthases involved in VLCFA synthesis, called Elops, determine the length of the final fatty acyl-CoA product. The yeast Elops are Elo1p, Fen1p, and Sur4p; the β-ketoacyl reductase is Ybr159wp; the β-hydroxyacyl dehydratase is Phs1p; and the enoyl reductase is Tsc13p.

Denic and Weissman (2007) report how the chain length of VLCFAs is determined.

In yeast, VLCFAs are components of sphingolipids and are essential for viability. Two yeast proteins, Fen1p and Sur4p, are required for VLCFA synthesis (Oh et al., 1997). They are thought to be β-ketoacyl synthases, otherwise known as elongase proteins (Elops). Two other genes products, Ybr159w (Kohlwein et al., 2001) and Tsc13p (Beaudoin et al., 2002; Han et al., 2002), are strong candidates for the β-ketoacyl and β-hydroxyacyl reductases, respectively (Figure 1). Data generated from a systematic genetic screen investigating the early secretory pathway in yeast (Schuldiner et al., 2005) suggested that the PHS1 gene product also plays a role in sphingolipid biosynthesis.

Using membrane reconstitution studies and proteins purified from *E. coli*, Denic and Weissman (2007) show that the yeast VLCFA synthase consists of a set of four proteins: an Elop, Ybr159wp (the β-ketoacyl reductase), Phs1p, and Tsc13p (the enoyl reductase; Figure 1). Using this reconstituted complex in liposomes they first establish that Phs1p acts as the β-hydroxyacyl dehydratase of the complex. The VLCFA synthase complex differs from the fatty acid synthase complex in two important ways: the former is embedded in the membrane of the endoplasmic reticulum rather than being soluble, and its substrate is not attached to ACP, but rather sits in the membrane as a CoA derivative. There are three different Elops in yeast, which show very limited functional redundancy. The length of the fatty acids that accumulate upon Elop deficiency depends on which particular Elop is lost (Oh et al., 1997). Therefore, it seems likely that the Elop is the critical component of the synthase that determines the final length of VLCFA. This has now been clearly shown by reconstitution of

VLCFA synthase in proteoliposomes with two different Elops, Fen1p and Sur4p. Sur4p produces longer fatty acids than Fen1p. Another open question resolved using this purified system concerns whether the VLCFA synthase acts like fatty acid synthase, performing reiterative cycles of elongating a fatty acid until it reaches a certain length, or whether different Elops in VLCFA synthases act sequentially on substrates of different lengths. Denic and Weissman (2007) clearly establish that, like the fatty acid synthase, a VLCFA synthase with a single Elop can perform repeated cycles of elongation on a fatty acid until it reaches the desired length.

It will be interesting to see if these results reflect how other membrane enzymes discriminate between fatty acids of different chain lengths. Some important enzymes that must do this are the ceramide synthases (Futerman and Riezman, 2005). They also span the membrane multiple times. Each type of ceramide synthase seems to make ceramides with different fatty acyl chain lengths. Chain length then affects a variety of other properties, such as intracellular transport of ceramide and its biosynthetic fate. The knowledge obtained from the new work by Denic and Weissman (2007) may also help us to understand the numerous roles for fatty acyl chains of different lengths because it should permit us to begin to manipulate the cell’s fatty acid content.

So, how is the final length of the fatty acid determined? In order to gain insight into this problem the topology of the Elops was determined. The Elops appear to span the membrane seven times with their presumed active site facing the cytoplasm. The authors created chimeras between Fen1p and Sur4p to map the region that determines fatty acyl chain length. They report that a small region embedded in the membrane near the luminal side confers specificity. Within this region, a lysine residue was conserved among members of the Elop family. By moving this lysine a turn of the helix toward the cytoplasmic or luminal face of the membrane, they could shorten or lengthen the VLCFA product, respectively. This led the authors to postulate a molecular caliper mechanism, in which the lysine in helix 6 determines the limit of a hydrophobic pocket where the VLCFA sits. Once the fatty acid reaches a certain length it no longer fits into the pocket, and further rounds of elongation are not possible. This is a very interesting hypothesis, but one that will probably require structural information to confirm, as it is impossible to rule out other mechanisms with our current lack of knowledge about the structure of membrane proteins in eukaryotes.


**REFERENCES**

Beaudoin, F., Gable, K., Sayanova, O., Dunn, T., and Napier, J.A. (2002). J. Biol. Chem. 277, 11481–11488.

Denic, V., and Weissman, J.S. (2007). Cell, this issue.

Futerman, A.H., and Riezman, H. (2005). Trends Cell Biol. 15, 312–318.

Han, G., Gable, K., Kohlwein, S.D., Beaudoin, F., Napier, J.A., and Dunn, T.M. (2002). J. Biol. Chem. 277, 35440–35449.

Jenni, S., Leibundgut, M., Maier, T., and Ban, N. (2006). Science 311, 1263–1267.

Kniazeva, M., Crawford, Q.T., Seiber, M., Wang, C.Y., and Han, M. (2004). PLoS Biol. 2, E257. 10.1371/journal.pbio.0020257.

Kohlwein, S.D., Eder, S., Oh, C.S., Martin, C.E., Gable, K., Bacikova, D., and Dunn, T. (2001). Mol. Cell. Biol. 21, 109–125.

Leibundgut, M., Jenni, S., Frick, C., and Ban, N. (2007). Science 316, 288–290.

Oh, C.S., Toke, D.A., Mandala, S., and Martin, C.E. (1997). J. Biol. Chem. 272, 17376–17384.

Schuldiner, M., Collins, S.R., Thompson, N.J., Denic, V., Bhamidipati, A., Punna, T., Ihmels, J., Andrews, B., Boone, C., Greenblatt, J.F., et al. (2005). Cell 123, 507–519.
