
# Immunological and genetic bases of new primary immunodeficiencies

**László Maródi**\* **and Luigi D. Notarangelo**†

**Abstract** | Since 1952, when congenital agammaglobulinaemia was described by Bruton, the characterization of genetically defined immunodeficiencies in humans has been crucial for a better understanding of the biology of the innate and adaptive immune responses. This Review focuses on the characterization of new primary immunodeficiencies and disease-related genes. A series of primary defects of innate immunity have recently been discovered and are discussed here. Moreover, new defects in pre-B-cell and B-cell differentiation and antibody maturation are summarized and recently discovered monogenic immunodeficiencies that disturb the homeostasis of both the innate and the adaptive immune systems are discussed.

---

**Toll-like receptor (TLR).** A type of pattern-recognition receptor that recognizes unique structures derived from microorganisms. Signalling through TLRs promotes inflammatory immune responses, cytokine production and cell activation in response to microorganisms.

Immunological and molecular genetic approaches to determine susceptibility to infectious diseases have led to the discovery of more than 200 primary immunodeficiency diseases (PIDs) and more than 100 disease-related genes¹,². In most cases, PIDs are inherited as monogenic disorders, and once the clinical and immunological phenotype is established in any given patient, existing technologies allow for the identification of the underlying genetic defect³,⁴. PIDs are challenging for both scientists and clinicians because they represent natural models of immunopathology, which usually can be studied effectively only in animal models, and may manifest with a wide range of clinical symptoms including susceptibility to infections, allergy, autoimmune and inflammatory diseases, lymphoproliferation and cancer. Over the past decade, advances in research on PIDs have shed unexpected light on the basic mechanisms of the development and function of the immune system. The genetic defects that cause PIDs can affect the expression and function of proteins that are involved in a range of biological processes, such as immune development, effector-cell functions, signalling cascades and maintenance of immune homeostasis. In this Review, we focus on recent advances in the recognition of novel forms of PIDs and in the characterization of their molecular basis.

## New primary defects of innate immunity

Innate immunity comprises a range of evolutionarily ancient mechanisms of host defence⁵,⁶. The innate immune system includes phagocytic cells, dendritic cells (DCs), natural killer (NK) cells, complement proteins and many cytokines and chemokines that direct the interaction between cells of the innate and adaptive immune systems⁷,⁸. Innate recognition of pathogenic microorganisms occurs rapidly during pathogen invasion and is mediated by Fc and complement receptors, lectin receptors (such as the mannose receptor and dectin-1 receptor), Toll-like receptors (TLRs) and non-TLR receptors⁹. Innate immune receptors such as TLRs can recognize conserved pathogen-associated molecules that are shared by different microorganisms, and following engagement can trigger the production of inflammatory cytokines and chemokines through the nuclear factor-κB (NF-κB)-dependent and interferon (IFN)-regulatory factor (IRF)-dependent signalling pathways⁶. Along with several known PIDs with defects in innate immunity (BOX 1)⁴,¹⁰, a series of new defects have recently been discovered.

### TLR3-mediated signalling defects in HSV encephalitis

Herpes simplex virus 1 (HSV1) is a ubiquitous pathogen that causes acute, self-limiting infections in children. Primary exposure to HSV1 infection usually results in herpetic gingivostomatitis. More rarely, patients with primary HSV1 infection can develop HSV encephalitis (HSE). Individuals who are affected by HSE are otherwise healthy and are not more susceptible to other infections. It has recently been discovered that in some patients the unique susceptibility to HSE might be inherited as a monogenic, autosomal recessive trait¹¹,¹². Some of these patients carry mutations in *UNC93B1*, which encodes an endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-expressed protein that is involved in signalling through TLR3, TLR7, TLR8 and TLR9, which reside in the ER and

---

*NATURE REVIEWS | IMMUNOLOGY*

© 2007 Nature Publishing Group

REVIEWS

Box 1 | Other primary immunodeficiencies in the innate immune system

Inherited defects in myeloid cells are characterized by recurrent infections with pyogenic bacteria and fungi^{9,88,89}. Patients with severe congenital neutropenia or cyclic neutropenia typically suffer from pyogenic infections of the skin, mouth and rectum. Chronic granulomatous disease (CGD) is characterized by impaired activation of the NADPH oxidase activity in phagocytic cells, resulting in the inability of these cells to generate toxic oxygen radicals and hence to kill catalase-positive bacteria^{90}. Patients with CGD suffer from recurrent abscesses in the lymph nodes, liver, bones and joints^{88}. As phagocytic cells are able to move and ingest but not kill viable microorganisms in these patients, granuloma formation is common and can cause obstruction in the gastrointestinal and urinary tracts, and rectal fistulas similar to those found in Crohn’s disease^{91}.

Genetic deficiencies of nearly all the components of the complement pathway have been described^{92}. The clinical expression of complement deficiencies include hereditary angioedema in patients with complement component 1 (C1) esterase deficiency, increased susceptibility to infections, and immunocomplex diseases in the case of early complement-pathway-component deficiencies. Recurrent invasive meningococcal infections can result from deficiencies of the terminal complement component (C5–C9)^{93}.

Some defects of innate immunity lead to selective susceptibility to specific pathogens, such as in epidermodysplasia verruciformis caused by mutation in the TMC6 or TMC8 genes (previously known as EVER1 and EVER2, respectively). Patients with epidermodysplasia verruciformis have persistent infection with human papilloma viruses^{94}. An IL-1 receptor-associated kinase 4 (IRAK4) deficiency predisposes affected patients to invasive pneumococcal disease^{9}, whereas defects of the interleukin-12 (IL-12)–IL-23–interferon-γ axis are associated with non-tuberculous mycobacterial infections^{21–23,95–97}.

that of AD-HIES. Recently, important discoveries have shed light on the pathophysiology of HIES. Minegishi et al. have identified a homozygous nonsense mutation in tyrosine kinase 2 (TYK2), which encodes the Janus kinase (JAK) protein TYK2, in a family with AR-HIES^{15}. TYK2 is involved in the JAK–STAT (signal transducer and activator of transcription) signalling pathway that is triggered by IFNα and IL-12. The affected patient presented with high levels of IgE, atopic-dermatitis-like skin lesions and recurrent infections with bacteria, HSV, Bacille Calmette–Guérin (BCG) and fungi. Stimulation of peripheral-blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) from this patient with type I IFNs and IL-12 failed to induce STAT1, STAT2, STAT3 and STAT4 phosphorylation. In addition, these PBMCs did not respond to IL-6 and IL-10. The impaired T helper 1 (T_H1)-cell response that was observed correlated with the T_H2-cell phenotype that was detected in vivo. Although screening of other patients with AR-HIES has failed to identify other individuals who have TYK2 mutations, which indicates that there is genetic heterogeneity in patients with AR-HIES^{16}, identification of this TYK2 deficiency has paved the way to the characterization of the molecular basis of AD-HIES.

In particular, Minegishi et al. were the first to describe heterozygous mutations in STAT3 in patients with classical, multisystem HIES^{17}. Shortly thereafter, similar findings were reported by Holland et al.^{18} The heterozygous STAT3 mutations were permissive for protein expression and affected the DNA-binding domain^{17,18} or the SRC homology 2 (SH2) domain^{18} of STAT3, and the mutants exerted a dominant negative effect. In particular, the mutants in the DNA-binding domain did not alter the dimerization of mutant STAT3 with wild-type STAT3, but severely interfered with the binding of the dimer to DNA in response to IFNα and impaired the cellular response to IL-6 and IL-10 (REF. 17). This reduced responsiveness to IL-10 might have a role in determining the hyper-IgE phenotype. In addition, STAT3 is involved in the development of T_H17 cells^{19} and in IL-22 signaling, which results in the secretion of β-defensins in the skin and lungs^{20}. Defects in these pathways might cause the increased susceptibility to infections in patients with HIES.

X-linked susceptibility to mycobacterial disease. Mendelian susceptibility to mycobacterial diseases (MSMD) is characterized by recurrent and severe infections that are sustained by weakly virulent bacterial species, such as nontuberculous environmental mycobacteria and BCG, and is associated with impaired IL-12–IL-23–IFNγ-dependent innate immunity^{21–23} (FIG. 1). Germline mutations in five autosomal genes of the IL-12–IL-23–IFNγ axis were reported to cause MSMD (FIG. 1). Recently an X-linked variant of MSMD was described in three kindreds^{24}. The affected patients carried hemizygous mutations in IKBKG (inhibitor of κ-light polypeptide gene enhancer in B cells, kinase-γ), which encodes the γ-subunit of the IkB (inhibitor of NF-κB) kinase (IKK) complex (also known as IKKγ and NEMO) that regulates the activation of the NF-κB

endosomal compartments. The apparent redundancy of UNC93B for protective immunity to other viruses might reflect activation of the interleukin-1 receptor (IL-1R)-associated kinase 4 (IRAK4)-dependent signalling pathway by intracellular TLRs in response to other viruses (but not HSV1), resulting in the release of IFNα, IFNβ and IFNλ^{10}.

Recently, heterozygous, dominant negative mutations in the gene that encodes TLR3 have been identified in otherwise healthy children with HSE^{11}. TLR3 is expressed in the central nervous system, where it controls the IFN response to double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) intermediates of HSV1. TLR3 is expressed by DCs and epithelial cells as well, which also use TLR3-independent pathways to produce IFNs in response to viral dsRNA, thereby justifying the resistance to other viruses in TLR3-deficient patients. The identification of TLR3 and UNC93B1 mutations in patients with HSE shows the essential role of TLR3-triggered, UNC93B-dependent induction of type I IFNs in response to HSV1.

Cytokine-induced JAK–STAT pathway defects in hyper-IgE syndrome. Hyper-IgE syndrome (HIES) is a severe PID that is characterized by eczema, typical facial and teeth abnormalities, elevated serum levels of IgE and recurrent pyogenic and candidal infections of the skin, lungs, lymph nodes and bones^{12}. Impaired IFNγ production by mononuclear cells has been reported in patients with HIES^{13}. Whereas most cases of HIES are inherited as an autosomal dominant trait (AD-HIES) or represent sporadic presentations, an autosomal recessive variant (or variants) of the syndrome (AR-HIES) has also been described^{14}, although its phenotype does not entirely overlap with

Figure 1 | The JAK–STAT pathway and its role in the regulation of innate immunity. Immune defence mechanisms against mycobacteria, salmonella and other intracellular pathogens involve monocytes and macrophages, dendritic cells (DCs), natural killer (NK) cells and T cells. Following infection with these pathogens, mononuclear phagocytes and DCs produce interleukin-12 (IL-12) and IL-23. These cytokines will then induce the production of interferon-γ (IFNγ) by NK cells, which occurs during the first 24 hours of infection, and constitute the most effective form of innate immunity against these pathogens. Next, naive T cells will preferentially develop into T helper 1 cells in the presence of IFNγ. IL-18 also induces the release of IFNγ by NK cells and T cells. IFNγ binds to its cell-surface receptor, which consists of the two heterodimeric subunits IFNγR1 (IFNγ receptor 1) and IFNγR2, which are coupled with Janus kinase 1 (JAK1) and JAK2. IFNγ binding results in dimerization of the two receptor subunits and phosphorylation of JAK1 and JAK2. Activated JAKs phosphorylate IFNγR1, leading to recruitment and activation of signal transducer and activator of transcription 1 (STAT1) proteins that translocate to the nucleus and bind to responsive elements (such as IFN-stimulated response element (ISRE)) of IFNγ-inducible genes, which are then transcribed. In a large number of patients with Mendelian susceptibility to mycobacterial diseases (MSMD) the IL-12–IL-23–IFNγ axis is functionally deficient²²,²³. Mutations in *IFNGR1*, which encodes IFNγR1, *IFNGR2*, which encodes IFNγR2, *IL12RB1*, which encodes the IL-12 receptor β1-chain (IL-12Rβ1), *IL12B*, which encodes the p40 subunits of IL-12 and IL-23, *STAT1*, or *IKBK*, which encodes IKKγ (inhibitor of nuclear factor-κB kinase-γ; also known as NEMO; not shown) have been previously reported to cause MSMD²²,²³. Partial forms of IFNγR1 and IFNγR2 deficiencies resulting from allelic heterogeneity have also been reported⁹⁵,⁹⁶. In addition, complete forms of IFNγR1, IFNγR2 and IL-12Rβ1 deficiencies have been found in which surface-expressed receptors failed to bind specific ligands⁹⁷,¹⁰⁰,¹⁰¹.

signalling pathway. These mutations affect residues that are likely to form a salt bridge in the leucine-zipper domain of IKKγ. *In vitro* studies unveiled an intrinsic defect in T-cell-dependent IL-12 production by monocytes from these patients. Importantly, none of the patients displayed anhydrotic ectodermal dysplasia with immunodeficiency, which is the clinical phenotype that is most commonly associated with hypomorphic mutations in *IKBK* in males. These studies clearly indicate a crucial role of IKKγ in protective immunity against mycobacteria in humans and demonstrate the importance of T-cell-triggered, IKKγ–NF-κB-mediated induction of IL-12 by mononuclear phagocytes in protection against mycobacterial infection. Further research by the same group revealed that other X-linked recessive forms of MSMD may exist²¹. Linkage analysis in one large family that includes four affected males who are maternally related identified two potential candidate regions at Xp11.4–Xp21.2 and at Xq25–Xq26.3 (REF. 25).

Severe congenital neutropenia. Severe congenital neutropenia (SCN) includes a heterogeneous group of PIDs that are characterized by a remarkable reduction in the number of neutrophils in the bone marrow and peripheral blood that causes recurrent and severe bacterial and fungal infections²⁶. Autosomal recessive SCN (AR-SCN) was first described by Rolf Kostmann more than 50 years ago in a large family from northern Sweden²⁷. An arrest in the maturation of the myeloid-cell lineage at the promyelocyte–myelocyte stage of differentiation and an increase in apoptosis of myeloid cells were found to be responsible for the low

Hypomorphic mutation  
A mutation in a gene that results in reduced expression or activity of the gene without complete loss of function.

Linkage analysis  
A method for tracking the transmission of genetic information across generations to identify the map location of genetic loci on the basis of co-inheritance of genetic markers and discernable phenotypes in families.

REVIEWS

number of circulating mature neutrophils. Genetic studies have revealed that more than 50% of patients with SCN and almost all of those with cyclic neutropenia have a dominant heterozygous mutation in **ELA2**, which encodes the neutrophil granule serine protease elastase ELA2 (REF. 28). An X-linked form of chronic neutropenia results from activating mutations in **WASP** (Wiskott–Aldrich syndrome protein)²⁹, which causes increased actin polymerization, defective cytokinesis and mitosis, and cytogenetic abnormalities³⁰.

Recently, genome-wide linkage analysis was performed in three large Kurdish families with SCN. All the affected patients had recurrent pyogenic infections and a promyelocyte–myelocyte maturation arrest in bone-marrow cells. In all of these patients, mutational analysis unveiled a homozygous single nucleotide insertion in **HAX1**, resulting in its premature termination and a complete lack of HAX1 expression in Epstein–Barr virus (EBV)-transformed B cells was observed³¹. In addition to the four patients in the index families, 19 additional patients with SCN, including those belonging to the original pedigree described by Kostmann, were found to carry homozygous **HAX1** mutations³¹.

HAX1 is a mitochondrial protein that is involved in B-cell receptor (BCR)-mediated signalling and cytoskeletal organization³²,³³. In addition, HAX1 has a crucial role in maintaining the inner-mitochondrial-membrane potential and protects against apoptosis³¹. Neutrophils from HAX1-deficient patients showed accelerated spontaneous and tumour-necrosis factor (TNF)-induced apoptosis compared with cells from healthy individuals. In addition, neutrophils from these patients showed a rapid dissipation of the inner-mitochondrial-membrane potential. This observation points to the involvement of mitochondrial control of apoptosis as a regulator of myeloid-cell homeostasis in humans. As HAX1 is ubiquitously expressed, it remains elusive why primary HAX1 deficiency does not appear to lead to disease manifestations in tissues, other than neutrophils.

accounted for decreased RNA stability and reduced protein levels, as well as for the abnormal lysosomal function in the affected individuals³⁴. Cytotoxic activity of T cells from these patients against CD95 (also known as FAS)-insensitive target cell lines was decreased, suggesting that p14 may be required for the coordinated release of the pre-stored content of cytotoxic granules. Although the phagosome–lysosome fusion, which is necessary for efficient killing of ingested microorganisms, appeared to be normal in affected individuals, cytotoxic T-cell activity was markedly reduced. Moreover, whereas neutrophils from these patients could phagocytose bacteria, a severe defect of bactericidal activity was observed. Also, the proportion of both memory and class-switched B cells was reduced, and serum IgM levels were very low in all of the patients. Importantly, the introduction of normal p14 into cultured precursors of myeloid cells isolated from these patients restored cellular morphology and bactericidal activity.

So, characterization of this subgroup of individuals with SCN has revealed a previously unrecognized role for p14 in regulating the subcellular localization of late endosomes and lysosomes. Combined defects of pigmentation and immune function (which are features of primary p14 deficiency) have also been previously described in patients with Chediak–Higashi syndrome³⁶, Griscelli syndrome type 2 (REF. 37) and Hermansky–Pudlak syndrome type 2 (REF. 38). These PIDs are caused by defects in proteins that are involved in regulating intracellular protein trafficking and cytoplasmic organelle movement.

Altogether, these studies have illustrated the complexity of biological mechanisms that are involved in myeloid-cell homeostasis, from the regulation of apoptosis to correct intracellular protein trafficking and sorting to granules, to the regulation of cytokinesis.

Leukocyte adhesion deficiency type III. The inflammatory response is highly dependent on the appropriate recruitment of leukocytes to specific target sites. This process requires extravasation of circulating white blood cells, in particular, neutrophils. Several different proteins mediate the interaction between circulating leukocytes and endothelial cells. For example, the interaction between sialyl-Lewis X (a fucose-containing protein that is expressed by leukocytes) and selectins (expressed by endothelial cells) mediates leukocyte rolling, whereas firm adhesion involves the binding of β₂-integrins (expressed on the surface of leukocytes) to intracellular adhesion molecule 1 (ICAM1) and ICAM2 expressed by endothelial cells at sites of inflammation. In addition, the interaction of chemokines with appropriate chemokine receptors on the surface of leukocytes results in the activation and conformational modification of β₂-integrins that can then bind their ligands with higher affinity.

Defects in the expression of β₂-integrins and fucose-containing proteins account for leukocyte adhesion deficiency type I (LAD-I) and LAD-II, respectively. More recently, a third form of LAD (LAD-III) has been reported³⁹, in which integrin expression by leukocytes

Chediak–Higashi syndrome  
An autosomal recessive disorder characterized by oculocutaneous albinism, recurrent infections, neurological abnormalities, neutrophil chemotactic defects and giant cytoplasmic granules. The lysosomal trafficking regulator (**LYST**) gene of as yet poorly defined function, is mutated in this syndrome.

Griscelli syndrome type 2  
An autosomal recessive disorder characterized by partial albinism, silvery grey hair, variable cellular immunodeficiency, recurrent infections and an accelerated phase.

Hermansky–Pudlak syndrome type 2  
An autosomal recessive disorder characterized by oculocutaneous albinism, platelet dysfunction and bleeding tendency, neutropenia and impaired cytotoxic activity.
is normal, but the integrins fail to generate high avidity for their cognate endothelial-cell ligands. In addition, patients with LAD-III also suffer from severe and recurrent bleeding, indicating a defect in the function of platelet α<sub>IIb</sub>β<sub>3</sub>-integrin, the main fibrinogen receptor.

Integrin activation in response to a range of stimuli is known to involve the small GTPase RAP1 (RAS-related protein 1). Activation of RAP1 is defective in patients with LAD-III. Through the analysis of two patients of Turkish origin, both born to consanguineous parents, it has recently been shown that LAD-III results from mutations in RAS guanyl-releasing protein 2 (*RASGRP2*, also known as *CALDAG-GEF1*). RASGRP2 is a key RAP1 and RAP2 guanine-nucleotide-exchange factor<sup>40</sup>. Both patients shared the same homozygous splice-site mutation that resulted in aberrant splicing and lack of protein expression. As a result of *RASGRP2* mutations, functional abnormalities have been detected in the ability of neutrophils and T cells from these patients to bind ICAM1 expressed by endothelial cells and therefore to arrest in response to chemokines. The analysis of this unique group of patients, therefore, has disclosed a crucial role for RASGRP2 in the regulation of integrin activation by inside-out signalling in human haematopoietic cells.

### Primary defects in B-cell development

B-cell deficiencies represent the most common type of PIDs in humans (BOX 2). Starting from 4–6 months of life, in parallel with the decrease of maternally acquired IgG, patients suffer from recurrent bacterial infections unless they receive regular immunoglobulin-replacement therapy. Several genetic defects have been shown to compromise the antigen-independent or antigen-dependent stages of B-cell development in humans (FIG. 2).

#### Inside-out signalling

The process by which intracellular signalling mechanisms result in the activation of a cell-surface receptor, such as integrins. By contrast, outside-in signalling is the process by which ligation of a cell-surface receptor activates signalling pathways inside the cell.

#### Class-switch recombination (CSR)

This process alters the immunoglobulin heavy chain (H) constant (C)-region gene that is expressed by B cells from Cμ to one of the other C<sub>H</sub> genes. This results in a switch of immunoglobulin isotype from IgM/IgD to IgG, IgA or IgE, without altering antigen specificity.

#### Somatic hypermutation (SHM)

A unique mutation mechanism that is targeted to the variable regions of rearranged immunoglobulin gene segments. Combined with selection for B cells that produce high-affinity antibody, SHM leads to affinity maturation of B cells in germinal centres.

---

Primary CD19 deficiency. During mammalian B-cell development CD19 expression begins at the pro-B-cell stage<sup>43</sup> and is maintained on the surface of B cells until they differentiate into plasma cells. CD19 is expressed in a molecular complex with CD21, CD81 and CD225. This group of surface molecules, which is also referred to as the CD19 complex, signals in conjunction with the BCR and may lower the threshold for antigen stimulation of B cells through the BCR<sup>44</sup>. Further insight into the biology of the CD19 complex was provided by the characterization of four patients from two unrelated families who had homozygous mutations in the *CD19* gene<sup>45</sup>, and shared increased susceptibility to infections, hypogammaglobulinaemia and poor antibody responses, but had a normal number of circulating CD20<sup>+</sup> mature B cells. Surface expression of CD19 was either undetectable or barely detectable in these patients, and the levels of CD21 were decreased. By contrast, CD81 and CD225 were normally expressed. Calcium flux and proliferation in response to BCR crosslinking were also defective, and the number of both unswitched and switched memory B cells (CD27<sup>+</sup>IgD<sup>+</sup> and CD27<sup>+</sup>IgD<sup>−</sup> cells, respectively) was decreased. These data indicate that CD19 is dispensable for B-cell development, but is required for differentiation into memory and plasma cells, and for normal antibody responses to antigens and immunoglobulin production.

---

Class-switch recombination and antibody-maturation defects. Terminal B-cell differentiation and antibody maturation take place in the germinal centres of secondary lymphoid organs. Maturation of the antibody response of B cells includes class-switch recombination (CSR) and somatic hypermutation (SHM) that ultimately allows for positive selection of B cells that express high-affinity antibody to the antigen. Defects in CSR is the hallmark of the hyper-IgM (HIGM) syndrome phenotype that is characterized by normal or elevated levels of serum IgM and decreased or undetectable levels of serum IgG, IgA and IgE<sup>46,47</sup>. In a subgroup of patients with HIGM syndrome, defective CSR is associated with impaired SHM<sup>47</sup>.

Interaction between CD40 ligand (CD40L; also known as CD154), which is expressed on the surface of activated CD4<sup>+</sup> T cells, and CD40, which is constitutively expressed by B cells, is a crucial event in the induction of CSR and SHM during the antibody response to T-cell-dependent antigens<sup>48</sup>. Mutations in *CD40L* and *CD40* cause X-linked and autosomal recessive forms of HIGM, respectively<sup>49,50</sup>.

CD40 crosslinking leads to activation of the NF-κB signalling pathway. Another form of X-linked HIGM that is associated with anhidrotic ectodermal dysplasia is caused by hypomorphic mutations in the gene that encodes IKKγ<sup>51</sup>. Null mutations in this gene are lethal in human males and cause incontinetia pigmenti in heterozygous females<sup>52</sup>. Patients with CD40L, CD40 or IKKγ deficiency suffer not only from bacterial infections but also from opportunistic infections, reflecting a defect in T-cell priming owing to the impaired CD40L–CD40 crosstalk between activated T cells and CD40-expressing DCs and macrophages.

---

Primary immunoglobulin deficiency. Two reports have recently described mutations in *B29*, which encodes Igβ (also known as CD79b, and is a component of the pre-BCR signalling complex) in patients with congenital agammaglobulinaemia<sup>41,42</sup>. In one case, a homozygous nucleotide substitution in *B29* results in a stop codon in the extracellular immunoglobulin domain, preventing the expression of the functional protein and interfering with the assembly of the pre-BCR complex on the cell surface<sup>41</sup>. Accordingly, transfection studies to reconstruct the BCR complex in *Drosophila melanogaster* Schneider-2 (S2) cells showed that, in contrast to the wild-type protein, mutant Igβ failed to promote expression of the BCR complex on the cell surface<sup>41</sup>. Examination of B-cell development in the bone marrow of the Igβ-deficient patient showed an arrest at the pro- to pre-B-cell stage, as has been observed in other known forms of agammaglobulinaemia<sup>41</sup>. In the other patient, a homozygous glycine-to-serine substitution at codon 137 resulted in inefficient formation of the disulphide bond between Igα and Igβ, and in markedly reduced export of the μ heavy (μH) chain to the cell surface<sup>42</sup>. Immunological leakiness in this patient was associated with a low, but detectable, number of CD19<sup>+</sup> B cells in the circulation<sup>42</sup>.
REVIEWS

Box 2 | Other primary immunodeficiencies associated with lymphocytes

Primary immunodeficiencies that are associated with inherited defects in B or T cells can result in deficiencies in antibody production, cellular immunity, or both<sup>98</sup>. Patients with B-cell deficiencies either lack B cells or have deficiencies in B-cell function (humoral or antibody deficiencies), and usually develop infections with encapsulated pyogenic bacteria that require opsonization for phagocytic ingestion, such as Haemophilus influenzae type b and Streptococcus pneumoniae. These patients may also acquire infections with Staphylococcus aureus, Gram-negative bacteria and the parasite Giardia lamblia<sup>99</sup>.

Severe viral infections are rare, but patients with X-linked agammaglobulinaemia (XLA) have a unique susceptibility to meningoencephalitis or dermatomyositis-like syndrome owing to infection with enteroviruses. In patients with XLA, which is the prototype of B-cell deficiencies, lymph nodes are very small. In addition, the concentration of all immunoglobulin isotypes are very low, and circulating B cells are either absent or present in negligible numbers in such patients. By contrast, lymphoid tissues are often enlarged in autosomal recessive hyper-IgM (HIGM) syndrome owing to activation-induced cytidine deaminase (AID) deficiency<sup>47,54</sup>. Growth and development are normal in most children with B-cell deficiencies, provided that they receive regular immunoglobulin-replacement therapy.

Patients with T-cell immunodeficiencies are highly susceptible to infections with opportunistic pathogens, such as Pseudomonas jiroveci, Candida albicans, herpesviruses, adenovirus, parainfluenzae virus type 3 and non-virulent mycobacteria<sup>3</sup>. Haematopoietic stem-cell transplantation is the mainstay of treatment for most patients with severe T-cell defects.


Defective DNA repair might also have a role in common variable immunodeficiency (CVID) and in IgA deficiency (IgAD), the most common forms of humoral antibody deficiencies in humans. In particular, genetic variations in *MSH5*, which encodes the mismatch repair protein MSH5, have recently been shown to be associated with CVID and IgAD in a large cohort of patients<sup>58</sup>. Interestingly, *MSH5* maps to the HLA class III region and linkage to this region has been shown in families with CVID and IgAD. MSH5 is known to form heterodimers with MSH4, and has a crucial role in resolving Holliday junctions that are formed between homologous DNA strands during meiosis<sup>59</sup>. It has been hypothesized that the MSH4–MSH5 heterodimer may have a similar role during the intrachromosomal synapsis of S<sub>μ</sub> to downstream target S<sub>x</sub> sequences, and facilitates the recruitment of proteins required for NHEJ DNA repair<sup>58</sup>. In keeping with this observation, a high proportion of congenic MRL-lpr mice carrying a hypomorphic *MSH5* allele showed reduced levels of serum IgG3, and increased use of long stretches of microhomology at immunoglobulin S junctions<sup>58</sup>. Interestingly, increased microhomology and lower mutation rates were also observed in CVID patients carrying disease-associated *MSH5* alleles<sup>58</sup>. This might account for the low-affinity antibody responses in CVID.

Activation-induced cytidine deaminase (AID), which is encoded by *AICDA*, is a protein that is selectively expressed by germinal-centre B cells. AID has a unique functional activity: it initiates both CSR and SHM by deaminating DNA cytosine residues to uracil within the switch (S) and the variable (V) regions of immunoglobulin genes<sup>53</sup>. The resulting mismatch that is generated between the two opposite DNA strands is resolved by uracil-DNA glycosylase (UNG), an enzyme that removes uracil from DNA. Subsequently, the abasic site is cleaved by a DNA endonuclease. This results in the generation of DNA double-strand breaks at the S and V regions that are eventually resolved by the integrated activity of several DNA repair proteins<sup>46</sup>.

Mutations in *AICDA* result in severe defects in both CSR and SHM<sup>54</sup>. Accordingly, these patients suffer from recurrent bacterial infections. In addition, they show prominent lymphoid hyperplasia. UNG deficiency also results in impaired CSR. In these patients, SHM is preserved, but is characterized by a large excess of transitions versus transversions at G–C residues<sup>55</sup>.

Microhomology  
The presence of short stretches of homologous nucleotides that flank DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs). The presence of such sequences favours the alignment of DNA ends and DNA repair through microhomology-mediated end-joining (MMEJ), a mechanism that is less dependent on Ku proteins than non-homologous end-joining (NHEJ). MMEJ might function as a salvage pathway for DNA DSBs that cannot be repaired by NHEJ.

Non-homologous end-joining (NHEJ). A pathway that rejoins DNA strand breaks without relying on significant homology. The main known pathway uses the Ku-end binding complex and is regulated by DNA protein kinase. The pathway is often used in mammalian cells to repair strand breaks caused by DNA-damaging agents, and some of the same enzymes are used during the strand-joining steps of V(D)J recombination.

Holliday junction  
A point at which the strands of two double-strand DNA molecules exchange partners, which occurs as an intermediate during genetic recombination.


SCID due to impaired calcium flux  

Severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID) comprises a heterogeneous group of monogenic disorders that result in early-onset severe infections by a range of pathogens (such as bacteria, viruses and fungi). Over 20 different genetic defects have been identified that account for SCID in humans<sup>3,4</sup>. Typically, patients with SCID have a severe defect in T-cell differentiation, along with direct or indirect impairment of B-cell development and function. However, a few patients with SCID have been described in whom T-cell development is apparently unaffected, but whose peripheral T cells fail to proliferate in response to activation stimuli and show defective nuclear translocation of nuclear factor of activated T cells (NFAT) as a result of defective Ca<sup>2+</sup> signalling<sup>60</sup>. One of the earliest events following T-cell receptor (TCR) crosslinking is the activation of phospholipase Cγ (PLCγ), which generates inositol-1,4,5-trisphosphate that releases Ca<sup>2+</sup> that is stored in the ER. This triggers Ca<sup>2+</sup> influx by opening the calcium-regulated activated calcium (CRAC) channels on the cell membrane<sup>61</sup>. However, the molecular identity of CRAC channels has remained obscure until recently. Feske *et al*. studied a family with SCID caused by defective Ca<sup>2+</sup> flux and identified the disease-causing locus at chromosome 12q24 using an elegant approach<sup>62</sup>. This involved unequivocal identification of heterozygous family members (who showed intermediate Ca<sup>2+</sup>-flux responses), followed by whole-genome linkage analysis. In parallel, a genome-wide RNA interference screen for NFAT regulators was conducted in *D. melanogaster*, taking into account that the pathways that regulate the shuttling of NFAT are highly conserved in

different species. Two potential candidates were identified by this method that interfered with the activation of store-operated Ca²⁺ entry and NFAT translocation: D. melanogaster stromal interaction molecule (Stim) (dStim) and D. melanogaster Orai (dOrai). A human homologue for dOrai (ORAI1) that mapped at chromosome 12q24 was found. Homozygosity for a non-conservative amino-acid change in the first of four potential transmembrane domains of ORAI1 was identified in the affected patients with SCID. Subsequently, the same group identified ORAI1 as an essential component of the CRAC channel⁶³.

---

**Antigen-independent stages**

- HSC
- PPC
- CLP
- Pro-B cell
- CD10⁺
- CD19⁺
- CD34⁺

Mutant proteins in autosomal recessive agammaglobulinaemia:
- μH
- SLC
- CD79a
- CD79b
- BLNK

- NK cell
- T cell
- Pre-BCR
- SLC
- μH
- CD79
- Pre-B1 cell
- CD10⁺
- CD19⁺
- CD34⁻

Mutant protein in X-linked agammaglobulinaemia:
- BTK

- pDC
- Mutant proteins in HIGM syndrome:
  - CD40
  - CD40L
  - IKKγ (NEMO)
  - AID
  - UNG

- Pre-B2 cell
- CD10⁺
- CD19⁺
- CD34⁻

---

**Antigen-dependent stages**

- IgA
- IgM
- Switched B cell
- IgM
- IgD
- Mature B cell
- IgE
- IgG
- Immature B cell

Intrachromosomal synapsis
The pairing of homologous chromosomes along their length. Synapsis usually occurs during prophase I of meiosis, but it can also occur in somatic cells of some organisms.

---

**Figure 2 | Human B-cell development and primary antibody deficiencies.** Haematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) with self-renewing capacity give rise to pluripotent progenitor cells (PPCs) that can differentiate into common myeloid progenitors (CMPs) or common lymphoid progenitors (CLPs). CLPs progress to B-cell-restricted precursors, in addition to giving rise to T cells, natural killer (NK) cells and plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pDCs). B-cell-lineage-restricted cells then pass through a CD10⁺CD19⁺CD34⁺ pro-B-cell developmental stage. Pro-B cells differentiate into CD10⁺CD19⁺CD34⁻ pre-B cells that express the membrane μH chain associated with the λ5/14.1 surrogate light chain (SLC) and the CD79a (Igα) and CD79b (Igβ) signalling molecules to form the pre-B-cell receptor (pre-BCR). Mutations in components of the pre-BCR and in B-cell linker (BLNK) results in autosomal recessive agammaglobulinaemia with no mature B cells in the periphery. Defects in the B-cell signalling pathway mediated by Bruton’s tyrosine kinase (BTK) lead to X-linked agammaglobulinaemia. In peripheral lymphoid tissues, mature naive B cells bearing both IgM and IgD undergo class-switch recombination and somatic hypermutation following stimulation by activated T cells, and give rise to memory B cells and plasma cells (switched B cells). Failure of T cells to deliver appropriate signals to B cells (through CD40 and CD40 ligand (CD40L)), or intrinsic B-cell deficiencies can affect maturation of the antibody response and result in hyper-IgM (HIGM) syndrome⁴¹⁻⁴⁷,⁹⁹. IKKγ, inhibitor of nuclear factor-κB kinase-γ; AID, activation-induced cytidine deaminase; UNG, uracil-DNA glycosylase.

---

**MRL-lpr mouse**
A mouse strain that spontaneously develops glomerulonephritis and other symptoms of systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). The lpr mutation causes a defect in CD95 (also known as FAS), preventing apoptosis of activated lymphocytes. The MRL strain contributes disease-associated mutations that have yet to be identified.

REVIEWS

Primary defects in immunoregulation
In the last few years, an increasing number of monogenic diseases have been identified that disturb the homeostasis of both the innate and adaptive immune systems^{4,64}.

X-linked lymphoproliferative syndromes. A group of genetically determined PIDs can lead to defective regulation of the immune response resulting in susceptibility to particular infections, autoimmunity, haemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis and lymphomas^{64–68}. X-linked lymphoproliferative syndrome 1 (XLP1) is characterized by a unique vulnerability to infection by EBV^{65,67} (FIG. 3). Patients with XLP1 have subtle defects in T-cell- and NK-cell-mediated cytotoxicity, a depletion of NKT cells, impaired IgG class switching, and they are unable to generate EBV-specific IgG antibodies. Mutations in SH2D1A (SH2 domain protein 1A), which is located at Xq25 and encodes the adaptor protein signalling lymphocyte activation molecule (SLAM)-associated protein (SAP), were identified as being responsible for XLP1 (REF. 67). However, as many as 20–40% of patients with XLP1 show normal expression of SAP, and have no mutations in SH2D1A.

A new form of XLP, designated XLP2, has been recently reported to be caused by mutations in BIRC4, which encodes the X-linked inhibitor of apoptosis protein (XIAP)^{68}. Apoptosis of lymphocytes from patients with XIAP deficiency was enhanced in response to various stimuli, including crosslinking of CD3, CD95 and TNF-associated apoptosis-inducing ligand receptor (TRAILR). Similar to patients with XLP1, patients with XIAP deficiency have severely reduced numbers of NKT cells, indicating that both SAP and XIAP are required for normal differentiation and function of these cells^{68}.

Immune thrombocytopenic purpura
An acute-onset thrombocytopenia caused by autoantibodies directed against unknown antigens on the platelet surface. Antibody-coated platelets are recognized and eliminated from the circulation by splenic macrophages. Immune thrombocytopenic purpura usually develops 2–4 weeks after exposure to common viral pathogens, including Epstein–Barr virus and HIV.

Noonan syndrome
A developmental disorder characterized by short stature, facial dysmorphisms, congenital heart defects and skeletal anomalies.

Costello syndrome
An autosomal dominant disorder comprising growth deficiency, mental retardation, curly hair, coarse facial features, nasal papillomata, low-set ears with large lobes, cardiac anomalies, redundant skin on palms and soles with prominent creases, dark skin and propensity to certain solid tumours. HRAS mutations have been implicated in approximately 85% of the affected cases.

encoding CD95 (TNFRSF6), CD95L (TNFSF6) or caspase-10 (CASP10), respectively^{69}. In some patients with ALPS, somatic mutations in the gene encoding CD95 were detected, accounting for a variant disease designated type Im (mosaic)^{70}. A large number of patients with ALPS have no detectable mutation in the CD95-mediated apoptosis pathway, which is classified as the type III form of the disease.

Whereas mutations in CD95 are a relatively common cause of ALPS, until recently, mutations in the gene encoding CD95L had only been identified in a patient with systemic lupus erythematosus. In 2006, the first patient with ALPS caused by a homozygous mutation in the gene encoding CD95L was reported^{73}. T-cell blasts from this patient failed to induce apoptosis in a CD95-transfected mouse target-cell line; furthermore, CD95-dependent cytotoxicity was markedly reduced in Chinese hamster ovary cells transfected with the mutant CD95L. The mutation resulted in a single amino-acid change in the extracellular domain of CD95L, but did not affect protein expression. However, the homozygous CD95L mutation interfered with the induction of BCL2-interacting mediator of cell death (BIM) by CD95 (REF. 74).

The genes that encode RAS proteins are a subfamily of oncogenes and proto-oncogenes that have a role in the transduction of growth signals, cell proliferation and apoptosis^{75,76}. Somatic mutation in the genes encoding RAS proteins are frequent in patients with cancer, and germline mutations in the RAS-encoding genes HRAS and KRAS cause Noonan syndrome and Costello syndrome, respectively^{77,78}. In a search for new disease-related genes in patients with type III ALPS, an activating NRAS mutation was found in association with a unique defect in IL-2-withdrawal-induced apoptosis in an adult patient who had typical manifestations of ALPS since childhood, and who had been treated for leukaemia and lymphoma^{79}. A selective decrease of the levels of pro-apoptotic BIM activation was proposed to contribute to the defect in apoptosis in this form of ALPS. This study suggests that gain-of-function mutations in the NRAS oncogene may not impair CD95-mediated apoptosis under physiological conditions. Furthermore, it suggests that, in contrast to HRAS and KRAS mutations, a germline-activating mutation in NRAS may result in chronic benign lymphoproliferation, similar to that which occurs in type III ALPS. Defective IL-2-withdrawal-induced apoptosis of peripheral-blood mononuclear cells appears to be a unique immune abnormality in type III ALPS, which helps to differentiate it from other known forms of the disease.

Autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome. Autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome (ALPS) is characterized by chronic non-malignant lymphadenopathy and hepatosplenomegaly resulting from impaired lymphocyte apoptosis that leads to the gradual accumulation of non-malignant lymphocytes^{69–72}. Autoimmune manifestations, including Coombs-positive haemolytic anaemia, immune thrombocytopenic purpura, neutropenia, vasculitis and glomerulonephritis, are common. In addition, patients with ALPS have hypergammaglobulinaemia and an expansion of circulating polyclonal CD4−CD8− (double negative) TCRαβ+ T cells. Mutations in several genes that are involved in programmed cell death and CD95-mediated apoptosis may cause ALPS. According to the genotype, ALPS can be classified as type Ia, type Ib or type II, based on germline mutations in the genes

Autosomal recessive IPEX-like syndrome. CD25 (also known as the α-chain of IL-2R) deficiency was first described in an infant with massive lymphocyte infiltration in the lungs, liver, spleen, lymph nodes and bone marrow, and poor T-cell responses to stimulation by CD3-specific antibodies, phytohaemagglutinin and IL-2 (REF. 80); a second case of CD25 deficiency has recently been reported^{81}. The affected patient in the first description of the syndrome was a compound heterozygote for a nonsense mutation and a single-base insertion, and his

a Physiological response  
to SLAM–SLAM binding

Disruption of SLAM-mediated  
signalling due to mutation in SAP

b CD95-mediated apoptosis pathway

SLAM

SAP

SH2
SH3
FYN

SH2
FYN

Mutation

No FYN activation
- FIM
- Lymphoma
- Hypogammaglobulinaemia

FYN activation
- Cytotoxicity
- Elimination of
  EBV-infected B cells

CD95L

CD95

FADD

DED

Pro-caspase-8  
or pro-caspase-10

BID

Caspase-8

Mitochondrion

XIAP

Cytochrome c

Caspase-9

Caspase-7

Figure 3 | Models for the pathophysiology of X-linked lymphoproliferative disease 1 (XLP1) and XLP2. Mutations in signalling lymphocyte activation molecule (SLAM)-associated protein (SAP) and X-linked inhibitor of apoptosis (XIAP) cause XLP1 and XLP2, respectively. a | SLAM, which is expressed by T cells, natural killer (NK) cells, B cells, dendritic cells and macrophages, is a homotypic immune receptor that interacts with SLAM expressed by other cell types<sup>102</sup>. Following a SLAM–SLAM interaction, SAP couples the cytoplasmic tail of SLAM (or other SLAM-like receptors) to the SRC-related FYN tyrosine kinase (panel a, left). SAP is composed almost exclusively of an SRC homology 2 (SH2) domain that preferentially recognizes tyrosine-based motifs of SLAM<sup>103</sup>. SAP-binding initiates the activation of FYN and phosphorylation of additional tyrosine residues of SLAM. A germline mutation in SAP will disrupt the activation of FYN and signalling through SLAM and other SLAM family members (panel a, right). SAP is involved in T- and NK-cell cytotoxicity; in addition, signalling through SLAM induces inducible T-cell co-stimulator (ICOS) expression in follicular Thelper cells. This contributes to the complex clinical phenotype observed in XLP1, which includes fatal infectious mononucleosis (FIM), high susceptibility to lymphoma, and hypogammaglobulinaemia. b | Apoptosis is mediated, in part, by the binding of CD95 ligand (CD95L) to CD95 (also known as FAS), which in turn recruits the adaptor protein FAS-associated death domain (FADD) through its death domain (DD). FADD then recruits pro-caspase-8 and pro-caspase-10 through its death effector domain (DED) to form the death-inducing signalling complex<sup>99</sup>. Release of highly active caspase-8 causes the death of the cell, which is augmented by caspase-8 processing of BH3-interacting-domain death agonist (BID). The active form of BID induces cytochrome c release from the mitochondrion. XIAP can suppress apoptosis by interacting with caspases through its baculoviral inhibitory repeat (BIR) domain<sup>68,102,103</sup>. EBV, Epstein–Barr virus.

peripheral lymphocytes failed to express CD25 following activation *in vitro*. The clinical phenotype was remarkable for its similarity to that observed in immunodysregulation, polyendocrinopathy and enteropathy, X-linked (IPEX) syndrome, which is caused by mutations in forkhead box P3 (*FOXP3*; a regulatory T-lineage specification factor)<sup>82</sup>. When activated *in vitro* with CD3- and CD46-specific antibodies, the CD4<sup>+</sup> T cells from the patient failed to produce IL-10, a cytokine with important immunosuppressive properties. Another similar case of IPEX-like syndrome owing to nonsense mutations in *CD25* has been recently identified (A. H. Filipovich and J. Sümegi, personal communication). In both cases, CD4<sup>+</sup>FOXP3<sup>+</sup> T cells were present in normal numbers, indicating that

CD25 expression is not required for the development of FOXP3<sup>+</sup> regulatory T cells. These data are in agreement with previous observations in gene-targeted mice<sup>83</sup>. These intriguing cases suggest that much remains to be learned about the pathophysiology of PIDs that present with lymphoproliferation and autoimmunity, and are caused by an imbalance of positive and negative signals of immune activation owing to mutations in genes that encode regulatory components of the immune system<sup>84</sup>.

Hepatic veno-occlusive disease with immunodeficiency. Hepatic veno-occlusive disease (VOD) is characterized by hepatic vascular occlusion and fibrosis. Most often, VOD follows haematopoietic-cell transplantation and

results from toxic damage to the endothelium in hepatic sinusoids, with clinical symptoms of hepatomegaly, ascites and jaundice<sup>85</sup>. Hepatic VOD with immunodeficiency (VODI) is a rare condition in which VOD is associated with lymphopaenia, severe hypogammaglobulinaemia, increased occurrence of opportunistic infections and a reduced number of memory T and B cells. It has been recently shown that VODI results from mutations in *SP110*, which encodes one of the PML nuclear-body proteins<sup>86</sup>. SP110 is an immunoregulatory protein that is expressed by T and B cells in the lymph nodes, spleen and liver. Intracellular expression of various cytokines, including IFNγ, IL-2, IL-4 and IL-10, following *in vitro* stimulation of cells from patients with VODI with phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate and ionomycin were reduced to a variable extent compared with cells from healthy individuals.

**Conclusions**

Identification of the genetic basis of PIDs has provided better diagnostic and therapeutic opportunities, and has also increased our knowledge of the molecular pathophysiology of the immune system. As compared with gene-targeted mice and other animal models, the study of humans with PIDs continues to offer unique opportunities. Different mutations within single genes can manifest with different phenotypes. For example, mutations in WASP may cause Wiskott–Aldrich syndrome or X-linked neutropenia. In the case of genes in which null mutations in mice are embryonically or perinatally lethal, hypomorphic mutations detected in humans can lead to a distinct phenotype, as illustrated by neutropaenia owing to p14 deficiency. Dominant negative mutations may interfere with the function of the protein and lead to abnormal intracellular signalling, as in HIES owing to STAT3 mutations. Finally, the spectrum of microorganisms that can colonize or infect the human body (and the conditions under which such interactions occur) vary from what is observed in mice. Not surprisingly, several forms of PID have been shown to result in unique and ‘narrow’ susceptibility to pathogens, as illustrated by familial HSE and MSMD.

Ultimately, unveiling the genetic basis of an inherited monogenic immunodeficiency disorder not only allows physicians to identify the disease-related mutation in the proband, but provides the opportunity for family screening and prenatal diagnosis. Furthermore, identification of disease-causing genes might provide a solid basis for immunotherapy of PIDs. This is exemplified by the recognition that *UNC93B1* mutations may be associated with an impaired secretion of type 1 IFN in patients with HSE, suggesting that administration of IFNα and/or IFNβ might be effective in treating patients with this encephalitis. Yet, in spite of this progress, many patients with PIDs remain undiagnosed owing to inadequate recognition or lack of appropriate diagnostic tools. Awareness campaigns in the professional and lay community should therefore continue for the benefit of patients with PIDs, in particular in countries with lower socio-economic conditions, including those in eastern Europe<sup>87</sup>.

---

1. Guzman, D., *et al.* The ESID Online Database network. *Bioinformatics* **23**, 654–655 (2007).
2. Samarghitean, C., Valiaho, J. & Vihinen, M. IDR knowledge base for primary immunodeficiencies. *Immunome Res.* **3**, 6–10 (2007).
3. Buckley, R. H. Primary immunodeficiency diseases due to defects in lymphocytes. *N. Engl. J. Med.* **343**, 1313–1324 (2000).
4. Fischer, A. Human primary immunodeficiency diseases: a perspective. *Nature Immunol.* **5**, 23–30 (2004).
5. Janeway, C. A. Jr. & Medzhitov, R. Innate immune recognition. *Annu. Rev. Immunol.* **13**, 251–276 (2002).
6. Beutler, B. The Toll-like receptors: analysis by forward genetic methods. *Immunogenetics* **57**, 1–8 (2005).
7. Trinchieri, G. & Sher, A. Cooperation of Toll-like receptor signals in innate immune defence. *Nature Rev. Immunol.* **7**, 179–190 (2007).
8. Taylor, P. R., Martinez-Pomares, L., Stacey, M., Lin, H. H., Brown, G. D. & Gordon, S. Macrophage receptors and immune recognition. *Annu. Rev. Immunol.* **23**, 901–944 (2005).
9. Picard, C., *et al.* Pyogenic bacterial infections in humans with IRAK-4 deficiency. *Science* **299**, 2076–2079 (2003).
10. Casrouge, A., *et al.* Herpes simplex virus encephalitis in human UNC-93B deficiency. *Science* **314**, 308–312 (2006).
11. Zhang, S.-Y., *et al.* TLR3 deficiency in otherwise healthy patients with herpes simplex encephalitis. *Science* **317**, 1522–1527 (2007). References 10 and 11 illustrate the crucial role of TLR3-triggered, UNC93B-dependent, induction of type I IFN responses in the control of HSV infection in humans.
12. Grimbacher, B., Holland, S. M. & Puck, J. M. Hyper-IgE syndromes. *Immunol. Rev.* **203**, 244–250 (2005).
13. Borges, W. G., Augustine, N. H. & Hill, H. R. Defective interleukin-12/interferon-γ pathway in patients with hyperimmunoglobulin E syndrome. *J. Pediatr.* **136**, 176–180 (2000).
14. Renner, E. D., *et al.* Autosomal recessive hyperimmunoglobulin E syndrome: a distinct disease entity. *J. Pediatr.* **144**, 93–99 (2004).
15. Minegishi, Y., *et al.* Human tyrosine kinase 2 deficiency reveals its requisite roles in multiple cytokine signals involved in innate and acquired immunity. *Immunity* **25**, 745–755 (2006). This paper illustrates that mutations in *TYK2* affect the cytokine-secretion profile in a patient with an autosomal recessive form of HIES, and offers significant perspectives towards the identification of the molecular defect in autosomal dominant HIES.
16. Woellner, C., *et al.* The hyper IgE syndrome and mutations in *TYK2*. *Immunity* **26**, 535 (2007).
17. Minegishi, Y., *et al.* Dominant-negative mutations in the DNA-binding domain of *STAT3* cause hyper-IgE syndrome. *Nature* **448**, 1058–1062 (2007).
18. Holland, S., *et al.* *STAT3* mutations in hyper IgE recurrent infection syndrome (HIES). *N. Engl. J. Med.* 19 September 2007 (doi:10.1056/NEJMoa073687). References 17 and 18 describe the identification of dominant negative mutations in *STAT3* in autosomal dominant HIES.
19. Yang, X. O., *et al.* *STAT3* regulates cytokine-mediated generation of inflammatory helper T cells. *J. Biol. Chem.* **282**, 9358–9363 (2007).
20. Wolk, K., *et al.* IL-22 increases the innate immunity of tissues. *Immunity* **21**, 241–254 (2004).
21. Levin, M. & Newport, M. Understanding the genetic basis of susceptibility to mycobacterial infection. *Proc. Assoc. Am. Physicians* **111**, 308–312 (1999).
22. Casanova, J. L. & Abel, L. Human genetics of infectious diseases: a unified theory. *EMBO J.* **26**, 915–922 (2007).
23. Rosenzweig, S. D. & Holland, S. M. Defects in the interferon-γ and interleukin-12 pathways. *Immunol. Rev.* **203**, 38–47 (2005).
24. Filipe-Santos, F., *et al.* X-linked susceptibility to mycobacteria is caused by mutations in the NEMO impairing CD40-dependent IL-12 production. *J. Exp. Med.* **203**, 1745–1759 (2006).
25. Bustamante, J. A novel X-linked recessive form of Mendelian susceptibility to mycobacterial disease. *J. Med. Genet.* **44**, e65 (2007).
26. Skokowa, J., Germeshausen, M., Zeidler, C. & Welte, K. Severe congenital neutropenia: inheritance and pathophysiology. *Curr. Opin. Hematol.* **14**, 22–28 (2007).
27. Kostmann, R. Infantile genetic agranulocytosis; agranulocytosis infantilis hereditaria. *Acta Paediatr. Suppl.* **45** (Suppl. 105), 1–78 (1956).
28. Horwitz, M., Benson, K. F., Person, R. E., Aprikyan, A. G. & Dale, D. C. Mutations in *ELA2*, encoding neutrophil elastase, define a 21-day biological clock in cyclic haematopoiesis. *Nature Genet.* **23**, 433–436 (1999).
29. Devriendt, K., *et al.* Constitutively activating mutation in *WASP* causes X-linked severe congenital neutropenia. *Nature Genet.* **27**, 313–317 (2001).
30. Moulding, D. A., *et al.* Unregulated actin polymerization by WASp causes defects of mitosis and cytokinesis in X-linked neutropenia. *J. Exp. Med.* **204**, 2213–2224 (2007).
31. Klein, C., *et al.* Deficiency of *HAX1* causes autosomal recessive severe congenital neutropenia (Kostmann disease). *Nature Genet.* **39**, 86–92 (2007). This paper reports on a new gene defect that is responsible for SCN, and that is mutated in the original family described by Kostmann.
32. Suzuki, Y., *et al.* HAX-1, a novel intracellular protein, localized on mitochondria, directly associates with HS1, a substrate of Src family tyrosine kinases. *J. Immunol.* **158**, 2736–2744 (1997).
33. Radhika, V., Onesime, D., Ha, J. H. & Dhanasekaran N. Gα13 stimulates cell migration through cortactin-interacting protein Hax-1. *J. Biol. Chem.* **279**, 49406–49413 (2004).
34. Bohn, G., *et al.* A novel human primary immunodeficiency syndrome caused by deficiency of the endosomal adaptor protein p14. *Nature Med.* **13**, 38–45 (2007).
35. Teis, D., *et al.* p14-MP1-MEK1 signaling regulates endosomal traffic and cellular proliferation during tissue homeostasis. *J. Cell Biol.* **175**, 861–868 (2006).
36. Tchernev, V. T., *et al.* The Chediak-Higashi protein interacts with SNARE complex and signal transduction proteins. *Mol. Med.* **8**, 56–64 (2002).
37. Menasche, G., *et al.* Mutations in *RAB27A* cause Griscelli syndrome associated with haemophagocytic syndrome. *Nature Genet.* **25**, 173–176 (2000).
38. Fontana, S., *et al.* Innate immunity defects in Hermansky–Pudlak type 2 syndrome. *Blood* **107**, 4857–4864 (2006).

© 2007 Nature Publishing Group

39. Alon, R., *et al.* A novel genetic leukocyte adhesion deficiency in subsecond triggering of integrin avidity by endothelial chemokines results in impaired leukocyte arrest on vascular endothelium under shear flow. *Blood* **101**, 1033–1036 (2003).

40. Pasvolsky, R., *et al.* A LAD-III syndrome is associated with defective expression of the Rap-1 activator CalDAG-GEFI in lymphocytes, neutrophils, and platelets. *J. Exp. Med.* **204**, 1571–1582 (2007). This paper describes the identification of the molecular mechanism that accounts for impaired integrin activation in LAD type III in humans.

41. Ferrari, S., *et al.* Mutation of the Igβ gene causes agammaglobulinemia in man. *J. Exp. Med.* **204**, 2047–2051 (2007).

42. Dobbs, A. K., *et al.* A hypomorphic mutations in Igβ (CD79b) in a patient with immunodeficiency and a leaky defect in B cell development. *J. Immunol.* **179**, 2055–2059 (2007).

43. Blom, B. & Spits, H. Development of human lymphoid cells. *Annu. Rev. Immunol.* **24**, 287–320 (2006). References 42 and 43 expand on the molecular defects in components of the pre-BCR that are responsible for congenital agammaglobulinaemia.

44. Carter, R. H. & Fearon, D. T. CD19: lowering the threshold for antigen receptor stimulation of B lymphocytes. *Science* **256**, 105–107 (1992).

45. van Zelm, M. C. *et al.* An antibody deficiency syndrome due to mutations in the CD19 gene. *N. Engl. J. Med.* **354**, 1901–1912 (2006). This paper describes the first cases of humoral immunodeficiency owing to CD19 deficiency in humans, and shows that CD19 is not essential for B-cell development, but is required for differentiation into memory B cells and antibody-secreting plasma cells.

46. Notarangelo, L. D., Lanzi, G., Peron, S. & Durandy, A. Defects of class-switch recombination. *J. Allergy Clin. Immunol.* **117**, 855–864 (2006).

47. Erdős, M., Durandy, A. & Maródi, L. Genetically acquired class-switch recombination defects: the multi-faced hyper-IgM syndrome. *Immunol. Lett.* **97**, 1–6 (2005).

48. Noelle, R. J., *et al.* 39-kDa protein on activated helper T cells binds CD40 and transduces the signal for cognate activation of B cells. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **89**, 6550–6554 (1992).

49. Korthäuer, U., *et al.* Defective expression of T-cell CD40 ligand causes X-linked immunodeficiency with hyper-IgM. *Nature* **361**, 539–541 (1993).

50. Ferrari, S., *et al.* Mutations of *CD40* gene cause an autosomal recessive form of immunodeficiency with hyper-IgM. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **98**, 12614–12619 (2001).

51. Jain, A., *et al.* Specific missense mutations in *NEMO* result in hyper-IgM syndrome with hypohydratic ectodermal dysplasia. *Nature Immunol.* **2**, 223–228 (2001).

52. Smahi, A., *et al.* The NF-κB signaling pathway in human diseases: from incontinentia pigmenti to ectodermal dysplasias and immune-deficiency syndromes. *Hum. Mol. Gen.* **11**, 2371–2375 (2002).

53. Muramatsu, M., *et al.* Specific expression of activation-induced cytidine deaminase (AID), a novel member of the RNA-editing deaminase family in germinal center B cells. *J. Biol. Chem.* **274**, 18470–18476 (1999).

54. Revy, P., *et al.* Activation-induced cytidine deaminase (AID) deficiency causes the autosomal recessive form of the hyper-IgM syndrome (HIGM2). *Cell* **102**, 565–575 (2000).

55. Imai, K., *et al.* Human uracil-DNA glycosylase deficiency associated with profoundly impaired immunoglobulin class-switch recombination. *Nature Immunol.* **4**, 1023–1028 (2003).

56. Imai, K., *et al.* Hyper-IgM syndrome type 4 with a B lymphocyte-intrinsic selective deficiency in Ig class-switch recombination. *J. Clin. Invest.* **112**, 136–142 (2003).

57. Peron, S., *et al.* A primary immunodeficiency characterized by defective immunoglobulin class switch recombination and impaired DNA repair. *J. Exp. Med.* **204**, 1207–1216 (2007).

58. Sekine, H., *et al.* Role for Msh5 in the regulation of Ig class switch recombination. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **104**, 7193–7198 (2007).

59. Snowden, T., Acharya, S., Butz, C., Berardini, M. & Fishel, R. hMSH4–hMSH5 recognizes Holliday junctions and forms a meiosis-specific sliding clamp that embraces homologous chromosomes. *Mol. Cell* **15**, 437–451 (2004).

60. Feike, S., *et al.* Severe combined immunodeficiency due to defective binding of nuclear factor of activated

T cells in T lymphocytes of two male siblings. *Eur. J. Immunol.* **26**, 2119–2126 (1996).

61. Hogan, P. G. & Rao, A. Dissecting I<sub>CRAC</sub>, a store-operated calcium current. *Trends Biochem. Sci.* **32**, 235–245 (2007).

62. Feike, S., *et al.* A mutation in *Orai1* causes immune deficiency by abrogating CRAC channel function. *Nature* **441**, 179–185 (2006). By using an elegant approach that combined a functional assay to identify heterozygous carriers, linkage analysis and candidate-gene analysis, this paper identified a new gene that encodes a structural component of membrane calcium channels, mutations in which result in SCID in humans.

63. Prakriya, M., *et al.* Orai1 is an essential pore subunit of the CRAC channel. *Nature* **443**, 230–233 (2006).

64. Hull, K. M., *et al.* Systemic autoinflammatory disorders and their rheumatic manifestations. *Curr. Opin. Rheumatol.* **15**, 61–69 (2003).

65. Sümegi, J., *et al.* A spectrum of mutations in *SH2D1A* that causes X-linked lymphoproliferative disease and other Epstein–Barr virus-associated illnesses. *Leuk. Lymphoma* **43**, 1189–1201 (2002).

66. Risma, K. A., Frayer, R. W., Filipovich, A. H. & Sümegi, J. Aberrant maturation of mutant perforin underlies the clinical diversity of hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis. *J. Clin. Invest.* **116**, 182–192 (2006).

67. Sayos, J., *et al.* The X-linked lymphoproliferative-disease gene product SAP regulates signals induced through the co-receptor SLAM. *Nature* **395**, 462–469 (1998).

68. Rigaud, S., *et al.* XIAP deficiency in humans causes an X-linked lymphoproliferative syndrome. *Nature* **444**, 110–114 (2006). In this paper, the authors report on the identification of a second gene responsible for XLP1 in humans.

69. Bidere, N., Su, H. C. & Lenardo, M. J. Genetic disorders of programmed cell death in the immune system. *Annu. Rev. Immunol.* **24**, 321–352 (2006).

70. Holzelova, E., *et al.* Autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome with somatic Fas mutations. *N. Engl. J. Med.* **351**, 1409–1418 (2004).

71. Rieux-Laucat, F., Le Deist, F. & Fischer, A. Autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndromes: genetic defects of apoptosis pathways. *Cell Death Differ.* **10**, 124–133 (2003).

72. Wang, J., *et al.* Inherited human caspase 10 mutations underlie defective lymphocyte and dendritic cell apoptosis in autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome type II. *Cell* **98**, 47–58 (1999).

73. Del-Rey, M., *et al.* A homozygous Fas ligand gene mutation in a patient causes a new type of autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome. *Blood* **108**, 3622–3623 (2006).

74. Bosque, A., *et al.* The induction of Bim expression in human T-cell blasts is dependent on nonapoptotic Fas/CD95 signaling. *Blood* **109**, 1627–1635 (2007).

75. Diaz, R., *et al.* The *N-ras* proto-oncogene can suppress the malignant phenotype in the presence or absence of its oncogene. *Cancer Res.* **62**, 4514–4518 (2002).

76. Malumbres, M. & Barbacid, M. RAS oncogenes: the first 30 years. *Nature Rev. Cancer* **3**, 459–465 (2003).

77. Tartaglia, M., *et al.* Gain-of-function SOS1 mutations cause a distinctive form of Noonan syndrome. *Nature Genet.* **39**, 75–79 (2007).

78. Aoki, Y., *et al.* Germline mutations in *HRAS* proto-oncogene cause Costello syndrome. *Nature Genet.* **37**, 1038–1040 (2005).

79. Oliveira, J. B., *et al.* Autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome caused by a mutation in *NRAS*. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **104**, 8953–8958 (2007).

80. Sharfe, N., Dadi, H. K, Shahar, M. & Roifman, C. M. Human immune disorder arising from mutation of the α chain of the interleukin-2 receptor. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **94**, 3168–3171 (1997).

81. Caudy, A. A., *et al.* CD25 deficiency causes an immune dysregulation, polyendocrinopathy, enteropathy, X-linked-like syndrome, and defective IL-10 expression from CD4 lymphocytes. *J. Allerg. Clin. Immunol.* **119**, 482–487 (2007).

82. Bennett, C. L., Reddy, S. T., Chatila, T., Atkinson, J. P. & Verbsky, J. W. The immune dysregulation, polyendocrinopathy, enteropathy, X-linked syndrome (IPEX) is caused by mutations of *FOXP3*. *Nature Genet.* **27**, 20–21 (2001).

83. Fontenot, J. D., Rasmussen, J. P., Gavin, M. A. & Rudensky, A. Y. A function for interleukin-2 in Foxp3-expressing regulatory T cells. *Nature Immunol.* **6**, 1142–1151 (2005).

84. Notarangelo, L. D., Gambineri, E. & Badolato R. Immunodeficiencies with autoimmune consequences. *Adv. Immunol.* **89**, 321–370 (2006).

85. McDonald, G. B., Sharma, P., Matthews, D. E., Shulman, H. M. & Thomas, E. D. Venoocclusive disease of the liver after bone marrow transplantation: diagnosis, incidence, and predisposing factors. *Hepatology* **4**, 116–22 (1984).

86. Roscioli, T. *et al.* Mutations in the gene encoding the PML nuclear body protein Sp110 are associated with immunodeficiency and hepatic veno-occlusive disease. *Nature Genet.* **38**, 620–622 (2006).

87. Maródi, L. & Notarangelo, L. Education and worldwide collaboration pays off. *Nature Immunol.* **8**, 323–324 (2007).

88. Johnston, R. B., Jr. Clinical aspects of chronic granulomatous disease. *Curr. Opin. Hematol.* **8**, 17–22 (2001).

89. Maródi, L. Local and systemic host defense mechanisms against Candida: immunopathology of candidal infections. *Pediatr. Infect. Dis. J.* **16**, 795–801 (1997).

90. Decoursey, T. E. & Ligeti, E. Regulation and termination of NADPH oxidase activity. *Cell. Mol. Life Sci.* **62**, 2173–2193 (2005).

91. Marciano, B. E., *et al.* Gastrointestinal involvement in chronic granulomatous disease. *Pediatrics* **114**, 462–468 (2004).

92. Seelen, M. A., Roos, A. & Daha, M. R. Role of complement in innate and autoimmunity. *J. Nephrol.* **18**, 642–653 (2005).

93. Schneider, M. C, Exley, R. M., Ram, S., Sim, R. B. & Tang, C. M. Interactions between *Neisseria meningitidis* and the complement system. *Trends Microbiol.* **15**, 233–240 (2007).

94. Ramoz, N., *et al.* Mutations in two adjacent novel genes are associated with epidermodysplasia verruciformis. *Nature Genet.* **32**, 579–581 (2002).

95. Jouanguy, E., *et al.* Partial interferon-γ receptor 1 deficiency in a child with tuberculoid bacillus Calmette–Guérin infection and a sibling with clinical tuberculosis. *J. Clin. Invest.* **100**, 2658–2664 (1997).

96. Döffinger, R., *et al.* Partial interferon-γ receptor signaling chain deficiency in a patient with bacille Calmette–Guérin and *Mycobacterium abscessus* infection. *J. Infect. Dis.* **181**, 279–384 (2000).

97. Jouanguy, E., *et al.* In a novel form of IFN-γ receptor 1 deficiency, cell surface receptors fail to bind IFN-γ. *J. Clin. Invest.* **105**, 1429–1436 (2000).

98. Shearer, W. T., Cunningham-Rundles, C. & Ochs, H. D. Primary immunodeficiency: looking backwards, looking forwards. *J. Allergy Clin. Immunol.* **113**, 607–609 (2004).

99. Conley, M. E., *et al.* Genetic analysis of patients with defects in early B-cell development. *Immunol. Rev.* **203**, 216–234 (2005).

100. Vogt, G., *et al.* Gains of glycosylation comprise an unexpectedly large group of pathogenic mutations. *Nature Genet.* **27**, 692–700 (2005).

101. Fieschi, C., *et al.* A novel form of complete IL-12/IL-23 receptor β1 deficiency with cell surface-expressed nonfunctional receptors. *Blood* **104**, 2095–2101 (2004).

102. Nichols, K. E., Ma, C. S., Cannons, J. L., Schwartzberg, P. L. & Tangye, S. G. Molecular and cellular pathogenesis of X-linked lymphoproliferative disease. *Immunol. Rev.* **203**, 180–199 (2005).

103. Engel, P., Eck, M. J. & Terhorst, C. The SAP and SLAM families in immune responses and X-linked lymphoproliferative disease. *Nature Rev. Immunol.* **3**, 813–821 (2003).


**Acknowledgments**

Supported by the Hungarian Research Fund (OTKA 49,174) (L.M.) and by European Union EURO-POLICY-PID and CARIPLO-NOBEL grants (L.D.N.). We thank M. Erdős for input on the figures.


**DATABASES**

Entrez Gene: <http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?db=gene>

| AIIDA | B29 | caspase-10 | CD19 | CD40 | CD40L | CD95 |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| CD95L | ELA2 | HAX1 | IFNα | IFNβ | IFNλ | IKBK |
| FOXP3 | IRAK4 | MSH5 | RASGRP2 | SH2D1A | SP110 | STAT3 |
| TLR3 | TLR7 | TLR8 | TLR9 | TYK2 | UNC93B1 | WASP |

OMIM: <http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?db=OMIM>

| AD-HIES | AID | ALPS | AR-HIES | AR-SCN | CVID | HGM |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| HSE | IgAD | IPEX | VODI | XLP1 |  |  |

**ALL LINKS ARE ACTIVE IN THE ONLINE PDF**
