
Autophagy

ISSN: 1554-8627 (Print) 1554-8635 (Online) Journal homepage: http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/kaup20

# Mucolipidosis type IV: The importance of functional lysosomes for efficient autophagy

Silvia Vergarajauregui & Rosa Puertollano

To cite this article: Silvia Vergarajauregui & Rosa Puertollano (2008) Mucolipidosis type IV: The importance of functional lysosomes for efficient autophagy, Autophagy, 4:6, 832-834, DOI: 10.4161/auto.6567

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.4161/auto.6567

Published online: 10 Jul 2008.

Submit your article to this journal

Article views: 20

View related articles

Citing articles: 6 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=kaup20

Download by: [62.102.148.67]
Date: 15 March 2016, At: 03:59

[Autophagy 4:6, 832-834; 16 August 2008]; © 2008 Landes Bioscience

# Article Addendum

## Mucolipidosis type IV

### The importance of functional lysosomes for efficient autophagy

**Silvia Vergarajauregui and Rosa Puertollano**

Laboratory of Cell Biology; National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute; National Institutes of Health; Bethesda, Maryland USA

**Key words:** mucolipin-1, MLIV, p62, lysosome, autophagy

---

Mucolipidosis IV (MLIV) is a lysosomal storage disorder characterized by severe neurological and ophthalmologic abnormalities. In contrast with most lysosomal storage disorders, which are attributed to the absence of specific lysosomal hydrolases, accumulation of material in MLIV results from defects in membrane transport along the late endocytic pathway. Mutations in *MCOLN1* are the cause of MLIV; however, how the lack of *MCOLN1* function ultimately leads to neurodegeneration remains largely unknown. We found that *MCOLN1* is required for efficient fusion of both late endosomes and autophagosomes with lysosomes. Impaired autophagosome degradation results in accumulation of autophagosomes in MLIV fibroblasts. In addition, we found increased levels and aggregation of p62, suggesting that abnormal accumulation of ubiquitinated protein inclusions may contribute to the neurodegenerative phenotype observed in MLIV patients. These findings corroborate recent evidence indicating that defects in autophagy may be a common feature of many neurodegenerative disorders.

Recent studies reveal an interesting connection between lysosomal function, autophagy, and neurodegeneration. Autophagy is a crucial clearance mechanism that protects against the accumulation of toxic protein aggregates and damaged organelles. The last step of autophagy requires fusion of autophagosomes with late endosomes/lysosomes to ensure degradation of the autophagosome's content. In some lysosomal storage disorders (LSDs) characterized by severe neurodegeneration, such as Multiple Sulfatase Deficiency and Mucopolysaccharidosis type III, accumulation of undegraded substrates in lysosomes due to the lack of specific lysosomal hydrolases impairs autophagosome degradation and leads to defective organelle turnover and accumulation of autophagosomes and protein deposits. In addition, recent evidence shows that the ESCRT machinery that regulates sorting of proteins into late endosomes is required for efficient autophagosome degradation; mutations in the ESCRT-III subunit CHMP2B are associated with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and a rare form of frontotemporal dementia (FTD), two neurodegenerative disorders characterized by the accumulation of abnormal ubiquitinated protein inclusions in neurons. Therefore, is suggested that defects in autophagy may lead to neurodegeneration.

Mucolipidosis type IV (MLIV) is a lysosomal storage disorder characterized by severe neurological and ophthalmologic abnormalities due to defective transport of membrane components in the late endosomal-lysosomal pathway. MLIV is caused by mutations in mucolipin 1 (*MCOLN1*), a late endosomal/lysosomal ion channel belonging to the transient receptor potential superfamily. Cells from patients with MLIV accumulate enlarged vacuolar structures containing phospholipids, sphingolipids, mucopolysaccharides, and gangliosides. It is therefore plausible that disruption of lysosomal function due to lipid buildup has important repercussions for the autophagic pathway. Using multiple approaches, including LC3 localization, LC3-II/LC3-I western blot, electron microscopy, and LC3/CD63 co-localization analysis, we find increased basal autophagy in MLIV fibroblasts. Autophagosome accumulation in *MCOLN1*-deficient cells is due to decreased autophagosome degradation and increased autophagosome formation. We also find increased levels of p62, a protein commonly found in protein inclusions associated with neurodegenerative disorders, as well as accumulation of ubiquitinated aggregates. Importantly, the majority of p62 accumulated in MLIV cells is resistant to extraction with detergents, an indication that p62 is part of aggregates or protein inclusions.

Based on these data, we propose a model in which, analogous to other LSDs, defective lysosomal function caused by mutations in *MCOLN1* results in impaired fusion of autophagosomes with lysosomes and subsequent degradation. Defective autophagy leads then to unproductive removal of protein aggregates and damaged organelles. Cells may try to respond by increasing autophagosome formation (accordingly, we observed elevated levels of Beclin 1 in lysates from MLIV fibroblasts); however, the system cannot be balanced and deposits of ubiquitinated aggregates and protein inclusions build up in the cytosol. Accumulation of misfolded proteins may not be very deleterious in fibroblasts, in which the rapid rate of division may help to split the burden of protein inclusions between daughter cells. In contrast, neurons do not divide, making the accumulation of protein inclusions progressively more harmful. In addition,

---

*Correspondence to: Rosa Puertollano; Laboratory of Cell Biology; National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute; National Institutes of Health; Bethesda, Maryland 20892 USA; Tel.: +1.301.451.2361; Fax: +1.301.402.1519; Email: puertolr@mail.nih.gov*

Submitted: 07/03/08; Revised: 07/08/08; Accepted: 07/08/08

Previously published online as an Autophagy E-publication:

www.landesbioscience.com/journals/autophagy/article/6567

Addendum to: Vergarajauregui S, Connelly PS, Daniels MP, Puertollano R. Autophagic dysfunction in mucolipidosis type IV patients. Hum Mol Genet 2008; DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddn174.

Defective autophagy in MLIV

Figure 1. Accumulation of autophagosomes and p62 aggregates in MLIV fibroblasts. Double immunostaining of LC3 (upper) and p62 (lower) in control (left panels) and MLIV (right panels) fibroblasts. Note the increased number of LC3-positive vesicles and the accumulation of p62 in MLIV cells. Bar, 10 μm.

neurons are particularly sensitive to the accumulation of toxic products. Therefore, it is understandable that defects in autophagy often translate into neuronal death and neurodegeneration.

Autophagic dysfunction may also cause accumulation of damaged organelles. The connection between defective autophagy and accumulation of aberrant mitochondria is well established in MLIV and other LSDs. These abnormal mitochondria are deficient in ATP production, produce increased amounts of reactive oxygen species, and increase susceptibility of cells to pro-apoptotic stimuli. However, it is important to keep in mind that autophagy also plays a fundamental role in the turnover of other organelles such as peroxisomes and ribosomes, as well as in diverse cellular processes including degradation of parts of the nucleolus, delivery of certain proteins to the vacuole, removal of viruses and other pathogens, and processing of intracellular proteins for presentation on MHC-II molecules. Although, to date, the role of autophagy in some of these processes has only been described in yeast, it seems clear that a general deficiency in autophagic function may have many important and diverse consequences for cellular function. Particularly interesting is a recent report showing autophagy activation favors fusion of multivesicular bodies (MVBs) with autophagosomes while blocking exosome secretion. This diversion of MVBs to the autophagic pathway might have an impact on the delivery of cargo from the plasma membrane to lysosomes. In addition, Rab5 and PI3KIII, two components of the sorting machinery at early endosomes, are also required for autophagosome formation. Therefore, increased autophagosome formation and/or autophagosome accumulation might “sequester” these proteins at the autophagic pathway to the detriment of protein sorting along the endocytic pathway. In support of this idea, we find that delivery of platelet-derived growth factor receptor (PDGFR) from the plasma membrane to lysosomes is delayed in MLIV fibroblasts (Fig. 2). Further studies will be required to clarify the multiple interconnections between the autophagic and endosomal pathways.

Our results also revealed a robust increase in both the number and the size of autophagosomes after autophagy induction (e.g., by starvation), indicating that the autophagic machinery remains functional in MLIV fibroblasts and that cells can

www.landesbioscience.com

---

**Figure 2. A model of how defective autophagy may lead to neurodegeneration in MLIV patients. Trafficking along the late endosomal/lysosomal pathway is perturbed in MCOLN1-deficient cells (shown to the right). As a result, fusion between autophagosomes and lysosomes is delayed and de novo formation of autophagosomes is increased. Dysfunction of the autophagic pathway leads to accumulation of protein aggregates and to defects in organelle turnover, thus rendering cells, especially neurons, more susceptible to cell death. In addition, accumulation of autophagosomes may redirect MVBs to the autophagic pathway making delivery of cargo to lysosomes and subsequent degradation less efficient. The following abbreviations are used: autophagosome (Autophag); amphisome (Amph); autolysosome (Autolys); early endosomes (EE); multivesicular bodies (MVB); lysosomes (LY); mucolipin-1 (MCOLN1); mucolipidosis type IV (MLIV); platelet derived growth factor receptor (PDGFR).**

respond to stress conditions. Therefore, it is tempting to speculate that situations that promote autophagy induction, such as caloric restriction or treatment with rapamycin, could potentially favor the elimination of protein inclusions and ubiquitinated aggregates.²⁸,²⁹ However, it is important to be cautious in this regard, as the nature of the protein inclusions might determine the susceptibility to clearance by autophagy. Cuervo's laboratory has recently described that AIMP2 (p38) and desmin-positive inclusions are resistant to autophagy clearance, whereas aggresomes containing huntingtin, mutant tau or a combination of synphilin-1 and α-synuclein are eliminated after autophagy induction.³⁰ Therefore, an approach that combines autophagy induction with activation of other cellular degradative systems, such as the ubiquitin-proteasome system or chaperone-mediated autophagy, or promotes simultaneously autophagy induction and enhanced lysosomal degradation, may be necessary for effective patient treatment.

### Acknowledgments

This project was supported by the Intramural Research Program of the NIH, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute (NHLBI).

### References

1. Settembre C, Fraldi A, Jahreiss L, Spampanato C, Venturi C, Medina D, de Pablo R, Tacchetti C, Rubinsztein DC, Ballabio A. A block of autophagy in lysosomal storage disorders. Hum Mol Genet 2008; 17:119-29.
2. Parkinson N, Ince PG, Smith MO, Highley R, Skibinski G, Andersen PM, Morrison KE, Pall HS, Hardiman O, Collinge J, et al. ALS phenotypes with mutations in CHMP2B (charged multivesicular body protein 2B). Neurology 2006; 67:1074–77.
3. Filimonenko M, Stuffers S, Raiborg C, Yamamoto A, Malerød L, Fisher EM, Isaacs A, Brech A, Stenmark H, Simonsen A. Functional multivesicular bodies are required for autophagic clearance of protein aggregates associated with neurodegenerative disease. J Cell Biol 2007; 179:485-500.
4. Skibinski G, Parkinson NJ, Brown JM, Chakrabarti L, Lloyd SL, Hummerich H, Nielsen JE, Hodges JR, Spillantini MG, Thusgaard T, et al. Mutations in the endosomal ESCRTIII-complex subunit CHMP2B in frontotemporal dementia. Nat Genet 2005; 37:806–8.
5. Amir N, Zlotogora J, Bach G. Mucolipidosis type IV: clinical spectrum and natural history. Pediatrics 1987; 79:953-9.
6. Bach G. Mucolipidosis type IV. Mol Genet Metab 2001; 73:197-203.
7. Altarescu G, Sun M, Moore DF, Smith JA, Wiggs EA, Solomon BI, Patronas, NJ, Frei KP, Gupta S, Kaneski CR, et al. The neurogenetics of mucolipidosis type IV. Neurology 2002; 59:306-13.
8. Slaugenhaupt SA, Acierno JS Jr, Helbling LA, Bove C, Goldin E, Bach G, Schiffmann R, Gusella JF. Mapping of the mucolipidosis type IV gene to chromosome 19p and definition of founder haplotypes. Am J Hum Genet 1999; 65:773-8.
9. Bargal R, Avidan N, Ben Asher E, Olender Z, Zeigler M, Frumkin A, RaasRothschild A, Glusman G, Lancet D, Bach G. Identification of the gene causing mucolipidosis type IV. Nat Genet 2000; 26:118–23.
10. Bassi MT, Manzoni M, Monti E, Pizzo MT, Ballabio A, Borsani G. Cloning of the gene encoding a novel integral membrane protein mucolipin, and identification of the two major founder mutations causing mucolipidosis type IV. Am J Hum Genet 2000; 67:1110–20.
11. Sun M, Goldin E, Stahl S, Falardeau JL, Kennedy JC, Acierno JS Jr, Bove C, Kaneski CR, Nagle J, Bromley MC, et al. Mucolipidosis type IV is caused by mutations in a gene encoding a novel transient receptor potential channel. Hum Mol Genet 2000; 9:2471-78.
12. Berman ER, Livni N, Shapira E, Merin S, Levij IS. Congenital corneal clouding with abnormal systemic storage bodies: a new variant of mucolipidosis. J Pediatr 1974; 84:519-26.
13. Riedel KG, Zwaan J, Kenyon KR, Kolodny EH, Hanninen L, Albert DM. Ocular abnormalities in mucolipidosis IV. Am J Ophthalmol 1985; 99:125-36.
14. Goldin E, Cooney A, Kaneski CR, Brady RO, Schiffmann R. Mucolipidosis IV consists of one complementation group. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1999; 96:8562-66.
15. Vergarajauregui S, Connelly PS, Daniels MP, Puertollano R. Autophagic dysfunction in mucolipidosis type IV patients. Hum Mol Genet 2008; DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddn174.
16. Talbot K, Ansorge O. Recent advances in the genetics of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and frontotemporal dementia: common pathways in neurodegenerative disease. Hum Mol Genet 2006; 15:R182-7.
17. Jennings JJ Jr, Zhu JH, Rbaibi Y, Luo X, Chu CT, Kiselyov K. Mitochondrial aberrations in mucolipidosis Type IV. J Biol Chem 2006; 281:39041-50.
18. Terman A, Gustafsson B, Brunk UT. Autophagy, organelles and ageing. J Pathol 2007; 211:134-43.
19. Meijer WH, van der Klei IJ, Veenhuis M, Kiel JAKW. ATG genes involved in non-selective autophagy are conserved from yeast to man, but the selective Cvt and pexophagy pathways also require organism-specific genes. Autophagy 2007; 3:106-16.
20. Kraft C, Deplazes A, Sohrmann M, Peter M. Mature ribosomes are selectively degraded upon starvation by an autophagy pathway requiring the Ubp3p/Bre5p ubiquitin protease. Nat Cell Biol 2008; 10:602-10.
21. Roberts P, Moshitch-Moshkovitz S, Kvam E, O’Toole E, Winey M, Goldfarb DS. Piecemeal microautophagy of nucleus in *Saccharomyces cerevisiae*. Mol Biol Cell 2003; 14:129–41.
22. Shintani T, Huang WP, Stromhaug PE, Klionsky DJ. Mechanism of cargo selection in the cytoplasm to vacuole targeting pathway. Dev Cell 2002; 3:825-37.
23. Espert L, Codogno P, Biard-Piechaczzyk M. Involvement of autophagy in viral infections: antiviral function and subversion by viruses. J Mol Med 2007; 85:811-23.
24. Dengjel J, Schoor O, Fischer R, Reich M, Kraus M, Müller M, Kreymborg K, Altenberend F, Brandenburg J, Kalbacher H, et al. Autophagy promotes MHC class II presentation of peptides from intracellular source proteins. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2005; 102:7922-7.
25. Fader CM, Sánchez D, Furlán M, Colombo MI. Induction of autophagy promotes fusion of multivesicular bodies with autophagic vacuoles in k562 cells. Traffic 2008; 9:230-50.
26. Ravikumar B, Imarisio S, Sarkar S, O’Kane CJ, Rubinsztein DC. Rab5 modulates aggregation and toxicity of mutant huntingtin through macroautophagy in cell and fly models of Huntington disease. J Cell Sci 2008; 121:1649-60.
27. Backer JM. The regulation and function of Class III PI3Ks: novel roles for Vps34. Biochem J 2008; 410:1-17.
28. Ravikumar B, Vacher C, Berger Z, Davies JE, Luo S, Oroz LG, Scaravilli F, Easton DF, Duden R, O’Kane CJ, et al. Inhibition of mTOR induces autophagy and reduces toxicity of polyglutamine expansions in fly and mouse models of Huntington disease. Nat Genet 2004; 36:585-95.
29. Bergamini E, Cavallini G, Donati A, Gori Z. The role of macroautophagy in the ageing process, anti-ageing intervention and age-associated diseases. Int J Biochem Cell Biol 2004; 36:2392-404.
30. Wong ES, Tan JM, Soong WE, Hussein K, Nukina N, Dawson VL, Dawson TM, Cuervo AM, Lim KL. Autophagy-mediated clearance of aggresomes is not a universal phenomenon. Hum Mol Genet 2008; DOI 10.1093/hmg/ddn157.
