
Biosci. Biotechnol. Biochem., 72 (8), 2110–2117, 2008

# Arabidopsis CYP85A2 Catalyzes Lactonization Reactions in the Biosynthesis of 2-Deoxy-7-oxalactone Brassinosteroids

Takumi KATSUMATA,$^{1}$ Akiko HASEGAWA,$^{1}$ Tatsuya FUJIWARA,$^{1}$ Tomoyuki KOMATSU,$^{1}$ Miho NOTOMI,$^{1}$ Hiroshi ABE,$^{2}$ Masahiro NATSUME,$^{2}$ and Hiroshi KAWAIDE$^{2,\dagger}$

$^{1}$Graduate School of Agriculture, Tokyo University of Agriculture and Technology (TUAT), Fuchu, Tokyo 183-8509, Japan  
$^{2}$Institute of Symbiotic Science and Technology, Tokyo University of Agriculture and Technology (TUAT), Fuchu, Tokyo 183-8509, Japan  

Received March 24, 2008; Accepted April 21, 2008; Online Publication, August 7, 2008  
[doi:10.1271/bbb.80192]

Brassinolide (BL), a plant 7-oxalactone-type steroid hormone, is one of the active brassinosteroids (BRs) that regulates plant growth and development. BL is biosynthesized from castasterone by the cytochrome P450 monooxygenase, CYP85A2. We showed that a *Pichia pastoris* transformant that synchronously expresses Arabidopsis P450 reductase gene *ATR1* and P450 gene *CYP85A2* converts teasterone and typhasterol to 7-oxateasterone and 7-oxatyphasterol, respectively. Thus, CYP85A2 catalyzes the lactonization reactions of not only castasterone but also teasterone and typhasterol. The two 2-deoxy-7-oxalactone-type BRs were identified in Arabidopsis plants. Although the reversible conversion between 7-oxateasterone and 7-oxatyphasterol was observed *in vivo*, no conversion of 7-oxatyphasterol to BL was observed. The biological activity of 7-oxatyphasterol toward Arabidopsis hypocotyl elongation was nearly the same as that of castasterone. These results suggest that a new BR biosynthetic pathway, a BR lactonization pathway, functions in Arabidopsis and plays an important role in regulating the concentration of active BRs, even though the metabolism of 7-oxatyphasterol to BL is still unknown.

Key words: Arabidopsis; Baeyer-Villiger oxidation; biosynthesis; cytochrome P450; *Pichia pastoris*

Brassinosteroids (BRs) are steroidal plant hormones that regulate growth and development in plants. Among the more than 50 BRs identified in the plant kingdom,$^{1)}$ brassinolide (BL) is one of the most active forms. Plants have several BR pathways that synthesize active BL, derived from the steroid biosynthetic pathways. For example, two pathways from campestanol to castasterone (CS), C6 oxidation and the late-C6 oxidation pathway, operate in many plants.$^{2)}$ Another branching pathway, the early-C22 oxidation pathway, was demonstrated using a BR-deficient mutant of *Arabidopsis thaliana.*$^{3)}$ Recently, a new shortcut pathway from campesterol to 6-deoxotyphasterol was demonstrated by a functional analysis of the cytochrome P450 monooxygenases (P450s) responsible for BR biosynthesis.$^{4)}$ Thus, at least four pathways are involved in the biosynthesis of CS, and CS is further metabolized to BL by lactonization of the B ring.

Plant cytochrome P450 monooxygenases are membrane-bound enzymes that are involved in hormone biosynthesis, secondary metabolism, and drug catabolism. Chemical analyses of the endogenous BRs in BR-deficient mutants of *Arabidopsis* and tomato have suggested that P450 genes encoding CYP90A1, CYP90B1 and CYP85 are involved in the biosynthesis of BRs.$^{5–8)}$ An analysis of the functions of P450s using a *Saccharomyces cerevisiae* heterologous expression system showed that CYP90B1 catalyzes the C-22 oxidation reaction in early-stage BR biosynthesis$^{9)}$ and that CYP85A catalyzes the C-6 oxidation reaction in late-stage BR biosynthesis.$^{8)}$ In 2005, two independent groups found that CYP85A-family proteins catalyze the Baeyer-Villiger-type oxidation reaction of CS to form BL.$^{10,11)}$ These were the first reports of a lactonization reaction in BR biosynthesis that synthesizes BL from CS. Although the synthesis of BL from CS is well accepted, another possible biosynthetic origin of BL, independent of CS, had been overlooked. We noted that plant hormone biosynthesis consists of metabolic grids, and that one enzyme can recognize multiple intermediates as substrates. For example, plant gibberellin 20-oxidases recognize non-13-hydroxylated and 13-hydroxylated GAs.$^{12)}$ In fact, BR C-6 oxidases

$\dagger$ To whom correspondence should be addressed. Fax: +81-42-367-5698; E-mail: hkawaide@cc.tuat.ac.jp

Abbreviations: BL, brassinolide; BR, brassinosteroid; CPR, NADPH-cytochrome P450 reductase; CS, castasterone; MeOH, methanol; P450, cytochrome P450 monooxygenase; TE, teasterone; TY, typhasterol; 7-OXTE, 7-oxateasterone; 7-OXTY, 7-oxatyphasterol

Biosynthesis of 2-Deoxy-7-oxalactone Brassinosteroids

used. The wild-type and *bril-5* mutant strains were kindly provided by Drs. Takeshi Nakano (Riken) and Kenneth A. Feldmann (Univ. Arizona), respectively. The mutant *det2-1* strain was obtained from The Arabidopsis Biological Resource Center at Ohio State University. The wild-type strain X-33 of the methylotrophic yeast *Pichia pastoris* was used for transformation (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA). Plasmids pPICZ-A and pPIC6-B were used for protein production. The antibiotics, zeocin and blasticidin S, were purchased from Invitrogen and Funakoshi (Tokyo), respectively. *E. coli* strain JM109 was used for cloning and plasmid amplification.

**Construction of the expression vectors.** Open reading frames of the *CYP85A2* and *ATR1* cDNAs were amplified by PCR (Advantage HF-2, Clontech, Palo Alto, CA, USA) from an Arabidopsis cDNA library using the following primers: CYP85A2-fwd, 5′-GCGAATTCA-TGGGCATAATGATGATGATTTTGGGTCTTCTTG-TG-3′; CYP85A2-rev, 5′-ATGGTACCTCAGTAAGG-TGAACACTTAAGATGGTATCCTTTTGG-3′; ATR1-fwd, 5′-GAATTCTAGACTTCTGCTTTGTATGCTT-CCGATTGTTTTAAG-3′; and ATR1-rev, 5′-TCTA-GACCAGACATCTCTGAGGTATCTTCCTTC-3′. The PCR-amplified products were ligated into the pCR2.1 vector, and the resulting plasmids were introduced into *E. coli*. The insert sequences were confirmed by using an ABI Genetic Analyzer (3130 XL). The *CYP85A2* ORF was isolated by digestion with *EcoRI* and *KpnI*, and then ligated into pPICZ-A previously digested with *EcoRI* and *KpnI*. The *ATR1* ORF was also isolated by digestion with *EcoRI* and *XbaI*, and ligated into the predigested pPIC6-B. These constructs were transfected into *E. coli*, and the resulting plasmids were isolated and purified with a Plasmid Midi Isolation kit (Qiagen, Valencia, CA, USA). Each plasmid was linearized with *PmeI*, purified (5 μg μl⁻¹), and used to transform *Pichia*.

**Transformation of P. pastoris.** The constructs, pPI-C6ATR1 and pPICZCYP85A2, were used for transformation of *P. pastoris* X-33. pPIC6ATR1 linearized with *PmeI* was used for the first transformation of the host cells by electroporation, according to the manufacturer’s protocol (MicroPulser, Bio-Rad). Transformants resistant to blasticidin S were isolated from YPDS plates containing blasticidin S (300 μg ml⁻¹), and the integration of the *ATR1* gene in the transformants was confirmed by colony PCR using the pPIC-specific primers 5′-GACTGGTTCCAATTGACAAGC-3′ (forward) and 5′-GCAAATGGCATTCGTGACATC-3′ (reverse). A transformant showing robust growth was selected and used for the next transformation. The linearized pPICZCYP85A2 gene was integrated into this transformant, and double transformants resistant to both blasticidin S and zeocin were selected on YPDS plates containing blasticidin S (300 μg ml⁻¹) and zeocin (100 μg ml⁻¹).

Fig. 1. Structures of 7-OXTE (1), 7-OXTY (2) and 3β-Hydroxy-7-oxa-campesta-6-one (3).

are also multifunctional P450 enzymes that recognize many substrates, including 6-deoxoTE, 6-deoxoTY, and 6-deoxoCS.⁸ This evidence suggests that BL is biosynthesized not only from CS but also from another BR. Among the naturally occurring BRs, 2-deoxyBL (7-OXTY) [(22R,23R,24S)-3α,22,23-trihydroxy-24-methyl-B-homo-7-oxa-5α-cholestan-6-one] (Fig. 1) exists in *Pisum sativum* L. and *Apium graveolens*.¹³,¹⁴ The biosynthetic origin of 7-OXTY in plants is unknown. Furthermore, other 2-deoxy-7-oxalactone-type BRs such as 7-oxatesterone (7-OXTE) had not been found in plants.

We describe here the recognition of a novel substrate by recombinant CYP85A2 protein produced in *Pichia pastoris*, a methylotrophic yeast. We demonstrate that CYP85A2 catalyzes the lactonization reactions of TE and TY to produce 7-OXTE and 7-OXTY, respectively. Furthermore, we have identified naturally occurring 7-OXTE and 7-OXTY in Arabidopsis and demonstrated their biological activity. These results advance understanding of the biosynthesis, biological activities, and physiological roles of 7-oxalactone BRs in plant growth and development.

**Materials and Methods**

Plants, microorganisms, and chemicals. Authentic 7-OXTY and 7-OXTE were chemically synthesized from TY and TE.¹⁵ *Arabidopsis thaliana* wild-type Columbia-0 and the *bril-5* and *det2-1* mutants were

Heterologous production and detection of ATR1 and CYP85A2 in P. pastoris. To detect the production of both ATR1 and CYP85A2, a c-myc epitope tag was fused to the end of the C terminus of each protein. The double transformant #9-1 was incubated in 100 ml of minimal glycerol medium containing blasticidin S (300 μg ml⁻¹) and zeocin (100 μg ml⁻¹) to increase the cell numbers prior to MeOH induction. An induction culture for the production of CYP85A2 and ATR1 was continued in the minimal MeOH medium containing blasticidin S and zeocin, according to the manufacturer's protocol. Induction was maintained by the addition of MeOH (final concentration 0.5% v/v) every 24 h. Cells harvested after five days of the induction culture were suspended in 100 mM phosphate buffer (pH 8) and disrupted at 4°C by using acid-washed glass beads. A microsome fraction of each was prepared by ultracentrifugation (100,000 × g) at 4°C for 1 h. A western blot analysis of the recombinant proteins was performed by using an anti-c-myc antibody conjugated with alkaline phosphatase (Invitrogen) and 5-bromo-4-chloro-3-indolyl-1-phosphate (BCIP)/nitroblue tetrazolium (NBT) staining (Promega, Madison, WI, USA). Feeding experiments were performed by adding substrates (1 μg each) to the cultures at the time the MeOH induction was started. After four days of the induction culture, the products were retrieved from the culture broth by centrifugation (10,000 × g, 4°C, 10 min), extracted with ethyl acetate, and analyzed by GC-MS.

GC-MS analysis. Samples were analyzed by using a GC-MS system (JMS BU25, JEOL, Tokyo, Japan; ionization energy at 70 eV, filament at 0.3 mA) coupled with a capillary DB-5 column (0.25 mm i.d. × 15 m, 0.25-μm film thickness; J&W Scientific, Folsom, CA, USA). The He carrier gas flow rate was 1 ml min⁻¹ (constant flow), the injector temperature was 250°C, and the samples were injected by splitless injection. The oven temperature program was 80°C for 1 min after injection, an increase of 32°C min⁻¹ intervals to 300°C, and followed by 300°C for 10 min. The samples were derivatized with TMCS (Pierce, Rockford, IL, USA), and a methyl boronate reagent in pyridine to form a trimethylsilyl ether methyl boronate ester.

Isolation of 2-deoxy-7-oxalactone BRs from Arabidopsis. BR-containing ethyl-acetate extracts of Arabidopsis (150 g fresh weight of the wild type, 10 g fresh weight of *bri1-5*) were prepared as described. The neutral ethyl acetate-soluble fraction was subjected to aluminum oxide column chromatography (50 g Aluminum oxide 90, II–III, 70–230 mesh, Merck). BRs were eluted in CHCl₃:MeOH 95:5 and CHCl₃:MeOH 2:1, and then purified with Sephadex LH-20 (bed volume, 700 ml; MeOH:CHCl₃, 4:1; Amersham Bioscience) and eluted with MeOH:CHCl₃, 4:1. The eluates from the elution volume to the total column volume (5.7 to 7.9) were collected as BR-containing fractions. After purification with an ODS cartridge column (Sep-Pak Plus C18, Waters), the BR fractions were separated by ODS-HPLC (Develosil ODS-5, 4.6 mm i.d. × 250 mm; Nomura Chemical, Aichi, Japan) with a CH₃CN-H₂O solvent system. The fractions that eluted from 16–18 min and 22–24 min contained 7-OXTE and 7-OXTY, respectively, and were further purified by using normal-phase HPLC (Senshu Pak Aquasil SS-352N, 4.6 mm i.d. × 250 mm, Senshu Scientific, Tokyo) at a flow rate of 1 ml min⁻¹ with n-hexane:2-propanol at 85:15 containing 0.5% H₂O. Eluates containing 2-deoxy BRs were converted to a methyl boronate ester and then to a TMSi ether with TMCS.

BR derivatives conjugated with fatty acids were extracted from *bri1-5* and purified as described previously. The BRs, 6-deoxoTE, TE, and 7-OXTE, were analyzed by GC-MS as methyl boronate-TMSi ether derivatives.

Bioassay. Thirty seeds each of Arabidopsis wild type (Columbia-0) and the *det2-1* mutant were germinated on MS medium containing 1.5% sucrose and 10 nM of BRs under fluorescent light at 22°C for 4 h after a cold treatment (4°C for 48 h). The seedlings were then incubated in darkness at 22°C for seven days. BR activity was estimated by measuring the hypocotyl length of each seedling.

In vivo metabolism of 7-OXTE and 7-OXTY. Seeds of *det2-1* were germinated and grown under continuous light at 22°C for one week. Thirty *det2-1* seedlings were transferred into an MS medium containing 3% sucrose, to which 10 μg of each substrate (7-OXTE and 7-OXTY) were added, and the seedlings were incubated at 22°C for an additional week. The seedlings were then harvested and homogenized in MeOH. Metabolites were purified from the seedlings and analyzed by GC-MS as described above.

Results

Transformation of Pichia and detection of the recombinant ATR1 and CYP85A2 proteins

The Pichia expression system can produce high yields of recombinant proteins. Several functional analyses of P450s using this system have been reported over the past decade. We sought to determine the function of CYP85A2, a plant hormone biosynthetic enzyme, using Pichia. The activity of NADPH-cytochrome P450 reductase (CPR) plays an important role as an electron donor in the oxidation activity of P450. Hence, we isolated Arabidopsis CPR cDNA (ATR1) for co-expression with the CYP85A2 ORF in Pichia cells. The pPIC6ATRI construct was used for initial transformation of the host cells. Transformants resistant to blasticidin S (three colonies) were selected for the next transformation. A selected Pichia transformant containing the ATR1 gene (strain #9) integrated in the chromosome was

Biosynthesis of 2-Deoxy-7-oxalactone Brassinosteroids

marker #9-1 #9 WT (X-33)
(kDa) (CYP85A2 & (ATR1 OE)
ATR1 OE)

203
116
92
50
37

authentic 7-OXTE MB-TMSi derivative. Furthermore, 7-OXTY was identified from a feeding experiment with TY as a substrate: 7-OXTY MB-TMSi (12.4 min retention time), *m/z* 560 (9%), 545 (20), 490 (15), 195 (36), and 156 (100).

In contrast, transformants containing individually integrated CYP85A2 or ATR1 genes did not convert these BRs into 7-oxalactone BRs (data not shown). In addition, 3β-hydroxy-7-oxa-campesta-6-one (Fig. 1) has not been identified as a BR that occurs naturally in plants. When 6-oxocampestanol, another substrate, was incubated with CYP85A2, this intermediate was retrieved from the culture broth and no metabolites such as 3β-hydroxy-7-oxa-campesta-6-one were detected (data not shown). These results demonstrate that CYP85A2 catalyzes the lactonization reaction of BRs, not only of CS to BL, but also of TE and TY to 7-OXTE and 7-OXTY, respectively.

**Identification of 7-OXTE and 7-OXTY from Arabidopsis**

There have been reports of the identification of 7-OXTY and 2-deoxyBL from seeds of celery<sup>13</sup> and pea.<sup>14</sup> No other 2-deoxy-7-oxalactone BRs, such as 7-OXTE, have been detected in the vegetative tissues of higher plants. We demonstrated that CYP85A2 catalyzes the lactonization reactions of TE and TY to 7-OXTE and 7-OXTY, respectively. We next examined whether endogenous 7-OXTY and 7-OXTE are present in Arabidopsis during the vegetative growth stage. BRs were extracted from 150 g of Arabidopsis wild type, purified by ODS-HPLC and normal-phase HPLC, and analyzed by GC-MS. Full-scan GC-MS analysis of the 7-OXTE fraction (the 40–44 min fraction after normal-phase HPLC) afforded characteristic ion peaks of the 7-OXTE MB-TMSi derivative, and these data were identical to those of the authentic 7-OXTE MB-TMSi derivative (Table 1). However, 7-OXTY was not detected from the wild type by GC-MS. It has been reported that the Arabidopsis *bril* mutant accumulates active BRs such as BL due to a mutation in a BR receptor.<sup>24</sup> For this reason, we attempted to identify 7-OXTY from the *bril-5* mutant. Ten grams of fresh *bril-5* vegetative tissues were subjected to extraction. The fraction containing 7-OXTY separated by normal phase-HPLC (the 28–36 min fraction) was subjected to GC-MS after derivatization, resulting in the identification of 7-OXTY from the mutant (Table 1).

Our group has reported the identification of TE conjugated with fatty acids in plant reproductive tissues.<sup>17</sup> Although a fatty acid-conjugate BR with TE was found, no other BRs, such as 6-deoxoTE and 7-OXTE, have been identified. To determine whether 7-OXTE conjugated with fatty acid is present in Arabidopsis, the less polar fraction of an extract of *bril-5* vegetative tissue was saponified, purified, and analyzed by GC-MS. MS clearly showed significant amounts of 7-OXTE, TE and 6-deoxoTE derived from

**Fig. 2. Detection of Recombinant CYP85A2 and ATR1 Proteins in Microsomes Prepared from Pichia Transformant #9-1.**

Both proteins were fused with the c-myc protein at their C termini and detected by using an anti-c-myc antibody conjugated with alkaline phosphatase. Staining was performed with BCIP/NBT. Left, *Pichia* wild type X-33; middle, *Pichia* transformant overexpressing ATR1 (#9); right, *Pichia* transformant overexpressing ATR1 and CYP85A2 (#9-1).

then used for a second transformation with pPICZCY-P85A2. Two transformants (#9-1 and #9-2) resistant to both blasticidin S and zeocin were obtained, and a transformant showing robust growth (strain #9-1) was selected for heterologous expression. When the order of transformation was changed, with transformation of pPICZCYP85A2 followed by that of pPIC6ATRI, no transformants resistant to zeocin and blasticidin S were obtained.

Transformant #9-1 was cultured, and production of the recombinant CYP85A2 and ATR1 proteins was induced by the addition of MeOH. The microsomal fraction was prepared after MeOH induction to check the production of ATR1 and CYP85A2. The molecular masses of ATR1 and CYP85A2 were calculated as 77 and 54 kDa, respectively. Two bands that were stained with BCIP/NBT appeared near 90 and 60 kDa, indicating that both recombinant proteins were produced in the *Pichia* cells (Fig. 2).

**Functional analysis of CYP85A2**

CYP85A2 catalyzes the Baeyer-Villiger-type oxidation reaction from 6-deoxycastasterone to BL via CS.<sup>10,11</sup> We tested the reaction of the CYP85A2 enzyme with TE and TY. Each substrate was incubated for four days with cells of *Pichia* transformant #9-1, which were producing both CYP85A2 and ATR1. Products in the supernatant were extracted and analyzed by GC-MS after derivatization. The transformant #9-1 was able to convert TE and TY to 7-OXTE and 7-OXTY, respectively. A full-scan GC-MS analysis of 7-OXTE after feeding with TE showed characteristic ion peaks of the 7-OXTE MB-TMSi derivative at 14.5 min: *m/z* 545 ([M – 15]<sup>+</sup>, 100% relative intensity), 169 (32), 156 (54). These data were identical to the ion peaks of the

T. KATSUMATA et al.

Table 1. GC-MS Data for 2-Deoxy-7-oxalactone BRs Identified in the Text

| Identified BRs$^a$ | source          | Rt (min. on GC) | MS $m/z$ (rel. int., %)                                                                 |
|--------------------|-----------------|-----------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| **Endogenous 7-OXBRs from Arabidopsis** |
| 7-OXTE            | WT              | 15'03"          | 545 ([M – 15]$^+$, 100), 169 (35), 156 (45)                                           |
| 7-OXTE            | authentic       | 15'03"          | 545 ([M – 15]$^+$, 100), 169 (35), 156 (27)                                           |
| 7-OXTY            | WT              | 13'15"          | 560 ([M]$^+$, 13), 545 (12), 531 (14), 490 (11), 195 (30), 156 (100)                   |
| 7-OXTY            | authentic       | 13'15"          | 560 ([M]$^+$, 8), 545 (19), 531 (8), 490 (13), 195 (49), 156 (100)                     |
| **Conversion experiments on 7-OXBRs** |
| 7-OXTY            | det2-1          | 13'14"          | 560 ([M]$^+$, 6), 545 (17), 531 (10), 490 (8), 195 (34), 156 (100)                   |
| 7-OXTY            | 7-OXTE$^b$      |                 |                                                                                       |
| 7-OXTY            | authentic       | 13'14"          | 560 ([M]$^+$, 6), 545 (21), 531 (9), 490 (12), 195 (52), 156 (100)                    |
| 7-OXTE            | det2-1          | 15'42"          | 545 ([M – 15]$^+$, 100), 169 (67), 156 (71)                                           |
| 7-OXTE            | 7-OXTY$^b$      |                 |                                                                                       |
| 7-OXTE            | authentic       | 15'42"          | 545 ([M – 15]$^+$, 100), 169 (51), 156 (67)                                           |

$a$, BRs were analyzed by GC-MS as methane boronate-TMSi ethers.  
$b$, These BRs (10 μg) were added into the culture medium incubating the det2-1 mutant. After 1 week of incubation, BRs were retrieved from the plants and analyzed by GC-MS.

Fig. 3. Mass Spectra of Methane Boronate-TMSi Ether Derivatives of 6-DeoxoTE (6-DTE), TE, and 7-OXTE in a Fatty-Acid Conjugate Fraction of Arabidopsis.

Panels A and B show the spectra of authentic 6-DTE and endogenous 6-DTE, respectively. A, GC retention time (RT) of 10.10 min, $m/z$ 530 ([M]$^+$, 62%); B, GC RT of 10.10 min, $m/z$ 530 ([M]$^+$, 46%). Panels C and D show authentic and endogenous TE, respectively. C, GC RT of 12.08 min, $m/z$ 544 ([M]$^+$, 35%); D, GC RT of 12.08 min, $m/z$ 544 ([M]$^+$, 35%). Panels E and F show authentic and endogenous 7-OXTE, respectively. E, GC RT of 15.30 min, $m/z$ 545 ([M – 15]$^+$, 100%); F, GC RT of 15.30 min, $m/z$ 545 ([M – 15]$^+$, 100%).

their conjugates were also identified in this fraction (Fig. 3). However, 7-OXTY, TY, and 6-deoxoTY were not present in this fraction.

### Examination of the hypocotyl-elongation activity of 2-deoxy-7-oxalactone BRs using det-2

7-OXTE and 7-OXTY have been reported to have activity in a rice lamina joint assay. The activities of 7-OXTE and 7-OXTY were reported to be 10–20 times higher than those of TE and TY, suggesting that the introduction of a lactone group on the B ring promotes biological activity. However, little is known about the biological activities of 7-OXTE and 7-OXTY in dicotyledonous plants. We tested the activities of 7-OXTE and 7-OXTY on hypocotyl elongation in det2-1. The activities of 7-OXTE and 7-OXTY on det2-1 hypocotyl elongation were higher when TE and TY were oxidized to form 7-oxalactone-type BRs (Fig. 4). Surprisingly, the activity of 7-OXTY was the same or slightly higher than that of CS.

#### Feeding experiments of det2-1 with 7-OXTE and 7-OXTY

The Arabidopsis det2-1 mutant lacks the 5α-reductase activity of (24R)-24-methylcholest-4-en-3-one, a step between campesterol and campestanol metabolism.

Biosynthesis of 2-Deoxy-7-oxalactone Brassinosteroids

Fig. 4. Effects of Various BRs (10nM each) on Hypocotyl Elongation in the Arabidopsis *det2-1* Mutant.

Growth conditions and procedures are described in the text. Each value is the means ± S.E. of 30 seedlings.

This mutation causes decreased endogenous levels of BRs, making it useful for BR biosynthetic studies in Arabidopsis.²⁷ To confirm the biosynthetic relationship of 7-OXTE and BL in Arabidopsis, we treated the *det2-1* mutant with these BRs and analyzed the resulting metabolites. *det2-1* seedlings cultured in MS medium were independently treated with each substrate. Following the incubation, the seedlings were extracted and the BRs in the extracts were purified and analyzed by GC-MS. The analysis showed that the *det2-1* mutant converted 7-OXTE to 7-OXTY and 7-OXTY to 7-OXTE, a reversible conversion (Table 1). However, no conversion of 7-OXTY to BL was detected.

### Discussion

Our functional analysis of a plant P450 in *Pichia* demonstrated a novel biosynthetic pathway of BR that may lead to the active form. Since eukaryotic P450 genes are widely distributed, determining their functions is an important goal for biochemists and physiologists. *S. cerevisiae* is often used to demonstrate the roles of P450 genes in plant hormone biosynthesis and catabolism.⁷,⁸,¹⁰,¹¹,²⁸⁻³² We developed another system using *Pichia* with two distinct expression vectors that provides a simple procedure to analyze P450 genes. Once a transformant overexpressing the CPR (*ATRI*) gene is prepared, functional analysis of a P450 protein is easily performed when the P450 gene is subsequently introduced. Transformants of the wild type and the *ATRI*-overexpressing *Pichia* strain that are resistant to both zeocin and blasticidin can be rapidly selected. Using this *Pichia* expression system, the production of CYP85A2 reached a level detectable with BCIP/NBT staining reagents. We are now using this system to analyze the functions of two other P450 genes, ent-kaurene oxidase and ent-kaurenoic acid oxidase, in gibberellin biosynthesis.

In BR biosynthesis, BL is thought to be synthesized exclusively from CS. This means that the lactonization reaction occurs only at the step of metabolism of CS to BL. The results of feeding experiments using Arabidopsis and *Catharanthus* seedlings supported the conversion of CS into BL *in vivo*.³³,³⁴ It was reported that this conversion reaction is catalyzed by CYP85A2.¹⁰,¹¹ Here, we examined the substrate recognition of CYP85A2. Some P450 enzymes catalyze multifunctional or multi-step oxidation reactions in plant hormone biosynthesis, including CYP85A1, CYP701A (ent-kaurene oxidase),³¹ and CYP88A (ent-kaurenoic acid oxidase).³² These facts suggest that CYP85A2 recognizes not only the lactonization reaction of CS, but also other lactonization reactions, such as those of TE and TY, to produce 2-deoxy-7-oxalactone BRs. We demonstrated that CYP85A2 catalyzes the lactonization reaction of TE and TY, but not that of 6-oxocampestanol. *In vivo* feeding experiments showed that 7-OXTE is converted to 7-OXTY in *det2-1*. Likewise, 7-OXTY added as a substrate was converted to 7-OXTE. However, 7-OXTY was unable to be converted to BL. Since the endogenous level of BL in Arabidopsis is quite low, only the *bril* mutant, which accumulates endogenous BL, could be used to examine the *in vivo* metabolism of CS to BL.³⁴ These results probably explain the results of our GC-MS analysis of Arabidopsis wild type and *det2-1*, which detected no endogenous BL converted from 7-OXTY. Demonstration of the conversion of 7-OXTY to BL may require other plant materials and a more sensitive procedure for BL detection.

In this study, the endogenous levels of 2-deoxy-7-oxalactone BRs in Arabidopsis were unknown. Due to the lack of BR internal standards, such as deuterium-labeled 7-OXTE and 7-OXTY, it was not possible to quantify the endogenous levels of BRs. GC-MS detected 7-OXTE as the free form in Arabidopsis wild type, but 7-OXTY was not detected from the same plant material. However, *bril-5* was found to contain detectable amounts of 7-OXTY and 7-OXTE-fatty acid ester, as well as BL,²⁵ suggesting that both BL and 7-OXTY play significant roles in BR biosynthesis and the subsequent signal transduction. This hypothesis is supported by the observation that 7-OXTY showed the same hypocotyl

2116

T. KATSUMATA *et al.*

campesterol → campestanol → 6-oxocampestanol

↓ ↓ ↓

22-OHcampesterol 6-deoxoTE BR-fatty acid ester TE CYP85A2 7-OXTE

↓ ↓ ↓ ↓

3-dehydro- 3-dehydro-TY

6-deoxoTY CYP85A1, 2 TY CYP85A2 7-OXTY

↓ ↓ ↓

6-deoxoCS CS CYP85A1, 2 BL

---

Fig. 5. BR Biosynthetic Pathway in Plants.

Several pathways from campesterol lead to BL. The known BR pathways are indicated by thin arrows. The BR lactonization pathway is added in BR biosynthetic grids (thick arrows). The biosynthetic origins of 7-OXTE and 7-OXTY are respectively derived from TE and TY by CYP85A2. 6-deoxoTE and 7-OXTE were identified in the fatty acid-ester form (thick arrows) as well as TE. No other BRs were found as fatty-acid conjugates. In our studies, the conversion of 7-OXTY to BL is still unknown (broken arrow).

---

elongation activity as CS, although the conversion of 7-OXTY to BL was not observed in the BR-deficient *det2-1*.

Recently, a pathway was proposed of a campestanol-independent shortcut leading to 6-deoxotyphasterol and 3-dehydro-6-deoxoteasterone from 22-hydroxycampesterol initiated by C-23 oxidation by CYP90C1 and CYP90D1. It was postulated that this pathway is a main route to the production of active BR. The BR biosynthetic intermediate 6-deoxotyphasterol, which is mainly supplied via the shortcut pathway, may be converted to 7-OXTY by CYP85A2 (Fig. 5). Taken together, the data suggest that a BR-lactonization pathway involving 7-OXTE and 7-OXTY regulates the endogenous level of active BL. Determination of the endogenous levels of 7-OXTE, 7-OXTY, and BL, and characterization of the C-2 hydroxylation enzyme, will be helpful in understanding the regulation of the concentrations of active BRs *in vivo*. Furthermore, questions whether 7-OXTY is one of active BRs or the precursor of BL are still remaining since the metabolism of 7-OXTY to BL is not confirmed. These are next and future subjects.

---

### References

1) Bajguz, A., and Tretyn, A., The chemical characteristic and distribution of brassinosteroids in plants. *Phytochem.*, **62**, 1027–1046 (2003).

2) Fujioka, S., and Yokota, T., Biosynthesis and metabolism of brassinosteroids. *Annu. Rev. Plant Biol.*, **54**, 137–164 (2003).

3) Fujioka, S., Takatsuto, S., and Yoshida, S., An early C-22 oxidation branch in the brassinosteroid biosynthetic pathway. *Plant Physiol.*, **130**, 930–939 (2002).

4) Ohnishi, T., Szatman, A. M., Watanabe, B., Fujita, S., Bancos, S., Koncz, C., Lafos, M., Shibata, K., Yokota, T., Sakata, K., Szekeres, M., and Mizutani, M., C-23 hydroxylation by *Arabidopsis* CYP90C1 and CYP90D1 reveals a novel shortcut in brassinosteroid biosynthesis. *Plant Cell*, **18**, 3275–3288 (2006).

5) Szekeres, M., Németh, K., Koncz-Kálmán, Z., Mathur, J., Kauschmann, A., Altmann, T., Rédei, G. P., Nagy, F., Schell, J., and Koncz, C., Brassinosteroids rescue the deficiency of CYP90, a cytochrome P450, controlling cell elongation and de-etiolation in *Arabidopsis*. *Cell*, **85**, 171–182 (1996).

6) Choe, S., Dilkes, B. P., Fujioka, S., Takatsuto, S., Sakurai, A., and Feldmann, K. A., The *DWF4* gene of *Arabidopsis* encodes a cytochrome P450 that mediates multiple 22α-hydroxylation steps in brassinosteroid biosynthesis. *Plant Cell*, **10**, 231–243 (1998).

7) Bishop, G. J., Nomura, T., Yokota, T., Harrison, K., Noguchi, T., Fujioka, S., Takatsuto, S., Jones, J. D. G., and Kamiya, Y., The tomato DWARF enzyme catalyses C-6 oxidation in brassinosteroid biosynthesis. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA*, **96**, 1761–1766 (1999).

8) Shimada, Y., Fujioka, S., Miyauichi, N., Kushiro, M., Takatsuto, S., Nomura, T., Yokota, T., Kamiya, Y., Bishop, G. J., and Yoshida, S., Brassinosteroid-6-oxidase

---

### Acknowledgments

The authors are grateful to Drs. K. A. Feldmann and T. Nakano for the gifts of Arabidopsis seeds. This work was supported in part by grant-in-aid for scientific research A (number 16208012) to Professor Takeshi Sassa of Yamagata University and H. K. of Tokyo University of Agriculture and Technology from the Japanese Society for the Promotion of Science.

from Arabidopsis and tomato catalyze multiple C-6 oxidations in brassinosteroid biosynthesis. *Plant Physiol.*, **126**, 770–779 (2001).

9) Fujita, S., Ohnishi, T., Watanabe, B., Yokota, T., Takatsuto, S., Fujioka, S., Yoshida, S., Sakata, K., and Mizutani, M., Arabidopsis CYP90B1 catalyses the early C-22 hydroxylation of C₂₇, C₂₈ and C₂₉ sterols. *Plant J.*, **45**, 765–774 (2006).

10) Nomura, T., Kushiro, T., Yokota, T., Kamiya, Y., Bishop, G. J., and Yamaguchi, S., The last reaction producing brassinolide is catalyzed by cytochrome P450s, CYP85A3 in tomato and CYP85A2 in *Arabidopsis*. *J. Biol. Chem.*, **280**, 17873–17879 (2005).

11) Kim, T.-W., Hwang, J.-Y., Kim, Y.-S., Joo, S.-H., Chang, S. C., Lee, J. S., Takatsuto, S., and Kim, S.-K., Arabidopsis CYP85A2, a cytochrome P450, mediates the Baeyer-Villiger oxidation of castasterone to brassinolide in brassinosteroid biosynthesis. *Plant Cell*, **17**, 2397–2412 (2005).

12) Phillips, A. L., Ward, D. A., Uknes, S., Appleford, N. E. J., Lange, T., Huttl, A. K., Gaskin, P., Graebe, J. E., and Hedden, P., Isolation and expression of three gibberellin 20-oxidase cDNA clones from arabidopsis. *Plant Physiol.*, **108**, 1049–1057 (1995).

13) Schumidt, J., Voigt, B., and Adam, G., 2-deoxybrassinolide—a naturally occurring brassinosteroid from *Apium graveolens*. *Phytochem.*, **40**, 1041–1043 (1995).

14) Yokota, T., Matsuoka, T., Koarai, T., and Nakayama, M., 2-deoxybrassinolide, a brassinosteroid from *Pisum sativum* seed. *Phytochem.*, **42**, 509–511 (1996).

15) Ando, T., Aburatani, M., Koseki, N., Asakawa, S., Mouri, T., and Abe, H., ¹³C-NMR assignments of brassinosteroids by two-dimensional techniques. *Magn. Reson. Chem.*, **31**, 94–99 (1993).

16) Abe, H., Honjo, C., Kyokawa, Y., Asakawa, S., Natsume, M., and Narushima, M., 3-Oxoteasterone and the epimerization of teasterone: identification in lily anthers and *Distylium racemosum* leaves and its biotransformation into typhasterol. *Biosci. Biotechnol. Biochem.*, **56**, 986–989 (1994).

17) Asakawa, S., Abe, H., Kyokawa, S., Nakamura, S., and Natsume, M., Teasterone 3-myristate: a new type of brassinosteroid derivative in *Lilium longiflorum* anthers. *Biosci. Biotechnol. Biochem.*, **58**, 219–220 (1994).

18) Trant, J. M., Functional expression of recombinant spiny dogfish shark (*Squalus acanthias*) cytochrome P450c17 (17α-hydroxylase/C₁₇,₂₀-lyase) in yeast (*Pichia pastoris*). *Arch. Biochem. Biophys.*, **326**, 8–14 (1996).

19) Andersen, M. D., Busk, P. K., Svendsen, I., and Møller, B. L., Cytochrome P-450 from cassava (*Manihot esculenta* Crantz) catalyzing the first steps in the biosynthesis of the cyanogenic glucosides linamarin and lotaustralin. *J. Biol. Chem.*, **275**, 1966–1975 (2000).

20) Matsuzaki, F., and Wariishi, H., Molecular characterization of cytochrome P450 catalysing hydroxylation of benzoates from the white-rot fungus *Phanerochaete chrysosporium*. *Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun.*, **334**, 1184–1190 (2005).

21) Dietrich, M., Grundmann, L., Kurr, K., Valinotto, L., Saussele, T., Schmid, R. D., and Lange, S., Recombinant production of human microsomal cytochrome P450 2D6 in the methylotrophic yeast *Pichia pastoris*. *ChemBioChem.*, **6**, 2014–2022 (2005).

22) Kolar, N. W., Swart, A. C., Mason, J. I., and Swart, P., Functional expression and characterization of human cytochrome P45017a in *Pichia pastoris*. *J. Biotechnol.*, **129**, 635–644 (2007).

23) Urban, P., Mignotte, C., Kazmaier, M., Delorme, F., and Pompon, D., Cloning, yeast expression, and characterization of the coupling of two distantly related *Arabidopsis thaliana* NADPH-cytochrome P450 reductases with P450 CYP73A5. *J. Biol. Chem.*, **272**, 19176–19186 (1997).

24) Noguchi, T., Fujioka, S., Choe, S., Takatsuto, S., Yoshida, S., Yuan, H., Feldmann, K. A., and Tax, F. E., Brassinosteroid-insensitive dwarf mutants of *Arabidopsis* accumulate brassinosteroids. *Plant Physiol.*, **121**, 743–752 (1999).

25) Abe, H., Asakawa, S., Ando, T., Mouri, T., Aburatani, M., and Takeuchi, T., Effect of introducing a lactone group into typhasterol and teasterone to promote rice lamina inclination. *Biosci. Biotechnol. Biochem.*, **56**, 1312–1313 (1992).

26) Fujioka, S., Li, J., Choi, Y.-H., Seto, H., Takatsuto, S., Noguchi, T., Watanabe, T., Kuriyama, H., Yokota, T., Chory, J., and Sakurai, A., The *arabidopsis deetiolated2* mutant is blocked early in brassinosteroid biosynthesis. *Plant Cell*, **9**, 1951–1962 (1997).

27) Fujioka, S., Takatsuto, S., and Yoshida, S., An early C-22 oxidation branch in the brassinosteroid biosynthetic pathway. *Plant Physiol.*, **130**, 930–939 (2002).

28) Pompon, D., Louerat, B., Bronine, A., and Urban, P., Yeast expression of animal and plant P450s in optimized redox environments. *Methods Enzymol.*, **272**, 51–64 (1996).

29) Kushiro, T., Okamoto, M., Nakabayashi, K., Yamagishi, K., Kitamura, S., Asami, T., Hirai, N., Koshiba, T., Kamiya, Y., and Nambara, E., The *Arabidopsis* cytochrome P450 CYP707A encodes ABA 8′-hydroxylases: key enzymes in ABA catabolism. *EMBO J.*, **23**, 1647–1656 (2004).

30) Zhu, Y., Nomura, T., Xu, Y., Zhang, Y., Peng, Y., Mao, B., Hanada, A., Zhou, H., Wang, R., Li, P., Zhu, X., Mander, L. N., Kamiya, Y., Yamaguchi, S., and He, Z., *ELONGATED UPPERMOST INTERNODE* encodes a cytochrome P450 monooxygenase that epoxidizes gibberellins in a novel deactivation reaction in rice. *Plant Cell*, **18**, 442–456 (2006).

31) Helliwell, C. A., Sheldon, C. C., Olive, M. L., Walker, A. R., Zeevaart, J. A. D., Peacock, W. J., and Dennis, E. S., Cloning of the *Arabidopsis ent*-kaurene oxidase gene GA3. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA*, **95**, 9019–9024 (1998).

32) Helliwell, C. A., Chandler, P. M., Poole, A., Dennis, E. S., and Peacock, W. J., The CYP88 cytochrome P450 *ent*-kaurenoic acid oxidase, catalyzes three steps of the gibberellin biosynthetic pathway. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA*, **98**, 2065–2070 (2001).

33) Suzuki, H., Fujioka, S., Takatsuto, S., Yokota, T., Murofushi, N., and Sakurai, A., Biosynthesis of brassinosteroids in seedlings of *Catharanthus roseus*, *Nicotiana tabacum*, and *Oryza sativa*. *Biosci. Biotechnol. Biochem.*, **59**, 168–172 (1995).

34) Noguchi, T., Fujioka, S., Choe, S., Takatsuto, S., Tax, F. E., Yoshida, S., and Feldmann, K. A., Biosynthetic pathway of brassinolide in *arabidopsis*. *Plant Physiol.*, **124**, 201–209 (2000).
