
Fungal Genetics and Biology 46 (2009) 221–231

**Contents lists available at ScienceDirect**

**Fungal Genetics and Biology**

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/yfgbi

---

### Participation in aflatoxin biosynthesis by a reductase enzyme encoded by *vrdA* gene outside the aflatoxin gene cluster

Yoko Shima<sup>a,d,3</sup>, Marisa Shiina<sup>a,b,1,3</sup>, Takao Shinozawa<sup>b,2</sup>, Yasuhiro Ito<sup>a</sup>, Hiromitsu Nakajima<sup>c</sup>, Yoshikazu Adachi<sup>d</sup>, Kimiko Yabe<sup>a,*</sup>

<sup>a</sup>National Food Research Institute, National Agriculture and Food Research Organization (NARO), Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8642, Japan  
<sup>b</sup>Faculty of Engineering, Gunma University, Kiryu, Gunma 376-8515, Japan  
<sup>c</sup>Faculty of Agriculture, Tottori University, Tottori 680-8553, Japan  
<sup>d</sup>School of Agriculture, Ibaraki University, Ami, Inashiki, Ibaraki 300-0393, Japan

---

#### ARTICLE INFO

**Article history:**  
Received 13 July 2008  
Accepted 25 December 2008  
Available online 3 January 2009  

**Keywords:**  
*vrdA* gene  
Reductase  
Metabolic grid  
Aflatoxin biosynthesis  
*Aspergillus parasiticus*

---

#### ABSTRACT

Three reactions from hydroxyversicolorone to versicolorone, from versiconal hemiacetal acetate to versiconol acetate, and from versiconal to versiconol are involved in a metabolic grid in aflatoxin biosynthesis. This work demonstrated that the same reductase of *Aspergillus parasiticus* catalyzes the three reactions. The gene (named *vrdA*) encoding the reductase was cloned, and its sequence did not show homology to any regions in aflatoxin gene cluster. Its cDNA encoding a 38,566 Da protein was separated by three introns in the genome. Deletion of the *vrdA* gene in *A. parasiticus* caused a significant decrease in enzyme activity, but did not affect aflatoxin productivity of the fungi. Although the *vrdA* gene was expressed in culture conditions conducive to aflatoxin production, it was expressed even in the *aflR* deletion mutant. These results suggest that the *vrdA* is not an aflatoxin biosynthesis gene, although it actually participates in aflatoxin biosynthesis in cells.

© 2009 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

---

### 1. Introduction

Aflatoxins are polyketide-derived secondary metabolites produced by certain strains of filamentous fungi, mainly *Aspergillus flavus* and *Aspergillus parasiticus* ([Payne and Brown, 1998](#)). Aflatoxins are highly toxic and carcinogenic in animals and humans, leading to hepatotoxicity, teratogenicity, immunotoxicity, and even death ([Eaton and Groopman, 1994](#)). Aflatoxin contamination of food and feed crops, such as wheat, corn, cotton, peanuts and tree nuts, is not only a serious health hazard but also an economic problem worldwide ([Jelinek et al., 1989](#)).

The biosynthetic pathway of aflatoxins has been extensively studied to develop strategies for reducing or eliminating aflatoxin contamination in food and feed. At least 18 enzymatic steps are required for conversion of acetyl coenzyme A (acetyl-CoA) to its final products, aflatoxins B₁, B₂, G₁ and G₂. Most of the enzymes have been identified, and the genes coding for the enzymes have been cloned and characterized ([Minto and Townsend, 1997](#); [Yabe and Nakajima, 2004](#); [Yu et al., 2002](#)). The genes constitute a large gene cluster encompassing 70 kb in the fungal genome, and their expression is positively regulated by the product of the regulatory gene, *aflR* ([Payne et al., 1993](#); [Price et al., 2006](#); [Woloshuk and Prieto, 1998](#); [Yu et al., 2004](#)). The *aflR* gene product belongs to the family of zinc binuclear DNA-binding proteins, and deletion of the *aflR* gene represses the expression of the aflatoxin biosynthetic genes ([Cary et al., 2000](#)).

We previously reported that a metabolic grid among hydroxyversicolorone (HVN), versicolorone (VONE), versiconal hemiacetal acetate (VHA), versiconol acetate (VOAc), versiconol (VOH) and versiconal (VHOH) is involved in aflatoxin biosynthesis ([Fig. 1](#)), and that three kinds of enzymes (monooxygenase, esterase and reductase) function in the grid ([Yabe et al., 1991a, 2003](#)). In that study, HVN was converted to VHA by a cytosol monooxygenase, which requires NADPH as a cofactor ([Yabe et al., 2003](#)), and the *moxY* gene encoding the monooxygenase, which catalyzes the reaction from HVN to VHA, was identified ([Wen et al., 2005](#)). Involvement of the MoxY monooxygenase in the reaction from VONE to VOAc as well as HVN to VHA was shown by the deletion of the *moxY* gene causing the accumulation of both HVN and VONE ([Wen et al., 2005](#)). The resulting VHA and VOAc were converted to VHOH and VOH, respectively, by an esterase enzyme encoded by the *estA* gene ([Chang et al., 2004](#)). VHA also serves as a substrate for the reductase reaction from VHA to VOAc. Based on the similarities of partial structures of the substrates, the same reductase as

---

1087-1845/$ - see front matter © 2009 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.  
doi:10.1016/j.fgb.2008.12.005

toxin gene cluster, although it is not included in the main pathway for aflatoxin biosynthesis.

We previously purified two reductase enzymes to homogeneity from the cytosol fraction of the mycelia of A. parasiticus NIAH-26 by monitoring the reaction from VHA to VOAc (Matsushima et al., 1994). Two enzymes (designated VHA reductases I and II) having the same enzyme activity were obtained, suggesting that these two enzymes are involved in aflatoxin biosynthesis in cells (Matsushima et al., 1994). However, in this study, we found that only the one enzyme corresponding to the larger enzyme (II) was reproducibly and successfully isolated from mycelia of the same strain, suggesting that another enzyme (reductase I) was a partial degradation product of the reductase II due to our previous poor techniques to inhibit certain contaminated proteases in crude fractions via many complicated purification steps in our early study (Matsushima et al., 1994). Therefore, our previous conclusion about involvement of two enzymes needed correction. This was accomplished in our current study, which demonstrated that a reductase enzyme corresponding to reductase II is the sole enzyme that catalyzes the reductase reactions in the metabolic grid in aflatoxin biosynthesis.

Our objective in this work was to determine the relationship between this reductase enzyme and aflatoxin biosynthesis. We isolated the genomic DNA as well as cDNA gene (named vrdA) encoding the reductase enzyme from A. parasiticus. Expression of the vrdA gene depended on culture conditions conducive to aflatoxin production, which was the same dependence seen for enzyme activity. However, this work demonstrated that the vrdA gene is not present within the aflatoxin gene cluster, and that the expression of the vrdA gene is not repressed by deletion of the aflR gene in A. parasiticus. These results strongly suggest that the reductase is not a common aflatoxin biosynthesis enzyme that is typically present in the aflatoxin gene cluster. This reductase might have a function other than aflatoxin biosynthesis, although it might inadvertently participate in aflatoxin biosynthesis because of its group substrate specificity to intermediates in aflatoxin biosynthesis.

### 2. Materials and methods

#### 2.1. Fungal strains and culture conditions

A. parasiticus strains used in this study are listed in Table 1. SY liquid medium (6% sucrose and 2% yeast extract; aflatoxin-inducing medium) and PY liquid medium (4% peptone and 2% yeast extract; aflatoxin-non-inducing medium) were used for Northern analysis (Motomura et al., 1999). YES liquid medium (20% sucrose and 2% yeast extract; aflatoxin-inducing medium) and YEP liquid medium (20% peptone and 2% yeast extract; aflatoxin-non-inducing medium) were used for RT-PCR (Cai et al., 2008; Yan et al., 2004). GY medium (2% glucose and 0.5% glucose) was used as culture medium (Yabe et al., 1988).

#### 2.2. DNA and RNA isolation

Genomic DNA was purified from A. parasiticus NIAH-26 as described previously (Motomura et al., 1999). Genomic DNA was also purified from A. parasiticus SYS-4 and the vrdA deletion mutant by using Nucleon PhytoPure (GE Healthcare, Buckinghamshire, UK) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.

For cloning, mycelia of A. parasiticus NIAH-26 was cultured in YES liquid medium at 28 °C for 4 days, and then total RNA was extracted from the mycelia as described previously (Motomura et al., 1999). mRNA was purified by an oligo(dT)-cellulose column using an mRNA purification kit (GE Healthcare) from total RNA. For

Table 1  
A. parasiticus strains used in this study.

| Strain                | Description                                                                                   | Reference           |
|-----------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------|
| SYS-4                 | A. parasiticus wild-type strain (NRRL-2999), aflatoxin-producing strain                          |                     |
| NIAH-26               | An UV-irradiated mutant from SYS-4, aflatoxin-non-producing strain$^a$                         | Yabe et al. (1988)  |
| $aflR$ deletion mutant | The $aflR$ gene deleted mutant isolated from SYS-4                                           | Cai et al. (2008)   |
| $vrdA$ deletion mutant | The $vrdA$ gene deleted strain from SYS-4                                                   | This study          |

$^a$ This strain induces all enzymes in aflatoxin biosynthetic pathway from norsolorinic acid to aflatoxins.

Northern analysis, mycelia of A. parasiticus NIAH-26 were cultured in either SY liquid medium or PY medium at 28 or 37 °C for 3 days. The total RNA was extracted using an RNeasy Plant Mini Kit (Qiagen K.K., Tokyo, Japan). For RT-PCR, mycelia from A. parasiticus SYS-4 and the $aflR$ deletion mutant were cultured in either YES liquid medium or YEP liquid medium at 28 °C for 3 days. Total RNA was then extracted from the mycelia using TRI Reagent (200 μl, Sigma-Aldrich, St Louis, MO, USA) and FastPrep FP100A (Q-Biogene, Santa Ana, CA, USA) as previously described (Yan et al., 2004) according to the manufacturer's instructions.

### 2.3. Determination of amino acid sequence of the reductase

VHA reductase was purified according to the purification procedures for VHA reductase II (Matsushima et al., 1994). Because the N-terminus of VHA reductase could not be sequenced, the enzyme was partially cleaved using Staphylococcus aureus V8 protease (Sigma-Aldrich) (Cleveland et al., 1977), followed by sequencing of the N-termini of the resulting peptides by an automated Edman degradation gas phase sequencer (model G1000-A; Hewlett-Packard, Palo Alto, CA, USA) as previously described (Motomura et al., 1999).

### 2.4. Cloning of $vrdA$ gene

The primers used in PCR are shown in Table 2. Degenerate PCR was performed using cDNA of A. parasiticus NIAH26 as described previously (Motomura et al., 1999). Degenerate primers VHA-F1, VHA-R1, VHA-F2 and VHA-R2 for the amplification of the $vrdA$ gene sequence were designed based on the determined amino acid sequences. To amplify the region between the two fragments, PCR was performed with primers $vrdA$-F3 and VHA-R1; for nested PCR, the primers were $vrdA$-F4 and VHA-R3. A Marathon cDNA Amplification Kit (Clontech) was used for 5′- and 3′-RACE PCR according to the manufacturer’s instructions. To determine the genomic DNA sequence, PCR was performed with genomic DNA of A. parasiticus NIAH26 using primers $vrdA$-F4 and $vrdA$-R4.

To determine the 5′- and 3′-flanking regions of the coding region, TAIL-PCR and inverse PCR were performed as described (Motomura et al., 1999; Ochman et al., 1988). TAIL-PCR was performed using the specific primers $vrdA$-TAIL1, $vrdA$-TAIL2 and $vrdA$-TAIL3 for the 5′-flanking region, and $vrdA$-TAIL4, $vrdA$-TAIL5 and $vrdA$-TAIL6 for the 3′-flanking region. Inverse PCR for the 5′-flanking region was performed using self-ligated DNAs derived from PstI- and SspI-digested DNA of A. parasiticus SYS-4 with primers $vrdA$-F5 and $vrdA$-R5; $vrdA$-F5 and $vrdA$-R6, respectively. Inverse PCR for the 3′-flanking region was performed using self-ligated DNA derived from HindIII-digested DNA with primers $vrdA$-F6 and $vrdA$-R7.

These PCR fragments were cloned and sequenced. DNA sequencing was performed using an ABI PRISM® BigDye™ Terminator Cycle Sequencing Ready Reaction Kit (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA).

Homology searches were performed using BLAST algorithms on the National Center for Biotechnology Information web server (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/BLAST) or the Database of the Genomes Analyzed at NITE (DOGAN; http://www.bio.nite.go.jp/dogan/Top). The genomic and cDNA sequences of $vrdA$ were deposited in the GenBank under accession numbers AB025578 and AB025579, respectively.

### 2.5. Northern analysis and RT-PCR

Northern analysis was carried out as previously described (Motomura et al., 1999). A 0.77 kb fragment, amplified using the genomic DNA with the primers $vrdA$-F4 and $vrdA$-R4 (Table 2), was cloned into a TA vector (pCR®2.1; Invitrogen Co.). The plasmid DNA was digested with EcoRI, and the resultant 0.77 kb DNA fragment as $vrdA$ probe-1 was labeled by DIG-High Prime (Roche, Tokyo, Japan). RT-PCR was performed using a ReverTra Dash RT-PCR kit (Toyobo Co, Osaka, Japan) according to the manufacturer’s instructions, using the primer pairs $vrdA$-F4 and $vrdA$-R8, $omtA$-F1 and $omtA$-R1, and $cmd$-F1 and $cmd$-R1, corresponding, respectively, to $vrdA$, $omtA$, and the calmodulin gene ($cmd$).

### 2.6. Southern analysis

Southern analysis was carried out as previously described (Cai et al., 2008) with some modifications. Genomic DNA of A. parasiticus SYS-4 and the $vrdA$ deletion mutant were digested with EcoRI and Xhol. Two fragments (one 1.2 kb and the other 2.0 kb) were amplified using the genomic DNA from A. parasiticus SYS-4 and pSP72-$ptrA$ (Wen et al., 2005) with primer pair $vrdA$-F7 and $vrdA$-R8 for the $vrdA$ probe-2, and the pair $ptrA$-F1 and $ptrA$-R1 (Table 2) for the $ptrA$ probe. The $vrdA$ probe-2 and $ptrA$ probe were labeled using ECL Direct Labeling and Detection System (GE Healthcare). The probes were hybridized according to the manufacturer’s instructions.

### 2.7. Construction of $vrdA$ gene disruption vector

The $vrdA$ gene disruption vector was designed to replace a 1.2 kb $vrdA$ gene open reading frame (ORF) region with the $ptrA$ selectable marker gene (Fig. 6A). The 1.6 kb KpnI fragment containing the 5′-flanking region of $vrdA$ was amplified with KOD-plus enzyme (Toyobo) using primers $vrdA$-L-F-KpnI and $vrdA$-L-R-KpnI. The 1.5 kb HindIII fragment containing the 3′-flanking region of $vrdA$ was amplified with KOD-plus enzyme using primers $vrdA$-R-F-HindIII and $vrdA$-R-R-HindIII (Table 2). The KpnI- and HindIII-digested PCR fragments, respectively, containing the 5′- and 3′-flanking regions of $vrdA$, were cloned into the corresponding sites of pSP72-$ptrA$ (Wen et al., 2005) to give pVRDA-L/R. After digestion of the vector with BglII and MluI, linearized fragments containing the 2.0 kb selectable marker $ptrA$, flanked by a 1.45 kb $vrdA$ 5′-region and a 1.39 kb $vrdA$ 3′-region, were used to transform A. parasiticus SYS-4.

### 2.8. Fungal transformation and screening for $vrdA$ deletion mutant

Fungal protoplasts were transformed as previously described (Wen et al., 2005). The pyrithiamine-resistant transformants were transferred to GY plates (containing 2% agar) at 28 °C for 2 days,

Table 2  
The oligonucleotide primers used in this study.

| Primer$^{a}$ | Sequence | Position$^{b}$ |
|---------------|----------|----------------|
| VHA-F1        | $5^{\prime}$-ATGGARCCNTAYAAYTAYGA-3$^{\prime}$$^{c}$ | +848/+867 |
| VHA-R1        | $5^{\prime}$-RTCNGTRTTYTCNCKNARNG-3$^{\prime}$ | +961/+942 |
| VHA-F2        | $5^{\prime}$-GCNMGNYTNGGNGAYWSNGG-3$^{\prime}$$^{d}$ | +10/+127 |
| VHA-R2        | $5^{\prime}$-TCNGGNCCNCCRTANCCCAT-3$^{\prime}$$^{c}$ | +178/+159 |
| vrdA-F3       | $5^{\prime}$-TCGGCTAGGTGACTCC-3$^{\prime}$$^{c,d}$ | +12/+125 |
| VHA-R3        | $5^{\prime}$-GCCCANGGNCKNGCNARNGC-3$^{\prime}$ | +930/+911 |
| vrdA-F4       | $5^{\prime}$-GGTCTCAAAGGTGATACTC-3$^{\prime}$ | +134/+152 |
| vrdA-R4       | $5^{\prime}$-ACAGGAGACCAAGGGATAAG-3$^{\prime}$ | +900/+881 |
| vrdA-TAIL1    | $5^{\prime}$-GGTTCTGATGCCTTTGTGTAGGCG-3$^{\prime}$ | +254/+230 |
| vrdA-TAIL2    | $5^{\prime}$-ATTCAGCACCCAGCCCTGCCATTCT-3$^{\prime}$ | +200/+176 |
| vrdA-TAIL3    | $5^{\prime}$-CCGTGCGTATTCCATTGTCCGGAG-3$^{\prime}$$^{d}$ | +113/$-$10 |
| vrdA-TAIL4    | $5^{\prime}$-CTTATCCCTTGGTCTCCTGTCCGCAC-3$^{\prime}$ | +881/+905 |
| vrdA-TAIL5    | $5^{\prime}$-GCGAGTCCGAGTCCGACAAAGCTAT-3$^{\prime}$ | +990/+1014 |
| vrdA-TAIL6    | $5^{\prime}$-ACAAGTTGCAATCGCGTGGTCGCTG-3$^{\prime}$ | +1063/+1087 |
| vrdA-F5       | $5^{\prime}$-GCGGAACATGTAATCGGCAG-3$^{\prime}$ | $-$314/$-$295 |
| vrdA-R5       | $5^{\prime}$-GGTCTGACTATACTTGAAAGACCCGAG-3$^{\prime}$ | $-$397/$-$422 |
| vrdA-F6       | $5^{\prime}$-CTCTGTGACGAAAACGATCC-3$^{\prime}$ | +2382/+2400 |
| vrdA-R6       | $5^{\prime}$-GGATAAGTCAGGGCGAGA-3$^{\prime}$ | $-$1360/$-$1377 |
| vrdA-F7       | $5^{\prime}$-ATGGAATACGCACGGTAAGA-3$^{\prime}$ | +1/+20 |
| vrdA-R7       | $5^{\prime}$-GAGTGCGGGCATTTGCAA-3$^{\prime}$ | +1783/+1767 |
| vrdA-F8       | $5^{\prime}$-GCCTACCACAATTCTCGCTG-3$^{\prime}$ | $-$44/$-$25 |
| vrdA-R8       | $5^{\prime}$-CCCCCTGGATGAATAGCCTA-3$^{\prime}$ | +1232/+1213 |
| vrdA-F9       | $5^{\prime}$-TGCTCATCCCTTCTCACC-3$^{\prime}$ | $-$1858/$-$1841 |
| vrdA-R9       | $5^{\prime}$-GGGTCTCCTTGGATCGTAA-3$^{\prime}$ | +3443/+3426 |
| vrdA-F10      | $5^{\prime}$-GCGGAACATGTAATCGGCAG-3$^{\prime}$ | $-$314/$-$295 |
| vrdA-L-F-KpnI | $5^{\prime}$-GGGGTACCGCCTGGTAACTACTCTAC-3$^{\prime}$$^{e}$ | $-$1705/$-$1688 |
| vrdA-L-R-KpnI | $5^{\prime}$-GGGGTACCGGTCATTAACACGTAGATGG-3$^{\prime}$$^{e}$ | $-$67/$-$87 |
| vrdA-R-F-HindIII | $5^{\prime}$-CCCCAAGCTTCTCAGATCGCGCAA-3$^{\prime}$$^{e}$ | +1430/+1450 |
| vrdA-R-R-HindIII | $5^{\prime}$-CCCCAAGCTTCACGCCCTTCTATCGGTA-3$^{\prime}$$^{e}$ | +2949/+2932 |
| omtA-F1       | $5^{\prime}$-GGTGAGACGAAGAGCCC-3$^{\prime}$ |  |
| omtA-R1       | $5^{\prime}$-CCTTCCCTCGCCTTTGCG-3$^{\prime}$ |  |
| cmd-F1        | $5^{\prime}$-GGTGATGGCCAGATCACCAC-3$^{\prime}$ |  |
| cmd-R1        | $5^{\prime}$-CCGATGGAGGTGATGACGTG-3$^{\prime}$ |  |
| ptrA-F1       | $5^{\prime}$-GGGCAATTGATTACGGGATCCA-3$^{\prime}$ |  |
| ptrA-R1       | $5^{\prime}$-TGACGATGAGCCGCTTTC-3$^{\prime}$ |  |
| ptrA-F2       | $5^{\prime}$-GCAAGAGCGGCTCATCGTCA-3$^{\prime}$ |  |
| ptrA-R2       | $5^{\prime}$-TGGGATCCCGTAATCAATTGCC-3$^{\prime}$ |  |

$a$ F, forward primer; R, reverse primer.  
$b$ The position numbers for the *vrdA* gene were based on its start site (+1). The open reading frame (start codon to stop codon) of *vrdA* genomic sequence positions +1 to +1240.  
$c$ Underlined nucleotides differ from those obtained from cDNA and genomic DNA sequences (*Fig.* 3).  
$d$ Intron is located inside of the primer sequence.  
$e$ Underlined sequence indicates restriction site.

Y. Shima et al./Fungal Genetics and Biology 46 (2009) 221–231

fungal transcription factors were also found: four AreA (5′-HGA-TAR-3′), which are factors that regulate genes involved in nitrogen metabolism, and two CreA (5′-SYGGG-3′), which are transcription factors involved in carbon catabolite repression (Fig. 3). The putative polyadenylation signal was found in the 3′-noncoding region (Fig. 3). Homology search revealed that the determined entire genomic DNA sequence (5772 bp) has no homology to either aflatoxin biosynthetic gene or sterigmatocystin biosynthetic gene, indicating that the *vrdA* gene was not present in either gene cluster.

A BLAST protein database search revealed that the *vrdA*-encoded protein is similar to members of the putative aldo-keto reductase family (Fig. 4). The *vrdA* protein appeared to have three consensus patterns of the aldo-keto reductase family and a number of structurally and functionally related NADPH-dependent oxidoreductases: [1] G-[FY]-R-[HSAL]-[LYVMF]-D-[STAGC]-[AS]-x(5)-E-x(92)-[LIVM]-G, [2] [LIVMFY]-x(9)-[KREQ]-x-[LIVM]-[SC]-N-[FY], and [3] [LIVM]-[PAIV]-[KR]-[ST]-x(4)-R-x(2)-[GSTAEQK]-[NSL]-x(2)-[LIVMFA] (PROSITE) (Fig. 4). Finally, the VrdA was classified into the aldo-keto reductase family 2.

The *vrdA*-encoded protein also showed similarity to putative enzymes of this family, such as an *A. oryzae* unnamed protein (98% identity), *Aspergillus fumigatus* putative aldo-keto reductase (76% identity), *Aspergillus nidulans* hypothetical protein (70% identity), *Malassezia globosa* hypothetical protein (63% identity) and *Pichia stipitis* aryl-alcohol dehydrogenase (55% identity) (Fig. 4). The *vrdA*-encoded protein also showed similarity to aldo-keto reductase encoded by the AF-toxin I biosynthesis gene (*Ito et al.*, 2004) present in *Alternaria alternata* (47% identity) (Fig. 4). Among these, the *A. oryzae* unnamed protein showed the highest similarity to the *vrdA*-encoded protein. DOGAN homology research revealed that the *A. oryzae* gene encoding the unnamed protein was located on chromosome 5. In contrast, *A. oryzae* contains the homologous region to the aflatoxin gene cluster in chromosome 3 (*Lee et al.*, 2006; *Machida et al.*, 2005).

### 3.4. Expression of *vrdA* gene

To investigate the expression of *vrdA* in aflatoxin-inducing and non-inducing conditions, Northern analysis and RT-PCR was performed. Northern analysis of *A. parasiticus* NIAH-26 revealed that the *vrdA* gene was expressed when the fungus was cultured in aflatoxin-inducing SY medium (Fig. 5A, 2.0 kb band) but not when cultured in aflatoxin-non-inducing PY medium. Similarly, RT-PCR showed that transcript of the *vrdA* gene was detected when the fungus was cultured in aflatoxin-inducing YES medium (Fig. 5B, 1.0 kb band), but not when cultured in aflatoxin-non-inducing YEP medium. This result corresponded to the expression of *omtA*, aflatoxin biosynthetic gene (Fig. 5B, 1.2 kb band). Furthermore, Northern analysis revealed that *vrdA* was expressed at aflatoxin-inducing temperature, 28 °C, but not at an aflatoxin-non-inducing temperature, 37 °C (Fig. 5A). The same temperature dependency was previously reported in expression of the *dmtA* gene, an aflatoxin biosynthesis gene (*Motomura et al.*, 1999). The *cmd* gene (0.33 kb band), which is not involved in aflatoxin biosynthesis, was constitutively expressed, irrespective of the medium. These results suggest that the expression of the *vrdA* gene was regulated similar to other aflatoxin biosynthesis genes.

Expression of aflatoxin genes requires expression of the *aflR* gene; the AflR protein positively regulates expression of the genes in the aflatoxin gene cluster (*Payne et al.*, 1993; *Price et al.*, 2006; *Woloshuk and Prieto*, 1998; *Yu et al.*, 2004). In fact, our RT-PCR confirmed that the *omtA*, an aflatoxin gene cluster gene, was not expressed in the *aflR* deletion mutant, whereas it was expressed in the wild-type strain (Fig. 5B). The *cmd* gene was constitutively expressed irrespective of the strain used. RT-PCR results showed

-958 AGGAGTTTGTGGTGCGGTTGCTTGAGGCTACGAAGGGTCTGCCGAGTGGTGATAAGGTTCTGCTGGCATTGAGGGATGGGGATCATGGTT
AreA
-868 TTGATATGAGTTCTCGGTATGAGGAGGAGTGGTTACAGAAACGCTCTTAAGTCGGGGGGGAGACTTGGCTGGAGTGATCGGAGAAG
CreA
-778 GAGTGTATAAGTTATGGGTATCGGATAATATAGATTAATAGTTTTCTGTGATGGTTATGATATCGCAATTTGGCCTAAATT CCTGTAATTGT
-688 ACAAAACCTCCCTTAGTTCGTCTTAGAAGTAATTCCACAGCTCAATGCTCTAGACACAAAATTCTTTCAAAGCCGAATGGCGAAGAGCAGACT
-598 TACTAAGCCATGGTAGGTCAGTTTTGGCACGTCCTGGTCCAGAATCCTTTTGTAGTATCCGAGAACAAATAGATTCCAAACGATGAATCC
-508 CATCCAGATGACATCGGGTCGGGCGAATGCTTCTTGAAATGGACTCGCGAAACTAATCAATTTATAGACTCAACTTGAAGGAATCGACTCG
-418 GGTCTTCAAGTATAGTCAGACCTCGGCCC AAGTATGAGACAGATCGCGGATTCGTTAGACTTTAACTCCGCTATAATCTGGGGTTACCTT
CreA
-328 CGATTAACTCCGTTGCGGAACATGTAATCGGCAGTATT CCTATGACGAA GTGGGCTGACCATGAGCTTA ACTGGTAGATCAAGACTCTTC
-238 ATTCGCTACACCTATGCAGATAGTTCGAGAGATAATTCAGTGTGACTGGTCGTCCGGACTTTATATCTGT TAACTCCGTCTAGGCGTGT C
AreA AreA
-148 AGGCTTAGATAAAGGATAAAGATGTTTCTCGCCCTCACCCTCCAAAAAGCTGCAGTTTTTCTTCCATCTACGTGTTTAATGACCCTTGAAGC
AreA
-58 TTCCTAAGTTTACAAGCCTACCACAATTCTCGCTGACTAGTACTACAATCTCCGACAAATGGAATACGCACGgtaagatttctccccatcc
M E Y_A_R.**
L_G_D.
33 acctttgtagcattgacccaagtgcctttcaa atattgttatagatccaattgctgacctacgatggaaaatatgacacagGCTGGGGGAT
123 TCGGGCCTCAAGGTCTCAAAGGTGATACTCGGCTGTATGGGATACGGCTCCCCAGAATGGCAGGGCTGGGTGCTGAATGAAAGAAGAATCT
S_G_L_K_V_S_K_V_I_L_G_C_M_G_Y_G_S_P_E_W_Q_G_W_V_L_N_E_E_E_S 38
213 CTTCCGCTTATTGAACACGGCTACAAACAAAGGCATCAGAACCTGGGATACTgtaagaagcgaatgcgggagcaaatcacgcgagttctaac
L_P_L_I_E_H_A_Y_N_K_G_I_R_T_W_D_T 55
303 ggatttttaccagGCGGATATGTACTCCCACGGCAAATCCGAAAGAAATCGTGGGAAAGGCTCTGAAGAAATATAATATCCCCCGTTCCCCG
A_D_M_Y_S_H_G_K_S_E_E_I_V_G_K_A_L_K_K_Y_N_I_P_R_S_R 81
393 AGTGGTAATATTGACCAAATGTTACTTTGGTGTGGACGATCAGGGGAACTTTCCCTCTCCTCTCGACC GGGAGACAGAACGAGGGTGA
V_V_I_L_T_K_C_Y_F_G_V_D_D_Q_G_N_F_P_S_P_L_S_T_G_R_Q_N_E_G_D 111
483 CTACTTGAACCGCGTTGGTCTTTCTCGCAGACACATCTTGGAGGCGGTGATGCCAGTGT TGAGCGGCTGGGAACTTATATTGACGTGCT
Y_L_N_R_V_G_L_S_R_R_H_I_L_E_A_V_D_A_S_V_E_R_L_G_T_Y_I_D_V_L 141
573 TCAAATCCACCGACTTGATCGTGAGACGCCACGGGAGGAGATCATGAGGGCACTGAATGATGTAGTTGAGAGGGCAAGGCTCGATACAT
Q_I_H_R_L_D_R_E_E_I_M_R_A_L_N_D_V_V_E_S_G_K_A_R_Y_I 171
663 CGGCGCTAGTTCCGgtatgcttcacgctcaacaatctgaacaagcaagcactaatacctttcttttctgtagATGGCCGCTTGGGAATTC
G_A_S_S
753 AGACCCTACAAAACATCGCCATTCGCAATGGCTGGCACAAGTTTATCTCGATGCAGAACTACCACAATCTCATTGCCGTGAAAGAGGAAC
T_L_Q_N_I_A_I_R_N_G_W_H_K_F_I_S_M_Q_N_Y_H_N_L_I_A_R_E_E_R 212
843 GTGAAATGATCCCTTACTGCC TTGACAGCGGCGTATCTCTTATCCCTTGGTCTCCTGTGCACGTGGAGCCCTCGCCAGACCTTGGGCTT
E_M_I_P_Y_C_L_D_S_G_V_S_L_I_P_W_S_P_V_A_R_G_A_L_A_R_P_W_A_S 242
933 CTCGCTCTACCTTGGCTGAAAAACAGGATGCTGGGATAAGTATTCTCGTT CGGCCC GCGAGTCCGAGCAAAAGCTATTATTGACC
R_S_T_L_R_E_N_T_D_A_G_I_S_I_L_V_R_A_R_E_S_S_D_K_A_I_I_D_R 272
1023 GCGTGGAAAGATTGGCTGACAAGAAGGAATTAGCATGGCACAAGTTGCAATCGCGTGGTCGCTGAGTCACCCCAGCGAGTATCCTATTG
V_E_E_L_A_D_K_K_G_I_S_M_A_Q_V_A_I_A_W_S_L_S_H_P_S_E_Y_P_I_V 302
1113 TCGGGCTGAACACTAAGGATCGCATTGATGAGGCTGTTGCGAGTGTCCAGGTTAAGCTGACGCCGGAAGAGATTCAATACCTTGAAGAAC
G_L_N_T_K_D_R_I_D_E_A_V_A_S_V_Q_V_K_L_T_P_E_E_I_Q_Y_L_E_E_P 332
1203 CTTATGTCCCTAAGGCTATTCATCCAGGGGAACGATAAATCTGTGACGAGTGAAAGCCCGTGATGCAAATTTTAGTTGTATGCCA
Y_V_P_K_A_I_H_P_G_E_R * 343
1293 AATAACCTATTTGAAATGATCATATCTCATT CGAGGCTTTGGGTTCATGATA CGTT CGACCGACTTATCTATTGCAATGCTTACTATGAG

Fig. 3. Nucleotide sequence of the vrdA gene from A. parasiticus and the deduced amino acid sequence. Coding region of the vrdA gene as well as its 5′- and 3′-flanking regions are shown, although the longer sequence than that shown here has been deposited at the GenBank (accession no. AB025578 and AB025579). The first nucleotide of the translational initiation codon has been assigned position +1, and the deduced amino acid sequence (in one-letter code) is shown below the nucleotide sequence. The start of the vrdA cDNA sequence is indicated by an open triangle. Polyadenylation sites are indicated by filled triangles. Potential polyadenylation site is indicated by filled diamonds. Three intron sequences are indicated by small letters. Putative TATA box is double underlined. Deviation from the typical AflR binding motif is enclosed by an open box. Putative binding sites for fungal transcription factors are single underlined. Amino acid sequences with dashed lines correspond to the sequences determined for the purified VHA reductase protein from A. parasiticus. Fragment 1 (*), M-I-P-Y-C-L-D-S-G-V-S-L-I-P-W-S-P-V-A-R-G-A-L-A-R-P-W-A-S-R-S-T-L-R-E-N-T-D; fragment 2 (**), Y-A-R-L-G-D-S-G-L-K-V-S-K-V-I-L-G-C-M-G-Y-G-S-P-E.

that the vrdA gene was expressed in the wild-type strain as well as in the aflR deletion mutant. Interestingly, expression level of the vrdA gene in the aflR deletion mutant was higher than that in the wild-type strain (Fig. 5B). These results suggest that the vrdA gene was regulated differently, at least partially, than aflatoxin biosynthesis genes.

3.5. Disruption of the vrdA gene

Transformation of A. parasiticus SYS-4 with the linear replacement construct from pVRDA-L/R (Fig. 6A) generated 243 pyrithi amine-resistant transformants. Among 92 randomly selected transformants, five were confirmed to lack the vrdA gene by PCR using several primer combinations. One of the five transformants was randomly selected for confirmation of the expected gene deletion. When the P5–P6 and P3–P4 primer pairs were used, host strain SYS-4 yielded PCR products with predicted sizes of 2.1 kb and 5.3 kb, respectively (Fig. 6B, lanes 2 and 10). In contrast, when the resulting transformant was used, PCR products showed the predicted sizes of 2.6 kb and 5.8 kb, respectively, as the deletion mutant (Fig. 6B, lanes 1 and 9). Also, PCR analyses using other primers indicated that the vrdA gene was deleted in the transformant, as expected (Fig. 6B).

Southern hybridization was also used to analyze the genomes of host strain SYS-4 and a transformant. The host strain SYS-4 contained only a single copy of vrdA, because the vrdA probe hybrid-

Y. Shima et al./Fungal Genetics and Biology 46 (2009) 221–231

[1]

| Ap | 1 | MEYARLGDSGLKVS KVILGCMGYGSP EWQGWVLN-EEE SLPLIEHAYNKGI RTWDTADMYSHG KSEEIVGKALK |
| --- | --- | --- |
| Ao | 1 | MEYARLGDSGLKVS KVILGCMGYGT PEWQGWVLN-EE ESLPLIEHAYNK GIRTWDTADMY SHGKSEETVGK ALK |
| Af | 1 | MSYGSKKWQDWVLD -EDEALPLIEHA YKRGINTWDTAD YSHGLSEETLG KALK |
| An | 1 | MATDNQMEYVTLG KSGLKTSKVIL GAMSYGTS EWQDWVLD-EDK ALPLIEHAYKR GINTWDTADV YSHGRSEEITG KALK |
| Mg | 1 | MEYVNLGRSGLKVS KTILGCMSYGE KDWAEWVLE-EP ESLMLHAYQRG INTWDTANVYS YGRSEEITVGK ALK |
| Ps | 1 | MSSSTEYKKLGA SGLATSPIIVG CMSYGKKVWAD WVMDEEEKIFK ILKKCYDSGI RTFDTADMYS NGOSEVILGK FLK |
| Aa | 1 | MNYEKWRHPPVSL VESVKASRAVY KRLGNISGLVV SNPILGGMHTI GNPKWNDWVLD -EKESIALLKA AYERGVNTWD TANMYSNGESE KIMGKALR |

d

| Ap | 74 | KYNIPRSRVVILTKCYFGVDDQ--GNFPSPLSTGR---QNEGDYLNRVGLSRRHTILEAVDASV ERLG-TYIDVLQIHR LDRPREETIMRALND |
| --- | --- | --- |
| Ao | 74 | KYNIPRSRVVILTKCYFGVDDQ--GNFPSPLSTGR---QNAGDYLN RVGLSRRHILEAVDASV ERLG-TYIDVLQIHR LDRPREETIMRALNE |
| Af | 54 | KYSTIPHRVVILTKCYFGVTDEPN DGKLPPISACN---RNDGDWVN RVGLSRKHIFDAVDASV KRLG-TYIDVLQIHR LDRPREETIMKALND |
| An | 80 | TYNIPRN RVVIMTKCFYGVDDE---GNLPSIAACA---QNTGAMV NRVGLSRKHIFDAVDASI QRLG-TYIDVLQIHR LDRPREETIMKALND |
| Mg | 74 | KYNIPRERRVVI MSKCYFGAEGK---PIGSAGGR---TNDGVFV NRMGLSRKHIJDSEEVSV KRLG-TYIDVLQIHR LDRPREETIMRALND |
| Ps | 79 | KFNIQRDKV VILT KCYNLIDTN---IPTLNMANQYD---YPSYEFAN NQGLSRKHIFDAVKGSVER LG-TYIDVLQIHR LDKSTPKAEIMRALND |
| Aa | 95 | VHNIPRSKV VIMTKCCRAVTD PNIEPDIGISTAFYPELSGQS KDYVNHFGLS RASIFQQVEASLQLNTDY IDVLQIHRFDPEVPEETMKALHD |

[2]

| Ap | 162 | VVESGKARYIGASSMAAWEFQT LQNIAIRNGWHKFISMQNYHNL IAREEEREMIPYCLDS---GVS LIPWSPVAR GALARPWASR---STLR---E |
| --- | --- | --- |
| Ao | 162 | VVESGKVRYIGASSMAAWEFQT LQNIAIRNGWHKFISMQNYHNL IAREEEREMIPYCLDS---GVS LIPWSPVAR GALARPWASR---STLR---E |
| Af | 144 | VVESGKVRYIGASMAAWEFQT LQNIAARNGWHQFISMQNYHNL LAREEEREMIPYCLDS---GV GLIPWSPMAR GLARPWCSR---SSVR---E |
| An | 167 | VTEAGKVRYIGASSMAAWEFQAL NNVAKMNGWHTFISMQNYHNL LSREEEREMIPYCLDA---GG LIPWSPMAR GLLRPWKSA---PSLR---E |
| Mg | 159 | VIERGWVRYIGASSMAAWEFQQ LQNIAEKHGWHKFVAMQNLYNLL YREEEREMIPYCQNT---GVG LTTPWYALAS GTLARPWN GP---STER---S |
| Ps | 167 | VVSNGDVRYIGASSMRAADFVEL QFAETNGWAKFISMQNYNLIY REEEREMIPFCNDNSLGKVGL IPWSPITAR GLLARPGLVE---SEHNRSA |
| Aa | 190 | LVQMNKVRYLGASSMWAHEFAI LQHAAEKNNWTKFVSMQNHYSLL YREEEREMIKYCNLT---GVG VISWGSLASG RLARP PDQRTVSP------- |

[3]

| Ap | 249 | NT DAGISILVRARES ESDKAITD RVEELADKKGISMAQVATAWS LSHPSEYPTV GLNTKDRIDEAVASVQVKL TPEETQYLEEPYVPKAIHPGER |
| --- | --- | --- |
| Ao | 249 | NT DAGISILVRARES ASDKAII DRVEELAGKGGISMAQVAIAW SLSHPSEYPTV GLNTKDRIDEAVASVQVKLT PEEIQYLEEPYVPKAIHPGER |
| Af | 231 | NT DATLQLLVRSRE TEADKAI VERVEEI AKKKNISMAQVAIAWVL SHPKENPIL GLSSKERIDEAAAIKVOLTP EEIKYLEEPYRBKALTALER |
| An | 254 | STDKAMNVLLKSRE TEADEKI VRVEEVAKKKGVTMAQVAIAW SLGNKNEBNPIL GLNSKDRIDEAAAIKVKLTEE ERAYLEEPYM PKTVSPMER |
| Mg | 246 | THDKFRQTVLGKE-EADKVIVD RVEEIAKKKGVAMAQVTIAWLL SKKYVTPIL GLSKTSRIDEAVDAVKVKLT DEEISYLEEPYQPKRVTGY-- |
| Ps | 259 | KTDGAKKIFGLENLTEADKEIIN RVEEVAKKRDVSMAIISSAWVL SKG-AFP IIGLNSSEERVDDATKSLSVK LTDEELAYLEEPYQPKRRVYGFV- |
| Aa | 276 | --RGVNGTIYKDYNPTQSEEIIRR VHQTAVSRGIPMSQVALAW-LN KRIVAPVIGLSSVERIDEALDA KAVELSHEEERYLESAYRAQSI QGHA-- |

Fig. 4. Multiple amino acid sequence alignment of VHA reductase from *A. parasiticus* (Ap) with those from other organisms. Ao, *A. oryzae* unnamed protein belonging to aldo-keto reductase family (accession no. BAE62642); An, *A. nidulans* hypothetical protein belonging to aldo-keto reductase family (EAA66789); Af, *A. fumigatus* putative aldo-keto reductase (EAL89665); Mg, *Malassezia globosa* putative hypothetical protein belonging to aldo-keto reductase family (EDP41384); Ps, *Pichia stipitis* aryl-alcohol dehydrogenase (ABN66508); Aa, *Alternaria alternata* (BAC84994) aldo-keto reductase. n, residues of aldo-keto reductase thought to be involved in cofactor binding; d, potential hydrogen donor sites of aldo-keto reductase; *, residues of *vrdA* that are identical to cofactor binding or potential hydrogen donor sites of aldo-keto reductase; °, catalytic motif of the short-chain dehydrogenase/reductase superfamily. The three consensus sequences for the aldo-keto reductase family are bracketed above by the numbers [1–3]. Identical amino acids are highlighted on a black background, and similar amino acids are shown on a gray background.

ized to approximately 6.0 kb and 1.6 kb EcoRI fragments and a 4.5 kb XhoI fragment (Fig. 6C, lanes 1 and 3). Southern analysis results using the coding region of *vrdA* as a probe indicated that the *vrdA* region of the transformant had been deleted (Fig. 6C, lanes 2 and 4). When the *ptrA* gene probe was used for Southern analysis,

A

| 28°C | 37°C |
| --- | --- |
| S | P | S | P |
| kb |  |  |  |
| 6.9 |  |  |  |
| 2.7 |  |  |  |
| 1.8 |  |  |  |
| 0.6 |  |  |  |

B

| SYS-4 | SYS-4 Δ*aflR* |
| --- | --- |
| S | P | S | S |
| vrdA |  |  |  |
| omtA |  |  |  |
| cmd |  |  |  |

Fig. 5. Expression of *vrdA* gene. (A) Northern analysis. Total RNAs were prepared from *A. parasiticus* NIAH-26 that had been cultured in either SY or PY medium at either 28 °C or 37 °C for 3 days. After blotting onto a membrane, hybridization was performed using the *vrdA* probe-1. S, SY liquid medium; P, PY liquid medium. Location of *vrdA* probe-1 is shown in Fig. 6. (B) RT-PCR results. *A. parasiticus* SYS-4 and *aflR* deletion mutant were cultured in YES or YEP liquid medium at 28 °C for 3 days. PCR was carried out on synthesized cDNA with oligonucleotide primers specific for the coding regions of *vrdA*, *omtA* and *cmd*. S, YES liquid medium; P, YEP liquid medium.

the *ptrA* gene was detected in the transformant (Fig. 6C, 2.6 kb band of lane 2 and 5.0 kb band of lane 4). About 1.5 kb and 12 kb bands were detected in both SYS-4 and the transformant (Fig. 6C, lanes 1–2 and 3–4, respectively), which corresponds to the *ptrA* homolog gene (*thiA*). The *thiA* gene is a wild-type gene having no mutation required for pyrithiamine-resistance. These results demonstrate that the *vrdA* locus in the transformant had been replaced with the *ptrA* selectable marker.

### 3.6. Characterization of *vrdA* deletion mutant

The *vrdA* deletion mutant showed no remarkable morphological differences with the wild-type strain on GY agar medium (data not shown).

Aflatoxin productivity was also analyzed. After tip culture for 4 days, aflatoxins in the medium of the *vrdA* deletion mutant as well as in that of the wild-type strain SYS-4 were analyzed using TLC (Fig. 7A). There was no significant difference in aflatoxin production between the *vrdA* deletion mutant and the wild-type strain. HPLC analysis was also performed to quantify the aflatoxins. The amount of aflatoxins produced by the *vrdA* deletion mutant was not significantly different from that produced by SYS-4 (Table 3). Also, there were no significant differences in mycelial weight. When the *vrdA* deletion mutant and SYS-4 were each cultured in YES liquid medium supplemented with dichlorvos, aflatoxin production drastically decreased, and both VHA and VOAc accumulated in mycelia. There was no significant difference in the amount of either VHA or VOAc between the strains (data not shown).

The enzymatic activity of the reaction from VHA to VOAc was also analyzed to determine the function of the *vrdA* gene (Fig. 7B). When the cytosol fraction of SYS-4 was incubated with VHA in the presence of NADPH and dichlorvos for 10 min, a large amount of VOAc was produced (Fig. 7B, b). In contrast, when the cytosol fraction of the *vrdA* deletion mutant was similarly incubated, only a small amount VOAc was produced (Fig. 7B, c). The enzymatic activity in SYS-4 was $160 \pm 14.5$ pmol VOAc mg protein$^{-1}$ min$^{-1}$, and that in the *vrdA* deletion mutant was $42.8 \pm 5.8$ pmol VOAc mg$^{-1}$ min$^{-1}$, which corresponded to about 27% of that of SYS-4. The same reaction without cytosol fraction did not produce any VOAc (data not shown).

These results demonstrate that VHA reductase was not involved in the main pathway of aflatoxin biosynthesis, but was involved in the vertical branching steps connecting the main pathway from HVN to VHOH with the side pathway from VONE to VOH (Fig. 1).

## 4. Discussion

### 4.1. Metabolic grid

This work demonstrated that the same reductase enzyme catalyzes the three reactions from HVN to VONE, from VHA to VOAc, and from VHOH to VOH (Fig. 2; Matsushima et al., 1994). Although the route from HVN to VHOH via VHA might be the main pathway in aflatoxin biosynthesis, the route from VONE to VOH via VOAc also operates as a side pathway in cells (Fig. 1). Aflatoxin production was not inhibited in *vrdA* deletion mutant (Fig. 7A), whereas the enzyme activity catalyzing the reaction from VHA to VOAc, which branches from the main pathway, significantly decreased in *vrdA* deletion mutant (Fig. 7B). This result indicates that the reductase is not in the flow of the pathway, but rather that the reductase plays a role in connecting the two pathways. These results support the presence of a metabolic grid catalyzed by three kinds of enzymes (i.e., MoxY, EstA and VrdA) in cells.

### 4.2. *vrdA* gene and the aflatoxin gene cluster

Sequence analysis indicated that the *vrdA* gene is not located in or near the aflatoxin gene cluster. In addition, a homology search revealed high identity between the deduced amino acid sequence and an unnamed protein of *A. oryzae*. *A. oryzae* belongs to the *A. flavus* group, the same as *A. parasiticus*, and the *A. oryzae* RIB40 strain contains the homologous region corresponding to the aflatoxin gene cluster in chromosome 3 (Lee et al., 2006; Machida et al., 2005); the same strain contains the *vrdA* homolog gene in chromosome 5. These results strongly suggest that the *vrdA* gene is located in a different chromosome than the aflatoxin gene cluster in *A. parasiticus*. *A. nidulans* produces sterigmatocystin as a final product, which is a precursor of aflatoxins (Brown et al., 1996; Keller and Hohn, 1997; Shwab and Keller, 2008). This work also showed that *A. nidulans* contained a *vrdA* homologous gene in the genome, which was not present in the sterigmatocystin gene cluster. The presence of the *vrdA* homologous gene indicates that *A. nidulans* likely contains the same metabolic grid in the pathway for sterigmatocystin biosynthesis.

### 4.3. Regulation of *vrdA* gene expression

The *vrdA* gene contains the putative AflR-binding motif in its promoter region; the sequence 5′-CCGN$_5$CGA-3′ deviates from the typical AflR binding motif 5′-TCGN$_5$CGA-3′, where the first T is changed to C. The same deviation has been reported in the promoter region of *aflJ* gene present in the aflatoxin gene cluster, and

Y. Shima et al./Fungal Genetics and Biology 46 (2009) 221–231

**A**

![Image Description: Fluorescence photographs showing production of aflatoxins of wild-type strain SYS-4 or *vrdA* deletion mutant by tip culture. Developing solution was chloroform-ethyl acetate-formic acid (90%) (6:3:1, vol/vol/vol). Lane 1, SYS-4; lane 2, *vrdA* deletion mutant; lane 3, medium only.]

**B**

![Image Description: Formation of VOAc from VHA by the cytosol fraction. VHA was incubated with the cytosol fraction of either *A. parasiticus* SYS-4 or the *vrdA* deletion mutant in the presence NADPH and dichlorvos for 0 min or 10 min. Reaction products were then analyzed using HPLC. (a), SYS-4, 0 min; (b), SYS-4, 10 min; (c), *vrdA* deletion mutant, 10 min.]

Fig. 7. Effect of *vrdA* gene deletion on aflatoxin as well as on production of intermediates. (A) Fluorescence photographs showing production of aflatoxins of wild-type strain SYS-4 or *vrdA* deletion mutant by tip culture. Developing solution was chloroform-ethyl acetate-formic acid (90%) (6:3:1, vol/vol/vol). Lane 1, SYS-4; lane 2, *vrdA* deletion mutant; lane 3, medium only. (B) Formation of VOAc from VHA by the cytosol fraction. VHA was incubated with the cytosol fraction of either *A. parasiticus* SYS-4 or the *vrdA* deletion mutant in the presence NADPH and dichlorvos for 0 min or 10 min. Reaction products were then analyzed using HPLC. (a), SYS-4, 0 min; (b), SYS-4, 10 min; (c), *vrdA* deletion mutant, 10 min.

ulation of the *vrdA* gene expression, because promoter region of the *vrdA* gene contains numerous recognition sites for these transcription factors (Fig. 3). Nitrate reportedly inhibits aflatoxin cluster genes such as *aflR*, *nor-1*, *ver-1* and *omt-1* (Chang et al., 1995), suggesting that AreA, which is a factor that regulates the genes involved in nitrogen metabolisms, could be involved in the regulation of the *vrdA* gene. Furthermore, recombinant AreA protein binds to the binding sites of the *aflR–aflJ* intergenic region in *A. parasiticus* (Chang et al., 2000a), suggesting that AreA protein could bind to the promoter region of the *vrdA* gene. Because the carbon repressor CreA is the major regulatory protein mediating carbon repression in the primary metabolism of *A. nidulans* (Dowzer and Kelly, 1991), CreA might be involved in regulation of the *vrdA* gene.

### 4.4. Interaction between aflatoxin biosynthesis and other metabolisms

Since the *vrdA* gene is conserved in a wide of range fungi (Fig. 4), irrespective of aflatoxigenicity, the VrdA reductase might have another function other than aflatoxin biosynthesis. However, the side pathway from VHOH to VOH actually works within the cells, and elevation of NADPH levels in old culture or block of a certain step in the pathway from HVN to VB appears to shift from the main pathway to the side pathway. Significant amounts of VONE, VOAc, or VOH in the side pathway were detected, especially when either *moxY* or *estA* gene was deleted in aflatoxigenic fungi (Chang et al., 2004; Wen et al., 2005). Addition of dichlorvos, an inhibitor of EstA esterase enzyme, also caused accumulation of a large amount of VOAc together with VHA (Yabe et al., 1991a). Furthermore, small but significant amounts of aflatoxins were produced from VONE, VOAc, and VOH in cells (Wen et al., 2005; Yabe et al., 1991a, 2003), indicating that the reverse reactions also likely occur in cells. Therefore, the side pathway might play a crucial role as a reservoir of intermediates for aflatoxin biosynthesis.

This work strongly suggests that the aflatoxin biosynthetic pathway is so-called open to other unknown and aflatoxin-unrelated metabolisms in cells (Fig. 8). Deletion of the *vrdA* gene did not cause complete suppression of enzyme activity (Fig. 7B), suggesting that another, unknown oxido-reductase enzyme(s) present in the cytosol can participate in the metabolic grid in aflatoxin biosynthesis. These unknown enzymes are likely not affected by either the culture conditions or by AflR. In fact, we previously detected low, but significant activity of VHA reductase even when the fungus was cultured in peptone medium or when a non-aflatoxigenic strain was used (Matsushima et al., 1994; Yabe et al., 1991a). Also, when the *vrdA* deletion mutant was cultured in the presence of dichlorvos, significant amounts of VOAc and VHA were produced, and those amounts were similar to those in the wild-type strain in this work. Therefore, unknown oxido-reductase enzyme(s) remaining in the *vrdA* deletion mutant would have participated in the production of VOAc from VHA, and then reach equilibrium between VOAc and VHA within 4 days of culture. In fact, the amount of VOAc in the *vrdA* deletion mutant was not significantly different from that in the wild-type strain (Fig. 7). Although HVN, VHA, and VHOH were converted to VONE, VOAc, and VOH, respectively, VONE was further converted to versicolorol (VOROL) by an unknown oxido-reductase enzyme in cells (Yabe et al., 2003).

Similar incomplete inhibition of enzyme activity has been observed when the *estA* gene was deleted (Chang et al., 2004) (Fig. 8). Also, aflatoxin productivity was not completely inhibited after disruption of either the *nor1* gene (Trail et al., 1994) or *vbs* gene (Wen et al., 2005), both of which are in the aflatoxin gene cluster. Furthermore, disruption of *adhA* gene in O-methylsterigmatocystin (OMST, a precursor in a later step in aflatoxin biosynthetic pathway)-accumulating mutant also did not show complete suppression of OMST accumulation (Chang et al., 2000b). Although not every gene in the aflatoxin gene cluster has

recombinant AflR protein failed to bind to the motif (5′-CCGN₅CGA-3′) in the *aflJ* promoter region (Ehrlich et al., 1999). Furthermore, expression of the *aflJ* gene was not affected by deletion of *aflR* gene (Chang, 2003; Shima Y, personal communication). Therefore, a possible reason why the *vrdA* gene was expressed irrespective of the *aflR* gene might be due to its deviation of the motif (Fig. 5B). Genes having the deviated motif (5′-CCGN₅CGA-3) would not be under the control of AflR. Interestingly, RT-PCR analysis also revealed that expression level of the *vrdA* gene was higher in the *aflR* deletion mutant than that in the wild-type strain (Fig. 5B), suggesting that expression of the *vrdA* gene might be negatively regulated by AflR, whereas the amount of AflR in the wild-type strain did not completely repress the *vrdA* expression (Fig. 5B). This work shows that the *vrdA* gene is regulated differently than aflatoxin biosynthesis genes. However, the detailed regulation mechanism of the *vrdA* gene remains unclear.

Expression of the *vrdA* gene showed dependency on carbon sources as well as on culture temperature similar to the dependency shown by aflatoxin biosynthesis genes (Fig. 5), although genes other than the aflatoxin biosynthesis genes might be also affected by carbon sources. AreA and CreA might be involved in reg-

---

**Table 3**

Amount of aflatoxins produced by the wild-type strain SYS-4 and the *vrdA* deletion mutant.

| Strain                | Total conc. of aflatoxins (ng/mg/250 μl)<sup>a</sup> |
|-----------------------|-----------------------------------------------------|
|                       | Aflatoxin B<sub>1</sub>                             | Aflatoxin B<sub>2</sub> | Aflatoxin G<sub>1</sub> | Aflatoxin G<sub>2</sub> |
| SYS-4                 | 265 ± 51.7                                          | 11.4 ± 2.3              | 1209 ± 236               | 34.5 ± 7.7               |
| *vrdA* deletion mutant | 263 ± 24.3                                          | 10.6 ± 0.8              | 1163 ± 98.6              | 30.9 ± 2.1               |

<sup>a</sup> Nanograms of amount of aflatoxins production per mg of wet weight of mycelia in 250 μl culture medium. No significant difference in the mycelial wet weight in 250 μl culture medium was found, and the means of the wet weight of mycelia were as follows: SYS-4, 19.9 ± 0.1 mg; *vrdA* deletion mutant, 19.7 ± 1.6 mg.

Acetyl CoA
↓
NA
nor1 ↔
AVN
↓
HAVN
↓
adhA ↓↓
OAVN
↓
vbs ↓↓
AVR
↓
HVN vrdA VONE △ VOROL
↓
VHA vrdA VOAc
↓
estA ↓↓ estA
VHOH vrdA VOH
↓
vbs ↓↓
VA ← VB
↓
DMST DHDMST
↓
AFB₁ AFB₂
↓
AFG₁ AFG₂

Fig. 8. Proposed participation of external enzymes in aflatoxin biosynthesis. Enzymes in metabolisms other than aflatoxin biosynthesis would also participate in aflatoxin biosynthesis. VrdA reductase enzyme, an enzyme outside the aflatoxin production would create a side pathway from VONE to VOH. Reactions involved in the main pathway of aflatoxin biosynthesis (closed arrows) would also be catalyzed by additional enzymes from metabolisms outside the aflatoxin production (open arrows). Participation of numerous outside enzymes would enable production of a wide range of substances, which would function as reservoirs of intermediates of aflatoxins. Together with the *vrdA*, names of the genes (*nor1*, *adhA*, *estA*, and *vbs*) involved in the main pathway are shown, whose disruption reportedly does not completely inhibit each reaction. The *vbs* gene is involved in two reactions, namely, from OAVN to AVR and VHOH to VB (*Yabe et al.*, 2003). The reaction between VONE and VOROL would also be catalyzed by an unknown enzyme (indicated by a open triangle) (*Yabe et al.*, 2003). Abbreviations: Acetyl CoA, acetyl coenzyme A; NA, norsolorinic acid; AVN, averantin; HAVN, 5′-hydroxyaverantin; OAVN, 5′-oxoaverantin; AVR, averufin; HVN, hydroxyversicolorone; VHA, versiconal hemiacetal acetate; VHOH, versiconal; VONE, versicolorone; VOAc, versiconol acetate; VOH, versiconol; VOROL, versicolorol; VB, versicolorin B; DHDMST, dihydroxydemethylsterigmatocystin; VA, versicolorin A; DMST, demethylsterigmatocystin; AFB₁, aflatoxin B₁.

been examined in its remaining activity after gene disruption, these results indicate that various intermediates in the biosynthetic pathway of aflatoxins can serve as substrates for other unknown enzymes in cells, namely, enzymes other than aflatoxin biosynthesis enzymes.

The conclusion that the aflatoxin biosynthetic pathway can interact with other unknown metabolites may explain why aflatoxin biosynthesis can be affected by many environmental factors (*Buchanan and Stahl*, 1984; *Davis and Diener*, 1968; *Shwab and Keller*, 2008), inside or outside of cells, via primary as well as secondary metabolism. Therefore, the VrdA enzyme is a typical example to show the metabolic network composed of aflatoxin biosynthetic pathway and other unknown metabolic pathways in cells.

### Acknowledgments

We are deeply grateful to the late Professor T. Hamasaki of Tottori University for his support. We would like to thank Naomi Chi-
haya, Ryoya Suzuki and Akemi Koma for their technical assistance; Sumiko Mori for advice on amino acid sequencing; Kenji Yamagishi, of National Agricultural Research Center for Tohoku Regions, National Agriculture and Food Research Organization (NARO), for advice on TAIL-PCR; and R. Nakaune, of National Institute of Fruit Tree Science, NARO, for advice on inverse PCR. This work was supported in part by a Grant (Bio-Design Program) from NARO, Japan. The DNA search of the GenBank database was performed with the assistance of the Computer Center of the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries, Japan.

### References

Brown, D.W., Yu, J.H., Kelkar, H.S., Fernandes, M., Nesbitt, T.C., Keller, N.P., Adams, T.H., Leonard, T.J., 1996. Twenty-five coregulated transcripts define a sterigmatocystin gene cluster in *Aspergillus nidulans*. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 93, 1418–1422.

Buchanan, R.L., Stahl, H.G., 1984. Ability of various carbon sources to induce and support aflatoxin synthesis by *Aspergillus parasiticus*. J. Food Safety 61, 271–279.

Cai, J., Zeng, H., Shima, Y., Hatabayashi, H., Nakagawa, H., Ito, Y., Adachi, Y., Nakajima, H., Yabe, K., 2008. Involvement of the *nadA* gene in formation of G-group aflatoxins in *Aspergillus parasiticus*. Fungal Genet. Biol. 45, 1081–1093.

Cary, J.W., Ehrlich, K.C., Wright, M., Chang, P.K., Bhatnagar, D., 2000. Generation of *aflR* disruption mutants of *Aspergillus parasiticus*. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 53, 680–684.

Chang, P.K., 2003. The *Aspergillus parasiticus* protein AFLJ interacts with the aflatoxin pathway-specific regulator AFLR. Mol. Genet. Genomics 268, 711–719.

Chang, P.K., Ehrlich, K.C., Yu, J., Bhatnagar, D., Cleveland, T.E., 1995. Increased expression of *Aspergillus parasiticus* *aflR*, encoding a sequence-specific DNA-binding protein, relieves nitrate inhibition of aflatoxin biosynthesis. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 61, 2372–2377.

Chang, P.K., Yu, J., Bhatnagar, D., Cleveland, T.E., 2000a. Characterization of the *Aspergillus parasiticus* major nitrogen regulatory gene, *areA*. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1491, 263–266.

Chang, P.K., Yu, J., Ehrlich, K.C., Boue, S.M., Montalbano, B.G., Bhatnagar, D., Cleveland, T.E., 2000b. *adhA* in *Aspergillus parasiticus* is involved in conversion of 5′-hydroxyaverantin to averufin. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 66, 4715–4719.

Chang, P.K., Yabe, K., Yu, J., 2004. The *Aspergillus parasiticus* *estA*-encoded esterase converts versiconal hemiacetal acetate to versiconal and versiconol acetate to versiconol in aflatoxin biosynthesis. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 70, 3593–3599.

Cleveland, D.W., Fischer, S.G., Kirschner, M.W., LaemmlI, U.K., 1977. Peptide mapping by limited proteolysis in sodium dodecyl sulfate and analysis by gel electrophoresis. J. Biol. Chem. 252, 1102–1106.

Davis, N.D., Diener, U.L., 1968. Growth and aflatoxin production by *Aspergillus parasiticus* from various carbon sources. Appl. Microbiol. 16, 158–159.

Dowzer, C.E., Kelly, J.M., 1991. Analysis of the *creA* gene, a regulator of carbon catabolite repression in *Aspergillus nidulans*. Mol. Cell Biol. 11, 5701–5709.

Eaton, D.L., Groopman, J.D., 1994. The Toxicology of Aflatoxins: Human Health, Veterinary, and Agricultural Significance. Academic Press, San Diego, Calif.

Ehrlich, K.C., Montalbano, B.G., Cary, J.W., 1999. Binding of the C6-zinc cluster protein, AFLR, to the promoters of aflatoxin pathway biosynthesis genes in *Aspergillus parasiticus*. Gene 230, 249–257.

Ito, K., Tanaka, T., Hatta, R., Yamamoto, M., Akimitsu, K., Tsuge, T., 2004. Dissection of the host range of the fungal plant pathogen *Alternaria alternata* by modification of secondary metabolism. Mol. Microbiol. 52, 399–411.

Jelinek, C.F., Pohland, A.E., Wood, G.E., 1989. Worldwide occurrence of mycotoxins in foods and feeds – an update. J. Assoc. Off. Anal. Chem. 72, 223–230.

Keller, N.P., Hohn, T.M., 1997. Metabolic pathway gene clusters in filamentous fungi. Fungal Genet. Biol. 21, 17–29.

Lee, Y.H., Tominaga, M., Hayashi, R., Sakamoto, K., Yamada, O., Akita, O., 2006. *Aspergillus oryzae* strains with a large deletion of the aflatoxin biosynthetic homologous gene cluster differentiated by chromosomal breakage. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 72, 339–345.

Machida, M., Asai, K., Sano, M., Tanaka, T., Kumagai, T., Terai, G., Kusumoto, K., Arima, T., Akita, O., Kashiwagi, Y., Abe, K., Gomi, K., Horiuchi, H., Kitamoto, K., Kobayashi, T., Takeuchi, M., Denning, D.W., Galagan, J.E., Nierman, W.C., Yu, J., Archer, D.B., Bennett, J.W., Bhatnagar, D., Cleveland, T.E., Fedorova, N.D., Gotoh, O., Horikawa, H., Hosoyama, A., Ichinomiya, M., Igarashi, R., Iwashita, K., Juvvadi, P.R., Kato, M., Kato, Y., Kin, T., Kokubun, A., Maeda, H., Maeyama, N., Maruyama, J., Nagasaki, H., Nakajima, T., Oda, K., Okada, K., Paulsen, I., Sakamoto, K., Sawano, T., Takahashi, M., Takase, K., Terabayashi, Y., Wortman, J.R., Yamada, O., Yamagata, Y., Anazawa, H., Hata, Y., Koide, Y., Komori, T., Koyama, Y., Minetoki, T., Suharnan, S., Tanaka, A., Isono, K., Kuhara, S., Ogasawara, N., Kikuchi, H., 2005. Genome sequencing and analysis of *Aspergillus oryzae*. Nature 438, 1157–1161.

Matsushima, K.I., Ando, Y., Hamasaki, T., Yabe, K., 1994. Purification and characterization of two versiconal hemiacetal acetate reductases involved in aflatoxin biosynthesis. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 60, 2561–2567.

Minto, R.E., Townsend, C.A., 1997. Enzymology and molecular biology of aflatoxin biosynthesis. Chem. Rev. 97, 2537–2556.

Motomura, M., Chihaya, N., Shinozawa, T., Hamasaki, T., Yabe, K., 1999. Cloning and characterization of the O-methyltransferase I gene (*dmtA*) from *Aspergillus parasiticus* associated with the conversions of demethylsterigmatocystin to

sterigmatocystin and dihydrodemethylsterigmatocystin to dihydrosterigmatocystin in aflatoxin biosynthesis. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 65, 4987–4994.

Ochman, H., Gerber, A.S., Hartl, D.L., 1988. Genetic applications of an inverse polymerase chain reaction. Genetics 120, 621–623.

Payne, G.A., Brown, M.P., 1998. Genetics and physiology of aflatoxin biosynthesis. Annu. Rev. Phytopathol. 36, 329–362.

Payne, G.A., Nystrom, G.J., Bhatnagar, D., Cleveland, T.E., Woloshuk, C.P., 1993. Cloning of the *afl-2* gene involved in aflatoxin biosynthesis from *Aspergillus flavus*. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 59, 156–162.

Price, M.S., Yu, J., Nieman, W.C., Kim, H.S., Pritchard, B., Jacobus, C.A., Bhatnagar, D., Cleveland, T.E., Payne, G.A., 2006. The aflatoxin pathway regulator AflR induces gene transcription inside and outside of the aflatoxin biosynthetic cluster. FEMS Microbiol Lett. 255, 275–279.

Shwab, E.K., Keller, N.P., 2008. Regulation of secondary metabolite production in filamentous ascomycetes. Mycol. Res. 112, 225–230.

Trail, F., Chang, P.K., Cary, J., Linz, J.E., 1994. Structural and functional analysis of the *nor-1* gene involved in the biosynthesis of aflatoxins by *Aspergillus parasiticus*. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 60, 4078–4085.

Wen, Y., Hatabayashi, H., Arai, H., Kitamoto, H.K., Yabe, K., 2005. Function of the *cypX* and *moxY* genes in aflatoxin biosynthesis in *Aspergillus parasiticus*. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 71, 3192–3198.

Woloshuk, C.P., Prieto, R., 1998. Genetic organization and function of the aflatoxin B1 biosynthetic genes. FEMS Microbiol. Lett. 160, 169–176.

Yabe, K., Hamasaki, T., 1993. Stereochemistry during aflatoxin biosynthesis: cyclase reaction in the conversion of versiconal to versicolorin B and racemization of versiconal hemiacetal acetate. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 59, 2493–2500.

Yabe, K., Nakajima, H., 2004. Enzyme reactions and genes in aflatoxin biosynthesis. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 64, 745–755.

Yabe, K., Nakamura, H., Ando, Y., Terakado, N., Nakajima, H., Hamasaki, T., 1988. Isolation and characterization of *Aspergillus parasiticus* mutants with impaired aflatoxin production by a novel tip culture method. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 54, 2096–2100.

Yabe, K., Ando, Y., Hashimoto, J., Hamasaki, T., 1989. Two distinct O-methyltransferases in aflatoxin biosynthesis. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 55, 2172–2177.

Yabe, K., Ando, Y., Hamasaki, T., 1991a. A metabolic grid among versiconal hemiacetal acetate, versiconol acetate, versiconol and versiconal during aflatoxin biosynthesis. J. Gen. Microbiol. 137, 2469–2475.

Yabe, K., Ando, Y., Hamasaki, T., 1991b. Desaturase activity in the branching step between aflatoxins B₁ and G₁ and aflatoxins B₂ and G₂. Agric. Biol. Chem. 55, 1907–1911.

Yabe, K., Chihaya, N., Hamamatsu, S., Sakuno, E., Hamasaki, T., Nakajima, H., Bennett, J.W., 2003. Enzymatic conversion of averufin to hydroxyversicolorone and elucidation of a novel metabolic grid involved in aflatoxin biosynthesis. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 69, 66–73.

Yan, P.S., Song, Y., Sakuno, E., Nakajima, H., Nakagawa, H., Yabe, K., 2004. Cyclo(ʟ-leucyl-ʟ-prolyl) produced by *Achromobacter xylosoxidans* inhibits aflatoxin production by *Aspergillus parasiticus*. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 70, 7466–7473.

Yu, J., Bhatnagar, D., Ehrlich, K.C., 2002. Aflatoxin biosynthesis. Rev. Iberoam. Micol. 19, 191–200.

Yu, J., Chang, P.K., Ehrlich, K.C., Cary, J.W., Bhatnagar, D., Cleveland, T.E., Payne, G.A., Linz, J.E., Woloshuk, C.P., Bennett, J.W., 2004. Clustered pathway genes in aflatoxin biosynthesis. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 70, 1253–1262.
